P2306 P2306A P2306B P2306C 11878768 50287
Carolus II. D. G. Mag: Brit: Fran: & Hiber: Rex. &ct R. White Sculpsit. portrait of Charles II
THE ENGLISH ATLAS. Volume I. CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION OF THE Places next the North-Pole; AS ALSO OF Muscovy, Poland, Sweden, Denmark, And their several Dependances. WITH A General Introduction to Geography, and a Large Index, containing the Longitudes and Latitudes of all the particular Places, thereby directing the Reader to find them readily in the several Maps. printer's or publisher's device OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, for MOSES PITT at the Angel in St. Pauls-Church-Yard, London. MDCLXXX.
decorative portrait of Charles II TO THE KING. THE Reasons why I presume to prefix Your Majesty's Name to this Work, tho perhaps not sufficient to justifie my bold∣ness, yet I hope may be so considerable as to obtain my pardon. This seems, in many respects, to be a new Undertaking, and the greatest for Charge and Hazard that hath ever in this nature been adven∣tur'd upon by any of Your Subjects, and therefore stands in need of more then ordinary Patronage and Encouragement; which I cannot rationally hope from any other; For Your Majesty doth not only understand and delight in these Know∣ledges, but have been also at great Ex∣pences to promote, direct, and assist fur∣ther Discoveries. And except care be
taken to preserve what is already found out, all the Advantage that should arise from the Dangers of the Seaman, and the Bounty of the Prince, will determine with the Expedition; and the next Age is to begin again, as if no advance had bin acquir'd. I add also, That if other Princes had bin as industrious as Your Majesty, and Your Subjects (who, to omit smaller particulars, first Discover'd the greatest part of all the Northern Regions of Europe, Asia, and America, and first Compass'd the World), this Atlas would have bin more satisfactory, and the Sci∣ence better completed. The reproch also of the sloth, negligence, or what worse, of Mankind (that in so many thousand years know not, as yet, the few Leagues of their own habitation) would have bin avoided. However, as there is in this Work care taken to re∣duce into one body all that is hitherto known of the habitable Earth, and secure it from Oblivion: So I hope it may per∣petuate the memory of Your Majesty's Patronage, and testifie the Duty of Your Majesty's most Obedient and Loyal Subject, MOSES PITT.
THE PROPOSALS FOR Printing the English Atlas, THAT whereas Moses Pitt (of London, Bookseller) being Encouraged by His Most Sacred Majesty, his Royal High∣ness the Duke of York, his Higness Prince Rupert, both the Universities, the Royal Society, and divers others, the Nobility, Gentry, and Learned men of this Nation, to undertake the Printing of an Accurate Description of the World; and resolving to proceed with all convenient dili∣gence, for the more effectual carrying on thereof, makes these following Offers: I. He the said Moses Pitt having the advan∣tage of making use of divers Plates already Grav'd, but more especially of those of Janssons Atlas, doth design by renewing and regulating divers of them, and by adding many new Plates, to∣gether with new Descriptions throughout, to Print a compleat Collection of Maps, Tables, or Deli∣neations of the Heavens, Earth, and Seas, with their several parts, divisions, and names, anci∣ent and modern, in such manner, that all the Maps shall have the same situation of North and South; and all things shall be as exactly and par∣ticularly describ'd, as can be done by the help of all the Maps and Delineations already extant in Print, and of as many others as can be pro∣cured, of several things and places formerly but imperfectly described; as also of divers late and new discoveries of parts heretofore unknown, or not taken notice of as yet in any Maps. II. To every Map shall be adjoined an expla∣nation of the most observable matters and histo∣ries of the places therein contained; wherein is intended that this Work shall exceed all that have preceded; as also an Alphabetical Index to be added at the end of each Volume, with di∣rections for the speedy finding them in their re∣spective Maps. III. He will Print the whole Work in as good Paper and Character as any of those already Print∣ed by Bleau, Jansson, Sanson, or any other. IV. Whereas the Atlas's of Bleau and Jansson are usually comprehended in Eleven Volumes in Folio, in all the Languages hitherto; It is intend∣ed that this Atlas in the English Tongue, shall be printed in Eleven Volumes likewise, each Vo∣lume to be sold to the Subscribers at the rate of Forty shillings in Quires. But if those Gentlemen that are concerned in the management of it, shall think fit to contrive it in fewer Volumes, it shall still be at the rate of Forty shillings a Volume; and each Volume both in number of Maps and Descriptions, shall not consist of less then fifty-five sheet Maps and fifty-five printed sheets of Tables and Descriptions, one with the other ac∣cording to the judgment of the Directors. V. He doth also promise to deliver to the Sub∣scribers the several Volumes as they shall be com∣pleated and finished, they paying their Forty shil∣lings at the time of their subscribing, which is to be before the four and twentieth day of July, 1678; Forty shillings more at the delivery of the First Volume, Forty shillings at the delivery of the Second Volume, and the same sum to be paid upon delivery of each of the other Volumes successively, only the two last to be deliver'd at twenty shil∣lings a Volume; for which several sums afore∣said, the said Moses Pitt will give his Receipt un∣der his own Hand and Seal, with two Witnesses thereunto, with an engagement to deliver to the Subscribers or their Assigns, at his Shop in St. Pauls Church-yard, they making good their Subscrip∣tions, the several Volumes as they shall be print∣ed, according to the plain meaning of these Pro∣posals. VI. No Volume shall be sold singly to any Gentleman whatever, except the Subscribers (by the Bookseller Moses Pitt) under Five and fifty shillings in Quires; neither shall any Volume be deliver'd to any person whatsoever, before all the Subscribers have theirs, provided they send for them within one month after notice given in the Gazette of the finishing of every Volume. VII. The first Volume begins with the North-Pole, and the places and Countries next unto it, before which is to be added an Introduction to Geography, such as shall be advised by the per∣sons after-named, together with a Map of the Terrestrial Globe, and Maps of the greater Di∣visions or Parts of the Earth. This Volume is intended to be compleated before the four and twentieth day of the next ensuing March. The next Volume designed, is that which contains the Low Countries and West part of Germany, where hath lately been, and still is the scene of the greatest actions now on foot, intended to be compleated within six months after the said four and twentieth day of March. The said time pro∣portionably allow'd for the compleating of all the rest; unless it be judged necessary by the Directors, that a longer time be allow'd for some of the Volumes. VIII. Whosoever shall subscribe for ten com∣pleat Books, shall for the same price have eleven compleat Books in Quires deliver'd to him. IX. Because several Gentlemen do complain that they have been deceived by several Propo∣sers in this nature, therefore for the punctual per∣formance of what is here undertaken, the Book∣seller Moses Pitt, has already given sufficient Se∣curity to Sir Joseph Williamson, one of his Maje∣sties Principal Secretaries of State, and President of the Royal Society, for performance of his En∣gagement and Proposals. X. It is requested, that every Subscriber to this great Undertaking, would be pleased to set down the County and place of his Habitation, together with directions how to send to him, to the end that notice may be given him accord∣ing as the Work goes forwaad. WHereas his most Sacred Majesty has been Graciously pleased, for the promoting of this Design, to permit that his Collections of Maps and Descriptions of Countries may be perused, that such of them as have not yet been published, and are thought proper for this work, may be taken into it; and whereas his Royal Highness, and his Highness Prince Rupert, have been also pleased to promise the same favour; and the like has been done by the Right Ho∣norable
Sir Joseph Williamson, one of his Ma∣jesties Principal Secretaries of State, and Presi∣dent of the Royal Society; and also by the most learned Dr. Isaac Vossius, who is pleased to com∣municate his most copious and exquisite Col∣lections; and it is hoped that the same will be done by several other persons of Honour and Quality; therefore it is humbly desired, that all Gentlemen, who have any particular Maps or Relations of new Discoveries, or any more per∣fect descriptions of places already known, would be pleased to send the same to the said Moses Pitt, who will give sufficient security for the safe return of the same unprejudiced, and if they shall be thought proper (by the persons here∣after mentioned) to be inserted, he will take care that it shall be done, and that the obliga∣tion shall be thankfully acknowledged in such manner as shall be to their own best satisfaction. May 3, 1678. WE whose names are here subscribed, not doubting but that this Work will be of great Use, and for the Honour of the Nation, and being desired by Moses Pitt, to give him our Assistance, that he may be the better enabled to perform it, do promise that we will from time to time, at spare hours, both give our Advice for the carrying on of the Work; and further, since he offers to refer himself to us in divers of his Proposals, we will observe how he makes them good, and give an account thereof to Sir Joseph Williamson, President of the Royal Society, or to the President of the said Society for the time being: Chr. Wren Isaac Vossius. John Pell. W. Lloyd. Tho. Gale. Rob. Hook. UPon perusing these preceding Proposals, we whose Names are underwritten, well approving and highly commending this Design of the said Moses Pitt, do for his encouragement not only subscribe our selves for one or more Copies of the said Book, but also do recommend so Noble and Useful a Design to the rest of the Nobility and Gentry throughout his Majesties Dominions. The KING'S most Excellent Majesty. The QUEEN'S Majesty. His Royal Highness the Duke of YORK. Her Royal Highness the Dutchess of YORK. Her Highness the Lady ANN. His Highness CHARLES-LEWIS Elector Palatine of the RHINE. His Highness Prince RUPERT. JAMES late Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews. ALEXANDER Ld. Archbishop of St. Andrews. ARTHUR Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal. CHARLES Duke of Albemarlc, Captain of the King's Guards. HENRY Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamber∣lain of His Majesty's Houshold. HENRY HOWARD Earl of Arundel. ROBERT Earl of Ailesbury. ARCH. Earl of Argyll. HENRY Lord Arundel, Baron of Warder, Count of the Sacred Empire. Robert Abbot. John Adams of the Inner Temple. Richard Adams M. A. William Addams Esq of Logdon in Shropsh. Henry Aldrich, Student of Ch. Ch. Oxon. William Aldworrh Esq Will. Allen, of Much-Hadham in Hertfordsh. Richard Allestree D. D. Provost of Eaton. William Allestree Esq of Walton in Darbysh. Jo. Alport Esq Alexander Andersone Esq Tho. Andrew Esq of Harlestone in North. Sir Peter Apsley. Thomas Archer Esq Thomas Arundel, Merchant of London. Elias Ashmole Esq Sir Ralph Ashton Bar. of Middleton in Lanc. William Ashurst Esq London. Sir Jac. Astley Bar. of Melton Norfolk. John Ayde Esq Philip Ayres Esq JOHN Earl of Bridgwater, High Steward of the University of Oxon. JOHN Earl of Bath, Grome of the Stole to His Majesty. RICHARD Earl of Burlington. CHARLES Beauclair Earl of Burford. GEORGE Earl of Berkley. COLIN Earl of Balcares. VVILLIAM Viconnt Brouncker. PETER Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. JOHN Lord Bellasyse, Baron of Worlaby. CHARLES Lord Berkley of Straton. JOHN Lord Brackley. ROBERT Boyle Esq Francis Baber Esq Edward Backwell Esq of London. Robert Baird Esq Henry Baker Esq Henry Ball Esq William Ball Esq of Grays-Inn. Robert Band Esq Caleb Banks Esq of Aylesford in Kent. Thomas Barrow, Citizen of London. Edward Bartlet Jun. of Oxford. Sir William Basset, of Somersetshire. Ralph Bathurst M. D. Dean of Wells, and Pre∣sident of Trinity Coll. Oxon. Benjamin Bathurst Esq Deputy-Governor of the African Company, under his R. Highness. Edw. Bathurst, Fellow of Trinity Coll. Camb. Bartholomew Beal Esq of Buckinghamshire. Richard Beal, Merchant in Hamburg. John Bende Esq John Bennet Esq George Benson D. D. Dean of Hereford. Francis Bernard, M. D. of London. Sir Tho. Berney Bar. of Bark-Hall in Norf. Hen. Beeston L. L. D. VVarden of New C. Ox. Sir John Berry, Capt. of the Leopard. Thomas Beverly Esq Stewart Bickerstaff Esq of Wilderness in Kent. Leon. Bilson Esq of Mapledurham in Hansh. Sir John Blande Bar. of Yorkshire. William Blathwait Esq John Bleau of Amsterdam, (whose Father published a Latin Atlas). Thomas Blofeld of Norfolk. Thomas Blomer, D. D. Charles Blount Esq Christopher Boon, Merchant. John Boon Esq of Mount Boon in Devonsh. Sir Wil. Boreman, Clerk of the Green Cloth. Sir Oliver Boteler Bar. of Kent. Tho. Boteler, Fellow of Trinity Col. Camb. Edward Bouuerie, Merchant in Durham. Will. Bowes Esq of Stratelam. Robert Brady M. D. Master of Gonvil and Caius Coll. Cambridg. John Breedon Esq of Pangbourn in Barksh. William Bridgman Esq Robert Briscoe, Citizen of London. Edward Browne M. D. London. Peter Brown, of Langley Kent. Thomas Brown, Bookseller of Edinborough, in Scotland. Rich. Bulkeley Esq of Old Bawne in the County of Dublin in Ireland. John Bullingham, of Ketton in Rutland. Gilb. Burnet P. D. of the Rolles in London. William Burnet M. D. Nath. Burr, Merchant of Amsterdam. Arthur Bury D. D. Rector of Exeter Coll. Oxon. WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. HENRY Earl of Clarendon. JOHN Earl of Caithness. ROGER Earl of Castlemain. ROBERT Lord Vicount Cholmondely. JOHN Lord Bishop of Chester. GEORGE Lord Coventry. CHARLES Lord Cornwallis. Sir HENRY Capell, Knight of the Bath. Sir GEORGE Carteret, late Vice-Chamber∣lain of His Majesty's Houshold. Sir ROBERT Clayton Lord Mayor of Lond. Jacob Callaber, Merchant of Amsterdam. Sir Henry Calverley. Colleges and Halls in Cambridg which have Subscribed, are Christ. Coll. Dr. R. Cudworth Mr. Clare Hall Dr. Sam. Blith Mr. Corpus Xti. Coll. Dr. J. Spencer Mr. Emanuel Coll. Dr. Tho. Holbech Mr. Gonville and Caius Coll. Dr. R. Brady Mr. Jesus Coll. Dr Saiwel Mr. St. Johns Coll. Dr. Gower Mr. Katherine Hall Dr. J. Eachard Mr. and Vice-Chancellor. Kings Coll. Sr. Tho. Page Provost. Magdalen Coll. Dr. Peachel Mr. Pembrok Hall Dr. Nath. Coga Mr. St. Peters Coll. Dr. Beaumont Mr. Queens Coll. Dr. Henry James Mr. Sidney-Sussex Coll. Dr. Minshul Mr. Trinity Coll. Dr. North Mr. Dean and Chapter of Canterbury. John Castillion D. D. Dean of Rochester. Sir John Castleton Bar. Thomas Chalmers Esq Thomas Chambers Esq John Chase Esq Apothecary to His Majesty. Robert Chase. Thomas Cheek Esq Lieutenant of the Tower. Knightley Chetwodd, Fellow of Kings Coll. Cambridg. Walter Chetwynd Esq of Ingeste. Sir John Chichly, Commiss. of the Ordinance. Francis Cholmondeley Esq of Cheshire. Sir Hugh Cholmeley, alias Cholmondeley, Bar. Chaloner Chute Esq Sir Thomas Clargis. Samuel Clarke Esq of Snaylwel in the County of Cambridg. Lawrence Clayton Esq Sir Thomas Clayton, Warden of Merton Coll. Oxon. George Clifford Merchant in Amsterdam. Chr. Clitherow Esq of Rislip in Middlesex. Tho. Clitherow Esq of Pinner in Middlesex. Sir Thomas Clutterbuck. Duthlerus Cluverius Slesvicensis. Mark Cocky Merchant in Amsterdam. Rich. Coffin Esq of Portledge in Devonsh. Thomas Cole. Sir John Coell, Master of Chancery. Richard Colinge Esq Charles-Dutton Colt Esq Harry-Dutton Colt Esq William-Dutton Colt Esq Daniel Colwall Esq of London. Ja. Compton Esq John Cony Esq of Rochester. Tho. Cook Esq of Hadly in Suffolk. Sir John Corbet Bar. of Longnor in Shropsh. Sir Vincent Corbet Bar. of Acton-Reynold in Shropsh. John Corrance Esq of Suffolk. Mark Cottle Esq Register of the Prerogative Court. Sir Ch. Cotterel, Master of the Ceremonies. Sir Robert Cotton Kt. Bar. of Cheshire. Sir John Covert Kt Bar. Joseph Cox, for the Library of Winton. Richard Cox Esq Edward Cranfeild Esq Sir Cesar Cranmer. Henry Crispe Esq Comon Serjeant of London. John Cudworth, Citizen of London. Sir Thomas Cullum, of Horsted-place in Suffolk. HENEAGE Finch, Baron of Daventry, Lord High Chancellor of England. CHARLES Earl of Dorset. WILLIAM Earl of Devonshire. THOMAS Osborne Earl of Danby.
GEORGE Earl of Dumbarton. NATHANAEL Lord Bishop of Durham. ROBERT Deincourt, eldest Son of the Earl of Scarsdale. JOHN Drummond Esq of Londy. Sir EDWARD Dering Bar. of Surrenden-Dering in Kent, one of the Lords Com∣missioners of the Treasury. JAMES Dick of Priestfield, Provost of Eden∣burgh. Sir Henry Dacres. Sr. Thomas Darcy Bar. of Essex. Robert Dashwood Esq Fellow Commoner of Trinity Coll. Oxon. Samuel Davall, Merchant of Amsterdam. James Davenant, Fellow of Oriel Coll. Oxon. Isaak Davis Merchant of Rotterdam. Richard Davis Bookseller in Oxon. Ro. Davies Esq of Llannerch in Denbyshire. Thomas Deane, Merchant of London. Um. Denne Esq of Denne in Kent. Christopher Dering Esq Sir Edward Dering, of Sharsted in Kent. William Dickinson Esq John Dod B. D. of Hinton Northamptonsh. Sir William Dolben, one of the Judges of the Kings Bench. Henry Dove D. D. of St. Brides London. Tho. Doughty D. D. Canon of Windsor. Sir William Drake Bar. Jonathan Dreyden B. D. William Ducket Esq Charles Duncomb Esq James Duport D. D. Dean of Peterborough. John Durell D. D. Dean of Windsor. ARTHUR Earl of Essex. PETER Lord Bishop of Ely. THOMAS Lord Bishop of Exeter. ALEXANDER Lord Bishop of Edenbourgh. Sir JOHN Ernle, Chancellor of the Exche∣quer, and one of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury. Francis Eedes M. D. of London. Sir John Egerton Bar. Sir Philip Egerton Bar. of Cheshire. John Elliot M. D. Robert Elliot B. D. Minister of Fladburg in Worcestershire. Mr. Ellis, of Gonville and Caius Coll. in Cambridg. John Ellis D. D. Chanter of St. Davids. Sir John Elwes, of Grove House. Thomas Eliott Esq George Evelyn Esq John Evelyn Esq Sr. Richard Everard Bar. of Essex. Lawrence Eusden A. M. Dean and Chapter of Exeter. THOMAS Lord Vicount Fauconberg. ROBERT Lord Ferrers. JOHN Lord Frescheville, Baron of Stavely. WILLIAM Lord Fitzwilliams. CHARLES Fanshaw Esq His Majesty's En∣voy Extraordinary to Portugal. Sir STEPHEN Fox, one of the Lords Com∣missioners of the Treasury. CHARLES Finch Esq Fellow of Allsouls Coll. Oxon. Sr. Palmes Fairbourn, Governour of Tangier. Sir John Falconer, Master of His Majesties Mint in Scotland. Will. Farre, of Bushel in Middlesex. Charles Feltham, Citizen of London. Robert Fielding Esq Sir Jo. Fenwick, of Fenwick in Northumb. John Fisher M. D. London. John Fitz-Williams D. D. Thomas Flatman Esq London. Daniel Fleming Esq of Rydal in Westmerland. Edward Fleming Esq of Hampshire. Eben Ezer Forenesse Minist. William Forester Esq of Dot-hill in Shropsh. Robert Fox Esq London. Sir William Franklin. James Frazer Esq Sir John Frederick, President of Christs Hos∣pital for the use of the Children of His Majesty's new Royal Foundation there. Thomas Frewen, of Northam in Sussex. Sam. Fuller D. D. Chancellor of Lincoln. HENRY Duke of Grafton. HENRY Lord Grey of Ruthin. JOHN Lord Bishop of Galloway. SYD. Godolphin Esq one of the Lords Com∣missioners of the Treasury. Tho. Gale D. D. Master of St. Pauls School in London. John Gantlet Esq Edmond Gardiner Esq of Bedfordsh. Fran. Gardiner Alderman, of Norwich. James Gardiner D. D. Subdean of Linc. Thomas Gardiner Esq Controuler of the Post-Office in London. Richard Garth Esq Orlando Gee Esq Register of the High Court of Admiralty. William Genew Esq Thomas Gill, Citizen of London. Roger Gillingham Esq William Gore Esq Sir William Godolphin Bar. of Godolphin in Cornwall. Hierom Gohory Esq Charles Goodall M. D. Fellow of the Kings Coll. of Physitians in London. G. Gooddall Fellow B. D. of Exeter Coll. Ox. Richard Goodall, Citizen of London. Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonstone. Robert Gordon Esq of Clunne. Willliam Leveson Gower Esq John Graham Esq John Green Esq Will. de Grey Esq of Merbon in Norf. Francis Griffith Esq of London. Sr. Thomas Grosvenor Bar. of Cheshire. William Guise Fellow of Allsouls Coll. Oxon. John Guise Fellow of C. C. C. Oxon. THEOPHILUS Earl of Huntingdon. WILLIAM Lord Howard, Baron of Escrick. LAWR. Hyde Esq First Lord Commissioner of the Treasury. THOMAS Herbert Esq Sir ROBERT Howard, Auditor to the Excheq. CHARLES Hatton Esq Theod. Haak Esq of London. Henry Hall Esq John Hall Esq John Hall Esq Will. Hammond Esq of St. Albons in Kent. Sir Will Halford, of Welham in Leicestersh. Tho. Halsey Esq of Great Gudsden in Herf. Tim. Halton D. D. Provost of Queens Coll. Oxon. and Vice-Chancellor. John Hampden Esq of Hambden in Bucks. Robert Hampson, Serjeant at Law, of the Inner Temple. Sr. Tho. Hare Bar. of Stow-Hall Norf. Edward Harris. John Hartcliffe, Fellow of Kings Coll. Camb. George Hascard D. D. Rector of St. Clements Danes in London. John Harvey Esq Sir Will. Haslewood, of Maidwell in North. Henry Hawley Esq of Branford. Middles. Israel Hayes, Metchant in Amstetdam. Jo. Hawtrey, Fellow of Kings Coll. Camb. Robert Hawtrey Esq of Rillip in Middlesex. Peter de la Hay, of Westminster. Tho. Hayes, of Crattfield in Suffolk. Edward Haynes Esq Nicholas Hayward, Pub. Notary of London. Charles Hearl. Tho. Henshaw Esq of Kensington Middlesex. John Herbert Esq Sir John Hewly, of Yorkshire Charles Hickman, M. A. of Ch. Ch. Oxon. Samuel Hieron, M. A. of Huniton in Devon. Thomas Hillersden Esq of Elstow in Bedf. Abraham Hill Esq of London. Rich. Hill, Canon Resid. of Sarum. Thomas Hill Esq of Silton in Shropsh. Samuel Hoadley, of Tottenham-Highcross. Tho. Holbech D. D. Mr. of Emanuel Coll. Cambridg. Tho. Holdsworth, Dean of Midleham in Yor. Patrick Home Esq Barth. van Homrigh, Merchant in Amsterd. Robert Hook Esq of Gresham Coll. Lond. Walter Hooper Esq of Stokebury in Kent. Anthony Horneck, B. D. of the Savoy. George Horsnell, Citizen of London. Sr. Richard How Bar. of Compton in Glouc. Ferd. Hudleston Esq of Millon-Castle Cumb. Mr. Humphries, Rector of Barton in the Clay. Sr. Tho. Hussey Bar. of Lincolnshire. Will. Hussey, Merchant of London. John Huxley Esq of Broseley in Shropshire. Tho. Huxley, Fellow of Jesus Coll. Oxon. Harry Hyrne, of Kensington in Middlesex. Sir LEOLINE Jenkins, Principal Secretary of State. Will. Jackson M. D. of Nantwich. Ja. Jacobson Esq Mr. of the Steel-Yard Tho. James D. D. Warden of All-Souls Coll. Oxon. Will. Jane D. D. Reg. Prof. in Oxon. Nich. Johnson Esq Edward Johnson of Oxford Peter Joy Merchant of London. Sr. Tho. Isham Bar. of Lamport Northampt. ANTHONY Earl of Kent Thomas Kerby Merchant of Amsterdam Charles Killigrew Esq Abraham Kick Merchant of Amsterdam Will. Kinsmill of Sydmonton Esq in Hampsh. Sir N. Knatchbull Kt Bar. of Marsham in Kent. JOHN Duke of Lauderdale. GEORGE Earl of Linlithgow General of his Majesties Forces in Scotland FRED. Alefeild Count of Langland and Rix∣ingen, Great Chancellor to the King of Denmark HENRY Ld. Bp. of London THOMAS Ld. Bp. of Lincoln. CHRISTIAN Lindenaw, Chamberlain to the King of Denmark and Envoy Extraordina∣ry to the King of England Edward Lake D. D. Sr. James Langham, Bar. of Cottesbrook Nor∣thamptonshire Sr. William Langham of Walgrave Henry Langly Esq of Shrewsbury John Langley Esq of Amias Shrop. Thomas Langly Esq Henry Lavor Esq John Lawson M. D. London Eldred Lancelot Lee Esq of Cotton in the County of Salopp Esq Dan. Leblon Merchant of Amsterdam Sr. Nicholas Lestrange Bar. of Norfolke Roger Lestrange Esq Sr. Peter Lely of London VV. Levinz M. D. President of St. Johns C. Ox. Thomas Lewis Esq Thomas Lewis Merchant of London John Lewknor Esq of West Dean Sussex Edm. Long Esq of Linehams Court Wiltsh. Sr. James Long of Wiltshire. Mr. Lovell Cittizen of London John LLoyd, D. D. Principal of Jesus Coll. Oxon. Will. LLoyd, D. D. Dean of Bangor Robert Lovet Esq Richard Lucas Minister in Coleman-Street London Narcissus Lutterel Esq Edward Lutwych Esq JAMES Duke of Monmouth Chancellor of the University of Cambridg JAMES Marquess of Montross ROBERT Earl of Manchester CHARLES Ld. Vicount Mordaunt WILLIAM Ld. Maynard GEORGE Ld. Dela Mere Sr. JOHN Skiffiington of Fishenwick Bar. Ld. Vicount Massereene LORENG Muller Envoy from the Duke of Brunswick RICHARD Maiteland Esq Sr. GEORGE Mackenzie Ld. Advocate of Scotland Sr. GEORGE Mackenzie Ld. of Torbet Ralph Macro, M. D. London Robert Maddox Esq Sr. Thomas Mainwaring Bar. of Pever in Cheshire Rawlin Mallack Esq of Cockington Devon. Will. Man Esq Sword-Bearer to the Ld. Mayor of London Thomas Manning of London Gerhardus Martens M. A. and Minister of the German-Church London Narcissus Marsh S. T. P. Provost of Trinity Colledge in Dublin John Marsham Esq of Cuxton Kent. Thomas Master Esq of Ciciter Sr. John Matthews Robert Maylin Esq of Binnie John Morris Esq of London Henry Maurice Fellow of Jesus Coll. Ox. Isaac May Merchant of Amsterdam Clement Mayo Esq Edmond Meadow Esq Ro. Meine Esq Postmaster of Scotland. Sr. Richard Meredith Bar. of Denbishire Jonas More Esq of the Tower of London John Meriton D. D. Rector of St Michael Cornhill London Roger Meredith Esq Secretary of the Kings Embassy in Holland. Sr. Tho. Midleton Bar. of Denbishire John Millington Esq of Newich Edward Mills of the Temple Walter Mills M. D. Adiell Mill Cittizen of London. William Molyneux of Dublin Owen Morgan Esq Will. Morton D. D. Dean of Xt. Church Dub∣lin. Will. Moses Esq of London Luke Mott Fellow of Caius Coll. Camb. JAMES Earl of Northampton GEORGE Earl of Northumberland. JAMES Ld. Norreys FRANCIS Vicount Newport and Baron of High Archoll CHARLES Ld. North and Grey Baron of Kirtling and Rollston ANDREW Newport Esq Sr. John Napper Bar. of Luton Bedfordshire Georg Neale, M. D. of Leeds Yorkshire Jasper Needham M. D. London Walter Needham Honorary Fellow of the Kings Coll. of Physitians. Sr. Paul Neile of Codnor in Derbyshire Goddard Nelthrop Esq of Charter-House-yard London Edward Nicholas Esq of Hitcham Edward Nicholas Esq John Nicholl Esq Secretary to the Ld. Chan∣cellor John Nicholls Esq of Trewane in Cornw Will. Nicolson Fellow of Queens Coll. Oxon Will. Nott Bookbinder to the Queens Ma∣jesty Tho. Novell M. D. London JAMES Duke of Ormond Ld. Lieutenant of Ireland and Chancellor of the University of Oxon.
THOMAS Earl of Ossory AWBREY Earl of Oxford JOHN Ld. Bp. of Oxon Sr. Thomas Ogle of Lincolnshire Will. Oliver Bookseller in Norwich Rich. Owen D. D. Rector of St. Swithin and of St. Mary Bothaw London. Sr. Henry Oxenden Bar. of Dean in Kent Colleges in Oxford which have Subscrib∣ed, are All Souls Coll. Tho. James D. D. VVarden Brazen-Nose Tho. Yate. D. D. Principal Bailioll John Venn Mr. Christ Church John Ld. Bp. of Oxon Dean Corpus Christi Dr. Newlin President Edmund Hall Stephen Penton Principal Exeter, Arthur Berry D. D. Rector Jesus, John LLoyd D. D. Principal St. Johns VVill. Levinz M. D. President Lincoln Tho. Marshal D. D. Rector Magdalen Henry Clark M. D. President Merton Sr. Thomas Clayton VVarden New Coll. Dr. Beeston VVarden Oriel Robert Say D. D. Provost Pembroke John Hall D. D. Master Queens Tim. Halton D. D. Provost and Vice-Chancellor Trinity Ralph Bathurst M. D. President University Obadiah VValker Master Wadham Gil. Ironside D. D. Warden. WILLIAM Ld. Herbert Earl of Powis CHARLES Earl of Plymouth JAMES Earl of Perth. WILLIAM Ld. Bp. of Peterborough WILLIAM Ld. Paget Sr. Tho. Page Provost of Kings Coll. Cambr. Justinian Pagit. Esq Allington Painter Esq VVill. Palliser D. D. Reg. Prof. in Dublin Thomas Papilion Merchant in London Richard Parr D. D. of Camberwell George Payn Fell. Com. of Clare Hall Camb. Robert Payn Esq Will. Peachey Esq of New-Grove Sussex Robert Pease Merchant in Amsterdam Will. Peisley Esq of the Temple John Pell D. D. Mr. Pelling of St. Martins Ludgate Lond. Sam. Pepys Esq Sr. Philip Percival Bar. of Ireland Ralph Petley Esq High Sheriff of Kent William Pett Citizen of London Alexander Pitfeild of Hoxdon Middlesex Esq Robert Pleydall Esq Robert Plott L. L. D. of University Coll. Oxon. Sr. Walter Plunkett of Rathfeale Kt. in the County of Dublin in Ireland Tho. Plume D. D. Arch-Deacon of Roch. Charles Porter Esq Sr. Roger Potts Bar. Will. Powel Esq of Sulham Barkshire Henry Powel Esq William Price Esq Hum. Prideaux Student of Ch. Ch. Coll. Oxon Richard Prince Esq of Abcott Shropshire Robert Pringell Esq of Stichell Aaron Atkins Merchant of Amsterdam John Pulleyn Minister of the English Church at Hamburgh Sr. Will. Pulteney of St. Martins in the Fields London. Sr. Robt. Pye of Farindon Barksh. CHARLES Duke of Richmond and Lynox JOHN Duke of Rothes Ld. High Chancellor of Scotland. JOHN Earl of Rochester JOHN Ld. Bp. of Rochester GEORGE Ld. Rosse of Scotland Sr. Will. Rant of Norfolk Sr. Jonathan Raymond Sheriff of Lond. Ambrose Rea Minister in Essex Sr. Charles-Crofts Read of Bradwell in Suffolk Nich. Reppes D. D. John Rhodes Register to the Bp. of Roch. Peter Rich Esq of Lambeth Godf. Richards, Citizen of Lond. John Richards Esq John Richardson Esq Edward Rigby Citizen of London Sr. Thomas Roberts Bar. of Glassonbury John Robison Esq Agent for his Majestie to the King of Sweden Thomas Robinson Esq Sr. Richard Rooth James Rothwell Esq John Rowland Johnson of Amsterdam Henry Rumball Esq Benjamin Rudyard Esq Barkshire Sr. William Russel of Langhorn in the Coun∣ty of Carmarthen Barronett Michael Rutter Esq of Barton on the Hill Gloucestershire CHARLES Duke of Somerset CHARLES Duke of Southampton JAMES Earl of Sailsbury ROBERT Earl of Sunderland Principal Se∣cretarie of State EDWARD Earl of Sandwich ANTHONY Earl of Shaftsbury KENNETH Earl of Seafort ELIZABETH Shannon Vice-Countess of Shannon SETH Ld. Bp. of Salisbury OTHO Baron Swerin Envoy Extraordinary from his Electoral Highness of Branden∣burg, to his Majesty of Great Britain EZEK. Spanheim, Envoy Extraordinary from the P. Elector of Brandenburg to the King of France. PAOLO Sarotti Resident from the Republick of Venice at the Court of Great Britain ALEXANDER Stanhope Esq Sr. ROBERT Southwell Envoy Extraordinary from his Majesty of great Britain to the P. Elect. of Brandenburg Sam. Sainthill Esq of Devonshire Samuel Sandors Esq of Darbyshire Dr. Robert Say Provost of Oriel Coll Oxon John Saumures D. D. Dean of Garnsey Sr. Edward Seymour Bar. of Bury-Pomeroy in Devonshire and High Sheriff of the said County Dean and Chapter of Salisbury Charles Sankey D. D. Charles Shaw of Trinity Coll. Cambridge John Slade Rector Burg-clere Hampshire Edward Smith Citizen of London Sr. Carr Scroop of Lond. Baronett Dr. Scott L. L. D. of Camberwell Can. of Wind. Sr. John Sherard of Lopthorp Bar. Lincolnsh. Tho. Sheridan Esq of the County of Cavan Ireland Henry St. Johns Esq Stephen Swart Bookseller of Amsterdam Francis St. John's Esq of Thorp Nor-thamp∣tonshire Sr. Charles Scarburgh, Cheif Physitian to his Royal Highness Sr. Francis Scott of Thirleston Robert Scott B. D. Sen. Fellow of Trin. Coll. Cambridge Henry Seymour Esq Charles Shaw of Trinity Coll. Cambridge Daniel Sheldon Merchant of London Sr. Joseph Sheldon Alderman of London Ed. Sherburn Esq Clark of his Majesties Ord∣nance and Armory within the Kingdom of England Will. Shipman Merchant of London Ed. Shires Esq of Hadam Hartfordsh. Thomas Short M. D. Will. Shortgrave Fellow of Wadham Coll. Oxon William Sill Archdeacon of Colchester George Sittwell Esq John Skelton Arch-Deacon of Bedford George Smith M. D. of Thistleworth Mid∣dlesex Barthol. Soame Citizen of London. James Sotheby Esq of Grays Inn Lon. Fredrick Spanheim D. D. Professor of Divi∣nity at Leyden John Speke Esq of Somersetshire VVilliam Spencer Esq Henry Stafford Esq VVill. Stanly Fellow of Corpus Christi Coll. Cambridge James Stevens Esq of Stowell Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Dean of St. Pauls London HORATIO Ld. Townsend Baron of Lyn Regis or Kings Linn Sr. Gil. Talbot Mr. of the Jewel-House Sr. Robert Talbor John Taylor M. D. of his Majesties Commis∣sioners of the Wine Licence of Office Nathaniel Tench Esq London Thomas Tenison D. D. Tho. Tipping of Wheatfield Esq in Oxfordsh. Sr. John Thompson Bar. of Bucks. John Thornton Esq of Brock-Hall Nor∣thamptonshire George Thorp D. D. John Tillison Controllour of my Ld. of Can∣terburys Houshold Hugh Todd, Fel. of University Coll. Ox. Sam. Tomson Esq Richard Topham Esq Sr. Jonathan Trelawny Bar. of Trelawny Cornwall VVill. Trevill Esq of Cornwall Charles Trumbull L. L. D. VVill. Trumbull L. L. D. of Doctors Com∣mons London Ralph Trumbull of VVhitney Oxfordshire Francis Turner D. D. Thomas Turner B. D. Fellow of Corp. Christ. Coll. Oxon. VVill. Turner B. D. Dr. VVill. Turner of Aberdene. Cornelius Vermuyden Esq of Derbyshire Edmond Vintener M. D. Fellow of Kings Coll. Cambridge Sr. Tho. Vernon Bar. of Hodnett Shropsh. Henry Ulenbrock Jun. Merdhant in Amsterd. Isaac Vossius D. D. Canon of VVindsor Stephen Upman Fellow of Eaton. Coll. Robert. Uvedale of Enfeild Middlesex HENRY Ld. Marq of VVorcester CHARLES Ferdinand Earl of VValstein, En∣voy Extraordinary from the Emperor to his Majesty of Great Britain. GEORGE Ld. Bp. of VVinchester EDWARD Ld. VVard of Dudley Castle Staf∣fordshire SIDNEY Wortley alias Montague Esq VVill. VVake Student of Ch. Ch. Oxon. Edward VVake of London Obad. VValker Mr. of University Coll. Oxon Sr. Will. Waller John VVallis D. D. Geometry Professor Oxon Hen. VVallop Esq of Farly-Clop Hamsh. Sr. VVilliam VValter of Saresden Oxfordsh. James VVard Esq Sr. Patience VVard Alderman of Lond. John VVarner Arch Deacon of Rochest. Thomas VVatkins Esq Thomas VVatson Mr. of the Charter-House School London VVill. VVatson D. D. Dean of Battell Robert Waith Esq of Camberwell Surry. Edmond Waring Esq of Oldbury Shropshire Sr. Phillip Warwick John Johnsonius a Wasberg Booksellor of Am∣sterdam and Son in Law to Johnsonius that set forth the former Atlas. Sr. Christopher Wandesford Bar. of Kirkling∣ton Yorkshire William Walsh of Abberly Park Esq Wor∣cestershire Thomas Watson D. D. Fellow of St Johns Coll. Cambridge Thomas Weaver of Morvil Shropshire John VVedderburn Esq of Golford Dean and Chapter of Wells John VVelthdale Esq Paul VVentworth Esq of Lillingston Buck∣inghamshire Herbert VVestfaling Esq Sr. George VVharton Bar. of Kirkby Kendall VVestmorland Treasurer to the Office of his Majestics Ordinance Philip VVharton Esq Sr. John VVhatton of Leeicestershire Coll. Roger VVhitley Thomas VVhitley Esq Ralph VVilbraham Esq Sr. Joseph VVilliamson, President of the Royal Society Thomas VVillis Esq Student of Ch. Ch. Oxon Edward VVilson Esq of Dallam Tower, West∣morland Sr. Hump. VVinch, Bar. of Hannes in Bed∣fordshire William Winde Esq Paul Wicks of London Esq Sr. Will. Whitmore Bar. of Apley Shropsh. Sr. Paul Whichcot Kt. and Bar. of Hendon Middlesex Sr. Francis VVithens of VVestm. Sir John VVittewronge Kt. Bar. of Stantonbury in Buckinghamshire. Francis VVolferston Esq of Statfold, in Staf∣fordshire John VVolryche Esq of Dudmaston John VVostenholme Esq of Enfield in Mid. Rich. VVroe B. D. of VVigan, Lancash. Sr. Christopher VVren Surveior General to his Majesty Sr. Henry VVright Bar. of Dogenham Essex Lawr. Womock D. D. Arch-Deacon of Suffolk Sr. Cyril VVyche of Hockwold and Wilton Shropshire John Wynne Esq Owen Wynne Esq Benjamin Woodroff D. D. Canon of Ch. Ch. Oxon Sr. Peter VVyche Lady VVymondesold, of Putney Tho. VVyndham Esq Grome of the Bed∣chamber John VVyvell Minister by Rochester RICHARD Ld. Arch Bp. of York ROBERT Earl of Yarmouth Robert Yard Esq John Yardley M. D. Col. Med. Lond. S. Hon. Tho. Yate D. D. Principal of Brazen-Nose Coll. Oxon James Young Esq Robert Young Canon of VVindsor
ORBIS TERRARUM NOVA ET ACCURATISSIMA TABULA Auctore IOANNE à LOON map of the world HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE Serenissimo Potentissimoque Domino, Domino CAROLO SECUNDO, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae et Hiberniae Reg:. Defensor Fidei▪ Hanc tabulam totius Orbis. royal blazon flanked by the English lion bearing a standard with a Tudor rose and the Scottish unicorn bearing a standard with the Scottish thistle atop a dedicatory pedestal D. D. D.
NOVA TOTIUS TERRARUM ORBIS GEOGRAPHICA AC HYDROGRAPHICA TABULA map of the world blazon of the bishop of Oxford with dedicatory banner placed below To the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN by divine permission LD. BISHOP of OXON. this Mapp is humbly Dedicated Johannes Jansonius à waesberge and Moses Pitt and Steven Swart. historiated border SEPTEM PLANETA LUNA ♋ ☽ mythological depiction of the Moon MERCURIUS ♊ ☿ mythological depiction of the god Mercury VENUS ♎ ♉ mythological depiction of the goddess Venus SOL ♌ ☉ mythological depiction of the Sun MARS ♈ ♂ mythological depiction of the god Mars IUPITER ♐ ♃ mythological depiction of the god Jupiter SATURNUS ♑ ♄ mythological depiction of the god Saturn QUATUOR ELEMENTAE IGNIS mythological depiction of the element Fire AER mythological depiction of the element Air AQUA mythological depiction of the element Water TERRA mythological depiction of the element Earth QUATUOR ANNI TEM¦PESTATES VER ♈ ♉ ♊ mythological depiction of the season Spring AESTAS ♋ ♌ ♍ mythological depiction of the season Summer AUTUMNUS ♎ ♏ ♐ mythological depiction of the season Autumn HYEMS ♑ ♒ ♓ mythological depiction of the season Winter SEPTEM MIRABILIA MUNDI MURUS BABYLONIAE depiction of the Hanging Gardens of Babylon COLOSSUS depiction of the Colossus of Rhodes PYRAMIDES depiction of the Pyramids of Egypt (Great Pyramid of Giza) MAUSOLEUM depiction of the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus DIANAE TEMPLUM depiction of the temple of Diana at Ephesus IUPITER OLYMPICUS depiction of the statue of Zeus at Olympia PHAROS depiction of the Lighthouse of Alexandria map of the northern hemishpere AMERICA SEPTENTRIO∣NALISM map of the southern hemisphere TERRA AUSTRALIS INCOGNITA
THE INTRODUCTION. COSMOGRAPHY is a general description of the whole World,The In∣tention of the whole Work. con∣sisting of Heaven and Earth: of both which an account is intended to be given in this Atlas; that of the Heavens is re∣serv'd to a peculiar Vo∣lume. It being (as we conceive) of greater necessity, that we begin with that of the Earth. And first of this great Globe in general; the description whereof be∣longs to Geography; as that of particular Regi∣ons and Countries is called Chorography, which is contained in their peculiar Maps. Nor shall we omit, such Topographical descripti∣ons, or the knowledg of lesser places, as Ci∣ties, Rivers, Mountains, &c. where advantage may be to the Reader. Now this Globe, which we call of the Earth, consisteth of Land and Water, or Seas; the description of those is pro∣perly nam'd Hydrography, which sets forth the superficies of the Seas, and mouths of greater Rivers, the Havens, Rocks, Shallows, Creeks, and such other considerations as concern Navigati∣on; to this also an entire Volume in this Edi∣tion of an Atlas, is designed. And because that of ancient times, the divisions and boundaries of Kingdoms and Countries were very much divers from those at present; to avoid confusion, which must needs happen by treating in the same place of things so different, it is thought necessary to reserve the ancient Geography to a particu∣lar Tome, to be put forth, with the rest, in its due time. Thus you have an account of what is intended in the Edition of this Great Work. But it is first necessary to explain such terms, and lay such general grounds as are of use thro all the Volumes; which is the subject of this Preface, or Introduction. First then it is to be noted,Of the Globe of the Earth. that the Earth and Water make but one body, the figure whereof is round, and therefore is best and most natu∣rally represented by those we call Globes; tho Maps also, or plain Figures, if carefully drawn, are sufficiently exact. This proposition, tho it might be supposed rationally enough, as now granted by all learned men; yet may it be evi∣dently proved, both from Celestial and Terrestrial appearances; whereof an account and reason may easily be given by this figure, and not by any other. The Sun and the Stars rise sooner to them who live Eastwardly, then they do to us; which could not be if the whole face of the Earth were plain. 2. To those who live more or less Northward, the Pole is more or less elevated; for those inhabitants of Iseland, Lap∣land, &c. who live about a thousand miles more Northward then we do, see the Pole-star fifteen degrees higher then we can. And those, who travel hence towards those Countries, do find that this variation is made gradually, altering about a degree and a half at the end of every hundred miles; which could not be, except the body on which they moved were Spherical. 3. The Shadow which the Earth casteth upon the Moon, when she is partially eclipsed, is seen to be cir∣cular; and therefore the body which causes it must be so too. To these we may add, that many Propositions in Astronomy, Geography, and Navigation are founded on this supposi∣tion, and when they are applyed to use they prove true, and succeed according to expectation; which certainly they would not always do, if the very foundation upon which they are built, were un∣sound. The same also is proved by plain sense and experiment, as well as by reason and conse∣quence; for we perceive, that Ships which loose from their Harbours in calm weather, disappear gradually, first their Hulks, then their Sails, and after a few miles their highest Masts; the natu∣ral convexity of the water interposing betwixt them and our sight. Several also of our Country∣men and Neighbours have sailed round about this Globe, loosing hence Westwardly, and re∣turning again fromwards the East. From which, and other Navigations, we may conclude, not only that naturally no part of the Ocean is higher then another; but also that we may sail from any part to any part of the superficies of the Ocean; and that every Continent hath Sea about it, and is indeed but a greater Island. The controversie about the situation of this Globe, whether it stand still in the midst,Of the si∣tuation of the Earth. and as it were center, of the world, as the ancients generally opined; or whether it move upon its own axis, and about the Sun as the center; be∣sides that it is not so much to our purpose in this as in the Volume of the Heavens, the Maps and Descriptions being the same in both ways, and that the learned are not come to any issue in it, nor have we any thing to add to the common and vulgar probable arguments only, we shall omit. The parts of this Globe are naturally separated one from another by Seas, ledges of Mountains, Rivers, Desarts, and the like. Which are very opportune for the distinction of Nations, King∣doms, and Governments. In the beginning of the Creation,Of the Waters in this Globe. the Waters being lighter then the Earth, accordingly over∣spread and compassed it to some considerable
height; but whether there was in the beginning a greater quantity of Earth or Water created is an undeterminable curiosity. On the third day the Almighty Creator separated them, by causing the Waters to sink into the deep and open cavities of the Earth; where by the height and strength of the shores they are restrained (as in a Vessel) from returning to overflow and drown the dry land. But if the shores be weak (as many times it happeneth) the water breaketh thro, and overwhelmeth so much of the dry land, till it meet with an obstacle strong enough to coerce it. From hence some do imagine, that the Moun∣tains and Valleys were then also formed, the Earth being before equal and smooth, (which is very probable, in as much as the Scripture saith, that the dry land then first appeared). O∣thers also imagine, that the height of the highest Mountains equals the depth of the deepest Seas. Which indeed may be so, but is not evidently deduced from what hath been hitherto observed. It is more considerable what Olearius mentions, that examining with an instrument the height of the waters of the Caspian Sea, he found them level with the top of the bordering Mountains (p. 142, of his Travels) where he makes no doubt but that the Sea is higher then the Land. His ex∣periment, supposing it truly made, if not to be solved by the greatness of the refraction, I know not what to say to it, as neither can I resolve, Whether the Earth be in the center or middle of the whole world;The place of the Earth. and that all heavy bodies descend to it as their proper place; which is the reason of its stability and unmoveableness, tho it seem to hang in the air. Or as others think, that heavy things descend to the Earth as by a mag∣netical virtue drawn to it from such a distance. But this opinion declares not how the Earth keeps its place in the Air. Or as others say, that the Earth is but a shell of no great thickness, (per∣haps of three or four miles), and within it is quite hollow; by which means the weight is so inconsi∣derable, that it is susteined in the Air, as lighter bo∣dies are in the Water; and that this cavity is the place of punishment for wicked Angels and men. The parts of the Ocean receive different names,The parts of the Ocean. according to their greatness, or their shoes. Fretum (a Strait) is a narrow Sea contain'd be∣tween two opposite, but not much distant, shores; and giving opportunity of passing from one Sea to another, as the Straits of Gibralter, of Magellan, Davis, the Sound in Denmark, &c. Sinus (a Bay) is a part of the Sea running up into the Land, and almost encompassed by the shore. If but a little one, 'tis called a Creek; if large, a Gulf. And in these are Havens, or stations for Ships, as Roads are in the open Sea, but defended from some winds. The vast body of the Sea is called the Ocean; and the Sea is ordinarily called some lesser part of it let into the Land by a Strait, as the Mediterranean, Bal∣tick Sea, &c. A Lake is a large collection of waters enclosed within land; some of which have no known or visible communication with any Sea, as the Mare Caspium, Lacus Asphaltites, or Dead Sea. Others have Rivers running from them, or thro them, as the Lacus Lemanus, Be∣nacus, &c. Rivers are made up by Brooks, these by Springs.Of Springs and Foun∣tains. So that their originals are from these Springs; but whence that water comes which supplies so many Springs, is somewhat dubious. 1. Some imagine great caverns in the Earth, which being very cold, condense the air into drops of water, and those being collected make a Spring. It is true indeed, that all, or most of the famous Caves, as Ooky-hole, &c. in this Coun∣try, have Rivers in them of considerable big∣ness; but those seem not to be there generated, but to cross only the passage. And in others, such as that famous Cave, sometimes serving for the quartering of an Army, call'd Cavola de Custo∣za, near Vicenza, there are in many places con∣tinual droppings; but whether from coagula∣ted air, or vapours, or from water draining thro the Earth, I know not. There are also little Pools made by such droppings; and some also that have fish in them; but very many such must go to the making up one small Spring. 2. Others attribute it to the great abysse men∣tioned in the Holy Scriptures; and doubtless he that made the world, best knows the frame and constitution of it; if that be his meaning, as that very learned man Mr. Lydyat thinks he hath proved. There seems indeed to be water in all or most places within the Earth; but not in every place at an equal depth. Which water runs along in that bed, or vein of gravel, which lies sometimes higher and sometimes lower. Be∣low this I never heard that any one hath digged; nor do I think it hardly possible to dig under it. Whence this water proceeds, i. e. whether from the Sea or Rain, or concreated in it, is hard to affirm; only the Well-diggers do observe, that in this gravel also there is a current or stream of the water. Why this gravel lies unequally high, and how the water ascends in it, is a difficult question; which some solve, by saying that 'tis contained in the gravel, as the blood in the veins of an humane body, and moves with the like vi∣tal motion; others imagine, that because the gravel is an opener mass of bodies, not closely contiguous together, the water runs in them; and is forced into higher places, by some other causes, as by the motion of the Sea, violently impelling it in those narrow and crooked pas∣sages; but these being only conjectures, we must not enlarge too much upon them. 3. Most men think, that all Springs proceed from the Sea-water, dulcified by percolation thro the gra∣vel or other convenient passages of the Earth. The difficulty that oppresseth this is, that it is not easie to imagine, how the Sea-water should rise to the tops of mountains; yet even there are often found Sea-plants naturally growing, which perswade many men of the truth of that opi∣nion, tho they cannot justifie the manner. And there are also divers Lakes upon the highest hills amongst the Alps (as particularly upon Splu∣gen) which notwithstanding the top of the wa∣ter be frozen in winter, yet do Trouts and other fish live very well in them; which perswade the inhabitants that there is communication betwixt those Lakes and other fresh waters. 4. Others are of opinion, that the water that furnishes Springs is that of Rain or Snow, which comes from the clouds, and consists either of drops of Rains or of smaller Dew-drops, whereof many to∣gether make Rain. And these Clouds hanging commonly upon the hills, furnish them chiefly with moisture, which being reserved in Cisterns, or sometimes in mosses, break or spring forth where they find the easiest passage. Sometimes the sum∣mity of the hill is either a Lake or a Bog, and keeps the water, as in a Pond lined with Clay, till it come to such a height as it overflows. And this is the reason both of the continuance of Springs, and why there are so few in Plains, be∣cause the Rain-water that falleth there, goes down by the seams of the Earth, so deep that it cannot spring up again; nor are there moun∣tains so near, as to supply them from their Ca∣verns. Whether any, or all of these opinions are false, I shall not determine; but it seems to me, that such
a quantity of water issueth by these Springs, that perhaps all these causes, and many more, will hardly be sufficient; considering that some par∣ticular Rivers, v. g. Volga, vents (saith Vareni∣us) as much water in one year as the magni∣tude of the whole Earth amounts to. Or if not one (as some think they demonstrate), yet three or four, or as many as flow into the Caspian Sea, discharge so much water as cannot well be ima∣gined, except we acknowledge a circulation of water, not only by being rarified into vapours, and condensed again, but also in the bowels of the earth. To the conceiving whereof, perhaps it may somewhat conduce to be informed of the contents of this great Globe; at least so much of it, as is already discovered by the Miners and Well-diggers, tho not to any considerable depth, i. e. of a very few fathoms. As the Air is the place of the generation of those we call Meteors, and the Water of Fowls, especially Fishes; so is this Earthly Globe, of Stones, Minerals, Salts, Bitumens, Petroleums, and divers sorts of earths. And they say, that as far as they have digged, they find it to consist of several sorts (or mea∣sures) of earth, stones, &c. many times thinly spread one over another; yet none of them per∣fectly circular; but from the superficies of the Earth (whither in some place or other they reach) they dip, or slope, the further they go, still descending deeper, as if a line drawn down upon their superfices, were part of a Spiral line. And this for the great benefit of mankind, that the same place may be supplied with variety of soils. Thro which measures, descend from the superficies of the Earth seams, like veins in an animal body, which convey the Rain-water that falls upon the Earth; and therefore in our Quar∣ries of stone, these seams are fill'd with a very thin fine earth, for the easier descent of the wa∣ter; neither is this descent in a streight line, but one line begins at some small distance from the ending of the upper; that more parts of the Earth may be water'd and fertilized by it, not only to the production of Plants, &c. but also of Minerals, Stones, Coals, &c. in the very Earth it self. And why may not also in great Rains part of this water descend lower to the gravel, as well as into the Coal-pits, Lead-Mines, &c. Methinks therefore we may probably say, 1. That all those Springs which arise near the bottoms of hills, and all such as diminish much in dry wea∣ther, come from Rain-water, or melted Snow. 2. Such as arise in plains (of which there are not many) are furnished with the water in the gra∣vel, which is supplied either out of the great Abysse (if it be not the Abysse it self, not un∣known as it seems to Seneca, Nimis (saith he) ille oculis permittit, qui non credit esse in abscon∣dito terrae, sinus maris vasti) or out of the Sea, discharging it self by this means into the bowels of the Earth. 3. From this water also are sup∣plied the Wells and Pits, which in some Coun∣tries afford all the water they use; many of which also approach nearer the surface of the Earth in summer then winter, the greater heat of the Sun forcing them higher. 4. That it is not necessary that Salt-springs should bring that tincture from the Sea in wider channels, or pipes; because that there are great Mines of Salts of divers kinds, generated in the Earth, the solution of which may very well impregnate the water. But these are not so much to our purpose, but must be left to their particular Countries where they arise. It is most certain, that the most wise Creator made all things in number, weight, and mea∣sure; which proportions, tho we do not under∣stand, yet we must needs admire him, who in the beginning established such a never-failing har∣mony. Whether this Globe of Earth grow or not,Of the growing of the Earth. is not much material to our purpose; for nei∣ther the growth or diminishing of it can be so great as to alter the usual measures or distances. Yet it may be rationally said, that in low, soft, and boggy places it doth grow; not only by the winds and rain, carrying down somewhat still into those parts, but also by the grass, weeds, and fog, which by the rain being flatted and beaten down in winter, do the next Spring send forth new shoots from the old roots, which in tract of time do raise the ground. And this seems to be the reason why in such earths we often∣times find trees, which being cut down in those places where they formerly grew, and not car∣ried away in good time, are at length grown over and cover'd with those weeds and herbs. In the bottom of a turff-pit (for this matter is not earth, but turff) they found not long ago, a small parcel of Coins upon an heap (perhaps they had been tied up in some matter that was putri∣fied) of Edward IV. as I judg by the face; and this was about eighteen foot deep. Which gives us some conjecture, how long at most that turff was a growing, i. e. eighteen foot in two hundred years, [by the way also, there were a few years ago in the Forest of Dean, after the Miners had wrought over a great cinder-heap, found divers Coins of Brass, fresh as when first minted, of Tetricus, and some other of those Tyrants about the year 260, which gives some hint by whom, and at what time those Iron-mines were wrought]. Neither doth the dust, or small parts of Earth washed or blown from higher places, considerably diminish them, or fill up the Valleys, for then would they also thicken and in time fill up also the Sea, which seems to have been the opinion of Polybius, who con∣ceived, that because he saw the Black or Euxin-Sea in his time to be so muddy and thick, it would in time, by still thickning, become firm land. But the Lord of Busbeque, in his Ambassy to the Grand Seignior, about eighteen hundred years after Po∣lybius, found it exactly in the same condition as Polybius had described it. The superficies of the Earth is not equally nor perfectly round;The figure of the Earth. yet are not the extuberances so great or considerable, as to hinder the whole Globe to be accounted round; the greatest height of the highest mountain making an insensible difference in the computation of the Diameter of the whole Earth. Now there is a rising or swelling of the Earth, which commonly begins by the Sea-shore, and encreaseth the further it reacheth in the Continent (besides that of the particular mountains) which seems to have been so order'd, to make room for the Sea and wa∣ters. Yet were not all mountains made at, or near, the birth of the world. Some have been even in our memory cast up by Earthquakes, as Monte Novo in the Kingdom of Naples, near Poz∣zuolo. Others by the winds, heaping up the Sands together, which they say happens frequently in the great and sandy Desarts. But these are very few, and I suppose as easily blown asunder as brought together. However these deserve here no particular consideration. This rising of the Earth in large Continents, is doubtless very great, tho none either have, or will ever be at the trou∣ble and charge to measure it; yet some estima∣tion may be made by the length and swiftness of Rivers. It is commonly said, that a Ship is not able to sail against that stream whose declivity is one pace in an hundred; yet some declivity there must be, and (as they say) seldom is it
less then one in five hundred. Suppose then the Nile, which runs in the greatest Continent (A∣frick) which we know in the world; it disem∣bogues into the Mediterranean Sea, in 31 deg. of Northerly Latitude, and ariseth out of the Lake Zaire, which is in 10 deg. (or as some say 14) of Southerly Latitude, in all 41 deg. which comes to about 2460 miles English, if running streight, but because of its bendings, it may be well esti∣mated 3000 miles, which (allowing two foot to a mile) comes to six thousand feet, if it move with as slow a motion as can be, but consider∣ing that it is a swift River (the mud not setling till it come to the Sea), and hath in it divers great Cataracts, the Lake of Zaire must needs be much higher then the mouth of Nilus. But the height of mountains is more certainly and easily known, and divers of them have been measured; as one of the highest hills betwixt Yorkshire and Lancashire (Pendle-hill) if I be not mis-informed, was not found to exceed half a mile in perpendicular height; Olympus somewhat above a mile; and some others, as El Pico in the Isle of Teneriffe yet higher. But the certainty we know not. The manner of measuring and calculating is thus, which is much easier in such a mountain as Tene∣riff or Pendle-hill, being one peak or top stand∣ing in a plain, then in those Juga or ledges of mountains which run thro and divide most of the great Continents of the world; whereof the high∣est may be still higher then the other. geometrical illustration to determine the height of a mountain Let b c d represent a mountain, whose height a c is thus found. Take two stations in a straight line from it; the first at b, not far from the foot, the other at e, a considerable distance from it; from each of these stations take the angles at the top b c a, e c a; then out of 90 subduct b c a, the remainder is the angle c b a, which also being subducted from 90, the remainder is the angle c b e. Therefore in the triangle c b e, we have one side e b (viz. the distance of the two sta∣tions, which must be exactly measured) and all the angles, for c e b is the complement of the other two, to 180; then say, As the sine of the angle e c b is to the side e b So is the sine of the angle c e b to b c. Having then in the rectangular triangle b c a one side b c, and all the angles, for a b c is the com∣plement of b c a to 90, say then, As the Radius is to the sine of b c a, So is b c to c a the height. By the Quadrat, Divide 10000 by the number of parts cut at each station; then say, As the difference of the Quotients, is to the distance betwixt the stati∣tions: So is 100 to the height. This great Globe is not only divided into Land and Water;Divisions of the Earth. but many other ways in respect to them. As some are Continents, which are great parts of Land without any Sea. Islands are small parts encompassed by water. Peninsula or Cher∣sonesus, is a part of Land which would be called an Island, were it not for an Isthmus, or neck of land, which joins it to the Continent. A Mountain or Rock jutting out into the Sea, is called a Promontory, Cape, or Headland. Again, the Ancients divided all they knew of the Earth into three parts, Europe, Asia, and Africa, of each of these in their several places; but another Hemisphere having been lately dis∣covered, there is commonly added to these Ame∣rica, as the fourth part. Others also name two more, the Lands under the North and South Poles; which indeed were not comprehended in the former division: yet because we know not whether there be Land, or only Sea (as under the North Pole seems to be) it is not expedient to account them distinct parts till better disco∣vered. Our Mariners that went with design to pass under or near the North Pole, in their search of a passage to China, and arrived as far as 82 deg. of Latitude, found nothing but some few Islands; the rest as they could see being, in the midst of Summer, nothing but Ice. Some do imagine, that the three parts of the habita∣ble world received their division from the three Sons of Noah; and Cham indeed obtained Africa, but Japhet dwelt in the Tents or habitations of Shem; tho in process of time his posterity seems to have peopled the greatest part of Eu∣rope. The reason of the names we despair of know∣ing, they having been forgotten even in Hero∣dotus's time, there is no hopes now of retrieving them. See the discourse concerning the Map of Europe. Lastly, the parts of the Land before-mention∣ed,The parti∣cular ob∣servations in the de∣scriptions. are very opportune for the separating and distinguishing Countries, Nations, and Govern∣ments. The knowledge and consideration whereof is the chiefest and most useful design of this whole Work, and all others of the like nature. For it little conduceth, to know places, unless we be also informed, of what is contained, what acti∣ons performed, and what concerns our selves may have, in them. In those therefore we shall consider the names, situation, bounds of each Country, as also what Cities, Havens, Towns, Forts; likewise what Mountains, Valleys, Caves, Fountains, and other such remarkable and to us and our Country unusual things, as nature it self hath formed. To which shall be added, the condi∣tion and quality of the soil, and its productions, in order to the discovering what in every place abounds, and what therein may be communi∣cated to other Countries, or what may proba∣bly be carried to them in order to trade. In every Nation also account shall be given of their original Language, Manners, Religion, Employ∣ments, &c. that if any art or science useful to so∣ciety be there eminent, it may be transferred into our own Country. Much more considerable are their Governments, Civil and Military, their Magistrates, Laws, Assemblies, Courts, Rewards and Punishments, and such like. Neither must we omit the manner of educating their youth in arts liberal and mechanick, taught in their Schools. Universities, Monasteries, Shops also, and the like. Their manner of providing for their poor of all sorts, either in Hospitals or Workhouses. Lastly, it will be expected, that we give an account of the History or actions and successes of each Na∣tion, of their Princes, remarkable actions, &c. And these heads take in the sum of what is en∣deavoured as the principal intention in this Work.
Of the Artificial Division of the Earth, and what  depends hereupon. THE Supreme Celestial Sphere (tho it has really no lines at all described upon it, yet)  the benefit of our conceptions and expressi∣, is supposed to be divided into several parts,  imaginary Circles, which Artists have given gs and names unto. The Planes of these cles, being continued down to the inferior s and Earth, are conceived to divide them  into the like parts. The chiefest of these  eight; four great ones, which divide the vens and Earth into two equal parts; and nany lesser which divide them unequally. The at ones are the Horizon, Meridian, Equator, and  Zodiac: The two former of which are va∣le, differing according to places; the two er are fixt, and the same in all places. The r ones are, the two Tropics, one of Cancer,  other of Capricorn; with the two Polar les, one the Arctic or Northern, the other the rctic or Southern. These, and all Circles,  divided into 360 parts, or Degrees; each of which Degrees is again subdivided into 60 Mi∣nutes; these again into 60 Seconds, &c. The Horizon (so call'd because it terminates our sight) is that great Circle in the Heavens,Horizon. which divides the superior and visible, from the inferior and invisible Hemisphere, as in the Scheme hh. The two points, every way 90 De∣grees distant from it, are its Poles; Z. N. The superior of which, being exactly over our heads, is our Zenith, or Vertical point; the inferior, which is diametrically opposite to it, our Nadir. So that our Horizon varieth (tho not sensibly) every step that we move. The Circles drawn from one of its Poles to the other, and cutting it at right angles, are Azimuths: Those lesser ones, parallel to it, are Almicanters. It is usually distinguish'd into Rational, which exactly divides the Heavens into two equal parts, because its center is the same with that of the Earth; and Sensible, which divides them unequally, because its center is at our eye. But the Earth having no sensible magnitude in respect of the superior Orbs, the distinction, in respect of them, is useless and impertinent. the divisions of the celestial sphere he Meridian is a great Circle, passing thro  the Poles of the World, and of the Hori∣ PZ PN, it is so called, because when the  is under it in the day time, it is noon; in ight time, it is midnight. Any two East  West points have different Meridians; tho lobes and Maps they are generally described  10 degrees only, P 10 P, P 20 P, &c. his Line, intersecting the Horizon at right es, is the foundation of its partition into  oasts, call'd the Points of the Compass; from nce the Winds receive their denomination. For  Line extended between the two intersections,  the Meridian Line, points North and South;  her intersecting it at right angles, points East  West, which four are the Cardinal Winds.  distance betwixt each of these being equally ded, gives four more; each of these 8 being n divided, gives 16; these again, so divided,  which are distant from one another 11 deg. min. and thus named, North. North and by East North North East North East & by North North East North East and by East East North East East and by North South. South and by West South South West South West & by South South West South West and by West West South West West and by South East East and by South East South East South East and by East South East South East & by South South South East South and by East West West and by North West North West North West & by West North West North West & by North North North West North and by West Some have subdivided each of these into two parts, and reckon'd 64; but that division is ge∣nerally rejected, as being too nice for use. The
Line extended betwixt each of these, and its op∣posite, is that which Mariners call a Rumb, de∣scribed by the Ship, following the direction of the Needle; so that if it sail towards any of the Cardinal points, it describes an are of a circle; if towards any other, a spiral line. The Equator is a great Circle,Equator. drawn at an equal distance from both Poles of the World EE. It is so called, because when the Sun enters into it (as it doth about the tenth of March, and thirteenth of September) it makes the days and nights equal, in all places of the world. The Zodiac is a great Circle,Zodiac. which cutteth the Equator obliquely, into two equal parts EcE; its greatest declination, or distance from it, is about 23 deg. 30 min. 'Tis so call'd from the 12 Signs that are in it, Aries, Taurus, &c. each of which contains 30 deg. because that is the twelfth part of 360. The beginning of Aries and Libra are the Equinoctial points, and the Meri∣dian drawn thro them is the Equinoctial Co∣lure, PEP; as that thro the beginning of Cancer and Capricorn, is the Solstitial, PcP. The Tropic of Cancer is a lesser Circle,Tropics. de∣scribed by that point of the Zodiac which is most distant from the Equator bcb. In this the Sun moveth, when it it has obtain'd its utmost Nor∣thern declination, which is about June 11. The Tropic of Capricorn, is that answerable to it, on the other side of the Equator; where∣in the Sun moveth, when it has attain'd to its utmost Southern declination, dd; which is about Dec. 12. The Arctic and Antarctic Circles,Polar Circles. are those little ones so far distant from the Poles of the World, as the Tropics are from the Equator, aa and ee; because they are described by the Poles of the Zodiac, which are distant from those of the World 23 deg. 30 min. Besides these four, we may imagine innumerable other little Circles, parallel to the Equator; such as in Globes and Maps are drawn every 10 deg. for the more ready observation of the Latitude of places, as in the Scheme 10 10, 20 20, &c. These 4 less Circles divide the Earth into 5 parts,Zones. which are call'd Zones. But this partition was of more note amongst the Ancients then now it is; tho it could never be of any considerable use; for to describe the situation of a Country only by say∣ing that it was in such or such a Zone, is too wide a direction to find it out. The two Frigid ones, comprehended within the Polar Circles, they thought unhabitable, by reason of their extreme cold and darkness; as also they did the Torrid one, betwixt the Tropics, by reason of its ex∣cevssie heat: So that the two Temperate ones, betwixt the Polar Circles and the Tropics, are only left to be inhabited. But these mistakes have long since, by the improvement of Navigation and Merchandizing, been discovered; for even in the midst of the Torrid Zone, under the Equa∣tor, are now well known to lye Ethiopia, Suma∣tra, and many Islands, as populous and fruitful as any in the Temperate ones. Nor are they so much hotter then we, as they are nearer the Sun; because the length of their nights (being always about twelve hours), the frequency of their rain, and the briskness and constancy of their wind, doth extraordinarily temperate the heat, which else would extremely infest them. And tho nothing of the Southern Frigid Zone be yet discover'd, yet much which lyeth within the Nor∣thern is, as Greenland, Lapland, and divers other places, which are spoken of in the beginning of this Volume. Which shews, that tho the other be unknown to us, yet it may, notwithstanding its cold, be inhabited as well as this. The inha∣bitants of these Frigid Zones are call'd Periscii, be∣cause when the Sun by its annual motion is risen to them, it moves round about them without setting; and so casts their shadow towards every part of the Horizon. Those of the Temperate ones, are Heteroscii, because their Noon shadows are always cast only one way, ours Northward, the others Southward. Those of the Torrid one, are Am∣phiscii, because their Meridional Shadows are sometimes North, sometimes South. Nor is the division of the Earth into Climes,Climates. by lesser Circles parallel to the Equator, of much more use then the former; for by saying, that a Country lyeth somewhere within 8 deg. 25 min. of the Equator, where the longest day is above twelve hours, and less then twelve and an half (which is the first Clime), its situation is but little better described, then if we should say it was in the Torrid Zone. The like may be said of the rest of the 24 Climes, which are nothing else but a subdivision of the Zones into such unequal spaces, that the longest day in that part of it, which is next to the Equator, is shorter by half an hour then it is in the other part which is towards the Pole. So that look how many hours the longest day in any Country doth exceed twelve, the dou∣ble of that is the number of the Clime where it lyeth; as, because in England the longest day is about sixteen hours and an half, therefore it is in the ninth Clime, or eighteenth Parallel, for one of the other makes two of these. And thus we may reckon in the Southern, as well as our Northern Hemisphere, till we come to the be∣ginning of the Frigid Zones, where the Climes end; for here the longest days being twenty-four hours, i. e. the entire revolution of the Sun, they encrease so fast that they must be distinguish∣ed by the difference of weeks and months; as a degree and an half within the Polar Circles, the longest day is a month; three degrees and an half two months; six deg. 50 min. three months; 11 deg. 50 min. four months; 17 deg. 30. min. five months; 90 deg. six months. Those who inhabit the opposite points of the same Clime, have summer and winter together, but not day and night, and are called Perioeci. Those who inhabit the same points of Climes equally distant from the Equator, have day and night, but not summer and winter together, and are called Antoeci. The Perioeci and Antoeci therefore agree in neither, but are Antipodes to each other, living under points diametrically opposite. But the most exact, and now most usual de∣scription, of the situation of places, is by their Longitude and Latitude. The Latitude of any point, is its nearest distance from the Equator, as E 10, E 20, &c. towards P. It is measured by the Arc of the Meridian intercepted betwixt them. This directs to the very Circle, under some part of which the place lies, and so gives a better ac∣count of its sitethen Zones and Climes do; there∣fore some formerly describ'd the situations of Countries by this only. But to render the direction compleat, 'tis necessary that the Longitude also be added unto it. This is the distance of the Me∣ridian of the place from the first Meridian, to be numbred in the Equator, from 1 to 360, as in the Scheme E 10, 20, &c. towards E. But where to fix this first, or great Meridian, Geo∣graphers could never yet well agree; from whence many confusions have been occasioned, and are still continued in this science, and will not be thorowly redress'd, till they concur in the deter∣mination of this point; which tho it may be fixt indifferently in any noted place, yet they have all thus far agreed, as to place it in some of the most Western parts of the Earth; because the Sun,
and the rest of the Planets, move by their pro∣per motion, fromward the West towards the East. Ptolemy, and other ancient Geographers, fixt it in Hera, or Junonia, which is one of the Fortunate or Canary Islands, and (as 'tis probable) that which now is called Teneriff. Hence the Ara∣bians translated it about ten degrees Eastwardly. Some of our later Geographers transferr'd it to the Azores, or Insulae Flandricae; thinking that a Meridian drawn over these, did pass thorow the Poles towards which the Loadstone pointeth, as well as thorow those of the World; because here they observ'd no variation of the Needle. But they differ in assigning thorow which of these Isles it ought to be described. Some place it in St. Michael, which is about 9 deg. more West then Teneriff; because here they say the Compass vary∣eth least. Others say, that the variation is less in Corvo, which lies about 6 deg. Weft of this, i. e. 15 of Teneriff, and therefore fix it here. But some of the latest, finding the great inconvenience that there is in having different Longitudes ap∣plied to the same place; and also experimenting a far greater variation in the Azores then was pre∣tended, have reduced it again to Teneriffe, and suppose it describ'd over the top of El Pico, or the Peak; which being the most noted and accuminate mountain in the Western parts of the World, is better fitted for such a purpose, then any shore, or whole Island, can be; because it is not likely to be at all removed, as shores sometimes (by the encroachments of the Sea) for a good space are; and the top of it, being but of a very small compass, and as it were a point, hence Longi∣tudes may be computed even to a minute, which from the forenamed Terms can scarce be done to a degree. From hence all the Longitudes in the Maps of this Atlas are reckon'd. And we wish, that in all the new ones, which shall be drawn henceforward, it may be so to; or at lest, that it may particularly be express'd in them, from what Meridian it is that they compute; that so the account of Longitudes may become more intelligible and useful then, for want of such di∣rection, it commonly is in most of our Maps. Having the Longitude and Latitude of any place given, to find it in the Map, reckon the Longitude among the Meridians, which com∣monly are described from the upper to the lower side thereof; and the Latitude among the Paral∣lels, which are always drawn the contrary way, and where you see, or guess, that these two Lines intersect each other, is the place sought for. The Latitude may be found out either in the day by the Sun,How to find the Latitude. or in the night by the Stars. The elevation of the Equator above the Horizon, is the complement of the Latitude to 90 degrees, as may be collected from what has been said be∣fore. If therefore the height of the Sun be taken at noon, about the tenth day of March, or twelfth of September, and subducted from 90, the remain∣der is the Latitude. The same may be found at any other time of the year, if the distance of the Parallel, wherein the Sun moveth, from the E∣quator be first known; for this being added to, or subtracted from the Meridional altitude, ac∣cording as the Sun that day is below, or above the Equinoctial, makes the case all one with the former. In the night the elevation of the Pole may easily be taken by the Pole-Star; and this is always equal to the Latitude of the place: for because under the Equator, where the Latitudes begin, both the Poles of the World are in the Horizon, therefore so far as we remove from thence towards either Pole, so much it must be elevated, that the distance between the Zenith and the Horizon may be 90 degrees. Or else, the Meridional altitude of any other Star, whose declination is known, may be observed, and the Latitude hence collected, after the same manner as from that of the Sun's. But no such certain and easie method for the finding out the Longitudes hath yet been invent∣ed;How to find the Longi∣tude. tho very many Mathematicians, have long employed their wits in the search after it; being encouraged hereunto, not only by the apprehen∣sion of that great advantage and perfection which this Science, and Navigation, would receive from such a discovery; but also by several other great rewards which have been proposed to it. The principal means whereby it has been hitherto at∣tempted, and whereby it seems most likely to be effected, is the observation of some one Celestial Appearance, at divers places. Such as are Eclipses, the entrances of the Moon into the Ecliptic, its Latitude or distance from the Ecliptic, its ap∣proximation to, or distance from, some fixt Star. The conjunction and opposition of Jupiters Sa∣tellites, &c. for if the moment of time when any of these do happen, were exactly observed in any two distant places, the Longitude of the one from the other will be found out, by resolving the difference of time, that the appearance hap∣pens in one place sooner then the other, into de∣grees; allowing fifteen degrees for an hour, and fifteen minutes of a degree for a minute of an hour. From the observation of the beginnings, mid∣dles, and ends of Eclipses (of the Moon espe∣cially) the Longitudes of places have hitherto for the most part been determined; as be∣cause the same Eclipse, which at London was ob∣served at twelve a Clock, began not at Branden∣burgh till one, hence 'twas collected, that this later City had fifteen degrees Longitude more then the other. This is one of the best methods that has yet been found out; and if all Artists, who are able, would be constant, and diligent in their observation of it, in such Countries where they are; and then free in publishing these their observations, we should after a while hereby know the exact situation, at lest, of all great Cities, and other such noted parts of the Earth, which lovers of Science usually visit. But this indeed gives but very little direction to Mariners, when they are in any unknown part of the Sea, for whose sakes principally an easie method of finding out Lon∣gitudes is so earnestly sought after. For 'tis dif∣ficult to observe the beginning or end of an Eclipse exactly at Sea, by reason of the fluctuation of the Ship; and tho it were not, yet they happen so seldom in the whole year, that they cannot be of any considerable use to them, who must sometimes examine whereabouts they are, seve∣ral times in a day. Other appearances therefore, which happen more frequently, must be proposed to their ob∣servation; the usual ones are: 1. The Moons entrance into the Ecliptic (for the Line of her proper motion intersects it, as the Equator doth, only its greatest distance from it is but about five degrees) If the hour when this happens in any unknown place, be compared with the hour set down in the Ephemerides, which are calculated for any known Meridian, the difference of time (being resolved, as before) gives their differece of Longitude. But besides the difficulty that there is of observing this appearance exactly, it happens but once in a fortnight, and so is not frequent enough to serve the present turn. There∣fore to this is added, 2. The Moons place in the Zodiac, especially when she is in the Meridian; the time of night when this happens in any un∣known place, being by any of the fixt Stars found
out; and then compared with the time when the same point is in the Meridian for which the pre∣sent Ephemerides are calculated, the difference betwixt them doth likewise discover their distance in Longitude. But because the Moon for some days before and after the change cannot be seen at all, and for several more cannot be seen in the Meridian; therefore this method hath almost the same inconveniences attending it as the former; which some think are fully redress'd in this other, which is, 3. The Conjunctions, Eclipses, or any such appearance of Jupiters four Satellites. The time when they will happen in any known place, being first computed, and then compared with the time when they are observ'd in an unknown one, will also as before discover its Longitude. These Planets are so far distant from the Earth, that they have no considerable Parallax, and so their appearances are more easie to be observed then those of the Moon commonly are. And they move so swiftly about the body of Jupiter, that in a very little time a sensible alteration of their places is made; and so the moment of their conjunctions, and other appearances, may be the more accurately observed, and Longitudes hence more exactly determined. But because these Sa∣tellites are every year, for many weeks together, so near the Sun, that by reason of its rays they cannot be seen; and at other times cannot be discerned without the assistance of a very good prospective, and a very clear air; therefore neither can this be a constant direction. 4. The appulse of the Moon to any of the fixt Stars, is by some thought an appearance of the most universal use in this concern, because it may be observed at all times, but about the new Moon. And indeed did not the double Parallax, and the refraction of the Moon, render the calculation of its true place somewhat nice, and subject to mistakes; this method would be better liked, and more ser∣viceable then any of the precedent. Since therefore each of these Celestial appea∣rances has some difficulty or other attending it, which hinders it from being observed constantly, or without greater skill and care then Mariners usually adhibit; the fittest method, I think, is not to chuse one of them from the rest, and always to make use of that alone; but to observe any two or more of them in the same place, and with as much exactness as the present circumstances can well afford. For when some cannot, others may, be seen; and errors committed in the observa∣tions and calculations of one, may be found out, and corrected when compared with anothers. By such different observations frequently made, and compared with one another, which most Pilots can in some measure do, they will not only pro∣mote their own art and safety; but very signally contribute to the perfection of Geography. In order to which, it would be highly advantage∣ous, if any true lover of Arts would take care, that these following particulars may be put into practise: 1. That the Longitude of some great merchandizing City (suppose London) be exactly computed, by diligent and skilful Astronomers, from the observations of the same Eclipse there, and at the Peak of Teneriff, or by what other methods they shall judge most accurate. 2. That Ephemerides be carefully calculated for the Me∣ridian of that City, shewing the moment of time when all the forementioned Celestial appearances happen there. 3. That the Merchants, and other Mariners, be prevailed with (especially when they go any unusual voyage) to take with them these Ephemerides, and to note continually when they are in foreign parts, what difference they ob∣serve betwixt any of the appearances there, and in their Tables. And at their return, that they communicate them to such promoters of Learn∣ing who shall be ready to receive and improve them. The reason why the appearances of no other of the Planets, besides the Moon and Jupiters Sa∣tellites, can be serviceable to discover Longitudes, is because the proper motions of all the rest are so slow, that the quickest of them seems to con∣tinue in the very same point above half an hour, and so how exact soever the observation be, it may occasion the mistake of seven or eight de∣grees; whereas every Longitude should, if it were possible, be computed within as few minutes. Many other methods have been invented to solve this difficulty, whereof some are too erro∣neous to be mentioned, others too nice to be practised. Some Artists have undertaken to make Clocks to go so exactly, that being set to the just time of day at any known place, they shall go true to a minute for many days, and so being carried to an unknown one, will shew the hour at the place where it was set, which being compared with the hour, taken by the Sun or Stars, at the present place, will (as before) give the diffe∣rence of their Longitudes. But such Clocks as these have never yet been made, that we have heard of; tho of late, the Art is arrived to so great a perfection, that it seems scarce capable of any farther improvement. Others also have observed, that the spots in some of the Pla∣nets, and consequently their bodies themselves move regularly round their own axis, as Jupiter doth in less then ten hours; hence they collect, that if the time and manner of these spots appearance were calculated for any known Meridian, and then observed at another, their difference in Lon∣gitude may hereby be found out, as well as by any of the foregoing methods. But, besides many other difficulties which attend this observation, it cannot be made without the assistance of better Telescopes then are ordinarily to be had. To reduce the degrees of Longitude and La∣titude, and of all other Circles described on the Earth to English miles, or any other known mea∣sures, 'tis necessary that we first know how many of them answer to one degree; which being a∣greed upon, it will be easie to compute, not only the distance in miles, betwixt two particu∣lar places, whose Longitude and Latitude is gi∣ven, but also all the dimensions of the whole Earth. Our English miles are derived originally from the length of Barly-corns, 3 of which are an inch, 12 inches a foot, sixteen feet and an half a perch, 40 perch a furlong, 8 furlongs (that is 1760 yards) a mile by statute. And the opi∣nion most commonly received is, that about 60 of these are answerable to a degree in any great Circle on the Earth, and one of them to a minute. If so, then 60 multiplied by 360, or 21600 miles is the greatest Circuit. Its Diameter is 6872. The superficies is 148435200 square miles. The so∣lid content is 169921796242 cubic miles. When two places differ only in Latitude, the degrees of the Meridian intercepted betwixt them, mul∣tiplied by 60, gives their distance in miles. If they differ in Longitude only, and are both un∣der the Equator, their difference in degrees is likewise to be multiplied by 60. But when they are distant from the Equator, the Parallel under which they are is less, and so fewer miles equal a degree in it. The number of them in any de∣gree of Latitude betwixt the Equator and the Poles is found out by this proportion. As the Radius is to the sine complement of the Latitude: So is 60 to a fourth; which is the num∣ber of miles, answering to a degree of Longi∣tude,
under that Parallel. By this rule the follow∣ing table is calculated to each degree of Lati∣tude, shewing the number of miles, and sixtieth parts answering to a degree in their several Pa∣rallels.   English. Lat. Mil. Min. Equator 60 00 1 59 56 2 59 55 3 59 52 4 59 50 5 59 46 6 59 40 7 59 37 8 59 24 9 59 10 10 59 4 11 58 52 12 58 40 13 58 28 14 58 12 15 58 00 16 57 40 17 57 20 18 57 4 19 56 44 20 56 24 21 56 00 22 55 36 23 55 12 24 54 48 25 54 24 26 54 00 27 53 28 28 53 00 29 52 28 30 51 56 31 51 24 32 50 52 33 50 20 34 49 44 35 49 8 36 48 32 37 47 56 38 47 16 39 46 36 40 46 00 41 45 16 42 44 36 43 43 52 44 43 8 45 42 24 46 41 40 47 41 0 48 40 8 49 39 20 50 38 32 51 37 44 52 37 00 53 36 8 54 35 26 55 34 24 56 33 32 57 32 40 58 31 48 59 31 00 60 30 00 61 29 4 62 28 8 63 27 12 64 26 16 65 25 20 66 24 24 67 23 28 68 22 32 69 21 32 70 20 32 71 19 32 72 18 32 73 17 32 74 16 32 75 15 32 76 14 32 77 13 32 78 12 32 79 11 28 80 10 24 81 9 20 82 8 20 83 7 20 84 6 12 85 5 12 86 4 12 87 3 12 88 2 4 89 1 4 90   0 When places differ both in Longitude and La∣titude, the distance betwixt them is also found out by two operations in Trigonometry, where∣by an oblique angl'd spherical Triangle is resolv'd, having two sides, and the angle intercepted, gi∣ven, to find out the other side; for in the pre∣sent case, the complements of the Latitudes are the two sides; the angle made by them at the Pole is the difference of the Longitudes; and the nearest distance betwixt the two places, mea∣sured by the arc of a great Circle, is the other side. But this case hath so many varieties and in∣tricacies, that it will be too tedious to set down the whole operation, especially because it is in effect the same problem with that in Naviga∣tion. Having the difference of Longitude and Latitude betwixt two places, to find out the de∣grees of the Rumb leading to them; which may be more properly demonstrated in another Vo∣lume, to be set forth concerning such matters. An easie method, and sufficiently accurate for ordinary use, is to extend your Compasses from one place to the other, and then to apply them to the Equator, and mark how many degrees they set off there, which being multiplied by 60, gives their distance in miles. But indeed the most accurate observers find, that about 66 miles and a quarter, answer to a degree in the Equator; so that 60 is used only for the roundness of the number, and readiness of computation, every mile according to this rate answering to a minute; which would be a very strange and happy chance, if it were exactly so. This may be discovered by several ways, but the most practicable and certain is, by taking the height of the Pole at two places, distant North∣ward one from the other about an hundred miles, or as much more as may be; and then taking the true distance and situation of one place from the other by a large surveying Instrument and Scale (made by an accurate workman), not go∣ing always along the High-ways, but from by∣stations, observing Churches, and such remarka∣ble places. The miles, and other measures are so much different in one Nation, from what they are in another, yea in one part of the same Nation from what they are in another, that they cannot with∣out a great deal of difficulty and uncertainty, be reduced to one common standard; hence it is, that often in the same Map, we have a triple scale of miles, the longest, shortest, and mean ones. The Italian mile is commonly reckon'd equal to the English. Two of these make a French League; somewhat more then three of them a Spanish League; four of them a German mile; five, and somewhat more, a Swedish or Danish mile. What hath been farther attempted for the re∣duction of shorter foreign measures to our English foot, may be seen in the following table.   English Feet. Inch. 10th part. English Foot 00 12 00 Rynland, or Lynden,which was the old Roman Foot 01 00 04 Leyden Ell 02 03 01 Paris Foot 01 00 08 Lyon Ell 03 11 07 Bologna Ell 02 00 08 Amsterdam Foot 00 11 03 Ell 02 03 02 Brill Foot 01 01 02 Dort Foot 01 02 02 Antwerp Foot 00 11 03 Ell 02 03 03 Lorain Foot 00 11 04 Mechlin Foot 00 11 00 Middleburg Foot 00 11 09 Strasburg Foot 00 11 00 Bremen Foot 00 11 06 Cologn Foot 00 11 04 Frankford and Menain Foot 00 11 04 Ell 01 09 09 Hamburg Ell 01 10 08 Leipsig Ell 02 03 01 Lubic Ell 01 09 08 Noremburgh Foot 01 00 01 Ell 02 03 03 Bavaria Foot 00 11 04 Vienna Foot 01 00 06 Spanish or Castile Palm 00 09 00 Spanish Vare, or Rod 03 00 00 Foot 01 00 00 Lisbon Vare 02 09 00 Gibralter Vare 02 09 01 Toledo Foot 00 10 07 Vare 02 08 02 Roman Larger Foot 00 11 01 Roman Lesser Foot 00 11 06 Roman Palm, ten making a Canna 00 08 08 Bononia Foot 01 02 04 Ell 02 01 07 Perch 12 00 05 Florence Ell, or Brace 01 11 00 Naples Palm 00 09 06 Brace 02 01 02 Canna 06 10 05 Genoa Palm 00 09 06 Mantoua Foot 01 06 08 Milan Calamus 06 06 05 Parma Cubit 01 10 04 Venice Foot 01 01 09 Dantzick Foot 00 11 03 Ell 01 10 08 Copenhagen Foot 00 11 06 Prague, in Bohemia, Foot 01 00 03 Riga Foot 01 09 09 China Cubit 01 00 02 Turin Foot 01 00 07 Cairo Cubit 01 09 09 Persian Arash 03 02 03 Constantinople greater Pike 02 02 04 Greek Foot 01 00 01
PAge 7. col. 2. l. 29. in the Transactions of the Royal Society, ann. 1674, n. 101, it is mentioned, that the Grand Tzaar sent to disco∣ver Nova Zembla, and found it a Peninsula join'd to Tartary, as in the Map; which if true, we can∣not well imagine, how Barents should winter upon it; nor how divers other relations agree to it, as concerning Waygatz, and the like; tho the French Surgeon seems to make it also continued to the main land. In sum, it is most probable, that very little of those parts is discovered; they who sail thither not tracing from Port to Port, but because of the ill weather, harbouring where they first approach, and departing as soon as they can. In the year 1676, the industrious and in∣genious Seaman Capt. Wood, was again sent out by his Majesty King Charles II. to make a more perfect discovery of that North-East passage; perswaded unto it by divers relations of our own and Dutch Mariners; who reported many things concerning it, which Capt. Wood upon his own experience conceives to be false; as that they were either under or near the Pole; that it was there all thaw'd water, and the weather as warm as at Amsterdam, &c. He saith further, that himself could pass no further then 76 deg. where he found the Sea, as far as he could discern, entirely frozen without intermission. That it is most likely, that Nova Zembla and Greenland are the same Conti∣nent, at least that there is no passage between them; for that he found scarce any current, and that little which was, ran E. S. E. along the ice; and seemed only to be a small tide, rising not above eight foot. That whilst he was in that de∣gree there was nothing but Fogs, Frost, Snow, and all imaginable ill weather; tho at the same time the heat seemed to be as great as at any time in England. That the land, where not cover'd with Snow, was so boggy that they could not walk upon it; being grown over with a deep moss, under which they dug in less then two foot to a firm body of ice; so that it was impossible to make any Cave for their winter-lodging, had they been forced to it. There were great store of rills of very good waters, and some veins of black Marble. The point he landed at, he call'd Speedill point in 76 deg. 30 min. the Sea-water was ex∣traordinary salt, and so clear that he could see the shells at 80 fathoms deep. The like opinion also Capt. James hath deli∣ver'd concerning the North-West passage, which is, That there is no passing that way to China, Japan, &c. because there is a constant tide, ebb and flood setting into Hudsons Straits, the flood still coming from the Eastward; which, as it procedes (correspondent to the distance) it alters its time of full Sea; which also entring into Bays, and broken ground, becomes distracted, and re∣verseth with half tides. 2. Because he found there no small fish, as Cods, &c. and few great ones; nor any bones of Whales, Morsses, or the like found upon the shore; nor any drift wood. 3. Be∣cause in 65 deg. 30 min. the ice lay all in rands, which he believes to be produc'd as in the shoal'd Bays. For had there been any Ocean beyond it, it would have been broken to pieces; as they found it coming thro the Strait into the Sea East∣ward. 4. Because the ice seeks its way out to the Eastward, driving out at Hudsons Straits. But if there be any passage, it is very narrow, and the voyoge very long; nor can any large Vessels fit to merchandise, be able to endure the ice and other incommodities, as the long nights, cold, snows, frosts, &c. P. 24. col. 2. l. 36. till Vasile Ivanowitz about the year 1509. P. 36. col. 2. l. 63. as 5509  1679. ibid. l. 66 7188-5509. P. 36. col. 1. l. 41. Hun∣gary. About the year 1188 Bela was King of Hun∣gary, perhaps the original of the Imperial Family of the Russes, the time corresponding very well. P. 39. col. 2. l. 1. del. whose name seems to have been Zac. Litspenow. l. 67. He died in the forty-ninth year of his age, and two and thirtieth of his reign, in the year 1677, and left his son Feo∣dor Alexowich, a young Prince of about ninteen years of age, who reigns this present year, 1680. In the Description of Sweden. The times of the Kings supply thus, the 6th began his reign A. M. 2014, the 25th (the times of the rest being uncertain) began A. M. 2637, the 26th A. M. 2712, the 27th A. M. 2831, the 31th (the intermediate being also uncertain) A. M. 3031, the 32th A. M. 3060, the 33th A. M. 3125, the 34th A. M. 3174, the 35th 3252, the 36th A. M. 3551, the 46th A. D. 3916, the 47th (Ericus III.) A. M. 3929, in whose time accord∣ing to Loccenius, whose computation we have here follow'd, conceives our Saviour to have been born. decorative device
map of the North Pole A MAP of the NORTH-POLE and the PARTS ADIONING. depiction of the Sheldonian Theater OXON At the THEATER MDCLXXX▪ NOVA ZEMBLA map insert of Nova Zembla In the Philosophicll Transactions of a:o 1674 n:101, there is set down a Description of a Nova Zembla as it was sent to the Royall Society from a Russia Merchant, and discovered by order of the Grand Czaar▪ but there being not joyned to it either Longitude Latitude or other measure, we though it better to follow the two newest Maps, one printed at Amsterdam a:o 1678, the other at Nuremberg 1679▪ and to place this by itselfe▪ which shews it not an Iland, but joyned with the Continent at the letter K. K. royal blazon (of Charles Fitzcharles) debruised with a baton sinister To the Right Honble: Charles Fitz Charles Earle of Plymouth, Viscount Totnes, and Baron Dartmouth▪ This Map is Humbly Dedicated by M: Pitt. Letter C. stands for Cape I. Iland M. Mount P. Point R. River S. Sound
OXON UNIV DOMI∣NUS ILLV∣MINA∣TIO MEA blazon of Oxford University flanked by angels GREENLAND. GREENLAND,e Si∣ation of Green∣land. call'd by the Dutch Spitsbergen, because of its sharp∣pointed Rocks and Mountains, lies from 76 Degrees of Nor∣therly Latitude to 82; but how much far∣ther, as also whether Island or Continent, is not yet discover'd; for as much as no man hitherto is known to have passed beyond that. Our Mariners generally conceive it an Island; the Dutch only say, that they believe the Land to reach more North, because the Ice they found was not broken and floating as in the Sea, but firm and stable, as continued to the shoar. The South part of it looks towards the Promontories of Finland and Lapland, North-Cape, North-Kin, &c. The next Land on the West, is the large Country of Groenland, and Nova Zembla on the East; but these at so vast a distance, that they cannot be reckon'd as its confines or neigh∣bours. The Dutch attribute the first discovery of it to three of their own Pilots,The Dis∣covery of Green∣land. and have given most of the names to the Creeks and Promontories according to their own fancy. Which diligence had our men used from time to time, as also been careful to make Charts, as our industrious Neighbours oblige their Shipmasters to do; di∣vers discoveries had been asserted to this Nation, which are now almost disputed from us.L. 4. c. 17. The Dutch gave names (saith Purchas upon this very occasion) to places long before discovered by the English, as if themselves had been the finders. I shall instance only in these discoveries, which stran∣gers (as you may see in Hackluit) attribute to us:Vol. 1. . 512, 513, &c. But the Dutch, tho following our steps, en∣deavour to assert them to three of their own Pilots, ann. 1596, who searching for a passage to the East-Indies, light upon Greenland; these were Jacob Heemskerck, William Barents, and John Cornelis Ryp; what these men effected, will be best known by their own Journal, recorded by Purchas. June 7, 1696, they were in 74 De∣grees, the water as green as grass, [by the way, it were worth enquiry, whether this be not the cause of the blue Ice, which is by every one noted as peculiar to these Coasts]. June 9, they were upon Cherry- or Bear-Island, in 74 Degrees and 13 Minutes, the variation of the needle was 13 Degrees. June 13, they departed thence North and by East 16 Dutch miles. June 14, 15, they continued their course 20 miles. June 16, 17, 18, they continued 30 miles. June 19, they saw land, at 80 Degrees and 11 Minutes, and sailed South∣ward upon the Western Coast till 79 deg. 30 m. where they found a good road, but could not land because of Ice. June 20, they kill'd a mighty Bear, whose skin was 13 foot long; they found also a very good Haven, and good anchorage; on the East were two Islands; on the West a great Creek or a River, where they found many Geese (sitting upon their Eggs) of a perfect red colour, such as come once a year into some parts of Hol∣land, (as it should seem) from this place. This land they supposed to be Greenland, the Compass varied 16 deg. June 23, they weighed Anchor, but were forced back with Ice. 25, They weighed Anchor again, and sailed Southward, coasting till they entred into a River, whence they got not to Sea again till the 27th. 28, They kept on their course Southward, where there were so many Fowls that they flew against their Sails and Masts. 30, They were in 75 deg. July 1, they saw Cherry- or Bear-Island. This is all that I can find concern∣ing their voyage. To this I shall oppose two voy∣ages, the first of Sir Hugh Willoughby 1553, the other of Steven Burrows 1556. The Dutch do not allow Sir Hugh Willoughby to have passed Seynam,Blaeu's Maps. which is in 70 deg. and that also in 1571. Yet in their Maps they call a small Island by the name of Willoughby's Land; of which our men know nothing, except it be the same with Hope Island, a part of Greenland, as it is most likely; for the land he discover'd was a large Country, by the West-side whereof he sailed some days together with a good wind, and therefore could not be a small Island; as they describe this, which H. Hudson could not find when he sought for it; see a discourse of this in Purchas's Pilgrim, l. 3. c. 1, & 15. We have nothing of this voyage, but those imperfect or short notes which were found lying upon his table after his death; wherein it is contain'd; that they parted from Seynam Aug. 2. Aug. 14, they were 160 leagues North and Easterly from Seynam; they continued sailing till Sept. 14, when they landed on a country high, rocky, and un∣inhabited, from whence the cold and Ice forced them to return more South; which they did, till they reach'd Arzina a River in Lapland, where the next Spring they were all found frozen to death in their Ship. A few years after this, about 1556, we read of Steven Burrows, who searching a passage by the North-East unto the Indies, arrived in 112 deg. 25 min. of Longitude, and 76 of Latitude, and so sailed to 80 deg. 11 min. and thence to Nova Zembla. Now this cannot be any known place but Greenland; which is also con∣firm'd, because the Land was desolate, the Ice of a blew colour, and great store of Fowls. All signs of Greenland. But from this time began a great and familiar trade from England to all those Northern Regions; and many trials made to dis∣cover the North-East passage; so that no question but that they landed many times upon Greenland, but took no notice of it, as neither did the Dutch,
till many years after, when a gainful fishing was there found out. Before which, none either gave it a name, took possession of it, or pretended to the discovery. This trade was managed for di∣vers years by the Russia company of English Mer∣chants, as will appear by the story of it, which is this. In 1553, the King and Queen (Philip and Mary) gave a commission to certain Merchants to trade into Russia, and made them a corporation; who presently not only began a very brisk and profitable negotiation into those Northern Coun∣tries; but employed divers Ships for finding out a passage that way into the Indies. Particularly Arthur Pet, and Charles Jackman about the year 1580, rambled over all those Seas, and it is very probable they also were upon Greenland; but there is nothing particularly known concerning them. No nation but the English frequented those Nor∣thern Seas till 1578, that a Dutch Ship came to Co∣la, and a year or two after, another to St. Nicholas by the solicitation of an English man that set him∣self against the company. Afterwards they crept in more and more, and in 1594 they employed Barents and others, to find out a passage to the Indies, and in 1596 the three Dutch Pilots afore∣named upon the same design; who first light up∣on Bear-Island and thence to Greenland. Barents separating from his company, sayled to the North∣east of Nova-Zembla, where he lost his Ship, and himself died. In 1603 Steven Benet was employed, who went no farther then Cherry-Island, whence he brought some Lead Oar. In 1608 Henry Hudson, was sent forth to discover the North-pole, who went to 82 deg. (as did also Thomas Mar∣maduke of Hull, 1612), but saw divers Islands be∣yond that, and gave names to divers places upon Greenland formerly discovered; as Whale-bay, Hack∣luits-Headland, &c. The company having been informed of the great number of Sea-horses, Morsses, and Whales, that frequented Cherry-Island and Greenland, first applyed themselves with one or two Ships to the killing of Morsses; which in a short time made Morsses grow scarce. In the year therefore 1610, they set out the Ship Amity, Jonas Pool comman∣der, for Whale-fishing; who fell upon the land formerly discovered though not regarded, and called it Greenland: whether because of the green Moss, wherewith it was covered, or mistaking it for Groenland, a Northern Countrey formerly dis∣covered, or for some other reason I know not. He called it also King James New-land, but that name is grown obsolete. He also gave names to many of the most eminent places upon the west side of the Country; as to Horn-Sound, because there they found an Unicorns-horn; Ice-Point, Bell-Point, Lowness-Island, Black-Point, Cape-cold, Ice-Sound, Knotty-Point, Fowl-Sound, Deer-Sound. And in Cross-Road, 79 deg. 15 min. variation 18 deg. 16 min. northwest, he seized upon the Country to the use of his Masters, by setting up a red Cross, and fastning a writing to it. There also he made some quantity of Oyl, and brought an Unicorns-horn (as they called it) from thence. And this was the first time that any benefit was made by the fishing of that place. In 1611 the company hired six Basques, expert Fishermen, and sent them with two Ships to fish for Whales in Greenland, where the first Whale they killed, yielded them twelve tuns of Oyl. Some of his company looking about the Harbours for Whales discovered in Sir Thomas Smiths Bay a great number of Morsses. The Ma∣ster of one of the Ships taking with him some of his men, went thither and killed of them 500, and kept 1000 alive on Shoar, which afterwards they let go. In 1612 two Ships more were sent, when they killed seventeen Whales and some Morsses and made 180 tuns of oyl. This year the Hollanders came thither with one Ship, con∣ducted by Andrew Sallows an Englishman. Another English Pilot brought thither also a Spanish Ship; the English Ships met with, and threatned them; but notwithstanding they made a good voyage. In 1613 the company sent thither seven Ships, who had a Patent to prohibit all strangers, except the Muscovia company, from frequenting those coasts. Yet they met with fifteen Sail of Dutch, French, Flemish, and some interlopers of our own Nation. To some the General gave liberty to fish; with others he made composition to have half (or part) of what they caught; others he drave away from the Country, after he had taken out the English that were in their Ships; though themselves also by that means were not so well laden as they might have been: this year they discovered Hope-Island, and other Islands to the West. In 1614 they set out thirteen great Ships (be∣sides two Pinnaces) well armed; and the Dutch eighteen; whereof four men of war, who being stronger, stayed and fished there, as did our men also; but both parties made a poor voyage. This land they fully discovered to 80 deg. by Tho. Sher∣win, and Will. Baffin; and by others, divers Islands toward the East. They also took possession of several parts of the Country for the King, set∣ting up a Cross and the Kings Arms in Lead: (the Dutch afterwards did the like in the same places for the Prince of Orange). In 1615, they set out two great Ships, and two Pinaces, which by reason of fourteen Sail sent by the Hollanders, came home not fully laden. This year the King of Denmark sent three Ships, men of war, with an English Pilot James Vaden, to demand Custom of the Ships for fishing upon his Island as he pretended; the which was de∣nied, and the Island affirmed to belong to the King of England. In 1616 the company sent eight Sail of great Ships and two Pinaces, which being all appointed to several harbours returned with full lading, besides an overplus they left on Shore. This year they discovered Edges-Island, where they killed 1000 Morsses, and other Islands North-eastward; The Hollanders sent four Ships, who made a bad voyage. In 1617 the English sent out fourteen Ships, and two pinaces; they departed from Gravesend April 24, and arrived at Greenland, May 28 where they met with eleven Sail of Dutch fishing in Horn-sound, whom they forced away, and took from them what they had caught; as also the Kings Subjects, which were found in their Ships; this year they made 1900 tuns of Oyl. They sent also a small Ship north-eastward, which discovered Wyches-Island in 79 deg. and some other places; where they kil∣led store of Morsses. This year the Hull-men sent a Ship or two to Greenland, and pretended that it was their discovery; which was by oath in the Ad∣miralty proved to be false. The Dutch also did the same. In 1518 an Hull-man meeting with some Zelanders animated them to go to Greenland, and in Horn-sound to make a voyage perforce; but the English chaced them from thence, took some of their goods, besides some ordinance and am∣munition, which was afterwards restored. A new company also of some English, Scots, and Zelan∣ders procured a grant for setting forth Ships to those parts; which caused the former adventurers to joyn to them the East-India company; who set out that year thirteen Ships and two Pinaces, but were disappointed: and some of them fought with, robbed and worsted by a fleet of twenty-three Sail of Zealanders, who came thither on
purpose: so that proved a very unfortunate voyage. In 1619 nine Ships were sent, which by reason of the Hollanders being there before them, and driving away the Whales from the fishing places, made also a losing voyage. Besides another mis∣fortune, for as one of their best Ships lay at an∣chor under a mountain, a great piece of a rock of Ice, broke off, and fell upon the Ship, killed divers, and wounded more, and so broke the Ship, that she was very difficultly fitted up to serve home; and when they came home, the Dutch, who had fully laded, so much under∣sold them, that they were very much discou∣raged, and gave over their trading thither; But Mr. Ralph Freeman with a few more of the companions still continued, and in 1620 set out seven Sail; which by reason of so many Hollan∣ders and Danes, returned half laden. And in 1621 eight Ships went out, which, notwithstanding all the harm the Dutch did them, brought a reasonable good adventure of 1100 tuns of Oyl. In 1622, nine Ships were sent, one whereof was wrackt upon the Ice, the other brought home 1300 tuns of Oyl. We find nothing worth relating till 1630, when the Company set out a Ship,ut of the Relation Publisht by Dr. W. Wats. commanded by William Goodler; who landed in Bell-sound, and quickly made up his lading, sending for the Ship to come to take it in: the wind proved to be con∣trary, so the Master set on shoar eight of his men to kill them some Deer; who took with them two Dogs, a Gun, two Lances, and a Tinder-box. The first day they killed fourteen Deer, but being wea∣ry, and the night coming on, they laid them down to sleep in the convenientest place they could find. The next day proved very foggy, and so much Ice was got betwixt the shoar and the Ship, that the Ship was forced to stand so far off into the Sea, that they lost the sight of her. So they resol∣ved to hunt till they came to Green-harbour, where they would stay for their ship. In this passage they killed eight Deer more, with which they laded their Shallop, and came to Green-harbour; where when they arrived they found that the Ships were gone thence: they resolved therefore to hasten to Bell-sound to their Captain, and for the more speed they cast their Venison over-board into the Sea: so they sailed all that night and the next day, but having no compass, they wandred to and again so long till the Ships were departed thence also. These eight persons seeing themselves in almost a desperate condition, resolved however not to be wanting to their own preservation; and therefore they presently went about to get provision for the long Winter. The first day they killed seven Deer and four Bears, the next six Deer; but the night coming upon them, and leaving their provision in their Shallop, there arose a very high wind, which sunk their Shallop, and in the morning they found a considerable part of their stores swimming by the shore, which with great labour and some danger they recovered, as also their Shallop; which by main force they haled upon the Shore. The next thing was to provide their habitation, for which purpose they made use of the tent wherein the Cooper used to work, which was made of Timber and boards covered with Flemish tile, which being unable to resist the cold, they built another tent or house within it twenty foot long and sixteen broad, and stowed the di∣stance with earth, bones of fish, fritture of Whales, and such old timber as they could gather up of broken Shallops and the like; of which they made the best provision they could, laying it upon the beams that were under the tiles. They made also four Cabins, two to a Cabin, and furnished them with the skins of Bears, Deer, and Foxes they had caught, besides pieces of old Sails they found there. Having accommodated these things, they went out again to search for more provision; and up∣on the Ice they found two Morsses sleeping, they killed them both, and rosted them in their tent, and eat them at leisure. Reviewing their provi∣sion, they found it unsufficient to serve half the winter, and therefore they first limited themselves to one meal a day, and afterwards cut off one meal in a week more; and so many meals they fed upon the fritture of the Whales, reserving their Venison for sickness and Holidays; this they preserved by roasting and stowing it in their emp∣ty casks which they found there. Before they were well provided, they began to want light; for from October the fourteenth, till February the third, they had not the sight of the Sun; but in clear wea∣ther they wanted not the light of the Moon, which was a great advantage and consolation unto them. For looking out on a bright moon-shi∣ning day, they espied a great she-Bear with her Cubs coming towards the Tent; they fought with and killed her, but the Cubs escaped; they haled her into their Tent, and fed upon her twen∣ty days: her flesh was tolerably pleasant and whole∣some, but the Liver made their skins to peel off: which was also observed by the Dutch that win∣tered in Nova-Zembla. Many Bears afterwards came to visit them, at least forty, but they could kill no more then seven, one of which was at least six foot high. As the Sun and day began to ap∣pear, the Fowls, and Foxes began to come a∣broad, for which they set traps and springes. Of Fowls they took a vast number; and at several times they got about fifty Foxes, which they roast∣ed, and found to be pleasant and wholesome food. The Dutch relation of their men that wintred in Nova-Zembla saith, that though they did not re∣lish Bears flesh, yet Foxes they liked well, for by their Flesh they were much relieved in their Scurvies. May the first, it being somewhat warm, they went abroad to seek provision, where they light of great quantities of Willocks-eggs, which was a great refreshment to them: that day also came two English Ships into the Sound, which sent forth to seek them, and took them in, and brought them safe and sound into England. The effects of the cold upon them (the like al∣so being testified by those of William Barents com∣pany that wintred in Nova-Zembla) are wonderful;The won∣derful cold. as that it raised blisters on their flesh, as if they had been burnt with fire: if they touched Iron it stuck to their fingers; whilst they sate by a great fire, their stockings burnt, yet their feet not sen∣sible of heat, and their backs were frozen. Yet our men either had not such reason or will to complain as the Dutch in Nova-Zembla, whose Shoos froze as hard as horn to their feet; whose Sack was quite frozen; as likewise a Barrel of Wa∣ter became perfect Ice in one night; that their Carpenter taking a nail out of his mouth, the skin and flesh followed glued to it with Ice. That they heated Stones at the fire to apply to their feet and other parts of their bodies in their Cabines, to hinder them from freezing; with many like miseries which I omit. The last who hath brought us any news from this country, is Frederick Martens an Hamburger,Freder. Martens Voyage. who set out from the Elb, April the fifth, 1671. He hath printed a very large and accurate de∣scription both of the land and all things therein; as Fowls, Plants, Beasts, Mountains, &c. Which he did, as may be supposed, in great part to satisfy the curiosity of several Gentlemen of the Royal Society, who intreated his diligence in answering such queries as they sent him. We shall omit such
things as we think not so useful, and abridg the rest for fear of cloying the Reader. He first ar∣rived upon Charles-Isle of seventy Miles in length,Harbours and Ha∣vens. not above ten broad, separated from Greenland by a narrow strait called Forelands-ford, betwixt this Foreland and Muscle-haven are the highest moun∣tains, and though the greatest part of the moun∣tains and rocks of Greenland are of a red soil, and communicate that colour to the Snow upon them, which makes them look like fire; yet there are seven that are of a blew colour, and betwixt them many sharp pointed rocks. In South-haven they com∣monly repair their faulty Ships, being a very large and commodious harbour; wherein thirty and sometimes forty Ships have conveniently ancho∣red at the same time. Here also they take in fresh water, which runs plentifully from the mountains upon the melting of the Ice and Snow; for the Rivers (at least as far as they can go,) are too brac∣kish, and there are not any Springs or Wells as yet discovered. This Haven hath high Mountains on either side, but especially on the left, particu∣larly one called the Bee-hive, another the Devils∣huck, which is commonly covered with a thick mist; and which, when the wind drives it that way, darkens the Haven. Within this Haven also is the Island called of Dead-men, whom they ordinarily bury here in Coffins, heaping Stones upon them: where the bodies (if they escape the Bears) are pre∣served entire a long time: some say they have seen them so after having been dead thirty years. Here are also several Islands called Fowl-Islands; be∣cause of the vast number of Fowls that breed there. Next follows a Bay called by the Dutch Mauritius-Bay, where some have wintred; the relation where∣of, because it contains nothing considerable be∣sides what is before expressed, I shall omit. Near to this stand the only houses in the whole Coun∣trey, which are a few Cottages built by the Dutch for the making their Oyl, with a great Gun to de∣fend them, and those they call Smearbourg, and the Harlingish-Cookery. All other nations burn their houses at their departure. In the Northern-bay is an Island the Dutch call Vogel-sang for the great noise that the Fowls make when they take their flight. Next is Monyers-Bay, the furthest North of the Western part of Greenland; then Roe-field, so called for its abundance of Deer, the Soil here seems to be all Slats set up edgwise. Muscle-haven lieth at the mouth of the Way-gate, North of which Martens sailed to 81 deg. he saw seven Islands more, farther North, but the Ice permitted him not to approach them. Walter Thy∣mens Ford is by us called Alderman Freemans Inlet, and is a large mouth of a River, which is undis∣covered. The Soil,Soil. as much as has been discovered, of Greenland, is in most places nothing but Rocks or heaps of vast stones, many of them so high, that the upper half seems to be above the clouds; and so steep that they seem as if they would tumble down, as many times great pieces do break from the whole with a terrible noise. The little valley between them is seldom any thing but broken stones, and Ice heaped up from many generations. About Roefield and Muscle-haven is the greatest quantity of low land; yet is that also full of Rocks, stony, and for the most part cover'd with Snow and Ice; which being melted, as in some places it is in Summer, discovers no∣thing but a barren ground, producing heath, moss, and some very few plants. These Moun∣tains, which are exposed to the warm air and Sun-beams, are in some places clothed with the same; and in these places, and the holes of the Rocks, nest infinite quantity of Fowls, whose dung, with the moss washed down by the melt∣ed Snow, makes a mould in the valleys, or ra∣ther clefts, which if open to the Sun-beams, when the Ice is dissolved, produceth some few plants; as a kind of Cabbage-Lettuce of a Cress-taste, Scurvy-grass, Sorrel, Snakeweed, Mousear, Hearts-ease, a kind of Strawberry, divers sorts of Ranun∣culus, and of Sempervives, one like an Aloes, another like our Prickmadam, a third like our Wall-Pepper; and some few others, unknown to our Climate. The Sea seems not so salt here as in other places.The Sea. It is generally so clear, that one may see at least twelve fathoms under water; and commonly of the colour of the air. The course of it at Musclebay, and some other places, is observed to be Northward. There hath been no particular notice taken of the Tydes; and Martens thinks, that it ebbeth and floweth not regularly, according to the Moon (for then it would drown the nests of the birds that build nigh the surface of the water in the Islands) but rather that the high-water is caused by the winds. The whole land is so encompassed with Ice,The Ice and cold. that it is difficult to be approach'd; and 1613, about the middle of June the Ice was so much and so strong, that the Ships which went from Holland to the Whale-fishing, were not able to come to the shore; nor was the Snow thawed from the Land. The Rain-Deer also, and other Beasts, were many of them starv'd for want of food. Though ordinarily the Ice breaks in May, yet if the Northerly or Easterly winds continue long (for those are the coldest) the Frost endures the longer. For though the Sun stay half the year, yet never arising above 33 deg. 40 min. above the Horizon, its beams are so few and scatter'd, that they are most-times insufficient to dissolve the Ice, much less to dispel the cold. From the weakness of the heat also it proceeds, that the vapours from the earth are neither hot enough to warm the air, nor thin enough to rise to any considerable height, but they hang con∣tinually in thick dark mists upon the mountains, and sometimes upon the earth it self, insomuch that he which is at one end of his Ship cannot discern his companion at the other. Concerning the Cold and Ice it is further re∣markable, that the Ice is oftentimes raised above the water many (16) fathoms, and this is much fresher than the other; many-times also it is thirty-five fathoms underwater, which is more salt, and easilier melted. It is frozen sometimes to the bot∣tom of the Sea. Freezing makes a great, and to them who have not heard it before, a terrible sound, as the Ice doth also at the breaking. Sometimes it breaks only into great pieces, which is very dangerous to the Ships, for then many times the Sea, beaten from one Ice to another, is turn'd into a whirlpool, which overturns the Ships. Some∣times it shatters at once into small pieces, with more noise, but less danger. The Seamen de∣fended their vessels at first with Ropes, Mats, and such like soft and loose materials hung down by the sides of the Ships, whereby they thought to break the force of the Ice; but they quickly found this too weak a defence. Now they use Poles, Hooks, and the like, to keep it at a distance, and that the Ship may drive along before it; which serves well in a calm, but an high wind often dashing the Ice against the Ship breaks it to pieces. Some∣times it is crushed between two pieces of Ice; sometimes thrust up upon other pieces; William Barents found upon a great Ice 10 fathoms above water, much earth, and Fowls-Eggs lying upon it. The Beasts of this Country, are only these:The beasts. 1. Foxes, white, gray, tawny, and black. 2. Rain-Deer,
which by feeding upon the yellow Moss in three months grow to a prodigious fatness, above four inches upon the ribs; which seems to be the reason, why they are able to endure so long a winter; though sometimes also they dye for want of food. At the first discovery they did not fear or avoid our people; but when one of them found himself wounded with a bullet, he assaulted the shooter, threw him down, and had not his com∣panions rescued him, the poor man was in danger to have lost his life; they are now as wild as other Deer. 3, Bears, chiefly white ones, which are of a wonderful largeness, 6 foot high, their skins 14 foot long, above an 100 weight of fat has been ta∣ken out of one of them; and they have strength proportionable. When our men had killed so large a Bear that they were not able to bring him off; and went to call for more help: another Bear coming by accident, took him up in his mouth, and run away with him, and at a distance began to eat him. Our men coming when he had eaten near half of him, found the other half as much as four of them could tug to their tent. The Hollanders in Nova Zembla observed, that when the Sun disappeared, the Bears left them till the Sun returned: and in their stead the Foxes grew more bold. The largest sort of Bears are those they call Water-Bears, that live by what they catch in the Sea, where they have been seen swim∣ming twelve miles from any shore. The Dutch Relation saith, that skins have been seen fourteen ells long, but they meant feet. Our men say, that the story of their bringing forth their young de∣formed, and that they reduce them into shape by licking, is a fable: for that they have seen very young ones, and some also taken out of their Dams bellies, perfectly formed. In this Country there doth not breed any great quantity of Land-fowls:. there is one of the big∣ness of a Lark, with a square bill, that feeds upon worms, and tasts not fishy. Another they call Snow-Fowl, of the bigness and colour of a Sparrow, with a white belly; being almost starved they flew into a Ship in great abundance, and were so tame that the Mariners took as many of them as they pleased; but as soon as they were fed with Hasty-pudding flew away, and would no more come near them. Of Water-fowl there is great variety, as Cuthbert-Ducks, Willocks, Stints, Sea-Pigeons, Sea-Parrets, Guls, Noddies, and in so great abun∣dance, that with their flights they darken the Sun; and at their rising make such a noise, that persons talking together cannot hear one another speak. Particularly there is one called by the Dutch Raadt∣sheer, all white as Snow except his Bill, (which is thin, small and sharp) his feet and eyes; he lives up∣on what he can get in the water. 2. A Diver or Didapper (called by the Mariners a Pigeon, be∣cause of the noise he makes) almost as big as a Duck, with a thin, crooked, sharp-pointed bill, two inches long, feathers black, legs and feet red: these swim very swift, endure long under water, and are tolerable good meat. 3. Like to this, but some∣what bigger, is the Lumb, only his belly is white, and his noise like the croaking of a frog; these build in the Mountains, and carry their young ones in their beaks to the Sea to teach them to swim and dive; their flesh is not good. 4. The Mew (called Kutle-gehf, from the noise he makes) hath a crooked bill with a bunch under it, his belly is all white, his wings and back gray, with black pinions, legs and feet; and a red ring about his eyes; the Fishermen baiting their hooks with Whales-flesh, catch store of these Mews as if they were Fish. He is pursued by another fowl for his dung, which as soon as he hath dropt, the other eats and leaves him. 5. The Allen pursues and beats the other Birds till they vomit their prey, for him to devour, which when done he goes his way from them. There are also great quantities of Fishes in these Seas, as Seals, Dog-fishes, Lobsters, Gernels,Fishes. or Shrimp-gurnets, Star-fish, Mackrel, Dragon-fish, Dolphins, Buts-head, Unicorns, and the like. But the chiefest profit, and that which draws men to those desolate and comfortless places, is the Whale-fishing. Of Whales there are several sorts: some unprofitable to the Fishers,Whales. as the Jubarta of a black colour, sixty foot long, with a fin upon his back: his fins are nothing worth, his back yeilds some, not much, Oyl: his belly none at all. Sedeva is of a white colour, bigger then the rest, his fins not above a foot long, scarce any Oyl. Sedeva Negra is of a black colour, with a great tumor upon his back, yields neither Oyl, Fins, nor Teeth. Sewria white as Snow, of the bigness of a Wherry, yeilds little Oyl, no fins, but is good to eat. Those which are more sought after, and profitable, are the Bearded or Grand-Bay, because first killed in Grand-bay in Newfoundland, black, with a smooth skin, and a thin shining membrane over it, white under the chaps; this is the best for Oyl and Fins, yielding an hundred Hogsheads of Oyl, and five hundred Fins; he is commonly about eighty foot long. Sarda is like the other, but lesser; so yeilds lesser Oyl, and Fins, hath growing things like Barnacles upon his back. Trumpa, as long, but thicker, then the former, of a grey colour, with one spout in his head, (the others have two) and teeth about a span long, but no Fins, in his mouth. In his head he hath a hole like a Well, wherein lies that they call Spermaceti; they also sometimes find Amber-grise in his guts like Cow-dung: his Oyl coagulates, and will be solid and white as Tallow: he will yeild forty Hogs∣heads of Oyl. Otta-Sotta gray, having white fins in his mouth, not above a yard long; he yeilds the best Oil, but not above thirty Hogsheads. These Fins are that we call the Whale-bone, and groweth in the upper jaw, on either side of his mouth, about three hundred of a side, but the short ones are not regarded. The Ancients thought that he lived upon the froth of the Sea, which he raised, and as it were, churned by violent beat∣ing upon the water with these Fins, and after∣wards sucked it up; and that because many times they found his stomach quite empty. O∣thers say, that he feeds upon such plants and weeds as he finds in the Sea, for they have found great quantity of such in his stomack; but it is most like∣ly that his chiefest meat are a certain sort of small Crabs, some call them Sea-Beetles, and Sea-Spiders, (whereof the Bays of that Sea are so cover'd that they seem black with them) of which sometimes his Fins hang full, which afterwards he sucks in. These he pursues continually, for they have both found the Crabs themselves, and also some∣times great quantities (in some a Bushel) of those little Stones called Oculi-Cancrorum, in his stomach. That they devour not great Fishes it is manifest, because their throat is so very strait, not above half a foot wide. The Female hath her natural part seven or eight foot wide, (the young one being bigger than an Hogshead when first brought forth) and the Male's is equal to a little Pil∣lar seven or eight foot long; she brings forth her Foetus alive, and nourisheth it with Milk, which is white and sweet, but tasting somewhat fishy: her Teats, two in number, are as it were sheath'd in her breasts, that they appear not till the young one comes to suck. Their skins the ancients used in∣stead of Ropes, as also for covering their Houses, and defence against the cold; under the skin is that they call the Blubber, or Adeps, out of which
being cut into thin slices, and put into hot Cop∣pers, the Oyl is melted, the flesh is thrown away; the ribs are employ'd to make the houses of the Laps, Fins, Samoieds and the like; the other bones they burn. The Tail serves for a chopping block, whereupon to cut their blubber. For the man∣ner of catching and ordering the Whale,Whale-fishing. it is this. When they have discovered him, which is by his spouting water, which they can discern at a great distance (though where they see plenty of those small Crabs, they have good hopes of find∣ing the Whales) seldom fewer then two Shallops well man'd make towards him; and row to him so near, that the Harponer hath opportu∣nity to lance out his Harping-iron, which he doth with all his force; but strikes not at ad∣venture, (for some parts of him, his head parti∣cularly, are not vulnerable), but either upon a soft piece of flesh, which he hath near his spout, or under a Fin. The Beast as soon as wounded hasts down to the bottom of the Sea, they still giving him more Rope, whereof one end is fa∣stened to the Harping-iron, then they diligently watch his rising again, when with their lances they wound him in the belly and such places as are softest, and deep as they can; taking heed always that he strike not them or their boat with his tail. When they see him spout up blood, they know he draws towards his death, and that shortly after he turns up his white belly; which as soon as they spy, they hale him close to the Ship, and with great Knives slice his sides, raising the blubber from the flesh; which they do by fixing in it strong Iron Hooks made fast to a Ship rope, which by a pully they lift up still as they cut and loosen the blub∣ber; many of these great flakes they put upon a rope, and so drag them to the Shore; where they are heaved up by a Crane, and laid upon the Tail of the Fish, chopt into small pieces, after∣wards sliced thin like Trenchers, so put into the Cauldrons or Coppers, which becoming brown with the fire are called Frittures, are taken out and cast away as having yeilded their Oyl. The Li∣quor then is laded out into a Boat half full of water, both to cool and cleanse it (by suffering all the filth to sink to the bottom) and thence by long Troughs, that it may be more cooled, conveyed into the Hogsheads or other like vessels.The Whale∣bone. The head which is at least one third of the whole Fish, is cut off, and tug'd as near the Shore as they can bring it, then hoised up by a crane, and the Fins (Bronchiae, Pinnae, or whatever you please to call them, their substance is like horn, but we call them Whale-bone), are cut out, dressed, and bound up by fifties; and the rest of the head, which yeilds Oyl, cut as the rest of the body. The tongue particularly; which being very great of the figure of a Wool-sack, is also fastened at both ends, and lifted up only in the midst, (with which he spouteth up the water) and about eight tuns weight, veild∣eth from six to eleven Hogsheads. One Housson a Diep-man in 1634 got twenty six Hogsheads (Ca∣dos) out of one tongue, and a hundred and twen∣ty out of the body of one Whale. The Whale hath many enemies;The Whales enemies. 1. A kind of lowse or insect that eats through his skin to de∣vour the fat; he hath on each side four feet, an head like an Acorn with four horns. 2. The Saw∣fish, which hath a long Snout, on either side set with teeth like a Saw; he seldome gives over the Whale till he hath killed him; he eats up his tongue and nothing else. 3. The Hay, from two to three fathoms long, round and small; a sharp snout and three rows of teeth in his mouth, with which he will bite great pieces out of the Whale, and sometimes eat up all the fat; the Fishermen have found Whales half devoured by them; they are taken with a bait fastened to an Hook, with an Iron Chain, for a Rope they will presently sheer asunder. The Whales, when the Sea begins to freez, go Southward, dispersing themselves; some unto the coast of America, some few this way, and many keep in the deep and wide Ocean, where the Bas∣ques, who say that the Whales follow the light, used to fish for them, before Greenland was disco∣vered. And I have heard that the Dutch caught a Whale near Japan, that had sticking in her an Harping Iron lost at Greenland. WILLOƲGHBIES-ISLAND. THe Dutch had no way to take from Sir Hugh Willoughby the honour of first adventuring upon these Northern Coasts (which he did by the commission, and at the charges of King Edward the sixth, but at the advice and direction of the great Sea-man Sebastian Cabot Grand Pilot of Eng∣land) but by bestowing on him an imaginary Ti∣tle of an Island, which they call Willoughbies-Island, and which they place near Nova-Zembla. Besides what we have spoken to this matter in the de∣scription of Greenland; it may further be noted, that neither Captain Edge, who travelled those Seas so many times; nor Mr. Seller, nor any other English man that we know of, name any such Islands in their Maps, nor do any of the Journals of our Mariners, nor H. Hudson, who expresly went to seek for it, mention any such place; and the latest Dutch Map of Nova Zembla (which is the nearest Country to that imaginary Island) set out 1678, makes not any mention of it; nor does Sir H. Willoughby seem to have sayled that way, which is East and by North from Sainam; but set his course towards North-east: nor doth the descrip∣tion he made of the Countrey agree to a small Island. All which being considered, Mr. Purchas with good reason several times affirmeth that Willoughbies-Island is no other then a conceit of the Cart-makers; and for such we shall let it pass till better informed. NOVA-ZEMBLA. NOva-Zembla is separated from the Samoieds Countrey by the Streits of Waygates, (or as the new Map calleth them, Straet van Nassau), it was first discovered by the English in 1556: and since visited by several both English and Dutch, who have attempted to find out a passage that way into the Tartarian-Sea, and so farther to Cathay, China, Japan, &c. Yet notwithstanding all their endeavours, very little progress hath been made in that discovery; except you will say, that they discovered by sad experience, that though perhaps the Sea might be continued through those Streits, yet by reason of the very great hinderance, as well as danger, of the Ice, it is unpassable; or if in some warm Summers per∣haps it might be sailed, yet is the danger and trou∣ble so great, that it is not worth the hazard and charges of the adventure. Especially since the mis∣carriage of that worthy Pilot William Barents, who out of confidence of the feasibility of the enter∣prise, adventured so far that his Ship was first hem'd in, and afterwards frozen and broken in the Ice: so that they were forced to winter upon the land, where the good man lost his life; of whose sufferings by cold I have before spo∣ken. Only give me leave here to take notice of their particular observations of the setting and rising of the Sun, comparing them with others
made in Greenland by the English. Our men that winter'd in Greenland 1630,The length of their nights. lost the light of the Sun intirely, Oct. 14, and saw him not again till Feb. 3. Those that stayed there in 1633, say, that Oct. 5, was the last day they saw the Sun, though they had a twilight, by which they could read, till the 17; on the 22 the Stars were plain to be seen all the 24 hours, and so continued all Winter. Jan. 15, they perceived for six or seven hours about noon, so much light as they could make shift to read by it. Feb. 12, they saw the light of the Sun upon the tops of the Moun∣tains, and the next day his whole body. Those in Greenland in 1634, (who all perished there) left in writing, that the Sun disappear'd Oct. 10, and was seen again, Feb. 14. Those that winter'd in Nova-Zembla in 1596, in 76 deg. on Nov. 2. (new stile, saith Purchas, i. e. Oct. 23,) saw the Sun not fully above the earth, it rose South-South-East, and set South-South-West; after Nov. 4, (Oct. 25,) they saw the Sun no more; but the Moon conti∣nued as long as she was in highest degrees to be seen day and night. Jan. 24, they saw the edge of the Sun above the Horizon; and 27, he totally appear'd and he then was in 5 deg. 25 min. of A∣quarius. They farther observed, that by an Ephe∣merides, which they carried with them, at Venice would be a conjunction of the Moon and Ju∣piter that very day at one a Clock in the mor∣ning, which they in Nova-Zembla saw at 6, in Tau∣rus. So that the difference of Longitude of these two places, is 5 hours, which answers to 75 deg. Venice therefore being accounted in the Longitude of 37 deg. 25. min. Nova-Zembla must be 112 deg. 25 min. And from thence it is no more than 60 deg. to Cape Tabin, the uttermost point of Tartary. What to say to these observations, so contrary to all Astronomers, I know not: had Barents made them, they would have staggered us more; but since the Observer hath so grosly mistaken in the Latitude of the place, which he always places in 76 deg. insomuch that Hudson saith, that that place is by them laid too far North much out of its place, to what end he knows not, we have the less reason to as∣sent to him in the rest; besides to place Nova-Zembla in 76, is to make it in the same Latitude as Horn-Sound in Greenland, which no man ever affirmed. Nor can any one imagine that the re∣fraction of the Sun-beams can cause such a diffe∣rence; for Mr. Baffins observation, which he made in Greenland, from the Air whereof that in Nova-Zembla cannot much differ, will not admit any thing like that difference; which take in his own words: Beholding it about a north-north-east Sun, by the common Compass, at which time the Sun was at the lowest, one fifth of his body was above the Horizon, and four fifths below; his declination for that instant was 10 deg. 35 min. north, being at noon in 2 deg. 7 min. of Virgo, his daily motion was 38 min. whose half being 19, to be added to the former, (because it was at twelve hours before noon) his place at that instant was 2 deg. 26 min. of Virgo, whose declination is (as before) 10 deg. 35 min. The Latitude of the place was 78 deg. 47 min. whose complement was 11 deg. 13 min. the declination being subducted from the complement of of the elevation of the Pole leaveth 38 min. four fifths of which is 12 min. being substracted from 38, leaveth 26 min. for the refraction, which is more or less according to the thickness or thinness of the air. But to return to Nova-Zembla:Situation of Nova-Zembla. There is lately a new Chart of Nova-Zembla put out in Holland, which separates it from Samoiedia by the Streights of Nassau, or Fretum Waygats, but makes the North of it (wherein Barents in 1595 wintered) in the same parallel with part of Greenland; and that Nova-Zembla is inhabited with people like in clothing, stature, and manner of life to the Samoieds; that they are Idolaters, as many of the others, Barbarous &c. Another Map joyned with the former also continues Groenland to Green∣land on the South-west corner, which also is contrary to all other Relations; but the Map of Nova-Zembla is manifestly calculated out of the observations of them that wintered there with W. Barents; and therefore I shall neither disparage nor approve it: further trial may determine it. A late Traveller a French-man, Chyrurgeon in a Danish Ship, saith, That Nova-Zembla is a Continent joyned on the South to Samoiedia by a ledg of Mountains called by him the Pater-Noster-Mountains, and on the North to Greenland; which is contrary both to this new Chart, and to the observations of all Marriners both English and Dutch. He saith also that he, with others, went ashore upon Nova-Zembla, and brought a∣way some of the inhabitants into Denmark; that they were more barbarous then any other nation he had ever seen. A Groenland-Monk (in the Chron. of Iseland) saith, that the Pigmies inhabi∣ted Nova-Zembla; this Traveller indeed saith, they were but short, truss'd persons, but not so little as to deserve the name of Pigmies, nor in∣deed much lesser then his Countreymen the Gronelanders are described. The Dutch, who wintered there,Beasts. mention no other beasts then Bears, Foxes, and such other as live upon prey; for that, say they, there is neither Leaves nor Grass, for other Beasts to feed upon; but Mr. Hudson saith, that all the land they had seen of Nova-Zembla seemed pleasant; much high-land, and without Snow; in some pla∣ces also green, and Deer feeding upon it, nor were all the high hills covered with Snow. But Mr. Hudson was there in Summer; and it is pro∣bable that, assoon as winter begins, the Deer be∣take themselves to Samoieda, or some other place. Our Merchants, that have lived in Russia, say,Fowls. that upon Nova-Zembla is a great lake wherein a wonderful number of Swans and Geese do breed, which moult their feathers about St. Peters day; and at that time the Russes go thither to gather their feathers, and to kill the Fowls, which they dry, and bring into their own Countrey for win∣ter provision. Both English and Dutch in their frequenting this coast have given names to several places. And it is a remarkable inconvenience that the Dutch very rarely make use of a name given by another nation; but had rather give new ones themselves; that the world may take them to be the great dis∣coverers, and diligent observers. In 73d. was a land discovered by H. Hudson, and called Hold-with-hope, unknown, as he conceived, to any Christian till that time, and (as our late Navigators say) to any since. CHERRY- and other ISLANDS. OUr men conceive Greenland to be broken land,Northern Islands. or a great number of Islands at least, very near to one another. On the West-side, they discovered as far as 82 deg. the most Northerly point they called Point Purchas, there they found very many Islands, which they thought not wor∣thy to give names to, being careful only to take notice of those six or eight Harbours which were commodious for their fishing. On the East-side, they went no farther then 78 deg. because the Dutch disturbed their trading on that side. There are also many Islands, some of which are named,Hope-Island. as Hope-Island, discovered in 1613; which may
be that the Dutch call Willoughbies-land, or John Mayens-Island, though indeed it corresponds well to neither; but rather to the later. It belongeth to Greenland, and is but a small Island, and lies North-east and South-west; whereas the Coun∣trey Sir H. Willoughby landed upon, was a large Countrey, (in as much as he sayled many days by the side of it,) and lies North and South, which must be Greenland. Edges-Island was discovered 1616,Edges-Island. Wyches-Island. by Capt. T. Edge, who had made that voyage ten times. Wyches-Island (so call'd from a Gentle∣man of that name) was found out 1617, but there being nothing remarkable come to our knowledg concerning these, we pass them over. Only it is worth noting, that both the Whale and Morss-fish∣ing was known and practised 800 years ago, as appears by the Relation which Octher the Nor∣wegian made to his Lord Alfred King of England; where he also saith, that the Morsses were hunted for their teeth, which were mightily esteemed. Cherry-Island,Cherry-Island. when first discovered I know not, but it received not its name, nor was known to be of any profit till 1603, when a Ship set out at the charges of Sir Francis Cherry touched upon it, and found there some Lead, and a Morsses tooth; but stayed not to fish, because the year was too far spent. However they called it (in honour of Sir Francis Cherry, for whose use they took possession of it,) Cherry-Island. In 1604,Morss-fishing. a Ship set sail (Mr. Welden the Mer∣chant, and Steven Bennet the Master) from London, April 15, and arrived at Cola in Lapland May 1; they stayed in Lapland till July 1, and July 8 they came in sight of Cherry; and they came to an Anchor on the South-south-east side, but, because of the stream, could not land: so that they sailed round about the Isle, and at length anchored two miles from the Shore. Going on land one of them with his Gun killed as many Fowl as almost la∣ded their Boat. July 9, they found on Shore no∣thing but store of Foxes; that part of the Island was in 74 deg. 45 min. July 10, they weighed An∣chor and stood into another Bay, and came to an∣chor in eight fathoms, where they saw an incre∣dible number of Morsses swimming in the Sea. Coming to Shore, they espied a vast company of them lying on the ground, they shot at them with three Guns they carried with them, but with all their weapons they could kill but fifteen of above 1000 that lay there like Hogs hudling together on heaps, but they found as many teeth as filled an Hogshead. Before the 13th, they killed near 100 more, making use only of their teeth. In 1605, the same persons went again, arriving there July 2, they went on Shore, and July 6, slew abundance of Morsses, and not only with Shot, as they did the year before, but with Lances dex∣trously used directing them to certain places of their bodies; they began also to boil their Blub∣ber, and made 11 Tuns of Oyl, (5 of their bel∣lies will yeild one Hogshead,) and abundance of Teeth. Here also they found a Lead-mine un∣der Mount-misery, and brought away about 30 Tun of the Oar. In 1606, the same Ship with the same persons was sent again, and landed July 3, in 74 deg. 55 min. where they stayed till the Ice was all clear∣ed; for the Morsses will not come to Shore till the Ice be all vanished, where at one time in six hours, they slew betwixt 7 and 800 Morsses, and 2 great Bears; they made 22 Tuns of Oyl, and 3 Hogsheads of Teeth. In 1608, June 21, was so hot that the melted Pitch run down the sides of their Ship: in 7 hours time they slew above 900 Morsses, making 31 Tuns of Oyl and above 2 Hogsheads of Teeth, besides 40 more. They took alive into their Ship, 2 young Morsses a Male and Female, the Female died, the Male lived 10 weeks in England; where they taught it many things. In 1610, at another voyage with two Ships they killed many Bears, and saw divers young ones, no bigger than young Lambs, very game∣some and lusty; they brought two of them into England. Much Fowl also they slew, and many Seals; and June 15, set up an Ensign in token of possession of the Island for the Muscovia Compa∣ny: in Gull-Island they found three Lead-mines, and a Coal-mine on the North side of the Island. Three Ships more also came to fish at Cherry-Island, they killed 500 Morsses at one time, at other times near 300 more, one man killing forty with his lance at one days hunting. The Morss, Walrush, Horse-whale, Rosmarus,Morsses. or Sea-horse, (for so he is by the Ancients often called, though of late they have discovered another Fish not unlike him, with straight teeth, which they call the Sea-horse) hath a Skin like a Sea-calf, (with short and sad yellow fur) a mouth like a Lion: if any, hardly discernable, ears, yet they hear well, and are frighted with noise; (which also is said of the Whale, that he is driven away with the sound of a Trumpet,) large breast, short thighs, four feet, and upon each foot 5 Toes with short sharp Nails, with which they climb the Ice; and as large as a great Ox, having a great semicircu∣lar Tusk growing on each side of their upper jaw; which are very much valued, especially by the Nor∣thern people, partly for their uses in medicines, as to make cramp-rings, (which they make also of the bristles upon his cheeks) to resist poison, and other malignant diseases, wherein they are at least equal to that called the Unicorns-horn; but more for their beauty, which is equal to, if not surpassing, Ivory. The heaviness of it, makes it much sought after for handles of Swords. Their skins being dressed are thicker then two Ox-hides, yet light and excel∣lent to make Targets against Darts and Arrows of the Savages. They feed upon Fish and Herbs, and sleep, if there be Ice, upon that; where if surpri∣sed, the female casts her young ones (of which she hath commonly two at a time) into the Sea, and her self after them, swimming away with them in her arms; and if provoked, after she hath secu∣red them, returning many times to set upon the Boat, into which if she can fasten her teeth, she will easily sink it. But if they be farther from the Water they all rise up together and with their weight and force falling upon the Ice endeavour to break it: as they did when surprised by Jonas Pool in 1610, where himself and divers of his men escaped drowning very narrowly; one of them being in the Sea, the Morsses set upon him with their teeth, but with very great labour and haz∣zard of his company he escaped death, though sore wounded. Frequently also they sleep on the Shore, and if they have convenience, upon an high and steep place; they always go in great com∣panies, and set one to keep watch; which if sur∣prised a sleep, 'tis an easy matter to kill all the rest; but if he give warning by grunting, they clap their hinder feet under their two tusks, and so roll into the Sea. But if they be caught on plain ground, yet are they hardly slain, being both strong and fierce, and all hasting one way to the water. The Dutch at first were very much trou∣bled to kill them, their Shot the beast valued not much, their Hatchets and Half-pikes would not pierce them, nor did they think they could be killed, except struck with great force in the midst of the forehead. The first time they set upon them, of 200 they could not kill one, but went for their Ordinance to shoot them. Our men after a little experience found the way to dispatch them
with Javelins, as is before rehearsed. Some imagine this to be John-Mayens-Island, but it seems rather that it is not; for the northmost point of that is in 71 d. 23 m. whereas this is 74 d. 55 m. except the Dutch be not so accurate in their obser∣vations and calculations as were to be wisht, which I much suspect, v. Nova-Zembla. Besides Cherry-Island is round, not frequented with Whales but Morsses. Our men also have travelled it on foot from North to South, which on Mayens-Island, can∣not be done; and though they tell many particu∣lars of the place, yet they never mention the great Beeren-berg. Hope-Island indeed is a long Island, lies much what as they say of Mayens, and hath been visited by the Whale-fishers, but it is more North then they place their Island. The itch of ascribing discoveries to themselves hath brought (as I fear) confusion both in this and many other matters of this nature. JOHN MAYENS-ISLAND. JOhn Mayens-Island, so called from the name of the first Discoverer, (as the Dutch pretend) seems by the English to be called Hope-Island, or if not, I know not whether the English have been upon it. It seems not to be of any great consequence, all that is spoken of it, being that it extends in length from South-west to North-east. The farther it shoots out in length, the more contracted and narrower it grows in breadth; so that in the middle the distance is very small between both Shores. Before the Whale-fishing was removed to Greenland, in the Summer time this Island was much frequen∣ted by the Sea-men whom trade invited thither; and the Island was well known to most of the Northern adventurers of Europe; but since the Whales have deserted those Shores, and have re∣moved their Sea-quarters farther to the North, the Sea-men and Fisher-men have been forced to follow their Prey to Greenland. For it seems the Whales, either weary of the place, or sensible of their own danger, do often change their Har∣bours. In the Spring time the western side of the Island is not so much enclosed with Ice, as that which lies in the North; where it runs out into the Sea, with a sharp point behind the Mountain of Bears; for on this side, all the year long, the Ice never removes from the Shore, above ten miles; and in the Spring time so besieges it, that there is no passage through it. For which reason the Mariners, who are bound for this Island, use all the care they can to avoid the Eastern, and to make directly to the Western Shore, there to lie while the fishing season continues; if by miscar∣riage they come upon the East-side, they are then forced to fetch a compass about the North part of the Island, whereby they are not only exposed to the terrible winds that blow off from Bears-Mountain, but also to the dangers of the Float∣ing Ice: for here the Sea flows from South to North, and ebbs from North to South. At the Northern end of the Island appears the Bears-Mountain of a prodigious height, and so perpen∣dicularly steep, that it is impossible to climb to the top of it. This Mountain from the Bears there frequently seen, called Beerenberg or the Bears-Mountain, at the bottom takes up the whole space between the Eastern and the Western Shore; on the North-side it leaves a little room for leveller ground to the Ocean; and being of prodigious height, may be descryed 30 miles off at Sea. The Sea-coast lies thus, 1, Noords-hoeck or the Nor∣thern Angle, is the extream point shooting out to the North. 2, Oosthoeck is the most Eastern point Ysbergh mark'd 1. 2. 3. are three Mountains of Ice, or rather vast heaps of congealed Snow, which dissolved by the heat of the Sun, falls from the top of Bears-Mountain, but upon the Sun's reti∣ring freezes again. 3, Zuydoost-hoeck, is the South∣east Angle. From this point the Shore extends it self from East to West to a little Island, and then winds again to the West and South; in some places not passable by reason of its steepness, in others smooth enough. 4, Cleyn Sand-bay or Little Sand-bay, Eyerland, or Eggland, being certain Rocks full of Birds; here about a Musket shot from the Shore, the Sea is 60 fathom deep, and a little farther, the sounding line will not reach to the bottom. 5, Groote Hoot-bay or great wood-bay, by reason of the great pieces of rotten timber, that are there found. In this, which is the narrowest part of the Island, are certain Mountains not very steep, from the top whereof any person calling them that stand upon either Shore may be heard by both. 6, Cleyn Hoot-bay, or Little Wood-bay. 7, English Bay and several others, to which the Dutch have given such names as they thought fit. GRONELAND, CAlled also Groenland, Groinland,The name and situa∣tion. and more anciently Engroenland, lies (as the Islan∣ders say) like an Half-moon about the North of their Countrey, at the distance of four days sail∣ing. But it seems not to lye so much East, but rather on the North of America. From Cape Fare∣well in 60 deg. 30 min. on the South, it is un∣known to how many degrees in the North. The East and West are encompass'd by two great Oceans, but at what degrees of Longitude is not yet discovered. Only Mr. Fotherby found it near the Coast of Groneland, in 71 deg. and the South of Greenland to be above two hundred leagues. It is said to have been discover'd first by a Norwegian Gentleman,Ancient discove∣ries. whose name was Eric Rot∣cop, or Red Head; who having committed a mur∣ther in Iseland, to save his life, resolved to ad∣venture to another Country, whereof he had heard some obscure, flying reports. He succeeded so well, that he arrived in a safe Harbour called Sandstasm, lying between two Mountainous Pro∣montories; the one upon an Island over against Groneland, which he called Huidserken, or White Shirt, because of the Snow upon it: the other on the Continent, called Huarf Eric. He winter'd in the Island; but when the season suffer'd, pass'd into the Continent: which because of its greenness and flourishing he called Groneland. Thence he sent his Son to Olaus Trugger King of Norway to get his pardon, which was easily granted, when he was inform'd by him of this new discovery. Whereupon divers Gentlemen adventured to plant there; who multiplying not long after, divided the whole Country into the Eastern and Western; and built two Cities, Garde and Albe. In Albe was a Bishops See, and a Cathedral Church dedicated to St. Anthony. The Seat also of the Vice-Roy, sent thither from time to time by the Norwegian. They write also of a great Monastery called of St. Thomas; wherein was a Spring, whose water was so hot, that it dressed all their meat; and being conveyed into the Cells, and other Rooms, in pipes, heated all the Monastery as if it had been so many Stoves. They say also, that this Monastery is built all of Pumice-stones, and that this hot water falling upon them, mixeth with the outer parts, and produces a sort of clammy matter, which serves instead of Lime.
But what the Norwegians conquered,By the Norwe∣gians. or pos∣sessed in this Country, was an inconsiderable corner of that large Continent. Themselves men∣tion a Nation, whom they call Skrelingers, to have inhabited in the middle of the Land, but what they were we know not. But whether their pau∣city exposed them to the mercilesness of the Na∣tives: or whether it were an Epidemical disease, which they called the black Plague; which swept away, not only most of that Nation in Groneland, but also the Merchants and Mariners in Norway that maintained that traffique: or whether it were some other reason, which is now forgotten; so it is, that since 1349, little intelligence hath de∣scended to us concerning Groneland, till seeking the North-west passage to China, occasioned more knowledg of it. In 1389, they say, that the King of Denmark sent a Fleet thither, with intention to re-establish his dominion in those parts; but that being cast away, discouraged him from any fur∣ther enterprise; till now of late Christian IV, re∣newed somewhat again of that navigation, of which by and by. In 1406, the Bishop of Dron∣theim sent a Priest (called Andreas) to succeed Henry Bishop of Garda, if dead; if alive, to re∣turn and bring notice of the state of the Church there. But Andreas never came back; nor hath there been since any further care taken to supply Bishops, or maintain Christianity there. There is a relation in Purchas's Pilgrim, part 3, of one Ivor Boty a Gronelander, translated 1560 out of the Norweighish Language; which gives a suffi∣ciently particular account of all the places in that Country inhabited by Christians; but nothing besides. Afterwards another part of it is said to be dis∣covered by Antonio Zani;A. Zani. the relation of whose adventures is at large in Hackluits third Volume. I shall not insert them, because not useful to our present purpose. And tho there be grounds suffi∣cient to make us doubt of some of these relations, yet not to reject them. Gudbrandus. Thorlacius, an Islandish Bishop, and discreet person saith, that the Islandish Chronicles affirm, that they used formerly to trade to Engroneland, and that in the days of Popery that Country had Bishops. Now our men in all the places where they have landed, find none but Savages, and those also Idolaters, speaking a language different from all that ever they heard; though the Natives in their customs most resemble the Laplanders, of whom more in due place. The occasion of our voyages to those Coasts,Later dis∣coveries, by the English. Sir Mar∣tin Fro∣bisher. was to find out a way to China, &c. by the North∣west; which had been fruitlesly sought toward the North-east. The first whom we read to have searched the North-west for a passage, was Martyn Frobisher, who in 1576, with two Barks coming to the height of 62 deg. found a great Inlet, called by him Frobishers Straits, whereinto having sailed 60 leagues, with main land on either side, return∣ed. He found there a certain Oar, which he con∣ceived to be of Gold; and the next year he made a second voyage to fetch a quantity of it, but it proving to be nothing but black Lead, answer'd not expectation; yet they found a Silver Mine, which lay so deep and fast in the Rocks, that they could not dig it. They melted Gold also, but in very small quantities, out of several stones they found there upon Smiths Isle. They found also a dead fish, of about twelve foot long, not unlike in shape to a Porcpoise, having an horn six foot long (such as is commonly called Unicorns-horn) growing out of his snout, which is still kept at Windsor. In 1578, he went out again upon a dis∣covery; wherein passing as far as he thought good, he took possession of the Land in the name of Queen Elizabeth, calling it Meta incognita. In 1583,Sir Hum. Gilbert. Sir Humphrey Gilbert upon the same design went to the great River of St. Laurence in Canada, took possession of the Country, and setled a fishing trade there. This voyage I suppose was made upon suggestion of a Greek Mariner, who assured some of our Nation, that himself had passed a great Strait, North of Virginia, from the West or South Ocean, and offer'd to be Pilot for the discovery, but dyed before he came into England. In 1585,Mr. Da∣vis. Mr. John Davis was employed with two Barks to the same search. The first Land he came to, he named the Land of Desolation, and is one part of Groneland; then he arrived in 64 deg. 15 min. in Gilberts Sound, where they found a great quantity of that Oar which Frobisher brought into England, and also Lapis Specularis. Thence they went to 66 deg. 40 min. to Mount Raleigh, Totness Sound, &c. where they saw some few low shrubs, but nothing else worth noting. In 1586, he made a second voyage to the same place, where he found amongst the Na∣tives Copper Oar, as also black and red Copper. Thence they searched many places Westward, and returned with good hopes of discovering the desired passage. In 1587, he made a third voyage, to 72 deg. 12 min. the compass varying to 82 deg. West∣ward, the Land they called London-Coast; and there they found an open Sea, and forty leagues between Land and Land, thinking this to be the most likely place to find the passage; and it was from him called Fretum Davis. Thus from time to time proceeded the dis∣covery of these Countries;Mr. Hud∣son. but now not upon hopes of a passage to the Indies, but for the pro∣fit of trading; till Mr. Hudson in 1610, after he was satisfied that there was no passage North∣easterly, was sent to make a trial here also. He proceeded an hundred leagues further than any before had done; and gave names to certain places, as Desire-provokes, Isles of Gods mercies, Prince Henry's-Cape, King James's Cape, Queen Ann's-Cape, and the like; but the Ice hindred him from going further, and the sedition of his men from returning home. In 1612, James Hall returning into England,James Hall. and with him William Baffin, who discovered Cockins Sound, in the height of 65 deg. 20 min. which differed in Longitude from London 60 deg. 30 min. Westward. They saw also the footing of a great Beast, they supposed an Elk, or the like. James Hall was killed in the Boat by a Native, pretend∣ing to trade with them. They tried the Mine at Cunninghams River, which the Danes had digged before, and found it to be nothing worth. There were Rocks of very pure stone, finer and whiter than Alabaster; and Angelica growing plentifully in many places, which the Savages use to eat. In 1615, Mr. Baffin was sent again;Mr. Baf∣fin. he found Fair-Point to differ in Longitude from London 74 deg. and 5 min. Westward. But the chief thing they discover'd was, that there was no passage in the North of Davis Straits, it being no other than a great Bay; but that profit might be made by fishing for Whales, Morsses, and Unicorns, of which there are good store. In 1616, Mr. Baffin went again. In Sir Tho. Smiths Sound, 78 deg. Lat. their Compass va∣ried 56 deg. Westward, the greatest variation that is any where known. Despairing to disco∣ver their desired North-west passage, they re∣turned home, and since that we hear of no more voyages made from England upon that design. The King of Denmark also,By the Danes. partly to advance
the trading of his own, and partly to renew his ancient pretence to that country, if any thing should be discovered worth the claiming, whilst the English were busie in these discoveries, set out two Ships and a Pinnace 1605, the Admiral was Capt. John Cunningham a Scot, Godske Lindenaw a noble Dane, was Vice-Admiral, the chief Pilots were James Hall and John Knight, English men. Gotske arrived on some part of the country, where he traffick'd some small matters with the natives, took two of them, and returned into Denmark. The other two Ships arrived at Cape Farewell, thence went to Frobishers Straits, gave Danish names to divers places, traded with the natives, of whom they brought away three, and found certain stones, in a place call'd Cunninghams Ford, out of an hundred pound of which, were extract∣ed twenty-six ounces of fine silver. In 1606, He sent again four Ships and a Pin∣nace, Godske Lindenaw Admiral, and James Hall Pilot-General; they brought away five of the natives. In 1607, James Hall was sent again, but the Seamen mutining as soon as he came to the coast, brought the Ship back again into Denmark, with∣out any thing done. The King of Denmark set out two Ships more, under Christian Richardson an Holsteiner, with Norwegian and Iselandish Mariners, who returned before they saw shore. More of their expeditions we know not, till 1619, when he sent out John Munck with two Ships. They arrived safe at Cape Farewell, 60 deg. 30 min. where their tackle was so frozen, and full of isicles, that they could not handle them; the next day was so hot, that they could not endure their clothes, but wrought in their shirts. The south part of Hudsons Bay he call'd Mare Novum; that part towards Groneland, Mare Christianum. He arriv'd in 63 deg. 20 min. where he winter'd, and call'd it Muncks Winter∣harbour, and the country New Denmark, (it seems to be near Diggs Island). In that long winter he there endured, little of note happen'd, but that in April it rained, and then came thither vast quantities of fowls, of divers sorts, to breed in those quiet, undisturbed places. Of all his com∣pany, which was forty-six in one Ship, and six∣teen in the Pinnace, scarce so many were left alive, as were able to bring the Pinnace thorow very horrid dangers to their own country. In 1636, The Gronelandish Society at Copen∣hagen, sent two Ships; which arrived at Fretum Davis, near to which the Pilot found a black sand, which he conceived to contain considera∣ble quantity of Gold, wherewith he freighted his Ship, neglecting further discovery. Return∣ing to Denmark, and his Sand, after examination being found to contain no Gold at all, he was so severely blamed by the President of the So∣ciety, and so ashamed to be mistaken, that he dyed with grief. And since that nothing more known of any adventures that way from Den∣mark. If any one desire to know what became of the eight Gronelanders,Grone∣landers  Den∣mark. brought at several times into Denmark; the account is this: The King com∣manded great care should be taken of them, appointed certain persons to attend them, to give them liberty enough, so as they prevented their escape. No necessary or convenience was want∣ing; their food such as they could eat, milk, butter, cheese, flesh, and fish, but raw. They could eat no bread, nor boil'd meat, but no∣thing so much abhorr'd by them as wine, or brandy. Their pleasantest beuvrage was train∣oyl. But whatever was done to, or for them, could never take away that melancholy and chagrin, which they continually lived in for the want of their beloved country. They could ne∣ver be brought to learn much of the Danish lan∣guage, or to apprehend any thing of Christian Religion. Three of them were sent back towards their own country 1606, the most towardly and hopeful, who might serve for interpreters and brokers to the Danes; but two of them, Oxo and Omeg died in the Ship, and the third (because the Danes durst not land, or trade, by reason of the great numbers of natives that appear'd in arms on the coast, ready to revenge them that had been before carried away) was brought back into Denmark, to his former treatment. An Am∣bassador arriving there from Spain, the King was pleased to shew him those Savages, and their dex∣terity in rowing, which was by all the spectators admired. The Ambassador sending them money, one of them had the courage to buy him clothes after the Danish fashion, got a feather in his cap, boots and spurs, and all things ala cavaliere; he came also to the King, and desired to serve him: but this fervor was quickly decay'd, and the poor man returned to his sadness and complaints. Some of them endeavoured to get to Sea in their little boats, but being retrieved, dyed of melan∣choly. Two lived divers years at Koldingen in Jutland, where they were employed in diving for Pearl-Muscles; in which, their skill and dex∣terity was such, that every one that saw them, believed they had practised the same employ∣ment in their own country. Such success they had, that the Governor promised himself great profit thereby; and that in a short time he should sell Pearls by the quart, if they continued. But his covetousness destroyed his gain; for not con∣tent with what they fished in summer, he also compelled them under the ice in winter time; where one of them fell into such a disease, from the cold so contracted, that he dyed. After whose death the other never enjoyed himself; but find∣ing an opportunity, he got his little Boat, and before he was overtaken, got to the main Sea. But being brought back, they represented to him, the impossibility of his ever getting home to Groneland; but he sleighted their advice, and told them, that he intended to go northward so far, and when he was there the stars would direct him into his own country. The country is mostly all high-land and mountains, cover'd with snow all the year,The Soil, &c. but the southern parts more than the northern. They have very little or no wood growing there, except some few bushes, and not many plants or herbs; consequently, not many beasts there nourished; but their chief subsistence is upon fish∣ing. There are divers mountains, which pro∣mise rich mines of mettal: and some have been found to contain it actually, others only to make a shew. The inhabitants know neither sowing nor planting; tho the soil seem'd to be fertil and pleasant, especially between the mountains. The northern parts, by reason of the terrible ice and cold, are wholly undiscovered; the southern con∣sist of many Islands, different in shapes and big∣ness: which seems to be the reason, that in these Seas are many and various strong currents, and (as Ivor Boty saith) very many dangerous whirlpools towards the west and north; none of which how∣ever have been found by our Mariners. The country seems much subject to earthquakes, else very healthful; only it was observed, that those who went thither infected with any Venereal disease, grew worse immediately, and could not there be cured. Which they attributed to the purity of the air, perhaps they might have done it more rationally to the cold.
Ivor Boty speaks much also of their great num∣bers of Cows and Sheep;Beasts. but our men found no beasts there, but Bears, Foxes (very many of which are black), Rain-Deer, and Dogs, whereof are two sorts, a bigger, which they use to draw their Sleds; and a lesser, which they feed for their tables. Our men observed this peculiarity both in their Foxes and Dogs, that their pizzles were of bone. Tho it is very likely, that there are the same sorts which are in Lapland and Samoieda; but our men have not searched any more than the shoars, both because of their short stay, and the treachery of the inhabitants. Of Fishes there is great both plenty and variety, Whales,Fishes. Seals, Dog-fish; but in these are caught the greatest quantity of Sea-Ʋnicorns, whose horns are so much esteemed, and kept as rarities in the Cabinets of Princes. The natives here are so well stored with it, that they have sufficient both for truck, and their own use. They make of them (besides other utensils) swords, and heads for their darts and arrows; which they work and grind with stones, till they make them as sharp∣piercing as ours. This horn grows in the snout of the fish, and is his weapon, wherewith he fears not to fight the Whale; and to assault, and some∣times endanger a Ship. The fish it self is as large as an Ox, very strong, swift, and hard to be caught, except left on the shore by the tide, or entangled by the weeds. Fowls are here in great abundance and va∣riety.Fowls. Our men have seen those they call Bass∣geese, or such as once a year come to breed in the Bass, a famous rock or Island near Edinburgh. The natives also have a very great art and dex∣terity in making and setting snares and springes to catch them; which they do chiefly for their skins and feathers. Two or three of our men, with their guns, killed in one day fifteen hun∣dred, and found them worse tasted, but better clothed than those of the same kind in these countries; they could not eat them till flayed, their skins being very thick, tough, and more cover'd with feathers; which also were not easily plucked off; which is the reason that the natives dress their skins as they do those of beasts, and Seals, and make garments of them; using them to all purposes like other furrs; with the feathers outward in summer, inward in winter: which is also observed in all other cold countries, as well as Groneland. All persons,Of the North∣light. that have been there, give a won∣derful and strange account of a certain north∣light, as they call it, not easily conceived by them who have not seen it. It appears usually about the time of the new Moon, and tho only in the north, yet doth it enlighten the whole country; sometimes also Norway, Iseland, and even these regions of ours, as Gassendus (vita Piresk, & ex∣ercit. In Doctorem Flud) saith, himself observed, and at large describes. Nor should I much doubt to affirm, that it is that which is sometimes seen in England, and especially in the northern parts, call'd Streaming. It is said to be like a great pil∣lar (or beam) of fire, yet darting out rays and streams every way, moving also from place to place, and leaving behind it a mist or cloud; continuing also till the Sun-beams hide it. The country seems to be inhabited by divers nations,Division of the Country. differing in habit, manners, and language. Those whom James Hall found and brought with him, differed much from those with whom Gotske Lindenaw had to do. That part which the Norwegians are said to have anciently possessed, was an inconsiderable part of that whole coun∣try, and they found several nations there besides themselves; govern'd by several Kings; tho they write not, that they had wars one with ano∣ther, but only against them. Our late discove∣rers in 66 deg. 50 min. found a country which the natives (as they could understand them) called Secanunga; who also said, that they had a great King, carried upon mens shoulders, and they called him Cachico. But more particulars than these, I find not. The inhabitants are generally of a low stature,Inhabi∣tants. black hair, flat nos'd, broad fac'd, lips turned up, and of a ripe Olive colour, some of them also quite black. Their women (for their grea∣ter ornament doubtless) stain their faces in blew, and sometimes in black streaks, which co∣lour they let into the skin, by pricking it with a sharp bone, that it will never be taken nor worn out. In all things they resemble the Sa∣moieds and Laplanders. They are very active and strong, yet could some of our English run swifter, and leap farther than any of them; but they were hard enough for any of ours at wrastling. They are also very couragious, and sometimes despe∣rate, for rather than be taken by our men, they would throw themselves down the rocks and mountains. Extreamly thievish, treacherous, and revengeful they proved; nor could any kindness or fair dealing win them; but, as true Barbari∣ans, never omitted any opportunity of fulfilling their desires; they would steal when they saw the Mariners look upon them. After they had been well used and treated at their tables, they would shoot at, sling stones, wound, and kill our men, if they could. Yet are they apprehen∣sive enough, and quickly conceive yours, and express their own meaning. If they had not seen what was asked them, they winked, or co∣ver'd their eyes; if they understood not, stopt their ears, and the like. They delight exceed∣ingly in musick, to which they would keep time both with their voice, hands, and feet: wonder∣ful also affectionate one to another, and to their country. In one voyage there went a Danish Ma∣riner, with black hair, flat nos'd, and other, tho not very exact, resemblances of a Gronelander; as soon as they saw him, they came about him, kissed him, hung upon him, and shewed to him all possible demonstrations of kindness and affe∣ction. And those who were in Denmark, never enjoy'd themselves, nor had any content, but continually pined away, and languish'd with dis∣content for their condition, and love of their country. Their religion, such as it is, seems to be unto the Sun; for when our people invited them to conversation, bartering, &c. they held up their hands towards the Sun, and cried Yotan, nor would they come near us, till our men had done the like. But John Munck, and divers others, having gone farther into the country, found images, such as we make of Devils, with horns, beaks, claws, cloven feet, &c. very ill made; Altars also, and quantities of bones of beasts, as of Deer, Foxes, Dogs, and the like, near unto them. They seem also, as all Idolaters, given to inchantments and sorceries. Our men have seen them lying flat upon the earth, and mut∣tering their prayers, or charms, into the ground, worshipping the Devil, whose proper habitation they conceive to be under them. In some diseases they tye a stick to a great stone, to which they pay their devotions; and if they can lift it up easily and lightly, they think their prayers are heard, and recovery granted. In winter they retire from the Sea-side, unto the warmer val∣leys, where they have their houses and towns; which are commonly caves at the foot of an hill,
round like an oven, close to one another; and passages in the inner parts from one to another; their doors, which are low and round, open to the south; and they dig trenches also to draw away the water that falls, or drains, from the hill. The entrance, and some part of their house stands without the cave, which they frame very handsomly and commodiously of the ribs of Whales join'd artificially at the top, and cover'd with Seals-skins. They raise also one part of their floor higher than another, which they strow with moss to sleep upon. But in their fishing time they have tents, which they remove from place to place in their larger Boats. They set up four poles, and cover them with skins; which serves very well in summer: when fishing is done, they return with them to their houses. Their manner of bartering, is to make two heaps, one of such things as they desire, the other of what they would part with; and they cease not to take away from the one or other, till the trade is ballanced. The chiefest things of ours which they valued, were knives, needles, little pieces of iron, looking-glasses, &c. for these they would sell their bows and arrows, their boats, and strip themselves of their clothes, but never, like some other Barbarians, sell their wives and children. Their clothing is either of birds skins,Their Clothing. with the feathers and down upon them, or Seals, Dog∣fish, or the like. Seals they use most in their fish∣ing, because that fish there abounds, and are easily deceived, by seeing one clad in their own Livery: besides, that these kind of furs are not so apt to be wet, tho dip'd in water. They wear the hair sides outward in summer, inward in winter, and in great colds carry two or more suits one upon another. They dress their skins very well, making them dry, soft, and durable, and sow them also very strong with sinews of beasts, and needles made of fish-bones. But in nothing do they shew so much art,Their Boats. as in their Boats or Canoes. They are made of that we call Whalebone, about an inch thick and broad, and these not set like ribs, but all along from prow to poop, fast sowed to one another with strong sinews, and cover'd over with Seals-skin. They are from ten to twenty foot long, and about two foot broad, made like a Weavers shuttle, sharp at both ends, so that he can row either way; and in making this pointedness they are of all things most curious, for therein consists the strength of their Vessel. In the middle of it are the ribs, both to keep the sides asunder, and to make the hole in the co∣vering, wherein the rower sits. They have a deck made of the same materials, which is closely fasten'd to the sides, in the midst whereof is a round hole, as big as the middle of a man; so that when he goes to Sea, he sets himself in that hole, stretching out his feet forward into the hollow of the Boat; he stops up the hole so close with his frock, or loose upper garment, that no water can enter, tho it were in the bottom of the Sea. His frock is strait tyed at the hand∣wrists, and to his neck, and his capouch sowed also close to it; so that if the Boat be over∣turned or overwhelmed in the Sea, he rises up again without any wet either upon his skin or in his Boat. They have but one oar, which is about six foot long, with a paddle six inches broad at either end, this serves him both to bal∣lance his Boat, and move it; which he doth with that incredible celerity, that one of our Boats with ten oars is not able to keep company with them; the Danish relation saith, that they row∣ed so swift, that they even dazled the eyes of the spectators; and tho they crossed frequently, yet never interfered or hit one another. Their fishing ordinarily is darting;Their Fishing. their darts are long, strongly barbed, and at the other end have bladders fastned to them, that when they have struck the fish, he may spend himself with strugling to get under water, which yet he can∣not do, and so is easily taken. Besides these, they have greater Boats for the removing their tents and other utensils, as also to carry their fish they have caught to their houses; these are thirty and forty foot long, and have sometimes ten, and sometimes more seats for rowers. Cardinal Bembus (in his Venetian History) saith, that in his time one of these, with seven persons in it, was by storm cast upon the coast of Britany. I know not whether it be worth mentioning, that they have Kettles and Pans made of stone (some say of Load∣stone) that endures the fire wonderfully, but not having tools fit to hollow them sufficient∣ly, they make up the edges of Whalebone. FREESLAND, or FRISELAND, LIeth in 60 deg. more westerly than any part of Europe: distant from Iseland  leagues. It is reported in bigness not to be much lesser than England; a ragged and high land, the moun∣tains cover'd with snow, and the coast so full of drift Ice, that it is almost inaccessible. It was first discovered to us by Nicolao and Antonio Zani,Its Disco∣very. two Venetian Gentlemen that were here shipwrack'd. They describe the inhabitants to be good Christians, very civil, and to be go∣vern'd by a great Lord, whose name was Zich∣may, whose mighty conquests, and strange acci∣dents, may be read in Hackluit. It is not our business to write or repeat romances. Those men whom our Seamen (touching there acci∣dently) saw, were like in all things to the Grone∣landers, both in features of body, and manner of living, as much as they could judge; so like, that many of them thought it continued to Groneland; in which opinion also they were con∣firm'd by the multitudes of the Islands of ice, which coming from the north, argued land to be that way: for many of our Mariners hold, that salt water doth not freeze, but that all the ice they find in the Sea comes from the Bays and mouths of fresh water Rivers; for the ice it self is sweet and fresh being dissolved, and serves to all purposes as well as spring or river water. Be∣sides, the salt Sea (they say) is always in mo∣tion, and so cannot freeze. But the Dutch, who wintred in Nova Zembla, took notice that the salt water freez'd, and that two inches thick in one night. There seems to be good fishing every where upon the coast. In their soundings they brought up a sort of pale Coral, and little stones clear as Chrystal. They call'd it West England, and one of the highest mountains they called Charing-Cross.
EUROPA delineata et recens edita per NICOLAUM VISSCHER map of Europe blazon of Simon Van Horn Nobilissimo Prudent. Domino D. SIMONI VAN HOORN, Consulo et Senatori Vrbis Amstelodamensis, , Ordinum Belgicae Feoderatae nomine ad Magnae Britanniae Regem nuper Legato extraordinario. Tabulam hanc D. D. Nicolaus Visscher
EUROPE. THE Holy Scripture (a Monument ancienter,The peo∣pling of the world after the Flood. and of greater authority then any among the Heathens) declares the whole earth after the Flood to have been o∣verspread by the sons of Noah. Cham's poste∣rity seems to have peo∣pled Africa, and some parts of the adjoining Continent; yet not so universally, but that di∣vers Colonies were there planted, both of the sons of Sem and Japhet. The posterities of Sem and Japhet were so intermingled, that even an∣ciently, much less in these later times, there could not be any exact distinguishing of their limits. Tho the common opinion is, that Japhet's sons inhabited the greatest part of Europe. We must therefore omit this division, for want of evidence, and content our selves with that of the Ancients, dividing the then known world into Europe, Asia, and Africa; the modern discoverers have added America.The anci∣ent divi∣sion of the world. Now when this division of the Earth into Europe, Asia, and Africa, was first instituted, as also the reasons of it, and of the impositions of the names, is to us utterly unknown. That it is very ancient, appears by Herodotus, the first credible Historian that we have of the Heathens; and from what he says in his fourth Book, it may be ea∣sily collected, that even in his time, tho the names were universally receiv'd, yet the rea∣sons of them were not known. It should seem however, that the division was made by the Grecians, or by some neighbours to those Seas; because to them, and as far as their knowledge reach'd, it seems very proper and useful. The bounds of Europe are conveniently stated, as to them, but in other respects the division seems not so rational; for Asia is much bigger than both the other; nor is Europe an equal balance for Africa: but Europe being least known to them, and seeming a vast territory, perhaps they might think that the whole Earth was not large enough to contain more than three such proportions. Besides the Regions within both the Polar Circles, seem not to be comprehended under any of these parts; and tho the limits betwixt Europe and Asia seem to be well deter∣mined as far as Palus Meotis, yet are they be∣yond that (which is the greater part) not so distinctly constituted by any natural limits, nor any other certainty. However tho perhaps the division of the Astronomers into Zones, Cli∣mates, &c. may seem more accurate, yet is this, to us especially (who consider not the spaces of ground only, but the differences of Nations also and habitations) much more commodious, and therefore we shall follow it in these discourses, beginning first with Europe. Europe,Europe. tho acknowledged the least of the four parts of the world, yet in many respects is by learned men preferred before the rest. Strabo, and after him many other Geographers, have recommended it for the mildness of the air, the fertility of the soil, the multitude of navigable rivers, and the abundance of cattel, and all other things necessary or convenient for humane life: but more especially for the valour, ingenuity, and beauty of the inhabitants. To which may be added, the magnificence of their Governments, the freedom of their Subjects, the equality of their Laws, the arts and industry of the people, and above all the sanctity of their Religion: which is accompanied with a greater proportion and variety of learning and knowledge than all the world besides could ever pretend to. Yet I do not perceive one part to have much ad∣vantage over another, except from the industry and skill of the inhabitants, which in one place is greater in one kind, in others more signal in another, and is able to convert a natural incon∣venience to a greater pleasure and profit. All the advantages we know Europe to have above other parts of the world, are from its embracing Chri∣stianity so generally as it doth. For if we reflect upon the ancient Inhabitants before they were Christians, they were as barbarous, wild, faith∣less, bruitish, as any the most inhumane Nati∣ons of America. Tho it cannot be denied, but that the civility of the Romans, possessors of the greatest part of Europe, was a great disposition to their receiving of Christianity; and that the extream barbarousness of some, as well as the voluptuousness of other Nations, renders them less prepared to embrace it. It is in vain for us to search into the origine of the Name, either from ancient fables,Its Name. or mo∣dern conjectures, our first Historian, as we al∣ready touched, ingenuously confesseth, he could neither discover who was the first imposer of the name, nor for what reason it was given. Not∣withstanding, if it may be lawful to adventure a conjecture grounded upon an observation of that excellent and ancient Historian Thucydides, in his first Book, it may probably have had its name from a Province called Europa, near the Bospho∣rus Thracius; to which place was the shortest and most usual passage out of Asia, and where new Colonies arriving thrust forward the ancient In∣habitants: who from Europa peopling the rest of the Regions westward, might perhaps carry with them the name of the Country they quit∣ted to make room for new plantations.First Inhabi∣tants. How∣beit we must not conceal, that the learned are of divers judgments in this matter: For all those who hold Europe to be peopled by the posterity of Japhet, do as we now mention'd, maintain that the first planters came by Sea out of Asia: but those who rather imagine them the offspring of Shem, conceive that they came by land betwixt the Caspian Sea, and Palus Meotis, thence thro Tartary, and ancient Scythia, into the Northern parts as far as Scandia, where their inundation being stopt by the vast Ocean, they overflow'd into the Southern parts, as Britany, France, Ger∣many, Thrace, &c. And this opinion seems to be confirm'd by the tradition of the Northern Na∣tions in their Edda, as the other pretension seems to be grounded upon Scripture: but as this makes not much use of any arguments but what are drawn from the similitude of names, so that tra∣dition of Edda seems to suppose those places in∣habited before Thor or Wodens migration, which indeed seem to be but of later times, even after the Trojan war. Tho we suppose two Wodens, Princes of Colonies, the later being about our Sa∣viour. Methinks it is not improbable, that Scan∣dia, Sarmatia, and thence as far as Thrace, were peopled from the North, the Getae being origi∣nally
Goths, and the Daci Danes, the Sarmatae Scy∣thians; nor is there any memorial of Nations ancienter than these in those places. Besides, their languages betray their original. But the same reasons seem not to hold concerning Greece, Italy, and all the South-part of Europe; nor is it likely, that they who lived in a continual prospect of Europe, even so near that they could swim over without the help of bladders, should so long for∣bear to seize upon a plentiful and rich Country, till they were prevented by those who successive∣ly peopled the Countries of the North, and round about the Euxine Sea. Wherefore it appears more probable, that the Southern Europe was first plant∣ed from the Maritime Coasts of Asia; which seem also to be inhabited by the posterity of Japhet. It is bounded on the north by the Frozen Sea,Bounds. on the west by the vast Western Ocean, on the south from Afric by the Mediterranean, and on the east from Asia by the Archipelago, and so on by the Black Sea, and Palus Meotis, or the Sea of Zabache, and thence by the River Tanais to the most eastern winding thereof at the City Tuja, and thence by an imaginary line to the River Oby, and by that to the Frozen Sea. Europe,Situation and ex∣ent. as describ'd on the Globe, lies toward the Artic Pole, mostly in the northern tempe∣rate Zone, under the fourth and the ninth Cli∣mats, and between the seventh and seventeenth Parallels, which fall about ten degrees on this side the Tropic of Cancer, and three within the Polar Circle. It is extended in length from Cape St. Vincent, to the mouth of the River Oby, 71 deg. on the Equator, which reckoning 60 miles to a degree, come to 4260 English miles. The breadth of Europe from Cape Matagan in the Morea, to the most northern Country at the Polar Circle, con∣tains about 44 deg. on the Meridian, which make about 2640 English miles. Europe conteins in it several Kingdoms,Division. the greatest of which is the Empire of Muscovy or Russia on the north-east, comprehending seve∣ral Nations more to the north-east, scarce known to us; and on the east Cazan, and other Coun∣tries by the River Volga; and part of Lapland on the north-west. Next to Muscovy on the west lies the Kingdom of Sweden, containing great part of Finland on the east, and all to the mountains of Norway on the west. Again, to the east of Europe, by the Caspian Sea, lies the Country of the Circassi, and the Kingdom of the Lesser Tar∣tary, and some other lesser Provinces. Thence south-west lies the Kingdom of Poland, extend∣ing it self thro the midst of Europe from the Baltic to the Euxin Sea, comprehending on the north Prussia, Litvania, Lifland; on the east Vo∣linia, Podolia; and southward Moldavia, Wala∣chia. Northwest of Poland, lies Germany, under several Princes, the Emperor being the chief. North of Germany lies the Kingdom of Denmark; to the west Flanders, or the Low Countries, un∣der divers Governments; and north-west of them, the Kingdom of Great Brittain, comprehending several Islands. South-west of Germany lies the Kingdom of France; more south, the Kingdom of Spain; full south Italy, under several Princes. South-east of Germany lies the greatest part of European Turky, as Hungary, Transylvania, and more south Croatia, Dalmatia, and all Greece. There are in Europe,Empires, &c. three Empires, that of Muscovy, the Roman Empire, and the Empire of the Turks. Ten Kingdoms, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, England, France, Spain, Portugal, and the Lesser Tartary. Nine Common∣wealths, and about forty Principalities; of which when we come to particular Countries.riginal Langua∣ges. The principal Languages spoken in the nor∣thern and western parts of Europe, may be rec∣kon'd these three, the ancient Gothic, the Anglo-Saxonic, and the Francic, which also seem to be near akin, or to have great affinity one with ano∣ther, and the later to be made up of the two former. From the Gothic, which differs little from the old Greek, are derived the ancient Cimbric, and the modern languages now spoken in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Iseland. The Anglo-Saxonic may seem to have given birth to the Belgic, or Low Dutch, especially the ancient Frisic, and in great part to the English and Scotch, The Francic is compounded of the other two, and seems to be the same with the Alamannic or Theotisc, whence the upper German language takes its original. The ancient British, which seems also to be the Celtish or Gaulish, the dialects whereof are still spoken in some parts of Great Britain, and in Britannia in France. The Cantabric also, or the language of the Biscainers in the northern mountains in Spain, is not much different. And likewise the Irish, if not it self a dialect of the old Cimbric, as it seems to be, must be accounted an original language. The Turkish language is generally spoken in European Turky, and also Arabic is well under∣stood by their learned men, as being the lan∣guage of the Alkoran; and is spoken in some of the Mountains of Granada. The Inhabitants of the Lesser Tartary, that live between Tanais and the Neiper, speak the Tar∣tarian language; as also the Cossacs, with some small difference. The Fins and Laplanders seem to have divers languages, both from one another, and from all the rest. The Paisan-Liflanders likewise have a different language to themselves. The Sclavonic language, whether originally one or many, is still continued in divers Regions of Europe, as in the dominions of the Emperor of Russia, divers countries subject to the King of Poland, in some parts of Hungary (but the Hun∣garian tongue properly so call'd, is by the learned accounted an original language), Bohemia, and Sclavonia, but with greater difference than dia∣lects of the same language use to be. The ancient Greek seems to have been the mother of the old Hetruscan, Oscan, Menapian, and such others as were spoken anciently in Italy, as may appear by those few remainders still extant of them; and therefore also of the Latin, in the opi∣nion of many learned, as the Latin is of the present Italian, French, Spanish, Grison, and some other lan∣guages. The Greek it self, tho with great alterati∣on, is still continued in the Continent and Islands of Greece, and some places near thereunto. The glory of Europe is its Religion,Religion. which in most parts of it is but one, tho diversly professed. Greece, with its Islands in the Egean Sea, and others as far as Corfu, as also some parts of Croa∣tia, Dalmatia, together with Muscovia, Walachia, Moldavia, Podolia, Volinia, and some other parts of the dominions of Poland, with other neighbouring Countries, follow the Greek Church. The Latin Church conteins, 1, Those of the Reform'd Religion, and 2, Those of the Roman. 1. The Reformed Religion is embraced in Great Brittain and Ireland, and the lesser Islands belonging to the Crown of England. And with some diversity in Sweden, Denmark, Holland, and the rest of the Ʋnited Provinces, and several parts of Germany, Transylvania, and some parts of the Kingdom of Poland.
2. The Roman Religion prevails in Italy, Spain, Portugal, France, Poland, and the greatest part of the German Empire, and other Countries. Mahumetanism is professed in European Turky, by the Great Turk and his Musselmen. The great ledg of Mountains that has its be∣ginning at the great Western Ocean,Moun∣tains. first divides France and Spain by the name of the Pirenean Hills, and is thence continued thro the south parts of France, till it cover Italy, and is there call'd the Alps; a branch of which running thro the whole length of Italy, has the name of the Apennine Mountains; another branch is continued under divers names, as the Rhetian-Hills, thro the coun∣try, now called, of the Grisons. Alpes, Graiae, No∣ricae, Juliae, &c. all which have now divers names according to the several countries thro which they pass. From Italy they continue thro Stiria, Carinthia, Hungary, Transylvania, Moldavia to the Black Sea; and branch out into divers other countries; of all which we shall treat more ex∣actly in the particular descriptions. The Mountains of the north are not much discover'd; one ledg of them is continued from the Baltic to the northern Ocean, dividing Norway from the neighbouring Nations. Those in the utmost north, anciently call'd Riphaei and Hyper∣borei, have at this day lost those names, conse∣quently they are unknown, except they be those which are by the inhabitants call'd Welikicame∣nopoias, i. e. Cingulum mundi, or the great Rocky Girdle; of which, as also of other Mountains not here mentioned, in their proper and particular places. The Seas that coast Europe,Seas. are the Northern and Western Ocean, the Mediterranean Sea, and the Euxin or Black Sea, which also contein in them several lesser Seas, Bays, Streights, &c. and have different names from the different shoars they wash, as Mare Britannicum or Brittish Sea, Mare Germanicum or German Sea, &c. and are therefore to be look'd upon by us as belonging to those Countries whence they derive their names. We defer to speak of the Rives that are com∣prehended in one Country,Rivers. till we come to treat of that Country. The most noted which run thro divers Countries, are these: First, the Danubius, or Danow, which arising in the Alps, runs thro Germany, Hungary, by Transylvania and Walachia, into the Euxine Sea. Next, the Rhine, which arising also in the Alps, not far from the head of the Danow, runs along by Germany and the Low Countries into the Brittish Ocean. The next is Boristhenes or Nieper, which has its rise in the Confines of Muscovy, and runs thro Litvania, Volinia, &c. into the Euxine Sea. And lastly, Don or Tanais, arising likewise in Muscovy, and running thro the lesser Tartary, and other adjoining Countries, falls into Palus Meotis. We omit to speak of the Volga, till we come to Asia, to which it more properly belongs. The dispositions of the Inhabitants cannot be easily reduc'd to one general character,Dispositi∣ons. varying according to the Religions, the Governments, the customary employments, and the divers tem∣perature of the air and soil in which they live. The Arts peculiar to,Arts. and most practis'd in Europe, and there invented, may be reckon'd Print∣ing, Painting, Statuary, divers particulars in the Art of War and Navigation, and most especially in the learned and scholastic Sciences, in which the Europeans have advanced to a much greater per∣fection than either the Asiatics or the Africans.
map of Russia NOVISSIMA RUSSIAE TABULA Authore Isaaco Massa. blazon or coat of arms Doctrina et humanitate praedito D. Isaaco Bernart, rerum quae per Mos¦coviam maxime trahuntur mercator peritissimo hanc Moscoviae tabula dedicat affinis finis. Hen. Honius Wirst. Germanica quorum
map of northern and eastern Russia RVSSIAE, vulgo MOSCOVIA dictae, Partes Septentrionalis et Orientalis. Auctore Isaaco Massa▪ blazon or coat of arms
MUSCOVY, OR RUSSIA. MEsech or Mosoc, the son of Japhet, is generally supposed to have peo∣pled this Country; the chief reason I conceive to be the similitude of the name. We find also in Strabo, frequent men∣tion of the Moschi, tho it be uncertain from him where their Country was. Mela placeth them near the Caspian Sea; Pliny near Iberia, which is now called Georgia; Lucan, and since him Sidonius, near the Sarmatae; and it seems, that Sarmatia was a name better known than Russia. So that the Moschi seem to be some of those many Nations at this time under, and that toward the south of the Mus∣covitish Empire. But the Annals of the Country acknowledg no other name they had anciently then Russes, tho some modern Latin-writers call them Roxalano's, quasi Russo-Alanos, but more Ru∣thenos, and their Nation Rossia; which signifies dispersion or scattering, because they (tho very great and populous) yet lived dispersed, with∣out certain government, in continual quarrels and dissentions one with another, till Genareta Daniel, or Ivan his son, surnamed Caleta or Scrip (because he always carried such an one at his girdle, with money to relieve such as were in necessity) gather'd and bound them together in one government and body. And for their better union, built amongst, and almost in the middle of them, the City Mosco, upon a River of that name; making it thenceforward the Metropolis of the Empire: from whence they begun to be call'd Muscovites, and by little and little have ad∣vanced themselves into a very great and famous Nation. It is true,. that the name of Russes was ancient∣ly further extended than now it ordinarily is, for the Russes were said to inhabit from the Weisel to Volga, and from the Black Sea to the Northern Ocean. And even yet the Polonians call a part of the Kingdom of Poland Red Russia; part also of the dominions belonging to Lithvania, Black Rus∣sia; and that under the Grand Tzaar, White Rus∣sia; as they say, because that people ordinarily woar white garments, but more universally white caps upon their heads. Of these alone in this place we are to treat. The dominion of the Grand Tzaar lies between 46 and 66 deg. of Latitude, that is, from Astra∣can to Fretum Waygatz, (tho part of his Empire lies some more South, and some more North) which allowing 60 miles to a degree, comes to 1260 English miles. And in Longitude from Bo∣risthenes about 55 deg. to the Volga 80 deg. after the same rate about 1500 of the same miles, ac∣cording to our best and newest Maps. The bor∣ders toward the North are the Frozen Sea, and some part of Lapland; on the South are the Crim∣and Precop-Tartars; on the East we may account the Volga and the Ob to be his borders; and on the west, the dominions of the King of Poland, Sueden, and some part of Lapland. Tho these are not exactly set down, yet they may serve for a general direction; more preciseness must be ex∣pected in the description of the several parts. But from this general notion, every one perceives that there must necessarily be a vast difference, as be∣tween the length of days (some being not sixteen hours, others six months long) so to heat and cold, betwixt the several parts of this countrey; and consequently as great variety of seasons, soils, fruits, and productions of the Earth; likewise also of habits, customs, diet, and even of the very dispositions and manners, as well as the figures of the inhabitants, upon which heat and cold have no small influence. So that we shall omit these general descriptions, and reserve what we find concerning the particulars to their proper places. And of the Government and Empire in general, it will be best treated of when we come to the Seat, or Metropolitical City of the Em∣pire. Mean while we shall proceed to speak of the several Provinces, as they lye in order, be∣ginning at the North-East part. But we must be∣speak the Readers first, not to expect any exact description of the bounds and limits of each Pro∣vince, for besides that no Author hath so nar∣rowly look'd into those things; it should seem, that the Emperor observes not always the same Commissions, but enlarges or diminishes his Go∣vernments as himself pleaseth. But for the same reason neither have we an exact enumeration of the Provinces, some reckoning more, some fewer. Those who number them according to the titles of the Grand Tzaar, cannot find their count; for those places mentioned in his title, are some of them small places and inconsiderable, some again contain more Provinces then one, and some such Governments as are not at this time under the Grand Tzaar; but as they subdued any dominion, they united all the titles to their for∣mer. But of this only by the by. In this we shall follow the tract of ground, proceeding from North-East to North-West, and make use of the best information we can find. And before we enter upon Russia, we shall take notice of a certain people, that take up a great share of these northern parts, not as inhabitants, nor as strangers, but as a wandering people, living upon hunting and prey, wherever they can find it. In this tract of ground we find the names, but nothing else, of divers Nations, as Ʋgolici, Hugritsci, Voluhisci, Calami, and the like; all whom the Russes (who till of late had not any distinct knowledg of them) called by the name of Sa∣moieds, or self-eaters; and since that, they have also called a great tract of land both of the West and East side of the River Ob, Samoiedia; I think erroneously, the Samoieds (as I said) not being a nation. But however it be, We shall begin with these Samoieds,Of the Sa∣moieds. tho not named amongst the Emperors Subjects, (except they be included in the title of Great Comman∣der of Siberia, or Obdoria, neither of which is likely), partly because the Muscovites retain their ancient form in their title, partly because these peo∣ple are only in part, and by their own free sub∣mission
under the Tzar. Part continue still in their ancient fierceness, barbarism, and heathenish∣ness. Nor is their Country reduc'd into Towns and Governments, as Russia is. They seem to be a Nation altogether distinct from the Muscovites, both in the make of their bodies, manner of living, language, &c. and to be rather akin to the Tartars, as are also the rest of those most Northern Nations, Laplanders, Gronelanders, &c. because of their low stature, full∣chestedness, broad and flat faces, long black hair, little hollow eyes, short legs, and knees bowing outward. They inhabit the confines of Europe and Asia,Their ha∣bitations. and take up a considerable portion of the nor∣thern tract of both those parts. They live on both sides of the River Ob (Obba, Oby); the Russians call them Sam-ieda, i. e. self-eaters, which is not improbable, both because at present they eat all manner of raw flesh, even the very carion that lies in the ditch. And those who live upon Way∣gates, even till these times will not suffer the Russes to land upon their Country, but if they catch will kill any of them, and eat them. Of those also, who live beyond the Ob, the Russians re∣port, that they, in hard times, do not make any difficulty to devour one another; that if a Merchant come amongst them to trade, they will, to make him an high entertainment, not stick to kill a child for his sake; and that if any one dye amongst them, they make the best of him, and eat him. But themselves give another reason even of the name Samoied, as if it signi∣fied of themselves; that they were ab origines, and born in that place. However, as I said, this is not a name of a Nation, but an accidental diffe∣rence from most other people, yet such an one as hath quite obliterated the true name. How far they extend beyond the Ob, is not yet disco∣vered. On this side the River they reach as far as Petzora; or at least the inhabitants of the Coun∣try betwixt those two Rivers, seem to be of the same original with the Saimoieds. Waygate and Nova Zembla in appearance are inhabited by the same Nation; as are Siberia, Borandia, Jugoria, and so was the greatest part of Northern Russia, till civiliz'd. The Reader must not expect any exact rela∣tion of their affairs and actions.Their dis∣covery. They have not any thing of learning or records, nor so much as oral tradition of what hath been done amongst them in the very last ages. Nor do strangers mention any thing of them, save that they fre∣quented, with their Furs and other commodi∣ties, the free Fairs and publick Marts held in se∣veral Towns of Russia, till their submission to the Muscovite. And the first that gave any notice of them to this part of the world, were our own Countrymen, who endeavouring the discovery of a passage that way to Cathay and China, happen'd upon their Country; who notwithstanding could not give any exact relation of them, because of their ignorance of the language, and the extream shyness and jealousie they have of all strangers and their conversation. The first that we find to have light upon them, was Stephen Burroughs an English man, 1556, in his voyage to discover the North-East passage. Before him also I find not any of our Geographers to have mentioned Way∣gats (which he saith are Islands lying North-East of Pechora) and Nova Zembla; his relation (as also that of Rich. Johnson, who went the same voyage, are extant in Hackluit. Afterwards 1596, Will. Barents gave some small account of them; since that, divers others. What we can find con∣cerning them,Their lan∣guage and manner of life. we shall set down. They have not all one language, but how many, or how differing, and in what places which language, we know not. Their manner of li∣ving seems to be much according to nature. They have no Cities, but some of them have houses, whither they sometimes (when not convenient to travel) retire; which are (as the Groenlan∣ders) in the foot of an hill, with passages to one another; the part that is not dug out of the ground, is of wood, meeting together at the top, and cover'd with bark and turf; with a hole in the top, which serves them for a chim∣ney to vent their smoak, and door to creep out when the snow stops up their entrance. But the greatest part of them travel from place to place, where they can find best pasturage for their Rain-Deer, and best game or prey for themselves, and they would reckon it a curse to be confin'd to one place. Those next the Sea side abide upon the Sea commonly a month together, when it is seasonable fishing. When they wander, they carry wives, children, and all their wealth along with them; pretending no propriety in any place. They tra∣vel upon Sleds, drawn by their Rain-Deer, with so great speed, that they are able to post two hundred Italian miles in one day. They bait and rest where is best provision for their beasts; and they travel commonly in company, ten Sleds fasten'd one to another, and to every of them one Rain-Deer at least, in which they carry their stuff and wealth, and call it Argish: but when thus laden, they make shorter days journeys, and travel not above thirty miles in twelve hours. At night they pitch their Tents, which are the largest Skins and Furs set and extended upon short poles or stakes (of which the Country is very plentifully stored), so covering the whole frame, except a hole at the top, which lets out the smoak, and they heap snow upon the outside; the fire they make in the middle, and round about it spread their Bears-skins and Furs, whereupon they sleep. It is the wives office to set up the Cabbans, and guide the Argish, or Convoy of Sleds; whilst the men bring in firing, and such provision as can be got for their Supper. From this their con∣tinual changing places, it comes, that these Sa∣moieds are the only guides for Merchants in win∣ter time to all the great Towns near those Coun∣tries; who rarely mistake their way, tho the wea∣ther be never so misty. They are very nimble, and excellent archers; so that at Moscow, to shew their skill, they set a small round piece of Tin, from which retiring as far as they could discern it, they never missed to hit with their arrow. Their garments are all of Fur; that next their bodies (called by them Mallek, or a shirt) of young Fawns, Hares, or Swans-skins, very soft and well-dressed; the outward (called Parka) of stronger and thicker Fur. And they take care to have them very fit, and not too loose or big for their body, which I suppose they do for warmth; for which cause they are very careful of their caps, and coverings for their heads. The women also have the same garments as the men, and therefore are not easily distinguished from them; save that they suffer on either side a lock of hair to hang down below their ears, and make blew lines in their faces, by drawing a thred dip'd in blew paint, lightly under the skin. The fashion of their habits is not the same in all places. They have no Bread, Rice, or any thing like it; their food is flesh of beasts, of all sorts, (which they eat raw, if they have not the convenience of drying it in the Sun, or wind, or scorching it with the fire), fish also, and fish-oyl, and honey. Of body they are very strong, active, swift,Dispositi∣ons. and healthful; hardy, and able to endure very great labour, thirst, and cold. And the women not less then the men; for at their child-bearing
the husband only is the midwife, and the good∣woman, as soon as deliver'd, washeth her child in snow, and the next morning is able to con∣duct her Argish. They seem also to be stout and bold spirited, tho wars seldom happen amongst them; but their weapons, besides bows and ar∣rows, are long spears and short swords. They are of a very quiet and not-quarrelsom disposi∣tion amongst themselves, but suspitious and jea∣lous of all strangers, but this is because of their want of conversation. They seem not to have any government amongst them (those I mean who are not subjects to the Muscovite) every one follows his own fancy and employment; but when they want any directions, or are in diffi∣culties, they apply themselves to the most anci∣ent person in that company or hoard, and he also is their Priest, and his directions they fol∣low. Their frequentest consultations are concern∣ing the future, which way they shall remove, and to what place, what success in their hunting, whe∣ther take such a journey, and the like. Contro∣versies amongst them are not  frequent, but are determined by a certain oath : They make an image of a man in snow, and lay before it a Wolves snout; he that is to swear, takes a sword, and rehearsing the names of his wives, children, and friends, desires that if he be not in the right, they may all be cut in pieces, even as himself doth cut that snow-image with that sword, which immediately he doth. Then he wishes that the Wolf may destroy his Rain-Deer, and that henceforward he may never kill any beast, if he speak not the truth; then he cuts the Wolves snout to pieces, and there is no more to be said to that controversie. The Samoieds buy their Wives for Deer, and may have as many as they can purchase;. the bet∣ter sort have four or five. He is the richest man that hath most Deer and Daughters; selling them to such as will give most for them. Their mar∣riages are not celebrated with any great cere∣monies. The Bridegroom makes a feast to his friends, which (according to his ability) conti∣nues perhaps seven days. The feasting being end∣ed, the Bride adorned with many iron rings, bra∣zen bells, fish-bones, &c. is deliver'd up to her hus∣band, and all others depart the Tent till the next morning. If they like not their wives after half a year or a year, they return them back to their friends, and receive their Deer. When a rich man dies amongst them, that he may not be un∣attended in the next world, they strangle one of his slaves (whom they bury with him) and three of his Deer, with which they feast themselves. If a young child dies, under seven years old, they hang it by the neck on some tree, saying, that it must fly to heaven. It hath been reported by divers Authors,. that these Samoieds and the Northern Russes exhibited great worship to an Idol they called Slata-baba, or the golden-old-wife, which was a great image of stone, representing a woman with a child in her arms. But our men say that is a fable; that there is indeed in one of the Islands in the mouth of the River Ob, a great Rock, which with the help of fancy, may seem to be somewhat like such a woman; and that the Fishermen do ma∣ny times in storms shelter themselves under that Rock, and practise their sacrifices and sorceries there, but not to the Rock. They seem to ac∣knowledg a God, but to apprehend and repre∣sent him by such things by which they receive most benefit. They have been frequently ob∣served every morning, as soon as they go forth, to fall on their knees, and hold up their hands toward the Sun. They have also many images, made as like men as their rudeness could work them; to which it is supposed that they use sa∣crificing, for they have found them set upright, besmear'd with blood, and many bones and ashes before them, and sometimes a chopping-block, whereupon it is supposed the beast to be offered was killed and divided. But tho our men never saw them sacrifice, yet Richard Johnson (in Hackluit p. 283.) gives us a strange relation of their divi∣nations and sorceries, whereof he was an eye∣witness; and it was to be informed which way, and to what place they were next to remove. He saith in short, that the ancientest of the fa∣mily or kindred is always the Priest, that he had on his head a garland, and a piece of a coat of mail, whereto were fastened fish-bones, and many other trinkets; that he first beat upon an instrument like half a drum, with a little mawl, afterwards he begins to whoop and hollow as our hunters do, and the people answer'd him, but he with so great violence that he became sensless, and so fell down, and lay for some space. Coming to him∣self, he rose up and commanded three Ollens (or the largest Deer) to be killed; then he took a sword of near a yard long, and thrust it several times into his belly, but without any wound; af∣terwards he heated it in the fire, and thrust it in at his navel and out at his fundament, when (saith Johnson) I laid my finger upon it, but no wound follow'd. The Priest being wearied, reposed whilst they heated a kettle of water, which being hot, they sang again, and brought in like the frame of a Sedan, into which the Priest, having put off his matters and his shirt, sat down, and put about his neck and under his left arm a small cord with a slip-knot, and gave one end to one lusty young man, and the other end to another; then they set the seething water before him, and cover'd both the frame wherein he sat and the kettle, that no man could see those dreadful mysteries. The people began to sing furiously, and the young men drew the cord close, whereupon hearing somewhat to fall into the water, I asked (saith Johnson) what it was, they told me, it was his head and left shoulder which the cord had cut off, but they would not suffer me to go see that it was so. After more ve∣hement singing, he came from behind the cur∣tain safe and well. I demanded what their God had said, and whither they were to go; but was an∣swer'd, that it was not for them to know what their God said, but that they were to obey what their Priest commanded. This was before their submission to the Muscovite, for since that time the Emperor hath caused Christianity to be preached amongst them; and tho he forceth none of them to embrace it, yet many of them are baptized, and the worship of the Devil decreaseth and groweth out of reputation amongst them. God of his mercy grant, that these ends of the earth also may be reduced under the laws and government of his Son, our dear Lord. Amen. Their submission to the Grand Tzaar I shall re∣late somewhat more copiously,Their sub∣mission to the Grand Tzar. to shew all the world, that the Russes are neither so barbarous, nor tyrannical as too many Authors (who measuring all men by themselves, account what∣ever is different from those notions wherein them∣selves have been educated, as barbarous and un∣reasonable) represent them. In the time of Ivan Ba∣silowich there lived upon the River Wichida, or Witsogda, an husbandman of a poor and vile de∣scent, called Oneeko, or Onyka, who by his indu∣stry in tilling the ground, came to very great riches, which he vastly encreased afterwards by trading. Amongst many children he had three sons, Jacove, Gregory, and Simon, who traded in common. These men, with their father, dealt
chiefly with the Samoieds, that came yearly to the Fairs of Osel and Ʋstiug. Oneeka was not con∣tent with the gain he reaped by his trade, but had also a great curiosity to know what country∣men, and whence they came, that brought such rich Furs to these markets; conceiving that great wealth was there to be obtained. He began there∣fore to insinuate into the conversation of these Samoied traders; by his inviting and cajoling them, he obtained that twelve of his servants might go with them into their country; to whom he gave strict and particular orders how to behave them∣selves, and what to observe; which they did very carefully and faithfully. At their return with the Samoieds, he courted them much more friendly, and commanded also his own servants not to speak of what they had seen or discover'd. The next year he sent more of his servants, and some of the most trusty of his kindred, with such low priz'd Merchandize as he conceived most proper for that place. These went to the River Ob, where making acquaintance with the Samoieds, they found Furs there to be of small price; that the people lived barbarously and incommodiously, in companies, without cities, without houses, or bread; govern'd only by some of the anci∣entest among them, without laws, without pro∣priety; yet peaceably amongst themselves, and without envy to their neighbours, of whom they knew little. The Onykaes driving this trade awhile became very rich, built many Churches, and some Towns; and grew so rich, that they were esteemed worth in money, besides lands, cat∣tel, &c. three hundred thousand Rubbles, or Marks. They set yearly at work ten thousand persons, besides five thousand slaves they had of their own; and paid to the Emperor yearly three and twenty thousand Rubbles for Custom, be∣sides their maintaining several Garrisons on the confines of Siberia. But whether they were a∣fraid, that their riches might breed them ene∣mies and accusers at the Court, where they were sure to be worsted; or whether they thought this trade thus managed was too great for Subjects, and prejudicial to their Prince, they resolved to declare it to the Emperor, and to make the ad∣vantage publick, and to the behoof of the Prince. Some of them therefore go to Moscow, and by rich presents insinuate into the favour of Boris Godenow, the Emperors Brother-in-law (and him∣self afterwards also Emperor), who at that time govern'd under a weak Prince the whole Em∣pire. After some time they discover'd to him the situation of the countries of Samoiedia and Sibe∣ria, what they had seen, and observed therein, and what great wealth and advantage might thereby arrive to his Tzaaric Majesty. This no∣tice was received of Boris with all the affection imaginable, as also by the Emperor himself Pheo∣dor Ivanowich. And first of all, they confirmed to the Oneekaes so great priviledges and honours as a subject was capable of; then they sent certain Gentlemen and Soldiers in company of, and to be at the direction and discretion of the Oneekaes; they order'd them to be richly clothed, and to carry the garb of Ambassadors; and gave them presents of small value to be bestowed among the natives, according to discretion; enjoining them to observe all rivers, woods, passages, very diligently, and especially such places as might be most convenient for building Castles and Towns; as also to use the people with all gentle∣ness and kindness, and if it were possible, to bring some of the people along with them. These mes∣sengers, with those whom the Oneekaes joined to them, behaved themselves so discreetly, and were so liberal of their trifles, that in a short time they had obtained the affections of the natives; whom, by frequently insinuating the great power and majesty of the Grand Tzaar, making him almost a God upon earth, and the happy living of his subjects, they before their return perswaded them to submit themselves to his government, and to pay him as tribute for every head that was able to shoot, a pair of Sables every year; a thing not valued by the Samoieds, but arising to a prodigious advantage to the Muscovite. And because the Samoieds desired to see these great wonders with their own eyes, which these messen∣gers had declared to them concerning Muscovy and the Emperor; they offer'd to take divers of them unto Moscow, and to leave divers of their own people, who might live and learn the lan∣guage against the time the others returned. When these poor Barbarians arrived at Moscow, and saw all the gallantry of the Court, the majesty and pomp of the Prince, the greatness of his Armies, the conveniency also of their houses and house∣hold-stuff, the regularity of their obedience; in sum, when they had tasted the Russes meats, and found them much better then their own, and per∣ceived the civil life of the Muscovites to be in all respects preferred to their own barbarism, they intreated that they might be accepted into the number of his subjects; and have persons sent to instruct and govern them according to those excellent rules which themselves there saw. Which things were accordingly granted, and Governors sent, and Castles and Towns order'd to be built, and the people to be instructed, as they still con∣tinue to do. Besides others, these Towns are of most note, Soil-Camscoy upon the river Wisera, built for the refreshing and convenience of travellers, who from hence proceed on their journey into Sa∣moiedia, and those places by land. The inhabi∣tants are Russes and Tartars; there is also great store of cattel, especially horses, upon which they tra∣vel over the great mountains Coosvinscoy-, Cirgin∣scoy-, and Paduinscoy-Camen; places desert, and only frequented by Tartars and Samoieds in their hunting. Vergateria, the first Town in Siberia, begun to be built about 1590, where is resident a Governor and a Garrison for the Muscovite, who every spring by the several rivers distribute their proportions of corn and provisions to the fur∣ther Garrisons, who live where the ground is not tilled. Japhanis, upon the river Toera, begun since Vergateria. Tinna, twelve days journey di∣stant from Japhanis, where are in winter-time great markets for Furs, between Muscovites, Sa∣moieds, and Tartars. Tobolsca, the chief City of Siberia, whither are brought all the tributes of of the Countries beyond, which thence are con∣vey'd to Moscow. Here is also the seat of justice for all Samoiedia and Siberia, and all the Gover∣nors are bound to obey this; it is situated be∣tween the rivers Yrtis and Tobol. Pohemy, upon the river Tassa, in a very fruitful soil; most of the inhabitants are Siberians. Olscoygorod, which was afterwards razed down by command of the Governor of Tobolsca, because too near the Sea, and instead of it they built Zergolta, upon an Island in the Ob, and above that Noxinscoy, at first a Castle, now grown into a great City; from whence by the command of the Grand Tzaar Boris Godanove, they have discovered, and built divers Towns beyond the Ob, which more pro∣perly belong to the discourse of Asia. They also built Tara, Jorgochum, Besobia, and Mangansoiscoi∣gorod, with many others, of which besides the names we know nothing; and in truth, all these northern parts are as yet undiscover'd, and no∣thing comes to our hands but imperfect relati∣ons
map of southern Russia MOSCOVIAE PARS AVSTRALIS. Isaaco Massa blazon or coat of arms
of particular persons, to whom we cannot tell what credit ought to be given; yet they say, that the Muscovites (the Emperor and his Coun∣cil) are most exactly and particularly informed, and keep perfect registers from time to time, of all these both discoveries and buildings. One thing I shall add for their commendation, that wherever they come, they build Churches and Chappels, and take great care to set up the exercise of their Religion; to which they by divers artifices, as well as by example, (but not by force) endea∣vour to draw in and instruct the Samoieds, Siberians, and other heathens under their dominion. It is also to be noted, that it is no wonder that the Straits of Waygats and Nova Zembla are so stopped up with ice, that no passage at any time, or very rarely, for great Ships, and only in some years for smaller Barks, can be hoped for thro those places; for so many huge Rivers discharging themselves into those Straits, in the spring when the ice begins to thaw, carry along with them vast mountains of ice, which is all gather'd into those narrow places, till the wind drives it into the open Seas. In 1612, Capt. Isa. Samer was sent to this discovery, who could not perform his design, but in the end of July measured ice there sixty fa∣thoms thick; this ice melting first at the sides of the Rivers, and driven down with mighty violence by the great quantities of melted snow forcing it from above, carries down trees, and sometimes even whole woods fastened in it; which is the reason that they find so much floating wood in those Straits, and upon all the northern coast of Mus∣covy, and the Islands adjoining; I dare not say so far as the north of Ireland, where is often taken up Pines and Firs, which grow not in any place neer them, and have given cause for some men to suspect, that there are some other Islands near the Hebrides, as yet undiscover'd. The several Provinces of Russia. THE first Province of Russia toward the North-East is Obdoria, situate betwixt Ob and Pechora or Petzora Rivers.. A large country, but thinly inhabited, which may be the reason that it is in our Maps call'd Samoiedia, more fre∣quently than Obdoria, as if it were only the coun∣try of the Samoieds. Concerning the great River Ob, or Oby, we have but little of certainty; for I cannot find that any of our Merchants have been there. An English Factor, before ann. 1600, employ'd one Englishman, with others his servants, to discover the way unto, and the trade of it by land; but they were imprison'd, by order of the Russ-Governors, who seem unwilling that any one should understand that profit, but them∣selves. Some conceive, that these people are mention'd in Curtius, and other ancient Authors, by the name of Scythae Abii (from the River Aby, or Oby) but it is uncertain. The River it self is said to arise from a Lake call'd Cataisko; as if the Catayans (whom most men conceive to be the Chi∣neses) lived upon, or near it. It is said also, that it re∣ceives many great Rivers, whereof we know little besides the names; that it is navigable two hun∣dred leagues from the Sea; that it disembogues into the Sea beyond the Straits of Waygats; that the mouth is eighty Versts or Italian miles broad, yet many shallows and flats in it; and that it is plentifully stored with Fish. The Samoieds seem to say, that an English Ship did many years ago arrive there, but being there wracked, the men were all killed by the Samoieds. Betwixt Oby and Petzora, is a very large Coun∣try, like a Promontory, running very far into the North or Frozen Ocean; in which, as I said, are the Provinces of Obdora and Condora, how separated we know not; nor any thing else of them, more then that they receiv'd the faith of Christ in 1618, and they were not in the titles of the Grand Tzar before Ivan Vasilowich. From Medemskoy Zavorot in the mouth of Pechora, to Ob are sixteen days sailing with a good wind. Six days to Breit-Vinnose in the Straits of Waygats; leaving the Rock Sacolia Lowdia on the Starboard-side. Waygats was at first menti∣on'd by Steph. Burroughs, but not known whether to be a distinct Island, or part of Nova Zembla; and in some of our late Maps it is quite omitted, and instead of it is put Fretum Nassauvianum, according to the fancy of our neighbours. The inhabitants they say are Samoieds, very barbarous, men-eaters, &c. Over against these Straits, a new Map (printed at Nurenburgh this year 1679) in the Continent where we conceive Obdora and Condora, hath plac'd (by what authority, and whether with the good liking of the Grand Tzar, let them consider who are concern'd) New Walckeren, New Holland, and New West-Frieseland, besides divers other names of the Low Countries. I suppose it proceeds only from an itch they have of attributing all disco∣veries to, and giving names by themselves. The Bay of Petzora is called Yongorsky-shar; and there fall in divers great Rivers, as Cara-reca (or the black River), Moetnaia-reca (the muddy River), Zolena-reca (the green River), betwixt it and Ob. Petzora also is named both in the Grand Tzars title, and by Authors also, as a Province,Petzora. which they say is bounded by the River of that name, and the great mountains called Ziemni-poias, or Cingulum mundi. In 1611, a Ship was sent to settle a Fa∣ctory at Pechora; they found the Bar very shallow, nine or ten foot water; afterwards they came into the Suchoi-more, or dry Sea, because of the shal∣lowness of the water. The inhabitants say, that Pechora flows into the Sea with seventy-two mouths, others say six only; the Channel that trendeth South-West is the deepest and best. The Town is called Pustozera, because on a Lake which the Russes call'd Osera, and it lies in 68 deg. 30 min. of Latitude. In the Town are three Churches, and the people poor, speak a language of their own, and are Christians ever since 1518; they live chiefly upon the Geese, and other fowl which they catch in the Spring and Summer, whose feathers they sell to Merchants, and the flesh they powder and dry for Winter. The Ri∣ver is plentifully stored with fish, especially Sal∣mons, (whereof in one year they took above fif∣teen thousand) which they salt, sell and convey to Mezen by land. They live commonly upon fresh fish boil'd and dry'd. Hither use to come every year two thousand Samoieds with their com∣modities. The Pechora runs thro great Permia, and the head of it is five weeks journey above Pustozera. Divers great Rivers fall into it, as Shap∣kina, Nougorotka, Habeaga, and Ouse, of which be∣sides the names we know nothing. East of the Pechora lies the Promontory of Borandey, scarce mention'd in any Author, the chief Town where∣of is Vetzora; the inhabitants are originally Sa∣moieds, but somewhat civiliz'd by the Muscovites. Three days journey above Pustozera, lies upon the same River Oust-zilma, a Town of about three∣score houses, in 66 deg. and 30 min. where they have Ry and Barley growing very good, and where is a very good trade for Furs. Siberia, call'd by the Russes Sibior,Siberia. is much of the same nature, tho more South then Obdoria and Petzora; from which it is divided by those high and terrible mountains called Ziemni-poias, which by reason of the cold winds to which they are exposed, and continual snow, are very bar∣ren,
and hardly passable in many places. Here and there are trees (some say Cedars, and about them the blackest Sables), and the best white Falcons. Herberstein reports, that there were some persons, that after seventeen days travel to go over them, return'd back, as thinking them un∣passable. They were heretofore all Samoieds, (and in Bar. Herbersteins time had neither Castle nor City) situated upon the River Cama; out out of it ariseth the Jaycks, a large River, that passing thro the plains of Tartary enters into the Caspian Sea. The Country was then also full of Woods and Lakes, and almost desart till they submitted to the Muscovite, together with the other Samoieds. The Country is so call'd from Sibier, or Sibior, the first built City amongst them; tho Tobolsca be the chiefest; which is a City of great trade, to which the Teseeks, Boughars, and Tartars bring very rich commodities from Persia, of all sorts. Papinougorod also is a good trading Town, so call'd from the Nation of the Papini, amongst whom it is built, who were a sort of Samoieds, and had a peculiar language. But Siberia is now for nothing more famous, then that it is the place of banishment for such either of∣fenders as deserve that punishment, or as have by any way faln under the Tzars displeasure; for these also he sends thither, with their wives and children, and sometimes gives them there some small government. To poor people it is now not terrible to be sent into Siberia, as formerly it was, because they find tolerable livelihood there, but to the rich and noble it is look'd upon, as sending to the Galleys in France and other places; only they are obliged to bring in a certain num∣ber of Sables, upon pain of severe bodily chastise∣ment; nor is it an easie matter for any of them to escape. One thing more is to be observed, that many learned men (and amongst them Olearius) confounds this Siberia with another Province, near that name, under the Grand Tzars domi∣nion, in the South, bordering upon the domi∣nions of Poland; which is almost as great an er∣ror as that of those who think Samoiedia and Sa∣mogitia to be the same. This Country is said to have yeilded in 1589, a tribute of four hundred sixty-six timber of Sables (every tim∣ber containing forty skins), five timber of Mar∣trons, an hundred and eighty cases of black Fox (every case containing also forty skins) besides other commodities. To Tobolsca (which is almost in the midst of Siberia) are brought all the tri∣butes, and thence sent by convoy to Mosko; but the chief Governor of all these northern Coun∣tries resides at Vergateria. Permia, situate upon the River Vischora or Vi∣storna, which is ten miles from Weliki Perme (or great Permia) the chief City of this Province,Permia. and falls into the River Cama. Permski upon the East borders upon Tumen, which is under the Tartars; where is a great trade from Boghar and Persia. From Tumen to Tobolsca they travel in fourteen days; from Tobolsca to Beresova (another great trading Town upon the Ob) in nine days; from Beresova into the River Ouse, and down that in∣to the Petzora, and so to Pustozera, in three weeks. The Permians pretend to be an ancient Nation, I suppose, because they have a peculiar language and characters. Yet till they submitted to the Muscovites, they lived no otherwise than the Sa∣moieds; neither as yet have they much use or knowledg of bread, nor do they plant or sow, but live upon hunting, and have their Sleds drawn with Deer, or great Dogs, which they bring up for that purpose; and when the snow is hard frozen, they have their Nartes (which the Laps and Fins call Saksit, other Nations Artach) or long Skeits, made of thin wood, or bark, where∣with they glide over the snow with incredible swiftness; but these are used in all northern Coun∣tries, where they are accustom'd to much snow. They were very zealous Idolaters; insomuch that the first Bishop, who was sent to convert them, they flay'd alive; yet did not this discourage his successor Stephen, who happily setled Christiani∣ty, and civility in a great part, amongst them; he also invented characters for their peculiar lan∣guage, and is reckon'd amongst the Saints in the Russ-Calendar. Yet amongst them (as amongst the Siberians, Samoieds, and most of these nor∣thern Countries) are secretly still many Idola∣ters, who frequent not their Cities, but live in Woods, and amongst the Marshes. They seem to be a rich people; for when Ivan Vasilowich sought for an aveny or pretence to fleece them, he sent to them for so much Cedar to build him a Palace; they returning answer, that they had no such thing in their Country, nor did they know what it was; he punish'd their obstinacy at twelve thousand and sixty Rubbles, or Marks. Whence we may gather, that they were united to the dominion of the Muscovite before that time, and some say under Vasilie his father. This demand of the Emperors, might either take its rea∣son from the report of Cedars upon the mountains of Siberia, or that report from this message. Jugoria, Jugria, Hugria, Juhar, Juhria, Juha∣ria,Jug Jugra, where it is situated I know not; for some place it on the East, others on the West-side of Ob. H. Smith, who lived in Petzora 1580, saith, that it lies over against Waygatz. If it be true, which the Baron of Herberstein saith, that this was the Country whence Attila with his Huns over-run so much of Europe, and afterwards setled in Pannonia, which from the name of their own Country Juga∣ria, they called Hungaria, they should seem to be West of Ob; for Dubravius (who writes the sto∣ry) saith, that they were a very barbarous and deformed Nation, living amongst great Lakes and Forrests; which agrees well enough to the Jugorsky; and that some of them hunting a Stag, the beast took thro the Marshes, and by that means shewed them a way into a better Country then their own, which knowing no other, till then contented them very well. But the hunters re∣turning, and declaring the pleasures and riches they had discover'd, perswaded them to leave that uncomfortable place, and by their valor seek bet∣ter habitations; which they presently put in execu∣tion. The difficulties in this opinion are, that the present Juhria is not stored with horses; that the inhabitants are a very poor, miserable, and but few people, much undisposed for such high and generous thoughts of conquering their neigh∣bours. Yet is not the argument which the dili∣gent and learned Baron useth, to be despised, which is, that both the remainder of the anci∣ent Hungarians (who live between the Danow and Tibiscus) and these Jugarians use the same lan∣guage, which is not known to be any where else spoken. But reserving this dispute to a properer place, we have nothing more to say of them, but that they live much-what after the manner of the Samoieds, the same diet, clothing, tribute, &c. West of Petzora, along the North Sea,Dwina. lies the Province of Dwina, continued unto a River of that name; which is so call'd (Dwina signi∣fying Twain or two) because it is the confluence of two Rivers, Jugh and Sachona, or Suchana; (Jug ariseth in the Country of the Cheremise-Tar∣tars, Suchana from a Lake near Vologda); after the conjuncture, it runs an hundred leagues before its falls into the North or White Sea. This hereto∣fore belonged to the Duke of Novogorod, but is
map of the Don River DWINAE FLUVII. nova descriptio Sumptibus Janssanio-Waesbergiorum, et Mosis Pitt.
now a Province of it self. The Country is very barren, and therefore hath very few Cities or great Towns, and even the Villages stand very thin, tho it contain an hundred leagues in length. The chiefest and only Town heretofore was Dwi∣na, situate in the midst of the Province, where the River begins to take its name. But since the trade of the English and Dutch, &c. is transported this way, which formerly was to Narva, it is very much augmented and enriched. The greatest place of commerce is Archangel (by the Russes called Ar∣chania) at the mouth of the Dwina, on the left hand of the entrance. It is but a small Town, but very populous, because of the trade. And here it will be most proper to take notice, that the first trading that was to this place, or in a man∣ner to Muscovy (by which that Country is so mightily enriched, and by which also we come to have some more distinct and particular know∣ledge of the Country) was 1553, when by the advice of Sebastian Cabot (grand Pilot of Eng∣land) divers Ships were furnish'd for discoveries toward the North. It was the fortune of Rich. Chanceller to fall into the Bay of St. Nicolas, where he was very well receiv'd, and sent for thence to the Emperor Ivan Vasilowich, who entertain'd him with all imaginable kindness, and began to esta∣blish a considerable trade, under such priviledges as were agreed upon 1555; which were from time to time renew'd and augmented, or some∣times ebb'd and flow'd, according to the interest of the Grand Tzar. Some of our neighbours in∣deed, that first interloped into our trade, have from time to time made their advantages; and tho they came in at first under our wings, yet have they since endeavoured to pluck our feathers; but it had been in vain, had not the late rebellion in our Country, and especially the martyrdom of our late blessed Soveraign, made us to be ab∣horr'd of God and man. I mean not only of all Christian Princes, but even of all those who pre∣tend to humanity. Tho I know not whether any resented it so vively as this Emperor, who im∣mediately revoked all his priviledges and free∣doms granted to our Merchants, and till this day (I know not by whose fault, but certainly some gain more by it than others) they cannot be retrieved. But to return to Dwina; this Pro∣vince is very barren, and the Villages are but few and scatter'd. The inhabitants live upon dry'd fish and Venison, the cold not allowing any corn or grain; but their chiefest commodity is Salt, which they make here in great plenty. Besides, the trade at Archangel hath also made divers of their haven Towns to be considerable, and set up fishing and carriage; as Lampas, a great Mart for the Samoieds, and all the North. Colmogro, Pine∣ga, Mezen, all which ly neer to, or upon the Gulf of Mezen, and trade with many Barks (great Ships they have none) to Petzora, Ob, Nova Zem∣bla, and those Eastern parts. But the impositi∣ons are continually so much augmented upon the foreign commodities that arrive at Archan∣gel, that our Merchants fear to be forced to withdraw their trade, and then the greatest part of these inferior Towns, and the whole Province, will also diminish, and return to be what they formerly were. St. Nicolas is in 64 deg. Colmogro in 64 deg. 25 min. from Mezen to Candinos fifty Leagues, thence to Colgoie fifty leagues, thence to Pechorskoy-Zavorot, or the Bay of Pechora, forty leagues, thence to Pustoiozera fifty leagues. There are divers Islands upon this Coast, but not of any consequence. Colgoieve is the largest, in 69 deg. 20 min. thirty leagues from the Bay of Pet∣zora; it is high clay-ground, in it breed many Geese, besides other Fowls, Hawks also; and hither the Russes repair in the Summer-time. To this of Dwina,Ʋstiug. we will subjoin Ʋstiug (Osti∣um Jugh Fl.) that gives name to a Provice, tho but a poor one. The natives formerly had a language proper to themselves, as well as divers other Provinces before mention'd; but the care of the Emperor is such, that he abolishes them by degrees, and introduceth the Muscovitish; which the people willingly do, finding it much better for their commerce. Here (and in Dwina) Sables are not of so great reputation, but they have the best black Foxes. Here are also very great and famous Fairs and Marts. West of Dwina is Corella (Carelia, Carelen),Corella. and betwixt them both the Island Solowski, fa∣mous for the Abby of St. Nicolas, whereinto they permit not any woman to enter. It is in 63 deg. 50 min. The banks of the Sea hereabouts are white and shining with Alabaster. In this Province is much Salt boiled. The people live much-what like the Laplanders, tho not altogether so barba∣rous, for they have some Towns, as Corelnburg, Nordenburg upon the mouth of a Lake, which by the River Warfuga emptieth it self into the Bay of St. Nicolas. Kexholm, in the hands of the Suedes; and the greatest part of all this Province pays tribute both to the Russes and Suedes. At the Treaty 1616 of Stolbow, the Grand Tzar quitted the title of this Country to the King of Sweden. Vodska, or Votska, thirty leagues North of No∣vogorod,Vodska. upon its left hand is the strong Castle of Ivanogorod, surrender'd to the Swedes by the same Treaty, as well as the Towns Jamagrod and Augdow, and the Castles Coporia, Noteburg, and Kexholm. They say, that all the beasts that are brought into this Province turn white. The in∣habitants have a language proper to them∣selves. Woskopitin is by some Authors placed between Kexholm and Noteburg,Woskopi∣tin. a large and fruitful Pro∣vince both for Corn and Cattle, but so pester'd with Lakes and Marshes, that it is very little fre∣quented, and the name scarce known. Bieleiezioro,Bieleio∣zioro. situated upon a Lake of the same name and signification, i.e. the White Lake; which Lake is thirteen Leagues long, and as many broad, and furnishes only one River, call'd Sosna, which falls into the Wolga. In this Lake is a Castle both for natural and artisicial strength accounted im∣pregnable; whither in times of danger the Princes have sent their treasure, and themselves also re∣tired. The whole Province is full of Woods and Lakes, that (except when they are hard frozen) it is not easily passable. Near this Lake is another small Lake that produceth Sulphur (I rather sup∣pose Naphtha or Petroleum), swimming like froth or oyl upon the water. This is said to be first possessed by Sinaus Varegus, whose brother Truvor setled in Pskouvia, and Runiz in Novogardia. These three are by the Russes look'd upon as the Founders of their Nation. Vologda is the only City in all the Grand Tzars dominions that is fortified with a stone-wall,Vologda. and for its strength the Emperor is wont, in times of danger, to secure here part of his treasure. It is, as the rest of those Westerly and Northerly Pro∣vinces, much encumbred with Woods and Mar∣shes, many of which are (except in Winter) ut∣terly unpassable. It is situated upon the River Waga, which falls into the Dwina; and it (toge∣ther with all the Provinces mention'd since Dwi∣na) belonged to the Dutchy of Novogorod. Novogorod, call'd Weliki, or the Great,Novogo∣rod. to di∣stinguish it from others of that name. The Dutch call it Nieugarten; in 58 deg. 23 min. situated upon the River Volgda (not Volga) or Volchou, famous for its Bremes, a little below the Lake
Ilmin. Whilst it was governed by its own Prince, it was in so great power, fame, and wealth, by reason of the vast commerce of several Nations there established, that it was proverbially spoken, Who can do any thing against God and Great Novo∣gorod? The reason of this trading, was the con∣venience of the River, which being navigable from the very Spring, and the Country abound∣ing in Wheat, Flax, Hemp, Honey, Wax, and Leather (which is better dressed here than in any other place), invited hither so many Merchants from all the Northern Countries, and those up∣on the Baltick Sea, that it was the greatest City of all the North for trade and wealth. The first diminution of it, was from Vitold Duke of Lith∣vania, who 1427 obliged the City to compound for their peace at a great rate. But Ivan Vasili Grotsdin 1477, forced them to receive a Gover∣nour from him; but that not satisfying of him, he went thither in person, pretending I know not what devotion, and (by the help of the Bishop) being admitted into the City with his Army, he pillag'd it, carrying away three hun∣dred Carts loaden with Jewels, Gold, and Sil∣ver; besides many more filled with rich stuffs and sumptuous moveables; all which he sent to Moscow, and transported many of the inhabitants into other places, and sent Muscovites to inhabit in their steads. But their greatest calamity was from Ivan Vasilowich in 1569, who upon a suspi∣tion of their endeavouring to revolt, came hither with his army, slew, drowned, and trampled to death a vast number of people; presently after this follow'd a great plague, which brought so great a famine, that they eat one another; the Tzar on this occasion, pretending to punish their in∣humanity, cut to pieces the greatest part of the re∣maining inhabitants. His barbarous cruelties here acted are not sitting to be repeated. It was in 1611 taken by the Swedes by storm, but at the great Treaty between the two Crowns of Russia and Sweden, it was agreed to be redeliver'd to the Russes, and in their hands it hath continued ever since. On the other side the water is a strong Ca∣stle built of stone, join'd to the City by a large Bridge, wherein lives the Weywod or Gover∣nor, and the Metropolitan; by which two, all the affairs Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, in all that Province are governed. The Town is encompass'd with a Rampart of timber and earth, and hath a Castle in the midst, reasonably well fortified. There are about an hundred Monaste∣ries (whereof that of St. Antony is the chiefest), Churches, and Chappels; which have their Steeples and Towers cover'd with Copper gilded; the Cathedral Church is that of St. Sophia. In the territory belonging to this City,Brunitza, Sedrowa, and Sta∣ra-Russa. are Brunitza, Sedrowa, and Stara-Russa, which the Ba∣ron of Herberstein calls Russ, and saith it gave name to all the Russes. Near that Town is a salt Ri∣ver, which the inhabitants have formed into a Lake, and with Conduits draw the salt-water to their houses, where they boil the Salt; with which, and other commodities, they drive a great trade into Polotskow, a Province of Poland. The Russes say, that near to Novogorod was the famous battel of Whips (mention'd by Justin, l. 2. and many other Authors) wherewith the Masters returning victorious, after some years wars, conquer'd their Slaves, who in the long time of their absence, had seized upon their estates and wives; which is the reason why the Novogorod-money had formerly on one side an Horse-man shaking his whip. Bielski is a Province between Novogorod and Smolensko,Bielski. having its principal City and Castle called Biela, Bielha, or Bielow, situated on the River Osca. This had heretofore a Prince of its own, subject to the descendents of Jagellan Duke of Litvania, till Basilius Prince of Bielski fell off to the Grand Tzar, and agreed to pay him tri∣bute; it now augments the number of his Titles, As doth also that of Rischow,Rischow. which hath also a Castle and City of that name; it had also for∣merly a Prince of its own, but now is a member of the Russ-Empire. The Country is full of For∣rests and Lakes; particularly, here is that great Forrest of Wolchonisky; wherein arise the Volga, the Dnieper, the Dwina, and the Lowat, all great Ri∣vers. Near to this are Woloizk, famous for its white Hares, and the Princes frequent hunting there. Wyelikyeluki, a large City, with a good Castle. And Toropyecz, a large Town also, and a Castle; all which came to the Crown of Rus∣sia, by surrender of their proper Lords. Twer is near to the foresaid, North-West from Moskow. The capital Town is Twere, situate on the River Twertza, which falls into the Volga near this Town. This is a large Town, and hath in it about sixty Churches, the chiefest that of our Saviour. Upon the same River is placed Torsoch, Tersack, or Torsiock, a large Town also. The Province is rich both in Corn and Merchandise; very popu∣lous also, being ready to furnish their Prince with forty thousand good Horse, and twice as many foot. Here is also a Mint and a Bishops See. Near to these is Plescow, which the Russes call Pscow; the chief City hath a strong Castle, situ∣ate upon a Rock, whence springs the River Pskow, which after six leagues dischargeth it self into the Lake of Peipis, which Herberstein calls Czuezko or Czudzin. It was govern'd by its own Princes till Ivan Vasilowitz 1509 united it to his Crown. The Citizens till then were famous for their va∣lour, civility, and honest dealing in their trade; but the Grand Duke transported them, and put Muscovites in their stead. It is one of the strongest wall'd Cities in all Russia; 'tis of so great extent, that when besieged by Stephen King of Poland, there were said to be in it seventy thousand foot, and seven thousand horse (besides the inhabitants) in garison. Were it not for one ledg of Rocks, the Navigation from hence to the Baltic Sea would be very convenient and easie. There were in this Province divers places of strength, which gave the Grand Tzar Vasilie great trouble to reduce them to his command. South and by West of this Province of Novo∣gorod (that we dispatch all these Territories that ly together) lies the great City of Smolensko,Smolensko. be∣longing anciently to Litvania, recover'd to that Province by Vitold their Duke, in 1413. Basilius the Grand Tzar made several attempts to recover it, but in vain, till his beloved General Michael Glinski, a valiant Polish General, that ran over to the Russes, recover'd it more easily with his mo∣ney, then he could with his arms. The Poles have endeavour'd several times to recover this City, and in one battel near unto it, slew eighty thou∣sand Russes, but could not reduce the City till Sigismund King of Poland took it in 1611; and in 1633, Michael Federowitz besieged it in vain, yet his son Alexie Michaelowitz had it surrendred to him by composition in 1654, and the Russes still keep it. The River Nieper, commonly thought to be Boristhenes (tho Beresine comes nearer that name) runs thro it. The City is very well forti∣fied, both with good walls, well palisado'd, and as they say, above ten yards high, and also with a very strong Castle upon the bank of the River. To this jurisdiction belong Drohobus, Wyesma, and Mozaizko, where the Emperor commonly once a year diverts himself and the Ambassadors in hunting. This Mozaisko hath many times a
Governour of its own, and a Territory belonging to it. The Town was taken from Alexander King of Poland by the Grand Tzar Ivan, predecessor of Vasilie; and the Grand Duke often repairs thither in devotion to St. Nicolas, the great Saint of the Russes, who is said to be buried in the Chappel of the Castle. There remains one Province or Dukedom,. which anciently belonged to Litvania, the South-West border of Muscovy, called Sewera, Severia, Siberia. Which hath given occasion to some to confound it with that Province which the Russes call Sibior, upon the River Ob. This is a large and fruitful Principality, reaching from the Dnieper to the Castle of Mscenek, which is now demolish∣ed. This Country had at first Dukes of its own, afterwards it acknowledg'd the superiority of the Dukes of Litvania, together with which (Jagello becoming Christian) it submitted to the Kings of Poland; afterwards they fell from Casimire unto the Grand Tzar; at length, in the Reign of Va∣silie, father of Ivan Vasilowich, the Duke was ac∣cused of treason, and lost his Principality, which was united to the Crown of Muscovy. The chief City,Novogrod Siviersky. and sometimes residence of the Dukes is called Novogrod Siviersky, a City and Castle, well fortified after the manner of Russia; from whence to the City Moskow is an hundred and fifty leagues; the way lies thro Bransko, Se∣rensko, Worotin (a small Principality, the City Wo∣rotin is upon the River Occa) and Coluga, a Town also upon the Occa, and dependant upon the Ab∣bey of Troitza. Other great Towns in this Pro∣vince are Starodub, Posiwol, Czernigow, Kilski, Krom, Arol, and Osippow. They that from hence travel to∣wards Tartary, pass the Rivers Sna, Samara, Ariel, Koinschwada, and Molosca. They pass the Rivers on branches of trees fasten'd together, instead of Boats. This Country, by reason of its neighbourhood to the Tartars (upon whom it borders toward the East) is much of it Desert and Forrest, for want of culture; but those few inhabitants there are, are very warlike, being kept in continual exercise by the Tartars. Thus much for the Western parts of this Em∣pire, let us proceed to those that ly in the in-land Country.. South of Vologda, North of Jeroslaw, lies the Town and Castle of Castrom, upon a Ri∣ver of the same name, which looses it self in the Volga. And East of Castrom is the little Town of Galitz, near the Lake Galitz; here the Grand Tzar hath a manufacture of Salt. Jaroslaw,Jaroslaw. fifty leagues North of Moskow, a Pro∣vince rich in Corn, Cattel, and Honey. The City lies upon the Volga, containing about forty thou∣sand inhabitants, strongly fortified, and of a great trade, as having a very easie passage to Archangel. They make here much Linnen Cloth. This used formerly to be the Title and subsistence of the younger Sons of the Emperors family, till Ivan Vasilowich took it from them to himself, 1565. Yet he permitted some of them to keep the Title, being till of late called Knest Jaroslawski. Of the same condition and propriety is Rostow,. the City is twelve leagues South of Jeroslaw, upon a Lake of the same name. Ivan Vasilowich put to death the last Heir to this Province, of the family of the Grand Tzar.. In this Province is Ʋglitz, a Town famous for its bread. Chlopigrod was a great Mart for all the Northern Nations (yet more bartering than buying and selling),. because of the River Mologa, by which it communicateth with Weliki Novogrod. It is now ruined. The name signifies, the Castle of Slaves; for they say, that when their Masters had sub∣dued their Slaves with their Whips, the Slaves re∣tired hither. Susdal is between Rostow and Wolodomir.Susdal. The City is famous for a stately Monastery of Nuns, whi∣ther Ivan Vasilowitz confined his Wife; and it was formerly the Metropolis of Russia. This Province also belonged to the younger Sons of the Em∣peror; and since ruin'd by the Tartars ann. it hath never recover'd it self. Castrom and Galitz belonged formerly to this Government. Pereaslaw belonged formerly to Rostow,Pereaslaw famous now for its salt Lake and fruitful Soil. At the end of harvest the Grand Tzar commonly retires thi∣ther to hunt. In the Town are reckon'd near thirty thousand inhabitants. East of this is the City and Principality of Wo∣lodomir;Wolodo∣mir. which was anciently the Metropolis of all the Russes, till Ivan or Danislow built Moskow, and translated the seat of the Empire thither, more out of danger of the invasion of the Tar∣tars. The soil so fruitful, that it renders frequently thirty for one. The City is the second in the Em∣pire for greatness, and was built by Wolodomir, one of the chief Founders of the Empire, in 928. Some say, that he married Helena the daughter of Niceph. Phocas; but the Chronology will hardly permit it. East of Wolodomir is the City and Province of Nisi-Novogrod (in Dutch Nisen Nieugarten) or little Novogrod;Nisi-Novo∣grod. some call it Novogrod the lower, or in the low Countries; a Country very fruitful and pleasant. This Province also is the utmost limits of Christianity; for tho the Grand Tzar have some dominions East of it, even as far as the River and Castle Sura; yet are most of the inhabitants there Czremiss and Mordwitz Tartars, and follow Ma∣homet. The City is in 56 deg. 28 min. it is situated at the confluence of the Rivers Occa and Volga; which being join'd, make a River of four hun∣dred Geometrical feet broad. It is inhabited by Russes and Germans, who had here the exercise of the Reformed Religion. There is also a famous Church, built above six hundred years ago, in imitation of that of St. Sophia in Constantinople. All provisions are exceedingly cheap. Here is a very strong Castle cut out of the main Rock, with very great charge and trouble by the Grand Tzar Va∣silie Ivanowich. Near to this is Vasiligrod,Vasili∣grod. at 55 deg. 51 min. where the Sura falls into the Volga, between No∣vogrod and Cazan. Bezvodna, Kadniza, Rubotka, Tzetschina, Targinits, Jurkin, Masa, Kremonki, Par∣mino, besides others, are large Villages in this Province. Spessabelka, Stoba, Welikopat, Tsimonskoy, and Dioploy, are considerable Islands in the Ri∣vers. The Principality of Casinow is also near to this.Casinow. The inhabitants speak the Tartar language. All their women go with their heads uncover'd, and dy the nails of their fingers black. Wiatka, or Viathka, a Province, City,Wiatka. and Ri∣ver of the same name, lies North of Nisi-Novo∣grod; it is a barren, marish Country. Vasilie took it from the Tartars, and annexed it to his Crown and Titles; yet the Tartars still lurk and steal what they can about and amongst the Russes. In this Province are the Towns of Chilinova, Orlo, Cote∣nicz, and Sloboda. Amongst those Countries live the Czremisses and Mordwa-Tartars.Czremis∣ses and Mordwa-Tartars. Their Customs are not much different, save that the Mordwitz have some few more houses. Those on the right hand of the Wolga, they call Nagorni, Mountainiers; those on the other Lugowi, or inhabitants of the plain and grassy Countries. There are amongst them some Mahumetans, but the greatest part are Heathen; who believe that there is one eternal God, and evil Angels also, which they endeavour to paci∣fie, lest they should do them harm; and this is a
great part of their Religion. Not far from Casan is a River called Nemda, to which they go in pil∣grimage, where (as also in a Brook hard by the Nemda, called Schokshem) they think the Devil dwells. This Brook hath not above four foot wa∣ter, but never freezeth; whence they conceive such fancies, that they dare not approach at too near a distance, and then also with presents, lest the Devil should be angry with, and kill them; tho they see the Russes have not the least appre∣hensions of any such danger. When they sacrifice, they kill an Horse, Cow, or Sheep, and hang the skin upon a pole between two trees; they rost, or boil the flesh, part of which they take in one hand, and Mead (or some other beverage) in the other, and throw it into the fire before the skin, praying the skin to take care of presenting their prayers and requests to God; which are only for conveniencies of this life. They worship also the Sun and Moon, and what they dream of in the night; but have neither Temple, Priest, nor Ser∣vice. Their language is peculiar to themselves, tho (being under the Grand Tzar) many of them now speak the Russ. If a rich man dy, they kill his best Horse to serve him in the next world; but his nearest friends eat him. Polygamy is frequent amongst them; but if a wife be without children three years, they dismiss her and take another, and often the sister of a former wife. Their wo∣men are wrapp'd rather then habited in white Cloth, which leaves nothing of them seen but their faces; those who are betrothed, have on their heads a Coif with a point half an ell long, whereat hangs a bell. The men shave their heads. All of them, men and women, are very swift, and excellent Archers. The Mordwitz have a kind of a Governor or Captain of their own; but they are all subject to the Grand Tzar, whom they are obliged to assist in all his wars; but pay him no tribute, except what presents they voluntarily send him. Resan is situated betwixt Occa and Don,Resan. or Ta∣nais, which riseth in this Country; near to it is the City of Colunna, Columna, or Colon; but the chiefest City of Resan is also called Resan, upon the Occa, near the Isle of Strub, which heretofore was a Government of it self. This Province is the most fruitful in all Russia, if not in the world; if they romance not too much, who say, that one grain produceth many stalks, each stalk many ears; that it grows so thick and strong, that an Horse can very difficultly pass thro it, or a Quail fly out of it; they till every year, but never ma∣nure their land. The fruits also here are very good; the people also very couragious, civil, and liberal towards strangers. The Province is able to send fifteen thousand Cavaliers to the wars, and forty thousand foot. In this Province are great Towns, Corsira or Cassier, formerly head of a Pro∣vince of its own name. Tulla, on the edge of the great Desart, it hath a strong stone Castle, built by the Grand Tzar Basilius, who took it by force from the Prince that had the right and dominion of it. Odoiow, where Tulla and Ʋppa flow into the Occa. Near to this was Msczeneck, a strong Fort, but now ruined. Thereabouts live a few poor people in their Huts, who refuge themselves in the great Marshes (which take up all that Coun∣try) upon the invasion of the Tartars. Colluga, famous for its wooden Ware. Czirpac, near to which are Iron-Mines, the only sort of Mines in all Muscovy. And Worotin, a small Province, all upon the Occa; as also the Towns of Cazigorod and Murina. This River breeds the best fish, and watereth the richest meadows in all Russia. We have not yet spoken of Leucomoria, Lop∣pia, and some other Countries upon the Ob and the North Sea, because part of what is said of them is certainly fabulous, and all the rest un∣certain; we shall however respit them till we come to Asia: Nor of Casan and Astracan; but we shall defer them also till we come to speak of Volga, and the Tartars; their Countries and affairs being mingled together. There remains therefore only Moscua,Moscua. the Me∣tropolis of this great Empire, which we purposely reserved to this place, that what we have to say concerning the Empire it self, and the whole Na∣tion, might be more easily apprehended. The Province and City of Mosko are almost in the center of all the Grand Tzars dominions, but nearer the West and South; for which reasons, as also because the soil is none of the fruitfullest, it was very prudently chose for the Seat of the Empire. For toward the West and South is the greatest danger of invasion, and the fiercest ene∣mies; and the barrenness of the soil makes the air so very good and healthful, that it is ac∣counted a wonderful thing to hear of a plague, or any epidemical disease in that Province; tho they are sometimes afflicted with a violent burn∣ing Feaver, which they call Ognyo, whereof few recover, yet I do not hear that it is malignant. Nor is the sterility any inconvenience in any part of Muscovy, because the Country is generally very fruitful, and carriage from place to place very easie and cheap, in Summer time, because of the great number of navigable Rivers; and in Winter by reason of the convenience of their Sleds, whether drawn by Deer (whose nourish∣ment costs nothing, a little moss, which useth not to be very scarce in bogs and woods, suffi∣cing them), or Horses, which are very hardy, and used to travel forty or fifty of our miles without baiting; so that a Country-man will for four Crowns conduct you eleven or twelve hundred miles. Besides, the inland trade amongst themselves is very great; for having very many fasting days, they must be supplied with fish from the Sea. The North sends them Furs and Skins for their clothing; the South sends Corn, Cloth, Linnen and Woollen, and almost all manufa∣ctures. Besides, the frequent passings and re∣passings of so many Governors, both renders tra∣velling very commodious, and frequently cheap also, and makes a great circulation of trade and commodities in the whole Nation. The City of Moskow is in 55 deg. 36 min. La∣titude, and about 66 deg. Longitude. Of the vastness of it, before its great desolation by fire 1571, strange things are related; as that it was more than double as large as it was afterwards; that there was in it many hundred thousand in∣habitants; and that there were slain, burnt, drowned, and troden to death, above eighty thousand persons. Possevinus, who was there Am∣bassador 1582, saith, that in his time it was not above five Italian miles in compass, and not more then thirty thousand inhabitants. But I am afraid that Author doth much depress the power and number of inhabitants everywhere in Russia. In 1611, forty-one thousand and five hundred houses were again reduced to ashes by the Poles, and two hundred thousand persons slain. Olearius saith, that in his time its circumference was about three leagues. Our relators in 1662, allow it four leagues (sixteen miles) in compass, and the fi∣gure round; and is said to contain above forty thousand houses. It consisteth of four parts, or quarters. The first is Cataigorod, or mid-City, divided from the rest by a brick-wall; the River Moskwa runs on the South-side, as the Neglina doth on the North of it. In this part is the Castle fortified with three strong walls, and a good
ditch; wherein are two Palaces of the Grand Dukes, one of stone, another of timber. In this Castle are two Steeples, in one of which is a bell weighing 33600 pound. The Exchequer and Magazine of powder are also in the Castle. Two fair Monasteries, five Churches and Chappels, all of stone, and in St. Michaels Church the Sepul∣chers of the Grand Tzars. At the Castle-gate is the Church called Jerusalem, which Ivan Vasilo∣witz thought so magnificent that he put out the Architects eyes, that he might never make the like. And before the Castle, is the great Market place; where every trade hath a station by it self. The second quarter is Tzar-gorod, encompas∣sing the other, like a semicircle; walled about with stone, wherein is the Arsenal, and the work∣men in mettal, as Bell-founders, Casters of Can∣non, &c. The third is Skoradom on the North-West side of the other; the River Jagusa passes thro it, and here is the market for houses, timber, &c. The fourth is Strelitza Slavoda, being the quar∣ters of the Strelitz, or Guard of the Grand Duke, fortified with wooden Ramparts, and built for strangers and mercenary Soldiers. There are in this City above two thousand Churches and Chappels, built (saith Possevin) more for ornament to the City, then use; but this Author (as I observed before) seems to be partial against the Muscovites. The Houses in Moskow, and generally in all Muscovia, are after the same fashion; made of Fir∣timber squared, and dove-tail'd one into another (not with mortise and tenant) at the end; two, or at the most three stories high; their windows short and narrow; the chinks between the timber calk'd as I may say, or stop'd up with moss; stairs on the outside; instead of chimnies, stoves; the covering, or tiling, of bark, and upon that some∣times turfs of earth. Nor is their houshold-stuff much richer; no beds, chairs, wainscot, hangings, or the like unnecessary implements. The walls co∣ver'd with mats, benches to sleep and sit upon; a pot or two, as many wooden dishes; a spoon to hang at the girdle. If a fire happen in the City, as it doth very frequently, they go not about to quench it with water, but only to stop the course of the flame by pulling down the neighbouring-houses; to which purpose, the Soldiers that keep their night-guards, carry each of them an hat∣chet, to cut down an house presently. Nor are the people very much concern'd for their small and cheap furniture. But the Merchants, and persons of quality, have for their magazines Vaults of stone, with little windows, and those also have shutters, as well as their doors, of white iron. There dwell in the City a great number of Greeks, Persians, but especially Tartars; yet the Greeks are most welcom, as most sympathizing with the Russes in their Religion. The Lutherans also and Reform'd, are well received, and have liberty publickly to exercise their Religion, which they of the Roman Communion cannot. No Jews are admitted amongst them. Moskow being near the center of the whole Em∣pire, it is very convenient to take our measures by it of the rest of the Country, allowing pro∣portionably for the nearness to, or remoteness from it. As first, for the temper of the air. The cold is here sometimes so excessive, that water will freeze as it is falling, that the earth will chop, as with us in the violent drought of Summer, even to above twenty fathoms long, and a foot broad; and people are found dead in their Sleds. The cold also endures a long time; the frost ordina∣rily begins with November, but breaks not up till April, i.e. till the Sun hath been some considerable time above their Horizon; whence it comes to pass, that all their plants, and whatsoever is un∣der-ground in winter, is ready to thrust it self into the air as soon as it hath liberty; their Rye (for this reason) they sow in the beginning of win∣ter, that as soon as the snow and ice is melted, it may spring, and have time to ripen; but all their other corn, which requires not so much maturation, they sow not till May. And it is by strangers much taken notice of, that even al∣most as soon as the snow is gone, the fields are all green; and plants spring much faster then in another place, where their natural force and vi∣gor hath not been so much restrained and kept back by the cold and the snow; so that what they sow in May and June they reap in July and August; and indeed the shortness of their sum∣mer allows them not much time for tillage. It is also observed, that their Rye is in its kind their best grain. And for their fruits, tho they have of most sorts, as Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries, &c. yet they are not so good, nor do not ripen so kindly, nor can be so long preserved, as in those places where they grow and ripen slower. But those things which are of hasty and speedy growth, are very good; as all sorts of Berries, Herbs, Gourds, and Melons, which are here both ex∣ceedingly great (some weighing forty pound) and very well tasted; but they breed them in hot beds, as we do here, and never remove them. All Authors almost speak of a certain Melon, or Gourd, called Boranetz, or a Lamb that grows upon a stalk, and when it hath eaten all the grass within its reach, it dies. It is possible, that there may be a fruit, which with the help of imagi∣nation may somewhat resemble a Lamb, and it may also be downy and woolly; also it may be either of so hot a temper, or so great a depre∣dator of moisture, that it may cause the neigh∣bouring-plants to wither and dy; but that there is any animal growing upon a root, and eat∣ing, &c. they that have seen it, must believe it, but other persons may have their liberty. It is not long ago since they began to cultivate gar∣den-herbs, but they prosper very well, as Aspa∣ragus for the purpose, grows as thick as a mans thumb. And edible roots must needs become both large and pleasant. From this multitude of melted snow it comes to pass, that the ground is very soft and mellow; which tho it be an inconveni∣ence in their high ways, (insomuch that even the streets of Moskow would be unpassable, were it not that they pave them with round Fir-trees, laid close to one another), yet in their tilling their ground it is very useful; for neither do they use any manuring, even in the barrenest places, nor is their ground difficult to belaboured (no small convenience to a lazy people), that even stirring it with a stick is in some places sufficient for their Corn. Nor is their Corn (being so short a time betwixt the sowing and harvest) subject to so many accidents (droughts, rains, blastings, &c.) as ours is; whence it is noted, that it is exceed∣ing rare to hear of a dearth in Muscovy (except by the wickedness of them that buy up the Corn to sell it dearer), tho they sow little more than for their own spending. But sowing for plenty, they have much to spare; as the Dutch know very well, who bring thence great quantities to sup∣ply their own necessities. It is also observed in their weather, that the Summers are violently hot, both because their days are so long, and the soil (for the most part) sandy, which easily receives, and retains strongly the heat of the Sun so long upon it. This heat
coming upon proportionable moisture, produces prodigious quantities of Gnats, and other Insects; which, tho not so dangerous as Toads and Vi∣pers, yet are much more troublesom, and a much greater annoyance. Indeed an extraordinary heat is requisite to force up such a quantity of mate∣rials as must serve to make so much snow, that it covers the ground some yards thick. But it is hard to believe what some Authors say, that it sometimes sets on fire their Corn-fields and their woods. But this heat is augmented or conserved (as was said before) by the nature of the soil; for in Livonia, in the same degrees of Latitude, yea divided only from Russia by the River Nar∣va, their Corn seldom comes to be so ripe and hard that they can thresh or grind it; but they are forced to help themselves with stoves, built in their Barns for drying their Corn; which tho it be easier to thresh, yet it neither yeilds so much flower, nor is so good to sow, as that which ri∣pens by the heat of the Sun, as it always doth in Muscovy. The Country is generally overgrown with Woods (and their Forrests consist most of Firs and Birch, which loveth a light sandy soil) and Lakes; both I believe from the same cause, want of tillage. For the Natives husband not much more then they are sure will serve themselves; for should they have greater plenty, they could not find markets for it; and they are not care∣ful of encreasing their stock of men. Albertus Campensis tells very great stories (whom in some things we have followed) of the great abundance of people in Russia; Possevine again as much dis∣parages them. But our own Authors affirm, that it is not so well peopled as it might be; partly because of their wars, which devour always great quantities of them; and partly because they are lazy, and take more care themselves to live in ease and plenty, then to multiply their Nation, or employ more hands then of needs they must. These Forrests must needs be very well stored with Beasts and Fowls. Their Beasts are Elks, which the Germans call Elans and Olans, and the Russes Lozzi, not much unlike to the Rain-Deer. Wild Bulls (which seem to be the Bisontes of the Ancients), Boars, Bears of a prodigious magni∣tude, strength, and cruelty, both white and black. Wolves also too many; for in an hard winter, both the Bears (who sleep not when hunger pinches them) and Wolves are very pernicious to their cattle, and their persons also, when they meet them unarmed. There are also Horses plen∣ty; small, but strong, couragious, and very ser∣viceable. Cows, Goats, and Sheep; Fallow Deer also, and Roe-Bucks in great plenty. Besides these, are many others who are hunted only for their Furs, as the Wolverine or Wood-Dog, Beavor, Once, Lysern, Sable, Martron, black, dun, red, and white Foxes, the Gurnstal, the Laset or Mi∣never, Hares, which in winter change their co∣lour into white, as the Squirrel doth into gray, whereof comes the Fur they call Calaber. There is one sort of Squirrel, that hath upon the point of its shoulder a tuft of hair, much like unto fea∣thers, with a broad tail, with which they aid themselves so much in their leaping, that they seem to fly. The Furs of these are the great riches of this Country, and the greatest traffick, since they sell to strangers (besides what is paid to the Grand Tzar for tribute) for a million of Rubbles per ann. the chief are black Foxes, Sables, Bea∣vors, white Bears, Ermins or Gurnstals, and Squir∣rels; Wolverin also, and white Fox are much esteemed, as also that of a Water-Rat, which smelleth like Musk. There is so great abundance of Fowls and Birds, that they will not take the pains to catch the smaller sorts, as Thrushes, Fieldfares, and the like. Birds of prey here are very excellent of di∣vers sorts, Gerfalcons are accounted the best; and divers of them white, which are (for their ra∣rity) of great price, and presents for Princes. Of their Fish we shall speak when come to their Lakes. The other products of the earth are Mines, and of these we have but a very slender account. It is reported, that not long ago there hath been discover'd near Tula, upon the frontiers of Tar∣tary, a Silver Mine; which is wrought by Ger∣man work-men, sent thither by the Duke of Saxo∣ny at the entreaty of the Grand Tzar. A league and a half from this Mine, (in a delightful Valley between two high Mountains) is an Iron-work upon a small, but convenient River. This was, and I believe still is govern'd by a Commissary from the King of Denmark, who is obliged to fur∣nish into the Grand Dukes Arsenal yearly, a con∣siderable quantity of bars of Iron, of Canons, and fifty thousand poods (or twenty thousand quintals) of ball, by a contract made with the Emperor. Peter Marcelis, the first that set up this Work, grew to be very considerable at the Court, and obtained the priviledge to trade alone in Iron, Corn, and Fish-oyl; as also to make Gold and Silver-wire; which is a very great profit, consi∣dering the great use of Embroideries in Muscovy. There are in several other places, especially toward the North-West parts, Iron-mines also, but not so good as this last mentioned. How∣ever, in all of them the Iron is observed to be brittle; yet is it very serviceable for many uses, to which they understand very well how to ap∣ply it. The commodities of the Country, which draw Merchants thither, are 1. Their Furs. 2. Wax, whereof they have shipped in one year hereto∣fore fifty thousand pood, every pood being forty pound; but now not above ten thousand pood. 3. Honey, whereof they spend great quantities in their own country, in their drinks, yet is much also transported. 4. Tallow, heretofore much more, now about thirty thousand pood yearly sent out of the Country; the reason of the plenty of it is, because the great men generally burn Wax-lights, the ordinary people slivers of Fir or Birch, dip'd in Fish-oyl. 5. Hides of Losh (Lozzi) and Buff, of which are bought by forreign Mer∣chants about thirty thousand per ann. besides Goats and other skins. 6. Train-oyl of Seals. 7. Caviare, the greatest part of it is made at Astra∣can, of the Roes of Sturgeon and Belluga. This is a large fish, twelve or fifteen foot long, with∣out scales, else not unlike a Sturgeon. Of these fishes they take great quantities for the roes, which they salt and press, and put up into casks. That which is made of the Sturgeon, is black, small grain'd, and waxy; that of the Belluga, is darkish gray, and the grain as large as a Pepper-corn. In one fish they find sometimes an hundred and fifty or two hundred weight of spawn. This fish is said to ly in the bottom of the River, and to swallow many large pebbles of an incredible weight, to ballast him against the violence of the River, encreased by the melted snow; and when the waters are asswaged, he disgorgeth himself. This spawn they cleanse from its strings, salt it, drain away the oyly part, by laying it on shelving boards, then put it into casks, and press it till it become hard. Isinglass (ichthyocolla) is made of the sounds of this fish. This trade is reserved to the Emperor himself. 8. Hemp and Flax; which is a great trade with the French, who carry thither Brandy, and bring back Hemp and Flax, which
they work up in Normandy. 9. Salt likewise is a great profit to them. 10. So is Tar also. Many other commodities of lesser value and quantity, are hence carried away, as Morsses-teeth into Turky and Persia. Slude, it is a soft rock in Corellia, which they cut out into lumps, and afterwards tear it into small pieces; we call it Muscovy-glass, it is the lapis specularis, and is used for Lanthorns, Windows, &c. Salt-peter, Pot-ashes, Corn, Isinglass, and Iron are likewise hence transported. They have also divers manufactures, as Utensils of wood, Clothes, Saddles, and Harness for Horses, Arms, and the like; which they vend to several neigh∣bouring countries, which want such conveni∣encies. To which the ignorance and unskilful∣fulness of the Tartars, and lazy slothfulness of the Gentleman-like Polanders, give them no small op∣portunity. Of the Government and Manners of the Russes. THus much of the Soil, their Forrests, and their Commodities; concerning their Lakes we shall discourse when we come to their Rivers. It follows we should next treat of their Govern∣ment, and the manners of the people, which de∣pend upon it. The chief axiom in their politicks is, That above all things they should agree one with ano∣ther, and join together against all the world. For the Empire being very large, and exposed on three sides to very dangerous enemies, Tartars, Turks, Polonians, and Swedes; their country also not being well peopled, the fortified places at great distances, they have no security but a strict union amongst themselves. Which causeth them all to concen∣ter in absolute Monarchy, as the greatest con∣junction of interests, or rather but one interest in the whole. The Prince therefore, for his part, complies with them as much as he can, marries rare∣ly with any stranger, suffers not strangers to ad∣vance to any considerable honours, fills all the places of trust, profit, and honour, with his Russes; the greatest preferment a foreigner can expect, is to be Colonel of a Regiment, or to command a Fort or Army, and this but seldom, and for one expediti∣on only. He labours to breed in his people an admi∣ration of themselves, and that their own customs, laws, and manners are better and more rational then in any other country whatsoever; wherefore he hinders his people from travelling abroad (tho for merchandise), from conversing with strangers, even Ambassadors, and from entertaining any forreigner, except for trade. Neither will he suffer them to build any large Ships to transport mer∣chandise in quantities to other countries: But they want not small vessels for fishing, or carry∣ing goods from one of their own ports to ano∣ther. Nor is he willing that any forreigner, who hath lived long in Russia, should leave them, and return to his own Nation. Nor that his Russes should be interpreters to other Nations. It is very rare if any of them understand Greek, tho they have most affection unto, and receiv'd their Re∣ligion from, that Church. There was at Slaboda a school set up for the Latin tongue (which now few or none understand), but it was quickly pull'd down again: A Printing-press also for their own books, but if not forbidden, 'tis used only for their Offices, and such books as the Grand Tzar commands. Nor are there many (tho there want not men of parts) that desire any further know∣ledg then to read and write in their own tongue, to understand their Service, and such homelies of the fathers (especially St. Chrysostom) as are transla∣ted into the Russ language. Now tho this seems to be good policy, yet is it indeed but forcing of nature; for the conversing with civiler and more knowing people cannot but work in them a despi∣sing of their own manners and ignorance, and a great desire of reforming that inconvenience; which how far it may be heightned, I know not. Besides, wanting learning they are very easily led by a good tongue and fair pretences. And there∣fore we have seen, that notwithsstanding their edu∣cation in the veneration, I had almost said ado∣ration, to their Prince; yet are they subject to follow any pretences, if they think to amend their condition by it; and the oppressions of the Mous∣sacks, or common people, and of their great men them to affect alterations. How greedily did they embrace the (Wor) impostor Demetrius, tho their Grand Tzar Boris Godonove was a worthy, and not cruel Prince? how easily did they deliver up to his enemies Vasili Zuiski, a prudent and valiant (but only as they conceived unfortunate) Em∣peror? what a number of impudent cheats found followers? nay I know not whether ever any pretender, except cropt in the bud, that was not able to raise an army against the government. In the time of the reign of the Princes of this pre∣sent family, who have behaved themselves with great prudence, courage, and moderation, being far from the tyranny of others; yet did one Ti∣moska Anchedina feign himself heir of the Zuiskies; and had he not been diligently pursued in his very beginning, might have raised very great troubles; as did Stepan Radzin, who only pre∣tended reformation; and that insurrection against corrupt Judges in 1636, which was difficultly quieted, even by the Grand Tzar himself with his cap in his hand, and tears running down his cheeks. Both the stories of Timoska, and of this sedition are at large set down by Olearius. The Grand Tzar labours to nourish in the peo∣ple an opinion of his own wisdom, good govern∣ment, and care of all his dominions; so that they in common discourse attribute all their propriety, all their happiness and prosperity to God and the Grand Duke. And it is very remarkable, that they had this very opinion of Ivan Vasilowich, then whom a greater tyrant was never represented in any story; yet hear what a writer of our own saith (Purch. l. 4. c. 9.) If I found not an universal conspiracy against him, I should speak in his defence. I honour his good parts, his wit, his learning (perhaps more then any Russ in his time), his exemplary seve∣rity upon unjust Magistrates, his martial skill, indu∣stry, &c. Tea, his memory is still savoury to the Russes, who hold him in little less reputation then a Saint. And to the same purpose also Herberstein, Whether he was incited to those murders and cruelties by his own natural disposition, or the malice and trea∣chery of his subjects, (as himself said) I dare not de∣termine; especially since he had not any truculent aspect, or sign of fierceness in his countenance. And tho these policies help very well, yet are they not sufficient to conserve the power of the Prince, nor peace of the Nation. He knows that he can∣not trust to the affections or the judgment of the common people (who the more learned they are, are the more intractable and dangerous); but useth other more effectual and certain means of well governing: As that he bestows all places of honour and gain, even of the very Diacks or Clerks, immediately by himself. Whereby he is able to reward all that serve him; and all is ac∣knowledged to be his bounty. Which is so much the more acceptable, because it carries the testi∣mony of his good opinion of the person; and this breeds a great dependance upon him, and emu∣lation amongst the Nobility; who incessantly by
their observance strive to out-merit one another for his favour. But lest all these should fail, he hath force to coerce them, who will not be obe∣dient either for duties sake or reward. And be∣sides the garrisons which are dispersed in the Castles up and down the country, wherein are great numbers of soldiers, he hath the guards of his person, which ordinarily amount to 16000 foot, besides horse; many of which also are foreigners, who have no dependance upon any person but himself. That he may engage more of his No∣bility and Gentry, he never continues a Gover∣nor longer then three years; nor is there any he∣reditary; nor doth he frequently chuse the same person again into the same employment, but ad∣vanceth him according to his merit. He disposeth of all the lands in his Empire, whereof some be∣long to respective governments and employ∣ments; the rest tho he seldom takes from the chil∣dren of the last possessor, especially of the com∣mon people, except for crime. The Commons pass over their lands by descent of inheritance to which of their sons they please; which commonly they do after our Gavel-kind; and dispose of their goods by gift or testament, without any controul, saith Dr. Fletcher. Yet they pay an acknowledgment after the na∣ture of an Heriot, or Relief. They have few laws, but many customs in their government,Their Laws. according to which they judg; yet no case special, extraordinary, or of consequence, is determined without the knowledg and approba∣tion of the Grand Tzar. There being a Chief Justice, who is also a chief Councellor, that re∣ceives all appeals and informations from all places, and acquaints his Majesty with them. But in 1647, the Grand Tzar by a memorable example called together the wisest men in his dominion, and caused to be set down and published a Code, containing the laws and ordinances whereby the Judges were to regulate their judgments. Which are printed in fol. under the title of Solorna Ʋlo∣sienia, or Universal Right. The Grand Tzar also makes peace and war, sends all Ambassadors, whom he commonly chuseth out of the richest of the Nobility, who may bear the expences at his own charge; the Emperor taking to himself what he pleaseth of the presents made to his Ambassador, and rewarding him according to his merit, with a government, or other beneficial employment. The more solemn laws are thus made: The Em∣peror calleth to him such of the Boiars, or Nobi∣lity, as he thinks most fit for wisdom and authority, and orders also the Patriarch to send for such of the Clergy as he thinks most prudent, to be present at a day appointed, (which commonly is a Friday, being their strict fasting-day), where the Clergy sitting in an honourable place by themselves, one of the Se∣cretaries proposeth the points to be deliberated up∣on, asking first of all the advice of the Clergy; his Majesty requires their godly opinions and ad∣vice, and if they approve of what is proposed, the proposals pass to a full conclusion, and are made into an Act; else they are relinquished. After all the consents given, the Diacks or Secretaries, draw them up into the form of a Proclamation, and send them to the great Cities, with charge to the Governors to see them observed. This care is taken for the Laws of greater consequence: there are besides them ve∣ry many, which tho made upon particular occasi∣ons, yet for want of better, they are in force as prece∣dents. The great prime Minister Afanase Na∣shockin was endeavouring a reformation and me∣thodizing of these, which without some such di∣ligence must of necessity grow to be too nume∣rous, and not very consistent one with another. Next to the Prince,The Nobi∣lity. are the Nobility; which are of divers degrees. Formerly there were youn∣ger branches of the Royal Family, who had the government and revenues of several Cities and Provinces in the middle of the Kingdom, as is before mentioned; but these were extinguished by Ivan Vasilowich, and the succeeding Princes have not had occasion to renew those powers and titles. There were also Ʋdelney Knazey,Ʋdelney Knazey exempt or priviledged Dukes; who enjoyed a very great jurisdiction, and absolute authority in their own precincts. When the house of Beala grew too powerful for the rest, they submitted upon cer∣tain terms, the chief whereof was to assist in the wars with such a number of men. But Ivan Vasi∣lowich by degrees so clipped and restrained their authority, that at length he reduced them into the same condition with the rest of his subjects. And to effect this, he first set one against ano∣ther; but afterwards divided the whole Nobility into two factions; the one was of confiding men, such as he conceived to be firm to his interest; the other were malignants, or ill affected. If any one of these were oppressed, spoil'd, or kill'd by one of the other party, there was no remedy nor justice to be expected. All men knew also, who was of which party, and a register was kept of them. By which barbarous and tyrannical means, in seven years (for so long that continued) he took out of the way all such as himself suspected, encouraged his own party, and enriched his trea∣sures exceedingly by the confiscations. If any re∣mained, he took away their estates, and gave them in exchange others of lesser value in some remote Province; or by some other means wasted and consumed them. And whom Ivan left, Boris Federowich made a shift to dispatch, that himself, a stranger to the Throne, might the more securely enjoy it. Now therefore the chiefest degree of Nobility is that of the Boiars or Boiarens.Boiars. These are such as the Emperor, besides their Nobility, honours with be∣ing of his Council. These are the great body of Nobles, out of whom he raiseth his servants, go∣vernors, soldiers, &c. Many of them are rich, both in lands (which they receive from, and continue by, the favour of the Emperor), salaries for their services, especially the Court-offices and governments, and their own acquisition. Many also have annual pensions from the Emperor, especially if they have either merited well, or by abilities give hopes that they will be able to do him service. They also who have born any great office in war, as a General, Governor, &c. do leave some∣thing of title to their posterity; so as they take place of all under the Boiars. They also, as well as the Boiars, may add wich to the name of their ancestors, Federowich, Ivanowich, &c. i.e. the son of Theodore, of John, &c. which is accounted a great honour amongst them, and they may have repa∣rations upon those who do not give it them. Yet themselves do not use that priviledg when they write to their Lord; but on the contrary, dimi∣nish their own true name, calling themselves, v.g. Timoska for Timothy, Ivoska for Ivan, and the like diminutives for humilities sake. They also carry a little Kettle-drum at the pummel of their saddles, upon which they beat with the end of their whip, to make way for them in crouds in the streets; and in wars, to give notice of marching, staying, or the like. The first that receives the command beating, all the rest answer him. Next to these are the Knazey,Knazey. which our people call Dukes. This title anciently was of great ho∣nour, insomuch that the Grand Tzar call'd him∣self Weliki Knez, or Great Duke. But the Knazey communicating their titles to all their posterity,
have so multiplied, that now there are Knazey, who are glad to serve persons of mean quality for a small salary. Tho at the same time they will not fail to boast of their nobility, and trouble any one that shall affront them. The Sin-boiars, or Sina-boiarskey, are the sons of such as enjoy lands and revenues for serving the Emperor in his wars; and are the same with those that with us hold in Knights-service, and the lands holden in this tenure are commonly divided amongst the sons; except the sons are so numerous that there is not a competency for each of them; in which case they petition the Emperor for maintenance, and he commonly gives them inferior offices in the Court, or makes them spies and informers, allowing them a small annual pension; till a war come, which enter∣tains them all. The Grand Tzar hath also his Council.. He gives indeed the honorary title of Counsellors to very many who never come to consult; but those who are actually employed, and called to advise, are called Dumnoy Boiaren; and their num∣ber is as the Prince pleases. This Council con∣sisteth of all the great Officers of State, and such others as himself pleaseth to call to this honour. Yet neither are all these continually present; but he (as most other Princes) for more secrecy in some, and more easie dispatch in other busi∣nesses, hath a few select persons (a Cabinet Council) with whom he adviseth first, and pre∣pareth matters for the great Council; who for the most part meet together rather to consent, and to give weight and reputation to the resolves, then to argue, or give their opinion, and determine affairs. The Patriarch is not named amongst them, as being supposed to be continually em∣ployed in the duties of Religion; but in matters of consequence, his advice is commonly asked and followed. This Council receiveth appeals; and all other great matters are remitted to them. Besides this, there are many other Chambers, Courts, or Councils, (as they are called in some Kingdoms); but the principal are six, which have every one their several businesses. The first is for Ambassadors, and foreign affairs. The second for businesses of war. The third for the demeasne and revenue of the Prince. The fourth for trade and merchandise. The fifth for determination of civil causes amongst themselves. The sixth for cri∣minal matters. Every Council hath its President, Counsellors, Secretaries, &c. who write all things at large in rolls, after the ancient manner, some∣times thirty or forty ells long; whereof they have vast quantities orderly laid up in their respective offices. To these also are referred all the affairs of the whole Nation; every Province being assign'd to one of these; to send their appeals, make their relations, receive orders, and the like. Every Council knowing the Provinces that belong to it, and the Province knowing its own Council and office where to make their applications. In their judgments they give sentence according to witnesses, if there be any; if none, they give li∣berty for trial by combat, wherein it is lawful for the Appellant or the Apellee to substitute ano∣ther in his stead. Sometimes they put them to the question or torment, wherein they are very ingeniously cruel; sometimes also to their oath; tho no man be compelled to swear; but if any voluntarily offers it, it is commonly accepted, and solemnly performed in the Church, by kissing a cross. But he that swears in this manner twice or thrice, becomes infamous, he is prohibited en∣trance into the Church, nor will persons of con∣dition willingly converse with him. For there be∣ing amongst them no more abhorr'd crime then false-swearing, they startle at every solemn oath; tho in their conversation they are not scrupulous of swearing. They refer also some doubtful mat∣ters to lots, of which see a story in Hackluit, p. 309. Their usual punishments are severe.Their Punish∣ments. A robber is broke upon the wheel. A sacrilegious person impaled. A traitor, and a servant that murthers his master, beheaded. An Adulterer compound∣eth with the abused husband; and besides, is whipped from the Court to the house of the Adul∣teress; and she (if her husband pleases) is repu∣diated, and put into a Monastery; and himself after six weeks, hath liberty to marry another. But none suffer more severity, then those that are in debt; who are kept prisoners till a day appoint∣ed, when they engage to pay; if they keep not their day, and be able to pay, they are every day brought into the Court, and there beaten for an hour together upon their shins and the calves of their legs, and back to prison at night, and so till the debt be paid. But if they be unable to pay it, they are made slaves to the creditor. The chief Officers of State and the Court for secular businesses under the Emperor are much-what the same as in all other Monarchies.Officers of State. The Chancellor, who is also the chief Secretary, and to him belongs, and he presides in the office of Ambassadors; his charge also is to present petiti∣ons to the Tzar, and to return his answer, which he doth in the Princes own words. The Treasu∣rer, that looks to, and takes account of all the revenue. The Constable, who looks after the soldiery. The Master of the Horse, who besides the Prince's horses, minds also the Guards, their discipline and quartering. The Ocolnick, or Chief Justice, whom they call the Great Counsellor, al∣ways present with the Princes person: under whom is the Neddesnick, who commands all the Serjeants, Prisons, &c. And divers of these are sometimes bestowed upon the same person. Ilias Danielowitz Miloslawsky was Generalissimo, an em∣ployment very befitting him, for he was a man of great courage, and strength both of body and mind; he had such a vast memory, that he knew all the Commission-officers of an Army of eighty thousand, what their abilities, and where their quarters. He was also Treasurer, and had divers offices besides. Afanase Nashockin succeeded him in his Princes favour, and was Chancellor, Trea∣surer, Lord of Russia minor, and had several other employments; a man not corrupted by bribes, very sober and abstemious, indefatigable in business, and who seriously set about a refor∣mation of the evil customs of his country. But such a vast dominion as Russia cannot be governed without very many Magistrates;Inferior Magi∣strates. and such indeed there are. There is a Court, or Coun∣cil for the government of Moskow, who have many officers under them. In all the great fron∣tier Cities are Weywods, or Governors of great quality and experience; and in every City two, if not three, besides the officers of Justice, &c. In lesser Cities are also Governors, but of lesser qua∣lity; whom the Grand Tzar appoints by deli∣vering them a staff, which at their return they restore him again, and this is the ensign of their power. Besides these, there are divers other Ma∣gistrates, as the Gubnoy-starust, which is like an Alderman or Mayor of a Town. Sotskoy-starust, like a Baily of an Hundred. And divers others, who can judg in small cases, and from whom there ly appeals; a great catalogue of them is in Olearius, an. 1636. But Afanase Nasbockin had a design, that to save the subjects trouble, and the Princes charge, the Governors should in many
cases, and even in some capital matters, have power of judging without appeal, and executing also their judgments. One thing seems very faulty in their government, that having so many Ma∣gistrates salaried by the Prince, their stipends must necessarily be very small and inconsidera∣ble, yet are they by these to make their fortunes, and many of them to receive rewards of former services and expences. Consequently they must oppress the people, and so much the more, as will not only satisfie themselves, but also buy their peace and impunity at their return from their employment. Thus much for their government,The reve∣nues of the Emperor. let us see what means there is to maintain it, the Empe∣rors revenues I mean, which are very great, and arise thus: 1. There is the office of the Steward, which re∣ceives all the Emperors revenue of his inheritance, or Crown-lands; which contain thirty-six Towns with their territories; whereof some pay their rents in money, others in corn, or other provi∣sion. This provision for the Emperors houshold is more then is spent, and the surplus is sold by the Steward, and the money brought into the Treasury, which according to the bounty and hospitality of the Emperor is more or less. In Ivan Vasilowich's time, it was accounted 60000 Rubbles per ann. but in his sons time 230000. And this commonly is employed in paying the wages of his houshold-servants. 2. The office that receiveth the Tagla and Po∣dat, (Tagla is an imposition upon every measure of grain that groweth in the Kingdom; the Podat is a tax of money upon every Town and Precinct), bringeth in communibus annis about 400000 Rubbles. 3. The Court of the great income (bulsha pre∣cod) receiveth all the customs upon commodi∣ties in all the principal Towns, and this is farm∣ed out to the respective places; and is therefore (as trading riseth and falleth) sometimes more, sometimes less; communibus annis it may be rec∣kon'd 340000 Rubbles. The customs of the Town of Archangel, have (as some say) amount∣ed to 600000 Rubbles per ann. This office also gives account of all the Bath-stoves, and Cabacks, or drinking-houses; the greatness of which revenue may be conjectur'd by those of Novogorod, where are three houses that pay each 4000 Rubbles per ann. As also of the mulcts of sentences that pass in any Court, which is ten per cent. paid by him that is convict by Law. He hath also an impost for every name contained in the Writs that pass out of the Courts. This amounteth commonly to 3000 Rubbles. He hath also the half of Fe∣lons goods (a fourth going to the Judg and Officers, the other fourth to the informer). There being moreover divers rents of lands allowed for the maintaining so many horse; others for so many foot; others for the mercenary or fo∣reign soldiers. There is somewhat spared out of these rents, and in times of peace above the one half, which is also brought into this office. What it amounts unto, is uncertain. But in the year 1590, these three offices were reckon'd to bring in yearly 1400000 Rubbles. 4. But besides these, he hath other very great revenues by merchandizing, as 1. By Caviare and Isinglass, which all belongs to him; he either hiring men to fish for him, or lending them money to set up fishing, and the account being made of what they have caught, he allows them for their pains, and takes all the rest. He hireth out also the greatest part of the fishery of the Lakes and Rivers. 2. By Furs; for Siberia, and those nor∣thern countries, do all pay their tribute in Furs, which he selleth by his Merchants, or else saveth money, by paying with it Ambassadors, soldi∣ers, and the like. His merchandizing is very re∣markable, for (1) he hath the liberty of pre∣emption of whatever merchandise comes into his country; which he buys also at low prizes, so that many times he engrosseth a whole com∣modity, and raises its price as he pleaseth. (2) The price of what he buys is paid in commodities of his own; for he never, or very rarely suffers any gold or silver to be carried out of his dominions. (3) He hath also the prevendition; none must sell his com∣modities, v. g. Furs, till the Tzar hath sold all that he intends; whereby he sets what price upon commodities he pleaseth. (4) He frequently monopolizeth one, or more of the commodities of his own country. And all Sables (the best trade of the Nation) are his own as tribute, or at a small set-rate. All this is managed either by the Go∣vernors of his Towns, many of whom are no other then his Factors, or stewards for his inte∣rest; or by Goses or Merchants of his own, who have salaries to look after these matters. Besides, the presents brought him by foreign Ambassa∣dors, and what his own bring him (for he takes what pleaseth him of what is given them), are very considerable. But neither are his expences small.His  His family consists of at least a thousand persons, nourished and salaried by him, besides his Guards at Moskow, 16000 musqueteers and about 5000 horse. His gar∣risons upon the frontiers (the greatest towards Tar∣taria) a hundred thousand men. Compounding for peace with the Tartar is very chargeable. His own table consists ordinarily of fifty dishes of meat, which are all brought up; he chuseth what he liketh, and sends the rest to whom he pleases. The salaries of his officers and magistrates, tho to each of them but a small matter, yet being many, ariseth to a very vast sum. The receiving of Ambassadors is chargeable; for he defrayeth all their expence from their entrance into his Country till their going out. His posts, messen∣gers, horses, carriages have a large account; so have his works, buildings, making arms, canons, and the like. Concerning their dispositions, manners,The  the  and customs, we have very many (and most of them impertinent) discourses. They are generally men of strong, vigorous, healthful bodies. 'Tis but of late that they have entertained Physitians; but in Fevers (and other diseases) garlick and strong-water were their only remedies; tho they had some few that pretended to understand the vir∣tues of plants, yet they were not much believed. This healthfulness may perhaps be attributed to their frequent fastings, and generally slender diet; tho themselves rather conceive it to be from their much use of sweating in stoves, which repairs the damages that the colds bring upon them; confirming those parts which the cold weakeneth. All strangers admire their sudden changing from heat to cold, that from sweating in an hot stove, they will naked leap and wallow in snow, and immediately return to the heat again. So much has custom harden'd and fami∣liariz'd their bodies to these extreams, if yet cu∣stom can do it, and that they have not a pecu∣liar contexture and temperature of their parts from their nativity. But it seems out of doubt, that the exercises of their young men, which are boxing, cudgels, and wrastling, do much contri∣bute to their patient enduring of beatings, whip∣ings, and the like. Nor is the familiar recreation of the Ladies to be discommended, which is swinging, or that which the Romans called petau∣rus. They seem to affect corpulency, especially
their Nobility; who perhaps imagine, that a pro∣minent belly is an evident difference betwixt one that lives at ease and plenty, and a man of labour. Authors are very liberal in the censure of their manners,es un∣y cen∣d by . not excusing them from any vice; and interpreting all their customs and actions (I am afraid) too sinisterly. Few, that have written, conversed with persons of better quality (their Boiars being prohibited all company with stran∣gers, and even Ambassadors) then such as serve them for gain, or trades-men, who seldom in any country are commended for their justice and good dealing by strangers. But Dr. Fletcher, and those few of our own country that have written, confess that there are amongst the Nobility very many, and amongst the populace some, of very excellent parts, courage, and discretion. But it is not rational, to pass censure upon any Nation or Country, from the customs of the meanest people, whose man∣ners are everywhere licentious, turbulent, and bestial enough. It seems indeed, that the educa∣tion and oppressions amongst them, suggest such customs as render them sufficiently infamous. But good indoles, experience of good and bad, ex∣amples, and instruction of vertuous persons, and especially our holy Religion, in many conquers those evil motions and temptations, which others, not looking into themselves, do swallow and em∣brace. Being therefore educated only to write, read, and cast accounts (which yet they do not so artificially and conveniently as the rest of the world, for they count by forties and nineties, not hundreds, or sixties, which is the usual; nor by eighties, which perhaps is the best) and those who are ordained for the Clergy, to sing; they must misspend a great part of their youth. Nor do they attain to the mortifying their passions, and the exercise of virtues practis'd even in trivial schools. Nor do they by books learn the examples and prudence of other nations and times. Nor are they able to serve themselves of other useful arts and sciences, as not that of well-speaking, not mathematicks, and what depends upon them, as architecture, measuring, fortification, &c. where∣in they are forced to make use of foreigners when they have necessity. Besides, that all learning hath this use, that it replenishes the memory with good notions, and elevates the mind to some de∣gree of contemplation. Yet in this also they have some that seeing their defect, labour to amend it; as Ivan Borissovits Cirkassi got divers histories, and foreign books of arts and sciences, translated into the Russ tongue; he was esteemed the wisest and justest person of their nation, by them who yet did not imitate him. But in sum, they have just so much learning as to account whatever they know not to be vanity, and them fools that stu∣dy it; and yet to make them jealous and afraid to be over-reach'd and couzen'd by strangers, whom they always suspect to know more than themselves. Their oppression by their superiors drives them to fortifie themselves by cunning and deceit, ready also and willing to help themselves by any safe, tho unlawful, means. They are also hereby render'd very timorous and cowardly, and as far from valour as generosity. From hence pro∣ceeds also, that they are haughty and insolent towards their inferiors, mistaking that for gran∣deur and greatness of spirit; cruel also when they have advantage. The coldness of their country invites them to strong drinks; and the pleasure of these provokes to excess and drunkenness; and this to all bestiality and quarrelsomness. Michael Fe∣derowitz, a very wise, moderate, and sober Prince, did what he could to hinder this vice; punishing with slitting the nose, the use of Tobacco (which the Russes took brutishly, only to cause drunken∣ness and sleep), and also regulating the number of drinking-houses. He also made severe laws against injuring superiors. And his diligence and severity had some, but not the desired, effect; for he reformed in a great part those excesses in the Nobility, but the lowest sort were not much amended. But there being no Nation so good,Their Mi∣litia and Wars. wherein are not many (should I say the major part, I should not be disbeliev'd) bad; and none so bad, wherein are not many good: we ought to be wary how we censure them. Let us therefore pro∣ceed rather, to shew their publick actions, and by them take a truer or better estimate. As, that we may judg of their valour, let us consider their soldiery, and manner of warring; that we may know their piety, let us look upon the exercise of their Religion, and the like. To begin with the soldiery. They have four very potent and war∣like neighbours; some whereof are always ene∣mies (the Tartars and Turks), and the rest no very good friends (the Polanders and Suedes). And such is the situation of the country, that they cannot have neer hand any friends or assistants. So that their defence must rest upon themselves; for the foreign soldiers and officers that straggle to them for pay, are not considerable as to a great war. His standing Militia then consists partly in his Garrisons, which in the frontier Towns, espe∣cially toward the Tartars and Turks, (for the Po∣lonians and Suedes being Christians, when he hath made an accord with them, he hath peace), who keep no articles longer then it is for their advan∣tage, are very strong, numerous, and well fur∣nish'd with good officers. In the inland places the guards are few and weak, sufficient only to coun∣tenance the government, and to be nurseries for a serious war. His garrisons, besides his ordinary guards (which are above twenty thousand) a∣mount to an hundred thousand men, in actual service, and upon continual duty; and therefore in time of war must be augmented. Besides there∣fore he hath a Militia to be ready upon summons to rendezvous and march as he shall please; which is thus. He letteth out a great part of the land of the whole Nation, to those called Sinaboi∣arskey, upon condition that themselves, their sons, and retainers, or farmers, to such a number as he thinks fitting, shall serve him with horse and arms, and at their own charge, in the wars. Such are the present Spahi amongst the Turks, and Knights-service amongst us. Now every son of any of these is a Sin-boiar, or Gentleman; and as soon as he is able to bear arms, enters himself in the Roserade (or Office of Great Constable), and petitions for means to maintain him. If his fa∣thers Farm be not sufficient, nor any other void, they are either put into some low and mean em∣ployment, or else deferred till there happen some∣thing fit for him; till when he must shift as well as he can. When the Emperor goes in person to the wars, he hath a select guard of fifteen thou∣sand horse, who are all paid; the best sort have not under seventy Rubbles, the second not un∣der forty, and the third not under twelve Rub∣bles per ann. besides their lands, which are also allow'd them. Besides these, the chiefest Nobles, and men of employment, are also obliged to maintain considerable numbers of horse, amount∣ing to sixty thousand, at their own charges; yet receiving a sufficient allowance also for them from the Grand Tzar. And these are muster'd and em∣ployed every year, at least to shew themselves up∣on the borders of Tartary. The foreign soldiers are mostly mingled amongst his guards, and are sometimes more, sometimes fewer; the greatest part are Polonians, Circassians, or Cossacks (who
amount sometimes to four thousand, and are dispers'd in garrisons furthest from their own country), Dutch, and some few Scots, Suedes, and Danes; many of which are for their skill taken to be officers. All these (besides the hundred thou∣sand before mention'd) are esteemed to make up three hundred thousand horse, which are ready to march upon all occasions. Their arms for their foot,Arms and discipline of their Soldiers. are a gun, a sword, and an axe behind them; of their horse, are bows, arrows, iron masses, scimiters, targets, lances; some few have helmets, corslets of iron, or quilted cloth. But now they have great quantity of fire∣arms, and abundance of canon. And in all their arming and discipline, they conform to the Eu∣ropean manner, which was introduced amongst them by the great number of officers, Poles, Swedes, Scots, &c. that have been thither invited by the goodness of the pay. Every one of the Sin∣boiars carries his own provisions for so long time, which are biscuit, oats, pulse, pepper and salt to∣gether, vinegar, and brandy. Their Comman∣ders are the same that we have; a General, Lieu∣tenant-General, four field-Marshals, each of whom takes care of the fourth part of the army; and each hath two under-Marshals, who twice every week (whilst in the field) muster and exercise their men. They have also a General of the Ord∣nance, and other officers under him. They made use of (in their wars with the Tartars) a Gene∣ral they call'd the Walking Captain, or the Com∣mander of the walking Castle, which is nothing else but a double wall of thick pales, so contrived that it might be in ashort time set up in length, and then it would reach seven miles; and the two walls about ten foot distance. The pales were higher then a man, and in them loop-holes, to lay out the noses of their musequets. And this is sufficient for the defence of their shot, where the enemy hath no canon, as the Tartars have not; else it is of little use or esteem. They had also one great Drum carried upon four horses fastened together, and eight men to beat it; but these customs are laid aside, and they follow the modes of the Ger∣mans, and other Europeans. They are acknowledg'd to be better at keeping Forts and Cities then in a field battel;Their Va∣lour. to which al∣so their frequent fastings, slender diet, education to hardship, do much dispose them. Their women have many times supplied the defect of soldiers, kept guards, fought stoutly upon the works, and e∣ven defended breaches. In some of the Castles of Livonia, when the Poles took them, they found al∣most all the men consumed; in one but two were left, and yet those two refused to yeild up the Fort, lest they should seem not to have performed their trust to their Prince. When the Polonians upbraid them with their loss of so many battels when they had sufficient advantages, they answer, But who hath Smolensko, Novogorod, &c. Their Forts are ve∣ry well victual'd and man'd; fortified commonly with turf, kept up with bavins, hurdles, or timber, which resist battery the better, tho the frost have too much power upon them. They now also face them with brick and stone. Their Sinboiars are educated and inur'd to war in those Forts; but they stay not above a year or two in one garrison, as neither do the Governours. There are gene∣rally two, and sometimes three Governors in one garrison; the chiefest hath care of the munition, and never stirs forth; the other upon occasion go abroad, sally, fetch in contribution, &c. many of them are very valiant, expert, and careful soldiers. Of all their borderers, they most apprehend the Swedes. The Polonians are more valiant, and will not fear with twenty thousand to fight sixty thousand Russes; but they are not so expert in taking Towns, nor are they so easily kept together, their obedience being too volun∣tary. The Tartars do the Russes most mischief, for in sudden and violent inrodes, they sweep a whole country, carrying away all that are able to march, and children that can endure to be carried in baskets, which they bring with them for that purpose. If the Russes meet with them, they never refuse to fight with them; but the Tartars seldom come to a battel, but if they ap∣prehend themselves weaker, they will all disperse, and rendezvous again at night, or after one day or two. In their last invasion he is said to have carried away four hundred thousand captives; which is enough to depopulate a country. The best defence against them is a great barren desart of twenty days march, being the confines be∣tween them and the Russes. But in general all wars are prejudicial to the Russ; for they raise great ar∣mies for the most part of married men, and are not very careful of preserving their men; all the time therefore that war lasts, the women are unfruit∣ful, and by that means the old stock decays, and the new doth not advance. The remedy they have is by working the Czremiss and other moderater Tartars mingled amongst them, to a coalition with them into the same Religion and Govern∣ment; which the Russes sedulously endeavour, and have in good part effected. Next for their Religion, and religious ceremo∣nies.Religin  of the . Themselves say, that St. Andrew planted Christianity amongst them, which was by inva∣sion of the Tartars afterwards either abolished or very much defaced, till after the year 900 (some say 960, other 989) it was again restored by Volodomir. I find in Can. 28. Conc. Chalced. that it is order'd, That the Churches of the Barbarians should receive their Ordinations from Constanti∣nople. Both Balsamon and Zonaras interpret this of the Russes. So that these two learned persons were of this opinion, that the Russes were Christi∣ans before that Council, which began 451. And their Metropolitan being consecrated by the Con∣stantinopolitan Patriarch, may seem to argue so much. But neither of these arguments are con∣vincing; let us therefore follow the common opinion. It is acknowledged by all, that they were Christians in Volodomir's time, and that they follow'd, or consented with the Greek Church, as they do still in most of their opinions and pra∣ctices. The greatest difference seems to be their rebaptization, whereof more by and by. Their Ecclesiastical Government was the same with that of all the Churches, till now of late, i. e. by Bi∣shops, Priests, and Deacons; whether they retain the lesser Orders (as they are called) I cannot find. Till of late the supreme Officer in their Church was the Metropolitan of Moskow; who being elected by his Clergy, was ordained or consecrated by a commission from the Patriarch of Constantinople. But about the year 1588, there came to Moskow one Hieronymus, who pretended to be Patriarch of Constantinople, and to have been banished for I know not what reason by the Turk. Others said, that he was deposed by his own Clergy, for complying too much with the Western Church. And de facto he did endeavour to recon∣cile the Russes to the Church of Rome; to which purpose Ant. Possevine was at that time also sent by the Pope, the King of Poland, and other Christian Princes, who interessed themselves seriously in this affair; which not succeeding, Hieronymus be∣gan to treat about resigning his Patriarchship, and translating of the See from Constantinople to Mos∣kow; which motion was greedily embraced by the Russes. And Jan. 25, 1588, in a very great solemnity, (the Prince, and all the Nobility and
Clergy going in procession thro a great part of the City) at length in our Lady's Church, he made an oration to the foresaid purpose, deliver'd up his Resignation authenticated, and his Patriarchal Staff, into the hands of the Metropolitan of Mos∣kow; who presently with divers ceremonies was inaugurated Patriarch. And his successors do all use that title, and are consecrated by their own Bishops. Whether this action was valid I dispute not; 'tis sufficient that the Patri∣arch of Constantinople, who is most concern'd, doth not question it; and to stop his mouth, as I suppose, there is every year, besides upon divers other occasions, a very considerable present of five hundred crowns sent to him. Besides, the Greeks want not other artifices, as sending things hallow'd, reliques, &c. for which they receive very great presents. Yet Filaretes Nikitys, the late Pa∣triarch and Father to the Emperor Michael Fede∣rowitz, was consecrated by the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, but since him none. Till this time there was no other Metropoli∣tan in all Russia but this of Moskow; but that Church being become , they imme∣diately made two new Metropolitans, the one of Novogrod velica, the other of Rostove, these were the only Archbishopricks before. But since that they have added two more, one of Casanskoi and Swiatskoi, who resideth at Casan; the other of Sarskoi and Pondoskoi, who lives commonly in the Castle of Moskow, and is the Patriarch's Sub∣stitute or Coadjutor, when upon any good cause, as age, sickness, or the like, he is hindred from of∣ficiating. They had also (as Possevine complains) but eleven Bishops for all that large Empire; but since that time they have added two (I suppose because of their conquests), and advanced all except one, that is the Bishop of Comenskoi and Cassieskoi, who lives at Columna, into Archbishop∣ricks. The Patriarch hath absolute power in what concerns Religion, with such authority, that even in things relating to the Civil government, he reforms what he thinks prejudicial to Religion, without giving the Grand Tzar any account of it; who, without any contestation, commands the orders made by the Patriarch to be exe∣cuted. As the late Patriarch Nicon being an ene∣my to musick, forbad all musick in their merry meetings, and search'd the houses in Moskow for such instruments, and burnt five wagon-load of them. Leo, Ju∣tion. their first Metropolitan, had his See at Chiow, afterwards when Wolodomiria was the Me∣tropolis of the Empire, the Metropolitan also re∣moved thither, accompanying still the Prince; and now is at Moskow. The jurisdiction of the Bishops is the same as in other Churches; for be∣sides their authority over the Clergy, and order∣ing Ecclesiastical matters, they take cognisance also of causes Testamentary, Matrimonial, some pleas of injury, &c. They never visit their Dio∣ceses, but have certain Lay-men, in whose judg∣ments they can confide, to give them account of the lives and demeanors of the Clergy. They have also Officials or Commissaries, (called Boiaren Ʋladitskey) Lay-men (they have both Archdea∣cons and Protodeacons, but not employed in those offices) that keep their Courts, and exercise their jurisdiction. And these are not appointed by the Bishop, but by the Emperor, tho he seldom denies the Bishop to nominate, if he request it. But every Bishop hath for Ecclesiastical matters, and for the more solemn service of God, a Council of twenty-four Priests of his Diocess, who are as it were Pre∣bends or Canons of his Cathedral Church, where they continually reside. The revenues of the Bi∣shops have been (as they say) greater then now they are. The Patriarch hath about three thousand Rubbles per an. The Metropolitans and Archbi∣shops about two thousand five hundred. But all this revenue is not for their own use, but they are obliged to furnish at their own charges, such a number of soldiers. The nomination of Bishops belongs to the Emperor,Election of their Bishops. who always takes them from amongst the Monks, which obligeth them all to live un∣married, not to eat flesh, wear no rings, or linen shirts or drawers; besides other the like Mona∣stick observances. The Patriarch is chosen by all the Bishops, Clergy, and Abbots, who give no∣tice of their election to the Prince; if he disap∣prove it, they chuse another. Lately, at the electi∣on of Nicon, the Clergy named two, and could not agree, the Emperor caused them to cast lots, and the lot fell three times upon the person of Nicon. Of inferior Clergy they have a very great number;Inferior Clergy. there being many Parishes in their Ci∣ties, tho unequally divided (some much bigger then others), and every Church many Priests be∣longing to it. They have no particular care of educating persons for this office; but any one that thinks himself fitly qualified, presents him∣self to the Patriarch, or the next Metropolitan, who examining his ability (which consists chiefly in reading, writing, and singing well) ordains him; which is chiefly by cutting of the hair on the top of his head, covering it with a Callot, and putting on a Surpless, a little cross of white silk upon his breast, and then gives him his benedicti∣on, and authority to officiate in the Church, and to administer the Sacraments. He must be the hus∣band of one wife, and if his wife dy, he can nei∣ther officiate as a Priest, nor marry another; so that they do not conceive the character to be indelible. Yet a widower may sing, read, &c. and may serve as a Deacon, but he must not officiate at the Altar. And some of them get leave to keep their Benefices, and yet enter into a Monastery; such they call Churnapapaes. Their revenues are not from tythes,Their Re∣venues. tho it be said, that Volodomir at his introducing of Christi∣anity, setled tythes also upon the Clergy; nor have they any setled salary, but they are content with what they receive from the people for bap∣tizing, marrying, burying, offerings, prayers for the dead, &c. besides, every private person upon any occasion of business, desires the Priest to say a prayer for him, for which he gives him some∣thing. They also solemnize the Sains-day of the Parish, when all the neighbourhood come in to be prayed for, and make an offering. Once a quar∣ter also he blesseth his Parishioners houses and fa∣milies. By these and many other such like ways, they make up a competent livelihood for them∣selves, and to give the tenth also of it to the Bi∣shop. Protopapaes, or Archpriests and Archdea∣cons are only in Cathedral Churches. They have service thrice a day;Their Ser∣vice. about break of day Mattens, at noon Mass, Vespers in the evening. And it consists of Psalms, certain por∣tions of Scripture, the Creeds, prayers, and some∣times an homily of some of the Fathers, or the life of the Saint of the day in their own language. Never other preaching, except once in a year, when the Patriarch with very great solemnity, makes a short exhortation to the people, to serve God, obey their Prince, and live in unity and chari∣ty with their neighbours. They never kneel at their devotions, but stand up, and sometimes bow, knocking their forehead to the ground. Ivan Va∣silowich was frequent in the Church, sung the prayers with the Clergy, and sometimes had his forehead swell'd with knocking the floor. They
communicate children at seven years old,Commu∣nion. and before in case of sickness; when they communi∣cate, they have an hoste in the middle of a barley cake; the communicants partake of the hoste, the rest of the people have the barley-cake broke amongst them, as a pain-benist. They commu∣nicate ordinarily but once a year, which is about Easter, and then only three at a time, and al∣ways after some extraordinary fasting, mortifica∣tion, or confession, which they make standing in the middle of the Church, and before some pi∣cture of a Saint. The Priest appoints him pen∣nance, gives him absolution, and admits him to the Sacrament. They are very severe in their fa∣stings, having more of those then of flesh-days; tho every day be the memorial of one Saint at least, yet are there but thirteen great and solemn holidays, besides the Sundays; nor do the ordi∣nary people observe many of these, and those they do observe, they do it more with debau∣chery and drinking then devotion. But in their fasts they are so severe, that they will not taste any thing that comes of flesh, not so much as a medicine, if it have cornu cervi, or ungula Alcis in it. All authors take notice of the veneration they have to their images.Their I∣mages. Possevine saith, they do only not adore them. Others say, that they look upon the Saints as causes and coworkers of their salvation. Yet divers amongst them are of ano∣ther opinion. A Protopope of Casansky speaking too liberally against this worship, was degraded, and thrust into a Monastery. And their late Pa∣triarch Nicon seeing he could not remedy it, re∣tir'd from his charge to a private life. Others excuse this worship, attributing it to the great ceremoniousness the Russes use both in their de∣votions and ordinary conversation. All men take notice and make long discourses of their marriages and burials.Their marri∣ages, But there is scarce any Nation that hath not some particularities about these; many men also take delight in their own fancies. That which is most peculiar to the Russes is, that they keeping up their women, especially their virgins, very close and private, rarely suffering them to come abroad, so much as to Church, or to make visits, but never to Balls or merry meetings; it happens frequently that a man comes to marry one whom he never saw before, or is not acquainted with her con∣ditions. Parents commonly make up the matches, only the young man may employ his mother, or some other friend, to see and give information of her; as the maid doth of the bridegroom. But in recompence of the inconveniencies which may follow, they dissolve marriages upon very slight occasions; and the man, after a short for∣bearance, hath liberty to marry again. They go to Church, and receive the Priests benediction; who having ask'd their consents, and read some prayers, gives them his blessing, and drinks to them, and they also drink to one another. All their friends present them, and the gifts that please are prized, that the value may be returned in a competent time; those which are unuseful or superfluous, they return again, nor is it ill taken. A woman is not worse esteemed for marrying a second husband, but a third is scandalous. What is particular in their burials is,and buri∣als. that they carry out their dead (even the Emperor him∣self) the same day he dyes, and accompany him with great howlings and lamentations of wo∣men. They leave the body unburied for eight days, praying for him every day; then they re∣turn, kiss him, the Priest puts a billet into his mouth, to testifie of his godly life, and that he receiv'd absolution; and then after some prayers they inter him, and keep his anniversary with prayers and devotions. They bury none in their Churches. They think their baptism to be most solemn,Their bap∣tism. and most effectual of any other celebrated a∣mongst Christians. Children they baptize in the Church, adult persons in Rivers; the Font stands in the midst of the Church, and they consecrate new water for every one that is baptized, ima∣gining that the impurity of the childs original sin (cleansed by baptism) remains still in the water. They have a solemn procession about the Font, the Clerk (who is always their Deacon) carrying before the image of St. John Baptist. As soon as the child is baptized, he puts a grain of salt into his mouth, anoints him, making the sign of the cross upon the forehead, hands, breast, and back, with consecrated oyl, puts him on a white shirt, and hangs about his neck a little cross; which he is obliged to wear as long as he lives; which if it should not be found upon him at his death, he would not receive Christian bu∣rial. He assigns him also a particular Saint to be his Patron, ordering the godfathers to put him in mind (when he comes of age) to have a par∣ticular devotion towards him. Conceiving bap∣tism to be the entrance into the Church, they baptize all (except the Greeks) that come into their Church, tho they have been before bapti∣zed in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Those also who are excommunicated, or are conceived to be out of the Church by any prophane or wicked action (as those they call Chaldaeans) they receive into the Church again by baptism. So that there are those amongst them who have been baptized ten or twelve times. In the rest of their ceremonies and doctrines,Other remains of the ∣ses. they differ little from the Greek Church; only they superadd divers things, as the hallowing of their Rivers, which they do twice every year; the greatest pomp is on Palm-sunday, when the Emperor leads the Patriarchs horse. They account many things and persons unclean, as Christians of another profession; insomuch that the Emperor washeth his hands after any Christi∣an Ambassador hath kissed them. They will not permit such to enter into their Churches, and if they do enter, they sweep after them. Divers sorts of meats also are accounted unclean, nor do they willingly eat of any fowl, or such thing killed by a woman. After they have accompa∣nied their wives, they enter not the Church till they have washed; and many other such obser∣vances they have. After any one hath received Extreme Unction, they will hardly give him meat, but no medicine upon any terms, so that he must dy in his own defence. They begin the year on the first of September, that day being, as they suppose, the first day, and they keep their account from the creation. They account our Lord to have been incarnate in 5509 of the world (reckoning according to the Septuagint), to which adding the year of our Lord (as 5509 1679) gives their account of this present year 7188: and subtracting from the present year of the epocha at our Lords birth (as 7188 + 5509) gives the present year of our Lord 1679. Their Offices are all in their own language, which is the Sclavonian; and hath so great affinity with the Polonian, Lithvanian, Cassubian, Vandalian, those also of Bochemia, Dalmatia, Bulgaria, and Croatia, that they can make ashift to converse one with another. It remains that we speak something of their Religious. They have many Monasteries,Their  ligious. and some very rich; but all of one order, which is St. Basil. Few of their Governors are Archiman∣dritae or Abbots, but most Priors or Igumeni. Tho
many of them have great revenues, yet do they difficultly admit any one, except he bring a stock with him, which is seldom under three hundred Rubbles; the rest of his estate he must dispose of at his admission. The ceremonies of their recepti∣on are changing his cloths, which are to be all of woollen, clipping his crown very bare, unction, and the like. They vow perpetual chastity, and abstinence from flesh. Nor hath he that is once enter'd, ever any hopes to get out again. The Monastery of Troitza is said to have had near an hundred thousand Rubbles per ann. in revenue. It is built like a Castle, having walls of stone regularly fortified, and stored with Cannon; and the ordinary number of Religious (besides their officers and servants) were about seven hun∣dred. They have also Nunneries of several orders. Some admit only noble widows and maids, others promiscuously; but this is universally observed, that none that are once enter'd do ever return to their secular condition. The Emperor having continued with his wife twenty years without ha∣ving issue by her, thrust her into a Nunnery, where after two months she was brought-a-bed, but could not for all that go out of the Nunnery. The History of the Princes of Russia. THE Russes have the same vanity that the Romans (and most other Nations) have had, to deduce their original either from Gods, or the most famous of men. Whereby how much honour soever themselves think to have obtain∣ed, so much do other Nations think they have lost of truth. Some Authors derive them from Augustus Cesar. Ivan Vasilowich, the learnedst of all the Russes, and who had reason to be best in∣formed, told an English Goldsmith smiling, (be∣cause the Emperor had said, that all Russes were theeves), that he was not a Russ, but a German, and that their family came from Beala, a famous King of Hungary. More particulars of this we know not; as neither who, when, or upon what occasion they came; nor who were their successors. But it is certain the Imperial Family was com∣monly called the House of Beala. Others say, that the first Governors were three brethren (Rurich, Sinaux, and Truvor) of the Varegi. But who those Varegi were, or what Country they inhabited, 'tis uncertain, as is also the time of their coming, which some say was ann. 752, others 861. And of these Rurich setled at Novogrod, Truvor at Plescow, and Sinaux at Bielioser; these two last dying with∣out issue, Rurich succeeded, and left the whole dominion to his son Igor. Igor married Olga, and fighting with the Drewlians, was taken by them and beheaded. Olga afterwards defeated and de∣stroyed these Drewlians, went to Constantinople, was baptized, and took the name of Helena about the year 876, brought Christianity into Russia, and died with the opinion of sanctity, and her anni∣versary day is July 11. Suetoslaw when he came to age succeeded his father, and Jeropolick him. Next after him was Wolodomir, concerning whom we have something of certainty. Zona∣ras saith, that in the time of Basilius the Empe∣ror, there was a Bishop sent from Constantinople to convert the Russes, (I think his name was Leo). The Russes would not believe except they saw a miracle; whereupon the Bishop threw the book of the Gospels into the fire, and after a long time took it out unblemish'd; and this was the begin∣ning of the conversion of the Russes, but their so∣lemn receiving it was not till 988, when their Prince Wolodomir marrying Anna Sister of Basilius and Constantine, was converted, baptized, and changed his name into Basilius. He is by them look'd upon as their Apostle, and they celebrate his Festival July 15. he died in 1015. This man removed the Metropolis of the Nation from Kiow to Wolodomir. He had many children, who fought and slew one another; two (Borissus and Chle∣bus) are for their holy lives and unjust deaths accounted holy Martyrs, and their day is July 24. Sewoldus Coras, some call him Jeroslaws, after ma∣ny wars subdued his brethren, and obtained the government. He was follow'd by his son Wolodomir, surnamed Monomachus, but others say he was called Jeroslaw (or fair bank) because he built that City. Saxo Grammaticus saith, that he married the daughter of Harold King of England. He was a potent Prince, and kept very good correspondence with the Em∣perors of Constantinople. But it is to be noted, that the actions of this, are confounded with those of the other Wolodomir. They say he died ann. 1146, which is not probable, if he was the husband of that Lady who followed, and is not set down till 1237, when reigned George, by some called Gregory, call'd by some Szeveloditz; others make Wszevolod to be the father, and George his son. George was ann. 1237 slain by Batus a Tartarian Prince, who subjected the whole country to the Tartars; ordering that the Tartars should from time to time chuse the Princes of Moskow; that when they sent their Ambassador, the Prince should go to meet and wait upon him on foot, offering a plat∣ter of Mares-milk; that if the Tartar let any of it fall upon the main of his horse, the Prince should lick it up; and that he should bare-headed and on foot give the Tartars horse his provender out of his cap; but the most grievous was, that the Tartar had a house and a guard in the Castle of Moskow. Michael succeeded his brother, and was also slain by the same Tartar. Next was Alexander his son; and then his son Danielou or Daniel, surnamed Caleta. He transferred the Im∣perial Seat to Moskow, and called himself Great Duke of Muscovia, &c. some say by the authority of Inocent IV, about ann. 1246. Some place after him George Danielowitz Caleta, who (they say) was slain by Demetri Michaelowitz, who was kill'd by the Tartars. Other place next to Daniel his son Ivan, chosen by Zanabeck the Crim-Tartar; who favoured him so much, that he abated some part of the slavery imposed upon the Tzars. His son Ivan Ivanowitz succeeded, and was wholly subject to the Tartars. Demetri Ivanowitz was his son, who refused to pay tribute to the Tartars, making a fierce war upon Mamai Kan, and gained a very bloody victory, the earth for thirteen miles to∣gether being cover'd with carcases. But Tach∣tanisk Kan in another battel slew Demetri, and renewed the power of the Tartars over the Russes. Vasili Demetriwitz follow'd ann. 1357, who chased the Tartars out of Russia, and conquer'd Bulgaria beyond the Wolga. Being jealous of his wife Ana∣stasia, he disinherited his son Vasili, and gave the Empire to his brother George, who at his death restor'd it from his own sons to the right heir. But those sons making war upon Vasili, took him prisoner, and put out his eyes, therefore was he call'd Vasili Ciemnox, or dark. But the Boiars be∣ing faithful to him, he reigned peaceably till his death; and left the Empire to his son Ivan Vasi∣lowich surnamed Grotzdyn, who was the first that gave lustre and fame to the obscure name of the Russes. For taking away the Dukedoms and Go∣vernments from his Uncles, who accounted them∣selves
absolute in their dominions; he united the whole Nation in his own person, and call'd him∣self Tzaar, or as they pronounce it Tzar, that is King. He married Mary daughter to Michael Duke of Tweria, some say Severia, or Severski, and presently after chaced him out of his Dukedom, and united it to his Crown. He conquer'd also the Duke of Novogrod about ann. 1488, and united that City, with all its dominions, to his own estate, and carried from thence three hundred Carts laden with gold, silver, jewels, and other rich commo∣dities, to his Treasury at Moskow. He warred also with Poland and Livonia, with various success. By his first wife he had Ivan, who died before him, and left one son called Demetri. Afterwards Ivan married Sophia daughter to Thomas Paleolo∣gus, who reigned in Morea, by whom he had di∣vers children. This being a woman of great spi∣rit and understanding, so continually upbraided her husband with his slavery to the Tartars, that at length she forced him to free himself, her self contributing a beginning unto it. For whereas the Tartars had an house within the Castle, where lived a Governor, and others that were as con∣tinual spies upon the Emperor and his Russes; she pretended a vow, when with-child, to build a Church there when she was safely deliver'd. Ha∣ving therefore brought forth a son, she invited the Tartar Governor to the Christning, and ca∣joling him with great kindness and magnificence, begged that house of him for fulfilling her vow; which he granted. Afterwards her husband and the Muscovites took courage, and never ceased till they had shaken off the Tartar slavery. Tho the Tartar continues to this day to call them his Go∣lops, or slaves. She wrought also much upon her husband (now very ancient, for he was sixty-six years of age when he died, which was in 1492, after he had reigned forty-two years and seven months), that passing by Demetri the son of John, whom he had by a former wife, he declared her son Gabriel (whose name he changed to Vasilie) his successor. Vasilie proved a very great Tyrant over the people, and his own brothers and family; but he recover'd a great part of the country which had been conquer'd by Vitoldus Great Duke of Lit∣vania. In 1514, he took Plescow and Smolensko; but was unfortunate in his designs against the Tartars. He married Helena daughter of Glinski, by whom he had Ivan called Vasilowich, who was born Aug. 26, 1528. Vasilie died 1532, and made Michael Glinski Tutor to his son. Ivan Vasilowich began his reign ann. 1540, whose very great victories over his enemies, his most barbarous cruelties and tyrannies towards his subjects, and pretended sanctity, have given large subjects to all historians of those times, and amongst others to Paulus Oderborn who hath writ a peculiar book of him. However he behaved himself in other respects, he raised the Empire of Muscovy to its height. He subdued the Kingdoms of Casan and Astracan; which are signified by the two Crowns over the Eagles heads in his Arms. And Astracan being the capital City of the Circass-Tartars, having conquer'd that, he reduc'd them also to terms, i. e. to accept of his government, pay him some small tribute, and to assist him with so many horse and arms in his wars. This Nation reacheth as far as Persia, and being set upon by the Turk, when he went to invade Per∣sia, they sent to the Tzar for Engineers to forti∣fie their Towns, &c. which he presently sent, and with them also Governors and soldiers for their defence, and his securing their obedience to him∣self for the future. The subduing of the Tar∣tars alarm'd his neighbours, but none more then Selimus the Turkish Emperor, who ann. 1569, sent an Army of three hundred thousand, besides forty thousand Crim-Tartars, to recover Astracan and other places from the Muscovite. Serebrine, a very faithful and valiant General, commanded in Astracan; who at first much wonder'd from whence such an Army should come, having scarce ever heard of the Turks, but notwithstand∣ing was not wanting to his duty, but hasten'd to strengthen his garrison with men and provisi∣ons; and gave order to all the country, espe∣cially those upon the Caspian Sea, to hinder the Turks as much as they could from provision. The Turks, whether by mistake or malice of the Tar∣tars, got into great woods, where their slow marches made them consume much of their store, and the contrary winds hinder'd their ships upon the Caspian Sea, from coming up the river, and cast some upon the shore, which were all pillaged by the inhabitants, who were very active in obedience to the Governor of Astracan. However to the banks of Volga they came, whi∣ther Serebrine went, and made many successful skirmishes with them. In one he slew divers of their best Officers, and divers thousands of their men. Mean-while victuals grew scarce in the Turkish Army; and those few Ships that escaped the winds and the Russes, brought refreshment, but no such quantity as could serve them any considerable time. So that they began to retreat. But their ill diet, and the bad air of these marishes, especially in the end of Autumn, brought the plague amongst them. Their magazine of pow∣der also at Azoph was by lightning blown up. And to compleat their misery, the remainder of the Army being shipt upon the black Sea, were cast away. So that very few of that vast Army returned to Constantinople. And the Russ had by that means established himself more firmly in the conquest of all those countries. Ivan Vasi∣lowich conquer'd also a great part of Livonia, and many other places. By his first wife he had two sons, Ivan (whom himself killed with his staff) and Pheodor, who succeeded him. He had many wives, and one he put into a Monastery for her sterility, who there within two months brought forth a son, called Demetri; but notwithstanding that, she was forc'd into the Nunnery, and had a son there, yet could she never get out. Some say, that this was the act of his father; it may be that both concurred in this, as in many other acts of injustice and tyranny. He dyed March 28. 1584, leaving two sons, Pheodor and Demetri. Pheodor was a very weak Prince, and having married the sister of Boris Feodorowich Godanove, left the managing of all affairs to him; who ha∣ving caused Demetrius to be murther'd (as was said), and made his party amongst the Nobi∣lity and people, (Pheodor also after awhile (ann. 1597, having reigned twelve years) dying, the last of the house of Beala) after much dissembled tergiversation was chosen Grand Tzar; and reign∣ed seven years peaceably, till an Impostor (Griski, or Gregory Otrapeion) flying into Poland, and there declaring himself to be Demetri, the son of Ivan Vasilowich, who (as he said) was not murther'd, but another in his stead, was furnished by divers Noblemen of Poland, with an Army to recover his right. Boris in the time of Pheodor, tho he had obliged some of the Boiars, yet had he made away divers even of the best Nobility, who were most likely to contest his power, following herein the steps of Ivan Vasilowich. He also incurr'd their hatred the more, by his engrossing to himself and family all the gainful employments, before he was chosen Emperor; for he had then no less then ninety-three thousand and seven hundred
Rubbles per ann. And for these and the like rea∣sons many of them at first secretly favoured, after∣wards openly join'd themselves and their power to Demetri. Particularly Peter Basmaneuf, entrust∣ed with an Army by Boris to fight against him, went and carryed with him all his Army to De∣metri, and brought him to Moskow in a manner without any bloodshed. At which time Boris first on April 13, 1605, and shortly after his wife and son died, either by poison, as most say, or mur∣ther'd by some sent from Demetri to that pur∣pose, and left the Throne void to that Impostor, which he enjoyed not nine months before he was suspected, as not sleeping after dinner, nor using stoves, and in divers other matters not con∣forming to the custom of the Muscovites. And when the Russes saw moreover, that he had en∣gaged to marry the daughter of the Palatine of Sandomiria, and to bring in the Roman Religion, they formed a conspiracy against him; chiefly by the practice of Vasilie Zuisky. They chose for the execution of their design the seventeenth day of May 1606, nine days after his marriage; when Zuisky, with other Boiars and the people, after dinner finding the Guards asleep, forc'd their way into his chamber; he affrighted with the noise, leapt out of a window and broke his leg; the Boiars follow'd and there slew him, and hurried his carcass into the market-place, where they also laid by him his great fautor Basmaneuf, ex∣posing them three days. Afterwards they chose Vasilie Ivanowich Zuisky Grand Tzar in his stead, who was crown'd June 1, 1606. He had not reigned long before another Demetri appear'd in Poland, and being by them assisted, raised very great troubles in Muscovy. After him also started up another Demetri in Moskow it self; who also found followers and abettors, people who in the times of trouble and licentiousness, take even a sorry pretence to rob and plunder. Mean-while divers of the Nobility bandied together against their Lord Zuisky, pretending that he was un∣fortunate; that victory seem'd to shun, and troubles to follow him; that as long as he go∣vern'd there could be no hopes of peace, &c. Which silly stories prevail'd so much upon an amazed people, that they seized upon Zuisky, and shaving him, put him into a Monastery. Mean-while the Poles were not idle in defending and asserting their Demetri, but came with their army before Moskow. The Russes to heal all their wounds, and soder up their differences, chose Ʋladislaus, son to the King of Poland, to be their Grand Duke, upon certain conditions; whereof one was, that Zuisky and his family should be put into the hands of the King of Poland, which was accordingly done, and he imprisoned till death, and buried in the high-way. The Polish army before Moskow, understanding the election of their Prince, behaved themselves very peace∣ably for a while; and the General with part of his army was admitted into the Castle, the rest of the army was quarter'd in the Villages with∣out; but they by little and little got into the City, where they had not long continued e're there happen'd a quarrel (which amongst men used to drunkenness is not hard to find) of the Poles against the Russes; whereupon they fell upon the City, and in despight of their General plunder'd and burnt it. They say, that at that time perished two hundred thousand persons. The treasury also was pillaged, and all the wealth of the Emperor scatter'd amongst the Polish sol∣diers; some of whom are said to have charg'd their pistols with pearl. The Russes being in this almost desperate con∣dition, and upon the very brink of ruine, at length a Butcher (whose name seems to have been Zachary Listpenow) began not to despair, and to give out amongst the people, that if there could be found an honest Treasurer, there would not want good officers and soldiers of the Russ Na∣tion to deliver them from their miseries, and settle peace and glory again in their country. The people destitute of other hopes, catch'd hold up∣on this straw, and bid him name whom he thought fit to be General; which he did, and proposed to them a very worthy, but poor and neglected Gentleman, called Pozarskey. The peo∣ple approved his choice, took him for Com∣mander, and the Butcher they made Treasurer; bringing readily unto him all the money they ow'd unto the Emperor, and what they could spare of their own. Wherewith he presently raised an army, and joining it with a body of Cossacks then in service of the Muscovites. They marched to Moskow, besieged the Poles in the Castle, and forc'd them to surrender, and to march out of the Empire, which they immediately performed. Hereupon the Russ Nobility convened at Moskow, and seeing their country free from strangers, and an obedient army of their own, they re∣solved upon electing of a new Emperor; which they put in execution ann. 1613, and made choice of a young man, called Michael Federowitz, and sware allegiance unto him. His father had for∣saken his wife for Gods sake (as they say) i. e. quitted her, and betaken himself to his devo∣tions in a Monastery; he was of the house of Romanove, and when his son was chosen Tzar, he also was elected Patriarch; and being a very wise and moderate person, he put his son (who was always obedient unto him) upon secure and prudent counsels. His name was changed to Philaretes Nikiditz, and he died ann. 1633. The first thing he did, was to recover Smolensko; and by the mediation of Christian Princes (especially King James) he made peace with the Poles. He also made a peace with the Swedes, who had been the sorest and heaviest enemy to the Russes. And by the assistance also of King James an ac∣cord was made, and all differences reconciled. The Swede was to render Novogrod, Stara Russa, Porkow, Lagda, Aydow, with all their Territories to the Muscovites. And the Muscovites surrendred Ivanogrod, Jama, Coporia, Noteburg, with their pre∣cincts, to the Swede, and renounce all title to Livonia; which was no small prejudice to the Russ, who thereby lost the salt trade, which had brought in no small revenue. He died July 12, 1645, in the forty-seventh year of his age, and thirty-third of his reign. He was a prudent, pious, and valiant person, endeavouring by all means to banish the memory of former tyrannies, and to make up the breaches of his own people, which he did very successfully. To him succeeded his son Alexes Michaelo∣witz, a more martial, but yet as mild a Gover∣nor; whose actions are so fresh in all mens me∣mories, that I think it superfluous to write them; but such have been these of the house Romanove, that if their successors continue to tread in the steps of these their ancestors, they need not doubt of both a lasting reign, and glory to all posterity. He died about the year 1676, and left his son, a young Prince of about sixteen years of age, to succeed him. The Lakes and Rivers of Muscovy. COncerning the Lakes and Rivers of Muscovy, 'tis to be observed, (1.) That almost all their Rivers take their original from Lakes; or
else they could hardly be perpetual. (2.) That the Rivers of Muscovy are (except where they be straitned by mountains, which are not very frequent) for the most part broad and shallow; full of islands, flats, and deep holes; because all their Rivers in a manner chiefly consist of melted snow, and when the snow dissolves, it causeth great floods and violent deluges, but withall carry so much sludge that it fills up streams; which remains so till a new deluge cleanseth that place and fills up another, so that the channel is very uncertain, and now are depths which were shal∣lows before. (3.) That they are not very full of fish; and were it not for the Lakes and deep holes (which are not frozen to the bottom) there would be no fresh-water fish at all; for fish cannot live in ice. Therefore they observe, that there are no Carps at all, nor much other fish, except what comes from the Sea to spawn as soon as the Rivers are thawed, such are Salmons, Belluga, Cods, Haddocks, Omelies, and the like. And of these there are great store, because store of feeding. Some Lakes also are well stored, be∣cause not frozen to the bottom. (4.) That there are no Maps extant, except of Wolga, Dwina, and Dnieper, because the course of the others are not so well discover'd. One of the greatest Lakes of this country is Ivanosera, i. e. Johns-Lake (Osera signifying a Lake), in the great Forest of Epiphanow, called also Jepiphanoulies, and Okonitzkilies, in the Pro∣vince of Resan, eight leagues from Tula. This Lake is near five hundred Versts or Italian miles long. And in the said Forest arise also the Rivers Schaet and Don, or Tanais. The Schaet running Eastward receives the River Ʋppa or Oppa, and emptieth it self into the Occa. But Tanais (Tana and Don) cometh out of the Lake at the Town Donco, and entreth into the marshes of Meotis, or Sea of Zabaque. From the spring to its end∣ing is directly about eighty leagues, but by water 'tis twenty days journey. Donets Sewersky falls into Tanais three days journey above Azoph. Bieleiosora, sixteen leagues long, twelve broad, scarce of fish, receiveth thirty-six smaller Rivers, and sendeth out only the Schotsma, which falls into the Volga four leagues below Mologa. Ilmin, Ilmen, Ilmer, Limido, is twelve leagues long, and as many broad; and ends about two miles above Weliki Novogrod. It receives the Ri∣vers of Lowat, arising in the Forest of Wolkowsky from a Lake called Fornow, and Scholona, and passeth away by the Wolkowa, which after run∣ning thirty-six leagues, dischargeth it self into the Lake Ladoga or Laduga. Ladoga, about an hundred leagues long, and sixty broad, is full of Isles, and is the mother of the Neva, which enters into the German Ocean. It is stored with fish, and hath many Towns and Villages upon its banks. From the same Lake of Fornow ariseth also the Wolga, of which by and by. In the same Forest also, about ten leagues from Fornow, ariseth Bo∣risthenes, near the Town of Dnieperche, and there∣fore called Dnieper. And ten leagues from the Dnieper also the Dwina or Duna, by some ima∣gined to be Rubus, by others Turuntus of Ptolo∣my, taketh its original from a Lake of the same name. It passeth by Vitepsko, Polotsko, Dunen∣burg, &c. to Riga in Livonia, and ends in that part of the Baltick called the East-Sea, and by the Russes Waretzcoie-morie. Besides this, there is another Dwina whereof we have spoken in the Province of that name. Weza beginneth in a marsh between Bieleio∣sora and the Volga, passeth by Suetzogorod, and so into the Dwina. Mosqui, or Mosqua, springeth near to Twere, thence six leagues below Moscow it enters into Occa, after it hath received the Jagusa or Jausa. Weglin hath its spring a little above Moskow, and joins with Occa. Ʋgra ariseth near Drohobus, passeth thro a great desert between Worotin and Coluga, thence falls into Occa. This was sometimes the boundary be∣twixt Russia and Lithvania. Occa comes out of a great Lake in the Pro∣vince of Rezan, passeth by many great Towns near Nisi-Novogrod. From the same Lake flows Sem, and Schosna, both fall into the Dnieper. Narva is navigable from the Lake Czutzho, or Czudin, called in Latin Picis or Polas, and by the Dutch Peifves. The Volga ariseth out of the foresaid Lake of Forenow, in the Forest of Volkonski; two miles after it hath left this mother-Lake, it falls into another called Volga, whence it taketh that name; it being anciently called Rha, and by the Tartars Edel. This River till it come to Nisi-Novogrod, is not visited by strangers, or Merchants, who passing from Moskow down the River Moscua, and then at Kolutin Serge Monastir down to Occa, upon which stands the City of Rezan, heretofore a noble City, but being destroyed by the Tartars ann. 1568, it was by the Grand Duke transferr'd to another place eight leagues distant, and is called Peresla Resanski, southward from Moskow. And thence near an hundred and twenty Versts Cassi∣nogorod, the chief Town of the Tartarian Province called Cassinow, subject to the Russ. About an hundred leagues from thence is Moruma, the chief seat of the Mordwiz Tartars, and is inhabited by them and Muscovites, but is under the Grand Duke. Below which falls into the Occa, the Ri∣vers of Morsna-reca and Clesna, which comes from Wolodomir. And all these fall into the Volga at Nisi-Novogrod, in 56 deg. 28 min. and the needle declines more then nine degrees westward; an hundred leagues by land (by water many more) from Moskow, and 550 to Astracan. The inhabi∣tants are Tartars, Muscovites, and Hollanders, who have there a Church, and a congregation of above an hundred persons, the most part soldiers and sutlers, and some Merchants. The Volga is here about a mile broad, and in May and June, when the snow-waters come down, is very passable, else by reason of the frequent sand-banks and shallows, the passage is very troublesome. The next Town of note is Vasiligrod, in 55 deg. 51 min. built by the Emperor Vasilie, to hinder the in∣cursions of the Tartars of Casan, which are those called the Czremisses, of whom we have spoken before. Thence to Casan, in 55 deg. 28 min. upon the Casanka, a little above where it falls into the Volga, reacheth East and Southward to the great desarts; their next neighbours are the Tartars, Schibansky, Nagas, and Casatks. The Town it self is large, and fortified after their manner, but the Castle hath very strong and well con∣trived works faced with stone, much canon, and a strong garrison of Muscovites; tho in the Town the Tartars live mingled amongst them. This Province was formerly under the Cham of Tar∣tary, and was able to bring sixty thousand men into the field, till conquer'd by Ivan Vasilowich. The whole story whereof was thus; Vasilie Ivano∣wich having given the Tartars a great overthrow, forced them to submit, and receive a Governor from him, who was one Scheale, a Tartar in∣deed, but otherwise so contemptible for his per∣son, that his subjects joining with the Crim Tar∣tar, surprized and ejected him. Which success gave the Tartars so much courage, that under
map of the Dnieper River TRACTUS BORYSTHENIS vulgo DNIEPR et NIEPR dicti, à KIOVIA ad Urbum OCZAKOW ubi in PONTUM EUXINUM se exonerat.
map of the Volga River NOVA ET ACCURATA WOLGAE FLUMINIS, olim RHA dicti DELINEATIO Auctore Adamo Oleario. blazon or coat of arms Illustrissimo Domino, D.no BENEDICTO BAGGE de BERGA, Sueco, haec Geographica fluminis WOLGAE descriptio humillimè offertur Apud Janssonio-Waesbergias: et Mosim Pitt:
the command of two brothers Mendligeri and Sapgeri, they invaded Russia, and stopped not till they had taken and pillaged Moskow, burnt all, except the Castle, the guards whereof were forced to buy their safety with considerable pre∣sents; and the Muscovites also to sue for a peace, which was granted upon very bad terms; as that the Grand Duke, and all his subjects, should for ever be tributary to the Tartars; and the Duke, when he came to pay his tribute, should smite the ground with his forehead (a great expression of submission) before the statue of Mendligeri, which he caused to be erected in the middle of the City of Moskow. After this victory Mendligeri re∣turned to Chrim, and Sapgeri setled himself King of Cazan. But Mendligeri having a great mind also to Rezan, besieged that, and summoning the Castle, sent word, that it was in vain to resist, since that now they had taken Moskow, and the Duke and all his subjects were become tributa∣ries to them. The Governor (Ivan Kower) re∣plied, that he knew no such thing, neither could he believe it, except he saw some authentick testi∣mony: whereupon the Tartar sent him (by cer∣tain Officers) the very original instrument of sub∣mission; which as soon as the Governor saw, he sent away the Officers with this message, that he would keep that writing as faithfully as the Castle of Rezan, nor would he part with either of them so long as he had a drop of blood in his body. He had in the Castle an Italian, an excellent Ca∣nonier (Giovanni Giordano) who did great ser∣vice, and slew great numbers of the Tartars, and with a shot took away part of Mendligeri's gar∣ment; who being thereby affrighted, offered to raise the siege, if the Governor would return him his writing; which he refusing to do, Mendligeri was forced immediately to rise and be gone. The Governor (as soon as the Tartar was departed) sent the Instrument to Moskow; where it was received with an extraordinary joy of the Prince and peo∣ple, who presently brake to pieces the statue of Mendligeri, raised an army of twenty-five thou∣sand men, and proclaimed open war against Sap∣geri, and sent a defiance unto him; withall set down before Casan, but was forced to retire, af∣ter having lost many men before it. Ivan Vasilowitz succeeded his father, and be∣gan his reign with the siege of Casan; which ha∣ving batter'd in vain for two months together, at last he began to mine the walls; the mines took their effect, blew up the works, slew great numbers of Tartars, and gave the opportunity of an assault, which (July 9, 1552.) was carried on with that vigor, that the Castle was taken; and being well repaired by the Muscovite, is still kept by them. Sixty versts below Casan, falls the great river Cama into the Volga, on the left hand, by several mouths, some thirty versts distant from others. The water of it is blackish, and riseth out of Permia. Upon this river should seem to be (if it be at all) the great forrest Step, which is six or seven hundred versts long; wherein you may ride a days journey amongst cherry-trees, yet not above two foot high; being so frequently burn'd down by travellers, who careless of their fires at night, set fire on the dry grass and burn down three or four hundred furlongs at a time. They say also, that here grows spontaneously Tulips, Roses, Aspara∣gus, Onions, Marjoram, and what not? which I im∣pose not upon any mans faith, because I find somewhat like this, but more probably men∣tioned in the Ʋkrain. Thirty versts lower Zer∣dick (another branch of Cama) enters the Volga, over against which, on the right-hand bank, is the City of Tetus, an hundred and twenty versts from Casan. Twenty-five versts below Tetus, but on the left bank of the river, is the river Ʋtka, which rises near the City Bulgara. Below that is the Island Staritza, in 54 deg. 31 min. where they find Pyrites of several colours, so round and oval that they very well serve for shot. Sixty-five versts below Tetus is Ʋneroskora, a ruined City of the Tartars. Hereabouts is very good fishing, by a particular invention of the Russes; they bait an hook, and fasten it to a strong line, which they tye about a little board of four or five inches cover'd over with tin, and drag it after the boat; the mo∣tion of the water, continually turning up the bright tin towards the Sun, intices the greater sort of fishes, who are thereby easily caught. Up∣on and near the banks of the river, are the ruines of divers Cities, which the people say were de∣stroyed by Tamerlain; the names of some of them are Simbeyska-gora, Arbuchim, but of the greatest part the names are unknown. The river Adrobe enters Volga in 53 deg. 48 min. as doth the river Ʋssa not much lower. A little beyond in a great plain is a sandy hill, call'd Sariol-Kurgan, which they say, was the burial of a Tartar Emperor and seven Kings there slain, and made by the Soldi∣ers carrying sand and earth in their helmets. Three hundred and fifty versts below Casan is Sa∣mara, a large City upon a river so called, three versts from the banks of Volga; tho it do not wholly join with the great stream till fifteen versts lower; and over against it on the right hand fall in also the rivers Ascula and Lisran. Below Samara an hundred and fifteen leagues is the mountain of the Donski Cosacks, who from hence usually robbed the boats that came down the Volga. below this the river Zagra joins the Volga; and not far thence the river is so shallow that the Cosacks ford it, and lurking in the sledgy and bushy Islands of the ri∣ver, rob and spoil securely. These people do very much mischief to the Russes, and the Emperor to repress the inrodes of them and the Tartars, hath built divers Cities and Forts, giving them to be in∣habited only by soldiers; one is Soratof in 52 deg. 12 min. chiefly against the Kolmuck-Tartars, whose country begins here, and reaches to the Caspian Sea; a very deformed, barbarous, and cruel sort of people, great man-stealers, and enemies both to Russes, Cosacks, and chiefly the Nagai-Tartars. Cza∣ritza, Tsornojar, and divers others, were built for the same reason. An hundred and fifty versts be∣low Saratof on the left hand of Volga, is the river Ruslana, and over against that the mountain of Ʋrakufs-Karul, where they say a Tartarian Prince called Ʋrak was killed by the Cosacks: near to which is the river and mountain called Camaschin∣ka, near whereto Stenko Radzin was born; the river rises out of the torrent of Iloba, and falls into the Don. The Cosacks bring over land their boats upon four wheels thence into the Volga, where they exercise their piracies and plunderings. The river Bolloclea is ninety versts below Camu∣schinka; and near that (about 48 deg. 51 min.) is the shortest distance betwixt the Volga and Don, which is about seven leagues. In 49 deg. 42 min. is Tzaritza, three hundred and fifty versts from Soratof. From thence to Astracan is only heaths and barren grounds; below lies the Isle of Zer∣pinske, over against which a little river rises out of the Don, but so little that it will hardly bear a small boat (Massa in his Map (for in others it is not to be found) calls it Kamous) falls into the Volga. Near to this place also was begun a trench large enough to convey Vessels from Don to the Volga, and it is expressd in divers Maps; but it was given over; for the Nagai, and the other Tar∣tars, fearing (not without reason) that it would be a means to bring the Turk upon them, as the
Muscovite also did, they joined all together, and not only disturbed the work, but also beat the army of the Crim-Tartar consisting of 80000, to∣gether with 20000 Turks, and 3000 Janisaries. Below that on the same side, the river Wesowi, and thirty versts from that Wolodinerski Ʋtsga empty themselves into the Volga. The country all hereabouts, and down as far as Astracan, is very plentiful in Liquorice. Thence the river descends to Tzormegar, a little City inhabited only by a garrison against the Cosacks, who there used to rob; and particularly defeated a great convoy of fifteen hundred Muscovites; for the river being there very swift, they suffer'd the soldiers to go first, and then setting upon the Merchants killed seven or eight hundred of them, and carried away all the goods before the convoy could come up to help them. The next considerable place is Astracan, a great City in an Island made by two branches of the Volga, and called Dolgoi. It was anciently the Metropolis of the Nagai-Tartars, and built by one of their Kings called Astra-chan; it lies in 46 deg. 22 min. and the needle varies westward 13 deg. 40 min. others say that it lies in 47 deg. 9 min. yet is the winter (which lasts but two months) so cold, that the river is frozen hard enough to bear sleds. The Island is sandy and barren, except some gardens cultivated by the richer Citizens. The country also there∣about is marshy and desart; yet do the inhabi∣tants make a great profit by their salt, which the Sun bakes upon the top of the water about a fin∣ger thick; the inhabitants cast it up into great heaps, and transport it to other countries. The river also is mightily stored with fish; and there is great plenty of fowls of all sorts. They have great store of most excellent fruits, and particularly grapes. This City was ann. 1554 taken from the Tartars by Ivan Vasilowich, who sending his army in small parties, and several ways, arrived at the Town before he was expected, or the enemies provided to receive him; presently encouraging his men, by promising them the plunder of the Town, Aug. 1. he took it by storm, where he spa∣red none that would not be baptized. Having re-peopled it with Muscovites, he encompassed it with a stone-wall, and other fortifications. Mi∣chael Federowitz afterwards added another part to it; so that the circuit of it at present is 8000 Geometrical feet, defended by 500 pieces of Ord∣nance, nine Regiments, each containing 500 Mus∣queteers, two Weywods, &c. The situation of it invites Merchants thither from all parts, even from the Indies; so that the customs (tho very low) amount to 25000 crowns per ann. The inhabi∣tants of the country (Tartars of Crim and Na∣gaia) are not permitted to live in the City, as neither to build Cities, or fortifie Towns. But for the most part they live in huts of reed or cane, like to our hen-coops, which in cold weather they cover with a course cloth; the summer they spend in rambling up and down to find pasture for their cattel; in winter time retireing un∣der Astracan, for their security against the Cal∣muk and Jaick Tartars. The Grand Tzar lends them arms, which they restore at such a time; they pay no tribute, but are obliged to serve him in his wars, which they do very willingly, in hope of prey. They have their own Princes, Comman∣ders, and Judges; but some of their chief Mur∣za's are always kept as hostages at Moskow. If any one desire to know what these Cosacks be,Of the Co∣sacks. that have caused all this noise and trouble in the world; tho we shall treat more largely of them when we come to the Ʋkrain, yet it will not be amiss to give here some general account of them. Authors differ much concerning the reason of their name; some say, that they are so called from Cosa, which in the Polish language signifies a Goat. But I find that in the Circassian, and other Tartar languages, Cosac signifies a Sol∣dier; perhaps as Cimber in old time amongst the Germans; which name most properly agrees to them, for they are no other then a collection of theeves and robbers, out of all nations and coun∣tries, living chiefly upon spoil, pillaging and pi∣racy. They are of two sorts, according to the places of their habitations; which they chuse in fastnesses, desart and unknown places, more for their security then other conveniences. Those that live upon the Boristhenes in the Ʋkrain, are called Zaporousky; but besides them there are another sort like those, who (because they live upon and about the Don or Tanais) are called Donsky, and these are they of whom we speak at this time. They are in some degree subjects to the Grand Tzar (as the other were to the Po∣landers), but they obey not much more then themselves please; tribute or acknowledgment they pay none; laws and government, such as it is, they have of their own; only when the Grand Tzar commands, they assist him with what num∣ber of soldiers he pleaseth, but he pays and pro∣tects them against their enemies, i.e. all the world, but chiefly the Crim-Tartars their neighbours. One of these was Stenko (or Stepan) Radzin, who, to revenge his brothers death, that was hanged for heading a sedition of the Cosacks in the army of the Grand Tzar against the Poles ann. 1665, by Jurie Alexowitz Dolgarowsky the Russ General, ann. 1667, after he had got so much into the favour of the Cosacks as to be acknowledged their Gene∣ral, he began to pillage upon the Volga and the Caspian Sea, as far as Jaick, which he plunder'd and burnt; he destroyed all their fisheries, their villages, and whatever he could light upon, bring∣ing a very great calamity upon all those nations. Thence he went to the other side of the Caspian Sea to Terki, &c. and so into Persia; where in a certain City finding great quantity of excellent wine, himself and soldiers (of whom he had five or six thousand) were so drunk, that the Persi∣ans fell upon them and slew them; Stenko (with about five hundred of his Cosacks) with great difficulty escaped to their boats, which they call Stroogs. Thence he came again to Volga, to recruit his losses both of men and spoils, which he did in short time; and one day entertaining his Offi∣cers upon the river with his Mistress (a very beautiful Persian Lady, whom he had taken pri∣soner) he drowned her with his own hands; and presently upon that set up Reformer against drink∣ing, whoring, &c. and got so much into the fa∣vour of the people, that Astracan was by the Ci∣tizens and Soldiers surrendred unto him: where his cruelties upon the Governor and the Officers, are not easily express'd, besides other great mis∣chiefs he did to the Grand Tzar. But amongst his own Cosacks he was very humble, and of easie address. Nor could any one know him from an ordinary Cosack by his garb, or outward appea∣rance, but only by the very great observance they gave him, bowing to the ground when they came to him, and by the compellation they used to∣wards him, which was Batskie, Father. Which partly also shews the manner of the Cosacks go∣vernment; which is, that their General hath no more power then the Soldiers give him volunta∣rily, which is commonly according to the advan∣tage and success they get by him. But (as I said) more of these when we come to the Ʋkrain.
map of the Crimea TAVRICA CHERSONESVS, Hodie PRZECOPSCA, et GAZARA dicitur.
CRIM-TARTARS. The Country of the Crim-Tartars, containing Precop, and the Taurica-Chersonesus. BEfore we treat particularly of this country, it is necessary that we speak of the Tartars in general; and shew the reason of their name, and how they came into these places. And be∣cause this discourse doth more naturally belong to Asia, we shall here only give a brief account of them, reserving a larger treatise to its proper place. We must also premise, that since Histo∣rians do so much disagree, especially the Western from the Eastern, in their relations concerning these people, the Reader must not here expect either the reconciling, or setting down, all their differences, much less the confutation of any; but we shall briefly, and with the best judgment we have, deliver that which seems to us most probable; and that also chiefly out of the Eastern writers, who seem to have more exact knowledg of these matters then our own people. Martinius saith, that in the Chinese Histories mention is made of the Tartars four thousand years ago; but I cannot find them nam'd in our Historians till about twelve hundred years after Christ. That the Scythians anciently inhabited all the northern Regions, I think is out of doubt; as also, that these Tartars were a tribe of them, which subduing all the rest, abolished the former, and introduced their own name. They are by all the ancientest Historians called Tatars; and this seems to have been the general name of those Nations that inhabit beyond Imaus, the north-east parts of Scythia, and north of the wall of China; built (as some say) a few years before our Saviours time, tho our Historians make no mention of it till the greatness of these Tatars suggested to the Chinois to secure themselves by this defence from their fury. There are divers conjectures concern∣ing the reason of the name; some derive it from a Syriack word, that signifies abundance, because of the populousness of that Nation; some from a word signifying remainder, i. e. of the twelve Tribes; others say, that it is the name of the Province they inhabit, or of the river upon which they are seated, and is the greatest river in all that tract. They are divided into many Tribes, and that which dwels upon this river, is particularly called Mogul, i. e. watery or fenny Tatars. Others say, that Mogul or Mongul is the name of the Nation, and Tatar of the Tribe; and that Tribe which lives on that river are called Su-Mogul, or Mohall; which is the Arabians opinion, Su-Mogul in their language signifying watry Mogul. The great fame, and the first knowledg that we have of the Tartars, was from the victories of Gingis- (Jinjis-) Chan, whom our Historians call Chinchis, Changius, Cinguys, &c. Gingis, they say, signifies the sound of iron, and they gave him this name because he was a Blacksmith. Can is a title of the greatest honour in their Language, as Emperor in ours. In the year of the Hegira 559, which is of our Saviour 1202, reigned over these eastern Tribes of Scythia, call'd Tatars, one Ʋng-Chan: in whose service was entertain'd (or as some say brought up with him) a young man call'd Tamugin, who became a person of very great prudence, valour, and good fortune, and arrived at so great esteem for his military services, that by the malicious suggestions of those who envied him, Ʋng-Chan conceived a very great jealousie against him, and resolved to apprehend, imprison, and proceed a∣gainst him as there should be reason. The night appointed for this exploit was discover'd to Ta∣mugin, by two of Ʋng-Chans servants. Who pro∣viding against it, left his Tents standing as they were before, wherein were their wives, chil∣dren, &c. but all the men of war he took with him, and placed himself and them in ambush; who rising up at the approach of Ʋng-Chan, slew him and all his followers; and presently seizing upon the Kingdom, caused himself to be called Gingis-Chan. and from the very beginning of his reign, either incited or encouraged (as all Au∣thors agree, and himself always pretended) by some divine, or at least supernatural apparition, he designed wars upon all his neighbours, and the enlargement of the dominion and name of Tatars. He also set up a new Religion (if it was not the same which was begun by Sagomorbar-Chan, who was taken for a great Prophet, of whom we know very little), but wherein it consisted I find not any satisfactory account. He believed a Providence; and set up Mesquitas to comply with Mahometanism; but, as an Arabick Author saith, it was like a branch broken off the great tree of the Musselmans law, and is extremely detested by them. He compelled none to his Law, and gave greater indulgence, then they, to the Christians; and some of his successors (either Manga or Kub∣lai) were actually baptized, with his whole fa∣mily, and many of his chief Officers, who ob∣tained great victories against the Saracens; but afterwards they returned to their former impiety, which is continued by them to this day. The first thing Gingis-Chan did,His Victo∣ries. was subjecting to himself all the neighbouring Scythians, which he easily did, partly by force, partly promise; and subdued to the Tatar Government, all Cathay eastward to the great Ocean, and as far as the Volga or Edil westward. He also extended his do∣minion very far into India and Persia. Yet lived he not many years; but at his death divided his con∣quests amongst his sons; and (after he had shew∣ed them by a bundle of arrows, which as long as bound fast together none of them could break, but the youngest broke them all when severed) exhorting them to unity amongst themselves, and obedience to his eldest son, he gave him the an∣cient kingdom, and of his conquests as far as Bactria or Chowaresme, and made him supreme over all. His successor was Ogtai,His Suc∣cessors. or as we call him Hoc∣cota-Chan, whose life also was short; besides him he had many sons, particularly one called Tuschai, (whom some call Ken, others Cuine) the Father of Batuu or Baydo, of whom more by and by. Hoc∣cota had also Cuina-Chan who succeeded him. The next Emperor to Gina or China-Chan was Mango-Chan, who conquered China. To him succeeded Cobila- (or Kublai) Chan, of whom M. Paulus Venetus, Haytho, and others write largely; he is said to have been baptized, and embraced Christianity by the perswasions of a King of Armenia. The eleventh (or as some say the thirteenth) of this race, not in order of succession to the Chan, but to one of the brothers, was Timur∣langh, whom we commonly call Tamerlan; who
attributed all his victories to his observance of the Religion of Gingis-Chan,Of Tamer∣lan. for which he was by the Mahometan-Doctors declared an Infidel, and by their writers call'd Devil, Plague, Cala∣mity, Traitor, and Aldighall (which we corruptly call Degnal) i.e. Antichrist to the Turks; and in∣deed he persecuted them with very great vio∣lence, and mightily encouraged the Sect of Gin∣gis-Chan. Concerning these,Of Batuu. account must be given in due place; it is necessary for our purpose to speak only of Batuu or Baatu, or Bayto, whom our au∣thors call Batus, son of Hoccota. He enjoyed the country upon the eastern banks of Volga or Edil; and to give a specimen of his disposition, when Ban (either his brother or brothers son) com∣plained, that he saw no reason why Baatu should enjoy the fruitful pastures upon Edil, and him∣self as near akin to Gingis-Chan, should be dri∣ven into the dry and sandy wilderness; Batu sent for him, and tho the words were spoken in his drunkenness (which the Tartars are used to par∣don), he cut off his head. This Batu therefore (his son Sartach also pos∣sesing northwards all betwixt Don and Volga) fell upon the Nations called Comani,His Wars. Alani, and Ga∣zani, living between the Euxin and Caspian Sea, and wholly wasted their country; destroying all, except some few who fled into Hungary, and there got for awhile secure habitations. Afterwards he fell upon the Polowczi, seated upon the Tanais, and all along upon the north of Palus Maeotis. They are commonly said to have been Gothic Na∣tions; but Polotwski are called by the Russes, such as live without houses, in waggons, wandring from place to place, as they can find pasture for their cattel. Whatever they were, they sent Ambassa∣dors to the Russes, their ancient enemies, for assistance against the Tatars; as did also the Ta∣tars, to advise them to be quiet. But the Russes put to death the Tatar messengers, and joined with the Polowczi. Some say, that Cottian their Prince had married his daughter to Miecislaus Duke of Kiow, and that this Miecislaus Romano∣witz, Miecislaus Mscislawitz, with the Militia of Halicks, the Dukes of Czirnovia, Smolensko, and most of the Russes, joined all their forces to the Polowczi, and having march'd twelve days toge∣ther, arrived at the river Kalcza. A. C. 1224, July 17, the Tatars (who were there encamped) perceiving them wearied with so long a march, immediately gave them battel, and made a very great slaughter; many of the Russians were slain and taken, and the rest flying homewards, were murder'd by the Polowczi, whom they came to assist. The Tatars pursuing their victory, abso∣lutely destroyed the Polowczi, and seized upon their country, which is that which we call Tar∣taria Precopensis. About thirteen years after, A.C. 1238, they fell upon Russia, part of which they absolutely wasted, as all the country about Kiow; part of it being full of woods and lakes, and not fit for the Tatars pasturage, they conquer'd, but gave them conditions, whereof we have given before a short account p. 37. thinking it more ad∣vantagious to have tribute and dominion over the country, then to lay it waste. Not long after Batu divided his army; himself with one part fell upon Hungary, the other he gave to one Peta to march into Poland, &c. who the first year de∣stroyed all as far as Sendomiria. The next year he entred again, and forced Boleslaus the Chast Duke of Poland, out of the country; who retired to the Monastery of Willehrad in Moravia. Peta then also burn'd Cracovia, all except St. Andrews Church, which was fortified and well defended against them. Thence they came to Breslaw in Silesia, which they found burnt to their hands by the soldiers and inhabitants, despairing to keep it. Thence they came to Lignitz, where Henry Duke of Silesia had got together a considerable army, besides those brought to him from Poland, Prussia, and many other places; and gave battel to the Tatars, who there obtained a very great victory. Henry, the Grand Master of the Dutch Knights, and many other persons of quality, were slain; and so many in all, as the Tatars, to shew the greatness of the slaughter, filled nine great sacks with their right ears; and the Arabian au∣thors say, they amounted to 270000, which is manifestly false, if spoke of this battel; if of all the war, may have some probability. This battel was fought V. Id. Apr. 1241, at a place thence called Walstad, a mile from Lignitz. The Tatars also were so weakened, that they stirred not out of their camp for fifteen days space, to cure their men, and to deliberate whither they should march next; and they resolved upon Moravia, to be nearer to their General. The King of Bohemia raising what men he could, sent them under the command of a very valiant and expert soldier Jaroslaus a Sternberg, to defend such places as were most considerable. He with much labour and difficulty got into Olmutz, when the scouts of the Tatars appear'd before the Town. Trusting to the strength of his works, he forbore to fight the enemies so long, that they conceiving him a coward, began to despise him, and to keep their own guards more negligently; which Jaroslaus perceiving, after they had recommended their cause to God by fasting and prayer, chusing a dark night, march'd out of a postern, and with great silence fell into the Tatars camp, of whom they slew a great number; Peta was slain by Ja∣roslaus himself; the rest drew off, and marched to Batu, into Hungary. Batu had ravaged for two years together, not only Hungary, but Slavonia, Bosnia, Rascia, Bul∣garia, and the countries on both sides the Danube. Some say, that after this, making an attempt upon Austria, and endeavouring to swim a great river, he was drowned; others, that going against the Greek Emperor he was overthrown; however it was, it is agreed, that his army returned back, and seizing upon all the country between the Bo∣risthenes and Volga, and the Taurica Chersonesus, which before they very much wasted, there setled unto this day, being called Crim-Tartars, from the chief City of the Chersonesus, called Crim; and Precopenses from Precop, which in their language signifies a ditch; such a one being drawn cross the Isthmus, to cut of that Peninsula from the con∣tinent. The Tartars at first were Lords, yet not ab∣solute, for they acknowledged the superiority of the Great Cham, the chief heir of Gingis-Chan, till Lochtan-Chan, one of the descendants from Batu, refused obedience to him, and took upon himself the absolute dominion over all those places, except some few cities in Taurica: which notwithstanding their conquests, remained in the hands of the Genoueses, their inhabitants: till about the year 1574, when Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks, took them. A little before that, they had forsaken their old religion of Gingis-Chan, by the practices of Hedegh, and Sida-hameth-Chan their Emperors, and embraced the Mahometan; yet the common people are not very zealous in it to this day; but make use of their little puppet-idols of felt, &c. and continue many other pagan cu∣stoms of their former religion. Mahomet the Great fearing they should grow too powerful for him, under colour of taking in the City of Caffa, possessed by the Genoueses, made himself Master of the best part of the Chersonesus, and of the
City of Azoph or Azek, a strong place at the mouth of Tanais. Afterwards the Crim-Tartar aided Selimus I. (who married his daughter) with an army of 150000 men against his father; and then the two Nations made a league, that the Tartars should assist the Turk when required with 50000 horse; that they should not make war, except against the Muscovite, without leave of the Turk; that they should yearly pay to the Turk a tribute of three hundred Christians, some furs, butter, and such other things: And the Turk should pay them 5500 ducats; and the Cham should succeed to the Turkish Empire, if the males of the Ottoman line should fail. But this lasted not long, for Amurath III. in the year 1584, quarel∣ling Mahomet the Crim-Tartar, as if he designed to intercept Osman Basha in his return from Per∣sia to Constantinople, authorized Osman to invade him; who taking him and his two sons, strangled them, and set up Islan the brother of Mahomet, under such conditions as the Grand Signior pleased. The Tartars did enjoy also all the coun∣try of Budziak, which lies between the Niester and Boristhenes, as we shall shew hereafter, but the Turk hath seized upon that; so that now their dominion reacheth only between Dnieper or Bo∣risthenes and the Don or Tanais; and of this, that Peninsula called Taurica Chersonesus is the chiefest part. That Peninsula, or Chersonesus, was called Tau∣rica, becaused inhabited by a sort of Scythians called Tauri and Tauro-Scythae. Afterwards the Greeks mingled amongst them, and brought the country into great beauty and fame. But their names and actions belongs to the ancient Geo∣graphy. The Genoueses taking advantage of the great feuds of the Greeks amongst themselves, in the year 1266 (or about the time of the Holy∣war) took Caffa, and planted a considerable in∣terest in the country, the Tartars either permit∣ing them because of the gain they made by their traffick, principally of slaves (which they furnished to a great part of the world, but especially to Egypt, who generally had all their Mamalukes, as long as that government lasted, from this place): or not being skilled in besieging of Towns, especially such as could be perpetually relieved. And indeed it was very convenient for the Ge∣noueses, for having besides this a great plantation at Pera near Constantinople, they thereby enjoyed the whole trade of the Black-Sea, till (as we said) they were ruin'd by the Turks; since which time I cannot find that it hath suffer'd any considera∣ble alterations. We shall therefore describe it (be∣ing by Christians an unfrequented country) out of Mart. Broniovius, who was sent Ambassador twice thither, from Stephanes Battori King of Po∣land; from which such little informations as we meet with since do not considerably differ. This Chersonesus then is about fifty leagues long, and thirty where broadest. The first Town at the entrance upon the east is Przecop, called by the Tartars Or, situate upon the Dyke, in the narrow∣est part of the Isthmus, where it is not above a mile wide, anciently called Eupatoria, Pompeiopo∣lis, besides other names. 'Tis now a small Town of about four hundred fires; it hath a stone Ca∣stle, but not strong, wherein the Cham hath con∣tinually his Beg or Palatine, who commands the guard upon the rivers of Boristhenes and Tanais, as also the Tartars in the plains betwixt; he also examines all strangers, suffering none to pass without the Chams letters. Sachingeri the Great Cham here overthrew the Nagay-Tartars, and raised seventeen forts upon the Dyke, some of them of the skuls and bones of the slain. Coslow, situate near unto the Black Sea, is a Town of traffick, having near two thousand houses, and is in the power of the Cham. Ingermen is now only a Castle, but hath been a great Town, as appears by the ruines, amongst which are many caves cut out of the rock, wells, and old buildings of the Greeks, witnessed by their inscriptions, there very frequent; it is now an inconsiderable place, inhabited by a few Turks. Sari-germen by the Turks, by the Tartars Topetarkan (anciently Cher∣sonesus and Corsuna, the noblest and most ancient City of all the Peninsula) is still compassed with a strong stone-wall, and divers aquaeducts, and other noble buildings entire, but without inha∣bitants; the Turks every day fetch away the marble and stones for other buildings. Volodo∣mir, the Grand Tzar took this Town from Joan∣nes Zimisces, and amongst other rich plunder, carried away two large royal brazen gates to Kiow; from whence Boleslaus II. King of Poland transferred them to Gnesna, where they still re∣main. They say also, that Volodomir was here bap∣tized. Balachey, or Balaclawa (by the Genoueses called Jamboli) or the tower of fishes, the Sea there being very well stored, situate under the mountain Baba. The Genoueses took it without any loss from the Greeks, and made it a very com∣modious, beautiful, and strong haven. The Turks at this day build here their gallyes and ships; tho it be but a poor Town, at most but of an hun∣dred and twenty fires, the inhabitants Turks, Jews, and Greeks. Mangut, or Mancus, was a very mag∣nificent City, tho not by the Sea-shore; but first by the Turks, and afterwards by a great fire, it was so wasted that nothing now remains of it except one high tower, and a strong stone-house, whereinto the Cham thrusts the Russ-Ambassador as often as he hath a mind to quarrel his master. There are some few Turks, Jews, and Greeks that inhabit there, in all about sixty fires. There re∣mains still upon the ruines of the walls of some of the Churches, the pictures of divers of the Greek Emperors, and other famous men. Cer∣cessigermen is a small Turkish Fort, not far from Mancop. The Palaces of the Cham are situated in the middle of the country. Baciasaray (Baccasa∣ray) is a Town of about two thousand houses, wherein is a Meschite, and divers sepulchers of the Chams, very magnificent, as is their Palace, built with great charges by their former Princes; besides that it is seated in a country very proper for hunting and fowling, and is nobly adorned with gardens, orchards, bathes, &c. Almasaray is another house whither he sometimes retires, in a Town of about seventy fires. There are also divers little Castles, where his own brethren, chil∣dren, and their wives are kept. Sortasse is a Town where the Ambassadors of foreign Princes have many times liberty to divert themselves. At Creme, or Crim, anciently Taphros and Taphrae (from whence they are called Crim-Tartars) is his Mint, and a very strong Castle in possession of the Tartars, but the Town is most inhabited by Turks, in all about an hundred houses. Sidagios or Sudacum, was a very noble and strong City, situated in the mountains, taken by the Genoueses from the Greeks, so set one family against ano∣ther, that they would not come to the same Church; the Turks by a long and difficult siege took it from the Genoueses; 'tis famous for the wine growing thereabouts. Caffa, or Theodosia, still the chief City of the Peninsula, hath be∣twixt five and six thousand houses, inhabited most part by Christians, who have about forty-five Churches, Greeks, Armenians, and remainders of the Italians, some Turks, and few Tartars, all un∣der a Turkish Sangiac. Slaves they reckon there about thirty thousand, a Town of great traffick,
about two days sailing from Constantinople; yet is it nothing to what it was under the Genoueses. Kerky is a little Town of the Tartars, of about an hundred families, upon the Strait called anciently Bosphoras Cimmerius, which is here about three leagues broad. This Town is open, for the Grand Signior will not allow the Tartars to have any fortified Town besides Przecop. Over against this is Taman, a Town and Castle upon the continent, in the country called anciently Colchis, now the Circassians, or Petigor-Tartars. Karasu belongs to the Cham, and hath above a thousand houses. Tusla is amongst the Salt-works, and hath about eighty houses. Arabet, or Orbotec, is a double Ca∣stle, near to which the Cham keeps his Stud or breed of horses, which are reckon'd to be about seventy thousand. The country towards the south is mountainous, and consequently well water'd; the rest plain, and good pastures, but wants wa∣ter; for that near at hand is brackish, and their good water is drawn out of very deep wells, of which there is no want, dug by the former inha∣bitants. Thus much of the Chersonesus,The coun∣try of Przecop. without this the Crim-Tartars enjoy all betwixt Boristhenes (Nieper) and Tanais (Don); which from Ossove upon the Don to the Nieper, in a strait line is accounted about four hundred English miles; but the Nie∣per fetching a great compass eastward, in some places it is not so much. This is for the most part plain and even ground, and rich pasturage, without any Town, or constant habitation, or propriety. Only it seems that the Cham by his officers appoints what parts shall be tilled; and in February proclamation is made amongst all the Tartars, that if any have a mind to till any ground, they should get all their matters ready by such a day, when they will go to such a place, commo∣dious for that purpose; and accordingly some do go, and the rest attend upon them, that they be not disturbed. Betwixt this plain and Russia lies waste a great country, (as they say) requiring twenty days to cross it; full of woods and lakes, and sometimes under-water, which is the great∣est security of the rest of that Empire. The government is wholly in the hands of the Cham.The Go∣vernment of the Crim-Tartars. The Cadi's determine lesser causes, but capital and matters of greater importance are judged by the Cham himself, with his Council. He is of easie access, and reasonably just. He al∣ways chuseth a Galga, who is next to him alive, and succeeds after death; this is commonly his son or brother, according to merit. If any one have better pretensions, he flies to the Grand Signior, who judges the cause. His younger sons are Soldans, and are brought up by such as have the custody of their wives, with whom they are educated, till of sufficient strength; and according to their fitness, they are furnished with commands, either in his own country, or are recommended to the neighbouring Tartars, who willingly re∣ceive them. Part also are hostages with the Turks. When the family of Gingis-Chan was numerous and potent, they chused always the Chan, but Sachibgerei and Deuletigerei Chans made away with most of them, and setled the dominion in their own posterity. The Chan hath many Officers and Counsellors. Hamiat are those who take care of the affairs of foreign Princes. Captains also, Coracei, Ʋlans, and the best of the Murses are called to Council. The Ʋlans are those of an ancient family of Chans, but were deprived of it by the Giereys, the name of the present Royal family; but if this be extinct, the Ʋlans have a right to return again to that honour. The most promising of the Tartar youth attend upon the Chams person. Most of the Courtiers and great persons are very rich, with the booties got chiefly from the Christians; are splendidly clothed, keep good houses, and live as well as the noblest Turks. They wear no sort of arms in the Court. They live in houses also, and upon their lands, which they husband by their slaves, and their herds in the country, which are govern'd by other Tartars their reteiners. The Tartars rarely merchandise, or exercise any ma∣nual art; rather chusing to live miserably and poorly, then not idly. The revenues of the Cham, are 1. The Dona∣tives and Presents sent him yearly from all the neighbour-Princes by their own Ambassadors. 2. Tribute of Christians, Jews, Tartars, and in sum, all except the Turks under his dominion. 3. The Turk pays every day to the Cham twenty-five dollars, to the Galga twelve and a half, to the Sultan-hostage two and a half, besides lands. All the great persons also have salaries, but un∣certain. 4. He hath the tenth of all the slaves taken, and for every one besides of better qua∣lity three crowns, and for others each one dollar. 5. Every well pays him an horse. 6. The richer and better sort of Tartars furnish him with pro∣vision, and in case of necessity all the Nation con∣tribute. 7. He hath vast herds and flocks, kept by his factors. 8. He coins copper-money, which is only current in his dominions, and once in four or five years he calls it all in, and coins a new sort. The forces of the Chan are esteemed in all (such as they be) to amount to three hundred thou∣sand horse; foot he hath none, but what he bor∣rows from the Turk, as he doth commonly a few Janizaries for the guard of his person when he goes to war. The ordinary Tartars live miserably. It is by most authors reported, that it is some days after their birth that they first open their eyes. Their mothers or nurses wash them every day in salt∣water, to harden and thicken their skins against cold (which some in Poland use also), and 'tis no more then necessary, for from seven years old, that they leave their Cantares (their walk∣ing habitations) they never sleep in an house, but in the open air, tho frost and snow; nor eat they any thing but what they shoot down with their arrows; and at twelve or fifteen years old they go to wars with their fathers. Their clothing at best is a short shirt, with a pair of course draw∣ers, and a sheeps-skin with the wool upon it over their shoulders; garments very insufficient against cold. Their walking Cabans or houses, are made of reeds, osiers, or the like, woven like baskets, twelve or fifteen foot wide, cover'd either with a course hairy felt, or cloth, incommodious e∣nough in every respect. Their ordinary diet is flesh almost raw (tho dead of sickness, or putri∣fied), without bread or salt, and sauc'd with the sweat and fome of their horses; only garlick they eat in abundance, which they think helps to di∣gest their undress'd meat. A life certainly not de∣sirable, nor to be embraced by any, but such as know no better. Which is the reason that many of them amongst the Muscovites, leave their bar∣barism, and apply themselves to the civility and religion of the Russes. All of them intermarrying into their own Nation, renders them all like to one another; that is, they are of mean stature, yet square and big-limm'd, thick shoulders, short neck, great head, broad face, large forehead, large and black eyes, which they open but half, short nose (which some of them break when they are children), narrow mouth, tann'd co∣lour, black and stiff hair. Each one when he goes to the wars, carries with him two or three
horses at least, a sword, a bow and quiver with about twenty arrows, a knife, tinder-box, an awl to mend his bridle, &c. a dial with a needle, and a striag to bind his prisoners. Their horses also, which they call Baquemates, are long, raw-bon'd, low, and very ugly, their mains and tails long and tufty; yet incompara∣ble for service, usually marching twenty or thirty leagues without drawing bit. But the Cham, Myrza's, and great persons among them, have Turkish, Persian, and Arabian horses (which they buy at very great rates), as also good armour, coats of mail, excellent fire-arms, &c. The chiefest thing for which they are remark∣able, and what is least understood concerning them, is their manner of warring; which is not, as most suppose, by violence and open force, but by cunning and artifice, in this manner: Suppose they would invade Poland; if the Cham go in person, he marcheth seldom fewer then eighty-thousand strong; if a Mirza com∣mand, seldom more than fifty thousand. And they always chuse the winter, when the rivers are frozen; and the rather in a snow, the hard slippery ways beating their horses feet, which are not shod, except some few, which have pieces of oxes hoofs sowed to them. They make ve∣ry short marches (ten or twelve miles a day), and they contrive that their return may be be∣fore the rivers be thawed, which they seldom are till March. They march as much as is pos∣sible thro valleys, low and unfrequented places, to conceal themselves from the scouts of the Cossacks; nor do they at nights make any fires; they continually send out scouts to catch some of the inhabitants, and get notice of the ene∣my. They march commonly an hundred (i.e. three hundred horses, each man having three horses) in front, which takes up near a thou∣sand paces, and in file, when most close, they reach three large leagues; but when they march loosely, ten leagues; an army of eighty thou∣sand having above two hundred thousand horses. They make an halt every hour at a whistle, and alight, that themselves and horses may urine. They divide their army into three tierces; two whereof march in a body, the other third is a∣gain divided into two, which make the two wings. The body marcheth slowly, but with∣out giving any more rest then an hour at a time, till they arrive at the utmost whither they design to go; nor do they much harm till they come thither. But when they return, which is by another way, the wings divide themselves into small troops, and ravage every way ten or twelve leagues, and then pillage, burn and kill all that resist; those that yeild they bind and carry away prisoners; all their cattel also they carry away, only the hogs they gather into an house, and set fire into the four corners, and so burn them as unclean creatures. As soon as these wings have ravaged so far, they return to the body, which is easily found by their track, and as many more are sent out in like manner; and after their return as many more. So that they all plunder, and the body never diminish∣eth; nor ever marcheth more then a foot-pace, in very good order, to be always ready to de∣fend themselves, (for they fight not willingly if the enemy should charge them). To prevent their mischief, the inhabitants have always either their own dwellings fortified, or have a Town, or the Landlords Mannor-house, or a thick wood, to which they retire in such hazards. The Cos∣sacks, where they live, fill their grounds full of trenches and hedges, to hinder their march. They also keep very diligent watches, both be∣yond and upon the river, that they may have timely notice of their invasion. Then, if they cannot overtake them, they repair to the known passages (of which there are not many) thro the Nieper, and there (as well as they can) am∣bush themselves, to surprize them at their re∣turn; as they do many times, and recover much of the prey. After they are return'd into a safe place of their own deserts; they put themselves in order, and divide the prey. And first, con∣sideration is had of them who have lost their horses in the service, as also of the kinred of them who are slain; next the Cham, after him the Officers take their share; the rest is divided amongst the soldiers. The richest of their prey, are the persons they take; and of all them the most esteem'd are the Polish women, especially virgins, who are sold at very great rates, even into Persia and India, to be put into their Se∣raglio's. But the Tartars of Budziack have another man∣eer of stealing.The Tar∣tars of Budziack. They are less civil, but more va∣liant then other Tartars. The country betwixt Danubius and Boristhenes, was sometimes under the Crim-Tartar; till the Turk planted Towns upon the convenient places of the Sea-coast, and along the rivers. Yet is the country still possessed by Tartars, yet not subjects either to the Turk or Crim; but (as the Cossacks amongst the Christi∣ans) a Nation of theeves, and banditi, libertines; that in their lives acknowledg no superior, either God or man. These many times invade their neighbours in summer, but with lesser numbers (twenty thousand at most), lest they should be dis∣covered; because the Cosacks are continually up∣on the guard, even in these places; they march to their rendezvous (which they appoint in some valley, or obscure places upon the confines) in very small parties, lest they should be descried by treading down the grass. They observe the the same manner in the enemies country, ap∣pointing certain places for their meetings, and separating again presently. So that it is very difficult to meet with a track, but if the Cosacks do happen upon such a one as will lead them to the place of rendezvous, yet except they surprize them eating, or sleeping (which is very difficult, because they keep such diligent sentinels), they know not afterwards which track to follow to overtake them again. The Tartars first divide into four bodies, which march east, west, north, and south. After they have gone a little way, each troop subdivides again into three, and af∣ter that each troop into three again; so that at length they have not above ten or twelve toge∣ther; and tho some take further compass then others, yet all know the time and place of meet∣ing, which according to the occasion is after three, four, or more days. If they chance to be rencountred with the enemy, except they have very great advantage, they fight him not, but divide after their manner, and run away full∣speed, yet shooting still if pursued; nor are the horses of Poland, or any other, able to over∣take them. After they have thus dispersed for some leagues, they join again, and follow their design. All Authors take notice also of a great advantage they have over other Nations, that they can see better and farther, insomuch that a Tartar will discern a single Russ further then a Russ can a troop of Tartars; which they attri∣bute partly to their natural constitutions, that they have little hollow eyes; partly to their cu∣stom, that they use continually to half-close their eye-lids. When they would swim a river, each gets him a bundle of reeds, sedges, bulrushes, or the like, about three foot long, upon which
they tye three or four sticks across, and two or three long-ways; upon these they make fast their saddle, clothes, arms, and such baggage as they have; the bundle they make fast to their horses tail; so that from a convenient low bank they go into the river, holding in one hand the bridle of their horse, with the other swimming themselves. Sometimes the Cosacks seek them in their own country, and then they march always in their Tabor, that is, in the mid∣dle of their chariots, and send out sentinels on every side at a good distance. If they first espy the Tartars, they leave their Tabor and fall upon them, and commonly have the advantage; but if the Tartars first see the Cosacks, they assault them in their Tabor, but at a distance with their arrows, which tho they reach further then the Cosacks guns, yet is their Tabor so good a de∣fence, that fifty Cosacks will not fly from five hundred Tartars. decorative device
map of the Ukraine Typus Generalis UKRAINAE sive PALATINATUUM PODO∣LIAE, KIOVIENSIS et Braczlaviensis terras nova declinatione exhibens. Vrbs Antiqum Christianm Oppidum Turcae. Pagus. Ruinae. Fons Flia Signum quo Flia decurrit. Pagi Tartarum Homaijbiorum G. Mons Mlendi Transitus.
OF THE BORISTHENES, AND THE Cosacks of Ukrain. WE have spoken before in general of the Bo∣risthenes, as far as it continues in the Grand Tzars domi∣nions; wherein is nothing observable, but what Cities and Towns are upon it; which appear suffi∣ciently by the Map. But now we come to speak of the remainder, which is betwixt the domini∣ons of Poland and the Tartars; which affordeth us greater variety of matter. We have also treat∣ed in general of the Cosacks, and of those who live upon the Tanais, and are under the Muscovite; but we now come to the great body of them, who first assumed that name, and inhabit upon or near the Boristhenes, and are or were lately under the Polanders. We begin with Kiow, the place of the original of these valiant people the Cosacks. Kiow, Kisovia, of Kijovia, was an ancient, beauti∣ful, and strong City, even before it was the Me∣tropolis of the Russes. Mieceslaus their Duke ha∣ving married the daughter of the Prince of the Polowtzi, and assisting them, was himself slain in the battel, and the Town afterwards quite ruin'd, which was the reason why Volodomir (deeply en∣gaged in that war, but escaping) made Volodo∣mir the seat of the Russ-Empire. Kiow was situated upon an hill, near the Nieper, where still re∣main the ruines of many Arcades, high walls, Churches, and Sepultures of divers Kings (an∣cienter then those of the Russ-Princes) with Greek inscriptions. There remain in reasonable good condition two Churches, S. Sophia, (whose walls are lined with excellent Mosaick work, and the vault is earthen pots cemented, and filled with good plaister): And S. Michael, most conspicuous for its guilded roof. Betwixt this and the Nie∣per, is New Kiow, along the bank of the river about three English miles, containing not above six thousand inhabitants, and encompassed with a silly trench of twenty-five foot broad. The Roman Communion hath four Churches, the Greek ten, which they call Cerkuils, and a kind of University, called Bracha Cerkuils. It hath a reasonable trading for corn, furs, wax, honey, tallow, and salt-fish. They have four jurisdicti∣ons, that of the Bishop, of the Palatine or Sta∣rost, of the Wovit, and of the Consuls of the City. Half a league below Kiow, is a large Village called Piecharre, where is a noble Monastery, the habitation of the Metropolitan or Patriarch. And under the mountain, close by it, are divers grots, dug like mines, wherein are conserved many bo∣dies, buried very many years ago; amongst others there are (saith Beauplan) three heads in dishes, which every day distill an oyl soveraign for several diseases; the bodies are neither so black nor hard as Mummies; the place is a sandy-stone, but very dry; it seems to be of the same nature of that called Roma subterranea. Below Piecharre is Stayky,Stayky. an ancient Town on the top of a mountain, as all those ancient Towns are, even in Italy, built so for strength and security. There is also a Ferry to pass men over the river. After that is Richow, where is an easie passage over the river. Lower is Tretemirof, a Monastery amongst inaccessible rocks. Here the Cosacks conserved the choicest of their wealth. A league below that is Pereaslaw, a strong Town of six thousand families. Here the Cosacks have a Regiment; as they have another and a Ferry at Kaniow, a little lower, but on the east bank of the Nieper. On the same side is Cirkacse, the center of all their retreats, burnt by the Polanders ann. 1637. On the same side is Krilow; and below that Kremierczow, the lowest Town upon the river, all below it being desart. A league from thence the river Pseczoll, and a little lower on Russia side, Omelnik fall into the Nieper; as also on the Poland bank Worsko and Orel, two rivers very full of fish. Here are divers dwarf-Cherry and Almond-trees; which one of our country-men (I doubt mistake∣ingly) hath placed far on the north of Volga. Con∣tinuing down the river are many Isles, most of them uninhabited, because overflowed in the spring, but much frequented by fishers. Divers ri∣vers also encrease the Niester at Romanow, but chiefly Samar, which supplies not only much fish, but other commodities, as honey, wax, venison, and especially timber. The Cosacks call it the holy river, and in the spring here are said to be caught sturgeons and herrings. A little below that the Polonians built a fort in the year 1635 at Kudac, which is the first of the Porohi. Poroui, or Porohi, called anciently Catadupae,Porouhi. in the Russ-language signifies a rock of stone; and of these there are thirteen chains, or as it were causeys, that cross the Boristhenes, and ren∣der the navigation from the Ʋkrain to the Black Sea impossible; so that tho the Ʋkrain be a very fruitful country in corn, and all other commo∣dity; yet the inhabitants, not being able to vend them, suffer much of it to lye unhusbanded, or at least not so well as it might be. Of these rocks, some are under, some above water ten foot, as big as houses, and very near to one another, so that stopping the course of the ri∣ver, they make very great falls, some to fif∣teen foot, when the water is low; for in the spring, when the river is swelled with the melted snow, they are all (except the seventh, called Nienashtes, which only there hindreth naviga∣tion) covered with water. Betwixt Budelou and Tawolzany (which are the tenth and eleventh) the Tartars do often swim the river, the banks being shallow. A little below the lowest Porouhi, is an Island they call Kaczawanicze (or boil-millet) because here they make good cheer, when they have passed the Porouhi. Below that is a river, a Promontory, and the best passage for the Tartars (the river not being above an hundred and fifty paces broad), called Kuczkosow. Below that is the Isle Tomahowka, whither the Cosacks often re∣sort and rendezvous. But their chiefest retreat is below the river Czertomelik, upon an Island
where are some old ruines, but which is com∣passed about with a vast number of small Islands, some dry, some overflowed in the spring, some marshes, but all cover'd with canes as big as pikes; which hide the passages between the Islands, and render it all a great labyrinth, known only to the Cosacks, who call it Scarbniza Woyskowa, or the treasure of the army. Here they lay up all their ordnance, their money, and whatever will not spoil by the water. The Turks have lost many gallies so engaged amongst these Isles that they could neither go backward nor for∣ward, and were seized by the Cosacks. Here also they make their Cholna, of which more by and by. From these Porouhi the Cosacks take their name of Zaporouski; which are the great body, in imi∣tation whereof the Donski are lately set up. None can be a Zaporouski Cosack, who hath not passed in his little boat all the Porouhi's, i.e. who hath not made a course or voyage upon the Black Sea; no more then he can be a Knight of Malta that hath not made a Caravane. We shall first shew the original and actions of the Cosacks, and afterwards finish what concerns the Boristhe∣nes, and the countries adjacent. The Cosacks,Of the Cosacks. so called (saith a late author) from Cosa, which in the Slavonian language sig∣nifies a sythe, their ordinary weapon; began in the time of Sigismund I. King of Poland, and were certain volontiers upon the frontiers of Russia, Volhinia, and Podolia, that troop'd toge∣gether, partly to defend themselves from the Tartars, which they did by fighting them at the passages over the Nieper, as they returned with their prey; partly to rob upon the Black Sea, where they getting very rich booty, drew more into their association. At first they were about six thousand, under Eustachius Daskovicius their Ge∣neral. But their numbers quickly encreased, their neighbours seeing the rich booties got by their pyracies, part whereof they laid in their Skarbniza Woskowa, the rest they brought home to their own houses; agreeing upon a time of rendezvousing the next spring upon the Isles and Rocks of Nieper, whence they again return to their pyracy. Stephen Batory King of Poland considering the service which might be made of these thieves in defending the frontiers of his country from the inrodes of the Tartars,Their Establish∣ment. (to which they were too much exposed), owned them, and formed them into an orderly Militia, giving them the Town and territory of Trethimirow, about eighty miles in length, in the Palatinate of Kiow, upon the Boristhe∣nes; appointing them a General, to whom he gave power to chuse his under-officers, giving them many priviledges, besides some pay; he join∣ed to them also two thousand horse; to the maintainance of whom he assigned the fourth part of his demesne, whence they were called Quartani. These forces had such effect against the Tartars, that the country beyond Breclaw, Bar, and Kiow began to be peopled, Towns and For∣tresses to be builded, and colonies brought from the neighbouring places. But as their establish∣ment and union was very proper to make head against the Tartars, so in short time it proved of great danger to Poland it self; for the Cosacks knowing their own strength, and of what im∣portance they were, began to set up for them∣selves; they would not obey the orders of their superiors, nor acknowledg the power of the Po∣lonians over them. Their first rebellion was in the year 1587, under John Podkowa their Gene∣ral, who was foiled, taken, and his head struck off. In the year 1596, Sigismund III. upon the complaints and threats of the Grand Seignior, forbad them to pillage any more upon the Black Sea; from which they indeed for awhile abstained, but it was that they might fall upon Russia and Lithvania, under the conduct of Na∣levaiko their General. The Polanders, to secure their country, were forced to raise an army a∣gainst them, commanded by Zolkiewski; whom the Cosacks fought at Bialacerkiew and worsted; but he returning, and forcing them into places of disadvantage, compelled them to give up their General, who in like manner lost his head. In the year 1637, certain Polish Noblemen ha∣ving obtained the lands upon these frontiers, in the places appointed for the quarters of the Co∣sacks, began to force these their new subjects to the same services as in other parts of the King∣dom; which are, to work three days of the week, man and horse, for their Lord; to pay also, ac∣cording to their Farms, so much corn, poultry, fowl, &c. at Easter, Whitsontide, and Christmas; to cart home his Lords wood; besides other du∣ties, as paying so much money, the tenth of their cattel, honey, fruits, and every third year the third oxe; and these ordinarily, besides what the Lord pleaseth to impose upon them; for indeed the Lords are absolute, nor are they punished if they kill their paysants, who are little better then their slaves. These Noblemen also applied themselves to the King and Senators; shewing them, that the Cosacks only could frustrate their plantati∣ons; (for the paysants, when they found them∣selves to be oppress'd, listed themselves amongst the Cosacks), that they were a thievish, libertine sort of people, and hinder'd both by example and protection the obedience of their Farmers. It was therefore resolved, to build a Fort at Ku∣dac, a place near their Porouhi, and therefore very convenient to bridle the Cosacks; who well un∣derstanding to what this tended, first cut in pieces two hundred men that were set to guard the building of it; afterwards, when it was finished, resolving to take it, they fell into jealousie of their General Sawakonowicz, and having murder'd him, chused one Paulucus, a man of little con∣duct and experience; and before they were got into their Tabor, being met by the General Po∣toski, they were routed at Korsun, and forced to deliver up their General and four more of their chief Officers, who were put to death at Warsaw; notwithstanding that the General had promised them their lives. Presently followed the loss of their priviledges, and their Town Trethymirow, and the suppression of their Militia, which was new modelled into a more obedient form. This more irritated the Cosacks, who again tried their fortune with Potoski, but were worsted; and then fortified themselves upon the river Starcza, be∣yond Boristhenes. After this, the Polonians, having lost so many in trying to suppress them, were forced to compound, and promise that their Mili∣tia (of six thousand) should be re-established un∣der a General appointed by the King. But these articles were not observed; for the Cosacks (as they returned every man to his house) were killed or plunder'd by the Polish soldiers; and another Militia set up, excluding the ancient and true Cosacks. But the Tartars a little after ruining a great part of the Ʋkrain, shewed the necessity of the former establishment. For Ʋladislaus IV. pretend∣ing to make war upon the Tartars, was very careful to set them up again, giving them for their General Bogdan (or Theodore) Chmielniski, son of a Polish Gentleman, enrolled young into the Mi∣litia of the Cosacks, and by the degrees of Captain, Commissary, &c. brought to be General. This man was the spark that kindled that terrible war which endangered all Poland. Chmielniski in the
year 1647, having received some injuries from a Po∣lish Officer, whereof he could get no redress, be∣gan to complain to his Cosacks, who unanimously resolved to stand by him, as did also a vast num∣ber of the Rusticks, oppressed by their Landlords, who had farm'd out much of their lands to the Jews, who had also monopolized all the advan∣tages of the country, as brewing of Beer, distilling Aqua-vitae, nay even the keys of the Church∣doors, insomuch that a native could not be mar∣ried, or Christen a child, without paying so much to a Jew; which so irritated the Rusticks, that they came in to Chmielniski, and made him an army of two hundred thousand. The King, who pretended to fight the Tartars, and endeavour the conquest of Crim, underhand favoured them; but the Commonwealth growing jealous, as if he intended to make himself absolute, because he had got together a considerable army of fo∣reigners, caused him to disband that army, and disown the Cosacks. And sent against them an army, part of which turned to the Cosacks, the rest was wholly destroyed. Upon which, divers overtures of peace unsuccessfully proposed, Chmi∣elniski called in the Crim-Tartar with an hundred thousand horse, and march'd into Poland; but were there so valiantly resisted by the Polanders both at Zbaras and Zborow (where the new King John Casimire was in person with an army) that the Tartar weary of the war, was very willing to hearken to a peace, as Chmielniski also pretended, and accepted of moderate propositions; this was in the year 1649. But Chmielniski fearing that the Poles would not faithfully observe that treaty, began more and more to fortifie himself by leaguing with the Grand Seignior, and forcing the Prince of Moldavia to a conjunction and al∣liance with him. And at a Diet proposing such terms as intimated, that he intended to make himself an absolute Prince under the patronage of the Turks, by the Poles a new war was gene∣rally agreed upon; which broke out very fiercely in the year 1651, when was fought a very cruel and decisive battel, wherein the Cosacks and Tar∣tars were overthrown; yet not so but that Chmi∣elniski found means to raise another army, and to make peace upon articles to him not very dis∣advantageous. What became of him and his Cosacks since that, we have little account, only that part of them have submitted themselves to the Musco∣vite; part also, under Dorosensko their General, called in the Turks and Tartars against the Polan∣ders; and that by the agreement in the year 1677 betwixt the Grand Seignior and the King of Po∣land, Ʋkrain and the Cosacks were to be under the Turk. Thus much of their Militia by Land, 'tis fit to give some small account of their exploits by Sea. Having assembled (commonly about six thousand) upon the Islands of Skarbniza Was∣kowa, the first thing they do is to chuse their Ge∣neral for that expedition; and to make their Boats which they call Colna, which are about sixty foot long, twelve deep, and as many wide; built very slight, pinning one plank upon the edge of the lower, and so widening as it heightens; they have at each end a stern, and about twelve or fifteen oars of a side; they have no deck, but (that it may not sink, tho full of water) they encompass it round about with a rowl of reeds as big as a barrel, tyed together and to their Boat with ropes. They have a sorry mast and sail, but seldom use them, except in fair weather. Their provision is a tun of biscuit, which they take out of the bung as they use it; a barrel of boil'd millet, and another of paste made with water, which they eat with their millet, and serves them instead of beverage. Every Boat carries about sixty persons, every man having two guns, with powder and ball necessary, and in each Boat five or six falconets. They wait for a dark night (about the beginning of June, so that they may return about the first of August) that they may pass undiscover'd by the Turks gal∣leys, which ly at Oczacow to intercept them. With these Boats they course over all the Black Sea, and the coasts upon it, even to the very suburbs of Constantinople, pillaging and spoiling where∣ever they come. If they spy a galley, they keep at a distance till night, and observing well the course of the vessel, when it is dark they imme∣diately row up to it, and all together board it, and commonly carry it; they take out all the money, cannon, and merchandise that they please, and sink it, not having the skill or opportunity to use it. If a galley spy them in the day-time, they avoid fighting by rowing swifter then they, or retiring to shallows, or amongst reeds, where the galleys cannot follow them. As long as they used this trade, they abstained from using violence against their Lords, living upon what they got from the Turks; till the Grand Seignior threatned Sigismund to make war upon him, except he redress'd the robberies and pyra∣cies of the Cosacks; and then, wanting subsistence, they turned their arms against their own coun∣try. The permitting them to chuse their Gene∣ral and Officers, was taking the bridle out of their mouths; for he, having no power but precarious, and being many times displaced or murder'd without any reason, is forced to comply with all their violences. He is chose either by cla∣mor, or throwing their caps at him. He hath four Counsellors (whom they call Assaul), a Lieu∣tenant, General of the Ordonance, and all the same Officers that other Christian armies have. They are arm'd with guns, which they manage very dextrously; besides, they have many sythes set long-ways upon poles, with which they fight both fiercely and skilfully. Being all of them Far∣mers, they understand all trades necessary for humane life, and are very capable to learn or perform any employment. But their greatest ex∣cellency is in preparing Salt-peter, and making Gun-powder, which they do in great perfecti∣on. Their Religion is the very same with the Russ;Religion. (they also call themselves Russes, their country being nam'd sometimes Black, sometimes Red Russia), and delight to imitate them in manner of living. They have their Metropolitan of Kiow, who is consecrated by the Patriarch of Costan∣tinople, and is subject to him immediately. Their chief observances consist in fasts and holidays. But the Nobility (of which there are some few amongst them) imitate the Polanders, and are most of them Roman-Catholicks. Their manners are like those of soldiers;Manners. not careful of what's to come, spending freely what they have at present amongst their companions, and permitting the future to shift for it self; very inconstant, mutinous, and following their present advantage rather then their faith or promise. Potent drinkers, yet having by reason of their labour and hardship so great health, that Phy∣sitians are not esteem'd amongst them. The chiefest thing wherein the inhabitants differ from the Polonians, is their marriages;Marri∣ages. That the maids in this country frequently woo the men; for if a virgin have an affection to a young man, she is not asham'd to go to the house where he lives with his parents; declaring her affection to him, and promising all love and obedience
if he pleaseth to accept of her in marriage. If she be rejected by the young man, as being too young, not disposed to marry, or the like; she tells them, that she is resolved never to part out of the house till he consent; and there she takes up her quarters. To force her out of the house would be to provoke all her kinred; nor would the Church suffer them to use any violence unto her without inflicting heavy penances, and noting the house of infamy; so that after two or three weeks, the parents, or the young man himself, moved with the constancy of the woman, accom∣modate matters as well as they can, and make up a marriage. Thus much for the Cosacks;Of the Ʋkrain. let us now return to the place of their habitation, the Ʋkrain. The word signifies a frontier-place; which lying be∣yond Volhinia and Podolia, containeth part of the Palatinates of Chiow and Braclaw, between 48 and 51 deg. of Latitude. A country water'd with so many rivers, that it must needs be fruitful both for corn, pasturage, as also for fish, honey, tim∣ber, &c. Being a frontier, all the Towns and ha∣bitations are fortified either with a ditch, or have some thick wood, where they make recesses with their goods in time of an invasion by the Tar∣tars. The inhabitants glory much to be called Cosacks; and indeed many of them in these late insurrections, by the tyranny of their Landlords have been compelled to join with, and take arms amongst them. It is terminated on the East with the great river Nieper or Boristhenes, of the great∣est part whereof (so much as concern'd the Co∣sacks) we have already given an account. Below Kaczawanicze is Kuczkosow, where is the best passage of the Tartars, the river not being more then an hundred and fifty paces broad, the banks easie, and the country all about plain, so that they fear not the ambushes of the Cosacks. Below that is the cape of Chortizca, an Island very proper to inhabit, and easily fortified against the Tartars. Next to that is Wielsky Ostro, and below that Tomahowka, an Island easily fortified, which Chmielniski chose for a retreat, and where the Cosacks first rendezvous'd when they began their insurrection in the year 1648. Kair and Wieleski∣woda, Nosokowka, are three Islands very commo∣dious for the Tartars passage into the Ʋkrain; the stream next Tartary they call Kosmaka, and there the Cosacks disguise themselves when they go into the Black Sea, for fear of the guard which is always kept by the Turks in the ancient ruines, which they call Aslan-Korodick. Tawan is the greatest and easiest passage of the Tartars, the river not being above five hundred paces broad, being all in one channel. The last pass, and at the mouth of the Nieper is Oczacow, where the river is three miles broad; yet both the Tartars and others pass it frequently in this manner; they furnish themselves with flat-bottom'd boats, at the stern whereof they fasten across poles of a good length, upon which they tye the heads of their horses, as many on the one side as the other, to balance them; they put their baggage in the boat, and row it over, and with it the horses. The Turks pass'd over in this manner forty thousand horse, when the Grand Seignior sent to besiege Azak or Azow, at the mouth of Don in the year 1643, which the Donski Cosacks had taken from him the year before. Oucze Sau∣ram or Nowe Koniecpolsky is the lowest habitation the Polacks have towards Oczacow, which was be∣gun to be built in the year 1634. Oczacow call'd by the Turks Dziancrimenda, is the place where the Turkish galleys lye, to keep the entrance into the Black Sea; there is no port, but good an∣chorage, the Castle is well fortified, the Town not so well, there are in it about two thousand inhabitants. Below that is a platform with good ordnance, to guard the mouth of the river. About three miles below Oczacow is an haven called Be∣rezan, upon a river called Anczakrick; it is suffi∣ciently deep for galleys. Southward of that are two Lakes Jesero Teligol and Kuialik, both of them so abundant in fish, that the water (ha∣ving no exit) stinks of them, yet they come above an hundred and fifty miles to fish there. Bielogrod is about three miles from the Sea, upon the river Niester, anciently called Tyras, by the Turks Kierman. This Town is under the Turk; as is also Killa, well fortified with a counterscarp; the Castle is above the Town upon the Danow; opposite to it, on the other bank of the Danow, is Kiha, where are seen divers ancient ruines. Betwixt Bielogrod and Killa are the plains of Bud∣ziack, where the rebel or banditi Tartars refuge themselves, who acknowledg no superior, either Turk or Cham; they are always watching upon the confines of Poland, to catch what Christians they can, and sell them to the Turks; of these we have spoken before. There are also many Turkish villages along the south-bank of the Niester; but all the country betwixt that and the Danow, as also betwixt that and the Nieper, are desarts, and are inhabitated by those Tartars who there pasture their flocks, of whom we have spo∣ken already. Such also was the Ʋkrain till of late, that the industry of the late Kings of Poland, and the valour of the Cosacks has render'd it as fruitful as it was before desart. We may judg of it by what Monsieur Beauplan saith, that in seventeen years that he lived in that country, him∣self laid the foundations of above fifty colonies, which in a few year sprouted into above a thou∣sand villages. But being so lately planted, the Reader cannot expect we should have much to inform him. Yet it is not amiss to give some account of animals which are almost proper to this country. They have a beast which they call Bobac,Anim. not much unlike a Guiny-pig; they make holes in the earth, whereinto they enter in October, and come not abroad till April; within they have many little apartments, disposing severally their provi∣sion, their dead, their lodging, &c. eight or nine families live together as in a City; each having his particular habitation. They are easily tamed, and are very gamesome in an house. When they go to make their provision, they set a sentinel, who as soon as he spies any one, gives a signal by making a noise, and they all haste to their caves; many more things are spoken of these little creatures, as that they have slaves and punish∣ments, &c. Sounaky, a kind of goat, is desired for his beau∣tiful sattin-like fur, and white, shining, smooth, delicate horns. He hath no bone in his nose, and cannot feed except he go backward. Thy have many wild horses, but of no value, only for their flesh, which they sell in the mar∣kets, and think it better then Beef or Veal. When these horses come to be old, their hoofs so straiten their feet (being never pared) that they can hardly go; as if that beast was so made for mans use, that without his care he was unprofitable.
map of Poland NOVISSIMA POLONIAE REGNI Descriptio. blazon or coat of arms Nobiliss: & tam dignitate ueris quan Meritis ac Patriam Honoratiis Viro▪ D.no NICOLAO PAHL▪ in celeberrimo Maris Balthici emporio. Vrbe GEDANENSI▪ Prae¦consuli & vicepraesidi▪ bonarum artium Patrono ac fautori obser¦vantiae ergò D. D. D.  IOANNES IANSSONIVS.
POLAND. POLONIA, or Poland, call'd by the Natives Polska, takes its name, as some conjecture, from Pole, which in the Slavonian language (here commonly spo∣ken) signifies a plain and champain Country, such as this Kingdom for the most part consists of. Others suppose, that the inhabitants, from their first Captain Lechus or Lachus, being called Po-lachi, that is, the posterity of Lachus; and by corruption Polani and Poloni, imparted their name to their country. And in favour of this opinion it may be urged, that they call themselves Polacci, the Italians Polacchi; the Russians, Greeks, and Tartars call them Lachi, and Lechitae; the Hungarians Len∣gel, probably for Lechel, the same with Po-lachi. But Hartknoch finding the Bulanes placed by Pto∣lomy among the ancient inhabitants of Sarmatia, and observing the Poloni to be call'd Bolani and Bolanii by the German writers, thinks he hath made the fairest discovery of the original of the word. Nevertheless Cromerus affirms, that the pre∣sent name either of the country or people, hath not been in use above nine hundred years. Cer∣tainly in the time of Alfred King of England, about the year 880, this Country was called Weonod∣land, and before that by the Romans generally Sarmatia, as being the best known part of that great Country. Only that branch of Poland which lies on the west-side of the Weissel, belonged to old Germany, and (as Ptolomy acquaints us) was inhabited by the Aelvaeones, the Luti, Omanni, Longi, Diduni, and Luti Buri, with other German Colonies. By some writers the same is assigned to Vandalia (and the Vistula called Vandalus) ha∣ving been for a time in the possession of the Van∣dals. The people of Poland are the undoubted off∣spring of the Slavi, Slavini, or Slavonians, seated in Justinians time, as Jornandes relates, on the north-side of the Carpathian mountains, from the fountain of the Weisel to the Niester, and thence ex∣tending themselves westward to the Danube, and eastward to the Euxin Sea; from which parts they then made innundations into the Roman Empire. In their first expeditions they were joined with the Antae and Vinidae or Venedi; or rather, in the opinion of the foresaid Author, were but the same Nation differently called. The Venedi we find mentioned by Ptolomy, as a great people long before, seated in Sarmatia, upon the coast of the Sinus Venedicus (now Baltick Sea), which from them probably took its name, as did like∣wise the Venedic mountains, scituate in their ter∣ritories. And Hartknoch supposes the Bulanes, Gy∣thones, Phinni, &c. placed also by Ptolomy over a∣gainst these Venedi, in the inland countries of Po∣land, to be of their colonies. Perhaps this people, after they had made themselves considerable by their conquests, took the name of Slavi from Sla∣va, in their language signifying fame or glory; which their descendents (saith Cromerus) still retain in their compounded names, as Stani-slauus, Wence∣slauus, &c. tho now writ commonly Stanislaus, Wenceslaus. Some writers would have the Ve∣nedi to be originally a German Nation, yet they are by Cromerus and others sufficiently proved to be of the old Sarmatae or Sauromatae, which were of Scythian extraction, and probably brought forth in the neighbourhood of the Lake Maeotis, the fruitful womb of so many puissant Nations. The name of Poland belongs properly to two Provinces alone,Situation. the Greater and the Lesser Po∣land; from which, as the principal parts, the whole Kingdom hath taken its denomination. It lies, saith Starovolscius, between the 38th and 54th degrees of Longitude, counting from the Marquisate of Brandenburgh to the Nieper or Bo∣risthenes, which amounts to 250 Polish leagues, every league containing about four English miles; but the Podolian and Russian are somewhat lon∣ger. The highest elevation of the Pole in the most northern parts of Livonia subject to this Crown, is about 58 deg. The lowest in the Pa∣latinate of Poccuce in Red Russia, 48 deg. So that the whole Country being situated between the seventh and thirteenth Climats, hath to its long∣est day from 16 to near 18 hours. This Kingdom is bounded on the North by the Baltick Sea, and the Swedish Livonia.Bounds. On the East by the Muscovian Russia, and the Desarts of Tartary. On the South by Moldavia, Transilva∣nia, and Hungary, from which the Niester and the high and woody Carpathian mountains di∣vide it. On the West by Silesia, the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, and the further Pomerane. Poland is an even champain country. Tho the Lesser Poland, the nearer it approaches to the confines of Hungary, the more hilly and woody it is; but the farther it lies from thence, the more open and level. In the very middle also of the Kingdom, the Palatinate of Sandomir is moun∣tainous and rocky. Formerly the country was all overgrown with woods, but by the care of Si∣gismund the elder, and Sigismund Augustus his son, and the advantage of the long peace they both enjoyed, husbandry was cherished, and the Pro∣vinces improved in tillage and pasturage; so that it is now accounted the Egypt of Europe, as ha∣ving supplied the wants of most parts thereof with corn; whilst the Vistula (being navigable) serves to conveigh all the commodities of the country to Dantzick. Yet this good husbandry doth not hinder but that it is well stored with Trees, as Oaks, Beech, Fir, &c. not only profita∣ble for the common advantages of Woods, but also for the vast quantities of Honey and Wax which they yearly afford; the hollow trees sup∣plying hives, and the leaves and wild flowers nou∣rishment to innumerable swarms of Bees. The air is cold, even to that extremity,Air. that trees are oftentimes parch'd to the very roots, and water pour'd down freezes ere it fall to the ground. The Lakes and Rivers are often frozen five or six months together, and are passable by Coaches and Carts laden, at the end of March. This vehement sharpness of the air we may ra∣tionally impute to the largeness of the conti∣nent, and the opacousness of the over-spreading woods. Yet notwithstanding, Orchards and Gar∣dens are very frequent, and plentifully stored with Fruits and Flowers, as excellent in their kinds, as in any other part of Europe. This country being for the most part plain,Mines. abounds not in Minerals; yet some Mines there are, as of Lead and Iron in divers places; of
Quicksilver at Tustan in red Russia; of Vitriol near Biecz in Cracovia. But the most considerable of all are the Salt-Mines at Bochnia and Velisca, in the Lesser Poland, which are the great enrichment not only of the country, but of the Kings Exchequer also. They descend into the Mine with long Ropes (as we into our Coal-pits), and there dig out great masses of Salt in streets, leaving so much interstitium as is sufficient to sustain the earth. 'Tis generally of a blewish colour, yet some is white and transparent like crystal; when it is newly got it hath a bitterish taste, but being exposed to the air becomes sweeter, as also more heavy and brittle. In these Mines are small foun∣tains of salt water, which boil'd with pieces of the Rock, yeild great quantities of excellent Salt. They have also some veins of Sal Gemmae, and of another mineral resembling hard Pitch, call'd by them Carbunculus, as Cromerus saith, which taken in powder purgeth. In the deep caverns of the Mines, the workmen are said some∣times to hear voices like those of Cocks, Dogs, and other animals, which they esteem a bad omen. The chief rivers of Poland are 1.Rivers. The Weissel, mentioned in authors under the different names of Vistula, Visula, Visla, Justilla, Istula and Van∣dalus: it rises in the Dutchie of Teschen in Silesia out of the mountain Carpathus (now Crapack) in the confines of Hungary; whence running to Cra∣cow, the chief City of the Lesser Poland, and there becoming navigable, by the accession of other streams, it continues its course Eastward to San∣domiria, and thence Northward to Warzaw in Masovia, afterwards winding for some leagues westward to Thorn in Prussia, it turns again to the North, and at the Island Grosswerder is divided into two streams, emptying it self by the one into the Bay Frisch-Haff, and by the other into the Baltick Sea. The head of this river lies in 49 deg. 20 min. of Latitude, and its mouth in 54, but both in 41 deg. of Longitude: its course is above 100 Polish miles. It divided antiently the Euro∣pean Sarmatia from Germany. 2. The Warta; rising near Cromolow in the Palatinate of Cra∣covia, under 40 deg. 50 min. of Longitude, and 50 deg. 30 min. of Latitude: and from thence taking a winding course to the North-west, washes the Towns of Olstin, Warta, Posna, &c. in the Greater Poland; and near Costrin, falls into the Oder. 3. Notez, which flows out of the Lake Goblo in the Greater Poland; and after a long course to the Southwestward, near Dresen dis∣charges it self into the Warta. 4. The Niester, or Tyras of the ancients; which takes its rise out of the Sarmatian mountains, near the head of San, running at first to the North, then wind∣ing Eastward, and enlarged with many lesser Rivers, waters the Province of Pocutia, sepa∣rates both the upper and lower Podolia from Moldavia, and in the Province of Bessarabia, emp∣ties it self into the Euxine Sea. 5. Bug or Bugus, rising in Red Russia, near the Town Olesco, at Stroczacz enters the Narva; nor is it long after that, ere the Narva it self rowls into the Weissel. This Narva is said to have this peculiar quality, that no venemous creature will live in its streams; insomuch that Serpents sticking to the sides of the Boats that come out of the Bug, as soon as they enter Narva will give a hiss, and scud away with all the speed they can. 6. San, rising out of the Sarmatian mountains and falling into the Weissel near Sandomiria. 7. Niemen, call'd by the Germans Memel, by the ancients Chronos, it rises in the Dutchy of Sluczko in Black Russia, runs also thro Litvania, and Prussia, at length flows into the lake Kurisch-Haff, and so into the Bal∣tick (call'd perhaps from hence the Chronian) Sea. 8. The Dzwina or Dwina, named of old Rubon, and since by the Latins Duna, which springs in the Muscovian Russia, and after a course of an hundred and thirty leagues thro Russia, Litvania, and Livonia, throws it self into the same Sea two leagues from Riga, the Metropolis of Livonia. Besides these, we may reckon the river Bog, or Boh (the Hypanis of the Greeks), which takes its origine from a Lake in the confines of Podolia, and falls into the Nieper. The bigger Poland, Cujavia,Laker. and the territory of Lublin, have several great and remarkable Lakes, abounding with fresh fish of all sorts. The chief of them are Goplo, five miles in length, and half a mile in breadth; and Briale, or the white Lake, so call'd by an Antiphrasis, because that in the months of April and May it dyes the skins of those that wash in it of a swarthy colour. The Woods in Poland are well stored in most places with Hares, Conies, Squirrels,Beast. Dear and Foxes: and in many parts with Bears, Wolves, and Bores. Of amphibious beasts they have Castors, Otters, and as some of that countrey affirm, a sort of white Bears, which live very frequently in the water. The Masovian Forests are stored with Elks, Wild Asses, Ʋri, which Dr. Charleton interprets Owres, and the Bisontes Jubati by some rendred Buffs. These Bisontes, accor∣ding to Aldrovandus, in their shape and horns re∣semble an Ox, but have mains like a horse, beards on their lower jaws, tongues rough like a File, and very hard, a bunch upon their backs, and their hair smells like musk. They are of incredible strength, some affirm that they will toss a man and horse into the air. The Po∣lish Nobility hunt them, and esteem their flesh powdred a great dainty. The Ʋrus or Owre cal∣led by the Polanders Thur, is a kind of wild Ox, much bigger, swifter and stronger then the tame; hath a short black beard, a bush of hair upon his forehead, and horns excessive large and wide, of which Pliny saith the Romans made Lanthorns. Girdles of his skin are said to be helpful to women in travail. The Elk called by the Poles Loss, by the Germans Ellend, that is, miserable, because of the falling-sickness with which it is troubled; is about the bigness of a large Horse, bodied like a Stag, but broader, its legs longer, feet large and cloven; the hoofs where∣of are accounted a great medicine against the falling-sickness. In the deserts near Boristhenes, Sig. Herberstein saith, there is a wild Sheep called by the Polanders Solhac, shaped like a Goat, but with shorter legs, and horns growing streight up. It is exceeding swift, and leaps very high. They have also a sort of wild Horses in the Ʋkrain called by them Dzikie-Konie, which the Nobles eat for a great rarity. In Lithvania and Muscovy is a vora∣cious unserviceable beast, not seen in any other Countrey, as Mat. a Michovia tells us, called Rosso∣maka, which hath the body and tail of a Wolf, the face of a Cat, and feeds on dead carcasses. When it hath found one, it never leaves eating till its belly is swelled to the utmost stretch; then seeks out some narrow passage between two trees, and by squeezing its body thro, forces out the load of its stomach; afterwards returns to its prey, devouring and disgorging successively till all is consumed. The Hart-like-Wolf, or European Lynx, call'd by the Latins Lupus Cervarius, and by the Natives Ris, with spots on its belly and legs, affords the best Furs in Poland, tho the country be well stock'd with Martrons. They have neither Camels, tame Asses, nor Mules; which beasts thrive not in cold countries: but are compensated with great plenty of excellent Horses; which are very fair and large, pace al∣most
naturally, and surpass the German Horses in swiftness, tho they come short of the Turkish. Those of Lithvania are inferior to the Polish in bigness, strength, and beauty. Fowl, both tame and wild, is no-where more plentiful then in this Kingdom. 'Twere needless to reckon up their several kinds, since I find none peculiar to this Nation, save only the Quails of Podolia, which have green legs, whose flesh is very unwholsome, and if immoderately eaten, breeds the cramp. The Polanders are generally of a good com∣plexion, flaxen-hair'd, and tall of stature. The men, for the most part, corpulent and persona∣ble. The women, slender and beautiful, disdain∣ing the help of art and fucus's to set them off. They are naturally open-hearted and candid; more apt to be deceived, then to deceive; not so easily provoked as appeas'd; neither arrogant, nor ob∣stinate; but very tractable if they be gently and prudently managed. They are chiefly led by ex∣ample; are dutiful to their Princes and Magi∣strates; and very much inclined to civility and hospitality, especially to strangers; whose customs and manners they are forward to imitate. The Gentlemen (who are all noble) take delight in keeping great sore of Horses and Arms. They en∣tertain a multitude of servants, many of which are only obliged to follow them, but disdain any mean office, and sit with their Masters at Table. The principal Senators march, whether on foot or horseback, in the middle of their retinue, put∣ting the best clad before them. The Daughters always walk before their Mothers, as in Italy; and the unmarried Sisters before the married. The education of their youth is more loose and negligent then in other their neighbouring coun∣tries; but for the most part good nature, and vertuous inclination supplies that defect. Tho they hate the Greek tongue, and will not suffer their children to learn it, lest they should imbibe also the Religion of the Greeks; yet they covet nothing more then to have them well instruct∣ed in the Latine; so that in no part of Italy, not in Rome it self, shall a man meet with so many that are able to converse in Latin as here. Even the Daughters of the Nobility and weal∣thy Citizens, at home or in Monasteries, are taught to write and read as well the Latine as their Na∣tive Language. When they grow to years of maturity, and not before, they are put to learn good huswifery, and to look after their dairies; or else imployed in spinning, weaving or sowing: whilst the men, according to their several qualities, follow their Husbandry, Mer∣chandiseing, or the more weighty concerns of Church and State. The Pesantry live in great servitude to their Lords, whose dominions they may not quit without their permission, if they were born, or have inhabited three years there∣in; those that do so, are certainly hanged if taken. The Nobles are very much addicted to travel, as admiring forreign Countries more then their own: which is the reason that they greedily, and easily, learn the languages of those Nations they affect. And they esteem it no small commendation of their ingenuity to introduce something of the new habits and customs of the people with whom they have convers'd. For tho they are very docible and easily attain what they give their minds to; yet they rather set themselves to learn the inventions of others, then to invent any thing new of their own. Neither indeed are they so fit for Mecha∣nic as for learned Arts; to which they therefore more apply themselves, as appears by the many eminent Divines, Historians, Mathematicians and Philosophers that have flourished in Poland; witness Stanislaus Hosius, Cardinal and Legat at the Coun∣cil of Trent; Matthias a Michovia, Johannes Dglu∣gossus, and Martinus Cromerus, their excellent Histo∣rians. Johannes Zamoscius their great General, and Chancelor of the Kingdom, excelling no less in most parts of learning then he did in military conduct. Nicolaus Copernicus the famous Astro∣nomer, Martinus Smiglecius the Logician, Abr. Bzovius, who hath continued Baronius's Annals; with many others, whose works are much esteem∣ed in forreign countreys. And doubtless the Learn∣ed would have been obliged to more of their na∣tion, had not their writings perisht for want of Printing, but lately received amongst them. Phy∣sick also begins to come in request; since, even in these parts, the modern luxury in diet is at∣tended with more diseases then the homely fare of former Ages. Their language is a dialect of the Slavonian,Language. and not so copious as many others. It is difficult to write and read because of the multitude of Consonants joined with one Vowel; yet the harshness is much corrected in speaking, for they pronounce them as if mixt with Vowels. They have borrowed most of their terms of art, for trades and instruments, from the Germans; of which nation there are many Artisans and Mer∣chant, among them, and some Towns and Vil∣lages chiefly speak the German language. Hot Baths are very much used in this Coun∣try,Baths. especially in Winter; and are frequented by both sexes, though in places apart from one another. Their Habit differs according to the condition,Habits. age, and quality of the person; and of late, they much affect new fashions, which are often brought in by the Soldiery, in imitation of those Nations a∣gainst whom they have been victorious. The wo∣men also have the same variety; only they come nearer the dress of men, then in most other Nations. The antient diet of the Rusticks, was Milk,Diet. Cheese, Fish and Herbs; now Beef, Veal and Mut∣ton. The Tables of the Nobility and Citizens are furnished with all sorts of dainties, wherein they use great store of Spice and Sugar. And indeed luxury in diet and apparel prevails more and more amongst them every day. The common drinks of the country are Beer,Drinks. and Mead boil'd with Hops. Besides which they use great quantities of Aqua-vitae, made by infusing wheat in water for some days, and then distilling off the Spirit, and mixing it with Sugar and hot Spices. The Nobility and Merchants here drink wine as plentifully as in other places, imported from Hungary, Moravia, the Rhine, and Gascogny. The money peculiar to Poland is coined in such small pieces, that 'tis very troublesome receiving,Money. or paying out any round sum in it. The Gross is a little piece of copper mix'd with silver, va∣lued at three half-pence English. The Attine at four pence half-penny. Their Trigross and Segross, both of pure silver, the one three times, the other six times the value of a Gross. But the most currant money in Poland at this time is forreign coin; brought in chiefly, tho not in great plenty, by the Hungarian, German and Italian Merchants, for the Commodities of the Countrey: which are Rie, Wheat, Barley, Oats and other Pulse, Flax, Hops, Hides, Tallow, tann'd Leather, divers sorts of Furrs brought first out of Muscovy, but dress'd and vended here. Honey, Wax, Amber, Pitch, Pot-ashes, Masts and Planks. The Horses also of Poland, for their swiftness, hardiness and easy pace, are much coveted by Foreigners. Besides all these, it supplies the neighbouring countreys with vast
numbers of Oxen and Sheep. To which must be added the Salt-pits; whence springs the greatest revenue the King of Poland has. The riches of Poland consist in the commo∣dities of the countrey already mention'd;Traffick. which (though they are of several sorts and general use, yet) bring but little money into the kingdom, being counterpoised by the incredible quantity, and richer variety of foreign merchandize; so that they hardly suffice to pay for the Cloth, Silk, Jewels, Tapistry, the Fruit, Spice, Salt-fish, Wine, Tin and Steel brought in from England, Flanders, Portugal and Spain, &c. But to say the truth the people are neither industrious nor addicted to trade; the Nobility being forbid it by their own constitutions upon the forfeiture of their Honor: and the Commonalty for the most part wanting estates sufficient to promote it. Besides, those of better fortunes spend too much of their revenues in costly apparel and furnishing their tables; by which means, instead of saving and laying up, they become very poor, or at least always in a wanting condition. To which we may add that their Countrey lyes not commodiously for traffick, not having the advantage of any considerable Port Town, Dantzick only excepted. The chief strength of Poland consists in their Cavalry which is very numerous and readily rai∣sed;Military Strength. the Nobility being bound by the Laws of the Land, to attend the King in all expeditions for the security of the Kingdom. In such cases the King sends his summons-into all the Pa∣latinates, which are proclamed three times, and at a months distance from one another. Upon the third Proclamation, the Nobility are obliged to repair to the paricular rendezvous of their own Palatine who leads them to the general rendezvous; and, in regard they are exempted from all other burthens, they bear their own charges all the time of the war. If there be any that refuse to appear, their goods are presently confiscated to the use of the Kings table. They all serve on Horseback, and are enrolled above 200000, yet in as much as they have very few fortified places on any side, for the security of their frontiers, they can hardly draw together a∣bove 100000, without leaving their provinces too naked. But these forces, when assembled, serve only for the defence of their countrey, and march not beyond its limits above five leagues: wherefore when they have occasion to lead an Army further, it is decreed in the Senate (which is convoked before every war) to levy stipendiary Souldiers: and as they are composed principally of the Nobles, they frequently signalize them∣selves by their valour, and successes against the much greater numbers of their enemies. Thus Zamoschius in the time of Sigismund the third with 3000 men worsted Carigereius the Scythian who with 70000, was making an inroad into Poland, and forced him with the loss of many thousands of his Tartars to return into his own countrey Tau∣rica Chersonesus. And Zolkievi with 3000 horse, setting upon 80000 Muscovites unawares, put themselves all to flight: and brought away pri∣soners three German Regiments that served a∣mongst them. The Polish foot is of little esteem; and therefore although each City is bound to set forth a certain number, yet the King rather chuses such a sum of money as may be equal to the charges, and so makes provision of Foreign∣ers taken chiefly out of Hungary and Germany. The Zeporensian Cossacks formerly served the Po∣lish Kings in their wars, either as Volontiers or for very small pay. They came in some∣times 30000 strong, arm'd with Lances or Sci∣miters, and long Guns: each had his Horse, and as occasion required fought either mounted or on foot. They used their own discipline, and chose all their Officers out of their body: even their cheif Commander, whom they would de∣pose without any fault, if he were not success∣ful. Now although the strength of the Polan∣ders may be said to equal, both in number and quality, most of the Kingdoms of Europe; yet it often falls out that they are unsuccesful in their undertakings, partly because of the slow∣ness as well of their councils, (which consisting of all the principal Officers in the Kingdom, are not readily convened, nor without much ado kept together) as of their Nobles in their ren∣dezvousing, who seldome come in before the last summons: partly also because the generality of the Souldiers depending more upon their par∣ticular Patrons then the King, are apt to follow their inclinations tho to the prejudice of the pub∣lick. Besides it being a difficult thing to furnish necessaries for so many persons any long time, having no publick Magazins provided towards the Seat of the war, they are inclined to muti∣ny and disband before they have done their work. Fortified Towns they have but few, as we said before, believing their own courage fortification enough to defend their countrey; and unwilling by means of Garrisons, to give their Kings op∣portunity of assuming an absolute power and arbitrary rule over them. The government of Poland partakes more of Aristocracy then Monarchy; and is shared a∣mongst the King, the Senate and Nobility. Some would reckon in the Citizens and Kmetones (for so in old Charters are the Husbandmen called) who live dispersed in Villages: but they being never admitted to publick offices and employ∣ments, ought not to be numbred among the or∣ders and estates of the Kingdom. At first the Kings of Poland were successive, of the  as appears from the testimony of all their Histori∣ans: and it was the custom that the reigning Prince appointed his successour. So Lescus the Third appointed Popielus: so also Boleslaus the Chast, did Lescus the Black. Nay oftentimes the Kings of Poland divided the Kingdom amongst their sons, which is not usual in elective govern∣ments. This is evident from the example of Bo∣leslaus Crivoustus; and is further confirm'd, in the Polonian Histories, by the precedent of Boleslaus the Curld. But in the reign of Sigismund Au∣gustus, a Law was made that no King of Poland should presume to nominate, or impose on the Kingdom a successor: which law was not only renew'd in the interregnum after his death, but se∣veral times afterwards: the custom of Elections having encroached upon the Scepter for some while before, for want of issue of the true Polish Royal Family. From this Electiveness it now comes to pass, that from the death of one, till the E∣lection of another King, there are frequently too long Interregna; during which the Arch-Bi∣shop of Gnesna performs all Kingly offices, acting in all things like their Soveraign; without any distinction, save that he is not crown'd with the Royal Diadem. And such an Interregnum may happen (not only by the death, but) by the Deposition or Resignation of the King. De∣position of Kings was formerly more frequent in Poland, then now. Henry Valois is the last pre∣cedent in that kind, who being elected King of Poland, when he heard of the death of his Bro∣ther Charles the Ninth, withdrew himself pri∣vately out of Poland by night, that he might not loose his right in France. Whereupon the Poles, after they had often besought his return, finding him not in the least inclin'd to forsake a succes∣sive
for an elective Kingdom, in a general assem∣bly of the Estates discharg'd him from being King of Poland, and renounced their allegiance. The most memorable example of Resignation is that of John Casimir in the year 1669: of which a large narrative is given by Nicolas Chwalkowski (in his Treatise de Jure Publico Polonico) who was an eye witness of the whole Ceremony. The Interrex, or person who performs the Regal offi∣ces during the Interregnum as was said, is the Arch-Bishop of Gnesna, a Legate born, the Primate and first Prince of the Kingdom, not suspected, as being a spiritual person, of affecting the Crown. Which dignity is not conferr'd upon him by E∣lection, but is annexed to his Archbishoprick, least any delay in his nomination should endam∣mage the publick. This office he takes upon him not only upon the death, but also in the Kings absence, or residence in another Coun∣trey: as when Henry withdrew into France, and Sigismund the Third went into Swedeland. If there be no Archbishop of Gnesna, then this dignity belongs to the Bishop of Cujavia; or in his ab∣sence also or vacancy of the See, to the Bishop of Posnania. At the beginning of the Interregnum the Archbishop betakes himself to Warsaw, whither all the neigbouring Nobility repair to him; by whose advice Proclamations are issued forth out of the Archbishops Chancery under his hand, with all his Titles annexed, whereby the Inter∣regnum is proclamed by the publick Ministers in all the Palatinates and Districts of the Kingdom; and in the mean while all necessary orders are taken for the security of the people. The In∣terrex also receives, opens and answers all the letters from Foreign Princes; gives audience to all foreign Ambassadours; and indeed all the publick affairs of the Kingdom pass through his hands. As for the Candidates, this is certainly agreed, that no Piasti or Native, is excluded from the hopes of Election. The Electors in the first place, are the prime Senators of the Kingdom, as well Ecclesiastick as Secular: next to them the Nobility, who have liberty to act either in their proper persons or by Deputies; and lastly, the Deputies of Cracow, Posnania, Leopolis and Vilna. For the Polonians believe that it very much avails both to the security of the Governour, and to confirm the allegiance of them that obey, that the King should be chosen by the Genera∣lity, who can then have no pretence to com∣plain of their own Act. The place of Election is in an open field not far from Warsaw, near the Village Wola, by reason of the multitude of them who have voices in the Election; it is mark'd out by the Marshals of Poland and Lithuania. When the day of Election is come, and the Se∣nators all met, the Interrex asks the Question three times, Whether it be their pleasure to command that such a one shall be declared King? If by con∣sent of voices, they return for an answer; It plea∣ses us, Let him live; then the Archbishop declares him King in these words: In the name of God, I declare such a one King and great Duke of Lithuania, and beseech the King of Heaven to enable him for so great a charge, and through his mercy so to order that the Election may be prosperous for the Nation and happy for the Catholick Religion. After which the Marshals proclaim the Election in the follow∣ing manner: King N. is unanimously elected, and so declared by the Interrex; him therefore all ye ac∣knowledg your lawfully elected and declared King. If the King, so elected, be absent, his Ambassa∣dours are obliged to confirm by oath the con∣ditions, and receive the decree of the Election. After which the Marshalls make a second Procla∣mation in these words; The Polanders have a law∣ful King. On the other side, before the King is admitted, he is obliged by oath to preserve the Laws and priviledges of the Kingdom and the Cove∣nants agreed upon by the Estates, in all their clau∣ses, points and conditions, and to renew the said oath at his Coronation. But though he be now elected, the Interregnum does not cease till after his Coro∣nation: for till then he assumes no other Title then that of King Elect; neither are his Letters to Foreign Princes seal'd with any other seal then that of the Chamber. So that though the present King was permitted to make use of the Seal of great Duke of Lithuania before his Coronation; that was only done upon the necessity of the Muscovitick Expedition. The usual place of Co∣ronation is Cracow: where the Crown is kept in the cheif treasury, under the charge of the high Treasurer: and the person performing the cere∣mony is always the Archbishop of Gnesna, if not prevented by sickness. The chief Ceremonies at the Coronation are the Questions propounded to the King, Wilt thou profess the Catholick faith delivered by Catholick men? Answ. I will. Wilt thou defend and maintain the Church and its Ministers? Wilt thou uphold, defend and govern the Kingdom by God committed to thy care according to Justice? Ans. I will. All which he confirms by the usual form of words and laying his hand upon the Evan∣gelists. The Ceremony of anointing is perform'd with saying these words: I anoint thee King with the sanctified oil, in the name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost. The words of Confirmation are; Sit and possess the Throne appointed thee by God. Let thy hand be strengthned and thy right hand exalt∣ed. The solemnity being ended, the King repairs to the grand Assembly for the Coronation; where the Interrex resigns his Authority, and the Sena∣tours, together with the Nobility and Deputies of the Cities, take their oaths of allegiance to the new King. The present power and authority of the Kings of Poland will more plainly appear by a recital of the articles to the observance whereof they bind themselves, as well before as at their Coro∣nation: for they contain all the essential proper∣ties of Regal Dominion under the name of Pacta Conventa. As to their power in Ecclesiastical af∣fairs, the Roman-Catholick Kings of Poland have been so kind as to part with their chiefest prero∣gatives in that particular, reserving only to themselves the collation of benefices. The King swears to maintain peace between the dissenters in Religion, of which there are many in Poland, and to compose the causes and differences among persons professing the Greek religion, as appears by the Pacta Conventa sworn to by John the Third, now reigning. As for foundations of Churches and Monasteries, whatsoever liberty the King may have to erect, they are to be confirm'd by all the orders at the general assembly of Estates: and thus the immunities and priviledges granted by the Kings of Poland to the Academy of Vilna were also confirm'd. The next preroga∣tive is the legislative power: concerning which we find, that in the time of Lechus, the Kings of Poland had an absolute authority of making Laws themselves, as necessity required. But after∣wards, when they had received the Christian faith, they began to make Laws with the con∣sent of the Peers. Insomuch that Sigismund the Third, in the year 1570, enacted, That no Law should be of publick force till reviewed and sub∣scribed by such a number of Deputies of the No∣bility and Senators, whose consent was to be re∣quired before-hand whether the Law should pass: which Law remains to this day. The determi∣nation of Controversies was likewise formerly
in the breast of the King as supreme Judg; till Ʋladislaus Jagello granted this priviledge to the Nobility, That they should not be punished or impri∣son'd till convicted by Law. After him Bathor threw off the burthen of hearing causes from his own shoulders, and erected several courts of Judica∣ture in Poland and Lithuania: reserving only to himself the judgment of such causes as concer∣ned his Chequer and such Cities as were imme∣diately under his jurisdiction. But now the No∣bility create the chief Judg or Marshal, with his assistants in those tribunals; nor does the King sit alone upon causes that come before him by way of appeal: besides, the King swears to determine all Court causes according to the ad∣vice and opinion of the Senators and Officers re∣siding at Court; as also to call the causes in order as they are set down in the Register, and neither to retard nor further any cause for favour or interest. The power of making war did formerly without doubt absolutely belong to the King. But Casimir the third (in the year 1454) made a promise that he would undertake no war with∣out the consent of the Senate. At this day the Kings of Poland, by the Pacta Conventa, promise not to admit or call in any foreign assistance with∣out the especial consent of the Estates; not to encrease the number of the standing Militia, nor raise forces privately; not to send aid to any other Prince, without consent as aforesaid; nor to com∣mit the trust of Forts or Castles to strangers or plebeians, but to men of worth and landed No∣bility. Besides all these engagements, there is a Council of War, elected out of the Senate and Nobility, to attend and advise him in the field, according to the late Constitutions in the year 1676, and several others before. He is also ex∣presly forbid to undertake any offensive war; as an affair wholly belonging to the General Assem∣bly. Again, his power of making peace, and entring into new leagues, is so far limited, that neither shall be valid, unless approved and con∣firm'd by the General Estates. Only ancient Al∣liances may be renewed by the King, with the consent of the Senators resident at Court. What his power is in raising Tribute and Taxes, may be easily gather'd from the words of Konarscius in Fredo, p. 98. The Estates of the Kingdom, saith he, have exempted thee, speaking to the King, from all charges and expences. It is their business to pay the Soldiery, and to furnish the Magazines; thine, with their joint and mutual consent, to pro∣claim war, overcome and triumph. The coinage of money is a Royal prerogative, and as soon as Poland knew money, was in the sole power of the Kings; but Ʋladislaus Jagello, in the year 1422, made a promise not to coin any money without the consent of his Counsellors: which law was renewed by Sigismund the third, in the year 1632; and inserted into the Pacta Conventa, sworn to by the present King. Nor was it with∣out the consent of the Senate, that Casimir Ja∣gello granted to the Cities of Dantzick, Elbing, and Thorn, the priviledg of coining money, which they keep to this day. The prerogative of con∣ferring employments and honours still remains in the sole power of the King. He is supreme judg and arbiter of merit and reward; and disposes of all, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, dignities. Yet this illustrious prerogative suffers some eclipses too; for first, the King can advance no foreigner, nor any person who has no lands in the Province where the preferment lies. Next, he can neither diminish nor increase the number of the Offices either of the Court or Kingdom. Thirdly, he is obliged to supply such as are va∣cant by a time limited. Fourthly, he engages himself not to bestow the Office of Bishop, nor the Commands of Palatine, Castellane or Cap∣tain, upon any of his Sons, Grandchildren, or other relations of the Royal Blood. Fifthly, he is restrained from conferring a plurality of high dignities upon one person. Lastly, he is bound not to seek any private advantage by the advancement of any man: and 'tis pro∣vided, that all promises of preferment made in order to his advancement to the Crown, shall be invalid. But (granting his power to be consi∣derable in conferring of Honours, yet) he is not able to deprive the same persons, tho ill deser∣ving, of the honours once conferred upon them, without the consent of the Estates: and with their approbation he may remove from their employments, not only Seculars, but Ecclesiasticks. By the same permission he has also power to create Dukes, Earls, and Barons: but the reason why he makes so few is, because the Polish Nobility will not admit of any other superiority one a∣mongst another, then what comes by birthright. And because they are very cautious of admitting strangers, he is not permitted to advance any foreigner into the number of the Nobility, by way of Naturalization, without the consent of the Estates first obtained, and the particular re∣commendation of the General of the Army. It is in the Kings power to give Audience to the Ambassadors of foreign Princes, and to elect his own; but he cannot send them abroad, upon the concerns of Peace, War, or entring into new Leagues, without the consent of the resident Se∣nators. Formerly the priviledg of hunting be∣longed solely to the King; but now every one of the Nobility hath power to use that sport in his own grounds. The King cannot contract a marriage for himself, without the consent of the Senate. He is not permitted to enjoy or possess any lands of inheritance in his own Kingdom; nor is he suffer'd to stir beyond its confines, ex∣cept the Senate agree thereto. He may not have any foreigners employed about him at Court: for all the Court-Officers are sworn to be true and faithful (not only to the King, but also) to the Senate, and are under the jurisdiction of the Marshal of the Kingdom. He is also obliged, by the Pacta Conventa, to take care that the Queen do not meddle with State affairs. To all these Articles the Kings of Poland most religiously swear observance. Nay, to keep their Kings the more in awe, the Nobility of Poland published the following Declaration in the year 1609, If any Nobleman, or Senator, observe that the King has acted contrary to the Laws and Priviledges of the Kingdom, he is to give notice thereof to the Primate and the Senators, who are to admonish the King there∣of. If he slight the admonition, it shall be lawful publickly to declare the Kings neglect to the Senate; to the end, that the Deputies may be enjoin'd, in the name of the whole Nobility, to advise him to desist from acting so contrary to the established Laws of the Land. If the King take no notice of this second ad∣monition, they are then to acquaint the General As∣sembly of Estates. If the third admonition prevail not, then all the Orders are to proceed according to the Article of withdrawing their Allegiance. The Revenues of the Kings Houshold, arising out of his Lands and Salt-pits, are computed to above three millions of Florens yearly. Of which Piasecius gives this account: That the allowance of the Kings of Poland is such, as is (not only sufficient to maintain the splendor of a Court equal to any Prince in Christendom, but also) large enough for all occasions of Royal munifi∣cence. The truth of which many of the Nobi∣lity experience, by the large possessions which the
King often grants them during his or their lives. The publick Revenues of the Kingdom, are either ordinary or extraordinary. The ordinary Reve∣nues are, the fourth part of the Rents of the Kings Lands, granted by him towards the payment of the Soldiery; Impost upon Wines; Custom up∣on goods exported and imported; the fourth Gross out of Great and Little Poland, &c. The extraordinary Revenues are, 1. The Agraria, or a certain sum of money tax'd upon Lands and Farms. 2. Excise upon Beer; from which the Tenants of Noblemen, that keep publick-houses, are not free. 3. Capitatio Judaica, or the Jews Pole-money; which in the year 1671 was tax'd at 150000 Florens. The Jews in Lithvania, upon extremity, are tax'd at 40000 Florens. Sometimes they pay two Florens a head for themselves, their wives and children. 4. The Merchants Dona∣tives; which in the year 1650 was raised to 40000 Florens. 5. The Chimney-money; which is doubled and trebled, as necessity requires. Sometimes a general Pole is laid upon the whole Kingdom; where every man, the Archbishop not excepted, pays according to his estate, and the Offices he holds. Nothing of all this belongs to the King, but 'tis all reserv'd for public uses; of which the Treasurers give an account to the General Estates, who have the only power to levy these new assessments and extraordinary im∣positions, as the necessity of affairs requires. The Kings of Poland, and its Dukes, may be distinguish'd into four Classes, or Orders of Suc∣cession. The first contains a Catalogue of the Dukes of Poland, as follows. A. D. 700] Lechus the First. Who built the City Gnesna, in the place where he found an Eagles Nest; and therefore gave it this name from Gniazdo, which in the Polish language sig∣nifies a Nest: hence also the Arms of Poland are an Eagle. Their own Historians are not agreed about his extraction, whether he was a Native or Croatian; nor about the time in which he reigned, some affirming, that it was about the year of our Lord 550, others almost an hun∣dred years later; and both parties speaking only by conjecture. Nor lastly, are they agreed about the children he left behind him; but they gene∣rally acknowledg, that upon the faileur of his off∣spring, the people made choice of twelve Pala∣tines for their Rulers, calling them Woiewodes, i. e. Captains of War; and the Country being divided into twelve parts, each had his peculiar Province. But when they began to cherish pri∣vate feuds, to the embroilment of the Com∣monwealth, and thereby also invited their ill∣affected neighbours to fall upon them, the peo∣ple were constrained to seek their peace and safe∣ty in a Monarchy. And with much solicitation perswaded Cracus, a person of great fortune and interest amongst them, to take upon him the en∣tire Government; which he managed with sin∣gular prudence and success. He (or his Subjects after his decease, in remembrance of his vertues) built a new City upon the side of the Weissel, which from his name was called Cracow or Cra∣covia, and made the Metropolis of the King∣dom. His younger son Lechus II, succeeded him, having first slain his elder brother to make way for himself; but the murther being detected, he was deposed and banish'd. 750] After him reigned his sister Wenda, who chose rather to rule alone, then to be wife to a King. After she had repulsed Ridigerus, a Ger∣man Prince (who not being able either by in∣treaty or force to obtain her in marriage, killed himself for shame and grief), lest any adverse chance should sully her honour, she leapt from the bridge at Cracow into the Weissel. Twelve Palatines again. 760] Premislaus, or Lescus the First. He was a Goldsmith, and created King, because he had by an unusual stratagem, overthrown the Hun∣garians and Moravians: he died without issue. 804] Lescus II. The Polish Nobility having agreed to ride a Race for the Government, one of the Competitors strowed galltraps (tribulos) in the way, and thereby so disabled all the horses save his own, which he had shod for the purpose, that he won the prize. The cheat being disco∣ver'd, he was torn in pieces by them; and this Lescus, a poor obscure man, who out-ran the rest on foot, from being the scorn of the mul∣titude, was by the popular applause saluted Prince. He always after kept by him the course clothes he had formerly worn, to mind him of his ori∣ginal. 810] Lescus III. 815] Popielus I. 830] Popielus II. He is reported to have been eaten up by Mice, thro Gods judgment, as is con∣ceiv'd, for the murders committed by him. For he is said to have poyson'd all his kindred, that he might unite the Slavonian Principalities to his own Dukedom. The second Classis, of which there is much more certainty then of the former, contains the following Princes. 843] Piastus Rusticus, a Citizen of Cruswic, of noted hospitality and charity. 861] Ziemovitus. 892] Lescus IV. 913] Ziemomyslus. 964] Mieceslaus. The first Christian King. He was born blind, and in the seventh year of his age, when at a publick banquet his name was to be given him, received his sight. He founded the two Archbishopricks of Gnesna and Cracovia, with divers Bishopricks; and gave the tythes of the whole Kingdom by a perpetual Edict to the Clergy. 999] Boleslaus I. He received the Title of King from Otho III. Emperor of Germany; his predecessors being no more than Dukes of Po∣land. 1025] Mieceslaus II. Casimirus I. Driven out of Poland in his mi∣nority, by factions occasioned from his mo∣thers ill government. He travel'd thro Hunga∣ry, Germany, Italy, and at last in France was made Religious, and Deacon in the Benedictine Convent at Cluny; was invited thence to the Crown by the Poles, who to procure the Popes dispensation for his Vow, condscended to a perpetual tribute of an obolus per head upon all the Commonalty, for the maintaining Lamps to burn in St. Peters Church at Rome, called hence Peter-pence. 1059] Boleslaus II. surnamed the Bold; he murther'd Stanislaus Archbishop of Cracow as he was officiating at the Altar, for which he was excommunicated and deposed by Pope Gregory VII. His successors too were deprived of the Title of King, the Bishops being forbid to anoint any of them; which continued for 213 years, till the time of Premislaus. 1082] Ʋladislaus I. 1103] Boleslaus Krzywousci, or the wry-mouth∣ed. He is recorded to have been a victor in forty Battels; but being forced to retreat out of the field at his last battel against the Russians, he dy∣ed for grief. 1140] Ʋladislaus II.
1146] Boleslaus IV. surnamed the Curld. 1174] Miecislaus the Old. So called for his prudence, tho but a young man. He was de∣posed, by reason of his evil Counsellors, and twice by his cunning regain'd the Kingdom. 1178] Casimirus II. This Prince having re∣ceiv'd a box on the ear from one of his Pages, whose money he had won at play, acquitted the boy, saying, That the Lad was transported with the loss of his money, and that he himself had been justly punished for prostituting his Dignity. 1195] Lescus the White. 1199] Miecislaus the Old, again. Lescus the White, again. 1202] Mieceslaus the Old, a third time. 1203] Ʋadislaus Lasconogus, or small-shank'd. 1206] Lescus the White, a third time. In his reign the Teutonick Knights, or Knights of the Cross, took footing in Prussia, being call'd in by his brother Conradus, Duke of Masovia and Cu∣javia, to assist him against the Prussians. 1226] Boleslaus IV. surnamed the Chast, be∣cause he never knew his wife all the while he was married to her. In his time the Polanders received so great an overthrow from the Tartars, that the right ears only of the slain fill'd nine large sacks. 1279] Lescus the Black. During his reign the Tartars made another inundation into Poland, and carried away so many captives, that 'tis said above 21000 virgins were counted amongst them, at the division of their booty; the men they generally murder'd, and poisoning their hearts, cast them into the waters, from whence sundry new diseases were occasioned, amongst others, some say, the Plica Polonica. 1295] Premislaus. He reigned seven months, and in that time re-assumed the title of King, be∣ing crown'd by the Archbishop of Gnesna. 1296] Ʋladislaus Lochius. So called from the shortness of his stature; Lokiek signifying an Ell. 1300] Wenceslaus the Bohemian. 1305] Ʋladislaus Lochius, again. 1333] Casimirus, surnamed the Great, and the last of the family of Piasti, to whom Poland owes all its beauty, grandeur, and riches. 1370] Lodowick, King of Hungary, and Ne∣phew of Casimir the Great. Hitherto the Crown of Poland was successive, except when the King dyed without issue. In the third Class it began to be elective, Ʋladislaus Ja∣gello being obliged to swear (as Hartknoch ac∣quaints us) that he received it by election, and not succession. This Class contains the Kings of the Jagellonian family, in the following order. 1386] Ʋladislaus Jagello, chosen Husband to Heduiges second daughter to Lodowic, and there∣with King of Poland, upon condition that he should unite to the Crown his dominions of Lit∣vania, Samogitia, and part of Prussia; become Christian himself, and endeavour the conversion of those Nations; and lastly, pay two hundred thousand Florens to William Duke of Austria, for∣feited by Heduiges, who was before contracted to the said Duke. He was a pious Prince, and founder of the University at Cracow. 1434] Ʋladislaus III. 1447] Casimirus IV. 'Tis very memora∣ble what Loccenius reports of this King, how that meeting with Charles King of Swedeland at Dantzick, he was forced to get a Monk to talk Latin with the said King, who understood no Polish, but talked Latin accurately. Hereupon Casimir being ashamed of the ignorance of him∣self and his followers, returning home caused publick proclamations to be made, That from thence-forward no man should be advanced to any dignity, except he were able to speak Latin. Whence, saith the same Author, it came to pass, that the Polanders have ever since excelled in the Latin tongue. 1492] Johannes Albertus. In whose reign the Tartars laid waste Rusia, Podolia, and several other parts of the Kingdom. 1501] Alexander. This King is reported to have been such a prodigal, that had he ruled long he would have begger'd the Nation. His Queen Helena was not suffer'd to be crowned, because (being a Greek) she refused to conform to the Roman Church. 1507] Sigismund I. Reckon'd (by Paulus Jo∣vius) one of the three Worthies (Charles V. Emperor, and Francis I. King of France, being the other) who, had they not been contemporary Princes, deserv'd singly to have ruled the whole world. Besides the large endowments of his mind, he was a person of such vast strength of body, that 'twas ordinary for him (in his youth) to break asunder horse-shoes and strong ropes. 1548] Sigismundus Augustus. In his time the Lutheran Religion began first to take footing in Poland. The fourth and last Class contains a Register of Kings elected out of divers families; which occasioned several Interregna. The order of these Princes is as follows: 1574] Henry Valois, Duke of Anjou. He fled from Poland into France upon news of his bro∣ther Charles's death; and was thereupon deposed by the Estates. He reigned five months. 1576] Stephen Bathor, Palatine of Transylvania. 1587] Sigismund III. Prince of Sweden, who after the death of his father John III. was crown'd also King of Sweden; but deposed again by his subjects, chiefly for attempting to introduce the Roman Religion amongst them (in which he had been educated by his mother). His Uncle Charles IX. Duke of Sudermannia was chose in his place. 1632] Ʋladislaus IV. Famous for his many conquests over the Turks, and subduing Muscovy, of which he was elected Tzar in his Fathers life∣time. 1648] John Casimir, designed for a Religious, and had lived two years of probation amongst the Jesuits, but (as Hartknoch writes) nominated Cardinal by Innocent X. before he took the vow of that order. Being elected King, he married his brother Sigismund's widow. He laid down his Diadem, and retired into France. 1669] Michael Koributh, Duke of Wisniowiec. An unfortunate Prince, who lost Caminiec to the Turks. 1674] John Sobieski, formerly General against the Turks; now reigning, A. D. 1679. The Queen of Poland, except she be a Roman Catholick, is never crown'd; nor then, unless the King himself request it, who is always present at her Coronation. During his life, the charges of her Court are defrayed out of his Exchequer; but after his death she maintains her self out of the revenues of such lands as the King, with the consent of the Estates, made over to her upon marriage. The Senate of Poland is famous as well for the Nobility, as number of persons. Among whom he that precedes all the rest (both in dignity and place) is, The Archbishop of Gnesna; who always sits next the King, upon his right hand. He has, be∣longing to his Court, a Marshal, who is also a
Senator of the Kingdom, in the rank of the Ca∣stellanes. This Marshal rides before the Arch∣bishops Coach; and when he goes to Court, carries a staff before him upright, till he comes into the Kings Chamber, where he turns it down∣wards. His authority is so great, that in the ab∣sence of other Marshals, he bears the staff of au∣thority before the King, when he goes to the General Assemblies. The Archbishop has also a Cross born before him, which the bearer holds upright behind his chair whilst he sits in the Se∣nate. Next to the Marshal is the Chancellor, for the dispatch of publick affairs both in Church and State. The other Officers of the Archbishops Court, are the Chamberlain, Master of Requests, Steward of his Table, Treasurer, Chaplain, Li∣brary-keeper, Master of the Horse, and Clerk of the Kitchin. As he is a Prince, while his meat is going up to table, whether at home or abroad, the drums beat. When he comes to Court, he goes directly to the King; never waiting his Ma∣jesties leisure, or any prefixt time. And upon no∣tice of his coming, he is met at the bottom of the stairs by the sub-Chamberlain; at the top by the Marshal of the Court. When he approaches the Royal presence, the King himself goes some paces to meet him. The title which the King gives him is, To the most Reverend Father in Christ. By others he is styled, Most High and most Reve∣rend Lord, Lord N. by the grace of God and the Apostolick See, Archbishop of Gnesna, Legate born, Primate, and chief Prince of the Polonian Nobility. His prerogatives are so great, that he gives not place to any Cardinal; for which reason no Cardinal is ambitious of being sent into Po∣land. Next to him the Archbishop of Leopol, takes place. After these two Archbishops, the Bishops are seated in the Senate, according to their dignity, in the following order: 1. Cracow. 2. Cujavia, who is also Bishop of Ʋladislow and Pomerania. 3. Vilna, and 4. Pos∣nania, by turns. 5. Polockzo. 6. Varmia, and 7. Lu∣ceorea, by turns. 8. Praemislia. 9. Samogitia or Mednic. 10. Culmo. 11. Chelmo. 12. Kiovia and Zernichovia. 13. Kamienieck. 14. Smolensko. These Bishops sit on the right and left hand of the King, next the two Archbishops. Con∣cerning the revenues and splendor of the Bishops of Poland, see Cromer. l. 2. descript. Pol. pag. 177. and Stanislaus Lubienski in vita Angelotti, fol. 310. Bishops by the Law are forbidden to hold Abbeys in commendam with their Bishopricks; only the Bishops of Kiovia and Kamienieck, having lost their revenues are now permitted that liberty, for their subsistence. Next to the Bishops sit the Palatines or Woi∣wodes, and Castellanes. The Palatines are Go∣vernors of Dutchies or Counties, Commanders of their Militia in the general Expeditions of the Kingdom, appoint Conventions of the Nobles within their own Palatinate, and preside in them, and in Courts of Judicature, and have the patro∣nage of the Jews, who are very numerous in Po∣land. They are the first order of the secular Se∣nators. The Castellanes are, as it were, the Lieu∣tenants of the Palatines, commanding in time of war the Nobility under them; there are divers of them belonging to one Palatine, each of them having his District or Castellanate, and from hence his title, and generally some revenue, but no jurisdiction in time of peace, only as he is a Senator. The Castellane of Cracow was preferr'd before the Palatine upon the rebellion of Scarbi∣mirus the Palatine against Boleslaus III. The Ca∣stellanes of Vilna and Troco, together with the Captain of Samogitia (the only Captain in the Senate) had pre-eminence in consideration of their antiquity. The Palatines are seated thus: 1. The Castellane of Cracow. The Palatines of 2. Cracow, and 3. Posnania, by turns. 4. Vilna. 5. Sandomiria. 6. Castellane of Vilna. The Pa∣latines of 7. Calistia. 8. Troco. 9. Sirad. 10. Ca∣stellane of Troco. 11. Palatine of Lenschet. 11. Cap∣tain of Samogitia. Palatines of 13. Bressic. 14. Kio∣via. 15. Inouladislow. 16. Russia, formerly of Leopol. 17. Volhinia. 18. Podolia, formerly Ca∣miniecz. 19 Smolensko. 20. Lublin. 21. Plock∣zow. 22. Belze. 23. Novogrod. 24. Ploco. 25. Vi∣tepz. 26. Masovia, formerly Culmo. 27. Pod∣lachia. 28. Rava. 29. Brzecienski. 30. Culmo. 31. Mscislauia. 32. Mariaeburgh. 33. Breslow. 34. Pomerania. 35. Minsco. 36. Czernichow. After these Palatines sit the Castellanes; di∣stinguished into Greater and Lesser. The Grea∣ter are these: 1. Posnania. 2. Sendomir. 3. Calissia. 4. Voynicz. 5. Gnesna. 6. Sirad. 7. Lenschet. 8. Samogitia. 9. Brestie. 10. Kiovia. 11. Inouladislow. 12. Leopol. 13. Volhinia. 14. Camieniecz. 15. Smolensko. 16. Lub∣lin. 17. Belze. 18. Novogrod. 19. Ploco. 20. Witepz. 21. Czetne. 22. Podlachia. 23. Rava. 24. Brzescia. 25. Culmo. 26. Mscilow. 27. Elbing. 28. Breslow. 29. Dantzic. 30. Mirisco. 31. Czernichow. The Lesser Castellanes are, 1. Sandecia. 2. Medirec. 3. Wislick. 4. Biecie. 5. Rogosnow. 6. Radan. 7. Zawichost. 8. Lenden. 9. Srim. 10. Tarnow. 11. Malagost. 12. Vielun. 13. Praemissia. 14. Halicie. 15. Senoc. 16. Chelmo. 17. Dobrzin. 18. Polaniecz. 19. Premetenski. 20. Kri∣vin. 21. Czechow. 22. Nackle. 23. Rospir. 24. Bie∣chow. 25. Bidgost. 26. Briesin. 27. Kruswic. 28. Os∣wiecz. 29. Camienecz. 30. Spicimiria. 31. Inoulad. 32. Kowale. 33. Santoc. 34. Sochaczow. 35. Warsow. 36. Gostinin. 37. Visna. 38. Raciecz. 39. Sierpz. 40. Wysogrogende. 41. Ripin. 42. Zacochim. 43. Cie∣chanon. 44. Live. 45. Slonsco. 46. Lubaczow. 47. Ko∣nar in Sirad. 48. Konar in Lenschot. 49. Konar in Cujavia. These are called the Lesser, as being more lately admitted into the Senate. To greater Castellanes they give the title of Wielmozni or Magnifici; to the Lesser that of Ʋrodzeni or Ge∣nerosi: but by private persons all Castellanes are called Jasnie Wielmozni, or Illustrissimi. It is esta∣blished by Law, that none may be either Pala∣tine or Castellane in that Province in which he hath no lands. The lowest in degree among the Senators are the Officers of the Kingdom and Great Duke∣dom of Lithvania, in the following order: 1. The supreme Marshal of the Kingdom. 2. The Marshal of the Great Dukedom of Lithvania. 3. The high Chancellor of the Kingdom. 4. The Chancellor of Lithvania. 5. The Pro-Chancellor of the Kingdom. 6. The Pro-Chancellor of Lithvania. 7. The Treasurer of the Kingdom. 8. The Treasurer of Lithvania. 9. The Marshal of the Court for the King∣dom. 10. The Marshal of the Court of the Great Duke of Lithvania. The office of the supreme Marshal is, to call the Senate upon command of the King or Inter∣rex; to command silence, and give leave of speak∣ing therein; to promulgate their acts to the people; and to pronounce and put in execu∣tion the Kings decrees in all causes of infamy and death. He prepares the place of the Diets, and hath the chief management of matters in those Assemblies; receives foreign Princes, and
Ambassadors at their arrival, providing them with lodgings; performs also most of the functi∣ons belonging to the Lord Steward of the Kings Houshold. In the publick assemblies, or when he goes before the King, he carries a staff upright. While the King resides in Lithvania, the Marshal of Lithvania has the same power there. The Chan∣cellors are both secular persons; and the office of Chancellor and Pro-Chancellor is the same, only the Chancellor keeps the great, and the Pro-Chancellor the lesser Seal. In short, these two are the mouth and hands of the King in the dispatch of all business. The Treasurers are the Stewards of the publick Treasury, and masters of the Mint. When the King bestows this office upon any one, four Senators are appointed to deliver the Treasury to him by an inventory, of which there are three copies, one with the King, another with the Treasurer, and the third they keep themselves. This, by the way, take notice of in reference to all the Senators, that none of them are permitted to stir out of the Kingdom without particular licence of the Grand Estates; and upon some pressing occasion. The rest of the Officers about the Court which are not of the Senatorian Order, as the Principal Secretary, Master of Requests, Captain Gene∣ral, &c. I spare to mention, being much-what the same as in other Nations; only it is to be observed, that there are two of every sort, one for the Kingdom of Poland, the other for the Great Dukedom of Lithvania. The Masters of Requests are always present when the King sits to determine controversies and differences among his Subjects; at which time it is their duty to lay open the nature and grounds of the controversie to the King. They stand fair, upon a vacancy, to be admitted Sena∣tors. The Magistrates for the several Districts are of two sorts, that is, Land; or Camp-Magi∣strates. The Land Magistrates are: 1. The Vice-Chamberlain, or Judg of bounds and limits. 2. The Standard-bearer. 3. The Land-Judg. 4. The Tribune. 5. The Land-Register. 6. The Keeper of the Treasury. Besides some other inferior Officers. The Camp or Military Officers are: 1. The Captain with Jurisdiction, who is Go∣vernor of some Town or Castle. 2. The Captain without Jurisdiction. 3. The Burggrave; who is Governor of some Castle, and takes care of the out-guards. 4. The Vice-Captain. 5. The Judg-Advocate. 6. The Field-Register. The Councils,Councils. or Parliaments of Poland, are of two sorts: 1. Civil, to which the Counsel∣lors come in their Gowns. 2. Military, to which they come in Military habit. The latter are only held in the time of an Interregnum. The former are frequently called: and are 1. Ordinary; which by the Laws are summon'd once in two years. 2. Extraordinary; which are assembled as the necessity of affairs requires. When either Or∣dinary or Extraordinary Councils are to be con∣vened, the King by his Letters summons the lesser Councils or Conventions, in the several Palatinates, larger Provinces, and certain Districts. These Conventions precede the general Assemblies of the Kingdom six weeks, unless upon some extraor∣dinary accident: and are held in the proper Ci∣ties of the Palatinates and Provinces, appointed for that purpose. Here, after they have chosen a Marshal (who seems to be much like our Spea∣ker, as being the Director of the Convention) they first consider of such things as are pro∣pounded to them by the Kings Deputies, dis∣patched away to every Convention, and of what other business is to be motioned at the General Session. After that they choose the Land De∣puties, or provincial Delegates, for the general Assembly. Every Province sends so many (al∣most in the same manner as our Shires, save on∣ly that they are not chosen by the people) till the whole number amount to about 300. These Deputies are generally elected out of such Ma∣gistrates as are not of the Senatorian order: ex∣cluding all Judges and their Assistants, Col∣lectors, and all Officers of the Exchequer, un∣less they have exact and full acquittances from the Treasurer. The Delegates, like our Bur∣gesses, have a certain allowance from their re∣spective Provinces, during the sitting of the ge∣neral Assembly. The particular Conventions be∣ing broken up (which by the Law are not to sit above four days) three weeks before the Se∣nators and Delegates repair to the Grand Session, they meet at the general Committees for the several Provinces; where they again read over the Kings commands, the instructions given to the Delegates, and what was thought needful to be propounded for the publick good. The grand Assembly being met, the Deputies repair to their Chamber and choose their Marshal or Director; which done, they are all conducted to kiss the Kings hand: and after that ceremony perform'd, the Chancellours of the Kingdom and Dukedome, in order, declare to them the substance of those affairs which are to be the subject of their Debates. Before they depart, they put the King in mind of supplying such employments as are vacant with deserving per∣sons; and desire an account of such Laws or Ordinances as have been made by the resident Senators since the sitting of the last grand Con∣vention. Having so done, they return to their Chamber. The power of these Nuncii, or De∣puties, is very great: for when they send any of their number to the King, they are presently admitted, let the King be never so busy, and have an immediate dispatch. If they clash in their debates, the King is careful to send some of the Senators to reconcile them; who then give them the Title of Mosci Panovoie Bracia or Gracious Lords Brothers. They have also power to impeach any great Officer of Misdemeanours, and to put the King himself in mind of his pro∣mises touching the Laws and priviledges of the Kingdom; neither is any constitution valid, that has not its Original from the Chamber of the Deputies. And, which is yet more, if any one of the whole number of the Nuncii dissent, no∣thing can be legally concluded. So that upon the protestation and departure of one Deputy, the whole Convention is ipso facto dissolv'd. Whilst the Deputies are thus consulting, the King and Senators have little to do, but to hear certain criminal causes appointed before hand for the first week, and some other civil contro∣versies the second; till the return of the Depu∣ties embodies the whole Senate together. Then every man has liberty to deliver his mind, with the leave and direction of the Marshal. The King suspends his own opinion, till the Senators and Deputies, or the major part of them agree. Then he endeavours to reconcile their different votes; or if he cannot prevail, concurs with that party which has voted most conformably to the Laws and priviledges of the Realm. These consultations by the Law, ought not to be con∣tinued
above fifteen days after the joyning of both Houses: though sometimes urgency of af∣fairs causes farther prolongation. When the Session breaks up, the Deputies returning home, give notice of their return to the Captains with Jurisdiction, and the Palatines or Vice-Palatines give the same notice of the return to the De∣puties to the Nobility, inviting them withal to the Post-Comitial Assemblies or Conventions of Relation; the meeting whereof the King ap∣points. In these Conventions, the Deputies pro∣duce the constitutions made in the last general Assembly of Estates, delivered to them under seal by the Chancellours, and take care that they be fairly transcribed into the Land and mili∣tary Registers; not omitting, after this, to give a full account of what they have acted in discharge of their Trusts. If the grand Session break up in confusion, not having effected any thing to purpose; then certain Post-Comitial Councils are called, wherein the King prefixes a time for ano∣ther grand Session. Nor is it a wonder that much disturbance should rise in the General Assemblies; considering the multitude of the Deputies, and the liberty of each member: for which reason, Cardinal Johannes Franciscus Com∣mendonus, facetiously said, That Morbus Comitialis was the Epidemical distemper of Poland. Now, that the King may not want a Council in the interval of general Conventions, they, before they break up, appoint 24 Senators (8 Pala∣tines, 8 Major, and as many Minor Castellanes) and four Bishops to wait quarterly (four at a time, one Bishop and three Senators) till other 28 are chosen. And these are bound so close to their duty, that they accompany the King to the Wars: for which they have a Stipend allowed and payed out of the Treasury. The Courts of Judicature in respect of their division are the same as in other countreys, that is, either Ecclesiastic or Secular; either for civil or criminal causes: but in respect of the Judges and manner of proceeding therein, not easily to be understood without a particular survey. The Nobles have a Court peculiar to themselves, cal∣led the Court of Land-judicature, wherein all actions relating to estates in Land are tryed. Where also the Captains, and, by their permission, the Kings Tenants may sue the Nobles them∣selves for wast done upon the Lands belonging to the Kings table. To this Court likewise be∣long all actions of debt upon Contract. The Judges of this Court are, a chief Judg, a Judg, and a Secondary. Upon the death of any of these, the Nobility propose four landed men, whom they recommend to the King; who chu∣ses one out of them into the dead place. All the Judges are bound to be resident at the Session of the Court; which is twice, thrice, and sometimes four times, a year. The next remarkable Court is that of the several Cap∣tains jurisdiction, called Sudy Grodskie or Court∣military. The chief Judg of this Court is a Captain, he sits alone, takes cognisance of Rapes, Burglary, Setting Houses on fire, Rob∣beries upon the High-way. &c. Noblemen not Landed are here also tryed; and forreign Mer∣chants coming to Faires. He has also power, without any noise of Law to condemn and pu∣nish idle Vagabonds, Thieves, Proscribed per∣sons, Fugitives, and people of infamous conver∣sation. The writ of the Court runs Nos Capi∣taneus &c. Tibi &c. Mandamus vigore Regio, & nostra, qua hac parte fungimur, Authoritate, &c. In Criminal causes it is to be served a fortnight, in Civil a week, before the Court sits. To the Judicia Campestria may be referred the Vice-Cap∣tains Court: which takes cognizance of the di∣vision of Estates between brothers; forcible e∣jections; servants entertained without testimo∣nial; exaction of customs; non-payment of pub∣lick duties; &c. The Sub-Chamberlains Court is for settling the bounds of Noblemens Estates. The Commissorial Courts are erected for the same pur∣pose, when the controversy happens between a Noble-man and one of the Kings tenants. For then the King sends down Commissioners to settle the limits of his own lands: who therefore issue out their writ after this form. Nos &c. Com∣missarii per Majestatem Regiam specialiter deputati vobis Generosis &c. innotescimus, &c. The Tri∣bunal-Courts are superiour Courts, which take cognizance of all causes removed thither by way of appeal from the Courts of Land-judicature, the Captains Courts, the Vice-Chamberlain and the Commissorial Courts. The Judges of these Courts are as well spiritual as secular. The spiritual Judges are elected by the several Chap∣ters of the Provinces; the temporal Judges, by the most voices of the Nobility. These Courts are held only in two places for Poland, Petricow and Lublin. The Causes are heard in order: for three days are allowed to enter all causes that come; and whatever is not enter'd in those three days cannot be medled with that sitting. Here are tried all causes that concern Ecclesia∣stical persons, and the revenues of Churches and religious houses. The writs issued hence run all in the Kings name, under the Seal of the Province where the Defendant lives. The De∣crees of the Court are seal'd with the Seal of the province where the Court is held. From hence there lyes no appeal either to the King, or the General Session; unless where the Court is equally divided, or that the case in Contro∣versy be not decided by the Constitutions. The Courts of the General Conventions are either Cri∣minal, or Civil. The Criminal either for publick crimes, as High Treason, Treason, Robbing the Exchequer, Violation of the priviledges of the General Parliament, and adulterating or falsify∣ing the publick Coin; or else for private crimes, as Murder, Poysoning, Incest, Adultery, and such like hainous offences. To the civil Conven∣tional Courts belong all causes concerning the E∣state of the Kings table; goods unlawfully re∣ceived; extortion of custome; negligence of Magistrates; &c. all causes concerning the tenths of Noblemens Estates; profanation of Churches; Land-offices and Honours; &c. The Judges of this Court are the King and the Senatours. Whilst the Senatours and Deputies give their votes, the King absents himself; afterwards, when the de∣cree is confirm'd by plurality of votes, he re∣turns; and the Marshal having proclaimed the Sentence in the Kings presence, commands the person condemn'd to be clapt into irons, and takes care that execution be done. For causes that relate to the public Revenues there is the Court of the Exchequer usually held at Radom: and therefore called Tribunal Radomiense. The Judges of this Court, besides the Treasurer, are certain Senators, elected for this purpose in the general Parliaments of the Kingdom. Before this Court are examined and tryed all Sub-trea∣surers and Collectors of contributions and Cap∣tains which have not brought into the Treasury what collections were paid into their hands; as also all Merchants and others by whom the Treasury has suffer'd any dammage. This Court seldome sits above a fortnight or three weeks, and always adjourns before the meeting of the general Conventions. Nearly relating to this Court is that which they call The Commission for
payment of Souldiers wages. Here are tryed such Souldiers as have not appeared after they have received their pay, or that have commit∣ted any Acts of violence towards the Kings Sub∣jects. The Judges of this Court are the chief Commission-officers of the Army, with certain selected Senators and Deputies to assist them. To omit the Military Courts which are the same in all well disciplined armies, the Marshal of the Kings house has also his Court; whose jurisdi∣ction extends not only over the Kings servants, but also over the Senators themselves that live in the Court. The Captural Court is two-fold; either General, which sits during the Interreg∣num to prevent disorders, having absolute power of life and death; whose Judges are chosen out of the prime Nobility: Or, Particular; in the several Palatinates of the Kingdom, the Judges whereof are chosen out of the Nobility at the several particular Conventions in the beginning of the Interregnum. They take cognizance of all causes tryable in the Captains Court, and of all injuries and batteries (but meddle not with ci∣vil matters) being like a Court constituted to keep the peace during the Interregnum. All Cap∣tural Courts cease three weeks before the Assem∣blies for Election meet. After the Election is over, they sit again till the Coronation of the King. The Jews are every where tried and judg∣ed by the Palatines, from whom there lyes no appeal except the sum exceed an hundred Florens. They that live in Towns or Villages belonging to Noblemen are under the jurisdiction of the Lord of the Royalty. In the Assessorial Court the Chancellour sits as supreme Judge, assisted by the Masters of requests, and the principal Secretaries of the Kingdom. Here are heard all causes remo∣ved from the City Courts, as also from the Pa∣latines when the controversy lies between a Chri∣stian and a Jew. Of the Court of Relations the King himself is Judg, and hears all causes re∣moved by way of appeal out of the Assessorial Court. Hence there lies no appeal, but only to the Parliament it self: and that but in two or three cases. As when the action relates to an E∣state which the possessour affirms that he holds by inheritance; or that it concern the publick revenue of the kingdom. I do not find any Ec∣clesiatical Courts particularly named; however most certain it is, that the Bishops have their se∣veral Courts, where either they, or their offici∣als, take cognizance of all ceremonies and insti∣tutions Ecclesiastical, and are Judges of Heresy, Schism, Magick, Incantations, Usury, Simony, as also controversies about Tithes and Church-lands, of murder or violence offer'd to a reli∣gious person, or upon holy ground. Moreover, they determine the rights of Patronage, Ma∣trimonial differences and contests touching birth∣right. As for Wills and Testaments, the diffe∣rences about them are decided in the secular Courts as well as in these; unless in case of some Legacies left to the Church. From the Bishop's Court there lies an appeal to the Arch-bishop of Leopol; from him to the Arch-bishop of Gnesna; and thence to the Apostolick See. To the Spi∣ritual Courts belong the Court of Nunciature un∣der the jurisdiction of the Popes Nuncio, for that purpose always residing in Poland. However before he enters into his office, he is obliged to present to the King and the principal Ministers of State the Apostolick brief of his Nunciature, wherein he acknowledges the King as supreme. To conclude, it has been often controverted a∣mong which of Aristotle's five sorts of govern∣ment, the government of Poland may be rec∣kon'd: which when the most learned have not been able to determine, they have all betaken themselves to the common Proverb, frequently in the mouthes of the Polonians themselves, Po∣lonia confusione regitur: yet such a confusion, saith Coricinius, which has preserved the Virgin honour of the Nation safe and undefiled in the midst of so ma∣ny cruel and bloody Wars. At this day there is no less confusion in the re∣ligion then government of Poland. In the year 965 Miecislaus King of Poland, (John the 13th. being then Pope,) received and entertained the Christian faith according to the ceremonies of the Church of Rome; which though it be still the most profest and reigning religion to this day, yet have other Religions and Sects got no small footing in the Realm. For in the year 1264 the Jews flock'd into Poland, planting them∣selves whole Colonies together, in this King∣dom. To whom Boleslaus Duke of Great Po∣land, granted several priviledges and immunities, which Casimir the great (at the suit of another Jewish Esther, who was his Mistress) very much enlarged: by which means their number is now so encreased over all the Cities and Villages of Poland, that is now called the Jews paradise. In the year 1397, Vitoldus, grand Duke of Lithua∣nia, having overthrown the Nagayan Tartars, tran∣slated whole Herds of them into his own Ter∣ritories; who to this day obstinately maintain the follies of Mahomet. Much about the same time, in the reign of Ʋladislaus Jagello, the o∣pinions of John Huss brake forth, and (by the pains of Procopius Holy, Brederick Straznicz and William Kotska) prevailed so far in Poland, even among the Nobility, that though several severe Edicts were made against them, yet could they never be wholly extirpated. At length the Lu∣therans and Calvinists invaded the Roman-Catho∣lick Religion with more danger to the Papacy; their party being encreased by the Students of Cracow, through the neglect of the Magistrates in not revenging the murder of one of their Col∣legiates. For they, thereupon dispersing into Bohemia and Germany, upon their return so large∣ly propagated the doctrine of Luther, that Si∣gismund Augustus himself, the Archbishop of Gnesna, with the Bishops of Culmo and Camieniek, lean'd very much to their party. Among these the Arrians intermixed themselves, and although so severely prosecuted by John Casimir and o∣thers that Alexander the seventh, for their sakes, gave the Kings of Poland the Title of Orthodox, yet they still shelter themselves under the name of Dissenters. As for the Calvinists, how far they have strengthened themselves may appear by the late disturbances in Dantzick. The Russians, though a great part of them, in the year 1596, joyned themselves to the Roman Church; yet the more numerous party, which go by the name of Not-united, still retain the ceremonies of the Greeks, under Arch-bishops and Priests of the same profession. And their priviledges were confirmed by the agreement made in the year 1658. The Armenians, who are very nu∣merous in Poland upon the account of Trade, profess the Roman Catholick religion, being wrought thereto by the zealous industry of John Casimir. Lately, for the better support of the Ro∣man-Catholick Religion, there was an Article in∣serted into the Pacta Conventa, to which this present King swore, That no Person should be elected to the Kingdom of Poland that was not of the Roman Ca∣tholick religion; and that the Queen should be ei∣ther a Roman Catholick born, or by conversion. It is considerable that there was not any con∣gregation of the Antitrinitarians continued from the ancient Arrians and Photinians; but the be∣ginning
map of the Palatinate of Poznan PALATINATVS POSNANIENSIS▪ IN MAIOTI POLONIA PRIMARII NOVA DELINATIO Per G. F. M. blazon or coat of arms
of them was since the reformation: and they began to appear in Poland about the year 1560, by the suggestions of certain runnagate Ita∣lians, refuging themselves in Countries where the Nobility have the liberty to set up and maintain what religion they please. These were Paulus Alciatus a Milanese, a fanatick and very unlearned person, Valentinus Gentilis, Bernardinus Ochinus, Paulus Orsacius, Franc. Lismaninus, &c. who at first, all of them, professed the reformed Religion; but afterwards fell, some to Arrianism, Photinia∣nism, Anabaptism, Judaism, Mahometanism, and some set up new sects of their own. The first person of quality that appear'd in their de∣fence was Georgius Blandrata, (a Physitian, sustained first by Nic. Adzeo surnamed the Black, after∣wards by the Battori) Petrus Statorius, and some others. These men having long lurked up and down these Countries, sowing their Tares where they found opportunity, at last were disco∣vered and cited to a Synod of the Reformed: where they answered so ambiguously and cun∣ningly, that they deceived the Synod, and were embraced as Orthodox. In 1565, the King of Poland permitted a disputation between the Re∣formed and them; the sum of which is set down by Possevinus (De Atheismo haereticorum hu∣jus seculi c. 13.) the success was, that both parties departed with the same opinions they brought thither. But the Reformed in divers Synods drew up out of their several Confessions, Augu∣stan, Bohemian, and Helvetian, Articles of their belief concerning the Trinity; which being ap∣prov'd by King Stephen, he allowed them a Church publickly in Cracow. But the Antitrinitarians lurked and sheltered themselves here and there under such Nobility as they could perswade to befriend them; nor were they ever established, for when any of their Patrons died, there succeeded most times one of another perswasion; so that they were forced to remove; till they settled at Racovia under the protection of Sienjenius: there they set up a School, Press, &c. But not this till after the coming of Socinus; who being known by the divers books he had printed, was sent for by Blandrata about 1579. He learned his opi∣nions from his Uncle Lelius Socinus, who was the first in that age that revived those doctrines concerning our Saviours mediatorship. So∣cinus at his first arrival was taken up with dis∣putes against the dissenters, such as Franc. Davidis, Christ. Francken, Farnesius, Greg. Pauli, and others, particularly with Petr. Stoinsky, a very eloquent man; who openly yeilded the cause, and went over to Socinus; and afterwards assisted him very much in reducing all those that held either Arrianism, or wilder opinions concerning our Saviour. It should seem that Socinus was most of all favoured by Morstinius, Blonscius and o∣ther Noble-men; and that they were not yet setled in Racovia; till, Greg. Pauli who had got in there with his Anabaptists, and called it New Jerusalem, was by the Magistrates thence dispos∣sess'd. There succeeded Socinus some persons of more eminent learning, such as Crellius, Schli∣tingius &c. whose authority kept the party uni∣ted till the year 1638; when certain of their Scholars thinking themselves strong enough to exert and defend their zeal, put off their mode∣sty, and threw down a cross near unto their Schools in Raconia. Of which complaint being made to the Diet, it was commanded, that their Temple, School, and Printing-house should be taken from them, and their Pastors and School-masters banished, which being executed, their Patron Sienjenius died for grief. What has been hitherto said, has related to Poland in general; which, according to the opinion of the best modern Geographers, may be di∣vided into the following Provinces. 1. The Greater Poland; which contains the Palatinates of Posnania, Calissia, Lancicia, Bresta, Inouladi∣slavia, Sirad and Rava, and the Territories of Vielun and Dobrin. 2. The Lesser Poland; in which are contain'd the Palatinates of Cracow, Sendo∣mir and Lublin; the Dukedomes of Oswiec, Ta∣bor and Aever, and the County of Scepus. 3. Li∣thuania; which consists of three Palatinates of Vilna, Troco and Brescia. 4. Masovia; to which belong the Palatinates of Masovia, Ploco, and Podlachia. 5. Prussia Regia; which is divided in∣to the Palatinates of Culmo, Mariaeburg and Po∣merania, and the Bishoprick of Varma. 6. Samo∣gitia; in which are no Palatinates: but the whole Province is subject to one Governour or Cap∣tain. 7. White Russia; which borders upon the great Dukedome of Moscovy, and contains the Palatinates of Novogrod, Micislavia, Viteps, Polo∣co, Smolensco, Czernichovia and Kiovia: of which at present a great part is in the hands of the great Duke of Moscovy. 8. Red Russia; in which lay the Palatines of Russia, Podolia, Volhinia, Belze, and Braclavia. Lastly, the Southern tract of Li∣vonia is also reckoned among the Provinces of Poland. But of all these we shall treat more fully in the following Order. GREAT POLAND. THe Greater Poland (containing the Coun∣ties of Posnania and Calissia,Great Po∣land. and the Pa∣latines of Sirad, Rava, Vielun, and Cujavia; which last is subdivided into the Baronies of Breste and Junuvladislavia), is bounded on the South with Silesia; on the West with the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, and the upper Pomeren; on the North with Masovia, and part of Prussia; on the East with the Lesser Poland. 'Tis generally a le∣vel champain country, abounding with pleasant Rivers, Lakes, and Ponds, and well furnish'd with all manner of Fish and Fowl. Some parts of Cu∣javia indeed are more mountainous; but what those want in pleasure, they repay with profit; the hills every-where affording good store of Wool, and the valleys plenty of Corn. The Metropolis of the whole Province is Posnania (called by the Poles Posnan,Posnania; by the Germans Posen) seated in 39 degrees of Longi∣tude, and 52 and about 10 minutes of Latitude, on the river Warta. The City is not large; but well stockt with Merchants from all parts of Germany. John Lubranski, formerly Bishop of this place, founded here a Gymnasium (or petty-University) in the suburbs, ordering the Pro∣fessours to be called from Cracow, where him∣self had been Doctor of Laws. Though this structure has since that time been very much beautifyed by Adam Ca∣nar, one of Lubranski's successours in the Bi∣shoprick; yet tis still outdone by the Jesuits Col∣ledge and Monastery in Posen. The people here are civil and gentile; orderly and cleanly in their houses, and go more rich in apparel then is ordinary in any other place in Poland: Cracow onely excepted; with which notwithstanding Posen may vie for beauty, trade, and riches. The greatest part of the inhabitants are Roman-Catholicks. However, there are many large swarms of Jews, who live among them, and enjoy more priviledges and immunities then the Citizens themselves. The Town is governed by a Court of Schipins or Aldermen; who them∣selves are subject to a Burgo-master, chosen
yearly (as a Mayor in our Cities) out of them: who, during his government has the title of Ge∣neral of Great Poland conferred on him. The Bishop and Clergy are in the Province of the Archbishop of Gnesna. Seven miles from this city you have Gnesna (called by the Dutch Gnisen) formerly the Me∣tropolis of Poland,Gnesna. built by Lechus the first Duke of Poland; by whom it had its name gi∣ven from the Polish word Gniasao, which signi∣fies a nest: because in this place Lechus found an Eagles nest. Whence to this day, the Princes of Poland bear a spread Eagle for their Arms. This is the seat of the chief Metropolitan Arch∣bishop in the whole Kingdome: of whose state and grandeur we have given you a relation be∣fore. In the Cathedrall is kept an inestimable treasure of Gold, Silver, and curious enam∣el'd vessels, left by several Princes of Poland and Archbishops of this See: which was much en∣creased by the legacies of Henry Firley, late Archbishop, who, besides many vessels and vest∣ments of great worth, gave them his own mitre, valued at 24000 Polish guilders; which, being reduced to our English money, will amount to about 2300 pounds sterling. The gates lead∣ing into the Cathedral are of Corinthian brass and rarely wrought. These at first were taken out of the Monastery of Corsuna in the Tauric Chersonese; whence they were remo∣ved to Kiow: and from thence brought hither by Boleslaus the second. In the year 1613 this city was miserably laid wast by fire; and does yet daily loose something of its anti∣ent glory. The rest of the Towns of Posnania are mean∣ly built, and without any considerable fortifi∣cations. Their buildings (excepting onely the Churches, Monasteries, and other religious hou∣ses) are most commonly of wood. The County of Calissia has its name from the chief City in it,Calissia. by the Polanders called Kalisk; seated on Przoen and fortifyed with a strong brick wall. Stanislaus Karncow, Archbishop of Gnesna, founded here a stately Colledge of Jesu∣its; and endowed it with a considerable reve∣nue. The countrey round this City is general∣ly, like the rest of the greater Poland, pleasant, fruitfull and very well cultivated and inhabi∣ted; every where abounding with great Towns and villages. Among which Borek and Golu∣chow are the most considerable; the former, for a famous picture of the Virgin Mary resorted to with a great opinion of devotion by most of the zealous Romanists in these parts; the latter for an extraordinary peice of modern Archi∣tecture, in the Palace of the Counts of Lesno. The City of Sirad,Sirad. which gives name to the Palatinate of Siradia, is seated on the south of Calissia upon the river Warta. 'Tis fortifyed with a strong brick wall. Most of the houses are of wood, and very mean and low. This City, and the territories about it, made former∣ly a Dukedome, usually given to the second son of the Polish King. Seven German,Petricow. or twenty nine English miles from Sirad, lyes Petricow, a neat and well built City; where sits yearly the Parliament of Po∣land. Vielun,Vielun. or Wielun, is somewhat differing in beauty from the rest of the Cities of these parts: most of its houses being brick. Rava is as populous a City as Vielun,Rava. but short of it in the splendor of its buildings; which are commonly wood: except the castle which is brick. In this is reposited a fourth part of the revenues of the Crown: and all captives, if persons of any considerable quality, are here kept prisoners. Instances whereof we have in the natural son of Charles King of Sweden, who (with other officers of the Swedish army) was taken prisoner in the Lifland wars; and Baldise General of Gustaphus Adolphus's forces, who (with Streffe, Taiste, and other Colonels) was taken in the wars of Prussia. Five German,Lowicz. or twenty English miles from Rava lies Lowicz; the residence of the Archbi∣shop of Gnesna. 'Tis a place much more popu∣lous then Rava, and yearly (in the Fair-time) throng'd with great numbers of merchants, who flock thither from all quarters. The Arch∣bishop's Palace is seated in a low and marshy ground; nevertheless its fabrick is magnificent, and well becoming the state of so great a Prince. Lancicia (or Lanschet) giving denomination to a Palatinate of the same name,Lancicia. is situate in a low and fenny ground; encompassed with a ditch and brick wall. Not far from the City is a Monastery; which might easily (if as well provided for by art as nature) be made impreg∣nable. There is besides little in the City worth taking notice of; except the great fairs kept once a year; and the sessions of the Deputies of this Palatinate, which are here holden. Cujavia is bounded on the East with Masovia and the Palatinate of Rava:Cujavia. on the south with the Palatinates of Lanschet and Calissia: on the north with Prussia. It contains in it two Baro∣nies, Breste, which lies to the east and south; and Juniuladislavia. This Countrey is rich in corn and cattel, and well stored with Fish. In the Palatinate of Bresty lies the City of Ʋ∣ladislaw:Bresty. the seat of the Bishop of Cujavia and Pomeren. The Cathedral here is a pitiful old-fashioned peice of building; but well furnished with plate and rich ornaments and reliques with∣in. The houses are generally of brick. Mat∣thias Golanciew (who was forty two years Bishop of this See) beautifyed this City very much; by building that stately Palace which is seen at this day in Ʋladislaw, instead of an old ruinous castle, and founding the Church of St. Vital the Martyr. The next considerable place is Bresty; built of brick and wood interlayd. The other Towns of note are, Nisaw, a wall'd Town; Rasienski, guarded with a fair Castle; Radschow, seated on the lake Goplo; and Kowale, upon the Vistula. Cruswick belongs properly to the Palatinate of Bresty, though situated upon the confines of Inou∣ladislavia.Cruswick. In the suburbs of this City stands a Church dedicated to St. Peter, built of square stone; with a Colledge of twenty four Canons. In the adjoyning Island stands a Brick Castle, built by Popielus the elder, who chose this place to live in, rather then Cracow or Gnesna (whither he had once removed his Court) as being of too timorous a nature to trust himself in the confines of the Russians or Hungarians. Here (as the Polonian Chronicles report) Papielus, son of Pa∣pielus the elder, was devoured by mice: heaven, by this punishment, revenging the blood of se∣veral of his relations, whom his greedy ambi∣tion of swaying the scepter had prompted him to poyson at a banquet. Cromer advances the story by telling us, That his father, in his ordi∣nary revels, used to wish himself and his children this kind of death; and, That the mice were miraculously generated out of the carcases of his poyson'd kindred. The Palatinate of Inouladislavia (or Inoulocz) comprehends the territories of Bydgost, Bebro,Inouladi∣slavia. and Inoulocz: reaching fron Cruswick and the lake Goplo as far as the Vistula and confines of Pomeren.
map of Prussia PRUSSIA ACCURATE INSCRIPTA a Gasparo Henneberg Erlichensi blazon or coat of arms Nobiliss.o & tam prosapia generis quam Meritis in Patriam Honoratiss.o Viro D.o NICOLAO VON BODECK. Consuli et Primario Iudici in cele∣berrion totius Maris Baltici Emporio. Vrbe Gedanensi▪ artium lite∣rarumque autori benevolentiss.o D. D. D. Ioannes Ianssonius.
There are in it several Towns, of note and villa∣lages, all of them built of wood. It sends to the Parliament of Poland, besides the Palatine, four Castellanes, of Inoulocz, Bydgost and Conarow. Bydgost is a walled-Town, seated on the river Barde (by which all sorts of merchandize are brought from the Vistula) and trades much in Sammon. The rest, worth taking notice of are, Gnieucow, Vartislaw, Solete, Dibow and Strelec; in which last stands the richest Nunnery in the greater Po∣land. MASOVIA. Masovia (called by the Polanders Mazowsze, by the Germans Die Masaw), lies in the very middle of Poland, bounded on the north with Prussia; on the east with Lithuania and Polessia, on the west with some part of the lesser Poland; on the south, with the Palatinate of Rava. 'Tis usually divi∣ded into these four parts: The Palatinates of Pod∣lachia, Plockzo, Masovia, strictly so called, and the territories of Dobrin; which last ought rather to be reckoned a part of the Palatinate of Plockzo. There are different conjectures touching the o∣riginal of its name. The most commonly recei∣ved is; That, upon the death of Mieceslaus the second, the Nobility of Poland (not enduring the impotent and effeminate government of his surviving Queen Rixo) layd hands upon what every man could catch. Among these Masos (or, as others call him, Maslaus) formerly Cup∣bearer to the deceased King, siezed upon that large tract of land which he, after his own name, called Masovia. This Masos was afterwards o∣vercome by Casimir the first; by whom he was taken and put to death. By this means it was again restor'd to the Crown of Poland: though it still retained the name of Masovia. But Sta∣nislaus Serictius (rejecting, in part, this story), de∣rives more probably the Massovii from the Mas∣sagetes. I know, saith he, what our Historians have written touching the original of the Massovians. But it seems incredible to me, that so famous and coura∣gious a people should stoop to borrow their denomina∣tion from so mean a person. In the year 1220 Les∣cus the white, in the Parliament of Sandomir, grant∣ed the Dukedomes of Masovia, Cujavia, and Do∣brinia to his brother Conrade: from which time it was governed by Dukes of its own (doing homage however to the Kings of Poland) till the the year 1495, but then the race of the Dukes of Masovia began to fail. For that year John Duke of Masovia dyed a Batchelour; upon which John Albert reunited Plockzo to the Crown, leav∣ing the rest of Masovia to his brother Conrade. Which (after his decease in the year 1503) was granted to his children, upon condition, that for default of male issue, it should return to the Crown: which was effected in the reign of Sigismund the first. In the same manner the Pa∣latinate of Podlachia (formerly belonging to Masovia, and joyned by Casimir Jagellon to Li∣thuania) return'd to the Kingdom of Poland in the year 1567. There are no peculiar Bishops in Masovia: but the whole Province is divided under the jurisdiction of Posnan, Plockzo, and Luceoria. The Metropolis of Masovia is Warsaw (by the Polanders called Warfrawa) seated in the very centre of the Polish dominions, upon the Vistu∣la: encompassed with a double wall and deep ditch: distant 40 German, or 160 English miles from Posen and Cracow. Here the King of Po∣land keeps his Court, in a large four squared Pa∣lace, built by Sigismund the third; but much beautifyed by his successours. Over against this, on the other side of the river (which is passa∣ble by a stately wooden bridge) sits the great Parliament of Poland in another of the Kings Palaces called Viasdow, seated in the midst of ma∣ny and delicate Groves and Gardens. In the City are publique buildings of good note; the most remarkable of which is St. John Baptists Church: where divine service is performed by secular Canons. Not far from Viasdow (in the suburbs called Cracow) stands, as a trophie of the victory obtained by the Poles over the Mos∣covite, a small Chappel, built (by the Kings com∣mand) for the burial of Demetrius Suiscius, great Duke of Moscovie, who dyed a captive in the Castle of Gostenin. The Nobility of Masovia (which are more numerous then in any other part of Poland; be∣ing reckoned to amount to near forty thousand, whereof fifteen thousand appear'd in a body at the Coronation of Sigismund the third) are all Roman-Catholicks: never suffering any of other religions or opinions to reside among them. Out of these are sent yearly, to the ge∣neral Assembly of the Estates, one Palatine and six Castellanes. The Palatinate of Plockzo lyes eastward from Masovia: between the Vistula and Prussia.Plockzo. 'Tis divided into the territories of Plockzo, Zavera, Mlava and Srensco; and sends out, to the great Parliament, four Senators: that is, The Bishop, The Palatine and Castellanes of Plockzo, Rad∣zyagas, and Sieprez. It has its name from Plockzo, its chief City, seated on a high bank of the Vi∣stula; whence you have a fair prospect of a plea∣sant and fruitful Countrey. The City is an E∣piscopal See; and very populous. There are in it several religious houses and Churches, be∣sides the Cathedral, very well endowed: espe∣cially the Abby of Benedictines in the suburbs; where, among other reliques, is kept the head of St. Sigismund (to whom the Church is dedi∣cated) enchased in gold, given by Sigismund the third. The territory of Dobrizin is properly a part of the Palatinate of Plockzo; though Mr. Blaeu,Dobrzin. and some others, have made it a distinct part of Masovia. It has its name from the City Dobrzin, situate, between Cujavia and Plockzo, on a rock near the banks of the Vistula. The houses in it are generally of wood; and the whole City is environed with wooden fortifications. The Countrey affords great store of fruit and fish. PRƲSSIA. Whence Prussia or Borussia (called by the Ger∣mans Preussen) should fetch its name,Prussia. is not easily determined. Certain it is, That it is not to be met with amongst antient authors. Cluverius thinks Helmoldus, who flourished in the twelfth Century, is the oldest writer that gives any ac∣count of the Countrey under this name. But both Dithmarus (who lived in the beginning of the eleventh Century, in the days of the Empe∣rour Henry the second) and, before him, an A∣nonymous writer of the life of St. Adalbert (the Apostle of the Prussians) about the year 990 men∣tions it; Marianus Scotus will have the word deri∣ded from Aprutis; a City, saith he, in these parts, where St. Adalbert suffered martyrdome in the year 995. But this conjecture is vain and preca∣rious: for where any City of this name former∣ly stood, or its ruins can at this day be found, only he himself can tell us. Johannes Annius Viterbiensis tells us, the Prussians were at first called Pruti; and that from one Prutus a Scy∣thian King, grandchild to Noah. That this na∣tion
is an offspring of the antient Scythians is in∣deed allowable: but to the rest of the story we can say no more then, That 'tis well known how nimble this author and his feign'd Berosus are at counterfeiting of names in the Etymologies of Countries. Others (of the same authority with Viterbiensis) bring the Prussians out of Asia, un∣der the command of Prussia a King of Bithynia. Some will have the word Prussi, or Prutheni, cor∣rupted from Bructeri; an antient people of Ger∣many, who (say they) conquered and peopled these parts. The most probable opinion is, that the Prussians are the same with the Borusci, a peo∣ple formerly inhabiting some parts of Russia, a∣bout the Raphaean mountains; whence they were driven out by excessive snows and cold. For (to omit the affinity there is among the three words Borusci, Borussi, and Prussi) the antient language of the Prussians is onely a dialect of the Russian; as we shall have occasion to shew by and by. Who were the first inhabitants of Prussia is harder to find out then the etymology of the word. Many, as well ancient as modern Geo∣graphers, think Eridanus and the Insulae Electri∣des (so famous for the Electrum, or Amber, car∣ryed all Greece and Italy over) were in this coun∣try. But who in those days peopled the land, they dare not determine. The most likely story is, that the Venedi or Venedae (a large branch of the Sla∣vonian Nation) were here seated. This seems plain from the words of Ptolomy, who tells us, the Venedi, upon the Vistula, had on the South the Phinni and Gythones. And Cluverius confirms the assertion from several places in Liefland, which to this day retain the names of Wenden, Windaw, Ʋschewende, &c. Hence came the mistake of the Latin Poets; who, having read that Electrum was brought from the Venedi, confounded these peo∣ple with the Venetians of Italy, and fancied Pa∣dus was the ancient Eridanus. Besides the Venedi, the Galindae and Sudini are here placed by Pto∣lomy; and Hartknoch proves, from the idolatrous worship used formerly in Prussia, that the Goths were sometime masters of the country. The Aelii and Aelvaeones (reckon'd by some writers as the ancient inhabitants of Prussia) were Goths. At this day the Prussians are a kind of hetero∣geneous people, made up of Swedes, Polanders, Germans, and others of the neighbouring Na∣tions. The whole country is bounded on the North with the Baltick Sea for fifty German, or two hun∣dred English, miles together; on the East, with Lithvania and Podlachia; on the South, with Ma∣sovia; on the West with the Vistula; which se∣parates it from Cassubia and part of Pomeren. The chief Rivers in it are, the Vistula, Nemeni, Cronon, (called by the Natives at this day Mi∣mel, and near the mouth of it Russ), Nogat, Elb∣ing, Vuser, Passar, Alla, Pregol, Ossa, Ʋrebnicz, Lice, and Lave. By the help of these, and the conve∣nient havens which are every-where found upon the Baltick shore, all the commodities of the country are easily exported, and foreign wares brought in. The inhabitants are generally strong-body'd and long liv'd. Adam Brememsis (in his descrip∣tion of Denmark, and the Northern parts of Eu∣rope) tells us, the Prussians were grey-ey'd and yellow-hair'd. The same opinion the ancients had of all the Northern Nations; whence Sido∣nius Apollinaris speaking of the Heruli, who doubt∣less came out of this country, saith: Hic glaucis Herulus genis vagatur, Imos Oceani colens recessus; Algoso prope concolor profundo. And Ausonius, speaking of Bissula, a Swabish Virgin taken captive by the Romans, says of her: Sic Latiis mutata bonis, Germana maneret, Ʋt facies, oculos caerula, flava comis. But since the Prussians have mix'd themselves with other Nations, and admitted of the modish luxury of the rest of the European countries, they are neither so healthy, nor of the same com∣plexion, as formerly. The apparel of the Prussian-Gentry is not much different from, tho not altogether so gaudy as, that of the more Southern Nations. The Rusticks wear, after the fashion of their forefathers, long and strait coats of course wool or leather. 'Tis reckon'd an argument of more then ordinary riches, if a Yeoman be able to purchase an holi∣day Suit of course English cloth. Tho the Venedi, as Tacitus witnesses, were the first of the Scythian race that forsook their wag∣gons (which their ancestors were wont to live in), and begun to build houses; yet their suc∣cessors are not yet arrived at any great curiosity in Architecture. Near the Vistula indeed, which is the ancient seat of the Venedi, the houses are magnificent, in comparison of the wooden huts which you meet with towards the wild confines of Lithvania. Tacitus tells us, the Phenni, who dwelt in these parts, had no other shelter from the injuries of the weather and wild beasts, then the boughs of trees twisted together. And to this day the invention is not much improved; for the rude commonalty have yet no other habi∣tation then hovels made of stakes interwoven with rods, and cover'd with earth, at best a little fern. The many incursions which have been made into this country, upon the several late quarrels of the Dukes of Brandenburgh with the Polander and Swede, have forced them to raise some Castles and Fortifications of stone; but o∣therwise a stone-house is as rare as a coat of English Freeze. Nor is there any greater advance∣ment made in their lodgings; for the ancient Prussians lay on the ground, or sometimes on the skins of beasts, and these sleep on straw. They are naturally content with spare diet, and more given to sloth then gluttony or drunk∣enness. The most ordinary food they have is fish; their land abounding with great store of Rivers and Lakes, to the number (as they have been formerly reckon'd by some of their Monks) of two thousand thirty and seven. They ne∣ver used to eat herbs, or any manner of roots, before the Teutonick order came among them. So that, it seems not so natural to man (if we may judge of mans nature, by the actions of these men, who had never yet studyed luxury in variety of meat and drink) to feed upon the fruits of the earth; as Aristotle, in his Oecono∣micks would perswade us. The drinks used heretofore in Prussia, as well as the neighbouring Countries, were water, Mares-milk mixed (sometimes) with blood, and Mead. This last is still much in use among them; and made in such quantities, that they can afford to send it into other Nations. From the Germans they have learned the art of brewing beer. They have been alwaies (and are still, both men and women) much given to drunkenness; seldome, or never, keeping holiday without a fit of it; and judging they have not made a friend welcome enough except the whole family be drunk in the entertainment. Though the Prussians had little use of mony among them, before the arrival of the Teutonick order, in the thirteenth Century; yet they tra∣ded
map of parts of Prussia, the islands between Elbing and Dantzig TRACTUUM BORUSSIA circum Gedanum et Elbingam▪ ab incolis WERDER appellati▪ cum adiuncta NERINGIA▪ nova et elaboratissima delineatio Authore Olao Ioannis Gotho blazon or coat of arms To the orp. WILLIAM PEACHEY Esq of New Grov in SUssex This Mapp is Hum-bly Dedicated.
with the Germans and other people long be∣fore that time, giveing furrs and hides in ex∣change for linen, and such other commodities as they needed. The chief trade they had, lay in the Electrum, or Amber, so famous among the antients; though that was at last laid aside; the idle nation contenting it self with the bare provision of necessaries. What this Electrum should be, all Historians, that write of Prussia, have busied themselves to find out. The Poets feigned it to be the tears of the Heliades, deplo∣ring the harsh fate of their brother Phaeton. Some Philosophers have fancied, 'tis nothing else but the fat sweat of the Sea. Others tell us, 'tis the gum of a tree; but cannot agree what kind they should pitch upon; whether Poplar, Cedar, or Elm. Kircher is of opinion, that 'tis only a bituminous substance, which, rising from the bottome of the Sea, is toss'd to and fro by the waves, till brought to a consistency. But no man ever that liv'd upon the Baltick, could yet observe any such Bitumen on those Seas. Besides the veins of Amber, which are found under ground, in places far distant from the Sea, do sufficiently evince the contrary. It is confes∣sed that now and then 'tis met with in the Baltic Sea, and in the adjoyning Lakes and Rivers; but when this happens, we must suppose those frag∣ments broke off from some vein under water by the violence of a flood or tempest. Mr. Hart∣man (a late German author, who has printed a large treatise de succino Prussico) gives this final determination of the nature of it; since, saith he, it can neither be melted nor is malleable, 'tis impossible it should be metal; and because 'tis too so∣lid a body to come under the species of Sulphur or Bi∣tumen, it must needs be ranked among the kinds of precious stones. Amber or Succinum is a coagula∣tion of Petroleum; which being of divers colours, white, yellow, red, black, &c. accordingly grows into divers substances. Whilst very liquid, like Oyl, it is called Petroleum; if somewhat thicker and clammier, 'tis Naphtha; if still more, it is Bitumen; but if into a hard and stony sub∣stance; if of such colours it becomes white, yel∣low, red, black Amber; if very black, it is Ga∣gates or Jet. In breaking the Rocks near Tan∣gier for the Mole, they frequently find Amber growing in the clefts of the stones. Pliny tell us, 'twas called heretofore, by the Germans, Glessum, or Glass, because of its transparency; and that thence the Romans called the Island where it was gathered Glessaria, which by the Barbarians was, before Cesar Germanicus came into these Seas with his fleet, named Austrania (I had rather read Austa∣nia; for the ordinary German name for Amber is Augsteyn, because 'tis good for the eyes.) The Prussians, as we have said, had little or no knowledge of the use of mony before the ar∣rival of the Teutonick order among them, in the year 1230. These men, coming out of Germa∣ny, brought with them the coin of their Coun∣try. Among the rest of their peices of mony, the broad Bohemian Gross was long currant both in Prussia and Poland. But, not judging that small stock they had brought with them suffici∣ent to furnish the Country with mony, they presently begun to set up Mints and Coin peices of their own: which they did so accurately, that most Nations have granted, that the art of coining was here first brought to perfection. Whence the Learned Sr. Henry Spelman thinks, our English word Sterling came from the Easter∣lings, who coming out of Prussia, first taught the art of refining and coining purer silver in En∣gland, then before their coming had been made use of. The species of mony currant at this day in Prussia, are these: 1. A Schilling; which contains six pence (or Pfennings) none of which are now in use in single peices. 2. A Gross; which consists of three Schillings. Twenty of these Grosses make 3. A Mark. 4. A Gulder is made of thirty Grosses. 5. A Dollar (or Thaler) is worth three Gulders. Two Dollars make 6. A Ducate; valued at nine shillings English. These are the most ordinary and proper Coins of Prussia: though Swedish and Danish mony is currant too. Some of the late Prussian writers will have the word Schilling fetch its name from one Bernhard Schilling, who first stamp'd this kind of Coin. But this fancy is confuted by Schottelius; who nevertheless is himself baffel'd in the Etymology of the word. The Gross had its name given it, because 'twas the greatest peice of mony made use of in the infancy of coinage. The lower Saxons (changing, according to their manner, the high Dutch s into t) call it a Grott; whence we have our word Great. A Mark was formerly no peculiar piece of Coin; but a cer∣tain weight of mony, worth thirty six of the Marks now used in Prussia. So that it had not this name, as Loccenius guesses, from the German word Mark, because 'twas marked or stamped with some particular Coin; but was only used in that Country in reckoning of mony, as we count by pounds (and marks) and the French by Livres; though neither of us have any piece of mony of that value. Gulder signifies no more then a peice of Gold Coin. A Dollar (or Thaler, as the Dutch write it) has its name from the German Thal, a valley or dale; because first coined at the Mines in Joachim's-dale, in the year 1517; whence for a while, instead of the word Thalerus, they used Joachimicus for a Dollar. The worth and value of every one of these are almost yearly changed, by the continual allays of brass and copper mixt with silver; and other intrigues of state. That the Venedi (the first inhabitants of some parts of Prussia) spoke the Slavonian tongue,Language. is beyond all controversy. After them, the Goths brought in a dialect of the Celtick, little diffe∣ring from the German, tongue: but this wrought little change among the Prussians, who (till the arrival of the Teutonick order) spoke, as they do still in many places, a language fundamen∣tally the same with what the Russians, Polonians and Lithuanians now use. Grunovius indeed, a Prussian born, is of another opinion; because the Polanders do not at all understand a Preusner, and the Lithuanians very little. But how invalid this argument is, any one may perceive, who shall consider with what difficulty an Austrian, Lunen∣burger and Fleming (and how much more a Dane, German and Englishman) would discourse toge∣ther. A mixture of the Slavonian and German tongues, and a revolution of (perhaps) two thousand years, must needs alter the Prussian language considerably from what it was at first. What time Prussia,Religion. with the adjoyning Coun∣tries, began to leave off their Idolatrous worship, and to be converted to Christianity is hard to discover. Stanislaus Lubienscius, Bishop of Plockzo, thinks Andrew the Apostle first planted the Gospel in these Northern Climates. Others, more punctual in the story, tell us, That the same Apostle sayl'd out of Greece by the Euxine Sea, and (coming up the Boristhenes or Dnieper) land∣ed at Kiow, then the Metropolis of Russia; whence he went forward, baptizing and converting the Heathens, as far as the Baltick Sea. Some, up∣on
as shallow ground as the former, will have St. Bartholomew and St. Thaddaeus first preachers in Prussia. However, all agree in this; That, to∣wards the latter end of the tenth Century, St. Adalbert or Albert (Bishop of Prague in Bohemia and (say the Polish writers) afterwards Archbi∣shop of Gnesna) came through Poland into Prus∣sia; where he either first planted, or restor'd, Christianity. But, the Heathenish Priests (per∣ceiving innovation of religion inconsistent with their interest) made the people so incensed against St. Adalbert, that they slew him barbarously at Fischhausen in Sambland, in the year 997. Upon this, Boleslaus the first (King of Poland) enters Prussia with a great army, and brought the in∣habitants to these conditions of peace; That they should pay tribute to Poland, and embrace the Christian religion. And, to prevent for the future all relapse into Idolatry and superstition, he burnt up the great Oak at Romanove; the tem∣ple of three of their superior Gods. But no sooner had he left them, then they forsook Christianity, and return'd to their Idols. After him, three of his successours (of the same name) did several times reduce them to Christianity and homage to the Crown of Poland. But all in vain; For, at the first opportunity, they were sure to throw of both yokes. In the beginning of the thirteenth Century, the Polish Nobility (having rent that Kingdome in pieces) neglected the con∣version of the Prussians for a while. However, about the year 1215, Christianus, a Cistertian Monk, was very busy in confirming them in the principles they had received; and to that end, by the Pope's command, took upon him the authority of a Bishop. But finding his own pow∣er insignificant, he was quickly forced to beg the assistance of Conrade Duke of Masovia. This expedient also proved unsuccessful. For the Knights of Dobrin, whom the Duke had opposed to the fury of the Prussians, making incursions into Masovia, were all vanquished and slain by the Idolaters. When all these expedients prov'd un∣succcessful, the Christians begun to consider of some other means of converting the Prussians: since no fair usage would work upon such a stub∣born people as they found these were, they pitcht upon the Knights of the Teutonick Order (famous at that time all Christendom over) as most likely, either to perswade or force them into Christiani∣ty. Conrade, Duke of Masovia, pleased with these proposals, immediately dispatches letters to the Master of the Order; profering him the land of Culm, and auxiliary forces, in case he should meet with any opposition. Upon this, in the year 1226, Herman de Salza (fourth Master of the Teutonic Order) forthwith sends Herman de Balke, one of his Knights, among the Prussians, with the title of Superintendent (afterwards chang∣ed into Provincial) of Prussia. But so vigorously did the Heathens oppose these undertakings, that it was fifty three years before they could be brought to renounce their Idolatry. After Chri∣stianity began to take root among them, seve∣ral Bishopricks and Monasteries were founded. Notwithstanding all which, many Heathenish Cities were winked at: for the barbarous com∣monalty could not, but by degrees, be weaned from their antient folly. Besides, the Masters of the Order minded the enlargement of their own power and dominion more then the preaching of the Gospel; being grown to that height of inso∣lence, that they despised the Canons and Con∣stitutions of the Church of Rome, and sleighted the Popes threats and excommunication. This neg∣lect gave way to many Schisms and divisions in the Prussian Church; insomuch, that the Walden∣ses, Wiclesians, and Hussites, had almost overrun the Land. However, the Teutonic Order still pro∣fessed the Roman-catholic religion, till the days of Alhert Marquess of Brandenburgh, last Master of that order, and first Duke of Prussia; who hav∣ing (not without a great deal of blood-shed) re∣jected the Polish yoke, about the year 1520, be∣gan to embrace Martin Luther's opinions, and (by his own example and authority) first perswa∣ded the greatest part of the Teutonic order to marry; and by degrees won over the whole Country to Lutheranism. The present Elector of Brandenburgh (being himself a Calvinist) has coun∣tenanced of late Calvinism in Konigsberg, and o∣ther chief Cities of Ducal Prussia, but in Dantzick, and the other Towns upon the Vistula, which are subject to the Crown of Poland, the people are Lutherans. The same Laws and Judicature are not observ∣ed all Prussia over. For some parts of it only, (known by the name of Prussia Regalis) are subject to the Kings of Poland, and those too enjoy seve∣ral peculiar privileges and immunities: the rest (which usually goes under the name of Ducal Prussia) is immediately subject to the Elector of Brandenburgh. The three Islands called commonly by the High Dutch Die Werder. The chief part of the Regal Prussia lyes in the three Islands between Elbing and Dantzick; which the Germans call Die Werder, which signifies pro∣perly so many solid pieces of ground in the middle of fenns and bogs. The first and least of these,Dantzick. is der Dantzicher Werder, or Island of Dantzick, which is seated on the North-West end of it, upon the Vistula. When, and by whom, this City was built at first, is not certainly known. Becanus thinks, twas built by the Danes; and from them called Dans∣wick i. e. the City of the Danes. But this deri∣vation of the word has too much Dutch in it. 'Tis more probable that to the word Dan (Codan, Cdan or Gdan) was added only the Slavonian ter∣mination Scke which made Danscke or Gdanscke, changed afterwards into Dantzig. The chief part of the City (Die rechte Stadt) was built by Conrad Wallenrodt Master of the Teutonic order about the year 1390. St. Maries Church in Dantzick is the stateliest Fabrick in Prussia: having in it forty eight altars and 3722 windows. The font in it was made at Antwerp, and cost 24000 Rixdollars, or 5400 pound Sterling. The City is exceeding populous, and a place of the greatest trade in these parts. The next Island is Der Marienbursche Werder,Marien∣burg. the greatest of the three: which takes its name from Marienburg a pleasant City on the banks of the Negat. The Castle of Marienburg was built in the year 1281. It was reckoned the strongest hold the King of Poland has, and by the Preusners set in competition with the best forts in Christen∣dom; according to their hobbelling verse: Margenburg ex luto, Offen ex Saxo, ex Marmore Mei∣land. And Faelix Pidelarus has given this bold character of it. Fundamenta latent domibus camerata profundis, Firmior Arctoo nulla sub axe jacet. This old Castle was burnt down in the late Ger∣man wars, and a new one built in its place; short
map of Lithuania MAGNI DVCATVS LITHVANIAE▪ Caetrarum{que} Regionum illi adiacentium exacta descrip
of the former, if that deserv'd the Elogium they give it. The town it self is but meanly built; most of its houses being wood. The Inhabitants are poor and beggarly. For, though the Island be rich ground, yet it costs near its worth to pre∣serve it from the overflowing of the Vistula; which is done by great banks cast up on each arm of the River. The best mead in Prussia is made here. The third Island is Der Elbingscher Werder, so called from the City of Elbing seated in it. Pto∣lomey seems to place his Aelveones and Tacitus his Helvecones near this place: whence Fridericus Za∣melius takes the liberty to call this City Augusta Aelvaeonum and Aelveopolis, not doubting but it had its name from these antient people. Henne∣bergerus more probably brings the name from Oehlsing, Oelfang or Eelfang, that is, a place where Eels are caught. But Conringius (a very learned professor of Physick in the University of Helmstad) with most judgment brings the word from Elff which was a common name given by the Goths almost to all Rivers: For 'tis certain the Gothes lived here for some considerable while: though it be but a meer guess to affirm that this was the seat of Ptolomey's Aelveones or Tacitus's Helvecones. Elbing, as it now stands, was built about the middle of the thirteenth Century by the Burgers of Lubeck; who prevailed with the Master of the Teutonic Order to suffer it to enjoy the same Laws and Priviledges which the Emperour Friderick the second had granted to Lubeck. The Master gave them also for their arms (which the City still bears) two Crosses, and a net out of the arms of Lubeck: but in the year 1454 they delivered their laws, libertyes, City and themselves into the do∣minion of the King of Poland. The City is well built and very clean. There is in it great store of English who trade here in cloth: though their number has of late been something abated by the greater concourse of Merchants to Dantzig. The Country Rusticks in the neighbourhood of Elbing have as well built houses and as rich clothes as most Noblemen in Pomeren; and you can scarce here discern a Bore from a Burger by his habit. The whole Island is a level champagn Country like Holland; and as fruitful too and well peopled as any part of that Province, Amster∣dam excepted. Prussia Regia. THe other parts of Prussia, more immediately subject to the Crown of Poland, are the fol∣lowing Cities, all seated on the banks of the Vi∣stula. 1. Dersavia, or Dirschau; called formerly Zu∣der-Sau, because seated on the bank of a small ri∣ver of that name, which runs into the Vistula. It was built in the year 1209; burnt 1433; and utterly destroyed 1577. So that now there is lit∣tle of it to be found, but ruins. 2. Marienwerder, or the City of St. Mary in the Island, was built by Burehard Burgrave of Mag∣deburg (about the year 1233), who fenced it with walls and a strong Castle. This City has been often in the hands of the Electors of Branden∣burgh; whence, commanding all the Ships that came up and down the Vistula, they could easily spoil the whole trade of Poland. 3. Culm; an antient and famous City, giving name to that great tract of Land which from it is called Culmigeria, or the Land of Culm. Most of the Prussian writers will have Culmigeria to fetch its name from the Hulmigeri; antient inhabitants of these parts. And 'tis as probable the Hulmige∣ri might have their name fr Holm (easily turn∣ed, according to the idiom of the Northern lan∣guages, into Culm) which signifies a piece of firm ground among boggs, such as Culm is at this day seated upon. The City was built (or rebuilt ra∣ther) by Herman de Balk, first provincial of Prus∣sia in the year 1232. As soon as it was finished Herman de Salza, Master of the Teutonic Order, gave Laws and Constitutions (Die Kulmsche Hand∣veste) for its government: a specimen of which antient Canons is given by Lambecius, out of an old Dutch Manuscript in the Emperor's Library at Vienna. The City at present looks old and ru∣inous; but is still a Bishop's Sec. The Lutherans were permitted the exercise of their religion in private houses, by a publick edict signed and pub∣lished in this City by John Malachowski, Bishop of the Diocess, the thirteenth of March 1678. 4. Thoorn; built at the same time with Culm, by the Knights of the Teutonic Order, for a post a∣gainst the Heathen Prussians; but not in the place where it now stands. Old Thoorn was seat∣ed a mile West-ward from the new; where to this day are found the ruins of an old Castle and City. By whom, and when, new Thoorn was first founded, is not easily determined: for when in the year 1454 this part of Prussia delivered it self up into the hands of the King of Poland, the old and new Thoorn joyned interests, and made up one entire Corporation betwixt them. Whence it hapned, that the records of the new City were neglected and lost. Thoorn seems to have had its name from the German word Thor, a gate; because built by the Teutonic Order, as a gate to let in such forces into Prussia as they should have occasion for. Hence, the arms of Thoorn are a Castle and Gate half open. At present this City is the neat∣est and best built in Regal Prussia. The streets are much broader, and the houses statelier then at Dantzig. It owes much of its beauty to Henry Stroband, Burgo-master of the Town, who died in the year 1609. He built the Gymnasium here, and endowed it with a considerable revenue, for the maintenance of several Lecturers, and poor scholars. He founded also the Hospital and pub∣lic Library; and built a-new the Town-hall, which (were it not of late out-done by the Stadt∣huis at Amsterdam) might be reckoned the stateliest in Europe of its kind. The rest of this Country (comprchended un∣der the general name of Ducal Prussia) is subject to the Elector of Brandenburgh; and therefore, as a part of the Empire, shall be treated of in the description of Germany. The Great Dukedom of Lithvania. WHence this large and noble Country should have its name, is utterly unknown.Lithva∣nia. 'Tis ridiculous to bring the word from the La∣tine Lituus, a hunting-horn; because forsooth the inhabitants are much addicted to hunting. Erasmus Stella, an Historian of good credit, tells us, some Prussians under the command of Litwo, one of their Kings sons, came into these parts about the year 573; and called the land, after their Captains name, Litwania, or Litvania. The Polish Historians agree generally in this story; That Palaemon, flying the fury of Attyla, left Rome, and came with several Italians into this Coun∣try, who gave it the name of La Italia; which was afterwards corrupted into Lithvania. The Lithvanians themselves glory in this derivation of the name of their Country; and prove this story of Palaemon true by the Roman names of their Nobles; Ʋrsin, Column, Julian, &c. But this etymology seems too far fetch'd. Stella aims fairest, tho he miss the mark a little. For 'tis
certain, the Prussians did conquer this land, and seat themselves in it; tho the additional story of Prince Litwo seems feign'd. More likely it is, that the Prussians not satisfied with their change, call'd the Country Lithvania from Litwo, which (in the ancient Prussian language) signifies a vagabond or wanderer. The ancient inhabitants are thought to have been the Alani;Antient inhabi∣tants. since the Lithvanians do still re∣tain some footsteps of the name of these peo∣ple, in their Lithalani and Roxalani. But he that shall compare the account which Ammianus Mar∣cellinus gives of the manners of the ancient Ala∣ni, with what the best Authors say of the old Lith∣vanians, will easily perceive that they are not both one Nation. Their language sufficiently proves them to be of the same original with the Prussians; and what that is, we told you be∣fore. About the year 1235 Ringeld (son of Gim∣but,Altera∣tion of Govern∣ment. of the posterity of Palaemon) is said to have first taken upon him the title of Great Duke of Lithvania. In the year 1319, Gedimin (who first built Vilna) refused to pay homage to the Russian; and entring Novogrod with an army, took Volodimir, and made all Volhinia swear fealty to the Magistracy of Lithvania. How large the Dukedom is, may appear from the vast territories he left to each of his seven sons at his death. To Montvid he gave Kiernova and Slo∣min; To Narimund, Pinsko, Mozyr and part of the Province of Volodimir; To Olgierd, Creve and the Country beyond as far as Beresine; To Kieystut, Samogitia and the territories of Troce, Lida, Ʋpide and Subsylvania; To Coriat, Novogrod and Ʋolkow∣iski; To Lubart Ʋolodomir and Ʋolhinia; To his youngest son Javnut, Vilna, Osmia, and Braslaw; designing him for Great Duke. But soon after, when the Tartars begun to infest Volhinia and Kiow, Javnut was deposed, and his brother Olgierd made Great Duke in his place. He in the year 1331, falls upon the Tartars, and in a short time makes himself Master of Podolia, which they had kept for some years. About the same time Demetrius, Duke of Moscovy, sent an Am∣bassador into Lithuania, to demand a restitution of all those Provinces which formerly belong'd to the Dukedom of Russia. The Great Duke im∣mediately upon his arrival commits him to close custody; and marching forthwith in the head of his army towards Moscovy surprised the Duke in his Palace, and forced him to accept of a peace upon this condition; That for the future, the bounds of Lithuania should reach as far as Mosco and the river Ʋgra. When Ʋladislaus Jagello was chosen King of Poland, in the year 1386, he pro∣mised, that from thence forward the Great Duke∣dom of Lithuania should be annexed to that Crown. At the same time the Lithvanian and Russian Nobility took an oath of allegiance to the King and Queen of Poland: which was repeated in the years 1401 and 1414. But this obligation they afterwards shook off. For, when the Polan∣ders desired to joyn Volhinia, Podolia, and some other Provinces of Russia, to their own King∣dom; the Lithuanians (loath to part with so fair possessions) opposed them with that vehemence, That for several years there was nothing but con∣tinuall skirmishes between the two Nations. At last, in the year 1566, differences begun to be composed; which were finally determined A. D. 1569 by articles drawn up, and subscribed to by both parties, in the presence of several Am∣bassadors of other Nations. The principle Arti∣cles agreed upon were these: That the Lithuanians should for the future disclaim all right and title to the Provinces of Podlachia and Volhinia, and the Palati∣nate of Kiow; That they should never by themselves elect a Great Duke, but upon a vacancy repair to the place whither they should be summon'd by the Archbi∣shop of Gnesna as Interrex of Poland; That in every such election the Lithuanian and Polish Nobility should have equal power in giving of voices; That whoever by a majority of voices of both Nations should be elected King of Poland, should at the same time be pronounced Great Duke of Lithuania; That the election should al∣ways be had in some place near the confines of both Countries; That the Parliament should sit in Poland and Lithuania by turns, &c. In the year 1654, the Moscovite made many and terrible incursions in∣to Lithuania; which were carried on with that success, that A. D. 1655, he took Vilna. This hold he kept till the King of Poland (having made peace with the Swede, who oppressed him on the other hand) drave him out, and made him retreat as far as the confines of Moscovy. However, the war ceased not till, in January 1667, a truce for thirteen years was agreed on upon these conditi∣ons: That Polockz, Vitepski, Duneburg and the hi∣ther Liefland should return to the Polander: Provided, that Nevel, Vieliss and Sebisch be excepted from the Palatinates of Polockz and Vitepski; That the Mosco∣vite should retain Smolensko, Sevir and all the Ʋkrain beyond Boristhenes; That Kiow after two years should be restored to the Crown of Poland; &c. The Country is full of woods and Lakes;Soil. which yeild good store of Venison and fish. The Forrests also afford them great quantities of ho∣ney and pitch. The land is tolerably fruitful; but the extreme cold too often spoils their har∣vest. The greatest trade of Lithvania lies in Pitch,Commo∣dities. Tar, and Timber: which is transported into Hol∣land, and other foreign Nations. For these they receive in salt and Wines. For all other necessa∣ries they are well enough provided; being well stockt with great herds of Cattel (though they are not so large as in Germany and other their neighbouring Countries) and considerable flocks of sheep. Besides, the woods furnish them with Ermins, Sables, and all manner of furs, to defend them from the (otherwise intolerable) sharpness of the air. The Lithvanians seem to have natures propor∣tionate to their quality:Temper the peop for the Nobles are as proud and domineering, and the Commonalty as sneaking and mean spirited, here as in any part of Europe. The reason of such inequality of tempers, proceeds from the unreasonable slavery that Landlords force their Tenants to undergo. If you have but a good train of at∣tendance, you may uncontrolably plunder any peasant's house in the Land: and, if you please, give him a kicking into the bargain. He dares not open his mouth; except to give you thanks for giving over when you are weary. They are bound to serve the Lord of the Mannor five or six days in the week; and if he spares them (as is usu∣ally) munday, they must work on sunday for themselves. If any ask them a reason why they labour that day; they will readily reply, Ought we not to eat on Sundays, as well as other days? In their wars with Poland, they gave a sad te∣stimony of their barbarous cruelty (the usual at∣tendant of a low spirit), by denying quarter to all Captives, ripping up women with child, murder∣ing of infants, &c. They are perfidious to their Prince, and regardless of oaths and promises. Before Ʋladislaus Jagello brought great num∣bers of them into Poland,Appae and there clad them with woollen, and put shoes on their feet, the Lithvanians knew no other clothing, then the raw hides of beasts, linnen, and the inner bark of the Linden-. The Nobles indeed wore
map of Livonia NOVA TOTIVS LIVONIAE accurata Descriptio. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios et Mosem Pitt.
cloth; but their clothes were brought to them ready made out of other Nations. The common people are not yet so much civilized, but that they wear still in many places their anti∣ent apparel. The Rusticks eat bread made of the ears of wheat, not winnowed, nor thresh'd. This they call Duonos, a gift: (for the same reason that the Polanders call bread Bozydar, and the Germans Gottes-gab, the gift of God) and no proverb is more ordinary in the mouthes of the Lithvanians then, Dieva dave dantes, Dosi duonos. i. e. God that gave teeth, will give bread. The rest of their diet is flesh, herbs, and roots; of which they have plenty. The most general drink of the Country, is a kind of Brandy, made of Corn. Besides this, they have some beer, and a sort of mead, boyl'd with Hops; which is kept sometimes an hundred years together in Noblemen's houses. Of late there has been brought hither great quantities of Spanish and French wines, from Konigsberg, and other places near the Baltick Sea. The Lithvanians generally (as well in Cities as Villages) speak the Russian language: and write all pleadings and proceedings of Courts-judicature in that tongue. However there is a great mix∣ture of Latin words in their talk; which seems to confirm the story of Palaemon. So for Ignis they say ugnis; unda, wanda; aer, oras; sol, saule; mensis, menuo; dies, diena; ros, rasa, Deus, Diewas, vir, viras, &c. Besides, they have many Polish words; though these two languages are not originally the same. The Latin tongue is as common here as in Poland; and you shall not meet a Lithvanian (from a Duke to a plowman) that cannot give you an answer in that language. 'Tis probable the Greeks first taught them how to write; for they call letters Goomata, : unless perhaps they had them more immediately from the Russians, who use the same word. No Nation in Europe has been more besotted with Idolatry then Lithvania. Among the rest of their false Gods they (as well as the antient E∣gyptians, Greeks, Romans and Indians) were great worshippers of serpents: and many of them con∣tinued so till within these few years. Of which Signismund, Baron of Herberstein (in Comment. rer. Muscovit. P. 84) tells us this memorable story: Returning (says he) lately from Masovia, at Tro∣ki (a small Town about eight English miles from Vilna) mine host acquainted me that that year he had chanced to buy a hive of bees of one of these serpent-worshippers, whom he with much ado had perswaded to betake himself to the worship of the true God, and to kill his adder. Within a while after coming that way he found the poor fellow miserably tortur'd and deformed, his face wrinkled, his mouth awry, &c. demanding the cause of his misery, he re∣ceived this answer from him: That this judg∣ment was inflicted on him for killing his God, and that he was like to suffer heavier torments if he did not return to his former worship. Nay to this day here are too great footsteps of this Idolatry: for in many Villages (both in Lithvania and Prus∣sia) you shall meet with poor Bores that keep Ad∣ders in their houses, to which they (though pro∣fessed Christians) pay a more then ordinary su∣perstitious respect, and fancy some great misfor∣tune will befall them if these Laria take any harm. Besides, the antient Lithvanians had an Idol call∣ed by them Percune, to whom they kept a conti∣nual fire burning, with as much caution and di∣ligence as ever the Vestal fire was kept at Rome. For, if the Waidelot (or Priest that was to attend the Altar) should happen to let the fire out, he was sure to dy for't. The like ceremonies were performed in remembrance of Kiern, one of their Princes, on the top of a high hill near Dzie∣waltow. These and many other superstitions they seem to have borrowed from the Romans, who came into this country under the conduct of Pa∣laemon. Hence they used to burn their dead; ex∣pecting (saith Cajalowicz, part. I. Hist. Lithv. lib. 5. p. 140.) a resurrection out of the ashes at the coming of a strange God to judge the whole earth from the top of one of their mountains. From these Idolatrous practises they were first converted to Christianity by Ʋladislaus Jagello, their Great Duke; who A. D. 1386 upon his mar∣riage with Hedvig Queen of Poland turned Chri∣stian, and was baptized at Cracow by John Bishop of that See. He is said to have been a very pious and zealous Prince, and exceeding diligent in bringing over the whole Dukedom of Lithva∣nia to the Christian religion. At the first he met with no small opposition: but when the King had cut down their tall trees (the Temples of their Heathenish Gods) and no mischief befell him, the people begun to think their Idols would never take this affront, if able to revenge them∣selves; and therefore they were resolved to listen to their Princes advice. Whereupon, the King immediately built a Cathedral, and founded a Bishoprick, at Vilna; and the Queen furnished seven parish Churches in the neighbourhood with Chalices, vestments, and all other necessaries for divine service. The Russians at that time (as most of them are still) were members of the Greek Church: so that the King thought good to forbid marriage with a Russ that would not conform to the Church of Rome. At this day many Lithvanians are of the Greek Church, tho more of the Roman. In Vilna, and several other great Towns, vast numbers of the Inhabitants are Lutherans. The whole Dukedom is divided into ten Pala∣tinates; the Metropolis and chief of which is Vilna. The next is the Palatinate of Troki; 3. Min∣sko; 4. Novogrod; 5. Breste; 6. Volhinia; 7. Kiow; 8. Miecislaw; 9. Vitebsk; 10. Poloxko. Vilna (called by the Inhabitants Vilensski, by the Germans die Wilde) has its name from the ri∣ver upon which 'tis seated. The houses are gene∣rally low and mean; all of wood, excepting only in some streets where Merchants of other nati∣ons, that resort hither for trade, have built them∣selves more then ordinary gentile ones of stone. Most of the Churches are of stone; some of wood. The suburbs are not built here as at other Cities in Europe, but round the walls in a confused and disorderly manner; every man placing his house (which is nothing else but a wooden booth) where he pleases. The citizens are exceeding poor and idle, slaves to their Nobles and their belly. They are taken notice of for great lovers of onions and garlick; which kind of diet (help'd by their smoaky houses) blinds half of them be∣fore they arrive at any considerable age. Their excessive intemperance in drinking, breeds con∣tinual quarrels among them. If a stranger be kill'd in any such broil, the murderer pays only sixteen dollars as a mulct. If a Lithvanian be slain, and the murderer fly; 'tis usual to preserve the dead corps embalmed till they can apprehend the fugitive, whom they cannot condemn with∣out shewing him the carcase of him he slew. There is not one public hospital in the whole Ci∣ty; though it stands in more need of such a pro∣vision then any place in Europe; if we might
judge by the swarms of beggars every street af∣fords. The only peice of neat building is the Monastery of Bernardine Monks, all of hewn stone. The Moscovian company of Merchants have also a considerably handsome structure built for a repository of Furrs, Ermines, and other rich merchandise brought from Mosco. The great Dukes Palace has nothing of note in it, but the armory, which is admirably furnished with all sorts of arms and armour; considering that Lith∣vania it self affords no mines of brass or iron. A∣bout two English miles from Vilna the great Duke has another Palace (called from its situation Wersupa that is, near the water) built by Sigismund King of Poland, all of wood, and beautifyed with a Park, and pleasant orchards, and gardens. The rest of the Cities of Lithvania have little in them observable, save that they give titles to Palatines and Dukes. What numbers there are of these last may be easily guess'd by what is re∣ported of Vitoldus once Great Duke, That he had no less then fifty Dukes at once in his army. Samogitia THis country has its name from its situation, which is low and wet; Samogitz, in the lan∣guage of the inhabitants, signifying a marshy ground: Whence the Moscovite calls it Samotzka∣semla. It is bounded on the North with Liefland; on the East and South with the great Dukedom of Lithvania; on the West with the Baltic sea and some parts of Prussia. A great part of the country is continually o∣verflown with rivers and Lakes, unpassable but in a frost. The rest of it is full of woods, which afford good store of hony, purer and better then any in Lithvania or Liefland. The inhabitants differ little from the Lithva∣nians either in manners, habit, or language. They are sottishly ignorant, grosly superstitious and easy to be imposed upon. They use no plough in tilling their ground, but dig it up with spades or sticks, as it is usual in some parts of Moscovy. When one of their governours, having obser∣ved how far his countrymen were outdone in their husbandry by other nations, endeavoured to teach them the art of plowing, it chanced that for two years after their crop was not so rich as formerly it had been; whereupon the people attributing the miscarriage to the new device, grew so enraged, that the governour was glad to decry the experiment for fear of an insur∣rection. When Ʋladislaus Jagello had converted the greatest part of Lithvania, he endeavoured to bring the Samogitians to the Christian faith. In pursuance of this resolution he goes himself into this country and (burning up their hallowed groves, and destroying the serpents and other creatures they worshipped) with threats and promises made them vow to abandon their for∣mer Idolatry, and worship the true God. And for fear that when his back was turn'd they might relapse into their former heathenism, he found∣ed a Bishoprick at Mzdniki: endowing it with a revenue sufficient for the maintenance of a Bishop and twelve Prebends, who were to officiate at so many parish Churches in and about the City. Howbeit, the good King was not so successful in his undertaking, nor his successours so vigilant in the prosecution of his designs, but that to this day many poor ignorant Idolaters may be found in the desart parts of this country. These (like the Lithvanians spoken of before) worship a four footed serpent, about three hands long, called in their tongue Givosit. Without one of these houshold gods you shall scarce find a family. If any mischief befalls them, they think 'tis because the little deity has not been well attended. Ano∣ther piece of heathenish superstition is still re∣tain'd by the Rusticks, in the following manner: About the latter end of October they have a ge∣neral rendezvous of men, women, and children, who bring with them to the place appointed, loaves of bread and vessels full of beer. These they set on a table spread with hay. That done, they bring out a young heifer, a boar and a sow, a cock and hen, with other such cattle and poul∣try as the house affords, in pairs male and female. When things are thus in readiness, out comes an old Priest or Wizard, who, mumbling over a few hard words, gives the sacrifice a blow with a stick, which stroke is seconded by the whole company till the heifer be dead and beat to pie∣ces. Whilst this ceremony lasts, they cry; This oblation of thanksgiving we make thee O Ziemiennik (so they call the feigned god) for that it hath plea∣sed thee to preserve us from all the evils of the year past; and we beseech thee to protect and defend us for the future from fire, sword, pestilence, and all our ene∣mies. After this, they take a little of every dish they have provided and put it in four corners of the house, and in the ground, crying aloud, Accept O Ziemiennik our offerings, eat with us and be merry. The solemnity thus over, they spend the rest of that day in feasting and drunkenness. There is no City or great Town in Samogitia of any consequence. Mzdniki is a poor and despicable City: all the rest scarce merit the name of villages. Lithvania and this Province have all along been sharers in the same fortune and change. They were both at once subject to the Russians; at once overrun by the Teutonic Order; and at once converted from Idolatry and subjected to the Crown of Poland by Ʋladislaus Jagello. Livonia LIvonia, or Liefland, is bounded on the East with Russia; on the West, with the Baltic sea; on the North, with the Finland-bay; on the south, with Samogitia and some part of Lithvania. The length of it is about 500 English miles and the breadth near 160. The country is generally plain and fruitful, a∣bounding with corn and hony: some parts of it are fenny, full of Lakes and rivers. The many conquests this Land has suffered have made its inhabitants a medly of Moscovites, Swedes, Danes, Polanders and Germans. But the last have the greatest share in the country; whence the generality speak High-Dutch. The common people are used as hardly here as in Poland or Lithvania: and the Nobility lord it as much. Drunkenness and gluttony are vices the Lieflanders are generally addicted to, from the greatest Lord to the meanest peasant. The Bores would be hard put to't to get a living, con∣sidering the untolerable drudgery they undergo, if they had not the priviledge of hunting hares (of which they have great plenty in these parts, white in winter, and brown in summer), foxes, bears, and other kinds of venison. 'Tis agreed upon by all Authors, that Liefland was first annexed to the Crown of Poland by Si∣gismund Augustus; though the story is told diffe∣rent ways. Kojalowicz tells us, That William Furstenburg, Master of the Liefland Order of Knighthood, upon his turning Lutheran had frequent quarrels with William Archbishop of Riga; whom he accused, at a session of the
Nobility at Winden, of a conspiracy of betray∣ing Curland into the hands of Albert Duke of Prussia, and the rest of Liefland to Sigismund King of Poland, his kinsman. Upon this pre∣tence, he immediately enters the Archbishop's territories with an army, and takes him prisoner. King Sigismund, hearing this, wages war with Liefland, and A.D. 1557 conquers it. But the reasons of this war seem to be grounded upon better pretensions then these. For (though it be true that there arose many skirmishes between the Archbishop and the Master of the Order, touching points of religion, yet) during Fursten∣burg's government Ivan Duke of Moscovy, and not Sigismund King of Poland, overrun and lay wast the greatest part of Liefland. Against whom Gothard Ketler, Furstenburg's successour, request∣ed the aid of King Sigismund; who quickly beat the Moscovian out of his holds, and created Gothard Duke of Curland, annexing the rest of Liefland to his own dominions. But he found this country was easilier conquer'd then kept. For the Reva∣lians, finding themselves unable to withstand the dayly incursions of the Moscovians, commit∣ted their land to the protection of Eric King of Sweden. Whereupon, this King thought his ti∣tle to Liefland was as good as the Polanders: espe∣cially, since Ferdinand the Emperour had given him the sole charge of defending it. Upon these pretensions he presently routed the Poles out of Habsal, Lehale, Parnow, and other places, and put into them garrisons of his own. Besides the Po∣lish interest received at the same time another fa∣tal blow upon this occasion: John Duke of Fin∣land married Katherine sister to the King of Po∣land, to whom he lent 80000 (some say 124000) dollars, upon a mortgage of the castles of Wit∣tenstein, Karchise, Frichate, Helmult, Ermise, Ruja and Bortwic; all in Liefland. Returning into Sweden he was accused by King Eric his brother of high treason in offering to make a confederacy (as he call'd it) with Sigismund Augustus King of Poland without his consent. In this rage the King robs his brother of all the castles, and takes them into his own hand: not without the pretence of being more able to defend them from the fury of the Moscovite. Not long after, upon the death of Eric King of Sweden and Sigismund King of Po∣land, the Duke of Moscovy with irresistable force created the great Duke of Holstein King of Lief∣land. When the Kings of Sweden and Poland per∣ceived matters brought to this pass, they thought it high time to lay aside all petit animosities be∣tween their two Kingdoms and to joyn forces a∣gainst their common enemy the Moscovite: fear∣ing lest otherwise whilst they two stood quarrel∣ling for each a shell, he should snatch away the fish. And indeed this confederacy prov'd very successful to the Swede; who, in the year 1580, retook many strong holds from the Moscovite: as, Lode, Lehale, Habsal, Narwe, the Province of Wicki, Wittenstein, Carelogrod, &c. Steven King of Poland fearing lest, if the Swede went on with the same success and vigour he begun with, he would bring all Liefland to his own beck, claps up a peace with the Moscovite, unknown to the King of Swe∣den, upon these conditions: That the Moscovite should restore all the places he had taken in Lithva∣nia; That, on the other hand, King Stephen should re∣store to the Duke of Moscovy Vielikoluk and some other forts he had taken in these wars. After this, when Si∣gismund son of John the third King of Sweden, was, upon the death of Stephen, elected King of Poland, the Poles admitted him upon this condition, That he should annex all that part of Liefland which was under his goverment to the Crown of Poland. But Sigismund the third coming to he Crown of Sweden could not by any means be perswaded to grant this request. When he was deposed from his Kingdom there arose bloody wars be∣tween the King of Poland and Charles IX. whom the Swedes had set up King in his place. These Gusta∣vus Adolphus continued, and in them overrun al∣most all Liefland; till in the year 1629, a truce was made for six years upon these terms: That in the mean time the King of Sweden should enjoy all he had won. This truce was again renewed for 26 years more, A.D. 1635. by the mediation of Ambassadours from the Kings of England and France, and the States of the Ʋnited Provinces. In the year 1654, whilst a great part of Lithvania was laid wast by the Moscovite, Charles Gustavus King of Sweden, before the 26 years were expir'd, proclaimed war against the King of Poland, alledg∣ing, among other things, as a reason for his pro∣ceedings, That the Polish Ambassadour at Stock∣holm had protested against his succession to the Crown of Sweden. At the beginning the fortune of the war went much on his side; but within a short while the Danes making incursions into Sweden, forced him to quit Poland, and be more concern'd to defend what he had at home, then to seek for new conquests abroad. However the war still continued till A.D. 1660. when, upon the death of Charles Gustavus, peace was establish∣ed between the two Kingdoms at Oliva, a Mo∣nastery near Dantzic, of which these are some of the Articles: That John Casimir King of Poland should for ever renounce all pretensions to the King∣dom of Sweden and Principality of Finland; That he should only challenge the title of King of Sweden for his life, but not make use of it in any of his letters to the Swedish King; That he should deliver up to the Swedes all that part of Liefland which lyes beyond the river Duna, and disclaim all right and title to E∣sten and Oesel and whatever on this side the Duna was in the hands of the Swedes during the truce; That the King of Poland should still keep the southern Lief∣land, in which are reckoned Duneburg, Rositen, Lu∣zen, Marienhusen, &c. This country was long subject to Paganism and Idolatry; until about the year 1158 it begun to be frequented by Merchants from Lubeck, who got leave of the inhabitants to build a small Chappel in an Island upon the Duna (thence call∣ed Kircholm) for the exercise of Christian worship. Afterwards Menard a Monk of Segeberg was con∣secrated Bishop of Liefland by the Archbishop of Bremen, and sent over by the Merchants to pro∣pagate Christianity in these parts. His seat was at Ʋxkel a small village upon the Duna, not far from Riga. Bertholdus, a Monk of Bremen, of the order of St. Paul, succeeded him in his Bishop∣rick. He was the first founder of Riga, whither he removed his See: but lived not long to enjoy it there. For endeavouring to promote Chri∣stianity more by the sword then spirit, he was o∣vercome and slain by the Pagans. Albertus, Berthol∣dus's immediate successour, fortifyed Riga, and made it a City. That done, he joyned himself to the order of the sword bearers (an order of Knighthood confirmed by Pope Innocent the third about the year 1204) hoping thereby to be better able, then his predecessor had been, to oppose the rage of the Heathen. Not long after, when this order was changed into the Teutonic or∣der, the Bishop of Riga, and the rest of his socie∣ty subjected themselves to the Teutonic Order of Prussia; The master of which had power given him to appoint a Provincial of Liefland. On the other hand, the Prussian Bishops of Culm, Pomesen, and Sambland, did (though not at the same time, as some would have it) advance the power of the Bishop of Riga, making him an Archbishop
and themselves his Suffragans. Only the Bishop of Warme, as having never been subject to the Teutonic Order, would not yield to be reckoned a member of the Province of Riga. In this state the Church of Liefland continued for a long time, till (in the year 1513) William Plettenberg, the XLI Provincial of Liefland, bought off all ho∣mage to the Teutonic Order in Prussia, and was himself made absolute Prince of Liefland. His successors lived and injoyed their dominions in peace till the days of Sigismund Augustus King of Poland: but afterwards (what with foreign and domestic wars, and the continual incursions of the Moscovite, Polander, Swede, and Dane) the Country was brought to be a meer medly of men and religions. At this day those parts that are subject to the Danes and Swedes do generally profess the Lutheran religion. Most of the sub∣jects of the King of Poland adhere to the Church of Rome, though some are Lutherans. In some parts of Esten the poor ignorant Rusticks are half Pagans. Liefland was formerly divided into two parts only, Letten and Esten: to which the order of the sword bearers added Curland. Some have di∣vided the whole Country into six parts, Curland, Semigal, Esten, Letten, Harland, and Virland: but Semigal is no more then a Province of Curland, and Harland and Virland parts of Esten. Of these, Curland is immediately subject to its own Duke: who nevertheless pays homage to the King of Poland. Some parts also of Letten (which go under the name of South Liefland) are, since the treaty at Oliva, in that Kings possession. The Curoni, antient inhabitants of Curland and Semigal, are thought by some to be the same with the Caryones mentioned by Ptolomey. There is, not far from Windaw, a small village which still bears their memory in its name: being by the inhabitants to this day called Curon. The most notable places in it are: 1. Mitaw, the seat of the Dukes of Curland, upon the bank of the river Mauss; taken by Gustavus Adolphus in the year 1621, but restored A.D. 1629. The Town is but mean and inconsiderable, but the Castle magnificently rebuilt by some of the late Dukes. 2. Windaw, or Winden, (as the Germans write it, though the inhabitants call it Kies) seated on the mouth of the river Windaw; whence it has its name. Here formerly was the residence of the Provincials of Liefland, afterwards the general Parliament, or great Council, of Curland had their sessions in this City; which made it exceeding populous. At this day there is little appearance of its antient splendor: nor is it frequented by any but a few Dutch Merchants, who are here laden with Tar, Pitch, and Wax. 'Tis a mistake very ordinary among the historians that write of this Country, to confound this City with Wenden in Letten: telling us, that this too is called by the Polanders Kies. And the old Dutch sea-carts men∣tion a kind of Castle with three towers upon the mouth of the Windaw; but never take notice of of any sea-port-Town in this place. 3. Pilten or Piltyn; the seat of the Bishop of Curland, built by Waldemar King of Denmark A.D. 1219. The southern, or Polish Liefland contains only a few small Towns or villages; among which there is nothing worth taking notice of but Dune∣burg, a Castle (as its name intimates) seated on the river Duna. Volhinia, Podolia, &c. THough the Polish dominion reached for∣merly a considerable way beyond the Nieper or Boristhenes, taking within its precincts the ter∣ritories of Kiow and Braclaw (which go under the general name of the Ʋkrain, spoken of before;) yet, since the treaty ratifyed between the Grand Seignior and the King of Poland in the year 1677, the whole Country of the Cosacks was delivered into the hands of the Turks: and the hither Vol∣hinia is at this day the outmost bounds of the Kingdom of Poland. Walachia too and Moldavia were by Ʋladislaus Jagello annexed to the Crown of Poland; but, soon after his death, his son Casimir lost them both back again to the Turks. For, when by reason of the continual trouble he had in defend∣ing Prussia against the Teutonic Order he could not possibly succour those parts, the Palatine of Wa∣lachia struck up a peace with Mahomet upon con∣dition of paying a yearly tribute of 2000 Crowns. Since that time the Palatines of Walachia have sometimes sworn fealty to the Turks, sometimes to the Polanders; but kept their word with nei∣ther. Several of the Kings of Poland have been in a condition of repossessing themselves of these parts; but, fearing to engage in a war with so potent an Enemy as the Grand Seignior for so mean a stake, they have rather chose to resign them quietly and suffer him still to enjoy them upon condition: That the Turk should constitute no Vicegerent in these their neighbouring Provinces but such as was lineally descended from the Dukes of Moldavia, and consequently of a Polish stock: nor should demand any arbitrary, but a certain fix'd and de∣termin'd tribute. But these priviledges the Poles have now lost; insomuch that the Turk is grown absolute Lord of the Country, and governs it by whom, and how he pleases. But these two Countryes could not satisfy the the Great Turk; who found an occasion to pick a quarrel with the King of Poland, whom he knew himself able to conquer. Wherefore, in the year 1672, advancing further into this Kings domini∣ons with a vast army, he took Camienec the best fortress in the Kingdom; and had marched fur∣ther into the very heart of the Nation, had he not been stopt with proposals of peace from King Michael upon these terms: That the Polan∣ders should quit all title to Podolia, and resign it wholly to the Turk; That with Podolia they should also sur∣render all pretensions to the Ʋkrain; That they should pay yearly to the Grand Seignior a tribute of 22000 du∣cates; &c. These conditions (proposed and ra∣tifyed by the King alone, without the approba∣tion of the Parliament) were looked upon by the whole Nation as too dishonourable to be obser∣ved. Wherefore, 'twas resolved, they should endeavour to the outmost to recover bravely what their King had so cowardly parted with. Accordingly, towards the latter end of the year 1673, they proclaimed war against the Turk, which was carried on with good success under the conduct of John Sobieski (the present King of Poland) their then valorous General: who on the 11 of November, discomfited the Turkish ar∣my, and retook the Castle of Chotim. After ma∣ny more bloody engagements, in a war of seve∣ral years continuance, the peace was at last con∣cluded in November 1676 upon these, and some other conditions: That the Lipec-Tartars should be permitted to remove their goods and families into Podolia, and there live subject to the Turk; That the Ʋkrain should remain in the hands of the Grand Seignior; That Polish Garrisons should be put into Niemierow and Kallik, and the Bassaw of Camieni∣ec have nothing to do there till matters were adjusted at the convention of Ambassadours at Porte; That Pa∣wolocz and Bialocerkiew should remain entire in the possession of the Polander; That the resignation of Podolia should be debated by the Ambassadours at
Porte; That in all places taken by the Turks the Christians should enjoy the free exercise of their reli∣gion; &c. These articles were read and ratifyed in the Parliament of Poland the 22 day of Februa∣ry A.D. 1677. Since which time the Great Turk has not answered the expectation of the King of Poland in resigning the Countries he had taken. Podolia is doubtless worth seeking after (and too good to be parted with upon sleight terms by those who, having made themselves Masters of it by a fair conquest, are able to keep their hold) if what Maginus reports of it be true: That 'tis so fruitful, that in one night the grass will hide a rod, and in a few days a plough. Volhinia is as well worth defending as Podolia regaining; being a fruitful and plenteous Coun∣try, exceedingly well stock'd with corn, sheep, Timber, fish, Hony, &c. Places of greatest note in it, are: 1. Luceoria or Lusuc, a Bishop's See, first founded by Ludowic King of Poland and Hun∣gary, about the year 1374. 2. Olyka, a seat of some of the Lithvanian Dukes: among whom John formerly Duke of this place and Nieswiesc (with his brother Nicolas Radziwil, Marshal of the great Dukedom of Lithvania) was made a Prince of the Empire of Germany in the Diet at Augspurg A.D. 1547. 3. Ostrog, once the seat of Dukes, to whom a great part of this Country was immediately subject: but that line is of late utterly extinct. The Lesser Poland. THe Lesser Poland lyes on the south of the Greater, from some part of which it is sepa∣rated by the Warta, from others by the Pilcza. It is divided in the middle by the Vistula (upon which are seated most of its great Towns) and contains in it three Palatinates, of Cracow, Sendomir, and Lublin. This Province (as all Poland has formerly been) is very woody; of . which heretofore occasioned so many barbarous robberies as were usually com∣mitted under the shelter of their Forests. Inso∣much that, in the year 1450, Casimir called an assembly of the Nobles of the Lesser Poland only to consult of some means to suppress the intole∣rable thieveries practised among the generality of them, the Nobility not excepted. But, be∣cause many of the Grandees of Poland were not at that time satisfyed with this King's title to the Crown, nothing could be effectually enacted by his Authority: so that, for a long time Ra∣pines and Murders were encreased rather then diminished. For by these delays of justice the Robbers were come to that strength at last, that (under the conduct of two Noblemen, Cauca Sweborowski and John his brother) they had for∣tifyed the mountain Zebrace near Oswenskim, and several other places; whither such armies of Ruf∣fians continually flocked, as could not afterwards be suppressed without a deal of bloodshed and hazard of the whole Country. Cracow (the Metropolis of this Province and the whole Kingdom of Poland) is seated on a rocky bank of the Vistula. 'Tis said to have had its name from one Cracus, Gracus, or Gracchus, whom the Polanders (so they themselves say, though the Bohemian writers will needs make him one of their Princes) set over them as soon as they grew weary of the twelve Palatines, who took the government into their hands upon the death of Lechus the first. Others think it the same with Ptolomey's Carodunum, corrupted into Cracow. This City (as 'tis the largest, so it) is the best built of any one in Poland. Cromer sets it in competition with the best built Cities of Ger∣many or Italy: but we must allow him to stretch a little more then ordinary in commendation of his own Country. The houses are for the most part of free-stone, and four or five stories high; but covered with boards instead of slat. There are in it a considerable company of Italian and German Merchants, who bring in such foreign wares as the Country stands in need of. It con∣sists (like London and Paris) of three parts: 1. Cra∣cow, properly so called, or the antient City: 2. Ca∣zimiria, joyned to the rest by a wooden bridge cross the Vistula: 3. Stradomia, which lyes be∣tween Cracow and the bridge. The King's Pa∣lace is seated on the top of an high hill; whence it overlooks both City and Country. 'Twas rebuilt in the magnificent posture it now stands by Sigis∣mund the Elder; who added the gallery on the north side, from whence you have one of the best prospects in Europe. The University of Cracow was first begun by Casimir the Great, finished by Ʋla∣dislaus Jagello, in performance of the last will and testament of his Queen Hedwig, and had its pri∣viledges confirmed to it by Pope Ʋrban. In the year 1549; the scholars of Cracow by a general consent left the University (upon an affront put on them by the Magistrates of the City, who refused to execute justice upon the servants of Andrew Czarnkowski, when in a quarrel they had slain a great number of students), and dispersed themselves into several parts of Germany; whence returning Lutherans, they spread the reform'd opi∣nions all Poland over, and got great numbers of proselytes. Upon the first planting of Christia∣nity in this Kingdom (Miecislaus the first, who begun his reign in the year 964) Cracow was made an Archbishoprick. But, within a hundred years after, Lampert Zula refusing to receive his Pall from the Pope of Rome as his predecessors had done before him, it degenerated into a Bishop∣rick. Afterwards (in the reign of Boleslaus the chast, which begun A.D. 1226) a contest arising between Jvo Bishop of this Diocess and the Bishop of Vratislaw, about precedency, the Bishop of Cracow, upon his submissive appeal to the See of Rome, was again restored to the dignity of an Archbishop: which only lasted during his life. At this day the Bishops of Cracow wear an Arch∣bishop's Pall, set richly with jewels; which is the only relique they have of their antient ho∣nour. The next Palatinate of the Lesser Poland,Sendomir. is that of Sendomir. The City is seated on the bank of the Vistula; and fortifyed with walls and a Castle, both built by Casimir the Great: who afterwards dyed of a surfet, by eating too freely of the fruits of this Country, which are reckoned the fairest and best in Poland. Here is nothing else worth the taking notice of, save the Monastery of Do∣minican Friars founded by Jvo Archbishop of Cracow. The Palatinate of Lublin was taken out of that of Sendomir (as being too big for the jurisdiction of one Palatine) by Casimir Jagellonides.Lublin. The Ci∣ty is not very large, but well built and much fre∣quented (especially in the Fairs kept three times a year) by Christian, Jewish, and Turkish Mer∣chants. 'Tis much better fortifved by the marshes which environ it, then its walls: and more be∣holden to nature for its defence then either Ca∣simir the Great, who walled it round, or the Russians, who built the adjoyning Castle. The great Church in it was built by Lescus the black, upon a great conquest obtain'd against the Lith∣vanians near this City, and dedicated to St. Mi∣chael, who in a vision the night before the battel had promised him good success. St. Bridgets Monastery, among many other magnificent ones, was founded by Ʋladislaus Jagello. One of
the two chief Courts of Judicature (from which no appeal lies, save to the Parliament of Poland) is kept at Lublin. Hither, for judgment in con∣troversies of any great moment, repair the Pa∣latinates of Cracow, Sendomir, Russia, Podolia, Lub∣lin, Belze, Podlassia, Volhinia, Braclaw, Kiow, and Czernichow: or, at least, so many of them as are still subject to the Crown of Poland. Of other Countries and Provinces to which the Kings of Poland have formerly pretended a title by con∣quest, contract, or otherwise. BEsides the places mentioned, and at present subject to the Crown of Poland, the Kings of that Nation have from time to time lay'd claim to many and large Territories now in the hands of other Princes. Omitting Bohemia, Mo∣ravia, Wagria, Misnia, and the Dukedomes of Ru∣gen, Mecklenburg and Lunenburg (which, whate∣ver some of the Polish writers assert and endea∣vour to make good, were very little, or not at all subject to Boleslaus Chrobri, who was the only King that ever could plausibly pretend a title to any part of them) we shall confine our dis∣course to those Countries to which the Polonian Princes may seem to have had a more just and legal title. That all (or most of) Silesia was part of the Dukedome of Poland,Silesia. in the days of Lechus the first, and several of his successours, is highly pro∣bable, from the writings of Adam Bremensis and Helmoldus; who both of them make the river Oder the bounds of Poland. Besides, the German Chronologers tell us, that Charles the Great, Lu∣dovicus Pius, and other Emperors conquer'd the Silesians, and made them tributary to the Empire. But the Polish Historians (upon what grounds I know not) are generally positive in asserting, That Silesia was always, without any such intermission or conquest as the Germans strive to make out, a part of the Polish dominions. Only Vincentius Kadlubko a∣grees with the Germans, affirming, That Bolesla∣us Chrobri (amongst his many other conquests) re∣gain'd Selucia, as he calls it, and left it annexed to the Crown of Poland. After his time we find that Casimir the first translated the Bishoprick of Bicine to Vratislaw: whence 'tis manifest, that in his days Silesia was part of the Realm of Poland. Not long after, Henry the IV, Emperour of Germa∣ny (in the Diet at Munster A.D. 1086) made over Silesia, Lusatia, and indeed all Poland, to Vratislaus King of Bohemia: though, as Cromer says, he had no right to a foot of land in any of them. Where∣upon ensued a bloody war betwixt the Bohemians and Poles: wherein it is to be conjectured, the latter had the better, since all Historians agree, that Silesia was under the King of Polands go∣verment during the whole reign of Boleslaus the third. His son Ʋladislaus the second, being de∣posed by his brethren, who were left Co-heirs with him in the Kingdom, fled first to the Empe∣ror Frederick the first, who brought Boleslaus Crispus (Duke of Poland and brother to Ʋladisla∣us) to such straits, that he was forced to resign all Silesia into the hands of his brother's children: but upon condition they should still pay homage to the Princes of Poland. From that time the Polanders begun to sleight and hate the Silesians, seldom calling any of the Silesian Nobility to Councils of Parliament, and balking the right succession, if any of this Province had a just title to the Crown. These jealousies and quarrels were fomented and increased by John King of Bohemia (son to the Emperor Henry the seventh) who by this means whedled the Dukes of Silesia into his yoke; and afterwards forced Casimir the Great to resign the supreme government of that Province into his hands. After this the Poles (though they had frequent skirmishes with the Bohemians, yet) never regain'd any considerable footing in Silesia. For, excepting the small ter∣ritory of Wschovia (retaken by Casimir the Great A.D. 1343) and some other parcels of ground annexed to the estates of several Bishopricks and Abbeys in Poland, Silesia is at present wholly sub∣ject to the King of Bohemia. Lusatia was once conquer'd by Boleslaus Chro∣bri; but soon after lost again.Lus For (though when John King of Bohemia subdued Silesia, Lu∣satia was reckoned a part of that Country, and has ever since so continued, yet) the Polanders claim'd no more of it, as Lords of Silesia, then a few frontier Towns: the rest was under the Mar∣quesses of Misnia and Lusatia, Princes of the Em∣pire, as Goldastus proves. 'Tis without all authority of Annals, what some of the Polish writers have endeavoured to make out by Etymologies,Ne Ma that the greatest part of the Marquisate of Brandenburgh was formerly subject to the Princes of Poland. That New Marck indeed (or, at least, a good share of it) was theirs, is beyond all controversy: since, as the best Hi∣storians witness, Miecislaus or Miscio (the first Christian Duke of Poland, towards the latter end of the tenth Century) first founded the Bishop∣rick of Lubuss. This City was taken from the Polanders by the Emperour Henry the second; but recovered by Boleslaus the first, King of Poland. His successours kept it till the year 1109, when it was again taken by the Emperour Henry V, who gave it to Adelgot Archbishop of Magde∣burg. But soon after it return'd into the hands of the Poles. When Silesia was, as we have said, di∣vided among the sons of Ʋladislaus the second, the territories of Lubuss devolved into the hands of the Silesian Dukes, whence it happened within a short while after to be made a part of the Mar∣quisate of Brandenburgh. Cromer says, 'twas mort∣gaged by Boleslaus the bald; and never redeem∣ed. But Dlugossus (ad ann. 1198.) tells us, 'twas sold by Boleslaus, son to Henry Duke of Vratisla∣via. From that time the Kings of Poland have had very little to do in New Marck; and, at pre∣sent, have not one foot of land in it. Ʋladislaus Ja∣gello brought it wholly under his power; but his son found it too hot service for him to keep it, and was therefore fain to resign it up to the Marquess. John Casimir (their late King) parted with the last stake, by delivering up the Town and Castle of Drahim to the present Elector of Branden∣burgh in the treaty at Bydgost in the year 1657. That the Slavonians were antient inhabitants of Pomeren is undeniably true.Pom Pomorska (in the Slavonian language) signifies near the sea: whence Vincentius Kadlubko, an antient and judicious Po∣lish writer, uses frequently the word Maritima for Pomeren; and, speaking of this Country, these phrases are ordinary with him: Maritimae Praeses; Maritimae Dux; Ingressus est Maritimam; &c. But whether or no the Polanders were masters of Po∣meren, immediately upon the entrance of the Slavoniaus, is a grand question: which the Poles affirm, but the Pomeranians deny; and 'tis hard to decide the controversy between them. Hel∣moldus, agreeing (as it should seem) with the latter, places Pomeren amongst the free Slavoni∣an Provinces, lying without the bounds of the Polish dominions. And, before his days, Adam Bremensis gives us the same account. Micraelius (an Historian of good credit, lib. 2. Chron. Pomer. num. 46. p. 191.) is of opinion, that the first en∣trance which the Polanders made upon Pomeren
was in the tenth Century; when the Emperor Otto III. authorized Boleslaus Chrobri, King of Po∣land, to make war upon, and bring into his sub∣jection, the Prussians, Pomeranians, Wendi, and Russians. Which done, the Emperor (at a visit given King Boleslaus) made the Bishop of Col∣berg a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Gnesna. In the beginning of the eleventh Century, Mieci∣slaus II. spread his dominions all over Casubia and the Eastern Pomeren; putting Garrisons into all the Forts and Castles between the Persandt and the Vistula, and committed the government of them to Bela, the King of Hungary's brother. But, upon Bela's return into Hungary, Pomeren shook off the Polish yoke, and only was subject to Dukes of its own, till Svantibor surrendred it a∣gain to Boleslaus III. Duke of Poland, upon con∣dition he would free him from prison; to which his own subjects had committed him. After Svantibors death, the Dukedom of Pomeren was divided amongst his four sons; whereof two (who were Dukes of the Western Pomeren, from Colberg as far as the Marck and the Dukedom of Mecklenburgh) were admitted Princes of the Em∣pire by Frederick Barbarossa: the other two were forced to yeild themselves subjects to the Crown of Poland. But the Pomeranians, soon weary of bondage, revolted once more from the King of Poland: and perhaps had for ever rejected his government, had not Mestwin their Duke (want∣ing issue) endeavour'd to subject them to the Dukes of West Pomeren. For, looking upon the people of that Country as meer strangers (be∣ing indeed three parts of them Germans) they chose rather to give themselves up into the hands of their acquaintance, then to be slaves to an up∣start and foreign Nation. Whereupon, they una∣nimously swore fealty to Praemislaus II. King of Poland; who took upon him the title of Duke of Pomeren, and quarter'd his Coat with (the Arms of Pomeren) the Gryphins. By this means the Kings of Poland became sole Lords of the Eastern Pomeren. In the year 1460, Casimir Jagellonides (strait∣ned in the wars he was engaged in against the Teutonick Order in Prussia) committed the Cities and Castles of Lavenburgh and Bouta, to the trust of Eric II. Duke of West Pomeren; whose suc∣cessor George (son of Bugislaus X. and Nephew to Sigismund I. King of Poland) had these Ci∣ties confirmed to him and his posterity, upon condition of paying some sleight acknowledg∣ment to the Crown of Poland. Upon these terms the present Elector of Brandenburgh renewed his title to these places (after the usual fashion) by his Ambassador, in the year 1670. What right the Polanders have at this day in Prussia, we have shew'd before: but formerly their pretensions were much greater then now. Sometimes the Duke of Masovia Lorded it over the Prussians, and made the Master of the Teu∣tonick Order his Vicegerent. But in the treaty made between Sigismund I. King of Poland, and Albert Marquess of Brandenburgh (whom the Knights of the Teutonick Order had made their Master) in the year 1525, it was agreed upon, That the Teutonick Order should be wholly ex∣tirpated, and that part of Prussia which (to this day) is called Ducal Prussia, should be go∣vern'd by the said Marquess, with the title of Duke of Prussia; and the rest (or Regal Prussia) remain still subject to the King of Poland. But with this proviso, That the Duke should al∣ways pay homage to the Crown of Poland, and (as a member of that Kingdom) be President of the Kings Council. Lastly, John Casimir (the late King of Poland) granted, first in the year 1657, and again 1663, full and absolute power and dominion over Ducal Prussia, to the present Elector of Brandenburgh, on this condition, That the Dukedome, upon defect of male issue, should return to the Kings of Poland as supreme Landlords, and be conferred on the Dukes of Onoldsbach and Culmbach, as Feudataries.Muscovy. How affairs stand at present between the Great Duke of Muscovy and the King of Poland; may appear by the Treaty of Peace signed by both parties A.D. 1667, spoken of before. But formerly the Kings of Poland have laid claim, and made good their title either by justice or the sword, to several large Territories now in the hands of the Great Duke. For first, Jorislaus Duke of Russia was forced to pay tribute to Bo∣leslaus Chrobri, A.D. 1018. Afterwards, A.D. 1069, Boleslaus II. possessed himself of Kiow, and indeed the whole Dukedom of Russia; over which he set Jesaslaus a tributary Duke. After his death, continual wars were between the two Nations, till Casimir the Great, in the year 1340, reduced the Southern Russia into the form of a Province. But how little of that remains at this day in the hands of the present King of Poland, we have shew'd before. Several of the Kings of Poland have stiled themselves Kings of Sweden;Sweden upon no other pretence then having made themselves masters of a great part of Liefland. But this title ceased upon the death of John Casimir, their late King; as hath already been observed in the description of Liefland. Of the Pretensions of Foreign Princes to the Kingdom of Poland. WE have seen to what Kingdoms and Countries the Kings of Poland have in former ages claimed a right and title; and we may perhaps find as many Kings and Princes of other Nations who have challenged the Crown of Poland upon as good grounds. But (to omit the many conquests obtain'd by the Russians, Bohemians, Hungarians, and o∣thers, over the Poles, enough to entitle any po∣tent Prince to their Kingdom) the strongest pretensions to this Crown, are those of the Em∣peror. For the most of the Polish Historians tell us, That Boleslaus I. was created King of Poland by the Emperor Otto III. before which time the Princes of that Nation were only Dukes. This story is confirmed by (besides the testimony of the most considerable writers of Poland) an ancient Epitaph found in the Cathedral at Posen, in which (among other commendations of Boleslaus I.) are the following rithmes: Tu possedisti, velut Athleta Christi Regnum Slavorum, Gothorum seu Polonorum. Caesar praecellens a te Ducalia pellens. And again: Ob famam bonam tibi contulit Otto Coronam Propter luctamen, sit tibi salus. Amen. However (tho the Historians of Poland grant, that Boleslaus received the title of King at the hands of the Emperor, yet) they deny stubborn∣ly that this Kingdom was ever subject or tribu∣tary to the Roman Empire. But Conringius (an ingenious and learned German Physitian, in his book entituled, De finibus Germanici Imperii, c. 18.) has demonstrated the contrary. For (not to take notice of Charles the Great, who, 'tis more than
probable, conquer'd Poland as well as Silesia) 'tis certain, that Miecislaus, the first Christian Prince of Poland, paid tribute to the Imperial Crown. And the Polish writers are forced to confess, That Otto III. remitted all homage (due otherwise) to Boleslaus Chrobri, when he created him King. After Boleslaus's death, Mie∣cislaus II. his successor, was compelled to pay the usual tribute to the Emperor Conrad II. Af∣ter this, several of the Kings of Poland very wil∣lingly submitted themselves to the Emperors; and others were forced out of their obstinate re∣fusal. At last (in the long vacancy of the Im∣perial Throne, soon after the middle of the thir∣teenth Century, during which Richard Earl of Cornwal was one of the four elected Emperors) whilst the Empire of Germany was in a confused distraction, the Polanders took occasion to shake off the German yoke, to which they could never since be reduced. This is part of the relation which Conringius gives us of the ancient state of Poland, in refe∣rence to the German Empire, founded chiefly up∣on the testimonies of Dithmarus Mersburgensis and Helmoldus, men of unquestionable veracity in their Histories. Hartknoch endeavours to evade the force of his argument by saying: That (tho it be true, that the Polanders have formerly paid some certain sum of money to the Em∣perors, by whom it was demanded under the notion of a tribute, yet) this does not neces∣sarily suppose any dependance of the Crown of Poland upon the Empire of Germany. For 'tis ordinary even with the Emperors themselves to buy peace with money. And thus the Eng∣lish bought their peace of the Danes, and made Lewis XI. King of France, pay for his. But let him consider: First, whether the words of Hel∣moldus (Chron. Slav. lib. 1. c. 1. num. 9.) can be properly understood of any such sum of money as is usually paid by any Nation upon the ratifi∣cation of a Treaty of Peace, when he says, ser∣vit & ipsa (speaking of Poland) sicut Bohemia sub tributo Imperatoriae Majestati. Here the Historian tells us plainly, the Kingdom of Poland was in his time as much tributary to the Emperor as Bo∣hemia; and how truly that was under his sub∣jection, every Historian will shew. Again, 'twas not very considerately done to instance in the tribute paid by the English to the Danes, or by Lewis XI. to the King of England. For both these were doubtless acknowledgements of sub∣jection and homage. The Danes, all know, were absolute Lords of our Land for 26, and made almost continual incursions into it for the space of 250, years. Dane-gelt (which perhaps Hart∣knoch, as some of our own Historians have done, mistakes for a tribute, or composition-money, paid the Danes upon any invasion) was at first only a Subsidy, gather'd for the maintenance of a standing army to oppose the Danish fury. Af∣terwards indeed the word was used to denote a tribute (sometimes amounting to 72000 pounds) levyed yearly in England, and paid to the King of Denmark; upon the refusal of which pay∣ment, the English were sure to feel the weight of that Kings displeasure. This tribute was certainly a sign of a true and real subjection to the Crown of Denmark; which might have lasted longer, had not the Saxon and Danish lines been peaceably united in the pious King Edward the Confessor. As to the tribute paid by Lewis XI. of France to the King of England, I shall say no more then, That 'tis well known upon what grounds our Kings (especially Henry V. and Henry VI; the latter of which was Crowned King of France in Paris) pretended a title to the Crown of France before his days; and what reason they had to demand a tribute. So that Hartknoch's argument drawn from these two examples, a∣mounts to no more than this, That the Empe∣rors of Germany had never any more title to the Crown of Poland, then the Danish Kings have had to the Throne of England, or the English to the Scepter of France: And what kind of pre∣tensions those were, Historians can inform us.
map of Sweden, Norway, and Denmark SVECIAE, NORVEGIAE, ET DANIAE, Nova Tabula.
SWEDEN. SCANDIA, or Scandina∣via, (probably so nam'd from the ancient Inhabi∣tants, who call'd them∣selves Schaanau or Shane; tho Junius thinks it may be very well so called from the ancient word Schans, signifying a For∣tification, the situation of the Country being well fenced), by the Greeks Baltia or Basilia,an∣d its tion. is a large Peninsula, lying be∣twixt 55 and 72 degrees of Northerly Latitude, and about 25 and 65 of Longitude. It is bound∣ed on the West and North by the vast Ocean, on the East by part of Muscovy and the Sinus Fin∣nicus, and on the South by the Baltick Sea; which Peninsula was inhabited by divers Nations, as the Suiones or Sueci, Queni, Northmanni, &c. and was accounted the store-house of men, and origi∣nal of thirty potent Nations, dispers'd into most parts of the habitable world. But we shall now at this time speak only of the principallest part of it, situated toward the most Easterly point, wherein is the seat of a great and powerful Empire, which has of late spread it self very largely out of this Peninsula; commanded by the King of Sweden. His dominion comprehends all from the Frozen Sea on the North; the Dofrine Hills or Scars on the West; the Lakes Ladoga and Onega, and part of Russia, on the East; and the Sund or Oresund, and the Baltick Sea, on the South. Omit∣ting for the present the new Accessions in Livo∣nia, &c. of which in due place. That we may speak distinctly of this great Em∣pire,p∣nd vi∣ we will begin first of all with the North; which is inhabited by a sort of people call'd Laps or Laplanders. All which notwithstanding are not subjects of the Swede; the Easterly parts being under the Muscovite, and the Westerly un∣der the Dane; however we shall speak of them indistinctly, their manners, language, and cu∣stoms being the same in all. 1.Muscovi∣tick Lap∣land. Muscovitick Lapland, called by the ancient Geographers Biarmia, at present by the Swedes Trennis, by the Russes Tarchanavoloch, and by the Natives Pyhinienni, takes in all the maritime tract of ground which lies from about Kola to the White Sea. It is divided into three parts, or Provinces: 1. Mourmanskoy, or maritime Leporie. 2. Tersa, or Terskoy Leporie. And 3. Bellamoreskoy Leporie. The exact description whereof is not accurately known to us. 2.Norwegi∣an Lap∣land. Norwegian Lapland, formerly called Scrick∣finnia, by Jornandes Scretfennia, now Finmark, or the Province of Wardhuus; runs all along the Norwegian shore from the Lake Tornetresk, near the Dofrine Hills, to the Castle of Ward∣huus; but how much more Easterly is not ex∣actly discover'd to us. All this Province, or Lieu∣tenancy, belongs to the Crown of Denmark. 3. Swedish Lapland; or, as the Swedes call it,Swedish Lapland. Lapmark. It contains all that most Southern and inland part of Lappia, from the Province of Hel-Singia in Sweden, to the Lieutenancy of Wardhuus, or quite to the North Sea. It is counted by some to be of equal extent with almost all Sweden pro∣perly so called. Andr. Buraeus says, it contains in length above four hundred English miles, and in breadth three hundred and sixty. This Lap∣land is divided into six lesser parts, or Provinces, called Markar, i. e. Lands; all which have their names from the most remarkable Rivers that run thro each of them. 1. The first and most Northerly of all is Torne∣lapmark,The Pro∣vinces of Swedish Lapland. extending it self from the furthest cor∣ner of the Bay of Bothnia, all along or near to the North Sea, call'd by our Sea-men North-Cape. 2. Next to this, lies Kimilapmark, winding from the North toward the East, and bounded on one side by the Eastern Bothnia, on another by that part of Lapland which belongs to Russia, and on a third side by Cajania and Carelia. 3. West of Tornelapmark lies Lulalapmark, which has on the West-side the Dofrine Hills, and also on the South. 4. Pithalapmark, a Province very mountanous and barren. 5. Next to this Ʋmalapmark, bounding (as the former) upon the West Bothnia and the Do∣frine Hills. 6. South of which lies Angermandlandslapmark, bordering upon Angermannia and Temptia; tho Angermandlandslapmark and Ʋmalapmark are by many Authors reckon'd for one, because they are both govern'd by one Lieutenant, yet are they distinct Provinces. Each of these Provinces are (according to the ancient manner of the Country) subdivided into lesser parts, call'd by the Swedes Byar,Their les∣ser Divisi∣ons. and are equivalent to our Shires, and the Pagi  or  of the Ancients, which were not Villages or Country Towns, but large parts of a Coun∣try. There are several of these Shires or Pagi in each Province, except Angermandlandslapmark, which makes but one Pagus, vulgarly called Aosahla. Ʋmalapmark hath four; Ʋma, Lais or Raanby, Granby, and Vapsteen. Pithalapmark hath seven; Graotreskby, Arfwejerfsby, Lochteby, Arrie∣plogsby, Wisierfby, Norvesterby, Westerby. Lulalap∣mark hath five; Jochmoch, Sochjoch, Torpinjaur, Zerkislocht, and Rautomjaur. Tornelapmark hath nine; Tingewaara, Siggewaara, Sondewara, Rono∣laby, Pellejerf, Kiedkajerf, Mansialka, Saodankyla,
and Kithilaby. So that all the territories are di∣vided into thirty-three Byars. In each of these there are several Clans, or Families, which the Swedes call Rakar. In the Byar called Aosahla there are about thirty, in others more or less accord∣ing as they are in bigness and fertility, di∣stinguish'd by several names, each of which have a certain alotment of ground assigned them for the maintenance of themselves and their Cat∣tel; not in the nature of a country Farm, but of a very great length and breadth, so as some∣times to contain Rivers, Lakes, Woods, and the like, which all belong to one Clan or Family, who enjoy it all in common, without appropriating it to several persons. And thus much for the division of Lapland, not lately made (except that under Charles IX. some Clans had certain allotments assigned them) but derived from very ancient time, as appears from hence, that neither the Laplanders have known, nor the Swedes given them any other since the country has been under their sub∣jection; and it may not seem improbable, that this manner of possessing was begun immediately after the Flood; propriety being the effect of populousness. The inhabitants of this Lapland (supposing the Norwegian and Muscovitic Laps to be of the same original and extract) are said to have de∣scended from the race of the Finlanders and Sa∣moieds;The Inha∣bitants, and their Original. as may probably be gather'd from the likeness of their customs, language, and manner of worship; and also from the very name of Lap∣landers, i. e. banish'd men, or Runnagado's; for they are said to have been driven out of Finland once by the Tartars, when they extended their dominions as far as the Lake Ladoga; and after∣wards by the Swedes. And because such deserting of their Country was thought a disgrace to the whole Nation, none of the Laplanders of any quality to this day will endure to be called by that name, but give themselves some other com∣pellation, as Sabmienladti, Sameednan, &c. And this opinion, that they took their origi∣nal from the Finlanders, or rather were always of the same Nation with them, seems to be con∣firm'd by those descriptions ancient Geographers give of Finland and the Finlandish people, agree∣ing exactly to the modern Lapland and its inha∣bitants. Saxo says, that the Finlanders are the farthest people toward the North, living in a Clime almost unhabitable, good archers and hunters, wanderers and of an uncertain habita∣tion; wheresoever they kill a beast making that their mansion; and they slide upon the snow in broad wooden shoes; all which holds true of the Laplanders; as also do those descriptions of Finland set down by Tacitus. and Jo. Magnus Besides all this, the Norwegians and Danes call the Laplanders Finni, or Finlanders in general; and divide the whole Nation into Sioefinnar, i. e. maritime Finlanders, and Lappesinnar, the same with the Laplanders. The Russes also call them Kajienski, as coming from Cajania, a Province in Finland. And as we may hence probably conclude the Laplanders at first to have come out of Finland, so we may believe that the Finlanders more then once march'd out into Lapland; which is evi∣dent from the several names of their Leaders, whom some call Thinns-Rogre, others Miescho∣giesche. The first and most ancient transmigra∣tion was that of the Biarmi, whom some mis∣call Seridfinni, so called from their going to dwell upon the mountains Varama, signifying in their language a hilly country. Which people was by Harald Harfager King of Norway, almost all de∣stroyed in battel, and the Nation so scatter'd, that for ever after both the name and credit of the Biarmi was quite abolished and forgot. The second time of their deserting their Coun∣trey, was when the Russians enlarged their Em∣pire as far as the Lake Ladoga, which was about the sixth age after Christ. For fearing the cru∣elty of these people they retired into Lapland, and were called by the Russians Kajienski, for the reason aforesaid. To confirm what has been said, give me leave to insert here a Testimony greater then all exceptions, that is of the wor∣thiest of all Princes Aelfred the Great, who ha∣ving himself represented Orosius, or an antient Geographer and Historian in his own Saxon Lan∣guage, so as to add supplies where he is defective, gives an account of these Northern Shores out of the Relation of a Norwegian Nobleman imployed by himself for the discovery of these Countreys. The Testimony being more authentick then any one that hath written upon this subject so long ago, we shall here set it down almost verbatim. Otherus said to his Lord Aelfred, that himself li∣ved in the very Northerlyest part of Norway in the Country called Halgoland, that Northwards of this Countrey was desert; except some few places wherein a few Finns lived in Winter upon hunting, and in Summer upon fishing; that ha∣ving sail'd Northward and Easterly with a good gale for seven days, he arrived at a great River, on the right hand whereof was the Country of the Ferfinni, which was thinly inhabited by a few Fowlers, Fishers and Hunters; on the other side were the Biarmi, a populous Nation, so that he durst not land amongst them; that they dis∣cours'd with him many things concerning their Countrey, whether true or false he knew not, but supposed that they speak the same language with the Finni. That near this Countrey was the great fishing for Whales and Sea-horses; (which we call Morses) whose teeth were then accounted of great value. But there seems to have been another more ge∣neral migration of these Finns into Lapland, about the year 1150; and till this time we never find them called Lappi or Loppi: and the occasion of this name seems to be about that time Ericus Sanctus King of Sweden subdu'd the Finlanders and brought them under the Swedish Government, and also planted amongst them the Christian Religion; whereupon they being subjected to Strangers, and forc'd to be of a Religion different from that of their Ancestors, many of them retired from their own Country, and sought out a place where they might live more free, and accord∣ing to their own manner: and those that stay∣ed, and submitted to the Swedes, and embraced Christianity, looked upon the departers as de∣serters of their Countrey; whom fear of a good Government, and better Religion had made Ex∣iles; especially when the King had put forth an Edict that all should be accounted banish'd that would not renounce Pagan superstition. Being thus forc't out of their Native Coun∣trey,Their  mann of livi at fir. they liv'd for an age or more upon the Bothnic Coasts, and in the Woods of Tavastia, as a stragling and miserable people, neither ha∣ving Laws nor Governours, till the year 1272; at which time they were made tributary to the Crown of Sweden; under Magn. Ladulaos then King; who to bring them under his subjection, promised any one that could effect it, the Go∣vernment of them; which the Birkarli i. e. those that lived in the allotment or division of Birkala, undertook; and having for a great while cun∣ningly insinuated themselves into their conver∣sation under a pretence of friendship, at last set
upon them unawares, and quite subdued them; and for their pains (according to Ladulaos's pro∣mise) they alone had the priviledge to traffique with them and receive Tribute from them; which they constantly did till about Ann. 1554, when they were entirely united to the Crown of Sweden; and in 1600 better discovered and more cer∣tainly known to the Swedes, then formerly they had been; and this was effected by the care of Charles the ninth then King, who sent two fa∣mous Mathematicians M. Aron. Forsius a Swedish professor, and Hieron. Birckholten a German, with Instruments and all necessaries to make what discoveries they could of this Lapland. This Countrey,em∣ the  the . lying under divers Climes, has the Temperature of the Air, and likewise the nature of the soyl very different. In those parts that are most Northerly, and within the Artick-circle the air is extream cold and the ground barren; but without the Circle the heavens are somewhat more mild and benigne, and the earth more liberal in her productions, affording in those places near Bothnia some few sorts of Pot-herbs, as Coleworts, Rape-roots, Parsnips, &c. so that in those parts only they make Gar∣dens and till their ground. Through the whole Countrey the air though very cold and piercing, yet is not inferiour to any of other Regions in healthfulness and pureness, either because the va∣pours coagulated and so made heavier by the cold fall down, or from the frequent winds; which sometimes are so strong that they hinder all passengers from travelling, and likewise root up all trees and Bushes that stand in their way, so that on several of the Laplandish as well as Dofrine mountains there are no trees or shrubs to be met with, therefore the Inhabi∣tants make use of fish-bones for fuel; but most terrible are those Tempests and Whirlewinds, says J. Magn. which arise from the North, some∣times taking away the waters of the Sea from un∣der the Ships, and carrying the Ships up into the air, let them fall down again at far distant places; sometimes also sweeping away with them both Stones and living Creatures, and now and then meeting with great quantities of fish, which the Inhabitants use to dry in the cold, they hoise them up into the air, and let them fall, which the poor people gather as a gift sent from God. In those parts nearest the Pole, the Sun for some months never sets, and on the con∣trary for so long time never rises; and al∣though in Summer it never sets and goes below the Earth, yet neither does it rise more above it, but as it were glides along the edg of the Horison for the most part; and likewise in win∣ter when lowest it is not much beneath it, which is the reason, that though they have one conti∣nued night for some months, yet the Sun comes so near that it makes a kind of twilight. Snows are frequent, which last all the year long upon the mountains, and many months upon the plains, by the brightness whereof they travel with greater security and speed then otherwise they could do. Springs and Rivers are so numerous in this Country,. that together with the melted Snows and Frosts they make the ground all summer time generally loose and boggy. The most no∣ted Rivers are those whence the particular Marches and Regions have their names, as Ʋ∣meao, Pitheao, Luhleao, Torneao and Kimeao; these all spring from the Dofrine mountains, and be∣ing increas'd by several lesser rivers, do at last unburthen themselves into the Bothnick sea. In their course they run through many hilly and uneven parts of the Countrey, and are stopt by several dams and weares, and so violently force∣ing their way over precipices are not navigable. Such are the sluces Muscaumokke, Sao and Nio∣metsaski i. e. Hares-leap, so called, because the River Lughla runs between two mountains so near, that a Hare may leap over. Besides these,Lakes; and other less remarkable rivers there are abundance of Pools or Lakes, as Lu∣lafraesk. Lugga, Sabbaig, &c. well stored with Sal∣mons and such like Fish; one there is named Stoorafvan, in which there are as many little I∣slands as there are days in the year; but the most remarkable is Enaresraesk near Kimus, wherein the hills and islands are by some said to be in∣numerable, and Torneus affirms, that never any Inhabitant lived long enough to survey them all. Some of these are small, but fishy; they call them Suino i. e. Holy, and account it a sin to foul them. Some of them have two Chan∣nels, and when the Fish forsake the upper, they account it an ill omen, and use ridiculous sa∣crifices to the Demon of that March. Here are Mountains most of them small and inconsiderable,Moun∣tains; some also very high and almost unpassable, especially towards Norway, which the Swedes call Fiael, or, as the Northern English, Fells, and the Laplanders Tudderi, they arise a∣bout Zemptland, whence with continued ascent toward the North, they reach a 100 miles in length, till they come to Titus-fiord, which is a bay of the frozen Sea. Till of late no Mines of any Mettal were known to be in the Country,Mines; but in the reign of Queen Christina in the year 1643 there were veines found both of Silver and Lead by the Inhabitants of Pithalappia amongst Rocks so hard that they were forced to tear them in pie∣ces with Gunpowder; but in the wars 'twixt Swe∣den and Denmark in the year 1656 one Van Anen a Danish Governour so spoiled them, that it is not thought worth the charge to open them again; and since that also in the year 1668 another Silver mine (but mingled with Iron) was dis∣cover'd by a Native. There are also known to be some Iron and Copper mines in Torne and Lulalapmark, but not digged. Scheffer mentions a report of the discovery of a Golden Mine in the year 1671, but nothing of certainty con∣cerning it comes to our hands; what further concerns them will fall more properly under the discourse of Sweden. The Stones of this Country generally are ex∣treamly hard, of an ash colour, and unworkable;Stones; some there are found on the shores, which re∣present the shape of some animals, which the Inhabitants esteem much, and adore for Gods, under the name of Storjunkare. Some Authors speak of considerable quantities of Diamonds, Amethysts and Topaz; the Diamonds, which are reported to be of an incredible bigness, seem to be nothing but either Chrystals or Fluores, and Scheffer gives the same sentence of the other. Here are found in some few Rivers a sort of Pearl, but neither so oriental, nor so well shap'd as those that come out of the Indies; In the whole Country there are none of those we call either Fruit or Timber-Trees,Trees; but store of Pine, Firr, Birch, Willows and Alder. Plants most frequent among them are divers sorts of Berries, Angelica, highly valued by them for diet and medicine, Sorrel, &c. Proper to the Coun∣try are Calceolus Lapponicus. so call'd from the shape of its flower, a beautiful plant but of no use; great varieties also of Mosses, the food of their Rain-deer. This Country by reason of the many Lakes,Fish and Fowl. Rivers and Woods abounds much with Fish and
Fowl of all sorts; there is one sort of Bird cal∣led Loom or Lame (because their feet are so short and plac'd so far behind, that they can∣not go upon land, but always either swim or flie) very numerous in and peculiar to this Country: but no Bird abounds more than the White Partridge, not only in the Woods, but on the high Mountains, even when cover'd with the deepest Snows; they have a kind of hair instead of feathers, which in the winter is white; but when the spring comes they turn to their proper color; which seems to be usual in all cold Countries; they have hares feet, whence they are call'd by some Lagopodes. Fish are here in great abundance, not only suffici∣ent to supply the Inhabitants, but frequently transported into other Nations, although their constant victuals be nothing but dryed Fish; such as abound most are Salmon and Pikes whereof some are found eight foot long. Of all the Beasts of Lapland the Bear is chief,Beasts. stil'd by the Inhabitants the King of the woods; next to the Bear the Elk is remarkable, call'd by the Swedes Aelg or Aelgar, and by the Germans Ellend. It differs much from the Rain-deer; both in height, being as high as any horse; and in the make of it horns, they being shorter then those of the Rain-deer, above two hand∣fuls in breadth upon the Palm, shooting out not many lesser branches; (see a discription of this Creature among the beasts of Poland.) There is no great breed of them in Lapland, but they have them from other places, especially Lithva∣nia and Russia, whence twice a year they swim in great herds over the river Niva, in the spring to go into Carelia and those parts, and in Au∣tumn to return into Russia. Here are likewise besides these and the Rain-deer great plenty of Stags, Wolves, Gluttons, Beavers, and more sorts of Furs. As for the Stags, there are but few and little, such as are call'd Damicervi or , which since they have nothing peculiar from those of other Nations, let it suffice that they are named. Wolves are here in great num∣ber, distinguished from those of other Coun∣tries only by their colour, which is commonly white; a great enemy to the Rain-deer, but are observ'd never to assault them if bound to a stake, the Wolf being a jealous Creature, and suspects every rope he sees to be a snare to catch him. The next are the Gluttons (so nam∣ed from their rapaciousness) an amphilbious Creature, with a round head, strong and sharp teeth, like a Wolf; a plump body, and feet shorter then the Otters; their skin is of a very dark colour, some of them resemble Sables, on∣ly they have a softer and finer hair. Beavers also are very numerous here, and generally by reason of the quietness of the waters (which are never, or seldomer troubled with Ships and Boats then the Rhine and Danow are) all crea∣tures that live in Rivers and feed upon Fish a∣bound in this Country. Beasts also that live wholly upon Land, are in great number and variety; as Foxes of seve∣ral sorts and colours, as the black, brown, ash∣colour'd, white, and those that are mark'd with a cross all along the back, and down the should∣ers, call'd Crucigerae. Martrons or Martins (a little beast not unlike a Ferret, feeding upon Mice, Birds, and such like;) Ermins (which are white Weesels, with black tails, feeding also upon Mice, and the like little Animals,) Sables, (a kind of Martron, the white are very rare and of ex∣traordinary price, of the rest the black are the better) with some others, whose skins are highly priz'd and reckon'd the chief commodity of Lap∣land. There are also on the mountains of Lapland vast numbers of Mice, which because they ap∣pear commonly after rain, have I suppose, gi∣ven occasion to some Authors to think them generated in the Clouds, and so rain'd down: of these Mice are reported several incredible things, as their waging war, and drawing them∣seves in bodies like armies, their oeconomy also, and such like stories; they are meat for their Foxes, Rain-deer, and their Dogs, which eat only the fore part of them. Cattel common to other Nations, as Horses, Oxen, Sheep, &c. are not to be met with in Lap∣land; the beasts proper to this and the Northern Countries are the Rain-deer, an ancient name call'd by King Aelfred in his Saxon Periplus, Hy∣nas, and the Latine name Rangifer seems to be derived from it; they differ much from the Ta∣randus of Pliny, and also from our common Stags; they have three horns, two branching out backward like our Stags horns, sometimes five cubits in length, and adorn'd with five and twenty branches; the third spouting down their forehead, by which they defend themselves a∣gainst wild beasts. The Doe has but two horns, somewhat shorter, one whereof is fix'd in her fore∣head. Their feet are thick like Bulls feet; of an ash∣colour, except under their belly and haunches, which is white, resembling more an Ass then a Stag. This beast when it walks or runs makes a noise with its joints like the clashing of Flints, which is peculiar to these creatures. Though their hoofs be cleft, they do not chew the cud; they are naturally wild, but not difficult∣ly tamed, and made serviceable to men. The males they imploy in drawing their Sleds, and the Does they keep for their milk, of which they make Cheese, but not any Butter, for they have none in the whole Country, but make use of a kind of Tallow instead of it. The Inhabitants both in figure and manners are not unlike the Samoieds of Muscovy,The ∣ture inhabi∣tants. and the Description there given of that people, may in several respects be said to agree to them. They are generally short of stature, and for the most part very lean, and perhaps both by reason of the extream coldness of the Country. They are observ'd to be very light of body, which some, perhaps not without reason, attribute to their not eating any salt. They have great heads, pro∣minent foreheads, hollow and blear eyes, short flat noses, and wide mouths; their hair is gene∣rally flaggy, their breast broad, slender wastes, and though their legs be small, yet are they nim∣ble, strong and swift of foot; their usual exerci∣ses being running races, and climbing high Rocks and Trees. Though they are thus nimble and strong, yet they never go upright but stooping, which habit they get by frequent sitting in their Cottages on the ground, or by bending their bodies as they slide along the snow in their scaits. By reason of their living in woods among wild beasts, and want of correspondence, as well a∣mong themselves as with other Nations, they are very superstitious, fearful and mean spirited, and above all things dreading war; so that the Swedes seldom or never imploy any of them in their armies, though it be falsly reported that Gustavus Adolphus made use of both them and their magick in his expeditions upon Germany; but of late they begin to be more couragious, and considerable, and we are inform'd that this present King Charles the XIth, in his wars with the King of Denmark, had some Regiments of Lapps in his Army, who for the good service they did him, has given them better Lodgings then they had before, and caus'd them to change quarters
with some of the Inhabitants of Schonen who by reason of their treacherousness, were not so deserving as they. If they chance to be removed out of their own, into a more Southern Coun∣try, they frequently fall into deseases and dye; being less able to endure a milder air, and to feed upon Salt, Bread and boil'd meat, then other Na∣tions are to live upon their raw Flesh and dryed Fish. Formerly they were accounted plain∣dealers, and in bartering very honest; but having been deceiv'd by strangers they took up cheat∣ing and cousening as well as others, and are so far from being behind hand with them in it, that they are notorious and infamous for de∣ceiving and over-reaching one another in bar∣gaining. They (especially the women) are jea∣lous of all strangers whatsoever, and being con∣scious how much their simplicity exposes them to the craft of others, they are revengeful and desperate, endeavouring to prevent any mis∣chief that may seem to threaten them, by the destruction of the person that caused the suspi∣tion. And this they do frequently by the assi∣stance of Magick and the help of the Devil; as is said of one, who attempting often to mis∣chieve his Enemy, who was secur'd by his Coun∣tercharms, after long lying in wait for him, at last watched his opportunity, and finding him asleep under a great Rock, by his Spel split it upon him, and so buried him under it. They are also noted to be of a censorious and detracting humour, covetous and yet lazy withal, so that where the soyl might be improv'd, they often through idle∣ness let it lye barren and uncultivated. They seldom take pains so much as to hunt or fish, till pinch'd by want and necessity. Consequent to these qualities they are stubborn, undutiful to Parents when old, lustful (all, except the mar∣ried people, lying promiscuously together in one Hut, without any difference of age, sex, or condition), and subject to whatever vices at∣tend an idle and unthinking life. Yet in the midst of these enormities and depravations of manners, some good qualities are to be found amongst them, as their great veneration and respect for marriage, which they seldom or ne∣ver violate; their abhorrence of theft, which is remarkable in that they do keep their hands from pilfering, having so good opportunity to the contrary, there being no secured Magazines, nor Locks and Keys in the whole Country, but Mer∣chants leave their goods oftentimes in the open fields, defended by some covering from the wea∣ther, not at all from the treachery of any dis∣pos'd to be theevish. Their hospitality to Strang∣ers and those in distress is very remarkable, they receiving them into their Huts, liberally afford∣ing them the best chear they have, and often charitably supplying them with stock to traffick, lending money gratis, without any usury, and such like good deeds; which seem to be happy fruits sprung up in some of them since the plan∣tation of our holy Religion amongst them; the ignorance and gross superstition among the natives very much disappearing since the light of the Gospel was known to them. Concerning the Religion of the Laplanders, we may observe what progress they have made in Christianity since it was planted amongst them; as also what was the antient manner of worship proper to these Northern Nations, for the reliques of heathenish superstition amongst some of them to this day seem to be only rak'd up under the embers, ready to flame out, were it not for the strict Government of the Swedes, They worshiped they knew not what, but they call'd him Jumala or Jomala a word which they use now for the true God, as they did before for the supream Entity. Another God also they worship'd under the name of Turrisas or Turris-As the prince of the Ases or Asiaticks [whence it does appear that they conserved some knowledg of their migration, together with the rest of the Scandians out of Asia, under Woden]. Several other distinct Gods they had on different occa∣sions, as to preside over Ry, Barley, Oates and all sorts of fruits (whom they worshiped in Fin∣land, but had not any occasion for after their ba∣nishment); one also for Tempests, one to protect their Cattel, another to command Wolves, Squirrels, and such like ridiculous Deities. Ju∣mala was represented under the image of a man, sitting upon an Altar, with a Crown upon his head, adorn'd with twelve Gems, and a golden Chain about his neck, to which was fastned a large Jewel called from its figure Mens or Mene i. e. a Moon; upon his knees stood a large golden dish, into which they cast their offerings; and this dish they are supposed to have brought out of Finland, for when they lost it they could ne∣ver procure another. His Temple was in the woods, not built with any roof, but only a piece of ground fenc'd as the old Roman Temples were; this God being in time found useless, was at last casheard; and the Deities in greatest re∣putation amongst them at this day, are those things from which they think they receive the greatest benefits, as the sun, fire, and such like, of which more by and by. All the Heathenish Religion the Laplanders re∣tain to this day, may be reduc'd to two heads,Their Heathen∣ish Gods. Magical and Paganish, or Superstitious and Dia∣bolical. (Those superstitions they intermix with Christianity, we shall speak of under Religion as 'tis Christian). Of their Gods some are publick and common to the whole Country, o∣ther private and belonging only to a Division, neighbourhood, or some one particular Family; all which have their several names. Those of Lapponia Pithensis and Luhlensis have their greater and lesser Gods; the greater to whom they pay especial worship, are Thor, Storejunkare, the Sun, and some add Fire, which may seem not a di∣stinct Deity, but only an emblem of the Sun; The lesser, common also to the Tornenses, are worshipp'd under one name, except only that which they call Wira Accha, signifying a Livonian old woman, which at first was only an old stump of a tree, but now its Godship is quite rotten and moulder'd away. They worship also the Ghosts of men, their friends especially, de∣parted, and think some Divinity to be in them, as the Romans fancied to be in their Manes; Spectres also and Demons are ador'd by them, which they say wander amongst Rocks, Woods, Rivers and Lakes, as the Roman Fauni, Sylvani and Tritones are said to have done; The Genii al∣so, good and bad; which they suppose to fly in the air about Christmas, and they call them Juhly from Juhl (a word still in use among the Northern English) denoting at present Christmas, but formerly the New-year. Some Gods also there are common to the whole Country, the chief of which is Thor, or as the Swedes call him Thordoen, and the Lapps themselves sometimes Tiermes, i. e. Thunderer, or noise-maker. His proper place is thought to be in the clouds; and winds, rain, thunder, good as well as bad weather to be at his disposal. The Romans could not have greater thoughts of their Jupiter, then the Laplanders have of their Thor; whereupon they give him many great and honou∣rable titles, as Aijeke, great-grand-father, &c. To him belongs the arbitrement of life and death,
health and sickness; he can also restrain whatsoever is injurious, and give whatever is beneficial or ad∣vantageous to men. So as the thred of mans life was supposed by the Ancients to be tyed to Jove's chair; they fancy it to be in the power of this God to lengthen and shorten it as he pleases; that they cannot dye except he give leave, nor could have had a being but by his permission; that 'tis he that drives away those Daemons from the rocks and mountains that are enemies to them in hunting, fowling, and fishing; that he never suffers them to be hurt or dye, but when it is either for their good, or for the punishment of their offences. His image is always made of Beech-tree (therefore he is by some call'd Muora-Jub∣mel, i. e. the Wooden God), and the stumps that shoot out from the root of this tree, are easily by the help of fancy and a little art, made like a mans head, arms, &c. by him lies a bow and arrows, and sometimes a hammer, to kill the mischievous Daemons. Into his head there is driven a piece of iron or steel, and a small flint laid by him, by which is signified fire, the chief commodity of life. The place where this God is commonly worship'd, is a piece of ground not far from their huts, set apart for that service; where, upon some boards set together like a table, they place their images; this table they make use of instead of an Altar, and boughs of Birch and Pine, with which they surround it, serve them for a Tem∣ple. When they offer sacrifice to him, they ex∣clude all women, esteeming it a great crime if any of that sex be present. The first thing they do, is to enquire of the God, whether he will accept their sacrifice or not; and this they do by a certain instrument they call Kannus, not un∣like an old fashion'd Drum, commonly call'd by the Swedes Laplandish Drums, on which are pi∣ctur'd several of their Gods (of which more hereafter); to this Drum they fasten a ring, whereto is tyed some of the hair of the beast designed for slaughter; then one of them beats the Drum, and the rest sing to this purpose, What sayest thou, O great and sacred God, dost thou accept this sacrifice which we design to offer unto thee? And while some thus chant, others repeat the name of the place where they are (of the mountain if they do sacrifice to Storjunkare); this done, they observe upon what part of the Drum the ring rests; if upon that part where the Idol is pictur'd, they take it for granted that he is pleased, and so go on with their business; if not, then they carry their sacrifice to another of their Gods, re∣peating the same ceremonies; and so from one to another, till at last some of them vouchsafe to accept it. If they find by the resting of the ring, that Thor or Tiermes is pleased with it, then they proceed in their superstitious fooleries in this manner. First they bind the sacrifice (which is for the most part a Rain-Deer), behind their house or hut, and with a sharp knife running him thro the heart, gather the hearts-blood into a vessel; then reverently approaching the table on which the Idol is placed, they therewith anoint his head and back all over, and upon his breast draw only some small strokes or crosses; behind him they place the skull, feet, and horns of the beast given in sacrifice; before him, a coffer made of the bark of Birch-tree, into which they put a bit of every member of the said beast, with some of the fat; and the rest of the flesh they keep for their private use, and so depart very well sa∣tisfied. Lest this wooden God should corrupt and moulder away, or by reason of his ugliness grow out of repute amongst them, they once every year (about the latter end of Autumn) provide themselves a neat, new, and fashionable Image, which they with a great deal of solemnity con∣secrate, anointing it with the blood and fat of the sacrifice, whose flesh they do not carry away with them, but bury it under ground, and so end their devotions. After which solemnity about the Idol, they count it as good a Deity as any of the rest, and give it place accordingly. The next of their principal Gods is Storjunkare, i. e Great Commander; a Norwegian name (Jun∣kare signifying in that language a Governour), yet now in use amongst the Laplanders. He is sometimes call'd Stourra-Passe, i. e. Great Saint, and seems to be the same with Seita, which those of Kimi- and Torne-Lapmark worship. To this Storjunkare they pay their devotion next after Thor or Tiermes, whose Lieutenant they suppose him to be. He is said to preside peculiarly over all beasts and cattel; and as Thiermes affords life and being, so all things requir'd to the sustenance of man are supposed to be at the disposal of this God, and all blessings to come thro his hands. 'Tis believed by them, that he has often appear∣ed to fowlers and fishers in the shape of a tall personable man, habited like a person of qua∣lity, with a bow in his hand, and to have had bird-like feet; and if any happen thus to see him when they are fishing or hunting, they cer∣tainly promise to themselves good success at that time, and think the place to be holy where he vouchsafes to shew himself. His chiefest place of worship is where they suppose he most of all frequents, mountains and rocks; some of which are so high and craggy that they are unpassable to any but Storjunkare himself, who they think by the advantage of his birds-feet, can climb to the top of them; which the Lapps not being able to do, they consecrate any small stone they find, anointing it with the blood of a Rain-Deer, and so throw it up to the top of the rock, as a sacrifice to this inaccessible God. In Luhla-Lap∣mark are said to be thirty mountains or hills, (which we omit to name), wholly set apart for the worship of this God, and the number is pro∣portionable in other parts of the country. He is represented by a stone, which sometimes is like a bird, sometimes a man, and now and then re∣sembling other creatures, as they can find them, for they never use any art to polish any of them, but think that their shape comes by the imme∣diate procurement of Storejunkare. In the Isle Dama, which is made by a Cataract of the river Torna-traesh, are said to be found several of these Seitas in the exact shape of a man, one of which is very tall, and hard by him four others of a some∣what shorter size, with a kind of caps on their heads. Here formerly was the chief place of worship; but because the passage into the Island by reason of the Cataract is very dangerous, they are now forc'd from their Idolatry in that place place. These stones they do not set singly, but always three or four together, or more, accord∣ing as they find them; to the first they give the title of Storejunkare himself, the second they call Acte, or Storjunkare's wife, the third they place as his eldest son, and the rest they dispose of as his servants and attendants. The manner of wor∣ship which is used to this God, is much-what the same with that of Thor or Tiermes. In the first place they try if any one be able with all his strength to move the stone which represents their Deity; if they cannot lift it up, or find it heavier then usual, they desist from their worship at that time; but if it seem lighter then ordinary, they then think him well pleased, and so proceed in their ceremonies. They bind their sacrifice (which is always a male Deer) before their stone Idol, and after having run a thred thro his right ear,
kill him, and reserve the hearts-blood in a bason; this done, the Priest takes the horns and bones of the head and neck, with the shanks and hoofs of the Rain-Deer, and carries them to the con∣secrated mountain, where their God dwells; at the first approach he uncovers his head, bows or prostrates his body, and pays all ceremonies of honour and respect; then he anoints the stone with the blood and fat of the sacrificed beast, and places the horns behind it; to the right horn he tyes the Rain-Deer's yard, and to the left some red thred wrought upon tin with a little piece of silver. All the flesh that remains, the Votaries take a way with them, and depart with a mighty deal of satisfaction. This is the ordinary way of sacrificing to Storjunkare, tho in some places of the country the ceremonies alter a little, but not much. The last of the principal Idols is the Sun, whom they call Baiwe, common to them with all other Heathens; worship'd especially for his light and heat, both extreamly grateful to these poor peo∣ple. They fancy all things, especially their Rain-Deer, to be made by this God; and that he is an universal principal of being. They sacrifice to him in the same manner as to Storjunkare, only the string which they run thro the beasts ear is white, the Victim a Rain-Doe, and there are neither tables, images, nor horns erected, as in those ceremonies. Nor is their Idolatry more notorious then their Witchcraft; it being generally believ'd by all that have heard the name of Laplanders, that they are strangely addicted to Magick, and all arts of Sorcery. The ancient Biarmi are said to have been so skilful at the trade, that by only speaking to, they could ensnare and bewitch one another; and by their very looks not only stare men out of countenance, but their reason too: nor are the Laplanders at present much degenerated from them, but rather seem to have attain'd to grea∣ter proficiency in it. They have professors of this black Art, not inferior to Zoroaster himself, from whom some say they receiv'd their knowledge; Masters also and Tutors to bring up their chil∣dren in the way of their forefathers, and never count a son worthy the inheritance of his father, till he is able to manage a spell; which is com∣monly his best portion. Their familiar Spirits are peculiar to each distinct family; and more or less in number, according as they are resolved to be upon their guard, or inclined to be mischievous. If the Devil have a mind to make especial use of any one of them, he seizes them whilst young with some distemper or other, and all the time lies close siege to them, filling their imaginations with all sorts of dreadful apparitions; and this he does sometimes three or four times to the same person, making him fitter for his councils, by giving him a nearer prospect of Hell. Those that are thus seized by the Devil, are the ablest Sorcerers of any, and can effect their Magical designs without the usual assistance of a Drum; as Mr. Scheffer tells a story of a Laplander, who upon complaint made against him for keeping a Drum, brought it and deliver'd it up to him, and with tears confest, that tho he did thus wil∣lingly part with it, and never intended to pro∣vide another, yet he should still be tormented with the same fearful and troublesome visions about future events, which (tho his eyes were shut) were always present to his imagination. Yet such inspired Wizzards as these are rarely to be met with; most commonly they make an art of it; which according to the diversity of instru∣ments made use of, may be divided into two parts; the former employ'd about their Drum, the latter about knots, darts, spells, &c. The Drum is peculiar to the Laplanders, call'd Kan∣nus or Quobdas, made of a hollow piece of wood, which is always the root either of Pine, Fir, or Birch, growing in a peculiar place, and having the grain of the tree following the course of the Sun, i. e. winding from the right hand to the left. It is made hollow on one side, upon which they stretch a skin, fastening it with wooden pegs; on the other they make two holes to hold it by; the shape of the upper part is oval, about half an ell in diameter; upon the skin they paint several pi∣ctures in red, stain'd with the bark of an Alder∣tree; and thro the middle they draw some cross∣lines, in every quarter of which they place their chiefest Gods, with their attendants; neither do they observe always the same Gods, nor the same method, as appears by the picture of them in Scheffer; only it is remarkable, 1. That ordina∣rily they paint the Sun in the middle, their Gods above, and the earthly things under him. 2. That since Christianity came amongst them, many of them do place upon their Drums our Saviour and his Apostles, acknowledging him to be, or have the power of one of their Gods. 3. And that they alter their figures according to the oc∣casion of their inquiry; retaining the general no∣tion all Heathens had of the Deity, that divers of them had particular charges and employments; and hence, i. e. from this general consent of Ido∣laters, it may not improbably be gather'd, that their was but one original of all mankind, in as much as all acknowledg sacrifices and ceremo∣nies, whereby they might consult of things fu∣ture, of their good success in their affairs, and the aversion of their calamities; only this may be noted, that all Nations as they grew to be more civilized, became less addicted to Magick; the unpunish'd practice of which became so ex∣ceedingly harmful, and destructive to mankind; so that the poor Northern Nations were left in a manner abandon'd to the power of the Devil, their great enemy, till Christianity was brought in, in a manner forcibly by the rigorous com∣mands of the Kings of Sweden. Notwithstanding which, tho they have in many places given over their Drum, yet do they practice still their knots; have their Familiars in the shape of Flies, Bees, &c. but chiefly their black Cats (whom they not only consult at home about their houshold af∣fairs, but take with them also in their huntings, tho in the depths of snow), and their diabolical extasies, if I may so call them; which are exercised sometimes with, sometimes without a Drum; if with a Drum, the Sorcerer kneels down, and having a bunch of rings, or other pieces of brass, laid in the middle of the Drum, he beats with a consecrated hammer, so strongly that the rings dance upon it, by the resting of which upon such a figure, they draw forth an answer to what they would desire to know; but if this be not satis∣factory, then the Drummer puts himself, by dancing and howling, into a violent motion, till he falls down, which he chuses to do upon his Drum; and there he lies without motion or di∣sturbance, and without sense, till he volun∣tarily rise agian, and gives answer to what is desired. This kind of divination is chiefly used when something at a great distance is desired to be known. The stories are so frequent, and from persons not credulous, that it is very hard to dis∣believe what they speak concerning these Sor∣ceries. Take this from a person of worth and understanding, (as an example of the rest), who said that being one time at dinner with his Father, Mother, Brother, Sisters, &c. his Fathers knife was missing upon a sudden, nor could be found,
till two years after, when a Cosin of his return∣ing from being Factor in or near Lapland, brought it with him, telling them, that out of curiosity he had employed a Laplander (a pretender to great skill in this art), to bring him notice of the health and condition of that family, who after he had lain some time in this now describ'd man∣ner, brought him news, that they were all well, that he found them at dinner, and that to con∣firm his relation, he brought away that knife, which he deliver'd to the Merchant, and the Mer∣chant brought home now to his Uncle. Sometimes also they practise their Sorceries without the Drum, using instead of it common∣ly strings or darts, by which they advantage their friends, or injure their enemies at their pleasure. The strings they make use of to raise or quell the winds, which they sell to Mariners for that purpose. They consist commonly of three knots, the first of which being untyed, affords a favourable wind; the second a brisk gale; and the third a violent storm; as has been approved to the great dan∣ger and loss of several Mariners, that have given account of it in publick. By their darts, which are short Cylinders of Lead, they wound any one who hath offer'd them an injury, or their malice puts them upon to assault. These are said to be the most powerful charms of any, and upon oc∣casion to have split rocks, level'd mountains, and such like incredible exploits. Besides these,Christian Religion planted amongst them. they have some other remains of Idolatry; as a ball, which they work up of Cows∣hair, and so send it of mischievous errands; with several such like heathenish fooleries, all which are at this day in most parts left off among them; the Natives themselves informing one against another, and causing such delinquents to be brought to condign punishment, which is most frequently done in those parts that are under the Swedish Government; for Christianity, which was first planted in Finland by Ericus the Saint, and so made known to the Laplanders, has in these latter times made considerable advances amongst them, under the Reigns of their late Princes. In the year 1600 Charles IX. built some publick Schools in Lapland; and in the year 1619, or about that time, Gustavus Adolphus, who took especial care of the Laplandish Countries, and having united them more closely to the King∣dom of Sweden then his predecessors had done (they having been in former times rather tribu∣tary to the Birkirli, then subjects to that Crown) erected more publick Schools, and caused divers Christian Churches to be built amongst them, all which by the charity and piety of Christina were augmented both in number and endow∣ments, for the promoting of Religion and Learn∣ing amongst them; and many Pastors were con∣siderably stipended for that purpose. So that whereas formerly those that had a mind to have their children baptized, used to carry them (as Olaus Magnus relates) sometimes above two hun∣dred English miles to Church, they now are eased of that trouble, and have Churches built at very inconsiderable distance one from another; and whereas they had opportunity of hearing only one Sermon a year, (viz. when they came to a general Market which was held in February, or to pay their taxes to the King of Sweden), they now have Ministers provided which are al∣ways resident amongst them, whom they very much respect, and whose Sermons they constant∣ly frequent; so that now the light of the Gospel has very much expell'd all heathenish superstiti∣ons out of these remoter Regions of the world, and a pious and godly life, with the Lords Prayer repeated with sincerity, are experienced to be the most effectual countercharm against all Sorce∣ries whatsoever; it being constantly observed, that neither their Drum, nor any of their Magi∣cal instruments have any power against them that call upon the name of our Lord, nor are able to defend them from the power of his Mi∣nisters; insomuch that it has lately been report∣ed upon very credible authority, that the Devil foreseeing the danger of his Kingdom, appear'd visibly to his servants, encouraging them by all means to continue in their obedience to him. The truth of this I cannot assert, but all Authors affirm, that as Christian Religion got more ground amongst them, so Government, Civility, Arts, and Ingenuity have also proportionably advanc'd. We meet not with any thing concerning their Government before they came under the Bir∣karli,The ve. but what was of the chief of the Family; which toward their wives was very rigid, and toward their children very indulgent, or rather negligent; neither did the Birkarli exercise any greater power over them, then to fright them them into paying of tribute, part to themselves, part to the King of Sweden, and some other such subjection, as was for their own, not the peo∣ples profit. But Gustavus Adolphus took even this power also from them, and the country was by him wholly and entirely subjected to the Swe∣dish Government; which is at present managed by three chief Governours (called by the Swedes Lagmen), and as many Provincial Judges, so nam'd from the Provinces where they are plac'd. Under these there are particular Governours, Ʋnder-Lagmen, which have power to determine Suits at Law, or pass sentence upon Malefactors, even unto death; but never without the assistance of a Judg and a Priest. Anciently their Courts were called only twice a year, at their publick Fairs, in winter and summer; but now for the more effectual restraining of vice, they are more frequently used amongst them; and if any con∣troversie arise, which is of lesser concern, they put an end to it by these Courts; but if any hap∣pen of greater moment or difficulty, they appeal to the supreme Courts of Judicature in Sweden. Tribute, which formerly in the reign of La∣dulaus was granted to the Birkarli,The but. is now by the Laplanders paid only to the Crown of Swe∣den, (save that those of Torna, for their priviledg of fishing upon the coasts of Norway, pay some Ac∣knowledgment to the King of Denmark). It is com∣monly paid in kind, as furs, skins, or dryed fish. By a contract made betwixt Gustavus I. and these Lap∣landers, the inhabitants of Luhla and Pitha were engaged to pay yearly eight timber of furs (forty to every timber), and those of Torna were tax'd with the same number; and shortly after by ano∣ther agreement in the year 1528, this number was doubled. In the year 1602, under Charles IX. they paid instead of skins, every tenth Rain-deer, and one tenth of all their dryed fish. And in the year 1606, it was order'd by the same King, that over and above this certain Tax, every one when they came to the age of seventeen years, should pay either two Bucks or three Does out of their Rain-deer, and eight pound of dryed fish; but this was found very burthensome to the people; and the more, because the Magistrates took se∣veral occasions and pretences to encrease their burthens; wherefore Gustavus Adolphus about the year 1611, order'd them less, more certain, and equal payments; either of money, Rain-deer, or furs; more or less according to the largeness or smallness of the Provinces or allotments wherein they dwell. If the allotment be somewhat large, such as they call een heel skat, i. e. of whole Tri∣bute, they pay yearly to the King two Patacoons;
but if lesser, een half skat, i. e. of half Tribute, they pay but one Patacoon, or in lieu of it fifty Squirrels and two Foxes skins, with one pair of Laplandish shoes. If any one has no mind to part with his Rein-deer, then he is to pay three Pata∣coons, which is the set price of it, and cannot be refused by the Tax-masters. Besides these grea∣ter Contributions of Rain-deer, &c. which are only imposed on every hundred, each particular Family pays a lesser sort of Tax, which is con∣stantly levied upon it, viz. one white Foxes skin, and one pair of shoes; or instead of these, half a pound of dry'd Pike. These are all the Tributes which the King of Sweden at this day receives out of Lapland; which, notwithstanding they might be a very considerable addition to the Crown-revenues, have been by the singular piety of their late Princes, either wholly or in the great∣est part allow'd for the maintenance of Ministers, and endowment of publick Schools in the Lap∣landish countries. And because the Laplanders are thus obliged to pay Tribute of money and furs to the King of Sweden,Markets  Fairs. which every Native cannot provide himself with, but must procure by bargaining and trade, they have several Markets and Fairs appointed amongst them, whither Merchants of other countries, as Muscovy, Norway, and Sweden especially, resort, and bringing with them those commodities the Natives think most valuable, exchange them for furs, or what else this country affords, frequently to the Laplanders small, but the buyers great, gain. These Fairs they practis'd even by the little light of reason from their begin∣ning, as all other Nations do; for when one abounds, and another wants, it necessarily follows, that they must have a meeting-place to supply one another. But these Laps, fearing or abhorring the face of a stranger, were put to some difficulties in their bartering: so that they had no other way but to leave their commodities at a certain place, and after a while returning, accept what the buyer was pleased to leave in exchange for them. Therefore Charles IX. encouraged them to a more confident and profitable way of traffick, appoint∣ing two or more publick Fairs in every Province, and setting certain different rates upon all their commodities; so that at this time they not only barter, but have no small dexterity in over∣reaching and couzening stranger chapmen. Of late also they have some quantities of money brought in amongst them, and they understand the use of it; but even yet are either so stupid or unaccustom'd to Arithmetick, that they have but very few species current amongst them, which are the Patacoon, and half Patacoon, besides some very few Brass pieces of smaller value; but all their commodities are estimated according to the Patacoon, as the best Bear or Fox skin at one Patacoon, forty Squirrels or one Martron at half a Patacoon, and so all the rest; which manner of trading would be very disadvantagious to the buyer, if there were not customarily a price also tacitly set upon what they import, as a Suit of Clothes is by them estimated at three Patacoons, and one pair of Shoes, or four pair of Mittons, at half a Patacoon, and the like. But tho they use trading, yet not all of them, nor any of them out of necessity, for they can, and many do, make a shift with their natural conveniences, using them∣selves to as much hardship as nature can en∣dure. Fixt habitations they haue none,er ving. but remove their dwellings according to the season for hunt∣ing, &c. tho in the time of Charles IX. this their wandring was restrain'd, by his confining every one of them to his own Province. Those that like Herdsmen live upon their stocks of Rain-deer, in summer frequent the mountains: which being too cold in winter, they retire to the valleys, car∣rying with them their houses and stuff, either upon the backs of the Rain-deer, or (if of grea∣ter quantity) upon sleddes in baskets, the artifi∣cial making of which, is the greatest part of their employment. Their dwelling-houses are built after the most natural and homely fashion,Their dwelling-Houses; made only to secure them against the injury of the weather, and the assaults of wild beasts, after this manner; first, they erect four posts, in the figure of a square; which they bind together with cross-girders, and rear to them smaller pieces, fastening all with wyths; these, except the door-places, the poorer sort wholly cover with boughs of trees, or such like stuff; the richer, with a course woollen cloth, or an ordinary sort of Canvas. In these Houses or Tents they have two doors; the fore-door, which is of common use and entrance for the whole family; and the back-door, thro which the men pass, and that only when they go a hunting, fishing, &c. but all women are forbid it; either because that sex is thought to be very inauspicious to those exercises [for if any, when he is going to hunt, do but meet a woman, he presently returns back, and leaves his design for that day]; or because the image of their God Thor was com∣monly placed near their back-door, from whose sacrifices and presence all women-kind (as was said before) are wholly excluded. These houses are distinguish'd into several partitions, not by any wall, but only by great posts, or logs of wood laid upon the ground. Their fire-place is in the middle, about which the whole family lies, either upon the bare earth, or upon the skins of Rain-deer, Bears, &c. When they have a mind to change their habitation, (which they do con∣stantly twice a year), they unty this their Tent; take it away with them, and pitch it in a more convenient place. Another sort of houses a∣mongst them are the Granaries or storehouses; which, that they may the better secure their provi∣sion from wild beasts and vermin, they do not build upon the ground, but at some small distance from it, upon the bole or stump of a large tree. Their garments are very course and mean,Their Garments; made either of the skins of wild beasts (frequently in use amongst them), or the worst of our Eng∣lish cloth, which they wear only on Holidays and at their publick Fairs: they alter them according to the season of the year; yet each sex, for distin∣ction sake, has a different mode or fashion. The men use a long garment, reaching down from their middle to their ankles, which serves them for breeches and stockings; above this they have a sort of wide coat, call'd Mudd, which they tye about them with a leathern thong. Their shoes, as the rest of their ordinary garments, are made of the skins of Rain-deer, Elks, &c. with the hair out∣ward; the toe bending somewhat upward, and according to the ancient fashion, ending with a sharp point. On their heads they have a cap, made of the skin of some fowl, as Geese, Ducks, &c. but especially of the Loom, having the fea∣thers, head, and wings along with it, after the manner of the ancient Germans. The habit pro∣per to women, is a large wide Gown, of cloth or skins, according to their ability; gather'd close in the middle, and adorn'd with divers fi∣gures of birds, beasts, &c. which they themselves work very artificially. Linnen they use none; and in colder weather they only gird their ordi∣nary clothes closer about them, and cover them∣selves entirely, except one little hole to look thro; for which reason Adam Bremensis reports
them upon his own knowledge to be Cyclopes. Their ordinary diet is either of fish,Their Di∣et. or the flesh of their Rain-deer, &c. which they eat sometimes raw, sometimes (amongst the more civilized sort) boil'd, but for the most part dryed in the air. Bread and salt are unknown to them. In∣stead of Bread, they make use of their dryed fish, ground small like meal; and for salt, they take the inward bark of the Pine-tree, which they dry at the Sun, and putting it into boxes, bury it a small depth in the ground; then, after it hath lain there a competent time, they kindle a fire upon the place, and so dry it; whereby it be∣comes of a reddish colour, pleasant taste, and gives a good relish to their courser victuals. Tho they are very greedy of flesh, yet under the Swe∣dish Government they constantly abstain from it on Fridays, keeping fast that day with great ob∣servance. Their ordinary drink is pure water,Their Drinks. which in the winter time they keep in their houses conti∣nually hot, and so drink it. Of late some quan∣tities of Brandy, and such like hot liquors, are known amongst them, which they highly value, and drink only on Holidays and at their marri∣ages. Tobacco they frequently take, and count it a very great delicacy. The place where they commonly eat their victuals, is in the middle of their Tent, about the fire, without table, dishes, spoons, trenchers, or any such thing which is a sign of neatness and handsomness. Their potage they drink; And their commons each one lays upon his mittons; and when he has eat it, says Grace, shakes his fellows by the right hand (which is their charity-cup), and so depart every one to his business. Their chief employment is hunting;Their Emploi∣ments. in which they make use of divers sorts of instruments, as Spears headed with fish-bones, Nets, and of late Guns. In the snow time they make use of a kind of shoes call'd Skider, or Skidh, with which they will run down the strongest Deer. They are made commonly of Fir, or the bark of trees, about three or four, Olaus Magnus says, five or six ells long, and four or five inches broad; turn'd up at the forepart, after the manner of their shoes; for better convenience in sliding, they are cover'd with the skin of a Rain-Deer with the hair on; they fasten them to their feet with a piece of wythe, which is tyed to the middle of the Skait and to their ankles. In these the men are able to travel an hundred and fifty English miles a day; and the women are no less expert at it, tho never permitted to go a hunting. If they kill a Bear, they use very great solemnity and triumph about it, inviting their friends, and distributing its flesh (which they count a great dainty) a∣mongst them; honouring him that did the ex∣ploit, with several titles, and the best portion of the beast. They never bring home their prey by the fore-door, or after them; but always ob∣serve this as a special rule, that they throw it into the Hut before them. Marriage they hold in great veneration;Marria∣ges. it be∣ing seldom known that Adultery is committed, never if known, that it goes unpunished. When any one has a mind to marry, he enquires out a Maid who has a good share of Rain-deer (for the Parents give portions to their Children not equal∣ly, but with respect to primogeniture); then he, not being permitted to woe for himself, acquaints his nearest Kinsmen with his intentions, who ma∣nage the business for him, sollicite her Father, Mo∣ther, and Friends, presenting them with Brandy and Tobacco, or what is most esteemed, and so gain their consent. This done, the young man is invited to the Hut where his bride lives, where he accepts some conditions propos'd by her Friends, and lists himself as her Fathers hired servant for one whole year; after which time ex∣pir'd he takes his Wife to him, and proceeds to the solemnizing the Marriage, which is always done with great ceremony and pomp, according to their abilities. The bride they deck with the choisest ornaments they can get, as pieces of Tin and Alchymy, with several Rings of fish-bones and Brass, &c. and being thus attired, her near∣est Friends, (much, as seems, against her mind) rather dragg, then conduct, her to Church, where she is married to her Husband, according to the form, prescrib'd in their Liturgy. Formerly (says Olaus Mag:) Wedlock was solemniz'd by the Parents and Friends (the Father supplying the place of the Priest) by the striking of Flint and steel; the fittest Emblem as they thought, of a married life. And here it may be observ'd, That no one man is permitted to have many wives at once, but is constantly limited to one only; Po∣lygamy not being so much as heard of amongst them; That they never marry without the con∣sent of their Friends, but referr themselves whol∣ly to their advice, insomuch that clandestine Marriages are never practis'd by them; and that after they are contracted, they are not presently free to trade for themselves, but must serve their Father in Law as an hireling for a certain time, that he may be witness of their good husbandry, which seems to be a Custom from ancient times and Nations. Their Children, assoon as born, are put to the greatest hardships, that they may be able af∣terwards to endure the severity of the air the bet∣ter. They take two Vessels one of hot, the o∣ther of cold water, and dip the Infant first into one, and then into the other: and if it be strong enough to endure so sudden a change of heat and cold, they think it will make a hardy Fel∣low, and fit for their business; whereupon they endeavour to have it baptiz'd, as soon as they can possibly, wrapping it in moss, and so carrying it to Church, though at a very great distance, either upon their backs or in a Pannier upon their Rain-deer, as they anciently us'd to do to their publick Fairs, whither Priests were sent twice a year out of Sweden. While their Children are young, they use them to bow and arrows, by which they are to get their future livelihood, and to make them the more expert, always place their victuals upon a post, as their mark to shoot at, which they hit down, or fast. Diseases, especially infectious, are seldom or never known in this Country; but if it happen that any pestilential distempers be brought in, (as the Plague was lately amongst Hemp) the malig∣nity of them is corrected by the pureness of the Air; so that they never do any great mischief. The disease they are commonly troubled with, is the soreness of eyes, (whether caus'd by their smoaky Huts, or ill dress'd food, or any other reason, I know not) but it usually ends in blind∣ness. Pleurisies also, and inflammations (perhaps by reason of their constant feeding upon flesh) are sometimes incident to them; which they cure by drinking the decoction of the root of Moss, or the stalks of Angelica, in the whey of the milk of their Rain-deer. If a member be be∣numm'd with cold, they apply Cheese made of the milk of their Rain-deer, which is a present remedy: and when any pains or aches in their joynts or body, as the Gout, Cramp, Sciatica, &c. seize them, they apply a Caustick of the flame of any chips to the affected place, much after the same manner as the East Indians are said to cure such like Distempers, by a kind of moss
tableau of the summer life of Laplanders The Manner of the Laplanders Liuing in Summer tableau of the winter life of Laplanders The Manner of the Laplanders Liuing in Winter F. H. Van. Houe. Sculp: blazon or coat of arms R.t Honble ANTONY : EARLE of SHAFTSBVRY
call'd Moxa; and the West Indians by an excre∣scence of black Birch tree, call'd by them Spunk, and applyed after the same manner; from all which it seems, that the cure is to be attributed rather to the fire, then the fuel. If any one be dangerously sick, they either send for the Priest, if near, to prepare him for death; or to the Magician, to resolve them by his Drum, if he shall recover; parting their res∣pects 'twixt Gods Ministers and the Devils Ser∣vants. If he dye, they imagine that his Soul is not at rest till the body be in the grave, and for that reason use all haste possible to convey it to some Burying-place, which is frequently the nearest Cave or Wood; (Church-yards by reason of their remoteness, they seldom make use of) The dead body they carry upon a sledd, and when they come to the Cave, cast it in, and the sledd after it; or else cover it with great Logs of Wood, to secure it from wild Beasts; always laying besides it a Flint and steel, and sometimes a Hatchet, which they suppose may be servicea∣ble to them in the other world. At their return, they provide a Funeral Banquet, or rather a sa∣crifice to the Ghost of the deceased person; which is thus, They take those Rain-deer that dragg'd the dead body to the grave, and offer them in sacrifice to the Manes; feasting upon their flesh, and making merry with Brandy and Tobacco, and the best chear they have; at last they drink a health round to the person departed; this done, they carefully gather the bones of the Rain-deer, put them into a box, with a rude image of their friend, and so bury them together. These Cere∣monies, observ'd also in their Heathenism, shew'd, that even then, as it were by the dictates of Na∣ture, they conceived themselves to consist of an Immortal part also; and that they expected ano∣ther life after this, wherein they imagine every one to follow their former imployments, and con∣sequently to be again united to their bodies. The Lives and Manners of the Laplanders, as it is express'd in the Plate here annex'd. The upper-part is their Summer-living: The under-part their way of living in Winter. In the Ʋpper-part you have, (1) A Church for those who are converted to the Lutheran Religion; At the en∣trance of which, in lieu of a (2) Bason of Holy∣water, there stands one full of Brandy-wine, with a spoon in it, of which every one who comes to Church takes a sup, to encourage and warm his zeal. The first man you see represents the (3) Priest; the next the best (4) man of the Pa∣rish. Then follows a (5) Bride, attended upon by two (6) Bride-maids, after whom comes the (7) Bridegroom, and other friends. (8) Their manner of making Baskets, which is their great∣est trade. (9) Their way of carrying, and of rocking their children. (10) The manner how the young children grown up, suck the Rain-Deer. (11) The man and wife's way of lying in bed. (12) Their Houses for keeping their provisions; themselves, in the coldest part of Winter, lying in Tents. (13) Their manner of eating. (14) The Priests way of Baptizing, and the Clarks bringing water. (15) Their way of Wire-drawing, which is much used amongst them, for adorning of their Boots and Coats. (16) Amongst those who are not yet converted to the Christian Religion, you have their way of sacrificing. (17) Their three Gods standing uppermost, and under each of them upon the Altars lye three pieces of the sacrificed Rain-deer. (18) Their way of praying to them. (19) Their way of Burial. (20) Their way of praying to Death, that it would be pleased to spare them awhile. In the Ʋnder-part you have, (1) Their manner of bringing their Taxes (consisting of several sorts of Skins and dry'd Fish) to the Kings Commissioners, which being paid, each one takes a large spoonful of Brandy-wine, which stands at the end of the Table, and so away. Above which you see the (2) Commis∣sioners Tent. (3) Their, way of travelling in Sledds, drawn by Rain-Deer, (which, by the by, do agree so well with those barren Countries, that if you do but bring them into Sweden, (which yet is none of the most fertile), they dye in a short time). (4) Their way of carrying their goods. (5) Their manner of ruling their Rain-Deer with a whip or line. (6) Their way of shooting them. (7) Their taking Tobacco, which they prize a∣bove meat. (8) Their speaking in the ear of the Rain-Deer, telling them what they should do, or whither they should go, (which, as I am credibly inform'd, they will observe exactly). (9) Their manner of gelding them. (10) Their way of laying their heads under a Drum; which the Devil beats, and from thence the man learns what success he shall have in his affairs. (11) His giving the man the Hammer, and letting him beat.
OF THE Provinces of Sweden Properly so taken. NExt to be spoken to, is Suecia or Sweden, strictly so call'd; of which, because it has been honour'd always by the Residence of their Kings, and been the chief Scene of Swe∣dish Affairs, we shall in the first place treat; and afterwards speak of Gothia, or Gothland, with all its Provinces, rather as an Accession to the Crown of Sweden, then a distinct Kingdom from it: though anciently Gothia and Suecia had their distinct successions of Kings. Of Finland, In∣gria, and Aesthonia, with the late Conquests in Livonia, Pomeren, &c. we shall in the last place discourse; reserving the Laws and Govern∣ment, as also the manner and customs of the Peo∣ple, till we come to Stockholm, the present Me∣tropolis of this great Empire. Suecia then,Suecia. or Suetia, call'd by the English Sweden, or Swedland, is bounded on the North with Lapland, on the West with the Dofrine Hills, on the East with the Bothnick and Finnick Bays, and on the south with Gothland and Sconen. A fruitful, but in some parts mountainous and woody, Country; abounding with several rich Mines, and affording very great conveniencies of water and fuel for working them. It is divided into two General parts, viz. Suecia strictly so taken, and the Northlands, or Northlandish Pro∣vinces. I. The Northlands contain in them two distinct Countries or Provinces, Helsingia and Gestricia; parted one from the other by the great wood Oedemord. 1.Gestricia. Gestricia, which affords some Iron-mines and indifferent good store of corn. It has but one City in it, call'd Gevalia commodiously situated upon the Bay of Bothnia, half a days Journey from Kupferberg. 2.Helsingia. Helsingia, which was anciently a general name for all the Northern Provinces, from the North-sea to the River Ʋla, and the Lake Ʋlatresk in the North of Cajania, as appears from some records of a Parliament held at Telgis, A. 1328, and a distinct Kingdom of it self; govern'd by its own Kings, till the time of Ingellus the second, King of Ʋpsal (so were the Kings of Sweden anciently styl'd) who at his Coronation invited the King of Helsingia, and several other Princes, to the solemnity; and after having made them drunk with strong liquors, set fire on the Palace, and so destroyed them all, and seized their pos∣sessions; which ever after were united to the Crown of Sweden. The inhabitants of this Coun∣try had anciently a peculiar language of their own, and also an Alphabet altogether distinct from the Runick, as appears by several old mo∣numents found amongst them. They are re∣corded to have fought many famous battels, with their neighbours of Finland, Carelia, and Cajania; and after having driven some of their Enemies as far as the Sund, in memory of their conquest, and to eternize their name, to have built the City Helsingburg. From them are said to have come the Nylanders, who border upon Carelia; and use the same manner of speech to this day. The Na∣tives are generally very hospitable and courteous to strangers, of a docile and ingenious disposi∣tion, and above all things endeavouring to be neat and handsom within doors. The whole Country of Helsingia is divided into four Pro∣vinces. 1. Helsingia, properly so call'd,Helsingia. heretofore known by the name of Sundhede; which has in it three lesser divisions: Alora, thro which runs the river Liusna: Sundhede, in the midst whereof is the Lake Dil: and Nordstigh, not far from the wood Arskog. The soil is indifferently fruitful for Corn, but chiefly for Pasture; the inhabitants mostly imploying themselves in feeding and managing their stock of Cattel. Here is but one City in the whole Country, call'd Hudingsvaldia, remarkable for the great quantities of Corn, Butter, Hydes, Pitch, Rosin, Masts of Ships, and Deal-boards, that are convey'd hence into other Countries. 2. Medelpadia,Medelpa∣dia. much of the same nature with Helsingia; but only it is narrower, and a∣bounds more with woods and mountains; in it are two rivers very full of fish. Some say the Kings of Helsingia anciently resided here. 3. Angermannia, a fruitful and pleasant,Anger∣mannia. yet in some places mountainous, Country. The soil is so good and certain, that tho it bear Corn plen∣tifully, it needs not be manur'd above once in ten years. It is divided in the middle into two parts, the northern and southern, by a great wood, which runs all along from the ragged mountain Scula, and thence takes its name; water'd it is by only one river, well stored with Salmon and other fish; secur'd by one City, nam'd Herno∣sandia, yeilding the same commodities as Hudings∣valdia, only it affords no Copper. 4. Bothnia,Bothnia. not so full of mountains as Anger∣mannia; of a sandy and barren turf, but well supplied with fish and other commodities. It has in it several rivers of considerable bigness, which empty themselves into the Bothnick-Bay. Ci∣ties here are none, but this defect is supplied by a frequency of Market-Towns, which are al∣most as numerous as the Parishes. The advan∣tage of this Country is chiefly by the trade from the nearer parts of Lapland, which is managed chiefly by the Birkarli, and all comes to the Sea∣side this way. II. Sueonia, or Sweden, strictly so taken,Sueonia. which contains in it these five Provinces, Ʋplandia, West∣mannia, Dalecarlia, Nericia, and Sudermannia. 1. That which lies most North,Dalecar∣lia. or North∣west, is Dalecarlia, i. e. the Dale or Valley of men (Carle signifying a man); a woody and barren Country; yet very considerable for its abundance of Copper, Allum, and Vitriol; all which are said to be dug out of one and the same Mine, which is very large, and no less remarkable for its Met∣tals, then for the vertue of the water that is found in it; for if they steep a piece of Iron in it, it will in a short time (as they say) turn it into very good Copper, wanting a fourth part of the weight of the Iron. Which seems to confirm the opinion of some Philosophers, that all these three are of the same nature; and that Allum is the matter of Vitriol, as likewise Vitriol is of Cop∣per. This Province is in the Diocess of the Bishop of Westeras, and has never a City in it.
map of Dalecarlia and Westmannia provinces DALECARLIAE et WESTMANNIAE. Nova et Accurata descriptio. blazon or coat of arms VIRO ILLVST.mo D.no PETRO JULIO COYET, Equite Aurato, S. R. M. Sueciae Cosiliario Aulico, Scretario Status, et nunc ad Confoederatos Belgas extra ordinem Ablegato. D. D. D. Joh. Janssonius
map of Uplandia province VPLAN¦DIA
2. On the South or South-east of Dalecarlia, lies West- or Wester-mannia, or Westmannerland, bor∣dering upon Ʋpland and Gestricia. It is, accord∣ing to the several Dales or divisions that are in it, divided into three parts, viz. Oster- Wester- and Sun-Dalia. The soil is very fruitful, and the Mines very considerable, affording Steel, Iron; Copper, Lead, and some veins of Sulphur, in greater quantity then those of any other Province of the whole Country. There is also a Silver Mine discover'd, and made use of at Salberg. The Cities here are three, Arosia, Arbogia and Koping; the chief of these is Arosia or Westeras, a Bishops seat; where, in the Cathedral Church, are se∣veral great stones with Gothick inscriptions, as there are likewise at Stregnesia. In this City the agreement, by which the State of the Kingdom was changed from an Elective to an Hereditary Monarchy, was concluded ann. 1540, in the time of Gustavus I. and thence call'd Pactum Arosiense. The history was thus: The Swedes not being able to endure the tyranny and oppression of Christi∣ern II. then King both of Sweden and Denmark, forsook their Allegiance to him; and under the conduct of Prince Gustavus, (who had wonder∣fully escaped from his imprisonment in Denmark), took up arms against him, expell'd him their Country, and at last gain'd their former liberty and priviledges; whereupon, to requite their Ge∣neral for this signal good he had done the pub∣lick, they (at the instance of one Canutus Presi∣dent of the Council, and Johannes Gothus the Popes Legat, ann. 1523) unanimously elected him King; and considering how much it might tend to the happiness of the Kingdom, to have the Succession ascertain'd to his Issue, they, in the year 1540 wholly gave up their power of Electing their Kings for the future, and by Oath and solemn Co∣venant setled the Crown upon him and his Heirs for ever; which confidence of the people in their Prince, was justified in the event, for the new King was so far from abusing his Absolute pow∣er, that in that very year he published many Laws for the benefit of the people. 3.. South of Westmannia lies Nericia; a little, but fruitful, Province; yeilding good store of Sulphur, Allum, and Vitriol. Some Silver Mines there are, but not labour'd. Most of its inhabitants are Smiths who supply the whole Country, especially those that work in the Mines, with Iron instruments of all sorts. Here is one City nam'd Orebro∣gia. 4.. South or South-east of Nericia, lies Suder∣mannia, or Sudermanland; having on the East the Baltick Sea, Ostro-Gothia on the South, and the Lake Meller on the North. It is famous for several Cities it contains; the chief and most con∣siderable of which is Nicopia, the ancient seat of the Dukes of Sudermannia. Here also is the place for building of Ships; the workmen are good, and materials cheap. Next to this is Stregnesia, a Bishops seat: with Telga, Torsilia, and Trosa, all commodious for trade. 5.. North or North-east of Sudermannia, lies the Province of Ʋpland, so call'd from its situa∣tion in the Country, or as some say, from King Ʋbbon, who reigned here. It is bounded on the East side by the Baltick Sea, on the South by the Lake Meller, on the West and North by the Ri∣vers Sawe and Dalecarle. This Country affords great plenty of Corn, with which it supplies the neighbouring Provinces. Some few Mines it has, of Lead and Iron especially; some also of Silver, tho not digg'd. It is divided into three Lands, or (as the Swedes call them) Folk-lands: 1. Tihundria, which lies most Northerly of any, and takes its name from ten Prefectures, or Hundreds, into which it is shar'd out. 2. Athundria, lying betwixt Ʋp∣sal and Stockholm; so call'd because it contains eight Prefectures. 3. Fiedrundria, which takes its name from four Prefectures, into which it is divided; in it is the City Enkoping, four leagues from Ʋpsal, and seven from Stockholm. And here it may be observed, as peculiar to this Province, that it (as the Counties in England) is shared out into several Prefectures or Hundreds, as Erling-hundrat, &c. Each of them containing at first one hundred families, all, two thousand two hun∣dred; which is not observed in other Provinces, but their divisions are called Harodh (Har signi∣fying an Army, and Odh a possession), all which at first were supplyed with Inhabitants from this Province of Ʋpland; for when families increas∣ed above their hundreds, some (after the manner of an army) were singled out and listed to go and people, or rather subdue, other parts of the Country; wherefore these men setling in other Provinces, called the place where they first sate down, The possession of such a Colony or Ar∣my; as Daga-Harodh, Lystugn-Harodh, &c. In this Province are five Cityes; 1. Encoping, where was formerly a Monastery of Minorites. 2. Sigtunia, so called from Siggo, King of Swe∣den, who founded it. Here was anciently a Mo∣nastery of Dominicans, the burying place of some of their Archbishops. 3. Oregrundia or Oregrund, a rich & populous City, abounding with corn & several sorts of Merchan∣dise, because of the commodiousness of the Port. 4. Ʋpsal, the most Antient, and most famous,Ʋpsal. City in the whole Kingdom. It takes its name, says Johannes Magnus, from Ʋbbon King of Swe∣den, who founded it, about the year after the Flood 240: but as others, from its situation upon the River Sala. Here was formerly the chief seat of the Swedish Kings; for which reason, as well as for the dignity of the City, one of their Titles was Ʋpsala-Konung, i.e. King of Ʋpsal. Here were also the supream Courts of Judicature, Civil and Ecclesiastical; and the seat of their only Archbi∣shop, continued to it to this day. Fortified it is, by one onely Castle, built after the modern, not antient Gothick, fashion; upon a high hill, some small distance from the City, overlooking and commanding the whole Town: begun by Eri∣cus, continued by King John, and perfected by Charles Gustavus the first: in this City is the Metro∣politan Church of the whole Kingdom, covered upon the roof, (as are most of the chief buil∣dings), with Copper; adorned with an Artifici∣al Clock, and honoured with the Monuments of several of their Kings: Ericus the Saint is said to lye buried here in a golden Coffin: Gustavus Adol∣phus also has his Tomb in this Church, upon which the whole History of his life is inscribed in large golden Characters. Here is also the only University they have in the whole Kingdom; begun at first, say some, Ann. 1248, under Eri∣cus Balbus XI. by a College of only four Pro∣fessors: or as Loccenius will have it, about the year 1306, under one Andreas President of the said College, who kept a free Table for Choristers and poor Scholars to assist in the Quire; but now, by the care of some of their later Kings, advanc't in∣to a famous University. An. 1476, in the Reign of Steno Sture Senior, Pope Sixtus IV. gave it the same priviledges with Bononia: An. 1595, Charles then King endowed it with several Im∣munities and Revenues, by his Royal Patent: which, says Messenius, was in the year 1608 upon some differences 'twixt the Calvinists and Lu∣therans fraudulently got from it; which if so, yet probably that Prince who favoured the Re∣formers so much, did restore it to the Uni∣versity:
of this See Loccenius, Hist. Suec. Lib. 8. Pag. 474. An. 1624 in the time of Gustavus Adol∣phus it was most considerably augmented; that King settling upon the University 306 Mannors, 8 Granaries of Tythes, 4 Mills, and 30 Demes∣nes, out of his own Crown Revenues, free from all Taxes and Impositions, towards the mainte∣nance of more Professors and poor Scholars: commanding, that the chief Rector should be ele∣cted by the Professors; that one of these should read a publick Lecture throughout the whole year (continued at present only in the Winter∣time); that the Scholars should live peaceably, so∣berly, and minding their own affairs, not meddle with state matters; that none of them should (as they had formerly done) wear swords, or carry arms. This University in the time of King John III 1592, was removed hence to Stockholm; but that place being found, for several reasons, inconveni∣ent, it was in a short time remanded to Ʋp∣sal. A Library they have, well stored with books: a considerable part of which was given by Gusta∣vus Adolphus An. 1631, which he in his expedi∣tions against Germany took out of the Library of Wurtzburg and other places. To this City there anciently did belong several Lands and Revenues by the title of Ʋpsala Oedom or the Patrimony of Ʋp∣sal, given by Freius surnamed Pacificus, one of their ancient Kings, out of his own hereditary Lands, as a publick stock; which Patrimony being embezel'd by those men that had the managery of it, and for many years no account given, An. 1282, in the Reign of Magnus I. surnamed Ladulaus, it was order'd in Council, That these publick Lands should be sought after, and reunited to the Crown, or some other way found, to maintain the Grandeur of the Court. The Lands, by rea∣son of long alienation, could not be regain'd: wherefore it was enacted, that in lieu of them, all the Revenues of fishing in the Finnick and Both∣nick Bays, the Lake Meller, and all other Lakes and Rivers within the Kings Dominions; as also of all Mines of what Metal soever, should over and above the Land-taxes, wholly and entirely be∣long to the Crown. This City was anciently the chief Place of their Heathenish,Their an∣cient man∣ner of Wor∣ship. as it is at present of their Christian, worship: wherefore it may not be amiss here to treat as well of their ancient superstitions, as of their present true, Religion: The Heathenish Dei∣ties, to which they pay'd their devotion were Thor, Oden, and Freia; who are said to have come out of Asia into this Country, and were, though under divers names, worshiped by most of the Scandians. Thor, so call'd from the Assyrian word Thur or Thurra, i.e. powerful, had a Temple dedicated to him, so stately and magnificent, that, by the re∣lation of Johannes Magnus, who tells prodigious stories of the Golden Roof, &c. the Temple of the Sun in Cuzco was but a poorly adorn'd Chap∣pel to it: In the middle of this stupendous Fa∣brick their God was set, upon a bed or couch, with a Crown upon his head, adorn'd with twelve stars, and a scepter in his hand: Upon his right hand stood Oden or Othen, arm'd like a sol∣dier Cap a-pie, not unlike the Roman God Mars: On his left was plac'd the Goddess Freia, their Venus, holding a sword in one, and a bow in the other, hand. These three Deities were had in special reverence amongst them; Votaries com∣ing from very remote parts, every ninth year, to visit the Temple, and pay their devotions; of∣fering the most precious gifts they could provide, and sacrifices, for nine days together, (Pythago∣rean-like counting nine an auspicious number); and on every day nine sorts of Animals, three of e∣very sort: not sparing their servants, friends, chil∣dren, nor even their own selves, from being part of such bloody victims: This they did, not by choice, (every votary striving to be presented a sacrifice to his God), but by lots; taking him on whom the lot fell, tying a cord about his middle, and so let him down alive into a large well, dugg close by the Temple for that purpose: if he ex∣pir'd quietly, and without any great struggling, or motion of the water, they concluded, that their god was pleas'd, and their Petitions heard: if o∣therwise, and he seem'd to dye with any relu∣ctancy, they suppos'd their god was angry, and thereupon presently made ready another such∣like sacrifice, to appease the wrath: When the body was drawn up out of the well, (if a pleasing sacrifice), they thought it not fit; to bury it in the ground the ordinary way, but hung it up upon a tree in the consecrated grove; and for ever after suppos'd it to be instated in a place of happiness, and esteem'd it as one of their Demi-gods. In these cruel sacrifices their Kings themselves were not only present, but sometimes, when the lot fell upon them, offer'd up to their Gods: being at∣tended to the place of execution with great joy and acclamations by the greatest part of their subjects, who promised themselves great and lasting happiness by so Noble a victim. Besides these three principal, they worshiped many other inferior, Deities, upon different occa∣sions; as Methothim, who presided over their Ma∣gical Arts; Fro, to whom they always offer'd black victims; Vagnoft, Hading, &c. with all the the Sons and attendants of their principal Gods: Of which see Johannes and Olaus Magnus, Adam Bremensis, and Loccenius. The many foolish super∣stitions to which their Ignorance and credulity made them subject; as their arming themselves whensoever it chanc'd to thunder, and shooting arrows up into the clouds, to assist these Gods of their Country, who, (as they suppos'd), were wa∣ging war against those of other Nations; Their using to sacrifice their horses before they engag'd with their enemies, and setting the heads of them upon pales before the Army, in manner of a Pali∣sado; and such like, frequently met with in Au∣thors, are scarce worth mentioning: only this may be observ'd, that in their customs and cere∣monies about their worship, they had some faint notions of an Infinite power, to which they owed their being and happiness; that their soul did not dye with their body, and such like common dictates of natural reason: All which were clear∣ly discover'd to them, and the mists of Idolatry and Irreligion quite dispell'd, by the happy plan∣tation of Christianity amongst them. In the year of Christ 780,. Bero or Biorno III. King of Sweden, desir'd Charles the Great Empe∣ror of Germany, to send some able Ministers into the North, to plant Christian religion amongst them; who accordingly sent one Herebertus sur∣nam'd Belga, a man of noted piety and learning in those times. He succeeded well in his under∣takings, gain'd many proselytes, and built a Church at Lyncopen in Ostro-Gothia, where him∣self was Rector, and afterwards dyed. Ann. 814, Ludovicus Pius I. Emperor of Germany, in the sixth year of his reign, sent hither more Apostles; one of which was nam'd Ansgarius, a Monk of Corbey in France, who brought with him from thence di∣vers of the Monks; and planted in Saxony a Mo∣nastery of the former name, intending it for a Seminary to supply the want of Preachers in the North. But all this Emperors time Christi∣anity was rather privately brought in hither, (Pa∣ganism prevailing, and most of these pious men being martyr'd for their Religion) then publickly countenanc'd or established; till about ann. 955,
when Olaus Scot-konung, desirous to enjoy the pu∣rity of the Gospel, sent to Ethelred then King of England, desiring him to furnish him with Mini∣sters to preach Christianity to him and his subjects. [That there hath always been great friendship be∣twixt those two Crowns, appears by many par∣ticulars; one especially not to be forgotten, is that the Kings of Sweden would never permit any of their subjects to engage with the Danes and other Northern people, to exercise Piracy against, or invade, the English Dominions, as 'tis observed by Jo. Magnus, and other Authors]. Ethelred readily consented to so pious a request, and dis∣patch'd over one Sigfrid, then Archbishop of York, with divers other godly Priests, and wor∣thy labourers; who at their arrival in Sweden found kind reception, baptiz'd the King him∣self, with all his Courtiers; and prevail'd so far to have the Gospel propagated amongst his sub∣jects, that Christian Churches were built in every Province of the Kings Dominions. This so happy a plantation was water'd by the blood of three of his Followers, Ʋnaman, Sumaman, and Vina∣man, murther'd by the contrivance of a wicked woman, and lye buried at Wexio, a City in Sma∣landia. After this, Christianity was nurs'd up by their succeeding Kings; Ericus especially, who (as was said before) propagated it to the Finlanders. Exercis'd it was according to the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, till about the year 1530, at which time Gustavus I. then King, (upon what motives Authors do not agree), established the Lutheran Religion; displacing all those that re∣fus'd to subscribe the Articles he propos'd, a∣mongst whom was that elegant Historian and very learned person Jo. Magnus, then Archbishop; who refusing to comply with the King, left his Country, fled to Rome, there wrot his History, with an account of this Metropolis, and dyed 1544. In the year 1537, the said Gustavus enter'd in∣to a League with Christianus King of Denmark, Philip Landsgrave of Hassia, the Elector of Saxo∣ny, and other German Princes, to defend this Re∣ligion thus reformed, against the Emperor and other Princes of the Communion of the Church of Rome. In the year 1613, it was publick∣ly consented to by the States of the whole Kingdom. A. D. 1627, Gustavus Adolphus gave sactuary in his dominions to all those that were any way persecuted in Germany, or elsewhere, for this profession. Confirm'd it was, and agreed to, by Charles Gustavus X. ann. 1655; and by this present King Charles XI. in 1663, publickly ra∣tified and subscrib'd to, and ever since by him maintain'd; so that Lutheranism may seem to have taken deepest root in this Kingdom. The Clergy of Sweden is had in great honour and reputation. And tho the revenues belonging to the Church are since the Reformation very much impaired, (Gustavus I. annexing, as 'tis said, to the Crown at one time 7500 Farms and Ec∣clesiastical Livings), yet the respect due to their Ministers does not seem to be much abated. Their Archbishop always performs the Religious Solem∣nities at the Kings Coronation, and, with as many Bishops as the King pleases to chuse, is admitted Privy-Counsellor to his Majesty. He is reckon'd the chief person in the Kingdom next to the King himself, and accordingly takes place of all Tem∣poral Lords; and anciently when it was granted to a Knight or Lay-Privy-Counsellor to have only twelve, and a Senator eight, it was order'd that he might have forty, and a Bishop thirty, Horses in their Retinue. He has under him seven Suffragans, viz. the Bishops of Lyncopen, Scare, Stergnes, Westeras, Wexio, Aboa, and Riga: And divers Superintendents, who have Episcopal Jurisdiction, viz. of Calmare, Gottenburgh, Mari∣enstadt, Revel, &c. All which make up an Ec∣clesiastical College, call'd the supreme Consisto∣ry of the Kingdom, wherein the Archbishop al∣ways presides. The Clergy of this Nation, says Loccenius, according to the manner of the Eastern Churches, us'd to marry; till Pope Innocent IV. by a Council held at Sceningia a City of Ostro-Gothia, ann. 1248, forbad marriage to Priests, and caus'd those that had wives to put them away. What concerns their Religion, or their Church-Government, being the same with that of the Lutherans, must be elsewhere more largely treat∣ed of. The King is the absolute Soveraign in Ecclesiastical matters, which he determines not without the advice of his Archbishop and Bishops. He names all the Bishops, and by his power are summon'd all Ecclesiastical Assemblies. Authors make a difference betwixt their Bishops and Su∣perintendents, but it is not considerable, both equally depending upon the Archbishop; but the Superintendents have not in all things equal power with the Bishops. 5. The fifth and last City of Ʋpland is Stockholm,Stock∣holme. lying in 42 degrees of Longitude, and of Lati∣tude 58 ten minutes. A Town of great Trade, the present seat of the Kings of Sweden, and the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom. Situate it is in an Island on the side of the Lake Meller, en∣compassed on all sides, especially that toward the sea, with high rugged Rocks (called Scheren) which hinder the prospect of the City, but very much secure the Haven, which is very large and of dangerous entrance; though these Rocks are a defence to the Town, yet by reason of them it is sometime set upon by an enemy unawares, as it was by Sigismund King of Poland, Anno 1594. It is said to have been founded by King Birgerus Anno 1261, and from the great quantity of wood used in the building of it, called Stockholme, (Stock signifying wood and Holme an Island). But Anno 1552, a fire happening in the City and by reason of the wooden buildings burning down a great part of it, it was by publick command re∣built, part of stone, part of brick, part also up∣on Piles, so that the sea flowes under the houses. In it are several large well-built bridges; only two gates, opening to the South and North. Pub∣lick Inns or Lodging-houses here are none, but strangers take up their quarters with some of the Burghers, entertainment handsome, and charges not great. An. 1407, it was consumed by Light∣ning, and some thousands of people destroyed by the fire. In 1529, King Gustavus the first, called several principal Burghers and Merchants out of other Cities, to inhabit this; most of the inhabitants being driven hence by the tyranny of Christiern II. King of Denmark. There are in it eight Churches in all; one of which is supplied by a Finlandish, another by a German, Minister; who constantly preach in their own language. In the Cittadel is the Kings Palace, handsomely built, some part eight or nine stories high, yet of great strength and security; within it is a large and magnificent Church, built by King John, e∣rected upon Marble pillars, and rooft with Cop∣per; with a private Chappel for the King, very large also, having forty windows on each side; where at the high Altar is said to be a massy Silver Image of our Saviour crucified, in full pro∣portion. This City has been very often besieg'd; ann. 1434, by the people of Sweden, who rebelled upon account of Foreign Officers employed in the affairs of the Kingdom, contrary to the Laws of the Land': By King John 1481: 1522 by Gu∣stavus I. and at other times; the enemy always taking advantage of a hill called Bruncaberge, so
near, that from it they can batter the Cittadel. The Arms of this City are the Head of Saint Ericus Crown'd Or, taken by the agreement of the States, in remembrance of that Kings Vir∣tue and Piety; and those of the Kingdom are three Crowns Or, in a Field Azure, given for the same reason. This being the Metropolis, and lying so conveniently, is the greatest place of trade in the whole Nation; from whence are exported Copper, Iron, Steel, Lead, Deal∣board, and very many Manufactures made of those materials: Copper especially, whereof this Kingdom supplies the necessities almost of the whole world. This City is govern'd by four chief Magistrates or Consuls, who are elected out of the Burghers, and enjoy the dignity for their life. Their Office is to give Laws, and decide controversies arising 'twixt one Citizen and another, if of lesser con∣cern; but if of great moment, they always have the assistance of the Lieutenant of the Castle, who is President of the Court for that time; and either puts an end to the case, or transmits it to the Kings Council. They perform this office by turns, two having precedence, and supplying it one, and the other two the next, year. When any extraordi∣nary affairs happen, they may have the assistance of some of the principal Citizens, who take up∣on them particular businesses, as the care of Buildings, the decision of some private action, promulgation of Laws, &c. Besides these, there are twelve Senators or Aldermen, chosen out of the Body of the City, who have the office likewise for their lives. Out of these, four are elected to be Assessors to the Consuls; and in all cases and differences arising, to assist them. In this City commonly reside a great num∣ber of Foreigners, Germans and Finlanders espe∣cially, who, as all others of the Lutheran perswa∣sion, are allow'd free exercise of their Religion; which is not granted to any of the Roman Com∣munion. The soil of the Country hereabouts,Soil. as in most parts of Sweden, is generally fruitful; affording store of Corn, as Wheat, Rye, Bar∣ley, Oats, &c. and pasturage, and in some places no small quantity of Wood. In the South parts of Westro-gothia, the ground is so rich and fertil, that thirty-six days after they have sown, they reap their Barley. Beasts of all sorts are here in great plenty,Beasts. as Horses, Elks, Bears, wild Bulls, Castors or Bea∣vers, Sables, Ermins, Martrons, &c. Sheep also and Oxen, not only sufficient to supply the whole Country, but also to have great numbers trans∣ported out of Finland, Schonen, &c. into other Nations. Trees also are here in great abundance,Trees. as Fir, Pine, Birch, Juniper, &c. Apple also and Pear, Plumb, and other Fruit-trees; and of late Hops have been planted here. The Pines and Firs which grow upon the Sea-coasts, are said to have in the summer-time a kind of Rosinous Gum di∣stilling from them, which falling into the Baltick and Bothnick Seas, and by the waves carryed to the Prussian shore, has given occasion to some, to ascribe to this the original of their Amber, which seems to be rather a coagulation of Petro∣leum. Honey abounds very much in this Coun∣try, not only preserved in Hives in their Gardens, but ordinarily to be met with in the Woods. Wines have been sometimes in such scarcity here, that they could not be furnished for the Communion, to remedy which, divers Authors report, that P. Innocent VIII. ann. '1486, gave leave to the Priests of Norway, and places under the same parallel, to celebrate in some other Liquors. The Air is of different temperature,A accord∣ing to the diversity of Climes; for the most part it is cold, pure, free from vapours, and conse∣quently healthful. In those parts near the Beth∣nic and Baltic coasts, it is frequently mudded with sea and marish vapours. Serpents and venemous beasts, whatever some Authors say, are not at all, or very rarely in these Countries; but fowl and fish of all sorts in so great abundance, that even the Peasants, contrary to the custom of other Countries, are permitted to catch and to make profit of them. Lakes here are many, and very large;L the greatest and most considerable are, 1. Meller in Ʋpland; well stored with Salmon, Pike, and such like fish; and in winter so hard froze, that 'tis ordinary to have Markets and Fairs kept upon it. 2. Hielmer in Nericia. 3. Sitian in Dalecar∣lia. 4. Vener in Westro-gothia, an hundred and thirty English miles in length, and forty in bredth; having many Islands in it, and twenty-four considerable rivers which fall from the Nor∣wegian mountains, unburthening themselves into it; all which have but one passage out, call'd Tralhetta, i.e, the Devils Cap, lying towards the South. 5. Veter, in the same Province, whose waters are so clear and calm, that one may dis∣cern the bottom at a great depth. Upon the banks of this Lake were anciently founded the Monasteries of St. Bridget the chief Saint of this Kingdom, and of St. Catherine her daughter, with several other noble buildings. 6. Ʋla∣traesch in Cajania. 7. Pejenda in Tavastia; to which may be added, 8. Ladoga, upon the confines of Muscovy; the greatest part of which was by a treaty of Peace ceded by the Muscovite to this Crown. All of them abound with fish, the revenues of which make no small addition to the Kings Exchequer. From these Lakes arise many Rivers,R running so orderly from one to another, that they may seem, like those in Holland, to have their chan∣nels cut and directed by art. The first is Dale∣carle, whose head is in the Dofrine mountains, whence it falls into Dalecarlia, takes in several lesser Currents at Torsang, and so parts the Pro∣vinces of Ʋpland and Gestricia, and at last falls into the Bothnick Bay. 2. Saga or Sawe, which divides Ʋpland from Westmannia. 3. Angerman∣nie, which waters Angermannia, and is noted for its abundance of Salmon: with several others of lesser note. Mines in this Country, are very frequent;M as of Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead, Allum, Vitriol, Sul∣phur, &c. every Province almost affording some, more or less; where we shall make mention of them. The greatest part belong to the subject; yet some few are wholly in the Kings possession; workmen being maintain'd, and the whole reve∣nues receiv'd, by the Crown. In the year 1264 Magnus Laduslaus then King instituted, or rather re-establisht a society of Miners, to take care of all affairs relating to the Mines, and to determine all controversies arising concerning them. These men in the year 1649, in the reign of Queen Christina, had many priviledges granted to them, and several new Laws made amongst them; of which we find extant these; viz. If any subject discover a Mine in his own ground, of what metal soever, the whole profit of it is to be∣long to him for six years; after which time he is to pay tenths to the King; and, If he maintains a Forge, to fit out for every Hammer he keeps, one man and Waggon in time of war, for the Kings service. From these Mines comes the most considerable part of the Kings Revenues. In the year 1578, two or three Copper Mines are said to have yeilded to the Kings Exchequer above
500 Squipons, every Squipon being valued at 30000 Dollars; and other Mines proportionably every year since. Of the Government and Manners of the Swedes. THe Kings of Sweden are said at first to have been elected by the Governours of the Provinces, who never assembled but upon this occasion. He whom they commonly made the subject of their choice, was of the Royal Line; or some one of the Nobility of their own Coun∣try; and as some say, amongst these caeteris pa∣ribus, the tallest and most personable. The place where the election was perform'd, was Ʋpsal; where they assembling, and having agreed who should be their Prince, they went forth of the City to a place called Moresten a small distance from it; here were set in order thirteen large Stones, one in the middle whereon was plac'd their new elected King; the other twelve round it for the twelve Senators: where after some few Ceremonies, a Declaration of the duty of the King &c. they proposed to him an Oath, that he would protect and administer justice to his peo∣ple: and the Electors for themselves, the absent Nobility, all the Body of the people; and all their posterity mutually engag'd that they would o∣bey his Laws and bear faithful allegiance to him. These rites perform'd, the new King used to in∣vite all his Electors and Nobles to banquet, where he himself waited on them; and afforded them great and splendid entertainment, all which ended with a solemn Grace-Cup, called by them Berga-beger. These customs, since under Gustavus the first, the Kingdom was made hereditary, are quite left off, and when the Coronation is to be solem∣niz'd, the Nobles and chief Officers of the King∣dome meet at the Kings Pallace at Ʋpsal; whence they go to the Metropolitan Church in order. The Senators of the Kingdom carry the Royal Ornaments, the Drotset or Viceroy the Crown, the Marshal the Sword, the Admiral the Scepter, the Chancellor the golden Globe, the Grand Treasurer the Key, and the King on horseback follows them to the Church; where the Arch-Bishop receiving him, demands of him an ac∣count of his faith; then reverently approaching the high Altar he tenders to him an Oath to this effect. That he will fear God and defend his Church; promote love, justice and truth amongst his Subjects; that he will govern his Kingdom by Natives and not admit any Strangers into Council or places of great trust; that he will not alienate any Forts, Lands or Territories within his Dominions, but preserve them whole and entire to his Successours; that he will provide himself and his Court out of his constant Crown Revenues, and never burthen his Subjects with Taxes, but upon these accounts; viz. Either up∣on an Invasion, whether by Christians or Infidels; a Domestick Insurrection; upon the marriage of his Sons or Daughters; for the building of some new Forts; or upon diminution of the Exchequer: and that he will introduce no laws or Constitu∣tions without or against the consent of the peo∣ple. [To Sigismund the third, King of Poland, who claim'd this Kingdom, they propos'd that he would not alter any thing in the establish'd Religion, which was the Lutheran: which Oath he either refusing, or presently breaking, lost the favour of his people and the Kingdom it self before he was well setled in it.] This done, the Arch-bishop puts on him his Crown and o∣ther Kingly Ornaments, and one of the Heralds proclaims, such one is crown'd King of Swed∣land and Gothland, and none but he: then all the people answer, Let the King live. After this the King calls before him the Go∣vernors or Legifers of every Province and chief Cities within his Dominions, who for themselves and their respective Governments take an oath of Allegiance to the King; this done the King gives to every one of them, to the Legifer of Ʋpsal first, and the rest in order, an Escutcheon with the Arms of that Province or that City where they are to preside, as Badges of their Offices; and returning to his Pallace, his Nobility are by him splendidly entertain'd, and the Ceremony ends. Henceforward he hath power in Eccle∣siastical and civil matters, and rules his people as an absolute Monarch. The next heir to the Crown, is the Kings eldest Son, if he have any, who sometimes is by publick declaration acknowledg'd to be so, be∣fore his Fathers death, as Charles eldest Son to Gustavus the first is said to have been: and though in that Kings time the right of succession was by the States granted only to his Issue Male, yet in the year 1627, Gustavus Adolphus procur'd that the Kings Daughters also, might be admit∣ted to the Throne, by which procurement his Daughter Christina was made capable to suc∣ceed him. Upon default of Issue Royal, it is by the Ʋnio Haereditaria provided, that the nearest in blood to the Kings Family shall suceed: and up∣on failure of these, the power of electing is to devolve upon the States. The Kings younger sons, he commonly makes Governours over some particular Provinces, giving them Titles fitted to their Commands. His Daughters are provided for at the expence of the whole Kingdom, their Portions being not taken out of the Kings Ex∣chequer, but levied by publick Tax. In the In∣terregnum, absence, sickness or minority of the King, the Kingdom is govern'd by the Drotset or Vice-Roy, the Marshal, Admiral, Chancel∣lour and Treasurer of the Kingdom, who at their admission to the publick management of affairs, take an Oath not to diminish any thing of the Kings Rights, but preserve them whole and entire: and if it happen that any part of them be by these Trustees during the Kings Mi∣nority sold or alienated, the King, when he comes to full age, may by law recover it. Anciently the Kings of Sweden, shortly after they were elected, used to make a publick Pro∣gress through their Dominions, the Legifer or Lievtenant of every Province being bound to pro∣vide for his Reception: what the King did, was to assure the people of the great care he had of them, and that charge wherewith they had en∣trusted him, and to receive of the people Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity. This custom being found somewhat expensive, and the civil trou∣bles of the Kingdom oftentimes not permitting it, is now quite left of, and the people rest con∣tent in the confidence they have of their Prince, without thus seeing his Person. The Court of the King of Sweden,The Court of Sweden. like that of England, consists of Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military persons and government; 1. For the Ec∣clesiastical, there is the Arch-bishop with as many Suffragans as are by the King thought convenient, who attend the King both at Church, and Council: upon these several of the inferiour Clergy continually wait. 2. For the Civil, officers the Drotset or Vice-Roy is chief; whose office was anciently to admonish and di∣rect the King, to inform him upon any default whatsoever, and upon non-amendment to de∣clare the same to the Governours of the King∣dom,
in whose power it was when they thought fit to dethrone their Prince. 2. Next is the Chamberlain or Commissary General, who presides over the chief Court of Judicature, the Kings Chamber, commonly held at Stock∣holme; and discharges all expences, and orders all the disbursements of the Kingdom. He has under him one Questor, who takes care of what money is brought into the Exchequer and gives account to him. Under these are twelve Masters of accounts, who keep Registers of the Kings Revenues, take care lest any detriment happen to the Crown, and once a year make up their accounts to the Commissary General in the presence of some of the Privy Counsellours. E∣very one of these has one particular Province of the Kingdom given him in charge, in which he employs divers Tax-Masters who collect the Tributes, Tenths, and other Crown Revenues, and bring them to his hands. 3. In the third place succeeds the Chancellour of the Kingdom, whose Office is much-what the same, as in other Kingdoms. 4. The Treasurer of the whole Kingdom, who has under him several Secretaries and other Officers; his office is to keep the Crown, Globe, Scepter and Sword: he is Master of the Royal Mint, and Pay-master general of the whole Kingdom, accountable to none but the King only. 3. For the Military Officers, the principal is the Grand Marshal or Generalissimo of the Kings Forces. Next is the High Admiral of the Kingdom, with the several other officers not different from those in other States. Besides these chief Officers of State, each Pro∣vince of the Kingdom has its peculiar Gover∣nour, called Landshere or Stathallar, whose power is very great, and office considerable: under him there are in every Province as many Lands-men and Nemdaries or Nempmen, as there are Districts or Praefectures in it; all which have distinct and subordinate offices, appeals lying from the lower to the next immediately above it, and so to the su∣pream Court of Judicature the Kings Chamber: all actions acquiescing in the King as the source and fountain of the laws. By these Governours and Deputies agreeeing together, Tributes are exacted, and Taxes levied. According to an or∣der of the Senate held at Lyncopen 1599, they were to keep Courts of Justice twice in every year; all of them meeting in the Winter time about February at Ʋpsal at the publick Fair called Disting, and in Summer at Lyncopen. States or Orders of men in this Kingdom there are, says Bureus, six: 1. Princes of the Blood Royal, Nobility, Clergy, Souldiery, Merchantry, and Commonalty. 1.Princes of the Blood. The Princes of the Blood-Royal are dispo∣sed of by the King, according to their age and capacity. The eldest, as was said, is Heir appa∣rent to the Crown. The younger are commonly created Dukes, and made Governours of Pro∣vinces; of Ʋpsal first, and the rest in order of dignity. These after the death of their elder brother, if he dye without issue, have right to succeed in the Throne. 2.Nobility. The Nobility, which is said to have de∣scended from King Ingon or Harold of Norway, and spred through Germany, Suitzerland, Spain, &c. when the Goths invaded the Roman Empire. It is divided into three ranks or orders: 1. Consists of Earls and Barons or Franck-Barons. The Earls (Jerl) anciently were created only upon extra∣ordinary accounts, as were also their Dukes, call∣ed Hertog, neither of their titles being then he∣reditary. A war happening between them and some of their Kings, their Honour and Titles were for some ages quite laid aside, till King Eri∣cus XIV. about the year 1560, first of all renew∣ed these lost Titles, and restored them to their owners; which gracious favour of his was fol∣low'd by his successors, they not only conferring like honour during life, but at present making it hereditary. The second consists of those whose ancestors have been advanc't to the honour of Senators of the Kingdom. The third sort is made up of those, who are neither Counts nor Barons, and whose ancestors have not been of the Sena∣torian Order: of these Orders may be either their Knights, for their valour created by the King, whose Titles are not transmitted to their Heirs, tho frequently upon equal desert confer'd on them; or Gentlemen, who are the lowest degree of the Nobility, anciently called Affwap∣pen, either because they were expert in war, or bore a Coat of Arms. All these Noblemen en∣joy great priviledges and immunities: All their estates are free from taxes and impositions, so much only out of the Lands of Earls and Ba∣rons excepted, as they at their creation receive of the King, for which they pay some acknowledg∣ment to the Crown; only in time of war, and all exi∣gences whatever, they are obliged to fit out horses and men for the Kings service proportionable to their estates. Out of these are commonly elected the Senators, Judges, and chief Officers of the Kingdom; men of low birth, tho of considerable parts, seldom advancing themselves into places of great trust and employment in Civil affairs, in Ecclesiastical more frequently. The estates of these Noblemen are inherited as well by their daughters as their sons; the son (if one) having half, and a daughter three parts of them; which custom King Bergerus Jerl is said to have made and brought in about four ages ago. 3. The Clergy,Clergy. concerning whom what we find, is set down under Ʋpsal. 4. The Souldiery,. which enjoys very great priviledges from the King; as soon as any is listed Souldier he has over and above his or∣dinary pay, all his Lands Tax-free: if in time of war a Souldiers horse be killed under him, the King provides him with another, and if any be taken Captive by the Enemy, the King redeems him at his own charges, and such like; which we shall mention when we speak of the Forces of the Kingdom. 5. The Merchantry,Merchan∣try. in whose possession the most considerable part of the riches of the King∣dom is kept, and by whose procurement for∣reign Commodities are imported. For the good government and benefit of these, every Mari∣time City and Mart-Town had anciently their particular Municipal Laws, derived from Berca the ancient seat of their Kings, and about 600 year ago, a Town of the greatest trade in the Kingdom: by these it was ordered how, and in what manner, the Maritime Cities might exercise Trade as well with Inland Towns as Forreigners; what Commodities they might traffick with, not hindring one anothers commerce. &c. These laws were by the Civil wars in the Kingdom quite neglected, and for a long time out of use; but by the care of some of the late Kings, they or some equivalent to them, begin to be restored and put in Execution. 6 The last and lowest state,Commo∣nalty. and as it were the Basis of the rest, is the Commonalty, called Bond or Beond; of which there are two sorts. 1. Named Scatbonder, who have Hereditary Lands, privi∣ledges of fishing and fowling, &c. belonging to them: these in time of war are bound to fit out one Horse and Man for the Kings service. The second sort, are those that labour in the Mines, called Bergs-men no less profitable to the publick
then the former, and enjoy no less priviledges and immunities; both possessing Estates and Fishe∣ry of their own, and like the Commons of Eng∣land, having their Representatives in the publick Council of the Kingdom. Of these, some by reason of their freedom and advantage of Edu∣cation, which is denyed the Pesantry of o∣ther Countrys, sometimes arrive at great ho∣nours in Church and State; the famous King Ericus furnamed the Saint, is said to have been a Country-mans son. The Swedes, as all other Nations, were for a long time governed only by the laws of nature, the confus'd edicts of their Kings, Decrees of the States, and Responses of the wise: till about the year 1251, Bergerus Jerl compiled a body of Laws and Constitutions for the Kingdom, col∣lected out of the former. These, before the in∣vention of Paper, were engraven upon large wooden Posts; thereby, after the manner of the Romans and Athenians, to be promulgated to the people. They were commonly very short and general, as designing the decision of particular cases to the publick Magistrates. Besides these they had upon any emergent difficulties, other ancient Laws, which they called Recessus Regni, and other ancient Statutes of the Kingdom by which only great controversies were decided. At present the Courts of Justice are more regu∣lar; and for the speedier execution of it, there are in the whole Kingdom five supream Courts of Judicature. 1. The Kings Chamber, which is divided into three ranks or degrees; 1. Supream in which all Cases twixt Senator and Senator, brought thi∣ther by Appeal, are decided. 2. The Middle in which are determined actions of Treason, and all others betwixt Noblemen, Lagmen and pub∣lick Officers. 3. The lowest, where ordinary Trials are decided, whether Civil or Criminal, where it is judged, whether the procedure in Inferiour Courts, in actions brought thence by Appeal, has been Legal or not. From this Court there lies no appeal, but only to the King; who may pardon the crime, or mitigate the punish∣ment, as he pleases. Under this, for dispatch of business, are two other Courts, one for Civil, and one for Criminal matters of inferiour con∣cernment. 2. The Court Marshal, in which all matters rela∣ting to War are decided. The Grand Marshal of the Army is always President, having two Assessours, Senatours of the Kingdom, or publick Officers; all men of the sword; with the Master of the Camp, Master of the Artillery, and Cap∣tain General of the Kings Guards. 3. The Court of Chancery, for the decision of all cases Civil or Ecclesiastical;. here the Chancel∣lour of the Kingdom presides with four Sena∣tors Assessors, and the two Secretaries of State: here all Mandates, Edicts, Commissions, &c. are made in the Kings name; all Decrees of Se∣nate and Constitutions of the Kingdom registred; and in a word, cognizance taken of all com∣plaints and Cases 'twixt one Subject and another, whether relating to the Church or State; which are brought hither by Appeal from some Inferiour Courts. 4. The Court of Admiralty for the inspection and determining all business relating to the Na∣vy or Sea affairs; here the High Admiral pre∣sides, four Senators, four Vice Admirals and se∣veral Captains, Assessours. 5. The Court of the Kings Exchequer, in which all business relating to the Kings Reve∣nues, or wherein the Crown is any way con∣cerned are examined and decided; here the Grand Treasurer is Judge, who has four Assessours, two Senators and two Noblemen. Besides these there are other Inferiour Tribu∣nals,Inferiour Tribunals. instituted at first by Gustavus Adolphus in the years 1614 and 1615, in some of the most principal Cities of the Kingdom. 1. At Stock∣holme, where the Drotset presides with sixteen Assessours, four Senators, six Knights and six Lawyers. 2. At Junecopia in Gothland, where the President is a Senator of the Kingdom, six No∣bles and as many Lawyers Assessours. 3. At A∣boa in Finland, where a Senator is President, six Nobles and six Lawyers, Assessours. 4. At Dor∣pat in Livonia, a Senator President and twelve Assessours; two other also were by him appoin∣ted; one at Wismar in Pomeren, and another at Rugen in the Dukedom of Breme; but all pro∣ceedings there, by reason of the wars 'twixt this Crown and the neighbouring Princes, are quite stopt, and the four former at present only made use of. In the Cities of lesser note Justice is executed in this manner; the first hearing is before an In∣feriour Magistrate called Cammene Rat; the se∣cond before the Consuls and Senate of the Town, which are always four in number, each having his particular charge; the third, if the case be of importance, before one of the supream Tribu∣nals; where upon the first hearing, the Judg or President of the Court is bound to determine the case, or else to give under his hand that it is very intricate and requires longer time, or a higher Court, for its determination; or else he with the twelve Assessours are to be fined each three Marks apiece. Over and above all these Courts,The Se∣nate of the Kingdom. and as it were a Compound of them all, is the Senate of the Kingdom, held anciently only for the election of their Kings, and consisting of the Governours of the Provinces; but at present made up of more members, and summon'd for the same reasons and in the same manner as the Parliament in England. In it there are two Persons elected out of every Consistory, and one Rector of a Coun∣try Parish: out of every District one Colonel, with other Lievtenants and Majors: out of every Ci∣ty one Consul, one Senator or some other prin∣cipal Citizen; and out of every Territory one Inhabitant: every different order of these have a distinct house to sit in, and for every house a Chair-man or Speaker. For the Nobility the grand Marshal: for the Clergy the Arch-bi∣shop; for the Burgesses of Cities one of the Consuls of Stockholme or the Master of the Artil∣lerie: and for those of the Country some one e∣lected out of their own Body. When they have finisht their Deliberation severally, they confer all the Houses together, and having agreed upon a form, present their resolves to the King; if he is pleased with them and thinks fit to pass them into Acts, he with the Members of the Parlia∣ment subscribe and seal them: the Records of which the Marshal of the States (an Officer ap∣pointed for that purpose) puts into the Chance∣ry; causes them to be promulgated; and then quits his Charge, and his Staff the mark of his Dignity. The Laws used in Sweden,The Laws. as well as those of Ostro and Westro-Gothia are very ancient; every Province having formerly had, says Loccenius, particular Constitutions by which it was gover∣ned: the Plantiff and Defendant using to plead their own Causes, or to give the management of them to some of their Kindred, never taking the assistance of any Advocate or Proctour, con∣trary to their present practice. In cases du∣bious it was in use here, as in most parts of
Europe, to refer the determination of them, to the trial either of Fire Ordeal, (sufficiently known to most men), used at first in this Country by Olaus Scotkonung about the year 986, and quite abrogated by Bergerus Jerls about 300 years ago: or of scalding water; or of bringing the suspected Person, in cases of murder, to the dead body: (which if upon his approach begun to bleed, they judged him to be the murtherer), or of Duel, call'd Wehiding i. e. consecration. This manner of Tryal was first allowed, say some, by Frotho King of Denmarck, whence being brought into Sweden, and for sometime prevailing, it was first of all by Gustavus the Great under great pe∣nalties forbid; but not absolutely extirpated, till the time of this present King A. 1662, when its punishment was made arbitrary. At present if a Legifer be to be elected, it is done by the Bishop, (who gives notice thereof in the Court eight weeks before the election∣day), and the people of the Territory; who re∣turn three sufficient persons to the King, and he chuses one of them. If a President, the Legifer and the people of the District chuse him. Who takes an Oath to administer Justice impartially amongst them, and can be Judg in one only Di∣strict at the same time. When a Plantiff com∣mences an Action against the Defendant, he with two able House-keepers, goes to his house and summons him to the Court: if he appear the first, second, or third Court day, 'tis well: if not, he loses the Action, and distress is made upon his Goods. In cases of Murder, Adultery, &c. punishable by death; if the guilty persons flie, Bud kaffla or Hue and Cry is sent out after them, which is to go through the whole Precinct, and to be continued from one place to another, by the delivery of a Staff, the sign of authority. A Woman convicted of adultery by six Witnesses, loses her Dowry, her Estate, and if her hus∣band pleases, her life too. Whoever takes Use for Money loses it, and is punished beside: though privately at Stockholme and places of Trade, Use-money begins to be taken. If any person have scandalized his Neighbour and be convicted of it, he is besides the Fine, forced to recant and make a publick confession of the injury in writing: [formerly for such offences, the Fine was nine Marks, called Lopp-gold or Lip-fine; and the guil∣ty persons were forced to beat their own mouths, to crawl backward out of the Court, and were for ever rendred incapable of giving evidence.] Besides these and many such like Laws, there are published several belonging to the Goths, which they using in other Countrys, as well as this, are not more fit to be mentioned here, then in any other place. How powerful the Kings of Sweden are in Sea,Land For∣ces. as well as Land, Forces, is sufficiently manifest∣ed by their late, as well as present, wars. How far Gustavus Adolphus went in his expediti∣ons against Germany, is sufficiently known to the world; and how this present King has behaved himself between two powerful enemies, is no less manifest. And such is the great strength of the Kingdom, that sometimes it has maintain∣ed war with three potent adversaries, the Dane, the Pole, and the Muscovite, all at once. The Land-forces are provided and kept in readiness, after the manner of our Trained-Bands, by the Provinces of the Kingdom, thirty-two Regiments in all, seven hundred souldiers in each Regi∣ment. These are most of them Musqueteers; Pikemen being, by reason of their thick and frequent woods, not so serviceable in this, as other, champain Countries. The body of their Army, to their great advantage, is in time of war composed of Peasants (such soldiers as the ancient Romans desired to have), people labori∣ous, frugal, hardy, and being us'd at home to make all their clothes themselves, prove when they come to field, as many Taylors, Shoo∣makers, &c. as Soldiers. Every Company of Foot has its particular Captain, Lieutenant, and En∣sign; who have always, but especially if the seat of war be within the Kingdom, very small pay; the Captain himself not having (besides the abatement of all Taxes for himself, and some of his relations) above one Coat a year, and four Dollars per mensem; and a common soldier one Dollar and a fourth part per mensem. Regi∣ments of Horse are in Suecia and Gothia twelve, and in Finland two, one of which is made up by the Commonalty, the other by the Nobility of that Province. Each of these has its Captain, Lieutenant, and Cornet, and much-what the same discipline as in other Countries. Their horses are commonly lesser, but stronger and more accustomed to labour, then those of Germany. The Horsemen carry with them Carbines or short Guns. The reason why Finland maintains so few, and Suecia and Gothia so many, Regi∣ments; is, because the former is particularly ob∣liged to maintain the Fleet and Sea-soldiers; and the latter abound more with horses and men; the Province of Dalecarlia being said at one time to have raised thirty-thousand men, well armed. Of these Land-forces there is, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, a general muster once every year at least; all the Courtiers (some few only excepted) being allow'd pay, and bound to accompany the King to the place of Rendez∣vous. Next are the Sea-forces, no less considerable then those of the Land; the King having com∣monly in readiness above 50 men of war, many of them carrying 50 Guns; all under the command of one High Admiral. In a war against Denmark, King John the third, fitted out seventy men of war with several Merchants Ships, in which be∣sides the Seamen, were embarqued 18000 Land-Souldiers. The chief Port in the Kingdom is Stockholme, where lie at anchor sometimes above 300 Ships: in Finland, Livonia and other Parts, there are very convenient Harbours, though not so well stored with Ships; by reason that the Muscovite, the greatest enemy on that side, main∣tains no Sea-forces. The Kings Revenues, by which these are main∣tain'd, consist chiefly in the Crown-Lands, as Chases, Forrests, &c. which the King as was said, takes an oath not to embezil; but these being formerly, by the civil Troubles of the Kingdom, in great part alienated from the Crown; and of late, since the Titles of Earls and Barons were renewed amongst them, very much impair'd; (it being the custom that when the King honours any person with either of those Titles, he with it gives him a piece of Land which has former∣ly belonged to the Crown), other ways are sought out for the maintenance of their Courts and Ar∣mies; which are 1. From these Crown-Lands or Kings Patri∣mony daily regained, for which a Colledg of Re∣duction is of late instituted. 2. From the Mines of Copper, Silver, Lead, &c. 3. From the Sea-customs. 4. From the imposition upon Oxen transpor∣ted out of Schonen, Finland, &c. Which being a∣bout the value of 5 s. English by the head, a∣mounts to a great sum; especially in times of Peace. 5. From the several Companies of Merchants:
of which there is but one for Exportation, viz. The Tar-Company; though there be divers for Im∣portation, as the Tobacco-Company, the Sugar-Company, &c. who each pay yearly considera∣ble summs to the Crown. 6. From Impost on the Exportation of Guns. 7. From the Mulcts payed by those that are cast in Law; a third part of which is paid to the King. 8. From all moneys which the King pays out, from which he deducts to the value of one per Cent. Besides these there are many other ways where∣by the King raises money, as the Frank-Subsi∣dies or Quit-rents, the revenues from all sorts of Skins and Furrs brought out of Lapland &c. which not being constant and certain, but more or less according as the Snows fall or the Frosts conti∣nue, I omit to mention. When his Majesty of Sweden is engaged in a War, he can, and ordinarily doth, make use of these extraordinary means, as 1. All persons whatsoever, none excepted, who received salaries or pensions from the Crown, in the time of war, abate one half, and sometimes the whole, as 'tis said they did in these late wars. 2. The Gentry of Sweden, Finland, &c. pay a Contribution of about sixteen pence English, a man; which is called the Six-Mark Contribu∣tion. 3. All Towns pay a Contribution according to their in-comes, some more, some less. 4. Every Town, which is obliged to have con∣stantly in readiness a certain Company of Sea∣men, (whom the King sends for upon occasion, to serve in the Fleet) is bound in time of war to double the number. 5. When any army is transported over the Baltick, it goes either to Pomeren or Bremen, which Provinces pay so much a month, in money or provision, towards its support. 6. The Gentry of Liffland and the Neigh∣bouring Provinces, contribute so many thousand measures of Corn for the supplying of their Ma∣gazines. 7. Every Peasant plowing so much ground a year, must give one Shirt, one Lamb-skin Coat, one pair of Mittens, one pair of Woollen Stock∣ings, and one pair of Shoes, towards the main∣tenance of Souldiers. By these and such-like means, great additions are made to the Kings Exchequer; the ordinary income of which is said to have been in the year 1578 six or seven Tun of Gold of 100000 Dollers apiece, all charges of the Crown being first de∣ducted; though in that year, as also in se∣veral following, there were spent in maintain∣ing Wiburg and Revalia Cities upon the Borders of Muscovy, 100000 Dollers extraordinary. The Sueci or Swedes (by some Writers mista∣ken for the Suevi or Schwabs a people of Germany), seem to be the same Nation with the Sueones or Suiones of Tacitus, by that description of them which he sets down. An ancient and warlike people, united under distinct Laws (if Swedish Authors may in this case be credited) not many years af∣ter the Flood by one Suenno or Sueno eldest son to Magog, and great grand-child to Noah, and from him called Suenons or Sueons: though others will have them so named from Suedia or Suidia i.e. to burn Wood or Forrests that are cut down; they being forc't at their first arrival into this Country, to fell and burn the Woods in order to Tillage: but these opinions as well as that of Grotius who derives their name from the Swe∣dish and English word Swet, because the Swedes were always a laborious people, are conjectures scarce worth naming. That this Nation was not only before, but the Parent of, the Gothi or Getae, is asserted by many Authors, and, says Loccenius, apparent, from several Runick Monuments and ancient Swedish Laws, which testify that thence proceeded the Gothish people diffusing themselves into other Countrys, as Thrace, Spain, Italy, &c. One of these Laws is said to have been made a∣bout the time of Alexander the Great, for calling them back into their own Country Scandia; e∣very one being commanded presently to return, or forfeit all Title to any Inheritance there which they or their Ancestors had formerly possess'd. That they were not so well known to the world as these Goths or Getes (which we take to be the same People) is on the contrary altogether as certain: but the reason of this may be, that there were several Emigrations of the latter, when the former remained in their own Country, either not known by strangers as a distinct People from the Goths, or passing under the same name with them. The Norwegian Chronicles reckon five and twenty Kings of Sweden, before Haldanus Hwithen the first Founder of their Kingdom, which was afterward by Harald Harfagher the third King from him, very much enlarg'd and made an ab∣solute Monarchy. That out of this Country a vast number of men went to people Schonen and the Cimbrick Islands in the Reign of Ericus (the first Swedish King according to Loccenius his ac∣count), is attested by Johannes Magnus and other Authors; and about the year of Christ 870 one Otherus in his account of the Northern Regions which he made to King Aelfred, makes mention of Swedland or the Land of the Swedes, and the Isles of Gotland and Jutland, giving them much-what the same Limits they have at present. And in all ages so famous have been the warlike Ex∣ploits and victorious Arms of this Nation, that one Nicolaus Ragvaldi Archbishop of Ʋpsal, ma∣king an Oration (extant in Johannes Magnus) in the Council of Basil, A. D. 1440 concerning the noble atchievments of the Sweo-Gothish Peo∣ple, prevailed so far with the Holy Fathers there present, that it was moved in Council that the King of Swedland should have precedency of all other Christian Kings. The men of Sweden, as to their persons are generally of a proper and big body,Their Manners. a comely presence, and gentile carriage; in their youn∣ger years bred up to learning, travelling, and espe∣cially languages, (of which 'tis ordinary for a Swedish Gentleman to be able to speak five or six in perfection); and in their riper, accustomed to affairs of State and War. Honest, free, and plain∣dealers they are noted for, insomuch that the Granaries in the whole Country had anciently neither Lock nor Key, but only a Hatch, judg∣ed sufficient security amongst honest and trusty neighbours: and to steal Corn out of the common fields was a crime so horrid, that it was punishable by death. The women are also of a tall stature, and very personable, generally chast (adultery, which is severely prohibited by their Laws, being seldom committed by them), modest, virtuous, and endowed with those qua∣lities which are commonly the consequents of wholsom Laws and Government. They, the Citi∣zens especially, love to go neat, and provide them∣selves generally with good clothes and fair houses, counting that ill spent which is superfluously be∣stowed upon their worst part, their belly. When Marriage, Christenings, Burials, &c. are to be solemnized, they spare no expences to seem no∣ble and magnificent; sometimes rather then want a splendid Funeral for their Relations, keep∣ing the dead corps for several years, and in the
interim labouring to gather up as much mo∣ney as will maintain the pomp of it's burial. [Anciently they burnt their bodies; a custom, as they say, brought in by Wooden; however they make it one of their Epocha's, and call that time Aetas Cremationis: afterwards they buried them on the tops or some eminent places of hills, and this is call'd by their Writers Aetas Col∣lium; but Christianity hath reduc'd to the same cu∣stoms, that are used by the rest of that Religion.] Frugal and laborious they are; inured as well by their exercises, as the Clime of their Country, to all extremity of hardship; it being ordinary for a common Souldier to watch upon the Guard at Stockholme a whole winter-night full eighteen hours long, without being relieved. To be a Gentleman, and well descended, is highly esteem∣ed amongst them; tho frequently their titles of honour out-swell their estates; for when any one of a competent estate dyes, one half of it is allowed to the surviving widow, and the other half divided among the children; the son having two parts, and a daughter the third; the widows part upon her decease is shared amongst them after the same proportion; so that one great estate is cut out into many little parcels, by many children; which being again subdivided by these childrens children, the family is commonly reduced to a low condition, all inheriting equally the Titles and Priviledges of the Nobility. The hospitality of this Nation is amongst the rest of their good qualities,Their Hospitali∣ty. the most remarkable; they anciently using to entertain those that were strangers with the like civility as they would treat their friends; affording them victuals, and what necessaries they stood in need of, gratis; and fur∣nishing them with horses to the place whither they intended to go. The contrary to this, viz. churlishness and inhospitality, was thought so great a crime, and so unworthy the genius of any Swedish inhabitant, that in the time of Charles the second, (who is said to have reigned some∣time before our Saviours birth,) if any one denied lodging three times to Strangers, that King sent to set fire on the houses of such Offenders, and burn them down to the ground, This freedom of entertainment sometimes causing dammages and inconveniences to private Persons A. D. 1285 Magnus Ladulaus then King, put forth a Decree, that no one should think himself obliged, (as they, perhaps by some natural dictate did think themselves to be), to afford Lodging, Victuals and Horses, to Strangers; but might demand Money for what they afforded them: which some of the more Southern People (more accustomed to Strangers) at this day do exact, though among the more Northern, the ancient custom does still pre∣vail. Their Cloths anciently, as those of the Lap∣landers at present,Their Habit. were (as may be gathered out of Claudian and Jornandes) ordinarily made of Skins of Wild-beasts, and called Mudd; the black being in most request and used by the better sort. At present not only the Gentry, but the Com∣mon People, use Habits equal to those of other Countries, but strive to outgo one another in fineness and costliness. In the time of Gustavus the first, there was such irregularity of Habits among the people, the Courtiers especially, that the Dale∣carli petition'd him that all forreign Modes and Fashions might be left off in his Court, and for∣bid to be used in his Kingdom: but that King (perhaps seeing as great advantage by it in re∣spect of Trade, as disadvantage any other way) put the Petitioners off with a complement. The Common People have their Apparel made of course woollen-cloth; the Nobility and Gentry have diversity of Garbes according as they are A-la-mode in France. Their Drinks,Their Drinks. before the use of Wine amongst them, were water mixt with Honey called Miod or Mead, and Ale or Beer, which latter was only drunk at their publick Feasts, thence called Ol, i. e. Feasts where they had the liberty to drink Ale. The Cups which they used to drink in were anciently made of the Horn of a beast called Ʋrus; but at present are of Copper, Brass, and among the richer sort of the Commonalty, ordinarily of Silver. Healths to their King, their Friends, &c. they, for the greater Honour, always drink standing, and count it a great disrespect if the whole Company will not pledg them: insomuch that one complained to Gustavus the Great of his Companion, who would not drink the Kings Health in as many Cups as he had done; who instead of being re∣warded (as he supposed he should have been), was severely reproved, by that King. As an Attendant to their drinking, Tobacco is very much in use amongst them, which within these fifty years was altogether unknown to this Country. In their Diet they are sparing and abstemious:Their Diet. the better sort have their bread made of Corn, which though there be sufficient in the Country to serve all the Inhabitants, yet the poorer sort very frequently, and in time of scarcity always, make use of a kind of Bread made of the bark of Firr or Pine Tree, mingled with Chaff and made up with pure water: which is the chief rea∣son why the Swedish Souldiers can endure a Seige or any Extremities of war, much better then any of other Nations. Anciently at their Banquets they had Poets Laureat maintained by the King, who sung before the Guests some Poems com∣posed in honour of their Kings: as they did also in their Camps and Garrisons amongst the Soul∣diers, thereby to animate and incourage them to an imitation of their Ancestours; but at pre∣sent their customs in these matters are very little different from those common to other Nations. After their Victuals and manner of treating their Guests, follow their Exercises;Exercises. which were commonly such as might fit them for Warlike Exploits and hazardous Enterprises. Olaus Mag∣nus reports, that the ancient Goths used to dip their Children as soon as born in cold water, and as they grew up to riper years to inure them, like as in a house of correction, to constant and severe lash∣ing, and such like severities. Tilts also and Turna∣ments were in use amongst them, in which and such like Sports Totila one of the Kings of the Goths was, says Procopius, very early and carefully in∣structed. The ordinary sort of People use to make Fortifications, Bastions, &c. of the Snow or Ice, and after the manner of Souldiers en∣gage one another; to Climb Rocks also, and like the rest of the Scandians to slide upon the Snow in Scaits. Chess-play also (perhaps to teach them, or to advantage their conduct in War) was very much in use amongst them, their Kings and chief men delighting in it, and thereby says Olaus Magnus, prognosticating future events, as of Victories, Marriages, and such like; this peo∣ple being very much addicted to Magick and prying into secret occurrences. Marriage, as it anciently was,Marriage. so at present is esteemed very sacred, and chastly observed. A Maid without the consent of her Parents or Tu∣tors is not permitted to marry, nor can a Guar∣dian betroath his Pupil or Orphan to any one, but in the presence of four Witnesses at least, two in behalf of one party, and two of the o∣ther. If after a Virgin is thus contracted to a∣ny one, her Guardian do not stand to the Pro∣posals agreed on, but endeavour to hinder the
Marriage, the Husband may demand his Bride, break any Lock to come to her, and if any re∣sist, he may without being questioned for it, kill him: and if he happen to lose his life in the Quest, he that kills him shall be deem'd a Murtherer. If any Husband leave his own, and contract and cohabit with another mans wife; he shall upon sufficient proof, lose his head: and the Woman be stoned to death. Learning, which thrives best in a peaceable and quiet Country, has sometimes been under so general a disrepute in this Kingdom, that 'tis said, the eldest son of Amalaswentha, who was Heir to the Crown, was not suffer'd to be brought up in the knowledg of any Liberal Arts. But such disregard never lasted long; Learning being al∣ways, when the heat of war was over, recalled from her banishment; and when men had lea∣sure to think upon their better part, constantly embrac'd and follow'd by them; and that even in their Kings Palaces, they always maintaining Philosophers to instruct them in the secrets of nature; and Poets (which they call'd Scald from Scal, i. e. sound, because they repeated their verses aloud) to inform them of the worth of their predecessors; these not only remain'd in their Garrisons (as was said) but some one al∣ways accompanied the King in all great expedi∣tions, that they might be eye-witnesses of those actions, of which they were to give an account in publick. One of these is reported to have had so good Lungs, that being commanded by the King to repeat some verses, he spoke them so loud, that he was heard throughout the whole Army. The letters which they made use of, were call'd Runick from Ryn, signifying a furrow, for the same reason that the Latins use versus, exarare, &c. because that anciently when they had writ from the left hand to the right, they turn'd back a∣gain from the right to the left. By whom at first invented, is uncertain; some say by Odinus or Wooden, one of their chief Gods. That they came into Sweden about the year of Christ 380 or 400, is affirmed by many, altho the superstitious use of them generally practis'd by the inhabitants, seems to prove, that they were much sooner known to them. With these the common peo∣ple used to carve certain sticks or staves (still in use among some of them), setting upon them the names of their Gods, their Months, their Holy∣days, &c. which served them for an Almanack, and some Idolatrous purposes. These cha∣racters, in the reign of Olaus Scotkonung, at the desire of Pope Sylvester II. and Sigfrid Archbishop of York, (who was sent thence to preach Christi∣anity in Sweden,) were quite abolished; and some∣time after, by the whole Council at Toledo, says Wormius, utterly condemn'd; it being by them thought almost impossible ever to have extir∣pated Paganism, unless they had first rooted out these letters, in which so much of their idolatry (tho perhaps something of good learning and antiquity) was writ. The Swedish language differs only from the Danish and High-Dutch in dialect,Their Lan∣guage. being rougher and less capable of improvement then either of the other two; whence the Swedes rarely write any thing in their own tongue. Some of their Authors endeavour to bring the language from another fountain, telling us, That the old Runick (fragments of which may be seen in the Danish monuments published by Wormius) is the mo∣ther tongue of Denmark, and the Gothick of Swe∣den. But these differ only in character, not words; as may be easily perceiv'd by comparing Ʋlphi∣la's Gothick Version of the Gospels (not long since published by the learned Franciscus Junius) with Wormius's Collection of the old Runick mo∣numents. The Colledge of Antiquaries at Ʋp∣sal have lately taken great pains in publishing a new Edition of the Codex Argenteus with the mo∣dern Swedish, thereby to demonstrate their tongue a dialect of the ancient Gothick. (Of this see more in Denmark). The Swedish year was anciently divided only into Summer and Winter; but afterwards,Their Year. ac∣cording to the custom of other Nations, mea∣sured by Months and Nights: this Nation ra∣ther using to count by nights then days, as also rather by Winters then Summers, both because they were longer, and (chiefly) because that was the mode of all Northern Nations, perhaps from the beginning of the world. Their Months are called Monat from Mona sig∣nifying the Moon; the particular names yet in use amongst them, were given in remem∣brance of some of their Heathenish Gods, as 1. January they call Thors-monat from their chief God Thor. 2. February Goia-monat, from Goia or Freia daughter to Thor or Jupiter. 3. March Thur-monat, from Thur) which seems to be the same with Othen or Oden) an Asiatick Deity the same with Mars; and so of the rest. Their Trading, as of all other Nations,Their Trading. was anciently bartering, but at present Money is very plentiful among them, as of Gold, Silver and Copper, and these last as well supplied, out of their own Mines, as imported by Merchants. decorative device
OF GOTHIA AND IT'S PROVINCES. GOthia or Gothland,Gothia and its Provinces. i. e. the Land of the Goths, is parted from Suecia by the Woods Kolmord and Tydhweth: A large and fruitful Country, situ∣ate betwixt two potent Nations, and frequent∣ly at war one with ano∣ther, the Swedes and Danes; for which reason it became anciently the ordinary seat of their wars, till the inhabitants ob∣serving the Swedes to be their nearest and more dan∣gerous (as being upon the same Continent), and very often victorious, neighbours, they join'd and incorporated with the Swedes, and their Country has ever since been reckon'd as a chief part of the Swedish dominions. It is bounded on the East with the Baltick Sea; on the West with the Mountains called Lyma Fiell, and the Sinus Codanus; on the North with the Provinces of Nericia and Suder∣mannia; and on the South with the Sund or Ore∣sund, and part of the Baltick. It is divided in general into East- and West-Gothia. 1. West- or Westro- or Wiso-Gothia,Westro-Gothia and its Provinces. which has in it these three Provinces, 1. Westro-Gothia pro∣perly so taken. 2. Dalia. 3. Vermlandia, to which may be added Hallandia. 1. Westrogothia,Westro-Gothia. a plain and fruitful Province; somewhat inferiour indeed in fertility to Ʋpland and Sudermannia, but exceeding both of them in abundance of Cattel and convenience of pastu∣rage; in which the great wealth of this Coun∣try does consist. In this Province are several great Rivers, as Tida, Lida, Nos, &c. which fall∣ing into the Lake Vener, are sent out by two pas∣sages at Elffzburg and Kongelff, and at last unbur∣then'd into the Sinus Codanus; with some others, as Eda and Visk; which fall not into the Lake, but empty themselves into the same Bay. Here are several Cities of good note, viz. 1. Gothburg or Gottenburg, a considerable Mart-Town, ly∣ing upon the mouth of a small River which runs out of the Sinus Codanus; between the Towns of Elsberg and Goldberg, frequented very much by Hollanders, and other strangers, and of late en∣dowed by the Swedish Kings with many notable priviledges. The unsuccessful efforts of a great Danish Fleet against it ann. 1644, shews it to be a place of great strength and consideration. 2. Scare, anciently the residence of the Gothish Kings, and at present a Bishops seat: so called from Scarinus a potent King of the Goths who built it; it was in the time of Adam Bremensis, the Metropolis of Westgothia, but now a ruined and fenceless Town. 3. Mariaestadt, and 4. Li∣decopia, less considerable then the former. Towns of most note are 1. Falecopia. 2. Skedvi. 3. Hio. 4. Bogesund. 5. Bretta. 6. Old Ludosia, taken and for∣tifyed by Christianus the I, King of Denmark, but soon after in the same year regained by the Swedes. This Town seems to be the same with Losa, mentioned by Meursius in his Danick Histo∣ry. 2. Dalia,Dalia. lying betwixt the Lake Vener and some part of Norway; a Province for the most part mountanous, and consequently barren. It is wa∣tered with several Lakes and Rivers well stor'd with Fish of all sorts: Here the pasturage is good, and their Cattel larger then those in any other part of the Country; there is one Town of note called Daleburg. 3. Vermlandia, last inhabited, as Authors re∣port,Vermlan∣dia. amongst all the Gothick Provinces; one Ola∣vus Tretelia being said first of all to have brought Colonies hither. It is a Country Mountanous and Woody, having some Mines of Iron, and one vein of Copper indifferently rich. Lakes and Rivers it has many, though but one only City, called Charlestat from Charles the IX King of Sweden who built it, in the place of an ancient City named Tingvalla. 4. Hallandia,Hallan∣dia. which has o the West the Si∣nus Codanus, on the South Schonen, and on the North and North-East Smalandia and Westro-Gothia. A pleasant and fruitful Province, reach∣ing in length from Bahusia to the City Laaholm upon a small River which falls into the Sinus Co∣danus, several miles; but in breadth in some parts not above half a mile, and where broadest not exceeding three miles. It has in it four Cities 1. Halmstadt. 2. Falkenburg. 3. Laaholm. 4. Waers∣burg, all lying upon the Codane Bay, very conve∣niently for Trade and exporting of those Commo∣dities which come out of the more Northerly Provinces. In the year 1645 by a Ratification of peace held betwixt Christina Queen of Swedland and Christian the IV King of Denmark, this Province with all its Cities, Towns, Forts and Appurtenances was granted to the Crown of Swe∣den, for thirty years as a pledg of security, where∣by the Swedes might be ascertain'd of their free passage through the Sund or Oresund; the con∣troversies about which had been the chief occa∣sions of their former war. At the end of thirty years if the Swedes thought convenient, either this Province was to be retained by them as a pledg for the performing of the covenant on the part of the Danes, or they to have some other Province, or Cities and Forts equivalent to it, gi∣ven into their hands, which might be to them sufficient assecuration. An. 1658, by articles of a peace concluded at Roschild a City in Zeland, it, with all its Cities, Towns and Forts, was granted to Charles the X, then King of Sweden and to his successours for ever. II. Eastern-East- or Ostro-Gothia,Ostro-Go∣thia. which has in it these Provinces, 1. Ostro-Gothia properly so call'd. 2. Smalandia, and 3. Oelandia, to which may be added Gotlandia, Scania and Bleckingia. 1. Ostro-gothia divided from Westro-gothia by the Lake Veter or Wetter; for the most part a level and champaigne Country, abounding with Corn and Cattel of all sorts, which are exported hence in very great plenty into other Countries. Here are very great conveniences for Hunting, Fowling and Fishing either for pleasure or profit. Nor are
map of Gothia GOTHIA Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios er Mosem Pitt▪
map of Scania SCANIA, Vulgo SCHONEN Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios▪ Mosem Pitt. blazon or coat of arms VIROIllustri & Generosissimo, Dno. OTTHONI KRAGH, Toparchae in Trutzholm. Summo R. M. DAN. Secretario▪ Patrono suo magno. Dedicat & Consecrat Johannes Janssonius.
Mines altogether wanting, but some few are to be met with in the Mountains near Godegard, Hellestaberg and Vongaberg. Cities in it are 1. Vad∣sten, where was anciently a Fort and a Monastery dedicated to St. Bridget, and (at present) an Hospi∣tal for lame Souldiers. 2. Schening, anciently a very famous City, but now a ruin'd and very in∣considerable Town. Here 'tis said, that by com∣mand of P. Innocent IV. an. 1248 a Council was held, in which Marriage was forbid Priests, which they had used from the plantation of Christianity till that time. 3. Lincopia, Lincoepping, a Bishops seat; not far from the mountain Kettleberg; a pleasant, though not spacious, City. In the middle of it are Springs bubling out, the like whereof are not to be met with in all Sweden: here is an an∣cient and stately Church built by one Herebertus, who is said to be one of the first planters of Chri∣stianity in these Countrys. 4. Norcopia lying be∣twixt Sudercoepping and Neucoepping upon the banks of a large Lake, and thence very well supplyed with Fish of all sorts. 5. Sudercoepping or Sodercoepping, a handsom, but fenceless, City: near this place, says Olaus Magnus, are found Cubi∣cal Crystals, or rather as I conceive Fluores, of small bigness, but in great plenty. 2. Smalandia parted from Ostro-Gothia by the Wood Holavedh; a very large Province being 95 German miles in compass, indifferently fruitful in those parts where it is not overgrown with wood. It abounds very much with Cattel (whence some say it has its name, Smala signifying Cattel), which are exported hence in great numbers into Denmark and from thence into Germany and Holland. In it there are very many Lakes, the chief of which are Bolm, Viostez, Moklen and Asnan. Rivers likewise not a few, as Nyssea, Laga, Helga, Marboa, Aem, &c. This Country is cut out into several Divisions or Territories, the principal of which are Tieherad, Verendia (which is said anciently to have had di∣stinct Laws of its own), Tiustia, Finheidia and Mauringia, &c. It abounds with several Mines as of Copper and Lead, and in some parts with great store of Iron; which is said to be found in the bottom of their Lakes and Rivers. Cities here are 1. Calmar whose name is said to have been gi∣ven to it by the Germans, from the coldness of the air which blows from the Baltick Sea. Here is a very convenient Port frequented by our En∣glish Merchants and some of other Nations. In the year 1230 Ericus King of Denmark, Norway and Swedland, instituted thirteen Prebendaries in this City: and ordered that the Cathedral Church here, should have the priviledges of an Ecclesi∣astical Colledg. It is at present governed by one Superintendent, who with the rest of the Bishops has a place in the publick consistory of the King∣dom. This City was sometimes under the power of John King of Denmark and Christiern the second who succeeded him, but not long after regain'd by the Swedes. In the year 1611 Christianus the fourth King of Denmark took this City, putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword; but two years after it was by vertue of a ratification of peace made betwixt the Northern Crowns restored to the Swede. In the year 1647 it was almost quite consumed by fire, not above sixty houses left standing in the whole City; but since that, is very handsomly rebuilt, and at present by reason of its commodious Situation upon the Baltick, a very considerable Trade-Town. 2. Jenecoepia or Je∣necoepping, situate in a Vale near the Lake Veter, built for the most part of Wood: a City quite naked and easy of access. It is reported that ancient∣ly the houses of this City were covered on the out∣side not with Thatch or Stone, but with a sort of courser Cloth or Canvas, which the Inhabitants thought a great piece of handsomness. M. Heberer in his Itinerary reports, that when he came to this City he found a great number of very large Ser∣pents, which were kept tame by the Citizens, and though they were familiarly admitted into their houses, yet never did them any injury; [whe∣ther or no they used to eat them, as the Indians are said to do at this day, is not by him set down; though 'tis probable they did not feed them in their houses for no other end then to sport with]. 3. Vexio, a Bishops See; where some of the first Planters of Christianity, as was said, lie buried. 4. Ekesio, and 5. Vesterwick. 3. Oelandia, a pleasant and fruitful Island, lying in the Baltick Sea, divided from Smalandia by a very narrow Bay; in it are Cattel, as Oxen, Hor∣ses, &c. Birds also and Wild-beasts, in great plen∣ty: and besides the Fort called Barkholme or Bornholme, two and thirty Parishes in all. This Island was by the Dane yeilded up to Gustavus Adolphus, an. 1613. See more concerning it a∣mongst the accessional Provinces of the Crown of Sweden. 4. Scania or Schonen, a Province abounding with Corn, Beasts, Birds and all other Commodities of life: here several Mines of Silver, Lead, Iron, &c. are said to be laboured, and their Mettal to be hence transported into other Countries; but this seems to be a mistake, either from the confounding of the word Scandia with Scania (which is frequent∣ly done by Geographers) or from counting that Mettal which is brought hither from the more Northern Provinces, to come immediately from this. This Province an. 1658 was ceded to the Swedes, and an. 1660 confirm'd to them; so that it may seem one of the new accessions to the King∣dom, amongst which see a description of it. 5. Blekingia, a fruitful Province lying upon the Baltick coast. It was given up to the Swedes an. 1658, and (as was Schonen) confirm'd to them an. 1660. A larger account of this Province may be expected by and by. 6. Gothlandia or Gothland, an Island lying in the Baltick Sea, over against Ostro-Gothia, about eigh∣teen German Miles in length, and five or six in breadth; fourteen miles from the Gothick Shore, twenty from Curland, thirty from Dantzic, fifty from Bornholme and eighty from Rostock. It has in it one City named Wisbuy or Visburg the resi∣dence of the Governour of the Island. When it was under the Danish Government, Friderick the second ordered one superintendant to preside here, and subjected all the Churches and Parishes, (about an hundred in all) to his jurisdiction; which authority was shortly after lost, and by Christian the fourth again restored. Upon the de∣caying of Wineta and Julinum Mart-Towns in Pomerania, this City became famous for Trade, and may be reckoned among the chief of the whole North. In this City Hydrographical Ta∣bles and Sea-mens Cards are said to have been first printed and perfected; and rules for Naviga∣tion and Commerce for the whole Ocean, as far as the Scythian Sea and Hercules his Pillars, here prescribed and by Sea-men observed. In it were anciently ten Churches and four Monasteries, at present only seven Churches in all. Near this place are several large Rocks with Gothic Epitaphs and Inscriptions, of which see Pontanus. This City was formerly under the command of the Teutonick Order, in which time it was beseiged by Ericus King of Swedland, Denmark and Nor∣way, and after much loss both of men and mo∣ney on both sides, the difference was referred to the Emperor, who ordered that the Teutonick Order should yeild up to the King their Title both to the City and the Island; and he in con∣sideration
of it to pay them in hand a 1000 En∣glish Nobles. After King Ericus's death it was some∣times in the possession of the Swedes, sometimes of the Danes. See more amongst the Swedish Islands. That this Country was first of all inhabited by the Goths, and from them receiv'd its name, is agreed on by most Authors; but whence they came hither, under whose conduct, or in what age of the world, is very much controverted. That they came out of Scythia Europa over the Venedic Bay under Magog, and from him were call'd Magogae, Gothi or Getae, is the opinion of Jo. Magnus, and Olaus Magnus his Brother and successor in the Arch∣bishoprick of Ʋpsal. Tho they seem to have no motive for it, other then the affinity of names, not being able at such great distance of time, to have any certain authority of Historians. Other Authors, and those of very good account, affirm the Goths or Getes at first to have been a Colony of the Messagetae who inhabited Scythia Europaea in those parts near the Palus Maeotis or the Caspian Sea, and thence to have come into Scandia, there to have setled, and sent out Colonies into Germany, Italy, and other parts both of Europe and Asia; and from the Messagetae to have been called by an ab∣breviation Getae or Gothi being (as most are of opinion) the same Nation. These Getae, as soon as come over the Baltick Sea, erected a Government among themselvs, administred justice by their own Laws, and in a short time (Northern Nations being observ'd to be most prolific) encrea'd to a nume∣rous and potent Nation; and the bounds of the Kingdom not being able to contain, and the Pro∣visions not sufficient to satisfy, so great a number, they were forc'd to seek out for themselves other more large, and more convenient, habitations: which they chose to do in the neighbouring parts beyond the Venedic Bay, and in other more Sou∣thern Countries; where they became to the Ro∣man and Greek Empires more known, and more considerable then any other enemies with which they had to deal. At what time their first emigration out of Go∣thia was,Their E∣migration out of Go∣thia. Crantius and Jornandes are very positive; It was say they A. M. 3790, the whole Colony was imbarqued in three Vessels, (too small a number to contain the seeds of so potent a Nation, had not several other people as the Vandali, Suevi, He∣ruli, &c. joyned with them, and made them in a short time very potent); the first place they touch'd at was the Isle of Gothland, (not improbably so called from them), thence they came to Rugen, and so on to Pomeren, where two of their Ships arriving before their fellows, those that came first to harbour called the other, when they came up to them, by way of reproach Gepantae or Gepidae, i.e. slow or slothful; whom, as not fit for their company and designs, they left in those parts, and joyning themselves with other Nations advanc'd on by land as far as Poland and the Palus Maeotis, where they divided themselves into two Companies. 1. Those that went toward the East, called by the Romans the Oriental. 2. Those that march'd into Transilvania and places near Germany, Spain, &c. call'd the Occidental Goths; which branch about the year of Christ 450 possess'd almost all the King∣dom of France. [This division to be made first of all after their emigration out of their own Country, Loccenius with some other Swedish Writ∣ers cannot allow, but say, that their Country was divided into Ostro- and Westro-Gothia before ever they parted from it; that being the most certain, constant and first distinction, as may be gathered from the ancient Swedish Laws, which in the very beginning, says the same Loccenius, testify the same thing.] Those that went into Spain are said to have driven out the Inhabitants, planted themselves in their room, about the year 369 or 407, and retain'd that Kingdom till an. 710: the chief families of Spain counting it an honour to have their pedigree deduced from the anci∣ent Goths. By those that went towards Italy un∣der the conduct of Alaricus or Allreich, (who Anno Christi 409, sack'd Rome it self) and the Go∣vernment of it retain'd by Theodoricus Veronensis (Dietrick vonberne) who died An. 526, and after the Government was for seventy years by them maintain'd, they were quite overcome and ut∣terly expell'd that Country by Narses; of which see the Catalogue of their Kings. They that travell'd as far as Thracia and Maesia and the parts of Macedonia, were by Claudius the Roman General almost all overcome in Battle, he at one time killing 320000 of them, as he himself in a Letter to the Senate declares; for which sig∣nal victory a golden Statue was erected for him in the Capitol. At several other times and in se∣veral other places, they made head against the Roman Empire, as in the time of Constantine, and Theodosius who overcame 20000 of them, which to mention in this place is not so pertinent, as in that where the Seat of the war was; where∣fore at present we shall relate no more of those famous exploits which were performed by the Goths after their departure out of Scandia: but leave them to be taken notice of in other more convenient places. Besides this emigration, which is said to have been under the conduct of Berico or Berig, Au∣thors make mention of another egression of the Gothish or Getish people, as should seem much ancienter; in the reign of Ericus one of their first Kings, about the time of Sarug or Saruch great Grandfather to Abraham; when, as was said, were peopled Denmark, Jutland, Fionia, and the neighbouring Islands then called Wetala∣heedha, i.e. marshy and waterish places. This opinion, tho as to the time of the transmigra∣tion it may seem somewhat improbable (the earth then not being so well stored with inhabitants, especially in Suecia and Gothia, places so far re∣moved from the Mount Ararat, which is gene∣rally supposed to be Caucasus, (upon which, as many Authors are of opinion, Noah's Ark rested) as to be forced by reason of the multitude of them, to send out Colonies into other Countries), yet as to the evincing an emi∣gration into these western and southern parts very anciently to have been, it is by Jornandes, Crantzi∣us, and all Swedish writers unanimously approv'd; to whom we refer the Reader for further satis∣faction in so difficult and obscure a controversie. This people, tho at present united under the same Government and Laws with the Swedes,The  and com∣monly passing under the same name with them, was anciently different from them as well in their manners as their policy; whereupon it may not be amiss to set down in this place, what occurs amongst Authors as proper to this Nation in re∣lation to their manners and customs, which may probably seem to have been the same, not only in Scandia, but also in all the other parts of Europe and Asia, which they subdued, and whither they extended their dominion: they always ruling by their own Laws and Constitu∣tions, which they suffer'd not to be translated into any other language, but always published in their own; not only making those they over∣came, their subjects, but, by instilling their cu∣stoms and manners into them, as much as possi∣ble, the same Nation. [This piece of policy was practised by William the Conquerer here in Eng∣land, who caused all our Laws to be turned in∣to the French language, that thereby this Nation
might in time forget its own tongue, and be better disposed to endure his yoke]. That the Goths were always a warlike people, their se∣veral swarmings into other neighbouring Coun∣tries, and the great victories they obtain'd over them, do fully manifest. Mela does not only com∣mend them for their courage, but their honesty and plain-dealing, who says, Of all the Thraci∣ans [it seems they had in his time advanc'd into, and been considerable in, the more Southern parts of the world] the Goths or Getes are the most va∣liant, and the most just. And this their courage in war was from the belief they had of the im∣mortality of their souls (a doctrine they receiv'd from Zamolxes their great King and Prophet); according to Lucan lib. 2. De bello Pharsal. where speaking of the Goths, he says: —certe populi, quos despicit Arctos Faelices errore suo, quos ille timorum Maximus haud urget Lethi metus: inde ruendi In ferrum mens prona viris, animaeque capaces Mortis, & ignavum rediturae parcere vitae. Their education and usage whilst young, was such as best fitted them for warlike enterprizes and cou∣ragious exploits; for their children as soon as born were dipp'd over head and ears first in cold, then in hot, water; and as the Spartan children used to be whipp'd at the Altars of their Gods, these were constantly lash'd with scourges till the blood gush∣ed out, thereby to inure them to hardship; nor, when they were grown up, were their exercises or employments any other, then such as agreed best with men of a military constitution. They practis'd Tilts and Turnaments, as did also the Swedes, ri∣ding the great Horse, vaulting, &c. and for recrea∣tion, Chess-play. As any one exceeded another in rank and quality, so more, and more noble, per∣formances were expected from them; their Kings sons being never admitted to sit at table with, or scarce come into the presence of, their fathers, be∣fore they had received some signal testimony of their courage from the very chief of their enemies; as is reported of the Longabards (a people, says Wolf. Lazius, anciently inhabiting Scandia), who under the conduct of Alvinus, son to their King Odvinus, obtaining a great victory over the Ge∣pidae, requested that their General who with his own hand had slain the King of the Gepidae's son, might be admitted to sit with him at the publick or triumphal Banquet: but the King refused their address, and told them, that it was against the custom of theirs, and the Gothick Nation in ge∣neral, that their Kings son should be permitted to eat with his father, before he had commendations of his valour from another Prince. This the son hearing took with him forty soldiers, went to Juris∣mundus's Camp (so was the King of the Gepi∣dae named) and telling him he was the man who slew his son in battel, desired of him a testi∣monial of his courage; the King admiring his boldness, courteously received him, placed him by him in his dead sons room, and giving him the armour which he used to bear, peaceably dismissed him. Lovers they were, tho no great practisers, of Learning; and (according to the character Jo∣hannes Magnus gives of them) easier drawn by perswasion then command; as always hating and thinking it unworthy themselves to be inferior to any in knowledg or courage. Towards their friends courteous; towards their enemies, if obstinate, cruel and revengeful; if submissive, none more merciful and kind, and no Nation rea∣dier then the Goths to accept a parley, or any o∣verture of peace. Their wives (of which they, as also the Scythi∣ans, were allow'd plurality) were not less valorous, considering their sex, then their husbands; they ac∣company'd them in all dangers, and frequently, taking up arms, made a great and considerable part of their army: as they are said to have done in Thra∣cia and Maesia when they were set upon by Clau∣dius the Roman Commander. [Yet did not the women always, and upon every Colony and De∣tachment of Goths sent out of Scandia (several of which are mentioned by Wolf. Lazius) follow their husbands: for the Laws commanding the men to return into their own Country, or to forfeit their Estates, (every one that presum'd to be ab∣sent after such a time, being thereby adjudged dead in Law, and his next heir to enter upon his inheritance) were chiefly procured by the wo∣men, whom the Goths at their departure had left in Suecia and Gothia]. The Virgins were taken in marriage without any other dowry then their own perfections, to commend them to their hus∣bands choice, never having any portions given them. Adultery amongst them was punished by death; with many such-like customs, which may be gather'd out of their Laws publish'd by Isidore Bishop of Sevil in Spain. Their manner of Government was the best,Their Govern∣ment. and (according to Aristotle's opinion) the most natural of any, the Monarchical; their King (when distinct from the Swedish) not be∣ing bound in any Covenant with his people, nor holding his Estate at the Will of the Subject; whereupon perhaps their Kingdom was more con∣siderable in it self, and more terrible to its enemies; as being more expeditious in its determinations, and united in its designs, then a Democratical State is frequently found to be. Their Kings did not only bear rule over the Goths their own Na∣tion; but after their uniting with the Swedes, some∣times commanded that people also: tho at present the King of Sweden is, and for many years has been, absolute Monarch over both Kingdoms. A Catalogue of their Kings is given by Jo. Magnus, Grotius upon Procopius, Crantzius, Loccenius,Their Kings, Swedish and Go∣thish. Wolf. Lazius and other Authors, whom we shall follow; setting down what we find most remark∣able, and agreed upon, concerning them. They are commonly divided into foreign and domestic, or in∣ternal and external, Kings; who exercised their au∣thority sometimes in Gothland and Swedland, sometimes in Scythia, Italy, Spain, and other pla∣ces which they subdued. [Wolfgang. Lazius is of o∣pinion, that those Kings which were made in Forreign Countries, as not only in Thracia, Maesia, &c. but even in Scythia before the time of the Trojan war, did not only rule over their own par∣ticular Colonies, but had the whole Kingdom of Swedland subject to them: which seems to be contrary to what we have alledged out of Locc. and other approv'd Authors; for if the Swedes were subject to them in Thracia &c. upon what authority did they publish Laws for the recalling them thence? and if those were Lords and Ma∣sters of Sweden, upon what account could they be justly disinherited for not returning thither? and it is further said, that when Theodoricus was King of the Goths in Italy, one Radolphus King of Swed∣land with many of his Subjects went to visit him: which shews that even then, when the Gothish Nation was most potent abroad, the Swedes had a distinct King of their own and exempt from their Jurisdiction.] Johannes Magnus by what authority I know not (Loccenius himself in a matter so obscure not venturing to be positive) deduces the Original both of this Nation and Monarchy of the Swedes from 1. Magog, Grand-child to Noah by Japhet, whom he makes to be their first King and Founder. 2. After him is said to have succeeded Swenno his
eldest son, who (as the same Author says) first of all gave name to the Swedes or Swenons. 3. Gether or Gogus who founded the Getish or (as afterward named) the Gothish Nation. 4. Ʋbbo brother to Swenno Anno a Dil. 246, who is said to have built Ʋpsal. 5. Siggo, who, to defend his Territories against the Finlanders, built the City Sigtuna near the Lake Meller. 6. Ericus, Anno a Dil. 357, he so prudently mana∣ged, and so far extended, his Kingdom, that by many Historians (amongst which Locce∣nius is one) he is reckoned as the first King of the Swedes and Goths: how descended, is some∣what uncertain; but by some said to have been a poor mans son, and advanced to the Throne by the voices of the people. In his Reign se∣veral men (vagabonds), such as would not conform to his Laws and Government, were sent out into Schonen and the Cimbrick Islands. He lived to a great age and died peaceably. Af∣ter the death of Ericus, (An. Mundi 2014, ac∣cording to the Swedish Chronicles), the state of this Kingdom was much disturb'd by civil commotions, and the succession in the Throne for some time interrupted. The next names are 7. Ʋddo. 8. Alo. 9. Othenus. 10. Charles I. 11. Biorno and Getharus. All which ruled both in Gothia and (their own Country) Suecia. 12. Gylfo, who is said to be descended from one Ferinoto King of Finland. 13. After Gulfo the Kingdom is said to have been govern'd by Judges for sometime, till Othinus or Odinus, who came out of Asia into the Nor∣thern parts, and settling at Ʋpsal, by his Ma∣gick and Sorceries gain'd so much favour a∣mongst the people, that they elected him King, and after he was dead esteem'd him as one of their principal Gods. He was, as I may say, the Numa Pompilius of the Swedes, being the first that established any set worship, and sa∣cred solemnities amongst them; that gave Laws and ordain'd Officers, both to execute justice in his Kingdom, and take care of all Religious matters; the chief of which were twelve, of a Senatorian order, call'd Driar or Drotnar; (whence Drotset, the name now in use to de∣note their Viceroy, seems to come). This he did, as he pretended, by the advice, or at the command, of the Gods, with whom he kept great familiarity and correspondence. 14. Niordus or Nearchus, a famous Magician. 15. Freius, Froerus or Frotho, surnam'd the Pea∣ceable, the first that took upon him the name of Drott or King. He is said to have given the patrimony of Ʋpsal, call'd Ʋpsala Oedom, which belongs to the Crown, and which the King takes an oath not to alienate or embezle. 16. Odder, and Freia or Frigga his wife, who with her husband rul'd peaceably, and was reputed a Goddess after her death. 17. Fiolmus, a sottish and negligent Prince, who neither regarded his own, nor the peoples, welfare. Being invited to banquet by Fretho King of Denmark, and made drunk with strong Liquors, he was accidently drown'd in a Vessel of Mead. 18. Sueigder, of whom the Norwegian Chronicles mention many fabulous Stories and Diaboli∣cal Enchantments. 19. Walander or Wanlander, who made an inrode into Schonen and Hallandia, and conquer'd them, or rather regain'd them out of the hands of one Ostarus, who had possess'd him∣self of those parts. In his time the Russes are said to have imploy'd one Retho, a famous Pi∣rate, to infest the Swedes, who lay upon their coasts and did very much injury to them; (hence Retheran signifies in the Swedish Lan∣guage, to commit rapine). Against this Pirat the King levied all the forces he could, but withal distrusting their power, desired assistance of the Devil, promising him his body and soul, upon condition he might obtain a victory o∣ver him: which he is said to have done, and the Devil shortly after, according to com∣pact, to have come and fetch'd away his bargain. 20. Wisbur. 21. Domalder, who with many of his Nobles, was sacrific'd to their God Odinus or Woden. 22. Domarus. 23. Vignerus, in the Norwegian Chronicles call'd Dygue, the first that took upon him the name Konung or King. 24. Ingemarus or Agnus, as some report, mur∣ther'd by his wife. 25. Humelus or Humblus, whose eldest son Dan was the first King of the Danes, and gve name to that Nation. 26. Sigtrugus, who defeated Gramus King of Den∣mark in battel. 27. Suibdagerus, first of all King of Norway, next of Denmark, and afterwards of Sweden: the first Forrainer after Odinus that obtain'd the Swedish Kingdom. 28. Asmundus. 29. Ʋffo. Both which waged a long and bloody war with Hadingus King of Denmark. 30. Hunningus or Hundingus who concluded a peace with Hadingus; and lov'd him so entire∣ly, that hearing a (false) report of his death, he made a funeral Banquet (as was the cu∣stom) in honour and remembrance of him; invited his Nobles to it; and, as not willing to survive his friend, before them all drown'd himself in a Vessel of Metheglin; which Ha∣dingus hearing, and being resolv'd that affecti∣on should not seem cold on his part, for very grief hang'd himself. 31. Regnerus, a good and peaceable King. 32. Hothebrodus, who took up arms against Hel∣go King of Denmark, because he, in disgrace of the Swedish Nation, had made a law a∣mongst his subjects, that if any of them kill'd or injur'd a Swede, he should pay only half the mulct, which was to be pay'd, if he had done the like to any other person whatso∣ever. 33. Atislus, a warlike and magnificent King. 34. Hotherus, who waged war with the Danes and Russes, and died of a wound he received in battel. 35. Rodericus, King of Denmark and Swedland at the same time; but either leaving or loosing the former, he retir'd into the latter, and there ended his days. 36. Attilus, who kill'd Wermundus King of Den∣mark in single Duel, and was himself after∣wards slain by Wermundus's two sons. After this Kings time, the succession for about 600 years was much interrupted; who enjoy'd the Kingdom is uncertain: Botvildus, Charles II, Ericus II, and six more are mention'd, but lit∣tle more known of them, then their names. He whom Historians first pitch upon to have certainly succeeded was 46. Alricus, who challenging Gestiblindus King of the Goths to Duel, thereby lost both his life and Kingdom. 47. Ericus III, surnamed the Wise, and by some
the Eloquent; a happy and peaceable Prince. He reign'd according to Johannes Magnus's computation about four and thirty years be∣fore our Saviours Birth. A Catalogue of the Gothish Kings, who reigned shortly after their Transmigration out of Scan∣dia, while they dwelt about the Palus Maeotis near the time of the Trojan War: collected out of Wolf. Lazius, upon whose credit you are to take them. 1. Telephus, well known for his exploits in the Trojan War. 2. Bericus or Beger. 3. Filimar. 4. Frogradus. 5. Aringis. 6. Eurypilus. 7. Tamyris. 8. Antriregus. After this succession of Kings in Scythia Europea, the Goths, either weary of that Country or dri∣ven out of it by some of their potent Neigh∣bours, are said by the same Author (though I find not his opinion seconded by any Swedish writer) to have returned into Gothia, and par∣ticularly to have pitch'd upon the Isle Gotland, as the fittest seat for their Kings; a long series of whom might seem not very necessary to be set down, being for the most part, the same with the Swedish Kings before mention'd. 48. Haldanus, in whose reign the Hunns overrun Gothia and the greatest part of the Kings do∣minions, built Hunnaberg an ancient City in Ostro-Gothia, and after some continuance in the Country were, by this King at last utterly ex∣pell'd. 49. Sivardus or Sigvardus, in whose time com∣motions arising in the Kingdom, the Goths elected a separate King of their own nam'd Carolus, whom some make to be 50. Charles III. 51. Ericus IV. slain by Haldanus King of Den∣mark. 52. Haldanus, who got the Kingdom by his va∣lour. Of this King are reported several pro∣digious Stories, as of his Gigantick stature, his pulling up Trees by the roots, and such like, not inferiour to those, which Poets re∣late of Hercules and the Giants. 53. Ʋngvinus, who to his own Kingdom united Gothia, for a long time govern'd by distinct Kings. 54. Ragvaldus or Regnaldus. 55. Amundus. 56. Haquinus, in whose reign the Goths elected one Sivardo King of Gothia. 57. Ostenus I. who entertain'd an implacable ha∣tred against the Norwegians: sent a great Ar∣my against them, subdued their Country, made the Inhabitants Tributary to the Swedish Crown, and as an opprobrium to the Nation, set a Dog to be chief Governour over them, to which they were to pay all subjection and swear allegiance, under the penalty of losing one hand and one foot; this is mention'd both in the Swedish and Norwegian Chronicles. 58. Alverus or Alaricus, elected, says Krantzius out of the Nobles; and in the midst of his happy Reign, stabb'd by his Brother Ericus, who was impatient to obtain the Crown, which he thought he might procure after his death; but vainly, for the Government was conferr'd on 59. Ingo I. eldest son to Alverus. He was the first that order'd the election of Kings to be held at Moresten near Ʋpsal, (of the manner of which, see what was said in Suecia.) About this time the Kingdom was governed by Jud∣ges: the next King is 60. Ingellus I. kill'd by his Brother. 61. Germunder, in a war against Denmark taken Prisoner and hung up upon a Gibbet. 62. Haquinus. 63. Egellus, after whose time succeeded several Kings: Johannes Magnus reckons twenty, con∣cerning whom nothing very remarkable is set down by Historians. The next great Epocha is counted from the reign of 84. Bero or Biorno III. the first Christian King in Sweden, converted to Christianity by one Herebretus, at his request sent to him by Charles the Great, Emperor of Germany. 85. Brautamundus or Amundus, in some civil commotions in his Kingdom, kill'd by his bro∣ther, and Successor 86. Sivardus II. who in his expeditions against Norway, was, with the greatest part of his Ar∣my, overcome in battel, the enemies Forces mostly consisting of Women. 87. Herotus or Haraldus, 'twixt whom and the King of Denmark a war broke out concerning the Province of Schonen; which this King at last freely granted to the King of Denmark as a reward of his signal prudence and valour. 89. Charles VI. 90. Biorno IV. 91. Ingellus II. in whose time Helsingia, and se∣veral other Provinces in Suecia, had their di∣stinct Governours: these he under colour of friendship, invited to a Banquet, and when he had made them drunk with strong Liquors, he caus'd a fire to be set on the place where they were, and so destroy'd them all, and seiz'd on their possessions. To revenge this cruelty Gramus Duke of Sudermannia, and Hau∣no Duke of Ostro-Gothia rais'd Forces, and came against him, but with no good success at last, for under pretence of a Parley they were taken Prisoners, and at Ingellus's com∣mand burnt to death. 92. Olaus (from his commanding many thick woods to be cut down) surnam'd Tratelia or Tree-Feller. He is said by some, to have em∣brac'd Christianity, at the perswasion of Ans∣garius a Learned Bishop sent into Sweden by Lewis II. Emperor of Germany. But though he himself (perhaps) did favour Christian Re∣ligion, it got small footing amongst his Sub∣jects; for Paganism is said for a long time to have prevail'd in the Reigns of the succeed∣ing Princes. 93. Ingo II. 94. Ericus VI. surnam'd Windy-Cap; who is said to have had a Cap, by holding up of which he could cause the wind to blow from what Point he pleas'd; for which and such like ma∣gical exploits, he, by the consent of the peo∣ple, was elected King. 95. Ericus VII. surnam'd Victorious. 96. Ericus VIII. surnam'd Aarsel, i.e. Rich in Corn. He is said to have countenanc'd Christianity, which had been from the time of Bero 'till his reign, very much suppress'd; and endea∣vouring by Law to establish it in his Kingdom, to have been by the fury of his Subjects torn in pieces, and martyr'd for his good intentions toward them. 97. Olaus surnam'd Scotkonung, i.e. Infant-King: because advanc'd to the Crown when young. He embrac'd Christianity and sent to Ethelred King of England to furnish him with able Ministers to teach him and his Subjects in that Religion. Ethelred ac∣cordingly
order'd Sigfridus Arch-bishop of York, and with him two Priests Eschillas and Davi∣dus, to go into Sweden; where the King kindly receiv'd them, was by them baptiz'd, and at their intreaty built Christian Churches in most Provinces of his Dominions, and as some say, by reason of his great constancy and zeal in his Religion, had the name of Christianissimus given him. He among several good Laws and Constitutions, order'd that the chief power of e∣lecting the Kings of Sweden, should not belong to the Goths in any case, but principally to the Swedes: and that they (before call'd Kings of Ʋpsal) should be thenceforth stil'd Kings of Swedland and Gothland. This King suppress'd Duelling and the Runick Characters, introduc'd the trial by Fire Ordeal, and dyed in a happy old age. 98. Anundus, nick-named Carbonarius, because he order'd that whosoever offended against the Laws which he had promulgated, should in proportion to the crime, either have all his house, or part of it burnt down. He was educated in the Christian Religion by the care of his father Olaus, which in his reign he defended, and dyed peaceably. 99. Enundus, base-son to Olaus, and brother to Anundus, surnam'd Gammel, i. e. base, from his contempt of Religion; or, as some are of opinion, because he yeilded up to the Crown of Denmark, Schonen, Blekingia, and Hallandia, which belong'd to him, as being part of the Kingdom of Gothia. 100. Haquinus III. surnam'd Rufus. 101. Stenchillus II. bred up in the Christian Re∣ligion, which he very much encouraged a∣mongst his subjects; making his Palace a san∣ctuary for any that were persecuted in any parts of his dominions for that profession. 102. Ingo III. Not descended from the Blood-Royal, but, for his singular virtues elected King by the voices of the people. He is said to have been so exact an observer of his own Laws, that he never offended against any of them. 103. Halstanus, a just and peaceable Prince. 104. Philippus. 105. Ingo IV. in his progress through his domi∣nions, by some of his Courtiers, poison'd at a small Village in Ostro-Gothia. 106. Ragvaldus, surnam'd Knaphofde, i. e. cock∣brain'd; elected by the Swedes without the consent of the Goths, which they not endu∣ring, (as thinking it a breach of their priviledges,) rebell'd against him, and in battel slew him. For one to succeed him both Nations pitch'd upon 107. Suercherus II, who as he was going to Church on Christmas day, was, by a Ruffian (employ'd by one Scatelerus, who hop'd to ob∣tain the Crown after his death) miserably assas∣sinated. Gothick Kings out of their own Country, who reign'd over the Goths while they inhabited a∣bout the River Vistula or Weissel, and also in Dacia and Thracia: near that time when, accord∣ing to some Authors, they divided themselves into Ostro- and Westro-Goths. 1. Anthinus. 2. Antheas. 3. Gothilas, a Famous Queen, whose Daughter Medumpa was married to Philip King of Ma∣cedonia. 4. Sitalcus elected King An. ante Christum 300. He, with an army of 150000 men lay'd wast all the Country of Greece. 5. Dromgethes. 6. Tanobonta. 7. Boroista, cotemporary with Sylla the Roman-Dictator, who lived An. ante nat. Christ. 76. 8. Commositus, both King and Priest. 9. Corillus, under whose conduct the Goths (says Lazius) first of all invaded Dacia. 10. Dorpaneus, co-temporary with Domitian the Roman Emperor, An. Christ. 83. 11. Decebalus. 12. Ostrogotha. 13. Cinna or Omba. 14. Cannabas or Canabandes. 15. Hildericus, surnam'd Ovida, who liv'd in the time of Constantine the Great. 16. Gebeticus. 17. Armanaricus who was, (says Damasc. suppl. Eutrop.) overcome by the Hunns, and made Tributary to them. 18. Vinnitarius. 19. Hunimundus. 20. Totismundus. 21. Alaricus and Fridigernus, who, as Lazius men∣tions, reign'd at the same time in Thracia; they defeated the Roman Forces sent against them, commanded by Valens the Emperor, whom they put to flight, and apprehending him in a small Cottage, whither he had fled to hide himself, burnt him to death. 23. Theomarus, who conquer'd Maesia. 24. Radagaisus, who to Maesia added a great part of Pannonia, An. Christ. 390. 25. Alvaricus, a Potent King. 26. Alaricus II. who subdued all Illyricum, and extended his Arms as far as Italy (Arcadius and Honorius sons to Theodosius the Emperor, either for some private ends, wishing the success, or not being able to withstand the power of his Forces; and thereupon not timely preventing his designs) he sack'd Rome, subdued Naples and overran the greatest part of that Coun∣try. But at last the Goths were by Stilico Ge∣neral of the Roman Army, driven out of Italy; and after their departure thence, they are said to have sate down in France, The Ostro-Gothish Kings who ruled in Italy accor∣ding to Wolf. Lazius. 1. Alaricus. I. 2. Theodericus, whom Leo, or (as Scalig.) Zeno the Emperor made his adopted son; he ex∣pell'd the Heruli out of Italy, and wholly sub∣jected it to the power of the Goths, he had one daughter nam'd Amalasuentha. 3. Theodatus, or (as Jornandes has it) Euthari∣cus, call'd out of France by the Italick Goths to be their King, 4. Alaricus II, though he was the first of that name who setled in Italy. 5. Alaricus III. 6. Athalaricus, who had one only Daughter, whom he married to Vittigis, who maintain'd a war against Justinian the Emperor for about fourteen years; and defended himself brave∣ly against the Roman Power. 7. Illovadus, he was kill'd in battel by Narses the Roman General. 8. Alaricus IV. who reigned only five months. 9. Totylas, or Odilo. 10. Teias, the last Gothish King in Italy, who him∣self was kill'd by the Romans, and his people almost all rooted out and destroyed by them; some few only remaining, who mixing and in∣corporating with the Italians, at present pass for the same Nation with them. Westro- or Wiso-Gothick Kings, who reign'd in Gal∣lia
Lugdunensis and Aquitanica. 1. Alaricus I. who (as was said) conducted the Gothick people into those parts. An. Salut. 411. 2. Austulphus, son to Alaricus. 3. Theodericus, kill'd by Attyla King of the Hunns. 4. Turismundus, son to Theodericus, who, to re∣venge his fathers death, waged war with the Hunns, and overcame them. 5. Dietmarus, in whose time a great part of the Goths, under the conduct of one Vallia, went into Spain. 6. Gundoccarus, in the time of Theodosius junior. After his reign the Goths in these parts grew inconsiderable, as intermixing themselves with other people, and not having a distinct King of their own, but being subjected to (many) other Princes. Besides these Gothish Kings which we have men∣tioned, there were many other, who ruled over the Wiso-Goths in Spain, and the adjacent parts; a Ca∣talogue of whom we leave to be set down in Spain and Arragon, and the Kingdoms where they reign∣ed: for the Goths in those parts blending with the Romani, Alani, Suevi, Mauri, Saraceni, &c. did not so much continue a distinct Nation of themselves, as become a people incorporated with those of other Nations; or these with the Goths: so that they were ruled by Forreign Princes, and their manners modell'd by different Laws. The second great Epocha in the Swedish Chro∣nicles, is from the reign of 108. Ericus IX. surnam'd the Saint, a virtuous and pious Prince. He never lay'd any Taxes or Impositions upon his Subjects, but was content with the Crown-Patrimony, and when Money was offer'd him by his people, he re∣fus'd to accept it. He built the Cathedral Church at Ʋpsal, and propagated Christianity to the Finlanders. This King new modell'd all the Swedish Laws, and expung'd those that any way favour'd Paganism. He was mur∣ther'd by a Party of Rebels, and in the very place where they cut off his head, there pre∣sently issued out (says Loccen.) a spring of pure water, famous for curing diseases. 109. Charles VII. a peaceable and religious King: who founded several Monasteries, and had an Arch-bishops see granted him, in his own Dominions. 110. Canutus son to Ericus. 111. Suercherus II. 112. Ericus X, a quiet and peaceable King. 113. John I, surnam'd the Meek. He propagated the Christian Religion amongst the Leiflan∣ders. 114. Ericus XI, surnamed the Stammerer. He rooted out Paganism in Tavastia, and brought over the Inhabitants to the Christian Faith. 115. Waldemarus son to Bergerus Jerl, who upon the death of Ericus, in his Fathers absence, was clected King: which his Father being dissatis∣fied with, at his return declaring his displeasure, that an unexperienc'd youth (his Son) should be advanc'd to the Crown, and himself disre∣garded, he was thereupon desir'd to take up∣on him the management of all publick affairs. After his death, Waldemarus had absolute power in his Kingdom, and ruled by his own (un∣fortunate) commands. He was depos'd by his people, and his Crown given to 116. Magnus I, surnam'd Ladulaus, i. e. the Lock to Granaries, because he made such severe Laws against stealing Corn, and breaking up Gra∣naries, that in his reign, the people used nei∣ther Lock nor Key; his Laws being sufficien to secure them from Thieves and Robber He built many Churches and made several wholsom Laws; ordering that all Offenders, in∣stead of paying mulcts, should be obliged to assist in building some Tower or Fort. 117. Birgerus son to Magnus, in his time and by his means Carelia received the Gospel. He ma∣nag'd affairs imprudently, and thereupon was depos'd and banish'd by his Subjects, and his Kingdom conferr'd on 118. Magnus II. surnam'd Smeek, i. e. the flatter'd or cocker'd Prince. In the former part of his reign he ruled peaceably, and had the affecti∣ons of his people, but falling into sottishness, and following strange women, he lost the love of his Subjects, and was in a Senate at Stock∣holm publickly arraign'd for his misdemeanors, call'd for to answer for himself, and not appear∣ing in his own defence, by them depos'd. [Ericus XII. son to Magnus, sometime during his Fathers reign manag'd all business of State, and there∣fore he is by some reckon'd amongst the Kings of Sweden, though without good reason, for he was only an assistant to the King in Coun∣cil, not a Partner in the Government.] The fourth Swedish Epocha is reckon'd from the re∣markable alteration of affairs under 119. Albertus of Mecklebourg, elected by the Suf∣frages of the people. For some time he rul'd well, but preferring Germans to the chief pla∣ces of trust in his Kingdom, he thereupon lost the love of his Subjects, and his Crown to boot. After he was depos'd he retir'd into a Mona∣stery. The person who succeeded was 120. Margaretta Queen of Denmark and Norway. She vex'd her Subjects with intolerable Taxes, admitted Danes, English-men and Italians, into publick Offices, and was thereupon assaulted by the Nobles of the Kingdom; who had cer∣tainly slain her, had she not given them fair pro∣mises, and propos'd to them one to succeed her, viz. 121. Ericus XIII. her Nephew, son to Wartislavus Duke of Pomeren. He was King of Denmark, Norway and Sweden at the same time: He mar∣ryed Philippa Daughter to Henry IV. then King of England: for some time he reigned happily, but breaking the Laws of the Kingdom, and not observing his Coronation-Oath, he fell in∣to great troubles, and at last, after he had en∣joy'd three Crowns for five and forty years, was dethron'd by his Subjects; [this King after he was depos'd is said to have turn'd Pirat, and very much infested the Brittish Coasts,] his Kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden, were given to 122. Christophorus Duke of Bavaria. This King revis'd and corrected the municipal Laws of Sweden, and caus'd them to be promulgated; from him call'd Christopher's Laws. He dyed suddenly at Helsinburg, as he was going to con∣sult with his Nobles at Jenecopia. After this Kings death, there was an Interreg∣num for some small time, during which, all pub∣lick business was manag'd by one Benedictus Bi∣elke and Nicolaus Baner, two Principal Officers of State in the time of King Christophorus. The fifth Epocha is reckon'd from the ending of the Interregnum, which was, when the Govern∣ment was undertaken by 123. Carolus VIII, Canuti, Marshal of the King∣dom, who was descended from the Stock of the ancient Gothish Kings. As soon as he was setled in the Throne, he pretended Title to Gotlandia which the Danes then possess'd; and thereupon made war with Christianus I, King of Denmark; but
with small success. He lay'd upon his Subjects heavy and grievous Taxes, and attempting to take away Church Lands and pious Dona∣tions, lost the favour of his Subjects, and was by them expell'd, or rather by the Danish for∣ces driven out of his Dominions. His friend whom he in his Banishment trusted himself with, was Casimirus King of Poland, who en∣tertain'd him nobly for seven years, during which time Sweden was govern'd by. 124. Christiernus I. King of Denmark, call'd hither by the prevailing Faction; but seizing the pub∣lick Treasure of the Kingdom, and committing many cruelties, he was shortly after deposed from being King; and 125. Carolus Canuti, recall'd from Dantzick, and restor'd to the Throne; but being troubled with civil Commotions at home, chiefly manag'd by the Arch-bishop of Ʋpsal; and endanger'd by the Danish Forces from abroad, commanded by the depos'd King Christiernus I. he voluntarily left the Government of the Kingdom, and ap∣pointed for his Successor his Nephew 126. Steno Sture Senior, who was receiv'd by the Senate at Stockholm, rather as a Protector, then an absolute Governour of the King∣dom; he manag'd all publick affairs very happily, and with great satisfaction to the people for a long time, till in the year 1491; at which time he was accus'd by the Senate, for acting in several matters without their know∣ledg and advice, for making a League with the Inhabitants of Riga against the Teutonick Or∣der, (of which the Russes taking advantage, had made some inrodes into Livonia and Finland,) and such-like Crimes; and thereupon by them turn'd out of all office: the Kingdom was con∣ferr'd on 127. John II. son to Christiern I. King of Den∣mark. He took Steno Sture into favour, and going (as was then the custom) to visit his do∣minions, left him Vice-roy at Stockholm, to ma∣nage all the affairs of state during his absence. Steno, got into the Office, endeavours nothing more then to lessen his Masters, and to advance his own credit and interest with the people; and thereupon calumniates him as a publick Enemy to the Nation, seizes upon those Castles and Forts which the King had Officer'd with Danes, besieges Stockholm, gains the City pre∣sently, the Castle (in which the Queen had se∣cur'd her self) after two years siege, and not long after, the command of the whole King∣dom. Upon these disorders in Sweden, the King shelters himself in Denmark, thence sends a Messenger to Steno Sture, desiring him to send his Queen Christina to him, whom he courteously attending to the Borders of Den∣mark, dyed suddenly at Jenecopia a City in Sma∣landia, being (as was suppos'd) poison'd by some of the Queens friends. The Kingdom was dispos'd of by the Nobles, and given to, or rather (as Johannes Magnus relates,) forcibly obtain'd by, 128. Suanto Sture son to one Nicolaus Grand Mar∣shal of Sweden. He was Administrator or Pro∣tector of the Kingdom, not absolute King. He took Colmar then possess'd by the Danes, and maintain'd a bloody war against John II. of Denmark, the exil'd King of Sweden. A Treaty of peace being agreed on to be held at Colmar, he refus'd to be present, and was thereupon by Maximilian the Emperor of Ger∣many and John of Denmark declared an Enemy to the publick, and a disturber of the peace, and as such he and all his accomplices, were by all good men to be deem'd, and their possessions to be confiscated. Suanto not valuing all their protestations against him, declares against their proceedings, and striking a League with the Lu∣bechers (which they afterwards broke) puts him∣self in a posture of defence: in the prosecution of the war he dyed at Arhusia, after he had govern'd very happily for eight years: the next who succeeded him was his son 129. Steno Sture Junior, Protector of the King∣dom: Upon some grievous quarrels and ani∣mosities breaking out 'twixt this King and Gustavus Trolle (who afterwards enjoy'd the Crown), the Kingdom was miserably shatter'd and opportunity given to Christiern II. son to John II. King of Denmark, to make an Inva∣sion into it. Steno to defend himself, raises an Army, goes against him, and near the Lake Wener, loses his life in battel. The Kingdom was by the Nobles under certain conditions, as of having their Laws and Religion pro∣tected, &c. given to 130. Christiern II. King of Denmark, who having obtain'd the Diadem, meditated nothing more, then revenge and cruelty, and committed so many Massacres and Acts of hostility upon his Subjects, that he may seem not much in∣feriour in tyranny to Nero himself. He under pretence of friendship, and deciding the trou∣bles of the Kingdom, invited all his Nobles to a royal banquet, and after having treated them splendidly for two whole days, at last (pretending the disturb'd state of the King∣dom, requir'd that they should be taken out of the way, and that the Popes Bull (which he caus'd publickly to be read before them) gave him authority to do it, murther'd them: cast∣ing their dead bodies out into the streets, where they lay for three days, to be torn by Dogs, and trod upon by the Souldiers. The body of Steno Sture, which had layn some time in the ground, he caus'd to be dug up and given to the Dogs to devour; with such∣like unheard of Cruelties, which made him hated amongst his Swedish Subjects, and not secure while he liv'd among them. Here∣upon he retir'd, or rather fled into Denmark, and the whole management of Swedish affairs was undertaken by 131. Gustavus I. Nephew to Steno Sture by his brother Ericus, whom Christiern had put to death. He when young was taken by Christiern, and carried prisoner into Denmark, whence miraculously escaping, he came into Sweden, put himself in the head of the dissenting party, manag'd several engagements against the Ty∣rant very successfully, and was at last, seemingly much against his will, crown'd King. This King was the first who made the Kingdom of Sweden Hereditary; the Nobles and Commons in con∣sideration of the great service he had done the Nation, freely giving up their ancient right of electing, and establishing the Crown upon him and his heirs for ever. He was the first that encourag'd and propagated the Lutheran Con∣fession in Sweden, and made a League with the Reform'd Princes of Germany, to defend it a∣gainst all Opposers. He protested against Christi∣anus III. King of Denmark, who alledg'd some pretentions to the Arms (three Crowns Or) of Sweden: made a peace with the Russes, and af∣ter he had reign'd happily for nine and thirty years, dyed in a quiet and peaceable old-age: his Diadem (according to the right of inhe∣ritance) was conferr'd on the head of 132. Ericus XIV. his Eldest son. As, soon as or before, he was well settled in the Throne, the first thing he propos'd to the Senate, was to
consult about a marriage with Elizabeth Queen of England. He concluded a peace with the Danes, which they not observing on their part, he made war against them, invaded Norway, and committing some cruelties upon the Nor∣wegian Noblemen, thereupon quite lost the favour of his own Subjects, and was by them under the command of his rebellious Bro∣thers (notwithstanding their oath of Alle∣giance) treacherously betrayed, thrust from his Throne, and shut up in Prison; where, after nine years confinement, he died miserably. Du∣ring his imprisonment, when he perceiv'd what way affairs would go, and to whom the King∣dom after his death (according to justice) be transferr'd, he is said to have writ under his Escutcheon these words; Translatum est regnum & factum est fratris mei; a Domino constitutum est ei: which so happen'd, for the Diadem (in right) descended upon 133. John III. brother to Ericus. He, as soon as invested with his Royal Robes, endea∣vours to lay a Foundation for a quiet reign: and thereupon concludes a peace with the Mus∣covite, the Pole, and the Dane, his three potent Neighbours. This King is said to have endea∣vour'd to introduce the Religion of the church of Rome into his Dominions, and labour'd to perswade his Brother Charles to embrace that Profession; but with small success. In the lat∣ter part of his Reign he was victorious in war, and saw his son Sigismund crown'd King of Po∣land. He died, not without suspicion of being poison'd. After his death, his Brother Charles Duke of Sudermannia for some time manag'd all publick affairs, 'till his Nephew, to whom ac∣cording to the right of succession the Crown did belong, could conveniently come out of Poland, to receive it. 134. Sigismund son to John III. He was educated in the Religion of the church of Rome. Hereupon the States of Sweden fearing lest he, being admitted King, might reestablish Popery amongst them; before his Coronation, propos'd to him an Oath, not to alter any thing in their Religion reform'd according to Luther, but to allow his Subjects the free exercise of that profession. This Oath he endeavour'd at first to evade, but (being ad∣vised by the Popes Legat and some Jesuits, that an Oath taken by him with Heretics was not obligatory; or if he scrupled that, that a Dis∣pensation for the breach of it was easily at∣tainable from the Pope) at last solemnly took it, and promising the States faithfully to ob∣serve all the conditions of it, he left Sweden, and return'd into Poland. During his absence, all affairs of the Kingdom were managed by Duke Charles his Uncle; who for some small time executed the Office of Vice-Roy very quietly, and to the great satisfaction of the Kings subjects; but some differences arising about Religion (the Papists, Jesuits especi∣ally, to whom free exercise of their Worship had been granted, growing powerful, and thereupon behaving themselves insolently to∣wards the Lutherans) the businesses of State became troubled, and the determination of controversies, and removal of jealousies out of the peoples hearts, a very difficult matter. Hereupon Sigismund is sent for out of Poland; but both delaying to come into Sweden, and to send Orders to his Uncle,An. Ch. that Popish De∣linquents (as they were represented to him) should, according to Law, be proceeded a∣gainst as enemies to the State, and that other (such-like) grievances should be redress'd; he so lost his interest with his Swedish Sub∣jects, that when (at last) he came amongst them, they opposed him as a public enemy; made war against him, and overcame him in Battel. After he was defeated, he return'd to Poland, and his Crown of Sweden was by the States set upon the head of his Uncle 135. Charles IX. Duke of Sudermannia, and brother to John III. He maintain'd the Augustan Confession during his whole Reign; carryed on a bloody war against his Nephew Sigismund, and Christia∣nus IV. King of Denmark (whom he challeng'd to a Duel): and after he had reigned eleven years, dyed at Nycopia, in his return from op∣posing the Danes. The Government after his death, according to the right of Inheritance descended upon his eldest son 136. Gustavus Adolphus II. surnamed the Great. This King, in the beginning of his Reign, pro∣secuted the war with Denmark, which his fa∣ther was engaged in at his death: but, intend∣ing to turn the whole forces of his Kingdom against his Cousin Sigismund K. of Poland, he, within a short time, concluded a peace both with the Dane and Muscovite; this done, he invaded Livonia, took several places of great importance in that, and other Provinces, which belong'd to the Pole; and at last, making a Truce with his Cousin for six years, he return'd into Sweden. During the war with Poland, Fer∣dinand II. Emperor of Germany, had done him (as he alledged) very many injuries; (as, his sending assistance to the Pole into Borussia un∣der the command of Arnhemius: his not ad∣mitting the Swedish Delegates to a Treaty of Peace at Lubeck, but charging them to de∣part the Empire, &c.) whereupon he invaded the Imperial dominions, took several strong Cities, and, after he had over-run a great part of the Empire, was kill'd in battel near Leip∣sick. He was succeeded by 137. Christina his only daughter, who being then but seven years old, the affairs of the Kingdom were order'd by her Guardians, till she came to the eighteenth year of her age; at which time she took the Government upon her self, made a Peace with the Emperor, and the King of Denmark; and at last, either weary of ruling so potent a Kingdom, or thinking the care of it too great a burthen for her to undergo, voluntarily laid down the Crown, and com∣mended it to 138. Charles Gustavus X. A Noble and Victo∣rious Prince. He maintain'd war against the Pole, the Muscovite, and the Dane. As he was returning from Gottenburg upon the confines of Denmark, to Stockholm, he dyed of a Fea∣ver; and his Kingdom, according to right of succession, descended upon 139. Charles XI. his son, then four years of age. During his Minority, the Kingdom was go∣vern'd by his Guardians; but coming to full age, he took upon himself the management of all publick affairs; and is now reigning A. D. 1680. Aged twenty-four years. A warlike and virtuous Prince.
Of the Great PRINCIPALITY OF FINLAND. BEyond the Bothnic Bay lies the Great Principa∣lity of Finland;Finland. call'd by the Natives Somi or Soma, from the great number of Lakes that are in it (Soma signi∣fying a Lake); but by the Swedes first, and after them, by all stran∣gers, call'd Finland, q. Fine-land, from the plea∣santness of the Country; or (as others say) q. Fiende-land, i.e. the Land of Fiends or Enemies: the Finlanders using for a long time, before they were under the Swedish power, to make frequent incursions into that Kingdom, and very much injure and molest its inhabitants. It is bounded on the East, with the Sinus Fin∣nicus, and the Lake Ladoga; on the West, with the Bothnic Bay; on the North, with part of Lapland; and on the South, with part of the Finnic and Baltic Seas. It is divided into these seven Provinces:Its Pro∣vinces. 1. Sou∣thern-Finland. 2. Northern-Finland. 3. Cajania. 4. Savolaxia. 5. Tavastia. 6. Nylandia. And 7. Ca∣relia. 1.Southern Finland. Southern Finland, parted from the Nor∣thern by the River Aujaroki, which waters the Episcopal City Abo. It extends it self all along the Finnic Bay, Eastward; having on the North and North-East, the Provinces of Tavastia and Nylandia. In it are, besides several little Towns, two remarkable Forts, viz. Gusto in the Western, and Raseberg (to which belongs a Dynasty or Principality) in the Eastern, part of it. 2.Northern Finland. Northern Finland, running along the East∣side of the Bothnic Bay, towards the North. It is indifferently large in circumference, taking in both the Satagunda's, with Viemo and Masco. Wa∣ter'd it is by one only River, call'd Cumo-elff (fa∣mous for its abundance of Salmon, and other sorts of Fish) which falls into the Sea near the City Biorneborgh. Towns of note here are Raumo, Nystadh, and Nadhendal: to these Sanson adds Castelholm, in the Island Alandia. 3.Cajania. Cajania, or Ost-Bothnia, as some call it, in opposition to West-Bothnia, which lyes over a∣gainst it, on the West side of the Bothnic Bay. In it are many large Rivers, the chief of which are, Kimi-elff, (which emptieth it self into the Bothnic Bay at the most Northern Cape of it, and parts this Province from West-Bothnia.) Iio-elff, and Vla-elff. Cities here, are 1. Vlam or Vlo, 2. Vasa or Wassam Cal; to which may be added, the Forts Cajaneburg and Vlaburg. 4.Savo∣laxia. Savolaxia, which is bounded on the East, with the Lake Ladoga; on the West, with a a ridge of Mountains, which part it from Ca∣relia; on the North, with part of Muscovitic Lapland; and on the South, with Tavastia and Carelia. This Province abounds much with Lakes and Rivers, most of which disburthen themselves into the Lake Ladoga. The Rivers afford Fish (Pike especially) in great abundance; and the Lakes, besides the great quantity of Fish they breed, supply the inhabitants with Sea-Calfs, not met with in any other Scandian Lakes. Here is one remarkable Fort, call'd Nystort, or St. Olaus's Fort; built in the year 1475, by one Ericus Axelson Governor of Aboa, in the reign of Carolus Canuti VIII. 5. Tavastia, an in-land Province;Tavastia. having on the West, North Finland; on the North, Caja∣nia; on the East, Savolaxia and Carelia; and on the South, Nylandia and the Principality of Rase∣borg. In it there is one Fort, call'd the Fort of Tavastia or Tavasthus; built by Berjerus Jerl, A. D. 1250, to keep the Tavastians in awe; whom he at that time had brought over to the Swedish Government, and forc'd to profess the Christian Religion. Here is one Lake of a considerable bigness, nam'd Jende or Pejende: and towards the Northern parts of the Province, several o∣thers, call'd Kautilambi, i.e. Iron Lakes; not so large as the former, but no less remarkable, by reason of the great quantity of Iron which the inhabitants find in them, and (as is said) daily hook out for their private use. 6. Nylandia or Neuland, so call'd New-land,Nylandia. because its ancient inhabitants (the Finni and Ca∣relii) being driven out, new Colonies were sent out of Helsingia and Suecia, to go people, or ra∣ther defend, this Country. Here are two Cities, Borgo and Hesingfors. 7. Carelia,Carelia. lying upon the East-side of the great Peninsula Scandia or Scandinavia: parted from Russia by the Rivers Pinsyoki, which runs toward the North Sea; and Povevetz, which falls into the Lake Onega. [by the near approach∣ing of these two Rivers toward each other, Scan∣dia is almost made (as the Ancients suppos'd it to be) a perfect Island; the nick of land call'd Maanselke, not being above three German miles in length in that part where the Rivers come nearest together]. This Province anciently con∣tain'd all that large tract of ground which lies be∣tween the River Kymi on the North, the Lakes Pe∣jende on the West, and Onega on the East; and the Rivers, Sueci which falls into the Lake Ladoga, and Nieva which empties it self into the Finnic Bay, on the South and South-East: but at present its bounds are much narrower, taking in only the more Southern part of that large Country which formerly it did (wholly) contain. It affords good store of pasturage, and breeds Cattel, as Oxen, Horses, &c. in great abundance, whence it has its name Carelia, (Caria, in the Finlandish tongue, signifying Herds or Droves of Cattel). While the Finlanders had Kings of their own,Of  Gov∣me Calia. all Carelia belong'd to their jurisdiction; but af∣ter the Swedes on the one side, and the Musco∣vites on the other, began to infest it by frequent wars and invasions, the title to it became very disputable, and was for a long time very hotly contended for by those two potent enemies. A∣bout the year 1319, Magnus II. surnamed Smeek,
map of Finland MAGNATUS DUCATUS FINLANDIAE Nova et accurata delineatio. blazon or coat of arms Caiania blazon or coat of arms Finl: Metz. blazon or coat of arms Finland blazon or coat of arms Finl: Sept. blazon or coat of arms Savolexia blazon or coat of arms Tavastia blazon or coat of arms Nylandia blazon or coat of arms Caretia blazon or coat of arms Literis, et morum elegantiâ probatissime Juveni, Magnorum Parentum Filio, D.no JACOBO SCHÜTZ, Suece, tunc, pro tempore, vitae excolendae gratiâ per varias terras peregrinanti, tabula haec Geographica submisse offertur.
King of Sweden, and George Duke of Novogar∣dia, divided the whole Province betwixt them, setting certain bounds in Systerbeg, and other places towards the North; beyond which it was not lawful for either of them, without the others leave, at any time to pass. These limits, tho not punctually observ'd on either side, are said to have continued, as a distinction of the Swedish Territories in this Province, till the reign of Charles IX. King of Sweden A. D. 1609. in which year Ivan Vasilowitz Tzar of Muscovy, being en∣gaged in a war with Sigismund King of Poland, and in danger to lose his whole Empire; desired of the said Charles IX. that he would send some forces to his assistance, and promised him upon condition that he would aid him in that extre∣mity, to deliver up into his hands the Principa∣lity of Carelogorodia or Kexholmia, with the City and Fort, as a perpetual possession to him and his Successors. But the Tzar proved not so good as his word, for after he had freed himself from the danger he was in, he not only caused the Swe∣dish soldiers to be robb'd of all the pay he had given them, but refused to yeild up Kexholmia to the Swedes. This very much incens'd Charles IX. who upon the first advantage (the Poles rally∣ing their forces against the Muscovites, and ta∣king their Imperial City Mosco) invades that part of Carelia which the Tzar retain'd from him; takes Kexholm, and several other Forts upon the confines of Muscovy; and withall makes an in∣rode into the Province of Novogorod Weliki, i. e. Novogorod the great. During the war Charles dyes, and the prosecution of it was continued by his successor Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden. He takes from the Russes Noteburg in Ingria or Ingermannia; and had such good success in his con∣quests, that in the year 1616 he obtain'd of them very advantagious conditions of peace, viz. That (as it is in the eighth Article of the Ratification) Michael Federowitz Great Duke of Muscovy should yeild up to the Swedes Ivanogrod, Jamma, Capories, and Noteburg, formerly belonging to the Princi∣pality of Novogard; with all Cities, Towns, Pre∣fectures, &c. appertaining to, or any way depend∣ing upon them: And also (according to the ele∣venth Article of the said Ratification) should de∣liver to Gustavus Adolphus and his successors for ever, as a perpetual possession, all that part of Carelia which the Russes laid claim to; with all the Cities and Towns contained in it. (See what was said in Muscovy concerning this Province, pag. 15.). The chief Cities in Finlandish Carelia,Cities are 1. Wi∣burg, a noted Mart-Town, well fortified with Trenches, Forts, and a strong Castle, against which the Muscovites very often have made un∣successful attempts, with no less then an hundred thousand men. 2. Kexholm, or (as the Swedes call it) Kekisalmi, i.e. the Frith of Gurnardi; from keki, signifying a kind of Fish call'd a Car, or Gur∣nardi, (which abounds in the River Woxen, upon which this City stands;) and Salmi, a Frith or Bay. The Russes call it Carelogorod, i. e. the Fort of Carelia; gorod in their language denoting a Fort. In this Province the soil is exceeding rich; in those places especially which lye near the Lake Ladoga; for, fifteen or twenty miles Northward from it, the ground is so overflown with Lakes and Rivers, that it bears Corn only on the higher and more mountainous parts; whereupon the inhabitants live mostly upon hunting and fish∣ing; taking more pains for their subsistance where the earth is less bountiful. The largest and most remarkable amongst the Lakes of this Country, (and, as some are of opinion, of all Europe) is the Lake Ladoga, of which four parts in five belongs to the King of Sweden. It has its name from a kind of Fish about the bigness of a Herring, call'd in the Russian tongue Lagdog, (which is peculiar to this Lake, and with which it very much abounds.) The figure of it is oval, about an hundred leagues in length, and sixty in breadth. In it are many small Islands, and upon its banks several Towns of very good note. Near a place call'd Kidila in this Province, are dug out of the ground a sort of precious stones, which go under the name of Kexholmian Rubies; the Russes call them Kidelsco Camen. The ancient inhabitants of Finland were (says Jornandes) the most hospitable and least barba∣rous of any of the Scandians;The Inha∣bitants of Finland. but at present they are of all (the Laps only excepted) the most fierce and unciviliz'd. Their language, which they make use of,Their Lan∣guage. and which is proper to themselves, is of a harsh and uneven dialect; difficultly attainable by any stranger, as having in it some proprieties not common to any Europaean tongue; as, in the whole language they have no F, nor any word that begins with B, D, or G, or two consonants; so that they pronounce v. g. for the, he; for grant, rant; for both, poth; for good, cood, &c. Thro the whole tongue they observe no Genders, and have but one Article (se) to denote both sexes: their Prepositions they place after the words to which they belong: Their Rythms in Verse they count not from the like ending, but the like beginning, of the last words; and many such-like differences. The Government of Finland,Their Go∣vernment. was anciently administer'd by Kings of its own, who exercis'd their power without controul, and were no ways tributary to, or dependent on, a foreign jurisdiction: till about the year of Christ 1150, Ericus IX. surnamed the Saint, King of Sweden, brought the whole Country into subjection to his Laws, and (at the same time) compell'd them to embrace the Christian Religion. Af∣ter his days Tavastia was conquer'd by Berjerus Jerl; and Carelia by Turgillus Kuntesonius, who built Viburg to defend it against the Russes, A. D. 1193. At present, the whole Principality be∣longs to the King of Sweden, and is reckon'd as a very considerable part of his dominions. Of Ingria or Ingermanland. INgria, Ingermanland,Of Ingria. or (as the Muscovites call it) Isera, is a fruitful and pleasant Pro∣vince; having on the East and South, part of Muscovy; on the West, Esthonia and part of the Finnic Bay; on the North, the Lake Ladoga, and the River which joins it with the Finnic Bay. It affords beasts, both wild and tame, of seve∣ral species, in great plenty: That which abounds most, is the Aelg, Elk, or (as the Germans call it) Ellent, which (as we mentioned in Lapland) in the spring-time swims over the River Nieva in numerous herds into Carelia, and towards the end of Autumn, returns by the same way into Russia, and the more Southern parts of this Pro∣vince, and also into Esthonia, Livonia, &c. here are several Cities, of great importance and strength, which were formerly the chief secu∣rity to the Russes on this side, but now are all given up by the forementioned Treaty A. D. 1616, into the possession of the Swedes. As, 1. Notte∣burg, which the Russes call Oresia, i. e. a Nut, from its compactness and strength. It is seated in a small Island at the mouth of the River Nieva, which by reason of its breadth is a great secu∣rity to it. About the year 1614, Gustavus Adol∣phus
besieged this City, and after he had lain be∣fore it with his whole Army for a long time, and not by force able to gain it; it was at last by the Burghers voluntarily surrendred up to him: not because they wanted any provision necessary to defend the City, but because (as is reported) a strange distemper of Boils or Warts in the mouth and throat, seized the greatest part of the inha∣bitants: so that they were not able to eat any victuals, or sufficiently to secure their Bastions against so potent an enemy. 2. Ivanogorod, built upon a Rock, in a small Isthmus, at the conflu∣ence of two Rivers; it lies opposite to Narva, parted from it only by a large and rapid River, which runs from the Lake Peipus, and empties it self into the Finnic Bay. On the East-side of this City there is a small Mount, made hollow, partly by art, and partly by nature; in the side of which many of the poorer sort of people, such as ordinarily live in the suburbs of great Cities, come to inhabit. 3. Jamagorod, situated upon the River Laga. 4. Capurium or Coporio, a strong Fort, lying upon the Finnic Bay. All these Cities and Forts, by vertue of the Peace concluded 'twixt Gustavus Adolphus King of Swe∣den, and the Muscovite, an. 1616 or 1617, were deliver'd up into the hands of the Swedes, and ever since by them retain'd, (of what was given to the Tzar by that Treaty, see what was said in Muscovy, p. 23. concerning the Province of No∣vogorod, &c.) Of the new Accessions in Livonia. SOme,Livonia. tho the lesser, part of Livonia or Liefland (as is taken notice of in Poland, where a description of the whole Province may be seen) belongs at present to the Crown of Poland: all Esthonia, with the Island Oselia, and some Towns in Lettia and other parts, which lye upon the Baltic coasts, being in the possession of the Swedes; and held by them by vertue of a Ra∣tification of Peace concluded at the Monastery of Oliva near Dantzic, ann. 1660, between John Casimir King of Poland, and Charles XI. the pre∣sent King of Sweden. The Articles which chiefly relate to the Swedes, and their possessions in Lief∣land, we shall (for the Readers satisfaction) here insert: 1. It was agreed on, That a general and inviolable peace, amnesty, and friendship should thence∣forward be maintain'd between the said Crowns of Sweden and Poland, the Emperor Leopold, and Frederic Wilhelm Marquess of Brandenburg, and between their subjects of what degree, condition, or Religion soever. 2. That the King of Poland for himself and his heirs should renounce all pretensi∣ons to the Crown of Sweden and the Great Princi∣pality of Finland, and to all other possessions which his Grandfather John III. King of Sweden had formerly enjoyed: but that the said John Casimir, during his life, might, when he writ to any Prince or Ally whatsoever, use the Arms and Title of the King of Sweden as well as those of Poland. Only ob∣serving this, that in all transactions 'twixt him and the King of Sweden, he should stile himself King of Poland and Great Duke of Lithva∣nia, without adding any more Titles, but only annexing three Etcaeterations: thus, John Casimir King of Poland, Great Duke of Lithvania, &c. &c. &c. (The like was to be done by the King of Sweden, after the Title of Great Duke of Finland). 3. That the King and States of Poland and Lith∣vania should yeild up to the Swedes all Livonia be∣yond Dwina, with the Island Rune, and some other places beyond the Dwina, which the King of Swe∣den during the Truce had possession of; and also all Esthonia and Oselia, and all Cities, Towns, Forts, &c. that did formerly any way belong or ap∣pertain to the Crown of Poland: the King of Swe∣den being hereby obliged vpon the surrender of these places, not to lay any claim to Curland or Semi∣gallia, or to any Towns and Forts that belong to those Provinces: That all the inhabitants in the Swedish Livonia should have free exercise of their Religion, Laws, &c. with undisturb'd intercourse of Trade upon the Dwina: And several such-like Conditions. The whole Province of Liefland, in respect of its jurisdiction, may be divided into Swedish and Polonian Liefland. 1. Polonian Liefland,Polonian Liefland which lies beyond the Dwina, and contains in it the Dukedom or Prin∣cipality of Curland, and Semigallia, with part of Lettia. (of which see Poland) 2. Swedish Liefland, which may be said to con∣tain the Districts of Esthonia, Odepoa, Oselia, and Lettia. This Province being frequently subject∣ed to different Princes, has no very certain li∣mits set, nor like names given to the parts of it, by any that have undertaken to describe it. Some Authors adding Harland and Verland, as distinct Provinces from the former, which may seem rather parts only of Esthonia, then diffe∣rent Principalities from the rest. I. Esthonia, Estia, or Esthland, (so call'd from the Estii its ancient inhabitants) is bounded on the North with the Finnic Bay; on the West, with the Baltic Sea, and the Islands Dagho and Oselia; on the East, with the Lake Peipus, and part of Musco∣vy; and on the South, with the District of Let∣tia and the River Dwina. It is cut out into five divisions or Dioeceses, Alentakia, Wiria, Harria, Wicia, and Jervia. 1. Alentakia,Alentakia. which lies betwixt the Lake Pei∣pus and the Finnic Bay; having the River Nar∣va on the East; and on the West, the District of Wiria. In it are two Cities of note: 1. Narva, call'd commonly the German Narva, to distin∣guish it from Muscovitic Narva, which lies oppo∣site to it upon a River of the same name, not far from the famous Fort Ivanogorod. It is a place of great strength and consideration; and ordi∣narily well garrison'd with Swedish soldiers. Be∣hind the Castle there is a small piece of ground, encompass'd with wooden pales, which was gi∣ven by Gustavus Adolphus to the Russes, where they are permitted to live, and enjoy free exer∣cise of their Religion, which is according to the Ceremonies of the Greek Church. The German Lutherans (of which there is a vast number,) that reside here, have a particular Church allow'd them, and Sermons preach'd to them in their own language. This City is said to have been built by Waldemarus II. King of Denmark, A. D. 1223. It was taken by the Russes in 1558, and by them lost to the Swedes A. D. 1581, and in the year 1599, by a Ratification of Peace, con∣firm'd to the Kings of Sweden, and ever since by them possess'd. It lies in 60 deg. of Northerly Latitude; forty German miles from Pleskow, and as many from Novogardia. 2. Nieslot, or Neuschlos, i. e. new Fort: not far from the Lake Peipus, upon the River Narva. 2. Viria, Wiria, or Wilandia;Viria. which has Alen∣takia on the East, Harria on the West, the Fin∣nic Bay on the North, and Jervia on the South. Places remarkable in it are: 1. Wesenberg, not far from the River Weissenaa, which A. D. 1581, was taken by the Swedes from the Muscovite. 2. Tolsburg, twelve miles distant from Wesenberg. 3. Borcholm. 3. Harria or Harrenland,. bounded on the South with Wicia, on the East with Viria, and on the North and West with the Finnic Bay. In this division is Revalia, the Metropolis of Liefland; a
little, but handsom, pleasant, and well fortified, City; lying in 59 deg. 30 min. of Longitude. In the year 1374, it was sold to the great Ma∣ster of Livonia. In 1561, being in danger to fall into the hands of the Muscovite, it committed it self to the protection of the Kings of Sweden; and has ever since been subject to them. Here was anciently a Bishops See, but, since Lutheranism spred it self into these parts, that Title is here dis∣continued, and all Ecclesiastical affairs manag'd by Superintendents. For the promoting of Learn∣ing and good Education, this City has one publick Gymnasium wherein Professors and Tutors are maintain'd, to read and teach Humanity, and all the Liberal Arts. The chief Church is dedicated to St. Olaus. Not far from this place, is the Mo∣nastery of St. Bridget, seated upon the Finnic coast; and the Fort Pades or Badis, lying upon the Ri∣ver Assa. 4. Vikia, Wicia, or Wikke, which has in it these three places of note: 1. Habsalia, Habsel, lying upon the Bothnic Bay; formerly, viz. in the time of Frideric II. King of Denmark, in the possession of the Danes: afterwards A. D. 1575, taken by the Muscovite; and in the year 1581, gain'd by John III. King of Sweden. 2. Lode. 3. Leal. 4. Wickel or Wyck: all, Forts of good strength and consideration. 5. Jervia, which lyes landward, almost in the mid∣dle of the other Districts: It contains Wittenstein, Oberpalen, and Lau or Lais; places of moment. II. Odepoa, bounded on the East, with the Lake Peipus; on the North, with Embeck, and the Rivers Fela and Pernavia; on the West, with the great Bay of Livonia; and on the South, with Lettia. In it are these places of note, viz. 1. Derpat, Derbat, Dorpat, or (as the Russes call it) Juriogoord, a large City, built most of Stone and Brick, and secured by strong Stone-walls; where was formerly a Bishops seat. It was here∣tofore under the Tzar of Muscovy A. D. 1230. Under the Poles A. D. 1582. Afterwards taken from them by Charles Duke of Sudermannia, But by them regain'd, A. D. 1603. In the year 1625, when Gustavus Adolphus sent Forces into Livonia under the command of Jacobus de la Gardie, this City was gain'd to the Swedish Crown, and ever since remains as a part of its possessions. Here, by reason of the great abundance of all sorts of commodities of life, and the healthfulness of the air, Gustavus Adolphus ann. 1632, at the desire of one John Skytte Baron in Ouderof, (who had some∣time been Tutor to that King), instituted an University: and appointed and stipended one Rector, and several Professors, for Theology, History, Mathematicks, &c. 2. Warbek, upon the mouth of the River Embeck. 3. Kanneleks. 4. The Fort Ringen. 5. Odepoa, a small Town, whence the whole District has its name. 6. Nien∣hausen, a strong Fort upon the borders of Mus∣covy. 7. Marienburg, another Fort, not far from the Lake Peipus. 8. Tarnest a place anciently of good importance; but being in the hands of the Muscovites, it was besieged by the Polander, and at last by them taken, and when they quitted it, so demolished, that, tho the Swedes have spent some charges in repairing it, it has not at pre∣sent attain'd its ancient strength and splendor. 9. Felinum, Fellin, fifteen German miles from 10. Parnavia, Parnow, upon a River of the same name; a Town of great trade for all commodities, Corn especially; first of all added to the Swedish dominions by Ericus XIV. King of Sweden, an. 1562, Afterwards taken by the Poles and regain'd from them, an. 1617. 11. Sales or Lemsael: with some other less remarkable Towns and Forts. III. Lettia, bounded on the East, with part of Muscovy; on the West, with the Livonian Bay; on the North, with Odepoa; and on the South, with the Ri∣ver Dwina. Its chief City is 1. Riga, an Arch-Bishops See, lying in 48 deg. of Longitude, and 57 deg. 30 min. of Latitude, upon the Dwina, at its entrance into the Bothnic Bay. It is defended with a strong Wall, Bulwarks, Towers, an extraordinary large Trench, and three rows of great Guns; which were put in good order and readiness, (chiefly) by the care of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden. Here is a noted Harbour for Ships, much frequented by Merchants from Germany, Holland, England, &c. who come hither in the summer-time, and are laden with Hemp, Flax, Wax, Pitch, Tar; with Planks also, and Wood ready hew'n for build∣ing Ships; with skins of all sorts, as of Bears, Elks, Foxes, &c. and Furs of Castors, Sables, Mar∣trons, Ermins, &c. all which are brought to this City out of Muscovy and Poland in the winter-time over the ice and snow upon sledds; and made ready for sale against the time when the Mer∣chants usually arrive. The Citizens (commonly) speak either Swedish, German, Curlandish, or Li∣vonian; and have their Divine Service, (which is reform'd according to the Augustan Confession,) always celebrated in some one of those languages. In the year 1581, this City was taken by Ste∣phen King of Poland from the Emperor; and by his successor Sigismund III. endow'd with many notable priviledges and immunities, and by him kept in possession till 1605, at what time, Gustavus Adolphus Prince of Sweden, brought an Army into Livonia, and after six weeks close siege, had it surrender'd up to him: since which time it has always been under the Swedish power. 2. Du∣namund, i. e. the mouth of the Duna or Dwina; so call'd from its situation, being plac'd upon the Dwina, two miles from Riga, at its very en∣trance into the Livonian Bay. It is a Fort of great importance, commanding the whole River so, that without leave had from the Governour here, no Ship can pass into, or come out of, the Harbour of Riga. And because the Dwina at this place breaking forcibly into the Sea, and often, (in the spring-time especially), bringing huge flakes of ice along with it, very much alters the Chan∣nel, and thereby makes the passage into the Ri∣ver very dangerous, there are waiting here a sort of experienc'd Guides, call'd Pilosen or Pilots, who for small wages conduct all strangers along the safe way, either up to Riga, or back again into the Baltic. 3. Kakenhusen, Kockehaus, a strong Fort, where was anciently the residence of the Archbishop of Riga. 4. Ascherad; with many lesser Towns, Villages, and Forts. Of the late Accessions in Pomeren, and the Empire. HOw far the victorious Arms of Gustavus Adolphus spred themselves in the Empire of Germany; passing over the Elb, the Rhine, and the Danow, in one year; and thereby becoming as well the terror, as wonder, of Europe; is suf∣ficiently known to all the world: and how, after his death, the Swedish Conquests in those parts be∣gan to lessen, and several places of importance to be either forcibly regain'd by the Emperor, or by the succeeding Kings of Sweden freely yielded up to him, is no less manifest. What Cities, Towns, Forts, Titles, Territories, &c. were by a Ratifica∣tion of Peace concluded between the Imperial Ministers and the Swedish Agents, (in lieu of those many and large Dominions which Gustavus Adol∣phus had possess'd himself of), given up into the hands of the Swedes, either absolutely and for
ever, or under some conditions to be by the Swedes observ'd, we shall in this place only men∣tion: remitting the more large description of them to Pomeren, Germany, &c. whereunto they did formerly belong, and where an account of them may be expected. By a Treaty of Peace between the Imperial Plenipotentiaries and Swedish Ministers held at Osnabrug and Munster, A. D. 1649, it was con∣cluded: That, (because Christina Queen of Sweden had required of the Emperor and the Electoral Princes, that satisfaction should be made her, for delivering up to them several places which had been by her Father in the late Wars brought under the Swe∣dish power; and likewise upon account, that she ear∣nestly desired as much as in her lay, to restore and promote, the publick peace of the Empire; which the Emperor and their Electoral Highnesses on the other part were very ready by all means to advance and take care of) His Imperial Majesty with the con∣sent of the Electoral Princes, and States of the Em∣pire, should give up to the Queen of Sweden, and to her Heirs and Successors, these following Domi∣nions, to be held by them in full right of possession, as a perpetual and immediate Feud of the Empire, viz. 1. All Nether-Pomeren, commonly call'd Nor-Pomern, with the Isle of Rugen in the Baltic Sea, in the same manner and extent as the late Dukes of Pomeren had possess'd and enjoy'd the same. And also in Further-Pomeren, Stetin, Gartz, Dam, Gol∣nau, the Isle Wollin, with part of the River Oder that encompasseth it, the Sea commonly call'd das Frische Haff, with its three Bays, Peine, Swine, and Divenow; and so much land on each side, as shall be agreed on by the Commissioners, to be appointed for assigning the just limits for both Parties: Which said Kingdom of Pomeren and principality of Rugen, with all Dominions belonging, or places annex'd, to either of them; and also all Territories, Prefectures, Cities, Forts, Towns, Villages, Feuds, Rivers, Isles, &c. with all Tributes, Revenues, Titles, Digni∣ties, Preeminences, Immunities, and Praerogatives, Ecclesiastical or Civil; with all other Rights and Priviledges, should from that day (27 of July A. 1648) for ever belong to, and be freely used, and inviolably possess'd by, the then Queen of Sweden, her heirs and Successors, in as full and ample manner as the former Dukes of Pomeren had had, enjoy'd, or govern'd, the same. Moreover, That the King of Sweden, and the Duke of Brandenburg should both of them use the Titles and Arms of Pomeren, after the manner that the former Dukes of Pomeren used them: The King of Sweden for ever, and the Dukes of Brandenburgh so long as any of the Issue Male of that Family remain'd; but, that upon defect of the masculine Line of the house of Brandenburg none should lay claim to those Titles and Arms of Pome∣ren, but, the Kings of Sweden solely to retain them without any Competitor: and not only so, but then to have all Further Pomeren, with the Bishoprick and Chapter of Camminen yielded up to them and their successors for ever. 2. That the Emperor, with the consent of the E∣lectors, should give up to the said Queen and her suc∣cessors for ever, the City and Port of Wismar, with the Fort Walfisch, and the Prefectures of Poel (the Towns Sehedorff, Wietendorff, Brandenhusen and Wangern, which belong to the Hospital of the Ho∣ly Ghost in Lubeck, excepted) and Newen Clo∣ster, with all Rights and Priviledges belonging to them, in as full and ample manner, as the Dukes of Meklenburg had before enjoy'd, and possess'd, them. 3. That the Emperor with &c. should give up to the Queen of Sweden and her successors for ever, the Arch-Bishoprick of Breme, and the Bishoprick of Verden, with the Town and Prefecture of Wils∣hausen, and also all the Right the Arch-Bishops of Breme had to the Chapter and Dioeces of Hamburg, (provided that, the house of Holsatia, and the City and Chapter of Hamburg, retain'd their respective liberties, possessions, &c.) with all and singular Rights, Priviledges, &c. Ecclesiastical or Civil to the said Arch-Bishoprick, Bishoprick and Prefecture in any∣wise belonging; yet to retain them for ever, as an im∣mediate Fee of the Empire: using the ancient Arms which belong'd to them, but changing the Ecclefiasti∣cal Title, into a secular one, viz. that of Arch-Bi∣shop and Bishops, into Duke of Breme and Verden: And likewise the Kings of Sweden by vertue of this Grant to have priviledge to be present at all Diets of the Empire, under the Titles of Dukes of Breme, Ver∣den and Pomeren; Princes of Rugen, and Lords of Wismar: and to take place amongst the secular Prin∣ces, on the fifth seat in the said Diets: and in all Controversies arising concerning these Territories, to appeal to some of his Imperial Majestie's Courts of Judicature, there to have them determin'd. 4. That the Queen of Sweden, or her successors might have power to erect an Ʋniversity where they thought most convenient, in any part of these new Do∣minions. Lastly, that her Majesty of Sweden, and her suc∣cessors should acknowledge all these Possessions as Feu∣diatary to the Emperor, and receive all Investitures from, and (as their Predecessors and other Vassals of the Empire formerly used to do, to) take an Oath of Fidelity and Allegiance to him, and his Imperial successors for ever. By these additional Dominions in Pomeren and Germany (which at present, by reason of the wars between the two Northern Crowns, are very much disturb'd, and in great confusion) the Kings of Sweden had (as was said) several new Titles conferr'd upon them; which, with others that are taken from their late conquests in Livonia, Carelia, &c. make up the greatest part of the whole Catalogue: The present King sty∣ling himself thus; The most Serene and most &c. Prince Charles XI. King of the Swedes, Goths, and Vandals, and Hereditary Prince, Great Prince of Fin∣land, Duke of Schonen, Esthonia, Livonia, Carelia, Breme, Verde, Stetin, Pomeren, Cassubie, and Wenden; Prince of Rugen, Lord of Ingria and Wismar, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, Juliers, Cleves, Bergen, &c. Of the new Accessions in Denmark within the Baltic Sea, viz. Scania, Hallandia, Blekingia, &c. BY a Ratification of Peace concluded at Ros∣child Feb. 26, ann. 1658, between Charles X. then King of Sweden, and Frederic III. King of Denmark; the Provinces of Scania, Hallandia, and the Castle of Bahus: with all the Forts, Islands, &c. and also all the Royalties, Jurisdictions, Domi∣nions, Ecclesiastical or Civil; with the Revenues, Tributes, Payments, and all Rights whatsoever, whether by Land or Sea, were by the King of Den∣mark (in consideration of having some places restored to him, as Sialand, Laland, Falstria, &c. which the King of Sweden had, during the late war, made himself Master of) wholly ceded and given up to the Crown of Sweden, as a perpe∣tual possession, to be incorporated with that Kingdom for ever, in as full and ample manner as the Kings of Denmark and Norway had for∣merly
possess'd and enjoy'd the same. And, by another Ratification of Peace held at Copenhagen ann. 1660, between the said Frideric III. of Denmark, and this present King of Sweden, these Provinces in the same manner as they had been granted by the former Treaty, were confirm'd to the Swedish Crown. We shall treat of all these Provinces (though by reason of the present Wars 'twixt the Swedes and Danes, the possession of them is much di∣sturb'd, and some Cities and Forts in them, seized and Garrison'd by the Danish Forces) as Ac∣cessional parts of this Kingdom: remitting what may be said concerning the ancient Titles the Kings of Denmark had to them, or what else may concern them, to be spoken to in that King∣dom. 1. Scania or Schonen, a Province abounding (as was said in Gothia), with Corn, Beasts, Birds and all Commodities of life; having on the East, Ble∣kingia; on the West, the Sund, along the shore of which it runs for the space of twenty German Miles; on the North, Hallandia, and Westro-Go∣thia; and on the South, part of the Baltic or Ost-Zee. It is in length eighteen, and (where broad∣est) in bredth, twelve, German miels. In it are (besides many Towns and Villages) twelve No∣marchies or Principalities. The chief City is, 1. Lundia, Lundon or Lune, for∣merly (from the year 1109 to 1559) the seat of an Arch-bishop, who was wont to be call'd to the ge∣neral Diets of the Empire, and have his voice in them; It is said to have two and twenty Churches in it, and amongst the rest a magnificent Cathedral dedicated to St. Laurence, no less remarkable for its high Steeple (which is a guide to Mariners) and its large vault under the Quire; then for the Dial, which shews the year, month, week, day, and hour of the day, all, at the same time: with all Feasts both moveable and fix'd, as also the motions of the Sun and Moon, and their pro∣gress through every degree of the Zodiack. This Clock is so order'd by artificial Engines, that when ever it strikes, two Horse-men come forth and encounter each other, the one giving the other just so many blows as the hammer is to strike upon the Bell: at what time, a door o∣pening, the Virgin Mary appears, sitting upon a Throne with Christ in her arms, and the Magi doing him reverence, and two Trumpeters sound∣ing all the while. This is the suppos'd work of Caspar Bartholine the famous Mathematician. The Altar also of this Church is an excellent piece of work, of black and white Marble, adorn'd on the fore-part with the Sculptures of Frederic II, and Sophia his wife; and upon the Table-stone with the Images of our Saviour, and his twelve A∣postles, at his last Supper. 2. Malmoge or (as some call it) Elbogen, at the very Southern point of Schonen, just opposite to Copenhagen in Zeland, a well traded Port: the birth-place of the said Cas∣par Bartholine, or Malmogius Danus (as some pleas'd to name him) the great Mathematician. 3. Trel∣leberg, North of Elbogen. 4. Landscroon, on the Sea side, a place of great consequence and strength; built by Ericus VIII, An. 1413. It has six Gates in all, three towards the Sea, and three towards the Continent, with a fair Market∣place, and a stately Stadt-house. Here is a large and convenient harbour for Ships, though of somewhat hazardous entrance. This Ci∣ty was fortify'd with a Castle by Christian III. who remov'd the Fair at Engelholm to this place, where it is kept at Mid-summer eve∣ry year, with a great concourse of Merchants. 5. Helsemburg a mean Town, but fortified with an impregnable Castle, just opposite to Helsinore, and Croneberg in Seland; the other of the two Keys which openeth into the Sund. In the mid∣dle of the Castle rises a high four square Tower, which shews it self to Mariners a great way off from the Castle; and serves them as a mark to steer their course by. In this Town are kept two Fairs every year, one in Mid-Lent, the other up∣on Palm-sunday, noted for the concourse of people, and great store of Merchandize vended here. 6. Radneby, a Frontire Town, bordering on Verendia. 7. Christiania or Christendorp built by Christiern IV. An. 1604, out of the ruins of Ahu∣sia and Vaea or Wa, and fortifyed with eight Bul∣warks, and so encompass'd with Fens and Marshes on one side, and with the Sea on the other, that it may seem almost impregnable. To these may be added 8. Scanore, the most ancient of any. 2.Hallan∣dia. Hallandia or Hallandt which lyes to the North East, upon part of Westro Gothia; its li∣mits begin at the Promontory, call'd by the Natives Hallands-Ars (by Strangers Coll), and thence runs along the Codane Shore to Elsburg, sixteen German miles; and may be said to have on the West, the Sea which runs 'twixt it and Jutland; on the North, part of Smalandia; and on the South, Scania or Schonen. (Of this Pro∣vince, see what was said in Westro-Gothia.) 3. Blescida, Blekingia or Blecking,Blekin∣gia. a Province somewhat mountanous, woody and barren, and not near so fertil as either of the two former: It is bounded on the East and South, with the Baltic Sea; on the North, with Verendia in Sma∣land; and on the West, with Schonen. The whole Province is divided into eight Nomarchies, and contains these Cities and Towns of note, all lying upon the Baltic: 1. Ʋstadium, vulg. Ʋster. 2. Stanthamera, or Santhamer. 3. Ahuiis. 4. Sels∣burg. 5. Elenholm. 6. Rottenbuy. 7. Christianopolis Christenberg, rais'd out of the ground by Christiern IV. King of Denmark, A. D. 1604, to defend his Kingdom on this side: but not long after by a warlike Stratagem surpris'd by the Swedes An. 1611, and by them destroy'd and quite dispeo∣pled: since which time, it has been rebuilt, and at present is very well replenished with Inha∣bitants and much frequented by Merchants. 10. Bromsebro (famous, for the treaty of peace betwixt Christina Queen of Sweden, and Christia∣nus IV. King of Denmark concluded at this Town A. D. 1648): with many smaller Towns and Vil∣lages. To these may be added, 4.Jemptia. Jemptia or Jemp∣terland (so called from one Kietellus Jampte a Norwegian Nobleman, who escaping from the tyranny of Harald Harfager, King of Norway, came and set up a Government for himself in this Province and Helsingia) which lyes North∣ward in Suecia properly so call'd, having on the East, part of the Province of Medelpadia; on the West, the Dofrine Mountains; on the North, Angermannia; and on the South part of Helsin∣gia and Medelpadia. This Province did ancient∣ly belong to the Kings of Norway, though in the reign of Olaus Scotkonung it is said to have re∣volted from Olaus Crassus then King of Norway, and become Tributary to the Crowns of Sweden. In the year 1613, by a peace concluded between the Northern Crown, it was by Gustavus Adolphus yielded up to the King of Denmark; but A. 1642 repossess'd by the Swedes. Pontanus in his Map of Scandia, reckons up some places of note in it, viz. Alsne, Ron, Aus, Lidh, Hamer-dal, Ʋndersaker, Oviken, &c. In the time of Olaus Magnus this Pro∣vince was under the jurisdiction of the Arch-Bi∣shop of Ʋpsal. Near a small Village in this Coun∣try, there are (says Messenius) several large stones
with Gothick Inscriptions, which are a prophesy of what for the future would befall the Scandians. 5.Herrnda∣lia. Herrndalia, (call'd by Pontanus, Herdalia, and by most Authors reckon'd as a part of Helsingia,) contains the Territories of Nomedal, Hellegeland, Frostena, Indera, Heroa; with some others: all which, belong to the Dioeceses of the Bishop of Nidrosia; and are in the possession of the King of Sweden. Of the Baltic Sea, the Finnic, and Bothnic, Bays; and the Swedish Islands contain'd in them. THe Baltic Sea,The Bal∣tic Sea. (so called (says Pontanus) from the Saxon and English word (Belt), because it encompasseth the Kingdom of Sweden, after the manner of a belt or girdle: or (as Jornandes would have it) from Baltia or Basilia (i. e. Queen of Islands) the ancient Greek name of Scandia or Scandinavia: or (as Adam Bremensis is of opinion) from the Wiso-Goths who inhabited upon the Coasts of it, usually call'd Balts, i. e. a stout and va∣liant people) is the largest of any Sea in Europe, ex∣cept the Mediterranean; containing in it five and thirty Islands of considerable bigness, besides an in∣finite number of lesser note. The whole Bay (as some are of opinion) is call'd by Mela, Sinus Coda∣nus, (q. Gothanus or Gothicus, from Gothia that bor∣ders upon it; or Caudanus from Cauda, because it comes from the main Ocean, after the manner of a tail of a beast:) by Strabo, the Venedic Bay, from the Venedae a people of Germany, who liv'd upon the Coast of it: and, by the Danes and Swedes the Oost-Zee, because (as may be gather'd out of the History of Eric Eigod King of Denmark) the Danes who went pilgrimage to the Holy Land, used to pass into Russia, and the Eastern parts, by this Sea. It beginneth at the narrow place call'd the Sund: and interlacing the Countries of Denmark, Swe∣den, Germany, and some part of Poland, extend∣eth it self to Livonia and Lithvania. It, either by reason of the narrowness of the passage, by which the Ocean flows into it; or, because of its Northerly situation, whereby the Celestial influences have less power over it, never ebbs nor flows. From the several Countries and places that it washes, it has diverse names given it, and is distinguished into different Bays: the most remarkable are 1.The Both∣nic Bay. The Bothnic Bay, counted from the Island Alandia, Northward; to the River Kimi, which falls into it at the very furthest Cape. It has its name from Both, signifying in the Swedish Lan∣guage, a Fenny Country, or a Land overflown with water. 2.The Fin∣nic Bay. The Finnic Bay, so call'd from the Principa∣lity of Finland, which it waters. Some will have the Sinus Venedicus of Strabo, and the Mare A∣malchium of Pliny, particularly to denote this Bay. The Swedish Islands in this Sea [concerning those that are under the Danish Power, see Denmark] (to begin with the most Southerly first) are 1. Rugen, upon the Coasts of Pomeren: gi∣ven to the Swedes, by the great Treaty of peace at Munster and Osnaburg. A. D. 1649. (Of which consult the Volume of Germany). 2. Bornholm, is situate more Northward then Ru∣gen, and lyes opposite to Blekingia: it has one City in it, nam'd Santwyk, and thirty-two small Villages. This Island was, by a Ratification of Peace held at Copenhagen A. D. 1660, given up to the Danes under certain conditions; of which mention is made in Denmark. 3. Huena or Hueen, a very small Island in the Oresundic Bay, famous for the City Vraniburg, built by that excellent Mathematician Tycho Brahe, where the Pole is elevated 55 deg. 54 min. This Isle was yielded up to the Swedes by vertue of the foremention'd Peace concluded betwixt the two Northern Crowns, A. D. 1660. 4. Ʋtklippa, 5. Ʋtlengia, both, lying over against Blekingia. 6. Oelandia, a fruitful and pleasant Island, in which are said to be the best breed of Horses that are in all the Swedish Dominions. This Island A. D. 1526, was taken by Christiern King of Den∣mark, and shortly after regain'd by Gustavus I. King of Sweden. A. D. 1613, it was put into the hands of Gustavus Adolphus, and ever since retain'd by the Swedes. (See more concerning it amongst the Provinces of Gothia). 7. Gotland, lying over against Ostro-Gothia; in length seventy-two miles, and in breadth twenty. For a long time almost torn in pieces by the con∣tinual Arms of Denmark and Sweden; till 1648, by a Treaty of Peace betwixt Christina Queen of Swedeland and Christiern IV. of Denmark, it, with the City Wisbuy (of which see amongst the Gothic Provinces) was wholly yielded up into the hands of the Swedes, to be held by them as a perpetual possession. 8. Oselia, call'd by Pliny, Oserica, opposite to Liefland, and reckon'd by some as a District of Esthonia; fifty-six miles in length, and twenty-eight in breadth. In it is the City Arnsburg, for∣tifyed with a strong Castle. 9. Daghoe, Dachden or Dagheroort parted from Oselia by a very narrow Bay. 10. Alandia, lying in the middle Sea, betwixt it and Ʋpland, reckon'd by some as a part of Fin∣land: in it is the Fort Castleholm. 11. Hogland, in the Finnic Bay, with severalo∣thers of less note and importance.
decorative device
map of Denmark REGNI DANIAE Accuratissima delineato. blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms Nobilissimo Amplissimo, Consultissimoque Viro D. GERARDO SCHAEP, I. V. D. Inclyti et Celeberrimi Ansterodamensium Emporii Consuli ac Senatori: et ad Sere∣nissimos SVECIAE DANIA{que} Reges Legato Dignissimo, Fidelissimo. D. D. D. Ioannes Ianssonius
DENMARK. SAxo Grammaticus deduces the name of Denmark (Danmark or Dania) from Dan, the son of Humblus, a Prince of these parts many years before the coming of our Saviour. This opinion seems to have been an ancient tradition amongst the Danes, and is confirmed by one of the old Chro∣nicles of their Kings, published by Wormius out of a manuscript copy of the Scanian Laws, writ in Runick characters; in the beginning of which we read, Dan heet den forste cunung i Danmurk; der var fore Christus borth. Af hannom call is Dan∣murk, i. e. The first King of Denmark was called Dan; who reigned before the birth of Christ. From him Denmark had its name. But the stories they tell us of this King (like all their ancient histo∣ries) are so incoherent and incredible, that little trust can be given to this etymology. Others ridiculously derive the names of Danes and Dane∣mark from Dan the son of Jacob. Some from the Graecian Danai. Hadrianus Junius, a learned Hi∣storian, but not too happy in etymologies, would have the Danes so called from the abundance of Fir-trees which grow in their Country; not con∣sidering that a Fir-tree has not the same name (Dannen- or Tannen-baum) in Denmark as in Ger∣many; for the Danes, as well as the English, call it a Firtre or Firtrae. Pontanus, sleghting all the conjectures of other Authors, thinks he gives us a sufficient account of the original of the words Dani and Dania, when he tells us, That these peo∣ple are the Danciones or Dansciones (as the learn∣ed Mr. Cambden reads the word, instead of Dau∣siones in the vulgar Copies) mentioned by Pto∣lomey. But this determination is not at all satis∣factory; for the question is not, how long, but whence the Danes have had their name? For my own part, I dare not assent to any of the deriva∣tions yet given; but had rather guess, that the Danes or Dansche took their name from the great opinion they had of their own uprightness and integrity. For Danneman is a word ordinarily used among them to this day to denote an honest and good man. Thus the Germans use the phrase, ein Teutschhertziger mensch, to signifie a true (Dutch) hearted fellow. And we may observe, that it was the constant custom of all the Northern Nati∣ons, to give themselves names from their piety as well as prowess. Thus the people who stiled themselves Germans (War-men) in the field, were Teutschen (or Godly) at home; and the Cimbri (or Camp-fighters) in time of war, were Got∣tisch (pious and religious) as soon as they laid down their weapons. The ancient inhabitants of Denmark were the Cimbri and Getae:Ancient Inhabi∣tants. of both which we shall dis∣course at large in the description of Jutland. Con∣cerning the Goths, something hath been said in the description of Sweden, and more may be ex∣pected in the treatise of the Cimbric Islands. The Kingdom consists of, 1. Jutland,Division and Si∣tuation. which is a Peninsula, washed on either side by the Ger∣man and Baltic Seas, and bounded on the South with some parts of the nether Saxony. 2. Zee∣land, Funen, with some more Islands of less note. To these may be added, 3. Schonen and Halland, which formerly did belong to this Kingdom, but in the year 1658, by a Ratification of Peace con∣cluded at Roschild between Frederic III. King of Denmark, and Charles X. King of Sweden, were wholly annex'd to the Crown of Swedeland: and by another Ratification held at Copenhagen 1660, confirm'd to it. The Air is not so cold as in some places of Germany, which ly much more to the South:Air. nor so hot in Summer. This temperature pro∣ceeds chiefly from the adjoining Sea; which, as in England, fans the inhabitants in Summer, and keeps them warm in Winter. Sometimes indeed the Baltic Sea is frozen up (as it happ'ned in the year 1659, when the King of Sweden march'd his army out of Jutland into Zeeland over the Ice) and then Charcoal and Turf, which is their only fuel, stand their friends. The Land (naturally barren,Soil. and abounding with little but Woods and Mountains) is by the late care and industry of the inhabitants made very fruitful. Funen furnishes many foreign parts with Barley; and Zeeland's greatest trade lyes in transporting of Corn and Hay. Schonen is full of pleasant Meadows; whence some Authors think it had its name: for Schone signifies fair. The rich pastures in Denmark afford such mul∣titudes of Kine,Cattel. that (according to Oldenburgh's relation) some years forty thousand, others an hundred thousand Cows and Oxen are hence transported into the Low Countries; which must needs exceedingly enrich the Kingdom. They have also good breeds of Horses; but not in such numbers that they can afford to send any into other Nations. Helmoldus tells us,Fish. that in his time the great riches of the Danes consisted in Fish. And Saxo Grammaticus says, the Sea-coasts round Zeeland, and other parts of the Danish Kingdom, are so stock'd with shoals of Herrings and other Fish, that you may not only take them up with your hand without the help of any Net, Line, or Hook;
but that they hinder the passage of Ships and Boats. Certain it is (however strange and in∣credible Saxo's story may appear) Herrings swim usually in infinite numbers; and no part of the Seas were anciently better stock'd with this kind of Fish then the coasts of Denmark. But of late years the Herring-trade has fail'd strangely here; and those they do catch come far short of the English and Dutch Herrings in bulk and goodness. I am unwilling to think (with Oldenburgh) this decay of the Fishing-trade in Denmark, a judgment inflicted on the inhabitants; since our Fishermen will tell us, that some years the Herrings haunt the English shore, sometimes the Dutch or French. However, tho the Herrings have forsaken them, they have still plenty of other sorts of Fish, as Plaise, Whiting, Cod, &c. which they dry and send abroad. Pontanus, to shew how well they are provided in this kind, tells us this memorable story: It happened not many years before the writing of his History of Denmark, that several Ambassadors from most of the greatest Princes in Europe being met together at the Emperor of Germany's Court, had some disputes about precedency. Some of them asserted the dignity and power of their Masters from the riches of their Country in Gold and Silver: others brag'd of the plenty of Corn, Fruits, &c. when all had done, the Danish Ambassador told them, That should the richest Prince in Europe sell his King∣dom, and with the price buy nothing else but wooden Platters, the King his Master was able to fill them all with three sorts of fresh Fish. Whereupon they unanimously declared the King of Denmark the happiest Prince in Christendom; and placed his Ambassador next the King of France's, who sat on the Emperors right hand. Their Forrests are full of all sorts of Venison;Forrests. insomuch that every hunting season (which commonly is in August) there are above sixteen hundred Bucks brought in to the Kings Palaces; besides an infinite number of Hares, Conies, Boars, &c. However the ancient Romans vilified and con∣temned all the Northern Nations,Manners. esteeming them a sort of barbarous, dull, and unactive people; yet 'tis manifest from the relations given by Lu∣cius Florus, and other Roman Historians (who ne∣ver cared for speaking too well of their enemies) how stoutly the Cimbrians encounter'd the Ro∣man Forces. And 'tis more then probable, that the Galli Senones came out of this Country, who forced their Infantry to take sanctuary, or rather imprison themselves, in the Capitol. Besides, most of the Northern Nations have at some time or other stoop'd to the Danish Arms. For, if we consult the best of their Historians, we shall find, that Ireland was eight several times conquer'd by the Danes: The English were ten times beaten by them; and for many years subject to the Kings of Denmark: Scotland was for awhile tri∣butary to this Crown; whence some fancy it had its name; Scotland, in the Danish tongue, signi∣fying a Country that pays tribute to a foreign Potentate; hence we still retain the word Scot∣free, i. e. one exempt from all payments, dues, and duties: Saxony paid homage to Frotho, Si∣ward, and other Danish Kings: And the Swedes oftner then once swore fealty to the Danes; but revolted as soon as they found themselves able to rebel: The Kingdom of Norway, annex'd to the Crown of Denmark, in a sufficient testimony of the Danish valour: Nay, Saxo Grammaticus gives us many instances of the courage and con∣duct of several Danish Viragines, whose exploits (if he say true) may be set in competition with the bravest performances of the Hectors of other Nations. Tacitus, speaking of the ancient Ger∣mans, says, They were a little too much addicted to Gluttony and Drunkenness; but withal so obliging to strangers, that they looked upon it as the height of barbarism and rudeness, to turn any such out of doors, or deny them lodging. Both these characters may still be applyed to the Danes. For, since they grew so modish as to drink wine, they have ex∣ceedingly Ape'd their neighbours, the Germans, in large draughts, and long meals. Again, they are wonderfully complaisant to all Foreigners; which perhaps may in some part be attributed to their immoderate desire of learning the lan∣guages of other countries. But, notwithstand∣ing the civil entertainment usually met with in this Kingdom, it behoves every stranger to carry himself so circumspectly, that he seem nei∣ther by his words nor actions to sleight any thing he meets with. For, the Danes are naturally proud and self-conceited; and quarrelsome up∣on the least apprehension of an affront. The old Romans, commonly too peremptory in their censures, looked upon the Cimbrians as a dull phlegmatick people. And we know, the general vogue still gives the Italians, French, and Spa∣niards a larger share of brains then they allow to any of the Norther Nations. However, this Kingdom has never wanted men remarkable for their wit and learning; who (as we shall have occasion to shew hereafter) have, in spight of the disadvantages of a cold Country, given evi∣dent proof, that men do not, like waters, take a tincture from the earth and soil out of which they spring. 'Twas Julius Caesar's observation of the Gauls,Sta and  of  that they look'd down with a scornful eye upon the low stature of the Romans. And anciently the Northern people (except only the inhabi∣tants of Iseland and Groneland, if known to the ancients, whom excessive colds had pinched into as small dimensions as the Spaniards, and other Southern Nations, were heated into) were gene∣rally a sort of Gyants. The Danes in a more pe∣culiar manner, from their large size (say some) had the name of Geats; corrupted afterwards into Getae, Jutae, &c. At this day, the a-la-mode luxury of the times has so prevailed in Denmark, as to contract the pristine bulk of its inhabitants: who nevertheless seem still to be more vigorous and long-liv'd then most of their neighbours. Aristotle long since could tell us, that the Nor∣thern people were most commonly yellow-hair'd. And Lucan, speaking of the inhabitants on the banks of the Elb, says, Fundit ab extremo flavos Aquilone Suevos Albis. Indeed most of the Danes (those especially that live beyond the Baltic) are to this day either white or reddish hair'd. Hence it is, that in Eng∣land we usually say of a red hair'd man, He is a Dane. And from the old grudge between this Nation and Denmark, I fancy arose that ill con∣ceit that most English have of red hair'd peo∣ple. What the ordinary food is, may be easily known from the abundance of Corn, Fish,Die and all manner of tame and wild Beasts (fit for food), wherewith, as we have told you, this Kingdom is stock'd. Among the many other sorts of Fowl, no Nation in Europe has so many Woodcocks (call'd by Martial Perdices Rusticas, by Pliny Rusti∣culas, and accounted by the ancient Romans a great rarity) as Denmark.
It was long before Vines spread themselves so far Northward as to reach beyond the Rhine. In Julius Caesars days the Belgic Nervii knew no such drink as wine; or at least, as he says, would not suffer any such lewd liquor to come amongst them. But as soon as the Germans tasted the juice of the grape, they quickly commended the Glass to their neighbours the Danes; who, in a short time, grew as intemperate as their teachers. The ancient drink of the Country was Oel (Ale or Beer) made of Malt and Water; which is still in ordinary use among them. Though in England we make a distinction between Ale and Beer; yet the Danes know no such difference: what the Germans call Bier, is Oel in Denmark. This is that famous drink which animated the Western Nations against the Romans; which Ta∣citus calls humorem ex hordeo aut frumento in quan∣dam similitudinem vini corruptum, i. e. a liquor made of Corn which rivals Wine. It is undoubtely true, what Rodericus Tole∣tanus many years ago observed, that the High Dutch, Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Flandrian, and English Languages, are only so many distinct Dialects of one and the same Mother-tongue. Which may soon be discerned by any man that shall take the pains to compare the Lords Prayer, or any other piece of Scripture, in all these tongues. The Gibb'rish indeed spoken in Lapland, Finland, and some other Countries to the North-East of Sweden and Denmark, is quite another thing, and as unintelligible to the civilized Danes and Swedes, as Hebrew or Arabic. But the ordinary Danish (whatever some of their own Writers say to the contrary) is no more then corrupted Dutch. I know, Pontanus has taken the pains to collect a great many words out of the Danish tongue (which he calls vocabula Danis propria; tho all of them are not so) that are not to be found perhaps in any German Dictionary. What then? No man shall with this argument perswade me, that the Dutch and Danish tongues are fundamentally distinct, and not two branches of the same stock. For, you shall find thousands of words in Willeramus, Otfrid, and other ancient German writers, which are at this day wholly out of use: and scarce a County in England but has some peculiar words not understood in the rest, which nevertheless speak perfect English. Neither will it avail any thing to say, the ancient Danish tongue was brought hither out of Asia, and call'd formerly Asamal, i. e. the Language of the Asians: for the Edda Islandorum (which probably is the oldest piece which mentions the coming of the Asians into these parts) says, Odin (or Woden, the great Captain of the Asae) spread his language over Saxony as well as Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. Adding further, That within awhile the Asian tongue was generally spoken in all the neighbouring Coun∣tries. The strongest argument to prove a diffe∣rence between this tongue and the old Teutonic, may be had from a diligent enquiry into the va∣rious phrases and proprieties of speech used in both of them. But when we consider how much the idioms of the High and Low Dutch differ; and how vastly the Syntax of our English Language is alter'd from the Danish and German; we shall have reason to confess, before we pronounce these last two distinct primitive languages, that time is able strangely to alter the physiognomy of tongues as well as men. However, the dispute is like shortly to have an end; and the Danes will in a little while, if they do not already, speak good Dutch. For the German tongue is now ordi∣narily spoken in Copenhagen, and most of the chief trading Cities in Denmark. To let pass the stories of King Dan,Govern∣ment. whom some Historians make to reign in this Kingdom three hundred years before the birth of our Sa∣viour; it is manifest (from the unquestionable testimonies of the best Roman writers) that Den∣mark was a Monarchy in the Consulship of Ca∣tulus and Marius, near an hundred years before Christ. Afterwards, we have a certain account of Gothric, King of the Danes, in the days of the Emperor Charles the Great, from whom the pre∣sent Kings of Denmark are descended in a lineal succession, (except, what Pontanus seems not to allow of, the line of the ancient Kings failed upon the death of King Christopher III. A. D. 1448). The power of the Danish Nobility in Council is exceeding great: but not so large as to make the supreme Government Aristocratical. Some would argue, That the Nobles are above the King, since 'tis well known they denied to Crown Frederic II. (in the year 1559) till he had sworn never to pretend to be able, by his own autho∣rity to put any Nobleman to death. From this, and some other like instances, Bodinus endea∣vours to prove the Kings of Denmark petty Princes rather then absolute Monarchs: not remembring that (even in France it self, as well as all other Kingdoms of Europe) it has always been thought requisite, for the satisfaction of the people, that every King at his Coronation should make some solemn Vow to maintain the ancient Laws and Priviledges of his Country and Subjects. And if, in the case mentioned, the Nobility of Denmark required their King to lay a stricter obligation on himself then was usual; the performance was arbitrary, and not constrain'd. The Subjects might possibly, upon the Kings refusal to gra∣tifie them, have rebell'd against their lawful So∣vereign; but could not justly have compell'd him to a compliance. Before the year 1660,King. the Kingdom of Den∣mark was not (as Norway) Hereditary, but Ele∣ctive: yet so, that the Senators usually chose the eldest son of their King, who thenceforward was styled the Prince. The rest of the Kings sons had the Titles of Dukes and Heirs of Norway. The Election in ancient times was commonly had in this solemn manner: As many of the Nobles as were Senators, and had power to give their voices, agreed upon some convenient place in the fields, where seating themselves in a circle upon so ma∣ny great stones, they gave their votes. This done, they placed their new elected Monarch in the middle, upon a stone higher then the rest, and saluted him King. In Seland to this day there is such a company of stones which bear the name of Kongstolen, or the Kings seat. And Olaus Mag∣nus tells us the same story of a great stone, call'd by the Vicenage Morastaen, near Ʋpsal in Sweden. Near St. Buriens in Cornwall, in a place which the Cornish-men call Biscow-Woune, are to be seen nine∣teen stones set in a round circle, distant every one about twelve foot from the other; and in the very center one pitched far higher and greater then the rest. This Cambden fancies to have been some Trophee erected by the Romans under the later Emperors; or else, by Athelstane the Saxon, when he had subdued Cornwal, and brought it under his dominion. But Wormius, more proba∣bly, guesses, that in this place some Danish or Saxon King, was elected by his followers. And I conceive the same may be said of Long Meg and her daughters, near little Salkeld in Cumber∣land. But, to return to Denmark, of later years the Danes in their elections have follow'd the customs of other Countries, till Frederic III. in the year 1660; who was the first that ventur'd to
exercise the authority of an absolute Prince, and to shake off the dependance his Ancestors were wont to have upon the good will of their Sub∣jects; procuring, with fair words and threats, a Law to be established, That for the future the Kingdom of Denmark should immediately upon the Kings death descend upon his lawful Heir. Whereupon, the present King Christian V. was the same night his Father dyed (without any previous election, or consent asked of the Nobi∣lity) proclaimed King. The Rites of Corona∣tion are usually perform'd at Copenhagen; where the King is anointed by the Bishop of Roschild. The Chronicles of the Kings of Denmark which have hitherto been publish'd,Catalogue of their Kings. are so imperfect and contradictory one to another, that 'tis ut∣terly impossible to give an exact Catalogue of their Kings. Saxo Grammaticus (who liv'd, saith Stephanus, in the twelfth Century) has made a shift to collect a great many stories out of the scatter'd fragments of old Runic Inscriptions and ancient Ballads, and to relate them in a better method and stile then could be well expected from the age he liv'd in. But, when we consi∣der, that the best he met with, could not possi∣bly be of more authority then such venerable scraps of Chronicles as are published by Wor∣mius at the end of his Monumenta Danica, and see how these two run counter, it is hard to rest sa∣tisfied with the relation he gives us; and yet as difficult to provide our selves of a better. The first rational account given us of any of the Da∣nish Kings, which we may safely rely upon for truth, is in our English Chronicles: which (as the Learned Sir Henry Spelman in an Epistle to Ol. Rosecrantz, formerly Danish Ambassador in England) treat more fully and clearly of the affairs of Denmark, then any of the Danish Histo∣rians. Wherefore (omitting the relations given of Dan, Humblus, and the rest of their Heathen Kings, as either false or frivolous) we shall con∣tent our selves with a short Register of the Kings of Denmark since the first planting of Christianity in that Kingdom. And 1. Harald, being beaten out of his Kingdom by his brother Reinferd's accomplices, fled to the Emperor Ludowic for help: who assisted him in regaining of his Crown, upon condition he would forsake his Idolatry, and turn Christian. Whereupon he was baptized in the year 826, and immediately restored to his dominions. But soon after he renounced Christianity, and continued Heathen till reclaim'd by St. Anschar: who, for his good offices in the Northern King∣doms, was made Archbishop of Hamburgh, in the year 835. 2. Eric succeeded his brother Harald (with whom he had been baptized in Germany) in his King∣dom and cruelty against the the Christians. In his days (about the year 853) the Danes first enter'd France, under the command of their Captain Rollo, (though others more probably relate him not to have been the first of those Northern Rovers that invaded France, but to have succeeded to Gotfrid, and to have entred France about the year 876, and not to have been peaceably settled in Normandy, till 889 or 890: see the History of the life of King Ael∣fred), and seated themselves in that part which has ever since kept the name of Normandy. 3. Eric Barn, or the Child, being the only male left alive of the Royal Family after the bloody wars between his predecessor and Guthorm King of Norway. He begun his reign happily, having married the daughter of King Guthorm; but within awhile he grew more cruel then any of his Ancestors had been; slaying more Bishops, and destroying more Churches and Religious Houses (both in Germany and England) then all the rest of the Danish Kings put together. In his German wars he slew Brunno Duke of Saxony, and twelve Counts. He dyed about the year 902. 4. Canutus the Hairy (or Lodneknudt) suc∣ceeded his father Eric. In his days, saith King Eric in his Chronicon, every third man in Den∣mark went by lot to seek his fortune: so that those who marched off, over-run all Prussia, Semgal, Curland, and several other Countries; whence they never return'd, but there they and their posterity have continued to this day. He dyed a Heathen, about the year 912. 5. After the death of Canutus, the Danish Scepter was given to Frotho his son, (so say the most credible Historians, tho Lindenbruch reports, that his brother Sueno reigned nine years). He was twenty years King of England and Den∣mark; in the former of which he was baptized, and dyed a good Christian. 6. Gormo, Gormund, or Guthrum (surnam'd Har∣tesnute, and Engelender, because born in Eng∣land) succeeded his father. He, together with his followers, was baptized at Aalre in Sommer∣setshire, and had our Learned and Pious King Aelfred to his Godfather; who at the Font gave him the name of Athelstane, and after∣wards bestowed on him the Kingdom of the East-Angles. From this Gormo a Village near Huntingdon, call'd at this day by the inhabi∣tants corruptly Godman-Chester, had its name Gormon-Chester: As Cambden proves from that old Verse, Gormonis a Castri nomine nomen habet. I am very unwilling, I must confess, to con∣found this Gormo with King Aelfred's God-son, who (as far as we can learn from English wri∣ters) never sat in the Throne of Denmark; nei∣ther do the times agree. But the Danish Histo∣rians will have it so; and 'tis in vain to seek for satisfaction in the midst of such confusion as we meet with in their writings. 7. Harald, surnam'd Blaatand, succeeded his father Gormo. In his days the Danes threw up that famous Trench between Gottorp and Sles∣wic, call'd Dannewirck: of which we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. 8. Sueno (or Svenotho, surnamed Tuiskeg, i. e. fork'd-beard) succeeded Harald. At first he was an Heathen, and a severe persecutor of the Christians: but afterwards he turned Christian himself, and founded three Bishopricks, at Sleswic, Ripe, and Arhuse. Some say, he dyed in the year 1012, and was buried at York: others make him live till the year 1014, and bring him to his grave in Denmark. 9. Canutus the Great, son to Sueno. He was at once King of England, Denmark, Sweden, Nor∣way, Slavonia, and Sambland; some make him King, or Duke at least, of Normandy. And this seems to be the meaning of that old Distich which (not reckoning either Slavonia or Samb∣land a Kingdom) brings him in thus speak∣ing of himself, Facta mihi Magni pepererunt inclyta nomen, Quinque sub imperio regna fuere meo. He was buried at Winchester, in the year 1036, after he had been twenty-seven years King of Denmark, twenty-four of England, and seven of Norway; leaving the Kingdom of Denmark to his son 10. Hardi-Cnute; who within four years obtain'd the Kingdom of England, upon the death of
hs brother Harald. Here he dyed, in the year 1041, and was buried by his father in the Ca∣thedral at Winchester. 11. Magnus, King of Norway, seized on the King∣dom of Denmark upon the death of Hardi-Cnute; pretending a title to it by contract. But he enjoy'd it not long. He dyed in the year 1048, and left the Kingdom to 12. Sveno Esthret, son on one Ʋlf an English Earl. He dyed in the year 1074, and left behind him five sons, who all of them sate successively in their fathers Throne. 13. Harald, Sveno's eldest son, held the Scepter only two years. He was a soft easie and ti∣morous Prince; afraid to punish offenders, or to look an enemy in the face. So that the English, making use of the opportunity, shook off the Danish yoke without any considerable molestation. 14. St. Canutus, King Swain's second son, was barbarously murder'd in St. Alban's Church in Odensee (a City in the Isle of Funen) whi∣ther he fled for sanctuary from the rage of his own Subjects, in the year 1088, (Pontanus says 1077). The occasion was this: The pious King commanded that all his Subjects should pay Tythes, according to the custom of other Nations. This Edict was represented to the people (by his brother Olaf, who long'd for the Crown) as an encroachment upon the priviledges and liberty of the Subject. Where∣upon they quickly rose in open rebellion against their Soveraign; who, to appease the rage of the rabble, was martyr'd. 15. Olaf, Swain's third son, upon the slaughter of his brother Cnute (which he traiterously had procured), was by his followers unani∣mously declared King. But his brothers blood went not long unrevenged. For in this Kings days the famine was so great in Denmark, that even the Kings Houshold wanted bread. Olaf, at last sensible that this judgment was inflicted on the Kingdom for his sins, pray'd that God would turn the current of his vengeance from the people, upon his head that had offended. His prayers were heard; and the same night (in the year 1096) he dyed hungry and mi∣serable, and the famine immediately abated. 16. Eric Swain's fourth son, (surnam'd the Good for his religious zeal and piety), who dyed in his pilgrimage towards Jerusalem, and was bu∣ryed in the Isle of Cyprus, in the year 1106. In his days Lunden was made an Archbishops See; before which time all the Danish Bishops were under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Bremen. 17. Nicolas, Sveno's youngest son. He was slain by the Jutes, in revenge of Cnute Duke of Flanders (whom he had caused to be killed in the Church), in the year 1135. 18. Eric Emund, a pious and good King, suc∣ceeded his Uncle Nicolas: and was barbarously murder'd by one Plag Sorte (a Nobleman of Jutland) in his own Palace, in the year 1139. 19. Eric Lamb succeeded his Uncle Eric Emund. He laid down his scepter, and put himself into a Monastery at Odensee in Funen; where he dyed, in the year 1147. 20. Swain Gratenhede, Eric Emund's son, got the Crown upon the death of his Kinsman Eric Lamb. In this mans days there were three Kings of Denmark at the same time: Some running after Cnute, King Nicolas's Grandchild; others following Waldemar, son to Cnute Duke of Flanders. After some skirmishes, in which both Swain and Cnute were slain, the whole Kingdom was rul'd by 21. Waldemar, surnam'd the Great. He was Lord of all the Countries on the North of the Elb, and dyed in the year 1182, leaving the King∣dom to his son 22. Cnute. He bravely maintain'd a war against the Emperor of Germany, who would needs demand homage of the Kings of Denmark. He dyed at Ringstede in the year 1202. 23. Waldemar II. Cnute's brother. He new mo∣dell'd the Danish; conquer'd Norway, and set over it a Vice-Roy; vanquish'd and put to flight the Emperor Otto, who thought to have made himself Master of Holslein; and having reign'd victoriously thirty-nine years, dyed in the year 1241 (Crantzius says 1242). 24. Eric Plog-penning, Waldemar's son. He was taken at Sleswic, and slain by his brother 25. Abel, who reign'd wickedly two years, and was then murder'd by his rebellious Subjects, in the year 1252. 26. Christopher I. brother to Eric and Abel. He lived in a continual war with his own people; to whom rebellion was now grown natural. Some of the Danish Chronicles say, he was at last (in the year 1259) poyson'd by Arne∣fast Bishop of Arhuse; as the Emperor Henry the Seventh was afterwards by Bernardine the Monk with the Eucharist. 27. Eric Glipping, King Christopher's son, who be∣ing seated in his fathers Throne, gave himself up to all manner of lewdness and debauchery. His whole life is nothing else but a Catalogue of his oppressions, sacriledges, murders, and whoredoms. After a long uninterrupted course of wickedness, sleeping one night in a Barn at Findetorp (a small Village in the Bishoprick of Wiberg) he was murder'd with fifty-six (some say seventy) wounds, given him by seven Ruf∣fians, hired to dispatch him by Andrew Stigot (Marshal of Danemark, whose wife he had ra∣vish'd), and some others of the Nobility, in the year 1286. 28. Eric Menved, Glipping's son. He was as godly a Prince as his father was impious. The mur∣derers of his father had conspired his death; but were prevented by Providence, which pro∣tected him both from the lewd life and mise∣rable death of his Ancestors. So that he dyed, as he had lived, peaceably, in the year 1319, and was buryed at Ringstad; where his Epitaph is still to be seen, as follows: Ego Ericus, quondam Daniae Rex, regnans ann. xxxij. Rectus Justiciarius pauperum & divitum ubi jus habuerunt. Oro omnes, quibus aliquid forefeci, ut mihi per suam gratiam indulgeant, & orent pro anima mea. Qui obii A. D. 1319. die beati Brixij Episcopi & Confessoris. 29. Christopher II. Menved's brother. He trod in his fathers steps, and ended his days like him. He is reported to have been an unfortunate, sluggish, cruel, and perfidious Prince; an ha∣ter of the Nobility, and hated by the Com∣monalty. Had he had any sense of Religion, policy, or common honesty in him, he might have been an happy Prince: for never were the Danes more unwilling to rebel and take up arms against their King then in his days, tho never more provok'd to it. Having lin∣ger'd out a reign of about thirteen years, he dyed at last forsaken of all, neglected and un∣pity'd, at Nicoping in the Isle of Falster, in the year 1333. After this Kings death the Danes seem'd to be weary of a supreme Soveraign, and resolv'd
not to set any more over them. They fancy'd, 'twas more eligible to have no King at all, then, such as they had the bad luck to meet with, a Sot or a Tyrant. But, after fifteen years con∣fusion, they found it was better to have an ake∣ing head then none at all. Whereupon, weary of their new Anarchy, they resolv'd to establish in the Throne of his father 30. Waldemar III. King Christopher's son; who re∣collected the scatter'd members of the King∣dom into one body, and dismounted most of the Usurpers, without any great blood∣shed. He is represented as a Prince of great sub∣tilty, avarice, and boldness. When Pope Gre∣gory XI. threatned to excommunicate him for his saucy behaviour, and sleighting of the Apo∣stolic See; he is said to have return'd this an∣swer: Valdemarus Rex Daniae, &c. Romano Pontifici salutem; vitam habemus a Deo, regnum ab in∣colis, divitias a parentibus, fidem vero a tuis praedecessoribus, quam si nobis non faves, remit∣timus per praesentes. Vale. i. e. Waldemar King of Denmark, &c. To the Bishop of Rome sendeth greeting. We hold our life from God, our Kingdom from our Subjects, our Riches from our Pa∣rents, and our Faith from thy Predeces∣sors, which, if thou will not grant us any longer, we do by these presents re∣sign. Farewel. He dyed in the year 1375, and was buried by his father at Sora. 31. Margaret, King Waldemar's daughter, was upon the death of her father crown'd Queen of Denmark; and manag'd the Scepter more discreetly then almost any of the Kings her Predecessors had done. A womans govern∣ment seem'd at first a little uncouth: but her Subjects soon found a great deal of satis∣faction in her prudent management of affairs at home, and wise conduct abroad, when in one Campagn she took Albert King of Swe∣den, Rodulph Archbishop of Scharen, the Duke of Mecklenburg, and the Earls of Holstein and Reppin, prisoners. Her father was wont to say of her, That Nature intended her for a man, but spoil'd her in the making. She dyed a great friend to Religion, and Patroness of the Cler∣gy, and was buryed at Roschild in the year 1412, leaving the Kingdom to her Great-Nephew 32. Eric, son of Ʋratislaw VII. Duke of Pomeren. Who, having spent a great many years in ty∣ranny, rapine, perjury, oppression, and whore∣dom, was at last (in the year 1438) forced to quit his Throne, and fly from the fury of his incens'd Nobles into Gothland: whither he carried with him a vast treasure, and one Ce∣cilia his Concubine, who, by her evil coun∣sels and proud humours, brought him to these extremities. 33. Christopher Duke of Bavaria and Count Pa∣latine of the Rhine, another of King Waldemar's Great-Grandchildren, succeeding Eric in the Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. His reign was short, but prosperous; espe∣cially against the Rebels in Jutland and the Hans Towns. He dyed (childless) at Helsing∣burgh in the year 1447. The Danish Chro∣nicles are full of his commendations; but Jo∣hannes Gothus, and other Swedish Historians, will not by any means allow him so good a character. 34. Christian I. son of Theodoric Count of Olden∣burgh, was elected King of Denmark upon the death of King Christopher. He was a generous, pious, and valiant Prince; but wholly igno∣rant of all manner of learning. He reduc'd the Swedes to their Allegiance, who in the beginning of his reign had revolted from the Crown of Denmark; annex'd Holstein to his Dominions; made himself Duke of Dithmars and Stormar; and, having ruled three and thirty years, dyed in peace, in the year 1481, and was buryed in a Chappel which he himself had built at Roschild; leaving his Crown to his son 35. John; who was a Prince endued with all the Royal qualities of his father. He was devout in exercises of Religion; temperate in diet; grave in apparel; and valiant in exploits of war, which (excepting only the overthrow he receiv'd from the Dithmarsians in the year 1500) proved exceeding successful. He dyed of the plague at Olburgh, in the year 1513. 35. Christian II. King John's son, who was the bloodiest, cruellest, and most dissolute Prince that Denmark, or perhaps any other King∣dom, ever saw. Lindenbruch gives this cha∣racter of him, That Nero, Phalaris, and Sylla, put in the scales against him, would signifie no more then half an ounce to a pound weight. Meur∣sius reports, that he was born with one hand grasp'd, which when the Midwife opened, she found full of blood. This was look'd upon, by his father, as a certain prognostic of a bloody mind: of which his subjects had af∣terwards a lamentable experience. The only good he ever did his Country, was the found∣ing a Fair, and establishing a more then ordi∣nary trade, at Copenhagen. At last, after he had by his wickedness thrown himself out of three Kingdoms, and for six and thirty years un∣dergone the miseries of banishment or impri∣sonment, he dyed in the Castle of Kallenborg in Zeeland, in the year 1559. 36. Frideric I. King John's brother, succeeded his Nephew Christian. As soon as he was Crown'd (in the year 1524) he begun to bring the Augspur Confession into all the Churches of Denmark. He ruled almost ten year in quiet∣ness, and dyed at Sleswig in the year 1533. 37. Christian III. Frideric's son. He perfected the reformation which his father had begun in the Church. He lived (and dyed in the year 1559) a Prince of singular piety, wisdom, temperance, justice, and all Royal virtues: And left behind a fair pattern of a happy King and good Christian to his son 37. Frederic II. Who, having exactly imitated his fathers example, after a happy reign of twenty-nine years, dyed in his Palace of An∣derscow in the year 1587. Immediately after his Coronation he was engag'd in a war against the rebels of Dithmars, whom he quell'd with small trouble. Afterwards he waged war with Eric XIV. King of Sweden, which lasted seven years. The rest of his days were spent in peace and quietness. 39. Christian IV. before his fathers burial was elected, and soon after crown'd, King of Den∣mark. In his reign the Emperor of Germany (Ferdinand II.) overrun the greatest part of the Cimbrian Chersonese; and had once well nigh brought the whole Kingdom of Den∣mark under his subjection. But King Christian, contracting as it were all the exspiring Spirits of his Realm, made the Imperialists at last give ground, and brought them to a Treaty upon honourable terms. He dyed in the
year 1648; and was succeeded by his son 40. Frederic III. Who receiv'd as great a blow from the Swedes as his father had done from the Germans. Charles Gustave, the victorious King of Sweden, had brought him to that ex∣tremity as to lay close siege to Copenhagen, which City, and consequently the whole Kingdom of Denmark, would doubtless have faln into the hands of the Swedes, had not the Empe∣ror of Germany, the King of Poland, and most of the Northern Princes (jealous of the grow∣ing power of the Swedish King) concern'd themselves in the defence of it. He that de∣sires a further account of the beginning, con∣tinuance, and end of these Northern wars, may have recourse to the accurate history of them written by R. Manley, and printed in the year 1670. King Frideric got his Nobles per∣swaded to consent, that the Kingdom of Den∣mark, as well as that of Norway, should be Hereditary: and was himself proclaim'd he∣reditary King, the twenty-third day of Octo∣ber in the year 1660. He dyed of a Fever the twenty-fifth day of February 16 69/70. and that night, (as is before said) the Nobility swore Alle∣giance to the new King 41. Christian V. now reigning. A valiant and active Prince. The Royal Family of Denmark consists of the Children of the King, and his near Relations, together with the Princes of Sunderburg, Norburg, Gluckburg, Arnsbeck, Gottorp, and Ottingen or Oy∣tin; who are all descended from King Christian the third, excepting the Houses of Oytin and Got∣torp, who are the issue of his brother Adolph Duke of Sleswic. The Nobles (who never pretend to, nor ac∣cept of the Titles of, Dukes, Earls, or Barons) are such as have for many ages had a single Coat of Arms belonging to their Family; which they never alter, nor quarter with any other. There are to this day some Families of the Nobility in Denmark (as Wren, and others) who are said to have been at the signing of a Treaty of Peace between Charles the Great and King Hemming, on the Eidor. Upon the death of any Noble∣man, all his goods (moveable and immoveable) are divided amongst his Children: so, as a son has two moieties and a daughter only one. By the Laws of Denmark the King is prohibited to purchase any part of a Nobleman's Estate: nor can any of the Nobility buy any of the Crown Lands. A Catalogue of the names of the chief Noblemen at this day in Denmark, is given us by the Author of L'Estat des Royaumes de l'Europe, in the following Alphabetical order: Achsel, Appelgard, Alefeld, Andersem; Bielke, Banner, Brache, Bilig, Below, Bild, Brokenhusem, Biorn, Beck, Blick, Bassi, Bax, Baselich, Bockowlt, Budde, Baggen, Bammelberg, Brune, Blom, Block∣torp, Breiden; Daac, Dresselberch, Dune, Duram, Dam; Freze, Fassi, Falster, Falcke; Guldenstern, Grubbe, Goce, Green, Gelschut, Galle, Gram, Gris, Goss, Gadendorp, Grabow; Hardenberg, Holke, Ho∣ken, Hiderstorper, Hube, Hesten, Hager, Holer, Hoe∣ken, Hoier, Hacken, Harberger; Jul, Juensen, Ju∣enan, Jensen, Johensen; Korwitz, Krabbe, Kaas, Krusen, Kragge, Krumpen, Krumdick, Kercberg, Kars∣senbrock, Koelet, Knutzen; Lange, Lindeman, Lunge, Lutkem, Laxman, Lancken, Leven, Lindow; Munck, Matiessen, Marizer, Must, Matre, Meinstorf, Moeten, Magnussen; Negel, Narbu, Norman; Ofren, Otten; Pasberg, Podessen, Podebussen, Papenheimb, Podwisch, Plessen, Pensen, Paisen, Petersen; Qualem, Quittow; Ranzaw, Rosenkrantz, Rastorp, Ruthede, Reuter, Ruten, Rosenspart, Rosengard, Ronnow, Reventlow, Ratlow, Ritzerow; Schram, Schefeldt, Schelen, Seestedt, Stuege, Swron, Stantbeke, Split, Solle, Swaben, Sant∣barch, Spar, Spegel, Sturen, Suinem, Staken, Stove, Siversen; Trolle, Totten; Vhrup, Vonsflet, Vantin∣nen, Ʋken, Voien, Ʋlstandt, Vren; Wlefeld, Walken∣dorp, Wipfert, Witfelt, Wogersen Wenfsterman, Wolde, Worm, Walstorp, Wenfin, Wittorp. Though none of these are ever made Dukes,Knights. Marquises, Earls, or Barons; yet 'tis usual for many of them to be dubb'd Knights, upon any considerable piece of service done their King or Country. The Danes call their Knights Ridders, i. e. Equites, Riders: and all their offspring have the title of Riddersmens men. The most noble Order of Knighthood in Den∣mark,Knights of the Ele∣phant. is that Of the Elephant. Of which we cannot have a better account then is given us by the Learned Elias Ashmole Esquire, Windsor Herald at Arms, in his famous work of The Institution, Laws, and Ceremonies of the most Noble Order of the Garter, p. 120. Observing, saith he, some diffe∣rence among writers touching the Institution, Collar, and Ensign of this Order, I was in doubt what to say, till at length I haply met with better satisfaction from a Letter wrote in the year 1537, by Avo Bilde Bishop of Arhusen, some∣time Chancellor to John King of Denmark and Norway, unto John Fris Chancellor to King Chri∣stian the third; a copy whereof was commu∣nicated to me by Monsieur Cristoftle Lindenow Envoy from Christian the fifth, now King of Denmark, to his sacred Majesty, the present So∣veraign of the most Noble Order of the Gar∣ter. This Letter informs him of the Institution, and some other particulars relating to the Or∣der, to wit, That King Christian the first being at Rome (whither he had travel'd upon a reli∣gious account) Pope Sixtus the fourth, among other honours, invested him with this Order, in memory of the Passion of our Lord and Sa∣viour; and withall ordain'd, that the dignity of Chief and Supreme should be continued, as a successive right, to the succeeding Kings of Denmark. This King founded the magnificent Chappel of the three Kings in the Cathedral Church at Roschild (four leagues from Copen∣hagen) where the Knights were obliged to as∣semble, upon the death of any of their frater∣nity. He also admitted thereinto divers Kings, Princes, and Noblemen. The chief Ensign of this Order was the figure of an Elephant, on whose side (within a rundle) was represented a Crown of Thorns, with three Nails all bloody; in honour and memory of the Passion of our blessed Saviour. The Knights were obliged to the performance of acts of Piety, Alms-deeds, and certain Ceremonies; especially upon those days on which they wore the Ensigns of the Order: But King John set so high a value upon it, that he wore them on every solemn Festi∣val. He also advanc'd the honour of this Or∣der to so great esteem, that it became accepted by both our King Henry the eighth, and James the fifth of Scotland, his sisters son; with whom the Ensigns thereof remain'd as a pledg and assurance of constant and perpetual friendship; with these he likewise invested divers Ambassa∣dors, Senators, and Noble Danes. There is one Ivarus Nicholai Hertholm, a learned Dane (as I am inform'd) who hath written a particular Treatise of the Elephantine Order, but not yet printed. The scope whereof is to shew, that the before mentioned Epistle of the Bishop of Arhusen, does not sufficiently make it appear, that it received its first Institution when Chri∣stian the first had those many honours confer'd on him by Pope Sixtus the fourth. And that
the Badge was an Ensign meerly Military; an∣ciently given as a memorial and incitement to the Danish Princes, who took upon them the defence of Christianity against the Moors and Africans. 'Tis greatly presumed, that this Book (which we hope may shortly be published) will furnish the world with many choice things re∣lating to the antiquity and honour of the In∣stitution, Ensigns, and Ceremonies of the Royal Order. Heretofore the Knights wore a Collar of Gold, compos'd of Elephants and Crosses, fashioned something like Crosses ancrees (Men∣nenius calls them Spurs) at which hung the picture of the Virgin Mary to the middle, hold∣ing Christ in her arms, and surrounded with a Glory of Sun-beams. But they have long since laid this Collar aside, and now wear only a blew Ribbon, at which hangs an Elephant enamel'd white, adorn'd with five large Dia∣monds set in the middle. Those Elephants worn by the Knights in the days of Christian the fourth, had in the same place within a circle the Letter C, and in the heart thereof the figure of 4, made to signifie Christianus quartus. This honour hath most commonly been conferr'd by the Kings of Denmark, on the day of their Coronation, both upon the Nobles and Senators of the Kingdom. It seems Frederic the third brought into use (in imita∣tion of the most Noble Order of the Garter) an embroider'd Glory of Silver Purl, wrought upon the left side of their Cloak or Vest, on which was embroider'd two Crowns within a Rundle, bearing this Motto, Deus Providebit; for such an one did Count Guldenlow (Ambassa∣dor hither from that King) wear at his resi∣ding here in England in the year 1669. But we are to note, that the Motto hath changed with the King, for that of the present King is Pietate & Justitia; and this the Knights of his election now wear in the middle of the circle. Nevertheless, all the Knights created by his father, are obliged still to continue the former Motto. In remembrance of the Danebroge (or holy Danish Cross) which was thought miraculously to have preserved King Waldemar the Second's Army from the fury of the Lieflanders (as we shall have occasion hereafter to shew when we come to speak of the Arms of this Kingdom) that King instituted the Order of Knights of the holy Cross.Knights of Dane∣broge. Which continued till the relique it self was lost in Ditmarss: but then was, for many years, quite lay'd aside. Of late the present King Christian the fifth revived this antiquated Order in the year 1672. Ordaining, That Knights of this Order, of which he him∣self is one, should wear a white enamell'd Cross edged round with red, hung in a string of the same colours reaching from the right shoulder to the left side. Thomas Bartholinus P. has given us a large account of the first Original, Progress, Restauration, &c. of this Order. To whom we refer the Reader. Out of these Knights,Senators. and the rest of the No∣bility, were chosen formerly the Senators; who seldom exceeded the number of eight, but are now a far greater number. As long as they conti∣nued in their places, they were maintain'd (as our Parliament may be, if they please, during their sitting) by the Country. The King allow'd them Castles to live in. They pay'd no Taxes: but were obliged to keep a certain number of Light-horse ready for service upon all occasions. They were bound to attend the King, at his call, upon their own charges: provided he stir'd not out of his own dominions. But if he sent them on an Am∣bassy into other Princes Courts, they had an al∣lowance out of the Treasury. Besides these, there are others that live as Pen∣sioners;Pensio∣ners. to whom the King, in requital of some good services done him, assigns certain Livings (for life or a set number of years, forlaeninger) out of which they are to provide so many Light-horse as the King thinks fit, and pay in yearly such a sum of money into the Treasury. But these are neither so numerous nor large as before the alteration of Government in the year 1660. Again, out of the Nobility are chosen all the Court-Officers. Of which the chiefest are, 1.Court-Officers. The Chancellor. 2. The Admiral; who takes care of the building and repairing of all sorts of Ships belonging to the Crown. He has under him a Vice-Admiral, who acts by his Commission. 3. The Marshal, who provides necessaries for all manner of dispatches in the times of war and peace. 4. The Treasurer, who receives in, and gives acquittan∣ces for all summs paid into the Kings Exchequer: he has under him two Secretaries of the Nobi∣lity, and a great number of inferior Scribes. 5. The Master of the Horse. There are only seven Bishopricks in Denmark;Bishop∣ricks. which are all (as in England) in the Kings gift. 1. Copenhagen; where the Bishop has Archiepis∣copal rights, tho without the title. 2. Ripen and 3. Arhusen; both in the Northern Jutland. 4. O∣densee in Funen. 5. Wiburg. 6. Arhusen. 7. Sleswic, in the Southern Jutland. The Cities are governed by their distinct Cor∣porations.Cit. And the Citizens enjoy peculiar Pri∣viledges and Charters as in other parts of Europe. The Rustics are either Freeholders [Frybun∣der],Rustics. such as have hereditary Estates, paying only some small Quit-rent to their Landlords. Or Wornede, Villains, absolutely in the power of their Lords. Whilst the Kingdom of Denmark lay confused and broken into several incoherent parts,La. the Provinces had not all the same Laws; but were governed by peculiar Statutes, established by their petty, but independent, Princes. Whence in Danish Authors we meet often with mention made of the Leges Scanicae, Leges Sialandicae, &c. But afterwards, when all these scatter'd members came to be re-united under the same head; they were all subject to the same Government and Laws. The Laws now in use were drawn into one body (which they call the Jydske Lowbog, or the Book of the Laws of Jutland) and established by King Waldemar the first, and revised and confirm'd by Waldemar the second. To the observation of these, as the only Municipal Laws of the Land, the Kings of Denmark have formerly bin sworn at their Coro∣nation. Howbeit, some of them have been since changed. As for instance, by the ancient Laws of Denmark (as well as in England, as may ap∣pear by the frequent mention of manbot and wer∣gild in our English-Saxon Laws) murder was not punished with death, but a pecuniary mulct. This custom was observed till the days of Christian the third; who, looking upon it as a constitution inconsistent with the Law of God and dictates of humane reason, abrogated it; ordering, that from thenceforward wilful murder should be judged a capital crime. The ancient Danes were so careful and zealous to transmit their Estates to their right heirs, that (tho they could be so merciful as to suffer murderers to live, yet) they punished Adultery with death. Which Law is still in force in Saxony (as may be seen in any Sachsen-Spiegel) and many other parts of Ger∣many. The fashion of deciding all manner of causes in our English Courts by a Jury of twelve men,Jud∣ture. may seem to have bin borrowed from the Danes; who
used formerly (as they do still in some parts of Jutland) to assemble every Parish by themselves, once a year in the fields to determine all dif∣ferences by twelve select men. From whom, if the disagreeing parties were not reconciled, an appeal lay to the Judge of the Province; and thence to the supreme Court of Justice; as is shown before. The Heathen Danes had another way of de∣termining Controversies by Duels; in which the Challenger was to demonstrate the justice of his cause by his success. This custom lasted till the first planting of Christianity by Poppo: who, to confirm the truth of his Doctrine, took up with his bare hands glowing-hot bars of Iron, without the least harm, to the admiration of all beholders. This miracle wrought not only a change in the Religion, but Laws also of the Kingdom. For hereupon King Sueno, or Sue∣notto, ordered, That thence forward all persons accused of any hainous crime, should clear themselves by carrying in their hands a glow∣ing plough-share, or some other piece of hot i∣ron. This kind of purging is called by some of the Danish Writers Jerntegn, i. e. Iron-token: by others Ordale. Whence this last word should fetch its original is not agreed on by our modern Etymo∣logists. Verstegan brings it from Or, an old word for Law, and deal, a part or portion. And indeed the German word Ʋhrteil seems to favour this de∣rivation. Our fore-fathers, the Saxons, had bor∣rowed from the Danes several kinds of Ordale. As, by carrying a bar of hot iron up to the high Altar bare hand; by treading barefoot and blind∣fold over a certain number of glowing barrs laid on the ground at unequal distances; by thrust∣ing the naked arm into a pot of boiling water; and lastly, as they use to try Witches, by throw∣ing the accused party into a River or deep Ves∣sel of cold water. He that desires to see an ex∣act account of the ceremonies used in the second and third kinds of Ordale may read them at large in the Ecclesiastical Laws of King Athelstane, pub∣lished by the Learned Sr. Henry Spelman, Concil. Britann. tom. 1. pag. 404. And in the same Kings Laws, as they are published by Mr. Lambard, you have the other two sorts described. The first that throughly abolished all kinds of Ordale in Denmark was King Waldemar the Second, about the year 1240, at the request of Pope Innocent the Third: who thought it an intolerable and hai∣nous impiety thus to tempt God. Barclay, in his Icon Animorum, wonders that such innumerable swarms of men should sally out of these parts as were able to overrun the greatest part of Europe; whereas at this day there is such a scarcity of Inhabitants that the King of Den∣mark is hardly able to wage war with any of his Neighbours without a supply of Souldiers out of foreign Countries. But this is no such great miracle, when we consider how the vastest Em∣pires in the World (Assyria, Egypt, Judaea and Rome it self, vainly flattered with the name of Ʋrbs Aeterna) have had their periods. The greatest strength of the King of Denmark (as of all Prin∣ces of Isles) consists chiefly in the number of their Mariners and good Ships. In all Skirmishes and Wars between the Dane and Swede, it is obvious to observe how much the latter have usually pre∣vail'd at Land, and the former at Sea. Christian the second, upon a short warning, fitted out a hundred good men of war to aid Henry the Se∣cond King of France against the English; and this present King has a much larger Fleet always ready for action. The Danish King can afford to build yearly twelve men of war, without im∣poverishing his Exchequer. And in this Naval force the power of Denmark chiefly consists. Their Vessels were formerly bulky, large and unwieldy; unfit either for flying or pursuit. But now they build more advantageously; and thereby they are enabled to furnish themselves with many more Ships in proportion then otherwise they could, and those easier man'd and fitter for ser∣vice. The yearly revenue of the King of Denmark ariseing from the rents of Crown-Lands,Revenues. Custom∣lands, Custom-money, Tithes, and other con∣tingences, is not easily stated. Some measure may be taken from the income brought in by the Customers of Elsineur, raised from those infinite sholes of Merchant Ships which daily pass the Sundt. Every Ship that passes that way, pays for each mast a Rose-noble, or four Rixdollars. And it has been observed, that usually 200 Ships, often 400, and sometimes 600, pass by in one day. But reckoning only 200 to pass daily, and each of these to pay two Rosenobles or eight Rix∣dollars for two masts, for each day in the year, there will be gathered about 400 pound of our money. Nor is the revenue arising from the exportation of Cattle much inferiour; when for every beast the Customers take a Rixdol∣lar. Coins in use are: Ducates of Gold,Money. of the va∣lue of two Rixdollars; or Crowns of Gold, of the value of either eighteen or nineteen Marks. Or the double of these. The lesser Danish coins are 1. Hvide, whereof three make one of their Shillings. 2. Soslinger, whereof two make one Shilling. 3. Shilling, whereof sixteen make a Mark. 4. A Mark, which is the fourth part of a Slet-dollar. 5. A Rixdollar, which is six Mark or ninety-six Shillings. Besides the Bards or Druids,Learning. we have an ac∣count of many other kinds of Poets and Learned men among the antient Danes. Wormius tells us the several sorts of Verses composed by the Sci∣aldri and Runae are innumerable; but may be at least the best of them, reduced to 136 heads. It was formerly the custom of all the Northern Nations to have the Genealogies and famous deeds of their Ancestours put into Doggerell; that, being daily tuned over by parents to their children, they might be the easilier remembred and handed down to posterity. These ballads they called Viiser, i. e. Wise-sayings. (And how much the Wisdom of the Antients consisted in Poe∣tical compositions and fables, is sufficiently shown by the Incomparable Sr. Francis Bacon.) The Composers of these Songs were reckoned among the Grandees of the Nation, and always attended the Prince as his wisest Counsellours. Nay, so great was the esteem the people had of these men; that Hiarnus is said to have had the Crown of Denmark presented him as a reward for an E∣pitaph made upon the deceased King Frotho: a story hardly to be parallel'd in any of the An∣nals of other nations, except we believe (what St. Augustine cites Varro for) that there was once a Nation so enamour'd of musick as to make a Trumpeter their King. In Seland, betwixt Ros∣chilt and Slangendorp, there is a small hill, called to this day Frode-Hoy, where they say King Fro∣tho was buried. The neigbourhood report, That the Kings Grave-stone, upon which this fa∣mous Epitaph was writ, was not many years since broken and carried to mend a bridg at the bottom of the hill. The Copy of these precious Verses (if we may judge of the worth of them by the price) is not to be met with in the Ori∣ginal language. Saxo Grammaticus, who calls them barbarum metrum, saw them; and has gi∣ven
us this Latine translation of them: Frothonem Dani quem longum vivere vellent, Per sua defunctum rura tulere diu. Principis hoc summi tumulatum cespite corpus, Aethere sub liquido nuda recondit humus. I cannot tell whether this instance will prove (if we do grant it to be true) that Learning flourished much in Denmark about these times. However, from the many ancient Runic Epi∣taphes and Inscriptions published by Wormius, 'tis manifest that the Danes were of old Lovers (at least) of learning. Afterwards as soon as Learn∣ing begun to spread its dominions beyond the narrow confines of Rome or Athens, Denmark had its share of Scholars. 'Twere an endless task to give a complete Re∣gister of all the Danish Authors:Learned Men. I shall therefore content my self with a short Catalogue of some few, who have always been esteemed men of great learning and sound judgment, and most of them excellent at some piece of knowledg. 1. Saxo Grammaticus, who lived in the twelfth Century, has writ the History of Denmark in so elegant a stile; that Erasmus was amazed to find so much Rhetoric and clean Latine in Denmark; especially in so barbarous an age as Saxo lived in. 2. Erasmus Laetus, Professour of Divinity in the University of Copenhagen, has published ma∣ny learned works; of which Gesner has given a large Catalogue. 3. Nicolaus Hemmingius, famous for his acute Commentaries on several parts of the Scripture. He died at Roschilt, A. D. 1600. 4. All Europe, as well as Denmark, do to this day gratefully acknowledge the vast improve∣ments which Astronomy (the noblest and most ancient of all the sciences) has received from the admirable observations of Tycho Brahe, a Danish Nobleman; to whom King Frideric the Second gave the Island Ween, as a place remote from all trouble, and fit for a Students retirement. Here Tycho, about the year 1575, built his Ʋraniburg; (an Observatory built like a Castle, and fenced round with regular fortifications) which he a∣dorned with a collection of the most exact Ma∣thematical Instruments that could possibly be made or procured. Among his many Admi∣rers, who daily flock'd from all parts of the Learned world to pay him their respects, our Learned King James (returning from the cele∣bration of his marriage with Queen Ann) lodged three nights together in the Island with him; and afterwards honour'd him with a letter from his own hands, dated at Holy-rood House, Au∣gust 1, 1593. The learned Resenius (at the end of his Inscriptiones Hafnienses) gives us a large ac∣count of the life and death of this famous man, and an exact description of the Ʋraniburg. 5. Christianus Severini Longomontanus, was bred up in the Science of Astronomy by Tycho, whom he assisted many years in his Observations. After∣wards, he was made publick Professour of Astro∣nomy at Copenhagen: where he writ his Astronomia Danica, (printed at Amsterdam by Janssonius) in which he explains the various motions of the Planets according to his Master Tycho's Hypothe∣sis and some observations by himself in the Isle of Ween. Had he given over writing as soon as he had finished this work, or medled with no o∣ther parts of Mathematics but Astronomy; he might have ended his days, as he spent his youth, in good repute and credit. But, after he had be∣stowed above thirty years of his dotage in la∣bouring to demonstrate the square of a circle, (which he fancied he had at last conquered in that peice of his entituled De vera Circuli mensura 4o. Amstelodami A. D. 1644.) he became so ridi∣culous, as to have the work of so many years confuted in one page by our learned Dr. Pell; at that time publick Professor of Mathematicks in Amsterdam. 6. Arrild Witfield, Lord of Odersberch, and some∣time Chancellour of Denmark, was the first that reduced Saxo's History to a Chronological me∣thod, annexing the year to every memorable passage. Besides, he composed and published an accurate Chronicle of the Kings of Denmark and Norway in the Danish tongue: of which work Pontanus, who was once his Clerk, gives a very high Character. 7. Stephanus Stephanius, Professour of History in the University at Sor, has illustrated Saxo Gram∣maticus with most accurate and learned Notes. Besides, he writ an exact account of the affairs of Denmark during the reign of Christian the Third, from the year 1550 to 1559; which, since his death, was printed at Sor A. D. 1650. 8. Olaus Wormius, late Regius Professor of Phy∣sick in Copengagen (besides the rare collection he made of natural Curiosities; of which his Mu∣saeum Wormianum is nothing else but a Catalogue) has with great diligence and success made disco∣very of that venerable and mysterious part of learning which before his time, had lain unre∣garded for many ages in every corner of Den∣mark. His Literatura Runica, Monumenta Danica, Fasti Danici, and other writings of this kind, are enough to inform any man how much his own Countrey-men, and all that are well-wishers to learning, are indebted to his indefatigable pains and industry. 9. Petrus Johannes Resenius, Professor of Moral Philosophy and Counsellour to the present King of Denmark, has for several years last past applyed himself to an Enquiry after the antiquities of his Country. In order to which he has made a much larger Collection of Runic Monuments then ever Wormius met with; which (as I am informed) he designs ere long to publish in a work of some Volumes. The Edda Islandorum (and other an∣tient pieces, already printed) may give us a tast of his abilities in these severer Studies, and teach us what to expect from so curious an Anti∣quary. To these many more (as Petrus Severinus, the two Bartholins, Borrichius, and several others which are to found in Erasmus Vindingii his Academia Hafniensis) might be added: but those that have been reckoned up, are sufficient to shew us how much Denmark has contributed to the ad∣vancement of Learning. What kind of Idols and false Gods were wor∣shipped by the antient Danes,Re. and in what man∣ner shall be shewn at large in the Description of Island. Christianity begun to be first planted in these Northern Countries by King Eric, who had been baptized in Germany at the request of the Emperor Ludovicus; but it took no deep root at first. For Eric, being setled in his Throne, re∣lapsed into his former paganism, and turned a bitter persecutor of St. Anschar (who was sent to promote the Christian Religion in Denmark, Nor∣way, &c. by the said Emperor and Pope Gregory the Fourth, A. D. 835) and his followers. Af∣ter this (tho some of them were initiated in Chri∣stianity, yet) the Christians had no considerable footing in this Kingdom, before the reign of King Sueno Tweskeg: who at his Baptism had the Emperor Otho II, to his God-father, and from him was afterwards called Suenotho. He (by the as∣sistance of Poppo, who, as we have said, confirm'd
his doctrine by a miracle which introduced the use of fire-Ordale) established the Christian reli∣ligion upon a sure foundation, and appointed se∣veral Bishops in the Kingdom. Frideric Duke of Holstein, being elected King of Denmark, brought with him the Augsburg Confession; which has e∣ver since been professed in that Kingdom. Chri∣stian the third gave liberty to the English, Scots, and Hollanders to build Churches and have the free exercise of their religion; though no Cal∣vinists are to be found except some few at the present Queens Chappel. Those few Papists that live in this Kingdom, are forbid the publick ex∣ercise of Divine service. Plutarch reports of the antient Cimbrians,. that they had Shields and Helmets painted with the shapes of several kinds of wild beasts. Others say they used to set a brazen Bull on the top of their Standard as a token of strength and va∣lour. At this day the King of Denmark's Arms are a complication of fourteen several Coats thus ordered: In a field Gules he bears a Cross Argent (the Arms of the house of Oldenburg) which quar∣ters the upper part of the Coat into four Can∣tons. The first of these gives (the Arms of Den∣mark) Or, six half hearts Gules, three Lions pas∣sant Guardant Azure, with Crowns of the First. This Coat is parted with (the Arms of Norway) Gules, a Lion Crowned Or, holding in his paws an Hatchet Argent, with an haft of the Second, The second Canton carries Gules, a Leopard in Chef Or, the field sown with nine hearts of the Second; which are the Arms of Gothland. These are parted with Gules, a Dragon Crown'd Or, the antient Coat of the Vandals or Slavonians; Ac∣cording to the distich; Hinc rigidos Slavus effert pernicibus alis, Et loca propugnat sanguinolenta, DRACO. The third Canton gives Azure, three Crowns Or: to denote the union of the three Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway and Sweden. This Coat is parted with Gules, a paschal Lamb Argent, hold∣ing a Cross Or, at which hangs a Streamer of the Second, charged with a small cross of the First. The first original of this Coat is said to have been this: in the year 1218, when King Waldemar the second engaged the Lieflanders in sharp and bloody war, the Danish Army having lost their Standard, began to be so discouraged, that they gave ground, and had almost yielded the victory to their Pagan Enemies: when on a sudden a new Standard fell from heaven, displaying a white Cross in a bloody flag. At the sight of this the Danes immediately rallied their scattered forces with so much courage and success, as made them in a short time masters of the field. In remem∣brance of this so miraculous a deliverance, the Kings of Denmark kept the sacred flag with as much veneration as ever the Romans did their Palladium; thinking their future success would very much depend upon the safety of so holy a Relique. This is the account the Danish Histo∣rians give us of this part of their Kings Arms. But 'tis more probable that the Pope gave King Waldemar this banner when he went against Lief∣land; to mind him that the business he now un∣dertook was the Conversion of those poor igno∣rant Heathens he should there meet with. Thus the Emperor Constantine the Great, made a Cross be carried before his Army with this Motto, In hoc signo vinces; and the Knights of the Teutonic Order bore a white Cross, when they were sent to convert the Prussians. But, to return: the fourth Canton bears Or, two Lions passant Azure; which are the Arms of Sleswic. These are parted with Gules, an headless Fish stuck on a stake and crown'd Argent: which is the coat of Island. In the Center of these four Cantons, and the mid∣dle of the great Cross, hangs a Scutcheon bear∣ing Azure, a Horseman in compleat armour Ar∣gent, holding a Sword in his right hand of the same, with the hilt Or, his Horse covered with a Cloth of the second: which are the Arms of Dith∣marse. The lower part of the Arms contains four more Coats. Whereof, the first is Gules, three Pinks (some call them nails of our Saviour's pas∣sion) and three leaves of Nettles, which are in∣termixed and meet in Angles at the heart of the Coat; which is charged with a small Scutcheon Argent, for Holstein. The second (which is the Coat of Stormaria) is Azure, a Swan Argent, with a Coronet round her neck Or. The third (belong∣ing to the Earldom of Delmenhorst) is Or, two Barres Gules. The fourth and last Coat (which belongs to Jutland) is Azure, a Cross Patty, at the bottom fetchet, Or. Below the Arms is usu∣ally hung, in a chain Or, the Scutcheon of the Order of the Elephant. The Helmet Or, embroidered and damasked, the sights covered and wanting barrs; above which a Crown Or, encircled with four Circles, and adorned with precious Stones: on the top of this a Globe Or, and above all a Cross patty Argent. The Crest is a Leopard, passant over the Crown, Or,; eight Streamers Azure; a plain Cross Argent; four spears bending to the Dexter side, and as many to the Sinister Or. Supported by two Savages, crowned and girt with Ivy proper, armed with two pointed Clubs. The Mantle Or, sown with hearts Gules and Lions Azure, doubled Ermine. decorative device
JUTLAND. THO many of our mo∣dern Authors make a scoff at the relations the Danish Historians give of the Gyants anciently bred under the Nor∣thern Climates;Cimbri∣ans, whence so called. yet 'tis certain (both from the testimony of the most credible Roman writers, and the inscriptions of ancient Graves, and other monuments), that there were formerly in these parts some people of larger sizes then are any∣where to be met with at this day either in this or any other Nation. And what else can be meant of that Law of King Frotho (mention'd by Saxo Grammaticus) wherein 'twas order'd, that no ordinary Rustic should be bound to have any quarrel with one of these over-grown Kempers, determined by Duel (which was then the usual way of deciding all manner of contro∣versies), except the Warriour had fewer and lighter weapons then the Plebeian? Those that endeavour to prove the ancient Danes men of greater dimensions then the modern, from the bulk of their Grave-stones and Tombs; do not consider, that it was the custom of the Danish Pagans to burn the dead bodies of their deceased friends, and bury only the ashes; and that the ancients used to worship at the monuments of their Princes and great men, which for this rea∣son were usually considerable heaps of stones and earth cast up by the high-way side. However (to omit these kind of idle conjectures) the Nor∣thern people had doubtless in their Armies good store of Kempers (men of vast bodies and strength) upon whose broad shoulders lay the heavyest and hottest service in every engagement. From these Kempers the whole Nation were by the Romans called Cimbri, by the Greeks Cimmerii, and their Country Chersonesus Cimbrica, which name was given to the whole tract of land beyond the Elb; tho later Historians confine it to that part only which now goes under the name of Jutland. Whence the Juti and Jutia (which without all doubt is the same with the more modern word Jutlandia) should come,Jutland, whence so called. is harder to determine, then to trace the original of Cimbria. Venerable Bede, speaking of those Nations who came to aid the Britains against the oppression of the Romans, mentions the Vites as well as the Angles and Saxons. Cambden, and some others, would have us read Jutes instead of Vites; as (saith that famous Antiquary) one Manuscript Copy hath the word. But the Learned Sir Henry Spel∣man, observing in most Copies Vitae more then once, and never Jutae, will not admit of this alteration. Ethelwerd, who writ about the year 950, calls Bede's Vitas, Giotos; telling us, that the Angles were a people that dwelt inter Saxones & Giotos. Tacitus places the Huithones (so Pon∣tanus reads the word, and not as 'tis usually print∣ed, Nuithones) next to the Angli. In other Authors we meet with the Vitungi, Juthungi, Gu∣thungi, Guthas, Juthones, &c. which without que∣stion are all of one and the same original; only variously corrupted, either by the inadvertency of transcribers, or unskilfulness of foreign wri∣ters in the idiom of the tongue of that Country which they described. Arngrim Jonas (an Islan∣dian Author, well skill'd in the Antiquities and Language of his own Country) says, Jaet, in the Islandian and Norwegian dialect, signifies a Giant. Adding further, that there is still a place in Norway call'd Risalandt, i. e. the Land of Gi∣ants; near which is Jaetumhaimar, or The Giants dwelling. Lastly, he tells us, Jutland is nothing but a corruption of Jaetumland. So that Jutia has the same signification with Cimbria; and the Guti, Gothi, Gotti, Getae (call'd in the English-Saxon monuments Geatun), Vitae, Jutae, &c. are the same men with the Cimbrians. Jutland reaches no further then Sleswic. So that Holstein, and the rest of the Provinces which lay between the Eidor and the Elb (tho formerly a part of the Cimbrian Chersonese) are not now reckon'd as any portion of this Country. Northern Jutland. THE Northern Jutland is much larger and better peopled then the Southern. It is divided into nine (some reckon fifteen) great Lordships; which (says Lyscander) being sever∣ed one from another by so many arms of the Sinus Limmericus, Lymfiord, gave occasion to that part of the King of Denmark's Arms which bears a Lion and nine Hearts in a field Or. There are in it four Bishopricks, Ripen, Arhusen, Alburg, and Wiburg. In the further corner of the North Jutland lyes Wensyssel, which has the names of Venulia, and Vandalia in Latin Authors; and is thought by some to have been the seat of the ancient Vandals. Its inhabitants are the lustiest and har∣diest of any of the King of Denmark's subjects. The chief Town in this Tract is Wensyssel, so call'd from the Province. Schaghen, seated on the Pro∣montory between the Norwegian and Baltic Seas, is much more frequented by Merchants, from all parts of Europe, then any other Town in Jutland; and would have a far greater trade then now it has, were it not for the dangerous coast it stands on. Alburg has its name from the multitude of Eels taken in that part of the Lymfiord on which it is feated. It was anciently call'd Burgle; whence this Bishoprick is often named Episcopatus Bur∣glaviensis or Burglumiensis. In this Diocess there are thirteen High Courts of Judicature; one hundred and eighty Parishes; six Cities; and an hundred Noblemens houses. This Bishoprick was first founded by King Sueno Esthrith about the year 1065. The Bishops had their residence at Borlum (a small Village not far from Alburg) till, upon the introduction of the Augsburg Con∣fession into Denmark, Stigot (the last Bishop of the Popish Religion) was commanded to devest himself of all Episcopal Jurisdiction, and to live privately in the Monastery at Borlum. This hap∣pen'd A. D. 1536; since which time the Luthe∣ran Bishops have had their Palace at Alburg. The fruitfullest part of this Diocess is Ty, which lyes between the German Ocean and Limfiord. Some Authors are of opinion, that the Dutch have their name from the ancient inhabitants of this Tract; and to strengthen their argument, they put us in mind, that the Germans are to this day
map of Jutland Totius IVTIAE GENERALIS Accurata delineatio. Apud Janssonis-Waesbergios, et Mosem Pitt blazon or coat of arms
map of northern Jutland JUTIA SEPTENTRIONALIS in qua Dioeceses ALBURGENSIS et VIBURGENSIS.
map of southern Jutland JUTIA AUSTRALIS, in qua Dioeceses RIPENSIS et ARHUSIENSIS.
map of Schleswig DUCATUS SLESWICENSIS Nova Descriptio.
map of northern Schleswig DUCATUS SLESVICENSIS Pars SEPTENTRIONALIS.
map of southern Schleswig DUCATUS SLESVICENSIS AUSTRALIS PARS.
called Tyscke by the Danes. The chief Town in Ty is Tysted; where Christian III. founded a Free-school, which is now grown up to a Gymnasium or mungrel University. Not far from Tysted stands the old Nunnery of Westerwic; famous for the Tomb of a pious Maid of the Blood-Royal, of whom the Neighbours (who call her in their tongue Liden Kirsten) report many miracles, and sing old Ballads made in commendation of her holy and chast life. The Diocess of Wiburg lies in the very middle of North Jutland. Lyscander calls Wiberg the Me∣tropolis of Jutland. It is indeed a place of the greatest concourse of people, who flock hither for justice in all causes Civil and Criminal. It was formerly called Cimmersbeg, as being the chief City of the ancient Cimbrians. Tacitus calls it Civitatem parvam: but withall, that it had been a glorious and strong hold, and the Metropolis of a terrible and warlike Nation. Whence, and when, it got the name Wiberg, is not easily deter∣mined. Some tell us, that after the many petty Principalities of the Cimbrians were united into one Monarchy by Wiglet, this City lost its an∣cient name, and was called (after the Prince) Wigburg; corrupted by degrees into Wiberg. Elnot, in the life of St. Canutus, says, it had its new name from Wig; an Idol worshipp'd in this place. I rather think it the seat of the Danish Pyrats; called formerly Wigs or Wikenger. For it was the custom in the Northern Countries, where the inhabitants were more then the fruits of the Land could sustain, for young Noblemen to live of what they could catch abroad. As the Lacede∣monians thought Robbery, so these fancied Py∣racy, lawful and glorious. Whence Princes of the blood would often turn Pyrats, and take up∣on them the title of Kings, tho they had not the least dominion at land: as the Norwegian History reports of St. Olaus. The most notorious Pyrats mention'd by the Northern Historians, are the Jomswikinger, who dwelt in the City Wollin, called anciently Jomsberg, where they had established certain Laws, and were subject to Magistrates and Governors chosen out of the Royal Family. Cambden tells us, that the Danes are usually un∣derstood by the name Viccingi in the Latin wri∣ters of our English History; because, says he, they were professed Pyrats. In our Learned King Aelfred's translation of Bede's Ecclesiastical Hi∣story, Pyrats are called Wicengas and Wicings: and Mr. Cambden guesses probably, that the in∣habitants of Glocestershire, Worcestershire, &c. were formerly called Wiccii, from the Sea-robberies committed daily by them upon the mouth of the Severn. The English-Saxons named a stout warriour Wiga; skill in war, Wig-chaept; a fort Wighus, &c. In the old Francic History of the life of St. Anno Arch-Bishop of Cologne, we read: Ninus hiz der eristi mann, De dir ie volc Wigis began, i. e. Ninus is the first that ever made war. And in Willeramus's Paraphrase upon the Can∣ticles Wighuis is a Castle, Wiigfimme the art of Combat, &c. Nial's Runic History says, Gunnar var alra manna best Viigur deira sem de voru a Islande, i.e. Gunnar was the best Champion that lived in Island in his days. From what has been said, it seems very probable, that Wiberg signifies no more then Wigton, the name of several great Towns in England and Scotland; and the Scots still retain so much of the old Saxon word Wig as to call souldiers and pillagers of the Country, Wigs or Wiganeers. There has been for some years a quarrel between the Bishops of Alburg and Wi∣burg about precedency; each pretending his Bi∣shopric the more ancient. 'Tis very hard, if not impossible, to decide the controversie; except we date the first institution of the Bishoprick of Alburg from the removal of the Bishops Palace to that City. For the Bishopricks of Wiburg and Borlum were both founded in one year by Sueno Esthrith; who made Heribert Bishop of Wiburg the same time that he gave Borlum to Magnus. Wit∣field gives Wiburg the precedency; but Alburg is reckon'd the better and more honourable pre∣ferment by other Danish writers. From the high Court of Judicature holden at Wiburg, the Jut∣landers can make no appeal; save to the King himself. The most memorable Bays in this Dio∣cess are Sallingsundt, Virckesundt, Hualpsundt, Se∣bersundt, and Othesundt. The last of which had its name from the Emperor Otho the first; who making an incursion into Jutland about the year 948, came as far as this Bay, into which he is said to have cast his Spear, and given it the name it retains to this day. The most considerable and fruitful part of this Diocess is Salling, a Penin∣sula in the Limfiord; whence are brought the best Horses that are to be met with in the King of Denmark's Dominions. The name of this Pro∣vince seems to point out the seat of the old Sa∣balingi, whom Ptolomey makes a people inhabiting some part of the Cimbrian Chersonese, but more Southerly then Salling. The chief River in the Bishoprick of Wiburg is Gudius, Gutalus, or Gudde∣nus; called by the Natives Gudden Aa, and sto∣red with plenty of Fish. Arhuse is a neat and pleasant Sea-port Town on the coast of the Baltic Sea:Arhusen. whence Etymo∣logists derive its name from Aar-hus, i. e. the house of Oars. Which is a much more probable con∣jecture then is brought by Pontanus; who fetches the word Arhusen from Ptolomy's Harudes. The greatest part of the Danish Historians, are of o∣pinion that it was first made a Bishops See about the year 1014. Tho, if it be true that Poppo was made Bishop of this Diocess, its original must be fetcht as high as the year 992. The Cathedral at Arhuse is a neat piece of Architecture; adorned with several rich monuments of Bishops, Noblemen, &c. The Bishops Palace has lain many years in its ruins, which still retain marks of its antient splen∣dour and grandeur. It is seated in the heart of Jutland, and furnished with all manner of neces∣saries that the Country affords at a very reasona∣ble rate: and what forreign Commodities either the need or luxury of its Citizens call for, are brought daily in by the Mariners. In this Dio∣cess there are thirty one Judicatures, Seven Ci∣ties, three hundred and four Parishes and five Forts; the strongest of which is Schanderborch or Schonderborch (i.e. the neat Castle) seated on the Gudden. The rest of the Cities of note in the Bishopprick of Arhusen are 1. Horsen, on the South of Arhusen. 2. Randruse, a place famous for the best Salmon in Jutland. 3. Ebeltod, on the Bal∣tic Coast: a Town of considerable trade. The Bishoprick of Ripen,Ripen. bordering on the Southern Jutland, contains in it seven Cities, two hundred eighty two Parishes, ten Castles and an hundred Noblemens houses. It is seated upon the clear and sweet river Nipsaa, which parting it self into three streams, divides the Town into as many parts; and gave occasion to the City's Arms, which are three Lions. Here abouts Pto∣lomy seems to place his Cimbros phundusios. That this City should have its name from the Latin word Ripa, upon its being situate on the banks of the river, is no great wonder: if we consider that whilst the Natives of these parts busied
themselves chiefly in fortifying and peopling their great Ciities, 'twas ordinary for the Germans, Ro∣mans, and other Foreigners, to give names to small Villages upon the Sea-Coasts; which after a re∣volution of some years, by the advantage of a brisk Sea-Trade, grew bulky, and were often ad∣vanced into large Corporations. The Cathedral is a stately Fabrick of hewen stone, beautified with a Tower of an incredible height; which serves for a good Land-mark to the Sea-men that sail along this dangerous shore. This Church was first built on the top of a hill by King Eric Barn, whom St. Ansgar had converted to Chri∣stianity, about the year 848. Near an hundred and fifty years after, upon the reclaiming of the Danes from the Idolatry they were relaps'd into, this Church was turn'd into a Cathedral, and Ripen made a Bishops See, as it hath continued ever since. There is a kind of an University at Ripen; but comes far short of that at Copenhagen. The rest of the Cities and great Towns of mo∣ment in this Diocess, are: 1. Kolding, first built by Eric Glipping about the year 1268, in the place of an old Castle of the same name, and fortified with such strong walls and good ditches, as made it a City able to defend the frontiers of the Da∣nish dominions; which in those days reached no further South then this place. But they that think Kolding had its name from Ptolomy's Chali, who seem to be placed in this part of Jutland, make it a City much more ancient. Christian III. was so much taken with the situation of it, and plenty of all things in the Country adjoining, that he removed his Court to the Castle Arnsburgh, which hangs over the Town; which he repair'd, and in which he ended his days. On the South the City is washed by a River which divides the Nor∣thern Jutland from the Southern; and separating it self into two branches, is emptied soon after into the Baltic Sea. The Bridge over this River brings yearly a great treasure into the King of Denmark's Coffers. For, besides the impost upon all other kinds of commodities, for every Ox or Horse that passes this Bridge towards Holstein, or any of the Hans Towns, the owners pay a Rix∣dollar; which, considering the infinite number of Horses and Kine which are yearly sent this way out of the Northern Jutland, must needs amount to a vast revenue. 2. Weel; a compact, neat, and well built City, on the Baltic shore; but not very large. 3. Ward. 4. Rinkoping. Both seated near the Western-shore upon the same Ri∣ver. 5. Holstebro. 6. Lemwick; which is the outmost bounds of the Bishoprick of Ripen Northward; seated on the Limfiord, whence it has its name. At Jelling (a small Village in this Bishoprick, not far from the City Weel) is to be seen one of the most famons Runic Monuments that the three Northern Kingdoms afford. This Village is said to have had its name from one Elling, a General of the Cimbrians, and fancied to have been the seat of several Danish Kings. The inscription has been thought worthy the di∣ligent enquiry of Jos. Scaliger, Bonaventura Vulca∣nius, Lindenbrogius, Stephanius, and Wormius; and may therefore justly challenge a place in our de∣scription of this Province. The words are these: Haralter Kunugr bad kaurva Kubl dausi eft Gurm fadur sin Aug eft Thiurni mudur sinasa. Haraltr Kesor van Tanmaurk Alla aug Nurvieg Aug tini folk Kristno, i. e. Harald the King commanded this Tomb to be built in remembrance of Gormo his father and Thyra his mother. Harald the Emperor won Denmark, and all Norway; and Christ'ned the inhabitants of both King∣doms. How worthy Queen Thyra was of such a last∣ing monument as this, we shall shew hereafter; and shall in this place only take notice of King Harald's styling himself Kesor, or Emperor of Denmark and Norway. Which seems to be done in contempt of the Emperor Otho the first; who, having conquer'd a great part of the Kingdom of Denmark, annexed this to the rest of his do∣minions, and writ himself Emperor of the North; till this King [Harald Blaatand] forced him to retire, and made him part with (not only what∣ever he had taken in Jutland, but) a great part of Saxony. After so great a conquest and defeat of so mighty an Emperor, he had reason to as∣sume a title as swelling as ever Otho could pre∣tend to, who came no further then Othesundt with his Army. Especially, if it be true (what Helmoldus reports of him), that he was so far King of Saxony, as to be the Author of those Laws which are to this day observed in the up∣per and lower Saxony; and contained in their Saxon-Spiegel. Southern Jutland. THE Southern Jutland (which is often comprehended under the name of the Dutchy of Sleswic) reaches from Kolding and the River Leewens Aa, as far as the Dannewirk, which is reckon'd about eighteen German miles. The breadth of it does not any-where exceed eight, seldom six, miles. The chief City,Sleswic. which sometimes gives name to the whole Province, is Sleswic. It is seated on a River, or rather a small arm of the Sea, called by the inhabitants De Slye. So that Sleswic is no more then a Village (call'd anciently by the Saxons Wic by the Hollanders to this day Wiick, and the Latines Vicus) upon the Slye. Hence the ancient people of these parts are called by Ptolomy Sigulones, which some read Slievnes, i.e. Wooners (or dwellers) upon the banks of the Slie. Adam Bremensis calls the Town Slias-wig; and Ethelwerd, an ancient English-Saxon Histo∣rian, gives us this account of it: Anglia vetus sita est inter Saxones & Giotos, habens oppidum Capitale quod sermone Saxonico Sleswic nuncupatur, secundum Danos vero Haithaby, i. e. Old England lies be∣tween Saxony and Jutland; the Metropolis of which is called by the Saxons Sleswic, but by the Danes Haithaby. In an old History of the life of Charles the Great it is called Sliestorff. It had its Danish name Haitheby, saith Pontanus, from Hetha, a certain Queen of Denmark. Which as∣sertion seems confirm'd by a passage in the Pre∣face to King Aelfred's English-Saxon translation of Orosius: And of Scipinges heale he cƿaeþ {that} he seglode on fif dagan to þem porte þe mon haetaet Haeðh;um. se stent betƿuh Winedum & Seaxum & Angle. & hyrðh; in on Dene, i.e. And from Sciringes-heal he said, that he sailed in five days to the Port which is called Haethe, which stands between the Vandals [Vinedi] Saxons and the Angles, to whom it is subject. 'Twas questionless heretofore a City much frequented by Mer∣chants from Britain, France, Spain, Flanders, and all other parts of the trading world. Adam Bre∣mensis (who lived about the year 1100) calls it Civitatem opulentissimam ac populosissimam, i.e. a City exceeding rich and populous. And so it must needs have been. For, before Mariners
learnt perfectly the way of shunning the dange∣rous Sands upon the coasts of Jutland, and at the entrance into the Baltic, carriages were usu∣ally brought up the Eidor and Threan as far as Hol∣lingsted by Ship, and thence conveyed by Land to Sleswic: where they were again shipped and so transported into Zeeland, Sweden, &c. The Citi∣zens here were first converted to Christianity, and the great Church built, by King Eric Barn, assisted by St. Anchar, about the year 800. Not long after (in the year 1064) the Slavonians, making incursions into this part of the Country, took Sleswic, destroyed the Church, rooting out Christianity and replanting Paganism. This re∣lapse is sufficiently confirm'd by the many Runic monuments, found daily in and about this City: whose inscriptions shew them to be Heathenish reliques, tho of too late a date to have been e∣rected before the first appearance of Christianity in these parts. But the Slavonians kept not long footing here. For, within a short while, the Danes, weary of the tyranny and Idolaty of strangers, forced them to quit their Conquets and retire. Whereupon, paganism was once more rooted out, Christianity reestablisht, and the Cathedral rebuilt. Soon after this the Angles, that main∣tain'd a trade in Sleswic, built the Church of the Holy Ghost near the market-place with the ad∣joyning Hospital. The Dukedome of Sleswic was first given by Christopher King of Denmark, about the year 1253, by way of pension to the children of King Abel; upon condition the Duke of Po∣meren, and some other petit Princes of Vandalia, would engage they should always acknowledg a dependance upon, and never pretend any title to the Danish Crown. After a revolution of some years it became the inheritance of Christiern of Oldenburg King of Denmark, who annexed it to the Danish Realm; a part of which it has conti∣nued ever since. Assign'd indeed it hath been of∣ten as a portion to some of the younger Princes of the blood: but never quitted its dependance upon the Crown. This City, as appears by their records, was first made a Bishops See by the Em∣peror Otho the first: who, upon his conquest of Jutland, first sent ministers hither to instruct the ignorant Heathens in the principles of the Chri∣stian religion, and afterwards set a Bishop o∣ver the new Converts; whom the records call Mark. Upon the South of Sleswic lies Ekelfort: cal∣led so from the abundance of Squirrels in the adjoyning woods; as the Arms of the Town still show. It is a Town of good Trade, and one of the safest parts in the Baltic shore. Flensburch, takes its name from Flen a small bay of the Baltic Sea, upon which it is seated. Mhier (in his accurate History of the affairs of Flanders, speaking of Henry Duke of Sleswic who died at the siege of this City A. D. 1427) says it ought to be called Vlensburg not Flensburg; from Vlens, which in the language of the Inhabitants signifies the flux and reflux of the Sea. Some fetch its name from one Fleno, a Danish Noble∣man, who had the Custom of the fishing trade in this place, and was Lord of the Mannor. It is situated in a low and pleasant valley, begirt with several hills of great height. It consists chiefly of one continued street of magnificent and noble buildings; the length of which is said to be near two English miles. All along this street the Ships are brought up in a port so com∣modious, that the Citizens can lade and unlade their Vessels at their doors. On the top of an hill in the Suburbs stands the Castle; which ea∣sily commands the Town and Haven. Betwixt this City and Sleswic is the undoubted seat of the antient Angles; the ancestours and first Founders of our English Nation in Britain. Which is not only proved by the assertion of our famous Hi∣storian Ethelwerd, quoted before; but from a small village in this tract, which to this day is cal∣led Anglen. Ptolomey indeed and Tacitus place the antient Angli furrher southward, as far as the banks of the Elb: and they were doubtless a more populous nation then can reasonably be imagined to be confin'd to so narrow a piece of ground as at this day goes under the name of Anglen, in the maps of our modern Geogra∣phers. For we cannot otherwise conceive they should so far overpower the Saxons and Jutes, who came with them into Britain, as to call so great a part of our Land after their own names; with∣out any notice taken of their Allyes. Hadersleve, seven German miles distant from Flensburg Northward,Hader∣sleve. was first made a City and had its Charter confirm'd by Waldemar Duke of Jutland about the year 1292. It was formerly defended by a strong Castle built on the top of an hill which overlooks the Town. This John Earl of Holstein pull'd down, and instead thereof begun to build a new one call'd from him Hans∣burg, or John's-Castle; for Hans in the High Dutch and Danish tongues is the same with John) which was finished by King Frideric the Second. The most of the streets in Hadersleve are of a good breadth and very uniform. In the Great Church is to be seen a stately monument erected by King Eric the Eighth to the memory of Rombold Duke of Silesia, who was sent Ambassador hither from the Emperor Sigismund, to compose the differen∣ces between the King of Denmark and the Earls of Holstein about the claim laid by both parties to the Dukedom of Sleswic: and died before the work was finished. On the Western Coasts of South-Jutland live the Srond-Frisians;Srond-Frisians. mention'd often by Saxo Grammaticus as men of great strength and agili∣ty of body. This Historian reckons Eyderstede a part of his Frisia minor; but now a days there are none go under the name of Strand-Frisians except a small remnant of people who inhabit the Strant (an inconsiderable Island in the Ger∣man Ocean) and a little narrow tract of land between Husem and Langenhorn. In the middle of this petit Province they have a market-place: where they maintain a small traffick and com∣merce amongst themselves. Their country is de∣fended from the rage of the Sea (like Holland and other parts of the Netherlands) by great Earthen banks, which preserve their meadows and corn fields, lying all on one level, from the waves. They have a great art of making the whitest and best salt in Europe, of earth soked in the Sea-water, dried and boil'd. Saxo says these people are a Colony of Frislanders in the low Countries, who, being a laborious nation, and destitute of habi∣tations in their own Country, came hither to seek their fortunes, and by draining the fenns, made this piece of marshy ground habitable. What time this transplantation hapned is not mention'd in the Danish Chronicles: but that it was so, will be manifest to any one that will com∣pare the language, habit, and manners, of this people with those of the Frisians in the Nether∣lands. The rest of the Towns of note in the South∣ern Jutland are 1. Husem; a rich and neat port-Town on the Western Shore. 2. The two Tun∣derens, Greater and Less, both places of consi∣derable traffick upon the same coast. 3. Gottorp, the ancient seat of the Earls and Dukes of Hol∣stein. It is seated on the top of the Slie; ex∣ceedingly well fortifyed; and very remarkable
for the Tol-booth, or Custom-house, which one year with another brings in Toll for at least 50000 Oxen which are brought out of Jutland into Ger∣many. 4. Appenrade, seated on a small bay of the Baltic Sea, and much frequented by the Danish Fishermen. Of the ancient wall of Partition, which divided for∣merly the Dukedom of Holstein from the King∣dom of Denmark. BEfore the invention of Guns, and other ter∣rible Engines of war, now used by all the Europeans, and the greatest part of the known world, the only fortifications and ramparts were strong walls and ditches; which the ancients fancied, as indeed they were, sufficient to defend them from the arrows and battle-axes (the on∣ly weapons then in use) of their barbarous neigh∣bours. Hence it was, that the Chinois thought their Empire secured from the incursions of their bloody neighbours the Tartars, when their fa∣mous King Tzinzow had hedged them in with a wall of some hundreds of miles in length. Thus the best expedient the Romans could find of put∣ting the borders of their Brittish dominions in a posture of defence against the daily revolt of the Natives, whom they had driven into Scotland, was the building of Picts Wall, and Severus's rampire, which reach'd from Sea to Sea. For the same reasons the Kings of Denmark, having their Territories continually infested by the daily in∣roads of the Germans, thought it highly requi∣site to block up their passage, by walling up that neck of Land which lies between Hollingsted and Gottorp. It is hard to determine, from the account gi∣ven by Historians when this work was first be∣gun. Paulus Aemilius, a curious French Historian, says, Gothofred King of Denmark (whom the Da∣nish writers call Gothric) was the first that made use of this stratagem, to exclude the Armies of the Emperor Charles the Great, about the year 808. The same story is told us by Aimoinus and Christianus Cilicius. But Saxo Grammaticus, Crant∣zius, and the whole Class of the Northern Hi∣storians, tell us unanimously, That Queen Thyra (daughter of Ethelred King of England, and wife to Gormo Gamle King of Denmark) was the Au∣thoress of this fortification; and that thence she had the surname of Danebode (i.e. the Mistress builder of the Danish Nation) bestowed on her. I can scarce allow the latter part of the story to to be truth; since we find that this surname was given her long before she had done any thing either towards the building or repairing of the Danewirk (as they call'd this Fort.) For upon a monument erected by King Gormo Gamle in ho∣nour of his Queen Thyra we find the following Inscription: Gurmr Kunugr gerdi kubl dusi eft Turui Kunu sina Tanmarkur-bat, i.e. Gormo the King erected this Tomb for Thyra his Queen Danebode (or repairer of the King∣dom of Denmark). This inscription cannot be an Epitaph writ af∣ter Queen Thyra's death; seeing all the Danish writers assert positively that she outliv'd her husband Gormo many years, and after his death took the Danewirk in hand. So that its more then probable the surname of Danebode was given her for the many good offices she had done the Na∣tion in repairing several old decayed Castles and Forts, and building a great many new ones. King Eric the Eighth, in his Danish Chronicle, says Thyra built the Fort of wood. Which Witfield understands of the fencing the rampire with Stakes; as bulwarks are guarded in our modern fortifications. Others make Harald Blaatand, Queen Thyra's son, the first Author of this work; after he had driven the Emperor Otho out of Jut∣land. Which Erasmus Laetus, the Danish Virgil, al∣ludes to; when, speaking of this King Harald, he says, Hic ille est solido primns qui Cimbrica vallo Munijt arva, solique ingens e corpore dorsum Eruit, immani quod se curvamine longos Incitat in tractus, medium{que} perambulat Isthmum, Et maris Eoi ripas cum littore jungit Hesperio, ac tenuem Sleswici respicit urbem. King Eric decides this controversy by telling us, That Thyra built a wooden fortification; and afterwards advised her son to strengthen the work by Trenches and Rampires of earth. Notwith∣standing all these relations of other Historians, both Pontanus and Wormius agree, that 'tis most likely the rude draught of this Fort was first drawn by King Gothric; and only repair'd and improv'd by Queen Thyra, King Harald and o∣ther succeeding Princes. Waldemar the first built a wall of brick, seven foot broad and eighteen high, to strengthen it. After so many improve∣ments the fort was reckon'd impregnable. For soon after King Waldemar's reparation, when Henry Duke of Saxony (surnamed the Lion) in∣tended to have endeavoured a breach through this fort into the King of Denmark's dominions, he was disswaded from the enterprise by his chief Counsellor Bernhard Razburg, who represented the undertaking as a thing impossible to be effect∣ed; assuring him Danewirkae custodium Danorum sexaginta millibus mandatum esse. i.e. That Dane∣wirk was defended by a Garrison of sixty thousand Danes. Hence King Sueno, finding himself una∣ble to force his way through so strong and so well man'd a Rampire, endeavour'd to work his passage by corrupting the Keeper of Wiglesdor, the only Gate leading through this wall into Jut∣land. At this day there remain but sleight marks of so great a work. At Schubuge and Hesbuge, two small Villages upon the ruins of the wall, the In∣habitants find reliques of old furnaces and brick∣kilns; whence the Danish Antiquaries conclude that King Waldemar had his bricks burn'd here, tho he was forced to fetch mortar as far as Goth∣land. Joh. Cypraeus tells us, at Dennenwirch, an inconsiderable Village in these parts, may still be seen the ruins of an old Castle where Queen Thyra lodged. The same Author says, Wiglesdor was an∣tiently called Kaelgate; because placed in an o∣pen and plain part of the Country, where the Enemy could have no shelter, nor be in any pro∣bability of suprizing the Defendants. HOLSTEIN. ANtiently the whole Territories of the Duke∣dom of Holstein (contained at present in the Provinces of Holstein properly so called, Dit∣marss, Wagerland, and Stormar) went under the ge∣neral name of Nortablingia; or the country be∣yond the Elb Northwards. Adam Bremensis and Helmoldus are the first that mention Holsatia: which the former derives from Holts-geseten i.e. seated in a wood or forrest. The Holsteiners are taken notice of generally
map of Holstein DUCATUS HOLSATIAE DESCRIPTIO NOVISSIMA. Excudebant Janssio-Waesbergii: et Moses Pitt.
as men of great strength and courage, and very observant of oaths and promises. Whence Hol∣stein glaub (or, the faith of an Holsteiner) is a thing they are very tender of, and a proverbial speech in which they pride themselves. The fruitfulness of the soil, convenience of trading in the Baltic and Brittish seas, and indu∣stry of the Inhabitants render Holstein the richest Country in the King of Denmarks dominions: and make the incomes of some of the Nobility exceed the treasure of many Princes in Germa∣ny. The chief Cities and great Towns in Holstein are, 1. Kyel (Chilonium;) seated on the Baltic shore in a corner of land, shut in betwixt the mouths of two rivers. Whence some have fetcht its name from the German word Kiel; which signi∣fies a wedge. It is furnished with a large and commodious haven, which is continually throng'd with Merchant-Ships from Germany, Liefland, Sweden, and all the Isles on the Baltic Sea. There is yearly in this Town a meeting of the greatest part of the Nobility of Holstein; who come hi∣ther to consult about the affairs of the Duke∣dom, especially the concerns of the mint and value of money. The Castle (which is seated on the top of an hill, commanding the Town and haven) was first built by Adolph of Schaum∣burg the first Earl of Holstein. Earl Adolph IV. founded a monastery of Franciscan Minorites in this City; which upon the bringing in of the Augsburg confession into this Country with the rest of the Danish Territories, was changed into an Hospital. 2. Rensborg or Reinholsburg; founded by one Reinold, of whom we have no further account then that he was either a Prince of the Blood, or some Great Nobleman. This is the best fortifyed Town in the Dukedom; environed with the Byder, and defended by a strong Castle built by Earl Gerhard the Great. 3. Wilster, a neat and well built City: seated on a River of the same name, which soon after empties it self into the Stor. 4. Nieumunster, seated on the North-West of the Stor, not far from the head of it. The Earldom of Holstein was only a Province of the Great Dukedom of Saxony; until Lotha∣rius Great Duke of Saxony, afterwards Emperor of Germany, bestowed it upon Adolph Earl of Scha∣umburg or Schouwanburg about the year 1114. Since which time we have the following account of the Earls of Holstein. 1. Adolph of Schouwenburg; the first ab∣solute prince of Holstein. On whom the Earldom was bestowed as a recompence for the services he had done the Duke of Saxony in his German and Danish wars. 2. Adolph II. son to Adolph the I. having obtained his fathers Earldom, cast out the Slavonians, who a little before his time had overrun all this part of Saxony; and planted in their rooms Colonies of Germans, Frisi∣ans, and Nether Saxons. In the quarrel a∣mong the three pretenders to the Crown of Denmark (Sueno, Canutus, and Waldemar) he sided with Canutus; and had setled him in the throne, had not King Sueno by fair means and promises prevailed with him to lay down his Arms. He left the Earldom to his son 3. Adolph III. who after many skirmishes and battles with Waldemar II. King of Den∣mark, was at last vanquished and kept close prisoner by that King; who, by the inter∣cession of Andrew Bishop of Lunden and some others, granted him his liberty upon condition, That he should disclaim all right and Title which he and his predecessors had hitherto pretended to the Earldom of Hol∣stein or any other place formerly subject to Henry, surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony; and quietly retire to the inheritance of his Ancestors at Schouwenburg. But these Ar∣ticles (tho at the first secured by Hostages) were not long observed by his son 4. Adolph IV. who, associating to himself Henry Earl of Zurin, Gerhard Bishop of Bre∣men, and some other petit Princes, begun a rebellion against King Waldemar; and suc∣ceeded so well in the undertaking, that with∣in a very short time he made himself master of all the Territories his father had been beaten out of and renounced. His son 5. Gerhard, enjoy'd peaceably the domi∣nions left him by his Father. He was for some time kept prisoner at Imsburg by the Folchungs, a noble family in Sweden, for be∣ing in company with one Ingemar, an up∣start Gentleman but great favourite of their King Magnus; whom they slew in a rage, and cast his companions into prison. 6. Henry, Gerhards son, was the first that set up a Custom-house in Hamburg; which brought in no small portion of the revenue of his successors. 7. Gerhard the second, son of Henry, up∣on the death of Christopher the second King of Denmark, was made Protector of the Danish Kingdom, and Tutor to the young King Waldemar the third. By these advan∣tages his power grew so great that he ven∣tur'd to stile himself Duke of Jutland; and by degrees would in all probability have as∣pired to the Crown of Denmark, if not time∣ly taken off by one Ebbo, a Danish Noble∣man, who murdered him in his bed at Ran∣derhusen. 8. Henry the second, son to Gerhard II. refused the Crown of Sweden, when it was offered him by Ambassadors sent from that Court A. D. 1363. He is said to have been a Prince of great courage and candor, cour∣teous in his behaviour, and exceedingly chast and temperate in the whole course of his life. In short, a man that had in him all the Royal vertues that might deserve a King∣dom; and the modesty to refuse one when offer'd. 9. Gerhard the third, Henry the second's son, after he had got the Dukedom of Sles∣wic annexed to the Earldom of Holstein by Margaret Queen of Denmark, was slain by the men of Dithmarss, whom he had requi∣red to do him homage. His son 10. Henry the third, being denied that right to the Dukedom of Sleswic which his father had enjoy'd, made war against Eric the Eighth King of Denmark; in which, at the siege of Flensburg, he was slain. 11. Adolph V. (commonly called the twelfth, by those that reckon all the Earls of younger houses) succeeded his brother Henry, and was the last Earl of this house. In the year 1440, he received the Dukedom of Sleswic at the hands of Christopher the third King of Denmark; swearing fealty to that Crown. Christian Earl of Oldenburg (son of Hedvi∣gis sister to Henry and Adolph the two last Earls of Holstein) succeeded his Uncle A∣dolph in the Earldom of Holstein. Which in his time was enlarged by the addition of Dithmarss, and changed into a Dukedom by the Emperor Frideric the third, A. D. 1474.
When this Christian was advanced to the throne of Denmark, the Dukedom of Holstein became a part of that Kingdom. Yet so, that the Kings of Denmark (as the Kings of Sweden upon the late ac∣cessions in Germany to their Crown) were reckoned Princes of the Empire as Dukes of Holstein, tho not obliged to repair to any Diet. Afterwards, the title of Duke of Holstein, (together with a considerable part of the Country) was given to Adolph, Christian the Third's brother (created Knight of the Garter by our Queen Elizabeth A. D. 1562) who governed it interchangeably with the King his brother by turns. Upon the decease of this Duke and his issue male, the title was conferr'd on Ʋlric King Christian the fourth's brother. Since his days there have been several houses of the Dukes of Holstein, as Sunderburg, Norburg, Gluckburg, Arnsbeck, Gottorp and Ottingen. Amongst whom the Duke of Holstein Gottorp is chief, and challenges the same power in govern∣ing and administration of justice which was at first conferred upon Duke Adolph King Christian the third's brother. In the late wars between the two Northern Crowns, the King of Denmark (jealous of the great power of the present Duke of Got∣torp) forced this Prince to quit his Dukedom and leave his Majesty in full possession of the whole Country of Holstein. But at the signing of the Treaty between the Kings of France, Sweden, and Denmark at Fountenblaeu on the second of Septem∣ber 1679, the Danish Ministers promised their Master should, at the desire of his most Christian Majesty, restore to the said Duke all his Countries, Towns, and places, in the state they were, and the soveraignty thereof; all which he claim'd by vertue of the Treatyes of Roschild, Copen∣hagen, and Westphalia, which by this Treaty were confirm'd. The Duke expected, besides being restored to his Countries, some recompence for the damages he had sustained during the war; and at least to have had back the Canon (be∣ing an hundred excellent Brass pieces) which were taken out of Tunningen, when it was seized and dismantled by Denmark. But his expecta∣tion in this point were not answered. One of the Articles of the same Treaty was, That the Country of Rixingen, belonging to Count Alefelt, Chancellor of Denmark (made Governour of Holstein in the year 1663, upon the death of Christian Earl of Rantzaw, chief Minister of State to the late King Frideric III.), confiscated during the war, should be restored to him. DITMARS. THE inhabitants of this Province are a rem∣nant of the ancient Saxons; and retain much of the prowess and heroic spirits of their ance∣stors. Some will have the word writ Deutsch or Teutschmarsh, i. e. the German or Dutch Marsh; because the people are reliques of the German-Saxons, and the Country plain and fenny. The Ditmarssians were never (like the Wagrians and Stormarians) brought under subjection to the Earls of Holstein, till that whole Earldom was annexed to the Crown of Denmark. And tho they were given by the Emperor Frideric III. to Chri∣stian Earl of Oldenburgh, the first Danish King of that House; yet soon after they threw off this yoke, and refused to acknowledg themselves sub∣ject to him or his successors, till (by the valour and good fortune of King Frideric II.) they were vanquished and forced to submit in the year 1559. In this expedition the King of Denmark was assist∣ed by John and Adolph, Dukes of Holstein, his Cou∣sin-Germans. Whereupon, they sharing the con∣quest with him, Ditmars was divided into two parts; whereof the Southern fell to the King of Denmark, and the Northern to the Dukes of Holstein. The only places of note in Ditmars, are, 1. Mel∣dorp, the chief Town in the Province, seated on the German Ocean, and a place of good trade. 2. Heyde, which is a large, but poor City, on the borders of the great barren Sands, of the same name, which overspread the middle of the Country. 3. Lunden, opposite to Tonningen, near the mouth of the Eyder. STORMAR. STormar (Stormars or Stormarsh) signifies no more then the Marshy ground lying along the banks of the river Stoer. For 'tis observable, that the inhabitants of the Great Dukedom of Holstein are distinguished by names taken from the nature of the soil in that part of the Country they inhabit. And the ancient Marsi were no∣thing else then a people that liv'd in these bogs and fens; and thence took their name. Hamburgh (of which City we shall have oc∣casion to give a large description elsewhere) stands in Stormar;Ham∣burgh. and upon that score the Earls and Dukes of Holstein have always pretended a right to this City, and demanded homage of the Ci∣tizens. These pretensions were judged legal, and the right and title of the said Dukes ratified, by the Emperor Charles IV. in the year 1374. Where∣upon the Hamburghers swore allegiance to Chri∣stian I. King of Denmark; acknowledging him and his successors their lawful Lords. But not long after they endeavoured to throw off that yoke; presuming much upon their own strength, and the assistance they promise themselves upon all occasions, from the rest of the Hans Towns. This last year (1679) the present King of Den∣mark renewed his claim, and came before this City with an Army of sixteen or seventeen thou∣sand men, to demand homage; entring the Elb with fourteen men of war, and seizing several Merchant-ships, English and others, at Gluck∣stadt. On the ninth of November an agreement was signed between the King and this City; the Articles of which were: I. That his Majesty and this City shall remain unprejudiced in their several rights and preten∣tions; and that the point of homage shall be amicably determined by Treaty, or by an ordi∣nary process before the Chamber of Spire; and that in the mean time this City shall enjoy a Neutrality, and free commerce, as formerly. II. That this City, with a thankful acknow∣ledgment of his Majesties good will towards them, shall remain in an humble devotion to∣wards him, and shall to the utmost of their power further his good, and prevent any evil they know likely to happen to him. III. That, for the greater manifestation of this their devotion, this City shall send a formal De∣putation to his Majesty. IV. That this City, in consideration of his Ma∣jesties being graciously pleased to receive them again into his favour, shall pay him 220000 Crowns, at four Terms; the first payment to be made immediately after the ratifying the Re∣cess; the second within six months after; and the third and last at the end of other six months. V. That his Majesty shall quit all his preten∣tions to any Lands which this City at present holds, either in particular, or in common with the City of Lubeck; shall release the Ships stopt
map of Ditmars, Rendsburg, Kiel, and Bordesholm in western Holstein DITHMARSIA, RENDESBURGUM, KIEL et BORDESHOLM, in Occidentali prte HOLSATIAE.
map of Stormaria in southern Holstein Tabula Geographica novissima DUCATUS STORMARIAE in Meriodionali parte HOLSATIAE. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, et Mosem Pitt.
map of Wagria in eastern Holstein WAGRIA, quae est PARS ORIENTALID HOLSATIAE. Ex Officina Janssonio-Waesbergios, et Moses Pitt
at Gluckstadt; and shall ratifie this Recess with∣in eight days. Five days after the signing of this Interim Re∣cess (so called, because it leaves both parties in the same rights they had before) the Deputies of Hamburgh, according to the tenure of the third Article, waited on the King of Denmark at his Quarters at Pinneberg, and being admitted to Audience, spoke to him in the following words: Most Serene and most Potent King, most Gracious Lord! Whereas your Royal Majesty is by the mercy of God happily arrived in this your Dukedom, and consequently in the neigh∣bourhood of this City of Hamburgh; and hath caused proposals consisting in three points, to be made to the said City, and hath desired their resolution thereupon: And whereas the first point, through the shortness of time, and for other reasons could not be determined at present; and that your Majesty hath therefore been graciously pleased to refer the same to an amicable agreement, or to a legal determina∣tion; and in the mean time to remove the displeasure you had taken against the said City; and by an Interims Recess graciously to agree, That as well the rights and pretentions of your Majesty, as of the said City, shall remain un∣prejudiced: The Burgermasters and Raedts De∣puties do, in the name of themselves and of all the Burghers, appear before your Majesty, and do promise faithfully to observe the said Inte∣rims Recess in all its points and clauses; and particularly to bear your Majesty most hum∣ble and becoming devotion; That to the ut∣most of their power they will further your Ma∣jesties good, and hinder all ill and detriment from happening to your Majesty. Provided this City be left in a quiet and undisturbed enjoy∣ment of their Neutrality and Commerce, and of all their Rights and Priviledges: And that the Rights of his Imperial Majesty and the Empire be maintain'd. To which the King returned them a kind an∣swer; assuring them of his good will, and that he would punctually observe on his part this Agreement. Which done, within a few days after the Danish Army decamped. Other Cities and Towns of note in Stormar, are, 1. Gluckstadt, built and well fortified by King Christian IV. (who much delighted in its plea∣sant situation) and much improved by his suc∣cessors. It gave sufficient proof of its strength soon after the first building of it; when it with∣stood and beat back the Emperors Army, and held out a siege of almost two years continu∣ance, without yeilding at last. It commands the passage of the Elb: so that it highly concerns the Hamburghers to be at peace with the King of Denmark; except they could make themselves masters of this Fort, and so secure a free passage both for their Men of War and Merchant-Ships. 2. Crempe, seated on a small river of the same name. This is reckoned one of the Keys of the Kingdom of Denmark; and in the German wars gave a good testimony of its so being; when in the years 1627 and 1628, it bravely resisted the fortunate German General, Count Wallenstein, for thirteen months together, and at last was yeilded upon honourable terms. It owes the chief of its strength to King Christian IV. who fortified it with a wall and ditches. 3. Itzehoa, seated on the navigable River Stoer, which furnishes it with plenty of fish, and all manner of merchandise from abroad. 4. Bredenberg, one of the neatest little Towns in all the King of Denmark's Terri∣tories; the ancient seat of the most noble Fa∣mily of the Rantzows; very remarkable for the stout resistance it made Count Wallenstein, who, having at last taken it by storm, put all the Gar∣rison in it to the sword. WAGRIA. WAgria (or Wagerland) is almost girt round with the Baltic Sea and the two Rivers Trave and Suentin. The whole length of it, from Odelslo as far as the Village Grotenbro, amounts to near forty-eight English miles; and the breadth about twenty. It is observable, that the Princes of Holstein, tho they bear the Arms of every other Province in that Dukedom, have not the Arms of this Country (which are a Bulls-head) in their Coat. Perhaps, because the Arms of Ol∣denburgh are thought sufficient to represent the whole Province. Plutarch tells us, that the an∣cient Cimbrians, who first made an inroad into Italy, bore a Bull's-head Sable in a field Gules: which shews of how venerable an antiquity the Arms of Wagerland are, and how justly they may claim some place (if not the best) in the Coat of the Dukes of Holstein. It had its name from the Wagrii, a people in Slavonia, who made them∣selves masters of this Tract by conquest. The chief Towns of Wagerland, are, 1.Lubeck. Lu∣beck, seated at the confluence of the Rivers Trave and Billew. From the pleasantness of its situa∣tion and stately buildings, some Etymologists have derived the name of this City; calling it Lobeck (or ein eck dess lobes) i. e. an honourable Corner. Which agrees well with the account an ancient Poet gives us of it in these two verses: Angulus haec laudis dicta est urbs nomine prisco, Angulum in hunc fertur fluvius Travenna per aequor. It was rebuilt by Adolph II. Earl of Holstein, about the year 1143. But within a short while after grew so headstrong (upon the daily ac∣cession of new Priviledges and Charters granted by this Prince and his successors) that it bid de∣fiance to the Earls of Holstein, and became a Dukedom of it self. By the Emperor Frideric I. it was made a member of the German Empire. Upon his death the Lubeckers chose themselves another Duke; who, after he had govern'd them five years, was vqnquish'd by the Danes; by whom the City was made tributary to their King. Out of this bondage it was rescued by the Emperor Frideric the second, who made it an Imperial City; in which state it continues to this day; and therefore (as a branch of the Empire of Ger∣many) will be described elsewhere more at large. 2. Segeberge, seated on the River Trave, about sixteen English miles from Lubeck. It was an∣ciently called Aelberg; which name, upon the building of the Castle on the top of the adjoin∣ing craggy mountain, was changed into Sege∣berg. The occasion of which (as Helmoldus tells the story) was this: When the Emperor Lotha∣rius began to advise with some of his Counsel∣lors, in the year 1134, about building some con∣siderable fortification in these parts, which might check the growing power of the Sclaves in this Province; and had at last pitcht upon this hill as the most convenient place. One of the Scla∣vonian Princes is said to have spoken propheti∣cally to his Companion these words: Seest thou the fortification on the top of those mountains? Let me tell thee, it will in a short time prove the yoke of the whole Land, &c. Whence, say the Danes, the place to this day retains the name of Sege∣berg; which in High Dutch signifies, Behold the mountains. 3. Odelso, a fair City on the River
Trave, in the middle way between Segeberg and Lubeck. In the year 1338, John Earl of Wa∣gerland bought this City into his hands, at the rate of ten thousand Marks of Silver. After this it continued in a very flourishing condition till Eric of Pomeren (in his wars with the Dukes of Sleswic and Holstein) so defaced it, that it could never since recover its ancient glory. 4. Ploen, an ancient City, seated in the middle of a Lake of the same name; by which (and a Castle built not many years since, by Joachim Ernestus Duke of Holstein, after the Italian fashi∣on) it is exceedingly well fortified. In the furthest corner of Wagerland lyes the ancient and famous County of Oldenburgh;Olden∣burgh. di∣vided from the rest of this Province by the Ri∣ver Brockaw. Tho 'tis generally agreed on by all the Danish writers, that Oldenburgh (the chief City in this County) was anciently the Metro∣polis of the Wagrians and Venedi (two warlike Nations, to whom the greatest part of Mecklen∣burgh was subject), yet we find no mention made of this place before the reign of Otho the Great; who after he had vanquished the Venedi, founded here a Bishoprick (afterwards translated to Lu∣bec) and bestowed it on Marcus his Chancellor. It was formerly a Town of great trade, and ex∣ceeding populous, having been beautified with four Churches, three Monasteries, and five Gates; but since the Port was stop'd up, at the com∣mand of Queen Margaret, its glory has decreas'd daily, and (by the late dreadful fire, caus'd by thun∣der and lightning, which hath laid waste the best and greatest part of the City) 'tis now become much less considerable then it was before. decorative device
map of Funen NOVA et Accurata descriptio totius FIONIAE vulgo FUNEN Apud Janssenio-Waesbergios, et Moses Pitt.
The Baltic Sea. ORtelius, out of Pliny, en∣deavours to prove, that Xen. Lampsacenus men∣tions the Baltic Sea; and thence concludes, that this name is much more ancient then most of the modern Geographers fancy, who make Adam Bremensis and Helmoldus the first Authors that call this Bay Mare Balthi∣cum. But he that shall take the pains to examine Pliny's words upon this occasion, will find, that no mention is there made of the Baltic Sea, but of an Island only in these parts called Baltia; which is now named Schonen: but is not, as the Ancients imagined, an Isle. From this Baltia some think this Sea was called Baltic; as the Adriatic Sea had its name from the Island Adria. Others, more happily, derive the word from the Danish and English word Belt: because Seeland and the greatest part of the King of Denmark's dominions are girt round with this Bay. And to this day the inhabitants of Seeland and Funen call that small arm of the Sea which part these two Islands die Belt. Pomponius Mela, who is followed by many late writers of good note, calls the Baltic Sea Sinus Codanus: which signifies no more then the Danish Bay. For Codanus, Godanus, or Gedanus, is the same with Danus; and Gedanum and Dantis∣cum signifie the same thing. And indeed when we consider what a large portion of the Danish Kingdom is encircled with the Sea; we shall find reason enough (notwithstanding the late surrender of several Islands to the Swedes) to let it still retain this its ancient name. The most considerable Islands in the Baltic, which at this day are subject to the Crown of Denmark, are these that follow: FIONIA. FIonia or Funen, is parted from Jutland by a streight of the Baltic, called by the inha∣bitants Medelfarsund, about one German mile in breadth; and separated from Seeland by the Bel∣tis-sund, or Baltic Bay. The length of it, from East to West, is about ten German miles; and the breadth eight. Saxo Grammaticus, Lyscander, and most of the Danish writers, make this the pleasantest piece of ground in the King of Denmark's dominions. Whence they have fancied the Island had its name from fine; which has the same signification in Funen as in England. Tho Adam Bremensis may seem to favour this conceit, in calling the inhabitants of this Island Finni, and their Country Finningia; and Pontanus allows the etymology; yet methinks Stephanius guesses better at the derivation of the word, when he fetches it from Fion, which in the old Runic monuments signifies a neck of land rent from the continent; and such any man will suppose Funen to be, who shall have the oppor∣tunity of viewing that slender Frith which at this day separates that Island from Jutland. The Island abounds with all manner of Corn, especially Wheat and Rye, which is hence yearly transported in great quantities into other Na∣tions. Besides, the Natives have generally great Herds of Cattle, and very good Breeds of Horses. The Woods, which overspread almost the whole Island, are exceedingly well stored with Deer, Hares, and Foxes. The chief City in this Island is Ottensee; which some will have to take its name from Woden, the great God of the ancient Danes, whom some of their Historians call Othin or Odin. Others, more probably, say, 'twas built by the Emperor Otho the first, who overrun a great part of the Danish Kingdom, and left his name in more places then one. This opinion seems to be confirmed by a Letter written by the Emperor Otho the third, about the year 987, in which this City is named Ʋrbs Othonesvigensis. Pontanus thinks, 'twas first built by King Harald; who, to testifie his gratitude to the forementioned Emperor Otho the first (by whose procurement he was converted to Chri∣stianity) called it Ottonia or Ottensche, and his son Suenotto. This City is seated in the very cen∣ter of the Island, and therefore in a fit place for the Sessions of the Nobility and Magistracy; which are yearly held in this place. As were likewise the General Assemblies of the Kingdom of Den∣mark, before the year 1660. The buildings in this Town are generally well built, and the streets uniform. Besides other public buildings, there are in it two fair Churches; whereof one is de∣dicate to St. Cnute, the other to St. Francis. Not far from the former of these stands a stately Town-Hall, upon a very spacious Market-place; where King Frideric II. renew'd the ancient League be∣tween the Crown of Denmark and the Dukes of Holstein and Sleswic in the year 1575. When the Quire of St. Cnute's Church was repair'd in the year 1582, the workmen found, in a Vault, a Copper Coffin gilded and adorn'd with precious stones; upon which was writ the following in∣scription in old Latin-Gothic characters: Jam coelo tutus summo cum rege Canutus Martyr, in aurata rex atque reconditur arca: Et pro Justitiae factis Occisus inque; Ʋt Christum vita sic morte fatetur in ipsa. Traditur a proprio, sicut Deus ipse, ministro. A.D. MLXXXVI. Other Towns of note in Funen, are 1. Bowens, a Port-Town of good trade, seated on the West∣side of the Island, at the North-end of Medelfar∣sund. 2. Middlefar, seated on the common pas∣sage from this Island to Kolding in Jutland. On the thirtieth of January in the year 1658. Carolus Gustavus, King of Sweden, led his Army over the ice to this place; and having routed the Danish Forces that opposed him, made himself absolute master of the whole Isle of Funen. 3. Ascens, not far from the mountains of Ossenburgh, where John de Hoy, Nicholas Fechlenburgh, and Gustavus Troll, Bishop of Ʋpsal, were slain; and their Ar∣my, commanded by Christopher Earl of Oldenburgh, totally routed by John Rantzaw, King Christian the third's General, who level'd this City to the ground. 4. Foborg, upon the Southern coast of the Island. It was once burnt by the unruly sol∣diers of Christian the third; whilst Odensee (ad∣hering to the captive Prince Christian the second, who at that time was kept close prisoner at Sun∣derburg) redeem'd it self from the like fate by a
large sum of money. 5. Swynborg, over against the Island of Langland. From this place Carolus Gustavus, King of Sweden, led his Army over the ice into Seeland, in the year 1658. 6. Nyborg the usual passage from Funen into Seeland. This City was first fortified with a Moat and Bulwarks by King Christian the third. It is very memorable for the battel fought by the Confederates of the Empire Brandenburgh, Poland, and the Low Coun∣tries, in the year 1659, against the Swedes; who in that engagement were overthrown, and utterly routed out of Funen. Besides the great Towns mentioned, there are in Funen a great number of fair Villages; among which they reckon up no less then 264 Parish Churches. SEELAND. SEeland (the largest, fairest, and most fruitful Island in the Baltic Sea) lies to the East of Funen, from which 'tis separated (as we have said before) by the Belt. On the other side it is parted from Schonen by a small Frith, call'd by the inhabitants Oresundt, thro which pass all the Merchant-ships which traffick in the Baltic. The breadth of it is about twelve German miles, and the length eighteen. This Island is undoubtedly the ancient Codano∣nia, mentioned by Pomponius Mela; which signi∣fies the same thing as the more modern words Dania and Denmark. Most of the Danish Etymo∣logists derive Seeland from Soedland or Seedland, from the plenty of Corn which this Country affords. Others, with greater probability, make the word signifie no more then an Island, or piece of ground encompassed with the Sea. Whence Saxo Grammaticus, and several other ancient Hi∣storians, call it Seelandia, from the old Danish word Sia or Sio, which is now turned into Soe, and in our English tongue corrupted into Sea. In most, or all of the ancient Runic Manuscripts it is called Soelunder, or the Sea-Grove. The Edda Islandorum calls it Soelund; and gives us this ac∣count of the first original of the word: There was formerly a certain King in Sweden, named Gylfi, who promised an Asian Sorceress (call'd Gesion, who had pleased him with her me∣lody) as much land as four Oxen could plow up in one day and a night. Whereupon, the old Hag brings four of her sons out of North Jutland; and turning them into as many Oxen, caused them to plow up a large and deep fur∣row round this piece of ground. Which when the Sea had fill'd up, the land became an Isle, and was call'd Seelund. Stephanius thinks Ptolomy alluded to this fable when, speaking of some Islands in the Baltic, he said, , i.e. Beyond the Cimbrian Chersonese ly three Islands called Alociae; from the Greek word , a furrow. Copenhagen (the Metropolis of this Island,Copenha∣gen. and of the whole Kingdom of Denmark) is seated on the East of Seeland, upon the Sea-shore. The Danes call it Kiobenhaun, and the Germans Copen∣haven; both which words are corruptions of Kiob∣manshafen, i.e. Portus Mercatorum, as Saxo some∣where calls it. Mejerus, a learned Frisian writer, derives the name of this City from Coppen (which, says he, in the Frisian language signifies James) and Haven, q.d. St. James's Haven. But there is very little or no grounds for any such deriva∣tion. About the year 1168, Axil Wide surnamed Snare (Saxo calls him Absolon) Archbishop of Denmark, built a considerable fortification in the Island in which now stands the Castle. This was call'd after his name Axel-huys; and was a good defence to the whole Island against the daily in∣cursions of Pyrats. Under the protection of this Fort several Fishermen, and others that traded this way, used to harbour their Ships in security. This caused a continual concourse of the Natives, who resorted hither to furnish the Vessels with such provisions as their Country afforded; and in a short time laid the first rude draughts of a City, which at this day (for strength, trade, beauty and bulk) is not surpass'd by many in Europe. Most of the Danish Kings, especially Christian IV. have been very active in beautifying this City, with an University, Churches, Walls, Ditches, &c. James Ecland Bishop of Roschild, was the first that granted any priviledges to it, in the year 1254. These his successor Ignatius confirm'd; and they were afterwards considerably enlarged by King Waldemar in the year 1341; and Eric of Pomeren in the year 1371. Christopher of Bavaria endowed it with Municipal immunities, like the other Ci∣ties of Denmark, in the year 1443. All which were confirm'd by the large Charters of Christian the third and Frideric the second. The Citizens houses till within these few years, were very mean and low, most of them patcht up of wood and mor∣tar; but of late they are grown more curious and expensive in Architecture, and few of their streets are without a considerable number of fair brick buildings. The Cathedral Church, dedi∣cate to St. Mary, is beautified with a noble Cop∣per Spire, built at the charges of King Christian the fourth. The Advowsance of this Church belongs to the Professors in the University. The Market-place is exceeding spacious, and no small ornament to the Town. Besides these, the Kings Palace, the Arsenal (which perhaps excels any thing that Europe affords in this kind), the Ob∣servatory, or Runde taarn, and the adjoining University Church, and Library, the Exchange, &c. are places richly worth the seeing, and deserve a larger description then the bounds of this short account of the whole Kingdom will permit. The City is governed by four Burgomasters, one whereof is Regent or President for his life. This honour is at present conferr'd on that worthy and learned person P. John Resenius, Professor of Mo∣ral Philosophy in the University at Copenhagen, and Counsellor to the present King of Denmark. With him, most of the other Professors of note in this University (as William Langius, formerly Tu∣tor to this present King Christian the fifth; Erasmus Vindingius, Professor of History and Geography and Author of the Academia Hafniensis, which gives us an exact account of all the famous men that have ever flourished in this University; Thomas and Erasmus Bartholini, both well known by their incomparable works, &c.) are at this day Mini∣sters of State in the Court of Denmark, and keep only the title and pension of Professors, without being tyed to the performance of the duties. Amaga or Amagria (called by the Danes Ama∣ger) is a small Island on the East of Copenhagen,Am about six English miles in length, and four in breadth. It is wonderfully well stock'd with all manner of Fowl and Venison, has in it plenty of Corn, and furnishes the Market at Copenhagen with weekly supplies of Milk, Butter, Cheese, &c. whence some think it had its name; for Amaga, in the old Teutonic dialect, signifies a Granary or Storehouse; and thence Drusomagum, Borbetoma∣gum, Duromagum, Neomagum, and other places in Germany, had their name. And from hence the French Magazin and Italian Magasino have their original. There are two Parish Churches in this Isle. The one called by the inhabitants Hollen∣der Byes Kircke, i.e. the Dutch Church; from a
map of Seeland SELANDIAE in Regno Daniae Insulae Chorogra∣phica Descriptio. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios; et Mosem Pitt. blazon or coat of arms VIRO Illustri ac Generoso Dno GEORGIO SEEFELDO Haereditario in REFFES Regni Daniae Senatori▪ ac Iudici provintiali Se∣landico▪ Domino ac Patrono plurimum honorando D. D. D. Johannes Janssonius. blazon or coat of arms
Colony of Hollanders sent hither by Margaret Archdutchess of Austria, to be Overseers of the Kitchin-Garden to her Niece Elizabeth King Chri∣stian the second's Queen. These Gardners have since that time so far encreased their number, that they are not able to live in their first habitations (tho swoln into a Village of half an English mile in length:) but are of late forced to build them∣selves a new Town not far from the Western Gate of Copenhagen. The other Parish Church is called by the Danes Torne Byes kircke; and belongs to the Natives. On the eight of October in the year 1658, the Swedish forces broke into this Island: and the next day burnt down every Vil∣lage in it. But on the tenth of December follow∣ing Charles Gustavus King of Sweden, and his Ge∣neral Wrangel, were forced to leave behind them their Army engaged, and fly hence in a small Fisherman's Catch. The rest of the great Towns and places of note in this Island are:Roschild. 1. Roschild; which takes its name from a river running by the Town, which drives seven mills. Roe in the antient Danish Tongue, signifies a King, and Kille a stream of water. 'Twas formerly the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom: but of late years this City has decayed (and Copenhagen grown) so fast, that it is scarce remarkable for any thing at this day save the great old Cathedral, the burying place of the Kings of Denmark; and some small trade. This City was first made a Bishop's See by Suenotho, King of England, Denmark, Sweden and Norway about the year 1012. who gave the Bishoprick of Roschild (which is now swallowed up of Copenha∣gen) to Gerebrand a Monk. Afterwards Sueno Gratenhede fortifyed it with a wall, ditch and bul∣wark. Lyscander tells us, there were once no less then twenty seven fair Churches in this Town. A∣mong these, I suppose, he reckons the Chappel built by King Harald, Svenotho's father, in which both he and his son (whose dead corps were carried out of England to Roschild to be buried) are entombed. In the old Cathedral, amongst many other rich monuments in honour of several of the Danish Kings and Queens, stands a fair marble pillar, which Margaret Queen of Denmark erected on purpose to hang thereon the Whet∣stone (which is fastened to it with a chain) which Albert King of Sweden, in derision of her Sex, sent her to sharp her needles on. This scoff cost him seven years imprisonment, and a renunciation of all the right he pretended to the Kingdom of Swe∣den: for the performance of which Articles the Hans-Towns were sureties. 2.Elseneur. Elseneur (called otherwise Helsenoer, Helsche∣noer, Helsingor, and Halsingor; as the opposite Ca∣stle in Schonen is by Adam Bremensis Halsingburg) is so named q. d. Halsen-ore i. e. An ear in the neck; because at first a watchtower seated on that neck of the Sea (called by the Danes Oresundt) which parts Seeland from Schonen. Here Pontanus fan∣cies Ptolomy's Hellevones, had their habitation. The chief ornament and strength of this Town laies in Croneburg, a Royal and impregnable Castle, which commands this side of the Oresundt with as much case as Elsingburg secures the other. It is built of hewn Free-stone, brought hither out of Gothland. This was for many years the seat of the Danish Kings; who (as may appear from what we have said before touching the revenues of this Crown) had from hence one of the most pleasant and profitable prospects in the whole Kingdom. Eve∣ry ship that passes this streight is obliged to strike sail to Croneburg, and that done, the master is to come to a Composition in the City for Cu∣stom: upon pain of the confiscation of his vessel and loading. Frideric the second built the Castle of Croneburg at his own charges, without a penny Subsidy from his Subjects: and covered it with Copper. 3. Fredericksburg: called formerly Ebelholt,Frede∣ricksburg. and only a Monastry dedicated to the Holy Ghost (of which Johannes Parisiensis, who was afterwards put into the Popish Kalendar of Saints, is said to have been Abbot about the year 1201) till turn∣ed into a Castle by King Frederic the second. The structure was first begun by one Harlef a Danish Noble man, who sold it to King Frideric. After this King's death, his son Christian the fourth spar∣ed no charges in compleating what his father left unfinish'd: but adorned it with a Collection of the richest Pictures, Statues, Hangings, &c. that Eu∣rope could afford. Insomuch, that Mounsieur l' E∣spine (a French writer, who printed his History soon after the finishing of this Royal Palace) does not stick to say, That the world can scarce parel∣lel this piece. Adding further, that here the locks and bars in the windows were all of beaten Silver &c. The foundation of the house is all Free∣stone; but the upper building brick. It is seated in a pleasant wood about the middle way betwixt Elsineur and Copenhagen. The adjoyning Park was first stock'd with fallow Deer sent thither out of England in the 24. year of the reign of our Queen Elizabeth. 4. Ringstede:Ringstede. a Town of the greatest Antiquity of any (excepting Roschild) in Denmark: where ly buried many of the Danish Kings, particularly King Waldemar the first, and Eric the Godly. It is seated in the very center of Seeland, where, desti∣tute of Trade, it decayes dayly. 5. Sor, Soor or Soer; seated in a pleasant woody Country between Slagen and Ringsiede. Absalon Hvide (Archbishop of Lunden and Bishop of Ros∣child) founded here a fair Monastry about the middle of the twelfth Century, and endowed it with large Revenues for the maintenance of several learned men, who were to be employed in writ∣ing and publishing the History of the Acts and Monuments of the Kings and other Heroes of Denmark. Upon this encouragement, Saxo Gram∣maticus first took the pains to collect a vast com∣pany of old Historical fragments, and afterwards digested them into a better Order then could ra∣tionally be expected from any man bred up in a Nation so unpardonably barbarous as Denmark, in and before his dayes, is known to have been. Afterwards Esbern, the said Archbishop's brother, augmented the Revenues by the addition of four∣teen Villages; and enlarged the Monastery it self. He dyed within a year after his brother (A. D. 1202.) and was buried at Sor. Many years after this, King Frideric the second removed the School which he had founded at Fridericksburg (for the education of the young Nobility) to this place: where having encreased the number of both teachers and hearers, he thought it also requisite to enlarge the Income. Which done, of a rich Po∣pish monastery, it became one of the best endow∣ed Free-Schools in the reformed part of Christen∣dome. His son, Christian the fourth, turned the Free-School into a small University; by setling certain Salaries for the maintenance of a set num∣ber of Professors, who were to instruct young Noble men in the principles of several Arts and Sciences, and the rudiments of the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French, and Italian Tongues. Besides, to to this Gymnasium he annexed an Academy furnish∣ed with fit Masters to teach perfectly all Gentile and Marshal Exercises; as, Dancing, Vaulting, Riding the great horse, &c. Whence some Au∣thors call the University at Sor, Academiam Eque∣strem: because at first principally intended for the Education of young Gentlemen in the Acts of
Chivalry, tho afterwards it grew to be the most famous University (for all manner of learning) in the King of Denmark's Dominions. In the year 1621, the Nunnery of Mariebo in Laland was de∣molished; the Nuns thrown out, and the lands given to this University. But at this day these and all other the large Territories which have been heretofore settled upon the University at Sor, are in the present King's hand: who threatens dayly to reestablish an University in this place, but with∣out any show of performance. His resolutions I suppose, (if ever he had any such) are in a great measure stopped by the continual disswasion of the Professours at Copenhagen; who think it very inconsistent with their Interest to have another University erected in their neighbourhood. For heretofore, when any Professor's place was vacant at Copenhagen, 'twas odds but some brisk fellow from Sor carried it. 6.Ander∣skaw. Anderskaw or Andersbouw, formerly a great Monastery, now a strong Castle about an English mile from Slagen. It is seated in a level Cham∣pagn Country, and delicately well built. Here Frideric the second dyed A. D. 1548. 7.Kallen∣borg. Kallenborg (which Saxo Grammaticus calls Kallunda and Meursius Callundeburgum) was for∣merly a small Village inhabited by none but Fishermen, and by them named Herwig. But Es∣bern Suare (brother to Absalon Hvide, abovemen∣tioned) turned it into a City about the year 1158, or (as some) 1171, and beautified it with a Ca∣stle, Church and several other publique buildings. 'Tis at present a Town of good Trade, having the convenience of as safe an harbour for Ships as any haven in Denmark. 8.Kosor. Korsor, so called from the multitude of Cros∣ses erected formerly in the place, out of the abun∣dance of superstitious Zeal in the Inhabitants. 9.Koge. Koge, Coagium: a small but very populous and rich City; about sixteen English miles from Copenhagen. It is a place much thronged with Corn-merchants and Fishmongers; the Commo∣dities, pleasant situation, &c. of this City are ex∣pressed by Westhow a Danish Poet, in three Distichs thus: Fluctibus Arctoi sat bella Coagia ponti Alluor: hinc campus, subjacet, inde nemus. Quae silvae utilitas, agri emolumenta, fretique Commoda sunt, meus haec omnia civis habet. Dat glandes & ligna nemus, dat pascua campus, Piscibus & variis mercibus unda beat. LALAND LAland or Lawland (so called from its low si∣tuation) is an Island about 32 English miles in length, and 20 in breadth. It is divided from Seeland by the narrow bay Gronesond, or (as some Maps call it) Goldersond: and from Falster by a bay much narrower then the former. It is a very fruitful Country, and affords great quantities of Corn, and good store of rich pastu∣rage. Lyscander says of this Dukedome, That there are in it four several Gentes (I suppose he means Herrits or Lordships) and as many Cities. The great Towns, or Cities he speaks of, are: 1. Na∣schaw or Nachscouw; which (together with the adjoyning Monastery) was stormed, taken and burnt by the Lubeckers in the year 1510. 2. Sascoping. 3. Newstadt; once famous for a noble Monastery built here A. D. 1286. 4. Lavinscoping. Besides these, the Nunnery of Mariaebo (spoken of before in the Description of Sor) was as considerable and remarkable a place as any in the whole Island. Other Islands, less considerable, in the Baltic Sea. WHat Islands have been of late delivered up by the Danes into the hands of the Swedes upon the Ratification of Treaties and Leagues, may be seen in the description of Swedeland. Of those that remain still in the hands of the King of Denmark; these we have mentioned, are of most note: and 'twere irrational to expect a particular account of those millions of diminutive Islands that lay scattered along the Coasts of See∣land, Schonen, Jutland, &c. Among them, these fol∣lowing are all that are worth the taking notice of. 1. Falster:Falster. a considerable Island adjoyning to Laland. It is not above 16 English miles in length, but so fruitful, that it furnishes not only its own Inhabitants, but a great part of the Dukedom of Mecklenburg, and several other parts of Germany, with Corn. Great Towns of note in this Island are: 1. Nycoping; which Dr. Heylin (for I cannot find that he borrowed the expression from any other writer) calls the Naples of Denmark, from the pleasantness of its situation and uniformity in building. 2. Stabecoping; a place of some Trade, upon the account of Passengers, who come daily this way betwixt Seeland and Germany. 2. Mona or Meun.Mona. A chalky Island to the North∣east of Falster: which serves for a good Landmark to the German Vessels that trade in these Seas. Ly∣scander tells us, 'twas formerly annex'd to the sti∣pend of the Danish Admiral, as a place the fittest of any in the King of Denmark's Dominions for such an Officer to reside in. The only Town of consequence in it is Stege; which bravely with∣stood the Lubeckers in the year 1510, and forced them at last to retreat. 3. Langeland.Lange∣land. A narrow Island betwixt Funen and Laland; about 28 English miles in length and only 8 in breadth, whence it has its name. There are in it 16 Parish Churches, and a great number of Noblemens houses; besides the impregnable Castle of Traneker, which is admirably well pro∣vided with all manner of Military ammunition. Rutcoping may pass for (what the Danish writers will needs have it to be) a City: but 'tis a mise∣rably poor one, and in no great probability of being advanced by Traffic. 4. Alsen.Alsen. A small Isle over against the Bay of Flensburg in the Dukedom of Sleswic; of which it is a part, and therefore only subject to the Kings of Denmark as Dukes of Sleswic. The learned and Noble Danish Antiquary Rantzow, thinks the Elysii Arii and Manimi mentioned by Tacitus, were the antient Inhabitants of this Island, Ar and Meun; and that these three Isles have the same names at this day (saving only a small alteration, such as may easily happen in the revolution of a few years) which they had when that learned Roman writ his Annals. This Isle is every where either exceeding fruitful or very pleasant: and so populous, that several thousands of stout fighting men have been raised in a very short time out of its four Towns and thirteen Parishes. Sunderburg (here∣tofore the usual seat of the Dukes of Sleswic, and to this day one of the strongest holds which the King of Denmark has) is the chief Town in the Island. 5.Femeren. Femeren or Fimbria (which some curious E∣tymologists have ventured to derive from Cim∣bria) is a small Island on the Coast of Wagerland; from which it is separated by a very narrow chan∣nel. This piece of ground has always been lookt upon as one of the most considerable keys of Den∣mark;
map of Lalandia and Falstria LALANDIAE et FALSTRIAE Accurata Descriptio. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios▪ et Mosem Pitt.
either to exclude or let in the Imperialists. And therefore Christian IV. thought the Germans would do him less harm in running over all Jut∣land, then if they should make themselves masters of this Isle. Whereupon, in the year 1628, he took care to put strong Garrisons into every place of moment in it; and to fortifie the old Castles and Towns which his predecessors had suffer'd to decay, and sleighted. On the coasts of Jutland, between the Promon∣tory of Schaghen and the Isle Funen, there are se∣veral little inconsiderable Islands, as Anholt, Lasso, Niding, Helm, Tune, Kitholm, Jordholm, Samsoe, &c. Among these, the three first are notorious for the dangerous Sands which lye round them; whence 'tis an ordinary proverb, used by the in∣habitants here, Lassoe, Niding, und Anholt Maecken dat menich stuerman niet werdt oldt, i. e. Lassoe, Niding, and Anholt Hinder shipmen to grow old. Of the ancient Inhabitants of the Isles in the Baltic Sea. THat the Dani Insulares (as Saxo calls the inhabitants of these Isles) are all of one extraction, will be found a question very dispu∣table, after a diligent enquiry into the different customs and languages used in several of the Baltic Islands. Ptolomy, we know, and most of the ancient Geographers, make Scandinavia, or Schonen, an Island; but of so large a bulk, that Alter Terrarum Orbis, is one of the most usual names they give it. This, Pliny tells us, was by some of the Greek writers call'd Baltia; which by Pytheas is corrupted into Basilia. Now, if we grant, that this Continent (which the ancients mistook for an Island) were named Baltia , because the noblest Isle in this Sea (which seems the most probable conjecture), then it will not by any means be irrational to conclude, that in all probability the inhabitants of all these pe∣tit Islands were only so many small branches of the old warlike Nation of the Goths, whom the most learned Historians place in Schonen. But then 'twill still be doubted, whether these Goths were not a Nation wholly distinct from the Getes mention'd in Jutland; and consequently, whether those that inhabit the Isles upon the coasts of Schonen, be not descended of another stock then they that live near Jutland can reasonably pretend to. Pontanus is exceeding angry at Jor∣nandes, Orosius, and others, for affirming, that the Getes and Goths are one and the same people; but, as I conceive, without any great reason. For if (as is prov'd in the description of Jutland) the Getes gave name to a great part of the Cimbrian Chersonese; these two Nations are easilier brought together then he is aware of. And could we once perswade Pontanus's admirers to grant, that the Getae, Gutae, Vitae or Witae, were the ancient inha∣bitants of Jutland (as seems plain from the ar∣guments and authorities of learned men before alledged), 'twill be no difficult matter to evince the truth of this assertion, That the Getes and Goths, together with all the inhabitants of the Da∣nish Isles in the Baltic Sea, are originally one and the same Nation. 'Tis true, in some small Islands in and near the Finnic Gulph, the people use a language altogether unintelligible to a true Dane or Swede; but further westward, the languages spoken in all the Baltic Islands, are so many dia∣lects of the Gothic tongue. And the old Runic monuments, daily found in most Provinces of the Danish and Swedish dominions, prove mani∣festly the same words and characters to have been used in Schonen, Jutland, and the interme∣diate Islands. From the difference of manners, customs, ha∣bits, &c. in these Isles; no more can be conclu∣cluded then, that some, wanting the conveni∣ence of traffick and correspondence with other Nations, are forced to content themselves with the rude and ungentile ways of living, taught them by their homebred Ancestors; whilst others, who lay more in the road of Merchant-ships, must needs insensibly admit of a daily alteration both in manners and language. decorative device
NORWAY. WHat the Edda,Name. and other Mythological writers, tell us of Nor (son of their God Thor, & Grand∣child to Woden) the first grand Captain of the Norwegians, from whom that people, and their Country, fetch (say these men) their names; merits just as much credit as the Danish stories of their King Dan. The truth is, Norway (or Norweg, as the Germans write it; whence the Latin word Norwegia) is only via seu tractus sep∣tentrionalis, i. e. a country situated towards the North. Hence in the Danish, Swedish, & Norvegian tongues, 'tis to this day called Norrike, or the Northern King∣dom (Pliny's Nerigon is only a corruption of this word); and we find, that anciently all the Cim∣brian Kingdoms were named Regna Norica. By Helmoldus the Norwegians are called Nordliudi; which word is not (as Dr. Heylin guesses) de∣rived from the Dutch word Nordt and the French lieu; for Nordliod or Nordtleut, in the Northern languages, is no more then the people of the North. In the Preface to our King Aelfred's Anglo-Saxonic Version of Orosius, this Kingdom is stiled Norðh;manna land, the Country of the Normans. Adam Bremensis calls it Normannia. And we know Rollo brought his Normans out of these parts. This Kingdom is bounded on the South with the Baltic Straits,Bounds. which separate it from Jutland; on the North and West with the Northern Ocean; on the East with Sweden and Lapland. The whole length of it (from the Baltic Sea as far as Fin∣mark) is reckoned to be about 210 German miles. The Eastern part of Norway is very thin peo∣pled;Soil. being a Country of nothing but inaccessi∣ble and craggy mountains. Towards the South there is greater store of inhabitants; who dwell in pleasant valleys, encircled with barren and rocky hills. The rest of the Country is overspread with woods; which furnish the greatest part of Eu∣rope with Deal-boards, and Masts for Ships. The long ridge of high mountains which di∣vide this Kingdom from Sweden (where Pliny places his Sevo) are continually covered with snow; whence intolerable sharp winds are sent down into the valleys beneath, which by this means become desolate and unfruitful. But more Southerly, and all along the Western coasts, the air is much more temperate; and would be health∣ful enough, if not corrupted by the putrefaction and stench of a certain kind of Rats (called by the inhabitants Lemmer) which infect the whole Country with the Epidemical disease of the Jaun∣dice and a giddiness in the head, which is most especially apt to seize on strangers, unacquainted with the danger, and unarm'd against the di∣stemper. In the valleys there are good breeds of Cattel;Commodi∣ties. insomuch that the inhabitants export yearly great quantities of Butter, Tallow, Hides, and Cheese. Their chief Grain is Barley. The woods afford Timber, Pitch, Tar, rich Furs, and great store of Filberds. Besides these commodities, they have a good trade from their Stock-fish and Train-Oyl, which is vended all Europe over. Christian IV. King of Denmark, employ'd se∣veral Artists in the search of some Silver and Gold Mines, in the year 1623. And 'tis said, some lumps of the Oar of both those mettals were here found and presented to the King. But this disco∣very never turned to any considerable account. For the Natives were utterly ignorant of the art of refining any kind of Minerals themselves; and altogether unwilling to admit into their Country any foreigners skill'd in that way. The inhabitants are much of the same com∣plexion and humour with the Danes. They are generally effeminate and lazy; not so much thro any fault of nature, as the want of employ∣ment. For the King of Denmark seldom or never makes use of this Nation in his wars; as being loth to trust them with arms. The ancient Nor∣wegians (as well as their neighbours) are every where reported to have been notorious Pyrats; but at this day the Seas are scarce in any place in Europe so secure from robbery as on the coasts of Norway. The cause of this alteration can scarce be attributed to the modern honesty of this King∣dom, so far excelling that of former days; but rather to the general poverty and mean spirited∣ness of the inhabitants, into which the Danish rigor has forc'd them. For they have little or no Shipping allow'd them; and are too low kept to pretend to hector and domineer. Their diet is (what they furnish other Coun∣tries with) Stockfish, and a coarse kind of But∣ter and Cheese. Their usual drink, Rostock Ale. In this they commonly drink three draughts; one in remembrance of God, the second to the Kings health, and the third to the Queens. As Norway is still reckon'd a distinct Kingdom from Denmark; so it had formerly its own inde∣pendent Kings, who sometimes Lorded it over the Monarchs of Sweden and Denmark. Never∣theless, the account we have of these Princes (from the Chronica Norvagica, published by Jo∣hannes Slangerupensis in the year 1594, and Olaus Wormius in the year 1633, and the relations of other Historians) is so imperfect and incredible, that 'twould but waste paper to give the Reader a catalogue of them. The last King that sway'd the Scepter in Norway, was Haquin; who in the year 1363 married Margaret eldest daughter of Waldemar III. King of Denmark; thereupon uniting the two Kingdoms. Now, tho King Haquin had only one son by Queen Margaret (Olaus, for some while King of Denmark) who dyed without issue; yet the Danes, having once got footing in this Kingdom, were resolved to keep their station; and therefore, to secure themselves from all fu∣ture insurrection and rebellion, they immediate∣ly put strong Garrisons into all the Cities and Forts of consequence in the Nation. Since it is manifest (from the language, man∣ners, &c. of the inhabitants) that the Norwegians and Islanders are both one people; what the Rea∣der misses in the general description of Norway, may possibly be met with in the following one of Island.
The Prefecture of Masterland. THis Prefecture takes its name from the chief City in it; seated on a rocky Peninsula, and famous for its great trade in Herrings and other Sea-fish. This City (with two more of less note, Con∣gel and Oddawald) and the adjoining Country are commanded by the strong Castle of Bahus, now in the hands of the King of Sweden. It was first built by Haquin IV. King of Norway, about the year 1309, upon a steep rock on the bank of the river Trollet; and was then look'd upon as the best Fort that King had in his dominions, and a sufficient Bulwark against the daily assaults and incursions of the Swedes and Westro-Goths. The Bishopricks of Anslo and Staffenger, with the Province of Aggerhuse. ANslo (called by the inhabitants Opslo, and by some Latin writers Asloa) was first built by King Harold, cotemporary with Sueno Esthri∣tius King of Denmark, who frequently kept his residence in this City. Here is held the chief Court of Judicature for all Norway; wherein all causes and suits at Law are heard and determined before the Governor, who acts as Vice-Roy of the Kingdom. The Cathedral is dedicated to St. Alward; who took great pains in preaching the Gospel to the Norwegian Heathens. In this Church is to be shew'n the Sword of Haquin, one of their ancientest Kings; a signal testimony (if the stories they tell of it be true) of the strength and admirable art of some Norwegians of former ages. The hilt of it is made of Crystal, curiously wrought and polished; whence Olaus Magnus will needs conclude, that the use of Crystal was an∣ciently much more ordinary in Norway then it is at this day in any part of Europe. Not far from Opslo, on the other side of the Bay, stands the Castle of Aggerhusen; memora∣ble for the brave resistance it made the Swedish Army in the year 1567, which besieg'd it hotly eighteen weeks together; but was at last beat off, and forced shamefully to retire. About twenty German miles Northward of Opslo, lies the City Hammar; formerly a Bishops See, but at present under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Opslo. Near this Town is the Island Moos; where (if we believe Olaus Magnus) a huge and monstrous Serpent appears constantly before any grand alteration in the State or Government of the Kingdom of Norway. In this Province, besides the places already men∣tioned, stand the Cities of Tonsberg, Fridericstadt, Saltsburgh, and Scheen; which have all a consi∣derable trade from the Copper and Iron Mines, which hereabouts are in greater numbers then in any other part of the Kingdom. 'Twas in this Province that the Silver Mines (mention'd be∣fore) were first discover'd at the expence of Chri∣stian IV. King of Denmark; and some of the ad∣joining hills are by the neighbourhood to this day called Silver-bergen, or the mountains of Sil∣ver. To these Mines, and the lofty woods of Pines and Fir-trees (with which this part of the Coun∣try is overspread) the Kingdom of Norway owes the greatest part of, if not all, its trade. The City of Staffenger lies in 59 degrees (some reckon 60, and a great many odd minutes) of Latitude. It is seated in a Peninsuia, upon a great Bay of the Northern Ocean full of small Islands, and guarded by the strong Castle of Doeswick, which lies about two English miles from the Town. In Civil affairs this City is under the jurisdiction of the Governor of Bergenhusen; tho it has its own peculiar Bishop constantly residing in the Town. The whole Bishopric is divided into the several Districts of Stavangersteen, Dalarne, Jaren, Listerleen, Mandalsleen, Nedenesleen, and Abygde∣lag. Thomas Conrad Hvegner (Bishop of this Dio∣cess in the year 1641) took the pains to collect a great number of Runic inscriptions, which lay scatter'd up and down his Diocess; some of which are published by Wormius, who further informs us, that this Conrad's predecessor (whose name he omits) writ a Topographical description of this City and Bishoprick. Beyond the Bay appears the Island Schutenes, three German miles in length, but scarce half an one in breadth. Between this Island (which has in it several considerable Villages) and the Con∣tinent runs up a narrow Frith to Bergen; which is called by the Dutch Merchants, T' Liedt van Berghen. To the Bishopric of Staffenger belongs the Pro∣vince of Tillemarch, or Thylemarch; which gave Procopius the first grounds for that assertion of his, which he defends with so great vehemency, viz. that Scandinavia (taken in its largest extent, of which Thylemarch is a very inconsiderable part) is the ancient Thule. The Parish of Hollen in this Province is very remarkable for a Church-yard, or burying place, on the top of a Church, dedi∣cated to St. Michael, which is cut out of a great high rock, call'd by the Vicenage Vear, upon the Lake Nordsee, half a mile distant from Scheen. Wormius thinks, 'twas formerly an Heathenish Temple; but converted to Christian uses upon the first planting of the Gospel in this King∣dom. The Prefecture and Bishoprick of Berghen. THis Bishoprick (the most fruitful and plea∣santest part of all Norway) lies to the North of Aggerhusen, in the middle or heart of the Kingdom. It derives its name from the fair and noble Emporium or Mart-Town of Berghen; or else from the strong Castle of Berghenhusen, the usual seat of the Vice-Roy of Norway, at a small distance from Berghen Northward. Berghen (an ancient and famous Sea-Port Town mentioned by Pomponius Mela and Pliny) is the Granary and Magazine of the whole King∣dom of Norway. It lies distant from Bahusen about an hundred German miles by Sea, and sixty by land; from Truntheim as many; from Schagen, the outmost Promontory of Jutland, almost eighty. Some have fetcht its name from the Norwegian verb Bergen, which signifies to hide or conceal; because the Haven being surrounded with hills, seems to be a kind of sculking-place for Ships, where Vesfels of two hundred Tun and upwards ride in a spatious and most se∣cure Harbour, free from all danger of wind and weather. But we need not trouble our selves any further for the derivation of the name then to consider, that Berghen in the Norwegian language signifies mountains; and Berghen-husen, a company of houses among the hills. The buildings in this City, till within these few years, were exceeding mean and contemptible; most of them of wood, cover'd with green turf, and therefore frequently burnt down. But of late, the Hamburghers, Lu∣beckers, Hollanders, and others that trade this way, have beautified the Town with an Exchange and a great many private houses of credit. The most peculiar trade of this City lies in a kind of
Stock-fish, catcht upon these coasts, and thence called usually by the Norway Merchants Berghen∣visch. This the Fishermen take in winter, com∣monly in January, for the conveniency of drying it in the cold and sharp air. Besides, hither Furs of all sorts, and vast quantities of dry'd Fish, But∣ter, Tallow, Hides, &c. are brought from all parts of Norway, to be shipt off into other Countries. The Townsmen, not many years ago (observing the daily encrease of their trade, and the great concourse of strangers which it drew from all parts; and fearing they themselves might at last be prejudiced by an unlimited and general ad∣mission of foreign Tradesmen and Merchants into their City) made an order, that whoever would, after such a time, be admitted a freeman of the Town, should either be whipt (at a Game instituted upon this occasion, and call'd by them Gantenspill), or rowl'd in mud and dirt, or lastly hung in a basket over some intolerable and filthy smoak. This hard usage quickly diminished the number of foreigners, who fancied it scarce worth their while to purchase their freedom at so dear and scandalous a rate. But of late, the industry and skill, as well as number of the inhabitants encreasing, these barbarous customs are laid aside, and the Citizens themselves are now able to ex∣port what was formerly fetcht away from them. The Bishop of this Diocess was heretofore under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Truntheim. To the Governor of Berghen are subject the Prefectures of Sudhornleen, Nordhornleen, Soghne, Sudfiord, Norfiord, and Sundmerleen. The Prefecture and Bishoprick of Nidrosia or Truntheim. THE fourth Castle and Government in Nor∣way, is that of the City Nidrosia (as it was anciently called from the river Nider, on which 'tis seated) or Truntheim; formerly the Metropolis of the Kingdom, and the seat of the King and Archbishop of Norway. Pontanus some∣where calls this City the Cabinet of all the Nor∣wegian monuments; but Wormius found no great reason to confer so honourable a title upon it, when (after a diligent search into the Antiqui∣ties, old monuments and reliques of the primi∣tive inhabitants of this Kingdom) he met with no more then three Runic inscriptions in this whole Diocess. The conveniency of the Haven makes this place resorted to by some Mariners and Merchants to this day; but the ruines are so great that it looks more like a Village then City; not having had any opportunity of re∣covering its former splendor since it was burnt down in the year 1522. Its houses are a company of old fashion'd and rotten buildings; and the Kings Palace is decay'd below the meanness of an English Cottage. However, something of its ancient grandeur still appears in the Cathedral, dedicated to St. Olaus; which (tho almost con∣sumed by fire, yet) by the ruines shews it self to have been one of the most magnificent and largest structures in the world. In this Church the Huntsmen were wont to make a yearly offering of the skins of the largest and stoutest white Bears, which they kill'd, for the Priest to tread upon at Divine Service. Groneland and Iseland were for∣merly parts of the Diocess of Truntheim, but now this Bishoprick is not of so large an extent. In the Castle resides the Governor of the whole Prefecture of Truntheim; who has under him se∣veral other Governors of lesser Provinces. In the Country a little beyond this City there grows no wood at all. But, instead thereof, the inhabitants make use of fish-bones, as well to build their houses and for several implements of housholdstuff as fuel; and with the fat of the same fish they feed their Lamps in winter. The Prefecture of Truntheim in the year 1658, was by the Danes surrendred up to the Swedes by a publick Treaty of Peace. The next year they wrested it again out of the hands of the Swedish King; but resign'd it back at the Treaty of Ros∣child. Halgoland (the Country of Ohther King Ael∣fred's Geographer) is a part of this Prefecture. Of which that Author gave this account to the King his Master, {that} nan man ne bude be Nor ðh;an him. i. e. That no inhabited Country lay further North then this. But the great fishing trade upon these Coasts have made the English better acquainted with these parts, then this Gentleman was with his own Country. The Prefecture of Wardhus. THE Castle of Wardhus (the seat of the fifth and last great Governor in the Kingdom of Norway) has its name from the Island Warda, in which it stands. This Isle lyes about two Ger∣man miles from the main land of Finmark; being near twelve English miles in compass. The in∣habitants of this and the two adjoining Isles (which in Finmark go all under the general name of Trunsolem) live only upon Stockfish; which they dry in the frost. They have no manner of Bread nor drink; but what is brought them from other places. Some small stock of Cattel they have; but only such as can make a shift to live of their masters diet, dryed fish. Finmark or Norwegian Lapland. ON the North of Norway lies Finmark, or (as the Natives use to call it) Taakemark; which perhaps was the ancient habitation of the Finni, mentioned by Tacitus. For the character which that Historian gives us of those people is very applicable to the modern Finmarkers. The Finni, says he, are a people extraordinary savage, and miserably poor. They have neither Horses, Arms, House, nor Home; but feed upon roots, and such provision as their Bows and Arrows can procure, and are clothed with the skins of wild beasts. To this day Finmark is not divided (as all other Coun∣tries generally are) into distinct Lordships and Inheritances; but, as in Mr. Hobbes's state of na∣ture, every private man pretends a right and title to every part of the Land, and the strength of the Arm is the only Judge of controversies. When fishing season comes in, they throng to the Sea∣coasts; and when that is over, retire again into the uplands. Only the Islanders in Heymeland keep their stations, and have their Churches in Trom, Suro, Maggero, and other places. The language, manners, and habits of the people, are the same as in the Swedish Lapland; of which an account has been already given. Of the ancient Commerce between the old Britains, English, and Norwegians. THo the relations which our English writers give us of the prowess and brave exploits of the valiant British King Arthur, savour too much of Romance; yet, in the main, our best Historians agree unanimously in this, that no Prince ever conquer'd more of the Northern
Kingdoms then this King. W. Lambert, in his , assures us, that all the Islands, Nati∣ons, and Kingdoms, in the North and East Seas, as far as Russia, were tributary to him. And Geoffry of Monmouth says, King Arthur at one time summon'd no less then six Kings to appear before him at his Court in Britain, viz. 1. Guil∣laumur, King of Ireland. 2. Malvase, King of Iseland. 3. Doldaff, King of Gothland. 4. Gunnase, King of Orkney. 5. Lot, King of Norway. And 6. Aschile, King of Denmark. Upon these con∣quests, the Kingdom of Norway was annexed to the Crown of England, and the Norwegians incorporated into one Nation with the Britains. But this amity was of no long continuance; for Norway was at too great a distance, and its people too stiff-necked, to be kept in subjection. In the days of our Saxon Kings a continual and uninterrupted war between this Nation and the Northern Kingdoms, put a stop to all trade in the British and Norwegian Seas. But as soon as the Danes had made themselves Masters of this Island, commerce was again renewed; which lasted till the English took their opportunity to-shew the world, by rejecting the power of Denmark and all manner of communication with that people, how highly they resented the tyrannical usurpa∣tion of foreign Princes. Since the Conquest, England has seldom or never wanted a considerable Fleet of Norway Merchant∣men. William of Malmesbury (who dyed in the year 1142) tells us, That in his time Bristow was a place much frequented by the Irish and Norwe∣gians. Hackluit gives an account of certain Trea∣ties concerning the Northern trade between our King Henry the third, and Haquin King of Nor∣way. He that will take the pains to read over the agreement between Henry IV. King of Eng∣land, and the Company of Merchants from the Hans Towns (set down at large by Mr. Hackluit in the first Volume of his English Voyages, p. 146.) will find a considerable Register of our Merchant∣men taken on the Coasts, and out of the Havens of Norway; and may thence be enabled to give a tolerable guess at the number of our Norway Merchants in those days. In the twenty-fifth year of the reign of our present Soveraign Charles II. an Act pass'd for the encouragement of the Greenland and East∣land trades, &c. In which 'twas order'd, That it should be lawful to and for every person and persons, Native or Foreigner, from and after the first day of May, 1673, at all times to have free liberty to trade into and from Sweden, Denmark, and Norway. This, and several other clauses of the same Act, which take off a great part of the custom formerly paid upon the importation of any East-land com∣modity, have encouraged great numbers of Mer∣chants and others to traffick in these Northern Seas, and improv'd the trade of Greenland, and Norway, far beyond the example of for∣mer ages. For (tho the advantages that can be hoped for from these kind of Voyages be not an∣swerable to what may be expected out of the Le∣vant and American plantations, yet) the small danger and charges these men are exposed to are strong inducements to venture a voyage; where∣in the hazard is not great, nor any way propor∣tionable to the prospect of gain. Besides, in the Act before mention'd, 'tis provided, That what∣soever person or persons, subjects of this Realm, shall desire to be admitted into the fellowship of Merchants of Eastland, shall be admitted into the said fellow∣ship, paying for his admission the sum of forty shil∣lings, and no more. Which is a sum exceedingly inconsiderable, if compared with the fees paid upon admission into some other companies. decorative deivce
The Islands of FERO. THE Fero Islands are on∣ly so many high and rocky mountains in the Northern Seas, divided from one another by narrow Friths and rapid Currents, and inclosing a larger or lesser circuit of stony valley, cover'd over with a turf of about two foot thick. They are so called from Fare, which in the language of the Natives signifies a Ferry; from the many Ferries or Crossings of the water from one Island to another. They are sixteen in number: 1. Fugloe, or Fowl-Island, about three English miles long, and two broad. 2. Swino, in which is a pleasant valley of a mile in length. 3. Videroe, six miles long, and three broad. 4. Bordoe, six miles in length, and a mile broad; famous for a good harbour, call'd by the Natives Vaag. 5. Cunoe, of the same bigness. 6. Kalsoe, something longer and broa∣der then either of the former. 7. Osteroe, twenty miles long, and in some places two, in others four miles broad. 8. Stromoe, twenty-four miles long, and eight broad. In this Island stands Thors-Haven, the Metropolis and Town of greatest Traffick in all the Fero Islands. 9. Wagoe, a round piece of ground, of about eight miles in Diameter. 10. Migness. 11. Rolter, a mile long, and half a mile broad. 12. Sandoe, eight miles long, and four miles broad. 13. Sknoe, three miles long, and one in breadth. 14. Storetdie∣men. 15. Lille-Diemen. 16. Sideroe, twenty miles long, and eight broad. The air in these Islands is in summer tempe∣rately warm; not very hot at any time. In the coldest winter the frost is never so violent as to cause ice in any of the Bays; so that Horses and Sheep lye in the fields the whole winter long. They have never any Thunder in the Summer, but frequently in the Spring, Autumn, and Win∣ter; which is then generally accompanied with a storm, and followed by showers of rain. The air, of it self, is wholesome; free from the Plague, Small-Pox, or any contagious disease, except brought in by foreigners; so that the inhabitants are commonly long-liv'd. However in some of the Islands the Natives are exceedingly subject to rheums, which cause violent coughs and head∣achs; both which diseases they cure by drinking soure Whey, as hot as they can endure it. Be∣sides these, the Scurvy, Leprosie, and a kind of feaverish distemper (called by the Natives Land∣farsoet) are Epidemical illnesses which reign in several of the Isles; but seldom or never turn to mortal diseases. The Southern Islands produce great store of Barley (tho hardly any other grain comes to maturity), insomuch that a Tun of seed will or∣dinarily yeild twenty or thirty Tun of grain. The pasture grounds afford great plenty of good and sweet grass. These the inhabitants call Fiedelands; and take care commonly that they lye open to the North and North-East winds. In some of these fields they have stocks of as large and fat Oxen as any other part of Europe affords. The Islands are all of them plentifully stor'd with all manner of medicinal plants, requisite for the cure of those distempers to which the inhabitants are most inclined. Amongst the rest, you may every where meet with great quan∣tities of Scurvy-grass, Water-cresses, Sorrel, &c. They have great store of Angelica; which grows as well on the tops of high hills as in the open fields. This commonly makes one of their most delicate dishes at all entertainments. Besides, the Radix Rhodia (call'd in their language Hielpe-Rod) is no where met with in so great plenty as in these Islands, upon the banks of running streams and Lakes. The distilled water of this plant is here made use of upon all occasions, as Rose∣water with us in England. Here are several sorts of Fowl; as Doves, Stares, Owls, Sparrow-Hawks, Crows, and Ravens (ma∣ny of which are white), Grellings, &c. Their chief Sea-fowl is a kind of Teal, about the bigness of a Crow, with a yellow, long, and round bill; a great enemy to, and persecutor of the Raven. The Eyder (a sort of Duck, which yeilds the Eyder-down) is a Fowl peculiar to these Islands. This Bird usually pulls the down from her own breast to build her nest withall. When her young ones are fledg'd and gone, the inhabitants take away the down and cleanse it for use. If the fea∣thers be pull'd off by mens hands, they are good for nothing, but immediately rot away. Another notable sort of bird they have, which they call an Imbrim, with a long neck and beak, the back grey and checquer'd with white spots, with a white ring about the neck. This bird has two holes under her wings, each large enough to hold an egg; here 'tis thought she hatches two eggs at once, being never seen with above two young ones at a time, nor known to come ashore. The adjoining Seas furnish the inhabitants with Cod, Whiting, large Flounders, &c. besides Murts, a kind of Pilchards, so plentiful in these parts, that the Havens and Creeks are fill'd with them. Of these (with the Seals, Grind-whales, and Dog∣fish, which were formerly caught in great num∣bers upon their Coasts) the inhabitants of the Fero-Islands made anciently a vast advantage; but of late years their fishing-trade is strangely de∣cayed. These Islands were first inhabited in the reign of Harold (surnam'd the fair-hair'd) King of Norway, in the year 868. For that King, having taken a resolution to reduce all Norway under the subjection of one Prince, fell foul upon all the petit Princes in that Kingdom; whose subjects (being by this means either undone by the wars, or dispossess'd of their inheritances) resolv'd to seek out other habitations, and (under the con∣duct of one Grimar Camban, a Pyrate) at last seat∣ed themselves in these Islands. The people are generally humble in conversa∣tion, civil in carriage, and courteous in speech, especially to strangers, whom they entertain with a great deal of hospitality and respect. They are obedient and liberal to their Magistrates, and very charitable to the poor. The more beggerly sort of them will filch for their bellies, but never lay their hands on Gold or Silver; insomuch that if one of these poor pilferers come into a rich mans house, 'tis ten to one but he pinches an horn
REGNI NORVEGIAE Nova et Accurata descriptio. map of Norway F. Lamb Sculp. blazon or coat of arms To the Worp.ll Mark Cottle Esq Register of the Prerogative Court this Map is Humbly Dedicated
map of the bishopric of Bergen EPISCOPATUS BERGENSIS. Sumptibus Janssonio-Waesbergiorum, et Mosis Pitt.
map of the bishopric of Stavanger, Bergen, and Oslo Nova et accurata Tabula EPISCOPATVVM STAVANGRIENSIS, BERGENSIS et ASLOIENSIS Vicinarumque aliquot territoriorum Excudebant Janssonio-Waesbergii, et Moses Pitt. blazon or coat of arms
spoon, if laid in his way, but will be sure to leave a Silver one behind him. Their diet is moderate and frugal; on milk, fish, gruel, and flesh. They dry both their fish and flesh in the wind, without salt; having wind∣houses built for this purpose. After the flesh is dry'd, they boil it in water, and thicken the broth with Barly-meal; which is reckoned one of their greatest delicacies. The men wear woollen Shirts, flannel Trowces and Wastcoats, with short loose Coats of the same. The women, rich and poor, go all alike in strait Gowns without skirts. Their Stomachers are commonly large, and adorn'd with thin guilt gingling plates of Tin. Their Shoes (which have no soles, but are made of pieces of Leather drawn together at the heels and toes, and fasten'd with a string or ribband above the ancle) are of sheep∣skin for the women, and tann'd Neats-leather for the men. They lye on beds of Hay, over∣spread with pieces of Flannel. The Norwegian tongue was heretofore gene∣rally spoken in the Fero-Islands; but of late years the Danish dialect has much prevail'd. How∣ever in the Northern Islands their language is for the greatest part made up of Norwegian words and phrases, tho the Southern inhabitants make use of a quite different dialect. The whole dominion of these Islands is divided into the six districts of Norderoe, Osteroe, Stromoe, Waagoe, Sandoe, and Sanderoe. To each of these districts belongs a Sheriff, who, as Judge, deter∣mines all causes and controversies of less mo∣ment. These Sheriffs gather the Kings tythes; and put in execution all orders they receive from the Kings Commissary. The people are govern∣ed by the Laws of Norway; having no peculiar Laws of their own. They have a general Sessions held once a year, in the spring time, at Thors∣haven, in which the Kings Commissary, or Bay∣liff, presides as Judge, being assisted by the six Sheriffs; who exhibit to the Court all Law-suits, either Civil or Criminal, which come not under the cognizance of their petit Commission. Be∣sides these, there are thirty-six more (six for each district) chosen, like our Jury-men, to assist the Commissary in pronouncing of sentence; and a Recorder appointed to register the proceedings and sentence. The Ecclesiastical affairs are governed by a Synod of the Priests or Ministers; who meet and sit once a year. Out of the whole Synod one is elected to preside over the rest, with the title of Provost. These people were first converted to Christiani∣ty in the fourth year of the reign of Olaus Try∣geson King of Denmark in the year 1000, by Si∣gismund Bresteson, a Ferroyer born, and sent into his own Country by the said King for this pur∣pose. After the Augsburg Confession was em∣braced in Denmark and Norway, it soon reached these Islands. There are at this day thirty-nine Parishes in all the Islands; which are supplyed by so many Pastors of the Lutheran Religion. Besides Sundays, Holidays, and the usual days of prayer, as in other places, these men observe yearly six peculiar days of Prayer, viz. three in Ascention-week, and three in Michaelmas-week. They have but one publick School among them; which was endowed by King Christian IV. and Nicolas Trolle, formerly Governor of Roschild and Vice-Admiral of Denmark. This furnishes the University of Copenhagen oft times with as able Scholars as any other School in the King of Den∣marks dominions. The chief Commodities of these Islands are Skins, Feathers, Tallow, Train-oyl, and Stockins; upon all which there is a particular price set. Stockins are the chief staple commodity they have; in making of which, all the inhabitants (rich and poor, Priests and Plowmen) are forced to employ themselves to help out the small in∣comes of their mean possessions and inconsidera∣ble stipends. Of the Isle of SCHETLAND. SChetland (or Hetland, as Arngrim Jonas will have the word writ) is an Island lying be∣tween the Fero-Islands and the Promontory of Schagen in Jutland. It has been long a dispute amongst the best Geographers, whether this be not the ancient Thule? Gasper Peucer tells us (and our learned Cambden encourages us to believe him) that this Island is called by the Northern Mariners to this day Thilensell. Pomponius Mela says of Thule, that it was Belgarum (which Mr. Cambden reads Bergarum; understanding thereby the City and Territory of Berghen) littori opposita; which ac∣count agrees well with the situation of this Island. Besides, says Mr. Cambden, Schetland is about two days sail from Cathness in Scotland; which is the exact distance between Thule and the Caledonian Promontory in Solinus's relation. Again, Schetland lies in 63 degrees of Northern Latitude, as well as Ptolomy's Thule. Whether our learned Antiquary read Solinus aright or no, I shall not venture to question; tho I know there are some that read the place quoted thus, A Caledoniae promontorio Thulen petentes bidui navigatione excipiunt Haebudae Insulae, (and not as the vulgar Copies have it, A Caledoniae promontorio Thulen petentibus bidui na∣vigatio est); and the rather, because it follows, Ab Orcadibus Thulen usque quinque dierum ac nocti∣um navigatio est. However, I am afraid the La∣titude of Schetland will not be found to exceed sixty degrees, and a few odd minutes; and then the Parallel betwixt Ptolomy's Thule and this Island will fail. The manners of the inhabitants, nature of the soil, temperature of the air, &c. are the same in this Isle as in Iseland.
ISELAND. ISeland is an Isle in the Deucalidonian Seas,Situation. situ∣ate 13 deg. and 30 min. of Longitude, and 65 deg. and 44 min. of La∣titude; reckoning the situation of the whole Isle from Skalholt, the chief City in it. It is bounded on the East with the Northern Ocean; on the South, with the Deucalidonian Sea; on the North and West, with the frozen Sea of Groenland. The Isle was first discovered by one Naddoc;Discovery. who sailing near the coasts of the Fero Islands, was by an unexpected tempest driven upon the Northern parts of Iseland; which, from the great quantities of snow that then overspread the coun∣try, he call'd Sneeland. After him a Swedish Ma∣riner, nam'd Gardar, made a second discovery of this Isle; and, after his own name, call'd it Gar∣darsholm. This hapned in the year 864. Not long after this, one Flocco (a Norwegian Pyrate) made a third discovery of it; not casually, as the other two had done, but by design. He had heard some faint stories of the two former discoverers; and questioned not, but, if he could meet with this Newfound Land, to be better paid for his pains then his predecessors had been. Where∣upon he resolves on the adventure; and (instead of the Mariners Compass, which at that time was never dream'd of) made use of the follow∣ing expedient to direct him in his Voyage; he took with him, out of Schetland, three Crows; and, having sail'd Northwards for some days, he let one of them fly, which he perceiv'd re∣turn'd to Schetland. Soon after, he threw a se∣cond out of the Ship; which, finding no land to set her foot on, return'd weary into the Ves∣sel. Within awhile after, he sent out the third Crow; which flew to this Isle. Flocco follow∣ing this leader, landed safe in the Northern parts of the Isle, and there winter'd. Finding this coun∣try, all the while he staid there, oppress'd with in∣tolerable frosts and snow, he call'd the whole land Iseland, or Iceland; which name it retains to this day. The next winter he spent in the Southern parts. But meeting there with as cold entertainment as he had found in the North, he hoised up sail the spring following, and return'd to Norway; where he was ever after call'd Rafna∣floke, or Flocco the Crow. The first inhabitants of Iseland came into the Isle in the yeat 874;First In∣habitants. brought hither by one In∣gulf, a Norwegian Baron, who (with Hiorlief, his brother in-law) fled, or was banish'd his own Country for murdering another Nobleman. The Islandic Chronicle (which makes the said year its Epoch) tells us, that this Ingulf found the Isle wholly desolate, and destitute of all manner of inhabitants. Nor is there in this work any men∣tion of any former discovery whatsoever, made either by the English or Irish; tho some of our Historians have asserted, that Iseland was well known to both these Nations long before Ingulf brought in his Norwegians. The Irish Annals go further, and assure us, that the ancient Iselan∣ders call'd the Irish Papas, and the Western part of their Isle, as most frequented by Irish Mer∣chants, Papey. Arngrim Jonas follows the Chro∣nicle of his Country, and is very passionate in asserting, that before Ingulf no manner of inha∣bitants were heard of in this Island. And in his specimen Islandicum, he is extremely enraged at Pontanus, and the Authors he follows, for offer∣ing to assert, that Iseland is the ultima Thule of the ancients. For, says he, if our Isle be that Thule, which Virgil and other Roman writes mention, it must needs have been inhabited in the days of Au∣gustus the Emperor; and then what credit, I pray, can be given to our Iselandic Chronicle, which tells us in plain terms, that this Isle was never inhabited before Ingulf's days? But if that learned Author would give us leave to argue the case, 'tis possi∣ble he may not find any reason at last to be in so great a rage. For, in the work quoted, he him∣self allows the story of the Irish being first call'd Papas by the ancient Iselanders. If we enquire what those ancient inhabitants were, that gave the Irish this name? 'Twill questionless be an∣swer'd, they were Heathens. This Arngrim takes for granted; and thinks the answer satisfactory enough. And it is plain, that the first inhabi∣tants of Iseland were Heathenish Idolaters, from one passage in the Iselandic Chronicle, where we are told, that in the West of Iseland there is a large piece of ground encircled with a ditch, in the midst of which stands a great stone, made use of formerly for an Altar, whereon they used, in the days of Idolatry and Paganism, to sacri∣fice men to their God Woden. But then if we consult the ancient monuments of the Northern Kingdoms, we shall find the greatest part of Den∣mark and Norway converted to Christianity be∣fore Ingulf's time: so that it will be found upon examination highly probable, that there were inhabitants in Iseland before Ingulf brought over his Norwegians; and those perhaps known to the English and Irish. The Isle is for the most part mountainous and rocky;Soi tho some valleys afford good store of Corn and pasturage. Nothwithstanding there are so many and so vast mountains in this Isle, there is no manner of mines either of mettals or minerals in the whole land, except Sulphur. The most notorious mountain in Iseland is He∣cla;Mou Hec which stands on the South-East of the Isle, not far from the Sea-shore. This is one of the greatest Vulcanoes in Europe or the world; belch∣ing out by fits such deluges of fire, as threaten a general conflagration of the whole Isle. Blef∣kenius reports, that sometimes it vomits up not only flame and fiery coals, but large torrents of water, which burn like Brandy or Aqua Vitae. At other times it throws up prodigious quantities of cinders and pumice stones. Its greatest outrages are caused by a West-wind; insomuch that when the wind blows moderately from that quarter, the inhabitants of the neighbouring valleys (who are acquainted with the securest passages to the mountain) march up in droves to the mouth of the furnace, where they recreate themselves by throwing great stones into the flames, which re∣turn them with as great a violence as a barrel of gunpowder blows up the slats of an house. So that 'tis exceeding dangerous for any one to ap∣proach the flames, who is not perfectly acquaint∣ed with every part of the mountain. For besides the danger of being knockt on the head with some of these stones, it often happens, that the ground unexpectedly opens, and the flames swal∣low men up alive. The silly Rustics believe ve∣rily,
map of Iceland Novissima ISLANDIAE TABULA Sumptibus Janssonio-Waesbergiorum, Mosis Pitt et Stephani Swart.
map of the eastern part of the diocese of Trondheim DIOECESIS TRUNDHEMIENSIS PARS AUSTRALIS. Ex Officina Janssonio-Waesbergiona, et Moses Pitt.
that Hell is in the bowels of this mountain, and that the souls of the damn'd are tormented in these flames. Nay, some of them will con∣fidently protest, that they have several times seen whole Herds of Devils enter the mouth of the furnace with their burthens of damn'd souls; and, having eased their shoulders, return for a new loading. Another place of torment the Na∣tives fancy under the rocks on the Sea-coasts; and the clashing of the ice against the banks pro∣duces a noise which they take for the howling of the damn'd. If any battel be fought in any part of the world, the Natives will confidently pretend to know the very day, tho they are not able to assign the place of the fight; and that, by observing the more then usual importa∣tion of souls upon such days. But these and the like idle stories, collected by Blefkenius and other Authors, wholly ignorant of the affairs of Ise∣land, were never the opinions of the generality of the Iselanders since their conversion to Chri∣stianity. Nor does the mountain continually (as they would have us believe) send out flames, since the Iselandic Chronicle takes particular no∣tice of the years 1104, 1157, 1222, 1300, 1341, 1362, and 1389, as very signal for such fiery eruptions as they speak of. Since the year 1558 (notwithstanding Blefkenius's Romantick story to the contrary) we have no certain relation of any such accident. Munster and Frisius report, that the flames of Hecla would not burn Tow; which story is near akin to what Pliny tells us, of a moun∣tain enflamed by Water and quenched with Hay. Blefkenius speaks of a strange Lake (and Arn∣grim says, he has heard as much of a Fountain near Skalholt) which immediately petrifies what∣ever is thrown into it. Insomuch that if you take a long pole, and stick part of it into the bottom of the Lake, that part of the staff which sticks in the earth will in a short time be turned into iron, the middle into stone, and the uppermost part (which never came into the water) remain wood. He further adds, that the part of the staff which resembles iron will burn like a coal. Another Lake he mentions, which (like the Gre∣cian Aornon, spoke of by Virgil) sends out such pestiferous exhalations as poyson the birds which fly that way. Several other strange stories he tells, which, because rejected by Anrgrim, we omit. In most places of the Isle you may meet with hot Baths and scalding Fountains; the water of which, if set to cool, throws off a sulphureous scum. Of all the affronts which Blefkenius, in his scurrilous description of Iseland, has put upon that Country; none is highlier resented by Arn∣grim then the sleight and false account he gives of the Laws, Manners, and Religion of the inha∣bitants of that Isle. Whoredom, Theft, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Sorcery, &c. are vices he accuses the whole Nation of. We may rationally imagine, that the ancient Iselanders were men of the same temper, manners, and religion with the Norwegi∣ans, from whom they were descended, i. e. men of vast stature, strong and valiant, great duel∣lers and pyrats. But since Christianity was intro∣duced into their Isle, none of those barbarous qualities which that Dutch Satyrist lays to their charge, can justly be reckoned among the ca∣tholick enormities of the Island; 'tho 'tis possi∣ble some few may still be found among several thousands that to this day retain a small tincture of the old Idolatrous superstition, and ungentile demeanor of their ancestors. Their temperance in meat and drink, and the naturally strong con∣stitution of their bodies, enable them to last out commonly to a good old age; tho I cannot but refer Olaus Magnus and Blefkenius to the Readers sentence; the former of which tells us, the Ise∣landers live ordinarily three hundred years; the latter (with more modesty and caution, which in him are rare qualities) reports, that he saw a man in Iseland who told him that he had then lived two hundred years. By the account which Blefkenius gives of the habitations of the Iselanders,Habitati∣ons. it must needs be concluded, that either he never travell'd amongst them (whatever he pretends to), or else he mi∣stook their houses (cover'd with turf and grown over with grass) for small hillocks and rampires. For he says, all their houses are underground; and they, their kine, horses, and sheep, have all one cave. Anciently the Iselanders (like the Germans in Tacitus's days) dwelt far apart; ac∣cording as every man took an affection, to this field, or that fountain; this wood side, or that plain. They used neither mortar nor tyles; but the whole fabrick of their houses consisted of timber and turf. Their windows were most com∣monly in the roof, seldom in the walls of their cottages. Some of their Nobility had more stately Palaces, built of large pieces of timber brought hither out of Groneland and Norway. At this day their houses are most of wood, cover'd over with turf; except in their Cities (Hola and Skalholt), where, instead of tyles, they make use of fir-boards. But since the trade between them and Norway began to decrease, their buildings have lost much of their ancient splendour; and the neatest of their Villages run daily to ruine. Besides, their traffick with foreign Nations is much abated; and they seem to draw towards that de∣gree of meanness which Krantzius speaks of, when he tells us, The Iselanders and their Cattel have the same lodging. Arngrim confesses, that upon the South-shore of the Isle, near Skalholt, there are three small Parishes, in which the inhabitants are destitute both of wood and turf, the only fuel of the country. The poorer sort of these, being not able to purchase fuel from abroad, are constrained in the extremity of winter, to betake themselves to a corner of their Ox-stalls, and there borrow heat from their Cattel. It is manifest from the ancient Laws of Ise∣land (whatever Munster, Frisius,Diet. and Blefkenius say to the contrary) that upon the first inhabiting of this Isle, the ground was till'd, and several sorts of grain sowed and reap'd. 'Tis a malici∣ous slander to say, as those Authors do, That the Islanders feed upon carrion, and unsavoury meats, and want the use of bread. The best and happiest of Nations are now and then, upon some extraor∣dinary occasions, driven to harsh extremities in meat and drink, and forced (in spight of former plenty) to submit to a famine. And it may rea∣sonably be supposed, that the Seas about Iseland, bound up by a long continued frost, may some∣times bring the like calamities upon this Isle; who have the greatest part of their food out of these waters. But (setting aside all such accidental casualties, and extraordinary dispensations of Gods providence) Iseland is as well provided for all manner of necessaries in meats and drink, as any other Country whatever. For the Iselanders have generally considerable stocks of Kine and Sheep, besides large piles of dry'd fish of several sorts. 'Tis true, a great part of the inhabitants want bread and salt, which are reckon'd two of the great requisites in furnishing out one of our Southern tables. But he that shall seriously con∣sider, the vast strength and healthy constituti∣ons which these usually enjoy, and the old age they ordinarily arrive at, will be apt to conclude, that dry'd fish would prove as trusty a staff of
life as bread, if we were used to it; and that salt may probably be convenient in an hot Country, to preserve our meat from corrupting, but needs not be made use of at the table. In short, the Islanders have all manner of necessary and sub∣stantial food, as Beef, Mutton, Geese, Hens, Par∣tridges, and all sorts of fowl. They want only the delicacies of sauces, which other Countries enjoy; and the sharpness of their air furnishes them with stomachs which easily supply that de∣fect. The most general drink used amongst them is Whey;Drink. which is commonly so good that an ounce of it will very well bear half an ounce of water. Sometimes they drink a kind of Mead, made of a little Barley flower and an Honey∣comb boiled in water. Another liquor they have, which is squeezed out of a certain reddish berry, peculiar to this Isle. The ancient Iselan∣ders used to import Beer from Denmark, Scotland, Norway, England, and other foreign Countries: but for many years last past the inhabitants have not been able to maintain any considerable com∣merce with these Nations; and upon the decay of trade, are forc'd to content themselves with such liquors as their own Land affords. How poor and mean soever these liquors may seem to Southern palats, used to the juice of the Grape; yet with these the ancient Iselanders could make merry; and keep banquets and revellings with the mean fare before-mentioned. What gran∣deur their public entertainments wanted in the delicacy of the viand and richness of the liquor, was made out in the length of their feasts and number of their guests. Thus we read, that Theodore and Thorwald (brethren, and Citizens of Hialtaedat in North Iseland) solcmnizing the fu∣nerals of their father Hialta, entertained twelve hundred persons for fourteen days together, at a banquet; and at their departure presented the chief of their guests with gifts answerable to their qualities. After the same rate, and for as long a time, Olaus Pa (a West Islander) and his bre∣thren entertained nine hundred men. But I know not whether this be an instance of the generosity and gallantry, or not rather prodigality of these people. For the Northern Nations are generally strangely lavish in their entertainments at Wed∣dings and Burials; insomuch, that 'tis grown a proverb in some of those Countries, Pay for thy fathers Coffin before thou thinkest of buying a Cradle: meaning, that the entertainments at the burial of a father and marriage of a new wife (if they come together) are sufficient to ruine a man in his estate, and make his heir a beggar. Before the convenience of money was invent∣ed,Money. the most natural method of buying and sel∣ling was by exchange of one commodity for ano∣ther. This in the nonage of traffick, was the only expedient made use of in all Nations of the world; but continued, I think, longer in Iseland then in any of the known Western Countries. One great reason of a later then ordinary use of money among the Iselanders, was the want of mettals in their Country. Some Silver they had, brought in from foreign Countries; which if they chanced to make use of in commerce, they weigh∣ed it in a balance, but never coined or stamped any of it. Of late, Danish money has been brought into this Isle; tho in very small quantities. The chief comodities of the Country,Commodi∣ties. are Brimstone, dry'd fish, and Whale-bone. Of this last they have so great plenty, that (according to Blefkenius's relation) some of them make houses of it; and the only great Bridge in the Isle is made of the same matter. It seems, formerly great quantities of Beef, Mutton, Butter, &c. were ex∣ported hence into other Countries. For Arngrim Jonas concludes his Satyrical answer to Blefkeni∣us's abusive description of Iseland, with these words, Hoccine impune fierisinitis, O Senatus Populusque Hamburgensis? Hanccine statuistis gratiam deberi Islandiae, quae &c. i. e. Can the Burgomasters and Raedtsherrn of Hamburg wink at such faults as these? Are these the thanks ye give our Isle for feeding your City these many years with Beef, Mutton, Butter, and Fish? England, Holland, Denmark, Bremen, and Lubec have all tasted the sweets of our Land; but never any returned their thanks in such a scurrilous Pasquil as your Libeller, &c. Wormius tells us, that the old Danish tongue,Lang used in ancient inscriptions, and other monu∣ments of Runic learning, has been no where so clean and pure kept to this day as in Iseland. And the reasons he assigns are, 1. The inhabitants of this Isle have not maintained so great com∣merce with other Nations as the rest of the Northern people; by which means they have exceedingly avoided the introducing of strange and uncouth words into their language. 2. The Iselanders, from the first peopling of their Isle, have been wonderfully accurate and curious in committing all transactions of moment to wri∣ting, and thereby transmitting at once the glory of their actions and purity of their tongue to posterity. Saxo Grammaticus confesses, he ow'd a great part of his Danish History to the writings of the Iselanders; whom he commends, above all other Northern Nations, for their curiosity in registring the famous deeds of their ancestors. No question, Saxo met with many rarities in that language which have since perished. Stephanius reckons up above twenty several tracts that he himself had seen; most of which, I suppose, are to be met with in the publick or private Libra∣ries of Denmark; and some may e're long be pub∣lished by the learned Resenius. Wormius collected his Runic Dictionary as well out of the Knitling-Saga, and other Iselandic manuscripts, as the old Runic inscriptions of his own Country. In the year 1651. Runolph Jonas, an Iselander, pub∣lished a Grammer, teaching the rudiments and syntax of this tongue; and there is now in the hands of our Learned Dr. Marshall (Rector of Lincoln Colledge in Oxford) a manuscript Copy of an Iselandic Dictionary, never yet printed. The Edda Islandorum (published first by Mag∣nus Olai,Edda and afterwards by J. Peter Resenius) is a piece of the greatest note of any old Iselandic monument extant. It contains a collection of mythological stories about their ancient Hea∣thenish Gods; out of which fables the old Ise∣landian Rythmers borrowed the subjects of their Ballads. It has always annexed to it, as an inse∣parable companion, the Skalda; or Iselandic Pro∣sodia; which teaches the art of their ancient Poe∣try, and gives rules for the composure of their several kinds of Verse. Out of these two Saxo Grammaticus took all those monstrous stories of the first founders of the Danish Kingdom, which have so far scandalized some Readers, as to make them (upon the sole account of these Romances) reject his whole History as fabulous and incredi∣ble. From several passages in Saxo's work, it is evident, that this Historian had read a much perfecter Copy of the Edda then the publishers of the printed Editions have followed; and there is at this day in the rich Library of the learned and pious Prince Rodulph Augustus Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburg, at Wulfenbuttel, a more perfect ma∣nuscript Copy then either Magnus or Resenius ever saw. Anciently Iseland was divided into four Pro∣vinces;Govern∣ment. named from the four quarters of the
world, East, West, North, and South-Iseland. Each of these contained three lesser Districts, except∣ing North-Iseland, (being larger then any of the other three) was subdivided into four of these Districts. Every District had in it three publick Courts of Judicature, and ten or more Hreppar or Constable-Wards. The Government of the Isle was Aristocratical till the year 1261, when it was subdued and made tributary to the King of Norway. Afterwards, when the Kingdoms of Denmark and Norway were linked together by Queen Margaret, Iseland was also annexed to the Danish Crown. Since that time, it has been go∣verned by a Vice-Roy; who (when he is in the Isle, for he is not obliged to be always resident) keeps his Court at the Castle of Besestat, near the Western shore. His office is to collect taxes for the King of Denmark; as Butter, Sheep, Wool, &c. for the provision of the Navy Royal. What kind of Gods the idolatrous Iselanders worshipped before they were converted to Chri∣stianity, will appear from a survey of the Edda; which, as we have said, is nothing else but a re∣gister of those mock-Deities. The chief Gods mentioned in this and other ancient Northern monuments, are, 1. Thor, whom the Edda makes the son of Woden. He is said to have come out of Asia with his father; and for that reason is some∣times call'd Asathor, or Thor the Asian. Arngrim Jonas makes this God answerable to Jupiter among the Romans. And in an old Anglo-Saxonic Homily, in the publick Library at Cambridge, which treats of the Gods of the Gentiles, we meet with these words: Se Iovis is arðh;orðh;ost ealraðhaera Goda. ðh;e ðh;a Hae∣þenan haefdon on heora geddylde. & he hatte Ðor betƿux sum∣mum ðh;eodum. þon ðh;a Ðeniscan leoda lufiaþ sƿiðh;ost, i.e. This Jove is the most honourable of all the Gods mentioned in their verses. Some Nations call him Thor, whom the Danes reverence above all others. Hence the day which the Latins call'd dies Jovis, is in Ise∣land named Thorsdagh, and in England Thursday, the Germans call it Donnersdag, dies Tonantis, i.e. the Thunderers day, which signifies the same thing. 2. Woden, or Oden; the Captain of the Asians that first peopled these Northern Countries. He is sometimes call'd, , As, the Asian. So in the ancient form of an oath taken in Norway and Iseland, we read, Hialpi mier suo Fryer og Ni∣ordur og hin al matke As, i.e. So help me Frier, and Niordur (a Norwegian King, Deified for his no∣ble exploits), and the almighty Asian (i.e. Woden). From him the Iselanders call the fourth day of the week Odensdagur; and we, Wendesday. The Nobi∣lity of the ancient people of the North, were wonderfully ambitious of fetching their pedigree down in a streight line from this Patriarch and God of the Northern Nations. Hence possibly it comes, that in some Copies of our Anglo-Saxonic Chronicle the Genealogy of our English King Cerdic (with several others) is run up to one who is said to be  (or the son of Woden) and there the pedegree breaks of. As if in so doing they had sufficiently imitated St. Luke's Genealogy of our Saviour unto Adam, which was the son of God. And hence, as may well be conjectured, the Islanders do to this day call their Noblemen Godar and Hoffgodar, i.e. such as are of the lineage or family of the Gods. Besides these two, we sometimes read of Freyer (as in the Norwegian oath, before quoted) one of Wo∣dens companions; and Friga, Wodens wife (whence our Friday); with several others of less note. Arngrim allows, that several Christians came out of Norway into Iseland with Ingulf, in the year 874; but that the Isle was then converted to the Christian faith, he denies. A full and total con∣version, he says, was never attempted, till about an hundred years after. The first that openly preached the Gospel was one Frideric, a Saxon born, who came over into this Isle in the year 981, and succeeded so well, that within three years after there were several Churches built. The Iselandic Chronicle mentions one Thangbrandt, another outlandish Bishop, who came into Ise∣land, in the year 997. At last, in the year 1000, it was agreed on in a general Assembly of the whole Isle, That the worship of Heathenish Idols being abandoned, they would unanimously em∣brace the Christian Religion. In the year 1056 Isleif, an Iselander, was consecrated Bishop of the whole Isle; and enter'd upon the See of Schal∣holt the year following. It is very observable (what is recorded in the Iselandic Chronicle) that this Isleif married Dalla, the daughter of one Thorwald; and by her had three sons. The eldest of which (named Gysser) succeeded his father in the Bishoprick of Schalholt; altho he also is said to have married Stenun, the daughter of Thor∣grin. Since that time the inhabitants of Iseland have continued stedfast in the Christian faith. Gud∣brand Thorlac (who entred the Bishoprick of Ho∣len in the year 1571) abolished the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome; and intro∣duced the Augustan Confession, which to this day is maintained all over the Isle. The same Bishop first procured a Printing-house to be set up in Ise∣land; and afterwards caused the Bible, and seve∣ral other godly books, to be translated into the Iselandic tongue and printed. Christian the third, King of Denmark, founded two Free-schools in Iseland (one at Holen, and the other at Skal∣holt) which by the munificence of his successors, Frideric the second and Christian the fourth, were improved into two considerable Colledges, where young men were instructed in the liberal Arts and principles of Religion, till they were thought fit for the ministry. Of late years many ingeni∣ous men, and learned Iselanders, have been bred up in the University at Copenhagen. We have before taken a survey of the mean Cottages, or Burrows, of the Rusticks in Iseland;Cities. and we cannot expect that their Citizens should live in much better fashion. There are only two Cities in the Isle (Holen and Skalholt), the one the seat of their Northern, the other of their Southern Bishop. In both of them, the houses are built of wood (rarely of stone), cover'd with either boards or turf. The Cathedral at Holen, according to Arngrim's description, either is, or at least has been a stately Fabrick. In his days, the Church-porch had on each side five pillars, which were fourteen ells high (I suppose he means Norwegian ells, one of which is about three quar∣ters of a yard English), and five in thickness. The Quire and Body of the Church were proportiona∣ble to the Porch. This noble structure was blown down in the year 1584; but magnificently re∣built at the charge of Frideric II. King of Den∣mark, within four years after. Neither of these Cities look any better then one of our ordinary Villages; for the houses are not contiguous, nor defended by any fortification or rampire. Blefkenius tells us (how truly, I know not) of a pleasant plain in the middle of Iseland,Judica∣ture. where formerly stood an high flaming mountain, which by degrees burnt away. This plain, says he, is encompassed with huge rocks, which make it in∣accessible, excepting only in one place; and there too you have room for no more then one passen∣ger at once. From the tops of two of these rocks fall down two large rivers; which, with a terrible noise, are swallowed up by a whirl∣pool in the midst of the plain. Hither yearly (upon the twenty-ninth day of June) repair all
such as have any suit at Law or other controver∣sie to be determined. At the passage stands a guard of soldiers, who admit all in that desire the favour, but suffer none to go out without a pass from the Governor. As soon as all, who have any business, are come in; the Governor (or Lieutenant of the Isle) reads his Commission from the King of Denmark. That done, he gives his charge; insisting much upon the good will and kindness which the King his Master and him∣self bear the Iselanders, and advising them all to administer justice without respect of any manner of persons whatever. After this, he returns to his Tent; where in a godly Sermon, preach'd to him and the rest of the Assembly, the necessity of punishing offenders, and vindicating the in∣jur'd, is declared. As soon as Sermon is ended, the twelve chosen Justices (whom they call Loch∣maders, i.e. men of the Law) sit down on the ground, with each a book of the Iselandic Laws in his hand. After the Plaintiff and Defendant have both given in what they have to say; they all arise, and every man examines privately the verdict of his book in the case proposed. Return∣ing, they consult awhile of the sentence, and then unanimously pronounce it. If any consi∣derable doubt arise among them, which they themselves cannot easily solve, they consult the Lieutenant; but will not give him authority or leave to decide the controversie by pronouncing of sentence. These twelve Jurymen (of whom one always is Foreman) have great respect shew'n them, as long as these Assizes last. They have power to determine all Civil causes; and to pro∣nounce condemnation, as they think convenient, against all Criminals. Those that are condemn'd to dye (as Adulterers, Murderers, and notori∣ous Thieves) are beheaded; but smaller mis∣demeanors are marked in the forehead with an hot iron. This account of the manner of proceeding in the Iselandic Court of Judicature (the much dif∣ferent from the methods made use of in the days of their Nomophylaces, mentioned by Arngrim Jo∣nas) I can the easilier credit, because I do not find it contradicted in Arngrim's reply to Blefke∣nius. Besides, the custom of deciding controver∣sies by the verdict of twelve Jurymen here in England, may perswade us to believe the same fashion may be observed in these Danish domini∣ons; from whence, probably, it was first brought into Britain. The End of the First Volume. decorative device
AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX, Containing The NAMES of all the COUNTRIES, CITIES, TOWNS, RIVERS, ISLES, &c. IN THE Maps of the First Volume. Places. Map. Latitude. D. M. Longitude. D. M. A   AAb 20 58 00 22 00 Aabo 25 58 00 22 00   29 58 20 22 00   36 57 00 24 10 37 55 50 23 10 36 56 55 23 40 30 55 40 27 00   32 55 40 27 00 20 55 00 29 00   22 55 30 29 00 37 55 50 24 40 29 59 00 20 00   24 60 40 31 40 20 56 00 24 00   30 56 40 24 40   36 56 55 24 20 d 36 56 30 24 30 22 30 00 27 00 37 55 35 22 40   36 56 40 24 50   29 60 00 23 00 32 54 50 27 00   33 54 55 27 00 30 55 20 24 00 29 58 00 21 00 37 55 25 23 40   30 54 40 25 20 34 55 10 25 30   20 58 00 21 00   25 58 30 21 00   29 58 20 22 00     58 40 21 00 37 56 50 24 50 38 55 10 24 50 36 56 50 23 10   20 57 00 27 00     56 00 29 00     56 00 33 00     58 00 21 00   22 56 00 33 00     56 30 29 00     57 00 27 00   29 57 40 21 30   36 57 15 24 30 ing 24 59 40 32 00 d 30 57 20 24 20 a 34 55 25 25 10 ed 36 57 10 24 40 p 34 55 05 25 20 p 32 54 50 27 00   33 54 55 27 10 eford 29 58 40 23 30 ng 19 57 30 39 00 sen 41 53 25 23 00 38 55 00 23 50   39 55 00 23 50   40 55 00 24 00 I. 01 77 10 47 00 k 19 57 30 40 00 d 39 55 10 24 00 g 39 54 55 23 50 Abella fl. 18 55 00 42 00 Abelheffuit 37 56 05 24 50 Abijam 21 64 30 37 00 Abildorst 37 56 00 23 10 Abkier 38 55 10 24 20   39 55 10 24 20   40 55 10 24 20 Abilliunge 30 56 00 28 20   31 56 10 28 50 Abo 06 60 00 39 00   20 60 00 39 00   21 60 00 39 00 Abor 34 55 10 24 50 Abosoe 35 56 20 24 40 Abra 40 54 50 24 10 Abramesca 09 M   Abramstrup 32 55 50 26 40 Abrum 20 55 00 27 00 Abskow 06 46 00 54 00   11 46 00 54 00 Abstoruy 31 56 10 28 20 Abswangen 16 54 20 38 30 Abweden 16 53 40 39 00 Abweiden 16 54 20 38 30 Aby 22 56 30 32 00   31 55 55 28 20 Abygdelag 29 58 40 22 30 Achas 11 50 00 60 00 Achmatzgora M. 10 A   Achmatzko Ins. 10 A   Achterup 38 54 45 24 00 Achterwehz 38 54 15 25 00   42 54 15 24 50 Achtoba fl. 10 G   Achtobenisna Ustga 10 G   Achtopska fl. 10 F   Achyr Y. H. 12 49 00 52 00 Ackebro 40 54 35 24 10 Ackefiord 28 59 30 20 30 Ackestede 20 53 00 23 00 Aoroto 06 41 00 42 00 Aczud 06 46 00 41 00 Adauwa 06 58 00 46 00   19 58 30 46 00   20 58 00 46 00 Adehon 06 47 00 57 00   11 47 00 57 00 Adelbuy 38 54 45 24 30   40 54 45 24 30 Adelhoff 17 53 55 37 00 Adelwick 26 67 30 349 00   25 59 30 21 00   28 60 00 21 00 Adestadt 14 49 40 33 00 Adima 06 55 00 67 00   08 55 00 67 00 Admirals I. 01 75 00 73 30   06 74 00 77 00   07 75 00 78 00 Adosogn 20 59 00 21 00 Adsleff 37 56 05 24 30 Adune fl. 17 54 00 37 00 Adzel 19 57 30 44 00 Aebeltost 37 56 15 25 10 Aebeltostwiig 37 56 15 25 00 AEgil 17 53 55 36 40 Aeichenberg 17 54 20 36 20 Aelholm 33 54 40 26 50 Aelsange 22 58 30 25 00   25 59 50 25 00 Aelsen 35 54 40 24 40 Aenby 27 63 00 26 00 Aer 35 54 40 25 20 Aeunisioki fl. 20 68 00 37 00 Aeye 27 64 20 26 00 Af C. 01 65 00 321 00 Affrade 41 53 55 25 20 Afringbyochnioll 36 56 50 24 30 Agaard 30 56 40 23 20 Agarcova 06 58 00 60 00   07 58 00 60 00   08 58 00 60 00   20 58 00 60 00 Agarstruy 31 55 40 28 10 Agarup 31 55 50 28 50 Agaruy 30 56 00 29 00   31 55 45 28 30     56 05 29 10 Agatzlibert fl. 11 49 00 55 00 Agby 31 55 55 28 10 Agdrup 36 57 15 24 30 Agenborg 18 54 00 39 00 Agenes 20 64 00 25 00   25 64 00 25 00 Agerup 32 55 30 26 40 Ageruy 31 55 30 28 20 Aggabro 22 56 30 30 00 Aggeby 22 56 30 33 00 Aggenes 27 64 40 26 00 Agger 20 61 00 23 00   30 55 00 26 00   32 55 10 26 00   34 55 15 25 50   35 55 00 25 40   36 56 40 23 00     56 45 22 30   37 55 55 24 50 Aggerkrog 37 55 35 23 10 Aggernis 34 55 05 24 50 Aggerstaggaard 36 56 55 23 40 Aggerschow 38 55 05 24 10   39 55 05 24 10 Aggers Husslet 29 59 20 24 30 Aggerhuys 22 59 00 25 00   25 59 30 25 00 Aggeruy 31 56 05 29 00 Aggil 16 54 40 39 00 Agius 19 57 00 41 00 Aglbaek 37 56 15 24 20 Aglon fl. 16 55 20 39 30 Agry 37 56 10 25 00 Agulfa 31 56 15 28 50 Ahel 38 55 10 24 10 Ahls 25 60 00 22 00 Ahuys 30 55 40 29 20   31 55 50 29 40 Ahwenjerwi 21 61 30 44 00 Aines T. 20 68 00 36 00
Aniel 22 58 30 27 00 Aisted 37 55 50 23 50 Aker 19 59 00 35 00   20 57 00 29 00     59 00 35 00   22 57 00 29 00     59 00 35 00   23 59 20 35 00 Akerby 23 59 50 34 00   24 59 50 34 00 Akersund 06 58 00 24 00   20 58 00 24 00   22 58 30 25 00   25 58 30 25 00   29 58 40 25 00 Akiere 31 56 00 28 00 Akierman olim Biel∣logrod 12 46 00 48 00   13 T   Akizo 20 61 00 41 00 Akosineitlu 20 63 00 46 00 Akosinuthi 21 63 00 46 00 Akraues 26 65 30 353 00 Akwo 21 61 00 41 00 Akzaf fl. 06 45 00 68 00 Aland 22 59 30 34 00   23 59 50 34 30   30 55 00 30 00 Alandia 06 60 00 37 00   19 60 00 36 00   20 60 00 36 00   21 60 00 36 00   22 60 00 37 00   23 60 00 36 30 Alruy 31 56 10 28 10 Alater 10 B   Albaek 36 56 25 24 40     56 45 24 20     57 05 24 50 Albazichia 06 46 00 60 00   11 46 00 60 00 Alba 01 72 40 04 00 Albek 36 57 25 24 50 Albersdorp 41 54 10 25 50   43 54 10 25 50 Alberte 31 55 35 28 40 Albis fl. 20 54 00 23 00   41 53 20 25 10   42 53 55 23 50   44 53 45 24 00 Albo Herrit 31 55 40 29 30 Alborch 35 56 40 24 40 Alboug Promont. 33 54 55 26 10 S. Albrecht 16 54 00 36 00     54 40 37 40   17 54 15 36 10 Albrechtaw 16 53 40 37 00 Albrechtsdorff 16 54 00 38 30 Albuga 06 57 00 79 00   07 57 00 79 00 Albursis Dicecesis 30 56 40 23 40 Albus Lacus 18 53 00 52 00 Alby 35 56 00 25 00 Alckloh 44 53 50 24 10 Alde 28 61 30 19 00 Alding 39 55 20 23 50 Aldum 30 55 40 24 20   35 55 40 24 20 Alebeke 22 57 00 33 00 Alem 20 56 00 32 00   22 57 00 00 00 Alemborg 18 54 00 39 00 Alenby 20 63 00 26 00   25 63 00 26 00 Alentakia 19 58 30 45 00 Alersvadsbro 31 55 30 29 20 Ales 19 57 00 42 00   20 57 00 42 00 Alesta 31 55 30 29 10 Alexandria 12 50 30 44 00   18 50 30 44 00   20 60 00 52 00   21 60 00 52 00 Alexandrow 12 48 00 46 00 Alexandrowka 12 49 00 51 00 Alexin 06 54 00 58 00   08 54 00 58 00   20 53 00 58 00 Alfeld 17 54 00 36 50 Alglo 19 59 30 40 00   21 59 30 40 00 Algusboda 22 56 30 31 00 Algutseruy 31 56 00 29 20 Algutstorp 31 56 05 28 50 Alholm 20 54 00 26 00 Alhruy 30 55 20 28 00   31 55 35 28 10 Alieri 20 63 00 41 00 Alijerfi 21 63 00 41 00 Aling 39 55 20 24 00 Aling Closter 30 56 00 24 00   35 56 00 24 00 Alingzas 20 57 00 27 00   22 57 30 27 00 Alit 20 60 00 31 00 Aliwenjervi 21 61 30 44 00 Alkier 39 55 15 24 00 Alla fl. 14 53 40 38 00   16 53 20 38 00     54 20 39 00   18 53 30 38 00 Allatur 06 58 00 80 00   07 58 00 80 00 Alleguzrum 22 56 30 33 00 Allemohe 44 53 30 24 50 Allemstrup 38 54 55 24 20   40 54 55 24 20 Allenaw 16 54 20 39 00 Allenstein 14 53 40 38 00   16 53 40 38 00 Aller 35 55 20 24 00   37 55 20 24 00   38 55 20 24 30 Allerburg 14 54 40 39 00   16 54 20 39 00 Allermog 41 53 30 24 50 Allermoll 39 55 20 24 30 Allersloff 32 55 00 27 00     55 30 26 40   33 55 00 27 10 Allerup 39 55 25 23 30     55 10 24 00 Alleso 34 55 25 25 00 Alling 37 56 05 24 10 Alling Aabro 36 56 20 24 50 Allum 37 56 05 24 20 Alma fl. 11 47 00 53 00 Almand So 37 56 05 24 00 Almaphot 26 66 00 358 35 Almdorp 38 54 35 24 10 Almelo 20 52 00 21 00 Almenhausen 16 54 20 38 30 Almentruy 31 55 45 28 40 Almen Closter 36 56 20 23 50 Almind 30 55 20 24 20   35 55 20 24 20   37 56 15 23 50 Almingari 26 67 30 349 00 Alminger 26 68 00 350 00 Almino 37 55 30 23 50 Almoi Sr. 16 53 40 39 00 Almonia fl. 16 54 20 39 30 Almsla 22 56 00 30 00 Almunge 22 59 30 34 00   23 59 40 35 00 Alnisry 30 56 00 30 00 Alnon 20 62 00 34 00   21 62 00 34 00 Alo 19 58 30 42 00 Alpo 19 58 30 43 00 Alro 37 55 50 24 40 Alrum 31 56 00 27 40 Als 06 60 00 22 00   20 60 00 23 00   28 60 00 23 00 Alsa 35 56 40 23 20 Alsbeck 40 54 15 24 40 Alschlef 38 55 00 24 00 Alfeko 23 59 30 34 30 Alsee 39 55 30 23 20 Alsen 30 54 40 24 40   34 54 55 24 50 Alsingsund 40 55 00 24 40 Alslee 39 55 00 24 20 Alsleff 37 55 30 22 50 Alsloff 33 54 50 27 10 Alsne 20 63 00 30 00 Alsno 23 59 10 34 00 Also 36 56 20 25 20   37 56 20 25 20 Alssen Ins. 38 55 00 25 00 W. Alsted 31 55 25 28 30   32 55 20 26 40 Alster fl. 41 53 35 25 40   44 53 35 24 40 Alstrup 36 56 45 23 10     57 05 24 00 Alswangen 19 56 30 38 00   20 56 00 38 00 Alsinderup 32 55 50 27 00 Alta 06 61 00 33 00   20 61 00 32 00 Altafiord 26 66 00 352 00 Alt Christburg 16 53 40 37 00 Alt Dresden 14 50 40 30 00 Altena 30 53 40 24 20   41 53 30 24 40   44 53 30 24 40 Altendorf 15 51 30 33 20   17 54 10 36 40 Altenfeld 17 54 00 36 40 Altenhayn 16 53 40 37 30 Alten Krempe 41 54 05 25 40   43 54 05 25 40 Alterndorp 41 53 50 23 30 Alte Sorg 15 52 30 32 20 Altetief 40 54 35 23 20 Altewall. 40 54 30 24 50 Altewiesel 17 54 05 36 20 Altfart 17 54 10 37 00 Alt Fischau 17 54 05 37 00 Althaus 16 53 20 36 00 Althoff 16 54 00 37 00   30 54 00 24 20 Altkeikutt 16 53 20 38 30 Altkirch 16 53 40 38 00 Alt Mandoe 38 55 15 23 30   39 55 15 23 30 Alt Marck 16 53 40 37 00   17 53 50 36 40 Alt Rosengard 17 54 00 36 50 Alt Ruttin 43 54 05 25 40 Alt Snaken 16 54 40 Altstate 16 53 20     53 40 Alt Swogel 43 54 00 Alt Tiet 16 54 20 Altvath 06 45 00 Alverloh 44 53 50 Alversdorp 42 54 10   43 54 05 Alveslo 41 53 45 Alvestroom 28 60 30 Alvos 26 64 30 3 Alund 19 59 30   24 60 00 Aluygford 01 66 30 3 Alwe 17 53 50 3 Amaca Palus 06 49 00 6 Amack 30 55 40 2 Amag 31 55 35 2   32 55 30 2 Amaupe 21 61 30 4 Amberg 22 57 30 3   41 53 50 2   43 53 50 2   44 53 50 2 Ambreitenstein 17 54 05 3 Amcopelt zhokel 26 66 00 35 Amel 20 61 00 2   25 61 00 2   28 61 00 2 Amelandt 20 53 00 2 Ameren 30 54 40 2 Amersworden 42 54 05 2 Amerswurd 41 54 05 2 Amlanok s. 16 53 20 3 Amnhere 22 58 30 3 Amoesjerf 20 65 00 4   21 64 30 4 Amot 31 56 15 2     56 15 2 Ampel 19 58 30 4 Ampol 12 48 00 4     49 30 4 Amrom 40 54 40 23   41 54 40 23 Amsterdam 20 52 00 20 Amtrup 37 56 00 23 Amungin 24 60 20 32     61 10 32 Amungin Lacus 24 59 30 32     59 40 32 Ancker 16 54 40 38 Anclam 14 53 40 30   20 53 00 29 Andama 06 61 00 56   07 61 00 56   20 61 00 57 Andeso 30 55 40 27   32 55 50 27 Andegrabe 17 54 10 36 Andelow 31 55 45 28 Anderum 31 55 40 29 Anderup 39 55 20 24 Andholm 39 55 05 24 Andorp 35 55 00 24 Andrea de revena 06 46 00 70 Andrerum 31 55 35 29 Andrinopoli 06 42 00 44 Andrup 30 55 00 24   38 55 20 24 Andryjow 12 47 00 49 Ands 38 55 25 24   39 55 25 24 Andsbro 39 55 25 24 Andverskow 32 55 20 26 Aneskog 06 58 00 27   22 58 30 27 Aneslof 34 55 25 25 L. Anfleth 39 55 20 24 Anger 06 64 00 55 00   07 64 00 55 00   20 64 00 55 00 Angerap fl. 14 54 20 39 00   16 54 00 40 00 Angerburg 14 54 00 39 00   16 54 00 39 30   20 54 00 39 00 Angermannia 06 63 00 32 00   20 63 00 32 00 Angermannus fl. 20 63 00 32 00 Angermund 14 52 40 30 00   19 57 00 39 00 Angern 19 57 00 40 00   20 57 00 40 00 Angerzta 22 56 30 29 00 Anglen 30 54 40 24 20 Angnham 22 59 00 28 00 Angul R. 12 47 30 49 00 Angulat Wiolky R. 12 47 30 49 00   13 R   Anholt 20 56 00 26 00   22 56 30 26 00 Animpeldo 21 61 30 43 00 S. Anna 38 54 20 24 10   41 54 20 23 50   42 54 20 23 50 S. Anns bay 01 76 00 88 00 Qu. Anns C. 01 65 50 321 00 Qu. Anns Forland 01 63 30 299 00 Annburg 19 56 00 41 00 Annedal 25 58 30 23 00
Annuderford 26 67 00 348 00 30 56 20 26 20   35 56 40 26 20 30 56 40 26 20   35 56 40 26 20 37 55 35 23 20 37 55 35 23 10 30 56 00 23 40 35 56 00 23 40 37 56 05 24 40 38 55 20 24 40 22 58 30 29 00 37 55 25 23 30 37 55 25 23 40 12 49 00 48 00 20 62 00 37 00   21 62 00 38 00 12 51 30 48 00   18 51 30 47 00 19 57 30 44 00   20 57 00 44 00 22 58 00 33 00   06 59 00 81 00   07 59 00 81 00 30 55 00 24 20 35 55 00 24 20   38 55 00 24 30   39 55 00 24 30   40 55 00 24 30 39 55 00 24 30   40 55 00 24 30 39 55 05 24 30 24 60 40 30 00 41 53 40 24 20   44 53 40 24 20 39 55 05 23 40   19 58 30 35 00 38 55 00 23 50   39 55 00 23 50   01 62 00 343 30 12 45 30 52 00 26 66 00 359 00 31 56 05 28 10 06 45 00 69 00 11 47 00 55 00 06 59 00 32 00   20 59 00 32 00   24 59 10 32 20 22 59 00 32 00   23 59 20 32 30 M. 10 C     20 56 00 32 00   22 56 30 32 00   37 56 05 24 40 06 43 00 64 00 01 64 30 58 00   06 64 00 61 00   07 64 00 61 00   20 64 00 61 00   09 R   38 54 50 23 20   39 54 50 23 20   40 54 50 23 20 06 45 00 39 00 30 54 20 28 40 32 55 30 26 00 31 55 50 29 10 20 59 00 26 00   22 59 00 27 00   25 59 00 27 00 40 54 30 24 30 35 56 20 23 00 38 54 30 24 30   40 54 30 24 30 41 54 00 25 20   43 54 00 25 20 15 52 20 32 20 41 53 55 24 00   42 53 55 24 00 41 53 45 25 10   44 53 35 25 00     53 45 25 10 41 53 40 25 00   44 53 40 25 00 40 54 20 24 40   38 54 30 24 20   40 54 30 24 20 14 53 00 32 00   15 53 00 32 20   20 52 00 32 00 30 54 00 23 40 31 55 55 29 30 34 55 10 25 10   22 59 00 26 00 25 59 00 26 00 39 54 55 24 20   42 54 00 25 00   43 53 55 25 20   44 53 55 25 20 fodinae 23 59 40 33 00 fl. 16 54 40 40 00 20 56 00 24 00   30 56 00 24 40   35 56 00 24 40 Dioece∣s 30 56 20 24 00 frons prom. 11 46 00 54 00 14 58 40 40 00   16 53 40 39 30   20 53 00 39 00 16 53 40 40 00 Arisle 31 55 55 29 30 Arkebec 30 54 00 24 00 Arle 19 56 30 42 00   37 56 00 24 00 Arle fl. 38 54 35 24 10   40 54 35 24 10   41 54 35 23 50 Arlero 31 55 35 28 20 Armstede 44 53 55 24 40 Arn fl. 16 54 20 39 00 Arnaw 16 53 20 37 30     54 40 38 30 Arnak 30 55 00 25 20   32 55 00 25 20   34 55 00 25 20 Arnsborg 06 58 00 40 00 Arndorf 16 54 00 38 00   30 56 20 23 00 Andrup 38 55 00 24 00   39 55 00 24 00   40 55 00 24 10 Arnedal 29 58 20 23 00 Arnefioerd 25 61 00 20 00   28 61 00 20 30 Arnes 20 63 00 35 00   21 63 00 34 00 Arnhem 20 51 00 20 00 Arning 33 54 45 26 20 Arnis 20 55 00 25 00   34 55 40 25 00   37 55 40 25 00 Arnithlunt 38 55 10 24 30   39 55 10 24 20 Arno 20 58 00 29 00   22 59 00 29 00   29 58 40 21 00 Arnoe 38 55 00 25 10     55 00 25 20   40 55 00 25 10     55 00 25 20 Arnoo 22 59 30 34 00   23 59 20 34 00     59 30 34 30 Arnoon 24 59 10 33 40 Arnsberg 37 55 55 23 30 Arnsboke 30 54 00 25 20 Arnsborg 19 58 00 40 00   20 58 00 40 00 Arnsdorf 16 53 40 37 00 Arnstein 16 54 20 38 00 Arnum 38 55 10 23 50   39 55 10 23 50 Arnijorfvi 20 65 00 36 00 Aro 30 55 00 24 40   34 55 50 24 40 Aroe 37 55 15 24 20   39 55 15 24 20 Arokebeck 42 54 10 24 00 Arool 08 52 00 56 00 Arop 30 56 40 23 00   35 56 40 23 00 Arosia sive Westeras 23 59 30 33 00 Aroslowicc 12 50 30 52 00 Arpsdorp 41 53 55 24 40   42 54 00 24 40   44 54 00 24 40 Arr 32 55 00 25 20   34 54 55 25 30 Arr So 32 55 50 27 00 Arrige 31 55 30 28 20 Arrilldt 38 55 05 23 50   39 55 05 23 50   40 55 05 23 50 Arroe 38 54 55 25 20 Arromas 06 55 00 70 00   08 55 00 70 00 Arool 06 52 00 56 00 Arsa 06 62 00 65 00   07 62 00 65 00   09 M   Arschen S. 16 54 20 38 30 Arschepel 40 54 25 24 50 Arschlee 39 55 00 24 20 Arsinar. 20 68 00 56 00 Arska 06 59 00 76 00   07 59 00 76 00 Arski Principes pa∣sehumuki Circassi 06 43 00 67 00 Arsleff 36 56 20 24 40   37 56 20 24 40 Ar So 37 56 00 24 00 Arturp 31 55 50 28 00 Arva 14 49 00 36 00 Arunarfiord 26 66 30 348 00 Arup 39 54 55 24 20 Aruyca 20 59 00 28 00   22 59 30 28 00 Arx minor 18 54 00 42 00 Arzina fl. 01 68 30 54 30 As 20 58 00 28 00   22 58 00 28 00 Asak 20 57 00 28 00   22 57 30 28 00 Asaka 22 57 30 29 00 Asbesioo 22 59 00 26 00   25 58 30 26 00 Asboo 24 60 30 32 00 Ascala 21 61 00 43 00 Ascens 30 55 00 24 40   34 55 10 24 50   35 55 00 24 40 Ascerode 19 56 30 42 00 Aschbuden 17 54 05 37 00 Ascheberg 41 54 05 25 00   42 54 05 25 10   43 54 05 25 00 Aschlef 39 55 00 24 00 Ascho 32 54 50 26 40   33 54 50 26 40 Aschou 39 55 15 23 30 Aschow 40 54 25 25 00 Aschwein S. 16 54 00 39 30 Aschza fl. 16 55 20 39 30 Asdal 35 57 20 24 20   36 57 25 24 30 Asdalkirk 36 57 25 24 30 Asedo 20 56 00 31 00   22 57 00 31 00 Asel 30 53 40 24 00   41 53 40 24 00   44 53 40 24 00 Asem 31 55 35 29 10 Asendruy 31 55 50 29 30 Aserald 25 58 00 22 00   29 58 00 22 00 Asseri 19 59 00 44 00 Asern 31 55 50 29 40 Aserstrup 33 54 50 26 20 Asia 11 49 00 59 00   12 46 30 54 00 Asith 39 55 00 24 00 Ask 30 55 40 28 20   31 55 50 28 30 Askala 20 61 00 43 00 Aske 20 59 00 24 00   22 59 00 24 00   25 59 00 24 00   31 56 00 29 20 Askeland 29 60 20 19 30 Askenkrog 17 54 15 36 30 Asker 22 59 00 32 00   23 59 00 32 00 Askero 29 58 20 23 30 Askesogn 29 58 40 20 30 Akesun 20 58 00 31 00   22 58 30 31 00 Askierad 18 56 00 42 00 Askircke 30 55 40 24 40 Aslan H. 12 46 30 50 00   13 P   Asle 31 55 45 28 40 Asmind 36 56 20 24 00   37 56 20 24 00 Asminderod 32 55 50 27 20 Asmindrup 32 55 30 26 20 Asmundruy 31 55 50 28 10 Asnen 22 56 00 30 00 Asnes 20 55 00 26 00   30 55 40 26 00   32 55 40 26 00     55 50 26 20   34 55 35 25 50 Asoff olim Tanais emporium 06 49 00 62 00   08 49 00 62 00 Aspe 30 53 40 24 40   36 56 30 23 10   37 56 30 23 10   41 54 00 24 10   42 54 00 24 10   44 54 00 24 10 Aspen 22 57 30 27 00 Asperaw 42 54 05 24 40 Aspern 44 53 50 24 20 Asperop 34 55 25 24 40 Asperosa 06 42 00 44 00 Asph 39 55 00 23 50 Aspoo 20 58 00 36 00   23 58 50 36 00   24 59 10 33 20     59 10 34 00 Aspromiti 06 47 00 56 00   11 47 00 56 00 Asrot 30 54 20 24 40 Assa fl. 19 59 00 41 00 Assaunen 16 54 20 39 30 Affeck S. 16 54 00 39 30 Assels 36 56 40 23 00 Assendrup 32 55 50 26 20 Assendrupbro 37 56 00 24 40 Assens 37 55 15 24 30     55 45 24 40   38 55 15 25 00   39 55 15 25 00 Asserballig 38 54 55 25 00   40 54 55 25 00 Assertorp 31 55 25 28 40 Assetruy 31 55 30 28 40 Assila 21 61 00 48 00 Assindrup 32 55 20 26 40 Assow 11 50 00 58 00 Assowa fl. 11 53 00 50 00 Astat 26 67 00 355 00 Asterup 38 55 15 24 30   39 55 10 23 40     55 15 24 30 Astorp 35 56 20 23 40 Astracan 06 49 00 74 00     49 00 76 00     51 00 78 00   10 G   Astrop 30 56 40 24 40
  35 56 40 24 40 Astrup 30 55 20 26 40     57 00 24 00   32 55 30 26 40   35 57 00 24 00   36 56 40 23 30     56 40 24 30     56 50 23 50     57 15 24 20     57 20 24 30   37 56 00 24 40     56 00 23 10 Asungen lacus 22 57 00 28 00 Asup 31 56 00 28 10 Aszwa fl. 18 55 00 39 00 Atarp 31 55 55 28 00 Atrendorp 30 54 00 23 40 Atrobe fl. 10 C   Attafiord 26 67 00 349 00 Attamanskoi Goria 06 49 00 62 00 Attaruy 31 56 10 28 40 Atten Botteh 20 70 00 37 00 Atteruy 31 55 55 28 30     55 55 28 50 Attuadia 06 60 00 35 00 Attundria 23 59 50 35 00 Atued 20 57 00 32 00   22 57 30 32 00 Atzbuttel 41 54 05 24 10   42 54 05 24 10 Atzbyll 38 54 55 24 40   39 54 55 24 40   40 54 55 24 40 Auber 19 58 30 41 00 Aubrugke 41 54 15 24 00 Aucliten 16 54 20 39 00 Aven 40 54 55 23 50 I. Avenas 06 69 00 29 00 Avendorp 41 54 30 26 00 Aventoft 38 54 50 23 50 Averdorp 42 53 50 23 40 Aver Erstal 39 55 10 24 10 Averfleth 42 54 00 24 00 Averkerck 35 56 20 22 40 Averschluse 44 53 40 25 10 Aversdorp 41 54 10 24 00 Averwisch 42 54 15 23 50 Averwolt 43 53 55 25 20 Averstad 24 60 00 32 20 Aufhalt 15 51 40 33 00 Auffudon 42 54 00 23 50 Augbon 20 61 00 34 00 Aughon 21 61 30 34 00 Augsfelde 43 54 05 25 10 Augspirt fl. 16 54 40 41 00 Augste fl. 16 54 20 39 30 Augustew 06 53 00 40 00   14 53 40 41 00   18 53 30 40 00 Augustova 16 53 40 41 00 Augustruy 31 56 00 28 20 Auhr 16 53 40 37 30 G. Auhr S. 16 53 40 38 30 Avia Joki 20 68 00 44 00 Aulsnes 29 59 00 20 00 Aulum 36 56 25 24 30   37 56 10 23 10     56 25 24 30 Aundsberg 37 56 15 24 00 Aunisma 20 60 00 52 00 Aunit 30 54 40 26 20   33 54 45 26 30 Aurajoki fl. 21 60 30 39 00 Aurdal 25 58 00 22 00 Aurick 20 53 00 22 00 Aursie 30 55 20 26 40   32 55 20 26 40 Ausacker 38 54 40 24 40   40 54 45 24 40 Ausbruch 17 53 55 36 50     54 10 36 30 Augard 39 55 05 24 10 Ausing 36 56 20 25 00   37 56 20 25 00 Austlendingafiordung 26 66 00 359 00 Austrich S. 16 53 40 38 00 Auxi T. 20 66 00 42 00 Auytiwalo 20 62 00 46 00   21 62 00 45 00 Aw fl. 42 54 00 24 30   44 53 40 25 00     53 45 24 10 Awe Mohl 44 53 35 24 50 Awnuwa fl. 18 55 30 40 00 Axoefired 20 69 00 37 00 Axholmen 24 59 40 32 40 Axelwal 31 55 50 28 20 Axiopolis 06 44 00 43 00 Axted 36 56 40 23 30 Aynoe 06 70 00 49 00   07 70 00 49 00   20 70 00 48 00 Aytrup 39 55 25 24 30 Azaber 11 51 00 56 00 Azara 06 48 00 59 00   08 48 00 59 00   11 48 00 58 00 Azaraba 11 49 00 59 00 Azerbosand 32 55 50 27 00 B.   Baart 30 54 00 28 00 Babcoski 20 57 00 45 00 Babe 09 E   Babent S. 16 53 40 39 00 Babey 06 50 00 66 00     53 00 69 00   08 50 00 66 00     53 00 68 00 Babia 11 49 00 48 00   09 H   Babica 18 51 30 47 00 Babie 18 56 00 52 00 Babim 12 48 30 47 00 P. Babimost 15 51 50 33 00 G. Bombst 15 51 50 33 00 Babin 12 50 00 43 00   18 51 00 40 00 Babine Y. 12 48 30 48 00 Babker Wiesen 17 54 15 36 40 Babkoski 19 57 00 45 00 Babot 16 53 40 39 00 Babrina 06 62 00 66 00 Baca 06 41 00 77 00 Bacalarz 18 53 30 41 00 Bacassarium 11 47 00 54 00 Bachantin 06 48 00 75 00 Bachmac 12 50 00 51 00 Bachmat 12 49 30 48 00 Bachtoock 06 49 00 75 00 Bacivachi 11 49 00 58 00 Backendrup 32 55 30 26 00 Backesond 28 60 00 20 00 Back kirk 36 56 35 22 20 Bacmachi 06 49 00 61 00   08 49 00 61 00 Bacovens 19 57 00 38 00 Bacruchi 11 49 00 58 00 Bacularzowo 14 54 00 41 00 Badendorp 43 53 50 25 20 Badgakousa fl. 06 60 00 55 00   07 59 00 56 00   20 59 00 55 00 Badstuen 36 56 45 23 50 Baeken 31 55 45 28 30 Baekmark 36 56 25 22 40   37 56 25 22 40 Baesle 31 55 55 27 50 Baffins Bay 01 70 &c 280 &c Bagaan 24 59 40 31 20 Bagarder 26 68 00 349 00 Bagiswon 36 57 20 24 30 Bagoe 37 55 20 24 20   38 55 15 24 50   39 55 15 24 50 Bahena 14 49 20 37 00 Bahometz 18 55 30 46 00 Bahrby 31 55 30 29 50 Bahre 31 55 35 28 30 Bahus 06 57 00 26 00   20 57 00 26 00   22 57 30 26 00   25 57 30 26 00 Bahusdalia 20 58 00 26 00 Bahuys 30 57 40 27 20 Bajargaln 16 54 40 40 30 Bajazet 06 45 00 45 00 Baida 06 66 00 104 00   07 67 00 104 00 Baistrup 38 54 50 24 20 Bakle 12 48 30 49 00     48 30 51 00 Balagana R. 12 45 30 51 00 Balagna 06 58 00 64 00   07 58 00 64 00   08 58 00 64 00 Balanowka 12 48 00 47 00 Balao 17 54 00 37 00 Balastonda 06 62 00 66 00   07 62 00 66 00 Balaw 16 53 40 37 00   17 54 00 36 50 Balby 22 55 30 28 00 Balden S. 16 53 20 39 30 Balderup 32 55 40 27 20 Baldon 19 56 30 42 00   20 56 00 42 00 Baldow 17 54 05 36 20 Baldring 31 55 30 29 10 Balesten 22 58 30 28 00 Balga 16 54 20 37 30 Balgarfiord 26 65 30 350 00 Balhokell 26 66 00 353 00 Balibygh 20 57 00 27 00   22 57 30 27 00 Balince 12 48 30 43 00 Balkar 30 56 00 28 00   31 56 05 28 10 Balkered 30 55 20 28 40   31 55 25 29 10 Ballastplact 40 54 15 23 40   42 54 15 23 50 Balle 37 55 35 23 50 Balli 41 53 50 23 50 Balligard 39 54 55 24 40   40 54 55 24 40 Balling 36 56 35 23 20 Ballscho 38 55 25 25 00 Ballum 38 55 05 23 40   39 55 05 Balneum Vitold 18 53 30 Balobarowka 12 48 30 Balscho 31 55 30   37 55 25 Balsloo 30 55 20   34 55 15   35 55 20 Balson 20 62 00   21 62 00 Balt 16 53 20 Balteberg 31 55 50 Baltinge 31 55 40 Baltrum 20 54 00 Baltz 16 53 20 Baltzick fl. 10 C   Balum 40 54 35 Balund 24 59 30 Bamhoel 39 55 10 Bammen S. 16 54 40 Banar 01 62 00 3 Banaw fl. 16 54 00 Banckelldam 39 55 10 Banckloff 39 55 15 Band 31 55 25   41 53 25 Bandelsdorp 41 54 30 Bangsbe 36 57 15 Bangsbro 25 60 30   28 60 30   29 60 20 Banse 16 53 40 3 Bansen 16 53 40 3 Bansewyck 17 54 00 3 Baprotten S. 16 53 40 3 Bar 12 49 00 4   18 49 00 4 Baragum 06 44 00 6 Baran fl. 18 54 00 4 Baranow 18 50 00 4 Baranowka 12 50 00 4 Baranowo 15 52 00 3     52 20 3 Barasse 18 50 30 4 Barbaren 16 53 00 3 Barbecke 30 54 00 2   39 55 20 2   41 54 00 2   42 54 00 2   44 54 00 2 Barchstede 38 54 20 2   41 54 05 2 Barck 41 53 55 2   42 53 55 2   44 53 55 2 Barckenthyn 41 53 40 2   44 53 40 2 Bardastrant 26 66 00 34 Bardt 20 54 00 2 Bardyn 43 54 20 2 Bareesnik 06 63 00 6   07 63 00 6 Bare herrit 31 55 40 2 Baremose So. 32 55 00 2   33 55 00 2 Barendorp 43 54 15 2 Barenfelt 44 53 35 2 Barent 17 54 05 3 W. Barents I. 01 75 45 7 Bargarderwick 26 68 00 34 Bargen 15 51 40 3   42 54 20 2 Bargenstede 42 54 05 2 Bargfelde 41 53 45 2   44 53 45 2 Barghorst 44 53 45 2 Bargstal 38 54 20 2   40 54 20 2   41 54 20 2 Bargstede 42 54 10 2   44 53 40 2 Bargteheyde 41 53 40 2   44 53 45 2 Bargum 38 54 40 2   40 54 45 2 Barid 33 54 45 2 Barinowec 12 49 00 46 Baritzpole 12 49 30 49 Barizopola 13 B   Barkare 24 59 20 32 Barkaw 41 54 10 25 Barkie 24 60 00 31 Barklin 15 51 50 33 Barkow 41 54 00 25   42 54 10 25   43 54 05 25     54 10 24 Barlcter haven 42 54 05 23 Barllt 41 54 00 23   42 54 05 23   44 53 55 24 Barlos 34 55 15 24 Barlow 41 54 05 24 Barm 38 54 25 24   40 54 25 24   41 54 25 24 Barmesse 42 54 10 25 Barmstede 30 53 40 24   41 53 45 24   44 53 50 24 Barnbeck 44 53 35 24
44 53 50 25 10 20 52 00 32 00 19 59 30 41 00   21 59 30 41 00 43 54 50 25 10 29 58 00 21 00 37 55 45 24 30 37 55 45 24 30 37 55 55 23 10 14 51 40 30 00 14 51 20 38 00 42 54 10 23 50 31 55 29 29 00 22 55 30 28 00   31 55 40 28 00   32 55 40 27 40 39 55 15 23 50 06 67 00 64 00   07 67 00 64 00   20 66 00 63 00 38 55 05 24 40 39 55 05 24 40 38 55 20 24 10 27 63 20 23 00 42 54 10 24 20 22 57 30 33 00 26 66 00 348 00 16 54 00 39 00 14 54 00 38 00   16 54 00 38 30   18 54 00 38 00   20 54 00 38 00 14 54 00 33 00 16 53 40 38 30 39 55 10 24 30 14 49 00 37 00 18 54 00 41 00 12 49 30 49 00 31 56 15 29 00 12 50 00 49 00 40 54 55 24 40 01 70 00 321 30 44 53 45 24 20 12 49 30 44 00   18 49 30 44 00 06 56 00 58 00   08 56 00 58 00   20 56 00 59 00 38 55 00 24 30 30 55 00 26 20   32 55 10 26 20   34 55 15 26 10 41 54 05 25 10 31 55 40 29 40 40 54 45 23 20 34 55 10 26 40   38 55 15 24 50   44 53 50 24 20 29 59 00 24 30 38 55 20 24 10 39 55 20 24 10 11 54 00 46 00 08 52 00 68 00 06 52 00 68 00 27 63 20 23 00 10 C   28 61 30 19 00 12 50 30 51 00 15 52 10 32 40 28 61 30 18 30 30 55 20 26 40 32 55 20 26 40 41 54 20 25 50   43 54 20 25 50 16 54 00 37 30 39 55 10 24 40 39 55 05 24 00 18 56 00 42 00 19 56 00 42 00 14 51 00 31 00 38 54 50 24 20   40 54 50 24 20 20 62 00 46 00 23 59 10 35 30 16 54 00 39 30 16 54 00 38 30 16 54 00 38 00 16 54 00 39 00 43 54 05 25 10 12 50 00 50 00 12 47 00 51 00   13 O   Cherry I. 01 74 20 39 00 01 75 30 78 30     66 30 339 00 01 76 10 87 00 01 65 00 325 00 30 55 20 23 40   37 55 30 23 30   38 55 15 24 10   39 55 15 24 10   55 20 23 50   42 54 00 24 10 44 54 00 24 00 28 59 30 20 00 31 55 25 29 00 01 68 50 116 00 31 55 25 28 40 30 55 40 25 00 32 55 40 25 20   38 55 00 24 10   39 55 00 24 10   40 55 00 24 10 Beeck 37 55 55 24 20 Beel 43 54 10 25 10 Beelgorode 06 52 00 57 00   08 52 00 57 00 Beelschwitz 16 53 40 37 00 Beelt 06 68 00 72 00   07 68 00 72 00 Beenloss 32 55 20 26 40 Beeranelz 06 54 00 57 00 Beeren I. 06 74 00 38 00 Beeresondt 20 63 00 19 00 Beerstede 41 53 35 25 30 Beerwalt al. Mese∣witz 16 53 20 36 30     54 00 36 30 Beesle fl. 44 53 50 24 50 Beester fl. 42 53 45 25 00 Begdanow 18 54 00 43 00 Begelhuss 39 54 50 24 10 Begerhorn 42 54 05 24 10 Beinisch fl. 16 54 00 39 00 Beiseleiten 16 54 20 38 30 Beisten 16 54 00 38 30 Beistfeld 17 54 00 36 20 Beitna fl. 10 C   Beke 22 58 30 27 00   38 54 50 24 40   39 55 15 25 40   42 54 00 24 00 Bela 09     Belaslouda 09     Belater 06 58 00 83 00   07 58 00 83 00 Bela wolga 06 58 00 81 00   07 58 00 81 00 Belda 06 49 00 77 00 Beldorp 42 54 10 24 10 Beldring 32 55 10 27 00 Belef 11 53 00 52 00 Belenczin 15 52 00 33 00 Beleof 06 53 00 57 00   08 53 00 56 00 Belesk 06 54 00 52 00   08 54 00 52 00   11 54 00 50 00 Belewic 15 52 10 33 20 Belgardt 14 53 40 32 00 Belgincamen 06 53 00 69 00   08 53 00 69 00 Beling 23 59 50 34 00 Belitz 16 53 20 37 00 Belkow 42 53 50 23 40 Bell P. 01 77 30 35 00 Bell S. 01 77 45 36 00 Bellacouczin 13 C   Bella More, hoc est album Mare 07 65 00 55 00   20 65 00 55 00 Bellamoreskoy Le∣porie 01 65 &c 45 &c Belling 33 54 50 27 10   34 55 20 25 00 Bellinge 31 56 05 28 40 Bellum 41 53 50 23 40 Bellyn 41 54 15 25 10   43 54 15 25 10 Beloi I. 01 71 00 87 00 Beloi Ostroof 06 71 00 91 00   07 71 00 91 00 Belom 42 53 50 23 40 Below 42 54 05 25 00 Beloy 06 53 00 71 00   08 53 00 71 00 Belsko 15 52 30 32 40 De beldt 30 55 00 26 00   33 54 55 26 10   34 55 25 24 40   35 55 20 25 40 Belum 36 56 45 24 50   41 53 55 23 50 Belz 18 50 00 42 00 Bemoll 41 53 55 24 40   44 53 55 24 40 Benan 16 53 40 37 30 Benden 19 56 30 39 00 Bendlewo 15 52 00 33 40 Bendzyn 14 50 00 35 00 Bener 30 53 40 24 20 Beneruy 30 55 40 28 40   31 55 45 29 10 Benestrad 29 58 40 21 30 Benewolt 42 54 15 24 00 Benikendorp 41 53 50 25 40   43 53 50 25 40 Benkei 16 54 00 40 00 Bennebeck 38 54 25 24 30 Benslo 20 57 00 24 00   30 57 20 24 20   35 57 20 24 20 Bentfelt 41 54 10 25 40   43 54 10 25 40     54 20 25 10 Bentschen 14 52 00 32 00 Bentstaven 44 53 50 25 10 Bentz 43 54 10 25 20 Bepestow R. 12 48 00 53 00 Bercad 12 48 00 47 00 Berchoist 41 53 25 25 00   43 54 00 25 20 Bercken 16 54 00 38 30 Berczowiko 12 49 00 44 00 Berdiezow 12 49 30 46 00   18 50 00 46 00 Berdnick S. 16 53 40 37 30 Bereesnik 09 P   Bereesnick Wagscoy 09 O   Beregowa 12 50 30 45 00 Berehorst 44 53 25 25 00 Berelina fl. 18 53 00 46 00 Berendorp 43 54 15 25 30 Berensdorp 43 54 20 25 20 Beresond 25 63 00 20 00   27 63 00 21 00 Beresouwa Ouska 20 64 00 60 00 Beresova 01 66 20 86 20 Beresowa 06 66 00 93 00     66 00 100 00   07 66 00 93 00     66 00 101 00   09 H & I   Berestetzkw 12 50 00 43 00   18 50 00 43 00 Bercstoczka 12 49 00 30 00 Berestowiec 12 50 30 51 00 Berewicz 12 50 30 50 00 Bereza 12 49 00 47 00   18 52 00 42 00 Berezan P. 12 46 30 49 00     49 30 49 00   13 S   Berezanka 12 50 00 50 00 Berezina fl. 18 52 00 47 00     54 30 46 00 Bereznoe 18 51 00 44 00 Berezowka 12 48 30 45 00 Berg 24 59 30 32 40 Berga 20 60 00 26 00   22 60 00 26 00   25 60 00 26 00   28 60 30 26 00 Bergen 06 54 00 29 00   20 54 00 29 00   29 60 00 20 00   30 54 20 28 40 Bergen hurslot 29 60 00 20 00 Bergenhus 20 58 00 21 00 Bergenhusen 38 54 25 24 20   40 54 25 24 20   41 54 25 24 10 Bergenstieft 20 59 00 20 00   29 60 40 21 00 Bergerdorp 41 53 30 25 00   44 53 30 24 00 Berget 31 55 25 29 10 Bergfiord 29 58 00 21 00 Bergfrieden 16 53 20 37 30 Berghen 06 60 00 20 00   14 54 20 29 00   20 60 00 20 00   25 60 00 20 00   28 60 00 20 00 Berghenstift 25 60 30 20 00 Berghfioerd 20 70 00 36 00 Berglgard 31 55 55 28 30 Bergn 38 54 20 24 20 Bergstede 41 53 35 24 50 Bergum 30 55 40 24 00   35 55 40 24 00 Beringstede 42 54 05 24 20 Berke 23 60 00 32 00 Berken 30 54 00 24 40 Berlin 14 52 20 30 00 Berlinecz 12 48 30 45 00 Berlineken 15 52 50 31 40 Berlingsandt 39 55 00 23 20   40 55 00 23 20 Berlm 41 54 00 25 10 Berlyn 43 54 00 25 10 Berm 14 54 00 35 00   16 54 00 36 00   20 54 00 35 00   26 65 30 02 00   44 53 35 24 50 Bernaszowka 12 48 30 45 00 Berndrup 38 54 35 24 20   39 54 55 24 20     55 05 24 00   40 54 55 24 20 Berneski 06 53 00 51 00   08 53 00 51 00   11 54 00 49 00 Berneuken 15 52 40 31 40 Bernfiord 26 65 30 02 00 Bernstadt 14 51 00 34 00 Bernstein 15 52 50 32 00 Beroe 06 44 00 44 00 Berozowula 12 49 00 52 00 Bersenick 16 54 40 40 30 Berson 19 56 30 43 00   20 56 00 43 00 Berstrup 36 56 55 23 50 Bert 34 55 25 24 30 Berttingen 14 53 20 38 00   16 53 40 38 00 Berzniki 14 54 00 42 00 Besana 06 58 00 48 00 Besano 20 58 00 48 00 Besaw 16 53 40 38 30 Beschendorp 43 54 10 25 40 Besehorst 41 53 25 25 10
  44 53 25 25 10 Bensenbeck 44 53 45 24 20 Besergenoss 06 50 00 64 00   08 50 00 64 00 Besetschin petin 06 58 00 52 00   20 58 00 53 00 Basobia 01 66 00 95 20 Besond 27 64 40 26 00 Best fl.] 44 53 45 25 00 Bestaad 27 65 00 27 00 Bestadt 20 64 00 26 00   25 65 00 27 00 Bestendorff 16 53 40 37 30 Bested 36 56 45 22 40 Beswodna 10 B   I. Betemska 10 C   Betna 22 58 30 33 00   23 58 40 33 00 Betock 06 52 00 68 00 Betoeck 08 52 00 68 00     53 00 65 00 Betoki 18 55 00 40 00 Betom 22 58 00 29 00 Betygola 18 55 00 41 00 Betze 30 54 00 24 00 Beucken 16 54 20 38 30 Bevense 41 53 50 25 00   43 53 50 25 00 Bever 41 53 45 24 30   44 53 45 24 30 Beulshaven 28 59 30 20 00 Beustoft 38 55 10 24 10   39 55 10 24 10 Beutschen 15 52 00 33 00 Beydenfleth 41 53 55 24 00   42 53 55 24 00   44 53 55 24 00 Beyersholm 40 54 55 24 00 Beyerskrog 39 54 50 24 00 Beytelen 44 53 35 24 20 Bezdziess 18 52 00 43 00 Beznalcza 12 49 00 50 00 Biala 15 52 50 33 40 Biala Cerkiew 12 49 00 48 00 Biala horylka 12 49 30 51 00 Biala Osuka 12 49 30 51 00 Bialcz 15 51 50 33 40 Biale 12 48 30 50 00 Biale Grudki 13 A   Bialigrod 06 46 00 47 00 Bialla 18 57 30 41 00 Bialla cerkieir 18 49 00 47 00 Bialla Grodko 12 50 00 45 00 Biallogrodka 18 50 00 44 00 Biallutten 16 53 00 38 00 Bialogrod 11 46 00 47 00     47 00 47 00   18 53 30 43 00 Bialogrodka 18 50 00 47 00 Bialoozapki 12 49 30 50 00 Biolowies H. 12 50 00 51 00 Bialozur 13 D   Bialyicze 20 53 00 47 00 Bialymsie 18 54 00 48 00 Biarneborg 06 62 00 38 00 Biber fl. 16 54 00 37 30 Biberstein 14 50 40 29 00 Biberteich 14 52 10 32 00   15 52 10 32 00 Bibula Rulansek lacus 11 49 00 64 00 Biby 24 59 00 32 40 Bicbrza fl. 18 53 00 40 00 Bichaud 14 50 40 40 00 Bichel 41 54 00 25 10 Bichzni R. 12 46 30 54 00 Biciany 14 51 20 38 00 Bick R. 12 47 30 53 00     47 00 47 00 Bickiewo 15 51 40 34 20 Biczek R. 12 47 30 53 00 Bidgoslia 14 52 40 35 00 Biebena stabin 06 58 00 57 00 Bieczo 18 49 30 39 00 Biefuskow Herrit 32 55 20 27 00 Bielan 14 51 40 39 00 Biela Ozera 20 59 00 56 00 Bicla soroka 11 51 00 46 00   18 51 00 48 00 Bielawa 15 52 30 33 20 Bielbo 20 57 00 30 00   22 58 00 31 00 Biele Jezioro 12 47 00 51 00   13 O   Bielepolde 12 49 30 47 00 Bielha 06 55 00 52 00   20 55 00 52 00 Bielica 06 53 00 43 00   18 53 30 43 00     54 30 48 00 Rielilowka 18 50 00 45 00 Biellekamin 12 49 30 43 00 Bielleruy 31 55 40 28 30 Biellogrod 12 46 00 48 00     50 00 54 00   13 T   Bielow 12 50 30 44 00   18 50 30 44 00 Bielopole 18 50 00 46 00 Bielshovet 40 54 10 23 30   41 54 10 23 30 Bielsks 14 49 20 35 00 Bielski H. 12 49 00 52 00 Bielsko 14 52 40 41 00   18 52 30 41 00 Bielunerwick 26 68 00 350 00 Bienemuhle 15 51 30 33 20 Bierby 32 55 20 26 20     55 40 26 20   36 57 20 24 20 Bierchels 36 57 00 24 10 Biere 37 55 55 24 50 Biereby 31 56 05 28 40 Bieret 31 5610 28 20 Biergens 36 56 30 24 00   37 56 30 24 00 Biergraff 36 56 25 24 30   37 56 25 24 30 Bierholm 39 55 10 24 40 Biering 36 56 20 24 10   37 56 20 24 10 Bierkerod 31 56 05 27 30 Bierlo 31 55 55 29 30 Biernalt 31 56 15 29 00 Bierndrupmoll 39 55 20 24 20 Bierneberg 20 62 00 38 00 Biernede 32 55 20 26 40 Biernekulli 31 56 00 28 10 Bierning 37 55 15 24 00 Bierno 19 60 00 40 00   20 60 00 41 00   21 60 00 41 00 Bierre 30 55 20 26 00   32 55 10 26 20     55 30 26 00 Bierre Herrit 31 56 10 28 10   37 55 45 24 20 Bierrig 37 55 45 24 20 Bierse 31 55 25 29 10     55 35 28 20 Bierscholm 31 55 25 29 10 Biersted 32 55 40 26 00   36 57 00 24 10 Bierstruy 31 55 35 28 40 Bierum 14 49 40 36 00 Biesental 14 52 20 30 00 Biesverskow 32 55 20 27 00 Biez R. 12 50 00 52 00 Bihrenshagen 17 54 05 37 10 Bikow 12 49 00 22 00 Bilawa 15 51 30 33 00 Bildschow 38 54 40 24 30 Bilchowisoe Y. H. 12 47 00 50 00   13 Q   Bilenburger Marsch 42 53 50 24 10   44 53 45 24 10 Bilenberg 41 53 45 24 00   42 53 45 24 10   44 53 45 24 00 Bilikowce 12 49 00 51 00 Bilikowka 12 49 00 47 00 Bilink 15 52 00 34 20 Billaskog 31 55 50 28 10 Bille 41 53 30 24 50   44 53 30 24 50 Bile fl. 30 53 20 24 40   41 53 30 24 50     53 35 25 00   44 53 30 24 50     53 35 25 00 Billeberg 30 55 40 28 40   31 55 50 28 10 Billenbroeck 44 53 40 25 10 Billenhusen 44 53 30 24 40 Billewarder 44 53 30 24 40 Billinge 31 55 50 28 50 Billingen 22 58 00 29 00 Billum 37 55 30 22 50   39 55 30 23 20 Bilocee R. 12 47 30 46 00 Biloszowka 12 49 00 50 00 Bilred 37 56 15 24 30 Bilsbeck 44 53 45 24 20 Bilsen 43 54 20 25 10 Bimack 06 44 00 72 00 Bimoer 44 53 40 25 00 Bindcrup 36 56 40 24 10   39 55 25 24 30 Binebeck 40 54 35 25 00 Binerar 26 66 00 350 00 Binern 16 54 00 38 00 Bingholm 30 55 40 24 20 Bingnottr 26 65 30 355 00 Binhoff 17 53 50 36 20 Binicsski 18 54 00 43 00 Binkael fl. 11 50 00 56 00 Binnensted 31 55 30 29 20 Binslef 36 57 25 24 40 Biola Osera 06 59 00 56 00   07 58 00 56 00   08 58 00 56 00 Biolderup 38 54 55 24 10   39 54 55 24 10   40 55 00 24 10 Biolegrudki 12 10 00 48 00 Bion 29 58 20 21 31 Biordalsvand 28 60 30 24 00   29 60 00 24 00 Biore 28 60 00 21 30   31 55 50 29 10 Bioreelf 29 60 00 22 00 Bierkefiard 24 59 10 3 Biorken 24 59 10 3     60 3 Biorkesta 24 59 30 3 Biorko 20 60 00 4   21 60 00 4   23 59 10 3 Biorkofierd 23 59 10 3 Biorkon 20 63 00 3   21 63 30 3 Biorkoog 24 59 20 3 Biorneborgh 21 61 30 3 Biornholm olim Wit∣scild   01     36 56 20 2     56 50 2   37 56 20 2 Biorning 38 55 15 2   39 55 15 2 Biornoo 22 56 30 3 Biornstrandvig 29 59 40 2 Biornstruy 31 55 45 2 Biortunda 22 59 00 3   23 58 50 3 Bircholm 30 55 40 2   32 55 00 2   38 55 00 2   40 55 00 2 Birck 38 54 45 2   40 54 45 2 Bircke 34 55 25 2 Bircken 16 54 00 3 Bircken S. 16 54 00 4 Birckene 29 60 40 1 Birckenfelt 16 54 20 3 Birckcruy 31 55 55 2 Birckholm 32 55 40 2   34 55 05 2 Birckimsbrok 29 58 20 2 Bircklef 39 55 10 2 Birg 30 56 00 2   35 56 00 2 Birgelaw 16 53 00 3 Birkaria 20 62 00 4   21 60 30 3 Birke 31 55 35 2 Birkeberga 30 56 00 2   31 56 10 2 Birked 30 54 40 2   33 54 50 2 Birkefall 31 56 10 2 Birkelt 31 56 15 2 Birkenes 29 58 00 2 Birkerod 32 55 50 2 Birko Zawka 12 49 00 4   13 D   Birnbaum Pol. Mied∣zichod 14 52 20 3   15 52 30 3 Birrum 39 55 15 2 Birsa 19 56 30 4 Birssa 06 56 00 4 Birze 18 55 30 4 Bisberg 23 60 10 3 Bisborg 18 53 30 39 Bischburg 16 53 40 38   20 53 00 39 Bischdorf 16 53 20 37 Bischmarck 16 54 00 3   20 53 00 3 Bischoff 42 53 55 2 Bischofswerder 16 53 20 37 Bischstein 16 54 00 38 Bischwalde 16 53 20 37 Biscop 20 60 00 22 Biscops Boye 29 57 40 21 Biscopvaire 25 60 00 22   28 60 30 22   29 60 20 22 Bishorstersant 44 53 40 24 Biskea 20 65 00 35 Biskopberg 17 54 20 36 Bislef 36 56 45 24 Bispenso 33 54 45 26 Biss fl. 14 54 40 41   16 54 20 40 Bissa 20 56 00 42 Bissen S. 16 53 40 38 Bisserkeim 16 54 20 40 Bisseruphaffn 30 55 00 26   32 55 10 26 Bistein 18 54 00 39 Bisterfelt 16 54 00 36 Bistris R. 12 48 30 43     49 00 43 Bistrokourka 06 64 00 62   07 64 00 62   09 Q   Bistupice 14 50 40 40 Bitschen 16 53 20 37 Bitterschlos 44 53 30 25 P. Bittgoscz or G. Brombergk 15 53 10 34 Bittk 26 67 00 352 Bittkfiord 26 67 30 353 Bium 30 56 00 28 Biusaas 24 60 40 32 Biusas 20 60 00 32 Bivu 31 55 55 28 Blaaberg 20 55 00 22   30 55 00 23     55 40 22
35 55 00 23 40     55 40 22 40 23 59 30 33 00 01 72 00 70 00 P. 01 78 00 32 30     75 20 76 00 ifa 22 57 30 32 00 erke 42 54 00 25 00 eness 41 53 35 24 30   44 53 35 24 30 kenmoer 42 54 15 23 50 bose 16 53 20 36 30 rck 40 55 05 24 30 14 52 00 30 00 senie 09 I.   32 55 50 27 20 eck 39 54 55 24 40 hoek 06 65 00 60 00   07 65 00 60 00   20 65 00 60 00 sandr 39 55 05 23 20   40 55 05 23 20 38 54 10 23 30   40 54 10 23 30   41 54 10 23 10 endorp 41 54 15 25 20 wisch Beck 16 54 40 38 30 ew Blesen 15 52 20 32 40 nose 31 55 55 28 30 37 56 00 24 30 30 56 00 29 20 06 56 00 29 00   20 56 00 29 00   22 56 00 30 00   31 55 55 29 40 16 54 40 39 00 36 56 50 24 40 30 55 20 28 40   31 55 30 28 50 14 52 20 32 00 dorp 43 53 30 23 00 dorp 17 54 10 36 40 38 54 20 25 10 40 54 20 25 10   41 54 20 24 50   42 54 20 24 50 Oluya 20 70 00 54 00 22 55 30 28 00 die met la∣ water boven 27 64 20 27 00 36 56 40 23 00 15 52 50 33 20 37 56 05 24 00 ishagn 42 54 15 24 50 20 61 00 19 00   25 60 00 19 00   28 60 30 19 30 endal 41 53 45 25 00   42 54 10 24 50   44 53 45 25 00 hagn 42 54 15 25 00 enort 17 54 10 36 50 14 52 00 37 00 18 54 00 42 00 28 59 30 20 00 37 56 15 24 50 berg 15 51 50 32 40 enaw 16 53 40 37 00 enstein 16 54 00 36 30   17 54 00 36 40 cke 43 54 00 25 00   44 54 00 25 00 36 57 35 25 10 16 54 00 37 30 36 57 00 22 50 dorp 43 54 05 25 50   44 53 45 25 20 32 56 00 27 00 15 52 00 34 00 20 56 00 26 00 31 56 15 29 00 31 56 10 28 40 20 57 00 28 00   22 57 00 28 00 31 56 05 29 30 18 49 30 44 00 uwka 12 49 00 49 00 aynce 12 48 00 46 00 zuwka 12 48 30 51 00 Rousey 09 R   nowka 12 48 30 47 00 her fl. 14 51 00 32 00   15 51 30 32 20 erava 16 53 20 37 00 berg 41 53 30 24 50   42 54 05 24 00   44 53 30 24 50 bersberg 15 51 40 32 20 06 64 00 61 00   07 64 00 61 00 orossca 07 60 00 65 00 boroska 06 60 00 66 00   12 48 30 50 00 borossca 09 H   bosna fl. 18 52 30 47 00 18 54 00 47 00 br fl. 18 54 00 47 00 brik 12 49 30 51 00 brick R. 12 49 30 51 00 Bobrka 18 49 30 42 00 Bobrowika 12 50 00 50 00 Bobrowlci 15 52 00 33 20 Bobrowniki 18 51 00 40 00 Bobrvia fl. 18 53 00 46 00 Bobruisk 18 53 00 46 00 Bobrwncniky 12 49 00 43 00 Bobrycz. fl. 13 B   Bochar 06 49 00 87 00 Bocloster 22 55 30 29 00 Bochhorst 44 53 50 24 20 Bochma Salis fodinae 18 50 00 38 00 Bochnia 14 49 40 37 00 Bochotnice 14 51 00 39 00 Bochowa 18 49 30 38 00 Bock 16 54 40 38 30 Bockeholm 41 54 15 24 30   42 54 15 24 30 Bockeholt 40 55 00 24 30 Bockel 41 54 05 24 30     54 10 24 30   44 53 55 24 30 Bockelse 44 53 50 24 20 Bockelsesse 41 53 50 24 30 Bockelvehmen 42 54 05 24 10 Bocken 42 54 05 24 40 Bockeniss 38 54 30 25 10   40 54 35 25 10 Bockenschluis 44 53 25 25 20 Bockhagn 38 54 40 25 10   40 54 40 25 10 Bockholtz 39 55 00 24 30   42 54 00 24 00 Bockholt 41 54 05 25 20   43 54 05 25 20 Bockhorst 42 54 05 24 20     54 10 24 10 Bockie T. 20 67 00 32 00 Bocklenborg 41 54 00 24 00   42 54 00 24 00 Bocklunt 38 54 25 24 40   40 54 25 24 40 Bocksee 43 54 15 24 50 Bocksehe 42 54 15 25 00 Bocrevels 20 54 00 57 00 Boczowoe 12 49 00 43 00 Boda 20 57 00 33 00   22 57 00 33 00 Bodand 22 58 30 28 00 Bodena R. 12 47 00 47 00 Boderne 20 58 00 30 00   22 58 00 31 00 Boderuy 31 55 25 28 20 Bodinghausen 42 54 10 23 50     54 15 23 50 Bodow 14 54 00 34 00 Bodup fl. 16 54 40 40 30 Bodup S. 16 54 40 39 30 Bodum 36 56 40 22 50   39 55 00 24 20 Bodwyck 25 64 00 26 00   27 64 20 26 00 Bodzetyn 14 50 40 38 00 Boe 20 58 00 20 00   25 63 00 21 00   27 63 00 22 00   28 61 30 19 00   29 58 20 20 30   31 56 10 29 30 Boekel 42 54 10 24 40 Boeckelhoep 42 54 10 24 10 Boakenbrugge 41 53 25 25 30 Boeckhorst 42 54 05 25 00 Boeckhorsthoff 41 53 45 24 30 Boedum 40 55 05 24 30 Boegoenar 06 52 00 71 00   08 52 00 70 00 Boegoenar fl. 06 52 00 70 00   08 52 00 70 00 Boekenberger Moer 42 54 00 24 30 Boel 38 54 35 24 50   39 54 55 23 50   40 54 40 24 50 Boemstede 38 54 35 24 10   40 54 35 24 10 Boeravet 08 54 00 57 00 Boezei 18 52 00 41 00 Boelesio 31 55 45 28 40 Bog R. 06 48 00 47 00   11 48 00 46 00     48 00 47 00   12 47 00 49 00   13 R     18 49 30 46 00 Bogaloy Satoon 06 53 00 66 00   08 53 00 67 00 Bogenasgaard 32 55 40 26 40 Boge Sager 31 55 30 28 50 Bogeschon 39 55 15 24 30 Bogesund 20 57 00 29 00   22 57 30 29 00 Boglowy 06 53 00 69 00   08 53 00 69 00 Boglowy Montes 06 53 00 73 00 Bogo 32 55 00 27 00   33 54 55 27 00 Bogoofleenie 09 R   Bogosenie 20 64 00 62 00 Bogsted 36 57 20 24 30 Boguadmoll 37 55 35 23 40 Boguslaw 12 49 00 49 00 Boguss 15 51 40 33 40 Bohako 12 49 00 51 00 Bohmgart 17 53 55 36 50 Bohnssewiec 18 53 30 46 00 Bohowska 13 E   Bohrup 39 54 55 24 40 Bohusco 13 E   Bohuslaw 11 50 00 46 00   18 49 30 47 00 Bojaarka 09 R   Bojanowa 15 51 30 33 40 Bojanowo 15 51 50 33 40 Bojarki 12 48 30 48 00 Boienhusen 42 54 10 24 50 Bojenic 15 51 40 34 00 Boire Els 25 60 00 21 00 Boirneskar 19 59 00 36 00   23 59 00 36 00 Boix 14 52 00 32 00   15 52 10 32 00 Bokasko 12 48 30 50 00 Bokelhoep 38 54 10 24 30   40 54 10 24 30 Bokelhop 41 54 10 24 20 Boko 34 55 15 24 40 Bokowiec 15 52 40 33 40 Boktost 30 55 40 28 00   31 55 50 28 20 Bolanowka R. 12 48 00 46 00 Bolarisioo 22 58 30 26 00   25 58 30 26 00 Bolderop 34 55 25 25 20 Bolderschleben 38 54 55 24 20   40 54 55 24 20 Bolenborg 30 53 40 26 20   41 53 55 26 00 Bolenburch 20 54 00 26 00 Boleskoghen 21 61 30 33 00 Boleslaw 14 51 00 35 00 Boleslaw 14 51 00 35 00 Bolesta 30 56 00 28 00   31 56 00 28 20 Bolewitz 14 52 00 33 00 Bolgoff 06 53 00 56 00   08 53 00 56 00 Boliczane 12 47 30 44 00 Bolildmarck 39 55 10 23 30   40 55 10 23 30 Bollafiord 26 67 30 360 00 Bollart 39 55 10 23 20 Bolle 36 56 35 24 40   37 56 35 24 40 Bolleberg 22 56 00 28 00 Bollensiel 41 53 35 22 50 Boller 36 57 00 24 40     57 15 24 20   37 55 50 24 30 Bolleruy 31 55 30 29 30 Bolling 37 56 00 23 00 Bolling herritzing 37 56 00 23 00 Bollingstede 38 54 35 24 30   40 54 35 24 30   41 54 35 24 10 Bolloclea fl. 10 E   Bollwerck 17 54 10 37 00 Bollyn 38 54 15 25 20 Bolmen 22 56 30 29 00 Bolnowky 13 D   Bolow 43 54 05 25 00 Bolotrum 20 59 00 51 00 Bolshitt 20 59 00 30 00   22 59 30 30 00 Bolsoi Barande 06 68 00 78 00   07 68 00 78 00 Bolsoidwoor 06 61 00 67 00   07 61 00 67 00 Boltsack 30 55 40 25 20   35 55 40 25 20 Bolstad 22 56 00 28 00 Bolswart 20 53 00 20 00 Boltoste 31 55 35 28 20 Bolvanscaiagoeba 06 68 00 77 00 Bolengerwick 26 67 00 349 00 Bolwyck 20 58 00 23 00   25 58 30 23 00 Bombst 14 52 00 32 00 Bomeso 15 52 10 34 20 Bommelhooft 28 59 30 19 30 Bommeltieff 40 54 50 23 40 Bommerhok 37 56 05 24 20 C. Bona fortuna 06 66 00 63 00   07 66 00 63 00   20 65 00 62 00 Bondeholm portus 33 54 50 26 40 Bonden 21 63 30 36 00 Bonder 31 56 00 28 10 Bonebuttel 41 54 00 24 50   42 54 00 24 50 Bonensak 16 54 20 36 30   17 54 20 36 30 Boningstede 44 53 40 24 40     53 40 25 00 Bonit 30 54 40 27 00   32 54 50 27 00   33 54 55 27 10 Bonkeflod 31 55 30 28 10 Bonrum 31 55 35 29 30 Bontenbarg 43 54 00 25 40 Bontory 12 48 30 47 00 Bonus 30 54 40 24 20 Bonus Portus 06 48 00 52 00   08 48 00 52 00
  11 48 00 52 00 Boolen 31 55 45 28 50 Boosee 41 54 15 25 00 Booseruy 31 55 55 28 10 Booslund 32 55 20 26 20 Boost 31 55 45 29 00 Bootekyrckyt 20 59 00 34 00   22 59 00 34 00   23 59 00 34 00   24 59 00 34 40 Boplum 30 54 40 23 40 Boraanka 09 A   Boraven fl. 16 53 20 40 00 Boraven S. 16 53 20 40 00 Borbe 30 54 20 24 40 Borbuy 38 54 30 25 00   40 54 30 25 00 Borby 42 54 30 24 40 Borch 30 54 20 26 00 Borck 12 49 00 52 00 Borcke 30 53 40 24 40 Borckholm 22 56 30 33 00 Ambt. al. Praefect. Bor∣disholm 40 54 05 25 00   41 54 10 24 40   42 54 10 24 50 Bordarid 22 57 30 28 00 Bordersbuy 38 54 30 24 50 Bordetboem 42 54 00 24 00 Bordlum 40 54 40 24 00 Bordrup 40 54 50 24 10 Bore 20 58 00 20 00   25 58 30 20 00 Borek 29 58 20 20 30 Borek 29 58 20 20 30 Borek 15 51 40 34 20 Boren 38 54 35 25 00   40 54 35 25 00   41 54 35 24 40 Boreste 31 55 45 29 20 Boreveilefior 32 55 40 26 40 Borg 20 54 00 26 00   38 54 50 23 20     55 00 23 50   39 54 50 23 20     55 00 23 50   40 54 40 23 30   41 54 30 26 00   43 54 25 26 00 Borgerfiord 26 65 30 353 00 Borgholt 42 54 15 23 50 Borghorst 41 53 35 25 10   44 53 35 25 10 Borgo 06 60 00 43 00   19 60 00 43 00   20 60 00 43 00   21 60 00 43 00 Brogstede 40 54 20 24 50 Borgun 20 60 00 22 00   25 60 30 22 00   28 60 30 22 30   29 60 40 22 30 Borgwede 38 54 30 24 40   41 54 30 24 30 Borgworden 40 54 20 24 20   42 54 20 24 00 Boriowo 06 55 00 53 00   08 55 00 52 00   20 56 00 53 00 Boringkloster 31 55 30 28 40 Borisow 06 53 00 46 00 Borissagoroda 06 50 00 60 00   08 50 00 60 00 Borke 16 53 20 40 00 Borkhol 20 57 00 33 00 Borko 14 51 40 33 00 Borkow 12 48 30 45 00 Borkowo 15 51 50 34 00 Borku 06 63 00 64 00   07 62 00 64 00   09 N   Borkum 20 53 00 21 00 Borlum 30 54 40 23 40     57 00 23 40   35 57 00 24 00   36 57 10 24 00   38 54 35 24 00   41 54 40 23 40 Borlum Herrit 36 57 10 24 00 Born 16 54 00 37 30 Borna 22 57 30 29 00 Bornholm 06 55 00 30 00     56 00 33 00   20 55 00 30 00   22 55 00 30 00   30 55 00 29 40 Bornholt 30 54 00 24 00   31 56 10 29 00   41 54 05 24 00 Bornhovet 41 54 00 25 00   42 54 05 25 00   43 54 05 25 00 Bornsholt 31 56 10 29 00 Borodiczyn 12 48 30 43 00 Borosda 06 57 00 54 00   20 56 00 54 00 Borosnoy Ostroof 09 N   Borowecz 14 51 40 40 00 Borowicza 13 F   Borowika 12 48 30 50 00 Borre 30 55 00 27 20   32 55 00 27 20 Borreby 32 55 10 26 20 Borrlund 31 55 40 28 40 Borsciowka 12 50 00 48 00   13 A   Borse 32 55 10 27 00 Borse Herrit 32 55 10 27 00 Borse Kufoe 12 48 30 45 00 Borsholm 39 55 00 23 50 Borsowa M. 06 52 00 65 00   08 52 00 65 00 Borsozowka 12 54 00 47 00 Borst fl. 31 55 40 29 00 Borstel 22 60 00 35 00   23 60 00 35 30   30 53 40 24 40   41 53 35 24 40     53 45 24 50   44 53 35 24 40     53 45 24 30     53 45 24 50 Bortdorp 42 54 10 24 40 Bortzow 41 53 45 26 00 Boruby 30 55 40 28 00   31 55 40 28 10 Boruczin 15 52 40 33 40 Borum 37 56 05 24 30 Borum Aa 37 56 05 24 20 Borumle 12 48 30 50 00 Borup 32 55 30 27 00 Boruy 15 52 00 33 00 Borwald 17 54 15 36 30 Borysow 18 54 00 46 00   20 53 00 46 00 Borsthenes fl. nunc Nieper 11 49 00 48 00   12 48 00 51 00   12 51 30 49 00   18 52 00 48 00     50 00 48 00     53 00 48 00   20 54 00 49 00 Borzna 12 50 30 51 00 Borna R. 12 50 30 51 00 Bosagaz lacus 11 50 00 62 00 Bosaw 43 54 05 25 10   44 53 50 25 20 Bosbo 22 56 30 28 00 Bosch 20 53 00 21 00 Boscrop 22 55 30 28 00 Bosenhorst 44 53 30 25 00 Bosenwardt 42 54 05 23 50 Boseruy 30 56 00 28 00   31 56 00 28 10     56 00 28 40 Bosfeld 43 54 10 25 00 Bosferd 43 54 10 25 00 Boskow 15 51 40 33 40 Bosowka 12 48 30 47 00 Bossaw 41 53 45 25 20 Bosse 38 54 15 25 00   40 54 15 25 00   41 54 15 24 40   42 54 15 24 40 Bosserup 31 55 25 28 50 Bossflet 41 53 50 24 00   42 53 50 24 10   44 53 50 24 00 Bosstede 41 53 55 24 50   42 54 00 24 50   44 54 00 24 50 Bostad 30 56 20 28 00   31 56 15 28 00 Bostbro 36 56 20 24 30   37 56 20 24 30 Bostorp 44 53 35 25 10 Bostrup 32 55 00 26 00   34 55 05 25 50 Boszepel 16 54 00 36 00 Bote fl. 06 65 00 61 00 Botern 42 54 00 25 00   43 54 00 25 00   44 54 00 25 00 Boternhofn 41 54 05 24 30   42 54 05 24 30 Botgersdorf 16 54 20 39 00 Bothkamp 41 54 10 24 50   42 54 10 24 50 Bothnia 06 64 00 33 00   20 64 00 34 &c   21 63 &c 33 &c Botzow 14 52 20 29 00 Botten 20 70 00 40 00 Botterbeck 42 53 55 24 50   44 53 55 24 50 Bottergat 40 54 35 23 50 Bottersant 39 55 25 23 20 Bottnaridt 20 57 00 29 00   22 57 00 29 00 Bottnes 20 61 00 33 00 Bovenah 38 54 15 24 50   41 54 20 24 40   42 54 20 24 40 Bovenkerck 40 54 40 25 00 Bovenshofiuit 32 55 20 25 20 Bovestede 40 54 50 24 10 C. Bovet 01 62 30 341 00 Bouczowa 12 49 30 48 00 Bouczucze 12 49 00 43 00 Boveitio S. 16 53 40 39 30 Bouhorofscoy 09 R   Bouling 36 56 25 22 30   37 56 25 2 Boulouczane 12 47 30 4 Bourlundt 38 55 05 2 Borum 30 55 20 2 Bousing 36 56 25 2 Bouta 14 54 00 3   16 54 00 3 Bouzin 13 G   Bowberg 36 56 25 2   37 56 25 2 Bowed 36 57 05 2 Bowens 30 55 20 2   34 55 25 2     55 30 2   35 54 40 2     55 20 2   37 55 35 2 Bowensberg 30 56 20 2   35 56 20 2 Bowenshoffuit 34 55 25 2 Bowtky 12 49 30 4 Boxtehude 20 53 00 2   30 53 20 2 Boyen 40 54 30 2 Boyendorp 44 53 30 2 Boyer 44 53 35 2 Boysagola 18 55 00 4   19 55 30 4 Bozek fl. 18 49 30 4 Bozendorp 20 52 00 2 Bozguka 12 48 30 4 Bozpalcez 12 49 00 5 Braaby 32 55 20 27 Braadschow 36 56 55 2 Braarup 33 54 50 2 Braba 34 55 00 2 Braball 40 55 00 2 Brabeck 38 55 20 24 Braborg 22 58 00 3 Brabowice 12 48 30 49   13 D   Braby 37 56 05 24 Bracalabow 18 53 30 48 Brachenfelde 42 54 00 24 Brack 41 54 05 25 Bracke 31 56 05 27 Braekpant I. 06 77 00 44 Brackerlandt 44 54 00 24 Bradaw 06 48 00 46   18 49 00 46 Braderup 39 55 15 24 Bradrup 38 54 50 24   40 54 50 24 Bradschou 20 56 00 24   30 56 40 24   35 56 40 24 Brack 41 53 55 24   43 54 05 25   44 53 35 25     54 00 24 Braedkier 36 57 05 24 Braem fl. 44 53 05 24 Braemaw 44 53 55 24 Braembeck 42 54 05 25 Braemfelde 44 53 35 24 Braemkamp 42 54 15 24 Braemstede 40 54 50 24   41 53 55 24   42 53 55 24   44 53 55 24 Brageruy 31 55 35 28 Brahin 18 51 30 48 Brahin fl. 18 51 00 48 Braiki 12 48 30 45 Brailow 12 49 00 46 Brakenes 20 59 00 24   22 59 00 24   25 59 00 24 Brakilow 12 46 00 46 Bralan 22 58 00 27 Brambeck 39 55 15 24 Bramberg 06 53 00 35 Bramderup 39 55 15 24 Bramdrup 38 55 20 24   39 55 20 24 Braming 37 55 25 23 Brammer 41 54 10 24   42 54 10 24 Bramstede 39 55 15 24 Brandabolstader 26 65 00 357 Brandaw 16 53 40 36 Brande 42 53 50 24   44 53 50 24 Brandenburg 06 53 00 28   14 53 20 29     54 40 38   16 54 20 38   20 53 00 29 Brandenburgensis pars 14 53 00 29   15 52 50 31 Brandenburger Marck 20 52 00 29 Branderup 34 55 25 24   39 55 30 24 Brandlundt 39 55 00 24 Brando 34 55 10 26 Brandorp 35 55 20 24 Brandshoff 17 54 20 36 Brandslyk 33 54 45 26 Brandsoe 37 55 20 24
  39 55 20 24 50 lsted 31 55 40 29 10 strup 36 56 20 24 00   37 55 30 23 50     56 20 24 00 39 55 20 24 20 gaw 16 54 00 36 30     54 20 35 30 ge 14 54 20 35 00 glorp 34 55 20 25 20 berg 31 55 55 28 30 18 52 30 41 00 o 06 53 00 52 00   08 53 00 51 00   11 55 00 49 00   22 59 30 28 00 kog 20 59 00 28 00   22 59 30 28 00 ss 33 54 45 26 20 berg 37 55 40 23 50 35 55 00 24 00 aw 12 48 30 46 00 09 E   kw 06 55 00 44 00   18 55 30 44 00   19 55 30 44 00   20 55 00 44 00 ak 09 I   olm 28 60 00 20 00 36 57 20 24 50 eer 27 64 20 24 00 by 32 55 20 26 40 14 50 20 33 00 berg 14 54 20 37 00   16 54 20 37 40 swalde 16 54 00 36 30 swaldt 16 53 40 38 00 fl. 18 54 30 42 00 24 59 30 33 20 dendorp 40 54 25 24 40 hagn 43 54 10 25 40 lum 38 54 35 24 10   40 54 35 24 10   41 54 40 23 50 f. 39 55 00 23 50 37 55 40 24 00 o 38 55 00 23 50   39 55 00 23 50 moes 39 55 30 23 10 beck 41 54 05 24 50     54 20 24 40   42 54 05 24 50     54 20 24 40   43 54 05 25 10     54 15 25 10 berg 20 53 00 24 00   30 54 00 24 20   41 53 55 24 20   42 53 55 24 10   44 53 55 24 10 rugge 41 54 15 23 30 wath 39 54 55 24 10 e 43 54 10 25 20 de 38 54 35 24 00   40 54 40 25 00   41 54 40 23 40 rup 37 55 30 24 10   39 55 35 24 40 g 36 56 40 23 20 enick 09 C   dt 20 62 00 18 00   25 62 30 19 00 yck 22 58 00 26 00 25 58 00 23 00 g 30 55 00 25 20   32 55 10 25 40   33 54 45 26 50   34 55 00 25 20     55 10 25 30 is 38 55 05 24 40 wick 26 66 00 348 00 26 65 00 360 00 ge 32 55 40 26 00 bergs Schantz 17 54 00 36 40 enberg 42 53 55 24 20   44 53 55 24 20 ugge 40 54 15 23 50 holm 42 54 15 24 00 erdorp 38 54 25 24 40 39 55 20 24 00 by 34 55 20 25 00 men 06 53 00 23 00   20 53 00 24 00   30 53 40 23 00 mensis Duca∣ 41 53 45 23 00   44 53 35 24 02 erfrold 33 54 40 26 40 21 62 00 34 00 olac 07 63 00 62 00 volock 07 64 00 62 00   09 Q   vosoc 06 63 00 62 00 enborg 41 53 55 24 10 enirz fl. 14 49 40 35 00 sch 08 52 00 53 00 zo 18 55 00 58 00 ing 37 55 35 24 10   38 54 55 25 20   40 54 55 25 20 ggard 37 56 05 23 00 Brenno 15 51 40 33 20 Breno 22 58 30 29 00 Brenstrup 39 55 20 24 00 Brentved 32 55 20 27 00 Bresse Field 20 59 00 21 00 Bresik 15 51 50 31 40 Breslaw 14 50 40 33 00 Bresmi 14 51 20 37 00 Bressia al. Briesti 06 51 00 41 00   12 52 00 42 00   14 52 00 42 00 Bressici 18 51 30 41 00 Bressuefield 29 59 00 21 30 Bresten 37 55 40 23 50 Brestenbro 37 55 55 24 10 Brestetowce 12 49 00 51 00 Bretschem 14 53 00 37 00   16 53 20 37 00 Brette 20 58 00 27 00   22 58 00 27 00   25 58 00 27 00 Bretzlar 16 54 00 36 30 Bretznicza 14 51 00 35 00 Brevavolock 06 64 00 62 00 Brewary 12 50 00 49 00   13 A   Breyholt 41 54 10 24 20   42 54 10 24 20 Brieg 14 50 40 34 00 Briggs Bay 01 59 00 266 00 Brigirta 19 59 00 42 00 Brignit 37 56 15 24 50 Bringstrup 32 55 20 26 40 E. of Bristols I. 01 53 10 283 00 Britomstolb 06 69 00 89 00   07 69 00 89 00 Bro 20 59 00 28 00   22 59 00 28 00   29 58 40 20 30 Bro fl. 14 53 00 35 00 Broacker 35 54 40 24 20   38 54 50 24 50   40 54 55 24 50 Broby 30 56 00 29 00   31 56 05 29 30 Brochni 14 49 20 39 00 Brockdorp 41 53 55 24 00   42 53 55 24 00 Brockedal 25 58 30 22 00 Brocksbul 39 55 10 24 30 Brodaw 43 54 05 25 40 Brodaruy 31 55 30 28 20 Deutsch Broden 17 53 50 65 10 Polniseh Broden 17 53 50 36 10 Broder 37 56 00 24 50 Brodersbuy 41 54 35 24 30 Brodersby 40 54 35 24 50     54 40 25 10 Broderup 39 54 50 24 10 Brodi 12 50 00 43 00   15 52 10 33 20 Brodin I. 10 A   Brodland 36 57 00 24 30 Brodniw 15 51 50 34 00 Brodosovitsa 09 C   Brods 14 52 00 32 00 Brodta 41 53 55 25 40 Brodtom 43 53 55 25 40 Brodug 31 56 15 28 30 Brody 12 50 00 43 00   18 50 00 43 00 Brodziec 15 52 00 32 40   20 53 00 46 00   18 53 30 46 00 Broeck 42 54 15 24 40 Broeknappen 28 60 30 20 00 Broeckstede 44 53 55 24 30 Brofiord 29 58 40 20 30 Broholm 32 55 10 25 40   34 55 10 25 30   38 55 10 25 50 Brohor 12 50 00 43 00 Brok 18 52 00 40 00 Brolucke 34 55 30 25 20 Bromberg 14 53 00 35 00 Bromby 30 56 00 27 40   31 56 05 27 40 Brommen 22 60 00 24 30   28 60 00 24 30   29 60 00 24 30 Bromollgaard 36 56 55 23 20 Broms 31 55 30 28 50 Bromsebro 22 56 00 31 00 Bromsness 27 63 40 23 00 Brondrup 38 55 05 24 00   40 55 05 24 00 Brondum 38 55 30 23 30   39 55 30 23 30 Bronshoy 32 55 40 27 20 Bronel 06 55 00 59 00 Bronckelstruy 31 56 10 29 30 Bronnesta 31 55 55 29 00 Bronsholm 40 54 40 24 50 Bronss 38 55 10 23 40   39 55 10 23 40 Broo 19 59 30 35 00   21 59 30 35 00   23 59 20 34 30     59 40 36 00   24 59 20 32 20 Brorup 32 54 50 26 40   37 55 30 23 20 Brosche 17 54 10 36 30 Broserop 31 55 40 29 20 Brostorp 31 56 05 28 20 Brostoruy 31 55 50 29 10 Brostrup 39 55 20 24 00 Brostruy 31 55 40 28 40 Brotsack 17 54 05 36 40 Brotte 06 58 00 27 00 Broucke 17 53 55 36 20 Brovis 20 56 00 23 00   30 56 40 23 20 Brousenscoy Goro∣dock 06 60 00 65 00   07 60 00 65 00   09 F   Brousnaia reca 09 F   Browis 35 56 40 23 20 Bruck S. 16 54 00 40 00 Bruckersdorff 16 53 40 37 30 Bruczkowo 15 51 40 34 20 Brudnick fl. 14 50 00 34 00 P. Brudzewk G. Brau∣sendorff 15 52 00 32 40 Brudzewo 15 52 10 34 20 Brufka 12 48 00 46 00 Brugge 41 54 10 24 50   42 54 10 24 50 Brulle 34 55 20 25 00 Brummen 30 55 20 26 20 Brunan 17 54 15 36 40 Brunbeck 24 60 00 32 40 Brunde 38 55 00 24 20   39 55 00 24 20 Brunderup 39 55 05 24 00 Brundlundt 39 55 10 24 00 Bruniha 41 54 10 24 30   42 54 10 24 30 Bruness 26 65 30 350 00 Brunsbutel 20 54 00 25 00   30 54 00 23 40   41 53 55 23 40   42 53 55 23 50 Brunsdorp 41 53 30 25 10   44 53 30 25 10 Brunsud 21 63 00 35 00 Brunswald 17 54 00 36 30 Bruseneetz 06 60 00 65 00   09 F   Bruseneez volost 07 60 00 65 00 Brusgaard 36 56 20 24 40   37 56 20 24 40 Brushan 12 49 00 46 00 Brusilaw 18 50 00 47 00 Brusk Herret 37 55 30 23 40 Brust 17 54 00 36 10 Brusterort 16 54 40 37 30 Bruszy 12 49 30 51 00 Bruta 26 67 00 353 00 Brutafiord 26 67 30 353 00 Brutkowa 16 53 40 40 00 Brutsicha 09 I   Bruxsee 42 54 15 24 40 Bryckel 41 54 00 24 00 Brycken 42 54 00 24 00 Brynd 37 55 50 23 30 Bryndby oster 31 55 35 27 10   32 55 40 27 20 Bryndbywester 32 55 30 27 20 Bryndersleff 36 57 05 24 20 Bryndum 36 56 35 23 20     56 45 24 40   37 55 30 22 50     56 35 23 20 Brynnitz fl. 14 50 40 34 00 Brynnitzca 14 50 40 34 00 Brysdorp 44 53 40 24 30 Bryczini 14 53 00 40 00 Brzeslye 14 52 20 36 00 Brzessowica 18 53 30 42 00 Brzezany 18 49 30 42 00 Brzezini 18 52 30 40 00 Brzosrek 14 49 20 38 00 Brzostek 18 49 30 39 00 Btainka 12 49 00 46 00 Bubbaray 31 56 05 29 20 Bubiloporoh 18 52 00 51 00 Bubnik 12 50 00 51 00 Buchett fl. 16 53 20 37 00 Bucholtz 16 54 00 38 00 Buchsdorff 16 54 20 39 00 Buchslundt 38 54 50 24 10 Buchwald 17 53 55 36 40 Buchwostowa fl. 10 G   Buck fl. 14 52 20 38 00 Buckenf 25 59 00 20 00 Buckenfioerd 06 59 00 19 00 Buckenfiord 20 58 00 19 00   29 59 00 20 30     60 00 20 00 Bukzacz 18 49 00 43 00 Budanow 12 49 00 44 00 Bude 44 53 40 24 40 Buderup 36 56 45 24 30 Buderupholm 36 56 45 24 30 Budilow 12 47 00 52 00   13 L   Budilow fl. 13 M   Budowiesz fl. 18 55 30 47 00   20 55 00 48 00 Budurfiord 26 65 00 351 00
Budup fl. 16 54 40 40 00 Budziak 12 46 00 47 00 Budzieffewo 15 52 20 34 20 Buerkal 38 54 55 24 00   39 54 55 24 00   40 54 55 24 00 Buendrop 43 53 55 25 10 Bufan 06 49 00 76 00 Bug R. 12 49 30 43 00     50 00 42 00     50 30 42 00     52 00 41 00   18 51 00 42 00     51 30 41 00     52 00 39 00     52 00 40 00 Bugcbirg 39 55 20 24 30 Bugel fl. 14 52 00 41 00 Buing 38 54 25 24 30 Buk 15 52 10 33 40 Buki 12 48 30 48 00   18 49 00 47 00 Buko 15 51 50 32 40 Bukowiec 14 52 00 33 00   15 52 00 33 20 Bulberg 36 57 00 23 20 Bulbure 31 56 10 29 20 Bulcke 38 54 25 25 20   40 54 25 25 20   41 54 25 25 00   42 54 25 25 00   43 54 25 25 00 Bulckehovet 43 54 25 25 00 Bulderup 39 54 55 24 00   40 54 55 24 00 Bulene 12 49 00 44 00 Bulgar sepultu∣ra celeberri∣ma 06 56 00 79 00 Bulgara 10 D   Bulgaria 06 43 00 40 00     56 00 80 00   12 45 30 46 00 Bulkoeg 40 54 45 23 50 Bulle fl. 44 53 40 24 20 Bullencoling 44 53 45 24 20 Bullenhoff 44 53 45 24 20 Bulsbull 40 54 50 24 00 Bulston So. 37 56 10 23 40 Bultel 30 54 00 23 40 Bun 12 49 30 42 00 Bundsbull 40 54 40 24 40 Bung 40 54 25 24 50   41 53 55 24 00 Bungenen 25 64 30 25 00   27 64 40 26 00 Bungholm 27 64 40 26 00 Bunikow 15 51 50 33 40 Bunse 41 54 10 24 10 Bunsingen 41 54 05 24 30   42 54 05 24 30 Bunso 42 54 10 24 10 Bunstorp 41 54 20 24 30 Bunstrop 38 54 20 24 50   40 54 20 24 50   42 54 20 24 30 Bunstrup 39 55 25 24 10 Buntge S. 16 53 40 37 30 Buphever 38 54 35 23 50   40 54 35 23 50 Bupse 38 54 35 23 50 Bupte 38 54 35 23 50   40 54 35 23 50 Buraheoh 21 64 00 37 00 Burario 22 57 00 29 00 Burckartsdorff 16 54 00 37 30     54 20 38 30 Burcklubben 21 64 00 37 00 Buree fl. 20 64 00 36 00 Buren 40 54 35 23 10 Burger Phul 17 54 05 37 00 Burges Rossgart (Pra∣tum in quo Civi∣um Equi pascun∣tur) 17 54 05 37 00 Burgerwalt 17 54 20 36 20 Burglubben 20 64 00 38 00 Burggraffhof 17 53 55 36 20 Burhunka R. 12 46 30 50 00   13 Q   Burhurko O. 12 46 30 50 00   13 Q   Burklartsdorff 16 53 20 37 30 Burlow 31 55 35 28 20 Burntnick 19 57 30 42 00 Burolldden 21 64 00 37 00 Burow 41 54 20 25 50 Burren 38 54 35 23 20   41 54 35 23 00 Burse 27 64 20 26 00 Bursea 20 56 00 28 00   22 56 30 28 00 Burso 33 54 45 26 40 Burstin 12 49 00 43 00 Burtnick 06 57 00 42 00   20 57 00 42 00 Burum 22 56 30 25 00   30 56 40 25 20   35 57 00 25 20 Burzewic 15 51 30 33 40 Bussehehaken 20 59 00 45 00 Busemin 14 51 00 35 00 Busk 18 50 00 42 00 Buso 21 59 30 41 00 Busting 27 64 20 25 00 Bustorp 35 56 20 23 20   38 54 30 24 40   40 54 30 24 40   41 54 30 24 20   42 54 05 24 50 Bustrup 36 56 35 23 20 Busza 12 48 00 45 00 Buten 14 52 00 32 00 Buterup 32 55 40 26 20 Butkova 16 54 00 40 30 Butow 14 53 40 34 00   15 53 10 32 20   20 54 00 34 00 Butsloto 30 54 40 23 40 Buttons Bay 01 58 &c 270 &c Buttons Isles 01 60 20 310 00 Butzbull 39 55 00 23 40 Butzfleth 44 53 40 24 00 Butzholm 39 55 00 24 00   43 54 25 25 10 Old Butzholm 39 55 00 24 00 Butzow 43 20 00 25 50 Butzwedel 44 53 50 24 30 Buukirk 36 56 20 22 50   37 56 20 22 50 C. Buxio 11 45 00 62 00 Buxtehude 41 53 25 24 20   44 53 30 24 20 Buyhuys 22 56 30 27 00   30 57 00 27 20 Buymir Las 12 49 30 53 00 Buynes 27 64 20 26 00 Buysen 25 64 00 26 00   38 54 10 24 00   41 54 10 23 40   42 54 10 23 40 Buysen Jugst 20 53 00 21 00 Buzan I. 10 G   Buzin 12 48 30 50 00 By 06 59 00 28 00   22 59 00 28 00   24 60 10 33 00   31 56 15 28 30 Byalogrod 06 47 00 47 00 Byarnum 31 56 05 29 10 Bycez 14 49 20 38 00 Bychell 43 54 05 25 10 Bychow 11 53 00 46 00   18 53 30 48 00 Byerte 38 55 25 24 30   39 55 25 24 30 Bygda 20 64 00 36 00   21 64 00 36 00 Bygelandsk 29 58 20 22 30 Bygholmwiel 36 56 55 23 30 Byglefield 29 58 20 21 30 Bykow 12 50 00 50 00 Byla fl. 14 49 20 36 00 Byllundt 39 55 15 24 10 Bylsen 44 53 45 24 30 Byrksing 23 60 00 34 00 Bysion 24 60 10 31 00 Bysse 42 54 10 24 50 Byskea fl. 21 64 30 36 00 Byssow 11 50 00 46 00   18 50 00 47 00 Bystensee 38 54 20 24 50   40 54 25 24 50   41 54 25 24 30 Bysthorst 41 53 40 24 10   44 53 40 24 10 Bysterschlinck 38 55 20 22 50 Bystrzye 18 54 30 43 00 P. Bytnice, G. Beut∣nic 15 51 50 32 20 P. Bytom, G. Betha∣nia 15 51 30 33 00 Bytost 40 54 40 24 40 Bytte 30 54 40 27 00 Bytte I. 33 54 40 27 10 Bzrezauy 12 49 00 43 00 C.   CAbakin 06 53 00 64 00   08 53 00 64 00 Cabara 01 62 30 342 30 Cabarda 06 49 00 63 00   08 49 00 63 00 Cabardi 11 49 00 57 00 Caburcta fl. 11 46 00 53 00 Cacari 06 46 00 61 00   11 46 00 62 00 Cagia 06 48 00 61 00   08 48 00 60 00     48 00 61 00   11 48 00 60 00     48 00 61 00 Cajaneburgh 06 65 00 45 00   20 65 00 45 00   21 64 30 45 00 Cajania 06 63 00 40 00   21 63 00 40 00     65 00 49 00 Cajansalmi 20 66 00 45 00 Cailallaxi 11 47 00 56 00 Cailaoci 06 47 00 56 00 Calajoki 20 64 00 40   21 64 00 40 Calami 06 66 00 93   07 64 00 93 Calamita 11 46 00 53 Calaw 14 51 40 30   16 53 40 37 Calfsont 30 57 40 27 Calis 06 66 00 39   20 66 00 39   21 65 30 39 Calis Elfe 20 67 00 38   21 66 00 38 Calissiensis Palatina∣tus 15 51 40 34 Calis T. T. 20 68 00 34 Calmar 06 56 00 32   20 56 00 32   22 56 30 32 Calmie R. 12 46 30 54 Calmie Wielky R. 12 46 30 54 Calolimiona 11 47 00 5 Calso 06 57 00 34 Calveschin 16 53 00 3 Camelbgab 40 54 50 2 Cameni 06 66 00 88   07 66 00 8 Camerova 16 53 00 3 Camesuga 09 F   Camieniecz 14 52 20 4 Camiensko 14 51 00 36 Camin 06 53 00 31 Camlees 09 D   Cammin 14 53 40 31   20 53 00 31 Camo 20 71 00 44 Camp 43 54 00 2 Campa 01 61 30 344 Campe 16 53 40 40 Campen 16 54 40 39   20 52 00 21   38 54 20 24     54 55 23   40 54 20 24   42 54 05 23     54 20 24     53 55 24   44 53 50 24 Campenaw 16 54 00 37   17 53 55 36 Campi deserti citra Borystenem ol. Dzike Polie 18 49 30 47   13 I   Campi deserti ultra Borystenem 18 49 00 49   13 M   Campus inter Bo∣hum & Boryste∣nem 18 53 00 51     54 00 51     55 00 51 Camstigal 16 54 20 38 Cancorsi 11 48 00 58 Candalex 20 67 00 53 C. Candenoes 07 68 20 64   20 68 00 64 C. Candinos 01 69 00 59 Canida 06 47 00 55 Canisco 14 51 20 36 C. Cant 01 72 25 70 Cantshoeck 06 72 00 74   07 72 20 75 Capel 38 54 30 23   40 54 30 23 Capella 09 A   Cappeln 20 54 00 25 Capel Sker 21 61 30 38 Caporybe Chodzy B. 12 47 30 48 Cappel 38 54 35 25   40 54 35 25   41 54 40 24 Cappelen 30 54 40 24 Cara R. 01 68 20 79 Carane 06 68 00 64   07 67 00 65   20 67 00 65 Carasof 12 49 30 47 Carastal 06 43 00 86 Carasuk M. 12 46 30 53 Caratseff 06 52 00 54   18 52 00 54 Carby 36 56 40 22 Caroatogni 11 58 00 54 Carcyna 06 48 00 52   08 48 00 52   11 48 00 52 Carelia 06 61 00 45   20 61 00 45   21 61 00 44     64 30 51 Carkow 43 54 20 25 Carleby 20 64 00 39   21 64 00 39 Carlo 21 65 00 40 Carlskog 20 59 00 30   22 59 00 31 Carlso 20 57 00 34   22 57 00 34 Carlstad 06 59 00 29
38 54 50 24 00   40 54 50 24 00 30 54 00 24 20   35 54 40 24 00 06 59 00 19 00   20 59 00 19 00   25 59 00 19 00   29 59 00 20 00 14 51 40 32 00   15 51 30 33 00 20 59 00 29 00   22 59 00 29 00 22 57 00 24 00   30 57 00 24 40   35 57 00 24 40 06 42 00 49 00 12 48 00 48 00 30 55 20 25 20   35 55 20 25 00 14 54 00 35 00 16 54 00 35 30 S. 16 53 40 39 30 Praefectura gk 15 52 00 31 40 36 57 15 24 40   37 56 15 23 40 23 58 30 35 00 15 52 40 32 20 I. 01 51 20 284 30 Swans-nest 01 61 40 280 00 06 58 00 75 00   07 58 00 75 00   10 D.   Perevoosvel ium Caza∣ 06 52 00 70 00   08 51 00 71 00 06 66 00 56 00   07 66 00 56 00   20 66 00 56 00 06 54 00 54 00   08 53 00 54 00 16 53 20 37 30 06 56 00 63 00   08 56 00 63 00 22 55 30 28 00 31 55 50 27 50 31 55 25 29 00 goeba 06 69 00 85 00   07 69 00 85 00 41 54 05 25 30 fl. 18 55 30 49 00 lacus 18 55 30 49 00 11 47 00 53 00 fl. 11 55 00 59 00 06 54 00 59 00   08 54 00 59 00 38 55 00 24 10 43 54 05 25 30 z Pars 16 54 40 35 00 22 55 00 29 00 30 55 00 29 40 zke 16 54 00 56 30 19 60 00 39 00   20 60 00 39 00   21 60 00 39 00 31 55 35 28 10 ki Circassi gulus 06 43 00 69 00 en 16 54 40 38 30 kercke 38 54 25 25 10   40 54 25 25 10   41 54 30 24 50 ekrog 17 54 15 36 30 38 54 20 24 00   40 54 20 24 00   41 54 20 23 40   42 53 55 24 00 erde 38 54 20 24 00 w 16 54 20 40 30 cusa 06 47 00 86 00 aria 18 52 00 39 00 16 53 20 37 00 11 47 00 55 00 ris 16 54 40 37 30 d 34 55 25 24 40 fl. 16 54 20 38 00 fl. 11 46 00 53 00 06 58 00 78 00   07 58 00 78 00 en 14 59 40 38 00 z 15 52 20 33 40 z 15 51 40 35 00 r 41 53 45 24 20   44 53 45 24 10 frald 17 53 55 36 30 06 49 00 89 00 Logovi 10 C.   Nagorni 10 C.   18 53 00 43 00 fl. 16 54 40 40 30 he 41 53 45 24 10   44 53 45 24 10 o 12 51 30 47 00   18 51 00 47 00 12 50 00 50 00 15 51 50 34 00 Prom. 01 70 00 353 00 on Masovo 09 M.   les 01 65 00 288 00 I. 01 78 30 31 &c. Charlton I. 01 51 40 283 00 Charssin 15 51 50 33 00 Chelm 06 57 00 50 00   14 49 40 36 00   20 57 00 50 00 Chelmiez 11 52 00 46 00   18 51 30 48 00 Chelmo 14 50 40 41 00   15 52 20 33 20     52 30 33 00 Chelno 14 50 40 41 00 Chentyny 14 50 20 37 00 Chepeen 06 41 00 84 00 Cherry or Bear I. 01 74 20 39 00 Chiatscoy 06 54 00 65 00   08 54 00 65 00 C. Chidley 01 68 40 322 00 Chilan 06 41 00 82 00 Chinis 06 48 00 79 00 Chiorlich 06 43 00 46 00 Chioz 14 51 00 37 00 Chleeb 06 59 00 62 00   07 59 00 62 00   08 59 00 62 00 Chleeb I. 09 C.   Chlinoff 06 61 00 78 00   07 61 00 78 00 Chliwino 18 54 00 46 00 Chmilna 13 D.   Chmielowka 12 48 30 47 00 Chmilnik 18 49 30 45 00 Chobienic 15 51 50 33 00 Choczyn 12 48 30 44 00 Chodorkow 18 50 00 46 00 Chodzez 14 52 40 33 00 Chodziess 15 52 50 34 00 Choino 15 51 20 34 00     52 30 33 20 Cholawi 15 51 50 34 00 Cholica 12 50 00 50 00 Cholvia 18 53 00 46 00 Chomutes 12 49 00 51 00 Choperor 06 52 00 73 00   08 52 00 73 00 Choperor fl. 06 52 00 74 00   08 52 00 74 00 Choran fl. 18 56 00 50 00 Chorciea 18 56 00 52 00 Chorobritza 06 63 00 62 00   09 P.   Chorobritza Ostroog 09 P.   Choross Ciessow 18 50 30 46 00 Choroski 18 50 30 46 00 Chorosseza 18 53 00 41 00 Chorostow 12 49 00 44 00 Chortyka Ostro. 12 46 30 52 00   13 M.   Chosseza 18 50 30 44 00 Chotowa 18 53 30 44 00 Chourogori 09 P.   Christburg 16 53 40 37 00   17 53 50 36 50 C. Christian 01 60 20 326 20 Christiania 25 59 00 25 00 Christian haven 40 54 25 25 20   42 54 25 25 00   43 54 25 25 00 Christianopel 06 56 00 32 00   20 56 00 32 00   22 56 00 33 00   30 56 20 31 00 Christianum Mare 01 60 &c 280 &c Christiapries 30 54 20 25 00   28 54 20 25 10   40 54 20 25 10   41 54 20 25 00   42 54 20 25 00   43 54 20 25 00 Christiansand 25 58 00 22 00 Thristianstadt 06 56 00 29 00   20 55 00 29 00   22 55 30 29 00   30 55 40 29 00     55 55 29 30 Christisca 12 48 00 46 00 Christmimmol 16 55 00 41 00 Christonda 06 43 00 60 00 Christurp 30 56 20 24 40 Chrobers 14 50 00 37 00 Chroniee 15 51 50 34 20 Chronon nunc Nie∣men fl. 18 54 30 40 00 Chrostowicze 14 49 40 36 00 Chryczkieszemi 12 47 00 49 00 Chudow 18 54 30 47 00 Chunino 15 52 10 34 00 Chwalin 15 51 50 33 00 Chwastow 12 49 30 48 00 Ciabacz R. 12 46 30 54 00 Ciarayostrow 18 49 30 44 00 Ciasse 15 52 00 35 00 Cibardi 06 49 00 57 00   08 49 00 57 00 Ciblie 13 B.   Ciechanow 06 52 00 39 00   18 52 30 39 00 Ciechanowie 18 52 30 40 00 Ciecieresk 18 52 30 49 00 Cieciereski 11 53 00 47 00 Cieczeref R. 12 50 30 47 00   18 50 00 46 00     50 30 48 00 Ciessybiesy 18 49 00 42 00 Ciffrus fl. 06 41 00 82 00 Cihince 18 53 00 47 00 Cimkowicze 18 53 00 44 00 Cimmerium 11 48 00 47 00 Cimmers 31 55 30 30 00 Cincopa 11 48 00 58 00 Ciossaniec 15 51 40 33 20 Cioteza 18 55 00 46 00 Ciprico 06 47 00 56 00   11 47 00 56 00 Circassi 06 46 00 67 00 Circassia 12 45 30 54 00 Ciskoy Oostroog 09 P.   Ampt or Praesectura Cismar 43 54 10 25 50 Cismar 20 54 00 26 00   41 54 10 25 50   43 54 10 25 50 Cismisbeec 43 54 10 25 40 Citowiany 18 55 00 41 00   19 55 30 41 00 Citwa 18 53 30 45 00 Citwa fl. 18 53 00 44 00 Citskova Monast. 09 M.   Cizy 06 48 00 59 00   08 48 00 59 00   11 48 00 58 00 Cladaw 16 54 00 36 00 Clampe 30 54 00 25 40 Clanxbull 38 54 50 23 40   40 54 50 23 40 Clapmuts 23 59 00 35 00   27 63 40 23 00 Clarup 36 56 55 24 40 Claus 14 53 40 40 00   16 53 40 40 00 Claus S. 16 53 40 40 00 Clausdorp 42 54 15 25 00 Clawtosst 38 55 00 24 10   39 55 00 24 10 Cleberg 16 53 40 38 40 Cleken 17 53 50 36 40 S. Clemens 38 55 05 23 30   39 55 05 23 30   40 54 40 23 20     55 05 23 30 Clementz Fehr 16 54 00 37 00   17 54 05 36 50 Clenets 30 54 00 25 00 Clesmareca 06 56 00 62 00   07 57 00 63 00   08 56 00 62 00 Clestrupmoll 36 56 45 24 10 Cleve 20 51 00 21 00   42 54 20 24 00   43 53 55 25 20 Cleverdyck 44 53 40 24 20 Clevitz 41 54 05 25 10   43 54 05 25 10 Cleynalefioerd 28 60 00 19 30 Cleynehust 21 59 30 44 00 Cleyne Tutiers 21 59 30 44 00 Cleysee 40 54 40 23 40 Clim 35 56 40 23 20 Clina 06 56 00 56 00   07 56 00 56 00   08 56 00 56 00   20 56 00 56 00 Clint 30 54 40 26 40   32 55 00 26 40 Clipleff 38 54 55 24 20   39 54 55 24 20   40 54 55 24 20 Clipbul 35 55 00 24 00   38 54 45 23 50   40 54 45 23 50 Clodawa fl. 14 52 00 35 00 Clodzasno 14 53 00 42 00 Clomsk 06 51 00 42 00 O. Closter 20 64 00 59 00   29 59 40 20 30   35 56 40 24 20   41 54 15 25 10   43 54 15 25 00 t' Clooster Gloetsit∣scoy. 09 B.   t' Cloost. Grigori Kassian 09 B.   t' Clooster Lopoto 09 B.   t' Cloost. Paulina 09 F.   Clot 14 50 40 39 00 Clowtorff 38 55 20 24 10   39 55 20 24 10 Clukimali R. 12 46 00 53 00 Clukiwielky R. 12 46 00 52 00 Cluvensiek 41 54 20 24 40   42 54 20 24 40 Cluysfiord 22 59 00 25 00 Coadinten 16 55 00 40 00   20 55 00 39 00 Cobinol. Ducatus 18 51 30 42 00 Cobnogro 06 64 00 62 00 Cochinacho 06 47 00 88 00 Cockins S. 01 65 20 321 30 Cocksbroot 27 62 30 20 00   28 62 30 20 30 Codderwagh 27 63 20 24 00 Coersant 30 55 20 23 00   35 55 20 23 00
Coesnetsena 06 58 00 60 00   07 59 00 60 00   08 59 00 60 00   09 A   Coevorden 20 52 00 21 00 Cogshult 31 55 30 29 10 Coisa 06 45 00 73 00 Coisa fl. 06 45 00 79 40 Cola 01 69 00 49 00 Colberg 06 54 00 32 00   14 54 00 32 00   20 54 00 32 00 Colberger Heyde 30 54 20 25 00   41 54 30 25 00   43 54 25 25 20 Colcolcova 06 68 00 74 00   07 68 00 74 00 Colcova 06 67 00 63 00   07 67 00 65 00   20 67 00 64 00 C. Cold 01 78 30 31 00 Coldenbuttel 38 54 25 24 10   40 54 25 24 10   41 54 25 23 50 Coldenkercke 41 53 50 24 40 Colderup 30 56 40 23 20   35 57 00 23 20 Colding 38 55 30 24 20   39 55 30 24 20 Coldenhoff 44 53 50 24 20 Colgoye I. 01 69 20 62 10 Colibarnie 06 48 00 45 00 Colings 30 54 00 25 40 Colivia fl. 06 63 00 79 00   07 63 00 79 00 Collegoie I. 20 68 00 68 00 Collen 16 53 20 36 00     53 40 39 00 Colligin 16 53 40 39 00 Colmar 41 53 45 24 10   44 53 45 24 10 Colmensee 14 53 00 36 00   16 53 00 36 00 Colmischland 16 53 20 36 00 Colmogra 07 64 00 61 00   09 Q   Colmogro 01 64 20 58 00   20 63 00 61 00 Colnan 17 53 55 36 40 Coldo 14 53 00 40 00   16 53 20 40 00 Colo 14 32 00 35 00 Coloebelca 06 52 00 67 00   08 52 00 67 00 Colomna 06 55 00 59 00   08 55 00 59 00   20 56 00 53 00 Colonia 06 48 00 41 00 Colsenga 06 60 00 64 00 Colstrop 34 55 25 25 20 Coluga 06 54 00 57 00   08 54 00 57 00   11 54 00 54 00 Columna 11 54 00 55 00 Coluta 06 58 00 46 00   19 58 00 46 00 Colzig 15 51 40 33 20 Combra 06 49 00 55 00   08 49 00 55 00   11 49 00 55 00 Comenetz 06 58 00 60 00   07 58 00 60 00   08 58 00 60 00   09 A   C. Comfort 01 63 40 321 00     65 50 281 40 Comitz 20 53 00 35 00 Comne Wasbroo 31 55 35 28 50 Conary 14 50 20 38 00 Condaw 19 56 30 40 00   20 56 00 40 00 Condora 06 65 00 71 00   07 65 00 71 00 Condoside 19 58 00 45 00 Conestape 11 47 00 55 00 G. Coniada 16 53 20 36 30 Kl. Coniada 16 53 20 36 30 Conils 15 51 50 31 40 Conin 14 52 00 35 00 Coningen 20 69 00 51 00 Coningsbergen 29 59 20 23 30 Coningshaven 28 60 00 20 00 Conings Silver gru∣ben, or the Kings Silver Mines 20 59 00 23 00   25 59 30 23 00 Conit 14 53 20 34 00 Conitsa pogost 06 56 00 58 00   07 56 00 58 00   08 56 00 58 00 Conloy 06 65 00 64 00   07 65 00 64 00 Consback 20 57 00 26 00   22 57 00 26 00   25 57 00 26 00   30 57 00 27 00 Conson 14 50 40 39 00 Constantinopolis 06 43 00 46 00 Constantinow 18 49 30 45 00 Conte T. 21 66 00 39 00 Conterstein 17 53 55 36 20 Conterswalde 16 54 00 36 30 Contesc 06 42 00 41 00 Contin 16 54 20 38 30 Conts T. 27 66 00 38 00 Contzendorff 16 54 00 36 30 Conua fl. 14 50 00 39 00 Copa 06 47 00 58 00   08 47 00 58 00   11 47 00 58 00 Copa fl. 06 48 00 63 00   11 47 00 59 00 Coperbergen 06 61 00 79 00   07 61 00 81 00 Coperberget 20 60 00 32 00 Coping 20 59 00 33 00 Copio 06 63 00 46 00   20 63 00 46 00   21 62 30 46 00 Coponagar Mons 10 F   Copono I. 10 F   Coppele 20 67 00 43 00 Copperberg 24 60 30 32 00 Corallen Linaw 16 53 20 36 20 Coraxet caucasus M. 11 47 00 61 00 Corczyn 14 50 00 38 00 Corelicze 18 53 00 43 00 Corene fl. 16 54 40 38 30 Coresch 06 51 00 56 00   08 51 00 56 00 Coreta 11 47 00 58 00 Corfula 06 56 00 47 00 Corgina 06 69 00 88 00   07 69 00 88 00 Corlin 20 53 00 32 00 Corneliof Mons 20 58 00 60 00 Coro 06 45 00 63 00 Coro condame 11 47 00 56 00 Coron 14 51 00 39 00 Corop 34 55 35 25 00 Coropgaard 30 55 20 25 00   34 55 35 25 00   35 55 20 24 40   37 55 40 24 50 Corotavea fl. 06 68 00 80 00   07 67 00 80 00 Corporio 06 59 00 47 00   21 59 00 47 00 Corppe 30 54 20 24 20 Correliof Monas 06 58 00 60 00   07 58 00 60 00   08 58 00 60 00   09 A   Corselitz 32 54 50 27 10 Corset 36 56 40 24 30 Corsnes 28 60 00 20 00 Corsula 20 56 00 57 00 Cortiza 11 54 00 55 00 Cos 35 56 20 23 20 Cosby 30 56 00 29 00   31 56 10 29 30 Coshildgard 34 55 20 25 30 Coslavia 11 47 00 53 00 Cosleff 40 54 30 24 50 Coslo 06 47 00 51 00   11 47 00 51 00 Cosmai 06 48 00 82 00 Cosneice 14 51 20 39 00 Cosoechova 09 D   Cosova 20 64 00 54 00   21 64 30 53 00 Cofsar Duc. 18 51 00 42 00 Cossiera 11 54 00 54 00 Coslin 14 54 00 32 00 Costa Ajazo 06 46 00 60 00   11 46 00 61 00 Coster 06 58 00 25 00   20 58 00 25 00   25 58 00 25 00 Costintsarch 06 71 00 75 00   07 71 00 74 00 Costintsark 01 71 20 71 00 Coszieglo 14 50 20 35 00 Cotala 11 48 00 58 00 Cotelnitz 06 59 00 79 00 Cotelwitz 07 59 00 79 00 Cotores Reca 08 57 00 58 00 Covitz 06 53 00 35 00 Cotsenga 07 60 00 64 00   09 F   Cotwitz 14 51 20 31 00 Cotzenbull 38 54 20 24 00 Cotzko 14 51 40 40 00 Covitsa Pogost 20 56 00 58 00 Coulunga 20 53 00 57 00 Cowale 14 52 20 36 00 Coxaga 06 58 00 74 00   07 58 00 74 00 Coxbroot 25 62 00 20 00 Coxenia Volost 09 G   Coxwyck 27 63 20 24 00 Coyden 16 53 40 38 00 Coylowka 12 49 30 47 00 Coyvanim 06 65 00 40 00   20 65 00 40 00   21 65 00 41 00 Cozala 06 48 00 59 00   08 48 00 49 30 Crabbekerck 28 60 00 20 00 Crackaw 16 55 00 40 30 Crackelsart 16 53 40 37 30 Crackerort 16 55 20 39 30 Cracoln 16 54 00 38 Cracovia 14 49 40 36   18 50 00 3 Crajenka 14 53 00 33 Crakaw 16 54 00 36   17 54 20 3 Crange 14 54 00 3 Crantz 44 53 30 2 Cramptschen 16 53 00 3 Crapelnaw 16 53 20 3 Crarop 34 55 15 2 Crasnik 14 50 20 4 Crasniki 18 55 00 4 Crempe 30 53 40 2 Cremum 11 47 00 5 Crensburg 06 56 00 4 Crepuina 06 53 00 5   08 53 00 5 Cresschow 14 49 40 3 Cressona 06 47 00 5   11 47 00 5 Creusburg 19 56 00 4   20 56 00 4 M. Creutz 16 54 40 3 Creutzberg 14 50 40 3 Creutzburg 16 54 20 3 Crewitten 16 54 40 3 Crime 12 45 30 5 Crimea seu Tartaria Przecopensis 06 50 00 5   08 50 00 5   11 49 00 5 Crisby 40 54 35 2 Cristorp 35 56 20 2 Cristrup 36 56 20 2   37 56 20 2 C. de Croce 11 48 00 5 Crone 14 53 00 3 Cronebeck 22 57 00 3 Cronenborg 30 55 40 2   31 55 55 27   32 55 50 27 Cronshagen 41 54 15 2   42 54 20 2 Cronu 30 54 00 2 Croom 06 52 00 56   08 52 00 5 Cropoci fl. 18 49 30 38 Croppe 38 54 25 24   40 54 25 24   41 54 25 24 Croppen 19 56 30 4 Croshovet 41 54 20 25 Crosnensis Duca∣tus 15 51 50 32 Cross I. 01 76 00 78 Cross P. 01 71 15 70 Crossen 14 51 40 32 Crossin 14 50 40 39 Crosta 14 50 40 31 Crotesche 16 53 20 37 Crotinen 16 53 20 39 Crotovo 09 F   Crouslat 06 47 00 39 Crowolow 14 50 00 36     51 00 41 Crupiscken 16 54 40 40 Crusska 18 54 00 47 Crutsborg 18 54 00 38 Crutzfelde 43 54 05 25 Cruysfioerd 20 60 00 19   25 60 00 19   28 60 00 19 Cruyshaven 23 59 10 35   07 71 00 76 Crzueza 14 49 00 39 Cua fl. 18 52 00 44 Cubent 06 48 00 75 Cujavia 14 52 20 35   18 53 00 38 Culan 06 53 00 30 Culdinga 18 56 00 40 Cullen 31 55 25 29     55 30 29 Culm 14 53 00 36   16 53 20 36 Culmigeria 16 53 20 36 Culonsara 20 64 00 40 Culta Stagviara 06 43 00 46 Culvia fl. 06 64 00 65   07 64 00 65 Cumania 11 49 00 54 Cumberland Isles 01 67 00 304 Cumbletosta 31 55 30 29 Cunningham ford 01 67 30 322 Cuorneby 31 55 30 28 Cura fl. 06 41 00 80 Curisch Haff 16 55 00 39   18 55 00 38   20 55 00 38 Curisch Nevang 16 55 00 38   18 55 00 38   20 55 00 38 Curlandiz Ducatus 06 56 00 39   18 56 00 39   19 56 00 39   20 56 00 39 Curonensis Lacus 16 55 00 39 Curoswan 14 50 00 38 Curtmed 16 54 20 39 Curtus 06 63 00 90
hw 14 50 40 36 00 Danisanoff 06 57 00 72 00   07 57 00 73 00   14 52 20 31 00 14 52 20 36 00 31 55 55 28 20 06 51 00 39 00 12 48 30 47 00 relnik fl. 13 H   stik R. 12 48 00 50 00 hick 13 D   nik 12 48 00 47 00 15 51 50 33 40 ny 12 50 30 52 00 12 48 00 46 00 ostro 12 49 30 45 00 11 54 00 47 00 zrkly H. 12 47 00 49 00 akly R. 12 47 00 49 00 ek 15 53 00 33 20 aka R. 12 47 30 53 00 olowka 12 50 30 51 00 wo 15 51 30 33 40 zawezyce 18 52 00 41 00 awka 12 49 00 47 00 e H. 12 46 30 48 00 re Slao. 12 48 00 48 00 e Morze vulgo lens Euxinus 12 45 30 48 00   13 S.   low 14 52 40 32 00   15 52 50 33 40 ka 12 49 30 48 00 bozynczy 12 48 30 44 00 i 15 51 50 34 20 yrazttyso R. 12 48 00 48 00 hshord Zisso∣ 18 55 30 50 00 Kow. 12 49 00 44 00 ryske Duca∣ 06 51 00 43 00   18 51 30 43 00 zsy 18 54 00 49 00 in 12 48 30 50 00 owince 12 49 00 48 00 wirtmon 18 51 00 43 00 nitz 14 49 40 37 00 n Dabrowa 13 G   rn 12 48 00 50 00   13 G   owisowa 12 49 00 50 00 ow 18 51 30 39 00 ez 14 50 00 35 00 ha 16 53 00 37 00 pin 15 51 50 34 00 ochow 14 50 20 35 00 wic 15 51 50 33 40 ia 18 54 30 47 00 nisis Lagowoy. 07 59 00 69 00   08 59 00 68 00 nisis Nagor∣ny. 07 57 00 68 00   08 57 00 67 00 how 06 51 00 50 00 ski 12 49 00 50 00 nec 18 49 00 44 00 ielko 14 52 20 37 00 ino 15 51 40 34 40 ihow 11 51 00 48 00   12 51 00 50 00   18 51 00 49 00 ikow 13 B   iowezc 12 48 30 46 00 nobel 11 51 00 46 00   12 51 30 48 00   18 51 00 48 00 owiecz 12 48 30 44 00 nowka 12 49 30 51 00 owa 12 50 00 43 00 sk 18 51 30 39 00 omelik R. 12 47 00 51 00   13 O   ikow 12 50 00 47 00 vobel 06 51 00 48 00 wiansk 18 52 00 39 00 wonak 15 52 10 34 00 ona Wiesso. 15 51 40 34 00 ewa R. 12 49 00 42 00 ora 12 47 00 45 00 zin 15 52 20 34 00 tzigk 14 52 20 32 00 aszy 13 E   pach 11 54 00 54 00 poch 06 54 00 58 00   08 54 00 58 00   20 54 00 57 00 fl. 16 55 00 39 30     55 00 40 00 elow 14 50 20 38 00 anla Sucha D. 12 47 00 48 00 chy 12 49 00 48 00 egrudka 12 49 30 48 00 nogrodka 18 50 00 47 00 owocze R. 12 48 00 43 00 owberoa 12 46 30 48 00 natz 14 51 40 39 00 aow 06 49 00 45 00   18 50 00 45 30 bojow 12 49 00 54 00 chak 12 49 30 50 00 aki 12 49 00 51 00 Czybyryn 11 49 00 47 00 Czyhyryn 18 55 00 50 00 Czyrkassy 06 49 00 48 00   11 49 00 47 00   12 48 30 50 00   18 49 00 48 00 Czyrkassys 18 56 30 51 00 Cyrsko 14 52 00 39 00 Czyszmiennigra fl. 18 55 00 50 00 D.   DAare field. 20 39 00 22 00 Dabinka 15 51 40 34 00 Dabnie 15 51 40 33 20 Dabno 18 50 30 43 00 Dabrina 07 62 00 66 00 Dabrowa 15 51 50 34 20 Dackaw 16 53 40 36 30 Dadeloff 06 53 00 60 00 Daeckendorp 43 53 55 25 20 Daelon Olinia. 20 69 00 56 00 Dafer 26 66 00 353 00 Dageroort 19 58 30 39 00   20 58 00 39 00 Dagho 06 58 00 39 00   19 58 30 39 00   20 58 00 40 00 Dahrzyn 18 52 30 38 00 Dakendorp 41 53 55 25 20 Dal 35 56 40 24 40 Dalbu 20 60 00 27 00   22 60 00 27 00   25 60 30 27 00 Dalbuy 38 55 25 24 30   39 55 25 24 30 Dalby 20 55 00 24 00   30 55 20 24 20     55 40 24 20   31 55 40 28 30   32 55 20 27 00   35 55 20 24 20     55 40 24 20   36 56 35 23 30   37 55 45 24 20 Dalby Kloster. 31 55 40 28 30 Dalby nedre 36 56 35 24 50 Dalby offre. 36 56 30 24 50 Dalcowieze 18 54 00 46 00 Daldorp 41 54 00 25 00   43 54 00 25 00   44 54 00 25 00 Daleburg 06 58 00 27 00   20 58 00 27 00   22 58 00 27 00 Dalecarlia 06 61 00 16 00   20 60 00 27 00   24 61 10 29 20 Dalecarlus 22 60 00 33 00   23 60 10 33 30   24 60 10 33 40 Dalem 22 57 30 32 00 Dalen 19 56 30 41 00   20 56 00 42 00 Dalerne 29 58 40 20 30 Dalgabia S. 16 54 00 40 00 Dalgowischko S. 16 53 40 39 30 Dalheim 16 54 20 38 30 Dalia 06 57 00 16 00 Daller 38 54 55 23 50   39 54 55 23 50   40 55 00 23 50 Doliewo 15 51 50 34 00 Dall 36 56 50 24 30 Dallerup 37 56 05 24 20 Dallia 22 58 30 27 00 Dall Heyde. 39 55 15 23 40 Dallhollt 39 55 00 24 30 Dalm Kloster 34 55 20 25 00 Dal Molle 36 57 00 24 30 Daloin 20 57 00 32 00 Dalsarp 20 57 00 29 00   22 57 00 29 00 Dalskog 22 58 30 27 00 Dalso 31 56 05 29 10 Dalt S. 16 53 40 39 30 Dalar 26 67 30 355 00 Dalwein 16 54 00 36 00 Dalwin W. 16 54 20 38 00 Dam 14 53 20 31 00   20 53 00 21 00 Dambiec 15 51 40 33 40 Dambrower 15 51 50 33 20 Dambrowka 15 52 10 33 40     52 20 34 20 Dame 41 54 15 25 50   43 54 15 25 50 Damehovet 43 54 15 25 50 Damcrou 17 54 05 36 10     54 05 36 20     54 05 37 10 Damesdorp 42 54 05 25 00   43 53 50 25 20   44 53 50 25 20 Damkowce 12 49 30 50 00 Damme 20 53 00 30 00 Damosse 19 55 30 44 00 Damsgaard 30 55 20 24 20   35 55 20 24 20   36 56 30 22 30   37 56 30 22 30 Damwisch 44 53 45 24 20     53 50 24 10 Danasi 06 50 00 89 00 Danby I. 01 51 05 283 30 Dandaca 11 47 00 52 00 Daneri 22 59 00 35 00   23 59 20 35 00 Dangiwicma fl. 18 55 30 41 00 Dania 06 55 00 24 00 Danietofska 06 58 00 59 00   07 58 00 59 00   08 58 00 59 00   20 57 00 60 00 I. Danilofska 10 A   Danilofsko fl. 10 G   Danilok 12 48 30 45 00 Danilow 12 49 30 43 00 Danischenwoldt 41 54 25 24 40   42 54 25 24 50 Danmar 33 54 40 26 30 Dannew 43 54 15 25 20 Danorum 38 54 25 24 30 Danstrup 30 55 40 28 20 Danstruy 31 55 40 28 30 Dantzig 06 54 00 36 00   14 54 20 36 00   16 54 20 36 00   17 54 20 36 20   18 54 30 37 00   20 54 00 36 00 Dantzigergat 22 58 30 35 00   23 58 40 35 00 Dantzigergrentz∣stein 17 54 10 36 40 Dantzigerwerder 17 54 15 36 20 Danubius fl. 12 45 30 45 00 Danubii Ostia 11 46 00 47 00 Danwerck 40 54 30 24 30 Danwitzen 17 54 05 37 00 Daprowo 12 48 30 51 00 Daps 38 55 20 24 20 Daps fl. 39 55 20 24 30 Darcie's I. 01 68 15 321 30 Dargist S. 16 54 00 40 00 Dargun 20 53 00 28 00 Darkoswinge 31 55 25 28 30 Darohy 18 53 00 46 00 Darow 18 52 30 44 00 Darrig 43 54 15 25 20 Darum 37 55 25 22 50   38 55 20 23 40 Darumb 39 55 20 23 40 Daskowce 12 49 00 45 00 Dasalo 21 63 00 47 00 Dassow 41 53 50 25 40   43 53 50 25 40 Dastrur 36 56 35 24 20 Daswerck 40 54 35 24 00 Datum 41 53 40 24 30   44 53 40 24 30 Davemver 22 60 00 34 00   23 60 00 34 30 Davids hoff. 16 53 20 38 30 Davens 43 54 15 25 20 Daugieliski 18 55 00 43 00 Davidow fl. 18 52 00 45 00 Davis's Straits. 01 64 &c. 313 &c Daulunt 34 55 25 25 00 Daumer S. 16 53 40 38 30 Debice 18 49 30 39 00 Debicza 14 49 20 38 00 Debowolecka 15 51 30 33 20 Debrinia 09 L   Dedberg 37 56 00 22 50 Dedeloff 08 53 00 60 00 Dee 30 57 00 25 00   35 57 00 25 00 The Deep bay 01 74 40 74 20 Deerdals Elff. 29 58 20 21 00 Deer S. 01 79 05 35 00 Deezbul 35 54 40 24 00 Deezbul 30 54 40 24 00 Degeberg 31 55 45 29 30 Degerhoffuit 34 55 20 25 30 Degera fl. 22 60 00 27 00   25 60 00 27 00 Degermuld 27 64 20 26 00 Delen 21 59 30 37 00 Delensdorp 44 53 40 25 00 Deler 23 59 00 35 00 Delfbrucke 41 54 05 24 00   42 54 05 24 00 Deling 42 54 10 23 50 Delmenhorst 20 53 00 23 00 Delstede 38 54 15 24 30   41 54 15 24 10   42 54 15 24 10 Deltzigk 15 52 40 31 40 Delve 38 54 20 24 20   40 54 20 24 20   41 54 25 24 00   42 54 20 24 00 Delverorth 42 54 20 24 00 Demanowka 12 49 30 51 00 Dematyn 14 49 00 37 00 Demboniza 06 45 00 40 00 Demetrowicz 11 54 00 51 00 Demesnes 20 70 00 48 00 Demitre Navolock. 09 G   Demitropol 12 48 00 47 00 Demkowka 12 48 00 47 00
Demochan 12 47 30 51 00 Dene S. 16 55 20 39 30 I. Denescheri 10 E   Denisowka 12 49 00 50 00 Deniszky 13 C   Denmarex haven. 01 67 00 322 00 Depenow 41 54 05 25 00   42 54 05 25 00   43 54 05 25 00 Depenotrasse 44 53 45 24 20 Deppen 16 53 40 38 00 Deraznia 18 50 30 44 00   12 49 00 45 00 Derbent 06 43 00 74 00 Deretschi petin. 06 57 00 49 00   20 56 00 49 00 Derewnia 18 53 30 44 00 Derezienr. 12 48 30 46 00 Derpt 19 58 00 44 00   20 58 00 44 00 Derzykrai 12 49 30 50 00 P. Desire 01 80 20 41 40     76 40 97 00 Deski 12 49 00 49 00 Deslor 06 46 00 46 00 C. Desolation 01 61 00 322 00 Dessaw 20 53 00 26 00 Dessoy S. 16 53 40 39 00 Destre 31 56 15 28 40 Dezna R. 12 50 30 49 00     51 00 50 00     51 00 51 00 Detelitzko 21 59 00 48 00 Detzbull 38 54 45 23 50   40 54 45 23 50 Devitten 16 53 40 38 00 Deutsch Netka. 15 51 50 32 20 Dewica 12 50 30 50 00 Dewiczee 12 50 00 50 00 Depel 15 52 30 32 00 Depen 16 54 20 38 20 Deyen 36 57 15 25 00 Deylaw 18 53 30 37 00 Dialle fl. 16 54 40 38 00 Dibbe 35 56 20 22 40 Dickhusen 41 54 10 23 40   42 54 00 23 40     54 10 23 40     54 15 23 50 Dicksee 43 54 10 25 10 Dicksondt 41 54 05 23 30 Dicoia 08 51 00 56 00 Diebaw olim Nes∣saw. 16 53 00 36 00 Diebe S. 16 53 40 37 00 Diedo 09 E   Diefholm 28 60 00 20 30 Diell 16 53 20 37 30 Diepebay 06 74 00 76 00   07 74 00 77 00 Diepsond 27 64 40 25 00   28 60 00 20 00 Diernysshovet 39 55 05 24 30 Dierslo 31 55 35 28 30 Diersow 42 54 05 25 10 Diesdorp 41 53 25 23 10 Diesiasina 06 69 00 83 00   07 69 00 82 00 Sir D. Diggs C. 01 74 25 298 00 Diggs I. 01 63 00 287 30 Digraness 26 67 00 01 00 Dikoia 06 51 00 57 00 Dilanger 21 61 30 34 00 Dilinge fl. 16 54 20 39 30 Dillo 22 58 30 29 00 Dilsbo 20 61 00 33 00 Dimitrom 12 48 00 46 00 Dina fl. vide Dzrina. 13 O   Dinaw 14 49 20 39 00 Dineborg 18 55 30 43 00 Dinge W. 16 54 20 38 00 Dingtuna 24 59 20 32 40 Diolova 09 A   Dippel 40 54 55 24 50 Diraford 26 67 00 349 00 Dirichdrop 43 43 20 25 00 Dirichshutte 41 53 50 24 50   44 53 50 24 50 Dirschow 16 54 00 36 30   17 54 05 36 20 Dirschkeim 16 54 40 38 00 Dis 30 55 20 24 00 C. Discord 01 59 50 332 20 Dissow 43 53 55 25 20 Distelberg 20 57 00 25 00   22 58 00 25 00   25 58 00 25 00 Ditmarschergrun∣den 40 54 05 23 40   41 50 05 23 10 Ditmarsen 41 54 15 23 50 Ditmars 30 54 20 23 40 Ditna fl. 16 54 20 39 30 Dittersdorff 16 53 40 77 30     54 00 39 00 Dittrichswalt 16 53 40 37 00 Diuremose 31 56 00 27 40 Diursion 24 60 40 31 20 Diwitzagora five Jungfrowenberg 10 C   Dluga 15 52 20 34 20 Dlugoschyn 14 50 00 36 00 Dlusentz S. 16 53 40 39 00 Dmitowka 12 50 00 51 00 Dmitre navolose 07 60 00 65 00 Dnieprsco 06 54 00 54 00   08 55 00 54 00   20 55 00 54 00 Dniester a Ptol. Ty∣ras fl. 18 49 30 42 00     49 30 43 00 Dnipr fl. 18 54 30 31 00 Dnisper fl. 18 56 30 50 00 Doan 06 41 00 41 00 Doben 16 54 05 39 30 Doberan 30 54 00 27 00 Doberg 37 55 30 22 20 Doberina 09 I.   Dobern 16 54 00 37 30 Doberlaw 14 51 20 30 00 Dobersdorp 41 54 20 25 00   43 54 20 25 00 Doberstrop 38 54 15 25 20 Doblen 19 56 00 41 00 Dobossna 18 53 00 47 00 Dobrapolo 12 48 30 47 00 Dobre 14 52 20 39 00   18 52 00 40 00 Dobrefort 12 50 00 42 00 Dobrilow 12 48 30 42 00 Dobrin S. 16 53 40 40 00 Dobrotwor 18 50 00 42 00 Dobrzyn 14 52 20 36 00 Dobrzynia fl. 18 55 00 47 00 Docken 41 53 35 24 30 Dockenhude 44 53 55 24 30 Docz R. 12 50 30 51 00 Dodeberg 30 55 40 22 40   35 55 40 22 40 Dodei 16 53 40 38 30 Dodelach 14 53 00 33 00 Dodina 19 55 30 44 00 Doetna 08 55 00 58 00 Doelsand 20 55 00 22 00   30 55 20 22 40   35 55 40 23 00 Dofre 06 62 00 14 00   20 62 00 24 00   25 62 00 24 00   28 62 00 24 30 Dofre Fiell 20 62 00 24 00   25 62 00 24 00   27 62 40 24 00   28 62 00 23 30 the Dofrine Hills. 01 63 &c. 31 &c Dogup fl. 16 54 20 40 30 Doine fl. 16 54 40 39 00 Doinge 31 55 25 28 40 Dokndow 18 51 30 41 00 Dolalyeze 18 53 30 43 00 Dolce 18 55 00 46 00   20 55 00 46 00 Dolem 14 52 00 30 00 Dolga Insula. 10 G   Dolgen 15 52 50 32 20 Dolgoi I. 06 69 00 78 00   07 69 00 78 00 Dolgoi Ostrof. 06 69 00 76 00   07 69 00 75 00 Dolhinow 18 54 30 45 00 Dolholowka 12 49 00 51 00 Doliec 15 52 10 34 00 Dolina 12 49 00 42 00     49 30 49 00   13 B. 00 00 Doliven 16 54 00 40 30 Dolleaw 40 54 50 23 50 Dollerup 39 55 25 24 10 Dolliopole 12 48 00 43 00 Dolrot 38 54 35 25 00   40 54 35 25 00 Dolsko 15 51 50 34 00 Dolftct 16 54 00 37 00     54 20 38 30   17 53 55 37 00 Domatow 11 50 00 47 00   18 49 00 48 00 Domdangen 19 57 00 39 00 Domeraw 16 54 20 37 30 Domeraw S. 16 53 20 37 30 Domerby 35 56 20 23 20   36 56 30 23 40   37 56 30 23 40 Domersdorp 43 53 55 25 30 Domesnes 06 70 00 38 00   07 70 00 48 00   20 57 00 40 00 Domitz 06 52 00 26 00   20 52 00 26 00 Dommesness 06 57 00 39 00   19 57 00 13 40 Dommestorp. 31 56 10 28 10 Domnaw 16 54 20 38 30   18 54 00 38 00 Domnitz 14 52 00 33 00 Domokant fl. 13 I   Domontow 13 E   Domstrup 36 56 30 24 50   37 56 30 24 50 Domuntow 12 49 00 49 00 Don olim Tanais. 06 50 00 65 00   11 50 00 59 00     51 00 6     52 00 5 Donaiken S. 16 54 00 4 Donajowec 18 49 00 4 Donayofce 12 49 30 4 Doncapel 41 54 00 2 Dondiro 09 D   Donecz i. e. Minor Tanais cognomine Sewerki. 11 51 00 5 Donen fl. 16 55 20 3 Donesum 40 54 40 2 Donetsreca 06 51 00 6   18 50 00 5     51 00 6 Donide Ova 06 57 00 5   07 57 00 5   08 57 00 5   20 57 00 6 Doniec R. 12 48 30 5     49 30 5 Donka fl. 19 59 00 4 Donkagorod 06 53 00 6   08 53 00 6 Donki 12 49 00 5   13 E   Donko 11 53 00 5 Donneruplund 37 55 45 2 Donsdorp 43 54 20 2 Dont 40 54 40 2 Doorn 44 53 30 2 Doptzice 14 49 4 3   18 49 30 3 Dorchobus 12 50 30 4 Doregaard 36 56 45 2 Dorgabusa 08 54 00 5   20 54 00 5 Dorgalmasa 06 54 00 5 Doriajofco 12 49 00 44 Dornike 42 54 10 25 Dorobobus 18 56 00 50 Dorobostai 18 50 30 43 Dorohobuss 18 50 30 44 Dorp 06 59 00 50   20 59 00 50   38 54 35 25   43 54 15 25 Dorpstede 38 54 25 24   40 54 25 24   42 54 05 24 Dorpum 38 54 40 24   40 54 40 24 Dorrebeck 17 54 40 24 Dorsuniski 18 54 30 41 Dortt 38 54 40 25 Dory 18 54 00 44 Dosenbeck 41 54 10 25   42 54 05 24     54 10 25 Dost S. 16 54 00 38 Dosterup 38 55 05 23   39 55 05 23 Dostrup 32 55 30 27 Dottken 42 54 10 24 Dova fl. 16 54 00 39 Douboki 12 49 00 49   13 D   Dove Elve. 44 53 30 24 Dove Moll. 44 53 50 24 Dourk 37 56 00 24 Dousch 30 54 20 24 Douspuda 18 53 30 40 Dowerdick 42 53 55 24 Dopico 18 54 30 45   20 54 00 46 Dozarzi 18 54 30 45 Draaby 30 55 40 26   32 55 50 26 Dracsoocenb 31 55 40 28 Dracstanden 27 64 40 27 Drage 40 54 25 24   41 54 00 24   42 54 00 24 Dragesond 27 62 30 21   28 62 30 20 Dragsholm 32 55 40 26 Draken 32 55 30 27 Darker 30 55 20 27 Draksond 25 62 00 20 Drammen 25 59 30 24   29 59 00 24 Dranarp 22 56 00 28 Dranderup 30 55 20 24   35 55 20 24 Drandsow 43 54 20 25 Drangedal 29 58 00 21 P. Draskow G. Dros∣se 15 52 40 32 Drareen 16 55 20 39 Drauganess 26 67 30 351 Drausenlacus 16 54 00 37   17 54 00 37 Drawa 15 52 50 32 Drebeck 44 53 45 24 Dreberg 30 53 40 20 Drebnow 15 51 40 32 Drebosce 12 49 00 50   13 D   Drechsmynde 33 54 40 26 Dreeggers 43 53 55 25 Drelborg 39 55 00 23
38 55 05 23 50 41 53 20 25 00   44 53 25 25 00 14 50 40 30 00 31 55 35 29 10 owka 12 47 00 50 00   13 P   G. Dricsen 15 52 40 32 40 28 61 00 19 30 39 55 30 24 40 38 55 00 25 20   40 55 00 25 20 15 51 30 33 20 fl. 16 54 00 38 00 S. 16 53 40 37 30 rgen. 01 73 50 72 00 16 53 40 37 30 26 67 00 355 00 16 54 00 39 30   18 54 00 39 00 14 52 40 32 00 19 55 30 45 00 34 55 25 24 20 41 53 20 22 40 36 56 50 23 10   37 56 15 25 10 sum 41 53 45 24 00 sholm 23 59 10 34 30 06 51 00 41 00   14 52 40 51 00   18 52 00 44 00 gezako 16 52 20 34 00 06 56 00 52 00   20 56 00 51 00 36 56 45 23 00 enes 20 64 00 24 00   25 64 00 24 00   27 64 00 24 00 sholm 32 55 50 27 00 27 64 20 26 00 32 55 30 26 00 14 52 20 32 00   15 52 20 32 00 11 51 00 57 00 lacus 11 51 06 54 00 39 55 15 24 10 18 53 00 48 00 Oelnik fl. 12 48 00 51 00   13 I   06 55 00 45 00   18 55 30 44 00   19 55 00 45 00   20 55 00 45 00 15 52 00 33 40 hammer. 15 52 30 32 40 wor 19 55 30 45 00 wor 18 55 30 44 00 R. 12 49 30 52 00 18 55 30 45 00 18 55 30 45 00 zyca 18 55 00 44 00 06 55 00 55 00   18 55 00 43 00   20 56 00 54 00 14 51 20 37 00 12 48 30 51 00 P. Dupino. 14 51 20 33 00   15 51 20 34 00 roi 10 F   19 56 00 43 00   20 56 00 43 00 fl. 19 56 00 44 00 18 53 30 42 00 14 49 20 39 00 06 54 00 43 00   18 54 30 43 00   20 54 00 43 00 18 55 00 41 00 12 51 00 42 00   18 50 30 42 00 12 50 00 44 00 39 54 55 24 10 18 54 00 44 00 ica olim Du∣ 18 51 30 44 00 18 54 30 48 00 44 53 45 25 20 18 53 30 45 00 18 53 30 43 00 uze 18 54 00 48 00 21 59 00 48 00 10 A     06 56 00 53 00 20 56 00 53 00 sach 31 55 55 28 20 17 54 20 36 30 fl. 38 55 00 24 20   06 64 00 60 00     64 00 64 00 areca 09 C.   arva. 09 C.   20 59 00 46 00   14 49 00 38 00   18 49 00 39 00 15 52 00 33 40 S. 16 53 40 39 30 S. 16 53 40 38 30 fl. 06 56 00 43 00 ick fl. 18 49 30 38 00 schbeck 16 54 40 39 00 18 49 30 42 00 Duneberg 19 56 00 44 00 Duneburg 06 56 00 44 00   20 56 00 44 00 Dunekelsdorp 43 53 55 25 20 Dungard 37 55 45 24 20 Dunilowicze 18 55 00 45 00 Duncker 22 59 00 33 00   23 59 00 33 00 Dunslund 37 55 40 23 30 Dupiewi 15 52 10 33 40 Durben 19 56 30 38 00   20 56 00 38 00 During 16 20 00 37 30 Durna 12 47 00 57 00 Durup 36 56 40 23 20 Dusiaty 19 55 30 43 00 Dussiniani 18 54 00 42 00 Dussniki 15 52 10 33 20 Dustaty 18 55 00 43 00 Dusziuki 14 52 00 33 00 Duttcbutt 38 54 45 25 00   40 54 45 25 00 Duvomont 20 57 00 42 00 Duvense 41 53 40 25 20   44 53 45 25 20 Duvenstede 38 54 20 24 50   40 54 20 24 50   44 53 40 24 50 Duulre 06 60 00 65 00 Duvostorum 06 44 00 43 00 Duyrhaven 23 54 10 35 30 Duysburg 20 51 00 22 00 Duyts 19 59 00 46 00 Duyveloselts 28 62 00 20 00 Dwina 07 64 00 64 00   01 62 &c 60 &c Dwina R. 01 64 00 58 00 Dworcer 18 53 00 43 00 Dybbe 36 56 30 22 30   37 56 30 22 30 Dybeek 31 55 25 28 50 Dybek 30 55 20 28 20 Dybingsvand 29 58 20 21 00 Dyers C. 01 67 30 314 30 Dyestadt 37 55 35 24 00 Dylle 40 54 35 25 10 Dyllefeld 33 54 45 26 40 Dymidowca 12 50 00 51 00 Dynby 37 55 45 22 40 Dyreudde 22 58 30 29 00 Dyrhaffue 37 56 00 24 20 Dyrstad 37 55 30 23 50 Dyvads K. 29 58 20 23 00 R. Dzawice 13 D   Dziarerimenda olim Oczakow. 12 46 30 49 00   13 R   Dzicwiatkowice 18 52 30 42 00 Dzierzassno 15 52 50 33 00 Dziesna 06 55 00 46 00   18 55 30 46 00   20 55 00 46 00 Dziesna fl. 11 51 00 47 00   18 50 00 48 00     55 30 45 00 Dziewienisski 18 54 00 43 00 Dzike Polie 12 47 00 50 00   13 L   Dziniufe 12 49 00 46 00 Dziwaliow 18 55 00 42 00 Dziwnige 12 49 30 51 00 Dzwina a Ptol. Ru∣bon fl. 18 55 30 45 46     56 00 42 00   19 56 00 48 00     55 30 44 00     55 30 46 00     56 30 43 00     57 00 41 00   20 56 00 44 00     63 00 62 00 Dzwinose fl. 18 54 00 45 00 Dzwoniec 12 47 30 52 00   13 L   E.   EBbarbo 31 55 30 28 30 Ebbendrop 43 54 15 25 00 Ebberuy 31 56 00 28 40 Ebbeso 31 55 30 28 40 Ebbesand 22 59 00 25 00 Ebeest 22 56 00 25 00 Ebelo 30 55 40 25 00   34 55 35 24 50   35 55 40 24 40   37 55 45 24 40 Ebeltod 35 56 00 25 00 Ebeltost 30 56 00 25 00 Eberbd 31 55 45 29 00 Eboyck 28 62 30 21 30 Echovet 42 54 15 24 40 Eckeldsdorp 43 54 00 25 30 Ecken 41 53 40 25 10   44 53 40 25 10 Eckersdorff 16 53 40 37 30 Eckersperg 16 53 40 39 30 Eckholt 43 54 25 24 50 Eckhorst 30 53 40 25 20   43 53 50 25 20 Ecklenforde 42 54 30 24 40 Ecklenforderhaven 40 54 30 25 10   42 54 30 24 50 Eckrenforde 38 54 25 25 00   40 54 25 25 00 Eckquock 39 54 50 24 20 Eckrnford 41 54 30 24 40 Eckwath 38 55 05 24 20   39 55 05 24 20 Ecschou 34 55 10 25 10 Ecza 18 56 00 42 00 Ed 20 58 00 26 00   22 58 30 26 00   25 58 30 26 00 Eda 20 59 00 28 00   22 59 30 28 00   25 59 30 28 00 Edhbo 21 59 30 35 00 Edelacke 41 54 00 23 50   42 54 00 23 50 Edenberg 31 56 15 28 20 Edelten 20 60 00 24 00   25 60 00 24 00   28 60 00 23 30   29 60 00 24 00 Edges I. 01 77 &c. 42 &c. Edge M. 01 76 30 37 00 Edsbroo 19 59 30 35 00   20 59 00 35 00   22 59 00 35 00   23 59 50 35 00 Edsochn 22 59 00 28 00 Edswel 06 60 00 26 00   20 60 00 26 00   22 60 00 26 00   25 60 00 26 00   28 60 00 26 00 Edzberg 22 58 30 31 00   23 58 50 31 30 Edzueden 22 57 30 28 00 Eed 27 64 40 26 00 Eedae 27 64 00 24 00 Eegby 32 55 20 27 00 Eegholm 40 55 00 25 30 Eeken 38 55 00 24 50   40 55 00 24 50 Eelweyck 27 62 40 22 00 Eertflo 30 56 40 23 20 Eerst 37 55 30 23 40 Eerstehoeck 07 73 00 75 00 Eerstholm 30 55 00 30 00 Ees 30 54 20 23 40 Eesche 42 54 05 23 50 Effkebull 41 54 40 24 00 Effui K. 29 58 20 22 00 Effuisund 29 58 20 22 00 Egoyvig 20 55 00 26 00   32 55 40 26 40 Eegberg 36 57 15 24 30 Egebierg 32 55 50 26 20 I. Egede 32 55 20 27 00 Egeholma 31 56 10 29 10 Egens 30 55 00 25 20     56 40 24 40   34 55 05 25 30   35 56 40 24 40   36 56 50 24 50   37 56 15 25 00 Egensclosterochby 36 56 55 24 50 Egentzkamp 42 53 35 25 40 Eger 29 58 20 20 30 Egersund 29 58 00 20 30 Egsgaardochby 37 55 40 23 10 Egge 27 64 40 28 00 Eggebeck 38 54 35 24 30     54 50 24 10   39 54 50 24 10   40 54 35 24 30     54 55 24 10   41 54 40 24 10 Eggesud 37 56 10 24 50 Eggero 20 58 00 20 00   25 58 00 20 00 Eggerstede 44 53 40 24 30 Eggestede 42 54 05 24 00 Eggod 37 56 10 24 50 Egholm 21 59 00 43 00   30 55 00 26 00     55 40 26 40   32 55 40 26 00     55 40 26 40   34 55 10 26 00   36 56 55 24 20   38 55 20 24 50   39 55 20 24 50 Egisloff 32 55 20 26 20 Eglijerni 20 62 00 51 00 Eglijervi 21 61 00 51 00 Ego 35 56 00 24 40 Egruss 38 54 40 25 00   40 54 40 25 00 Egstrup 37 55 55 23 50 Egsund 21 61 30 33 00 Egtwed 37 55 35 23 40 Egward 37 55 50 23 00 Eherto 20 56 00 25 00 Ehest 40 54 20 23 50 Ehrfiord 29 59 00 21 00 Eiapial 26 64 30 357 00 Eiapiallahokel 26 65 00 357 00 Eichmedig 16 54 00 39 30 Eicholtz 16 54 00 38 00 Eichron 16 54 00 38 30 Eichwald 17 54 05 36 30
Eide 06 60 00 21 00 Eideford 29 60 00 22 00 Eidvand 25 58 30 21 00   29 58 20 21 00 Eidsk 29 58 00 22 30 Eidze 29 58 50 21 00 Eieruy 31 55 35 28 40 Eige 25 58 00 21 00 Eige K. 29 58 00 21 30 Eignbuttel 44 53 40 24 30 Eilenstede 44 53 35 24 30 Eilinge 31 55 45 28 30 Eilsted 30 53 40 24 20 Eilwig fl. 15 52 00 31 40 Eimen fl. 16 54 40 40 00 Einfelt 42 54 05 24 50 Eingvaller 26 65 00 355 00 Einsidel 16 53 20 36 00 Eirar 26 65 00 01 00 Eirarbala 26 64 30 355 00 Eisaruy 31 55 34 28 40 Eisisski 18 53 30 42 00 Eisse fl. 16 55 20 39 30 Eister fl. 16 55 00 40 00     55 50 23 40 Eistrup 37 56 00 23 10 Ekeby 24 59 20 32 40 Ekelenford 30 54 20 24 40 Ekelst 31 55 35 29 20 Ekenes 19 60 00 40 00   20 60 00 40 00   21 60 00 40 00 Ekera 22 59 00 34 00 Ekero 21 59 30 36 00   22 59 30 36 00   23 59 10 34 30     59 50 36 30 Ekeroe 19 59 30 36 00 Ekeroon 24 59 10 34 20 Ekesar 20 60 00 29 00   22 60 00 29 00   24 60 10 29 20   25 60 00 29 00 Ekesio 06 57 00 31 00   20 57 00 31 00   22 57 00 31 00 Ekkere 22 57 00 30 00 Eklisund 28 60 00 23 30   29 60 00 24 00 Eknan 22 57 00 33 00 Ekolen lacus 23 59 30 34 30 Ekolsund 23 59 20 34 00 Ekow 19 56 00 42 00 Elan fl. 06 52 00 74 00   08 52 00 74 00 Elb fl. 14 51 00 29 00   20 53 00 26 00   30 53 40 24 00   41 54 00 23 10   44 53 25 25 10 Elbing 06 54 00 37 00   14 54 00 37 00   16 54 00 37 00   17 54 05 37 00   18 54 00 37 00 Elbing fl. 16 54 00 37 00 Elbings Campe 17 54 10 26 50 Elbinsche Hohe 17 54 05 37 10 Elbinschewerder 17 54 05 36 50 Elbings Rossgart 17 54 00 36 50 Elbingswald 17 54 10 36 50 Eloholm 30 56 00 30 00 Elder 44 53 25 25 10 Elderop 35 56 00 24 20 Eldey 26 64 30 351 00 Eldor 26 64 30 357 00 Eleholm 06 56 00 30 00   20 56 00 29 00   22 56 00 30 00 Elersdorp 41 54 15 25 40   43 54 15 25 40 Elerstorp 30 54 00 25 20 Elfstroom vide Elb 30 54 00 23 00 Elfuedalen 24 61 20 29 40   25 61 30 28 00 Elfueria 25 60 30 26 00 Elfuerin 20 60 00 26 00 Elghult 20 56 00 31 00   22 57 00 31 00     58 30 27 00 Elhovet 38 54 50 24 00   40 54 50 24 00 Elif 37 56 10 24 50 Elima 06 60 00 44 00   20 60 00 44 00   21 60 30 44 00 Elins 12 48 30 47 00   22 57 30 28 00 Elinsk 21 49 00 52 00 C. Elisabeth 01 62 40 306 00 Qu. Elisabeths forland 01 62 40 336 00 Elisarow 06 57 00 46 00 Elitten 16 54 00 38 00 Elizarow 19 57 30 46 00   20 57 00 46 00 Elkiaer 36 57 25 24 40 Elkier 36 57 20 24 40 Ellebogen 31 55 35 28 00 Old Ellebogen 30 55 20 28 00 Ellenberg 40 54 40 25 00 Ellenborch 20 52 00 27 00 Ellenborg 32 55 20 25 40 Ellensiede 40 54 30 24 30 Ellerbeck 41 53 40 24 40   43 54 15 25 00   44 53 40 24 30   00 53 40 24 40 Ellerbruch 16 54 00 37 00 Ellerhelgoon 21 61 00 34 00 Ellerhelmsberg 35 57 00 23 00 Ellerholmsberg 30 57 00 22 40 Ellerhope 44 53 45 24 30 Ellendorp 42 54 10 24 40 Ellerod 30 55 20 29 00   31 55 35 29 30 Elling 32 55 10 26 20   36 57 20 24 50 Elling S. 16 53 20 38 00 Ellingaard 36 57 20 24 50 Ellingow 35 57 00 24 40 Ellingstede 38 54 30 24 10     54 30 24 30 Elitzhoy 36 56 50 24 20 Ellrow 44 53 45 24 30 Ellum 38 55 00 23 50   39 55 00 23 50 Ellund 38 54 45 24 20   40 54 45 24 20 Eline fl. 16 54 00 38 30     54 20 39 30 Elinenherst 41 53 55 25 50   43 53 55 25 50   44 53 45 25 00 Elmeschehagen 38 54 15 25 00   40 54 15 25 00   41 54 15 25 00   42 54 15 25 00   43 54 15 25 00 Elmesdorn 30 53 40 24 20   41 53 45 24 20   44 53 45 24 20 Elmiazow 12 49 00 49 00   13 D   Elnesie 22 58 00 26 00   25 50 00 26 00 Elpersbuttel 41 54 05 23 50   42 54 05 23 50 Elsa fl. 14 49 20 35 00 Elsange 29 59 00 25 00 Elsborg 22 57 30 26 00   30 57 20 27 00   37 56 15 24 10 Elsenare 16 53 00 36 30 Elsholm 39 56 00 24 30 Elsingborg 32 55 50 27 40 Elsingborg vide Elskarby 06 60 00 34 00   20 60 00 34 00   21 60 00 34 00   22 60 00 34 00   23 60 20 34 00   24 60 20 34 20 Elsnebben 23 58 50 35 00 Elsnedalen 20 61 00 28 00 Elsve 36 56 45 23 10 Elsted 30 53 40 24 40   37 56 10 24 40 Elster fl. 14 51 20 30 00 Elsterwerd 14 51 00 30 00 Elstrop 42 54 15 24 20 Elstrup 38 54 15 24 40   40 54 15 24 40 Eltang 37 55 30 23 50   39 55 30 24 20 Eltin 35 55 20 24 20 Elwith 30 55 20 24 40   34 55 30 24 50   35 55 20 24 40 Emb 37 57 10 24 10 Embeck fl. 19 58 00 45 00 Embrick 20 51 00 21 00 Emsbull 38 54 45 23 40   40 54 45 23 50 Emsbuttel 44 53 35 24 40 Emckendorp 42 54 15 24 40   43 54 20 25 10 Emcloster 35 56 00 24 00 Emden 06 53 00 22 00   20 53 00 22 00 Emdgard 34 55 00 24 50 Emelsbuttel 42 54 00 24 10 Emia fl. 21 59 30 49 00 Emkl 20 55 00 24 00 Emklost 30 56 00 24 00 Emmerleff 38 55 00 23 40   39 50 00 23 40   40 55 00 23 40 Emmersche 39 54 55 23 50   40 54 55 23 50 Emmersont 25 63 30 23 00 Emmes 24 61 20 31 20 Emrig 30 56 20 23 00 Ems 20 52 00 20 00 Emtorwyck 22 59 30 29 00   24 49 50 29 20 Emwig 20 56 00 22 00 Ena 20 61 00 42 00   21 61 30 43 00 Enanger 20 61 00 33 00   21 61 30 34 00 Enaraby 06 69 00 44 00   07 69 00 4 Enara Tresk 01 69 10 4   20 69 00 4   06 69 00 4 Enarraby 20 69 00 4 Enbeck 42 54 00 2 Enchhuysen 20 52 00 2 Enckendorp 42 54 15 2 Encoping 20 59 00 3   24 59 20 3 Endela 19 58 30 4 Endelau 35 55 40 2 Endelo 30 55 40 2   34 55 40 2   37 55 45 2 Enderupholm 37 55 30 2 Endisloff 32 55 20 2 Endorp 41 54 00 2   42 54 00 2   44 44 00 2 Endrup 39 55 15 2 Endsleff 36 56 30 2 Engar 34 55 35 2   37 55 35 2 Engberg 36 56 35 2   37 56 35 2 Engbrotta 37 56 10 2 Enge 38 54 45 2   40 54 45 2 Engebeek 31 56 15 2 Engebirg 30 56 20 2   35 56 20 2 Engelaruy 31 56 10 2 Engelholm 22 56 00 2   31 56 05 2 Engelinge 19 60 00 3 Engellaw 41 54 15 2   43 54 15 2 Engellaw 16 54 20 3 Engelsbeck 31 56 10 2 Engelsburg 16 53 20 3 Engelsby 38 54 45 2 Engelstein 16 54 00 3 Engelsholm 37 55 40 2 Engelstruy 31 55 30 2 Engeltasta 31 56 05 2 Engemark 36 57 00 2 Engesio 24 59 20 3 Engeswang 35 56 20 2 Engiswong 37 56 05 2 Engleruy 31 56 10 2 Engloo 23 59 20 3 Engom 37 55 40 2 Enklinge 21 60 00 3 Enkopia 23 59 20 3 Enkoping 22 59 00 3 Enleve 39 55 00 2 Ensal 21 60 00 4 Ensleff 36 56 20 2   37 56 20 2   37 56 30 2 Enskal 19 60 00 4 Enst 35 56 20 2 Enstede 38 54 55 2   39 54 55 2   40 54 55 2 Epenworden 41 54 10 2   42 54 10 2 Epleboda 20 60 00 2 Eppendorp 41 53 35 2   44 53 35 2 Erbeck 30 55 20 2   34 55 20 2   35 55 20 2 Erentung 23 59 50 3 Erf vel domus. 17 54 05 3 Erfede 38 54 20 2   40 54 20 2   41 54 20 2 Erfuala 24 59 10 3 Erigland 36 56 30 2   37 56 30 2 Ericksfiverd 20 62 00 2   25 62 30 2   27 63 00 2 Erickshaven 27 63 20 2 Ericksholm 22 55 30 2   31 55 45 2   32 55 40 2 Eringsloff 33 54 40 2 Erinistat 06 44 00 4 Erla 19 56 30 43   20 56 00 43 Erling S. 16 53 40 37 Erloff 39 55 10 24 Erlow 41 53 45 24 Ermeland 16 54 00 37 Ermelundgrard 32 55 00 27 Ermsz 19 57 30 43 Errigstede 38 55 15 24   39 55 15 24 Erskewyck 28 62 00 2 Erstkirck 35 55 20 24 Ersleff 36 56 45 23 Ersnes 21 65 00 37 Ersshale 38 54 55 29   40 54 55 29 Erstehocck 06 72 00 74 Ersttieff 16 54 20 37 Ertholma 20 55 00 30   22 55 00 30 00
27 63 20 21 00 19 57 00 40 00 42 54 20 24 10 32 56 00 57 00 40 54 35 23 50 34 55 30 25 10 40 54 30 24 50 16 53 40 38 00 44 53 30 25 10 17 54 00 37 00 35 56 20 23 40 20 53 00 22 00 44 53 45 24 20 31 56 05 29 20 36 56 40 23 30 31 56 10 28 10 30 55 20 27 00   32 54 50 27 00     55 20 27 00   33 54 55 27 00 31 55 30 28 10     56 10 29 20 23 59 10 33 00 21 60 30 34 00 22 59 00 27 00 30 55 40 29 20 31 55 40 29 50 31 55 25 28 40 39 55 15 23 20 40 54 30 24 40 38 54 30 24 20   40 54 30 24 20 31 55 40 28 50 31 55 50 29 10 22 56 00 27 00 30 56 00 27 00   31 56 00 27 00   32 56 00 27 00 36 56 20 24 50   37 56 20 24 50 41 53 25 23 00 31 56 00 27 00   32 55 50 27 20 14 52 00 35 00 41 53 30 24 20   44 53 30 24 20 19 58 00 43 00   44 53 30 24 20 06 58 00 41 00   21 59 00 42 00 36 56 30 23 30   37 56 30 24 30 26 65 30 02 00 36 56 20 24 50   37 55 25 23 30     56 20 24 50 36 56 30 23 30   37 56 30 23 30 29 59 20 21 00 15 52 20 31 40 20 68 00 57 00 22 55 30 27 00 40 54 30 24 00   42 54 30 23 40 30 55 00 27 00   32 55 10 27 00 19 56 30 43 00 25 63 30 24 00 34 55 20 25 20 11 47 00 53 00 37 55 30 24 00 27 63 20 24 00 31 55 50 29 30 06 60 00 47 00 43 54 05 25 20     54 10 25 20 41 54 05 25 20   43 54 05 25 20 43 54 05 25 20 12 47 30 43 00 12 49 00 44 00 13 B.   31 55 45 28 40 20 61 00 39 00   21 61 00 39 00 20 61 00 38 00   21 61 30 38 00 11 52 00 66 00 19 59 00 43 00   20 59 00 44 00 26 67 00 357 00   38 54 10 25 10     54 15 24 30   40 54 10 25 10     54 15 24 30     54 20 25 00   41 54 10 24 20     54 10 24 50   42 54 10 24 50     54 15 23 40     54 15 24 20     54 20 23 40   54 20 24 50   30 54 20 23 40   41 54 05 24 50     54 25 23 30 42 54 05 24 50   30 54 20 23 20   38 54 15 23 30   40 54 15 23 30   41 54 15 23 20 Eye 06 58 00 21 00   20 58 00 21 00   25 58 00 21 00   29 58 00 21 00 Eyerleff 36 56 50 23 20 2. Eylanden 06 70 00 78 00   07 70 00 78 00 3. Eylanden 06 67 00 60 00   07 67 00 60 00   20 66 00 61 00 7. Eylanden 06 69 00 58 00   07 69 00 57 00   20 69 00 57 00 Eylandenvan Flo∣wach. 20 62 00 18 00   25 62 00 19 00 Eylandenvan Lom∣bassche. 06 68 00 60 00   07 68 00 61 00   20 68 00 60 00 Eylandenvan Podc∣semske. 20 64 00 59 00 D. Eylaw 16 53 20 37 30 P. Eylaw 14 54 20 38 00   16 54 20 38 30 Eysenberg 16 54 20 38 00 Eysing 36 56 30 23 20   37 56 30 23 20 Eysserndorp 42 54 10 24 40   43 53 55 25 10 Eystrup 40 54 40 24 40 Eytum 40 54 55 23 20 Eytumtieff 40 54 50 23 20 F.   FAare 30 55 40 26 20 Faareveyle 32 55 40 26 20 Faderby 36 56 50 22 40 Faegre 22 58 30 30 00 Fao 32 54 50 26 40   33 54 50 26 30 Faermesen 44 53 35 24 50 Fagrilt 31 56 00 27 50 Fahlun 24 60 30 32 20 Fahrstede 42 54 00 23 40 Faien 22 56 30 28 00 Fair Haven. 01 79 35 34 00 Falckenaw 16 53 40 36 30     53 40 37 00     54 00 39 00 Falckenberg 06 56 00 27 00   20 56 00 27 00   22 56 30 27 00   41 54 05 24 30 Falckenborg 30 56 40 27 20   40 54 00 24 50   42 54 05 24 30 Falckenheid 16 54 40 38 30 Falckensloff 32 54 50 27 00   33 54 50 27 00 Falconara 11 46 00 47 00 Falgenau 17 54 00 36 10 Falgo K. 29 58 40 20 30 Falckenow 17 53 55 36 20 Falknaw 19 58 00 45 00   20 58 00 44 00 Falkowo 15 51 40 34 20 Fallecoping 22 57 30 29 00 Fallekoping 20 57 00 29 00 Fallsbolle 30 54 40 25 40   32 54 50 26 00   34 54 55 25 50 Falnes K. 29 59 00 20 00 Falsloff 36 56 35 24 40   37 56 35 24 40 Falster 06 55 00 28 00 I. Falster 20 55 00 27 00 Falsterboe 20 55 00 28 00   22 55 00 28 00   30 55 20 27 40   31 55 22 28 00 Falsterlaland 30 54 40 26 40     54 40 27 40 Falstria 32 54 50 27 00 Falstrup 30 56 00 24 00   37 56 15 24 10 Falxin 06 45 00 43 00 Famastro 06 43 00 52 00 Fanastrand 27 63 00 21 00 Fano 20 55 00 23 00   30 55 20 23 00   35 55 20 23 20 Fanocc 38 55 20 23 20 Fanokund 37 55 25 22 30 Fansing 36 56 20 24 50   37 56 20 24 50 Farasan 06 53 00 66 00   08 53 00 66 00 Farasau fl. 06 53 00 64 00 Farascon fl. 08 53 00 65 00 Farbe 43 54 15 25 30 Fardorp 38 54 30 24 40   40 54 30 24 40   41 54 30 24 20 Fardrup 38 55 20 23 40   39 55 20 23 40 Farelt 22 56 00 28 00 Faretofft 38 54 40 23 50   40 54 40 23 50 Faretrap 38 54 45 23 20   40 54 45 23 20 C. Farewell 01 59 30 329 00 Fargestet 36 56 25 22 20   37 56 25 22 20 Fari 30 55 40 29 20   31 55 50 29 50 Farille 30 56 00 29 00   31 55 55 29 30 Fariltosta 30 55 40 28 40   31 55 55 28 50 Farindloss 32 55 20 27 00 Faringe 21 59 30 35 00 Faro 06 58 00 35 00   19 58 00 35 00   20 58 00 35 00   22 58 00 35 00 Farrisholt 39 55 20 24 10 Farrnwinckel 42 54 05 23 50 Farrup 37 55 20 23 00 Farse 36 56 45 23 50 Farup 30 55 20 23 40   35 55 20 23 40   37 55 40 23 50 Farum 30 55 40 27 00   31 55 45 27 00   32 55 40 27 00   35 55 40 27 00 Fassendorp 41 54 05 25 20   43 54 05 25 20 Fastrop 30 56 00 29 00   31 56 05 29 10 Fastrup 36 56 50 23 50 Faugo 34 55 20 25 10 Faulen 16 53 20 38 00 Faulioc fl. 08 53 00 65 00 Faul Ober fl. 14 52 00 32 00   15 52 00 32 40 Faunefiord 30 55 00 27 00   32 55 00 27 00 Faursbyll 34 55 25 24 50 Fausbuy 39 55 00 24 00 Fauscheberg 34 55 15 24 50 Faustrup 39 55 20 24 30 Fawerwra 39 55 15 24 20 Fawralt 30 56 20 28 40   31 56 10 29 00 Faxe 30 55 00 27 00   32 55 10 27 00   35 55 20 27 00 Faxe Herrit. 32 55 10 27 00 Faxo 20 55 00 27 00 Feadie 20 60 00 19 00   25 60 30 19 00 Feddie 25 58 30 25 00   28 60 30 19 30 Feddie K. 29 58 00 21 00 Feddring 42 54 15 24 00 Feduszka 12 48 30 52 00 Feed 20 59 00 26 00   22 59 30 26 00   25 59 30 26 00 Feessy 27 63 20 24 00 Fegere 22 56 30 28 00 Fegesond 36 56 50 23 20 Fegetasch 43 54 05 25 10 Fegtasch 41 54 05 25 10 Fehr 17 54 00 37 00     54 10 36 30   30 54 40 26 40     55 00 25 40   32 55 00 26 00   34 54 55 25 50   40 54 20 24 10     54 50 23 20   41 54 25 26 00   42 54 10 24 10   43 54 25 26 00 Fehre 32 54 50 26 40   33 54 45 27 00     54 50 26 50     54 55 26 50 Fehre Tors. 33 54 45 26 10 Fehrhus 39 55 15 24 40 Fehrstede 38 55 15 23 40   41 54 35 26 00   44 53 55 24 00 Feile 22 56 30 29 00 Fekowcze 12 48 30 46 00 Fela fl. 19 58 00 42 00 Felamsbygge 31 56 15 28 30 Felde 42 54 15 24 40 Felding 36 56 20 23 00   37 56 20 23 00 Feldsoggen 06 60 00 19 00 Feldstede 38 54 55 24 30   39 54 55 24 30   40 54 55 24 30 Feldthusen 44 53 55 24 20 Feldum 39 55 15 24 30 Fellaberga 31 56 15 28 50 Fellin 06 58 00 44 00   19 58 00 43 00   20 58 00 43 00 Fels 30 56 20 24 00   35 56 20 24 00 Felsbro 24 59 20 32 00 Felste 34 55 20 24 50 Felstin 12 49 00 44 00 Felxin 12 47 00 46 00 Fembria 20 54 00 26 00
Femeren 30 54 20 26 20   41 54 30 26 00 Femeria 43 54 25 26 00 Fenian 31 56 00 29 00 Fenne 30 54 40 26 40   32 54 50 26 40   33 54 55 26 40   34 55 25 24 30 Fenoe 37 55 25 24 10   38 55 30 24 40   39 55 30 24 40 Fens 34 55 20 24 40 Fenschou 34 55 20 24 40 Fensmark 32 55 10 26 40 Fenya 31 56 00 29 00 Feo 30 54 40 26 20 Ferkingstad 29 59 00 20 00 Ferdescop 31 56 05 29 10 Fere fl. 17 53 50 36 10 Ferrebeck 31 55 35 28 20 Ferie 31 55 50 29 40 Feringen 24 59 20 31 40 Fermag 30 56 20 22 40 Fermang 35 56 20 22 40 Ferabo 24 59 40 32 40 Fernbuttel 44 53 55 25 00 Fernebo 22 59 30 33 00   23 59 40 33 00 Ferning 20 56 00 22 00 Ferring 36 56 30 22 30   37 56 30 22 30 Ferst fl. 14 54 00 35 00   16 54 00 36 00 Fers herrit 31 55 35 29 10 Fersloft 32 55 40 26 40 Fersted 35 56 40 24 40 Festede 39 55 15 23 50 Feti 06 47 00 53 00   11 47 00 52 00 Fetingsholt 31 56 15 29 00 Fettenheen 44 53 55 24 00 Feuderichsa 09 C   Feudersicha 09 E   Feuling 37 55 25 23 20     55 55 24 10 Feyenwellen 40 54 45 24 40 Fiantz herret 37 56 20 23 30 Fieburg 06 57 00 48 00   20 56 00 48 00   20 56 00 48 00 Fied 30 55 00 27 00   32 55 00 27 00   33 55 05 27 10 Fiediesund 29 58 20 23 30 Fiedrundria 23 59 40 33 30 Fiekal 19 58 30 41 00 Fielde 33 54 45 26 50 Fielde Field 29 60 40 22 30 Fielden 37 56 20 25 00 Fieldsoggen or Scoggers Wag 28 60 00 19 30 Fielen 36 56 30 23 10   37 56 30 23 10 Fielie 31 55 40 28 20 Fieil 41 54 10 23 50   42 54 10 23 50 Fiell fl. 42 54 10 23 50 Fielle 28 61 30 22 30     62 30 22 30 Fielle weer 27 64 40 25 00 Fiell See 42 54 10 23 50 Fielstrup 38 55 20 24 30   39 55 20 24 30 Fieltring 36 56 30 22 20   37 56 30 22 20 Fielweer 25 65 00 25 00 Fienisloff 32 25 20 26 40 Fieras 22 57 00 26 00   30 57 00 27 20   35 57 00 27 20 Fierde 29 58 40 20 00 Fierek 29 58 00 22 30 Fiereggen 21 63 30 36 00 Fiersta 31 55 50 28 00 Fierstatruy 31 55 50 27 50 Figen Elff 29 58 20 20 00 Filballe 35 56 00 25 00   37 56 15 25 00 Filchn 15 52 40 33 00 Filhal 30 56 00 25 00 Fille Fiell 06 61 00 22 00   20 61 00 21 00   25 61 30 22 00 Filni 20 60 00 34 00 Filny 22 60 00 34 00   23 60 00 34 30 Finckenwerder 41 53 30 24 30   44 53 30 24 30 Findaasi 25 59 30 19 00 Findaass 29 59 20 20 00 Finderup 32 55 30 26 20 Findsland K. 29 58 00 22 00 Finzier 44 53 50 25 00 Finlandia 06 61 00 39 00   19 60 00 40 00   20 62 00 39 00   21 62 00 39 00     65 00 50 00 Finland Merid. 21 65 00 50 00 Finland Sept. 21 65 00 51 00 Finmager 25 60 00 20 00 Finmanger 20 60 00 20 00   28 60 00 20 00 Finmarchia 06 69 00 35 00   20 69 00 34 &c Finmark 01 69 &c 33 &c Finsfioerd 28 60 30 20 00 Finstrom 19 60 00 37 00   21 60 00 37 00   22 60 00 37 00 Fiol 19 59 00 43 00 Fionia 32 55 20 25 20   35 55 20 24 40   37 55 35 24 40 Fiosloff 32 55 20 27 20 Fischbeck 39 55 05 24 00   44 53 45 25 00 Fischenlache 17 54 05 37 00 Fischerbud 17 54 10 37 10 Fischhausen 16 54 40 38 00   18 54 30 38 00 Fischeradt 16 54 40 38 00 Fischow 17 54 00 36 50 Fischie 19 60 00 38 00   21 60 00 38 00 Fisckinottu 26 65 30 358 00 Fissow 41 54 05 25 20   43 54 05 25 20 Fiste R. 01 71 15 322 00 Fister K. 29 58 40 21 00 Fiume Condra 11 47 00 59 00 Fiume de Nicosia 11 46 00 63 00 Fixen lacus 22 59 30 28 00 Fixund 28 60 00 20 30   29 60 00 21 00 Flaa 20 60 00 24 00   22 60 00 25 00   25 60 00 24 00   28 60 00 24 30 Flaa K. 29 60 00 25 00 Flackebierg 32 55 20 26 20 Flackebiergs herrit 32 55 20 26 20 Flackesandt 38 55 15 23 30   39 55 15 23 30 Flackesandgrund 43 54 25 25 10 Flackstroom 40 54 05 23 50   41 54 00 23 00   42 54 10 23 40 Fladde 35 56 40 23 20 Fladkirk 22 57 00 24 00   30 57 00 24 40   35 57 00 24 40   36 57 15 24 40 Flad So. 36 56 45 22 40 Flad Strand 36 57 15 25 00 Fladvand 30 57 00 24 40   35 57 00 25 00 Flagge Sandt 39 55 15 23 30 Flagsted 31 55 30 29 40 Flachenowsche Niederung 17 53 55 36 20 Flameweg 44 53 50 24 20 Flamsoe 27 62 40 21 00   28 62 30 20 00 Flanck fl. 15 52 20 32 00 Elantholm 40 55 05 24 50 Flasset 27 63 40 23 00 Flathstein 39 55 00 24 20 Flatsaw 38 55 15 23 15   39 55 15 23 50 Fleckebuy 38 54 30 24 50   40 54 30 24 50   41 54 30 24 30 Fleckefiord 29 58 00 21 00 Flecken 24 59 40 33 00 Fleckeren 20 57 00 23 00 Fleckeron 06 58 00 23 00   25 57 30 22 00   29 57 40 22 30 Fledingberg 36 56 30 23 30   37 56 30 23 30 Flederborn 14 53 20 33 00 Fledy 31 55 40 28 20 Fledby 30 55 40 28 00 Flegenberg 41 53 35 24 50 Flestrup 37 55 20 24 00 Flemhude 30 54 00 24 40   38 54 15 25 00   41 54 20 24 40 Fleming 43 54 10 25 20 Flemlos 34 55 10 25 00 Flenhude 42 54 20 24 50 Flensborg 06 54 00 24 00   20 54 00 24 00   30 54 40 24 20   35 54 40 24 20   38 54 45 24 30   40 54 45 24 30 Flensborgerwick 30 54 40 24 40   40 54 50 24 50 De Flesen 25 63 30 21 00 Flesinsker 22 59 40 37 00 Flesiusker 19 59 30 37 00   20 59 00 37 00 Fleslycke 31 56 10 29 30 Flesma 31 55 45 29 30 De Flessen 27 63 40 23 00 Flessond 27 63 40 23 00 Fletiboo 24 59 40 23 00 Fleynfossen 27 63 40 23 00 Flinge 31 55 40 28 40     56 00 27 Flinging 22 55 30 28 Flint becke 38 54 10 25     54 15 25   41 54 15 24 Flinterup 32 65 30 26 Flintholm 34 55 10 25 Fliotzdalr 26 66 00 360 Fliserid 22 57 00 32 Floda 06 65 00 30   20 60 00 31   22 58 30 33   23 58 50 33   24 60 30 31 Floddero 28 60 00 20 Flode 36 56 50 23 Flodensovoka 06 64 00 52   07 64 00 52   20 64 00 52   21 64 00 52 Flodh 06 58 00 27   20 58 00 27   22 58 00 22 Flogster K. 29 58 20 23 Floidt 39 55 15 24 Flonder So. 36 56 30 23   37 56 30 23 Floo 25 63 00 22   27 63 00 24 Floowag 28 62 30 19 Floren 29 58 40 22 Florwag 28 60 30 20 Flosholt 31 56 10 28 Flosiusker 21 59 30 37 Flo So. 36 56 25 23   37 56 25 23 Flothbeeck 41 53 35 24   44 53 35 24 Flugge 41 54 30 25 Fluggendorp 43 54 15 25 Flugsfelde 41 54 06 25 Fluhing S. 16 53 40 37 Fluide 38 55 15 24 Flus 30 54 00 24 Flushingers P. 01 76 10 97 Flusstyn 18 49 30 44 Flynder 36 56 25 22   37 56 25 22 Flyng 31 55 40 26   32 55 40 27 Fobesket 30 55 20 24   35 55 20 24 Fobis flu. 39 55 15 24 Fobithschleth 38 55 25 24   39 55 25 24 Foborg 30 55 00 25   32 55 00 25   34 55 05 25   35 55 00 25   37 55 55 24   38 55 05 25   40 55 05 25 Fochsbeck 39 55 05 24 Fockebeck 38 54 15 24   40 54 20 24   41 54 20 24   42 54 20 24 Fockste 20 58 00 20   25 58 00 20 Focksten 29 58 00 21 Fodaruy 31 55 40 28 Fodby 32 55 10 26 Fodbyga 30 55 00 26   32 55 10 26 Foddie 20 58 00 21 Fodhoo 22 59 00 33   23 59 10 33 Fodslet 32 54 50 26   34 54 50 25 Foerd 41 53 55 24   42 53 55 24     54 15 24   44 53 55 24 Foernes 27 64 40 26 Foerstede 39 55 15 23 Foester 25 63 30 23 Fogderup 39 55 00 24 Fogdoo 24 59 10 33 Fogel 19 59 30 37   20 59 00 37   21 59 30 37 Fogelde 20 69 00 35 Fogelsleff 37 56 15 25 Fogler 16 54 20 37 Fogn 29 58 40 20 Fokowce 12 48 30 44 Folcksdrop 44 53 35 24 Folckestruy 31 55 45 29 Foldero 29 59 00 21 Folding 37 55 25 23   38 55 25 24   39 55 25 24 Foldingbro 39 55 20 24 Foldingwra 40 54 45 24 Foleth 34 54 50 25 Folker 20 60 00 33   22 60 00 33   23 60 00 33 Folkierna 24 60 00 32 Follensbroo 22 59 00 32   23 59 20 32
37 55 35 24 00 37 55 55 24 40 25 59 00 25 00 31 55 45 29 00 Cerevisialis 26 66 00 354 00 commutans la∣s albas in ni∣s 26 64 30 354 00 commutans la∣s gras in albas 26 64 30 353 00 servidissimi 26 65 00 355 00 27 64 40 25 00 16 54 40 38 00 Ford 01 79 00 33 00 30 55 20 26 20   32 55 20 26 20   34 55 20 26 10 22 57 30 32 00 31 56 10 28 10 31 55 55 28 40 28 60 30 24 00 37 55 15 23 20   38 55 15 23 50   39 55 15 23 50 udden 21 60 00 35 00 zudden 20 60 00 35 00   23 60 20 35 00 36 56 25 24 30   37 56 10 24 30     56 25 24 30 14 51 20 31 00   20 57 00 27 00     62 00 32 00   22 58 00 26 00   25 58 00 26 00   27 58 00 26 00 40 54 50 24 20 32 55 10 26 20     55 20 27 00 19 60 00 35 00   20 60 00 35 00   21 60 00 35 00   22 60 00 35 00   23 60 10 35 00   24 60 10 35 00 20 61 00 33 00   21 61 30 33 00 25 64 30 27 00 forstenow 17 54 10 36 40 37 55 30 23 00 30 55 20 24 00 26 66 30 351 00 26 66 30 351 00 06 51 00 75 00   12 45 30 50 00 Kamouz 08 51 00 75 00 28 60 30 24 00   29 60 20 24 00 22 55 30 28 00   31 55 30 28 10 37 55 25 22 50 38 55 15 23 50   39 55 15 23 50 30 56 30 23 00   37 56 30 23 00 01 77 30 41 00 39 55 20 24 10 06 60 00 19 00 32 55 20 27 00 29 58 20 21 00   30 56 00 24 40   35 56 00 24 40 37 56 05 24 30 aren Vatne 29 58 00 21 30 denaw 16 53 40 38 30 dfordt ad Ode∣ 14 52 00 31 00   15 52 00 31 40 34 55 20 25 20 ker 20 53 00 20 00 kelt 31 55 25 29 00 inge 31 55 40 29 10 tow 37 56 10 24 40 up 37 56 15 24 30 41 54 15 25 30 nburg 16 54 20 37 30 endors 16 54 00 38 00 35 55 20 25 00 30 55 20 25 00 14 51 40 33 00 28 60 30 20 00 eck 42 54 05 23 50 land 14 52 00 31 00     53 00 34 00 16 53 20 37 30 lerichsborg 22 55 30 27 00   30 55 40 27 00   31 55 55 26 50   32 55 50 27 00   35 55 40 27 00 rickstad 06 59 00 25 00   22 58 30 25 00   25 58 30 25 00   30 54 20 24 00   42 54 25 23 50 ericoden 30 55 20 24 20   34 55 30 24 30   35 55 20 24 20   37 55 30 24 20   39 55 30 24 50 richsburgs Brick 32 55 50 27 00 Frodrichshoff 42 54 00 23 50 Fredstorp 44 53 50 24 50 Ald. Freeman's Inlet 01 78 25 43 00 Freesland 01 60 &c 341 &c Freestede 42 54 04 24 00 Fregelan 22 58 00 26 00 Frehol 25 63 00 22 00 Freidethal 14 49 40 34 00 Freistadt 14 49 40 35 00     53 20 37 00   16 53 20 37 00   20 53 00 37 00 Freleff 36 56 50 24 20 Frellerup 36 56 25 25 00   37 56 25 25 00 Fremmandeby 24 60 30 32 00 Fremmirud 22 58 00 28 00 Frennefors 22 58 00 27 00 Frerop 34 55 20 25 30 Fresenborg 41 53 50 25 10   43 53 50 25 00   44 53 50 25 00 Fresenhagen 38 54 45 24 10   40 54 25 25 10     54 45 24 10 Fresleff 36 56 50 24 30 Frestrup 39 54 55 24 10 Fretum weygats 06 69 00 77 00   07 69 00 78 00 Freudenberg 16 53 40 38 30     54 00 39 00 Frewdenthal 16 53 20 37 30 Freyberg 42 53 50 23 50 Freyborg 41 53 50 23 50 Freyenwillen 38 54 45 24 40 Freyhain 14 51 20 34 00 G. Freystat P. Kozu∣chowo 15 51 30 32 40 Frideberg 15 52 40 32 20 Frideck 14 49 20 35 00   14 53 00 36 00   16 53 00 36 30 Fridenberg 16 54 20 39 00 Friderichstadt 20 54 00 24 00     58 00 25 00   38 54 25 24 10   40 54 25 24 10   41 54 25 23 50 Fridlandt 14 53 00 33 00     54 20 39 00   15 53 10 33 00   16 54 20 39 00 Fridrichsdorff 15 52 50 32 40 Fridtstede 39 55 10 24 20 Friedland 14 50 40 32 00   18 54 00 39 00 Frilenwalde 14 53 20 31 00   20 53 00 22 00 Frigestad 31 55 45 29 20 Frillestad 31 55 55 28 00 Frillsted 30 55 20 28 20   31 55 25 28 30 Frillestruy 31 56 05 27 40 Friropp 31 55 30 29 00 Frisboe 31 55 45 29 40 Frische Haff. 14 54 20 37 00   16 54 20 37 30   17 54 20 37 10   18 54 00 38 00 Frisching fl. 16 54 20 38 30 Frisch Nerung 16 54 20 37 00   20 54 00 36 00 Frisia Orientalis. 30 53 30 22 40 Frissue 31 55 20 28 10 Frist 14 54 20 34 00 Frista 22 57 30 28 00 Friswyck 27 63 00 24 00 Frixend 20 59 00 28 00 Frixende 22 59 30 29 00 M. Frobishers Straits 01 63 &c 322 &c Frodsleff 36 56 45 23 00 Froen 20 61 00 25 00   25 61 00 25 00   27 63 40 23 00   28 61 30 25 00 Frokeni 22 59 00 29 00 Frolands 20 58 00 23 00   25 58 30 23 00 Frolands R. 29 58 20 22 30 Frolby 37 56 10 24 30 Frolunda 22 57 00 28 00 Fromye 16 53 20 36 30 Froosten 27 64 40 27 00 Frorop 35 55 00 24 00 Frorum 31 55 35 29 30 Frorup 38 54 40 24 30     55 20 24 20   39 55 20 24 20 Frosing 39 55 20 23 40 Frosky 16 53 40 38 30 Frosle 38 54 45 24 20 Froslow 31 55 30 29 40 Frosso Nolder 06 63 00 29 00   20 63 00 29 00 Froste Herrit 31 55 40 28 50 Frosten 20 64 00 27 00 Froyborg 38 55 00 23 50 Fruermarck 39 54 55 24 20 Fruerring 37 56 00 24 30 Frutach 06 48 00 55 00 Fuelsang 33 54 45 27 00 Fuelsbattel 41 53 35 24 40   44 53 35 24 40 Fuelse 33 54 40 20 40 Fuelsee 42 54 10 23 50 Fuelse Herret 33 54 45 26 40 Fuerrade 44 53 45 25 30 Fugelsung 31 56 10 28 40 Fuglas 22 57 30 30 00 Fuglault 31 56 15 29 20 Fuglevyk 22 59 30 27 00 Fuglewyk 25 59 00 27 00 Fulebierg 32 55 10 26 20 Fulendorp 41 53 55 24 30   44 53 55 24 40 Fulenhagen 44 53 30 25 20 Fulia 12 45 30 47 00 Fullen L. 24 60 20 32 40 Fullie 31 55 25 28 10 Fulmingawigh 26 68 00 359 00 Fulsig 36 57 15 24 20 Fulstorp 35 56 00 24 00 Fulvastapi 26 68 00 349 00 Fundbo 23 59 40 34 30 Funder 37 56 05 24 00 Funen 30 55 20 24 40   34 55 20 24 40 Funnesdahl 06 62 00 27 00   20 62 00 27 00   25 62 30 27 00   27 62 40 28 00 Furby 24 59 30 33 00   36 57 15 24 00 Furde 20 53 00 24 00 Furland 36 56 45 23 30 Furnsund 23 59 30 36 00 Furo 22 57 00 33 00 Furstenberg 15 51 50 32 00 Furstenow 15 53 10 32 40   16 54 00 36 30 Furstenwalde 14 52 00 31 00 Furstenwerder 16 54 00 36 30   17 54 15 36 30 Furungen 22 58 00 28 00 Furusund 19 59 30 36 00 Fusing 38 54 30 24 40   40 54 30 24 40 Fusingoe 36 56 25 24 20   37 56 25 24 20 Fuynen 20 55 00 24 00 Fyffharrig 42 54 05 24 50 Fylborne 31 55 55 27 40 Fyle 31 55 30 28 00 Fyllestadt 31 55 50 28 20 Fyllitzloff 32 55 40 26 26 Fyllsoe 37 55 40 22 40 Fyre So. 31 55 45 27 00   32 55 40 27 20 Fysterup 38 55 20 24 30 G.   GAard 36 56 20 23 10     56 20 24 20     56 30 22 30     56 35 24 10   37 55 25 23 00     55 45 22 50     55 55 22 50     56 00 23 00     56 15 23 00     56 20 23 10     56 25 24 20     56 25 24 50     56 30 23 40     56 35 24 10   39 54 55 24 20   42 54 15 24 50 Gaarde 28 60 00 23 00   29 60 00 23 00   43 54 15 24 50 Gaarsleff 37 55 35 24 20 Gaate 38 54 55 23 40 Gabel 39 55 15 24 10 Gabin 14 52 20 37 00 Gablick 16 54 00 40 00 Gadberg 37 55 40 23 40 Gadbierg 30 55 40 23 40 Gade 40 54 45 24 10 Gadebusch 20 53 00 26 00 Gadelundt 41 54 00 24 50   42 54 00 24 50   44 54 00 24 50 Gadendorp 42 54 05 23 50 Gadstrup 32 55 30 27 00 Gaerde 27 62 30 21 00   28 62 30 20 00 Gaerstede 44 53 40 24 40 Gaerten 27 64 40 26 00 Gaffwerslund 37 55 35 24 10 Gagne 24 60 40 31 40 Gaickebull 38 54 30 23 50   40 54 30 23 50   41 54 30 23 40 Gaieken 16 53 20 37 00 Gail s. 16 54 00 40 00 Gaistacht 44 53 25 25 10 Galacz 06 45 00 44 00 Galdarna 21 63 30 37 00 Galeien 16 54 00 38 30 Galendorp 41 54 30 26 10   43 54 20 25 40
Galetz 06 58 00 62 00   07 58 00 62 00   08 58 00 62 00 Galindia 16 53 40 38 30 Galingen 16 54 00 38 30 Gallen 37 56 15 24 30 Gallhus 38 54 55 23 50   39 54 55 23 50   40 54 55 23 50 Gallstede 38 55 05 24 10   39 55 05 24 10 Galmitz 14 52 20 32 00 Galmsbull 40 54 45 23 50 Galta 37 56 05 24 30 Galta Garben 16 54 40 38 00 Galten Herret 36 56 20 24 30   37 56 20 24 30 Galtrup 36 56 45 23 00 Galmbergh 34 53 20 24 40 Gamelahlbode 39 55 25 24 40 Gamelbuy 39 55 15 24 30   40 54 30 25 00 Gamelgaarrd 39 55 10 24 40 Gamelsbu 38 54 45 23 40 Gamelschow 39 55 05 24 10 Gamelundt 41 54 35 24 10 Gammelby 33 54 45 26 20   38 55 20 24 30   39 55 00 23 50 Gammelgard 34 54 55 24 50 Gammelhille∣sunds gab. 29 58 00 23 00 Gammelmel 36 56 20 22 50   37 56 20 22 50 Gamelsogen 37 56 00 22 40 Gammelstrup 36 56 30 23 40   37 56 30 23 40 Gammelstruy 41 55 45 29 10 Gammeltost 37 55 45 22 50 Gammelundt 38 54 35 24 30   40 54 35 24 30 Gand S. 16 53 40 39 00 Gandefiord 29 58 40 20 30 Ganderup 39 55 15 23 50 Gangenat 27 63 20 23 00 Gangewadsbroe 31 56 00 28 20 Gangloud 34 55 15 24 50 Gansloss 32 55 40 27 00 Gantawick 26 65 30 02 00 Gantost 31 55 50 27 50 Garbeck 43 54 00 25 10 Garbo 36 57 25 24 50 Garbo So. 36 57 25 24 40 Gardar 26 65 00 354 00 Garde 41 54 15 24 50 Gardebuy 38 54 50 24 10   39 54 50 24 10 Garden 40 54 50 24 10   16 53 20 38 00     55 20 39 30 Garden S. 16 53 40 37 00 Gardensee 14 53 20 36 00   16 53 40 36 30 Garding 38 54 20 23 50   40 54 20 23 50   41 54 20 23 30   42 54 20 23 40 Gardollen 25 60 00 24 00   29 60 00 24 00 Garkow 43 54 00 25 30 Garlow 30 55 20 24 20 Garloe 35 55 20 24 20 Garn 19 59 30 35 00   22 59 30 35 00   23 59 20 35 00 Garna 22 58 30 34 00   23 58 50 34 00 Garpe 42 54 05 25 10 Garpeberg 23 60 10 32 30   24 60 10 32 40 Garschaw 16 54 00 36 00 Garsden 16 55 40 39 30 Garspy 22 56 30 30 00 Ost Garstang 31 55 40 28 40 W. Garstang 31 55 40 28 40 Gart 30 54 00 25 00 Gartz 17 53 55 36 20   20 52 00 30 00   41 54 15 25 50   43 54 15 25 50 Gartzee 20 54 00 26 00 Garwolin 14 51 40 39 00 Gasdal 28 61 30 24 30 Gashelmarne 20 61 00 34 00   21 61 30 34 00 Gasoe 38 55 05 23 50   39 55 05 23 50 Gasoer 36 56 55 24 40 Gassum 36 56 30 24 40   37 56 30 24 40 Gastholm 28 60 30 20 00 Gare 39 54 50 23 40 t' Gat van Balnus 25 57 30 25 00 t' Gat van Macster∣landt 25 57 30 25 00 t' Gat van Ny∣copung 23 58 30 33 30 t' Gat van Winno 25 57 30 26 00 Gaudke 16 54 40 38 00 Gaudke fl. 16 54 40 38 00 Gausno 30 55 00 26 40   32 55 10 26 40 Gausutte 16 55 00 39 00 Gawainen 14 54 00 39 00 Gawaitten 16 54 20 40 00 Gawaitte fl. 16 54 20 40 00 Gawew 16 54 40 39 00 Gawickenberg 16 54 20 38 00 Gay 15 52 30 33 40 Gaziminia 14 50 40 39 00 Gedberg 36 57 10 24 50 Geddestruy 31 56 00 29 10 Gedinge 31 55 40 28 30 Gedingebro 31 55 40 28 40 Gedisby 33 54 40 27 00 Gedisgaard 30 54 20 27 00   33 54 40 27 00 Gedwabenen 16 53 20 38 30 Geel 16 53 20 40 00 Geeske 27 62 30 20 00 Gegen fl. 28 62 30 20 00   16 55 00 40 00 Gelacken 16 54 00 39 30 Geierswald 16 53 20 37 30 Geigendorsf 16 53 40 38 00 Geilaw 38 54 50 24 20 Geilbal 39 55 25 24 20 Geilbo 31 55 35 29 40 Geildaw 40 54 50 24 20 Geil S. 16 53 40 37 30 Geilgarben 16 54 40 38 30 Geil 39 55 20 24 20 H. Geist 43 54 05 25 30 Geldorp 40 54 30 24 40 Gelengow 12 49 30 43 00 Gelland S. 16 53 40 39 00 Gellerup 37 56 10 23 30 Gelsrum 22 57 30 32 00 Gelsta 20 57 00 29 00   22 57 30 29 00 Gelsteo K. 34 55 30 24 40 Geltingn 38 54 45 25 00   40 54 45 25 00 Geluckstadt 30 53 40 24 00   42 53 50 24 00 Gembicza 14 52 20 35 00 Gemmeruy 31 55 35 28 40 Gemrid 22 57 00 27 00 Gemsing 36 56 30 23 00   37 56 30 23 00 Genalia 06 60 00 33 00 Geneist 16 53 40 39 30 Gener 30 55 00 24 20   35 55 00 24 20 Genner 38 55 05 24 30   39 55 05 24 30 Gennerford 39 55 05 24 30 Gensiosa 22 56 30 33 00 Genskrog 17 54 20 36 20 Georgeburg 20 54 00 39 00 Georgenberg 18 54 30 39 00 Georgenburg 16 54 20 39 30 S. Georgio 06 48 00 54 00   08 48 00 54 00   11 48 00 54 00 Gepisan 08 53 00 61 00 Ger Aa 36 57 00 24 50 Gerbas 16 54 00 40 30 Geabas S. 16 54 00 40 30 Gerbyn 43 4 10 25 10 Gerdawen 14 54 20 39 00   16 54 20 39 00 Gerden 17 54 00 36 20 Gerdrup 32 55 10 26 20   38 54 55 23 05   39 55 00 23 50 Gereby 38 54 35 25 00   40 34 35 25 00 Gerecht 17 54 20 36 10 Geren 16 54 00 36 30 Gerestads K. 29 58 40 23 30 S. Gergen 17 54 05 37 00 Gerild 36 56 25 25 10   37 56 25 25 10 Gerleff 36 56 15 24 20   37 56 15 24 20 German 20 54 00 37 00 Germandzoo 20 65 00 38 00 Germaniae Pars 06 51 00 25 00 Germundzo 21 65 00 38 00 Gerom 22 57 30 29 00 Gersloff 32 55 30 26 20 Gerversdorp 41 53 45 23 40 Gerum 36 57 15 24 40 Gerumsgaard 36 57 15 24 40 Ges 37 55 55 24 40 Geserich S. 16 53 20 37 00 Geskendorff 16 53 40 37 30 Gesmalla 17 53 55 36 40 Gessige 31 55 30 28 10 Gessing 36 56 25 24 50 Gessingholm 36 56 20 25 00     56 25 24 50   37 56 20 25 00 Gestbro 37 56 25 24 50 Gestdal 29 58 20 21 00 Gesten 37 55 30 23 30 Gestendorp 41 53 30 23 10 Gesterriff 30 54 20 27 00 Gestricia 06 60 00 31 00   20 61 00 31 00   22 60 00 33 00   23 60 20 32   24 61 10 33 Gestrup 39 55 05 24 Old Gestrup 38 55 05 24 Getinga 20 56 00 27   22 56 30 27   30 56 40 27 Getinge 31 55 45 28 Getkanshokell 26 66 00 354 Gettdorp 41 54 25 24 Gettorp 38 54 20 25   40 54 20 25   42 54 20 24 Gettrup 35 56 40 23   36 56 45 22 Gettzoer 20 54 00 27 Getzor 33 54 45 27 Gevalia 20 60 00 33 Geudaw 40 54 50 24 Geverstorp 42 53 50 23 Gevingkoos 25 64 20 27   27 64 20 27 Geye eyar 26 64 30 352 Geye Pleylaster 26 64 30 351 Gibna 06 55 00 58 Giederuy 31 56 05 29 Giedgudisski 18 54 30 41 Giedrocie 18 54 30 43   20 54 00 43 Giedsbro 37 55 15 23 Giedungen 29 58 40 20 Giegzyn 18 55 00 41 Gielstaw 39 55 15 23 Gielstbro 38 55 15 23   39 55 15 23 Giemlitz 17 54 10 36 Gieorloff 30 55 20 27   32 55 20 27 Gieranoyny 18 54 00 43 Gierleff 36 56 30 24   37 56 30 24 Gierleff Herret 36 56 35 24   37 56 35 24 Gierloff 32 55 20 26 Gierloss 32 55 50 27 Giern 37 56 10 24 Giernes 29 58 00 23 Giers Herrit 31 55 55 29 Gierslow 31 55 25 28 Gierting 38 55 20 24     55 30 23   39 55 20 24     55 25 23 Giertzig 14 52 20 32 Giobeck 44 53 45 24     53 45 24 Gieselaw 42 54 10 24 Gieshoy 32 55 40 26 Giesing 39 55 05 23 Giesnes 31 55 30 29 Giesning 32 55 40 26 Giestneht 41 53 20 25 Giffue 37 55 45 23 Gieffuentost 32 55 40 27 Gikow 30 54 00 25 Gilan 06 41 00 84 Gilan fl. 16 55 00 40 Gilberga 24 59 00 32 Gilberts S. 01 66 15 321 Gilbing S. 16 53 40 38 Gildebrynd 32 55 30 27 Gildeley 32 56 00 27 Gilg fl. 16 54 40 39 3 Gilgenaw 16 53 20 37 3 Gilgenburg 14 53 00 37   16 53 20 37 3   18 53 00 38 Gilina 08 55 00 58 0 Gilbenga 22 59 00 28 0 Gillebo 31 55 30 28 5 Gilss 26 66 30 353 0 Gilssfiord 26 66 00 351 0 Gimen L. 24 60 40 31 4 Gimen S. 16 53 20 38 0 Gimling 32 55 20 26 2 Gimmerup 36 56 20 25 1   37 56 20 25 1 Gimming 36 56 25 24 4 Gimor S. 16 53 40 38 0 Gind 37 55 50 24 4 Gingelstad 31 55 50 29 3 Gingtost 40 54 45 25 0 Ginzonda 06 46 00 53 0   11 46 00 53 0 Giol 20 56 00 24 0   30 56 40 24 2   35 56 40 24 2   36 56 55 24 1 Giolderup 38 55 00 24 1   39 55 00 24 1 Giong Herrit 31 56 05 29 2 Gioraruy 31 55 55 27 5 Giordlund 38 55 20 23 5   39 55 20 23 5 Giordwath 39 55 20 23 5 Giorsle 31 55 55 27 5 Gierloff 32 55 40 26 4 Giorsle 31 56 05 27 5 Giorsloff 32 55 20 27 2 Giorslokyrke 31 55 35 28 2 Giorslou 31 55 35 28 1
    55 35 28 30 up 36 56 55 23 40 23 59 30 34 00 beck 41 53 40 25 00 w 16 54 40 38 00 rGiro 11 45 00 62 00 31 55 25 28 30 de 43 54 05 25 20 31 55 55 28 10 a 20 52 00 26 00 d 32 55 20 27 00 ls K. 29 58 20 22 30 ag 32 55 40 26 20 nbrug 41, 43 53 55 25 00 22 57 30 32 00 37 55 50 22 30 32 55 40 27 20 26 66 30 349 00 22, 25 59 00 26 00 anden 16 54 00 38 00 ammer. 22 59 00 32 00   23 59 10 32 00 den 22 59 00 28 00 41, 43 54 00 25 10 14 50 00 33 00 22 59 00 28 00 tten 16 54 00 39 00 om 42 54 10 24 00 15 53 10 34 00 wa Slaboda. 6, 7, 8, 20 58 00 56 00 z fl. 15 51 40 33 40 gra 20, 22 56 00 29 00 bok 15 52 20 32 40 ing 31 56 05 27 50 32 55 10 26 20 up 36, 37 56 30 24 30 g 30, 35 56 00 25 00 12 49 30 42 00 32 55 30 27 00 nge 31 55 30 29 30 41, 44 53 40 24 30 noer 41, 44 53 55 24 20 15 51 40 34 00 12 49 30 51 00 34 55 35 24 50 y 18 50 00 42 00 ko 14 50 40 35 00 in 16 54 00 39 00 15 52 00 33 20 scoy 6, 7 59 00 61 00 14 50 00 34 00 gow Glogovia 14 51 20 33 00   15 51 30 33 20 31 55 50 27 50 31 55 30 28 30 34 55 15 25 30 eg 36 56 25 25 10 d 33 54 40 26 30 p 31 55 30 28 10 16 53 40 38 00 09 C   w 12 50 30 52 00 o 14 52 00 33 00 t 41, 44 53 50 24 00 32 55 20 26 40 p 36 56 40 23 00 iag 22 56 30 33 00 g 41 54 15 24 00   42 54 05 24 20 15 52 10 34 00 en 16 54 00 38 30 7, 8, 20 56 00 59 00 asis Archic∣patus 15 52 10 34 40 na G. Gnisen 15 52 20 34 40 Gnewin 14 54 40 34 00 14 52 20 34 00 Doactz fl. 08 51 00 67 00 cha 08 51 00 71 00 15 52 00 33 20 a 30 53 40 25 00 ow 41, 43 54 00 25 10 17 54 00 36 30 ea 14, 16 53 00 37 00 o 16 54 00 36 30 a 26 65 00 359 00 41 53 45 25 30 16 53 20 36 30 42 54 05 24 10 43 54 10 25 10 01 60 40 345 00 42 54 05 25 10 owo 15 51 40 34 00 God's delive∣e. 01 50 &c 287 &c God's Mer∣. 01 63 00 304 00 27, 28 62 30 20 00 bitsa 09 D   43 54 05 25 30 41 53 55 25 00 19, 21 60 00 46 00 43 54 15 25 40 37 55 25 23 10 er zting 14 51 40 30 00 in 12 49 30 47 00 41 54 05 24 10 14 52 40 34 00 Golan fl. 27 63 40 26 00 Golbirg 34 55 30 24 50 Golassin 15 51 30 33 40 Golbe fl. 16 54 20 40 00 Goldap 6, 16 54 00 40 30 Goldap fl. 16 54 00 40 00 Goldaw 16 53 20 37 00 Gold bay 01 76 25 93 00 Goldbeck 43 53 55 25 10 Golding 19, 20 56 30 39 00 Goldperg 16 53 20 38 00 Goldung 06 56 00 39 00 Gole Polie 12 48 30 52 00 Golesz 14 49 20 38 00 Golgewicz 15 51 30 33 20 Golinen 16 53 20 37 00 Golino 15 51 30 33 40 Golitsky 09 E   Gollies 41, 43 54 00 25 00 Golnow 14, 20 53 20 31 00 Golobeica 6, 7 66 00 66 00 Goloebeia 6, 8 50 00 74 00 Goloebentza 6, 7 66 00 66 00 Gologory 18 49 00 42 00 Golousina 09 I   Goloypisda 09 F   Golpho de Nigro∣poli 6, 8, 11 48 00 52 00 Goltpach 16 53 20 37 30 Goltstaf 30, 34 54 50 25 50 Goltz fl. 14 50 40 31 00 Goltzi 6, 7 69 00 78 00 Goluben S. 16 53 40 40 30 Golup 16, 20 53 00 36 30 Gombergsteen 23 58 40 35 00 Gomlewick 26 65 30 350 00 Gommanuy 31 56 00 27 30 Gommelgard 35 54 40 24 40 Gonaruy 31 56 05 28 20 Gonentz sive Gori∣untz 14, 16 53 20 40 30 Gonf 30 53 40 25 00 Goniadz 18 53 00 40 00 Goniuncz 14 53 00 40 00 Gonnebuttel 42, 43 54 00 25 00 Gonsagger 38, 39 55 10 23 50 Gonsemagle 30, 32 55 40 27 00 Gonsgaw 39 55 30 24 40 C. Good-hope 01 62 00 332 30 Goor 39 55 15 24 00 Gora 15 51 40 34 20     52 20 33 40 Goray 14 50 00 40 00   15 52 20 32 40   18 50 30 40 00 Gorca 09 R   Gorckel S. 16 53 40 39 30 Gorczdy 19 55 30 39 00 Gorczuss 11 46 00 54 00 Gording 36, 37 56 20 22 40 Goreislaw 18 56 00 48 00 Gorgoscoitzar 6, 7 69 00 82 00 Gorgzdy 18 55 30 39 00 Goring 37 55 25 23 10 Gorka 14 51 20 33 00     52 00 33 00   15 51 40 33 40 Gorkossin 16 53 00 36 30 Gorlitz 14 51 00 32 00   16 53 20 37 30 Gorloff 30, 32 55 30 26 00 Gorns 43 54 15 25 20 Goro 11 45 00 64 00 Gorodisa 09 N   Gorodisna Kerkdorff 09 G   Gorodna 6, 7, 20 56 00 56 00 Gorssin 15 51 40 33 40 Gortze 43 54 20 25 50 Gorzick 15 52 10 32 40 Goschutz 14 51 00 34 00 Gosciechowo 15 51 50 33 40 Gosciewic 15 51 30 33 40 Goscissin 15 51 50 33 20 Goscfelt 40 54 25 25 00   41 54 25 24 40 Gosinge 22, 23 58 50 33 30 Goslo 19 59 30 41 00 Goslynin 14 52 20 36 00 Gosnopolim 20 59 00 51 00 Gosse See 39 55 55 24 20 Gosslin 15 52 00 34 00 Gosslina 15 52 00 34 00 Gosted 33 54 45 26 50 Gostgaw 16 53 00 36 00 Gostin 15 51 40 34 00 Gosto 21 59 30 41 00 Gostorp 43 54 15 25 50 Gosvopoli Monast. 06 59 00 51 00 Goteborg 20, 22 57 00 26 00 Gotendorp 43 54 05 25 20 Gotheborch 30 57 40 27 20 Gothia 22 55 00 35 00 Gotlandia 6, 19, 20, 22 57 00 36 00 Gotrup So. 37 56 05 23 30 Gotske Sande 6, 19, 20, 22 58 00 36 00 Gottaw 43 54 15 25 50 Gottenborg 25 57 30 26 00 Gotterwalt 17 54 15 36 20 Gotteskoeg 38, 40 54 45 23 50 Gotteswaldt 16 54 20 36 30 Gotteswerder 16 53 40 36 30 Gottorp 30 50 40 23 20 Gottroppel 38, 40 54 45 24 20 Gottrup 39 55 10 24 00 Gottsberg 42, 44 53 50 24 40 Gottsgabe 38, 40 54 55 25 30 I. Gouberman 26 67 00 347 00 Goven 42 54 20 23 50 Goviza fl. 18 55 00 40 00 Goulelf 27 64 20 26 00 Goutberg 10 A   Goy 16 54 00 39 30 Graan 21 62 00 34 00 Graadyb 37 55 25 22 40 Graben 16 53 20 37 30 Grabenick 16 53 40 40 00 Grabinowo 15 51 50 34 00 Grabow 14 51 20 34 00   44 53 45 25 00 Grabowiec 15 52 30 33 40 Grabowiecz 14 49 40 36 00 Graby 14 52 40 36 00 Graeleff 36 56 45 24 30 Graenoa 22 57 30 27 00 Graerup 39 55 10 24 30 Graested 32 56 00 27 00 G. Graffna S. 16 53 40 39 00 Grafue 25 60 30 26 00 Grafvero 31 56 00 29 00 Graheden 24 60 00 32 20 Gram 37, 38, 39 55 15 24 00 Gram fl. 39 55 15 23 50 Grambalosa 22 55 20 23 50     57 30 27 00 Gramby 39 55 15 24 00 Gramer S. 16 53 20 38 30 Gramhoff 38, 39 55 15 24 00 Gramitz 14 53 00 29 00 Grammersdorp 43 53 55 25 30 Gramoeca 08 54 00 62 00 R. Gran 21 59 30 35 00 Grande 27 64 40 26 00   41, 44 53 35 25 00 Grandleff 37 56 15 24 30 Grandloss 32 55 40 26 40 Granefiera 23 59 20 33 30 Granepden 16 53 20 37 00 Grarup 38 55 10 24 40 Grasmar 22 57 30 33 00 Grason 20, 21, 22, 23 60 10 35 30 Grasuig 29 58 40 25 00     59 00 25 00 Grasua 22 59 00 29 00 Gratz 14 53 00 31 00 Graudentz 6, 14, 16 53 20 36 30 Graden W. 16 54 40 39 30 Graudip 30, 35 55 20 23 00 Grave 25 60 00 21 00 Gravel 42 54 05 24 20 Graven 28, 29 60 00 21 30 Gravisk 6, 8, 20 55 00 53 00 Grauslysski 18 54 00 43 00 Grawatten 16 55 20 39 00 Graumena fl. 18 55 30 39 00 Grebin 16, 17 54 15 36 30 Grebnischdorp 17 54 15 36 20 Grebniskerwalt 17 54 15 36 20 Grebstad 25, 29 58 00 22 00 Grecning 36 56 20 24 20 Gredsle 30, 35 55 20 23 20 Gredstedbro 37 55 20 23 00   38, 39 55 20 23 40 Gredstede 39 55 20 23 40 Greenland 01 76 &c 32 &c Greffsmolde 41 53 45 26 10 Grefsnas 22 57 30 27 00 Greffue 30, 32 55 30 27 00 Greffuinge 32 55 50 26 20 Greguzyn 18 54 30 42 00 Greibo S. 16 53 40 40 30 Gremln 17 54 00 36 20 Grenna 20, 22 57 00 30 00 Grenge 2, 22 60 00 31 00 Grengie 24 60 10 31 00 Grening 37 56 20 24 20 Grensholm 38 54 50 25 40 Grentinge 31 55 35 28 40 Gresenhagen 43 53 55 25 20 Gresholm 36 57 20 25 00 Gresnewitz 6, 7, 8, 20 58 00 60 00     09 A.   Gresrup 37 55 55 24 00 Gresset 32 55 50 27 00 Greswe 30, 31 56 00 28 00 W. Greswe 31 55 30 28 10 Grevenhoff 44 53 30 24 40 Grevenkrog 41, 42 54 10 24 50 Grewlandt 39 55 20 23 50 Greyel 41 54 05 25 20 Greynastari 26 67 00 358 00 Gribbo 22 58 00 32 00 Gries 39 55 00 24 00 Griesen 16 53 20 38 00 Griesmoer 39 55 00 24 00 Grieswerd 44 53 30 24 30 Griethboen 42 54 00 24 10 Griffenhagn 20 52 00 31 00 Grimersdorp 41, 43 54 20 25 40 Grimrid 22 57 00 27 00 Grims I. 01 67 50 355 30 Grimsey 26 68 00 357 00
Grimstad 29 58 00 23 00 Grimstalo 20 58 00 23 00 Grimsted 32, 33 54 50 26 20 Grina 20, 22, 30, 35 56 20 25 20 Grinaa 36, 37 56 25 25 20 Grindelos 34 55 35 24 50 Grinderslest Clost. 36 56 40 23 30 Grindesleu 30 56 20 23 20 Grindesloe 35 56 20 23 20 Grindewick 26 64 30 353 00 Grindheims K. 29 58 00 22 00 Grindholmsund 29 58 40 24 30 Grinsted 37 55 40 23 20 Grinsted ochbro 37 55 40 23 20 Grinky 14 53 20 42 00 Grinosol 30 56 20 25 00 Grinsdafiordt 26 65 30 350 00 Grissa 14 50 40 33 00 Grissenberg 14 50 40 32 00 Grit 31 56 00 29 30 Grizin 15 51 50 34 00 Grobin 30 54 00 25 00 Grocig 15 51 50 33 00 Grochwie 15 51 30 33 00 Grode 38 54 40 23 50   41 54 40 23 30 Grodeck 14 52 40 41 00   18 53 00 41 00 Grodersbul 39 55 10 24 30 Grodingen 22, 23 58 50 34 30 Grodischki 16 54 00 40 30 Grodkaw 14 50 20 34 00 Grodao 06 53 00 42 00   14 53 00 40 00   15 52 10 33 00   18, 20 53 00 40 00 Grodzeezko 6, 7, 8, 20 58 00 55 00 Grodziec 15 51 30 35 00 Grodziecz 14 49 40 36 00     52 00 38 00 P. Grodzisk G. Gratz 14 52 00 33 00   15 52 00 33 20 Grodzissewo 15 52 20 33 40 Groembs 43 54 10 25 50 Groemsmel 43 54 10 25 20 Groen Eyland 20, 22, 31 56 00 31 00 Groenhoff 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 00 Groenhude 42, 44 53 55 24 20 Groenow 20 52 00 22 00 Groms 41 54 10 25 10 Gronbeck 37 56 10 24 10   39 55 20 24 10   44 53 35 25 10 Gronberg 41, 43 54 00 25 30 Grondal 28, 29 60 30 23 30 Grone kiergaard 36, 37 56 30 23 30 Groneland 01 60 &c 321 &c Gronelf 25, 28, 29 60 20 22 00 Grone Meyfeldt 42 54 00 23 40 Gronenthal 42 54 10 24 00 Gronesund 32, 33 54 55 27 10 Grongryfft 38 54 55 24 30 Gronhawss 43 54 10 25 30 Gronholt 30 54 20 24 40   32 55 50 27 20   38 54 30 25 00 Groning 36 56 35 23 30 Groningen 20 53 00 21 00 Groningor 36 56 35 23 40 Gronlant 44 53 50 24 10 Gronnebirg 30 53 40 25 40 Gronult 31 56 15 28 40 Gronwaltsandt 43 54 25 26 00 Gronwold 41 53 35 25 10 Gronwickhode 39 55 25 24 30 Grootalefioerd 28 60 00 19 30 Grootvergsteylaent-Water 28 62 00 20 30 Groothelm 30 56 00 25 20 Groot Holm 35 56 00 25 20 Groot Hust 21 59 00 44 00 Groot Tutiers 21 59 30 45 00 Grordersby 38 54 35 25 00 Gros Barnitz 43 53 50 25 10 Gros Bockwobt 42 54 05 24 50 Gros Bronhovet 42 54 05 24 00 Grosbrotzende 17 53 55 37 00 Groschkenkampe 17 54 15 36 40 Grosenanfleth 39 55 20 24 30 Grosenfelt 40 54 40 24 30 Grosensee 44 53 35 25 00 Gros Flintbeck 42 54 15 24 50 Groshaf 33 54 45 26 30 Groshovet 43 54 20 25 20 Grosbon Jr. 19, 20 57 00 39 00 Grosklinck 44 53 30 25 00 Groskumerfelt 42 54 00 24 50 Grospampow 44 53 30 25 20 Grosrennow 43, 44 53 55 25 00 Grosse Flacke 39 55 00 24 30 Grosse Moer 42 54 05 24 40 Grossen 16 54 00 38 00 Grossenexen 41 53 35 26 10 Grossen Nordtsche 42 54 20 24 40 Grossenwarder 42 54 10 24 40 Grossenwyhe 38, 40 54 45 24 20 Grossereyde 38 54 25 24 30 Gross Harrich 42 54 05 24 50 Grossida 6, 8, 11 47 00 52 00 Gros Sinder 17 54 15 36 20 Gross Reyde 40 54 25 24 30 Gross Schironsee 42 54 10 24 50 Grosschlamyn 43 54 15 25 40 Grossvolstede 42 54 10 24 40 Groteheide 39 55 20 23 40 Grote Hust 19, 20 59 35 44 00 Groten Aspe 41, 42, 44 43 55 24 40 Grotenbrad 41 54 25 25 50 Grotenbrod 43 54 25 25 50 Grotensee 41 53 35 25 00 Grotensolt 38 54 40 24 30 Grote Proen 43 54 55 25 30 Grote Tuters 19, 20 59 30 45 00 Grottenbuttol 42 54 10 23 40 Grotzg 14 52 00 32 00 Grot Zsna 14 53 00 35 00 Grow 37 56 15 23 30 Growenstein 38, 40 54 55 24 40 Grolund 38, 30 55 00 24 00 Grolieff 38 55 20 23 10 Grobe 39 55 20 23 10 Grube 30, 41, 43 54 15 26 00 Grubenhagen 20 53 00 28 00 Grubyn 19 56 30 38 00 Grudeck 12 48 30 44 00     48 30 47 00     49 00 44 00     49 30 47 00 Grumby 38, 40 54 35 24 50 Grumtofft 38, 40 54 45 24 50 Grun 37 55 40 23 30 Grun S. 16 53 40 39 00 Gruna 26 67 00 349 00 Gruna Harepper 26 65 00 356 00 Grunaw 16 53 00 36 30     54 20 37 30   17 54 00 36 50 Grunberg 15 51 40 32 40 Grundby 31 55 25 28 40 Grundfor 37 56 10 24 40 Grundoffki 16 53 40 40 00 Grundrup 36 56 50 24 30 Grunensolt 17 53 55 36 40 Grunhagen 16 54 00 37 30     54 20 39 00 Grunhoss 16, 18 54 40 38 20 Grunsiheffe 16 53 00 37 00 Grun So 37 55 40 23 30 Grunsund 20 63 00 35 00 Grurup 36 56 45 22 40 Grusina wgost 6, 20 58 00 51 00 Gruska 20 54 00 47 00 Gruteshauschezee 15 53 20 32 40 Grutta 16 53 20 36 30 Gryckin L. 24 60 20 32 40 Grydwad 37 55 40 22 40 Grydfieldsvand 29 58 20 21 00 Gryfero 20 56 00 28 00 Grymatew 12 49 00 44 00 Grynkisslci 18 55 00 41 00 I. Gryp 20, 25, 27 64 00 22 00 Grypsond 27 64 00 23 00 Grypsound 6, 25 64 00 22 00 Grypswald 14, 20, 30 54 00 29 00 Grypswaldish Oie 14 54 00 30 00 Gryse 18 56 00 40 00 Grysero 22 56 30 28 00 Gryta 20, 22 57 30 33 00 Grytenes 20, 22, 23 60 00 33 00 Grytin 24 60 40 32 00 Grytnes 24 60 10 32 40 Grytsker 21 62 30 37 00 Grytskey 20 63 00 37 00 Grywell 43 54 05 25 30 Gryze 19, 20 56 00 40 00 Grzebnicko 15 52 10 33 40 Grzibna 16 53 00 36 00 P Grzymolowo   G.   G. Schwarsentz 15 52 10 34 00 Gualentscha More 06 46 00 47 00 Guarda 25 60 00 23 00 Guben 14 51 40 31 00 Guber fl. 16 54 00 39 00 Guber S. 16 53 40 39 30 Gublaruy 31 55 45 28 40 Gucken 17 53 50 36 40 Guddem 32 55 20 26 20 Gudendorp 41 54 05 23 50 Gudingholm 36 56 55 24 40 Gudmo 30, 32, 34 55 10 25 40 Gudom 22 57 30 29 00 Gudum closter 30, 35, 36, 37 56 30 22 50 Guduad 37 56 10 24 10 Guesbergen 42 54 00 24 50 Gugan S. 16 53 40 38 00 Gugel 17 53 50 36 10 Zur Gugel 16 53 40 36 00 Guidding 38, 39 55 15 23 40 Guiding 36 56 50 24 40 Guidozicz 12 49 00 42 00 Guileccha 06 57 00 71 00 Guiloi Dovets 06 51 00 67 00 Gulberg 30 57 40 27 20 Gulbrawtsdalen 25, 28 61 00 24 30 Gulbuy 20 61 00 23 00 Gulby 25, 28 62 00 24 00 Guldager 37 55 25 22 50 Guldagger 39 55 30 23 20 Guldborg Herret 33 54 50 26 50 Guldborg Sund 33 54 50 26 50 Guldenstein 41 54 15 2 Guldensten 43 54 15 2 Gullager 31 55 35 2 Gullatiny 31 56 00 2 Gulleraser 24 61 10 3 Gulmitz 14 51 40 3 L. Gulsbygge 31 56 15 2 Gulspang 20 58 00 3   22 58 30 3 Gulstaff 38 54 45 2 Gumlsahoff 31 56 00 2 Gummentruy 31 55 40 2 Gunarp 22, 30 56 40 2 Gundersloff 32 55 20 2 Gundersmoll 36 57 10 2 Gundestrup 22 56 00 2 Gundsloff 32 54 50 2   33 54 55 2 Gungapis 16 55 00 4 Gunmundra 6, 20, 21 63 00 3 Gunnarod 31 55 50 2 Gunnarskog 22 59 30 2 Gunnarsora 19, 20 59 00 3 Gunasora 22 59 00 3 Gunnerlow 31 55 25 2 Gunnestruy 31 56 00 2   00 56 00 2 Gunolpspiat 26 67 30 0 Gunstrup 37 55 30 2 Guntan 17 53 55 3 Gunterstruy 30 56 00 2 Guntze 41, 42 54 05 2 Guraw 14, 15 51 30 3 Gurbeck 41 54 00 2 G. Guricsen P. Gorka 15 51 30 3 Gurken I 16 52 20 3 Gurkim 10 B.   Gurreby 33 54 45 2 Gurt 16 53 20 3 Gurtta fl. 16 54 00 4 Gusdal 6, 20, 25 61 00 2 Guslin 14 51 40 3 Gusna 31 55 30 2 Gussez 15 53 30 3 Gusterschloss 44 53 35 2 Gustrop 42 54 10 2 Gustrow 20 53 00 2 Gutnicken 16 54 00 3 Gutow 30 53 40 2 Gutstadt 14, 16 53 40 3 Gutt 16 53 40 3 Guttenfeldt 16 54 00 3 Gutterbuck 14 51 40 30 Guttlandt 16 54 00 3 Gwostofski Salina 10 G.   Gyattwele 31 55 55 2 Gykow 38, 41, 43 54 15 2 Gylandsk 29 58 00 2 Gyldebec 40 54 40 24 Gylling 37 55 50 24 Gypshelm 22, 23 59 00 34 Gyrenstrand 43 54 15 25 Gyrichsbeck 44 53 45 25 Gyrsting 32 55 30 26 Gzinder 16 54 00 36 H.   Haalbo Herrit 32 55 50 27 Haalsbro 36 56 50 24 Haard 38, 39 55 30 24 Haarsloff 32 55 10 26 Haasen 29 58 40 20 Haassfiord 29 58 40 20 Habel 40 54 40 23 Haber 22 56 30 27 Haberhorst 17 54 15 36 Haberniss 40 54 45 25 Haberschlunt 38, 39 55 05 24 Haberwisch 41 54 15 23 Habo 20, 22 57 30 30 Habspar S. 16 53 40 37 Habuy 38, 40 54 25 25   40 54 30 24 Haby 41 54 25 24 Hackehof 19 59 00 45 Hackenborg 40 55 00 24 Hackluit's headland 01 79 50 32 Hackluit's I. 01 77 40 292   01 62 10 287 Nort Hacksted 40 54 45 24 Hacstede 40 54 35 24 Hadberg 36, 37 56 30 22     56 30 23   37 56 15 24 Hadderup 38 54 45 24 Hadeland 28 60 00 25 Hadelerwath 41 53 55 23 Hademarsch 41, 42 54 10 24 Hadersleben 38, 39 55 15 24 Hadersleu 30 55 00 24 Hadersleve 35 55 10 24 Hadersleveweet 34 55 10 24 Haderup 37 56 20 23 Hadiaz 12 49 00 52 Hadrup So 36 56 20 23 Hadstede 30, 38, 40, 41 54 30 24 Hadstedmarsch 40 54 35 24 Hadstrup 37 55 50 23 Haemdorp 38, 40, 41, 43 54 15 24
n 42 54 15 25 00 42 54 05 24 30 ng 41, 44 53 25 24 30 p 42 54 15 24 40 ie 39 55 10 24 10 20, 27 63 00 24 00 43 54 25 26 00 16 54 20 38 30 g 43 54 05 25 30 30 56 20 24 20 36 56 40 24 50 37 56 10 23 00 37 56 15 24 20 20, 22 58 00 33 00 gard 37 56 05 24 50 39 55 05 23 20 22 56 30 32 00 ra 44 53 50 24 50 kerg 17 54 20 36 10 38, 40 54 25 25 10 41, 42 54 25 24 50 th 43 54 10 25 50 ou 20, 34 55 10 25 00 y 31 55 40 28 10     55 55 28 40 berg 27 63 20 24 00 31 56 10 29 10 d 31 56 05 28 40 d 32 55 40 26 20 36 56 20 24 30   37 56 20 24 20 20 59 00 26 00   25, 28 59 30 26 00 d 36 57 05 24 40   30, 35 56 20 24 40 36 56 55 24 10 26 67 00 355 00 30 56 20 29 00 16 54 00 36 30 36 56 45 24 00 32 55 30 26 20 38, 39 55 10 24 40 et 38, 38, 40 55 10 24 40   20, 30, 35 56 00 23 40   36, 37 56 30 24 40 ille 32 55 20 26 20 20 53 00 23 00 36, 37 56 20 23 50 37 56 15 24 40 30, 41 53 50 24 20 42, 44 53 50 24 20 ick 41, 42 54 05 24 50 ick 43 54 05 24 50   44 53 55 24 20 p 41, 43 54 10 25 40 01 65 00 338 30 06 48 00 41 00   12, 18 49 00 42 00 19, 20, 21 60 00 40 00 al 25 60 00 22 00 20, 30, 36 56 45 24 00 20, 22 58 00 27 00 20, 22, 30 56 30 27 00 20, 22 56 00 29 00 d 31 56 15 29 40 i 19 58 00 42 00 ke 31 56 15 29 30 37 56 10 24 10 berg 30, 31 56 15 28 50 beck 42 54 00 25 00 lacus 24 60 00 33 20 19 59 00 44 00 o 30 55 20 26 20 36 57 05 24 20 beck 37 56 15 23 20 g 37 55 55 24 50     56 15 24 40 g Dall 28, 29 60 00 22 00 off 32 55 30 26 00 bre 29 60 00 22 00 36 56 45 24 00 dt 6, 20, 22 56 00 27 00 20, 25 60 00 21 00   28 60 00 21 30 ume 28, 29 60 00 22 00   20 56 00 24 00   22 57 00 25 00   30 56 40 24 40     57 00 25 20   35 56 40 24 40     57 00 25 20   36 56 55 24 50 ck 41, 44 53 40 24 30 29 60 20 20 00 30 56 40 24 40 30, 32 55 20 26 00 le 36 56 55 24 40 es 32 55 50 26 40 30 55 40 26 40 29 59 20 20 30 ck 29 57 40 22 00 20 63 00 37 00 33 54 45 26 30 dertioff 42 54 00 23 40   38, 40 54 30 24 00 nger 21 60 30 34 00 land 19, 20, 22 60 00 37 00 leruy 31 56 00 28 10 42 54 00 24 20 sund 20, 25 58 00 23 00 ugke 44 53 50 24 30 Hamburg 20 53 00 25 00   30, 44 53 30 24 40 Hamdorp 41, 42, 44 54 00 25 00 Hamchorst 43 54 10 25 20 Hamelmoes 30, 35 57 00 23 40 Hamelmose 36 57 05 24 10 Hamelsbuttel 44 53 35 24 40 Hamelwordea 41, 42 53 45 24 00 Hamer 15 52 00 33 20     52 10 33 00     52 30 32 00   42 54 15 24 50   44 53 40 25 05 Hamerlow 31 55 25 28 20 Hamero 22 59 00 29 00 Hamershoy 36, 36 56 25 24 20 Hamersond 27 63 40 23 00 Hamersteiu 20 53 00 34 00 Hamerswag 27, 28 62 30 21 30 Hames 17 53 50 36 30 Hamfeld 41, 44 53 35 25 10     53 40 25 10 Hammel 37 56 10 24 20 Hammellef 37, 38, 39 55 15 24 20 Hammelolanda 31 55 40 28 50 Hammer 14 52 00 33 00   15 52 50 32 40   30 55 00 27 00   31 55 25 29 20   32 55 10 27 00   36 57 00 24 20   37 55 50 23 50 Dill Hammer 31 55 25 28 00 Hammergaard 37 55 50 24 00 Hammermolle 32 55 50 27 20 Hammersteslsand 36 55 45 24 50 Hammerstein 14 53 40 34 00 Hammerswag 20, 25 62 30 21 00 Hammerum Herret 37 56 10 23 10 Hammerum Herritzting 37 56 05 23 20 Hammes Herrit 32 55 10 26 40 Hampon So 37 56 00 23 50 Hampthog 31 55 30 29 40 Hamwedel 41, 42 54 10 23 20 Han R. 01 69 00 322 00 Hanback 36, 37 56 20 24 30 Handberg 36, 37 56 25 23 10 Handele 44 53 25 25 20 Handels 41 53 25 25 30 Hanebrugge 44 53 35 25 20 Hanefiord 26 65 00 353 00 Haneklettersand 44 53 35 24 20 Haner 26 65 00 354 00 Hango 19, 20, 21 59 30 39 00 Hangstbuttel 41 53 40 24 50 Hanheret 30, 35 57 00 23 20 Han herret 36 56 55 23 40 Han Herritzting 36 56 55 23 50 Hanibalshoeck 27, 28 62 40 21 00 Haning 36 56 50 22 50 Hanklit 20 56 00 22 00 Hanna 18 51 30 41 00 Hannab 31 56 15 29 10 Hannanger 29 57 40 21 00 Hannas 30, 31 55 20 29 00 Hannes 36 56 55 23 20 Hanningswooge 28 62 00 19 00 Hannoe 20 55 00 30 00   22 56 00 30 00   30 55 40 29 40 Hannowra 31 56 15 29 30 Hanstrup 36 56 55 23 10 Hano 35 56 20 24 40 Hanoska 26 56 00 357 00 Hanower 20 51 00 24 00 Hanrow 42 54 05 24 10 Hanrowhoff 41 54 05 24 10 Hansborch 34 55 10 24 30 Hansdorp 16 53 20 36 30   41, 44 53 40 25 00 Handsfeld 43 53 45 25 20 Hanssgow 38 55 30 24 40 Hanshagen 16 54 00 38 30 Hanskocks 27 64 40 26 00 Hansuen 41, 43 54 15 25 30 Hanswaldt 16 53 40 37 30     54 20 38 00 Hanswartiberg 17 54 05 37 00 Hantuit 30 54 40 54 20 Hanusisiki 18 54 00 42 00 Hanweyl 35 56 55 23 30 Hanwit 35, 38, 40 54 45 24 20 Hanspanski 20, 21 60 00 52 00 Hapsal 19, 20 58 00 40 00 Hara S. 16 54 00 39 30 Hara T. 20 66 00 36 00 L. Harager 31 55 45 28 30 St. Harager 31 55 45 28 20 Haraker 24 59 30 33 00 Haralsion lacus 24 59 40 31 00 Harbo 21 59 30 35 00 Harborg 20 53 00 24 00 Harborkirkoch Back 36, 37 56 35 22 30 Harboorki 30 56 20 22 40 Harbour 30, 35 56 20 23 00 Harby 30, 34 55 05 25 00 Harckendorp 43 54 20 25 50 Harckes 44 53 45 24 40 Diegress Harckes H. 44 53 40 24 40 Hardangerfield 25, 28, 29 60 00 21 00 Hardbuy 40 54 45 24 50 Harddrup 30 55 00 24 20 Hardebeck 44 54 00 24 40 Hardmark 29 57 40 22 00 Harderwyck 20 52 00 20 00 Hardsby 38 54 45 24 50 Hardwick 26 68 00 350 00 Harels Eid 29 59 20 20 00 Haren 21 65 30 38 00 Haretzleff 36, 37 56 25 24 40 Harholm 31 56 00 28 40 Hariff 37 56 05 24 30 Haritzkiaer 37 55 40 23 50 Harka 19 59 00 42 00 Harkesheyde 41, 44 53 45 24 40 Harle 28 60 30 20 00 Harlefield 28 60 30 20 00 Harlingen 20 53 00 20 00 Harlosa 31 55 35 28 50 Harmangr 21 62 00 34 00 Harmas 20, 21 62 00 43 00 Harmensand 42 54 10 23 40 Harmensdorp 43 54 15 25 10 Harmsoe 25, 27, 28 62 40 20 00 Harmsond 22 57 30 26 00 Harmensworden 42 54 10 23 50 Harn 35 56 40 23 00 Harndorp 34 55 25 24 50   35 55 00 24 00 Harnsdorp 43 54 10 25 30 Harre 36 56 40 23 20 Harre Herret 36 56 40 20 20 Harrenur 36 55 40 23 10 Harres 39 55 00 23 50 Harreschle 38, 40 54 45 24 30 Harreslef 36 57 20 24 10 Harrested 30, 32 55 10 26 40     55 30 26 40 Harria 19 59 00 41 00 Harrich 41 54 05 24 50 Harsborg 35 55 00 24 20 Harsker 22 57 30 33 00 Harstede 42 54 15 23 50 Hartienholm 42, 44 53 50 24 50 Hartsche 35 55 40 24 20 Harsholm 40 54 55 25 00 Hartsprung 39, 40 55 00 24 50 Hartstock 23 59 00 35 00 Hartzhals 30 57 20 24 00 Harwesthude 44 53 35 24 40 Hasbiekow 18 50 00 47 00 Hasdael 25 63 00 23 00 Haselberg 16 54 00 38 00 Haseldorp 30, 41, 44 53 40 24 20 Haseldorper Marsch 44 53 40 24 10 Haseloe 30 56 00 26 20 Haselow 41, 44 53 40 24 20 Haselunen 20 52 00 22 00 Hasen 22, 23 60 10 33 00 Hasen fl. 16 54 00 40 00 Hasen S. 16 54 00 40 00 Hasenberg 16 53 20 37 30 Hasenbusce 44 53 50 24 20 Hasendal 41, 44 53 30 25 10 Hoch Hassendal 44 53 25 25 20 Hasebroeg 44 53 55 24 30 Hasenpot 19 56 30 39 00 Hashoep 43 54 05 25 30 Haske 26 64 30 357 00 Haslam 20, 21 64 00 44 00 Hasle 22 58 30 30 00   31 56 10 28 20   32 55 20 27 00 Hasleff 36 56 55 23 50   37 56 05 24 40 Haslere 31 56 10 29 30 Haslo 33 54 45 27 00 Hasloch 44 53 45 24 40 Hasloe 35 56 20 24 20 Haslum 36, 37 56 20 24 40 Hasnaness 26 64 00 355 00 Hasrekrung 31 56 10 29 20 Hassebued 37 55 35 22 40 Hassee 41 54 15 24 50 Hasseberg 43 54 20 25 20 Hasselberg 43 54 05 25 40 Hasselfelde 43 54 05 25 10 Hasselhelm 23 58 30 33 30 Hasselkroog 44 53 35 25 00 Hasselo 41 53 40 24 40 Hasselundt 38, 40 54 35 24 20 Hasselwyck 27 64 40 26 00 Hassholt 42 54 15 24 40 Hassing 30, 35 56 40 24 40   36 56 45 22 50 Hassion lacus 24 60 30 31 20 Hassleruy 31 56 00 28 00 Hastee 28 62 30 20 00 Hasterup 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 00 Hastndorp 43 54 00 25 00 Hastrupgaard 36 56 30 23 20 Hasund 24 60 20 33 10 Hasurebierg 32 55 20 26 40 Haters Riff 30 55 40 25 20   32 55 50 25 40 Hatsborg 30 53 40 24 20 Hats Herret 37 55 55 24 00 Hattala 20, 21 63 30 44 00 Hattem 20 52 00 21 00
Hatting 37 55 50 24 20 Hattinga 37 55 50 24 20 Hatting Herret 37 55 40 24 10 Hattula 21 61 00 42 00 Hatuna 22 59 00 34 00   23 59 20 34 30 Hatzborg 41, 44 53 35 24 20 Haube 21 61 30 42 00 Haudrup 32 55 30 27 00 Have 43 53 50 25 10 Havecost 43 54 00 25 20 Havekost 41 53 50 25 10 Have fl. 20 52 00 28 00 Havelberg 20 52 00 28 00 Haven 41 54 25 26 00   43 54 10 25 50 Haverwath 39 55 10 23 40 Havetofft 38, 40 54 40 24 40 Haugstbuttel 44 53 40 24 50 Havickhorst 42 54 15 25 00 Haulnus 37 55 45 23 50 Haumsfiord 26 66 00 352 00 Haumsschwert 26 66 00 353 00 Haunless 32 55 10 27 20 Haur 28 59 30 20 00 Hauriniowka 12 49 00 51 00 Hausith 39 55 10 23 40 Hausleff 37 56 20 24 20 Hawewath 39 55 10 23 40 Haugarde 39 55 05 24 20 Haustede 39 55 00 24 10 Haya 09 A   Hayhole 40 54 55 24 40 Haystrup 38, 40 55 15 24 40   39 54 55 24 10 Hayron 12 50 00 51 00 Hayron R. 12 49 30 53 00 Hdeyard 40 54 55 24 10 Healt 31 56 15 29 10 Hebro 35 56 20 24 20 Hebrus sive Bober fl. 15 51 40 32 20 Heby 31 55 30 30 00 Heckefield 29 58 20 21 30 Heckeberg 31 55 35 28 50 Hedals 20, 25, 28, 29 60 20 25 00 Hedding 32 55 20 27 20 Hede 37 56 10 23 10 Hedebo 31 56 05 27 40 Hedemora 22 60 00 32 00   23 60 10 32 30   24 60 10 32 20 Hedenes 20 58 00 23 00 Heding 20 55 00 27 00 Heed 24 59 30 32 00 Heeda 6, 20, 25 62 00 29 00 Heede 44 53 45 24 30 Heegarde 39 55 20 23 40 Heeinge 31 55 35 29 20 Heel 6, 20 54 00 36 00 Heelshope 43, 44 53 55 25 20 Heem 36 56 35 23 30 Heer Christenop Oere 27 64 00 24 00 Heer Michel op Hem 27 64 20 25 00 Hefer 19, 21, 23 60 00 36 00 Hegaard 36 56 40 23 30 Hegarde 39 55 10 24 20 Hegeboslad 29 58 00 21 30 Hegelandsk 29 58 00 22 00 Hegelguard 37 55 50 23 10 Hegelman 31 56 10 29 10 Hegeni 35 56 20 23 20 Hegge 28, 29 60 40 24 00 Heggewick 27 64 40 25 00 Heglingla 31 55 50 29 00 Hegwyck 25 64 00 25 00 Hehnisdorp 41 54 15 25 20 Heiboden 17 54 20 36 20 Heickendorp 40, 41, 42, 43 54 20 25 00 Heickenhorst 42 54 05 24 30 Heide 20 54 00 24 00 Heidemhl 17 53 50 36 30 Heidisfiord 26 67 30 356 00 Heidkrog 44 53 40 24 50 Heidmell 41 53 55 24 50 Heidort 41 54 25 25 10 Heiligberg 17 54 20 36 10 Heiligebeyl 18, 20 54 00 38 00 Heilige Lander Leen 25 65 30 26 00 Heigelandt 6, 20 54 00 22 00     66 00 25 00 Heiligenthal 16 53 40 38 00 Heiligholm 19, 20, 22 57 00 35 00 Heiligpeel 16 54 20 37 30 Heiligwaldt 16 53 40 37 00     54 40 38 30 Heilsberg 6, 14, 16 54 00 38 00 Heillsee 39 55 20 24 30 Heilsminde 39 55 20 24 40 Heilste 20 59 00 24 00 Heim 20 65 00 28 00 Heinrichaw 16 53 20 37 00 Heinsing 37 55 40 23 30 Heinisari 20, 21 61 00 49 00 Heirhamer 22 58 30 34 00   23 58 40 34 30 Heirup 39 55 20 24 20 Heisagger 38 55 10 24 30 Heisbeck 43 53 50 25 10 Heist 30, 41, 44 53 40 24 20 Heisterende 44 53 50 24 20 Heisternest 20 54 00 36 00 Heitse 37 55 20 24 00 Heitelm 41 53 35 24 20 Hecla, vel Mons per∣petuo ardens 26 65 30 357 00 Hekla promonto∣rium 26 64 30 359 00 Heklipial 26 65 30 357 00 Hela 16 54 40 36 00 Heldewath 39, 40 55 05 24 10 Heldom 36, 37 56 30 22 30 Heletruy 31 55 45 28 00 Al Helgaara 31 56 05 28 00 Helgelandt 38, 41 54 15 22 40 Helgepethert 26 65 30 351 00 Helkale 40 54 45 23 30 Helkulo 38 54 40 23 30 Helia 22 56 30 29 00 Heliatt 31 56 05 28 50 Helies S. 01 79 10 41 30 Heligbeke 31 56 10 28 40 Heling I. 01 76 40 47 30 Helis 34 55 20 24 30 Helitzgard 34 55 00 24 50 Helle 22 56 00 25 00   28 60 00 20 30   44 53 50 24 10 Hellelandsbrok 29 58 20 21 00 Hellendske Nie∣drunge 17 54 00 37 10 Hellenis 30, 34 55 00 24 40   30, 35 56 00 25 00   38, 40 55 10 25 00 Hellenis Mons 35 56 00 25 00 Hellesfiord 26 66 00 20 00 Hellesta 22 57 30 28 00   31 55 35 28 40 Hellevad 30, 35 56 40 24 20 Hellewad 36 57 05 24 30 Hellewickhopn 26 68 00 349 00 Hellezo 29 58 40 20 30 Helliesund 25 57 30 22 00 Helliesundsgab 29 57 40 22 00 Hellingvand 28, 29 60 20 23 30 Hellis 30, 35 55 20 24 20 Hellistrup 32 55 30 26 40 Hellum Herret 36 56 45 24 40 Hellurfiord 26 65 00 351 00 Hellusmagle 32 55 20 26 40 Helm 30 55 40 23 20 Helm 20, 22 56 00 25 00 Helmdrup 37 55 35 23 50 Helmet 19, 20 57 00 43 00 Helmsdorp 43 54 15 25 20 Helmstede 30 56 20 27 40 Helsberg 18, 20 54 00 38 00 Helle 41, 42 54 00 23 40 Helsenor 20, 22 56 00 27 00 Helsertieff 42 54 05 23 40 Helsing 32 55 50 27 00   36, 37 56 20 24 30 Helsingborg 20, 22 56 00 27 00   30, 31 55 55 27 40 Helsinge 32 55 30 26 00 Helsingia 06 61 00 31 00   20 62 00 32 00 Helsingo 20, 21 60 00 42 00 Helsingor 30, 32, 35 55 40 27 20 Helsingsfors 19, 20, 21 60 00 42 00 Helsted 32 55 20 27 20 Helstorp 35 56 20 24 20 Helstrup 30 56 20 24 40 Heltberg 36 56 45 22 50 Hem 30 54 20 24 00   36, 37 56 30 24 40   40 54 20 24 10   41, 42 54 20 23 50   42 54 20 24 00 Hembdingen 44 53 45 24 30 Hembuttel 41, 42 54 00 23 40 Hemed 30, 36 55 40 22 40 Hemelen 30 56 20 23 00 Hemersum 35 56 20 24 20 Hemeso 32 55 20 26 00 Heminstede 42 54 10 23 50 Hemme 36, 37 56 25 25 10 Hemmed 37 55 50 22 50 Hemmeleff 36, 37 56 25 25 20 Hemmelmarck 38, 40 54 30 25 00 Hemmelsdorp 41 53 55 25 30 Hemmerwarth 42 54 20 23 50 Hemmes 30 55 20 28 20   31 55 25 28 40 Hemmestrup 36, 37 56 20 24 10 Hemmingstede 41 54 10 23 50 Hemnefiverd 25 64 00 25 00 Hemnschel 20, 25, 27 64 00 25 00 Hemos 30 55 20 26 20 Hems 20 59 00 24 00 Hemsio 22 57 30 27 00 Hemstede 41 54 15 24 00 Hemstee 30, 35 55 40 24 20 Hemwurth 42 54 15 23 50 Henberg 35 55 20 24 20 Henckelstruy 31 55 45 28 10 Henekus 38, 39 55 00 24 10 Heng 29 58 40 20 30 Hengi 37 56 10 24 10 Hengl So 37 56 10 24 00 Hening 32 55 20 Henneberg 34 55 25 Hennegaard 37 55 45 Henne Marken 20 61 00   25 61 30 Heno 28 61 30 Hencichsdorff 16 53 00 C. Henrietta Maria 01 55 05 Pr. Henry's C. 01 61 00 Hensel S. 16 53 40 Henstede 41 53 45   42 54 00     54 10   44 53 50 Hensted Herret 36 56 40 Hepsass 26 67 30 Hercanum 6, 8, 11 49 00 Herdisarwick 26 64 30 Heredadkloster 31 55 55 Heredod Kloft. 30 56 00 Heredstop 31 55 30 Hereloff 25 58 30 Heresoff K. 29 58 20 Herfogle 32 55 20 Hergaard 37 56 00 Hergen 30 54 00 Heringskrog 17 54 15 Heringsandt 42 54 15 Herits 29 57 40 Heritz 20, 25 58 00 Herkli 12 48 30     49 00   13 E   Herlands Sedeged 37 55 40 Herliunge 22 57 30 Herlossholm 32 55 10 Herlow 12 47 30   31 55 55 Herlunda 20, 22 56 00 Hermanshoffued 29 58 00 Hermanstadt 14 49 40 Hermenaw 16 53 40     53 40 Hermersdorff 16 54 00 Hermesdorff 16 54 20 Hermitzleffgaard 37 57 10 Hernfehr 41 53 55 Hernijervi 20 64 00 Herning 37 56 00 Hernold's ness 01 65 10 3 Hernon 6, 20 62 00 Hernor 21 62 30 Hernstadt 14, 15 51 20 Herop 34 55 35 Herreberg 31 55 40 2 Herredtstedt 38, 39, 40 55 10 2 Herrenpful 17 54 05 3 Herrestedt 32 55 40 2 Herrested Herrit 31 55 30 2 Herrested Wester 32 55 40 2 Herritzloss 33 54 40 2 Herrnborg 41 53 45 2 Herrnfehr 43 53 55 2 Herrnhoven 44 53 50 2 Herro 27 63 00 2 Herry 22 57 30 2 Hersbull 38, 40, 41 54 30 2 Hersche 30 55 40 2 Herse 31 55 50 2 Hersesio 21 64 30 3 Hersey 26 65 30 35 Hersholm 30 57 00 2 Herteff 37 55 30 2   39 55 35 2 Hersloe 34 55 30 2   37 55 30 2 Hersloff 30, 32 55 40 2 Herslou 31 55 50 2 Hersted 36 56 50 2 Herteskoy 31 55 25 2 Hertzberg 16 54 00 3 Hertzenberg 17 54 15 3 Hertzhals 29, 35 57 20 2 Hertzholm 36 57 15 2 Hertzhorn 41, 44 53 50 2 Hertzogwald 16 53 20 3 Hervijervi 21 64 00 4 Hesel 42 54 10 2 Heselich 16 53 20 3 Heselo 20, 22, 25 56 00 2 Heskestads K. 29 58 20 2 Heslager 32 55 15 2   34 55 15 2 Hesleberg 31 55 35 2 Heslund 31 55 55 2 Hesner 20 58 00 2 Hesnesgab 29 58 00 2 Hesselby 36, 37 56 20 2 Hestberg 36, 37 56 20 2 Hested 30 56 00 2   31 56 05 2 Hestefiord 22 58 00 2 Hesteboffuit 33 55 54 2 Hestensle 31 55 45 2 Hestfiord 26 67 00 35 Hestholm 19 58 30 4   40 54 55 2 Hestholmen 28 60 30 2 Hestra 22 56 30 2 Het Jamen Voloft Jagris 09 M.  
sorp 43 53 55 25 30 41, 44 53 40 24 20 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 10 20 58 00 22 00 25 58 00 23 00 29 58 00 22 30 38, 40 54 25 23 50 oom 40, 41 54 25 23 30 ydbalg 30 54 20 23 20 41, 42 54 10 23 50 16 55 00 39 30 elde 44 53 50 24 50 41 53 50 24 50 33 54 45 26 40 6, 25 66 00 25 00 25 59 00 24 00 elaw 16 54 00 38 00 oft Coksbr. 28 62 30 20 30 42 54 15 24 00 32 55 40 26 20 36, 37 56 25 23 50 36 57 00 23 10 28 62 30 20 30 sousen 44 53 55 24 30 31 55 40 29 40 erbek 37 56 05 22 50 44 53 55 24 50 31 55 40 29 00 ands 06 59 00 21 00 andsk 29 58 40 21 00 22 59 00 32 00 20 58 00 32 00 er lacus 23 59 10 32 30   24 59 00 32 00 sholt 30, 31 56 00 27 30 So. 37 56 15 22 50 sgaard 32 55 20 26 40 fiord 29 60 00 19 30 28, 29 60 20 23 30 39 55 05 23 40 in natsel alzt. 26 66 00 358 00 36 56 40 23 20 36, 37 56 20 24 10 36, 37 56 25 23 10 rup 39 55 20 24 20 37 55 50 24 40 de 38, 39, 40 55 00 23 40 26 65 00 360 00 12 48 30 47 00 27 62 40 21 00 29 58 40 20 30 36 56 55 23 00 31 55 45 28 40 20, 24 60 40 34 00 24 59 40 30 00 37 55 35 22 50 org 31 55 50 27 50   38 54 35 24 30 bekk 39, 40 54 35 24 30 have 41, 43 54 20 25 50 ensteden 41, 42 53 55 24 10 awort 41 53 45 23 30 19 60 00 42 00 31 56 00 27 50 sort 16 53 40 37 30 port 30 53 40 23 40 37 56 20 25 00 agoge 32 55 20 27 00 37 55 45 24 10 cle 31 56 10 28 10 loff 32 54 10 27 00 Himmelstede 15 52 40 31 40 era 24 59 20 32 20 herg 36 56 35 23 20 25 59 00 28 00 eraa 29 59 00 20 30 38, 39 55 05 24 10 37 56 05 22 30 15 51 30 33 20 orp 42 54 05 23 50 39 55 20 23 40 ofter 30 56 40 24 40 affel 37 55 30 24 10 20 63 00 45 00 dstruy 31 55 55 28 40   28 60 30 19 30 gel 34 55 25 24 30 25, 28 60 30 19 30 berga 24 59 20 32 00   06 57 00 29 00 20, 22 57 30 30 00 37 56 15 24 10 30 55 55 24 50 ford 26 65 30 350 00 lely 37 56 10 24 50 36 57 20 24 20 agholm 37 56 10 23 30 36, 37 56 20 24 50 22 57 00 29 00 holm 31, 32 55 50 27 20 chus 36, 37 56 20 24 10 37 55 20 23 00 36 57 00 23 50 ci Montes zarisci 11 55 00 64 00 sedorp 20, 21 62 00 45 00 eck 30, 35 56 20 23 40 aborstel 41 54 05 24 30 oki 06 68 00 48 00 chberg 16 53 20 37 30 Hirschfeldt 16 54 00 37 00 Hirschnfelde 44 53 35 24 50 Hirtz 36 56 45 24 10 Hirtzlalghoy 37 56 00 23 20 Hirtzmell 36 56 45 24 10 Hiruyoki 07 68 00 50 00   20 68 00 46 00 Hisingen 20, 22 25 57 30 26 Hiskin L. 24 60 30 33 00 Histernes 26 65 30 352 00 Hitteren 6, 20, 25, 27 64 00 24 00 Hitteron 6, 20, 25, 29 58 00 21 00 Hitterslen 20 55 00 24 00 Hittis 19, 20, 21 59 30 39 00 Hiulared 31 55 40 29 00 Hlanka fl. 18 51 30 47 00 Hleirup 36, 37 56 20 23 20 Hlodewick 26 68 00 349 00 Hlubokie 18 55 00 45 00 Hnappadalzhokel 26 65 30 359 00 Hoan 20 70 00 35 00 Hoborg 19, 22 57 00 35 00 Hobro 30, 36 56 20 24 20 Hoby 22, 30 56 00 30 00 Hochafit 37 55 50 24 50 Hoch Bettsh 15 51 20 33 40 Hochland 17 53 55 36 30 Hochrosen 10 57 00 42 00 Hochwach 41 54 20 25 30 Hockelberg 39 55 20 24 20 Hockerup 38, 40 54 50 24 30 Hokkerland 16 54 00 37 30 Hodde 37 55 35 23 10 Hodeschi 12 49 00 53 00 Hodrup 40 54 45 24 10 Hodsedborg 36, 37 56 20 23 00 Hoduzisski 18 55 00 44 00 Hoe 38 55 30 23 10 Hoc Towria 7, 20 66 00 54 00 Hoem 39 55 15 23 50 Hoen 30, 41 54 20 24 20 Hoensee 16 54 00 40 30 Hoensirst 16 54 00 38 00 Hoenstein 14, 18 50 40 30 00 Hoesel 30 55 00 30 00   44 53 50 24 10 Hoff 40 54 40 24 40 Hoffwer 37 55 40 24 00 Hoffmantorp 22 56 30 31 00 Hoffringholm 36, 37 56 25 25 00 Holua 22 58 30 30 00 Hog 31 55 40 28 10 Hogaby 20, 22 57 00 33 00 Hogalen 31 56 10 29 30 Hogalt 31 56 15 29 00 Hogbro 31 55 40 28 20   36, 37 56 20 23 30 Hoge 30, 31 56 00 28 00   38, 40, 41 54 35 23 40 Hogebo K. 29 58 20 22 30 Hogeholck 20 62 00 20 00 Hogel 40 54 40 24 10 Hogelandt 20, 21 59 30 44 00 Hogelsdorp 44 53 55 25 00 Hogen 41 53 55 25 20   42 54 15 24 00 Hogendorp 17 53 50 36 30 Hogenes 22 56 00 27 00 Hogentruy 31 56 00 28 00 Hogerup 32 55 20 27 20 Hogeste 31 55 50 29 20 Hogestruy 31 55 45 28 20 Hogewegh 41 53 35 22 50 Hogelunt 38, 39 55 10 24 20 Hogholt 36 57 15 24 30 Hogisko So. 37 55 35 23 50 Hognerop 22 58 00 29 00 Hogsby 20 57 00 32 00 Hogsdunt 39 55 00 24 00 Hogsetrer 20, 22 58 00 26 00 Hogsfiord 29 58 40 21 00 Hogstholt 39 55 00 24 10 Hogsleff 36, 37 56 30 23 40 Hogsleffmol 36 56 35 24 00 Hogstlundt 38, 40 54 55 24 00 Hogsrod 31 55 40 29 00 Hegstrup 30, 32 55 10 27 20 Hogum 35 56 20 22 40 Hogwick 20 64 00 25 00 Hohendorp 43 54 20 25 10 Hohen solde 40, 41 54 20 25 30   44 53 55 24 10 Hohenhorn 41, 42 54 05 24 10 Hohenhorst 41 53 40 24 10 Hohenste 43 53 50 25 20 Hohenstein 14 53 20 38 00   41, 43 54 15 25 40 Hohenwald 17 54 00 37 00 Hohenweg 44 53 55 24 10 Hohenwestede 41, 42 54 05 24 20 Hohenworden 42 54 10 23 50 Hohesiar 44 53 25 24 30 Hohesche Temie 17 54 00 36 50 Hoiberg 39 55 05 23 50 Hoiby 31 55 30 28 30 Hoiersdorff 15 51 30 33 20 Hoigaard 37 55 40 23 50 Hoig Herrit 31 56 15 28 20 Hoine 35 55 20 24 20 Hoining 37 56 05 24 30 Hoisdorp 44 53 40 25 00 Hoist 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 00 Hoistdorp 43 54 15 25 20 Hoium 39 55 20 24 10 Hokelsberg 17 54 05 37 00 Hokhusudh 21 60 00 35 00 Hoki 18 54 30 49 00 Hokiofwinge 31 55 30 28 10 Hokulsa 26 66 30 360 00 Hola 01 67 00 353 00 Holaki 12 48 30 51 00 Holandsk 29 58 20 20 30 Holbaeck 30, 32, 35 55 40 26 20   36, 37 56 25 24 50 Holbaekgard 36 56 25 24 50 Holberg 36, 37 56 20 24 30 Holcker 35 56 20 24 00 Holdenis 40 54 50 24 40 Hold with hope 01 73 00 12 00 Holebull 38, 40 54 55 24 30 Holgaholm 31 56 15 29 00 Holgurdalur 26 67 00 356 00 Holinge 31 56 00 28 00 Holinskon 37 56 00 24 00 Holk 31 55 55 27 50 Holland 14, 16, 18, 20 54 00 37 00 Hollanderb 32 55 30 27 20 Hollander Wonend 17 54 5 36 20 Hollen 41, 44 53 40 24 20 Holinholm 36, 37 56 20 24 10 Hollingstede 38, 40 54 20 24 30 Hollola 20, 21 61 00 43 00 Holloa lac. 20, 21 61 00 43 00 Holloy 39, 40 55 00 23 20 Holm 20, 22 58 30 27 00 Holm S. 16 53 40 40 00 Holmedal 22 59 00 27 00 Holmegaard 30, 32 55 10 26 40 Holmenlant 37 56 05 22 40 Holmgra 28 60 30 19 30 Holmo 20 70 00 32 00 Holmon 21 63 30 37 00 Holmsk 29 57 40 22 00 Holmstad 31 55 50 28 10 Holmstrup 32 55 30 26 20 Holmstien 27, 28 62 30 20 00 Holnas 6, 22 60 00 35 00   23 60 20 34 30 Holner 30, 35 56 00 24 20 Holnes 21 60 00 35 00 Holnigbaek 37 55 50 24 10 Holnkrog 17 54 20 36 20 Holone 18 51 00 42 00 Holowaiza 18 53 00 42 00 Holowbacz 12 48 00 46 00 Holowczyn 18 54 00 42 00 Hols 25, 29 60 20 23 00 Holsatia 41, 44 54 00 24 00 Holsebro 32 55 10 26 40 Holsk 20, 28 60 00 22 30 Holsluing 22 57 00 28 00 Holsbro 30 56 00 23 00 Holsted 37 55 25 23 20 Holstein 20, 30 54 00 24 20 Furst Holstein 30 54 00 24 20 Holstengraven 41, 42 53 55 25 30 Holster Closter 25, 28 59 30 20 30 Holster See 39 54 55 24 30 Holstvame 28, 29 60 20 23 00 Holt 39, 40 54 50 24 10 Holtalen 20, 25, 27 63 00 26 00 Holtbeck 42 54 05 24 30 Holte 25 58 30 23 00 Holte K. 29 58 20 23 00 Holten 41 53 45 25 00 Holtena 40 54 20 25 10 Holtenagh 43 54 20 24 50 Holtenklincken 44 53 45 25 00 Holtog 30, 32 55 20 27 20 Holtse 38, 40 54 20 25 00 Holttrop 42 54 10 24 30 Holtz 44 53 35 25 00 Holtzacker 40 54 45 24 10 Holtzcamp 43 53 50 25 20 Holtzcate 44 53 55 24 20 Holvad 20, 30 55 20 24 00   37 55 25 23 20 Holumby 30, 31 55 40 28 40 Holuniki 13 C.   Homala 21 63 00 51 00 Homel 06 51 00 49 00 Homelen 35 56 20 23 00 Homelom 36, 37 56 35 22 50 Homme 30, 32 55 20 26 40 Hommedal K. 29 58 00 22 30 Hommelwyck 20, 25 64 00 27 00 Homo 36, 37 56 20 25 20 Homola 20 63 00 51 00 Hompdorp 40 54 50 23 50 Homsnes 29 57 20 24 30 Homynde 33 54 40 26 30 Honborg 30 55 20 24 20 Honckleflield 29 59 20 21 30 Hond 41 54 15 23 40 Hondelef 36 57 15 24 10 Honding 40 54 35 24 20 Hondorp 43 54 20 25 10 Hondt 40 54 45 23 40 Honerherde 42 54 15 24 20 Honesta 31 55 30 29 10 Honig 38, 39 55 05 24 00
Honigdael 27 62 30 21 00   28 62 30 20 30 Honigfeldt 16 53 40 36 30 Honigsee 41, 42, 43 54 10 25 00 Honlen 19, 20 56 00 40 00 Honnenbuttel 41 54 00 25 00 Honsge 31 55 25 28 40 Honsholm 31 56 00 28 40 Honskow 32, 34 55 10 25 50 Hoop 07 70 00 44 00   20 71 00 44 00 Hoop bay 01 64 30 321 00 Hoop Eyland 06 76 00 44 00 Hoornsond 06 76 00 33 00 Hooy 20 70 00 38 00 Hop 1, 26 67 00 360 00 Hope advanced 01 60 30 302 00 Hope check 01 61 00 267 00 Hope I. 01 76 20 44 00 Hopcless I. 01 76 40 41 30 Hope Sanderson 01 73 20 319 00 Hopd en 29 59 40 20 00 Hopdi 26 64 30 01 00 Hopdterup 38 55 10 24 30   20 55 10 24 20 Hopdorp 30, 35 55 00 24 20   34, 4, 40 55 10 24 30 Hopen 42 54 00 23 50   41, 44 53 20 24 50 Hopenbrock 43 54 00 25 20 Hopnafiord 26 66 30 01 00 Hopenbecke 17 54 05 37 00 Horadyscze 13 G.   Horastruy 31 56 10 29 00 Horbeloff 32, 33 54 50 27 10 Horby 30, 32 55 40 26 20   36 56 35 24 20 Hordem 25, 28, 29 60 20 23 30 Hord 36, 37 56 20 25 10 Hordum 36 56 50 22 50 Hore 30 55 40 28 40   31 55 45 29 00 Horeby 32 54 50 27 00 Hored 31 56 05 29 20 Horel fl. 11 49 00 48 00 Horia 20, 22 56 00 28 00 Horica 12 50 00 44 00 Horin R. 12 50 00 45 00   18 51 00 44 00 Hork 11 55 00 47 00 Horka 14 51 00 31 00 Horkoszynoe 12 49 00 51 00 Horla fl. 15 51 20 33 40 Horle 27, 28 62 43 21 00 Hortiunga 31 56 05 29 00 Horloff 32 55 20 27 20 Horn 20, 22 58 00 30 00 Horn S. 01 75 50 36 00     74 00 319 00 Hornafuan 20 65 00 32 00 Hornborg 37 55 50 24 10 Hornesk 29 58 00 22 00 Horning 37 55 45 24 20 Hornsdorp 43 54 00 25 00 Hornsec 38, 39, 40 55 00 24 10 Horns Herret 32 55 40 26 40 Horns Herritzting 36 57 20 24 40 Hornsleff 37 56 15 24 40 Hornsnes 36 57 25 24 20 Hornsted 36 57 20 24 40 Hornstedkir 36 57 20 24 30 Hornum 25 56 40 24 20   36 56 45 23 50 Hornum Herritzting 36 56 50 24 20 Hornysse 38, 40 55 05 25 10 Horo 22 57 00 27 00 Horoizin 12 49 00 43 00 Horod 30, 31 55 45 29 20 Horodak 06 51 00 44 00   18 52 00 44 00 Horodck 18 54 00 45 00 Horodek 06 55 00 49 00   18 52 00 42 00 Horodela 12 50 30 42 00 Horodenicze 12 48 30 46 00 Horodi 18 52 00 44 00 Horodicz 12 48 30 49 00 Horodla 18 50 30 42 00 Horodnio 12 50 00 51 00 Horodvice 12 50 30 45 00 Horodyeze 12 50 00 51 00 Horodyscze 12 48 30 51 00 Horodyski fl. 12 49 30 52 00 Horodzisscze 18 53 30 45 00 Horol fl. 18 55 00 51 00 Horosci 6, 20 57 00 52 00 Horoscowa 12 48 30 46 00 Horozyn 12 48 30 50 00 Horrels 20 62 00 20 00 Horsbeck 43 53 55 25 20 Horsbugge 38, 39 55 05 24 20 Horsbull 38 54 45 23 40   40 54 55 23 50 Horsdorp 43 53 55 25 20 Horsens 6, 20 55 00 24 00 Horsheck 38, 40 54 45 24 10 Horsker 19 59 30 44 00 Horslandet 21 61 30 34 00 Horslen 23 59 00 36 00 Horslo 31 56 10 29 10 Horslund 33 54 50 26 30 Horssnes 30 56 40 24 40 Horst 41, 44 53 50 24 10 Horstede 38 54 30 24 10 Horsten 41, 42 54 15 24 20 Horsue 30, 32 55 40 26 20 Horup 38, 39 55 10 24 00 Horwol 11 52 00 46 00 Horya 30 56 00 28 40 Hoscl 41 53 40 24 20 Hospital 17 54 05 37 00 Hosta 23 59 10 32 00 Hostad 31 55 40 28 30 Hostebro 35 56 00 23 20 Hosten 22 58 00 33 00 Hoster 34 55 10 25 00 Hosterup , 38, 39 55 30 23 20   38, 39, 40 54 55 24 30 Hostoste 31 55 30 28 20 Hostro 37 55 35 24 00 Hostrup 36 57 15 24 20 Horsua 20 58 00 30 00 Hofium 36 56 35 23 20 Hottero 29 59 00 20 00 Hotzagerkirck 36, 37 56 20 23 10 Hou 39 55 00 23 40     55 20 24 20 Houdal 30 56 00 28 40   31 56 00 29 00 Houdst 39 55 10 24 30 Hovede 42 54 15 24 00 Hovet 16 54 00 36 00 Hovetbeck 41, 42 54 15 24 30 Houlberg Herret 36, 37 56 20 24 20 Houle 12 49 00 49 00   13 C.   Houstrup 37 55 40 24 00 Hournum 36 56 30 24 10 Housken 29 58 40 20 30 How 31 56 15 27 50     56 15 28 30 Howe 36 56 30 22 30 Howenhorn 44 53 50 24 20 Hozbroe 38, 39 55 10 23 40 Hoy 28 60 30 20 00   32 55 20 26 20 Hoyby 32 55 50 26 20 Hoyelsi 32 55 30 27 00 Hoyen 36 57 35 25 10 Hoyer 38, 39, 40 54 50 23 40 Hoyerstieff 38, 39, 40 54 55 23 40 Hoyersword 40 54 25 24 00 Hoyragola 18 54 30 41 00 Hoyran 18 55 30 53 00 Hoyruss 36 56 40 23 10 Hranhopen 26 68 00 359 00 Hrebinia 18 53 30 45 00 Hresko 18 53 00 45 00 Hrisey 26 67 30 357 00 Hrottangsseior 26 65 00 360 00 Hrollelisfiord 26 67 30 357 00 Hron R. 12 49 30 52 00 Huaalsond 20 70 00 38 00     70 00 39 00 Hualfiord 26 65 00 353 00 Huallat 26 66 00 348 00 Hualladfiort 26 67 30 357 00 Hualso 32 55 30 26 40 Huamkro 36, 37 56 35 24 00 Hualsleff 36 56 20 24 20 Hubarlyk 12 49 00 49 00 Hubbersdorp 41, 43 54 00 25 20 Hubbert's hope 01 59 00 266 00 Hubbo 24 59 30 33 00 G. Hubenick 16 54 40 38 00 Hubin 12 49 00 47 00   17 54 00 37 00 Hubkow 18 51 30 45 00 Hubstyn 43 54 10 25 30 Hudae 43, 44 53 50 25 10 Hudcne 20 57 00 28 00   22 57 30 28 00 Hudhen 21 63 30 36 00 Huderup So. 37 56 20 23 30 Hudewath 39 55 00 24 10 Huding 20 55 00 23 00 Houdson's bay 01 55 &c 280 &c Hudsons Strait 01 60 &c 290 &c Hudwickswald 21 62 00 34 00 Huen 30 55 40 27 40   31 55 45 27 30   32 55 50 27 20 Huerbeck 42 54 05 24 50 Huering 34 55 30 25 20 Huerrestrup 36 56 35 24 00 Huetto Herret 36 57 00 24 00 Hugendruy 31 55 40 28 50 Huger 35 55 00 23 40 Hugersby 30, 35 57 20 24 20 Huggerbyow 35 57 00 24 20 Huglen 29 59 20 20 30 Huharlyk 13 C.   Huidberg 36 56 40 22 50     56 50 22 40 Huidbergaard 36 56 40 23 00 Huidings K. 29 58 40 20 00 Huidstedgaard 36 57 15 24 20 Huilke 37 55 55 24 30 Huilfager 37 55 40 22 50     57 15 24 50 Huilsom 36 56 35 24 20 Huirrildshaffn 32 55 10 26 20 Huitgnond 21 60 30 Huittis 21 61 30 Hulaimki 11 50 00   18 50 50 Hulgeberg 35 56 40   36 56 45 Hullerschow 39 55 05 Hullerup 40 54 45 Hulse 30 55 40   31 55 50 Hulsboy 36 57 05 Hulskodubrowiczkic 18 52 30 Hulskopohoryle 18 52 30 Hulsum 35 56 20 Hulterstad 22 56 00 Hultet 31 56 00 Hultis 20 61 00 Humbled 30 54 40   32 54 50   43 54 50 Humdorp 38, 39 54 50 Humelfelt 40 54 30 Hunbro 36 57 05 Hunborg 36 56 50 Hundebull 39 55 15 Hunderup 37 55 20   39 55 25 Hundhamer 27 63 20 Hunding 38 54 35   38, 39 55 00 Hundsbaek 37 55 25 Hunseby 33 54 45 Hundsgard 39 55 00 Hundskar 19, 20, 22 58 30 Hundsloch 15 51 30 Hundslund 36 57 00   37 55 50 Hundstorp 35 56 40 Hundtsand 39 54 55 Hundwickswald 20 62 00 Huneberg 22 58 00   31 55 40 Hunevagstrand 29 58 20 Hunkir 36 57 05 Huntaw 16 54 20 Huokirk 37 55 30 Huoring 37 55 50 Huorns Herrit 36 57 25 Huornum 36, 37 56 30   37 55 45 Huornum Herret 36 56 50 2 Huorum 37 55 50 2 Hurdings So 20 58 00 2   25 59 00 2 Hurn 30 56 20 2 Hurre 31 55 40 2 Hurup 36 56 40 2   38, 39 55 10 2 Husbii 20, 30, 35 56 00 2   20, 22 60 00 3 Husbuy 38, 40 54 45 2 Husding 30, 35 55 00 2 Huseby 19, 22, 23 59 30 3   23, 24 60 20 3 Husewick 26 67 00 35 Husiatyn 18 49 00 4 Husum 30, 38, 40, 41, 42 54 30 2 Hutaf 17 54 05 3 Huttbleck 44 53 50 2 Hutte 30 54 20 2 Hutten 38, 41, 42 54 25 2 Huttenhosf 40 54 25 2 Hutwersdorp 43 53 55 2 Hutzfelde 43 54 05 25 Huyer 30 55 00 2 Hwarod 31 55 45 29 Hwedholm 34 55 05 25 Hwellinge 31 55 30 28 Hwideby 31 55 40 29 Hwideror 31 55 50 28 Hwideruy 31 55 40 28 N. Hwidinge 31 55 45 28 Hya 24 59 40 34 Hydollen 28, 29 60 20 23 Hygenas 22 59 00 28 Hygum 37 55 20 23   38, 39 55 15 23 Hyldtost 33 54 40 26 Hyle 06 58 00 20 Hylla 31 55 30 29 Hylle 29 58 40 21 Hyllersted 37 56 15 25 Hyllestads 20, 29 58 20 22 Hyllested 32 55 20 26 Hyllige 31 55 30 28 Hylling 32 55 40 26 Hylt 31 56 15 29 Hymrery 22 56 00 28 Hyom 36, 37 56 35 22 Hypanier 21 63 30 46 Hypaniervi 20 63 00 46 Hypavieria 06 63 00 47 Hyrig 20 57 00 24 Hyring 30, 35 57 20 24 Hyrring 40 54 45 24 Hyrup 30 56 20 28 I.   Jabbiaka 14 49 20 35 Jabinco 12 49 21 44
15 52 10 33 00 o 15 52 50 33 40 Mokra 12 47 30 47 00 18 50 00 44 00 16 53 40 37 00 39 55 05 24 30 oii 6, 7, 8, 02 57 00 00 60 12 48 00 43 00 i 41 53 35 22 40 41 53 25 22 50 06 53 00 67 00 32 55 50 26 20 berg 15 52 50 32 40 09 H M   12 49 30 50 00 m Rhymnus 06 49 00 83 00 06 55 00 85 00 fl. 60 50 00 86 00 09 A.   12 49 00 50 00 ce 12 49 00 46 00 19 59 00 42 00 20 59 00 43 00   12 46 00 46 00 ii 13 F   20 59 00 42 00 38 54 35 24 30 18 52 30 42 00 red 06 59 00 47 00 t James's Bay 01 51 &c 280 &c rs's C. 01 62 40 291 30 t Volostlagris 6, 7 62 00 65 00 iec 12 49 00 49 00   13 C   18 50 00 44 00 20, 21 61 00 42 00 06 47 00 89 00 y 40 54 40 24 20 p 36 56 55 22 50 18 52 30 44 00 12 49 00 46 00 18, 19 56 00 41 00 hoff 17 54 15 36 30 ervi 07 65 00 47 00 14 52 20 41 00 18 51 30 41 00 14, 16, 18 53 00 38 00 iec 15 52 30 34 40 ecz 18 51 00 39 00 aw 16 53 40 37 00 lacus 24 60 20 30 20 b 17 54 00 37 00 ke 16 53 20 38 00 pel 18 50 00 45 00 is 01 65 00 77 00 43 54 20 25 20 zowka 12 48 30 51 00 39 55 10 24 00 up 39 55 00 24 20 nd 39 55 10 24 10 39 55 10 24 10 dorp 42 54 00 24 20 43 54 05 25 40 holm 37 56 05 24 30 Oe 29 59 40 20 30 dt 38, 39, 40 54 50 24 10 aga 09 H.   eo 14, 15 51 40 34 20 yn 14 52 00 34 00 12 49 00 47 00 e 12 50 30 45 00 12 50 00 49 00 ria 09 K.   aw 18 50 00 41 00 15 51 40 34 20 ede 42 54 05 24 10 ga 12 48 00 45 00 39 55 05 24 20 itz 20 52 00 30 00 da fl. 18 52 00 42 00 ky 14 52 00 33 00 wce 12 48 30 47 00     49 30 51 00 18 49 30 39 00 nt 30 54 20 28 40 13 E.   kowo 15 51 50 34 00 ka 14 49 00 38 00 oyny 18 54 30 41 00 12 47 00 45 00 22 56 30 30 00 a fl. 6, 7 62 00 82 00 cala 06 61 00 42 00 arai 21 65 00 37 00 meray 20 65 00 37 00 asthus 20 61 00 42 00 14 51 00 33 00 lasowka 12 50 30 43 00 or 18 52 30 43 00 orow 18 49 30 41 00 sickon 6, 7, 8 58 00 60 00 erzic 15 51 40 33 40 lowic 18 49 00 43 00 owiecz. 12 49 00 43 00 y 06 47 00 49 00 t 20 57 00 46 00 e 18 49 30 44 00 mani 18 55 30 44 00 P. 01 77 00 92 00 S. 01 78 20 35 00 Ice haven P. 01 75 30 95 00 Icagalitza 09 D.   Ichaitza 07 59 00 63 00 Ichalitza P. Eyl. 09 D.   Ichalitza Kerckdorp en River 09 D   Icora fl. 08 53 00 67 00 Icoreetz 6, 8 53 00 65 00 Iczycz fl. 18 49 30 48 00 Idersnis 32 55 10 26 40 Iderstrup 33 54 45 27 10 G. Idioffa 16 53 20 38 30 K. Idioffa 16 53 20 38 30 Ido 22 57 30 33 00 Idom 36, 37 56 20 23 00 Idra 6, 20, 25 61 00 27 00 Idstede 40 54 35 24 40 Jeberg 36 56 40 23 40 Jaboe vel Attamans∣koi Gorod 6, 8 49 00 62 00 Jedinga 09 E.   Jedr 23 59 10 33 00 Jedrzeiow 18 52 30 40 00 Jedsted 37, 39 55 20 23 40 Jeduty 12 50 30 51 00 Jegerna 12 49 30 43 00 Jegerndorf 14 49 40 34 00 Jegid 36 57 15 24 40 Jegstrup 37 55 15 23 30 Jehaitza 06 59 00 63 00 Jeko 12 49 30 49 00 Jelcetz 6, 8 52 00 60 00 Jelm 20 70 00 39 00 Jelmsbuys 20 71 00 40 00 Jels 37, 38, 39 55 20 24 10 Jcl So 37 56 05 24 20 Jelso K. 29 59 00 21 00 Jelstrup 36 57 15 24 10 Jeltefioerd 28 60 30 19 30 Jeltescaer 28 60 30 20 30 Jema 20, 25 60 30 29 00 Jemgol 20, 22 56 00 31 00 Jemisco 09 P.   Jemisco reca 09 P.   Jemplum 06 66 00 38 00 Jempse 06 62 00 43 00 Jempta 20 66 00 37 00   21 65 30 38 00 Jemptia 6, 20 63 00 31 00 Jemptun 20, 21 65 30 38 00 Jemsse 20, 21 62 30 43 00 Jende lacus 21 62 00 43 00 Jedrzciow 14 50 20 37 00 Jene 20 57 00 30 00 Jeniejervi 20 62 00 50 00 Jenijoki fl. 20 61 00 51 00 Jenila 20 61 00 42 00 Jenisjervi 21 62 00 49 00     62 00 50 00 Jenitsa rasna fl. 08 52 00 65 00 Jeno fl. 20 70 00 44 00 Jensgard 37 55 50 24 40 Jenskow 17 53 55 36 10 Jensnes 37 55 50 24 40 Jenyoki 21 61 00 52 00 Jerby 20, 22 58 30 26 00 Jerdrup 37 55 25 23 40 Jeremiouka 12 48 30 50 00   13 F.   Jeribovo 09 H.   Jerken lacus 21 59 30 35 00 Jerloff 37 55 35 23 50 Jerlohol Herrit 37 55 40 24 00 Jerloss 32 55 30 26 00 Jerm 37 55 25 22 50 Jermed 37 56 10 24 20 Jern 38, 39 55 20 23 40 Jerna 24 60 40 30 40 Jerndrup 38 55 15 24 20 Jernaruy 31 56 05 28 20 Jerota 35 56 40 23 20 Jeroslaw 6, 7, 8, 20 57 00 59 00 Jerpas 20, 22 58 00 28 00 Jersdorp 34 55 30 25 20 Jersege 31 55 55 29 20 Jersi 32 55 30 27 00 Jersleff 36 57 05 24 20 Jersleff Herrit 36 57 10 24 20 Jervia 19 58 30 42 00 Jervosalsco 21 59 00 49 00 Jerup Mose 36 57 25 24 40 Jeschedorp 43 53 55 25 10 Jeschonovitz 16 53 20 39 00 Jesietrow 12 48 30 49 00 Jeskis 20, 21 61 00 47 00 Jesow 16 54 20 38 30 Jessa Oeloff 08 49 00 72 00 Jessen 16 53 20 40 00 Jest 6, 8 55 00 62 00 Jesupol 12 49 00 43 00 Jetz Marck 36 57 00 24 00 Jeven fl. 42 54 10 24 30     54 15 24 20 Jevenstede 40, 42 54 15 24 30 Jewesi 20 62 00 44 00 Jeytza 09 J.   Jezael 18 50 00 40 00 Jeziero 12 46 30 49 00   13 S.   Jeziora 18 53 30 41 00 Jezioro 12 48 30 50 00 Jeziorosa 18 55 30 43 00 Jezirnica 18 53 00 42 00 Jezora 15 51 50 34 20 Jezow 14 51 40 36 00 Igelosa 31 55 40 28 30 Igeltierna 24 60 00 32 40 Igeneberg 31 56 00 29 00 Iggar 21 60 30 34 00 Ignees 14 49 00 39 00 Jhumain 18 53 30 46 00 Jhumienka fl. 18 53 30 46 00 Jiodelaw 31 55 35 28 40 Jiongovi gorri Montes 06 56 00 75 00 Jishoy 30, 32 55 30 27 20 Ikantuwick 26 67 00 360 00 Ikasnia 19 55 30 44 00 Iken 30, 34, 35 55 00 24 40 Ikrida Clooster 26 66 00 360 00 Ilanada O. 12 45 30 47 00 Ilands P. 01 75 50 96 30 The 2 Ilands 01 70 40 70 40 The 3 Iles 01 74 00 317 00 Ilckenberg 42 54 10 24 20 Ilgenit S. 16 53 40 40 30 Ilgin 15 51 40 33 20 Ilgrof 38, 40 54 35 23 50 Ilia 18 54 00 44 00 Ilia fl. 18 54 00 45 00 Iliasgrod 12 48 00 46 00 Ilkovostin 12 51 00 47 00 Ilkusch 14 50 00 36 00 Ill So 37 56 05 24 00 Ilmen lacus 6, 20 57 00 50 00 Ilmin R. 12 50 00 53 00 Ilstruy 31 55 35 29 00 Iltaga hilbi 26 65 00 359 00 Ilum 34, 38 55 10 25 10 Ilza 14 50 40 38 00 Imbilax 21 61 30 50 00 Imbilova 6, 7, 8 56 00 58 00 Imbueren 41, 42 54 10 24 20 Immerwath 38, 39 55 05 24 20 Impery Chamipere∣copensis pars 18 52 &c 54 00 Imsen 41 53 35 23 10 Imsland K. 29 59 00 21 00 Imster fl. 16 55 00 40 30 Imstra fl. 18 54 30 40 00 Ince fl. 06 65 00 61 00 Indaal 27 64 20 26 00 Indas fl. 11 47 00 54 00 Indega 6, 7 67 00 71 00 C. Inderski 10 C.   Indfior 36, 37 56 25 22 30 Indfiorden 36, 37 56 20 22 20 Indrica fl. 19, 20 55 00 45 00 Indura 18 53 00 41 00 Inenas 20 69 00 30 00 Ingedgaard 36 56 45 23 30 Ingeleste 30, 31 55 30 28 20 Ingelsted Herrit 31 55 25 29 40 Ingen 20 71 00 39 00 Ingestost 33 54 45 26 40 Ingo 19, 21 60 00 41 00 Ingolysshopdi 26 64 30 360 00 Ingria 6, 20, 21 59 00 47 00 Ingstrup 36 57 05 24 00 Ingstrup Soe 36 57 05 24 00 Inie 19, 21 60 00 38 00 Iniow 18 53 00 43 00 Inkaarsandt 39 55 10 23 30 Inkerck 35 54 40 24 20 Inkerme 6, 11 46 00 53 00 Inkirck 30 54 40 24 20 Inland 22, 25 58 00 26 00 Inlanden 22 56 30 30 00 Inmarck 39 55 10 24 00 Inneroe 27 64 40 27 00 Innnimgen 41 54 05 24 30 Inningn 42 54 05 24 30 Inotoc 06 49 00 78 00 Inowlocz 14 51 20 37 00     52 40 35 00 Inrekerck 20 60 00 20 00 Insalm 20, 21 63 30 44 00 Insio L. 24 60 40 31 40 Inskul, ab aliis Ingu∣la vocatur fl. 18 53 00 52 00 Inslo 34 55 25 24 40 Inster fl. 16 54 40 40 30 Insterburg 14, 16, 18, 20 54 20 39 30 Instrup 30, 35 57 00 23 40 Instulec ab aliis In∣gulec fl. 18 53 00 51 00 Insulac 10 A.   Insul. Camenio 09 A   Io 21 65 00 40 00 Joblonow 12 49 00 50 00 Jockam 16 53 40 38 30 Jockena 6, 7, 20 68 00 59 00 Joclovects 09 E.   Jodekop 17 54 10 36 40 Jodup fl. 16 54 40 40 00 Joglefield 29 59 00 21 30 Johailky 13 D.   S. Johannes 38, 40 54 40 23 30 Johannowa 14 49 00 35 00 Johansburg Pol Pis 16 53 20 39 30   18 20 53 00 39
Johansdorp 41, 43 54 15 25 40 Jokas 20, 21 62 00 46 00 Joklehed 25, 29 58 40 22 00 Jokomuca 06 66 00 35 00 Jokulssiord 26 67 30 349 00 Joldelundt 38, 40 54 40 24 10 Jolmajervi 20, 21 63 30 52 00 Joloszynce 12 49 00 50 00 Jolstede 39 55 00 24 20 Jompis 20 61 00 42 00 Jonasdorf 17 54 00 36 40 Ald. Jonas S. 01 76 00 270 00 Joncas recetsca 09 I.   Ione 22 57 00 32 00 C. Jones 01 57 00 288 30 Jonso 30, 32, 34 55 05 25 30 Jonstruy 31 56 10 28 20 Joofda dorpen River 09 L.   Joras 21 62 00 46 00 Jorbek 30, 35 54 40 24 40 Jorcke 41, 44 53 30 24 10 Jordtbeck 39 55 20 23 50 Jordholm 22 55 30 27 00 Jordkirk 38, 39, 40 55 00 24 20 Jordsandt 38, 39, 40 55 00 23 30 Jordschou 34 55 15 24 40 Jores Ostref 20 67 00 52 00 Jorested 31 55 30 30 00 Jorgenaw 16 54 20 39 00 Jorgental 16 53 40 37 30 Jorgesca Volost 09 I   Jorgochum 01 67 00 91 00 Jorgowitz 07 58 00 63 00 Jorll 30, 38, 40, 41 54 35 24 20 Jorloss 34 55 10 25 00 Jorlund 30, 32 55 40 27 00 Jorlunds Herrit 32 55 40 27 Jormonowka 12 49 30 48 00   13 B   Jornoklow 12 49 00 50 00 Jorns 20 62 00 46 00 Joroslaw 14 49 40 39 00 Jorsaker 20 63 00 33 00 Jorsbo 36 56 50 23 20 Jorsbogaard 36 56 50 23 20 Jorup 37, 39 55 30 23 40 Josema 20, 21 63 30 38 00 Josenberg 42 54 00 23 50 Josimena Mon. 06 63 00 63 00 Josnneva Mons 07 63 00 63 00 Josowa 12 49 00 47 00 Jostal 20 60 00 38 00 Jostero 29 58 00 23 00 Jostrup 32 55 30 26 40 Josundfiord 29 59 00 21 00 Joughoria 06 60 00 96 00   07 61 00 97 00 Joukis 21 61 30 48 00 De Jouldaghen 27 65 00 26 00 Joulsond 27 62 40 21 00 Jouraki 12 48 30 42 00 Jourdal 27 63 00 24 00 Jourin 12 49 00 43 00 Jowara 20, 22 66 00 44 00 Jowka 12 49 30 51 00 Iperstede 40 54 30 24 10 Ipostrup 32 55 40 27 20 Ipus fl. 18 52 00 49 00 Iritha 07 62 00 69 00 Irits t. 20 66 00 37 00 Irmonech 06 38 00 84 00 Irpien fl. 18 50 00 48 00 Irsta 24 59 20 33 00 Irtha 06 62 00 69 00 Irtisch fl. 6, 7 64 00 89 00 Irup 36 56 45 22 50 Irwa R. 12, 18 50 00 44 00 Irzypole 18 49 30 48 00 Isadou Vlasovi 09 I   Isafiorder 26 67 00 349 00 Isbuilitz 10 A   Isbursl 19 57 00 46 00 Ischlack S. 16 54 40 39 30 Isdbicza 14 52 20 36 00 Isedkirk 37 55 50 24 30 Isefiord 32 55 40 27 00 Iseland 01 65 &c 346 &c Iselmont 20 54 00 29 00 Iseremenina 09 I   Iserkopogost 20, 21 59 00 49 00 Isernhinrich 38, 40, 41 54 15 23 40 Isgaard 37 56 10 25 00 Isgard 35 56 00 25 00 Isige 31 55 20 28 30 Lil. Isige 31 55 25 28 40 Isiornoi 07 56 00 56 00 Isiornoy Salon 06 52 00 73 00 Isiornoi Sracz 06 55 00 57 00 Iskiolna 18 53 30 42 00 Iskorasien 18 51 00 46 00 Iskule 18 53 00 44 00 Islocz fl. 18 53 30 44 00 Ismen 18, 20 57 00 45 00 Ismenski 10 C   Isokoinuka 20 66 00 35 00 Isora fl. 20, 21 59 00 48 00 Isosimeva Monast. 09 O   Isoyda 06 61 00 66 00 Issen 18, 20 59 00 49 00 Istocz fl. 18 53 00 41 00 Istozera 09 N   Istorp 20, 22, 30 57 00 27 00 Isunsberg 24 61 00 30 20 Isznia 12 50 00 51 00 I. Itelinski 10 B   Itima 20, 21 60 30 45 00 Itshop 30 54 00 24 20 Ittesund 22 59 00 25 00 Itzehoa 6, 41, 42 53 55 24 10 Itzehoe 30 54 00 24 20 Itzstede 41, 44 53 45 24 50 Ivanagorod 6, 20, 21 59 00 46 00 Ivaniska Ozera 09 B   Ivaniskareca 09 B   Ivantzur 10 G   Jubeck 40 54 35 24 30 Juczosa fl. 18 55 00 48 00 Judal 20 62 00 33 00 Judekink 16 54 40 38 30 Juderup 32 55 30 26 20 Iveland 25 58 00 22 00 Ivendorp 43 53 55 25 40 Ivenfleht 44 53 50 24 00 Jvere 38, 39, 40 55 10 23 30 Iversnis 34, 38, 39 55 20 24 50 Juga fl. 6, 7 61 00 69 00 Jugh R. 01 61 00 65 00 Jugk 16 53 40 40 00 Jugulatmaly R. 12 47 30 50 00   13 Q   Julberg 31 55 25 28 40 L. Julbg 31 55 25 28 40 Julby 34 55 20 25 30 Julebo 31 55 45 29 50 Juletta 20, 22, 23 59 00 33 00 Julingholm 37 55 50 23 20 Julo 20 61 00 42 00 Jultowkow 12 49 00 45 00 Jundewath 40 54 55 24 10 Junferland 25, 29 58 20 23 30 Jungfer 17 54 10 36 50 Jungfraw 16 54 00 37 00 Jungfrawbergh 16 54 00 36 00 Jungfrouwenberg 10 C.   Junfrun 22 57 00 33 00 Jungfrusker 19, 21 59 30 38 00 Jungfrusund 19, 21 59 30 39 00 Jungschal 17 54 05 37 00 Junka Monast. 10 B   Junka fl. 10 C   Jungsheffuit 32 55 00 27 00 Juppis T. 20 68 00 32 00 Jura fl. 16, 18 55 00 40 00 Juraa 24 59 50 31 20 Jurborg 20 55 00 40 00 Jurekerk 25 60 30 20 00 Jurgensburg 19 57 00 43 00 Jurgensdorff 17 53 55 36 40 Juria fl. 18 51 00 42 00 Juriena Volock 09 L   Juriewicze 18 53 30 46 00 Juricwo 18 54 00 45 00     54 00 46 00 Jurilandt 6, 20, 25 64 00 25 00 Jurmen 06 49 00 80 00 Jurmo 20, 21 60 30 38 00 Jurpale 12 48 30 48 00 Jursand 30, 35 55 00 23 20 Juruvesi 20 62 00 47 00 Jursalm 06 64 00 44 00 Juskowce 12 49 30 51 00 Juskulec fl. 18 54 30 51 00 Jussar 19, 20, 21 59 00 41 00 Jutia 22, 34, 35, 36 55 20 24 10 Jutland 25 57 00 24 00   30 54 55 23 40 Suder Jutland 35 55 20 23 40 Jut roschin 14 51 20 34 00 Jutrossin 15 51 30 34 00 Jutszon 21 65 30 39 00 Juttsbuttel 42 54 10 24 10 Juwakolce 12 49 30 49 00 Juxt S. 16 53 40 39 00 Iwaczewice 18 52 30 43 00 Iwan 12 50 00 51 00 Iwancze 12 50 00 51 00 Iwanczlek 12 49 30 50 00 Iwangrod 12 48 30 47 00 Iwancki 12 48 30 48 00 Iwanko 12 49 30 49 00 Iwankowece 12 49 30 51 00 Iwanowa & Jezioro lacus 11 52 00 55 00 Iwedhem 20 58 00 30 00 Iwery 18 55 00 40 00 Iwie 18 53 30 43 00 Iwieniec 18 53 30 44 00 Iwinca 18 50 00 46 00 Iyrwec 20 61 00 40 00 Izdani 12 49 30 51 00 Iziburski Ins. 10 G.   K   KAallandt 16 55 00 38 30 Kaaruy 30, 31 56 10 28 20 Kabak 10 C.   Kabakklicissa 10 D.   Kabak Tenkosski 10 C.   Kaban 10 C.   Kabangamel Vadum 10 G   Kadrup 39 55 15 24 30 Kabel 36, 37 56 35 Kabbuse 31 55 25 Kacanetopol 12 48 00 Kackenhausen 16 54 00 Kacksaga 07 58 00 Kackserbal 16 54 40 Kacza Wacyz 13 M. Kaczhasow R. 12 47 00 Kaczki Las. 12 48 30 Kaczmazof 12 48 30 Kacznrowka 12 48 00 Kaczowce 12 49 00 Kadakporoh 18 52 00 Kaddaw 15 53 00 Kadem 41, 44 53 45 Kaditten 16 54 00 Kafflow 14 52 00 Kaga 6, 20, 21 64 30 Kagalink 6, 8 50 00 Kagalink fl. 6, 8 50 00 Kagstrup 32 55 30 Kalebuy 38, 41 54 30 Kahleby 40 54 35 Kain 14 51 00 Kainar R. 12 47 30 Kainko Salina 10 G. Kair 12 46 30 Kakenhusen 6, 19, 20 56 00 Kakolewo 15 52 00 Kakolnic 12 49 00 Kalas 21 61 00 Kalaskuscze 12 48 30 Kalbull 40 54 50 Kaleberg 37 55 55 Kalckgrund 30, 35 56 20   38, 40 54 50 Kalckhorst 41 53 55 Kalcko 15 52 20 Kalckstein 16 54 00 Kalckstein M. 16 54 40 3 Kaleberg 16 54 20 3 Kaleins 26 67 30 35 Kalhaven 20 61 00 3 Kalia 6, 7 63 00 6 Kaliave fl. 20 62 00 4 Kaliavesti 21 62 30 4 Kalia Volost 09 P.   Kalikina 09 I.   Kalinova 16 53 40 4 Kalis 14, 15 53 10 3     51 40 3 Kalitwa 6, 8 53 00 7 Kalitwa fl. 08 53 00 70 Kalk 31 55 30 28 Kall 32 55 00 26 Kalla 26 67 00 35 Kallafiord 26 67 30 352 Kallehaffn 32, 33 55 00 27 Kallenberg 20 55 00 26 Kallerup 36 56 50 22 Kallhaven 21 62 00 34 Kallile 19, 20 57 00 45 Kalling 37 56 20 25 Kalliojervi 20, 21 64 30 47 Kallo 29 58 40 21 Kalloe 37 56 15 24 Kallewiig 37 56 10 24 Kallundborg 30, 32, 34 55 35 26 Kalmer 30 56 40 31 Kalmersondt 30 56 00 31 Kalmowe B. 12 47 30 52 Kalna 16 53 40 36 Kalnebloto 12 48 30 48 Kalniki 12 49 00 50   13 D.   Kalnne 14 52 20 33 Kalns 12 48 30 45 Kalo 20, 22 56 00 24   30, 35 56 00 24 Kalocze 12 49 00 42 Kalslund 32, 38, 39 55 20 23 Kalsoir 22 58 30 30 Kaltenhoff 41, 53 53 55 25 Kalundt 38, 40 54 50 24 Kama 6, 7 62 00 80 Kama fl. 10 D.   Kameenka 09 C.   Kamenez 12 49 30 43 Kamenice 12 48 30 44 Kameno 6, 7 62 00 64   09 N.   Kameschwick 16 54 20 40 00 Kamien 12 50 30 52 00   18 51 00 43 00 Kamien H. 12 49 30 52 00 Kamienczay R. 12 48 00 46 00 Kamieniec 14 52 20 39 00 Kamieniecz 18 52 00 40 00 Kamienky 12 48 30 43 00 Kamin 14 52 00 35 00 Kamintzke 16 53 40 39 00 Kamiona 15 52 20 33 00 Kamionhuroa 12 48 30 47 00 Kamionka R. 12 47 00 50 00   13 P.     12, 18 50 00 42 00 Kammerlant 44 53 50 24 10 Kammon fl. 16 55 00 40 00 Kamnager Mons 19 F.   Kamouz 06 51 00 74 00 Kampen 39, 40 54 55 23 20
Kamptr 38, 39 55 15 23 50 ti fl. 10 A.   ti Mons 10 A.   20 63 00 47 00 21 63 30 47 00 21 61 30 40 00 31 56 10 28 00 6, 7 67 00 53 00 12, 18 49 00 49 00 13 D.   15 51 40 33 40 42 54 00 23 50 16 53 20 38 00 18 53 00 44 00 21 59 30 42 00 09 Q.   06 50 00 69 00 09 Q.   6, 7 68 00 48 00 31 55 45 28 30 R. 12 46 30 52 00   13 N.   D. 12 46 30 48 00   13 S.   15 52 10 34 00 fl. 16 53 40 37 30 15 51 30 34 00 18 54 30 44 00 fl. 16 55 00 39 30 14 51 40 38 00 6, 8 52 00 51 00 11 54 00 49 00 22 56 00 29 00 12 49 00 45 00 07 62 00 56 00 21 59 00 46 00 6, 7, 20 61 00 60 00 20 63 00 56 00 15 51 50 33 00 39 55 20 23 40 19, 21 60 00 40 00 20, 21 60 00 51 00 19, 20, 21 60 00 41 00 06 61 00 40 00 12 49 30 49 00   13 C.   12 49 30 50 00 20 61 00 40 00 19 58 00 43 00 22, 24 59 30 34 00 32 55 50 27 00 31 55 35 29 50   32, 33 54 50 27 00 13 H.   36, 37 56 25 25 20 42 54 05 25 00 37 55 20 23 10 39 54 55 24 10 15 51 40 33 40 29 59 00 20 00 31 55 55 28 50   12 49 30 51 00 12 50 00 48 00 08 50 00 72 00 06 50 00 73 00 22 58 00 33 00 32 55 10 26 40 kirik 30, 35 55 20 23 40 agn 38, 41 54 20 25 20 30 56 20 28 40 34 55 25 25 20 21 61 00 51 00 37 56 10 23 30 16 54 00 37 30 30, 32 55 20 27 00 12 48 30 49 00   13 D.   31 56 15 28 50 fl. 10 D.   36, 37 56 25 25 10 41 53 30 25 00 15 51 40 33 20 44 53 45 25 20 41 53 55 24 00 43 53 55 25 20 21 62 30 38 00 20, 21 62 30 37 00 31 55 45 28 50 26 65 30 352 00 37 56 05 24 40 19, 20, 22 60 00 37 00   21 59 30 37 00 30, 32, 33 55 00 26 40 38, 39 55 15 24 00 38 55 15 24 20 Ins. 10 G.   27 63 20 23 00 36, 37 56 15 25 20 enen Frosky 16 53 40 38 30 12 48 00 46 00 16 67 30 357 00 kaw 15 51 30 33 40 berg 44 53 50 24 40 ffass 29 58 20 23 00 22 56 00 27 00 30, 31 56 00 27 40 42 54 00 23 50 37 55 55 24 30 fl. 16 54 00 36 00 S. 16 53 40 39 30 nace 17 54 00 36 40 Katzeno 19 56 30 43 00 Kavelecks 19 58 00 44 00 Kauke fl. 16 55 00 39 30 Kautaceni 20 69 00 37 00 Kautawesi 21 61 00 41 00 Kaute T. 20 64 00 32 00 Kautten 16 54 20 40 00 Kautz S. 16 53 40 38 30 Kawalina 13 B.   Kawionki 12 50 30 53 00 Kaymen 16 54 40 38 30 Kayrary B. 12 48 30 48 00 Kaytha 11 46 00 53 00 Kazemienczuk 12 48 00 51 00 Kazimierz 18 51 00 40 00 Kazyn 12 49 30 49 00   13 C   Keckova 16 53 20 38 30 Kecsmarck 17 54 15 36 30 Kedinger Landt 42 53 50 23 40 Keelbek 38, 40 54 40 24 30 Keelen 16 54 00 39 30 Keesma Volost 6, 7, 8 59 00 62 00 Kegleholm 24 59 20 31 40 Kegoe 31 55 25 28 50 Kegor 01 70 20 49 00   6, 7 70 00 52 00 Kekeniss 38, 40 54 50 25 00 Kenenyssgard 40 54 55 25 00 Keisinge 31 55 30 28 20 Kelda 20, 22 57 00 33 00 Kelinghusen 30, 42, 44 53 55 24 20 Kellenhusen 43 54 10 25 50 Kellerma 20, 21 60 00 45 00 Kellern S. 16 53 40 38 00 Kellersee 43 54 10 25 20 Kelmo 20, 22 58 00 31 00 Keltis 21 60 00 49 00 Keltzen 15 52 30 32 00 Kelz K. 15 52 50 32 20 Kembliew 15 51 50 33 20 Kemeloe 20 66 00 53 00 Kemi 6, 7, 8, 21 64 00 53 00 Kemiby 20 67 00 43 00 Kemon 19 57 00 42 00 Kempa 15 51 50 34 20 Kempinge 31 55 25 28 10 Kempisgard 39 55 20 23 50 Kempo 14 51 00 34 00 Kemps 38, 41, 43 54 20 25 20 Kendel 19, 20 59 00 43 00 Kenis 30, 34 55 00 25 00 Kenservi S. 16 53 40 38 30 Kenstorp 35 56 20 24 00 Kenstrup 30 56 20 24 00 Kenti 14 49 20 36 00 Kenting 34 54 55 24 50 Keplawick 26 65 00 353 00 Kepnil 14 52 00 30 00 Keragi 31 56 00 29 10 Kerbswald 17 54 05 37 00 Kerck 28 60 00 20 00 Kerck volost ker∣banga 09 C.   Kerckwerder 41, 44 53 25 24 50 Kerkel 11 47 00 53 00 Kerkenelf 25, 28, 29 60 20 22 00 Kerkerup 32 55 20 26 20 Kerlingfiord 26 66 30 350 00 Kermes S. 16 53 40 38 30 Kern 15 51 40 33 00 Kerna 20, 22 56 30 29 00 Kerndorp 30, 34 55 10 24 50 Kernosaska 12 48 00 46 00 Keroe 20 70 00 47 00 Kerra 31 56 00 28 10 Kerre 31 55 45 28 40 Kerreberg 31 55 45 28 10 Kerretti 20 66 00 52 00 Kersgard 34, 37 55 25 24 20 Kersholt 36 57 20 24 50 Kertemunde 20 55 00 25 00 Kertna 20 58 00 45 00 Kertna Isakais 19 58 30 45 00 Kerven 18, 21, 23 59 30 36 00 Keschofska 10 C   Kesdorp 41, 43 54 00 25 20 Keseberg 31 55 25 29 40 Keselle 12 50 30 49 00 Kesemarck 16 54 00 36 30 Kesmarck 14 49 00 37 00 Kestrup 32, 34 55 05 25 30 Ketel 28 59 30 20 00 Kettekones 06 67 00 63 00   07 66 00 62 00 Kettesbuttel 42 54 10 23 50 Ketting 33 54 45 27 00   38, 40 54 55 25 00 Kettorp 20, 30, 35 56 40 23 20 Kettrup 20, 25, 30, 35, 36 57 00 23 40 Keusborfle 41 54 00 24 10 Kexholm 6, 20, 21 61 00 48 00 Keydingerlandt 30 53 40 23 40 Keylum 39 54 55 23 20 Keytum 38, 39, 40 54 55 23 20 Kezaryn 12 48 00 47 00 Kezin 12, 18 50 00 43 00 Kezizenias 12 49 30 43 00 Khyszewka 12 49 30 52 00 Kia 6, 7, 20 67 00 64 00 Kiaer 32 55 30 26 20   36 57 00 23 10     57 10 24 00 Kiaergaard 37 55 20 23 00 Kiaer Herrit 36 57 00 24 20 Kiaerochengemarck 36 57 05 24 10 Kiaersbaek 37 56 10 22 40 Kibitten 16 54 00 38 30 Kiandajervi 21 64 30 46 00 Kianga T. 20 66 00 32 00 Kiafnesiolo 18 54 00 44 00 Kibelowka 12 50 30 50 00 Kibaluwka 12 48 30 47 00 Kickhastn 32 55 50 26 40 Kicyday 18 55 00 41 00 Kider 19 59 00 43 00 Kides 20, 21 62 00 49 00 Kidila 6, 7, 20, 21 61 00 51 00 Kiding 39 54 55 24 40 Kidenhoe 39 55 20 24 00 Kiederlesi 12 45 30 53 00 Kieflinge 30 55 40 28 00 Kiega 09 R.   Kiegta 09 R.   Kiekza ozera 09 A.   Ambt. Kiel 42 54 10 24 50 Kiel 20, 30, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 54 15 25 00 Kielby 32 55 00 27 20 Kielce 14 50 20 38 00 Kielderup 36 56 30 24 40   37 56 30 24 40 Kielgaard 36 56 45 23 30 Kiele 37 56 30 24 50 Kielerfoerd 43 54 20 25 00 Kielit 6, 7, 20 65 00 51 00 Kielkamp 42 54 10 25 00 Kiellewadstruy 31 56 10 28 00 Kielmy 18, 19, 20 55 00 40 00 Kieln 30, 31 56 00 28 20 Kielsandt 39 55 15 23 30 Kielst 38, 39 55 30 23 20 Kielstroom 28 60 30 20 00 Kielstrup 38 54 50 24 30   38, 39, 40 55 10 24 30 Kielstruy 31 55 25 28 40 Kiemeland 29 58 40 24 30 Kienlacus 24 59 40 32 00 Kienstrede 44 53 20 25 20 S. Kier fl. 16 54 20 39 30 Kieracker 40 54 40 24 20 Kierby 36, 37 56 30 24 40 Kierelowlas 12 48 30 48 00 Kiergaarsholm 36, 37 56 30 23 20 Kiergard 39 54 50 23 40 Kierherritzting 36 57 00 24 20 C. Kierit 6, 7, 20 65 00 54 00 Kierlingwig 25 58 30 24 00 Kierlingvigen 29 58 40 24 30 Kiernow 18 54 30 42 00 Kierpslundt 39 55 05 23 50 Kiersgard 36 57 20 24 20 Kiersol 19 57 30 42 00 Kierstorp 31 55 30 28 30 Kierstrup 33 54 40 26 50 Kierstruy 31 55 40 29 10 Kiertemynde 32 55 30 25 20 Kiesbeck 39 55 00 24 00 Kiesdorp 44 53 50 24 40 Kiestrup 39 55 10 24 30     55 15 24 10 Kietga 20 64 00 61 00 Kihosalmi 21 63 30 44 00 Kiini 06 66 00 40 00 Kikela 19 58 30 44 00 Kila 24 59 40 33 00 Kilabro 22 56 30 28 00 Kilas 20 61 00 38 00 Kildorp 35 56 20 24 20 I. Kilduyn 06 70 00 54 00   20 70 00 54 00 I. Kildyn 07 70 00 53 00 Kilerfoerd 42 54 20 25 00 Kilia 6, 11 46 00 47 00 Kilia Nowe 12 46 00 47 00 Kilia stary 12 45 30 47 00 Killeklint 30, 32 55 20 26 00 Killen 22 59 00 28 00 Killingsii 36 56 55 23 50 Kimarech 06 41 00 81 00 Kimboferdt 21 64 30 38 00 Kimi 20, 21 65 30 40 00 Kimeao R. 01 66 30 40 00 Kimi T. 20 67 00 42 00 Kimi flod 20, 21 66 00 40 00 Kimito 19, 21 60 00 39 00 Kimi Lapmark 01 67 00 40 00 Kimmerloff 32 55 20 27 00 Kin 19 58 00 40 00 Kinasiervi 20, 21 65 00 46 00 Kincksee 34 55 15 24 50 Kincke 34 55 20 25 00 Kind 36, 37 56 20 24 00 Kindertoft 32 55 20 26 20 King 30 55 00 26 40 Kinge 37 56 05 24 00 Kinge T. 20 69 00 38 00 Kingelste 31 55 50 28 00 Kengenaflodt 20 68 00 37 00 Kintoch 06 50 00 77 00 Kintzervig 28, 29 60 00 21 30
Kiobeloff 33 54 50 26 20 Kiobenhafiven 6, 20, 22 55 00 27 00   30, 32, 35 55 40 27 20 Kiobste 36 57 20 24 10 Kioff 16 53 20 36 00 Kioflinge 31 56 15 28 20 Kiokouria 6, 7 62 00 66 00   09 M.   Kiolbygaerd 36 56 55 23 10 Kioping 32 54 50 25 20   34 54 55 25 30 Kiornedohl 31 55 35 29 50 Kiorneruy 31 55 50 29 00 Kioswing 30, 31 55 30 29 20 Kiovienhs Palati∣natus 13 A.       G. H.   Kiow 13 A.   Kipensoo 21 59 30 47 00 Kipping 32 33 54 50 26 50 kirben 14 51 40 33 00 Kirch 39 55 15 23 30 Kirchberg 36 56 55 24 10 Kerchebuy 39 55 00 24 30 Kirchoff 41, 44 53 30 24 40 Kircholm 18 56 00 42 00 Kirckby 34 55 10 25 20 Kirckedorp 35 56 20 24 20 Kirckerup 32 55 40 27 00 Kirckesteyn 28 62 00 20 30 Kirckwelling 31 56 00 28 00 Kirsick S. 16 53 20 39 00 Kerhus 35 56 20 24 00 Kirieska Metropol. Casan 10 C.   Kirkbro 31 55 40 28 30 Kirkebbar Closter 26 65 00 359 00 Kirkeby 33 54 50 27 00 Kirkeslet 21 60 00 42 00 Kirnes S. 16 53 20 38 00 Kirtza 6, 7 63 00 71 00 Kirumpe 20 57 00 44 00 Kirunpe 19 57 30 45 00 Kiryiaka 12 48 00 47 00 Kisa 20 62 00 54 00   22 57 30 32 00 Kisczynoe 12 48 30 48 00 Kisiar Mons 10 F.   I. Kisiar 10 G.   Kisilow 12 49 30 49 00 Kisko 19, 20, 21 60 00 40 00 Kislinge 30 56 00 29 20 Kismi Lappmark 20 66 00 42 00 Kissczin 18, 20 54 00 46 00 Kisskova 16 53 00 37 00 Kistrupholt 36 57 00 24 40 Kithaika lakus 06 62 00 104 00 Kithyorfui 20 66 00 44 00 Kitinekulle 22 58 00 29 00 Kitsouga 09 I.   Kittilaby 6, 20 67 00 39 00 Kitur 26 67 30 348 00 Kitwinowice 12 50 30 52 00 Kitzelandt 38, 40 54 50 24 30 Kitzerup 32 55 30 26 40 Kiula 20, 21, 22, 23 61 00 38 00 Kinbike 30, 31 55 40 29 50 Kiula 06 61 00 39 00 Kiurnervi 20, 21 63 30 44 00 Kitwitzmoer 42 54 20 24 00 Klackendorff 16 53 40 38 30 Kladinick fl. 14 50 00 35 00 Kladow fl. 17 54 15 36 10 Klagtorp 31 55 30 28 10 Klalkowka 12 50 30 50 00 Klampe 30, 43 54 15 25 20 Klarisholm 37 56 15 24 40 Klaslawa 15 52 00 33 00 Kleatzkoy 6, 8 51 00 24 00 Kleczk 18 53 00 44 00 Kleczko 14, 15 52 20 34 20 Kleef 30 54 20 24 00 Kleffuen 29 57 40 22 00 Klefua 22 58 00 29 00 Kleichemorff 17 54 00 36 50 Kleine Hust steng∣holm 19 59 30 44 00 Kleine Tuters 19 59 30 45 00 Klein Fenno 34 55 25 24 30 Klein kutzen 14 51 20 32 00 Kleinensolt 38, 40 54 45 24 30 Kleinwick 26 64 30 354 00 Kleistrup 36 56 30 24 10 Kleistrup soeller 36 56 30 24 10 Klekotyn 18 49 00 45 00 Klemezik 15 52 40 33 40 Klensaw 41 54 05 25 20 Klentzow 43 54 05 25 20 Klep 29 58 20 20 30 Klessawisch S. 16 54 00 40 00 Kletlkamp 41, 43 54 15 25 20 Kletna 20 68 00 68 00 Klettendorp 17 54 00 36 40 Klewan 18 50 30 44 00 Klewyn R. 12 50 30 52 00 Kleyn Gander 15 52 00 32 00 Kliernin 15 52 30 31 40 Kliestrup 37 56 30 24 20 Kliestrup so 37 56 30 24 10 Kliestrup sueller 37 56 30 24 10 Klincke 41, 44 53 30 25 00 Klinckrade 44 53 45 25 20 Klingbeck 16 54 20 38 00 Klingeberg 16 54 20 39 00 Klingenberg 16 54 20 38 00 Klingewelle 31 55 35 29 00 Klinghusen 41 53 55 24 30 Klinte 31 55 40 28 50 Klipfbeck 39 54 55 24 20 Klipleu 30, 35 54 40 24 20 Klippen 30 55 40 31 00 Klistruy 31 56 15 28 30 Klitboder 37 56 15 22 20 Klitgaard 36 56 50 24 10 Klobany 12 49 00 44 00 Kloboecona 06 69 00 84 00   07 68 00 83 00 Kloby 30, 32 55 30 26 00 Klockenhagen 43 54 10 24 50 Klodmoll 37 56 10 23 50 Klofuend 22 58 00 28 00 Kloging 38, 39 55 05 23 50 Klogstork 16 53 40 37 00 Klonisko Monast. 09 O.   Klovening 28 62 00 19 00 Klopotin 12 50 30 45 00 Klosterchen 16 53 40 36 30 Klostrup So. 36 56 55 23 20 Klotzyn 43 54 15 25 50 Klounovo 09 I.   Klourions 6, 7 61 00 66 00 Klowan 12 50 30 44 00 Klowance 13 D.   Klowarp 31 55 30 28 30 Klucken 15 52 50 32 00 Klum 36 56 55 23 40 Klurckio 17 54 20 36 30 Klutzee 30, 41 53 55 25 50   43 53 55 25 50 Klutzerhovet 41 54 00 26 00 Klyff 39, 40 55 00 23 40 Kmolnick 12 49 00 46 00 Knacksley 39 55 10 24 20 Knapstrup 32 55 30 26 20 Knarid 20, 22, 30 56 00 28 00 Knarod 31 56 20 28 40 Knautten 16 54 20 38 30 Knebell 37 56 10 25 00 Knelkeim 16 54 00 39 00 Kneesma Volost. 09 B.   Kniahium Y. O. 12 57 00 52 00 Knialinon 13 L.   Kniaziow 13 L.   Kniazize 18 54 00 48 00 Knielou 17 54 00 36 20 Knifholt 35, 36 57 15 24 50 Knilussa fl. 10 G.   Knipig 14 52 40 36 00 Kniseno 14 53 00 41 00 Knislinge 31 55 55 30 00 Knissick 39 55 00 24 10 Knoep 38, 40, 42 54 20 25 10 Knol 34 55 05 25 10 Knollerup 37 55 45 23 50 Knorborg 39 55 20 24 00 Knoff 39 55 25 23 20 Knotty P. 01 79 30 33 00 Knudplaot 39 55 15 23 20 Knudseiie 36 57 05 24 30 Rnudseye K. 36 57 05 24 30 Knudshoffuit 32, 33, 34 55 05 26 40 Knudstruy 31 55 55 29 10 Knutsbro 31 56 05 29 30 Knutshovet 39 55 00 24 40 Kobbevlict 28 60 00 20 00 Kobel 6, 19, 20 57 00 46 00 Kobelgrube 16 54 20 36 30 Kobelgura 14 51 00 34 00 Kobelin 14 51 40 33 00 Kobell 43 54 05 25 30 Kobelpude 16 54 40 38 00 Koben 15 51 20 33 20 Kobicz 12 50 00 50 00 Kobielin 15 51 30 34 20 Kobilak 12 48 00 52 00   13 I.   Kobilak fl. 13 H.   Kobile 12 49 00 46 00 Kobilno 15 52 10 34 00 Kobula reca 09 G.   Kobilniki 18 54 30 44 00 Kochanow 18 54 30 48 00 Kochaven 23 59 10 35 30 Kochauskiland 17 54 00 37 00 Kochcndorp 40 54 25 25 10 Kocksteen 27 63 20 24 00 Koczk 18 51 00 40 00 Kocrolten 16 53 40 39 00 Koczowa 12 49 00 48 00 Koczuby H. Y. D. 13 S.   Kodeme D. 12 47 30 48 00 Koden 18 51 30 41 00 Koderitzmoll 37 56 00 23 30 Kodiaki 13 T.   Kodmia reca 09 N.   Kodminska Ozera 09 N.   Kodminskoy 09 N.   Kodminskoy Monast 09 N.   Kodna 12 49 30 47 00 Kodnia 18 50 00 46 00 Kodolika 12 48 00 50 00 Kodorow 12 49 30 49 0   13 C.   Kodyaki 12 48 30 50 0 Koe 29 57 40 22 0 Koeckwol 20, 21 64 30 43 0 Koeg 44 53 50 24 0 Koehaven 23 59 00 35 3 Koerwerder 43 54 05 25 3 Koesvelt 20 51 00 22 0 Koewinckel 43 54 05 25 0 Koffnetz S. 16 53 20 38 0 Kogdal 36 56 55 24 0 Koge 30 55 20 27 0   32, 35 55 20 27 0 Kogekro 22, 30, 32 55 30 27 0 Kogerup 36, 37 56 30 23 3 Kogor 20 70 00 51 0 Kohbergen 44 53 35 25 2 Kohendorp 40 54 30 24 5 Kohlenkercken 42, 44 53 50 24 4 Kohoff 43 54 15 25 4 Kohobiowka 12 48 30 47 0 Kohovede 38, 40 54 30 25 0 Koibenhafven 31 55 40 27 2 Koicla 21 63 00 50 0 Koida 20 63 00 50 0 Koidatiow 18 53 30 44 0 Koiervi 21 61 30 42 0 Koirusvesi 21 62 00 46 0 Koisye Rousey 09 R.   Kowosari 21 61 00 49 0 Koizubi Hy. D. 12 46 30 48 0 Kokar 19 59 30 38 0   20, 21, 22 59 30 38 0 Kokel 43 54 15 25 3 Kokier 38, 39 55 15 24 3 Kokincki 20, 21 61 30 39 0 Korkonhaus 18 56 00 43 0 Kokofzki 12 49 00 50 0 Kokshaga 10 C.   Kola 6, 7, 20 69 00 52 0 Kola fl. 20 69 00 51 0 Kolaczowic 15 51 30 34 0 Kolajersvi 6, 7, 20 67 00 44 0 Kolaszynce 12 49 30 50 0 Kolatalowka R. 12 48 30 53 0 Kolbeinstas 26 65 30 352 0 Kolbeck 24 59 20 32 4 Kolben S. 16 53 20 38 3 Kolbuy 39, 40 55 00 23 4 Kolby 30 54 40 25 0   32 55 40 25 2 Koldekat 39 55 05 24 0 Koldemerten 30, 35 55 40 24 0 Kolding 20, 30, 34, 35, 37 55 20 24 2 Koldsgaard 37 55 50 23 5 Kole 42 54 00 24 0 Kolen 20 59 00 27 0   22, 25 59 30 28 0 Kolesin 6, 7, 8, 20 57 00 56 0 Kolet 37 56 00 24 4 Kolewick 26 66 30 348 0 Kolezynowka 12 50 00 51 00 Kolgarb 39 55 00 24 00 Kolgoi Ostrof 6, 7 69 00 68 00 Kolischen 14 50 20 35 00 Kolk 18 51 00 43 00 Kolka 19 59 00 43 00 Okolla 26 66 30 350 00 Kollafiord 26 66 30 350 00 Kollekelle 32 55 40 27 20 Kollemorten 37 55 45 23 50 Kollerup 36, 37 56 15 24 30 Kolling 36 56 20 25 00 Kolsehap 39 55 15 24 10 Kolinaoki 06 52 00 84 00     58 00 87 00 Kolmarden 22 58 30 32 00 Kolnik 12 48 30 47 00 Kolno 18 52 00 45 00 Kolodona 12 49 30 44 00 Kolodykybansky 12 46 30 50 00   13 Q.   Kalomak R. 12 48 30 52 00 Kolomey 12 48 30 43 00 Kolschnap 40 55 05 24 00 Kolsgaard 37 56 10 25 00 Kolskygaard 36 56 05 24 20 Kolsta 20, 22 58 00 32 00 Kolstrup 39 55 20 24 20 Kol Sand 36, 37 56 20 25 10 Kolswick 26 66 00 348 00 Kolthaver 20 66 00 34 00 Koltoss prima Ins. 10 A.   Koltyniany 18 55 00 40 00     55 00 43 00 Koltxen 19 57 00 42 00 Koltzig 14 51 40 32 00 Komaie 18 54 30 44 00 Komdrup 36 56 50 24 40 Komiencza 12 49 00 48 00 Komionobrod 12 48 00 46 00 Komiszna 12 49 00 51 00 Kommes 20, 25 59 00 24 00 Komorniki 15 52 10 34 00 Komoroska P. 12 47 00 47 00 Komorowka 12 50 30 50 00 Komozenince 13 C.   Konarzewo 15 52 00 33 40 Konapmo 29 57 40 21 30
Konczenicze C. Zane 12 48 00 46 00 niori 6, 7 65 00 85 00 eetsgorie 09 O.   nenka 19 58 30 41 00 g 33 55 05 26 50 gel 20, 25, 30 57 30 26 00 genhoy 37 56 15 23 00 gensbro 37 56 15 24 20 ges T. 20 67 00 39 00 r Kongesleff 36 56 50 24 50 geslestund 36 56 50 24 50 ggaard 36, 37 56 35 22 50 ongttede 30, 32, 37, 39 55 30 24 00 gsylt 31 55 55 27 40 18 53 30 42 00 nick S. 16 53 20 38 30 ingsberg 6, 14, 16, 18, 20 54 30 38 00 nigsbull 38, 40 54 35 23 50 igdorff 16, 17 54 00 36 40 nigshverd 41 54 20 24 40 gsforrde 38 54 20 25 00 igskrog 38 54 45 24 20 igsmarck 38, 39, 40 55 05 23 30 igswalda 15 52 20 32 20 ing 15 51 50 35 20 ingsfelde 40 54 20 25 00 ingsgarde 22 57 00 33 00 ingshane 41 53 55 23 40 ingshaven 39 55 00 23 20 ingzahra 22, 23 59 30 33 30 inko 15 52 20 33 20 ioncze 13 D.   ke T. 20 68 00 31 00 lezcky 12 49 00 43 00 navesi 20, 21 62 30 41 00 umiesi 20, 21 62 00 49 00 otop 12 50 00 51 00 owitz 21 60 30 49 00 sbach 06 57 00 26 00 sba Wolda fl. 6, 8, 11 49 00 50 00   18 55 30 53 00 ska Wolda fl. 12 46 30 52 00   13 N.   ky 13 L.   ntinow 12 48 30 49 00 antinowe 12 49 00 46 00 36 56 55 23 00 14, 15 52 40 33 00 ugzoyer 20 71 00 46 00 unghampn 21 61 30 49 00 ungzgard 22 56 00 33 00 16 53 20 40 00 Ozera 09 A.   Ozera 09 B.   Kopanica G. Kopnir 15 51 30 33 00 12 46 30 47 00 R. 20 66 00 59 00 erberget 06 60 00 31 00 gowka 12 48 30 46 00 ping 20, 22 57 00 30 00   6, 24 59 20 32 20   30, 38, 40 54 55 25 30 plince 12 49 30 50 00 pmancbro 22 58 30 27 00 Kopnitz 14 52 00 32 00 Koporio 20 59 00 47 00 Koperby 40 54 35 25 00 Kopul 6, 7 61 00 66 00   09 H.   Kopung 22, 23 59 20 32 30 Kopur 16 54 40 38 00 Kopuytovo 09 R.   Kopyl 18 53 00 44 00 Kopys 18 54 30 48 00 Korak R. 12 49 30 52 00 Korbala 6, 7 63 00 63 00   09 O.   Korborg 41 54 30 24 10 Korbijervi 21 62 00 50 00 Korbiseisko 21 60 00 49 00 Korciany 19 55 30 39 00 Korczik 12 50 00 45 00 Korezika 12 48 30 43 00 Korzoways 12 46 30 48 00 Kordyn 6, 18 50 00 47 00 Korela 20 63 00 63 00   09 Q.   Korestena 12 48 30 47 00 Koretany 18 55 30 39 00 Korezyn 18 50 00 39 00 Koritten 15 52 00 32 20 Kormanian 6, 8 49 00 71 00 Kormargrod 12 48 30 46 00 Kormialow 18 54 30 41 00 Kormissa 10 C.   Kornerup 32 55 40 26 40 Kornicke 43 54 10 25 50 Kornmuhl 17 54 20 36 10 Kornyszowka 12 49 00 50 00 Korol 12 49 00 51 00 Korolaveagoeba 06 69 00 80 00 Koroleuca 09 M.   Koroloko 12 48 30 44 00 Koropie 12 50 30 49 00 Korotaoengoeba 07 69 00 80 00 Korotay 10 D.   Korowe 12 49 30 50 00 Korpilowka 13 A.   Korpo 19, 21 59 30 38 00 Korschellen 14, 16 53 00 38 30 Korscheltzky 16 53 00 39 00 Korschen fl. 16 53 40 38 30 Korsholm 36 56 55 24 50 Korsholmen 19, 21 60 00 44 00 Korski O. 12 47 30 52 00 Korsleby 36, 37 56 35 24 10 Korsor 30, 32, 34, 35 55 20 26 00 Korsum 12, 18 49 00 48 00 Korsun 11 49 00 46 00 Kortemoer 44 53 45 24 10 Korten 44 53 45 24 20 Kortnick S. 16 53 20 38 30 Kortow 12 48 30 43 00 Korup 36 57 20 24 40 Korzee fl. 18 50 30 44 00 Korzet Ducatus 18 50 30 45 00 Korzer 12 50 30 45 00 Kosa 12 46 00 52 00 Kosacor 10 C.   Kosakenberg 10 B.   Kosakorum transitus 10 B.   Kosasky O. 12 46 30 50 00   13 Q.   Kostbildgaard 32 55 20 25 40 P. Koscian G. Ko∣sten 15 51 50 33 40 Koschmin 14 51 40 34 00 Koselaw 41, 43 54 15 25 40 Koselow 12 48 30 45 00 Kosema K. 12 47 00 50 00   13 P.   Kosian 6, 18, 20 56 00 48 00 Kosiglowa 14 50 00 36 00   15 52 10 34 00 Kosin Ins. 10 C.   Koskasina 20 62 00 64 00   09 P.   Koskinpe 21 61 30 44 00 Koskiupe 20 62 00 44 00 Koskosinskoy Ostroog 09 P.   Koslach 44 53 25 24 50 Kosow 15 51 40 34 00 Kosowa 12 48 30 43 00 Kosoteen fl. 06 64 00 81 00   07 63 00 81 00 Kosschel 16 53 20 37 30 Kosseinicze 18 54 30 44 00 Kossela 16 53 20 38 00 Kossin 6, 7, 8, 20 57 00 55 00 Kosslack 41 53 25 25 00 Kosslefl 38, 41 54 30 24 40 Kossow 18 52 30 43 00 Kostapaw 12 49 00 50 00 Koston 14 51 40 33 00 Kostnich fl. 16 53 40 38 30 Kostowata Ins. 10 C.   Kostrant 26 66 00 353 00 Kostuma fl. 10 C.   Melum Koswinge 31 55 25 28 30 Koszki 12 49 00 49 00 Koszky 13 D.   Kotecz 14 52 00 34 00 Kotel 41 53 35 25 20 Kotelma 18 50 00 46 00 Kotelna 12 49 30 47 00 Kotey 30 53 40 25 00 Kotimowka 12 50 30 47 00 Kotlas 6, 7 61 00 67 00   09 K.   Kotlino 15 51 40 34 40 Kotnar 12 47 30 44 00 Kotnitza 10 B.   Kotorisca fl. 08 53 00 66 00 Kotra fl. 18 53 30 42 00 Kottel 44 53 35 25 10 Kottenberg 16 53 20 38 30 Kotyca 18 55 00 39 00 Kouciazyn 18 54 30 43 00 Kouczenicz 12 48 00 46 00 Koumo 6, 20 54 00 42 00 Kovoda 6, 7, 20 67 00 51 00 Kovoist 09 Q.   Kovovitz 20 60 00 49 00 Koureska Reca 09 Q.   Koureeska Volost 09 Q.   Kourgomia 07 63 00 64 00 Kourgomina 06 63 00 64 00   08 N.   Kourgominscoy Ostroof 09 N.   Kour Ostroog 09 R.   Kousborstel 42 54 00 24 10 Kowalewo 15 52 00 33 40 Kowalma 12 49 30 49 00 Kowarsko 18 55 00 42 00 Kowel Duo 18 51 00 42 00 Kowloay 6, 7 65 00 65 00 Kowno 18 54 30 41 00 Koworyno 12 48 30 50 00   13 F.   Kowpeczaince 12 49 30 43 00 Kowsterfehr 32 55 00 27 00 Koxbul 38, 39, 40 55 00 23 40 Koyor 41, 43 54 20 25 10 Koysowa 12 50 00 48 00 Kozan Horodi 18 52 00 44 00 Kozaki 13 L.   Kozar 12 50 30 50 00 Kozazin 12 48 00 47 00 Kozia 12 50 30 53 00 Kozin 18 50 30 44 00 Koziryneck 14 51 40 40 00 Kozlow 12 49 30 49 00   18 49 30 43 00 Kozow 12 49 00 47 00 Kozuchowo 15 51 30 32 40 Krabisholm 36, 37 56 35 23 30 Krace Waicslo 12 48 30 47 00 Kracow 20 53 00 27 00 Kracksee 35 56 20 25 00 Kraegstede 38, 40 54 50 24 20 Krag 36 57 25 24 20 Krageborg 31 56 05 29 20 Kragelund 37 55 40 23 00   40 54 35 24 10 Kragerup 32 55 30 26 20 Kragholm 40 54 45 24 40 Kragsberg 37 56 15 25 50 Kragsdal 36, 37 56 20 23 00 Krag So 37 56 15 23 30 Kragstrup 32 55 40 26 40 Kraisk 18, 20 54 00 45 00 Kraleidcrwick 26 68 00 351 00 Kralelund 22 57 00 33 00 Kramersky 16 53 40 38 30 Kraminsky 17 54 00 36 30 Kramsko 15 51 50 33 00 Kranc 15 51 30 33 20 Krancz 15 52 00 33 00 Kranskrog 16 54 40 38 30   17 54 20 36 20 Kransnest 17 54 00 37 00 O. Krap 22 56 00 29 00 Lrapperup 20, 22 56 00 27 00 Krappitz 14 50 20 34 00 Kapruy 30, 31 56 05 27 30 Krasilow 12, 18 49 30 44 00 Krasilowka 12 50 00 51 00 Kraska R. 12 48 30 53 00 Krasna 12 48 30 46 00 Krasne 12 48 30 42 00 Krasnik 18 50 30 40 00 Krasno Pol 12 49 00 45 00 Krasnoy Yair 08 50 00 62 00 Krasnystow 18 50 30 41 00     54 30 47 00 Krasnygorot 20 56 00 47 00 Krassunislo 14 50 20 40 00 Krasupol 12 48 30 48 00 Krasuygorod 06 56 00 46 00 Kratz 14 52 40 36 00 Kranstrup 39 55 20 24 00 Krazilufka 12 50 30 45 00 G. Krebe P. Krobia 15 51 40 34 00 Kreblewo G. Kreb∣beln 15 52 30 32 40 Krebsee 16 53 40 36 30 Kreck fl. 16 54 40 38 00 Kreestza 20 57 00 53 00 Kregme 32 55 50 27 00 Kreiberg 36 56 35 23 20 Kreikowo 15 52 00 34 00 Kremenia 6, 7 51 00 74 00 Kremme 14 52 40 29 00 Kremouki 10 B.   Krempe 20, 30, 41, 42, 44 53 50 24 10 Krempel 42 54 20 23 50 Krempelsdorp 41, 43 53 50 25 20 Kremper Marsch 44 53 55 24 10 Kremps 42, 43, 44 53 50 25 00     54 00 25 10 Krengelbeke 31 56 10 28 40 Krenkerup 33 54 45 26 50 I. Kresnoy 10 D.   Kreutzorth 41 54 00 25 50 Krewo 18 54 00 43 00 Kreydany 20 55 00 42 00 Kriany 18 51 00 40 00 Kribekohl 17 54 10 36 20 G. Kriebon P. Krizt∣win 15 51 40 34 00 Krikoce 12 48 30 47 00 Krilow 13 G.   Krilowka 12 50 30 42 00 Krimtsase 06 49 00 69 00 Kringslum 39 55 05 23 40 Krino 07 64 00 62 00 Krinsky R. 12 47 00 54 00 Krirowo 15 52 00 34 20 Krisling 16 53 40 38 00 Kristal 20, 22 57 00 32 00 Krivo 06 64 00 62 00   09 Q   Krius Ins 10 C.   I. Kriusna 10 A.   Kriwoczelik 12 49 00 48 00 Kriyczow 18 54 00 50 00 Krmenczuk O. 12 47 30 48 00 Krobblen 14 52 20 32 00 Krobia 14 51 40 33 00 Krocka 06 57 00 51 00 Krocker 44 53 45 24 10 Krodern 22, 25, 28, 29 60 00 25 00 Kroeck 41 53 45 24 20 Die Kroecke 44 53 45 24 10 Kroen 32 55 40 27 00 Krog 17 54 20 36 20
Krogaspe 41, 42 54 05 24 40 Krogeholm 31 55 30 29 10 Krogskou 36 57 20 24 50 Krogstruy 31 56 10 28 00 Krogsult 31 56 15 28 40 Kroja fl. 18 55 30 41 00 Krokek 22 58 00 32 00 Kroki 18 55 00 41 00 Krokinow 18 55 00 41 00 Kroilki 15 51 40 35 00 Kromerup 32 55 10 26 20 Kromiany 12 49 30 51 00 Kromolice 15 52 00 34 00 Krone 14, 15 53 20 33 00 Kronge 33 54 45 26 40 Kronholm 22 57 00 33 00 Kronie 18 54 00 42 00 Kronnigard vel Be∣stede arx. 26 65 00 354 00 Kronsborg 42 54 15 24 40 Kronsford 41, 44 53 45 25 20 Kronshorst 44 53 35 25 00 Kropan 20, 22 59 00 30 00 Kropiwna 12 49 00 50 00 Kropiwnu fl. 18 54 30 49 00 Kropodarynce 12 49 00 50 00 Kropp 30, 31 56 00 27 50 Krose 18 55 00 40 00 Kroses 26 66 30 352 00 Krosne fl. 13 B.   Krosnepole 12 49 30 46 00 Krossna 15 51 50 32 20 Krossyn 18 53 00 43 00 Krotosihyn 14 51 40 34 00 Krowpsuzolo 12 49 00 50 00 Kroze 19, 20 55 00 40 00 Krsna 18 51 30 41 00 Kruckelaken S. 16 54 00 39 30 Krucken 16 54 20 38 30 Krucz 15 52 40 33 20 Krudtsant 41, 42, 44 53 45 24 00 Kruggeloss 34 54 50 25 50 Kruhla 18 54 00 47 00 Krukalatuken 16 54 00 39 00 Krumaw 44 53 55 24 10 Krumbeck 42, 43 53 55 25 20 Krumdyck 41, 42 53 50 23 50   41, 42, 44 54 00 24 00 Krummesse 41, 44 53 45 25 20 Krumsee 43 54 10 25 20 Krumsfiord 26 65 30 351 00 Krumshovet 39 55 20 24 40 Krumstede 41 54 05 24 00 Krumwell 42 54 00 23 50 Krumwick 26 65 30 351 00 Krumwisch 42 54 20 24 40 Krupa 18 50 30 44 00     53 30 43 00 Krupice 12 50 30 53 00 Krupiwna 12 50 00 51 00 Krupka 18 54 00 47 00 Kruschin 16 53 20 36 30 Krusscoia 09 Q.   Krussewo 15 52 50 33 40 Krusuick 14 52 40 35 00 Krylow 12 48 00 51 00   18 50 30 42 00 Krynkt 18 53 00 41 00 Kriispol 12 48 30 47 00 Kryssborg 18 56 00 43 00 Krywy Tazltysa R. 12 48 00 48 00 Krzan 14 49 40 36 00 Krzeeszow 18 50 00 40 00 Krzemieczuk 13 H.   Krzemien 14, 18 52 00 40 00 Krzemienezyk 18 55 00 51 00 Krzemienica 18 53 00 42 00 Krzemienice 18 50 00 43 00 Krzemieniecz 12 50 00 44 00 Krzepice 14 50 40 35 00 Krzibelle S. 16 53 40 40 00 Krzizanowo 15 51 50 34 00 Krzyczow 11 54 00 48 00 Krzyezow 06 52 00 50 00 Krzywina fl. 18 55 00 47 00 Ksaufufiord 26 67 00 350 00 Kubbesko 29 57 40 21 00 Kubelyn 41 54 15 25 30 Kublicz 12 48 30 47 00 Kuchari 15 51 50 35 00 Kuchewerder 17 54 15 36 40 Kuckels 43, 44 53 50 25 00 Kuckendorff 16 53 40 38 00 Kuckernees 16 55 00 39 30 Kuckowin S. 16 53 40 40 30 Kuczeminize 12 48 30 46 00 Kuczkasow fl. 13 M.   Kud fl. 39 55 10 24 00 Kudaczik fl. 13 L.   Kudak 12 47 30 52 00   13 L.   Kude 39 55 10 24 00 Kuden 42 54 00 23 50 Kudewade 41 53 30 25 10 L. Kudlow 14 53 40 33 00 Kudie T. 20 65 00 31 00 Kudoma 11 55 00 61 00 Kudzyn 18 54 00 47 00 Kuenumgd 36 57 10 24 10 Kuflow 18 51 30 40 00 Kugelius fl. 11 49 00 60 00 Kuhle 42 53 55 23 50 Kuhlen 42, 44 53 45 24 20 Kuhren 40 43 54 10 25 00 Kujalick R. 12 46 30 48 00 Kujalick Reca 13 S.   Kujali Sucha 12 46 30 49 00 Kujalik Sucho 13 S.   Kuimetz 19 58 30 42 00 Kuina S. 16 53 40 39 00 Kuis So. 37 55 55 24 00 Kuislinge 22 56 00 29 00 Kuitowiany 19 55 30 40 00 Kukelyn 43 54 15 25 30 Kukeniss 43 53 55 25 40 Kukult 31 56 15 28 50 Kulberg 31 55 45 28 40 Kuld 20, 22 56 00 27 00 Kulikow 18 50 00 42 00 Kullan or Kol 30 56 00 27 20   31 56 05 27 30 Kullard 14 51 20 33 00 Kulborn 17 54 00 37 00 Kullere 31 56 10 29 10 Kullinge 22 58 00 32 00 Kulowesi 21 61 30 40 00 Kulren 42 54 10 25 00 Kulsbrun 16 54 00 37 00 Kume 20, 21 62 00 39 00 Kumegen alias Rin∣chow 16 54 40 38 00 Kumeki 13 D.   Kumele fl. 39 55 00 23 50 Kumerfelt 41, 42, 43, 44 54 00 24 50 Kumla 24 59 40 33 20 Kumlinge 19, 21 60 00 38 00 Kumonne 19 58 30 40 00 Kumsaak 6, 8 50 00 69 00 Kumski 12 48 30 49 00 Kuna 12 48 30 47 00 Kund 39 55 20 24 30 Kundby 32 55 40 26 20 Kundsdiip 30, 35 55 20 23 20 Kundshofuit 30 55 20 25 40 Kundsgard 35 56 00 25 00 Kunersdorff 15 52 00 31 40 Kungsara 24 59 20 33 20 Kungzhampn 22 58 00 33 00 Kunickein 16 53 40 38 30 Kunitz 14 51 00 33 00 Kunoko T. 20 64 00 30 00 Kunow 14 50 40 38 00 Kunsakalsuer 21 61 00 34 00 Kunsoon 20 61 00 34 00 Kunt 37 55 15 22 40 Kuntzen 16 55 00 38 30 Kuntzendorff 17 54 05 36 20 Kuorum 36 56 50 23 50 Kuow 12 50 00 48 00 Kupanowka 12 48 30 51 00 Kupeze 12 49 30 49 00 Kupiski 18 55 00 42 00   19 55 30 43 00 Kurczahn D. 12 47 00 48 00 Kurczice 12 50 30 45 00 Kureby 32 55 30 26 00 Kuren 41, 42 54 10 25 00 Kurhaven 27 64 00 24 00 Kurichsdorp 42 54 10 25 00 Kurinka 12 49 30 51 00 Kurium 10 A.   Kurkiniemi 21 61 30 40 00 Kurkuch 17 54 00 37 00 Kurkyoki 21 61 30 49 00 Kurmanian 6, 8 49 00 71 00 Kurmick 14 52 00 34 00 Kurnotowic 15 52 20 33 00 Kurnik 15 52 00 34 00 Kurow 41, 43 53 55 25 20 Kurowo 15 51 50 34 00 Kursk 12 51 00 55 00 Kursoon 21 61 00 34 00 Kurssaup 18, 19, 20 55 30 40 00 Kurtaw 15 53 10 32 40 Kurtowiany 18 55 30 41 00 Kusala 19, 21 60 00 45 00 Kusaw S. 16 54 00 38 00 Kusingojervi 20, 21 66 00 46 00 Kusinade Mianiski 10 C.   Kuso 19 59 30 41 00 Kusow 41, 43 54 10 25 10 Kussersdorp 41, 43 54 05 25 30 Kustranda 6, 7 62 00 55 00 Kustrin P. Kusscier∣zin 15 52 20 31 40 Kutlaw 15 51 30 33 00 Kutorki 12 49 00 51 00 Kutsch S. 16 53 40 39 30 Kutschen 15 52 30 32 40 Kutt fl. 16 54 20 39 00 Kutten 16 54 00 40 00 W. Kuttorp 31 55 30 28 10 Kutzen 15 52 30 32 40 Kuylow 13 B. 50 36 50 Kuyssin 18 53 00 40 00 Kuznica 18 53 00 41 00 Kwalezyn 12 50 30 50 00 Kwilczo 15 52 20 33 00 Kyckuyt 06 76 00 36 00 Kyding 40 54 55 24 40 Kye 36 56 50 24 00 Kyelezen R. 12 48 00 52 00 Kyholm 30 55 40 25 20   32 55 50 25 40 Kyla 20, 22 59 00 29 00 Kylkyael 37 56 00 23 40 Kyll 20, 22 59 00 32 00 Kyllarod 31 56 10 28 10 Kyllinge 31 55 45 29 20 Kymen fl. 21 61 00 44 00 Kymenegard 19, 20 60 30 45 00 Kymian fl. 20 61 00 44 00 Kymso 36 56 25 25 10 Kyn 20, 28 61 00 18 00 Kyndby 30, 32 55 40 26 40 Kyng 32 55 00 26 40 Kynnacs 20 71 00 43 00 Kynso 37 56 25 25 10 Kynsund 37 56 25 25 10 Kynsund 6, 20, 25 61 00 19 00 Kyovia 6, 11, 18 50 00 48 00 Kypersalo 19 58 00 40 00 Kyrk hedding 31 55 35 28 30 Kyrkeslet 19 60 00 42 00 Kyrkobersle 31 55 40 28 30 Kyrkoswinge 31 55 20 28 30 Kyro 6, 20, 21 63 00 38 00 Kyro fl. 20 62 00 39 00 Kyschow 14, 16 53 40 35 00 Kysel 14 51 40 33 00 Kytaigrod 12 48 30 44 00 Kzeydani 06 55 00 42 00 L   LAadste op Wol∣den 28 62 00 20 30 Laaholm 30 56 20 28 00 Laajervi 21 64 00 45 00 Laba 17 53 55 36 40 Labbe See 19 56 30 45 00 Labiaw 16 54 40 39 00   20 54 00 39 00 Labissin 15 52 50 35 00 Lablonka 18 54 00 47 00 Labluna 15 52 00 33 20 Labtyn 43 54 10 25 00 Labuck W. 16 53 40 38 30 Lache 15 51 40 33 20   17 54 05 37 00 Lachowczy 18 54 00 48 00 Lachowicza 18 52 30 44 00 Lachowicze 18 51 30 43 00 Lachwa 18 52 00 44 00 Lackelingie 31 55 40 28 20 Lacken 16 54 00 37 3 Lacus fons Stolpe 14 54 00 34 0 Laczny 13 M.   Ladby 30 55 00 26 4 Laddey 20 71 00 40 00 Ladek 15 52 00 35 00 Ladekop 16 54 00 36 30 Ladelund 38, 40 54 50 24 00 Ladesko Ozero 21 60 00 50 00 Ladiga 06 59 00 51 00 Lading 37 55 55 24 20 Ladizin 12 48 30 46 00 Ladoga 6, 20, 21 59 00 51 00 Ladoga lacus 6, 7, 20, 21 60 00 50 00 Ladowa 12 48 40 45 00 Laedinga 09 C.   Laedste 28 60 00 20 00 Laeggehorn 39 54 55 23 30 Laerbeck 37 55 40 24 00 Laerskou 37 55 25 23 40 Laerwyc 28 59 30 20 00 Laestripso 09 I.   Laevanger 27 64 40 28 00 Laeubla 09 L.   Laevle Monast. 09 R.   Laewesi 21 62 00 44 00 Lagarben 16 54 00 39 00 Lagard 31 56 00 27 30 Lagaw 15 52 10 32 20 Lagel 38 54 25 24 40 Lagelince 12 49 00 43 00 Lagow 14 50 40 39 00 Lagsbroo 31 56 00 29 20 Lahnawesi 21 61 30 44 00 Laholm 6, 20, 22 56 00 28 00 Lais 19, 20 58 00 44 00 Lais S. 16 53 20 38 30 Lackhouce 12 49 30 45 00 Laland 6, 20 54 00 26 00   33, 34 54 50 26 20 Lale 18 55 00 40 00 Lalesch 19 59 00 42 00 Lamaschyn 14 51 40 41 00 Lamers 40 54 15 25 30 Lamgarben 16 54 00 39 00 Lamershagen 38 54 10 25 30   41, 43 54 15 25 10 Lamhand 16, 17 54 05 36 50 Lampas 01 66 20 59 40   6, 7, 20 65 00 65 00 Lampasken 16 54 20 38 30 Lampis 21 61 00 42 00 Lamsicken 20 58 00 60 00 Lanasalo 21 60 30 46 00 Lanben S. 16 53 20 38 00 Sr. Ja. Lancaster's S. 01 74 00 271 00 Lancceim 16 54 00 39 00
icia 14 52 00 36 00 kaw 16 53 00 36 30 cke 14 53 40 34 00 ckedorf 16 53 40 38 00 15 51 50 35 00 deep 39 55 15 23 20 de 28 60 00 25 00 de R. 01 69 30 345 00 deby 38 54 35 24 20   38, 39 55 00 24 00 deck 14 50 00 33 00 cke 14 53 20 33 00 dekirke 33 54 40 26 30 denis 37 55 55 23 00 ikercken 41 54 30 26 00 agrepper 26 65 00 356 00 32 55 00 25 40   34 55 05 25 30 drup 37, 39 55 35 22 50 berga 14, 15 52 40 32 00   14, 18 54 00 38 00 skou 22 55 30 28 00 dskron 16 54 00 39 00 krona 30, 31 55 40 27 40 kroon 20, 32 55 40 27 40 soort 22, 23 58 30 34 30 sperg 16 54 00 38 30 trass (high way) 17 54 15 36 30 dvig 25, 29 58 00 23 00 weg 44 53 25 25 00 zut 18 49 30 40 00 16 53 20 39 00 S. 16 53 40 38 00 gufiord 26 67 30 349 00 ganess 26 68 00 03 00 gballe 38, 39, 40 55 05 24 30 Legballig 40 54 45 24 50 gbeck 39 55 00 24 20 gbirg 30 55 40 23 00 gbul 30 55 00 23 40 egebaek 32, 33 55 00 27 00 geberg 31 55 55 27 50 gebierg 29 58 40 26 30   35 55 40 23 00 gedaler 26 65 00 356 00 gefio 20 69 00 37 00 geland 20, 30, 32, 34 55 00 25 40 geibeck 44 53 50 24 30 geln 41, 44 53 45 24 30 geloh 44 53 45 24 20 gelot 22 56 30 33 00 gen 15 51 30 33 20 genaw 16 54 00 36 00 genes 1 , 6, 7 73 00 75 00 geafelt 17 54 10 36 20 genhagen 43 54 10 25 40 genhals 42 53 45 24 10 genholm 40 54 40 24 00 genhorn 38, 39 55 10 24 30 genrahe 42 54 05 25 00 geraw 16 53 40 37 00 gerehe 42, 43 54 05 25 10 geroge 20 54 00 22 00 gerooghe 30 53 40 22 00 gesee 34 55 25 25 00 gesond 27 63 20 22 00 gesund 20, 25 58 30 24 00 getwede 39 55 20 24 00 gewarden 41 53 30 22 50 ghals 41, 44 53 50 24 10 ghalsen 23 58 50 33 00 ghede 36 57 05 24 50 gheden 24 59 50 32 40 gholt 40 54 30 25 10 gkier 39 55 10 24 20 glen 41 53 35 25 00 gloh 44 53 35 25 00 glundt 39 55 05 24 10 gnhorn 41, 44 53 35 24 40 go 34 55 15 25 30 grod 12 48 00 46 00 angiaersdam 24 59 40 33 00 ang So 36, 37 56 25 24 10 angstede 40 54 35 24 30 angsvan lacus 24 59 30 32 00 angting 36, 37 56 30 23 10 angtora 24 59 30 33 40 angut 16 53 40 37 30 angwra 40 54 40 24 20 angwedel 41, 42 54 10 24 40 anken 15 52 00 32 20 annajervi 20 65 00 47 00 annasiervi 21 65 00 47 00 amutz 16 53 20 37 00 annou 17 54 05 36 20 anora 06 43 00 59 00 anowece 12 49 00 44 00 G. Lantzko 16 53 00 37 30 aor S. 16 53 20 37 00 awetra 22 57 30 27 00 yoki 21 61 00 40 00 ow 43 54 05 25 10 pinoski 16 53 40 39 00 Miscov. Lapland 01 65 &c 43 &c Lappa 21 61 00 38 00 Lappajervi 20 64 00 46 00 Lapp Marck 20 67 00 35 00 Lappo 20 61 00 39 00 Lapponia 07 68 00 41 00   20 65 00 31 00   21, 25 67 00 37 00 Lapsee 41 53 45 25 50 Laptaw 16 54 40 38 30 Laptresk 21 60 30 43 00 Lapusane 12 47 30 45 00 Lapuzua 06 47 00 44 00 Lapurasi 21 61 00 46 00 Lapwasistond 20 61 00 46 00 Larderup 38, 39 55 25 24 20 Larenskoy 6, 7 62 00 70 00 Laret 30, 31 55 55 27 40 Larf 20, 22 58 00 29 00 Laroszow 12 48 30 45 00 Larskyrka 19, 20, 21 59 30 35 00 Larskyrkn 22, 23 59 40 35 30 Las 12 48 30 45 00 Lasbeck 44 53 45 25 10 Laserschantz 17 54 00 36 40 Laske 17 54 10 37 00 Lasko 14 51 40 36 00 Laskowo 15 52 40 34 00 Lasla 14 49 20 38 00 Lasleinen 16 54 40 40 30 P. Lassczin G. Le∣schen 15 51 30 34 00 Lassendorp 43 54 00 25 30 Lasz 12 49 30 50 00 Latebrae Cosacorum 10 E.   Latebrae Latronum 10 B.   Latendorp 42, 44 54 00 25 50 Latenhusum 41 53 45 24 10 Latibulum Cabansar 10 G.   Laticzow 12, 18 49 30 45 00 Latoniecz 14 52 00 39 00 Latovicz 18 51 30 40 00 Laticzow 06 49 00 44 00 Latz 14 49 20 38 00 Lava 16 53 20 38 00 Lauben 14 51 00 32 00 Filt Lauben 15 51 30 33 20 Laubul 35 55 00 23 40 Lauckissken 16 54 40 39 00 Lauckne fl. 16 54 40 39 30 Laucup fl. 16 54 20 40 30 Lauda 14 52 00 35 00 Laudava 16 53 00 36 30 Lauffen 16 54 40 39 30 Laugzemy 18 56 00 39 00 Launajervi 06 65 00 47 00 Lavoja 20 59 00 50 00 Laurberg 37 56 15 24 30 Laurdalen 29 59 00 24 00 S. Laurence bay 01 71 00 71 00 S. Laurentius 3, 8, 40 54 40 23 30 Laurrig 25 59 00 24 00 Laurvigen 29 58 40 24 00 Lauskouwens 20 70 00 51 00 Lautenburg 14, 16 53 00 37 00 Lautern 16 54 00 38 30 Lautrup 38, 39 54 55 24 10 Lautte 16 53 40 37 00 Lautte fl. 16 54 20 38 00 Lautten 16 54 20 38 30 Lawenborg 20 53 00 56 00 Lawrenburg 41, 44 53 20 25 20 Lawica 15 52 10 33 40 Lawiska 15 51 50 33 40 Laxbul 39 55 25 23 50 Laxefioerd 20 70 00 42 00 Laxen 22 58 30 27 00 Laxen lacus 24 60 10 31 40 Laxerby 20, 22 59 00 27 00 Laxgaard 37 55 55 23 00 Laxoro 36, 37 56 20 22 40 Laxrierel 20 64 00 45 00 Laygard 39 55 10 24 20   40 54 55 24 30 Lazomet S. 16 53 40 40 00 Lebaen 43 54 10 25 10 Lebal 20 58 00 41 00 Lebatzaw 43 53 55 25 10 Lebatze 43 54 00 25 20 Lebbayen 38 54 20 25 20 Lebboyen 41, 43 54 20 25 00 Lebe 14 54 40 34 00 Lebedyn Las 12 48 00 49 00 Lebkow 17 54 10 36 30 Leborg 37 55 30 23 30 Lebrade 40, 41, 43 54 10 25 10 Lebras 18 51 30 43 00 Lecester P. 01 62 30 335 30 Lechelaw 17 54 00 36 40 Lechi 11 53 00 60 00 Leck 38, 40 54 45 24 00 Leckaw 40 54 45 24 00 Lecking 32 55 00 27 00 Leckio 22 58 30 29 00 Lecknes 20, 29 58 00 21 30 Lecksgard 38 54 45 24 00 Leczcnow 12 50 00 43 00 Leda 36 56 35 23 30 Ledelebn 14 51 40 31 00 Lediggrab 17 54 05 37 00 Leefdief 07 68 00 86 00 Ledne 01 61 00 340 00 Leefdies 06 68 00 86 00 Leelang 22 59 00 27 00 Leer 20 53 00 22 00 Leersud 20, 22, 25 59 00 25 00 Lee Sio 22, 25 59 00 27 00 Leeswanger 20, 25 64 30 28 00 Lefanger 21 64 00 37 00 Leffring 37 56 15 24 10 Legelund 37 56 15 23 30 Legend Oe 36 56 40 23 00 Legenhsen 19 59 00 45 00 Legerdorp 44 53 55 24 10 Legerschow 38, 39 55 05 24 20 Legerup 38, 39 55 15 24 10 Leggehorn 40 54 55 23 30 Leggesandt 39 55 20 23 30 Lehal 19 58 30 41 00 Lehe 41 53 30 23 10   42 54 20 23 50 Lehem 35 56 20 24 40 Lehinenkurku 20, 21 60 30 37 00 Leicherort 16 55 00 39 00 Leiden 16 54 20 38 30 Leimusco 7, 8 58 00 59 00 Leimusko 6, 20 57 00 60 00 Zum Leinen 16 53 00 36 30 Lejowogrod 12 52 00 49 00 Leipa 14 51 00 31 00 Leippe 14, 16 53 20 36 00     53 20 37 30 Leire 30, 32 55 30 27 00 Lek 18 53 30 40 00 Lekaczouf 12 49 30 43 00 Lekno 15 52 40 34 20 Lelaki 12 49 30 49 00 Leliske S. 16 53 20 38 30 Lellinge 32 55 20 27 00 Lellilz 20 56 00 44 00 Lelliz 19 56 30 45 00 Lelow 14 50 10 36 00 Lem 35 56 20 23 00   36, 37 56 00 22 50 Lemale T. 20 67 00 39 00 G. Lembock 16 53 20 38 30 Lemen 12 48 30 47 00 Leming 37 56 10 24 10 Lemkuhlen 41, 43 54 15 25 10 Lemles 34 55 15 25 00 Lemmeland 19, 21 59 30 37 00 Lemnica 18 54 30 48 00 Lemoszowka 12 49 30 50 00 Lemwza 06 58 00 48 00 Lemsel 19, 20 57 00 42 00 Lemwick 35 56 20 23 00 Lemwuy 36, 37 56 30 22 40 Lena de Gospo 6, 8, 11 49 00 54 00 Lena de Isal. 6, 8, 11 49 00 54 00 Lenbla 07 62 00 66 00 Lenburg 19, 20 57 00 42 00 Lencza 14 51 00 40 00 Lendalen 20, 22, 25 58 00 26 00 Lendern 42 54 10 24 10 Lendila 20, 21 64 00 48 00 Lendum 36 57 15 24 30 S. Lenekild 32 56 00 27 00 Lenith 39, 40 55 10 24 00 Leneward 18 56 00 42 00 Leng S. 16 53 20 38 30 Lengel 30 56 00 30 40 Lengelmejervi 21 61 30 42 00 Lenhofd 20, 22 56 30 31 00 Lensaen 41, 43 54 10 25 40 Lensaenhoft 43 54 10 25 40 Lensen 06 50 00 43 00 Lensmanszag 28 62 00 20 00 Lenst 41, 43 54 10 25 50 Lentswyk 27 64 40 26 00 Lente 41, 43 54 10 25 20 Lenten 25, 28 60 30 26 00 Lentz 16, 17 54 20 38 00 Lentzeberg 16 54 20 38 00 Lenvarden 19 56 30 42 00 Leopolis 6 18 54 00 48 00 Lepel 06 54 30 47 00 Lepin 6, 7 60 00 91 00 Lepoon 16 54 20 40 30 Lepsoe 27, 28 62 30 20 00 Lepuna fl. 18 54 00 40 00 Lepuny 18 54 00 42 00 Lerckenolt 31 56 10 28 50 Lerd 39 55 20 24 10 Lerdal 20, 28, 29 60 40 22 00 Lere 06 44 00 88 00 Lercken lac. 19, 23 59 40 35 30 Lerneborg 18 54 00 39 00 Lernnesud 21 63 30 35 00 Lernued 37 55 20 23 00 Lerom 22 57 30 27 00 Leron 20 57 00 27 00 Lersbuttel 42 54 10 24 00 Lertem 22, 25 58 00 27 00 Lerup 20 56 00 23 00   30, 35, 36 57 00 23 50 Leruspol 12 50 00 49 00 Leruwed 38 55 20 23 40 Leschfelt 44 53 50 24 10 Lesck 15 52 10 31 40 Lescger 20 64 00 37 00 G. Lesewitz 16, 17 54 05 36 40 Lesichen 15 52 00 32 20 Lesietrow 12 48 30 49 00   13 D.   Lesina 08 52 00 58 00 Lesken 16 54 00 36 30 Lesla 14 52 40 35 00 Lesnice 12 49 00 48 00
Lesou 20 56 00 25 00   22, 30, 35 57 00 25 20 Lesseryn 18 50 00 46 00 Lessa Oeleff 06 49 00 72 00 Lessnica 18 54 00 46 00 Lessniczkiniewos 18 53 30 47 00 P. Lessno G. Lisse 15 51 40 33 40 Lestiersi 20, 21 63 30 41 00 Lesic 15 51 40 33 40 Lethnitz 15 51 40 32 40 Letsen 18 54 00 39 00 Lettawisch George∣borg K 16 55 00 41 00 Letten 6, 19 57 00 43 00 Lettendal 21 62 00 34 00 Lettenholmarna 21 52 00 34 00 Letzen 16 54 00 39 30 Letzing 41, 43, 44 53 50 25 00 Letzkaw 16 54 00 36 30 Levas 09 F   Leukla 06 62 00 66 00 Leucomoria 01 63 00 90 00 Leudt 39 55 05 24 30 Leudeep 39 55 05 23 40 Zum Leven 16 53 00 38 00 Leven fl. 41 54 10 24 30 Levensaw 38, 41 54 20 24 50 Levenstede 38, 41 54 15 24 30 Leventin S. 16 54 00 39 30 Levermoer 39 55 05 24 20 Leveroe 27 63 00 21 00 Leuff 35 56 40 23 40 Leufoe 30 56 40 23 40 Leuneberg 14 54 00 39 00 Leuneburg 16 54 00 39 00 Leuwenburg 14 54 20 20 34 Lewalde 16 53 20 37 30 Lewenhagen 16 54 20 38 30 Lewenow 15 52 30 32 00 Lewenstein 16 54 00 39 00 Lewic 15 52 20 33 00 Lewtofft 40 54 45 25 00 Lewed 38, 39 55 05 24 00 Lexa 6, 20, 21 63 00 49 00 Lexand 24 60 50 31 20 Lexen 27 64 40 25 00 Lexwicken 27 64 40 27 00 Leye 31 55 40 28 00 Leyse 16 54 00 29 00 Leysert 19 59 30 46 00   20 59 00 46 00 Leyssaw 16 54 00 36 30 Leysse 16 54 00 36 00     54 00 38 00 Leyssena 16 53 20 36 30 Leytieff 39, 40 54 55 23 30 Lezanko 14 49 40 39 00 Leze 15 52 20 33 20 Liabro 20, 25, 28, 29 60 00 24 00 Liba 6, 18, 19, 20 56 00 38 00 Libberga 16 53 20 36 30 Libellitz 21 62 30 48 00 Libenfelde 16 53 20 37 00 Libenhoff 16 54 00 36 00 Libenitz S. 16 53 40 36 30 Libenou 17 53 55 36 20 Libental 17 54 00 36 40 Libewald 16 53 40 37 00 Libmhul 16 53 40 37 30 Libna 14 52 40 36 00   16 53 00 36 00 Libok 14, 15 52 20 32 40 Libstat 14 54 00 37 00   16, 18, 20 53 30 38 00 Lichegin 16 54 00 40 00 Lichtenaw 16 54 00 38 00 G. Lichtenaw 16, 17 54 05 36 30 Kl. Lichtenaw 17 54 05 36 20 Lichtenfelde 17 53 55 36 50 Lichtenfeldt 16 53 40 37 00 Lichtenhagen 16 54 20 38 30 Lichtenwoldt 16 54 00 38 00 Lichwa fl. 18 52 00 44 00 Lick 14, 16 53 40 40 00 Lick fl. 16 53 40 40 30 Lickaez 12 49 30 49 00 Lickerort 16 53 40 40 00 Licwyn 06 53 00 57 00 Lida 18, 20 53 30 42 00 Lida fl. 22 58 00 29 00 Liddekiobing 31 55 40 28 10 Liddo 31, 32 55 40 27 00 Lidermark 32 55 20 27 00 En Lidenholmi Suen 37 55 40 22 40 Lidenkro 37 55 20 23 20 Lidh 20 62 00 32 00     63 00 31 00 Lidkioping 2022 58 00 29 00 Lidowiany 18, 19 55 30 41 00 Lie 36 56 20 24 10 Liebe fl. 16 53 40 36 30 Liebenhoff 17 54 05 36 10 Liebeda 18 53 30 43 00 Liebiedziow 18 54 00 44 00 Liefflant 27 54 10 36 20 Liekavesi 21 61 30 39 00 G. Liegotzin S. 16 53 20 39 30 K. Liegotzin S. 16 53 20 39 30 Lienes T. 20 66 00 35 00 Liensfelde 41, 43 54 05 25 20 Liaerbeck 36 57 20 24 50 Lierberg 36, 37 56 20 24 30 Liessaw 17 54 05 36 00 Lietata 21 61 00 38 20 t' Liet van Dronten 20, 25 63 30 22 00 Liffoe 36 56 50 23 30 Liffuersloff 32 55 10 27 20 Lifftap 36 56 45 23 30 Ligd fl. 21 59 30 48 00 Lignitz 14 51 00 33 00 Ligual 19 58 30 43 00 Ligumy 18 55 30 41 00 Liguni 19 55 30 42 00 Liguol 20 58 00 43 00 Likowiez 12 49 00 44 00 Lildkirk 36 57 00 23 20 Lilhara 24 59 30 32 40 Liliendal 41 54 15 25 00 Lilkerck 30 56 40 23 00 Lillaruy 31 55 40 28 40 Lille 36 56 40 24 10 Lillebug So. 37 55 50 24 00 Lillebrend 32 54 50 27 00   33 54 55 27 00 Lillebucken 29 59 00 20 00 Lille Fulede 32 55 30 26 20 Lille Hammer 20 60 00 25 00   25, 28 61 00 25 30 Lille Hedding 32 55 10 27 20 Lillerod 32 55 50 27 20 Lilleruy 31 55 55 28 50 Lillewore 36 56 50 24 30 Lilleo 31 55 55 29 30 Lima 24 61 10 29 00 Limen & vulgo Meo∣tis Palus 12 46 00 53 00 Limford 41 53 50 24 30 Limhut 14 53 40 37 00 Limingo 06 65 00 41 00   20 65 00 41 00 Limo 37 56 15 24 50 Limpincken 16 53 20 37 00 Linberga 20 56 00 27 00   30 56 40 27 40 Linberggaard 37 55 45 23 10 Linike 15 53 20 33 00 Lind 36 56 25 24 40   37 56 25 24 40 Lindarod 31 55 50 29 10 Lindaw 15 52 10 32 20 Lindekund 37 55 30 23 30 Lindelse 30, 32, 34 54 50 25 40 Lindelsee 38 54 50 25 50 Linden 42 54 15 24 00 Zur Linden 16 54 00 39 00 Zur Linden Lipu∣etza 16 53 00 36 30 Lindenaw 16 53 20 36 30     54 00 36 30 Lindenbosch Silva 08 52 00 54 00 Linden lacus 24 59 40 31 20 Linderas 20, 22 57 30 31 00 Linderup 37 55 50 24 00   39 55 15 24 40 Lindesberg 23, 24 59 30 31 20 Lindesnes 20, 25, 29 57 30 21 00 Lindewith 38, 40 54 40 24 10 Lindholm 32 55 40 26 40 Lindholt 39 55 10 24 10 Lindkoping 6, 20, 22 58 00 32 00 Lindow 40 54 35 25 00 Lindrup 37 55 15 24 10     55 20 23 20 Lindschemell 39 54 55 23 50 Lindsholm 32 55 00 27 00 Lindtholm 38, 40 54 45 23 50 Lindthorst 41, 44 53 20 24 40 Lindujervi 6, 7, 20, 21 62 00 52 00 Linge 35 56 20 23 40 Lingeb 35 56 00 25 00 Lingeholm 31 55 30 29 00 Lingen 20 52 00 22 00 Lingenberg 17 54 15 36 30 Lingmany 18 55 00 43 00 Lingnan 17 54 05 36 40 Lings 34 55 20 25 10 Lini 15 52 10 33 20 Linkold 19 55 30 42 00 Linkow 18 55 30 41 00 Lincowlza fl. 18 55 00 42 00 Linlisgard 32 55 10 26 20 Linnarit 20 56 00 31 00   22 56 30 31 00 Linnesberg 20 59 00 31 00 Linnet 37 55 15 23 30 Linneth 38, 39 55 10 24 00 Linow 14, 44 53 40 25 10 Linse 16 53 40 36 30 Linski 12 49 00 50 00 Linstnack 39 55 00 24 30 Lintapy 18 54 30 44 00 Linten 20 60 00 26 00 Lintrup 38, 39 55 20 23 50 Lintwit 34 55 20 25 10 Lionty 12 46 30 47 00 Liorsleff 36 56 40 23 10 Lipa 18 53 00 44 00 Lipa R. 12 49 30 43 00 Lipanka R. 12 48 00 52 00 Lipe 15 52 00 34 40 Lipezani 12 48 30 45 00 Liphyn 18 53 00 57 0 Lipincza 14 49 40 37 0 Lipiniski 18 53 30 43 0 Lipko 15 52 30 32 2 Lipnica 15 52 20 33 4   18 49 30 38 0 Liporow 13 C.   Lipowe 12 49 00 47 0 Lippe 41 54 20 25 2 Lippen 14, 15 51 40 33 0 Lippo 06 42 00 51 0 Lipsk 18 52 30 44 0     53 00 41 0 Lirtsta 22 58 30 30 0 Lisagorra 06 53 00 66 0 Lisberg 37 56 10 24 4 Lisianka 12 47 00 52 0 Lisianki 12 48 30 48 0 Lisiankli R. 12 47 00 54 0 Lisina 06 52 00 58 0 Lisna Reca 09 E   Lisno 19 56 00 46 0 Lissa 14 51 40 33 0 Lissoven 16 53 40 40 3 List 30 55 00 23 2 Listerland 25, 29 57 40 20 3 Listerleen 29 58 00 21 0 Listvenikoof 09 C.   Listwesterland 35 55 00 23 0 Litenka 12 49 00 52 0 Lith 38, 40, 41 54 30 24 0 Lithuania 11 55 00 45 00   6, 14, 16 54 20 41 0 Litin 12 49 00 46 0 Lile Topdals K. 29 58 20 22 3 Littobersle 31 55 40 28 3 Litzlehoga 19, 20, 22, 23 59 00 36 0 Liunge 32 55 50 27 0 Liungelse 32, 34 54 55 25 5 Liunits Herrit 31 55 25 29 0 Livo 14 52 20 39 0 Livonia 6, 18, 19 58 00 42 0 Livoniae terminus 18 56 00 45 0 Liusdal 20 61 00 31 0 Liusenkierknur 36 56 40 23 1 Liusgaard 37 56 15 23 5 Liustorp 21 62 30 33 0 Liw 18 51 30 40 0 Liwiec fl. 18 52 00 40 0 Lixdaas 29 60 20 19 3 Lixinen 16 53 40 37 0 Lmiowka 12 48 30 47 0 Loasult 31 56 10 28 4 Lobackzow 12 49 00 47 0 Lobarod 31 55 40 28 5 Lobaw 14, 16 53 20 37 3 Lobe 38 24 20 24 4 Lobo fl. 14 54 40 34 0 Loboisk 18 54 00 45 0 Lobovia 16 53 20 37 0 Lova deserta olim Dzike Polie 12 46 30 51 00 Lochanny 12 47 30 52 00   13 L.   Lochstet 16 54 40 37 3 Lochta 6, 21 64 00 39 00 Lochtari 6, 20 65 00 34 00 Lochti 20 64 00 40 00 Lochwica 12 49 30 51 00 Lochwica R. 12 49 30 51 00 Locken 16 53 40 37 30 Lockesond 28 60 00 20 30 Lock Ries 30 54 40 24 00 Locks-land 01 66 00 328 00 Locstelle 20 68 00 31 00 Lodberg 36 56 45 22 40 Lodhen 19, 20 58 00 41 00 Lodhorn 28 60 00 20 00 Loding 37 56 10 24 30 Lodzei 14 54 40 41 00 Loecstede 42, 44 53 35 24 40 Loef 42 54 00 24 10 Loegaheca 20 58 00 48 00 Loem 39 55 05 25 00 Loendorp 41, 42 54 10 25 00 Loensdorp 41 54 20 25 50 Loep 42 54 05 24 40 Loersbeck 43 54 20 25 50 Loersdorp 43 54 20 25 50 Loet 22 56 30 33 00 Loewarde 20 53 00 21 00 Lofens 44 53 40 25 20 Lofgrunden 20 60 00 34 00 Lofo 21 59 30 37 00 I. Lofoeten 20 68 00 26 00 Losoudden 21 63 30 36 00 Losstadh 21 60 00 34 00 Lofue Herrit 32 55 30 26 00 Loger 39 55 30 24 30 Logetost 33 54 50 26 20 Loginen 16 53 40 39 00 Logivi 20 68 00 31 00 Logowagora 11 51 00 47 00 Loysted 36 56 50 23 40 Logum 39 55 05 24 00   40 54 50 24 00 Lohberg 43 54 05 24 40 Lohebeck 38, 39 55 05 23 40 Lohissyn 18 52 00 43 00 Lohklinte 38, 40, 42 54 10 24 40
Lohm 38 50 00 24 00 Lohm Closter 38, 39 55 00 24 00 Lodt 44 53 35 24 20 Loikensbro 25 61 00 24 00   28, 29 60 40 24 00 Loimioki 20 61 00 40 00 Lo 19, 21 60 00 41 00 Lowagord 18 51 30 49 00 Lisby 6, 20 64 00 33 00 Laitz 20 53 00 29 00 Lokacze 18 50 30 42 00 Lakenitz 14 53 20 30 00 Lakerup 31 55 30 28 10 Lokna 12 50 00 53 00 Lolbygaard 36 56 45 23 00 Lloe 30 54 00 25 00 Locaazy 18 51 30 41 00 Lomhasho 20 68 00 60 00 Lombsa 14 53 00 40 00 Lommaruy 31 55 55 29 20 Lomnic 15 52 00 33 00 Lomowetyborek 13 F.   Lomsa 06 52 00 40 00 Lomsbay 01 74 00 72 30   07 73 00 76 00 Loanza 18 52 30 40 00 L S. 16 53 40 39 00 Londiga 20 68 00 29 00 Loadom 36, 37 56 30 24 20 Loadon-Coast 01 72 00 320 00 Londrangard 26 65 30 350 00 Lonekoping 06 57 00 30 00 Longaa 36, 37 56 20 24 30 Longarid 20, 22 56 30 28 00 Longarod 31 56 05 29 20 Longasio 22 56 30 31 00 Longborg 30, 35 56 00 22 40 Longby 37 56 10 24 40 Longd 37 55 45 24 00 . Longes 20 67 00 30 00 Longlaeg 37 55 30 22 30 Longlundt 38 55 05 24 10 Longon 21 65 00 38 00 Long Shipholm 28 62 30 20 30 Longskow 37 55 45 24 00 Longweer 27 63 00 21 00 holm 31 56 00 28 50 aki 15 51 50 33 40 Lonoe 37 55 45 22 40 sholm 31 56 10 29 10 ou 26 65 00 02 00 ult 31 56 00 27 50 Loco 20, 21 61 00 66 00 Lfda 07 61 00 66 00 Looffasen 24 60 20 32 20 . Look-out 01 75 00 37 00 loom 6, 20, 25, 28 61 00 24 00 aius R. 12 49 00 54 00 Lopatin Ins. 10 C.   pesco pogost 21 59 30 42 00 oppia 01 65 &c 93 &c Loppis 21 60 30 42 00 Lorasbay 06 73 00 77 00 Lordbroumol 36, 37 56 25 23 40 Lordwat 38 55 20 23 50 Loreentz 16 54 40 38 00 Lorgowitz 08 58 00 63 00 Lorop 34 55 15 25 20 lorstrup 36, 37 56 20 24 30 Lordbaek 37 55 40 24 00 Lorup 39 55 05 23 50 Los 30 56 20 23 20 Losasen 23 60 20 32 30 Losdals K. 29 58 00 22 00 Losendorp 17 54 00 36 40 Losens 41 53 40 25 20 Losice 18 51 30 40 00 Losieze 14 52 20 40 00 Losmen 21 62 30 34 00 Losning 37 55 45 24 10 I. Losoeten 06 73 00 26 00 Lossen 16 53 20 36 30 Losshult 22 56 00 29 00 Loszow 12 48 00 46 00 Loszocki Bor 12 49 30 53 00 Lotomirsk 14 51 40 36 00 Louberg 37 55 50 22 50 Louby 37 56 05 24 20 Loucoveetz 09 R.   Louden 19, 20 56 30 44 00 Lovel 36, 37 56 25 24 00 Lovelbro 36, 37 56 25 24 00 Lovenbro 37 56 10 23 10 Lovenstede 38, 40 54 40 24 10 Lougen Elff 29 58 40 24 00 Lougn Elff 29 59 00 21 00 Lougotina 09 R.   Loupia 09 M.   Lourow 12 49 00 42 00 Lousnsca volost 09 J.   Loutbro 36 56 55 24 30 Louwenborch 20 54 00 34 00 Lowa fl. 20 57 00 50 00 Lowicz 14 52 00 36 00 Lowin 15 52 20 33 00 Lowret 31 56 15 28 50 Lawstadt 31 55 35 29 20 Logingo T. 20 66 00 39 00 Loy fl. 16 55 00 39 30 Loydt 38, 40 54 35 24 50 Louweinia fl. 18 55 00 42 00 Lozchinen 16 54 00 38 30 Lozelzicie 18 54 00 41 00 Lozi 15 52 00 34 00 Luban 6, 19, 20 56 00 44 00 Lubansker See 19 56 00 44 00 Lubartow 12, 18 50 00 45 00 Lubayez 12 49 30 49 00 Lubbe 42 54 05 24 50 Lubberas 14 51 40 31 00 Lubeck 6, 20 53 00 26 00   30, 41, 43, 44 53 50 25 30 Lubecker and Ham∣burger Lander Vier Kerckwerder 44 53 25 24 50 Lubeiz 12 49 00 46 00 Luberga 22 57 00 27 00 Lubicze 20 56 00 52 00 Lubiecz 11 51 00 47 00 Lubieczo 18 53 30 43 00 P. Lubielowo V. G. Lubenaw 15 52 10 32 40 Lubieze 06 56 00 52 00 Lubin 06 50 00 40 00   14 51 00 40 00   15 51 50 34 00 Lubischaw 16 54 00 36 00 Lubischmul 16 53 00 36 00 Lublin 18 51 00 40 00 Lublinitz 14 50 40 35 00 Lubne 18 49 30 49 00 Lubnie 12 49 00 51 00 Lubniki 19 55 30 40 00 Lubomb 18 51 00 42 00 Lubomla 14 50 40 41 00 Luboss 15 52 20 33 00     52 40 33 40 Luboula 14 49 00 37 00 Lubowlo 18 49 30 30 00 Lubtyn 41, 42 54 10 25 00 Lubue 6, 11 50 00 49 00 Lubyo 22, 23 58 40 33 30 Lucanisch S. 16 53 40 39 30 Luce fl. 07 65 00 61 00 Luchaw 41, 44 53 40 25 20 Lucomorye 6, 7 63 00 96 00 Lucstat 06 53 00 24 00 Luczay 18, 20 55 00 44 00 Luczini 15 51 50 34 00 Lucziniec 12 48 30 45 00 Ludbramcz 14 52 20 36 00 Ludersbuttle 42 54 15 24 10 Ludknenord See 41 54 15 24 40 Ludschen 16 53 40 36 30 Ludsen 19, 20 56 00 45 00 Ludwichs waldt 16 54 20 38 00 Luem Closter 30, 35 55 00 24 00 Luenaw 42 54 10 24 20 Luenstede 41, 42 54 10 24 30 Luestat 20 53 00 24 00 Lug R. 12, 18 50 30 42 00 Lugan 19 59 00 35 00 Lugastruy 31 55 55 27 50 Lugum 38, 39, 30 55 05 24 20 Lugum Closter 40 55 00 24 00 Luka 12 49 00 45 00     50 00 48 00   13 A.   Lukoic lacus 20 55 00 51 00 Lukoicsac 18 56 30 49 00 Lukomla 18 54 30 47 00 Lukonla 12 49 00 50 00 Lukosch 14 52 40 35 00 Lukou 14 51 40 40 00 Lukow 15 52 30 34 00 Lukote lacus 06 55 00 51 00 Lula 6, 20 65 00 38 00   21 65 30 37 00   01 75 00 37 00 Lulalapp Marck 20 67 &c. 32 &c.   01 66 30 31 00 Luleao R. 01 65 50 38 00 Lulojoki 06 68 00 49 00 Lulsdorp 15 53 10 32 20 Lumme 31 55 40 28 10 Lummens 29 60 20 24 20 Lummens K. 29 60 40 24 00 Lumse 16 53 00 40 30 Lun 36 56 50 24 20 Luna 18, 20 53 00 42 00 Lunaby 30 55 20 28 20 Lum 29 57 40 21 00 Lund 20, 22 55 30 28 00   20, 22 58 00 29 00   30, 31 55 40 28 20   36 56 40 23 00   39 55 10 24 30 Lunda 22, 23 58 30 33 00 Lundbaek 36 56 50 24 00 Lundby 24 59 20 33 00   30, 31 55 20 25 00     56 05 28 20   32 55 10 27 00   34, 35 55 25 25 00   36 56 50 23 50 Lunde 20, 25 58 00 21 00 Lunde K. 29 58 00 21 30 Lundegaard 33 54 45 26 20 Lunden 38, 40, 41, 42 54 20 23 50 Lundenberg 40 54 30 24 00 Lunderschow 39 55 25 24 10 Lundevand 29 58 00 21 30 Lundewath 38 54 50 24 10 Lundey 26 68 00 358 00 Lundforlund 32 55 20 26 20 Lundgat 35 56 20 23 20 Lundhovet 34 55 30 25 20 Lunding 39 55 10 24 30 Lundo 21 60 30 39 00 Lunds 30 54 40 24 40 Lundsgard 34 55 30 25 20 Lundshossuit 32 55 30 25 20 Lundtoft 38, 40 54 50 24 30 Lundur 26 65 30 354 00 Lundy 40 54 40 23 50 Luneburgensis Du∣catus 41, 44 53 20 24 30 Lunerbum 20 53 00 25 00 Lunetby 34 55 15 25 10 Lung 35 56 20 23 20 Lungard 34 55 15 25 30 Lungby 31 55 45 29 40 Lunge 36 56 45 23 40 Lungeby 22 56 30 32 00 Lungen 21 62 30 34 00 Lungeronbro 36 56 35 24 00 Lungerop 35 56 20 23 40 Lungholm 28 59 30 20 00 Lungkorcken 16 53 20 37 00 Lungsgard 22 55 30 28 00 Lungwath 39 55 20 24 20 Lunia 18 52 00 44 00 Lunkiaer 36 56 40 24 50 Lunnager 31 55 45 28 10 Lunnokuf 12 49 00 47 00 Lunoe 36 56 35 23 40 Lupow fl. 14 54 20 33 00 Lurborg 18 54 30 40 00 Lurekerk 28 60 30 20 00 Lurgraff 37 56 15 23 10 Luro 22 58 30 29 00 Lusappel 34 55 00 25 00 Lusatia 14 51 40 30 00 Luschwich 15 51 40 33 20 Luseborg 43 54 00 25 20 Lurensotte 39 55 00 23 30 Luseroort 20 57 00 38 00 Luserorth 43 53 55 25 30 Lusgard Herret 37 56 15 23 50 Lusheim 23 59 10 35 00 Lusicinen 16 54 00 39 00 Lusoey 27 64 20 24 00 Lufsi 21 61 30 44 00 Lustrup 38 55 15 23 40 Lusuc olim Lucevria 12 50 30 43 00   18 50 30 43 00 Lutke 16 53 20 40 00 Lutke bronhovet 42 54 05 24 10 Lutkeburg 22 56 00 31 00 Lutkebuttel 42 54 05 23 50 Lutkeby 30 56 00 30 20 Lutkeflintbeke 41, 42 54 15 24 50 Lutke Harrich 42 54 05 24 50 Lutkenbockwolt 42 54 10 24 50 Lutkenborg 38, 41, 42 54 15 25 20 Lutkenbrad 41 54 20 25 50 Lutkenbrodt 43 54 20 25 50 Lutkenhorn 38, 40 54 50 24 10 Lutke Nortsche 42 54 15 24 40 Lutken Rennow 43, 44 53 55 25 00 Lutkensee 41, 44 53 40 25 10 Lutke Nuchel 43 54 10 25 20 Lutkenwistede 42 54 05 24 20 Lutke Preen 43 53 55 25 30 Lutke Reide 40 54 10 25 30 Lutke Relybbe 43 54 10 25 30 Lutke Rode 30 53 20 23 20 Lutke chirensee 42 54 15 24 50 Lutke Schlamyn 43 54 10 25 40 Lutke Tonderen 30 55 00 23 40 Lutke Volstede 42 54 15 24 40 Lutkewyhe 40 54 45 24 20 Lutkneholm 38, 40 54 40 24 10 Lutkow 30 53 40 29 00 Lutojoki 7, 20 68 00 47 00 Lutol 15 52 10 32 40 Lutolck 15 52 00 33 00 Lutom 15 52 20 33 00 Lutomisl 15 52 10 33 20 Lutsche Riff. 30 56 40 22 00 Lutterbeck 43 54 20 25 00 Lutzbeck 44 53 55 24 20 Lutzholmbro 36 56 55 24 30 Lutzhorn 41, 44 53 50 24 30 Luxborg 38, 40 54 45 24 40 Luxsted 35 56 40 24 00 Luxtoer 30 56 40 24 00 Luyg 38 55 05 25 10 Luygarde 38 54 55 24 30 Luysberg 30 55 40 23 00   35 55 00 26 20 Luzki 12 49 00 49 00 Lwow olim Leopolis 12 49 30 42 00 P. Lwowek G. Pol∣nisch Neustat 15 52 10 33 20 Lybiskrog 17 54 05 36 10 Lyby 31 55 45 29 00 Lycten 30, 35 57 20 25 00 Lyderle 31 55 55 28 00 Lydom 37 55 45 22 50 Lydy 36 56 35 23 20 Lyckolm 37 56 35 23 10 Lyenskirk 37 55 45 23 00
Lyensta 37 55 45 23 00 Lykkisholm 36, 37 56 20 25 10 Lylyfiord 36 56 35 23 40 Lym 20, 30, 35 56 20 25 00 Lyma 20, 25 61 00 28 00 Lyma Fiel 25 61 30 26 00 Lymbal 22 56 00 25 00 Lymford 30, 35 56 40 24 40   44 53 50 24 30 Lymfordheyde 44 53 50 24 30 Lyndal 29 57 40 21 30 Lyndayelff 29 57 40 21 30 Lyndby 32 55 40 26 40   36, 37 56 20 25 10 Lynde 37 56 05 24 10 Lyderunsgaard 36 57 15 24 30 Lyndum 37 55 50 24 20         Lyngaa 37 56 15 24 30 Lyngdrup 36 57 00 24 30 Lynge 30, 32 55 20 26 40 Lyngen 29 58 00 22 00 Lyngholm 36 56 50 22 40 Lyngo 29 58 20 23 30 Lyngsholm 36 57 10 24 30 Lyng Soo 36 56 40 22 50 Lynkaus 36, 37 56 35 23 10 Lynste 30 53 40 25 20 Lyo 34 55 00 25 10 Lypok 12 51 00 48 00 Lyse 31 56 15 28 40 Lyse Kloster 28, 29 60 00 20 00 Lysenaa 24 59 40 31 00 Lysen lacus 24 59 50 30 40 Lyskow 18 52 30 42 00 Lysobyki 18 51 00 40 00 Lyssappel 38, 40 54 55 25 00 G. Lys2aw 16 53 20 36 30 Lyssefiord 29 58 40 21 00 Lyst 38, 39, 40 55 00 23 20 Lystager 30, 32 55 20 26 20 Lystertieff 38, 39, 40 55 05 23 20 Lystrup 32 55 20 27 00 Lysuyg 20 59 00 29 00 Lysuyk 22 60 00 28 00 Lyswyck 24 60 00 29 00 Lyw 14 52 20 39 00 Lyxtor 36 56 40 23 40 M   MAa 31 55 45 29 10 Maala 31 56 05 29 10 Maalhammer 24 59 20 33 20 Maalwyck 27 64 20 27 00 Maunselkeby 6, 7, 20, 21 66 00 44 00 Maas 40 54 40 25 10 Maaslaxi 21 60 30 47 00 Mabbersandt 38, 39, 40 5 00 23 10 Mabuwska 12 49 00 46 00 Machern 16 53 40 39 00 Machnowka 12 48 30 48 00 Macielow 18 51 00 42 00 Mackenbeck 42 54 00 24 00 Mackere 22 56 00 28 00 Macrabova 14 54 00 40 00 Madelica fl. 18 55 00 54 00 Madenbeck 43 54 05 25 20 Madenfelde 43 54 05 25 20 Madrandin 06 44 00 88 00 Madum 37 56 15 22 40 Maelsond 25 57 00 27 00 Maelstrand 22 57 30 26 00 Maelstroon 6, 20 68 00 24 00 Maeotis Palus 06 48 00 55 00   12, 30 46 00 60 00 Maerabova 16 54 00 40 30 Maeren 32 55 00 27 00 Macs 40 54 45 23 50 Maestrand 29, 30 57 40 26 20 Magaticho 11 46 00 55 00 Magelby 34 54 50 25 50 Magelkier 36 56 25 23 20   37 55 45 24 30 Magellehoy 37 56 10 23 00 Maggeroe 1, 6, 7, 20 71 00 41 00 Maggiore, seu Pon∣tus Euxinus quon∣dam Axenos 11 46 00 57 00 Maglebrend 33 54 55 27 00 Magleby 32 55 00 27 20     55 10 26 20 Maglesede 31 55 50 28 50 Magleso 32 55 30 26 20 Magnorabo 22 59 30 27 00 Magnarabro 25 59 30 28 00 Magstrup 37, 38, 39 55 15 24 20 Mahatam 6, 20, 21 63 00 44 00 Mahylna 18 53 00 44 00 Maiaczkair R. 12 46 30 51 00   13 P.   Maigrova 6, 7, 8 56 00 56 00 Maihlauck 16 54 20 40 30 Maiz 36 56 40 24 00 Makow 14, 18 52 30 39 00 Makritz Ins. 10 C.   Mala 20, 21 60 00 48 00 Malager 20 69 00 32 00 Malakles 20, 2, 30 57 00 28 00 Malandia 22 57 00 30 00 Maland 20 58 00 23 00 Malbeck 22 57 00 30 00 Malchndorp 43 53 55 25 20 Malekett 22 60 00 27 00 Malenthyn 41 53 45 25 50 Malerup 30 55 20 28 00 I. Malesond 22, 30, 35 57 20 26 40 Maleslet 31 56 10 29 20 Malgaard 37 56 30 24 30 Mali 20, 22 57 00 31 00 Malingy 26 67 30 355 00 Malkendorsf 15 52 10 32 20 Malkubben 19, 23 59 30 36 00 Mall 19 59 00 44 00 Mallahem 30, 31 55 40 29 00 Mallawesi 21 61 30 41 00 Malle 36 56 55 23 10 Mallien 16 53 20 38 30 Malm 20, 22, 23 58 30 33 00 Malma 24 59 20 32 20 Malmisch 6, 7 59 00 77 00 Malmo 6, 20, 22 55 00 28 00 Malmsion lacus 24 60 00 30 40 Malmufko 12 49 30 46 00 Malmmyen 30, 31 55 35 28 00 Malogoscz 14 50 20 37 00 Malos 23 58 50 33 00 Malose 31 56 10 28 20 Malpenaw fl. 14 50 20 34 00 Malqueren 30 55 40 30 00 Malstrand 20 57 00 25 00 Malt 38, 39 55 25 24 00 Maltesholm 30, 31 55 50 29 30 Malult 31 56 15 28 40 Malung 20 60 00 28 00   24 60 50 29 40   25 60 30 28 00 Mammen 36 56 20 24 10 Mammon 37 56 15 24 10 Mamon fl. 6, 8 52 00 73 00 Mamugovesi 21 63 00 45 00 Man fl. 13 E.   Manansari 21 61 00 49 00 Mancopia 6, 11 46 00 53 00 Mandal 29 57 40 22 00 Mandalselff 25, 29 57 40 22 00 Mandalsleen 29 57 40 22 00 Mandoe Insula 39 55 15 23 30 Mandzalcyskce Howdzisseze 11 49 00 49 00   18 54 30 51 00 Mangan 01 65 20 93 00 Mangelberg 20, 25 63 00 22 00 Mangelenberg 27 63 40 24 00 Mangelkiaer 37 56 25 23 20 Manhagen 43 53 10 25 40 Manharuy 31 55 45 28 50 Manits 6, 8 50 00 63 00 Mankussa Volost 9 G.   Manneruy 31 55 50 29 10 Mano 19 58 00 40 00 Manoe 30, 35 55 20 23 20 G. Mansdorf 17 54 05 36 40 Manselealamki 20, 21 64 00 46 00 Mausfelt 16 54 20 38 30 Mansfield I. 01 61 00 285 00 Mansielicha 12 48 30 51 00 Mansinsari 20, 21 61 00 50 00 Mansura fl. 06 45 00 69 00 Mapa Trinici 6, 11 47 00 57 00 Mapopa 6, 8, 11 48 00 58 00 Maratse fiald 27 64 40 28 00 Marechoffer S. 16 53 20 39 00 Marckewitz 43 54 20 25 40 Marcklac 16 54 00 39 30 Marcksdorp 43 54 10 25 40 Marckvelt 27 64 20 27 00 Marckof 06 52 00 67 00 Mardin 12 49 00 45 00 Mardo 25, 29 58 00 23 00 Mare album 6, 7, 20 65 00 55 &c Mare Balticum 06 58 00 35 00   19, 20 58 00 36 00   30, 31, 34 55 20 28 00   43 54 20 26 00 Mare Caspium 06 47 00 28 00   10 G.   Mare Cimbrium 41 54 30 22 40 Marede 30 55 00 26 20   32 55 10 26 20 Mare delle Zabache olim Moeotis Pa∣lus 6, 8, 11 48 00 55 &c Mare de Sala ve de Baha 06 45 00 76 00 Mare Germanicum vulgo the Noord zee 27, 28, 29 60 &c 18 &c.   30, 37 56 10 22 20 Margenaw 16, 17 54 10 36 40 Margenburg 6, 14, 16, 20 54 00 36 30 Margenfeldt 16 53 20 37 30     54 00 37 30 Margengat 16 53 40 38 00 Margens 16 53 40 36 30 Margense 16 54 00 36 00 Margenwalde 16 53 20 37 30 Margenweine 16 53 40 36 30 Margosest 06 47 00 43 00 S. Margreten 41, 42 53 55 24 00 Margrete toruy 31 56 05 28 20 Marguin 14 52 20 34 00 Marjacker 35 56 20 24 40 Marjager 30, 36, 37 56 35 24 40 Maria Madalen 36, 37 56 20 25 00 S. Mariamon 06 56 00 51 00 Marianow 12 48 30 45 00 Maribo 30, 33 54 45 26 40 Marie T. 20, 21 66 00 38 00 Marielovo 6, 7 64 00 62 00   9 Q.   Mariena 6, 20 57 00 53 00 Marienburg 6, 19, 20 57 00 44 00 Marienburgische∣werder 17 54 15 36 30 Marienhaus 18 56 00 44 00 Marienhouse 6, 19, 20 56 30 45 00 Marienwald 14, 15 52 50 32 20 Marienwerder 16, 20 53 00 36 00 Marienwerders Nie∣drung 17 53 50 36 20 Mariestadt 6, 20, 22 58 00 29 00 Maring S. 16 53 40 38 00 Markaryd 30, 31 56 15 29 10 Markhus 36 57 05 23 50 Markige 31 55 25 38 30 Markova 09 I.   Markow 18 54 00 44 00 Markowa 12 50 30 42 00 Marcowicza 12 50 00 44 00 Marksdorp 41 54 10 25 40 Markushoff 17 54 00 37 00 Marlsdorp 41 54 30 25 50 Marmora 06 42 00 47 00 Marne 41, 42 54 00 23 40 Marnekoeg 42 54 00 23 40 Marneplaet 42 53 55 23 40 Marneplaten 41 53 55 23 30 Marnewadt 41 54 00 23 30 Marof fl. 08 52 00 67 00 Marrete 25 61 00 22 00 Marrestuen 20, 28, 29 60 30 22 30 Marsch 44 53 45 24 00 W. Marsch 40 54 45 23 50 Marschacht 41, 44 53 20 25 20 Marslo 34 55 25 25 10 Marstrande 38 54 55 25 30 Martensrade 43 54 15 25 10 S. Martini 20, 21 60 30 40 00 Martinow 18 49 00 42 00 Martinowa 12 49 00 42 00 Marunbe 17 37 00 54 00 Marup 36 57 20 24 10 Marutendorp 42 54 15 24 50 Maruy 31 56 10 29 20   10 B.   Masa Masandra 06 41 00 83 00 Masbull 38 54 45 23 50   39 55 00 24 00 Masesten 21, 22 60 00 36 00   23 60 00 36 00 Masiady 18, 19 56 00 39 00 Masiareca 21 59 30 50 00 Masko 20, 21 60 30 39 00 Maslaustaw 12 49 00 49 00   13 C.   Maslaxi 20 60 00 47 00 Masleben 38, 40 54 35 25 00 Masloff Ins. 10 C.   Masmeka 12 48 30 46 00 Masnes 32 55 00 26 40   16 53 00 37 00 Masovia 18 52 30 39 00 Massio 20 56 00 31 00   22 56 30 31 00 Masterup 38, 39 55 10 24 20 Maszkow 12 50 30 52 00 Masznowka 12 44 30 51 00   13 G.   Mategory 09 Q.   Mater S. 16 53 20 38 30 Matford 39 55 25 23 40 Maths Kalanenkrug 16 54 40 38 30 Matikow 12 48 30 45 00 Matka Goba 20 69 00 50 00 Matriga 11 47 00 56 00 Mattared 30, 31 56 00 28 40 Mattern 16 54 20 36 00 Mattrin 14 53 40 32 00 Matyas Zowka 12 49 30 48 00   13 B.   Matzeof 6, 7 69 00 78 00 Matzwitz 43 54 20 25 20 Mauers fl. 16 54 40 39 00 Maulen 16 54 20 38 30 Mauringojervi 7, 20, 21 65 00 47 00 Maurolaco 6, 11 47 00 58 00 Maurozichi 6, 11 47 00 59 00 Mausdorf 16 54 00 36 30 Maxanimi 20, 21 65 30 40 00 Maxina 12 50 00 51 00 Mayak B. 12 46 30 48 00 Maybolg 33 54 50 26 50 Maydonow Las 12 48 30 49 00 Mayens I. 01 71 10 09 00 Maylaby 31 55 55 28 20 Mayts S. 16 53 40 39 30 Mazanis 06 49 00 88 00 Mazarisci Montes 11 50 00 65 00 Mazy 12 52 00 47 00 Mchi 15 51 40 34 20
z fl. 11 53 00 60 00 zlhaven 01 70 40 71 00 aw 14, 16, 20 53 40 36 30 bing 16 53 40 37 00 heiburg 16, 17 54 05 37 00   20 53 00 27 00 ecklenborg 30, 41, 43 53 50 25 50 zck H. 12 46 30 50 00 zet 12 46 00 46 00   13 P.   edaker 24 59 20 32 00 edallandt 26 65 00 360 00 ddel So 36 57 00 23 00 edelbuy 40 54 50 24 10 edelby 38 54 50 24 10 edelladia 6, 20 62 00 31 00 edelsom Herret 36, 37 56 20 24 10 edewedowka 12 49 00 49 00 edlanck fl. 16 54 40 39 30 niki 19 55 30 40 00 dobull 38 55 15 24 10 edowodowka 13 C.   eduedmon 6, 20 59 00 51 00 edue Sibroch 06 55 00 59 00 edvitz 21 59 00 45 00 edziboze 12 49 00 45 00 edzova 08 55 00 59 00 elbeck 42 54 00 24 10 elby 37 56 10 24 40 elhaven 6, 7 71 00 78 00 elunder 39, 40 54 55 23 50 escvi 07 69 00 83 00 eskoi 06 69 00 83 00 egaricho 06 47 00 50 00 eger 20 54 00 24 00 egger 30 54 20 24 00 eggersee 38, 40 54 20 24 30   41 54 20 24 10 edleve 31 56 10 29 30 agijervi 21 63 00 49 00 egrina 6, 7, 20 59 00 53 00 ekarince 12 49 00 47 00 elbli 32 55 50 26 40 eilgaard 36, 37 56 25 25 10 eil So. 36 56 25 23 10 erup 30, 35 56 00 23 20 nersdorp 38, 42 54 15 24 50 enge 31 56 10 29 20 ensterswalde 16 54 00 36 00 neselans 17 53 55 36 20 lastader 26 65 30 353 00 elbeck 30, 41 54 00 24 10 elby 31 56 15 28 20   39 55 15 23 40 elderop 35 56 00 24 40   39 54 55 24 20 eldorp 20, 41, 42 54 05 23 50 eler lacus 24, 33 59 10 32 40 elsssee 41 54 15 24 50 elgrond 38, 39 55 15 24 50 elhorn 39 55 00 23 20 Melit 34 54 55 24 50 Melitsch 14 51 20 34 00 Melke 27 63 00 24 00 Mellcrup 36, 37 56 25 24 50 Mellingstede 41, 44 53 40 24 50 Mellomgreswe 31 55 25 28 10 Mellum 41 53 40 22 40 Mellungh 25 62 30 21 00 Melmenesnach 06 47 00 87 00 Melo 20, 25 57 30 22 00 Meloczicze R. 12 47 30 46 00 Meloso 22, 23, 59 00 32 00 Melowce 12 49 00 44 00 Mels 39, 40 55 0 24 40 Melsack 14, 16 54 00 38 00 Melsdorp 42 54 20 24 50   44 53 45 25 10 Melstorp 34 55 10 25 20 Melsuyn 18 49 30 39 00 Melving 27 63 00 21 00 Melus 20, 25 64 00 25 00 Melzack 18, 20 54 00 38 00 Memel 6, 19, 20 55 00 38 00 Mendeck 16 53 20 37 30 Menduharia 20, 21 61 30 45 00 Meng 38, 39 55 20 24 30 Mengholt 36 57 00 24 50 Menghusen 41, 42 54 00 23 50 Menoko R. 12 49 30 51 00 Menschendorp 43 54 15 25 40 Mensele 21 60 30 43 00 Mensout 16 53 40 38 30 N. Mensterberg 17 54 10 36 30 Meazik 15 52 40 33 00 Meolden 38, 39, 40 55 05 23 40 Meppel 20 52 00 21 00 Meppen 20 52 00 22 00 Mera 06 45 00 88 00 Merasneit 26 65 30 353 00 Merchants I. 01 69 00 321 00     58 00 289 00 Merchmdorp 43 54 05 25 40 Merckeboe 22 59 00 24 00 Mercka 16 53 00 36 00 Merecz 18, 20 54 00 42 00 Merecz fl. 18 53 30 42 00 Meren 06 41 00 80 00 Merex 06 54 00 42 00 Merjerfoi 21 64 00 41 00 Merima 19 58 30 41 00 Meringaard 37 55 45 24 10 Merlick R. 12 49 00 53 00 Merlo R. 12 49 00 53 00 Merne 30 54 00 23 40 Merona 7, 8 57 00 64 00 Meron 20, 25 60 30 21 00 Mersen 14 51 00 29 00 Meruske 16 54 00 40 00 Meryn 12 50 30 50 00 Mesbruch 17 54 05 36 50 Mesoritsch 14 45 20 35 00 Meseritz 14 52 20 32 00 Mesewitz 16 53 20 36 30 Mesing 34 55 30 25 10 Messing Oschetnke 16 5 20 36 30 Metele 18 41 00 Metka T. 20 32 00 Metkow 12 49 30 51 00 Metriken 16 20 39 30 Metropolitzki 10 .   Metsohotna fl. 10 E.   Mettele 20 53 00 41 00 Metzen 41, 42, 43 54 00 24 30 Metzotta 55 00 59 00 Meum 20 55 00 28 00 Meussling 41, 43, 44 53 50 25 20 Meyendorff 16 54 00 36 00 Meyendorp 41, 44 53 35 24 50 Meyerfui 20 6 00 41 00 Meylesdorp 44 53 35 25 00 Meynaw 40 54 45 24 10 Meyne 38, 40 54 45 24 10 Meysing 37 50 06 24 30 Meysord 20 70 00 37 00 Mezeensche Golfe 6, 20 66 00 63 00 Mezen 1, 6, 7 65 30 66 00 Mezieris 12 50 30 45 00 Mezorof 12 49 00 46 00 Mia 6, 20 59 00 50 00 Miadzial 6, 18, 20 54 30 44 00 Mialek 15 51 50 33 20 Miaswgost 21 59 00 50 00 Miart wowod R. 12 47 30 49 00 Mias R. 12 47 00 54 00 Miastko 15 51 40 33 20 Micduiky 18 54 30 43 00 Michael 14 51 00 34 00 Michaelis 6, 20, 21 61 00 46 00 Michaeloff 6,, 8 50 00 68 00 Michaloff 6, 8 53 00 62 00 Michalowka 12 51 00 47 00 Michelaw 16 53 00 37 10 Michelsdorp 43 54 20 25 50 Michelstray 31 55 30 28 50 Michlaw diegrosse 17 54 05 37 00 Michlaw diekleine 17 54 05 37 00 Michlooleu 16 54 00 38 30 Miclowitz 14 50 00 35 00 Micola 09 B.   Cl. Micola 6, 7 59 00 60 00 Micola B.P. Cloost 09 O.   Micola Chram 09 M.   Micola Conda∣courscoi 6, 7 64 00 61 00 Micolajowtzyzna 18 53 00 44 00 Micola Koulacoof 6, 7 61 00 67 00   09 K.   Micolana Opoco 6, 7 61 00 66 00   09 H.   Micola Royde Kour∣skoy 09 R.   Micola Silcnskoi Mo∣nast. 09 O.   Micola Silenskoi 06 63 00 63 00 Midalshokell 26 65 00 357 00 Middelburg 41, 43 54 05 25 30 Middelfan 34 55 25 24 30 Middelfaer 37 55 30 24 10 Middelfar 30, 35 55 20 24 20 Middelfartsund 34 55 15 24 40 Middelhoeck 20, 25 62 00 18 00 Middelsandt 39, 40 54 50 23 30 Middelsteen 23 58 40 35 00 Middelum 38,40 54 40 23 30 Midfiord 26 67 00 01 00 Midra fl. 07 65 00 62 00 Midzyboss 18 49 30 45 00 Miechonziewo 14 52 00 33 00 Miechina 15 51 50 34 20 Miechorzewo 15 52 10 33 20 Miechow 14 50 00 37 00 Miediowka 12 48 00 50 00 Midwick 26 66 30 348 00 Miedwina 12 48 30 48 00 P. Miedzichod v. G. Birnbaum 15 52 30 32 40 Miedzirccz 14 49 20 35 00 Miedzoyre 19 56 00 41 00 Miedzymoyze 18 56 00 41 00 P. Miedzyrzecz 15 52 10 32 40 G. Mieseritz 18 50 30 44 00     53 00 42 00 Miedzyrzeci 18 51 30 41 00 Miedzyrzeez 14 52 00 41 00 Miedzyrzycs 12 49 00 49 00   13 D.   Mielsbeck 37 55 35 22 50 Mielberg 40 54 25 24 40 Mielecz 18 50 00 39 00 Mielso 37 56 25 23 10 Mielst 39 55 05 23 40 Mielstad 14 51 20 34 00 I. Mien Lacus 18 52 30 52 00 Mienso 23 59 10 34 30 Mierislow 15 52 50 34 00 Mierlos Herrit 32 55 30 26 20 Miesborstel 42 54 05 24 20 Mieschschwada 14, 16 53 20 40 00 Mieskina fl. 08 49 00 73 00 Mieskowo 15 51 40 34 40 Miesscziczko 15 52 30 34 20 Mieuweholmen 27 63 40 22 00 Migalin 6, 8 51 00 72 00 S. Mihal 13 A.   Mihlentz 17 54 00 36 30 Mikaliwka 12 49 00 49 00 Mikalowka 13 D.   Mikilsoier 21 63 30 38 00 Mikioszowce 12 49 00 50 00 Mikola Silenskoi 07 63 00 63 00 Mikolaw 12 49 30 51 00 Mikolawka 12 49 00 49 00 Mikolinsk M. 13 A.   Milce 18 51 00 42 00 Milck 16 53 40 39 30 Milckendorp 42 54 15 24 50 Milcza 6, 18 54 30 45 00 Milden S. 16 53 40 38 00 Mildorp 30 54 00 23 40 Milem 16 53 20 38 00 Milentz 16 54 00 36 30 Milesseuskihordek 18 54 30 57 00 Miliolajowka 12 49 00 46 00 Milisch 16 53 20 38 00 Mill I. 01 64 20 289 00 Millesuyk 20, 22 58 00 28 00 Millewantz 16 54 00 36 00 Millkans 17 54 10 36 10 Millobe instar cretae albi Montes 10 A.   Milloss 32 55 40 26 20 Miloslaw 15 52 00 34 40 Milstede 38, 40, 42 54 30 24 10 Milutince 12 49 00 45 00 Mimia 18 55 00 39 00 Mimmel fl. 16 55 00 40 30 Min fl. 13 E.   Minchow 18 51 00 40 00 Minden 20 52 00 23 00 Minds Herret 37 55 35 24 10 Mingenen 16 54 00 38 00 Minia 19 55 30 39 00 Minima 15 52 40 34 00 Minkaks 26 64 30 359 00 Minotu 26 66 30 358 00 Minsk 6, 18, 20 53 30 45 00 Minsko 14 52 00 39 00 Minsterberg 17 54 00 36 00 Minter S 16 54 20 38 00 Miobeck 30 57 00 27 40 Miolo 21 60 00 42 00 Miome 28 61 00 19 30 Mione 20, 25 60 30 19 00 Miorr 22 57 30 27 00 Mios Vand 28, 29 60 30 23 00 Mir 18 53 00 44 00 Mirchaw 16 54 00 35 30 Mirebull 40 54 40 24 10 Miregrod 12 48 30 47 00 Mirgla fl. 16 55 00 40 00 Mirnesi 20 63 00 47 00 Miropol 12 50 00 46 00 Mirvasi 06 63 00 47 00 Mirvesi 21 63 00 46 00 Mis R 12 47 30 55 00 Misthusum 30, 35, 38, 39 55 05 23 40 Misiakowce 12 49 00 46 00 Mislowitz 14 49 40 35 00 Missunde 38, 40, 41 54 30 24 50 Miswalde 14, 16 53 40 37 00 Mitaw 6, 18, 19, 20 56 00 41 00 Mitbargen 39 55 25 23 10 Mitenwalde 14 52 00 30 00 Mitizenki 12 50 30 51 00 Mitre 6, 7, 8, 20 57 00 56 00 Mitrenga 15 52 10 33 00 Mitsunt 34 55 35 25 10 Mittelfart Sund 37, 38, 39 55 30 24 40 Mituske fl. 10 G.   Mizael 27 63 00 24 00 Mliow 12 48 30 49 00 Mliownowy 12 48 30 49 00 Mliow Stary 13 E.   Mlode 12 49 00 48 00 Mlyn 12 49 30 51 00 Mlyni 15 51 50 34 00 Mnichi 15 52 20 33 00 Mnock 12 49 30 51 00 Moajervi 6, 7, 20 62 00 53 00 Moain 19 57 00 43 00 Mobierg 36, 37 56 25 23 10 Mobilow 06 53 00 48 00 Moborg 36, 37 56 25 22 50 Mochd 15 51 50 33 20 Mochuczin 15 52 30 32 40 Mochylow 12 48 00 45 00 Mocrby 09 B.   Modebul 39 55 15 24 00 Modenaw 16 54 40 38 00
Modens 20, 22, 25, 29 59 30 24 00 Modruneller 26 67 00 356 00 Modrze 15 52 00 33 40 Modvedietsa 6, 8 51 00 74 00 Modyn 44 53 45 24 20 Moerdick 42 54 00 24 00 Moerhusen 44 53 50 24 10 Moerigel 41 53 55 24 20 Moerrigil 44 53 55 24 20 Moerkercken 38, 40 54 40 24 50 Moerlingen 42 54 05 24 30 Moerse 42 54 15 25 00 Moerwasserlandt 40 54 35 23 20 Moesbeck 39 55 00 24 00 Moesta 27 64 20 27 00 Moeswick 39 55 25 24 40 Moetnaia 1, 6, 7 69 00 90 00 Mafass 17 54 10 37 00 Moffsee 38 54 10 25 10 Mogenfeldt 43 54 05 25 20 Mogenstrup 30, 32 55 10 26 40 Mogintzar 07 68 00 87 00 Mogitia 20 56 00 40 00 Mohila D. 12 47 00 48 00 Mohiloviensis Distri∣ctus 18 53 30 49 00 Mohilow 11, 18, 20 54 00 48 00 Mohlendorp 42 54 10 24 40 Mohlenkamp 43 54 05 25 30 Molenotrate 42 53 55 23 50 Mohrenfleth 41, 44 53 30 24 40 Moian 19, 22, 23 59 10 36 00 N. Moinge 31 55 50 28 10 Mokina 09 I.   Mokleby 22 56 30 33 00 Moklinta 24 60 00 33 00 Mokrufeld 26 66 30 357 00 Molansk 29 58 20 23 00 Molanga 09 D.   Molberg 36 57 20 24 40 Molbuy 39 55 15 24 10 Molby 38, 39 55 15 23 50 Molczar 18 53 00 43 00 Molda 27 62 40 21 00 Moldavia 06 47 00 41 00 Moldawa fl. 12 47 00 44 00 Moldenith 40 54 35 24 40 Molejac fl. 48 53 00 42 00 Molenbeck 40 54 30 24 30 Molendorp 41 54 10 24 40 Molenrade 44 53 35 25 10 Molgomzaia 01 68 00 90 00 Molhagen 44 53 40 25 10 Molinica 12 48 30 44 00 Mollaek 37 55 25 23 30 Mollarod 30, 31 56 05 29 00 Mollen 41, 44 53 35 25 20 Mollerup 37 56 15 25 00   39 55 00 23 50 Mollerup So 36 56 35 23 10 Mollhagn 44 53 35 24 50 Mollie K. 29 58 40 20 30 Molling 37 56 00 24 40 Mollung 20 62 00 21 00 Molnbyggia 24 60 40 31 20 Molne 30 53 40 25 20 Molo 30, 32 55 40 27 00 Molodcezno 18, 20 54 00 44 00 Molodcesko 06 54 00 44 00 Mologova reca 20 58 00 53 00 Moloma 06 60 00 79 00 Moloma reca 6, 7 60 00 78 00 Molotynoe 12 49 30 50 00 Molqueren 22 56 00 30 00 Mols 30, 35 56 00 25 00 Moltoubam 25 64 00 25 00 Moltouhaven 27 64 20 25 00 Moltbeck 30 55 20 24 00 Molterup 38, 39 55 15 24 20 Moltziancona 6, 7 68 00 81 00 Monaster 6, 11 49 00 48 00 Monastr 12 46 00 52 00     47 30 52 00 Monasteri 12 50 00 42 00 Monastericha 09 F.   Mona2tery 13 L.   Monasterystza 12 50 00 50 00 Mona2teryz 12 48 30 47 00 Monasterzysscze 18 49 00 43 00     56 00 51 00 Mona2tir 10 C.   Moncastro 11 47 00 47 00 Monckberg 43 54 20 25 00 Monckbrarup 38, 40 54 45 24 40 Monckendick 44 53 35 25 10 Monckgard 34 54 50 25 00 Monckhagen 41 53 50 25 20 Monckloh 41, 44 53 50 24 30 Monckmoll 40 54 50 24 30   40, 43, 44 53 55 25 00 Monckneversdorp 43 54 10 25 30 Monckoe 38, 40 55 05 25 20 Moncksohe 42 53 50 24 30 Mone 30, 32, 33 55 00 27 20 Monekenhag 43 53 55 25 20 Mongintzar 06 68 00 88 00 Monickdorp 17 54 20 36 20 Monick Gartz 17 53 55 36 20 Monik Grebis Muhl 17 54 15 36 20 Monkarowa 12 50 00 48 00 Monkeo 29 59 00 24 30 Monle F. 20 67 00 38 00 C. Monmouth 01 54 00 283 00 Monow 44 53 45 25 20 Monsdabla 31 55 50 29 20 Monsklint 30, 32 55 00 27 20 Mons Precista 09 A.   Mons S. Crucis 14 50 40 38 00 Monsteras 20, 22 57 00 32 00 Monsterberg 14 50 20 33 00 Monstersondt 22, 30, 35 57 00 27 20 Monstrup 32 55 30 26 20 Monstruy 30, 31 55 20 28 00 Mont S. 16 53 40 40 00 Montaw 16 53 40 36 00 G. Montaw 16, 17 54 00 36 20 Kl. Montaw 17 54 00 36 20 Montes Boglowy 08 53 00 72 00 Montwiliski 18 55 00 41 00 Moo 20, 22 59 00 28 00 Mooxa 6, 8 56 00 65 00 I. Mopsonowits 6, 7, 20 68 00 67 00 Mora 20 61 00 30 00   24 61 10 30 40 Moralene 22, 23 59 30 34 00 Moransen 16 53 20 38 00 Morap 31 55 55 28 00 Morasky Slac 12 48 30 53 00     49 30 54 00 Morassig Niederung 17 54 10 36 10 Moratz 36 57 00 23 10 Morawieskarx 6, 18 50 00 49 00   11 51 00 47 00 Morawitz 18 50 30 43 00 Morbeck 39 55 30 23 20 Morby longa 22 56 00 33 00 Morckhoy 32 55 30 26 20 Morcza 12 49 00 43 00 Mordowiti 07 57 00 67 00 Mordua 06 55 00 66 00   07 54 00 67 00 Morgenfelde 16 54 00 39 30 Morgmaghaw 21 61 30 34 00 Morkholt 37 55 35 24 20 Morko 23 58 40 34 00 Mornulec 12 49 00 47 00 Morom 06 57 00 64 00 Morren 14 52 40 32 00 Mors 6, 7 63 00 62 00   30, 35 56 40 23 20 Mors en Jara 09 O.   Morsleff 37 56 00 24 40 Morsna fl. 10 A.   Mos reca 09 O.   Morsum 38, 39 54 50 23 30   40, 41 54 35 24 00 Morum 32 55 50 27 00 Morung 16 53 40 37 30 Moruntia 12 50 30 44 00 Morup 30 55 20 26 40 Mosaisco 6, 8, 20 55 00 56 00 Mosbou 22 59 00 25 00 Mosbyaas 31 55 25 29 00 Moscha fl. 11 55 00 53 00 Moscovia 20 57 00 57 00 Moscua 6, 8 55 00 58 00 Mose 36 47 05 24 00 Moseberg 22 56 30 29 00 Moshus 39 55 25 24 30 Mosic 20 38 00 31 00 Mosio 22, 23 59 00 32 00 Moskow 11 55 00 54 00 Mosnisk 11 55 00 52 00 Mosny 18 49 00 48 00 Mosow dolina 12 47 30 51 00 Mosow Roy Dolina 13 I.   Mospeltzsneit 26 65 30 354 00 Mosqua 20 55 00 58 00 Moss 20, 22, 25 58 00 25 00 Mossar 18 55 00 44 00 Mossin 15 52 00 33 40 Mossion lacus 24 60 00 30 20 Mossny 11 49 00 47 00 Moster Sodre 31 55 45 28 50 Mostki 15 52 10 32 40 Mosty 18 50 00 42 00     53 00 42 00 Mosund 29 59 00 25 00 Moswang 39 55 10 24 00 Moszina 14 52 00 34 00 Moszna 12 48 30 49 00   13 E.   Moszna fl. 13 E.   Moszow 12 48 30 48 00 Motala 22 58 00 31 00 Motendorp 44 53 40 25 10 Motlau fl. 16 54 00 36 30 Motol 18 52 00 43 00 Motowilufka 12 49 30 48 00 Motrzyn Las 12 48 00 50 00 Mottennagen 16 54 20 38 30 Mottrup 37 56 05 23 10 Motylka 15 53 00 34 00 Motzen 41, 42, 44 53 50 25 00 Mougra fl. 6, 7, 20 65 00 62 00 Moulniczna 14 51 40 38 00 Moulowencze 13 D.   Mourmanskoi le∣porie 6, 7 69 00 48 00   20 69 00 48 00 Mourmans Koy More Norvegicum & Da∣nicum mare 06 74 00 45 00   07 70 00 60 00 Mow 36 56 50 24 50 Moyens 44 53 35 25 10 Mozakofski 10 G.   Mozy 18 51 30 47 00 Mozyn 06 51 00 47 00 Mrowino 15 52 20 33 40 Mrziplod 14 50 20 36 00 Msczenecia 11 53 00 52 00 Msczenek 11 53 00 53 00 Msczenekca 11 53 00 52 00 Mseibohow 18 52 30 42 00 Mseisslaw 6, 8, 20 53 00 49 00   11 54 00 48 00   18 54 30 50 00 Mfibobow 06 52 00 42 00 Msicza 06 57 00 49 00   20 57 00 49 00 Mslow 14 50 40 36 00 Mucanve fl. 14 52 00 42 00 Muc hawicg R. 12, 18 51 30 42 00     52 00 42 00 Muckenhagen 16 54 00 36 00 Mucker 16 53 20 36 30 Mucker S. 16 53 20 39 00 Muddel 17 54 20 33 00 Muddelo fl. 17 54 10 36 20 Mucsfelde 41, 43, 44 54 00 25 00 Muggeln 43 54 15 25 10 Mugsfelde 42 54 00 25 10 Muhebrock 42 54 05 24 50 Muhl 15 52 30 32 20 Muhlgrab 17 54 15 36 10 Mukenholt 17 54 20 36 10 Mukovina 09 I.   Mulbock 15 52 00 32 40 Mulcrod 31 55 40 29 00 Mulhausen 16 54 00 37 30     54 20 38 30 Mulin 12 50 30 52 00 Mullawes 20 61 00 41 00 Mulleberg 31 55 35 28 30 Muleras 15 51 50 40 00 Mulsaridt 22 57 00 29 00 Multeinen 16 54 00 39 00 Mumeinen 16 54 00 39 00 Mumhapuera 26 66 30 357 00 Munaderness 26 67 30 351 00 Munckenbo 34 55 25 25 20 Muncketorp 23, 24 59 20 33 00 Muncko 32, 34 55 00 25 20 Munks Winter∣harbor 01 63 20 268 00 Munde 16 54 20 36 00 Munder P. 01 69 00 344 00 Munke 30, 31 56 00 28 20 Munke Bierby 32 55 30 26 20 Munken S. 16 54 20 38 30 Munster 20 51 00 22 00 Mensterberg 16 53 40 37 00 Munsterdorp 41, 42, 44 53 55 24 10 Munsterhaven 28 59 30 20 00 Muntow 17 53 55 36 20 Munzersscherger 17 54 05 37 00 Murakwa 12 48 30 46 00 Murlakoski 20 62 00 41 00 Murulakoski 21 62 00 41 00 Murumptung 22 56 30 27 00 Murzinowo 15 52 30 32 20 Mus fl. 11 50 00 57 00 Musbedding 31 55 35 28 40 Muschol 29 58 40 24 00 Muse 28 59 30 20 00 Muskacken 16 53 20 38 00 Musse 33 54 45 26 40 Mussholm 30, 32, 34 55 30 26 00 Musmova 09 I.   Mussniki 18 54 30 42 00 Mussond 28 60 30 19 30 Mussund 25 60 00 19 00 Mustasar sive Wassa 21 63 00 38 00 Musza fl. 18 56 00 41 00 Mutorstreitz 16 54 00 36 00 Mutten fl. 16 55 20 39 30 Mutterstrentz 17 54 15 36 20 Muxhal 43 54 20 25 00 Muxza R. 12 48 30 44 00 Mydra reca 06 65 00 62 00 Mydre 15 51 50 34 20 Myel fl. 41 54 05 23 50 Mygdal 36 57 20 24 30 Mykolai 14 50 00 36 00 Mylenhaven 42 54 10 23 40 Mylerhofen 41 54 05 23 40 Mylsnite 14 49 40 37 00 Mylstain 14 49 20 37 00 Mylstede 41 54 30 23 50 Mynde 30, 32 55 00 26 40 Myngind 36, 37 56 15 24 40 Mynke 37 56 15 24 50 Myresle 31 55 40 29 30 Myromow 14 50 20 36 00 Myss 18 52 30 43 00 Mysselworden 41 53 40 23 10 Myslimiege 18 49 30 38 00 Myssogola 18 54 30 42 00 Mzdniki alias Wo∣mie 18 55 00 40 00
N   NAas 20, 22, 23 60 00 32 00   24 60 40 31 00 Naas 24 59 20 32 40 sgard 24 60 20 32 20 fl. 18 54 30 41 00 rs olim Nauba∣s 11 51 00 64 00 fl. 16 54 40 41 00 erybis 12 48 30 48 00 ieby 34, 41 55 05 25 20 iel 14, 20 52 00 34 00 etieff 38 55 10 23 20 18 54 00 46 00 arzin 14 52 20 38 00 kwonna 12 48 30 42 00 26 66 00 349 00 avia 16 54 40 39 30 swra 40 54 45 25 00 za 18 53 00 42 00 R. 01 70 00 384 00 Nagaia Horda 06 54 00 86 00 Nagayski 06 49 00 71 00 Nagel Eyland 6, 7, 20 68 00 58 00 fl. 16 53 40 36 00     54 00 37 00 S. 16 53 40 36 30 39 55 25 24 10 41 53 45 24 50 men S. 16 53 40 37 00 Nackle G. Nakell 15 52 50 34 20 ki 26 66 30 358 00 boki 18 53 30 44 00 stroog 09 P.   bow 11 49 00 48 00   18 56 30 51 00 drup 36 56 50 23 10 iaki 07 61 00 67 00 eachanie 15 52 20 33 40 fl. 36 57 20 24 50 jow 12 49 30 43 00 woka 12 49 00 43 00 anga 20 57 00 27 00   22 57 30 28 00 ff 16 53 00 40 30 ff fl. 14 52 40 39 00 ama reca 09 B.   eew 14 53 00 41 00   18 52 30 41 00 ew fl. 18 52 30 40 00 gho 19, 20, 21 59 00 41 00 Ostroog 09 M.   fl. 16 54 20 37 30 ocz 18 54 00 44 00 ocz fl. 18 54 00 44 00 inen 16 53 00 38 00 buy 39 55 05 24 20 va 6, 19, 21 59 00 46 00 wey 19, 20, 21 60 00 46 00 25, 28 60 30 26 00 satse 09 C.   by 24 59 20 31 40 Nascow 41 53 40 25 40 Nasee 20 54 00 26 00 Nasewit S. 16 53 40 37 30 Nasia 21 59 30 50 00 Nassaw P. 01 75 40 81 00 Nassen 36, 37 56 20 23 00 Nassenhoff 17 54 15 36 20 Nassentorp 31 55 30 28 10 Nassonofski 10 F.   Nassonofsko mons 10 F.   Nastacka 12 49 00 48 00 Nastedick 42 54 20 23 50 Naszlaka denie pro∣wym B. 12 47 30 48 00 Natangia Baronia 16 54 20 38 00 Natatz S. 16 53 20 38 30 Natolia sive Asia mi∣nor 06 42 00 51 00 Natra 20, 21 63 00 34 00 Natz 26 67 00 350 00 Natzdors 15 52 30 32 00 NaTzfiord 26 66 30 350 00 Navast fl. 19 58 00 42 00 Naubarum 6, 8 49 00 52 00 Naviula 06 61 00 66 00 Navinky 20 63 00 62 00   09 Ket. Q.   Naumberg 14, 15 51 40 32 00 Navo 21 59 30 39 00 Navalock 6, 7 63 00 63 00   09 O. P.   Navos 12 51 30 49 00 Nautrup 36 56 40 23 20 Nawes 06 50 00 48 00 Nawlinge 30 56 00 28 40   31 55 55 29 10 Nawos 11 51 00 46 00   18 51 00 48 00 Nawydwor 18 53 00 41 00 Naxkow 32, 33, 34 54 45 26 20 Nebbelund 33 54 40 26 40 Nebel 37, 39 55 30 23 10 Nebelhoff 38 55 15 24 00   39 55 15 23 50 Neberdorp 41 54 10 25 30 Nebersdorp 41 54 20 25 20 Nebil 37 55 50 24 20 Nebild 36 56 55 22 50 Neboll 40 54 45 24 50 Nebraw 16 53 40 36 30 Ned 31 55 50 27 50 Nedder Schluis 41, 44 53 30 25 20 Nedenes 29 58 00 23 00 Nedenesleen 29 58 00 22 30 Nedere 20 62 00 30 00 Nednes 25 58 00 23 00 Nedones 06 58 00 23 00 Nedutze 14 49 00 37 00 Neempten 42, 43 54 05 25 10 Neeren 42 54 10 23 50 Neers 41, 42, 44 53 45 25 00 Nees 31 56 05 29 10 Neeskirck 36, 37 56 25 22 30 Neffager 37 55 45 24 20 Negeln 16 55 20 39 00 Negenharrig 42 54 05 24 50 Negernbuttel 42, 43, 44 53 55 25 00 Negro P. 01 77 00 44 00 Neher 42, 44 53 45 24 50 Neidenburg 16 53 20 38 00 Neisse 14 50 20 34 00 Neisse fl. 14 50 20 34 00 Nelson Port 01 57 20 268 00 Nelubow 06 49 00 49 00 Nembs 43 54 00 25 00 Nemdon 19 58 30 35 00 Nemdoom 23 58 50 35 30 Nemirow 18 49 00 46 00 Nempten 41 54 05 25 00 Nemson 21 62 30 34 00 Nenasy lac 12 47 00 52 00   13 L.   Nerilddall 37 55 50 23 00 Nerimi 25 58 30 21 00 Nerimselff 29 58 20 20 00 Nerims K. 29 58 20 30 00 Neron 28 61 00 21 00 Nerslen 19 56 00 43 00 Nerunge 17 54 20 37 10 Nerungske Heide 17 54 20 36 20 Nes 20, 25 60 00 23 00 Nesberg 37 55 35 23 10 Nesby 32 55 20 26 40 Nersbyholm 32 55 20 26 40 Neschwitz 14 51 00 31 00 Nesehorn 39 54 50 23 30 Nesenesch 08 53 00 57 00 Nesgavel 34 55 35 24 40 Neshoholm 31 55 25 28 50 Nesklio 25 58 30 24 00 Ness 20, 29 58 00 21 00     60 00 24 30   36 56 50 24 40   40 55 00 24 30 Nessaw 16 53 00 36 00 Nessbro 29 60 00 24 00 Ness Edollen 22, 28 60 00 24 00 Nessum 30, 35 56 20 22 40   36, 37 56 35 22 50 Nessund 36 56 40 22 50 Nesswiess 20 53 00 44 00 Nestelso 32 55 10 26 40 Nestorp 35 56 20 24 00   36 56 45 23 50 Nestrichna 09 M.   Nestred 30, 32, 35 55 00 26 40 Nesvisium 6, 18 53 00 44 00 Nesyerivi 20, 21 62 00 41 00 Neteby 31 56 00 27 40 Netteberg 44 53 30 24 50 Nettelke 42 54 10 25 00 Neudeichsdorff 17 54 05 36 30 Neudomarki 20 70 00 46 00 Neudorff 17 54 15 36 40 Neverkroeg 42 54 20 23 50 Neversdorp 43 54 20 25 20 Neversstaven 44 53 50 25 00 Neverstorp 44 53 50 25 00 Neugutt 15 51 40 33 20 Neuhoff 16 54 00 39 00   17 54 05 36 50 Neukirch 17 54 10 36 30 Neukrug 16 54 20 37 20 Neuling 36 56 50 24 30   37 56 05 23 20 Ne ultra 01 65 00 275 00 Neumarck 17 53 50 36 40 Neundorff 17 53 50 36 30 Neuschantz 17 53 50 36 20 Neustadt 16 55 00 39 00   41 54 05 25 40 Neustede 20 55 00 26 00 Neuwteich 17 53 05 36 30 New fl. 16 54 20 39 30 Newcken 16 54 40 39 30 Newcloster 41 53 30 24 20 New-denmark 01 60 00 266 00 Newdorf P. Nowa∣wies 15 52 30 32 40 Newdorsgen 16 53 40 36 30 Newedorp 16 54 20 38 30 Newehuss 41 54 15 25 10 Newel 6, 20 56 00 49 00 Newemuster 41, 44 54 00 24 40 Newenburg 14, 16 53 40 36 00 Newendick 44 53 45 24 20 Newendorff 16 53 40 36 30 Newendorp 41 54 20 25 20 Newenhusen 38, 43 54 15 25 10 Newenkirchen 41 54 10 25 20 Neweshog 31 55 35 28 30 Newetieff 41 54 40 22 50 Newfart 17 54 10 37 00 Newfelt 42 54 20 23 50 Newgarde 39 55 15 24 30 Newgarten 14 53 40 31 00 Newgrunde 41 53 55 23 10 Newhauss 6, 15 52 40 32 40 Newkirck 16 54 00 37 30 Newkoeg 38 54 35 24 00 Newkrug 16 53 20 36 00 Newlant 42 54 00 23 40 Newmarck 15 53 20 37 00 Newmarkt 06 47 00 39 00   16 53 40 37 00 Newmohle 39 55 00 24 20   41, 42, 43, 44 54 20 25 20 Newmuhl 16 53 20 36 30 Newmunster 42 54 00 24 50 New north Wales 01 63 00 275 00 Newseil 42 54 20 23 50 New Severn 01 57 20 274 00 New South Wales 01 56 00 272 00 Newstadt 14 49 20 34 00     52 00 33 00   43 54 05 25 40 Newstedlin 14 51 20 32 00 Newteioh 16 54 00 36 30 Newtieff 38, 39, 40 54 35 23 10 Newwerck 41 53 50 23 10 Nex 20 54 00 30 00   22, 30 55 00 30 00 Nexel 32 55 40 26 00 Neza fl. 18 52 30 44 00 Nezevesch 06 53 00 57 00 Niaren More 06 72 00 83 00   07 71 00 80 00 Niarontza 07 70 00 91 00 Niarrontza 06 70 00 92 00 Nibe 30, 35 56 40 24 20 Nibel 35 55 40 24 20 Nibol 38, 40 54 55 24 50 Nibuy 40 54 45 25 00 Nicaleby 06 64 00 39 00 Nichenl So. 36, 37 56 25 23 30 S. Nicholas 01 64 30 57 00 Nichorosseza 18 50 00 46 00 Nickelsdorff 16 53 20 37 00 Nickelsharn 16 53 40 37 30 Nickelswald 17 54 15 36 30 Nickleswalde 16 54 00 36 30 S. Niclas Mon. 6, 20 64 00 99 00 Nicola 6, 8 55 00 58 00   07 66 00 64 00   09 P.   Nicola Comolscoi 6, 7, 8 58 00 50 00   09 A.   S. Nicolai 16 53 40 39 30 Nicola Mocroi 6, 7, 8 59 00 61 00 S. Nicolas 6, 7, 20 59 90 51 00   07 64 00 60 00   09 R.   S. Nicolas Diep 09 S.   S. Nicolas Mon. 06 56 00 51 00 S. Nikcolaus 38, 40 54 40 23 40 Nicolazevaski 08 55 00 60 00 Nicolsca 6, 7 63 00 62 00 Nicomdia 06 42 00 49 00 Nicoping 30, 35 55 40 26 20 Nicopolis 06 44 00 40 00 Nid 26 67 00 353 00 Nida 16 53 40 39 30 Nida fl. 14 50 20 37 00 Niden 16 55 00 39 00 Niden S. 16 53 20 39 30 Nidenberg 18 53 00 38 00 Nider Lei cherwald 17 54 10 36 40 Nidfiord 26 67 00 353 00 Niding scopulus 30, 35 57 00 26 40 Niebsmol 36, 37 56 30 22 50 Nibuersschluis 44 53 25 25 20 Niebuy 38, 39 55 00 23 50 Nie Closter 44 53 30 24 20 Niedaw 17 54 05 36 40 Niedewitz 15 52 00 32 20 Niedzadi 15 51 40 34 20 Niedzanidzie 12 50 00 51 00 Niedzwiedzice 18 52 30 44 00 Niegam 44 53 25 25 00 Niegrundt 39 55 10 24 40 Niehof 17 53 50 36 50   30 54 00 24 20     54 20 25 00 Nichuys 20, 30 54 00 25 00   30 53 40 23 40 Niekroeg 42 54 00 24 10 Niekercken 38, 40 54 45 24 50   38, 39, 40 54 50 23 50 Nickorocc 12 49 30 47 00 Nieland 39 55 00 23 40 Nielied 28 59 30 20 00 Nielmiewicue 18 53 00 43 00 Niels 43 53 55 25 00   39 54 55 23 20 Nielsby 39 55 20 23 50 Nielstrup 33 54 50 26 40   37 56 25 25 00
Niemancicze 18 54 00 41 00 Niemen fl. 18 54 30 40 00 Niemen fl. olim Chro∣non 6, 18 54 30 43 00 Niemenizyzna 18 54 30 43 00 Niemezty 18 55 00 40 00 Niemexino 15 52 30 34 40 Niemolen 38 54 15 25 20 Nie Monaster 20 60 00 54 00 Nie Munster 30 54 00 24 40 E. Nienasyteozyporoh 18 56 30 52 00 Nienborsted 42 54 05 24 20 Nienbroeck 41, 44 53 55 24 10 Nienbull 40 54 45 23 50 Nienburg 20 52 00 24 00 Niendorp 17 54 20 36 20   38, 40 54 25 25 00   41, 43 53 &c 24 &c Niengamb 41, 44 53 25 25 50 Niengoers 43 53 55 24 10 Nienhafe 38, 40 54 25 25 10   41, 42 54 15 4 40     54 25 24 50   43 54 00 25 20 Nienhagen 43 54 10 25 40 Nienhofen 44 53 40 25 30 Nienholmen 20 63 00 20 00 Nienhuse 41 53 50 23 40 Nienkattbeck 42 54 10 24 30 Nienkerc 30 54 00 25 40 Nienkerken 41, 42 54 15 23 50   41, 42 53 55 24 10   43 54 10 25 20 Nienkrog 42 54 10 23 50 Nienlus 20 53 00 22 00 Nienrade 43 54 10 25 40 Nien Raleff stede 44 53 35 24 50 Nienstede 41, 44 53 30 24 30 Nien Stettien 14, 20 53 00 32 00 Nientot 41 53 25 22 40 Nienwalde 41, 44 53 45 24 50 Nienwedel 15 53 00 32 40 Nienwisch 41 54 10 23 50   42 54 15 23 50 Niepart 15 51 30 34 00 Nieper fl. 11, 12 48 00 51 00 Nieprossowo 15 52 10 33 40 Niesaoy 6, 8 50 00 68 00 Niesnchoieza 18 51 00 42 00 Niesalono 18 50 30 45 00 Niesse fl. 14 51 00 32 00 Niessewa 18 56 00 45 00 Niestadt 6, 20 54 00 26 00   14 52 40 30 00   20 53 00 26 00   30 54 00 25 40 Niester fl. 06 48 00 44 00 Niestre R. 12 47 30 46 00 Nietezoba 12 48 30 49 00 t' ieuwediep 09 S.   Nieudorp 40 54 40 23 20 Nieu Holmen 25 63 30 21 00 Niewiaza fl. 18 54 30 41 00 Nieza 14 53 00 33 00 Nifer 17 54 20 36 20 Nigaard 35 55 20 24 20 Nigarde 39 55 20 23 40 Niglitz 21 61 30 49 00 Nigropoli 6, 8, 11 49 00 53 00 Nihus 40 54 50 24 30 Nikalineze 12 49 00 43 00 Ikissma 6, 7, 20 61 00 56 00 Nikola zaraski 66 55 00 60 00 Nikolinczin 12 48 30 42 00 Nikonowka 12 49 30 50 00 Nikoping 32 55 50 26 40   33 54 45 27 00 Niloes 30 57 40 27 20 Niloss 32 55 30 26 20 Nilpis 20 69 00 35 00 Nilsthup 36 57 05 24 10 Nimelen 19 56 30 41 00 Nimersdorff 16 54 20 40 00 Nimirow 12 48 30 46 00 Nimleff 36 56 20 25 00 Nimtod 35 56 20 25 00 Ninbuttel 42 54 00 24 10 Nindorp 41, 42, 54 05 24 30 Ning 22 57 00 26 00 Ning Herret 37 56 05 24 40 Nioteczynce 12 49 00 45 00 Nipor fl. 16 54 40 40 00 Nirasneit 26 66 00 353 00 Nis fl. 22 57 00 29 00 Nisen 29 60 40 19 30 Nisinovogorod 6, 7, 8 58 00 64 00   10 A.   Nisiowka 12 50 00 50 00 Niskowce 12 49 30 43 00 Nisschor 40 54 40 23 40 Nissendorp 43 54 15 25 30 Nisshorn 40 54 50 23 30 Nisua fl. 6, 7 63 00 80 00   09 O.   Niter 39 55 05 24 00 Niterskier 39 55 05 24 10 Nivad 30, 32 55 40 27 20 Niuboki 06 56 00 52 00 Niversfelde 43 54 10 25 20 Niurund 21 62 00 34 00 Niurund elf Torso 20 62 00 33 00 Nizyn 12 50 00 50 00 Nobels 17 54 15 36 10 Noble 18 51 30 43 00 Nodager 36, 37 56 20 25 00 Nodebo 32 55 50 27 20 Nodem S. 16 54 40 38 00 Nodoe 29 59 00 20 30 Alte Nogat 17 53 50 36 20     54 00 36 40 Ngat fl. 17 54 05 36 40 Nogatsch fl. 17 54 00 37 00 Nohendorff 17 54 00 36 40 Nokoi Ostrof 20 68 00 58 00 Nolleff 37 56 00 24 40 Nolmaki 20 68 00 36 00 Nolosua 20 66 00 63 00 Nolstrup 36 56 25 25 00 Nolt marck 40 55 00 25 00 Nomendael 20, 25 65 00 25 00 Nommenduel 6, 20, 25 65 00 26 00 Noor 20, 22 59 00 29 00 Noorder Aw 39, 40 54 55 24 00     55 15 24 00 Noorder grunden 30 54 00 23 20 Noorderpyp 40 54 15 23 40 Noordfioerd 20, 25 63 30 24 00   28 61 30 20 00 Noord gulen 28 61 30 19 30 De Noordhoeckvan Stadt 28 62 00 19 30 Noordholm 25 58 00 23 00 Noordlegen 27 64 40 25 00 Noors 36 56 55 23 00 Nort Caep 6, 7, 20 71 00 42 00 Noorthoeck 25 62 00 19 00 Noorthorn 27 63 40 25 00 Noort Jutland 20 56 &c 23 00   30, 35 56 40 23 40 Nortkyn 7, 20 71 00 44 00 Noort See 20 56 00 19 00   25 59 00 23 00 Noorwyck 28 60 00 20 00 Noosma reca 09 B.   Noothaven 28 60 00 20 00   30 54 20 24 40 Nor 36, 37 56 30 24 30   37 55 25 22 40     55 50 23 40 Nora 20, 22 59 00 32 00   23, 24 59 20 31 30 Noragger 36, 37 56 25 22 30   36 56 25 25 00 Norala 20, 21 61 00 33 00 Noraerberg 18 54 00 39 00 Jorajervi 20, 21 62 30 50 00 Noraskog 20 59 00 31 00 Nor Burkin 24 60 00 31 40 Norbekitten 16 54 20 39 30 Norberg 36 56 25 24 20 Norborch 35 55 00 24 40 Norborck 37 55 50 22 40 Norborg 30 55 40 23 00 Norbuy 40 54 35 25 10 Norby 22 58 00 31 00   30 56 00 25 00   31, 32 55 30 29 30   40 54 25 24 40 Nordama 31 56 10 28 40 Nordballe 38 55 05 24 30   39 55 05 24 30 Nordballing 36 55 25 24 30 Nordborck 35 55 40 23 00 Nordbrarup 38, 40 54 40 24 50 Nordbull 40 54 45 23 40 Nordby 36 56 50 22 40 Nordde 44 53 55 24 10 Norddyck 41 54 15 23 40 Nordeburg 14, 16 54 20 39 00 Norden 20 53 00 22 00 Nordenaw 17 54 05 36 30 Norderarm 38 55 15 24 00 Norder Aw 38 54 45 24 40     45 55 24 00 Norderborg 30, 34 55 00 24 40 Norderford 01 65 00 337 00 Nordfiord 01 67 30 348 00 Nordernye 20 53 00 21 00 Norderup 32 55 20 27 00     55 30 26 20 Norderwyck 29 58 40 25 30 Nordfiord 26 67 30 351 00 Nordfoelen 20 70 00 34 00 Nordhatstede 42 54 10 24 00 Nordhaven 39 55 05 23 20 Nordhordland 29 60 40 20 00 Nordhurss 39 54 55 23 50 Nordlendingafior∣dung 27 67 00 356 &c Nordmaling 6, 21 63 30 35 00 Nordmatig 20 63 00 35 00 Nordorp 42 53 55 24 00 Nordoug 38 54 30 23 30 Nordsec 20 59 00 23 00 Nordsio 26 67 30 349 00 Nordsoevand 29 59 20 23 00 Nordtorp 41, 42 54 10 24 40 Nord Vram 31 55 50 29 20 Nordwollum 39 55 05 23 50 Noreberg 22 59 00 32 00   23, 24 59 50 32 20 Norenga reca en Labano 09 F.   Norfior 36, 37 56 20 22 3 Norgaard 33 54 45 26 5 Nor Haesle 31 55 25 28 1 Norhafen 40 54 35 25 1 Orhald Herret 36 56 30 24 3 Nor Herret 36 56 50 23 0 Nor Herritzting 37 55 50 22 Norholm 29 58 00 22 3   37 55 40 23 Noricia 6, 20, 22 59 00 31 0 Nor Jorkin 24 60 00 30 4 Noriusse So. 36 56 55 24 0 Norkar 38 54 55 24 0 Norklit 36, 37 56 20 22 3   37 56 15 22 Norkoping 6, 20, 22 58 00 32 0 Norland Herret 37 56 30 24 3 Norlund 30 56 20 24 2   33 54 50 26 3   35, 36 56 40 24 2 Norlyng Herret 36, 37 56 25 24 0 Normer 06 63 00 23 0   25 63 30 24 0 Normer Hitteren 27 63 20 23 0 Normstede 38, 39 55 10 23 5 Nor Noren lacus 24 60 10 30 4 Noroyk 19 57 00 35 0 Noore 20, 22 60 00 31 0   19, 21, 22 69 30 35 0   23 59 40 35 3     60 00 31 3   30, 32 55 00 22 0 Norre Asbo Herrit 31 56 05 28 2 Norre Barkie 24 60 10 31 4 Norreby 31 55 25 28 4 Norre Herret 33 54 50 26 2     54 55 26 5 Norre Jerloss 32 55 40 26 2 Norre Ringso 31 55 45 28 5 Norrerum 31 55 50 28 5 Norre Udden 20 62 00 19 0 Norre Udden of Stadt 25 62 00 10 00 Norring 37 56 10 24 4     56 15 24 50 Norsholm 20, 22 58 00 31 0 Norsmund 37 56 00 24 5 Nor So 36, 37 56 30 23 2 Norsnee 37 55 55 23 5 Nort Bierte 39 55 30 24 3 Nortborg 38, 39, 40 55 00 24 4 Nortby 39 55 20 23 2 Nortgul 25 60 30 20 0 Northachstede 38, 41 54 10 24 0 North Cape 01 71 50 40 00 North Kin 01 71 40 42 0 Northolt 39 55 05 24 3 Northusen 41, 42 53 55 23 4 Nortmarsch 38, 40, 41 54 35 23 40 Nortorp 42 54 00 24 00 Nortough 40, 41 54 30 23 10 Nortrandres 36 56 55 24 30 Nortsee 38, 41 54 20 24 40 Nortstupel 38, 40 54 25 24 20 Nortstrand 41, 42 54 30 23 40 Nortued 36 57 20 24 50 Nortvedlille 36 57 20 24 50 Norup 37 55 40 23 40 Noryk 22 57 00 35 00 Norwalleso 31 55 25 29 10 Norwegia 6, 20 61 00 22 00 Norwynn 37 56 00 23 10 Norysie 31 56 15 29 00 Nos fl. 22 58 00 28 00 Nose 41 53 35 25 20 Nosee 44 53 40 25 20 Nosokowka R.Y.O. 12 47 00 51 00   13 P.   Nosowitz 16 53 20 37 00 Nosten 19, 22 58 30 35 00 Nosuskr 12 48 30 47 00 Notaugar 21 61 30 34 00 Noteborg 06 59 00 49 00 P. Notec fl. G. Die Netre 15 52 50 33 00     53 00 34 20 Notesius fl. sive No∣tez 14 52 40 34 00 Notfeld 38 54 35 24 50 Notteborgh 20, 21 59 30 49 00 Notteruy 31 55 45 28 10 Notting 36 56 50 23 50 Nottingham I. 01 64 00 287 30 Nottmark 39 54 55 24 50 Norzendorff 16 54 00 37 00 Nova 6, 7, 8 56 00 58 00 Nova Britnmia 01 57 00 290 00 Nova reca scu fl. 08 54 00 58 00 Nova menia 06, 8, 11 48 00 53 00 Nova Russa 6, 20 57 00 50 00 Nova Slso 6, 7 62 00 71 00 Novavel 16, 20 54 00 41 00 Nova Zenabla 01 69 30 71 00 Nouchar reca 08 53 00 55 00 Noveczelee 12 49 00 46 00 Novekoicepole im Qucze 12 48 00 47 00 Novenmiasko 14 52 40 38 00 Novemiaslecko 19 56 00 40 00 Novcistesko 19 55 30 42 00
Novemiasto 14 49 00 39 00 Novidwor 14 54 00 42 00 Novigrod 14, 18 52 40 39 00 Novogorod Weliki 6, 20 58 00 51 00 Novogrod 11 52 00 48 00 Novogrod Severski 06 51 00 50 00 Novolock 20 63 00 63 00 Nousis 21 60 30 39 00 Noutulax 6, 20, 21 62 00 50 00 Novum Mare 01 54 00 283 00 Nowasily 6, 8 53 00 57 00 Nowawiess 15 52 00 33 00     53 00 34 00 Nowegrolla 12 50 00 43 00 Nowemiasteczko 18 55 30 41 00 . Nowemiasto G. Newstadt 15 51 50 34 40 Novitrag 14 49 20 37 00 Nowodwor 18 52 00 39 00 Nowogrod 12 48 00 46 00 Nowogrodek 18, 20 53 00 43 00 Nowy 12 48 00 52 00 Nowydwoe 18 52 30 42 00 Nowydwor 18 53 30 42 00 Nowy Potok 12 48 00 51 00 Noxinscoy 01 66 10 87 00 Nonow 14 52 00 37 00 Nbe 36 56 50 24 00 Nbel 30, 34 54 40 24 20   38, 40, 41 55 20 24 20 N 38, 40, 41 54 35 24 40 Nborg 32 55 20 25 40 Nchell 41, 43 54 10 25 30 Nco 19 59 00 40 00 andt van Numet 20, 30, 35 56 00 22 20 Nmmendal 22, 25, 29 59 30 24 00 ax 20 64 00 59 00 r 06 52 00 41 00   18 52 00 40 00 rnyerf 20, 21 60 00 42 00 ze fl. 18 52 00 41 00 berg 16 53 40 38 30 ssemarck 22, 25 59 00 26 00 sterup 37, 38, 39 55 15 24 10 merk 34 55 00 24 50 shel 30 53 40 25 00 el 41, 42 54 00 24 00 sehow 41, 43, 44 53 50 25 00 zen 41, 42, 44 53 50 24 40 44 53 50 24 20 al 30, 31 55 30 30 00 be 31 55 45 28 30 bbole 31 55 &c 29 &c ll 38 54 45 23 50 bolle 31 55 50 28 20 boll Steinberg 38 54 45 24 50 borg 20 55 00 25 00   30, 34, 35 55 20 25 30 Nybro 37 55 40 22 50 Nbu 20 54 00 23 00 Nyby 20, 21 60 30 43 00   31 55 45 28 50 Nyding 31 56 10 28 00 Nyebroo 31 55 25 29 30 Nyekopparberget 24 59 40 31 00 Nyenhusen 19 57 30 45 00 Nyester fl. 11 47 00 47 00 Nygaard 37 55 30 23 40 Nygal 31 55 35 29 30 Nyhoff 19, 20 58 30 42 00 Nyhole 31 55 40 28 20 Nykarky 06 60 00 38 00 Nykarleby 20, 21 63 00 39 00 Nykberg 37 56 15 22 30 Nykiobing 20, 22 55 00 26 00   36 56 45 23 10 Nikirk 37 55 25 23 00     55 50 23 50 Nykobing 20 56 00 23 00 Nykoping 6, 20 58 00 32 00   30 54 40 27 00 Nykopung 22, 23 58 30 33 30 Nykirky 21 60 30 38 00 Nylandia 6, 20, 21 60 00 41 00 Nylose 6, 20, 22 57 30 26 00 Nym 37 55 55 24 10 Nymol 31 55 30 28 50   36, 37 56 20 22 50 Nypsaa 38 55 15 23 40 Nyrup 36 56 50 24 10 Nysker 19, 20, 21 59 00 38 00 Nyslax 20, 21 64 00 43 00 Nyslot 06 58 00 46 00     62 00 47 00   20, 21 61 00 47 00 Nysocha 20 59 00 28 00 Nysochn 20 58 00 31 00   22 60 00 28 00   24, 25 60 20 29 00 Nysogen 37 56 05 22 40 Nysshorn 39 55 20 23 30 Nysted 30, 33 54 40 26 40 Nystrup 36 56 55 22 50 O   OAlmoreka 12 48 00 46 00 Ob al Oby R. 01 70 00 87 00 Obb reca 06 68 00 92 00   07 70 00 92 00 Obbendorp 38, 42, 43 54 15 25 00 Obdora 6, 7 67 00 84 00 Obening 38, 39 55 05 24 10 Oberad 16 54 40 38 00 Oberpalen 19, 20 58 30 43 00 Obersidne 15 51 50 32 40 Oberszitz 14 52 20 33 00 Obidow lacus 11 47 00 47 00 Obiezerse 15 52 30 34 00 Obikier 38, 39 55 15 23 50 Obliczica 12 46 00 46 00 Obneoczowo 12 50 30 51 00 Obodena 12 48 30 46 00 Obola fl. 18, 20 55 30 47 00 Obola lacus 18 56 00 47 00 Obolce 18 54 30 48 00 Oboneeschi petia 6, 20 58 &c 52 00 Oborniki 14, 15 52 20 33 00 Obra 14 51 40 34 00 Obra fl. 14, 15 51 40 33 00 Obrein 14 50 20 36 00 Obrestadreff 6, 20, 25, 29 58 00 20 00 Obrzicko 15 52 30 33 20 Obslo 6, 20, 22 59 00 25 00 Obtorowo 14 52 20 33 00 Oby 17 54 20 36 10   20, 30, 35 56 40 24 20 Oby fl. 6, 7 62 00 96 00 Occa fl. 6, 8 52 00 56 00     55 00 61 00 Oceanus Deucaledo∣nius 26 64 00 351 &c Ochemo 09 K.   Ochenwerder 41 53 25 24 50 P. Ochla G. War∣tenberg 15 51 40 32 40 Ochseuwerder 44 53 25 24 50 Ockla 28 59 30 20 00 Ockle 28 59 30 20 00 Ocklohn 38 54 40 23 50   30 54 40 23 50 Ockwordn 41 53 50 23 50 O Closter 30 56 40 24 20 Ocraina 06 52 00 59 00 Ocrzka 14 51 20 39 00 Ocsenes fl. 08 50 00 71 00 Ocsmatow 12 48 30 48 00 Ocul S. 16 53 40 38 00 Oczakow olim D. Zi∣arcrimenda 12 46 30 49 00   18 52 00 51 00   13 R.   Oczuca 18, 20 53 30 46 00 Odaliunge 30, 31 56 00 28 20 Odby 30, 32 55 40 26 00   36 56 35 22 50 Odden 27 64 00 23 00   30, 35, 36 57 20 24 20 Odder 37 55 55 24 40 Odderude 41, 42 54 10 24 00 Oddesandt 40 54 40 23 20 Oddo 26 65 00 357 00 Odeesse fuinen 06 55 00 25 00 Ode Hadstrup 32 55 30 27 00 Odenbull 38, 48 54 30 24 00 Odenpo 19 57 30 44 00 Odensee 20, 30, 34, 35 55 25 25 00 Odensholm 19, 20, 21 59 00 40 00 Oder 14 49 20 34 00   20 52 00 30 00 Oder fl. 14 50 00 34 00   15 51 20 33 20 Oderup 36 56 45 23 10 Oderwart 42 53 50 23 50 Odh 20 51 00 28 00   22 57 30 28 00 Odne 20 60 00 24 00   25, 28 60 30 23 00 Odnek 29 60 20 24 00 Odoe 20, 22 56 30 33 00 Odojum 11 53 00 53 00 Odojum lacus 11 52 00 54 00 Odolanaw 14 51 20 34 00 Odoof 06 54 00 58 00   08 54 00 57 00 Odorp 35 56 20 24 00 Odruczko 18 54 00 48 00   20 53 00 47 00 Odsgaard 36, 37 56 20 24 00 Odsted 37 55 30 24 10   39 55 35 23 50 Odsunt 35 56 20 23 00 Odtz Herrit 32 55 50 26 20 Odum 37 56 15 24 40 Odwalla 22, 25 58 00 26 00 Odwalle 20 58 00 26 00 Odys 37 55 25 23 50   38, 39 55 20 24 20 Odzielko 14 53 40 42 00 Odzieowis 12 49 30 44 00 De Oe 27 63 20 23 00 Oelandia 6, 20, 22 56 00 33 00 S. Oelengat 28 62 00 20 30 Oelesond 28 60 30 19 30 Oelevos 06 66 00 27 00 Oelwyck 27 64 20 26 00 Oere 27 63 00 21 00 Oerilandt 27 64 40 26 00 Oers 36, 37 56 25 22 40 Oesbuy 39 55 15 24 40 Oesel 6, 19 58 00 39 00 Oesen 27 64 40 27 00 Oestergard 22 57 30 35 00 Oesterrod 27 64 40 26 00 Oestost 33 54 45 26 40 Oetevos 25 66 00 27 00 Offenbuttel 41, 42 54 10 24 10 Offendalen 25 60 30 22 00 Ossendorp 41, 43 53 54 25 30 Offenseite 41, 44 53 54 25 30 Offenseite 41, 44 53 50 24 20 Offeraal 28 60 00 23 00 Offerlund 37 55 55 23 40 Offre Ullero 22, 24 59 35 29 00 Offuerdageren 24 59 40 31 40 Offuer Sillen 24 60 10 31 20 Offuer Taenger 24 61 00 32 20 Ofica 11 47 00 47 00 Ogaard 30 56 20 24 20 Ogard 35 56 20 24 40 Ogeby 33 54 45 28 30 Ogne 20 58 00 21 00   29 59 00 20 30 Ogne K. 29 58 20 20 30 Ograina 08 52 00 58 00 Ogrodzieniecz 14 50 00 36 00 Ohe 30, 38, 40, 42 54 40 25 10   44 53 40 24 40 Oholow 13 A.   Ohoros Cieszow 12 50 00 47 00 Ohr 16 54 00 36 00 Ohrfeldt 40 54 45 25 00 Ohrfellde 38 54 40 25 00 Ohulow 12 50 00 49 00 Oiestadsk 29 58 20 22 30 Oirup 31 55 30 29 10 Oitmitsa 6, 7 66 00 69 00 Okena 12 48 30 43 00 Okenapole 12 48 00 46 00 Okka fl. 11 53 00 51 00     55 00 56 00 Okkima fl. 11 54 00 57 00 Okiebo 20, 24 61 00 33 40 Okmiana 18 55 30 39 00 Okmiany 18, 19, 20 56 00 40 00 Okuniow 18 51 30 39 00 Olo fl. 14 50 40 34 00 Olaisfior 26 67 30 356 00 Olandt 36 56 50 22 50   28, 40, 41 54 40 23 40 Olanow 12 49 30 46 00 Olasnesta 12 46 30 48 00 Olba lacus 06 52 00 47 00 Olbiey 18 55 00 44 00 Olby 36, 37 56 30 23 00 Olkbyl 34 54 50 24 50 Olde 25 61 00 19 00 Olde Bennebeck 40, 41 54 25 24 10 Oldefiel 42 54 15 23 40 Oldegumb 41, 44 53 25 25 00 Olde Goers 43 53 55 25 00 Oldehovet 38, 39 55 25 24 50 Oldeihan 41, 42 54 00 24 20 Oldekatbeck 42 54 10 24 30 Oldelandt 41 53 30 24 30 Oldelied 28 59 30 20 00 Oldenborg 20, 30 54 00 25 40   41, 43 54 15 25 40 Oie Graffschafft 44 53 30 24 50 Oldenborg 41 53 30 23 00 Oldenbuttel 42 54 10 24 10 41, 42 54 00 24 10   4354 20 25 50 44 53 35 24 50 Oldenhoven 38, 40 54 25 25 00 Oldenkercken 41, 44 53 35 24 10 Oldenklucken 15 52 50 32 20 Oldenswort 38, 40, 41 54 25 24 00 Oldenwerder 44 53 30 24 30 Oldenworden 41, 42 54 10 23 50 Olderworderhaven 42 54 10 23 40 Olderburg 14 49 40 35 00 Olderup 38, 40 54 30 24 10 Oldersbeck 40 54 25 24 20 Oldersond 28 62 00 19 00 Oldeslo 20, 30, 41 53 40 25 00   42, 44 53 56 25 10 Oldesum 38, 40 54 45 23 30 Oldesund 20, 25 61 00 19 00 Oldo 20 61 00 18 00 Oldste 30, 35 55 40 24 20 Oldsted 37 55 45 24 20 Oldt Nackesandt 39 55 10 23 20 Ole 37 55 30 23 00 Olen 42 53 55 23 50 Olescho 11 55 00 51 00 Olesco 08 55 00 56 00 Olesezenay R. 12 49 00 52 00 Olesicze 14 49 20 40 00 Olesk 18 50 00 43 00 Olesko 6, 20 54 00 56 00 Olesond 25 60 00 20 00 Oletzko 14, 16 54 00 40 00
Oletzko fl. 16 53 40 40 30 Olevad 37 55 30 23 00 Olewieg 37, 38, 39 55 20 24 50 Olexinice 12 49 30 43 00 Olex 12 49 30 43 00 Olgodkirk 37 55 45 23 10 Olha fl. 18 52 30 74 00 Olha lacus 18 53 00 47 00 Oliesion lacus 24 59 30 31 20 Oligaard 36 56 55 23 50 Olim 30 56 40 23 20 Olimgejokiflodt 20 67 00 45 00 Olingso 33 54 45 26 30 Olintum 38 54 45 24 00 Olis 20, 30, 35 56 00 24 40 Olita Monast. 18 54 00 41 00 Oliva 16, 17 54 25 36 10 Olke 31 55 55 27 50 Olkowiez 12 48 30 48 00 Olmerstofft 40 54 50 24 20 Olmuts 14 49 40 20 00 Olobok 14 51 40 34 00 Olodenas 12 48 30 46 00 Oloki 13 E.   Olontza 6, 7, 21 61 00 51 00 Oloschou 34 55 15 24 40 Olosmuling 28 61 30 19 00 Olpeniss 38 54 35 25 10 Olscoygorod 01 69 10 86 00 Olsdorp 41, 42, 44 53 55 24 20 Olseborg 41, 44 53 50 24 40 Olsed 31 55 50 29 30 Olsemagle 32 55 30 27 00 Olsiady 18, 19 55 30 40 00 Olsiany olim Ducatus 18 54 00 43 00 Olsio 22 07 00 28 00   30, 31 55 45 29 40 Olslyck 32 55 40 27 00 Olssa 14 51 00 34 00 Olssanka 11 50 00 46 00   18 49 30 47 00 Olsstyn 18 53 30 38 00 Olst 36, 37 56 20 24 40 Olsted 32 55 50 27 00 Olstede 44 53 40 24 50 Olsten K. 6, 20, 25 62 00 19 00 Olsto 20 56 00 28 00 Olstrup 32, 33 55 10 26 40   37 56 05 23 00   39 55 00 24 00 Olstruy 31 55 50 27 50     56 00 29 00 Olstyn 14 50 20 36 00 Olszank R. 12 49 00 49 00 Olszance 12 48 30 49 00 Olthof 30, 35 54 40 23 40 Oltoruy 31 55 50 28 10 Oltwa 12 48 30 51 00 Oltwa R. 12 48 30 52 00 Oltwa Olszna 12 48 30 52 00 Oludofce 12 49 00 46 00 Olusbuy 39 55 20 25 00 Olyka 6, 12, 18 50 30 44 00 Omarck 20, 22, 25 59 00 27 00 Ombay 6, 7 67 00 53 00 Ombon 29 59 00 21 00 Omcluick fl. 13 H.   Omelowa R. 12 47 00 50 00   13 P.   Omet fl. 16 54 020 39 30 Omezan fl. 16 54 00 38 00 Omiclink 13 H.   Omielnik 12 48 00 51 00 Omli K. 29 58 20 23 00 Omme 30 55 00 26 40   32, 34, 37 55 15 25 50 Ommegang 6, 7 71 00 45 00 Ommel 37 56 05 24 00 Omti 20 58 00 23 00 Omuleff fl. 16 53 00 39 00 Omulski S. 16 53 20 38 00 Onas 19, 20, 21 60 00 43 00 Onazima ozera 09 A.   Ondeland 29 60 40 19 30 Ondojervi 20, 21 65 00 46 00 Ondutness 26 65 30 350 00 Oneat 06 57 00 52 00 Onega 6, 7 63 00 57 00 Onega fl. 20 63 00 57 00 Onega lacus 6, 7, 20 61 00 54 00 Onesta 31 55 55 29 30 Oneza 12 48 30 47 00 Ongwesi 20, 21 63 00 44 00 Oniarp 31 55 40 28 20 Onixty 18 55 00 42 00 Onochova 00 K.   Onozera 09 O.   Onsac 06 53 00 67 00 Onsberg 32 55 50 25 20 Onsebro 22 56 00 27 00 Onse Herit 31 55 50 28 50 Onsgy 07 64 00 77 00 Onsild Herrit 36, 37 56 35 24 30 Oonsill 36, 37 56 30 24 20 Osio 20, 22 56 30 28 00 Osion lacus 24 60 10 30 40 Onsloff 32, 33 54 50 27 00 Onso 22 58 30 29 00 Onsoilscoi 06 62 00 67 00 Onsthea 7, 8 59 00 64 00 Onstinga 06 61 00 67 00 Onsuy 22 57 30 32 00 Onswy 24 59 30 32 20 Oockla 6, 7 63 00 71 00 Oonswakle 31 55 35 28 30 Oor 20 56 00 30 00 Oor aan 24 61 10 31 40 Ooras 31 55 49 24 10 Oorloff 6, 7 60 00 79 00 Oorschitzs fl. 16 53 00 38 30 Oosby 31 55 45 29 00 Oscorca 09 G.   Oostfiord 27 64 20 25 00 Oostgul 20, 25 60 30 20 00 Oostsee Vid. M. Balt, 20 55 00 31 00 Oostvisk 21 60 00 46 00 Oostria Gothia 20, 22 58 00 31 00 Oostroog 09 P.   Oostzee 16 54 40 36 30 L. Opagr. 31 55 35 28 20 S. Opagr 30, 31 55 35 28 20 Opaicypsa fl. 18 50 00 43 00 Opaline 14 52 00 33 00 Opaicow 11 54 00 51 00 Opanasowke 12 49 30 52 00 Oparow 14 52 00 36 00 Opato 14 50 00 37 00 Opatow 14 50 20 39 00 Opdaal 27 63 00 24 00 Opdael 25 63 00 23 00 Open 16 54 00 38 00 Ophnissa 11 47 00 47 00 Opoczinsky 12 49 00 52 00 Opoczno 14 51 00 37 00 Opolifrova 09 I.   Opolinsa 20 59 00 47 00 Opoluko 06 56 00 46 00 Opolzko 20 56 00 47 00 Oporowo 15 52 30 33 20 Oporycza 12 49 30 47 00 Oppaizypsa R. 12 50 30 43 00 Oppelen 14 50 20 34 00 Oppeniss 40 54 40 25 10 Oppensundby 32 55 40 27 00 Oppoleinietz 14, 16 53 00 38 30 Opsa 18 55 00 44 00 Opflo 25 60 00 26 00   25, 29 59 20 25 00 Opslofiord 29 59 00 24 30 Opslostift 29 59 20 22 30 Opslostifthus 20 59 00 22 00 Opus Danorum 41 54 30 24 10 Opuskorborg 38 54 25 24 30 Or 12 46 00 51 00 Oraael 20 61 00 18 00 Orajoki 19 57 30 41 00 Oran 21 63 00 35 00 Olange Isles 01 77 00 93 00 Oratruy 31 56 10 29 10 Orbow 12 50 30 50 00 Orbuy 39 55 15 24 40 Orby 22 57 00 28 00   22, 23 60 00 34 00   30 55 20 26 00   31, 32 55 00 27 50 Orchow 14 51 20 41 00 Orchowo 18 51 00 42 00 Orczakow 11 47 00 48 00 Orczica 12 49 00 50 00 Orderup 39 55 10 24 00 Ordestrup 36 56 45 24 20 Ording 38, 40, 41 54 20 23 40 Ordowa 06 55 00 53 00 Ordzino 15 52 30 33 20 Orebro 22, 23, 24 59 00 31 40 Oreby 33 54 45 26 50 Oreda 20 57 00 29 00   22 57 00 29 00 Oredatsvand 29 58 20 21 00 Orede 36 53 40 25 00 Oregrund 19, 20, 21, 22 60 00 35 00 Orel 6, 11 49 00 48 00 Orel fl. 11 49 00 50 00   13 I.   Orenshovet 38 54 35 24 10 Oresa fl. 18 52 00 46 00 Oresca 21 59 30 49 00 Oreshoff 31 55 35 29 10 Oresion 22 57 00 28 00 Oreskowa 12 48 00 46 00 Oreslo 35 55 40 24 40 Oresto 22 57 00 28 00 Oret 24 61 10 31 40 Orevand 29 58 20 22 00 Orewa 18 54 00 47 00 Orezakow 06 47 00 49 00 Orezyk R. 12 48 30 53 00 Orgard 34, 37 55 30 24 40 Orhiwesi 21 62 00 42 00 Oridis fl. 20 58 00 49 00 Orie 20 70 00 32 00 Orinesi 20 62 00 47 00 Oring 35 56 20 23 00   41, 42, 44 53 50 24 50 Oriow 12 47 00 47 00 Orivefi 21 62 30 48 00 Orkewo 12 51 00 42 00 Orkliunge 30, 31 56 00 28 20 Orkowo 15 52 10 34 20 Orlawsha 12 48 00 47 00 Orleetz 09 Q.   Orley 16 53 20 38 00 Orlince 12, 18 50 00 43 00 Orlinsko P. 20 58 00 48 00 Orliow 12 48 30 49 00 Orlitza reca 08 53 00 55 00 Orloff 16 54 00 36 30   17 54 10 36 40 C. Orlogonas 7, 20 67 00 61 00 E. Orlogonas 06 67 00 61 00 Orlongen 22 58 00 32 00 Orly 18 52 00 44 00 Ormekier 31 56 00 27 30 Ormeo 19, 20 59 00 40 00 Ormes 25 59 30 26 00 Ormetz 22 59 00 26 00 Ormholt 36 57 10 24 30 Ormoliniecz 12 49 00 45 00 Orm S. Katan 20, 21 61 00 37 00 Ornael 06 61 00 18 00   25 61 30 19 00 Ornel 28 61 30 19 00 Ornon 19 58 30 35 00 Ornum 39 55 00 24 40 Oro 32 55 40 26 40 Orom 31 55 30 29 30 Orowa 14 49 00 36 00 Orre 25, 29, 37 58 20 20 00 Orreholmen 22 57 30 29 00 Orrevand 29 58 20 20 30 Orrit 37 56 10 23 20 Orrit Moll 37 56 10 23 20 Orsa 6, 18 54 00 48 00   20, 24 61 00 30 00 Orse 31 55 25 28 50 Orsloff 30, 32 55 &c 27 00     55 &c 26 20 Orslosa 22 58 00 28 00 Orslum 36 56 40 24 00 Orsmarck 33 54 50 26 40 Orssa 41, 42 54 05 24 10 Orsted 32 55 30 27 00   36, 37 56 25 24 50   38, 39 54 30 24 20 Orstede Treya 40 54 30 24 20 Orszanck fl. 18 54 30 48 00 Ortelssberg 18 53 30 39 00 Ortelsburg 14, 16 53 20 30 00 Ortenther Lippeinen 16 54 40 38 00 Orth 43 54 00 25 10 Ortheid 17 54 20 36 30 Orting 36 56 35 23 20   37 55 55 24 40 Ortostad 31 55 40 28 30 Orum 30 56 20 23 00   30, 35 56 40 24 40   36 56 &c 24 &c     57 00 24 30   37 55 40 24 20 Orutrup 36 56 45 22 50 Osaw 41 54 00 24 20 Osb 31 55 35 28 20 Osby 30 55 40 28 40   31 55 45 29 00 Oschbuttel 42 54 00 24 30 Oschetzko 16 53 00 37 00 Oscol 6, 8 52 00 59 00 Oscol reca 08 52 00 59 00 Oscul 12 49 30 55 00 Oscul R. 12 49 30 55 00 Osdorp 41, 44 53 35 24 30   42 54 05 24 10 Osdoster 30 57 00 27 20 Osebro 32 55 50 26 40 Osel 01 62 10 64 30 Osenburg 20 52 00 23 00 Osera 06 58 00 53 00   20 58 00 52 00 P. Osieczna & G. Storchnest 15 51 40 33 40 Osiek 18 50 00 39 00 Osieka Polska 15 51 50 33 40 Osihorowka fl. 13 M.   Osihozowka R. 12 47 00 52 00 Osinborodk 18 55 00 45 00 Osinova 09 G. & I   Osinsco 20 57 00 53 00 Osinsko 06 57 00 53 00 Osivova 06 60 00 65 00 Oskala 6, 18 56 00 47 00   20 55 00 50 00 Oskatczyczuca fl. 18 55 30 47 00 Oskelt 22, 25 58 30 26 00 Osl 37 56 20 24 20 Oslapiopopost 07 62 00 68 00 Osle 36 56 30 23 40 Oslebok 29 57 40 22 00 Osle Closter 36, 37 56 30 23 40 Osloe 34 55 20 24 50 Oslonr Ins. 10 D.   Oslors 06 71 00 101 00 Oslum Kirmen 06 48 00 49 00 Osmiana 20 54 00 43 00   20 58 00 34 00 Osmo 22, 23 58 40 34 30 Osmova Volost 09 O.   Osorca 6, 7 60 00 65 00 Osoveets 09 E.   Osowa Szin 15 51 40 33 20 Osowo 15 52 30 33 40 Osre 20 59 00 29 00 Ossa 16 53 20 36 20
Ossa fl. 16 53 20 37 00 K. Ossa fl. 16 53 20 36 30 Ossaw 42, 44 54 00 24 20 Ossbuy 37 55 15 24 10 Osby 38 55 15 24 40 Oe 19 58 00 43 00   20 58 00 42 00   37 55 35 23 10 Oen S. 16 53 40 37 00 Oenberg 30 55 00 25 00 Oendorp 34 55 15 25 00   34 55 15 25 30 Oendrup 32 55 20 25 40 Oko Ins. 10 B.   I ssino 10 F.   Omiana 18 54 00 43 00 Oolm 14 50 00 38 00 Oyck 14 50 00 38 00 Ot 36 56 40 23 00 Oamkirmen 11 48 00 49 00   18 53 30 53 00 Oapie 12 48 30 51 00 Oapio pegost 06 62 00 69 00 Oby 30, 34 55 00 24 20   31 56 00 27 50 Oe 35 56 00 24 20 Oeaw 40 54 35 24 10 O Egistborg 32 55 00 27 00 Oen 22, 25 59 30 27 00 Oenbroch 41 53 50 23 30 Oendalen 28 60 30 22 00 Oendalsvand 29 60 00 22 30 Oenfeldt 36 54 20 24 00   38, 40 54 30 24 20   41, 42 54 20 24 30 Oenou 30 54 40 24 20 Oenow 38, 40 54 40 24 20 Oer 15 52 20 32 00   37 56 20 24 50 Oerude 30 54 20 24 20   41 54 20 24 30 Oer Alling 36 56 20 24 50 erborstel 42 54 15 24 00 Oerbuy 38, 39 55 20 24 10   40 54 50 24 10 erby 22, 23 60 00 35 00   30, 31 55 40 29 10   39 54 55 23 50     55 05 23 30   40 54 25 24 50 erdalarna 24 61 10 31 00 eregens 34 55 05 25 20     55 35 25 00 erfung 38, 40 54 485 23 20     54 55 23 30 erfelt 41 54 20 23 50 ersioerd 28 60 30 20 00 ergaard 36 56 45 23 00   37 55 50 23 00 ergab 29 57 40 22 30 Oergard 36 56 40 23 30 Oergarde 40 54 45 25 00 Oergeill 40 54 50 24 30 Oer Haresdste 31 55 30 29 40 Othassng 36 56 55 24 40 Oterhelle 44 53 50 24 10 Oerhever 38, 40 54 25 23 50 Oerhovet 43 54 15 25 50 Oerholm 38, 40 55 00 25 00 Osterhorn 41, 44 53 50 24 20     53 50 24 30 Osterild 36 56 55 23 10 Osterlinneth 39 55 15 24 00 Ostermoer 41 53 55 23 50     54 20 24 20   42 53 55 23 50 Ostermoll 36, 37 56 25 22 40   42 54 05 24 20 Osterobeling 38 55 10 23 50 Osteroen 25 60 30 20 00   28 60 30 20 30   29 60 20 20 30 Osteron 20, 21 65 00 39 00 Osterrade 41, 42 54 10 24 10     54 20 24 40 Osterrod 16 53 40 37 30   20 53 00 37 00 Oster Ronfelt 42 54 15 24 30 Ostersang 39 54 55 23 20     54 55 23 30 Ostersnee 37 55 45 24 00 Osterstede 40, 42 54 05 24 20 Osterstide 41 54 05 24 20 Osterulsloff 33 54 40 26 50 Osterwein 16 53 20 37 30 Osterwolt 40 54 35 23 40   41 54 10 24 00 Osterwyck 16 53 20 37 30   17 54 10 36 20 Osteryl 30, 35 56 40 23 00 Ost Espinge 31 55 45 29 10 Ostgul 28 60 30 20 30 Ostgulen 29 60 40 20 00 Ostium Bogi 18 52 30 52 00 Ost Kiel 25 58 30 23 00 Ostloft 35 56 40 23 00 Ostorf 07 72 00 101 00 Ostorp 34 55 30 25 00 Ostorpgard 34 55 10 25 10     55 30 25 00 Ostr 36 56 55 22 50 Ostrafiord 20 68 00 28 00 Ostre 19, 22, 23 58 30 35 00 Ostrelundby 31 56 00 28 20 Ostro 12 49 00 48 00 Ostrocoln 16 53 40 40 30 Ostroczyce 18 54 00 45 00 Ostrog 12, 18 50 00 44 00 Ostrogck 12 50 30 46 00 Ostrohe 42 54 15 24 00 Ostroladowicze 18 51 30 48 00 Ostroleka 18 52 30 40 00 Ostrolenka 14 52 40 39 00 Ostrometke 16 53 00 36 00 Ostronie 14 49 20 35 00 Ostrop 39 55 20 24 30 Ostropol 12, 18 49 30 45 00 Ostrovock 14, 15 52 30 33 40 Ostrosina 20 60 00 53 00 Ostrow 6, 20 57 00 47 00   14, 18 52 40 40 00 Ostrowie 18 52 00 40 00     54 30 43 00 Ostrup 36, 37 56 25 25 10 Ostrup Moll 37 56 10 23 20 Ostrnote 12 49 30 46 00 Ostrynna 18 53 30 42 00 Ostez 11 51 00 47 00   18 50 30 48 00 Ostrze 12 50 30 49 00 Ostslag 38, 40 54 20 24 40 Ostvalla 22, 25 59 30 27 00 Osult 31 56 15 28 40 Osvonka 12 48 00 46 00 Oswerlow 30, 31 45 20 28 40 Oszany D. 12 47 30 49 00 Oszmiana fl. 18 54 00 43 00 Otawa R. 12 49 30 51 00 Otestrup 30, 32 55 20 26 20 Otina 06 66 00 68 00 Otiogorie 09 R.   Otma 07 66 00 68 00 Otorowo 15 52 20 33 20 Ottemarsch 44 53 30 24 30 Ottenby 22 56 00 33 00 Ottenby Konungz 20 56 00 33 00 Ottensen 41, 44 53 30 24 30 Otterdalen 29 58 20 22 00 Otterdorp 20 53 00 23 00 Otterendorp 30 53 40 23 20 Otterness 29 58 0 22 00 Ottersbul 39 55 05 23 40 Ottersloff 32, 33 54 50 26 20 Ottesund 36 56 35 22 50 Ottingaard 37 56 00 24 40 Ottonia 34 55 25 25 00 Otzis 21 61 30 49 00 Ovansio 24 60 30 33 20 Oubeck 39 55 00 24 30 Ouchna Woloch 06 64 00 57 00   7, 20 64 00 56 00 Oucht Ostroog 09 R.   Oucht Ozera 09 O.   Oucze 12 45 00 47 00 Oucze berkat 12 48 00 47 00 Oud 30 55 20 28 40   31 55 35 29 00 Oudendorp 43 53 55 25 30 Oudenitza 06 62 00 65 00   09 M.   Ouds Closter 31 55 35 29 00 Ouduowf 12 49 30 46 00 Ovelcor 06 56 00 52 00 Ouelgunen 43 54 05 25 30 Ovelgunne 41 53 20 23 00   44 53 50 24 10 Ovendorp 42 54 05 24 50 Overgat 35 56 20 24 40 Oversee 38, 40 54 40 24 30 Ovestadsk 29 58 00 21 30 Ovisholm 30, 31 55 40 29 00 Oulo 20, 21 65 00 41 00 Culonsaro 21 65 00 40 00 Oulsteen K. 27, 28 62 30 20 00 Ourdema 6, 7 62 00 69 00 Oureavre 32 55 40 27 20 Oureydre 32 55 30 27 20 Ourfum 6, 7 60 00 79 00 Ousac 08 53 00 76 00 Ousbyl 44 53 55 25 00 Ouscia 6, 7 63 00 62 00   09 P.   Ouse R. 01 66 00 80 00 Ouserki 09 P.   Ousgy 06 64 09 77 00 Ousiepsa 09 L.   Ousioofda Monast. 09 L.   Ousiorga 09 M.   Ousiorna Kerck en Rive 09 M.   Ousioumis 09 M.   Ousizoli 6, 7 64 00 73 00 Ouskowria 09 K.   Ousoil 6, 7 62 00 67 00 Ousoilscoy 07 62 00 67 00   09 M.   Ouspinega 09 Q.     20 64 00 62 00 Ousragga 09 O.   Oustanga 6, 7 59 00 64 00 Oustendal 27 63 00 24 00 Ousthea 06 59 00 65 00 Oustinga 07 51 00 67 00 Oustjuga 09 K.   Oustjuga reca 09 G.   Oustonga Kerckdor∣pen River 09 E.   Oust-Zilma 01 66 00 78 00 Ousvacenga dorpin Zir 09 L.   Ouswaanga 09 O.   Ouswagga 6, 7 62 00 65 00   09 M.   Ouswayma 06 65 00 71 00 Ouswuyma 07 63 00 71 00 Outajerfo 20, 21 65 00 42 00 Outrup 36 56 45 23 00   37 55 45 22 40 Outs Mors 09 O.   Ouyma 09 R.   Ouzel R. 12 48 00 52 00 Owdorp 42 54 20 24 30 Owe 36 56 35 24 40 Owenbuttel 42 54 00 23 50 Owendorp 44 53 50 24 10 Owergaard 36 56 35 24 50 Owersted 31 55 30 29 30 Owette 39 55 10 23 50 Owieczek 15 52 40 34 00 Owistosta 31 55 50 27 50 Owrapo 12 51 30 47 00 Ourucze 18 51 00 46 00 Owrueze 06 51 00 46 00 Oxbeck 40 54 35 24 50 Oxbuy 38 55 30 23 10   40 55 00 24 50 Oxefiordsgal 29 58 20 23 30 Oxehalsen 23 59 20 36 00 Oxelyk 37 55 35 22 30 Oxemwath 37, 38, 39 55 15 24 10 Oxendrup 36 57 10 24 00 Oxevalla 22 57 00 28 00 Oxholm 36 56 55 24 00 Oxie 31 55 30 28 20 Oxlund 38 54 45 24 20 Oxside 20 54 00 35 00 Oxye Herrit 31 55 30 28 10 Oya 20, 22 59 00 33 00 Oydnevand 29 58 00 22 00 Oye 20 60 00 23 00   25 60 30 23 00 Oyek 28, 29 60 40 23 30 Oyer 20, 25, 28 61 00 25 00 Oyeso 31 56 00 28 20 Oyest 14 50 20 34 00 Oyma 6, 7 64 00 61 00 Oyske 29 58 40 21 00 Oytin 30 54 00 25 20 Oytkedorp 44 53 40 25 00 Oza 18 53 30 41 00 Ozarince 12 48 30 45 00 Ozaricze 12 50 30 51 00 Ozatow 12 48 30 47 00 Ozem 19 57 30 46 00 Ozera de Olgoy 09 B.   Ozera Ivaniska 09 B.   Ozohowca 18 49 30 44 00 Ozorow 12 49 30 51 00 Ozunicze 18 55 00 44 00 P   Paapszag 28 62 00 20 00 Paaruy 31 56 05 29 30 Pabel 38, 40 54 35 24 20 Pabiola 20 55 00 43 00 Pabitanicze 14 51 20 36 00 Pachlicz fl. 15 52 10 32 40 Pacholm ne 16 53 40 37 00 Pacicze 12 48 30 42 00 Paczysko 12 49 30 49 00 Padana 7, 20, 21 63 00 52 00 Padasioka 20 61 00 43 00 Padasioki 21 61 30 43 00 Padelck 40 54 25 24 10 Padeleck 38 54 25 24 10 Paden 19 58 30 39 00   20 58 00 40 00 Padenstede 41, 42, 44 54 00 24 40 Paderitza 6, 7 68 00 87 00 E. Padesemska 06 64 00 59 00 Padingstede 41 53 50 23 10 Padis 19 59 00 41 00 Padligor 15 51 50 33 00 Pacpkamp 42 54 10 24 40 Paes reca 20 69 00 47 00 Paganess 26 67 30 302 00 Pagansa 06 46 00 89 00 Paggensee 43 53 50 25 10 Paiersvi Tresk 6, 7, 20 66 00 46 00 Paiker 19 57 30 42 00 Pais 19 58 00 43 00 Paislacken 16 54 00 39 00 Pakoscho 14, 20 53 00 35 00 Palaelny 11 46 00 53 00 Palak 30 54 20 24 00 Palankow 12 46 00 48 00 Palastra 6, 8, 11 49 00 56 00 Palbitz 14 54 20 34 00 Palcig 15 51 50 32 40 Palczyki 12 50 30 51 00 Paleegreswe 31 55 25 28 20 Paliminskiroob 06 64 00 57 00
Palinga 09 M.   Palk 20 62 00 49 00 Pallisberg 37 56 10 24 00     56 15 22 40 Palowisa 14 51 40 41 00 Palschaus 17 54 10 36 20 Palschaw 16 54 00 36 30 Palsgard 30, 35, 37 55 45 24 40 Paludes Amarae 8, 11 49 00 66 00 G. Pamer S. 16 53 40 40 00 Pamiatkowo 15 52 20 33 40 Panaria 16 53 40 37 30 Panckaucza 13 C.   Pangajervi 21 63 30 49 00 Pangker 41, 43 54 20 25 20 Pangropoli 6, 11 46 00 54 00 Paniecz 15 51 50 34 00 Panieki 15 51 40 34 20 Panilova 06 64 00 62 00   09 Q.   Panitza 6, 7 63 00 63 00   09 O.   Pansen S. 16 53 40 37 30 Pansieu 06 51 00 74 00 Patsieu Perevolock 6, 8 51 00 74 00 Panstma 06 62 00 68 00 Panterhus 31 55 35 29 10 Pantzina fl. 10 B.   Panum 36 56 45 24 10 Papantzina 10 D.   Paparoma 6, 8, 11 49 00 56 00 Papefioerd 25 59 30 19 00   28 60 00 19 30 Pap I. 01 65 30 04 00 Papei 01 66 00 350 00 Papendorp 41, 44 53 35 25 00 Papenover 44 53 25 24 40 Papenow 42 54 05 24 20 Papey 26 65 30 03 00 Papifiord 26 65 00 02 00 Papinougorod 01 66 10 76 00 Papirmol 44 53 35 25 10 Pappaw 16 53 00 36 00 Pappenhusen 42 54 15 23 50 Paradeis 16 53 40 37 30 Paradis 15 52 10 32 40 New paradys 15 52 00 32 20 Parchaw 43 54 15 25 10 Parchim 20 53 00 27 00 Parchwitz 14 51 00 33 00 Parcow 18 51 00 41 00 Parczow 14 51 40 41 00 Parent 16 54 00 36 30 Parga 21 60 00 39 00 Parionfka 12 48 30 47 00 Paris 06 42 00 46 00   16 54 00 39 00 Parkarre 12 46 30 48 00 Parkingshoff 17 54 15 36 20 Parmino 10 B.   Parniel 19 57 00 41 00 Parnsse 12 49 30 43 00 Parsieche 6, 7 64 00 72 00 Parstruy 30, 31 56 00 28 40     56 15 28 30 Partesbeck 19 58 30 44 00 Paruy 31 55 55 27 50 Parzenczewo 15 51 50 33 40 Pas 16 54 00 39 40 Pascharti 6, 7 60 00 87 00 Paseborg 21 60 00 41 00 Pasiris 8, 11 49 00 52 00 Pass 17 54 05 36 10 Passa reca 20 59 00 53 00 Passade 43 54 20 25 00 Passarg fl. 16 54 00 37 30 Passenheim 16 53 20 38 30 Passerg 16 54 20 37 30 Passerge fl. 14, 18 54 00 37 00 Passewalck 20 52 00 29 00 Passow 43 54 15 25 10 Pastki 12 48 30 50 00 Paswelstruy 31 55 55 27 40 Paswis 06 49 00 52 00 Paterborn 20 51 00 23 00 Pater noster 22, 29, 30 58 00 26 30 Paterswaldt 16 54 20 39 00 Pates T. 20 68 00 33 00 Patiminskoiroob 20 64 00 57 00 Patrixfiord 26 66 30 348 00 Patersort 16 54 20 38 00 Pavere 30 54 00 25 20 Paugajervi 20 63 00 49 00 Pavilova 07 64 00 62 00 Paulick S. 16 53 20 38 00 Paulina 6, 7, 8 59 00 61 00 Pauloof Mon. 6, 7, 8, 20 58 00 61 00 Paulsboel 39 55 05 24 20 Paulskrog 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 20 Paulstrup 37 55 20 23 00 Paustma 07 62 00 68 00 Pautzke 6, 20 54 00 35 00 Pautzkerwick 14 54 40 35 00   16 54 20 36 00 Pawer fl. 16 54 40 39 40 Pawlowo 15 52 30 34 20 Pawolocz 12, 18 49 30 47 00   18 50 00 46 00 Pczyc fl. 18 52 00 46 00 Peays 06 50 00 74 00 Peat Jib 08 50 00 74 00 Pebalg 19 57 00 43 00 Pebiola 19 56 00 43 00 Pechorskoy Zavorot 01 68 30 70 00 Pedersborg 32 55 20 26 40 Peelsma reca 09 B. & F.   Peelsma volost 09 B.   Peem 41, 42, 43 54 05 25 10 Peesaowaten 06 51 00 71 00 Peesken 16 53 40 36 30 Peeskis 8, 20 55 00 57 00 Peeskit 06 55 00 57 00 Peetinscoy Ostroof 09 C.   Peetintsa 09 C.   Poetnitsa 07 59 00 62 00 Peetsenga 09 C. & E.   Peetsenga reca 09 E.   Peetsenscoy Ostroof 09 E.   Peetsorsa 09 I.   Peetvitsa 06 59 00 62 00 Peezawatsca fl. 08 51 00 72 00 Pegaorda 06 62 00 89 00     62 00 90 00 Pegeil 16 53 40 38 00 Pei 12 50 00 43 00 Peimar 19, 21 60 00 40 00 Peine 20 51 00 25 00 Peipus lacus 6, 19, 20 58 00 45 00 Peisern 14 52 00 34 00 Peisida reca 06 70 00 107 00 Peiskretschen 14 50 00 35 00 Peisla 20 66 00 66 00 Peitzschedorff 16 53 40 39 00 Pekestrant 26 66 00 351 00 Pelckitte 16 54 20 38 30 Peldejersi 6, 20 68 00 39 00 Pelicany 18 55 00 43 00 Pelingsker 19, 21 60 00 43 00 Pelingsund 19, 21 60 00 43 00 Pelinosero 20 68 00 56 00 Pelisjoki 20, 21 63 00 48 00 Pelitza 20 66 00 60 00 Pelk 21 62 00 49 00 Pelkene 21 61 30 41 00 Pella 16 54 40 38 00 Pellen 16 54 20 38 00 Pellworm 41 54 30 23 20 Pelterswaldt 16 53 40 36 30 Pelzionkee borlanaika 06 68 00 78 00 C. Pembrock 01 62 10 281 30 Pencum 14 53 00 30 00 Pendoreca 09 O.   Penezaki 12 49 30 48 00 Penitz 43 54 00 25 30 Peniwesi 20, 21 61 30 44 00 Penno 19 60 00 43 00 Pentari 19, 20, 21 59 30 42 00 C. Pentecost 6, 7 66 00 62 00 Pentkowo 15 52 00 34 20 Pentsenga 06 59 00 63 00 Pepeenkina 09 A.   Pepekendorp 43 53 55 25 30 Pepermarck 39, 40 54 50 24 10 Pepersorth 40 54 25 24 30 Pepielany 19 56 00 40 00 Pepoessi 6, 7 64 00 71 00 Peratin 12 49 30 50 00 Perbul 39, 40 54 50 24 20 Percetsca 09 R.   Perczdzir 18 53 30 45 00 Perdchaw 17 54 05 36 30 Perdoel 41, 42, 43 54 05 25 00   12 49 30 49 00   13 C.   Perecop 18 52 00 53 00 Perecopseoia 6, 8 51 00 73 00 Peredmicik 18 50 00 43 00 Perckop 12 51 00 50 00 Peremisl 6, 8 54 00 57 00 Peremogoria 6, 7 62 00 66 00 Peremogorie 09 L.   Pereonowka 12 49 30 48 00 Pereslaf Risanskoi 6, 8 55 00 61 00 Pereslaw 7, 8, 20 56 00 59 00 Peretitsa 6, 20 58 00 48 00 Perholst 28 62 30 21 00 Perichzales 14 51 40 41 00 Perkelskaeren 19, 21 60 00 45 00 Perleberg 20 52 00 27 00 Parmawelik 07 62 00 70 00 Permia 01 63 00 75 00 Pernaw 6, 19, 20 58 00 41 00 Pernaw fl. 19 58 30 42 00 Pernispa 21 59 00 46 00 Perno 20, 21 60 00 43 00 Pernonie 08 50 00 71 00 Persannt fl. 14 53 40 32 00 Persaw 16 54 00 36 30 Person 20, 21 65 30 38 00 Perske 16 54 20 38 00 Persker 20, 21 62 00 37 00 Persse 20 64 00 39 00 Persso 21 63 30 39 00 Perstorp 31 56 10 29 20 Peerstrup 33 54 50 26 30 Perstruy 31 55 45 29 40 Perstun 18 53 00 41 00 Pervovie 06 50 00 70 00 Perwerck 17 54 00 36 40 Perzeiaslow 18 49 30 48 00 Pesnes 22 57 00 33 00 Pestelon 16 53 40 36 30 Petarn S. 16 54 00 38 00 Petenitz 41 53 55 25 40 S. Peter 30, 38, 41 54 20 23 50 Peterow 14 53 40 33 00 Petersdorp 30 54 20 26 00   41, 43 54 15 25 40 Peershagen 16 54 00 36 30 Peterswald 17 53 50 36 30 Peterswalda 15 51 30 32 40 Petexshagen 17 54 10 36 40 Petigori 08 48 00 63 00 Petrikowycze 06 51 00 46 00   18 52 00 46 00 Petrus 6, 20 57 00 45 00 Petscerscoi Sanowot 6, 7 69 00 73 00 Petschissa 10 D.   Pettenitz 43 53 55 25 40 Petterger S. 16 53 40 38 30 Petterkaw 16 53 40 37 00 Pettersdorff 16 54 20 39 00 Petterswald 16 54 00 38 00 Petterwitz 16 53 20 37 00 Petxionke Borlo∣naika 07 68 00 78 00 Petzdorff 16 53 20 38 00 Petzerski mons 10 C.   Petzinka Closter 6, 7, 20 69 00 48 00 Petzora 1, 6, 7 67 00 76 00   10 B.   Petzora al. Pecho∣ra R. 01 68 00 70 00 Petzora reca 6, 7 66 00 79 00 Pevafiord 26 67 00 01 00 Peusterort 16 54 40 38 40 Peute 44 53 30 24 40 Pexama 6, 21 62 00 46 00 Peyne en mohl 44 53 40 24 10 Pezo 6, 8, 11 48 00 59 00 Pezonda 11 64 00 62 00 Pezyc fl. 20 52 00 46 00 Pfaffendorff 16 53 20 36 00 Psars 17 54 05 37 00 Pfeil 16 54 00 37 00 Pfeilhaus 17 54 05 37 00 Pferde Kamp 17 54 15 36 40 Phasis 06 45 00 64 00 Philipow 18 54 00 40 00 Philippopoli 06 43 00 41 00 C. Philips 01 62 00 267 00 Philips Stadt 22 59 00 30 00 Phobicz 14 51 40 36 00 Phorebisseza 18 49 30 46 00 Piaczesne 12 48 30 46 00 Piall, vel Geel 16 53 20 40 00 Piasecko 12 49 30 48 00 Piasecna 18 53 00 44 00 Piaski 12 49 30 51 00   18 53 00 42 00 Piasoczno 14 52 00 38 00 G. Piasuden 16 53 20 39 00 K. Piasuden 16 53 20 39 00 Piatek fl. 18 50 00 46 00 Piateko 18, 19 55 30 40 00 Piathawka 12 48 00 46 00 Piatybory 12 49 00 47 00 Pickekop 26 64 30 358 00 Pickerholm 30, 35 57 00 25 00 Pickle 16 53 40 36 30 Pidea 6, 11 48 00 51 00 Pidkepos 19, 21 60 00 46 00 Piecana 12 49 00 49 00   13 D.   Pieczkowskihorodek 18 54 00 44 00 Piekarsky 13 D.   Piektupeen 16 55 00 40 00 Pielatowcze 12 49 00 44 00 Pielavesi 21 63 30 43 00 Pieliki 12 49 30 48 00 Pielskagouba 20 67 00 53 00 Pieroi 06 62 00 68 00 Pierssaie 18 53 00 44 00 Pieski 12 49 00 46 00 Pietrawa 12 49 30 52 00 Pietrowe 12 49 00 51 00 Piezane B. 12 47 00 48 00 Piglowice 15 52 00 34 20 Pike 21 60 30 39 00 Pikoriski 19 57 30 46 00 Pila 18, 19, 20 56 00 39 00 Pilcza 14 50 00 36 00 Pilcza fl. 14 51 20 38 00 Pilkene 6, 7, 20 60 00 53 00 Pillaw 16 54 20 37 30 Pillekalen 16 54 40 40 30 Pillepeen 16 54 20 41 00 Pilsno 14 49 40 38 00 Piltyn 6, 20 57 00 39 00 Piltzen 16 53 40 39 00 Piltzowitz 14 50 00 35 00 Pilworm 38 54 30 23 40 Pilzno 18 49 30 39 00 Pimingo 21 65 00 41 00 Pina fl. 18 52 00 43 00 Pindele 21 61 30 41 00 Pinega fl. 1, 6 66 00 67 00   07 65 00 67 00 Pinego fl. 20 64 00 65 00 Pingeier 26 67 00 354 00 Pingis 6, 7, 20 63 00 63 00   09 P.  
Pingo fl. 06 64 00 63 00   07 65 00 63 00 nienuiecz 12 48 30 42 00 ne 14, 15 52 10 32 00 nnenberg 41, 44 53 40 24 40 Grasschaft (Co∣mitatus) Pinnen∣berg & Reinbeck 44 53 40 24 20 now 44 53 45 24 10 k 06 51 00 43 00   18 52 00 43 00 kova 16 53 00 36 30 tzkona 16 53 40 36 00 ow 14 50 00 37 00 tek 12 49 30 46 00 dungamitt 26 65 00 358 00 oi 07 62 00 68 00 trawin 14 50 40 39 00 trkow 14 51 00 36 00 rowo 15 52 10 34 00 aya 11 50 00 48 00   18 49 30 49 00 ckel 20 57 00 42 00 de fl. 16 55 00 40 00   19 56 30 44 00 enow 15 52 30 31 40 z 20 52 00 31 00 kala 21 61 30 41 00 kel 19 57 30 42 00 Pirkes 19 57 30 41 00 rly 12 49 30 42 00 ik 15 51 40 33 00 ki 15 51 40 33 20 as S. 16 53 40 39 40 jervi 21 64 30 46 00 ski Ins. 10 G.   oi S. 16 53 40 39 00 . 18 53 00 39 00     53 00 40 00 6, 11 50 00 58 00 nka 12 50 00 49 00 y 22 56 30 30 00 orum Tabernae 10 B.   dri G. Peisern 15 51 50 34 40 anc 12 46 30 47 00 eim 16 53 40 38 00 k 12 49 00 51 00 S. 16 53 40 38 30 ni 15 51 50 34 00 izen 16 53 40 40 30 ia eyar 26 64 00 356 00 ls 26 67 30 360 00 fiord 01 67 00 01 00   26 67 30 360 00 6, 20 65 00 38 00 Lappmark 1, 20 66 &c 31 &c o R. 01 65 30 37 00 zoe 12 49 30 43 00 kaw 16 54 00 37 30 oyn 16 53 40 39 00 aitza 6, 7 68 00 74 00 o 12 48 00 51 00   13 G.   a 16 54 20 38 00 ne 30 54 00 25 00 Plancio 01 79 30 73 00   6, 7 74 20 38 00 Paacken 16 54 20 38 00 eken 16 54 00 38 30 wig 16 54 00 37 30 askowo 15 51 50 34 20 atei 26 67 30 358 00 atey 26 66 00 350 00 attenhoff 17 54 10 36 40 sen 16 54 00 38 40 ten 16 53 40 37 00 tzen S. 16 53 20 38 00 we 20 53 00 27 00 chow 12 49 00 50 00 shamer 15 52 00 32 00 isse fl. 15 51 50 32 00 Pene S. 16 54 40 40 00 Pescou 06 57 00 46 00 Pescow Puth 20 57 00 46 00 Pesczynice 12 49 30 52 00 essa 6, 7, 8 58 00 62 00 Pezenice 18 54 00 45 00 essow 14 51 40 34 00 Pez 14 49 40 35 00 ott 26 67 30 355 00 Pssan 18 55 00 45 00 Poczk 18 52 30 38 00 Poczko 14 52 20 36 00 Pockstorp 42 54 10 24 40 Poe 26 64 30 355 00 Ploen 41, 42, 43 54 05 25 10 Poenersee 42 54 05 25 10 Pokyrof 12 49 30 45 00 Pomacze 12 49 00 43 00 Pomany 18 55 30 42 00 Pomendorp 17 54 20 36 20 Pion 20 54 00 25 00 Pioner Gebieth i.e. ju∣risdictio 43 54 00 25 10 Pionersee 43 54 05 25 10 Piongiany 18, 19 55 30 39 00 Pionsk 18 52 30 37 00 Pioosca 09 H.   Pioska fl. 18 52 30 41 00 Poskirow 18 49 30 44 00 Potelle 19 56 00 39 00 Ploto fl. 11 53 00 52 00 Ploto lacus 11 52 00 53 00 Plotolle 18 55 30 40 00 Plovolnicka 06 65 00 72 00   07 65 00 73 00 Plowiecz 14 49 00 37 00 Plowiskan 16 54 20 39 30 Plumkow 43 54 05 25 30 Plusa fl. 20 58 00 47 00 Pluska 12 50 30 50 00 Pluskotontz 16 53 00 36 30 Plussupa fl. 16 54 40 40 30 P. Pniewi G. Poune 15 52 20 33 20 Pnstin 12 49 30 50 00 Pobesania 16 53 00 38 00 Pobetten 16 54 40 38 00 Pobivince 14 51 40 36 00 Pobo 09 G.   Pobolowo 18 52 30 47 00 Poboysko 18 54 30 42 00 Pobunden 16 54 40 38 30 Pochens 09 F.   Pocouche 12 48 30 43 00 Pocrof 6, 28 58 00 50 00 Poda Osil 6, 7, 20 64 00 58 00 Podayce 18 49 00 43 00 Podbrzezie 18 54 30 43 00 E. Podesemka 6, 7 64 00 59 00 Podhunze 12 49 00 43 00 Podkamien 18 50 00 43 00 Podlachia 14 52 40 41 00   16 53 20 40 30 Podlesse 15 52 30 34 20 Podoczapinw 12 49 30 34 20 Podolia 11, 12, 18 49 00 44 00 Podorosk 18 52 30 42 00 Podorze 12 49 30 43 00 Podrzewie 15 52 20 33 20 Podsk 6, 8, 20 55 00 53 00 Podvosenie 09 I.   Poelholt 40 54 35 24 40 Poels 41, 43, 44 53 50 25 10 Poelsee 42 54 15 24 40 Poels Riff. 38 54 55 25 10 Poerzees 08 57 00 63 00 Poester 27 63 40 24 00 Pogesamia 16 54 00 37 30 Pohanicz 12 50 30 52 00 Pohemy 01 68 00 81 00 Poherbycza 12 49 00 47 00 Pohlea 38, 40, 41, 42 54 15 24 20 Pohost 18 51 30 44 00   20 55 00 45 00 Pojo 19, 21 60 00 40 00 Poitis 20, 21 60 30 40 00 Pokorowko olim       Prokory 13 D.   Pokraie 19 55 30 42 00 Pokrironice 14 50 00 39 00 Pokroie 18 55 30 41 00 Pokrzywnia 18 50 30 39 00 Pokutia 18 49 00 42 00 Pol 44 53 40 24 20 Pola 12 46 30 50 00 Polado 06 46 00 44 00 Polaeno 06 58 00 49 00 Polaiewo 15 52 40 34 00 Polaniecz 14 50 00 38 00 Pole 06 52 00 65 00 Poleckt 16 53 40 38 00 Polemno olim Polonc 12 49 30 45 00 Polen 30 54 20 24 00 Polessa 18 51 30 42 00 Pol Greben 16 53 20 37 30 Polia 07 62 00 58 00 Polibna 10 C.   C. Polibno 10 C.   Policko 15 52 10 33 00 Polinasero 07 67 00 57 00 Polince 12 49 00 50 00 Polissa 6, 20 58 00 51 00 Politan 12 48 30 45 00 Politzko 14 52 20 32 00 Polivasero 06 67 00 57 00 Pollhorn 42 54 10 24 30 Pollin 6, 7 63 00 84 00 Polnisch Netka 15 51 50 32 40 Polnisch Neustadt 15 52 10 33 20 Polnow 20 54 00 33 00 Polock 06 66 00 66 00   07 66 00 65 00 Poloczk 6, 18, 20 55 00 46 00 Poloi 12 49 00 49 00 Polomen 16 53 40 40 00 Polone 18 50 00 45 00     54 30 48 00 Polonge 18, 19, 20 55 30 38 00 Polonia 14 52 00 34 00 Poloniae pars 06 50 00 37 00 Polonia minor 18 50 30 39 00 Polonixi 6, 8, 11 49 00 56 00 Polon 18 52 30 43 00 Polota fl. 18 55 30 46 00 Polowen Mons 10 F.   Polowo 12 49 00 43 00   18 55 00 44 00 Polozkow 12 50 30 52 00 Polplin 14, 16 53 40 36 20 Polsacz 13 I.   Polschefehr 17 54 10 36 20 Polskie 15 51 40 34 40 Polsosca 06 58 00 50 00 Poltew fl. 12 49 30 42 00   18 50 00 42 00 Poltowslo 14 52 40 38 00 Poltzamajoki 19 58 00 44 00 Poltzerhaeck 43 54 05 25 40 Poltzin 14 53 40 32 00 Pomanoust B. Y. D. 12 47 30 48 00 Pomei 17 53 55 36 10 Pomeran 12 49 30 43 00 Pomerania or Po∣meren 06 54 00 29 00   14 53 40 30 00   30 54 00 28 00 Pomerellia 14 54 00 35 00   20 53 00 35 00 Pomersdorf 16 54 00 37 00 Pomesamia 16 53 40 36 00 Pomkarovo 09 I.   Pomokla 12 49 30 50 00 Pomoxany 18 49 30 43 00 Pompa gunpur 26 65 30 359 00 Ponekueza 12 49 30 49 00 Ponel 19 58 30 41 00 Ponienias 06 55 00 42 00 Ponienumi 19 55 30 43 00 Ponievios 19, 20 55 00 42 00 Poniewicss 18 55 00 42 00 R. Ponoy 7, 20 66 00 60 00 Ponsdorp 41, 42, 43 54 10 25 00 Ponskenas 19 59 30 42 00 Pontico 6, 8, 11 47 00 56 00 Pontus Euxinus 06 45 00 49 00   12 45 30 48 00   13 S.     18 51 30 52 00 Pootsenitsma 09 L.   Popelaw 14 50 20 34 00 Popholt 38 54 35 24 30 Popiclony 18 55 30 40 00 Popiele 18 55 30 42 00 Popieuky 12 48 30 45 00 Popina 18 52 00 43 00 Popooskina 09 I.   Popercie 18 54 30 42 00 Poporooska 09 H.   Popota 08 E.   I. Popowitza Gurka 10 F.   Popowo 15 51 50 33 40 Poppe 14 52 20 32 00 Poppen 16 53 20 39 00 Poppenbull 38, 40 54 20 23 50 Poppenbuttel 44 53 35 24 40 Popuczy 13 E.   Popusczo 13 E.   Porchow 6, 20 57 00 49 00 Porden 16 53 20 38 30 Poriagouba 20 67 00 53 00 Porkaland 21 59 30 41 00 Porlarkshassn 26 64 30 356 00 Porohy 18 52 00 50 00 Porojervi 20, 21 62 30 52 00 Porop 34 55 25 25 00 Porovesi 21 63 30 45 00 Porovovo 6, 7 71 00 74 00 Porozow 18 52 30 42 00 Porsmose 32 55 20 26 40 Porso 19, 21 59 30 41 00 Porteti 6, 8, 11 49 00 55 00 Portkaland 19 59 30 41 00 Port nelson 01 57 00 268 00 Portoes 30 54 00 25 00 Posadowo 15 52 10 33 20 Posangerfioerd 20 70 00 42 00 Posangerness 20 70 00 41 00 Poschkaitten 16 54 20 38 30 Posen 14 52 20 34 00   16 53 40 39 00   17 54 15 36 30 Posfelt 41, 42 53 55 24 00 Posilie 16 54 00 37 00 P. posnania G. Posen 15 52 10 34 00 Possillien 17 54 00 36 40 Postawy 18 55 00 44 00 Posteinen 16 54 20 39 00 Posvoly 19 55 00 42 00 Poswole 18 55 30 42 00 Porafioerd 06 71 00 47 00 Potiwlo fl. 11 53 00 50 00 Potoeden fl. 08 52 00 66 00 Potok 12 48 30 46 00     49 00 43 00 Potowky 12 49 30 48 00 Potritten 16 54 00 38 30 Potsfioerd 07 70 00 47 00 Potsosna 20 58 00 50 00 Pottagen 16 55 00 40 20 Pottgorsa 16 53 00 36 00 Pottloose 43 54 20 25 40 Pottluse 43 54 00 25 00 Potwlo 6, 8, 11 52 00 51 00 Potz 19, 20 58 00 41 00 Potze 42 54 00 24 20 Potzimajer 20 64 00 46 00 Potzimajervi 21 64 00 45 00 Povensa 6, 7, 20 63 00 54 00 Pougsenga 09 P.   Povisenga 6, 7 63 00 62 00 Povosteets 09 L.   R. Povoy 06 66 00 61 00 Pouslowoik 12 49 30 46 00
Poutsega Volost 09 N.   Poutska reca 09 B.   Powelstruy 31 56 00 28 40 Powiewisko 15 52 10 34 20 Powsxedue 13 C.   Poyassa 6, 7 66 00 87 00 Poyenberg 42 54 00 24 20 Pozanow 12 50 00 49 00 Praesto 30, 32, 35 55 00 27 00 Pralles fl. 16 54 40 38 00 Prandnitz 16 53 10 37 20 Prangau 17 54 10 36 30 Pranska 14 50 40 35 00 Prausna fl. 14 51 40 34 00 Prausnitz 14 51 00 34 00 Praust 16 54 00 36 00 Praustrup 39 55 20 23 50 Precista 09 R.   Preckol 16 55 20 39 30 Precsista 20 56 00 49 00 Preetze 38, 40, 42, 43 54 10 25 00 Preetzer Closter 42 54 15 25 00 Pregel 42 54 20 23 50 Pregel fl. 14, 16, 18 54 20 39 30 Preitfelt 17 54 15 36 30 Premstwiakel 17 54 05 37 00 Preniatyn 12 50 00 43 00 Prenslaff 17 54 15 36 30 Prenstorp 30 53 40 25 20 Preny 18 54 00 42 00 Prerossla 14, 16, 20 54 20 41 00 Prestegrunde 20, 21 61 30 34 00 Prestelunds 6, 20, 25 60 00 24 00 Prestholm 19 58 30 40 00 Pretacka fl. 07 65 00 95 00 Pretze 41 54 10 25 00 Pretzistanateiga 6, 7, 8 57 00 59 00 Preuschkonigsdorff 17 54 00 36 50 Preusch Marck 16 54 00 37 00 Preyel 40, 41 54 25 23 50 Prezysta 6, 7, 8, 20 56 00 54 00 Priceford 01 67 50 321 00 Priedsted 37 55 35 24 10 Prielonik 6, 7 61 00 67 00 Prilouck 09 I. K. O. P.   20 63 00 63 00 Priment 14 51 40 33 00 Printz fl. 16 53 00 37 00 Prionen S. 16 53 20 38 00 Pripetius fl. 18 52 00 44 &c Priluka 12 49 00 46 00 Proberg 16 53 40 39 30 Probozin 12 49 00 44 00 Probstey Pretze 43 54 15 35 00 Probyle 12 47 30 48 00 Prochi 15 51 50 33 20 Proczenkowa 12 49 00 45 00 Prodensdorp 42 54 20 24 50 Prodiwin fl. 18 52 30 46 00 Prodow 41 54 05 25 40 I. Proleikarsa 10 D.   Promicss 18, 20 54 00 41 00 Prona fl. 08 55 00 63 00 Pronetz 6, 8 54 00 63 00 Pronsdorp 41, 43 53 55 25 10 Propernaw 16 54 20 37 00 Propoisk 6, 11, 18 53 00 49 00 Proppendorff 17 54 00 36 40 Proprut fl. 14 49 20 37 00 Proschewa 16 53 20 36 30 Prosna fl. 15 51 41 35 00 Prosolasken fl. 16 53 20 39 30 Proftaniza 06 45 00 46 00 Prostken 16 53 40 40 30 Prostlyvia 14 52 40 40 00 Proszowice 14 50 00 37 00 Protacka fl. 06 64 00 96 00 Protokeperulski fl. 10 G.   Protrowin 18 50 30 39 00 Prova fl. 06 55 00 63 00 Provisla 6, 7 64 00 61 00 Prousky 12 49 00 49 00   13 C.   Proustgaard 37 56 05 22 40 Prozzon 14 49 00 39 00 Prseno 15 52 20 33 40 Prtzelang 16 53 00 37 30 Prut R. 12 47 00 45 00 Prussia 6, 14 53 00 37 00 Prussice 15 52 30 34 00 Pruzana 18 52 00 42 00 Prybus 14 51 20 32 00 Prydland 14 53 00 33 00 Pryluca 18 49 30 46 00 Przasnyss 18 52 30 39 00 Przeclaw 18 50 00 39 00 Przecop olim Ta∣phre 6, 8 47 00 53 00 Przeczlaw 14 49 40 38 00 Przedbors 14 51 00 37 00 Przejaslow 11 50 00 47 00 Przekop 18 52 00 53 00 Przetaie 18 54 00 42 00 Przelom 18 53 30 41 00 P. Przement       G. Priment 15 51 40 33 20 Przemil 12, 18 50 30 43 00 Przemysl 18 49 30 40 00 Przemislavis 12 49 30 42 00 Przeworsk 18 50 00 40 00 Przeprawa Ta∣tarska B. 12 47 00 50 00   13 Q.   Przerossla 16 53 20 39 30 Przerosl 18 54 00 40 00 Przevorsco 14 49 20 39 00 Przewloczyna 12 49 00 51 00 Prziaflow 06 49 00 49 00 Prziborowo 15 51 30 34 00 Przipice R. 12 51 30 47 00 Przipiec fl. 18 51 30 47 00 Przomyslia 14 49 20 39 00 Przoprawa Ta∣tarska B. 12 47 00 50 00 Przuyk 14 51 20 38 00 Przyluka 12 49 30 50 00 Przysieka 15 52 30 34 00 Przywalka 18 53 30 41 00 Psarski 14, 15 52 20 33 00 Psastruy 31 55 40 28 50 Psezina 14 49 40 35 00 Psizol R. 12 48 30 51 00   13 H.   Psol fl. 11 49 00 48 00 Psvia 18 55 00 45 00   20 55 00 46 00 Ptasskowo 15 52 00 33 40 Pubvier 20 60 00 49 00 Puchowicze 18 53 00 46 00 Pucsche 17 53 50 36 10 Puddes fl. 19 57 00 45 00 Pudlerort 16 54 40 39 00 Pudnun 06 63 00 52 00 Pudoa 6, 7, 20 61 00 56 00 Pudua 06 45 00 42 00 Pugahus 30, 31 56 00 29 00 Puggard 37 55 20 23 00 Pukeberg 22 57 30 32 00 Pularcez 12 49 00 51 00 Pulin 18 50 30 46 00 Pulsen 41 54 20 25 10 Pulsse 42 54 05 24 10 P. Purchas 01 82 00 41 00 Purchas I. 01 80 40 41 00 Pultawa 12 48 30 52 00 Pultuwisk 6, 18 52 00 39 00 Punice 15 51 30 33 40 Punie 18 54 00 42 00 Punitz 14 51 40 33 00 Purdunock S. 16 53 20 38 30 Purt 12 48 00 44 00 Pusenki 12 49 30 51 00 Puslina 06 60 00 52 00 Puffenheim 18 53 30 38 00 Pussery 31 56 15 29 00 Pustky 13 E.   Pustina 7, 20 60 00 52 00 Pustozera 01 67 30 71 00 Putelnik 12 50 00 42 00 Putimle 6, 8 51 00 53 00 Putlose 30, 41 54 00 25 20 Putrinen 16 53 20 38 30 Putschback 16 54 20 38 00 Putyrol 12 50 00 52 00 Pyateck 14 52 00 36 00 Pybaruy 31 56 05 29 20 Pyhejes 21 60 30 49 00 Pyhejoki 19 59 00 45 00   6, 20, 21 64 00 41 00 Pyhema 21 60 30 38 00 Pyherjerfui 20 64 00 42 00   21 61 30 40 00 Pyhr fl. 6, 7 68 00 95 00 Pykow 18 49 30 45 00 Pyla 06 53 00 34 00   14 52 40 33 00 Pyltin 18, 19 56 30 39 00 Pyrtis 19 60 00 43 00   21 59 30 42 00 Pysch fl. 16 53 20 40 00 Pysdry 14 52 00 34 00 Pyss 19 59 00 44 00 Pytis 20 60 00 44 00   21 60 30 45 00 Pytisfagero 19, 20, 21 60 00 43 00 Pzczew 15 52 20 32 40 Pzeczki 20 54 00 45 00 Pzekenojow 12 49 30 42 00 Q   QUall 28 59 30 20 00 Uadassaw 6, 18 56 30 45 00 De Quaden est de Roemsdaelsche schaezen 27 63 00 21 00 Quadendorf 16, 17 54 20 36 00 Quadenkrog 17 54 20 36 20 Quaelwagh 27 63 20 23 00 Quaernesfio 28 60 30 22 00 Quaernes strand 27 63 20 23 00 Quage 38, 41 54 25 23 20 Quale 43 53 55 25 10 Quals 43 54 15 25 50 Qualsams 25, 29 58 00 21 30 Quandloss 32 55 30 26 20 Quaruebeck 41, 42 54 20 24 50 Quarnsted 42, 44 53 55 24 30 Quars 38, 40 54 55 24 30 Quarisho 22 58 00 33 00 Quedenaw 16 54 40 38 30 Quedlitz 16 53 40 38 30 Quelkar 20 56 00 53 00 Quere 40 54 45 24 50 Querkeby 32 55 20 26 40 Querken 20, 21 63 00 37 0 Quern 38 54 45 24 50 Querum 40 54 45 24 5 Quesendorff 16 53 20 37 0 Questzen 15 52 30 31 4 Quetz 16 53 40 38 0 Queyday 18 55 00 40 0 Quiadkowa 16 54 20 39 0 Quick 16 53 40 39 3 Quickborn 41, 42 54 00 24 0 Quickhorn 30 53 40 24 4 Quiddeinen 16 54 00 37 3 Quidlebygden 25, 28 60 30 22 0 Quidflemarck 32 55 19 26 2 Quidstrup 39 55 15 24 4 Quiensdal 25, 29 58 00 21 3 Quiensheed 29 58 00 21 Quiesca 08 53 00 67 0 Quilnitz 14 52 20 33 0 Quinckborn 44 53 45 24 3 Quinsfiorden 29 58 00 21 0 Quirswyck 27 63 40 23 0 Quisfelholt 36 57 05 24 4 Quistrup 36, 37 56 30 23 0 Quivaskopogost 20, 21 60 00 49 0 Quikanjervi 20 62 00 50 0 Quolstrup 37 56 10 25 0 Quorning 36, 37 56 25 24 1 Quorup 38, 39, 40 55 00 24 1 Quynherrid 28, 29 59 40 21 0 Qwerle 31 55 45 28 1 Qwettinge 31 56 00 29 2 Qwinge 30, 31 56 00 29 3 R   RAa 22, 25 59 00 25 0 Raade 41 53 40 24 5   42 54 05 24 3 Raafza reca 09 F.   Rabangangloss 06 59 00 06 0 Rabanga Volost 09 B.   Rabel 40 54 40 25 Rabelhorst 41, 43 54 15 24 4 Raberg 14 51 00 30 0 Rarbergk 36 57 25 24 5 Rabstede 38, 39, 40 55 00 24 Raby 31 55 40 28 3 Racha lacus 11 52 00 52 0 Rachaunsche Mucken∣krafit 17 54 20 35 Racheby 36 56 45 23     57 15 24 Rack 30 56 20 25 Rackittke 17 54 05 36 Racoh 15 52 10 34 Raoola 6, 7 62 00 66 0   09 M. Q.   Racolscoi 09 M.   Raconitza Volost 6, 7 65 00 72 0 Racot 15 51 50 34 0 Raczanow 14, 18 50 00 38 0 Rada 6, 20, 22 60 00 29 0 Radek 15 52 20 32 0 Radavitza 16 3 00 36 3 Radcza 18 54 00 47 0 Rade 38, 39 54 55 23 5   41, 42 54 00 24 0 Radeawe 38 54 45 24 2 Rademis 38 54 30 24 1 Raden 29 60 20 19 3 G. Raden 16 53 20 37 0 Radenberg 14 50 40 32 0 Radenitz 15 51 50 32 2 Radichen 15 51 40 33 0 Radis 20 59 00 41 00 Radlino 15 51 40 34 40 Radem 14 51 00 38 00 Radomi 18 54 00 49 00 Radomicko 15 51 40 33 40 Radomysl 12, 18 50 00 47 00 Radoschyte 14 50 40 37 00 Radoski 16 53 00 37 00 Radosskowice 18 54 00 45 00 Radowka 12 48 30 47 00 Radun 18 53 30 42 00 Radune fl. 17 54 15 36 10 Radzicpiwce 12 49 00 45 00 Radziowce 12 49 00 45 00 Radziowka R. 12 49 30 51 00 Radziviliski 18, 19, 20 55 30 41 00 Radziwilow 12, 18 50 00 43 00 Radzymin 14, 18 52 00 39 00 Raescoy 6, 8 54 00 64 00 Rafdogorca 09 K.   Rafdogorie 09 P.   Raffno 25 57 30 23 00 Rafos 29 58 00 21 30 Rafftille 31 56 00 29 10 Ragnet olim Land∣zut 18 54 30 40 00 Ragrot 12 48 30 46 00 Ragup fl. 16 54 40 40 30 Rahanganglos 7, 8 59 00 61 00 Raiewisseza 18 51 30 42 00 Raigrodt 14, 16, 20 53 00 40 30 Rainske 16 53 40 39 00 Raiske Ostref 20 67 00 50 00
Rakaruy 31 55 50 28 40 Rakienwost 06 58 00 53 00 Rakiski 18 55 00 43 00 Rakloff 32 55 40 26 00 Rakonicwic 15 51 50 33 20 Rakow 18 53 30 44 00 Rakyschde fl. 16 54 20 39 30 Raleffstede 41, 44 53 35 24 50 Raleigh Mount 01 67 40 313 00 Ralm 38 55 00 25 40 Ralybbe 41 54 10 25 30 Ram fl. 16 54 00 38 00 Ramahs 31 55 30 29 10 st Ramblose 31 55 55 27 50 V. Ramblose 31 55 55 27 40 Rambne 31 56 05 28 30 Rameenja 09 F.   Rameenja reca 09 F.   Ramen 24 60 20 31 20 Ramhusen 42 54 00 23 50 Ramitten 16 54 20 38 30 Ramk 19 57 00 44 00 Ramloss 31, 32 55 55 27 00 Ramme 36 56 30 22 30 Rammegaard 37 56 30 22 30 Ramnas 22, 23, 24 59 30 32 40 Ramprhopn 26 67 30 360 00 Ramsberg 24 59 30 31 20 Ramsfioerd 20, 25, 27 64 00 24 00 Ramsing 36 56 35 23 20 Ramsoe 27 62 40 21 00   28 62 30 20 00 Ramso Herrit 32 55 30 27 00 Ramso Ole 31 56 10 28 00 Ramstad 23, 24 59 40 34 20 Ramtn 17 53 55 36 40 Rana 14 51 40 37 00 Rand 28 60 00 25 00 Randagunpur 26 68 00 359 00 Randakambrfiord 26 68 00 350 00 Randberg 29 58 40 20 30 Randbyl 20, 35, 37 55 40 24 00 Rande 30 56 20 24 40 Randen 19 58 00 44 00 Randers 36, 37 56 20 24 40 Randersdorp 43 54 20 25 00 Randersen 35 56 20 24 40 Randerup 38, 39, 40 55 05 23 40 Randest 36, 37 56 30 24 20 Randisund 29 58 00 22 30 Randleff 37 55 55 24 40 Rando 29 59 00 21 00 Randro 36 57 25 25 00 Randrup 36 56 45 24 50 Randrus 37 56 05 23 00 Randzen 19 57 30 43 00 angasalo 21 61 30 41 00 ngnit 16, 20 54 40 40 00 ank Hyttan 24 60 20 32 00 Ranschemuhl 16 53 20 37 00 Ranschke 16 53 20 37 30 Ransfior 37 55 35 24 20 Rantrum 38, 40 54 30 24 10 Rantum 38, 40 54 50 23 20 Rantzo 30, 41, 43 54 15 25 20 Rantzouholm 34 55 10 25 10 Rapin 6, 19, 20 57 00 45 00 Raptou 17 54 00 36 10 Rarby 31 56 00 28 10 Raredt 31 55 45 28 40 Rarop 35 55 40 24 20 Rarup 30, 37 55 45 24 30 Rasbitek 15 52 20 33 00 Raseborg 6, 19, 20 60 00 41 00 Rasfioerd 20 70 00 40 00 Rasik 19 59 00 42 00 Rask 37 55 50 24 10 Raskow R. 12 47 30 46 00 Rasl 06 41 00 79 00 Rasnas 22, 23 59 20 34 00 Rasnehule 31 56 00 29 00 Rasso 23 59 40 34 30 Rasted 33 54 45 26 50 Rastenbarg 14, 16, 18 54 00 39 00 Rastorp 38, 40, 41, 42, 43 54 15 25 00 Rastowica fl. 18 50 00 46 00 Rastrup 36 56 40 24 30 Rasvan lacus 24 59 20 31 00 Rasuntz 14 52 40 37 00 Raswelberg 31 56 05 28 10 Raswinge 31 55 40 28 50 Ratan 20, 21 64 00 37 00 Ratern 43 54 15 25 50 Ratensdorp 43 54 10 25 10 Ratenvolo 09 P.   Rathlaw 41 54 15 25 30 Ratibor 14 50 00 34 00 Ratkensdorp 43 54 20 25 10 Ratklaw 43 54 15 25 30 Ratkou 30 53 40 25 20 Ratno 18 51 30 42 00 Rattkow 43 53 55 25 30 Ratzeborg 41, 44 53 40 25 30 Ratziniervi 20 64 00 47 00 Ravamoliczno 14 51 40 37 00 Raudasol 21 62 00 47 00 Rauden 14 50 00 35 00   16 53 20 36 00 Ravebusch 43 53 55 25 20 Raven 38 54 35 25 00 Ravenholt 40 54 35 24 40 Raumo 6, 20, 21 61 00 38 00 Raunholt 36 57 05 24 40 Rauning 39 55 20 23 50 Ravorg 06 50 00 83 00 Rausnstrup 32 55 20 26 40 Rausswe fl. 16 54 20 40 30 Raustrup 39 55 05 24 10 Raustrup molle 36 57 00 24 20 Rautajervi 21 61 30 42 00 Rautalambi 21 63 00 44 00 Rautalamiln 6, 20 63 00 44 00 Rautavesi 21 62 30 44 00 Rautenburg 16 54 00 37 30 Rautowesi 21 61 30 40 00 Rautte 20 66 00 30 00 Rautus 20, 21 60 00 49 00 Rawicz 15 51 30 34 00 Rawlund 31 55 40 29 40 Ray 39 55 20 24 30 Raysdorp 42, 43 54 15 25 00 Reagger 38, 39 55 10 23 50 Rebarck 40 54 40 24 40 Rebeck 38, 39 55 25 24 30 Rebinck 06 45 00 41 00 Rebniczy R. 12 47 30 46 00 Rebs 36 56 45 24 00 Rebstrup 36 56 40 24 10 Rebuiok 06 46 00 39 00 Recke 44 53 50 25 20 Reden 14, 16 53 00 36 00 Rederstall 41 54 15 24 00 Redinge 30 55 40 28 40   31 55 50 29 20 Redingstorp 41 54 05 25 30 Redtbroeck 44 53 25 24 50 Redwisch 43 53 55 25 50 Reebnaia 07 67 00 90 00 Reebvoja 06 67 00 91 00 Reecker 19, 20 58 00 39 00 Reenskloster 27 64 40 26 00 Reer 36 57 00 23 00   41, 42 54 00 24 10 Reerslooff 32 55 30 26 00 Rees Closter 25 64 30 26 00 Reesteen 28 60 00 20 00 Reff 25, 29 58 30 20 00 Reff R. 12 47 00 47 00 Reffs 20 70 00 39 00   36 56 50 24 50 Reff So 37 55 55 24 00 Regel 19,20 59 00 42 00 Regenwalde 14 53 40 31 00   20 53 00 32 00 Regin 30 55 00 25 20 Regm 34 55 15 25 20 Regna 20, 22 58 00 32 00 Regnstrup 32 55 10 26 40 Rehedick 42 54 00 23 50 Rehorst 44 53 50 25 10 Rehtwische 43 54 10 25 30 Rehwisch 42 54 00 23 50 Reichenaw 16 53 20 36 30 Reichenbach 16 54 00 37 00 Reichenberg 16 54 00 38 30     54 20 36 00 Reichenfelt 17 54 00 36 50 Reichenow 16 53 20 37 30 Reichenwald 15 52 00 32 00   16 54 00 37 30 Reichstein 14 50 20 33 00 Reickfiord 26 67 30 359 00 Reide 41 54 25 25 20 Reidt 26 65 30 01 00 Reidtfiord 1, 26 65 50 10 30 Reidtwisch 44 53 55 24 10 Reikiadatur 26 66 30 358 00 Reikreness 1, 26 64 50 351 00 Reimershorn 41 53 40 25 00 Rein 14, 16, 18 53 40 39 30 Reinfeld 16 54 00 36 00   20 53 00 25 00 Reinfelde 41, 43, 44 53 50 25 10 Reinly 06 60 00 24 00   28, 29 60 30 24 30 Reinschke S. 16 53 40 39 00 Reinbeck 41, 44 53 30 25 00 Reinebroers Closter 26 67 00 355 00 Reinsbuttel 41, 42 54 15 23 40 Reiptzigk 14, 15 52 00 31 40 Reisijerfi 21 63 30 42 00 Rekawick 26 68 00 349 00 Rellingbeck 44 53 40 24 20 Rellingen 41, 44 53 40 24 30 Relybbe 43 54 15 25 30 Rembeel 41 53 40 26 00 Reme T. 20 66 00 40 00 Remersholm 44 53 40 24 50 Remigola 18 55 00 42 00 Remmels 42 54 05 24 20 Ren 12 46 00 46 00 Rends borg 38, 40 54 15 25 50 Rendswuren 42 54 05 25 00 Rendzon 30 54 00 25 40 Renen 20 53 00 26 00   41 53 40 25 50 Reninge 31 56 05 29 20 Renke 22 59 00 27 00 Rennelow 31 55 45 28 30 Rennow 41, 42 53 55 25 00 Renow 43 53 55 25 40 Rensefelt 41, 43 53 55 25 30 Rensen S. 16 53 20 36 00 Rensing 44 54 00 24 30 Rensingen 41, 42 54 00 24 30 Rentza 09 D.   Rentzee 38, 39, 40 54 50 24 10 Rentzeel 41, 44 53 45 24 30 Repanova 07 63 00 63 00   09 P.   Repen 06 55 00 23 00 Repfioerd 20 70 00 40 00 Repola 21 64 00 48 00 Reppell 39 54 55 24 10 Reppen 14, 15 52 00 32 00 Rero 31 56 00 29 20 Rers 6, 8, 11 47 00 56 00 Rerum 31 55 35 29 50 Resala 20, 21 61 00 48 00 Resania 6, 8 54 00 60 00 Resanskoi Ozera 06 54 00 60 00 Rusbuy 38, 39 55 10 23 40 Resbuysandt 39 55 10 23 40 Resby 39 55 00 23 40 Resegviate 12 46 30 48 00 Resehovet 16 54 40 36 00 Reseloro 06 51 00 72 00 Resen 30, 35, 36 56 20 23 20 Resenbro 37 56 05 24 10 Resetow 08 51 00 72 00 Reskiergaard 36 57 00 24 00 Resolution I. 01 61 30 308 00 Resleu 31 55 45 28 30 Respopien 06 51 00 74 00 Ress fl. 39 55 10 23 40 Resse 18 54 00 39 00 Ressel 16 54 00 39 00 Resstow 18 49 30 40 00 Ressundt 20 63 00 31 00 Reste 35 56 20 23 20 Rested 36 56 45 23 00 Resthow 14 49 40 39 00 Restorp 41, 42, 44 53 55 24 30 Restrup 30, 36 56 40 24 20 Reszosund 21 61 30 37 00 Rethwische 41, 44 53 45 25 10 Rethwischwal 44 53 50 25 10 Retow 18, 19 55 30 39 00 Retusari 20, 21 59 30 47 00 Rettuyk 20 61 00 31 00 Retvik 24 61 00 31 40 Retz 14, 20 53 20 32 00 Revalia 21 59 00 42 00 Revel 6, 19, 20 59 00 42 00 Rexten 29 59 40 20 00 Reybrufiord 26 67 30 351 00 Reygberg 37 56 00 22 50 Reygerstigslandt 44 53 30 24 40 Reynebeck 30 53 20 25 00 Reynefeld 30 53 40 25 00 Reyneknaap 28 60 00 20 00 Reynesle 31 56 15 28 20 Reynsbuttel 30 54 2 23 40 Reysen 14 51 40 33 00 Reysiersi 20 63 00 42 00 Rezan 6, 8, 11 54 00 59 00 Rha 42 54 00 24 00 Rhando fl. 16 54 00 39 30 Rhombites Major fl. 11 49 00 60 00 Rhombites Minor 8, 11 48 00 61 00 Rhor S. 16 53 20 38 00 Rhymnus 06 50 00 84 00 Rhynstroom 42, 44 53 50 24 00 Riazara 21 64 00 50 00 Ribe 30, 35 55 20 23 40 Ribbeknut 35 57 00 23 40 Ribben 20, 21 65 00 38 00 Ribnitz 20, 30 54 00 27 40 Ribno 14, 16 53 40 39 00 Ribno S. 16 53 20 40 00 Ribojad 15 52 10 33 00 Ribsdorp 43 54 15 25 50 Ribvoy Ostrog. 09 P.   Richaw 16 53 40 37 30 Ricka 19 59 00 43 00 Rickelshoff 41, 42 54 10 23 50 Rickenhus 44 53 25 24 40 Ricknau 17 54 10 36 40 Ricktoffte 31 55 55 28 00 Riczow 12 49 30 45 00 Ricziwol 15 52 40 34 00 Ridders 41 54 00 24 20 Riddingsdorp 43 54 05 25 30 P. Ridzin G. Reisen 15 51 30 33 40 Riebenaslabin 7, 8 58 00 57 00 Riebnaslaboda 20 58 00 57 00 Rieden 17 54 05 37 10 Rienly 25 60 00 24 00 Riensberg 43 53 55 25 10 Riepe 42 53 55 24 00 Ries 38, 39, 40 55 00 24 20 Riesbeck 40 54 50 24 10 Riesbryck 38 54 40 24 10 Riesbuy 38, 40 54 30 25 00 Rif 30 54 40 23 00 Rifhorn 30, 35 55 40 22 20 Riga 18, 19 56 30 41 00 Rigerdorff 15 52 00 32 40 Rikalholm 21 64 00 37 00 Rillesk 6, 8, 11 52 00 52 00 Rillum 39, 40 54 55 24 20 Rimanow 14, 18 49 00 39 00
Riminderfiord 26 67 30 351 00 Rimon 20, 21 60 00 34 00 Rinchow 16 54 40 38 00 Rincoperdiep 30 56 00 22 40 Rinckeniss 40 54 55 24 40 Rinckguy 38 54 50 24 40 Rind 37 56 00 23 30 Rinde 6, 7, 20 69 00 55 00 Rindsaker 6, 20, 25 60 00 25 00 Riag 37 55 55 24 10 Ringcloster 37 56 00 24 30 Ringen 20 57 00 44 00 Ringgiffue 37 55 45 23 40 Ringsebull 33 54 40 26 40 Ringsted 30, 32, 35 55 20 26 40 Ringsted Herrit 32 55 20 26 40 Ringrwed 38, 39 55 15 24 20 Rinkioperdiep 35 56 00 22 40 Rinkiobing 37 56 05 22 40 Rinom 37 56 05 22 50 Ripenberg 44 53 25 25 00 Ripensis Dioeesis 30 56 00 23 20 Ripertieff 38 55 15 23 20 Ripervig 29 58 00 22 30 Rippina 16 53 00 37 00 Ris 06 44 00 39 00 Risan 06 48 00 83 00 Risenberg 19 58 30 41 00 Risenburg 16 53 40 37 00 Risenkirch 16 53 40 37 00 Risenwaldt 16 53 40 37 00 4isinge 22 58 00 32 00 Risinghoffuit 30, 32, 34 55 30 25 20 Risolss 30, 32 55 00 26 40 Risnis 34 54 50 25 40 Risow 12 46 00 46 00 Riss 30 54 40 25 20   32, 34 54 50 28 40 Riffnes 30 54 40 25 40 Risserup 30, 32 54 40 26 40 Risten 41 53 35 24 30 Ristejervi 20 65 00 46 00 Ristersond 28 62 00 19 20 Ristijervi 21 65 00 45 00 Ristikyleicki 19 58 00 42 00 Ristisalma 21 61 30 50 00 Riszow 13 C.   Ritamen 21 60 00 48 00 Rittertam 17 54 00 36 40 Ritzebuttel 41 53 50 23 20 Ritzrow 44 53 40 25 20 River van Roems∣dalen 25 62 30 21 00 Rivulus ex flumine Tanai sive Don 10 E.   Rixdorhoffp 43 54 10 25 10 Rixstorp 41 54 10 25 10 Rndaw 18 54 30 38 00 Roa 29 58 40 20 00 Robach 17 58 05 36 50 Robbeknut 30 57 00 23 40 Robbiako 21 65 00 53 00 Roberg 6, 20 64 00 26 00 Robier 22 57 00 24 00 Robierg 30, 35 57 20 24 40 Roboa 31 55 55 27 40 Rochmancw 12, 18 50 00 44 00 Rocho 19 59 00 41 00 Rochociz 15 52 00 33 20 Rochsand 22 59 00 24 00 Gross Rocken S. 16 54 40 40 00 Klein Rocken S. 16 54 40 40 00 Rodaun fl. 16 54 00 36 00 Rodaun S. 16 54 00 36 00 Rodaw 16 53 40 37 00 Rodby 30, 33 54 40 26 40 Rodding 38, 39 55 20 24 00 Rode Aw 39, 40 55 00 24 20 Rodebeck 42 53 55 24 50 Rodeclyssand 38 55 15 23 00 Rodehoff 17 53 55 36 30 Rodehusen 40 54 35 24 10 Rode Mausdorff 17 54 10 36 40 Rodemoll 44 53 55 24 50 Roden 16 54 20 38 30 Rodenborg 41 53 45 25 40 Rodenesi 38, 40 54 50 23 40 Rodenpeis 18 56 30 42 00 Rodenpis 19 56 30 42 00 Rodensand 41 54 05 25 20 Rodersdoff 16 54 20 38 00 Roderstal 42 54 15 24 00 Rodesandt 43 55 10 25 20 Rodetieff 38, 40 54 45 23 20 Rodbel 21 60 00 46 00 Rodbelle 20 68 00 31 00 Rodia 06 42 00 47 00 Rodin 37 55 40 24 20 Roding 36 56 35 23 10   37 55 20 23 20 Rodinge 31 55 30 29 10 Roding Herret 36 56 35 23 10 Rodnaw 16 54 20 39 00 Rodniano 14 49 20 39 00 Rodoul 39 55 15 24 00 Rodozawka 12 48 30 51 00 Rodfchowa 14, 20 52 20 35 00 Rodsted 37 56 25 24 30 Roe 43 54 05 25 30 Sr. Th. Ree's I. 01 52 00 283 30 Roed 36, 37 56 20 25 00 Roeffsdorp 41 53 55 25 10 Roemdaelsche ey∣landen 06 62 00 19 00   25 63 00 19 00 Roemsdaal oft Yffi∣oerd 27 62 40 22 00 Roemsdalen 25 62 30 21 00 Roemsdaelsche Scha∣cren 25, 27 63 00 20 00 Roerwyck 22 59 00 25 00 Roest 38, 39 55 05 24 00 Roewinckel 41, 42 54 05 25 00 Roewyck 27 63 00 22 00   28 62 30 21 30 Rotdinagora 09 R.   Roffted 36 56 25 24 30 Rosnkild 36 56 40 24 20 Roffsee 38, 39 55 15 24 20 Rog R. 12 48 00 47 00 Rogatsova 6, 20 55 00 58 00   08 56 00 58 00 Rogby 36, 37 56 30 24 50 Roge 29 58 40 24 30 Rogeinen 16 54 00 37 30 Rogel 22 58 30 27 00 Rogenhausen 16 53 20 36 30 Rogesinki 19 57 00 45 00 Reggenhorst 41, 43 53 50 25 20 Roggensdorff 41 53 50 25 50 Rogho 21 59 00 41 00 Rogle 30, 31 56 00 27 50 Rogild 36 57 05 24 30 Rogin 35 56 00 24 20 Rogind 37 56 05 24 20 Roging S. 16 53 40 37 00 Roging 16 53 40 37 00 Rogitten 16 54 20 37 30 Rogo 22 58 30 25 00 Rogossno 15 52 30 34 20 Rogoszno 14 52 20 34 00 Rogowa 16 53 00 36 00 Rogs 31 55 55 27 50 Rogsen 15 52 00 33 00 Rogstrup 37 56 10 24 30 Rohaczow 06 52 00 48 00   11 53 00 45 00   18 52 30 47 00 Rohacziviense Terri∣torium 18 53 00 47 00 Rohaczik R. 12 46 30 51 00   13 O.   Rohatyn 18 49 30 42 00 Rohaznia R. 12 48 30 46 00 Rohasnie 12 48 30 46 00 Rohe 44 53 45 24 10 Rohutkiermen 6, 11 48 00 49 00 Roidal K. 25, 28, 29 59 30 21 30 Roidalsvatne 29 59 00 21 30 Roine 21 61 00 42 00 Roinewesi 21 61 30 42 00 Roinga 31 56 00 29 10 Roke 30 56 00 28 40   31 56 05 29 00 Rokiaheide 26 67 00 359 00 Rokitna 12 49 00 48 00 Rokovesi 21 63 00 45 00 Rokolax 20, 21 61 00 47 00 Rokusna R. 12 49 00 54 00 Rolandsvatne 25, 28, 29 60 00 22 00 Rold 36 56 40 24 30 Roldrup 40 54 40 24 40 Rolefesdorp 43 53 55 25 30 Rolefhagen 44 53 45 25 10 Rolestorp 43 53 55 25 10 Rolsshagen 41 53 45 25 10 Rolsshoru 42 54 15 24 40 Roll 37 56 15 24 20 Rollen 20 68 00 30 00 Roll So. 37 55 45 22 40 Rollyn 43 54 15 25 50 Rolm 40 55 05 25 40 Rolsberg 31 55 40 28 50 Rolskey 26 67 30 357 00 Rolskow 36 56 45 24 30 Rolsted 37 56 25 24 30 Rom Insula 20 55 00 23 00   30, 35 57 00 25 20   38, 40 55 05 23 20 Rombites minor 06 48 00 60 00 Romania 06 42 00 41 00 Romanicze 12 49 30 50 00 Roma nora 6, 8, 20 55 00 58 00 Romanow 12 49 30 48 00   13 K.   Romanowka 12 48 30 48 00 Romanowo 12 50 00 46 00 Romaritza 09 L.   Romatineza 12 49 30 44 00 Rombelessord 01 68 00 320 00 Romdal 44 53 45 24 20 Romerswaldt 16 54 00 38 30 Rometh 39 55 05 24 00 Romioh 40 54 45 24 20 Romitten 16 54 00 40 30     54 20 40 00 Romitisch Iagtpude 16 54 20 40 30 Rommen 16 53 20 37 30 Rommendal 20, 25 60 30 26 00 Romo 36, 37 56 30 22 40 Romozyn Las. 12 48 00 48 00 Romps 30, 35 55 20 25 20 Roms 40 54 30 24 10 Romsdalen 6, 27, 28 62 40 23 00 Romso 07 55 40 25 20 Ron 38, 40 55 05 25 00 Ronbaeck 32 55 10 26 40 Ronbaecksholm 32 55 10 26 40 Ronberg 36, 37 56 30 23 20 Ronbro 36 57 10 24 40 Rondoe 28 62 30 19 30 Rondrup 36 56 55 24 30 Roneburg 19 57 00 43 00 Ronfelt 38, 41 54 15 24 30 Rong 28 60 30 20 00 Rongs 22 57 00 26 00 Ronhoft 40 54 55 24 50 Ronitavesi 20 62 00 44 00 Ronne 43 54 15 25 00 Ronnebergs Herrit 31 55 50 27 50 Ronniberg 31 55 50 28 10 Ronshoff 34 54 50 24 50 Ronsholm 31 55 50 28 50 Ronsten 39 55 05 24 20 Ronswed 36 57 05 24 50 Roo 20 59 00 25 00   24 60 40 32 20 Roobergh 25, 27 64 30 26 00 Roodholm 28 60 00 20 00 Rookoe 23 58 40 35 00 Roolte 30, 32 55 10 27 00 Roomfortuna 24 59 30 33 00 Roosand 27 63 20 23 00 Roosdina 09 I.   Rooswa 07 60 00 82 00 Rootholm 23 58 50 35 00 Rop 19, 20 57 00 42 00 Ropanova 06 63 00 63 00 Ropin R. 12 50 00 48 00   13 A.   Ropola 20 64 00 47 00 Rorbaek 37 55 50 23 50 Rorbaek So. 37 55 50 23 50 Rorbeck 34 55 25 25 20   39, 40 54 55 24 10 Rorby 32 55 30 26 00 Roring 20, 30 56 20 24 00 Rorkar 39, 40 54 55 24 00 Rorsl. 35 56 00 25 00 Rorop 32 55 30 27 00   35 56 20 24 20 Rorslo 34, 37 55 25 24 40 Rorwyg 32 55 50 26 20 Ros 18 53 00 42 00 Ros fl. 12 49 00 48 00   13 D.   Rosa 15 52 00 33 20 Rosauca 18 53 00 42 00 Rosberg 36, 37 56 35 24 50 Rosdoria 6, 8 50 00 66 00 Rosdori Donski 6, 8 50 00 69 00 Rosen 16 53 20 37 00 Rosenaw 16 53 40 37 00     54 00 38 30 Rosenberg 16 53 40 37 00 Rosenbergischwick 16 54 20 37 30 Rosendal 31 56 00 27 50 Rosenfelde 43 54 15 25 00 Rosengaard 36 56 40 23 20 Rosengard 17 54 00 36 50 Rosengart 16 54 00 39 30 Rosenhoff 41, 43 54 15 25 50 Rosenholm 37 56 15 24 50 Rosenort 17 54 00 37 00 Rosenou 17 54 10 36 50 Rosenow 14 53 40 32 00 Rosenthal 16 53 20 37 30 Rosenwald 37 55 40 24 20 Rosetal 15 51 30 33 00 Rosfiorden 29 57 40 21 30 Rosienie 6, 20 55 00 41 00 Rosing 36, 37 56 20 25 10 Rositen 19, 20 56 00 45 00 Rositta fl. 19 56 00 44 00 Roskild 30, 31, 32, 35 55 40 27 00 Rosleff 36 56 40 23 30 Roslocken 16 53 20 39 30 Rosnes 30, 32, 34, 35 55 40 25 40 Rosnes Gniben 32 55 40 25 40 I. Rosno 10 B.   C. Rosofar 11 47 00 51 00 Rososse 18 51 30 41 00 Rospopien 08 51 00 74 00 Roffa 11 48 00 52 00 Roffar 19, 20, 21 59 30 40 00 Rosschintzke 16 53 20 40 00 Rosse 19 58 00 45 00 Rossitten 16 55 00 39 00 Ross malaness 26 65 00 352 00 Rossocka fl. 14, 16 53 00 39 30 Rossocken 14 53 00 39 00 Rost 42 54 10 24 00 Rostang 31 55 50 28 40 Rostarzewo 15 51 50 33 20 Rostawica R. 12 49 00 48 00 Roste 38, 40 54 40 25 00 Rosted 36, 37 56 20 22 50 Rostock 20 53 00 27 00   6, 30, 54 00 27 00   09 Q.   Rostow 6, 7, 8 57 00 59 00   17 54 15 36 10
Rostrup 36 56 55 22 50 Rostwarowo 15 52 20 34 00 Rostwyck 21 65 00 37 00 Roszan 14 52 40 39 00 Rotby 20 54 00 26 00 Rotel 19 58 30 40 00 Roterkrug 17 54 00 36 50 Rotha fl. 18 50 00 42 00 Rothnes 41 53 25 25 00 Rotkel 34 55 05 25 20 Rotkow 41 53 55 25 30 Rotlof S. 16 53 40 37 30 Rotneby 20, 22, 30 56 00 31 00 Rotsbeck 41 53 50 25 20 Rott 20, 25 58 30 20 00   40 54 25 24 20 Rottenby 30 55 00 29 40 Rottes 27 63 20 24 00 Rottesdorp 43 53 50 25 20 Rottum 20, 22 55 00 29 00 Rotuns 28 60 30 23 30 Rotz fl. 07 65 00 61 00 Rotzilain lacus 20, 21 61 00 44 00 Rotzinjervi 21 64 30 47 00 Rotzo reca 20 65 00 61 00 Rovaniemi 20 66 00 41 00 Rouden 17 53 55 36 10 Rovenes 20 70 00 39 00 Roveroth 42 53 45 24 00 Roveur 28 59 30 19 30 Rouffslundt 38, 39 55 05 24 00 Rougs 20 57 00 26 00 Rougstrup 39 55 15 24 20 Roun lacus 23 60 20 32 00 Rounela 06 69 00 38 00 Rousey 09 F.   Rouxela 20 69 00 36 00 Rowbirg 39 55 15 24 20 Rowna 18 50 30 44 00 Rowstorp 41, 44 53 35 25 00 Roy 39 55 20 24 20 Rozan 18 52 30 39 00 Rozanna 18 52 30 42 00 Rozanowka 12 49 30 52 00 Rozbykolo 12 49 30 52 00 Roztki 12 49 00 49 00   13 D.   Rozgrzebienica 18 56 00 51 00 Rozwoloze 18 49 00 47 00 Rozysseza 18 50 30 43 00 Rubalgaard 37 55 40 23 50 Rubberg 14 50 40 33 00 Rube 37 55 15 23 00 Rubenscoi Ozera 6, 7, 20 59 00 59 00 Ruberg 33 54 40 26 20   36 57 15 24 00 Rubiczewicze 18 53 30 44 00 Rubiessow 18 50 30 42 00 Rubina 12 49 30 51 00 Rubon fl. 18 56 00 43 00 Rubotka 10 B.   Rubsdorp 43 54 20 25 00 Ruckersdorff 15 51 30 32 40 Rud 22, 30 57 20 27 20 Ruda 15 51 50 35 00   24 60 10 29 40 Rudaw 16 53 20 40 00 Rudbom 06 46 00 40 00 Rude 38, 40 54 40 24 50 Rude fl. 39 55 10 24 10 Rudebeck 39 55 05 24 20 Rudenwerder 41 53 30 25 30 Rudewade 44 53 35 25 10 Rudkoping 32 54 50 25 40 Rudnice 15 52 40 34 20 Rudniki 18 54 00 42 00 Rudomina 18 54 00 41 00 Rudtieff 39 55 00 23 40 Rudtkoping 38 54 55 25 50 Ruganara 20 64 00 50 00 Rugard 30, 34, 35 55 25 24 50 Rugavara 6, 7 64 00 51 00 Rugen 30 54 20 28 20 I. Rugen 06 54 00 28 00 Rugenvand 25, 28, 29 60 00 23 00 Rugenwalde 14 54 20 32 00   20 54 00 33 00 Rugerod 31 56 05 27 30 Rugge 42 53 50 23 50 Ruggesandt 38 54 15 23 50 Rugia Insula 14, 20 54 20 29 00 Ruien 19, 20 57 30 42 00 Ruil 19 58 30 42 00 Rulbroaa 36 56 35 23 20 Rulle 40 54 35 24 50 Rullum husum 42 53 55 23 50 Rulsohow 38, 40 54 45 24 40 Rulsoe 20 71 00 39 00 Rum 35 56 20 23 00 Rumal 20, 21 61 00 46 00 Rumarepper 26 65 00 356 00 Rimen 19, 20 56 00 39 00 Rumeta 20, 21 60 00 48 00 Rumfortuna 22, 23 59 30 33 00 Rumne 12 49 30 52 00 Rumne Suche R. 12 50 00 51 00 Rumper 42 54 15 24 50 Rumpel 44 53 45 25 00 Rumpt 42 53 45 25 00 Rumssysski 18 54 30 42 00 Rumasten 20, 22 56 30 33 00 Runaw 16 54 00 38 30 Rund 37 56 15 24 40 Runda 19 59 00 44 00 Rundby 30 55 40 24 00 Runden 24 60 30 32 20 Runderort 16 54 40 39 00 Rundmoll 39 55 05 24 30 Rundthost 38, 40 54 40 25 00 Rungholt 38, 40, 41 54 30 23 50 Runkeby 34 55 15 25 20 Runo 19 57 30 40 00   22 57 00 33 00 Runowo 15 51 40 34 20 Runsborg 18 56 00 40 00 Runstigokto 32 55 50 27 20 Runt Fiell 20, 25, 27 63 00 25 00 Rurasertima 20 59 00 33 00 Rurup 38, 39 54 35 24 50 Rusawa 12 48 30 46 00 Ruscha fl. 20 57 00 46 00 Rusche 42 54 15 24 50 Ruscinow 18 50 00 49 00 Rusel 30 53 40 25 20 Ruskog 6, 20, 22 58 00 30 00 Ruslana fl. 10 F.   Rus Nava 21 59 00 46 00 Rusouf 13 C.   Rusowo 12 48 00 46 00 Russ 16 55 00 39 30 Russchehaken 19 59 30 46 00 Russe 42, 44 53 50 24 10 Russe fl. 16 55 00 39 30 Russia 11, 12 55 00 42 00 Russia rubra 18 50 00 40 00 Russino 6, 11 50 00 48 00 Rust 20 67 00 24 00 Rusta T. 20 68 00 35 00 Rusthusen 42 54 00 23 50 Rutebull 38, 39, 40 54 50 23 50 Ruting 43 54 10 25 50 Rutkoping 30, 34 54 40 25 40 Rutlen 29 60 40 19 30 Rutschicz 15 52 10 32 40 Rutt 20 54 00 28 00 Rutte 44 53 40 24 10 Ruttin 41, 43 54 05 25 40 Rutzen 15 51 20 33 40 Runns k. 29 60 20 24 00 Ruzyn 18 50 00 46 00 Ry 20 59 00 28 00 Rya 20, 22, 30 56 00 28 00 Ryffa 30, 35 56 40 24 20 Rybe 20 55 00 23 00 Rybenberg 41 53 30 25 30 Rybnik 14 50 00 35 00 Ryckel 44 54 00 24 50 Ryczny 12 49 30 51 00 Ryd 21, 23 59 30 35 30 Ryde 33 54 45 26 30 Rydik 36, 37 56 25 23 10 Rye 30 55 20 26 40   35, 37 56 00 24 00 Rygaard 36, 37 56 20 25 20 Ryhaff 36, 37 56 30 23 10 Ryhcma 20 61 00 37 00 Ryholin 22 56 30 30 00 Rykfortkrog 17 54 20 36 20 Rylesch 6, 8 51 00 54 00 Rylsk 12 50 30 53 00 Rymito 19, 21 60 00 39 00 Ryne 31 55 25 29 00 Ryomgaard 36, 37 56 20 25 00 Rypa 31 56 15 29 00 Rypen 38, 39 55 15 23 40 Rypin 14 52 40 37 00 Riperdeep Die Nac∣kegenandt 39 55 10 23 30 Ryperhus 35 55 20 23 20 Ryr 20, 22 58 00 27 00 Ryrowka 12 49 30 58 00   13 B.   Rys 20 59 00 44 00 Rysby 20, 22 56 30 32 00 Ryslet 36 56 55 24 10 Ryss 40 54 55 25 30 Rysseberg 31 55 55 28 40 Ryssobote 21 60 00 46 00 Ryssholm 30, 31 56 00 28 20 Ryst 38 54 55 23 10 Rysten 44 53 35 24 30 Rystsandt 39, 40 54 55 23 10 Rysum 30, 35 54 40 24 00   38, 40 54 45 23 50 Ryszow 12 49 30 49 00 Ryt 19, 20 57 00 45 00 Ryttern 22, 23, 24 59 20 33 00 Rzaszotonuwka 12 48 30 52 00 Rzeczki 18 54 30 44 00 Rzeczyca 11, 18 52 00 48 00 Rzeczycensis Terra 18 52 00 48 00 Rzemien 14 49 40 38 00 Rzepilewo 15 52 20 33 20 Rzepucwow 18 54 30 48 00 Rzoawa Wodino∣rowa 7, 8 56 00 54 00 Rzouwa 20 55 00 45 00 Rzyssczow 11 50 00 47 00 S.   SAaby 32 55 30 26 40 Saala 6, 7, 20 62 00 56 00 Saals 37 56 15 24 30 Sabackzar 6, 7 58 00 70 00 Sabazara 10 C.   Sabbara 16 53 20 38 00 Sabine 14 54 20 40 00 Sablondnie 6, 7 62 00 64 00 Sabloudine 09 M.   Sabolotie 09 P.   Sabolotka 09 E.   Sabolotna 07 61 00 65 00   09 H.   Sabolotva 06 61 00 65 00 Sabro 37 56 10 24 30 Sabro Herret 37 56 10 24 30 Saby 22 57 30 31 00   24 59 20 32 40 Sachaizow 18 52 30 39 00 Sachta 09 E.   Sackaraw 16 53 20 36 30 Sackbaek 37 55 40 22 50 Sackula 20, 21 60 30 49 00 Sackum 19 56 30 38 00 Sacora dorp en River 09 P.   Saderwisch 42 54 00 23 50 Sadi 15 52 20 33 40 Saddle I. 01 79 55 35 00 Sadluck 17 53 50 36 40 Sadowo 18, 19 55 30 41 00 Saeby 30, 32 55 40 26 40   33 54 45 26 20 Saebygaard 36 57 10 24 50 Saencluga 09 P.   Saetwitz 43 54 20 25 50 Saevild 37 56 00 24 50 Safan 20, 22 60 00 30 00 Safuen 22 57 30 28 00 Sagan 14, 15 51 20 32 40 Sagatin 6, 7 60 00 89 00 Sagatoierfui 20 65 00 31 00 Sagen 16 53 20 36 30 Sagerinsko Ins. 10 C.   Sageware 12 48 30 42 00 Sagnisk 19, 20 57 30 44 00 t' Castel Sogori 09 Q.   Sagow 43 54 10 25 30 Sagvasdina 6, 7 68 00 83 00 Sagwara 06 68 00 36 00 Sahalax 21 62 00 41 00 Sahlasokn 24 59 40 33 20 Sahmbs 41, 44 53 30 25 10 Saholm 38, 40 54 40 24 10 Saholmaw 38 54 40 24 00 Sahsel 41 53 35 24 50 Saientzkova 16 53 20 36 00 Saierskn 20 58 00 51 00 Saila 20 57 00 27 00 Sainam 01 70 00 31 00 Sais 19, 20 58 00 42 00 Saki 15 51 40 33 40 Sakien 20 60 00 46 00 Sakiervi 21 60 30 46 00 Sakus 6, 7 65 00 94 00 Sala 21 63 00 48 00   22, 23 59 30 33 00 Salaberg 24 59 40 33 20 Salac 13 A.   Salacinit 06 48 00 50 00 Saladam lacus 24 59 40 33 20 Salaruy 31 55 45 29 10 Salasze 12 49 00 46 00 Salatt 19 56 00 42 00 Salatski 19, 20 57 30 45 00 Salaw 16 54 20 39 30 Salberget 23 59 40 33 00 Salbo 20, 25 63 30 27 00 Salder fl. 11 47 00 54 00 Salen lacus 22 56 30 30 00 Salenski Daebia 6, 7 69 00 53 00 Salenski Daelna 20 69 00 56 00 Salselt 14, 16 53 40 37 00 Salhro So. 37 56 00 24 10 Saline 10 F.   Salinae cristallinae 10 F.   Saline 11 46 00 47 00 Salinea 6, 8, 11 48 00 54 00 Salines 12 45 30 50 00 Saling 36 56 40 23 20 Salinis 6, 20, 21 61 00 51 00 Salis fl. 19 57 30 42 00 Salisbury I. 01 63 10 289 00 Salisfodinae 14 49 40 37 00 Salisfodinae Russo∣rum 10 C.   Eyl Salisnoy 09 O.   Sall fl. 16 54 00 37 30 Salla T. 20 67 00 31 00 Sallen 16 53 40 39 00 Sallero 20 70 00 34 00 Salleruy 31 55 35 28 20 Salling 30, 35 56 20 23 20 Sallingsund 35 56 20 23 20 Salm 15 53 00 33 00 Salin huys 09 S.   Salmanshaven 28 62 00 19 00 Salmanshutten 20, 25 61 30 19 00 Salmia 61 54 00 37 30
Salmockia 20 63 00 63 00 Salnack 20 03 34 04 59 Salo 20, 21 64 30 40 00 Salonichi 06 42 00 40 00 Salishovet 34 55 30 25 20 Salsberg 19 57 30 42 00 Salsow 30, 41, 43 54 20 25 10 Salten 6, 20, 25 66 00 27 00 Salte Slot 32 55 10 26 40 Saltkog 31 55 50 29 10 Saltmerfioerd 28 59 30 19 30 Saltvik 19, 20, 21 60 00 37 00 Saltum 36 57 05 24 00 Salts S. 16 53 40 39 00 Saltsbeck 39 55 05 24 30 Salvage I. 01 63 10 302 00 Salven 27 64 40 26 00 Samaelliwka 12 49 00 46 00 Samangerfioerd 28, 29 60 00 20 30 Samar fl. 10 C.     11 49 00 50 00   13 L.   Samar 06 52 00 77 00   10 C.   Samara R. 06 52 00 78 00   12 47 30 53 00 Sambenes 28 60 00 21 00 Sambia 16 54 40 38 00 Sambory fl. 12 50 00 51 00 Samdon 20 57 00 29 00 Samfiere 20, 25, 29 61 00 20 00 Samien 06 70 00 30 00   20 69 00 32 00 Samland 16 54 40 38 00 Samlenes 29 60 00 21 30 Samlode 21 65 00 53 00 Sammanger 29 60 00 20 30 Samogitia 6, 16 56 00 39 00 Samoieda 01 67 00 80 00   6, 7 68 00 89 00 Samoleze 15 52 30 33 20 Samosco 20 59 00 48 00 Samotiga 09 B.   Samotiana 09 I.   Samotz 07 59 00 61 00 Samotzga 06 59 00 62 00 Samps 30 56 00 25 20 Sampter 14 52 20 33 00 Samsiere 06 61 00 20 00 Samso 30, 32, 35 55 40 25 00 San fl. 14, 18 50 30 40 00 Sanaggar 34, 37 55 35 24 40 Sanagr 30 55 20 28 20 Sanalioki 21 61 30 40 00 Sanbit 06 59 00 30 00 Sancklam 40 54 40 24 30 Sancti Montes 11 50 00 61 00 Sand 37 55 15 22 40 Sanda 09 E.   Sandal 25 62 30 23 00 Sandava 26 66 00 349 00 Sandby 22 56 30 33 00   31 55 30 29 50     55 40 28 40   33 54 45 26 20 Sandbygaard 32 55 20 26 40 Sandbyhoff 31 56 00 29 10 Sande 44 53 45 24 20 Sandecz 14, 18 49 20 37 00 Sandeid 20, 25 59 30 20 00 Sandeid K. 28, 29 59 20 20 30 Sandenn 21 64 30 38 00 Sanderson's hope 01 73 20 320 00 Sanderson's tower 01 68 00 313 00 Sanderup 30 56 00 24 00 Sandewaldaw 14 51 20 33 00 Sandfiord 29 58 20 23 30 Sandhammer 30, 31 55 30 29 50 Sandisnehen 41, 44 53 40 25 10 Sandkrog 17 54 05 37 00 Sandnes 29 58 20 22 30 Sando 19, 21 60 00 42 00 Sandoc Hede 37 56 10 23 10 Sandoe 27 63 00 21 00 Sandohampn 22, 23 58 30 36 00 Sandom 22 57 30 29 00 Sandomiria alias San∣domirs 14, 18 50 00 39 00 Sandplaet 10 C.   Sands 20, 26 50 00 21 00 Sands K. 29 59 00 21 00 Sansta 27 64 20 24 00 Sandsuer 29 59 20 24 00 Sandt 39 55 05 23 20 Sandtbeck 40 54 40 25 00 Sandthokel 26 66 00 357 00 Sandwyck 22, 25 59 00 24 00   26 67 00 01 00   39 55 10 24 30 Sangarum 34 55 20 25 00 Sangisland K. 29 58 00 22 00 Sanholt 34 55 05 25 10 Saniara 08 52 00 77 00 Sanna 11 46 00 60 00 Annagr 31 55 25 28 50     56 00 28 10 Sanne 16 53 40 40 30 Sanock 14 49 00 39 00 Sansand 25 59 00 26 00 Sansoy 20 55 00 25 00 Sansund 0, 22 59 00 26 00 Santfiord 25 58 30 24 00 Santhamer 22, 30 55 10 29 20 Antock 18 49 30 40 00 Santodero 11 46 00 54 00 Santruy 30, 31 55 40 28 00 Santuaer 20 69 00 33 00 Santwyck 19, 22 57 30 35 00 Sanuyk 19 57 30 35 00   20 57 00 36 00   22 55 00 30 00 Sanwick 22 56 30 28 00 Saoseria 6, 7 63 00 65 00   09 M. & P.   Saostrome 6, 7 62 00 64 00 Saostrovie 09 N.   Sapiciezyski 18 54 30 41 00 I. Saponoska 10 A.   Sapsojervi 20, 21 64 30 45 00 Sara 19, 20 57 00 42 00 Sarachi 06 47 00 47 00 Saraevae 09 E.   Sarafka 12 49 00 45 00 Saraitfich 06 49 00 78 00 Saraponicooscy 6, 7 70 00 88 00 Sarass 18 52 30 41 00 Saratoff 6, 8 52 00 76 00 Sarbinowo 15 51 30 34 00 Sarckaw 16 55 00 38 30 Sarckewitz 43 54 00 25 30 Sarga fl. 11 50 00 55 00 Sargen S. 16 53 40 36 30 Saribrod 06 43 00 39 00 Sariol Kurgan 10 D.   Sarismaki 20, 21 64 00 44 00 Saritz 20 59 00 48 00 Sarkasalt 21 62 30 46 00 Sarkisalt 20 63 00 46 00 Sarlhusen 41 54 00 24 30 Sarllaw 42 54 00 24 40 Sarnow 14 51 20 33 00 Sarnowo 15 51 20 34 00 Arow 41, 43 54 00 25 20 Sarra 6, 7 58 00 80 00 Sarrethusen 42, 44 54 00 24 30 Sarslo 31 55 35 28 20 Sarsta 22 58 00 28 00 Sartowitz 16 53 20 36 00 Sartzbuttel 42 54 10 24 00 Saseetsie 09 P.   Saslat 14 49 20 36 00 Sassel 43 54 10 25 20 Das Landt Sassen or Sachsen 41, 44 53 45 25 20 Sasseruy 31 55 40 29 00 Sassow 43 54 15 25 50 Saswede 30, 31 55 20 25 40 Satakunda 21 62 00 39 00 Satanow 12, 18 49 30 44 00 Satchedorp 43 54 20 25 20 Sater 20, 23 60 10 32 00 Satewitz 41 54 20 25 50 Sather 24 60 20 32 00 Satherboo 24 59 10 32 20 Satita 22 57 00 27 00 Satorp 38, 40 54 40 24 40 Satosta 31 55 45 29 00 Satrinde S. 16 53 40 40 00 Satrup 38, 40 54 55 24 40 Satska 6, 7 64 00 54 00   20 64 00 54 00 Satup fl. 16 55 20 40 00 Sava 20 66 00 36 00 Savatopoli 11 46 00 63 00 Sauch 19 56 00 43 00 Save 19 59 00 43 00 Savef 21 59 30 46 00 Savijoki fl. 21 60 30 39 00 Saulel 16 54 00 38 30 Savolax 6, 20, 21 63 &c 46 00 Savalaxia 21 65 00 52 00 Sauran fl. 11 48 00 47 00 Sauva T. 20 67 00 34 00 Sawada 15 51 30 33 40 Sawin 14 51 00 41 00 Sawoloce 6, 20 56 00 47 00 Sawran R. 12 48 00 47 00 Saxen 24 60 10 30 40 Saxhit 20, 22 59 30 30 00 Saxkoping 30, 33 54 40 26 40 Saxstorp 38, 40 54 30 25 00 Sayersmeck 20, 21 64 00 43 00 Saysel 08 53 00 61 00 Sbabaskick 06 52 00 83 00 Sbara Ducal 12 49 30 44 00 Sbaras 12 49 00 47 00 Sbuczin 14 52 00 40 00 Scaehuyxfioerde 27 63 40 24 00 Scager 30 57 20 25 00 Scagerrif 20, 30 57 20 25 00 Scahorse P. 01 65 00 284 00 Scalfhale 06 44 00 70 00 Scalsio 20 57 00 27 00 Scamachi 06 47 00 75 00 Scamena alias Schosna fl. Hyrgis Herodoto 11 52 00 55 00 Scanderborg 37 56 00 24 30 Scandrup 37 56 00 24 30 Scania vulgo Schonen 22 56 00 28 00 Scara 20, 22 58 00 29 00 Scarep 34 55 10 25 30 Scarholt 20, 22 55 30 28 00 Scarhorn 41 53 55 23 10 Scebing S. 16 53 40 37 30 Scelehange 28 60 30 20 00 Schacht 42 54 15 24 30 Schachthagen 43 54 05 25 40 Schackendorp 41, 43, 44 53 55 25 00 Schaddelhorn 43 53 50 25 10 Schadeck 14 51 40 35 00 Schadelig sand 37 56 00 23 40 Schader 37 56 15 24 40 Schadewald 17 54 00 36 40 Schads 38, 39, 40 55 00 23 40 Schaepsted 42 54 05 24 00 Schaeropen 23 58 40 35 00 Schaerswyk 27 64 00 24 00 Schafftlundt 38, 40 54 45 24 10 Schager Rack 35 56 40 26 00 Schagerriff 35, 36 57 20 25 00 Schakunicke 16 55 00 39 30 Schalavonia 16 55 00 40 00 Schalckhlt 42 54 15 24 00 Schalhorn 43 54 10 25 10 Schalka 14 50 40 33 00 Schallings sand 38 55 25 23 10 Schals 30, 35 56 20 23 40 Schalteck fl. 16 54 40 39 30 Schamacsi 06 41 00 47 00 Schandelig Sand 37 55 40 23 20 Schanderborch 30, 35 56 00 24 20 Sceanderup 38, 39 55 25 24 20 Schandow 14 50 40 31 00 Schannen 16 53 00 37 00 Schanshoeck 6, 7 71 00 77 00 Schantz 17 54 00 36 50 Schantz am bohmgar∣tenweg 17 53 55 36 50 Schapste 30 54 00 24 00 Schapsted 41 54 05 24 00 Scharbutze 43 54 00 25 30 Scharffenber 17 54 10 37 10 Scharffsdorp 43 54 15 25 10 Scharholm 28 60 30 20 00 Scharild 37 55 55 23 20 Scharildgaard 37 55 45 24 30 Scharpau 16, 17 54 15 36 40 Scharoe 38 55 00 25 30 Scharse 16 53 00 36 00 Schartwed 39 55 26 24 30 Schatz herritzting 37 55 30 23 00 Scharzkirk 37 55 25 22 50 Schaulx ffaw 39 54 55 24 10 Schedelitz 14 49 40 36 00 Schednitz 16 53 40 38 00 Scheephaven 28 59 30 20 00 Schenburg 42 54 10 24 30 Scheiby 37 56 10 24 40 Scheidebeck 39 54 50 24 00 Scheid 16 55 00 40 00 Schelde 38 54 50 24 50 Schelischwick 16 54 20 38 00 Schelitten 16 53 40 38 00 Schellen 16 53 40 39 00 Schelling 20 53 00 20 00 Schellinghorn 39 54 50 23 20 Schelmund S. 16 53 40 40 30 Schelrade 41, 42 54 10 24 10 Schenckenberg 41 53 45 25 20 Schenderop 34 55 25 25 20 Schenefelt 41, 42 54 05 24 10 Schenkel 41 54 20 24 40 Schenno 16 53 00 38 00 Schepenpa, nunc Schippenbeyl 18 54 00 39 00 Scheperi 42 54 15 24 50 Schepery 44 53 45 24 40 Scheps 16 53 00 37 00 Schering 34 55 05 25 20 Schern 30, 35 56 20 24 20 Schernbro 37 55 55 22 50 Schernicke fl. 16 53 20 38 30 Schern S. 16 53 40 39 00 Scherrebeik 38, 39 55 05 23 40 Scher So 37 55 30 23 40 Scherum 36 57 15 24 40 Scherumbro 36, 37 56 20 22 50 Schesky S. 16 53 20 38 30 Schessuppa fl. 16 54 40 41 00 Schetland I. 01 60 00 15 00 Scheven 16 53 20 37 00 Scheukirk 36 57 10 24 40 Scheute 16 54 20 37 30 Schibasen 14, 15 52 00 37 30 Schibbel 37 55 40 23 50 Schichmamago Ins. 10 B.   Schiedenborg 41 53 35 25 30 Schierbroeck 42 54 15 24 10 Schiermonckoge 20 53 00 20 00 Schiern 37 55 55 23 00 Schiernow 38, 42 54 20 24 30 Schifelbein 20 53 00 32 00 Schifhus 36, 37 56 30 23 30 Schikwirnawitz 14 51 40 37 00 Schildberg 14 51 20 37 00 Schildberg 14 51 20 34 00 Schildek 16 53 20 37 30 Schilderop 35 56 20 24 20 Schilling 16 53 40 37 30 Schiltern Ostrowit 16 53 20 37 00 Schilup 16 54 40 40 00
Schimonicken 16 53 40 39 30 Schinkel 40, 42 54 20 24 40 Schiod 37 55 45 24 30 Schiodstrup 37 56 10 24 50 Schipbeck 41, 44 53 30 24 40 Schiphost 44 53 40 25 10 Schiplund 39 55 15 24 10 Schippenpeil 16, 18 54 00 39 00 Schiraiboirak 10     Schirenbeck 43 54 10 25 30 Schiret fl. 11 49 00 54 00 Schirkup 16 54 20 40 30 Schirow 41 54 20 24 30 Schirwinde fl. 16 54 40 41 00 Schirwindt 16 54 40 40 30 Schistezum Rein 16 53 20 36 00 Schlautlaw 17 54 00 36 50 Schlautz 17 54 00 36 20 Schlawa 14 51 40 33 00 G. Schlefsko 16 53 20 38 00 Schlender See 43 54 15 25 10 Schlense 16 54 40 39 00 Schlent 43 54 15 25 10 Schlichting 42 54 20 23 50 Schlickborg 44 53 45 24 10 Schlipsmynde 38 55 05 24 40 Schloem 44 53 30 24 50 Schloehaw 14 53 20 34 00 Schlos 44 53 35 25 10 Schlossaw 16 53 00 36 30 Schlotcrey 16 53 00 36 00 Schlotfelt 42 54 00 24 10 Schluiss 41 54 10 25 50 Schlukip 43 53 50 25 30 Schluse 43 54 10 25 50 Schluth 3, 40, 41 54 30 23 30 Schmalcien 16 54 00 38 00 Schmaletieff 38, 41 54 35 23 00 Schmanch 16 54 00 37 30 Schmarmensel 14 52 20 35 00 Schemeckewaldt 16 53 20 37 30 Schmeditte 16 54 20 38 30 Schmelle 14 51 40 32 00 Schmeltz fl. 16 55 20 39 30 Schmergrub 16 54 20 37 30 Schmey 16 53 20 37 00 Schmigel 14 51 40 33 00 Schnecke fl. 16 54 40 40 00 G. Schneidemuhl P. Pyla 15 53 00 34 00 Zur Schnellach 16 53 40 36 30 Schnellengtein 14 50 00 33 00 Schobore S. 16 53 20 38 30 Schobull 38, 40 54 30 24 10 Schoborg 36 56 25 22 40 Schoenefelt 41 53 35 24 30 Schoenwaldt 16 54 20 38 00 Schoerdaal 27 64 40 28 00 Schoeren 27 64 40 26 00 Schoka 16, 18 54 40 38 30 Schol 30, 35 55 40 24 20 Schold 40 54 50 24 50 Schollagger 38, 39 55 15 24 00 Scholp 30 54 00 24 20 Schomstrup 37 56 00 24 50 Schonau 16 54 00 37 30   17 54 00 36 30 G. Schonaw 16 54 20 39 00 Schonbaum 17 54 15 36 30 Schonbeck 44 53 40 25 10 Schonbecken 42 54 10 24 40 Schonberg 16 53 40 37 00   41 53 40 25 10   17 54 10 36 30 Schonbergen 38, 43 54 20 25 30 Schonbille 14, 16, 20 54 00 40 30 Schonborn 15 52 00 32 40 Schonbruch 16 54 20 39 00 Schonbruck 16 53 40 36 30 Schondomeraw 16 53 20 38 30 Schoneck 14, 16 54 00 36 00 Schonefeldt 44 53 35 24 30 Schonen 30, 31 56 00 27 40 Schonenberg 30 53 40 25 40 Schonen Veldt 43 54 10 25 30 Schonenwoldt 41 54 10 25 30 Schonerort 17 54 15 36 30 Schonetzka S. 16 53 20 38 30 Schoneweyde 43 54 10 25 10 Schonewiese 17 54 00 36 40 Schonfelt 16 53 40 38 00 Schonis 16 54 00 37 30 Schonfurst 16 53 20 37 00 Schongen 27 64 40 28 00 Schonhorst 17, 42 54 10 26 30 Schon Jariken 16 54 00 40 30 Schonigstede 44 53 30 25 00 Schonkercke 43 54 20 25 00 Schonkercken 41, 42 54 20 25 00 Schonlinden 16 54 00 38 00 Schonschutz 17 54 10 36 30 Schonse 16 53 00 36 30 Schonsee 16 54 00 36 30 Schonsund 25 64 30 27 00 Schonwaldt 16 53 20 36 30 Schonwick 16 54 20 38 00 Schonwiese 16 54 00 37 00 Schonwaldt 16 54 20 39 00 Schoon7s;ruck 16 53 40 38 00 Schoongat 28 60 00 20 00 Schoonsond 27 64 40 27 00 Schordal 20 64 00 28 00 Schos S. 16 53 40 39 00 Schostorp 30, 35 56 00 24 40 Schota 14 52 00 36 00 Shotborg 38, 39 55 20 24 10 Schotschegat 28 59 30 19 30 Schottborg Aw. 38 55 20 24 00 Schottenborghoff 39 55 20 24 30 Schotts 37 56 15 24 30 Schoubulgard 39 54 55 24 30 Schoubulling 39 55 15 24 30 Schubuy 40 54 35 24 50 Schouby 34, 37 55 30 24 40   38, 39 55 05 24 20 Schoushoffuet 36, 37 56 25 25 20 Schousund 20 64 00 26 00 Schouwesbo 34 55 25 25 20 Scowhus 39 55 20 24 10 Schraentnel 16 55 20 39 30 Schrannen 16 53 20 37 00 Schrappen 16 54 00 37 00 Schrauwe 38, 39 55 20 23 50 Schrem 36 56 55 23 50 Schrerenborn 43 54 20 25 00 Schrethstacken 44 53 35 25 20 Schrintsky 14 52 40 37 00 Schrodome S. 16 53 20 38 30 Schrogsten 16 55 20 39 30 Schdtstrup 38, 39 55 10 24 10 Schruernick 16 53 00 36 30 Schrum 41 54 10 24 00 Schrydsholt 36 57 05 24 40 Schuby 39 55 00 24 30 Schudding 19 56 30 41 00 Schuehus 35 56 20 23 20 Schuflis fl. 16 55 20 40 00 Schulen 16 54 00 38 30 Schulendorp 41, 44 53 45 25 10 Schulp 41 54 15 24 20 Schulpe 38, 40 54 15 24 00   41, 42 54 20 23 40 Schultz 17 54 05 37 00 Schurtz 17 54 20 36 20 Schustrup 39 55 20 24 10 Schutka sinus 10 C.   Schuttorp 35 56 20 24 40 Schwaben 16 55 00 40 30 Schwale fl. 42 54 05 24 50 Schwalenbroec 42 54 00 24 50 Schwalges 16 54 00 40 00 Schwalgew 16 53 40 37 00 Schwan 17 54 10 36 40 Schwanen 42 54 15 24 30 Schwansfeldt 16 54 00 39 00 Schwarmicz 15 51 50 33 00 Schwarsentz 15 52 10 34 00 Schwartz fl. 16 54 00 39 30 Schwartzelache 17 54 05 36 50 Schwartzena 16 53 20 37 00 Schwartzenstein 16 54 00 39 30 Schwartszortz 16 55 20 39 00 Schweidnitz 14 50 40 33 00 Schweinart 14 52 40 32 00 Schweintheim S. 14, 16 53 20 39 00 Schwena fl. 16 54 20 39 00 Schwentae fl. 16 55 00 40 30 Schwente fl. 16 54 00 36 30 Schwente S. 16 54 00 36 30 Schwente S. 16 53 40 38 00 Schwente W. 16 53 20 36 00 Schwentyn fl. 38 54 15 25 20 Schwerin 14 52 20 32 00 Schewetz 14 53 00 36 00 Schwinborg 38, 40 55 05 25 40 Schwingain S. 16 53 40 40 00 Skhwolmen 16 54 00 38 30 Schworlinetz 14 50 20 35 00 Schydlow 14 50 00 38 00 Schydlowietz 14 50 40 38 00 Scio 06 41 00 48 00 Scieholm 20 71 00 38 00 Scklow Comitatus 18 54 00 48 00 Sckosco 06 54 00 25 00 Sckott 16 53 20 38 00 Scludendorp 43 54 00 25 20 Scobul 41 54 30 23 50 Scobyll 40 54 40 24 20 Scodleck 14 52 00 40 00 Scodberg Herret 36, 37 56 30 22 40 Scodberg Herritz∣ting 37 56 30 22 40 Scoggeswag 28 60 00 19 30 Scogumsandt 39 55 15 23 30 Scolderup 40 54 35 24 50 Scompen 16 53 00 36 00 Sconenweide 41 54 10 25 20 Scopulus 21 59 30 41 00 Scordia fl. 08 55 00 63 00 Scorodia fl. 06 55 00 64 00 Scorpoe 28 62 30 19 00 Scorup 31 55 25 29 00 Scosna 11 52 00 59 00 Scrooezacz 14 52 20 38 00 Scudenes 25 59 00 19 00 Sculari 06 42 00 48 00 Scuttorp 30 56 20 24 40 Scyfertsswoldt 16 54 00 38 30 Sczaltin 14 52 40 37 00   16 53 00 37 00 Sczydat 18 54 30 47 00 Sdatzlin 16 53 00 36 30 Sdechow 14 49 40 38 00 Sdeden S. 16 53 40 40 00 Sduni 14 51 40 34 00 Seala 12 49 00 44 00 Sebastiowka 12 48 30 47 00 Sebber Clooster 30, 35 56 40 24 00 Sebel 19 56 30 40 00 Sebelyn 41, 43 54 00 25 20 G. Seben S. 16 54 00 40 00 Kl. Seben S. 16 54 00 39 30 Seberad 20 62 00 33 00 Sebrowcze 12 49 30 44 00 Seby 30 55 00 25 00   34, 35 56 00 24 20 Sebygard 35 57 00 24 40 Sebyow 35 57 00 24 40 Secarup 43 54 20 25 00 Sechendorp 41, 43 54 15 25 30 Secunderup 37 56 10 24 20 Sedder 30, 32 55 20 27 00 Sedert 31 55 50 29 20 Seding 33 54 40 26 40 Seddinggard 33 54 40 26 40 Sdorp 41 54 10 24 40 Sedrundk 16 54 00 40 30 Seeburg 14, 16 53 40 38 30 Seeby 30, 35 57 00 24 40 Seebygaard 30 57 00 24 40 Seedorp 41, 43 54 00 25 10 Seefelt 42 54 05 24 10 Seegard 34 55 20 25 10   38, 39, 40 54 55 24 30 Seekrugk 15 52 20 34 20 Seclandia 31 55 50 26 30 Seelendorp 43 54 15 25 30 Seelken 14, 16 53 40 40 00 Seelmenga 6, 7 60 00 65 00   09 G.   Seelskirk 36 56 55 23 00 Seelza 6, 7 62 00 64 00   09 N.   Seenfio 20 62 00 34 00 Seeps 14 52 40 37 00 Seersloff 30, 32 55 40 26 00 Seestede 38, 42 54 20 25 00 Seewang 38, 39 54 55 24 00 Segalendorp 43 54 20 25 50 Segard 35 54 40 24 40 Segenfelt 15 52 50 32 00 Segeberg 20, 30 53 40 25 00   41, 42, 43, 44 53 55 25 00 Seger 15 51 50 33 40 Segebergrheyde 41 53 50 24 40 Segersio 22, 23 59 00 32 00 Segersta 22 57 30 29 00 Segerstad 22 56 00 33 00 Seggewo 28 59 30 20 00 Seglinge 21 60 30 37 00 Seglora 22 57 00 28 00 Seglstrup 30 57 00 24 00 Segwara 20 69 00 36 00 Sehelendt 38, 41 54 15 25 30 Sehern 15 52 10 32 20 Sehordal 25 64 00 27 00 Sehruem 42 54 10 24 00 Seidisfiord 26 67 00 350 00 Seiemolle 31 55 35 28 10 Seiling 37 56 10 24 10 Seilstrup 36 57 15 24 10 Seilstrupk 36 57 15 24 10 Seio fl. 21 60 30 48 00 Seipel 16 53 20 37 30 Seiser S. 16 54 00 39 30 Seisjervi 20, 21 63 00 53 00 Seiskari 21 65 30 39 00 Seiskau 20 55 00 39 00 Seisme 22, 25 59 30 25 00 Seismer 28 60 00 25 30 Seitsch 15 51 30 33 40 Sekeya 12 47 00 44 00 Sekit Monas. 12 48 30 42 00 Sela 22, 23, 24 59 10 34 00 Selager 20 62 00 33 00 Selandia 33 55 05 26 50 Selands Odde 32 55 50 26 00 Selanger 21 62 00 34 00 Selaw 18 54 30 39 00 Selburg 18 56 00 43 00   19, 20 56 30 43 00 Selchaw 15 52 10 32 20 Selck 38, 40, 41 54 30 24 40 Seld 30, 35, 36 56 40 23 40 Seldorp 30, 34, 35 55 20 24 20 Selcezow 12 49 30 43 00 Seleneets 06 64 00 72 00   07 64 00 73 00 Selentza 20, 21 60 00 50 00 Seleroon 24 61 00 31 00 Selgenfelt 16 54 20 38 30 Selgis 6, 7, 20, 21 62 00 52 00 Selie 09 P.   Selisa 09 F.   Selisso 10 B.   Selitza 6, 7 59 00 63 00 Sellegard 22, 30, 35 56 40 24 40 Seller 20 57 00 21 00 Selleros 20, 22, 25 59 30 25 00   28 60 00 25 30 Sellested 34 55 15 24 50 Sellor 29 57 40 21 00 Selmenga 6, 7 60 00 65 00
Selonschipetia 6, 20 58 09 49 00 Selsborg 30, 31 55 40 29 40 Selskier 39 55 15 24 10 Selt 36 57 00 23 50 Selten 19, 20 57 00 44 00 Seleucax sive Sermax 99       20, 21 60 00 51 00 Selvoge 01 59 50 383 00   26 64 30 354 00 Sem 22 57 00 29 00 Sem fl. 6, 8 51 00 51 00   11, 12 50 00 53 00 Semby 30, 34 55 30 25 00 Semeikyn 6, 8 53 00 70 00 Semen 16 53 20 37 30 Semerbolle 32, 34 55 00 25 50 Semested 30, 35 56 20 24 20 Semgal 6, 20 56 00 41 00 Semibratoff 6, 7, 8, 20 57 00 59 00 Simieliski 18 54 30 42 00 Semigalla 18 56 00 42 00   19 56 30 41 00 Semigo 21 61 00 47 00 Semijervi 20 61 00 53 00 Semikorker 08 49 00 65 00 Semimaki 18 53 30 52 00 Semingen 21 62 00 47 00 Semisjersi 06 65 00 33 00 Semisiers 20 64 00 33 00 Semmerstede 38, 39 55 15 24 20 Semmertwed 39 55 15 24 20 Semsdorp 41 53 45 25 10 Semskebeeck 19 53 30 44 0 Sendzinki 15 52 10 33 20 Senecza 12 49 00 48 00 Senfurs 17 53 50 36 40 Sengeloss 32 55 40 27 00 Senhusen 40, 42 54 20 23 50 Senisjervi 20 62 00 53 00 Senkorker 06 49 00 66 00 Sennaw 16 53 20 38 00 Senne 19 57 00 44 00 Sennea 22 56 30 28 00 Sensar fl. 16 54 00 38 30 Sensburg 14, 16, 18 53 40 39 00 Senser 16 54 00 38 30 Senskowa 16 53 00 36 30 Sententz S. 16 53 20 38 30 Sepno 15 51 50 33 40 Seppakyle 19 57 30 42 00 Sepultura cujusdam Tartari religiosi 10 B.   Serben 19 57 00 43 00 Serebochova 09 E.   Seredna 09 M.   Seregova 6, 7 64 00 71 00 Serhiowka 12 49 30 52 00 Serkeloss 32 55 30 26 40 Serkerna 13 E.   Serensci Donetz fl. 08 51 00 65 00 Serensko 08 54 00 51 00 Seret 12 47 00 44 00 Seret fl. 12, 18 47 00 43 00 Sereth 06 47 00 41 00 Sereusko 06 54 00 52 00 Serna 20 61 30 28 00 Serniken 6, 19 57 00 41 00 Seroczk 18 52 00 39 00 I. Serpinski 10 E.   Serritsleff 36 57 10 24 10   37 55 55 24 30 Serslou 31 55 45 28 20 Serve T. 20 65 00 31 00 Serwecz 18 54 30 45 00 Serwecz fl. 18 54 30 45 00 Sescam 6, 8, 11 48 00 53 00 Sestede 41 54 20 24 40 Sesten 16, 18 53 40 39 00 Sesvegen 19 57 30 44 00 Seswedakle 31 55 30 28 30 Setelopow 12 48 30 47 00 Seth 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 00 Setepance 12 49 00 49 00 Setepanofce 12 48 00 44 00 Setra 09 M.   Setragoeba 20 66 00 65 00 Setzettin 14 50 20 36 00 Sevala 24 59 30 33 20 Seubil S. 16 54 40 39 30 Seven 41, 44 53 25 24 40 Sevenborgen 19, 20 56 00 38 00 Severiae Ducatus 12 51 00 52 &c Severiensis Duc. 06 52 &c 50 &c Severstede 40 54 40 24 30 Sevien 19 57 00 43 00 Sevold 6, 19, 20 57 00 42 00 Sexmeki 20, 21 61 00 41 00 Sext S. 16 53 20 39 30 Scyborcdorff 16 53 40 38 00 Seye fl. 39 54 55 23 40 Seyerswaldt 16 53 40 37 30 Seyrsleff 36 56 50 23 20 Sforth fl. 11 54 00 51 00 Sgaro 14 52 20 38 00 Sgers 14 51 40 36 00 Sgolmagova 09 O.   Shening 20 57 00 31 00 Sheperi 43 53 55 25 30 Shistrup 30 55 20 26 20 Shrop 17 54 00 36 40 Shyvenhoff 17 54 15 36 30 Siacola 07 62 00 67 00 Siady 6, 19, 20 56 00 39 00 Siaukiany 18 55 30 40 00 Siavona 06 58 00 50 00 Sibbar closter 36 56 50 24 00 Sibbendal 22 59 00 27 00 Sibbernes 19, 20 59 00 39 00 Sibbersdorp 43 54 15 24 40 Sibberuy 31 55 40 29 00     55 45 28 20 Sibbo 19, 21 60 00 42 00 Sibbofagero 21 59 30 42 00 Sibbosagero 19 59 30 42 00 Sibberia 01 64 00 80 00   06 65 00 84 00 Sibsdorp 43 54 15 25 40 Sickenes 28 62 30 21 30 Sichlin 14 52 00 36 00 Sicko 12 49 00 51 00 Sidebamo 20 62 00 37 00 Sidehamn 21 62 00 37 00 Sidorowka 12 48 30 38 00 Sidrowa 09 M. & O.   Siebenboem 41 53 45 25 10 Siebis 19, 20 56 00 46 00 Siekiera 12 49 00 47 00 Siekierzyn 12 50 00 51 00 Siela 21 63 00 34 00 Sielbeck 41, 43 54 10 25 20 Sielso 30, 32 55 50 26 40 Sielundt 39 55 25 24 30 Siem 36, 37 56 35 24 40 Siemb 38, 39 55 15 23 50 Siemlund 37 55 15 23 10 Sienno 18 55 00 48 00 Sienvatycze 14 52 40 41 00 Siepve 18 52 30 39 00 Sier 37 56 25 22 50 P. Sierakow       G. Zirckaw 15 52 30 33 00 Sierokowo 14 52 20 33 00   15 51 30 34 00 Sierez 15 52 10 33 00 Sierhagen 41, 43 54 05 25 30 Sieric 18 53 30 41 00 Siernenoes 7, 20 68 00 58 00 Sieroslaw 15 52 10 33 40 Siersloff 32 55 50 27 00 Sieruenoes 06 68 00 58 00 Sierwenta fl. 18 54 30 42 00 Siesbeck 41 53 45 24 50 Sieseby 38, 40 54 35 25 00 Sieseki 18 55 00 42 00 Sieskacri 21 59 30 46 00 Siessole 18 54 30 42 00 Siest 38, 39 55 25 24 20 Sievard 21 64 00 35 00 Sieuko 12 51 30 53 00 Sieziawa 12 49 00 48 00 Sigersted 32 55 20 26 40 Siggenersbusch 43 54 15 25 50 Siglu 26 67 30 355 00 Siglufiord 26 67 30 356 00 Signilasker 26 67 30 355 00 Signilasker 19 60 00 36 00 Sigtuna 20, 22, 23 59 30 34 00 Sikajoki 20, 21 64 30 41 00 Sikisari 21 61 30 50 00 Silberbach 16 53 40 37 30 Silbero 22 59 00 29 00 Silce 18 52 00 42 00 Silckeborch 35 56 00 24 00 Sile 14 50 40 35 00 Sileckaan 24 59 30 30 40 Silecken lacus 24 60 50 30 20 Silenga 09 I.   Silenska reca 09 O.   Silesia 14 51 20 32 00 Silhol 39 55 05 24 30 Siliaen lacus 24 60 50 31 00 Silik R. 12 47 00 54 00 Silke 37 56 05 24 10 Silkeborg 20 56 00 23 00   30 56 00 24 00 Silkina 09 I.   Silleren 22 59 00 27 00 Sillerod 22 59 00 27 00 Sillerup 37 55 35 24 10 Sillewoge 20, 25 51 30 19 00 Sillewood 28 60 30 19 30 Silmar 21 62 30 38 00 Silmarsund 20, 21 62 00 37 00 Silsen 42 54 05 24 20 Silt 30 55 00 23 00 Silterdiep 30, 35 54 40 23 00 Siltz 35 55 00 23 20 Siltzen S. 16 54 00 39 30 Simhalo 11 47 00 53 00 Simberskagora Urbis rubera a Teimute longe devastata 10 C.   Simcowieze 18 53 00 44 00 Simenaw 16 53 40 37 30 Simens 41 53 45 25 40 Simensberg 38, 40, 41 54 30 24 00 Simensklus 42 54 05 24 10 Simense 43 53 55 25 30 Simershaven 30 55 20 29 20 Simiatycze 18 52 00 41 00 Simimajok 11 48 00 48 00 T. Simla 06 49 00 70 00 Simmers Haven 31 55 35 30 00 Simno 18, 20 53 30 41 00 Simo Els 20 66 00 41 00   21 65 30 40 00 Simonsdorff 17 54 05 36 30 Simpenes 19, 21 59 30 36 00 Simrid 20, 22 57 00 27 00 Simsio 22 57 00 28 00 Simsted 36 56 35 24 10 Simtuna 22, 23 59 30 34 00 Sinfftrebe fl. 10 C.   Sindalkirke 36 57 20 24 30 Sindberg 37 55 45 24 00 Sinderborg 20 54 00 25 00 Sinding 37 56 05 23 20   37 56 10 24 00 Sindinggaard 37 56 10 23 20 Sinega 6, 7 61 00 66 00   09 K.   Singgeling 39 55 20 24 30 Singnilasker 21, 23 59 30 36 00 Sinislocz 06 52 00 46 00 Sin Oiar 6, 7 69 00 56 00 Sinopi 06 43 00 55 00 Sinova 07 60 00 65 00 Sinowoda 12 48 00 48 00 Sin samarfl 10 C.   Sinus Bothnicus 6, 20 61 00 36 00   19 60 00 35 00 Sinus Carcinitus 11 47 00 49 00 Sinus Codanus vulgo Shager Rack 30 57 00 26 20   31, 32 56 05 26 30   35, 36 57 20 25 20 Sinus Tinnicus 6, 19 59 00 41 00 Magnus Sinus Livo∣niae 19, 20 57 30 40 00 Sinuso 06 43 00 57 00 Sio 20 61 00 54 00 Sioberg 31 56 00 27 40 Siobis 06 56 00 46 00 Siobo 31 56 15 28 50 Siobol 31 55 35 29 10 Sioby 37 55 55 23 40 Sioby So 37 55 55 23 40 Siogaurd 37 55 40 23 30 Sioislocz 18 53 00 46 00 Siollenyss 38, 40 55 00 25 10 Siolyza fl. 18 55 30 40 00 Siored 31 56 00 29 00 Sioring 36 56 55 22 50 Sioring So 36 56 55 22 50 P. Siorna 09 E.   River Siorna 09 H.   Siornei in 06 55 00 57 00 Siorsleff 37 56 15 24 10 Sir 22 56 00 26 00 Siradia 14 51 20 35 00 Siraw 19 56 30 38 00 Sirenstrup 40 55 00 24 50 Siretirvesi 20 63 00 45 00 Siretuvesi 21 63 30 45 00 Sirgune 16 53 40 37 00 Sirio fl. 20 61 00 53 00 Sirkeflucht 20 66 00 33 00 Sirolien 06 51 00 74 00 Sirotien 08 51 00 74 00 Sirovag 29 58 20 20 30 Sirowatkina 09 I.   Sisan fl. 10 C.   G. Siseroy S. 16 53 20 39 00 Siselgal 19 56 30 42 00 Siser fl. 16 54 20 39 00 Sisopoli 06 44 00 46 00 Sisosera 09 L.   Sitlinskoy Ostroof 09 C.   Sitniki 12 48 30 49 00 Sitno 6, 18 56 00 47 00 Sitsmga 09 C.   Sittelong 31 55 50 29 20 Sitico 14 50 40 36 00 Sitzbuttel 42 54 05 24 10 Siversbull 38 54 25 24 00 Siversdorp 43 54 10 25 20 Siversfelt 40 54 25 24 00 Sivershagen 41, 43 54 10 25 40 Sivertshatten 44 53 50 24 50 Siu Oiar 20 69 00 57 00 Siundo 19, 21 60 00 41 00 W. Siwa R. 12 48 00 53 00 Six fl. 11 47 00 54 00 Skauro 20 59 00 20 00 Skaaro K. 29 59 00 20 00 Skabnica Woyskowa kosaski 12 46 30 51 00   13 O.   Skabta 26 65 30 358 00 Skaby 37 56 15 24 50 Skaf Weerso 31 55 30 28 30 C. Skaga 01 67 10 351 00 Skagafiord 01 67 00 351 30 Skageford 01 65 20 338 00 Skagafiord 26 67 30 355 00 Skaganess 26 68 00 354 00 Skagastrand 26 67 30 354 00 Skagen 20 62 00 35 00   21 63 00 35 00 Skala 14 50 00 36 00 Skalholt 18 49 00 44 00 Skalen 16 53 20 37 00
Skalholt 01 65 40 355 00   26 65 30 356 00 Skalingkrog 37 55 30 22 20 Skalistyarodek 18 49 00 44 00 Skaller 36 57 20 24 10 Skalose 31 55 55 29 30 Skalot 12 49 30 44 00 Skalsho 31 55 40 28 40 Skalsio 22 57 30 27 00 Skalwy 20, 22 58 30 32 00 Skammeruy 31 55 35 28 30 Skamp 15 52 00 32 40 Skampstrup 32 55 00 55 30 Skania 6, 32 56 00 28 00 Skanilla 22 59 30 35 00   23, 24 59 30 34 30 Skanor 22, 30, 31 55 30 28 00 Skaralt 31 55 40 28 40 Skarapha 12 49 00 48 00 Skarfuer 21 62 00 37 00 Skarmiers 14 50 00 37 00 Skaro 32, 34 55 00 25 20 Skarregaard 36 56 50 23 10 Skarreklit 36 57 00 23 30 Skarriso 32 55 30 26 20 Skars Fiell 06 62 00 26 00   20, 25, 27 63 00 27 00 Skarup 37 56 10 24 20 Skarzy nuwka 12 48 00 47 00 Skatila 22 56 30 30 00 Skattorp 30, 31 56 10 28 20 Skatungeby 24 61 10 31 20 Skaukirk 36 57 30 25 10 Skaun alias Skagen 06 57 00 24 00   20, 22, 25, 30 57 00 25 00 Skaunk 29 47 20 25 30 Skaunreff 29 57 40 25 30 Skawina 14 49 40 36 00 Skebbo 25 59 00 25 00 Skebboo 22 59 00 26 00 Skedvy 24 60 20 32 20 Skedwy 24 59 20 32 00 Skeen 6, 20, 29 59 00 24 00 Skeffning 32 55 50 27 00 Skeiringe 31 55 25 28 10 Skelby 30, 33 54 40 27 00   32 55 20 26 40 Skellebierg 32 55 30 26 20 Skellemull 17 54 20 36 10 Skellesta 21 64 30 36 00 Skellingkroeg 30, 35 55 40 23 00 Skelskor 30, 35 55 00 26 00 Skelum 36 56 40 24 40 Skemmershus 31 56 00 28 10 Sken 39 55 00 24 50 Skenninge 22 58 00 31 00 Skensved 32 55 30 27 00 Skepbovik 19, 22, 23 60 00 35 30 Skeptuna 21 59 30 35 00 Skerbicze 12 49 30 48 00 Skerkie 24 59 30 33 00 Skerle S. 16 53 20 37 00 Skerngaard 36, 37 56 25 25 10 Skersta 22 57 30 30 00 Skerup 37 55 35 24 00 Sketerup 36 56 45 23 00 Skeubro 36 57 10 24 30 Skeylinge 30, 31 56 00 28 00 Skeynge 30, 31 56 00 29 00 Skialkandifiord 01 67 00 357 00   26 67 30 358 00 Skibasle 31 55 55 29 20 Skiberuy 31 55 40 29 40 Skibshalm 32 55 20 26 00 Skiby 30, 32 55 40 26 40 Skielka B. 12 47 30 47 00 Skiem 20 55 00 22 00   30, 35 56 00 23 00 Skienm ffa 30, 35 56 00 23 20 Skierensund 29 57 40 22 00 Skierkragen 29 57 40 22 00 Skiern 36, 37 56 25 24 20 Skierstemuny 18 54 30 40 00 Skiffel 29 59 00 25 30 Skiffel Skarel 21 65 00 39 00 Skildrup 36, 37 56 30 24 30 Skillinge 31 55 30 30 00 Skilsion 24 60 00 30 20 Skilu 24 59 40 31 20 Skin 26 65 00 360 00   35 56 20 23 20 Skinnertruy 31 56 10 29 10 Skinskatteberg 22, 24 59 40 31 40 Skioldborg 36 56 50 23 00 Skiols 25 59 30 20 00 Skiolsfiord 29 59 00 20 30 Skiols K. 28, 29 59 30 20 30 Skiorping 32 55 20 26 20   36 56 45 24 30 Skiplana 22 57 30 27 00 Skippines Herrit 32 55 40 26 00 Skissing 33 55 00 27 00 Skiu 30 56 20 23 20 Sklakloster 23 59 30 34 30 Sklow 11 54 00 46 00 Skodborg 37 55 25 23 30 Skodevensk 29 60 20 23 30 Skofde 22 57 30 28 00 Skogsgal 31 56 15 28 40 Skogskirkia 20 61 00 33 00   24 61 10 34 20 Skoki 15 52 30 34 20 Skokowo 15 51 40 34 20 Skoldo 19 58 00 40 00 Skolenge 33 54 45 26 30 St. Skolenge 31 55 40 28 40 Skolkop 31 56 05 29 00 Skomandt 16 53 40 40 30 Skon 21 62 00 34 00 Skongel 37 56 10 24 30 Skonile 18 54 30 42 00 Skorby 30, 31 55 25 29 00 Skoren 25 64 30 26 00 Skoretina 09 I.   Skorpinge 31 56 00 28 10 Skorring 32, 33 54 50 27 00 Skorule 20 54 00 42 00 Skorzewo 15 52 10 34 00 Skosde 20 58 00 30 00 Skotsgrunden 21 64 30 37 00 Skotthus 31 55 40 29 00 Skottlandt 17 54 20 36 10 Skougaard 30, 35 55 20 24 20 Skouso 29 57 40 22 00 Skowrop 31 55 25 28 50 Skozcow 14 49 20 35 00 Skredevols 25, 28 60 30 24 00 Skreblinge 31 55 45 28 20 Ost skreblinge 31 55 35 28 20 Skrobeloff 32, 34 55 00 25 40 Skrodevolsk 29 60 40 24 00 Skrom 36 56 50 22 50 Skromberg 31 55 50 28 10 Skromult 31 56 15 28 40 Skrsipsko 15 52 20 33 20 Skrundebygdek. 29 60 00 23 30 Skrzinno 14 51 00 37 00 Skudegierdsk 29 58 40 20 30 Skuden 29 59 00 20 00 Skudenes 29 58 40 20 00 Skudi 18, 19 56 00 39 00 Skudy 20 56 00 38 00 Skuelleleff 32 55 40 26 40 Skula Mons 21 63 00 33 00 Skuttenkrog 17 54 15 36 30 Skultuna 24 59 30 33 00 Skululfiord 26 67 00 349 00 Skummesle 31 56 15 28 10 Skunmeske 30 56 20 28 00 Skutunge 22, 23, 24 59 50 34 00 Skyff 36 56 30 23 30 Skyffinge 32 55 00 27 00 Skyts Herrit 31 55 25 28 10 Skyttholm 37 56 10 24 30 Slabin 12 51 00 50 00 Slabossino 15 51 40 34 40 Slabotco 6, 7 65 00 65 00 Slabotten 20 65 00 64 00 Slado 22 57 30 33 00 Slage 20 54 00 33 00 Slagel 30, 32, 35 55 20 26 20 Slagels 20 55 00 26 00 Slagelse Herrit 32 55 20 26 20 Slagslund 32 55 40 27 00 Slalille 32 55 20 26 40 Slamersdorp 41, 42, 44 53 50 25 10     54 00 25 10 Slamyn 41 54 10 25 40 Slangerup 22, 35 55 40 27 00 Slangeruy 31 55 50 26 30 Slans 17 53 55 36 20 G. Slans 17 54 00 36 20 Slara Russa 06 57 00 51 00 Slarup 37 56 10 24 20 Slatta 20, 22 56 00 30 00 Slaukaw 14 50 00 36 00 Slawa 15 51 40 33 00 Slawatycze 18 51 30 41 00 Sleech 06 66 00 27 00 Slegeruy 31 55 25 28 20 Sleis 17 54 05 37 00 Sleming 33 54 45 26 50 Sleminge 31 55 25 28 50 Slemsdorp 43 53 50 25 40 Sleporod 12 50 30 52 00 Slesien 41, 43 54 15 25 00 Ducatus Sleswicensis 40 54 00 24 00 Sleswieg 38, 40 54 30 24 40 Sletoso 31 56 05 28 40 Sletten 25, 29 59 30 19 00 Sleway 39 55 15 24 10 Sleymunde 38, 40, 41 54 40 25 10 Sleystroem 41 54 40 24 40 Slitchting 41 54 20 23 50 Sliple 35 54 40 24 20 Slipshaven 34 55 20 25 40 Slire 28 60 30 23 00   29 60 20 24 00 Sliwenhoff 17 54 05 36 10 Sloboda 12 46 30 47 00   13 D.   Slobodi 09 C.   Slobodka 09 G.     12 50 00 52 00 sloboka 12 49 00 45 00 Slocloster 35 56 20 23 40 Slodenkrog 17 54 20 36 20 Slohadyszozo 12 49 30 46 00 Slohodysseza 18 50 00 46 00 Slokokol 12 46 00 51 00 Slomniki 14 50 00 37 00 Slonim 18 52 30 42 00 Slonygrodek 18 50 00 41 00 Slopa 15 53 00 33 00 t' Slot 09 A.   Slot 37 56 25 24 30 Sloten 20 52 00 20 00 Slouda 09 P.   Slowienie 18 54 00 47 00 Slowieszna R. 12, 18 51 30 47 00 Slowinsk 18 54 00 44 00 Sloycn 36 56 55 23 40 Slube fl. 15 51 50 31 40 Ducatus Slucensis 18 52 30 45 00 Sluczk 06 52 00 44 00   18 52 30 45 00 Slucz R. 18 51 00 45 00 Slukip 41 53 50 25 30 Slupee 15 52 00 35 00 Slupeza 14 52 00 34 00 Slupia 15 52 00 34 00 Slupiec 12 49 30 49 00 Slustrup 32 55 20 26 20 Slypminde 39, 40 55 05 24 30 Slythamm 19, 22 57 30 35 00 Smachthagen 44 53 45 25 10 Smacker fl. 16 54 20 39 30 Smadollen 28, 29 60 30 23 00 Smadzirowa 12 50 00 45 00 Smael 41 54 20 25 10 Smael fl. 42 53 50 24 40 Smaelbeck 44 53 50 25 40 Smaelonsee 43 54 05 25 00 Smaelstede 42 54 10 25 50 Smaholm 39 54 50 23 50 Smalandia 06 57 00 29 00   20 57 00 30 00 Smalefelt 41, 42, 44 53 50 24 40 Smalenbeck 44 53 40 25 00 Smalenfleth 44 53 30 24 30 Smallediep 30,35 54 40 23 00   40 54 35 23 30 P. Smarzewo       G. Schmarshaw 15 52 00 32 40 Smasensee 43 54 05 25 00 Smaskaren 21 65 00 39 00   21 61 00 34 00 Smedacker 38, 40 54 55 24 10 Smedb 31 56 00 28 50 Smedebuy 40 54 40 24 30 Smedeby 22 56 00 32 00 Smedeswurd 41, 42 54 00 23 40 Smedseruy 31 55 30 29 30 Smerbock 17 54 15 36 30 Smerop 30 56 20 24 20 Smerup 32 55 20 27 20 Smeursond 28 59 30 20 00 Smeurholm 27 63 20 22 00 Smigel 15 51 50 33 40 Smigrod 14, 18 49 20 38 00 Smikuwka 13 E.   Smil 12 46 00 47 00 Smila 12 48 30 50 00 Smiogora Mons 10 A.   Smisterup 32 55 40 27 20 Sir Tho. Smith's Bay 01 78 00 290 00 Smith's Forland 01 59 00 288 00 Smith's Iles 01 78 30 41 00 Smith's Inlet 01 79 50 39 00 Smoel 38, 43 54 20 25 30 Smolenkia 11 55 00 48 00 Smolensco 11, 18 55 00 48 00 Smolno 15 51 50 33 00 Smolsin 14 54 40 33 00 Smolsum 20 54 00 34 00 Smoluvy 18 54 30 48 00 Smolwy 18 55 30 43 00 Smorgonie 18 54 00 44 00 Smorop 35 56 20 24 20 Smorum 32 55 40 27 00 Smorums Herrit 32 55 40 27 00 Smostric 12 49 00 44 00 Smotryk 12 49 30 50 00 Smuderow 18 50 30 45 00 Smullen 25 64 30 23 00   27 64 20 24 00 Snaassen 27 65 00 28 00 Snab 36 56 45 23 10 Snabe 35 56 40 23 20 Snacko 37, 39 55 33 24 10 Snageholm 31 55 30 29 10 Snags Itrup 32 55 40 27 00 Snarsta 31 55 25 29 10 Snatebull 40 54 45 24 00 Snattarnotic 26 66 00 358 00 Snaweliock 44 53 50 24 20 Snebelshokell 26 65 30 351 00 Sneberg 36, 37 56 30 24 20 Snedinge 32 55 10 26 20 Sneland 01 65 00 360 00 Snelen 43 53 50 25 00 Snelsen 44 53 40 24 40 Snena 14 52 20 35 00 Sneselt 31 56 10 29 10 Snesloff 32 55 20 27 00 Snessore 32 55 10 27 00 Sniat 15 51 50 33 40 Sniatyn 06 48 00 43 00   12, 18 49 00 51 00 Snidten 20 57 00 43 00 Snidskaren 20 65 00 39 00 Sniobergen 24 60 10 33 00
Sniopiallastrand 26 67 00 349 00 Snittelaw 41, 42 54 10 24 10 Sniuten 24 59 40 32 20 Snode 32, 34 55 10 26 00 Snoneke 22 55 00 30 00 Snolleloff 32 55 30 27 00 Snostrup 37 56 10 24 10 Snowelsjock 42 53 50 24 20 Sobergh 36 56 45 24 40 Sobi fl. 14 49 20 36 00 Sobien 14 49 00 39 00 Sobnoclita 06 63 00 63 00 Sobolnikik 18 53 30 43 00 Soborg 31, 32 56 00 26 40 Sobota 15 52 20 33 40 Sobowyczka 12 49 00 45 00 Soby 37 56 10 24 20 Sobygaard 37 56 15 24 20 Soccobei Mons 10 D.   Sochaszow 14 52 20 37 00 Sochmbroot 20 62 00 20 00 Sochow 14 49 40 38 00 Sockelunds Herrit 32 55 40 27 20 Sodag 31 56 05 21 40 Sodenkyle 20 67 00 41 00 Soderingholm 36, 37 56 30 24 50 Soderkoping 20, 22 58 00 32 00 Sodermanniae pars 24 59 00 32 40 Sodersomsiom 24 60 10 30 20 Soderup 32 55 30 26 40 Sodre 20, 44 60 00 31 00   22, 23 60 00 32 00 Sodre Barkin 24 59 50 31 40 Soechajamore 6, 7 68 00 77 00 Soecha Verchna 09 A.   Soechna 06 60 00 63 00 Soechna fl. 07 60 00 64 00   09 A.   Soed 39 55 10 24 40 Soel 27, 28 62 30 20 00 Soelkur 39 55 15 24 30 Soelsont 25 63 30 23 00 Soende 21 62 00 45 00 Soerbirck 32 55 30 26 20 Soeren 42 54 05 24 20 Soes 38, 39 55 00 24 20 Soeska 09 C.   Soezava 06 47 00 42 00 Soffen S. 16 54 00 40 00 Soffina 08 55 00 58 00 Sofflen 37 56 10 24 40 Sog 6, 20, 25 60 00 20 00 Sogaard 36 56 55 23 00   37 56 10 22 30 Sogard 30 54 40 24 20   32 55 30 26 20 Sogn 6, 20, 25 58 00 22 00   29 60 40 20 30 Sogneby 32 55 40 27 20 Sognedal 29 58 00 22 00 Sognedalk 29 58 00 21 00 Sognek 29 57 40 22 00 Sognfioerd 28 61 00 20 00 Soholm 32 55 20 27 20 Soidefiord 29 59 20 21 00 Soiga 09 M.   Soilcamsca 6, 7 62 00 81 00 Soilotitzat 20 65 00 61 00 Soio 6, 7 61 00 53 00 Soisalo 20, 21 62 30 47 00 Soiscoigorod 01 64 55 93 00 Soisinje Volost 09 I.   Sok 12 49 00 42 00 Sokinderup 36 56 55 23 00 Sokol 12, 18 50 30 42 00 Sokol Ins. 10 D.   Sokolgoura 13 K.   Sokolma 18 51 00 43 00 Sokolnia 18 54 30 47 00 Sokolowo 15 51 40 33 40 Sokorowka R. 12 47 00 51 00   13 O.   Sola recaseu fl. 6, 7 67 00 98 00 Solartlaff 26 66 30 348 00 Solaska 20 64 00 55 00 Solberg 31 55 25 28 50 Solbierg 32 55 30 26 20 Solbroo 38, 40 54 30 24 20 Soldaio 6, 11 46 00 54 00 Soldaw 16 53 00 37 30 Soldin 14 52 40 31 00 Soldsted 37 56 15 24 10 Sole 20, 25 58 30 20 00 Solecz 14, 18 51 40 39 00 Soleczniki 18, 20 54 00 43 00 Solek 29 58 40 20 30 Solendael 6, 27 62 00 21 00 Solet 20 63 00 33 00 Soleza 06 57 00 48 00 Solhisnahokell 26 65 00 358 00 Solholt 36 57 00 24 40 Soliee 15 51 50 33 20 Solitz 16 53 00 36 00 Soliaruy 31 55 45 28 40 Soliendael 20 62 00 21 00 Solientun 23 59 20 35 00 Sollerod 32 55 30 27 00 Sollerup 39, 40 54 55 24 00 Sollingwrs 38 54 55 24 10 Sollmierzie 15 51 20 34 00 Sollwidg 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 20 Solm 15 52 10 32 40 Solmoclata 07 63 00 62 00   09 P.   Solo 19 58 30 45 00 Solok 18, 19 55 30 43 00 Solomasca 6, 8 52 00 74 00 Solombar 20 64 00 61 00 Solomireczki Horo∣dek 18 54 00 45 00 Solona 6, 8 49 00 72 00 Solona fl. 18 52 30 45 00 Solorax 21 61 30 49 00 I. soloskr 20 65 00 55 00 Solotkevo 09 R.   Solotnava 09 H.   Solotti Ins. 10 A.   Solottigora 10 A.   Solpia fl. 18 55 30 39 00 Soltaw 20 52 00 24 00 Soltenaw 20 52 00 23 00 Soltholm 31, 32 55 35 27 50 Soltoria fl. 18 54 30 40 00 Soltwedel 20 52 00 26 00 Soltza 06 58 00 51 00   20, 21 59 00 51 00 Soma 01 64 10 49 40   6, 7, 20, 21 64 00 54 00 Somby 06 68 00 43 00   07 69 00 42 00 Someraw 16 53 20 37 00 Somerfeldt 16 54 00 37 30 Somerhaff 20, 22 55 00 29 00 Somero 20 21 61 00 40 00 Som Herrit 32 55 40 27 00 Sommek 39 58 40 20 30 Sommeraner 17 54 00 36 50 Sommerao 17 54 00 36 50 Sommerhusen 42 54 15 23 50 Sommero 19 60 00 40 00 Sommersteke 38, 39 55 15 24 20 Somochza 6, 7 61 00 67 00   09 I.   Somowica 12 48 30 50 00 Somowicza 13 E.   Somps 35 56 00 25 00 Sonafleroo 09 F.   Sonberg 36 56 35 22 50 Sonboren 24 60 40 32 20 Sonder Asbo Hertit 31 56 00 28 20 Sonderboe 38, 39 55 20 23 30 Sonderborg 38, 40 54 55 24 50 Sonderfieg 39 55 25 23 10 Sonderlostgude Herrit 31 55 55 27 50 Sondersieg 38 55 30 23 00 Sondsted 30, 32 55 20 26 20 Sonerskon 06 58 00 51 00 Sonerup 32 55 30 26 40 Sonneborg 19, 20 58 00 40 00 Sonnenberg 16 54 00 37 30 Sonnenborn 16 53 40 37 30 Sonnerupgaard 32 55 30 26 40 Sonneruy 31 55 30 28 30 Sonnewlald 14 51 20 30 00 Sonoruy 31 55 35 28 40 Sonschareg 6, 8 47 00 63 00 Sontag O. K. S. 16 53 40 40 00 Soojoki 6, 7 61 00 53 00   20, 21 61 30 52 00 Soonba 09 D.   Soor Jorkin lacus 24 60 00 31 00 Soosca 6, 7 59 00 62 00 Sooski Volost 6, 7 64 00 72 00 Sophia 06 43 00 40 00 S. Sophia, olim C. Onanthia 6, 11 46 00 62 00   13 A.   Sopockini 18 53 30 41 00 Soqua 14 53 00 39 00 N. Sor 31 55 40 29 00 Sor Aa 36 57 05 24 50 Sora 30, 32, 35 55 20 26 20 Sorala 20, 21 61 00 33 00 Soralax 20, 21 62 00 49 00 Soran lacus & fl. 11 54 00 58 00 Soratoff 10 A.   Soravada 22 58 30 34 00 Sorbo 29 58 40 20 30 Sorby 24 59 20 32 00   31 56 00 29 20 Sorbye 32 55 20 26 20 Sordovat 21 61 30 49 00 Sorcesna 09 P.   Soren 41, 43 54 10 25 20 Sorhorden 25, 28, 29 60 00 21 30 Sorg 38, 40 54 20 24 40 Sorg fl. 30, 41 54 20 24 20 Sorga 6, 7 62 00 65 00 Sorga fl 09 M.   Sorgab 29 58 00 20 30 Sorgana fl. 11 51 00 60 00 Sorge 15 52 30 32 40 Sorge fl. 17 53 55 37 00 Sorghoog 40 54 20 24 40 Sor Haelle 31 55 25 28 10 Sor Helior 31 56 00 27 50 Sor Hwidinge 31 55 45 28 20 Soring 37 55 50 24 30 Sorkholm 19 58 00 41 00 Sormisca 09 O.   Sor Moinge 31 55 50 28 00 Sor Noren 24 60 10 31 00 Sorock Ostrowe 10 A.   Soroczyme 12 49 00 51 00 Sorokina 09 L.   Soronata R. 12 50 00 53 00 Sorquitten 16 53 40 39 00 Sorrerum 31 55 50 29 00 Sorslyn 14 49 00 37 00 Sorterup 32 55 20 26 20 Sorup 38, 40 54 40 24 50 Sorupgaard 30, 32 55 20 26 40 Sor Vrom 31 55 55 28 10 Soruvada 23 58 50 34 30 Sorysio 31 56 15 28 50 Sosawa 12 47 30 44 00 Sosdall 31 55 55 29 00 Sosonowsky 12 49 30 48 00 Sosna reca 6, 8 52 00 61 00 Sosnica 12 50 30 51 00 Sosnow Ins. 10 B.   Sosom crasnoi 6, 7 62 00 70 00 Sosow 12 49 30 43 00 Soss fl. 11 52 00 47 00 Sossaw 16 53 20 37 30 Sossina 06 55 00 58 00 Sostrup 36, 37 56 25 25 10 Sosz fl. 18 53 00 49 00 Socarid 22 56 30 29 00 Sotkamesi 21 62 30 46 00 Sotterup 39 55 20 24 10 Sottungar 19, 20 59 30 38 00 Sovel 36, 37 56 25 23 20 Soven ecken 41, 44 53 25 25 20 Soverka 21 63 30 50 00 Soulack 14 52 40 32 00 Sousenga reca 09 H. & O.   Sousensenga Kercvo∣lost 6, 7 61 00 66 00   09 H.   Sousengicoy Mouast. 09 H.   Sousky 13 D.   I. Sousrowits 06 66 00 60 00   07 66 00 61 00 Sousrowitz of Cruys Eylandt 20 66 00 61 00 Soute Rivier 6, 7, 20 66 00 51 00 C. Southampton 01 62 10 279 00 Southolm 22, 30 55 20 27 40 Soutkaves 20 62 00 46 00 Soutkete 6, 7 66 00 55 00 Soutlande 30 55 00 24 00 Soutsak 22, 23 59 00 35 00 Soyde 6, 20, 25 59 00 21 00 S. Soyde 28, 29 59 30 21 00 Soyfioerden 28 59 30 21 00 Spadnlandt 44 53 25 24 40 Spanden 16 54 00 37 30 Spanteth 38, 39 55 15 23 50 Spandith 37 55 15 23 10 Spandow 14 52 20 30 00 Spang 31 55 55 28 30 Spunga 22, 23 59 10 35 00 Spange 31 56 00 29 20 Spangereid 29 57 40 21 30 Sparruy 31 56 00 28 10 Sparboe 27 64 40 28 00 Sparisholm 32 55 10 27 00 Sparrishope 44 53 50 24 20 Sparsatra 24 59 30 33 20 Spas 6, 7, 8 57 00 59 00 Spasko 20, 21 59 00 49 00 Spasna priloe 6, 7, 8 59 00 60 00   09 A.   Spassa belca 10 B.   Spati 06 57 00 48 00 Specksfehr 38, 40, 41, 42 54 15 24 30 P. Speed-ill 01 76 30 83 00 Spendrup 36, 37 56 25 24 40 Sperdillen Vandt 20, 22, 25, 28 60 00 25 00 Sperling 16 54 00 40 00 Spey fl. 16 54 00 38 30 Spicinca 12 49 00 47 00 Spicket 44 53 25 24 50 Spikeroge 20 54 00 22 00 Spilkeneyck 27, 28 62 30 21 00 Spillerup 32 55 20 27 20 Spilo 37 56 10 24 30 Spilpenning 31 55 35 28 20 Spinsk 29 57 40 21 30 Spirding S. 16 53 20 39 30 Spirlingsdorp 17 54 15 36 20 Spicerod 31 56 00 28 30 Spirsberg 16 54 00 35 30 Spitsbergen 06 75 00 34 00 Spitz 17 53 55 36 20 Spoelbeck 38 54 40 24 10 Sponsa 30 56 20 28 00 Spongbro 37 55 35 24 00 Sponsta 22 56 30 28 00 Sporop 30, 35 56 00 24 20 Spottrup 36 56 35 23 10 Sprakebull 38, 40 54 45 24 10 Spranth fl. 42 54 00 24 00 Sprehe fl. 14 51 00 31 00 Sprehenberg 14 51 20 31 00 Spreng 41, 44 53 40 25 10 Sprengols 17 54 05 27 00 Spro 30, 32, 34, 35 55 20 25 40
14 51 20 32 00 Sprouden 17 53 50 36 20 Sproy fl. 16 54 00 20 00 Spurwyck 28 60 00 20 30 Spyck 30 53 40 23 00 Spyckerooge 30 53 40 22 00 Squarzepe 15 52 30 34 00 P. Squirzina G. Schwerin 15 52 30 32 20 Sracz 07 56 00 57 00 Srala fl. 15 52 30 34 20 Srast 19 57 30 51 00 Srebrne 12 49 30 51 00 Srilarud 12 48 30 47 00 Srim 15 51 50 34 00 Sroczko 15 52 00 33 40 Sroda 15 52 00 34 20 Srzednik 18 54 30 41 00 Staaby 37 56 15 22 40 Staby 30 54 20 26 00 Stackendorp 43 54 20 25 10 Stackesandt 39 55 15 23 30 Stadager 32, 33 54 50 26 40 Stadarstad 26 65 30 351 00 Stade 6, 20, 30 53 00 24 00 Stadel 37 56 10 22 30 Stadelo 37 56 10 22 30 Stadersandt 44 53 40 24 10 Stadlin 14 50 40 34 00 Stadtby 27 63 40 24 00 Stadstsbugden 27 64 00 26 00 Stadts Muling 28 62 00 19 00 Stadur 26 67 00 351 00 Staef 20 69 00 29 00 Staelsandt 40 54 35 23 30 Staf 12 46 00 51 00 Stafanger 20 58 00 20 00 Staffenstorp 31 56 15 28 30 Stafflesitz 16 53 00 36 00 Stafning 37 56 00 22 50 Staffstede 40, 42 54 10 24 30 Stagnitten 17 54 05 37 10 Stahinini 06 41 00 44 00 Stainslawow 18 51 30 40 00 Stakarp 31 56 10 28 30 Stall 17 54 00 36 50 Stalmirz 12, 18 49 30 42 00 Stamme S. 16 53 40 39 00 Stammo 19, 21 60 00 45 00 Stamerid 22 57 00 27 00 Stand 21 61 00 46 00 Stang 20, 25 60 00 26 00 Stangby' 31 55 40 28 20 Stangen 29 58 40 24 30 Stangenberg 16 53 40 37 00   17 54 05 36 20 Stangenbirg 39 55 20 24 30 Stangwyck 27 63 20 24 00 Stanilawnf 12 48 30 46 00 Staniselauf 12 50 00 42 00 Stanislawo 14 52 20 39 00 Stankow 18 53 30 45 00 Stankowo 15 51 40 34 00 Stapelfelde 44 53 35 25 00 Stapelholm 41, 42 54 25 24 00 Stapeling 20, 22 56 00 33 00 Stapholt 01 66 00 352 00   26 65 30 354 00 Stappen 20 71 00 41 00 Staps 26 65 30 351 00 Stara 6, 7 62 00 65 00 Stara Russa 20 57 00 51 00 Stara Toema 09 F.   Starbes 14 49 00 37 00 Starcice 12 49 00 48 00 Starckenberg 16 54 20 39 00 Starcz 13 F.   Stare 12 49 30 49 00 Starec 12 48 30 50 00 Stargardt 14, 16 53 40 36 00 I. starizo 10 C.   Starlacken 16 54 00 39 30 Starodub 12 52 00 52 00 Starop 35 55 20 24 20 Staropgard 30, 35 56 20 23 40 Starosiele 18 54 30 48 00 Starsecz 6, 7, 8 56 00 54 00 Startge fl. 16 54 20 38 00 Starup 30, 35 54 40 24 20 Stary 12 48 30 49 00   13 B.   Stary Dwor 15 52 20 32 20 Stary H. 12 46 30 51 00   13 P.   Starynki 18 54 00 45 00 Staswyn 16 53 40 39 30 States I. 01 69 00 76 30 Statna fl. 18 56 00 45 00 Statrup 39 55 15 24 30 Stavanger 25, 29 58 40 20 30 Stavangersleen 29 59 20 21 00 Stavangerstift 25, 29 59 00 21 00 Stavener 20, 22 59 00 28 00 Staveren 20 52 00 20 00 Stavitow 39 55 20 24 10 Stawicz 12 49 00 48 00 Staxirwald olim Her∣lands Saedeged 37 55 40 24 30 Stayki 12 49 00 51 00   13 B.   Stazsow 12 49 00 43 00 Steblo 12 48 30 49 00 Steckenis fl. 44 53 25 25 20 Stede 30, 35 57 00 24 20 Steedsandt 38, 40 54 45 24 00 Steech 20 66 00 27 00 Steeck 25 66 30 27 00 Steen 30, 32 54 40 27 20 Steendeur 23 59 00 35 30 Steenker 20, 25 64 30 27 00 Steenekruys 28 60 00 21 00 Steenloss 32 55 40 27 00 Steen Rack 09 R.   Steensoe 30 56 20 31 00 Steensond 28 61 00 19 30 Steensoort 19 56 30 38 00 Steenwyck 20 52 00 21 00 Steffens Herrit 32 55 20 27 20 Steffens hoffit 30 56 20 25 20 Steffens hoffuit 30, 32 55 20 27 20 Steffens klint 32 55 20 27 20 Steffens krog 36, 37 56 25 25 20 Steffvelt 39 55 15 24 40 Stege 20, 30, 32 55 00 27 00 Stegeborg 22 58 00 33 00 Stegen 41, 44 53 40 24 50 Steglstrup 35 57 00 24 00 Steger 17 54 15 36 40 Steiishop 41, 44 53 35 24 50 Stein 40, 41 54 20 25 00 Stein fl. 16 54 00 38 00 Stina 14 50 00 34 00 Steinow 14 51 20 33 00 Steinbeck 41, 44 53 30 24 50 Steinberg 41, 42 53 50 24 10 Steinborg 42, 44 53 55 24 10 Steinerutz 43 54 00 25 10 Steinfelt 42 54 10 24 10   43 53 50 25 10 Steinford 38, 42 54 15 25 10 Steinmett 38 54 55 24 00 Steinow 41 53 45 23 20 Stinorth 41, 43 54 25 26 00 Steinss 39 55 20 23 50 Steinwasser fl. 14 52 00 33 00 Steinwer 42 54 20 24 30 Steintkuel 44 53 50 24 00 Steiteruy 30, 31 55 25 28 50 Steiugrinisfiord 26 67 00 351 00 Stekenis 41 53 40 25 20 Steko 34, 37 55 35 24 30 Stelle 42 54 15 23 50 Stellerborg 41, 42 54 15 23 50 Stelling 44 53 35 24 30 Stellow 41, 42, 44 53 55 24 30 Stemmeshest 20, 25 63 00 21 00 Stempelburg 14 53 00 34 00 Stemwahr 44 53 35 25 00 Stenasa 22 56 00 33 00 Stenbeck 43, 44 53 55 25 10 Stenbrug 22, 25 59 00 24 00 Stenby 37 55 40 24 20 Stendrade 43 54 00 25 20 Stendrup 30, 35 55 40 24 20 Stendorp 41, 43 54 10 25 30 Stendrup 37, 38 55 25 24 00 Stenemille 32 56 30 26 20 Stenkorf 29 60 00 21 30 Stengartzhult 22 57 00 29 00 Stenholm 20, 21 59 30 44 00 Stenholt 30, 35 56 20 24 40 Stenmo 30, 31 56 20 28 20 Steno 20 69 00 31 00 Stenot 36, 37 56 25 24 50 Stenrade 43 53 50 25 20 Stenrup 39 55 10 24 00 Stensbal 30, 35 55 40 24 20 Stensbeck 36 57 25 24 40 Stensemagle 32 55 30 26 20 Stenshede 36 57 10 24 50 Stenshult 31 56 15 29 10 Stenskrag 30, 35 56 20 25 20 Stensmolle 31 56 10 28 00 Stenssew 15 52 00 33 40 Stenum 36 57 10 24 00 Stenumgaard 36, 37 56 20 22 50 Stepan 06 50 00 44 00   18 51 00 44 00 Stepanufka 12 48 00 47 00 Stephans 09 F.   Stepping 38, 39 55 20 24 20 Ster R. 12, 18 50 30 43 00 Sternberg 14, 15 52 20 32 00 Sterdebul 40 54 40 24 00 Sterkinghoy 32 55 30 27 00 Sterlincza 13 R.   Sterlnioza 12 46 30 49 00 Sterup 38, 40 54 40 24 50 Stetelup 19 57 30 43 00 Stettin 14 53 20 31 00   20 53 00 30 00 Steffenshoffit 35 56 20 25 20 Steyn 42, 43 54 25 25 20 Steynbeck 39 55 10 23 50 Stezicza 14, 18 51 20 39 00 Stezybowka 12 49 00 48 00 Stibilaw 16 54 00 36 30 Stickcista 27 64 40 28 00 Stierner 20 70 00 38 00 Stiernero 29 59 00 20 30 Stiffel So 36, 37 56 25 23 10 Stisst 25 59 30 24 00 Stigby 31 55 30 29 40 Stiggesle 31 55 30 29 20 Stigliz 15 52 50 33 00 Stilling 30, 32 55 20 26 00 The Still Sea 01 69 &c 76 &c Stinderup 39 55 15 24 40 Stintebull 38, 40 54 30 23 50 Stips 43 53 55 25 00 Stmilais Volost 07 61 00 66 00 Stobbelow 17 54 10 36 20 Stobben 43 53 50 25 10 Stobberuy 31 55 35 28 50 Stobe 17 54 10 36 50 Die Stobischelache 17 54 10 36 50 Stobnica 15 52 30 33 40 Stobnicza' 14 50 00 38 00 Stobra fl. 14 50 40 34 00 Stoby 30, 35 55 40 24 20 Stockelsdorp 43 53 50 25 20 Stockholm 6, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 59 00 35 00 Stocklisski 18 54 00 42 00 Stockmarck 33 54 45 26 30 Stocksee 41, 42 54 00 25 10 Stocksund 20 64 00 25 00   25 65 00 25 00 Stoeff 43 54 15 25 30 Stoekerhoed 39 55 15 24 20 Stoel 38, 40 54 25 25 10 Stoens 32, 34 55 10 25 40 Stoer fl. 30, 42 53 05 24 10 Stoffis 43 54 15 25 20 Stofring 36, 37 56 25 24 40 Stoffring Slot 36 56 25 24 40 Stoffwin 31 55 40 28 10 Stojanow 12 50 00 43 00   18 50 30 42 00 Stoikowo 15 52 40 33 20 Stokain 16 54 20 38 30 Stolb 07 56 00 54 00 Stoibitza Stoba 10 B.   Stolck 40 54 35 24 40 Stolham 41 53 25 23 00 Stoll 06 56 00 54 00 Stollen 16 54 00 38 00 Stolling 39 55 00 24 30 Stolmen 20, 29 59 40 19 30 Stolpa fl. 14 54 20 33 00 Stolpe 16 53 40 38 30   41, 42 54 05 25 00 Stolteland 38, 39, 40 54 50 24 20 Stoltenaw 06 52 00 24 00 Stoltenbergen 43 54 20 25 10 Stoltenfelde 15 53 00 32 00 Stonpiva 06 64 00 62 00 Stooruy 31 55 25 28 30 Stopels 27 63 20 21 00 Stople 43 54 05 25 00 Stoppels 25 63 00 21 00 Stor 36 56 40 24 10 Stor fl. 41 53 55 24 30     54 00 24 50 Storavan 01 65 00 35 00 Storchtnest 14, 15 51 40 33 40 Store 6, 20, 25, 27 64 00 25 00 Storebag So 37 55 50 24 00 Storebucken 29 59 00 20 00 Store Fulede 32 55 30 26 00 Store Junfrun 20, 21 61 00 34 00 Store Soteren 29 60 00 20 00 Store Hammar 30, 31 55 20 28 00 Storiss 37 55 50 24 30 Storko 14 52 00 31 00 Stormar 30, 41 53 55 24 20 Stormaria 43, 44 53 55 24 50 Stormsund 28 60 00 19 30 Storn Aivan 20 64 00 34 00 Stornisgarde 38, 39 55 00 24 10 Stor Oen 29 59 40 20 00 Storonscoy 20 58 00 47 00 Storrorbaek 36 56 35 24 20 Storusna 20 59 00 52 00 Storwore 36 56 50 24 40 Stove 30, 41 53 40 25 40 Stoven 20 70 00 48 00 Stougaard 37 55 45 23 50 Stoupina 07 64 00 62 00   09 Q.   Straa So. 37 56 10 22 40 Stradan 16 53 20 37 00 Stradin 15 51 50 33 20 Stradun 18 53 30 40 00 Strajeniki 18 54 30 42 00 Strakffus 17 54 50 37 00 Stralsund 6, 20 54 00 28 00 Stramfiord 26 65 30 353 00 Strandbarm 28, 29 60 00 20 30 Strandboke 31 56 05 28 50 Strandborg 36, 37 56 30 23 00 Srandby 22, 25 57 00 24 00 Strandelhorn 38, 39 55 05 24 10 Srandoe 38 54 55 25 40 Strandssognk 29 58 40 21 00 Strandt 26 67 00 36 00 Stranfiord 29 60 00 23 00 Strangwyck 20, 25 63 00 24 00   30 54 40 23 40 Stranstrup 35 56 40 23 40 Sramp 39 55 25 24 30 Strasburg 16, 20 53 00 37 00 Straum 01 67 30 345 00
Straumness 26 66 30 348 00     67 30 348 00 Streclucy 06 51 00 74 00 Streelnoy 08 51 00 74 00 Streis 17 54 25 36 10 Sreitplaets 16 54 40 38 30 R. Strela 07 66 00 59 00 Strelczy 12 47 00 52 00   13 L.   Strelen 14 50 20 33 00 Strelitz 14 50 20 35 00 Strelitza 6, 7 59 00 62 00   09 C.   Strelitza reca 09 C.   Strelitzorum excubiae 10 G.   Strellen 20, 21 59 30 48 00 Strelna R. 20 66 00 58 00 Strelne Mons 10 E.   Strelow 37 55 45 23 00 Strena R. 06 66 00 58 00 Strengel S. 16 54 00 39 30 Strengnes 6, 20, 22 59 00 33 00 Strenglyn 43 54 00 25 10 Strenskaret 21 64 30 38 00 Streo 32 55 50 27 00 Strese 15 51 40 33 40 Stretro di Cuffa 11 47 00 56 00 Strezo 15 52 00 33 00 Stricze 12 48 30 46 00 Striega 14 51 00 33 00 Striestyn 18 52 30 48 00 Striga 14, 16 52 40 37 00 Strige fl. 16 54 20 40 00 Strige S. 16 53 40 39 00 Strikestucht 06 66 00 33 00 Strilais Volost 06 61 00 66 00 Strilinska Volost 09 I.   Srilinska reca 09 I.   Strinsooy Monast. 09 N.   Strisojecz R. 12 49 30 43 00 Stripsode 37 55 30 24 10 Strisgund 12 48 00 47 00 Stro 30, 31 56 00 29 00 Stroby 30, 32 55 20 27 20 Strodyck 41, 44 53 50 24 10 Stroe 31 55 45 28 40 Stroknan lacus 22 57 30 29 00 Stroko 06 47 00 45 00 Strom 20, 22, 25, 28 60 00 26 00 Stromen 29 59 00 20 30 Stronsholm 23, 24 59 20 33 00 Stroncz 15 51 40 33 20 Stroo 31 55 40 28 40 Stroom 28 62 00 20 30 Stroomshorn 28 62 00 20 30 Stroswelstruy 31 56 00 28 00 Strovag 25 58 30 21 00 Struckdorp 38, 40 54 35 24 50   43, 44 53 55 25 10 Struer 36, 37 56 30 23 00 Strumen 14 49 40 35 00 Strumien fl. 18 52 00 44 00 Strumpki S. 16 53 40 39 00 Strumwick 26 68 00 350 00 Strunojervi 21 63 30 49 00 Strupilicas 6, 7 65 00 86 00 Struys haven 28 60 30 20 00 Strykow 15 52 00 33 40 Stryps Ode 39 55 30 24 40 Strzeino 15 52 20 34 40 Strzessyn 6, 11 52 00 48 00 Strzow 14 49 20 38 00 Stubbe 40 54 35 25 00 Stubbeck 39 54 55 24 20 Stubbekoping 32, 33 54 50 27 00 Stubben 44 53 45 25 10 Stubbendorp 41, 43 53 50 25 10 Stubbum 39 55 20 24 30 Stube 30 54 20 24 40 Stubergaard 36, 37 56 25 23 20 Stubern 41, 43 54 25 26 10 Stubkiebing 20 55 00 27 00 Studebeck 42 54 15 24 10 Studnie 12 46 00 50 00   13 Q.   Studzieniczo 12 48 30 45 00 Stuen 25 60 30 22 00 Stuersbull 39 55 15 24 10 Stuersie Donets fl. 06 51 00 63 00 Stufenhorn 41, 44 53 50 24 50 Stuha fl. 18 49 30 48 00 Stum 16, 17 53 40 36 30 Stumlschdorss 16 53 40 36 30 Stuthoff 17 53 50 36 30 Stuthoff 16, 17 54 20 36 30 Stupiez 13 C.   C. Stupingar 10 F.   Sturgaard 37 56 00 23 30 Sturmhosel 16 54 00 39 00 Sturswyck 28 60 00 20 30 Stwolowitze 18 53 00 43 00 Stydding 39 55 15 24 20 Styllhorn 41, 44 53 25 24 40 Styrsion 24 60 50 31 20 Su fl. 10 C.   Suahed 29 58 00 21 00 Suaning 34 55 10 25 10 Svanskog 22 59 00 28 00 Svanstrup 30 56 40 23 40 Svarholt 36 58 00 24 50 Svarsloff 32 55 40 26 40 Svatrelha 22 58 00 29 00 Svavestede 30 54 20 24 00 Substyn 43 54 05 25 40 D. Subua fl. 18 56 00 44 00 Suchana R. 01 61 00 63 00 Sucha Oltwa R. 12 48 30 52 00 Sucha Orczica R. 12 49 00 50 00 Sucha Yahorlik 12 47 30 47 00 Suchodolce 18 55 00 46 00 Suchsyoki 20 66 00 86 00 Suchy Omielnik R. 12 48 00 51 00 Suchystow 18 49 00 44 00 Suckaw 16 54 00 36 00 Sucksdorp 42, 43 54 20 24 50 Sudavia 16 53 20 40 00 Suddorp 40 54 35 23 20 Suddick 44 53 45 24 10 Suderauw 42, 44 53 50 24 10 Suder Aw 39, 40 54 40 24 40 Suderbeck 42 54 10 24 10 Suderbrarup 38, 40 54 35 24 50 Suderde 42 54 10 24 10 Suderdick 42 54 15 23 40 Suder Elve 44 53 25 24 40 Suder Fardrup 39 55 15 23 40 Suder Feldt 39 55 10 24 40 Suderhattstede 41, 42 54 05 24 00 Suderholt 39 55 00 24 20 Suderhom 42 54 15 23 50 Suderhovet 38, 39 55 05 23 30 Sudr Jutland 20, 30 55 00 24 00 Sudermarsch 42 54 25 23 50 Sudermarshwisch 40 54 25 24 10 Sudermannia 23 58 40 32 00 Sudernusterup 39 55 15 24 10 Suderoug 38, 40, 41 54 30 23 40 Suderstapel 41, 42 54 20 24 00 Suderup 40 54 45 24 30 Suderwall 40 54 50 23 30 Suderwilstrup 39 55 10 24 30 Sudfall 38, 40, 41 54 30 23 50 Sudilkow 18 50 00 44 00 Sudlendingasiordung 26 56 30 354 00 Sudow 16 54 40 37 30 Sudthaven 39 55 05 23 30 Sudtwollum 39 55 05 23 50 Sudzilkow 12 50 00 45 00 Svecia 6, 25 62 00 29 00 Svederoe 30, 31 56 20 27 40 Svedoy 24 59 30 32 40 Svegge 27 63 40 23 00 Sveegh 20, 25 62 00 29 00 Suelang 22 59 00 27 00 Svelen 41, 42, 44 53 50 25 00 Svelgenoos 07 68 00 68 00 Svenekel 6, 7, 20 68 00 47 00 Svenkholm 36, 37 56 20 22 40 Svenlinga 20, 22 57 00 28 00 Svennes 25, 28 60 30 24 00 Suenskehoga 19, 22 59 00 36 00 Suenstrup 36, 37 56 30 24 30 Sueom 37 55 25 23 00 Sueombro 37 55 25 23 00 Suerborg 32, 33 55 00 26 40 Suerdsio 20, 24 60 50 32 20 Sveri fl. 20 60 00 53 00 Suerin 20 53 00 26 00 Suested 36 56 50 22 50 Sugar 26 67 00 348 00 Sugstrup 36 56 50 22 50 Suhardolur 26 67 30 356 00 Suhaki 12 48 30 45 00 Suhewieskii R. 12 46 30 53 00 Suhibarda R. 12 46 30 53 00 Sujatscke 6, 7 57 00 75 00 Suidten 19 57 00 43 00 Suinevad 22 58 30 32 00 Suino 30 55 20 24 40 Suiola fl. 18 55 30 42 00 Suistoma 21 62 00 50 00 Sukalicz 12 49 00 48 00 Suka Morzi 12 46 00 51 00 Suka Omelnik 13 H.   Sukolowka 12 48 30 47 00 Sula fl. 12 48 30 50 00 Sulby 22 55 30 51 00 Sulciow 14 51 00 37 00 Suldalsfiord 29 59 00 21 00 Sulderup 36 56 45 24 10 Sulen 29 60 40 19 30 Sulesow 12 50 30 52 00 Sulfelt 41, 44 53 45 25 00 Sulka R. 12 49 30 52 00 Sulomiritsch 14 51 20 34 00 Sulsa 06 44 00 45 00 Sulsdorp 43 54 20 25 50 Sulsen 41 53 40 24 40 Sulstede 38, 39, 40 55 00 23 50 Sulstorp 35 56 20 24 20 Sulstrop 41 54 30 25 50 Sulski 12 47 00 52 00 Sultz 14 51 40 33 00 Sult Ins. 38 54 55 23 30 Sult fl. 44 53 45 25 10 Sulveli 30 53 40 25 00 Sulvenize 18 50 00 44 00 Sumar fl. 18 52 00 51 00 Sumo 34 55 20 24 30 Sumy R. 12 50 00 53 00 Sund 20, 22, 30, 35 56 00 27 00 Sunda K. 37 56 10 23 30 Sund Aa. 20, 25, 28 60 00 23 00 Sundaal 27 63 00 24 00 Sundby 22, 30, 32 55 40 27 00 Dunby Fehre 32 55 50 26 40 Sundenis 39 55 10 23 40 Sundenwick 26 68 00 350 00 Sundewith 38 54 50 24 50 Sunderborg 30, 35 54 40 24 40 Sunderby 34 55 10 25 00 Sundersee 34 55 25 24 50 Sundgulen 29 60 40 20 00 Sundhordland 29 60 00 20 30 Sundir 10 C.   Sundstrup 37 55 35 24 00 Sundviken 20 63 00 30 00 Sunga 6, 7 63 00 54 00 Sungdall 37 56 15 22 50 Sunen lacus 21 61 30 48 00 Sunheda 20 61 00 32 00 Sunmersle 31 55 55 28 20 Suno fl. 21 61 30 52 00 Sunnau 31 55 35 28 30 Sunne 16 53 20 38 00 Sunnenstruy 31 55 55 28 10 Sunnersberg 22 58 00 29 00 Sunnersleu 31 55 45 29 30 Sunne Tumruy 31 55 55 28 20 Sunre 31 55 25 28 40 Suoncke 30 55 00 30 00 Supienno 18 54 00 48 00 Supoi fl. 13 D.     18 55 30 51 00 Suprasl Monast. 18 53 00 41 00 Suprenow 12 49 00 46 00 Supta fl. 18 56 00 47 00 Sura fl. 6, 7, 8 57 00 66 00   10 B.   Surass 6, 20 55 00 49 00     55 30 48 00 Surgatti 6, 8, 11 47 00 55 00 Suryck 11 55 00 63 00 Surky fl. 13 L.   Surmanma 6, 20 58 00 32 00 Suro 1, 6, 20 70 00 36 00 Surywiliski 18 54 00 43 00 Susdal 6, 8 56 00 61 00 F. Suski poroh 18 56 00 52 00 Sussa 18 54 30 46 00 Sussell 41, 43 54 00 25 30 Sussenthal 16 53 40 38 00 Susta 6, 7, 20 60 00 54 00 De Susters 25 58 30 25 00 Susugovo 09 I.   Sutumgswick 26 67 30 360 00 Sutzfelde 44 53 40 25 20 Suu Ins. 10 C.   Suverstede 38 54 35 24 30 Suydfioerd 28 61 30 19 30 Suytfoord 20, 25 61 00 19 00 Suydgulen 28 61 30 19 30 Duydhoek 25 61 30 19 00   28 62 00 19 00 Suydhorn 43 54 20 25 50 Suzaco olim Tazos 11 47 00 60 00 Swabstede 41, 42 54 25 24 00 Swackendorp 40 54 40 25 00 Swaenholm 27 64 20 25 00 Swale 41 54 00 24 50 Swalow 31 55 50 28 20 Swancburgh 19 57 00 44 00 Swanebusch 44 53 25 24 50 Swanholm 32 55 40 26 40 Swans 40, 41 54 35 24 50 Swansdorff 17 54 00 37 00   39 55 00 23 50 Swansen 38, 41 54 35 24 40 Swanshog 31 55 40 29 00 Swantzen 20 54 00 25 00   30 54 20 24 40 Swapstede 38, 40 54 25 24 20 Die Swang 38, 39 55 20 23 30 Swarkow 12 50 30 52 00 Swartaw 43 53 55 25 30 Swartbeck 43 54 20 25 10 Swarte Clippen 06 72 00 74 00   07 72 00 75 00 Swartenbeck 41, 44 53 25 25 10 Swartengrunden 41 53 45 23 00 Swartenhoeck 06 75 00 79 00 Swart Ocks 27 63 20 22 00 Swartou 30 53 40 25 20 Swartruy 31 56 05 29 30 Swaftrum 40 54 35 25 10 Swaswelsberg 31 55 35 29 50 Swawelbrucket 22, 23 59 10 32 00 Swawen 41 54 15 24 30 Swebierg 31 56 00 27 40 Swecia 07 65 00 45 00   19 50 30 35 00   30 57 40 28 00 Lill Swedall 31 55 30 28 30 Swedero 22 56 00 27 00 Sweidnitz 14 51 40 32 00 Sweihe 41 53 20 23 00 Sweinart 15 52 30 32 20 Sweitz fl. 18 55 30 39 00 Swelbeck 41, 43 54 15 25 40 Swelgenoes 06 68 00 70 00   20 67 00 68 00 Swelming 32, 34 55 00 25 20 Swelundt 38, 39 55 05 24 10
Swenborg 32 55 10 25 40 Swensby 38, 40 54 40 24 50 Swenskiob 31 55 45 29 20 Swentin fl. 41 54 15 25 00 Swenstrup 32 55 30 27 00   38 55 00 24 50 Swenstruy 31 55 30 28 20 Swerborg 30 55 00 26 40 Swerdrup 39 55 15 24 40 Swersdorp 41 54 10 25 20 Swerup 39, 40 54 55 24 30 Swesing 38, 40, 41 54 30 24 10 Swesna 20 55 00 39 00 Swetagora 09 I.   Swetenoes 6, 7, 20 68 00 60 00 Sweterina 22, 30, 35 56 40 25 00 Swiadosci 18 55 00 43 00 Swiagle 12 50 30 46 00 Swiazki 10 D.   Swibosin 15 52 00 32 40 Swiccelnow 18 50 00 49 00 Swidowek 13 E.   Swidwowiec 12 50 00 50 00 Swiec fl. 18 52 00 47 00 Swiecicas lacus 18 52 30 44 00 P. Swieczichowo G. Swecko 15 51 40 33 40 Swieta 19, 20 56 00 38 00 Swieta fl. 18 55 00 42 00 Swier 18 54 30 54 00 Swierzno 20 54 00 44 00   18 53 00 44 00 Swiexna 18 55 00 39 00 Swimgorod 06 55 00 56 00 Swinborch 34, 35 55 10 25 30 Swinciany 18 54 30 43 00 Swineberg 30, 31 55 20 29 20 Swingi 18 55 00 40 00 Swinhusen 42 54 15 24 00 Swinigorod 8, 20 55 00 56 00 Swinkowka R. 12 48 30 52 00 Swinkull 43 54 15 25 40 Swinninge 32 55 40 26 20 Swinno 20 53 00 44 00 Swinoe 38 55 25 24 50 Swislocz 20 53 00 46 00 Swislocz fl. 18 53 00 46 00 Switelna 12 50 00 49 00 Switten 19 56 00 41 00 Switzerdorp 44 53 35 24 20 Swogel 41, 43 53 55 25 20 Swogellnbeck 43 54 00 25 10 Swolen 14 51 00 38 00 Swollerup 32 55 30 26 00 Swondawara 20 68 00 38 00 Swontoinai 20 61 00 45 00 Swontoival 21 61 30 45 00 Swooi 09 P.   Swynborg 30 55 00 25 20 Swynborg 30 55 00 25 20 Swinesnarl 25 58 00 25 00 Swynestruy 31 56 10 28 40 Stoynkule 43 54 05 25 20 Swynoe 28 62 30 19 30 Swysel 44 53 50 25 00 Sybbersdorp 43 54 10 25 20 Sybenboem 44 53 45 25 10 Sybsdorp 41 54 15 25 40 Syck 6, 20, 25 59 00 19 00 Syecke 41, 44 53 35 25 00 Syff 30, 32 55 20 27 00 Syggen 41, 43 54 20 25 50 Syholm 30 55 20 27 20 Sykro 37 56 10 24 30 Sylck 44 53 30 25 00 Sylderbeck 39 55 15 24 30 Sylderup 38, 40 54 40 24 20   38, 39 55 15 24 30 Syllested 33 54 45 26 30 Sylva ad Borysthe∣nem 18 55 30 51 00 Sylverstede 38, 40 54 30 24 30 Syndeled 41 54 30 24 10 Syndeledfiord 29 58 20 23 30 Synder 36, 37 56 30 24 20 Synderbag 36, 37 56 25 24 20 Synderboe 30 55 20 23 20 Synderborck 30, 35 55 40 22 40 Synderby 36 56 50 22 40 Synderfelding 37 55 55 23 10 Synderfior 36, 37 56 20 22 40 Syndergaard 36 57 15 24 30 Synder Herritzting 36 50 45 23 00 Synderhoe 37 55 20 22 40 Synderholm 36 56 50 24 10 Synderlemwig 36 56 35 23 10 Synderskow 37 55 25 23 20 Syndersthoe 37 55 45 23 40 Syndersyd 20 55 00 22 00 Syndersyde 30, 37 55 40 23 00 Synderup 32 55 30 26 20   36 56 40 24 10 Synderwong 37 56 15 22 30 Synderwug 37 56 05 22 30 Synderwyck 29 58 40 26 00 Synd Jerlos 32 55 30 26 20 Synd Joles 30 55 20 26 20 Syndling 37 56 25 24 00 Syre 29 58 00 21 30 Syredalsbygde 29 58 00 21 30 Syredals K. 29 58 20 21 30 Syrekobing 31 55 50 28 10 Syrekoling 30 55 40 28 00 Dyrickdorp 43 54 00 25 30 Syro 30, 35 55 40 25 40 Sysme 21 61 30 44 00 Systerne 29 58 40 25 00 Systofft 33 54 50 27 00 Systorbeck 21 59 30 48 00 Sytovoma 20 66 00 31 00 Syuwatica R. 12 49 30 53 00 Szabine 16 54 00 40 00 Szabissin 15 52 30 34 20 Szachischowa 14 52 00 37 00 Szaczk 18 53 00 45 00 Szalawila 12 49 00 51 00 Szaltuliki 12 48 30 48 00 Szamborze 15 51 50 34 40 P. Szamotuli 15 52 30 33 40 Szandarow 12 48 30 52 00 Szanderow Stary 12 48 30 52 00 Szandorow 12 48 30 46 00 Szaraska 18 49 30 44 00 Szaren S. 16 54 00 40 30 Szarigrod 12 48 30 45 00 Szarn S. 16 53 20 38 00 Szarnova 16 53 00 36 00 Szarogrod 18 49 00 45 00 Szaty 18 54 30 42 00 Szaukiany 19 55 30 40 00 Szaulany 19 55 30 41 00 Szawice 12 49 00 50 00 Szawlany 18 55 00 41 00 Szawle 18, 20 55 00 41 00 Szcressow 18 52 00 42 00 Szelantha 16 53 00 37 00 Szering S. 16 53 40 38 00 Szern 16 53 40 36 30 Szerslyn 18 49 30 38 00 Szerwenti 18 54 30 42 00 Szeszupa fl. 18 54 30 40 00 Szeszuwa fl. 18 55 00 40 00 Szewci 15 52 10 33 40 Szezodrohossez 18 51 30 42 00 Szezucim 18 53 00 43 00 Szezurowice 18 50 00 43 00 Sziatyn 12 48 30 43 00 Szielin 14 52 40 39 00 Sziewor 14 50 00 36 00 Siian 12 48 30 45 00 Szile 15 51 50 33 20 Szin 15 51 40 33 20 Szklow 20 53 00 48 00 Szlochczino 15 52 00 34 20 P. Szlichtingshekowo G. Schlichting∣sheimb 15 51 30 33 20 Szlnbow 18 52 20 39 00 Szoldri 15 51 50 34 00 Szomka fl. 18 56 00 49 00 Szozara fl. 18 52 30 43 00     53 00 42 00 Szrasza fl. 18 55 00 39 00 Szrzoda 14 52 00 34 00 Szuabiski 19, 20 55 00 42 00 Szubin 15 52 50 34 40 Szumst 12, 18 50 00 44 00 Szuse 16 55 20 39 30 Szuski 12 49 00 50 00 Szufu fl. 16 55 20 40 00 Szwerupe fl. 16 54 40 39 00 Szweta fl. 18 56 00 41 00 Szydlow 18, 19 55 00 41 00 Szydlowiec 18 51 00 39 00 Szylele 18 55 00 40 00 Szyffrwo 11 54 00 47 00   18 54 30 49 00 T   TArnborg 32 55 20 26 00 Taarning Moll 39 55 20 24 30 Taas 36 57 15 24 30 Taassing 30, 32, 34 55 00 25 40 Tabe fl. 16 55 00 39 30 C. Tabin 01 69 52 147 00 Taborowka 12 49 00 48 00 Tabring 36 56 45 22 50 Tabtrum 39 55 20 24 10 Tacke fl. 16 54 40 39 00 Taczmin fl. 13 G.   Taden 42 54 05 24 10 Tadens Siell 38, 39 54 50 23 50 Taerbeck 42, 43 54 00 25 00 Taerling 27 64 20 24 00 Taeroe 38 55 05 25 40 Taes 07 68 00 95 00 Taes fl. 06 68 00 96 00 Taginitz 10 B.   Taipol 20, 21 60 30 49 00 Takeray 31 56 00 28 50 Tala 18 56 00 42 00 Talalajowka 12 48 30 47 00 Talcas 19, 20 58 00 44 00 Tala 18 56 00 42 00 Talalajowka 12 48 30 47 00 Talcas 19, 20 58 00 44 00 Tale 39 54 55 23 20 Talingburen 42 54 10 23 50 Talknafiord 26 66 30 34 09 Talla 21 60 30 46 00 Talie 39 55 00 24 10 Talsen 19, 20 57 00 39 00 Talfo 20 69 00 21 00 Tam 20, 21 64 00 37 00 Tampaol 06 49 00 42 00 Tamasi 06 45 00 64 00 Tamasjervi 21 63 30 51 00 Tamdrup 39 55 15 24 40 Taming 35 56 00 24 20 Tamiraca 6, 8, 11 48 00 52 00 Tammila 21 61 00 41 00 Tamnaw 16 54 20 40 00 Tamrekoski 21 62 00 40 00 Tanais Emporium 06 49 00 63 00 Tanais five Don fl. 6, 8 50 00 64 00 Tanckstede 41, 44 53 40 24 50 Tanderup 32, 34 54 50 25 20 Tandorp 34 55 15 24 40 Tandra 12 46 00 50 00 Tandrup 36 56 45 22 50 Tandzleth 38, 40 54 55 24 00 Tanebay 20 71 00 44 00 Taness 29 57 40 22 00 Tang 37 56 15 24 10 Tang So 37 55 55 24 10 Tangart 34 55 15 25 30 Tange 31 56 00 28 00 Tangenrade 43 53 55 25 20 Tangi 26 64 30 353 00 Tanizyn 12 49 30 49 00 Tanke 15 52 50 32 00 Tanleff 37 55 30 24 00 Tannenberg 16 53 20 38 00 Tannerup 39 55 15 23 40 Tannes 20 62 00 28 00 Tano Aa 37 56 15 24 10 Tansgart 34 54 55 25 00 Tanstrup 30, 32 55 20 26 20 Tanum 36, 37 56 25 24 30 Taplauken 16 54 20 39 0 Tappendorp 42 54 05 24 30 Tappiaw 16, 18, 20 54 20 39 00 Taprop 35 56 20 24 00 Taps 37, 39 55 20 23 50 Tapsaw 42 54 05 24 30 Tapsuher 39 55 20 24 20 Taptrup 36, 37 56 20 24 00 Taransky Rog 13 K.   tara 01 67 30 90 00 Tarass 18 50 00 43 00 Tarassa reca 6, 8 54 00 58 00 Tarata I. 01 66 30 117 00 Tarczin 14 52 00 38 00 Targorod 06 46 00 42 00 Targowic H. 12 48 00 48 00 Targowice H. 12 50 00 51 00 Taristo 06 47 00 44 00 Tarhowita 18 50 30 43 00 Taribull 40 54 55 24 40 Tariua 14 51 40 32 00 Tarki 06 45 00 71 00 Tarmagno 6, 8, 11 49 00 59 00 Tarna 14, 15 51 40 32 00 Tarnopol 18 49 30 43 00 Tarnow 14 49 40 38 00 Tarnowiec 15 52 40 33 40 Tarnowitz 14 50 20 35 00 Tarnowo 15 52 20 33 40 Tarnum 39 55 20 23 50 Tarossa 06 54 00 58 00 Tarow 18 52 00 45 00 Tarp 40 54 40 24 30 Tar parvo 11 49 00 58 00 Tarph 22 58 00 26 00 Tarra T. 20 66 00 30 00 Tarresdorp 42 54 15 24 40 Tarstede 38, 40, 41 54 35 24 50 Tartago 06 43 00 42 00 Tartariae paras 6, 7 69 &c 104 00 Tartarski Molobiza 10 C.   Tarucza H. 12 50 00 52 00 Tarum 17 54 05 36 50 Tarwestwort 19 58 00 43 00 Taryn 27 65 00 25 00 Tasoffcoigorod 6, 7 68 00 98 00 Tasoffcagoieba 06 68 00 95 00 Tas So 37 56 05 24 00 Tasta reca 09 E.   Tasta Volost 6, 7 60 00 64 00   09 E.   Tastorp 31 55 30 29 30   41 54 00 24 50 Taftorst 42 54 05 24 50 Taftorp 30 54 00 24 40 Taszlik Bodysz R. 12 48 00 49 00 Taszlik Sucha 12 48 00 49 00 Taszmin R. 12 48 00 50 00 Taszyn 12 49 00 50 00 Tatarebarlat 12 46 00 48 00 Tatenberg 44 53 30 24 40 Tating 38, 40, 41 54 20 23 50 Tavanger Stiff 20 59 00 22 00 Tavastia 20, 21 62 00 41 00 Tauchel 14 53 20 34 00 Taud 37 56 25 24 50 Tavisalmi 20 36 00 46 00   21 63 00 46 00 Tanloe 39 55 30 24 40 Tauragen 16 55 00 40 30 Taurica Chersone∣sirs 6, 8 47 00 54 00 Taurogi 18 54 30 40 00 Tausche 17 54 05 36 40 Tauftleff 34 54 50 24 50 Tautske 16 53 20 37 30 Tawaczowka 12 49 00 48 00
Tawan Oy Wielka Prozoprawa Tatorska B. 12 46 30 50 00   13 Q.   Tawasthus olim Cro∣neburg 21 61 00 42 00 Tawolzany Y. 12 47 00 52 00 Tawutzanyproh alias Limes 18 56 00 53 00 Tczechirzek 15 51 50 32 40 Tebinka 06 48 00 49 00 Teby 21 59 00 35 00 Techelsdorp 41, 42 54 10 24 50 Techow 43 53 55 25 30 Teczyn 14 49 40 36 00 Tedinghusen 20 52 00 23 00 Tedossova 09 I.   Teehow 41 53 55 25 30 Teelaego Monaster 09 L.   Teenicost 06 55 00 69 00 Teesoa 6, 7 66 00 67 00 Teestrup 32 55 20 27 00 Tegeladen 31 55 50 27 40 Tegelhoff 38, 40 54 50 24 40 Tegenhoffsohe waldt 17 54 10 36 40 Tehinka 18 53 00 52 00 Tehinka R. Y. H. 12 47 00 50 00   13 Q.   Teinenhoff 17 54 00 37 00 Tekin 12 47 00 47 00 Telikina 6, 7, 20 63 00 54 00 Telga 22, 23 59 00 34 30 Telie 20 59 00 34 00 Teligol D. 12 47 00 48 00 Teligol Jeziero 12 46 30 49 00   13 S.   Teling 35 55 40 24 00 Tellemark 6, 20 59 00 22 00   29 59 20 23 00 Tellie 19 59 30 35 00   21, 23 59 30 36 00 Telmaza 12 46 30 47 00 Tellinstede 38, 41 54 15 24 20 Telsse 18, 19 55 30 40 00 Telstost 39 55 15 24 00 Telusch 06 57 00 78 00 Templin 14 53 00 30 00 Temroch 6, 8, 11 47 00 57 00 Temruk 12 45 30 53 00 Tems 30 54 20 25 40 Tenala 19, 20, 21 60 00 40 00 Teneby 06 69 00 41 00 Teneseia reca 06 70 00 103 00   07 70 00 106 00 Teneseia R. 01 71 00 96 00 Tenila 21 61 00 43 00 Tenoby 07 69 00 40 00   20 69 00 41 00 Tensbuttel 41, 42 54 05 24 00 Tensefelt 43 54 00 25 00 Tensker 22 58 30 34 00 Tenyne 20 58 00 20 00   22 58 00 28 00 Tepdal 25 58 00 22 00 Teratyn 18 50 30 41 00 Terebittova 09 I.   Terechtymirow 11 50 00 47 00 Terechtymnew 18 49 30 48 00 Terensack 06 50 00 76 00 Tericoff 06 55 00 62 00   08 55 00 61 00 Terid 36 57 15 24 20 Tering 39 55 05 23 50 Terka fl. 06 46 00 67 00 Terlice 12 48 30 47 00 Termenik R. 12 47 30 55 00 Termini Lithvaniae 18 52 30 49 00 Terminus Regni Het∣singivi 21 65 00 42 00 Tern R. 12 50 00 52 00 Ternaruy 30 56 00 28 00 Ternhulte 39 55 10 24 10 Ternova 06 43 00 41 00 Ternow R. 12 47 00 51 00   13 O.   Ternuka R. 12 47 30 53 00 Terph 20 58 00 26 00   38, 39 55 00 24 00 Terschana Wolochi 6, 7 68 00 51 00 Terskoy Leporie 01 66 30 117 00   20 68 00 57 00 Terslo 34 55 25 24 50 Tersuus 21 61 00 49 00 Terweta fl. 18 56 00 41 00 Teschen 14 49 20 35 00 Teschendorp 43 54 20 25 40 Tesckaw 41, 43 53 50 25 40 Teskowa 12 50 30 44 00 Tesna fl. 21 59 00 49 00 Tesne 6, 20 58 00 49 00 Tessin 20 53 00 28 00 Tessloss 32 55 30 26 20 Testabro 22, 25 58 30 26 00 Tester 23 59 10 33 30 Testimen 16 53 40 38 30 Testorp 41, 43 54 15 25 30 Tetenbull 38 54 20 24 00   41, 42 54 25 23 40 Tetenhusen 38, 40, 41 54 20 24 40 Tetiow 18 49 30 47 00 Tetowka 12 48 00 46 00 Tetscajagoeba 6, 7 67 00 68 00 Tetus 10 C.   Tetusch 07 57 00 78 00 Tevenis fl. 18 55 00 39 00 Teutel 41 53 45 23 00 Teutschdorff 16 54 00 37 30 Texel 20 53 00 19 00 Tgrenborch 34 55 15 25 20 Thabor S. 16 53 40 37 30 Tham 14 51 40 30 00 Tharaw 16 54 20 38 30 Tharn S. 16 53 40 37 30 Thavenit 16 53 20 36 00 Thaver 16 53 20 38 00 Thedra 20 57 00 53 00 Theerwisch 14, 16 53 20 39 00 Thegelhoff 39 55 15 24 20 Them S. 16 53 20 38 00 Theman 6, 8 47 00 57 00 Theme 31 55 55 28 30 Theodosian Cassa 6, 11 47 00 55 00 Therme 26 65 00 355 00 Thiergart 16 53 40 37 00 Thoden 14 51 40 42 00 Thoman 11 47 00 56 00 Thomsdorp 43 54 15 25 50 Thorn 6, 14, 16, 20 53 00 36 00 Alt Thorn 16 53 00 36 00 Thowall 42 54 00 23 50 Thuczany 14 49 40 36 00 Thuids K. 29 58 00 22 00 Thumb 14 52 20 34 00 Thumby 38, 40, 41 54 40 24 50 Thumgaard 37 56 10 22 40 Thumhorst 41, 44 53 35 24 50 Thumkirck 37 56 10 22 40 Thus 36 57 05 24 10 Thus Closteroch kirck 36, 37 56 20 23 10 Thy 16 54 00 36 30 Thychi Mons subal∣bus 10 B.   Thyholm 36 56 40 22 50 Thzahan 14 51 40 29 00 Tiarness 26 67 30 358 00 Tibensee 42 54 15 23 50 Tibirck 30, 32 55 50 27 00 t' Eyl Tichsna 09 D.   Tictima 06 59 00 63 00 Ticzememcze 12 49 00 43 00 Tidemsdorff 16 54 00 37 30 Tidera 6, 7 63 00 71 00 Tidinge So 31 56 05 29 30 Tidmansholm 36 57 15 24 30 Tidoon 24 59 20 32 40 Tieras 6, 20, 22 57 00 27 00 Tiebbin 14 52 00 30 00 Tiebna Wolok 20 70 00 52 00 Tiefensee 16 54 20 38 00 Tieff 16 54 20 37 30 Tieffenaw 16 53 40 36 30 G. Tiefkrum 16 54 00 40 00 K. Tiefkrum 16 54 00 40 00 Tiehma 07 60 00 62 00 Tiege 17 54 10 36 40 Tiegerwerd 17 54 10 36 40 Tielaw 42 54 15 24 00 Tield 36, 37 56 25 24 00 Tieldgaard 36, 37 56 25 24 00 Tiele 38, 40, 41 54 20 24 30 Tielenhem 42 54 15 24 10 Tielenhin 38 54 15 24 30 Tielerborg 42 54 15 24 10 Tieono Soosna 08 53 00 66 00 Tiepena Ourtse 20 70 00 52 00 Tiereborg 38 55 25 23 30 Tiergardte 43 54 00 25 10 Tiernagel 25 59 30 20 00 Tierreby 32 55 10 26 20     55 50 27 00 Tierrebieri 6, 20 69 00 55 00 Tieslundt 38, 39 55 10 24 10 Tifferthal 16 54 20 38 00 Tiffina 7, 20 59 00 53 00 Tifkoce 12 49 00 43 00 Tigde 31 55 30 29 20 Tigelse 30, 31 55 20 28 00 Tigenhagen 16 54 00 36 30 Tigenhoff 17 54 10 36 40 Tignez 06 43 00 39 00 Tigzaes 20 56 00 30 00 Tihundria 23 59 50 33 00 Tilberga 24 59 30 33 00 Tilenen S. 16 53 40 40 00 Tilenhem 41 54 15 24 10 Tilewaldt 16 53 20 37 00 Tilitz 30, 33 54 40 26 20 Tillendorf 15 51 30 33 20 Tillicamervi 20, 21 64 00 46 00 Tilse 6, 16 54 40 40 00 Tilsted 36 56 55 23 00 Timecz 14 49 40 36 00 Timelfiord 20, 25, 28 62 30 21 00 Timendorp 41, 43 54 00 25 30 Timens K. 29 58 20 20 30 Timgaard 30, 35 56 00 23 00 Timmen Aspe 41, 42 54 05 24 40 Timmerby 30, 35, 36 56 40 23 00 Timmering 37 56 05 23 10 Timmershult 31 56 15 28 40 Timonowka 12 48 00 46 00 Timonokawiss 12 48 00 46 00 Tind 36 56 25 24 50 Ting 32 55 10 26 20   33 54 55 27 10 Tingelefl 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 10 Tingnael 27 63 20 24 00 Tingoesi 6, 7 70 00 100 00 Tingsted 33 54 50 27 00 Tingwara 6, 20 68 00 35 00 Tingzaas 22 56 30 30 00 Tinendorff 17 54 00 37 00 Tinkawoda 12 46 00 52 00 Tinnenbuttel 41, 42 54 10 24 40 Tinnemdor 43 54 10 25 10 Tinning 37 56 10 24 40 Tinningstede 38, 40 54 50 24 00 Tinnum 39, 40 54 55 23 20 Tino 27 62 40 21 00 Tintam 19, 20 56 30 40 00 I. Tioplei 10 B.   Tiore K. 29 58 40 20 30 Tioruy 31 56 00 28 50 Tireborg 30, 35 55 40 24 20 Tiremberg 18 54 30 38 00 Tirgarten 17 54 00 36 50 Tirholm 35 56 20 23 20 Tiribiry 20 69 00 53 00 Tiriud 21, 23 59 20 36 30 Tirrishoy 40 54 40 24 30 Tirschtigel 14 52 00 33 00 Tirsen 19 57 00 44 00 Tirtolstle fl. 16 53 40 39 30 Ti So 32 55 30 26 20 Tissina 06 59 00 53 00 Tisterup 37 55 20 23 50 Tistrup 36, 37 56 20 25 10 Titiow 12 49 00 47 00 Titrowla 06 56 00 47 00 Tiustrup 30, 32 55 20 26 20 Tiwelse 30, 32 55 20 26 40 Tloki 15 51 50 33 20 Tlotzilcu S. 16 53 40 40 30 Tlukawi 15 52 50 34 00 Tmiervi 21 63 30 45 00 Tmo 28 52 30 21 00 Toarp 31 56 05 28 20 Toboo 31 56 10 28 30 Tobol Metropolis Si∣beriae 6, 7 65 00 89 00 Tobol R. 01 64 00 80 00   6, 7 63 00 87 00 Tobolsca 01 65 00 82 00 Tochmajervi 21 62 30 49 00 Tockena Wolok 6, 7 70 00 52 00 Todendorp 41, 44 53 40 25 00 Todly 36 56 50 22 50 Todma 07 60 00 64 00 Todsfelde 44 53 55 24 50 Todsleff 36, 37 56 30 24 50 Todtenbuttel 41, 42 54 05 24 20 Todtendorp 43 53 55 25 30 Todtenfelde 44 53 35 24 50 Todmansbierg or Die Knoll 38 55 25 23 00 Toelaego Monast. 6, 7 61 00 66 00 Toeloneezkoi Mon. 06 61 00 67 00 Toema De Studt 09 F.   Toeren 20, 24 59 00 35 00 Toergaefhoeck 6, 7 69 00 100 00 Toergas 09 N.   Toergas reca 09 N.   Toergos 6, 7 62 00 64 00 Toeroe 38, 39 55 10 24 50 Toeroraptsa 08 55 00 62 00 Toeroripza 06 55 00 63 00 Toester 27 63 40 24 00 Tosda fl. 6, 7 63 00 85 00 Tofdals 20 58 00 22 00 Tofft 40 54 55 23 50 Toftlund 39 55 10 24 00 Tofftum 39 55 10 23 30 Togarup 31 55 30 28 20 Togeruy 31 55 35 28 20 Togelycke 31 56 00 27 50 Togerod 31 55 45 28 20 Togerup 33 54 40 26 40 Togil 20 58 00 42 00 Togrod 31 55 30 29 00 Togruy 31 55 30 29 50 Togswerg 30, 32 55 00 26 40 Toiby 31 55 50 26 50 Toigil 19 58 00 42 00 Toima Chisma 09 N.   Toima Nisva 6, 7 62 00 65 00 Toima Verchna 6, 7 62 00 65 00   09 M.   Toisma 6, 7 61 00 66 00 Toisma Nisva 09 H.   Toisma Verchna 09 H.   Tokaruy 31 56 05 29 20 Tokary 12 49 30 51 00 Tokolka 18 53 00 41 00 Tol 20, 30, 35 57 00 24 20 Tolaruy 31 56 00 28 00 Tolck 38, 40, 41 54 35 24 40 Tolcks 16 54 00 38 30 Tolcksdorff 16 54 00 37 30 Tolcremit 16 54 20 37 30 Toldusco 21 59 00 46 00 Tolefioerd 28 59 30 20 30
Tolen 22, 28 60 00 26 00 Tolenge 31 55 35 29 20 Tolhuss 38, 40 54 40 24 20 Tolie 06 59 00 34 00 Tolke 30, 32 54 40 27 20 Tollebolle 30, 32 55 00 26 00   34 55 00 25 50 Tollenspicker 41, 44 53 20 25 00 Tollie 20 59 00 35 00 Tolloss 32 55 30 26 40 Tolmarckgott 40 54 45 24 50 Toloczyn 18 54 30 47 00 Toloubie 09 K.   Tolshoffue 36 57 20 24 50 Tolsma 6, 7 59 00 63 00   09 D.   Tolstede 38, 40 55 00 24 20 Tolstorp 30 57 20 24 20 Tolstrup 20, 36 57 00 24 00   30, 35 56 00 24 20 Tolstrupgaard 37 55 55 24 30 Tolteray 31 55 35 28 20 Toltsburg 19 59 00 44 00 Tolva 6, 7 62 00 54 00 Toluk 36 57 20 24 40 Toluste 12 49 00 44 00 Tom 37 56 00 24 10 Tomahowka fl. Y Ostro 13 O.   Tomakowka 18 55 00 52 00 Tomaspol 12 48 00 46 00 Tomerop 34 55 20 24 50 Tomesdorp 17 54 00 36 30 Tomice 15 51 50 35 00 Tomilowka 12 49 00 48 00 Tommerup 32 55 40 26 00 Tommeruy 31 55 25 28 20 Tommestruy 31 56 10 28 20 Tommila 20 61 00 41 00 Tomrop 22 55 30 28 00 Tomsdorp 41 54 15 25 50 Tonajervi 20 62 00 51 00 Tonder 38, 40 54 55 23 50 Tonderen 30 55 00 24 00 Tong 37, 39 55 15 23 50 Tonki 06 61 00 48 00 Tonning 38, 40, 41 54 20 24 00 Tonningen 20, 30, 42 54 20 23 40 Tonningstede 44 53 45 25 00 Tons 35 55 40 25 00 Tonsberg 25, 29 58 00 24 00 Tonsotte 39 55 10 24 40 Tonteroy 27 64 20 27 00 Toopsa ns. 09 N.   Toopsa reca 09 N.   Toortkin 06 71 00 44 00 Tooruy 31 55 25 28 40 Topdal 6, 20, 29 58 00 22 00 Toper 15 52 00 32 20 Toperow 12 50 00 43 00 Topferge 36, 37 56 25 24 30 Toporzysseza 18 51 00 46 00 Torak 06 57 00 46 00 Torakis 19 57 30 46 00 Torasjoki 21 62 30 51 00 Torbenfelde 32 55 30 26 20 Torczyn 18 50 30 43 00 Toreby 30, 32, 33 55 20 27 20 Toreden 36 57 15 24 40 Toren 22, 23 58 30 34 00 Torgaw 14 51 20 29 00 Torhuwka 12 49 30 29 00 Torichthoff 17 54 00 36 50 Torild 37 55 55 24 40 Torild Herritzting 37 55 40 23 40 Toringe 31 55 30 28 30 Torkelstrup 33 54 55 27 00 Torkow 30, 31 56 20 27 40 Torlosa 30, 31 55 45 28 30 Tormanstruy 31 56 00 29 00 Tormaruy 31 56 15 28 31 Tornahowka R. Y. Ostro 12 47 00 52 00 Tornborg 37 56 05 23 30 Tornby 32 55 30 27 20   36 57 30 24 20 Torne 20, 21 65 30 39 00 Torneao R. 01 66 00 39 00 Tornefoldt 20 67 00 37 00 Torne Herrit 31 55 40 28 10 Torne Lapmarck 01 67 00 35 00 Tornes 22 57 30 32 00 Torning 38, 39 55 10 24 20 Torno Trosk 20 68 00 33 00 Tornow 15 52 00 31 40 Tornschow 39 55 05 24 00 Tornshave 39 55 25 24 40 Tornum 38 55 20 23 50 Torodisva 6, 7 60 00 65 00 Torook 06 56 00 55 00 Torop 35 56 20 23 40 Toopiecz 20 56 00 52 00 Toropiexz 06 56 00 52 00 Toropilo 6, 7, 8 59 00 61 00 Toropiso 09 B.   Torosovitza 09 G.   Torp 20, 22 57 00 28 00 Torpajaux 20 67 00 33 00 Torpe 20, 28, 29 60 00 23 00 Torpejauz 06 67 00 33 00 Torpgard 34 54 55 25 00 Torracea 11 49 00 52 00 Torreberg 31 55 35 28 30 Torredat 29 58 00 22 00 Torredberg 37 56 00 24 40 Torring 36, 37 56 30 22 40 Tors 33 54 45 26 50 Torsager 37 56 15 24 50 Torsang 20, 22, 23 60 00 31 00 Torsas 6, 20 56 00 31 00 Torbaek 37 55 50 23 20 Torsco 20 59 00 41 00 Torsege 31 56 05 28 30 Torsholm 36 57 00 24 30 Torsilia 20, 22, 23 59 00 33 00 Torsilla 24 59 10 32 40 Torsk Minde 36, 37 56 25 22 20 Torsko 19 59 30 41 00 Torskog 22, 25 59 00 27 00 Torsleff 36 56 55 24 00 Torslund 33 54 40 26 40 Torsmyd 30, 35 56 20 22 20 Torso 37 56 15 24 20 Torsoek 20 56 00 55 00 Torsso 22 58 30 29 00 Torsted 37 56 10 22 50 Torstedlund 36 56 45 24 20 Torstuna 22, 23, 24 59 30 34 00 Torstundmagle 32 55 30 27 00 Torsult 31 56 10 29 20 Tortarki R. 12 47 30 52 00 Torweslaas k. 29 59 00 20 00 Torum 36 56 40 23 30 Torup 32 55 50 26 40   36, 37 56 20 24 20 Toruy 31 55 30 28 30     56 15 29 00 Torwas fl. 11 50 00 54 00 Torzok 7, 8 56 00 55 00 Toschandt 40 54 35 23 30 Tosel 37 56 00 24 40 Tosingkiaer 32 55 30 26 40 Tossal 21 60 30 38 00 Tost 6, 25 59 00 24 00 Tosta 30, 31 55 45 28 00 Toster 24 59 10 33 20 Tosterup 38, 40 54 40 24 00 Tostoey 27 64 00 24 00 Tostore 22 57 00 27 00 Tostorp 35 56 20 25 00 Tostrup 32 55 40 27 00   33 54 45 26 40   36 56 35 24 00 Tostruy 31 56 05 28 20 Tosziowki 12 49 00 51 00 Totcruy 31 55 40 28 50 Totina 06 60 00 64 00 Totsburg 20, 21 59 00 44 00 Tottoruy 31 55 50 29 10 Totzoe 36 56 45 23 10 Tovajervi 21 62 00 51 00 Touberg 06 59 00 24 00 Toudering 36 56 40 23 30 Toul 6, 8 53 00 58 00 Tovora 09 Q.   Tourandaia 7, 8 59 00 61 00   09 A.   Tourie babbe 20 66 00 54 00 Tourkalen 19 56 00 42 00 Touroveets 09 D.   Touroveetz 06 61 00 66 00   09 D. & K.   Touscholundt 39 55 19 24 10 Toustgaard 36 57 00 24 10 Touteroe 27, 28 62 40 21 00 Tow 31 55 40 29 00 Towolzany Ysz. 13 M.   Towronnatz 07 61 00 66 00 Toxar 06 68 00 73 00   07 68 00 72 00 Traby 18 54 00 43 00 Trachenberg 14 51 20 33 00 Traenogh 20, 25 66 00 25 00 Trage fl. 14, 15 53 10 32 40 Trajanopoli 06 52 00 45 00 Tralaw 17 54 05 36 30   41, 43, 44 53 50 25 00 Tram 43 54 10 25 10 Trambczino 15 51 50 35 00 Tramblowa 12 49 00 44 00 Tramby 37 55 50 23 00 Tramen 41 53 45 25 50 Tramkiaer 37 55 55 23 00 Trampen 16 54 00 36 00 Trampenan 17 54 05 36 30 Tranberg 37 56 40 25 20 Tranema 22 57 00 29 00 Tranervi 31 56 00 28 10 Tranerup 38, 40 54 55 25 20 Tranestrand 24 61 20 29 00 Tranestrau 20, 25 61 00 27 00 Trankier 34 55 05 25 50 Trankierslot 34 55 05 25 50 Trannas 31 55 35 29 30 Trano 36 57 00 24 00 Trave fl. 30, 41 53 40 25 00 Travemund 41, 43 53 55 25 40 Travena 44 53 30 24 30 Traukier 32 55 00 26 00 Traukierslot 32 55 00 26 00 Trautenaw 14 50 20 33 00 Travenhorst 41, 43 54 00 25 10 Treb 15 52 20 32 00 Trebisonda 06 42 00 62 00 Treborg 35 55 00 23 40 Trebowla 18 49 30 43 00 Trechtemirof 13 C.   Treckillissinwick 26 67 30 351 00 Treden 37 55 55 24 10 Treeg fl. 31 55 4 28 10 Treen fl. 41 54 25 24 00 Treia 30 54 26 24 20 Treia fl. 30 54 40 24 20 Treiden 19 57 00 42 00 Treidera fl. 19 57 00 41 00     57 30 43 00 Trelborg 20, 22 55 00 28 00 Trelleborg 30, 31 55 20 28 00 Trellund 37 55 40 23 30 Trelsdorp 38, 40 54 35 24 10 Trelstorp 41 54 40 23 50 Trembuttel 41, 44 53 40 25 00 Tren fl. 38, 40 54 25 24 20 Trenes 31 55 50 29 20 Treneward 41 54 00 23 40 Trenoer 40 55 00 25 00 Trenth 43 54 10 25 10 Trenthorst 44 53 50 25 20 Treptow 14 54 00 31 00 Tresbeet 37 55 40 24 10 Tresfioerd 20 62 00 22 00   25 62 30 21 00 Tresk 07 70 00 45 00   21 59 30 41 00 Trosloff 30, 32 55 20 27 00 Trethymirow 12 49 30 49 00 Tretness 29 58 00 21 00 Trettey 15 52 10 31 40 Trettin 15 52 00 31 40 Trewenbrietz 14 51 40 29 00 Treya 38, 41 54 30 24 20 Tribbeken 15 51 50 32 00 Tribel 14 51 20 32 00 Trifaltigkeit 16 54 20 38 30 Trifft 17 54 00 32 00 Trigall 16 53 40 40 00 Trikalen 19 57 30 43 00 Trim P. 01 67 00 340 00 Trimpen 16 54 20 39 30 Trindagger 39 55 20 24 20 Trindel 30, 35 57 00 25 40 Trindelen 22 57 00 25 00 Trindemarch 38 54 30 23 50 Trinnes 20 68 00 50 00 Tripoli 06 42 00 61 00 Tripul 13 B.   Tris T. 20 68 00 39 00 Trist 17 54 00 36 50 Tritau 20, 30 53 40 25 00 Trittow 41, 44 53 35 25 10 Trivici 11 47 00 52 00 Troborg 30 55 00 23 40 Trochimowka R. 12 48 30 52 00 Troczeniecz 12 48 00 47 00 Troczice 12 49 00 47 00 Troebes 08 54 00 61 00 Troia 06 58 00 31 00 Troiea fl. 16 54 20 39 30 Troisa 09 N.   Troiza 6, 7 63 00 64 00 Troki 18, 20 54 00 42 00 Troldborg 36 57 25 24 50 Trolhetla 22 58 00 27 00 Trolholm 30, 32 55 10 26 20 Tromnes 20 68 0 29 00 Tromo 20, 26, 29 58 00 23 00 Tromsond 20 70 00 34 00 C. Tromsond 20 69 00 34 00 I. Tromsond 16 70 00 33 00 Tromsund 29 58 00 23 00 Trondhem 20, 25 64 00 26 00 Trop 30 54 40 26 20 Tropgard 30 54 40 25 00 Troppa 14 49 40 34 00 Tropsiski 11 53 00 49 00 Trorod 31 55 50 29 20 Trosa 22, 23 58 40 34 00 Trosconaia 6, 7 68 00 81 00 Trosinis 06 45 00 44 00 Trosse 30, 35 56 40 23 00 Trossno 15 52 00 34 20 Trostorp 34 55 25 25 00 Trostrup 37 56 00 24 40 Trouda 09 F.   Trounchfild 09 S.   Troup 32 55 40 26 40 Troupen 17 53 55 36 40 Trous 36,37 56 30 22 20 Troyborg 39 55 00 23 50 Troysa 6, 7 64 00 61 00 Troyts 20 55 00 58 00 Troytsko 6, 8 55 00 58 00 Trubiec R. 12 50 00 49 00 Trubiess fl. 18 49 30 49 00 Trubiesz fl. 13 C.   Truckelin 16 53 40 40 00 Trudsholm 36, 37 56 35 24 50 Trulstruy 31 55 35 28 40 Trumatz S. 16 53 40 37 00 Trumena 16 53 40 36 30 G. Trumena 16 53 40 37 00 Trunderup 36, 37 56 30 24 20 Trundoon 21 65 00 38 00
Trundesee 42 54 15 25 00 Truneruy 31 55 25 29 00 Truntz 16 54 00 37 30 Trup 39 55 20 24 20 Truserod 31 55 45 29 30 Trus So 36 56 30 24 40 Trust P. 01 76 10 81 00 Trutenaw 16 54 00 36 30 Truttgnow 17 54 15 36 20 Truzholm 32 55 30 26 40 Tryggeveld 32 55 20 27 00 Trygk 37 56 10 24 40 Trylesy 18 50 00 47 00 Trylisie 12 49 30 48 00 Trypolo 12 49 30 48 00 Trysfiord 25 57 30 22 00 Trysky 19 55 30 40 00 Trzebissewo Tri∣bisch 15 51 30 33 40 P. Trziel H. Tir∣fcheigel 15 52 10 33 00 Tsamovatea 06 63 00 63 00   09 N.   Tsaracuata 07 62 00 63 00 Tsarostroog 09 O.   Tschirna 15 51 30 33 40 Tscloncezkoi Mons 07 61 00 67 00 Tseloveerskoy Mon. 09 K.   Tsercas 08 47 00 64 00 Tsercaskoi 06 50 00 63 00 Tseremenina 09 I.   Tsernaia 6, 7 68 00 90 00 Tseronchova 09 H.   Tservoia Oerositza 06 52 00 65 00 Tsier 6, 8 50 00 73 00 Tsimla 6, 7 50 00 70 00 Tsiorne 09 E.   Tsiornoia 6, 7, 8 56 00 56 00 Tsiornoijam 08 55 00 57 00 Tsiosovitza 09 M.   Tsoie 6, 7 62 00 68 00 Tsosowoia fl. 06 59 00 82 00 Tsseplaw 15 57 30 33 20 Tswinoe 39 55 25 24 40 Tuartok 06 46 00 76 00 Tuchorza 15 52 00 33 20 Tuckschow 38, 39, 40 55 00 24 00 Tuczno 15 53 10 33 00 Tuczyn 18 50 30 44 00 Tudelinnai 19 58 30 45 00 Tudo Ozero 6, 7, 20 60 00 56 00 Tued 37 56 10 25 00 Tuen 30 56 00 25 00 Tuenstrup 37 55 55 24 40 Tuersted 36 57 25 24 30 Tue So 31 56 00 27 50 Tuestrup 35 57 20 24 20 Tueta 22 59 00 28 00 Tuga fl, 21 61 30 50 00 Tuja 11 53 00 66 00 Tuillon 37 56 10 24 20 Tulczin 12 48 30 46 00 Tule So 32 55 20 26 40 Tuliec 15 52 10 34 20 Tuliglow 12 50 30 52 00 Tulisskowo 15 51 40 35 20 Tulla 11 53 00 55 00 Tulla fl. 11 53 00 57 00 Tulo 21 61 30 42 00 Tulomajervi 6, 7, 21 61 00 52 00 Tulseruy 31 55 35 28 20 Tumboholm 31 55 35 29 30 Tumboc 23 59 10 33 00 Tumbo Tiaren 24 59 50 30 40 Tumen 01 64 30 78 40   6, 7 64 00 85 00 Tumen fl. 6, 7 64 00 83 00 Tumenscko 06 47 00 73 00 Tumeruy 30 56 00 28 00 Tuming 30 56 00 24 20 Tumist 15 52 10 33 20 Tuna 6, 20, 25 59 00 25 00 Tunder 39 54 55 23 50 Tunderen 20 54 00 23 00   6, 35 55 00 23 40 Tundtost 39, 40 55 00 24 50 Tune 31 55 35 26 40   32 55 30 27 00 Tunga 26 65 00 359 00 Tungenes 29 58 40 20 00 Tungendorp 41, 42 54 05 24 50 Tuno 32 55 50 25 20 Tunum 22 58 00 27 00 Tvolosttsaraeva 09 E.   Tupitz 14 53 00 33 00 Tura fl. 6, 7 66 00 75 00 Turbowka 18 50 00 47 00 Turcec fl. 18 51 00 42 00 Turcisk 18 51 00 42 00 Turcmen 06 49 00 83 00 Turegrino 20 57 00 33 00 Turenberg 16 54 40 38 00 Turia fl. 18 53 00 42 00 Turich 10 C.   Turick 42 54 05 25 10 Turinge 20, 22, 23 59 00 34 00 Turko 20, 22 56 00 27 00 Turla fl. 12 47 30 46 00 Tur Iago 14 51 20 41 00 Turobin 18 50 30 40 00 Turow 06 57 00 45 00 Turowo 15 52 10 33 20 Turossa 08 54 00 58 00 Turubaizawka 12 49 00 51 00 Turze 18 53 00 44 00 Turzee 18 53 00 47 00 Turzysk 18 53 00 42 00 Tustrup 36 56 45 24 40 Tutterupholm 32 55 10 27 00 Tutze 30, 32 55 40 26 20 Tutzenaess 32 55 40 26 20 Tuve Vann 25, 29 59 00 22 00 Tuylo 22, 30 56 30 27 00 Twalgiten 16 54 00 39 00 Twarr 14 49 00 36 00 Twardoschin 14 49 00 35 00 Twarkowo 15 51 50 34 00 Twdum 37 56 00 22 50 Twed 34 55 10 25 30 Twede 39 55 15 23 40 Tweehem 22 58 30 30 00 Tweeg 06 56 00 55 00 Tweer 7, 20 56 00 55 00 Twersted 30, 35 57 20 24 20 Twery 19 55 30 39 00 Twestorp 35 55 00 24 00 Twidegard 31 55 55 28 10 Twigaso 31 56 05 29 20 Twilenfleth 44 53 35 24 10 Twissmarck 39 55 05 23 30 Twist P. 01 69 10 73 30 Ty 30, 35 56 40 22 40 Tybierg 32 55 20 26 40 Tydsholm 39 54 55 24 00 Tye fl. 17 54 05 36 20 Tyensen 41, 44 53 45 24 30 Tyerp 22, 23 60 10 34 00 Tykoyn 18 52 30 40 00 Tykiob 32 55 50 27 20 Tylsa 20, 22 57 00 27 00 Tylsege 31 56 05 28 30 Tymelsoo 23 59 10 34 00 Tynden 36 56 55 24 50 Tynhoostvand 25, 28, 29 60 00 23 00 Tynnero 20, 21 62 30 34 00 Tyrambo 6, 7, 11 48 00 59 00 D. Tyraw 16 54 20 38 00 Tyreborg 39 55 25 23 30 Tyregod 37 55 50 23 40 Tyria 21 61 30 49 00 Tyrhol 30 56 20 23 20 Tyrind 19 59 30 36 00 Tyrring 37 56 05 23 30 Tyrsted 33 54 40 26 40   37 55 50 24 20 Tyrsting Herret 37 56 00 24 10 Tyrwes 21 61 30 40 00 Tyrxele 19 56 00 40 00 Tysie 20 58 00 27 00 Tysith 38, 39 55 10 24 00 Tyss 36 56 40 23 30 Tysse 22 58 30 28 00 Tyssemark 22, 25 59 30 27 00 Tysshoem 35 54 00 25 00 Tyssholm 30 57 00 25 00 Tyssowte 18 50 30 41 00 Tystad 06 56 00 22 00 Tystedt 20, 30, 35 56 40 23 00 Tystemphoff 39 55 20 24 20 Tysterup 39 55 20 24 20 Tystrup 32 55 30 26 20 Tysver 25 59 00 20 00 Tysver K. 29 59 00 20 00 Tzaelaeninina 09 H.   Tzalorovo 09 I.   Tzar Constantin 09 K.   Tzaritsan 6, 8 51 00 76 00 Tzarostroog 6, 7 63 00 63 00 Tzenicost 08 55 00 69 00 Tzercas 11 48 00 65 00 Tzerecofskoy Ostroof 09 L.   Tzerecona 6, 7 62 00 65 00   09 M.   Tzerkaskoi 08 50 00 62 00 Tzerleneets 09 P.   Tzernakova 09 E.   Tzernoia Ocrositza sive Babey Saton 08 52 00 65 00 Tzerwosaimisch 6, 8 54 00 55 00 Tzier fl. 08 50 00 72 00 Tzimonski 10 B.   Tztzscina 10 B.   Tzua reca 6, 8 55 00 64 00 Tzugdam 17 54 10 36 20 U.   Vaan 24 60 50 30 20 Vaanelf 24 60 50 30 20 Vachockz 14 50 40 38 00 Vads 25 59 30 20 00 Vadsfiord 29 59 20 20 30 Vadsk 28, 29 59 20 20 30 Vadum Owetzebrod Kosacorum transi∣tus 10 B.   Vaersont 19, 22 57 30 35 00 Vahal 07 60 00 63 00 Vahal Volost 06 60 00 64 00 Vahre 43 54 20 25 10 Vahren 41 54 20 25 10 Vahrenstede 38, 40 54 35 24 40 Vaire 20 60 00 22 00 Vakoniemi 20 62 00 49 00 Vakterpa 19, 21 60 00 44 00 Valbygaard 32 55 20 27 00 Valcken Eylandt 6, 7 70 00 82 00 Valle 29 58 40 22 30 Valle K. 29 57 40 21 30 Valna 14 49 00 40 00 Valsterbon 32 55 20 27 40 Valtes T. 20 67 00 34 00 Vam Aan 24 61 20 30 40 Vandaas 31 56 00 29 30 Vandas 30 56 00 29 00 Vangs 25, 28 60 30 23 00 Vangrowiecz 14 52 20 34 00 Vanso 20, 25 58 00 21 00 Vanso K. 29 57 40 21 00 Varadanus nunc Copa 6, 8, 11 48 00 62 00 Varangito 11 47 00 51 00 Varborg 20 55 00 26 00 Varbougo 25 58 30 20 00 Vard 6, 20 55 00 23 00   30, 35 55 40 23 20 Varel 41 53 20 22 50 Varels Oe. 29 59 40 21 00 Varhoe 37 55 25 23 10 Varhovet 40 55 00 25 20 Varhougs K. 29 58 20 20 30 Varhous Aa. 29 58 20 20 00 Aarilli Veliki 6, 7 60 00 64 00 Varisal 21 60 30 38 00 Varke T. 20 67 00 33 00 Varkirk 30 57 00 24 40 Varmia 16 54 00 37 30 Varna 06 45 00 46 00 Varne 30 54 00 25 20 Varness 26 67 30 353 00 Varot 19, 22 57 30 35 00 Varpeloff 32 55 20 27 20 Varsten 29 57 40 21 00 Vasilli Velycky 09 F.   Vassa fl. 10 C.   Vasson 21 63 30 36 00 Vasterdalarna 24 61 00 29 10 Vastuy 06 46 00 43 00 Vatnedal 25, 29 60 00 23 00 Ubarg 38, 39, 40 54 50 23 50 Ubbalt 31 56 10 29 10 Ubeling S. 16 53 40 39 30 Uberta 6, 8, 11 48 00 54 00 Ubeslo 30, 34 55 20 25 20 Ubiedz R. 12 51 00 50 00 Ubin 12 49 00 43 00 Uby 34 55 20 24 40 Ucke 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 20 Udai fl. 18 49 30 49 00 Udby 36, 37 56 25 24 50 Udbinedre 36 56 35 24 50 Udd 20 61 00 37 00 Uddaruy 31 55 55 29 20     56 05 29 30 Uderbierum 37 55 15 23 00 Uderwangen 16 54 20 38 30 Udklippen 29 58 20 23 30 Udland 20, 25, 28 60 30 21 00 Udow 19, 20 58 00 46 00 Udsiere 29 59 00 19 30 Udstads 20, 25 58 30 22 30 Udsted 30, 31 55 20 28 40 Udsulen 29 60 40 19 00 Udvar 29 57 40 21 30 Udwelling 31 56 00 28 00 Udy R. 12 49 00 54 00 Udym 12 49 30 51 00 Veaky 12 49 00 45 00 Vedbygaard 32 55 30 26 20 Veecza fl. 09 A.   Veer 30, 35 55 00 24 40 Veerst 37 55 30 23 40 Veesky 6, 8 52 00 73 00 Veetzinga 6, 7 59 00 62 00 Veexinga 09 C.   Vegusdal K. 29 58 20 22 30 Veidilusa 26 67 30 352 00 Veile 30 55 40 26 20 Veil Vyg 32 55 40 26 40 Veilo 30, 32 55 00 26 00 Veiro 32 54 50 26 20 Velickadereauna 6, 7 63 00 66 00 Vilicka Dereesna 09 M.   Velick Ostroog 09 P.   Veltloega fl. 06 58 00 70 00 Venian lacus 24 61 00 30 20 Vendele T. 20 64 00 33 00 Vendisla 29 58 00 22 00 Veneberg 36 57 20 24 10 Veneberg Herrit 36 57 20 24 10 Venedig 16 53 40 37 30 Venne K. 29 59 00 21 30 Venskouria 6, 7 61 00 67 00 Verchna 09 O.   Verchna Lorga 09 I.   Verchna Toima fl. 09 M.   Vercova 08 53 00 61 00 Verden 6, 20 52 00 24 00 Verder 20, 25 58 30 24 00 Verdiwick 26 67 30 349 00 Verdo Ellertymen 29 58 40 24 30
Vere 34 55 10 24 40 Vereona 06 53 00 61 00 Vergatena 01 66 00 69 00 Vergboon 21 65 00 38 00 Vergvick 06 49 00 69 00 Verlorn Wasser 17 53 55 37 00 Verloss 32 55 40 27 00 Vermelandia 6, 20 59 00 28 00 Vero 20, 21 63 30 39 00 Verrup 37 55 25 23 10 Versche Rivier 6, 20 66 00 49 00 Verum 36, 37 56 20 24 30 Veschloven 16 54 00 40 00 Vesman 24 60 10 31 00 Vestergab 29 57 40 22 30 Vesterloffgude Her∣rit 31 56 00 27 40 Vestervig 30 56 20 23 20 Vestkap 26 67 00 354 00 Vestmannia 22 59 30 31 00 Vesoick 09 E.   Vestre 22, 23 58 30 35 00 Vestung Heubt 17 54 15 36 30 Veter lacus 20 57 00 30 00   22 58 00 30 00 Vettenbuttel 42 54 00 23 50 Venskouria 09 L.   Veustina 07 63 00 71 00 Veustina 06 63 00 71 00 Veyby 36 57 10 24 10 Ugra fl. 11 54 00 52 00 Ugelstruy 31 55 30 29 30 Ugerby 36 57 25 24 30 Ugest 14 51 40 37 00 Ugildkirk 36 57 15 24 30 Ugkoniemi 21 62 00 49 00 Uglitz 6, 7, 8, 20 57 00 56 00 Uhanie 18 50 30 41 00 Uhewath 40 54 45 24 50 Uhlbeck 39 55 10 23 40 Uhora 18 55 00 44 00 Uhr 35 55 20 24 00 Uhren 39 55 30 24 20 Via regia 44 53 55 24 40 Vianen 20 51 00 20 00 Viadrus fl. 15 51 50 31 40 Viaxea fl. 6, 7 61 00 78 00 Viazd 14 51 40 36 00 Viburgensis Dioecesis 30 56 20 23 20 Vibygaard 32 55 30 27 00 Vidava 14 51 20 35 00 Vidrina 09 E.   Viellerup 32 55 40 26 40 Vierus Werstadt 14 59 00 35 00 Vigebordsfiord 29 59 20 20 30 Vigedal 20 59 00 20 00 Vinedals K. 28 59 30 23 00 Vigedalsvand 29 58 20 20 30 Vigehogsfioerd 28 59 30 20 30 Viger 28, 29 60 00 21 00 Vigmostadt 25 57 30 21 00 Vigmostadt K. 29 57 40 21 30 Vigoozero 6, 7, 20 63 00 52 00 Stift Vigsiden 29 59 00 25 00 Vigsidin 25 58 30 26 00 Vildloss 32 55 30 26 20 Vilia fl. 18 54 30 43 00 Vilna 6, 18, 20 54 00 43 00 Vincent 14, 16 53 20 40 00 Vincent fl. 14, 16 53 20 40 00 Vindefiord 29 59 00 21 00 Vindela Flodt 20 64 00 34 00 Vindero 20, 25 57 00 21 00 Vinderod 32 55 50 27 00 Vingaker 22 23 58 50 32 33 Vinstrup 30, 32 55 50 27 00 Vinstrup So 32 55 20 26 40 Viol 38, 40, 41 54 35 24 20 Virbiczo 12 48 30 45 00 Virksund 36 56 30 23 50 Vischersboede 27 62 40 21 00 Viselsca 09 C.   Visnice 14 49 40 37 00 Vistrup 36 57 20 24 10 Vistula fl. 14, 16 49 20 35 00   18 50 00 56 00 Vitegre 20 60 00 56 00 Vitho 38, 40 54 20 23 40 Vitskild 20, 30 56 40 23 40 Vitzbeck 42 54 00 24 30 Vitzgra 6, 7 60 00 55 00 Vium 37 56 15 24 00 Viwiatczyca fl. 18 56 00 48 00 Ukna 20, 22 57 00 33 00 Uknon 22 57 00 33 00 Ukolskidwor 19 55 30 44 00 Ukonsari 21 60 30 51 00 Ula 18 55 00 47 00 Ula fl. 18 55 00 47 00 Ulaborgh 6, 20, 21 65 00 41 00 Ulacisco 09 Q.     20 63 00 62 00 Ulaff S. 16 53 40 40 00 Ulanoni 6, 18 49 00 45 00 Ula Tresk 6, 20, 21 65 00 44 00 Uldaer 39 55 10 24 10 Ulderup 38, 39, 40 54 55 24 40 Uldrick 28 60 00 20 00 Uleff 37 55 45 24 20 Uleming 27 63 20 23 00 Ulen 19 58 00 41 00 Ulfo 20, 21 59 00 42 00 Ulfon 20, 21 63 00 35 00 Ulfsund 24 54 10 32 20 Ulfuesund 23 59 20 32 30 T' Ulie 20 53 00 20 00 Ulielandt 20 53 00 19 00 Ulina 20 68 00 35 00 Ulkebull 38, 40 54 55 24 50 Ullared 31 55 50 24 40 Ulldall 39 55 10 24 10 Ullengia 20 56 00 31 00 Ullerup 39 55 10 23 50 Ullmohl 39 55 10 23 50 Ulnes K. 29 60 20 24 00 Vlowez 18 50 00 44 00 Ulsebuy 38, 40 54 35 24 40 Ulseniss 38, 40, 41 54 35 24 50 Ulshal 32 55 00 27 00 Usoo 19 59 00 42 00 Ulstrup 36, 37 56 20 24 20 Ulstruy 31 55 55 29 20 Ulsuesund 20 58 00 22 30 Ultang 39 55 10 24 40 Ultby 32, 34 55 05 25 20 Ultes 20 67 00 39 00 Ulves 28 60 30 24 00 Ulvesbull 38, 40, 41 54 25 24 00 Ulvig 25, 28, 29 60 00 21 30 Um 19 58 30 40 00 Uma 21 63 30 36 00 Uma Lappmark 1, 20 64 30 31 30 Uman 12 48 30 48 00 Umbicz 12 50 00 50 00 Umeao R. 01 64 30 35 00 Umel 40 54 55 25 30 Umiata 10, 20 55 00 45 00 Un aan 24 61 20 31 00 Undal 29 57 40 21 30 Undalsfiord 29 57 40 22 00 Undera 29 57 40 21 30 Uundersaker 20 63 00 29 00 Understed 36 57 15 24 50 Underup 37 55 55 24 20 Unerosskagora 19 B.   Ung 40 55 00 25 30 Unienow 14 51 40 35 00 Unk 24 59 50 31 50 Unnarid 22 57 00 29 00 Unouck 06 E.   Unther Rantha 16 54 40 38 00 Vobal Volost 09 F.   Voder Kamp 41 54 15 25 20 Voeghtsgaerde 27, 28 62 30 21 00 Voer 37 55 55 24 20 De Voerd na Oere 27 63 40 24 00 Vogel 25 63 30 21 00 Vogelsundt 41 54 00 23 10 Vogelsang 16 54 20 37 00 Den Voghel 20 63 00 20 00 De Voghels 27 63 20 22 00 Volberg 37 56 10 22 50 Volbova 09 I.   Volcksdorp 41 53 35 24 50 Voloc 06 69 00 91 00 Volgerre 28 59 30 20 00 Volgsbull 38, 40, 41 54 35 23 30 Volibo 25 60 30 24 00 Volibok 28, 29 60 40 24 00 Volicazole 6, 7, 8 58 00 59 00 Volinza 14 50 40 39 00 Volkova 09 I.   Vollerwieg 38, 40, 41 54 20 23 50 Voloc 07 69 00 91 00 Vologda 01 59 00 58 00 Vologda fl. 09 A.   Voloinga 7, 7 67 00 71 00 Het Jamen Volost Ja∣gris 09 M.   Volok Korbanga 06 59 00 63 00   07 59 00 62 00 Volost peelsina 6, 7 59 00 61 00 Volstede 38, 40 54 40 24 10 Voltas 09 C.   Volvo 20 66 00 54 00 Volynia 12, 18 50 00 44 00 Vom 30 51 00 43 00 Vomerbywos 35 56 00 23 20 Vorn Sio 31 55 35 29 00 Vongeri 6, 20, 21 63 00 50 00 Vonserva 32 55 40 26 20 Vooghtsgaard 27 63 40 23 00 Vooren 30 54 40 23 20 Vorbaek 37 55 35 23 30 Vorballum 39 55 05 23 40 Vorbro Aa 36 57 20 24 20 Vorbrugge 41, 42, 44 53 55 24 20 Vorde 20 52 00 23 00 Vorderkamp 43 54 15 25 30 Vordon 14 53 00 35 00 Voren 35 54 40 23 20 Vorflucht 17 54 15 36 20 Vorgaard 36 56 45 24 50 Vorgod 37 56 00 23 10 Vorland 44 53 55 24 00 Vornossoova 09 Q.   Vorobjova 09 T.   Vorrindsbro 37 55 55 24 20 Vors Aa. 36 57 05 24 50 Vorwarck 43 53 50 25 30 Vosania 67 62 00 69 00 Vosbal reca 09 F.   Vosborg 30 56 20 22 40 Vosdresenie Monast. 06 60 00 54 00   07 60 00 53 00 Vosduesevie 6, 8 55 00 58 00 Voskresenie 09 R.   Voslrono 06 61 00 66 00 Vosnesenie 6, 7 64 00 61 00   09 R.   Vos Rondal 28, 29 60 30 21 00 Vosnesnese 20 61 00 53 00 Vostro 09 I.   Vostrog 35 56 20 22 40 Vostrono 07 61 00 65 00 Vostrova 09 H.   Voter lac. 06 58 00 30 00 Votiecho 14 50 40 39 00 Votlasemeetz 6, 7 61 00 67 00 Votlasemeets goro∣dock 09 K.   Vounitz 14 49 40 37 00 Voindia Kouria 6, 7 61 00 66 00   09 K.   Voysema 6, 7 62 00 71 00 Upallt S. 16 53 40 40 00 Upissa fl. 19 56 00 38 00 Uplandia 23 60 &c 33 00 Upniki 18 54 30 42 00 Uppa fl. 6, 7 59 00 84 00 Upsala 06 60 00 34 00 Upsalia 23 59 40 34 30 Vraaby 32 55 20 27 00 Vrale 37 56 00 24 00 Vram 31 55 50 29 20 Vramruy 31 55 30 29 50 Vrams 31 55 55 28 10 Urangarp 31 56 15 38 10 Uraniborg 30 55 40 27 40 Urbanowo 15 52 00 33 40 Urby 39 55 05 23 50 Urdal 25, 29 60 40 24 30 Urdowa 08 55 00 53 00 Uregleff 36 57 10 24 10 Urek 20 52 00 20 00 Urendorp 42 53 55 24 00 Urevand 25 58 30 21 00 Urgsidin 22 58 30 25 00 Urhusen 38, 40 54 40 24 00 Uria 12 50 00 43 00 Urieschegat 28 59 30 19 30 Urinsted 36 57 10 24 00 Urkedal 27 64 20 26 00 Urnehovet 40 55 00 24 20 Uroczysseze 18 50 00 49 00 Urop 30, 35 55 20 25 20 Ursakowa 16 53 00 36 30 Ursen lacus 24 60 20 30 00 Urskog 20, 22, 25 59 30 26 00 Ursloe 34 55 35 25 00 Urshofski S. 16 53 40 40 30 Ursult 20, 22 56 00 30 00 Urt 15 51 50 31 40 Urup 37 55 55 23 10 Urupgaard 37 55 45 23 10 Uruvesi 21 62 00 48 00 Urzedow 14 50 40 39 00 Urzesna 14 52 00 34 00 Uscie 12 50 30 51 00   15 53 00 34 00 Usedom 14 53 40 30 00 Usedom I. 20 53 00 30 00 Usiatyn 12 49 00 44 00 Uskebul 35 54 40 23 40 Usluzna 07 58 00 53 00 Usman fl. 08 53 00 64 00 Usowka 12 49 30 51 00 Ussdaw 16 53 20 38 00 Usspole 18, 20 55 00 43 00 Usted 6, 20, 22 55 00 29 00 Ustiug 01 61 20 64 00 Ustiuga 01 60 00 65 00 Ustrup 36, 37 56 20 22 30 Ustuzna 06 58 00 53 00 Ustpryky 12 48 00 43 00 Uswiath 06 56 00 51 00   18 56 30 48 00 Usza fl. 12 51 00 48 00     53 00 43 &c Uszacza fl. 18 55 00 46 00 Uszuska 12 49 00 44 00 Usztye 14 52 40 33 00 Utcluczka 14 49 40 37 00 Uter 44 53 25 24 40 Uterocy 27 64 40 27 00 Uterssen 30, 41 53 40 24 20 Uterstum 40 54 40 23 30 Uthkaarsandt 39 55 15 23 30 Utho 21 59 30 38 00 Utka fl. 10 C.   Utklippia 6, 20, 22 55 00 31 00 Utlengia 22, 30 56 00 32 00 Uto 19 58 30 35 00 Utrecht 20 51 00 20 00 Uttere 20 59 00 30 00 Utweere 28 61 00 19 00 Utweer klippen 20 60 00 18 00 Utzloff 16 54 20 36 30 Utzyoki 6, 7, 20 70 00 43 00 Uvan fl. 24 60 30 29 20 Uumen 31 55 30 28 00 Uur 30 55 20 24 20 Uxkul 19, 20 56 30 42 00
Uxujervi 21 61 30 51 00 Uxus fl. 21 61 30 51 00 Uylaruy 31 56 00 28 10 Uysk 20, 25 65 00 26 00 Uytfierr 20, 25 59 00 19 00 Uzda 18 53 00 44 00 Uzlowiec 18 52 30 43 00 Uzweta 18, 19, 20 55 30 40 00 W.   WA 22 56 00 29 09 Waa 31 55 50 29 30 Waaghbuy 27 63 20 24 00 Waanga reca 09 O.   Waargarde 38, 39 55 25 24 40 Waboyck 28 62 30 20 30 Wabs 38, 40 54 30 25 10 Wabul 40 54 35 24 00 Wacbnogrobla 12 48 30 47 00 Wacken 42 54 00 24 10 Wackenbeck 44 53 45 24 30 Wackendorp 43, 44 53 50 25 10 Wadange fl. 16 53 40 38 00 Wadang S. 16 53 40 38 00 Wadense 31 55 55 28 00 Wadowicze 14 49 20 36 00 Wadrapusta 6, 7, 8 56 00 54 00 Wadsted 37 55 55 23 10 Wadstena 22 58 00 31 00 Wadam 36 56 55 24 20 Wael 30 53 40 25 00 Waelstede 41, 42 53 55 25 00   43, 44 54 00 25 00 Waelwyck 27 63 20 23 00 Waer 37 55 50 24 30 Waerdam 42 54 15 23 40 Waerdspetigen 22 57 00 27 00 Waerholm 27 64 00 24 00 Waersbergen 25 57 00 27 00 Warsborg 30 57 00 27 20 Waga 6, 7 62 00 61 00 Waga fl. 1, 20 63 00 60 00 Wagenschos 14, 16 53 20 40 00 Wagensa 35 56 20 24 00 Wagense 36 56 40 23 50 Wageren 41 54 15 25 10 Wagerlandt 30 54 00 25 20 Wagga Reca 09 O.   Wagria 43 54 &c 25 &c Wagrow 14 52 20 40 00 Wagrowiec 15 52 40 34 20 Wahle 42 54 00 24 00 Wai fl. 11 50 00 48 00 Waidana fl. 19 57 30 44 00 Wainkiswa 30 56 00 28 40   31 56 00 29 10 Wainsel 19 57 00 42 00 Waita 22 57 30 33 00 Waka fl. 18 54 30 42 00 Wakendorp 41 52 45 24 40     53 50 25 10 Wekeniss 41 53 45 25 30 Wal 20, 22 60 00 33 00   23, 24 59 30 32 20 Walachia 06 45 00 39 00   12 47 00 43 00 Walamo 20, 21 61 00 50 00 Walawe 12 48 30 49 00 Walbech 31 55 45 29 20 Walbo 20 60 00 33 00   24 60 30 34 00 Walbul 40 54 40 24 00 Walby 32 55 50 27 00   36, 37 56 25 25 20 P. Walcz G. Die Krone 15 53 20 33 20 Walkem 16 54 20 38 30 Walckewitz 43 54 10 25 20 Walckmul 17 54 05 37 10     54 10 25 30 Wald 17 54 00 37 00 Waldaw 16, 18 54 30 38 00 Walders 25 60 30 23 00 Walderstiff 29 60 20 23 30 Waldorp 41 53 30 25 00 Waldowitz 14 50 20 36 00 Waldres 25 61 30 20 00 Waldt 43 53 55 25 10 Wale 44 53 45 24 30 Wale S. 01 77 30 30 00 Walgerway 28 60 30 20 00 Walhof 19 56 30 42 00 Wali 21, 22 23 60 00 35 00 Waliske S. 16 54 00 40 00 Walkaw 15 51 30 33 20 H. Walkonowazaboi∣aporoh 18 56 30 53 00 N. & S. Wallaker 31 55 50 28 00 Walle 40 54 55 23 40 Walleberg 30, 31 55 20 29 00 Wallekild 32 55 40 26 20 Wallen 41, 42 54 15 24 00 Wallensbock 32 55 30 27 20 Walleroe 27, 28 62 30 20 00 Wallers 28 60 30 24 30 Walling 17 54 00 37 00 Wallingsved 32 55 10 26 20 Wallo 22 57 00 33 00 Walloby 32 55 20 27 20 Wallogaard 32 55 20 27 00 Walmar 19, 20 57 00 43 00 Walness 33 54 55 26 50 Walo 21 59 30 36 00 Walpusch fl. 14, 16 53 00 39 00 Walsbull 38, 40 54 45 24 20 Walsche fl. 16 54 00 37 30 Walsdorp 41, 42, 43 54 10 25 10 Walsfioerd 20 63 00 23 00 Walshutter 17 54 15 36 20 Walsingham 01 66 30 311 30 Walstorphoff 42 54 10 25 10 Walsta 24 59 30 32 20 Walstersdorp 16 54 20 38 00 Waltost 30 55 40 28 40 Walwyck 27 62 30 21 00 Wamakoski 21 61 30 40 00 Wamdrup 37, 38, 39 55 25 24 10 Wammen 36, 37 56 30 24 10 Wamon 20 58 00 30 00   22 59 00 30 00 Wan 35 56 20 22 40 Wandckendorp 42, 43 54 05 25 00 Wanda fl. 21 60 30 42 00 Wandeling 34 55 10 24 30 Wandern 15 52 20 32 20 Wanderup 30, 38, 40 54 40 24 20 Wandesbeck 41, 44 53 30 24 40 Wandlack 16 54 20 39 30 Wandting 38 55 10 24 30 Wandfeldt Herret 36, 37 56 30 22 30 Wanfflode 21 65 00 53 00 Wang 36 56 55 22 55     57 00 24 20 Wangels 43 54 15 25 30 Wangeroe 20 53 00 22 00 Wangoi S. 16 53 40 39 00 Wanhavesi 21 61 00 41 00 Waniewka fl. 18 52 30 41 00 Waniewo 18 52 30 41 00 Wanneberg 31 55 55 29 20 Wanozera 08 53 00 63 00 Wanse 17 54 05 37 00 Wansion 24 59 50 32 40 Wanste 31 55 30 29 10 Wansteto 31 55 30 29 10 Wantinge 31 56 05 28 10 Wantzowo 15 52 10 33 20 Wapelfelde 41, 42 54 05 24 20 Waples 16 53 20 38 00 Waplitz 17 53 50 36 40 Wapenberg 01 60 00 325 00 Waralb 31 56 00 28 10 Waranger 6, 7, 20 70 00 46 00 Warbek 19 58 00 45 00 Warcloster 35 56 00 24 00 Ward Aa 37 55 35 23 20 Wardal 20, 25 64 00 28 00 Wardana fl. 18 56 00 40 00 Warde 37, 39 55 35 23 00 Warder 41, 43 53 55 25 10 Warderoth 42 54 15 23 40 Warders 28 59 30 20 00 Wardhuys 20 69 00 42 00 I. Wardhuys 01 71 00 47 00   6, 7, 20 70 00 48 00 Waren 20 53 00 28 00 Warendorp 43 54 10 25 40 Warestorp 31 56 10 28 20 Warestrop 30 56 20 28 20 Wargar 40 54 40 23 50 Wargarde 35 57 00 24 40 Wargen 16 54 40 38 30 Warghoo 20, 21 63 00 37 00 Waringborg 30, 32 55 00 26 40 Waritzenkivi 21 61 00 52 00 Warka 14 51 40 38 00 Warkallen 16 53 40 38 00 Warkaw 41, 44 53 40 25 30 Warkirck 35 57 00 24 40 Warkloster 20 55 00 24 00   30 56 00 24 00 Warkowicze 18 50 30 44 00 Warleberg 38, 40, 42 54 20 25 00 Warlitz 17 53 55 36 30 Warlsdorp 43 53 55 25 30 Warmbad 14 50 40 32 00 Warmhoff 17 53 50 36 20 Warmloso 31 55 25 29 00 Warmstrup 37 56 15 24 20 Warnaw 41 54 10 25 00 Warnecloster 20, 22, 25 59 00 25 00 Warnike 15 53 20 31 40 Warnis 38, 39, 40 53 55 24 30 Warnishovet 39 55 00 24 30 Waronia 20 69 00 55 00 Waronowazabora 12 47 00 52 00 Waroytza Kerckdor∣en River 6, 7 59 00 63 00   09 D.   Warsaw S. 16 53 40 40 00 Warsberg 35 57 00 27 20 Warsbierg 38, 40 55 05 25 30 Warsenga 09 M.   Warsiga 6, 7, 20 66 00 58 00 Warske S. 16 55 00 40 00 Warsker 22 57 30 33 00 Warsow 35 56 40 24 40 Warsow 35 51 20 35 00 Warta 14 51 20 35 00 Warta fl. 14 50 20 33 00 Wartenberg 14 51 00 34 00   15 51 40 32 40 Wartenburg 14, 18 53 40 38 00 Alt Wartenburg 16 53 40 38 30 Wartow 32 55 40 27 20 Warven 41, 42 54 10 23 40 Warwa 12 49 30 51 00 Warwick forland 01 65 00 336 00 Warwick S. 01 65 40 320 30 Warzimon 14 52 20 35 00 Warzovia 14 52 20 38 00 Was T. 20 67 00 30 00 Waschbeck 41, 42 54 00 24 40 Waschbuck 41 54 15 25 30 Waselkow 18 53 00 41 00 Wasieliski 18 53 30 42 00 Wasiligorod 6, 7, 8 58 00 67 00   10 B.   Wasilkow 12, 18 49 30 48 00   13 A.   Wasilowka 12 48 30 47 00 Wask 19 57 30 43 00 Wasosse 18 53 00 39 00 Wassa, sive Musta∣sars 6, 20, 21 63 00 39 00 Wassergang 17 54 05 36 50 Wassmut 14 53 40 36 30 Wastena 20 58 00 30 00 Waster 30 56 20 27 40 Wasterkaaruy 31 56 15 27 50 Wastet 30 54 40 24 20 Wastraas 24 59 30 33 00 Wassunda 22, 23 59 30 34 30 Wata 23 59 40 36 00 Wate T. 20 67 00 39 00 Watgestroom 28 60 00 20 00 Watne 25, 27, 28 62 30 21 00 Watnefiord 27 62 30 21 00   28 62 30 20 30 Wato 19, 20 59 30 36 00 Wattenbeck 42 54 05 24 50 Watuskiste 6, 20, 22 59 00 38 00 Wawiecka 18 53 30 42 00 Waxholm 23 59 10 35 00 Wayby 36 56 35 23 10 Wayen 27 64 00 23 00 Waygord 38 54 40 23 50 Waygats Straits 01 69 00 73 00 Wdfiorden 36, 37 56 25 22 29 Weckelwyck 27 64 40 26 00 Wedbak 30, 32 55 40 27 20 Wedby 30, 31 56 00 28 30 Wedde 39 55 20 24 10 Weddelum 42 54 00 24 10 Wedder 16 53 40 39 00 Weddinghusen 42 54 15 23 50 Weddigstede 41, 42 54 15 23 50 Weddoo 19, 21, 22 59 30 36 00 Wedel 41, 44 53 35 24 20 Wedelbeck 44 53 35 24 20 Wedelbroeck 44 53 50 24 30 Wedelhoep 41 54 00 24 10 Weding 38, 40 54 45 24 30 WedmanhoiHerrit 31 55 25 28 40 Wedoe 28 62 30 21 30 Wedrapusta 20 56 00 54 00 Wedstrup 32 55 40 27 00 Wedtstede 37, 38, 39 55 15 23 40 Weede 41, 43 53 55 25 10 Weedel 44 53 35 24 20 Weekholm 22 59 00 28 00 Weel 30, 35 55 20 24 10   41 53 30 24 10 Ween 22 55 30 27 00 Weerpgarde 34 55 20 25 20 Weftertsholm 36 56 45 24 40 Wefoe 31 55 35 28 50 Wegby 31 56 05 28 10 Wegeholm 30, 31 56 00 28 00 Wegelso 31 55 35 28 10 Wegerbro 36 56 45 24 00 Wegerby 36 56 45 24 10 Wegersdorff 16 53 40 37 00 Wegrow 18 52 00 40 00 Wegstorp 34 55 10 25 30 Wehr fl. 41, 42 54 10 24 40 Wesenberg 43, 44 53 50 25 20 Wehsorstroom 41 53 35 23 00 Weiby 32 56 00 27 00 Weida 14 51 00 34 00 Weida fl. 14 51 00 34 00 Weier S. 16 53 20 37 30 Weiksdorff 15 51 30 33 20 Weil 20 55 00 24 00 Weilby 37 56 05 24 50 Weile 37 55 40 24 00 Weilefior 37 55 40 24 20 Weimersdorp 41 54 15 24 50 Weine 15 51 40 33 20 Weink 37 55 25 23 30 Weirum 36, 37 56 25 23 00 Weisbuy 39 54 50 24 10 Weisdam 39 55 00 24 20 Weisemberg 17 53 55 36 20 Weiss S. 16 53 40 39 00 Weissel fl. 14 50 00 38 &c Weisselburg 16 53 40 36 30 Weissen S. 16 53 40 40 00 Weissenberg 20 59 00 44 00 Weissenkrog 17 54 20 36 20 Weissze fl. 16 55 00 40 00
Weixenzip 20, 21 62 30 45 00 Wekelax 6, 20, 21 60 00 45 00 Wekolsang 22 56 30 30 00 Welaw 6, 20 54 00 39 00 Welby 30, 34 55 25 24 40 Welbuyhoff 39 55 00 24 10 Wele 40 54 45 24 40 Weliby 37 56 20 24 50 Welikiperm 6, 7 61 00 90 00 Weliki Poyassa 07 66 00 88 00 Weliki prewos i.e. Magnus trajectus 11 50 00 60 00 Welingleu 30 56 00 24 00 Welinghusen 44 53 30 24 50 Welitzen 16 53 40 40 30 Welkofrat 10 B.   Welduyn 40 54 35 23 20 Welle 31 55 55 27 50 Welleff 37 56 25 25 10 Wellem buttel 42 54 10 24 00 Wellendorp 43 53 55 25 30 Weller 36, 37 56 20 24 20 Wellerhope 42 54 15 24 10 Wellerup 39 55 05 24 10 Welles 36 56 25 25 10 S. Welling 37 56 00 22 50 Wellingbuttel 44 53 35 24 50 Wellinghusen 42 54 15 23 50 Wellsee 41, 42, 43 54 15 25 00 Wellugart 35 56 20 23 40 Welme holm 37 55 55 24 10 Welmick 14 52 20 41 00 Welt 38, 40, 41 54 20 23 30 Welue 37 56 00 24 30 Wemindhog 31 55 25 28 50 Wemme 36, 37 56 20 22 50 Wemmentruy 31 56 00 27 40 Wemmerloff 30, 32 55 20 26 00 Wemmerlow 31 55 35 29 40 W. Wemmeshoy 31 55 25 28 40 Wen 22 57 00 32 00 Wendel 20, 22, 23 60 00 34 00 Wenden 19, 20 57 00 42 00 Wendenen 16 54 00 39 00 Wendling 39 55 10 24 30 Wendtorp 40, 43 54 20 24 50 Wendsyssel 29 57 20 25 00 Wene 35 56 20 23 20 Wenemanhusen 42 54 15 23 50 Wener lacus 6, 20 58 00 28 00 Wengel 36, 37 56 20 24 20 Wengelen 17 54 00 37 00 Wengeinia 15 52 10 33 00 Wengern 17 53 55 36 30 Wennebuttel 42 54 10 24 00 Wennergaard 37 56 00 22 50 Wennigstede 39, 40 54 55 23 20 Wennoe 36 56 35 23 00 Wensen 16 53 20 37 00 Wenslia 35 57 00 24 00 Wensuld 37 55 25 23 50 Wensussel 20, 30 57 00 24 00 Wensyn 41, 43 53 55 25 10 Wentingbond 40 54 55 24 50 Wentliunge 22 56 00 32 00 Wentschen fl. 16 53 40 39 30 Wentschen S. 16 53 40 39 30 Wentzloff 32 55 10 26 20 Weperitz 15 52 40 32 00 Werbkymiasto 12 49 00 45 00 Werby 31 55 30 28 30 Werczer lacus 19 58 00 44 00 Werckens 20 61 00 37 00 Werdena 16 55 20 39 30 Werder 6, 20 58 00 41 00 Fischavis Werder 16 54 00 37 00 Dasgrosse Wer∣der 16, 17 54 15 36 40 Klein Werder 16 54 00 36 30 Wereloczyn 12 50 30 50 00 Weressczyn 18 50 00 47 00 Werested 31 55 35 29 50 Werinde 20 59 00 35 00 Werindo 19, 22 59 00 35 00 Wering 34 55 20 25 00 Wercknes Udd. 21 61 00 37 00 Werkosari 21 61 00 49 00 Ost Werlinge 31 55 25 28 30 W. Werlinge 31 55 25 28 20 Werlum 20, 25, 30, 35 57 00 24 00 Wermelen 22 59 00 29 00 Werraskog 22 59 00 28 00 Werne 31 55 50 28 20 Wernemo 20, 22 56 30 29 00 Wernersdorff 16, 17 54 00 36 30 Wero 30, 35 56 00 25 20 Weroneez 6, 8 53 00 64 00 Werop 30, 35 56 20 24 00 Werpinge 31 55 40 28 20 Wersloff 32 55 40 26 00 Wersom 31 55 50 28 40 Wersse 35 56 40 23 20 Werum 36, 37 56 25 24 10 Waerwoni 12 49 00 51 00 Weryni 20 68 00 30 00 Wesby 31 56 00 27 40 Weseby 40 54 30 24 50 Weseff 37 56 15 22 30 Wesel 20 51 00 21 00 Wesem 31 55 35 28 30 Wesenberg 19 59 00 44 00   41 53 45 25 20 Weser fl. 20 53 00 23 00 Weserstroom 30 53 40 22 40 Wesilax 20, 21 61 00 41 00 Weskinde 32 55 40 26 00 Weslinck 17 54 20 36 20 Wesling 41 54 15 23 50 Weslingburen 41, 42 54 15 23 40 Wesloma 10 B.   Wesnes Tresfioerd 27 62 30 22 00   28 62 30 21 30 Wesoffka 10 D.   Wesoma 6, 8, 20 55 00 58 00 Wesowei Ins. 10 F.   Wesowei fl. 10 F.   Wessel 42 54 15 23 50 Wesselborg 37 55 30 25 50 West 35 56 40 23 00 Westalling 37 56 20 24 50 Westat 20, 21 60 00 34 00 Westbryndcrsleff 36 57 05 24 10 Westbutendick 42 53 55 23 50 Westby 31 56 00 27 50 Westelyck Sandt 39 55 25 23 20 Westen Clost. 29 58 40 20 30 Westenschof 42 54 15 24 40 Westensee 38, 40, 41 54 15 25 00 Westerad 41 53 55 25 10 Wester Alling 36 56 20 24 50 Westeras 6, 20, 22, 23 59 30 33 00 Westerbeck 38, 39 55 10 23 40 Westerborg 33 54 45 26 30 Westerborstel 42 54 15 24 00 Westerbutter 42 54 00 23 50 Westerby 31 55 40 28 50 Westercuppel 33 54 45 26 10 Westerdick 42 54 00 23 40 Westere 38, 40 54 50 24 00 Wester Egede 32 55 10 27 00 Wester Egisborg 32 55 10 26 40 Westerfelt 42 54 20 23 50 Westerfiord 36 56 20 22 20 Westergard 19, 22 57 30 35 00 Westerhassing 36 56 55 24 40 Westerhever 38, 40, 41 54 25 23 30 Westerhoist 39 54 55 24 00 Westerholm S. 01 76 00 295 00 Westerhorn 42, 44 53 50 24 20 Westerhude 41 53 40 23 10 Wester I. 01 76 30 42 30 Westerkirck 37 55 50 23 50 Westerlandt 38, 39, 40 54 55 23 20 Westerlinucth 39 55 15 24 00 Westermar 38 54 40 23 50 Westermarsch 39 55 05 23 30 Westermoer 44 53 55 24 20 Westermuh 40, 42 54 15 24 20 Westernik 20, 22 57 30 32 00 Wester Obeling 39 55 10 23 40 Westerode 43 53 55 25 10 Westerorstede 40 54 30 24 20 Westerow 44 53 45 25 10 Wester Ronfelt 40, 42 54 15 24 30 Weste Rya 30, 31 55 40 28 40 Westersyde 30, 35 55 40 22 40 Westertiep 39 55 05 23 50 Westervedsted 37 55 15 23 00 Westerulsloff 33 54 40 26 50 Westerwandet 36 56 55 22 50 Westerwedstede 39 55 15 23 40 Westerwolt 38, 40, 41 54 35 23 40 Westerwyck 35, 36 56 20 23 00 Westeryl 30, 35 56 40 23 00 Westfior 37 56 20 22 20 Westfioerd 27 64 20 25 00 Westhermitzleff 36 57 05 24 00 Westkrog 17 54 20 36 20 Westlendingafior∣dung 26 67 30 349 00 Westloff 35 56 40 23 00 West Los 36 56 55 23 10     P   Westmanna vel Pisti∣lia Eyar 26 64 00 356 00 Westmanna I. 01 64 30 355 00 Westmannia 6, 20 59 00 31 00 Westod 35 56 00 25 00 Ld. Weston's I. 01 53 00 282 00 Westorp 34 55 20 24 30 Westrel 20 69 00 29 00 Westrogothia 6, 20 57 00 28 00 Westrol 06 69 00 28 00 Westsceck 43 54 20 25 40 Westtorp 42 54 05 23 50 Westwilling 36, 37 56 20 24 20 Weta fl. 18 56 00 40 00 Weternde 43 54 15 25 20 Wetlanoy Ins. 10 C.   Wetlage fl. 10 C.   Wettenberg 41 54 10 24 20 Wetterndorp 42 53 55 24 20 Wettersloff 32 55 20 26 40 Wevelsfleth 41, 44 53 55 24 00 Wewirsche fl. 16 55 20 39 30 Wexo 30, 32 55 40 27 00 Wexsio 16, 20 56 00 30 00 Weybeck 38, 40 54 50 24 20 Weyby 36, 37 56 35 22 50 Weyen 38, 39 55 25 24 00 Weyersleff 36, 37 56 20 25 10 Weygats 6, 7 70 00 80 00 Weyhol 39 55 10 24 20 Weymowic 15 52 10 33 40 Weyro 30 54 40 26 20 Weysterup 38, 39 55 25 26 30 Wgeloss 32 55 50 27 00 Wgorloss 30, 32 55 30 26 20 White's C. 01 61 30 332 00 The White Sea 01 65 00 50 00 Wiacza fl. 18 53 30 45 00 Wiartel 16 53 20 39 30 Wiasma 6, 8, 20 55 00 53 00 Wiatrowo 15 52 30 34 20 Wiazyn 18 54 00 44 00 Wiazyn fl. 18 54 00 44 00 Wibbi 12 50 30 50 00 Wibiholm 23 58 50 33 30 Wiborg 6, 20 60 00 47 00   30, 35, 36, 37 56 20 23 50 Wiborg Herritzting 37 56 15 22 40 Wiby 34 55 20 24 40 Wica 23 60 20 32 00 Wicawsow 18 55 30 43 00 Wichlen 43 54 10 25 10 Wichtis 19, 21 60 00 41 00 Wicia 19 58 30 41 00 Wick 41 54 20 24 50 Wick fl. 16 54 00 40 00 Wicliczkasalisfodinae 18 50 00 38 00 Wicwierza fl. 18 55 00 39 00 Wicze R. 12 48 00 49 00 Wiczeniecz 12 49 00 43 00 Wiczincza 12 48 00 43 00 Widbe 36, 37 56 20 25 00 Widdama 31 56 05 29 00 Widenberstel 42 54 00 24 30 Widendorp 43 54 15 25 20 Widimin 16 53 40 40 00 Widoe Closter 26 65 00 354 00 Widslel 37 55 55 24 30 Widukla 18 55 00 40 00 Widzba fl. 18 55 00 48 00 Widzi 18 55 00 43 00 Widzie 20 55 00 44 00 Wieders 17 54 10 37 10 Wiedezycz fl. 18 52 00 48 00 Wichlen 42 54 10 25 10 Wieiby 37 55 30 24 20 Wiele 39 54 50 24 00 Wielek 12 46 30 52 00   13 N.   Wieleze 18 52 00 45 00 Wielgia 15 52 20 34 00 Wieli 20 64 00 53 00 Wielichow 15 51 50 33 40 P. Wielin G. Filehn 15 51 40 33 20     52 40 33 00 VVielesia fl. 18 56 00 49 00 VVieliss 18 56 00 49 00 VVielka Przeprawa Tatarska 13 M.   VVielka fl. 19 57 00 46 00 VVielkieluki 6, 20 56 00 50 00 VVielova 18 54 30 41 00   20 55 00 41 00 VVielsbeck 38, 40 54 50 24 30 VVielum 14 51 00 35 00 VViemo 20, 21 60 00 39 00 VVienbergen 43 54 20 25 40 Wienczourg 14 53 00 34 00 Wieprze 18 54 30 42 00 Wieprz fl. 18 51 00 40 00 Wierbicz Las 12 48 30 48 00 Wieremameivi 21 64 00 45 00 Wierzbolow 18 54 00 40 00 Wierzchovin 15 52 30 33 20 Wiesbeck 41, 42 54 10 24 20 Wiesen 16, 17 53 40 37 30 Wiesgaard 38, 40 54 55 24 20 Wieskowle 31 55 45 28 30 Wiessy 18 54 30 42 00 Wiesbuy 38, 39 55 00 23 50 Wiesby 40 54 50 24 10 Wietlica fl. 18 52 00 44 00 Wieuzenne 18 55 00 45 00 Wiewie 18 54 30 42 00 Wiff 35 55 20 24 20 Wiffeld 37 56 10 25 00 Wigerloff 33 54 45 27 00 Wigersleff 36 56 45 23 00 Wighersandoe 27, 28 62 40 20 00 Wigsteen 23 58 40 35 00 Wigsyden 31 56 00 27 30 Wiig 32 55 50 26 20 Wika 20, 24 60 30 32 20 Wilberg 37 56 05 23 10 Wilbul 39 55 20 23 50 Wilby 30, 34 55 00 25 00   36, 37 56 20 25 10 Wilczino 15 52 20 33 20 Wildaa fl. 39 54 55 23 50 Wildeman 16 54 40 39 00 Wildenberg 16 53 20 38 30 Wildenburg 14, 20 53 00 38 00 Wildendorp 43 53 50 25 10 Wildenhoff 16 54 00 38 00 Wildenscharm 44 53 55 24 30 Wildrup 36 56 45 22 50 Wildfang 39 55 15 24 30 Wilhelmsdorff 16 53 40 37 30 Wilica 18 54 00 44 00 Wilke 15 51 40 23 40
Wilk fl. 16 55 00 40 00 Wilkosmirz 6, 18, 20 55 00 42 00 Wilkowo 15 51 50 33 40 Wilkuchke 16 55 00 40 00 Wilkuski S. 16 53 20 39 30 Willeia 18 54 30 41 00 Willemrade 41, 43, 44 54 00 24 50 Willlemsgarde 42 54 00 24 40 Willemskerc 23 59 10 35 00 Willenbrogh 17 54 00 36 30 Willerslo 35 56 20 23 00 Willerup 36 56 40 24 40 Willerupgaard 36 56 45 23 10 Willestrup 36 56 40 24 30 K. Willige 31 55 25 29 00 Willingen 19, 21 59 30 42 00 Wilna fl. 18 54 00 43 00 Wilpol 21 60 30 44 00 Wilsbeck 39 54 50 24 20 Wilsk 18 50 30 46 00 Wilsleff 38, 39 55 20 23 40 Wilstede 36 56 45 23 40   41 53 45 24 40 Wilster 41, 42, 44 53 55 24 00 Wilster Auw 42 52 55 24 00 Wilster Marsch 42 53 55 24 00 Wilstorp 34, 35 55 10 24 30 Wilstrup 38, 39 55 10 24 30 Wilsund 36 56 50 23 00 D. Wilten 16 54 20 39 00 Wiltevis 44 53 50 24 00 Wimersdorp 41 53 55 24 40 Wimerstede 42 54 15 24 00 Wimmerby 20 57 00 32 00 Wimrup 39 55 20 24 00 Winaradnakraza 13 R.   Winburgn 41, 42 54 05 23 50 Windbleff 36 56 50 23 40 Windaw 19, 20 57 00 38 00 Windbuy 42 54 25 24 40 Windeby 30, 32, 33 54 50 26 20   38, 40 54 25 25 00 Windeleff 38 55 45 23 50 Winderath 38, 40 54 40 24 50 Winders 40, 42 54 30 24 20 Winderup 38, 39 55 20 24 30 Winding 32 55 10 26 20   37 55 40 24 00 Windkirk 37 56 15 23 00 Window fl. 19 56 30 39 00 Windwyth 39 54 50 24 00 Wing 22 57 30 28 00 Wingaker 20 58 00 32 00 Winge 37 56 00 24 30 Wingeby 30 54 20 24 20 Wingen 22 60 00 26 00 Wingenes 22 58 30 28 00 Winger 20, 25 60 00 26 00 Wingeslo 35 56 00 24 00 Wingi 36, 37 56 25 24 10 Winsle 31 55 55 29 20 Winkel 36, 37 56 20 24 00 Winnica 18 49 00 46 00 Winnicze 12 49 00 46 00 Winnie 18 51 00 41 00 Winningen 34 55 20 25 30 Winno 20, 22, 25 57 00 26 00 I. Winnoe 30, 35 57 20 26 40 Wino Gora 15 52 00 34 20 Winoo 31 55 55 29 30 Winseldorp 41, 44 53 40 24 40 Winsen 30 53 30 24 40 Winsleff 36 56 35 24 40 Winsnes 28 60 30 20 00 Winstroom 23 59 10 35 30 Wintburg K. 16 55 20 39 30 Winterasa 22, 23 59 00 31 30 Winterhorst 44 53 35 24 20 Winterhude 44 53 35 24 40 Wintzig 14 51 20 33 00 Winum 39 55 05 23 50 Winxnia 18, 19 56 00 40 00 Wiodimirczacz 06 57 00 48 00 Wiole 21 64 30 52 00 Wiolkaprzeprawa Tatarska B. 12 47 00 52 90 Wipolsova 09 H   Wippe fl. 16 54 40 39 30 Wippel Aw 39 54 55 24 20 Wippen fl. 14 54 00 33 00 Wir R. 12 50 00 52 00 Wirbaliske 16 54 20 41 00 Wircliatouria 06 66 00 75 00 Wirdawesi 21 61 30 40 00 Wiria 19 58 30 43 00 Wiriskwald 19 59 00 43 00 Wirke 31 55 45 28 30 Wirkowenies 12 49 30 47 00 Wirksund 37 56 30 23 50 Wirlax 20, 21 60 00 46 00 Wirle fl. 39 54 55 24 00 Wirle Aw 38, 40 54 55 24 00 Wirmo 21 60 30 39 00 Wiro 19, 21 59 30 44 00 Wirring 36, 37 56 20 24 50 Wirschatowria 07 66 00 75 00 Wirschbona 16 53 40 39 00 Wirsta 20, 22 56 00 29 00 Wirsted 31 55 25 28 30 Wirwita fl. 18 55 30 40 00 Wirzbna 15 52 20 32 40 Wirzeka 15 51 50 34 00 Wirzowa 12 49 00 48 00 Wisangi 20 68 00 35 00 Wisborg 30, 36 56 40 24 40 Wisborggaard 36 56 40 24 40 Wisby 19, 20, 22 57 30 35 00 Wisch 41, 42 54 00 24 00 Wische 44 53 25 25 00 Wischegrod 14 52 20 37 00 Wischrum 36, 37 56 25 24 10 Wiscliosta 22 56 00 29 00 Wiselmine 17 54 20 36 20 Wisfiera 22 56 30 31 00 Wiskow 14 52 20 38 00 Wisia 30 56 00 28 40 Wisida 20 59 00 51 00 Wising 37 56 00 24 10 Wisingborg 22 57 30 30 00 Wisingzoo 22 57 30 30 00 Wisio 31 56 10 29 10 Wislana 22 58 00 27 00 Wislax 20, 21 62 00 46 00 Wislinen 14 54 40 41 00 Wisloko fl. 18 50 00 39 00 Wismar 20 53 00 27 00 Wismelow 31 55 30 28 40 Wisniow 18 54 00 43 00 Wisniowiec Ducatus 18 50 00 43 00 Wisnum 20 58 00 38 00 Wisodo 20 58 00 51 00 Wisoki 15 52 30 34 20 Wisoko 06 58 00 51 00 Wisseloost 31 55 50 28 30 Wisseltost 30, 31 56 10 29 30 Wissio 20, 22 56 00 29 00 Wissnum 22 58 30 30 00 Wisted 36 56 55 24 40 Wistede 41 54 10 24 20 Wisletfl. 16 54 20 40 30 Wistritten 16 54 20 41 00 Wiszna 12 49 00 51 00 Witenstein 19, 20 58 00 43 00 Witepsk 6, 18, 20 55 00 48 00 Witgewaldt 16 53 20 38 00 Witholm 27 63 20 22 00 Withor 30, 31, 32 55 40 27 20 Witkel 34 55 00 25 30 Witsehilt 35, 36 56 40 23 40 Witskofle 31 55 50 29 40 Witsogda R. 01 64 00 66 00 Wittbeck 38 54 30 24 20 Wittegrunden 41 53 50 22 50 Wittemberg 20 54 00 35 00 Witten 37 56 15 24 30 Wittenbeck 41 54 20 24 50 Wittenbergen 38, 40 54 10 24 30   41, 43 54 15 25 10 Wittenhagen 42, 44 53 55 24 20 Wittenhusen 41, 43 54 20 25 30 Wittenmolt 42, 43 54 10 25 10 Wettensee 38, 40 54 20 24 50 Wittenward 41 54 15 23 50 Wittestein 16 54 20 38 30 Wittmolt 41 54 10 25 10 Wittorp 42, 44 54 00 24 40 Wittow 20 54 00 29 00 Wittsee 38, 39 55 10 24 20 Wituleik B. 12 47 30 48 00 Witzhoff 41, 44 53 35 25 00 Witzooda fl. 06 64 00 75 00   07 63 00 74 00   09 K.   Witzwort 41, 42 54 25 23 50 Wiuff 37 55 30 23 50 Wixness 33 54 50 26 50 Wizaraisze 12 49 30 47 00 Wizlis 06 55 00 50 00 Wizna 14, 18 53 30 40 00 Wixuny 18 55 00 43 00 Wiladislaw 6, 14 52 20 36 00 Wldoorg 36, 37 56 20 22 50 Wilerup 36 56 55 23 00 Wlessko 16 53 20 37 30 Wlodarka 18 49 30 47 00 Wodawo 12 51 00 42 00 Wlodimer 6, 8 56 00 62 00 Wlodimirowa 20 55 00 54 00 Wlodziemierz 6, 12, 18 50 30 42 00 Wlsie 32 55 50 27 00 Wlso 30, 32 55 20 27 00 Wlsund 36, 37 56 25 22 40 Wningo 19 59 30 43 00 Wobbenbull 40 54 35 24 10 Wobelniki 19 55 30 43 00 Wobrorz 14 51 20 36 00 Wobs 43 54 05 25 10 Wociechowo 15 51 40 34 20 Wociessino 15 52 30 34 00 Wodaditzki 14 52 20 34 00 Woda sclena 12 46 00 50 00   13 Q.   Wodder 38, 39 55 10 23 00 Woden 18 51 30 40 00 Woden S. 36 56 35 23 20 Wodna T. 20 67 00 35 00 Wodschow 36 56 55 24 30 Woga fl. 19 56 30 42 00 Wogaw 16 54 20 38 30 Wogenap 17 54 10 37 00 Wogensted 33 54 45 26 40 Wogran 15 52 50 32 20 Woinowo 15 51 50 33 00 Woinslow 12 49 00 42 00 Woinuta 18 55 00 39 00 Woitowce 12 48 30 46 00 Woketorow 12 49 00 42 00 Wolaw 14 51 00 33 00 Wolberschit 14 51 00 37 00 Wolburgsaw 42 54 00 24 00 Wolburgs Herrit 32 55 30 26 40 Wolschowa fl. 21 59 00 51 00 Wolcolata 18 55 00 45 00 Wolcosscoi 06 56 00 53 00 Wolczawoda R. 12 47 30 53 00 Wolczna fl. 18 53 00 46 00 Woldai 6, 20 57 00 53 00 Woldava olim Du∣catus 18 51 00 42 00 Woldby 37 56 10 24 20 Woldeck 14 53 20 30 00 Woldemanstosst 38 54 50 24 20 Woldendhorn 41, 44 53 40 25 00 Woldenk 28 62 00 20 30 Wolderop 35 56 40 23 00 Wolderssoe 34 55 20 25 10 Woldersum 41 54 20 23 50 Woldesloff 32 55 20 27 20 Woldorp 44 53 40 24 50 Woldrup 44 53 30 25 00 Woldt 38, 40 54 25 24 20 Woldtsum 42 54 20 23 50 Woleznyporoh 18 52 00 51 00 Wolfo 20, 25 58 00 23 00 Wolffs fl. 16 53 00 37 30 Wolfsdorp 16 53 40 38 00   44 53 40 24 50 Wolfsmohl 44 53 45 24 30 Wolfsstede 44 53 40 24 50 Wolga reca olim Rha 6, 7 56 00 54 &c Wolaga lacus 6, 7 56 00 53 00 Wolgast 14 54 00 30 00   15 52 50 32 40 Wolhum 38 55 05 23 50 Wolia 14 49 40 36 00 Wolkiniki 18 54 00 42 00 Wolkino 10 B.   Wolkowisca 18 53 00 42 00 Wollin 14 53 40 31 00 Wolling 36 56 35 23 20 Wollische Werder 20 53 00 31 00 Wolma 18 53 30 44 00 Wolmersdorp 42 54 05 23 50 Wolne 12 49 30 53 00 Wolniow 12 47 00 52 00   13 L.   Wolniow fl. 12 47 00 52 00   13 L.   Wolno mogu B. 12 47 30 52 00 Wolny 12 47 00 52 00   13 M.   Woloc 6, 8 55 00 54 00 Woloczoze 12 49 30 44 00 Woloczysseza 18 49 30 43 00 Wolodorka 12 49 00 48 00 Wolodimera 06 57 00 61 00 Wolodimirow Ko∣lodes 18 51 00 43 00 Wolodinerski 10 F.   Wologda 6, 7, 8 59 00 60 00 Woloige 20 67 00 67 00 Wolomera 20 57 &c 57 00 Woloszyn 12 48 30 49 00 Woloyca 6, 8 51 00 60 00 Wolozyn 18 53 30 44 00 Wolpa 18 53 00 42 00 Wolping S. 16 53 40 38 00 Wolse 30 55 20 28 40 Wolsern husen 42 54 15 23 40 Wolsgaard 36 56 35 24 30 Wolsted 36 56 50 24 30 Wolstin 15 51 50 33 20 Wolstona 06 58 00 31 00 Wolstorp 35 57 00 24 40 Wolstrup 36, 37 56 30 23 00 Woltersmoll. 43 54 00 25 20 G. Woluy poroh 18 56 00 52 00 Wolwyck 27 63 20 24 00 Wolyki 12 49 30 54 00 Wolijoki 21 64 30 44 00 Wom 30, 31 55 20 28 40 Womens Isles 01 72 00 319 30 Wong 22 58 00 29 00 Wongeskar 30 56 20 27 20   31 56 15 27 40 Wonkofcze 12 49 00 45 00 Wonsbec 38, 39 55 15 24 40 Wonsdorff 16 54 20 39 00 Wonsyld 38, 39 55 25 24 30 Wonutten 16 55 00 40 00 Wopaucke 16 54 00 39 30 Woran 12 50 30 53 00 Worani 18 54 00 42 00 Woranonice 12 49 00 46 00 Wordal 28 60 30 25 30 Wordingborg 32 55 00 26 50 Wore 36, 37 56 25 24 50 Worevocz 06 57 00 47 00 Worenzuite 16 54 00 38 30 Worg 36 56 50 24 00 Worgel 17 54 15 36 30 Worinisch S. 16 54 20 38 30
Work 36 57 05 24 40 Workallen 16 53 40 37 30 Wormdit 16, 18 54 00 38 00 Wormsfelt 15 52 40 32 00 Wornsleff 37 56 05 24 40 Worning 36, 37 56 25 24 10 Worobie 12 49 30 51 00 Woromecz 18 55 00 46 00 Worona reca 08 53 00 64 00 Woronacwoda fl. 13 L.   Woronca zabora 13 L.   Woronczewi 18 54 00 48 00 Woronkowe 12 49 30 51 00 Woronowa fl. 13 M.   Woronowka 12 48 30 50 00   13 B. & G.   Worosclewka 12 48 30 46 00 Worota 06 58 00 48 00 Worotin 11 54 00 53 00 Woroy 06 67 00 25 00 Worozowka 12 49 30 49 00 Worskla fl. 11 50 00 49 00   18 54 00 51 00 Worsklo R. 12 48 00 52 00   13 I.   Worynin 12 50 30 52 00 Wosborg 36, 37 56 20 22 40 Wositz 16 54 00 36 30 Wossari 20, 21 61 00 50 00 Woskiaergaard 36, 37 56 35 22 40 Wosnes 37 56 15 24 50 Wostenholm 01 62 40 288 00 Wotschoi petin 6, 20 59 00 48 00 Wotmcsc 15 51 33 40 00 Wouymanga 09 E.   Wouymonsky 09 E.   Wowna reca 06 53 00 64 00 Wowesil 35 55 20 24 20 Wowisk 15 52 20 34 00 Woxen fl. 20, 21 61 00 47 00 Woxna fl. 20 61 00 31 00 Woxtoruy 31 56 10 28 30 Woyens 39 55 15 24 20 Woynilow 18 49 30 42 00 Woystawice 18 50 30 41 00 Wra 22 56 30 28 00   39 55 10 24 10   41 54 15 24 40 Wraa 36 57 15 24 10 Wragarde 39 54 55 24 00 Wrambaek 36 57 05 24 20 Wrangesond 28 60 30 19 30 Wrango 21 59 00 42 00 Wranstrup 32 55 20 26 40 Wrangt 30, 35 56 20 24 00 Wranum 37 56 15 24 00 Wrenste 36, 37 56 20 24 30 Wridsloss 32 55 10 26 40 Wrigsted 37 55 45 24 30 Wrist 41 53 55 24 30 Wroblewo 15 52 30 33 20 Wroem 38, 41, 42 54 15 24 30 Wroh 38, 40 54 15 25 00 Wrom 41 54 15 24 10 Wronki 15 52 30 33 20 Wrotzko 16 53 00 36 30 Wryst 44 53 55 24 30 Wthover 28 61 30 18 30 Wtweerklippen 25 60 30 19 00 Wuiaradna 12 47 00 49 00 Wuiaradna Kricza 12 46 30 49 00 Wuid 36, 37 56 25 25 00 Wuingo 20 59 00 43 00 Wulfsdorp 43 54 00 25 20 Wulfsfelde 41, 43 53 55 25 10 Wulfsmoll 41 53 40 24 30 Wulfsmoer 44 53 55 24 20 Wullum 37 55 45 24 00 Wundeleff 40 54 50 24 30 Wunerby 22 57 30 32 00 Wuren 42 54 15 25 00 Wursterlandt 41 53 40 23 10 Wus So 37 55 35 23 50 Wuschbuck 43 54 15 25 30 Wusen 16 54 00 37 30 Wuslack 16 54 00 38 30 Wusleff 36 56 50 24 10 Wusitz 17 54 10 36 20 Wust 36 56 55 23 30 Wustefelde 43 53 50 25 10 Wustemoer 39, 42 54 55 24 10 Wutzlaff 17 54 15 36 20 Wuyma fl. 6, 7 65 00 74 00 Wyby 37 56 05 24 40 Wyches Land 01 76 00 49 00 Wyck 39, 40 54 40 23 40   42, 43 54 20 24 50 Wydow 38, 40 54 55 23 50 Wygaart 30 54 40 24 00 Wyhebeck 40 54 45 24 20 Wyhenessczo 18 52 30 43 00 Wyksio 22 58 00 26 00 Wyksten 20 58 00 35 00 Wyle 36 56 40 23 20   43 54 15 25 20 Wyllstede 44 53 45 24 40 Wym 37 55 50 22 50 Wymersdorp 44 53 55 24 40 Wymgaard 37 55 50 22 50 Wynkirk 36, 37 56 25 23 00 Wynsen 41, 44 53 20 25 00 Wyprz fl. 14 51 40 40 00 Wysby 36 56 45 22 50 Wyshodorek 18 49 30 43 00 Wyshorowo 18 50 00 48 00 Wyslaka fl. 14 49 20 38 00 Wysokidwor 18 54 00 42 00 Wyssoaczk 18 51 30 44 00 Wyssogrod 18 52 00 38 00 Wyssokie 18 52 00 41 00 Wyst 36 56 35 24 40 Wystyniec 18 54 00 40 00 Wyzgrod 12 50 00 48 00   13 A.   X   XErceniow 12 50 30 47 00 Xiass 15 52 00 34 40 Xiassi 15 51 50 34 20 Xyaz 14 50 00 37 00 Y   YAron H. 12 49 00 45 00 Ydby 36 56 40 22 40 Ydding 31 55 30 28 40 Yersovand 28, 29 60 30 23 00 Yffioerd 27 62 40 22 00 Ygd 36 57 05 24 30 Yliberg 36, 37 56 20 23 20 Yltzen 19 57 30 44 00 Ynge 31 55 50 29 40 Yngeren 22, 23 58 30 33 00 Yo 6, 20 65 00 41 00 Yo flodt 20, 21 65 00 41 00 Yrtis R. 01 65 00 82 00 Ysby 30, 31 56 15 28 30 Ysergrond 22 57 00 25 00 Yserholm 30, 35 57 00 25 00 Ysnale 31 56 15 29 10 Ysteen 25, 29 57 40 21 00 Ystwage 28 60 00 20 00 Yting 37 55 55 24 20 Ytterdageren 24 59 40 31 20 Ytter Sillen lacus 24 60 00 31 20 Ytter Taenger 24 60 50 32 20 Yttre Ullero 22, 24 59 40 29 40 Yxen 24 60 40 31 20 Yxno 22 58 00 28 00 Yxpa 21 60 30 46 00 Z   Z Abaras Ducatus 18 49 30 43 00 Zabaniowka 12 48 30 51 00 Zablote 18 53 30 42 00 Zabna 14 49 40 38 00 Zabno 18 50 00 39 00 Zabocryc 12 48 00 46 00 Zabotow 12 48 30 43 00 Zabru 06 47 00 74 00 Zacaria 6, 8 49 00 61 00 Zadia fl. 16 54 40 30 00 Zag 27, 28 62 30 22 00 Zagarn 19 56 00 41 00 Zagh 27 74 20 25 00   28 62 30 21 00 Zaghe 27 62 40 22 00 Zaghen 27 62 40 21 00     64 20 26 00 Zagorowo 15 51 50 35 00 Zagory 6, 18, 19 56 00 41 00 Zagra fl. 10 B.   Zahesea 06 42 00 86 00 Zajazkowo 15 52 20 33 20 Zaibona 12 49 00 51 00 Zajetzkow 06 58 00 52 00   20 57 00 52 00 Zain s. 16 54 00 39 00 Zakrotzin 14 52 20 37 00 Zakrozim 18 52 00 39 00 Zakryunicze 18 50 00 44 00 Zakrzow 14 49 20 36 00 Zalemo 20 56 00 41 00 Zalemoyre 19 56 00 41 00 Zalemoyze 18 56 00 41 00 Zaloges 12 49 30 43 00 Zalosie 18 49 30 43 00 Zalotitza 06 65 00 49 00   07 65 00 48 00   20 64 00 53 00 Zamasse 18 55 30 44 00 Zamicufce 12 48 30 45 00 Zamocant 13 I.   Zamochan 12 47 30 51 00 Zamoscie 18 50 30 41 00 Zancorsi 08 48 00 49 00 Zandhop 16 54 00 39 00 Zantoch 14, 15 52 40 32 00 Zapplaw 15 51 20 33 40 Zarca 20, 21 59 00 50 00 Ruinae urbis Zaref∣gorod 10 F.   Zariz 10 E.   Zarki 14 50 20 36 00 Zarmekow 43 54 05 25 30 Zarncwits 43 53 50 25 40 Zarniezo 12 48 30 47 00 Zarnow 14 51 00 37 00 Zarnowiecz 14 50 20 36 00 Zarodemeze 12 48 30 46 00 Zarowno 12 49 00 42 00 Zarpen 41, 44 53 50 25 10 Zary 06 56 00 51 00 Zaryszince 12 48 30 51 00 Zaslow 12 49 30 45 00 Zaslow Ducatus 18 50 00 44 00 Zator 14 49 40 36 00 Zatum 15 52 30 32 40 Zaucorsi 06 48 00 59 00 Zaveroot 07 69 00 93 00 Zaviemel 15 51 50 34 20 Zaullen S. 16 53 40 37 30 Zavorool 06 68 00 94 00 Zauther 16 53 40 36 30 Zawadowla 12 48 00 47 00 Zawalow 12 49 00 43 00 Zawichost 14, 18 50 20 39 00 Zazicrze 18 53 30 45 00 P. Zbassin G. Beut schen 15 52 00 33 00 P. Zchowa G. Frau∣stadt 15 51 30 33 20 Zdin 19 56 00 42 00 Zditowo 18 52 00 43 00 Zebel 41 54 05 25 00 Zebin 18 54 00 46 00 Zebrzidowicze 14 49 20 36 00 Zedenich 14 52 40 29 00 Zedicz 15 51 30 33 20 Zeelandt 6, 20 55 00 26 00 Zegel 42 54 10 25 10 Zeiger 16 54 00 37 00 Zeiland 20 70 00 38 00 Zelechow 14 52 00 39 00 Zeleloy 12 49 30 47 00 Zeleniecz 12 48 00 47 00 Zelensi 6, 7 68 00 79 00 Zelins 12 48 30 42 00 Zelisky 13 E.   Zell 20 52 00 25 00 Zellyn 41, 43 54 10 25 10 Zelow 16 54 20 39 00 Zelowivrafsca 09 K.   Zelozeykova 09 M.   Zelwia 18 53 00 42 00 Zelwia fl. 18 52 30 42 00 Zembano 11 46 00 53 00 Zembrow 18 52 30 40 00 Zemele 18 55 30 41 00 Zem Ostoof 6, 7 70 00 78 00 Zeneki 12 49 00 51 00 Zenkova 09 I.   Zenonis Chersonesus 11 48 00 55 00 Zepkau 17 54 00 36 10 Zerbee 15 52 10 31 40 Zerboka 12 48 00 46 00 Zercot 6, 8 53 00 69 00 Zerdik fl. 10 D.   Zerdzia fl. 18 52 00 47 00 Zergolta 01 69 00 87 00 Zermony 18 53 30 42 00 Zerne 15 52 20 32 00 Zernowitz 16 54 40 35 30 Zerutsche 43 53 55 25 30 Zestackoof 6, 7 60 00 75 00 Zetechor 14 51 20 39 00 Zetopance 13 D.   Zeyor 17 54 10 36 50 Zeymy 18 54 30 42 00 Zezmory 18 54 30 42 00 Zgnilykilsz R. 12 48 30 48 00 Ziaskow 12 48 30 47 00 Zibrogen 15 51 50 32 00 Ziclene 12 48 30 48 00 Zidelskrog 17 54 15 36 30 Ziecovovitz 14 52 40 40 00 Ziegelhoff 39 55 00 24 20   43 53 50 25 20 Zigelshein 17 54 00 36 50 Zielenczin 15 52 00 33 20 Zielizarowa 20 56 00 54 00 Ziemovo 15 51 40 34 00 Ziegelscheun 17 54 20 36 10 Zimerpude 16 54 40 38 00 Zimia 14 51 40 33 00 Zimino 15 52 00 34 20 Zimun 15 51 50 33 40 Zincowce 12 48 30 47 00 Zinten 14, 16 54 20 38 00 Ziplow 17 54 15 36 10 Zipnow 14 53 00 33 00 Zirckaw Pol. Sier∣akow 14, 15 52 20 33 00 Zitowirz 12 50 00 47 00 Zitta 14 50 40 31 00 Zittea 18 54 00 38 00 Ziukow 12 49 00 45 00 Ziwiecz 14 49 20 36 00 Ziwotow 12 49 00 47 00 Zloczow 18 49 30 43 00 Zlodsiejowka 12 49 30 51 00 Zlota Delina olim Duma 12 47 00 51 00   13 P.   Zlotonsza 13 E.   Zlukein 18 55 30 42 00 Znin 15 52 50 34 40 Znszna 12 48 00 47 00 Zobla 15 52 10 314 0 Zobotia 12 48 00 50 00 Zobowitz 16 54 00 36 00
Zobtenberg 14 50 40 33 00 C. Zochloma 6, 7, 8 59 00 65 00 Zochow 18 49 30 39 00 Zoclzisski 18 54 30 42 00 Zodziski 18 54 00 44 00 Zolawi 15 52 00 34 00 Zolmosa 6, 7, 20 62 00 55 00 Zolmin 12 48 30 50 00   13 F.   Zoludeki 18 53 00 42 00 Zoock fl. 06 53 00 78 00 Zoossa 6, 7, 8, 20 56 00 56 00 Zopka 16 54 00 36 30 Zopoczkini 14 54 00 42 00 Zorany 18 55 30 40 00 Zorawka 12 49 30 51 00 Zornogar 10 F.   Zorno More 06 44 00 52 00 Zornownow 12 50 00 44 00   18 50 30 43 00 Zorzo 06 44 00 41 00 Zossle 18 54 30 42 00 Zottersdal 20 58 00 22 00 Zotterdalvalle 25 58 30 22 00 Zouzel 19 56 30 42 00 Zplawi 15 51 50 33 40 Zarayki 12 49 00 47 00 I. Zubzinski 10 B.   Zuchow 12 50 30 44 00   18 50 30 43 00 Zuerkova Luki 6, 8, 20 54 00 50 00 Zugan 06 48 00 77 00 Zugore 18 54 00 42 00 Zuishous 20 63 00 45 00 Zukamjervi 21 62 00 51 00 Zullenzig 15 52 20 32 00 P. Zulichowo G. Zil∣lich 15 51 50 32 40 Zum leinen 14 52 40 36 00 Zum leven 14 53 00 38 00 Zumoscie 08 54 00 61 00 Zunz fl. 06 46 00 68 00 Zunza 06 47 00 69 00 Zupruny 18 54 00 43 00 Zuschabresche 14 52 20 35 00 Zutphen 20 52 00 21 00 Zuy 20 56 00 51 00 Zuyder See 20 52 00 20 00 Po. De Zuzaco 11 46 00 59 00 Zuzaco Tazosolim 06 47 00 59 00 Zwabiski 18 55 30 42 00 Zwan H. 12 48 30 45 00 Zwaniez 12 48 30 44 00 Zwaniecz R. 12 49 00 44 00 Zwenirporoh 18 52 00 51 00 Zwiabel 18 50 30 45 00 Zwimacze 18 50 30 43 00 Zwmogrolka 12 48 30 48 00 Zwonowo 15 52 30 34 20 Zycin 18 53 00 45 00 Zydaczow 18 49 30 42 00 Zydowiec 12 49 30 47 00 Zydowo 15 51 50 33 40 Zygnnintow 12 49 00 51 00 Zymka 15 51 50 34 00 Zynkow 12 49 00 52 00   18 49 00 44 00 Zyoe 38 55 00 25 40 Zysseza 6, 20 56 00 51 00 Zytomirz 18 50 30 46 00 decorative device
Directions for the Book-Binder Sheets of Descriptions &c. THE Title and Dedication. The Proposals and Subscribers Names. The Introduction to Geography A B C Inclusive. Greenland Pag. 1. Willoughbyes Island Pag. 6. Nova Zembla Ibid. Cherry and other Islands Pag. 7. John Main's Island Pag. 9. Groneland Ibid. Frisland Pag. 13. Europe Pag. 14. Russia or Muscovy Pag. 17. Several Provinces of Russia Pag. 21. Government and Manners of the Russe Pag. 29. History of the Princes of Russia Pag. 37. Lakes and Rivers of Muscovy Pag 39. Crim Tartars Pag. 43. Boristhenes and the Cosacks of Ʋkrain Pag. 49. Of the new Accessions in Pomeren and the Em∣pire Pag. 37. The second Alphabet. Poland Pag. 1. Great Poland Pag. 13. Massovia Pag. 15. Prussia Ibid. Prussia Regia Pag. 19. Great Dukedome of Lithuania Ibid. Samogitia Pag. 22. Livonia Ibid. Volhinia, Podolia &c. Pag. 24. Lesser Poland Pag. 25. Other Countreys formerly belonging to the King of Poland Pag. 26. Pretensions of forrain Princes to Poland Pag. 27. The third Alphabet. Sweden Pag. 1. The Laplanders manner of living Pag. 11. Provinces of Sweden Pag. 12. Government and Manners of Sweden Pag. 17. Gothia and it's Provinces Pag. 24. Catalogue of the Kings of Sweden and Goth-Land Pag. 27. Principality of Finland Pag. 24. Ingria or Ingerman-Land Pag. 35. Of the new Accessions in Livonia Pag. 36. Of the new Accessions in Denmark Pag. 38. Of the Baltic Sea Pag. 40. Of Denmark Pag. 41. Of Jutland Pag. 52. North Jutland Ibid. South Jutland 54. Partition of Holstein from Denmark Pag. 56. Holstein Ibid. Dithmarse Pag. 58. Stormar Ibid. Wagria Pag 59. Baltic Sea Pag. 61. Fionia Ibid. Seland Pag. 62. Laland Pag. 64. Lesser Islands Ibid. The ancient Inhabitants of those Isles Pag. 65. Norway Pag. 66. Masterland Pag. 67. Bishopricks of Anslo and Staffengar Ibid. Prefecture of Bergen Pag. 67. Bishoprick of Nidrosse Pag. 68. Prefecture of Wardhus Ibid. Norwegian Lapland Ibid. Of the Commerce of the ancient Britans, English, and Norwegians Ibid. Islands of Foero Pag. 70. Islands of Shetland Pag. 71. Iseland Pag. 68. Index from B to Mm Inclusively. In which is also a Catalogue of Books Printed at the Theater in Oxford, and sold by Moses Pitt, at the Angel in St. Pauls Church-yard, London. Figures and Maps to be plac'd thus: 1. The Kings Picture. 2. A Copper Title. 3. A Map of both the Hemispheres. 4. A Map of the Earth in a plain Chart, both before the Introduction to Geography. 5. A Map of the North-pole, pag. 1. of Greenland. 6. A Map of Europe, pag. 14. 7. Laplanders manner of living in Summer and Winter, place in the Description of Sweden pag. 11. in the third Alphabet. The following Maps are markt or number'd on the Plates thus, answerable to the Index. 6. Novissima Russiae Tabula pag. 17. 7. Russiae vulgo Muscoviae pag. 18. 8. Muscoviae pars Australis pag. 21. 9. Dwinae Fluvii Descriptio pag. 22. 10. Nova & Acurata Wolgae Fluminis olim Rha dicti delineatio pag. 41. 11. Taurica Chersonesus hodie Przecopsca & Gazara dicitur pag. 43. 12. Typus Generalis Ʋkrainae pag. 49. 13. Tractatus Borysthenis vulgo Dniepr & Niepr dicti pag. 40. Place these Maps in Poland, Alphabet the second. 14. Novissima Poloniae Descriptio pag. 1. 15. Palatinatus Posnaniensis pag. 13. 16. Prussia, pag. 15. 17. Tractuum Borussiae pag. 16. 18. Magnus Ducatus Lithuaniae pag. 19. 19. Nova Totius Livoniae Descriptio pag. 20. Place these in Sweden, Alphabet the third. 20. Suetiae, Norvegiae, & Daniae, pag. 31. 21. Magnus Ducatus Finlandiae pag. 34. 22. Gothiae pag. 24. 23. Ʋplandiae pag. 13. 24. Dalecarliae & Westermanniae pag. 12. 25. Regni Norvegiae descript. pag. 66. 26. Novissima Islandiae Tabula pag. 68. 27. Dioecesis Trundhemiensis pars Australis Pag. 68. 28. Episcopatus Bergensis pag. 67. 29. Episcop. Stavangriensis, Bergensis, & Aslocen∣sis pag. 67. 30. Regni Daniae delineat. pag. 41. 31. Scania vulgo Schonen pag. 25. 32. Selandiae pag. 62, 33. Lalandiae & Falstriae pag. 64. 34. Fioniae vulgo Funen pag. 61. 35. Jutiae Generalis pag. 52. 36. Jutiae Septent. pag. 52. 37. Jutiae Australis pag. 54. 38. Ducatus Slevicensis pag. 54. 39. Ducatus Slesvicensis Septent. pag. 54. 40. Ducat. Slesvicensis Aust. pag. 54. 41. Ducatus Holsatiae Descript. Pag. 56. 42. Dithmarsiae &c. pag. 58. 43. Wagriae pag. 59. 44. Stormariae pag. 58. The Maps may be placed with the Descriptions, as here directed, or after them, or in a Volume by themselves, as the Buyer pleaseth.
Books Printed at the Theater in the Ʋniversity of Oxford, since 1672. And sold by MOSES PITT, at the Angel In St. Pauls Church-yard, London. In FOLIO. THE Synodicon or Canons of ancient Councils with their Scholia, Greek & Latin in 2. Vol. A Catalogue of printed Books in the Bodleian Li∣brary in Oxford. The History of the Ʋniversity of Oxford Lat. The description of the Colleges and public Buildings in the Ʋniversity, in perspective. The History of Lapland. The Arundel Marbles, and others in the Ʋniversity of Oxford described Lat. The Natural History of Oxford-shire by Dr. Plot. The History of the life of King Aelfred Lat. Dr. Pococks Commentarys on the lesser Prophets; where∣of part is now in the Press. Iamblichus of Aegyptian Mysteries, Greek & Latin. Dr. Charletons description of Animals. Lat. St. Cyprians works; now in the Press. Lat. Josephus Gr. & Lat. now in the Press. The Great Ʋniversal Herbal of Dr. Morison; almost fi∣nished. Lat. Jo. Scotus de Divisione Naturae; not yet extant, now in the Press. Lat. The 2d. and 3d. Volums of the Atlas now in the Press, which are intended to be finished before Dec. 25. 1680. A large English Bible, on Imperial paper, of the same print as this Volume of Atlas is. In QUARTO. SEveral English Bibles. Dr. Willis de Anima Brutorum. Lat. His Pharmaceutice Rationalis 2. Vol. Lat. The description of the most rare Plants of Sicily, Mal∣ta, Italy &c. by P. Boccone. Lat. Four controversial Dialogues, by D. Cole. A Tract of Maimonides Heb. & Lat. of the Tything for the poor, &c. The History of the Jacobits, &c. by Jos. Abudacnus. Lat. Edw. Earl of Clarendon against Mr. Hobbs. The Benefits of our Savior to Mankind. Dr. Salls Votum pro Pace. Lat. A discourse of Convex-Glasses. In OCTAVO THO. Lidiats Chronological Canons. Lat. Dr. Vossius de poematum cantu. Lat. De Sibyllinis Oraculis. Lat. Dr. Mayow de Spiritu nitro-Aereo, &c. Lat. Dr. Brevints Saul and Samuel, or the new waies of Salvation &c. A Paraphrase and Annot. on the Epistles of St. Paul, &c. The Ladies Calling. The Government of the Tongue. The art of Contentment. The Lively Oracles. Xenophon Cyr. Paed. Gr. A Dissertation of Free-Schools. by C. Wase. Epicteti Ench. & Theophrasti Charact. Gr. & Lat. The Certainty of Christian Faith, by Dr. Whitby. The Deaf and Dumb mans Tutor, by Geo. Dalgarno. Catholico-Romanus Pacificus, by Jo. Barnes an English Benedictine. Lat. Herodians History, Gr. & Lat. Zosimus History, Gr. & Lat. Aratus with Schol. Gr. Nemesius de Nat. Hom. Gr. & Lat. Quintilians Declam. Lat. The History of West Barbary. Homers Iliads Gr. with the Schol. Theocrit. Gr. with the Schol. Suetonius, Lat. The state of the Greek Church, by Tho. Smith. Mr. Oughtreds Mathematical Tracts, not before extant. Plinies Epistles, Lat. Demetrius Phalereus, de Elocut. Gr. & Lat. Pachymerius Logic. Gr. & Lat. Reflections on the Council of Trent, by H. Luzancy. Greek Psalter, according to the Alexandrian Copy. In TWELVES. NEW Testament Gr. with the Various readings. Dr. Cole, de secretione. Lat. Grotius de Veritate &c. Lat. St. Clements Epist. Gr. & Lat. Cornelius Nepos. Lat. Grammatica Rationis. Lat. Ars Rationis. Lat. Lilies Grammar with Notes. Lat. Of the Education of Gentlemen. Depth and Mystery of the Roman Mass, by Dr. Brevint. The Christian Sacrifice, &c. Maximus Tyrius. Gr. & Lat. B. Andrews Devotions Gr. & Lat. Dr. Willis Pharmac. Rat. 2. Vol. Lat. Archimedes his Arenarius Gr. & Lat. Justins History. Lat. Dr. Salls Defence of the Catholic Religion of the Church of Eng. Sallusts History. Lat. M. Aurel. Antoninus Gr. & Lat. Faustinus's works. Lat. Epictetus Gr. & Lat. Seneca's Tragedies. Lat. Elegantiae Poeticae. Lat. New Test. Lat. Bibles 12. Eng. Common Prayers 12. and 24. Eng. A brief Explication of the Catechisme of the Church of England. Books prepared for the Press. A Volume of the ancient English Historians ne∣ver yet Printed. A Saxon Lexicon, the work of Mr. Junius, not yet Printed. His Etymologicon, not yet Printed. Several of the Antient Greek Mathematicians. The Coptic Gospels and Psalter. The Saxon Chronology. Lactantius's Instit. &c. now in the Press. Orosius's Hist. Jo. Antioch. Gr. & Lat. never yet Printed. With many others almost fitted for the Press.
portrait of Charles II and his court THE English ATLAS VOLUME II TOME I
THE ENGLISH ATLAS: VOLUME II. Containing the DESCRIPTION Of Part of the EMPIRE OF GERMANY. VIZ. The Upper and Lower SAXONY: The Dukedoms of MECKLENBURG, BREMEN, MAGDEBURG, &c. The Marquisates of BRANDENBURG, and MISNIA, with the Territories adjoining. The Palatinate of the RHINE: And the Kingdom of BOHEMIA. By WILLIAM NICOLSON, M. A. Fellow of QUEEN'S College, OXON. OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, for MOSES PITT at the ANGEL in St. PAUL'S Church-yard, LONDON. MDCLXXXI.
TO THE QUEEN'S Most Excellent Majesty THIS SECOND VOLUME OF THE ENGLISH ATLAS IS DEDICATED BY THE Humblest of Your Majesties Servants MOSES PITT.
map of Germania Nova Totius GERMANIAE DESCRIPTIO Apud Janssonio-Waesbrgios, Mosem P et Stph St
THE General Description OF GERMANY. GERMANY (as descri∣bed by Ptolemy,cient unds. and other ancient Wri∣ters) was doubtless of a much larger extent then the vast Country which at this day bears that name. Tacitus has given this account of it: Germany, says he, is separated from Gallia, Rhetia, and Pannonia, by the Rivers Danow and the Rhine. From the Sarmatians and Dacians it is divided and defend∣ed by a long Ridge of Mountains, and a mu∣tual awe which obliges these fierce Nations and the Germans to rest contented on each side with their ancient bounds and properties. The rest of it is encompassed with the Ocean; in some of whose Isles several considerable Kingdoms have of late years been discover'd. However (notwithstanding this assertion of Tacitus, making the Rhine the utmost bounds of Germany on the borders of Gallia), 'tis certain, That long before his time (in the days of the Emperors Julius and Augustus) several Colonies of the Germans had seated themselves in the Gallic Territories, and inhabited a large plat of ground on the South side of the Rhine. And 'tis well known, that both Germania Prima and Secunda (so often mentioned by ancient and modern Geographers) lay on the same side of that River. Wympheling (in his little Tract De Rebus Germanicis) demonstrates that all those Cities which stand on the Southern bank of the Rhine, did always belong to the Germans; notwithstanding the pretensions of se∣veral French Kings to the contrary. 'Tis true, Lewis XI. King of France (before he came to the Crown) made several incursions into Alsatia, upon pretence of recovering the ancient Rights which his Ancestors had challenged upon the Rhine. But this pretended jurisdiction never spred it self so wide as to reach beyond the banks of that River on either side. For, as Freherus shews, the ancient Gauls always claim'd a right to the Ri∣ver Rhine; altho the Germans were Lords of the Soil on both sides. Besides, the Hermun∣duri, Marcomanni, and Quadi (who were all of them Germans) extended the bounds of their Nation beyond the Danow; and seated themselves on the South side of that River. Whence in process of time the name of Illyricum (which formerly was a word used to signifie a fifth part of the Celtish Nation, containing the Territories of Liburnia, Dalmatia, Noricum, Vindelicia, and Pannonia) was by the Roman writers limited to Liburnia and Dalmatia only; and the other three Provinces reckon'd parts of Germany, as being almost quite overrun with the people of that Nation. Aeneas Sylvius and his followers fancy, that Germany is at this day a Country much larger then it was ever thought to be by the Ancients. But he that shall consider, that the three Nor∣thern Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Swe∣den, with their several Dependences, and all Bel∣gium (as is still evident from the Languages of these people, which are only so many distinct Dialects of the High-Dutch) were formerly branches of the German Nation; will be apt to conclude with Cluverius, that New Germany is scarce a third part so big as the Old. At present, Germany is bounded on the South with the Mountains of Italy, beyond the Danow;Modern Bounds. on the East, with Poland and Hungary; on the West, with the French Provinces of Picardy and Champagne; on the North, with the Baltic Sea and British Ocean. Monsieur de Pibrac is of opi∣nion, that La Germanie est presque trois fois aussi
grande que la France, i. e. Germany is near three times as big as France. And most Geographers make that Kingdom thrice as large as Italy. So that, if we should (tho there is little reason for so doing) deny the Netherlands to be any part of Germany at this day; yet this Nation will still continue to be incomparably the largest in Europe. The length of it, from East to West, amounts to 840 Italian miles; and the breadth, from North to South, to about 745; according to the computation of Sansovine, in his Treatise Del governo di diversi Regni. Which account (if we reckon, as is usual, five Italian for one German mile) comes near Winthers relation, which tells us, Germany is 686 English, or about 171 Dutch, miles long; measuring from the mountains of Italy to the British Ocean. All this tract of Land (or so much of it at least as lies from the Rhine Northwards) was by the Ancients look'd upon as a barren,Nature of the Soil. unin∣habited, and solitary Wilderness; destitute of Cities, Villages, Houses, Fruit, and all other things either requisite or convenient for the sustenance of any other kind of inhabitants, then (such as they fancied the Germans to be) a sort of savage wood-men, little different from the beasts of the field, either in education or diet. But the improvements, or discoveries rather, of later Ages have exceedingly alter'd the case; and our modern Historians and Geographers, in spight of Tacitus's cavils and envious Epithets, have been forc'd to confess, that the Germans are a numerous and industrious people, and their Country both wonderfully pleasant and fruitful. A more signal instance of the plenty of Corn in this Country cannot be given, then we meet with in the stories which the German writers tell us of the Emperor Charles the Fifth; who maintain'd an Army for a considerable while against the Turks, consisting of 90000 Footmen and 35000 Horse. Besides, the same Emperor, for some years together, waged a continual war with most of the Northern German Princes; during which, the Armies on both sides are said to have con∣sisted of above 150000 men. Now (altho Ger∣many alone provided all necessaries of food and provender for these vast multitudes of men and horses, yet) we do not read, that any the least famine or scarcity of bread ensued hereupon in any part of the Dutch Territories. The chief Rivers in GERMANY. THere is hardly any Nation in the World comparable to this for the multitude of its noble Rivers; several of which carry Vessels of a vast burthen for some hundreds of English miles. The most principal of these are: I. Danubius,Danow. or the Danow. Brietius says, that this River was anciently call'd Matoas; which, in the old Scythian language, signifies harmless; because they fancied it was pretty secure sailing upon its waters. Afterwards, when a great company of strangers (unacquainted with this Torrent) had here unluckily suffer'd shipwrack and lost their lives, its name was changed into , or ; which word some Critics de∣rive from the Macedonian , signifying (as Plutarch tells us) as much as , Death. Cato thinks 'twas first call'd Danubius from the Danes; whom he confounds with the Dacians. Our mo∣dern Geographers embrace Pliny's opinion; and derive the word, by a Metathesis, a jugis Adno∣biis; whence it has its first source. The Hunga∣rians call it Duna; the Polanders Donay; and the Germans die Thonaw. The head of this great River is in Swaben, near a small Village named, from the Danow, Tone-Eschingen; which is situated in a part of the Hercynian Wood, call'd by the in∣habitants Schwartz-wald, or Black-forrest. Within a few furlongs of this Fountain it receives into it two more small Rivolets; soon after which, dividing it self into two branches, it encircles the City Ʋlm with two fair streams; both admirably large, considering the short course of the River. Afterwards it passes by several brave Cities in Germany and Hungary; as, Regensburg, Passaw, Vienna, Presburg, &c. being largely augmented in its passage by the accession of many Navigable Rivers. Insomuch, that it seems to challenge the character which Ovid long since gave of it: Cedere Danubius se tibi, Nile, negat. As soon as it comes into Illyricum (near the City Belgradum, which the Germans call Stuhlweissen∣burg) it looses it name, and is called Isther. At last, Qui centum populos & magnas alluit urbes, Euxinum irrumpit bis terno flumine Pontum. One of these six Currents runs with that vio∣lence into the Euxine Sea, that it is said to pass, thro the midst of the salt waters, fresh and sweet for near forty English miles together. 'Tis an admirable singularity in the Danow; that it alone, of all the great Rivers in Europe, runs with a strangely rapid current Eastward; whereas most others run either to the West or South, some few Northwards, but not one so directly East. Salomon Schweigger (a German traveller) reports, that sweet water is brought from the Danow, by Aquaeducts, to Constantinople; which is two days journey from any part of this River. Before the Danow leaves Germany (tho Strabo asserts the con∣trary) it meets with these three notorious Ca∣taracts: 1. Der Saw-russel, or The Swines-snout; so called from a sharp pointed Rock hanging into the River near Lintz in Austria; under which is a most dangerous and almost unavoidable whirlpool, which certainly sucks in all the Vessels which sail near it, except managed by more than ordinary care and discretion. Ath. Kircher (in his Mund. Subterr.) says, that whatever is swal∣low'd by this Whirlpool, is thrown up again in a Lake near Canische in Hungary. 2. Der Strudel; so called from the noise which the water makes in its fall. This is a perilous Cataract, near Grei∣non in Austria, where the water falling with a great violence amongst the Rocks, distracts the watermen with its noise and smoke, and too often either overturns or splits their Vessels. So that few or none were formerly so fool-hardy as to pass this precipice without the assistance and conduct of some expert Boor in the Vice∣nage; who for many years had made it their business to understand all the little creeks and windings in this dangerous passage. But of late years it has not been reckon'd a matter of so great difficulty to shoot this Gulf. On the top of one of the highest Rocks stands the ruins of an old Castle; where formerly, as the report goes, some notorious Pyrats (who lived upon the pil∣lage of such Boats as they could now and then hook into some of the neighbouring Cliffs) kept their residence. 3. Der Wurbel, or Whirlpool; not much more then a furlong distant from the Strudel. The Watermen that use this passage are of late grown so expert in shunning this Gulf,
that (except your Pilot be drunk, which is here no strange mishap) there is little danger of mis∣carriage. As soon as you have past the Whirl∣pool, you are sure to be waited on by a fellow bearing St. Nicolas's picture (to whom an adjoin∣ing Chappel is dedicated) and an Alms-box; into which every man casts what he pleases, as an offering of thansgiving to that Saint for the late deliverance. On the top of the great Rock, which causes a great motion in the water, stand the reliques of an ancient Fort, which the Ger∣mans call Der Tuffels Thurn, or The Devils Tower. The original of which name, according to Aven∣tinus's relation, was this: On a time, Bruno Bishop of Wurtzburg accompanied the Emperor in his passage down the Danow. When they came to this Tower, they were suddenly scar'd by a strange Apparition in the shape of a Black∣amore; saying, I am, Bruno, thine evil Genius; I shall do thee no mischief at present, but thou shalt be sure to meet with me again e're long. When they were come to Bosenburg (a Village within ten English miles of this Wurbel, where passengers usually refresh themselves) it happen'd, that the Chamber, where the Emperor and the Bi∣shop were a resting themselves, suddenly falling down, killed Bruno. II. The next great River in Germany,. is the Rhine. Some Etymologists derive this word from the Greek word , to flow; because of its rapid Current. Others fetch it from an old Celtish word Rijen, which signified to divide or separate; alluding to the old story (before mentioned) of the separation of France from Germany by this River. But the generality of modern Dutch wri∣ters are pleas'd to fancy, that it comes from the ordinary German word Rein, which signifies pure or clean. Because forsooth, 'twas a fashion amongst the ancient inhabitants of this Coun∣try, to try whether their children were legitimate or spurious by casting them into the Rhine; which would never suffer those to sink who were law∣fully begot, but usually drown'd the bastards. This story Cesar tells us in his Commentaries. And hence, says Schottelius, the Germans to this day retain this proverbial saying of any notorious and scandalous crime: Das weschet ihm der Rhein nicht ab, i. e. The Rhine can ne're wash this of. Tacitus reports, that the old Germans worshipp'd the Rhine as a God. Martial alludes to some such thing, when he says: Nympharum Pater amniumque Rhenus, &c. And the modern Germans seem to be little less jealous of the repute of this noble River, when they give out, that Die Thonau ist aller wasser ein Frau: aber der Rhein mag mit ehren wol ihr Mann Seyn, i. e. The Danow is indeed the Lady Paramount of Rivers: but the Rhine may well seem to be her Husband. Where note, that the Danow is (as most other names of Rivers in the High Dutch tongue are) of the Feminine Gender, but the Rhine of the Masculine. There are two Springs in the Rhaetian or Cel∣tic Alps (as some Authors call them) from which the Rhine has its rise. The first not far from a small Village, call'd by the inhabitants Tavetsch; out of a considerably high Mountain, which the Germans call St. Gottardes Geburg. The other Foun∣tain is not far from Reinwald in Rhaetia. These two Fountains are about forty English miles di∣stant from each other; but their Currents meet in one about eight of the same miles from the City Cur. Within three quarters of one of our miles from this confluence of the two streams, the River dilates it self into that vast Lake which is ordinarily (by a corruption of the name of Poomen, a Town on the banks of this water) call'd Der Boden-See. The broadest part of this swift River is be∣twixt the City Emeric and the strong Castle of Schenckenschantz; where the breadth of it is judged (but I am afraid the story has out-stretch'd the measuring-chain some furlongs) to exceed two English miles. Immediately after the union of the forementioned Currents, the depth of the Rhine is so considerable, that Vessels of large bulk and burthen might easily (if not letted by several Cataracts and Rocks which block up their way) sail from Stein to Francsurt on the Meyn, Collen, Mentz, and all other places of con∣sequence upon this River. The Cataracts of the Rhine are reckon'd to be nine in all; whereof seven are but small ones, and come far short of those mentioned in the Danow. The most terrible and dangerous one among the nine, is a little below the City of Schafhuysen in Switzerland; where the whole Ri∣ver falls from the top of a Rock seventy-five foot high (Surius Carthusianus says, fifty cubits). The other great Cataract is near Lauffenburg in Switzer∣land; which Town has its name from Lauffen (in the language of the inhabitants signifying a Cataract or water-fall) and Burg, a Castle. This is not so dangerous as that at Schafhuysen; for sometimes the Watermen venture their Vessels to slide down this precipice by ropes, which is utterly impossible at the former. There is no small dispute among ancient and modern Geographers, about the several mouths of the Rhine. Formerly there were two known Channels of the Rhine; and every body could tell where each of them emptied it self into the Sea. For this great River being divided into two streams at Schenckenschantz, that part of it which still retain'd the name of the Rhine (passing by Arn∣hem, Rhine, Ʋtrecht, and Leyden) ran into the Sea at Catwic; whilst the other branch, passing by Nimeghen, under the borrowed name of the Wahle, joining it self with the Maes, was in the same Channel convey'd into the Ocean. But in the year 860 (or as some reckon 1170), amongst many other damages done to the Hollanders by an extraordinary Spring-tide, the commodious Haven at Catwic was quite stop'd up with Sand, and the current of the Rhine obstructed. This River still runs, but with a very slow pace, to∣wards Catwic; but never reaches the ruins of that famous Town. What becomes of the water is not certainly known: but most probable it is, that it may be swallowed up by some undiscern∣able Abyss, and by a subterraneous channel con∣vey'd at a considerable distance into the Sea. Another mouth of the Rhine we owe to Drusus, who cutting the neck of land between this River and the Issel, brought a great Arm of the Rhine (along the Sluce, which to this day bears the name of Drusus's Ditch) into one Channel with the Issel, along with which it still continues its course into the Zuyder-See. III. The third great River of Germany,Elb. is the Elb, Albis; which Bertius, and others, derive from the Saxon word Elve, which in upper Saxony is used both for the name of this River and the number of Eleven. Now all Geographers agree, that the Elb springs from Eleven currents. But
when I consider, that the Bohemians name this River Labe, I am apt to question the truth of this Etymology, tho I cannot assign a better; for to fetch the word ab albis rupibus (as some do) is vain and impertinent. Tacitus tells us, that the Elb springs in the Country of the Hermunduri (a Schwabish peo∣ple); but the learned Historian mistook his mark, and should have writ Aegra instead of Albis. Pto∣lemy's blunder was as great as this, when he named Moldau (which runs thro Prague, and is called by the inhabitants Wltawa) the Elb. Dubraw gives the truest account of the source of this River, when he tells us, that it springs out of the moun∣tains near Hirschberg in Silesia, upon the confines of Bohemia. These mountains are by Latin wri∣ters called Riphaei, Gygantarii, and Niviferi montes; and by the Bohemians and Germans, Die Risenge∣burge; from the multitude of strange and mon∣strous apparitions which are seen here by the Rusticks, as themselves report. The names of the eleven Fountains out of which it springs (or rather small streams of which it is composed) are, 1. Krumb-seyffen. 2. Gross-seyffen. 3. Nose. 4. Gra∣nitz. 5. Sperber-seyffen. 6. Haubritz. 7. Hinner∣lein. 8. Ganss. 9. New-wasser. 10. Heydelbach. 11. Kalch-wasser. The first course it steers is Southwards; in which it passes by the Cities of Dwur, Jaromitz, and Kralowy-Hradetz (or, the Queen's Hradetz); at which last place it is augmented by the ad∣mission of Warlitz and Orlitz (two large streams flowing from the confines of Bohemia and Mo∣ravia) into its Channel. At Melnick it meets with the Moldau; and soon after with the Aegra. Af∣terwards, it passes by the Cities of Dresden, Misen, Torgow, Wittenburg, Magdeburg, and Lawenburg; and at Hamburg bears Merchant-ships of almost as large a bulk as any traffick on the Ocean; and that at the vastest distance from the Sea of any navigable River in Europe. The City of Hamburg is eighteen German, or seventy-two English miles distant from the Sea; and yet you shall ordi∣narily meet with Vessels of three hundred Tun riding in this Harbour. On the South side of this City it divides it self into a great many branches, which encircle an infinite number of small Islands. Lastly, a little below Gluckstadt, it branches into two Arms (whereof one bears the name of Die Zuyder Elb, the other Die Noor∣der Elb) which empty into the British Ocean. German Rivers of less note, are: 1. The Oder; which springs in Moravia, and (after a current of about 300 English miles through some parts of Brandenburgh and Pomeren) falls into the Bal∣tic Sea. 2. Visurgis, or the Weser; which issuing out of the mountains of Thuringia, runs through Hessen and Westphalia down to Bremen; not far from which it empties it self into the British Ocean. But these, and some few more of the like bigness, are not so considerable as to merit a description in this place; but may well be re∣serv'd till we come to the description of parti∣cular Provinces. Whither also we refer the Rea∣der for an account of the Forrests, Mountains, Mines, Baths, Mineral-waters, Cities, Universi∣ties, Money, and all sorts of Commodities pe∣culiar to any of the Principalities. For Germany ought to be look'd upon as a vast Collection of several different Nations, and not as one petit Kingdom, which may easily admit of one and the same General Description. Of the Ancient Inhabitants of Germany; together with an account of the different names of Celts, Dutch, Germans, and Almans. CLuverius (in his incomparable Book de An∣tiqua Germania) affirms, that Ascenas,Ancient Inhabi∣tants. No∣ah's Great-grandchild, was the first that peopled Germany, Britain, Spain, Gallia, and Illyricum; calling the people of all these five Nations after another of his own Names, Celts. Nay, he is so positive in this assertion, as to set down the very year when this grand Plantation first began. This, says he, hapned in the year of the World, One thousand seven hundred ninety-two, and one hundred thirty-six years after the Flood. The authority of this great man has so far prevailed with his own Countrymen, that you shall hardly (if at all) meet with a modern German writer who is not wholly of his opinion. Some of these Dutch Antiquaries make use of this passage in Josephus,  (i. e. Ascanaxes, or Ascenas, was the Founder of the Ascanaxi, or Ascanites) to con∣firm their doctrine. But this argument is too idle and precarious; since to take for granted, that the Ascanaxi mention'd by Josephas are Germans, is in effect to beg the Question. The original, I suppose, of this and the like mistakes, proceeded from a misunderstanding of some ancient tradi∣tions generally received among all the Northern Nations; which told them strange stories of the peopling of the Northern parts by one As, and his retinue. Now these Critics (being resolved to find out, if possible, what this great man should be, and whence he derived his pedigree) after a long and diligent search, could pitch on no body whom they could fancy so well qualified, both in name and time, for the character they had met with of the Father of the German Na∣tion, as this Ascenas. Whereas, 'tis much more probable, that the old German or Celtish Mytho∣logists meant no more by As, then some gene∣rous Asian Captain, who had first brought their Ancestors out of Asia into Europe. That the Spa∣niards, Gauls, Germans, and Britains were formerly so many branches of one and the same Nation seems evident, from the terminations of the names of several Towns, Villages, Woods, Pasture∣grounds, &c. in brig, fort, dun, ham, berg, and the like; which are a sufficient testimony of the iden∣tity of languages, and consequently of people, in all these Countries. And (from the fables of the Edda Islandorum, and other ancient monu∣ments found in some of the Northern Domini∣ons; which all along give their Heroes the title of Asians) it seems as rational to conclude, that the first inhabitants of the Northern parts of Europe came out of Asia. What else can be meant by the word Asamal (i. e. the language of Asi∣ans) so often made use of in the old Runic mo∣numents to signifie the Danish tongue? And why is Woden (the grand Captain of the Cimbrians) so many times, in the Edda before-mentioned, styled As, the Asian? I am apt to believe, that from this Woden the Germans have first derived the proper name of Asch (by the Latins turned into Ascanius) which is to this day in ordinary use among them. And that hence also the Town of Aschburg (call'd by Tacitus Asciburgum) and Ascharic (a King of the Gauls) had their names. So that 'twill not be so great a wonder (if we reflect seriously upon what has been said) as some would make it, to find several German words in the Persian language; and perhaps Monsieur Bochart is not guilty of so great a Paradox as
map of the course of the Elbe River ALBIS, Fluvius Germaniae celebris, A FONTIBUS AD OSTIA Cum fluminibus ab utroque latere in illum fluentibus descriptus. Jo: Vanden Avele inventor et feecit.
map of the course of the Elbe River NOBILIS FLUVIUS ALBIS maximà curà, ex variis famosis{que} Auctoribus collectus, et in lucem editus. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergi∣os, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart. view of Hamburg EMPORIUM HAMBURGUM 1. S. Gertraut 2. S. Iacob 3. Der Blauen toren 4. Det Tochthuys 5. Wenser Toren 6. S. Peter 7. Dome 8. S. Iohannis 9. S. Catharina 10. De Borse 11. 't Rathus 12. Maria Magdalena 13. S. Nicolai 14. H. Geist 15. Melder Dor 16. Den Bollen stal 17. S. Michel 18. Anschar Kirche unt Weisen haus blazon or coat of arms
many imagine, in asserting, that our Northern Kingdoms have borrow'd both men and man∣ners from the Phoenicians. That Celta was a general name for any Nor∣thern or Western European among the aricient Greek and Latin writers,Celts. is well known; but whence the word sprung, is not easily determin'd. Clu∣verius (as was even now said) reports, that As∣cenas call'd his followers first Celts, from one of his own Surnames; but what that was, neither he nor any other Historian I have yet met with, can inform me. Our Country-man Verstegan fetches Celtae from the Greek word , Light∣horsemen; asserting (I suppose for the Etymolo∣gy's sake) that the ancient Celts were excellent Warriors on Horseback. But it is not necessary that we should go as far as Greece to seek for the derivation of this word. Cesar tells us, those men whom the Latins call'd Gauls, were used to name themselves Celts. And Pausanias confirms the sto∣ry, , says he, , i. e. At last it grew a fashion to name them Gauls (Galatas); but formerly both they themselves and others call'd them Celts. It is from what has been said (and several other authori∣ties, which might be produc'd to the same pur∣pose) manifest, that the Germans, and the rest of the ancient inhabitants of the Western parts of Europe, call'd themselves Celts; and did not borrow that name from the language of any fo∣reign Nation. Some Dutch Etymologists derive the name from the German word Gelten, i.e. Va∣lere, to be worth (whence the ordinary Dutch word Gelt, money); grounding their opinion upon the authority of Strabo, who tells them, that the Celts were so called ; which they inter∣pret, from the preeminence they had amongst other Nations. So that, with these men, a Celt signi∣fies as much as a man of extraordinary worth and accomplishments. Cluverius, with a great deal of indignation, rejects this opinion; which never∣theless (if we consider the high value the Celts used to set upon their own persons) has as great a shew of probability on its side, as his own, be∣foremention'd. I find, that in our old British or Welsh tongue (which is an undoubted Dia∣lect of the ancient Celtic language) Celi signi∣fies God. And it seems to me as rational, to bring the derivative Celtic from this Primitive, as to fetch the word Gothic from Gott, or God, and Teutsch from Teut. Of the reasons of which Etymologies we have already given a hint in the Description of Denmark; and shall have occasion to treat of the same subject more at large in the following Paragraph. We see then,Dutch. that the name Celts was not ap∣propriated to the Germans only; who made up no more then one of the five Provinces into which the vast Celtic Nation was divided. But other particular names we meet with in ancient and modern Historians, which are peculiarly ascrib'd to the Germans. Amongst these, the name of Teutones or Teutonici (turn'd by the High Dutch into Die Deutschen or Teutschen; by the Nether∣landers into De Duytschen; by the Danes and Swedes into De Tydsker; and lastly by the English into The Dutch) seems to be of the greatest an∣tiquity. Some very unskilful Etymologists have endeavour'd to bring this word from the name Aschanaxes (which they read Ascanes) before-men∣tion'd. For by prefixing the German particle thi, used formerly instead of die, to this proper name, they presently turn it (by the help of an Apo∣strophy and a German termination) into Th' As∣canen; which they do not at all question but was afterwards corrupted into Tuiscones, Teutones, Teutsch, Deutsch, &c. But (to pass by other im∣pertinencies of this derivation) it must needs be allow'd a grand soloecism in any language, to prefix two Articles to one and the same Noun; which we must be forc'd to admit of by fetching die Teutschen from thi th' Ascanen. The most pro∣bable derivation of Teutsch is from Teut, the name of one of the ancient Celtic Deities. Lucan talk∣ing of the Gaulish Gods, says, Et quibus immitis placatur sanguine diro Teutates. And Tacitus giving an account of the manners and customs of the Germans in his days, tells us, Celebrant carminibus antiquis Tuistonem (some Copies of good note read Tuitonem) Deum, terra editum & filium Mannum, originem gentis, condi∣toresque, i.e. They sing Ballads in praise of their God Tuit, and his son Man, the first founders of their Nation. This Teut, Theut, or Tuit, seems to be the same with the Phenician , the Egyptian , and Alexandrian , all mention'd by Bochart. And I doubt not, but that the Gre∣cian , and , as well as the Latin word Deus, are all sprung from the same original. From this Primitive, 'tis obvious to form the Deriva∣tive Teutisch (which will signifie as much as One descended from the stock or lineage of the God Teut), afterwards contracted into Teutsch. And thus in short, to tell us the whole Nation is descended from Man (which the old Egyptians, as well as Germans, used instead of the Hebrew word Adam) the son of Teut; is to run up the pedigree of this people, as St. Luke has done our Saviour's, unto Adam, which was the son of God. Nor were the Germans only heretofore guilty of this vanity and arrogance, but almost every Nation under Hea∣ven. Diodorus Siculus could long ago tells us, , &c. i. e. The Barbarians, as well as Greeks, cast about for the reputation of being thought descended from an ancient stock and lineage; and strive by all means to have themselves taken for the first inhabitants of their own Country. To compass these designs, 'twas usual with them to compose certain fabulous Rythms, which con∣tain'd large and compleat Genealogies of parti∣cular Families as high as some great God or other, whom they fancied to spring up out of the Earth. And we find it was so ordinary a thing among the Greeks to derive a mans pedigree from Jupi∣ter or , that Ʋlisses sleighted that piece of va∣nity in his Antagonist, Nam genus, & proavos, & quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voco. Sed enim quia retulit Ajax Esse Jovis pronepos; Nostri quoque sanguinis auctor Jupiter est, &c. Where you see how hardly he is provok'd into an humour of bragging of his heavenly Ance∣stors. The name of German,Germans. tho of a much later date then either of the former, has met with a greater variety of derivations then both of them. Amongst the many curious Etymologists that have rack'd themselves to find out the true origi∣nal of the word, some are too busie in looking abroad into foreign languages. One of these, reflecting upon the pristine barbarity of the Dutch Nation, strains hard to fetch the word German from the Latin Immanitas. Another
fancies the Germans were so call'd a germinando; because they were observ'd to be a numerous and fruitful people. A third will have Germani to signifie only Brothers; and is of opinion, that the Latins meant no more by the word then, that the Dutch were Brothers to the Gauls, whom they so exactly resembled in their complexion, hu∣mours, and manners. A fourth ransacks Asia; and at last seizes upon the Carmani as the un∣doubted Ancestors of the Germans. The German writers are as zealous on the other hand, in find∣ing out the original of their own name at home; but most commonly meet with as little success as the former. Some will needs have Gern, which signifies freely or willingly, to be the primitive of this, as well as several other proper names which they have still in use amongst them; such as, Gerbert, Gerbrand, Adelgern, Fridegern, &c. But I cannot see what tolerable meaning or sense can be pick'd out of Gern-mann; tho the foremen∣tion'd proper names, admitting of gern for one principal word in the composition of them, are significant enough. Verstegan laughs at the short∣sightedness of any man that pretending to the least smattering of High Dutch, cannot at the first glance perfectly discern the true Etymology of the word German. Ger, says he, or Gar (for both are indifferently used) is as much in the Tuitsch or Teutonic tongue as al; and we Eng∣lish men have a phrase to say, Drink a Gar∣aus (tho some, not knowing what they say, instead of Gar-aus, which signifies all out, do say Car-aus). Thus gar and all being shew'd to be equivalent, both German and Alman is as much as to say All or wholly a man. And this name the Germans may well at some time, and upon some certain occasion have attributed or assum'd to themselves, in regard of their great manliness and valour; and other Nati∣ons, that had proof thereof might rightly af∣ford them. The former part of this story (how dogmatical and positive soever he be in asserting it) I can no more allow of, then I can of Becanus's conjecture, viz. that German is no more then Gehrmann, einer der viel gehret, i. e. a covetous greedy fellow, that can hardly ever be satisfied. Which is a derivation as abusive as 'tis ridiculous and dull. I am altogether of Verstegan's opinion, as to the reason of his Ety∣mology, viz. That the valour and prowess of this Nation gave the first occasion to the name of Germans. Tacitus tells us, Germaniae vocabulum recens & nuper additum; quoniam qui primi Rhe∣num transgressi Gallos expulerint, nunc Tungri nunc Germani vocati sunt. Ita nationis nomen non gentis evaluit paulatim, ut omnes primum a victore ob metum mox a seipsis invento nomine Germani vocarentur. In which words the learned Historian assures us, 1. That the Dutch were not time out of mind call'd Germans; but receiv'd that name from the Gauls. 2. That their valour and the cowardise of their enemies first occasion'd this new name. If then the Germans had this name given them for their valour, what can be the true meaning of the word? Schottelius (who perhaps understood High Dutch the best of any man that ever wrote in that language) assures us, that Wehr, in the old Teutonic tongue, signifies War; and Wehrman, a Warriour, or Man of War. Now, 'tis easie to observe how ordinary it is for the Latins, and other foreign Nations, to turn the Dutch W into G or Gu. And thence proceeds that strange mangling of the German proper names, when usurp'd by strangers, who are not able to pro∣nounce a W. For example, the Dutch proper name Wilhelm (for so it ought to be wrote, not Guild-helm, as Verstegan would have it) is by the Latins turn'd into Gulielmus; by the French, into Guillaume; by the Italians, into Guglielmo; by the Spaniards, into Guillermo. The French, espe∣cially since they admitted into their tongue so much of the Latin and its pronunciation, have both wrote and spoke several words, which in the original High Dutch begin with a W, after the Latin mode with Gu, which will sufficiently appear by comparing these and the like German and French words together: Such are, ich winde, je guinde; windachs, guindal; wespe, guespe; wim∣pel, guimple; wise, guise, &c. And thus instead of the old Dutch word wehre, and our modern Eng∣lish war, they say guerre; whence Guerrman, and at last German, instead of Wehr-mann. That the name Alemanni (which the French,Almans. Spaniards, and Italians continually use instead of Germans) is derived from all and man, which two words have the same signification in High Dutch and English, is agreed on by every one; altho Verstegan's reason, before-mention'd, be not by any means current and allowable. In the year 358, the Germans mustur'd up a vast Army against the Romans, amongst which were reckon'd up above 36000 of their Nobility out of Thurin∣gia, Saxony, Hassia, and most of the other Prin∣cipalities of the Upper Germany. This great concourse of people from all parts of so large a Country, gave the first occasion to the name of Almanner, i. e. A mixt people of all sorts of men and nations. Which was renew'd upon the like oc∣casion by the Emperor Valentinian, in the year 368; and has ever since that time been made use of, by the Foreigners before-mention'd, to signifie the whole Nation of the Germans. Of the Humours, Manners, Religion, &c. of the Ancient Inhabitants of Germany. THE account we have from the old Roman and Greek Historians, of the affairs of this barbarous part of the world (as they had rea∣son to stile it), tho now and then mixt with a little contempt and undervaluing expressions; yet, are much more exact then could reasona∣bly be expected from the pens of such as usually employ'd themselves more in cultivating their own, then prying into the manners of foreign Nations. Julius Cesar indeed had reason to be acquainted with their neighbours the Gauls; who were a people of the same extraction with the Germans themselves, and therefore (in all proba∣bility) differ'd but little from them in humours and manners. After his time, Tacitus had the opportunity and advantage of residing in Ger∣many for some years; and was consequently bet∣ter able (not to mention his vast parts and learn∣ing) to give a more accurate description of Ger∣many, and a fuller account of the manners of its inhabitants, then any of his Countrymen had done before him. Out of these two, and seve∣ral other eminent writers in both languages, Clu∣verius compiled his admirable Volume De Anti∣qua Germania; which does not only furnish us with an exquisite Geographical description of old Germany, but gives us likewise an exact and impartial account of the monstrous bulk and barbarous practices of his Ancestors, the anci∣ent Germans. Abraham Ortelius, an accurate and famous Geographer, publish'd a small Treatise at Antorf in the year 1596, entituled Aurei seculi imago; in which the learned Author endea∣vours to give us an exact pourtracture of the old Germans in writing and cuts.
From these, and the Brass-cuts commonly prefix'd to Cluverius's incomparable Work before∣mention'd, it appears, That the first inhabitants of Germany (or those at least whom the Romans were first acquainted with) were men of a lar∣ger size then their neighbours; men generally of a vast and almost incredible stature. Insomuch, that if (as we have noted in the Description of Denmark) the Getes were so call'd, because in respect of the inhabitants of other German Pro∣vinces, they were Giants, it will be exceeding difficult for us Pigmies to conceive the unrea∣sonable dimensions of some of our Northern forefathers. We cannot imagine,Stature. that such big bon'd fel∣lows as these should be cocker'd in the Cradle, or nursed with that tenderness which the formal luxury of our Age requires. And accordingly the foremention'd Authors say, that their wo∣men seldom or never made use of a Midwife; but every one made shift to deliver her self, and as soon as her short travel was over, return'd un∣concernedly to her employment. As soon as ever the child was born, the mother dip'd it all over in-cold water, to harden it. Some Commenta∣tors think Virgil understood the Germans in that Distich of his, Durum a stirpe genus; Natos ad flumina primum Deferimus, saevoque gelu duramus & undis. Tho others fancy that he rather speaks of the Spartans. But however Sidonius speaks down∣right of the ancient Dutch-men, Excipit hic natos glacies, & matris ab alvo Artus infantum molles nec Cimbrica durat. Frideric Tileman, an ingenious German writer, rejects the opinion of Julian, Nonnus, and others, who report, that the reason of casting young children into the Rhine (of which custom we have said something before) was to try, by their swimming or sinking, whether they were law∣fully begotten or bastards. He allows of the sto∣ry; but thinks the design was rather to inure their infants to cold, and to teach them courage. Or∣telius says, they used to place the infant on a Shield, and so commit it to the River. Upon the first discovery of the innermost parts of Germany to the Romans,Clothes. the inhabitants wore little or no clothes; the young people used to go stark naked; the elder sort were all, men and women, alike habited: but both sexes so meanly clad, that their wild beasts skins (their Coats being seldom made of better stuff) reached no lower then their Navels, and never cover'd their naked∣ness. Some of the better sort wore little short Woollen Mantles; in which, such as were de∣scended of a noble Family had their Coats of Arms wrought in colours, and sometimes in Gold or Silver. But such pieces of gallantry were, I suppose, first brought in amongst them upon their acquaintance with the Romans. Others had a kind of Suit and Coat all of one piece, which reached as far as the middle of their legs, but wanted Sleeves. Such as to this day are worn in the Highlands of Scotland, and some parts of Schwaben. Those that wore Shoes (for the common people used no such thing, but went barefoot) had a kind of Sandals made of a Bad∣gers-skin, or other rough untann'd Leather. The Nobility and rich Yeomanry had small Bracelets of Gold about their Arms, and Rings on their Fingers. They had seldom any other Bed then the Earth,Beds. which sometimes they strew'd with Hay, or the Leaves of Trees. The more fashionable sort lay upon the Skins of Dogs, Wolves, or Bears. And from this custom the Germans still retain the word Barenhauter (or Bearskinner) as a nick-name of as great reproach and contumely as can be put upon any man; which seems at first to have signified as much as a lazy loytering fellow that never stirr'd from off his Bears-skin. Tho the German Cookery be doubtless much different from what it was in former days;Diet. yet their Victuals seems to have been almost the same in all Ages. We find the Ancients fed upon Bread, wild and tame Flesh of all sorts (especially Pork), Butter, Fruits, &c. They drank Water, Milk, and Beer; which last, Cluverius tells us, was a drink peculiar and almost natural to the Ger∣mans. Some indeed that liv'd on the borders of Gallia drank Wine; but this was only of late years. For they were utter strangers to that sort of liquor before the Emperor Probus taught them to plant Vines. Julius Cesar says of the ancient Schwabes, Vinum ad se omnino importari non sinunt, quod ea re ad laborem ferendum remollescere homines atque effoeminari arbitrantur, i. e. They will not suffer any man to import Wine into their Coun∣try; looking upon that liquor as a thing which strangely weakens and effeminates those that drink it. In their public Feasts and Entertainments they used a great deal of freedom and jollity.Feasts. No man was to bring his Wife to any of these Revels; nor his Son, before the twentieth year of his age. They sat commonly on the ground in a semi∣circle, for the convenience of the Waiters. The chief Man, or Master of the Feast, sat in the middle; and the next honourable places were on his right and left hand. If any man wanted a stomach answerable to his allowance of victu∣als, 'twas ordinary to pouch his Commons till the morrow. They had never more then one Knife in a Family; which hung in a certain con∣stant place, where any Guest could fetch it, when he had met with a morsel too tough for his teeth: for otherwise, if possible, they devour'd their meat without cutting. The Commonalty seldom or never married more then one wife;Marri∣ages. but the Princes and Nobi∣lity (who were able to maintain more) had the liberty to marry as many as they pleased. Ta∣citus gives this account of the Rites and Solem∣nities used in their Marriages, Dotem non uxor marito; sed uxori maritus offert. Intersunt parentes & propinqui, & munera probant: munera non ad delicias muliebres quaesita, nec quibus nova nupta co∣matur; sed boves, & frenatum equum, & scutum cum framea gladioque. In haec munera uxor accipi∣tur, atque invicem ipsa armorum aliquid viroaffert, &c. i. e. It is here a fashion for the man to give his wife, and not the woman her husband, a por∣tion. The Relations of both parties are present, to examine and approve of the Dowry; which does not consist of such trinkets as young wo∣ers use to present to their Mistresses, or Brides make use of in their wedding-dress; but some Oxen, a bridled Horse, a Shield, Spear, and Sword. These the new married woman receives from her Bridegroom; to whom she again pre∣sents some sort of weapons, &c. And how in∣violably they kept their marriage-vows, the same Historian can inform us, Septa pudicitia agunt; nullis spectaculorum illecebris, nullis conviviorum ir∣ritationibus corruptae. And in another place, Se∣vera illic matrimonia. And again, Paucissima in tam numerosa gente adulteria. Where this Italian seems strangely surprized with the admirable chastity of so populous a Nation; and wonders at the more then ordinary strait-lac'd modesty of their
Matrons, which would not suffer them to in∣dulge themselves the pleasure of seeing a Play, or dancing with a friend at a Wake. The very name of Germans,War. as before explain'd, would testifie that they were a warlike people; tho nothing of their valiant exploits were to be met with upon record. But Florus can tell us, in what a consternation the Roman Soldiers were, when they first thought of giving Battel to the Germans: insomuch that every man, who had any thing to dispose of, made his Will before he went to fight; as never expecting to return out of the field alive. And we do not find that Ger∣many was ever yet subdued by any foreign ene∣my. Nor can it be imagin'd, but those that from their Cradles (if ever they had any such thing) were accustom'd to lye on the ground, and go naked, should at last make good Soldiers. And accordingly, we find they spent the greatest part of their lives in Martial exercises. In time of any general invasion, every man (except infirm persons, and such as attended their Sacrifices) that exceeded the age of twenty years, was press'd to take up Arms. Otherwise, in case of a more inconsiderable quarrel, in which some few particular Provinces were only concern'd, every Gow (or Village) sent out an hundred fighting men, with a Centurion to command them. The greatest mischief was, they under∣stood but little Martial discipline; and there∣fore their chief confidence lay in the number and resolute humours of their Soldiers. Their armies used commonly to encamp in some large Wood or Forrest; and there ly skulking till they had an opportunity of making an advantageous Sally upon the enemy. Many of them fought naked; others wore some slender Armour over their Head and Shoulders made of the Hide of a Wolf, or some other wild Beast. Every man carried a Club on his Shoulder (such as Hercu∣les is ordinarily pictur'd with), and most of them had Spears in their hands. When the Romans came amongst them they learned to be more metho∣dical and orderly in their engagements. By de∣grees, they came to wear good substantial Hel∣mets of Iron; which they adorn'd on the top with a tufft of Horse-hair, or sometimes a bunch of red Feathers. Whence, to this day, the Ger∣mans reckon that an ancient Coat of Arms, which shews such a tufft in the Crest. As 'tis likewise accounted no small token of Nobility to bear in their Coat Pallets of several colours: since the old Germans used to wear Shields on their left sides, streaked with red, blew, white, and seve∣ral other colours for distinction's sake. Some of their Commanders, and other great men in the Army, wore a long and broad Sword on their right side; which they used to manage with both hands. These are reported to have been so weighty, that (when well guided with the whole force of a lusty German) they would cut off both the Head and Arm of a Roman at a blow. Their Horsemen never used any Saddles; but, instead thereof, rid upon painted Clothes. He that had slain an enemy hand to hand, used to bring home his Head in triumph; which, if 'twas the Head of an Officer, could not be redeem'd at any rate; but was kept as the richest piece of furniture in the house, and shown at publick Entertainments. Among the ancient Princes of Germany,Inheri∣tance. the eldest Son (or other Heir apparent of the Fa∣mily) always inherited the whole and entire ju∣risdiction of his deceased Father; and the youn∣ger children had certain Villages and Lordships assign'd them for portions. The Hermunduri are said to have been all of one Family; which had encreas'd so largely in the revolution of some years as to over-spread all that vast Province which they inhabited. Out of the Nobility the Peasants chose them∣selves a King or Captain;Govern∣ment. who had supreme do∣minion over all the Province in which he pre∣sided. Cluverius likens this Governor to him whom the Lacedemonians and Spartans were used to set over their Commonwealth; who was bound by his place to be their General in time of war. I am of opinion, that this great Leader of any Province had the same name which their Dukes retain to this day; each of them being, even in those days, call'd ein Hertzog; which (as our word Duke) signifies no more then A Captain or General of an Army. M. Luther makes this title as ancient as will serve my purpose; when he derives the word Vercingentorix (which was the name of a German Prince, encountred by Julius Cesar; and Florus fancies the repeating of it enough to frighten an Army) from Hertzog Hinric, i. e. Duke Henry. Tho the Germans,Religion. before Charles the Great took care to have them converted to Christianity, were Idolatrous Heathens; yet we do not read that they were guilty of such horrid impieties and profaneness as their neighbours. They liv'd up to the rules of Morality as much as any Nati∣on that never heard of God and the true Reli∣gion. What a great respect they had for Di∣vine Service (as they ignorantly call'd their Ido∣latrous practices) is manifest from their chusing of Priests out of their Nobility: who, besides the knowledge of their profession, were common∣ly tolerably well vers'd in Moral Philosophy and Physicks; and ordinarily call'd to Council upon debate of any weighty State affair. They had Females too amongst them, who were some∣times admitted to the Priestly Office; and had as great respect paid them as the men. History makes mention of one of these She-Druids, who prophesied of the Emperor Severus's death; and another who foretold the coming of Diocletian to the Empire. They all believ'd the immortality of the Soul, and rewards and punishments after this life. They were great worshippers of the Sun; whom, Cluverius says, they look'd upon as the only true God. Some, in confirmation of this opinion, have made Sonn in the old Teu∣tonic language, to signifie as much as the modern Sonders, Sonderlich, i. e. Only. Thus probably the Latin word Sol is only a corruption of So∣lus. And for the same reason both the Romans and Dutch (together with all other Nations who speak nothing but different Dialects of the La∣tin or German tongue) dedicate the first day of the week to the Sun. Another God they had, to whom they used to offer man's flesh; who is some∣times call'd Woden, elsewhere Godan, by some Co∣dan, by others Dan (whence probably the name of Danes and Danish; as well as from Teut, Teut∣isch, and from Got, Gottish). From him we have our Wednesday; which the Westphalians call Godens∣dach, or Goensdach; the Netherlanders write it Woensdach; the Danes, Onsdag; and the Swedes, Odensdagk. But of this (and their God Teut) we have spoken before; and shall only add, that the word Godan was after some time contracted into God or Gott. Another God they worshipp'd, who is stiled by Latin writers Taranes (the same doubtless with the Danish Thor, mention'd in the Description of Denmark), and answers to the Ro∣man Jupiter, as Woden to Mercurius. They wor∣shipp'd this Taranes as the God of Thunder; which in our old British (or Welsh) language is still called Taran, but in the Danish tongue Torden. Whence it appears, that Thor and Taranes, as well as the Dutch Donnersdag and our Thursday, signifie
the same thing. 'Tis very probable, that this same God was by the ancient Celts named Pen or Pin; which in their language, signified High and Chief. And hence 'tis, that the Austrians do still call Thursday Pfinstag, and St. Bernard's Moun∣tain, which the Italians call Monte Jove, was for∣merly named Mons Peninus. And 'tis as likely, that from their Pen or Pin, the Feast of Whitsun∣tide might first be called Pfinstfest (which name it still retains); as that our Easter, and the Dutch ostern, should bear the name of Ester or Ostar, one of their ancient Goddesses. The Moon was worshipp'd by them under the name of Frea or Fria; whom they reported to have been the wife of Woden, and whose name is still retained in our Friday, and their Freytag. Another God they worshipp'd, who resembled Mars the God of the Romans. Him some of them called Eric or Erich, others Thies or Ties; from whom the third day of the week got the name of Erichtag and Tiis∣day; which later was afterwards by our English Saxons turn'd into Tiƿesdaeg (which we have made Tuesday) and by the Germans into Dingsdag, Zies∣dag, and Zingsdag. Tho Schottelius thinks Dings∣dag derived from the primitive Ding, which sig∣nifies Judgment; because on that day most Cases at Law used to be pleaded and determined. The learned Grotius, in his elaborate History of the Goths, &c. is of the same opinion, and expounds the word Thinxtag or Diensdag, Dies dicatus ju∣diciis, i. e. a day set apart for the Trial of Law∣suits. Cluverius fancies the old Germans had some glimmering notions of a Trinity; and that they worshipp'd the Sun, Moon, and Fire (or Vulcan) as three distinct persons in one and the same God∣head. He asserts further, that, besides the be∣lief of the Souls Immortality, they acknowledged the world had a beginning; and affirm'd, that soon after the Creation of it, the Angels fell away from that state of glory in which God had at first placed them. Besides, they had heard that night was before the day, and that the even∣ing and the morning were the first day; and there∣fore they used to reckon their day from Sun-set∣ing to Sun-set the next evening. And from this custom of our German Ancestors, we English∣men have been used to reckon Seven nights to a week or Sev'n-night, and Fourteen nights (not days) to a Fortnight. They used to sacrifice and perform other their Divines Rites in Woods and Forests, and the Oak (above all other Trees) was peculiarly made choice of for an Altar. In∣stead of a Temple they usually resorted to a kind of Summer-house made of Oaken and Beech∣wigs, platted over head. They look'd upon it as the height of profaneness to offer to draw a picture or representation of any of their Gods; and therefore did not (like the Egyptians and Israelites) worship Images. I know not upon what grounds Mr. Verstegan has given us the portrai∣cture of several Images worshipped by the an∣cient Germans. 'Tis certain they offer'd Sacri∣fice to Woden, Thor, and several other Gods, whom e mentions: but I think we have only his word r't, that they carved out Images to represent  them the Deities they adored. The Nether axons indeed erected a vast pillar, which they lled Irmensul (or the General Pillar), on the p of which (says Meibomius, Professor of Phy∣k at Helmstadt, who has writ a learned Trea∣e upon this subject) stood the image of an med man, which was worshipp'd as a God. is was destroy'd by Charles the Great, after  had conquer'd Witikind, and converted the xons to Christianity. J. G. Schottelius (whom  shall have frequent occasion to mention in  following sheets) has published a Tragedy called Irmensul, which presents us with a lively account of the practices of the ancient Adorers of this Idol, and the abolishment of it by the aforesaid Emperor. This Play is still in great vogue among the Germans; and is frequently act∣ed, with a good applause, at Vienna, Leipsic, and other great Cities of the Empire. Some frag∣ments of the famous Pillar are still kept in the Cathedral Church at Halberstadt. When any Sacrifices were offer'd,Sacrifices. not only the Priests themselves, but their Offerings also were crown'd with wreaths of Oak, or some other sacred Tree. At a more then ordinary solemn and publick Offering, they used to sacrifice Beasts of several sorts and colours; but at lesser solem∣nites, they offer'd only white Cattle. And in their Sacrifices to the infernal Gods, or Devils, they made use of none but black ones. Upon some occa∣sions, they used to offer men in sacrifice; where most commonly their idle servants and notori∣ous malefactors were brought to slaughter: but in some cases of extraordinary exigency, they would offer up their own children, their sons and their daughters unto Devils. The Priests commonly shot the sacrifices dead with arrows; tho some∣times the men were crucified. When the Rites and Ceremonies were finished, they were wont to eat up the sacrifices (whether men or beasts), and from the inspection of the Entrails, prog∣nosticate the event of a future war, or other en∣terprize, like the Aruspices among the Romans. These Feasts were held with all imaginable mirth and jollity; and after Dinner, the Priests always entertain'd their Guests with all manner of Mu∣sick and Dancing. The opinion they had of man's Creation,Funerals. and the Soul's eternity, made them more readily em∣brace death then 'twas usual for Idolaters and Pagans to do. For tho they had no thoughts of a Resurrection, or future judgment; yet they were verily perswaded, that the Souls of those that departed this life were received into other bodies, and lived again in another world. This made them generally of this opinion, that 'twas lawful for any man to dispatch himself as soon as he grew weary of the cares and trobles of this life. They used to lay their dead Corps upon a large heap of wood; and so, setting fire to the pile, burn them. When the fire was gone out, they gathered together the bones and ashes of the deceased, and buried them. 'Twas also the fashion to throw into the flames the dead mans Horse and Armour; nay, we read, that amongst the ancient Celts it was the custom to burn their Wives, Servants, and Dogs with their dead Hus∣bands or Masters. As it is usual in some parts of the Indies to this day (where Polygamy is allow'd of) for such Wives as are resolv'd never to marry a second time, and are ambitious to be esteem'd chast, to leap into the fire after the Corps of their deceased Husbands. At the Funeral of any Nobleman they used to have Tilting and Turna∣ments; and had several Rhithms sung in com∣mendation of the party deceased, containing a register of the brave actions of his life. Taci∣tus gives this short account of the behaviour of the old Germans, upon the death of any of their intimate Friends, Lamenta ac lachrymas cito, dolo∣rem & tristitiam tarde ponunt; foeminis lugere ho∣nestum est, viris meminisse, i. e. they can soon wipe of their tears, but not so easily conquer their sorrow. It is for women to bewail, but for men to remember only the loss of a friend.
Of the Humours, Manners, &c. of the Modern GERMANS. SEneca long since observed,Intelle∣ctuals. that men of ex∣traordinary large Bodies had commonly nar∣row Souls. And he gives this reason for 't, because, says he, grand abilities of both Soul and Body are too great a happiness for one man to enjoy. 'Tis probable, the same considerations mov'd the Historians of old to represent the ancient Germans (who, as we have told you, were a people of a larger growth then other men) as a Nation of a dull and phlegmatic constitution. Tacitus tells us, they were generally ignorant of the use of letters. And other writers would perswade us to believe, that they were incapable of Learning. Some of our modern Satyrists endeavour to make the present Germans answer the character which those men give of their Ancestors; and strive to make the world believe, that Germany is to this day a Coun∣try of Gothamites. It has for some years been a proverb in the mouth of several French-men, Pour faire un bon temperament, il faut mesler le vif argent de France, avec le plomb d' Allemagne. i. e. That the Leaden temper of a German, is to be helpt by mingling the French Quicksilver with it. Jos. Scaliger (in his posthumous piece entituled Scaligerana) will not allow the best of the High Dutch writers to be men of parts; but rails at them all as a pack of senseless Loggerheads. But we all know how much that great man was pufft up with the sense of his own merit; and how unapt he was to confess the least grain of scholar∣ship in a foreigner. Our whole Island under went his censure, when Mr. Lydiat ventur'd to contra∣dict his dogmatical positions, and the incompa∣rable Sir Henry Savil to confute his gross errors in Geometry. It is doubtless an unpardonable rudeness in any man to accuse a whole Nation of folly: And he that will take the pains to per∣use several of the High Dutch writers, and re∣flect upon the many ingenious inventions for which the world is beholding to this Nation (of which we shall have occasion to speak hereafter) will confess this. But their Morals as well as Intellectuals,Morals. un∣dergo the sharp censure of our modern Scriblers, who accuse all Germans of intemperance, and make drunkenness a vice proper to that Coun∣try. 'Tis grown an ordinary proverb, Germa∣norum vivere est bibere. 'Tis hard to excuse them all of this fault; nor are they themselves able to deny the accusation, but commonly rack their brains to find out reasons why large draughts should be more pardonable in them then other men. The sharp air they live in, is (they tell us) of so parching a nature, that without a continual supply of new moisture, their bodies would shrink into nothing. No∣thing more ordinary in this Country then Trinck-bruder; men that have created a brother∣hood, or intimacy of acquaintance, by being drunk together. It is the fashion to bring a stran∣ger an unreasonable great vessel of drink to the Table; which they call your welcome. And this you are obliged in civility to take off, at one or more draughts, in a health to the good man of the house; tho you run the hazard of being drunk in cancelling the obligation. Ph. Melancthon was used to say, Wir Teutschen essen uns kranck; wir essen uns in die Holle, i. e. We Germans eat our selves sick; we eat our selves into Hell. Long meals might probably occasion distempers; but glut∣tony is not so ordinary a vice among them as drunkenness. It is indeed no extraordinary thing to sit at Dinner from twelve at noon till five in the evening, or at Supper from seven at night till two or three in the morning: but then the greatest part of that time is spent in drinking of healths. However, 'tis best to wave this accusation; least in arraigning them we condemn our selves. There are as sober and temperate men in Germany as in any Nation of Europe. For tho the Court of Saxo∣ny (of which in its place) has been of late years eminent for this sort of exercise, 'tis unreasona∣ble to bring the whole Empire into the Indite∣ment. I know no Dish of general use in Germany,Diet. which is any great rarity in England, except Snails. From Michaelmas till almost Easter these are eaten as a great delicacy. You shall scarce come at a Nobleman's Orchard or Garden, in which you shall not find a Snail-house, which furnishes his Table all the winter with this Dish. They boil them in the shells, and so serve them up. Their other food is Beef, Mutton, Fowl, &c. none of which are ever brought to Table in such large quantities as in England. Tho the High Dutch have a proverb,Travel. Wer wol leben und wol Schlaffen wil, der bleib zu hauss, i. e. He that has a mind to live and sleep well, stays at home; yet no Nation in the world is more given to travelling then they. Not a Court in Europe but is full of them; and they are easier met with on the road then Scotchmen. This general itch of seeing foreign Countries, does doubtless strange∣ly impoverish their Nation; and carries out yearly more money then all their Silver Mines can afford them. For 'tis below the spirit of a German Noble∣man to appear in a foreign Court without a Reti∣nue answerable to his Quality: which piece of state will quickly swallow up a larger sum then the rent of his small Lordship amounts to. There was, not many years ago, a small Book published under the title of Itinerarium Germaniae Politicum; wherein the Author earnestly advises his Country∣men never to go beyond the bounds of the Ger∣man Empire, except on public occasions. And questionless, he that shall with circumspection view all the rarities and Princes Courts in Dutch∣land (taking the Netherlands into the circuit) will return sufficiently qualified for a States-man without making any further progress. 'Tis the peculiar commendation of the Ger∣mans to be true and upright in their dealings with every man.Integrity. Teutschhertziger (or Dutch-hearted) is an Epithet which with them is usually apply'd to an honest and just man, that scorns flattery or dissimulation. A Frenchman gives this character of them, La parole d'un Alleman vaut un obliga∣gacion, i. e. A German's word is as good as ano∣ther man's bond. Which is no more then what Tacitus observed of their Ancestors, That no Nation under Heaven went beyond them at keeping their word. Another excellent quality they have,Hospita∣lity. which many of their neighbours want, To be exceed∣ing obliging to strangers. Julius Cesar gives this character of the ancient Germans, Hospites vio∣lare fas non putant: qui quaque de causa ad eos ve∣nerunt, ab injuria prohibent sanctosque habent. Iis∣que omnium domus patent, victusque communicatur, i. e. They look upon it as a piece of injustice to affront a Traveller; and esteem it a part of their Religion to protect those that come un∣der their Roof. Their Lodgings are open to all comers, who are welcome to such entertain∣ment as the House affords. Tacitus, and others, give the same account of them. Nor have the German Noblemen to this day degenerated from the good nature and hospitality of their fore∣fathers. The relation which a modern Italian
writer gives of Sweden, is as applicable to Ger∣many; Per le strade non sono assassini, si che si va molto sicuramente. Pochissimo si spendi da viandanti, non usando di dimandar cosa alcuna per conto dell' Al∣bergo o del cibo, i. e. There are here no murders nor robberies committed on the High-ways; but you may travel with all imaginable secu∣rity. Besides, you travel cheaper in this Coun∣try; because you pay nothing (or very little) for your victuals and lodging. The only in∣convenience you meet with on the Road is, the being condemn'd to ride night and day in a Post-Waggon (so they call it); which will carry you little faster then a foot-pace. If you chance to have the priviledge of resting two or three hours in the middle of a winter-night, the best bedding you are to expect is clean straw, upon which all that meet together (men and women, Nobles and Peasants) promiscuously tumble. That the Germans were anciently men of cou∣rage,alour. and took that name from their prowess, we have already shew'n. Willichius gives this high character of the present Germans, Vincun∣tur quidem Germani, sed non nisi a Germanis, i. e. 'Tis indeed possible the Germans may be con∣quer'd, but it must be done by Germans. We have a good proof of this in their late wars, wherein the King of Sweden (Gustavus Adolphus) vanquish'd the Emperor with his own Subjects. That great Prince's Army had been quickly over∣thrown, and swallow'd up by the Imperialists, had not the Saxons and Brandenburgers helpt him out. The only instance of want of courage in a German Army which we meet with in History, is that which we find recorded of the Count of Mansfield's Army, consisting of fifty thousand men, who suffer'd a small body of ten thousand Turks to pass by their Trenches without disturbance, and to relieve Gran (a great Town in Hungary) before their faces. But we are not to argue, from this one passage, that the High Dutch Sol∣diers want valour. We may be sufficiently con∣vinc'd of the contrary, when we consider, that the Imperial Crown never yet fell from their heads; notwithstanding the many vigorous as∣saults made by some of their potent neighbours. Donatus Gianottus, a late Italian Historian, con∣fesses, that Non e dubio, che, se le forze dell' Ale∣magna fusseno unite, habberebbe l' Italia a temer di loro molto piu, che di quelle del Turco, i. e. 'Tis no question, but if the Princes of Germany would amicably compose differences among themselves, and unite their forces, Italy would have reason to fear them much more then the Turks. And any man will find reason to believe him, that shall consi∣der what vast numbers of fighting men most of their Electors, and some of their less potent Princes, can raise upon occasion (but of this more here∣after). Besides, the German Soldiers are gene∣rally tough hardy fellows; who can scarce meet with harsher entertainment, and worse lodging, in any foreign Camp, then they have been bred up to at home. 'Tis a known Adage, Germani duros possunt sufferre labores. They are a people used to hardship; and there∣fore can easily undergo the inconveniences of war. The Croats and Switzers (the former for Horse∣men, and the later for Foot) are famous all Eu∣rope over. The only blot in the Scutcheon of a German Soldier is, that he is too mercenary. We have a remarkable instance of this in the Army commanded by Frideric Elector Palatine of the Rhine, at the battel of Prague; where the great∣est part of that brave General's Army threw down their weapons, crying out Gelt, Gelt, i. e. Money, Money; intimating, that without bet∣ter pay they were resolved to fight no longer. And the King of France has found the truth of this in his late victories; many of which (even in Germany) were obtained by the assistance of German Forces, which deserted their Country, and fought under his Banner, in hopes of bet∣ter pay then they could expect from the Con∣federates. The High Dutch Commanders have been brand∣ed with ignorance of Martial Discipline,Martial Disci∣pline. and want of conduct. But the many famous Generals which their Country has bred up within the compass of little more then this last Century, have taken off that scandal. Such were, 1. Frideric the Se∣cond, Count Palatine of the Rhine; who bravely defended Vienna against the Turks, and first in∣troduced the Reformed Religion into the Pala∣tinate. 2. Albert, Elector of Brandenburg; who in some of the Dutch Histories is stiled the Achil∣les of Germany. 3. Albert Wallenstein, Duke of Frideland; who equall'd Gustavus Adolphus in va∣lour and prudent conduct, and wanted nothing but success to make him as renown'd a General. To these we may add the present Elector of Bran∣denburg (of which excellent Prince we shall have occasion to give a character hereafter), with many others. The great recreation amongst the Nobility,Recreati∣ons. in Summer, is hunting the Deer and wild Boars; with both which kinds of Venison the Woods and Forests in Germany abound. 'Tis the fashion in many of the Princes Courts to hang up the pictures of such huge Boars as have been taken by them; which is near a-kin to the custom pra∣ctis'd by some of our English Gentry, of hanging up the skins of Foxes and Badgers, and Antlers of Stags, in their Halls. In the winter (when the Snow lies thick on the ground) they have a custom in Cities and great Towns, to ride round the streets in Sledges, which are shaped much like the Sella Curulis, or Triumphal Chariot among the Romans (if the writers of the Latin Antiqui∣ties have described it right) and drawn by a Horse richly trapped with a great number of little Bells, and Feathers of divers colours. Tacitus reports of the ancient Germans,Games. that they were immoderate players at Dice; insomuch, that they would game away their Money, Clothes, Estates, and last of all their Liberty; the loser being bound to resign himself up into perpetual slavery to the Conqueror. This unreasonable kind of gaming is long since laid aside; but they still retain among them a great respect for the play at Chess, at which they are generally expert Gamesters. This game in their tongue is call'd Schachspiel; which signifies exactly the same thing with the Latin Latrunculorum ludus. For, in the old German Laws collected by Lindenbrogius, and others, Schacher or Schachman signifies a Robber, and Schach, Latrocinium, Theft. The Learned Prince Augustus late Duke of Brunswic-Wulfen∣buttel (who published an accurate Explication of Trithemius's Cryptography, under the feigned name of Gustavus Selenus) wrote an incompa∣rable Treatise concerning Chess-play in the Ger∣man tongue; wherein he gives a learned account of the original, progress, and laws of that Royal Game. Their women are of a tolerable complexion:Women. but commonly more corpulent then in any of their neighbouring Nations; excepting the Ne∣therlanders, who glory in their fat. They are much more obsequious to their Husbands, and have far less of the House at Command then the English or French Ladies; neither do they ever, as it is the custom with us, sit at the high end of
the Table. Which made Caracalla (speaking of the Germans) say, That no Nation knew how to govern their wives, but they that make the Sun of the Feminine gender, and the Moon of the Masculine. For the Germans say, der Mond and die Sonn; where der is the Masculine Article, and die the Feminine. Our English Saxons brought over the same rule into Britain; and for a while observ'd it. Whence in an Anglo-Saxonic Manuscript (entituled De Aequinoctio vernali) in Sir John Cotton's Library, we find, under ðh;am ci&cule yrnðh; seo sunne & sc mona & ðh;a tƿelf tacna, i. e. Ʋnder this Circle (speaking of the Zodiac) move the Sun, Moon, and twelve Signs. And again, Hegelympðh; geaegðh;er ge to þaere & unnan ge to þam monam, i. e. 'Tis ordinary both for the Sun and Moon. Where (as hath been noted by the Re∣verend Dr. Marshall, in his learned Observations upon his own Edition of the Saxon Gospels) Se and þam are Masculines, but Seo and þaere are Fe∣minines. The like has been observ'd in the Ara∣bic by our famous Dr. Pocock. But, to return. 'Tis an insolent rudeness among the High Dutch to salute any woman with a kiss; except she have been bred in England, France, or some other fo∣reign Nation, where that fashion is observed. The only formal greeting they have, is by a mutual touch of the hand. Their Marriages and Burials are for the most part wonderfully expensive;Marri∣ages and Burials. and in some places so extravagantly costly, that an ordinary man will scarce recover the charges of his Fathers Fu∣neral, or his own Marriage, in seven years after. They always keep a Marriage-Feast (or Hoch∣zeit) according to their quality. Some of these Entertainments last a month; all which time the new married Couple keep open house for all comers. They send the Bell-man, or common Cryer, round the Parish to invite in all their neigh∣bours; who send in Wine, or some other part of the Entertainment before them. They use no Chimneys,Lodging. unless it be to dress their meat in the Kitchin; but live in Stoves, which are heated (to what degree they please) by an Oven in the corner, or other part of the Room. They ly commonly betwixt two Fea∣ther-beds, when they are at home; tho Straw be the best bedding you meet with on the Road. Of the GERMAN Tongue. MOst foreigners that do not understand the German tongue, are strangely prejudic'd against the learning of it; looking upon it as an ungentile, barbarous, and rough language. All which aspersions have been first cast upon it, by such as were too lazy to take the pains to study it; or else too dull, after all their labour, to ap∣prehend it. The French use to say, Qu'il faille parler par la langue Francoise seulement aux grands Seigneurs, mais par la langue Alemande aux me∣chanicques et aux Rustiques, i. e. That a man should speak French only to Noblemen, and great per∣sons; but confer with Trades-men and Peasants in High Dutch. When John Lang, Ambassador from the Emperor Ferdinand the First, resided in the Court of Poland, an extraordinary intimacy hapned to be contracted betwixt him and Peter Roysy, the King of Spain's Minister; who hear∣ing his own Servants muttering over some bro∣ken pieces of Dutch, which some of Lang's Re∣tinue had taught them, told Lang, The Germans did not speak, but thunder; and he fancied 'twas in this language that God forbid our first Parents Pa∣radise. To which Lang is said to have reply'd, But the Serpent had before that tempted Eve in Spa∣nish. It must be confessed,Pronun∣ciation. that there is a vast dif∣ference betwixt the pronunciation of the High Dutch, and that of other Languages deriv'd from the Latin. This made Pomponius Mela say long since, that the German proper names were not fitted to a Roman mouth. And from hence it comes, that in the Latin Historians, which treat of the affairs of Germany, we meet with such strange unintelligible monsters of words, when they endeavour to put a Latin termination to a Dutch word, learnt only by the ear. A great number of consonants meeting together in one word, are enough to choak an Italian or French∣man; insomuch, that some of both those Nati∣ons, after they have spent the greatest part of their lives in Germany, are scarce able to speak one intelligible sentence in High Dutch. The Ger∣mans tell a story of a French-man, who had spent four and twenty years in the service of one of their Nobles; who one day, hearing him sput∣ter his broken language, ask'd him, If he was not ashamed, after so long time spent in Germany, to speak Dutch no better? To which Monsieur re∣plied, I look upon't as a very unreasonable thing to expect that any man should in so small a time, as twenty-four years, understand so crabbed a tongue. There are thousands of words in the High Dutch which can never possibly be pronounced by a man whose tongue has been accustomed to a soft and easie language. How would an Italian, Spaniard, or French-man, mangle and spoil these and the like compound words, Herbstfruchte, Marcktfreyheit, Pfrundpflicht, Sturmstreich, Slup∣floch, Dachsjacht, Kornschacherer, &c. which never∣theless a Dutch boy of four or five years old, will run over without stammering. Pronuncia∣tion does exceedingly vary in different Climates; and the inhabitants of cold Countries have ge∣nerally a much harsher tone then those who are bred up in a warmer air. But however, the Ger∣man tongue is far from any grating harshness. 'Tis a noble and manly language; which, as one has well observed of it, better becomes a Gene∣ral at the head of his Army, then a Gallant courting his Mistress. The excellency of a tongue cannot be better discern'd, then by resolving it into its first principles, and taking a strict survey of it in its Letters, Monosyllables, Compounds, Derivatives, and Syntax. Tho Tacitus be positive in asserting,Letters. that nei∣ther men nor women understood the use of Let∣ters amongst the ancient Germans; yet we are since sufficiently convinced of the contrary. The Inscriptions of those many Runic Monuments (some of which were erected many years before Tacitus's days) which have been of late disco∣ver'd in the King of Denmark's Dominions, will evidently demonstrate, that some part at least of this large Nation knew how to express their mind in characters. The word Letter is of ex∣tremely ancient use in the Northern languages; since we find it in several of the oldest Inscripti∣ons collected by Wormius. But whence it should fetch its original, is not easily determined; for we meet with it in almost all the European lan∣guages. The Latins write it Litera; the French, Lettre; the Spaniards, Letra; the Italians, Le∣tera; the Germans sometimes (for buchstab is the more usual word with them) write it, as we do, Letter. The Latin Critics are hard put to it to six upon a good Etymology of it in that tongue. One brings it a lituris; another, from lino; a third, a lineando; a fourth, quia legentibus iter praestat; and a fifth, quod legendo iteretur. But these are all
alike ridiculous; and therefore it may perhaps be worth our search to enquire, whether an apter primitive then any of these, may not be found in the German language? and consequently, whe∣ther the Latins borrowed the word litera, amongst many others, from the Dutch? Schottelius derives it from an old Teutonic monosyllable Lett or Litt (still used in Saxony and the Netherlands, tho the High Dutch, instead thereof, say Glid) signify∣ing a member or part; which, in the plural num∣ber makes Litter or Letter. This is as probable a conjecture as any Latin writer can pretend to; since letters are nothing else but the several parts and members of a word. And possibly the Ro∣mans had their word Scribere from the Dutch Schreiben, or (as it was writ formerly) Scrieven. The most usual word for a Letter, amongst the Germans, is Buchstab, i. e. einer stab des buches, or a staff made use of in a book. The reason of which name is thus given by Wormius, The an∣cients, says he, were wont to make one long strait line (in fashion of a staff) as a founda∣tion of whatever they were about to write. And indeed the Runic Inscriptions seem to be nothing else then a company of such staves, cross'd and turn'd as occasion requir'd. The other mem∣ber of this compound word, Buch (whence our Book), had the like original with the Latin word Liber; being so called from Buche, which signi∣fies a Beech-tree. Because, before the ancient use of paper, the old Cimbrians wrote on this kind of wood, and stones, as the Romans did on the bark of trees. Lazius gives us a specimen of an Al∣phabet used by the Normans, in their Sorceries and Incantations, before ever they came ac∣quainted with the Romans. Duret thinks, que l' Alphabet des lettres des Gots a este le premier Al∣phabet des premieres & plus anciennes lettres, i. e. That the Gothic Alphabet is the most ancient one in the world; and a Copy of the first Let∣ters that were ever invented. Where by Gothic Letters he does not understand the Alphabet in∣vented by Wulphilas, Bishop of the Goths, and by him employed in writing his Version of the four Evangelists (of which the Codex Argenteus, published by the late famous Franciscus Junius F. F. in the year 1665, is a noble transcript): but the old Runic characters; which the Bishop would not make use of in this pious work, because they were used in Sorcery and Witchcraft. Upon the same consideration, all other ancient Alphabets, used in the other Provinces of Ger∣many, were laid aside, as soon as Christianity ap∣pear'd in this Country. Thus, upon the first conversion of the Saxons by Charles the Great, the Latin Letters were introduced into those parts; and their old conjuring characters abolished. Mr. Sheringham thinks (and 'tis more then pro∣bable) that our old Anglo-Saxonic character was first made use of upon the like occasion. For that (before their conversion to Christianity) both they and the Danes in Britain used another sort of Letters, seems manifest from the several fragments of Runic Monuments found at Beau∣castle, Papcastle, and other places in the North of England. But when those that had employ'd themselves in the conversion of these poor Ido∣laters, saw how these characters had been made use of in their Incantations and idolatrous pra∣ctices, and that (upon the sight of them) they were always ready to return to their Sorceries; they resolved to remove them, and give others in their stead. It was formerly a grand question among the ancient Philosophers,ignifi∣ancy of ords. whether words have their significations  or ; from the natural im∣port of the words themselves, or the will and pleasure of the first author of them? Plato was of opinion, that a reason could at first have been given for the name of every thing in the world; because he that gave every particular being its distinct name, knew its particular nature; and was directed by divine providence in finding out a name answerable to that nature. In like man∣ner as Bibliander fancies Adam was directed, when he named every thing according to its nature. Many learned men have been curious in observing what an accurate analogy there is in the Greek and La∣tin tongues betwixt the voices of birds and beasts; and the words which in those languages are made to signifie such and such voices. Julius Pollux brings these, and many more, examples out of the Greek tongue, , &c. And Jos. Scaliger has collected these, among many others, out of the Latin, Boare, Mugire, Rudere, Latrare, Barrire, Blaterare, Tetrinnire, Glocitare, Fringulare, Trinsare, &c. But certainly there is no tongue more exact at this sort of Onomato∣poeia then the High Dutch. For example, the Germans say, the Ox beelket, the Bear brummet, the Sheep bleeket, the Swine gruntzet, the Dog baffet, the Horse wihelet, the Cat mauet, the Goose schnatteret, the Hen kakkelt or klukket, the Raven kraket, &c. Besides, no language comes near this, in the aptness of expressing the sounds and noises of inanimate creatures by verbs active. Which is also an excellence observed in our own tongue by the learned and famous Dr. Wallis in his English Grammar. No greater argument can be made use of for the antiquity of a language,Monosyl∣lables. then the multitude of monosyllables; which cannot be imagined to be derived from any primitive further off, nor hardly fancied to be a corruption of so many words in foreign languages. Simon Stevin, an ingenious Hollander, has reckoned up 2170 mo∣nasyllable primitives (and the number might have been advanced far higher) in the Dutch tongue; whereas, in the Latin he can find no more then 163; and only 265 in the Greek. In our English tongue a whole speech might be com∣posed of monosyllables; which are all of them originally Dutch. Indeed, in the High Dutch Dia∣lect many of these ancient primitives are turned into Dissyllables: but if we look back unto the old way of writing these words, we shall find that they consisted only of one syllable. Thus, Vater, Muttel, Himmer, Leber, &c. were anciently written, Vaer, Moer, Himl, Lefr, &c. There are in the German tongue twenty-three principal terminations;Deriva∣tives. which (tho they signi∣fie nothing in themselves, yet) when added to another word, do very much alter its significa∣tion. Of which our English tongue has retain'd a great many. As, 1. Er in Buyer, Seller, Wait∣er, &c. 2. En in Golden, Brazen, Silvern, &c. 3. Hood (in Dutch heit) in Manhood, Priest∣hood, &c. 4. Dom in Kingdom, Dukedom, &c. with many others of the like nature. By the help of these, and the authority which every man has to make use of them as he shall see occasion, the German tongue is made exceeding copious. For sometimes you may meet with a word of five or six syllables; of which one only is significant of it self, and the rest nothing but so many ter∣minations hudled up together. For example, Ʋn∣wiederaufloslich signifies indissolvable; in which word the syllable los is the primitive, and the rest (un, wieder, auf, and lich) only prepositi∣ons and terminations annexed to alter the sig∣nification. The Greek tongue has hitherto been thought,Com∣pounds. by most learned men, to be the richest of any
in admirable compounds. A. Gellius says, he often endeavour'd to render several Greek com∣pounds into Latin, but found many of them so exquisitely significant, that all the skill he had in the Roman tongue, was too little to furnish him either with a single word or Periphrasis, which would fully express the signification of any one. The words he instances in are, , &c. But however the Latin tongue may come short of the Greek; yet questionless the High Dutch equals, if not exceeds it. For in this language you have not only words compounded of Adjectives and Substantives (as in the Greek words before mentioned) and Verbs or Participles with Pre∣positions (which is usual in all languages); but also innumerable ones which consist of two Sub∣stantives, or two Adjectives. We have still in our English that great elegancy of compound∣ing Substantives on many occasions; as in these words, Huswife, Snowball, Football, Nightcap, &c. But the greatest excellency in this kind of com∣position, is in altering the signification of the word by transposition of the Substantives. As in England we say Horsemill, and Millhorse; Shoe∣cloth, and Clothshoe, &c. Examples in this kind are infinitely more in High Dutch then English: but I shall not stay to trouble the Reader with any more then these, 1. Feurschiff, signifies a Fire-ship: but Schiff∣feuer, a Fire on Shipboard. 2. Jagthund, any Dog that will hunt: Hund∣jagt, an Hunting with Dogs. 3. Schifflast, the Burthen of a Ship: Lastschiff, a Ship that carries Burthens. 4. Friedgeld, Money paid for Peace: Geldfried, Peace procured by the payment of Money. 5. Wassermuhl, a Watermill: Muhlwasser, the Water which drives the Mill. 6. Kaufmark, the Market-place: Markkauf, the price given for any thing bought in the Mar∣ket. Sometimes three or four Substantives may be elegantly compounded into one word. As, Walfischfang, the catching of Whales; Kernobs∣baum, a Pippin-tree; Erbkuchenmeisterampt, the Office of the chief Master of the Kitchin; with thousands more of the like. The Germans have of late, in some places, much corrupted their Language, by admitting into it a great number of French, Italian, and Latin words; which they have turned into Dutch by giving them a German termination. Hence Parliren, Disputiren, Informiren, &c. have crept into their Language. However, they are still so ten∣der of the reputation of their own tongue, that (tho they love the fashion of using foreign words, yet) they will never write nor print any Latin, French, or Italian word in Dutch chara∣cters. It will come near an impossibility to reckon up all the different Dialects in the German tongue;Dialects. if we consider, that the old British, English, Da∣nish, Swedish, Norwegian, Islandic, and Flandrian tongues (with their inferior Dialects) are only so many branches of the same stock. Besides, the differences of Dialects in High Germany it self are innumerable; and some of them so vastly different among themselves that a Brandenburger will hardly understand a Misnian, nor a Schwabe either of them. The Citizens of Leipsic observe three several Dialects within the narrow walls of that small Town. Busbequius found a great deal of High Dutch in the Tauric Chersonese; and some have brought several fragments of it out of Persia. But, passing over the petit inconside∣rable dialects and small shreds of the Tongue, the whole German Language (confin'd to the Empire and Netherlands) is usually divided into the two dialects of Saxon and Francic. The Saxon (of which our English tongue is a branch) con∣tains under it the Languages of the Netherlands, Westphalia, Brunswic, Holstein, Mecklenburg, Pome∣ren, the Marks, Prussia, and Liefland. There are many reasons to induce us to believe, that this Dialect comes far nearer the ancient German or Celtic then any other whatever. The strongest argument we can make use of, may be taken from that infinite number of German words mention'd by ancient Latin Authors, which at this day are no-where made use of but in the Lower Saxony only; or at least among such Nations as are issued thence. Thus, Pliny tells us, the old Gauls call'd a Whale Phiseter, a Fish-eater. Our English word Mare (whence comes the title of Marshal) is lost in the High Dutch; but still in use among the Lower Saxons, who write it Mahre. Pausa∣nias assures us, that this was a Celtic word; and thence fetches the Marpais Longobardorum, spoken of by Paulus Diaconus. Duret says, Les habitans de Saxe se sont de tout temps & d'anciennete vantez de parler entre tous les autres Alemands la plus en∣tiere pure & diserte langue Allemande, i. e. The Inhabitants of Saxony have always brag'd of, and pretended to the only pure unmix'd and ancient German tongue. There was not many years since, an ingenious Poem published in the Saxon dialect; wherein 'tis shew'n, how far, in many particulars, this surpasses the High Dutch, as spoken in Misnia and Austria. But we are not to allow of this determination; since it matters not, what alterations are made in any dialect, provided it retain manifest and unde∣niable marks of the fountain whence it at first sprang. The Greek tongue was no-where so spoke as we find it in the Grecian writers. And tho wo∣men and boys were admitted into the Roman Theaters, to hear speeches; yet none of their wri∣ters will allow, that these people could speak the true Latin tongue. That is only the true language of any Nation, on which the learned men in it have thought fit to set their stamp. Now, seeing the Germans have all along pitcht upon the High Dutch dialect in all their writings, ever since they set pen to paper; 'tis highly reasonable that we should pronounce it the nobler Dialect, and esteem it the only true German tongue. The Netherlan∣ders, 'tis true, write in their own Dialect; but it is, because they will not reckon themselves a part of the Empire; and fancy they must needs be esteem'd so, if they cannot shew a Language of their own. But however, there is not one man in an hundred, of all these, who will not readily allow, that the German language far ex∣cels his Low Dutch. Aventinus tells us, that Charles the Great com∣posed a Grammar of the High Dutch Tongue;Gram∣mars. the rules of which he collected out of a com∣pany of old genealogical Ballads, which he had picked up among the Country Rustics. But Tri∣themius says, he found it an undertaking too great for him; and never liv'd to finish it. After his days, the Emperor Rudolph the First, in the year 1273, published a Decree, ordering all Lawyers to draw up their instruments and pleadings in this Tongue. Which was afterwards confirm'd by Maximilian the First at Colen, in the year 1512. Upon this, the study and improvement of the High Dutch came much in fashion; and by de∣grees that Dialect was advanced to the repute which it now has (not only in the Empire, but) in all parts of the Northern Kingdoms of Eu∣rope. From thenceforwards, the best Scholars in Germany have thought it worth their while to take some pains in trimming and beautifying their
mother-tongue. The German Historians men∣tion (besides that imperfect piece of Charles the Great) several Grammars, writ by Pierius, Wi∣sens, Sunthem, Aventine, Luther, and Meliss, which are now all lost. Luther was undoubtedly a man that thorowly understood the German Tongue; tho he never attain'd that knowledg and accu∣racy, which he shews in all his writings, without a great deal of pains and study. Sleidan repre∣sents him as the greatest Master of the German Tongue, and best Translator of any foreign Lan∣guage into his mother-tongue, that ever wrote. His translation of the Bible (now commonly made use of all Germany over, where the Com∣monalty are permitted to read the Scriptures) sufficiently confirms the Historians testimony. And he himself assures us, that he took such care to have this work exactly done, that sometimes (in the translation of Job) he and his assistant would consult for a fortnight together about the rendring of one word. But of all that have hitherto undertaken to give an account of the High Dutch Tongue, Mr. Schottelius (formerly Counsellor to the late Duke of Brunswic-Wulfen∣buttel) has done the best. He had, at several times, published a great many little Tracts upon this subject (as his Sprachkunst, Verskunst, &c.) which at last he collected into one entire work in five Books, printed at Brunswic in Quarto, A. D. 1663. Duesius (in his preface to his Dutch Grammar) complains,ctiona∣es. that few of the Nobility of Germany are so good Masters of their own mother-tongue, as to be able to write it right. Tho this accusa∣tion is not altogether warrantable, yet certainly the Germans are as liable to this grosness as any other Nation in Europe. One great reason of which proceeds (I suppose) from the want of a compleat Dictionary in their own Tongue. For by this means the wits of Italy and France have reduc'd their Language to that purity, which at this day makes them so much admired by fo∣reigners. But the Germans have not (nor ever had) any such helps in their Tongue. In the year 1616, George Henisch (an ingenious and learned German) published a Book at Augsburg, entituled, Thesaurus linguae & sapientiae Germaniae. Which, if ever finish'd, would have prov'd a work of great learning and use; but the Author dying before 'twas finish'd, it went no further then the letter H. Besides, there has not that ex∣actness been observed either in the transcribing or printing of it, as might be expected; for often the Primitives, Compounds, and Derivatives are misplaced, and sometimes a great many of the most considerable Compounds omitted. He that would compleat this work, and write an exact Dictionary of the High Dutch Tongue, must necessarily be a man of indefatigable industry, and accurate observation. For, 1. It will be requisite, that he make a perfect collection of all the Pri∣mitive words in the ancient German or Celtic Lan∣guage. Which he cannot be well supposed to do out of a particular Dialect made use of in Meissen or Austria; but must be forced to ran∣sack all the several branches of that copious Tongue. For it cannot be expected, but that in the Danish, Swedish, English, Welsh, and Norwe∣gian Tongues, there are thousands of words which (tho not now to be met with in the Ger∣man Language, yet nevertheless) are originally Celtic: And therefore he that would publish to the world an absolute and accurate Dictionary of the High Dutch, must gather up into one bundle these scatter'd remnants. Since in Ger∣many you shall observe a vast number of Deri∣vatives, in ordinary use, whose Primitives must be fetcht out of other Languages. Kilian had taken a great deal of pains in collecting the old Saxon words into his Teutonic Dictionary: but his elaborate work suffer'd no small injury by the ignorance and avarice of Booksellers, who in their later Editions have left out the greatest part of the old words, as obselete and out of use. Schot∣telius has made a very considerable catalogue of these stamm-worter (as he calls them) or radical words: but 'tis capable of a vast enlargement. 2. He must be exceeding punctual in setting down all the different Cases of Nouns, and the Moods and Tenses of Verbs: for hence proceeds no small variety in the German Tongue. 3. He must of ne∣cessity converse with all manner of Tradesmen, and from them learn the names of their Tools, &c. For it is hard to conceive, what a large portion of any Tongue is confin'd to Tradesmen's Shops and the Husbandman's Stall. The Miners in Ger∣many have almost a particular Language of their own; which cannot be understood by any Dutch∣man never concern'd in that employment. Joh. Matthesius (formerly Minister at Jochimsthal, and an intimate acquaintance of Philip Melancthon's) publish'd twenty Sermons in the year 1562, which were all preach'd before a congregation of Mi∣ners, and contain an explication of all the Texts of Scripture which mention either Mettals or Minerals. In which discourses the Author has industriously muster'd up the greatest part of the words and phrases peculiar to the Miners. About two years ago there was printed, at Freyberg in Meissen, an Alphabetical Dictionary consisting of nothing else but these kind of terms and phrases. If by these, and some other such-like means an accurate Dictionary of the German Tongue were compleated and published, the ge∣nerality of High Dutch would be able to write, as well as speak, their own Language perfectly; and foreigners would not find it so hard a task to be Masters of that noble Tongue. And with∣out doubt the profit would richly recompence the pains and cost. They only betray their own ignorance, who proclaim to the world, that there is nothing worth the reading writ in High Dutch; since, 'tis well known, the Germans are the best Mechanics in the world; and do still instruct the rest of Europe in the Art of purging and refining all sorts of Mettals. Now most of those who are employ'd in this Art are men that have not had the opportunity of learning any language but their own; therefore we must expect, that the instructions we have from them be writ in High Dutch. Another grand advantage which an Englishman will reap from the perfect know∣ledge of this Tongue, will be an ability of un∣derstanding much more readily the Histories and Customs of his own Country. For there are in England, and English writers, innumerable names which will never be rightly explain'd by any man utterly ignorant of the German Tongue. Nor is it enough to have breath'd in the German air, and to return with a little smattering of the mo∣dern Language; but our English Antiquary ought to be a man that has traced the Dutch Language thro the several alterations it has met with, by the frequent change either of time or place. The daily sensible corruption of our own Tongue,Corrupti∣on of their Tongue. is sufficient to inform us what we are to expect in another, after a revolution of some Centuries. 'Tis true, the High Dutch are not so much enamour'd of A-la-mode French words and phrases as the English; yet 'tis impossi∣ble but that every Age should produce some notable alteration in the best of Languages. What the Language was before Charles the Great's days, we have no other way of guessing
then by consulting the proper names of men and places mention'd in Latin Historians: for this Emperor was the first that by his own ex∣ample taught them to write Books in the Ger∣man Tongue. By his appointment Kaiban, Hai∣mo, and Strabo translated the Bible into High Dutch; and Otfrid, a Monk, turned the four Evan∣gelists into German Verse; of which later there are still many Copies to be seen, one of which was printed at Basil in the year 1571. A little before the Emperor Rudolph the First's public Edict for the Pleading and Registring all Law∣cases in the German Tongue, we find the life of Anno, Archbishop of Colen; a Copy of which was published by Martin Opitz (the Maro of the German Nation, as he is usually stiled) at Dant∣zic in the year 1639. Melchior Goldastus has col∣lected, and in the second Tome of his German Antiquities, published a great many old Francic (or High Dutch) Edicts, Patents, &c. besides se∣veral Glossaries, and other small fragments. An ancient Paraphrase on the Canticles written by Willeramus Abbot of Merseburg, was published (out of an old Manuscript in the Library at Leyden) by Raphelengius in the year 1598, and afterwards illustrated with learned observations written and published by Franciscus Junius F. F. at Amsterdam in the year 1655. The famous P. Lambecius, in the account he has given of the Imperial Library at Vienna, has published several fragments in the same ancient Dialect; which had been lost for many years. And the industri∣ous F. Junius (now mention'd) has collected a great company of Francic Glossaries, never yet publish'd. Besides, we find among that learned man's papers (which by his Last Will and Testa∣ment, he bequeathed to our University of Ox∣ford) Tatian's Harmonia Evangelica in Latin and Francic; upon which he has writ Notes, and a large Commentary. All which (with many o∣ther of that incomparable Authors works) may, 'tis hop'd, e're long be published. How much these several pieces differ from one another, and how vastly all of them vary from the Dutch found in Luther's Translation of the Bible, will be best discern'd by those who (not without infi∣nite pleasure and satisfaction) shall take the pains to compare them. Nay, as I am inform'd, there is no small difference (in spelling and dialect) between M. Luther's own Manuscript Copy of the High Dutch Bible (still kept in the Library at Noremberg) and the printed Copies that bear his name, and have his very words, but alter'd according to the modish speaking of later years. As no particular Age has hitherto given us the sight of an entire German Tongue; so nei∣ther are we to expect to find it perfectly spoke at this day in any one Dukedom or Province in the whole Empire. The Citizens of Vienna are thought to speak tolerable good High Dutch; tho the rest of the Austrians bestow too much breath upon their words, and speak far broader then any other Germans, All agree, that the Misnians talk most accurately; and in Meissen the Citizens of Leipsic have usually the preemi∣nence. Of Learning and Learned men amongst the GERMANS. 'TWas questionless long before the Germans arrived at any great stock of Learning: tho (what Tacitus reports of them) that they were all of them utter strangers to Letters, is no∣toriously false, as we have shewed before. The only care they took to preserve the memory of any great man, was by registring the famous actions of his life in Doggerel; which they used to sing among themselves, but never committed any part of it to writing. Their Letters, made use of chiefly (if not altogether) in their Idola∣trous Ceremonies, were reckon'd too sacred to be employ'd in humane affairs. Some Schools they had, wherein the Priests, and others that serv'd at their Altars, were educated and in∣structed in the principles of their false Religion: but none of these mysteries were revealed to the Commonalty. For altho (as Cluverius affirms) the Priests themselves had some knowledge of a true God, the Creation of the World, Eternity of the Soul, &c. yet these secrets were deliver'd to the Rustics in dark Fables and mysterious Riddles. After the Germans grew acquainted with the Romans (especially in the Reign of Ha∣drian the Emperor) several good Schools were erected in many places of Germany; insomuch, that their young Noblemen were commonly taught to understand and write Latin. Nay, they are said to have been so greedy of learning any thing that came from Rome, that the German Soldiers would ordinarily return out of the Camp perfect Romans, both in Language and Manners. But most of these Schools were upon or near the banks of the Rhine; and still the Northern Germans were destitute of all opportunities of such good education. Yet afterwards, when the Kings of France got footing in Germany, they (especially Dagobert and Charles the Great) found∣ed Schools wherever they came. One grand un∣dertaking, which the Governors and Masters of these Schools enter'd upon, was, the reducing of the High Dutch tongue to writing; which before that time had never been tyed up to any rules. This they found to be a difficult task, and it was long before they could compass their de∣signs; insomuch, that for many years all man∣ner of proceedings at Law (nay, the very rudi∣ments which were taught to School-boys, and whatsoever else was committed to writing) were constantly drawn up in the Latin tongue. But by degrees the Germans got their Language re∣gulated; and then apply'd themselves to the study of all the liberal Arts and Sciences. And they went on with so much zeal,Ʋniver∣sities. that in a short time there were several Universities of good note. Histories report of Charles the Great, that he built Gymnasia (or great public Schools for the teaching of the Arts and Sciences) accor∣ding to the number of the Letters in the Alpha∣bet: many of which grew up in time to be Uni∣versities; which multiplied so exceedingly, that Justus Lipsius affirms, that in his days there were more Universities in Germany then in all Christen∣dom besides. At this day, they reckon above thirty Universities, besides Gymnasia, in the Em∣pire; and most of these are as well stockt with Scholars as any University in Europe. 'Tis report∣ed, that when the Emperor Charles the Fourth, King of Bohemia, had founded the University at Prague, and given equal priviledges to Bohemi∣ans, Polanders, and Germans, the City was over∣burthen'd with Scholars; insomuch, that he was resolved to retrench his favours. And within a week after this Decree was put in execution, no less then 24000 Scholars fled out of Prague; and not long after, sixteen thousand more follow'd them. Whence it appears, that in that one Uni∣versity there were in those days more Students then almost any other Nation in Europe could shew; and more Scholars in Prague then inhabi∣tants
in most great Cities. In the year 1409, there was reckon'd forty four thousand Scholars under the Rectorship of John Huss; which are an incredible number, if we consider how vastly they surpass the slender multitudes which any of our modern Universities can brag of. The Princes of Germany are still exceedingly zealous in keeping up the state and grandeur of their Universities; and there is nothing they so much pride them∣selves in, as the number of Scholars which their Dominions afford. The Germans are all of them exceedingly in∣dustrious in their several Callings and Professi∣ons;. and their Scholars study as hard as their Rustics drudge. The Hebrew tongue is no-where so generally studied as among the Germans; and few attain to so great a knowledg of it as they ordinarily do. This kind of study seems to have had its first original from a mutual exchange of Languages betwixt this Nation and the Jews; since no European tongue is so generally spoken by the Jewish Merchants as High Dutch. The greatest accusation which foreigners have hither∣to laid to the charge of the High Dutch, is, that they are generally troubled with too great an itch of printing; tho they have nothing to pub∣lish but the state of a Question, or a few Com∣mon-places collected out of the writings of their Cotemporaries. It were to be wished, that a little more moderation were made use of in publish∣ing those millions of Suppositions and Disputa∣tions, which yearly overstock the Fairs at Franck∣furt, Leipsic, &c. But, I suppose, the greatest thing proposed in printing of these Philosophical Pam∣phlets is, first the hindering of every poor fellow from taking a degree (since no man can be a Graduate in Germany who has not published one such Disputation at least): And secondly, the maintaining the many Presses which are in each University. There has been in Germany in all Ages (since Learning first flourish'd in the Western parts of Europe), and still continues to be, a great num∣ber of famous men excellently skill'd in all Arts and Sciences. Of whom we shall not in this place trouble the Reader with a Catalogue; but refer him to the following Descriptions of the several Provinces; where he may expect to find most of them mention'd, when we come to treat of the particular Universities, in which they flourish'd. Of the ingenious Inventions of the GERMANS, and their skill in Mechanics. NO man, however prejudic'd against the German Nation, will deny, that they are incomparably excellent at the Mechanical part of Learning. They are admirable at Chymistry, Medicinal Compositions, and all sorts of Physico-Mathematical Experiments. But, besides the im∣provements of these, and many other parts of Natural Philosophy, they have had the repute of being accounted the first Inventors of the two great requisites of Scholars and Soldiers, viz. Print∣ing and Gunpowder. Albertus Magnus,. a Dominican Frier, was the first that practis'd Chymistry in Germany; and taught it publicly. After him, the greatest part of that, and several other Religious Orders, ad∣dicted themselves to this kind of study: for the carrying on of which there are as great conveni∣ences here as in any other Country in Europe. Amongst the rest, one Barthold Schwartz (a Fran∣ciscan Frier) had made a great proficiency in this Art; and had, at several times, communi∣cated many rare experiments to his Fraternity. One time having mingled some dry'd Earth, Sul∣pher, and Saltpeter, with some other ingredients, in an Earthern Crusible, and plac'd them on a hot fire, in order to some preparation or other; on a sudden, the Vessel was broke into a thou∣sand pieces, with a wonderful noise and violence. At first he was amazed at the unexpected event; but afterwards, having often repeated the expe∣riment, he began to imagine there might be more in the business then he lookt for; and fancied, that this lucky hit might, if well improv'd, give occasion to an invention far beyond his first ex∣pectations. Whereupon, he caused a long Iron pipe to be made, with a touch-hole. This he cramm'd full of those ingredients which he had observed to contribute most to the foremention'd effect, and put some small stones above them; which were quickly, as soon as the combustible matter was fir'd, thrown out with a greater noise and violence then the first accident had produc'd. This was the first original of Guns; which hap∣ned (says the Author of the Vera inventa Germa∣niae) in the year 1380; but either that Author was grosly mistaken, or his Book is false printed. I suppose it ought to be read in the year 1330. for some time the invention was kept private, and communicated only to some private friends; but it was not long before the Germans (as Vo∣laterran tells us) discovered the secret to the Ve∣netians, when they were besieged by the Genoueses. And how gratefully they acknowledg'd the kind∣ness, is manifest from the Cities of Padua, Ve∣rona, &c. which the Venetians soon after, by the help of Guns, took from the Germans; and have not to this day restor'd them. If it had been pos∣sible to have confin'd the Art of making Gun∣powder to Christendom only, the Christians might have been in a better posture of defence against the Turks (in all parts of the known world) then now they are: And had the Germans kept their own counsel, they might by this means have made themselves Masters not only of Europe, but the whole world. So terrible and irresistible were great Guns and Mortar-pieces upon their first appearance. But within a short time, the Jews (who always swarm'd in Germany) had pryed into the secret; and immediately, out of spite to Christianity, and hopes of great gain to them∣selves, taught the Turks the whole Art. For this reason the Muscovites do still mortally hate the Jews; and (as most pernicious Creatures in a Christian Commonwealth) forbid them to traf∣fic in their Dominions. After the Venetians, the Merchants on the Baltic were the first that made use of Guns at Sea, In the the year 1347, the English took Calais by the help of Guns. The French had the Art from the English; whom they requited just as well as the Venetians did the Ger∣mans (tho not with so great success); for Eng∣lish-men were the first they shot at. Soon after, the Spaniards got the knack; and they quickly handed it over to the Moors. Tho the common vogue has usually hitherto given the Germans the credit of being the first inventors of Guns (and 'tis no great matter if we go with the stream, yet) many of our Countrymen are unwilling to give away the honour of inventing the Powder from our English Nation. Roger Bacon (a Franciscan Frier, sometime Fellow of Merton-Colledg in Ox∣ford), in one of his Epistles, inscribed ad Parisi∣ensem, has these words, In omnem distantiam quam volumus possumus artificialiter componere ignem, com∣burentem ex sale Petrae, & aliis, (instead of aliis a Manuscript Copy in the hands of our late
Learned Dr. Gerard Langbaine, Provost of Queen's Colledg in Oxford, had Sulphure & Carbonum pul∣vere). He adds, Praeter haec, sunt alia stupenda Naturae, nam soni velut Tonitrus & coruscationes pos∣sunt fieri in aere, imo majore horrore, quam illa quae fiunt per naturam: Nam modica materia adapta, sc. ad quantitatem unius pollicis, sonum facit horri∣bilem & coruscationem ostendit violentum, & hoc fit multis modis quibus Civitas aut Exercitus destruatur. —Igne exsiliente cum fragore inaestimabili. —Mira haec sunt, si quis sciret uti ad plenum, in debita quan∣titate & materia. In which words he tells us plainly, That out of Saltpeter, Sulphur, and Coal-dust, he could make fire which should burn at what distance he pleased; that with the same matter he could cause Thunder and Lightning in the Air more terrible then that produc'd by Nature; that a City or Army might be destroy'd by this kind of fire; that the flame burst out with an unspeakable noise, &c. Whence (says our ingenious Dr. Plott, in his Natural History of Oxfordshire) 'tis plain, he either invented or knew Gunpowder. Dr. Dee, in his Annotations upon the Epistle now quoted, fancies he conceal'd the invention purposely in the word aliis (for so all the Copies he had met with read the passage); as well knowing what a murdering thing Gun∣powder would prove, if discover'd. But he had another reason sufficient to stop the discovery. For his Skill and Mathematics had given occa∣sion to some of his ignorant acquaintance to take him for a Conjurer, and as such to commit him to prison. Which jealousies would questionless have been augmented by his raising these kind of Thunderings in the Air. He dyed in the year 1292; which was near an hundred years before ever any German pretended to the invention of Guns. The relations we have of the Spaniards first discoveries of Mexico and Peru will inform us, what strangers the Americans were to the use of Guns. Those poor Pgans concluded the Spaniards must needs be Gods; when, after Lightning and Thunder, their Companions fell down dead before them. Hereupon, they began to sacrifice to them as solemnly as to any of their Idols; till the Spanish cruelty had given them reason to change their opinion. They had no other argument to put a stop to their devotion, then a perswasion that 'twas impossible Heaven should be a Ken∣nel of such Blood-hounds as they had experienc'd these men to be; and therefore they resolv'd to try whether these Thunderers were not mortal. The proposed experiment they managed thus: When a company of them had made a shift to catch a stragling Spaniard, they dipp'd him over head in water; which they conitnued to do so long till by his being drown'd they discover'd his mortality. But it was not long before the Ame∣ricans themselves grew acquainted with these En∣gines of Thunder; and within a short time the Spaniards Guns recoil'd upon their Masters. Both Spaniards and English have smarted in the West Indies, for revealing this secret of war to the Pagan Natives. Another invention the Germans challenge which has been as great an advancement to learning,Printing. as the former to war, viz. PRINTING. The Hol∣landers will not allow of this pretension; assert∣ing obstinately, that this admirable invention was first hit upon at Harlem, in that Province. Ber∣tius, Boxhornius, and Scriverius (a Citizen of Har∣lem) are stout maintainers of this their pretended right; and alledg many probable arguments in behalf of what they say. We shall give the Rea∣der a short account of the arguments on both sides; and refer the determination of the con∣troversie to himself. The Germans tell their story thus: This noble Art was invented at Strasburg in the year 1440, by John Guttenburg (an Alderman, or Schepin, of that City), and perfected at Mentz by the same man. In the public Library at Ba∣sil they shew several Books printed with the very first characters that were invented by John Gut∣tenburg; which were Cast Letters, such as are at this day used in Printing Presses, though not so exact. The most considerable argu∣ment the High Dutch have for themselves, is taken from the character in which they find the first Latin Books are printed: which is near (if it be not the same with) that black Letter which is to this day used by the Germans in their ordi∣nary writings. Now 'tis likely (say they) that if any other people had been the first inventors of Printing, they would have made use of the characters of their own Country. But the Hol∣landers are not perswaded with any arguments from any of these kind of Topics, to resign their title, and quit all manner of pretensions: but are as zealous for Harlem, as the former for Mentz or Strasburg. They tell us, Printing was first in∣vented by one John Lawrence Coster, a Citizen of good fashion in Harlem. Who walking one night after Supper in the adjoining Wood with some of his little Grandchildren, he cut some pieces of the Bark of a Tree into Letters; and printing therewith some characters upon paper, taught the little Boys their Alphabet by this new con∣trivance. But observing that the invention was capable of a further improvement, he immedi∣ately advanced; and within a few days printed off several copies of sentences and fragments col∣lected out of divers Authors. Hadrian Junius says, he saw the first Book that Lawrence printed; in which this was observable, that the Leaves were not printed on both sides; but two Leaves glued together, to avoid the deformity of vacant pages. Afterwards, he changed his Beechen Letters into Leaden ones; and those, not long after, into Tin. This done, he contriv'd that glutinous sort of Ink which to this day is made use of in all Printing-Presses. The House where he liv'd is still to be shew'n, near the Market-place in Har∣lem; on the front of which was formerly en∣graven his Picture, with some Verses in com∣mendation of him. But of late they were struck out, to take away the occasion of the Market∣peoples staring up at the windows. The Burgo∣master and Raedtsherrn of the Town have in their custody a specimen of his first Essay; and Junius reports, that in his time they had several drinking-cups (kept in his house beforemention'd) which were made of the first Letters he used. An∣gelus Rocha (who published an account of the Vatican Library, in the days of Pope Sixtus the Fifth) tells us, that Aldus Junior, a learned An∣tiquary, shew'd him a printed Copy of Donatus's Grammar in Vellam; in the first page of which were these words, Johannes Faustus civis Mogunti∣nus, Avus maternus Joannis Schoeffer, primus ex∣cogitavit imprimendi artem typis aereis: Quos deinde plumbeos invenit, multaque ad poliendam artem ad∣didit ejus filius Petrus Schoeffer. Impressus est au∣tem hic Donatus & Confessionalia primo omnium A. D. MCCCCL. Admonitus certe fuit ex Donato Hollan∣diae prius impresso in tabula incisa. In which words Mariangelus Accursius (for the same Author says 'twas his hand) assures us, that the first man that printed Books in Germany with molten Letters had the first hint of his Trade out of Holland. The old Chronicle of the City of Colen (which was wrote in the year 1496) confirms this story in telling us, wie wail die kunst is vonden tzo Mentz, als dan nu gemeynlich gebruicht wirt, so is doch die eyrste vurbyldung vonden in Hollant vuss den Dona∣ten,
die dae selffst vur der tzyt gedruckt syn, i. e. Not∣withstanding the common report of the first in∣vention of this Art at Mentz; yet the first hint was had from Holland; where Donatus was printed before that time, (speaking of Guttenburg's first printing at Mentz). And indeed most of the German Historians seem very willing to grant, that the first printing with wooden Cuts was invented by this Coster (before their Country∣man found out the way of setting Letters, composing words out of the several different characters, and making lines up of words, and pages of lines); but this they look upon as an Art distinct from Typography, and no more then (in all probability) was some thousands of years since practis'd in China (and perhaps Mexico too) where they used thus to cypher out their Hieroglyphicks. But the Hollanders have a se∣cond part of their story; which, if true, utterly confutes whatever the High Dutch can pretend to bring against them. They tell us further, that after Costor had improv'd this new-found Art so far as to print with Tin Letters, he began to take more Servants into his House, to enable him to carry on his work with greater vigour. Amongst these there was one John (whom Junius fancies to be Joannes Faustus abovemention'd), to whom upon his taking an oath of secresie, the whole Art was communicated. After this fellow had for some time apply'd himself with all imagina∣ble industry to his trade, and attained to as great skill as his Master, he resolv'd at the first oppor∣tunity to fly, and to take with him as many of his Masters Utensils as he and another (whom he had made privy to his design) could conve∣niently carry off. Accordingly, on Christmas-Eve (which was a night of as great solemnity in Holland in those days, as it is still in the Popish do∣minions) whilst Coster and his whole Family were attending the usual Processions, these two seized on as many Cases of Letter, and other printing instruments, as they were able to convey with∣out the danger of being apprehended in their flight. With these carriages John and his Com∣panion got safe to Amsterdam; where, for some short time, they privately printed small Books and Pamphlets. Thence they removed to Stras∣burg, and there communicated their Art to Gut∣tenburg; who, carrying on the Press at his own charges, had the honour of being reckon'd the first Printer in the world. At last they setled at Mentz; where (out of danger of being prose∣cuted by Costor) they kept open shop, and made public profession of their Trade. The first Book they printed in this City was Alexander Gallus's Grammar, with Peter Hispanus's small Gramma∣tical Tracts annex'd. There is in our public Library at Oxford, a Copy of Tully's Offices printed by this Faustus on Vellam: which, by the irregu∣lar and unequal cut of the Letter, seems engra∣ven in plates or cut in wood; as those Copies of Coster's work which are in the custody of the Prince of Orange, and the Citizens of Harlem. At the end of it we read these words, in red Letters: Prae∣sens Marci Tulii clarissimum opus. Johannes Fust Mo∣guntinus civis. non atramento. plumali canna ne{que} aerea. Sed arte quadam perpulcra. Petri manu pueri mei feliciter effeci finitum Anno M. CCCC. LXV. Junius says, that he often has heard his Master (Nicolas Gale) tell of an old Bookseller in Har∣lem, with whom he was acquainted in his youn∣ger days; who had been Servant to Coster, and Chamber-fellow witht his Fellow that cheat∣ed him of this invention. The old man would tell the story with such vehemency of passion as commonly caus'd the tears to gush from his eyes; and he was resolv'd to undeceive the world, but liv'd not so long as to perform his promise. These are the reports we have from both parties, whereby each of them pretends a just title to the Invention: but whether has the surer grounds, I dare not venture to determine. Some French Authors have engaged their King∣dom in the brawl; and assert, that France has as good reason to lay claim to this point of Ho∣nour, as either Germany or the Low Countries. The grounds they have for this conjecture, are exceedingly mean and inconsiderable. The first original of their mistake (as Wimpheling assures us) was this: About the year 1471 the Art of Printing was first carried to Rome by one Ʋldaric Hahn, a German. Now, Hahn (in the High Dutch) signifies as much as the Latin appellative Gallus, a Cock; whence the Latin writers call'd him Ʋl∣daricus Gallus, which Campanus, and others, in∣terpret Ʋlderic a Frenchman. And when those Hi∣storians had represented him as the first Founder of Printing in Italy; these men, very illogically, concluded he was the first Inventor of that Art which the world ever heard of. Notwithstand∣ing these brags, Printing was not only us'd in Holland and Germany, but in England also, be∣fore ever the French were acquainted with it. Stow tells us, the Hollanders first taught our Na∣tion this Art; being brought over into England by William Caxton about the year 1471; and adds, that the first printing in this Isle was in Westminster-Abbey. But it appears the Art was sooner brought hither then he speaks of: For there is in the Archives of our University of Ox∣ford, a Copy of St. Jerome's Exposition of the Apostles Creed (given by Mr. Moses Pitt, the Pub∣lisher of this ATLAS), printed on Paper, which ends thus: Explicit exposicio sancti Jeronimi in sim∣bolo apostolorum ad papam laurencium. Impressa Oxo∣nie et finita Anno domini. M. cccc. lxviii. xvii die decembris. Mr. Wood (in his learned Account of the Antiquities of our University at Oxford) tells us, that Robert Tourner (Master of the Wardrobe to King Henry the Sixth) was the first that brought from Harlem into England the Art of Printing. The King furnish'd him with seven hundred Marks; and Thomas Boucher (Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of Oxford, who put the King upon this business) contributed three hundred more, to carry on the design. For some time, Tourner did nothing but travel up and down with Caxton, who traded at Amsterdam and Ley∣den: and could never come at Harlem; because the Citizens were cautious of admitting any stran∣ger, that might cheat them of the Monopoly of this new Art. At last (after the King had sent him a new supply of five hundred Marks) he agreed with Frideric Corsellis (one that wrought at the Press) to steal away from his Trade, and come over with him into England. Which, according to contract, he did; and set up a public Print-house at Oxford. Where a strong Guard continually attended him, till others had learned his Art; for fear he should make an escape before he had perform'd his promise. Not long after this, there was a Print-house set up at West∣minster, another at St. Albans, a third at Worcester, and many others in several Monasteries. The oldest Book we find printed at Westminster, is Caxton's Chronicle of the Kings of England; which was published in the year 1480. Boterus (who is follow'd by some late Authors that rely too much upon his authority) affirms, that the Chinois had the use of Printing amongst them above a thou∣sand years before 'twas known in Europe; and that the Europeans are not beholden to their own ingenuity for the discovery, but the good nature of these strangers who imparted the secret
to them. But if this be true, why then did not Marcus Venetus bring over the Art with him to Venice, Rome, or Naples; that so the Italians might have had the credit of being the first Teachers (or Restorers at least, for Boter hardly allows the Germans any better title) of the Art of Printing in Europe? When this question is press'd home to Boter, he is forc'd to confess (tho unwillingly), I Tedeschi sono stati Inventori della stampa, dell'ar∣tigliaria, et dell' horologio a mota, cose Nobilissime. i. e. The Germans have been Authors of three noble Inventions; Printing, Guns, and Clocks. I do not find any great reason to believe the Germans to have been the first Inventors of Clock∣work;Clock∣work. (tho they are as likely men, if Histories would allow us to fix our conjectures upon them, as any in the world). But, I am afraid, Boter injures his own Country in ascribing this to the High Dutch. The first man whom the Latin Hi∣storians mention as the contriver of an Engine in this kind, is Severinus Boetius, a famous Phi∣losopher and Nobleman of Rome. We meet with a Letter from Theodoric King of the Goths to this Boetius, to beg a Clock of him to present to his Brother-in-law Gundibald King of Burgundy; in which Letter he calls this Engine, Machinam mundo gravidam, coelum gestabile, rerum compen∣dium, i. e. A Machine that encircled the world, a portable Heaven, an abstract of the Universe. But however, none have more improved the Art of making Clocks and Watches then the Ger∣mans. The Emperor Charles the Fifth had a Watch in the Jewel of his Ring; and our King James had the like: both which were made in Germany. In the Town-hall of Prague there is a Clock that shews the annual and periodical mo∣tions of the Sun and Moon; the names and num∣bers of the Months, Days, and Festivals of the whole Year; the time of the Sun's rising and set∣ting; the rising of the Twelve Signs in the Zo∣diac; and lastly, the Age of the Moon, with its several Aspects. In the Elector of Saxony's Sta∣ble at Dresden there is a Saddle, which in the pom∣mel hath a gilded head, with eyes continually moving, and in the hinder part of it a Clock; which shews exactly the hour of the day. These and the like knacks are ordinary in every part of Germany: but the most famous, in its kind, is the great Clock at Strasburg; of which a full account shall be given when we come to treat of that City. Tycho Brahe tells us, that William Lantgrave of Hassia, had spent much study in contriving a way to regulate Clocks and Watches (that the former should not gain, nor the lat∣ter lose any thing, in their motion): but what success he met with, that great Astronomer does not inform us. This in great measure is now perform'd by the regulation which is given to motion by the Pendulum; and farther emprove∣ments are projected by some ingenious members of our Royal Society at London; and, 'tis hoped, they will be shortly able to give the world a good and satisfactory account how they have sped in the enterprize. The High Dutch have far outgone the rest of the European Artificers at the , or inge∣nious knacks and extravagances of Art: then which nothing more demonstrates the excellency and curious skill of a workman. One of these (not many years) presented the Landtgrave of Hassia with a Bear and Lion of pure Gold; which were hollow within, and each of them about the length of a man's middle finger. Every part and lineament in them was proportionable to their length; and both together weighed no more then a French Crown. The most curious man in this kind, which ever the German Nation bred, was Johannes Regiomontanus; who, as Keckerman tells the story, when the Emperor Maximilian came to the City of Noremberg, made a wooden Eagle which flew an English mile out of Town to meet him, and return'd back with him to his Lodgings. Peter Ramus reports of the same man, that having invited some friends to a Feast, to divert them, he threw an iron Fly from his hand, which flew round the Room and return'd to him again. Engraving, Painting, Cutting of Seals, &c. are Arts which the High Dutch are al∣most generally well skill'd in. Of the Religion of the Modern GERMANS. WE have before given the Reader a view of the Idolatrous practices, Ceremonies, and Sacrifices of the Pagan Germans; and shew'n how zealous they were in defending the Rites and Customs of their false Religion; and how much honour and respect they paid their Priests, and indeed all others who attended upon their Altars. Nor shall we find them less zealous in maintaining the true Religion after their Con∣version to Christianity. A sufficient testimony of which we may have from the multitude of Mo∣nasteries, Nunneries, Bishoprics, and Collegiate Churches which are every-where to be met with in Germany. This great Country cannot be suppos'd to have been all converted at once, but piecemeal; and hardly one Province in it but had its different Apostle. Theodoret mentions Germany, as well as Britain, amongst the Nations converted by the Apostles. And the Historian who (under the name of Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre) publish'd a Synopsis of the Twelve Apostles and Seventy Disciples, reports, that St. Thomas the Apostle preach'd in Germany. But these and the like sto∣ries have little of certainty in them; and there∣fore we shall not insist much upon the credit and authority of the Relators. However, the testi∣monies we have from Irenaeus and Tertullian are unquestionable; and both of them mention the German Church. So that we are sure, that so much at least of Germany as was made subject to the Romans, was a part of the true Church within the compass of the second Century; since Ire∣naeus commends the orthodox opinions of the German Nation. The Fable of St. Ʋrsula, and her 11000 companions, is ridiculous; and was first contriv'd in the twelfth Century. The Roman Martyrologers begin now to be asham'd of the story; and therefore in their red letter'd Calen∣dar, instead of Ʋndecem mille Virgines, they write Ʋrsula cum Sociis: being loath to defraud the Church of an Holiday, yet unwilling to impose such a palpable and incredible lye upon the Com∣monalty. 'Tis certain, there were two German Bishops present at a Council held by Constantine the Great, in the year 314. But all this proves no more then that Germania Prima and Secunda (which were in those days two Roman Provinces) were converted to Christianity. In the eighth Century many of our English Divines were sent over into Germany by Egbert Archbishop of York, to convert the Infidels in that Country: among whom the chief were, Willibrod Bishop of Ʋtrecht, Willibald Bishop of Aichstat, Swibert of Verdin, Wil∣libald of Bremen, and Winifrid (who for his good deeds got the surname of Boniface) Archbishop of Mentz. The last of these prov'd most fortu∣nate in the undertaking, and converted the great∣est part of the Country between the Rhine and Weser. The German writers acknowledg this man
for the great Apostle of their Nation. His Epistles, published by Serrarius, shew him to have been a very zealous man in his enterprize. After him, Charles the Great brought over the Saxons (tho not without much bloodshed) to Christianity; and utterly extirpated Idolatry in most parts of his Empire. The Bohemians and Moravians were not brought into the Church till some years after. But of the Religion of these Countries (with the Doctrines of John Huss and Jerom of Prague) we shall speak elsewhere. But the first beginning of the Reformation is that which will for ever magnifie the German Church.Reforma∣tion. M. Maier reckons this great work a∣mongst the vera inventa Germaniae; as if the Re∣ligion cried up by Luther had been a new thing, and not a restoring of the ancient Doctrines of the Church. This alteration in Religion was thus occasion'd: In the year 1517, the Arch∣bishop of Mentz, being to pay to the Court of Rome a greater sum of money then he could con∣veniently raise in his own Territories, got leave of the Pope to stock all the Markets in Germany with Indulgences and Pardons for all manner of sins past, present, and future. Whereupon he dispatches one Frier Tekel his Agent with orders to cry these commodities in all the Mart-Towns in the Empire; and to expose them to sale, if Customers came in. The Frier had serv'd an Apprenticeship to this trade; and therefore knew how to make a good market, if Luther had not appear'd against him. But he, upon the first noise of this business, first protested against these pro∣ceedings, and afterwards publicly oppos'd them. This was a strange surprize to the Popish Agent; who warn'd him (under the penalty of being otherwise for ever excommunicated and con∣demn'd for an Heretic) to reclaim his errors, and suffer his Holiness's work to go on. But Martin was too stout to be discouraged with threats or great words; nay, they serv'd only to provoke him the more. In Wittemberg and Leipsic he im∣mediately proclaimed war against all that should pretend to assert the Pope's power of granting Pardons and Indulgences. Several disputes were held by him and his Converts in the University at Leipsic against the Popish party; who, when their arguments would not reclaim him, branded him with the name of Heretic; and forbad any to hear him under the pain of Excommunica∣tion. But the Elector of Saxony's protection counterpois'd these rants; and how successful Luther prov'd, upon this encouragement, is well enough known to the world. This Elector was quickly follow'd by the Dukes of Brunswic and Lunenberg, Wirtenberg, Mecklenberg, and Pomeren; with the Marquess of Brandenburg, Landtgrave of Hassia, and most of the Imperial Cities. These all jointly gave in a Protestation (containing certain points, in which they had dissented from the ordinary tenents of the Church of Rome) to the Imperial Chamber at Spire, in the year 1529; from which time they had the name of Protestants. The year following they deliver'd in a Confession (subscribed by them all unanimously) at Augs∣burg; thence call'd Augustana Confessio. After this, upon their refusal to recede from the opi∣nions they had profess'd, the Emperor Charles the Fifth thought to force a recantation with his Sword. But after a long war, and great slaugh∣ter on both sides, the Emperor was glad to grant them at last a Toleration, and authorize their Confession; which was done at Passaw in the year 1552, and afterwards confirm'd to them at Augsburg in the year 1555. In the first be∣ginning of the Reformation, Luther took care to have the Bible translated into High Dutch, and published all over Germany. He compiled also new Catechisms, to teach the children. About the year 1519, Zuinglius (a Canon of the Church at Zurich in Switzerland) began first in those parts to dissent from the Church of Rome, and declare against the fopperies of the Mass, Images, &c. The good success which M. Lu∣ther had met with in the Western parts of Ger∣many, encouraged him in the undertaking; and it was not long after, that his Tenents spread themselves as wide as Luther's had done before. For in the year 1526, the Mass was put down by an Order of the Senate in Zurich; and within two years after, Images were destroy'd at Bern. The clashing between him and Luther about the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (the later assert∣ing Consubstantiation; and the former denying the Elements to be any more then bare Signs of Christs Body and Blood) did not a little hinder the progress of Zuinglius's Doctrines; and the Popish party were well pleased to see the Refor∣mers jar among themselves. They met at Mar∣purg in Hessen, to try if they could possibly deter∣mine the controversies betwixt them; but broke of without any agreement. Upon this, open war was proclaimed between them, by the names of Sacramentarians and Ʋbiquitarians. However, Lu∣ther's credit still encreased in Saxony, and the Territories of the Dukes before mention'd; and Zuinglius was in as great request in Switzerland. John Calvin succeeded Zuinglius in his place at Zurich, adding several new opinions (touching Predestination, Free-will, final Perseverance, &c.) of his own to the Doctrines preach'd by his pre∣decessor. This enlarged the breach between the Lutherans and Calvinists (for so the Zuinglians were now call'd), and made them irreconcilable enemies. But notwithstanding the bad language which Calvin's followers had from the Lutherans, the authority of Calvin prevail'd so exceedingly as to be entertain'd in France, Scotland, the Ne∣therlands, a great part of Poland, and many Pro∣vinces of Germany. Whereas Lutheranism never reach'd much further then it was at first spread by Luther himself. The Kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden embraced Luther's Doctrine very ear∣ly; and the generality of the inhabitants of both those Nations profess it to this day. But in the Do∣minions of the Electors of Saxony and Branden∣burg, Luther's credit decays daily, and is thrust out by Calvinism. The present Elector of Bran∣denburg is a Calvinist; and encourages men of his own perswasion in the Universities of Francfurt upon the Oder, Konigsberg, and Rostoc. This makes the Scholars of Leipsic (who are strict Lutherans) dread his coming into their neighbourhood when he comes to take possession of Holie; which falls into his hands upon the death of the present Administrator, Augustus Duke of Saxony. For the Lutherans hate a Calvinist as much as a Turk; in∣somuch, that in the Great Church at Leipsic they have the pictures of the Devil, Ignatius Loyola, and John Calvin, hung in one frame with this subscription, The three great enemies of Christ and the Christian Religion. At Wittemberg, the only support which Luthers Doctrine has left is Abraham Calovius, an old Gentleman, that has taken great pains to run down all opposers of his opinions. But the greatest part of the University begin to close with Calixtus Junior (one of the present Professors in the University of Helmstadt) and his followers, who are stout pleaders for Comprehension. In the Kingdom of Bohemia, Arch-Dukedoms of Bavaria and Lorain, the Territories of the three Spiritual Electors, and other Bishoprics which still remain in the hands of the Clergy, the Popish Religion is still profess'd.
A short Account of the GERMAN Emperors. THat the vast tract of Land which to the Ancients was known by the general name of Germany, was subject to several Princes, and never acknowledged the Supremacy of any one Governor (except perhaps in the time of war, in which all the particular Provinces were mu∣tually concern'd to unite and defend themselves from the assaults of some potent foreign enemy) before the coming of Charles the Great to the Imperial Crown; seems plain from the whole History of that Nation. From this great Prince we must therefore begin to reckon the German Emperors. A. D. 800. Charles (son of Pepin King of France) was Anointed and Crown'd Emperor by Pope Leo the Third upon Christmass-day. He had before this rescued Italy, and a great part of Germany from the tyranny of the Lombards; and annex'd the whole Dominions of their King Desiderius (whom he took prisoner) to the Kingdom of the Franks. In the year 772 he began to make war upon the Saxons (at that time the most potent people in Germany) in hopes to reduce them, which he at last effect∣ed, to Christianity. Wherever he conquer'd he establish'd the Christian Religion, and erect∣ed Schools for the education of young chil∣dren in the same Doctrine. He was a great Benefactor to the University at Paris; where he would himself frequent Disputations, and reward the industry of those he found to be deserving men. Besides, he was the Founder of an incredible number of great Schools, and petit Universities in Germany; insomuch, that we shall scarce, in the following Description, mention a Town of considerable note in the Empire, which has not receiv'd some signal kindness from him. I know not whether it were his Acts of Piety or Prowess got him the title of Great: but doubtless both deserv'd it. After he had been Emperor fourteen years, he died at seventy-two years of Age, in the year 814, and was buried at Aix la Chapelle, where he had built a Church; and design'd also to have establish'd the chief Residence of the German Emperors. All his Epitaph was, Magni Caroli Regis Christianissimi, Romanorum Impera∣toris corpus hoc Sepulchro conditum jacet. He be∣queath'd his Empire to his Son Ludowic, then King of Aquitain. 814. Ludowic, or Lewis (for his piety, and zeal in promoting the Christian Religion, surnam'd the Godly) succeeded his Father. He was Crown'd Emperor by Pope Stephen IV. at Rheims in France. Soon after his entrance upon the Empire, he procur'd a translation of the Bible into the Saxon tongue; Copies of which he caused to be distributed among the Com∣monalty. The greatest exploit of war which he is reported to have done, was the expul∣sion of the Saracens out of Italy. Besides this, he took his Nephew Bernhard (King of Lom∣bardy, who had endeavour'd to make himself Master of Italy) prisoner; and putting out the eyes of him and his followers, condemned them all to a Monastery. By his first wife Irmengarde he had three Sons, Lotharius, Ludowic, and Pipin; who, overpower'd with the perswasi∣ons of some bad companions, rebelled against their Father; whom they took prisoner, and shut up in a Monastery. Some say his Son Ludowic released him willingly; but the most generally receiv'd story is, that most of his Subjects rose up in Arms, resolving to rescue their Emperor. Which Ludowic seeing, he sub∣mitted himself to his Father, and begg'd par∣don. After he was set at liberty, he march'd with his own, and his Son Ludowic's Forces a∣gainst Lotharius, who had raised the strongest rebellion; but dyed on the way, at Mentz, in the twenty-seventh year of his Reign, and sixty-fourth of his Age. 840. Lotharius, the Emperor Ludowic's eldest Son, succeeded his Father in the whole Empire; ha∣ving thrown out his two Brethren, who were left partners with him. He was the first that annex'd Austrasia (which was from him call'd by the High Dutch Loth-reich, by the French Lot-regne, now Lorreign, i. e. Lotharius's King∣dom) to the German Empire. After he had ruled fifteen years, he retired into a Monastery at Treves; where he lived some time after. In his days Pope Joan, under the covert name of John VIII. (as the Historians of that time ge∣nerally relate) was Head of the Church of Rome. 855. Ludowic II. (a Prince of wonderful Piety and Learning) succeeded in the Empire upon his Fathers resignation. He conquer'd the Scla∣vonians, and converted them to Christianity; defended Italy from the incursions of the Sa∣racens; and made provision in most parts of his Empire for poor Widows and Orphans. He had a great quarrel with the Court of Rome for electing a Pope without acquainting him. But the Popish writers tell the story otherwise, and say, That when the Emperor heard how that Court had elected Pope Adrian II. into the room of Nicolas I. without staying for his voice, he commended them highly for so do∣ing. Nay, they make him give this reason for his approbation of their proceedings, Qui enim fieri posset ut peregrinus & hospes dignoscere posset in aliena republica, quis potissimum caeteris praeferendus sit? i. e. How is it possible that a stranger should be so well skill'd in a foreign Commonwealth, as to be able to pitch upon a man fittest for promotion? Which, says Wimpheling, was a saying that became so great an Emperor. He Reign'd nineteen years and ten months. 875. Charles the Bald (a base mean-spirited man, Ludowic the First's Son) succeeded his Nephew. Pope John IX. perswaded him with fair words and money to come to Rome for his Corona∣tion, and there to receive the Imperial Scepter from his hands. He Reign'd only two years; being poyson'd, as was supposed, by one Sede∣chias a Jewish Physitian. 878. Ludowic, surnam'd Balbus, succeeded his Fa∣ther Charles; but never enjoy'd the Crown (if it was, which many question, ever set upon his head). When he had linger'd out a year and an half, he dyed; leaving his Throne to 879. Charles III. surnam'd the Gross, from his bulk and fatness. He might have been stiled a second Charles the Great, if he had been as successful in managing as obtaining of King∣doms. For, by the death of his two Brothers, all Germany, France, and Italy came into his hands. He was the first that added the year of our Lord to the year of his Reign, in the dating of any public Proclamations, Grants, &c. At last (when by several base actions, espe∣cially in concluding a dishonourable peace be∣twixt himself and the Normans, in which he gave them that part of France which is still called Normandy, he had contracted the ha∣tred of the whole Empire) he was deposed by his Nobles; and dyed miserably in a poor beggarly Village in Schwaben.
888. Arnolph (Natural Son of Caroloman Duke of Carinthia, and King of Bavaria) was elected into the room of Charles, thus deposed; and rul'd the Empire with a strong arm for twelve years. He quell'd the Rebels in Moravia and Normandy; and defeated Guido and Berenga∣rius, who had made head against him in Italy. He storm'd Rome, and took it; but soon after was poyson'd there, by the procurement of Guido's wife, and dyed in great misery; being eaten up of Lice, which the poyson bred in his body. 900. Ludowic IV. Arnolph's Son, was elected by the Nobles into his Father's stead. The Hun∣garians were continually at war with this Em∣peror; who had seldom the good fortune to come off the field a Conqueror. In these skir∣mishes a great part of the German Nobility was cut off; which shortned his life, and brought him to his grave before he had got a Son to inherit his Throne. He dyed an unfortunate Prince; and with him the Family of Charles the Great was wholly extinct. During his Reign there was another Ludowic set up for Emperor by the Pope in Italy; who was taken prisoner, and had his eyes put out, by Beren∣garius King of Lombardy. 912. After the death of the Emperor Ludowic, the Princes of Germany proffer'd the Imperial Crown to Otto Duke of Saxony; who had the name of the wisest man and best Soldier of his time. But old Age had render'd him (at least in his own conceit) unfit for Government. Whereupon, he made over the proffer'd Em∣pire to Conrad Duke of Franconia; who, upon Otto's recommendation, was immediately de∣clared Emperor. He was no sooner stept into the Throne, but his carriage disobliged a great many of the Princes of the Empire; who made war upon him, and put him hard to 't to keep the reins in his hand. Henry (Duke of Saxony, Duke Otto's Son) engag'd him the oftest, and with greatest courage and success. However, Conrad by his last Will and Testament (not∣withstanding the frequent quarrels between him and that Duke) bequeathed his Empire to Henry; whom he had experienced to be a Prince that for his valour and conduct deserv'd an Empire. 919. Henry (surnamed Auceps, from the great delight he took in Hawking) was by the Ger∣man Princes, according to the tenour of the Emperor Conrad's Will, proclaim'd King of the Romans at Fritzlar. Soon after, the Pope fent to proffer his service in consecrating and anointing him Emperor: but it was not ac∣cepted. For Henry return'd his Holiness this answer, that 'twas enough for him, that Gods pro∣vidence, and the voices of his Nobility, had made him King of the Romans. They that fancied this Title too mean, might (in Gods name) go to Rome for Consecration and Ʋnction: but, for his own part, he was satisfied with the honour already conferr'd on him. He was a valiant and prudent Prince; one that composed most of the ani∣mosities and quarrels of his own people, and bravely defended them from the incursions of the Hungarians, and other foreign Enemies. He was the first that instituted the sports of Tilts and Turnaments; and fortified the great Towns in Germany. Ordering, that every ninth Bore should remove his Family into a City; and that the Citizens should be maintain'd by a Contribution of the third part of the Corn and Hay round about the Country. Having overthrown the Hungarians at a memorable Battel near Mersburg, he had the title of Pater Patriae, rerum Dominus & Imperator conferr'd upon him. Afterwards, going into Italy, he was taken with an Apoplexy; of which, to the great grief of the whole German Nation, he dyed, after he had reign'd seven years and six months. 936. Otto, the Emperor Henry's Son, succeeded his Father in the Empire, and equall'd him in all his acts of piety, wisdom, and prowess; whence he was surnamed the Great. He com∣pell'd Harald, King of Denmark, to acknow∣ledg the Emperor of Germany's Supremacy, and embrace Christianity; subdued the Bohemians, and forc'd their Prince Boleslaus to turn Chri∣stian; deposed Pope John XII. and put Leo VIII. in his place; making a Decree, that for the future the power of chusing Popes should be in the Emperor alone. The fashion of Chri∣stening of Bells was first brought up in his Reign. 973. Otho II. succeeded his Father Otho the Great. He found the Empire in peace, and (except∣ing some small skirmishes betwixt him and his Cousin Henry Duke of Bavaria, whom some malecontent Bishops had proclaimed Empe∣ror) never met with any opposition in his own Dominions. He overthrew the Turks in Apulia; and was thence stiled Pallida Saracenorum mors. He reign'd eleven years; and at his death left the Empire, as he found it, in perfect peace. 984. Otho III. surnamed the Child, was advanc'd to his Father's Throne at ten years of age; but quickly grew up to be a Prince of wonderful sagacity and prudence. Some say, he was the first that instituted the manner of Elect∣ing an Emperor by the majority of the Voices of Seven Electors (of which more hereafter). He reign'd eighteen years, and dyed in Italy; being poyson'd with a pair of Gloves present∣ed to him by the wife of Crescentius, a Rebel whom he had caus'd to be hang'd. The wo∣man had been his Concubine for some time after her husbands death; and was in hopes of being married to him, and so made an Em∣press. But when she saw him ready to leave Italy without taking notice of any former con∣tract betwixt them, and preparing for a return to Germany, she was resolv'd by this expedi∣ent to satisfie her revenge, tho she could not provide for her lust and ambition. 1002. Upon Otto's death, Henry Duke of Bava∣ria was chosen Emperor by the Electors. His piety got him the Title of Holy; and a mis∣chance in his Childhood surnam'd him the Lame. Willegise Archbishop of Mentz (a Wa∣goner's Son, whence that City got a Wheel for its Arms) Crown'd him. He fought many great Battels, and from most of them came off Conqueror. The Saracens were by him driven out of Apulia and Calabria; and the Wendish Armies, which had over-run a great part of Germany, he utterly vanquish'd. He is by some Historians stiled the Apostle of Hun∣gary; because he was the first that thorowly converted that Nation. Upon his death-bed (after he had reigned twenty and three years) he is said to have return'd his Empress Cuni∣gunda to her friends for a pure Virgin; in which state, by mutual consent, they both had con∣tinued from the first day of their marriage. Tho we read, that once he so far question'd his Wife's chastity, and the performance of her Vow, as to make her purge her self by a fiery Ordeal. Which she perform'd by going barefoot over a red-hot iron grate, without the least shrink or sense of pain. 1024. Conrad, a Prince descended from Charles
the Great, succeeded Henry; and was Crown'd Emperor at Aix la Chappel by the Archbishop of Colen. Amongst Historians we find this high character of him, that he was Acer con∣silio manuque strenuus, charus Principibus, Populo acceptior, Reipublicae salutaris, i. e. Quick at Council-board, and valiant in the field; one on whom the Princes of the Empire doted; the People's Darling; the strength of the Empire. One of the good Laws which he established was, That it should be death for any Prince to offer to disturb the peace of the Empire by making an offensive war upon any particular Province in it. He died suddenly in his return from an expe∣dition against the Hungarians; and was buried at Spire, after he had reigned fifteen years. 1039. Henry (surnam'd the Black, Conrad's Son) succeeded his Father in the Empire. He reign'd seventeen years and seven months. The first war he engag'd himself in, was against the Bohemians; upon their refusal to pay tribute to the Emperor. Afterwards, he turn'd his Forces against the Hungarians; and restored their King Peter, who had been deposed by his own Subjects for Tyranny. In the year 1046, he march'd into Italy to compose diffe∣rences among the three Popes, who were set up by contrary factions. But he depos'd them all, and made a fourth, viz. Clement II. re∣newing the old Law, wherein it was enacted, That no Pope should be created without the con∣sent of the Emperor. 1056. Henry IV. succeeded his Father at six years of age. He is said (during his reign, which lasted fifty years) to have fought sixty-two great battels: which are more then either Marcus Marcellus, Julius Caesar, or any other Roman General could ever brag of. Pope Hilde∣brand (who went under the name of Grego∣ry VII.) cast off this Emperors yoke; and, after some skirmishes, got Rudolph Duke of Schwa∣ben proclaim'd Emperor in his stead; to whom the Pope presented an Imperial Crown with this Inscription: Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rudolpho. But this Emperor, of the Pope's making, was soon vanquish'd and slain. However, within a while, the Empire was taken from him in good earnest; and that by his own Subjects, who deposed him, and elected his Son into his room. This Emperor is reported to have been brought to those extremities before his death, as to be forc'd to beg a Prebendary of the Bishop of Spire (some say Wormes) in the Church which he himself had built; which was nevertheless denied him. 1106. Henry V. was admitted into his Father's Throne by his rebellious Subjects, and crown'd Emperor at Goslar. At his Coronation part of his Sword was melted with Lightning; but the Scabbard was untouch'd, and himself escap'd without harm. He was forc'd to ac∣knowledg the Pope's Supremacy; and to quit all pretensions to the power of Investiture, which his Ancestors challeng'd as their right. He reigned nineteen years; dyed without issue; and was buried at Spire. 1125. Lotharius, Duke of Saxony, was elected to succeed Henry V. and receiv'd his Crown from the Pope at Rome, in the year 1133. The greatest thing this Emperor did, was the revi∣ving the practice of the Civil Law in the Ger∣man Empire; after it had been banish'd thence for the space of five hundred years. 1138. Conrad (Duke of Schwaben, and Lotharius's Sister's Son) succeeded his Uncle; carrying the Empire against Henry Duke of Bavaria, who for some time opposed him. In his days a Body of the Canon Laws was first set forth by Gratian a Benedictine Monk; and publicly taught in the Universities of Germany. He reign'd fourteen years. 1152. Frideric Duke of Schwaben (surnam'd Bar∣barossa, from his red beard) was elected Em∣peror, upon the death of Conrad; and was Crown'd at Rome by Pope Adrian IV. He was a wise, valiant, and pious Prince; and com∣monly fortunate in all his undertakings. Pope Alexander the third excommunicated him for his obstinacy; but afterwards was reconciled, when the Emperor threw himself at the Pope's feet, and suffer'd him to tread on his neck. In the year 1187 (accompanied with our King Richard I. and Philip II. King of France) he went to fight against the Saracens in the Holy Land. Here he was drown'd in a river, where∣in he intended only to have bathed himself; and was buried at Tyre, after he had reign'd thirty-eight years. 1190. Henry (Frideric Barbarossa's Son), tho short of his Father in deserts, was-elected into his place. He took Tancred prisoner in Sicily (who thought to have supplanted him in that King∣dom), and having put out his eyes, sent him bound into Germany. Pope Celestine (who Crown'd him Emperor) perswaded him to engage himself in the Holy-war; but he never reach'd Palestine; dying upon his journey thi∣ther, when he had reigned almost eight years. 1198. Upon the death of the Emperor Henry, his Brother Philip was at first elected. But (be∣cause he refused to submit himself to the Pope, as his Ancestors had done) he was shortly after excommunicated; and Otto Duke of Brunswic, by the Electors, and the Pope's authority, de∣clared Emperor. Whereupon, the two Em∣perors engaged the whole Empire in a long and bloody war; each asserting a legal title, and refusing to quit his pretensions, to the Crown. At last, Philip was treacherously slain in his bed; after he had ruled the Empire (at least the greatest part of it) ten years. 1208. Otto (Son of Henry, surnam'd the Lion, Duke of Brunswic) got possession of the Em∣pire, as soon as Philip was taken of. He had not reign'd four years e're he met with his Predecessor's fate; having the Imperial Crown taken from his head, by the Pope of Rome and the Electors, and given to Frideric King of Sicily. Otto got some succours from the Kings of England and Poland; but was never able to make any considerable resistance. One battel decided the controversie; establishing Frideric in the Imperial Throne; Otto being deserted on all hands, and afterwards dyed miserably at Brunswic in the year 1218. 1212. Frideric II. King of Sicily, being by these means advanced to the Empire, prov'd a wise, valiant, and learned Prince; in every respect like his Grandfather Frideric Barbarossa, before∣mention'd. He is said to have understood per∣fectly the German, Greek, Italian, and Turkish tongues; and to have been admirably appre∣hensive at learning all manner of Arts and Sci∣ences. He was five several times excommu∣nicated by three Popes: but could never be forced to submit. Pope Gregory IX. was de∣posed by him; and had doubtless lost his head, if he had come into his hands alive. His con∣tinual quarrels with the Popes, gave the first occasion of heats and animosities (which after∣wards burst out into a terrible combustion and flame) betwixt the Guelphs and Gibellines; whereof the former adher'd to the Pope's in∣terest,
and the later to the Emperors. After he had reign'd thirty-eight years, he dyed (some say, was poyson'd) in Italy. After his death follow'd an Interregnum of twenty-three years continuance; during which time the Empire was govern'd indeed by none, but claim'd by these seven following Princes: 1. Henry, Landtgrave of Hassia and Thuringen, who was slain at the siege of Ʋlm. 2. Conrad IV. Frideric the Second's Son, who was elected King of the Romans, and (in the year 1254, after he had pretended to be Emperor for three years and five months) was poysoned by his Physiti∣ans. 4. Manfred. 5. William Earl of Holland; who was first pronounced King of the Romans by the Pope, in opposition to Frideric II. He was slain treacherously by the Frisians. 6. Alphonsus, King of Castile; the Author of the famous Astro∣nomical Tables that still bear his name. 7. Richard Earl of Cornwal, Brother to our King Henry III. He is supposed to have bought the voices of the Archbishop of Colen and the Elector Palatine of the Rhine; who proclaim'd him King of the Ro∣mans in the year 1254. But the same men that set him up, deposed him afterwards; and he was forc'd within six years to return to England, where he ended his days. 1273. Rodolph Earl of Habsburg (after a long and grievous Interregnum) was by an unani∣mous consent of the Electors chosen at Franc∣furt. His election was confirm'd by the Pope; but he refused to fetch his Crown from Rome, alledging for an excuse that of Horace, —quia me vestigia terrent, Omnia te adversum spectantia nulla retrorsum. Whereupon, he was Crown'd at Aix la Cha∣pelle; and immediately after his Coronation, put out several Edicts for the suppressing of Robberies, Oppressions, and Tumults; which the late licentious Anarchy had produced. These Statutes and Proclamations he back'd with force of Arms; till he had at last reduc'd the Empire to its former peace and tranquil∣lity. And 'twas no easie matter to effect this, since in the single Province of Thuringen, he met with no fewer then sixty strong Castles, which the Robbers had made almost impreg∣nable. He was the first that raised the Austrian Family; creating his Son Albert, who was after∣wards Emperor, Arch-Duke of Austria. He dyed in the year 1271, and was buried at Spire, in the seventy-third year of his age. 1292. Adolph, Earl of Nassaw, was by the inte∣rest of the Elector of Mentz, declared Empe∣ror; contrary to the expectation of most of the German Princes, who thought him a Prince no way qualified for so high an advancement. He serv'd in person, and took pay in the Army of our King Edward I. who was at that time engaged in a war with France. This was so highly disgusted by the Elector of Mentz (his late promoter, who thought it an action highly infamous in an Emperor to make himself mer∣cenary), that he prevail'd with the other E∣lectors to depose him, and elect in his stead Albert Arch-Duke of Austria. Adolph, tho not able to manage the Empire, was unwilling to part with the power he had once got into his hands; and therefore (assisted by Otto Duke of Bavaria, Rudolph Count Palatine of the Rhine, and several of the Imperial Cities) he was resolv'd to oppose Albert and his party to the uttermost. But all the forces which he or his friends could raise, were not sufficient to secure him; so that (upon the first engage∣ment, which happen'd near Worms) his whole Army was routed; and he himself slain by Duke Albert's own hand; after he had reign'd six years and six months. The German Histo∣rians observe, that all the Officers who com∣manded Albert's Army against the Emperor Adolph, came to untimely ends. 1298. Albert, having thus slain Adolph, was Crown'd Emperor at Aix la Chappelle; and receiv'd his Crown, tho he once refus'd to do it, at the hands of Pope Boniface VIII. He is said to have been a Prince of quick parts and solid judgment; a munificent rewarder of men of great deserts, and as severe a punisher of delinquents: but withal, one that too greedily gap'd after the Territories and Dominions of neighbour Princes. He made his Son Rudolph King of Bohemia; and endeavour'd, tho in vain, to bring the Kingdom of Hungary under his own subjection. At last, when he had reign'd ten years, he was treacherously slain by his Nephew, and three Ruffians more of his par∣ty; who, for this murder, were afterwards imprison'd and executed. 1308. Henry, Earl of Luxemburg, for his great wisdom and valour was elected into the room of Albert. He rul'd the Empire four years and nine months; and is reported to have been a Prince of such an even temper, that no excess either of prosperity or adversity could move him; and so devout in the exercise of religious duties, that he would spend whole nights in prayer before a Crucifix, and con∣stantly every day receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. This last piece of devotion cost him his life; for he was poyson'd by a Fran∣ciscan Minorite with a Consecrated Wafer. The Emperor was immediately sensible of the Friar's villany, and therefore advised him to withdraw speedily, lest he should be appre∣hended. But the Priest neglecting his counsel, was seized on; first flay'd alive, and afterwards put to death. After the murder of this Emperor, ensued a great famine in most parts of Germany; which was so terrible in Bohemia and Poland, that in some Families Parents and Children fed upon one ano∣ther. Nay, in many Provinces the Malefactors that were in the day time executed for Murder and Robbery, were in the night stoln from the Gallows or Gibbet; and carried by the half-starved Bores to their Cottages, and there eaten up. Those that escaped the Gallows abroad, and the jaws of hungry friends at home, had much ado to secure themselves from the ravenous Wolves, which could hardly be kept off with the best weapons the inhabitants were able to pro∣vide. The German Chronologers have made use of the word Cucullum to bring to their remem∣brance the remarkable year when this famine first begun (for it lasted three years in all), whence the Verse, Ʋt lateat nullum tempus famis ecce CUCULLUM. In which last word we have as many Numeral Letters as will give us the year 1315. 1318. Ludowic, Duke of Bavaria (after an Inter∣regnum of some years) was Elected and Crown∣ed Emperor by a majority of the Electors; but was oppos'd by Frideric Duke of Austria, the Emperor Albert's Son, who was set up by another faction, and Crown'd at Bonna a small
Town in the Territories of the Archbishop of Colen. For some time the dispute was ma∣naged with equal success betwixt the two Em∣perors; but at the last the victory went on Ludowic's side, who (having utterly routed Frideric's Army) got the whole Empire into his own hands. He was a great opposer of the Pope's authority; insomuch, that in a pub∣lic Oration, spoken by him at Francfurt, he declared openly, Quod nihil Juris Pontifici Ro∣mano sit in Imperium, i. e. That the Bishop of Rome had no reason to pretend to any Juris∣diction over the Empire. He deposed Pope John XXII. and set up Nicolas V. in his stead. He sleighted the Popes Excommunications, which were daily denounc'd against him; be∣ing encouraged thereto by Occam (and some others), who came in with him for a share in the Curse. Occam's continual advice to him was, O mi Imperator, Tu me gladio defende, ego Te verbis & scriptis defendam, i. e. Do you, my Liege, guard me with your Sword, and I'll protect you with words and writing. 1346. Upon the death of Ludowic, Charles IV. (Son of John King of Bohemia) was elected and proclaim'd Emperor, by a Gang which he had corrupted with large sums of money. He is blam'd by some Historians for taking much more care of the public affairs of France and Bohemia then those of the Empire; for be∣ing more solicitous in promoting the interest of his own private Family then the good of the Commonwealth; and lastly, they repre∣sent him as a miserable penurious wretch, that minded more the scraping together an Estate and great Portions for his Children, rather then the administring of Justice, and the grand concerns of his Empire and people. How∣ever, 'tis commendation enough to say, that he was the first contriver and establisher of the Aurea Bulla; which contains a register of all the Rites and Ceremonies, which for ever are to be observ'd by the German Princes in the Election of their Emperors (of which more hereafter). He was doubtless a prudent and learned Prince; one that took great delight in the reading of Books, and enjoying the com∣pany of Scholars. There were three more Em∣perors elected against him at several times; but none of them contended with him for the Crown. The first of these was Edward III. King of England, whose brave exploits in France had made him famous all Europe over. But he, finding employment enough in the ma∣nagement of his own Dominions at home, very generously refus'd the Imperial Diadem when it was offer'd to him. The second was Frideric Landtgrave of Thuringen; who for a good sum of money very willingly quitted his pretensions. Gunther Earl of Schwartzburgh, was the third; who was Crown'd at Aix la Chap∣pelle, and drew up his Forces near Francfurt, intending to have given his Rival battel. But Charles was loath to encounter so great a Sol∣dier; and hazard an Empire at one engage∣ment, which had cost him such large sums as he was obliged to pay to some of his Votaries. He still fancied his Gold was the best weapon he had to trust to; and so indeed it prov'd. For therewith he hired a Physitian to poyson Gunther's body; which made him unfit for go∣vernment. That done, he compounded with his Children; and a small piece of money bought off their Title. He reign'd thirty-two years. 1378. Wenceslaus, Charles the Fourth's Son, suc∣ceeded his Father, upon his earnest entreaty; for there was nothing in himself that could deserve a Crown. In the beginning of his reign he gave himself up to all manner of vicious practices; and towards the later end proved a cruel, but unfortunate Tyrant. He was twice taken prisoner; but made his escape. At last, the Electors (weary of so sordid an Emperor) deposed him; after he had reign'd twenty-two years. Frideric, Duke of Brunswic, was elected into the room of Wenceslaus; but never liv'd to enjoy the Imperial Crown. For, returning from the Election, he was barbarously slain by Henry Count Waldeck; who, with a company of Ruffians, lay in ambush for him near Fritzlar. Where∣upon, the Electors immediately return'd to Franc∣furt, and chose 1400. Rupert, Elector Palatine of the Rhine. A Prince of great valour, tho never engag'd in any war but by constraint. The greatest en∣terprize he ever set upon, was the recovery of the Dukedom of Millain; which his predeces∣sor Wenceslaus had sold. But John Galeazzes (at that time Duke of Millain) quickly routed his Army; and forc'd him to retire back into Germany. He dyed in peace, after he had reign'd nine years and ten months, and was buried at Spire. 1410. Jodocus Barbatus (Marquess of Moravia, and the Emperor Charles the Fourth's Nephew) succeeded Rupert. He reign'd no longer then five months; being no way qualified for an Emperor; and having nothing remarkable in him but his beard, which surnam'd him Bar∣batus. 1411. Sigismund (Wenceslaus's brother, King of Hungary and Bohemia) was chosen into Jodo∣cus's place, by an unanimous consent of all the Electors. Historians represent this Empe∣ror as a Prince of incomparable piety, learning, and valour; who wanted nothing but success in his undertakings, to make him compleatly happy. He was a great promoter of the Coun∣cil of Constance, held in the year 1415, where∣in John Huss and Jerom of Prague (notwith∣standing the Emperors Pass, and promise that they should return safe to Bohemia) were con∣demn'd to be burnt alive for Heretics. This so incensed the Hussites, that they immediately rebell'd against Sigismund, under the com∣mand of their General Zysca, who had been bred up in the Emperors Court. This Zysca prov'd so fortunate in the field, that he van∣quish'd the Emperors Army fourteen several times. He was a Captain of that courage, that (after his death) his Soldiers cover'd a Drum with his skin; imagining, that the noise thereof would strike terror into the hearts of the stoutest of their enemies. Sigismund having reign'd twenty-seven years (most of which time was spent in a continual war with the Hussites) dyed, and left his Empire to his Son-in-law 1440. Frideric III. (or IV. if we reckon the Duke of Brunswic, who was slain at Fritzlar, for one) Duke of Austria, was unanimously elected into the Imperial Throne, upon the decease of the Emperor Albert; and was Crown'd Emperor at Rome by Pope Nicolas V. He made it his whole business to procure and establish an uni∣versal peace in Christendom; and to that end procured the calling of the Council of Basil. He married Leonora daughter of Alphonsus King of Portugal; whence the Houses of Spain and Austria were united into one Family. He reign'd fifty and three years (the longest of any of
the German Emperors), and dyed, as some say, of a Surfet by eating too much of a Melon; tho he was never tax'd for being guilty of any manner of intemperance in meat or drink, but always esteem'd a severe punisher of drunken∣ness and gluttony. 1493. Maximilian succeeded his Father Frideric; having been, before his Fathers death, Crown'd King of the Romans, in the year 1486. From his birth till he was almost nine years old, he is said to have been utterly speechless; but after∣wards he gain'd the use of his tongue, and prov'd one of the most eloquent and learned Emperors that Germany ever bred. He married Mary the only Daughter and Heiress of Charles Duke of Burgundy; upon which marriage, all the Dukedoms, Marquisats, Earldoms, and other Dominions of which the said Charles had been Lord, were for ever annex'd to the Territories of the House of Austria. The wars he was engag'd in against his neighbours on all hands (especially the Venetians) were al∣most innumerable; tho for the most part he was forc'd to take up Arms in his own defence. 'Tis reported of him, that he would never pass by a Gallows or Gibbet without a reverent sa∣lute, in these words, Salve sancta Justitia. For five years before his death (which happen'd in the twenty-fifth year of his reign) he had his Coffin always by him, and carried after him in every expedition he undertook; which gave some of his retinue occasion to conjecture that he had some great treasure in it, and that the pretence of its putting him in mind of mor∣tality, was only a false veil to blind the vulgar. 1519. Charles V. (Son to Philip King of Spain) was elected Emperor, and Crown'd with the greatest pomp imaginable at Aix la Chappel. A puissant and brave Prince; who well deserv'd the surname of Great, conferr'd on him by Pope Paul III. The whole History of his Life seems to be nothing else but a Catalogue of his Conquests. The writers of those times mention forty great victories obtain'd by him; and seventy battels from which he came off the field a Conqueror. The Pope of Rome and the French King were at the same time his prisoners. He quash'd the League made by the Protestants at Schmalcade, and took the Elector of Saxony and Landtgrave of Hassia prisoners. He forced the Great Turk to relin∣quish Vienna; and afterwards won the King∣dom of Tunis. At last (having reign'd thirty-eight years), loaded with victories and honour, he resign'd the Empire, and betook himself to a Monastery; where he was used to say, That he had more pleasure and satisfaction in the retired and solitary enjoyment of one day in a Monk's Cell, then ever he could perceive in all the fortunate Triumphs that attended the rest of his life. 1558. Ferdinand I. (upon the voluntary resigna∣tion of his Brother Charles V.) was by an una∣nimous consent of the Electors declared Em∣peror; tho Pope Pius IV. refused to pronounce the Election valid, because Ferdinand had grant∣ed the Lutherans a toleration. But, some say, the same Pope was afterwards so far reconciled to him, as to grant him the priviledg of re∣ceiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both kinds. He was a mild, peaceful, and tem∣perate Prince; a hard student, and perfect Master of the Latin tongue. He was exceed∣ing courteous to all (even the meanest of) his Subjects; and had a certain hour in every day, in which he attended the suits and com∣plaints of poor men. When some of his Cour∣tiers objected to him the inconveniences that would follow upon the permission of so easie an access to all manner of supplicants, he an∣swer'd, That himself could expect but harsh usage at Gods Throne, if beggars were hinder'd from ap∣proaching his. He dyed of a Catarrh in the sixty-first year of his age; after he had reign'd six years. 1564. Maximilian II. (Ferdinand's Son, and King of Bohemia) was elected into his Fathers room; being first proclaim'd King of the Romans at Francfurt, and afterwards Crown'd King of Hungary. This Emperor prov'd as great a fa∣vourer of the Protestants as his Father; inso∣much that some Roman Catholics have not stuck to call him the Lutheran Emperor. He renewed the Articles of Peace agreed upon be∣tween the Protestant and Popish parties at Passaw; and granted some of his Nobility (and branches of the Austrian Family) a free exer∣cise of the Lutheran Religion. Qui in conscien∣tiis Imperium sibi sumunt, conantur coeli arcem in∣vadere, is a saying which Historians know not whether to attribute to this Emperor, or Maxi∣milian I. but 'tis most probable it was the for∣mer's, since he is known to have been the greatest favourer of the Protestant perswasion that ever rul'd the German Empire. He dyed at Ratisbon in the year 1576, having reign'd twelve years. 1576. Rudolph, Maximilian's Son, was elected Emperor immediately upon his Father's death. Some curious Chronologers have fancied his coming to the Imperial Crown in this year something ominous; since the Numeral let∣ters in RƲdoLphƲs IMperator AƲgƲstƲs make up the number 1576. He was a Prince exceed∣ingly addicted to the studies of all manner of Arts and Sciences; especially the Mathema∣tics and Mechanics. In both which he receiv'd great assistance from the famous Astronomer Tycho Brahe; who dyed in his Court, where he had spent the greatest part of his banish∣ment. Several Cities and Provinces in Germa∣ny, at his request, began to make use of the Gregorian account; tho many Ambassadors, sent from the Electors to Rotenburg to treat of this particular, rejected it. The greatest war he engaged himself in was against the Turks; with whom at last he concluded a Peace, in the year 1600. But the truth is, he minded his book more then Arts of Chivalry; and was a greater Scholar then Soldier. Which gave his Brother Matthias opportunity of under∣mining and cheating him of the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia; and forcing him to con∣tent himself with the Arch-Dukedom of Austria and the Empire. 1612. Matthias, upon his Brother's death, was Elected and Crown'd Emperor at Francfurt. The Protestant Religion was as much perse∣cuted by this Emperor, as it was encouraged by his predecessor. Which harshness and seve∣rity gave occasion to that bloody Civil-war which broke out first in Bohemia, and had after∣wards like to have set the whole Empire in a flame. When the oppression, which the Pro∣testants lay under, had occasioned some dan∣gerous seditions in a great many considerable Cities and Market-Towns in the Kingdom of Bohemia, the Emperor order'd a Synod to be call'd at Prague; designing to allow the dissent∣ing party (as they term'd the Lutherans) some small priviledges, but such as should be far short of the large Charter given and confirm'd to them by his Brother Rudolph. At this meet∣ing the Emperors Ambassadors (William Sla∣bate and Jurislaw Bazius) where thrown out
of the window for their domineering carriage, and so perished. This mightily incensed the Emperor; who, endeavouring to be reveng'd, had like to have ruin'd himself and his Em∣pire. He dyed without issue; having reign'd seven years. 1619. Ferdinand of Gratz (Arch-Duke of Austria, and Grandson to Ferdinand I. by his Son Charles) succeeded Matthias in all his Titles and Do∣minions. The Bohemians, fearing he might prove as severe a persecutor of the Protestants in that Kingdom as his predecessor had been, refus'd to acknowledg him their King; but immediately upon his being proclaim'd Em∣peror, proffer'd the Crown of Bohemia to Fri∣deric V. Count Palatine of the Rhine; who, accepted their kindness. Which so highly en∣raged the Emperor, that he resolved to use his utmost endeavours wholly to ruin and over∣throw the Protestant party. Whereupon en∣sued that bloody German war, of almost thirty years continuance; which was at last happily concluded by the Westphalian Treaty of Peace in the year 1648. After a troublesom reign of seventeen years (spent in a continual Civil war, which had ruined and laid waste the great∣est part of the Empire) he dyed at Vienna; leaving his distracted Empire to his Son 1637. Ferdinand III. who the year before his Fa∣thers death was elected King of the Romans. He carried on the war, which his Father had begun, with variety of success. He obtain'd a great victory over the Protestant party at Ratisbon; and broke the vast power of the Swedes at the battel of Norlingen. But after∣wards, being forsaken by most of the Princes of the Empire, he was forc'd to think of pro∣curing a peace by fair means and Treaty. Ac∣cordingly, the Articles of Peace between the Emperor and the other Princes and Estates of the Empire, were sealed at Munster and Osna∣burg (the Popish Agents keeping their residence at the former of these Cities, and the Prote∣stants in the latter) A. D. 1648. In the year 1653, Ferdinand IV. (this Emperors eldest Son) was elected King of the Romans at Augs∣burg, by an unanimous consent of all the E∣lectors; and within a month after, solemnly Crown'd at Ratisbon. But dying within a year after his Coronation, he never liv'd to inherit the Throne of his Father; who surviv'd till the third of April in the year 1657. 1658. Leopold (the present Emperor of Germany, and Son of Ferdinand III.) was elected on the eighth day of July, after a vacancy of fifteen months, into his Fathers Throne; and Crown∣ed at Francfurt the twenty-second day of the same month. He is a mild, peaceful, and re∣ligious Prince; a great lover and encourager of Learning; and more conversant in the study of Books then Arms. Whether his young Son now living (who is not yet full three years old) will be elected King of the Romans, or the growing Interest of the French King may engage a party strong enough for the Dauphin? is a question that time only can resolve. Of the Power of the GERMAN Emperors. THO the words Imperator and Rex seem to signifie the same thing; yet the general consent of all Nations hath for many years di∣stinguish'd between an Emperor and a King, and given the former the preeminence. All the Eu∣ropean Monarchs, that write themselves Kings, do willingly and readily give place to the Em∣peror of Germany; whose Ambassadors, in foreign Courts, are always first admitted to Audience. David Ʋngnade (the Emperor of Germany's Am∣bassador at the Court of Constantinople) having design'd to take formal leave of the Sultan, was admitted to Audience for that purpose; but ob∣serving the most honourable place in the Presence-Chamber taken up by the Persian Ambassador, and not like to be resign'd, he flung away; and had left the Sultan and Court in a huff, if the Persian had not (which he afterwards was forc'd to do) given him the place and seated himself below him. 'Tis well known, that from Julius Caesar the Roman Emperors got the name of Caesares; and every one of them, after Octavian, got the trick of surnaming himself Augustus. In Germany the Emperor is to this day stiled Der Keyser, or Caesar; and he always writes himself zur aller zeit Mehrer des reichs; which the Germans make to signifie the same with semper Augustus. Further, it is the generally receiv'd opinion amongst the Com∣monalty (and the tradition is stifly asserted and maintain'd by many of their most famous wri∣ters) that the German Empire is the same with that which the Romans anciently pretended to; and hence it is, that they call their Emperor Der Romischer Kayser, that is, The Roman Cesar; and the German Empire Das heilige Romische Reich, that is, The holy Roman Empire. I shall not here stay to enquire after the large extent of the old Ro∣man Empire, or the power and authority of their Emperors. 'Tis sufficient to know, that Petro∣nius's Verse Orbem jam totum Victor Romanus habebat. was only an hyperbolical rant. And when St. Luke tell sus, there went out a decree from Cesar Augustus that all the world should be taxed, he means no more by the word  then the several Pro∣vinces and Territories of which the Romans had then made themselves Masters. So that tho we should grant (which we shall find but little rea∣son to do) that the whole power and authority of the Roman Cesars descended upon the German Emperors; it will not thence follow (what some of the High Dutch writers endeavour to make out), that all the Princes of Europe, to go no further, ought to pay some homage or acknow∣ledgment to the Emperor of Germany. But we cannot indeed allow them so much as this, that the German Emperors have any right or title to the ancient Roman Empire. The original of this conceit sprung hence: Charles the Great, in the year 800, coming to Rome (upon some re∣ligious account or other, and not to lay claim to that City) was unexpectedly saluted by Pope Leo III. and the Citizens, by the title of ROMA∣NORUM IMPERATOR AUGUSTUS. But what a sorry kind of Empire the Romans could then pretend to, is well known. The Western parts of their ancient Empire, Germany and France, were already in Charles's possession; and the So∣veraignty which that City once challenged in Spain, and other parts of Europe, was quite lost. Nay, in Italy it self the Pope and Citizens of Rome had nothing left to dispose of, except that City and some few small Towns which this Charles the Great and his Father had taken from the Lom∣bards by force of Arms, and annex'd to the Do∣minions of the Bishop of Rome. Whence it will appear, that Charles the Great got little more then a bare Title at Rome; and that some other
considerations (as the vast extent of the German Empire, beyond the narrow compass of any Eu∣ropean Kingdom) has moved all the Western Monarchs to give place to the Emperor. Besides, the crafty Bishops of Rome have always made it their business to diminish the Emperor's power and grandeur; lest it should eclipse their own. By which means the Authority which the Empe∣rors do still retain, is scarce sufficient to secure them from contempt; and the Imperial Crown brings little more dominion along with it, tho much more honourable, then that of an infe∣rior Monarch. It is an undoubted prerogative of every great Monarch in the world, to confer Titles of Ho∣nour (as Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Lords, &c.) on whom they please; and to grant the privi∣ledges of the most ancient Families, of what Or∣dersoever, within the bounds of their own King∣doms, to any who they fancy deserves their fa∣vour. But in this the Emperor surpasses them all, in that he challenges a power of creating Kings; which is a piece of Authority never pretended to by any other Potentate. Thus the Emperor Otho III. made Poland a Kingdom, in the year 1001; which before that time was govern'd by a Duke. Hen∣ry IV. did the like for Bohemia, in the year 1086; and Charles the Brave, Duke of Burgundy, desired the same kindness of the Emperor Frideric III. but could not obtain it. The Popes of Rome have for a long time laid claim to this Prerogative; as appears from their frequent excommunicating and deposing of Kings in every Country in Chri∣stendom. Nay, they go further, and challenge a power of deposing the Emperor himself at their pleasure, and creating a new one in his place; as has been sufficiently shew'n in the foregoing Chapter. But how empty and vain these pre∣tensions are, may be learned from the single ex∣ample of Pope Pius V. who endeavoured to create Cosmo di Medices Great Duke of Tuscany. For the Emperor Maximilian II. opposed the design; and first made Cosmo receive the Title from him, and afterwards forced the Pope to confess, that he had exceeded and transgress'd the bounds of his power. If any Prince in Germany chance to be a noto∣rious delinquent, and disturber of the common peace of the Empire; it is not in the power of the Emperor alone to divest such an offendor of his Honour and Dignity, or to banish him the Empire. Such punishments cannot be inflicted without the consent of the Electors; who are to judge of the nature of the misdemeanor, and give in their opinions to the Imperial Chamber. Where the States of the Empire view the deter∣mination, and take care the sentence be executed according to Law. The Emperor, at his Coronation, is sworn not to infringe or violate the Priviledges and Proper∣ties of any free State in the Empire; and there∣fore cannot mitigate or augment any Tax or Sub∣sidy which either a Prince Regent of the Empire, or an Imperial City thinks fit to levy amongst their own Subjects. Besides, he has no authority to punish a malefactor, or raise money in the Territories of these Free States: Nor is it lawful for him to advance a Subject of any of these States to any Honour but what shall be consistent with the Allegiance he owes to that particular Prince or City whose more immediate Subject he is. In time of War, he cannot command any Free State or Prince to assist him with men or money; but must be forc'd to undergo the whole burthen thereof himself; except it be the pri∣vate interest of some peculiar Prince to stand by him. However, (tho they are not very ready to take his part in every offensive quarrel he en∣gages himself in, yet) most of them stick close to him when invaded by a foreign enemy, and the common interest of the Empire lies at stake. And indeed it nearly concerns the Free States of the Empire, to be cautious of assisting and encourage∣ing the Emperor's engaging himself in any other then a Defensive war. For, if he should by con∣quest enlarge his Dominions, they were in dan∣ger of being curb'd and brought under: but if, on the contrary, the victory should go on the enemies side, they would all certainly suffer as his Accomplices. The overgrown Authority of the Popes of Rome has (amongst other encroachments upon the Imperial Prerogative) rob'd the Emperor of his ancient Right of conferring Ecclesiastical Be∣nefices and Bishoprics on whom he pleases. 'Tis well known in what subjection the Bishops of Rome liv'd under the Government of their an∣cient Emperors; however they have Lorded it for these late years. As soon as the Emperor Con∣stantine the Great removed the Empire from Rome to Constantinople, the Popes began to have more elbow-room; and taking hold of the opportu∣nity, laid the first foundation of their own great∣ness upon the ruins of the decaying power of the Emperor in Italy. Another advantage they made of the blind zeal of the neighbouring Princes; who were exceeding fervent in carrying on the Catholic cause, till they had enabled the Popes to arrogate to themselves the Title of Ʋniversal Bi∣shops. But still the Lombards, who had overrun the greatest part of Italy, kept these Usurpers un∣der; until Pepin and his Son Charlemaigne under∣took their protection, and added to their Riches the Revenue of several Towns and Provinces ta∣ken from the Lombards. These good offices ob∣liged the Roman Bishops to a return of gratitude; which they express'd by doing homage to the said Princes for the Territories of Ravenna and Penta∣polis, or Romagnia (which Pepin had liberally bestowed on them) and making over to Charles the Great for ever, the Right and Prerogative of chusing Popes. After this Emperor's death, some of the ambitious Clergy, who found they had not interest enough in the Emperor's Court to compass their ends, went to Rome; where they got themselves chosen Popes, and prevail'd with the easie Emperors of Germany to confirm the Election. From these beginnings they arose by degrees to that height, as to take upon them the power of electing and degrading of Emperors at their pleasure; nay, of trampling the Majesty of the Emperors under their feet, as Pope Alexan∣der III. serv'd Frideric Barbarossa. And we cannot imagine, that they who had thus magnified them∣selves above all Temporal Monarchs (as they were pleased to distinguish) should stick to the old Decree of accepting the Popedom at the Em∣perors hands. Accordingly, Leo IX. having re∣ceiv'd the Bishopric of Rome from the hands of Henry IV. repented of his so doing; and divest∣ing himself of his Papal Robes, march'd to Rome as a private person; where he was elected anew by the Clergy. After which time the Popes be∣gun to invert Charles the Great's Statute; order∣ing, that none should be honour'd and obey'd as lawful Emperor of Germany, but those who re∣ceiv'd the Imperial Crown at their hands. And some of them were so insolent as to affirm, that there was as much difference between Popes and Emperors as betwixt the Sun and Moon: intend∣ing from thence to infer, that as the Moon has no light but what she borrows from the Sun, so the Emperor has no power or Majesty but what
the Pope bestows on him. But they did ont al∣ways meet with such tame Emperors as would undergo their yoke; and since Charles the Fifth's time (who took the Pope of Rome prisoner) there has not been one Emperor that has fetch'd his Crown from Rome. The house of Austria have in a great measure recover'd the ancient power and priviledges of the German Emperors; and probably the Pope's Authority would have de∣cayed a great deal more in this time, had not the Jesuites (who swarm in the Court of Vienna) been diligent in working the mild temper of their present religious Emperor into a compliance with whatever they buz into his ears. How the Em∣perors lost the power of Investiture, &c. we shall shew more at large when we come to treat of the Ecclesiastical Estate of the Empire. In all Proclamations, Patents, Decrees, &c. the Titles of their present Emperor run as follows: Leopold I. by the Grace of God, Emperor (Kay∣ser) of the Romans, always Augustus (Mehrer des Reichs), &c. King of Germany, Hungary, Bohe∣mia, Dalmatia, Croatia, Slavonia, Bulgaria, Bosnia, Servia, and Rescia; Arch-Duke of Austria; Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, Luxemburg, Wittenberg, together with the higher and lower Silesia; Marquess of the Holy Em∣pire, Burgaw, Moravia, with the higher and far∣ther Lusace; Earl of Habsburg, Tyrole, Ferrete, Ki∣burg, Goritia, &c. Landtgrave of Alsace; Lord of Windischamrck, Portnaw, and Salins. For what more peculiarly relates to the Em∣peror as Arch-Duke of Austria, we refer the Rea∣der to the Description of that Country; where he may also expect an account of the grandeur of the Emperors Court, Retinue, Servants, &c. Of the Election and Coronation of the GERMAN EMPERORS. THE principal Members of the German Em∣pire, next to the Emperor himself, are the Eight Electors, viz. the Archbishops of Mentz, Triers, Colen (who are also Arch-Chancellors of the Empire; the first in Germany, the second in France and the Kingdom of Arles, and the third in Italy), the King of Bohemia (Cup-bearer to the Emperor), the Duke of Bavaria (Great Steward of the Empire), the Duke of Saxony (Grand Marshal or Constable), the Marquess of Brandenburgh (Great Chamberlain), and lasty, the Prince Palatine of the Rhine (Cheif Treasu∣rer of the Empire). These Eight (for so many they have been since the Westphalian Treaty, tho heretofore only Seven) have Right and Autho∣rity to Elect the Emperor; and also to Depose him, when by his enormous crimes, or unmanly idleness, he neglects the Honour of the Empire, the public good, and the duty of his place. Thus they serv'd Wenceslaus; tho advanc'd to the Im∣perial Throne at the request of his Father Charles the Fourth, who had deserv'd far better things at their hands for composing the Aurea Bulla, of which more hereaster. The Archbishop of Mentz has several times taken upon him to re∣mind such Emperors as have not suited with his humour, of this grand power of the Electors; and to threaten them with the execution of it, if they should not alter their courses. At what time the power of chusing the Em∣perors, was first committed to those Princes, who to this day bear the Title of Electors, is not ea∣sily determin'd. It is certain, that Charles the Great transmitted the Imperial Dignity to his posterity by way of Succession. And the same Right continued for some ages in his Family; until some of his Successors, falling far short of this incomparable Emperor, were thought unfit to Govern. Whereupon, the Empire was offer'd to Otho Duke of Saxony; and upon his refusal, given to Conrad Duke of Franconia. After his death, Henry, Duke Otho's Son, was Elected Em∣peror by a general consent of all the Princes and Estates of the Empire; and was succeeded after∣wards by his Son Otho I. who obtain'd the Crown by the same means. This way of Succession from Father to Son, was observ'd till Henry IV. who coming to the Crown when he was a Child, and managing it very ill when he was of years to have govern'd better, was contemn'd and sleighted by the Lords of the Empire. And Pope Gregory VII. (taking this opportunity of magnifying his own Authority in the German Empire) excommuni∣cated him, and declaring him unfit to sway the Imperial Scepter, order'd him to be deposed; which was a thing before that time never heard of in the Empire. Whereupon the Rebel Princes thinking themselves absolv'd from their Allegi∣ance, Elected Rudolph Duke of Schwaben into the Emperor Henry's place; and made a Law, That the Right of Succession should be therein abolished, and the Power of chusing Emperors committed to the people. What Anarchy and confusion follow'd upon this Decree, the German Histories will suffi∣ciently inform us. But in process of time the less considerable part of the Rabble of Electors were depriv'd of their late gain'd right and priviledge of chusing Emperors; the whole power being usurp'd by a few of the chief Officers in the Im∣perial Court. From the year 1250 till 1500, it was the ge∣neral opinion of all Historians, that the Emperor Otho III. and Pope Gregory V. reduc'd the num∣ber of Electors to Seven; only in this the Au∣thors of those times cannot agree, Whether the Emperor or Pope had the greater Authority in settling the Affair? But this opinion has of later years been strongly oppos'd by most learned wri∣ters; and 'tis highly probable, that more then Seven had voices in the Election of Emperors until the time of Frideric II. For Otho Frisingensis assures us, that Henry II. was chosen by all the Lords of the Empire; and after his death, Con∣rad Duke of Franconia was advanced into his place by the consent of the same Electors. Hen∣ry III. Conrad's Son, was likewise Elected; tho we are not told by whom. The Abbot of Ʋrs∣perg tells us, that Henry IV. was raised to the Im∣perial Dignity by the Bishops of Germany; that Henry V. was chosen by an unanimous consent of all the members of the German Empire; that Lotharius II. was made Emperor by two Arch∣bishops, eight Bishops, with several Abbots and Lords of the Imperial Court; that Conrad III. was admitted into the Throne, the Duke of Saxony not being call'd to the Election, and the See of Mentz being then vacant; that Frideric Barbarossa was chosen by all the German Princes; that Phi∣lip was Elected Emperor by the Suevians, Bava∣rians, and Saxons; that Otho IV. had the Scepter from the Citizens of Colen, Strasburg, and some other Imperial Cities. This Otho was afterwards excommunicated by the Pope of Rome, and Fri∣deric King of Sicily Elected into his room by the voices of the King of Bohemia, the Dukes of Au∣stria and Bohemia, the Landtgrave of Thuringen, and several other Princes of the Empire. Hither∣to we see the Emperors were not chosen by any set number of Electors; tho it is likely, that those Princes who have now got the sole power into
their hands, had even in those times the greatest share of authority in all Elections; as being the most potent members of the Empire. But when, after the death of Frideric II. no man for many years took care of the supreme Government; in this deplorable condition of the German Empire, Seven of the chief Princes (by taking upon them, as is probable, the management of all public affairs) laid the first foundation of the Electoral dignity; which was afterwards confirm'd to them by the Emperor Charles the Fourth's Aurea Bulla. The reasons why the number of Electors was reduced to Seven was this, because that if in any Election six of the voices chanc'd to be equally divided, the seventh Elector might cast the bal∣lance to that side where he could rationally sup∣pose there was the most merit. And 'twas pru∣dently order'd, that three of the Electors should be Churchmen, that they (having no prospect of being themselves Elected into the Imperial Throne) might curb the ambition of any secu∣lar Elector, who without desert should pretend to the Crown. Amongst the many acts of absolute Soveraign∣ty whereby the Emperor Ferdinand II. disobliged a great part of the States of the Empire, the trans∣ferring the Electoral Dignity from Frideric V. Count Palatine of the Rhine to Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, was the highliest resented. And at the Westphalian Treaty the Ambassadors found it no small difficulty to reconcile the differences which hereby were occasion'd between the two Princes. The Duke of Bavaria utterly refus'd to consent to the Peace, except he might be suf∣fer'd quietly to enjoy the Electorate; which he fancied his deserts might justly challenge, and the Emperor as lawfully confer on him. On the other side, the Prince Palatine as obstinately de∣manded a restitution of the Dignity taken from him; alledging the just Title his Ancestors always had to this Honour. Both their pretensions were thought plausible; and both of them met with resolute Assertors in the Treaty. At last it was agreed, that the Duke of Bavaria should have an Electorship confirm'd to him and his poste∣rity, and an Eighth should be new Erected for Charles Ludowic Prince Palatine of the Rhine; pro∣vided, that if the Wilhelmine branch happen'd to fail before the Rodolphine, the Princes Palatine should re-enter upon their ancient Electorate, and the Title of the Dukes of Bavaria to any such Dignity be wholly abolished. The Right of Electing is not conferr'd on the person of any of the Electors, but annex'd to their Electoral Principalities and Estates; inso∣much, that if the King of Bohemia can make out his Title to that Kingdom, the Prince Palatine to the Palatinate, the Duke of Saxony to his Duke∣dom, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh to his Marquisate, they may all justly lay claim to the Title and Dignity of Electors. So that as long as there is any male issue in any of the Electoral Families, the power of giving a voice in the Ele∣ction of an Emperor cannot be taken away from that House. The Electoral Dignity is so great, that some have thought it equal to Regal Authority; and in this indeed the Electors excel Kings, in that they have power to create Emperors; which no other Potentates in Christendom can pretend to. The King of Bohemia (except when in a Diet for the Election of an Emperor) used to give place to several of them. And there were hot disputes heretofore between the Elector of Brandenburgh and Rodolph II. King of Hungary about prece∣dency. But certainly there is little reason that any Elector (excepting the King of Bohemia) should pretend to stand upon equal terms with a Mo∣narch. The last Duke of Burgundy, of the Blood Royal of France, demanded and obtain'd prece∣dence of all the Electors at the Council of Basil. And 'tis observable, that so long as the Elector of Bohemia was only a Duke, he had the lowest place in every Election; but having once ob∣tain'd the Title of King, he took place of all his Collegues; because it was not thought fit that a Royal person, Crown'd and Anointed, should give place to those that were but barely Electors. The order of precedency which the Electoral Princes observe amongst themselves, is as follows: 1. The Archbishop of Mentz, Arch-Chancellor of Germany, takes place of all the rest. As soon as the Imperial Throne is vacant, 'tis his Office to warn his Collegues to repair (either in their own persons or by their Deputies) within three months after the date of his Letters Patents to Francfurt upon the Mein, in order to the Electi∣on of a new Emperor. 2. The Archbishop of Triers, Arch-Chancellor of the Kingdoms of France and Arles (where by France we are not to under∣stand all the Territories subject at this day to the French King; but such only as were formerly parts of the Kingdom of Burgundy, and came into the hands of the Germans in the Eleventh Century). He has the first vote in the Election. 3. The Archbishop of Colen, Arch-Chancellor of Italy; that is, of the Kingdom of the Lombards, and the small remains of the ancient Roman Em∣pire. He has the second vote; and usually puts the first (or German) Crown upon the head of the new chosen Emperor. 4. The King of Bo∣hemia; to whom the Sachsenspiegel (or Body of the old Saxon Laws) denies a vote in any Ele∣ction, tho the Aurea Bulla says expresly, he has the third vote in the Diet. Whence it appears, that the manner of Elections was alter'd in Charles the Fourth's time from what it was in the Thir∣teenth Century, when the Sachsenspiegel was first published. 5. The Count Palatine of the Rhine, who has the fourth vote at Elections. 'Tis his peculiar prerogative to sit Judge (at the Imperial Court) when any Suit is commenc'd against the Emperor. 6. The Duke of Saxony, Arch-Marshal of the Empire. He is Sword-bearer to the Em∣peror, and has the fifth voice at an Election. 7. The Marquess of Brandenburgh, Lord Cham∣berlain of the Empire; who, in any solemn pro∣cession, bears the Scepter before the Emperor, and has the sixth vote at his Election. Note: This account is to be understood of the State of the Electors before the quarrel between the Prince Palatine and the Duke of Bavaria, up∣on the Emperor Ferdinand's suspension of the for∣mer in the year 1623. Tho the case be now al∣ter'd upon the Duke of Bavaria's Right confirm'd to him by the Westphalian Treaty before-men∣tion'd; yet (since the Elector of Bavaria pre∣tends to no other Title then what anciently be∣long'd to the Princes Palatine, and the Dignity may possibly return again to that House) these rules of precedency may still hold good. Notwithstanding the account already given of the Order and Rank of the Electors, the Duke of Saxony and Prince Palatine may seem to have the preeminence before any others. For these two (the former in all parts of the Empire go∣vern'd by the Saxon Law; the latter in Schwa∣ben, and all places where the Francic Laws are observ'd) rule the Empire in time of an Inter∣regnum. Many late writers of the Roman Church have been zealous in attributing this Prerogative to the Pope; whom they would have to be the Emperor's Vicar, as well as Christ's. But this asser∣tion is contrary to the fundamental Laws of the
German Empire; and we cannot hear of any Re∣cord of Antiquity which will testifie for them, that ever any such power was granted by the Emperor. The said Electors have power (du∣ring the vacancy of the Imperial Throne) to de∣termine all manner of Law-suits; to gather the revenues and incomes of the Crown; and in the name of the whole Empire, to tender and require an Oath of Allegiance. Only they may not dis∣pose of the Lands of any Prince of the Empire, or others of the Nobility that have their Lands confirm'd to them by the Ceremony of the Ban∣ner (fahnenlehnen); nor alienate any parcel of the Crown-lands or revenue of the Empire. In short, whatever they do is to undergo the cen∣sure and approbation of the next Emperor. In the late Interregnum, upon the death of the Em∣peror Ferdinand III. there was no small quarrel between the Duke of Bavaria and the Prince Pa∣latine about the Right of Protectorship; the for∣mer pretending, that this Dignity was annex'd to the Office of Chief Sewer, which had been transferr'd from the Prince Palatine to himself. Whereupon, as soon as the Emperor was dead, he immediately gives notice to all the neighbour∣ing Princes and States of the Empire, of his as∣suming the Title of Vicar. On the contrary, the Prince Palatine laid claim to the same Autho∣rity; and complain'd of Bavaria's encroachment upon his priviledges. Each asserted his right in public Remonstrances; and printed Pamphlets flew thick on either hand. In this juncture, most unprejudic'd persons were of opinion, that the Palatinate writers had the greatest share of rea∣son on their side; and very many were loath to approve of the Duke of Bavaria's proceedings, tho unwilling or afraid to appear in public against him. At last, the quarrel was stop'd (tho not finally determin'd) by the present Emperor Leo∣pold's succession to his Fathers Throne. The Aurea Bulla orders, that the Election should be had at Francfurt; which is commonly observ'd. But however the Ceremony has not been confin'd to any particular place. For Henry II. was chosen at Mentz, Henry III. at Aix la Chappel, Henry V. at Colen, Lotharius II. at Mentz, and after him Maximilian, Rodolph II. and Ferdinand III. receiv'd that honour at Ratisbon. But afterwards, the E∣lector of Saxony question'd the Election of Fer∣dinand I. because 'twas at Colen, in the year 1530. The whole Ceremony of the Election is per∣form'd in this method: The Elector of Mentz, within a month after he has notice given him of the Emperors death, signifies the same to his Col∣legues, and summons them to a new Election. Im∣mediately (upon warning receiv'd, or at the day appointed in the Archbishops Letters) the Electors repair to Francfurt, or send their Ambassa∣dors, who have full power to act as their Deputies∣Formerly it was a custom for the City to send out a Body of two hundred Horse to meet the Ele∣ctors, and conduct them in at the Gates: but this fashion has not of late years been so punctu∣ally observ'd. During the Election, all strangers and foreigners are commanded to withdraw and leave the City. That done, the Electors proceed to Election; which is always had in the Quire of St. Bartholomew's Church. After Mass is said, they come up to the Altar, where they severally take an Oath to Elect the fittest man, that stands, to be Emperor. The Elector of Mentz takes the votes in the order before-mention'd; and last of all gives his own voice. Every Elector gives his vote under his Hand and Seal; and the majority of voices creates the new Emperor. If the num∣ber of votes should be equal (which may easily happen, now there are Eight Electors) the con∣troversie would be hard to determine; since no provision has been made for any such occurrences. As soon as the votes are examin'd, the Electors return to the High Altar; where the Archbishop of Mentz pronounces the Election, and tells the Congregation whom they have made choice of for their Emperor. The Temporal Electors have power to name themselves; tho the Ecclesiastics have no such passive or reflexive voice. Yet none of them have so absolute a power of giving any secular man their voices, without some restraint. For it is ne∣cessary, that he who is by their votes rais'd to the Imperial Dignity be 1. Of an Illustrious Family; because it cannot reasonably be supposed, that so many great Princes, as are his Subjects, would willingly pay homage and yeild obedience to a person of low and mean extraction. 2. A Prince of good Estate, and large Revenue; that his in∣comes may maintain him (without oppressing his Subjects) in that splendor which becoes his Imperial Majesty. 3. A German; lest being a stranger, he should transfer the Seat of the Em∣pire to some other place; and either wholly de∣prive Germany of that Prerogative, or put it up∣on a necessity of defending it by force of Arms. Indeed before the Emperor Charles IV. had pub∣lished the Aurea Bulla, it was not necessary that the Emperor should be a natural German (and we know many of the ancient Emperors were fo∣reigners); but since that time it has become a Law, That whoever is admitted into the Impe∣rial Throne be a German, at lest by extraction. And no other plea could be pretended by Charles and Ferdinand I. since the former was born in the County of Flanders, and the later at Medina in Castile. And when Francis I. King of France al∣ledg'd, that he was a German; he did not intend the Electors should believe that Angoulesme was in Germany, but that his predecessors were ori∣ginally Germans. Immediately after the Election is over, the new chosen Emperor takes upon him the Titles of Cesar and Augustus; and, if he pleases, confers Honours and Priviledges, and executes all other acts of Soveraignty. If he be prefent, he Dines in public; and then the Ecclesiastical Electors say Grace and hold the Seals; the Elector of Bran∣denburg gives him water to wash; the Elector of Saxony executes the office of Marshal; the Prince Palatine presents him the first Dish of Meat, and the King of Bohemia the first Glass of Wine. If any of the Electors be absent, his office is per∣form'd by his Lieutenant; and not by his Am∣bassador, who is only his Deputy in the Election. The three Ecclesiastical Electors are suppos'd al∣ways to be personally present; and therefore have no Lieutenants. But the Vicars of the four anci∣ent Secular Electors are the Lords and Counts of Limburg, Walpurg, Papenheim, and Hohenzolleren. After the Reign of Charles the Great, none of the German Kings would for many ages take upon them the Title of Emperor, till they had receiv'd the Crown of the Roman Empire at the Pope's hands; and of later years several of them have been very critical in distinguishing between the Titles of Kayser and King of Germany. Whence immediately after the ceremony of the Election was finish'd, they would stile themselves only Emperors of Rome Elect, but actual Kings of Germany. Whereupon, some Authors tell us, that every one of them used to be Crown'd at Aix la Chappel with an iron Crown, as King of Germany; at Milan with a Silver one, as King of Lombardy; and at Rome with a Golden one, as Emperor. What grounds there might be for any such tradition I know not; but 'tis certain,
that Charlemagne's Crown, which is now a days set on the Emperors head at Aix la Chappel, is of pure Gold; and the Emperors do not use to seek a Crown at Rome or Milan. The Aurea Bulla calls the Crown used at the Emperors Coronation In∣fula; and anciently all the Diadem made use of at such a solemnity was a wreath of white Scarffs, wherewith they bound the heads of their Kings. The Elector of Colen for a long time perform'd the Ceremony of Coronation; but because the Archbishops of that See have not been Priests for many years, the Archbishop of Mentz has exe∣cuted the office for this last Century. At the Co∣ronation of the Emperor Ferdinand III. there arose a grand dispute betwixt the Elector of Colen (who at that time was a Priest) and the Archbishop of Mentz; the former demanding a restitution of the Honour which did formerly belong to his See, and the later asserting his right from the ex∣ample of his Predecessors, who had long enjoy'd it. However, the Archbishop of Colen was over∣thrown, and the Archbishop of Mentz perform'd the office; and in so doing (some say) only pre∣serv'd a right which many ages before had be∣long'd to his predecessors. At the Coronation the King of Bohemia carries the Crown; the E∣lector of Bavaria bears the Globe; the Duke of Saxony the Sword; and the Marquess of Bran∣denburgh the Scepter. Of the King of the ROMANS. THat there may be a King of the Romans cho∣sen while the Emperor is living, is a mat∣ter of fact which none can be ignorant of, who are conversant in the writings of the modern Ger∣man Historians. Thus Charles IV. Wenceslaus, Maximilian I. & II. Rodolph II. Ferdinand III. & IV. were all elected in the life-time of their Prede∣cessors. However, many of their Civilians que∣stion the lawfulness of the Election; fancying, that by this means the Electors may disturb the peace of the Empire, by setting up two Princes at once who by Election have a just Title to the Imperial Crown. The consequence indeed may be dangerous; but there is no disputing the Au∣thority of those who doubtless have as great power in appointing the Emperor a Successor when they please, as they have in deposing him. 'Tis ordinary in some of the High Dutch wri∣ters, to mean the Emperor when they speak of the King of the Romans; and till of late years there was no difference between them. But now there are many marks of distinction: As, 1. The King of the Romans bears for his Arms the Eagle with one head; the Emperor with two. 2. The former is only stiled Augustus; but the later Sem∣per Augustus. 3. The Emperor in his Letters Pa∣tents directed to the King of the Romans, begins his Compellation with Ʋnsern Liebten, i. e. To our Beloved &c. but the King in his Answers comple∣ments the Emperor with the Title of Ihre Ma∣jestaet, i. e. Tour Majesty. Lastly, the King of the Romans always acknowledges the Emperor his Su∣perior; and has no authority of his own during the Emperors life. When the Emperor is absent, or employed in other affairs, he usually takes upon him the administration of the Empire; and after the Emperors death succeeds without any further Election. The first occasion of Electing a King of the Romans, proceeded from a politic contrivance of the Emperors; who by this means got the Im∣perial Crown secured to their own Family. For making use of their power and authority while themselves sat in the Throne, they could easily obtain the favour of the Electors to chuse a Son, Nephew, or other Relation, to be King of the Romans; which at last being grown customary prov'd almost as considerable kindness to the House of Austria, as if they had entail'd the Em∣pire upon that Family. For das Heilige Romische Reich (or the Holy Roman Kingdom) signifies the same thing in the German Tongue as the Sacred Empire; and 'tis all one to chuse any Prince King of the Romans, as to Elect him Emperor. Of Dukes, Counts, and other Orders of Nobility in the GERMAN Empire. THo the ancient Germans had litle or no Magistracy amongst them in time of peace;Dukes. yet both Julius Cesar and Tacitus agree in this, that whenever they were engag'd in war they had one supreme Governor, who ruled the Armies and gave laws to the multitude. This superinten∣dant of their forces they call'd Heertog or Heer∣zog (a name which their Dukes to this day re∣tain) which signifies as much as the Latin word Dux, or our Duke, i. e. A Leader or Commander of an Army. He was usually chosen in a general Assembly of the whole Country by a majority of voices; and as soon as he was elected they set him upon a Banner, and bore him upon their shoulders. Which ceremony, as Cluverius proves, was afterwards observ'd by later Germans in the Election of their Kings, and by the Roman Sol∣diers at the Coronation of their Emperors. Julius Cesar tells us, that these Dukes had power of life and death; but Tacitus, who was better acquaint∣ed with the state of Germany, assures us, they had no such authority. They could indeed give counsel and orders to the Soldiers; but had no power to punish offenders, or correct the obsti∣nate. For, in all probability, there was not any manner of Judges in the Land that had the power of sentencing any offender to death. When any controversie arose amongst the Commonalty,Counts or Graven. they were wont to chuse a Judg out of the Nobility of the Village where the quar∣rel begun. These kind of Judges they call'd Gra∣fen or Graven; and their office was to determine all trifling disputes in their neighbourhood. Mei∣bomius (in his learned Tract of Irmensul) tells us, that all Germany was anciently divided into Vil∣lages, call'd by the inhabitants Gouwen; and that each of these had their peculiar Judges, thence nam'd Gowgraven. Ein Graff (says the Author of the Glossary upon the Saxon Spiegel) bedeut nach altem Sachsischen Deutschen ein Richter, i. e. Graf signifies a Judg in the old Saxon language. Die Graven signifies properly the grey headed or elders of the people; whence our King Edward the Con∣fessor (in the thirty-fifth Chapter of his Laws, afterwards confirm'd by William the Conqueror) tells us, that the Low Dutch Greve is in effect the same with the English Eoldenmen now Aldermen. This was the ancient state of the Dukes and Earls in Germany, before the Romans overran some parts of that Land; but whatever came into their hands was immediately divided into Provinces, and govern'd as they themselves pleased. Whence Duces and Comites were created by them in seve∣ral places; but such as had another kind of power committed to them then the aforesaid Hertzogen and Graven could pretend to. In Roman Histori∣ans
we meet with a great many of this sort; such as Dux Germaniae primae, Dux Moguntiacensis, Dux Sequanicae, Dux Rhetiae primae & secundae, Dux Bel∣gicae secundae, &c. And Ammianus Marcellinus speaks of one Carietto, whom he calls Comes per utramque Germaniam. These had authority to raise Taxes; and were invested with many other priviledges in the administration of justice which the others wanted. But the Romans having never got any conside∣rable footing on the East-side of the Rhine, could not fix any of their fashions of Government in the Northern parts of Germany. So that these still retain'd their ancient forms; until the Franks, having made themselves Masters of all, introduc'd new modes, and establish'd a new sort of Govern∣ment every-where. For these Conquerors, imi∣tating the Romans, reduc'd all Germany into Pro∣vinces; over which they appointed so many Dukes, who had authority to govern, and to administer justice according to the tenure of their respective Commissions. To these Dukes they sometimes added Assistants; who were from their office (which was to aid the Dukes in the ma∣nagement of great and weighty affairs) call'd Counts, or Comites. The Dukes were always elected by the King and Nobility out of some illustrious Family; yet so, that if the deceased Duke's Son were capable and worthy of his Fa∣ther's honour, he was seldom rejected. At last the power of these Dukes grew exceedingly great and terrible; insomuch, that 'twas ordinary for several of them to deny to pay homage to the Emperors. Which when Charles the Great ob∣serv'd, he destroy'd the two great Dukedoms of the Francic Kingdom (Aquitane and Bavaria), by dividing them into several smaller Counties. But not long after Charles's death, the Emperors created new Dukes in most places where he had chang'd them into Counts. Whereupon the Em∣pire was quickly reduc'd to the former straits; every Duke pretending to, and exercising Regal authority in his own Province. The first of these that grew formidably potent was Otho Duke of Saxony, afterwards elected Emperor; who (tho he refus'd the Imperial Diadem, and got it con∣ferr'd on Conrad Duke of Franconia) was always look'd upon as the most powerful Prince of the German Empire in his time. After Otho's death, the Emperor Conrad used all means possible to reduce the overgrown power of the Duke of Saxony to some tolerable mediocrity; but his endeavours prov'd unsuccessful, and Duke Henry stoutly maintain'd the Honours and Priviledges which his Father Otho had enjoy'd without distur∣bance. From that time forward the Emperors lay under an obligation of creating new Dukes; who, getting into their hands the government of several potent Cities, set up for almost absolute Princes. Our Learned Antiquary Mr. Selden, reckons up six several sorts of Graves or Counts; which are these: 1. Schlecht-Graven, or simple Counts. 2. Counts Palatine; which (as will be shew'n anon) are subdivided into several other branches. 3. Counts of the Empire. 4. Marck-Graves, or Counts of the Frontiers. 5. Landt-Graves, or Counts of Provinces. 6. Burg-Graves, or Counts of Cities and great Towns. There was anciently a seventh sort (Here-Graven) who answer'd ex∣actly to the primitive Dukes or Her-tzogen; for as the office of these was to conduct and govern the Soldiers; so the others were to determine all controversies as Field-Judges. The Gefurstete Graven do not make a distinct species; being no∣thing else then such Counts as, besides their or∣dinary Title, may challenge that of Furst, or Prince. In the old Laws and Constitutions of the Empire, we meet with almost an innumera∣ble company of inferior Officers who have the title of Graven bestow'd on them. Such are, 1. Cent-Grave; he that had the government of an Hundred. We may English the word High-Constable. 2. Holtz-Grave, or Wald-Grave; Over∣seers of the Woods and Forests. 3. Gograf; of which before. 4. Spiel-Grave; the Master of the Revels. 5. Hans-Grave; a Title formerly given to the Chief Judg in all matters relating to Trade debated in the Diet at Ratisbon. But we shall not weary the Reader with insisting upon these obsolete Titles of Honour; contenting our selves with a short account of the six first kinds, which are all our famous Antiquary beforemen∣tion'd has thought worthy his taking notice of. The first are such as are stiled barely Counts,Schlecht∣graven. without the addition of any more then the place which gives them that Title. As Der Graf von Eissenburg, Der Graf von Ortenberg, &c. There were formerly only four of this kind in the whole Em∣pire, who were ordinarily called Die vier Graven dess Heiligen Romischen Reichs, i. e. The four Graves (or Counts) of the Holy Roman Empire. These were the Counts of Cleve, Schwartzenburg, Ciley, and Savoy. But (since the Counts of Cleve and Savoy were advanced to Dukes, and the Family of the ancient Counts of Ciley was extinct, which happen'd about two hundred years ago) the Count of Schwartzenburg in Thuringen is the only Prince that bears that Title; stiling himself usually to this day, der vier Graven dess Reichs Grave zu Schwartzenburg, i. e. of the four Counts of the Empire, Count of Schwartzenburg. Besides him, there are now-a-days several other German Counts who may justly be referr'd to this head; tho they have no Investiture into any Graffschaft or County, but are only stiled Counts of some small Castle or inconsiderable Territories of which they are Lords. Such are the Counts of Ottingen and Zol∣lern; who are supposed to be of the posterity of some of the ancient Counts of the Empire, and thence retain the title, tho not the grandeur and power of their Ancestors. Counts Palatine (call'd by the Germans Pfaltz-Graven,Counts Palatine. or Dess Heiligen Romischen Reichs Hoffe-Graven) are such as have in their Title a certain eminence of their Dignity from a relation (as their name denotes) to the Emperors Court or Palace. For Palatinus is but the possessive of Pa∣latium; and signifies no more then an Officer of the Houshold with us in England. But this Title is twofold: 1. Originally Feudal, and annex'd to the name of some Territory or Grafschaft, with such jura Imperii & Majestatis as other ordinary Princes of the Empire have not; as we see in the Title of the Counts Palatine of the Rhine. 2. Meer∣ly Personal, without the addition of any particu∣lar Territory proper to him that hath the Dig∣nity. Both the Title and Nature of this later kind are originally to be fetcht from the Exam∣ples of the old Roman Empire: but the former (tho the Nature of it may be found in the an∣cient Constitutions of the Roman Empire, under the name of Praefectus Praetorio, yet) was in or∣dinary use, as to the Name and Title, only in the Francic Kingdom. For there was in the Court of the Francic Kings (long before their King∣dom was chang'd into an Empire) a chief Offi∣cer known by the name of Comes Palatii, or Count Palatine, who had a Vice-Regency under the King, in like sort as the Praefecti Praetorio in the elder Empire, or the old Chief Justice of Eng∣land under our ancient Kings; that is, he had the exercise of supreme Jurisdiction (in the name of the King) in all causes that came to the Kings
immediate audience. I suppose the Office of Hofmeister, used to this day in every German Prince's Court, is a relique of this Palatinate. And that Comes Palatii might easily signifie the same thing with Praefectus Praetorio or Hofmeister, will not be difficult for any man to imagine that shall consider the signification which the word Comes had amongst the ancient Romans in the usual com∣pellation of Comites and Amici, used by their Em∣perors to the greatest Officers in the Court and State; whence afterwards in the Eastern Empire we meet with Comites sacrarum largitionum, Comi∣tes metallorum, Comites rerum privatarum, Comites Patrimonii, &c. in all which expressions Comes manifestly signifies the same thing as Praefectus or Magister. The reason why the name of Pala∣tine (which, as we have said, denotes only such as are members of the King's or Emperor's Hous∣hold) should afterwards be join'd with a Pro∣vince remote from the Court, seems plain enough. For, whereas other ordinary Counts had only a power subordinate to that of the Counts Pala∣tine, who exercis'd supreme Jurisdiction in the Emperors name; these had all the Royalties and Jura Imperii in their respective Provinces, which the Counts Palatine enjoy'd at Court. And the like forms of speaking we meet with (among the old Romans) in the Officiary Dignities of Prae∣fectus Praetorio Orientis, Praefectus Praetorio Illyrici, Praefectus Praetorio Italiae, and Praefectus Praetorio Galliarum. Where we see the Title of the Hous∣hold, or Emperors Palace, transferr'd to these several Provinces; to denote, that they who bore those Offices (being as so many Vice-Roys in their peculiar Territories) should enjoy like Power, Jurisdiction, and Dignity in their respective Do∣minions, as if by the name of Praefecti Praetorio they had always liv'd with the Emperor in his Court. The additional Title of Palatine hath been conferr'd upon the Counts of Habspurg, Tu∣bing, Witelenspach, Schiern, Ortenberg, and several other Princes of the Empire. In some old lists of the German Princes we find mention made of four Ertz-Pfaltz-Graven, or Archi-Palatini, viz. Rheni, Saxoniae, Franciae (or Franconiae), & Hungariae. But at this day the Counts Palatine of the Rhine are so singularly eminent Princes by this Title, that commonly no other place is understood by the general name of the Palatinate but only their Territories. However Saxony is still a Pfaltz∣graffschaft or Palatinate, and the Duke thereof hath the Soveraignty of a Count Palatine; tho he be not so stiled, because the Title of Duke is rarely join'd with Palatinus. Of the Authority and Power of the Counts Palatine of the Rhine, we shall speak more at large hereafter, when we come to a particular Description of their Terri∣tories. What the Dignity of a Count of the Empire is,nts of  Em∣. may be learn'd from the Patent granted by the Emperor Rudolph II. to Thomas Arundel of War∣dour in Wiltshire (afterwards made Lord Arundel of Wardour by King James) for the creating of him a Count of the Empire; which Title his Heirs have kept to this day. That the Title is here∣ditary appears from this passage in the Patent, Te supradictum Thomam Arundelium qui jam ante Comitum consanguinitatem a majoribus acceptam in Anglia obtines, omnesque & singulos liberos haere∣des, posteros & descendentes tuos legitimos utriusque Sexus natos aeternaque serie nascituros, etiam veros sacros Romani Imperii Comites & Comitissas creavi∣mus, fecimus, & nominavimus, &c. The learned Mr. Cambden (in his History of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth) speaking of this Patent, tells us, that whoever hath the Title of Count of the Empire conferr'd on him, has withall a Seat as∣sign'd him, and may give his voice, in the Im∣perial Diets; he may purchase an Estate in any part of the Emperor's Dominions; may list Vo∣lunteers, and cannot be su'd in any Court of Ju∣dicature save only the Imperial Chamber. By ver∣tue of the aforesaid Patent the Title of Count of the Sacred Empire, is at present enjoy'd by the Right Honourable Henry Lord Arundell of Warder. Those of the Nobility whom the ancient Fran∣cic Kings made Governors of such Provinces as were of the Frontiers of the Empire,Mark-graven. were stiled Mark-Graven, from the old word Marken, which signifies the outmost Marks or Limits of the Em∣pire; in the same sence as we use the word Marshes, speaking of the bounds betwixt England and Scot∣land, or Wales. From the High Dutch Mark-Grave the Latins borrow'd their Marchio and Marg∣gravius; the Italians, Marchese; and the later Greeks their  and , instead of our French Marquis and Marchioness. Some Etymo∣logists have endeavour'd to bring the Title of Mark-Grave from the old Francic word Mare (sometimes written March) signifying an Horse; and these fancy there was no great difference for∣merly between the Titles and Offices of Marschal and Mark-Grave, or Mar-Grave (as they write it). In the Feuds we read, Qui de Marchia in∣vestitur Marchio dicitur. Dicitur autem Marchia quia Marcha & ut plurimum juxta mare sit posita. Where what is said of the derivation of the word Marchio from Marcha is true; but if by ut pluri∣mum juxta Mare the Author means, that the word Mare bears a part in the original of Mark-Grave or Marquise, he is manifestly mistaken. For altho the Marca Anconitana and Trevigiana in Italy, as also the Marquisate of the Holy Empire in Bra∣bant, and the Marca Normanica and Britannica in France, be adjoining to the Sea; yet the Mar∣quisates of Misnia, Lusatia, Brandenburg, Moravia, Austria, Mountferrat, and Susa in Savoy are inland Countries, but had the name of Margrafchaften fixt on them; because they were such Provinces as were the Limits or Frontiers of the German Kingdom. When Marquises, as well as Dukes and Counts, began to multiply in the German Empire, there were four of them who had the Title of Die vier hohen Mark-Graffen, i. e. The four High (or Chief) Marquises. These were they of Brandenburg, Merhern (or Moravia), Meis∣sen, and Baden; whose Territories are thence call'd die vier hohen Markgrafchaften, i. e. The four Chief Marquisates. In the Titles of Landtgrave and Burggrave, the termination grave signifies the same thing as in Markgrave.Landt∣graven. Landt in the German tongue signi∣fies no more then a Province or Territory: so that the word Landtgrave, if literally translated, must be render'd Comes Provincialis, a Count that has supreme Government in some particular Pro∣vince. Landtherr was anciently a Title of the same signification, and conferr'd upon the Lords of Verona (who were of the Family de la Scala, or the Scaligers), of Mirandula, Padua, and Mil∣lain; who were lookt upon as Princes equal in power and dignity to as many Counts Palatine. The Germans usually reckon up four Landtgraves (as well as four Dukes, four Counts, four Mar∣quises, and four of most other Dignities) as most eminent in the Empire; these are, the Landt∣graves of Thuringen, Hessen, Alsace, and Luchten∣burg; of which the Landtgrave of Hessen is at this day a Prince of the greatest note. The most an∣cient Creation of a Landtgrave which we meet with in History, is that of Ludowic III. Count of Thuringen; who, by the Emperor Lotharius his Father-in-Law, had his Title alter'd into Landt∣grave
of the same place, in the year 1126. Some∣times we meet with the word Landtgrave made use of to signifie a petty Judg of any small Pro∣vince or Territory; and such an interpretation the word will bear, tho it be not so usual as the former. For Grave, as we have shew'n before, signifies a Judg as well as Count; and Landt may as well denote a small Province as large Terri∣tory. Burg,Burgrave. in the Teutonic tongue, signifies a Castle or Fort; whence Burggrave is no more then Prae∣fectus Castellanus, a Grave or Count  a Castle or any other fortified place. The four chief Bur∣graveschafts of the German Empire, are those of Stromberg, Noremberg, Magdeburg, and Rheineck; besides which there are several of less note. The Territories which anciently belong'd to the Bi∣shoprick, are now (since the late death of Augustus Administrator of Halle and Magdeburg) come into the hands of the Elector of Branden∣burg. But the Title remains still with the Dukes of Saxony, to whom both Title and Territory were heretofore given by the Emperor Rodulph I. who at the same time annex'd the Burggrafschaft of Noremberg to the Graves von Zollern, which is since made a part of the Marquisate of Bran∣denburg. How great the power of these Marg∣graves was formerly, the Author of the Saxon-Spiegel informs us, when he says, Palatinus seu Palansgravius Imperatoris Judex est; Burggravius vero, id est perpetuus Castellanus, Judex Marchio∣nis, i. e. a Count Palatine may sit Judg in a Case wherein the Emperor is a Party; and a Burggrave has the priviledg of passing sentence upon a Mar∣quiss. And Besoldus assures us, that the Bishops also were under the Jurisdiction of a Burggraf. Aliquando etiam (says he, speaking of this Title of Honour) in Episcopatibus exercebant Jurisdictio∣nem; unde Peucerus lib. 5. Chronic. eos illarum ter∣rarum Judices esse censet, quae Imperatorum donatione Ecclesiis accesserunt. But all this is to be under∣stood of the four chief Burggraves before-men∣tion'd; and not of others of an inferior rank, who had little more then the name of Burggrave; or at most never had any Jurisdiction more then the bare and naked signification of their Title would allow them, which was only to be the Governors of some Castle or Fort. Such I fancy were the Ancestors of the Noble Family of the Wassenaers in Holland; who, as Grotius tells us, were formerly Burggraves of a great Castle erect∣ed in the place where Leyden now stands, which City had been before destroy'd by the Normans. For tho those men were Lords of the Rhine, and as such demanded Toll of all Vessels that traded upon that River as far as their Territories reach'd (which priviledg their Successors always after∣wards challeng'd); yet they never advanc'd to that heigth as to have any inspection over Mar∣quisses. In old Memorials, and other papers of State registred by the High Dutch Antiquaries, we shall often meet with the words Burggraf and Landtgrave in a literal signification; and not as Titles of Honour, in which sense we have hither∣to spoke of them. For tho Burggrave in the or∣dinary acception of the word (and as a Title of Honour) denotes one that hath the command of some eminent Fort in the Empire; yet it may be also (and is often in ancient Dutch writers) used to signifie one that hath the command of any obscure and inconsiderable Castle; whereby the Governor obtains the name of Burggrave, tho he cannot reach the Dignity. And because Landt signifies a small as well as larger Territory, and Grave may properly enough be used to denote any man invested with any sort of Jurisdiction; therefore the word Landtgrave is sometimes ap∣plied to ordinary Barons. Next after these several sorts of Counts or Earls the Freyherrn, or Barons,Freyherrn. take place in the Cata∣logue of the German Nobility. The word sig∣nifies as much as Domini liberi, free Lords or Ba∣rons; such as are not Tenants to, nor have any dependance upon any superior Landlord. So that sometimes we find Freyen and Freyherrn used sy∣nonymously by some of the German writers; and then an High Dutch Freyherr is no more then a Scotch Laird; which is a Title any Scotch man will pretend to, who has got but as much free-land as will yeild him twenty shillings a year. But or∣dinarily the Title is only given to such as hold considerable Territories and Jurisdictions from the Emperor; and are Proceres proximo post Co∣mites gradu ornati, as Paurmeister defines Barones. And the most considerable Heraulds and Lawyers of the German Nation have maintain'd the asser∣tion, That a Freyherr differs only from a Grave in Name and Title, but is the same thing in Dig∣nity and Jurisdiction. Besoldus determines the dif∣ference thus, Ex moribus nostris Comiti Baro aequi∣paratur, nullumque inter eos censetur esse discrimen; nisi quod Baro non est investitus de Comitatu; qui ta∣men aliis in rebus suscipiendis honoribusque admini∣strandis haudquaquam Comite inferior censetur, i. e. By our (German) Customs a Baron is equal to a Count; only the former is ceremoniously In∣vested into his Territories, but in no other thing (as conferring of Honours, and the like) is he in∣ferior to the later. Some reckon up six kinds of Barons in the German Empire, and give them their several names thus: 1. Such as are stiled simply Freyen (without the additional Title of Herr), that is, Free-men; of whom before. 2. Frey∣herrn, or Free Lords; such are the Freyherrn zu Walpurg, zu Aulendorff, and the like. 3. Semper-Freyen, or Semper Liberi; which is a Title given to the four chief Barons of the Empire, who are sometimes otherwise stiled simply Freyherrn zu Limburg, Dussis, Weysterburg, und Alwalden. 4. Herrn, or Lords; such are the Herrn zu Plauwen, Herrn zu Krannichfelt, &c. 5. Edle Herrn, or Noble Lords; as the Counts of Mansfelt write them∣selves Edle Herrn zu Heldrungen, &c. 6. Such as are stiled barely Edlen, or Noblemen; as the Ba∣ron of Overfurst is usually stiled Edle van Over∣furst. Sometimes the word Edle is put after the mention of the Barony. Thus in an old Char∣ter granted by Magnus Duke of Brunswic in the year 1360 (as 'tis cited by Paurmeister) we read Evert von Werberge de Edle, for Everard Baron of Werberg. But 'tis doubtless true, what some of the German Lawyers affirm, that Freyen, Frey∣herrn, Edlen Herrn, and Herrn are only so many different words which signifie one and the same Order and Dignity; and may each of them be English'd Barons. Whether the Title of Semper-Freyen be a word which distinguishes the rank of the four above∣mention'd chief Barons of the Empire from all others, is a question disputable enough.Semper-Freyen. Some draw the original of that Title from the solemn words of semper ingenuus existat; which, as they pretend, may be met with in some Copies of old Manumissions. And hence they conclude, that such as to this day retain the name of Freyherrn, are descended from such Ancestors as were an∣cient Barons in the Empire. Others more pro∣bably guess, that the word Semper was only super∣added to the Title of Freyherr to denote the an∣tiquity of those four (who bear this name) in the rank of Barons. Paurmeister gives his opinion of the case proposed in these words: Ego Baronum genera nulla esse arbitror; & quocunque nomine Sem∣per-Freyen, Freyherrn, Edle Herrn, vel singulariter Freyen, Herrn, Edle vel Die Edle, appellantur, No∣bilitate
ac Dignitate pares esse. Omnes enim generali vocabulo Herrn comprehenduntur; ut perpetuo habet Decretorum Comitiorum subscriptio, Von der Graven und Herrn wegen, i. e. I do not think there are any different kinds of Barons; but that whatever Title they may have (whether Semper-Freyen, Freyherrn, Edle Herrn, Freyen Herrn, or Edle), they are all of them notwithstanding of equal Nobility and Dignity; since they all agree in the general Title of Herrn; as we find the De∣crees anciently pass'd in the Diets subscribed, Von der Graven und Herrn wegen, i. e. by assent and authority of the Counts and Barons. And as Herrn is a common name for all sorts of German Barons, so is Herrschaft a general name for a Ba∣rony; which two words the High Dutch use in the same sense as we do Lord and Lordship. We see then what the Title of Frey-herr signi∣fies:on. And in the modern writings of the Germans we seldom or never meet with the word Baron; tho this is as ordinary in Spain, Italy, France, and England, as the former is in Germany. However, Schottelius (who made as diligent enquiry into the ancient monuments and records of the Ger∣man Nation as any man whatever) assures us, that Bar or Baar, in old Teutonic manuscripts, signifies a Baron; and is commonly there used instead of the more modern word Frey-herr. And possibly there may be as just grounds for deri∣ving Baro from the High Dutch as either the La∣tin or Greek. For the Latin word Vir (signifying a man separate and distinct from the vulgar by his virtue, whence the generality of Critics de∣rive Baro) has in all probability been borrowed of the High Dutch; in whose ancient Laws Baro, or Barus, and Foemina, do usually occur for a man or woman. The English Saxons call'd a man ƿer or ƿar; which the old Franks turn'd into Ber, and afterwards Paro. In Junius's Edition of the Codex Argenteus the Gothic word Wair is used for man, and Waire in the plural for men. Sometimes instead of Baron the Germans use the Title of Banner-herr,nner-herr. or Panner-herr; which may be render'd Dominus vexillifer, and signifies the same thing with Banneret. I cannot certainly affirm that the word Banner-herr (tho ordinarily met with in German writers) is ever made use of to denote any High Dutch Title of Honour; but only to express the Honorary Titles of other Na∣tions. What a Chivalier Banneret, or Knight Ban∣neret, (which the Germans usually render Ban∣ner-herr) does signifie, may be learn'd from the account which the Author of La division du mond gives of it. Pour faire, says he, un Chevalier Ban∣neret, cest quant il a longement suyvy les guerres et que il a assez terres et revenue tant que il peult te∣nir et soudoyer cinquants gentils homes, pour accom∣pagnier sa Banniere. Lors il peult licitement lever ladit Banniere et non autrement, car nul autre home ne puit porter Banniere en Battaile sil n'a cinquant homes prestz pour battailler. Which story of main∣taining fifty men under him to accompany his Banner, is in the end of the old printed Copy of Gesta Romanorum in French; notwithstanding the assertion of some late Authors, that a Banneret need have no more then twenty-five (some say ten) men under him. The Germans call a Knight Ritter,tter. for the same reason as the Latins stiled him Eques: because this Title was formerly never conferr'd upon any man that had not perform'd some gallant ex∣ploit in the field; and who was dubb'd Knight by being accouter'd with a Sword and pair of Spurs. One of our ancient English Poets, Dan. Lydgate, gives us a full explication of the Title of Ritter, in these words: Eques ab Equo is said of very right, And Chevalier is said of Chevalry, In which a Rider called is a Knight. Arragoners done also specifie Caballiero through all that party Is name of worship and so took his 'ginning Of spores of Gold, and chiefly Riding. The first original of dubbing of Knights with a Sword, came probably from the ancient cu∣stom of the Northern Nations of girding their young men with a Sword as soon as they were able to bear Arms. Nihil (says Tacitus speaking of the ancient Germans) neque publicae neque pri∣vatae rei nisi armati agunt. Sed arma sumere non ante cuiquam moris, quam Civitas suffecturum proba∣verit. Tum in ipso concilio vel Principum aliquis, vel Pater vel Propinquus, scuto frameaque Juvenem ornant. Haec apud illos Toga, hic primus Juventae honos. Ante hoc Domus pars videntur; mox Reipub∣licae. Besides this Ceremony of giving a Lance or Target to such as were admitted members of the Empire, they had another way of adopting Sons per arma. Thus Theodoric King of the Eastern Goths in Italy, adopted the King of the Heruli; by a Charter still extant in Cassiodorus's Northern History. And hence Justin the Elder being about to adopt Cosroes the King of Persia's Son, was ad∣vised by Proclus his Chancellor  (as Procopius speaks) , i. e. That it should be done according to the custom of the barba∣rous Nations, who did not adopt Sons by Writing but by Arms. There are not so many several Orders of Knight∣hood in Germany as in most other European Na∣tions;Orders of Knight∣hood. if we except those who have any Honour and Title of some particular Order sent them from the Kings of Spain, England, and Denmark. For from these Princes several Dukes, Counts, and other Grandees of the Empire, receive the honorary Titles of Knights of the Golden Fleece, the Garter, and the Elephant. The Teutonic Or∣der of Knighthood (of which we have spoken something before in the Description of Prussia) was first instituted under the walls of Acon, or Ptolemais in the Holy Land; altho Jacob de Vi∣triaco, Polydore Vergilius, Gretser, and several other Historians of good note make the Order much more ancient. After the City was taken by the Christians, these new Knights (who were most of them Citizens of Lubec and Bremen) fix'd them∣selves at a Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary; from whence they are sometimes stiled Equites Mariani. Here they were setled under Henry Walpot (von Passenheim) their first Great Master, in the year 1190. Afterwards, when the Christi∣ans were beaten out of Syria, they remov'd to Venice, and thence to Marpurg in Hassia; where, as in several other parts of Germany, their Con∣vent was endow'd with fair revenues. Whence some fancy they first got the name of Equites Teutonici, or the Dutch Knights; tho in all like∣lihood the Order had this name before it was brought into these parts, consisting at its first institution chiefly of Germans. Being call'd into Prussia, say some, by the Muscovite (or, as others, sent thither by the Emperor Frideric II.) they seat∣ed themselves at Marienberg, about the year 1340 (after a long engagement in a bloody war against the Natives), under the thirteenth Great Master of their Order Sigefrid de Feuchtwangen. In the year 1450 they were forc'd to submit to Casi∣mir IV. King of Poland; and at last the Order was surrender'd by Albert Marquise of Branden∣burg (the thirty-fifth and last Great Master of the
Order) to Sigismund King of Poland, who there∣upon created him Duke of Prussia. Such of the Knights as disrelished this action of their Master Albert, retir'd into Germany; where they chose one Walter Croneberg Master of their Order. Af∣terwards the Title was conferr'd upon Maximi∣lian, one of the younger Sons of the Emperor Maximilian II. But the Order never flourish'd, but decay'd daily, since the days of Albert before∣mention'd; and is at this day an obscure honour of little or no repute in the world. The only Order of Knighthood at this day known in Ger∣many, or taken notice of for Knights of the Em∣pire, are the geschlagenen Rittern, or dubb'd Knights; on whom the Emperor confers that honour by touching them lightly upon the shoul∣der with a naked Sword, and saying to each of them Esto Miles Dei & Sancti Stephani. The Title of Armiger,Esquires. or Esquire (as we and the French use the word), is wholly out of use in the Empire. Yet in ancient Dutch Records we read of Skiltknaben and Wapeneren; both which words have one and the same signification, and are properly render'd Armigeri. And these had their Title and Dignity conferr'd on them by delivery of a Sword only (without girding it on) with a blow on the cheek or ear; which gave them the liberty of bearing a Sword, or other Arms, in attendance on a Knight or Ritter ge∣schlagen, but not of wearing it girded on as the Knight himself did. For it was not lawful for∣merly for any subject whatever in the Empire to bear Arms; excepting such as had the Emperors more especial licence so to do. The Gentry in the Empire are express'd by the general name of Edel-lute;Gentle∣men. which (as our Gentleman) is an universal name for all such as either from the blood of their Ancestors, the favour of their Soveraign, or their own virtue, are raised to an eminency above the multitude. Hence Edel-dom and Edel-heit are used to signi∣fie Nobility; and Veredelen and Edel-machen, to Enoble. Some singularly eminent Gentlemen in Francken, Schwaben, and Rhein-land, who are free from Taxes, and subject to no other Court but the Emperor's, have the Title of die freye vom Adel, or die freye Adeliche Reichs Ritterschaft, i. e. the free Gentlemen, or Ordo Equestris of the Em∣pire. Our English Saxons used the word Aedel in the same signification; whence, in Aelfric's Glos∣sary, Generositas is interpreted AEdelborynnesse, No∣ble Birth; and generosa is render'd by þ AEðele, or a Noble Woman. Indeed Aetheling, Etheling, or Adeling, was commonly used by our Saxon An∣cestors to denote the Kings eldest Son, or Heir apparent to the Crown; who afterwards got the Title of Prince of Wales. Hence Edgar Etheling, so often nam'd in our English Historians, had his Surname; which Robert of Glocester in his Poem upon King Harold (a manuscript Copy of which may be seen in Sir John Cotton's Library) explains thus: The Gode tryewemen of the Lond wolde aabbe ymade King, The kind Eir, the young child Edgar Atheling. Wo so were next King by kunde me cluped him Atheling. Thervore me cluped him so; vor by kunde he was King. But, if we search into the Etymology of the word, we shall find that AEðeling is only a patro∣nymic from the primitive AEðel; and signifies no more then Nobilis ortu, or Generosus, i. e. one de∣scended from him that was AEðel, or a Noble∣man. Thus in King Aelfred's Saxon Version of Bede's Ecclesiastical History, we read mid eallum AEðelingum his ðeode, that is, with all the Ethelings of his Nation; instead of the Latin, Cum cunctis Gentis suae Nobilibus. Of the Present State of the German Church; with a view of the Power and Dignity of the Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Abbots, and other Ecclesiastical Orders therein contain'd. HOW much several of the Provinces and Principalities of the German Empire differ among themselves in points of Religion (since the first beginning of the Reformation by Mar∣tin Luther) we have shew'n before; and it can∣not be expected, that where the Doctrines are so dissonant there should be an Uniformity in Church Discipline. The intolerable greatness which the Roman Church had usurp'd in all parts of the Emperor's Dominions was the first thing which render'd it uneasie; and therefore 'twas no unexpected change (when Luther's opinions had prevail'd with so many of the great Princes of the Empire) to see Bishoprics converted into secular Principalities, and a new form of Church-Government set up instead of Episcopal Dignity which had been so much abused. The Archbishops and Bishops of the Roman Church,Prelates of the Roman Church. who to this day bear rule in such parts of Germany as have not embraced either Luther or Calvin's Doctrine, have more power, and ex∣ercise a greater authority in their several Bishop∣rics then any other Prelates in Christendom. Most of them are great Princes, and challenge as ab∣solute a dominion over the Temporality of their Diocesses as any Secular Elector can pretend to over his own Lands and Inheritance. Hereto∣fore, besides the three Ecclesiastical Electors, there were five Archbishops and thirty Bishops that had Seats and Voices in the Assemblies and Diets of the Empire. But their number has exceedingly decreased of late; since the Archbishoprics of Magdeburg, Bremen, and Riga, together with the Bishoprics of Halberstadt, Minden, and Werden have been chang'd into Secular Principalities; those also of Besanson, Verdun, Mets, and Toul cut off from the Empire, and inseparably united to the Territories of Spain and France; and lastly, those of Valesia, Losanna, and Chur abolished by the Suisses. Insomuch, that at present, in the Col∣ledge of Princes of the Empire, only the Arch∣bishop of Saltzburg (besides the Ecclesiastical E∣lectors) and about twenty Bishops have Votes. By this secularizing three Archbishoprics and six Bishoprics, the Protestant Princes (some of them at least) have lost the opportunities of providing for their younger Brethren in as plentiful a man∣ner as they could have done before the Treaty of Munster. For whilst the Archbishopric of Magde∣burg was in the hands of the Elector of Saxony; that of Bremen in the possession of the King of Denmark; and the rest of the Spiritual Dignities, which are now cut off from the Church, were in the gift of other Princes of the Empire; considerable maintenance was provided for many young Dukes and Counts, who at this time can get nothing but the bare Title of their Elder Brethren, and are not permitted to have the least share in the Inheritance and Temporal Estate of their Ance∣stors. The Bishopric of Lubec remains still an Ecclesiastical preferment, tho in the hands of the Lutherans; and ever since the death of Bal∣thazar of Rantzau (which hapned in the year
1547) has been in the gift of the Dukes of Sles∣wic and Holstein. The present Bishop is a youn∣ger Brother of the Duke of Holstein; and keeps his residence at Eutin, a fair Palace situate on a Lake about two German miles from Lubec. Among the Roman Prelates, the Archbishop of Saltzburg is chief; being born Legate of the Pa∣pal See, and giving place to none but the Electors in the public Diets of the Empire. How fair and strong a City Saltzburg is, and what riches it brings in yearly to this Prelate by the abundance of Salt here vended; we shall have occasion to shew hereafter. Bishops of the Roman Church, who still enjoy a Seat and Suffrage in the Assemblies of the Empire, are, Bamberg, Wirsburg, Wormes, Spire, Eichstedt, Augsburg, Constance, Hildesheim, Pader∣born, Munster, Osnabrug, Passau, Strasburg, Frisinguen, Liege, Trent, Brix, and Basil. Amongst which Osnabrug belongs to the Lutheran Princes by turns; and since the death of Francis Count of Wirtem∣berg, the Bishopric came into the hands of the present Bishop Ernest Augustus, Duke of Lunen∣burg, youngest Brother of the House of Zell. And since the late decayed power of the Elector of Colen (who challenges the Bishopric of Hilde∣sheim) the last Duke of Hanover took possession of the Diocess of Hildesheim, and kept it by a strong hand: And whether his Brother Ernest Augustus (Bishop of Osnabrug, who has lately suc∣ceeded him in the Dukedom of Hanover) will restore it to the Archbishop of Colen, I cannot determine. There had long been a quarrel between the Emperors of Germany and the Bishops of Rome about the Right of Election and Investiture of Bishops in the Empire;sti∣ of ops. before the Council of Trent determined the controversie, and gave the sole power of conferring of Dignities and Prelacies (not only in the German Empire, but in all other parts of Christendom) to the Pope. How unjust an usur∣pation this was, the Pope's own Canons will in∣form us; where we meet with Pope Leo begging leave of the Emperors Ludowic and Lotharius to consecrate one Colonus Bishop of Riete; with se∣veral other the like examples. And an infinite number of Historians, and other ancient Authors (many of which the Reader may find quoted by the learned Author of the Review of the Council of Trent) assure us, that the Emperors always peaceably enjoy'd this Right of investing Bishops and Abbots, till the days of Pope Gregory VII. who (altho himself had receiv'd Confirmation from the Emperor Henry IV. yet) thunder'd out an Excommunication against all Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Marquises, Earls, and all other secular powers that should lay claim to the Right of In∣vestiture into Bishoprics or any other Ecclesiasti∣cal Dignities; and against all those that should receive any such preferment at their hands. This Decree has been observ'd by Gregory's Successors as an inviolable Statute of the Apostolic See; and enroll'd in their Books of Decretals. After many irreconcilable broils and bickerings betwixt the Pope and Emperor (after this Excommunica∣tion was issued out), the one endeavouring to keep, the other to regain the said Right; at last, Henry V. was forced to yeild to Pope Calixtus, and divest himself of that Right which his An∣cestors had always challeng'd, and to which most of them made good their title and plea. This poor Emperor, I say, (abandon'd almost by all the world, and combated by his own Subjects, those especially of the Clergy) was constrain'd to quit his claim to all manner of Investiture by this formal Declaration: I Henry by the Grace of God Emperor of Rome, for the Love of God and of the Holy Roman Church, and of Pope Calixtus, and for the benefit of my own Soul, do restore unto God, and to his blessed Apo∣stles St. Peter and St. Paul, and to the Holy Ca∣tholic Church all kind of Investiture made by the Ring and Staff, and permit that Elections and free Consecrations be made in all Churches. Now (tho the terms of this renunciation shew that it was only personal, and that it laid no ob∣ligation on his Successors to follow his exam∣ple, yet) by virtue of this surrender, the Popes of Rome have for more then five hundred years pretended to an unquestionable Right of Investi∣ture of all sorts of Eclesiastical Dignified persons. And that Emperor's Successors have always want∣ed either courage or strength enough to regain their lost prerogative. There are two ways of advancing these Pre∣lates in the German Church; whereof the one is term'd Election, and the other Postulation. When the Chapter of any Cathedral, being Canonically assembled, chuses any particular member of their own body to be head thereof (which is sup∣posed to be lawfully done, when two thirds of the Canons give him their voices) he is said to be Archbishop or Bishop by Election: But if the same Canons think fit to promote to that Dig∣nity some Prince or Prelate who is not of their own body, they call that kind of proceeding Po∣stulation. Besides the Archbishops and Bishops there are several other Ecclesiastical Princes of the Em∣pire,Abbots. who have Seats and Voices in the Diets. The chief of these is the Master of the Teutonic Order (tho he has nothing but a bare Title from his Order); who keeps usually his Residence at Manenchal or Morkenthal, and has a Vote in all Assemblies immediately after the Archbishop of Saltzburg. The rest are the Abbots of Fulda, Hirsesfeld, Murbach, Kempten, Corbay, Prum, Sta∣bel, and Ludors, the Grand Prior of Malta, the Provosts of Elvang and Beressolagaden; who have Voices after the Bishops. There are three and twenty other Prelates,Abbesses. and fourteen Abbesses that come after the Secular Princes; who (tho they have Seats in the Diets, yet) have no voices but in a full body, no more then the Counts. The Abbesses are they of Qued∣limburg, Essen, Hermord, Nidez, and Obermunster at Ratisbon, Lindau, Herenroda, Buchau upon the Lake, Federsic, Rottemmuster near Rottevil, Hag∣baen, Guttenzel, Beind, Dandelau, and Gunderthem. These Ladies are obliged to send in their Depu∣ties to all public Assemblies of the Empire; be∣ing excus'd a personal presence because of their Sex. However they have as good a right to chal∣lenge Seats in the Diets as any Prince whatever. The three and twenty Prelates have each of them the Title of Abbot, Provost, or Bayliff of some particular place; and have commonly so large revenues annex'd to their Titles and Dignities, that if their riches were employ'd to the best ad∣vantage, they would be able to strike terror into any secular power that should dare to affront them. All the reform'd members of the German Em∣pire (both Lutherans and Calvinists) agree in this,Reformed Church. That they make all their Clergy acknowledg the Supremacy of that Prince under whom they live; who is appeal'd to, by an unanimous consent of both parties, as supreme Judg over Spiritual as well as Temporal Delinquents. But in inferior Orders, and points of Church Discipline there is some small difference betwixt the followers of these two different opinions. Where the Calvi∣nists have got the power into their own hands, we find no mention made of Archbishops or
Bishops; altho in some parts of Germany they are in subjection to Superintendants. The few Lu∣theran Princes that take the Title of Bishops upon them, are as absolute in their Dioceses as secular Monarchs; and have as great command over their Lay-Subjects as Clergy-men. The other Princes, who are purely secular, have in their Dominions general Superintendents; to whom all the Deacons, Priests, and particular Super∣intendents, are obliged to give an account of their Lives and Doctrines. The particular Super∣intendents (who represent our Bishops, as the General ones do Archbishops) visit their Dio∣ceses once a year, and make an exact enquiry into the Doctrine and Manners of all the Pastors un∣der their Inspection. Under every Prince there is a Consistory, answerable to our Convocation of the Clergy; in which the ancientest and most worthy Prelate in the Principality (who is com∣monly the Superintendent General) does usually preside. This Consistory, fortified by the power and authority of the Prince, ordains what is just and reasonable for the maintenance of the pro∣fessed Religion; and has power to degrade, im∣prison, or otherwise punish any offender in holy Orders. This difference of opinions must needs create different interests in the German Church;Interest of the Roma∣nists. and make several of its members (who ought all to be equally concern'd for the common peace) drive contrary ways. The interest of those that have sworn Allegiance to the See of Rome, lies chiefly in crying up and maintaining the Supre∣macy of the Pope; and adhering to the Empe∣ror only so long as he shall acknowledg himself the Popes Vassal. For tho they will grant them∣selves to be Subjects to the German Emperor; yet the bond of Religion tyes them stronger than any other obligation whatever. So that, should there ever arise another Emperor so brave as to dare to undervalue the thunderings of the Vatican, and demand a restitution of those many Prerogatives of which the Pope hath rob'd his Ancestors; it is to be fear'd, there would not be found one Clergy-man in ten, who would forsake the Pope's interest, and close with the Emperor in the controversie. 'Tis true,Interest of the Re∣formed Clergy. the Lutherans are a great share of the Empire; who, if close united, might be able to make head against a very potent Assailant. For the greatest part of the Principalities of the Houses of Saxony, Brandenburg, Brunswic, Lunen∣burg, Holstein, Meklenburg, Wirtemberg, Darmstadt, Dourlach, Lawenburg, and East-Friesland profess the Lutheran Religion; besides a great number of Counts, and the most considerable of the Im∣perial Cities, as Hamburgh, Lubec, Strasburg, Ʋlme, Noremberg, and many others. All which being back'd with Denmark and Sweden (both which Kingdoms embrace the same opinions) might seem strong enough to secure themselves against any future attempts of the Roman party. But in∣deed there is such a mixture of Calvinists in most of the Territories now mention'd, that with these Dissenters they are obliged at least to be at unity; tho otherwise a Lutheran hates the name of John Calvin as bad as he does that of Ignatius Loyala, as hath been before shew'n in the Chapter treat∣ing of the Modern Religion of the Germans. On the other hand, the Calvinists will be sure to stick by the Lutherans whenever they are persecuted by the Popish party; well knowing, that these two opposite props of the Reformed Religion mutually support each other. In some parts of the Elector of Saxony's Dominions there has of late sprung up some small jealousies and discon∣tents between the Professors of the Lutheran and Calvinist doctrines, upon the terrible apprehen∣sions which the Lutherans harbour of the Elector of Brandenburgh's arrival in their neighbourhood; whom they know to be a strict Calvinist, and to have encourag'd the assertors of his own Tenents in most parts of his Electorate. But there is no fear of these petty animosities breaking into a ge∣neral flame; since, even in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, the Lutheran party is still much more numerous then the Calvinist. Of the Laws establish'd and observ'd in the Empire. SInce there are so many different forms of Government in the Empire (which must needs besuppos'd where there are so many Princes that exercise absolute dominion over their own Subjects), we must necessarily expect a great variety in the Bodies of Municipal Laws practis'd and made Statutable in the several Principalities. The Civil Law (strictly so call'd) is indeed the Jus Publicum Romanum; and generally observ'd in every Court of Judicature throughout the whole Empire. But because the four Tomes of these Statutes have not made provision for every particular case, there have since been com∣piled several Bodies of Decrees, which are re∣ceiv'd with as great veneration and esteem, and made as inviolable, as Justinian's Pandects. The chief of which are these: I. Aurea Bulla; which is, in the original,Aurea Bulla. a small Book in Parchment, containing twenty-four Leaves and thirty Chapters; whereof the twenty-three first were published at Noremberg the tenth of January in the year 1356, and the other seven at Mets on Christmas-day following, by the Au∣thority of the Emperor Charles IV. (the first com∣poser of the Decrees therein contain'd) toge∣ther with the approbation and consent of the greatest part of the Princes, Counts, Barons, and other Estates of the Empire. This Imperial Act of Parliament is call'd Bulla for the same reason that all Letters Patents of Emperors, Popes, and several other great Princes have that name gi∣ven, viz. from the Seal which gives it its whole strength and validity. For it is the fashion to hang great Seals at the bottom of Letters and Edicts of State, which have for many years had the name of Bullae, because they resemble those guilt pictures which children in the old Roman Com∣monwealth used to hang upon their breasts till they arriv'd at fourteen years of age, and then consecrated them (as holy reliques) to their Lares. These Seals are not always of the same matter nor bigness; but different in bulk and value, according to the importance of the Let∣ters to which they are fix'd. Ordinary Letters of State (such as contain Commissions or In∣structions for Ambassadors, or the like) are usual∣ly seal'd with an impression made upon Wax; but such as contain publick Statutes or Edicts of Princes, bear Seals of Lead, Silver, or Gold, answerable to the worth and weight of the Laws therein ratified or publish'd. Hence this irrevo∣cable and most important Edict of the Emperor (containing all the fundamental Laws of the Em∣pire touching the time, place, and persons ne∣cessarily requir'd to the due Election of an Em∣peror; the number, immunities, and preemi∣nences of the Electors; the order and decorum they ought to observe in all public Assemblies and Solemnities; the appointing of Vicars in the time of an Interregnum, &c.) was judged fit to
be sealed with the Great Seal of the Empire, and that upon Gold; to shew that (as that metal is the most excellent and incorruptible of all others, so) the matters contain'd in that Bull were indeed the principal Laws of the Empire, and such as should be always inviolably observ'd, without the least alteration. On one side of this Golden Seal (which is fast'ned to small Cords of yellow and red Silk) is shewn the protraicture of the Emperor Charles IV. seated upon his Throne, with his Imperial Crown on his head, the Scepter in one hand, and the Ball in the other; having on his right hand the Arms of the Em∣pire, and those of Bohemia on the left, with this Inscription writ round him, Carolus quartus, Di∣vina favente clementia, Romanorum Imperator, sem∣per Augustus, & Bohemiae Rex. On the other side you have a Castle with two Towers, thus sub∣scribed, Aurea Roma; and these words in the cir∣cumference, Roma caput mundi regit Orbis fraena rotundi. Some of the Statutes herein contain'd (notwithstanding the pretended immutability) have, since the promulgation of them, been vio∣lated and broken. For example, 1. The Aurea Bulla says positively, that the Election of a King of the Romans ought to be had at Francfurt; and yet Ferdinand I. was Elected at Wormes, and Fer∣dinand III. at Ratisbon. 2. The Bull orders, that the number of Electors should not exceed Seven; and yet the Treaty of Munster has alter'd this Decree, and given Eight several Princes Voices in the Election of an Emperor. 3. 'Tis order'd in the Bull, that all the Electors should be pre∣sent at saying of Mass, before they proceed to the Election; whereas, since the Reformation overspread so large a part of the Empire, seve∣ral Protestant Princes are exempted from their attendance at Church until the Ceremony of the Mass be over. II. The next considerable part of the Munici∣pal Laws of the Empire is contain'd in the Capi∣tulatio Caesarea;tula∣aesa∣. which is a Collection of forty-one Articles of Agreement between the Electors and Emperor Elect, to which the later is bound to subscribe (after his having first taken an Oath to observe punctually every thing therein con∣tain'd) before his Coronation. When these are so often transcribed as that each Elector may have one Copy, sign'd and seal'd by the Empe∣ror's own hand, they are deliver'd to, and kept by the Eight several Princes that have voices in the Election, as Sureties for the new chosen Empe∣ror's good behaviour, and faithful administra∣tion of the affairs of the Empire; before which Ceremony is over, the Election is not held valid and irrevocable. The chief things which the Em∣peror promises upon Oath, and subscribes to in these Articles, are: To maintain and preserve all the Priviledges and Royalties of the Electors, Princes, and other inferior Estates of the Empire: That he will not act any thing contrary to the Decrees contain'd in the Golden Bull, but suffer the Electors to assemble at what times, and upon what occasion they shall think fit: That he will not waste or diminish any part of the Revenues of the Imperial Crown; nor bring in any foreign forces into the Empire without the consent of the Electors and the other Estates: That no stranger shall be by him admitted into any public Office; but that, on the contrary, all great places at Court, and in the Field or Country, shall be supplied by true Germans, de∣scended from some Noble Family in the Em∣prie, &c. These, and some other Articles of the like importance, being by the new chosen Em∣peror subscribed and sworn to, the Election is confirm'd, and the Emperor solemnly Crown'd and admitted to the Imperial Throne. III. The third Class of the Laws of the Em∣pire,Recessus Imperii. are such Acts of Parliament (so we may properly enough call them) as are established by Authority of the Emperor and Estates of the Empire assembled in public Diets. These the Germans call Abschiedte, which is commonly ren∣der'd by Latin Authors Recessus Imperii; because they are Enacted at the breaking up (or upon the retirement) of the Assemblies of the Estates General of the Empire. These kind of Statutes are Enacted in the following manner: First, the Electors and other chief Princes, who have par∣ticular Votes in the Diet, take the Bill proposed into consideration; and, after some consultation and debate, put it to the vote. If it be not re∣jected by a majority, the Deputies from the se∣veral Cities are called in; to whom the Decree of the Princes is communicated. If these think they have any thing to say which may reasonably be objected against the sentence of the Electors, they may be heard as Counsellors; but have no vote in altering or establishing any Decree what∣ever. This done, the Archbishop of Mentz (in the name of all the Electors, and other Princes) proposes the matter to the Emperor, as he had done before to the Deputies. If his Imperial Ma∣jesty approves of the sentence, the Bill is pass'd and becomes a Statute; but if he rejects it, the reasons on both sides are scann'd betwixt him and the Princes, till one party yeild. When they are agreed upon the thing debated, the Acts of that Session are drawn up in form of Laws, and read to the whole Diet. Afterwards (as soon as they are sign'd by the Emperor, two Spiri∣tual and two Temporal Princes, one Abbot, one Count, and the Common Council-men of the City where the Diet is held) they are publish'd, and become Statutes obligatory through the whole Empire. When they are thus Enacted, two authentic Copies are made; whereof one remains in the custody of the Emperor, the other of the Archbishop of Mentz. The rest of the Estates have only the priviledg of transcribing the original Copies. IV. To the three former may be added a fourth sort of Decrees in the Empire,Sanctio Pragma∣tica. call'd usually by the German writers Sanctio Pragmatica de Pace publica; which contains all the Statutes (con∣firm'd by many of the Emperors in several Diets) to be put in execution against all disturbers of the public peace of the Empire. Herein 'tis decreed, that whatever Prince, or any other member of the Empire, shall endeavour by open hostility to disturb the public peace of the whole body; he shall be cut off from the other members, and look'd upon as an Out-law. But 'tis hard to imagine, that this should be put in execution against any offender; if the interpretation which some High Dutch Lawyers have put upon it be allowable. For they tell us, that to qualifie a man for the proscription herein mention'd, it is necessary, 1. That the forces he raises be atroces & majores quam quibus resisti queat, i.e. such as the whole Militia of the Empire is not able to with∣stand. 2. That his Army consist not of Volun∣teers, but Soldiers press'd to Rebellion. 3. That the person thus offending have evil designs in his head (as 'tis indeed a thousand to one but he has), and an intention of overthrowing the establish'd Government. Any one of these accom∣plishments is not enough, they say, to make a compleat disturber of the peace; but 'tis necessary that they all concur, before the Law can take hold of any man as a delinquent. To these four heads may be referr'd all the Laws and Decrees in force at this day over the
whole Empire; excepting what is contain'd in the Emperor Justinian's Collections of the Roman Laws. However in particular Provinces and Principalities we must expect to find other Bodies of Statutes; such are the Sachsen-Spiegel, Schwa∣ben-Spiegel, Das Sachsische Weichbild, &c. of which more at large when we come to treat of the se∣veral Princes Dominions where they are ob∣served. Because it is not possible we should in this place give the Reader an exact account of the Laws peculiar to Germany, and others common to the Empire with other Nations; therefore we shall refer him, for the satisfaction of his curiosity in this particular, to the works of those many learn∣ed Lawyers which have treated at large of this subject. Among whom Hermannus Conringius (late Professor of Physick at Helmstadt) is usually reckoned the most eminent; Arumaeus, Besoldus, Speidelius, Hippolytus a Lapide, Paurmeister, Lam∣padius, and others, have done their Country great service in collecting together, and com∣menting upon, the Municipal Laws of the Ger∣man Empire. The Recessus Imperii (or Statute-Laws of the States assembled in the public Diets) are collected into one body, and sometimes illu∣strated with accurate notes by the Author of the Comitiologia, Panvinius, Gotlieb von Hagen, and most especially by the industrious and learned Author of a small book entituled Grundfeste des Heiligen Romischen Reiches. Monsieur Rachel (Ple∣nipotentiary from the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp in the late Treaty of Peace at Nimeguen) pub∣lished a small Treatise this present year 1680, entituled Introductio ad Jus Publicum Germanicum; wherein he gives a concise, but learned account of the Historical, Chronological, and Georgra∣phical parts of the whole Common-Law practis'd in the German Empire. Of the DIETS of the Empire, and the matters therein transacted. THE Supreme Court of Judicature in the German Empire is the Diet; which is no∣thing else but a General Assembly of all the Estates of the Empire. It answers in all things to our High Court of Parliament; whether we respect the Persons that constitute it, or the Affairs usually therein transacted. When the Emperor,Summons. by advice of the Electors (who are of his Council) has a mind the Estates should assemble, he issues out his Summons by Letters to the several Princes and other Estates of the Empire, who have Seats and Votes in the Diet, acquainting them with the time and place appointed for their sitting. Every member of the Diet is bound by his Allegiance to appear at the day appointed, either in person or by proxy. In the old Francic Kingdom, the several Princes of the Empire were bound to make their perso∣nal appearance, and never permitted to send De∣puties in their places; except upon a just and lawful pretence, to be approv'd of by the Em∣peror and Electors. Whence it happen'd, that in those days there would not appear above two or three Deputies at most in a Diet: whereas now the better half consists usually of such Sub∣stitutes as have no voices of their own, but come there to vote for their Masters. The chief rea∣son for such an alteration sprung from the grow∣ing luxury of later Ages; which oblig'd some poor Princes to keep away, for fear of being con∣strain'd to live at a rate beyond what their Purse would bear, tho no more then what their Quality required. Hence proceedings in the Diet come to be so slow pac'd, and every matter in debate is held much longer in agitation (before any thing be finally resolv'd on) then it would be, if every Prince were obliged to personal appea∣rance. For it must needs often happen, that in several particular cases brought before the Diet the Deputies want full instructions; and so, not daring to act beyond their Commission, are forc'd to expect new Orders from their Masters before they will venture to proceed. Nay, since the days of Maximilian the Emperor (and for some short time before) many of the Estates have taken the liberty of neither appearing in person, nor by their Ambassadors. However, in such cases all matters transacted in the absence of these Estates or their Deputies, have as much force as if they were present; as appears from the Reichs absciede zu Trier und Colln A. D. 1512. §. Es solln auch, &c. But when some grand and important affairs of the Empire require the personal ap∣pearance of the Members themselves, the Em∣peror commonly urges them by his Summons to repair in person to the place appointed. Thus Ferdinand King of the Romans (in the year 1555) not only by his Letters Patents, but by Ambassa∣dors requested of the particular Estates, that they would give their personal attendance, and not leave matters of so great importance (as were then like to be brought before them) to be taken into consideration by Deputies only, who could not make so ready a dispatch as the weight of the affairs before them would require. After such a pressing Summons as this, the Estates (that absent themselves) either send in no Deputies at all, or else make their Ambassadors Plenipoten∣tiaries, by giving them as full power and autho∣rity to vote and act in the Assembly as if they themselves were present. The old Roman Emperors used to call Assem∣blies of their Estates at Roncale (a pleasant place upon the River Padus); where the Princes,Place. and others, gave their votes in the open fields. After∣wards they removed their meetings into great Towns and Cities; which was a custom before Charles the Great pitcht upon Mentz as a place most convenient for the setting of the Diet. The Aurea Bulla orders, that whoever is chosen King of the Romans, should hold his first Diet at No∣remberg; but with this proviso, Nisi legitimum obsteterit impedimentum, i. e. Except a lawful rea∣son may be given for the contrary. Hence Charles V. gives this reason why he did not ob∣serve the Statute of the Bull, Dieweil er der Ster∣blichen lufft halber den Reichstag zu Nurnberg nicht habe halten wollen, habe er solchen gen Wormbs an∣gesetzet, i. e. Since he could not conveniently hold a Reichstag (or Diet) at Noremberg, because of the bad and unwholsome air; therefore he thought good to remove it to Worms. The like reasons were given by the Emperor Maxi∣milian for removing the Diet to Augsburg, and by Ferdinand III. for calling one at Regenspurg. By Charles the Fifth's Capitulation 'twas order'd, that it should be lawful for the Emperor to call a Diet at what place he pleased; provided it were not without the bounds of the German Empire. But because there ought to be had a respect to the convenience of the several Princes and Estates as well as the Emperor himself; therefore in the Capitulation sworn to by the present Emperor Leopold, 'tis expresly said, Ʋnd sunderlich keinen Reichstag ausserhalb des Reichs Teutscher Nation, auch ehe und bevor wir darzu umb der sieben Chur∣fursten consens und verwilligung durch sonderbahre
schickung angehalten, und uns mit denselben so wohl der zeit als mahlstat vergleichen, oder sie von selbsten des Reichs anliegen halber uns darumb unterthanig angelanget und erinnert, vornehmen oder ausschrei∣ben, i. e. And especially no Diet without the bounds of the German Empire, nor before by an express Ambassador we have obtain'd the consents of the seven Electors, and consulted with them about the time as well as place of the Diet's sit∣ting; or they themselves, taking the public good of the Empire into consideration, shall humbly desire Us to call such an Assembly. At present the Diet is usually held at Ratisbon; as a place of a convenient distance from the Courts of most of the Princes, and other Estates, of the Em∣prie. As soon as any of the Estates,ing Em∣ or their Am∣bassadors, are come to the place appointed, the first thing they do is to beg audience of the Em∣peror, to whom they shew their Summons, thank his Imperial Majesty for his gracious calling a Diet, and promise their utmost endeavours in promoting the general good of the Empire in the following Assembly. The Ambassadors are bound to give the Emperor an account of the reasons of their Masters absence; according to an Order of the Diet to that purpose, as appears from the Reichs Ascheide zu Trier und Colln, A. D. 1621. §. Es sollen auch die Churfursten, &c. This done, they are to acquaint the Marshal of the Empire (Count Papenheim) with their arrival, that he may be the better able to execute his Office; which is, to provide each man a lodging sutable to his Quality, and to write down the names of every particular member. Lastly, they are to give in their names to the Chancellor's (or Archbishop of Mentz's) Office; and there to shew their Credentials. The proposal of every thing to be discussed in the Assembly belongs to the Emperor alone,osals. and not to the Estates or Members of the Diet. And altho in his Summons a particular day be always nominated for their Session, yet 'tis in the power of his Imperial Majesty to defer the proposal of any business for some time longer. Insomuch that oftentimes the Estates (to save charges) have made a later appearance then was appointed in their Summons. When the late Emperor Ferdinand III. had call'd a Diet at Ratisbon in the year 1654, three months were almost slipt over, after the day appointed, before any thing was proposed to the Assembled Mem∣bers. When, at last, the Emperor is pleased to make the States acquainted with their business, the Vice-Marshal gives warning to every parti∣cular Member to attend his Imperial Majesty at such a set time. At which time appointed, the Electors, and the rest, give their attendance, and wait on the Emperor to Church; where public prayers are had for the happy success of all their consultations in settling the Affairs of the Em∣pire. Which done, they all return to the grand Council Chamber; where the Emperor in his Robes declares to the Estates the reasons why they are assembled, and proposes to them the heads they are to treat of in the following Diet. The controversie about taking place in the Diets has been long since determined amongst the Electors by the Golden Bull;eceden∣ but the other Princes, and Deputies for the Imperial Cities, have continual quarrels at every meeting; inso∣much that sometimes the Diet is ready to break up in confusion; and would doubtless often do it, if some milder spirits then the rest did not compose the strife by yeilding their places to their Antagonists with a reserved protestation against making use of this single instance as a president for the future. The order observed by the Ele∣ctors in the Assembly, is somewhat different from what it was before the Treaty of Munster; upon the account of the Duke of Bavaria's being made one of the number. At this day they seat them∣selves thus: First, the Elector of Mentz chal∣lenges the chief place, and sits always in the middle. On his right hand are placed the Ele∣ctors of Treves and Colen, by turns; and, after one of them, the Bavarian and Brandenburgher. On the left (after one of the abovenamed Spi∣ritual Electors) the Duke of Saxony and Prince Palatine of the Rhine. The Ambassadors of the Electors take the same place among themselves as if their Masters were personally present; but if any one Elector appear in his own person, the Ambassadors of all the rest yeild him the place, tho perhaps he should have sat below all their Masters. The Princes of the Empire divide themselves into two Benches;Princes of the Em∣pire. Die Geistliche und Weltliche (as they call them, or) the Spiritual and Secular. In the Diets of the old Francic Kingdom, the Bishops, or Prelates, and Secular Princes made two distinct and separate Bodies; as they do to this day in Provincial Courts. And the reason was the same; because the Prelates used not to intermeddle with matters of State, but concern'd themselves only in setling the affairs of the Church, with which the Secular Princes were never con∣cern'd. But afterwards, when the Bishops of Rome had removed the debate of all Ecclesiastical af∣fairs from the German Assemblies to their own Courts, the Prelates of the Empire appear'd no more in the public Diets as Bishops, but as Tem∣poral Princes; such as had no Secular Jurisdiction being shut out of the Court. On the Spiritual Bench sit the Arch-Dukes of Austria, and the Dukes of Burgundy (who were permitted this honour because Princes, tho Secular, yet of a more then ordinary eminence in the Empire); the Arch∣bishops and Bishops, that are not Electors; seve∣ral Abbots (some of which had Princely Digni∣ties conferr'd on them by Charles the Great); and lastly, the Master of the Teutonic Order. The Lutheran Prelates were formerly wholly excluded from all appearance at any General Assembly of the Estates of the Empire; against which hard usage their often repeated Protestations prov'd unsuccessful. At last, matters were so order'd in the Westphalian Treaty of Peace, that they obtain'd a Seat in the Diets; but not amongst the Roman Prelates, nor the Secular Princes, but on a Bench by themselves, betwixt both the other. But because the Archbishopric of Magdeburg (by vertue of the said Treaty) is turn'd into a Duke∣dom; and the Bishoprics of Lubeck and Osnabrug into Secular Principalities by turns; therefore at this day all the Reformed Princes (excepting those that are Electors) sit on the Secular Bench, which is appointed for all Princes, Counts, and Barons of the Empire, who have votes in the Diets. All the Ecclesiastical Members of the Diet have not equal votes;Prelates. as neither have the secular ones. The Ecclesiastical as well as Secular Princes of the Empire (as also all other Prelates that have Princely Dignities annex'd to their Sacred Functions, together with the Master of the Teu∣tonic Order) have single voices; and give in their votes to the Vice-Marshal by turns. But others, that can lay no claim to any Temporal Princi∣pality, give their voices by companies. Of this last sort there are at this day two Benches, die Schwabische and Rheinische. Formerly, the Counts and Barons of the Empire had no more then two voices; and were therefore (as the Prelates are now) divided into two Benches, call'd by the
Germans in those days die Wetterawische und Schwa∣bische Bank. Afterwards, in the Diet held in the year 1641, the Counts of Franconia had a pecu∣liar voice allow'd them; and not long after (in the year 1654) another vote was given to the Counts of Saxony and Westphalia. So that at pre∣sent there are four Benches of Counts (the Schwa∣bish, Wetterawish, Francic, and Westphalian) who have votes in the public Diets of the Empire. The Deputies or Delegates of the Imperial Cities make up the third and last rank of the Members of a General Diet or Assembly of the Estates of the Empire.Imperial Cities. What time the Cities that have now votes, and go under the known name of Imperial Cities, came to have that pri∣viledg, cannot certainly be learn'd from the Ger∣man Historians. The Author of the Chronicle of Spire endeavours to prove, that several of these Cities were invested with this honour in the twelfth Century. The Oath taken by the Emperor Fer∣dinand I. may seem to countenance this relation, In Christi Nomine Juro, non solum Principum, sed Ci∣vitatum ccnsilio, negotia, confoederationes & Collegia Ʋniversitatis tractanda esse. But this passage is not to be understood of the Cities of Germany (which in this Emperor's days were in too mean a con∣dition to offer to concern themselves in the Go∣vernment of the Empire), but of those in Italy; which many years before had been call'd to pub∣lic Assemblies in the Italian Kingdom. The most probable opinion is, that the Imperial Cities (those I mean in Germany which at this day bear that name) were not admitted to the Diet be∣fore the fourteenth Century; not long before they were reckon'd up by the Emperor Charles IV. (in his Golden Bull) amongst the other Estates of the Empire. Their Deputies at present are divided into two Benches; whereof the one is called Die Rheinische, and the other Die Schwa∣bische Bank. On the former, sit the Deputies of Lubec, the free Cities upon the Rhine, in Witteraw, Alsace, Saxony, and Thuringen. On the latter, the Delegates from the free Cities in Schwaben and Franconia. The Deputies of the City where the Diet is held, sit at a Table by themselves, and there take an account of the voices of other De∣legates; which are brought to them, and register'd by the two Registers of Ʋlm and Spire; whereof the former represents the Cities in the Rheinish Circle, and the latter those of Schwaben. Some Historians will tell us,Debates. that the greatest disputes which happen at a German Diet, are about precedency; and that more time is spent in rank∣ing the Members in their due places, then in de∣bating the Emperor's Proposals when they are set down. Another fourth part of their time (or rather more) they will have to be spent in set drinking matches. Whence the Emperor Fer∣dinand is said sharply to have reprehended the intemperance of the greatest part of the Am∣bassadors sent to the Diet from the several Princes and Imperial Cities. A third quarter of their time is employ'd in disputing the Priviledges and Prerogatives of a Diet; and shewing in what cases it may, or may not be curb'd or controll'd by the Emperor. The fourth and last part they spend upon the business proposed by the Empe∣ror; which is commonly concerning some Ar∣ticles of Peace with some foreign Nation; the making or renewing some Laws of the Empire; the regulating of Coinage; raising of Taxes; or some such State affair. Of the Imperial Chamber, and other General Courts of Judicature. IN the days of Charles the Great, and some of his Successors,Imperial Chamber the Bishops and Officers of the Crown jointly with the Emperor decided all Ecclesiastical causes. The Prelates, Counts, and other persons of Quality, who had any Suits of Law to commence, were heard at the first in∣stance in the Emperor's Court; but the Secular Princes could not be judged but in the General Diets of the Empire. Afterwards when Law∣suits began to multiply in proportion to the growing malice and wickedness of men, the in∣finite numbers of Clients that overstockt the Court became burthensom to the Emperor, who could not possibly attend and hear all Causes brought before him. Besides, the Emperor's Court be∣ing not always kept in one place, both parties concern'd in any controversie were forced to fol∣low the Emperor for a decision into the remotest parts of Germany. Upon these considerations, Maximilian I. (taking compassion upon his quar∣relsom Subjects, and desiring as much as possi∣bly he could to save both their labour and mo∣ney) setled a Sedentary Parliament at Worms or Francfurt in the year 1495, which was soon after brought to Spire; whence it cannot be removed without a consent of all the Estates of the Empire, except in time of Plague or War. At first the Assessors,Assessors. appointed as Judges in this Court, were only sixteen; but their num∣ber has since been encreased to fifty, who are all nominated by the Head and principal Members of the Empire. The Emperor names the supreme Judg (who is always a Count or Baron, and well skill'd in the Civil and Municipal Laws of the Empire) and four of the principal Officers. Each Elector names one Assessor; and the rest are pro∣moted to that employment by the several Circles or Benches of Voters in the Diets. Now, as those Princes and Estates of the Empire who have power to nominate the Assessors in this Court, are of different Religions (some adhering to the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, and others professing the Reform'd Religion, and em∣bracing the opinions either of Luther or Calvin), so are also the Assessors themselves. Tho there lies no appeal from the Imperial Chamber to any other Court of Judicature;Visiters. yet if the Judg and Assessors of this Court be accused of any unjust proceedings in the determination of any controversie, execution of the sentence pro∣nounced is deferr'd till the Visiters of the Cham∣ber examine the reasonableness of the complaint, and redress the grievance if justly alledg'd. Whence it appears, that the Assessors themselves that sit at this Tribunal are not the supreme Judges of the Empire; but that their Visiters may more justly claim that Title. For some time before the conclusion of the Westphalian Treaty of Peace, it was almost impossible to procure any such Vi∣sitation, because of the continual quarrels be∣tween the Princes of the Roman and Lutheran per∣swasion; the former of whom denied the later the power and authority of Visiting the Impe∣rial Chamber, which by the Fundamental Laws of the Empire was conferr'd upon them. All Appeals from other inferior Provincial Courts of Judicature are made hither;Appeals. tho few trouble this Court but such as are very quarrel∣som themselves, or forc'd to give their atten∣dance by others that are so. For Justice is here but slowly administred, by reason (chiefly) of the vast number of old Suits, commenced many years ago between several great Princes of the
Empire, which are still depending. At the West∣phalian Treaty, the Evangelical (as they stile themselves) or Lutheran Estates of the Empire made a general complaint of the abuses put upon them by the Assessors of the Imperial Chamber; in which, amongst other things, they tell the Protestant Princes and Ambassadors assembled at that Treaty, Dass es mit der Administration der Justitz zu Speyer dermassen langsahm und verzug∣lich zugehet, dass die gerichtliche Process bey eines Menschen ja offtermals kindes und kindes kinder gantzen lebenzeiten kaum zu ihrem endlichem be∣schluss, i. e. That the administration of Justice at Spire is so intolerable slow-pac'd, that sometimes a Law-suit cannot be finish'd in a man's whole life-time; but must be left to be manag'd by his Grandchildren. But since in the foremen∣tioned Treaty matters were in part composed between the Protestant and Popish party, the Lutherans are not so much abused as formerly; nor are they forc'd to attend any longer for the administration of Justice then others Members of the Empire. Those that are immediately subject to the Emperor, have all their simple Law-cases tried at this Court; but others that are only mediately his Subjects, make no ap∣pearance, save only upon appeal from some lower Court. Another High Court of Judicature is in the Emperor's Palace,ichs . wherever he keeps his resi∣dence; call'd by the Germans Der Reichs Hoffrat, which we may English, The Dutch King's Bench. The Emperor Ferdinand I. published the Laws and Ordinances to be observed in the Trial of all Law-Cases in this Court, in the year 1549. Which orders were afterwards enlarged by Maxi∣milian II. 1596. And lastly revised and amended by the Emperor Matthias in the fourteenth year of this Century. In this Court the Emperor himself is supreme Judg; being assisted by a cer∣tain company of Assessors, whereof some are Protestants and others Papists. The Emperor's place is usually supplied by his Representative or President of the Court; who is always a Count, or Baron at least, of the Empire. 'Tis a point much controverted by the Ger∣man Lawyers, Whether the Authority of this Court or the Imperial Chamber at Spire be the greater? Most of them appear vigorously for the later; and tell us, That even the Emperor himself falls under the cognisance of this Court, tho he be Judg in the other. For proof of this they produce several authentic Records, where∣by it appears, that the German Emperors have been summoned to appear as Defendants before the Assessors at Spire. But let them consider, that the Imperial Chamber is under the inspection of Visitors, who have power to correct all errors and misdemeanours in the proceedings of the Assessors; whereas the Reichs Hoffrat is not sub∣ject to any such Supervisors. Again the Hoffrat takes immediate notice of all manner of Cases in the Empire; many of which the Imperial Chamber cannot take into consideration, except they are legally removed from some inferior Court. Lastly, by whom was an Emperor ever summon'd to appear at the Imperial Chamber in Spire? Questionless not by the Judg and As∣sessors of that Court; who could never pretend that their borrowed power was greater then their Master's that lent it them. No. But whenever the Emperor was summon'd to appear, 'twas done by his own permission; and the summons always run in his name. For example, one of these papers begins thus: Wir Maximilian, erwehl∣ter Romischer Kayser, entbieten dir Maximilian Ertz-Hertzogen zu Oesterreich, &c. Where Maximilian Elect Emperor of the Romans summons Maxi∣milian Arch-Duke of Austria (the same man) to make his appearance. And I cannot see how from hence any man can rationally conclude, that the power of the Judg and Assessors in the Impe∣rial Chamber at Spire reaches further then the Emperor's. What is remarkable in the proceedings in the several Provincial Courts of Judicature, shall be taken notice of when we come to the Descripti∣ons of the particular Provinces wherein they are held. Of the present State and Interest of the GERMAN Empire. THat the whole Empire of Germany (if the Members thereof were firmly united) would be the most potent and invincible Nation in Europe, is without controversie, and asserted by the unanimous consent of all modern Poli∣titians. But as long as the Princes and Counts (who by their carriage declare themselves no more then nominal Subjects to the Emperor, but real and absolute Lords in their own Terri∣tories) are at a continual enmity amongst them∣selves, Ephraim against Manasses and Manasses against Ephraim; they cease to become a terror, and are made a prey to their neighbours. Hip∣politus a Lapide's grand rule for fixing the Em∣pire in a flourishing condition (by healing up its breaches, and uniting its disjointed members) was questionless a soveraign receipt; which would infallibly have cured all the diseases of the then miserable Empire, if it could have been made practicable with as much ease as 'twas proposed. But (as the learned Pufendorf, under the covert name of Monzambanus, has observ'd) 'tis in vain to preach up such doctrines in the Empire, till we are assured that all the Princes of Germany are wise men, and know how to govern their passions according to the exactest rules of mora∣lity and true policy. What miseries their own animosities and quar∣rels brought upon them, all Historians (who give us an account of the brave exploits of Gusta∣vus Adolphus) will acquaint us. Different opi∣nions in Religion first bred jealousies between the Emperor and the chief Princes of his Em∣pire; which afterwards broke out into a flame, and set all Germany on fire; nay, and brought the whole Nation into so miserable a condition that there was not a Province in it which had not (by fire and sword, by plague and famine) lost half its inhabitants. The Swedes had Gar∣risons in one hundred twenty and five several places in Germany; the French in forty-six; and the Hessians in thirty-nine; and all these forces brought against the Emperor at the request of his own discontented Subjects. It will not be amiss in this place to take a short abstract of the Articles signed in the Treaty of Munster;Treaty of Munster. as far as they relate to the new Accessi∣ons obtain'd by other Kingdoms and Principa∣lities, and the losses sustain'd by the Emperor in the late Civil wars. Since from hence we shall not only perceive what the miseries were which their own dissentions brought upon them; but also learn in what condition the Empire was after the Ratification of the said Westphalian Treaty. First then, it was agreed, That the Imperialists should pay to the Crown of Sweden five milli∣ons of Gold to defray the charges of the War,
(one third part whereof was afterwards laid out in paying off and disbanding some of the Swe∣dish Forces, another was given away in rewards to such Officers as had shew'n their gallantry in the Wars, and the third was disposed of in libe∣ralities by the Queen). Besides this money, the Empire quitted, and annex'd to the Kingdom of Sweden, all the hither Pomeren, with the Island and Principality of Rugen, the Cities of Stetin, Garts, Dam, Holnau, the Isle of Wollin, the River Oder, and the part of Frischehaff; the Collation of all the Ecclesiastical Benefices which the Dukes of Pomeren challeng'd before the Treaty in the Bishopric of Camin, with the Reversion of that Bishopric, nay of the rest of Pomerania, and the new Marquisate of Brandenburgh, in case the Heirs male of that Family should happen to fail. Add to these Wismar, a strong Port-Town on the Baltic Sea; the Fortress of Walfisch, the Baili∣wic of Poel and Neucloster; and lastly, the Arch∣bishopric of Bremen, and Bishopric of Werden, both converted into Dukedoms; together with the City and Bailiwic of Wilshausen. So that by that Treaty the King of Sweden got the Titles of Duke of Bremen, Werden, and Pomeren, Prince of Rugen, and Lord of Wismar. And in all these Lands and Territories had supreme power and authority to Erect Universities, set Imposts upon all Commodities, either exported or imported, and the like; paying only to the Emperor a small homage, as is done by other great Princes of the Empire. II. To the King of France, and his Suc∣cessors for ever, were given (by the same Trea∣ty) the Cities and Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, with Moyenvic, Pignerol, Brisac, the Landt∣gravedom of Alsatia, the Bailiwic of Haguenau, and the Fortress of Philipsburg. By this bargain the French were great gainers; and the Empe∣ror lost not much. The former, besides the considerable enlargement of their Territories, cut off all possibility of the Spaniards uniting his Italian Forces with those in the Low Countries; which might easily be done as long as Alsace and Lorain were in the hands of the Arch-Dukes of Austria. The later, by giving up his right in Alsace, made the Kingdom of Bohemia heredi∣tary to his House; and therefore catcht as much with one hand as he lost on the other. What the acquisitions or losses of particular Princes were, we shall take occasion to shew in the De∣scriptions of the several Principalities which they now possess. We see into what condition the Emperor of Germany was brought by engaging himself in a Civil war with the Princes of his Empire;Present Estate. how much of his Dominions were snatcht away by the Swedes on the one hand, and the French on the other. This was the posture of the German affairs, till the late wars with France and Sweden alter'd the scene; for the French enlarg'd their conquests in the German Territories, and the Swedes lost a great part of the Dominions which the Westphalian Treaty had made them Masters of; and more they had parted with, if the over∣grown power and authority of the French King had not forc'd the Elector of Brandenburgh to resign a great many places which he had bravely won. How matters will at last be adjusted be∣tween France and the Empire, is hard to deter∣mine; since the French King lays claim daily to some new Rights or Priviledges in the Emperor's Dominions. However, Strasburg is still reckon'd the Imperial Bulwark against the French fury (as it has always been esteem'd), notwithstanding the pretensions of their King to several Rights of this City. And as the Empire seems secured from any sudden incursion of the French by Strasburgh; so it is from all invasions of the Turk by Vienna; of the Polander by Ʋvratislaw; of the Dane by Hamburgh and Lubeck; and of the Hollanders by Colln. So that there is no great fear of being injur'd by a foreign enemy, if all the German Princes would unanimously join hands in defend∣ing the strong Holds, and securing the bounds of that Empire whereof they pretend to be Mem∣bers. But as long as each petty Prince is only solicitous about the enlargement of his own small Demesne, and the strongest permitted to annex as much of their neighbour's Territories to their own as they can lay their hands on, the German Empire is in great danger of being de∣stroy'd by its own Members. The Electors in∣deed, and all the other great Princes of the Em∣pire pay some small Homage and Acknowledg∣ment to the Emperor; but all the while exer∣cise as absolute a Monarchical Dominion in their several Principalities as the Emperor himself does in Austria or Bohemia. So that Germany is not really a Nation subject to one supreme Head and Go∣vernor, but a combination of several little Com∣monwealths and Kingdoms; whose general inte∣terest consists in maintaining an inviolable confe∣federacy amongst themselves, and an unanimous desire to secure rather then enlarge their Domi∣nions. In a word, The Foreign Interests of the Empire (to speak in the language of the in∣comparable Sir William Temple) are the defence of the Eastern parts against the Turk, and the preservation of the Western Circles against the growth of France; the Domestic, are the limited Constitution of the Imperial power, and the balance of the several free Princes and States of the Empire. Of the HANS-Towns. BEfore we come to a particular Description of Hamburgh, and other great Cities on the Northern and Western parts of the Empire, 'twill be convenient to premise something of the Hans-Towns in general; that the Reader may the bet∣ter understand what we mean by that word, when he shall meet with it in the following sheets. By Hans-Towns then the German writers under∣stand a certain number of great Cities all along the Sea-shore, from the Finnic Bay down as far as the mouth of the Rhine; which several ages ago enter'd into a solemn confederacy for the advancement of Trade, and the better security of their Territories against the incursions of any foreign Enemy. In what year this League was made,When fo Confede∣rate. is not certainly known; and Chytreus (who was as di∣ligent and curious in enquiring after these kind of Antiquities as any Historian of the German Nation) tells us, that very few of the old Re∣cords he had met with in any of the Hans-Towns, could give him the least hint of the year when they were admitted into that number. However, he guesses the Society was first instituted a little before the reign of the Emperor Ferdinand II. about the year 1200. And the noble Historian Thuanus embraces his opinion in this as well as most other particulars of the German History which he meddles with. John Angelius Werden∣hagen (an impertinent Author, who has scribled four large Tomes De Rebus publ. Anseaticis) gives no positive account of the first original of this Confederacy; but seems to bring it down from
the time of Henry Duke of Brunswic, surnamed the Lion. Henry Suderman (who was sometime Counsellor to the Hans-Towns) fetches its Insti∣tution far further then the beginning of the thir∣teenth Century, or later end of the twelfth; which is the time usually pitcht upon by other Historians. With how little probability these opinions are back'd, is easie to observe; tho per∣haps, after the most diligent enquiry, we shall not be able to guess right our selves. For Lu∣beck has been always look'd upon as the chief of all the Hans-Towns, and for that reason their High Court of Judicature was kept there. There∣fore 'tis very likely that this City was one of the first that enter'd into that solemn League and Covenant. Now 'tis certain, that Lubeck was only built towards the later end of the twelfth Century; and it is hard to imagine, that this Town and Hamburg would enter into any such League as long as they were under the yoke of the then inconsiderable King of Denmark; which they did not shake off before the year 1226. Be∣sides, if Lubeck were then one of the Hans-Towns we should meet with an account of some succour sent her when she was engaged in war against Waldemar and his two Sons, Eric Abel and Christo∣pher, Kings of Denmark (which was ended about the year 1259); and yet no Historian of those times mentions any such thing. We may there∣fore probably enough conclude, that the said Cities enter'd not into any Confederacy till after the sixtieth year of the thirteenth Century; at which time Peace was first concluded with the Danes, and Trade began to be improv'd in these parts of the German Empire. What Angelius re∣ports of his having seen some Charters and Pri∣viledges granted to the united Hans-Towns, which are dated in the year 1194, is as little to be cre∣dited as the stories which others of the German Historians relate of our King Henry the Third's granting of large Priviledges to the same Cities in the 1206; whereas 'tis well known, that this Prince was not advanced to his Fathers Throne before the year 1216, and was then only nine years of age. Polydor Virgil (to whom we know what credit to give, in those particulars especi∣ally wherein he dissents from the rest of our Eng∣lish Historians) witnesses indeed for these men, that Henry the Third did grant some such kind of priviledges to the Hans-Towns as they men∣tion; but the same Author will tell them, that this King reign'd till the year 1273. And Ange∣lius, when he comes to ransack old Norwegian papers for testimonies of the Antiquity of this Society, can produce nothing of unquestionable authority (as he phrases it) written before the year 1278. Afterwards, when he comes to give us a short Compendium of their Laws (which he has transcribed out of Domannus); the oldest amongst them does not bear date beyond the year 1312. So that possibly this Company was no proper Body Politic before that time. But the German Historians differ as much in assigning the derivation of the word Hans,ne. and the reasons why these Confederate Cities should call themselves by that name; as they do in pitch∣ing upon the time of the first Institution of their Confederacy. We shall give the Reader a short catalogue of the most probable opinions; and leave it to his judgment to embrace or reject any of them as he shall see cause. First then, some derive the word Hanse, or Anse (for in Latin Au∣thors we meet with Ʋrbes Anseaticae and Ansati∣cae, as well as Hansaticae) from the Dutch am zee or am see, signifying near unto, or upon the Sea-shore; because, say they, the Hans-Towns were at first only a company of Cities which (lying upon the Sea-shore) enter'd into a Confederacy meerly for the advancement of Trade by Navi∣gation. And that this was the sole end of their entring into a League (and not the securing of their Territories, which was the thing which some Cities upon the Rhine proposed to themselves upon their entring into the like Confederacy) they prove from the testimonies of Chytraeus and Crantzius; who are Authors of good credit and authority. 2. Others bring the word from Hansa, which in the old High Dutch tongue signifies a Common Council. Thence the Greek word  (Mat. xxvi. 4.), which our English Interpreters have render'd they consulted, is in some ancient Dutch Versions translated sie haben ein Hansa gemacht. 3. Wehner tells us, that in old Charters of some of these Cities instead of Hanse-Stadte (as the Germans now-a-days usually write the word) he has met with Hayn-Stadte; which signifies, in the ancient Saxon Dialect, a City si∣tuate in a Wood (such as are a great many of the Hans-Towns in Saxony), and not, as some ex∣plain it, a Town in a pleasant Valley or plain Field. 4. The fourth opinion (and last, that looks like a probable conjecture) is, That they had the name of Hans-Towns from that preeminence and precedency which they justly challeng'd amongst the rest of the German Cities; for the same rea∣son as great Lords and Princes of the Empire are sometimes stiled Grosse Hansen, Gewaltige Han∣sen, &c. And hence several old German proper names fetch their original; as Anselmus (Hans∣helm), a man famous for his Helmet; Ansbrech∣tus (Hanswert), one that deserves to be made a Lord; Ansfridus (Hansfried), a Prince of a peaceable temper; and the like. And the ordi∣nary name of Hans (used at this day all Germany over) is not, as many think, a contraction of Johannes; but a part of those others abovemen∣tion'd. But at present Hans is not so honoura∣ble a Title as formerly; for the Germans call an impertinent medling fellow (such as the old La∣tins would have named Ardelio, and the Greeks ) Hans in allen gassen; and Hans un∣muht, Hans filtzmaul, Hans sparmund, Praal Hans, Bauer-Hans, and the like, are lookt upon as Nick∣names of the highest ignominy and disgrace. It would be worth a critical Etymologist's while to enquire, whether the word Hans (amongst other of its significations) did not denote something relating to trade and merchandise; since to this day he that determines (as Judg) all contro∣versies amongst the Merchants and Tradesmen of Ratisbon, is call'd Hans-Graff. The Hans-Towns of Germany are usually di∣vided into four Circles,Number. distinguished by the names of the four principal Cities amongst them, viz. Lubeck, Colln, Brunswic, and Dantzig. To the Circle of Lubeck belong the Cities of Hamburg, Rostock, Wismar, Stralsund, Lunenburg, Stetin, An∣clam, Golnau, Gripswald, Colberg, Stargard, Stolpe, &c. To that of Colln, Wesel, Duissburg, Emmerick, War∣burg, Ʋnna, Hammen, Munster, Minden, Osnabrug, Dortmund, Sost, Herford, Paderborn, Limgow, Bille∣feld, Warberg, Lippstadt, Cossfeld, Nimwegen, Sut∣phen, Rurnmund, Arnheim, Venloh, Elburg, Harder∣wic, Thiela, Bommel, Deventer, Campen, Swol, Gro∣ningen, Bolsswerder, Gorcum, Hinlopen, Staveren, Embden, Briel, Wieringen, Middelburg, and some more of less note. To Brunswic belong Magde∣burg, Gosslar, Einbeck, Gottingen, Hildesheim, Han∣nover, Ʋlsen, Buxtehude, Staden, Bremen, Hammel, and Minden. In the Circle of Dantzig are rec∣kon'd Konigsberg, Colmar, Torn, Elbingen, Bruns∣berg, Riga, Derpt, Revel, &c. In each of the four chief Cities was held an High Court of Judica∣ture; where all cases were pleaded that concern'd
any of the particular members of that Circle. Lubeck was reckon'd the Head and Metropolis of all the Hans-Towns;Metropo∣lis. as lying the most con∣venient for Trade, and being best fortified and most populous, amongst them. Hence all the rest of the Cities mentioned made use of the Seal of Lubeck in all their public Letters; and that City kept an Advocate in the Imperial Cham∣ber at Spire, to plead all manner of Causes in which any of the Hans-Towns (in matters of Trade) were concern'd. This City had also the sole power of calling, by her Letters Patents, an Assembly of the Estates of the whole Society; in case of any extraordinary exigence that con∣cern'd their whole Body in general. These kind of Assemblies were commonly held at Lu∣beck; but if the Radts-herrn of that City thought fit, they might (and sometimes did) appoint such another place of meeting, as lay more con∣veniently for the generality of the members con∣cern'd. This Society in short time became so consi∣derable as to obtain large priviledges in most places of Trade in Europe;Privi∣ledges and Gran∣deur. nay, they were some∣time grown so formidable as to be able to wage war with the most potent Monarchs in Christen∣dom, and to come off honourably. The chief Mart-Towns they resorted to in foreign Nations (in each of which they had extraordinary privi∣ledges and immunities granted to them, and kept their Storehouses and Exchanges) were these four, London here in England, where their Store∣house was call'd Stael-hof, because the greatest commodity they traded in with the English was Steel; Novogrod (and afterwards Narva) in Russia; Bergen in Norway; and Bruges in Flanders, whence (after some time) they removed to Antwerp in Brabant. But after the year 1500,Dissolu∣tion. their Trade began to fail daily, and the Society to dwindle into no∣thing; insomuch, that in the year 1570 there was scarce a City to be found that would offer to challenge the ancient priviledges formerly al∣low'd to Hans-Towns. Afterwards, there were some who appear'd very zealous in endeavouring to renew the decay'd Confederacy; but all their endeavours prov'd successless and vain. For many of the lesser Cities found themselves impoverish'd rather then enrich'd by continuing the League; since they were obliged to contribute to all pub∣lic charges of the Society, tho they gain'd little or nothing by the bargain. Besides, within a while the great current of Trade was turn'd from Germany into England and Holland; and the Hans-Towns render'd thereby unable to maintain so great a Fleet as formerly. So that, by degrees, the Society fell in pieces; and there nothing remains of it at present but the bare name in the memory of the Germans and their neighbours. decorative device
THE Territories, Name, Manners, &c. OF THE ANCIENT SAXONS. ALtho at this day the Up∣per and Lower Saxony take up but a very small share of the German Em∣pire; yet 'tis manifest, from the writings of the best Antiquaries, that formerly the better part of the inhabitants of that Nation were known by the general name of Saxons. Gens Saxonum saith Ethelwerd (an ancient English-Saxon Histo∣rian, who flourish'd about the year of Christ 950) in toto erat maritima, a Rheno flumine usque ad Do∣niam urbem quae nunc vulgo Dan-marc nuncupatur. Since Mr. Cambden could not find out what City this Author, and the men of his time, call'd Donia or Dan-marck; I shall not pretend to enquire. But we may from hence safely conclude, that all the ancient inhabitants of Jutland, Sleswic, Holstein, the Bishopric of Bremen, County of Ol∣denburg, both Frislands, and a great part of Hol∣land, were comprehended under the common name of Saxons. This assertion is confirm'd by a notable passage in the old Belgic Chronicle, written in rythm near four hundred years ago; wherein the Author tells us, Oude bocken hoor ick gewagen, Dat al't land beneden Nyemagen, Willen neder Sassen hiet. Alsoo als die stroom vershiet, Van der Maze ende van den Rhyn, Die Schelt was dat west ende Syn. I hear, says he, that old Books report, that all the Country below Nimmeguen was former∣ly call'd Nether Saxony; which was bounded on the west with the Skelt (a River on the coasts of Flanders), that issues out of the Maes and Rhyne. The German Antiquaries give West∣phalia the name of Old Saxony; and out of this Country, 'tis probable, some of our English-Saxons came; as we shall shew anon. Mr. She∣ringham (in his learned Treatise De Anglorum Gen∣tis origine) makes Alsace a part of the ancient Saxon Territories; telling us, that the name which to this day it retains was borrow'd from its Saxon inhabitants. For these men call'd their own Country Sassen, as well as themselves Die Sassen; and thence named this part of their Do∣minions (which was the pleasantest and richest piece they were Masters of) Edel-Sassen, or No∣ble Saxony. Which name was easily turn'd (by changing the High Dutch termination into a La∣tin one) into Edelsassia; and at last contracted into Elsatia, or Alsatia. 'Tis a difficult task to pick up a true and ra∣tional account of the name of Saxon out of the frivolous conjectures of ignorant Monks,Name. or the equal impertinencies of illiterate Etymologists. Isidore Hispalensis will needs have the Saxons to fetch their name from the Latin word Saxum; and he gives this reason for his fancy, quod sit durum & validissimum genus hominum & praestans caeteris piraticis, i. e. because they were always a strong and hardy people, and archer pyrats than any of their neighbours. But why should the Saxons be beholden to the Romans for their name; since they inhabited the same Country, whereof their own offspring are still Masters, long before Rome was built? Besides, we do not find that the Romans gave any new names to the Nations they conquer'd; any otherwise then by giving them a Latin, instead of their barbarous, termi∣nation. Crantzius tells us of some (and him∣self seems not altogether to dislike their opini∣on) who derived the word Saxon from Askenas, the great Leader of the Asians, who first peopled Germany. But why these people should any more retain the name of that grand General of the Asian Army, then the Goths, Franks, or any other branch of the ancient Dutch Nation, he cannot inform us. Goropius (who is follow'd by Cis∣ner, Cambden, and several other learned men) brings the Saxons from Sacae a Scythian people; from whom they were first call'd Sacasons, or the Sons of the Sacae, and by contraction Saxons.
These Scythians (he tells us, and alledges the Authority of Strabo to confirm his story) leaving their ancient Seats, conquer'd Bactriana, and a good part of Armenia; thence they pass'd into Capadocia, and for some time inhabited that part of it which bordereth on the Euxin Sea; at last they pass'd thro the Hercynian woods into Germany, and gave the name of Sacasena (after∣wards turn'd into Saxonia) to the Country that here, by their Conquests, they had made them∣selves Masters of. Strabo indeed says (and we may believe him) that the Sacae did leave their ancient Scythian Seats; and Mr. Cambden observes well, that Ptolomy places his  near that part of Scythia whence these men are said to have sallied out. But that they ever pass'd the Her∣cynean woods, is one of Goropius's Forgeries; and a story not to be met with in Strabo, or any other Author of credit. I wonder most, that Mr. Cambden (who was so great a Master of our old English-Saxon tongue) should not discern the absurdity of this etymology. For in that lan∣guage saex in the singular number signifies a Saxon, as well as Sachs to this day in the High-Dutch dialect; and seax, seaxna, and seaxena (as also the modern Dutch words Sachsen and Sassen) are plurals. Now if seax and seaxen be only broken remnants of sacson and sacsones, we should in all probability meet with the entire words in some of our ancient Saxon Monuments; which could never yet be produced by the best of Antiqua∣ries. Wherefore (to omit other impertinences of this kind) the most probable opinion is, that the Saxons had their name from a short kind of weapon (call'd in their language Seax) different from what any other Germans wore, and pecu∣liar only to their own Nation. In confirmation of this conjecture, some of our English Histori∣ans give us a relation of a treacherous parly be∣twixt Hengist (the first Saxon that landed in Bri∣tain) and King Vortigern. It was agreed, that both parties should meet on Salisbury-Plain un∣arm'd; but the Saxons, intending nothing but treachery, carried privately under their Coats short Daggers, which upon the watch-word (nem eowr Seaxes, or take your Seaxes) they immedi∣ately drew out these weapons, and slew no less then three hundred of the British Nobility. The like story (and as equally true) some of the German writers relate of a treacherous massacre committed by the ancient Saxons in Thuringen. Pontanus urges the reasonableness of this Etymo∣logy more home when he tells us, that Saxony in its ancient Arms bears two Seaxes, or Hangers, cross-ways; which, says he, is an undoubted proof of their first denomination. And 'tis said, that Erkenwyn, King of the East Saxons, gave for his Arms three short Daggers Argent in a Field Gules. A Sythe is still call'd Saisen in the Nether∣lands; and Scher-Sax in the High Dutch signifies as much as (ein messer damit man scheret) a Ra∣zor. Wormius tells us, that Sags or Saks in the Runic Dialect, signifies a Sword or Dagger, whose Hilt and Blade were almost of equal length. Nor is it at all extraordinary for people to take their names from the several sorts of weapons used by them in battel. Thus most learned men agree, that the Scythians had their name from the Teu∣tonic word Scytan, to shoot; because they were excellent Bow-men. The Picards are thought to have been first called by that name from Pikes, a sort of weapon they best understood. We may therefore venture to conclude with the Latin Rythm of the Learned Engelhus, Quippe brevis gladius apud illos Saxa vocatur, Inde sibi Saxo nomen traxisse putatur. From the account which is given us of this people by Zosimus, Marcellinus, Diaconus,Manned and other ancient writers, we may learn, that they were men of a vast bulk of body, and proportionable strength; the most renown'd Warriors in Ger∣many, and the most terrible enemies which the Romans ever encounter'd. Mr. Cambden says, they were such notorious Pyrats; and most of them so accustom'd to live at Sea, that they were a∣fraid to appear on dry land. Which agrees with the relation which Isidorus gives of them, Gens Saxonum, says he, Myoparonibus non viribus nitun∣tur, fugae potius quam bello parati. Hence it was, that all along the coasts of Britain and France, as far as the borders of Spain, the Romans maintain'd continual standing Regiments under the com∣mand of several Generals; who (from their Commission and Office, which was to secure the Inhabitants from the sudden and frequent incur∣sions of the Saxon Pyrats) were stiled Comites litoris Saxonici per Britanniam & Galliam. Sido∣nius, in one of his Epistles, gives this character of a Saxon Pyrat, That he is an enemy formi∣dable beyond comparison; one whom frequent Shipwracks recreate rather then terrifie, as be∣ing not only acquainted, but grown familiar, with the perils of the Ocean, &c. Their whole Nation was govern'd by Twelve of the chief Nobles in the Land;Govern∣ment. who were E∣lected to that Dignity by the Commonalty. In time of war, they chuse a King out of these Twelve chief Commanders; who executed Re∣gal authority over the rest as long as the war last∣ed; but as soon as peace was concluded, was degraded into his former quality. This custom continued amongst them until the conclusion of their wars with the Emperor Charles the Great; at which time Wittikind (a Nobleman of Angria in Westphalia, and one of their Twelve Rulers) had the name and authority of a King conferr'd on him. But when he was afterwards conquer'd and converted to Christianity by that Emperor, this fading Title was turn'd into the more du∣rable one of Duke; and his Eleven Compani∣ons were advanc'd to the Honourable Titles and Dignities of Earls and Lords, from whom the greatest Princes at this day in the German Em∣pire derive their pedigrees. Some have imagined, that from this Duo∣decemviral Government of the ancient Saxons our modern way of Judicature by the Verdict of Twelve Jury-men, had its first original. Whe∣ther this opinion be wholly allowable, I shall not stand to dispute (having said something of this matter in the Description of Island). But 'tis certain, that under the Reigns of some of our English-Saxon Kings, this way of proceeding was practis'd in the decision of most Causes both Ci∣vil and Criminal. For proof hereof, I shall only quote an old Law made in King Ethelred's time, wherein (cap. 3. de Pignore ablato) 'tis enacted, that tƿelf lahmen scylon rehte taecean Ƿealan and AEnglan. syx England & syx Ƿylisce. þlien calles þaes hy agon gif hi ƿoh taecen. oþþe geladian hi {that} hi bet ne cuþon, i. e. All contro∣versies betwixt the English and Welch should be determin'd by Twelve men skill'd in the Law, six of each Nation; who if they pass'd sentence con∣trary to the Law, should forfeit their whole Estates; except they should excuse themselves by acknow∣ledging their error, and bewailing their want of judgment in the case proposed. Which penalty is near akin to the attainder to which our mo∣dern Juries are liable when they bring in a false and corrupt Verdict. Tho we have spoken before of the Heathenish Gods worshipped in all parts of Germany,Irmenseul and amongst the rest of Irmenseul, the great Idol of
Saxony; yet a more accurate description of that Image, so long worshipp'd by our Saxon Ance∣stors, and peculiar to that branch of the German Nation, was purposely reserved for this place. Mr. Verstegan writes the word Ermensewl; and will needs have the Idol so named, q. d. Die seul deren armen, i. e. the pillar or support of the poor. O∣thers tell us, that Hermes, or Mercury, was wor∣shipp'd under one and the same name both in Germany and Greece; and thence conclude, that Ermensewl is only a corruption of Ermes-sewl. Some again (observing how the Image, according to the relation of Historians, represented the God Mars rather then Mercury) reject this Etymo∣logy; and derive Ermensewl from Arms-sewl, and that from -sewl, the Pillar of Mars the God of War. But such Etymologists as these take too great pains to make the ancient Germans speak Greek. The learned Schedius, with a great deal of reason and probability on his side, guesses it was the Image of Harminius Captain of the Che∣rusci, a Saxon Nation in the days of Augustus Ce∣sar; who having by strategem overthrown the forces of Quintilius Varus, got the Title of Deli∣verer of Germany conferr'd on him by the Roman Historians, who all confess, that from him the Roman Empire (tho then in its full strength) receiv'd such a blow as made its foundations tremble. And indeed the Image might well seem to be the pourtraicture of so noble and brave an Hero. For it represented an armed man in his full proportion; carrying in his right hand a Ban∣ner display'd, and in his left a pair of Scales. On his head was engraven the effigies of a Cock; on his breast a Bear; and upon his Scutcheon a Lion. And let the Reader judg how exactly this Idol answers the character which Tacitus gives of Har∣minius, in these words, In single engagements his success was various; in war he was invincible; and is still worshipp'd by the Barbarous Nations. From which last words of the Historian we may ratio∣nally conclude, that Irmenseul is only a corrup∣tion of Harmins-seul; which is further confirm'd by Schedius's story, that the Saxons used in a kind of Martial Dance (arm'd Cap-a-pee with the spoils of their enemies) to surround the pillar, and at every turn, falling on their knees, to kiss and adore it. Dithmar says, that this Statue was in his days (tho now nothing remains of the monument but the pillar at Hildesheim) to be seen at Mersburg with this Inscription, DUX EGO GENTIS SAXONUM VICTORIAM CERTAM POLLICEOR ME VENERANTIBUS. From the Latin words in this Inscription some have concluded, that the Saxons, in the days of Heathenism, had a great acquaintance with the Romans, and were perfect Masters of their lan∣guage. I am much apter to fancy, that the whole Inscription is fictitious, and contriv'd only by some Monk at Mersburg. Since we do not read, that the Saxons e're maintain'd any tolera∣ble friendship and correspondence betwixt them∣selves and the Romans; at least, not so much as to turn such admirers of their tongue as to use it in an Inscription, which ought to have been understood by all the worshippers of this Idol, and consequently the whole Saxon Nation. Where∣as, on the contrary, the best Historians will in∣form us, that before the coming of Charles the Great into these parts, the Saxons were a very rude and illiterate people; wholly ignorant of all manner of Learning and Letters, excepting only a few barbarous Runic scrawls; and those too but very rarely used in this Country. Some of the less considerable Saxon Idols are men∣tion'd before in the account we have already given of the Religion practis'd amongst the an∣cient Germans and Danes; and for the rest we refer the Reader to Schedius's learned Treatise De Diis Germanicis. The Anglo-Saxonic version of Bede's Ecclesiasti∣cal History,Saxons first com∣ing into England. and a Manuscript Saxon Chronicle in our public Library (a great part of which seems to be an Epitome of the said History) tell us, that the Saxons were first brought over into Britain in the year 449, under the command of Hengist and Horsa, two Brothers, the great Grandchildren of Woden; from whom most of the Northern Princes endeavour to fetch their pedigree. And they further add, that these Saxon Ancestors of ours were a people made of three of the stoutest Nations in all Germany, viz. from the Saxons, Angles, and Jutes. From Jut∣land came the inhabitants of Kent and the Isle of Wight. From Saxony (I mean, says Bede, that Country which we now call Old-Saxony; which is the same, as shall be shew'n hereafter, with West∣phalia) came the East, South, and West Saxons. From the Angles (who, they tell us, were a peo∣ple that inhabited the Country betwixt Saxony and Jutland) were descended the East Angles, Middle Angles, Mercians, and North-humbrians. Where by the way we may take notice, that all the manuscript Copies of the Saxon Chronicle which are to be met with, tell us, that the inha∣bitants of Kent and the Isle of Wight came of iotum, instead of which Bede's Interpreter writes of geatum. And the best manuscript Latin Copies of the same History have De Jutarum origine; and not Vita∣rum, as most printed Copies (and amongst others, the Colen Edition) read the word. So that it ap∣pears those Antiquaries have but little grounds for their opinion, who (upon Venerable Bede's authority) have had the confidence to assert, that there was anciently a people in Saxony call'd Vitae, from whom the Isle of Wight had its name. Whereas Mr. Cambden assures us, that the old Britains nam'd this Island Guith (which in the British tongue signifies a separation or divorce) for the same reason that the Romans gave Sicily its name, quod ab Italia esset Secta, i.e. because it had been formerly cut off from the Continent of Italy. As some ingenious men have fancied that Kent and Picardy were heretofore join'd by a narrow Isthmus; which in time was wash'd asunder by the waves of that rough Sea which at this day runs through the Channel betwixt Dover and Calais, or else cut at the charge of some of the British Kings. The main of this story seems credible enough;Hengist and Horsa. and is back'd with the authority of most of the famous English and German Historians. But that the names of the two first Saxon Commanders were Hengist and Horsa, I see very little reason to believe; tho I find this part of the narrative pass uncontradicted in all Authors that have given us an account of the first landing of the Saxons in this Island. And in the Elector of Saxony's Gal∣lery at Dresden (among other pourtraictures of that Princes Ancestors) are shew'n the pictures of these two famous Champions. 'Tis strange,
that such grand Warriors (whom we have rea∣son to believe descended from one of the best Families in Saxony) should have names peculiar to themselves; and such as were not known to be given to any men, either before or since their time. The first occasion, I suppose, of the ge∣neral mistake, came from the Saxon Army's bear∣ing a young black Horse (which was afterwards, upon the conversion of Witikind to the Christian Faith, changed into a white one, the Crest of the House of Brunswic's Arms to this day) in their Flags. Now, Hengist or Hengst (in the old Saxon dialect) signifies a Stallion; and that Horsa is a word of the same signification, I need not tell the English Reader. So that the Captains of the ancient Saxon Troops seem to have had the names of Hengist and Horsa given them, for the same reason that some writers have enigmatically called the Emperor the Eagle, the King of France the Lilly, &c. i.e. from the Arms they bear. The excellency of the Municipal Laws ob∣served in Saxony,Laws. even in the times of Heathenism, appears from Charles the Great's confirming a great part of them; and that at the same time when he alter'd the Laws as well as Government of most other Provinces in Germany. His exam∣ple has been follow'd by the succeeding Empe∣ror's down to our days. Insomuch, that the Saxons are still govern'd by the Laws of their Ancestors; whereof a great part are compre∣hended in those two famous Digests of their Laws entituled Der Sachsen-Spiegel and Das Sachsische Weichbild. Of which more hereafter. For an account of the Ordeal (their famous way of determining controversies, soon after their being converted to the Christian faith) we refer the Reader to what we have already said on that subject in the general Description of Den∣mark. Tho I am apt to believe that this piece of Judicature was never practis'd by any other Saxons then the English; and 'tis certain, they were not acquainted with it till some time after they had setled themselves in this Island. decorative device
map of lower Saxony SAXONIA INFERIOR Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
A DESCRIPTION Of some of the most Considerable PROVINCES IN THE Lower Saxony. THE general name of the Lower Saxony (by some late Geographers) has been made to com∣prehend the Archbi∣shoprics of Magdeburg and Bremen; the Bishop∣rics of Halberstadt, Hil∣desheim, Lubeck, Swerin, and Ratzeburg; the Ter∣ritories of the Dukes of Brunswic and Lunen∣burg, Holstein, Mecklenburg, and Saxon-Lawenburg. Amongst these, an account of the Dukedom of Holstein has been already given in the Descrip∣tion of Denmark; and nothing within the pre∣cincts of his Dominions (excepting Hamburg in Stormaria, and Lubeck in Wagerland) is at pre∣sent reckon'd a part of the German Empire. Of the commodities, present state, &c. of the rest we shall endeavour to give the Reader an account in the following sheets. Beginning with a De∣scription Of the famous City of HAMBURG, and the Coun∣try adjacent. WHence this great City should have its name,Name. is not easily agreed on by the German Historians. Some derive the word from the Hams of Bacon brought hither from all parts of Saxony, and here sold to foreign Mariners. Others again fetch it from Jupiter Ammon, whose Image (they tell us) was worshipp'd in these parts until Charles the Great had extirpated Idolatry, and planted Christianity in this and the neighbouring Pro∣vinces. Crantzius says, 'twas first call'd Ham∣burg from one Hama, a stout Saxon Champion, who was here slain by Starcater, a Danish Giant. Dresserus brings it from Hain, which signifies a pleasant Grove. The most probable opinion is, that this City first had its name from the Forest Hamme, which formerly lay between the Rivers Bille and Alster, and gave the Title to the anci∣ent Lords of Ham; who, about the time of Charles the Great's leading his Army into these parts, built themselves here a Castle, which (from their own names) they call'd Hamburg. This conjecture is embraced by Sylvius Hamburgensis, Andreas Angelus, P. Bertius, Isac. Pontanus, and most other Authors of repute who have given us any historical account of this City. Ponta∣nus tells us, that Ham in the old Saxon Dialect signifies a Forest or Chase; and proves it from Suderham and Norderham, two large Forests in Dithmars. But Authors are as hardly reconcil'd about the situation as name of the place.Situation. The great∣est part of Writers tell us, the City stands in Stormaria, a Province in the Duke of Holstein's Dominions. But some German Historians are very zealous in asserting, that it is a true Saxon City, and the outmost bounds of Saxony and Stormaria; adding further, that to a diligent ob∣server it will evidently appear, that the greatest share of the Town (even at this day) is sepa∣rated from the Continent of Stormaria by some small arms of the River Elb. Some Antiquaries have endeavour'd to shew,Antiquity. that this noble Hans-Town was in the days of Albion (the grand Captain of the Albingi, who was afterwards Christen'd at Minden with Wite∣kind) a considerable Village. After the death
of this Albion (about the year 785) Charles the Great gave this part of the Country to Ʋtho, one of his Noblemen and Attendants; who (to se∣cure himself from the frequent incursions of the Vandals, and others his Heathenish neighbours) began first to fortifie the place in the year 787 (or as some say 789). But these first founda∣tions were quickly shaken, and Ʋtho's rude draught of a strong City was utterly defac'd. For the Vandals pouring in upon him and his small reti∣nue, sack'd the Town and laid it wast in the year 810. This, says Conringius, is that which the Author of an ancient Chronicle means when he tells us, Anno 810 Castellum nomine Hochbuci Albi flumini contiguum, in quo Odo Legatus Impera∣toris & Orientalium Saxonum erat Praesidium, a Wilsis captum. From hence we must conclude, that the Saxons had no place that deserv'd the name of a City before Charles the Great's time; and that Hamburg was one of the first, tho in great danger of perishing in its infancy. The year following the Emperor regain'd this Coun∣try from the insulting and barbarous Vandals, and rebuilt the Town; which was afterwards, by his Son Ludovicus Pius, advanced into a con∣siderable City. The same Emperor made it an Archbishop's See about the year 833,An Arch∣bishoprick. bestowing it upon Ansgar (the great Saint of the City of Hamburg, call'd by some of their Writers Anscharius, by others Ansagrius or Ansearius) who first converted the inhabitants to Christianity. Within a while after, the whole Province round about embrac'd the Christian Faith; and several Evangelical Preachers subjected themselves to the Archbishop of Ham∣burg. Afterwards the Archbishopric was transla∣ted from this City to Bremen (as we shall have occasion to shew hereafter); and for several Ages last past there has been neither Archbishop nor Bishop of Hamburg. After the Hamburgers were established in the Christian Religion,To whom subject. and began to trade, they had daily large and ample priviledges conferr'd on them by most succeeding Emperors; to whom they paid homage. But we must needs con∣clude, that they were sometimes obliged to change their Masters, according as contrary interests of their neighbours prevail'd. Whether the Earls of Schawenburg had not formerly a more then ordinary Jurisdiction over this City, is a point which to this day the Hamburgers do not care to dispute. Crantzius, Chytraeus, and other Histo∣rians can inform us, that Woldemar Duke of Sles∣wic (by the assistance of his Brother Canutus VI. King of Denmark) took Hamburg out of the hands of the Emperor Otho IV. which City (when him∣self was afterwards advanc'd to the Danish Throne) he setled upon Albrecht Earl of Orlemund and his Heirs for ever. But the same Albrecht, as Chy∣traeus reports, sold his whole Right and Title to the Citizens for fifteen hundred Marks of good Silver; and so made the City a free and indepen∣dant State of it self. Afterwards, Adolph IV. Earl of Holstein confirm'd the said Liberties and Pri∣viledges to this City; which example of his was follow'd by his Successors down to Adolph XIV. (and last Earl of Holstein and Schawenburg of that Family) who dyed in the year 1459. Upon his death the Province of Holstein subjected them∣selves, by a formal Capitulation, to Christian I. King of Denmark; whom they freely Elected their Prince, and paid him homage under the Title of Duke of Holstein. At the same time the Citizens of Hamburg enter'd into an agree∣ment with the said King, promising that (as long as the Kings of Denmark should continue their priviledges to them, which King Christian upon the signing of this Compact confirm'd to them) they would always be ready to maintain the like friendship and correspondence between the Crown of Denmark and themselves, as had been formerly preserv'd betwixt them and the Earls of Schawen∣burg. To these conditions the King assented with∣out demanding any manner of homage or token of subjection. However, his Successors have al∣ways had an itching desire to get Hamburg wholly into their own clutches; and therefore have en∣deavour'd by all means imaginable to perswade the Citizens to submit themselves to the protecti∣on of their Crown. But all their artifices have hitherto prov'd unsuccessful; and every one of their Treaties and Capitulations brought to an end Salvo jure Caesaris & Imperii, & salvis liber∣tatibus Civitatis ab Imperiali culmine obtentis. In a Diet held at Augsburg in the year 1510, the Em∣peror Maximilian I. (together with the Estates of the Empire then and there assembled) de∣clar'd Hamburg a free Imperial City; and sum∣mon'd the Duke of Holstein to make his appea∣rance before the Imperial Chamber at Spire, and there to make good or renounce all pretensions to the said City. What success the late quarrels of the present King of Denmark (Christian V.) had in the year 1679, we have already told the Reader in the Description of Denmark; where a particular account is given of the Interim's Recess, signed at Pinneberg between the said King and the Deputies of the City of Hamburg. The continual jealousies betwixt the two Nor∣thern Crowns are a considerable security to the Citizens of Hamburg;Their Se∣curity by the Jea∣lousies  the two Northern Crowns. who would be in great danger of being utterly overthrown and enslav'd, if both those Kings should conspire to ruine them. But when the King of Denmark endeavours to annoy and incommode that City by the oppor∣tunity of the Fort at Gluckstadt (which commands the River Elb, and can easily stop the Merchant Ships which sail that way) the Swedish Garrison at Stade oppose him and protect the Merchants from the mischief design'd them. Another grand Bulwark of this great City consists in the prodi∣gious riches of its inhabitants; which are reckon'd by some so inexhaustible, that should both the Northern Kings join their Forces, the Senate of Hamburg would be able to oppose them, and to preserve their own Liberties by the expence of their Treasure. Hamburg is ten good German (or betwixt forty and fifty English) miles distant from Lubeck;Descripti∣on. being for the most part of it an Island, naturally well fenc'd in the middle of the River Elb, which runs in many little arms and streams thro se∣veral of its streets. It consists of two parts, the old and new Town, separated from each other by a Wall; both which are well fortified, and so close united that they may well pass for one City. From the tops of Towers and the City-walls you have a curious and pleasant prospect every way. There are only four great Gates that lead into the City: 1. Altenaver Thor, or the Gate which leads towards Altenaw, on the western side of the old Town; call'd commonly by the Citi∣zens the Millers Gate. 2. Das Dam-Thor, or the Gate which leads to the great Trenches on the North-side of the Town. 3. The Stone-Gate, leading Eastward. 4. The South-Gate, which leads to the Islands in the Elb; call'd by the in∣habitants (for what reason I have not yet learn'd) das Dihiane Thor. The streets are generally crook∣ed; or would otherwise vye with (if not out∣strip) any in Germany. The Buildings are most of Brick; and exceeding high and stately. On the North the Alster drives all the Mills which supply the whole Town with Meal.
The great Bulwarks of the City were not thrown up till within these few years;Fortifica∣tions. and very much mended upon the late fright the Citizens were put into by the King of Denmark's near ap∣proach to Penneberg. The better part of those vast Rampires and outworks, which now so se∣curely guard the Town from the fury of any that shall venture to besiege it, was finish'd in the space of four years; and remains to this day a sufficient testimony of the inexhaustible trea∣sure of the inhabitants. The Town is every-where exceeding popu∣lous.Multi∣tude of in∣habitants. Those that have seen an ordinary Jahr-Markt (or Fair) at Francfurt or Leipsic, will ad∣mire where those little Cities can find lodgings for so many guests as commonly resort thither: but at Hamburg each Street is daily as much throng'd as those other two trading Towns are twice or thrice a year; and you are here conti∣nually as in a Fair. He that shall at noon or in the evening take a view of their public Exchange (a neat piece of Building, but inferior to ours at London), may possibly meet with a greater number of people in one hour then at Leipsic in a whole Michael's-Mess. The whole Town consists of a great many little Islands in the Elb and Alster;Bridges. out of one into another you are led by a great number of Bridges, which are almost as plentiful here as at Amsterdam. The Sea flows up these small Chan∣nels; and sometimes (when a tempest is rais'd, about the change of the Moon, or in a Spring∣tide) does much harm in several parts of the City, often hurrying along with it whole Houses and Families. Such a mishap as this be∣fell the Town in the Spring of the year 1651, which ruin'd some considerable Families, and endamaged a great many more. The most famous Home Commodity which the Hamburgers have,Commo∣dities. is Beer; in Brewing of which there are a vast number of men employ'd in most parts of the Town. This is reckon'd one of the best tasted Liquors which the German Na∣tion affords; and is ordinarily exported into most of the neighbouring Towns and Villages. The Bores in Holstein are so great admirers of this sort of Drink, that some whole Villages are fully perswaded 'twould be present death to change their Liquor. At Lubec it is esteem'd one of the choicest commodities which their City has from Hamburg; and indeed the Germans have gene∣rally so good an opinion of it, that it is some∣times brought as far as Francfurt upon the Main; and there sold at an higher rate then their best Rhenish Wine. Besides, the Hamburgers have good store of all other necessaries for the furnishing out a good and commendable Table. The Hollanders have taught them to stock their Gardens (which ly without the Gates of the City) with all man∣ner of fruits and potherbs. With these, and all sorts of fresh-water and Sea-fish their Markets are daily stored from morning till night. 'Twould be needless to inform the Reader, that few (or no) places in Europe have grea∣ter opportunity of providing themselves with the choicest commodities of foreign Countries then the Citizens of Hamburg; since every man knows what swarms of Merchant Ships, from the most considerable parts of the known world, daily resort to this City. This is the great (I might say, only) Mart-Town in Germany; which furnishes the other Cities and chief Towns of the Empire with the richest Merchandise of all other Nations. The Haven is so commodious,Haven. and the River (even up to the walls) of that depth, that the largest Merchant-men that trade on the main Ocean may with great ease be brought up to the Town; excepting only some few of more then ordinary bulk and carriage, which are forc'd to strike anchor at the New Mills (about four English miles from the Town) and there to un∣lade their Cargo into smaller Vessels. Notwithstanding the many heavy burthens which are continually brought up the River to this Town, the mouth of the Elb is reckon'd to be eighteen Dutch (or seventy-two English) miles distant from Hamburg; and yet the Tide comes ordinarily sixteen English miles beyond the Town, as high as the common Ford betwixt this City and Lunenburg. So that the whole race of the Flood up the River Elb will amount to eighty-eight of our miles, at least; a much larger course then any other navigable River in Europe (not excepting our Thames, which only pretends to a second place) can brag of. The Trade which our English Merchants have,English Trade. for many years last past, brought to this City seems more considerable then any commerce they have hitherto enter'd upon with other fo∣reign Nations. And therefore there is good rea∣son that our Hamburg Company should be treat∣ed with that civility and respect which has of late been shew'n them in this place. Our Merchants have the priviledg granted them (which is de∣nied to most other foreigners) of pleading and trying all kind of Suits, wherein they themselves are more immediately concern'd, before their own Resident; who determines all causes in a public and stately Hall, built at the charges of the Company. They are also permitted the free exercise of their Religion; whilst men of other Nations and Confessions are forc'd to go as far as Altenaw to say Mass or hear a Sermon. The chief Church in Hamburg is dedicated to St. Peter. It was formerly a Cathedral,Churches. as long as the Town continued an Archbishoprick; and there is still kept a kind of Dean and Chapter, who keep here an Ecclesiastical Court from which an Appeal lies only to the Imperial Chamber at Spire. In this Church (which some say was first built in the year 801, others in the years 830) ly buried a great many of the Earls of Schawen∣burg and Holstein; whose names are writ in a fair Catalogue (next after Charles the Great and his Son Ludowic) of their Benefactors, which hangs up in the Body of the Church. This, a∣mongst other things, may be thought an argu∣ment sufficient to perswade any unprejudic'd man to believe, that the Princes of Holstein and Schawen∣burg had formerly a power more then titular over this City, whatever the Hamburgers may now-a-days pretend to the contrary. The other Churches of note are, St. Nicholas's, St. Jacob's, St. Catha∣rine's, the greater and less St. Michael's, and the New Church in the New Town. In each of these they keep a Register of poor and distressed people in the several Parishes; who have money weekly distributed amongst them, and a compe∣tent yearly allowance for clothes and fuel. The lesser Churches are, St. Gertrude's, St. Mary Magda∣len's, and that of the Holy Ghost. Near the last of these is the oldest Hospital in the Town; which is endow'd with yearly maintenance for one hun∣dred and fourteen poor people, such as are old, blind, dumb, &c. But this is not all the provision which the Ham∣burgers have made for such of their own body as are poor and needy.Hospitals. For hardly any great City in Europe (excepting Paris, and some few others, where an Epidemic conceit of the more then ordinary merit of good works have over-aw'd some Misers into an humour of bounty and mu∣nificence)
can shew more public Hospitals, and larger allowances for the maintenance of the miserable, then this Town. For example, 1. For such as live in any part of the Territories belong∣ing to this City, and not in the Town, they have an Hospital in the Suburbs; into which are rea∣dily admitted all such distemper'd or decay'd persons as are not able to maintain themselves any longer in the Villages adjacent. This Hos∣pital (dedicated to St. George) was founded about the year 1250; and endow'd with a sufficient salary for the maintenance of a vast number of poor people, with servants, and a Priest to attend them. 2. For such as are disabled with the French Pox, and not able to pay for their own cure, they have a kind of Pest-house; where such as are troubled with that disease are provided with Diet and Medicines convenient for their recovery. This was built in the year 1509, and named St. Job (for this reason without doubt, because design'd for such as were smitten with Boils, as Job was). 3. For poor fatherless and mother∣less Orphans they have their Waysen-hauss (as they call it) or Orphanotrophium; where such Ci∣tizens children as are left by their deceas'd Parents unprovided for, and incapable of procuring for themselves any competent maintenance, are care∣fully lookt after, and furnish'd with all manner of necessaries. They that are too young to be instructed in the School, are attended on by Nurses; and the rest are kept close to constant prayer, reading, writing, casting accounts, &c. Sometimes near three hundred Infants are at the charge of the Hospital (the whole yearly reve∣nue of which is said to amount to 21000 Rix-dollars) put to nurse abroad; and taken into the House as soon as they are well able to dress them∣selves. Such Boys as the Schoolmasters (who are five in number) observe to have parts, are fitted for, and sent to the Universities; and there maintain'd upon the public stock of the Hospi∣tal, till they may be well suppos'd to be in a con∣dition of providing for themselves. The rest of them are put out to such Trades as the Trustees think them most qualified for; and the Girls (as soon as they have learn'd to read, write, spin, knit, &c.) are sent to credible Services to earn their living and make their fortunes. 4. They have a common Pest-house for such as are sick of the Plague, or any other infectious disease; whi∣ther not only poor people, but others of the best rank and quality are brought to be cured of their virulent distempers. For the good and skilful attendants which all manner of diseas'd persons are sure to meet with in this place, ren∣ders it exceedingly preferable to any conveni∣ences they could expect at home. 5. They have a large and sumptuous Hospital for sick strangers (Das Gast. und Krancken-hauss) first built in the year 1632, where a Physitian, Chi∣rurgion, and all sorts of necessary Medicines and Salves are provided for such poor Travel∣lers as are fall'n sick upon their road, and are not in a condition to provide for themselves. 6. For distressed, aged, and decay'd Sea-men, the Burgers built and liberally endow'd a fair Hospi∣tal in the year 1556, which since that time has been very much augmented both in its buildings and revenues. In this Hospital there is not only a considerable maintenance allotted for a great number of maimed, aged, and feeble Mariners of all sorts; but also an ample provision is made for all such poor Widows and Orphans as have lost their Husbands or Parents at Sea, and are hereby reduc'd to want and beggery. In which particular the Hamburgers may seem to have out∣done the munificence of the present King of France in his sumptuous Hospital (Hostel des In∣valides) built lately near Paris for maim'd and decay'd Soldiers. For tho this noble and brave structure may justly challenge a preeminence be∣yond any in its kind that (perhaps) Europe or the world could ever shew; yet there wants in it a provision for the poor Wives and Children of such as have lost their limbs or lives in His Majesty's service; which would in all probabi∣lity prove as effectual a motive and encourage∣ment to all his Subjects to venture their lives and fortunes in his Army, as any expedient hitherto thought on; since some men are not so soon de∣terr'd from venturing into the Camp upon a prospect of the danger of losing their own lives, as a foresight of an inevitable ruin to their Fami∣lies at Home, if they should chance to be taken off or maim'd in the Field. Besides these, there are a great many more less and inconsiderable Hospitals for set numbers of poor Widowers, Widows, Orphans, &c. together with a large number of Free-Schools, endow'd with compe∣tent stipends, for the education of the Children of poor Burgers; who are in these places com∣monly furnish'd with Clothes and Books out of the public revenues of the Schools where they are instructed, till fitted for a Trade or the Uni∣versity, as their Friends are able or willing to dispose of them. To these Hospitals I think I may add their Bridewell,Bridewel. or House of Correction (Das Werck∣und Zucht-Hauss); since to reclaim lazy vaga∣bonds from their ill courses by hard labour and severe punishments, is as great a piece of charity as to cloth the naked or feed the hungry. This House was set on fire, and burnt down, by some of the wicked Varlets that had been committed to this Prison, in the year 1666; but soon after nobly rebuilt at the public charge of the City. This structure consists of two parts; whereof the first is appointed for such poor and needy people (whether foreigners or domestics) as are willing to earn their livings with the sweat of their brows, but are at a loss for masters to set them at work. Here they may be sure to find employment, and have an opportunity of pro∣curing bread by their labour; according to the motto written over the door of their Work∣house, LABORE NƲTRIOR. The other part of the House is reserv'd for Thieves, Whores, Vagabonds, and such kind of licentious persons as are disobedient to the Magistrates of the City, or regardless of the commands of their Parents or Masters. The motto or inscription over the door of this partition is, LABORE PLECTOR. That the City of Hamburg is a Free Imperial State of it self,A Free State. and wholly independant upon any supreme power whatever, except the Empe∣ror (who only challenges a small acknowledg∣ment or homage from this as well as other Im∣perial Cities), will appear from the following priviledges the Hamburgers have for many years enjoy'd: 1. The Burgomasters and Common-Council-men of the City have power to abrogate or enact what Laws they please; and to pass sentence, and proceed to execution in all causes Criminal or Civil; without acquainting the Duke of Holstein, or any other neighbouring Prince, with their intentions. 2. They have power to raise Soldiers, grant out Commissions to Com∣manders, and levy what Taxes and Contributi∣ons they judg necessary for the security of their own Commonwealth. 3. They can enter into a League (Offensive or Defensive) with whatever Prince or Potentate they please. 'Tis true, it has for many years been a custom for the City of Hamburg to present yearly the Dukes of Sege∣berg
map of Bremen Ducatus: olim Episcopatus BREMENSIS et ostiorum ALBIS et VISURGIS Fluviorum novissima Descriptio. blazon or coat of arms To the WORPfull Sr HENRY CALVERLEY of Eriholme in the Countij of Torcke knt this Map is Humbly D. D. by M: Pitt Notarum Explicatio Grosse Stätte. Kleine Stätte. Kirch dorffer. Adel: häusser. Dorffer. Häuser.
and Gottorp with a Pipe of Wine, an Hogs∣head of Serbst Beer, an hundred weight of Rice, and half an hundred of Almonds; but this is no more a sign of Tribute or Homage paid to either of these Princes, then their ordinary re∣turning of the Complement with a Present of Venison is an argument of their dependance upon the Hamburgers. By a Statute made by the Emperor Frideric I. (and confirm'd by Ferdi∣nand II.) the Citizens of Hamburg are exempted from all manner of Tolls and Custom-money due to the Emperor as Lord of the Elb, betwixt their own City and the Ocean; but by the same Decree, they are bound to secure and defend the River from the outrages of all Pirats and Free∣booters. Whereupon, in the year 1402, no less then seventy Pirats were brought prisoners into the City at one time, and not long after (in the same year) eighty more. But Christian IV. King of Denmark, by force of Arms robb'd the Ham∣burgers for some time of the priviledges the Em∣perors had granted them; compelling their Mer∣chant-men to pay Custom to the Crown of Den∣mark as they pass'd the Castle of Gluckstadt. This infringement of their Liberties gave occasion to a great and durable rupture betwixt the Danish King and the Citizens of Hamburg; which was at last made up by a Treaty of Peace in the year 1645, whereby it was agreed, that the Hambur∣gers (upon payment of 120000 Rix-dollars to the said King's Officers) should reassume their ancient Rights and Priviledges. And the 220000 Rix-dollars which (as appears from the fourth Article in the Interim's Recess, set down at large in the Description of Denmark) where paid the last year (1679) by the City of Hamburg to the present King of Denmark, was, as 'tis there phras'd, in consideration of His Majesty's being graciously pleased to receive the Burgers of that City again into his favour. Nay, and in all probability, the like sums will be ready, whensoever the King shall (at the front of as great an Army as he lately brought before this City) demand them. The Magistracy of the City consists of four Burgomasters and twenty Schepins or Aldermen;Magi∣strates. who were formerly all of them Civilians or other learned men, but are now chosen out of the Merchants and rich Tradesmen in the Town. Besides these they have twelve Common-Council-men (call'd in their language Die Oberalten, or chief Elders) who consult together and order the public affairs of the whole City. If any mat∣ter of more then ordinary moment be brought before them, they join with sixty more grave Citizens (whom they call Die Burger-alten, or Elders of the City); and if these dare not ven∣ture to give a final determination in the matter propos'd, the whole business is referr'd to a ge∣neral Assembly of all the Freemen of the Town. The Hamburgers have one notable custom a∣mongst them for the speedy reparation of any losses by fire. In most great Streets, and other parts of the Town, 'tis the fashion for such a number of the Citizens to enter into a solemn Covenant and Agreement; whereby they unani∣mously engage themselves to contribute a cer∣tain sum of money towards the rebuilding of any house which shall be burnt down within the circle of that Company to which they belong. Now any man has the liberty to engage him∣self in as many Companies as he pleases. So that sometimes it happens a considerable improve∣ment of a Burger's Estate to have his House burnt down, when the contributions he receives from the several Companies, of which he has made himself a member, amount (as often they do) to more then his House was worth at the first. The Territories belonging to this City contain a small circle of Stormaria;Territo∣ries. wherein nevertheless are several fair Villages, and some Noblemen's Palaces of good note. A great many of the little Islands in the Islands in the Elb, formerly subject to the Dukes of Lu∣nenburg or Lawenburg, are now under the Domi∣nion of the Hamburgers. To whom also belongs the strong Castle of Ritzenbuttel; the best Fort in Hadderland, or the Country betwixt the mouths of the two great Rivers Elb and Weser. A little below this, to the North-West, they have ano∣ther considerable Fortress call'd Das newe Werck; built for the convenient harbouring of such Merchant-men as sail that way. But the great∣est Royalty the Citizens of Hamburg can pretend to without the limits of their own City is from the Custom-house at Tollenspicker, not far from Winsen; where all passengers pay a certain Toll for themselves and their carriages. There are other places of less note that are equally subject to this City and Lubeck; and pay an acknow∣ledgment to both Corporations. The moneys currant in Hamburg,Money. and the ad∣jacent parts, are the same as in the Empire (those especially of the Emperor's coining) and the Kingdom of Denmark. Some small pieces are coin'd by the authority of the Burgo-masters and Radtsherrn of the City; and the Coins of all trading Nations in Europe will pass here at a good value. decorative device
THE Dukedom and City OF BREMEN. THE Dukedom of Bre∣men is bounded on the East with the Territo∣ries of the Duke of Lu∣nenburg;Bounds. on the South with the Weser; on the West with the German, or British, Ocean; and on the North with the Elb. Which large plot of ground was anciently inhabited by the Cauci; a valiant and warlike people, and (probably) the ancestors of those who to this day inherit this part of Germany. The whole Dukedom is subdivided into seve∣ral lesser Provinces;Division. amongst which the chief is the Bishopric of Verhden, on the borders of the Dukedom of Lunenburg. The next in order and greatness is the Land of Bremen (strictly so call'd) containing a Circle of some miles round that large and famous City. The third considerable Province is Wursterland, on the Sea-coast, from the Weser down to the mouth of the Elb. The inhabitants of this Province are reckon'd men of as good spirits and as brave Soldiers as any Subjects of the Empire whatever. Their fre∣quent rebellions under the Archbishops of Bre∣men first inur'd them to war; and they have ever since delighted in following the Camp. 'Tis reported of them, that in the height of their obstinacy (for which they were often severely lash'd by many of the Archbishops), they never built themselves any Cities, or Forts of defence; but relied wholly upon the strength and courage of their Companions, which they fancied a suffi∣cient bulwark against the sturdiest enemy that should dare to assault them. And they have still this character given them, That the Wursterlanders will fight and drink with the best men in Dutchland. After these come the inhabitants of Hadelia, or Hadeliria (das landt Hadelen); a proud and ig∣norant people; so strangely enamour'd of gay∣clothes, that their neighbours (alluding to this piece of vanity) say proverbially of them, There are no Pesants in Hadeland. Some part of this Province (upon the mouth of the Elb, where stand the Forts of Ritzenbuttel and New-Werck) was, as we have said, formerly in the hands of the Dukes of Saxon-Lawenburg; and is now sub∣ject to the Citizens of Hamburg. Another con∣siderable portion of it (in which is seated the Castle and Town of Atterndorff, which commands the greatest part of the Province) is still under the dominion of the said Dukes, and no part of the Dukedom of Bremen; to which no place of any consequence in Hadelland is subject, except the Village and Castle of Nyen-huss, on the mouth of the Oste. Next after Hadel-land comes Kedinger∣land, in which is seated the City of Stade; and beyond that Alt-land, or Old-land; a pleasant and fruitful Country of about fourteen English miles in length. He that shall travel the road betwixt Bremen and Stade,Soil. will be apt to have a very mean opi∣nion of the whole Dukedom of Bremen; meet∣ing with nothing but barren Sands and Heaths, a wast and uninhabited Country. And yet else∣where there is not any Country on the Northern parts of the German Empire fuller of pleasant Fields and Meadows, fruitful Orchards, and all other necessaries or delights. Whence some witty Geographers have pleased themselves in fancying the Dukedom of Bremen to be mighty like a spred Cloak; the two flaps of which (contain∣ing the Countries along the banks of the Elb and Weser) are lined with Velvet or Plush, but the middle part (which reaches from Vehrden up as far as the mouth of the Oste) is nothing but course Canvas or Buckram. Before the Westphalian Treaty, in the year 1648,Bishops and Arch∣bishops. this Tract of Land went under the name of an Archbishopric; and all the Princes, under whose subjection it was, were stiled Archbishops of Bre∣men. Of whom (with their three Bishops) the
account we have left us is, in short, as fol∣lows: 1. Wilhad (or, as some of the German Historians call him, Willibald) an English Priest, was at the request of Charles the Great sent over into Germany by Egbert Archbishop of York, about the year 788, where he was employ'd in converting the Infidels of that Country to Christianity; and for his meritorious perfor∣mances at last advanc'd to the Bishopric of Bremen. After he had spent several years in a vigilant execution of his Office, he died in the year 790, and was buried in the Cathe∣dral at Bremen; where to this day they pre∣tend to shew his Tomb. 2. Willeric, another English man, is said to have succeeded Wil∣had; tho many of their ancient Chronolo∣gers do not mention any such Bishop. And indeed the whole account we have of him, is only, That having for some unknown time (some, upon what grounds I know not, say till the year 840) enjoy'd this Jurisdiction, he left his See to 3. Luderic, a German. The old Saxon Chronicle calls him Lenderic; and tells us, that for his intolerable pride and ar∣rogance he was deposed by the Emperor Lu∣dowic the Godly, Charles the Great's Son; who chang'd the Bishopric of Bremen into an Arch∣bishopric, by setting up into this man's place 4. Ansgar (of whom we have said something before) the first Archbishop of Bremen and Hamburg; who was remov'd to Bremen upon the sacking of Hamburg by the Vandals in the year 850, from which time till his death (in the year 865) he kept both the Titles. The Archbishop of Colen stoutly oppos'd this union; alledging, that the Bishops of Bremen had al∣ways been Suffragans to his See, and that therefore 'twas an encroachment upon his Jurisdiction to convert that place into an Arch∣bishopric. But the Emperor took no notice of these murmurings; proceeding to confirm this newly conferr'd dignity to Ansgar and his Successors; ordering (as by his Diploma, still extant, does appear), that within the Province of the Archbishop of Bremen and Hamburg should be reckon'd all the Bishops in Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Groneland, Halsingland, Island, and the rest of the Northern Countries. 5. Rem∣bert (St. Ansgar's Scholar, and adopted Son) was, immediately upon his predecessor's death, advanc'd to the Archbishop's Seat; which he kept tweny-three years, and died in the year 888. Wilhad, Ansgar, and this Rembert are rec∣kon'd the three great Apostles of the Saxons; many of which Nation have taken the pains to write their lives. But the stories they tell us of them contain as many incredible things as the most Romantic Popish Legends. How∣ever, the Saxon Commonalty have still their memories and names in great veneration; and would as soon part with Christmas-day as St. Ansgar's (which is the eighth of February) out of their Almanacks. St. Wilhad's day is kept on the eighth of November; and St. Rembert's on the fourth of February. 6. Rembert was succeeded by one Adelgar, a Monk of Corbey (of whom nothing is recorded worth the taking notice of). 7. Hoyer, who was elected into the Archbishop's See in the year 909, and dyed the year following. The Bremen Chro∣nicle reports, that about an hundred and twenty years after his death his Grave was open'd; where nothing was found but a Pillow which had been laid under his head, and a Cross, both fresh and uncorrupted. Whereupon the Monks of Bremen concluded, that his body was immediately after his death snatch'd up into Heaven. 8. Reginward. 9. Ʋnni, who (going to convert the Infidels in Sweden) died at Birca in Gothland. 10. Adaldag. 11. Liben∣tius an Italian. 12. Ʋnwan, call'd by some Wimar. 13. Libentius II. 14. Hermannus. 15. Be∣zeline. 16. Albert, Son of one of the Dukes of Bavaria. 17. Liemar or Leimar, a Bavarian Nobleman; the fourteenth and last Arch-Bishop of Hamburg. For, when at the request of Eric King of Denmark the Pope had erected an Archbishops See at Lunden in Schonen, the Bishops of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway were subjected to the Archbishop of Lunden; and only Lubec, Schwerin, Lebus, and Ratzenburg remain'd Suffragans to the Archbishop of Bre∣men, who thereupon for ever quitted the Title of Archbishop of Hamburg. 18. Humbert, the first that ever stiled himself barely Archbishop of Bremen. 19. Frideric. 20. Adalbar. 21. Hart∣wic. 22. Baldwin, whose successor some have made one Barthold, but without any good authority. 23. Sifrid, Son to Albrecht Mar∣quise of Brandenburg. 24. Hartwic II. 25. Wol∣demar, Duke and Bishop of Sleswic. 26. Ger∣hard, formerly Bishop of Osnabrug. 27. Ger∣hard II. Earl of Lippe. 28. Hildebold or Hilde∣brand, Earl of Broch-hausen. 29. Giselbert. 30. Hen∣ry I. 31. Florentius de Brunchorst, against whom appear'd Bernherd Earl of Wolpe (whom some Historians make Archbishop instead of Floren∣tius), at lost the day. 32. John, Bishop of Lunden and Provost of Roschild in Denmark. 33. Burchard. 34. Otto, Earl of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst. 35. Gotfrid, Earl of Arnsberg. He had great quarrels with Maurice Earl of Olden∣burg for the See; which when he could not peaceably enjoy, he resign'd to 36. Albrecht Duke of Brunswic; chosen Archbishop in the life-time of his predecessor, in the year 1359. 37. Otto II. 38. John II. 39. Nicolas, Earl of Delmenhorst. 40. Baldwin. 41. Gerhard III. Earl of Hoga. 42. Henry III. Earl of Schwartz∣burg. 43. John III. 44. Christopher, Duke of Brunswic and Lunenburg. 45. Henry IV. Duke of Saxony, Engeren, Westphalia, &c. 46. John Adolph, Duke of Holstein, &c. who after the death of his Father was Regent Duke of Hol∣stein; and thereupon quitted the See of Bre∣men in the year 1596, leaving the place to his Brother 47. John Frideric, who was at the same time Bishop of Lubec, and (having en∣joy'd the Archbishopric of Bremen for the space of thirty-eight years) died in the Monastery near Buxtehude in the year 1634, and was bu∣ried in the Cathedral at Sleswic. 48. The last Archbishop of Bremen was Frideric Duke of Holstein, Son to Christian IV. King of Den∣mark, and Father to the present Danish King Christian V. But before this Frideric came to the Crown of Denmark, he had nothing left but the bare Title of an Archbishop. For, in the year 1644, the prevailing Forces of the Swedish King overran the Archbishopric of Bremen and Bishopric of Vehrden; as they had before many other Provinces of the German Empire. Afterwards, in the Treaty of Mun∣ster, it was agreed upon, that (ut satis fieret Serenissimae Reginae Sueciae pro locorum hoc bello captorum restitutione, Pacique Publicae in Imperio restanrandae condignè prospiceretur, as 'tis worded in the Tenth Article of that Treaty) amongst other places there mention'd, the Archbishop∣ric of Bremen and Bishopric of Vehrden should be for ever subject to the Kings of Sweden, and annex'd to their own Territories and Do∣minions,
sub solitis quidem Insigniis sed titulo Ducatus. And thus the Archbishopric was turn'd into a Dukedom; which Title it still retains. Whence the City of Bremen (which gives name to the whole Dukedom) is so call'd,City of Bremen. there are several different opinions amongst the Germans Writers; some of which, for the Rea∣der's diversion, I shall hear repeat, leaving it to himself to embrace any one, or reject all, as he shall see cause. One tells us, there was formerly a Ferry cross the Weser in the place where the great Bridg at Bremen now stands; and therefore will have the City so call'd from the flat bottom'd Boats (in the tongue of the Neder-Saxons nam'd Pramen) wherewith they us'd to ferry over pas∣sengers. Another fancies Bremen may be fetch'd from the abundance of Broom (in their tongue Brame) which grows in this Country. M. Mar∣tinius (a man of no contemptible parts and learn∣ing) guesses, that because the Land of Bremen is the outmost bounds of the German Empire towards the Ocean, therefore the City was call'd ein Brame; which word signifies properly the outmost seam or selvidge of a Garment. To omit the impertinences of other Etymologists, all agree in this, that Ptolomy's  (whence ever that word had its original) is the same with Bremen. Cluverius allowing of this opinion, adds further, Nec nomen omnino abhorret; nam dempta priore syllaba reliquum BIRANƲM satis aperta vestigia gerit vocabuli BREMEN. Et quid scio annon apud Ptolomaeum M corruptum sit in N, in∣tegrumque vocabulum fuerit FABIRAMƲM? Amongst the old rubbish of ancient German writers,Antiquity. and the small fragments of Antiquity which are at this day to be met with in that Coun∣try, 'twill be a difficult task to find out the first original of this City. 'Tis certain, one great part of it (which is known by the name of S. Stephani Statt) is of a later foundation then the main body of the Town; and another grand accession (call'd Die New Statt, or the New City) has been added within these hundred years. What time this City was first fortified we have no other account then in the general, that the Cities of Saxony (and in all probability Bremen amongst the rest) were first wall'd round by the orders of Henry Duke of Saxony, surnam'd Auceps, or the Fowler, about the year 1000. For this Prince had found by experience, that his naked Towns were not able to withstand the fury and outrages of the Vandals; who in those days mi∣serably infested the Northern parts of the Em∣pire. All the modern Historians will inform us, that the Suburbs of St. Nicolas (which at this day make up a considerable part of the City of Bremen) were first fenc'd round in the year 1623, and the a-la modern fortifications of the Newe-Statt, on the other side of the Weser, cannot pre∣tend to any greater age. At this day Bremen is a large and well-built Town.Descripti∣on. The Streets generally strait and even, excepting only near the Cathedral, which stands upon a small rising. The great Trade brought to this City by the Shipping, and the fruitfulness of the neighbouring plain (which is continually stockt with vast droves of Cattle) has strangely enrich'd the inhabitants of late years, and ren∣der'd the place exceeding populous. Nature, as well as art, has made this City very strong; and were the walls beat down, 'twould be a difficult task to take it, if resolutely defended. For, be∣ing situate on a level, the Citizens can immediate∣ly drown the neighbouring plain with the Weser; which usually once a year, like another Nile, over∣flows its banks, and thereby mightily improves the adjacent sandy fields. The Haven at Bremen is not so convenient for Ships to harbour in as that at Hamburg;Haven. and some∣times a great flood casts up such banks and ridges of sand, as makes the Weser for some miles un∣navigable for Merchant Ships of any great bur∣then. So that oftentimes the Citizens of Bremen are at vast charges to cleanse the passage; and yet can scarce clear the River so far as that Ves∣sels of greater bulk then ordinary can be brought within six English miles of their Bridge. At this distance from the Town the Rahts-herrn and Magistracy of Bremen have a Custom-house; where all foreign Commodities are unladed and brought up to the City in flat-bottom'd Boats, or small Vessels. By the Weser the Citizens of Bremen transport all their own commodities (as Timber,Commodi∣ties. Wool, Corn, and Minerals) into other Nations; and by the same stream convey the commodities of foreign Countries into Westphalia, the Dukedom of Brunswic, Hassia, Thuringen, and other parts of the German Empire. They have here an ex∣cellent art of dressing of Leather and Cloth; vast quantities of both which are sometimes brought hither out of other Countries, and re∣mitted to the great gain of the inhabitants. Ano∣ther considerable commodity of this City is their Fish; which is caught in the Sea and Weser, and hence transported into most neighbouring Coun∣tries. Every month they have a several sort of Fish in season; and within the very walls of the Town many thousands of Salmons and Lam∣preys are caught yearly, and (after they are pickled up, or dry'd in the smoak) shipp'd off. Soon after the Reformation (which was first begun at Bremen in the year 1522),Gymnasi∣um. the Burgers built a Free-School, and endow'd it with a fair revenue. This was afterwards advanc'd into a Schola Illustris (as they term it) or a College, wherein were profess'd and taught the four su∣perior faculties, of Divinity, Law, Physic, and Philosophy. At last it became a Gymnasium (or little University); and is at this day the most noted one in Germany; famous for the education of Nat. Chytraeus, Chr. Pezelius, Ʋrban Pierius, Mat∣thias Martinius, Joh. Lampadius, Lud. Crocius, Joh. Combachius, Joh. Coccejus, and several other learned men. The Magistracy of the Town consists of four Burgomasters, and four and twenty Raths-herrn,Magi∣strates. or Common-Council-men; who are divided into four Classes. So that one Burgomaster and six Rahtsherrn may be allotted for each quarter of the City. If any of the Burgomasters or Rahts∣herrn dy, or be brought so low in the world as not to be able to bear his office any longer, they are bound to chuse another into his place within four and twenty-hours after his burial or resig∣nation. The election is carried on in this man∣ner: Out of each Class one Elector is pitcht upon by lot; and the four that are at last set out for that office take an oath to chuse a person (out of the most considerable freemen of the Town) whom in their conscience they think the fittest for the place vacant. This done, they are shut up together in a Chamber by themselves; and not suffer'd to speak to any man before they have finish'd the Election. All manner of Law-Suits (tam Civiles quam Criminales, Fiscales ac Consistoriales) are tried before these Magistrates; from whose Court no Citizen can appeal to the Imperial Chamber at Spire, without being liable to pay a fine of fifty Gold-gulders to the common Treasury.
This is one of the most considerable Imperial Cities in the Empire; and was always reckon'd the third Hans-Town, after Lubec and Colen. Its first great priviledges were granted to it by the Emperor Henry V. in the year 1111, in remem∣brance of the valiant performances of the Citi∣zens of Bremen in the Holy War. For thus the words of their Charter run, Ob obsequiorum promp∣titudinem, multasque Deificas virtutes, viriles actus & non modicos labores & expensas, quos & quas Bremenses per mare suis navibus & per terram fece∣runt, in passagio ultra mare ad terram sanctam, quan∣do Civitas Hierosolymitana capta est, &c. But before this Emperor's time, 'twas certainly a free City; as appears from the Statua Rolan∣dina, which is still to be seen in the Market-place, bearing the Arms of the Empire (a spread-Eagle) with this inscription, in the old Neder-Saxon lan∣guage, Vryheitt do ick ju openbahr, De Carll und manig Forst vorwahr Deeser Stadtt ghegheuen hatt. Dess dancket Gode iss min Rath, i.e. I am a testimony of the Liberty which Charles (the Great) and many other Emperor's have granted to this City. For which I ad∣vise you to return God thanks. 'Twill not be amiss in this place to give the Reader a short account of the reasons which mo∣ved the ancient Germans (especially the inhabi∣tants of the Upper and Lower Saxony) to erect these kind of monstrous Statues in their Cities and great Towns. The tradition usually receiv'd amongst the Saxons is, That Charles the Great overran their Country by the help of one Ro∣land, a Gigantic General in his Army; and that thereupon the Emperor order'd his Image to be set up in all the Cities of note which he con∣quer'd; with this priviledg, That so long as they kept up such Statues they should have a right to several Regalia, not allow'd to other Cities in the Empire. But the truth or probability of this story depends wholly upon the credit and au∣thority of the common people; for from them some of the German Historians have borrow'd the relation, and afterwards (without any fur∣ther enquiry) impos'd it upon the world for a piece of authentic History. How ridiculous and absurd would it be for a triumphant Emperor to erect Trophees to the honour of Comman∣ders in his Army, where himself is acknowledg'd to be the Conqueror? Besides, it appears (from the unquestionable testimony of the best Dutch Records) that several of those Cities which shew such kind of Statues as these, were built many years after the death of the Emperor Charles the Great. Nor can the most accurate German An∣tiquary prove, that there was any such thing as a Statua Rolandina ever heard of in the Em∣pire before A.D. 1000. Again, what could per∣swade the Emperor to bestow such signal kind∣nesses upon mean and contemptible Villages in Saxony (as some to this day are; which never∣theless dare still pretend to shew one of these an∣cient Statues); whereas we do not find, that any of the brave Cities upon the Rhine had such pri∣viledges and immunities granted to them? If there be any probable account to be given of this custom, Goldastus's conjecture is the most likely to hit the mark. Now he fancies, that Ro∣land, or Ruland, is not a proper name, but an appellative, deriv'd from the old Dutch word Ru∣gen, signifying to judg or pass sentence in any Law-Case. So that by Ruland, or Rugeland, no∣thing else (as he thinks) can be meant, then ein Mahlstadt da man frey Kayserlich Gericht helt, i. e. a City or great Town on the utmost borders of the Empire, where the Emperor has been pleas'd to appoint a Session of Judges and Advo∣cates to try and determine, in his name, all Law-Suits and Controversies. And this power and authority committed to the Burgers of such cer∣tain Cities was represented (as it is still at Bre∣men, Magdeburg, and many other great Towns in Saxony) by the portraicture of a great Giant (mistaken for one Roland, whom they make Sister's Son to Charles the Great) representing the Emperor, and bearing the Arms of the Em∣pire. And they were anciently so superstitious in erecting or pulling down these Statues, accor∣ding as they had the right of Judicature con∣ferr'd on, or taken from them, that when the Emperor Charles the IV. had obliged the Ham∣burgers to submit themselves to the Dukes of Hol∣stein, they broke their Statue in pieces, Quam (says Crantzius) pro signo libertatis olim erectam habuerant. To conclude, 'tis a sufficient argu∣ment that these Statues were not first set up in Saxony (nor ever appropriated to that Country) in remembrance of General Roland their Conque∣ror, that we meet with the like monuments in Kinsberg, Prinslaw, and some other places in the Marquisate of Brandenburg; where we never read that Roland commanded an Army. The money currant in Bremen,Money. is chiefly the Emperor's own Coin. Some pieces they have out of Sweden; tho there cannot be any great treasure exported out of so poor a Kingdom. I have not seen any notable coin of their own, except their Bremischer Grot, or Vier-pfenninger; which is worth little more then an English half∣penny. From this Nether-Saxon word Grot, used instead of the High-Dutch Grosch, our English Groat had probably its first original; for their Grot, as well as ours, is valued at four Pence; altho a Penny at Bremen, as well as in Scotland, be not worth above a sixth part of one of ours. The Arms of Bremen are a Key Argent in a Field Gules;Arms. to denote the power of the Citi∣zens to open or shut (at their pleasure) the passage of any Ships which traffic upon the Weser. Other Places of Note in the Dukedom of BREMEN. I. VEHRDEN,Vehrden. formerly a Bishop's See, and no part of the Arch∣bishopric of Bremen; but may now reasonably enough be ac∣counted a part of the Duke∣dom, as having been given up into the hands of the Swedes, together with the Archbishopric (under the name of one en∣tire Dukedom) at the Treaty of Munster. Brus∣chius (in his History of the German Bishops) tells us, that Charles the Great founded this Bishop∣ric at Konende upon the Weser; others say Barde∣wic, about the year 776; whence not long after it was remov'd to Vehrden, which even in those days was (if the Saxons had any such) a strong and populous City. Crantzius reports, that the first Bishop of this Diocess was one Suibert an English man, who died in the year 708 (near seventy years before the first foundation of the Bishopric, according to Bruschius's calculation) and was succeeded by one Patto a Scot. But Emmius (in his accurate Frisian History) shews,
that this Historian mistook Suidbert the Frislan∣der, who was indeed the first Bishop of Vehrden, for one of the same name who came over into Germany with Wilhad the first Bishop of Bremen, And yet this correction of Crantzius's relation is not to be approv'd, unless we read 788 or 798 instead of 708; since, as we have before inform'd the Reader, one of our English Archbishops first furnish'd Bremen with a Bishop, at the request of the Emperor Charles the Great, in the year 788. We may from these contradictions easily ga∣ther what credit is to be given to the account which German writers are able to give us of the ancient State of this City; and the present is not worthy of a large description, having nothing in it extraordinary or remarkable. The River Aller (upon which 'tis seated) brings in all the Trade of the Town; since up the Weser, into which River the Aller emties it self, not far from Vehrden, are brought flat bottom'd Barges of a considerable bulk, laden with all foreign and domestic commodities which the Market of Bremen will afford. Count Tilly took this Town at the first assault in the year 1626; and after∣wards (in the year 1631) the Imperial Army gave it a second blow, which it has felt ever since. II.Otters∣berg. OTTERSBERG. A small fortified Town, not far from Bremen; beautified and defended by a strong Castle, the ancient residence of some of their Archbishops. Chytraeus tells us, that the Castle of Ottenberg bore a part for many years with the Citizens of Bremen in a rebellion against their Archbishops; to whom they were at last upon some condition agreed to by both parties, forc'd to submit themselves in the year 1547. In the last Civil Wars of Germany this Castle was twice taken and plunder'd by the Impe∣rialists; and once by Count Coningsmark the Swedish General. III.Rotter∣berg. ROTTERBERG. A small City seated on the River Wein, at about four English miles distance from Ottersberg. In the place where this City now stands, Nicolas the thirty-seventh Bishop of Vehrden built a Palace for himself and successors; which was afterwards fortified with strong Walls and a deep Ditch, about the year 1500, by Barthold the forty-ninth Bishop of that Diocess. At the same time the adjoining Vil∣lage, or Suburbs, were Wall'd in, and made a small City; which by degrees is grown to be a place of some trade, and is considerably popu∣lous. IV.Buxte∣hude. BUXTEHUDE. Seated on the River Essa, not far from the Elb, in as pleasant and fruitful a Country as any in the whole Empire. This is one of the Granaries of Hamburg; and fur∣nishes that great City with a large portion of their provision both for man and horse. V.Stade. STADE. The second City of note, next after Bremen, in the whole Dukedom; seated on the mouth of the River Zwinga and banks of the Elb. Bertius, and other writers skill'd in the ancient Geography of these parts, would have this City look'd upon as a place of the greatest antiquity of any in Saxony; esteeming it the same with Ptolomy's . Tho I think the Longitude and Latitude which Ptolomy assigns to that old Town (being 29 deg. of Long. and 51 deg. 20 min. of Lat.) will scarce come near this City. This large and ancient City was formerly sub∣ject to Earls and Marquises of its own; and thence we find the inhabitants in and about the City named by the Latin Historians Stadenses, Stadingi or Stedingii, as a people distinct of them∣selves and independant upon any of the neigh∣bouring Princes. Of these Earls and Marc-Graves the Reader may meet with a Catalogue in Crantzius, or Angelius a Werdenhagen. In the year 1234, the Stadenses were the oc∣casion of a bloody and terrible war in the Arch∣bishopric of Bremen; which happening in the very infancy of Christianity in these parts, had like to have stifled Religion in its Cradle. This bloodshed was occasion'd by a revolt of the Citizens of Stade from their obedience to the See of Bremen. Whereupon the Clergy of that City (being resolv'd to keep by a strong arm what their enemies had endeavour'd to wrest from them) took up arms, and engaged several of their neighbours in the broil. But this ex∣pedient did not meet with the expected success; having, after a long quarrel, only weaken'd both parties, and in no wise vindicated the Archbishop's Title. At last, a volley of curses and excom∣munications from the Bishop of Rome frighted the Citizens of Stade into submission, and ob∣liged them to yield obedience (as formerly) to the Archbishop's of Bremen. Hereupon Philip, Duke of Schwaben and Earl of Stade, annex'd the whole County to the Arch∣bishopric; reserving only to himself the City with its ancient priviledges and immunities. In which state it continued till (in the Civil wars of Germany) it fell into the hands of the Swedes; and was confirm'd to that Crown, as a part of the Dukedom of Bremen, by the Treaty of Mun∣ster. And possibly, we may have some reason to call this the Metropolis of the whole Coun∣try which is now subject to the King of Swe∣den as Duke of Bremen; since the City of Bre∣men it self was exemted from the Homage pay∣able to that Monarch from the Archbishopric by vertue of that Treaty, and is to this day a free Imperial City, immediately subject to the Emperor, and to him only. Notwithstanding the vast Rampires and Bul∣warks wherewith this City is fortified, and the natural strength of the place, it was besieg'd and taken in one day (April 13, 1645) by the Swedish General Count Coningsmark; who having at the first assault taken the Fortress on the mouth of the Zwinge, betwixt the City and the Elb, press'd forward with his whole Army to the Gates of Stade, and forc'd his way into the City. Where∣upon the Burgers were glad to surrender up the Castle and other strong Forts upon any condi∣tions the Conqueror was pleas'd to propose. The Town is at present in a flourishing con∣dition; being seated in a wholesom Air, and a pleasant rich Country. The Burgers (who have the character of the most civil and courteous people in this part of the Empire) have com∣monly Orchards and Gardens of pleasure with∣out the walls of the City, well stockt with all manner of Fruits and Flowers. Their Haven is large and commodious; and Ships of larger carriage and burthen come up to Stade then are able to reach Hamburg. The Market-place, Raht∣hauss (or Town-Hall), Exchange, and several of their Churches, are Buildings worthy a Tra∣veller's sight. Many and great have been the priviledges by several Emperors granted to this City. It was always reckon'd a Sanctuary for fugitives; inso∣much, that all manner of malefactors (whe∣ther Germans or Foreigners) that could reach Stade before vengeance overtook them, were sure to find shelter here, and be secure from the hand of justice. Besides the priviledg of coin∣ing money, authority to hunt in the neighbour∣ing Forests (and the like prerogatives challeng'd
by all Imperial Cities), they have power to de∣mand a certain Toll or Custom of every Mer∣chant-man that passes up the Elb to Hamburg; every such Vessel being oblig'd to strike anchor at the mouth of the Zwinge, and there to tarry till dismiss'd by the Masters of the Custom-House. These pretensions occasion'd (not many years ago) a quarrel between the Citizens of Stade and the Hamburgers; the later pretending, that 'twas an infringement of their prerogative (who were absolute Masters of the Elb below their own City) for Stade to lay claim to any such priviledg. But the controversie soon after was amicably compos'd; and each City has since peaceably enjoy'd its own peculiar Regality. This ancient Hans-Town (being one of the first that was enroll'd into that noble society) was once reduc'd to a mean and beggarly con∣dition by the overgrown trade and riches of the Hamburgers; insomuch, that it was forc'd to sell (almost for bread, the public stock not amount∣ing to ninety pounds sterling a year) to these upstart thriving Merchants its ancient priviledges, and put it self under the protection of the Arch∣bishops of Bremen. But in this low condition it did not long continue, before the English Mer∣chants (upon some affront the Hamburgers had offer'd them) remov'd their commerce to Stade. By which means this City, in a short time, re∣cover'd its former grandeur; and grew on a sudden rich and populous. VI. BREMER-VERDEN. A wall'd Town,Bremer-Verden. on the road betwixt Bremen and Stade; distant from the later about twelve English miles, and from the former near twenty-eight. It was first built by Luder Duke of Saxony; and afterwards made a Palace for the Archbishops of Bremen, who had here their usual residence. In the Ca∣stle (which commands a great part of the ad∣jacent plain) the Swedes have commonly a strong Garrison. The Town would otherwise be of little note; not having the convenience of any trade, except what is brought by the resort of passengers that travel this way to Bremen or Stade. decorative device
THE DUKEDOM OF LUNENBURG. THE Dukedom of Lune∣burg,Bounds. or Lunenburg, is bounded on the South with the Dukedom of Brunswic; on the South-East with Magdeburg; on the East with Bran∣denburg; on the North with Lauwenburg and Holstein; on the North-West with Bremen; and on the West with some part of Westphalia. The Metropolis (which gives name to the whole Dukedom) is thought by some to have had its name from the Moon (Lunus or Luna) worshipp'd by the ancient Idolatrous Inhabitants of this Land. Others derive the word from the name of the River Elmena, or Ilmenow, on which the City of Luneburg is seated, which (they tell us) was formerly call'd Luno from Isis the Egyp∣tian Goddess; who coming into Germany to visit her Kinsman Gambrivius (who was in those days Lord of that part of the Country where Ham∣burg now stands), was here Deified and wor∣shipp'd under the Image of an Half-Moon. Se∣veral of the Saxon Chronologers report, that this Idol was first brought hither by Julius Ce∣sar; who questionless (if we believe the more credible Roman Historians) never saw this Coun∣try. However, that the story in the main is true, and that the inhabitants of these parts did indeed worship an Image of the Moon, is agreed on by all the Dutch Antiquaries; altho they are at a loss to find out how their Ancestors came came by the Latin names of Lunus or Luna. There are to this day several Rivers and Towns in this Dukedom, and the Marquisate of Brandenburg, which still retain the name of Lune. The old Annals of the Cathedral Church at Vehrden say, that this Idol (which stood on the top of a mountain far from Luneburg, call'd at this day Kalk-Berg, from the abundance of Lime found there) was first destroy'd by Egistus, one of the seventy Disciples that first planted Christianity in the German Empire. Yet afterwards, when the inhabitants of these, as well as many other parts of the Empire relaps'd into their ancient Idola∣try, the Image was again set up and worship'd; until at last it was finally remov'd by Suibert (not Wibert, as some of their Historians write the word) the first Bishop of Vehrden; who, in the same place where this Goddess's Temple stood, built a splendid Monastery about the year 780, which was by him dedicated to St. Mary. Cluverius tells us, that the whole Country about Luneburg and Ʋltzen (which is a City about twenty English miles distant from Lune∣burg, towards the South) was first inhabited by the Cathulci; whom he guesses to have been a Pro∣vince of the Cherusci, whose Territories reach'd much farther up into the Empire. The Dukedom of Luneburg is every-where full of large Woods and Forests (many of which are noted in the Map) abounding with all sorts of Deer, wild Swine, and other kinds of Veni∣son.Nature of the Sil. The most noted Forests (wherein the Duke of Zell usually spends the hunting season of the year, accompanied with several of the neighbour∣ing Princes, Counts, and other Nobles of the Empire) are Raarbroock, die Roffkammer, Grode, Bergerwald, Kralingerbroeck, im Ringelow, im Lewen, and im Dromeling. Another great part of the Country is taken up with vast Heaths and Wasts; the largest of which (known by the name of Die Lunenburgurgische Heyde) lies on the West of the City Luneburg, being a great share of the Dukedom (for several German miles together) wholly desart and uninhabited. The inhabitants of this Country are look'd upon by the rest of the Germans,Manners of the In∣habitants. as the most rustical, both in language and behaviour, of any in the Empire. Tacitus can inform us, what stout Warriours the Dagublini (who were of the Na∣tion of the Cherusci, and as he guesses, ancient inhabitants of these parts) were in the days of the Emperor Augustus. For having rebell'd a∣gainst Quintilius Varus (the Emperor's proud Lieutenant in the room of Drusus) under the command of their Captain Arminius, they put the Roman General and his whole Army, con∣sisting of three Legions, to the Sword. Which sudden and shameful overthrow so far distracted
map of Lüneberg DVCATVS LVNEBVRGENIS Adiacentium{que} regio∣num delineatio Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
the Emperor, as that he was afterwards often observed to beat his head against the posts, and (in the bitterness of his passion and anguish) to cry out, Redde mihi Legiones, Quantili Vare. The Luneburgers have not indeed of late given any such Heroic testimony of their valour as this; but are however esteem'd good and hardy Soldiers, being from their Cradles accustom'd to a cold Climate and slender fare. What kind of Government the ancient Saxons (of which great Nation the present inhabitants of the Dukedoms of Brunswic and Luneburg are only two small branches) were subject to,. we have already given the Reader an account. And in the same state of Anarchy and confusion they had probably to this day continued, if the Em∣peror Charles the Great had not new modell'd their Government, and made them sensible of the convenience of being constantly subject and obedient to some supreme Rulers and Magistrates. But this he could never effect by Conquest or the Sword; only Religion by degrees reduc'd them into a formal Commonwealth, and the precepts of Christianity first taught them how to obey the Laws of Temporal as well as Spiri∣tual Princes. For the foremention'd Emperor (having won over the greatest part of the Na∣tion to the profession of the Christian Faith) got several Bishoprics erected in many parts of the Land; and perswaded the neighbourhood to pay Tithes and other Church duties to the Pre∣lates he had set over these new Diocesses. And this was the only Government known for some ages after in the Territories which now are known by the names of the Dukedoms of Brunswic and Luneburg. For altho we read, that the Emperor Lotharius made Ludolf) great Grandchild to the famous Wittikind that encountred Charles the Great) Duke of Saxony; yet Crantzius is of opi∣nion, that neither this Ludolf nor his Successor Otho had any thing to do with the Lower Saxony; but were only made Princes of Thuringen, Meis∣sen, and some other Provinces of the Upper Saxo∣ny. Indeed Wittikind (an Author of great cre∣dit) seems to assert the contrary; telling us, in the first Book of his History, that Otho (the first German Emperor of that name) being ad∣vanced to the Imperial Throne, left behind him one Herman, a Baron's Son (so the learned Mei∣bomius proves him to have been, tho most of the Dutch Historians say he was descended from much meaner Parentage) whom he made his Lieutenant in these parts; and to encourage him faithfully to discharge his Office, settled several Lands and Tenements upon him and his Heirs for ever. Soon after, the said Emperor return∣ing out of Italy, (where for some considerable time he had, for weighty reasons, been forc'd to keep his Residence) was so well pleas'd with Herman's acquitting himself bravely of the Trust reposed in him, that immediately he made him Duke of North-Saxony, containing all the Terri∣tories now subject to the Dukes of Luneburg and Lawenburg, together with a great part of the Duke of Holstein's Dominions. This hap'ned in the year of our Lord 966. By this means the great Dukedom came to be divided;kedoms and a new Dukedom (the Princes whereof however stiled themselves Dukes of Saxony) erected out of it, which was governed by Herman and his Successors Bruno, Bernhard, Artolf, and Magnus. The last of these died with∣out any Heirs male (tho not in the Emperor's Prison, as some Historians have confidently re∣ported, but at home in his own House) in the year 1106. Whereupon the Dukedom of the Lower Saxony was given by the Emperor Henry V. to Lotharius Baron of Querfurt. After Lotharius's death Henry Duke of Bavaria (surnam'd the Proud) got possession of this Dukedom; which he challeng'd upon a double account, as having married Lotharius's Daughter, and being him∣self the son of Wolfbilde Daughter to Duke Mag∣nus, Lotharius's predecessor. But Albert (sur∣nam'd Ʋrsus) Marquise of Brandenburg, oppos'd him with so good success at first, that he was forc'd to quit the City of Lunenburg, and a great part of the adjoining Territories; out of which nevertheless he made a shift to beat back Albert at last, and so made himself Master of the whole Dukedom. The pretensions which Al∣bert had to this Dukedom, were grounded upon his being Son to Duke Magnus's eldest Daugh∣ter Elicke; whereas Henry was only descended from the younger, and therefore had the worse Title, if his Father-in-Law Lotharius's Right had prov'd insignificant. This Henry left behind him one only Son, Henry surnam'd the Lion; a Prince of so great and fortunate undertakings in war, that the German Chronicles are full of his exploits. Some of the Dutch Historians tell us, he extended his Dominions from the Rhine to the Elb; others say, from the Adriatic to the Baltic Sea; a third sort go yet further, and make him Lord of Hol∣stein and a great part of Denmark. Certain it is, he was a victorious Prince, and Ruler over more Provinces then any of his Successors could lay claim to. But his large Dukedom was bro∣ken in pieces by the Emperor (as we had occa∣sion to tell the Reader before), and himself re∣duc'd from a great Duke of Saxony, and Lord of all the neighbouring Territories, to a mean and inconsiderable Duke of Brunswic and Lune∣burg. Hitherto we have found the Dukedoms of Brunswic and Luneburg united and subject to one Prince.Dukes of Lunen∣burg. But upon the death of this Henry (which hapned in the year 1195) they were divided. For Henry the Lion had three Sons, viz. Duke Henry, who was afterwards made Prince Palatine of the Rhine; Duke Otho, who was advanced to the Imperial Throne; and Duke William, who succeeded his Father in the Territories of Lune∣burg; but only stiled himself Dominus de Lune∣burg. And indeed he had but little reason to take upon him any greater Title; since his two Bro∣thers were sharers with him in the Estate of his deceased Father. For Otho took possession of the City and Country of Brunswic, and Duke Henry seized upon Zell, Bremen, and Stade. About the year 1213, Duke William dy'd, and was succeeded by his only Son Otho, who after∣wards (in the year 1235) was made Duke of Brunswic by the Emperor Frideric the Second's Diploma, which is at this day to be seen in the Duke of Zell's Archives. Duke William dying in the year 1252, left behind him two Sons, Albert and John; Albert kept all his Fathers Dominions in his own hands, but at last resign'd the Dukedom of Luneburg to his Brother John. Since that time the Duke∣doms of Brunswic and Luneburg have been always reckon'd two distinct Principalities, and usually subject to two different Princes. After this division of the two Dukedoms, Duke John governed the Dukedom of Luneburg about eight years; and then (dying in the year 1276) left his Estate to his Son Otho. By the way we may take notice of a notorious Parachronism in Dr. Heylin's Cosmography, wherein (reckon∣ing only the eight years Government of Duke John, without mentioning any power enjoy'd by his Brother Albert in the Dukedom of Lune∣burg)
he brings Otho II. to the Dukedom in the year 1261, which is fifteen years (exactly the time that Duke Albert kept possession of both his Father's Dukedoms) before his Father's death. Otho having reign'd 53 years, and dying in the year 1330, left behind him two Sons, Otho and William, who were joint-Governors of the Dukedom of Luneburg for the space of four and twenty years. After which (upon the death of Duke Otho without any Heirs male) Wil∣liam was the sole Governor for some small term of years. But considering, that upon the failure of issue from himself and his Brother, the Line of Luneburg was like to be extinct; he resolv'd (during his life-time) to chose himself a Successor. Where∣upon, at first, he pitcht upon Albert Duke of Saxony, his Brother's Daughter's Son; but after∣wards changing his resolution, he resign'd the Dukedom to Ludowic Duke of Brunswic, who had married his eldest Daughter Mechtild. Duke Ludowic having govern'd three years, and dying without issue, in the year 1358, was succeeded by Magnus (surnam'd mit der ketten, or Torquatus); to whom the Luneburgers sub∣mitted themselves upon condition, that he should protect them against all injuries offer'd them either by the Emperor Charles IV. or any of the Dukes of Saxony. Soon after Torquatus, upon his Father's death, got possession of the Terri∣tories of Brunswic; and so both Dukedoms were once more united. But notwithstanding the great confidence they repos'd in their new Prince, and the vast por∣mises he made them; Albert Duke of Saxony (assisted by the foremention'd Emperor Charles the fourth, in pursuance of his Right as being descended from the elder Brother's Daughter) by force recover'd the Dukedom of Luneburg in the year 1372, and enjoy'd it fourteen years. After his death there were great wars betwixt the Houses of Brunswic and Saxony; each of them laying claim to, and contending for this Duke∣dom. At last, in the year 1388 Bernhard Duke Magnus's Son obtain'd the Government. But soon after Frideric Duke of Brunswic being slain in his return from Francfurt (where he was newly chosen Emperor) Bernhard was remov'd to Brunswic, and the Dukedom of Luneburg gi∣ven to his Nephew Henry; who before had some share with him in the Government. Henry, having been sole Duke of Luneburg for the space of sixteen years, dyed A. D. 1416. and was succeeded by his Son William; who, within a while after, falling out with his Cou∣sin Otho, Duke Bernhard's Son, made several in∣cursions into the Dukedom of Brunswic, many of the most considerable Cities whereof he laid siege to, and took. Some while after, the quarrels betwixt the two Dukes were composed upon this condition, that they should change Dukedoms; which was accordingly done in the year 1428; and so Otho was made Duke of Luneburg, and William remo∣ved to Brunswic. Otho's Brother, Duke Frideric, succeeded him (tho Dr. Heylin makes him his Predecessor) in the Dukedom of Luneburg; and having go∣vern'd about fourteen years, quitted the Duke∣dom, and shut himself up in a Monastery at Zell in the year 1459. Hereupon the Government was committed to his two Sons Bernhard and Otho; the former of which dyed within five years, and the latter (surving about seven years) left behind him only one young Son, about three years old. This forced the old Duke Frideric, in his ex∣treme dotage, to reassume the Government till his Grandchild should come to maturity; he man∣naged the Affairs of his Dukedom for seven years longer, dying in the year 1478. The young Duke Henry, being not above ten years of age at his Grandfather's death, was assisted in the Government by his mother for some years. Ten years before his death, which hapned in the year 1532, he setled the Duke∣dom upon his three Sons, Otho, Ernest, and Francis. The first of these, preferring a retired life to the state and grandeur of a Dukedom, resign'd his Right to his Brother Ernestus during his Fa∣ther's life; demanding only a certain annual sti∣pend, sufficient for the maintenance of himself and a small family. This Ernest (together with his Brother Fran∣cis, who shared with him in the Government till the year 1539, but was afterwards put off with the Lordship of Giffhorn and Monastery of Isen∣hagen) brought in the Reform'd Religion in the year 1530. He died in the year 1546, and was succeeded by his Son Francis Otho; who, having govern'd about thirteen years, dyed without Issue male, and left the Dukedom to his two Brothers Henry and William. These two rul'd peace∣ably together for the space of ten years; but afterwards they separated themselves, and agreed, that William should have the sole government of the Dukedom of Luneburg, and Duke Henry be content with the Revenues of the Lordship of Dannenberg and Monastery of Scharnebeck; to which were afterwards added, the Lordships of Hitzaker, Luchau, and Warbke. In the year 1592, Duke William died; and was succeeded by his Son Ernest; who kept the Dukedom of Luneburg till the year 1611. In which he left it to his Brother Christian; Elect Bishop of the Diocess of Min∣den. This brave Prince govern'd the Duke∣dom in great peace and prosperity two and twenty years; and enlarg'd it with the Princi∣pality of Grubenhagen. After his decease, in the year 1633, the Duke∣dome of Luneburg fell to his Brother Augustus, Elect Bishop of Ratzeburg; upon which incom∣parable Prince (of whom the Reader may ex∣pect a larger account in the description of the Dukedom of Brunswic) descended not long after, by the death of Frideric Ʋlric, the Dukedom of Brunswic. Whereupon the Dukedom of Luneburg was given to Duke George, Lieutenant General of all the forces of the Lower Saxony, in the year 1636. He left four Sons, whereof the eldest Christian Ludowic, for some years, govern'd the Luneburgers; paying each of his younger Brethren an annual stipend of 12000 Ric-dollars. Upon his death the second Brother George William succeeded in the Government, and kept (as he doth to this day) his Residence in his Brothers Palace at Zell By the Treaty of Hildesheim the Dukedoms of Calenberg and Grubenhage were assign'd over to the third Brother John Frideric; who kept his Residence at Hannover in much greater state then his Brother at Zell. These, and all other Territories subject to the late Duke of Hannover, are now in the pos∣session of the youngest Brother Ernest Augustus; who, by the Treaty of Munster, was made Bi∣shop of Osnabrug, and is now (upon the death of his Brother John Frideric this last year 1680) Duke of Hannover. He married the Lady So∣phia, youngest Sister to our Prince Rupert,
of whom this character is usually given, that she is the most accomplish'd Princess in Europe; by whom he hath three Sons and a Daughter. Chief Cities, and other places of greatest note in this Dukedom, are FIrst,Luneburg. LUNEBURG. We have alrea∣dy given the Reader an account of the most probable opinion a∣bout the original of the name of this City; and but little more can be sai concerning its first Founders, and those that fortified it. The story of Julius Cesar's laying the first foundation of a City in this place, is (at best) incredible and groundless. There's hardly an ancient City in Europe which does not pretend to some vene∣rable piece or other of Julius's Architecture; which tho ordinarily admir'd by the vulgar, yet is contemn'd and laugh'd at by men of sence and knowing Antiquaries. The best testimony of its age I can meet with is Dithmarus Mersburgen∣sis's mentioning Luinberg, by the name of Civi∣tas, in speaking of an Earthquake which hapned in the days of the Emperor Henry II. But 'tis easie to observe, how the Historians of those times were wont to compliment any mean Vil∣lage with the title of Civitas. Yet Lambertus Schafnaburgensis (an Author of almost as great antiquity as the former) in his account of the transactions of the year 1073. gives this chara∣cter of Luneburg, that 'twas then Oppidum maxi∣mum Ottonis Ducis Saxoniae, situm in confinio Saxo∣num & Luticiorum. At present the Town contains about two Eng∣lish miles in circumference; being not built in exact square, but rather an oblong figure. The Streets are broad; and most of the Houses to∣lerably well built. Over against the Town-hall (which is a neat and compact piece of building) stands the Duke's Palace; where the Duke of Zell and his Family are lodg'd when he has a mind to reside at Luneburg. The chief Trade of the Town is in Salt; which the Citizens make in great abundance, out of certain pits of salt water, which spring within the walls. Their Salt-houses are fenc'd round and continually guarded; as being the main support of the City. These bring in the Duke a considerable yearly Revenue; and besides pro∣vision is hereby made for a great number of poor labouring men, who might otherwise starve for want of employment. II.Bardewic. BARDEWICK. At this day a Village within a mile of Luneburg; but anciently a strong and populous City. Some Authors fancy it to have been the first City in Saxony. And so que∣stionless it was, if it be true (as they pretend to be able to demonstrate) that it was built 990 years before Christ. Over the door of the Cathedral (which is now the only Church left of nine) are wrote in an old Gothic character these hobling verses: Abram dum natus mox Treveris incipit ortus Hinc annis Barduic mille sex X quo{que} quinque Post Barduic Roma duo C cum quinque triginta M C post Nat. junctis octaginta novemque Dum Brunsvicensis Henricus Leo dictus Simonis in festo Barduic subvertit ab alto. Meibomius (a learned Antiquary, whom we have already had occasion often to mention) has taken great pains to pick up, out of these Rithms and all other Monuments of note about this Town, a large account of the Antiquity of the place. The name he imagines, (contrary to the humour of some other Historians, who speak of Bardo a Knight Errant of old, and Foun∣der of Bardewic) derived from the Bardi, a Nor∣thern people, who wandring a great many years up and down Saxony and the neighbouring Coun∣tries, at last fix'd themselves in this place. Whe∣ther these Bardi may not have been a Tribe of such Poets as Mr. Cambden, and some other of our Antiquaries, says gave name to Bardsey, one of our British Islands, I shall leave to the Reader's judgment; since every Historian that mentions the Bards, will tell us, that they were the Genea∣logists amongst the Gauls (an undoubted branch of the German Nation) as well as the Britains. The Verses before-mention'd will inform us, that this great City was destroy'd by Duke Henry (surnam'd the Lion) on St. Simon and Jude's day in the year 1189. Since that time it has never been able to recover its glory; and is now remarka∣ble for nothing but a College of Eight Residen∣tiary Canons and some few Vicars. III. ULTZEN. A neat uniform little Town,Ʋltren. about the middle way betwixt Lunenburg and Zell. 'Twas anciently call'd Lawenwald, i. e. Lion-Forest; as appears from several of its old Re∣cords, and an inscription to this day legible on the North-side of the Town-hall. And from this its old name the Arms (or Rebus rather) of the Town are still, a Lion Passant Azure, in a Field Verd, betwixt Three Trees of the Second. The modern name Ʋltzen it had from the neigh∣bouring Monastery of Olden-Stadt; which, as is evident from several ancient Writings, bearing date A. D. 1255 and 1338, was formerly call'd Old-Ʋlssen. On the twentieth of September in the year 1646, this City was miserably destroy'd by a fire which in a very short time burnt down the fairest and richest part of it. This blow it has hardly yet so well recover'd as to be entirely re∣built; but however the most considerable streets and places of consequence are very much ad∣vanc'd by it, and the new buildings are every∣where more regular and splendid then the for∣mer. The Citizens have a Tradition among them, that the first English Saxons that came over in∣to Britain were sent from hence; and they tell us farther, that in remembrance of the good success they had met with in our Island, some of them returning, hung up a gilt Ship of Tin in the Market-place; which was to be seen here before the fire above mention'd. IV. ZELL.Zell. This City (famous for the u∣sual Residence of the Dukes of Luneburg) on a sandy level, at the confluence of two small Rivers, the Aller and Fuhse; about ten German miles distant from Luneburg, six from Brunswic, ten from Bremen, and thirteen from Hamburg. The word Zell in the language of some of the Lower Saxons, signifies the same with the High Dutch Kellar, or our English word Cellar; but for what reason the Town should have this name given it, I cannot determine. In an old Parch∣ment Deed (bearing date A. D. 1236, which to this day may be seen in the Duke of Zell's Archives) whereby Sigefride Count of Osterburg, makes over a great part of this Country to Otho Duke of Brunswic and Luneburg, we read mini∣steriales suos Tselle usque Breman. And another Indenture made between Henry's (surnam'd the Lion) Sons (dated A. D. 1203, and still to be seen in the same place) mentions this Town
by the aforesaid name. Higher then these times its Antiquity cannot be traced; and whether 'twas in those days a City, wall'd Town, or only a bare Castle, we know not. The Duke's Palace (as it now stands, being a square piece of building, moted round, and beautified with a great many pleasant Gardens, Orchards, Grotto's, &c.) was first built by Henry Duke of Brunswic and Lunenburg and Ann (born Countess of Nassaw) his mother in the year 1485. In this Palace are held the chief Courts of Judicature for the Dukedom of Luneburg. V.Walstrode. WALSTRODE, or Walo's-Cross. At first only a Monastery built by one Walo, a Prince of Anhalt, in the year 986, but afterwards advanc'd into a considerable Town. Walo's Statue is still to be seen in the Church with this inscription on its pedestal, Illustris Princeps Walo de Anholt Comes in Aschania, &c Dominus in Berneborch est fundator hujus Monasterii. It is situate in a very plea∣sant Valley, encompass'd on every side with Mountains and Woods. The chief trade of of the inhabitants consists in Honey, Wax, Wool, and Beer. Harborch, Winsen, Gifhorn, notable for a strong Palace belonging to the Duke of Lunenburg, with some other places of the like value, are only just considerable enough to merit a distinct chara∣cter in the Map from poor Villages; but have nothing in them so remarkable as to deserve a a particular description. The truth is, the greatest part of the Dukedom of Luneburg is a poor and barren Country; and its inhabitants are scarce any where so rich as that they need to wall in their Towns, or be afraid of the invasion of an Enemy. The most notable places in the Counties of Diepholt, Hoye, and Schawenburg, subject to the Dukes of Luneburg, the Reader will find describ'd in the next Volume; when we come to treat of all the little Provinces which are usually com∣prehended under the general name of Westphalia.
decorative device
map of Mecklenburg MEKLENBVRG DVCATVS Auctore Ioanne Laurenbergio Sumpti{us} Janssonio-Waesbergiorum, Mosis Pitt et Stephan Swart.
THE DUKEDOM OF MECKLENBURG. ALTHO at this day Geo∣graphers can hardly meet with any such place as Mecklenburg, from whence this Duke∣dom should have its name; yet the German Historians will inform us, that the small Vil∣lage (not far from Wis∣mar) which still bears that name, was anciently a large and populous City. And some of their Antiquaries pretend to be able to shew us its Rudera near this place, for some miles in com∣pass. J. Peters (in his Chronicle of the Dukes of Holstein) tells us, that this Village is the ruins of a very ancient City; which, says he, was built above three hundred years before Christ by An∣thyrius the first Duke of the Heruli, or Mecklen∣burgers. But we know, what kind of credit to give to such Romantic Chronologers as this; who impertinently pretends to trace the Annals of his Country thro those dark days of igno∣rance wherein he must necessarily lose himself and truth. Cluverius and Bertius are exceedingly displeas'd with that universal humour of Latin (who men∣tion this Country) of rendring Mecklenburg by Megalopolis or Megapolis, and the Mecklenburgers by Megapolitani. Such Etymologists as these, says Cluver, are but Novices in the German tongue. For the word Mecklenburg is not (as they ima∣gin) deriv'd from the old Saxon word Micle or Mickel (ordinarily met with in our ancient Eng∣lish-Saxon Monuments, and still used in some parts of England); but from the Dutch Verb Mecklen, whence Meckler, which (in the lan∣guage of all the Northern Germans that inhabit the Sea-Coasts) signifies as much as Proxineta, Pararius, a Broker; so that Mecklenburg had not its name, as Megalopolis in Arcadia, from the vast∣ness of its extent (altho Lindebergius reports it to have been above eight English miles in length and twenty in circumference); but from the great resort of Merchants to this place. For being the Metropolis of these parts, and the Seat (as 'tis suppos'd) of Bilunaus, Misilaus, Mistevus, Pri∣bislaus, and several other Kings and Princes of the Vandals; we may reasonably conclude, that all foreign Merchants (who probably were not very numerous) that traded in this part of Ger∣many, kept their Factors and Brokers at this City. The whole Dukedom of Mecklenburg (sub∣ject to the two Dukes of Gustrow and Swerin) is bounded on the East with the Dukedom of Pomeren; on the North with the Baltic Sea;Bounds. on the West with some part of the Dukedoms of Holstein and Saxon-Lauwenburg; and on the South with the Marquisate of Brandenburg. The Country has more in it of profit then pleasure;Commodi∣ties. being plentifully stock'd with all sorts of Corn and Fruits (especially Apples), and well stor'd with Fowl and Fish; but situate in an air very unwholsom in the Summer, and intolera∣bly sharp and cold in the Winter. Besides the advantage of the Baltic Sea, and a great num∣ber of Rivers every-where to be met with in this Dukedom, their Lakes (many of which are very large) afford them good store of all manner of fresh Fish. Insomuch, that at the Marriage-feast of Henry Duke of Mecklenburg-Swerin with Helen Daughter to the Elector Palatine, were serv'd up to the Table five thousand Breams; all of which were fresh, and newly taken out of the great Lake near Swerin. Some Romantic Genealogists have endeavour'd to bring down the Line of the Dukes of Meck∣lenburg from some of Alexander the Great's Ge∣nerals.Govern∣ment. The first original of which fancy sprung from the Duke of Mecklenburg's bearing an Horse's Head (which these Heralds are pleas'd to call the Head of Bucephalus) in their Eschutceons. And indeed the generality of German Antiqua∣ries fetth their pedigree from Anthyrius (the fore∣mention'd Founder of the City of Mecklenburg); whom they unanimously report to have liv'd in the days of that great Conqueror. From his Loins (after several generations) descended Bil∣liengus, a potent King of the Vandals; whose Mother, say some, was Charles the Great's Sister. He was the first that (after his own conversion)
brought in the profession of Christianity into Mecklenburg; tho afterwards, at the instigation of his Son Micislaus, both himself and all his Subjects turn'd Apostates. The next famous Prince of Mecklenburg was Gottschalck (surnam'd the Godly), who would often himself take the pains to preach Christianity to his Subjects; by whom he was at last, for his Religion, mur∣der'd in the year 1066. From him descended (amongst many others) Henry II. who dying in the year 1228, left behind him two Sons Ni∣colot and John. From the former of these sprang all the succeeding Princes of the Vandals until William the last Prince of that Line, who died in the year 1430. From the later (surnam'd Knese Janko, or John the Divine; because he had taken a Doctor of Divinity's degree in the Uni∣versity at Paris) are descended the present Dukes of Mecklenburg. This John left behind him Henry (who was six and twenty years kept prisoner by the Turks) Father to Henry surnam'd the Lion; whose two Sons, Albert and John, Dukes of Meck∣lenburg, were by the Emperor Charles IV. created Princes of the Empire in the year 1349. Which is not to be understood (tho I find this con∣struction put upon it by several of the modern German Historians) as if these two Princes, be∣fore Charles's creation, had been only ordinary Lords or Barons of Mecklenburg, and by the Emperor advanc'd to the dignity of Princes or Dukes. For from him they receiv'd no more than an admission into the number of the Estates of the Empire; under whose protection they were brougth by making themselves members thereof, upon condition they should be subject to its Laws, and contribute to its necessities. Albert's eldest Son (Albert II.) was chosen King of Sweden, and not long after taken prisoner by Margaret Queen of Denmark; by whom, after several years imprisonment, he was at last re∣leas'd upon the payment of a vast ransom. So that the management of the Dukedom of Meck∣lenburg was committed to his Brother Magnus; a Prince that (if we believe Chytraeus, who in his first Book of the Saxon Chronicle has given him a noble character) was nomine & re Mag∣nus, endow'd with all the excellent qualities that are requisite to make a brave Prince. His Son John, who succeeded his Father in the Dukedom, founded the University at Rostock in the year 1419. This Duke's Successors Henry the Fat, and Mag∣nus II. (Founder of the Cathedral Church at Rostock) upon the death of William the last Prince of the Vandals, made themselves Masters of the whole Land of Mecklenburg. After the death of this Magnus, and his Son Albert II. the Duke∣dom came to his Grandchild John Albert in the year 1547, who first brought in the Lutheran Confession into his Dominions, by demolishing Popish Abbeys, and converting their Revenues to the use of the University at Rostock. His Son John III. (who died in the year 1592) left two Sons; the eldest was Adolph Frideric, who married Ann-Mary Countess of East Frisland; by whom, amongst other children, he had Christian-Ludowic the present Duke of Mecklenburg-Swerin. His youngest Son was Gustavus Adolphus; who seated himself at Gustrow. In the late Civil Wars in Germany, the whole Land of Mecklenburg was overrun by the Imperial Army; and the Duke∣dom conferr'd upon their ambitious (and at last unfortunate) General Albrecht, Duke of Fried∣land. However, within a little while after, the two Dukes (Adolph Frideric and John Albrecht) were reinstated in their Dominions by Gustavus Adolphus, the victorious King of Sweden, their Kinsman. For a character of the present Dukes of Mecklenburg the Reader may have recourse to the following descriptions of Swerin and Gu∣strow, the places of their residence. The strength of these Princes would be con∣siderable enough,Milit strength. sufficient to secure their own Territories, and keep their neighbours in awe, if firmly united. Their equal pretensions to the sole government of the City and University at Rostock, did formerly occasion some animosities between the two Houses; but this quarrel has for some years last past been quite laid aside; and now a difference in Religion (the Duke of Swerin being a Romanist, and he of Gustrow a Lutheran) is the greatest cause of their mu∣tual fears and jealousies. Heretofore they thought it their chief interest to adhere to the Swedes, and secure themselves under the wings of the potent Kings of that Nations; but when after the many conquests of the brave Gustavus Adolphus the power of those Princes grew so formidable as to threaten an universal slavery to their neigh∣bours round about them, rather then the de∣fence of any of their Liberties, the Dukes of Mecklenburg thought it high time to relinquish that party, and join with the Dane and Bran∣burger in opposing their common enemy, the King of Sweden. They saw Wismar rent out of their hands, without any probability of being ever recover'd; and they had reason to fear, that a great part of the adjoining Country would follow it, if their ruin were not timely prevented by the strength of their new Allies. The whole Land of Mecklenburg (so much I mean as is now subject to the two Dukes which bear that Title) is usually divided in∣to these six parts:Territ∣ries. The Dukedomes of Meck∣lenburg (strictly so call'd) and Vandalia; the Earldom of Swerin; the Baronies of Rostock and Stargard; and the Bishopric of Butzow. In the Dukedom of Mecklenburg are reckon'd the Cities of Wismar (to which is the neighbouring Island Poel) Tempsin, Gades, Rhena, and Bucow. In the Dukedom of Vandalia, Gustrow, Sterneberg, Mal∣chin, Stavenhagen, Ivenack, Neu-Calven, Warin, Pentzlin, Rebell, Wredenhagen, Malchau, Tetrou, Goltberg, Parchum, Plage, Lupsian, Grabou, Domitz, Neu-Statt, Eldenau, and Gorlosen. In the Barony of Rostock, the City of Rostock, Ribnitz, Gnoien, Tessin, Laga, Schwan, Salines, and Morlou. In the Barony of Stargard, Brandeburg, Stargard, Fursten∣burg, Strelitz, Mirow, Fredland, and Wesenberg. And lastly in the Bishopric of Butzow, the City of But∣zow and the Peninsula of Swerin. The most considerable Cities in the Dukedom of MECKLENBURG. I. LUBEC.Lubec. This City is indeed situate in Wagerland, and (for that reason) we have already given the Reader some short account of it in the Descrip∣tion of Denmark; but because it is of it self an Imperial City, wholly indepen∣dant upon the Crown of Denmark, and imme∣diately subject to the Emperor of Germany, we have reserv'd a more particular survey of it for this place. And it cannot so properly be referr'd to any particular Province of the Empire as the Dukedom of Mecklenburg. For (altho the Citi∣zens of Lubec do not pay any manner of tribute or homage to the Princes of Mecklenburg, yet) it may perhaps as justly be reckon'd part of that
Dukedom, as Bremen (which never yet acknow∣ledg'd any subjection to the Kings of Sweden) may be esteem'd part of that Principality which now bears the name of the Dukedom of Bre∣men. The name of this City is fetcht by some from one Luba, a famous Fisherman that heretofore pitcht his Tents upon the Sea-shore in the same place where afterwards the great City of Lubec was built. But this fiction is of the same stamp with the frivolous Etymologies, with which some of our English Historians have furnish'd us, of Britain from Brutus, and London from King Lud. Others tell us, that Lubec, in the old Wendish tongue, signifies a Crown; and therefore would perswade us, that this Town had its name from the preeminence which (immediately after its first foundation) it might justly challenge a∣mongst the other Cities of Germany. Whence Lindebergius (alluding to this Etymology) con∣cludes his Elogium in the praise of Lubec with this Distich, Et decus Europae, & lumen sit totius Ansae, Et sit Vandalici pulchra Corona soli. But the most probable opinion is (what we have before mention'd) that the name is truly High-Dutch; and signifies no more than (Lob-eck or ein eck des lobes) a corner of Land, for upon such a plot of ground 'tis situate, commendable for something or other in it extraordinary and no∣table. The Polish Historians (particularly J. Ludo∣wic Decius in his History of Sigismund II. King of Poland) are very zealous in asserting, that this great City owes its birth to the Princes of their Country; who having made themselves Masters of all this part of Germany, built a Fort and (in some short time after) a wall'd Town in that neck of land upon which Lubec stands. But the Germans as vigorously oppose this asser∣tion; affirming, that Godschalck (a certain King of the Vandals) laid the first foundation of the Town A. D. 1040, which small beginnings were enlarg'd into the bulk of a considerable City by Crito, a Prince of Rugen, in the year 1104, or (as others) 1087. But however this is certain, that it was never a City, nor had any Charter confirm'd to it, before it had been once utterly ruin'd and laid desolate by Ratzo Prince of Rugen, in the year 1134, and rebuilt by Adolph II. Earl of Holstein A. D. 1140; who, being unable to defend any part of his Territories against the victorious Duke of Saxony and Bavaria (Hen∣ry II. surnam'd the Lion) was forc'd to yeild up to him Lubec amongst the other conquer'd parts of his Dominions. Afterwards, when success and pride had swell'd Henry to that height as to make him neglect his duty and allegiance to the Emperor Frideric Barbarossa, and to side with the Pope in a quarrel against him; he was by the said Emperor publicly proscrib'd, and devour'd by the joint forces of his neighbour Princes, every one laying hold of that part of his Estates which lay next him. In this confu∣sion Lubec was besieg'd and taken by the Em∣peror himself; but after his death restor'd to the foremention'd Duke Henry. Afterwards it was conquer'd by Waldemar Duke of Sleswic, and Brother to Canutus King of Denmark. But not long after the Citizens (finding themselves too severely treated by their Danish Lords) put their City under the protection of the Emperor Fri∣deric II. who granted them several priviledges and immunities, and restor'd them to the anci∣ent Liberties which they had enjoy'd under their first Masters. Since that time Lubec has conti∣nued an Imperial City, being always reckon'd one of the chief in the Empire, and the Metro∣polis of the Hans-Towns. The Bishopric of Lubec (which since John Adolph Duke of Holstein was elected Bishop of that See in the year 1596, has always been in the possessi∣on of some of the younger Brothers of that House) was first founded by the Emperor Otho I. at Oldenburg in Wagerland, and afterwards re∣moved hither (with the permission of the Em∣peror Frideric I.) by Henry the Lion; Duke of Saxony, in the year 1163. There is not any City in the Northern parts of the German Empire which at this day excels (or perhaps can equalize) Lubec either in beauty or uniformity of its Buildings, or pleasantness of its Gardens and Groves. The Streets are ge∣nerally strait and even; the Houses being all built with Brick, and cover'd with Tyles. In the year 1238, a great fire hap'ning in the City burnt down many of their Streets, which at that time consisted of Houses made of Timber, and cover'd with Thatch; whereupon the Senators of the City made an Order, that thenceforward no such Houses should be built within the walls of the Town. From the public Conduit they have water convey'd by pipes into every Citi∣zen's private House; according to which pattern the Conduits in London, and other great Cities in Europe, were first contrived. The Streets are in several places graced with rows of Linden Trees planted on each side. The Churches (about twenty in number) are generally well built and adorn'd with high Steeples or Spires; especially the Cathedral, dedicate to St. Mary, which is a piece of as curious Architecture as most in Ger∣many. The River Trave (on which Lubec is seated, about eight or ten English miles from the Sea) is large and deep enough to carry the largest Vessels that sail upon the Baltic. So that daily Merchant-men of the greatest bulk, as well as flat bottom'd Barges, are brought up to the Walls of the City; which, with its neighbour Hamburg, is thought to maintain near six hun∣dred Vessels in continual traffick. The City is govern'd by twelve Burgo-masters; who are all of them either Doctors of Civil Law, or some of the grave and experienc'd Nobility of the City. The Common Council is made up of half Lawyers and Nobles, and the other half Merchants. Their Laws will not permit any Handicrafts-man, two Brothers, nor Father and Son, to be of this great Council of the City; supposing that illiterate Mechanics can hardly have so much skill in State-affairs as will render them fit for Government, and that near Rela∣tions will be apt to side with one another, and not act with such unbyass'd judgments as others that are nothing akin. II. WISMAR.Wismar. Seated in the way betwixt Lubec and Rostoc, at an equal distance (namely seven German, or one and twenty English miles) from both those Cities. Cromer and Vapovius, zealous assertors of the honour of their Country, derive the name of this City from one Wissimir its founder; who, they tell us, was a Polish Prince descended from their Great Duke Lechus. The grounds of their story they borrow from Saxo Grammaticus and Crantzius; who report, that Wissimirus, a Prince of the Vandals, march'd with a good Army into Denmark, and there slew Siward King of the Danes, and at his return built Wismar. Now, these men imagining, that Princeps Vandalicus and
Vendicus signifie the same thing, conclude pre∣sently, that this Wissimir must certainly have been a Pole; and then the greatest honour they can do him is to bring him from the Loins of Lechus. Whereas, granting the main part of Crantzius's story (which nevertheless is undoubt∣edly false) that Wismar was indeed built by such a Prince as he mentions; yet upon examination we shall find, that this Wisimir, if ever there was any such man, must have slain Siward about the year of Christ 340, and we never hear of Duke Lechus in Poland before the year 550, nay some say he began his Government in the year 644. Wherefore, omitting these impertinent contra∣dictions and anticronisms, it is certain, that Wis∣mar had its name from the convenience of its situation; Wis-meer signifying no more then a safe and secure part of the Ocean, such an one as that is upon which this City is now seated. Nor is the Town so ancient as they would make it; but first built (or at least made a City) out of the ruins of Mecklenburg which (as hath been already said) was once the Metropolis of this whole Dukedom, about the year 1250, or as some will have it 1238, by Gunceline II. Earl of Swerin. Afterwards Henry Duke of Mecklenburg (for his great performances in the Holy Land sur∣nam'd Hierosolymitanus) brought hither the Sta∣tutes and Ordinances observed in the Govern∣ment of the City of Lubec, and new modell'd Wismar about the year 1266. From which time it grew so extravagantly great and po∣pulous, that within a very short time it was reckon'd one of the chief Hans-Towns; and was made the Harbour for all the Men of War be∣longing to that Society. This engaged the whole Community to contribute towards its fortifica∣tion; insomuch, that within the compass of a very few years, it became almost impregnable. By the Treaty of Munster the City and Haven of Wismar, with the Castle of Wallfrisch, and the Peninsula of Pole (excepting the Villages of Schedorff, Weitendorff, Brandenhusen, and Wangeren, which belong to the Hospital of the Holy Ghost in Lubec), as also Newen-Closter, were given up to the Swedes; since which time the King of Swe∣den has always stiled himself Lord of Wismar. But in these late Wars between the two Northern Crowns, the City of Wismar (amongst many others) was taken by the present victorious King of Denmark, Christian V. Altho it was agreed by the Eighth Article of the Treaty of Peace signed at Fountainblaeu on the second day of September in the year 1679, by the French and Danish Ministers, that Wismar and Rugen should be restor'd to the Swedes within three weeks after the ratification of the said Treaty; yet in a second Treaty sign'd on the twenty-sixth day of the same month at Lun∣den in Schonen, it was agreed, that Wismar should remain in the hands of the King of Denmark, as a surety for the arrears of certain Contributions due from that King to the Crown of Sweden. This obligation it seems is not yet cancell'd; for the Danes to this day keep possession of this great Town, and are not like to be forc'd in any short time to yeild it up. III.Rostock. ROSTOCK. A City of great antiquity; if we believe the stories which some of the Ger∣man Antiquaries report of it. For they tell us, that this is the very place which several of the ancient Roman Writers point at when they re∣port great things of Lacinium, Rhodopolis, and Laciburgium; all which names the modern Histo∣rians appropriate to Rostock. But how its name came at last to be chang'd (for there seems to be but little affinity betwixt Lacinium or Laci∣burgium and Rostock, altho Rhodopolis come some∣thing nearer to the modern name) they cannot so easily determine. Some think the word Ro∣stock, or Rostzogz a compound of two old Wen∣dish Monosyllables, signifying as much as a con∣fluence of two Rivers. So that this City, accor∣ding to this derivation, had its name at first for the same reason that several great Towns in France are at this day nam'd Confluent. The Po∣lish writers say, the name was first given it by some of their Country-men; in whose language Rostock signifies a moist or boggy place. P. Lin∣debergius (in his Chronocle of Rostoch) proves from inscriptions upon the Seal of the City, and other ancient Monuments, that the true name of the Town is Rotzstock; and he guesses, that this name was first given it from a great Red Pillar (von einem rothen saul oder stock) which in the days of Paganism and Idolatry was wor∣shipp'd by the Inhabitants of these parts. And this conjecture seems most agreeable to the name of Rhodopolis before-mention'd; not to mention its being back'd with the authority of a learn'd man and great Antiquary. But whatever grand conceit the Mecklenbur∣gers may have of the antiquity of this City; 'tis certain, that in the year 329, 'twas only a small inconsiderable Village built by some poor Fisher∣men on the banks of the Warna, and consisting of a few slender Tents rather then Houses. Af∣terwards it was advanc'd into a small City by Gotheschalk King of the Heruli; and by his suc∣cessor Primislaus the Second, notably enlarged a∣bout the year 1160. At last Burevinus (Primislaus's Son) made it a compleat City; having been at the charges of walling it about, and new model∣ling it according to the Laws and Constitutions of the City of Lubeck. Burevinus's Charter (which the Citizens of Rostock shew to this day amongst other records of their Corporation) is signed in the year 1218. At this Day it consists of three parts; the Old, New, and Middle City; in all which are reckoned 140 Streets, and many thousands of high and stately Citizens Houses. The most memorable things in Rostock, are usually by the Mecklenburgers (in their Saxon Dialect) reckoned up in the fol∣lowing Rithms. Seven doren tho St. Marien-karcke. Seven Straten van den grooten Marckle. Seven thore so der gahn tho lande. Seven kopmans bruggen by dem strande. Seven torne so up den Radthuss staan. Seven Klocken die daar daglycken slaan. Seven linden op den Rosen-garden. Dat syn die Rostocker kennewarten. i. e. There are seven times seven remarkable things in Rostock. 1. Seven great doors to the Cathe∣dral Church of St. Mary. 2. Seven large Streets leading to the chief Market-place. 3. Seven Gates of the City, towards the Land. Seven Bridges over the Warna; (which runs through several pla∣ces of the Town.) 5. Seven Towers on the top of the Town Hall. 6. Seven great Bells which chime at certain hours in the Town Clock. 7. Seven vast Linden trees in the Common Garden. But of late years one of their Bridges (being decayed with age) fell down, and because of no great use, has not since been repaired: so that one of their Septenaries is fail'd. The most notable Commodity of the Town is Beer: which is here brewed and carryed into se∣veral parts of Germany and other Nations. A
Rostocker will tell us, that yearly by the 250 privi∣ledged Brewers in this City, there are at least so ma∣ny thousand Tun of Beer brewed; besides the vast quantities which many of the Private Citizens (men especially of the chiefest rank and repute) must be supposed to brew for their own use. The University at Rostock (which is now one of the largest and best stockt in the German Empire) was first founded by John and Albert Dukes of Mecklenburg (two Cousin Germans) in the year 1419. The Corporation of the City bore it seems half the charges of the foundation: and therefore 'twas then ordered (by a Decree still in force) that half of the Professors should be chosen by the Dukes of Mecklenburg, and the other half by the Burgomasters and Radtshern of the Town. The Rector Magnificus (as they are pleased to intitle the chief Magistrate of their University) is chosen e∣very half year, as in most other German Univer∣sities, by turns, out of the two Companies of Pro∣fessors. He has power to call Convocations, and appoint times for meeting of the other Professors on all extraordinary occasions; as collecting or disbursing any part of their common-Treasure, or the like. In matters of greater weight and mo∣ment then are usually debated, he has an Assistant (whom they call Promotor) chosen out of the Se∣niors of the eighteen Professors. The University was at first stocked with Professors from Leipsic and Erfurt; who all of them received their Licen∣ces to teach and read in publick, together with a Charter of priviledges and body of Statutes, from Pope Martin V. The Bishop of Swerin is their perpetual Chancellor; who commonly deputes one of the Senior Professors his Vice-Chancellor at any public Promotion or taking of Degrees, when he himself is not at leisure to give a personal attendance. Amongst many other learned men that have been bred in this University Albert Crantzius, John Posselius and Nathan Chytraeus (three famous Historians) have got themselves and the place of their education great credit by their elaborate writings. The Citizens are subject to a kind of mixt go∣vernment; made up of Aristocracy and Demo∣cracy. The Democratical part consists of twenty four Aldermen, chosen out of the Nobility, Scho∣lars and rich Merchants of the Town; whereof four are Burgomasters, two Chamberlains, two Stewards for the River, and two Judges. The Cham∣berlains collect and distribute all manner of As∣sesments for the reparations of public buildings in and about the City. The two Stewards are o∣verseers of the Haven at Warnemund; and look to the cleansing of the Channel from that Port up to the City. The Judges determine and pass sentence in all causes Civil and Criminal. These twenty four Magistrates of the upper House decide all or∣dinary Controversies, and have the sole power of coining money, chusing Officers, &c. But be∣sides them there are in the Town a hundred more Common-Councilmen elected out of the inferior Tradesmen of the Town; who are summon'd to appear and give their opinions upon debate of any matter of more then ordinary concernment to the common welfare. Though the River Warna be navigable up to the Walls of the City of Rostock; yet it is not deep enough to carry Ships of the largest bulk, but such Vessels are forced to take harbour at Warnemund (so called, because situate on the mouth of the Ri∣ver) a small Town, about seven English miles di∣stant from Rostock. Since the Treaty of Munster the Swedes built a Fort on the mouth of this Ri∣ver; by the strength of which, and a good Ga∣rison always kept in it, they exacted a toll or custom of all Merchantmen that pass'd this way from or towards Rostock, to the great decay of trade in this City, and impoverishing of its inhabitants. This Castle was in the late wars between the Nor∣thern Crowns demolished; and thereby a stop put to the Swedish encroachments. Whereupon the Ministers for the Dukes of Mecklenburg in the last general Treaty at Nimeguen were very diligent in soliciting the Mediators for a redress of this grievance: which they represented as a violation of an express Article in the Westphalian Treaty. With Memorials and Petitions to this purpose our English Mediatours by the Duke of Gustrow's Minister, and the Popes Nuncio on the other hand by the Duke of Swerin's, were continually wearied in the latter end of the year 1678; and beginning of 1679. Their importunity prevail∣ed so far at last as to have the following clause inserted into the first Proposal of a Treaty be∣twixt the Emperor and King of Sweden. Omni casu salva sint Dominis Ducibus Mecklenburgicis sine turbatione competentia jura, & sublatum maneat vectigal seu telonium Warnemundense, cum omni∣moda aliarum quae ibi motae sunt, pretensionum abo∣litione, & portus Warnmundensis relinquatur in pristina, & qua nunc gaudet, commerciorum liber∣tate. But the Swedish Plenipotentaries in all their conferences with the Imperial Ambassadours up∣on this Subject constantly denied that they had instructions to meddle with it; and the Imperia∣lists were willing to omit the insertion of this point rather then delay the signing of the other Articles till new Instructions could be procured from the Swedish Court. So that all the satisfac∣tion the Princes of Mecklenburg had, was a com∣pliment from the Emperour's Plempotentiaries, shewing the great care their Master would be al∣ways ready to take in asserting their Rights and Priviledges, as well as those of any other mem∣ber of the German Empire, against the encroach∣ments of any Foreign Enemy whatever, and a Certificate under their hands that their Ministers had used all imaginable diligence in the discharge of their duty. Neque defuerunt, say they, durante hoc congressu officio suo praedictorum Dominorum Du∣cum (i. e. Mecklenburgicorum) Ablegati, Dominus Antonius Bessel & Dominus Joannes Reuter, sed omnes partes impleverunt, quae a Ministrorum fide, dexteritate, & vigilantia expectari possunt In quo∣rum omnium fidem, Legatio Caesarea praesentes hasce a se subscriptas sigillis suis munivit. Dabantur Neo∣magi duodecima Februarii Anno 1679. IV. SWERIN.Swerin. Situate (at about fifty En∣glish miles distance from Rostock) upon a great Lake; which from the name of this City, is usually by the Neighbourhood called Der Swerinsche See. It was built and fortfied by Henry, surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony; who (soon after its first foundation which is said to have been in the year 1163.) bestowed this City with all the Territories and Lordships thereunto belonging upon Guntzel or Gunceline, one of the Generals in his Army, whom he made Earl of Swerin. His son Henry who succeeded his father in the Earldom, was a great favourite of the Emperour Otho IV, and well deserved all the honour his master could con∣fer on him. He took Woldemar King of Denmark, prisoner in his own Kingdom; brought him bound into Saxony in triumph; and kept him in close custody in the Castle at Danneberg, till his Sub∣jects had almost reduced themselves to beggary by paying ransome. The last Earl of this Family was Otho; who died in the year 1355. His only daughter (and child) Richardis was married to Al∣brecht Duke of Mecklenburg: for which reason the Earldom of Swerin, after Otho's death was annexed to the Dukedom of Mecklenburg. The Bishoprick of Swerin was removed from
Mecklenburg to this City. The first Bishop of this Diocess was one Johannes Scotus; who (in the fourth year of his Prelacy, A. D. 1066) was mar∣tyred by the Wendish Apostates in these parts. Af∣ter his cruel and inhumane death (for his mur∣derers are reported to have cut of his hands and feet, and in that miserable condition to have left him alive for some days) the Seat was vacant for 83 or 84 years: until Eberhard was sent hither by the Emperour Conrad III, in the year 1260. This mans successour (Bruno, Berno or Benno, was removed from Mecklenburg to Swerin; when Henry the Lion, by the permission of the Emperor Fre∣derick the First, had built a new Cathedral and endowed it with considerable revenues. Some of the Mecklenburgish Historians report that much a∣bout the time of the foundation of this new Ca∣thedral, the said Duke Henry caused the Infidel Mecklenburgers to be driven by thousands into the Swerin-Sea at a place not far from Fichel (which from so remarkable a passage to this day retains the name of Die Dope or the Font) where they were all baptized by Bishop Benno. From this Benno there continued an uninterrupted succes∣sion of Bishops of Swerin (who nevertheless kept their usual residence at Butzow, a Fort and con∣siderable Town not far from Gustrow) until, in the Treaty of Munster, the Bishoprick was conver∣ted into a Temporal Principality; and given up to Adolph Frideric Duke of Mecklenburg; as before hath been said. In this City is kept the Residence of Christian-Lewis Duke of Mecklenburg Swerin; who was born the first of December 1623, and by being educated in France and under the protection of Romanists, was brought up in the faith of the Church of Rome: which he still professes. He married at first his Cousin German Christina-Margaret, daughter of John Albert Duke of Mecklenburg and widow of Francis Albert Duke of Saxen-Lawenburg. But having upon some discontent got himself divorced from her, he was the second time married in France A. D. 1653,) to Elizabeth de Montmorency, widow of Gas∣pard de Coligny Duke of Chastillon and Sister to Fran∣cis-Henry de Montmorency Duke of Luxemburg Piney. V. GUSTROW. A well fortified Town,Gustrow. about eighteen or twenty English miles distant from Ro∣stock; but remarkable for little or nothing save the residence of Gustave-Adolph Duke of Mecklenburg-Gustrow, only son of John Albert Duke of Mecklen∣burg and Eleonor-Mary Princess of Anhalt. He was born the six and twentieth of February A. D. 1633, and bred up a Lutheran; of which perswasion he still continues a zealous assertor; being a Prince of as great Learning as Gallantry, and equally able to maintain his Religion in the Schools and Field. decorative device
THE DUKEDOM OF POMEREN. IT matters not much whether we fetch the word Pomeren out of the High-Dutch or Slavoni∣an Language: since Po∣meer in the former sig∣nifies the same thing as Pomercze in the latter i. e. A Country situate upon the Sea-shore; such as the Dukedom of Pomeren is known to be. That the Slavonian tongue was once commonly spoken in this Country, appears from the termination of se∣veral names of great Towns in this Dukedom: as Bugslaw, Wratislaw, Witslaw, &c. And Historians will inform us that the whole land was many years subject to the Princes of Poland, and first annexed to the Empire of Germany by the Emperor Fri∣deric Barbarossa. The whole Tract of Land which was antiently comprised under the general name of Pomeren or Pomerland was of a much larger extent then the present Dukedom;. taking in (Eastward) all Ca∣subia and Pomerellia. But afterwards this vast Coun∣trey was by the Princes of Back-Pomerland (for by this name 'twas antiently distinguished from the present Dukedom of Pomeren; which in those days was called Fore-Pomerland) was given up into the hands of the Princes of Poland; in whose possession it has ever since continued. Towards the South, a great part of the Marquisate of Brandenburg was formerly subject to the Dukes of Pomeren. For first (in the Ʋcker Marck) not only Prentzlow, An∣germund, Aderberg, Schweet and Vierraden; but also Stargard and Friedland were both subject to that Duke; until the whole Ʋcker-Marck was given to John I, Elector of Brandenburg by Barminus I, Duke of Pomeren for a portion with his Daughter. And tho Prentzlow with the adjoyning Territories was afterwards wrested out of the hands of the Bran∣denburgers; yet they could not long keep their hold but were forced to resign back their Conquests. The Mecklenburgers made themselves masters of Fried∣land; and having once taken possession could ne∣ver be beaten out. Again (on the other side of the Oder) the greatest share of the New-Marck was under the Duke of Pomeren's Dominion; as part of the Dukedom of Stetin. Westward, Pomeren reached as far as the Warna; and Rostock was al∣most the outmost bounds of the Dukedom of Meck∣lenburg. Lastly, the Territories of the Dukes of Pomeren reached much farther Northwards into the Baltic Sea: which by degrees swallowed up a good part of their Dominions. The Isle of Rugen (as we shall have occasion to shew anon) is thought to be scarce half so large as it was formerly; and some whole Islands in the Baltic are at this day co∣vered with the Waves, which antient Historians mention as habitable Countreys. So that Pomeren (though at this day only a small Dukedom; nay, indeed no more then an inconsiderable part of the Marquisate of Brandenburg, yet) might antiently have passed for a Kingdom; and its Dukes have vyed Territories with most of the great Monarchs of Europe. At present the Countrey which bears the name of the Dukedom of Pomeren is a long and narrow tract of Land,Division. extending it self from East to West along the Baltic Shore: which is usually divided into the Provinces of Stetin and Wolgast and the Bi∣shopric of Cosslin. In the Province of Stetin are reckoned the Cities of Old Stetin, Stargard, Stolpe, Greiffenberg, Treptow upon the Rega, Rugenwald, Py∣ritz, Schlawe, Golnow. Gartz, Wollin, Camin, Belgarten, New Stetin, Sam, Zanew and Pohlitz; together with the forts of Sazigk, Zachan, Jacobs-hagen, Fridrich∣wald, &c. To which were fomerly added the Lord∣ships of Lauenburg and Butou: both which, upon the death of Bugislaus the last Duke of Pomeren, were annexed to the Crown of Poland. The Pro∣vince of Wolgast contains in it the Cities of Stralsund, Gripswald, Anklam, Demin, Pasewalk, Greiffenhagen, Wolgast, Barth, Trubsees, Grimmon, Damgarten, Ʋcker∣mvnd, Loytz, Gutzkow, Franckenburg, Richtenberg, Las∣sen and New Warp; with the forts of Weissen, Klem∣penau, Lindenberg and Torgelou. Within the com∣pass of the same Province are usually comprised the Isles of Rugen, Ʋsedom and some others upon these Coasts. There are every where almost large and navi∣gable Rivers in Pomeren:Rivers and Lakes. by the advantage of which the Inhabitants are not only enabled to export the
Commodities of their own Countrey and furnish themselves with the fruits and good things of their Neighbours, but also have a great convenience of fortifying their Cities and securing them against the Incursions of any foreign Enemy. Such as these are, 1. The Rekenitz, which separates this Coun∣trey from the Dukedom of Mecklenburg, making a kind of Ocean near Damgarten, and emptying it self into the Baltic at Dars. 2. The Barte, which springs near Stralsund, spreads into the sea at Bardt (a City borrowing its name from this River) and soon after is lost in the Baltic. 3. The famous O∣der which (as soon as it hath pass'd Gartz and Grief∣fenhagen, and is come into Pomeren) divides it self into several branches or Arms, embracing there∣in many large and fair Meadows; whereof some are above two English miles in breadth. After it has pass'd by Stetin it dilates it self first into the Dammish Sea or Lake, then into the Damantzke and Pfaffenwasser (as the Natives call it) and at last, ha∣ving passed betwixt Zegenorth and Schwantevitz, spreads it self into a vast fresh-water Ocean (known to the Neighbourhood by the name of Das grosse Frische Haff) extending it self above sixteen En∣glish miles in breadth and as many in length. This huge Lake afterwards disembogues it self into the Baltic Sea in three Currents; which make as many safe harbours (the Divenow, Swyne and Penemunde) for Ships that pass this way to Stetin. Betwixt the Peene and Swyne ly the Island of Ʋsedom; and the Liberties of the City of Wollin lye enclosed by the Swyne and Divenow. Besides these, and an innume∣rable Company of other Rivers which are lost in the Baltic Sea on the Coasts of Pomeren, this Duke∣dom affords a vast number of standing Lakes, as at New Stetin, Lukow, Sukow, Verschem, Dersenten, Penc∣kun, with many others. From what has been said the Reader will easily conclude,Fish. that the Dukedom of Pomeren is in all pro∣bability a Countrey as rich in all sorts of fish as any Principality of an equal extent in Europe; but yet the strange Stories which some of their Histo∣rians relate of the extravagant plenty in this kind will a little stagger his faith. They tell us, That within the compass of one year above five thou∣sand Rixdollars, (which allowing four Shillings and six Pence English for each Rixdollar, will I am afraid amount to a greater sum then the whole yearly revenue which the Elector of Brandenburg has out of Pomeren) was brought into the Duke of Pomeren's Treasury out of a six penny Custom demanded upon all fish caught in the Great Haff below Stetin, and a three penny one upon those taken in the Lake at Lassan. They add, That al∣though yearly out of the Lakes last mentioned, above thirty thousand Rixdollars worth of fish be taken and vended, yet there is never found any sensible decay of their stock. The most u∣sual sorts of Fish taken in the Haff are Salmon and Lampreys; of both which kinds are sometimes caught Fishes of an incredible bulk and weight. In the spring the Inhabitants of Gripswald, Bardt, Rugen and Wollin drive a good Herring-Trade: but in other parts of Pomeren this sort of fish is never, or rarely caught. In the Lake Mad∣duje near Colbatz the fishermen catch a large and broad Fish (call'd in their language Musenen), which, like Charrs in some Lakes in the North of England, is peculiar to this water, and not to be met with in any other Province of the German Empire. The Soil of the Country is in most places exceeding sandy and barren;Nature of the Soil. insomuch that some∣times the little crops which the inhabitants have sown in the fields near Damme, Golnow, Ʋcker∣mund, and several other parts of the Dukedom are suddenly overwhelm'd and stifled by huge drifts of Sand from the shore. Howbeit you may here and there meet with a fruitful field (especially near the City Pyritz, which is seated in a rich Valley), which supplies the wants of the neighbourhood so plentifully, that seldom any Corn is brought into Pomeren out of foreign Na∣tions; but on the contrary, great quantities in some fruitful years are exported thence. They have very few Mountains of any considerable height; but a vast number of large Woods and Forests, well stock'd with all manner of Game, as Deer, wild Boars, Hares, Foxes, Wolves, wild Horses, Bulls, and Bevers. Besides, the Lakes and Forests furnish the inhabitants with all sorts of Water and Land-Fowl; the former of which are so numerous, that they pretend to reckon up no less then twenty-two different kinds of wild Ducks. Besides the conveniencies and pleasures alrea∣dy mention'd,Commo∣dities. the inhabitants are provided for almost with all other necessaries (within the compass of their own Territories) that Nature requires; and the Ships of Stetin, Stralsund, and other Towns of Trade, bring in the delicacies of foreign Nations to satisfie the demands of Luxury. No Province in Germany affords grea∣ter quanties, nor more different sorts of Fruit then Pomeren. The inhabitants of Pomeren do not at all ap∣ply themselves to the planting of Vineyards;Beer. and if they should, their Wine would prove but very mean and contemptible, such as the Marquisate of Brandenburg affords, of which hereafter. How∣ever, this want is sufficiently supplied by those vast numbers of Merchant-Ships which come hither laden with the Wines of other Countries. Besides, should the inhabitants (which can now hardly be hoped for) grow so temperate as to put a stop to the importing the luxurious Li∣quors of foreign Countries, and content them∣selves with the drinks of their own Land, they would quickly experience (as many of their neighbours have done) the delicacies of the many sorts of Beer in Pomeren. Such are the bitter Beer of Stetin, the Mum of Gripswald, the Buckhenger, as they term it, (we may English it Knock-down) of Wollin, with many others; which are by the Mariners transported into other Na∣tions, and therefore look'd upon (as question∣less they are) preferable to most Wines. They have no kind of Mettals in any of their Mountains;Minerals. except only some few Mines of Iron in the Upper Pomeren. In some places the Sea casts up Amber, but not in such quantities as in Prussia. So that here any man has the privi∣lege of picking up and selling as much Amber as he can find, which the Nobility and Magi∣stracy in Preussen will by no means permit. The inhabitants are generally commended for men of quick and brisk parts,Manners of the In∣habitants. and people of as stout and hardy constitutions as any in the whole Empire of Germany. But on the contrary, they are charg'd with some vices and imperfections which seem scarce consistent with the former accomplishments. For most of them are brand∣ed with a foolish credulity and lavish prodiga∣lity; and usually upbraided as men more then ordinarily given up to intemperance in drinking, the Epidemical vice of the Dutch Nation. Cro∣mer, in his Ecclesiastical History of Pomeren, gives us a large account of the superstitious Ceremo∣nies of the inhabitants of this Country in the times of Paganism; and the like pains has been taken by Friedborn in his Chronicle of Stetin. But because most of the Idolatrous practices there mention'd are agreeable to the relation we have before given the Reader of the Religion of the
map of Pomerania NOVA ILLVSTRISSIMI DVCATVS POMERANIAE TABVLA antea à Viro Cl. D. D. Eilhardo Lubino edita, nunc iterum correcta per Frid. Palbitzke Pomer. L. L. Studiosum Sumptibus Janssonio-Waesbergiorum, Mosis Pitt, et Stephani Swart. portrait of Duke Bogislaw XIV of Pomerania BVGISLAVS IVNIOR XIV. POMERANIAE DVX. blazon or coat of arms Notarum explicatio Urbes Urbes cum arcibus Ducalibus Pagi
ancient Germans, we shall only in this place say, that at present these Pomeraners (almost unani∣mously) adhere to the Augsburg Confession. As to the manners and humours of the ancient Po∣meraners, how much they varied from those of the modern inhabitants, Cromer (in the Work but now cited) will acquaint us. They were, says he, utter strangers to all manner of deceit, theft, and robbery; and therefore knew not so much as the use of a Lock or Bolt, but conti∣nually kept open their Houses and Coffers. Hos∣pitality and good House-keeping was natural to them; every man having his Table constantly furnish'd with such provisions as his Estate would afford, for all guests. So that a beggar in Pome∣ren was a soloecism; since 'twas impossible (where victuals, clothes, and all other necessaries lay thus in common) to starve for want of provision either for the back or belly. But one black piece of cruelty they were guilty of, which stain'd and defac'd their other good qualities; they al∣low'd any Father to murder his own Daugh∣ters, if at any time he fancied he had begot more children then he was able conveniently to pro∣vide for. Over the male children they were more tender; and would not permit the slay∣ing of a Son upon any pretence whatever. Tho the ancient inhabitants of Pomeren (the Rugii,. Reudigni, Longididuni, &c.) were for many Centuries govern'd by Princes of their own; yet the ignorance of the times wherein they liv'd has left us in the dark as to any satisfactory re∣gister of their names and actions. The first Prince of Pomeren whom we meet with upon good record is Barnimus (one of the ancient and noble Family of the Gryphones; often men∣tion'd in their Annals, and so call'd probably from the Gryphin their Arms to this day) who is said to have govern'd in the year 933. His Grandson Suantiberus divided his principality be∣twixt his two Sons Bugislaus and Wartislaus. The former seated himself in Pomerellia, and retain'd the language and manners of his Countrymen the Slavonians; the later was made Lord of the Lower Pomeren (bordering upon the Dukedom of Mecklenburg) and shortly after conform'd himself to the Laws and Language of the Saxons his neighbours. Whereupon this part of his Father's Territories began to be reckon'd a part of the German Empire; and Bugislaus and Ca∣simir, Wartislaus's Sons, receiv'd the Title of Dukes of Pomeren, and Princes of the Roman Empire from the Emperor Frideric Barbarossa. This Dukedom was afterwards (in the year 1217) parted betwixt Bugislaus and Otho, two Brothers; from whom sprang the two Houses of Wolgast and Stetin, which continued near two hundred years. But the House of Stetin failing (A.D. 1464) upon the death of Otho the third, that part of the Estate was conferr'd upon Frideric the second, Marquise and Elector of Branden∣burg, by the Emperor Frideric the third. This the Dukes of Pomeren-Wolgast look'd upon as a notorious piece of injustice to their Family; and therefore were resolv'd to oppose with all ima∣ginable vigor the Elector's pretensions. At last the Quarrel was composed between the two Houses of Pomeren and Brandenburg upon these conditions; That both of them should retain the Arms and Title of Dukes of Pomeren: But the Possession and Revenues of all Territories com∣prised under that name, should be yeilded up to the Dukes of Wolgast: And that upon the failing of their Issue male, it should descend upon the Heirs of the House of Brandenburg. Accor∣dingly, upon the death of Bugislaus the fourteenth (who dyed without issue in the year 1637) the late Elector of Brandenburg George-William put in his claim to the Estate. But the Swedes ha∣ving (under pretence of assisting Duke Bugislaus against the Imperialists, in the Civil Wars of Germany) made themselves Masters of all the strong places in the Country, could not be per∣swaded to part with a Maritime Province which lay so convenient for them. And therefore (as Conquerors use to prescribe Laws with far less regard to justice then their own interests) they would not yeild to the conclusion of any Peace at the Treaty of Munster, before it was agreed, That all the Lower Pomeren, with the Isles of Rugen and Wollin, and the Town of Stetin, should from thenceforward be annex'd to the Crown of Sweden; and the Upper Pomeren only be en∣joy'd by the House of Brandenburg, and that no longer then the male issue of that Family last∣ed; upon the failure whereof it also was to be added to the King of Sweden's Dominions, and in the mean time both Princes were to enjoy the Titles, and bear the Arms of the Dukes of Pomeren. But because (for the common peace of the Empire, and in compliance to the peremp∣tory demands of the Queen of Sweden's Mini∣sters) the Elector had in this Agreement quit∣ted the Title to a good part of his Inheritance, 'twas further concluded, That his losses should be recompenc'd by the addition of the Bishop∣ricks of Halberstadt and Minden (converted into Temporal Principalities) to the Marquisate of Brandenburg; to which was also added the Re∣version of the Archbishopric of Magdeburg, which (after the death of the then Incumbent Admi∣nistrator Augustus Duke of Saxony) was to de∣scend upon him and his Heirs. Now, altho the Elector may seem to have gain'd by this bar∣gain (since the Lower Pomeren, which he has quitted to the Swedes, will not doubtless yeild so good a Revenue as the Principalities of Mag∣deburg, Halberstadt, and Minden, yet) there is no question but upon examination we shall find rea∣son to believe, that he had rather have the en∣tire Dukedom of Pomeren restored, then three more such inland Provinces bestow'd on him. Since by this means he would have the oppor∣tunity of making himself considerable at Sea; and be freed from the inconveniences of having a potent neighbour, who keeps him in perpe∣tual Jealousies. Upon these considerations the States of the Empire have thought fit to make a further reparation of his damages, by allow∣ing him Voices in their Assemblies as Duke of Pomeren and Magdeburg, and as Prince of Hal∣berstadt and Minden. And because formerly the Archbishops of Magdeburg and Bremen took their turns in the Direction of the Circle of the Lower Saxony, they have agreed, that the Elector of Brandenburg should alternate with the King of Sweden (who enjoys the ancient Archbishoprick of Bremen under the same Title as the said Duke does that of Magdeburg) in the same quality. After the Ratification of this Treaty at Munster, the Swedes quietly enjoy'd the Lower Pomeren, according to the tenure of the Articles afore∣said; until in these late wars the united forces of the Danes and Brandenburgers, not without great difficulty and much bloodshed, over-pow∣red them, and siezed on all the Lower Pomeren together with the Isle of Rugen and the City of Stetin. But of this we shall have occasion to say more in the following Descriptions of parti∣cular Cities.
Chief Cities in the Ʋpper POMEREN. I.Stetin. STETIN. This has ever been reckon'd the Metropolis of all Pomeren; and Stralsund only the chief Town in the Princi∣pality of Rugen. By whom, or when it was first built, cannot easily be determin'd; and 'tis to no purpose to trouble the Reader with the idle conjectures of illiterate Historians, who pre∣tend to fetch its genealogy from a warlike Na∣tion (whom they call Sidini) that before the building of Towns or Houses came in fashion in these parts of the world, kept their usual Ren∣dezvous in the place where Stetin now stands. However, 'tis more commendable for the improvements it has receiv'd in the beauty of its buildings, and number of inhabitants, within the memory of its own Records, then any An∣tiquity it can boast of; altho, as we have said, it is beyond the skill of the ablest Antiquary to find out its original. About four hundred years ago Stetin was built of a quite different figure from what it has at this day; the Church of St. Peter (which now stands without the walls) being plac'd in the very middle of the Town. The convenient and pleasant situation it now has (on the rising of a small hill) its regular fortifications, beauty, and strength it owes to the Saxons; who, by permission of some of the Dukes of Stetin, came hither to reform the bar∣barous manners and language of their then Wen∣dish Subjects. By this means trading was ad∣vanc'd, and the number of the inhabitants mul∣tiplied so exceedingly, that some Writers who give us a description of this City in its modern condition, represent it as a place where more people inhabit under ground then above it; in∣timating, that the Town is so populous, that a great number of its Citizens are forc'd to live in Cellars and Vaults. The Castle (formerly the Palace of the Dukes of Stetin, and now the usual Residence of the Swedish Governor) is a Pile of building which excels perhaps any piece of Architecture in these parts of Europe, and may vy with most of its kind in Italy it self. Besides these ornaments, the City is eminent for the great Exchange in it of all manner of merchandise; the plenty it has of all sorts of fresh and salt Fish; Wood, either for fuel or tim∣ber; Corn, and many other rich Commodi∣ties. The Citizens have been always commended for their great civility to strangers; and no less praised for their undoubted valour and resolu∣tion in opposing the violences of any foreign enemies. A more sufficient demonstration of their courage cannot be expected then they gave in defending their Town so bravely as they did against the forces of the Elector of Brandenburg in the year 1677. Which famous siege having possibly been one of the most memorable pieces of Gallantry (if we consider the resolution and courage of both parties) that these later Ages have produc'd, will in this place merit a more particular relation then ordinary. The Elector had the year before made an at∣tempt upon this City; but was in too weak a condition (considering the posture of the place and the strength of the Garrison that defended it) to pursue his intentions any further. Where∣upon he resolved for that time to withdraw his forces; and to provide himself better before he would venture upon a second onset. According∣ly that winter was spent in raising new Regi∣ments, and providing all manner of ammuni∣tion requisite for the carrying on of this design the Summer following. All things thus in rea∣diness, on the fifth of July in the year 1677. His Highness parted from Berlin at the Head of an Army consisting of Twenty-four Regiments (whereof Nine of Horse, Ten of Foot, and Five of Dragoons), besides-Foot Guards, and the assistance of Four Thousand Lunenburgers un∣der the command of Major General Enten. By these Forces the City was closely besieged from the seventh of July to the twenty-sixth of De∣cember following; on which day the Town was surrendred upon the conditions following: 1. That all the Swedish Soldiers should march out with Drums beating and Colours flying, and have safe conduct for themselves with their bag and baggage as far as Liefland; but all the Germans, whether Officers or common Soldiers, quitting the service of the King of Sweden, should be listed under the Elector. II. If any of the Swedish goods could not at present be carried off, it should be lawful for the owner to leave them behind him, to be restored upon demand, as soon as the Frost was over and the River navigable. III. A general pardon should be granted to all Partisans and Forragers, excepting such as are known to have committed some notorious murder, or other misdemeanour contrary to the Law of Arms, in their Sally. IV. All the wounded and sick Soldiers should have leave to ly in the City till they were cured. V. All the prisoners on both sides should be set at liberty. VI. That at the request of the Swedish Lieu∣tenant General, all Fugitives should be pardon'd, and receiv'd back to their respective Regiments. VII. His Electoral Highness should grant to the said Lieutenant General Wulfzen, the liber∣ty to carry off any two pieces of Cannon which he should chuse. VIII. The Wives, Widows, and Children of the Swedish Officers should be permitted to tarry in Stetin (if they thought fit) till Easter; and at their departure have pass-ports granted them. IX. All Officers of the King of Sweden, whe∣ther Civil or Military, should remain full Pro∣prietors of all their goods, movable and im∣movable; paying the same homage to the E∣lector as they had formerly done to the afore∣said King. X. Provided always, that if any of the said Officers were willing to part with any such goods, he should have a just price paid him, and licence to carry of the same whither him∣self should please. XI. The Elector should not make any altera∣tion in Religion. XII. The University, and Church of St. Mary, should enjoy their ancient Priviledges and Re∣venues. XIII. His Electoral Highness should take into his own protection all the Priests and School∣masters in the Town; defending them from all the insolencies and injuries of his Soldiers. These, with some few more less considera∣ble Articles being signed by both parties, the Elector enter'd the Town; a great part whereof lay miserably buried in its ruins, the effects of the valour and prowess of its inhabitants. Du∣ring this siege the Brandenburgers are said to have spent thirty thousand Granadoes, 24000 Hand-Granadoes, an hundred and fifty thou∣sand
Cannon-shot, and ninety-eight thousand pound of powder. By the late Treaty of Ni∣meguen, this Town was again restor'd to the King of Sweden. II.min. CAMMIN. Formerly a Bishop's See, whose Prelates had the priviledge of being invested and confirm'd immediately by the Pope himself. In the Treaty of Munster 'twas order'd, that af∣ter the death of the then incumbent Canons, the Bishopric of Cammin should be turn'd into a small Principality, and descend upon the Ele∣ctor of Brandenburg. III.g. COLBERG. A strong Town on the mouth of the Persant; annex'd formerly to the Bishopric of Cammin by Barnimus I. Duke of Po∣meren, and therefore given to the Elector of Brandenburg by the Westphalian Treaty. The convenience of the Haven and plenty of good Salt made here and sent into other Countries has invited a considerable number of Merchants to traffick and enrich the Town. IV. WOLLIN. At this day a poor Town, but the reliques of one of the greatest Cities that these parts afforded. Adam Bremensis asserts po∣sitively, that Julinum (which was the ancient name of this Town, turn'd afterwards into Wol∣lin) was once the largest City in Europe. And no doubt it was a place extraordinary strong and populous that was alone able to maintain a war against the whole Kingdom of Denmark, and to bring home its Monarch Suenotto three several times prisoner. In those days 'twas by all Nations resorted to as the greatest Mart-Town (excepting perhaps Constantinople) in Eu∣rope; and the Danes, Swedes, Russians, Jews, and several other people had here their peculiar Streets and Houses of Exchange. But within a while their Apostacy from the Christian Re∣ligion brought Gods heavy wrath and venge∣ance upon them; which destroy'd a great part of their City by Lightning and Fire from Hea∣ven, and the rest by the hands of Waldemar King of Denmark, who falling upon it unawares (in the year 1170) with a great Army, destroy'd the very ruins of the Town, and burnt up (what was only left) its Ashes. Never since has this place been any thing considerable, scarcely de∣serving the name of a City or great Town, be∣ing remarkable for nothing save that it gives name to the whole Isle where 'tis situate, which from it is call'd Das Wollinsche Werder. V.. USEDOM. This was once (after the de∣struction of its neighbour Julinum) a Town of good traffick; which was chiefly occasion'd by the resort of the Danes and Poles, who remov'd their trade hither. In the year 1473, the whole Town, with the Town-Hall, and all the Shops and Goods of the Merchants was burnt down; after which time it hardly recover'd any of its ancient riches and grandeur, and is now moul∣der'd into a Sea-Port Town of less note (if possible) then Wollin. Cities and great Towns of Note in the Lower POMEREN. FIrst,. STRALSUND. When this City (now the largest and weal∣thiest in Pomeren) was first built is not certainly known. The most credible Historians tell us, it owes its first original to Sun∣no II. King of the Franks; who laid the first foundation of this Town in the year 145 or 146, calling it from his own name Sunnonia; which was afterwards corrupted into Sunda, and by the addition of Strala (an Island situate no man knows where) turn'd at last into Stralsund. But I had rather believe it had the name Sund (as 'tis still sometimes call'd) from the narrow Sea upon which it stands; since this, as well as the Baltic Straits betwixt Helsingore and Helsingborg, would be properly nam'd in the Danish or Gottish tongue de Sund. The other part of its modern name seems afterwards added (von den Stralen oder flussen) from the interchangable portions of Sea and Land in this place. The first undoubted truth we find related of this City is that (after some great spoiling or utter destruction) it was magnificently rebuilt, enlarged and peopled with Germans, by Jaromar Prince of Rugen, about the year 1209. By this Prince's Son its fortifications were first begun in the year 1230, and the City removed a little out of the place where its first foundations had been laid by his Father. For before Jaromar had quite encompass'd his new built Town with a slender Wall (which he fancied would have been sufficient to have defended it against the incursions of the Danes on the one hand, and the Pomeranians on the other), the Dukes of Pomeren broke in upon him, and overpowering his small Garrison, burnt up the greatest part of the intended City. So that the Stralsunders have good reason to reckon the Age of their City no farther then from the year 1230, as they intimate from the following distich, engraven in several places of the Town in Golden Letters: Annis Ducentis, ter denis mille retentis, Fit Stralsundensis Civitas, cui nomen ab undis. Since that time it has had almost as many fair priviledges and immunities conferr'd upon it as any City in the Empire of its age. As 1. The Magistrates of the Town have power to deter∣mine all controversies as well in Criminal as Civil causes within their own Courts; from whence lies no appeal to any superior Judge or Prince whatever. 2. They have power to coin money; and raise forces either for Sea or Land. 3. In case of an engagement of the whole German Empire with some foreign Na∣tion in a Sea-Fight, the Stralsunders are not ob∣liged to venture any further abroad then is con∣venient for the defence of their own City. 4. They have had power to make Leagues and Confe∣deracies for the advancement of their own trade; and to chuse their own Patrons and Protectors out of all the Princes of the Empire. At this day the City is in a flourishing and splendid condition; the Houses generally stone, and very uniform. This last year (1680) some part of the Town was burnt down by an un∣happy accident; but the plentiful purses of the inhabitants will be able quickly to repair the damages of that fire. The Sea betwixt this Town and the Isle of Rugen is about an Eng∣lish mile in breadth; down to which from the Walls there are six great Gates, and as many Bridges leading thither. To these Bridges the Merchantships (of 150 or 200 Tun) which ride in the Harbour are fasten'd. Towards the Land it is fortified with regular Bulwarks, and Fish∣ponds of twice a Musket's shot in bredth; over which there are four Dams and Bridges, lead∣ing from the four Land-Gates of the Town. The chief Commodity of the Town is Corn; which the Merchants transport in great quanti∣ties into the Low-Countries, Scotland, Norway, and
many other parts of Europe. In some of the Northern Nations the Stralsund beer is reckoned a choise Commodity; and for that reason many tun of that Liquor is here yearly ship'd off. Stralsund has always so bravely maintain'd its priviledges and Liberties, that it would be a voluminous History to give an account of the many several Proofs its Inhabitants have given of their valour in this kind. Historians will ac∣quaint us that at once it withstood the United Forces of two Kings (of Denmark and Sweden) and ten Princes; against the assaults of all which it bravely defended it self, and in the engage∣ment took Eric Duke of Saxony Prisoner. Af∣ter this exploit the City began to be as terrible as before it had been impregnable; and none of the Neighbouring Princes durst offer either vio∣lence or any affront to the Citizens of Stralsund. In the Civil Wars of Germany, Count Walstein (trusting to Fortune that had always favour'd his former enterprises) lay close siege to the Town; but after a furious onset and a long but vain ex∣pectance of success, was at last forced shamefully to retire. Within a while after the Stralsunders put themselves under the protection of Gustavus Adolphus the triumphant King of Sweden; who though at first designed only for a titular Patron, prov'd in the end their real Lord and Master. However, the present Elector of Brandenburg is the only Prince that can justly brag of having fairly conquered the City of Stralsund: which (af∣ter he had taken Stetin and the greatest part of the upper Pomeren) was by him besieged and ta∣ken in the year 1678; though afterwards (as he stood obliged by the Fifth Article of the Treaty of peace signed by the Ministers of the Kings of France and Sweden and the said Elector at St. Ger∣main's en Laye the 29th of July in the year 1679) he resign'd it back into the hands of the Swedish King. II.Bardt. BARTH or BARDT. This Town, not many ages agoe, was the Metropolis of the up∣per Pomeren, and gave name to all that part of the Countrey wherein are now situate Stralsund, Grim∣men, Tribsees, with many other Cities and great Towns of good note. Some fancy it derived its name from the Lon∣gobardi, whom they make the undoubtedly an∣tient Inhabitants of these parts: and in confirma∣tion of this their conjecture produce the old Arms of the Town, wherein it bears a mans head with a long beard. But the more probable opinion is, That 'tis so called from the River Barte or Bartze; on the mouth of which it is seated. The Fields about this City are exceeding fruit∣ful, and abound with all manner of grain; whence (were the Haven here as deep and fit to harbour Ships of a considerable burthen as that at Stral∣sund) Bardt would be capable of being as much advanced by Merchandise as any of its Neighbour∣ing Cities. But that small Arm of the Sea upon which this City stands is so shallow, that neither Merchantmen nor almost any other Vessels (save only such as serve to convey Passengers from hence into Denmark or Sweden) can be brought up to the Walls of the Town. III. GRIPSWALD.Grips∣wald. Which was questionless a large and populous Town before it was wall'd round in the year 1233; and turn'd into a strong City. After which time it was daily enlarged and enriched by the great resort of Hollanders and o∣ther foreign Merchants; who had here the conveni∣ence of lading their Ships with as good Salt as any that Lunenburg or the other famous Salt-Markets of Germany will at this day afford. But upon the decay of wood (the small Forests near Grips∣wald being quickly burnt up in supplying their furnaces with fewel) this trade vanished; and the Town has much ado to keep up to the riches and splendour it hath long since attained. The only commendation of the Town at present is, that it is a regularly and well fortified place; and consi∣derable for an University, which has bred up, and continues so to do, many brave men singularly e∣minent for their parts and learning. In the Fields and Meadows near Gripswald there grows a kind of wild Garlick (which the Neigh∣bourhood call Ramess) in such quantities, that each year for near a month about Whitsontide, when the herb flowers, it smells so intolerable strong, that a stranger would hardly be able to struggle with the offensive stench of a walk for a quarter of a mile without the Gates of the City. All the Butter sold in the Town savours strong of this nau∣seous herb; and the very flesh of Cattel that graze in these pastures, tasts as if it were stuff'd with Garlick. There are besides these Cities mention'd,Other . many other great Towns of note in Pomeren; though not so considerable as to merit a particular De∣scription in this place. Such are, 1. Damgarten, and 2. Tribsees; both situate on the Coasts of the Dukedom of Mecklenburg; and remarkable for a Toll or Impost exacted upon Travellers by the Swedish Officers. The Dukes of Mecklenburg lay claim to all Rights and Priviledges in these two Towns: but the Memorials exhibited to that purpose to the Mediators in the late Treaty at Nimeguen, did not meet with the expected success. 3. Loytz. 4. Lassen. 5. Treptow; with several others.
decorative device
map of Rügen RVGIA INSVLA DVCATVS accuratissime descripta ab E. Lubino. Arces nobilium plerae{que} hoc signo notātur. Apud Janssonio-Waesburgios Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
THE ISLE OF RUGEN. RUGEN is one of the chief Islands in the Bal∣tic Sea; and famous for the courage of its an∣cient inhabitants men∣tion'd in most Histori∣ans of note by the name of Rugi or Rugii. Sido∣nius gives them the con∣stant Epithet of pugna∣ces; and none mention their names without some grand Elogium or other. Their chief Forts were Arcona and Camerentz; both which they fancied impregnable, till Waldemar King of Den∣mark shew'd them the vanity of that conceit by storming those two Bulwarks of their Coun∣try, and taking the whole Island in the year 1368. And indeed Arcona (if we believe the stories which some German Historians tell of it) was a place sufficiently fortified by Nature a∣gainst all the batteries which the Martial men of former ages were able to invent. For 'twas seated on the top of a vast rock by the Sea∣shore, which was so high that no arrow (shot from the strongest Bow) could possibly reach the Castle; so that the Fort was certainly tenable so long as the besieged were provided with victuals and ammunition. The Isle was formerly of a much larger ex∣tent then 'tis at this day;. reaching out to the South-East as far as Ruden, which is now an Island of it self distant about three Leagues from Ru∣gen, whereof 'twas anciently a part. This sepa∣ration was occasion'd by a great tempest in the year 1303 (some say 1309), at which time the Sea, breaking its banks, drown'd a great part of Rugen, and made by this breach so deep a Channel (call'd by the Shipmen Das new Tieff oder Schiffart, i. e. the new Channel) that the greatest Ships that sail on the Baltic can pass this way to Stralsund; a great advancement to the trade of that City. Whereas, before this accident, there was no passage this way; ex∣cepting only a narrow Road for Hulks, or small Hoys (call'd by the Mariners Dan Bellen) which the Danish Merchantment had almost stopt up with continual throwing into it the ballast of their Ships. At the present whole Isle is about thirty English miles in bredth, and as much in length; so that the whole circumference amounts to ninety miles (were it exactly round), or there∣abouts. But Rugen has so many Creeks, Promonto∣ries, Peninsuls, windings and turnings, that he who goes about to take an exact survey of its whole cir∣cumference will find it much larger. For 'tis observable, that so many branches of the Sea break into the Island, that no part of the land is above two or three English miles from the shore. And yet every small Province in the Isle (as the Peninsuls Wittaw, and Jasmunt, the Country of Bergen, the Isle of Ʋmmantz, Vid∣densee, Zuder, &c.) is so well secured by Nature from the most tempestuous rage of the waters that the inhabitants need not fear a deluge. Rugen is so rich a Corn-Country,Commodi∣ties. that it is u∣sually call'd the Barn of Stralsund; as Sicily was of Rome. Besides, 'tis well stock'd with good breeds of Horses, Kine, Sheep, &c. and especi∣ally with Geese, which are the largest in Eu∣rope. It was anciently commended for a Coun∣try where neither Wolf nor Rat was to be seen; but now the Rugians have as great store of these Vermine as their neighbours. Jasmunt furnishes the whole Island with Wood for Timber and Fewel out of a Forest call'd in their tongue de Stubbunitza, which exactly answers to our English word Copses. The Sea and multitude of small Lakes afford them plenty of Fish; e∣nough to supply the wants of themselves and their neighbours. Amongst other Lakes in the Isle, there is one (not far from Burchwall, the ruins of an old Fort in Jasmunt) which the neighbourhood, upon the authority of Tradi∣tion, superstitiously believe to be of that Na∣ture, that it will not bear a Boat, nor suffer a Net to catch a Fish of the many shoals they dai∣ly see in it. Near this Lake is a Promontory of a wonder∣ful height, which hangs over the Sea;Stubben∣kamer. and was anciently a notable shelter for Pirats, who used to cruise upon these Coasts. This Den is call'd by the Natives de Stubbenkamer or Bedchamber.
There are no Mart-Towns of any conse∣quence in the Island;Strength. nor have the Inhabitants the oppertunity of trading with any Mer∣chants save their Neighbours of Stralsund, who buy up all the Corn and other Commodities in the Country. So that we cannot expect to meet with such multitudes of people here as in the o∣ther Isles of the Baltic. However Rugen is eve∣rywhere so populous that tis able (upon a very small warning) to bring seven thousand stout fighting men into the field; which, if re∣solute and unanimous, are sufficient to de∣fend the whole Island against a potent ene∣my. The Language anciently spoken in Rugen was a Dialect of the Slavonian or Wendish tongue.Language. But after the Dukes of Pomeren (assisted by the Citizens of Stralsund, as shall be shew'n hereaf∣ter) had possession of the Island; the Wendish manners and language were utterly abolished, in∣somuch that 'tis recorded in the Annals of Rugen as a memorable thing, that (in the year 1404) there was one old woman left in the Isle that understood perfectly, and could speak the Sla∣vonian tongue. At this day the greatest part of the inhabitants speak the language of the Lower Saxons; and some few, especially where the King of Sweden's Officers keep their residence, speak Swedish. The ancient inhabitants of this Isle were the last of all the Northern Nations that were con∣verted from their Idolatry and Paganism,Religion. and embrac'd the Christian Religion. Helmondus seems to point more especially at the Rugians when he says, Inter omnes autem Borealium popu∣los sola Slavorum Provincia remansit caeteris durior, atque ad credendum tardior. However (about the year 813) a company of hardy Monks ven∣tur'd to preach up Christianity to these stubborn people; and succeeded so well in the under∣taking as in a very short time to bring over a great many of them to the true faith. But they as quickly abandon'd Christianity, and relaps'd into their former Idolatry. For (as upon the first preaching of the Gospel in Lycaonia the in∣habitants of that Country were ready to do sa∣crifice to St. Barnabas and St. Paul under the names of Jupiter and Mercury, so) these poor people mistaking God's Ministers for God him∣self, idoliz'd St. Vite (a poor Monk that had un∣dertaken their conversion) by the name of Swant; which name was afterwards given to a monstrous four headed Image, which they worshipp'd in a sumptuous Temple. To this Idol all the Ru∣gians repair'd, as to an Oracle, for advice; and the foreign Merchants that had made a safe Voyage, were obliged to offer up some of their best Merchandises as a tribute of thanksgiving to this grand tutelary God of the Island. Three hundred Horses were kept constantly for the service of Swant; one whereof was white, and never rid but by the chief Priest. This Horse was now and then shew'n to the people in a morning all over besmear'd with dirt and sweat, the Priest in the mean time protesting to the multitude, that Swant himself had brought the beast into that pickle by engaging with, and pursuing the Enemies of Rugen the night before. The manner of worshipping this Idol (which stood in Arcona, the famous City in old Rugen before mention'd) was thus: The chief Priest looking into a Horn which the Image held in its right hand (and which had been fill'd the year before with a precious liquor) prognosti∣cated, from the good quantity or scarcity of the liquor therein contain'd, the plenty or dearth of the year following. That done (with his lips shut, for fear of harming the Idol with his breath) he very solemnly poured out the re∣maining liquor at the feet of the Image, and having replenish'd it afresh, plac'd it again with a great deal of reverence in the God's right hand, whence he had taken it down. These Ceremo∣nies being ended, the rest of that day was spent in anniversary feasting and jollity. In this mi∣serable condition the Rugians continued for some ages; until by a continual conversation with their neighbours the Pomeranians, they were al∣most insensibly turn'd Christians, and (about five hundred years ago) at last wholly quitted their Idolatrous practices; and at this day the inhabitants of Rugen are as zealous assertors and maintainers of the Augsburg Confession as any Germans whatever. The Isle was anciently govern'd by Princes of its own,G∣mers. whose Dominions reach'd beyond the narrow boundaries the Sea had set them, a great way into Pomeren; taking in all the Territo∣ries near Stralsund, Gripswald, and other places now subject to the King of Sweden. Antiquity will afford us a Register of Eleven Princes of Rugen, and those in the following order: 1. Wislaus, who is said to have been Prince of Rugen in the days of the Emperor Otho I. about the year of Christ 938. 2. Grimus. Remarkable for nothing but his fil∣ling up a space in the Catalogue of these Princes. 3. Cruco, or Crito. At the same time Prince of Rugen, and petty King of the Obatriti in the year 1100; who after he had for some years exercis'd Idolatry and Tyranny in his Domi∣nions, was deposed and slain by Henry Son of Gothscalc) another inconsiderable King of the said Obitriti) at the entreaty of his wife Schla∣vine, Daughter to Swantibor I. Prince of Pome∣ren. 4. Raze. A great Warriour, who besieged Lu∣bec, and took it. He died in the year 1141. 5. Teslaus. A Prince who had continual wars with the Kings of Denmark; two whereof (Eric VI. and Sueno III.) he as often over∣came as he was beaten by them; but at last was utterly vanquish'd and made tributary by King Waldemar. 6. Jarimar, Teslaus's Brother. The first Prince of Rugen that embraced Christianity. 7. Barmita, arimar's Son. He died in the year 1241. 8. Witzlaus II. Barmita's Brother; and Founder of the Monastery at Campen. He died in the year 1247. 9. Jarimar II. Witzlaus the second's Son; who immediately after his admittance to the Go∣vernment rebell'd against the King of Den∣mark, and at last (after many Engagements) got himself and his successors eas'd from that yoke, in the year 1259. 10. Witzlaus III. Jarimar the second's Son. A great promoter of the Christian Religion in Liefland; where himself sometimes took upon him the office of a Priest, preaching Christianity to the poor Infidels of those parts. 11. Witzlaus IV. The last Prince of Rugen of this Family. Upon the unruly growth of the great City of Stralsund, the Merchants and Burgers finding themselves able enough to grapple with this Prince, were resolv'd to be no longer subject to him or any of his Suc∣cessors; if by violence or otherwise they could procure their liberty; whereupon they openly proclaim'd themselves a free City; declaring that neither the Princes of Rugen, nor any of their neighbours could lawfully pretend
to exact any Tribute or Homage from the Citizens of Stralsund. Upon the noise of this revolt, Prince Witzlaus (assisted by some of the neighbouring Kings and Princes) besieged Stralsund; demanding submission, together with an humble acknowledgment of their unpardonable crime in daring to make so traiterous a revolt; but in vain. For the Stral∣sunders not only persisted in the resolution of asserting their Liberty to the last; but bravely withstood the assaults of Witzlaus and his As∣sociates, and (after many hot disputes) slew this Prince in a sally; thereby putting an end to the controversie and whole Lineage of the Princes of Rugen, in the year 1325. After this the Island of Rugen (with other parts of that Principality upon the Continent) came into the hands of the Dukes of Pomeren; with which Dukedom, after the failure of that Line, it should have been annex'd to the Mar∣quisate of Brandenburg; but (as hath been be∣fore noted) in consideration of the signal fa∣vours the King of Sweden had done the Pro∣testant party in the Civil Wars of Germany, the Princes concern'd in the Westphalian Treaty thought fit to annex the Lower Pomeren to the Dominions of that King; and as a part of this Dukedom the Isle of Rugen was thrown into the bargain. Afterwards the King of Denmark (Fri∣deric III.) began to revive some ancient preten∣sions of some of his Ancestors to the Principa∣lity of Rugen; but the ensuing wars betwixt him and the Crown of Sweden (of which we have given the Reader some account in the Descrip∣tion of Denmark) put an end, as 'twas thought, to these pretensions. For the said Frideric (in the Treaty of Roschild, made between the two Northern Crowns in the year 1658) disclaim'd all right and title to the Isle of Rugen. How∣ever (notwithstanding the promises and pro∣testations made in that Treaty) the present King of Denmark shew'd, that Contracts made be∣tween great Princes and Commonwealths are no longer obligatory then consistent with the intrigues of State. For hearing that the Elector of Brandenburg had besieged Stetin, and that Count Koningsmarck (the valiant Swedish Gover∣nor of Rugen) had thereupon drawn the great∣est part of his forces into Pomeren, leaving the Island of Rugen to be defended by a small com∣pany of about fifty Horse; he immediately ship'd six thousand Soldiers, intending with them to surprize the deserted Island, and regain it into his own possession. But the weather not favou∣ring this design, the Danish Forces were kept off at Sea by contrary winds till that small Garri∣son which kept the Isle was alarm'd, and had time to give notice to the General; who never∣theless could not arrive with the rest of his Ar∣my before the enemy had made themselves Masters of Jasmund. However, after one brisk engagement with the Count's left Wing, the Danes were forc'd to fly in great disorder; lea∣ving six hundred of their Companions dead in the field, and two thousand five hundred more taken prisoners. The rest retreated confused in∣to Wittow; where they were beset with the Swedes who slew, took prisoners, and plunder'd as ma∣ny of them as they pleased. In this Victory the Swedes are said to have taken from the Danes (besides an incredible number of prisoners) six and twenty Standards, sixteen Field-pieces, five Mortar-pieces, and thirty thousand Rixdol∣lars in money. Yet this unhappy overthrow was not sufficient to discourage the brave King Christian from a second adventure; and the draw∣ing back his Arm after this defeat, seem'd only intended to fetch the greater blow. For having doubled his Forces in the year following (1678) he fell upon the Rugians with that irresistable strength and courage, which obliged them to resign up the whole Island upon his own terms. And it might to this day have been at his de∣votion, had not the French King struck in as Mediator betwixt the Northern Crowns, in the alte Treaty signed by the Danish and Swedish Ministers at Lunden in Schonen, Sept. 26. A. D. 1679; by the seventh Article of which Treaty 'twas agreed (because Lewis the Great was pleas'd to have it so), that Rugen should be deliver'd up to the Swede on or before the sixth of Decem∣ber following. Accordingly the King of Swe∣den is now repossess'd of that Island; and has sent in new Garrisons to fortifie and defend it against all future assaults of its formidable neigh∣bours the Danes and Brandenburgers. The only Town of note in the whole Isle of Rugen is Bergen;Towns. situate about the middle of the Island. It had the name of a City given it in the year 1190, but so little deserv'd that title, that it had not the advantage of being fortified or wall'd round. All the account which modern Travellers give of it is, that 'tis one of the better sort of Villages, consisting of a∣bout four hundred Houses. Stralsund indeed seems the Metropolis of Ru∣gen; and (as it was formerly) may still be so accounted, if we consider the many and great priviledges which the Burgers of that City still pretend to in that Island. For 1. The High Court of Admiralty in Stralsund determines all causes and contests arising in any of the Port-Towns in Rugen; and therefore (because the Stralsunders will not assign over this Jurisdiction to any Delegates residing in the Island) the Ru∣gians are obliged, upon debate of all such quar∣rels, to repair to Stralsund for judgment. 2. With∣out the consent of the Senate and Citizens of Stralsund, no definitive sentence can be given (nor no Court of Equity or Judicature what∣ever erected) in any part of the Isle. 3. The Ru∣gians may not, without leave first obtain'd from the Common Council of Stralsund, export any manner of Grain, or other Commodities; or brew Beer for sale. In short, this City is the Key of the Island, and the only Fortress upon which depends its security or ruine. So that had Rugen been kept by the King of Denmark, and Stralsund by the Elector of Brandenburg (according to the Rights of Conquest in the late Wars) 'tis probable, that those new ac∣cessions would in a short time have occasion'd quarrels and animosities between the two Princes. The Elector would questionless have been loth to have disclaim'd all Right and Ti∣tle to the Priviledges which the City of Stral∣sund now challenges in Rugen; and on the other hand, His Majesty of Denmark would (in all probability) have been as unwilling to have suffered any Prince of the Empire to Lord it in his Dominions. 'Tis almost necessary (considering the present State of Stralsund and the Isle of Ru∣gen) that both these places should be subject to the same Master; though not impossible to make the Island (at least independant upon, if not) a Terror to that City. For (since all the Merchant Ships, which come from the Danish Sund to the City of Stralsund, are obliged to sail round the Isle of Rugen) 'twould not possibly be so expen∣sive as profitable to build three or four good Port-Towns in Wittow, Jasmumd and other parts of the Island; and thereby (not only command all Ships that sailed this road, but also) divert the grand
current of trade from Stralsund to Rugen, the Store∣house of that City. But, as long as the City of Stralsund wants Provision for its Inhabitants and the Isle of Rugen vent for its great abun∣dance of Corn and other Commodities, there seems to be such a mutual dependance between the two places, that to subject them to different Masters manifestly threatens the destruction of their Common Interest. Tho never poor Island has been more mise∣rably mangled and afflicted with war (witness the Civil wars in Germany and the late Northern Broils,Nobility. in both which Rugen was several times taken and retaken) yet you shall meet with a great many noble Families that pretend to derive their pedigree from the true antient Rugii or Runi. Helmondus I think first taught them to call them∣selves by this latter name, fancying that the an∣tient Insula Runorum (whom Adam Bremensis calls fortissimam slavorum gentem) must needs be Rugen. Whereas 'tis more probable that the Runi (as the Learned Ol. Wormius conjectures) liv'd further Eastward, near the Coasts of Liefland; where to this day there is a small Island called by the Neigh∣bourhood Die Rune. However (let the Ancestours of the modern Rugian Noblemen be what they will) they have this good mark of Antiquity, that they pay Tithes duelier (of all manner of Grain, Fruits, Wool, &c.) then any people in Germany; and give larger allowances and more respect to their Clergy Men. The Rusticks pay easier Rents then is usual in other places; and there∣fore have reason to give (as they commonly do) that respect and honour to their Landlords which all the antiquity they brag of can chal∣lenge.
map of the margraviate of Brandenburg MARCHIONATUS BRANDENBURGICUS Authore Olao Iohannis Gotho, Gustaui Mag. R. S. Cosmographo. blazon or coat of arms To ye HONORABLE S.r LYONEL JENKINS Judge of ye Admiralty this Mapp is Humbly Dedicated
THE MARQUISATE OF BRANDENBURG. DIE Marck (which is now a word common∣ly used in Germany to express all the Territo∣ries subject to the E∣lector of Brandenburg, as he is only Marquise of the Empire) signifies no more then the out∣most Borders or Limits of a Country. So that Markgraf (instead of which we use the French word Marquis) is properly Judex or Comes Limitaneus; which we may English, Lord Lieutenant of the Marches. And this Title seems reasonably enough appro∣priated to the Marquises of Brandenburg; who, being seated on the outmost bounds of the Empire, might possibly heretofore supply the places of the Emperor's Delegates in hearing and determining Causes as well as opposing all violent incursions of foreigners. The City of Brandenburg (which lends the Marquis his Title, and was once the Metropolis of these parts) is now decay'd into a despicable Village; of which the Reader may expect a larger account anon, when we come to the Description of the Middle Marck. The whole Marquisate (which Dresser tells us is seven great days journey either in length or breadth) is bounded on the North with the Dukedomes of Mecklenburg and Pomeren; on the North-West with Lunenburg; on the West with Brunswic; on the South-West with Magdeburg; on the South with Anhalt, the Upper Saxony, and Lusatia; on the South-East with Silesia; on the East with Poland; and lastly, on the North-East with Prussia. The Country is generally Sandy, and full of Woods and Forests; affording good store of Corn, but small quantities of any other provi∣sions. In some parts of the Marquisate you may meet with good Flocks of Sheep, but rarely find any considerable Herds of Kine. The Bores near Francfurt, Brandenburg, and Berlin, brag of their Vineyards, and think the Vintage they have yearly, worth the toil of planting and looking after their Vines; but their neighbours have not so good an opinion of the mean Liquor which these poor men boast of; for in the Upper Saxo∣ny 'tis usual to frighten young children to School by threatning to make them drink Brandenburg Wine. And this Proverb is ordinary among them: Vinum auss den Alten Marck Calefacit ut Quarck.Now the word Quarck, in their Dialect, pro∣perly signifies a squeez'd handful of new Cheese; but is commonly used in a metaphorical sense, to denote any sort of insipid stuff whatever. Their Salt is brought to them up the Elb, Havel, and Spree, from other Countries; to whom they return Corn and Fish, the two chief Commo∣dities of this Province. The Elector of Brandenburg's Territories do not afford such Mines of Silver as several Countries subject to the Duke of Saxony,Mines. and some other Princes of the Empire. Which is one main rea∣son why the money coin'd in this Marquisate is much baser mettal then what we find currant in Saxony and the Dukedoms of Brunswic and Lunenburg. In some places they make a shift to dig up small parcels of Brass, Iron, and Cop∣per; but scarce any-where enough to supply the necessary occasions of the neighbourhood. The ancient inhabitants of this Country were the Varini and Naithones,Inhabi∣tants. two branches of the vast Nation of the Suevians; who were suc∣ceeded by the Helvoldi, Wilini, Beirani, and some other Tribes of the Slavonians. But the Empe∣ror Henry I. (having in the year 620 conquer'd and thrown out the greatest part of these peo∣ple) bestow'd these Territories upon Sigefride Earl of Rengelheim; who, with some of his suc∣cessors, new peopled the desolate Country with Golonies out of Holland, Zealand, Westphalia, Saxony, and Franconid: So that the present Bran∣denburgers are a mixt medly of several different German Nations; as may easily be observ'd from the confusion of Dialects which make up the Language of this people. The generality of
them are so lamentably poor and miserable, that to ly on a Bed of clean Straw is esteem'd the character of one of better fashion then his neighbours. Soon after the Emperor Henry the First's con∣quest of Brandenburg,Religion. the inhabitants were con∣verted to Christianity; and under the govern∣ment of the Elector Joachim the First, embrac'd the tenents of M. Luther. In this state they continued undisturbed until the breach betwixt George William (Father of the present Elector) and the Duke of Neuburg. For the latter, ha∣ving married a Daughter of the Duke of Ba∣varia (at that time the most potent Prince of the Popish party), embraced the tenents of the Church of Rome; fancying (as 'tis conjectur'd) that this expedient might be a means to secure the aid and assistance of the King of Spain, if his occasions should require it; on the other hand, the Elector (marrying a Sister of Fri∣deric the Fifth, Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine, and grand Protector of the Calvinists) adhered to the opinions of Calvin; hoping there∣by to engage the Netherlands to befriend him upon occasion. But when afterwards he was perswaded by his Wife to put out an Edict for suppressing the Lutheran Discipline and Doctrine, and authorizing the Calvinian, throughout his Dominions (which was done in the year 1615) all the inhabitants of the Marquisate unani∣mously rebell'd against him; and had proba∣bly put an end to his Line and Government, if they had not met with a speedy redress of their grievances. Hereupon the Elector was forc'd to compose the business by revoking this Edict, and setting forth a new one in its place; whereby 'twas order'd, that the Forms of Di∣vine Service should be used in all public Churches within the Marquisat of Brandenburg according to the Institution of Luther only, and that the Elector) with his Marchioness, and those few more that were of their opinion) should not be permitted to hear a Calvinist Preacher in any other place then a private Chappel. However, these means were found insufficient to secure the people from all innovations in Church-Disci∣pline. For upon the increase of the Electors Family, and daily conflux of new Favourites to the Court (who were easily won over to the Elector's opinions), they could not but observe a continual advancement of Calvinism, and as constant decay of the Lutheran party. Where∣upon they resolved the foremention'd Decree for the establishment of the Augsburg confession should be renew'd, and confirm'd (if possible) beyond all fear of a future violation. In pursu∣ance of this resolution, they procur'd the said Decree to be inserted (as the seventh Article) into the Westphalian Treaty; which they look'd upon as an eternal and immutable Law to the whole German Empire. Yet notwithstanding these assurances, the present Elector of Bran∣denburg (a zealous assertor of his Fathers Tenents) has in many parts of his Dominions, especially his two Universities of Francfurt upon the Oder, and Koningsberg, discouraged the Lutherans and countenanc'd Calvinism. The hot-spur Profes∣sors at Wittemberg (Abraham Calovius and his Bre∣thren) first provok'd him with daily Curses and Anathema's vented against Calvin and his fol∣lowers, to publish an Edict commanding all his Subjects to withdraw their Sons from that Uni∣versity within the space of three months after the publishing of the said Edict. Upon the death of his first Marchioness (Louis-Henrietta, Daugh∣ter to the Prince of Orange, and a zealous Cal∣vinist) the Brandenburgers had some hopes their Elector would have been brought over to their party, or at least (upon his second marriage with Dorothy, Daughter to Philip Duke of Hol∣stein and Relict of Christian-Lewis Duke of Bruns∣wic and Lunenburg, as resolute an assertor of Lu∣ther's Doctrine as the former of Calvin's) have a little abated his rigorous persecution. But hitherto their hopes have been blasted, without the Elector's care to redress their grievances any further then to wink at the ordinary exercise of the Lutheran Religion. And indeed 'tis almost impossible for him to be truly reconciled, as long as Strauchius (at present a noted Preacher in Dantzic, not long since committed to the Goal for railery) with some other hot-headed Lu∣theran Pulpiters take upon them to represent (not only Calvinists in general, but) the Elector himself as one of the Devil's chief instruments for perverting the true Christian Religion. Mutavit Dominos Marchia saepe suos,Gover∣ment. is a say∣ing we often meet with in the Historians that treat of this Marquisate. But the first time that we hear of any Marquise of Brandenburg is after the year 927. For Henry I. Emperor of Germany, having overcome this part of the Coun∣try, bestow'd it on Sigefride Earl of Rengelheim, on condition that he should defend these Marches (or outmost limits of the Empire) against the Sclaves; thereupon giving him the Title of Marckgraf or Marquise. From this time we may reckon up three several Catalogues, or Classes, of the Marquises of Brandenburg; begin∣ning first with such as were not Hereditary Mar∣quises; but had that Title confer'd on them by the Emperor, and enjoy'd it during his pleasure. These were 1. Sigefride, Earl of Rengelheim; who was (as we have said) created the first Marquis of Bran∣denburg by the Emperor Henry the first in the year 927. Besides his exploits in several ex∣peditions against the Slavonians, he might justly lay claim to some more then ordinary preferment as being Brother to the Empress. After his death 2. Gero, Count of Altenburg and Mersburg, was made Marquis by Otho the first. He built the Monastery of Gerenrood; which still re∣tains his name. Having govern'd a few years he left the Marquisate to 3. Bruno, or Brumito (Earl of Within and Bur∣graf of Zorbeck) created Marquise by the same Emperor. And, by the permission of Otho the third, his Son 4. Hugh succeeded; who, having been the Foun∣der of Seven stately Monasteries in Italy, died in the year 1001, and was succeeded by his Brother 5. Sigebart, whom Otho the third made the first Marquise Elector. His Son 6. Theodoric proved a great persecutor of the Heneti (two of whose Princes he perswaded the Emperor Henry II. to hang up), and all other Tribes of the neighbouring Slaves and Vandals. But was at last overpower'd by them; and being beaten out of all his Terri∣tories by Mistivoius Prince of the Obotriti, was forced to end his days miserably in a Mona∣stery at Magdeburg. 7. Ʋdo, Earl of Soltwedel, within some years after (encouraged with the assistance of the Emperor Conrad II. and the Archbishop of Magdeburg) gave battel to the Slaves, and having forc'd them out of their new Con∣quests, was himself made Marquise of Bran∣denburg. 8. Ʋdo II. succeeded his Father. But joining after∣wards
wards with Rodolph Duke of Schwaben in a Rebellion against the Emperor Henry IV. he was by the same Emperor proscribed; and his Marquisate given to 9. Primislaus, King of the Obotriti, and Ance∣stor to the Dukes of Mecklenburg. After whose death the Marquisate was made Hereditary by the Emperor Frideric Barbarossa; who con∣ferr'd it upon Albert (surnam'd Ʋrsus) Prince of Anhalt and Marquise of Soltwedel. From whom we may reckon the second Catalogue of Marquises, in the order following: 1. Albert, created Elector and Duke of Saxony, Brunswic, &c. in the place of Henry surnam'd the Lion. 2. Otho, Albert's Son; succeeded by his Son 3. Otho II. who died without issue in the Holy War; leaving the Marquisate to his Brother 4. Albert II. He died in the year 1221, and left his Dominions to his Son 5. John, a great Benefactor to Francfurt upon the Oder. His Son 6. Otho III. built Brandenburg in Prussia, and liv'd (all his reign, which lasted about fifteen years) in a continual warfare with the Archbishop of Magdeburg and Bishop of Halberstadt. This man's Brother 7. John II. has left nothing memorable recorded of him, save that he kept possession for some years of the Dukedom of Crossen, which was pawn'd to him by Henry Duke of Vratislaw. John the First's third Son 8. Conrad, obtain'd the Marquisate after the death of his two eldest Brothers, and died (very old and decrepit) in the year 1303. His Son 9. John III. did not long outlive his Father; but (dying in the year 1305) left the Marquisate to his Brother 10. Waldemar; who annex'd a good part of Lu∣satia (which he won from the Marquise of Misnia) to the Marquisate of Brandenburg. His Nephew 11. Waldemar II. died within four years of his Uncle (in the year 1323) having acted no∣thing worth the relating. And yet shorter was the Government of his Brother 12. John IV. the last Marquise of the House of Anhalt. After whose death (which hapned within forty days after he was advanc'd to the Government) the Marquisate, escheating to the Empire for want of Heirs, was given to 13. Lewis of Bavaria by his Father Lewis the Emperor. He resigned to his Brother 14. Lewis II. (surnamed the Roman, because born at Rome) who was succeeded by the Empe∣ror's third Son 15. Otho, Count Palatine of the Rhine. He af∣terwards sold the Marquisate to the Emperor Charles IV. who gave it to his Son 16. Winceslaus. But he had not enjoy'd it quite five years before he was (upon his Father's death) Elected Emperor. Whereupon he conferr'd the Marquisate of Brandenburg upon his Brother 17. Sigismund, King of Hungary and Bohemia; who (succeeding his Brother in the Empire) sold the Marquisate to Jodocus Duke of Mo∣ravia; but afterwards (having redeem'd it out of the hand of William Marquise of Misnia, to whom Jodicus had mortgaged it) conferr'd it upon Frideric Burggraf of Noremberg at the Council of Constance in the year 1417. From which time we may begin to reckon up the third and last Catalogue of the Marquises of Brandenburg, as follows: 1. Frideric Burggraf of Noremberg, was (in con∣sideration of his good services done against the Rebels in Hungary and Bohemia) created, as before said, Marquise of Brandenburg; pay∣ing only for his Investiture 400000 Crowns. His Son 2. Frideric II. succeeded his Father. Surnamed (for his peevish and cruel temper) the Mar∣quise with the Iron teeth. He was made Duke of Pomeren by the Emperor Frideric III. but his Brother 3. Albert relinquished all (but the bare Title) in Pomeren; leaving nothing to his Successors but the name (which they have hitherto kept) of Dukes of Pomeren. However, he is said to have been so remarkable at some acts of Chi∣valry, that the usual Titles conferr'd on him by Pope Pius II. were Achilles Germanicus and Ʋlisses Teutonicus. He died at Francfurt at the Election of the Emperor Maximilian in the year 1494. His Son 4. John is reported to have been a Prince as elo∣quent as his Father was valiant; and therefore he is commonly stiled Cicero Germanicus. He left the Marquisate (in the year 1499) to his Son 5. Joachim. As great a Lover, as his Father was a Master, of Eloquence: Founder of the Uni∣versity at Francfurt, and first authorizer of the Reform'd Religion in Brandenburg. 6. Joachim II. succeeded his Father; and (in the year 1534) got himself and his followers no small credit in a brave Expedition against the Turks; at that time the common Enemy of the German Empire. His Son and Successor 7. John George govern'd a long time in peace and prosperity. During his life, his Son 8. Joachim Frideric was Administrator of the Arch∣bishopric of Magdeburg; and (after his Father's death) govern'd the Marquisate of Branden∣burg with the same peaceable meekness and piety. He had (the usual blessing of good and religious men) the happiness to be a Fa∣ther of many Children; whereof the eldest 9. John Sigismund succeeded him. He married Ann Daughter of Albert-Frideric Duke of Prussia and Mary Eleanor his Wife, Daughter of Wil∣liam I. Duke of Cleve; who married his Daugh∣ter to the said Duke (as he did all the rest to other Princes) with promise, that upon the decease of her Brethren without issue, she and her Heirs should succeed to all his Territories. Upon this Title the present Elector of Bran∣denburg lays claim to the Dukedoms of Cleve, Juliers, and Bergen (or the Mountains) with the County of Ravensburg. 10. George-William, Son to John Sigismund and the Lady Ann beforemention'd, claim'd (in his Mother's right) the Dukedoms aforesaid, together with the Barony of Ravenstein. All which were parted betwixt him and his Cousin-German Wolfgangus Palatine of Newburg, and Son of Magdalen younger Sister to Mary-Eleanor. But falling out at last about the division of their Territories, they engaged their Friends and Allies in the broil. the Palatine having call'd in to his assistance the Forces of Spain, and the Elector John Sigismund (in behalf of his Son) the Confederate States of the Nether∣lands. After the death of Bugislaus Duke of Pomeren, 'twas hoped he might succeed into that Dukedom also; but how the Swede balk'd those expectations, in the Treaty of Munster, we have already inform'd the Reader. This Marquise's Son 11. Frideric William is at present Elector of Bran∣denburg; a Prince wise, valiant, religious, tem∣perate,
chast, and (in a word) master of all the noble virtues (without the least mixture of vices) of his Countryand Family. He was born in the year 1620, and upon his Father's death declared Elector, in the year 1656. He has several Children by both his Wives (before mention'd); whereof the eldest Son, or Electoral Prince (Charles Emile) was born the sixth of February in the year 1655. Tho the Elector of Saxony was formerly look'd upon as a much more potent Prince then the Marquise of Brandenburg;Strength. and for that reason has always taken place of him at the Elections of the Emperors: yet certainly the case is much alter'd at present; and the many accessions to the Elector of Brandenburg's Dominions, whereof the present Marquise and his predecessors have made themselves Masters in these last ages, have render'd him the most powerful and formida∣ble Prince (next to the Austrian Family) in the German Empire. Besides the Marquisate of Bran∣denburg, he challenges the Dukedoms of Magde∣burg, Preussen, Juliers, Cleves, Bergen, Stetin, Po∣meren, Casubia, Vandalia, Silesia, Crossen, and Ja∣gerndorff. Again, he writes himself Duke of Ru∣gen, Prince of Halberstadt and Minden, Earl of the Marck and Ravensberg, and lastly Baron of Ra∣venstein. The Marquise of Brandenburg's chief interest seems to consist in a firm adherence to the King of Denmark,Interest. who (possibly) is the only Prince can secure him from the encroachments of his neighbour the Swede. Next to the Swedes he is most jealous of the Dukes of Saxony; as having observed them more favoured by the House of Austria, in the controversie about the Dukedoms of Juliers and Cleves, then himself. This obliged him to compose the differences betwixt himself and the Duke of Newburg upon easier terms then otherwise he would have been willing to have done. The King of Poland is another terrible neighbour on the coasts of Prussia; and there∣fore the Elector (not daring to repose too great a confidence in a Prince who pretends a right to the Ducal as well as Regal Prussia) is ob∣liged to keep a constant and strong Army upon those coasts. In the year 1657, this question was moved, Whether the Elector of Brandenburg might lawfully be deprived of all the Territo∣ries which he held in Prussia as Dependances on the Crown of Poland, upon his having enter'd into a League with the King of Sweden; at that time declared Enemy to Poland? The Polish Law∣yers urged in the affirmative, that the Elector was the King of Poland's Vassal, and therefore forfeited his Lands by entering into a Confede∣racy with his Master's Enemies. But certainly (when we consider in what a miserable condition poor King Casimir was, and how unable to de∣fend either himself or his Subjects; and again, how probable 'twas, that in this conjuncture the Swedish Army would have swallow'd up the whole Dukedom of Prussia, as it had already the greatest part of the Kingdom of Poland, with∣out being obliged to quit the field by such a Treaty) the Poles had greater reason to thank the Elector for preserving, by this expedient, some part of their King's Dominions from the common destruction; then to condemn him for wisely shunning the ruin which King Casimir had brought upon this Kingdom. There are six chief Courts of Judicature,Courts of Judica∣ture. for the examination and trial of Cases Civil and Ec∣clesiastical, in the Elector's Dominions. 1. At Coen on the Spree; or in the Elector's Palace at Berlin. 2. At Colberg in Pomeren. 3. Cleve. 4. Hal∣berstadt. 5. Petershagh; where all Causes depend∣ing between any of the Elector's Subjects in the Dukedom of Minden are brought to trial. 6. Ko∣nigsberg in Prussia. To these may be added, the Court of Magdeburg; since that Archbishopric is now fall'n into the Elector's hands. But of this more hereafter. The whole Marquisate of Brandenburg (strict∣ly so call'd) is commonly divided into the Alt, Mittel, Neue, and Ʋcker-Marck, with the Terri∣tories of Prignitz and Sternberg. But (taking Prignitz and Ʋcker-Marck into the Middle, and Sternberg into the New) we may include them all under the three following heads: ALT-MARCK. FIrst, ALT-MARCK, or the old Marquisate, is bounded on the North with the Dukedom of Mecklenburg; on the West with Saxon-Lawenburg, and some part of the Duke of Lunenburg's Ter∣ritories; on the South with the Dukedom of Magdeburg; and on the East with the Middle Marck; containing about thirty English miles in length or bredth. Some Authors, for the plenty it affords of all manner of Herbs and Fruits, have been pleased to call it the Galilee of Germany. It is commonly subdivided into four petty Provinces, whereof that on the East (called Das Balsamer∣land or Ostland) contains Stendal, Arneburg, the City and County of Osterburg, with some other Towns of note: On the South lies Die Langer, or Das Angerland; taking its name from the River Anger: Towards the West Das land zu Zermund, in which is situate the ancient City Soltwedel: And lastly, Das Senland on the North; supposed to have its name from the Senones, who are thought to have been the ancient inha∣bitants of these parts. The most considerable Cities and great Towns in the Old Marck are: 1. Stendal, the Metropolis of this Province,Stendal. seated upon the River Ʋcht, about five English miles distant from the Elb and Angermund, in a pleasant plain, and at the side of a large Forest. It was built by the Emperor Henry the First in the year of Christ 920, and afterwards fortified with strong Walls and Bulwarks by Marquise Albert (surnam'd Ʋrsus) in the year 1150. In this neat and well-built Hans-Town are kept the ordinary Quarter-Sessions for decision of all Law-Suits in the Old Marck. The chief trade of the Citizens is in Corn and Linnen Cloth; with which (and the daily opportunity of entertaining Pas∣sengers that travel this road from Hamburg and Lubec towards Magdeburg, Erfurt, &c.) they make a shift to live handsomly. 2. Soltwedel (which some call Soltquedel,Soltwedel. others Soltquel), a great Town on the banks of the River Jetze, in the middle way betwixt Lunen∣burg and Stendal. Angelius a Wardenhagen (an ingenious Author, who has published a large and learned Treatise De Rebus publicis Hanseaticis) tell us, that Well and Hues (whence our word House) are words of the same signification in the ancient Saxon Dialect. And Besoldus (a man rarely well skill'd in the Etymologies of his mo∣ther tongue) notes, that Well (instead of which the Rustics corruptly say Wedel) may as ratio∣nally be derived from the Latin word Vella, used by ancient Roman Writers instead of the more
map of the Altmark MARCHIA VETUS Vulgo ALTE MARCK in March Brandenburgico blazon or coat of arms To the R.t Wor.ll Ralph Macro M. D.r this Plate is Humbly Dedicated by Moses Pitt.
map of the Middle Mark of Brandenburg MARCHIA MEDIA Vulgo MIDLE MARCK in Brandenburg blazon or coat of arms IE NE SERCH QV To the R.t Hon.t Iames Earle of Northampton▪ This Mapp is humbly Dedicated by M. Pitt.
modern Villa, as the Saxon Wic is usually fetcht from Vicus. So that Solwell, corrupted into Solt∣wedel, signifies (as these men will have it) an House, or Temple, dedicate to the Sun (Sol) the great God of the Romans. But how came the Pagan Germans to borrow an Idol from Rome, and to retain the Latin name? In answer to this scruple, the German Antiquaries tell us, that in the days of Augustus Cesar, Claudius Drusus be∣ing sent into these parts to fight against the Longobardi, built for himself and his followers a kind of Village on the banks of Jetze, in the very place where the Natives had worshipp'd an image of the Sun. Drusus, bred up in the like Idolatrous practices, joyn'd in the ceremonies of Adoration with these Infidels, and taught them to call upon their mock Deity by the Latine name Sol. Hence the Town, say they, got the name of Solwedel or Solwel. i. e. The House or Temple of the God Sol. Formerly this City, with the ad∣joyning Countrey, was subject to its own Mar∣quises; who are oftentimes mentioned by the German Historians (as particularly in the ac∣count they give us of the expedition against the Huns under the Emperor Henry I.) as Princes of extraordinary valour and gallantry. Afterwards the two Marquisates of Brandenburg and Solt∣wedel (or Zermund) were united and enjoy'd by the Princes of Anhalt, until (in the days of the Emperor Sigismund) they descended upon the Ancestors of the present Elector of Branden∣burg. The Town consists of two parts, the Old and New; whereof the former is fancied to be that which the foremention'd Historians report to have been built by Claudius Drusus, and the latter is said to be the work of the Emperor Henry I. The chief commodity of the Town is Beer; which (tho not so good as we meet with at Gardleben) is hence exported into several parts of the Marquisate of Brandenburg and Duke∣dom of Lunenburg. 3.Gardle∣ben. GARDLEBEN. Some Authors tell us, that the ancient name of this Town was Iso∣burgum from the Image of Isis here worshipp'd. Others believe 'twas Isernburg; and so called from its impregnable strength, that name signifying properly a City of Iron. The neighbouring old Fort (call'd still, by its ancient Wendish name Iseren Schnippe, i. e. Iron Jaws) gave occasion to both these opinions; which are purely conjectu∣ral, and are neither countenanc'd by Antiquity nor Probability. But (omitting these fancies with that of other Authors, equally impertinent, who write the Gardelegia, and fetch its Etymo∣logy from Gardalegionum, or Custodia Legionum; because forsooth Claudius Drusus quarter'd some of his Soldiers here as well as at Soltwedel) 'tis most likely this City had its name from the mul∣titude of pleasant Gardens among which 'tis seat∣ed. The Beer brewed in this Town is famous all Germany over; and reckon'd amongst the greatest Blessings of the Old Marck. Henry Mei∣bonius (a Professor in Helmstadt, whither great quantities of this Liquor is ordinarily convey'd) has writ a Panegyrick in commendation of it. Another great commodity of the Town is Hops, which are preferr'd by the Danish Merchants, and others, before the best in Germany, and bought up at a higher rate. The Arms of the City are three Hop-poles laden with Hops. IV.Anger∣mund. ANGERMUND, or Tangermund. Seated, as the name intimates, on the mouth of the Ri∣ver Anger or Tanger, about thirty English miles from Magdeburg. The Emperor Charles IV. (ha∣ving bought the whole Marquisate of Branden∣burg) built the Castle of Angermund in the year 1376, making this the usual place of his residence for some years after. The Citizens have a con∣siderable trade from the advantage of the Elb; by which their Corn and other Commodities of the Country are convey'd in Vessels down to Hamburg, and thence into foreign Nations. Other places of less note are, 1. Seehusen, or Senheusen, as some write it; seated on the River Alant, and falsely suppos'd to have been built by the Senones; who were indeed a Gaulish people, and never inhabited these parts. 2. Osterburg, a great Corn-Market. 3. Werben, seated at the confluence of the Rivers Elb and Havel; built by Henry, surnamed the Fowler, out of the ruins of the old Castellum Vari. Gustavus Adolphus fan∣cied this place capable of being made the strong∣est Fort in Germany; and himself contributed so far towards its fortification, as to cause that Castle to be built which now commands the whole Town. 4. Havelberg, anciently a Bishop's See. 5. Perleberg, the chief Town in Prignitz, seated in a pleasant and fruitful plain. Arneburg, Wittem∣berg, Bismarcht, Schnakenburg, with some others, are Villages rather then great Towns. II. MIDDLE-MARCK. MIDDLE-MARCK, as its name inti∣mates, is situate in the very midst of the Marquisate of Branden∣burg. 'Tis the largest of the three; and reaches from the banks of the Elb to the Oder, about an hundred English miles. The chief Towns in it are: I. BRANDENBURG; which,Branden∣burg. tho at present far inferior to many of the neighbouring Cities, well merits the preeminence; as having been formerly the Metropolis of the whole Land, and to this day giving name to the Marquisate. Some of the German Historians endeavour to perswade us, that 'twas built 416 years before the birth of our Saviour by one Brenno, a famous Captain of the Semnones. Others, more modestly, fetch its original and name from one Brando; who, as they tell the story, first built this City about the year 230. At present the Town is considera∣ble for little but its age; and the inhabitants would be put to a hard shift to pick up a live∣lihood, if the neighbouring Lake (about ten English miles in length) did not supply them with good store of Fish. In the great Church there are a great many Monuments and Sepul∣chers of Princes and Bishops, and in the Market∣place a Statua Rolandina; of which last we have already given the Reader a short account. II. BERLIN.Berlin. Angelius a Werdenhagen (an Author of good credit, to whom the world is indebted for the most accurate descriptions of the Hans-Towns hitherto published) tells us, this small City had its name (as well as Bernau, Beerwald, Bernstein, with some other places in the Marquisate of Brandenburg) from its first Founder Marquise Albert, surnamed Ʋrsus, or der Beer. It is seated on a pleasant plot of ground upon the bank of the River Spree; which Prickheimer, Dresser, Willichius, Maginus, Bertius, with some other noted Geographers, have mi∣staken for Ptolomy's Svevus. Whereas that great man makes his Svevus to empty it self into the Baltic Sea; and 'tis well known, that the Spree joins it self with the Havel at Spandau, with which it is swallow'd up by the Elb near Werben, which carries it into the German Ocean.
On the other side of the River stands Coln on the Spree (as 'tis nam'd for distinction sake), famous for the Palace and usual residence of the Marquises of Brandenburg. The Castle here was built by Marquise Joachim the second; but much enlarged and beautified by his Successors. Things most worth the seeing here are the Armory, Chambers of Rarities, Galleries (in some of which, among multitudes of other rare Pictures, there are a great many pieces of the famous Luke Kranach's work), Gardens, Waterworks, &c. In the year 1628, the Citizens of Berlin and Coln were strangely alarm'd with the sight of an Ap∣parition or Spirit which many of them pretended to have seen in the shape of a woman, and to have heard it pronounce these words, VenI, IVDICA VIVos & MortVos. Now because the curious men about the Court had observed the said year 1628, mystically pointed at in the numeral Letters of those words, they presently concluded that the Day of Judgment was not far off. III.Francfurt. FRANCFURT upon the Oder; which is said to have been built, about the year of Christ 146, by Sunno a Prince of the Franks; who pursuing the Vandals to this place with an Army of eighteen (some say twenty-eight) thou∣sand of his Countrymen, placed here a Colony of his Soldiers, calling the Town he had built for them Trajectum Francorum, or Francfurt. After∣wards (in the year 1253) John I. Marquise of Brandenburg, with his Brother Otho rebuilt the decayed Town, and enlarged it above a third part. In the year 1379, Marquise Sigismund granted many and great priviledges to the Ci∣tizens; upon their entring into the Society of the Hans-Towns. Lastly, the University of Franc∣furt was founded by Marquise Joachim I. and his Brother Albert (afterwards Archbishop of Mentz and Magdeburg) in the year 1506, at which time the Schools here were stock'd with Professors from Leipsic. Professors of best note in this University of late years (and probably some of them may be still alive) were Raetius, Strickius, Becman, and Schultz; who have pleased their Countrymen with the Edition of some few dis∣putations and small pamphlets of good credit. The Streets are generally large and well built, the Market-place spatious and stately; in which are yearly kept three great Fairs. Without the Gates of the City are to be seen the ruins of an ancient Carthusian Monastery; of which Johannes ab Indagine (who, as Dresser reports, was Author of above three hundred Treatises upon different Subjects) was sometimes Prior. To these may be added some few more of less note, as 1. Spandau, a strong Town on the mouth of the Spree; but mean and inconside∣rable for its buildings. 2. Oranienburg (called formerly Botzaw) about sixteen or twenty English miles distant from Berlin; a Village and Palace that affords the greatest variety of pleasures of any in the Marquise of Brandenburg's Dominions, encompass'd on every side with most delicate and pleasant Parks, and Forests well stock'd with all manner of Game. Bisental, Angermund, Lie∣benwald, Kremme, Nieustadt, &c. have nothing re∣markable in them. Prenslow (a Town well fur∣nish'd with Fish from the adjoining Ʋcker See), Strasburg and Templin are three well fortified Towns (and the only three worth the mention∣ing in the Ʋcker-Marck. III. NEW-MARCK. NEW-MARCK lies betwixt the River Warta and Pomeren; being separated from the Middle-Marck by the Oder; containing in cir∣cuit about an hundred English miles. It belong'd anciently to the Knights of the Teutonic Order, who (in the year 290) sold it to Otho Marquise of Bran∣denburg. Sigismund pawn'd it to the King of Poland; but redeem'd it again as soon as he was advanc'd to the Imperial Throne. The Country is every-where sufficiently fruit∣ful;Soil. and abounds with Corn-fields and Pasture∣grounds more then any other parts of the Mar∣quisate. Upon the banks of the Oder the inha∣bitants plant Vineyards; which sometimes (tho rarely) turn to good account. In some places the Bores find now and then considerable quan∣tities of red Coral; and several sorts of preci∣ous Stones, which (as Mr. Cambden speaks of the like Treasures in Cumberland) Gemmarii mi∣nimo ab egenis emunt & maximo revendunt. The only Town in the New-Marck which merits a particular Description in this place is Custrin, seated upon the Oder. And this too,Custrin. not many ages ago, was only a poor despica∣ble Village inhabited by a few beggarly Fisher∣men; until John Marquise of Brandenburg, re∣turning from his following the wars under Charles V. fortified the place with Rampires and Bulwarks of Earth, about the year 1537. But finding that (whatever security he might pro∣mise himself from these Fortresses against the invasion of a foreign enemy) such banks as he had cast up were easily wash'd away with a Flood, he soon after wall'd it round with stone; and 'tis now become the Key of the New-Marck. The invincible King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus, was baffled at this Town in the year 1631, being forced to raise his designed siege and withdraw his Army, which before that time knew not how to leave a Town unplunder'd. So that this City may possibly deserve that high character which Angelius a Werdenhagen (or his Author) has given of it in the three following Distichs: Ipsa licet cunctas adducat Thracia vires, Germanis certam saepe minata necem; Ipsa licet cunctas ducat terra Itala vires, Teutonibus magnum saepe minata malum; Nec tamen humana poteris delerier arte, Nec vi, nec vigili fraude, dolove capi.The Burgers have generally neat and well fur∣nish'd Houses; and the Market-place excells any in the whole Marquisate. Sternberg is memorable for nothing but its giving name to a small Territory adjoining. And Dam, Konigsberg, Morin, Banen, Soldin, Landsberg, with some others, may be reckon'd (without any great injury done them) amongst the Vil∣lages rather then Cities of the Marquisate. The places subject to the Elector of Brandenburg in Crossen, and some other parts of Silesia and Lusatia shall be described hereafter; when we come to give an account of the Countries to which they more immediately belong.
THE DUKEDOME OF MAGDEBURG. MAGDEBURG is ac∣knowledged by all Hi∣storians to be a City of as great Antiquity as most in Germany.. Some are of opinion, that 'twas first built by Drusus and his Son Ger∣manicus in the days of Augustus Cesar; but Pyrckamer thinks 'tis yet older, and the same with Ptolomy's Vesovium. They that fetch its original no higher then the Roman Captain Drusus's time, tell us, it had its name from an Image of Venus (called in their language die Magde, i. e. the Maid) which, say they, the old Records of Magdeburg report to have been worshipp'd in the neighbouring banks of the Elb. Hence we meet with the names of Parthenope, Parthenopolis, and sometimes Parthenopyrga (the Greek word , signifying the same with the High Dutch Burg) in Latin Historians in∣stead of Magdeburgum. This Image, as the re∣port goes, was destroyed, and its Temple utterly demolished by the Emperor Charles the Great's Officers; who converted the great Treasure they had seized to better uses, in building St. Stephens Church in the Town. An ancient Chronicle of the City of Brunswic gives this description of the foremention'd Image, That it represented a naked woman with bright shining eyes and long yellow hair; seated in a guilt Chariot, drawn by two white Swans and as many white Turtles. Upon her head was placed a Garland of Myrtle, and on her breast a burning Torch flaming every way. In her right hand she held a Globe of the world; and in her left three Golden Apples. She was attended by three Graces, who cover'd each others eyes with a Veil. What credit may be given to these stories I know not; nor will it probably be worth the while to enquire. How∣ever certain it is, that whatever Antiquity the Town of Magdeburg may pretend to, it was ne∣ver wall'd round before the year 940, nor could ever challenge the name of a City till some time after. For Edgitha (wife to the Emperor Otho I. and Daughter to our English-Saxon King Edmund) having the Land about Magdeburg setled on her for a Jointure, prevailed with her Husband to give her leave to build a City in this place and to wall it in. This Grant the Emperor seconded with large Contributions out of his own Trea∣sury; and translated the Bishopric of Vallersleben to this new City. So that Magdeburg had (if not its name) at least its glory from an English Princess. Soon after the said Emperor Otho prevailed with the Pope of Rome to make Magdeburg an Archbishopric; and to order that several of the neighbouring Bishops (particularly the Bishops of Mersburg, Zeitz, Havelberg, and Brandenburg) should be subject to the Archbishop of this Dio∣cess as to their lawful Metropolitan, who should acknowledg no man's supremacy (in Spirituals) but the Pope's. From thenceforward the Arch∣bishop of Magdeburg had the Title of Primate of Germany conferr'd on him; tho (as Krantius shews) the three Spiritual Electors and the Arch∣bishop of Saltzburg always refused to pay him that respect. In this State the Church of Magde∣burg continued till the year 1566, when the whole Chapter (having abandoned the innova∣tions and fopperies of the Church of Rome, and embraced the tenents of M. Luther) elected Joachim Frideric, at that time the only Son of John George Elector of Brandenburg, to be the Administrator of their Archbishopric; having before his admission bound him by oath to the observation of certain Articles, approved on by himself and his Father. After whose death he was advanced to the Electorate of Brandenburg; and his Son Christian-William chosen Administrator in his place. Who faithfully discharged his trust till the year 1631, in which the Town (after a long siege) was taken by the cruel Count Tilly; who destroyed the lives and fortunes of no less then thirty thousand Citizens with Fire and Sword, and carried the Administrator prisoner to New∣statt in Austria, where he chang'd his Religion and turn'd Papist. Into his place the Chapter elected Augustus, second Son to John George the First Elector of Saxony; who had had the
Title of Coadjutor from the year 1625. In the Westphalian Treaty it was order'd, that upon the death of the said Augustus, the Archbishopric of Magdeburg should again return to the House of Brandenburg; and be for ever annex'd to that Elector's Dominions under the name of a Duke∣dom. In pursuance of this agreement the pre∣sent Elector of Brandenburg has (upon the death of the said Administrator, which hapned this last year, 1680) taken possession of Magdeburg and the adjoining Territories; which ('tis thought) will advance his yearly Revenues the sum of 600000 Rixdollars. The siege of Magdeburg in the year 1631 (which we have already mention'd) is so famous for the valour of the Defendants,Siege. and notorious for the unparallel'd cruelty of the Besiegers, that it well merits a more particular account then we have yet given of it. The tenth of May (old stile) was the bloody day whereon this horrid and tragical Massacre was committed. The Burgers had long withstood the threats and force of the Imperial General Count Tilly, en∣deavouring to secure their Religion from the outrages of a Popish Army. But after a long and vain resistance, the bloody Count forced his way into the Town; and commanded his men to spare neither man, woman, nor child, but put all to the Sword; to fire all their Churches and private Houses; and to extirpate, if possible, their very name. In obedience to his command wo∣men in travail were ript up, and the sucking chil∣dren snatcht from their mothers breasts and hew'n in pieces before their eyes. The young Virgins were first ravish'd in the open street, and then murder'd; two whereof are said to have prevented their shame by hast'ning their death, the one throwing her self (before Tilly's face) into a Well, and the other into the Fire. Six∣teen Churches and Chappels (whereof many cover'd with Lead, and one with Copper) were burnt down; and not an House in the Town left standing, save a few Fishermen's Cottages, which the Imperialists would not vouchsafe to fire. Of near forty thousand Citizens scarce four hundred were left alive; and those desti∣tute of Houses and other conveniences requi∣site for the preservation of the miserable lives they had spared them. This bloody exploit Count Tilly was used to brag of afterwards in his jollity; calling it merrily The Marriage-feast of Magdeburg. Since this desolation the Town has not to this day been able to recover its former gran∣deur;Present condition. but is every-where checquer'd with new buildings and the ruins of the old. They have rebuilt one stately Church; but most of the rest ly still buried in their ashes. Tilly, in the heat of his rage, was perswaded to spare the Cathe∣dral; which is indeed a stately structure, and enough to recommend the whole Town to a stranger's eye. In one of the Chappels in this Church is shew'n the Tomb of the Emperor Otho the Great with his Wife Edgitha (before∣mentioned) holding in her hand nineteen small Globes within a Golden circle; which denote so many Tun of Gold given by the Emperor, at her request, towards the building of this Ca∣thedral. There are in this Church forty-nine Altars; whereof the High Altar in the Quire is of one piece of stone, curiously wrought, and of various colours. It is nine Hamburg Ells (each of which makes one foot and ten inches) in length, four in bredth, and one in thickness; and valued at above two Tun of Gold. Magdeburg had once the supreme Jurisdiction in Civil Cases as well as Ecclesiastical over all the other Cities in Saxony;Judica∣ture. and the Archbishop of this Diocess was (like our Bishops of Durham) a Count Palatine, who had the sole power of determining all Causes brought before him. But that grand Authority was lost by degrees; and now the Citizens of Magdeburg have no other Courts of Judicature then such as are kept by the Burgomasters and Raedtsherrn of other Ci∣ties as well as this. That part of this Dukedom which lies on the Western banks of the Elb, is exceedingly fruitful in Corn, but wants Wood, and other fuel; and on the contrary, that part of it which lies be∣yond the River has plenty of Wood, but wants Corn. There are contain'd in the whole Circle twenty-eight Towns, which anciently paid ho∣mage to the Archbishops of Magdeburg; and are now subject to the Elector of Brandenburg as their Duke. ANHALT. BEtwixt the Sala and the Elb lies the greatest part of this Princi∣pality; the whole being environ'd by the County of Mansfeldt, the Upper Saxony, the Bishopric of Halle, the Dukedom of Magde∣burg and the Bishopric of Halberstadt. The Princes of Anhalt pretend to as ancient an extraction as any Family in the German Em∣pire,Princes. or in Europe, ever did. Limneus, and some other Dutch Genealogists have a list of their Ancestors (whom they make a continual suc∣cession of Princes) from Ascenas Noah's Grand∣child; and 'tis easie to run up their pedigree from thence to Adam. I suppose the Title of Principes Ascanii gave the first occasion to this conjecture; which has been always exploded and laugh'd at by men of sense. 'Twill do these generous Princes credit enongh to give the most certain account of their Family that Antiquity will furnish us with; which if we mix with fabu∣lous Legends of Ascenas and Gomer, the whole story will grow questionable, and our intended flattery be turned into a downright defamation. A Genealogical Table of great Antiquity in the Prince's Palace at Pleskau affirms, that the Princes of this Family were Kings, Dukes, and Generals of the Saxons long before the coming of Christ; but however sets down for Head of the Family Berenthobald, who in the quality of King led the Saxons to the wars against Hermanford King of Thuringen in the year 524, and was rewarded with the Towns of Ascandt, Ballenstede, and the Lands adjoining. Again, we are assured from the testimony of most credible Historians, that above a thousand years ago Berenthobald II. and III. (both Princes of the House of Anhalt) were Generals of the Saxons against Clovis II. and Da∣gobert Kings of France; and that Clovis III. King of France, married Batildis a Princess of this House. From the Loins of these Princes, by an uninterrupted succession, was descended Albert Ʋrsus, who (by the favour of the Emperor Con∣rad III.) was made Marquise and Elector of Brandenburg. And not long after Henry, surnam'd the Lion, Duke of Saxony and Brunswic having disobliged the Emperor Frideric Barbarossa was degraded, and his Dignities conferr'd on Bernard the said Albert's Son, in the year 1169. So that Otho and Bernard, Marquis Albert's Sons, divided the Ascanian Family into two branches; whence
map of the Neumark MARCHIA NOVA Vulgo NEW MARK in March Brandenburg
map of the principality of Anhalt and archepiscopal see of Magdeburg PRINCIPATUS ANHALDINUS ET MAGDEBUR∣GENSIS Archiepiscopatus. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
proceeded two of the greatest Houses (Saxony and Brandenburg) in the German Empire. But Henry Bernard's son (notwithstanding the great promotion of his Father and Uncle) was the first Prince of Anhalt; having that Title conferr'd on him, together with several of Henry the Lion's Territories, by the foremention'd Emperour Fri∣deric. And in his race, both the Lands and Ti∣tle are continued to this day; tho the two Elec∣torates are translated into other Families. Nor is is Henry's Family like to fail in hast; being at this Day the most numerous of any in the Empire. In the last Century Joachim Ernest was the only person left of the Family; but he (dying in the year 1566) left behind him a numerous off∣spring of sixteen children. Whereof the eldest Daughter, Ann Mary, was married to Joachim Frideric Duke of Lignitz; Elizabeth to Joachim George Elector of Brandenburg; Sibil to Frideric Duke of Wirtenburg; Agnes Hedwig, to Augustus Elector of Saxony, and after his death to John Duke of Holstein; Dorothy Mary to John Duke of Saxon-Weimar; and Ann Sophia to Gunther Albert Count of Schurtzeburg. His five Sons divided the Principality into four equal shares at first; because Augustus had told them he would be content with a pension for his life, not intend∣ing to marry. But afterwards marrying Sibil Countess of Solms; his Brethren chose rather to assign him a fifth share in the Land then to allow him a pension sufficient for the mainte∣nance of him and his Family. Whereupon, John George had Dissau; Christian resided at Bern∣burg; Augustus at Pleskau; Rodolph at Zerbst; and Lewis at Cotheim. Now all of these having chil∣dren, and being of equal authority, the Family would necessarily be much weak'ned, if they did not agree to submit themselves unanimously to the Eldest of their Family; who has the supreme Government conferr'd on him, and the sole power of calling together the other Princes, when there is need of their advice in matters of more then ordinary consequence. All these Princes, thus united, have only one vote in the Diets; and therefore one of them is constantly deputed by the rest to be their representative in any such Session. 'Twill not in this place be amiss to inform the the Reader, that Prince Lewis beforemention'd (to the great credit of himself and Family) was the first Founder of the Frucht-Barende Geselschaft, as the Germans call it, or Fructifying Society. The story of which is as follows: This Prince having travell'd over all Europe, and observed the great advantages which the Nobility in France, Italy, and other Nations had, in being furnish'd with store of excellent Books in their own Languages, was resolved to try whether he could perswade any of his own Countrymen to set upon the Translation of the best Latin and Greek Authors into a more easie and intelligible stile then was ordinarily used among them. In pursuance of this design he instituted the Society aforesaid, whereof himself was the first President, and suc∣ceeded so well herein, that in a very short time after there were above twenty Princes, and at least six hundred Lords and Noblemen who en∣ter'd and enroll'd themselves in this College of Wits. And how much the German Nation is beholden to the endeavours of these Virtuosi, there is no intelligent man but what is abundantly sen∣sible. For besides the opportunity which every man has of reading the writings of foreign Au∣thors in his own Language, the Germans are able to spell their own tongue aright; which before the Institution of this Society, so few of them could do, that Duesius tells us, one main design of his publishing a German Grammar, was to teach the Nobility of that Nation to put their words into writing. The most considerable Towns in this small Principality are, 1. Zerbst. Seated on a small River about an English mile distant from the banks of the Elb. Dresserus fancies this a Town of great Antiquity,Zerbst.] and had its name from the Servetii (or Cervetii, as he reads it) an old Wendish people. But Wer∣denhagen (a better Antiquary) rejects this frivo∣lous assertion, and proves, that Zerbst in the Wendish Dialect signifies a strong Fort. 'Tis, at this day, remarkable for nothing but a sort of strong heady Beer; which the Citizens brew in Summer, and send abroad into all the neigh∣bouring Towns and Provinces. 2. Bernburg.Bernburg. Another Residence of the Princes of Anhalt; separated from the Palace by the River Sala. On the eleventh of March, in the year 1636, this Town was taken by the Elector of Saxony's Forces; who put the whole Garrison that defended it, with all the inhabitants (ex∣cepting only those few that belong'd to the Prince's Court) to the Sword, and plunder'd the City. 3. Dessau. A well fortified Town on the Elb;Dessau. seated in a pleasant and fruitful part of the Country. It had its name given (as most of the German Etymologists imagine) by the Jews; who in their mungrel Dutch-Jewish Dialect, call a fat soil (such as this Town stands on) Desse. The Prince's Palace in Dessau was first built (as appears by an old Inscription over one of the Gates) by Albert and Waldemar two Brothers, Princes of Anhalt, in the year 1341. In one of the Chappels of this Town is to be seen the Tomb of Jeckel Rehebock (whom some German Histo∣rians name Meniken von Belitz) an old Miller; who having for some time attended Waldemar, Marquise of Brandenburg, in the Wars, took upon him to counterfeit his slain Master; and carried on the design so cunningly, that a great many believ'd him to be the very Marquise, and follow'd him with as great respect as they had done his Master before. He dyed in the year 1350. 4. Aschersleben, or Ascania;Ascania. whence the Princes of Anhalt got the name of Principes Ascanii. 'Tis an old Town on the confines of the Bishopric of Halberstadt; and for that reason seized on by Canons of that Church upon the death of Prince Otho's Widow, in the year 1315. Since which time the Princes of Anhalt have often complain'd of the injustice of this action; and hoped for a redress at the Treaty of Munster; but in vain: for the Bishopric of Halberstadt was by that Treaty granted to the Elector of Brandenburg; who is too potent a Prince to be frighted into a resig∣nation of any of the dependances upon that Diocess.
THE DUKEDOME OF BRUNSWIC. THE Dukedom of Bruns∣wic (strictly so call'd) comprehends only the Territories subject to the Dukes of Brunswic and Hannover, or Calen∣berg. The Principality of Grubenhagen, with the Counties of Blanc∣kenburg and Reinstein, are indeed usually comprised under the same name, because subject to the Dukes of Zell and Wolfenbuttel (who are both entituled Dukes of Brunswic as well Luneburg); but are however in themselves distinct Dominions, and shall accor∣dingly be separately described. The Dukedoms of Brunswic and Hannever are exceeding populous and fruitful.Soil. The Wheat and Rye in this Country grows sometimes to that prodigious height, that their ordinary Ears of Corn are higher then the tallest man on Horseback. But yet we must not expect to meet with such pleasant and profitable Cornfields as these in every part of the Country. A great share of the Hercynean Forest ran thro this Land; tho that be now parcell'd out into smaller Woods and Parks. In these the Inhabitants have (be∣sides the provision of Timber and Fuel) great store of Deer, wild Swine, Hares, &c. with Fowl of all sorts. Not to mention their rich Mines of Iron, Salt, and Coal-pits; of which in their due place. The chief Rivers are the Weser (by which all manner of Merchandise are convey'd from Bre∣men up as far as Brunswic),Rivers. Leina, Innerste, Ocker; with some more of less note, which supply the neighbourhood with Fish. It is observable,Forts. that every-where in the Duke∣dom of Brunswic (as well as in the County of Blackenburg) you may meet with the Ruins of old Forts and Castles on the tops of high Hills and ragged Mountains; which, by most Anti∣quaries, are conjectur'd to be the Reliques and Rudera of so many Roman Fortifications, and an evident argument, that the Seat of the war be∣twixt the Romans and the Germans was for some time (at least) in this part of the Empire. I had rather think them the work of some Saxon Commanders, when engaged in the defence of their Country and Paganism against the Assaults of Charles the Great; or, perhaps, built by that mighty Emperor to secure his Conquests. However, thus much we may venture to con∣clude from these venerable Tents of Mars, of the  that the Lower Saxons (those especially that inhabited these parts) were anciently a stout and warlike people; men that were hardly conquer'd, and afterwards with more difficulty kept in sub∣jection. And such their progeny are still rec∣kon'd. They are men of a larger size then most others of the German Nation; and withall in∣ur'd to a coarse fare and cold lodging. Their ordinary diet is dry'd Swine's flesh and Sawsedges; which they digest with as much ease as any of their neighbour Nations do their choicest deli∣cacies. From their great greediness in devour∣ing this sort of diet, they are usually call'd (by the Hollanders and other Germans) Speckmuffen, or Bacon-guts. With these meats they eat a black and harsh tasted bread made of the coarsest Wheat or Rye-meal. This in their barbarous and rustic dialect, they call Pumpernickell; a compound that has no manner of affinity with any primitive in the High Dutch tongue. Some of their learned men give this account of the word, that a French Gentleman travelling this Coun∣try, and being ask'd what he thought of this kind of bread, made answer, that it was bon pour cheval, i. e. good diet for a Horse; which words being not rightly proportion'd to the mouths of the Brunswic Bores that heard him, were by them miserably corrupted into the word before∣mention'd. Their Land affords no Wine; but they think that defect abundantly recompensed by the great quantities of Beer brew'd in most places of note. The Brunswickers are not, 'tis true, so complaisant in their behaviour and carriage as some other Germans which a Travel∣ler may meet with; but their unfeign'd huma∣nity and hospitality will sufficiently atone for their want of Courtship. They know how to
be civil to a stranger without flattery; and in in their entertainment of Travellers their per∣formances are commonly as large as a French man's promise. We have already (in the description of the Dukedom of Luneburg) acquainted the Reader, that the whole Dukedom of the Lower Saxony, which was afterwards subdivided into those of Brunswic and Luneburg, was formerly subject to one Prince; and we have there also given him an account of the first original of this Dominion, with the continuance of it under several Princes during the union of its members. The first di∣vision of these Territories hapned in the year 1264; at which time Duke Otho's two Sons, Al∣bert and John, not liking to be copartners in the Government of the Lower Saxony, divided the Land; assigning to the former the City and Dukedom of Brunswic, and to the later the other of Luneburg. However, upon the death of Wil∣liam Duke of Luneburg, Grandchild to the fore∣mention'd Duke John, without issue male, in the year 1368, the two Dukedoms were again jointly subject to Duke Magnus, surnam'd Torquatus. But in this they could not long continue; for Tor∣quatus's Sons, as ambitious of independant and absolute Government as their predecessors, again separated Courts; Bernbard, the elder Brother, claiming this Dukedom to himself, and assigning Luneburg to Henry his younger Brother. After whose death, his Son William (surnam'd Victo∣riosus for his valorous exploits) fell upon his Uncle Bernhard; whom he reduc'd to those straits at last, that he made him and his two Sons change Dukedoms with him. From that time the Dukedom of Brunswic was enjoy'd by William and his Successors, until the extirpation of that Line in Frideric Ʋlrich, who died without issue A. D. 1634. In the year 1491, this Dukedom was divided (by Henry the elder and his Bro∣ther Eric) into two equal shares; whereof all the Country betwixt the Rivers Deister and Leina, together with the Territories of Gottingen, (and known by the name of the Dukedom of Brunswic-Wolfenbuttel) remained in the possession of Henry. But soon after, Eric's Line (upon the death of his Son Eric II. in Italy A. D. 1584.) was extinct; and these two Dukedoms again united in the House of Wolfenbuttel. In which condition they remain'd till the death of Frideric Ʋlric before∣mention'd. After which the Dukedoms of Wolfen∣buttel and Calenberg descended upon some youn∣ger Brothers of the House of Luneburg. The famous and learned Prince Augustus was advanc'd to Wolfenbuttel; where he is now succeeded by his Son Rodulphus Augustus. Of these two Dukes the Reader may expect a larger character in the following description of the Palace at Wolfen∣buttel. 'Twill not be impertinent in this place to re∣late for the Reader's diversion, the Romantic History of the first original of the ancient Guel∣phian Family; which formerly afforded Dukes, at the same time, of Bavaria and Saxony; and of which the Dukes of Brunswic and Luneburg are now the sole Relicts. The story goes thus: Jermintrudis, Countess of Altorf in Schwaben, having accused a poor woman of Adultery, and caused several severe punishments to be inflict∣ed on her for having had twelve children at a birth, was within a while after delivered of the same number her self, and all of them Sons. Her Husband, Count Isenberd, being absent at the time of her delivery, she commanded the Midwife to kill eleven of them; fearing possibly she her self might undergo the same punishment or scandal, at least, which the poor beggar wo∣man had done upon her instigation. The Mid∣wife going to execute her Ladies barbarous com∣mands, was met by the Count returning home; who enquiring what she carried in her Apron, was answer'd, Woelpen, i. e. Whelps. But sus∣pecting the truth of what she said, upon her re∣fusal to shew them, examining farther into the matter, forc'd her to confess the whole story. Upon which, enjoining the old womans secresie, and concealing the knowledg of the fact from his Countess, he put out all the children to Nurse; taking care their education should be answera∣ble to their quality. At the end of six years the Count invited to a great feast most of his own and his Lady's Relations, to whom, in the midst of their jollity, he presented his eleven Sons (all attired alike) to their Mother; who immedi∣ately, suspecting by their number the whole mat∣ter, confess'd her design, and was pardon'd by her Husband. From the eldest of these Whelps or Guelps (for so the old Count order'd them to be nam'd, in remembrance of the Midwife's answer) was descended that Henry Guelph, Earl of Altorf, whom the Emperor Conrad II. made afterwards Duke of Bavaria. How this Family came afterwards to encrease their Dominions by the accession of the Lower Saxony, is already shew'n in the Catalogue of the Dukes of Lune∣burg, and needs not here be repeated. The Reform'd Religion,Religion. according to the Doctrine of Luther and the Augsburg Confession, was first brought into this Country by Duke Julius; who died in the year 1589. Since which time the greatest part of the Duke of Brunswic's Subjects have been rigid assertors of Lutheranism, and as vehement opposers of Popery and Calvi∣nism. Indeed of late years, the great authority and respect which the Calixti, and other Lati∣tudinarians have got at Helmstadt has won over some multitudes to their perswasion; but the generality are of their Prince's Religion, and zealously pursue the footsteps of their Megalan∣der (as they are pleas'd to call him) Martin Luther. Each particular Dukedom has its distinct su∣premacy in Ecclesiastical as well as Civil affairs;Church∣govern∣ment. which are administred in this Manner: Under each Dukedom there is one Superintendens Gene∣ralissimus, who has supreme inspection over all the Church, and resembles one of our Arch∣bishops. To him are subject the several Super∣intendentes Generales, or Bishops; and to these the Superintendentes Speciales, which are the same thing in effect with our Arch-deacons. In some Provinces, they have no other distinction of Superintendents then into Generales and Specia∣les; to wit, where the whole Province is of so small extent as not to require more then one single Bishop. So that we see how willing the Lutherans are to admit of the Office and Dig∣nity of Archbishops and Bishops in their Church; altho they have got a trick of bawling out a∣gainst their names as Popish and Anti-Chri∣stian.
Cities and Great Towns in the Dukedom of BRUNSWIC. BRUNSWIC.Brunswic. I. In the Cathedral at Brunswic, among many other Monu∣ments, there is an old Parchment wri∣ten in Plat-Dutch containing a short account of the most considerable persons which ly buried in that Church, which begins thus, Alse man Schreff na Goddes gebordt 861, hefft Hertogg Danck∣quarth tho Sassen erstlik dusse Borch bemuhret unde Danckquarderode geheten unde nomen laten, i. e. In the year of Christ 861, Danckquarth, Duke of Saxony, first walled in this Castle, and called it Danckquarderode or Tanquard's-Cross. Which a∣grees with the story we find in most German Chronologers of note, who treat of the Anti∣quities of this place. For they tell us, that Bruno and Tanquard (Sons of Ludolph Duke of Saxony) were the first Founders of this Town, which from the former was called Brunswic; the latter only giving name to the Castle. Since that time this City has been continually aug∣mented by the succeeding Dukes of Saxony and Brunswic; and is now become one of the most considerable Hans-Towns in the Empire. Inso∣much, that the Citizens divide themselves into five distinct Corporations; who are govern'd by several Magistrates of their own, and have so many different Courts of Judicature. These Companies never unite, but upon some extra∣ordinary occasion; wherein the common inte∣rest of the whole Town seems concern'd. Whether Brunswic be a free Imperial City, or subject to the Dukes of Brunswic and Luneburg, has been a question often controverted betwixt both parties concern'd; each of whom have endeavour'd to assert their pretensions by dint of Sword, and have come off with various suc∣cess; witness the Sieges in the years 1492, 1550, 1553, 1605, 1606, 1614, 1616, &c. 'Twas last of all besieged by the present Duke Rudolphus Augustus; who took it in the year 1671. Since which time he has taken care to be very often resident in the Town, and always (at his depar∣ture) to leave behind him a strong Guard. The chief Trade of this City is in Hides and Mum.Trade. The Tanners have Skins out of Eng∣land, Denmark, and other Nations; which they return dress'd. Their Mum is of two sorts; one whereof is of a thin and weak body, the ordinary drink of the Citizens and neighbouring Rustics; the other, which they call Ship-Mum, is a much clammier and grosser liquor, brew'd on pur∣pose to be transported into foreign Nations. This kind of drink (which is scarce potable be∣fore it has been putrified by working at Sea) is made of Barley and Hops, with a small mix∣ture of Wheat. There are a set number of Brewers who have the sole power of ma∣king it; and their appointed time of brew∣ing, is from the beginning of October to the lat∣ter end of March, Here, by the way, I cannot but wonder, that Meibomius, writing a Com∣mentary de Cerevisiis potibusque & ebriaminibus extra vinum aliis, should omit (the two most famous liquors of his own Nation) Mum and Breuhane. II. WOLFENBUTTEL.Wolfen∣buttel. This is the anci∣ent Seat of the Dukes of Brunswic. Famous for its strong and impregnable fortifications. It confists of two parts: 1. Arx Guelpica, or the Duke's Palace; which is properly call'd Wolfen∣buttel. Which name it has from its first Foun∣der Duke Ekbert, who was of the Guelphian Fa∣mily. The termination of the word in this, as ma∣ny other names of Cities and great Towns in Germany, denotes a moist and watery situation; such as this Town has, and which contributes very much to its strength and security. 2. The City, or Henrich-Stadt: so called from Duke Henry the younger, its founder. The only remar∣kable thing in this part of the Town is the new Church: which some Italians, and many other Foreigners (if we believe the Citizens) have look'd upon as a most admirable piece of Architecture. In a vault under the Quire lie buried one and twenty Dukes and Dutchesses of Brunswic; wrapt up in Coffins of Lead with Inscriptions. In the Duke's Palace the most remarkable thing is The Library founded at the sole cost and char∣ges of the late Famous Duke of Brunswic-Wolfen∣buttel, Augustus: who, under the Covert name of Gustavus Selenus (soon after the edition of his learned Treatise, decipher'd into Augustus Lunae∣burgensis) publish'd a most ingenious Commen∣tary upon Trithemius's Cryptography, with some other works upon the like Subject. A Prince who infinitely surpass'd all his Predecessours in Learning and Knowledge; and came not behind the bravest of them in Acts of Chivalry. This monument of his learning, which we are now speaking of, is judged by all travellers the richest Collection of printed Books that Germany affords: and by many (who have not at all, or with pre∣judice, viewed Sir Thomas Bodley's at Oxford, the Emperour's at Vienna, the Vatican at Rome, &c.) thought the best furnish'd Library in Europe. The Duke's Library-keeper, Mr. Hanisius, brags of 124000 Volums: but let the Reader judge how a couple of small Chambers (which are not both so large as a third part of Bodley's Library) should possibly contain so great a multitude of books. Besides there is extant a small Pamphlet (pub∣lished in the year 1660, and supposed to be written by the Learned Conringius) entituled, Bibliothecae Augustae &c. Sciagraphia generalis; wherein the Author gives a short account of the first foundation of this Library, in the year, 1604, together with its daily increase till the said year 1660, by the accessions of the Libra∣ries of Marq. Freherus, the two Curiones, &c. and at last concludes with summa Voluminum 27666, tractatuum 115504, Autorum 56393. Now (tho I am willing to believe that the encrease of books has been very considerable since this account was given, yet) I cannot imagine the Collection with∣in these last twenty years (whereof Duke Au∣gustus liv'd only six) has so monstruously outstript that of the other fifty six, as to swell the number from 27666 to 124000. Amongst the Manu∣scripts (which amount to about 2000) the books of greatest rarity are 1. The French Embassyes in 438 Volums in Folio: transcribed in a very fair hand out of the French King's Library, at the charges of the munificent Founder. 2. A Latin Psalter; in notis Ciceronianis. 3. The four Evan∣gelists in Syriack, given by A. Kircher A. D. 1666. 4. An antient Copy of the Edda Islandorum; with the Skialdi annex'd. Much more complete then that publish'd by the Learned Resenius A. D. 1665. Besides these, and the like works of other men, there are one and forty Volums written by the hand of the Founder: whereof twelve (in Folio) are Musick-Books. In four large Volums he has given a short account of the most considerable Authors in his Library: to which he added a fifth containing an Alphabetical Catalogue of the Authors, and serving as an Index to the other four. These and the other monuments of Duke Augustus already extant in print (such as, his Com∣mentary
map of the duchy of Braunschweig and Meydburg BRAVNSWICK & MEYDBVRG com ceteris ad∣iacentibus Apud Janssonio Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
map of the duchy of Braunschweig DUCATUS BRUNSVICENSIS. Accuratissime discriptio. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios▪ Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
mentary upon Trithemius before-mention'd; His Schach-Spiel, containing a most learn'd account of the antiquity and mystery of Chess-play, &c.) are sufficient testimonies how well he deserv'd the character which a Gentleman gave of him in the following distich, written under his Picture in the Library: Tota tuos Europa Duces Regesque recense: Hic senio cunctos vicit & ingenio. He died A. D. 1666, in the 88th year of his Age. His Son and Successor, Duke Rudolphus Au∣gustus, keeps now his residence at Wulfenbuttel; a mild, learned, and religious Prince, following the steps of his Father rather in his Study then in Acts of Chivalry. He has no male issue; but is like to be succeeded by some of the Sons of his Brother Antony Ʋlric; the eldest whereof was slain at the late siege of Maestricht. III. HELMSTADT. Which City is reckon'd the oldest in Saxony, next Bardewic. It was built by the Emperor Charles the Great, about A. D. 782, and so nam'd from the abundance of Elm∣trees that encompass it. Here St. Ludger (who was sent into these parts by the foremention'd Emperor to convert the Infidel Saxons) preach'd; and the Citizens pretend to show Travellers the very Church (now almost nine hundred years old) wherein his first Sermons were deliver'd. But the great ornament of this Town is the Academia Julia; or University, founded by Ju∣lius Duke of Brunswic-Wolfenbuttel, in the year 1576. Amongst other grand priviledges granted to this University by the Emperor Maximilian II. 'twas order'd, that its Rectors should for ever be honour'd with the Title and Dignity of Counts Palatine. Whereupon, Henry Julius (Duke Ju∣lius's eldest Son, and Bishop of Halberstadt) was by his Father made the first Rector; and be∣fore his succession to the Dukedom of Brunswic upon his Father's death, founded the fair Col∣lege which is still call'd Juleum novum. These two Dukes procured for the use of the Pro∣fessors and Students in this University, a consi∣derable Library of Books; which since has been well augmented, but comes far short of that at Wolfenbuttel. Amongst some hundreds of Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Dutch Manuscripts (of little value) they have two old Volumes containing the Pentateuch in Hebrew; written on Vellam in a fair and legible character. For these two Books, they tell us, several Jewish Rabbies (who pretend to more then ordinary skill in discerning the true Antiquity of such kind of Monuments in their own language) have offer'd some hundred of Rix-dollars. After the death of Duke Frideric Ʋlric (the last Prince of the ancient House of Wolfenbuttel) the Dukes of Lunenburg divided the Rectory of this University amongst them; agreeing, that each of the Dukes Regent should, in his course, supply that Office for one year, and no more. And in state it has ever since continued. There is not any University in the German Empire that has bred up more eminent and learned men, within the compass of one Cen∣tury, then Helmstadt. Witness Joh. Caselius, Jac. Horstius, Val. Forsterius, Reinerus Reineccius, Hen. Meibomius, Joh. Stukius, Jac. Lampadius, Conr. Hor∣nejus, &c. and of late years, the ingenious Ca∣lixti, and incomparable Conringius. IV.. HANNOVER. The Metropolis of the Dukedom of Calenberg; whence the Duke's Pa∣lace was removed hither by George Duke of Brunswic-Calenberg upon the decease of the above∣mention'd Frideric Ʋlric. The Town was an∣ciently call'd Lawenroda, from the neighbour∣ing Castle which was subject to Counts of that name. About Henry the Lion's time it got the name of Hanover, from a Ferry at this place over the River Leina (as some imagine); Han over, in the old Dialect of the Lower Saxons, signifying the same as the more modern High-Dutch haben uber, i.e. to have or carry over. There are yearly kept in this Town four Fairs; during which there is always a vast concourse of Foreigners as well as Germans from all parts of the Empire. These contribute exceedingly to the enriching of the Citizens; but however a more considerable share of their wealth arises from their Breuhane (a sweet and muddy sort of Beer), which is hence exported in great quan∣tities into the neighbouring Towns and Villages. V. HAMELEN.Hamelen. An ancient City on the outmost confines of the Dukedom of Brunswic-Calenberg, seated on the mouth of the River Hamel (whence it has its name) and the banks of the Weser. This place is look'd upon as the Key to the whole Dukedom, and is therefore better fortified and garrison'd then almost any other City in the Duke of Brunsic's Domini∣ons. The Records of this City relate a notable ac∣cident which hapned amongst the Burgers on the 26th day of June in the year 1284. The story is as follows: The Citizens being strangely infested with Rats, and having tried all imagi∣nable expedients (but in vain) to rid themselves of these troublesom guests, at last met with a stranger who undertook, for a certain reward, to do the feat. The Burgers agreed to his proposals; and the strange Gentleman imme∣diately with his Tabret and Pipe draws after him all the Rats in the Town (like so many Maurice-dancers) to the River, and there drown∣ed them. Returning for his reward, it was de∣nied him; as being judg'd to great a recompense for so small a performance. However, less he could not be perswaded to take, but left the Town in a rage, threatning in a short time to be reveng'd. Accordingly, about a year after, he came again, and play'd the second part of the same Tune; but with another Train after him: For now he went attended with a great number of Children, who follow'd him in at the mouth of a great Cave on the top of a neighbouring Hill, call'd by the Burgers Kop∣pel-berg, and were never after heard of. In re∣membrance of this sad accident, the Citizens were wont for many year after (as appears by several old Deeds and other Records in that City) to date all their Indentures and Con∣tracts such a year von unser kinder aussgang, i.e. since the departure of our Children. The street thro which they pass'd is to this day call'd Bungloese Strass, or Tabret-street; and on the top of the Mountain, near the Cave's mouth, is still to be seen a mounment of stone with this inscription: Post duo CC mille, post octoginta quaterque, Annus hic est ille quo languet annus uterque. Orbantur pueros centum etque triginta Johannis, Et Pauli caros Hamelenses non sine damnis. Fatur ut omnes eos vivos calvaria sorpsit. Christe tuere reos, ne tam mala res quibus obsit. Which sorry piece of dogg'rel is there transla∣ted into two Distichs in the Nether-Saxon Dia∣lect; much of the same strain.
The Principality of GRƲBENHAGEN. GRUBENHAGEN,Name. in the Dutch language, signifies properly a Grove or Forest belonging to the ancient Family of the Grubes; tho afterwards that word was appropriated to a Castle built by some of the said Family, which in process of time communicated its name to the whole Prin∣cipality. Thus the Hague in Holland (called by the Low Dutch s'Gravenhaghe, which is ordina∣rily render'd in Latin by Haga Comitis) had its name from the neighbouring Forest; where, it seems, the Earls of that Province were anciently used to hunt. And indeed this whole Principality is nothing else but a large Forest;Hercynian Wood. most of it being a part of the Hartz, or Sylva Hercynia, mention'd by Roman Writers. Julius Cesar, in his Commen∣taries, says, that this Wood is at least nine days journey in bredth; and of an unaccountable length. Several men, he tells us, have travell'd forty days together strait forward in it; but that no man durst ever yet boast that he had seen both ends of it. The German word Hartz (out of which, without all question, the Latins form'd their Hercynia) signifies properly Rosin or Pitch; which is nothing else but the liquor distill'd out of the Pine and Fir-trees, the only Timber where∣with this Forest abounds. Since the Empire began to be cultivated, and the inhabitants un∣derstood the advantage of uniting themselves into Cities and Corporations, the Hercynian Wood has in many places been converted into great Towns and large Corn-fields; but yet, passing over these, 'tis still easie to track it quite cross the Country. In this Principality are most of the Mines of Silver,Mines. Copper, Lead, &c. belonging to the Duke of Brunswic and Lunenburg. The chief of which are at Rammelsberg, Wildeman, and Zellerfeld. Rammelsberg is an high Mountain not far from the City Goslar; on one side shaded with part of the Hercynian Forest, but on the other cover'd with nothing but moss. The German Histori∣ans tell us, that the Mines on this Mounttain were first discover'd in the year 972, by a Hunter; who having tied his Horse to a bush, and gone some distance from him, at his return found a great piece of Ore beat out of the ground with his Horse's hoof. This Hunter, they say, was surnamed Ramme; and thence the Mountain got the name of Rammelsberg. Upon the bruit of this Discovery, the Emperor Otho I. immediately procured a company of Franks that well under∣stood the art of melting and refining all sorts of Minerals; and sent them hither to teach the Saxons their mystery; to which, before that time, they were utter strangers. From these Franks the Town of Frankenburg, not far from the Mines of Rammelsberg, had its name. Not long after the riches of this mountain had been thus discover'd, the Miners were grown so numerous, that this one place could neither find work nor food enough for such vast mul∣titudes as daily resorted thither. Whereupon they began to seek for new treasures in the neigh∣bouring Hills; and met with so good success, that in the year 1045 (as Albinus testifies) ano∣ther great vein of Ore was discover'd in the place where Wildeman now stands; and a third at Zellerfeld in the year 1070. This last Town is now the chief of all the Mine-Cities belong∣ing to the Princes of Brunswic. Here the chief Overseer of the Mines keeps his Court every Saturday, and orders every workman his pay for the week past. The chief Metals which are found in these Mines, are Silver, Lethargy, Lead, and two sorts of Copper; one whereof is melted out of the Ore, like other Metals, the other is made by the Vitriol water upon great plates of Iron, which they steep in troughs made for this purpose. Besides these Metals, they find a great many sorts of Minerals; which abundantly recom∣pense the workman's labour, tho not sufficient to atone for the loss of his life, which is too often taken away by their nauseous and deadly smells. The richest of these are: 1. Gray Vitriol. 2. Atramentstein, or Ink-stone; a Mineral of ma∣ny various colours. Out of these two, bray'd and boil'd together, is made the ordinary green Vitriol. 3. Gedien Vitriol; which grows like Isicles out of the Rocks; and may be used with∣out any further cleansing or purifying. 4. Blew Vitriol; commonly made out of the Copper Ore. 5. White Vitriol; made of Lead Ore. 6. Misy; a Mineral much of the same colour and nature with the ordinary yellow Brimstone. 7. Brim∣stone; made out of a peculiar sort of Ore, found here in great quantities; out of which drop the stores Sulphuris, which usually coagulate like Ice∣sicles. The several ways of discovering of Mines, ordering of Minerals, Ore, &c. are the same here as at Friberg, and other Mine-Towns in the German Empire. So that for an account of these and the like rarities, we refer the Reader to the following Description of Misnia. The Metropolis or chief Town in the Prin∣cipality of Grubenhagen is Eimbeck or Ein-beck; which (says Letzner) has its name from the confluence of a great many small Rivulets in this place into one common stream. For Beck (in the dialect of the Lower Saxons, as well as that of the Northern English) signifies the same with the High Dutch word Bache, a Rivulet or small torrent. The only Trade of the Town was formerly in Breuhane, which was here brewed and export∣ed into many of the neighbouring parts; but of late years the Citizens have addicted them∣selves exceedingly to Husbandry and Tillage, and enrich'd the City mightily with their Com∣trade. Which would doubtless be daily advanc'd, if they had the advantage of a good River to take off their vast stocks of all manner of grain. Clausthal, Altenau, Andreasberg, Osterrode, and the other great Towns of this Principality are wholly inhabited by Miners; who being a sort of people bred in Caves and the bowels of the Earth, do not trouble themselves with the erect∣ing of fair structures above ground. The County of BLANCKENBƲRG and REINSTEIN. THis County, as appears from many ancient Charters, and o∣ther Instruments sign'd by se∣veral of the German Emperors, was formerly call'd Hartingow, or Hartgow; which name the Dutch Writers explain by das Gow an Hartz; and we may English it, the Hercynian County. For as the ancient Romans divided their whole Land
into so many Provinces, which were again sub∣divided into certain Praefecturas, Praesidiatus, Co∣lenias, or Municipia; so old Germany consisted of a set number of Gowen or Pflegen, and these were made up of inferior Voigteyen or Dingstule, that is, Hundreds or Bailiwicks. For altho the words Gowe and Pflege (now fleck) signified Pagus, a Town; yet the old Saxons, and other people of Germany, had not formerly above one of these in a whole County: so that Gow-graff (or Judex Paganus) was in effect the same thing as Comes, an Earl or Count. But when about the year of Christ 1100, the name of Gowen began to be antiquated and laid aside, Hartingow (once the largest County in the Lower Saxony) was forgot, and the County (or Grassschaft, a new word instead of Gowe) took its name from the two chief Forts in it, Blacken∣burg and Reinstein. Together with its name it lost its ancient boun∣daries, and was contracted into a much narrower compass then formerly. For the Counties of Stolberg, Schwartzburg, and Hohenstein, with the Bishopric of Quedlinburg, and County of Werni∣gerode were cut off from this Province. How∣ever, because the County of Wernigerode is still subject to the same Master with Blackenburg, we shall at present comprise both Provinces under one name; and give a description of them to∣gether. Tacitus, speaking of these parts, tells us, the inhabitants live in an intolerable sharp air; and Seneca says, they have a continual Winter. And certainly, if this character may be justly appro∣priated to any Province in Germany, 'tis to this; which is continually exposed to the North-wind, and endures the cold blasts from the top of Bructe∣rus and the neighbouring Mountains, which are usually cover'd with Snow till Midsummer. But this sharp air is not destructive to the healthy and vigorous constitutions of the inhabitants; who more commonly then any other Germans arrive at the age of 100 or 110 years. But however, were there such an intemperies Coeli, as these Authors mention, constantly ho∣vering over the heads of the Blackenburgers; yet that inconvenience would in a great measure be recompens'd by those other ways whereby Na∣ture has enrich'd this Country. For the Val∣leys, tho they afford but little Corn, yet are as plentifully stock'd with Kine and Sheep as the Forests with all manner of Venison. The Moun∣tains indeed are not so rich in Silver as some in the Principality of Grubenhagen and County of Stolberg; but this defect is supplied by the abundance of Iron Ore, which is almost pecu∣liar to this Province. The four chief Rivers in this Country (1. Die kalte Bode. 2. Die warme Bode. 3. Die Rapbode. 4. Die Lubbode) had their names, as Luther in his Onomasticon tell us, from one Bodo, Bode, or Vode, a Prince of these parts. For the ancient Germans had a peculiar fancy of eternizing their names by bestowing them upon the most nota∣ble Rivers in their Country; which they knew would outlast the strongest Forts and Castles they could build. The highest Mountain in these parts,. perhaps in Germany, is der Brocken, Blockberg, or Brocks∣berg; call'd by Latin Authors Melibocus and Bructerus: Bructerus Hercyniae montes supereminet omnes. And indeed it may well be call'd the tallest Moun∣tain not only in the Hercynian Wood, but in all Europe, if what some of the High Dutch Geo∣graphers relate of it be true. For they endea∣vour to perswade us, that the top of it comes near the uppermost Region of the air; in which they had questionless placed it, had not their Phi∣losophers acquainted them, that Ice and Snow (wherewith they observe the tops of this and the adjoining Mountains almost continually co∣ver'd) are products of the middle Region. They tell us further, that from hence, in a clear day, may be discern'd (not only the Cities of Brunswic, Magdeburg, Luneburg, &c. but) the German Ocean and Baltic Sea. Which is a story just as credible as (what some of our Northern Rustics will not stick to affirm) that from the top of some of our high Mountains on the outmost borders of England, a view may be taken of all the Seas round the Isle of Great Britain. Amongst the many wonders of Nature,Buman's hole. where∣with this County abounds, the most remarkable is a great Cave betwixt Blackenburg and Elbinge∣rode; call'd by the neighbourhood (from its first discoverer) Buman's hole. The mouth of this Cave is so narrow, that a man is forc'd to creep in at it; but soon after your entrance, you pass thro a dark and dismal Gallery, as high as the stateliest House. No man could ever yet affirm, that he met with the end of it; tho some Miners have confidently asserted, that they have gone as far as Goslar, which is about twenty English miles from the Cave's mouth. This story is confidently reported among the neighbour∣hood, that about 80 years ago, a venturous young fellow, who look'd after an herd of Kine in the neighbouring Woods, going alone to find out new discoveries in this Cave, lost his way, and (having by chance had his light put out) wander'd for eight days together before he found his way back. At his return his hair was perfectly grey; and the account he gave of his journey strange and terrible. He gave a relation of a great many odd kinds of Spirits and Appartions, wherewith he had encounter'd; some whereof seized on him as a Thief, judg'd and condemn'd him, but at last (having first put an halter about his neck) granted him a Reprieve. Many others, that have had the curiosity to view the inside of this strange Cave, pretend to meet with the like Faries; but withall affirm them to be better company then they were re∣presented by the poor Cow-herd. In this Cave are often found a great many large bones of strange creatures; some whereof are kept as rarities by the neighbouring Gentlemen. And not many years ago the Skeleton of a man, of a prodigious bulk, was brought out amongst other rarities of the like sort. Near the old Monastery of Michaelstein,Monk∣crags. not far from Blackenburg, two huge craggy Rocks are to be seen, confronting each other; which naturally (but as exactly as if cut by the most curious workman) represent two Monks in their proper Habits. The one of these is still (and has been possibly ever since the first plant∣ing of Christianity in these parts) call'd Hans Much, and the other Henning Munch. But, not to continue too long on this subject,Old Forts. the works of Art, in many places of this County, are as admirable as the foremention'd extrava∣gancies of Nature. For you shall scarce observe any high cragged hill in the whole Province, but on the top thereof may still be seen the ruins of an old Fort. 'Tis admirable to behold so many strong Castles hewen out of such high and inaccessible Rocks as most of these are; and no casie matter to guess what should be the design of these bulwarks in so barren and desert a place as the Hercynean Forest. Of all these, the
Duke's Palace at Blaekenburg (where the Duke of Wulfenbuttel usually spends the hunting part of the year) is almost the only habitable Fort in the Country; the rest, for the most part, be∣ing nothing else but so many venerable monu∣ments of Antiquity. Such are the old Castles of Reinstein (so call'd from its being hew'n out of one entire Rock or stone), Heimburg, Hartin∣gow, Gerssdorf, Lawenburg, Homburg, with many more. The most noteble of the utterly demolish'd Forts is Hartzburg;Hartz∣burg. the ruins of an old Castle of that name, not far from the Mountain Bructe∣rus. Some Historians assert, that this Fort was built about three hundred years before Christ, by the Chauci; a branch of the Saxon Nation, who in those days inhabited these Countries. Adding further, that these same Chauci erected in this place a Temple to the Honour of Sa∣turn; from whom the Castle was in those days nam'd Saturburg. This Satur (or Crodo, for that name also is given him by the German Antiqua∣ries) was represented by the Image of an old man standing barefoot on the prickled back of a Ruff; to denote (says Pomarius) the security of his Adorers in the most difficult undertakings. In his right hand he held a Bucker of water, strow'd over with all sorts of flowers and fruits; thereby promising to send rain on the Earth for the production of such flowers and fruits. In his left hand he carried a wheel; the emblem of that unity and concord which all his wor∣shippers were thereby advis'd to embrace. Mech∣tilde (Daughter to the Emperor Henry, surnam'd the Fowler) writ the whole History of this Idol in a rich Silken Coat of Needlework; which (in the late Civil wars of Germany) was taken by the Swedish General Bannier out of the Cathedral Church at Goslar, and carried into Sweden. Upon the conversion of Wittekind and his Saxons to the Christian Faith, this Idol and its Temple were both destroy'd together, by the express command of the Emperor Charles the Great; who chang'd the name of the place into Hartz∣burg, because situated in the Hercynian Wood. In the days of Duke Julius, a Salt-Well was discover'd at the bottom of this Hill, which occasion'd the building of a small Town for workmen (call'd to this day Julius-Halle); which is since by the great Trade of its inha∣bitants in Salt, Copper Kettles, Pots, Wire, &c. considerably enriched and augmented. Tho the Imperial City Goslar be wholly inde∣pendant upon the Dukes of Brunswic, and there∣fore cannot properly be reckon'd amongst the Cities and great Towns subject to those Princes; yet because 'tis situate in this Country, and wholly environ'd with the Territories of the said Dukes, 'twill not be amiss in this place to give the Rea∣der some short account of it. This City is said to have been founded by the Emperor Henry I. and to have had its name from the River Gose, upon which 'tis seated. Here the Emperor built himself a Palace; in which he was wont to keep his usual residence. This Palace, say the High Dutch Antiquaries, was properly nam'd Goslar; which name afterwards communicated to the Town built round about it. For the termination lar, laer, lager signifies no more, say they, then a dwelling House; and consequently Goslar must denote such a single apartment on the banks of the River Gose. The Citizens of Goslar enjoy as many and large priviledges almost as any other immediate Subjects of the Emperor. In all Im∣perial Writs and Letters directed to them, they are stiled Nobile Membrum Imperii; and they are exempt from paying Toll in any Market in the Empire, except three. All the Houses in this City are cover'd with a glittering kind of Slat; which is a great ornament to the Town, but e∣nough (on a clear day) to dazle the eyes of a Traveller at a great distance. The inhabitants are all Miners; and the only Trade of the Town is in digging, cleansing, tempering, and vending all manner of mettals, except Gold, and a great many sorts of choice Minerals of the Country; such as, Vitriol, Brimtone, Quicksilver, Coppe∣ras, &c. decorative device
map of the bishopric of Hildesheim EPISCOPATVS HILDESIENSIS DESCRIPTIO NOVISSIMA Authore Ioanne Gigante D. Med. et Math. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanū Swart. blazon or coat of arms AVITA FIDE
THE BISHOPRIC OF HILDESHEIM. WHENCE the City of Hildesheim (which gives name to this Bishopric) came to be so called, is not unanimously agreed on by their own Etymologists. Some of them read the word Bildesheim, and fetch its original from the Virgin Mary's Picture (in their language bilde) with some other reliques; which they tell us the Emperor Ludowic the Godly, at the first foundation of this Diocess, had hung upon a tree near this place, and returning could not pull them off again. Others would have us believe, that the ancient name of this Town was Hildeschnee, i.e. the Lord's Snow; and that it was so call'd from a great Snow which fell the night that the fore∣mention'd Emperor lodged in this place; cover∣ing all the Earth for some miles round, a foot deep, excepting only the place where the Cathe∣dral now stands, which remain'd dry and un∣touch'd. But these and the like stories are only to be look'd on as scraps of old Legends; and the ridiculous and idle fancies of illiterate Monks. 'Tis much more likely (what some Historians of note have recorded) that the said Empe∣ror nam'd this City after his Mother Hildegard. For Hilda or Hille (in the dialect of the Lower Saxons) is no more then an abbreviation of Hildegard; as well as Sander of Alexander, Fritze of Frideric, Metta of Mechtildis, Ilse of Eliza∣beth, &c. And instead of Hildesheim (in the language of the neighbouring Gentry) the Ru∣stics say Hillsem. When Gunther, a poor Priest of Eltze, was first advanc'd to the Bishopric of Hildesheim (which hapned in the year 822) this Diocese was but of a small extent. But in after ages the Counties of Wintzenburg, Schladen, Poppenburg, Peine, Woldenberg, Hundsrucken, and Lewenstein were annex'd to it. The last is now in the pos∣session of the Dukes of Brunswic; as the whole Bishopric may probably be in a short time. For altho the Citixens at present (as well as the Dean and Chapter of their Church) pay Homage to Maximilian-Henry,Govern∣ment. Elector of Collen, as their Bishop; yet the last Duke of Hannover quarter'd his great Army, during the late broils betwixt the King of France and the Empire, in this Diocess; without the leave (and doubt∣less against the will) of the said Elector. And 'tis easie for the present Duke to enter upon this whole Diocess when he shall see occasion; nor needs he be at a loss for such a pretence in so doing. We know into what straits Eric, Duke of Brunswic, brought John IV. (and forty-sixth Bishop of Hildesheim) in the year 1523, when he left him only the bare City of Hildesheim, with the three inconsiderable Forts of Peyne, Steurwald, and Marienborg; and that, for seve∣ral years after, these Territories (which are sur∣rounded with the Dominions of the Dukes of Brunswic and Luneburg) were subject to Duke Eric's Successor. So that all that hinders the potent Duke Ernestus from re-entring upon these rich possessions of some of his Ancestors, is, ei∣ther his exemplary fidelity in a strict observance of the Treaty of Brunswic in the year 1653, where∣in 'twas agreed, that this Diocess should be re∣stored to the Elector of Collen, as Administra∣tor of Hildesheim; or else we must ascribe the reasons of his delay to his generous temper, in scorning to take advantage of the present cala∣mitous estate of the said Elector. The Town of Hildesheim (tho usually divi∣ded into the Old and New City) looks all of it very ancient and venerable;Hilde∣sheim. but otherwise has nothing in it that's great or splendid. In the Cathedral may be seen the reliques of the fa∣mous Saxon Idol Irmensewl; of which we have already given the Reader a large account. The great Corn-trade of this Country was the first thing that rais'd the Burgers of Hildesheim to that pitch as to obtain so honourable a place in the Catalogue of Hans-Towns; and 'tis the same sort of traffic which still maintains their grandeur. The greatest part of the Burgers of this and the neighbouring Towns (and indeed almost all
the inhabitants of this Diocess) are Lutherans. The Reformation was first begun upon a quar∣rel betwixt the Citizens and Canons of the Church in the year 1552, whereupon the former call'd in John Bugenhagen. Ant. Corvin, and Henry Winkel, three Lutheran Preachers; who in a short time drew after them the most considerable part of the Town. At the Treaty of Brunswic above∣mention'd, it was agreed, that the Augsburg Con∣fession should not be openly taught or profess'd in this Bishopric beyond such a set number of years; but that Article was repealed and made invalid by a clause in the general Treaty of Westphalia 648. The best Catalogue of the Bishops of Hilde∣sheim which can be pick'd out of the many dif∣ferent (some imperfect, and most false) accounts given of them by the German Historians is as follows:Elshops. 1. Gunther; Founder of the Cathedral, and St. Cecil's Church. He died A. D. 835. 2. Frembert; who liv'd but a few months after his instalment 3. Ebc, a Frenchman; who having been suspended from the Archbishopric of Rhemes, fied to Ansgar Archbishop of Hamburg; by whom he was made Bishop of Hildesheim. He govern'd the Church twelve years. 4. Alfred, Founder of the Mo∣nasteries of Asvelde and Seligensted. He was Bishop eighteen years. 5. Marquard; slain by the Nor∣mans and Danes A. D. 880. who in his days overran Saxony, Westphalia, and the greatest part of the Netherlands. 6. Wigbert; a better Physitian then Divine; who left no monument behind him but a small Book of Medicinal Receipts. He died in the year 884. 7. Walbert; of whom little more is recorded then that he was Bishop, and died A. D. 903. 8. Sehard; who was two and twenty years Bishop. 9. Deuthard; he gave the Com∣munion-Table of Gold, still kept in the Cathe∣dral; and died in the year 936. 10. Ochwin, Abbot of Perge; who is said to have presented to this Church (as an holy relique) the body of Epiphanius. He govern'd 28 years. 11. Os∣dach. 12. Gerhard; who annex'd the two Vil∣lages of Algermissen and Silbrechthusen to the Dio∣cess. 13. Bernhard, Count of Sommerschenburg; Founder of St. Michael's Monastery. 14. Gothard; Founder of St. Bartholomew's Church and Mona∣stery. 15. Dithmar. 16. Aziline, or Anselm. 17. He∣ziline; whom some Historians call Echilo, others Hezel or Wezel. 18. Ʋdo. 19. Bruning. 20. Ber∣thold. 21. Bernhard, Count of Rotenburg; Foun∣der of St. Gotthard's Monastery, in remembrance of his predecessor of that name. He annex'd the County of Wintzenburg to this Bishopric. 22. Bruno. 23. Herman. 24. Adelgad. 25. Berno. 26. Conrad I. 27. Heribert. 28. Sigefride. 29. Con∣rad II. Founder of six Monasteries and Nunne∣ries; whereof three were built in Hildesheim, and the rest at Franckberg near Goslar, Wulfinghausen, and Wintzhausen. 30. Henry. 31. John, who annex'd to his Bishopric the County and City of Peine. 32. Otto, Duke of Brunswic and Lune. burg; who threw the Counts of Woldenberg out or their Estates, annexing them to his own Dio∣cess. 33. Sigefride, Count of Quernford; Foun∣der of the City of Gruncw, and a great Bene∣factor to Sarstede and Levenburg. 34. Henry Duke of Waldenberge; who enlarg'd the Dio∣cess with the addition of the County of Dasel. 35. Otto II. by whom was added Bockelem, Lat∣ter, Barenberg, and the County of Pfaffenburg (now Poppenburg) to the Bishopric. 36. Henry the third, Duke of Brunswic, who gave to the Diocess the County of Schladen with the Castles of Widenlage and Woldenstein. 37. John Schade∣band. 38. Gerhard, Baron of Berge near Minden; of whom Buntingus reports, that he cover'd the Tower of the Cathedral at Hildesheim with bea∣ten Gold instead of Lead. 39. John the third, Earl of Hoya. 40. Magnus, Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg; who gave the Towns of Grune and Hamelen with the County of Homburg. 41. Bern∣hard, Duke of Luneburg. 42. Ernest, Count of Schauenburg. 43. Henning. 44. Barthold. 45. Eric, Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg. 46. John, Brother to his predecessor Eric. This Bishop lost more to the Dukes of Brunswic then all his predecessors had bestowed on the Bishopric. 47. Balthasar Merklin, a Doctor of Laws, and Deputy-Chan∣cellor to the Emperor Charles V. 48. Otto III. Count of Schowenburg. 49. Valentine von There∣leben, a Doctor of the Canon Law; who sued the Dukes of Brunswic in the Emperor's Court, and recover'd back a great part of his lost Bishop∣ric. 50. Frideric, Duke of Holstein. 51. Bur∣chard (some say Nicolas) Von Oberg 52. Ernest, Duke of Bavaria. 53. Ferdinand, Duke of Ba∣varia, Archbishop and Elector of Collen. 54. Maxi∣milian-Henry, the present Elector of Collen, and Bishop of Hildesheim; born Duke of Bavaria the eighth day of October in the year 1621. Other Towns and places of note in the Dio∣cess of Hildesheim, are: 1. Peina,. a small City on the River Fuse, about twelve English miles from Brunswic. The Town it self stands in a plain; but the Castle (mention'd by Latin Au∣thors under the name of Castrum Poynum, and represented as the chief Bulwark of this Bishop∣ric) is mounted on an hill. Not far from Pei∣na was fought a famous battel in the year 1553, betwixt Maurice Elector of Saxony and Albrecht Marquise of Brandenburg; wherein the latter was Conqueror, and the former slain. 2. Marien∣borg; a Fort not not far distant from Hildesheim; and situate on the banks of the Innerste. 'Twas first built by Bishop Henry III. when he was brought to the utmost extremities by the too powerful Dukes of Brunswic. 3. Poppenburg. 4. Dassel. 5. Bokenem. 6. Woldenburg; with some others; all of them chief Towns in so many Counties of the same name: but of little other conse∣quence.
map of the bishopric of Halberstadt EPISCOPATVS HALBERSTA∣DENSIS Descriptio nova. Ex Officina Jsonis-Waesbergione, Mosis Pitt  Stephan Swart.
THE PRINCIPALITY OF HALBERSTAD. IRENICƲS is opi∣nion, that the City of Halberstad (which gives name to this Principa∣pality) is the same place with the , men∣tion'd by Ptolomy; this conjecture, tho never confirm'd by the least shadow of reason, is embraced by Appian, an Author not much given to mistakes. But whence it got the new name of Halberstadt, is not agreed on. Bertius (a learned Geographer, but one that in this par∣ticular relied too much upon the Authority of Bruschius and Schopper) derives the word from a confluence of the two Rivers Elb and Ora; neither of which come near this City. Dresser reads the word Albertistatt; and Werdenhagen (with the most probability on his side) guesses from the imperfect foundations of as much building as is now standing (still to be seen on the East side of the Town) and was never fi∣nished, that its name was rightly at first given it, Halbe-statt, or half a City. This Principality is for the most part as fruit∣ful in Corn as any of its neighbour-Provinces; and excels the most of them for pleasant Forests, and plenty of all sorts of Venison. The largest Park in it is the Hackel; lying in the midst of the Country, and giving name to the ancient Barony of Hackelborn in that neighbourhood. On the North-West there is nothing but fenny Bogs and Marshes for some miles; over which they have damms thrown up, and upon them high-ways leading to Helmstadt, Brunswic, &c. The Bishopric Halberstadt (which was only turn'd into a Principality by the Westphalian Trea∣ty in the year 1648.) was first founded by the Emperour Charles the Great at Salingstatt (call'd afterwards Ostrowick in the year 780. But soon after, with permission of the same Emperour, was removed to this place by its first Bishop Hil∣degrine; who was succeeded in his Diocese by the following Prelates: 2. Dietgrine. 3. Haymo, who died in the year 827, leaving behind him large Commentaries on the Prophets and Apo∣stles, some whereof are still extant. 4. Hilde∣grine the second. 5. Evelp. 6. Sigismund, Monk of Hirsaug. 7. Bernhard, Burggrave of Magde∣burg, and Founder of the Monastery at Hadmer∣sheim. 8. Hildeward, Count of Warlow. 9. Ar∣nold. 10. Brantho. 11. Burcard, Count of Wo∣burg. Bernard Bucho. 13. Dietmar. 14. Har∣rand; whom some Authors call Stephen. 15. Rein∣hard; who fought against the Emperor Henry the Fifth in the Woods of Welpho, and routed his whole Army. 16. Otto; deposed by Honorius for Simony. 17. Rudolf; Founder of St. Mary's Church in Halberstadt. 18. Ʋlric; who engaged himself in a war against Henry, surnam'd the Lion, Duke of Brunswic, to the almost utter de∣struction of himself and his successors. For the City was taken by the said Dukes Army, and burnt down to the ground; the Citizens also and Clergy-men taking Sanctuary in the Cathe∣dral, perish'd in the same flames with their Church. 19. Theodoric; who rebuilt the Cathedral, which his predecessor had so unfortunately destroy'd 20. Barthold. 21. Conrad. 22. Frideric, Burg∣grave of Kirchberg. 23. Ludolf, Count of Schla∣dem. 24. Meinhard. 25. Ludolf the second Count of Schladem. 26. Wolrad, Count Kranich∣feld. 27. Herman, Count of Blanckenburg. 28. Al∣bert, Count of Anhalt. 29. Albert, Duke of Bruns∣wic; a great Warriour, who fought above twenty pitcht battels (as the Chronicles of Brunswic in∣form us); and came off most commonly a Con∣queror. 30. Ludowic, Landgraf of Thuringen and Marquise of Misnia. 31. Albert, a great Philo∣sopher, but unfortunate Soldier; overcome in battel by Gerhard Bishop of Hildesheim, an elo∣quent Prelate. In remembrance of which over∣throw the Burgers of Halberstadt have to this day a proverbial saying among them, Klanck uberwand den Ranck, that is, Rhetoric prov'd too hard for Logic. 32. Ernest, Count of Honstein. 33. Rudolf, Count of Anhalt. 34. Henry, Baron of Werberge. 35. Albert, Count of Werningen∣rode. 36. John von Hoym. 37. Burcard, Baron of Werberg. 38. Gerhard von Hoym. 39. Ernest, Duke of Saxony. 40. Albert, Marquise of Bran∣denburg.
41. John Albert, Marquise of Branden∣burg. 42. Frideric, Elector of Brandenburg. 43. Si∣gismund, Brother to his predecessor Frideric. 44. Henry Julius, Son of Julius Duke of Bruns∣wic; elected Bishop when he was a child of two years old, upon condition that the Dean and Chapter should have the whole government in their hands for twelve years, paying only (du∣ring the said term) a certain yearly stipend of the Revenues of the Church to their Infant-Prelate. In the year 1591, this Bishop abolish'd Popish Ceremonies, and establish'd the Reform'd Religion in the Cathedral at Halberstadt. 45. Henry Charles, Son of the foremention'd Henry Julius; he died at six years of age, and was succeeded by his Brother 46. Rudolf, who also died the year following; and so the Diocess came to his Bro∣ther 47. Christian, a great Champion in the Civil wars of Germany; but not very fortunate. 48. Leopold William, Archduke of Austria; the last Bishop of this place. In his time the Re∣form'd Religion was laid aside, and Popery once more establish'd in Halberstadt. But not long after the Swedish Army, having taken the Town, restored the Augsburg Confession; and kept possession of the City and Diocess until the ra∣tification of the Treaty of Munster; by which (as we have said) it was given to the Elector of Brandenburg, under the Title of a Principality. In which estate it continues unto this day. The Town of Halberstadt is tolerably well built;Halber∣stadt. the streets are strait and uniform; and many of the buildings fair and stately. The most remarkable thing in the Town is the Com∣miss; a vast Inn, built by Henry Julius Duke of Brunswic and Luneburg, and Bishop of Halber∣stadt. This is thought to contain more and better accommodation for strangers then any other House of its kind in Europe. Albert Count of Wallenstein and Duke of Friedland (General of the Emperor's Forces in the Civil wars of Germany) kept his Court for some months in this Inn; and found lodgings in it for all his Attendants and Guards. Other Towns of note in this Principality are:Grunin∣gen. 1. Gruningen. Where was anciently kept the residence of the Bishops of Halberstadt. In the year 1593, the old Castle was demolish'd, and a new one built at the charges of Henry Julius before mention'd. The only remarkable things in this place at present are the great Organ in the new Chappel, and Wine-Fat in the outer Court. The later of these was made (as the inscription shews) by one Michael Werner of Landau upon the Rhine; possibly in imitation of that much larger one at Heydelberg, of which the Reader may expect a description in its place. This at Gruningen will hold 161 Wag∣gon loads of Wine; reckoning six Hogsheads to each load. 2.Oschersle∣ben. Oschersleben; a small Town on the bor∣ders of the Dukedom of Magdeburg. Not far from which lies Hornhausen; now a despicable Village, but once the larger Town on the two. 3. Osterwic; a strong little Town on the banks of the River Ilse. It ancient name was Saling∣stede; in which place (as we have said) the Emperor Charles the Great first founded the Bishopric, which was afterwards (by its first Bishop Hildegrine) removed to Halberstadt. Up∣on this removal, says Werdenhagen, the Town got the new name of Osterwic; which signifies as much as am osten wieken oder weichen, i.e. to move towards the East. To these I think we might add, the City of Quedlingburg; a considerable and well situate Town on the River Bode; but because it is sub∣ject at present to the Elector of Saxony, we shall reserve a more particular description of it till we come to treat of some of that Prince's Do∣minions. decorative deivce
THURINGIA LANTGRAVIATUS. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart. Serenissimo Fortissimoque Principi ac Domino D BERNARDO Duci Saxoniae Iuliae Clivorum Montium{que} Lantgravio THURINGIAE, March Misniae, Comiti Marcae et Ravensbergae Domino Ravestini etc. Hanc accuratissimam totius Thuringiae tabulam lubens consecrat dedicatque Henricus Hondius
THE LANDGRAVIAT OF THURINGEN. DƲRINGEN or Thu∣ringen (in Latin Au∣thors Duringia and Thu∣ringia) had its name from the old Deu∣ringi, Toringi, Turingi or Thuringi; who were a branch of the Vanda∣lii, mention'd by Taci∣tus, and the ancient inhabitants of these parts. Cluverius (in his incomparable Description of old Germany) gives us a large account of the manners, religion, &c. of these people; together with a learned account of their first passing over the Elb out of the Mark, and fixing themselves in this place. Micraelius guesses (from the names of several Towns in Thuringen; such as Gotha, Gotleben, Altengothen, &c.) that the Thuringi were a Gothic people, and no branch of the Vandals as Cluverius would make them. But his argument will only prove, that some part of the Gothic Nation has formerly in∣termix'd it self with the inhabitants of this Coun∣try; and not that the Goths were once sole ma∣sters of the whole Province, any more then the meeting with a few English names of Towns in Pembrokeshire, and other parts of Wales, will de∣monstrate the Welch men to be of an Anglo-Saxonic extraction. This Province is bounded on the East with the River Sala; on the North with the Hercynean Wood; on the West with the River Werra; on the South its utmost bounds are those vast Woods which separate it from Franconia; and are usually known by the name of the Thuringian Forest. The Country abounds almost every-where with Corn; and in some places you may meet large Vineyards, plentifully stock'd with Grapes; out of which is press'd a much more palatable sort of Wine then can be had in any part of Saxo∣ny or the Marquisate of Brandenburg. Amongst the many kinds of plants and herbs wherewith the Fields and Forests as well as Gardens of Thu∣ringen abound, the chief and most peculiar to this Province are wild Saffron and Woad; the later of which is used by our Dyers in their best blews and sky-colours, and with which the old Bri∣tains, as Cesar informs us, were us'd to paint themselves. Near Sangerhausen and Salfeld has sometimes been dug up considerable quan∣tities of Copper and Silver Ore; and at Franc∣kenhausen, Saltzungen, and Sultza, they have still rich Salt-pits. The chief Rivers of the Country are the Sala,Rivers. Werra, Ʋnstrut, Hiera, Ilm, Leina, Schwertze, Wip∣per, Helbe, Rahna, Helme, Lossa, and Giessel. Be∣sides these there are several great Lakes at the bottom of some of their Mountains; the most considerable of which are the Weissensee and Schwansee. The Bores of Thuringen are a rough and un∣hew'n sort of people; downright Clowns;Inhabi∣tants. and so far strangers to Courtship and breeding, that they are with much difficulty brought acquainted with the common principles of humanity. They hardly admit of any manner of government or order among them; and are (possibly) the only Germans that are uncivil to Travellers. The Thuringers upon their first appearance in these parts,Govern∣ment. subjected themselves to a King of their own chusing; and continued in this estate till their whole land was overrun and conquer'd by the Francks in the year 1522. In the days of the Emperor Charles the Great and his Fa∣ther King Pepin (who first rooted out Paganism and planted Christianity in this Province) the greatest part of it was subject to the Archbishop of Mentz; who govern'd it by several Deputies and Lieutenants. By this means the Kingdom of Thuringen came to be divided into a great many Counties and Baronies, or Lordships, such were the Counties of Schwartzburg, Kirchberg, Ke∣fernburg, Schoneberg, Gleichen, Sangerhausen, &c. the Lordships of Franckenstein, Saltza, Heldrungen, Dreffert, Apolda, Vargila, &c. After the death of the Emperor Otho, Ludowic Count of Schoneberg got the Title of Count of Thuringen conferr'd on him by the Emperor Conrad II. and his Grand∣child prevail'd with Lotharius II. to change the Title of Count into Landtgrave. In this Line the honour continued till the death of Herman, Landtgrave of Thuringen and Hessen, in the year 1226. Whereupon Henry Duke of Brabant got
possession of Hessen; and Thuringen fell to Henry Marquise of Misnia, and has ever since been sub∣ject to the House of Saxony. Erfurt (the Metropolis of Thuringen,Erfurt. and one of the largest Cities in Germany) is thought, by Bertius, and other learned Geographers, to have had its name from Erfa, an old ruinous Castle near thirty English miles distant from the Town. I had rather believe its ancient name to have been Ierafurt; which signifies no more then a Ferry over the River Iera, on the banks of which this City now stands. There are three Baronies and seventy-two fair Villages subject to the Citi∣zens of Erfurt; so that the Country Rustics have some reason for that proverbial saying in ordi∣nary use amongst them; Erfurt is not a City, but a Country. When this great City (which is a∣bout as large as Coln, and as beautiful) was first built, is not easily determin'd. 'Tis cer∣tain, that in the days of Boniface Archbishop of Mentz it was reckon'd an ancient City. For there is still extant an Epistle written by that Prelate to Pope Zachary; wherein we meet with these words, Ʋnam esse sedem Episcopatus decrevi∣mus in Castello quod dicitur Wurtzburg, & alte∣ram in oppido quod nominatur Buriburg (perhaps Nuriburg), tertiam in loco qui dicitur Erphesfurt, qui fuit olim Paganorum. The Town is situate in a pleasant and fruitful plain, abundantly stock'd with all manner of grain, and affording great plenty of good Wine. Vast multitudes of the Citizens are maintain'd by gathering and dres∣sing the Herb Woad before mention'd; which grows in great abundance in most fields near Erfurt. This and the other Commodities of the Town (Corn, Wine, &c.) are carried off at two great Fairs in the year; whereof one is held the week after Trinity Sunday, and the other at Martinmass. Weimar (a neat and well built City,Weimar. in the middle way betwixt Erfurt and Iena) is thought to have been anciently call'd Weinmarckt, from the great quantities of Wine sold daily at this Town. It is questionless a place of great an∣tiquity; since, as the old Chronicle of Thurin∣gen witnesses, the Emperor Otho II. held a gene∣ral Diet of all the Estates of the Empire in this City in the year 975. The only remarkable thing in the Town is the Landgrave's Palace; a regular and stately piece of building. The City of Iena (seated on the banks of the Sala,Iena. and famous for an Univesity and great concourse of learned men) may justly be rec∣kon'd the third in Thuringen, Some German Ety∣mologists would have this Town as well as the former fetch its name from the Grapes or Vine∣yards about it. They tell us Jain signifies Wine in the Hebrew tongue; and therefore too 'tis pro∣bable, say they, that the Jews were first founders of this City. But this conjecture has as little of probability in it as that fancy of some others, who endeavour to derive the name of this Town from the old Roman God Janus; since it does not ap∣pear, that there grew any Vines near this place fome Centuries ago; or that ever the Jews were Masters of it. The Town is at present a well compact piece; and tolerably well fortified with Walls and Turrets. The foundation of the Uni∣versity was first begun by John Frideric Elector of Saxony; who procured for it many brave and large priviledges from the Emperor Charles the Fifth. But this good Prince never liv'd to finish the work he had begun; but, upon his deathbed, committed that charge to his Sons; who got the foremention'd priviledges confirm'd by the Emperor Ferdinand in the year 1558. Since that time there has never wanted a considerable number of eminent Professors and learned men in all Faculties in this University; among whom the great J. Lipsius was one; a man sufficient of himself (not to mention any of his learned Collegues) to eternize the credit of the place. They have here a Library given them by some of the Dukes of Saxony, and daily aug∣mented; but not so considerable as to merit a particular Description. Gotha (the fifth great Town in Thuringen,Gotha seated on the Leina) is thought to have been built by some of the old Gothic Troops on their march through this Country towards Italy; and by them to have had the name of Gotha given it. However, 'tis certain, it was only a mean Village (such as might just serve for the Tents of a company of hardy Soldiers) before William Archbishop of Mentz wall'd it in the year 964. The whole trade of the Citizens is in sowing, gathering, and dressing Woad. They have three sorts of this herb; the first of which they sow about Christmas; the next (call'd Summer Woad) is sown in the Spring, Summer, or Harvest, and of this they have usually three crops; the third is not sow'n at all, but grows wild. Besides the good quality of this Herb, it is reckon'd a very Soveraign Balsamic; and cures wounds, if taken in time, almost with a touch. It something resembles Plantain; but shoots out a longer leaf. The roots of it ex∣ceedingly fatten and improve barren ground; and for that reason it has been of late years brought over into England, with Clover-grass, Cinque-foil, and other herbs of the like nature; and in many parts of this Kingdom (particu∣larly in Northamptonshire) is now sow'n with good success. Towns of less note are, 1. Eysennach or Ise∣nach, on the borders of Hessen; the Seat of a great branch of the House of Saxony. 2. Mul∣hausen, an Imperial City; but of no great con∣sequence. 3. Hahn. 4. Arnstadt, &c.
COMITATVS MANSFELDIAE DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Tilemanno Stella Sig. Apud Janssonio-Wassbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
THE COUNTY OF MANSFELD. SOME of the German Historians tell us, that Heger Count of Mans∣feld was one of the Commoners at our Bri∣tish King Arthur's round Table; and hence they endeavor to prove the Antiquity of this County. For King Ar∣thur is suppos'd to have reign'd about the year of Christ 540; and Mansfeld in Notinghamshire (which these men say was built by the fore∣mention'd Heger) is thought of age enough to justifie this story. But others trace its Antiqui∣ties much higher, and derive the name of Mans∣feld from Mannus Tuisco's Son, and Father of the Germans. And this fancy is back'd with the name of Ascania, a neighbouring Town in the Princi∣pality of Anhalt; which, say they, must needs have been so call'd from Ascenas the Father of Tuisco and the German Nation. This is one of the four Hercynian Counties; the other three being those of Stolberg, Hohen∣stein and Regenstein. It is bounded on the East with the River Sala, which separates it from the Bishopric of Mersburg and other parts of the E∣lector of Saxony's Dominions; on the North with some part of the Principality of Anhalt; on the West with the Counties of Schwartzburg, Stolberg, and some other lesser Principalities; on the South with Thuringen. In this County there are great store of Mines, which afford several sorts of Metals and Mine∣rals to the no small profit of the Inhabitants. Amongst the rest, the Scheiffersteyn (a kind of Mineral peculiar to this and the neighbouring Provinces) is here found in great abundance. 'Tis a blackish glistering sort of Slat; which be∣ing bray'd and melted down, yeilds a vast quan∣tity of Copper, and a considerable deal of Sil∣ver. John Hubensak (a German Commentator on some part of Munster's Cosmography) gives the following account of this Mineral: The Counts of Mansfeld, says he, have in their Domini∣ons several Mines of Scheifferstein; the like where∣of the whole world can scarce pretend to. For out of this stone the inhabitants melt a Cop∣per; each hundred weight whereof contains betwixt ten and twelve ounces of pure silver. Nor are the Mines like to fail in hast; since in what part soever of the whole County you dig for this Mineral, you are sure to speed. I my self have been an eye-witness of a strangely extravagant curiosity of Nature in the com∣posure of this stone. There is in the neigh∣bourhood (not far from Eisleben) a Lake of several miles in length and breadth, abound∣ing with several sorts of Fish, and other living Creatures, as Frogs, Water-Rats, &c. all which are lively represented in many of these Scheiffer∣stones by fair Copper-strokes thro the very body of the Slat. So far Hubensak. Now, what cre∣dit may be given to the later part of his story, I shall not determine; but leave it to the Rea∣der's discretion to believe or reject it. Many of Hubensak's Countrymen are forward enough to second him in the assertion; and Petrus Albinus (in his Chronicle of the Mines of Misnia) not questioning the truth of the story, endeavours to lay down the true and natural reasons of these appearances. And possibly Nature has wrought no greater miracles in these then in other stones daily found in many parts of our own Island. We may here, in one County, meet with lively pourtraictures of Plants, Insects, Fishes, Birds, Beasts (nay and several parts of man's body) delineated by Nature her self in the bodies of hard and flinty stones. For a testimony of this truth, I shall only refet the Reader to the fifth Chapter of our ingenious Dr. Plot's Natural History of Oxfordshire; where he may find a faithful register of almost innumerable Instances in this kind; together with a learned conjecture at the reasons of such variety of shapes. They that attempt the running up the pedi∣gree of the Counts of Mansfeld as high as Heger or Mannus are too Romantic to be credited,Counts. or taken notice of in this place. The more sober Genealogists are content to fetch the original of this Family from Burchard, the fifth Count of Quernfort; on whom the Emperor Frideric Bar∣barossa
bestow'd this County, in requital of the many signal services done by him, both in the wars against the foremention'd Duke Henry, and in the Holy Land. His grandchild Burchard, by a Son of the same name, was the first that assum'd the Title of Count of Mansfeld; about the year 1250. Since which time that Honour has been continued down to several Princes of the same Line; who have nevertheless always paid some small acknowledgment of Homage to the Electors of Saxony. Amongst these Counts, the most eminent have been: 1. Walerad, Privy-Counsellor to the Emperor Sigismund; a faith∣ful Servant to the Empire, and a notable Im∣prover of his own Estate. 2. John George; for some time Deputy-Governor of Saxony, under Duke Augustus. 3. Peter Ernest, Governor of Luxemburg under the Emperors Charles the Fifth and Philip the Second; by both of whom he was employ'd in their wars with France, and against the Rebels in the Netherlands. 4. Albert, a constant Friend to Martin Luther, and a faith∣ful follower of John Frideric the deposed Elector; in whose quarrel he lost his Estate, and was forc'd to retire to Magdeburg; which City was afterwards by him bravely defended against the Emperor's forces. 5. Ernest (Grandchild to the foremention'd Albert, by his Son John fa∣mous for his couragious and gallant behaviour in managing and carrying on the war against the Emperor Ferdinand the second; in behalf of Frideric Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine, and the States of Bohemia. At this day the Family of the Counts of Mansfeld is branch'd out into four or five distinct Houses; which division has render'd them much more inconsiderable then formerly they have been. The Metropolis of this County,Eisleben. and chief place of residence of the Counts Regent is Eisle∣ben; which has its name (as well as Eysenach, Eissfeld, Eysenberg, and other neighbouring Towns) from the abundance of Iron-Ore, which the Na∣tives call Eysen, found in these parts; and not from the Egyptian Goddess Isis, who (as some Legendary Historians tell us) upon the death of her Husband Osiris, being in a melan∣choly humour, wander'd into this Country, and gave her own name to several of the Towns in which she sojourn'd. The most notable thing which the German Historians have recorded of this City is, that their Megalander Martin Luther was born in this Town in the year 1483, and here ended his days in the year 1564. Over the door of the House wherein he was born the Citizens took care to set up his picture in stone with this inscription: Hostis eram Papae, Sociorum pestis & hujus: Vox mea, cum scriptis, nil nisi Christus erat. John Forster (a Professor of Divinity at Witten∣berg, and Superintendant of the Church at Eisle∣ben) tells us, that there hapned a great fire in this City in the year 1601, wherein the Counts Palace, and 250 Citizens-Houses perish'd; but yet 'twas observed, that the Church wherein this blessed Saint Luther (as he calls him) was Christ∣ned, the house wherein he was born, and ano∣ther in which he dyed, were sav'd from the flames; tho all about them were laid in ashes. But however, this great man's sanctity (tho able, it seems, to protect whole Houses from the rage and violence of the flames) was not sufficient to secure his monument from the fury of the Imperialists; who, in the late Civil wars of Ger∣many, broke down his Image, and defaced the Inscription above mention'd. The old and ruinous City of Mansfeld (which gives name to the County) lies about five Eng∣lish miles from Eisleben. It is defended by a strong Castle on the top of an high hill; which for many years had laid desolate, but was re∣pair'd and fortified in the year 1547. Wippra, Arnstein, Quernfurt, with some others, are remarkable for nothing else but giving names to so many petty Counties; into which the the whole County of Mansfeld (to provide Ti∣tles for its many Earls) is usually divided. decorative device
map of Upper Saxony SAXONIA SVPERIOR Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart. blazon or coat of arms
THE UPPER OF SAXONY. ALTHO 'tis usual with every Historian that treats of the affairs of Germany, to make fre∣quent mention of the Saxons; yet in such different senses is that word used by them, that we shall scarce meet with two of them that mean the same thing by Saxony. Now the the reason of this disagreement is to be ascribed to the uncertain bounds and limits of the Do∣minions of that ancient and warlike people; and the division of their Land into so many petty Tribes and Provinces, who were all ambitious of appropriating the name of Saxons to them∣selves. Albinus says, the ancient Limits of Saxo∣ny were, on the East, the Elb; on the West the Embs; on the South, Bohemia and Franconia; and on the South, Bohemia and Franconia; and on the North, Denmark; but Ptolomey con∣fines that Nation within much narrower bounds. Henry the Lion's Territories reach'd from the Elb to the Rhine; and from the Baltic down as far as the utmost bounds of the Hercynian Wood. This whole Tract was more immediately di∣vided into the Lower and Upper Saxony; of the former whereof we have already given the Rea∣der an account. Under the name of the later are sometimes comprehended (besides the Duke∣dom of Saxony, or Chur-Sachsen, as the Germans call it) the Marquisate of Misnia, Voitlandia, Thuringen, the whole Hercynian Forest, the Prin∣cipality of Anhalt, with some more of the neigh∣bouring Provinces. But in this place we only understand the Upper Saxony, strictly so call'd; or that small Province which gives the Elector the Title of Duke of Saxony. Which is bounded on the East with the Lower Lusatia and some part of the Marquisate of Brandenburg; on the North, with the Principality of Anhalt; on the West, with the County of Mansfeld and Land∣graviate of Thuringen; and on the South, with the Marquisate of Misnia. This small Province came to retain the name of Saxony upon this occasion: When the over∣grown power of Henry the Lion was grown so formidable as to oblige the Emperor to depose him, and to divide his Territories amongst the neighbouring Princes (many of whom, by their good services, had deserved large recompenses at his hands) the Dukedoms of Brunswic and Luneburg were the only Dominions continued to the posterity of the deposed Prince. The lower parts of Westphalia were seized on by the Archbishop of Coln; and another part of it (above the Weser fell into the hands of the Bishop of Paderbourn; and a third was given to Herman Landgrave of Thuringen. The Princes of Anhalt and Counts of Mansfeld were made Masters of another portion of this large Duke∣dom; and several of the Hans-Towns were made Imperial, and subjected to a Government of their own. By this means there was nothing left to be setled upon Bernhard Prince of Anhalt (whom the Emperor Frideric Barbarossa had created Duke Elector in the room of Henry the Lion) but the Territories betwixt the Sala and the Elb; and some of that too (as the City of Wit∣tenberg) was before assign'd him by the Em∣peror Conrad the third. However, 'twas order'd that these narrow Dominions should have the name of Ober-Sax, or the Upper Saxony, given them; and that Wittenberg should from thence forward be the Electoral City. The County is tolerably well provided for with all manner of grain;Soil. but comes far short of its neighbouring Provinces, Misnia and Thurin∣gen. Tho the Hills here afford some Mines of Silver and other kind of Metals; yet the Coun∣try will scarce yeild so much Wood as is suffi∣cient to cleanse, and purifie it. The inhabitants of this Country are still strict observers of the ancient Municipal Laws of their Heathen Ancestors;Laws. which were look'd upon by the Emperor Charles the Great as so agreeable to the dictates of right reason, that he saw no necessity of abrogating these upon his introdu∣cing of Christianity, and the observation of Gos∣pel precepts. The choicest of these old Statutes are collected into two Bodies or Digests; where∣of the one is call'd Der Sachsen-Spiegel, or Spe∣culum
Saxonicum; the other (which is only an abstract of the former) das Sachsische Weichbild. The Sachsen-Spiegel was at first (like Justinian's Institutes) collected by a German Nobleman, Ecke von Repkau, out of a great many old Re∣cords and Laws publish'd in the days of Super∣stition and Idolatry. It contains in it three Books; whereof the first consists of 71 Articles, the se∣cond of 72, and the third of 91. This (with a Glossary annex'd, explaining all the difficult and antiquated Law-terms in it) was first pub∣lish'd by one Burchard Lord of Mangelfeld; but a more accurate Edition was afterwards set out in Print by C. Zobelius, at Leipsick in the year 1569. Das Weichbild, or Wickbild, signifies pro∣perly the Cities Image or Statute; and how ap∣plicable this name is to a draught or model of State-Government (such as is contain'd in this Book) let the Reader judg. There are seve∣ral Editions of this Code; which contains only 137 choice Articles out of the Sachsen-Spiegel, with some notable observations thereupon. Wittenberg,Witten∣berg. as we have said, was once an Ele∣ctoral City; and is still reckon'd the Metropo∣lis of the Upper Saxony. Some Etymologists fetch its name from King Wittekind, whom they make the first Founder of this City; others will have it signifie no more then a white Rock; such as may be ordinarily met with in the Vicenage, and upon which they imagine the Town to be built. And, from this later conceit, the Stu∣dents in this City usually write its name in Latin Leucoris. The University was founded (after a long deliberation of several Electors from the year. 1399) by Duke Frideric, surnamed the White, in the year 1502. There are in it at present three Colleges; whereof the eldest is appointed for disputations in Physicks and other Arts; the new one, for Divines; and the third for Law∣yers. Wittenberg has no great reason to brag of any eminent Scholars, which of late it has pro∣duced. Abraham Calovius has indeed scribled over a great deal of paper; but to little pur∣pose. Another of their Professors (Teutschman∣nus) has taken vast pains to run down the Cal∣vinists, and establish the Doctrines of Luther: but both his answers and arguments are so con∣temptibly weak and silly, that the reading over his Book may probably confirm his Adversary, but is in no danger of confuting him. The Town is only one long street, and has little or nothing in it observable; so that the account which one gave waggishly of it, may possibly be pertient enough, viz. Leucorin intranti tibi quae sunt obvia quaeris? Sus, Miles, Meretrix, aut studiosus erit. Halle (tho a dependant on the Archbishop∣ric or Dukedom of Magdeburg;Halle. and, for that reason, now subject to the Elector of Branden∣burg) may justly be referr'd to this place; as being situated on the banks of the Sala, within the precincts of those Territories which were comprised at first under the general name of the Upper Saxony. It is thought to borrow its name from the Greek word , or , Salt; from the abundance of Salt-pits in this place. But this is only Goropius Becanus's fancy; and therefore I shall not press it too hard upon the Reader. These Pits were first discover'd by the Hermunduri, a branch of the Suevian Nation, some years before the coming of our Saviour; and by them valued at as high a rate as if they had been so many Mines of Gold. Of what va∣lue they are now a days may easily be compu∣ted from the weekly toll paid out of them to the Administrator of Magdeburg; which ordinarily amounts to five or six hundred Crowns. The Town is neatly built; on the side of a pleasant hill, cover'd with Vines. The inhabitants are a gentile sort of people; and by some fancied to be greater masters of the High Dutch tongue then the Citizens of Leipsick. This City is usu∣ally call'd Halla Saxonum, to distinguish it from some others of the same name in Schwaben, Bra∣bant, &c. and not (as Bertius and Mercator would have it) because 'tis the Metropolis of the Lower Saxony. For tho (as Albinus rightly observes) the ancient Geographers have been accustom'd to reckon her among the Cities of the Lower Saxony; yet her situation, together with the lan∣guage and manners of her inhabitants, declare her rather Misnian or High Saxon. To these we may add Quedlinburg,Quedlin∣burg. a small City betwixt Halberstad and Ermesleben. For altho this Town be indeed situated within the Circle of the Lower Saxony; yet of late years the German Geographers have been pleased to reckon it a part of the Upper, as being subject to the Elector. 'Twas formerly guarded by a Castle on the top of an adjoining hill; which is now demolish'd. From this Castle the Town got the name of Quedlinburg; which is a word of the same importance as Scarborough in English. For Quaddelen (in the Dialect of the Lower Saxons) signifies marks or scars got by blows or slashes on the face or other parts of the body. At this day 'tis remarkable for nothing but a Lutheran Nunnery; the Abbess whereof (who is always either a Princess of the blood of Saxony, or a Countess at least) is Lady Paramount of the whole City, and the Territories thereto be∣longing. It was once a Hans-Town; but upon a rebellion of the Citizens against their Abbess in the year 1475, that privilege was lost, and the City enslaved (rather then subjected) to the Elector of Saxony. For a Catalogue of the Electors of Saxony, we refer the Reader to the following Descrip∣tion of Dresden in Misnia; where their usual Residence is now kept.
map of the marquisate of Misnia and Voigtland Marchionatus MISNIAE una cum VOITLAN∣DIA. Authore Olao Ioannis Gotho S. R. M. Sueciae Geographo. Excudebant Janssonio-Waesbergi Moses Pitt et Stephanus Swart. blazon or coat of arms To IAMES FRASER Esqr. this Map is humbly dedicated.
THE MARQUISATE OF MISNIA. MEISSEN or Misnia (which is so called from a City of the same name, formerly a Bishop's. See, and the Metropolis of this Country; but now dwindled into a Town of little note) is bound∣ed on the East with Lusatia or Laussnitz; on the South with Bohe∣mia; on the West with Thuringen; and on the North with the Upper Saxony. The whole Marquisate (which is a vastly large Country) is usually divided into four parts. 1. Misnia, strictly so call'd; or Oster∣land, containing Dresden, Konigstein, Pirna, the old Fort of Sonnenstein, &c. 2. Der Ertzgeber∣gische Creyss, a Mountainous Countrey; wherein are comprehended the Mine-Towns of Friberg, Alteberg on the Moglitz, Augustus-burg, Annenberg, Marienberg, with some others. 3. The Circle of Leipsick; which (besides the depenances on that rich City) comprises the Counties of Roch∣litz, Waldheim, and Geringswald; with some other places of note. 4. Voitlandia; which was for∣merly reckon'd a distinct Principality of it self, but is now accounted by all a part of Misnia. Besides these Provinces, there are in this Mar∣quisate three Bishopricks. 1. Meissen. 2. Naum∣burg. 3. Mersburg. To each of these there are several Lands and Territories annex'd; some part of the Revenues whereof are disposed of towards the maintenance of a certain number of Canons in every Cathedral; but the greatest share is em∣ployed in raising Portions and Estates for the Elector's younger Children. The Plains of Misnia are wonderfully fruitful in all manner of grain; and the Hills as well stored with the richest Metals. In some places (especially on the banks of the Elb, near Dres∣den and Meissen) you may meet with large Vine∣yards; but their Wine is none of the best. At Libenau, Possern, Teuditz, and some other places in the Bishoprick of Mersburg, there have been formerly Salt-pits; but these were so infinitely out∣done by those at Halle before mention'd, that the Salters were forc'd at last to relinquish the trade as an employment which would by no means quit labour and cost. The whole Land is suf∣ficiently furnish'd with Wood; and in most places the Forests afford good store of Venison; tho only the Woods near Tschopau shelter Bears. The chief Rivers in this Province are the Elb,Rivers. Mulda, Pleiss, white and black Elster. The lesser are: Moglitz, Weiseritz, Flohe, Meisse, &c. All which afford plenty of all manner of fresh water fish; especially Carp, which are as numerous and large here as in any part of Europe. 'Tis agreed by most Historians, that the Mis∣nians had their original from the Mysi,Inhabi∣tants. a people of Asia; of whom Cicero (in his Oration pro Flacco) gives this character, that they were a people so contemptibly mean, that to call a man Mysorum ultimus was the most opprobious lan∣guage you could give him. However, the mo∣dern Mysi, or Mysnii, have no part in this cha∣racter, being a people of a singularly courte∣ous and affable behaviour. Nor are they less commendable for their delicate shape and neat∣ness in clothes; whence the Germans have a pro∣verb (Meissner Gleissner), intimating, that a Misnian makes the greatest shew of any German, Albinus commends them highly for chastity; and probably the severity of their Saxon Law (which punishes Adultery with death) may be one grand inducement to the practise of this vertue.
Chief Cities in MISNIA. DRESDEN.Dresden. The usual Seat of the Elector; a neat and well fortified City on the River Elb, which runs thro the midst of it, dividing the old Town from the the new. A Town which (as 'tis probably guess'd) had its name from the three Lakes (von den dreyen Seen) not far from it; which etymology of the word seems the more rational, for that (as its ancient Records testifie) the name of this City was formerly written Dresen. The new City (in which stands the Elector's Palace) is the much more beau∣tiful of the two, and better fortified; a place perhaps as well worth a curious Traveller's view as any Town in Germany. Not to mention the Stone-bridge,Rarities. which unites the two Towns, and for its largeness and length (consisting of seventeen fair Arches) is reckon'd one of the wonders of Germany; nor other no∣table pieces of Architecture in and about the Duke's Palace; that which most delights a stran∣gers eye is the Elector's Kunst-Kamer, or Cham∣ber of rarities, in which are to be seen a vast com∣pany of the wonders of Art and Nature. I had presented me by one of the late Elector's Courtiers a perfect Catalogue of all the rarities in this ad∣mirable Repository: but that being too large to insert in this place, I shall only at present give the Reader a short view of the choicest of them, in the words of the ingenuous and learned Dr. Edw. Brown, in the account he has publish'd of his Travels in Germany A. D. 1668. In the first partition are to be seen all man∣ner of well made Instruments belonging to most Trades, as Joiners, Turners, Barbers, Smiths, Chirurgeons, and other Artificers; instruments to force open doors, chests, &c. In the other Chambers these and the like are observable: A Tube Glass four Ells long. A large blew Turkish Glass. Variety of Coral, and artificial works of it. Fowls made of mother of Pearl. Drink∣ing Cups in the shape of Dragons, Elephants, &c. Castles of Gold and mother of Pearl. Several Fowls and Cups made out of Nautili, and other shells. A fine Oestrich made out of its Egg, with feathers of Gold. A Cup made of the Ball taken out of an Oxe's stomach, richly set, about a foot long. A stone as big as a man's fist, like a Bezoar's stone, taken out of an Horse. A Purse made out of the Linum Incumbustibile. Silver Ore from the Mines of Freyberg, almost pure, in strings and shoots. A natural Cross of Silver Ore. One hundred and twenty one heads carv'd on the outside of a Cherry-stone. A religious man, or Friar, of Japan carv'd in Box. A Crystal Cabinet sold by Oliver Crom∣well; wherein is kept a Ring, with stones in it of the shape of a Castle. His present Majesty of England, King Charles the Second, on Horse∣back; carv'd in Iron. An Head of King Charles the first. A Glass Organ. Topazes unpolish'd, ten inches in diameter. A Cup out of a To∣paze. Emeraulds, an inch in diameter, as they grow in the rock, resembling the vitriolum na∣tivum. Thunder-stones, smelling of fire. Rocks made out of all sorts of Ore; and the names of the places where they were digg'd written upon them. The figures of Fishes in stones out of Mansfeld; the stones are dark colour'd, but the Fishes of a Gold or Copper colour, (see more of these stones in the description we have given the Reader of the County of Mansfeld). All sorts of stones which are to be found in Saxony and Misnia, polish'd. Two large pieces of pure Virgin Gold out of the Mine. A Hart with a Cabinet in his side, containing all medicines taken from a Hart. A white Hart as big as the life, made out of the sha∣vings and filings of Harts-Horn; looking like Plaister. Figures printed in Trees. A Spur in part of a tree. Horns in trees. Besides these,Du. and some other rarities of less note, the foremention'd Author takes particu∣lar notice of the pictures of all the Dukes and Electors of Saxony (both in their Military and Electoral Habits). Amongst whom he might have observ'd the lively portraictures of Hengist and Horsus; drawn questionless according to the descriptions given of them by some of our Ro∣mantic English Historians. I shall not trouble the Reader with an historical account of the life and death of each particular Elector. We have already given a Catalogue of the Dukes of Saxony down as far as Henry the Lion, in the description of those Territories which are now subject to the Dukes of Brunswic and Luneburg. Upon the deposing of that Prince by the Emperor Frideric Barbarossa, Bernhard Prince of Anhalt (Son of Albert Marquise of Brandenburg) was made Ele∣ctor; and was succeeded by, 2. Albert his Son; from whom the Dukes of Lawenburg derive their pedigree. After him came 3. Albert the se∣cond, Son of his predecessor. 4. Rodolph I. Al∣bert the second's Son. 5. Rodolph II. Son of Rodolph the first. 6. Winceslaus, Son of Rodolph the se∣cond. 7. Rodolph III. Son of Winceslaus. 8. Al∣bert III. Son of Rodolph the third; the last Duke and Elector of Saxony of that Family. Upon the failure of this Line (and the neglect of the Princes of Lawenburg to lay claim to the Electo∣rate) Frideric, Landgrave of Thuringen and Mar∣quise of Misnia, was created Duke of Saxony and Elector by the Emperor Sigismund. By which means the Title return'd again to the Family of Wittikind King of the ancient Saxons; from which it had been alienated for the space of two hundred years. From this Frideric is derived the succession of the present Electors, down to this day, in the following order: 2. Frideric II. Son to the First. 3. Ernest, Fride∣ric the second's Son. 4. Frideric III. Ernest's Son. 5. John, Frideric the third's Brother. 6. John-Frideric, the Son of John; a great promoter of the Reform'd Religion. 7. Maurice, Cousin-German to his predecessor John; who drove Charles the fifth out of Germany, and was slain in the Battel of Siffridhuse against Albert Marquise of Brandenburg. 8. Augustus, Maurice's Brother. 9. Christian, Augustus's Son. 10. Christian II. Son of Christian the first. 11. John George, Christian the second's Son; who first sided with the Em∣peror Ferdinand against the Elector Palatine, and afterwards with the King of Sweden against the Emperor. 12. John George II. Son to John George the first. He spent the greatest part of his time in ease and quiet; and dying this last year (1680) in a good old age, left the Electorate to his Son 13. John George III. This Elector is a Prince of low stature, but great Spirit; something fat and corpulent, but withall active and brisk. He was born the 20th day of June A. D. 1647, and in the year 1663 married Ann Sophia Princess of Denmark, and Sister to the present King Christian. By her he has several children, the eldest of whom (John George) is the Electoral Prince. The Revenues of this Elector are thought to be as great (at least) as any other Prince's in Germany,Reve. excepting only the Imperial Family;
altho the circuit of his Dominions and number of his Subjects fall far short of what his neigh∣bour, the Elector of Brandenburg, is master of. They that reckon his yearly Revenue to amount to 400000 pound sterling, speak modestly e∣nough; and he that shall carefully compute all the incomes of his Treasury from the Imposition upon Beer and all other Commidities, from Taxes, Mines, &c. will (I presume) find it rise to a much larger sum. The profit which arises to him out of the silver Mines at Freyberg and some other places in his Territories has been long since computed to amount yearly to 130000 pound; and certainly the daily encrease of la∣bourers will rather augment that sum. The Excise or Impost upon Beer in Leipsick only (a City consisting of no more then two Parishes) is usually farm'd at the rate of 20000 pound per annum. Besides this, and the like Customs, he has Tenths of all the Corn, Fruit, Wine, &c. in his Country. Add to these the great standing Tax laid upon his Subjects towards the main∣tenance of a war against the Turk; granted at first in times of danger and hostility, but gather'd since in days of peace (at least, as to that Ene∣my) under pretence of being in a readiness to receive him, whensoever he shall attack this Country. Answerable to these vast revenues is the pomp and splendour of his Court; his Attendants be∣ing usually more numerous then the Trains of any of his neighbour-Princes. 'Tis reported, that in the Elector Christian the second's Court, at the same time, three Dukes, as many Earls, and five Barons (of foreign Nations, besides a great number of the Nobility of his own Country) were Pensioners to that Prince. Nor have the two late Electors abated much of this state and grandeur. Witness the Funeral of John George the First, in the year 1657, at which were twenty-four Horses of State cover'd with black, and the Electoral Eschutcheon wrought thereon, each of them being led by two Gentlemen; after which follow'd three thousand five hun∣dred persons in mourning. The Court of Saxony has been always more bronded with excessive intemperance in drinking then any other Prince's Palace in Germany. Nor have the Electors themselves been able to shun the imputation; a red nose being, as is reported by some of their own Historians, the insepara∣ble badg of that Family. II.Leipzig. LEIPZIG. This City is supposed to have been built by the Vandals (who were ancient inhabitants of these parts) about the year of Christ 700; and to have had its name from the Slavonian or Wendish word Lipzk, which sig∣nifies a Linden-tree (from the multitude of this sort of Timber, which formerly grew in this place). Whence in Latin Authors we sometimes meet with Phylurea instead of Lipsia; from the Greek word , tilia. 'Tis seated at the con∣course of three small Rivers (the Elster, Pleissa, and Parda) in a pleasant and fruitful plain, a∣bounding with all manner of necessaries and pleasures; as, large and rich meadows, which are mowed twice constantly (sometimes thrice) a year; pleasant Woods, and an infinite number of fine Orchards, plentifully stock'd with all sorts of fruit. Within the walls there is no such thing as Orchard or Garden; but the whole plot of ground is cover'd with stately Fabricks. Pleissen∣burg (or the Castle, seated on the Pleissa, which defends the Town) is a strong Fort, and strictly guarded; and St. Nicolas's Church is thought to be the fairest, on the inside, of any Lutheran Church in Germany. The Citizens have gene∣rally well-built houses; many whereof (especi∣ally near the market-place) are seven, some, nine, stories high. Near this place was the chief seat of the late civil wars of Germany: insomuch that this Town was five several times besieged and taken in the space of two years. At the last 'twas taken by the Imperialists on the 12th of August 1633. but restored upon the ratification of the Treaty of peace betwixt the Emperour and Elector of Saxony, sign'd at Prague A. D. 1635. At this day 'tis famous for (besides the purity of the high Dutch tongue; which is thought to flourish here in a more refin'd strain then in any other part of Misnia, and consequently of Ger∣many) the three things following: 1. The great Traffic and concourse of Merchants from all places of note in Europe; especially dureing the three fairs which are here kept yearly, at Christmas, Easter and Michaelmas. 2. The high Court of Judicature: before which the Ele∣ctor himself is bound to appear upon summons. The manner of proceding in this Court is at large deliver'd by Zobelius in his book entituled Diffe∣rentiae Juris Saxonici & Civilis; and by the Au∣thor of the Chronicon Lipsiense, written not ma∣ny years since in High-Dutch. 3. The Universi∣ty; which was founded here A. D. 1408 upon the quarrel betwixt the Hussites and Papists at Prague, whereby the former were forced to leave the town and to settle themselves at Leipsig; to which City two thousand of them are said to have flock'd in one day. There are in it at this day four Colleges and twenty four public pro∣fessors: amongst whom the chief professor of Divinity is Dr. John Adam Schertzer, a person of wonderful humanity and as great learning. The several books he has publish'd (especially his Col∣legium Anti-socinianum; wherein he has bravely confuted those knotty arguments of the Craco∣vian party, which few of his Countreymen be∣fore him were able to understand) sufficiently demonstrate to the world the quickness of his parts and foundness of his judgement. His Scho∣lar J. Carpzovius (son to the famous lawyer of that name, who was formerly professor in this University) has got himself great credit by his skill in the Eastern languages and his apprehen∣sive quickness in unfolding the mysteries of the antient and modern Jewish Rabbies: the greatest part of which accomplishment he had (as him∣self confesses) from the good Instructions of his Master Schertzer. Besides these old Mr. Thoma∣sius (Schoolmaster near St. Nicholas's) is look'd upon as a man singularly well skill'd in all man∣ner of philological writings. Amongst the old Manuscripts in their Library (which amount to some thousands; but are on∣ly the despicable plunder of a few demolish'd Monaseries) the onely rarity is Tzetzes's Greek Commentary upon Homer's Iliads: a book per∣haps hardly to be met with elswhere, and writ∣ten in a fair and legible character. III. FREYBERG.Freyberg. A famous and pleasant Mine-Town not far from the bank of the River Mulda. The Citizens have so grand a conceit of the delicacy of this Town's situation, that this is an ordinary proverb amongst them, Were I Lord of Leipsic, I would spend my Income at Frey∣berg It derives its name from the rich hills upon which 'tis seated: Fribergam Indigenae claro de nomine dicunt, Libera de fossis quasi ferres munera terris. In St. Peter's Church at Freyberg is the usual bu∣rying place of the Electors, many whereof ly
here entomb'd in fair Monuments; especially Elector Maurice, whose Monument of black Marble is rais'd three piles high, and adorn'd with many rich statues in Alabaster and white Marble. This is reckoned one of the noblest, and perhaps may pass for the very best, of its kind in Germany. When this City was surren∣dred into the hands of the Duke of Friedland's Sol∣diers in the year 1632, the Elector of Saxony paid 80000 Ricx-dollars to save these Sepulchers of his Fathers from being ransack'd and defac'd. And this large sum was the more willingly given because 'tis the fashion to bury the German Princes in their Robes and Ensigns of Honour, Rings, Jewels, &c. which would have been rich plun∣der for the Soldiers, if not compounded for. The Mines are said to have been found out accidentally in the year 1180,Mines. by a fellow car∣rying Salt; who in a Cart-road first discover'd a piece of Ore, which was found to be as rich in Silver as the best in Germany. Since that time the multitudes of Miners who have swarm'd hi∣ther, have made so great progress in their work as to undermine the whole Town; which stands (at least the greatest part of it) upon Vaults and Caverns. Besides these Mines within the walls, there are a great many more within a mile or two of the City; the most remarkable of which is that on the top of the high hill (Auff dem hohem berg); which is above seventy seven of their fathoms in depth. Now each of these fathoms contains twelve of their Ells, three of which make an English fathom; so that this Mine is (in all probability) the deepest in Europe. The Miners have a peculiar habit of their own, which cannot so well be describ'd as repre∣sented, in a figure, to the eye. They dig several sorts of Metals and Mine∣rals out of these Mines;Metals and Mi∣nerals. tho the only thing they labour for, is Silver. One of the Overseers of these Mines gave me thirty-two several kinds of Ore; all of which would yeild some Silver, but in a proportion different from the rest. The most ordinary sorts of Ore contain either Silver and Copper, Silver and Lead, or all three; but the Lead and Copper are not much regarded. They have here great quantity of Sulpher or Brimstone Ore; which is hard and stony, and usually speckled (which the Miners look upon as a sign of the richest Ore) with red spots. Some of this Ore contains Silver, some Copper, and some both; but in a small and inconsiderable proportion. An hundred weight of Ore yeilds commonly three pounds and an half of Sulphur; which runs out of a Furnace (made for that purpose) into water, and is afterwards melted over again and purified. The reliques of the Ore, out of which the Silver is already melted, serves for two uses; first, to melt down Silver; which, when too hard, it makes fluid. But the more consideral use of it, is in the making of Vitriol or Copperas, after this manner: They burn the Brimstone-Ore again, and then, put∣ting it into a large Fat, pour water thereon; which having stood a competent while, is boil'd to a considerable height, and then let out into Coolers. In these there are a great many sticks set up (as in the making of Sugar Candy), to which the purest Vitriol cleaves; as the worse sort does to the sides and bottoms of the Ves∣sels. They have several ways of discovering Mines;Virgula divina. the chief of which is with the virgula divina, the use whereof some of them look upon as a piece of Conjuration, rather then an experiment drawn from the principles of Natural Philosophy. 'Tis a forked piece of Hazel; the two horns of which the discoverer holds in his hands, with the forks upright. In this posture he traverses the ground, muttering a set form of unintelligible words to himself. When the fork'd stick (mov'd by an occult impulse) turns in his hand, and points to the ground, 'tis taken for an infallible argu∣ment of some rich veins of Silver in the place it points at. Upon this sign given, they imme∣diately fall a digging; and seldom miss of the expected success. Sometimes they meet with damps in the deep Mines; which are always dangerous,. and often prove mortal to the labourers. But the greatest inconvenience, and which constantly attends their labour, is the dust; which grates upon and frets their Skins, Lungs, and Stomachs; and too often shortens their days, by bringing them into irrecoverable Consumptions. To secure themselves against these two evils, they some∣times use large Vizards with glass-eyes; under which they have room enough to breath for some considerable while. At Freyberg there is a yearly Coinage of Ricx-dollars,. and other money; which is most com∣monly true sterling, and look'd upon generally as the best Cash in Germany. For whereas the Emperor's Coin is usually a base and mixt mer∣tal; the Elector's is pure and true Silver, cur∣rant in all parts of the Empire. IV. MEISSEN. Once the Metropolis and chief City in this Marquisate;. but at this time so inconsiderable, as that it hardly merits the fourth place in this Catalogue. It has its name from the River Meisse; on the banks of which 'tis seated. Before the Civil Wars of Germany, 'twas famous for a great wooden Bridge cross the Elb near this place; which Dresser is pleas'd to call the bravest sight of its kind in Germany; and Bertius ventures to name it the wonder of Europe. But some of the unruly Soldiers rob'd the Town of this piece of credit; and it has now nothing to brag of, but the Elector's Pa∣lace, which would be fit enough to entertain a Prince if it stood at Dresden, or any such plea∣sant part of Misnia. V. MERSEBURG. Formerly a Bishop's See,. but now usually assign'd as a portion to some of the Elector's younger Brother's; and upon that account enjoy'd by Duke Christian, young∣est Brother to the late Elector of Saxony. Some Antiquaries affirm, that in this place stood for∣merly the famous Saxon Idol Irmensewl (of which the Reader has already had an account) which they take to be the same with Mars among the Romans; and thence conclude the true ety∣mology of the word to be Marsburg, or the City of the God Mars. The Town at present con∣sists of a great number of old fashion'd and rui∣nous houses; amongst which there is hardly any thing worth the taking notice of, save the Ca∣thedral. Near this Church they have a Library, wherein are a great company of venerable Ma∣nuscripts, but very ill kept. Amongst which I took notice of the Books of Sammuel and the Kings in Latin; written in a fair and ancient Anglo-Saxonic character. Torgau (falsly plac'd by Mercator in the Upper Saxony), Ilenburg, Naumburg, with some others, are Towns of some note and traffick; but not by much so considerable as those already described.
map of upper Lusatia LUSATIA SUPERIOR Auth. Bartholomeo Sculteto Gorlitio. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart. blazon or coat of arms Vrbs Oppidum munitum Oppidum Arx Monasterium Pagus cum Templo Pagus Mons notabilis Officina ferri
THE MARQUISATE OF LUSATIA. LƲSATIA (or Lauss∣nitz, as the Germanes call it) is bounded on the South with the Kingdom of Bohemia; on the West with Mis∣nia and Saxony; on the North with the Mar∣quisate of Brandenburg; and on the East with the Lower Silesia. Not many years since this Province was part of the Kingdom of Bohemia; and is usually de∣scrib'd as such by most Geographers. But when (in the year 1620) the Lusatians had joined themselves in an open Rebellion with other con∣federate Traytors of that Kingdom, the Empe∣ror issued out his Commission to John George Elector of Saxony, to quell these Revolters, and reduce them (if possible) to their ancient obe∣dience. This he did effectually; and for his reward, and encouragement to proceed in these good services) had the whole Province pawn'd to him till further satisfaction should be made. At last (by the Treaty of Prague, in the year 1635) the Emperor setled this Marquisate upon the Elector and his Heirs for ever; in which State (excepting only some few places in the Lower Lu∣satia, which are subject to the Elector of Branden∣burg) it continues to this day. This great Marquisate is usually divided into the Upper and Lower Laussnitz; the former whereof is sometimes, by Geographers, named Hexapolis; because it has in it six Cities (Lo∣bau, Budissin, Camentz, Gorlitz, Lauben, and Zittau) all confederate. In the Lower Lusatia, the Cities subject to the Elector of Saxouy are: Lubben on the Spree, Guben, Lucken, and Calow. The rest (as Cotbus, Peytze, Sommerfeld, with some others of less note) pay homage to the Mar∣quise of Brandenburg. We cannot much commend this Country for its fruitfulness; the greatest part of it being a dry sandy and barren soil, and the rest made up of Fens and Bogs. However the inhabitants make a hard shift to grow so much Corn as is sufficient for their own relief; tho they never have so great plenty as to be able to export any of it into foreign Countries. They have no want of Wood. Venison, nor Fish; nay, they have such plenty of these Commodities as is suf∣ficient (had they the convenience of trafficking with other Nations) to enrich the Country, and bring in all the Rarities of other places. The two chief Rivers of the Country are the Spree and Neie;Rivers. both of them exceedingly well stock'd with all manner of fresh fish. The EElster too springs in this Marquisate; but is a rivulet of no consequence 'till it has pass'd thorough some parts of the neighbouring Provinces. It appears,Inhabi∣tants. from the mixture of an abundance of Wendish words with the High-Dutch spoken in these parts, that the ancient inhabitants of Lusatia were a branch of the Slovnian Nation. Hence in the Villages and most barbarous places of the Marquisate (especially in the Lower Lu∣satia) you meet with a strange kind of unintel∣ligible gibbrish; tho the Citizens every where speak good Dutch. Some of these people. Geo∣graphers say, have their original from the Ilingi, Elysii, or Lygii; others from the Semnnes; a third sort from the Scrabi; and a fourth from the Lusici or Lutitii. But from what Nation or Kindred the Polanders named this Marquisate Ditivonia (as Cromer, Newgebawer, and others tell cannot yet learn. The modern Lusatians are thought to be men of as apprehensive and quick natural parts as any of their neighbours; but exceedingly addicted to covetousness and penury. Their Country breeds neither Horses nor Horsemen; but (if we believe Joh. Boter, in the account he has gi∣ven us of the Military power of all the great Princes and Potentates of the world) they are able, upon a very short warning, to raise twenty∣thousand hardy foot Soldiers, who will endure a shock better then twice that number of deli∣cate and well-bred Western Warriours. They are (in all Cases, Civil and Criminal) strict observers of the Saxon Laws; to the harsh tenure of which they pay a better obedience then ever they were known to do formerly to any Statutes of the Kings of Bohemia.
The Chief Cities in LƲSATIA. BAUTZEN,Bautzen. or Budissina. Seated on the River Spree; and first built by a Bohe∣mian Duke of this name, about the year 800. In the year 1634 this City was so warmly besieged by the the Elector of Saxony's forces, that the Emperor's Soldiers (who kept the Town) were forc'd to fire the Suburbs, for fear of sheltering the Enemy. This fire was unhappily driven over, by a strong wind, into the City; and in a few hours laid it in ashes. In this miserable condition (having nothing stand∣ing but the walls and Castle) it was soon after surrender'd by the Imperialists. But not long after, even the small remainders of this large Town were demolish'd by some of the Swedish Generals. Since which time it has not been able to recover its glory; but is still something infe∣rior to II.Gorlitz. GORLITZ. Which City, seated on the Western banks of the River Neisse, is said to have been built and fortified by Boleslaus III. Duke of Poland; who died in the year 1139. Others say, 'twas founded by Duke Sobieslaus about the year 1131. However all agree in this, that after its first foundation 'twas burnt down to the ground, and that thence it got the name of Gorlitz; which in the Slavonian language (as well as Brandstat in the High Dutch, a name given it by most Germans) signifies a burnt City. For Gorlitz is a corruption of Tzschorlitz, the ancient name of this Town; and that of Ischorelik. There are at present several neat Churches in the Town; and a great many stately dwelling houses. The chief trade of the Citizens is in Beer-brewing, and making, colouring, and dressing several sorts of Linnen (and some Woollen) Cloth. ZITTAU,Zittau. or Sittau; which some will have to signifie as much as Susse aw; and to have had its name from the fresh and sweet waters on which 'tis seated. But we need enquire no fur∣ther after the etymology of the word, if what Dresser reports be true, that on a Grave-stone in this City was to be seen in his time the follow∣ing Inscription: Anno Christi 1021, Idibus Julii, obiit pia & illustris Foemina Zittavia, Christianissimo Principi Manfredo nupta, fundatrix & dotatrix hu∣jus oppidi, de ejusdem nomine dicti. There is hardly any thing at present remarkable in the Town, except the old Franciscan Monastery which, since the Reformation, has been converted into an Hospital. IV. LEIBA, Lobau, Liben, Loben, or Lubben, (for all these names I find given it by Mercator and other noted Geographers) is look'd upon as one of the oldest Towns in these parts. And for that reason the other five confederate Cities of Lusatia used always to send their Deputies to consult at this place, in time of any common calamity or danger. It is seated on the bank of a small Rivulet, about an equal distance be∣twixt Bautzen and Gorlitz, girt round with a delicate plain and pleasant meadows. We may judg of the riches of this little Town by the vast plunder which the Swedish Army confess'd they got out of it in the year 1639, which amount∣ed to a sum of seventy thousand Ricxdollars in ready Cash, besides other rich booties. V. LUBEN on the Spree; the chief Town in the Lower Lusatia. In this place the Elector of Saxony has a Palace; in which (sometimes in a progress for pleasure) he keeps his residence for some short while. What alterations were here in the late Civil wars of Germany, may per∣haps be remembred by some of the ancient Bur∣gers of the Town; but is not, I think, recorded by any Historian of note. VI. GUBEN. A well fortified little Town in the Lower Lusatia; seated on the River Neisse, which contributes very much to its strength and security. In the year 1631, immediately after the great battel of Leipsick, the Imperialists fell in upon this City and took it; but towards the later end of October were driven out again by Mar∣quise Hamilton (at that time a Commander in the Swedish Army), who coming suddenly upon them, put the greatest part of them to the Sword, and routed the rest. But the poor Citizens were harder put to it in the year 1642, when the Swedish General Stallhanss lay before it for three weeks together, and the poor besieged Saxons lay block'd up, and destitute of all manner of provisions and amunition, being at last forc'd to surrender themselves upon what terms their merciless enemies would propose to them. Camentz, Lucken, Calow, with many others, may pass for fair Villages; but will hardly de∣serve the name of Cities. decorative device
THE Great Dukedome OF SILESIA. MANY and various are the opinions of Geo∣graphers touching the original of the word Silesia, or Schlesien, to speak in the Ger∣man language. It is the opinion of some, that it is deriv'd from Schless, a small River which falls into the Oder; but others are con∣tent to fetch it from the Elysii, the ancient in∣habitants of this Country; not troubling them∣selves to dive any further into the original of that name. Within the compass of that vast Tract of Land which now is comprehended under the common name of Silesia were contain'd anci∣ently a great number of people of different names and government. Pirckheimer tells us, that the Country about Bresslaw was inhabited by the Lutiburi; the Principality of Sagan by the Batini; the Dukedom of Oppelen by the Sidones, and that of Teschen by the Cogni. To these Simon Grisbe∣cius adds several others in the following distich: Elysiam veteres Ligii, Quadique, Manimi, Marsigni clari quam tenuere Luij.And to these the learned Cluverius will have us to add the Semnones, Osi, Burii, &c. which, I sup∣pose, are no more then so many distinct names taken from the different Villages these men inha∣bited; or, it may be, from the names of the Ri∣vers, as was the peculiar fancy of these German people. Now these names of places, Rivers, &c. were (as Cureus, in his Chronicle of Silesia, assures us) quite lost and forgotten upon the admission of the Polish language into this Country. Lig∣nitz, Libus, and some few places more, retain their primitive names; but all the rest are, as appears from their termination, of a Polish ex∣traction. Pliny calls the Oder (the chief River of this Country) Guttalus; and others think that River which has now the name of the Spree, was by the ancients named Suevus. From whence some Geographers (not improbably) have con∣cluded, that first the Goths, and afterwards the Suevi, or Swabes, were formerly inhabitants of these parts. That Silesia was a part of the Polish Domi∣nions in the days of their first Prince Lechus (or at least a good large share of it,Ancient Govern∣ment. down as far as the banks of the River Oder) seems probable enough from the testimonies of Adam Bremensis and Helmoldus; the former whereof begins the Polish Nation from the Eastern banks of that River, which the later makes the utmost bounds (Eastward) of his Slavi. However 'tis as ma∣nifest, that the ancient Princes of Germany often invaded this Land; and probable enough, that 'twas sometimes tributary to them. Before Charles the Great's days we have but little of History (concerning these parts of the world) which we may rely on. But Cureus proves to us, that this Emperor (amongst many other his noble exploits) subjected Silesia to himself. And Egin∣hard means the same thing, when he tells us, that Charles the Great overran the whole Country betwixt the Rhine and the Vistula; where by the Vistula, 'tis evident, he understands the first ori∣ginal source or head of that River. After Charles the Great's days we have yet clearer testimonies of the Silesians paying homage to the Germans. Adam Bremensis (an Historian of unquestionable authority) speaking of the Emperor Ludowic the Godly, says, Ipse Boemanos, Sarabos, Susos (where, by the way, we are to take notice, that instead of Silesii some of the ancient writers have Slesii, others Sliusii, many Sileucii, and not a few Susi), & caeteros Slavorum populos ita perdomuit ut tributarios efficeret. Whence it appears, that they quickly threw of Charles the Great's yoke; as they did, not long afterwards, his Son's too. For Helmoldus tells us, post mortem Ludovici Regis, Bohemi, Sorabi, SƲSI & Slavi, quos ipse tributis subjecerat, tunc servitutis jugum excusserunt. Ano∣ther Rebellion the Annales Fuldenses mention in the year 874; Slavi qui vocantur Linones & Sliusi eorumque vicini defectionem molientes solitum dare censum renuunt. Quos Hludovicus Rex, missis qui∣busdam fidelibus suis, sine bello compressit, acceptisque
obsidibus nonnullis & muneribus non paucis eos sub pristinum redegit servitium. I have been the more punctual in alledging these Authorities, because I find the Polish writers obstinately deny, that the Silesians had in these days any other Lords then the Princes of Poland. Only Vincentius Kad∣lubko, in the second Book of his Polish Chroni∣cle, seems to allow of the foremention'd German Relations, when he says, that Boleslaus I. annex'd Seleucia, Prussia, Russia, Moravia, and Bohemia to the Territories of his predecessors; which intimates thus much, that formerly Seleucia, or Silesia, was under the dominion of some other Prince. In the year 1042, the Emperor Henry III. gave a grant of Silesia to Bretislaus Duke of Bohemia; who resign'd it up to the Polanders, on condition they should for ever pay out of it a yearly tribute to the Princes of Bohemia. After∣terwards Henry IV. (at a Diet held at Mentz A. D. 1086) gave power to Ʋrati-slaus King of Bohemia to invade Silesia, Lusatia, and the whole Kingdom of Poland, and to subject them to his own Government; as is testified by Cosmas Pra∣gensis, who was himself present at the Diet. This Cromer cannot deny; but only, in the height of his passion, asserts, that neither the Emperor Henry nor King Ʋratislaus had ever any thing to do with a foot of Land in any of these Ter∣ritories. This Assignment of Silesia occasion'd wars betwixt the Bohemians and Polanders; the later whereof we have reason to believe were Conquerors, since we read, that the Silesians remain'd still subject to Boleslaus III. King of Po∣land. This King's Son (Ʋladislaus II.) being ba∣nish'd by his Brothers, whom his Father had left Coheirs with him of the Kingdom, out of Po∣land, fled to the Emperor Conrad III. whose Suc∣cessor, Frideric I. forced King Boleslaus IV. to resign all Silesia to this exil'd Brother and his Heirs for ever. Ʋladislaus left behind him three Sons, Boleslaus, Mieczislaus, and Conrad; who were joint-Dukes of Silesia, but paid some small homage and acknowledgment to the Kings of Poland. The flocking in of the Germans into Silesia with Ʋladislaus and his Sons, and their setling themselves in this Dukedom, bred a great deal of bad blood betwixt this Nation and the Polanders. Insomuch that the Kings of Poland would seldom call any of the Dukes of Silesia to the General Assemblies or the Princes and Nobility of that Kingdom; nor were they ever admitted to succeed to the Crown, tho (before the Kingdom came to be Elective) they had often the justest Title to it. John King of Bohemia, and Son to the Empe∣ror Henry VII. was a zealous promoter of these dissentions; managing them so well to his own advantage, that at last he became Lord of Silesia, by an agreement made with Casimir the Great King of Poland. However, by this Treaty the whole Dukedom was not made over to him; for Bernhard Duke of Sweidnitz still acknowledg'd the Supremacy of the Polish Kings, as Stanislaus Lubienski proves out of several ancient Records of that Nation. Afterwards Casimir the Great recover'd by force of Arms the Town and Ter∣ritories of Wschovia, contrary (says Curaeus) to the Articles of the Treaty sign'd by him and the foremention'd John King of Bohemia; and by vertue of this Conquest, or rather outrage (committed by the said Casimir's Soldiers in the year 1343) the Kings of Poland have kept actual possession of Wschovia to this day. In the reign of Casimir Jagellonides IV. John Duke of Oswiecieme ventur'd, upon an affront given him, to invade Poland, and to lay waste several Towns and Vil∣lages in that Kingdom. The Polanders, to make themselves satisfaction for this injury, march'd into this Duke's Territories, and laid in ashes the whole Country before them; until Duke John was forc'd to compound the business, upon con∣dition that he should, for a certain sum of money, resign to the King of Poland his whole Right and Title to the Town and Fort of Oswieciem. By which means that City was cut off from the King of Bohemia's Dominions in the year 1454. About the same time the Dukes of Ratibor and Sessine made over the Dukedom of Sever to the Bishop of Cracow; whose Successors are Lords of it to this day. Some other small Tracts of Land in the Dukedom of Silesia do still belong to cer∣tain Abbies and other Religious Houses in the Kingdom of Poland; but all the most noted Provinces (except the Dukedom of Crossen, of which in its place) are reckon'd Dependances on the Crown of Bohemia; upon which score the Emperor of Germany stiles himself Duke of Si∣lesia. This Great Dukedom is commonly divided into the Upper and Lower Silesia;Divi. in the for∣mer whereof are contain'd the Cities and Ter∣ritories of Jagerndorf, Troppau, Teschen, Ratibor, and Oppelen; and in the later the Towns and Dukedoms of Grotkau and Neisse, Brieg, Bress∣lau, Oelss, Munsterberg, Schweidnitz, Javer, Lignitz, Glogau, Sagan, and Crossen. Another division of it is into the Polish and German Silesia; whereof the first contains all the Tract of Land beyond the Northern banks of the Oder; and the later that on the Southern. All along the Coasts of Bohemia there are vastly high Mountains which separate that King∣dom from the Dukedom of Bohemia;Soil. the most remarkable of which are the Montes Sudetes or Risen-bergen, whereof the Reader may expect a larger account in the description of Bohemia. Within the limits of Silesia the four chief Moun∣tains are: 1. Zottenberg or Zobtenberg, call'd by Latin Authors Mons Zotensis, Zabothus, and some∣times Silensis or Silentius. 'Tis usually, by the neighbourhood (being about two German miles distant from Schweidnitz) call'd the Silesian We∣thercock; for by the top of this Mountain they pretend to guess what weather they are to expect the next morning. On the top are still to be seen the ruins of an old Castle, storm'd and de∣molish'd by the Citizens of Breslaw in the year 1471, because it had been for several years the Harbour and Refuge of a great company of Robbers, who here kept their Rendezvous, and daily infested the Vicenage. Out of this hill the Silesians dig a delicate dark-green Marble. 2. Grats∣berg or Grodisberg, in the Dukedom of Lignitz; on the top whereof Duke Frideric the first built a fair Castle, which is since turn'd into a Watch-Tower. 3. Spitsberg; another Beacon-hill not far from the former. 4. Georgenberg, in the Duke∣dom of Schweidnitz; famous for the Strigische Erde, or Terra Sigillata, which is a sort of hard Earth with several white, yellow, and red strokes or veins in it. 'Twas first discover'd by an ex∣cellent Chymist (John Montanus, Physitian at Strigaw), and by him made use of as an anti∣dote against all manner of poison, and a soveraign medicine for a great many diseases, which he cured with a great deal of facility. The secret he kept for some years to himself; but at last (for the benefit of his Country and all mankind) pub∣lish'd a Tract in Latin, containing its description and vertues. The Oder is the chief of all the Rivers in Sile∣sia.Rivers. It springs near the Town Oder, not far from Teschen on the borders of Moravia; and passes by Ratibor, Cossel, Oppelen, Brieg, Brieslaw,
Glogaw, Beuthen, and Crossen (with some more Cities of less note) before it leaves this Duke∣dom. Other remarkable Rivers are the Bober, Neisse, Ohla, and Queiss. Besides these, 'tis the honour of Silesia, that the Vistula (the best River in Poland) and the Elb spring out of its mountains. There are also in this Country good store of Ponds and Lakes; which yeild plenty of all man∣ner of fresh water fish; especially Lampreys, which are caught in prodigious quantities in the Neiss∣lish Sea, and some other waters. Other Commodities of the Land are Mad∣der,mo∣ies. Flax, sweet Cane or Galengal, Wine (espe∣cially in the Dukedoms of Sagan and Crossen), Silver, Copper, Lead, Iron, and Chalk. They have plenty of Salt-peter, and some good Salt; tho not so much as to be sufficient for their own use; so that daily great quantities of this Commodity are brought in from Poland and other neighbouring Countries. They have all the sorts of wild and tame Beasts that any other part of the German Empire affords. Butter, Cheese (particularly, a kind of pitiful stuff made of Ewe's milk), Bacon, Honey, &c. But the greatest tra∣ding Commodities they have, are Wool and Flax. Silesia has bred several good Scholars and brisk Wits;abi∣ts. tho the ordinary Rustics are look'd upon as a people of a shallow understanding and small sence. They are commonly, in way of derision, stil'd by their neighbour Nations Eselsfresser, or Ass-Eaters. The occasion of which nick-name, some say, was this: A blunt Country Rustic travelling from near Breslaw into the Dukedom of Crossen, 'spy'd in a field an Ass feeding; which the poor fellow (having never before seen the like Creature) mistook unhappily for an over∣grown Hare. Whereupon, discharging his Blun∣derbuss, he shot the strange beast, and brought it home to his friends and acquaintance, who (being a pack of Bumpkins, of no longer heads then himself) roasted and eat up the outlandish Puss. This is the relation which the common people of Silesia give of their Title. Another story is, that the Miners at Reichenstein (not far from Glatz) having discover'd a vein of Gold-Ore, which they nam'd der guldener Esel, lay at it continually; being resolv'd, that no strangers or foreigners should share with them in the Treasure. And hence they got the name of Ass-eaters; from stuffing their purses and not their carcases. But this later narrative may possi∣bly have been contriv'd by some of the Silesian Wits; who, by this means, were in hopes to wear off the disgrace and ignominy of the for∣mer. Some of them (like the Bores of Italy and Bohemia) have a custom of reckoning the hours of the day from the Snnsetting; but few of the Nobility observe that method. The Lieutenantship of Silesia was for some time committed to Matthias Corvinus King of Hungary; but afterwards was conferr'd upon the Bishops of Breslaw; until the Emperor Rudolf II. decreed, that this charge should be committed to some of the Temporal Princes of that Nati∣on, who were to be nominated (as well as the subordinate Lieutenants of the several petty Duke∣doms or Counties) by the Council Chamber at Prague; to whom was also committed at the the same time the supreme inspection into all Law-Cases and the different administration of Justice in all Courts of Judicature in each par∣ticular Province. Christianity was first planted in Poland (and at the same time in Silesia,Religion. which was then a part of that great Dukedom) about the later end of the ninth, and beginning of the tenth, Century. In the infancy of Religion in these parts, the Polanders and Silesians were wont to assemble themselves in Woods, and other de∣sert places of the Land; for fear of laying them∣selves too open to the cruelty of their Magistrates, who were men of another perswasion. But at last Christianity was admitted to Court; for Mieceslaus, Duke of Poland, having married Dram∣bronica Daughter of Boleslaus Duke of Bohemia (a Christian) was himself baptized at Gnesna, in the year 965. Whereupon he caused nine Bishopricks to be erected in his Dominions; a∣mongst which one was founded at Schmogra in Silesia; which was afterwards removed to Bit∣schen, and at length fix'd at Breslaw. Soon after the Reformation begun by Luther, the Augsburg Con∣fession was brought hither; and at last confirm'd by the Emperor Rudolph II. in the year 1609. But Ferdinand II. (a bloody persecutor of the Protestants) repeal'd that Charter; allowing the public profession of the Lutheran Religion to the Citizens of Breslaw, and some few Towns more, and that too with several limitations and restricti∣ons. However, that Emperor was sensible (be∣fore his death) how vain 'twas to endeavour the extirpation of Protestants; and the whole Em∣pire, some years after, groaned under the dismal effects of his misguided zeal for the Church of Rome. The Silesians are at this day generally Lutherans; only some few of the Nobility, with their Dependants, adhere still to the Superstitions and Fopperies of the Romanists. We have hitherto given the Reader a gene∣ral account of the vast Dukedom of Silesia; and proceed in the next place to a more parti∣cular survey of the several petty Provinces which make up this large Territory, beginning with I. The Dukedom of CROSSEN. IN the time that the Silesian Princes were,Dukedom. by the subtilty of John King of Bohemia, set at variance and enmity amongst themselves (of which stratagem we have al∣ready taken notice), this Duke∣dom was first separated from the other parts of the Great Duke of Silesia's Dominions. For, in the year 1272, the City of Crossen was pawn'd to the Archbishop of Magdeburg; but redeem'd within two years after by Henry Duke of Breslaw. Four years after this, the Citizens of Breslaw pawn'd it a second time to John Marquise of Brandenburg for four thousand Crowns towards the ransom of their Duke; but with this pro∣viso, that the Marquise should not give assistance to Boleslaus Duke of Lignitz in his wars against their City. Not long after, Crossen was again re∣deem'd out of the Marquise's hands. But John the Great (commonly known by the name of Cicero Germanicus) got possession of it a second time, in lieu of fifty thousand ducats owing him for his wife's portion. Again, John Duke of Sagan de∣liver'd up this Dukedom into the hands of John the third, Elector of Brandenburg, with the con∣sent of Ʋladislaus King of Hungary and Bohemia, in the year 1391. Lastly, Joachim II. and his Brother John, Marquises of Brandenburg, had the sole and entire possession of this Dukedom granted them by the Emperor Ferdinand the first, King of Bohemia. Since which time the Electors have always enjoy'd it; and stiled themselves Dukes of Crossen in Silesia.
Crossen,City. in the language of some of the Na∣tives of this Country, signifies the outmost seam or selvidge of a piece of Cloth; an apt name for a City which (being seated on the frontiers of the Marquisate of Brandenburg) is the furthest Boundary and Bulwark of the Dukedom of Sile∣sia. 'Tis a comly old City; seated in a pleasant plain and in a good air. The Duke's Palace, Town-Hall, and some Citizens Houses, are built with a neat and well polish'd stone. The neigh∣bouring Hills are cover'd with Apples, Pears, and other sorts of Fruit. Some Wine they have growing; but exactly such trash as Altmarck, and some other parts of the Elector's Domini∣ons are wont to produce. II. The City and Dukedom of GLOGAW. THIS City is usually known by name of Great Glogau;City. to di∣stinguish it from a much more inconsiderable Town of the same name, in the Dukedom of Op∣pelen. Cureus fancies it to be the same place with Ptolomy's Lugidunum; which (as he probably enough conjectures) had its name from the Lugii, the ancient inhabitants of this part of the Country. Its present name is of Wendish extraction, and signifies properly a Thorn-bush; so call'd from its situation amongst Thickets, or in a Copse. Glogaw was made a true City by Conrad, Duke of the place, about the year 1260, at which time the City and Ca∣thedral (the only strength and ornament of the Town) were built, and the City stock'd with Germans; who establish'd here the Laws and Customs of their own Country. The Palsie is an epidemical disease in this Town; which is thought to proceed from the extraordi∣nary intemperance of the Burgers, in drinking a sort of bitter and muddy (but withal won∣derful strong and heady) Beer. They are also commonly tormented with the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys; a distemper partly ascribed (by their Physitians) to the same cause with the former, and partly to their feeding chiefly on Pork, Cheese, &c. To this Dukedom belong the petty Towns of Guhrau,Dukedom. Sprottau, Grunberg, Schwibussen, Beuthen, Pulkwitz, Koben, Newstatt, Warienberg, and Prim∣nikaw. The people of this Province have this peculiar Anti-Salic Law amongst them, that (upon failure of Issue male) a Daughter inherits the Estate of her Father before any of the nearest of his male Relations. III. The City and Dukedom of SAGAN. SAGAN (once one of the best and most populous,City. and still) one of the largest Cities in Sile∣sia. 'Twas, in the Civil Wars of Germany, several times taken by the Swedish forces, and re∣taken by the Imperialists. There is now little remarkable to be seen upon that large spot of ground, whereon this City is placed, except only the Castle, St. Mary's Church, and two Mona∣steries; and these are rather venerable for age, then commendable for any thing of rarity that's in them. The Dukedom (called by the Polish writers Ducatus Zeganensis) is of no large extent in length or bredth.Du. 'Tis bounded on the West with Lusatia and the Barony of Sora, which is rec∣kon'd a part of rhe Marquisate of Brandenburg; on the South with the Dukedom of Javer; on the East with the Dukedom of the greater Glo∣gaw; and on the North with Crossen. 'Twas once a part of the Dukedom of Glogaw; but afterwards it was subjected to Princes of its own, sometimes three or four at once; whence we read of the Dukedoms of Sagan, in the plural number. There are some large and rich Corn∣fields in this Province; which are well water'd with the Rivers Bober, Queiss, Tschirn, and Neisse. Pribus, Naumburg, and Freywald (three small Ci∣ties) are all subject to the Dukes of Sagan. IV. The Town and Dukedom of WOLAW. NOtwithstanding that Wolaw was anciently accounted a part of the Dukedom of Lignitz,Du. and has always been subject to the same Laws and Government; yet the petty Princes of Silesia (whether it be to multiply their Titles, or for what other reason, I shall not determine) have of late years made it a Dukedom of it self. And (because thus separated from Lignitz, 'tis still too large to be guided and govern'd by one man; being near as big as either of our English Counties of Huntingdon or Rutland) they have subdivided it into six larger Circles or Hundreds, which have their names from the chief Towns in them, viz. Wolau, Hernstadt, Winzing, Ru∣ten, Raude, and Steinaw; none of which are worth the describing. To these they add two more Enclosures (no bigger then one of our small Parishes in England) whereof the one goes by the name of Koben, and the other Breuba∣wischer hald; both which the Reader may see in the Map, and thence be able to take an estimate of their true bulk and value. Wolau it self, which in this Country makes a shift to give Title to a Duke,City. might pass for a Market-Town in England; but would never me∣rit, as here it does, the name of a City. 'Tis every way mean and inconsiderable. The build∣ings in it are contemptible; and the Citizens (for so they will needs stile themselves) hardly able to provide bread for their Families out of the little or no trade of the place. The neigh∣bouring Lake (der Gross Teich) furnishes them indeed with Fish enough for the support both of themselves and their children; or otherwise they would not, I think, have any possibility of subsisting. And yet this mean place was for some time the seat of the German Civil Wars; nay, the Swedish Lieutenant Gortzke thought it no small piece of honour, that he bravely main∣tain'd himself, and a Garrison in the Town, for some months; when (God knows) no Com∣mander of note would so far undervalue him∣self as to attack it.
map of Glogow DVCATVS SILESIAE GLOGANI Vera Delineatio Notarum Explicatio Vrbs. Oppidum. Pagus cum templis. Pagus cum Sede nobile. Pagus. Arx. Monasterium. Vinetorum Colles. Fedina et Officina Ferri. Lacus sive Stum Pa∣ludes
map of Wolow Ducatus SILESIAE WOLANUS Notularum explicatio Urbs Oppidum Pagus cum templo Pagus Arx Molindinum Vinetum Mons notabilis Bona Ecclesiastica
map of Wroclaw (Breslau) DUCATUS BRESLA∣NUS sive WRATIS∣LAVIENSIS. Sumptibus Janssonio-Wasbergiorum, Mosis Pitt et Stepha Swart. Notularum explicatio Vrbs. Oppidum. Pagus cum templo. Pagus. Molendinum. Arx. W blazon or coat of arms YAL DEVOIR blazon or coat of arms To the be Honourable Sr GEORGE CARTWRIGHT Bar. vice Cberline of the kings hou∣sehould  Mapp is humbly dicated map of the metropolis of Wroclaw (Breslau) BRESLAW totius SILESIAE METROPOLIS
map of the duchy of Lignitz Ducatus SILESIAE LIGNICIENSIS. Ex Officina Janssonio-Waesbergiana, Mosis Pitt et Stephani Swart. Notularum explicatio Vrbs. Pagus cum templo. Pagus. Arx. Molendinum. Mons notabilis. Locus vbi dimicatum. blazon or coat of arms FV̈RSTLICHE STADT LIGNITZ Schloss Closter Zu Vaser liebē Frawen S. Iohans. S. Peter vnd Paul view of Lignitz blazon or coat of arms
V. The Dukedom and City of OELSE. OELSSE is seated in the Lower Silesia, about sixteen miles di∣stant from Breslaw; first made a City (out of a poor Village) by the Emperor Henry I. in the year 936. The Country round this Town is pleasant enough, and the air whole∣som. The Gates, Walls, Turrets, and other For∣tifications of the City were handsom and noble before the late Wars; but the Swedish General Wittenberg's Troops demolish'd the greatest part of them in the year 1648, which have not since been rebuilt. However the place is still beau∣tified with a fair Church, College, and Town-Hall; and the Streets (especially the Market∣place, which is in an exact square) are gene∣rally neat and uniform. Oelsse had anciently its own Duke, who kept his residence in that City; but upon the death of Duke Conrad the Eighth, in the year 1492. the Dukedom was given to the Dukes of Munster∣berg, who have ever since been Lords of it. In this Principality are reckon'd the small Cities of Bernstatt, Festenberg, Kunstatt, Stroppen, Mosebahr, Hundsfeld, and Trebnitz. VI. The City and Dukedom of BRESLAW. BRESLAW, or Wratislavia (the Metropolis of Silesia) has its name from Wratislaus a Bohe∣mian Prince, its first Founder; whence the Citizens bear a great W in their Coat of Arms to this day. 'Tis seated at the confluence of the two Rivers Oder and Ohla, in a rich and pleasant Coun∣try. Towards the North indeed there are some Marshes and moist fields, whence are now and then some unwholesome gales sent into the Town; and the whole City is reported to have been built in the place of a great Pond dried up. The Citizens (who are exceedingly numerous, by reason of their great Traffick with the Hunga∣rians, Bohemians, Polanders, and other foreign Merchants who resort hither) are said to be as neat and gentile in their Clothes and Cookery as any other of the Emperor's Subjects what∣ever. Breslawers love to be esteem'd immedi∣ate members of the German Empire; and can∣not endure to be reckon'd a part of the King∣dom of Bohemia. Hence 'tis that they have ob∣tain'd leave of the Emperors to bear the spred Eagle in their Escutcheon; and that they peti∣tioned Charles V. to confirm their priviledges. For this reason M. Boregius (a Breslawer, who wrote a Chronicle of the Kings of Bohemia) ranks Breslaw among the Imperial Cities; but ne're mention it with the King of Bohemia's Towns; altho it be certain, that 'twas formerly subject to that Prince. This Goldastus, in his learned Treatise of the Kingdom of Bchemia, evidently proves; notwithstanding (what is usually alledg'd as an argument to the contrary by some ignorant and silly Historians) that it was once one of the Hans-Towns. The gene∣rality of the buildings in this City are fair and stately; only on the banks of the Oder stand four old fashion'd Fabricks, with Turrets on the top, which the Antiquaries of this place fancy to have been the ancient Palaces of so many Schwa∣bish Princes, who in former days were Lords of this City. Besides the vast traffick of the Citizens, the Town is famous for a Bishop's See and an University; wherein have been bred many learn'd men, and some great Writers. The Bishops of this Diocese (who had anciently the Epiphet or Title of Golden given them, from their vast re∣venues) are put in by the King of Bohemia; whom they acknowledg their supreme Head, at least, in Temporals. 'Tis a receiv'd Tradition in these parts, that the Kings of Bohemia have no power to promote a stranger to any Bishopric in Silesia; so that a Bohemian is no more capa∣ble of being advanced to one of their Dioceses then a Silesian is of being preferr'd to the Arch∣bishopric of Prague. But how false this report is, Historians will sufficiently inform us. Boleslaus,Dukedom. surnam'd the Long (a Polish Prince) was created the first Duke of Breslaw and Lig∣nitz by the Emperor Frideric in the year 1163. But these kind of petty Princes not being able to secure their Territories (and especially this large and rich City, which was a bait sufficient to tempt the most potent Prince of the neigh∣bourhood) from the incursions of the Tartars, Polanders, and other foreign Enemies, the Citi∣zens of Breslaw were forced to put themselves under the protection of the Kings of Bohemia (or, as they will have it, Emperors of Germany) to whom they are now immediately subject. VII. The Town and Dukedom of LIGNITZ. LIGNITZ (a fair City on the banks of a small Rivulet call'd Katsbach) is thought to have its name from the Lygii,City. a Ger∣man people, the ancient inhabi∣tants of this part of Silesia. About the year of Christ 1170, this Town was much enlarg'd beautified and fortified by Boleslaus the Long, the first Duke of Lignitz. After him Duke Frideric the second so far improv'd his predecessor Boleslaus's undertakings, that in the year 1532 it became one of the best fortified Cities, next to Breslaw, in all Silesia. Things best worth see∣ing in the Town are, the Hospital, the Town-Hall and Castle. The Dukedom of Lignitz is reckon'd one of the best Corn-Countries in Silesia;Dukedom. and affords near as great plenty of the Terra Sigillata as the Dukedom of Schweidnitz; especially the white sort, which is here more plentiful then in any other Province. The whole is commonly subdivided into seven Circles; whereof four have names from the four Cities of Luben, Parchwitz, Hayn, and Goldberg; and the other three are the divi∣sion of the barren or desert part of the Duke∣dom.
VIII. The Ducal Cities of JAWER, SCHWEID∣NITZ, BRIEG, MONSTERBERG, and OPPELEN. THE City of Jawer is seated in a pleasant Valley;Jawer. tho not far di∣stant from the rugged Crags and Mountains which separate Silesia from the Kingdom of Bohemia. It has not the advantage of any River near it; so that all the fortifications it has are high Rampires and deep Ditches. There is little of note in the Town but the Church, burnt down in the late Civil Wars A. D. 1648. but re∣built more stately then before; and the Castle, wherein resides the Lieutenant of the two Duke∣doms of Jawer and Schweidnitz. The Emperor Charles IV. King of Bohemia, married Ann Daugh∣ter of Henry II. Duke of Javer; who, with his Brother Bolco Duke of Schweidnitz, died without issue; whereupon these two Dukedoms were more immediately subjected to the Kings of Bohemia, in whose hands they still remain. To the Dukedom of Javer belong the Towns of Buntzlau, Lemberg, Schonau, Greiffenberg, Lahn, Fridberg, Lubenthal, Schmideberg, Naumburg upon the Queiss, Kupfferberg, and Hirschberg. 2. SCHWEIDNITZ, or Schweinnitz,Schweid∣nitz. has its name from the great Herds of wild Swine which were harbour'd in this place, before the Forest was cut down in the year 1070. Whence the Arms of the Town are a wild Boar. It was after∣wards much enlarged by Boleslaus I. who forti∣fied it with Walls and Rampires, and beautified it with several fair buildings; so that 'tis now one of the finest Cities in Silesia. The most re∣markable sight in the Town (next to the Churches and other publick buildings) is the great Gun in the Armory, which carries a Bullet of three hundred and twenty pound weight. This is by Schickfusius (in his Preface to Curaeus's Chronicle of Silesia) very improperly reckon'd amongst the great and extraordinary blessings which the Almighty has been pleased to bestow on some of the Cities in Silesia. In the Dukedom of Schweidnitz are the Towns of Strigau (memora∣ble, as we have already acquainted the Reader, for the Terra Sigillata found here in great quan∣tities), Reichenbach, Polckenhahn, Landeshut, Frey∣berg, Friedberg, Fridland, Zobten, Waldberg, and Gottesberg. 3.Brieg. BRIEG, or Brig, has its name from the Polish word Berega; which signifies an exceed∣ing high bank of a River, such as this City is seated on. The streets here are uniform enough; and the houses generally built of stone. St. Ni∣cholas's Church is an high and stately old Fabrick; beautified with two Towers, and built after the ancient Franckish mode. This whole City (ex∣cepting only some few publick buildings) was laid in ashes by the Hussites; who overran a great part of Bohemia and Silesia in the year 1428. In the Dukedom of Brieg are reckon'd the Towns of Strelen, Olau, Nimptsch, Pitschen, Creutzburg, Loben, Michelau, and little Oelsse. The two Mine-Towns of Reichenstein and Silberberg are jointly subject to the Dukes of Brieg and Lignitz; who are both of the same Family, and descended from the ancient Hereditary Kings of Poland. 4.Monster∣berg. MONSTERBERG, or Munsterberg, (so called from the Monastery built in this place by the Emperor Henry the first, the Founder of this City) is seated not far from the head of the River Ola, in a pleasant and fruitful plain. The Town is neither large nor strong; and has no∣thing in it of note but the School, an old Castle, and a fair Town-Hall. In this Dukedom are the Towns of Franckenstein and Warta; to which some Historians and Geographers are pleased to add Hainrichau, Tepliwoda, and Kamentz. 5. OPPELEN is seated in a sandy and dry,Oppelen. but fruitful, Country. 'Tis subject to the King of Poland; who prevail'd with the Emperor to withdraw all his Forces and Subjects hence in the year 1647. Since which time the Citizens of Oppelen, and all the Rusticks in the Villages near it, speak the Polish language. If strong Gates and thick Walls were proof against mo∣dern sieges, this Town were sufficiently provided against the assaults of an Enemy; but otherwise its fortifications are very mean and inconsidera∣ble. Among the many Towns and Villages in this Dukedom, the most remarkable are little Glogaw, Neustat, Kosel, Beudten, Gleibitz, Tost, Strehlitz, Falckenberg, Zultz, Rosenberg, Lubli∣nitz, and Schurgast. IX. The Cities and Dukedoms of GROTKAW, JEGERNDORF, TROPPAU, RATIBOR, and TESCHEN. CROTKAW is a City of no great bulk, as its name seems to inti∣mate; but so well seated that 'tis a proverb in this Country, 'Tis as impossible as for a Grotkawer to starve or freeze. The reason of which expression is grounded upon each Bur∣ger's having a plentiful share in the adjacent Corn∣fields and neighbouring Woods. Most of the Houses in the Town are Wood-buildings; only the Church, Bishop's Palace, and the Town-Hall are of stone. The Dukedom of Grotkaw is sub∣ject to the King of Bohemia, tho sometimes its Lieutenant is a Polander, and contains in it the Cities of Neisse (a place of great traffick) Ot∣machau, Wansen, Ziegenhals, Freywald, Hozenplotz, Jawernick, Kaltenstein, Patschkau, Oyest, Weidau, and Zackmantel. The great trade of this Coun∣try (especially the Citizens of Neisse) is in making, and selling to the Merchants of Bohemia and Poland, a sort of strong and durable Linnen-Cloth for Beds and Bolsters. 2. JAGERNDORF.Jagerndorf. Which signifies in the German language, a Village inhabited by Hunts∣men; and had its name probably from the abun∣dance of all manner of Game in the neighbour∣ing Woods. The Moravians call this Town Car∣nowf (whence the Dukedom is ordinarily, by Latin Authors, nam'd Ducatus Carnoviensis) and a Citizen of this place Carnowfsky; from the an∣cient Arms of the City, which are a pair of Horns between two great Stones. This City (with the small Dukedom which bears its name) was given by Ludowic King of Hungary and Bohemia, to George Marquise of Brandenburg; who was at the charges of building the Castle and erecting the other little fortifications that defend the Town. 3. TROPPAU has its name from the River Oppa, on which 'tis seated. For it was anciently (as appears from the old Records of the Town) call'd zu der Oppa; which name was in process of time corrupted into Troppau; instead whereof some still call it Opawa, and most Latin Histo∣rians, that treat of these parts, call the Duke∣dom Ducatus Oppaviensis. In the year 1405, this
map of Grotkow DUCATUS SILESIAE GROTGANUS cum Districtu Episcopali NISSENSI To John Nicholls Esq of Trewane in Cornwall this Mapp is Humbly Dedicated. blazon or coat of arms by Moses Pitt. Notularum Explicatio Vrbs Arx Pagus cum Templo Pagus nobilis Pagus Episcopalis Commenda
blazon or coat of arms map of Glatz COMITATUS GLATZ Notae Vrbs Oppidum Pagus cum templo Vicus Arx Auri et argenti fordinae Mons Notabilis Kohloruben Holtz fluesse
whole City was swallow'd up by a Deluge of waters, occasion'd by a sudden thaw of the Snow on the top of the Mountains. The Citi∣zens have plenty enough of all necessaries, and are especially noted for brewing of good Beer; but they can never hope to grow rich by any manner of Trade. Other chief Towns in this Dukedom are, Lassau, Oder, Kranowitz, Holdschin, Wagstatt, Kunssberg, Wigstatt, and Freundenthal, The inhabitants of these and all other Towns and Villages in the Dukedom observe the same Laws with the Moravians. For which reason the greatest part of them have often endea∣vour'd to associate themselves to the Mar∣quisate of Moravia, and renounce all dependance upon the great Dukedom of Silesia; but have always been opposed by the Citizens of Troppau, who have still been zealous to continue mem∣bers of their ancient Body. 4. RATIBOR is seated in a pleasant plain, about six German miles from Oppelen. We have no account of it before the year of Christ 1164; so that most Geographers venture to say, that 'twas built about that time. The private dwel∣ling Houses of the Citizens are, as in most parts of Silesia, generally wooden buildings; but the Duke's Palace, Cathedral, and some other pub∣lick buildings, are of stone. There is still in the City one Popish Monastery; and formerly the Je∣suits had a great footing in it, but since the Refor∣mation that sort of Cattel were driven out of their Harbors. The Dukedom of Ratibor (which contains the Towns of Oderberg, Sora, Ribenick, Pilzowitz, and Mieslowitz) was formerly govern∣ed by a Duke of its own; but upon the death of Duke Valentinus (its last Prince, who died with∣out issue in the year 1516) it became more im∣mediately subject to the King of Bohemia. 5. TESCHEN, or Tessin, is one of the oldest Cities in Silesia; said to have been built by Cessi∣mir or Gessimir, Son of Lescus III. Duke of Po∣land, A. D. 810, and from him to have had its first name, which has since been corrupted into Tessin. It is seated on the confines of Silesia, Moravia, Poland, and Hungary; whence it comes to pass, that its Citizens speak a medly of lan∣guages, hardly intelligible to any but themselves. They have here great store of all sorts of Veni∣son and wild Fowl; the Vistula and Elsa afford them plenty of Fish, and the Hungarian Mer∣chants bring them in daily vast quantities of Wine, Fruit, and other Commodities of that Country. At one of their Churches they have weekly Di∣vine Service and a Sermon in the Bohemian lan∣guage, and at another the like in High Dutch; for of these two Nations the Burgers chiefly con∣sist. Here is brew'd Beer, of two sorts, the one with Wheat, and the other with ordinary Barly Malt; the latter of these they call Matznotz; a sort of drink pleasant enough, but mighty strong and heady; which too often, on their Market∣days, makes the poor Rusticks commit several outrages and disorders in the height of their jollity. In this Dukedom there are several high moun∣tains; whereof two Rows are more especially remarkable, and taken notice of by Geographers and Historians. The first of these are those on the East of the Dukedom, dividing it from the Kingdoms of Hungary and Poland; mention'd usually in Latin writers by the name of Montes Carpatii; or Hungarici; but by the Natives of this Country call'd commonly Jablunka. Amongst these Hills the Silesians find the chief treasure of their Great Dukedom; having here a great many Mines of Silver and Lead. The Miners that in∣habit these parts are call'd by their neighbours Die Walachen, and are a sort of people much more rough and rustical then the rest of the Si∣lesians. A vast company of these Bores, in the year 1643, revolted from the Imperialists, and fled to the Swedish Army, but were not long after reclaim'd. The other row of mountains are on the South, and divide the Dukedom of Teschen from the Marquisate of Moravia. These Hills the Natives call Gesencke; but Latin Authors make them a part of the Sudetes, and name them Montes Moravici. These latter do not afford that plenty of Ore which is found in the former; but are tolerably well stock'd with Minerals and some Metals, and supply what they fall short of the other in this kind with huge flocks of Sheep, which are here pastur'd. Other Towns of note in the Dukedom of Teschen are Bielitz, Freystattlein, Friedick, Jab∣lunke (which has its name from the Eastern row of mountains abovemention'd), Nistkow, Strum∣men, Skotschau, and Schwartzwasser. Some add Lassla, with whom agrees J. Scultetus's Map of Si∣lesia; but this Town ought rather to be referr'd to the Dukedom of Troppau. X. The County and City of GLATZ. AMongst the Montes Sudetes lies the County of Glatz;County. being bounded on the South with Moravia, on the West with Bo∣hemia, and on the East and North with the Great Dukedom of Si∣lesia. For which reason modern Geographers have been at a stand to determine which of the three Nations they should refer it to; some of them making it a part of the Kingdom of Bohe∣hemia, others esteeming it a petty Province of the Marquisate of Moravia, and a third sort (who seem to have most probability on their side) call it a Silesian County. Its ancient inhabitants are thought to have been the Marsigni; in whose days the City of Glatz was call'd Luca. After them the Hungarians got possession of this and the neighbouring Provinces; and kept it till the Emperor Henry I. routed them, and hang'd up their chief Commander in one of the Forests of this County. From this great Hungarian War∣riour (whose name is said to have been Glozar) the City of Glatz or Glotz was first named; tho other Etymologists think its ancient name to be Klotz, which signifies properly the root and trunk of a Tree, but is sometimes taken for a large Fo∣rest, or Copse of Shrubs, such as they tell us once grew in the place where Glatz now stands. The Nobility of this County have a tradition amongst them, that before their Land was con∣quer'd by Henry the First, and made Christian, this County was immediately subject to the Em∣perors of Germany; by whom 'twas afterwards bestow'd on the Kings of Bohemia. M. George Aelurius (in his Chronicle of the City and County of Glatz, printed in the year 1625) says, that 'twas, as his Countrymen affirm, subject at first to the Emperors; but afterwards won and en∣joy'd for some time by the Princes of Poland, from whom the Bohemians took it, and (as ap∣pears from the Records of that Kingdom) were Masters of it in the years 1074 and 1114. After this the Dukes of Silesia made themselves Lords of the County of Glatz; which within a while return'd to the Kings of Bohemia, and then back again to the foresaid Dukes. In this state it
continued till the days of the Emperor Charles the Fourth; in whose reign it was once more subjected to the King of Bohemia. And thus it continued till King George (about the year 1460) bestow'd the Cities of Glatz, Munsterberg, and Franckenstein upon his own Sons; who thereupon had the Titles of Dukes of Munsterberg and Earls of Glatz conferr'd on them by the Emperor Frideric IV. In the year 1500, the Dukes of Munsterberg sold this Country to Ʋlric Earl of Hardegg; whose successors, within less then forty years after, sold it again to the Emperor Ferdi∣nand I. who bestow'd it on the Lords of Bern∣stein. From them it descended (A. D. 1549) upon Ernest Duke of Bavaria; after whose death it return'd again to the Kings of Bohemia, in whose possession it continues to this day. The Commodities of this Country are Iron, Coal, Silver-Ore, Timber, all sorts of Venison and tame Cattel, Butter, Cheese, &c. How rich the Country is, may hence easily be gather'd, that not many years ago, the King of Bohemia's Stewards and Rent-gatherers have been known to bring into their Master's Coffers near forty thousand Ricxdollars yearly out of this one County. The City of Glatz is a neat and compact Town, seated in a pleasant plain on the banks of the Neisse; but fortified with a strong Castle on the top of a neighbouring Hill, which over∣looks and commands the Town. The great Church is said to have been formerly the Temple of an Idol worshipp'd by the ancient inhabitants of these parts; in which as Aelurius tells us, the young maids of the Country used to nail up their hair against the walls, as was the custom amongst the ancient Romans; and that, not many years ago, several of these kind of Tabulae Votivae were still to be seen. The Charter of their City per∣mits their Magistrates to coin money in their own names; but they seldom make use of the priviledg any further then to give abroad a kind of small coin little better then the farthings and half-pence lately currant (by the authority of no better man then an ordinary Grocer or Chandler) in most of our Market-Towns in England. Besides Glatz there are the following nine great Towns in this County, Havelswerd, Neurode, Winschelburg, Mitselwald, Reinertz, Lewin, Lan∣deck, Beurath, and Wilhelmsthal or Neustatl; be∣sides an hundred fair Villages and upwards.
decorative device
map of the marquisate of Moravia MARCHIONATVS MORAVIAE Auct I. Comenio. Excudebat Janssonio-Waesbergä, Moses Pitt et Stephanus Swart. Notularum explicatio. Vrbs muris cincla Oppidum Pagus turritus Arx Zamek Castellum z Pagi innominati Monasterium Vinetorum colles Thermae seu aquae medicale. Officinae aria Auri et Argenti fodinae Ferri fodinae
THE MARQUISATE OF MORAVIA. MORAVIA is com∣monly, in the Bohe∣mian writers, preferr'd before Silesia; altho this later be a Duke∣dom, and the other no more then a Mar∣quisate. The reason of which preeminence must be ascrib'd either to this Marquisate's having been anciently a King∣dom; or else to its being made subject to the Kings of Bohemia before ever the Silesians em∣braced their yoke. The Germans call this Country Mahren, and some of their writers would have it nam'd Mehr∣henland, or Equarum Regio; imagining the true Etymology of the word to come from the mul∣titude of Horses or Mares bred in this Marqui∣sate. But certainly the word Moravia (which is undoubtedly of the same offspring with the German Mahren) is derived from the great River Mahr, Marck, or March, which passes thro the midst of the Province, and is in some of the Manuscript Copies of Pliny's Works nam'd Morus. Now the word March, or Marck, signifies (as we have acquainted the Reader in the description of the Marquisate of Brandenburg) the utmost bounds or limits of a Country; such as, in all probability, this River was of the ancient German Nation. Hence the inhabitants of these parts got the name of the Marcomanni (for so the word ought to be written, with a double n, notwith∣standing the Greek Authors write it ), because they were Borderers. 'Tis bounded on the East with the Silesian County of Teschen, and some parts of the King∣dom of Hungary; on the West with Bohemia; on the South with the Arch-Dukedom of Austria; and on the North with the Silesian Dukedoms of Grotkau, Troppau, and the County of Glatz. Its whole length is thought to be about one hun∣dred and ten English miles; and the bredth of it above fourscore. The better half of the Country, which lies towards the North and West, is hardly any thing else but a continued Wilderness; consist∣ing of nothing but huge mountains and unin∣habitable Woods and Forests. But towards Austria and Hungary the case is much alter'd; you may here meet with as fair Fields, and as many Towns and Villages, as in most parts of the German Empire. The waters (especially such as are found in several pits up and down the Country) are in many places poysonnous and pestilential.Waters. Which is thought to proceed from a sort of Tartar (or mixt Mineral, made up chiefly of Lime and Niter) which infects not only the waters that pass thro it, but gives a tincture to the Corn, Vines, Fruit-trees, and all other Vegetables that grow near it. Hence come the Epidemical di∣stempers of this Marquisate; which are reckon'd up by one of its own Poets in the following Verses: His sunt Moraviae Capitales Corporis hostes; Calculus, Arthridis, Colicus dolor, atque Caducus; His Hypochondriacum quintum annumerare licebit.But Nature may seem to have made recompense for these inconveniences, in providing (in other parts of the Marquisate) several rich Medici∣nal Fountains, which bring present relief not only to all persons griev'd with the foremention'd diseases, but readily cure almost all other distem∣pers and maladies incident to man's body. Of these Fountains, and their incomparable vertues there has a very good account been given by Thomas Jordan (a Moravian Physitian) in his Commentarius de Aquis Medicatis Moraviae; printed at Francfurt in the year 1586. Since which time there has been some other Medicinal Waters and Baths discover'd in Moravia, and learnedly treated on by Johannes Ferdinand Herdot (another famous Physitian of that Country) in a Book of his lately publish'd, and entituled Tartaro-Mastix Mo∣raviae. Other Fountains there are (especially near Nezdanicz, Zahorawitz, and Zucholacz; three Villages not far from Hunnobrod) which have a kind of salt and acid taste; the waters whereof are exceeding pleasant and wholesome.
The two chief Rivers of the Country are:Rivers. 1. Moraw, which (as we have said) gives name to the whole Marquisate. It springs in the County of Glatz, not above a measured English mile beyond the utmost bounds of Moravia; within the compass of which Comenius, in his Map of this Country, has ventur'd to bring it. Upon the banks of this River, which runs thro the very midst of the Marquisate, most of the chief Cities in Moravia are seated. 2. Teya; which springs out of two Fountains, the one in Austria, the other upon the borders of Bohemia; it re∣ceives into its Channel Igla, Schwarta, and a great many other petty Rivulets, and is at last swallow'd up it self by the Moraw upon the borders of Au∣stria. These Rivers afford great store of Trouts, Crevises, Barbels, Eels, Jack, Perch, and many other sorts of fresh Fish. All the Nations round about Moravia will wit∣ness,Commo∣dities. that it affords plenty enough, and to spare, of Wheat, Rye, Barley, and all manner of grain. They have store of red and white Wine; which grows as plentifully in some places of this Mar∣quisate as in Austria. They have good breeds of Horses, Oxen, Sheep, and Goats; but the Land (which some attribute to the extraordinary sharp∣ness of the air) breeds neither Ass, Camel, nor Mule. The Woods abound with all sorts of wild Beasts that bear Furs, as Wolves, Hares, Foxes, Marts, Beavers, &c. They have one kind of Beast almost peculiar to the Moravian Forest which they call Rysowe, and we may English it a Panther or Leopard. 'Tis about the heighth of an ordinary Cur-dog; but much thicker in the body. Its belly and feet are spotted; and it preys upon Deer and other Beasts of the Fo∣rest, whom it catches by a sudden pitching upon them from the top of some rock or tree. Daubravius,Moravian Myrrh. in the fourth Book of his History of Bohemia, tells us, there is a strange kind of Frankincense and Myrrh in Moravia; which grows not here (as in Arabia) upon Trees; but is dug out of the bowels of the Earth. For my own part I should have been apt to have call'd this Myrrh Mummy, if it answer the description he gives of it. Which, because 'tis something extraordinary and uncouth, I shall give it the Reader in his own words; Hoc vero, says he, jam mirabitur aliquis, & est profecto admiratione dignum, inveniri in Moravia, Thus & Myrrham, non ex arbore desudante, ut alibi lectam, sed e solo terrae erutam, uno tantum diu in loco, cui Gradisco nomen; in quo ad hunc diem Thus, non solum id quod masculum vo∣cant a similitudine testium, sed quod alia praeterea virorum mulierumque membra ostentat, effoditur. Nay, for fear this should be thought too strange and incredible a story to be believ'd, he tells us yet further upon his certain knowledg, Nuper autem Wenceslaus vetere procerum familia eorum, qui a Quercu cognominantur, clarus, dum in agro suo Sternbergensi fundamenta aggeri Piscinario molire∣tur, Corpus hominis integrum invenit, quod nihil nisi Myrrha erat; quam ille per amicos distributam, nostri quoque etiam tum privati memor, nos plus media parte lacerti humani donavit, quo aliquoties pro suffitu usi sumus. This latter account which he gives us of his Moravian Myrrh, agrees something with the description given by several Botanists of the Mandrake; but the learned Hertod (whom we mention'd before) in the first part of his Tartaro-Mastix Moraviae, removes this scruple by telling us, Sic infans ante annos quadraginta a fossoribus, in fodinis Aluminis prope Czernam Horam, inventus totus Myrrhatus. Hunc fossores Patribus Carthusianis prope Brunam, triginta aliquot taleris vendidisse, & hi postea eundum ad magnam suam Carthusiam in Galliam remississe, tandemque eodem dono Regem honorasse dicuntur. From all which it apears, that there is something extraordinary in this Myrrh (or call it what else you please) which well merits the view and study of a curious Phy∣siologist. The Country Rusticks believe there is this strange vertue in this Mineral (for so I think I may venture to name it) that it puts to flight all manner of Serpents, and amongst the rest (that old Serpent) the Devil. Aeneas Sylvius (who for having penn'd so many true stories was at last judg'd fit to sit in St. Peter's Chair, of  and become an infallible Pope) calls the Moravians, Gentem ferocem & ra∣pinarum avidam; ut quae tum iter non nisi armato potentiorique praebeat. And most Travellors brand their barbarous inhumanity, or at least incivility to strangers. The Hanaks especially (or Bores that live along the banks of the River Hana) are said to be notoriously guilty of this crime; but these are, by the gentiler sort of Moravians themselves, contemn'd and scouted as a pack of barbarous and ill bred Lowts. The true chara∣cter of the Moravians in general is, that they are men of exemplary obedience and fidelity to their Governors; free and open in conversation, and therefore apter to be deceiv'd then to impose upon; they are not easily provok'd to be angry, but, when once enraged, hardly appeas'd; not guilty of too much wit in discourse, but ratio∣nal enough; hardy in the Camp, and valiant in fight; faithful observers of their promises and compacts, and abhorrers of baseness and mean∣ness of spirit. They are indeed too apt to give credit to old Prophesies (a folly observ'd in the inhabitants of our own Island), and a little given to drinking and carousing: but are not so super∣stitious, nor so great drunkards, as they are re∣presented to be, by the satyrical pens of some Geographers. Their language (I mean that which is ordi∣narily spoken by the Country-Rusticks;Lang for the Nobility and Citizens speak generally High-Dutch) is a Dialect of Slavonian and little diffe∣rent from the Bohemian; of which more anon. The Moravians are said to have been first con∣verted to Christianity by St. Cyril and Meludius,Relig assisted by some other pious Doctors and Fathers of the Church. Soon after the Reformation had been set on foot in Bohemia by John Huss, a good part of Moravia began to throw off the Pope's yoke; and to profess the purer and undefiled Religion of the primitive Christians and Apostles. But John de Praga (at that time Bishop of Ol∣mitz, and afterwards Cardinal of the Church of Rome) so vigorously oppos'd the endeavours of all that labour'd to carry on the Reformation in this Marquisate, that during his time it never got any deep rooting. Afterwards (during the Reigns of George, Ʋladislaus, and Ludowic Kings of Bohemia) Popish Idolatry and Superstition was wholly extirpated; and the Reform'd Religion unanimously profess'd in all the Cities and great Towns of Moravia. But (to see the unhappy consequents of Toleration and Liberty of Con∣science!) as soon as the Synod at S. Brinn (which met in the year 1608, to settle the affairs of Re∣ligion) had made this Edict, Ʋt liceret omnibus credere, prout cuique Deus dat cognoscere, i.e. That every man should have power and license to regulate his Faith according to the measure of knowledg which God had given him; each Cobler set up for a Preacher of the Word, and an Expounder of Scriptures. Whereupon, the Church was im∣mediately confounded, and broken into an irre∣concilable medly and hotchpotch of Sects and Schismaticks, Hussites, Picards, Anabaptists, Arrians, Flaccians, Trinitarians, Photinians, Lutherans, Cal∣vinists,
Dulcians, Lugentians, &c. So that no less then fourteen several Conventicles had assembled themselves in one City; each of them asserting peculiar Doctrines and Tenets of their own, and denying all manner of Communion (in Church-Ordinances) with the other thirteen. Now what could be expected from this Anarchy in the Re∣formation, but the reestablishment of Popery? which accordingly hapned. For (soon after Fri∣deric the King of Bohemia's Forces were over∣thrown by the Emperor Ferdinand II. at Prague in the year 1620) Francis, Cardinal of Districh∣stein and Bishop of Olmitz, found it a very easie matter to root out the divided and mutinous members of the Reform'd Church, and to re∣plant his own Doctrines and Church-Discipline. After which some scatter'd parcels of the Re∣formed party lay skulking amongst the Rocks and Mountains on the borders of Silesia, for some years; but durst never appear in publick, and within a while after dwindled into nothing. The Kings of Moravia (for 'twas anciently a Kingdom) were once the greatest Potentates in this part of Europe; having for some time under their subjection the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Poland. About the year of Christ 700, Zuanta∣cop King of Moravia (being at the same time Lord of the Dukedoms of Bohemia, Poland, and Silesia) refused to pay Tribute or Homage to the Emperor of Rome; who falling in upon his Country, to demand satisfaction for this inso∣lence, was forced to make a dishonourable re∣treat. But, resolving not to endure this disgrace, he rallies up his scatter'd forces, and calls in to his assistance the Hungarians; an infidel people, who before that time were aw'd by the Mora∣vians, and kept from committing any outrages upon the Christian-Countries. By the help of these Heathens the Emperor routed Zuantacop's Army; forcing him to fly for shelter into the neighbouring Woods; where he associated him∣self to an Hermite, with whom he spent the residue of his days. By this means Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia, came to be disunited and parcell'd into four different Dukedoms; which were reckon'd so many Provinces of the Roman or German Empire. Some ages after, the Duke∣dom of Moravia degenerated into a Marquisate; which name it still retains, altho a great part of it be at this day immediately fubject to the Crown of Bohemia, and the rest broken into a few petty Baronies and Lordships. The chief Cities and great Towns in MORAVIA. OLMITZ, or Olomutium, (which Ortelius, with whom agree Ste∣phanus and Bertius, fancies to be the same place with Ptolomy's Ebu∣rum) is the Metropolis of Mo∣ravia; and the only Bishop's See in the Marquisate. 'Tis not very large, but neatly and well built; and seated in a conveni∣ent place (on the banks of the River Morawa) to maintain a Trade with the Merchants of Bo∣hemia, Hungary, Poland, Silesia, and Austria. The Antiquaries of this Country are of opinion, that Olmitz, or Olmutz, is nothing but a corruption of Juliomontium; and thence conclude, that the Town was first built (and so it was, as sure as either the Tower at London or Castle at Leyden) by Julius Cesar. But how then came it to be call'd Velgrad (as Boregius proves 'twas) when King Suatopluck built himself a Palace here: St. Cyril (the great Apostle of this Country, who liv'd about the year 880) was the first Bishop of this Diocess. He was the Author (as Aven∣tinus affirms) of the old Wendish or Crcation Al∣phabet; made use of in writing out the Bible, by him translated into his own mother-tongue. What became of this Translation I know not; except (as some late Antiquaries have ventur'd to say) the ancient Moscovian Bible, printed in the year 1581, be a Transcript of it. In the year 1346, the Bishopric of Olmutz was remov'd from under the jurisdiction of the Elector of Mentz, and subjected to the new Archbishop of Prague; tho some of the late Bishops of Ol∣mutz have denied to pay homage to any Prelate under the Pope. 2. BRINN, call'd in the Bohemian language Brno, and by Latin writers Bruna;Brinn. is the second City in Moravia; and a Town of so great repute, that it seems to share with Olmitz in the Title of Metropolis; since in these two Cities, by turns, the chief Courts of Judicature or Assizes for the whole Marquisate are held. 'Tis seated at the confluence of two small Rivers, Schwarta and Zwitta; and defended by the Spilberg, a strong Castle on the top of the adjoining Hill. The Moravian Philosophers make a great noise with the Ʋnicornu Minerale, which (amongst the other fossilia of their Country) is said to be found near this City. Of which Osv. Grollius (in his book entituled de Signaturis) gives this account; Ʋni∣cornu Minerale nobis quoque Deus largitus est; in Moravia tribus milliaribus Bruna (ubi eram ante Medicus) non longe a territorio Abbatis Zabrdovi∣censis, sub altissima rupe duorum inusitatae magni∣tudinis animalium incognitorum ossa, una cum duo∣bus junioribus efossa sunt, quae absque dubio tempore Diluvii aquarum impetu perierunt in illa solitu∣dine, &c. Another Author of the same Tribe (Anselm Boetius de Boodt, Physitian to the Empe∣ror Rudolf II.) gives a far different account of it; Cornu fossile, says he, prope Brunam Moraviae urbem inventum, ita exacte figuram trunci Juglan∣dis intrinsecus & extrinsecus refert, ut nemo nisi Cae∣cus negare possit, truncum illius Arboris fuisse, ac in Terra transmutationem accepisse. Hertod (in his ingenious Book beforementioned) says, there have been several fragments of this Mineral found in the Quarries near Niclsburg; one whereof ex∣actly resembled a man's thigh. I know not what more to make of all these relations, then that there are now and then in the fields near Brinn found several rare petrifications (for that I think is as fit a name for them as Ʋnicornu fossile) re∣presenting the parts of certain Animals and Plants. Which is no greater miracle then may be daily met with in the fields here about Oxford; as may be seen at large in the learn'd account given of such Rarities in the fifth Chapter of the Natural History of this County. 3. IGLAW, call'd by the Bohemians Gihlawa,Iglaw. seated on the borders of Bohemia, upon a River of the same name, is said to have been built in the year 799, and to have had its name from an Urchin or Hedghog (which in the German language is call'd Igle, but by the Moravians Gehlak); because that upon the laying the first foundation of this City, a great company of these kind of Creatures were found amongst the shrubs and thickets which grew in this place. The Town is large, well built, and strongly fortified. 'Tis a great thorow-fair, frequented by multi∣tudes of Travellers that pass this way out of Bo∣hemia towards Hungary. And for this reason the Citizens (as being daily accustom'd to converse with strangers) are more obliging in their car∣riage
then the rest of their Country-men. In the Hussites-wars this City stedfastly opposed the introducing of the Reform'd Religion, and (with a great deal of resolute obstinacy and male∣pert zeal) maintain'd the superstitious Discipline of the Church of Rome; but as soon as Luther's Doctrine began to peep abroad in the world, the heat was over with them; and the Citizens of Iglaw (of all the Cities of Moravia, sub∣ject to the Kings of Bohemia) were the first who embraced the Augsburg Confession, and turn'd Rebels, as themselves before had term'd other Protestants, to the Pope's Interest. In the late Civil wars of Germany (immediately after the Imperial Forces were routed at Jankow, in the year 1645) this Town was given up into the hands of the then triumphant Swedes; who, to make the City more tenable, burnt down the large Sub∣urbs on every side; and having so done, defended the Town with so much gallantry and manhood, that all the forces the Emperor could bring against it were beaten off for a twelve-month after. The Jesuits College, with the Gymnasium annex'd (founded by Adolph Michael Earl of Al∣tham) is a great ornament to the Town; and the two Monasteries, of Dominicans and Franciscans, are well worth the seeing. The chief trade of the Town (besides the entertainment of passen∣gers, which brings in the greatest part of their riches) is in selling Beer, and a sort of course woollen Cloth, which is made and dress'd after their fashion. 4.Znaim. ZNAIM, in the Bohemian language Znoymo, and in Latin writers Znogma; stands on the Teya, in a pleasant soil and wholesom air. The learned Cluverius is of opinion, that this place is the same with Ptolomy's Medoslanium. But I do not find, that his Latitude will agree at all to Znaim, tho his Longitude comes near it. The Annals of Moravia tell us, this City was first built in the place where it now stands by Pri∣mislaus Ottacar about the year 1222, having be∣fore that time lain buried in its ashes from the year 1145, when Ʋladislaus King of Bohemia, upon a provocation given him by his Kinsman Cunrad Marquise of Moravia, wholly destroy'd it and its inhabitants with fire and sword. The Town is defended by a Castle sufficiently fortified both by Nature and Art; but in great danger of being damag'd in time of siege, from the top of the Peldtenberg, an adjacent mountain, which over∣looks it, and stands within Canon-shot of it. It lies upon the coasts of Austria; and therefore is sure to be the first place attack'd by the Imperial forces in case of any rebellious uproar in either Bohemia or Moravia, as it has often already found by woful experience. There are a great many Vineyards round the City, which yeild commonly good store of an indifferently palatable Wine; but the chief income of the Citizens arises from the harbouring of passengers which travel this road betwixt Vienna and Prague. 5.Cremsir. CREMSIR, or Kremsier, call'd by the Bohemians Kromeritz, seated on the River Morawa, about the middle way betwixt Olmitz and Hradisch, was not many ages ago a poor Village; but is now become one of the fairest Cities in Moravia. The occasion of which alteration was this; John Bishop of Olmitz bought the Lordship of this Village for himself and his successors, of Otto Marquise of Moravia. After his death, Bruno Bishop of the same Diocess, observing the conve∣nient and pleasant situation of the place, built in it a fair Palace (call'd to this day from its first Founder's name Brunsberg); which draw∣ing together some considerable numbers of peo∣ple, obliged him soon after to wall the place round, and turn it into a City. 6. EWANCZITZ, seated at the confluence of the two Rivers Iglaw and Oslaw; both which here lose their names, and are afterwards call'd Schwartza. This City was once notorious for harbouring more different Sects in Religion then almost any other Town in Europe. The Parish Church was divided by the two prevailing par∣ties of Hussites and Lutherans; both of which had here the exercise of their inconsistent forms of Divine Worship at the same time. One of their streets was wholly inhabited by Jews; who had erected in it a Synagogue and School for themselves and children. Without the Gates of the City the Calvinists had two Churches; the one for the Bohemians, the other for the Ger∣mans; and these shar'd with the Hussites and Lu∣therans in the Magistracy and Government of the City. Another part of the Suburbs was taken up by the Holy Brethren of Switzerland; a pack of nominal Christians, who never were baptized, thought it a damnable sin to wear a Sword, and celebrated the Lord's Supper only at Whitsuntide. The Photinians, Atheists, and Quakers (for such kind of creatures I take the Schwenckfelder to have been, who denied the re∣surrection of the dead) met at their devotions on the banks of a Fountain in the field. At a small Village, nam'd Olekowitz, about half an English mile out of the Town, dwelt the Ana∣baptists, who were about four hundred in num∣ber. But this ridiculous toleration and distraction in Religion came to this issue at last; that now all those various parties of people, who all of them pretended to be true Protestants, are ca∣shier'd, and none permitted the free exercise of their Religion but Jews and Papists. To these we might add a great many more Cities, if (what Caspar Laudisman, in his Directi∣ons for the speedy understanding of foreign Lan∣guages, affirms) it be true, that there are in this Marquisate 100 Cities, 410 Towns, 500 Castles, and 30360 Villages. Which prodigious number of buildings would go near to cover almost all the habitable part of this Country. But I think there are few more then we have already men∣tion'd, which deserve to be taken notice of any further then to give them room for their names in the Map.
map of Bohemia BOHE∣MIA Notarum Explicatio Caritas Regia libera Oppidum Regis Bohemia Oppida inum et Nobil Pagus Arx Castellum Monasterium Oppidum cum Arce Fodine Auri Fodine argenti Fodine Stanni Fodine ferri Therme Officina Vitriaria Nomina quae habent tri innt Bohemica
THE KINGDOME OF BOHEMIA. BOHEMIA is bounded on the East with Mora∣via and Silesia; on the West with Voitland, the Upper Palatinate, and the Dukedom of Bava∣ria; on the South with the Arch-Dukedom of Austria; and on the North with the Mar∣quisates of Misnia and Lusatia. Whence the learned Godalstus (in that excellent Treatise of his entituled Commentarii de Bohemiae Regni, incorpo∣ratarumque Provinciarum Juribus ac Privilegiis, &c.) well argues, that this Kingdom must needs have been anciently a branch of the German Nation (and ought still to be so accounted) since all the people that encompass it speak the High-Dutch language. The whole Kingdom is encompass'd round with Mountains; the chief of which are the Montes Riphaei, or Hills of Giants, which part this Land from Silesia. Out of these spring the great River Elb; issuing out of two of them, famous heretofore for the enchantments and apparitions of evil Spirits that used to haunt them. One of these two is now adays named by the Silesian Germans that live near it Schnee∣kippe, from the continual Snow on the top of it; and the other Knieholtz, from the short shrubs or brush wood that grows there. The other Rivers of note are, the Eger, Mul∣dau, Satzawa, Orliecze, Lusinitz, Gyzera, and Mise; all which spring within the Kingdom, and are at last emptied into the Elb at Dietzin. Most of these run in a clear Channel; and afford great plenty of fish. In some of them the Natives find a sort of shell-fish (much like a Horse-Mus∣cle) with a Pearl in it of good value; such as those are which Mr. Cambden tells us, ly gaping at the mouth of the River Irt in Cumberland. In several parts of Bohemia (especially at Te∣plitz and Wary, both which have their names from the hot Baths there found) spring Mineral and Medicinal waters; which exceedingly refresh the body, and cure many distempers. The acid waters at Oegran and Comorzan are accounted mighty soveraign against many diseases; and there was, not many years ago, a Fountain of as great credit at Stechowicz near Prague. The like is still to be met with at Benessow near Cap∣licze; which, for the cures it has perform'd, has got the name of Dobra Woda, or good water. There are no Lakes in the Kingdom;Ponds. except∣ing only one or two near the Towns of Mosta and Tepla, of little or no moment. But the Fish-ponds in many places seem to equal the Lakes in foreign Countries. Witness those petty fresh water Seas at Pardubicz, Clumecz, Trzebon, Rozdialowicz, and Copydlan; where the Ponds (abounding with Perch, Jack, Carp, and other fish) bring their Masters in as large Revenues as so many good Lordships. The Soil of the Country is generally fat and arable; in few places barren or sandy.Commo∣dities. You have here also fine Woods and Forests intermix'd; but none so large as to render any considera∣ble part of the Kingdom uninhabitable. The Orchards and Gardens are so well stock'd with fruit, that yearly great quantities of Apples, Pears, &c. are hence exported into Misnia and other neighbouring Countries. The inhabitants have Wine enough (if the luxury of the pre∣sent age did not want greater supplies then na∣ture) in their own Vineyards; which is reckon'd a better bodied liquor then Moravian Wine, and equals the Austrian in taste, but is not capable of being kept to so good an age. The Fields and Meadows are richly stock'd with all manner of Cattel; especially Horses of more then ordinary courage and bulk. Their Hop∣gardens afford them a better and more plenti∣ful crop then is usual in other Countries. For which reason their Beer (whereof they have two sorts, white and brown) is highly valued, and exported into the neighbouring parts of Germany. There have been some Salt-pits discover'd in Bohemia; but so inconsiderable, that they found the profit would not answer the cost of digging. And therefore the Bohemians have their Salt out of Misnia, and other Provinces of Germany. But this want is sufficiently recompens'd by their
rich Mines of Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron, Lead, Sulphur, Niter, &c. as also by their Glass and Allum, made here in great quantities. They pretend to have Carbuncles, Ametheists, and other precious stones in their Land; which they say are often found in the Mines and amongst the Rocks of the Hill Countries. Anselm Boetius Boodt (whom we had occasion to mention in the description of Moravia) has written a parti∣cular Treatise entituled Historia Lapidum & Gem∣marum Bohemiae; to which we refer the Reader for a further account of these Rarities. Jaspers and Saphires, they tell us, are found near the source of the Elb; in the mountains before men∣tion'd, call'd by the Bohemians Krakonosse. Goldastus thinks the Hermiones were the anci∣ent inhabitants of this Country;Ancient Inhabi∣tants. a branch whereof he makes the Hermunduri, who at first dwelt a∣mong the Riphaean mountains, but afterwards descended lower. These people were driven out of the Land by the Boii, who made an inroad into this Country under the command of their General Sigovesus, Nephew to Ambigatus an an∣cient King of the Celts. Micraelius, a learned Pomeranish Historiographer, believes these men were not a branch of the Galli Senones (as most modern Antiquaries imagine); but rather of the Semnones, the old inhabitants of Pomeren. This people, whensoever they came, having about the year 600, setled themselves in these parts, extirpated the Nation of the Hermiones so far as to call the Land (after their own names) Boien heimat, or the dwelling-place of the Boii; which was in time corrupted into the modern German name Boheim or Boheimb. About the birth of our Saviour the Marcomanni, or ancient Moravi∣ans, rush'd in upon the Boii; and so far over∣power'd them as to make them quit their quar∣ters, and seek out a new habitation; which they nam'd Boioaria, and is now call'd Bavaria. How∣ever, they were not so totally routed but that a great many of them kept their old station, and mix'd themselves with their Conquerors; as no question vast numbers of the Hermiones and Her∣munduri had done with them before. The modern Bohemians call their Country Czechowe, and themselves Czechowsky; and these words the Hungarians and new Greeks make use of, being utter strangers to the German names of Boheimb and Bohmische. Those amongst them that do allow of this latter name, derive it from Boy, signifying in their language War; or Buch, that is, God; and Muz, i. e. Man. Intimating that they are a valiant and pious people. See the like fancy in the derivations of the words Teutcsch and German, p. 5, and 6. Answerable to this Etymology of their name are the manners of the present inhabitants of this Kingdom,Manners. if we may give credit to their own Historians, and some late Travellers who have for some time convers'd with them, and had the opportunity of observing their humours. They are represented to be men of great Hos∣pitality and Courage; faithful observers of their promises and contracts. They are exceedingly given to ape the manners and fashions of Fo∣reigners; according to the true character long since given of them: Eosdem habet cum simia Mores ferox Bohemia. Quae facta viderit facit, Cultusque priscos abjicit.And therefore 'twas an ingenuous fancy of the Painter, who having drawn the inhabitants of most Countries in Europe, in their proper Habits, pictur'd a Bohemian naked, with a web of Cloth at his feet, and all other requisites for the making up of a Suit. Intimating, that he could not tell what certain fashion to make his Clothes on; but left it to himself to make them after the next new mode he should fancy. That small handful of men that Zechus the Slavonian Commander brought into Bohemia, some time (for Authors cannot agree upon the year nor age) in the fourth, fifth, or sixth Cen∣tury (from whom the modern Bohemians love to derive their pedigree) were a company of poor and honest people; folk that had nothing themselves, and wanted the knavery to rob those that had. Now as long as they continued in this state of innocence, they had no need of Magistrates nor Laws; but liv'd () in a sociable community, and had their little All equally distributed among them. In this condition they remain'd for some years after Zechus's death; till the Moravians and Pannoni∣ans disturbed their quiet, and taught them the first rudiments of Villany. As soon as they were once initiated in wickedness, they were forc'd to take new measures; and to think of consti∣tuting some chief Magistrate to punish offenders. Whereupon they pitch'd upon one Crocus (an old Gentleman of a something longer head, as 'twas fancied, then the rest of his neighbours) to be their Governor. They had not yet any writ∣ten Laws amongst them; but their Judg (for so Crocus and some of his Successors are stiled by the Bohemian writers) was to determine all controversies by the known Customs of the Land. In extraordinary cases, which would not easily be decided by this sort of Common Law, there sat on the Bench with the Judg (for fear of arbitrary and illegal proceedings, if one man should be invested with the sole power of pro∣nouncing sentence) a certain number of Sena∣tors, or Aldermen, who had definitive Votes as well as himself. With this kind of Pretorian Authority () Justice was administred by Crocus his Son of the same name, and his Grand-daughter Libussa; until Primislaus, whom Libussa had mar∣ried, took upon him a more absolute command, and got the Title of Duke, or Commander in chief. This man was (as Florus says of Lucins Quinctius) Dictator ab arato, a poor Country-Farmer, whom Libussa advanced out of the dirt to her own bed; and therefore (like the fore∣mention'd Roman General) knew better how to keep the headstrong Bohemians, like so many Oxen, under the yoke. Thus was the Land govern'd by the children and successors of Primislaus and Libussa about four hundred and fifty years; until the Emperor Henry IV. having call'd a General Diet of the Estates of the Empire at Mentz, created Wrati∣slaus Duke of Bohemia King of the same Nation; by settling (with the Pope's permission) a Crown of Gold upon his head. This was done in the year 1082, tho some will have it 1072. From that time forward the Emperors of Ger∣many always lay claim to the Right of Investing the Kings of Bohemia, as their Vassals; and made it their business to perswade the poor people of that Kingdom to rebel against any Monarch (tho never so duly Elected into the Throne) who had not receiv'd the Regalia, as they call them, or Badges of Majesty at the Emperor's hands. So that Frideric V. (Grandfather to the present Elector Palatine of the Rhine, and Father to our Prince Rupert) was never like quietly to enjoy the Crown of Bohemia, however just his pretensions to it might be, so long as the Em∣peror
Ferdinand, his Competitor, refus'd to con∣firm him. Most of the Catalogues of the Kings of Bohe∣mia are so contradictory one to another; that 'twill be a difficult task to pick out of them a true Register of the names of these Princes. The best account, I know of, which has been given of them, is the ingenious Paul Stransky's, in his Res∣publica Bojema, printed at Leyden 1643. The present King is Leopold I. Emperor of Germany; whose character must be reserv'd for another place. The Heathen Slavonians, at their first coming into this Country, brought with them a great many Idol Gods; whom they worshipp'd as the only Protectors and Saviours of their Nation. The chief of these they call Pron or Peron; which, in their language, signifies the same thing as , or Jupiter Intonans. This was their God of Gods, Divum Pater atque Hominum Rex; and worshipp'd with the same reverence as Thor amongst the ancient Saxons. But this God was at last, for some misdemeanour or other, thrown out of favour; and the honour conferr'd on Swanto-Wit, an Idol whose Temple stood at Julinum (or Wollin) in Pomeren, in those days the largest City in Europe. Some small re∣membrances of this God they retain to this day; it being usual for friends, shaking hands, to use this mutual compellation Witeg, Witeg, or Witam te; in which they still seem to own the Idol Wit for their God. Christianity began first to be profess'd in the Kingdom about the year 894, in which, 'tis said, Duke Borsivogius was baptiz'd by Methodius the Saint of Bohemia. This Metho∣dius was a Prelate of the Greek Church; so that the Clergy of Bohemia did not for some ages ac∣knowledge the Bishop of Rome's Supremacy. The Reformation was first begun here upon this oc∣casion: A young Gentleman of this Country travelling into England, and visiting our Uni∣versities, had (here at Oxford) the opportunity of transcribing several Tracts written by our Brittish Authors. Amongst other things he chanc'd to light upon some of John Wicliff's works; Co∣pies of which he carried home with him, and shew'd to Jahn Huss and Jerome of Prague. Upon the reading of these Books, those two great men began immediately to reform Errors in the Church; which good work they prosecuted with great vigor and zeal, till they were sum∣mon'd to the Council of Constance, and there (contrary to the promises and protestations of the Popish Prelates then assembled) condemn'd for Hereticks, and burnt in the year 1415. But so firmly were their Doctrines rooted in most of the hearts of their hearers, that 'twas impossible for the Church of Rome, by this expedient, to hinder the progress of the Reformation, which soon after was more firmly establish'd by the industry of Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, &c. It had been well if (after the fopperies of Rome were thus abolish'd) the Bohemians had contented themselves with the free exercise of their Religi∣on, granted them by their Kings. But grow∣ing infolent as their number encreas'd, they be∣gan first to mutiny against the Emperors Mini∣sters of State in that Kingdom; and afterward, in the reign of the Emperor Matthias, fell into an open rebellion. This prov'd at last the ruine of the Reform'd Religion; which is now no∣where profess'd but in some by-corners and holes of the Kingdom. So unprosperous a thing is Rebellion for the sake of Religion. The Bohemian Language (as well as the Rus∣sian, Polonian, Croatian, and Wendish) is a dialect of the ancient Slavonian. A Tongue so copious and sweet, that the old Lawgivers of this Coun∣try (as appears from several of their Municipal Laws) were zealous in commanding the true and primitive pronunciation and orthography of it to be kept up. But this unhappiness attended the endeavours of these well-wishers to their Country, that they had not the use of any Let∣ters but the Ruthenian character; an Alphabet exceedingly imperfect, and wholly unfit for the polishing of a Language. Afterwards, when the Princes of Bohemia began to maintain a corres∣pondence with their neighbours in Germany, the Roman Letters were brought in; and by this means their Tongue was refin'd with better suc∣cess. However, the modern Bohemians are as negligent in this particular as their Ancestors were careful. Nay, most men of fashion in the King∣dom look upon't as scandalous to speak their own mother-tongue in its purity; and there∣fore talk ordinarily either the German Language entire, or else the Bohemian mixt and mangled with a great many outlandish words and bom∣bast. The Chief Cities in the Kingdom of BOHEMIA. PRAGUE is the Merropolis of this Kingdom;Prague. seated in a pleasant place on the great River Moldau. What name it had before the Bohemians came into this Coun∣try is not to be learnt out of any of their Records. But they, it seems, call'd it Boioheim, or the chief Residence of the Bohemian Princes. Its modern name was given it long after, upon the coming in of the Slavonians with Zechus. Boregius gives this blind account of the original of this name: Some of the Slavo∣nians coming to this Town, and finding them busie in building, enquired of one of the work∣men (who as it chanc'd was making a threshold, which in his language was call'd Prah) what they were a making, receiv'd answer Prah; as the Town was afterwards nam'd. 'Tis divided into three parts, the Old, New, and Little City; which latter is separated from the two former by the Moldau. This great City is compared by Aeneas Sylvius to Florence in Italy; and our Coun∣tryman Dr. Brown (who has seen both, and is curious enough in his observations) tells us, that this is much larger and more populous then Florence; that the River Arno, which runs thro Florence, is not comparable to the Moldau at Prague. But then, he tells us, the paving of the streets at Florence, the Cathedral, St. Laurence's Chappel, and the Duke's Palace outstrip any thing that Prague can boast of. Because the three par∣titions of the Town, before mention'd, are di∣stinct Corporations, we shall describe them sepa∣rately; beginning with 1. The Old Town; which lies on the Eastern banks of the River Moldau; is very populous and full of fair Houses, built after an old fashion. In this part of the Town stands the University; which has nothing stately in it but the Jesuits College. The Historians of Bohemia report strange things of the vast numbers of Scholars which have been resident at once in this University. Lewis du May, Counsellor to the Duke of Wirtenberg (in his incomparable Dialogue concerning the State of the German Empire) says, there are hardly at this day so many Students to be found in all Ger∣many as were here in the year 1409, when J. Huss himself is said to have had forty thousand Scho∣lars. 'Twas founded by the Emperor Charles IV.
and is still the only University in Bohemia. 'Twill be worth observation to take notice, that (as is reported) no Fly will touch any flesh exposed to sale in the Shambles here, let the weather be ne're so hot. The Jews inhabit a good share of this old Town; which from them is called Die Juden-Statt, or the City of the Jews. They are very rich; trading in all manner of Com∣modities; but especially in Jewels, and several sorts of precious stones found in the Mines of Bohemia. 2. The New Town was formerly separated from the Old by a Wall or Ditch; but now there is nothing that parts them but a Trench, into which they can let in the Moldau at pleasure. In this part are to be seen the ruins of the an∣cient Palace of the Dukes and Kings of Bohemia. There is still standing a great part of the walls round this Palace; the cement whereof is so good, that hardly any Engine can be invented which will pull them down. The Jesuits of late years have built here a new College for themselves, which goes beyond the other they had before in the Old Town. 3. The Little Town, or Kleine Seiten (as they sometimes call it) lies on the West side of the Muldau, over which you pass by a stately Stone∣bridg of sixteen Arches. In this place stands Winceslaus's Palace; wherein the Emperor, when he comes to Prague, keeps his Court. Some have ventur'd to affirm, that as good High-Dutch is spoken in this Palace, and by the neigh∣bouring Burgers, as in any City of Germany. But he that shall curiously and critically enquire into the truth of this assertion, will find, that the Language here spoken, falls as far short of the pure Misnian Dialect, as this Palace does of the Elector's Court at Dresden. Not far from hence is the Cathedral of this Archbishopric, dedicated to St. Vite; from the top of which you have the best prospect of the City of Prague. At Weissenberg, or the white Hill, near Prague, was fought the fatal battel between the Duke of Bavaria and Count Bucquoy, Lieutenant of the Emperor Ferdinand the Second's Forces, and Fri∣deric Count Palatine of the Rhine, and elected King of Bohemia; in which the new King was conquer'd, his Forces totally routed, his Ord∣nance seized on, and himself and his Queen (our King Charles the Martyr's Sister) forced to fly into Silesia. Prague was forced to resign it self up immediately into the hands of the Em∣peror; who soon after rooted out all maintainers of the Protestant Religion throughout the King∣dom. Some Historians have taken notice, that of the Gospel appointed to be read on the day whereon was fought this Battel (which was the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity, A. D. 1620) this Text, Render to Cesar the things that are Cesars, is a part. Which is as observable as the Church of England's appointing the 27th Chapter of Matthew to be read the second Lesson on the thirtieth of January; whereon our late King suffer'd Martyrdom. II. EGRA,Egra a great City on the borders of the Palatinate, is call'd by the Bohemians Chebbe; but by the Germans that inhabit it, Egra, from the River upon which 'tis seated. It was made an Imperial City by the Emperor Frideric I. in the year 1179, in remembrance of the fidelity of the Burgers to that Emperor in opposing Henry Duke of Bavaria, who had overrun the greatest part of this Country. It is walld with a double, sometimes with a tripple, wall; and defended by an almost impregnable Castle. The Market-place is surrounded with very fair build∣ings; and some of their Churches make a good show. Bertius and Ens speak of strange cures perform'd by the waters issuing out of a Foun∣tain in the Suburbs of this City. The Well they mention is not in the Suburbs; but about two English miles from the Town. Its waters are something salt and brinish; but very cool and clear. They are said to cure all infirmities in the Eyes, Ears, or other parts of the head; and many other cures are wrought by their purging and cleansing the body. Jac. Theodo∣rus Tabernaemontanus gives us an account of some strange feats wrought by them in his Book en∣tituled Wasser-Schatz, printed at Frantfurt A. D. 1584. And Paul Macasius publish'd a whole Treatise about the nature and vertues of these Egrish waters, in the year 1616. Some Anti∣quaries pretend to prove, that the old name of this City was Sourstad; from these bitter wa∣ters. But we can expect no great faithfulness in the account of its Antiquities; since the City, with all its Records, perish'd in the flames A. D. 1270. Other Cities of note are: 1. Budweiss, a fair and large Town, not far from the borders of Austria. 2. Kuttenberg; a Mine-Town on the Elb. Elnbogen; a strong Town on the borders of Misnia, call'd usually the Bohemian Key to the German Empire. 4. Thabor, in the way be∣twixt Prague and Budweiss; whence the Picarts got the name of Thaborites. Leimiritz, Augst, Bern, Bruck, Gretz, Maut, Hoff, Jaromir, Pilsen, &c. are no better then ordinary Market-Towns. decorative device
map of Franconia FRANCONIAE Nova Descriptio. Sumptibus Jansonio-Waesbergiorum, Mosis Pitt et Stephani Swart. blazon or coat of arms Reverendissimo & Illustrission Principi ac Domino Dnō FRANCISCO, Episcopo Bambergensi & Wirceburgensi, Franciae Orientalis Duci, Domino suo clemen∣tissimo, humillime offert Nicolaus Rittershusius U. I. D.
THE Great Circle OF FRANCONIA. FRANCONIA is the chief of the Ten great Circles or Districts into which the German Em∣pire is usually divided. This District sends to the Diets the Bishops of Wurtsburg, Eichstadt, and Bamberg; the Counts of Henneberg, Wertheim, &c. with several other Princes Spiritual and Tempo∣ral; besides the Deputies of the Imperial Cities of Noremberg, Rottenburg, Winsheim, and Schwin∣furt. 'Tis bounded on the South with Schwa∣ben and Bavaria; on the West with the Rhine and the Lower Palatinate; on the North with the Landgraviate of Thuringen; and on the East with the Kingdom of Bohemia. The Country has undoubtedly its name from the Franks, its ancient inhabitants; whom some Historians make a remnant of the old Trojans, who at first (being expell'd their own Country by the Grecians) seated themselves upon the Sea∣shore near the mouth of the Danubius. These Sicambri (for so they were then call'd) being beaten from their hold by the Goths, were forc'd to seek out new habitations; and at last (about 430 years before Christ) fix'd themselves, under the command of their General Marcomir, on the banks of the Rhine in Westphalia, Frisland, and Gelderland; all which Countries were afterwards compris'd under the General name of Sicam∣bria. About four hundred years after, they named themselves Franci, after the name of their great Commander Francus; who led them be∣yond the Rhine, and subdued for them the great∣est part of Gallia, which they nam'd Franckric (the Germans call it still Franckreich) or the King∣dom of the Franks. Others say, that the Franks were not one particular people; but that the Ʋbii, Mattiaci, Juhones, Sicambri, Tencteri, Ʋsipe∣tes, Marsi, Marsaci, Tubantes, Bructeri, Chamavi, Angrivarii, Dulgibini, Chassuarii, Ansibarii, Frisii, Chanci, Cherusci, Gambrivii, and some other branches of the German Nation united themselves into one Body by a solemn League and Covenant, as the only means to secure themselves against the grow∣ing power of the Roman Emperors. Having thus link'd themselves together, they took (as the Almans had done before them) one com∣mon name; calling themselves Francken, which in their language signified (as Freyen in the mo∣dern High Dutch) a free people; as we find in our ancient Law-books Francisia for freedom, Franciscare to set at liberty, and Franchises is a word still commonly used for liberties. About three hundred and sixteen years after Christ, there was great contest between the Thuringians and Schwabes; which the former thought to put an end to, by calling in the King of the Francks to their assistance, and desiring him to plant a Colony of his Soldiers betwixt them and their enemies. These proposals Clodomir, then King of France readily assented to; and imme∣diately dispatch'd his Brother Genebald with a great Army to take possession of their promised Dominions. Accordingly Genebald and his men fix'd themselves in Maingow (the ancient name of the Territories round Wartsburg); and in a short time made themselves masters of all that Country, which from them retains to this day the name of Franconia. The two chief Rivers of this Land are the Mayn and the Sala;Rivers. whereof the former springs out of two Fountains amongst the Hills on the borders of Bohemia, and (passing by Bamberg, Hassfurt, Schweinfurt, Kitzingen, Wurtzburg, Wer∣theim, and Francfurt) is swallow'd by the Rhine at Mentz. The German Geographers give this account of these Rivers; Maenus Pater dicitur quia rubrum & album Maenum generat & Maritus Salae; baec autem Ʋxor dicitur Maeni, & Mater quoniam octo liberos habet fluvios minores. This Country is encompass'd with Woods and Mountains;Soil. but has not in it any Hills of extra∣ordinary height. There are in it several Forests and Parks well stockt with Deer, wild Boares, and other sorts of Game. Most of the Hills (espe∣cially along the banks of the Rivers Mayn and Tauber) are cover'd with Vines; which yeild as delicate and rich a Wine as the best Vineyards upon the Rhine. The fields about Bamberg are
wonderfully fruitful in all manner of grain; be∣sides their great plenty of Grapes, Apples, and other fruit. Licorise grows so plentifully here∣abouts, that 'tis ordinarily carried off the field in Waggon-loads. The Bambergers have also great store of Saffron and Melons; and hardly want any thing that's pleasant or necessary. The Circle of Franconia is usually divided into six lesser Principalities;Division. whereof four are subject to Spiritual and two to Temporal Princes. The four Spiritual Princes are the Bishops of Bamberg, Wurtzburg, and Eeichstad, and the Master of the Teutonic Order. The first of these hath the pre∣eminence, and challenges a kind of Archiepis∣copal Jurisdiction over the rest. The Bishop of Wurtzburg is a more potent Prince then any of the rest; tho inferior in place to Bamberg. The Bi∣shop of Eichstad has no large Dominions in Fran∣conia; the most of his Territories lying within the bounds of Bavaria and Schwaben. The great Master of the Teutonic Order, has now little left but the bare Title to a few Bailiwicks; which seldom or never take notice of him for their Go∣vernour. The two Temporal Princes are the Burggraves of Noremberg; who are two Princes of the House of Brandenburg. Besides these, there are some more petty Counties and Lordships sub∣ject to other Princes of the Empire. As, Hen∣nenberg is under the Government of the Elector of Saxony and the Duke of Weimar; and several others places swear fealty to the Elector of Mentz. The old Francick Dialect,Language or Lingua Theotisca, is the true mother of the modern High Dutch; the word Theotisca being nothing else then a cor∣ruption of Die hogh Deutsch, in opposition to Die nieder Deutsch, spoken in Westphalia and the Lower Saxony. M. Goldastus has taken care to preserve several fragments of Records, Diplomata, &c. writ∣ten many ages ago in this tongue; and Martin Opitz (the Virgil of Germany, as he is usually stil'd) publish'd the life of Anno Archbishop of Coln, in the same Dialect, A. D. 1639. Otfrid's Historia Evangelica (written in old Francic near 900 years ago) was published at Basil in the year 1571; and Willeramus the Abbot of Mers∣burg's Paraphrase upon the Canticles at Leyden A. D. 1598. Upon which the learn'd Fr. Junius F. F. published his incomparable notes at Amster∣dam 1655. Since which time Mr. Lambecius (the Emperor's Library-keeper at Vienna) has made public several scraps in his curious History of some Rarities in the Imperial Library. And Mr. Junius (before mention'd) has lately be∣queath'd a noble Collection of the like monu∣ments of Antiquity to our public Library at Ox∣ford. Amongst which the choicest is Tatian's Harmonia Evangelica; illustrated with Mr. Junius's Notes, and design'd for the Press. WURTZBURG (call'd by Bede, Wirceburg;Wurtz∣burg. by Sigebert, Wirtiburgum and Wirtziburgum; by Trithemius, Paepolis, and Marcopolis; but by most of the modern Latin Historians and Geographers Herbipolis) is the Metropolis of Franconia; and has its name, as most imagine, from the variety of all manner of Herbs (Wurtzen) growing in this place. Conradus Celtes (the first Poet Lau∣reat in Germany) calls this City Erebipolis; which word some derive from a certain Pagan God named Erebus, never heard of by any Francic Antiquary. I rather think that Poet's Works corrupted; and Erebipolis carelesly written for Herbipolis. I cannot but here take notice of Champerius's mistake, who (tho a learned man) tells us, in his Treatise de Mirabilibus Mundi, that there are two Bishoprics in Germany subject to the Archbishop of Mentz; to wit, Wirceburgensis and Herbipogenensis. Which is something akin to the blunder of a late Geographer who made two distinct Cities of Strasburg and Argentina. 'Tis by some fancy'd, that the Palace at Wurtz∣burg was built long before the City; because, in the life of St, Burchard, the Palace is call'd Old Wurtzburg, and the Town New Wurtzburg. An∣drew Goldmayer, a whimsical Astrologer in this Town, has given us this punctual account of its age; Wurtzburg, says he, was built A. M. 3782, three years before the birth of our Saviour, in the two and fortieth year of the reign of the Em∣peror Augustus, in the twenty-sixth year of the reign of King Francus, on the twenty-seventh of February, about thirty-three minutes past eleven a clock in the forenoon. But men less skill'd in calculation, tho of better understanding, then this Gentleman, say 'twas built by Genebald, about the year of Christ 236. Bede calls it Pagus; but by that word questionless intends to render the German word Gow, which signifies a Province or County, as well as a Village. The Bishop has supreme Jurisdiction over the whole Town, in Temporals as well as Spirituals; and sits, at his pleasure, Judg in all Causes Civil and Criminal. When he appears in public there is a Sword carried before him with this inscription, Herbipolis sola judicat Ense & Stola. And when he says Mass, there lies before him, on the Altar, a drawn Sword; to put him in mind, that to him belongs the execution of Justice throughout the whole Principality of Franconia. The most remarkable sights in the Town (next to the Bishop's Palace, a stately structure on the top of an high hill beyond the River) the Hos∣pital and great College in the Gymnasium; both of which are mighty regular and uniform build∣ings, and equal most of our new built Colleges in Oxford. BAMBERG is said to have been at first nam'd Babenberg,B from Baba the Emperor Henry the First's Sister; tho others think it rather a corruption of Papenberg, or Pfaffenberg; as having been anciently the Seat of the Priests or Pfaffen. We have already acquainted the Reader with the delicate situation of this City, abounding with all sorts of rich fruits and plants beyond any of its neighbouring Provinces; and shall here only take notice of what is observable within the Town. The old Earls of Bamberg kept their residence at Altenburg, about an English mile from the Town; but the Bishops have now a∣days a Palace in the midst of the City on a small Island in the River Regnitz. 'Tis a pile of build∣ing sufficiently magnificent and splendid; rarely beautified with large and fair Orchards and Gar∣dens. The Jesuits College and Church make a good shew; and the four Spires at the Cathedral are noble. SCHWEINFURT (or Trajectus Svevorum) has its name from the Swabes passing the River Mayn in this place.S f Goltmeyer says, this Town was built 217 years before Christ; but brings little proof for what he reports. The Town is at present neither very large nor populous; but tolerably well fortified with Walls and Rampires, and has the advantage of a good River running by. This City is by some reckon'd a part of the Principality of Hennenberg; of which anon.
blazon or coat of arms map of the territory of Frankfort TERRITORIUM FRANCOFUR¦TENSE To Iohn Hillersdon of the Inner Temple Esq thisMapp is Humbly Dedicated by Moses Pitt.
The City and Territory of FRANCFURT upon the MAYN. THE Emperor Charles the Great (King of the Francks) having once made war against the Sax∣ons, and thoroughly incensed that bold and resolute people; he could get but little rest, till he had subdued them beyond all possibility of a Rebellion. For they were continually pressing in swarms upon the Francks; whom (when they found themselves too numerous for their ene∣mies) they would be sure to pursue to the very banks of the River Mayn; where they had some∣times the misfortune to be cut in pieces by the Francks, who (well acquainted with the Fords of that River) would suddenly rush in upon them, and put most of them either to flight or the sword. From these sallies 'tis thought the Town of Francfurt had its name; it being seated upon one of these common Fords of the Francks. This is the opinion of the ingenious Gunther in his Ligurinus; where he says, quia Carolus illic Saxonas indomita nimium feritate rebelles Oppugnans, rapidi latissima flumina Maeni Ignoto fregisse vado, mediumque per Amnem Transmississe suas neglecto ponte cohortes Creditur. &c.But others say, tho without reason, that 'twas built by Francus the first Captain of these peo∣ple; and that from him it got its name. And some, as ridiculously, have call'd it Helenopolis from the Emperor Constantine's Mother. The Town is divided into two parts, separated from each other by the Mayn; whereof the grea∣ter is call'd Francfurt, and the less Sachsen-huss, or the House of the Saxons. These two are united by a Stone-bridg cross the River, of thirteen or fourteen Arches; and subject to the same Magistrates. The City is strong and well forti∣fied; and, which gives it more strength then Walls or Rampires can do, its inhabitants are unanimous professors of the Lutheran Religion. The Jews indeed have one street to themselves, and are allow'd a Synagogue, with the public profession of their Religion. But these are so inconsiderable an handful of men, that there is no fear of their disturbing the Government. It is a place of great traffick, and well seated for that purpose. For the Mayn, passing by the great Cities of Bamberg, Schweinfurt, Wurtzburg, and Guemund, gives it an opportunity of trading with the greatest part of Franconia; and the same River running into the Rhine, carries off, and brings in Commodities from the Remoter parts of the German Empire and the Netherlands. The greatest concourse of foreign Merchants is at the two great Fairs kept here yearly in March and September; at which times all sorts of Commo∣dities, especially Books, are brought hither by the Factors of the Germans, Hollanders, Italians, French, and English. They have every year a Catalogue publish'd of such new Books, as are or will be brought into the Fair; and from them our London Booksellers have of late years learn'd the trick of printing a Catalogue every Term. As long as this Mart lasts (which is usually three weeks) there is here as great variety and choice of Books as in any City in Europe; but when that is over, the Booksellers shops are usually shut up. On the North-side of the City they have a spa∣tious Horse-Fair; wherein yearly a vast number of good Horses are bought and sold. Among the many Priviledges conferr'd on this City by several of the German Emperors,Privi∣ledges. the chief is its being appointed the certain place for the Election of every new Emperor. This was a customary thing ever since Arnulph the First's days; but confirm'd only by Charles IV. Author of the Aurea Bulla; of which we have already treated at large in the General Description of Germany. After the Electors have given their voices in St. Bartholomew's Church, if it does not appear (as, now there are Eight Electors, it may easily happen) which person has the most votes; it has been usual for the two Candidates to determine the quarrel by battel in the neigh∣bouring Fields, wherein the Conqueror is carried off with great acclamations back to the City, and there proclaim'd King of the Romans. Thus the controversie was decided betwixt Henry Land∣grave of Thuringen and Conrad Son to the Em∣peror Frideric II. as also between Ludowic Duke of Bavaria and Frideric Arch Duke of Austria; and lastly, betwixt Gunther Count of Schwart∣zenburg and Charles IV. These are the instances given by Munster, and some other German writers; all of whom Martin Zeiller (relying on the Au∣thority of Chrst. Lehman, in his Chronicle of Spire) fancies to be mistaken, and to report sto∣ries which none of the more ancient Historians (who flourish'd in the times when these things should have been transacted) ever mention. St. Bartholomew's Church in Francfurt is a ve∣nerable and stately piece of Architecture; having been first built by King Pepin, Charles the Great's Father. Some other public buildings (as the Town-Hall, several Monasteries, &c.) are worth the seeing. But the Mineral Springs and Baths are most remarkable; which are daily visited by the Nobility and Gentry of the Town and neighbourhood. Amongst the rest, there is one Cold Bath: wherein, as Zeiller reports, 'twas the custom in his days to wash women before they went to be married, or as soon as their month of childbed was over. But that which gave England the greatest cause to remember this City, was the entertainment of some of our Protestant Ministers; who, with their Congregations, fled hither in the days of Queen Mary's bitter persecution. Yet I am sorry our Island is forced to own such a sett of Eccle∣siastics; who went hence a pack of Zuinglian Gospellers, and return'd promoters of Purita∣nism and rebellious Principles. They arriv'd at Francfurt in June A. D. 1554, where by the favour of John Glauberge (an Alderman of the City) they were permitted the free exercise of their Religion in a Church formerly assign'd to the French Protestants. Their chief Ring-leaders were Whittingham, Williams, Goodman, Wood, and Sutton; who, before they began to instruct their flocks, took upon them to reform the Liturgy and Discipline of the Church of England. The Surplice and Litany were cashier'd as rags of the Whore of Babylon; and the Responsals laid aside, as formal pieces of canting, which disturb'd the due course of Divine Worship. In short, the whole Liturgy (except the Lessons and Psalms) was rejected, as savouring too much of Rome and Antichrist. Instead of the Magnificat, Nunc di∣mittis, &c. they sung so many Stanza's of Stern∣hold's Rithms. After Sermon they had a prayer for all states and conditions of men (more par∣ticularly for the Church of England, meaning their own Tribe) in imitation of our prayer for the Church Militant; and then concluded with
The Peace of God, &c. The noise of this upstart Church (wherewith Dr. Scory, Bishop of Chi∣chester, now Superintendent at Embden; Grindal, Sandys, and Haddon, at Strasburg; and Horn, Cham∣bers, and Parkhurst at Zurick; had refused to have communion) drew Knox, the Scotch Incendiary, from Geneva; in hopes of making a better mar∣ket here then he could do in Switzerland. Here he arriv'd about the latter end of September; and immediately took upon him the Superintendency of the Church; Whittingham and the other Di∣vines submitting themselves to his Apostleship and Government. This was highly resented by the Divines of Strasburg and Zurick, who were well acquainted with Knox's principles, and knew of what dangerous consequence the promotion of such a Hotspur was like to prove. Where∣upon, Gryndal and Chambers were sent to Franc∣furt to endeavour a composure of differences, and a reunion of all the English Protestants. But their endeavours prov'd successless and vain; tho they proposed, that the substance of the English Liturgy being retain'd, there might be (by a general consent) an omission of some cere∣monies and offices in it allow'd of. For Knox and Whittingham were as zealously bent against the substance as circumstantials of the Book. In the midst of these confusions Dr. Cox (Dean of Westminster, and a principal composer of the Li∣turgy in King Edward the Sixth's days) comes to Francfurt, attended with a great many more English Exiles. Upon his first arrival he causes one of his company to read the Litany in the Pulpit; and not long after got Knox expell'd the Town for publishing some treasonable expressi∣ons against the Emperor. Having thus worsted his adversary, he was resolv'd to follow the blow; which he did so effectually, as to procure an Order from the Common Council of the City, requiring all the English Protestants to be con∣formable to the Discipline of their Church as contain'd in the Book of Common Prayer. But Cox, tho at present Master of the Field, was not able to appease the dissatisfied Brethren; who follow'd Knox to Geneva, and there set up the profession of their former Schismatical Tenents. In short, these scandalous ruptures (first begun at Francfurt, and afterwards carried on at Geneva) occasion'd the irrecoverable discredit of our Church beyond Seas; and were the first seeds of those lamentable animosities which to this day threaten our destruction. The Territory of Francfurt (which is under the subjection of the Citizens and Magistrates of the Town) is bounded on the East with the County of Hanaw;Territory. on the South with the Land∣graviate of Darmstat; on the West with the Arch∣bishopric of Mentz, and on the North with the County of Wetteraw. The soil is generally co∣ver'd with Woods or Vineyards; and there is little of arable or pasture ground in it. The inhabitants of this Country are a labo∣rious sort of people;Inhabi∣tants. applying themselves chiefly to the planting of Vineyards and making Wine. The poor people sell off their Wine, and drink water; having seldom the happiness to taste a draught of Beer. It was indeed anciently a pro∣verb in Germany: Sachs, Bayr, Schwab, und Franck, Die lieben all den Tranck, i. e. The Saxons, Bavarians, Swabes, and Francks Are all inclin'd to excessive drinking. But now adays that piece of debauchery is laid aside in Franconia; and you shall seldomer meet with a drunkard here then in any other part of Germany. The ancient Francks were men exceed∣ingly plain and careless in their habit; whence the Germans to this day say of any thing that's plain and ordinary, 'tis gut Alt Franckisch: but the case is alter'd, and the modern Francfurters are rather foppish then slovenly in their Appa∣rel. In this they are still imitators of their An∣cestors, that they are a stout and hardy people; which is enough to keep up that honour and repute which their Ancestors have got in foreign Nations. The Asians call all the Europeans Francks, and the Mahometans give the Western Christians the same name. The Abyssines in Africa (as Va∣getius witnesses) call the other part of the Christian World Alfrangues; and the Country they inha∣bit (i.e. Europe, and some parts of Asia) Francia. The Principality of HENNEBERG. HENNEBERG was formerly no more then a bare County; the Earls whereof were first advan∣ced to the honour of Princes of the Empire by the Emperor Henry VII. in a public Conven∣tion or Diet of all the Estates of the Empire, in the year 1310. The first of these Princes was Berthold, surnam'd the Wise; who was succeeded by Henry. This Prince married his Daughter to Frideric Marquise of Misnia; bestowing on her for a Dowry the County of Coburg. The last Prince of this Line was George Ernest; after whose death, which hapned in the year 1583, the County of Coburg, with the whole Principa∣lity of Henneberg, fell into the hands of the Elector of Saxony. 'Tis a populous and fruitful Country; bounded on the East with the Forests and Mountains of Thuringen; on the South, with the Bishopric of Bamberg; on the West, with the Diocess of Wurtz∣burg; and on the North, with the Territories annex'd to the Abbey of Fulda. The Castle or Palace of Henneberg (whence the Principality has its name) is seated on the top of a Hill not far from the City Meiningen; but has nothing in it remarkable. SCHLEUSINGEN, which has its name from the River Schleuss, on which 'tis seated, is ac∣counted the chief City in the County, tho per∣haps not in the Principality of Henneberg. 'Tis famous for a Gymnasium built here by the last Prince of Henneberg George Ernest A. D. 1577. 'Twas for some time the chief Residence of the Earls and Princes of this Country; many of whose monu∣ments are still to be seen in the great Church. Besides this, the Towns of Romhilt, Meinungen, and Koningshoven, challenge the name of Cities; but very ill deserve that character. We have already given a description of Schweinfurt; which some Geographers bring within the bounds of this Principality. Schmalcad was once a part of this Principality; but is not esteem'd so now. COBURG indeed is reckon'd usually a part of the great Circle of the Upper Saxony; but ly∣ing nearer Henneberg then any other considera∣ble place of the Elector of Saxony's Dominions, I think it may reasonably enough be described in this place. When, and by whom 'twas first built, is hard to determine; but in this all Geographers agree, that 'tis one of the most ancient Cities in the German Empire. All are satisfied, that Ptolomy means this Town by his Melocavium, o∣thers read it Melocabus; which in the Greek tongue
map of the principality of Hennenberg PRINCIPATUS HENNEN∣BERGENSIS
map of the county of Wertheim COMITATVS WERTHEIMICI FINITIMARVMQVE REGIONVM NOVA ET EXACTA DESCRIPTIO. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
signifies the same with Coburg in the German. The City is at present tolerably large and well built; beautified and defended by a strong Castle on the top of a neighbouring Hill. In this Castle Martin Luther was several times imprison'd, for speaking more sleightly then became him of his Superiors. During this confinement he com∣piled several spiritual Songs, which are sung to this day, with a great deal of devotion by his followers. In one whereof he seems more then ordinarily to commend the happiness of impri∣sonment. Several also of his Epistles we find dated from this place; to all which he has sub∣scribed Grubock instead of Coburg, intending by this transposition of the Letters to dissemble his confinement. The Gymnasium (wherein are main∣tain'd Eleven Professors, in all Faculties) was founded by John Casimir Duke of Saxony A.D. 1602: as was also the Duke's Palace in the City not many years before. The City and County of WERTHEIM. IN the mouth of the Tauber, on the banks of the Mayn, is seated the City of Wertheim; in a fruit∣ful soil, and good air. The Ci∣tizens (whose chief trade is in making Wine) liv'd formerly in good credit; till (upon some disagreement be∣tween them and their Earls, who endeavour'd to reestablish Popery in the Town) they were brought to so great poverty and straits for the defence of their Religion, that they have scarce been able to recruit themselves to this day. How∣ever they still stick close to the Augsburg Con∣fession; and are zealous assertors of the honour of their Saint Luther. The County of Wertheim (which is a part of the old Francia Orientalis, as lying on the South side of the River Mayn) is bounded on the East with the Bishoprick of Wurtzburg; on the South with the County of Hohenloe and the Palatinate; on the West with the Silva Ottonica; and on the North with the large Forest of Speshart. This Province affords much more plenty of Corn then the Territories about Francfurt; nor is it any way inferior to those for the goodness of its Wine. The inhabitants have here good store of Meadows and Pasture-ground for Cat∣tel; which bring in yearly as great revenues as their best Vineyards. They have no want of wild Fowl; and are cloy'd with Venison. Among the several Villages that have depen∣dance upon the City of Wertheim,Niclas∣hausen. the most re∣markable is Niclashausen; famous for the birth and education of one John Behaim, who was burnt for an Heretick at Wurtzburg A. D. 1476. The occasion whereof was this: The poor Bore be∣ing melancholy and crack-brain'd, fancied daily that he saw, in his melancholy and dumpish fits, strange and terrible apparitions. One time the Virgin Mary forsooth, amongst his other spiri∣tual guests, gave him a visit; and grew so fami∣liar as to communicate to him several deep in∣trigues and secrets. The choicest whereof was, that there lay no obligation at all upon the Bur∣gers of Wertheim to shew any manner of respect to their Earls or inferior Magistrates; but that they were all as free and boundless as the Rivers that water'd their Country. This was a plau∣sible Doctrine in the ears of the Commonalty, and needed but little Divine Revelation to autho∣rize it; so that Behaim had presently more pro∣selytes then all the Preachers in the Country; and would in a short time have perverted the greatest part of the County, had he not early been overpower'd and prevented by the Bishop's forces. Erpach, Norimberg, Hanaw, &c. are purposely omitted in this place, tho parts of Franconia; as being reserv'd for the second Volume of Ger∣many. decorative device
THE County Palatinate OF THE RHINE. DIE Pfaltz (which is the ordinary German word for this County) signi∣fies no more then Pa∣latium,Name. whereof Pala∣tinus is only an Adje∣ctive Possessive. Now how Palatium should be a name given to a County, or Palatinus to an Earl, we have already acquainted the Rea∣der; treating of the High Dutch Nobility, in the General Description of Germany. There are only at this day two Counties in the German Empire which are usually known by the name of Coun∣ties Palatinate; whereof one (the Upper Palati∣nate) is part of the Dukedom of Bavaria, and shall be treated of elsewhere. About four or five hundred years ago,Bounds. very little of the Country about Huydelberg was rec∣kon'd a part of the Lower Palatinate; but most of the Cities in this neighbourhood were either Imperial or subject to some other Prince then the Counts Palatine, who are now (by Mar∣riage, Conquest, or Purchase) Masters of the Land. Before the Bohemian Wars, betwixt the Emperor and Frideric Count Palatine, and the Civil Wars of Germany, the Territories and Re∣venues of this Prince were large enough to make him more formidable then any of the other E∣lectors. But such were his misfortunes in those bloody Engagements, that he lost both the King∣dom of Bohemia (which he contended for) and also all his own hereditary Dignities and Estates. The Upper Palatinate was seized on by the Duke of Bavaria; and the Lower conquer'd and sub∣dued by the King of Spain. By the Treaty of Munster the late Count Charles-Ludowic, Son to the unfortunate King of Bohemia, was restored to some part of his Father's Dominions in the Lower Palatinate; but these are of no great ex∣tent, and are still like to be lessen'd by the daily encroachments of the French King. This Country is much the pleasantest part of the German Empire;Soil. and therefore 'tis no great wonder, that the neighbouring Princes have in all ages watcht an opportunity of getting it into their clutches. The Hills are cover'd with Vines, which yeild that rich Liquor known all Europe over by the name of Rhenish Wine. The Plains and Valleys afford plenty of all manner of Grain and Fruit; and the Forests are plentifully stock'd with Deer and other Game. The Rhine, pas∣sing thro the midst of the County, gives a fair advantage of exporting the commodities of this, and importing those of foreign Nations. The Rivers Rhine and Neccar have store of Fish; and the Hills want neither Mettals nor Minerals. That part of the Lower Palatinate which lies on the Western banks of the Rhine,, was first con∣quer'd by the Romans, and afterwards by the French; of whose Kingdom it was a part, but more immediately subject to the Earls of the Moselle. Afterwards, when the Kingdom of Lorrain came to be divided betwixt the Empe∣rors of Germany and the Kings of France, this Territory became a share of the German Empire; but was still possess'd by the Prince of Moselle as before. Upon the failure of that Family it fell under the more immediate power of the Em∣perors; who, for many good offices done them, were pleased to bestow it on the Elector's Pala∣tine. By the same means they became Masters of the other part of this Country, on the Eastern banks of the River; upon extirpation of the House of Schwaben. The present Elector Palatine is Count Charles, who was born on the last day of May in the year 1651, and was advanc'd to the Electorate upon the late death of his Father Charles-Ludowic A. D. 1680. He is a pious and learned Prince; and treads much in the steps of his Father, who pos∣sibly was (considering the troubles he had un∣dergone) as learned a Prince as Europe afforded in his time. The Revenues of this Elector's Ancestors are said to have amounted to 100000 pounds ster∣ling yearly. Nor can we well imagine them to have been less; when only the Silver Mines about Amberg, in the Upper Palatinate, yeilded 60000 Crowns a year; and the passage over one Bridg cross the Rhine brought in 20000 more. To
which, if we add the Revenue of all the De∣mesns immediately subject to these Princes, and the Church-lands, which after the Reformation were annex'd to the Electoral Estate; we may probably find the sum arise much higher. But now adays the case is alter'd; and the greatest share of the Riches as well as Honours, anci∣ciently appropriated to this House, is enjoy'd by the Duke of Bavaria. The state of Religion,. both in the Upper and Lower Palatinate, has been exceedingly chang'd and varied since the first introducing of the Augs∣burg Confession by Count Frideric II. For Fride∣ric III. set up the Doctrine and Discipline of John Calvin; which, soon after his death, was thrown out by Ludowic V. a restorer of Lutheranism. His Son, Frideric IV. brought the Calvinists once more in play, for the satisfaction (chiefly) of his beggarly Courtiers; who knew no readier way of raising their Fortunes, then by invading the Tythes and Glebe, with the other poor re∣mainders of the Church's Patrimony. By which means the Clergy being reduc'd (says Dr. Hey∣lin) to miserable short stipends under the name of a Competency, became so contemptible, and neglected by all sorts of men, that at last the Church of the Palatinate was in the same con∣dition with the Church of Israel under the reign of Jeroboam, when Priests were made out of the meanest of the people. But a Church reduc'd to these straits was not like to be of any durable continuance, but to end ere long in misery. Ac∣cordingly, the Bavarians and Spaniards soon after this havock made of the Church, fell upon them, and took away their ill-gotten Estates and starv'd Religion; leaving in the place of the latter the Idolatry and Superstition of the Church of Rome, which is to this day openly profess'd in most parts of the Elector Palatine's Domi∣nions, notwithstanding his own firm adherence to the Doctrines of the Calvinists. The Chief Cities in the Lower PALATINATE. HEYDELBERG is the Metropolis of the Lower Palatinate, and (as some would have it) of all Swa∣ben. 'Tis seated on the Neccar, which parts Swaben and Franco∣nia. It has its name from a lit∣tle sort of shrub resembling Myrtle, the fruit whereof (growing plentifully on the Hills round this City) the Germans call Heidelbeeren; whence Latin Authors write the name of this Town Myrtillorum mons and Myrtilletum. 'Tis compass'd round with Hills cover'd with Vines; except only towards the West, which way you have a good prospect over a large and pleasant plain. The Town is neither large nor very popu∣lous; its chief beauty consisting in one fair street, set off with an uniform Market place. The Elector's Palace (on the ascent of the hill Ko∣nigstul, which overlooks the whole Town) is a stately Fabrick; beautified with a great many delicate Gardens, Grottoes, &c. Not far distant from which stands a strong Tower; which, for its fortifications and heighth, is hardly to be pa∣rallel'd in the German Empire. 'Twas formerly call'd Trutzkayser, or Defiance to the Emperor; but since the restauration of the late Elector, that disobliging name has been abolish'd; and 'tis now call'd (from some new Works made round it in form of a Star) Stern-schantz, or Star-fort. But the most remarkable thing in this Palace (and indeed in Heydelberg) is the great Wine∣fat;Great Tun; mention'd by all that travel this Country under the name of the Tun at Heydelberg. That which is now to be seen, in an outer building near the Palace, was built by the order of the last Elector Charles-Ludowic; and far exceeds any of the former. It contains above 204 Fudder of Wine; which amounts to about 200 Tun of our English measure. Instead of Hoops it is built with large Trees of knee Timber, like the ribs of a Ship; which have several Inscriptions painted and carv'd upon them, and are supported by carv'd pedestals. Upon one side of the Vessel you have a handsom Stair-case, leading to the top; where you meet with a Gallery set round with Ballisters, three and forty steps from the ground. Before the year 1664 (in which year this was built) the old Tun, tho one of the won∣ders of the German Nation, was not comparable to this. 'Twas encircled with great Hoops of Iron, each of which are said to have weigh'd 12200 pound. It contain'd only 132 Fudder of Wine; and there were no more then seventeen steps to the stop. The University was founded by Count Rupert in the year 1387,Ʋniver∣sity. tho some will needs have it ten years older, and others near forty. It is still much frequented; and has given education to many eminent men in former days. Witness R. Agricola, Munster, H. Buschius, Xylander, Paul Cisner, Pacius, Franciscus Junius P & F. Smetius, Freherus, and Janus Gruterus. In the great Church,Library. dedicate to the Holy Ghost, was formerly kept the Elector's Library; of which the learned Scaliger (in one of his Epi∣stles to Janus Gruterus) gives this account; In∣dicem Bibliothecae vestrae sedulo legi. Locupletior est, & meliorum Librorum, quam Vaticana. One great part of this Collection was the Library of the Monastery of Sponheim; to which (says Tri∣themius, in a Letter to Damius Curtensis A.D. 1507) no Library in the German Empire is worthy to be compar'd, either for the rarity or multitude of Books; especially its Manuscripts in the He∣brew, Greek, Latin, Chaldaean, Arabic, Indian, Russian, Tartarian, Italian, French, German, and Bohemian languages. But this Treasure of Learning was siezed on, and plunder'd by the Spanish forces; who took Heydelberg in the year 1620. At which time a considerable number of choice Books were trodden to dirt; and the rest carried over the Alps to the Vatican, where they may still be seen in a long Gallery over against the Duke of Ʋrbin's Library. 2. WORMES,Wormes. tho more immediately sub∣ject to the Bishop of that place, is reckon'd the second Town in the Lower Palatinate. Freher, a man admirably skill'd in the Antiquities of this Country, says, that 'twas anciently the Metro∣polis of the Vangiones, the old inhabitants of these parts; and that within these few years was to be seen this Inscription in Capital Letters, over the Peacock-Gate, SPECULA VANGIONUM. But Cluverius tells us, its old name was Bormi∣tomagus, or Borbetomagus; corrupted afterwards into Vorvetomagus, Vorvemagus, Vormagia, Guarma∣cia, and at last Wormacia. The Imperial Chamber was formerly kept here; and in those days Worms was one of the most con∣siderable Towns in the Empire. Munster says, that in his time 200 Cities, Great Towns and Villages lay so near this City, that their inhabi∣tants could daily bring into Worms such provi∣sion as their Country afforded, and return home at night to their respective dwellings. But the many calamities which this place, and the neigh∣bourhood,
underwent in the Civil Wars of Ger∣many, and by the late incursions of the French forces (not to mention the miseries they have suffer'd by the often rebellion of the Citizens a∣gainst their Bishop) have mightily alter'd the case; and there is now nothing of state, nor any thing truly great, in the City. 3.Speyer. SPEYER is subject to the Elector Pala∣tine at the same rate with Wormes. It is thought to be the Nemetum Civitas, or Noviomagum men∣tion'd by Julius Cesar; altho Freherus proves, that the whole Country near this place was anciently concluded under that name. 'Tis seated in a plain on the Western banks of the Rhine; a large and populous City; which owes its security more to the number of its inhabitants then the strength of any fortifications near it. For Gusta∣vus Adolphus, the victorious King of Sweden, de∣molish'd its Bulwarks and Rampires; being un∣willing to spare so many men out of his Army as were requisite to Garrison it, and make it good against any future assault of the Imperialists. The Citizens of Wormes and Spire, tho Lutherans, swear fealty to their Bishops; who are under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Mentz. There are in this Town many stately Houses and fair Churches; the chief of which is the Cathedral, beautified with four Towers. But the great Glory of the Town is the Im∣perial Chamber; which was first placed at Worms by the Emperor Maximilian the First, and not long after fix'd at Speyer; from whence it can∣not be removed but by a general consent of the Estates of the Empire. This fills the City with a constant concourse of people from all parts of Germany; who repair hither for the final de∣termination of such Law-suits as they fancy have not been well decided by inferior Courts of Ju∣dicature in their own Country. For hither there lies an Appeal from any Prince's Court in the Empire. And the Electors themselves may, in some Trials at Law, be summon'd to appear before this Court. 4.Zwey∣brucken. ZWEYBRUCKEN (call'd by the French Deux-Ponts) has its name from the Bridges over two Rivers; at the confluence where∣of 'tis seated. This City is signal for little more then its giving name to a small Principality in the neighbourhood; which is enjoy'd by a youn∣ger House of the Counts Palatine, who are com∣monly stiled Principes Bipontini, or Principes Ge∣mini Pontis. These poor Princes have paid dear for some of the French King's late victories; espe∣cially his Triumphs in the beginning of the year 1677, wherein their chief City Zweybrucken was almost quite demolish'd. So near was it to an utter overthrow, that at this time there is hardly any thing more to be seen then the Skele∣ton of a City. 5.Ʋden∣heim, or Philips∣burg. UDENHEIM, a Town subject to the Bi∣shop of Spire; seated on the mouth of the Saltza, and on the Eastern banks of the Rhine. 'Twas anciently a Village; but was wall'd round by Gerhard Bishop of Spire, who first made it a City, and procured for it severallarge Priviledges. 'Tis conveniently seated for the command of the most considerable part of the adjacent Country; and for that reason well fortified by the Bishop of this Diocess a little before the breaking out of the Civil Wars of Germany. These new Forti∣fications, begun in time of peace, gave ground to the neighbouring Princes to suspect that some more then ordinary designs were carrying on by this Prelate. Whereupon Frederic V. (the then Elector Palatine, and Prince in chief of Ʋdenheim) required him to desist from finishing what he had begun; which he refused to do, alledging the Emperor's Placaet for what he did. Upon this contempt, the Elector beat it down by force. For this affront to the Emperor's Au∣thority, the Elector and his Confederates were cited to appear before the Imperial Chamber at Speyer; wherein 'twas resolved, that they should be proceeded against with all imaginable seve∣rity. This hard usage was one of the chief mo∣tives which induced the unfortunate Elector to accept the Crown of Bohemia; and consequently a chief cause of the Civil Wars of Germany. In which unhappy juncture, Marquise Spinola (the Spanish General) thought this Town so capable of being improv'd into a strong Hold, that he repair'd the demolish'd Fortifications, and (ha∣ving made the place almost impregnable) gave it the new name of Philipsburg. By the Treaty of Munster this Town and Castle were put into the hands of the French; and by the late Treaty at Nimeguen, resign'd up to the Imperialists in exchange for Freyburg in Brisgow. The present King of France, before the breaking out of the late bloody Wars, caused this Inscription to be written over the great Gate at Philipsburg: Tuendis RHENI Finibus. LUDOVICUS XIV. Francorum & Navarrae Rex Christianissimus Confecto in utraque Ger∣mania bello; restaurata ubique Pace; Muni∣mentum hoc suae virtutis, Assertaeque libertatis Germaniae Monumentum firmari isthoc agere, muroque Regiis sumptibus extructo, fecit Anno M. DC. LXVI. Perfecit in terrorem hostium, Foederatorum Prae∣sidium, Liliorum Subsidium, alterum Galliae cis Rhenum propugnaculum ac Germaniam versus Ostium, in ferius situ non Robore. Quod ille claudit, nemo aperit: Idem aperit, & nemo claudit. But when afterwards, in the succeeding War, it had fall'n into the hands of the Imperialists, the Emperor raz'd out the former Inscription, and caused this following one to be written in its stead: LEOPOLDƲS IMPERATOR CAESAR, Pius, Faelix, Augustus VICTOR & TRIUMPHATOR, Suscepto Juvandis Sociis, Tuendis civibus, Arcendis hostibus, necessario bello, restaurandae ubique Paci, Munimentum hoc, Vindicatae ab injectis Gallicae servitutis compedibus Libertatis publicae, futurum ad Posteros monumentum expugnavit, Germaniaeque postliminio restituit Anno Christianae salutis MDCLXXVI. Terrori hostium, Tutelae Civium, Germaniae Praesi∣dio; alterum Galliae cis Rhenum receptaculum ac Germaniam versus Ostium, Auspicato plura pari successu recuperandi augurio, Gallis clausit, Germanis reclusit. Quod Gallus claudit, Germanus aperit. There are some more well fortified Towns in the Lower Palatinate; such as Manheim upon the confluence of the Rhine and Neccar; Coube, Franckenthal, Keysers-Lautern, Simmeren, &c. but none of so good note as those already described.
blazon or coat of arms Helvetii blazon or coat of arms Alsatia blazon or coat of arms Pal. Rheni blazon or coat of arms Arch Mogun blazon or coat of arms Arch. Trevir. blazon or coat of arms Arch. Colon. blazon or coat of arms Clivia blazon or coat of arms Geldria blazon or coat of arms Vltrajectū blazon or coat of arms Hollandia Apud Jsso-Waesbergios Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
RHENVS Fluviorum Europae celeberrimus, cum MOSA, MOSELLA, et reliquis, in illum se exonerantibus fluminibus. map of the Rhine and its tributaries Ap Jss-Waesbergios Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
map of the Rhineland Palatinate PALATINA¦TVS AD RHENUM Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart. Not. Explicatio. Civitates munite. Ʋrbes. Ʋici. Pagi. Arces. Coenobia. Fortalitia.
Vera totius MARCHIONATUS BADENSIS, et HOCHBERGENSIS, ceterorumque Ducatum Landgravio∣natuum et Comitatuum ad Princeps huius nominis spectantium Geometr: Astro: Calcu: Delineatio. blazon or coat of arms Heic domus AEneae cunctis dominabitur oris. Et gnati gnatorum, et qui nascentur ab illis. Excudebant Janssonio-Waesbergii, Moses Pitt et Stephanus Swart. Explicatio Notarum Vrbs Oppidum Pagus notabilis Pagus Arx Monasterium Pag{us}. not. cum Arce Arx et Pagus Monast. cum Pago Balneum Acidus fons Fodinae AErarum
THE MARQUISATE OF BADEN. BADEN (lying along the Eastern banks of the Rhine) is a Province of no large extent, but exceedingly fruitful in Corn, Wine, and Hemp. The Country is every∣where very populous; and the Villages so thick that the whole Marqui∣sate has been by some compared to one conti∣nued City, with fair Gardens interlac'd among the buildings. Entz, Wirmb, Phintz, and the other Rivers, afford plenty of Fish. And the Chases and Parks are so well stock'd with Venison and Fowl, that what the Nobility in other parts of the German Empire covet as a delicacy, the Rustics of Ba∣den have for their ordinary food. The Merchants of Amsterdam, Antwerp, and other great trading Towns in the Netherlands, furnish themselves hence with those vast quantities of Flax and Hemp which they transport into foreign Nations; so that what passes for Holland Flax here in Eng∣land, grows for the most part in the Marquisate of Baden, and is brought thence down the Rhine. There are in this Country whole Woods of Ches∣nut Trees; which feed their great Herds of Swine at a cheaper rate then the Hog-Merchants of Whestphalia, who buy their Chesnuts at Bremen, can afford to do. The Quarries give the inhabitants an advan∣tage of building fair Houses with a small cost; providing them with a good Free-stone and Mar∣ble of all colours. Amongst these (especially in the County of Sponheim) they sometimes find Agat; which is here rarely polish'd, and sent into foreign Countries. But this Marquisate is most peculiarly happy in the multitude and goodness of its hot Baths and Mineral-waters; especially at Baden, of which more anon. From the vast conflux of the Nobility from all parts of the Empire to these Baths, we may reasonably imagine, that the complaisant carri∣age towards strangers which we find every-where practis'd by the inhabitants of this Country, has in a great measure proceeded from their conver∣sation with strangers, who flock hither upon the strong conceit they have of the more then or∣dinary virtues of these waters. They are gene∣rally a stout and hardy people; inur'd to labour and toil, or the severities of a Camp, from their their Cradle. Hence they come to be reckon'd as good Soldiers as any in the Emperor's Domi∣nions. And 'tis not a little Honour the Coun∣try has got this last year (1681) in having their Marquise Herman made choice of to succeed the late famous Commander Montecuculi in the place of General of all the Imperial Forces. No question, the Marquises of this Country are descended of an ancient stock of Princes;Marqui∣ses. but of what old Family they are to be reputed a branch, the German Heraulds can scarce de∣termine. Some fetch them from the Ʋrsins, and others from the House of Della Scala, or the Sca∣ligers. Some again labour to prove, that Baden and Hochberg are different Families; and others, that they are but one. Other Genealogists tell us, that the Emperor Frideric Barbaressa brought Herman Marquise of Verona out of Italy, and made him the first Marquise of Hochberg and Baden A. D. 1155. Which will very ill agree with what the best High Dutch Historians report of a Monastery being founded by Herman Marquise of Baden in his Village of Backenau, A. D. 1116, which was confirm'd by Bruno Bishop of Spire in the year 1122. The most probable opinion is, that they are descended from the ancient Counts of Vindonissa and Altemburg in Switzerland; from whom also the Dukes of Zeringuen and Tek, the Counts of Habspurg, and the Arch-Dukes of Au∣stria derive their original. At present there are two Families of the Mar∣quises of Baden; whereof one is a profess'd Lu∣theran, and the other a zealous Papist. For this reason their interests seem different; the Mar∣quise of Durlach associating himself with the Count Palatine, the Marquise of Brandenburg, the Duke of Wirtenberg, and the Count of Solms; and the Marquise of Baden with the Dukes of Bavaria, Savoy, and Lorrain, and the Princes of
Hohernzollern. Each of these Princes stiles him∣self Marquise of Baden and Hochberg, Landgrave of Sausenberg, Earl of Sponheim and Eberstein, Lord of Rotel, Badenweiler, Lohr, and Mahlberg. The Chief Cities in the Marquisate of BADEN. BADEN is the Metropolis of this Marquisate;Baden. and has its name from the vast number of Hot Baths in this place, which are said to be above three hundred. The Town stands amongst Hills, on a craggy and uneven spot of ground; so that there's hardly a strait and plain street in it. Some of the Baths are scalding hot; and all of them (running out of Rocks of Brimstone, Salt, and Allum) have the same tast. One of them is call'd the Kettle; out of which the water boils at a wonderful rate, reeking as if set over a Fur∣nace. These waters are reckon'd soveraign me∣dicines for several diseases; especially the Cramp and Gout, both which distempers have been admirably cur'd by them. For this reason there is a continual resort of the German Nobility and Gentry; who flock hither in as great com∣panies during the whole Summer as our English Gentry are wont to do to Bath in Somersetshire. See Joh. Keiffer's description of the Baths of this Country. 2.Durlach. DURLACH is seated on the bank of the River Psintz, at the bottom of a high hill; on the top whereof stands a Tower, wherein con∣tintial watch is kept for the security of the City. The streets in this Town are generally fair and strait; and the buildings stately and uniform. The Marquise's Palace far excells that at Baden; and is large enough to receive the Court and At∣tendants of the greatest Monarch in Europe. There is a Gymnasium, kept up by some few Professors, who read public Lectures in the several Facul∣ties. But that which is most worthy a Scholar's sight, is the rare Collection of ancient Coins and Meddals in the Marquise's Cabinet; and the Library adjoining, wherein are some pieces of good note. 3. PFORTZHEIM, says Rhenanus,Pfortz∣heim. was an∣ciently call'd Orcynheim, and by Latin Authors Porta Hercyniae; because 'tis seated at the entrance into the Schwartzwald (a part of the Hercynian Forest) as you travel from Spire. On one side of the Town you have fair Meadows, Pasture-grounds and Corn-fields; but the other side is nothing but Mountains and Woods. This Town was formerly subject to the Dukes of Schwaben; but fell afterwards, upon the death of Conradine the last Duke of that Country, into the hands of the Marquises of Baden; who are now Lords of it. 4. GERSBACH is a Town of no great ex∣tent;Gers∣bach. having in it only two Churches, whereof one is frequented by Lutherans, and the other by Papists. The Marquises of Baden (as Counts of Eberstein, a Castle not far from this Town) have here a Palace, and Court of Judicature for the determining all Controversies and Law-suits arising within the bounds of this small County. 5. BADENWEILER, a City betwixt Frey∣burg and Basil,Baden∣weiler. is a part of the Marquisate of Ba∣den, tho seated in the Territories of Brisach. The hot Baths of this place, sprung out of Hills of Allum, Brimstone, and Niter; but their Waters are not so hot here as at Baden. Drunk inwardly, they have been known to cure Asthmaes, and all manner of stoppage and shortness of breath, as also old and inveterate Agues and Feavers. By washing and bathing, they cure the Itch, Scab, and Leprosie; and are an excellent remedy against old sores and bruises. Rotel, Sponheim, Susenburg, and Mahlberg,Baden∣weiler. are places which have been formerly of some note, by reason of the Castles or Palaces of some anci∣ent Princes of the Empire, who have borrow'd their Titles from the ancient Seat of their Family. And hence the names of these old Towns are still registred in the Titles of the Marquises of Ba∣den; but otherwise they have nothing worthy of a description.
THE LANDGRAVIATES OF ALSACE. ALSATIA, or Elsass, has its name, in all proba∣bility, from the River Ell or Ill, which runs thorow it. Whence El∣sassen (as the Germans call the inhabitants of this Country) signifies no more then die an der Elle Sassen oder wohnen, i.e. the people that dwell on the banks of the Elle. Some I know would have the ancient name of the Country to be Edel-Sassen, intimating a delicate and Noble Seat; our Countryman Mr. Sheringham (as we have elsewhere observed) makes this a part of the Territories of the anci∣ent Saxons, and by them call'd Edel-Sassen, or Noble; as a piece of the richest and pleasantest ground they were masters of. The Country is certainly (as these later Ety∣mologists would make it) as rich and noble a Province as any in the German Empire; and as plentifully stock'd with all manner of necessaries, especially Corn and Wine. The Hills are com∣monly cover'd with Chesnut-Groves; and Leber∣thal, with some other Valleys, afford good store of Copper, Lead, and other Mettals. In some places you meet with rich Meadows and fat Pasture-grounds; which furnish the inhabitants with good Butter, and a sort of Cheese equal if not preferable to the best in Holland. 'Tis bounded on the East with Schwaben and the Dukedom of Wirtenberg; on the South with Switzerland; on the West with the Dukedom of Lorrain; and on the North with the County Pa∣latinate of the Rhine. The length of it is rec∣kon'd at about twenty German miles; tho the bredth scarce any where exceeds four. This whole Land was formerly subject to the Kings of the Francks; and by their King Hilde∣ric bestow'd, under the name of a Dukedom, on his Favorite Etico, in the year 684. Etico was succeeded by his Son Adelprecht; who left his two Sons Linfrid and Eberhard Coheirs of the Dukedom. After this the Dukes of this Coun∣try were driven out of their Dominions by Charles Martel, Hofmeister (or Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold) to the King of France. But in the days of the Emperor Otho I. the Counts of Ki∣burg, the Emperor's Kinsmen, got possession of Alsatia; and, as some will have it, were made the first Landgraves of this Country. Others say, that 'twas first divided into two Landgra∣viates in the reign of the Emperor Otto III. In whose time the Upper Alsace came first into the hands of the Counts of Hapsburg; who from thenceforward were Lords of that part of the Country. The Lower Alsace was afterwards by the Earls of Ottingen (who got the possession of it after the decease of Henry its Landgrave with∣out issue) sold to the Bishop of Strasburg; who is like to continue Master of it so long as the French King will give him leave. Alsatia is usually divided into the Upper and Lower Alsace; besides the lesser Territories of Ortenaw, Brisgow, Hagenaw, Sungaw, &c. But most of these petty Provinces may be referr'd to the Upper Alsace, and coming within the bounds of the Upper Landgraviate; and the rest to the Lower. The chief Cities and great Towns in the Lower ALSACE. NEXT to Strasburg (of which anon) the chief Town in the Lower Alsace is Zabern,Zabern. or Elsasszabern; as 'tis sometimes call'd, to distin∣guish it from the other two Ci∣ties of the same name, one in the Palatinate and the other in Bergen. 'Tis thought to be the Tabernae, mention'd by Anto∣nine and Marcellinus, one of the old Roman Gar∣risons; demolish'd by the ancient Germans, but rebuilt by Julian the Apostate. The City is de∣fended by a strong Castle on the top of a high Rock; up to which you are led by a narrow and rugged way, cut out of the hard craggy
Mountain by William III. Bishop of Strasburg. This Prelate and his successors have usually kept their Residence at Zabern, where they had also erected a Court of Judicature for the decision of all Controversies arising within the Precincts of their Diocess; but 'tis thought, that the French King, who pretends to be Master of the place, will employ the Castle otherwise hereafter. 2.Weissen∣burg. WEISSENBURG is an Imperial City; but reckon'd a part of the Lower Alsace, as be∣ing incorporated into the Province of Hagenaw. Beatus Rhenanus says, that 'twas the Seat of the ancient Sebusii; and therefore 'tis call'd by Latin Authors Sebusium. Dagobert King of France pre∣sented this City with a Crown of Silver, gilt with Gold, and adorn'd with a great many Turrets and other flourishes of Art; whose diameter was four and twenty foot. In remembrance of which noble present, the Citizens had a Crown of Cop∣per of the same bigness hung up in their great Church; which continued there till, in the late Civil Wars of Germany, 'twas broken in pieces by the Soldiery; who siezed on it for good plun∣der. The same King granted the Citizens of Weissenburg priviledg to hunt and fish within the compass of a certain circle; which in some places reaches two German miles from the Town, in others no more then one. This Circle is in their Charter stiled Emunitas; which the modern in∣habitants of the place have corrupted into Mun∣dat. The Emperor Charles IV. made the Abbot of this place (as well as of the Monasteries at Fulda, Kempten, and Murbach) a Prelate of the Empire; bestowing on him the Title of a Prince, and allowing him to sit at his feet in all Diets and other public Assemblies of the States Gene∣ral of the Empire. 3.Brisach. The Imperial City Hagenaw is seated be∣tween the two Rivers Motter and Sorna; about four German miles from Strasburg. 'Tis encom∣passed round with a sandy Soil and thick Woods; but at some distance from the Town there are large and pleasant Corn-fields, with good store of Vineyards. It has anciently been reckon'd one of the four chief Villages of the German Empire (and indeed it may now as properly as ever be term'd a Village, since 'twas burnt to the ground by the French Forces A. D. 1677); but had in it, even in those days, the supreme Court of Judicature for both the Upper and Lower Al∣sace. Afterwards the Emperor Frideric I. wall'd it round; beautifying it with a fair Palace, where∣in himself for some time kept his Residence, and making it an Imperial City. At the Jesuits Col∣lege was to be seen, before the Wars with France, a large old Roman Aries, or Battering-Ram; a piece of Antiquity of great value; but whether tis now to be met with, I know not. To these we may add Moltzheim, Hasle on the Brusch, Seltz, and some few Towns more; places of no great note before they were visited by the French Armies, and of much less since. The chief Cities and great Towns in the Ʋpper ALSACE. THE City of Brisach (call'd by Anto∣nine, in his Itenerary, Mons Brisia∣cus) is the Metropolis of Brisgow; the old inhabitants of which Pro∣vince we find often mention'd in Latin Historians by the name of Brisigavi or Brisigavii. B. Rhenanus, and some other High Dutch Antiquaries, are of opinion, that Brisach stood formerly on the Western banks of the Rhine; because on that side the old Ro∣mans used to build their Forts, and on the East of this Town there is still a great hollow valley which they take for the ancient Channel of the Rhine. But Cluverius is of a contrary opinion; and proves, that the Emperor Valentinian (whom all allow to have been the first Founder of Bri∣sach) built Castles on both sides the River. The Town stands on the top of a round Hill, excel∣lently well fortified both by nature and art. But they have only one deep Well, which supplies the whole City with water; the River being at some distance, and the passage troublesom. In the Civil Wars of Germany this Town was be∣sieged and taken by the Duke of Saxon-Weimar; whose Forces were, with a great deal of courage and gallantry, resisted by the Imperialists for four months together. During which time the besieged were brought to those extremities, as to dig up the dead bodies of their Soldiers, after they had been some days buried, and to eat their flesh. In this siege 80000 men are said to have been slain, and about 1100000 Rixdollars spent in ammunition, on both sides. Since that time (A. D. 1638) the French, under whose Banners the foremention'd Duke of Saxony then bore Arms, have remain'd masters of this City; where∣in their present victorious King, having of late repair'd its Fortifications, keeps a strong Garri∣son and a Court of Judicature (in imitation of the Chamber at Spire) which decides all Con∣troversies in his new Conquests, levies Contri∣butions, gives him right to all neighbouring Vil∣lages, as Dependancies on some great Towns yeilded up to him by the late Treaty at Nimi∣guen, &c. 2. FREYBURG in Brisgow was at first a Vil∣lage built by a company of Miners; who wrought at the Silver and Copper Mines about a German mile from Brisach, and in a short time grew so rich as to purchase the Estates and Titles of Noblemen. By this means their Village grew up into a large City; which was able, upon a very short warning, to send into the field three thousand fighting men. This City fell into the hands of the House of Austria A. D. 1386, and was by the present Emperor resign'd up to the French (together with its Villages of Lehn, Mez∣hausen, and Kirchzart) in exchange for Philips∣burg. There are in the Town fourteen Religious Houses, and an University founded by Albert Arch-Duke of Austria in the year 1450. The Citizens are excellent Artists at polishing all man∣ner of pretious stones; such especially as are found in Lorrain and the neighbouring Coun∣tries. 3. Near the place where the Imperial City Colmar is now seated, stood the ancient Argen∣tuaria; which was conquer'd by Gratian the Em∣peror A. D. 378, and afterwards destroy'd by the Gothic General Attila. Out of the ruins of this old Town, Colmar (or Cole-market) was first built. A City which stands in a plain and fruit∣ful Country; and formerly so populous that in the great Church at an Easter-time 'twas usual to have near four thousand Communicants. But the Civil Wars of Germany (wherein 'twas taken by the Swedish forces, and by them resign'd to the French) and the late engagements with the King of France's Armies, have made it as deso∣late of inhabitants as houses. 4. MUMPELGART (call'd by Latin Au∣thors Montisbeligardium, or Mons jucundi aeris; from the sweet and wholesom air breath'd from the top of the Hills round this place) is the
map of upper and lower Alsace VTRIUSQUE ALSATIAE SUPERIORIS AC INFERIORIS NOVA TABVLA Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart. Lantgraff im Obern Elssas blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms Lantgraff im Vnderen Elssas.
map of lower Alsace ALSATIA inferior Apud Mosem Pitt.
map of upper Alsace with Sundgau and Breisgau ALSATIA Superior cum SVNTGOIA et BRISGOIA
map of the territory of Strasbourg TERRIROTIUM ARGENTORA∣TENSE Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Ptephanum Swart.
chief Town in a County of the same name, sub∣ject to the Dukes of Wirtenburg. 'Tis seated on the utmost bounds of the German Empire to∣wards Burgundy; whence its inhabitants are a mixt people, consisting of French, Dutch, Lor∣rainers, Sabaudians, Switzers, and Burgundians; and the language they speak, a kind of mungrel French-Dutch tongue. The Citizens Houses are generally stone buildings, three or four stories high; and the streets tolerably uniform and large. Without the Gates of the City you have delicate Groves and Gardens; among which the chief is the Count's Garden of pleasure, beautified with a costly Summer-House, and enrich'd with all manner of rare Plants and Herbs. Mulnhausen (by most late Geographers placed in the Upper Alsace.) is one of the Confederate Cities of Switzerland. Keysersberg and Turcheim are Imperial Cities; but of no great note. The City and Bishopric of STRASBURG. ARGENTINA is a name of a Monkish invention, instead of Argentoratum; as well as Moguntia for Moguntiacum. To omit other frivolous conjectures about the Etymology of the words Argen∣toratum and Strasburg, we shall satisfie ourselves with the fancy of the learned Cluverius; who thinks the ancient name of this famous City to have been Argen Straaten, or Bad-street; which might easily, by adding a Latin termination, be turn'd into Argentratum, or Argentoratum; and afterwards (by omitting the two first syllables, and annexing burg, to denote some new built Fort) with as much ease turn'd to Straetburg, or Straesburg. This City (tho at first design'd only for a strong Fortification) is now one of the most populous and best trading Towns in Germany. The Citizens are generally courteous and rich; most of their Merchants and Magistrates having Houses fit to entertain so many Princes of the Empire. The Cathedral is one of the Wonders of Ger∣many; described at large by Os. Schadaeus, in a particular Tract upon this subject by him pub∣lish'd at Strasburg A. D. 1617. The Tower of this Church is the highest in the German Empire, nay possibly in Europe, or the whole world. Some have reckon'd it perpendicular, from the top of the Spire to the ground, at 574, others 575 geometrical feet; but Schadaeus, who seems most accurate in his computation, says 'tis 489 feet and 8 inches. Yet much more famous is this Cathedral for the great Clock in it; which (by the Honourable Mr. Boyle, and some others of our ingenious Vir∣tuosi) has been mention'd as an instance of the late great improvements of Arts Mechanical. 'Twas finished in the year 1574, at the charge of the Magistracy of the Town, by one Ha∣brecht, a famous Artificer; of whose work they have many more pieces in the same kind. This workman has his Instructions from D. Wolcken∣stein and Conr. Dasypodius, two learn'd Mathema∣ticians; the latter whereof has publish'd a Tract about this Clock. The first thing presented to your view is a Celestial Globe, with all the mo∣tions of Planets, fix'd Stars, &c. Behind which there is a perpetual Almanack; wherein the day of the month is pointed at by a Statue standing by. The Hours are crow'd by a gilt Cock; and afterwards struck on a Bell by an Angel; not far from which stands another Angel with an Hour-glass in its hand, which it turns round as soon as the Clock has done striking. The first quarter is struck by a Child with an Apple; the second by a Youth with an Arrow; the third by a full aged man with a Tip-staff; and the fourth by an old man with his Cane. On the outside of the Church are shew'n the true in∣crease and decrease of the Moon, with the mo∣tion of the Sun through all the Signs of the Zodiack. For a larger Description of this master∣piece of Art, I refer the Reader to the Treatises writ on this Subject by Dasypodius, Schadaeus, Frischlin, &c. The Bishopric of Strasburg was founded by King Dagobert; who made St. Amandus the first Bishop of this Diocess. Of late years there have been several quarrels betwixt the Bishop and Citizens; who to this day are unwilling to allow their Prelate the Jurisdiction that he lays claim to. The Armory of this Town is well worth the seeing. But their University makes more noise in the world then it ought to do. The Reader may expect a more accurate ac∣count of the present state of some parts of Al∣sace, when we come to treat of the French King's Conquests, in the Volume of France.
THE DUKEDOM OF WIRTEMBERG. WIRTEMBERG is a Province of the great Circle of Schwaben; a Country sufficient∣ly provided for with all manner of profits and pleasures. The Mountains are full of Mines and Vine∣yards, and the Val∣leys are well stock'd with large Herds of Cat∣tel. 'Tis of no great extent, but so populous that there is in it ('tis said) 63 Cities, 158 great Towns, 645 Villages, and 14 Abbeys. Before the Civil Wars of Germany, the Duke of Wirtemberg was able to raise an Army of 24000 men in 24 hours; but that calamitous War lessen'd the number of Soldiers in this as well as other Provinces of the Empire. The Princes of this Country were anciently no more then Counts; but raised to the Dignity of Dukes by the general consent of all the Estates of the Empire, in a Diet held at Worms A. D. 1495. The reason of which advancement was the great improvements they had made of their Estates; wherein was contain'd only the Castle of Wirtemberg, with some few Villages depend∣ing thereon. When Duke Ʋlric was driven out of all his Territories in the year 1519, his whole Duke∣dom was sold to the Emperor Charles V. After∣wards, in the year 1534, the Duke was restored to his Dominions by the assistance of Francis I. King of France, and Philip Landgrave of Hesse; the former whereof aided him with Moneys, and the latter with Men and Arms. Whereupon, he sent his Son Christopher to Ferdinand King of the Romans; who agreed, that the House of Wirtemberg should be again restor'd to their Dut∣chy, paying homage to the House of Austria. This order was observ'd till the year 1599, where∣in (by a Covenant made betwixt the Empe∣ror Rodolph II. and Frideric I. Duke of Wirtem∣berg) the Dukedom was reduc'd to its ancient state; the House of Austria only reserving to it self the Title and Arms (which the Emperor now bears) of Wirtemberg, and the right of Suc∣cession upon failure of Heirs male. The Metropolis of this Province (and place of the Duke's residence) is Stutgard; seated not far from the banks of the Neccar, about the mid∣dle of the Country. Stutgard signifies properly a Yard to train young Horses in; and such some Antiquaries tell us was formerly the place where this City now stands. This story they confirm by the Arms of the Town; which is a young Colt let loose. But I rather think this only a Rebus taken from the name of the City; which may possibly have no more affinity with the true Etymology of the word then the Ox in the Arms of our City of Oxford has with the anci∣ent name of this Town. The Duke's Palace is a noble Fabrick; adorn'd with most delicate Groves and Gardens of pleasure. In these you have as fair rows of Orange-trees, as well con∣triv'd Grottoes and Waterworks, and as stately a Pleasure-house as at any Prince's Palace in the Empire. But the Houses of private Citizens fall short of this pomp and grandeur. Most of them are wooden buildings; and of a very despicable height. TUBINGEN is the second City in the Duke∣dom; not many years since govern'd by its own Counts, who kept their usual residence at Leich∣teneck in Alsace. This place is at present most remarkable for its University; of which Duke May (Counsellor to the Duke of Wirtemberg, and therefore probably as much a Courtier as an Historian upon this subject) gives the fol∣lowing character: Altho the Duke of Wirtem∣berg be exceedingly at his ease; tho he have whatever he can wish; tho every day present him some new delicacies made or growing upon his own Territories; yet he would b much less spoken of in foreign Countries,  Eberhard the Wise had not founded the Uni versity at Tubingen, if Christopher the Prudence had not projected the College there, if Lew the Pious had not built it, if Frideric the Mag∣nanimous had not endow'd it, if John Frider the Peaceable had not preserv'd, and if Eber∣hard
map of the duchy of Württemberg WIRTENBERG DVCATVS. Apud Janssonio-Waesbergios, Mosem Pitt et Stephanum Swart.
the Constant had not rais'd it to a higher degree for the good of the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of the Empire. None are permitted entrance into this Society, but such as are de∣scended from some ancient Family, and have still the repute of good Gentlemen. There is also at Tubingen a supreme Court of Judicature; wherein all Controversies, in Cases Civil and Criminal, are determin'd by five of the Nobility, four Doctors in the University, and as many Burgers of the Town. Besides this, there is a Consistory of Divines and Civilians who take cognisance of all Ecclesiastical mat∣ters. The first Rector of the University in this Town was Joh. Nauclerus, whose Historical works Philip Melancthon took great care to publish in the year 1500. A Book highly commended by the learned Camerarius in his life of Melancthon. The only famous men, I think, whom they can brag of for this last age, are Martin Crufius, and Will. Schickard; both singularly well skill'd in the Oriental Languages. Besides these, I fancy 'twill be as difficult to find a Scholar worth the men∣tioning bred at Tubingen, as to meet with one City or great Town among the Hundreds of that name in the Dukedom of Wirtemberg, which merits a particular description in this place. The End of the Second Volume. decorative device
An Advertisement to the Reader. FOR the literal faults which may have escap'd the Press there needs no Apology: because these are neither so numerous nor so gross as to interrupt the sense or di∣sturb the Reader. And some of the more material Errata may be excused, by considering the different times wherein several Paragraphs of the Book (seemingly contradi∣ctory) were pen'd. For Example: 'Twas true (in the year 1680, when the sixth sheet was printed) that Augustus Duke of Saxony was Administrator of Magdeburg and Halle; as is said Pag. 21. Col. 2. And as true that the present Elector of Bran∣denburg was Duke of both those places at the penning of Pag. 92. Some other considerable mistakes we have taken notice of, may be thus Corrected: I. Instead of Halberstadt, pag. 9. col. 2. lin. 9. Read, Hildesheim, as in pag. 51. col. 1. II. For Charles IV. Wenceslaus, &c. pag. 33. col. 1. lin 35. Read, Wenceslaus Charles the Fifth's Son, &c. Since, as the best German Historians inform us, Wence slaus was the first of their Emperour's that had the Title of King of the Romans con∣ferr'd on him.
AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX, Containing The NAMES of all the COUNTRIES, CITIES, TOWNS, RIVERS, ISLES, &c. IN THE Maps of the Second Volume. Places. Map. Latitude. D. M. Longitude. D. M. A   AAb 34 49 30 26 50 Aag 01 47 40 25 20 Aaken 14 51 30 29 00 Aaihusen 17 51 50 26 40 A 01 51 00 20 00 Adelost 14 51 35 29 30 A fl. 38 46 00 23 40 Aberg 01 46 50 23 30 Ag 01 47 00 24 10 Aw 38 47 00 24 20 A 2, 3, 05 54 10 25 50     53 40 25 50 Ah 01 50 40 19 50 Ave fl. 05 53 25 26 30 Ah 34 48 50 29 00 Aji 38 46 20 22 20 Aendorf 4, 10, 11 53 00 28 20     52 45 29 00 Abberhsen 05 53 25 24 50 Abberod 16 52 15 27 30 Abbeville 01 50 00 17 40 Abensberg 01 48 40 28 50 Abensen 05 53 25 26 00 Abershausen 38, 39 50 00 25 10 Aberstet 19 51 35 28 30 Abigii 01 47 10 18 10 Abe 38 50 00 20 20 Ab 01 51 50 34 10 Asen 05 53 25 24 50 Abnard 01 47 20 30 40 Ashagen 08 54 30 33 30 Ab Gemund 45 48 50 26 40 As hage 08 54 10 30 00 Atat 45 48 55 26 00 Ach 38 47 40 25 20 Ach fl. 45 48 15 26 40 Achl 38 51 00 21 40 Achelstet 19 50 50 28 00 Achem 06 52 45 25 50 Achen 16 52 00 27 30 Achenheim 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Acheren 41, 42 48 25 24 30 Nider Acheran 40, 44 48 30 24 30 er Acheten 40, 44 48 25 24 30 Achgem 17 52 10 27 30 Achim 05 53 05 25 30 Achln. 45 48 15 25 50 Achstach 33 48 50 30 10 Achstetten - 45 48 10 26 40 Achtes 17 52 20 20 50 Achten 16 52 05 26 50 Achterwater 08 54 00 31 00 Acken 2, 15 52 00 28 30 Ackendorf 14 51 50 28 30 Ackerhusen 17 52 00 26 50 Ackstede 1, 24 53 40 25 00 Adderdz 21 51 15 29 40 Adderstet 21 51 25 28 40 Adebors Horneborg 03 53 45 25 00 Adelberg 33 50 50 30 40 Adelem 4, 16 52 25 26 50 Adelhaus 40 47 50 24 20 Adelhausen 40 47 30 24 15 Adelhessen 16 51 30 26 40 Adelhusen 15, 16 51 20 26 00 Adelhuss 41, 43 47 50 24 20 Adelmansfeld 01 48 50 26 40 Adelsdorff 20 51 15 32 55   30, 34 49 20 27 30 Adelshoff 40, 44 48 20 24 20   41, 42 48 25 24 20 Adelstein 2, 15 52 00 28 40 Adeltzhelm 34 49 20 25 50 Adem 38 51 20 25 00 Adendorf 14, 20 51 45 28 40 Adenshausen 21 51 20 30 10 Adeusleben 18 51 30 28 30 Adenstede 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Ader fl. 02 52 20 29 20 Aderberg 08 52 50 31 30 Aderborg 08 53 30 32 00 Aderburg 10, 12, 13 52 40 31 20 Adersen 4, 16 52 20 27 20 Adersleben 15, 16 51 55 28 00 Adersleben 18 51 35 28 00 Adersm 18 57 45 27 00 Aderspach 33 50 30 33 00 Aderstet 14 51 25 28 40 Adhnasfeld 45 48 55 26 30 Adnsted 18 51 40 27 40 Adoltzheim 37 49 25 26 05 Adorf 22 50 40 29 50 Aedigenberg 34 49 30 25 40 Aelmsgtin 22 50 30 29 20 Aelst 38 50 40 20 00 Aenbeck 2, 15 52 40 27 40 Aenstede 15 52 10 26 20 Aerdenburg 01 51 20 19 20 Aerding 01 48 10 28 50 Aernhem 38 52 00 21 40 Aerschot 01 51 00 20 50 Aert 38 51 40 22 00 AEthertus Mons Et∣tersberg. 19 51 05 28 10 Aetlprun 34 49 00 29 00 Affalterback 45 48 45 26 00 Affaltern 45 49 00 26 00 Affensteun 36 50 00 25 00 Affenthal 40, 44 48 30 24 35   41, 42 48 35 24 35 Afmested 14 51 36 27 50 Agoro 01 46 00 29 00 Agram 01 46 00 33 50 Ahane 32 49 20 34 10 Ahausen 34 48 50 28 20 Ahlem 16 52 16 27 20 Ahlfang 10, 12 53 30 30 40 Ahnebeck 10, 11 52 10 27 40 Ahrn 43 47 55 23 40 Ahrn 41 47 55 23 40 Ahuis 38 52 00 23 00 Ahus 01 52 10 23 10 Ahusen 05 53 05 25 50 Aibling 01 47 40 29 00 Aich 38, 39 49 40 24 40   45 48 15 25 00 Aich fl. 45 48 25 25 50 Aichbach 01 48 20 28 00 Aichen 45 48 00 26 50 Aichfelt 34 50 20 27 50 Aichlberg 45 48 25 26 30 Aichstet 1, 34 48 40 28 00 Aichstetensis Epis∣copatus 34 48 50 28 00 Aigelberg 33 48 30 31 20 Aigin 16 51 25 27 00 Aigneii le Duc. 01 47 20 20 40 Air 33 50 20 29 30 Aisch fl. 34 49 40 27 40 Les Aisd Angillon 01 47 00 18 20 Aisey le Duc. 01 47 30 20 30 Aisloben 34 49 50 26 40 Aitzum 15 52 10 26 20 Aix 01 45 20 22 10 Akaren 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 10 Akem 18 51 35 29 10 Aken 1, 38 50 40 22 20 Akenroda 16 51 40 28 10 Akerhasen 16 51 40 26 50 Akreschfrontz 27 51 35 33 40 Alandberg 33 48 40 32 10 Alant fl. 10, 11, 14 52 40 29 00 Alaun 23 51 35 31 40 Albach 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 40 Albaxen 17 57 45 26 00 Albeckh 45 48 25 26 50 Albeg fl. 18 51 49 27 50 Frawn Alben 41 48 40 24 50 Herrn Alben 41 48 35 24 50 Albendorf 31 50 25 33 20 Alberent 1, 22, 23 49 50 29 30 Alberg 01 46 10 27 50 Alberod 22 50 30 29 40 Albersdon 22 50 40 29 10 Albersdorf 16, 18 52 05 27 50   23, 24, 31 50 20 33 30 Alberspach 38, 41 48 00 24 40 Alberspach fl. 45 48 15 25 00 Alberst 14 51 30 28 50   20 51 30 28 30 Albertsheim 22 51 20 29 30 Albertsleben 19 51 15 28 10 Albich 39 49 40 24 20 Albis fl. 4, 5, 10 53 10 27 20   11, 15, 22 50 50 30 50   23, 24, 33 50 10 32 50   34, 39, 40 48 44 24 45 Albis fl. Fons 22, 24, 33 50 40 32 30 Albrachtshusen 16 51 35 27 00 Albrechitz 33 49 10 31 10 Albrechets 36 50 35 27 30 Albus Mons 32 48 40 34 50 Alckendorf 14 57 35 28 10 Alckersleben 19 50 50 27 50 Alckmaer 1, 38 52 40 20 40 Aldeberg 2, 22 50 40 29 50 Aldefeid 19 51 00 26 40 Alden 46 53 00 26 20 Alden Arhr 01 53 00 23 30
Aldenberg 38 51 00 22 30 Aldenburg 19 51 45 28 00 Aldendorf 19, 39 50 35 28 00 Aldenrode 20 51 45 28 10 Alding 38, 45 48 40 25 40 Alebeke 08 53 40 31 30 Alebero 1619 51 25 27 30 Alem 18 51 50 27 10   38 51 40 24 00 Alendorff 16, 19, 20 51 30 27 50   45 47 45 26 20 Alerstede 05 54 25 25 50 Aletzhaim 34 48 40 27 30   38, 39 49 20 25 50 Alexowitz 32 48 40 33 40 Alsfelde 15 52 00 26 20 Alfelt 01 52 00 26 40   01 52 00 26 40   34 50 40 25 50 Alsrede 16 52 05 26 30   17 52 20 26 20 Algenstedt 10, 11, 14 52 20 28 30 Algermis 15 52 30 26 20 G. Algermisse 16, 17 52 10 26 40 L. Algermisse 16, 17 52 10 36 40 Algershausen 34, 36 50 00 27 20 Algersheim 39 49 50 24 10 Alich 19 51 00 27 40 Alichwiler 39 49 40 23 20 Alinswil 41, 43 47 25 23 55 Alken 38 50 00 23 20 Alkendorff 18 51 40 28 10 Alla 01 45 30 28 00 Allebe 15 51 50 29 20 Alleleben 02 51 40 28 50 Alleman 38 45 50 22 40 Allheiligen 40 48 25 24 40 Allen 4, 16 52 20 26 20 Allenbach 41, 43 47 40 23 30 Allendorf 01, 15 51 10 26 40   19, 36 50 45 27 00 Allenhausen 15 52 30 28 00 Allenhusen 14, 16 52 10 28 10 Aller fl. 1, 4, 5, 6 52 30 26 20   10, 11, 14, 15, 52 20 28 00   16, 18 52 15 27 00 Allerae Fons 06 52 00 28 00 Allerbeckermulle 16, 17 51 50 26 20 Allerborn 15 52 20 28 00 Allerbrug 16 52 30 27 30 Allerburg 16, 18 51 30 27 20 Allersbach 1, 33 48 20 30 10 Allersberg 34 49 10 28 10 Allersburg 34 49 10 28 50 Allersdorff 19 50 35 27 50 Allerstet 19, 20 51 30 28 20 Allesmoy 05 43 30 26 40 Allrheiligen 39 49 50 25 00 Allroda 18 51 10 28 00 Allslebe 21 51 20 29 40 Almanstet 19 51 05 28 20 Almarodt 34 50 40 26 00 Almebeck 04 52 40 28 20 Almelo 01 52 30 22 50 Almen 38 51 20 25 00 Almenhausen 19 51 20 27 30 Almensbach 38 47 20 25 40 Almermull 19, 20 51 35 28 00 Almesdorff 19 51 00 28 00 Almhorst 16 52 15 26 20 Almsdorf 19, 20 51 20 28 46 Almstet 16, 17 32 00 26 40 Almswiler 41, 43 47 35 23 35 Almschwihr 40, 44 48 15 24 15   41, 42, 43 48 10 24 15 Alnebeck 14 52 20 38 10 Alouche 19 51 15 26 30 Alpen 38 51 20 22 20 Alperstet 19 51 10 27 50 Alpes 38 45 20 25 40 Al. Prever 01 46 40 28 00 Alpsen 39 49 20 24 30 Alre fl. 15 53 00 26 00 Alring 34 49 10 26 20 Alsatia 01 47 20 23 30 Alsbach 41, 43 48 00 23 40 Alsberg 34 49 00 27 40 Alsberch 17 52 30 27 00 Alsbnrg 16 52 10 27 00 Alsdorff 04 52 40 24 20   20 51 35 28 40 Alsheim 38 49 40 24 40 Alweim am alte Rhein 39 49 40 24 40 Alslebe 14, 18 51 40 28 10 Gr. Alsleben 16 52 00 28 00   18 51 40 28 10 L. alsleben 18 51 40 28 00 Alsleuben o∣lim Comitatus 14, 15, 20, 21 51 50 28 30 Alsonstensum 02 54 40 26 10 Alss 23 51 10 31 50 Alstat 01 50 00 34 00   15, 19, 20 51 30 28 20   36 50 15 27 20   42 48 50 34 25 Alstedde 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Alster 2, 3, 6, 53 50 26 40 Alster fl. 5, 6, 34 53 35 26 30 Alstet 19 51 05 27 10   36 50 30 27 30 Alsteren 01 47 00 26 20 Alta 45 47 55 26 20 Altach 41, 43 47 55 23 45 Altbrun 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 00 Altbunczel 2, 33 50 00 30 30 Altbury 45 48 35 25 10 Alt Closter 25 52 00 33 00 Altdorf 38 46 20 25 00 Alte Awe 26 51 45 32 20 Alteberg 20 51 45 28 20   25 51 00 33 00 Alteburg 20 51 45 28 00 Die Alteburg 16 51 25 28 10   19 51 30 28 00 Alteglan 38, 29 49 20 23 40 Altekirch 16 51 30 26 20 Altem 39 49 10 23 40 Alten 15 51 40 26 00 Altena 2, 24 54 00 26 30 Altenbaumberg 39 49 40 24 00 Altenberge 19 50 55 28 20 Alten Borsel 19 51 10 26 50 Altenbulach 45 48 25 25 20 Altenburg 01 48 00 34 50   1, 22 50 50 29 20   39, 45 49 00 25 00 Altendorff vulgo Mellendorft 14 51 30 28 50   22 50 40 29 50   25 50 50 33 40 Altenfurth 34 49 20 28 10 Altengerust 19 50 30 28 30 Altern Guttern 19 51 10 27 20 Altenheim 22 51 20 29 40   41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 15 Altenhohoenord 01 47 50 29 10 Altenhoven 01 47 00 31 40 Altenkirchen 09 54 50 31 10 Altenmula 14 51 35 28 35 Altenpach 33 48 20 30 20 Altenrode 14, 15 51 10 28 20   15, 20 51 40 28 00   19, 20 51 15 28 30 Altensleben 2, 15 52 00 28 10 Altensteig 45 48 20 25 10 Altenstat 45 48 30 26 30 Altensted 14, 16 51 35 27 50 Altenstein 34, 36 50 10 27 30 Altentan 34 49 20 28 10 Altenwedi 18 51 34 28 30 Ober Alterheim 37 49 40 26 15 Under Alterhim 37 49 40 26 15 Alte Porg 10, 13 52 30 32 40 Altselt 34 49 10 28 00   37 49 45 26 00 Altsitt 41 47 25 23 45 Althausen 2, 34 49 20 26 20   37 49 35 26 15 Altheim 37 4 30 25 05 Althof 28 51 00 34 10 Althooven 01 48 01 31 00 Altina 01 45 20 29 40 Alting 45 48 20 25 30 Altkilch 38, 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Altkirch 23, 25, 26 51 40 32 10 Altkirchen 08 54 50 30 30   34 49 30 27 00 Altkloster 26 52 00 33 00 Altleben 15 52 00 28 40 Altlei 38 49 40 23 20 Altlejiningen 39 49 20 24 20 Altmarck 32 48 40 34 20 Altmansdorff 31 50 30 34 00 Altmansfelt 34 49 00 26 30 Almanstain 34 48 50 27 40 Altmuhlmunster 34 48 50 28 40 Altmula fl. 34 48 50 28 40 Altnack 41, 43 47 30 23 35 Altnburg 01 46 20 32 30 Altnriif 38 46 20 23 20 Altenstaig 38 48 20 25 00 Altntal 45 48 20 26 40 Altorf 39, 42 48 40 23 40   40, 41 48 10 24 10   42, 43 48 05 24 15 Nider altorf 16 51 40 26 20 Altrip 1, 38, 45 49 10 25 00 Alt Sittenbach 34 49 20 28 20 Altstat 24 50 00 33 30   28, 29 51 15 34 55   30, 31 50 00 34 10   32 48 40 32 30 Alt Tzum 11 52 30 29 00 Alvelde 16 51 55 26 40 Alvenheim 44 48 25 24 00 Alvenleben Ba∣ronia 15 52 40 28 00 Alvenleben 02 52 20 27 50 Alvensleben 16 52 10 28 10 Alversdorf 02 54 50 26 10 Alversleben 15 52 10 28 00 Alumb 04 53 00 28 20   10, 11 52 30 27 40 Altwalda 30 50 25 34 30 Das Altwasser 23 51 00 31 40   26, 27, 29 51 35 33 00 Altwog 38, 40 48 00 24 00   41, 42, 43, 44 48 25 24 15 Altzeborn 39 49 10 24 20 Altzebrick 39 49 20 24 00 Altzei 38 49 20 24 20 Altzel 01 50 00 31 Altzenaw 29 51 15 32 Altzendorff 22 51 20 28 Altzens 39 49 30 24 Altzhaim 01 49 40 24 Altzschweier 40 48 30 25 Alwenslebn 14 52 00 28 Alworden 02 54 20 25   03 53 45 25 Alwii H. 16 51 30 26 Altzens 38 49 20 24 Amance 01 48 40 22   38 47 20 22 S. Amant 01 47 10 18     50 20 19 Amasis fl. 38 52 40 23 Amastorf 38 47 20 25 Amberg 1, 34 49 20 28 Ambishagen 01 49 10 26 Ambleben 18 51 55 27 Ambournaii 01 45 40 21 Ambsberg 34 49 00 27 Amelanc 01 53 40 21 Amelandt 38 53 40 21 Amelandergat 38 53 20 21 Amelgasen 16 51 50 26   17 52 05 26 Amelingsborn 17 51 55 26 Amelkhusen 2, 24 53 40 26 Amelsen 16, 17 57 45 26 Amelungsborn 16 51 45 26 Amelunxen 16 51 35 26   17 51 40 25 Amendorp 05 53 05 25 Ameronge 2, 38 52 00 21 Amersoort 1, 38 52 10 21 Amerw 41, 43 48 00 23 Amsurat 18 51 45 28 Amiens 01 49 50 18 Ammendorf 1, 15, 20 51 30 29 G. Ammeslebn 14 51 50 28 K. Ammeslebn 14 51 55 28 Amone 01 46 20 30 Amorbach 34 49 30 25 C.L. Amorbach 37 49 35 25 Ampaire 38 48 00 23   42 48 15 23 Ampelehen 16 52 10 27 Amperbach 41, 43 47 55 23 N. Amperg 33 48 30 31 O. Amprigen 40 47 50 24 Ampring 41, 43 47 45 24 Ampt 14 52 30 28 Amptitz 24 51 50 31 Amron 01 55 00 24 Der Amselbach 19 50 30 27 Amsterdam 1, 38 52 20 20 Amstet 19, 22 50 45 28 Amsdorf 14, 19 51 25 28   20, 21 51 25 28 Amsurdt 06 51 55 27 Amulter 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 S. An 44 48 20 24 2 Anberck 16 52 25 27 5 Anckershagen 07 53 25 30 Anclam 1810 53 50 31 Ancyle Franq 01 47 30 20 0 Andaffel 15 51 40 26 2 Andelfingen 1, 38 47 20 25 Andelgass 40 48 20 28 4 Andelstat 01 48 20 28 4 Anden 38 50 20 21 0 Anderbeg 18 51 40 27 4 Anderhach 1, 38 50 20 33 4 Andersdorff 26 51 35 32 5 Andersleben 19 51 05 27 4 Anterten 4, 16 52 20 26 4   17 52 35 26 3 Andeska hora 22, 33 50 10 30 0 Andlaw 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 5 Hoch Andlaw 43 48 15 23 5 Andlaw fl. 44 48 15 24 1 Andlfing 45 48 00 26 1 Andorf 04 53 20 28 0   10, 11 52 40 27 3   22 50 10 29 2 S. Andre 01 46 50 32 2   27 51 40 33 4   38 51 40 21 2   41, 43 47 20 23 3 Andresberg 18 51 20 27 20 Ancerstein 16 51 35 26 5 Aney 38 49 00 22 00 Anfordt 15 52 20 28 00 Anfurt 14 51 45 28 20   16 52 05 28 10 Angavn 22 51 20 29 40 Angbire 01 48 20 19 5 Angelberg 45 48 50 27 20 Angelhausen 19 50 50 27 40 Angeloch 39, 45 40 10 25 20 Angeroda 19, 36 50 45 27 4 Angerd 33 49 50 31 10 Angerfreat 34 50 00 28 20 Angermnnd 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 10   38 51 00 22 40 New Angermund 18 53 00 31 10 Angerac 10, 11 52 00 28 40 Angervirdt 38 51 00 22 40 Angersreut 22 49 50 28 20
Angsdorf 16 51 30 28 20   19, 20 51 35 28 00 Asrft 38 47 20 24 00 Anst 38 47 20 24 00 Anhalt Principatus 18 52 20 28 30   20, 21 51 45 28 00 Alte anhalt 14 51 15 28 00   15, 16, 28, 20 51 40 28 00 Anhausen 1, 45 48 30 26 50 Anholt 01 51 50 22 30 Anoure 01 47 30 21 00 Ansmern 19 51 20 27 10 Annaberg 1, 33 50 30 30 00 Annakirch 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 50 Anteberg 22 50 30 30 00 Antecy 01 45 30 22 20 S, annen 03 53 55 25 20 Amenberg 25 51 40 32 40 Anou 42, 43 48 05 23 20 S. Anoult 39 49 10 23 10 Ancult 38 49 00 23 00 Anij 38 48 40 22 20 Aaroda 15, 28, 19, 20 51 30 28 20 Ansbaoh 37 49 50 26 00 Anselheim 41, 43 47 55 23 55 Ansen 16, 17 52 05 26 30 Anserville 38 49 00 22 40 Ansig 02 50 30 29 50   33 50 33 30 50 Ansord 02 52 10 27 40 Ansow 1, 32 49 20 32 30 Anspach 19 50 45 26 30 Ansede 16 52 10 26 50   17 52 25 37 00 Antendorff 15 52 00 28 00 Antiquit S.P. 45 48 15 24 40 H. Antlaw 41 48 15 23 50 M. Antlaw 44 48 10 24 00 S. Anton 41, 42 48 20 23 45 Antwerpen 1, 38 51 10 20 20 Anvers 01 51 10 20 30 An. 41, 43 47 50 24 15 Anwaser 41, 43 48 00 24 15 Anweil 1, 42 49 00 24 30 Ansea 01 45 10 23 50 Apeldoorn 38 52 00 22 00 Apelnsted 16 52 10 27 30 Apen 05 53 15 24 20 Apenbeck 14 52 30 28 20 Apeborg 01 52 50 28 20   04 53 00 28 40   10, 11 52 30 28 00 Apenhof 41, 42 48 22 24 30 Apenroda 18 51 35 27 20 Apenwi 44 48 20 24 25 Apenwiler 41, 43 47 50 23 55 Apenwihr 41, 42, 43 48 20 24 25 Apesheim 39 49 50 24 10 Apfelstet 19 50 55 27 40 Apfelstet 19, 36 50 50 27 30 Apelda olim Baro∣ni 2, 19 51 00 28 20 S. Apolonati 41, 43 47 30 23 50 Appen 02 54 00 26 20   3, 05 53 55 26 00 Appenroda 16 51 55 27 30   17 52 00 27 40 Appenstet 02 54 10 25 50   03 53 45 25 30 Appenthal 16, 19 51 20 27 20 Appenweir 40 48 20 24 25 Appenzal 1, 38 46 50 26 10 Aquilea 01 45 40 30 50 Arade 05 53 25 24 30 Aransdorff 33 48 30 30 00 Aranto 01 46 10 21 40 Arberg 38 46 20 23 20 Arbergen 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Arbing 33 48 20 31 50 Arbois 01 45 40 21 50 Arbon 01 47 10 26 10 Arburg 38 46 40 24 00 Arcala fl. 38 47 00 24 40 Arckelshelm 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 00 Arckeroda 16 52 10 27 30 Arcis 01 42 20 21 10 Arcon 38 46 40 22 40 Arcona 08 54 50 30 30 Arcona & ll. 09 54 55 31 20 Ardois 41 48 10 23 20 Ardon 38 45 20 23 20 Andorff 38 50 20 23 00 Andres 01 50 50 17 50 Arelstain 36 49 55 28 00 Arelsbauck 22 50 40 28 40 Arenberg 01 50 30 23 00 Arenbruck 2, 21, 22 51 30 29 40 Arensbecke 01 54 20 27 10   01 51 20 24 30 Arensberg 7, 10, 12 53 10 30 10 Arensborck 01 54 00 26 50 Arensdorff 10 51 50 30 40   12 52 00 30 40   13 52 20 32 30   16 52 15 27 50   22 50 50 29 50   23 51 05 32 00 Nid. Ober Arens∣dorf 22 50 50 29 30 Aresgrin 22 50 10 29 10     50 20 29 20 Arenshagen 07 53 40 29 30   10 53 40 28 50 Arenshop 07 54 20 29 30 Arenswalde 1, 08 53 00 32 50   10, 13 53 00 32 40 Arentsee 1, 04 53 00 28 50   10, 11, 14 52 45 28 30 Arenveldt 16 51 55 26 20   17 52 10 26 20 Argenthal 39 49 50 23 40 Argfeld 19 51 00 26 50 Argshoven 34 49 10 26 40 Arien 01 50 40 28 20 Arkebeck 02 54 40 26 00 Arkeroda 18 51 55 27 10 Arklebow 32 49 00 34 10 Arlasberg 34 48 50 29 00 Arleux 01 50 10 19 10 Arlish 41, 43 47 25 24 00 Arton 38 49 40 21 40 Armentiers 01 50 40 18 50 Armerspach 41, 42, 43 48 15 24 30 Armeruh 29 51 10 32 45 Armeful 16 51 55 26 40   17 52 05 26 40 Armsberg 41, 42 48 50 24 10 Arnay 01 46 50 20 20 Arne 10, 11 52 20 28 50 Arneberg 2, 15 52 40 28 40 Arneburg 10 52 20 28 50   11, 14 52 25 29 00 Arnefast 05 53 25 24 30 Arnen 01 45 50 24 40 Arnhem 01 52 00 21 50 Arnherst 10, 12 52 20 29 30 Arnhausen 1, 10, 13 53 40 33 30   08 54 00 33 30 Arnis 01 55 00 26 40 Arnolds muhle 28 51 10 33 55 Arnolstain 01 46 30 31 00 Die Arnpurg 16 51 20 28 00 Arnsberg 16 52 00 25 50   34 48 50 28 20   38 51 20 24 20   41, 42 48 45 22 05 Arnsberg Mons 19 51 00 28 10 Arnsboke 24 54 10 27 10 Arnsburg 15 51 20 28 00 Arnsburg 19, 20 51 25 27 50 Arnsdorff 2, 15 51 40 28 40   23, 29 51 20 31 40   27 51 25 33 50   26, 29 51 35 33 00   30 50 20 34 10   31 50 10 33 40 Arnsee 06 52 45 28 00 Arnsgerent 19 50 35 28 10 Arnsheim 39 49 40 24 10 Arnshorst 04 52 20 24 40 Arnstat Baronia 19 50 50 27 40 Arnstat 14, 20 51 20 28 20   19 50 50 28 40 Arnstein 1, 16 51 40 28 10   14, 18 51 15 28 10   20 51 45 28 10 Arnstein Comi∣tat. 19, 20 51 45 28 20 Arntsche 02 52 50 28 10   15 53 00 28 20 Aroeleben 19 51 30 27 40 Aroia fl. 38 46 00 24 20 Arolfstain 34 50 00 28 00 Arpeken 16 52 16 26 50 Arras 01 50 10 18 40 Arren H. 16 51 20 27 00 Arrenhausen 19 51 25 26 30 Archisanii 33 49 50 31 30 Arschot 38 50 40 20 40 Arsen 38 51 20 22 00 Art. 38 46 02 25 00 Artelsheim 40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 05 Arten 16 51 25 28 20 Artendorn 01 51 00 24 20 Arten 15, 19, 29 51 25 28 10 Artesia Comita∣tus 01 50 30 18 00 Artzen 1, 17 52 00 25 50   16 51 55 26 00 Artzena 41, 43 48 00 24 00 Artzperg 22, 34 49 50 29 10 Arwangen 38 46 40 24 00 Arxdorf 16 52 06 26 20 Arxleben 2, 14 51 50 28 00   6, 25 52 00 27 60 Arzignano 01 45 10 28 30 Asbeg fl. 16 52 00 27 50 Asch 41, 43 47 20 24 01   45 48 20 29 30 Ascania 14, 15 51 25 28 20 Ascanien 14 51 30 28 20 Ascanien Comitat. 20 51 55 28 10 Aschach 36 50 10 26 50 Aschaffenburg 1, 34 49 50 23 30 Aschaw 01 47 30 29 20 Aschbach 34 50 10 27 00   41, 43 47 30 23 40   43, 45 48 50 26 00 Aschberg 36 50 35 27 30 Ascheburg 38, 29 49 40 25 20 Aschen 22 50 10 29 10 Aschenborg 06 51 55 27 15 Aschenhausen 36 50 35 27 00 Ascherlebische See 14, 16, 20 51 30 28 10 Aschern 3, 05 53 45 25 20   19 51 05 27 20 Aschersleben 1, 14, 15 51 50 28 20   16, 18 51 45 28 10 Aschesare 23 51 20 32 20 Aschwrde 05 53 20 25 00 Asel 17 52 25 26 40 Aseler Sandt 03 53 45 25 30 Aseleben 19 51 40 28 30   20 51 35 28 40 Asendorf 19, 20 51 35 28 40 Aslaw 29 51 20 32 45 Asmanstet 34 49 20 26 10 Asmested 16, 18 51 55 27 50 Asolynda 01 47 4 34 30 Aspach 01 48 00 31 50   19, 36 50 55 27 20 Aspe 2, 4, 05 54 20 26 40 Aspenselt 19, 36 50 50 27 20 Asperen 38 51 40 21 00 Asperg 45 48 40 25 40 Aspran 33 48 20 33 40 Assach 33 48 20 31 00 Asscheborch 15 62 30 27 40 Asseburg 16, 17 52 00 27 20 Dic Asseburg 18 51 50 27 20 Assel 16 52 05 26 40 Aslen 01 53 10 22 30 Assenoncourt 39 48 40 23 10 Assfeld 15 51 10 27 00 Alsumstattz 37 49 30 26 15 Astenay 38 49 20 21 00 Astersbach 36 50 40 27 20 Astwiler 41, 43 48 00 23 40 Asudange 39 48 40 23 10 Asweiler 39 49 30 23 10 Atemheim 33 48 20 31 20 Aterndorf 2, 04 54 20 25 40   03 53 45 25 50   05 53 50 25 20 Atmansfeld 01 49 20 28 40 Attendorf 26 51 45 33 10 Attignii 01 49 20 20 40 Attndaz 38 51 00 24 20 Attuwitz 22 51 10 30 00 Atugt fl. 16 51 50 27 20   17 52 00 27 20 Atzenbach 40 47 35 24 25 Atzendorf 14 51 35 28 30 Atzingen 40 48 40 24 05 Avallon 01 47 10 19 40 Aubin 01 46 50 21 20 Aubing 01 48 50 29 10 Aubonne 01 46 10 22 40 Auborg 06 52 30 25 20 S. Aubii 38 46 20 23 00 Auchswalt 22 50 40 30 00 Aucken 21 51 30 29 00 Auckum 38 52 40 24 00 Audenback 22 50 40 28 20 Audorf 01 50 10 29 10 Ave 36 50 40 27 20 Avegge 07 53 30 30 10 Avelde 01 52 10 26 30 Avesh. 44 48 20 24 00 Avenaii 01 48 50 20 20 Avenheim 41, 42 48 30 24 00 Aver 34, 36 50 10 26 50 Averbach 33 50 10 29 20   34 49 40 28 40 Averberg 33 50 30 30 10 Averdorp 05 53 50 25 30 Pont Averge 01 49 10 20 20 Averhau 22 50 30 30 20 Averkirchen 15 52 20 25 40 Aversberg 34, 36 50 40 26 50 Auffbergen 15 53 00 25 40 Auffhausen 19 51 00 27 30 Auffzug 26 51 55 32 50 Aufhalt 25, 26 51 50 32 40 Aushoff 44 48 15 24 25 Aufhuss 43 47 50 24 15 Aufmberg 28 51 15 33 45 Aufm Sande 02 52 00 30 10 Augbach 40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 20 Auge 22 50 50 29 00 Nider Ober Augen 40 47 40 24 05 Augenheim 40 48 35 24 25 Augenum 40, 45 48 25 24 20   41, 42, 44 48 25 28 15   41, 42 48 35 24 30 Augerd 02 49 50 30 00 Augerstein 15 51 30 26 20 Augest 32 49 40 34 00 Augsdorff 20 51 45 28 30 Augst 1, 40 47 30 24 10   41, 43 47 25 24 10 August 22 50 40 30 00 Augustberg 33 50 40 29 50 Aukom 33 48 40 33 10 Aulibltz 02, 33 50 10 31 20 Aulier 38 49 40 21 40 Auma 22 50 30 28 50   34 50 40 28 40 Aumale 01 49 40 17 40 Aunhost 01 50 00 31 00 Auniowitz 33 49 20 30 20
Aunleben 20 51 25 27 50 Aunlisst 33 50 00 31 00 Auhschimoves 33 49 50 31 20 Auntheim 22 50 50 28 50 Avo 01 49 10 23 10 Avould 41, 43 48 00 23 25 Aupaire 41, 43 48 15 23 20 Aura 34 50 10 26 20 Aurach 01, 38, 45 48 10 26 00 Hohen Aurach 45 48 15 26 00 Aurach fl. 34, 36 49 50 27 20 Auracher Vorst 45 48 20 26 00 Auras 28 51 15 33 55 Aurbach 22 50 20 29 30   40, 45 48 40 24 55 Nider Aurbach 22 50 20 29 30 Aurburg 01 47 20 29 10 Auret 24, 25 52 10 31 30 Aurick 1, 38 53 40 23 30 Auris 24, 25 51 20 33 30   25 51 10 33 40 Aurnhoven 34 49 20 26 50 Aursperg 45 48 10 27 10 Aurswalt 22 50 50 30 00 Auscha 22 50 30 31 10 Ausche 29 51 15 33 30 Ausgerit 40, 42, 44 48 30 24 25 Auscha 02 50 30 30 10   33 50 20 31 10 Aushuss 41 47 50 24 15 Ausigusta 01 50 30 30 50 Grosklei Aus∣ker 27 51 25 33 40 Auslebon 14, 18 51 50 28 00   16 52 05 28 00 Auslerlitz 33 49 00 33 30 Ausne 30 50 20 20 00 Ausow 32 49 40 34 00   33 49 20 32 20 Auspitz B. Husto∣pecz 32 48 50 34 10   33 48 50 33 40 Auspnrg 14 48 10 27 40 Ausshus 40 47 50 24 20 Aussig 22 50 30 30 50 Austen 26, 27 51 40 33 20 Austerlitz B. Slaw∣kow 32 49 00 34 00 Austi 24, 32 49 50 33 00 Austria Archiducatus 01 48 20 31 50 Austy 2, 33 49 50 32 00 Authamen 21 51 00 26 40 Autrive 38 47 40 22 40 Autry 01 49 10 21 00 Autun 01 46 30 20 00 Auw 41, 43 47 35 23 30 Auwe 01 49 20 26 40 Auwe fl. 04 53 40 26 00 Auweil 41 49 00 24 25 Auwerbach 39 49 10 23 40 Aux 01 45 50 23 00 Auxelle 41 47 20 23 20 Auxerre 01 47 30 19 20 Auxonne 01 47 00 21 20 Auxii le Due 01 46 00 20 00 Aw 22 50 30 29 40   38 48 20 26 00   40 47 45 24 10   45 48 20 26 10 Nider Aw 29 51 10 32 55 Ober Aw 29 51 10 32 55 Awe 22 51 00 29 00 Awe fl. 06 52 15 26 40 Aweleben 16 51 25 28 00 Awendorf 14 51 40 28 40 Awenhusen 16 52 05 25 40 Awerbach 39 49 30 25 10 Awing 38, 45 48 00 25 20 Awolt 04 52 40 28 00 Awlen 1, 34, 45 38 40 26 40 Axel 1, 38 51 20 19 50 Ay 01 48 50 20 00 Ayenheim 38 49 30 26 40 Ayle 22 50 10 28 30 Ayng 45 48 10 26 10 Annsdorf 23 51 25 30 50 Az 38 49 00 32 00 Azem 16 52 10 27 20   18 51 50 27 10 Azendorf 15, 18 51 20 28 40   19, 20 51 25 29 00 Azraylles 41 48 25 23 05 B.   S. BA 41, 43 47 45 23 50 Babas 07 53 50 28 40 Babbin 7, 29 54 00 30 00 Baben 10 52 20 28 40   29 51 15 33 10 Babenhaus 1, 34 50 30 25 40 Babenhausen 1, 45 47 50 27 10   39 49 50 25 20 Babiele 27 57 40 33 45 Bablitz 10, 12 53 00 29 40 Babne 08 53 00 32 00 Babow 07 53 15 30 10 Babsdorf 16 52 00 27 50 Babsim 07 53 25 29 10 Baburge 38 52 40 24 00 Bacara 01 48 20 23 00 Bach 40, 45 48 30 24 35 Bacharach 1, 38, 39 49 50 23 50 Bachel 16, 19 51 15 28 10 Bachster 19 51 05 28 00 Bachyn 01 46 40 34 20 Bachanang 01 48 40 26 10 Backe 05 53 55 25 00 Backeleb 19 51 15 28 10 Backelsse 05 53 05 24 10 Backern 27 51 40 33 40 Backhunany 45 48 50 26 10 Bad 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 00   41, 43 47 50 23 45 Badbergen 01 52 40 24 10 Badeborn 14, 16, 18 51 25 28 00 Bandegow 20 51 55 28 00   07 53 30 28 50 Badenholtzyen 20 51 45 28 20 Badekenstede 15, 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Badekow 07 53 20 27 40 Badel 10, 11, 14 62 30 28 10 Baden 1, 38 47 10 24 40   11 52 24 29 00   1, 39, 40, 41, 45 48 35 24 40 Badensis Marchio∣naty 01 48 30 24 30 Badendick 07 53 40 29 10 Badendorff 15, 19, 20 51 35 28 30 Badendorffscheheltz 20 51 35 28 40 Badenhusen 16 51 45 26 50 Badenick 10, 12 52 40 30 10 Badenwetler 40 47 45 24 10 Badenville 1, 38, 41, 43 47 40 24 10 Badern 16, 19 51 25 28 00 Badersee 07 53 35 20 50 Badewitz 14 51 40 29 20 Badhauss 40 47 45 24 15 Badow 07 53 30 28 00 Badra 20 51 25 27 50 Baenow 09 54 40 31 30 Baerlo 1, 15 52 20 27 10 Baersen 16, 17 57 46 26 10 Baesdorp 7, 10 54 05 28 50 Baesem 05 53 00 25 20 Bagnasca 01 45 40 25 00 Bahn. 38 47 00 25 00 Baicken 40 47 30 24 20 Baigneux 01 47 20 20 30 Baikow 4, 10 54 00 29 00 Baion 01 48 20 22 40 Bairsbrun 40, 41, 45 48 20 24 50 Bakanang 34 48 50 26 10 Bakenberg 09 54 55 31 10 Bakendorp 07 53 20 28 10 Bake vor de Me∣deme 03 53 45 24 50 Bakewltz 11 52 40 28 10 Bakum 04 52 40 24 20 Balaton Lacus 01 46 50 35 10 Ober Balbach 34 49 20 26 20 Under balbach 37 49 35 26 15 Balborn 41, 42 48 25 23 55 Bakkaw 26 51 45 32 40 Balden 40, 41, 42 48 05 24 05 Baldenaw. 01 49 50 23 20 Balderbach 38 50 40 24 40 Balderen 34 48 50 26 50 Ober Under Bal∣ding 45 47 45 25 00 Baldringen 45 48 00 26 40 Baldstet 19 51 05 28 00     51 15 28 40 Ballem 01, 38 51 10 21 10 Balen 27 53 30 27 20 Balenberg 34, 49 39 20 26 20 Balenroda 16, 19 51 30 28 00 Balg 41 48 35 24 30 Balgare 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 05 Balgen 04 53 00 25 40 Balieu 01 49 00 21 10 Balingen 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 10 Balinghausen 19 51 45 26 30 Balistet 19 51 05 27 30 Ballenberg 37 49 30 26 10 Ballenheim 22 50 50 29 10 Ballenstad 18 51 20 27 50 Ballen∣stede 14, 15, 16, 20 51 45 28 00 Ballenstede Comitatus 20 51 50 28 00 Ballerok 09 54 45 31 30 Ballevitz 07 53 20 30 30 Ballie 05 53 50 25 40 Thor Ballie 02 54 20 25 40   03 53 45 25 00 Ballin 07 53 20 30 40 Balret 40 47 45 24 15 Balm 38 46 00 24 20     53 20 21 20 Gr. Kl. Balmhausen 19 51 10 27 40 Balow 07 53 05 28 50     53 10 28 10 Balrech 41, 43 47 45 24 10 Baltersdorff 41, 43 47 30 23 40 Balterssh 41, 43 47 40 23 50 Baltrum 1, 38 54 00 23 10 Baltzenheim 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 05 Baltzeres 38 46 20 26 00 Baltzhaim 45 48 00 26 50 Baltzhausen 45 48 05 27 10 Balue 38 51 00 24 20 Balz 02 52 10 29 10 Bamberg 2, 33 49 50 33 3   16 52 05 27 5   1, 34, 36 49 50 27 4 Bambergensec Epis∣copatus 01 49 50 27 4 Bambow. 07 53 40 29 5 Bamiviz 36 50 40 28 0 Bamtook 41, 43 47 35 24 0   40, 43 48 00 24 1 Bamma 10, 12, 14 52 10 29 3 Bammersrode 19, 20 51 20 28 4 Bamwitz 19 50 40 27 5 Ban 32 49 30 33 2 Bandekow 07 53 15 27 4   08 53 50 32 3 G. L. Bandelvitz 09 54 25 30 5 Hohen Banderen 16 51 15 27 0 Bandevitz 07 53 25 28 2 Bandoville 41 48 20 23 1 Bandorf 16 52 20 27 5   45 48 15 25 3 Bandow 10, 11 52 20 27 5 Bandt 05 53 25 24 3 Banen 01 53 00 32 0   10, 13 52 50 31 5 Bang 05 54 00 25 4 Bangertshoff 37 49 45 26 0 Banitz 14 51 40 29 2 Banckwitz 28 51 10 34 5 Banow 1, 32 49 00 35 0 Banowicz 01 48 30 36 0 Bansen 39 51 35 33 0 Bansleben 16 52 05 27 3 Banstede 2, 4, 06 53 20 27 0 Banstelde 18 51 15 27 5 Bant or Kelen 1, 38 53 40 22 4 Bantk 10 52 40 29 2 Bautlum 16, 17 51 55 26 3 Bantze 09 54 55 31 00 Bantzen 02 51 00 30 20 Bantzenheim 40, 41, 43 47 45 24 00   14, 15, 20 51 40 28 00 Brantzkow 07 53 25 28 30 Bantzow 07 53 40 29 30 Bar 38 46 40 24 40   41 48 15 23 55 S. Barb 41, 42 48 35 23 50 Barbarot 41, 42 48 55 24 30 Barbeiskirch 40 48 40 24 55 Barber 06 52 30 25 20 Barbow 10 53 00 31 00 Barby 1, 02 52 00 29 00   10, 14, 15, 18, 21 51 35 28 50 Barby Comi∣tatus 10, 14, 21 51 35 28 50 Barchfeld 4, 6, 16 53 00 27 00   19, 36 50 50 28 00 Grot Lutk Barckel 17 52 05 26 00 Barckhausen 40 48 50 24 55 Barckwitz 21 51 05 28 40 Grosr Barde 22 51 10 29 40 Barde fl. 27 51 30 33 30 Bardewyck 1, 2, 04 53 40 27 00   5, 06 53 10 25 10 Bardorf 10, 12 52 50 30 20   14, 16 52 15 27 50 Bardt 8, 10 54 10 29 30 Barem 4, 16 52 05 27 20 Barenburg 1, 04 52 40 25 20 Barenbusch 08 53 50 34 30 Barenfliet 02 54 20 26 10   03 53 55 25 10 Barenslow 08 53 20 31 30 Barentin 10, 11 52 40 29 10   16, 17 52 05 26 40 Bareth 22, 23 51 10 31 50 Bargen 25, 26 51 50 33 00   45 48 40 26 30 Gross Bargen 27 51 35 33 45 Bargh 01 54 50 28 00 Barghausen 19 51 05 27 50 Bargsdorff 12 52 40 30 10   22 71 00 29 00 Bargstede 05 53 30 25 50 Barhovet 8, 09 54 30 30 00 Barhow 12 53 00 31 00 Barlch 19 50 35 28 00 Grosseu, Offer Ba∣ringen 19 57 00 27 00 Baringen rode 16 52 05 26 40 Bariuke 16 52 15 27 50 Barleben 10, 11 51 40 28 40   14, 18 51 55 28 40 G. Barleben 16 52 06 28 20 Barledue 01 48 40 21 20 Barlt 2, 5, 23 54 40 25 40 Barmitz 10, 12 51 40 30 10 Barmstede 05 53 50 26 20 Barnbotg 06 52 25 25 40 Barndor 01 52 00 25 30 Barne 10, 12, 13 52 30 31 30 Barneflet 03 53 15 24 50 Barnelde 17 53 15 26 30 Barningerode 17 52 15 26 40 Barnkevitz 09 54 25 30 50     54 40 31 30 Barnsdorf 07 54 05 29 10   16 52 00 27 40 Barnstein 1, 08 52 50 32 30 Barnstet 19, 20 51 25 28 40 Barnt 02 52 10 29 40
on 41, 43 47 25 23 25 on 28 57 30 35 10 sdorff 10 52 40 30 10 ottowitz 28 41 00 34 20 ow 09 54 45 31 30 . 38 48 00 23 40   41 42, 43 48 15 23 55   42, 44 48 35 23 50 ichhave 05 53 25 24 40 t 10, 12 51 40 30 50 s 07 53 40 29 40 cho 27, 29 51 35 33 10 sdorf 29 51 15 33 15 06 52 40 25 40 inghausen 01 52 30 26 00 eben 16 52 00 27 40 ebn 18 51 40 27 30 n 1, 10, 12, 13 52 40 31 20 raube 01 48 00 20 40 for Seyne 01 47 50 20 20 yhusen 17 52 30 26 10 ifeld 16 51 35 27 20 sdorf 07 54 05 29 20 leben 06 52 05 27 40 enheim 40, 41, 43 47 30 23 55 fleben 14 52 00 28 00 L. Bartensleben 16 52 10 28 00 feld 16 52 16 27 10 in 08 54 30 34 30 evitz 09 54 25 31 40 Bartime 45 48 40 26 40 mbach 45 48 50 26 10 f 19 51 15 26 50 fingen 38, 39, 41 48 40 23 30 ombredo 10, 13 53 00 32 00 sch 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 20   29 51 10 33 15 sch fl. 24, 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 20 schiorwerg 27 51 40 33 30 ensleben 18 51 55 28 00 dorf 10, 12 42 20 30 40 ich 38 50 40 22 40 sdorp 08 53 40 32 30 ville 38 48 00 22 00 01 53 20 27 10 velde 16 52 00 26 40 s 01 53 20 23 50 . Ob. Basa 16 51 20 28 00   19 51 20 27 40 Basbruch 15 51 30 28 00 Basdow 10, 12 53 10 30 40 Basekow 10, 12 52 40 29 30 Basel 1, 5, 40, 41 47 30 24 00 Basen 22 57 00 29 00 Basenwiler 41, 43 47 55 24 10 Baeben 02 51 50 28 20 s Klein Basle∣ben 02 57 50 28 40     51 55 28 50 Bassdal 05 53 30 25 20 Basse Avergne 01 45 40 18 30 Bassell 05 53 05 24 20 Basselperg 33 40 10 33 30 Bassen 16 52 25 26 20   38 53 00 23 40 Bassenberg 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Basserteich 23 51 25 31 00 Bassenstorf 38 47 00 25 00 Bassonen 38 46 00 23 00 Bassun 04 53 00 25 00 Bassy 38 49 00 21 40 Basselburg 01 50 10 30 30 Baoigne 1, 38 50 00 22 00 S. Bat. 38 48 20 24 00 Batelkow 07 54 00 28 50 G. K. Baten 22 51 10 29 40 Batenborg 38 51 40 21 40 Batevate 09 54 20 31 20 Batevitz 09 54 30 30 30 Bathach 23 52 35 31 50 Z Bathel 01 47 30 35 00 Bating 10, 12 52 30 30 10 Batnaw. 45 48 30 25 40 Batow. 01 53 10 33 00   10, 13 52 50 32 00 Battenberg 01 50 50 25 10 Battenheim 41, 43 47 40 23 50 Battesen 2, 4, 6 53 05 26 40 Batteune 21, 22 50 55 29 40 Battichendorff 19 57 20 28 00 Battin 10, 12, 13 53 10 31 10 Batzen 15, 16 52 10 29 40   31 50 30 33 50 Bavariae Ducatus 01 48 00 28 00 Bavay 01 50 20 19 50 Bauchwitz 25, 26 52 20 32 20 Baudevitz 02 53 30 28 00 Baudis 28 51 05 33 45 G. K. Baudis 29 51 10 33 30 Baudis Schantze 26 52 00 33 20 Baudmansdorf 29 57 15 32 55 Baudonvillers 01 48 20 23 10 Bavenstedde 16, 17 52 05 26 40 Baverstorp 07 54 00 30 00 Bavinga 41 48 10 23 50 Bauke 30 50 25 34 10 Baumelenonnes 01 47 10 22 30 Baumgarten 25, 27 51 00 33 00   28, 31 50 50 34 15   41, 42, 44 48 30 24 10   42, 43 48 10 23 55 Bauna 29 51 25 33 05 Baupaumes 01 50 00 10 50 Bausehlach 39, 45 48 50 25 10 Bauschwitz 37 51 30 33 20   30 50 30 34 30 Hoch Bauschwitz 26 57 35 33 20 Kl. Bauschwitz 26, 27 51 33 33 20 Bausin 07 53 20 27 50 Bausow 32 46 30 33 50 Bautsch 22 57 00 29 10   24, 32 49 40 34 30   26, 27 57 40 33 10 Kl. Bautsch 22 51 20 29 40 Bautzelvitz 09 54 50 31 10 Bautzke 26 57 35 33 20 Baw 40 47 38 24 10 Baworow 33 49 00 31 10 Bayerdorf 21 51 00 29 00 Bayersted 18 57 45 27 30 Bayon 38 48 20 22 20 Baytz 10, 12 51 40 29 50 Baxvig 22 50 20 30 00 Bazen 08 53 30 32 30 Beauce 01 47 50 18 00 Beaulieu 01 47 20 18 20   38 48 20 22 40 Beaulolois 01 45 40 20 00 Beaumont 38 48 00 22 00 Beaumon en Argen∣ton 01 49 30 21 10 Beaune 01 46 40 20 40 Beauquisne 01 50 00 18 20 Beauram 38 50 00 21 00 Beaure 38 45 40 22 20 Beauvais 01 49 20 18 00 Beauvieu 01 45 50 20 40 Bebeck 22 57 00 28 40 Bebelen 02 53 10 27 00   06 52 50 27 10 Bebenhausen 45 48 20 25 40 Beberteich 13 52 20 32 20 Bebing 45 48 40 26 30 Bebl 22 50 30 29 10 Beblen 41 48 00 23 50 Bebling 45 48 25 25 40 Beblingen 39 49 10 23 20 Beblow 07 53 10 30 10 Beblun 41, 42 48 40 24 20 Bebra 15, 19 57 10 28 20 Bechburg 38 47 00 24 00 Bechelln 10, 12 52 40 29 40 Bechen 22 57 20 29 40 Bechin 33 49 10 31 20   40 47 55 24 15 Bechinskykrag 33 49 20 31 50 Bechseuster fl. 19 50 25 27 40 Bechtelsheim 39 49 40 24 20 Bechten 39 49 30 24 40 Bechynerkraiss 33 48 50 31 40 Beckbergen 38 52 00 22 00 Beckendorf 16 57 20 27 40 Beckenhaus 40 47 55 24 20 Beckenriet 38 46 20 25 00 Beckholtz 21 57 45 29 30 Beckern 28 51 05 34 35 Alt Gross beckern 29 51 15 33 15 Becking 45 49 00 25 40 Becksbach 39 49 20 23 30 Beckendorf 20 57 20 28 50 Beczwa 32 49 30 35 10 Beczwa fl. 32 49 30 34 40 Beczwae Superioris fons 32 49 20 35 10 Beczwae inferioris fons 32 49 30 35 10 Beddige 16 52 05 27 10 Bedem 36 50 20 27 30 Bedern 19, 20 57 20 28 50 Bederkesa vulgo Bricksmale 1, 04 54 00 25 00 Bedesheim 39 49 10 23 30 Bedige 18 57 50 26 50 Bed gheim 37 49 40 26 10 Bedrichow 32 49 20 33 30 Bedweyler 39, 41 48 40 23 30 Beeren 22 57 00 29 40 Beerfel 16 57 55 27 40 Beernsle 16 57 35 26 50 Beersdorff 23, 25, 29 51 20 33 00 Beerstede 04 54 00 27 40 Beersum 16 52 00 27 40 Beerton 05 53 50 24 10 Beerwalde 8, 10 53 50 34 00   30, 31 50 30 34 00 Beese 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 30   22 57 20 29 30 Beesen 10 53 00 29 30   21 55 55 28 50   22 57 30 29 00 Beeser 12 53 00 29 20 Beesten 38 52 20 23 40 Befort 1, 38 47 20 23 20   41, 43 47 25 23 20 Behaw 30 50 35 34 10 Behnaw 25, 26 57 40 32 00 Beichaw 26 57 45 33 00 Beichlingen 01 51 10 28 10 Alt Schols Beich∣lingen 19 51 20 28 10 Beichlingen Comita∣tus 19 57 20 28 10 Beichm 38 50 40 22 40 Beienpostel 4, 06 53 00 27 00 Beiern 22 50 50 29 30 Beier Namborg 19, 20 57 35 28 20 Beighaim 38 48 40 25 40 Beigwitz 30 50 30 34 20 Beirselch 35 49 50 25 00 Beirsdorf 08 53 00 32 30   22 50 50 29 00 Beilstein 38 50 00 23 20 Beine 2, 15 52 00 28 00 Beinem 16, 17 52 00 27 10 Beignerstat 37 50 25 27 20 Beinhe∣im 38, 40, 41, 42, 45 48 40 24 20 Beinsheim 39 49 30 25 00 Beintheim 40 48 85 24 45 Beismar 19 57 15 26 50 Beisenthal 41, 43 47 20 23 45 Beisch 41, 42 48 55 24 00 Beisot 36 50 45 27 10 Beiss 41, 43 47 35 23 45 Beissel 19 57 15 27 20 Bekanstar 01 50 10 28 00 De Beke 09 54 45 31 20 Beken 17 53 25 26 50 Bekendorff 18, 19 57 50 27 50 Belberg 21, 22 51 00 28 50 Belchemons 41, 43 47 45 23 30 Belckow 08 54 00 32 30 Beldentia 08 53 40 30 30 Belem 05 53 50 25 30 Belen 19 50 35 27 50   22 57 10 29 20 Belenbrun 41, 42 48 55 24 25 Belentschin 25, 26 52 00 33 40 Belfar 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 30 Belfus 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 40 Belgardt 8, 10 54 10 33 30 Belgarten 01 53 50 33 30 Belgendorff 10, 12, 13 52 40 31 10 Belgeren 2, 22 42 30 29 20   21 50 55 29 50 Belgium 01 50 20 18 10 Belgraado 01 45 40 30 20 Beliken 41, 43 47 35 24 00 Belikowo 27 57 35 33 40 Belitz 02 52 10 29 20   07 53 54 29 10   10, 13 52 40 33 10 Belkow 05 53 45 25 30   10, 11 52 20 28 40 Bellana 01 45 30 26 00 Bellay 01 45 20 21 50 Belle 01 50 50 18 40 Bellegar 01 46 40 21 00 Bellem 02 54 20 25 40   03 53 45 24 50 Bellemmer hem 03 53 45 24 50 Beilen 10, 12 52 40 30 50   41, 42, 44 48 25 24 05 Bellenburg 19, 20 57 35 29 00 Bellendorf 10, 12 52 00 30 50 Bellentz 01 45 30 25 20 Bellerive 38 46 20 23 00   01 45 40 20 30 Belleville 38 48 40 22 00 Bellicken 40 47 30 24 10 Bellies 01 46 30 21 20 Bellin 07 53 40 29 20 Bellincken 10, 13 52 40 31 10 Belling 08 53 30 31 00 Bellingerbach fl. 39 49 00 25 30 Bellingsdorf 22 50 40 29 10 Bellitz 10, 12, 21 51 50 30 10 Bell 38 57 40 24 20 Belmenhuysen 03 53 50 25 00 Belmsdorff 23 57 05 32 10 Below 2, 7, 14 53 35 29 00 Belschwitz 23 57 15 31 20 Belsdorf 14 57 55 28 00 Belsfelde 19 57 40 28 10 Belsheim 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Belstet 16, 19 57 20 27 30 Belstor 16 52 15 28 00 Beltigeroda 16 51 55 27 30 Beltin 32 49 30 34 40 Beltriet 36 50 30 27 20 Beltsch 26, 27 57 40 33 15 Hoch Beltsch 26, 27 57 45 33 30 Klein Beltsch 27 57 40 33 35 Beltzig 1, 2, 14, 15, 21 52 10 29 40 Mittl. Belwitz 22 50 40 28 50 Bermerode 17 52 30 26 30 Bemikirch 45 48 35 26 30 Benatky 1, 2, 33 50 10 31 59 Bencken 21, 22 57 50 29 30 Benckendorff 19 57 40 28 40 Benckwitz 28 57 05 34 20 Bendeleben 15, 16, 20 51 20 27 40 Bendelin 10, 11, 14 52 45 29 20 Bendern 38 46 40 26 00 Bendigeroda 16 51 50 27 50 Bendorff 18, 19, 20, 22 57 20 28 50 Bendschin 24 49 50 34 30 Benea 4, 16 52 00 25 40 Benedict beurn 01 47 20 28 20 Bener 05 53 45 26 20 Benerode 16 52 15 26 40 Beneschow 24, 32, 33 49 50 34 30 Beneschow 33 48 40 31 40
Benselt 1, 44, 38 48 10 24 00   41, 42, 43 48 15 24 00 Gr. L. Bengerstorff 07 53 20 27 40 Bengstct 45 48 35 25 20 Benheim 39 48 40 24 30 Benikendorff 07 53 55 27 50 Benitz 07 53 10 30 30 G. K. Benitz 10, 12 52 10 30 00 Bennebeck 01 54 50 26 00 Bennenstorf 07 54 00 29 30 Bennewitz 21, 22 50 55 29 00 Bennickenstein 16 51 40 27 40 Bennigesen 17 52 25 26 20 Bennin 07 53 25 27 40 Benningel H. 16 57 25 27 00 Benningenstein 18 57 15 27 20 Benninghausen 19 57 35 26 30 Bennungen 15, 16, 19, 20 57 30 28 10 Bensch 32 49 50 34 30 Benschin 24 50 20 36 00 Bensen 22 50 40 31 10 Benshausen 36 50 35 27 20 Bensheim 01 49 30 25 00 Benster 02 52 50 28 30 Benstet 19, 20, 21 57 35 28 50 Benstorp 15, 16, 17 52 10 26 20 Benten 07 53 25 29 00 Bentersheim 39 49 20 24 50 Benthem 1, 38 52 20 23 30 Bentin 4, 07 53 30 27 50 Bentkendorff 20 57 35 28 50 Bentlage 38 52 20 33 40 Bentorff 41, 43 47 20 23 40 Bentschen Pol. Sbunsyn 24 52 10 32 30   25, 26 52 20 32 40 Bentwisch 07 54 05 29 20 De Bentwisch 03 53 45 25 10 Bentz 08 53 50 32 00 Bentzdorf 10, 14 52 00 29 20 Bentze 09 54 20 41 00 Bentzendorf 34 49 20 27 50 Bentzin 2, 07 53 20 28 30 Bera fl. 45 47 50 25 40 Beraun 24, 33 50 00 36 00 Berba 41 48 25 23 15 Berbelstein 41, 42 48 55 24 20 Berbergen 16, 17 52 10 26 50 Berbeshausen 19 57 20 26 30 Berchdorf 14 52 20 28 00 Berchem 16 52 15 27 00 Berchgum 05 53 35 24 00 Berching 34 49 00 28 30 Berchhorst 03 53 50 27 10 Berchstract 39 49 40 25 00 Berchterheyde 02 53 50 27 00 Berchum 17 52 30 27 00 Berchwerck 45 48 20 24 50 Berck 38 57 20 22 40 Bercka 15, 16, 17, 19 57 20 27 40 Berckdorff 21 57 00 28 50 Bercke 04 54 20 26 40 Bercken 41, 42, 43, 44 48 05 23 50 Berckenberg 12 52 00 31 40 Berckenbrug 12, 13 52 00 31 30 Berckenburg 10 52 00 31 40 Berckertrode 19 50 50 27 00 Berckewitz 21 57 20 29 40 Bercknergdorff 23 57 05 32 00 Berckrade 07 53 20 28 50 Bercsw. 43 47 40 23 40 G. K. Berden 16, 19 57 25 27 40 Berecamp 04 52 00 25 20 Beregard 01 46 20 21 40 G. K. Beren 10, 12 52 00 30 40 Berenburg 14 57 30 28 50 Berenfels 41, 43 47 20 24 00 Berental 41, 42 48 45 24 05 Berenprunen 34 49 00 27 00 Berenshagen 07 04 15 29 50 Beretzhausen 34 49 00 28 50 Berfis 16 57 35 27 20 Berg 11 52 50 27 50   38 47 20 26 00   41 48 15 24 25 Der Berg 28 57 20 34 10 Bergen 41 48 15 24 25 Berga 15, 16, 19, 20 57 30 27 40 C. Gerga 18 57 45 28 40 Bergamo 01 45 10 26 20 Bergbit 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 00 Berge 2, 04 53 00 27 40   10, 11, 16 52 10 28 10 Berge Ducatus 38 50 40 23 20 Aufder Berge 19 51 05 27 40 Aufn Berge 27 57 20 33 45 Bergelafe 09 54 25 31 10 Bergen 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 09 50 20 20 00   10, 12, 22, 35 50 10 29 10   37, 38, 39, 40 49 40 23 20   41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 25 Bergem opzoom 01 57 30 20 20 Bergen weyler 45 45 30 27 00 Berger 19 51 00 28 10 Bergerdorff 1, 2, 03 53 50 26 40   04 54 00 26 40 Bergersdorff 06 53 15 26 40 Bergerwalt 4, 06 53 00 26 40 Bergfeld 7, 10, 12, 16 53 10 30 40 Bergfrid 10, 11 52 10 27 00 Bergfrieda Toll 14 51 50 29 30 Bergh 10 57 20 26 50   42, 43, 44 48 15 24 25 Berghfrede 2, 15 52 00 28 40 Berghausen 25 51 00 33 00 Berghen 08 54 30 30 30 Berghit 38 48 20 23 40 Berghof 40 48 15 24 25 Bergholtz 10 53 10 30 30   41, 43 47 45 23 40 Berghtols Gaden 01 47 20 30 10 Bergkersheim 35 50 00 25 00 Bergkholtz 12 53 10 30 20 Bergkirchen 16 52 15 26 00 Bergling 16, 18 52 05 27 30 Aufm Bergman 28 51 00 34 35 Bergsow 08 53 50 31 00 Bergstat 45 49 10 25 10 Bergstede 4, 05 53 40 25 40 Bergtow 10, 14 52 00 29 00 Bergzabern 1, 38, 39 48 50 24 30 Bergzow 15 52 30 29 00 Berichta 34 49 50 26 40 Bering 45 48 15 26 10 Beringen 36 50 20 27 10 Beringsstorff 34 49 20 28 00 Beringsweidr 38 49 00 26 00 Beringsweiller 43, 45 49 00 26 00 Berkholt 21 51 45 29 40 Berkow 10, 11 52 20 28 20   13 53 00 31 40 Berlassreit 01 48 30 30 40 Berlicom 37 57 40 21 20 Berlin 1, 2, 07 52 30 30 40   10, 12 52 10 30 40 Berlineken 10, 13 52 50 32 20 Berling 41, 43 47 40 23 35 Berlinichen 7, 08 53 05 29 40 Berluck 03 53 45 25 30 Bermering 45 48 20 26 30 Bermersom 39 49 30 24 30 Bern 1, 4, 22 53 00 29 00   10, 11, 14 52 40 28 30   24, 32, 38 49 30 34 30 Berna 23 51 05 32 00 S. Bernart 37 50 25 27 20 Bernaw. 1, 33 49 50 29 30 Bernb. 41, 42 48 20 23 45 Bernbach 34, 36, 39, 40 49 20 27 40   41, 42 49 00 24 15 Bernberg 18, 22 51 50 27 50 Bernbrun 41, 42 49 00 24 15 Bernburg 1, 02 57 50 28 50   04 52 40 28 40   15, 20, 18 57 50 28 40   16 52 20 27 00 Bernburg Baronia 20 51 55 28 40 Berndorff 10, 11 52 30 28 50   21, 26, 29 51 00 29 20 Berne 05 53 15 25 00 Berneburg 21 57 30 28 40 Berneckh 45 48 25 25 10 Bernestell 38 49 40 23 00 Berneuken 1, 10, 12, 13 52 40 32 00 Bernewichen 08 52 50 32 30 Bernewiken 01 52 40 31 00 Bernewitz 02 59 30 29 00   10, 12, 15 52 10 29 50 Bernfels 34 49 40 28 10 Bernfelt 19 50 45 27 50 Bernfroda 19 57 40 27 50 Baringries 34 48 50 28 30 Bernhagen 08 53 40 32 30   19 57 20 26 30 Bernhaimer Waldt 34 492 0 26 40 S. Bernhard 33 48 40 32 40 Bernhausen 45 48 30 25 50 Bernheid 4, 10, 11 53 20 29 00 Bernow 10, 12 52 20 30 50 Bernriet 01 47 40 48 00 Bernsberg 2, 33 50 50 29 30 Bernshauen 19 57 40 26 40 Bernsh. 41, 42 48 30 24 10 Bernsdorff 6, 8, 14 52 35 25 20   19, 22 50 35 28 10   30, 31 50 30 34 00 Alt Bernsdorff 23 57 10 31 50 Bernsroda 16 57 30 28 00 Bernsroda 14, 15, 16 57 20 27 50 Bernstade 23, 24, 28 51 10 31 50 Bernstein Ned∣weditz 4, 32, 33 49 20 33 10   10, 13, 22 52 50 32 20 N. Bernstein 01 50 20 31 20 Bernteroda 16, 19 57 25 27 30 Bernum 38 52 20 24 20 Bernwald 22, 31 50 30 29 30 Beroltzheim 34, 37 49 20 26 00 Beroye 01 47 10 22 50 Berri 01 47 10 18 10 Berringen 16, 19 51 30 28 00 Bersch 38, 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 40 Berschildt 39 50 00 24 20 Bersdorf 22, 31 50 50 28 50 Berse 01 50 30 19 00 Bersendorp 07 54 00 30 00 Bersischen 38 46 20 23 20 Bersl. 18 51 35 27 30 Berstet 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 10 Bersth. 41, 42 48 35 24 10 Bersting 45 48 15 25 20 Berstitz 22 50 50 29 50 Bersw. 41, 42 48 10 23 50 Bertelsborn 19 50 55 28 00 Bertkow 8, 10, 11 53 50 30 30 Bertsderff Pol.Galac∣zin 23, 25, 26, 27 57 50 33 30   30, 31 50 20 37 10 Bertnitz 33 49 10 32 30 Bertrichamps 41 48 20 23 10 Bertsw. 41, 43 47 30 23 40 Bertzig 02 57 10 31 00 Berw. 41, 43 47 35 23 35 Berwalde 08 52 50 32 00 Berwiler 41 47 35 23 35 Berwin 38 50 20 22 00 Berzowitz 2, 23 50 20 30 10 Ober Nid. Besa 20 51 20 28 00 Besancon 01 47 00 22 10 Basaw fl. 19 50 30 28 00 Beschinaw 27 51 30 33 35 Besching 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Besckendorff 16 52 00 28 20 Besdes 2, 33 50 20 30 40 Besedorff 16 52 10 28 00 Besehorft 03 53 50 27 10 Beseke fl. 03 53 55 25 10 Besekendorff 18 57 40 28 10 Beseker Sluse 03 53 50 25 10 Besekow 1, 10, 12, 13 57 50 31 40 Beselin 07 54 00 29 20 Besen H. 16 57 20 27 00 Besenbis 40 48 05 24 05 Besenburg 19, 20 57 45 28 40 Besendorp 4, 6, 07 53 00 27 20 Esenfelt 45 48 20 25 00 Besenrode 20 57 30 27 50 Besenstet 20 57 40 28 40 Besentin 07 53 05 28 40 Besersdorff 21 57 05 29 10 Besicher 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 05 Besigaer 07 53 10 28 20 Besighaim 1, 39, 45 48 50 25 40 Besighoff 40, 43 47 50 24 20 Besikendorf 14 57 40 28 20 Besing 45 48 20 25 10 Beskennorf 06 57 55 28 00 Besneck 22 50 40 28 30 Besow. 07 51 05 29 30     53 30 27 50 Besperoda 16, 17 57 55 26 20 Bessebiss 41, 42 48 05 24 05 Ober Under Bessen∣bach 37 49 45 25 45 Bessihusen 16, 17 57 50 26 20 Bessin 09 54 30 30 50   33 49 30 30 30 Bessingen 39 48 50 23 10 Besedt 19 51 15 26 30 Bestenkedt 37 49 40 26 00 Besteritz 22 50 50 29 00 Besthaw 01 49 50 29 50 Beswering 10, 11 53 00 29 00 Beswitz 21 51 15 29 40 Betentorf 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Bethe 23 51 00 31 40 Bethmar 4, 16, 17 52 10 27 10 Bethmarsdorf 2, 15 42 00 27 50 Baronia Bethanien∣sis 25 51 50 32 40 Bethune 01 50 30 18 30 Bethick 41, 43 47 30 24 05 Beticken 41 48 40 24 35 Betlem 16, 17 52 15 26 30 Betlersdorf 30 50 25 34 10 Betling 45 48 25 26 00 Betloch 41, 43 47 25 23 50 Betmar 4, 16, 17 52 20 26 40 Betroberg 20 57 55 27 50 Betsch 24, 25, 26 52 30 32 30 Betsha 22, 33 50 00 29 50 N. O. Betschtorf 41, 42 48 40 24 20 Bettenburg 41 57 00 28 50 Bettenhausen 36 50 30 27 00 Bettenhoffen 40, 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 20 Betterlaw 15 52 20 26 00 Betterlo 15 52 50 26 00 Bettingen 34, 37 49 30 26 10 Bettlen 40 48 30 24 15 Bettlern 28 57 00 34 10 Bettnersdorff 14 51 40 28 20 Bettsdorf 23 51 00 31 40 Bettstorf 40 48 40 24 30 Betwar 39 48 50 26 00 Betwer 38 53 20 22 40 Betwiler 41, 43 47 20 23 55 Betz 12 52 30 30 20 Betzig 22 50 50 29 10 Betzin 10, 12 52 30 39 50     52 30 40 00 Betzing 41, 43 47 55 24 10 Betzkhenriedt 45 48 25 26 10 Betznaichew 10 52 30 30 20 Betznhauss 43 47 50 24 15 Betzow 2, 33 50 20 29 30 Beuchholt 02 54 30 26 00 Beudersee 20 57 40 28 50 Bevenpostel 16 52 35 26 50 Bever fl, 17 52 10 25 50 Beverde 15 51 50 26 00 Beveren 16, 17, 38 57 40 26 20
Bevergerd 38 52 20 23 40 Bevergern 01 52 20 23 50 Beverto 01 51 10 21 20 Beversdorf 13 42 50 31 40 Beverange 15, 16, 17 51 40 26 40 Beverwyck 1, 38 52 30 20 20 Bevio 38 45 40 26 20 Beumar 34, 37 49 30 26 30 Baume 22 50 20 29 10 Beundt 45 47 40 26 10 Beuren 1, 40 47 00 23 40 Beuregard 41 48 20 23 10 Beurerthal 40 48 35 24 40 Beurfelden 34 49 20 25 20 Beurs H. 16 57 30 27 10 Beuster 4, 15 53 20 29 20 Gr. Kl. Beuster 10, 11, 52 40 28 30 Beuthen 1, 24, 26 51 40 32 40 Beutnitz 1, 24, 25 52 10 32 10 Beuwren 01 46 50 25 30 Bewerstedemule 05 53 35 25 10 Beuhovene 05 53 25 25 10 Bexm 18 57 40 27 30 Bey 38 48 40 22 20 Beyde 22 50 30 29 50 Beyenfiet 05 53 55 25 50 Beyenrod 16 52 15 27 20     52 15 27 50 Beyenrode 16 51 25 27 10 Beyerland 38 51 40 20 00 Beyern 38, 45 47 40 25 40 Beyersdorf 10, 12, 22 52 20 31 00 Beyerste 16 52 05 27 40 Beyerwalt 22 50 50 29 10 Beylwig 45 48 45 25 50 Beymerward 16 57 25 26 50 Beysmar. 16 57 30 27 00 Beying 45 49 05 25 50 Beyflsbach 45 48 35 26 00 Beytz 02 51 50 30 20 Bezig 31 50 25 33 00 Bezendorf 2, 6, 15 52 30 27 50 Bezno 2, 33 50 10 30 40 Blatz 14 51 35 29 00 Bibarowitz 32 48 50 23 20 Bibbelde 16 57 20 26 40 Bibeisheim 39 49 40 24 20 Gr. L. Bibenden 16 52 05 27 30 Biber 35, 38 49 55 25 05 Bibera 34 49 20 26 40 Biberach 01 48 20 27 40 Biberagh 01 47 50 26 30 Biberbach 34 49 00 28 30 Bibesch fl. 22 50 50 30 30 Bibersdorf 02 52 10 30 00 Biberstein 2, 22, 34 50 50 29 20 Biberstet 16, 19 51 25 27 30 Biberteich 10, 25 52 20 32 30 Biberwatde 16 51 20 27 10 Biblen 44 48 20 24 00 Biblinghen 45 49 15 25 10 Bibra 36 50 25 27 10 Bibrach 38, 39, 45 49 00 25 40   40, 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 30 Bibreche 30 50 30 34 10 Biberstein 33 50 50 30 10 Biburg 01 48 40 28 50 Bichhausen 15 57 15 26 50 Bichlingen 15, 20 57 10 28 10 Bichlingen Comita∣tus 20 57 15 28 10 Bichlitz 19, 20, 21 57 30 28 50 Bichof 40 48 20 24 25   1, 4 16 52 20 25 40 Ober Unter Bicken 22 57 00 29 40 Bichenrieth 16, 29 57 15 27 20   40, 41, 43 47 45 24 30 Bichenensol 41, 43 47 55 24 05 Bichesheim 40 48 45 24 40 Bichhusen 07 53 20 27 30 Bidingen 39 49 00 23 10 Bidschoff 1, 33 50 00 32 20   02 50 00 31 10 Bieber 39 50 00 25 10 Biegnitz 26 57 46 32 50 Biel 38, 40 46 40 23 20 Biela 1, 28, 33 49 30 32 30 Bitla fl. 24, 31 50 20 34 00 Biel Bienne 01 47 00 23 30 Bielefeld 01 52 00 24 50 Bielendorffel 31 50 05 34 00 Bielersee 38 46 40 23 20 Bielezitz 33 49 20 30 50 Bielstein 01 50 30 24 40 Bielwiesaw 25, 26 57 20 33 20 Bielwiese 27, 29 51 25 33 20 Biendorf 07, 16 53 55 29 20 Biene Muhle 24, 25, 26 57 50 33 00 Bienes 23 57 20 32 20 Forest de Bienne 41 48 50 24 40 Bienrode 15 52 30 28 00 Bierelbach 41, 42 48 45 24 25 Bieren 41, 42 48 45 24 25 Biernhaum Polon. Miedzichod 24, 25 52 40 32 20 Biescherwalt 44 48 25 24 20 Biese fl. 11, 14 52 35 28 40 Biessen 41, 43 47 55 24 00 Bietigkhaim 39, 45 48 40 25 30 Bietingen 40 48 45 24 40 Bietlen 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 15 Biewieler 39 49 10 23 40 Bigel 44 48 30 24 30 Bigen 10 52 00 31 50   12, 13 52 10 31 50 Bigge 38 51 00 24 40 Biggenheim 39 49 40 24 10 Bihel 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45 48 20 24 25 Behenburg 38 51 00 23 20 Bihlstein 41, 43 48 00 23 45 Bila 16, 19 57 30 27 50 Bila fl. 30 50 12 34 20 Bilau 21 51 15 29 30 Bilaw 2, 15, 29, 30, 31 57 40 28 50 Bilawa 25, 26 57 50 32 40 Bilbencken 41, 43 47 25 23 55 Bilderla 1, 15 52 00 26 40   16 51 50 27 00   17 52 00 27 00 Bilenberg 03 53 50 25 20   05 53 45 25 50 Bilenberger Sluse 03 53 50 25 30 Bilhusen 17 51 40 26 50 Bilickum 41, 42 48 55 24 35 Bilin 2, 33 50 20 29 40 Bilitz 30 50 35 34 30 De Bilkow 03 53 40 25 00 Billam 19 57 15 28 20 Bille 3, 05 53 50 26 40 Bille fl. 05 53 30 26 30 Bilieben 16, 19 57 15 27 40 Billedal 05 53 10 25 20 Billehusen 03 53 50 26 30 Billewerder 03 53 50 26 40 Billickeim 1, 39 48 50 24 30 Billigratz 01 46 00 31 50 Billinische Fehre 02 52 40 29 10 Billingshausen 34, 37 49 50 26 20 Billkirch 2, 3, 4, 06 53 50 26 40 Billon 01 45 20 19 10 Billsertingen 40 48 45 25 00 Billsingen 40 48 45 24 55 Bilowitz 32 48 50 34 20 Bilsdorff 38 49 40 22 00 Bilsen 1, 18 57 50 21 30 Bilshausen 16, 19 57 35 27 00 Bilstein 1, 19 50 50 24 30   41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Bilstet 19 50 50 27 40 Bilt 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 50 Biltsick 14, 21 57 25 29 30 Biltzen 41, 43 47 50 23 50 Bilw. 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 25 Binumele 16 51 20 26 40 Binbach 34 50 40 26 20 Binch 01 50 20 20 10 Binder 16 52 00 26 50   17 52 16 27 00 Bindern 40, 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 05 Bing 38 49 40 24 00 Bingaim 38 48 40 25 20 Bingen 1, 39 49 50 24 00   40, 41, 43 47 50 24 10 Binickhen 38, 39, 45 28 50 25 40 Biningen 41, 43 47 25 23 55 Binnenbuttel 1, 2, 4, 06 53 20 27 00 Binow. 08 53 20 32 00 Binowitz 27, 29 51 20 33 15 Bintz 09 54 25 31 30 Bintz fl. 34 50 00 25 30 Bintzheim 40 47 35 24 05 Bionstet 19 51 06 27 40 Bionville 01 49 10 22 50 Birbach 33 48 20 31 50 Binckenbrucke 23, 25 57 20 32 20   27 47 45 33 25 Birckendorff 19 50 35 28 10 Birckenfeld 1, 37 49 40 23 20   39, 45 48 40 25 10 Birckenheide 19 50 35 28 10 Birckenhert 42 48 55 24 25 Bircksleck 26, 29 51 25 32 50 Birckholtz 25, 26 52 10 32 20 Birckmuhl 29 57 20 33 15 Birckretscham 28 50 50 34 20 Birckwalt 42 48 30 23 55 Birckwitz 31 50 25 33 30 Birem 06 52 35 26 10 Biren 2, 15 52 00 28 10   41, 43 47 45 23 40 Birgel 35 50 00 25 05 Birgwalt 41 48 30 23 50 Biritz 10, 11, 14 57 40 28 50 Birnthan 34 49 20 28 10 Birseck 41, 43 47 25 24 00 Birssen 40 47 55 24 05 Birstat 39 49 10 25 10 Birstein 1, 34 50 20 25 50 Birnitz Brtnice 32 49 00 32 50 Lang Birnitz 32 49 00 33 00 Birtum 04 53 00 26 20 Birwyll. 38 46 40 24 20 Bisch 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 55   41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Bischantz 27, 28 57 20 33 45 Bischausen 19 57 05 26 30 Bischborn 37 49 45 25 55 Bischdorff 23, 28, 29 51 10 31 40 Bischen 40 48 25 24 15 Bisohenzum Steg 40, 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 20 Bischkowitz 31 50 50 33 30 Bischleben 19 50 55 27 50 Bischofferade 20 51 35 28 30 Bischofferode 19 51 05 27 00     51 40 28 20 Bischoffingen 40 48 00 24 10 Bischofflack 01 46 10 31 40 Bischoshaim 01 49 30 26 10 Bischoshoff 01 47 10 30 10 Bischofing 41, 43 48 00 24 10 Bischofsdorp 09 54 45 31 00 Bischoffsee 10, 13 52 10 32 20 Bischoffsguter∣tern 19 57 10 27 10 Bischoffheim 1, 34 50 20 26 40   34, 37, 39, 45 49 30 26 10 Bischofsroda 16 57 30 27 20 Bischofftein 15 51 10 26 40 Bischofwalda 30 50 25 34 20 Bischofwerd 1, 2, 22 51 00 31 00   23, 24 51 15 31 00 Bischoszell 01 47 00 25 50   38 47 00 25 40 Bischtal 41, 43 47 45 23 35 Bischweier 40 48 40 24 40 Bischweiler 40 48 35 24 20 Bischwiler 42 48 35 24 40 Bischwiil 41 48 30 24 20 Bischwir 40 47 54 24 00 Bischwihr 41, 43 47 55 23 55 Bitchitz 28 50 55 24 15 Biscohorn 20 51 40 28 10 Bisdorf 10, 12, 14 52 10 30 50   15, 16, 18, 21 52 00 28 40 Bise 18 52 40 28 20 Bisel 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Biseleben 19 51 00 28 00 Bisemitz 09 54 25 31 30     54 45 31 30 Bisestede 2, 15 52 30 29 00 Bisenstorp 07 53 15 28 40 Bisental 10, 11, 12 52 30 28 20 Bisermuhl 27 51 30 33 10 Bishagen 16, 19 57 25 27 00 Bishausen 16 57 25 27 00 Bishorst 03 53 50 25 40 Biskupitz 32, 33 48 50 33 20 Bismansdorf 30 50 30 34 20 Bismarcht 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 40 Bismarck 2, 15 52 40 25 20 Bispen 1, 2, 4, 06 53 30 26 40 Bisperode 15 52 00 26 00 Bispingen 39 48 40 23 20 Bissendorff 4, 6, 16 52 20 26 30 Bissing 45 48 40 25 40 Bistang 39, 45 49 00 25 40 Bisteritz 14, 21, 32 51 25 29 40 Nid. Bisteritz 33 49 00 31 50 Bistland 08 53 00 30 00 Bistow 07 54 00 29 10 Bistricia 01 49 30 33 10 Bistrzic 33 49 10 30 20 Bitarke 16 52 10 26 20 Bitburg 01 50 00 22 40 Bitegast 09 54 25 31 10 Bitelsdorf 22 50 40 28 20 Bitess 33 49 10 32 50 Bitkow 10, 11 52 00 28 50 Bitlerselde 21 51 05 29 20 Bitsch 38 48 40 23 40   39 48 50 24 00 Bitchina 28 57 25 35 00 Bitschosen 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Bitchwir 41, 43 47 40 23 35 Bitta 32, 33 49 20 32 30 Bittaw 32, 33 48 40 32 40 Bitterfeld 1, 15 57 40 29 20 Bitz 45 48 00 25 50 Bitzaw. 01 46 50 27 00 Bitzfeld 45 49 50 26 00 Bitzkendorff 19 51 20 28 40 Biwende 18 51 45 27 10 Blagay 01 45 30 34 40 Blake 16 51 35 26 50 Blamkenbach 19 51 00 26 40 Blamon 1, 38, 41 48 30 23 10 Blanchkanu 34 50 40 26 00 Blackbrun 42 48 55 24 25 Blancke 28 57 05 34 05 Blanckefelt 10, 13 52 40 31 40 Blankenaw 01 50 30 26 00 Blackenberg 1, 16 51 50 27 50   10, 12 53 00 31 00 Blckenborg 05 53 10 24 50 Blackenburg 14 51 25 27 50   18 51 30 27 40 Blackendorff 14 51 35 28 20 Blackennesse 3, 5, 06 53 05 26 10 Blackeneslerlandt 03 53 50 26 10 Blackenfelt 10, 12, 26 52 00 30 40 Blackenhagen 10, 13 53 30 32 30 Blackenheim 20, 22 51 35 28 20 Blackenhorn 45 48 50 25 40 Blackenouwe 1, 16, 17 51 30 26 00 Blackensee 1, 08 52 10 30 30   10, 12 51 50 30 30   1, 8, 25, 26 52 15 32 20 Blanckesteinburg 22 50 20 28 40
Blanckstetten 34 49 00 28 30 Blaninger 41 47 35 24 00 Blani Aze fl. 33 48 50 31 00 Blank 38 50 40 23 20 Blankheim 38 50 20 22 40 Blankirchu 22 50 40 29 10 Blanmont 01 47 20 23 10 Blansko 01 49 10 33 40   32, 23 49 10 33 50 S. Blasi 1, 40, 41 47 40 24 40 Blasig H. 16 57 25 27 10 Blassen 12 51 50 31 10 Blassenburg 34 50 00 28 20 Blassin 10 57 50 31 20 Blata fl. 32 49 30 33 50 Blatandorff 14, 20 57 20 28 10 Blatana 1, 33 49 20 31 00 Blatnice 32 49 00 34 40 Blaubeyren 1, 45 48 10 26 20 Blaukochen fl. 34, 45 48 40 26 50 S. Blayse 38 49 00 22 20 Blecken∣stede 4, 15, 16, 17 52 20 27 20 Bledersheim 39 49 30 24 30 Bledlem 4, 16, 17 52 20 26 40 Bleich 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 30 Bleich fl. 41, 42, 43, 45 48 05 24 35 Bleicheroda 15, 16, 19 57 20 27 20 Bleicken 40 48 50 24 25 Bleiderhausen 45 48 45 26 10 Bleideshaim 45 48 45 25 50 Bleiderstet 16, 19 57 15 27 50 Bleisse 39 49 30 23 20 Bleiswedel 22 50 30 31 20 Blekede 2, 04 53 30 27 20 Wendisch Blekeden 07 53 10 27 40 Blekendorff 18 51 35 28 20 Blen 41, 42 48 15 23 35 Blene 04 53 40 25 40 Blensbach 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 40 Blenschw. 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 55 Blerick 01 57 20 22 10 Blesen 24, 25 52 30 32 00 Blesendorf 10, 11 53 00 29 10 Blesental 14 57 55 29 20 Blesern 21 57 20 29 30 Blesiperig 45 48 15 25 50 S. Bless 41, 43 47 25 23 50   41, 42, 43 48 05 23 40 Blessen 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 05 Blestina 01 45 50 35 20 Blewes 09 54 45 31 00 Blexem 38 54 00 24 20 Blexum 4, 05 53 40 24 40 Bleyberg 25 57 00 32 40 Bleydestat 39 50 00 24 20 Bleygr 40 48 40 24 10 Bleystadt 01 50 00 24 20 Blickers H. 16 51 15 26 50 Blickerst 41, 42 48 40 24 35 Bliderstet 15, 20 57 20 27 40 Blielebn 02 52 20 29 00 Bliemba 40 47 40 24 05 Blierstorff 05 53 30 25 50 Bliercaoel 38, 19 49 00 23 20 Blies fl. 38 49 20 23 20 Blieserhude 04 53 40 26 00 Blindendorff 22 50 20 28 50 Blisdorf 10, 12, 13 52 30 31 30 Blisendorf 10, 12 57 50 30 00 Bliskow 09 54 25 31 40 Bliskowitz 32 48 40 33 20 Bliste 07 53 35 28 00 Bliswill 41, 42 48 55 24 25 Blittersdorff 39, 40 49 10 23 20 Blo 28 50 50 34 20 Blobstn 41, 42, 43 48 20 24 10 Blockh. 09 54 05 31 20 Blockhuss 2, 07 54 10 27 40 Blocksberg 18 57 30 27 30 Bloczyl 1, 38 52 50 22 00 Blodesheim 41, 42, 43 47 45 24 00 Blomberge 08 53 10 32 30 Blomdorf 08 53 10 31 30 Blomendal 01 53 20 24 40   05 53 15 25 10 Blomenaghen 7, 08 53 20 30 20 Blomenow 15 52 30 26 00 Blomenowen Sluse and Have 03 53 45 25 30 Blomholt 07 53 20 30 20 Blommonberg 10, 12 53 00 31 20 Blonberg 01 47 30 23 20 Blondow 09 54 45 31 30 Blonskstein 2, 33 50 40 30 00 Blosheim 44 48 15 24 15 Blossenleben 19 50 40 27 20 Bloter∣thal 40, 41, 43, 45 47 55 24 25 Blotnltza fl. 24 50 50 34 30 Blotzen 41, 43 46 30 23 55 Blotzheim 40 48 20 24 15 Blotzingen 40 47 30 24 00 Blucher 2, 4, 07 53 30 27 30 Bluckow 09 54 45 31 30 Bludow 32 49 40 33 50 Blumberg 25, 26 52 00 32 20   38, 41, 43 47 25 23 30 Blumburg 40 47 35 24 25 Blumen 29 51 15 33 00 Blumenan 16 52 15 26 20 Blumenberg 13 53 00 31 00 Blumenkagen 4, 16 52 40 27 00   10, 12, 13 53 00 31 20 Blumenow 06 52 15 26 10 Blumenrode 19, 20 57 45 28 20 Blumenstein 39, 41, 42 48 50 24 10 Blumenthal 10 53 00 29 10   30 50 25 34 10 Blumeroda 29 57 15 33 35 Blumlaw 33 49 20 33 40 Bluse 07 53 45 27 50 Blussan 1, 33 50 00 30 30 Blute 22 50 40 28 40 Bluten 10 53 00 28 30   11 53 05 28 40 Blyelebere 15 52 20 29 20 Blyenbeck 38 57 10 22 00 Blyenoka 15 52 00 28 00 Blyst 19 57 15 26 30 Bneherode 19 57 00 26 30 Bobbelin 10 53 10 31 20 Bobel 02 52 10 29 00 Bobelwitz 26 52 25 32 20 Bobenrode 19, 20 57 40 28 10 Bobental 42 48 55 24 25 Bobenwerder 15 52 00 26 00 Bober sive Hebrus fl. 23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 33 57 50 32 00 Boberi fons 24 50 40 32 30 Boberaw 29 57 15 33 10 Boberhausen 21 57 15 30 20 Boberitz 26 57 35 32 30 Bobers∣berg 1, 10, 13, 24, 25 51 50 32 30 Boberstein 25 50 50 32 40 Bobischau 31 49 55 33 40 Boblin 08 53 20 31 30 Bobrowa 32 49 20 33 10 Bobruwka 32 49 20 33 10 Bobzin 07 53 25 28 00 Bochek 38 46 40 23 40 Bochera 19 57 20 28 10 Bochin 4, 10, 11 53 00 28 10 Bocholt 15 50 30 25 20 Bockholte 38 52 40 23 20 Bocholtz 40 47 55 24 25 Bochwitz 22 57 10 29 50 Bochorz 32 49 20 34 30 Bock 21 57 05 29 20 Bockberch 03 53 50 26 50 Bocke 08 53 30 31 30 Bockeberg 16 52 05 25 50 Bockehusen 05 53 15 24 40 Bockel 05 53 10 24 20     53 10 24 40 Bockelheim 15 52 10 26 40 Bockemerwart 35 50 00 25 00 Bockenem 35 50 00 24 55 Bockenheim 39 49 20 24 20 Bockenitz 4, 14, 16 52 20 28 00 Bockeroc 05 53 20 24 30 Bockey 26, 29 51 30 33 00 Bockholt 2, 07 53 40 28 10 Bockholtz 8, 10 53 20 32 30 Bocklenborg 05 54 00 25 50 Bockstale 20 57 40 28 20 Bocksekerthal 34 50 20 25 20 Bockwitz 26 57 40 32 40 Bodalow 33 49 20 32 30 Bodanetz 2, 33 50 00 31 20 Boddin 2, 07 53 40 27 50 Bode fl. 15, 16, 18, 19 51 50 28 00 Bodelkou 08 53 40 30 30 Bodenborg 16, 17 57 55 26 50 Bodendyck 1, 4, 06 53 00 27 20 Bodenhausen 16, 22 57 20 26 50 Bodenheim 39 49 50 24 30 Bodensee 1, 14, 16, 38 52 10 28 20 Bodensen 16, 17, 19 51 35 27 00 Bodenstat 32 49 30 34 40 Bodenstede 01 53 00 27 40 Bodenstein 15, 16, 17 51 20 26 40 Bodenwerdee 16, 17 51 45 26 10 Boders∣wihr 40, 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 20 Bodingen 37 49 30 26 05 Bodstet 19, 20 57 20 28 50 G. K. Bodungen 16, 19 57 25 27 30 Boebenheim 39 49 20 24 50 Boebicz 14, 20 57 25 28 50 Boechel 20 57 15 28 50 Boecholt 38 51 40 22 40 Boechorst 01 52 30 24 00 Boekl 38 57 40 23 40 Boepach 38 49 20 23 00 Boersdorf 10, 12 52 00 30 50 Boesdorf 15 52 40 28 00 Boesgaer 15 51 50 27 40 Boesleben 2, 15 52 30 28 10 Bossheim 37 49 30 26 05   41, 42, 44 48 10 24 10 Bogenaw 28 50 55 34 10 Bogkawicze 32 49 00 33 50 Bogkowitz 33 49 00 33 20 Bogusch 25, 26 52 00 33 20 Boguslanitz 28 51 25 34 55 Boguslawitz 28 57 00 34 20 Bohalow 1, 32 49 10 32 50 Bohemia 01 50 &c 30 00 Bohemsberg 31 50 40 33 30 Bohental 31 48 55 24 20 Bohmischbride 01 49 50 31 5 Bohmischbroda 2, 33 49 50 30 3 Bohmischdorf 30 50 15 34 2 Bohmich Triba 33 49 50 33 1 Bohuslainitz 33 49 00 33 5 Bohusow 2, 33 50 20 31 0 Bohutitz 32 48 50 33 4 Bojanowitz 32 48 50 34 2 Boicholt 01 51 50 22 4 Boichte 16, 17 51 55 27 2 Boidenstorp 07 54 00 28 4 Boikow 07 53 40 29 0 Boitzenborg 2, 4, 6, 07 53 30 27 2 Boisse fl. 07 53 20 27 4 Boistein 09 54 45 31 3 Boix 10, 13 52 10 32 2 Bokamnitz 33 50 40 31 1 Boke 7, 8, 10, 14 53 00 28 3 Bokel 4, 06 53 00 27 2 Bokelaw 06 52 10 26 1 Bokelo 16 52 15 26 1 Bokenem 16, 17 51 55 26 5 Klein Bokenu 39 49 30 24 3 Bokholt 10, 11 52 10 28 4 Bokoscht 33 49 00 32 5 Bokow 27, 33 50 20 30 5 Bolcken 40 47 40 24 0 Bolckenhan 33 50 50 33 0 Bolckenhain 24, 25 51 00 33 0 Bolcko∣witz 24, 25, 26, 29 51 30 33 0 Ober Nider Bolcko∣witz 26, 29 51 30 32 5 Bolckowiciensis Cir∣culus 26 57 30 33 0 Boldebuck 07 53 45 29 1 Boldelow 07 53 25 28 2 Boldenstede 08 54 20 29 3 Boldentin 7, 8 53 45 30 1 Boldevitz 09 54 35 31 1 Boleme 04 54 20 26 2 Bolen 22 57 10 29 4 Bolen alias Faul Obra fl. 25 52 20 32 2 Bolenborg 1, 2, 7 54 10 28 1 Bolenborgerwick 07 53 55 28 1 Bolendorf 7, 09 54 05 29 5 Boleslaw 33 50 10 31 5 Boleslawskykrag 33 50 40 31 4 Bolelitz 33 48 40 31 1 Bolewitz 25 52 20 32 4 Bolgelin 07 53 55 30 0 Bolgenbrol 10, 12 51 50 31 1 Bolgore 10, 12 52 10 31 00 Bolhagen 07 54 05 29 00 Bolkow 07 54 00 29 10 Bolla fl. 04 54 00 25 00 Bollagen 01 52 50 24 50 Bollen 05 43 20 24 50 Bollendorff 23 57 05 32 00 Bollensiel 05 53 35 24 40 G. Bolls 38 50 40 23 00 Bolnaw 16 52 15 27 50 Bolo 38 46 00 23 00 Bolsbach 40, 41, 42, 43 48 20 24 2 Bolschwiller 41, 43 47 45 24 1 Bolscheib 19 50 40 28 00 Bolsenhe∣im 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 05 Bolsfelde 15, 20 51 30 28 20 Bolsick 21 57 25 29 50 Bolslaw 01 50 10 31 50 Bolstet 19 50 55 27 20 Bolsum 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Bolswaert 1, 38 53 10 21 30 Bolsweiler 38 47 20 23 20 Bolswill 43 47 35 23 40 Boltelstet 19 57 10 28 10 Boltenhagen 7, 08 53 55 28 00 Boltzano 01 46 10 28 20 Boltze 07 53 40 26 00 Boltzelt 16 52 20 26 00 Boltzh 40 48 25 24 25 Boltzhuisen 16 57 30 26 30 Boltharst 42, 44, 45 48 25 24 20 Bolwiller Hersch 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Bomal 01 50 20 21 50 Bombst 24, 25, 26 52 10 32 30 Bome 4, 06 53 00 26 20 Bome fl. 4, 06 53 20 26 20 Bomesin 10, 11 52 50 28 20 Bomgart 7, 08 53 50 29 00 Bomke 14 57 35 28 20 Bomlitz 19 57 10 28 40 Bommel 1, 38 51 40 21 10 Bompst 10, 22 52 10 33 20 Bomsen 1, 38 50 40 23 20 Bon 10, 12, 21 51 30 30 20 Bonatz 4, 10, 11 52 40 27 20 Boncken 01 50 50 25 50 Bonde 21 51 10 28 40 Bondorf 1, 38, 41 47 40 24 50 Bone 14 52 15 29 20 Bonendyck 02 52 50 27 30 Bonevordt 16 51 20 26 40 Bonhain 01 50 00 19 20 Bonienbeg 18 57 45 28 30 Bonin 8, 10, 13 53 40 33 00 Bonnameis 35, 39 50 00 25 00 Bonne 01 45 50 22 30 Bonnendorf 4, 7, 10, 11 53 40 28 28
La Bonneville 01 45 40 22 40 Bonorirt 22 51 00 29 00 Bonowitz 27 57 40 33 35 Bonrala 16, 19 57 20 28 00 Bonrode 20 57 20 28 20 Bonsdorff 18 52 05 27 50 Bonsen 10, 11 52 30 27 20 Bonshausen 16, 18 51 50 27 50 Bontz 07 53 10 28 00 Boomparte 07 53 35 29 50 Bapehausen 34 50 30 26 30 Boppart 38 50 00 23 40 Boppentauer 36 50 10 27 10 Bopper 39 50 10 23 50 Bopingen 1, 45 48 40 27 10 Bor 33 49 30 29 50 Bora 28 51 05 34 00 Boratin 33 49 20 31 30 Boraw 28 50 55 34 10 Borbe 05 53 10 24 40 Borbeck 05 53 20 24 40 Borch 2, 10, 14, 15 52 20 28 20 Borchdorff 4, 6, 16 52 40 26 40 Borchersdorff 10, 12 52 20 30 20 Borchfeidt 19 50 45 27 00 Borcheffel 16 57 15 26 30 Borcholte 16 57 30 26 10   17 57 35 25 50 Gr. Borchow. 08 55 00 35 30 Borchstal 10, 11, 15 52 00 28 40 Borchstemme 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Borchtitz 09 54 40 31 30 Borchtrup 16, 17 52 00 27 20 Borchwedel 4, 6 52 40 26 40 Borchworm 01 50 40 21 20 Borck 38 57 40 25 00 Borching 40 48 05 24 20 Borckum 1, 38 53 50 22 30 Borda 23 57 15 31 40 Bordenan 16 52 20 26 20 Bordisholm 01 54 30 26 30 Bordum 05 53 25 24 30 Borekvulgo borcke 24, 25 52 00 24 00 das Borer 40, 41, 43 47 45 24 20 Borfeid 16 52 25 28 00   39, 45 49 00 25 40 Borg 05 53 10 25 10 Borgdorf 01 52 40 26 40 Borgedorf 14 56 25 29 20 Borgh 1, 11 52 20 29 00 Borghstenford 01 52 10 23 40 Borglaar 01 52 10 24 30 Borgloen 01 50 50 21 20 Borgo 38 45 40 24 20 Borgede 05 53 10 25 20 Borgwal 09 54 40 31 10 Borgwedel 15, 16 52 50 26 00 Boringen 19 51 00 26 50 Boritz 4, 10, 11, 33 52 40 29 00 Borkel 38 57 00 21 20 Borkeloo 01 52 10 22 40 Borken 1, 38 51 50 23 00 Borkendorf 30 50 20 34 20 Bormek 10, 12 52 20 30 00 Bormin 10, 12 52 00 30 10 Bormio 01 45 50 27 10 Born 7, 8, 9 54 20 29 40   14, 18, 22, 28 57 30 28 30 Bornaw 25 57 10 33 40 Borne 10, 14, 21, 41 57 40 29 20 Bornem 4, 16 52 20 27 40 Borneyn 15 52 30 27 40 Bornhaup 41, 43 47 35 23 35 Bornheim 35 50 00 25 05 Der Bornheimer∣berg 35 50 00 25 05 Bornholt 05 54 10 26 00 Bornhausen 16 51 50 27 00   17 52 00 27 00 Bornik 10, 12 52 20 31 30 Borniker 16 57 50 27 50 Bornitz 22 57 00 29 10 Bornke 18 57 30 27 40 Bornkresse 31 50 25 33 10 Bornstet 14, 15, 19, 20 57 50 28 20 Bornstet Baro∣nia 19, 20 51 35 28 20 Bornsteyn 01 47 20 34 10 Bornstorpshagen 07 53 45 28 00 Bornt 10 57 50 31 40 Borowa 33 49 30 32 30 Borowany 33 48 50 31 40 Borquim 38, 39, 41, 42 48 40 23 30 Borrentin 07 53 50 29 30 Bors 22 50 50 29 00 Borsbach 41, 42 48 40 23 55 Borschiz 32 49 00 34 40 Borsenchin 25 57 03 33 40 Borsfliete 02 54 20 26 00 Borsitz 32, 33 49 00 34 30 Borskamp 4, 6 53 40 27 40 Borslebn 16 52 00 27 50 Borslow 32 49 30 33 30 Borstel 2, 3, 5, 15 54 00 26 50 Borstendorf 22 50 40 28 50 Borsum 16, 17 52 00 27 30 Borsumerdam 17 52 25 26 40 Bortfelt 15 52 50 26 20 Bortschdorf 32 49 40 35 00 Katte Bortschen 26 51 45 33 30 Polnisch Bort∣schen 26, 27 57 45 33 30 Bortzow 1, 2, 7 54 10 28 00 Boruy 26 52 15 32 50 Boruhradeck 2, 32, 33 49 50 31 40 Bory 16 57 50 26 20 Bosch 17 52 05 26 10   1, 38 53 40 22 10 Boschwiller 41, 43 47 25 23 55 Bosdale 01 53 40 25 20 Bos∣dorff 2, 10, 19, 20, 30 52 30 27 50 Boseken 16, 19 57 20 27 30 Bosel 4, 10, 11 53 20 28 20 Boselhus 41, 42 48 35 24 00 Bosem 18 57 15 28 40 Bosenfeld 40 48 25 24 50 Bosentorf 41, 42 47 35 24 00 Bosslicte 02 54 20 26 00   03 53 55 25 20 Bosheim 40, 43 48 10 24 10 Boskow. 10, 12 52 00 29 50 Boskowitz 32, 33 49 20 33 40 Boskowstein 1, 32 48 50 33 00 M. Boson 01 47 20 22 30 Bosonville 1, 38 49 20 22 50 Bospert 39 49 30 23 20 Boss 19, 36 50 40 26 40 Bossenbach 34, 37 49 50 26 00 Bossow 07 53 55 28 10 Bossweiler 40 47 50 24 25 Bostat 34, 37 49 20 26 10 Bosted 02 54 20 26 40 Bostefelde 16 51 20 27 00 Bostleben 16, 19 51 25 27 40 Bostell 5, 10, 11, 16 52 20 28 40 Boswiler 41 47 35 23 40 Boteaw. 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 30 Boten 40 48 20 24 30 Botena 45 48 55 25 40 Boterheilingen 19 57 15 27 20 Botersen 5, 6 53 20 26 10 Botfeldt 16 52 15 26 40 Botinpen 41, 43 47 25 23 55 Botmar 4, 6, 15 52 40 26 20 Botmer 1, 16 53 00 26 00 Botschel 25 52 10 31 40 Bottberg 40 57 45 24 10 Battendorff 19, 20 57 25 28 20   30 50 30 34 10 Botter Tonne 03 53 45 24 10 Botting 45 47 50 25 30 Bottzhurst 41 48 25 24 20 Botwar 1, 45 58 50 25 50 Kleinen Botwar 45 48 50 26 00 Botwar fl. 34, 45, 48 48 50 25 56 Borzeborgk 10, 12 53 00 30 40 Botzen 16, 17 52 00 26 30   40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 05 Botzenhof 41, 42 48 35 24 15 Botzentor 41 48 35 24 10 Botzentorf 41, 42 48 35 24 10 Gr. Kl. Bot∣zitz 31 50 25 32 50 Botzow 1, 2, 33 52 50 30 30 Bovendorf 03 53 10 27 40 Bovendyck 15 52 50 27 40 Bover 01 57 30 23 10 Bovern 05 53 30 25 50 Boverstad 05 53 35 25 20 Le Boulay 01 49 10 22 50   41, 42, 43 48 10 23 30 Bouldry 38 48 20 23 00 Boulogne 01 50 50 17 30 Boumdaw 15 57 30 26 20 Bousen 10, 12, 13 52 10 51 50 Bourbach 36 50 25 27 10 Bourbon Lancy 01 46 10 19 20 Bourbon larc hambau 01 46 10 18 40 Bourbonnois 01 46 20 28 20 Bourgen Bresse 01 45 50 21 10 Bourges 01 46 50 18 10 Bourgogne 01 47 00 19 40 Bourmont 01 48 00 21 40 Bourtang 01 53 00 23 10 Bourtang F. 38 53 00 23 00 Bourtang heyde 38 52 40 23 00 Bouta 01 54 00 36 00 Bouthel 09 54 45 31 10 Bouthen 25 57 50 32 40 Bouxiers 38 48 40 22 20 Bowekule 2, 7 53 10 28 20 Bower 8, 10 54 00 31 00 Bowhof 09 54 50 31 10 Boxberg 37 49 30 26 10 Boxel 37 49 40 26 00 Boxtehude 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 53 50 26 00 Boxtel 01 53 50 25 50 Boye 38 51 20 21 20 Boykowitz 32 49 00 35 00 S. Boys 38 48 00 32 40 Bozchan 02 57 10 28 50 Bozin 02 50 20 30 20   33 50 20 31 20 Bozoches 01 49 10 19 30 Brabantia Duca∣tus 01 57 20 20 20 Brabantia 38 50 40 20 20 Brabantitz 32 49 40 35 00 Gr. Kl. Brachtern 19 57 25 27 20 Brachwitz 16, 19, 20 57 20 27 40 Brackenberg 16 57 20 26 50 Brackervaldt 01 57 10 23 50 Brackstat 21 57 15 29 10 Bracksted 2, 14, 15, 16 57 40 28 40 Bradhez 33 50 20 32 30 Braeckerwyck 05 52 25 24 40 Braensche 38 52 20 23 20 Braezn 33 50 20 32 00 Bragone 01 45 30 27 10 Brait 34 49 30 27 00 Braitneck 34 49 00 28 40 Braitnholt 45 48 20 25 40 Braitterst 40 48 30 24 30 Brake 2, 4 54 10 26 50 Brakel 1, 15, 17 57 40 25 40 Ampt Brakenberg 16 57 25 26 40 Brakenhaim 38, 39, 45 48 40 25 40 Brakewitz 21 57 50 29 50 Brakefeld 38 57 00 23 40 Bralin 24, 28 57 20 34 30 Bralitz 10, 13, 22 52 30 31 20 Bralletin 08 53 20 32 30 Brambach 39 58 40 23 20 Brambock 14 57 30 29 10 Brame 19, 36 50 35 26 40 Bramel 05 53 35 25 00 Bramhitschdorff 26 57 25 33 10 Bramow 07 54 05 29 20 Bramsche 01 52 30 24 20 Bramse 27 57 40 33 25 Bramstede 1, 2, 5 54 10 26 20 Branaw 01 48 00 30 10 Brancke 25 52 00 32 00 Branckenhaim 01 48 50 25 40 Branckgwitz 33 49 10 33 50 Brancz 32 48 50 34 50 Brand 31 50 10 33 30 Zum Brand 34 49 30 28 10 Brande 02 54 10 26 20 Brandeis 1, 2, 24, 32, 33 50 00 31 30 Branden∣burg 1, 2, 7, 8, 15 52 30 29 50   10, 12, 19 53 20 30 10 Alt Brandenburg 1, 12 52 30 29 50 Brandenburg Mar∣chionatus 01 52 40 28 40 Brandenstein 14 52 00 29 00 Branderode 19, 20 57 20 28 40 Brande Heide 21 57 25 29 10 Brandis 38 46 40 24 00 Brandlebe 02 53 70 27 40 Brandleve 07 52 55 28 10 Brandorf 22 50 50 28 50 Brandschurz 28 57 15 33 55 Brandsdorff 23 57 35 31 40 Brandshagen 09 54 20 30 50 Brandsheyde 15 52 00 29 20 De Brandt 6, 52 52 45 25 40 Brandt 2, 15 52 00 29 00 Brange 01 46 20 21 10 Branicz 32 50 00 34 40 Branitz 27 57 40 33 35 Brankowitz 32 49 00 34 10 Branneborn 19 57 05 26 40 Brannen 38 46 20 25 00 Branperg 45 48 50 25 30 Bransleben 14 51 45 28 20 A. N. Bransleben 16 52 05 28 10   18 51 45 28 00 Branstein 22 50 40 28 30 Brantz 02 51 20 28 50 Branzi 01 45 30 26 20 Brascheck 44 48 20 24 20 Brasevitz 07 53 45 30 50 Brastorp 07 53 20 27 50 Brat 21 51 20 29 40 Bratlen 41, 43 47 25 24 05 C. Bratlen 41 47 25 24 05   02 50 20 30 20 Bratzno 33 50 20 31 10 Brauchitsch∣dorf 25, 27, 29 57 20 33 00 Braumow 1, 32 49 00 35 20 Braumowitz 32 48 50 34 10 Brauna 24, 31, 33 50 30 33 00 Braunaw 26, 33 37 25 33 00 Braund 02 50 30 31 20 Braundorff 19, 22 57 20 28 50 Braune 23, 29 57 25 31 00 Braunroda 16, 18, 20 57 40 28 10 Braunsbach 34 49 10 26 00 Braunsch∣weig 1, 4, 15, 16, 17 52 30 27 20   6, 18 51 55 27 00 Braunschwicen∣sis Ducatus 01 51 50 26 10   16, 20, 21 57 35 26 40 Braunsdorff 19, 22 50 35 28 10 Braunseiff 32 46 40 34 20 Braunsfeld 01 50 20 24 50 Braunshagen 22 50 50 29 10 Braustene 16 57 45 27 30 Brausendorff 26 52 15 32 30 Brausroda 19 57 15 28 20 Bray 01 48 10 19 10 Brechdorff 16 52 25 27 50 Brechling 41, 42 48 25 23 55 Brecht 38 50 00 22 20 Breczfeld 45 49 05 26 00 Breckau 22 50 50 29 10
Breda 1, 38 57 30 20 40 N. S. Bred Ballie 05 53 50 24 40 Breddin 10, 11 52 40 29 10 Bredebeck 15, 16 52 20 26 00 Bredeberg 2, 4 54 20 26 20 Bredel 18, 57 40 29 00 Bredelem 16, 17 57 55 27 10 Bredelow 08 53 00 32 30   10, 13 52 50 32 00 Bredelwitz 27 57 35 33 15 Bredenberg K. 05 53 55 26 10 Bredenburg hof. 53 53 55 26 00 Bredenfelde 7, 8, 10 53 35 30 10 Bredentin 07 53 50 29 20 Brederck 10, 12 52 50 30 30 Bredert 39 50 00 24 20 Bredesort 38 52 00 22 40 Bredeworbs 15 51 20 27 00 Bredow 10, 12 52 20 30 00 Bredtstede 01 55 00 25 30 Bredweld 33 48 30 33 00 Brefoort 01 52 00 22 40 Breg fl. 45 47 45 24 50 Bregarten 33 48 20 31 50 Brege 09 54 50 31 10 Bregensis Duca∣tus 24, 25 50 50 34 00 Bregentz 01 47 10 26 40 Bregmenheim 23 57 25 31 50 Brehorn 05 53 15 24 20 Breichawicher Hald 27 57 35 33 20 Breickenfeld 39 49 40 23 20 Breidensche 36 50 30 27 20 Breie 21 57 05 29 20 Breifehan 22 57 00 29 10 Breigleber Berg 19 50 40 28 00 Breilenbach 16, 19, 20 57 35 28 10 Brein 21 57 05 29 10 Breinsdorff 22 51 00 29 20 Breint 16 57 30 26 50 Breisach 40 47 55 24 05 Breisch fl. 40 47 25 24 15 G. Breisen 10, 11 52 50 28 40 Breisnitz 22 57 00 29 00 Breisser 20 57 40 28 50 Breitbach 38, 39 50 20 23 40   41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45   41, 43 47 50 23 30 Braitberg 39 49 10 23 20 Breitbrun 34, 36 50 00 27 30 Breitebach 41 48 50 23 50 Breitenbach 19, 36 50 45 27 40   39, 42 48 50 24 00 Breitenbach fl. 19 50 35 27 50 Breitenborn 22 57 00 29 50 Breitunbrun 37 49 45 26 00 Breitenfeldt 21 50 50 29 10 Breitenfurt 30 50 15 34 20 Breitenherde 19 50 50 28 00 Breitenstein 14, 16, 18 57 15 27 40 Breiten Worbes 16, 19 57 25 27 30 Breitermuhl 29 57 25 33 10 Breiters 44 48 30 24 25 Breitin∣gen 16, 19, 20, 22 57 30 28 00   41, 43 48 00 23 55 Breitnaw 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 N. Breitnaw 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 00 Breitrubach 19 50 35 27 50 Breitschloss 41, 42 48 40 23 50 Breitsch 25 57 40 31 40 Breittaw 19 51 05 26 40 Breittendel 37 49 35 25 55 Breitungen 36 50 45 27 10 Brekenlache 23 57 35 32 00 Breln 22 50 20 30 40 Breltein 21 57 05 29 50 Brelum 15 52 00 27 00 G. K. Brembach 19 57 10 28 10 Brembe 05 53 35 25 30 Bremeberg 38 48 40 24 20 Bremeke 19 57 30 26 30 Bremel 40, 41, 42, 43 44 48 15 24 25 Bremen 1, 4, 5, 6 53 20 25 00 Bremen Archiepis∣copatus 3, 5, 6, 38 53 40 25 10 Bremenz G. 37 49 35 26 05 Bremer Vohr∣de 1, 4, 5, 15 43 50 25 30 Bremesen 41, 43 47 45 24 05 Bremgart 01 47 00 24 40 Bremgarten 38 46 40 24 40 Bremisch 34 50 40 26 40 Bremlberg 41, 42 48 55 24 20 Brempe 38 50 00 23 00 Brempt 1, 2, 15 50 00 23 20 Bremsenborch 07 54 10 29 30 Bremveiche 16 57 25 26 10 Brenbach 40 48 45 24 35 Brenckhusen 16, 17 57 40 20 10 Brendenitz fl. 24 50 00 35 30 Brenem 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Brengart 40 47 45 24 05 Brenno 25, 26 52 00 33 00 Brens 38 45 20 22 20 Brensheim 35, 44 50 00 25 00 Brenstein 41, 42 48 10 23 50 Brent fl. 36 50 20 26 50 Brentz 45 48 30 27 00 Brentz fl. 45 48 40 27 00 Breschim 44 48 15 24 00 Breseck 08 53 30 31 00 Bresel 38 53 00 23 20 Breselentz 06 52 55 27 40 Bresen 6, 7, 9 52 15 27 00 Gross Bresen 7, 10 53 40 29 10 Gross Bren∣sen 10, 12, 14, 21 57 40 32 00 Klein Bre∣sen 10, 12, 14, 21 57 50 29 40 Bresentz 06 52 55 27 40 Bresiger 27 52 10 28 00 Bresik 10, 12, 13 52 00 32 00 Breslaw 1, 4, 25 51 00 34 10 Furstenthumb Breslaw 28 57 10 34 10   25 51 00 33 40 Bresle 01 45 30 20 40 Bresn 22 50 50 29 20 Bresnitz 33 49 20 30 50 Bresolep 32 49 10 34 40 Bresow 1, 10, 12 53 30 31 20 La Bresse 09 54 45 31 10   41, 43 47 50 23 25 Brest 32 49 20 34 20 Breten 07 53 15 27 50   27, 28, 29 51 20 33 35 Breterleben 16, 19 51 20 28 10 Bretetorf 19 51 10 26 40 Bretleben 15, 20 51 20 28 00 Bretna fl. 41 48 00 24 25 Brethen 23 51 30 31 10 Bretsch 02 57 70 29 10   15 51 40 29 40 Bretsen 01 52 20 31 30 Bretsk 21 51 15 29 40 Bretspach 19 50 45 26 40 Bretsw. 42 48 15 23 55 Bretswiler 44 44 15 24 05 Bretta 34 49 00 26 50   41, 43 47 25 23 30 Bretach 45 49 05 25 50 Brettach fl. 39 49 00 25 50 Brettelin 2, 4, 7, 10, 11 53 10 28 10 Bretten 01 57 40 29 50   34 49 30 25 40   39, 45 48 50 25 10   41, 43 47 30 23 30 Bretteritz 22 50 30 28 20 Bretti 02 57 40 29 10 Brettin 14 52 10 29 10 Brettis 22 50 40 29 10 Brettsdorf 23 57 15 31 30 Bretzen 10, 12, 13 52 00 31 50 Bretzingen 37, 40 47 35 26 05 Bretznicza 01 57 10 26 10 Breuberg 34 49 30 25 30 Breuche grand 41 47 35 23 10 Breverde 16, 17 57 45 26 20 Breug 22 50 30 30 50 Breveiers 41 47 20 23 20 G. Breutenaw. 37 49 35 26 00 Brey 01 57 00 21 40 Breym fl. 45 48 50 25 00 Briare 01 47 30 18 20 Bricken 39 49 00 23 40 Brie Comte 01 48 30 18 30 Brieg 24, 25, 26 50 50 34 00 Briel 1, 38 51 50 20 00 Briene 01 48 10 20 40 Brientz 1, 38 46 10 24 40 Briesa 28 57 10 33 55 G. K. Bresa 28 50 55 34 10 Briese 25,27 57 10 33 40 G. K. Brlesen 30 50 35 34 20 Brieske 27 57 35 33 40 Briesnitz 25, 26 57 40 32 20 Briest 12 53 00 31 10 Brieters 41, 42 48 30 24 30 Brietsen 01 52 00 30 00 Brietzen 1, 10, 12 52 40 31 20 Briff 10, 12 52 00 29 40 Brig 34 50 30 26 40 Brig fl. 45 47 55 25 00 Briga 38 45 40 24 20 Ober Unter Brig∣leben 19 50 40 28 10 Brignon 01 47 40 19 30 Brigsmuhl 28 57 10 33 50 Brilach 01 46 30 34 20 Brillingen 02 53 20 27 10 Brilitz 21 57 15 29 40 Brilon 01 57 20 25 00 Brimaitz 01 45 10 20 40 Brin 1, 33 39 00 33 40 Brincke 4, 16 52 40 26 20 Brincken 05 53 05 25 20 Bring 38 48 40 22 40 Brinighoffen 41, 43 47 35 23 45 Brinn B. Bruno 32 49 00 33 50 Brinnitzka 1, 24 50 50 35 10 Brinschwitz 30 50 25 34 10 Brinsheim 41, 42 48 35 24 00 Brintz∣bach 40, 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 25 Brintz Werbelin 21 57 00 29 20 Brisach 1, 38 47 50 24 10   41, 43 47 55 24 05 Brischegg 40 48 25 24 10 Brischtorf 41, 42 48 40 24 20 Gr. Briscow 08 54 40 34 00 Brise 32 49 30 33 30 Brisen 2, 7, 33 49 20 31 50 Brisgow 38, 41, 43 47 40 24 20 Brisich 38 50 20 23 20 Brisnie 02 50 30 30 00   33 50 30 30 50 Brisnitz 21, 22, 31 57 00 29 30 Brisselwerde 16 57 30 28 30 Brist 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 52 10 28 50 Bristat 34 49 40 27 00 Kl. Bristetz 22 51 30 29 30 Bristorp 07 53 40 29 50 Alt Nieu Britin∣gen 19 50 40 27 00 Britsenheim 39 49 40 24 00 Brittingen 4, 6 53 40 27 20 Britze 4, 7 53 20 28 20   10, 11, 13 52 40 27 50 Britzen 28 57 15 34 45   41, 43 47 40 24 10 Britzing 40 47 45 24 10 Brivio 01 45 10 26 10 S. Brix 41, 43 47 20 23 50 Brixen 01 46 20 28 50 Brizen 2, 10 53 00 27 50 Brobergen 05 53 35 25 30 Brochel 06 52 20 26 50 Brochstet 19 57 15 27 30 Brochterberg 01 52 20 24 10 Brochuisen 16 57 35 25 10 Brock 08 53 50 32 30 Brockahagen 10, 12 52 50 31 00 Brockdorp 3, 5 53 50 25 10 Brockel 05 53 15 26 00 Brackarave fl. 17 52 25 26 40 Brockhusen 16, 17 57 50 26 20 Brockstede 2, 4 54 20 26 30 Brockwetterung 03 53 50 27 00 Brod 01 49 00 35 50 Brod Nemecky Deurschen Brod 33 49 30 32 10 Broda 21 50 55 29 20 Brode 2, 4, 7, 10, 11 53 10 27 40 Brodek 32 49 10 34 10 Brodel 10, 14 51 30 29 10 Brodelwitz 26, 27, 29 57 35 33 15 Broder 07 53 25 29 10 Brodersdorf 7, 8 54 00 29 20 Brods 10, 13 52 25 33 20 Brodthagen 07 54 05 29 00 Brodz 1, 24, 25 52 20 32 30 Brodtze 02 50 10 30 40 Broek 38 57 20 22 40 Broeckdorp 02 54 20 25 50 Broeckhausen 45 49 10 25 10 Broglo 16 52 20 26 00 Broich 38 49 40 22 40 Broichweiler 39 49 50 23 20 Broitzen 08 54 00 32 30 Deutsch Windisch Brok 16 52 10 27 20   10 57 40 30 00 Broke 07 53 15 27 30 Brokendorf 30 50 25 34 30 Brom 04 53 00 28 00 Brom∣bach 38, 40, 41, 43 47 30 24 10 Bromberg 15, 19 57 30 26 00 Brome 1, 6, 7 52 50 27 40 Brommenhoff 35 49 55 25 00 Brompst. 13 52 10 33 20 Brompt 40 48 30 24 15 Bronaw 27 57 45 33 35 Bronbach 01 50 10 23 50 Bronckhorst 38 52 00 22 00 Brndrutt 38, 41, 43 47 20 23 30 Bronhurst 41, 42 48 25 24 25 Brosan 33 50 20 30 50 Broschard 28 57 20 35 05 Brossen 22 57 00 29 10 Broterodt 16 57 35 26 50 Brotndorff 31 50 15 33 10 Brotroda 19 50 45 27 10 Brotrott 36 50 45 27 20 Brotsko 01 50 20 31 10 Broubach 39 50 10 23 50 Brouwershagen 1, 38 57 40 19 50 Brschtitz 32 46 00 33 40 Bruch 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 30 Bruchheus 40 48 45 24 45 Bruchow 4, 10, 11 53 00 28 40 Bruchw. 42 48 55 24 15 Bruchwill 43 47 30 23 35 Bruck 2, 14, 15, 20 57 15 28 50 Bruck B. Lauka 32, 33, 38 48 40 33 20   41, 42, 43 48 15 23 30 Brucke 10, 13 52 40 32 00 Brucken 16, 19 57 30 28 10   41, 43 47 35 23 25 Bruckenard 34, 36, 38 50 20 26 30 Bruckendorst 25, 29 57 10 32 40 Bruckhausen 39 49 10 25 10 Nien Olden Bruck∣husen 05 53 00 25 20   06 52 35 25 40 Brucking 41, 43 47 45 24 05 Bruckstett 21 57 05 29 00 Bructerus Mons vulgo Bloxberg 16, 17 57 50 27 47
Bruderbach 41, 42 48 25 23 55 Bruderstein 41, 42, 43 48 35 23 55 Brudnick fl. 24 50 20 34 30 Bruel 1, 4 54 00 28 50   2, 7, 10 53 40 28 20 Bruerberg 16, 17 57 50 26 10 Brugg 01 47 10 24 40 Brugge 1, 10, 11 53 10 29 00 Bruggen 1, 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Brugks 22 70 20 30 30 Bruheim 19 57 00 27 20 Bruill 38 50 40 23 00 Bruke 10, 12 57 40 30 00 Bruling 38, 45 47 40 24 40 C. L. Brumbach 37 49 40 26 50 Brumbergh 01 53 00 35 50 Brumby 14 57 35 28 50 Brumhausen 15 52 00 26 00 Brumpt 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Brumpterwalt 44 48 25 24 10 Brunsche 38 52 20 24 00 Brun 8, 22 53 30 30 30   40, 41, 43 47 55 24 20 H. Brun 20 57 35 28 10 Nider Ober Brun 39 48 40 24 10   40, 41 48 45 24 05 Brunacker 37 49 30 26 10 Brunbach 44 48 10 24 25 Brunberg 14 57 50 27 50 Brunckendorp 07 54 10 29 40 Brunckensen 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Brunckesen 15 51 50 26 00 Brunckhusen 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Brundorf 16 52 15 28 20 Bruneck 01 46 30 29 10 Brunehus 03 53 45 25 40 Brunhartshausen 36 50 40 26 50 Brunhurst 40, 44 48 25 24 25 Brunlem 17 52 25 26 50 Brunne 08 53 30 31 30 Brunne F. 10, 12 52 30 29 40 Brunnen 07 53 40 30 30 Brunow 2, 4, 7, 10, 11 53 20 28 20 Brunsberg 08 53 40 33 00   10, 12 52 50 29 50 Brunsbuttel 1, 2, 3, 5 54 20 25 20 Brunsbutlerhave 03 53 50 25 00 Brunsch∣wedle 16, 19, 20 57 35 28 10 Brunsdorff 22 50 40 29 40 Brunsfelt 10, 13 52 40 32 40 Brunshoret 07 54 05 28 50 Brunshusen 16, 17 51 45 26 50 Brunske 09 54 45 31 30 N. Brunslebn 14 57 45 28 10 Brunsroda 4, 15, 16 52 40 47 40 Brunstat 41, 43 57 35 23 45 Brunstein 16, 17 57 35 26 50 Brunthal 37 49 40 26 10 Bruntzelwaldaw 25, 26 51 50 32 20 Brunzow 08 53 50 30 00 Brush 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 30 Bruschek 41, 42, 43 48 25 24 10 Bruschw. 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 05 Bruschwil 41, 43 47 25 23 35 Brusendorf 10, 12 57 50 31 00 Brusenfelde 08 53 00 32 00 Brusenfelt 10, 13 52 50 31 40 Bruskevitz 08 53 20 32 30 Brusperg 32 49 40 35 10 Brustaw 25, 26 57 40 33 00 Kl. Brust 16 57 45 27 30 Brussel 1, 33 50 50 20 20 Brussels 20 57 50 28 40 Bruttrim 21 57 00 29 20 Brutz 02 53 30 28 30   07 53 25 29 10 G. K. Brutz 07 53 35 28 10 Brux 36 50 30 27 00 Bruyeres 01 48 00 23 00 Bruyl 01 50 40 23 20 Bryckel 05 54 05 25 50 Bryg 01 45 50 24 40 Brynnitz fl. 24 50 50 34 30 Brzecina 32 49 20 32 20 Brzeczicke Czer∣wena 32 49 10 32 20   33 49 20 32 00 Brzek 32 49 20 33 50 Brzeshan 2, 33 49 50 30 10 Brzestye 01 52 20 36 40 Brzezina 33 49 30 31 50 Brzeznicze 01 50 10 30 00 Brzezoroi 31 50 15 32 50 Brzezy 33 49 00 31 00 Brziseznitz 33 50 10 29 50 Bubenheim 39 49 50 24 20 Bubentorf 43 47 20 23 25 G. L. Bubkevitz 09 54 40 31 10 Bublitz 8, 9 54 10 34 00 Bublitse 01 53 40 34 10 Bucariza 01 45 20 33 00 Buch 2, 10, 12 52 20 30 50 Gros Buch 22 57 10 29 30 Buch L. 37 49 30 26 15 Bucha 15, 19, 20, 22 57 20 28 20 Buchaw 14, 45 51 20 29 40 Buchbach 14, 19, 22, 45 50 25 28 10 Buche 31 50 30 33 30 Bucheck 19 50 35 28 00 Buchelsdorff 26 57 55 32 20 Buchen 37, 40 49 30 26 05   41, 43 47 55 24 15 Buchenaw. 19 52 05 27 00 Buchenbach 34 48 50 26 50 Buchenfeld 40 48 40 25 05 Buchenlob. 19, 36 50 40 27 50 Bucherhausen 39 50 10 24 20 Das Bucherdahel 35 50 00 25 15 Buchhaim 45 48 45 25 50 Buchlaw. 32 49 00 34 30 Buchlowitz 32 49 00 34 30 Bucholt 43 47 55 24 20 Bucholtz 16 52 15 25 50 Buchorn 01 47 20 26 20 Buchs 38 46 20 24 40 Buchschwabach 34 49 10 27 50 Buchsi 38 46 40 23 40 Buchsshaim 45 48 50 26 50 Buchwald 23, 25, 26 57 40 32 20   27, 29 57 20 33 15 Buchwaldichem 28, 29 57 05 33 35 Buck 25 52 20 33 00 Bucke 10, 12 57 50 31 30 Buckeborg 06 52 10 25 50 Buckelsdorf 30 50 10 34 20 Buckem 06 52 30 25 50 Bucken 4, 16 53 00 25 40 Buckenbach 21 51 25 29 40 Buckenborg 15 52 20 25 20 Buckenheim 38, 39, 41 48 40 23 20 Buckenhoff 34 49 30 28 00 Buckevin 08 54 50 35 30 Buckewitz 04 53 00 28 20   10, 12 52 30 29 30 Buckholtz 10, 12 51 40 31 20 Buckig 40 47 45 24 10 Bucko 26 52 10 32 30 Buckow. 14, 21 57 30 29 30 Buckstein 23 57 00 32 00 Buckungen 16, 19 57 20 27 20 Bucquenheim 01 48 50 23 30 Buddenstet 16 52 20 27 50 Budeborg 15 52 10 26 40 Budedorp 08 53 30 32 30 Budel 09 54 20 31 10 Buden 14 57 50 28 50 Budendorff 18 57 40 28 20   26 57 45 32 30 Budenfelde 16 57 30 26 30 Budenskc 08 53 30 32 30 Budensted 14, 18 57 40 28 30 Budesheim 39 49 50 24 00 Budeze 32 48 50 32 50 Budkow 32 48 50 33 00 Budow 08 54 30 35 00 Budweiss Bude∣gowive 1, 33 48 50 31 30   32 48 50 33 10 Budwil 41 47 35 23 40 Budin 1, 22, 23 50 20 30 00 Budischow 32 49 00 33 10 Budiskowitz 32 48 50 32 50 Budislaw 33 49 10 32 40 Budissin vulgo Baudzen 22, 23, 24 57 10 31 20 Buech 39, 45 48 40 26 00 Buecholsdorf 30 50 20 34 00 Bueck 10, 11, 14, 15 52 10 29 10 Buecke 23, 25 51 30 31 00 Buehan 21 57 30 29 30 Buekow 08 54 30 33 30 Buelaw 22, 33 50 00 30 00 Buene 02 42 40 28 50 Buenen 16 57 25 26 20 Bueren 04 52 40 25 40 Buffart 25, 29 57 00 28 00 Buggeron 7, 8 53 50 30 20 Buggevitz 08 53 50 30 30 Buggow 07 53 35 30 10 Bugort 09 54 45 31 00 Buhel 40, 45 48 30 24 35 Buhendorf 41, 43 47 20 24 05 Buillon 1, 38 49 50 21 20 Buisson 20 57 50 28 40 Schloss Buissen 14 51 20 28 40 Buk 24, 32 52 20 33 00 Buka 18 57 45 28 40 Bukaw 10, 11, 15 53 10 29 00 Buke 10, 11 52 30 28 20 Buken 2, 15 52 10 29 00   41, 43 47 25 24 15 Buker 7, 8 53 45 30 30 Bukholtz 10 52 10 31 30 Buklaw 01 50 00 30 00 Bukow 2, 7, 10, 12, 13 14 53 00 32 20 N. Bukow 1, 7, 10 54 10 29 00 Old bukow 1, 7 54 10 29 00 Bukowiec 25 52 20 33 00 Bukowische See 08 54 30 33 30 Bulach 40, 45 48 45 24 45 Bulgerin 08 54 10 33 30 Bulgern 1, 33 48 20 31 40 Bulhausen 36 50 15 27 10 Bulikow 32 48 50 42 40 De Bulla 03 53 50 25 50 Bulleberg 14 57 55 29 40 Bullenhausen 03 53 45 26 40 Bulling 02 53 30 27 00 Bulow 2, 4, 7, 10 53 50 27 30 Bulstring 16 52 15 28 10 Bultberg 10, 11, 14 52 20 28 50 Balten 4, 16, 17 52 20 27 00 G. L. Balten 17 52 30 27 00   16 52 10 27 00 Buttring 14 52 20 28 20 Bultum 15 52 10 26 40 Bulvorsh 41, 43 47 40 23 45 Buna 22 57 20 29 50 Bunbergen 05 53 20 24 40 Ober Nider Bunaw 19, 20 57 20 28 50   15, 22 57 20 28 40 Bunczlaveris Kraiss 33 50 20 31 30 Bunda 01 52 10 25 00 Bunden 16 51 40 27 10 Bundorff 19, 20 57 30 29 00 Bune 16, 18 52 00 27 30 Bunegg 40 47 35 24 20 Bunen 41, 43 47 40 23 35 Bunfelt 15 57 30 26 00 Bunglay 01 52 40 17 10 Bunhemnersdorff 23 57 10 31 30 Bunnichen Cap. 16 57 20 26 30 Gr. Bunsow 08 54 00 31 00 Bunt 04 53 00 28 40   10, 11 52 30 28 10 Buntenbach 39 49 10 23 50 Buntenthal 41, 42 48 53 24 15 Bunthausen 16 57 30 27 50 Bunthum 15 52 00 27 00 Buntzlaw 1, 14, 25, 26 29 57 20 32 20 Buntzel 24 57 10 35 10 Alt Buntzel 24 50 10 31 30 Buochorn 38 47 20 26 00 Bur 41, 43 47 30 23 25 Buraw 14, 21, 23 57 25 29 30 De Burch 38 53 00 20 40 Burchausen 01 48 00 29 50 Burchorst 34 50 20 25 40 Burchbave 05 53 30 24 50 Burchw, 41 48 55 24 15 Burchwendrn 15 57 10 28 20 Burck 18 51 55 29 00 Burckberg 45 47 55 25 00 Burcke 22, 23 51 10 31 10 Burcken 40, 41, 42, 43 44 48 15 24 00   38, 41, 43 47 55 24 05 Burcker 01 48 00 24 00 Burckertsheim 22 57 20 29 40 Burckers 22 50 50 29 10 Burckersdorff 22, 23 50 30 29 40     50 50 29 50 Burckheim 34, 37, 40 49 20 25 50 Bureklengfelt 34 49 10 29 00 Burekow 09 54 50 31 00   40 47 40 24 25 Burckstettle 22 50 50 29 40 Burekewitz 09 54 30 31 10 Buren 1, 16, 38 57 30 25 10 Burens 22 57 10 29 50 Bureshagen 07 54 05 29 20 Burg 38 57 40 22 20   40, 45 48 30 24 30 Burg 22 50 30 28 40 Burga 22 57 00 28 30 Burg Altorf 01 48 50 32 10 Burgarner 14 57 15 28 20 Burgaw 01, 45 48 10 27 20 Burbach 40 48 40 24 50 Burgberg 27 51 30 33 05   29 51 30 33 10 Burgdorff 1, 38 46 50 24 00   5, 15 53 05 25 00 Burgeis 01 46 20 27 20 Burgel. 19, 22 57 00 28 30 Ampt Burgel 19 57 00 28 30 Burgen 22 57 10 29 00 Burgeni 25 57 00 33 20 Burgersdorff 19, 20 57 45 28 30 Burghesler 19 51 15 28 30 Burghun 34 30 40 26 30 Burglauer 36 50 20 27 00 Burgle 41, 43 47 35 24 10 Burglen 33, 38 58 50 30 00 Burglenfelt 01 49 00 29 00 Burglitz 01 49 50 30 50 Burgklitz 33 49 50 30 50 Burgk Pern∣haim 34 49 20 27 00 Burgktan 34 49 10 28 10 Burgo 01 45 50 28 30 Burgorner 19 57 45 28 20 Burgorner Rein∣holtz 20 57 45 28 20 Burgscheidin∣gen 15, 19, 20 57 20 28 40 Burgsdorff 18 51 40 27 00 Burgsin 40 47 40 24 10 Burgsleben 16, 20 51 25 28 10   19 51 30 28 00 Burgt 15 52 20 25 20 Burgwendt 19 51 20 28 10 Buriach 38, 39, 41, 45 48 40 24 40 Burick 1, 38 57 30 22 30 Burkifeld 45 48 00 25 40 Burla 19 50 55 27 10 Burlading 45 48 00 25 50 Burlenbach 40 48 50 24 30 G. Burn 22 57 20 29 30
Burnevitz 09 54 35 31 20 Burow. 7, 8 53 20 29 10 Burschwitz 26, 27, 29 51 25 33 20 Burstadt 34, 37 49 40 25 50 Burstet 16, 19 51 15 27 20 Burtenbach 45 48 10 27 20 Bury 3 49 20 21 40 Bus 41 47 20 24 20 Busbach 40, 44 48 20 24 35 Buschau 01 46 50 26 20 Buschdorff 21 57 25 29 40 Buscheim 35 50 00 25 10 Buschfelle 16 57 25 26 40 Buschmollen 07 53 55 30 10 Buscholtz 41, 42 48 40 24 00 Buschowitz 32 49 00 34 10 Buschvitz 09 54 35 31 20 Buschwi 41 47 25 23 45 Buschwill. 43 47 25 23 45 Buse 7, 9 54 10 29 50 Buseck 42, 44 48 20 24 30 Busegg 4 48 20 24 30 Besegg 40 48 20 24 35 Busen 02 54 50 25 40 Busenbach 40 48 45 24 50 Busenburg 41, 42 48 55 24 15 Busewin 01 57 10 35 50 Buslar 08 54 00 33 30 Buskow 08 54 10 33 00 10, 12 10, 12 52 30 29 50 Busleben 15 57 00 27 20 Buss 45 47 55 26 10 Bussans 38, 41 47 20 23 00 Bussem 3 49 50 24 30 Busseirtz 09 54 30 31 00 Bussow 07 53 35 29 20 Bussy 91 46 20 20 40 Bust 10, 11 52 30 28 30 Buswiler 39 48 30 24 00 Buswill 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Buswiller 1, 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Busze 08 53 00 33 00 Butelbrun 34 49 40 26 30 Buten 10, 13 52 00 32 40 Buthiader Landt 05 53 35 24 40 Buthow 01 53 50 35 10 Butia 22 50 50 29 30 Buting 01 53 40 27 10 Butkow 33 48 50 32 30 Butling 4, 6, 7 53 40 27 00 Butow 08 54 20 35 00 Butowische See 10, 13 53 20 32 40 Butsleben 06 53 20 25 50 Butstet 15 57 10 28 20 Butta 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 55 Buttebrun 37 49 45 26 15 Buttel 2, 3, 5 54 20 25 50 Buttelstet 15 51 00 28 00 Butterselt 02 57 40 28 40 Buttet 2, 4 53 50 26 50 Buttstat 19, 22 57 10 28 10 Butwil. 43 47 35 23 40 Butzbugh 01 50 10 25 10 Butzen 14 52 10 29 20 Butzflete 02 54 10 25 50   3, 5 53 45 25 30 L Butzin 07 53 50 29 40 Butzkow 07 53 15 29 40 Butzow 07 53 50 23 00   10, 12 52 10 29 50     53 40 28 20 Hohen Butzow 07 53 50 30 20 Bux 41, 43 47 20 23 25 Buxberg 25 57 30 31 40 Buxtehude 05 53 30 26 10 Buysen 01 54 00 22 50 Buytzer 15, 22 52 40 29 20 Byen 10, 11, 14 51 40 29 00 Bykenitz 14 52 00 29 30 Bykow. 10, 12 53 10 31 00 Byla fl. 24 49 40 35 30 Bylhorst 02 54 10 26 00 Bylitz 24 49 40 35 30 Bylstein 15 51 10 26 40 Bylstet 15 51 10 26 40 Byssitz 33 50 10 31 30 Bystorp 02 04 20 27 30 Bystricia 32 49 20 35 30 Bystritz 2, 33 49 20 31 30 Bystry 32, 33 49 20 31 40 Bytesch 1, 32 49 10 33 10 Byteska 32 49 10 33 40   33 49 10 33 00 Bzenee 33 49 00 34 00 C.   CAbelitz 14 52 15 29 10 Cabelstorf 07 54 10 29 50 Cabode Istria 01 45 20 31 40 Caden 02 54 10 26 30 Cadendorf 14 52 10 28 10 Caelbick 14 57 30 28 40 Caerden 38 50 00 23 20 Calais 01 51 00 17 50 Calaw. 1, 2, 8, 10 57 40 30 50 Calbach 35 50 05 25 00 Calcar 1, 38 57 40 22 20 Caldenrad 01 53 00 24 40 Cale 22 50 50 29 00 Calenberg 22, 26 50 40 29 40 Calsorde 1, 2, 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 20 Nider Ober Calfort 15 52 40 28 00 Calgocz Fr. 01 48 40 35 50 Calin 8, 10, 13 53 00 32 10 Callenberg 34 50 20 27 40 Calloo 38 51 00 20 00 Caln 07 53 45 30 30 Calnitz 07 53 00 28 20 Calpin 10 53 40 33 20 Calpin Lacus 07 53 25 29 40 Calstat 39 49 20 24 30 Calterburg 01 49 20 27 40 Caltrano 01 45 30 28 40 Caltzig 10, 13 52 10 33 00 Calven 08 53 50 35 00 Calvorden 16 52 15 28 00 Cambray 01 50 10 19 10 Cambury 22 57 10 28 40 Camens 1, 22, 23 51 10 31 00 Camentz 33 50 30 34 00 Camer 01 48 10 28 30 Cameryck 01 50 10 19 10 Camin 27 57 35 33 40 Caminse Boden 08 54 00 32 00 Camitz 07 54 10 29 50 Cammen 10, 12 57 50 29 50 Ter Cammer 10 51 20 29 20 Cammberg 19, 36 50 40 27 40 Cammerdos sermuhl 28 57 00 33 50 Cammerstain 34 49 10 27 50 Cammin 1, 2, 7, 8, 10 53 50 32 20 Camnitz 10 53 10 29 20 Camnig 30 50 30 34 10 Camoisen 4, 16 52 40 27 00 Camp 38, 39 50 00 23 40 Campe 2, 15 52 30 27 30 Campen 1, 38 52 40 21 50 Campil 10, 12 50 30 29 20 Campogasco 01 46 10 26 40 Camporosso 01 46 20 30 30 Camps 07 53 40 28 30 Campse 2, 7 53 40 28 10 Canab. Luneburgicae 06 52 55 26 10 Canoen 22 51 30 29 00 Canckelvitz 08 53 40 33 00 Cand fl. 40 47 40 24 15 Cander. 40 47 35 24 10 Canderblatz 40 47 35 24 10 Candirecourt 38 47 40 22 00 Candotz 01 46 10 35 10 Caneen 21 51 00 28 50 Canewitz 22, 23 51 15 31 10 Canitz 02 51 10 30 10 Canobio 01 45 20 25 10 Canorts 19 50 50 27 10 Canow 2, 7 53 00 29 10 Canstat 38, 39, 45 48 30 25 50 Canterick 8, 10 53 40 32 30   10 53 30 32 00 Cantersdorff 30 50 45 34 30 Canth 28 51 00 33 50 Cantiensis Districtus 28 51 00 33 45 Cantz 01 51 00 33 50 Cantzen 27 51 45 33 30 Cantzlersgrut 36 50 40 27 30 Cantzow. 07 53 20 30 50 Caorla 01 45 30 30 20 Cape 09 54 45 31 30 Capel 19, 38 51 45 28 30   41, 43 47 30 23 30 Capelen 20 57 20 28 00 Capell 37 49 45 26 00 La Capelle 01 49 50 20 00 Cappellen 39 49 20 23 40 Capelndorff 19 51 00 28 20 Caplerthal 41 48 25 24 35 Cappe 05 53 40 25 00 Cappel 1, 19, 39, 40 47 50 24 30   41, 42, 44 48 25 24 30 Die Cappel 16 51 20 28 00 Ober Nider Cappel 40 48 25 24 35 Cappendorf 15, 22 51 00 28 20 Cappern 10, 11 52 50 28 20 Cappeslaubeisheim 39 49 40 24 40 Caprun 01 47 00 30 00 Kein Carben 35 50 05 25 10 Carbitz 22 50 30 30 50 Carbow. 2, 7 53 10 29 00 Carbusen 22 50 50 29 00 Carchow 07 53 15 29 40 Carentz 07 53 05 28 20 Cargow 07 53 25 29 50 Carinthia Ducatus 01 46 50 30 40 Caritz 07 53 15 27 30 Carlburg 37 46 55 26 05 Gross Klein Carle∣witz 30 50 30 34 10 Carlitz 7, 8 53 45 29 50 Carll 38 50 00 23 00 Carlshoven 05 53 25 25 30 Carlstat 1, 5, 37 53 50 24 40 Carne 13 52 40 32 40 Carniola Ducatus 01 45 50 31 00 Carnits 08 54 00 32 30 Carnoviensis Ducatus 24 50 00 34 30 Carnstorp 07 53 40 29 40 Carolath 1, 24, 25, 26 57 50 32 40 Carow 7, 8 53 45 28 30 Carptzow 1, 10, 12 52 10 30 10 Carrelpo 09 54 20 31 00 Carrentzin 07 53 15 28 50 Carsaw 40 47 30 24 20 Carsdorff 19 57 20 28 30 Carsn 41, 43 47 25 24 15 Carstat 01 49 50 26 30 Carstede 2, 7 53 00 28 20 Carstenbroock 05 53 25 25 00 Carthaus 25, 40 42 10 31 20 Cartow 8, 10, 13 53 50 30 30 Cartuss 16, 17 52 05 26 40   40, 41, 43 47 55 24 25   42, 44 48 25 24 10 Cartz 07 53 40 28 40 Cartzigk 10, 12 52 40 32 50 Ampt Cartzigk 10, 13 52 40 32 10 Cartzin 08 54 20 34 00 Carvete 07 53 30 27 50 Carvitz 08 54 30 34 00 Carwe 10 52 40 32 50 Cascow. 08 53 10 31 30 Casdorf 07 53 00 28 40 Caseborg 8, 10 53 50 31 30 Casel. 01 49 40 27 10 Casemirsborg 08 54 20 33 30 Casemirshoft 08 54 00 34 00 Casen 22 51 00 29 00 Caserfeld 19 50 50 27 20 Casitz 22 51 10 29 20 Casn. 22 50 50 29 00 Casnevitz 8, 9 54 30 30 30 Casnagen 10, 13 53 20 32 30 Cassel 1, 15 57 10 26 10 Casswitz 22 50 50 29 00 Casteel 39 49 50 24 30 Castel 34 49 20 28 40 Im Castel 40 47 40 24 25 Castelburg 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 24 Casteldusie 01 46 40 22 30 Castelhoff 40 47 45 24 15 Castellar de Bouche 01 45 20 22 20 Castelote 01 47 20 22 50 Casten 40 47 40 24 20 Caster 38 40 40 22 40 Castillon 01 47 50 22 00 Castillon di Michaille 01 45 50 21 50 Castillon Sur Loin 01 47 40 18 30 Castillon Sur Lorie 01 47 20 18 20 Castre 38 50 20 20 20 Cathrineberg 22 50 30 30 20 F. de S. Cathrine 01 45 50 22 10 S. Cathrinen 39 49 40 24 10 Catrinenholtz 09 54 40 31 00 Cattus fl. 25 21 20 33 20 Catwyckop Zee 38 52 20 26 00 Catzen 22 50 50 29 10 Catzendorff 19, 22 51 20 28 30 Catzenelbogen 38, 39 50 00 24 00 Catzenelbogen Co∣mitatus 01 50 10 24 20 Catzenow. 07 54 10 30 00 Caub 01 50 00 23 50 Caubitz 31 50 40 33 50 Caulstorf 19 50 35 28 20 Caurzin 01 49 50 31 50 Cazon 08 54 10 30 30 Cbotowaplana 33 49 40 29 50 Cebitzwalde 22 50 20 29 00 S. Cecille 38 49 20 21 20 Ceeras 05 53 30 26 10 Ceester 05 53 45 26 00 Cell 1, 15, 38 52 50 26 50   40, 41, 43 47 35 24 20 Cell Closter 19 57 15 26 50 Newen Cell. 43 47 30 24 30 Ofter Cell 15 52 50 26 40 Wester Cell 15 52 50 26 40 Celler Volt 1, 15, 16, 17 57 45 27 10 Celsich 40 48 10 24 10 Cemeltz 22 51 20 29 30 Cemmers 21 57 10 29 20 Cemlitz 22 57 10 29 20 Cemlitz 22 57 10 29 03 Cemnitz 22 50 20 29 00 Cemnitzhamer 22 50 20 28 40 Cemritz 21 57 15 29 30 Cenna 22 57 00 28 40 Cencenige 01 46 10 28 50 Cerckwitz 22 50 10 32 30 Cerecwe 33 49 20 31 50 Cerekwica 32 49 10 32 20 Zum Ceren 19 50 35 27 50 Ceritz 08 54 40 35 00 Cetkowitz 32 49 20 33 40 Cetkowitz 32 49 20 33 40 Ceys 34 50 40 26 40 Chade 10, 11 52 00 29 10 Chaisny 01 46 30 20 40 Chalesowitz 33 49 00 31 20 Chaligny 38 48 20 22 00 Challon 01 46 30 20 50 Chalons 01 48 50 20 30 Chaltzin 33 48 50 31 20 Cham 1, 38 46 50 24 50 Chamberg 15 51 00 28 40 Chamaigne 38 40 00 22 20 Chamb. 01 49 10 29 40 Chambrey 38 48 40 22 40 Chambry 01 45 10 22 10 Chamony 01 45 30 23 10 Champ 41 47 20 23 10
Champaigne 01 48 00 19 30 Champlite 01 47 20 21 30 sgcands Champs 41 47 25 23 10 Chanldeney 38 40 20 22 00 Chanowitz 33 49 10 30 40 Chanvillers 41 47 20 23 20 Champpelle 38 45 40 23 20 a Charite 01 46 50 18 40 Charlemont 1, 38 50 10 20 50 Charleroy 01 50 20 20 30 Charieville 01 49 50 20 40 Charmes 01 48 10 22 40 Charolles 01 46 00 20 10 Chartr. 01 47 40 32 50 Charwaty 32 49 20 34 10 Chastau Chimon 01 46 40 19 40 Chasteau de Estraye 41 47 40 23 30 Chastel 1, 38 48 10 22 40 Chastelet 01 50 20 20 40 e Chastelet 01 50 00 19 20 Chastetion 41, 42 48 25 23 30 Chastilon 38 47 40 22 00 Chastillon 01 46 40 19 20 Chastillon sur Marne 01 49 00 19 50 Chastillon sur Seyne 01 47 30 20 30 Chau Chambreris 01 50 00 19 30 Chau Landon 01 48 00 18 30 Chau le traye 01 57 40 23 20 Chaulmes 38 47 40 23 20 Chauonten Bas∣signy 01 48 00 21 10 Chaurenf 01 45 40 21 50 Chauay 01 49 30 19 10 Chau Porcain 01 49 30 20 10 Chau Regnard 51 47 40 18 40 Chau Satins 01 48 50 22 40 Chausin 01 46 40 21 20 Chausinck 33 49 10 21 40 Chausiery 01 48 50 19 30 Chau vanges 01 48 20 20 50 Chelstorp 07 54 05 29 20 Chemer 34 50 30 27 30 Chemitz 33 50 40 29 50 Chemnitz 1, 22 50 40 29 50 Chermont 38 50 00 21 00 Cheronville 38 49 00 21 20 Cherusci 20 57 40 28 00 Chesne 38 49 40 21 40 Cheunow. 33 49 20 31 40 Cheynow. 01 49 10 31 40 Chaiavenna Com∣mitatus 01 46 00 25 50 Chidowa 01 49 50 29 40 Ciemse 01 47 40 29 20 Chievre 01 50 40 19 50 Chlleup 01 47 50 10 00 Chimay 01 50 00 20 10   38 50 00 20 20 Chinay 38 50 00 21 00 Chiney 01 50 20 21 10 Chinow 08 54 00 32 00 Chiny 01 49 40 21 40 Chitry 38 49 40 21 20   01 47 30 19 30 Chivira 01 45 10 25 20 Chiusa 01 46 10 31 00 Ciusa 01 45 10 27 50 Chleven 09 54 15 31 10 Chlovc 09 54 45 31 20 Chmelnitz 1, 24 50 30 35 20 Chmetisstna 33 49 50 30 30 Choren 24, 32 49 50 33 00 Choeznie 2, 33 49 40 31 50 Cholen 32 49 30 34 00 Cholste 09 54 30 31 30 Choae 38 50 20 21 40 Chonerg 1, 45 49 00 26 30 Choritz 32 49 30 33 40 Choryn 32 49 30 34 50 Chostein 39 49 20 24 40 Coteborez 32 49 20 32 40 Chotieborz 33 49 36 32 30 Chotieshitz 33 50 10 32 10 Chotissan 33 49 30 31 40 Chotissow 33 49 30 30 10 Chotse 09 54 50 31 00 Chrast 02 49 50 31 30   32, 33 49 40 32 50 Chrischovan 40 47 30 24 10 Christburg 01 53 50 37 10 Christendorf 22 50 30 28 40 Christes 36 50 35 27 20 Christian 41, 43 47 25 24 05 Christianoris 01 54 50 26 50 Christinick 10, 12 53 20 31 20 Christorf 10, 12 52 50 29 30 Chronyn 01 49 20 34 30 Chropyn 32 49 20 34 30 Chrudimerkraiss 33 49 40 32 50 Chrudimka fl. 2, 33 49 40 31 10 Chrudimsky krag 33 49 40 32 30 Chrudin 01 49 50 32 40 Chudim 2, 33 49 50 31 30 Chudobin 32 49 30 34 00 Chuinc. 24, 25 52 40 32 30 Chur 38 46 20 26 00 Chwaly 33 50 00 31 30 Chwateruh 02 50 00 30 10   33 50 00 31 10 Ciatece 33 50 10 30 20 Cibbeck 10, 11, 14 52 00 28 50 Cieblow. 01 52 00 33 00 Cilemnitz 02 50 30 31 20 Cilley Comitatus & Civitas 01 54 10 32 50 Cilnitz 22 50 50 28 30 Cimmeritz 21 51 05 28 40 Cirvevitz 09 54 20 31 10 Circhow. 08 54 00 31 30 Circksee 08 53 20 33 00 Cirkow 8, 9 54 30 30 30     54 10 31 30 Circulus Austria∣cus 01 47 30 31 20 Circulus Bavariae 01 47 10 27 50 CirculusBurgundicus 01 57 30 20 40 Circulus Electorum Rheni 01 50 10 25 00 Circulus Franco∣nicus 01 49 40 26 30 Circulus Rhenanus 01 47 40 23 20 Circulus Saxoniae Superioris 01 51 00 27 40 Circulus Saxoniae Inferioris 01 52 10 24 50 Circulus Suevicus 01 47 50 24 50 Circulus Westphali∣cus 01 50 00 19 20 Ciriaxburg 19 57 00 27 40 Ciritz 22 51 10 29 20 Cirmoisel 09 54 40 31 10 Cirtow. 07 53 10 30 00 Cischm 02 50 20 31 10 Cislow 07 53 20 28 50     53 20 29 30 Cismar 01 54 30 28 00   02 54 30 27 40 Cismone 01 45 30 28 50 Citadella 01 45 20 29 00 Citanova 01 45 10 31 30 Citeaux 01 46 50 21 00 Citen 10, 13 52 20 32 00 Citow 32 49 20 34 20 Cittevitz 09 54 30 31 20 Citzow. 08 54 40 33 30 Ciudat di Bellune 01 46 00 29 30 Claber 07 53 40 29 40 Clabow. 2, 7 53 40 28 20 Cladbach 38 37 00 22 20 Clade 25 57 40 32 40 Cladern. 07 53 30 28 30 Cladow 8, 10, 13 52 50 31 40 Cladrum 2, 7 53 30 28 20 Claesberg 16 57 30 27 00 Clagenfurt 01 46 40 31 30 Clagny 01 46 00 20 40 Clam 4, 16 52 20 27 40 Clamesy 01 47 10 19 10 Clampe 05 53 15 24 20 Clapen 26 51 50 32 10 Clatzow. 07 53 45 30 30   08 53 40 30 00 S. Claude 01 46 00 22 00 Claven 38 45 40 26 00 S. Claus 41, 43 47 30 23 25 Claus Culenhuys 03 53 45 25 20 Clausen 01 46 20 28 40 Claushagen 8, 10, 12 53 00 30 30 Clausthal 16, 17 57 45 27 10 Clebow 08 53 10 32 00 Cleest 2, 27 53 10 28 20 Clement 38 48 20 22 40 Clemmia 08 53 10 32 20 Clemon 01 47 20 18 00 Clempin 08 53 20 32 30 Clenpenow. 08 53 50 30 30 Clepach 34 49 40 27 40 Cleptzikaw 15 52 10 29 00 Clermont 1, 38 49 20 18 20 Cleron 01 46 50 22 20 Cleruaux 1, 38 47 20 22 50 Les Cles 38 46 20 22 40 Cless 22 50 50 30 00 Clesmont 01 47 10 23 10 Cleve 38 57 40 22 00 Cleven 01 45 50 26 00 Clewitz 10 53 10 31 50   13 53 10 31 30 Clincke 07 53 10 29 50 Cling fl. 15 57 10 27 20 Clingen 15, 19 57 10 27 40 Clitz 14 52 25 29 00 Clivia Ducatus 1, 38 57 40 22 20 Clobzow 07 53 15 29 50 Clockenhagen 07 54 15 29 30 Clocksin 08 53 10 32 30 Clodderaen 07 53 25 27 50 Clode 27 51 50 33 30 Gross Klein Cloden 26 51 45 33 30 Cloppenburg 1, 38 53 00 24 20 Cloppenhagen 07 53 35 31 00 Closchunicz 19 57 45 28 40 Closter 26 57 50 32 10 Alte Closter 3, 5, 6 53 45 26 10 Nie Closter 3, 5, 6 53 45 26 00 Closwitz 19, 22 50 50 28 20 Clotzke 15 53 00 28 40 Cloxin 07 53 35 29 40 Cloxtorp 07 53 40 27 50 Clucke 08 53 10 33 00 Clucksow. 07 53 49 30 10 Clis 09 54 35 31 10 S. Clum 41, 43 47 45 24 05 Clumitz 1, 2, 33 50 00 32 20 Clus 41, 43 47 20 24 00 Clasa 16 51 55 27 30 Cluse 1, 5, 9 45 40 22 50   18, 19 51 35 27 50 Cluson 01 45 20 26 40 Ciuttow 09 54 30 31 20 Clutze 08 53 20 32 00 Cnin 07 53 40 28 40 Cnesecum 01 53 00 27 30 Cobbein 14 52 05 39 00 Coblent 22 50 50 29 30 Coblentz 1, 38 50 10 23 50 Cobrow. 07 53 40 28 50 Cobstet 19 50 55 27 40 Coburg 1, 23, 34, 36 50 20 27 50 Coburg Ducatus 34 50 20 27 40 Cocheim 01 50 10 23 20   38 50 00 23 20 Cocher fl. 34 49 00 20 20 Coelbick 20 51 55 28 30 Coerbeck 38 50 40 20 40 Coesvlet 1, 38 57 50 23 20 Coeverden 1, 38 52 50 22 50 Coiffy 01 47 50 21 40 Coire 01 46 20 26 10 Colantze 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 50 Colckwitz 19 50 45 28 20 Colben 22 50 50 29 00 Colberg 1, 8, 10 54 00 33 20 Colbergische waldt 08 54 20 33 00 Colbitiche Heyde 10, 11, 14 52 00 24 20 Colbow 2, 7, 10, 11 53 20 28 10 Colbsh. 43 48 25 24 05 Colenhagen 02 54 10 27 30 Coldenitz 25 57 10 33 00 Coldenkercken 05 53 50 26 30 Coldiez 36 50 25 27 50 Coldingen 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Colditz 2, 22 51 00 29 40 Colemberg 01 49 10 27 10 Colemont 01 50 10 18 20 Colleda 19 51 20 28 00 Collen 1, 38 50 50 23 10   7, 10, 11, 22, 26 52 30 28 10 Stift Collen 38 50 40 23 00 Collenberg 37 49 40 25 55 Coller. 10, 12 52 50 30 10 Colman 01 46 10 28 30 Colmansrit 40 41, 33 48 00 24 20 Colmar 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 54 10 26 00   38, 41, 43 47 55 23 50 Colmarske Sluse 03 53 50 25 30 Colmberg 34 49 10 27 10 Colmensee 01 53 00 36 30 Colnbach 21, 22 50 50 28 50 Colo 01 52 00 35 50 Cononiensis Archi∣episcopatus 01 57 10 22 40 Colnigs 02 54 20 27 30 Colnitz 02 51 10 29 10 Colnitz fl. 22 51 20 30 10 Colpa 22 51 20 29 40 Colpin 7, 8 53 30 30 40 Colrey 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 30 K. Colrey 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 35 Coltbeg fl. 16 57 55 27 50 Colten 04 52 20 25 20 Coltsch 26 57 50 31 40 Coltzin 07 53 25 27 50 Coltzow. 7, 8 54 05 29 40 Columniersen Brie 01 48 40 19 00 Combach 22 50 40 28 10 Comble 38 50 20 21 40 Comeren 02 52 10 28 20 Commarcy 38 48 20 21 40 Commercy 01 48 40 21 40 Commernig 25, 26 57 30 33 00 Commota 1, 33 50 20 30 10 Como 01 45 10 25 50 Compelstat 19 50 45 27 00   36 50 50 27 00 Comperg 31 50 40 33 50 Compregne 01 49 20 18 50 Compte∣rey 10, 12, 13, 16 52 10 31 40 Conbremont 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 30 Conchen 39 49 30 23 30 Concordia 01 45 30 30 20 Conde 01 48 40 22 30 G. K. Condorff 22 50 40 29 10 Condet 01 50 20 19 40 Coneander Straten 08 53 20 32 30 Conedorp 09 54 45 31 30 Coneglihu 01 45 40 29 40 Confians 01 45 10 22 40     47 40 22 20 Conille 38 50 20 20 20 Conilz 10, 13 52 00 20 20 Conilz 10, 13 52 00 32 10 Conigeswart 23 51 25 31 20 Conin 01 52 10 35 30 Conings Luter 2, 14 52 30 27 40 Connevorde 05 52 15 24 40 Conow 7, 8 53 05 28 20   10, 11, 12, 13 52 50 29 10 Conrads∣burg 14, 16, 18, 20 57 20 28 10
Conrads wal∣daw 25, 26, 27 57 40 33 20 Constantz 1, 38 47 20 25 50 Contsdorsf 23 57 10 31 40 Contwich 38, 39 49 00 23 40 Conty 01 49 40 18 00 Contzstad 24 57 00 34 30 Cooveldt 04 52 00 25 20 Copenicgk 02 52 20 29 50 Coplow. 07 53 40 29 20 Copnitz 08 54 40 33 30 Coppen∣bruge 1, 4, 16, 17 52 10 26 10 Coppengraven 16, 17 51 50 26 30 Coppensted 16 51 55 28 10 Coppet 38 45 40 22 20 Coranpelwitz 26 57 40 33 20 Coravillers 41 47 35 23 10 Corbach 38 50 00 24 20 Corbauch 19 50 40 28 00 Corbe 22 57 00 29 50 Corbeil 01 48 30 18 10 Corbers 01 46 20 23 30 Corbey 15 57 40 26 00 Corbie 01 49 50 18 20 Corbigny 01 46 50 19 20 Corbitz 22 50 50 29 20 Corehow. 07 54 00 28 50 Cordematt 41, 43 47 20 23 35 Cordeshagen 08 54 20 33 30 Gr. Cordeshagen 08 54 20 29 30 Cordometz 41, 43 47 20 23 25 Zum Coren 36 50 35 27 50 Corlin 1, 8, 10 54 10 33 00 Cormoien 01 45 20 23 00 Cornard 41, 43 47 20 23 35 S. Cornelis 38 50 40 22 20 Cornon 06 52 35 25 20 Coroucy 01 49 10 19 50 Corsdorff 22 50 40 29 10 Corsine 41, 43 47 20 33 30 Cortryck 01 50 50 19 10 Corvei 16, 17 57 40 26 10 Corvy 01 57 40 26 00 Corwitz 22 50 30 29 00 Cosebrome 07 53 40 30 50 Cosel 2, 23 57 10 30 40 Coselitz 08 53 00 32 30 Coserow. 08 54 10 31 00 Coslin 1, 7, 8, 10 54 00 33 50 Cosne 01 46 10 18 30 Cossa 22 51 00 29 20 Cosschitz 22 50 30 29 10 Cosseck 22 50 30 28 50 Cosser 26 57 50 32 40 Cossiaco 01 45 10 32 10 Cossin 10, 13 52 50 32 10 S. Cosmam 41, 43 48 00 23 50 Cossonay 01 46 20 22 50 Costantz 38 47 20 25 40 Costorp 07 53 15 28 10 Costum 39 49 50 24 30 Coswick 1, 10, 14 51 25 29 30 Coszieglo 01 50 30 36 10 Cotechowitz 32 49 10 34 20 Cotlow. 07 53 40 30 50 Cottendorff 19 50 45 27 50 Cottbuss 2, 24 57 50 30 10 Cotwitz 01 57 40 31 20 Couche 01 46 40 20 30 Coudresin 38 46 20 23 00 Covelo 01 45 40 28 50 Coverstein 38 50 40 24 00 Couflan 38 47 20 22 20 Couffleu 38 49 00 21 40 Coulange 01 47 10 19 10 Couldre 38 45 40 22 20 Covorts 36 50 50 27 20 Coupey 38 48 00 21 40 Cowalck 08 54 00 34 00 Coytsch 22, 23 57 10 30 50 Crabew 07 53 45 30 00 Cracow 2, 15, 19, 20 57 25 28 50 Cradis 09 54 30 31 20 Craen 09 54 40 31 30 Cragencz 01 53 00 34 10 Crainburg 01 46 20 31 40 Craka 18 57 45 28 50 Crakow 7, 10, 12 53 10 31 10   22, 23, 24 51 10 30 50 Crakevitz 09 54 20 31 20 Crakle 22 51 00 29 00 Crammin 07 53 05 28 40 Crammen 2, 7 53 40 28 00 Crammonsd. 08 53 40 32 30 Crampe 19 57 40 28 40 Cramors 09 54 40 31 30 Cranach fl. 34 50 20 28 20 Crane 22 51 00 29 00 Cranenborg 1, 38 57 40 22 00 Crange 7, 8 54 00 34 20 Cranitz 19 56 25 28 10 Cransevitz 09 54 25 31 20 Crantz 28 51 15 33 50 Craschen 26, 27 51 50 33 50 Crase 16, 19 57 30 27 40 Crassow. 07 53 45 29 30 Crast 01 49 50 32 50 Crastelnizc 01 46 00 34 10 Cratza 02 50 40 30 40 Cratzborch 07 53 20 30 10 Cratze 08 54 10 33 30 Cratzke 08 53 40 33 00 Cratzin 08 53 10 33 00 Crauditz 01 50 00 35 00 Craveneck 33 48 20 32 50 Craula 19 57 05 27 10 Craupendoff 18 57 55 28 40 Craiicha 23, 25 57 20 31 40 Crauschwitz 23 51 35 31 40 Crause 01 53 10 30 20 Erster Crayr fur der Heyde 29 57 15 33 20 Ander Crays fur der Heyde 29 57 15 33 05 Dritter Crays uker der Heyde 29 57 25 33 00 Crebeck 17 57 35 26 50 Crebitschen 22 57 00 29 20 Creckow. 08 53 30 31 30 Creffontain 38 50 00 20 20 Creitzke 10, 13 50 50 32 40 Cremary 01 47 10 22 20 Cremerbroeck 08 54 20 35 00 Cremmin 10 53 20 32 40   13 53 20 32 30 Crempe 2, 4 54 20 26 10   3, 7 53 55 25 20 Crempe fl. 03 53 55 25 20 Crenitzow 08 53 20 32 30 G. Crentz 10, 12 52 00 29 50 Crentzach 40 47 30 24 10 Crenwitz 19 57 20 29 00 Creny 38 48 20 22 40 Crepitz 09 54 55 31 00 Crepy 01 49 10 18 50 Cresbach 34 49 10 25 40 Cressy 01 50 10 17 50 Creten 22 57 10 29 40 Cretian 01 47 30 29 20 Crettscheb 22 57 00 28 50 Cretzlin 07 53 20 29 20 Creveceur 01 57 40 21 10 Creuswitz 22 50 30 29 20 Creutz 01 49 20 34 10   34, 37 49 40 26 00 H. Creutz 22, 33 51 10 29 20 Creutz∣berg 10, 11, 19, 24 53 00 28 40 Creutzburg 19 57 05 26 50 Thorn Creutze 03 53 50 26 20 Creutzendorsf 28 51 20 35 05 Creutzhorst 14 57 45 28 50 Creutzmuhl 28 57 10 34 25 Creutznach 38, 39 49 40 24 00 H. Creutztall 45 48 00 26 00 Creweren 22 57 10 29 20 Crewessen 15 53 00 28 50 Creypa 19 51 25 29 00 Crhenitz 02 49 50 30 50   33 49 50 32 00 Criel 01 49 10 28 20 Crickow. 7, 10, 12 53 20 30 00 Crimnitz 22 50 40 29 20 Crimvitz 09 54 25 31 10 Old. Crin 07 54 00 28 50 Crine 08 53 50 30 30 Crineke 08 54 00 31 00 Crinitz 07 53 00 28 30   10, 11 53 00 28 10 Crinwasser 24 50 40 34 00 Crinwasser fl. 30 50 45 34 10 Cripshagen 16 57 05 26 00 Crisow. 07 53 50 29 30 Cristgrin 22 50 30 29 10   07 53 50 28 30 Critzow 01 53 50 28 40 Crivitz 2, 4, 7, 10 53 30 28 20 Croatia 01 45 40 33 40 Crochern 02 52 20 28 10 Crockster 15, 19 52 30 28 20 K. Crodorff 18 57 40 28 00 Croffel 41 48 55 23 35 Crofftel 39 48 50 23 40 Croix 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 30 Crolop 22, 33 50 20 30 20 Crolow. 08 54 40 34 00 Crommetinc 15 52 30 27 20 Cronach 1, 34 50 20 28 10 Cronaw C. L. 37 49 45 25 55 Cronberg 35 50 05 24 50 Crone 1, 2, 7, 10, 11 53 10 35 50 Cronenborg 1, 38 50 20 22 40   39 50 10 25 00 Cronendorff 21 57 00 29 00   22 57 30 39 10 Cronskamp 07 53 40 27 50     53 55 29 30 Cronstat 31 50 05 33 20 Cropendorf 16 52 10 28 10 Cropitz 18 51 20 29 00 Crosdewitz 19 50 45 28 10 Crosdorp 08 53 30 31 30 Croselin 8, 9 54 10 31 00 Crosick 20 51 45 28 50   21 51 10 28 50 Gross Klein Cross 30 50 20 34 10 Ducatus Crosnen∣sis 13, 24 52 10 32 40   25, 26 52 20 32 00 Crossen 1, 24, 25 52 00 32 10   10, 13, 19, 22 51 50 32 40 Crossin 07 53 30 29 10 Crossow. 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 10 Crosta 22, 23, 24 57 00 31 20 Crosten 22 50 20 29 00 Crostwitz 23 57 20 31 10 Crotoy 01 50 10 17 30 Croulow 01 54 20 34 20 Croucow 08 53 55 30 00 Cruideburg 38 51 20 22 40 Crukow. 07 53 25 30 25 Crumbach 19, 39 51 05 27 20 Crummel 07 53 10 29 50 Crummensee 10, 12 57 50 31 10 Crummepvel 07 53 40 28 10 Crummese 04 54 00 27 20 Crummin 08 54 10 31 00 Crumpe 19 51 35 28 50   20, 21 51 30 28 50 Ober Nider Crumpe 20 57 20 28 50 Crupe 20 51 35 28 40 Crusendorf 2, 7 53 30 27 20 Crusselbach 19, 36 50 40 26 40 Crutsmeshage 08 54 10 30 30 Heilige Crutz 40, 41 47 45 24 05 Heilige Crux 41, 43 47 50 23 50   42, 43 48 05 23 40 Crutznach 01 49 40 24 00 H. Crux 38 47 40 23 40 Cschastolewitz 33 50 00 33 10 Ctnentelvitz 09 54 40 31 30 Cub 38, 39 50 00 23 40 Cuba 22 50 50 29 00 Cubisser bodem 09 54 35 30 50 Cubisseoehr 09 54 35 31 00 Cucati 22 51 10 28 40 Cuckovitz 08 54 00 32 00 Cuckow. 09 54 35 31 00 Cugnon 38 49 40 21 20 Cuilly 38 45 40 23 00 Culenbach Mar∣chionatus 01 50 00 28 20 Culenborg 04 52 40 24 40   38 52 00 29 00 Culm 01 53 10 36 10   22, 33 50 50 28 50 Culman 23 57 30 31 20 Culmbach 22, 34 50 00 28 10 Culmitz 22 50 40 29 10 Culsow 08 54 40 34 30 Cultzow. 08 53 40 32 30 Cumbach 19 50 45 28 10 Cumicke 22 57 10 29 40 Cumitz 23 57 15 31 40 Cummendorf 07 53 35 30 20 Cummexow 7, 8, 10, 12 13 53 45 30 00 Cummerowsche See 07 53 45 30 00 Cummin 07 53 15 29 00 Cumroul. 08 53 50 29 30 Cunern 26 51 30 33 30 Cuners∣dorff 10, 12, 13, 23 52 10 32 00 Cunesse 07 54 05 29 50 Cunnersdorff 23, 25, 29 57 20 31 50 Cunrads waldaw 25 50 40 34 20 Cunrads walde 28 57 15 34 20   30, 31 50 45 34 20 Cunrow. 08 53 40 31 00 Cuntzen∣dorff 25, 26, 27, 31 57 40 32 20 Dure Cuntzendorff 31 50 25 33 30 Stein Cuntzendorff 31 50 40 33 30 Cupenheim 39 48 40 24 40 Cuppendin 07 53 25 29 20 Cupperickhausen 37 49 35 26 10 Curbach 01 57 10 25 20 Curbeke 38 57 20 24 20 Ober Unter Curck∣hen 45 48 35 25 50 Curdorsf 10 52 30 32 00   13 52 30 31 50 Curin 1, 10, 13 52 50 31 10 Curlath 01 47 00 28 10 Curow 08 53 20 32 00 Cursdorf 19, 26, 27 50 30 28 00 Curtau 31 50 20 33 30 Cuse 07 53 50 29 20 Cusserow 1, 7, 8 54 00 34 20 Cusery 01 46 10 21 00 Custrin 10, 12, 13, 24 52 20 32 00 Cuvilly 01 46 10 23 10 Cuyck 38 51 40 21 40 Cuzeaux 01 46 10 21 20 Cuzy 01 46 30 16 40 Czakontbury 01 46 30 34 00 Czarkowo 25, 26, 27 57 55 33 40 Czarnke 29 57 10 33 15 Czarnowans 24 50 40 34 30 Czarnowitz 33 49 20 31 50 Czaslaw 1, 2, 33 49 40 32 10 Czaslawer Kraiss 33 49 30 32 00 Czassten 32, 33 48 40 34 40 Czastolowitz 32 50 00 33 10 Czateritze 32, 33 49 00 32 20 Czauditz 24 50 00 34 30 Czebin 32 49 10 33 40 Czechy 32 49 20 34 00 Czederhaus 01 47 10 30 50 Czelakoval 2, 33 50 00 30 30 Czeletsch 24 50 10 36 00
Czempin 24, 25 52 10 33 00 Czeng 01 47 20 31 40 Czenstochow 1, 24 50 40 36 00 Czerkwitz 32, 33 49 00 32 30 Czernahora Schwatz∣burg 32 49 20 33 40   33 49 20 33 20 Czeruwena 33 49 20 32 10 Czevkowitz 32 48 50 34 20 Czeva fl. 32 48 30 34 10 Cziachow 33 49 10 30 30 Cziaslawsky krag 33 49 40 32 10 Cridiina 24 50 10 32 00 Czidivia fl. 33 50 00 32 30 Czilenipk 10, 13 52 20 32 30 Cziria fl. 33 50 50 33 10 Czirnicz 01 45 40 32 20 Deursch Czirwruri 31 50 20 33 00 Czikiow 33 49 10 31 10 Czorgo 01 46 30 35 40 Czouno 01 47 40 35 20 Czuetl. 01 48 30 32 30 Czumburg 33 49 10 33 50 Czwirczin 25, 26 52 00 33 30 Czwirnerey 27 57 50 33 15 D.   DAbel 07 53 40 28 50 Dabelow 07 53 05 30 30 Daber 01 53 30 32 50   08 53 40 33 00 Daberkow 08 53 50 30 30 Gross Daberkow 07 53 25 30 50 Worsten Daberkow 07 53 35 31 00 Dabertz 14 57 40 29 20 Dabruwina 01 45 30 34 30 Dabrun 21 51 20 29 40 Dachaw 01 48 10 28 20 Dachreden 16, 19 51 15 27 30 Dachsbach 34, 36 49 30 27 30 Dachsberg 41 48 30 23 45 Dachsdorff 19 57 10 28 00 Dachsfelden 38 47 00 23 20 Dachsburg 38, 42 48 20 23 40 Dachein 38 41 42 43 44     48 20 24 00 Dachstet 34 49 10 27 10 Dachswangen 40 47 55 24 15 Dachtiing 45 48 30 25 20 Dachwich 19 57 05 27 40 Dackenbrun 39, 41, 42 48 55 24 10 Daczitz 32 48 50 32 00 Dael 16, 17 57 50 26 10 Daelheim 38, 39 49 00 23 20 Daems 1, 4 53 10 24 40 Daetz 14 51 50 28 50 Dagstorff 42, 44 47 30 23 45 Dahenfeld 39, 45 49 00 25 50 Z. Dainbach 37 49 35 26 15 Dakow. 22 57 00 29 00 Dal 41 48 30 23 50 Dalberg 07 53 40 28 10   39 49 50 23 50 Dalbundt 44 48 35 24 20 Dalckow 14 57 45 29 00 Dalem 2, 16, 18 51 20 29 10   16, 17 52 05 27 40 Dalen 22, 28 51 20 30 00 Dalenborg 4, 6 53 40 27 40 Dalessitz 32 49 00 33 20 Dalffen 38 52 40 22 00 Dalfingen 45 48 15 26 50 Dalgen 10, 12 52 10 30 20 Dalheim 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 05 Dalhund 40, 41, 42 48 35 24 25 Dalhusen 16 51 30 26 20 Dalirenden 19 51 25 26 30 Dalitz 22 57 10 29 00 Dalkendorp 07 53 45 49 40 Dalkow 10, 11 52 20 28 50 Dalmeritz 09 54 45 31 30 Dalmin 1, 2, 4, 10, 11 53 20 29 10 Dalmstorp 7, 10 53 20 30 10 Dalow 08 53 30 32 30 Dalperch 01 47 10 23 50 Dalvitz 07 54 00 29 50 Dalwitz 21, 22 50 50 29 30 Dam 1, 8, 10, 12, 13, 38 53 20 32 10 Polnisch Dam 27 57 40 33 50 Thorn Dam 2, 4, 10 53 20 27 30 Damantz 25 25 00 33 20 S. Damarin 41, 43 47 40 23 30 Dambeke 2, 7 53 50 28 00     53 45 28 20 Damborzitz 32 48 50 34 00 Dame alias Domba 26, 27, 29 57 35 33 20 Dame lacus 08 53 50 33 30 Dameke 06 52 35 27 50 Damekow. 07 53 55 28 30 Damen 8, 10 54 00 33 30 Damerkil 41, 43 47 30 23 35 Damerow. 07 53 30 29 40 Dameshagen 07 53 55 28 00 Damersitz 08 53 50 34 00 Damerstorp 07 54 05 29 40 Dameshagen 08 54 30 34 00 Damesou 08 53 10 31 30 Damezow 10, 13 53 40 32 50 Damgarden 1, 7, 8, 10 54 20 30 10 Damitsch 26, 27, 29 51 30 33 20 Damke 1, 2, 4, 10, 11 15 53 00 28 10 Damiak 10, 11 52 40 29 00 Damiank 10, 12 51 50 29 50 Hohen Damm 10 53 30 27 50 Damme 7, 8, 38 53 40 29 50   4, 10, 12 52 10 29 40 Dammelwitz 28 50 55 34 20 Dammen 08 54 50 34 30 Dammer 24, 25, 26, 27 29 57 30 33 00 Gross Dammer 26 52 20 32 40 Keim Dammer 25, 26 52 10 32 20 Mittel Dam∣mer 26, 27, 29 51 30 33 20 Nider Dammer 27, 29 51 30 33 20 Ober Dam∣mer 26, 27, 29 51 30 33 10 Dammerow 07 53 15 29 20 Dammeretz 07 53 20 27 50 Dammitsch 27 51 55 33 30 Dammul 41, 42 48 30 23 35 Dampierre 38 47 20 22 40 Dampvilers 01 49 20 21 30 Dampullers 38 49 20 21 20 Damsdorff 10, 12, 28 51 50 31 30 Damstet 19 51 00 28 10 S. Damunky 33 49 10 39 00 Damwiler 41, 43 47 45 23 40 Dan 38 47 40 23 20 Danbach 39, 41, 42, 43 48 50 24 10 Danben 21, 22 57 05 30 00 Danck 44 48 15 24 30 Danckelsh 44 48 20 24 00 Dandorff 16 52 20 27 50 Danenkilch 41, 43 47 35 24 05 Danerwald 45 58 20 26 30 Dangast 05 53 25 24 40 Dangeisen 16 51 50 26 50   17 52 00 26 50 Danholl 06 52 25 25 20 Danhugel 20 57 35 28 30 Danikerode 16, 19, 20 57 40 28 10 Danikow 14 57 50 29 00 Dankensen 10, 11 52 40 27 20 Danksen 16 52 00 25 50 Dann Alt Dan 41, 43 47 40 23 45   22 50 30 28 50 Danne 22 50 50 29 10 Dannebeke 07 53 25 30 10 Danneberg 1, 2, 4 53 20 28 00   10, 11, 12, 19 52 20 31 10 Danneberg Comita∣tus 2, 10, 11 53 20 27 40 Dannewitz 10, 12 52 30 30 50 Zur Dannen 16 51 40 27 40 Dannenberg 6, 8, 10 52 55 27 40 Danowitz 10 53 50 31 40 B. Danagowice horny 32, 33 48 50 33 30 Unter Danowitz 32 48 40 34 00 Danroda 22 50 50 28 00 Dansdorff 21 57 45 29 40 Danso 41, 43 47 25 23 20 Danstall 39 49 10 24 50 Dansted 16, 18 57 55 27 50 Dantby 33 48 50 31 20 Dantz 2 51 20 29 40 Dantzick 01 54 10 36 30 Danubius Do∣naw tl. 33, 34, 45 48 10 32 00 Danuby fons 45 47 45 25 00 Danuwert 1, 34 48 30 27 40 Dapspe 16 57 50 26 20 Darbelade 07 54 00 30 00 Darenberg 10, 14, 21 57 30 29 00 Darendorff 10 52 40 27 30 Darensee 41, 43 47 55 23 35 G. K. Darfeldt 35 50 00 25 10 Dargaske 09 54 49 31 30 Dargelutze 07 53 25 28 50 Dargesloff 08 54 00 32 30 Dargitz 08 53 30 31 00 Dargsdorff 26 57 25 33 0 Dargun 01 54 00 30 20   7, 8, 10 53 40 28 10 Darmendorff 11 52 45 27 40 Darmsberg 40 48 45 24 55 Darmstad 1, 39 49 40 25 00 Darnay 01 48 00 22 20 Darne 2, 15 57 40 29 00 Darnewerl 02 54 30 25 40 Darnewort 03 53 55 24 50 Darney 38 47 40 22 00 Der Dars 7, 8, 10 45 25 29 40 Darsban 09 54 25 31 20 Darseroort 08 54 30 29 00 Darsewitz 08 53 50 32 00 Darskow 04 53 20 28 20   10, 11 52 40 27 40 Darsm 18 51 40 27 30 Darsum 15, 16 52 10 27 40 Dartz 8, 9 53 30 32 30   10, 13 52 50 32 00 Darwene 08 54 10 34 00 Darwitz 09 54 55 31 00 Darxdorff 27 57 25 33 25 Daschitz 32 49 50 33 00 Dase 25, 26, 27 57 40 33 20 Dashurst 40, 44 28 25 24 25 Daskow. 2, 7, 10, 11 53 20 20 10 Dasonin 39, 41, 45 4 50 24 40 Dae 2, 7 53 20 2 30 Dael 15, 16, 17 5 40 29 00 Dassow 1, 2, 4, 27 54 10 27 50 Dassower See 07 53 50 27 50 Danitz 33 49 00 32 20 Dattenrei 41, 43 47 20 23 23 Datum 05 53 40 20 50 Datzow 07 53 35 27 50 G. L. Datzow 09 54 20 31 00 Dauba 1, 2, 24, 33 50 30 31 20 Dauben 2, 21 57 40 29 20 Daub awaik 32, 33 49 20 33 30 Daubrawitz 32 49 20 33 40 Daubrowitz 2, 33 50 10 30 50 Daudenheim 39 49 40 24 20 Daudleby 1, 33 48 50 31 30 Davern 05 53 05 25 30 Daverstet 19 50 00 27 50 Daufers 01 46 49 29 10 Dauhausen 22 50 50 29 10 S. Davitz 33 49 10 33 40 Daumbach 39 50 10 24 40 Daunrit 38 47 20 23 20 Davorts 19 50 50 27 20 Davos 01 49 20 26 40 Daupe 28 57 10 34 35 Dauphine 01 45 10 21 00 Dauselen 40 47 45 24 05 Dawe 05 53 50 25 00 Dawent 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Dawiler 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 50 Daxland 40 48 45 24 50 Dazing 40 47 45 24 10 Deben 14 57 35 28 50 Debern 21 51 05 29 20 Debernitz 21 57 00 29 20 Deblin 32 49 10 33 30 Debschitz 23 57 15 31 40 Debstede 05 53 35 25 00 Deckendorff 01 48 40 30 10 Dechow 07 53 35 27 50 Deddelebn 14 57 45 27 50   16 52 00 27 58 Dederstet 15, 20 57 40 28 40 Dedie 32 49 10 34 00 G. L. Dedibn 18 57 40 27 30 Deeia 22 50 30 23 10 Deen 14 52 15 29 10 Deerhagen 07 54 20 29 30 Deerzow 08 54 10 30 30 Deese 22 51 10 29 10 Deetz 4, 10, 11, 14 52 20 28 30 Deferthausen 36 50 25 27 10 Degerfelden 40 47 30 24 15 Degerfelt 41, 43 47 25 24 10 Degern 41, 43 47 35 24 15 Degetow 07 53 45 28 10 Degte 10, 12 52 30 29 50 Deibn 22, 24 57 20 29 40 Deichsa fl. 25, 26, 29 57 20 32 40 Deichsel 27 57 40 33 20 Deidesheim 39 49 10 24 30 Deilbach 37 49 40 26 05 Deilsheim 39 50 00 24 30 S. Deinen 41, 43 47 55 23 50 Deinentz 19 57 35 29 00 Deiswitz 22 57 00 29 00 Deiten 34, 36 50 30 26 40 Deitersen 17 57 50 26 30 S. Deiy 38 48 00 23 20 Dekendorff 33 48 40 30 10 Delan 09 54 30 31 30 Delbich 35 56 20 26 20 Delbrugge 01 57 40 25 00 Delburg 02 54 40 25 50 Delden 01 52 20 22 50 Delfshagen 38 52 00 20 20 Delft 1, 38 52 00 20 10 Delfurt 17 52 15 26 50 Delictz 15 51 30 29 20 Delietz 02 51 30 28 40 Delitz 1, 22 51 30 29 20 Delles 22 50 20 29 00 Deliessen 17 52 00 26 30 Delmenhorst 1, 2, 5, 6 53 10 24 40 Delmissen 16, 17 57 55 26 30 Delsberg 38 47 00 23 40 Deltzaw 02 52 30 29 30 Deltzig 10, 13 52 40 32 00 Delue 02 54 50 26 10 Demangevelle 38 47 40 22 20 Dembke 16, 17 51 55 26 00 Dembke fl. 17 52 05 25 50 Demen 07 53 35 28 50 Demenicz 14, 20 57 20 28 50 Demer fl. 38 50 40 21 20 Demeren 07 53 40 27 50 Gr. Kl. Demich 22 50 40 28 30 Demker 10, 11 52 10 28 50 Demmin 7, 8, 10 53 55 30 10 Dempsin 1, 7 53 40 30 10 G. Denck 18 57 45 27 10 Denckendorff 45 48 30 26 00 Denckrost 05 53 10 24 30 G. L. Denckte 16 52 05 27 30 Dendorp 07 54 15 29 30   10 54 10 29 00 Denelburg 41, 42 48 35 23 50 Denenbach 41, 43, 45 48 00 24 20
Deneshausen 19, 36 50 50 26 40 Denevure 38, 41 48 20 23 00 Denewitz 10, 12 51 30 30 30 Dengelstat 15 57 20 26 40 Dengen 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 10 Denicham 38 52 20 23 00 Denin 08 53 00 30 30 Deningen 40 48 00 24 20 S. Denis 01 48 50 18 20   38 46 00 23 20 Dennenbach 40, 41, 45 47 55 24 25 Denning 43 48 00 24 15 Denritz 22 50 30 29 20 Densborch 07 54 05 29 30 Densdurff 4, 16, 17 52 20 27 20 Densen 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Denstet 15 57 00 28 00 Langen Dentzling 40 48 00 24 20 Deotz 14 57 45 29 20 Depenbeck 3, 5 53 45 25 30 Dephelde 03 53 45 25 30 Derbeug 09 54 45 31 00   07 53 00 28 40 Derbow 10, 12 52 50 30 00 Derdberg 37 49 45 26 05 Derdingen 45 48 15 25 40 Dereding 04 52 00 26 40 Derenborg 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Derendal 17 57 40 26 00 Darle 38 50 40 21 20 Dermbach 36 50 45 27 00 Dermitz 10, 13 52 30 32 00 Dern 38 50 40 24 20 Dernbach 41, 42 48 55 24 25 Dernborg 15 52 00 27 40     52 20 26 40 Dernburck 18 57 35 27 40 Dernstet 19 57 35 28 40 Derode 16, 17 51 45 26 50 Dersburg 16 57 55 28 00 Dersdorff 18 57 35 28 00 Dersenow 2, 7 53 30 27 30 Dersm 18 57 35 27 30 Dersted 18 57 40 27 00 Dervillem 09 54 20 31 30 Derwerde 15 52 00 25 40 Derwiller 41, 43 47 25 23 55 Derwitz 10, 14 57 50 29 20 Deschen 32 48 40 33 00 Desdorff 14, 18 57 50 28 40 Deske 23 57 20 32 00 Desow 21 57 25 29 10 Dessaw 1, 2, 14, 15, 18 57 50 29 20 Desse 08 53 00 32 30 Dessenheim 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 00 Dessin 07 53 20 27 50 Foon Dessow 14, 21 57 30 29 20 Destede 15 52 30 27 40 Destedt 16 52 14 27 30 Destel 20, 21 57 45 28 50 Destet 14, 19 57 15 28 50 Desswitz 22 50 50 28 50 Dete 34 50 30 28 00 Detelbach 01 49 40 27 00 Deteleben 19 57 10 28 20 Detenitz 2, 33 50 10 31 00 Detfurt sultz furt 16 52 00 26 50 Deting 45 48 10 25 20 Detitz 21 57 00 29 20 Detlau 34 49 10 27 40 Detlevesse 16, 17 57 50 26 10 Detten 4, 16, 38 52 20 27 40 Detternhausen 45 47 55 25 20 Detting 45 48 25 26 10 Detzbach 37 49 50 26 15 Detzel 14 52 05 28 20 Detzisaw 45 48 30 26 00 Devarnow 09 54 50 31 00 Deubitz 2, 15 52 40 29 00 Deven 07 53 35 30 00 Deventer 1, 38 52 20 22 10 Devitz 07 53 25 30 40 Deuning 41 48 00 24 15 Deussing 33 49 50 30 00 Deutschbrok 12 57 40 30 00 Deutschenbrod B. Nembrod 01 49 20 32 20   32, 33 49 20 32 40 Deutschen Brom 10, 11 52 20 27 40 Deutschossing 23 57 10 31 50 Deutsch Ostsch 28 57 15 35 10 Deutscw Wette 30 50 25 34 30 Deuville 38 49 40 20 40 Dexel 10, 13, 25 52 30 32 40 Deyenten 16, 17 53 55 26 30 Deynse 01 51 00 19 30 Deynvlin 41, 43 48 00 23 25 Dezize 01 46 30 19 10 Dhan 39, 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Dhen 42, 43 48 35 23 50 Dia fl. 32 48 40 33 30 Diae superioris fons 32 49 00 32 30 Dianocz 01 46 00 35 00 Dibelsh. 41, 42, 43 58 10 24 05 Dibsperg 39 49 10 25 20 Dichte 10, 12 52 20 29 40 De Dick 08 53 50 34 00 Dickeschidt 39 50 00 24 10 Dickhusen 02 54 50 25 50 Dicking 13 52 50 32 50 Dicknig 10 52 50 33 00 Dictramsel 01 47 40 28 40 Didelsheim 40 48 10 24 10 Didenhan 37 49 40 29 05 Didenhoven 1, 38 49 20 22 20 Didford 18 57 30 27 50 Didingen 24, 37 49 30 26 10 Didrode 16 57 20 26 50 Didsheim 35 50 00 25 10 Dieben 1, 15, 22, 25, 26 27 57 30 28 50 Dieberg 22 57 10 30 40 Diebham 29 57 25 33 30 Dieburg 34 49 50 25 00 Diebwiller 41, 43 47 35 23 50 Diedelhus 41, 43 48 00 23 40 Diedelrorff 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Diefal 41 48 15 23 50 Diefeaw. 41, 42 48 35 24 35 Dieffenbach 39 49 50 23 40   41, 42, 43 48 40 24 15 Nider Ober Dieffen∣bach 39 50 10 24 10 Diefmat 43 47 35 23 30 Dieffnbron 45 47 35 25 30 Diegundthoeffe 35 49 55 24 50 Dielzin 02 50 40 30 30 Diemar. 04 52 20 24 40 Diemarck 15 51 40 26 40 Dienberg 02 57 10 29 40 Diendorff 22 51 00 25 50 Datnie Diep 10 54 10 30 30 Diepach 34 49 10 27 00 Diepenhem 1, 38 52 10 22 40 Diepnow 06 52 20 25 40 Diepholt 1, 4, 6 52 40 24 50 Diepholt Comita∣tus 06 52 20 25 10 Dierdorff 1, 38 50 30 23 50 Dieren 38 52 00 22 00 Dierg 44 48 25 24 25 Diernaw. 45 48 25 26 20 Diernbach 1, 38 50 40 25 10 Diernwang 45 47 55 25 40 Diersberg 40, 41, 42, 43 44 48 15 24 25 Diery 01 49 50 22 20 Diesdorf 5, 16 52 25 25 00 Diesem 14 57 35 29 30 Diesenbach 41 47 50 23 30 Diesmat 41 47 35 23 35 Diessen 10 67 30 29 40 Diessenhoven 1, 38 47 30 25 20 Diest 1, 38 57 00 21 10 Diester 4, 16 52 20 25 00 Diester sylva 17 52 25 26 10 Dieteborn 16 51 20 27 40 Dietekirch 38 49 40 22 00 Dietendorff 19 50 55 27 40 Dietersbach 26, 27, 29 57 25 33 10 Dietersdorff 16, 19, 26 57 35 28 10 Dietershagen 15 52 20 28 40 Dietfurt 16, 34 51 50 28 00 Dietldorff 34 49 10 28 50 Dietlingen 40 48 40 24 55 Dietmansdorff 22 57 10 29 30   25, 31 50 40 33 20 Dietmelle 01 57 50 25 20 Dietorf 36 50 40 27 00 Diettenhaim 45 48 00 26 50 Diettingen 45 48 35 27 10 Dietwar 34 49 30 26 10 Dietz 1, 22, 38 50 10 24 10 Dietzenbach 35 49 55 25 05 Dietzin 24, 33 50 40 31 00 Dieupart 38 50 20 21 40 Dieuse 01 48 50 23 10 Diewer 19 51 10 26 40 Diewin 2, 24, 33 50 30 30 40 Diewitz 33 50 10 30 40 S. Diey 1, 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 20 Valdes Diey 43 48 50 23 35 Difb 42, 43 48 10 23 50 Diffental 37 49 40 26 00 Dilhem 38 50 20 24 40 Dilingen 01 48 30 27 10 Dililtsch 22 57 00 29 50 Dillen 10, 11 52 50 28 50 Dillenberg 39 50 00 24 40 Dillenborg 1, 38 50 40 24 50 N. Dillicken 41 47 30 24 05 Dilling 6, 22 52 20 25 10 Dilstadt 36 50 30 27 20 Dilstet 15 57 00 27 20 Dilstorff 19 51 10 28 00 Dimeren 16 57 25 27 00 Dimeringe 1, 39, 41 49 00 23 40 Dimerward 16 51 25 26 50 Dimipaire 41 48 10 23 20 Dimitz 2, 7, 10, 12 53 00 29 00 Dimt 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Dinant 1, 38 50 10 21 00 Dinatz 1, 12 52 10 30 10 Dinbach 39, 41, 42 49 00 24 20 Dinckler 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Dinckelheim 41, 42 48 35 24 25 Dinckelspihel 01 49 00 27 10 Dingelsted 18 57 40 27 40 Dingested 16 52 00 27 50 Dingling 40, 41, 42, 43 44 48 10 24 20 Dingstede 05 53 05 25 00 Dinskelspuhel 34 48 50 27 00 Dinniste 07 53 35 28 50 Dinsch 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 55 Dinsh 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Dinslaken 38 57 20 22 40 Dinstet 19 50 50 27 00 Dipach 34 49 50 26 50 Diperts 34 50 30 26 20 Dipigheim 41, 42, 43     Dipperg 1, 39 49 00 25 10 Dippolswald 1, 2, 22 57 00 30 40 Dirbrung 44 48 25 24 05 Direnbach 41, 42 48 55 24 30 Dirensheim 41, 43 47 55 24 00 Derewenitz 2, 33 50 20 32 20 Dirgahn 28 51 55 34 15 Diring 43 47 25 23 25 Dirmemach 41, 43 47 25 23 45 Dirmsteim 1, 39 49 20 24 50 Dirn 32 49 40 34 50 Dirna 33 48 50 32 30 Dirnb, 42 48 40 24 20 Dirncka 31 50 20 33 00 Dirnholtz 32 48 40 33 50 Dirnowitz 32 49 10 34 00 Dirschdorf 31 50 40 33 50 Dirschenriet 33 49 40 29 20 Dirschwitz 29 57 15 33 30 Dirsheim 40, 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 20 Dicub 41 48 40 24 15 Dirx 36 50 30 26 50 Disba 41 48 10 23 50 Dissdorff 1, 2, 4, 10 53 00 27 50 Dischbach 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 35 Disching 45 48 05 26 40 Disentis 01 46 10 25 30 Diserntis 38 46 00 25 20 Dissenbach 40 47 30 24 20 Disskow 21 50 55 28 50 Distelhausen 34, 37 49 30 26 10 Distelow 07 53 30 29 10 Ditersen 16 52 20 27 10 Ditersweiler 45 48 15 25 10 Ditmaning 01 47 50 29 50 Ditmar 33 48 40 31 50 T' Land tho Dit∣marsen 03 53 55 24 50 Ditmarsergronden 3, 5 53 50 24 30 Ditmarscher Wadt 03 53 50 24 40 Ditmarsia 02 54 50 26 10 Dittelstet 19 51 00 27 50 Dittersbach 23 57 00 32 00     51 05 31 50 Dittersbachel 23 57 05 32 10 Dittersbacherberg 23 57 05 31 50 Ditters∣dorff 10, 12, 20, 21 57 50 29 40 Z. Ditwar 37 49 35 26 05 Ditwiller 41, 42 48 35 24 00 Ditzhausen 36 50 35 27 20 Ditzndorff 22 50 50 29 40 Divenow. Portus 08 54 00 32 00 Divisch 32 50 00 34 30 Diuniste 03 53 30 28 30 Dizier 01 48 30 21 00 Dixmuyde 01 57 00 18 50 Dlugoschin 01 50 00 36 20 Dmnssow 33 49 40 31 40 Dobbekevitz 8, 9 54 40 30 00 Dobbelstein 33 48 20 30 30 Dobberin 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 40 Dobberpoel 08 53 10 32 30 Dobbertin 1, 7, 10 53 50 29 10 Dobbin 2, 7, 10 53 30 28 30 Dobeker 20 51 45 28 10 Dobel 07 53 40 29 00 Dobeln 1, 2, 18, 22 57 00 30 10 Dobenitz 22 57 30 29 50 Dober 10, 13, 23 53 30 32 30 Doberan 7, 10 54 05 29 00 Doberitz 10, 12 52 10 29 20 Doberlaw 02 57 40 29 50 Doberlin 25, 28 57 20 34 20 Dobermund 1, 2, 10 57 50 31 00 Dobern 01 54 20 29 20   25 57 50 31 40 Dobers 07 53 30 28 00 Dobersaw 29 57 20 33 05 Dobershutz 22, 23 50 40 29 10 Dobersobl 10, 13 52 10 32 40 Doberzikow 32 49 50 33 00 Dobicza 01 45 30 35 20 Dobilitz 21 57 10 28 40 Dobitz 22 50 40 28 40 Doblagh 01 46 30 29 20 Doblen 16 52 05 27 40 Doblin 07 53 55 28 50 S. Doboti 33 49 40 30 40 Dobra 33 48 30 32 20 Dobraberg 22, 34 50 10 28 20 Dobraum 33 48 50 34 00 Dobrawoda 33 48 40 31 40 Dobrickou 10, 12, 21 57 40 30 20 Dobritch 26 57 50 32 10 Dobronites 33 49 10 31 20 Dobrozlawitz 32 49 50 35 10 Dobrun 04 53 00 20 20   10, 11, 14 52 40 28 30
Dobrusko 2, 33 50 00 31 50 Dobrzan 1, 33 49 30 30 10 Dobrzich 1, 33 49 30 31 10 Dockum 1, 38 53 30 22 00 Dodclach 08 53 40 34 00 Dodelebn 2, 15 52 10 28 10   10, 14 57 40 28 40 Zum Dodeman 38 50 40 23 40 Doddendorf 14, 15, 18 57 40 28 40 Dodighoff 41, 43 47 45 28 10 Dodow 07 53 05 28 30     53 25 27 50 Doebelitz 15, 20 57 40 28 40 Doel 04 53 40 26 00 Doeren 15 52 30 25 20 Doerhoff 35 49 55 25 00 Doern 38 50 40 20 40 Doerweiler 39 49 00 24 40 Doesburg 1, 38 52 00 22 10 Doese 05 53 25 24 20 Doetscherode 20 57 30 28 00 Doetlingen 05 53 00 25 00 Doewegen 15 57 50 26 00 Dohar 08 53 40 30 30 Dohna 29 57 15 33 05 Doidweilet 30 49 10 23 20 Doino dosula 01 45 10 24 40 Doitzhausen 39 50 10 23 50 Dokz 2, 33 50 30 30 30 Dolagh 01 46 50 30 20 Dolany 32 49 30 34 20 Dole 01 16 50 21 20 Dolem 10, 12 52 00 30 30 Dolge 09 54 25 41 40   10, 12 52 50 30 00 Dolgelten 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 40 Dolgemose 09 54 30 31 20 Dolgen 10, 13 52 40 31 50 Dolgenow 10, 13 53 50 32 50 Dolitz 8, 10, 13 53 00 32 30 Dolkevitz 09 54 30 31 20 Dolma 25 57 10 33 00 Dolmar 36 50 35 27 20 Dolnstein 34 48 50 27 50 Dolsen 22 57 00 29 30 Dolsko 01 42 00 34 00 Hohen Dolsleben 10, 11 52 40 27 30 Domanin 32 49 00 44 30 Domasin 1, 33 49 30 31 40 Domazelitz 32 49 20 34 30 Domba 27 57 35 33 25 Domberg 40 47 40 24 20 Dombray 38 48 00 22 00 Dombsen 27 57 25 33 25 Domburk 18 57 30 28 10 Domenicz 14 51 15 28 50 Domenitz 19, 20 57 45 28 50 Domer 08 53 30 32 30 Domersleben 18 57 45 28 20 Domislaw 24, 25, 28 57 00 33 30 Domitsch 18 57 10 28 50 Domitz 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 10 11 53 20 28 10 Dommepure 41 48 30 25 05 Dommeretsch 28 51 05 35 05 Domnitz 25 52 20 33 20 Dompe 41, 42, 44 48 30 23 50 Dom Probstey 17 52 30 26 50 Domsdorf 30 50 15 34 20 Domskirche 28 50 55 34 20 Domsule 07 53 20 28 50 Don 38 49 20 20 40 Donastauf 34 49 00 29 10 Donaw 1, 33, 38 48 10 31 50 Donbihora 33 50 30 30 40 Doncapel 05 54 00 25 40 Donchery 01 49 40 21 00 Donersdorff 34, 36 49 50 27 10 Donerslebn 14 57 55 28 20 Donesching 45 47 45 25 00 Donisdorff 23 57 25 32 00 Lehault Donou 42, 43 48 25 23 40 Donnenwalt 10, 11 52 50 29 10 Donnerhorst 4, 5, 6 53 00 26 00 Donnesberg 33 49 20 29 20 Donstelt. 14 52 00 28 20 Donzy 01 47 00 18 40 Doora 22 50 50 29 10 Dornick 01 50 40 19 20 Doppel 22 50 50 28 50 Dorach 41, 45 47 45 24 40 Dore 10, 12, 14 52 00 29 40 Dorelshe∣im 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 00 Dorewert 12 52 10 29 40 Dorffel 23 57 00 32 00 Doringen 20 57 30 27 50 Ober Nider Dorta 19 57 15 27 00 Dorm 05 53 40 25 00 Dormicz 14 57 15 28 50 Dormdorff 25 57 10 33 20 Dorn 15 52 10 27 00   22 50 50 29 00 H. G. Dorn 18 57 40 26 50 Dornanies 22 57 00 29 00 Dornaw 26 52 25 32 20 Dornberg 15 57 00 28 20   19 57 00 28 30 Ampt Dornberg 19 57 05 28 30 Dornburg 22 57 00 28 30 Dornbusch 05 53 40 25 30 Dornckheim 35 50 00 25 10 Dorndorft 15, 19 51 10 28 40 Dorne 01 46 20 19 00 G. L. Dorne 16 57 55 27 20 Dornebusche 17 52 05 27 20   03 53 45 25 40 Dornebuskerhave 03 53 45 25 20 Dorneck 41, 43 47 20 24 00 Dornem 4, 6 52 20 25 40 Dornfeld 19 50 40 27 50 Dorpham 45 48 10 25 10 Dornhave 09 54 40 31 00 Dornheim 01 48 10 25 10   19 50 50 27 50 Dornick 12, 20 52 20 31 10 Dornikheim 34 46 50 25 10 Dornitz 18 57 10 28 50 Dornow 10, 13 52 10 33 10 Dorow 07 54 00 30 00 Dorp 10, 12, 38 52 00 30 10 Dorpe 16, 17 52 00 26 20 Dorpel 06 52 25 25 20 Dorphagen 08 53 50 32 30 Dorpmarck 04 53 25 26 20 Dornstein 39, 41, 42 59 00 24 15 Dornstet 1, 20, 45 48 10 25 00 Dornten 16, 17 51 55 27 20 Dorrendorff. 19, 36 50 45 26 40 Dorschbach 34 49 10 26 20 Dorse fl. 2, 11 53 00 29 00 Dorsehe fl. 15 53 00 29 40 Dorssen 25 52 20 31 40 Dorstat 15 52 20 27 20 Dorsted 16 52 05 27 20 Dorstewitz 19, 20, 21 57 30 28 50 Dort 1, 38 57 50 20 40 Dortan 01 46 00 21 50 Dortelweil 35 50 05 25 05 Dortisberg 37 49 40 26 05 Dortmund 1, 38 57 20 23 40 Lutke Dortmund 01 57 20 23 30 Dorweren 05 53 00 25 50 Dosen 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Dosse 10, 12 53 00 29 30 Dossenh. 42, 44 48 25 24 05 Dossfelt 22 50 30 29 10 Dostede 05 53 20 26 00 Dotechem 01 52 00 22 20 Dotis 01 47 40 35 50 Dotmes 1, 41 47 30 24 30 Dotn 38, 41, 45 47 40 24 00 Dottnfeld 35 50 00 25 05 Dottenhausen 45 48 25 20 40 Dottingen 40 47 45 24 10 Dotzem 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Dovay 01 50 20 19 00 Doubna 33 49 30 31 00 Douchery 38 49 20 21 00 Dove Elve 03 53 45 26 40 Doulet 38 50 00 21 20 Doulx fl. 38 47 00 22 00 Dourlens 01 50 10 18 20 Dousie 38 49 20 21 00 Douvis 15, 19, 20 57 45 28 40 Doxa 2, 33 50 00 30 00 Doxon 2, 22, 33 50 20 31 00 Drabach 43 47 30 23 35 Drabing 01 47 20 32 30 Drabotusch 32 49 30 34 40 Draburg 01 46 40 30 10 Drachenbrun 41, 42 48 45 24 20 Drachenfels 41, 42 48 55 24 20 Drachow 33 49 10 31 40 Drackenburg 01 52 50 25 40 Dragan 21 57 25 29 40 Drageinsteine 33 48 20 32 00 Drayt 05 54 00 26 00 Drahanitz 33 50 10 30 10 Drahanowitz 32 49 30 34 00 Drahony 32 49 10 34 00 Drahem 8, 10, 13 53 50 33 30 Draheim 1, 8 53 30 33 30 Dragenburg 4, 6, 15, 16 52 40 26 00 Draken∣stede 2, 14, 15, 16 52 10 28 00 Dramburg 8, 10, 13 53 40 33 00 Dramendorp 09 54 30 31 00 Dramfele 16 41 20 26 50 Dramitz 07 53 55 30 10 Drangefelt 15 57 20 26 20 Dranse 10, 12 53 00 29 40 Dranske 09 54 50 31 00 Drasendorff 33 48 40 32 40 Drasier See 8, 10, 13 53 50 33 30 Drasow 32 49 10 33 40 Dratow 07 43 25 30 00 Dravael 5, 7 53 10 28 20 Dreberg 7, 10 53 40 28 10 Drebern 06 52 30 27 20 Drebischam 19 50 35 27 50 Drebitz 18 57 10 28 40 Drebstatt 34 50 20 27 20 Drechow 08 54 10 29 30 Dreckroge 07 53 20 28 30 Dreckshausen 34, 38, 39 49 40 25 20 Drecks Odernheim 39 49 40 23 50 Drecksteenford 38 57 40 23 40 Dreetz 10, 12 52 30 29 30 Drehnow. 25, 26 52 00 32 00 Drei Hauslin 28 57 00 34 30 Dreissigacker 36 50 30 27 10 Drelebn 02 57 50 28 10 Dreling 4, 6 53 20 27 00 Drelvitz 14 57 55 29 10 Drena 22 50 50 29 10 Drengelborch 16 57 23 26 20 Drengenalde Kirch 19 51 25 26 20 Drenheim 41, 42 44 48 25 25 55 Drenhuysen 2, 3, 4, 6 53 40 26 50 Drenkow 2, 7 53 10 28 30 Drente 38 52 40 22 20 Drepta fl. 04 53 40 25 00 Dresden 1, 2, 8, 22, 23 24, 33 57 00 30 30 Alt Dresden 1, 2, 22, 23 24 57 00 30 30 Dresdorff 22 50 50 30 00 Dresick 22 57 00 28 50 Dreskow 07 54 00 28 40 Dreskowitz 32 48 50 33 50 Dresse 21 51 05 29 40 Drestenwort 01 57 40 24 00 Dretscher 22, 23 57 00 21 10 Dretz 4, 10, 11 53 20 29 00 Dretzel 14 52 05 29 10 Dreuben 14, 21 57 30 28 50 Drevitze 10, 12, 13 52 20 32 00 Drewahstits 32 49 20 34 30 Drewesewitz 09 54 30 31 10 Drewitz 10 57 50 29 20   11, 21 57 50 29 30   10, 12 52 00 30 20 Drewolck 09 54 50 31 10 Dreyen 1, 22 50 30 29 20 Dreyhauser 27 51 40 33 30 Dreykretsche 23 57 20 31 20 Dreyleben 14, 16, 18 57 50 38 20 Dreysteine 27 51 45 33 15 Dribach 41 48 45 24 40 Driebitz 26, 27 57 50 33 10 Drielake 05 53 10 24 50 Drieleben 2, 15 52 10 27 50 Drielich 35 49 50 24 55 Driesen 1, 10, 13 52 40 33 10 Driesum 01 53 20 21 50 Drifels 41, 42 49 00 24 25 Driglitz 22 57 00 29 10 Dringelberg 01 51 30 26 00 Dringelbung 15, 17 51 30 26 00 Dringenborg 05 53 15 24 40 Drinowe 32 49 10 34 20 Driplitz 22 50 40 28 50 Drisch B. Trest 32 49 00 32 40 Drispenstedde 16 52 05 26 40   17 52 20 26 40 Driospote 07 53 45 28 20 Dritona 32 48 50 35 00 Drittenheim 38 49 40 23 00 Driwell 05 53 20 24 30 D. kalng 33 48 50 31 00 Drnowitz 32 49 20 33 40 Drochten 04 54 00 25 40 Drochters 04 54 00 25 40 Drochtersen 2, 3, 5 54 10 25 50 Droebeln 15, 20 57 50 28 40 Droge 02 54 30 26 20 Droge Elve 03 53 45 26 30 Drogelwitz 26 57 40 33 20 Drolshagen 38 50 40 24 00 Dromersheim 39 49 50 24 10 Dromelinge 06 52 20 27 40 Im Drommelinse 02 52 40 28 00 Dromsdorf 19, 29 57 10 28 20 Drounewitz 07 53 30 28 00 Droplach 01 46 30 30 30 Droscheyda 26 57 55 32 20 Droschitz 33 50 10 31 40 Droschkaw. 25 52 00 32 20 Droschke 25, 31 52 50 32 40 Drock 22 51 00 29 20 Drosdow 10, 12 53 00 30 00 Drose 10, 11 52 50 28 20 Drosendorff Drosdo∣wive 32 48 40 33 00 Drosenfeld 22, 34 49 50 28 30 Droska 26 52 00 32 30 Drosse 07 53 45 29 30 Drossen 1, 10, 13, 24 52 20 32 00 Ober Unter Dros∣sing 45 47 50 25 10 Drousewitz 09 54 40 31 30 Dschbanitz 2, 33 49 40 31 50 Drubach 41 47 30 23 35 Drubitz 01 53 00 29 40 Druchtersheim 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Druckshusn 38 49 40 23 40 Druma 22 50 40 31 10 Druschke 28 57 25 35 05 Drusen 25 53 00 32 20 Drusenhe∣im 4, 41, 42, 44, 45 48 30 24 25 Drusevitz 07 54 00 29 40 Drutenberg 44 48 10 24 00 Drybach 42 48 45 24 30 Dryskaw 1, 2 57 40 31 10 Dub 1, 32, 33 50 40 31 50 Duba 02 52 00 29 50 Dubendorf 15 53 00 25 20 Dubbetz 09 54 40 31 30 Dubbin 24, 25 51 40 33 30 Duben 41, 42 48 30 24 00
Dubescheheide 21 57 10 29 30 Dubetsch 33 49 50 31 30 Dubitz. 01 45 40 34 50 Dubusk 32 44 40 34 00 Dubwerowen 32 49 20 32 20 Gr. Dubzin 07 54 40 34 30 Duchen 27 57 40 33 35 Duchgehst 05 53 35 25 20 Der Duchberg 16 57 25 27 30   19 57 25 27 10 Dud. Chalube 07 53 35 30 30 Dudelstorf 1, 38 50 00 22 50 Duden 44 48 25 24 05 Dudenheim 41 43 47 35 23 45 Dudenhoven 39 49 00 24 50 Dudenrode 19 57 20 26 40 Dudenstedde 17 52 30 27 00 Dudersenfelt 16 52 10 26 10 Duderstat 1, 15, 16, 19 57 30 27 00 Dudsche Weninge 02 53 10 27 40 Dudske Juden 11 52 40 28 20 Dueben 14 57 30 29 30   21, 22 57 00 29 30 Duebzat 33 50 20 30 30 Duerlandt 14, 21 57 20 29 10 Duerstede 01 52 00 21 40 Duffel 38 57 00 20 20 Duggerow 8, 10 53 40 31 00 Dugloschin 24 50 00 36 00 Dugwitz 28 50 55 34 05 Duina 01 45 40 31 30 Duingen 16, 17 57 50 26 30 Duisburg 38 57 20 22 40 Dukow 07 53 40 30 00 Dulmen 01 57 50 23 30 Dulseberg 10, 11 52 30 27 20 Dultenstein 40 48 10 24 30 Dumberg 33 48 20 31 00 Dume fl. 2, 11, 15 52 50 28 10 Dumerkevitz 09 54 25 31 30 Dumitsk 21 57 05 29 50 Dumitzsch 21 57 10 29 40 Dummer 04 54 00 28 29   7, 10 53 30 28 10 Dummerzee 04 52 40 24 40 Dumpach 34 49 40 28 40 Dumrade 09 54 25 31 10 Duna 19 57 25 27 10 Ausdem Duna 16, 19 57 20 27 30 Uniterm Duna 19 57 25 27 10 Dunam 16 52 15 26 30 Dunckelhausen 34 49 30 26 50 Dunckelheim 40 48 35 24 25 Dunden 41, 42 48 30 24 10 Dundenhe∣im 40, 42, 43, 44 48 14 24 20 Dunditz fl. 44 48 10 24 25 Dundorf 36 50 05 27 10 Dune 15 51 20 27 00 Dung 38 49 00 21 10 Dungelbecke 17 52 30 27 00 G. L. Dungen 16 52 00 26 50   17 52 15 26 50 Dungersheim 34, 37 49 50 26 40 Dun le Roy 01 46 40 18 10 Dunnekevitz 09 54 30 31 00 Dunnow 08 54 50 34 00 Dunow 08 53 50 32 30 Duns 09 54 20 31 10 Dunsen 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Dunsewitz 09 54 20 31 10 Dunsted 14, 16 52 10 28 20 Dunting 34 48 50 28 10 Duntlen 44 48 15 24 05 Duntz 22 50 50 29 00   41, 42, 44 48 30 24 00 Duntzburg 41, 42 48 40 24 00 Durba 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 25 Durbach 40 48 20 24 30 Durbuy 01 50 20 21 40 Durchwene 21, 22 57 05 29 30 Durckh. 41, 43 47 55 23 45 Durckhausen 45 47 50 25 20 Dureitschon 22 50 30 29 20 Duren 1, 38 50 40 22 50 Dur Hennersdorff 23 57 05 31 50 Durhoff 37 49 30 26 05 Durhay 38 50 00 21 40 Durin 22 50 50 28 50 Duringwalde 23 57 30 31 10 Durkawitz 30 50 25 34 30 Durlach 1, 38, 39, 40, 45 48 40 25 00 Durle 41, 43 47 20 23 40 Durlentsch 28 51 05 34 10 Durmersheim 40 48 45 24 40 Durmstein 38 49 20 24 40 Durn 01 48 40 35 20 Durnach 41, 43 47 35 23 45 Durnburg 22 50 50 29 00 Durnhoff 22 50 30 29 10 Durnholtz 1, 33 48 40 33 50 Durnholtzhausen 39 50 10 24 00 Durning 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Durode 15, 16, 17 57 50 26 40 Durpach 23 57 25 31 20 Durrluntzendorff 30 50 20 34 40 Durre Harte 28 50 50 34 05 Durrendorff 31 50 25 33 50 Durschow 10, 12 52 50 29 30 Durstedde 17 52 15 27 30 Durstorff 39 50 10 24 20 Durweiler 45 48 20 25 10 Dusdorff 6, 10 52 20 27 50   11, 14 52 35 28 50 Dusel 41, 43 47 45 24 10 Dushorn 4, 6 53 00 26 20 Dusselddorp 1, 38 57 10 23 00 Dussevitz 8, 9 53 50 32 30 Duster Mons 07 52 05 26 20 Dusucheim 38 48 20 24 20 Duszniki 25 52 30 33 00 Dutsch∣feld 40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 15 Duttenbron G. 37 49 50 26 10 Duttlen 41, 42, 43 48 20 24 05 Duttlingen 1, 38, 45 47 40 25 20 Dutz 10, 13 52 50 32 10 Duve 03 53 45 24 20 Duvenbeke fl. 09 54 35 31 10 Duxat 22 50 20 30 40 Duynkercken 01 57 00 18 10 Duysborg 01 57 20 23 00 Duytz 01 50 50 23 30   38 50 40 23 00 Dyckholtzen 16, 17 52 00 26 00 Dyckhorst 4, 6 52 40 27 20 Dyckhusen 05 53 25 24 20 Dycksandt 05 54 10 25 20 Dygborst 16 52 25 27 10 Dyghurst 01 52 50 27 10 Dymokurio 33 50 00 32 00 Dyna 16 57 20 28 30 Dynckeler 15 52 30 27 00 Dynter 38 51 20 21 20 Dyon 01 47 00 20 50 Dyrbaum 22 51 00 29 40 Dyske 21 50 55 29 00 Dwartten 22 50 20 29 10 Dworzisste 33 48 40 31 40 E.       EBeleben 1, 15, 16 51 10 27 30 Ampt Ebele∣ben 16 51 15 27 40 Ebelsbach 34, 36 50 00 27 30 Ebelsfeld 34, 36 50 00 27 50 Ebenaw 19 57 05 27 00 Ebenberg 22 50 50 31 30 Ebendorf 14, 36 57 45 28 40 Ebenfurt 01 47 50 34 10 Ebenhausen 34, 36 50 00 26 50 Ebenheim 19 57 00 27 10 Ober Nider Eben∣heim 41 48 15 23 55 Ebenstart 40 47 50 24 20 Eberach 34, 36 50 10 27 40 Mittel Eberach fl. 34, 36 49 50 27 20 Ran Eberach fl. 34, 36 49 50 27 20 Reich Eberach fl. 34 49 40 27 30 Eberbach 34, 38, 39 49 20 25 20   41, 42, 43 48 00 24 25 Eberburg 38, 39 49 40 23 40 Eberholtzen 17 52 15 26 40 Eberhorst 16 52 20 26 30 Eberminstat 1, 34 49 40 28 00 Ebern 1, 34, 36 50 00 27 40 Ebernit 37 49 40 25 55 Ebersbach 22, 23, 38, 45 57 00 29 40 Ebersberg 1, 33 48 00 31 20   16, 19 51 35 28 00   1, 33 48 00 33 50 Ebersdorff 19, 22, 34, 36 50 25 28 30   23, 25, 26 51 05 31 30 Ebersen 1, 4, 16 52 40 27 00 Ebersheim 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 55 Ebersheimunster 38, 41 48 00 23 40   42, 43 48 10 24 00 Ebersingen 39 49 00 23 10 Ebersroda 19, 20 57 20 28 40 Eberstein 15, 16, 17 51 45 26 20   40, 45 48 35 24 45 Eberstein Comi∣tatus 41, 45 48 30 24 45 Ebersteinburg 40 48 35 24 40 Eberstat 37, 39, 45 49 30 26 05 Eberstet 19 57 05 28 30 Ebersweier 40 48 20 24 30 Ebersweiler 42, 44 48 35 23 30 Eberswihr 44, 48, 20     Ebertsenroth 40 48 35 24 45 Ebertshauren 36 50 35 27 20 L. Ebesdorf 22 50 30 20 30 Ebing 38, 45 48 00 26 20 Ebingen 1, 40 48 00 26 30 Ebnet 41, 43 47 50 24 20 Ebnit 34 50 10 18 00 Ebnu 36 50 10 28 00 Eboltzhusen 16, 17 51 40 26 50 Hohen Thal E∣bra 16, 19 51 20 27 50 Ebrach 34, 36 49 50 27 10 Ebrenstock 19 50 40 27 40 Ebring 18 52 05 27 50   40, 41, 43, 45 47 50 24 15 Ebritz 22 51 00 29 20 Ebruille 01 45 50 18 50 Ebsdorp 2, 4, 6 53 10 26 50 Eckhendrets 33 49 20 29 30 Echetz fl. 45 48 15 25 50 Eching 01 48 00 25 30 Echte 15, 16, 17 51 50 26 40 Echterling 45 48 25 25 50 Echtstein 16 57 55 26 00 Eckartsberg 1, 15, 19, 22 57 10 28 20   23, 25 51 40 32 00 Ampt Eckartsberg 19 57 10 28 30 Eckb. 44 48 25 24 30 Eckboltzh 40, 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Eckelstet 19 51 05 28 30 Ecken 38, 41, 43 47 35 24 05 Eckendorff 14 57 35 28 50   41, 42 48 35 24 05 Eckenem 35 50 00 25 00 Eckenhaid 34 49 30 28 10 Nider Ober Ec∣kenheim 40 47 40 24 05 Ecker fl. 17 52 00 27 30 Eckers 36 50 40 27 00 Eckersdorff 10, 12 52 20 31 10   23, 28, 31 51 40 32 20 Eckerswihr 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 20 Eckholt 07 53 00 28 10 Eckhorst 04 54 20 27 20 G. K Ec∣kirch 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 40 Ecklenford 01 54 50 26 30 Eckort 09 54 45 31 00 Eckstein 40 48 50 24 45 Ecksted 10, 11, 19 52 20 28 40 Eckstorf 34 50 30 27 20 Ecksure 06 52 05 26 40 Eckwarser 05 53 30 24 40 Eckwersheim 41, 44 48 30 24 10 Ecwertsh 42 48 30 24 10 Eczdorff 20, 21 57 30 28 40 Eczleben 20 57 20 28 10 Edam 01, 38 52 30 21 00 Edang 34 49 30 27 50 Ederschen 39 49 50 24 40 Eddershem 39 49 50 24 40 Edelhausen 19 57 10 28 00 Edellaken 2, 3, 5 54 30 25 50 Edellakerhave 03 53 55 25 00 Edelstein 30 50 15 34 30 Edemissen 4, 16 52 40 26 40 Edenburg 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 00 Edensbet 20 57 35 28 40 Edenstet. 19 57 40 28 40 Eder 41 48 20 24 05 Edersdorf 22 50 50 28 30 Edersleben 20 57 30 28 10 Edesen 16 52 20 27 00 Edessen 16 57 40 26 50 Edewacht 05 53 10 24 30 Edicheim 39 49 20 24 50 Fdiehoven 39 46 00 24 30 Edighusen 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Edinchausen 4, 16 53 00 26 00 Edingen 38, 39, 44 49 20 25 00 Edsen 04 52 40 26 00 Ee fl. 34 49 30 27 10 Eeckholt 14, 21 57 35 29 00 De Eems fl. 38 52 40 23 20 Eesbeelk 16 51 30 26 50 Eestrum 01 53 20 21 50 Efferding 33 48 10 31 20 Effing 45 47 45 25 00 Effringen 40 47 35 24 05 Egart Sce 34, 45 48 40 26 50 Egdsdorff 19 50 35 28 00 Egelen 2, 14, 15, 18 52 00 28 00 Egelhart 39, 41, 42 48 50 24 00 Egelsbach 35 49 50 25 00 Hohen Egelsen 15 52 20 26 40 Egenberg 33 48 40 32 50 Egenstede 14, 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Egerdorff 14 51 35 28 40 Egers fl. 42, 43 48 20 24 05 Egersbach 41 48 20 24 30 Egersen 34 49 20 27 00 Egersheim 42 48 25 24 00 Krut Egersheim 42, 43 48 20 24 00 Egerthan 40 47 35 24 10 Egersw. 40, 41 48 20 24 25 Egery 38 46 40 25 00 Egesheim 38, 41, 43 47 50 23 50 Egestorp 15 52 20 25 40 Egewert 33 50 10 29 50 Eggbach 40 48 20 24 35 Hohen Eggelsen 17 52 25 27 00 Eggenfelden 01 48 10 29 40 Eggerkamp 3, 5 53 45 25 00 Eggerssen 16, 17 57 55 26 20 H. Eggesen 16 52 05 26 50 Eggeste 02 54 40 26 00 Eglesse 45 58 40 25 40 Egling 41, 43 47 35 23 40 Eglisow 1, 38 47 20 25 00 Eglong 05 53 30 24 00 Eglstat 45 48 10 25 20 Egmissen 15 52 40 27 00 Egmont op Zee 1, 38 52 50 20 20 Egnberg 01 48 20 33 10 Egra 22, 33, 34 49 50 29 20 Egra fl. 22, 34 50 10 30 10 Egringen 40, 41, 43 47 35 24 05 Egvort 16, 17 52 10 26 50
Eheleben 19 57 20 27 30 Ampt Eheleben 19 51 20 27 30 Ehenberg 23 57 00 31 20 Nider Ober Ehen∣heim 1, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 00 Ehera 19 51 10 27 40 Ehergetz 19 41 40 26 40 Ehing 1, 38, 45 48 00 25 30 Ehingen 01 48 10 25 20 Ehra 10, 11 52 20 27 20 Ehrenborg 01 46 30 29 00   6, 10, 13 52 30 25 30 Ehrenstein 19 50 44 28 00 Ampt Ehrenstein 19 50 45 28 00 Ehnstat 41, 43 47 45 24 15 Ehrtail 34, 36 50 10 26 40 Ehrswiler 41, 43 47 50 24 15 Ehwihr 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 00 Eiba 19 50 35 28 10 Eibel 41 57 10 29 00 Eibensen 16 57 40 29 30 Eiberg 40 48 30 24 40 G. K. Eibstadt 36 50 15 27 10 Eich 1, 33, 34, 40 50 20 25 20 Zur Eich 40, 41, 32, 44 48 30 24 10 Zur Hohen Eich 19 50 45 28 10 Eichart 29 57 25 33 10 Eichaw 25 57 50 32 40 Eichberg 29 57 30 33 05 Eicheberg 16 57 15 27 00 Eichel 27 49 40 26 00 Eichelberg 40 48 40 24 50 Eichelborn 19 57 00 28 00 Eichelfelt 36 50 30 27 30 Eichelsbach 37 49 40 25 50 Eichen 40 47 35 24 20 . Eichen 40 48 30 24 55 Eichenbuhel 34 49 40 25 55 Eichenoell 34 50 30 26 20 Eichenfst 37 47 45 26 00 Eichrenkirch 40 47 35 24 20 Eichenrodt 39 50 00 24 10 Eichfelt 19, 22 50 45 28 10 Eichof 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 25 Eichholtz 25, 29 57 10 33 00 Eichen 40 47 30 24 15 Eichstet 19 50 55 27 50   40 48 00 24 15   41, 43 47 55 24 10 Eichwasser 31 50 15 33 20 Eichwog 41, 42 48 45 24 15 Eickenhorff 19 51 40 28 30 Eickhorn B. We∣werzi 32 49 00 33 40 Eifborn 16 57 25 27 10 Eifel 38 50 20 23 00 Eiffeldt 36 50 20 27 40 Eifetadt 34 49 40 26 50 Eifferstorff 41, 42 48 40 24 30 Eifingen 39 49 00 24 30 Eigenreden 16, 19 51 15 27 20 Eigenroda 16, 19 57 20 27 30 Eikenborge 16 51 10 28 20 Eikendorff 20 57 40 28 20 Eilaw 26, 30 57 50 32 30 Eilang fl. 24 52 20 31 30 Eilenen 17 57 50 26 40 Eilenstock 22 50 40 29 30 Eiling 14, 21 51 55 29 40 Eilnburg 20 51 20 29 00 Eilnsted 4, 18 54 00 26 20 Eilsdorff 16, 18 52 00 27 50 Eiwig fl. 25 52 10 31 40 Eimbecke 1, 15, 16, 17 51 50 26 30 Eimbsen 16, 17 51 55 26 40 Eime 16, 17 57 55 26 30 Eime fl. 14 51 20 28 10 Einach 44 48 15 24 25 Eindorff 10, 12, 13, 19 52 10 31 10 Eine 23 51 20 31 20 Eine fl. 16, 18, 20 57 45 28 20 Einem 17 52 20 26 50 Einersleben 18 51 35 28 00 Einert 39 49 10 23 40 Einsa 22 50 50 29 00 Einsdorff 20 51 30 28 20 Einsidel 30, 39 50 00 34 30 Einsidt 22, 33 49 50 29 40 Einsmingen 39 48 50 23 10 Einville 01 48 40 22 50 Eiren 16 52 10 27 40 Eisbergen 16 52 00 25 50 Eisborn 19 51 30 26 40 Das Eischfelt 16, 19 57 20 27 20 Eischweilen 39 49 10 23 50 Eisdorff 21, 28 51 05 29 00 Eisfeld 01 50 30 27 40 Eisholt 10 57 20 29 10 Eisen 39 49 40 23 10 Eisenbach 34, 38, 39 49 40 23 30 Eisenburg 19, 23, 24, 25 57 00 28 50 Eisenburg 2, 22, 33 50 30 20 30   41, 43 47 45 23 45 Eisenbuttel 18 52 10 27 00 Eisendorff 29 57 10 33 30 Die Eisengreb 18 50 30 28 00 Eisenh. 71, 43 47 45 23 45 Eisenharner 28 57 10 35 05 Eisenhut 29 51 15 33 10 Eisenmost 25, 26, 27, 29 57 30 33 00 Eiseerein 41, 43 48 00 23 40 Eisenrode 23 57 15 31 30 Eisenthal 40 48 30 24 35 Eisenthor 33 48 40 32 00 Eisermuhl 29 57 35 33 15 Eisernschlag 35 50 00 25 00 Eiserstorf 31 50 10 33 40 Eisingen 37 49 45 26 15 Ampt Eisleben 19 57 40 28 30 Eisleben 15, 19, 20, 34 51 30 28 20 Eistbach 40 48 45 25 00   39 49 30 23 40 Eiter 22 56 20 29 20 Eitch 22 57 10 29 20 Eitwartsdorff 19 57 30 28 30 Eitz 21 51 20 29 30 Eitzem 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Eitzen 18 51 55 27 20 Eixe 16, 17 52 15 27 00 Eixen 07 54 10 30 00 Gr. Eixen 07 53 40 28 10 Ekeling 4, 6, 16 52 40 27 00 Eken Barleben 18 57 55 28 30 Ekendorff 18 52 05 27 50 Ekersdorff 23 51 05 32 20 Ekesdorff 23 57 40 31 50 Eklenborg 07 53 45 28 50 Ela 22 57 00 29 40 Elbel 14, 19, 20 57 10 28 40 Elb 4, 6, 11, 14 53 40 28 00   18, 21, 24, 32 51 35 29 10 Elbstroom 05 54 00 25 00 Elbenaw 18 57 40 28 50 Elbenschwand 40 47 40 24 20 Elberg 38 52 20 23 20 Elbersdorff 14, 20 51 20 28 50 Elbfese 16 52 20 26 10 Elbigerode 16 51 35 26 40 Elbing 41 48 30 23 15 Elbingeroda 16, 18 57 45 27 40 Elbingh. 01 54 00 37 20 Elbognerkraiss 33 50 00 29 50 Elbrinen 16, 17 51 46 26 00 Elburg 1, 38 52 30 21 50 Elcheleben 19 50 50 28 00 Elchingen 45 48 20 26 50 Elchnitz. 22 50 50 28 30 Eldagessen 16, 17 52 05 26 20 Eldagsen 15 52 10 26 00 Elde fl. 7, 1 53 15 28 30 Eldena 7, 8, 10, 11 53 05 28 30 Eldenaw. 01 53 30 28 20 Elderle 22 50 30 29 50 Eldingen 04 53 20 27 00   06 52 30 27 00 Eleman 36 40 55 27 30 Elenborg 10, 11 53 00 28 00 Elend 28 57 15 34 00 Elende 15 51 30 27 20 Zum Elende 16, 19 51 25 27 40 Elendeleben 2, 15 52 10 28 10 Elens 2, 3 54 10 26 20 Elfelt 1, 38, 39 50 00 24 20 Elfersgehofen 19 57 00 27 50 Elfflet 04 53 20 24 20 Elfs 15 52 30 25 25 Elgoch 28 57 15 34 50 Elgot 26, 27, 30 57 45 33 30 Elgoth 28 57 05 33 30 Elgg 01 47 10 25 20 Elgow 38 47 00 25 20 Eling 34 48 50 27 50 Elingshausen 36 50 30 27 20 De Elintz anfdem∣berg 19, 20 51 30 28 50 Elke 14, 21 57 30 29 10 Elkerck 4, 16 52 20 25 20 Elkers fl. 16 51 20 26 30 Ell 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 40 24 05 Elliben 19 50 50 28 00 Ellecom 38 52 00 22 00 Ellefelt 22 50 20 29 30 Ellen 14 52 15 29 20 Ellenbergo 10, 11 52 40 27 30 Ellenborg 2, 7, 10 53 00 27 50 Ellendcruitz 39 49 20 24 10 Ellendorp 4, 10, 11 53 40 28 40 Ellenhofen 45 49 00 25 50 Ellenwihr 41, 43 48 00 23 57 Ellerenholt 03 53 45 26 20 Ellerholtz 09 54 35 31 00 Ellerlandt 05 53 10 25 30 Ellers H. 16 51 25 26 50 Ellersleben 19 51 15 28 10 Ellerstorp 05 53 20 26 10 Ellew. 05 53 45 26 30 Ellich 18 51 15 27 10 Elligehausen 19 51 30 26 50 Ellingerode 16, 19 57 20 27 10 Ellings 16 51 55 27 30 Ellisch 28 50 55 33 55 Ellischen 28 57 05 33 45 Elm 4, 5 53 40 25 00 Der Elm 16 52 10 27 40 Elmedingen 40 48 45 24 55 Elmelingen 39, 45 48 40 25 00 Elmendorp 05 53 15 24 30 Elmenhorst 2, 7, 8 54 10 27 50 Elmeroy 15 52 30 27 20 Elmersforst 41, 42 48 25 23 55 Elmesheren 02 54 10 26 00 Elmeshorn 2, 5 53 50 25 30 Elmet 40 47 55 24 25 Elmshorn 04 54 20 26 00 Elmus 07 54 10 29 10 Ober Nider Eln 19 50 55 26 50 Elnbogen 1, 22, 33 50 00 29 40 Eloi 38 49 20 21 20 Elos 33 49 30 29 20 Elpe 38 51 00 24 40 Elpersbuttel 2, 5 54 40 25 40 Elpersheim 37 49 35 26 20 Elsa fl. 24 29 40 35 00 Elsas fl. 39 49 00 25 20 Elsbach 22, 38, 39 57 00 29 30 Niders Elsbach 35 50 05 25 00 Elsbeg 16 52 20 28 00 Elschen 26, 27 51 30 33 20 Elschetterstat 39 49 20 24 40 Elsdorp 04 53 20 25 40 Elseflie 05 53 15 24 50 Eisen 22 51 00 29 10 Elsenheim 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 00 Elser 02 51 50 29 10 Elslng 01 48 30 25 50 Elspe 34 50 20 26 40   36 50 25 26 50 Die Elsse 23 51 35 32 10 De Elste fl. 02 58 50 26 10 Elsted 04 54 00 26 20 Elster 1, 15, 21, 22, 23 24, 33 51 40 29 50 Schwartz Elster 23 57 20 31 10 Elster fl. 10, 15, 19, 20 22, 24 57 20 30 10 Elsterberg 22 50 30 29 10 Elstert 22 50 10 29 20 Elsterwerd 1, 2, 22 57 20 30 40 Elstorp 05 53 20 25 40 Elstra 22 57 20 29 00 Elsuren 05 53 30 24 40 Elt 38 52 00 23 40 Eltenhausen 19 50 50 27 00 Eltensen 17 51 50 26 30 Elterberg 33 50 20 29 10 Elterle 33 50 30 29 40 Eltesleben 16, 19 57 15 28 10 Elting 45 48 30 25 40 Eltinghausen 34, 36 50 00 26 50 Eltman 1, 34 50 00 27 30 Eltmans hausen 19 57 10 26 30 Eltnsen 16 51 40 26 30 Eltorp 38 50 40 22 40 Eltstneck 33 50 20 29 50 Eltz 15 52 00 26 20 Eltz fl 38, 40, 41, 43 45 48 05 24 15 Eltzach 38, 45 48 00 24 20 Eltze 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Eltzen 4, 6 53 00 26 00 Elve 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Groot Lang Elve 4, 16, 17 52 60 27 00 Groot Elvelde 15 52 10 27 00 Elvendorff 23 57 10 31 50 Elvers hausen 16, 17 51 40 27 50 Elwang 1, 34, 45 48 50 26 50 Elwang Praeposi∣tura 34, 45 48 40 26 50 Etweiler 39 49 40 23 20 Elwenstock 36 50 45 27 50 Elwiler 38 49 40 23 00 Elxleben 19 50 55 27 50 Embeck 4, 6 53 20 27 00 Embsing 34 48 50 28 10 Embstirchen 34 49 30 27 30 Emden 1, 38 53 30 23 10 Emden Comitatus 05 53 20 24 00 Emedorff 34 48 50 28 20 Emeisdorff. 33 48 10 32 30 Emeldingen 40 47 35 24 05 Emelhausen 19 51 15 27 10 Emeloort 38 52 40 21 40 Emendorp 3, 4, 6 53 40 26 30 Ementing 41, 43, 45 48 00 24 20 Emering 1 57 45 28 10 Emeringsberg 18 57 45 28 10 Emersieben 16 52 10 28 00 Emersted 16 52 10 27 50 Emettingen 40 48 00 24 25 Emhausen 36 50 30 27 20 Emiden 14 52 00 28 10 Emkendorf 07 54 05 29 40 Emkenhagen 07 54 10 29 30 Emlinchun 38 52 40 22 40 Emina fl. 38 46 40 24 00 Emmeleben 19 50 55 27 20 Emmendorf 2, 4, 6 53 00 27 00 Emmenhausen 16 57 30 26 40 Emmer 16, 17 57 50 26 10 Emmer fl. 16, 17 57 50 26 10 Emmerdorf 05 53 20 26 30 Emmerick 1, 38 57 50 22 20 Emmerig 16, 17 52 05 26 40 Emmering 16 52 00 28 10 Emmerke 16 57 25 26 20 Empel 16 52 10 26 30 Empershausen 36 50 40 26 50 Emps 38 46 00 26 00 Empshoop 05 53 05 25 10 Empte 16 52 20 26 20
Emptingen 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Emuting 01 47 50 28 50 Ems 38 50 00 23 40 Die Ems fl. 19, 36 50 55 27 10 Emseloch 19 57 40 28 20 Emseloo 20 57 35 28 20 Emser fl. 38 57 20 23 40 Enchuysen 01 52 50 21 10   38 52 40 21 00 Enckebach 39 49 10 24 10 Enckem 35 50 00 25 00 Encken 41 48 40 24 35 Enckendorff 33, 40 48 30 30 00 Enckenstein 40 47 35 24 20 Encre 01 50 00 18 30 Endersdorff 30 50 15 34 30 Enderspach 45 48 35 26 00 Endingen 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 10 Endorff 14, 16, 20 51 20 28 10 Enego 01 45 40 28 50 Enella 01 50 20 21 30 Enepeyern 45 48 15 26 20 Feldt engel 16, 19, 20 57 10 27 50 Holtz Engel 16, 19 51 20 27 50 Kirch Engel 16, 19, 20 57 20 27 50 Wester En∣gel 16, 19, 20 51 20 27 50 Engelach 16, 17 57 50 26 50 Engelberg 38 46 00 25 00 Engelburg 43 47 40 23 35 Engeleben 19 59 10 27 40 Engeloorstel 16 52 20 26 30 Engelsberg 24 50 00 34 00   32 49 50 34 20 Engelsborn 19 50 50 17 20 Engelshaus 33 50 00 29 50 Engelsot 41, 43 47 30 23 25 Engelsreut 34 50 30 28 00 Engelstain 34 50 30 27 40 Engelstat 38, 39 49 40 24 00 Engen 01 47 40 25 10 Engenburg 41 47 40 23 35 Engenstein 36 50 25 27 40 Engeren 01 52 00 24 50 Engerode 4, 16, 17 52 20 27 20 Engersen 1, 38 50 2 23 50 Engersdorff 33 48 30 33 50 Engersen 4, 10, 11 53 40 28 40 Engesen 15 42 20 26 20 Enghien 01 50 40 20 00 Engltal 01 49 20 28 20 Engsing 41, 43 47 35 23 40 Enhstlat 45 48 00 25 30 Engwiler 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Ening 38, 45 48 20 25 20 Enntz fl. 39, 45 48 30 25 00 Ens 1, 33, 38 48 00 31 40 Ens Klosterlin 40 48 35 25 00 Ens fl. 1, 40 47 40 32 10 Enschede 1, 38 52 25 23 00 Enschir 22 50 40 29 10 Ensen 38 47 40 23 40 Enseshaim 45 47 50 25 50 Ensheim 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 14 05 Ensing 45 48 25 26 00 Ensisheim 1, 41, 43 47 45 23 50 Enspach 40 48 25 24 30 Enspruck 01 47 30 32 00 Enssen 43 47 45 23 50 N. O. Enssen 41 47 45 23 50 Enstorf 34 49 10 28 50 Entenburg 40 47 40 24 15 Entenswand 40 47 45 24 25 Enterdorff 33 48 20 33 50 Entermuhl 28 57 05 33 55 Entring 45 48 20 25 30 Entyn 01 54 30 27 20 Entz fl. 45 48 30 25 00 Klein Entz fl. 45 48 35 25 10 Entzendorff 33 48 40 33 10 Entzowan 2, 33 50 20 30 10 Entzweyhing 45 48 40 25 30 Enutz fl. 38 48 40 25 00 Enzingen 19, 20 51 35 28 10 Epe 38 52 20 21 40 Epffich. 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 55 Ephesen 16 52 10 27 30 Eppendorff 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 54 00 26 40 Eppenstein 38, 39 50 00 24 40 Eppingen 39, 45 49 00 25 20 Eptingen 20 57 20 28 40 Erapelle 41 48 10 23 30 Erbach 39, 45 49 50 24 10 Erbenhausen 36 50 30 27 00 Erbesbidelsheim 39 49 40 24 10 Erbstet 19 57 00 27 20 Erckelen 01 51 00 22 30 Erckelsdorff 26 57 55 32 30 Erckerw. 41, 42 48 40 23 55 Ercksel 11, 14 52 30 29 20 Erdeborn 15, 18, 19 20 57 20 28 20 Erden 38 50 00 23 00 Erdperg 33 48 20 33 40 Exelbach 34 50 00 26 20   41, 42 48 55 24 20 Eren 38 51 40 24 00 Erenberg 36 50 25 27 30 Erenbreitstein 38 50 00 23 40 Erendorp 04 53 00 25 00 Erenpurchk 39, 45 49 10 25 40 Ereter 16 52 00 25 50 Erf fl. 37 49 40 25 55 Erffa 19 57 00 27 20 Erffeldt 37 49 35 26 05 Erfferding 01 48 10 31 00 Erffurt 1, 15, 19 57 00 27 50 Ergers 41, 44 48 20 24 00 Ergers fl. 44 48 15 24 10 Ergers∣bach 40, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 30 Ergersheim 41, 44 48 25 24 00 Hrut Erger∣sheim 41, 44 48 15 24 05 Ergersw 39, 41, 42, 43, 44 58 15 24 25 S. Erh 15, 16, 19 57 20 27 40 Erich 20 57 20 27 40 Erichsburg 14, 15, 17, 20 57 20 28 00 Erichsdorff. 19 51 00 28 10 Eringen 14, 16, 45 52 15 28 10 Erink 38 49 40 22 40 Erischenberg 23 57 00 32 10 Erksel 10 52 30 29 10 Erla 36 50 30 27 30 Erlabrun 34, 37 49 50 26 30 Erlach 1, 38 46 40 23 20   34, 37 49 50 26 10   40, 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 30 Erlang 01 49 30 27 50 Erlastegen 34 49 20 28 00 Erlbach 40 48 55 24 40 Bomen Erlbach 45 49 10 26 00 Erlbach fl. 41, 42 48 55 24 35 Nidern Erlebach 35 50 05 25 05 Erlehoff 45 48 40 24 40 Erlemuhl 28 57 15 33 35 Erlenbach 37, 39, 41, 45 49 40 25 50 Erlenbat 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 30 Erlenburg 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Erleshoren 34 48 50 28 10 Erlhaim 34 49 20 28 50 Erlicht 29 57 25 33 10 Erlinbach 37 49 25 26 10 Ermbdorff 34 49 50 29 10 Ermbswerdt 16 57 15 26 50 Ermelhausen 34, 36 50 10 27 20 Ermis 22 57 20 29 00 Ermreut 34 49 30 28 10 Ermsleben 14, 15, 16, 18, 20 57 25 28 10 Ermst fl. 45 48 20 26 00 Ermstet 19 51 00 27 40 Ernaltzh. 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Ernfeldt. 39 49 50 24 00 Ernoltsh. 41, 42, 43, 44 48 25 24 05 Ernstein 38 48 50 32 40 Ernsthoff. 37 49 40 26 00 Erp. 38 57 20 21 40 Erpach 1, 34, 38, 39 49 20 25 20 Erpach Comita∣tus 34, 39 49 20 25 20 Erpe 38 52 00 23 00 Erpeldinge 01 50 00 22 20 Erpelsheim 39 49 20 24 40 Erpswiller 41, 42 49 00 24 15 Errebn. 14 57 30 28 30 Ersdorff 19 51 35 28 40 S. Ersebeuth 01 46 30 35 10 Ersingen 40 48 45 24 55 Ersleden 33 48 50 32 40 Erstein 38, 40, 44 48 15 24 10   41, 42, 43 48 15 25 00 Ersten 05 53 05 25 20 Erswilller 16 51 30 26 10   40 47 50 24 20 Ertmansheim 22 51 20 29 30 Ertmersweitr 45 47 55 25 00 Ertzhausen 15 52 00 26 20 Ertzing 45 47 55 35 30 Ervendorff 10, 13 52 20 32 10 Erverfelt 1, 38 51 10 23 20 Erverten 01 57 30 24 40 Erville 38 48 20 22 40 Erwitten 38 57 20 24 40 Esbach 38 49 00 24 00   39 49 10 24 00 Esbe 18 57 55 27 40 Esbecke 16, 17 57 55 26 30 Esbergk 16 52 25 26 20 Escansienes 38 50 20 20 00 Esch 38 49 40 22 00 Eschauw 40, 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 10 Eschbach 41, 42, 43 47 45 24 10 Eschdorff 19 50 45 28 10 Esche 38 49 40 22 00 Eschede 1, 4, 6 53 00 27 00 Eschefelt 22 51 00 29 30 Eschen 29 57 35 33 25 Eschenaw 34, 38, 39, 45 49 30 28 10 Eschenbach 1, 34, 45 49 40 28 40 Eschenberga 19 51 05 27 30 Eschenhausen 34 50 30 27 00 Eschenrode 14 52 00 28 00 Eschenwege 15 51 10 26 40 Eschershausen 16, 17 51 45 26 20 G. L. Escherode 16, 17 52 05 26 40 Closter Esche rode 4, 16, 17 52 00 26 20 Escherden 15 52 10 26 2 Das Eschfelt. 15 57 30 26 4 Eschhorn. 35 50 00 24 5 Eschkenroda 18 52 00 28 0 Eschberg 33 48 30 31 1 Eschlemer 41, 43 47 55 23 4 Eschwege 01 51 10 26 5 Eschweghe 19 57 10 26 4 Eschweiler 38 50 40 22 2 Eschwitz 22 57 00 29 2 Eschcetwiler 41, 43 47 35 23 5 Nider Ober Esc∣kenburg 40 47 40 24 2 Esdain 38 49 20 21 0 Esdorpe 15 53 00 25 4 Eeset 4, 6, 16, 19, 6 52 25 26 2 Eselbach 19, 37 50 45 28 2 Esellinsen 02 54 20 26 3 Eselpurg 45 48 30 26 5 Esekeroda 16 52 15 28 0 Esenrode 06 52 10 27 1 Esens 01 53 50 23 4 Esensham 05 53 25 24 5 Esfedt 03 53 50 25 2 Esfleten Sluse 03 53 50 25 3 Esh. 39 50 10 24 4 Esinckhusea 17 52 30 27 0 Esing 34 48 40 26 4   45 48 45 26 4 Eskenrie 08 54 00 34 0 Eslern 33 49 20 29 4 Esling 38, 45 48 20 25 4 Ober Esling 45 48 30 26 0 Esltngen 16 52 15 25 4 Esloenshagen 19 57 05 27 0 Espach 40 47 45 24 1 Espenfeld 19 50 50 27 4 Esperde 16 51 50 26 20   17 52 05 26 1 Espern 05 53 10 24 20 Espernay 01 48 50 20 00 Eiperstet 16, 19, 20 57 25 28 10 Ober Unter Es∣perstet 19, 20 51 35 28 40 Esperuheim 22 57 10 29 30 Espinael 1, 38 48 00 22 50 Esringen 41, 43 47 30 24 00 Essa fl. 05 53 25 26 00 Essbecke 16 51 50 26 40   17 52 00 26 40 Essberg 16 52 10 27 50 Esscheborch 03 53 50 27 00 Esschenfelt 34 49 20 28 40 Esschersheim 35 50 00 25 00 Esschig 37 49 40 25 50 Essdorf 16 52 20 25 50 Esselbach 34 49 50 26 00 Esselborn 39 49 30 24 20 Esselburg 39 49 40 24 50 Essen 01 51 20 23 10 Esslam 34 49 40 26 50 Estabon 41 47 20 23 15 Estafflschin 01 52 00 35 30 Estaing 38 49 00 21 40 Estang 38 49 00 22 40 Estaple 01 50 30 17 30 Este 05 53 30 26 10 Este fl. 03 53 45 26 10   06 53 10 26 10 Esteborg 05 53 30 26 10 Estebrugge 03 53 45 26 10 Ested 10 52 20 28 10   11 52 20 28 20 Esten 16 51 15 26 20 Esteu felt 34 49 50 26 00 S. Estiene 38 50 30 20 20 Estinay 41 48 25 23 15 Ch. d' Estraye 43 47 35 23 20 Eswiler 01 50 40 22 40 Etal 01 47 20 27 50 Etalle 38 49 40 21 40 Erdlitz 33 50 20 30 10 Etentorf 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Eting 41, 43 47 30 23 50 Etla 2, 14 57 50 28 10 Kirch Etla 15, 20 51 50 28 40 Mittel Etla 14, 20 57 20 28 50 Ober Etla 15, 20 57 15 28 50 Etlingen 38, 41 48 40 24 40 Etten 38 57 20 20 20 Ettenhausen 19, 36 57 00 27 10 Ettenheim 40, 41, 42, 48 05 24 15   43 48 00 24 15 Ettenheim Mun∣ster 40 48 10 24 25 Etten Mun∣ster 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 20 Ettens. 05 53 25 24 40 Ettenweil 40 48 05 24 20 Ettenwiler 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 15 Ettern 19 57 00 28 10 Ettersberg Mons 19 57 00 28 10 Die Eetersburg 19 51 05 28 00 Ettesleben 16 50 50 27 50 Ettling 45 48 25 26 10 Ettlingen 39, 45 48 40 24 50 Etzdorff 22 50 40 29 20     57 30 28 40 Etzel 05 53 20 24 20 Etzen 15 52 40 27 00 Etzke 10, 13 52 20 32 10
Eubnowitz 33 49 20 33 50 L. Eubigheim 37 49 30 29 10 Evenberg 08 53 00 33 00 Evensen 16, 17 51 55 26 50 Evere 16, 17 52 10 26 50 Evergem 01 51 20 19 40 Everhim 34, 36 50 00 27 10 Everoda 17 52 05 26 40 Evenscht 16 51 25 26 20 Evensen 1, 4, 6 53 00 26 40 Evershusen 16, 17 57 50 26 50 Everstorp 5, 7 53 35 25 20 Evi 01 46 00 23 00 Evi 38 45 40 22 40 Ekheff 16 52 25 25 50 Euking 34 48 50 28 20 Eulenberg 21, 22 50 50 29 30 Eulenburg 01 51 20 29 40 Eulensted 14, 16 51 40 27 50 Eersdorff 22 50 30 29 30 G. K. Eura 16, 19 57 25 27 50 Euseibach 38 50 20 24 00 Eusenhausen 36 50 25 27 10 Euseroda 19 57 00 28 00 Euskirclin 38 50 40 23 00 Eusleben 16 52 05 28 10 Euspach 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 25 Euter fl. 34 49 30 25 50 Eutorp. 38 50 40 23 40 Euttelsh. 22 57 10 29 30 Euxel 41 43 47 30 24 10 Euxen 01 54 00 28 10 Ewanczitz 01 49 00 33 30   32, 33 49 00 33 40 Ewznowitz 32 49 10 34 10 Eweche 38 53 20 24 00 Ewersdorf 10, 11 52 30 27 40 ewinckel 10, 11, 14 52 40 28 20 G. Exen 04 54 00 28 20 Exteren 15 52 10 25 40 Extorf 36 50 25 27 20 Extteritz 22 57 20 29 20 Eyb. 34 50 40 28 10 Eyba 22 50 30 28 10 Eybach. 34 49 20 27 50 Hohn Eybach 45 48 30 26 40 Eybischbach 45 48 50 25 40 Eyburg 38 52 00 22 40 Eychaw 26 51 55 32 50 Eyck 38 51 00 20 00 Eyderstede 01 54 40 25 10 Eyersheim 37 49 40 26 05 Eygel 10, 12 57 50 31 50 Eyl 38 49 40 22 50 Eyle 02 49 50 30 10 Eylenberg B. So∣winetz 33 49 40 31 20   32 49 40 34 20 Eylenburg 15 51 20 29 40 Eyne 2, 15 52 40 27 20 Eynthoven 1, 38 57 20 21 20 Eypeltaw 33 48 20 33 30 Eyrshausen 19 57 20 26 40 Eysch 38 52 40 23 00 Eysdorff 15 52 10 25 40 Eysenach 1, 19, 30 57 00 27 00 Eysenberg 26 57 35 32 20 Eysenberg Comita∣tus 19 57 00 28 50 Eysenschmitt 34, 45 48 45 26 50 Eysshaim 45 49 05 25 40 Eysgrub Lednice 32 48 40 34 10   33 48 40 33 50 Eysleben 01 51 30 28 30   18 57 05 28 20 Eysling 45 48 30 26 20 G. K. Eysling 45 48 30 26 20 Eysschen 01 52 50 24 10 Eyssen 39 48 50 25 10   45 48 55 25 10 Eyting 38 48 00 25 00   45 48 15 25 20 Eytling 38, 45 48 20 25 20 F.   FAch 1, 34 49 30 27 40 Fackburch 38 49 40 23 40 Facksche 08 53 30 30 30 Fagnaw 01 46 00 30 10 Fahre 24 52 00 31 00 Fahrland 10, 12 52 10 30 20 Faitstein 18 57 35 27 20 Falb. 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 00 Falba 14 57 35 29 00 Falberg 16 52 05 27 30 L. Falberg 16 52 10 27 30 Faldorf 14 52 00 28 30 Falersleben 4, 16 52 40 27 40 Falchorst 10, 12 57 50 30 30 Falcken 19 57 10 26 50 Falcktnaw. 22, 30, 33 50 00 29 40 Falckenberg 1, 4, 8, 9 53 20 33 20   10, 12, 13, 14 52 10 30 50   21, 24, 30, 31 50 40 34 30 Falckenburg 8, 10, 39 53 30 33 30 Die Falckenburg 16, 19 51 25 28 00 Falkendorff 22 57 00 29 30 Falckenhach 09 54 15 31 00 Falckenhagen 01 53 40 34 50   7, 8 53 45 27 50   10, 12, 13 52 10 31 30 Falckenhoff. 42 48 35 24 15 Falckenstein 14, 15, 16, 18, 20, 22, 25, 32, 39 57 20 28 00   41, 42, 45 48 50 24 05 Falckensteiner∣bach 41, 42 48 45 24 10 Falckenthal 10, 12 52 40 30 20 Falckenwaldaw 25 52 30 32 00 Falckenwalde 10, 13 52 30 31 40 Falckersw. 41, 42 49 00 24 25 Fall. 4, 6 53 20 26 20 Fallenpostel 4, 6 53 20 26 20   06 52 10 27 20 Fanbach 36 50 45 27 10 Gr. Fanern 19 51 05 27 30 Fansdorff 10, 11 52 10 28 40 Far. 34, 38 49 50 27 00 Farben 07 53 50 28 30 Farberey 27 57 45 33 30 Farenpach 34 49 20 27 40 Farge 05 53 15 25 00 Farnaw 40 47 35 24 20 Ober Unter Farnstet 20 57 30 28 30 Farw. 41 48 35 24 00 Farsol. fl. 19 50 50 27 40 Fatz 22 51 10 28 10 La Fauche 01 48 10 21 40 Faucogny 01 47 40 22 40 Fauern 19 51 05 27 40 Favernach 38 46 00 23 20 Favernay 1, 38 47 30 22 10 Faulborn 16, 19 57 20 27 30 Faule Jppe 29 57 20 33 15 Faule Muhle 26 51 30 32 50 Faulenbach 37 49 40 27 00 Faule See 18 51 35 28 10 Faulquemont 1, 38 49 00 23 00 Faurendaw 45 48 30 26 10 Faurspach 45 48 50 26 10 Fautsperg 45 48 25 25 00 Febere 41, 43 47 25 23 30 Febr. 04 54 00 28 40 Fechenbach 37 49 40 25 55 Fechenem 35 50 00 25 05 Fechingen 14, 16 52 05 28 20 Fecholt 16 52 15 27 10 Feddewardt 05 53 30 24 30 Federsee 45 47 55 26 30 Fefersbach 40 48 20 24 30 Fegebutel 28 57 20 34 05 Fegersh. 20, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 05 Fehlen 14 52 10 29 20 Fehr 2, 5, 7, 9, 10, 12 53 30 28 10 Fehrbellin 10, 12 52 10 29 40 Feichtwang 01 49 00 27 10 Feirbach 41, 43 47 35 24 10 Feissy 38 45 40 22 40 Fersthsen 20 51 45 28 40 Fekensted 16 57 55 27 40 Felchta 19 51 15 27 10 Feldberg 07 53 10 30 40 Feldborg 10, 12 53 10 30 10 Felde fl. 36 50 50 26 50 Felden 34 49 30 28 30 Feldmuhl 28 57 05 35 00 Feldorff. 45 48 10 25 30 Feldsburg 32 48 40 34 00 Feling 33 48 30 32 30 Felixburg 33 50 10 30 00 Fellendorff 29 57 15 33 05 Fellon 38 45 20 23 20 Felm 01 48 20 31 00 Feln 33 48 30 31 10 Felringen 41, 43 47 40 23 25 Feltkirch 1, 41, 43 47 55 23 50 Feltre 01 45 50 29 10 Femern 10, 12 52 00 30 00 Fendenh. 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 10 Fenetrange 01 48 50 23 30 Fenmul 18 57 40 27 10 Ferbellin 01 52 50 30 00 Ferch 41 48 40 24 35 Ferchow 09 54 40 21 20 Ferden 01 53 10 25 40 La Fere 01 49 40 19 20 Fere Champenoise 01 48 30 20 00 Ferenbach 45 47 55 24 50 Ferette 01 47 30 23 40 S. Fergau 01 47 20 18 40 Fergernsdorff. 22 50 40 29 40 Ferglant 2, 15 52 20 28 30 Fermsiebrn 18 57 40 28 40 Fernach 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 30 Fernaw 43 47 30 24 15 Ferrieden 34 49 10 28 20 Unter Ferrieden 34 49 10 28 10 Ferrstet 14 57 35 28 30 Fersen 2, 4, 6 53 00 27 00 La Ferte Gaucher 01 48 40 29 20 La Ferte Milon 01 49 00 19 00 La Ferte suos Jo∣verre 01 48 50 19 10 Fertzersbrun 37 49 45 27 15 Fesikow 07 54 05 30 00 Festenberg 24 57 20 34 00 Festenburg 34 49 10 27 40 Ferzenbach 40 47 35 24 30 Feucht 34 49 10 28 10 Feucetwang 34 49 00 27 00 Feurbach 40 47 40 24 50 Feurbergk 16 52 25 26 40 Feurne 01 51 00 18 40 Feurs 01 45 20 20 10 Feyerbach 45 48 35 25 40 Fhilen 38 46 20 25 00 Fichel 07 53 40 28 30 Fichten 22 57 00 29 20 Fiddeck 08 53 00 31 30 Fidelsheim 39 49 40 24 30 Fiefers 41, 42 48 30 23 35 Fielsburg 19 57 10 26 40 Fiesbach 34, 36 50 00 27 30 Fiefers 38 48 20 23 20 Fietze 10, 13, 24, 25 52 30 32 20 Fikensolt 05 53 15 24 30 Filalhn 01 52 40 33 40 Filahn Pol. Wilinia 25 53 00 33 00 Filbach 37 49 40 26 15 Fimmelsen 16, 18 52 05 27 20 Findbuch 40 48 30 24 30 Fineburg 18 57 30 27 10 Fincke 05 53 20 25 30 Zum Fincken 40 48 20 24 40 Finckenb. 41, 42 48 30 24 30 Finckendael 07 54 00 30 00 Finckenwerd 2, 3, 6 53 50 26 20 Finckheim 44 48 30 24 25 Finiken 07 53 15 29 30 Die Finne 20 57 20 28 20 Aufder Finemont 19 57 20 28 10 Finsternam 39, 41, 42 48 50 24 20 Finsterwald 1, 2, 21 57 30 30 50 Finstorp 07 54 05 29 20 Firensperg 34 49 10 27 10 Alt Firt 43 47 25 23 45 Fisberg 34 50 40 26 50 Fisbach 1, 24, 25, 36, 38 50 50 32 40   41, 42 48 50 24 10 Fisbeck 10, 11, 14, 17 52 10 29 00 Fischberg 36 50 40 26 50 Fischbod 10, 12 52 10 31 00 Fischdorf 22 50 30 28 20 Fischebeck 2, 15 52 30 28 40 Fischedorff 23 57 40 32 20 Fischenberg 40 47 40 24 15 Fischntal 38 46 40 25 40 Fischer 38, 45 47 40 24 40 Fischerende 29 57 15 33 20 Fischerhaude 05 53 15 25 30 Fisenbenberg B. Ruda 1, 32 49 40 33 50 Fislitz 41, 43 47 25 23 50 Fisswarden 05 53 30 24 50 Fistrits 32 49 30 34 20 Fistritz fl. 24, 32, 33 49 30 34 00 Fixen 08 54 10 29 30 Flabeville 38 49 20 21 40 Flachsbach 34 50 00 26 20 Flackenstein 01 47 10 27 20 Flackestroem 05 54 05 25 10 Fladingen 34 50 30 26 40 Fladungen 1, 36 50 30 26 50 Flaen 07 53 20 27 50 Flamerom 39 49 30 24 20 Flamischdorff. 28 51 10 33 35 Flanck 10 52 10 32 20 Flanck fl. 13 52 10 32 20 Flandria Comita∣tus 01 50 50 18 30 Flanum 39 49 40 24 10 Flarchheim 19 57 10 27 10 Flasstockum 15, 16, 17 52 10 27 00 Flatersleben 20 57 35 28 50 Flavigny 01 47 10 20 20 Flawyll. 38 46 40 25 40 Elechdorff. 16, 18 52 20 27 30 Flocksperg 41, 42, 44 48 25 23 55 Fleckstein 38, 40, 41, 42 48 50 24 15 Flederborn 08 53 40 34 30 Flegenberg 2, 3, 4, 5 53 40 26 40 Flein 45 49 00 25 50 Flemensdorff 10, 13 52 50 31 20 Ausden Flemming 21 51 30 30 00 Flemnigen 22 57 20 28 40 Fleningen 22 50 50 29 40 Flensborch 01 55 10 26 00 Flesberg 22 51 00 29 30 Fleschenborg 35 49 55 25 00 Flesnow 07 53 40 28 30 Flete 2, 7 53 00 29 10 Fletmar 4, 6, 16 52 40 27 00 Flieden 34 50 30 26 10 Fliencken 40 47 40 25 25 Fliersum 39 49 30 24 20 Flihen 41, 43 47 20 23 50 Flimichan 22 50 50 29 30 Flin 38 48 20 22 40 S. Flo 44 48 20 24 25 Flochberg 45 48 50 27 00 Flochsbach 37 49 50 25 55 Floe 22, 33, 36 50 50 30 10 Floe fl. 22 50 30 30 20 Floen 38 50 20 21 20 Floerz 10 57 20 29 10 Flogel 05 53 40 25 20 Florecup 39 49 30 23 40 Floref 38 50 20 20 40 S. Florentin 01 47 40 19 40 Florentz 01 46 00 19 40
Flota 04, 16 52 00 25 20 Flote 06 52 00 25 30 G. L. Flote 4, 16, 17 52 00 25 20 Flotow 07 53 30 30 10 Flottz 14, 21 57 40 29 00 Fluschslant 41, 43 47 35 23 45 Flugelsburg 34 48 50 28 40 Fluisburg 01 47 00 31 30 Flums 38 46 20 25 40 Flune 07 53 25 27 40 Flurstet 19 51 05 28 20 Zu Fless 41, 43 47 50 23 30 Fleycstede 05 53 30 25 10 Flyet 10, 12 52 59 30 50 Fobrberg 04 52 40 26 40 Fockenrode 19 57 10 26 30 Fockeroda 19, 36 50 45 26 50 Fockewin 34, 36 50 10 27 20 Fockesberg 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 10 Fogelsdorff 18 57 40 27 30 Fogissheim 40 47 40 24 10 Fohrberge 06 52 20 26 30 Folckmarsum 01 51 20 25 40 Folle 34 50 40 25 40 Fonchiefons 41 48 00 23 25 La Fonderye 41 47 20 23 20 Fonkemuhl 10, 12 51 40 30 50 Fonnichow 2, 7 53 10 28 50 Fons du Rosne 01 46 00 25 10 Fontaine 38 47 40 23 00 Fontane bleau 01 48 20 18 20 Fontenelle 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 25 Fontenoy 38 48 20 22 00 Fontenoy le Chaft 01 47 50 22 20 Fontanel 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Fora ia 01 55 10 24 40 Forbach 40 48 30 24 45 Forcheim 1, 34 49 40 27 50   40, 41, 43 48 00 24 10 Forde 14 52 10 29 30 Forderburg 01 47 00 27 00 Fornitz fl. 4, 16 52 40 28 00 Forpach 38, 39, 41, 45 48 20 24 40 Forschb. 40, 42, 44 47 20 24 30 Forse 18 51 20 28 10 Forsfelde 1, 6, 14, 16 52 25 27 50 Forst 2, 24, 25, 33 50 30 31 30 In Forst 41 48 35 24 20 Forste 16 51 40 27 10 Forstenow 1, 13 52 30 23 50   16, 17 57 40 26 10 Forstenberg 16, 17 51 35 26 20 Forstensche 08 53 10 32 30 Forstet 41, 43 47 55 24 15 Forstfelst 39, 40, 41, 42 48 40 24 30 Forstgen 22 51 10 29 40 Forsth 41, 42 48 40 24 10 Forstwihr 40 47 55 24 00 Fortheim 40 48 00 24 10 Forw. 18 57 15 28 20 Forwerck 09 54 40 31 20 Foseln 21 57 15 28 50 Fouchie foux 42, 43 48 05 23 25 Fount 34 46 20 23 00 Fovo 01 48 30 22 00 Fowke 14 57 50 28 00 Foz 38 50 20 20 40 Framersbach 34 50 00 26 00 Framersheim 39 49 30 24 20 Franc 38, 41 50 20 20 20 France 01 48 40 17 50 Franche Comte 01 47 00 21 40 Franchimont 01 50 30 22 00 Franck 43 47 30 23 50 Francken 44 48 25 24 00 H. Francken 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Obr. Francken 22 57 00 29 40 K. Francken 41, 42 48 30 24 05 Francken∣berg 30, 31, 36 50 30 33 50 Franckenfelt 2, 6, 15 51 50 29 00 Vorwerck Francken∣feld 21 57 20 29 30 Francken∣hausen 1, 15, 16 51 20 28 00   18, 19, 20, 34 57 00 27 50 Ampt Francken∣hausen 16, 19 51 25 28 00 Francken∣heim 19, 36 50 45 27 30 Franckenheff 22 50 30 29 10 Franckenmarck 01 47 50 30 40 Franckenroda 19 57 00 28 20 Francken∣stein 1, 34, 38, 39 49 10 24 10 Franckenstein Dy∣nastia 34 50 40 27 10 Franckendal 22, 23, 24 51 10 31 00   1, 38, 39 49 20 24 40 Franckfort an Main 1, 34, 35, 38, 39 50 00 25 00 Franckfurt ander Oder 1, 24, 25 52 10 31 40   10, 12, 13 52 10 32 00 Franckfurder Wald 39 49 50 24 50 Francklebn 19, 20, 21 57 20 28 50 C. Franco 01 45 30 29 20 Franconia 38 49 40 25 40 Kl. Franckr. 41, 42 48 55 24 20 Franckstein 24, 31 50 30 32 30 Franckwiler 39 49 00 24 30 Frandeben 15 57 20 28 40 Francker 1, 38 53 20 21 30 Franomont 38 47 00 23 20 Franquemont 01 47 10 23 30 Fransborg 8, 10 53 10 30 00 Fransenborg 05 53 45 25 10 Frany 2, 33 50 10 29 50 Frapelle 42, 43 48 10 23 30 Frating B. Wrateni 01 48 40 32 40   32 48 40 32 50 Fraunberg 01 48 50 31 20 Nider Ober Frauns∣dorff 30 50 30 34 20 Fraustadt 01 51 40 33 20 Frauwen 36 50 30 27 40 Zum Frauwen 34 50 40 27 50 Fauwich 38 50 40 22 40 U. Fraw 44 48 10 24 05 O Fraw. 41, 42 48 10 24 00 Frawen Alb. 38, 39, 40, 45 48 20 24 40 Frawenberg 1, 33, 48 49 40 29 50 Frawenhain 2, 22 51 20 29 30 Frawerodt 34, 36 50 20 26 50 Frawensche 19 50 50 26 50 Frawenstein 2, 33 50 40 29 30 Frawental 34 49 20 26 50 Unfer Fraw. Zum Stetin 41, 43 47 20 23 50 Unfer Fraw. Zum See 41, 42 48 25 23 40 Frawnbrun 38 46 40 23 40 Frawstad 24, 25, 26, 27 51 50 33 00 Frayn B Wranow 32 49 40 33 10 Frayer 41 47 20 23 20 Freckfelt 42 48 50 24 35 Frecleben 14, 15, 18, 20 57 25 28 30 Fredeborg 1, 5 53 40 23 50 Fredeland 1, 7, 8, 10 53 30 30 30   12, 15 57 40 31 50 Grot H. Freden 16, 17 57 50 26 40 L. Fredendorff 10, 12 51 40 29 50 Frederichsdorff 13 52 40 33 00 Frederichshoff 02 54 30 26 00 Fredersdorff 10, 12, 21 52 50 29 30 Fredzdorff 10, 12 57 50 30 20 Freest 02 54 40 25 50 Freiberg B. Pri∣bor 2, 32, 33 50 10 29 10 Freiburg 1, 15, 19, 22 57 00 29 40   38, 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 20 Ampt Freiburg 19, 20 51 15 28 40 Freiburger Sandt 03 53 50 25 10 Freiburger Sluse 03 53 45 25 10 Freidberg 01 50 50 33 10 Freidenberg 34, 38 49 40 25 50 Freidenburch 34 49 20 29 00 Freideneck 41 48 30 23 50 Freidental 45 48 50 25 40 Freidlandt 01 50 30 33 00 Frein 33 48 50 32 40 Freien Bessingen 19 57 20 27 30 Freinrode 21 50 55 29 00 Freinwalde 12 52 30 31 20 Freiesteina 34 50 30 26 10 Freihein 01 57 40 34 10 Freiholtz 40 48 40 24 50 Freimbt 33 49 20 29 10 Freindrode 22 57 30 29 10 K. Freisa 22 50 20 29 10 Freisen 22 50 30 29 20 Freisl. 19 57 45 28 40 Freist 20 57 45 28 40 Freistat 1, 26, 32 49 00 28 20 Freistadiensis Cir∣culus vel Frie∣stadisches Weich∣bild 26 57 50 32 30 Freistein 32, 33 48 40 33 00 Freistet 40, 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 20 Freistetterwaldt 33 48 30 31 50 Freistritz 01 46 30 33 20 Freiwalda 30 50 15 34 10 Frekfelt 41 48 50 24 30 Frelsen 16 57 40 26 40 Frelsted 16 52 20 27 40 Frelterode 19 51 20 26 30 Le Fremboile 41, 42 48 30 23 30 Fremersberg 40 48 35 24 40 Frendenberg 1, 5, 6 50 50 24 10 Frendenstat rudera 30 50 15 34 30 Frenens 10, 11 53 10 28 40 Freningen 41, 43 47 35 23 45 Frensburg 41, 42 48 50 24 15 Frensdorff 34, 36 49 50 27 30 Frensenheim 39 49 20 24 40 Frenswege 38 52 40 23 00 Fresen 09 54 40 31 00 Fresenborch 02 54 00 27 00 Fresenoort 8, 9 54 40 30 00 Fresnitz 18 51 10 29 00 Fress 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Fresse 41, 43 48 00 23 25 Frestede 4, 6 53 20 27 20 Fretow. 09 54 10 31 10 Fretz 09 54 25 31 20 Freucke 16, 17 57 50 26 20 Freudeberg 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 00 Freudenberg 37 49 40 25 55 Freudenleben 15 52 00 28 00 Freudenstatt 40 48 20 24 5 Freudental B. Brun∣tay 01 49 50 34 2   24, 32 49 50 34 00 Das Freudenthal 19 50 55 27 4 Freving 33 48 30 30 5 Freundzberg 01 47 00 28 50 Freung 01 48 30 30 50 Frevoux 01 45 30 20 50 Frewstadt 24, 25 57 50 32 40 Freyberg 24, 25, 33 50 50 33 00 Freyenhagen 16, 19 57 20 27 00 Freyenstat 34 49 00 28 10 Freyenstein 10, 11 53 20 29 10 Freyenwalde 10, 29 52 30 31 2 Freyet 24 57 40 34 00 Freyhai 25 51 40 34 20 Freyorla 22 50 50 28 30 Freystad 24 49 50 35 00 Freywalda 23, 24 50 10 34 00 Freywalde 23, 24 57 30 32 00 Friberg 24, 33 49 40 35 00 Fribourg 01 46 30 23 30 Friburg 1, 38, 39 47 50 24 20 Frick 41 47 20 24 30 Frickenhausen 45 48 25 26 00 Fricurt 38, 41 48 20 23 00 Fridberg 1, 14, 15, 20, 21 57 15 28 4   2, 22, 23, 33, 34 50 50 30 10 Fridberg Baronia libera 19, 20 57 45 28 4 Fridberger Wardt 35 50 00 25 00 Fride 19 51 10 16 40 Frideberg 10, 13 52 40 32 40   16, 18, 19, 24 51 50 28 00 Frideck 1, 32 49 30 35 20 Fridelandt 1, 10, 12 52 20 31 30   8, 10, 13 53 20 33 20 Fridelsheim 41, 42, 44 38 30 24 00 Friden 15 57 10 26 40 Fridenben 41, 43 47 40 23 25 Frideneck 42 48 30 23 50 Fridensdorff 23 57 05 31 30 Friderichsberg 20 57 35 28 20 Fridersdorff 23, 26 57 10 31 50 Friderichswald 08 53 30 32 00 Fridesdorff. 23 57 00 31 50 Friding 38, 45 47 40 25 40 Fridingen 01 47 50 25 40 Fridland 1, 2, 13, 16, 23 50 50 31 50 Fridmansdorff 22, 34 50 00 28 40 Fridrichrode 19 50 50 27 20 Fridrichsbyl 39 49 00 24 50 Fridrichsdorff 1, 10 52 50 33 10 Fridrichsriet 22 50 10 29 10 Fridrichswald 10, 13 53 20 32 10 Fridrichswalde Glashutte 31 50 10 33 20 Fridstein 2, 33 50 30 31 00 Frieborg 04 54 20 25 20 Friedberg 01 50 10 25 10 Friedeck 24 49 10 35 00 Friedersdorff 31 50 20 3 10 Friedingen 40 47 30 24 05 Friedland 24, 25, 30 57 00 32 00 Friedsberg 24, 25 57 40 33 00 Friedwalt 30 50 35 34 20 Frinffen 43 47 25 23 40 Friekenhausen 34 50 40 27 00 Frielshaim 45 48 35 25 30 Frienhol 01 51 20 24 30 Frienholte 07 54 05 29 30 Frienstein 2, 7 53 10 28 50 Frienwalden 1, 8, 10, 13 53 30 32 30   31, 32 49 55 33 30 Friesagh 01 47 10 32 30 Friesdorff 18 57 10 28 10   19, 20 51 45 28 10 Friesenheim 40, 42 48 10 24 10 Friers Ochten 38 53 00 23 40 Friesoite 01 53 10 23 40 Fristen 41 47 25 23 40 Frihoff 41 48 30 24 35 Frilla 16 52 05 25 50 Frimar 19 57 00 27 30 Frimburg 33 49 10 30 50 Frinderstorff. 43 47 20 23 35 Frisack 01 47 10 31 30   2, 10, 15, 12 52 30 29 30 Frisack 10, 12 52 30 29 50 Frischow 1, 2, 32, 33 49 30 32 50 Friserberg 07 53 05 28 30 Frisenborg 02 53 10 28 00 Frisenheim 41, 43, 44 48 10 24 05 Frisia Dominatus 1, 38 53 10 21 30 Frisingen 01 48 10 28 40 Frist 08 54 50 35 00 Fristak 32 49 10 34 40 Fristorp 38 49 00 22 40 Fritsdorf 16 57 35 28 20 Frittelhausen 36 50 35 27 00 Fritzeler 01 57 00 25 50 Fritzow 08 54 00 32 00 Fro 41, 43 47 50 23 35 Frobeck 19 50 40 28 00 Frobeln 36 57 45 32 50 Frobelwitz 28 51 00 33 50 Frodstet 19, 36 50 55 27 20 Froheide 08 53 40 32 30
Frolach fl. 41 48 50 24 40 Froleben 2, 15 52 10 28 10 Froliche Wider Kunist 19, 22 50 50 28 30 Fromburg 39 59 40 23 30 Ober Mittel Frome 22 50 50 29 40 Fromes walde 22 51 10 29 50 Frommern 45 47 55 25 30 Fromontille 41 48 25 23 15 Fromsdorf 22 50 50 29 30 Fromstet 16, 19, 20 57 20 28 00 Fronberg 19 50 45 27 40 Frondettan 41 47 20 24 25 Frondorff. 15, 19 51 10 28 00 Fronleyten 01 47 20 33 00 Fronsberg 01 47 20 33 30 Fronstet 19 57 00 27 40 Fronzell 43 47 50 23 35 Froschen 27 57 35 33 30 Froschwiler 40, 41, 42 48 45 24 20 Frose 16 51 45 28 10 Frostwihz 41, 43 47 55 23 55 Frosz 14 57 45 28 50 Frovibfeld 38 47 00 25 20 Froville 38 48 20 22 40 Frouwenfeld 07 47 10 25 30 Frouzell 41 47 55 23 35 Fre 38 49 20 21 20 Fruart 38 48 40 22 20 Frue 38 50 00 21 40 Frundtstein 41, 43 47 40 23 30 Frutelbach 41, 43 48 05 23 40 Frutingen 01 46 10 24 00 Fruwend 08 53 30 32 00 Frydaw 01 46 40 33 50 Frydburg 01 46 20 34 10 Frystat 01 49 40 35 30 Frytnag 33 48 50 32 30 Ferst 41, 42 48 35 23 50 Fuchsheim 22 50 50 29 30 Fuchslock Sylva 19 51 20 27 20 Fuchsmeng 41, 43 47 25 23 30 Fuchsmuhl 29 57 25 33 05 Fuchswinckel 30 50 25 34 00 Fuechstat 34, 36 50 00 26 50 Fues fl. 15 52 40 26 20 Fuesbrun 33 48 30 33 00 Fuessen 01 47 20 27 40 Fuge 23 57 10 31 20 Fuhre fl. 08 52 50 31 30 Fuhrtverck 16 57 55 28 20 Fuirt 39 48 30 23 20 Fulbach 34 58 00 25 50 Fuld Abbetia 1, 34 50 30 26 20 Fuld fl. 34 50 40 26 20 Fulen 21, 22 50 50 29 30 Fulgris 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Fulle 4, 6 53 00 26 20 Fullersroda 19 57 80 28 10 Fullink 38 51 20 24 30 Fulneck 1, 24, 32 49 40 34 50 Fulsbuttel 05 53 20 25 10 Fulstein 24, 32 50 10 34 30 Fultnbach 01 48 20 27 20 Fumay 1, 38 50 00 20 40 Funa fl. 14, 20 51 25 28 40 Funs Oshen 10 57 50 31 00 Fuosach 38 47 00 26 00 Furchhusen 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Furenholt 15 52 10 25 20 Furholtz 33 48 30 30 50 Furne 22 57 20 29 50 Furst 45 48 10 25 50 Aufder Furst 42, 43 48 10 23 40 Furstefeld 08 52 40 32 00 Furstein 15 57 10 26 40 Furstenow 1, 8, 10 53 10 33 30   25, 26 57 00 33 40   34, 38, 39 49 30 25 30 Furstenberg 1, 10, 12 51 50 31 30   24, 25, 39, 45 52 10 31 30 Furstenburg 15 57 40 25 20 Furstenec 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 30 Furstendfeld 01 48 00 28 10 Furstenhagen 07 53 15 30 50   10, 12 53 10 30 20 Furstenock 34 50 40 26 40 Furstenstein 24, 25, 33 57 00 33 00 Fursten∣walde 10, 12, 13 52 00 31 30 Fursterberga 19 50 50 27 20 Furstermuntz 01 46 30 27 30 Furt 1, 22, 33, 34 49 10 29 50 Furtall 34, 36 50 10 26 50 Furtelbach 42 58 05 23 40 Furth 39 49 30 25 10 Fuse 17 52 35 27 00 Fuse fl. 4, 6, 16, 17 52 20 27 00 Fuserbach 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 25 Fusgeinheim 39 49 20 24 40 Fusswiller 41, 43 47 25 23 45 Fyeborch 2, 15 52 20 28 30 Fyfack 10, 11 52 50 28 50 G.   GAaren 22 50 50 29 20 Gab. 22 57 10 29 20 Gabel 1, 2, 33 50 40 30 40   26, 27 57 50 33 30 New Gabel 26 57 40 32 40 Gabelentz 22 50 40 29 20 Gabellen 24, 32 49 50 33 30 Gaberitz 22 50 40 30 00 Gaberndorsf 19 57 05 28 00 Gabitz 28 51 05 34 10 Gabow 10, 13 52 30 31 30 Gacza alias Ponisch∣wasser 26 57 50 33 30 Gadebusch 2, 4, 7 53 40 27 50 Gadens 07 53 15 28 50 Gadenstedde 4, 16, 17 52 20 27 00 Gadeshain 05 53 45 25 20 Gadow 7, 10, 12 52 50 29 40 Gaern 07 53 40 29 00 Gaertz 07 53 10 29 50 Gros Klein Ga∣fron 26, 27 51 35 33 10 Gagerns 09 54 35 31 10 Gaggenaw 40 48 34 24 45 Gaiasbach 36 50 00 26 50 Gaildorff 1, 34, 45 49 00 26 30 Gailesay 34 49 30 26 40 Gailhausen 34 50 00 25 40 Gailsdorff 19 50 45 27 50 Gairg 23 57 15 31 49 Gaisthacht 3, 4, 6 53 50 27 10 Gaisthachter Mons 03 53 50 27 10 Gaitsch 22 57 10 29 40 Galasbach 34 50 00 26 50 Galb 41 58 30 24 35 Galbitz 28 57 25 34 55 Galdigow 11 52 35 28 40 Galebeke 09 54 20 31 00 Galem 16 57 35 26 20 Galenbke 7, 8 53 40 30 20 Galesheim 39 49 50 24 10 Galgenberg 24, 25, 26, 29 57 20 33 00 Galgenwart 35 50 00 24 55 Galheinm 33 48 10 31 00 S. Gall 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Galleberg 43 47 35 23 45 Gallenaw 30 50 30 34 00 Gallentin 2, 7, 10 53 40 28 10 Gallenweiler 40 47 50 24 10 Gallfore 18 52 05 28 00 Gallhofen 34 49 30 26 50 Galln 4, 7, 21 54 00 27 40 Galowitz 28 51 00 34 10 Galschwitz 26 51 35 33 00 Galtz 38 46 40 23 00 Nye Ade Gamb 03 53 45 27 00 Gamberg 34 49 40 26 10 Z. Gamberg 37 49 40 26 05 Gambsthurst 40 48 30 24 30 Gamen 19 50 30 28 30 Gamersleben 2, 14, 15 52 10 27 50 Gamesen 4, 6, 16 52 40 27 20 Gamitz 02 57 10 26 20 Gamling 41, 43 47 55 24 05 Gamlthausen 45 48 25 26 20 Nie Olde Gamme 04 54 00 26 40 Gammelin 2, 7, 10 53 30 27 50 Gammerdyck 03 53 45 27 00 Gamor 4, 16 52 40 26 20 Gamssen 40 48 30 24 20 Gamsgrun 22 50 20 29 20 Gamsheim 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 20 Gamshusen 42, 45 48 30 24 30 Gamshusenwalt 44 48 25 24 25 Gamstet 19 50 55 27 40 Gamyny 01 47 40 31 30 Gandelfingen 01 48 20 27 00 Gandelu 01 49 00 19 10 Kl. Gander 10, 13 52 10 32 30 Gandersche 05 53 05 25 00 Gandersum 15, 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Gandey 28 57 05 34 05 Gondow 4, 10, 11 53 20 29 00 Gang 33 49 50 32 00 Gangelt 38 50 40 22 00 Gangler 22 50 50 28 50 Ganlitz 10, 13 52 50 30 40 Gangolff. 19 51 15 27 40 Gansaar 26, 27 57 40 33 30 Gansenhausen 40 47 35 24 15 Ganskevitz 09 54 40 31 00 Gansmul 22 50 50 28 40 Gantzow 7, 8 53 15 29 20 Garaw 09 54 30 31 20 Garbeke 02 54 10 27 00 Garben 27 57 25 33 40 Garberow 08 54 50 35 00 Garbow 11 53 15 28 10 Garburg 39, 41, 42 48 35 23 45 Garchlin 08 53 40 32 30 Garde 8, 38 48 20 23 00 La Garde lacus 1, 41 48 40 23 00 Gardeleben 1, 2, 10 52 40 28 30   11, 14, 15 52 15 28 30 Garden 1, 8 54 20 35 00 Gardense 01 53 30 36 50 Nider Gardesel. 16 57 20 26 00 Garest 10, 12, 13 52 20 32 00 Gargel 16 52 20 28 00 Garintz 07 53 20 28 50 Garleben 6, 16, 18 52 25 38 00 Garlebische Heyde 06 52 35 28 00   10, 11, 14 52 10 28 40 Garlin 2, 4, 7, 10, 11 53 10 28 20 Garlitz 07 53 15 28 00   10, 12 52 10 29 40 Garmin 08 54 00 30 30 Garmissen 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Garnbach 15, 20 51 20 28 20 Der Garnberg 15 52 10 29 20 Garnholsum 16, 17 52 05 20 50 Garnholt 05 53 14 24 30 Garoesche See 08 55 00 34 30 Garpsen 16 52 15 26 30 Garrelsdorp 07 53 15 27 30 Gars 01 48 00 29 20 Garsberg 45 48 35 25 52 Garsen 4, 6, 14, 16, 20 52 24 26 50 Garsenbutel 4, 6, 16 52 40 27 20 Garsnitz 19 50 20 27 50 Garsten 15 53 00 26 40 Grossen Gartach 39, 45 49 00 25 40 Klein Gartach 39, 45 49 00 25 30 Necker Gar∣tach 34, 45 49 00 25 40 Gartow 06 52 50 28 00   6, 10, 11, 12, 13 52 20 31 20 De Gartow Sylva 06 52 50 27 50 Garteroda 19 57 25 27 10 Gartz 1, 2, 4, 7, 8 53 10 31 50   9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 21 52 10 29 50 Old Gartze 2, 4, 6 53 30 27 20 Gartzgar 08 54 50 35 00 Garves 09 54 25 31 40 Garwel 22 50 20 29 10 Gasbach 36 49 55 27 50 Gassen 38 45 20 24 00 Gassendorsf 29 57 15 33 05 Gastorp. 01 57 30 23 30 Gateroda 16 51 20 27 30 Gatersleben 14, 16 57 30 20 10 Gaterstet 15, 19, 20 57 30 28 20 Gatow 10, 12, 13 53 00 31 20 Gatz 22 57 10 29 10 Gaurs 30 50 30 34 10 Gauspach 40 48 30 24 45 Gaussig 22, 23 57 00 31 10 Gauteck 22 57 20 29 20 Gdausow. 32 48 50 33 00 Gearnbach 16, 19 57 20 28 20 Geba Mons 36 50 30 27 00 Gebelhusen 16, 17 57 35 28 10 Gebelsheim 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 05 Ober Unter Gebern 16 57 25 27 40 Gebersdorff 19, 25, 31 50 30 28 10 Gebersen 16 52 30 36 30 Gebershaim 45 48 35 25 40 Geberswiler 41, 43 47 50 23 50 Gebesche 19 57 10 27 40 Gebeser 19 57 20 28 40 Gebeste 20 51 20 28 40 Gebrucken 40 48 45 25 00 Gebshausen 15 57 30 27 00 Gebstet 19 51 10 28 20 Gebwiler 3, 41, 43 47 45 23 40 Geckling 41, 42 49 00 24 30 Gederitz 19 57 10 28 20 Gedern 34 50 30 25 50 Geele 01 57 10 21 00 Geemen 01 57 50 23 00 Geeren 22 57 00 29 50 Geersberg 01 50 50 19 50 Geersdorff 22 50 50 29 40 S. Geertruyden∣berg 1, 38 51 40 20 50 Gees 01 52 50 22 50 Geestendorff. 05 53 30 25 00 Gefel 34 50 30 28 40   41, 42, 43 48 20 23 35 Gefesleben 16 52 00 27 40 Gefrad 41 47 30 23 30 Gefres 22, 34 50 10 28 40 Gegna 41, 43 47 30 23 30 Das Gehaus 19 50 40 26 50 Gehegemuhl 27, 29 57 30 33 10 Gr. Kl. Gehen 19 57 15 28 40 Gehenrodt 34, 36 50 10 26 40 Gehersdorff 34 48 50 28 00 Gehosen 16, 20 57 20 28 20 Gehren 25 57 50 32 00 Gehrstet 19 57 05 27 30 Gehulfenberg 15 57 20 26 40 Gelgeleben 19 50 55 27 50 Geigernest 41, 43 47 45 24 20 Geigernhoff. 41, 42 48 50 24 25 Geilsdorff 22 50 20 29 10 Gein 4, 10, 22 53 20 28 20 Geinsheim 38, 39 40 00 24 40 Klein Unter Geirs∣bergsleben 19 57 00 27 50 Greirsberg 01 50 30 26 40 Geisbach 26, 27 57 45 33 20   40, 44 48 25 24 30 Geisberg 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Geischen 26, 27 57 45 33 30 Geischer 38 51 40 23 00 Geisdorsf 24 57 10 32 00 Geise 19 50 35 26 40   36 50 40 26 40 Geisell 34 50 30 26 10 Geisel fl. 19, 20, 21 57 20 28 50 Geiselwind 34 49 40 27 10 Geisen 01 50 30 26 00
Geiserhofen 41, 42 48 45 24 25 Geisfelt 36 50 30 26 40 Geishorbach 41, 42, 48 48 55 24 25 Geishuss 41, 43 47 40 23 30 Geisla 01 50 30 26 40 Geislingh. 01 48 20 26 30 Geismar Ampt Geismar 16 51 20 26 20 Geispitz 43 47 30 23 50 Geispitzen 41, 42, 43 48 20 24 05   44 48 15 24 15 Geisien 22 50 50 28 50 Geissendorff 27 57 30 33 25 Geissing 45 48 45 25 40 Geiswiler 41, 42 48 35 24 00 Geiten 22 57 00 29 40 Geitcrbach 40 48 30 24 15 Geiterheim 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 10 Geladbeck 01 51 10 22 40 Geldendorff 25, 27, 28 57 30 33 55 Geldenhausen 01 50 10 25 40 Gelder 01 57 30 22 10 Geldria 1, 38 52 10 21 40 Gelckirchn 38 50 40 22 20 Gelichen 15 57 20 26 20 Gelitz 19, 22 50 30 28 10     50 40 28 00 Kl. Gelitz 19 50 40 28 00 Gellensdorff 4, 10, 11 53 20 29 00 Gellersdorff 33 48 30 33 10 Gellersen 16, 17 51 55 26 10 Gellin 10, 12 52 50 30 40 Gellingen 16, 19, 20 51 20 28 00 Gellssdorff 10, 12, 21 51 30 30 30 Gelmerbach 39, 45 59 00 25 50 Gelmeroda 19 51 00 28 10 Gelms fl. 39 48 40 25 30 Gelre. 38 57 20 22 20 Geltersaym 34 50 00 26 50 Geluckstadt 1, 2, 3 54 10 25 40 Gelwen 22 50 40 28 30 Gembicz 01 52 20 35 40 Gemblours 1, 38 50 30 20 40 Gemcke 16 52 30 27 40 Gemen 38 51 40 23 00 Gemer 38, 41, 43 48 00 23 55 Gemerich 1, 39 57 10 28 50 Gemekow 07 53 55 30 20 Gemerich 14 57 10 29 00 Gemmingen 1, 39, 45 49 00 25 30 Gemnerichz 20 57 40 28 50 Gemrickhen 39, 45 48 50 25 40 Gemunn 1, 34, 36 48 50 26 40   3, 7, 38, 39 40 00 23 20 Gemunnen 39 49 50 23 30 G. Gena 22 57 20 28 30 Genantstein 22 57 00 29 30 Genape 38 50 20 20 20 Gendersdorff 19 50 45 28 10 Genitz 22 50 50 28 30 Geneldenhausen 15 57 30 27 00 Genemuyde 01 52 40 21 50 Genershagen 17 52 20 27 10 Geneve 1, 38 45 40 22 00 Geneverzee 38 45 40 22 40 Genevi 29 54 40 31 20 Gengenbach 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45 48 15 24 30 Alt Gengen∣bach 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 25 Genghing 45 48 05 25 50 Genival 38 50 40 20 20 Geniumen 38 49 40 23 20 Genlin 02 52 20 28 40 Gennep 1, 38 47 40 22 00 Genreb 40 47 40 24 05 Genrshagen 16 52 05 27 10 Genschowitz 32 49 00 33 20 Genschwitz 28 57 00 34 20 Genseford 14 57 30 28 30   18 57 30 28 20 Genshagen 10, 12 57 50 30 50 Gensig 22 51 00 28 30 Gensslein 33 50 00 31 30 Gensstein 02 50 00 30 20 Gent. 01 51 00 19 40 Gente 21 51 20 30 00 Genterrberg 38, 39, 41 48 40 24 00 Gentin 1, 10, 11, 14, 15 52 30 29 20 Gentzin 4, 10, 11 52 40 28 20 Im Gentzingen 39 49 40 24 10 Gentzkow 07 53 40 30 40 S. Georg 1, 2, 33 50 20 30 00 Georgenberg 24, 25 51 00 33 00 S. Georgenberg 24 50 30 35 00 Georgengasse 27 51 30 33 25 Georgenzzel 36 50 40 27 00 Georgeswalde 23 57 05 31 30 Georgsdorff 30 50 20 34 00 S. Georwata 01 46 10 35 40 Gephorn 16 52 15 26 30 Geppersdorff 30 50 45 34 30 Gepping 38, 45 48 20 26 00 S. Ger 41, 42 48 35 23 50 Gera 1, 19, 22, 36 50 40 27 40 Gera fl. 19 51 05 27 40 Geranvile 38 49 20 21 40 Gerartsdorff. 23 51 35 31 50 Gerastetn. 45 48 30 26 40 Gerau 1, 39 49 50 24 50 Gerazur 19, 36 50 40 27 40 Gerbe 22 51 00 28 50 Gerbepaul 41, 43 47 55 23 25 Gerbeviller 01 48 20 22 50 Gerbitz 21 57 10 28 40 Gerbitzhausen 19 50 45 27 50 Gerbsted 14, 15, 18, 19, 21 51 15 28 30 Gerchdorff. 10, 11 52 10 28 00 Gerdhsheim 37 49 40 26 15 Gerckbwitz 21 57 05 28 30 Gerckhwicz 20 57 35 28 40 Gerden 16 52 05 26 30 Gerdow fl. 4, 6 53 20 27 20 Gerdshagen 07 53 45 29 10 Gerechdorff. 14 52 15 28 00 Gerege 22 57 00 28 40 Gerelin 14 52 20 29 20 Geren 2, 4, 7 93 40 27 20 Ampt Geren 19 50 40 27 50 Gerendorff 16 52 20 27 50 Gerewyz 19 51 40 28 40 Gensenstule 19 51 45 28 20 Gergshaim 34 49 40 26 30 Gerhortsgereut 36 50 25 27 30 Geringswalt 02 51 00 29 00 Gerisdorf 10, 12 52 30 31 10 Gerisow 38 46 20 25 00 Gerit 41, 43 47 40 23 25 Geritzk 10 57 50 31 40 Gerlen 36 50 30 27 30 Gerling 45 48 35 25 40 Gerlswald 10, 12 52 50 30 40 Gerltzofen 01 49 50 17 10 S. Germ 41, 42 48 50 24 25 S. Germain 01 45 50 19 10   21 48 50 18 00 S. German 41, 43 48 00 23 50 Germar 19 57 15 27 10 Germerode 19 51 10 26 30 Germersen 38, 45 49 00 24 40 Germersheim 39, 40, 41 49 00 24 50 Germsleben 6, 14, 18 51 35 28 20 L. Germsleben 14, 18 57 40 28 30 Gerndorff. 19, 20 57 25 28 30 Gr. Gernersleben 14 57 55 28 20 Gernitz 1, 22 57 40 29 20 G. K. Gernitz 22 57 10 29 10 Gernow 07 53 45 28 50 Gernrode 15, 16, 18, 19, 20 51 50 27 40 Gernrode Stift 20 57 45 27 50 Gernschwende 20 57 40 28 00 Geroda 15, 16 51 30 27 00 Gerolczeck 1, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45 48 10 24 30 Geroltsaw 40 48 35 24 40 Geroltzgrun 22, 34 50 20 28 20   34 50 20 28 30 Geroltzheim 34 49 30 26 20 E. l. Geroltzheim 37 49 35 26 10 Geroltzhoven 34, 36 49 50 27 10 Gerrendorff 22 50 40 28 20 Gerreshem 38 57 00 23 00 Gerrestein 38 50 00 22 40 Gersbach 1, 40, 41, 45 48 35 24 45 Gersdorff 6, 15, 16 57 45 28 00   20, 21, 22, 31 57 55 28 00   39, 41, 42 48 40 24 20 Gersen 22 50 40 29 30 Gersfelt 34 50 30 26 40 Gersheim 39 49 40 24 50 Gersleben 14, 20 57 25 28 30 Gersseiffen 25 57 00 32 20 Gersslow. 08 53 00 33 00 Gersten 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 10 Gerstenberg 22 51 00 29 20 Gerstetten 37 49 30 26 00 Gert 22 50 10 29 20 S. Gert 41, 42 48 55 24 20 Gerteviller 38 48 00 22 40 Gerthausen 36 50 30 27 00 Gertring 45 48 25 25 30 Gertwiler 41, 42, 44 48 15 23 55 S. Gertzberg alias Averkirchen 15 52 20 25 40 Gertzen 16, 17 57 50 26 30 Gertzenhan 22 50 50 29 50 Gertzk 21 57 15 28 50 Gewin 08 54 00 33 00 Gerwisk 14 57 55 28 50 Gerwitz 2, 15 52 20 28 20 Der Gesulsen See 21 57 00 28 20 Gesaw fl. 19 50 35 28 00 Geschwen 19, 36 50 45 27 40 Geschwend 19 50 30 28 20 K. Geschwend 19 50 35 28 30 Gesdorf 2, 15 57 50 29 00 Hohen Gesdorf 15 57 47 27 50 Gesenck 24 50 00 33 30 Gesenckgebierg B. Gesenick 32 49 50 33 40 Gesendorff 07 53 45 28 40 Gesenitz 33 49 50 30 20 Geser 22, 34 49 40 28 30 Altn Geser 22 50 30 28 30 Geserick 14, 21 57 40 29 30 Gesesse 30 50 25 34 00 Gester 02 54 10 26 00 Gesnat 43 47 30 23 30 Gesnitz 22 50 50 29 30 Gesseladorff 19 50 30 28 10 Gessen 21 57 15 30 00 Gessendorff 10, 12 57 50 31 40 Gest 44 48 25 24 00 Gr. Kl Gest 41, 42 48 30 24 00   41, 42 48 30 23 55 Gestat 33 50 20 29 50 Geste 05 53 25 25 40 Geste fl. 05 53 35 25 10 Gestel 38 57 40 21 40 Gestemule 05 53 25 25 30 Gestemunde 03 53 50 25 30 Gestengen 01 55 10 26 30 Gester 03 53 50 25 30 Gestin 01 53 50 33 00 Gr. Gestin 08 54 10 33 00 Gestinum 38 46 00 25 00 Gestrzoy 02 50 30 30 30   33 50 30 31 20 Getel 4, 16 52 20 24 40 Getterleben 15 52 00 28 00 Gevensheim 38 49 40 24 40 Gevering 15 52 20 27 00 Geversdorp 2, 3, 5 53 45 25 00 Gevershaghe 15 52 20 57 00 Gevesdorf 08 53 10 32 00 Geugenbach 01 48 10 24 30 Geuse 20 57 25 28 50 Geusen 19 51 25 28 50 Geustneck 33 48 20 39 10 Geuwne 41, 43 47 35 23 30 Gewenitz 14 52 15 28 30 S. Gewer 39 50 00 23 50 Gewershausen 39 50 00 23 50 Gewicz 1, 32 49 30 33 30 Gewitsch 33 49 30 33 30 Gewr 01 47 50 35 20 Geyen B. Kygow 32 48 50 34 20   33 49 00 33 50 Geyersberg 29 51 20 32 55 Geyersdorff 26 57 50 33 10 Geyerswalda 23 57 35 31 00 Geyhausn 45 48 15 26 30 Geynsheim 39 49 10 24 40 Geysdorff 23, 25 57 10 32 10 Geysing 38, 45 48 40 25 00 Geysling 45 47 55 25 20 Geyslingen 45 48 25 26 40 Gex 01 46 00 22 20 Ghalm 14 52 15 29 20 S. Ghausen 38 50 00 23 40 Gheffel 22 50 20 29 00 Gheinhoven 38, 39 49 00 24 40 Gerstinge 19 50 55 26 40 S. Ghiliain 01 50 30 19 50 Ghistede 04 52 20 25 00 Ghlawa fl. 32 49 00 33 30 Ghver 38 52 20 22 40 Ghyltum 15 54 00 26 00 Gialenau 31 50 15 33 00 Gibbeldehausen 19 57 45 26 40 Gibbin 09 54 25 31 40 Gibichenstein 18, 20 57 05 29 00 Gibichenstet 21 57 05 28 50 Gisch 34, 36 49 50 27 50 Giebe B. Giwawa 24 49 30 34 00   32 49 30 34 00 Gien 01 47 30 18 20   11 52 40 28 00 Giengen 1, 45 48 30 27 00 Gieren 23, 25 51 00 32 20 Gierlach 27 57 45 33 40 Giersbach 16, 19 57 30 28 00 Giersdorff 25 52 00 32 00 Alt New Giersdorff 31 50 10 14 00 Giertzig 24 52 20 32 00   25, 26 57 30 32 00 Giesdorff 23 57 15 31 50 Giesmansdorff 26 57 40 32 40 Giesse 04 53 40 25 00 Giessen 1, 22, 34, 38 50 30 25 10 Gr. Lutk Giesten 16 52 05 26 40 Gieterstain 45 48 15 26 00 Gietset 22 50 50 29 00 Gishorn 4, 6, 16, 18 52 40 27 20 Gigantum Montes 33 50 40 32 10 Gigelsheim 35 49 55 25 10 Gildesen 17 57 35 26 50 Gilemnitz 33 50 30 32 30 S. Gilg 41, 43 47 40 24 10 Giling 38, 39, 45 48 40 25 20 Gillersdorff. 19 50 40 27 50 Gilm 09 54 45 31 10 Gilounst 2, 33 49 50 30 10 Gilow 7, 10 53 40 29 50   28 50 50 34 15 Gilten 4, 6 53 00 26 00 Giltling 45 48 25 25 20 Giltum 16 52 30 26 20 Giltw 41, 43 47 35 23 35 Gimbert 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Gimborn 38 50 40 23 40 Gimelen 38 52 00 23 40 Gimmel 25, 26, 27 57 35 33 30 Gimmeldingen 39 49 10 24 30 Gimsburg 40 48 20 24 25
Gimbert 41 48 30 24 05 Gincka 33 50 20 30 00 Gindlbach 45 48 50 25 30 Gineze 33 49 30 31 06 S. Gingaw 38 45 40 23 00 S. Ginge 01 46 00 33 20 Gingersheim 43 47 40 23 45 Ginheim 35 50 00 24 55 Gingst 09 54 35 31 00 Ginbuch 41, 43 47 50 23 40 Ginsburg 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 20 Ginsenheim 39 49 50 24 30 Ginsheim 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Ginsperg 41, 42 48 25 23 50 Ginzum 38, 39 49 40 24 40 Giailtzen 22 57 00 29 30 S. Glovani Batiste 01 45 20 26 20 Giraw. 30 50 40 34 10 Girbaden 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 50 Girlachsdorff 25 57 00 33 00 Girsberg 41, 43 47 50 23 50 Girsdorff. 25, 29, 30 57 10 31 40 Hoben Girsdorff 30 50 40 34 20 Girsene 18 57 10 28 40 Girsene 18 57 10 28 40 Gisda 01 50 10 32 20 Gisdorf 28 57 15 34 55 Gisehm 33 50 20 32 20 Gisel fl. 44 48 25 24 15 G. Lat. Gisen 17 52 25 26 40 Gisenberg 10, 13 52 40 32 10 Gisendorf 09 54 25 31 00 Gisenheim 40 48 40 24 30 Gisenum 41, 42 48 40 24 30 Gishern 15 52 50 27 20 Gisbel 23, 31 57 95 32 20 G. K. Giskow 10, 11 52 30 27 50 Gisransdorff 25 51 40 32 40 Gispereda 19 50 55 27 20 Gissm 4, 16 52 20 27 40 Gissen 21 51 15 30 20 L Gissingen 37 49 35 26 05 Gistebing 33 49 20 31 30 Gisten 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Gisrp 33 50 20 31 10 Gisterwitz 10 52 30 31 40 Girtel 19 57 45 27 00 Gittelde 15 57 50 27 00 Gitter 4, 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Gitzera seu Iser fl. 24 50 30 32 00 Givitz 07 53 35 30 00 Gizera fl. 2, 33 50 40 31 10 Glacensis Comita∣tus 24 50 10 33 00 Glackisch 28 57 10 34 15 Gladebach 39 50 00 24 10 Gladigow 4, 10, 14 52 30 28 20 Gladow 14 52 05 29 10 Glambeke 7, 9 53 05 29 10 Glan 38 52 00 24 20 Glan fl. 38, 39 49 20 23 40 Glaneck 01 46 50 31 10 Glaris 01 46 30 25 30 Glartt 45 49 00 25 30 Glase 07 53 45 29 30 Glasendorf 30 50 35 34 10 Glasersdorff 25, 26, 31 57 30 32 00 Mittel Nider Ober Glasersdorff 26, 29 57 25 33 00 Klein Glasersdorf 26 57 35 32 40 Glasewaffer 31 50 15 33 20 Glasm 2, 7, 10 53 20 27 50 Glasitz 22 57 00 29 00 Glashutte 2, 14, 19 50 50 29 40   22, 31, 33 50 00 34 00   40, 41, 42, 45 48 45 24 10 Glasosen 37 49 45 26 00 Glasow 2, 7 54 20 27 10   10, 13 52 00 30 50 Glassow 10, 12, 13 53 10 31 20 Glatt. 38, 45 48 00 25 00 Glatt fl. 38, 45 47 00 25 00 Glatz 1, 24, 31, 33 50 20 33 30 Glaubigershoff 35 50 00 25 00 Glaucha 22, 33 50 40 29 20 Glauche 26 52 05 32 30 Glauschke 28 57 20 35 00 Glayt 24 48 15 26 50 Glazow 08 53 20 31 30 Glebitz 08 54 00 30 00   10, 13, 21 52 30 31 50 Gledinck 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Gleibwitz 24 50 20 35 40 Gleich 01 45 30 32 10 Gleichberg 36 50 20 27 20 Gleichen 1, 19, 36 50 50 27 40 Gleichen Comi∣tatus 19 50 55 27 30 Gleichenstein 15 57 10 26 40 Gleima 19 50 30 28 30 Glein 15 52 10 26 20 Gleina 19, 20 57 20 28 40 Gleinaw 27 57 25 33 25 Gleinig 26, 27 57 45 33 20 Gleinitz 26 51 40 32 50 Gleisberg 19 57 00 28 30 Gleisberg Comi∣mitatus antiquus 19 50 55 28 30 Gleissen 25 52 30 31 40 Glensgey 45 48 30 25 40 Glendorff 16 51 20 27 40 Glenia 22 57 00 28 40 Glesis 09 54 20 31 10 Glettweng 45 48 15 27 20 Gleusen 11, 21 53 05 28 40 Gleusin 04 53 20 29 00 Gleye 10 53 00 28 20 L. Gleye 16 52 00 27 10 Glieperg 34 50 30 25 10 Glin 7, 8 53 45 30 50 Glinde 2, 3, 4 53 50 26 50 Glincke 07 53 15 30 20 Glinick 10, 12, 14 52 10 30 20 Glinland 10, 12 52 20 30 00 Glinland 10, 12 52 20 30 00 Glintze 25, 26 52 00 33 20 Glisse 15 52 30 25 20 Glisel 41, 42 48 55 24 30 Gobitschen 26, 27 57 45 33 10 Glockels∣berg 41, 42, 44, 44 48 20 24 05 Glockenbach fl. 20 57 45 28 10 Glocknicz 01 47 30 33 40 Glode 09 54 40 31 00 Glosenaw 28 50 50 35 05   01 57 30 33 00 Glogaw 1, 24, 25, 26 57 40 33 00 Klein Glogard. 01 50 10 34 50 Glogowienois Cir∣cults Glogawisches Weichbild 26 52 00 32 50 Glogoviensis Duca∣tus 24, 25 52 00 32 00 Gloysen 26 53 10 32 20 Glembitz 30 50 30 34 00 Glempenaw 30 50 30 34 20 Gloschla 28 57 15 33 45 Glosle 08 54 50 35 00 Glotberg 38, 39 49 40 25 20 Glotkow 08 54 00 32 30 Glotto 14 51 40 28 40 Gloyen 2, 15 52 10 28 30 Gloyne 14 57 55 29 20 Gluchow 25 52 20 33 20 Gluckstadt 4, 5 54 20 25 40 Gluskow 10, 13 53 40 32 50 Gmindt 34 49 00 27 50 Gmund 33, 45 48 40 31 50 Gmunndt. 45 48 40 26 20 Gnadenberg 34 49 20 28 20 Gneist 21 47 15 29 30 Gnemar. 07 53 55 20 00 Gnerwitz 28 50 55 34 00 Gnesna 01 52 20 35 10 Gnewestorp 07 53 20 29 20 Gnewikow 07 53 55 30 20 Gr. Wewin 08 55 00 35 30 Gnewitzow. 07 54 05 29 40 Gnichwitz 25, 28 57 00 33 40 Gniska 28 57 15 33 55 Gnisou 02 54 10 27 10 Gniunt 38 48 40 26 20 Gnoien 1, 7, 8 54 00 29 50 Gnorstat 34 49 30 26 50 Gobel 14, 28 57 45 29 00 Gobelin 23 51 40 31 40 Goch. 1, 38 57 40 22 10 Gochsain 34, 36 50 00 27 00 Gochten 38 49 00 25 40 Gochtzen 49, 45 49 10 25 50 Gochtzheim 39 48 50 25 10 Gockswil 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 00 Goddenitz 10, 14 57 30 29 10 Gode 22, 23 51 10 31 10 Godeni 05 53 25 24 20 Goneritz 22 51 10 29 40 Godersdorf 08 53 00 32 00 Godersleben 18 57 25 28 00 Godsing 33 48 30 32 10 Godin 38 50 20 20 40 Goding B. Ho∣doning 01 48 50 34 30   32, 33 48 50 24 30 Godow 07 53 25 29 50 Godtberg 01 53 50 29 20 Godtbrech 08 53 00 33 00 Goede 02 51 00 30 10 Goeden 07 53 40 30 10 Goedewicz 19, 20 51 40 28 50 Die Alte Newe Goele 20 57 15 28 50 Goelen 07 53 10 28 20 Goelwitz 23 57 15 31 40 Goerden 07 53 35 28 30 Goeree 1, 38 57 40 19 40 Goergenthal 36 50 50 27 30 Goeritz 20 57 25 28 40 Goerke 08 53 50 32 00 Goern 2, 7, 9, 10, 11 53 10 27 50 Goersdorff 07 53 50 28 00 Goervliet 01 51 50 20 10 Goes 1, 38 51 30 19 50 Goesgen 38 47 00 24 20 Goetzenhain 35 49 55 25 05 Goeze Elve 03 53 45 26 40 Gofssen 16 57 35 26 20 Gogelow 2, 7 53 40 28 30 Goenroda 18 51 35 27 10 Hohen Goh∣ren 10, 11, 14 52 20 29 00 Goiet 01 50 30 22 10 Goila fl. 10 51 40 31 00 Goiltzleben 02 57 50 29 40 Goip 21 51 15 29 20 Goistet 19 51 00 27 41 Gola 25, 28 57 00 33 40 Golaczin Germ Bertsdorff 27 51 45 33 35 Golaschin 25 57 50 33 20 Golben 22 51 00 29 00 Golbogen 2, 15, 18 52 00 28 40 Golchen 08 53 40 30 30 Gold fl. 23, 24, 25 57 10 31 50 Goldbach 19, 23 51 05 28 20   41, 43 47 40 23 30 Goldbach fl. 25, 26, 27 57 30 33 00 Goldbeck 1, 8 53 20 33 00   10, 12 52 50 29 30 Goldberg 7, 10 53 35 29 30   1, 19, 24, 25, 29 57 00 32 30 Goldbergenisis Cir∣culus 29 51 10 32 45 Goldbron 26, 27 51 30 33 06 Goldebaum 07 53 15 30 30 Goldeberg 02 53 30 28 20 Goldebow 1, 2, 7 53 30 27 40 Goldevitz 09 54 25 31 00 Goldensted 06 52 35 25 20 Goldensteen 2, 4, 7, 10, 11 53 30 28 10 Goldentin 07 53 50 29 20 Goldhuben 29 57 15 33 10 Goldmuhl 27 51 45 33 20 Goldmuhlen 29 57 35 33 05 Goldschmiden 28 51 10 24 00 Goldstein 30, 32, 35 50 00 34 20 Nie Olde Golen 10, 12 52 00 31 40 Golestein 01 50 00 34 00 Golsing 41, 43 47 35 23 40 Golfo de triste 01 45 30 31 30 Golfo di Venetia 01 45 20 30 30 Golhartzteich 19 57 20 28 50 Golitz 10, 12, 13, 22 52 20 31 50 Golla 27 51 35 33 20 Gollenberg 08 54 10 33 30 Golleniffe 07 53 20 28 00 Golling 01 47 20 30 30 Golm. 07 53 35 30 50 Golmsdorf 22 57 00 28 30 Golnitz 22 50 50 29 20 Golnow 1, 8, 10, 13 53 30 32 30 Golonisi 41, 43 47 25 23 30 Gols 23 51 15 31 40 Gols fl. 22 50 30 29 10 Golsberg 22, 23, 33 51 20 31 20 Golschaw 29 51 20 33 00 Golsdorff 29 51 20 33 00 Golsen 1, 21 51 35 30 30 Golsleben 11 52 20 38 40 Golssen 2, 26 52 00 29 40   10, 12 51 30 30 50 Golswarden 05 53 20 25 00 Goltbergshewhe 24 51 10 32 30 Golteritz 21 50 50 29 00 Goltewitz 21 51 20 29 20 Goltfriedsberg 36 50 25 27 30 Golthorn 16 52 20 26 50 Goltin 01 52 20 29 40   1, 10, 12, 14 52 00 29 40 Goltkranach 22, 34 49 50 28 50 Goltow 10, 12 52 00 30 10 Goltsch 22 50 20 29 30 Goltscha 22 57 00 28 50 Coltschir 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 15 Goltze 2, 15 52 10 29 10 Goltzell 01 48 50 30 00 Goltzen 19, 29 51 15 28 30 Goltzern 22 51 10 29 40 Goltzleben 21 57 25 30 30 Gltznow 07 53 40 30 00 Goltzow 1, 8 53 40 30 00 Golup 01 53 00 36 50 Golwicz 20 57 45 28 40 Golwitz 07 53 55 28 30 Gomenik 10, 12 57 40 29 50 Gomeren 15 52 10 28 40 Gomering 45 48 15 25 50 Gomikow 08 50 40 30 00 Gompersdorff 31 50 10 34 00 Gommern 18 51 45 29 00 Gommersheim 39 49 00 24 40 Goms 38 45 40 24 40 Goncka 22 50 20 30 20 Gondersleben 16, 19 51 20 27 50 Gondersum 29 40 30 24 30 Gondorf 30 50 25 34 00 Gondrecourt 01 48 20 21 40 Gonf 2, 4 54 00 27 10 Gonna 16, 19, 20 51 35 28 20 Gonna fl. 20 57 30 28 10 Gonsholt 05 53 10 24 20 Die Gonsleiterien 19 50 40 27 40 Gontersberg 42 48 55 24 00 Gontum 39 49 30 24 30 Goodens 01 53 40 24 00 Goor 01 52 10 22 50 Goorn 09 54 50 31 10 Goota 22 51 20 29 40 Goppersdorf 22 50 50 29 40 K. Goraw. 22 50 30 29 20 Ober Nider Gorb 26 51 45 32 10 Gorbleben 20 57 20 28 10 Gorbsdorf 22 50 50 28 50
Gorcka 01 50 40 33 30 Gorcum 1, 38 57 50 21 00 De Gorde Sylva 44 53 20 27 40 Gerpen 10 53 30 29 50 Gorgenthal Ampt Gorgenthal 19 50 50 27 20 Gorgslow 07 53 35 28 30 Gorick 10, 11 52 40 29 00 Gorieshagen 08 54 40 34 00 Goringen 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Goritia 01 46 00 31 00 Goritz 10, 13, 25 52 20 32 10   19, 21 51 25 28 30 Gorka 24, 27 57 40 33 30 Gorka alias Gu∣richen 33 50 50 33 40   25 57 40 33 40 Gorka alias Ausm Sande 25 52 10 33 20 Gorkes 01 53 20 22 20 Gorlitz 1, 2, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28 57 00 31 50 Gorlitzhaim 23 51 05 32 10 Die Gorlitzscheham 23 51 05 32 10 Gorlosen 2, 4, 7, 10, 11 53 10 28 00 Gorlsdorff 10, 13 52 50 31 10 Gorlzick 02 52 10 28 50 Gormar 22 57 00 29 50 Gormick 14 51 20 28 50 Gormroda 22 50 20 30 20 Gorn 4, 7, 10 53 40 28 40 Gornitz 07 52 55 28 30 Gornow 10, 13 52 50 31 50 Gornsdorff 22 50 50 30 00 Gorrendorff 19 50 40 28 20 Gorschen 26, 27 57 45 33 10 Gorscho 25 57 50 32 00 Gorsdorf 19 51 35 28 40 Gorsleben 16, 19 57 20 28 10 Gorslitz 21 57 00 29 30 Gorslow 07 53 20 28 00 Gorthow 10, 11, 14 52 20 28 40 Gortz 14 51 40 29 30 Gortzick 15 52 10 29 20 Gortzke 10, 14, 21 51 40 29 30 Gortzwaldt 22 57 00 29 50 Goschickhow 25 42 10 33 20 Gosch'utz 1, 24 51 20 34 00 Goscziniec 25, 26 52 10 33 00 Gose. 10 52 30 29 10 Gose fl. 16, 17, 18 51 50 27 20 Gosel 22 50 40 29 20 Gosenhave 09 54 30 31 10 Goserswiler 39, 41, 42 49 00 24 20 Reichstadt. Goslar 1, 15, 17 52 00 27 00   16, 18 51 50 27 50 S. Gosman 41, 43 47 30 23 30 Gosmansdorf 34, 36 50 00 27 20 Gosmanstein 34 49 40 28 20 Gossa 22 57 00 28 50 Gosse 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 40 Gossefelt 4, 10, 11 52 30 28 10 Gosselborn 19 50 45 27 50 Gossen 34 49 50 26 30 Gossendorf 28 57 05 33 40 Gossengrin 22 50 10 29 30 Gosserstet 19 51 15 28 20 Gossleben 1, 14 52 25 28 50 Gostadt 22 50 20 30 00 Goswitz 30 50 25 34 00 Gotenez 16, 19, 20 57 35 28 20 Gotenitz 09 54 25 31 00 Goresheim 41, 43 47 55 24 10 Gotha 1, 19, 36 57 00 27 30 Ampt Gotha 19 57 00 27 30 M. S. Gothardt 1, 38 46 00 24 40 Gothen 15 57 00 27 20 Gotmansford 07 53 35 28 10 Gotsberg 1, 24, 25, 33 50 50 33 00 Gotsche 01 45 40 32 50 Gotsch 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Gotstall 41, 43 47 30 23 30 Gotstorp 03 53 45 25 40 Gotta 02 57 10 30 30 Gottauter 36 50 35 27 40 Gotten 22 57 00 30 00 Gottenheim 40 47 55 24 15 Gotteritz 22 57 20 29 10 Gottingen 1, 15, 16 51 30 26 20 Gottorp 01 54 50 26 10 Gottritz 22 51 10 29 50 Deutsche Gotts∣chow 10, 11 53 00 28 40 Wendische Gotts∣chow 10 53 00 28 50 Gottsdorff 32 50 00 34 20 Gottsgab 22, 33 50 20 29 50 Gottswalt 44 48 20 24 20 Gotzan 45 48 45 24 50 Gotzaw 39, 40, 41 58 50 24 50 Gotzberg 22 50 20 29 30 Gotzdorff 20 57 30 28 40 Gotzell 45 48 40 26 30 Gotzen 34, 45 48 40 25 00 Gotzleben 2, 10, 11, 19 53 00 27 30 Gou 01 46 10 20 30 Goude 1, 38 52 00 20 40 La Goutte 41 47 35 23 10 Gowensikerhave 03 53 45 25 20 S. Gower 01 50 00 23 50 Goy 28 57 10 34 20 Goysow 10, 12 53 00 29 40 Goze 01 49 00 22 10 Grabbenitz 07 53 25 29 40 Grabbin 2, 4, 7, 10 53 30 28 20 Grabbe 10, 13, 19 52 10 32 40 Graben 10, 12 51 50 33 30   25, 26, 27 57 40 33 30   40, 45 48 55 24 50 Graben fl. 27 57 40 33 05 Grabenhagen 01 53 50 29 50 Grabig 26 57 40 32 50 Grabis 09 54 30 31 00 Grabischen. 28 57 05 34 10 Grabonitz 01 46 20 35 10 Grabow 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 24 53 40 35 00 Gr. Kl. Grabow 10 53 00 29 10 Grabow fl. 08 54 30 34 00 Grabouw 01 53 10 28 00 Grabloster 33 50 30 30 30 Grabsleben 19 50 55 27 30 Grabsten 33 50 40 31 50 Grabus 41 48 55 24 50 Gracz 01 47 10 33 20 Gradelsch 01 45 50 24 00 Gradetsch 38 45 20 23 40 Gras Gradis 26 51 35 33 00 Gradisberg 1, 25 57 10 32 40 Gradisch 33 49 30 33 50 Gradisk 01 45 50 31 00 Gradiskia 01 45 40 35 20 Gradisko 32 49 30 34 20 Graditz 24, 25, 26, 29 57 20 31 30 Polnisch Graditz 26 52 15 33 10 Graditzberg 24 57 10 32 30 Gradowitz 26 52 10 33 10 Gradwyn 01 47 10 33 10 Graefenroda 19 50 45 27 30 Graefsmolen 10 53 40 27 20 G. I. Grael 09 54 25 30 50 Grafenhayn 25 57 40 32 00 Grafenstat 40 48 20 24 10 Grafenstein 24, 25 50 50 31 30 Grafenwerd 34 49 40 29 00 Graffel 4, 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Grafhorst 14, 16 51 20 28 00 Grafftein 02 50 50 30 40 Grahoff 16, 17 57 55 27 20 Graits 01 50 40 29 00 Grambow 7, 10 53 30 28 20 Grambschutz 24, 25 51 40 33 00   26, 27 51 40 33 00 Gramekow 07 53 50 28 20 Gramelow 07 53 20 30 30 Gramendorp 07 54 05 30 00 Gramenstein 45 48 15 26 10 Gramentin 07 53 10 30 30 Gramitz 10, 12 53 10 30 10 Gramkendorp 07 53 55 30 20 Die Gramme fl. 19 57 05 28 00 Grammentz 1, 8 54 00 34 00 Grammin 09 54 25 31 30 Alt New Grampitz 28 51 15 35 00 Gr. Grampse 07 53 05 28 10 Gramsberg 38 52 40 22 40 Gramstein 33 48 20 31 20 Grana 19, 20, 21, 34 51 35 28 50 Grancy 01 47 30 20 50 Le Grand Bernard 01 45 20 23 40 Grandeshagen 08 54 00 32 30 Grand Pre 01 49 20 21 00 Grandvelles 01 47 20 22 00 Grandvillars 38 46 00 23 20 Grane 2 50 55 29 30 Graneborg 05 53 40 25 30 Gransdorp 08 53 50 30 00   34 48 50 28 50 Grangor 43 47 20 23 25 Granrigny 38 47 40 21 40 Granowitz 29 51 10 33 25 Granskevitz 09 54 40 31 00 Gransoe 02 52 50 29 20 Granson 38 46 20 22 40 Grantkieu 38 50 00 20 00 Granwill 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Grantzin 2, 7 53 20 28 30 Grantzow 7, 8, 13 53 10 30 00 Hohen Nider Old Grapow 8, 10 53 10 32 00 Grapsdorf 10, 12 52 30 30 30 Grapson 08 53 40 30 30 P. Gras 33 48 30 32 30 t'Grasbrock 03 53 50 26 30 Graschwitz 28 50 50 34 20 Graseberg 8, 10 53 40 32 00 Graselitz 22 50 10 29 30 Grasenhaused 40 48 10 24 20 Graskendorp 07 53 50 28 00 Grasschen 25 57 20 33 20 Grasse 10, 13 53 20 32 50 Grassow 10, 12, 14 53 20 31 20 Graste 16 57 55 26 50 Grastorp 1, 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Gratz 24 49 40 34 30 Gratz Hradetz 32 49 50 34 40 Gratz 26 52 20 32 20 Grauche 21 57 00 29 30 Graudentz 01 53 20 36 30 Grave 1, 38 51 40 21 40 Gravedona 01 45 40 25 50 Gravenau 1, 33 48 40 30 40 Gravenberg 45 48 20 26 00 Graveneck 1, 45 48 10 26 00 S. Gravenhage 1, 38 52 00 20 20 Gravenstat 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 10 Graventhal 01 50 30 28 10 Graversch 41, 43 47 30 23 20 Gravesande 38 52 00 20 00 Graugen 22 50 30 30 40 Graupteich 23 57 20 32 10 Grautz 09 54 25 31 30 Gravitsch 22 51 10 30 00 Gr. Kl. Graven∣sted 10, 11 52 40 27 40 Grahoff. 18 51 35 26 50 Grawinkel 19 50 45 27 30 Gray 01 47 10 21 30 Grebelbaum 40, 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 25 Grebelwitz 25 57 00 34 00 Greben 7, 19, 25 53 25 27 40 Grebendorf 19, 20 51 25 28 50 Kl. Grebedorf 20 51 20 28 50   19, 20 51 25 28 50 Grebenstein 15, 16 51 30 26 00 Ampt Grebenstein 16 51 15 26 20 Greblitz 22 51 00 29 50 Grebnicb 44 50 10 34 30 Grebsdorff 22 50 50 29 00 Greding 1, 34 49 00 28 10 Greditz 23 71 20 31 30 Greeven 01 52 00 24 00 Gresenberg 34 49 30 28 20 Grefendorf 22 50 40 28 20 Grefenhaim 19 50 50 27 30 Grefenhavn 23 51 40 31 50 Grefenrode 34 50 40 27 40 Grefenstein 23 50 55 31 50 Grefenthal 22 50 20 28 10 Grefenthal Baronia 19 50 30 28 10 Greffen 40 48 35 24 25 Greffern 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 25 Greffsmolen 2, 7 54 00 28 00 Gregersdorff 29 51 05 33 15 S. Gregoristhal 41, 43 47 50 23 40 Greibnig 29 57 15 33 20 Greiffenberg 2, 33 50 50 31 10   1, 24, 25 57 00 32 00 Greiffendorff 32 49 30 33 30 Greiffenhagen 10 52 50 31 00 Greiffenhan 20 51 40 28 20 Greiffenstein 2, 19 50 50 31 10   23, 24, 25 51 05 32 30 Greihtz 22 50 50 29 20 Greining 38, 45 48 40 25 20 Greiss 30 50 25 34 30 Greisborg 22 51 00 28 30 Greisse 25, 26 57 40 32 00 Greiswerder 2, 3 53 05 26 20 Greitt 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 50 Grendelbach 41 48 10 23 50 Grendelbruch 42, 43 48 20 23 50 Grene 16, 17, 18 51 45 26 40 Greningen 39 48 40 25 30 Geenmul 37 49 45 26 00 Gr. Grentz 07 53 55 29 10 Grenting 43 47 30 23 45 Grernitz 21 51 00 29 10 Greschina 27 51 35 33 40 Gresenhorst 07 54 05 29 40 Gresenich 38 50 40 22 20 Gresental 19 50 30 28 10 Gresentorf 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Gresgen 40 47 35 24 20 Greskew 07 53 50 28 20 Grespach 33 48 20 30 50 Gresse 07 53 20 27 30 Gressen 02 53 40 27 20   07 53 45 27 50 Gressow 07 53 25 29 30 Greswill 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 00 Gretstat 34, 36 49 50 27 00 Gretz 2, 7 53 50 28 20   22, 33 50 40 29 10 Gretzichgn 38, 45 48 20 25 40 Gretschen 22 51 00 28 40 Greudenitz 21, 22 51 05 29 40 Greve 38 52 00 23 40 Grevelinge 01 51 10 18 00 Grevenbroeck 1, 38 51 00 22 50 Greyenhoff 03 53 50 26 20 Grevenitz 04 53 00 29 00 Grevenstule 20 51 40 28 10 Greventall. 34 50 40 28 00 Grevestein 38 51 00 24 20 Nider Ober Greu∣lich 29 51 25 32 45 Greunewa'de 23 57 30 31 00 Grewenitz 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 50 Greyers 01 46 10 23 30 Greyfenhage 10, 12, 13 53 00 31 40 Greyn 01 48 10 32 00 Gribben 07 54 00 29 20 Griben 10, 11, 14 52 00 28 50 Gribstsch. 22 51 00 29 20 Gribow. 10 57 20 30 00 Gricowitz 33 49 10 33 50 Grieben 09 54 45 30 50 Griefsen 22 57 00 29 40 Grieffstet 15 51 10 20 00 Griesb. 42 48 35 24 00
Griesbach 39, 40, 41, 42 48 40 24 10 Griesen 30 50 35 34 30 Griesheim 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 griess 38, 44 48 20 24 20   40, 41, 42, 43, 45 48 20 24 25 Griesten 38, 40, 41, 43 47 45 24 05 Grieswr 0 53 20 26 20 Griet 38 51 40 22 20 Grifenh 22 50 50 29 40 Grifenof 42 48 35 24 20 Griffenberg 1, 8 53 50 32 50 Griffenhagen 1, 8 53 10 31 50 Griffenstein 41, 42 48 35 23 50 Griffsee 38 46 40 25 00 Grift 16 51 15 28 10 Gorf Grifet 16, 19 51 15 28 10 Grign 01 45 50 28 40 Grignoncourt 38 47 40 22 00 Grillenberg 2, 33 50 50 29 30   16, 19, 20 51 35 28 20 Grillenborg 22 50 50 30 30 Grim 1, 2, 15, 18, 22 51 10 28 50 Grimborch 22 57 10 29 40   1, 38 59 30 23 10 Grim'ach 19 50 45 27 00 Grimme 1, 8, 10 53 20 31 30 Grimmels hausen 36 50 25 27 20 Grimmenberg 29 51 10 32 55 Grimmenstet 19 50 55 27 20 Grimmenthal 19, 36 50 25 27 20 Grimmitz 10 52 40 31 00 Grimnitz 2, 12, 15 52 40 31 00 Grimsberg 33 48 50 33 20 Grimtal. 34 50 30 27 20 Grind 1, 38 53 30 21 20 Grinewalt 41, 43 47 25 23 35 Grinow 38 25 20 46 20 Grintlach 34 49 30 27 50 Gripswalde 1, 8, 10 54 10 30 30 Gripswaldisch Oe 10 54 10 30 50 Grira 22 50 50 28 50 Grisbach 41, 43 47 50 23 35 Grisel 26 52 15 32 10 Grisem 17 52 05 25 50 Grisem fl. 17 52 05 25 50 Griow 7, 8 53 40 30 30 Grihoff 41 48 35 24 15 Grissa 1, 25 50 50 33 00 Grisshim 35 50 00 24 55   40 48 35 24 20 Griston 09 54 10 31 10 Gristow 08 54 00 32 00 Grithuss 41, 43 47 50 24 05 Gritzn'us 40 47 50 24 10 Grizin. 25, 26 52 00 33 10 Gr. Grobe 07 53 40 29 30 Grobelwitz 28 51 50 34 25 Groben 2, 14, 22 51 20 29 20 Grobon 41, 42 43 10 24 30 Lg Grobsdorf 22 50 50 28 50 Grochwitz 14, 25, 26 51 50 32 40 Groden 3, 5 53 45 24 30 Groditzberg 29 51 15 32 50 Grodno 25 52 20 32 40 Grodzisko 1, 25 52 10 33 00 Groen 15 52 00 26 00 Groenaw 1, 15, 39 52 10 26 20 Groene 15 52 10 26 20 Groeningen 1, 12, 38 53 20 22 20   40, 41, 43 47 50 24 50 Groffenhusen 41, 43 48 05 24 15 Groie 18 52 05 27 50 Groien. 04 54 20 25 00 Groissholtz 20 51 40 28 00 Groitsch. 25 51 10 33 00 Grol 1, 38 52 00 22 40 Grol Syloula 19 51 15 27 40 Grolbach 19 57 15 27 40 Grolsdorff 12 52 50 31 00 Gromberg 34 50 30 24 40 Gronaich 28 51 10 34 15 Gronbach 39, 45 48 50 25 00 Gronberg 38 50 20 25 20 Gronde 01 52 00 26 10   16, 17 51 50 26 20     52 05 26 10 Grondel 45 48 20 25 00 Das Grone Meyfeldt 05 48 20 25 20 Gronenberg 10, 12, 18 52 40 30 20 Groninga Domi∣narus 38 53 20 22 00 Groningen 10, 19 57 50 29 30 Grontandt 2, 33 54 10 26 10 Gronneberg 2, 4 54 10 27 30 Gronow 02 54 00 27 20 Gronowervitte 09 54 55 31 10 Gronowe 4, 16, 17 52 00 26 20 Groot Cellen 04 53 00 25 00 t'Groote Bake 03 53 45 24 10 Grootkattewyck 03 53 45 26 20 Gropel 04 53 20 25 00 Gropeln 05 53 10 25 10 Gropensted 18 51 35 28 10 Gropste 21 51 25 29 50 Groringen 14 52 00 29 30 Grosbe Schwitz 22, 23 51 00 31 20 Grosburg 25, 28 50 50 34 00 Grosch Weier 40 48 30 24 30 Groschwitz 30 50 30 34 10 Grosgorsdorf 31 50 20 33 00 Grosgrab 22 57 20 31 00   23 51 25 31 00 Gros Hamer 13 51 50 31 50 Grosl. 19 57 20 28 40 Gros Logisch 25 51 30 32 40 Grosmarck 2, 21 51 50 29 40 Grosnig 29 51 15 33 05 Grosow 09 54 35 31 00 Grospoplow 13 53 40 33 00 Gros Saul 26 51 45 33 30 Gross Saxen 39 49 20 25 10 Groschenaw. 23 51 00 31 40 Grosschlay 35 50 00 25 10 Grosschwerzeloc 34 49 10 27 50 Grosse 23 51 40 31 40 Grosseellsse 23 51 25 31 30 Grossen 1, 22, 27 51 10 29 20   28, 29 57 15 33 35 Grossenboraw 26 51 45 32 30 Grossenborssen bors∣sel 19 57 10 26 50 Grossendorff 26, 27, 29 51 25 33 25 Grossenkeuna 15 57 20 28 40 Grossenkorner 15 51 20 27 00 Grossen Schirs 14 51 25 28 30 Grossen See 19, 36 50 50 26 30 Grossen Woden 05 53 40 25 30 Grosser orner 14, 19, 20 57 45 28 20 Grossin 2, 10, 13 53 40 32 40 Grosslfing 45 48 00 25 30 Grosswerder 01 54 00 37 00 Grost 20 57 20 28 50 Grostintz 24 50 50 33 30 Groswangen 15 51 20 28 20 Groswi 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 30 Grosziten 13 52 40 30 50 Grotbe 01 50 50 31 50 Grote Mohlen 08 54 30 33 30 Groten Barckel 16 57 55 26 10 Grotenhage 08 53 30 32 30 Grotte Vitte 09 54 50 31 20 Grote Weyde 03 53 45 26 30 Grothe 23, 25 57 00 31 40 Grotkaviensis Du∣catus 24 50 20 33 30 Grotkaw 1, 4, 30 50 40 34 00 Alt Grotka 30 50 40 34 20 Grotsk 21 51 05 28 40 Grotz 30 50 30 34 10 Grotzberg 34 50 30 25 30 Grotzig 24, 25, 26 52 10 32 30 Grotzing 43 47 45 24 10 Grovorder tonne 03 53 50 25 30 Growerorth 03 53 45 25 30 Greyen 02 54 30 25 30 Grozingen 40 48 50 24 55 Grub 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Grube 10, 12 52 00 30 10   14, 19, 21, 36 51 25 29 30 Grubegri 22 50 40 28 30 Gruben 16, 22 51 20 27 00 Grubenhagen 7, 10 53 40 29 40   1, 19, 17 57 40 26 40     52 10 25 50 Grubenhagen Co∣mitatus 15 57 50 26 20 Grubern 21 50 50 29 00 G. L. Grubno 09 54 45 31 10 Grubow 01 53 30 28 40 Gruenrad 10, 13 52 40 32 00 Gruibing 45 48 25 26 20 Gruine 15 51 50 26 20 Grumbach 2, 33, 34, 36 50 40 30 40 Grumbach fl. 20 57 40 28 10 Grumberg 1, 39 49 00 24 10 Grumsdorff 08 54 20 34 00 Grun 22, 34 50 30 28 40 Gruna 22 57 10 29 10 Klein Gruna 35 50 05 25 05 Grunaw 22, 23, 28, 30, 35 50 40 29 50   25, 26, 27 57 55 32 20 Grunberg 24, 25, 26 52 00 32 30   33 49 20 30 40 Grunbergensis Cir∣culus vel Gruber∣gisches Weich∣bild 26 52 05 32 30 Grund 38 45 40 23 40 Ober Nider Grund 30 50 10 34 30 Im Grund 15 51 50 27 00 Grunderoda 16 57 35 27 50 GrundWorweck 27, 28 57 20 33 45 Grune 21, 22 57 00 29 30   30, 31 50 30 33 50 Grune Harte 28 50 50 34 10 Grune Hauss 25 57 20 34 20 Grunenberg 10, 12, 13 52 40 31 30 Grunenhagen 1, 2, 4, 6 53 30 27 20 Grunenwaldt. 2, 10, 12 52 00 30 30 Grunhartha 25 50 50 34 00 Grunhaus 28 51 20 34 20 Grunhoff 15 52 00 27 00 Grunhubel 28 57 00 34 05 Cl. Gruning 18 51 35 28 00 H. Gruningen 1, 15 52 00 28 10   14, 16, 18 57 35 27 00 Grunme 08 54 10 30 00 Grunow 10, 12, 13 52 00 31 50 Grunsder 22 50 40 29 00 Grunsfeld 34, 37 49 30 26 20 Grunstat 39 49 20 24 30 Ober Nider Grun∣stet 19 57 00 28 00 Grunwald 16 52 05 32 50 Grunwerdt 37 49 40 26 00 Grupenhagen 8, 15 54 40 34 00 Gruppenbach 45 48 55 25 50 Grusenheim 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 00 Gruspach B. Brus∣wany 32 48 40 33 50   22 50 50 28 20 Grussn 02 53 10 27 50 Grutel 4, 10, 11 53 40 28 40 Gruterode 19 57 30 26 40 Grutesenstein 01 48 30 34 00 Gruteshausche See 8, 10, 13 53 30 33 30 Grutz 10, 11, 14, 22 52 20 29 20 Gruwel 07 54 10 29 30 Gruwelscheidt 39 49 40 23 30 Gryers 38 46 00 23 20 Grypen 10, 12 52 30 30 10 Gryphiswaldisch Oie 1, 8, 9 54 20 31 40 Grypswald 09 54 00 31 10 Grysow 10, 11, 14 51 50 29 10 Guardo 01 45 10 27 20 Guben 24, 25 52 00 31 30 Gubendorff. 01 57 50 31 40 Gubesdorff 23 51 15 31 50 Guckelhoff 37 49 35 26 00 G. Guckenbach 37 49 35 26 00 Guckerwitz 28 57 10 33 50 Gudeborn 23, 24 57 30 30 50 Gudebusch 01 54 00 28 00 Gudleudthoff 35 50 00 24 55 Gudose 09 54 40 31 10 Guelphsleben 14, 20 51 20 28 20 Guenaw 01 48 30 28 10 Guetacherstab 45 48 00 24 50 Kl. Gufron 29 51 35 33 15 Gugelwitz 26, 27, 29 57 25 33 20 Gugenheim 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Gugh. 01 48 10 35 20 Guhla 27, 29 57 45 33 20 Alte Guhla Grosse Guhla 27 57 45 33 40 Guhlaw 25, 26, 29 57 40 33 00 Polnisch Guhlaw 26 57 50 33 40 Guhra 24 52 10 33 30 Guhren 26, 27 57 35 33 20 Guhuchen 29 57 30 33 10 Guhven 29 57 35 33 25 Guibs 14, 20, 21 57 20 29 00 Guickborn 05 53 45 26 30 La Guierche 01 46 40 28 30 Guillaume 01 45 40 19 10 Guines 01 50 50 17 50 Guintow 10, 11 52 50 29 00 Guise 01 49 50 19 40 Gula 27 51 30 33 15 Gulaw 30 50 40 34 20 Gulbeke 2, 15 52 20 28 20 Inder Gulden Awe 16, 19, 20 57 30 28 10 Der Gulden E∣sel 24, 30, 31 50 25 33 50 Guldenfels 41, 43 47 20 24 00 Die Gulder Aw 16, 19 51 30 28 00 Gulgewitz 24, 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 00 Gulich 01 57 00 22 30 Gulichen 28 57 10 34 55 Gulich 38 50 40 22 20 Gulman 23 57 30 31 10 Gulmitz 24, 25, 26 57 50 33 00 Gulnberg 02 57 40 28 20 Gulsch 34 50 40 28 10 Gulschwitz 29 57 35 33 00 Gulse 38 50 20 23 40 Gulsick 08 53 10 32 30 Gultin 09 54 30 31 10 Gultnberg 21 51 05 28 50 Gultz 07 53 45 29 50 Gultzi 07 53 15 27 40 Gultzow 7, 28 53 40 30 00 Gumebk 02 54 10 26 50 Gumeren 40 47 50 24 15 Gumersdorf 41, 43 47 30 23 40 Gumitz 06 52 55 27 40   22 50 20 30 10 Gummern 10, 14, 21 57 45 29 00 Gumper hosheim 41, 42 48 40 24 10 Gumpndorf 33 48 10 33 40 Gumund 38 49 00 25 00 Alt New Guncz 01 47 30 34 40 Gundelfing 34 48 50 28 40   40 47 55 24 20 Gundelfingen 45 48 30 27 10 Gundel∣heim 1, 34, 39, 45 49 10 25 40 Gundelsheim 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Gundersdorf 01 48 30 33 10 Gunderspuhl 34 49 30 28 10 Gundesfing 41, 43 47 55 24 20 Gunisch 28 57 15 33 45 Gunistet 19 57 20 27 50 Gunnersdorf 23 57 00 31 30 Gunsdorff 23 57 00 32 00 Gunsheim 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 25 Gunsleben 16, 18 52 00 27 50
Gunspach 40 38 35 24 25 Gunsroden 20 57 20 28 00 Gunstet 41, 42 48 40 24 15 Guntending 41, 43 47 25 24 00 Gunterode 16 57 25 27 10 Guntersberg 14, 15, 16, 18, 20 57 40 27 40 Guntersblumen 39 49 40 24 40 Gunturs∣burg 16, 19, 20 57 40 28 00 Gunterdorff 23, 25, 26 57 15 32 10 Guntershoff 41, 42 48 40 24 10 Gunterstal 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 20 Guntz fl. 45 48 20 27 00 Guntzberg 1, 45 47 55 27 10 Guntzburg 01 48 10 27 10 Guntzenhausen 34 48 50 27 40 Guntzeroda 16, 19 51 30 27 40 Guntzroda 16, 19 57 20 28 00 Guotndam 38 46 00 24 40 Gupff. 40 47 35 24 05 Gupts 2, 15 52 20 28 20 Guptz 14 57 45 28 50 Guptzk. 10 57 40 28 50 Guraw 24, 25, 26, 27 57 45 33 20 Gurawiensis Circu∣lus, or Gurawis∣ches Weichbild 26 57 50 33 30 Gurck 01 47 00 31 20 Gurckaw 26 57 35 33 20 Gurgemont 38 46 40 23 20 Gurichen Pol. Gorka 27 57 45 33 50 Gurigk 23 57 20 31 20 Gurselitz 28 57 20 35 05 Gursula 41, 43 47 20 23 30 Gurtaw 02 53 00 28 10 Gurtitz 09 54 35 31 00 Guscht 25 52 50 32 20 Guschutz 26 52 25 32 30 Gusen 14 52 05 29 00 Gusitz 26, 29 51 35 33 00 Guskrutz 23 51 15 31 50 Gusolitz 09 54 50 31 10 Gusow 07 53 50 30 00 Guspach 34 50 00 27 40 Guspersgrin 22 50 30 29 10 Gustavenburg 39 49 50 24 30 Gussen 15 52 30 25 20 Gussenstat 45 48 30 26 40 Gusted 4, 16 52 20 27 00 Gustedde 17 52 15 27 10 Gustelitz 09 54 25 31 20 Gusten 2, 14, 15, 20 57 50 28 10 Gusterade 09 54 40 31 00 Gustin 09, 24, 25 54 35 31 00 Gr. Gustin 08 53 50 32 30 Gustlafshagen 08 54 10 33 00 Guston 18 57 20 28 30 Gustow 8, 9, 10, 12 53 10 30 40 Gustrow 7, 10, 12 53 10 31 00 Gustrowenhave 09 54 25 30 50 Guswitz 27 57 50 33 40 Gutach fl. 45 48 00 24 50 Gutbrun 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 30 Gutenbag 41 48 55 24 25 Gutenberg 22, 34 50 00 28 10   38, 41, 45 47 30 24 40 Gutenburg 42 48 55 24 25 Gutergetz 10, 12 52 00 32 30 Guterklick 14 57 40 29 00 Gutermanstein 41, 42 49 00 24 35 Gutevitz 09 54 25 31 00 Guthuss 41, 42 48 20 23 55 Gutkendorff. 10, 12 57 50 30 40 Gutman 07 53 15 27 40 Gutnaw 40 47 45 24 05 Gutow 07 53 45 29 10 Guttenberg 15, 20 57 40 28 40   37, 39 49 45 26 15 Guttendorff 19 57 00 28 00 Guttenen 40, 41, 43 47 35 24 00 Guttenheim 41, 43 47 40 24 00 Guttenwaldt. 21 57 05 30 30 Guttenzell 45 48 00 26 40 Gutter 10, 11, 14, 10 57 50 29 00 Gutterbogen 02 52 00 29 20 Gutterbuck 10, 12, 21 57 30 30 30 Guttersdorff 33 48 30 33 00 Guttershausen 19 57 15 28 10 Guttig 37 49 30 26 05 Guttmans∣dorff 31 50 45 33 40 Guttwein 28 50 55 34 15 Gutzberg 23 57 00 32 10 Gutzenforst 22 50 20 29 00 Gutzkow 1, 8 54 00 30 50   7, 10 53 15 30 20 Gutzmin 08 54 20 34 00 Gyfhorn 01 52 50 27 30 Gygen 05 53 15 25 40 Gyle 16, 17 52 00 27 20 Gylsow 03 53 50 27 20 Gysenheim 38, 39 49 40 24 00 Gysmansdorff 23, 25 51 15 32 20 Gytelde 01 51 50 27 10 H.   HAach 40 47 45 24 05 Haastede 05 53 05 25 20 Habendorff 31 50 40 33 40 Haberach 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Habern 22 50 20 30 30 Haberschlacht 45 48 55 25 40 Habersdorff 34 48 10 27 40 Haberstro 28 51 00 34 00 Haberswerd 1, 34, 31, 33 50 10 33 30 Habr. 1, 32, 33 49 10 32 30 Habrowany 32, 33 49 10 34 00 Habsteden 39 49 40 23 20 Hachberg 37 49 45 26 15 Hachem 16 52 10 27 30 Hachtel 37 49 30 26 15 Hackebrugge 05 53 10 25 00 Hackenaw 29 57 10 32 45 Hackenborn 15 52 00 28 20 Hackmat 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Hadeborn fl. 20 57 45 28 20 Haddenborg 04 53 40 27 20 Haddersdorff 33 48 40 33 24 Land Zu' Hade∣len 3, 5 53 45 24 40 Hadielbich 15, 20 57 20 27 40 Hadimarsleben 1, 15 52 10 28 10   14 57 40 28 10 Hadler 1, 4 54 10 25 00 Hadler Wadt 3, 5 53 45 24 40 Haduhaim 34 48 50 27 30 Haecht 38 57 00 20 20 Haepeleben 15 52 50 26 40 Haerlem 1, 38 52 30 20 20 Haerstelle 15 51 40 25 40 Hafenlohr 37 49 45 26 00 Haferbeck 01 53 30 26 40 Das Grosse Haff 8, 10 53 50 31 30 Haffnerzell 33 48 20 30 50 Haffurt 36 49 55 27 20 Hag 01 48 00 29 10 Hage 14 52 30 28 50 Hagebrug 19 50 50 28 10 Op den Hagelte 03 53 45 26 40 Hagen 5, 8, 9 53 20 24 50   16, 38, 40 52 25 26 10 L. Hagen 8, 9 53 30 32 30 Hagena 05 53 35 25 40 Hagenbach 39, 40, 41, 48 50 24 40 Hagenburg 6, 16 52 10 26 10   34 49 20 27 30 Hagenerwick 09 54 20 31 40 Hagenest 22 57 00 29 10 Hagenaw 1, 38, 39 48 30 24 20   40, 41, 42 48 35 24 15 Hagenow 1, 4, 7, 10 53 40 28 00 Hagenowsche Heyde 07 53 20 28 00 Hagental. 41, 43 47 25 23 50 Hagenwalde 08 53 10 33 00 Hagenschies 45 48 40 25 20 Hagensdorff 33 50 10 30 00 Hage Oske 21, 22 50 55 29 20 Hager 01 50 40 24 40 Hagheborg 15 52 40 25 40 Hagmolle 16, 17 52 00 26 20 Hahausen 16, 17 57 55 27 00 Hahldorff 23 57 10 31 20 Die Haid 34 50 10 28 50 Haidegk 34 49 00 28 00 Haidegk Dynastia 34 49 00 28 00 Haidelfelt 34, 36 49 50 27 00 Haidelsheim 38, 39, 45 48 40 25 00 Haidnhaim 1, 45 48 30 26 40 Haidenhaimer Vorst 45 48 35 26 50 Hadingsfett 34 49 30 26 40 Haigerloch 45 48 05 25 30 Hailbron 34, 38, 39, 45 49 00 25 40 Hailbronische Holtzer 39 49 00 25 50 Haimendorff. 34 49 20 28 20 Haimerting 45 48 40 25 30 Hain 2, 19, 31, 36 51 10 29 30 Hainburg 34 49 10 28 30 Die Hainleite 16, 19 57 20 27 50 Vorder Hainleite 16, 19 57 20 27 50 Haitterbach 45 48 15 25 20 Hakamuhl 10, 12 52 00 30 20 Hakeborn 16, 18 51 55 28 10 Der Hakel 18 57 35 28 10 Haken 10, 12 52 30 29 50 Hakensted 14, 16 51 50 28 20 Haking 33 48 10 33 20 Halatsch 31 50 20 33 00 Halben 04 53 20 26 00 Halbendorff 30 50 40 34 20 Ober Nider Hal∣bendorff 23 57 10 32 00 Halberdorff 31 50 20 33 30 Halberstadt 1, 15 52 10 27 50   14, 16, 18 57 35 28 00 Halberstadt Stift. 20 57 55 28 00 Halbersteten 34 49 10 26 30 Halberstung 40 48 30 24 35 Halchter 18 57 45 27 00 Haldenheim 44 48 20 24 10 Halder Wettring 03 53 45 25 00 Halduff 28 50 55 34 15 Hale 02 54 20 26 20   05 53 45 25 10 Halen 01 50 50 21 10 Halenbek 10, 11 53 10 29 00 Hales 01 52 40 17 2 Haletta 20 57 20 27 5 Haling 4, 16 52 40 26 2 Halingen 16 52 25 27 4 Halla Archiepisc. 15 51 40 29 0   18, 19, 10, 21 57 10 28 4 Hallain 01 50 30 19 2 Halle 1, 15, 16, 17 51 30 28 5   18, 19, 20, 21, 22 51 00 29 0   1, 34, 38, 45 49 00 26 2   41, 43 47 20 23 3 Alten Newen Hal∣lensleben 14 52 05 28 2   18 52 00 28 2 Halleita 20 57 40 28 2 Hallenroda 16, 19 52 30 27 5 Haller 15 51 50 26 2 Hallerborg 4, 15, 16, 17 52 20 26 2 Hallerdorf 34 49 40 27 5 Hallermunde 2, 15 52 40 27 3 Hallersen 16 52 20 27 1 Nie Hallersleben 01 52 20 28 2   10 51 50 28 2 Hallersprinck 4, 16, 17 52 20 26 0 Hallerstedt 05 53 10 24 4 Halligen 40 47 35 24 1 Hallizenberg 33 48 20 30 5 Halmes 19 50 45 26 3 Hals 33 48 20 30 4 Halsbach 37 49 55 26 0 Halsdorf 22 50 50 29 5 Halsebeck 05 53 15 24 2 Halshausen 34 49 10 26 3 Halsleben 02 52 20 28 0   15 5 30 28 0 A N. Halsleben 16 52 10 28 2   15 52 30 28 2 Halstat 01 47 30 31 2   34 49 50 27 4 Haltauf 25, 27 50 50 34 0 Halte 22 50 40 29 0 Halter 38 57 00 23 4 Halteren 1, 38 57 40 23 2 Halungen 19 51 10 27 0 Halwang 45 48 15 25 1 Halwyll 01 47 00 24 3   38 24 20 47 0 Ham 1, 3, 16, 19 57 40 24 0   38, 39 49 40 24 4 Der Ham 20 51 40 27 50 Hama fl. 32 49 10 34 10 Hamm 16 51 25 27 50 Hambach 41, 42 49 00 24 30 Hamberge 05 53 25 25 10 Hamborn 16 51 15 26 20 Hamburg 1, 2, 3 53 50 26 30   4, 5, 6 53 30 26 30   41, 43 47 40 24 00 Hamel fl. 16, 17 52 00 26 10 Hamelburg 01 50 10 26 40 Hamelen 1, 17 52 10 26 00   6, 15, 16 52 00 26 00 Hohen Hame∣len 6, 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Hamelshausen 19 51 45 26 40 Hamelsprinck 17 52 25 26 00 Hamelwerden 02 54 10 25 50   3, 5 53 45 25 20 Hamer 2, 13, 15 52 40 28 40   10, 12 57 40 30 40 Gros Hamer 12 52 00 32 00 Hamerdorf 01 48 10 32 30 Hamersleben 14, 15, 16 51 45 28 00   43, 44 47 30 24 10 Cl. Hamerschleben 18 57 50 27 50 Hamerstat 41, 43 47 45 24 00 Hamerstein 1, 8 53 30 34 30   40 47 35 24 10 Hamgen 38 47 20 25 00 Hamleben 20 57 20 28 10 Hamme 05 53 20 24 50   15, 20 57 30 27 40 Hammelburg 34, 36 50 00 26 40 Hammeleben 16, 19 51 15 28 10 Hammer 4, 6 54 00 26 20   24, 25, 26 52 10 32 20   29, 31 57 30 32 50 Hammer alias Kleinkrelaw 27 57 30 33 30 Hammerbroeck 03 53 50 26 30 hammersfelt 19 50 45 27 50 Hammerspring 10, 12 52 40 30 30 Hammerstat 40 47 45 24 00 Hamont 01 57 10 21 40 Hampach 33 48 20 31 00   39 49 40 23 20 Hamrode 20 51 45 28 00 Hamterberg 02 54 00 27 20 Han 38 48 40 22 20 Hana fl. 22 51 10 30 10 Hanaw 1, 34, 39 50 00 25 10   35, 38 50 00 25 15 Hanaw Comita∣tus 34, 39 50 10 25 10 Hanbach 34 49 30 28 50 Zu. Heubach 42 49 00 24 30 Hanburg 34 49 40 27 50 Hande rode 16, 19 51 20 28 10 Handorp 16, 17 52 10 27 00     52 30 27 00 Haneck 41, 43 47 50 23 40
Haneklotet Sandt 03 53 50 26 00 Hanenbach 39 49 50 23 30 Hannenkamm 34 48 50 27 30 Hanetorf 41, 43 47 25 23 30 Hanets 22 51 10 29 50 Hanfelt 02 53 50 27 10 Hanhaim 45 48 10 25 50 Hanholdertonne 03 53 50 26 00 Hanhen 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 20 Hangbach 38 48 40 24 40 Hangen∣bieten 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 05 Hangewiisen 39 49 30 24 30 Hangnow 38 47 20 25 40 Hantt 45 48 25 25 10 Hanichen 26 51 55 32 30 Hanm 39 49 20 24 20 Haningen 36 50 50 26 50 Hanna 40, 41 48 55 24 40 Hannalb 41 48 55 24 30 Hannaus 23 51 05 32 20 Hannekehusen 05 53 15 24 40 Hannenburg 15 52 10 28 40 Hanningsbuttel 04 53 00 27 20   06 52 35 27 10 Hannonia Comit. 01 50 30 19 40 Hannover 01 52 30 26 20   4, 6, 16 52 20 26 20 Hannoville 38 49 00 22 00 Hansgrube 20 51 45 28 30 Hannshaim 39 48 30 25 30 Hannuye 01 50 40 21 10 Hanrahur 02 54 40 26 10 Hanrode 16, 17 52 00 27 10 Hanrou 01 54 30 26 00 Hanrich 33 48 30 32 30 Hansberg 10, 13 52 40 31 30 Hanschleben 19 51 10 27 40 Hansdorff 31 50 20 33 40 Hansfelt 08 53 20 32 30 Hanshagen 7, 8 54 00 29 00 Hanshaim 45 48 35 25 30 Hanspach 33 50 50 31 30 Hansplatte 02 52 30 28 40 Hanspitz 22 51 00 28 40 Hansttt 01 49 40 33 50 . zabreh 24, 32 49 40 33 30 Hansrtz 34 50 30 26 10 Hansweiler 39 49 20 23 30 Hantebrugge 05 53 15 24 50 Hantonchou 01 49 00 21 50 Hanum 04 53 00 28 00   10, 11 52 30 27 30 Hanwars 30 53 50 27 10 Hany 16 51 55 27 10 Hapsoheid 38 49 40 22 00 Hapsen 41, 43 47 35 23 50 Hapstein 38 52 20 23 40 Haradeck 22 50 30 31 30 Haras 16, 19 51 20 28 10 Harbach 34, 37 49 10 28 00 Harbarsen 17 52 10 26 40 Harbeke 06 51 55 27 40 Harbelben 16 51 20 28 00 Harberg 04 53 40 26 40 Harborakorne Weydo 03 53 45 26 30 Harbedt 06 52 45 25 20 Harburg 1, 2, 3 53 50 26 20   4, 5, 6 53 25 26 20 Die Harburg 16, 19 51 25 27 30 Harckbrugge 05 53 05 24 20 Harckshede 05 53 45 26 30 Hardeghem 15 57 30 26 20 Hardenberg 1, 38 52 40 22 40   15, 16, 17 51 40 26 20 Hardern 40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 10 Harderwyck 1, 38 52 20 21 40 Hardessen 16 51 35 26 40 Hardepe 15 52 40 26 20 Hardorp 38 52 20 32 20 Die Hardt Sylva 19 51 05 27 10 Hare 04 53 00 27 00 Harebrugge 16 51 30 26 20 Harem 35 50 00 25 05 Haren 38 52 40 23 20 Harhausen 19 50 50 27 40 Harheiben 19 51 25 27 40 Haring 15 52 10 26 40 Haringen 19 50 50 26 30 Harkoun 38 52 00 24 00 Harlinge 1, 38 53 20 21 20 Harlue 38 50 00 21 00 Harmanitz 1, 33 49 00 30 30 Harmensohlag 01 48 20 42 32 Harmsdorff 10, 12 52 20 30 30 Harnborg 04 53 40 26 00 Harpersdorff 29 51 10 32 45 Harpke 18 51 55 27 40 Harpstede 4, 5 53 00 24 40 Harras 20 51 20 28 10 Harresleben 15, 19 51 10 28 00 Harrihusen 16, 17 51 45 26 50 Harsckleben 18 51 35 27 50 Harsdorff 22, 34 50 00 29 40 Harsefeldt 5, 6 53 30 25 50 Harst 16 51 30 26 50 Harstelle 17 51 35 26 00 Harstenbeck 15 52 00 26 00 Harsthaw 39 48 30 25 10 Harsum 4, 16, 17 52 20 26 40 Hart B. Hobzy 22 50 50 28 50   31, 32 50 15 32 20 Die Hart 39 49 10 24 20   41, 43, 44 47 40 23 55 Harta 2, 23, 25 51 00 30 00 Harthe 22, 31 50 50 29 10 New Harte 31 50 20 33 20 Hartebery 36 50 20 27 25 Harten 41, 43 47 45 24 03 Hartenberg 39 39 20 24 00 Hartenstein 22, 29, 33 50 00 30 00 Hartes 36 50 25 27 10 Hartesburg 15 52 00 27 20 Harthaw 23, 26 51 05 32 20 Hartheim 34 49 30 26 00 L. Hartheim 37 49 35 26 00 Harthoven 39 49 00 24 50 Harthusen 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 10 Hartlieb 28 51 05 34 10 Hart Lusdorf 29 51 10 32 40 Hartmansdorf 10, 12 52 00 31 20   22, 23, 29, 34 50 30 29 40 Hartmanshoved 34 49 20 28 30 Hartmasw. 41, 43 47 45 23 40 Hartwicherode 20 51 45 28 10 Aufdem Hart∣ze 15, 16, 19 51 40 27 20 Vorden Hartz 16, 19 51 30 28 10 Hartswald 16, 17 51 45 27 00 Hartzbach 41 48 20 23 45 Hartzberg 07 53 30 29 00 Hartzburg 01 49 30 28 20   16, 17, 18 51 50 27 30 Hartzendorf 22 50 50 28 50 Hartzenweier 40 48 30 24 35 Hartzesdorff 22 50 50 29 50 Hartzfeld 07 53 15 28 50 Hartzhorn 05 53 50 26 00 Hartzingeroda 18 51 15 27 40 Hartzke∣rode 1, 14, 15, 20 51 40 27 50 Harvestehude 2, 3 54 00 26 40 Hary 17 52 05 27 10 Haryng 15 52 10 27 00 Hasbach 39, 41, 42 48 45 23 50 Hasbergen 05 53 05 25 10 Hasbruch 19 57 45 28 00 Haspach 40 48 20 24 30 Hasede 17 52 20 26 40 Hasekenhusen 16, 17 51 50 26 40 Hasel 29 51 10 33 00 Hasel fl. 16, 36, 41, 42 48 25 23 50 Hazelbach 22 50 40 29 10   26 51 30 32 40 Haselbach fl. 19, 20 51 40 28 10 Haselberg 37 49 40 26 00 Der Haselberg 19 50 45 27 50 Haselbrun 37 49 40 26 15 Haseldorp 2, 4 54 10 26 00   3, 5, 6 53 50 25 50 Haseley 25 51 10 34 00 Haselfeld 16 51 40 27 40   18 51 20 27 30 Haselheff 21 51 45 29 40 Haseloch 39 49 10 24 40 Haseloe 05 53 45 26 30 Haselon 2, 3 54 10 26 20 Haselow 08 53 40 33 00 Haselrede 15 52 30 27 00 Haselune 1, 38 52 40 23 40 Haselwarde 03 53 45 26 10 Haselwodt 05 53 30 26 20 Hasenberg 1, 2, 33 50 20 29 50 Hasenbrok 05 53 10 26 30 Hasenburg 39, 41, 42 49 00 24 10 Hasensia 08 53 40 34 00 Hasenthal 19 50 25 28 00 Haserbeck 4, 6 53 40 26 20 Hasfelden 40 48 50 24 50 Hasfurt 34 50 00 27 10 Hashurst 40 48 20 24 25 Hasistein 32 50 20 30 00 Haslach 34, 37 49 40 27 20   40, 44, 45 48 10 24 40   33, 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 50   40, 41, 43 47 50 24 15 Haslach fl. 34 50 20 28 10 Hasle 34 48 10 27 40 Hasleben 19 51 10 27 50 Haslow 2, 7 53 00 28 50 Hasmarsen 34, 39, 45 49 10 25 30 Hasmashusen 38, 39 49 40 24 00 Haspelsi∣heidt 39, 41, 42 48 50 24 00 Hassbruch 16 51 35 28 10 Hassel 40 47 35 24 25 Hasselaw 05 53 40 26 10 Hasselburg 41, 42 48 30 23 45 Hasselhorst 04 53 00 28 00   10, 11 52 30 27 30 Hasselt 1, 38 50 40 21 20 Hassen 01 48 10 24 30 Hassendorp 07 53 45 30 10 Hassie Landgra∣viatus 01 51 10 26 00 Hassitz 31 50 20 33 40 Hast 07 53 25 28 00   44 48 30 24 30 Hastenbecke 16, 17 51 55 26 20 Hasterad 32 49 00 34 10 Hastiers 38 50 00 20 40 Hastleben 16 51 55 08 00 Hatsborch 2, 3, 4 54 00 26 20 Hatschen 22 51 10 28 40 Hatschuts 22 50 50 29 20 Hatstat 41, 43 47 50 23 45 Hohn Hatstat 41, 43 47 50 23 40 Hattem 1, 4, 38 52 20 22 00 Hatten 05 53 05 24 50   40, 41, 42 48 40 24 25 Hattenberg 36 50 40 27 20 Hattendorff 34 50 40 25 50 Hattenem 38, 39 49 40 24 00 Hattorf 2, 6, 15, 16, 19 52 30 27 30 Hattingen 38 51 00 23 20 Hattnhofen 45 48 25 26 20 Hatzenbuhel 40, 41 48 55 24 40 Hatzenroda 16 51 40 28 00 Hatzenwir 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 30 Haubitz 22 51 10 29 40 Haudele 02 53 40 27 10 Hauderode 15, 20 51 20 28 20 Have 07 53 30 29 00 Gr. Have 07 53 50 27 50 Thom. Have 08 54 10 32 30 Havel fl. 2, 7 52 30 28 50   11, 12, 14, 15, 18 52 40 29 10 Havelberg 2, 10, 11, 14, 15 52 35 29 10 Havellandt 02 52 20 29 10 Havekost 03 53 50 26 50 Havenstein 1, 22, 33 50 10 29 50 Gros Haver 10 52 00 32 00 Haverbeck 17 5 10 25 50 Haverta 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Haufelde 19 50 50 28 10 Hauffnmuhl 28 51 20 33 55 Haugendorff 28 51 20 35 05 Hauysdorff 1, 30 50 20 34 10 Hault Clochier 39, 42 48 40 23 20 Le Hault de Chaulmes 41, 43 47 50 23 30 Le Haulte pierte 41 48 15 23 20 Haulte Sile Abb. 41 48 30 23 20 Haupersbron 45 48 45 26 10 Haupken 14, 16 51 55 28 00 Hauran 34 49 20 28 40 Haurbron 45 48 30 26 20 Hausberg 15, 19, 25 52 00 27 40 Haus Demmin 08 53 50 30 00 Hausdorff 23, 25, 28 51 40 32 10   30, 31 50 30 34 20 Hause 32 49 40 34 20 Hausen 16, 19, 34 52 20 26 00   35, 37, 39, 40, 45 50 00 24 55 Nider Ober Hausen 40 48 10 24 15 Hausen ander Sonn 35 49 50 25 10 Haus Freden 17 52 00 26 40 Hauska 2, 24, 33 50 20 31 30 Haus Ofen 16, 17 51 50 26 20 Hausplatte 15 52 30 29 20 Hauss 01 48 40 30 40 Haussomeren 15 51 10 27 40 Der Hausten∣berg 16, 19 51 25 28 00 Hauszumberge 06 52 10 25 30 Hawelsberg 21 51 45 29 30 Hawenstein 39 49 00 24 20 Hawhosf 36 50 45 27 10 Hawin 40 47 35 24 10 Hawreden 16, 19 51 30 27 30 Hayen 16, 17 51 50 26 20 Hayn 24, 25, 26, 29 51 20 32 30 Haynbach 26 51 35 32 50 Hayndorff 23, 25 51 00 32 00 Circulur Hayno∣viensis 29 51 20 32 50 Der Haynwald 29 51 10 32 45 Hebegra 01 50 00 29 10 Hebernbiele 23 51 15 32 00 Heblaruz 41, 43 48 00 23 30 Hebrus fl. Sive Bober 25 51 30 32 20 Hechberg 34 49 00 26 10 Grossen Hechberg 45 49 00 26 10 Hechedorff 20 51 20 28 20 Hechen 39 49 20 23 30 Heching 45 48 05 25 40 Hechling 14 51 30 28 30 Hechsted 18 51 15 28 10 Hechtelberg 2, 15 52 40 29 00 Heck 41, 43 47 30 23 35 Heckengercut 36 50 25 27 30 Heckfeldt 37 49 35 26 10 Heckling 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 15 Heckmul 34 50 10 26 30 Nidern Obern Heck∣stadt 35 50 00 25 50 Heckwalt 22 50 05 24 50 Hedanchen 28 50 50 29 00 Hedelfing 45 51 00 34 05 Hedeper 16 48 30 25 50 Hederen 34 52 00 27 30 Hedernem 35 49 40 28 10 Hedersleben 16 50 00 25 00   20 51 55 28 00 Old Hedersleben 18 51 40 28 30 Hederswich 10, 11 52 20 25 40 Hedesheim 39 49 20 25 00 Hedigenbeuren 37 48 35 26 00 Hedschendorff 10 52 00 31 30 Hedtlinck 03 53 50 25 50
Hedwigsbrun 27 51 25 33 15 Hedwigsburg 16, 18 52 05 27 30 Hee 38 53 00 23 20 Heed 22 50 20 28 00 Heele 38 50 40 21 00 Heen 01 50 30 24 20 Heerda 19, 36 50 55 26 40 Heerde 38 52 20 22 00 Heeren 4, 6 53 00 26 00 Heersdorff 22 50 50 29 50     51 00 29 20 Heevliet 38 51 40 20 00 Heffen 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 20 Hefflin 32 48 40 33 40 Heffner hunslach 45 48 50 25 30 Heg 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Hege 02 54 10 26 30 Hegelberg 40 47 35 24 10 Hegenh. 41, 43 47 25 23 55 Hegenoih 41, 42 48 40 24 15 Hegerloenne 10, 12 52 00 31 00 Hegessen 15 52 10 26 00 Hegle 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Hagnach 45 48 40 26 00 Hegy 28 47 00 25 20 Heherberg 41 48 55 24 10 Hehsackh. 45 48 40 26 10 Heibach 39, 45 49 30 25 40 Gr. Kl. Heibach 34 49 40 25 40 Heibate 07 53 55 28 30 Heichelbeim 19 51 05 28 10 Heid 38 49 40 22 40 Heidbreken 08 53 50 32 30 Heideborn 18 51 35 28 10 Heydelberg 1, 34, 38, 39, 45 49 10 25 10 Der Heydelberg 19, 36 50 40 27 40 Heidelsheim 40, 41, 42, 43 48 00 24 00 Heidenburg 33 48 30 30 10 Vorder Hender Heidenburg 40 47 45 24 20 Heidenfeldt 34, 37 49 50 26 10 Heidenheff 22 50 50 29 10 Heidersdorff 23, 30 51 10 32 00 Heidersdorfferberg 23 51 10 32 10 Heidersheim 35 50 00 24 25 Heidheff 07 53 00 25 20 Heidingfeldt 1, 37 49 40 26 30 Heidkrug 09 54 30 31 10 Heiensen 17 52 10 26 20 Heiersdorff 18 51 50 27 40 Heiersen 17 52 20 26 30 Heigendorff 19, 20 51 10 28 10 Heigenrode 16, 19, 20 51 30 28 10 Heilersen 16, 17 51 40 26 40 Heilgedorff 04 53 00 25 00 Heilgemer 39 49 00 23 10 Heilich 22 50 50 49 20 Heilicheim 39 49 10 24 30 Heilige Grab. 10, 11 53 00 29 10   25, 26 51 30 32 00 Eiffers Kirch Newen Heiligen 19 51 15 27 20 Zum Heiligenberg 39 49 10 25 10 t'sum Heiligenbusch 39 49 40 23 10 Heilige Creutz 03 53 40 24 30 Zum Heilingen Creutz 34 50 10 26 30 Heilingen∣dorff 2, 15, 16, 52 20 28 10 Heiligenhove 38 50 40 23 40 TZom Heiligen∣leben 02 52 50 27 40 Heiligenroda 16 51 25 27 40 Heiligen See 10, 12 52 20 30 30 Zum Heiligen See 25 51 30 32 00 Zum Heiligen Sei 23 51 30 32 10 Heiligen Stat 1, 16, 19 51 20 26 50 Heiligen∣thale 14, 19, 20 51 15 28 40 Heim 18 51 25 20 00 Nider Heim 22 50 50 29 40 Heimbach 38, 39 50 20 22 40   40, 41, 43 48 00 24 15 Heimburk 18 51 30 27 40 Heimers 16, 17 52 10 26 50 Heimersen 16 52 15 25 50 Heimerstorff 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Heimholt 16 51 30 26 10 Hein 22 50 50 29 00 Heinburg 16 51 50 27 50 Heinckowitz 27 51 35 33 40 Heindorff 22, 36 51 00 29 10 Heine 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Cl. Heine 18 51 40 27 00 Heinem 16 51 40 26 40   17 52 10 26 30 Heinen 34 50 30 27 20 Heinersdorff 22, 25, 26 51 00 29 30   30, 31 52 10 32 30 Langen Heiners∣dorff 26 51 45 32 30 Heingen 16 52 05 27 20 Heinhausen 35 49 55 25 10 Heinholtz 09 54 25 30 40   20 51 45 28 10 Heinichen 02 50 50 29 10 Heining 45 48 39 26 20 Heiningen 17 52 15 27 30 Heinrichaw 24, 30 50 40 33 30 Heinrichdorff 22 50 50 30 00 Heinrichs 36 50 35 27 30 Heinrichhagen 09 54 15 30 50 Heinrichswalde 31 50 20 33 50 Heinriedt 45 49 00 26 00 Heinsberg 38 51 00 22 00 Heinsdorff 21 51 20 29 00 Heinsen 16, 17 51 45 26 10 Heinstat 37 49 30 26 05 Heinstein 22 51 10 30 10 Heintzdorff 27 51 50 33 25 Heintzebortschen 27 51 45 33 30 Heintzen∣dorff 24, 25, 26 51 30 32 30 Gross Heintzendorff 29 51 30 33 00 Heissbeke 16 51 30 26 40 Heisse 23 51 35 32 10 Heissen 17 52 05 27 20 Heist 04 54 00 26 00 Heistrew 36 50 20 27 00 Heiteln 5, 6 53 35 26 10 Heitenbaden 34, 36 50 30 26 30 Heitern 41, 43 47 50 24 00 Heitersheim 40 47 50 24 10 Heitingsheim 45 48 45 25 40 Heitmansdorff 31 50 35 33 00 Heitren 38, 41, 43 47 45 24 10 Hekling 18 51 25 28 30 Hekmull 36 50 05 26 40 Helbe fl. 15, 16, 19, 20 51 20 27 40 Die Helbeburg 16, 19 51 20 27 40 Helbersk 34 50 20 27 30 Helbersdorff 22 50 40 29 50 Helberstat 1, 15 51 20 26 50 Helbra 19, 20 51 40 28 20 Das Heldethal 16 51 20 27 40 Heldefing 45 48 30 26 40 Helder 23 51 20 32 00 Heldreychen 15 51 40 27 20 Heldrungen 15, 20 51 20 28 00 Heldrungen Ba∣ronia 16, 19 51 20 28 10 Schloss Hel∣drungen 16, 19 51 20 28 10 Ober Hel∣drungen 16, 19, 20 51 20 28 10 Helen 4, 6, 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Helesem 38 50 40 21 00 Helffenberg 45 48 55 26 00 Helffenburg 33 49 00 31 10 Helfensen 16 52 00 26 10 Helffenstain 45 48 20 26 30 Helffenstain Comi∣tatus 45 48 25 26 30 Helffer alias Schwart∣ze Strauch 23 51 35 31 00   26 51 50 32 50 Helfingen 38 49 00 22 40 Helgeland 01 54 20 25 10 Helgenberg 41, 42 48 20 23 50 Helgenroda 19 51 30 27 30 Helgen∣stein 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 23 55 Helgen∣zell 41, 42, 43, 44 48 10 24 25 Helicroda 14 51 15 28 10 Helinsdorff 19, 20 51 45 28 30 Das Helokethal 19 51 25 27 20 Hell 36 50 30 27 10 Hellaesh 19 50 45 26 30 Helle 7, 9, 10, 11, 22, 29 53 40 29 40 Gr. L. Helle 07 53 30 30 20 Hellebratzhausen 19 51 15 26 50 Hellekrucke 25 50 50 33 00 Hellel 01 47 30 30 20 Hellemu'hl 27 51 30 43 15 Hellen 15 52 00 26 00 Hellendorn 38 52 20 22 20 HellensteinHerrs∣chaft 45 48 40 26 40 Hellenstein 45 48 35 26 40 Heller 19 51 10 26 50 Hellershoff 35 50 00 25 00 Hellersreid 33 49 20 29 40 Helling 34, 36 50 10 27 30 Hellivege 05 53 10 25 40 Helm 07 53 25 28 00 Die Helm fl. 15, 16 51 30 27 20   18, 19, 20 51 35 28 00 Helmasedt 33 48 20 31 30 Helmeritz 22, 34 50 10 28 30 Helmers 36 50 40 27 10 Helmershau∣sen 1, 16, 36 51 30 26 00 Helmeshusen 15 51 30 26 00 Helml 40, 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 25 Helmont 1, 38 51 20 21 40 Helmscat 02 52 20 27 40 Helmsdorff 14, 22 51 15 28 30 Helmstadt 1, 15, 16 52 30 28 00   6, 14, 18 52 00 27 50   34, 37, 39, 45 49 10 25 30 Helmstatterhoff 37 49 30 26 05 Helnees 36 50 45 26 40 Helpe 10, 13 53 10 32 40 Helpensen 17 52 10 26 00 Helsberg 19 51 00 28 10 Helsdorff 16 52 25 26 20 Helste 20 51 35 28 30 Helstet 19 51 40 28 30 Helstfelt 19 51 35 28 30 Helvetia 01 45 20 23 00 Helvoet 38 51 40 20 00 Helwil 41, 43 47 55 24 20 Hembstorff 15 52 20 28 00 Ampt Hemershausen 16 51 30 26 20 Hemersheim 39 49 40 24 20 Hemichen 2 51 00 29 10 Heming 45 48 40 23 30 Im. Hemith 15 51 20 26 40 Hemkerwoda 16 52 10 27 30 Hempfling 41, 43 4 30 23 45 Hemmaw 34 49 00 28 50 Hemmelerwaldt 16, 17 52 15 26 50 Hemmelsche∣borg 16, 17 51 50 26 10 Hemmelsdor 16, 17 42 05 26 40 Hemmendorf 16, 17 52 00 26 20 Hemmering 16 51 55 26 10 Hemschen 01 51 20 31 50 Hemschenthal 37 49 45 25 50 Hemsbach 34, 37, 39 49 10 28 00 Hemsdorf 14, 16 51 45 28 30 Hemsen 16, 17 51 35 26 10 Hemsgrit 41 48 15 23 35 Hemsheim 39 49 20 24 50 Henbach 34 50 30 26 10 Henckendorff 25 51 20 31 40 Hency 38 50 00 20 00 Hencrist 44 48 30 24 30 Hendorff 04 53 40 26 00 Henechen 14, 21 51 15 29 30 Henen 40 48 25 24 15 Henegrin 22 50 10 29 40 Henersdorff 22 50 50 29 20 Heneschuss 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 05 Henewalda 23 51 00 31 40 Hengelbach 19 50 45 28 00 Hengesberg 01 48 30 30 10 Hengverden 38 52 20 22 00 Hengw. 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Henh. 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Henichburg 16, 22 51 40 28 00 Henichen 23, 25 51 25 31 30 Henichendorf 10, 12 51 40 30 20 Henichun 22 50 50 30 00 Heniersdorff 26 52 20 32 10 Henighen 15 52 20 27 20 Henneberg 19 51 40 28 30 Henneberg Comi∣tatus 34 50 30 29 50 Henneburg 15, 19 51 40 28 40 Hennekenhagen 19 54 15 30 50 Hennekerode 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Hennenberg 10, 12, 36 52 40 30 40 Hennersdorf 23, 25 51 05 31 30 Henniger 28 51 10 34 55 Hennigsdorf 28 51 15 34 05 Hennigsen 4, 16 52 40 27 00 Henningsen 06 52 15 26 40 Hennoynice 32 49 30 34 10 Henrichow 1, 31 50 30 33 40 Henrichsburg 14, 20 51 20 28 00 Henrichshagen 07 53 45 30 20 Olden Henrichs∣hagen 07 53 15 30 40 Hensbach 41, 42 48 30 24 30 Hensberg 22 50 20 29 10 Hensbrun 41, 43 47 35 23 40 Henschendorf 22 51 00 29 20 Henschesheim 45 49 20 25 10 Henschusheim 39 49 20 25 10 Hensleben 14 51 30 28 30 Henspach 41 47 30 23 50 Henstede 2, 5 54 50 26 10 Hentlngen 36 50 20 27 10 Hentzdorf 30 50 25 24 00 Hentzigsdorff 30 50 30 34 20 Henubuch 22 50 50 28 30 Hepenheim 39 49 40 24 30 Hepfickhen 45 48 50 25 50 Heppach 38, 45 48 40 25 40 Heppenheim 39 49 30 25 00 Heradisk 32 49 20 33 50 Heraletz 33 49 20 32 10 Heraltitz 32 49 50 34 40 Heraltz 01 49 30 32 50   2, 33 49 30 31 30 Heratitz 24 49 50 34 30 Herbeau pierre 41, 42, 43 48 10 28 30 Herbel∣sheim 40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 15 Herbemont 1, 38 49 40 28 20 Herben 40 47 50 24 20 Herbetzen 39 49 00 23 30 Herbergn 05 53 05 24 40 Herbersdorf 29 51 30 33 00 Herberting 45 48 30 26 50 Herborde 17 52 30 26 50 Herbron 38 50 20 24 40 Herbsdorf 30 50 30 34 00 Herbsen 40 48 15 24 10 Herbstheim 44 48 30 24 20 Herbstleben 15, 19 51 10 27 20 Herbstain 34 50 40 26 00 Herbstadt 36 50 15 27 20 Herbulay 41 48 25 23 15 Hercbingen 38 50 40 23 40 Sy. va Hercinia 16, 17 51 50 27 10
Herck 41, 43 47 50 23 55 Herda 22 50 50 29 30 G. L. Herde 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Herden 40 48 35 24 45 Herdern 43 47 50 24 20 Herderhoff 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 15 Herdt 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 15 Herelsberg 34 49 30 28 00 Heremandorff 23 51 30 30 50 Herenberg 02 54 00 27 30 Herenstein 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Herestet 16, 45 51 30 26 20 Herentals 1, 38 51 00 20 40 Herfluch 43 47 40 23 35 Herfstadt 36 50 25 27 20 Herges 36 50 40 27 20 Hergesdorff 20, 26 51 35 28 20 Herhusen 15, 17 51 50 27 00 Herigsdorff 19 51 40 28 20 Heringen 15, 20 51 30 27 40   16, 18, 19 51 30 27 50 Ampt Heringen 16, 19 51 30 28 00 Herissow 38 47 00 26 00 Herkenwihr 41 48 55 24 40 Herlen 41, 43 47 25 24 10 Herlikeroda 16 51 40 28 00 Herling 45 48 15 26 40 Herlisheim 41, 42, 43 47 50 23 50 Herlitzen 40 48 30 24 20 Herlishausen 19 51 00 26 50 Hermanve 01 46 00 22 50 Hermaitz 32 49 40 33 10 Hermanrode 16, 19, 20 51 45 28 10 Hermanstker 16, 19 51 35 28 00 Hermansdorff 8, 23 51 00 31 40     51 15 32 00 Hermansfelt 36 50 25 27 10 Hermansgrin 22 50 20 29 10 Hermanshagen 7, 8 54 20 29 40 Hermanstadt 24, 30, 32 50 00 34 00 Hermanstein 01 47 10 33 40 Herdorff Wal∣dichen 23 51 00 32 00 Hermenstein 01 50 20 23 50 Hermelheim 41, 42, 44 48 20 23 55 Hermershusen 17 51 35 20 00 angen Hermers∣dorff 26 51 50 32 20 Hermitagie 01 46 40 25 10 Hermonsweile 40 48 45 24 25 Hermoring 45 48 30 27 00 Hermsborg 4, 6 53 20 26 40 Hermsdorff 19, 22, 23 50 55 28 40   25, 26, 28, 29 51 10 32 40   30, 31, 33 50 20 34 10 Hermstat Mons 19 50 45 28 10 Hermud 42 48 45 24 25 Hermunduri 19, 20 51 35 29 00 Herning 11, 14 52 25 28 10 Hernsem 1, 39 49 30 24 40 Heroletz 32 49 10 32 40 Herpenheim 01 49 30 25 00 Herpert 01 51 20 21 10 Herpf. 36 50 35 27 10 Herpsen 41, 42, 43, 44 48 10 24 05 Herpstorf 41, 43 47 25 23 30 Herras 34, 36 50 30 27 50 Herrenalb. 39, 40, 45 48 40 24 50 Beyder 4. Herren∣disch 35 49 55 24 50 Herren Laursitz 27 51 40 33 20 Herrenstadiensis Tractus 26, 27 51 45 33 30 Herreth 34 49 10 28 10 Herrieden 34 49 00 27 10 Herrnberg 45 47 20 25 30 Herrndorff 24, 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Herrn Motschel∣titz 25, 27 51 30 33 20 Herrnstad 1, 24 51 40 33 30   25, 26, 27 51 40 33 40 Herrn Schwende Der grosse 19 51 20 27 50 Hersberg 19, 36 50 35 27 30 Hersbruck 34 49 20 28 20 Herscede 38 51 00 24 00 Hersdorf 19 50 35 27 50 Hersen 4, 16, 17 52 20 27 00 Hershurst 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 20 Herstatt 37 49 45 26 15 Herstein 33, 39 49 10 29 50 Hersten 40 48 15 24 10 Hert 38, 39 48 40 24 40   39 48 50 25 50   40, 41, 45 48 55 24 45 Herten 40 47 30 24 15 Hertenberg 33 50 00 29 30 Herteneck 45 48 40 25 50 Hertern 40 47 50 24 05 Hertingen 41, 43 47 35 24 05 S. Hertogenbsch 01 51 40 21 10   38 51 20 21 10 Hertogenraid 38 50 40 22 20 Hertsberg 1, 2, 10 51 30 30 20   16, 18, 19 51 35 26 10   21, 22, 34 51 30 30 20 Hertwigswaldaw 25 51 40 33 20   26, 29, 30 51 45 32 20 Hertzdorf 10 53 10 30 40 Hertzfelt 110, 12 53 10 30 30 Hertzhoh 3, 5 53 55 25 30 Hertzoburg 01 48 00 33 10 Hertzogaurach 34 49 30 27 40 Hertzogenhant 41, 42 48 50 24 00 Hertzoggraben 27 51 40 33 05 Hertzogwalda 23, 27 51 15 32 30   30, 31 50 40 34 30 Nider Ober Hertzog∣walda 27, 29 51 25 33 20 Hertzogwaldaw 26 51 25 33 10 Mittel Ober Hertzog∣waldaw 26 51 50 32 30 Hertz-worwerg 30 50 40 34 20 Heruy le Chastel 01 47 40 19 50 Sch. Herw. 40 48 20 24 25   01 52 10 25 00 Herworden 38 49 20 22 20 Hesbring 01 50 20 18 00 Hesdin 16 52 10 26 40 Hesede 17 52 25 26 30 Heselen 28 51 15 34 00 Heseling 05 53 25 25 40 Heselock 39 49 40 24 30 Heshurst 43 48 20 24 20 Hesingen 40 47 30 24 00   41, 43 47 20 23 55 Heslewag 45 28 09 25 30 Heslingen 16 52 25 27 40 Heslinwar 45 48 40 26 00 Hespach 44 48 30 24 25 Hess. 39, 41, 42 48 40 23 30 Hessding Hostim 32 48 50 33 10 Hesselnthal 37 49 45 25 50 Hessen 4, 15, 16 52 00 27 40   18, 39 51 40 27 30   40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 00 Lang Hessen 22 50 40 29 20 Hesskhen 45 48 50 25 40 Hesslach 45 48 30 25 50 Hessling 05 53 25 25 40 Hessndick 38 52 00 24 20 Hestedt 10, 11 52 40 27 40 Hetdorf 23 51 15 31 50 Hetster 15 51 10 28 20 Hettelen 38 52 20 23 40 Hetting 45 48 00 26 00 Hettstadt 37 49 45 26 10 Hertstet 1, 19 50 50 27 50 Hetzal 44 48 20 24 25 Herzdorff 12 53 20 30 40   22 51 00 28 00 Hetzenberg 1, 2, 33 50 40 34 40 Der Heu 16 52 00 27 50 Heuber 18 51 35 27 40 Heubiez 19, 20 51 45 28 30 Heuchling 34 49 20 28 10 Heudorf 31 50 05 33 50 Hevel 22, 23 51 10 31 10 Heven 16, 17 51 50 26 20 Hevenssen 16 51 35 26 50 Hevenstat 01 49 00 26 00 Hever 16, 17 51 50 27 50 Hevere 15 52 30 25 20 Heuneber 20 51 35 28 30 Heuneburg 14, 20 51 10 28 40 Heunenbach 20 51 45 28 30 Heunenberg 20 51 45 28 30 Heuptdill 37 49 35 26 00 Heuscheuns 31 50 25 33 10 Heusdorf 15, 19 51 00 28 20 Heuseburg 16 52 00 27 50 Heusen 41 48 05 24 40 Heusenstain 35 49 55 25 05 Heusletz 14 52 15 29 00 Heusowar 01 48 10 36 00 Heust 21 51 30 29 30 Heuwigleben 19 51 05 27 20 Hewbach 40, 41, 42 48 20 24 30 Hewberg 40 47 35 24 15 Hewersheim 40 48 00 24 20 Hewershuss 41, 43 47 55 24 15 Hewerswerda 1, 22 41 20 31 10   23, 24 51 30 31 10 Hewerswerda Herrs∣chaft 23 51 35 31 00 Hewill 40 47 55 24 25 Ter Hey 38 52 00 20 00 Gross Kl. Heybach 37 49 40 29 50 Heychling 34, 45 48 50 26 30 Heyda 26, 28 51 50 32 30 Heyde 2, 5 54 50 25 50   30, 31 50 25 34 20 Hinder Heyde 23 51 30 32 10 Klein or Un∣ter Heyde 23 51 35 32 10 Nider Ober Heyde 23 51 25 32 10   29 51 20 33 20 Pensiger Heyde 23 51 25 32 00 Prubusche Heyde 23 51 35 32 00 Heyde Vorwerg 27 51 40 33 30 Heydeberg 29 51 10 33 20 Heydemuhl 27 51 35 33 10 Zur Heyden 19 50 45 27 40   36 50 45 27 50 Hof Heydt 37 49 40 26 05 Heyde Wirsewitz 27 51 40 33 30 Heydichen 27 51 40 33 50 Heyerdorf 22 50 50 28 30 Heyersdorf 16, 22 52 05 27 50 Heyersen 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Heygerode 19 51 15 26 50 Heygling 01 48 40 26 40 Heymarssen 15 52 30 25 20 Heyn 15 42 10 26 40 Heysenwaldt 45 49 15 26 00 Heyterod 19 51 20 26 40 Heytnberg 01 47 00 32 00 Hichalt 41, 42 48 10 23 55 Hiczkendale 14, 15, 20 51 20 28 20 Hiddensche W. 08 54 40 30 00 Hidl. 34 50 00 28 20 Zum Hiege 16 51 40 27 50 Hiel 40 27 30 24 05 Hierge 38 50 00 20 40 Hiverwasser 02 50 30 30 40 Kluziwody 33 50 30 31 40 St. Hilarie 41 47 25 23 10 Hilbersdorff 22 50 40 29 00 Nider Ober Hil∣bersheim 39 49 50 24 10 Hilbertzheim 16 51 20 26 20 Hilckersberg 33 48 30 30 30 Hildebrantshagen 07 53 20 30 50 Hilders 34, 36 50 30 26 40 Hildesen 15 52 20 25 20 Hildesheim 1, 4 52 20 26 40   6, 15, 16, 17 52 20 26 20 Hildesheim Epis∣copars 15 52 20 16 20 Hilershusen 16 51 40 26 40 Hilgendorp 07 53 35 28 20 Hilgen Muschel 39 49 20 24 00 Hilgenslede 02 54 20 26 20 Hilichrode 20 51 45 28 10 Hilkenbrede 16, 17 51 55 26 00 Hillerslebn 14 52 00 28 30 Tzum Hilligen Closter 02 53 00 28 40 Hilligen Creutz 05 53 50 25 10 Hilligendael 2, 4, 6 53 20 26 50 Tzum Hilligen∣graben 02 03 00 28 50 Hilligensteden 05 53 55 25 50 Hilligenwort 05 53 50 25 20 Hilligesvelt 4, 17 53 00 25 20 Groten Hil∣ligesvelt 16, 17 51 55 26 10 Hilpershausen 34, 36 50 30 27 40 Hilpertsaw 40 48 35 24 45 Hilprgk 36 50 15 27 30 Hils Mons 16, 17 51 50 26 30 Hiltenhusen 41, 42 48 30 23 45 Hiltmansfeld 40 48 30 24 30 Hiltpetstain 34 49 00 28 10 Hiltren 01 47 50 24 10 Hiltschin B. Hu∣cin 24, 32 49 50 35 00 Hiltzen 42 48 10 24 00 Hiltzetz 40, 41, 43 48 05 24 00 Hilvershausen 17 51 45 26 30 Hiltzerode 19 51 15 26 40 Himesken 22 50 00 28 20 Himlisch Ribney 31 50 00 33 20 Himmel 05 53 40 25 40 Himmel Port 1, 10, 12 53 00 30 20   38 51 20 24 00 C.L. Himmelporten 37 49 45 26 15 Himmelryck 1, 4 52 20 25 20 Himmelsberg 16 51 20 27 40 Himmelskron 34 50 00 28 30 Himmelstat 34, 37 49 50 26 30 Ampt Himmel∣stede 10, 13 52 40 32 20 Himmelstein 22, 33 50 20 30 00 C. L. Himmelthal 37 49 40 25 50 Himperg 01 48 00 34 00 Hindberg 07 53 40 28 00 Hindelopen 1, 38 53 00 21 20 Hindorp 03 53 55 24 50 Klein Hinersdorf 10, 11 52 50 28 40 Hinnebocke 05 53 20 25 10 Hinnendorff 10, 12 52 50 30 40 Hinrichsberge 07 53 20 29 40 Hinrichdorf 08 53 00 32 00 Hinrichshagen 08 53 40 30 00 Hinsberg 41 48 45 23 20 Hinsburg 39, 42 48 40 23 50 Hinschendorf 8, 10 53 30 32 30 Hinsh 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 05 Hinstein 02 51 10 29 20 Hinsthenfelden 03 53 55 26 40 Hintermuhl 29 51 10 33 30 Hintersnahe 36 50 30 27 30 Hintling 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Hintzdorff 14, 26, 27 51 20 29 10 Klein Hintzendorff 26 51 30 32 50 Hintzenhagen 07 53 40 49 30 Hipenburg 38 48 40 25 20 Hiplsfelt 44 48 30 24 25 S. Hippolitte 01 47 10 23 10 Hipsheim 40, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 10 Hipsthoff 39, 45 49 00 25 40 Hirckh. 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 05 Hirffelde 24 51 00 31 30 Hirlotzkratscham 28 51 05 34 20 Hirmo 33 51 50 30 50 Hirns 2, 22 50 50 30 00 Hirsaw 45 48 15 25 40 Hirsbach 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 45 Hirschaw 34 49 30 28 50 Hirschbach 19, 36 50 35 28 20
Hirsch∣berg 22, 24, 25, 34 50 40 31 30 Hirschebach 22 51 20 49 20 Hirschselda 25, 26 51 00 31 40 Hirschfelt 1, 33 50 50 26 20   2, 21, 22, 23 50 00 30 10 Hirschiug 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Hirschlanden 34 49 20 26 00 L. Hirschlanden 37 49 30 26 10 Hirschorn 34, 38, 39, 45 49 20 25 20 Hirschorner 16 51 45 27 30 Hirschsprunck 35 49 55 25 00 Hirseberg 33 50 50 32 40 Hirsendorff 22 50 40 28 30 Hirshaid 34 49 50 27 50 Hirsta 39 49 30 23 20 Hirstat 41, 42 48 50 24 15 Hirsthaw 38, 45 48 20 25 00 Hirtendorff 26 51 40 32 30 Hirtzbach 38, 41 47 20 23 40   42, 43 48 10 23 50 Hirtzenhau 34 50 30 25 40 Hirtzfelden 40, 41, 43 47 45 23 55 Hisph. 41 48 15 24 10 Hitenburg 40 47 40 24 15 Hitmerode 20 51 45 28 10 Hittefeldt 2, 4, 6 53 40 26 20 Hitzacker 01 53 20 28 00 Hitzfelde 05 53 20 26 30 Hitzger 4, 6 53 40 28 20 Hizenqurg 40 47 35 24 15 Hlnsko 2, 32, 33 49 30 31 30 Hlnsitz 33 50 10 32 20 Hluboka 33 49 00 31 30 Hluchow 32 49 20 34 00 Hluck 1, 34 49 00 34 40 Hniewkowtz 33 49 00 31 30 Hnsb 44 48 20 24 25 Die Hoben 05 53 25 24 50 Nider Hobendorff 22 50 40 29 20 Hobeneck 45 48 45 25 50 Hoben Kirchen 22 50 50 29 50 Hoben Leme 22 51 20 29 30 Hoben Milsen 22 51 10 29 00 Hoberechberg 22 50 00 29 20 Der Hoberg 15 51 20 26 20 Hobin 41, 42, 44, 45 48 25 24 20 Hochatzen 41, 42 48 30 24 05 Hochausen 38 49 20 25 20 Hochbeltsch 25 51 40 33 20 Hochberg 38, 41, 43 48 00 24 20   40, 45 48 00 24 25 Hochdorff 19, 22 50 50 28 10   45 48 40 25 30 Hochefelde 19 50 55 28 00 Hocheim 19, 38 50 55 27 40 Hochem 39 49 30 24 40 Hochendorf 16, 19 51 20 28 20 Hochenegg 40 47 40 24 20 Hochenwurg 34 49 10 28 50 Hochesizaitz 40 47 45 24 15 Hochfelt 38, 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 05 Hochhausen 34, 39, 45 49 20 25 30   37, 45 49 35 26 95 Hochheim 19 51 05 27 20 Hochkirch 22, 25 50 40 29 50 Hochspeir 39 49 10 24 10 Hochsenberg 01 54 00 35 40 Hochsett 01 49 40 27 30 Hochstadt 35 50 00 25 10 Hochsterkamp 23 51 00 32 00 Hochstet 34 49 40 27 30   40, 41, 42 48 35 24 10 Hochstetten 40 47 50 24 10 Hochturff 39 49 10 24 40 Hochurst 40 48 20 24 20 Hochutzen 44 48 25 24 05 Hochwart 40 48 45 25 00 Hochweiler 40 48 40 24 25 Hochwiderberg 09 54 35 31 00 Hockawitz 02 50 30 31 00 Hockele 04 53 40 26 00 Hockelen 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Hockenheim 39 49 10 25 00 Hockeren 16, 17 51 40 26 50 Hockericht 26 51 45 33 00 Hockstet 19 51 00 28 00 Hodan 02 50 30 30 20 Hodddelsen 4, 10 53 00 27 40 Hodenberg 05 53 10 25 20 Hodensleben 14, 16 51 50 27 50 Hodkawitz 33 50 30 32 00 Hoe 2, 22, 33 50 30 29 40 Hoechst 35 50 00 24 50 Hoeckbyll 05 53 35 24 20 Hoeckenheim 45 49 10 25 10 Hoehusen 16 52 15 26 30 Hoe Kelen 38 51 40 21 00 Hoelb 2, 33 50 30 31 30 Hoelstein 38 47 00 24 00 Hoenbach 22 51 10 29 40 Hoenberg 34 50 00 26 30 Hoendorff 22 50 30 29 30 Hoenkinigsberg 42 48 05 23 50 Hoenstein 1, 22 50 40 29 40   2, 23, 34 51 00 29 50 Hoenstein Comi∣tatus 16, 19 51 35 27 30 Hoersel fl. 36 50 55 27 20 Hoest 38, 39 50 00 24 40 Hoestet 38 49 00 24 20 Hoeve 09 54 40 30 50 Hoewal 22, 23 51 00 31 00 Hoey 01 50 30 21 30 Hofelden 37 49 35 26 05 Hofeldt 37, 41 49 40 26 05 Hofen 39, 40, 45 49 30 24 50 Zuden Hofen 45 48 35 25 10 Hoff 1, 22, 34 50 20 28 50   14, 16 51 30 28 20 Hoff B. Dwor∣ce 41, 22, 43 48 10 23 30   32 49 40 34 30 Hoffehen 28 51 10 34 05 Hoffeck 22 50 10 28 50 Hoffelt 08 53 40 33 00 Hoffen 39, 42 48 40 24 20 Hoffgen 22 51 10 49 40 Hofftetten 37 49 55 26 00   41, 43 47 20 23 55 Hofheim 34, 36 50 10 27 10 Nider Hofheim 35 50 00 24 45 Hofhurst 40, 43, 44 48 25 24 20 Hofswicksel 17 52 30 26 50 Hofwir 40, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 25 Hog 01 54 00 23 50 Hoge 1, 38 50 20 21 20 Hogebuchten 15 51 50 26 20 Hogefyn 10, 12, 13 52 30 31 10 Hogekercken 05 53 40 24 10 Hogekirch 23 51 20 32 00 Hogekrog 04 53 20 28 40   10, 11 52 40 28 00 Hogendorp 07 53 40 28 20 Hogenfelde 2, 7 53 10 28 00   10, 11 53 10 27 50 Hogengrape 08 53 00 33 00 Hogenholt 8, 10, 13 53 10 31 20 Hogenkercke 07 53 50 28 10 Hogenmucker 08 53 50 30 00 Hogenpritz 07 53 35 28 50 Hogenstein 08 54 50 34 00 Hogent 01 47 40 18 30 Hogenzier 07 53 20 30 20 Hoge Sarden 10, 12, 13 52 40 31 20 Hageschar 2, 3, 5, 6 53 50 26 20 Die Hoge Wegen 05 53 40 24 40 Hoge Wische 07 53 20 28 40 Hohberg 29 51 10 33 00 Hohebec 14 51 45 29 00 Hoheberg 38, 45 47 40 25 20 Hohe Giest 16 51 40 27 40 Hohe kirch 23 51 15 31 30   25, 26, 29 51 10 32 00 Hohelb 1, 24 50 30 32 30 Hoheleina 15 51 20 29 20 Hohe Maut B. Meyto 01 49 40 33 00   2, 24 49 40 31 50   32, 33 49 40 33 00 Hohen 01 53 00 27 10 Hohenachersc 41, 43 47 55 23 35 Hohenaw B. Cah∣now 1, 32 48 30 34 20 Hohen Banderen 19 51 25 26 30 Hohenberg 1, 45 47 50 25 20   10, 11 52 30 28 40 Hohenboraw 26 51 55 32 50 Hohenburg vel S. Otilia 41, 42 48 50 24 15   44 48 10 24 00 Hohen Damm 11 52 30 28 00 Hohen Dodleben 18 51 45 28 30 Hohendorff 21 51 20 29 40   33 49 00 30 10 Nider Hohendorff 22 50 40 28 10 Hohene 10, 12 52 10 31 00 Hoheneck 39 48 40 25 40 Hoheneiche 19 51 05 26 30 Hohen Enpleben 18 51 25 28 30 Hohenfels 34 49 10 28 50   41, 42 48 50 24 05 Hohen Gosdorff 21 51 20 29 20 Hohenhamslach 39, 45 48 50 25 30 Hohenhorn 05 54 05 25 50 Hohenkinigs∣berg 41, 43 48 05 23 50 Hohenkirch 33 48 30 31 20 Hohen Letz 14, 21 51 45 29 30 Hohenloe Co∣mitatus 34, 45 59 00 26 00 Hohenoaon 33 48 40 34 00 Hohenporstel 16 52 10 26 20 Hohenrechberg 34 49 00 28 50 Hohenroda 16 51 55 26 00 Hohen Schonhusen 12 52 10 30 50 Hohenstauf 45 48 30 26 20 Hohenstein 1, 15 47 20 33 30   41, 42, 45 48 25 23 45 Hohenstein Comi∣tatus 15 51 30 27 00 Hohen Stift 21 50 55 29 30 Hohenward 2, 15 52 20 28 30   10, 11 51 50 28 40 Hohenwitz 14 51 55 29 00 Hohenwond. 14 51 55 28 50 Hohenze 2, 15 51 55 28 50 Hohenzegatz 2, 15 52 10 28 50 Hoherechberg 1, 33 49 50 29 20 Hohernaben 10, 12 52 20 29 20 Hohersdorff 26, 27 51 50 33 10 Hoherziatzs. 18 51 50 29 10 Hohesichel 31 50 25 33 00 Hohe Turn 21 51 00 29 00 Die Hohe Wait 16, 19 51 20 27 30 Hohkirch 19, 27 50 50 27 30 Hohmbury 19 51 10 27 20 Hohn 06 52 25 27 00 Hohngern 45 48 35 26 00 Hohurst 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 20 Hohwettzen 26 52 00 32 40 Hohwirden 19 51 00 27 40 Hoierswerda 02 51 20 30 20 Hoikendorp 08 53 20 32 00 Hoingen 40 47 55 24 10 Hojoul 38 50 20 21 20 Hoir 18 52 00 27 50 Hoistede 39 49 40 23 40 Hoitzendorp 07 53 30 30 50 Holach Com. 01 49 10 26 20 Holan 33 50 30 31 20 Holbrun 33 48 30 33 10 Holchen fl. 44 48 25 24 20 Holchter 16 52 05 27 20 Holczeel 20 51 30 28 30 Holczengel 20 51 20 27 50 Holdenstet 19, 20 51 35 28 20 Holdorp 2, 7 53 50 27 40 Hole 34 49 20 26 40 Holenau 31 50 25 33 30 Holenberg 16 51 50 27 30 Holenburg 33 48 30 35 10 Holeschow 1, 32 49 20 34 40 Holfelt 34 49 50 28 10 Holice fl. 05 53 10 24 40 Holingshuss 05 53 05 24 30 Holitsch 32 48 40 34 40 Holkeberg 08 53 40 33 00 Holl 40 47 40 24 20 Hollandia Comi∣tatus 1, 38 52 00 20 20 Holle 4, 5 53 20 24 20   16, 17 52 00 26 50 Holleben 19, 22 51 30 28 50 Hollen 05 53 40 26 10 Hollenburg 1, 33 48 20 32 50 Hollensted 4, 6 53 20 27 20 Hollerborn 35 50 00 25 10 Hollum 38 53 20 21 20 Holm 2, 4, 5 53 40 26 30   6, 7 53 05 26 30   16, 40 52 30 27 10 Der Holm 8, 9 54 30 30 00 Holmeck 39 49 10 24 00 Holmkirchen 39 48 50 23 30 Holmstein 16, 19, 39 51 45 27 50 Holnberg 34 49 40 28 20 Holnstede 16 51 40 26 50 Holnstein 33, 34 48 30 32 30 Holloehen 20 51 30 28 00 Holpte 07 53 25 30 50 Holrmont 16 51 50 26 00 Ducatus Holsaltia 01 54 40 25 40 Holsen 05 53 35 25 00 Holspron 45 48 30 25 20 Holstatt 36 49 50 27 40 t'Landt tho Hol∣stein 03 53 55 25 00 Holsteinsche Wis∣chen 03 53 50 26 40 Holsten graven 3, 5 50 50 25 00 Holstet 16, 19, 20 51 35 28 00 Holt 1, 38 51 20 22 40 Holtdorf 16 52 35 25 50 Zum Holte 05 53 30 25 00 Holtem 15 52 00 27 20 Holtemburg 15 52 00 27 40 Holtensen 16, 17 51 40 26 40 Holteselen 07 53 00 28 30 Holtesen 16 51 45 26 20 Holtfeld 01 49 50 28 10 Holtgraste 05 53 10 24 10 Holtheim fl. 16 51 55 27 50 Holthuise 15 52 20 25 20 Holthusen 07 53 25 28 20   10, 11, 17 52 20 27 30 Holtz 41, 44 48 15 24 00 Bran Clebis∣che Holtz 18 51 50 28 00 Holtzarcsig Rootz 21 51 10 29 10 Holtzdorff 19 51 00 28 00 Holtzen 5, 16 53 10 25 40   40, 41, 43 47 35 24 05 Langen Holtzen 16 51 55 26 40 Der Holtzenberg 19 51 25 27 30 Holtzerode 19 51 40 26 30 Holtzh. 41, 42, 43 48 20 24 05 Holtzhaus 40 47 55 24 20 Holtzhause 19 50 50 27 40 Holtzhausen 02 53 30 28 00   15, 16, 39 51 10 28 20 Nider Ober Holtz∣hausen 19 51 10 28 20 Holtzhauserhoff 35 50 00 25 00 Holtzheim 44 48 20 24 10 Holtzhoff 40 48 25 24 20 Holtzhuss 43 47 55 24 15   41, 42, 44 48 25 24 20 Holtzkirche 23 51 10 32 10 Holtzkirchen 34, 37 49 40 26 20 Holtzkirch∣hausen 34, 37 49 40 26 20
Holtz Mun∣den 15, 16, 17 51 50 25 40 Holtstets 22 51 00 28 50 Holtz Suera 16 51 20 27 40 Holtzwihr 41, 43 47 55 23 55 Holutede 17 51 45 26 40 Homberg 1, 34 50 40 24 00   37, 38, 45 49 45 26 05 D Homberg 19 50 45 28 00 Hombergen 38 52 00 23 40 Homborg 38, 39 49 00 23 00 Homburg 16, 17 51 45 26 20 Hombreisen 16 51 20 26 30 Homersleben 16, 18 52 00 28 20 Homfalizer 1, 38 50 00 22 00 Homgen 41, 43 47 55 24 05 Homhag 10, 12 53 00 30 50 Homo 2, 33 50 10 32 00 Homon 15 51 30 26 00 Honaw 38, 40 48 20 24 20   41, 42; 44 48 25 24 15 Honberg 34 49 40 20 10 Hondecourt 01 50 00 19 10 Hondensleben 18 51 50 27 50 Hondorf 22, 31 51 00 28 40 Hondsloch 26 51 45 33 10 Hondtsbos 01 52 50 20 30 Honerland 07 53 05 27 40 Honersen 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Honersleben 14 51 50 28 00 Honhorst 16 52 30 27 00 Honichen 33 50 50 29 50 Honla 16 52 20 27 30 Honnover 05 53 10 25 00 Honningen 19 51 15 27 10 Honraid 15 52 10 25 40 Honscha 23 51 25 31 30 Honse 4, 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Honsinni 01 50 20 32 40 Honsain 34, 36 50 10 27 50 Honstatt 22 51 10 29 40 Honstet 19, 20 51 40 28 40 Honteborg 04 52 20 24 40 Hontorp 07 53 40 28 00 Hongehorst 03 53 50 25 40 Hong Pawen Mons 41 47 40 24 10 Hongstraaten 01 51 20 20 40 Hoorn 1, 38 52 40 21 90 Hope 2, 3, 4, 6 53 40 26 40 Hopensted 16 52 00 27 30 Hopes 05 53 20 24 10 Hopfeberg 27 51 30 33 15 Hopfen 45 48 10 25 10 Hopffga 19 51 00 28 00 Hopffingen 37 49 35 26 00 Hopnsted 18 51 35 27 20 Hoppegarte 10, 12 52 10 31 20   22 51 00 29 30 Der Hoppelberg 18 51 35 27 50 Hoppen 07 53 40 28 30 Hoppenberg 26 51 30 33 10 Hoppenrade 07 53 40 29 20 Hoppensack 16 51 45 27 20 Hoppensen 16, 17 51 40 26 30 Hoppenthale 20 51 25 27 50 Hora 2, 33 49 50 31 20   39, 45 48 40 25 20 Horazdieg 01 49 10 30 40 Horb. 1, 38, 45 48 10 25 10 Horba 19 50 40 28 00 Horbarnsen 16 51 55 26 40 Aufdem Alten Horbe 19 50 40 27 50 Horben 43 47 50 24 20 Horbury 01 48 00 23 50   1, 15, 20, 22 51 20 28 00   41, 43 47 55 23 55 Horckhaim 45 49 00 25 50 Hordorf 16, 18 52 00 28 00 Horen 16 51 55 27 40 Horenburg 19 51 35 28 30 Horgenberg 45 49 00 26 10 Horgen 38 46 40 25 00 Horitz 33 48 40 31 10 Horka 23, 24, 25 41 20 31 30 Horla 16, 19 51 35 28 10 Horla fl. 24, 25, 27 51 50 34 00 Hormer Siel 05 53 35 24 20 Horn 1, 33, 34, 45 48 40 32 50   4, 5 54 20 26 20   22, 25 51 20 29 50 Aufden Horn 19 51 15 27 30 Horn Sylva 07 53 10 28 30 Hornbach 41, 42 48 55 24 30 Hornberg 1, 34, 38, 41, 45 48 00 24 50 Hornburg 1, 4, 5 49 10 23 10   16, 17, 18 52 00 27 30   20, 38, 40 51 30 28 30 Horneborch 2, 3, 6 53 45 25 50 Horneckh. 34, 45 49 10 25 40 Hornhausen 18 51 45 27 50 Hornhusen 16 52 50 28 00 Horningen 16, 19 51 35 27 40 Hornitz 23 51 00 31 40 Hornknotn 23 51 00 32 10 Hornsen 16, 17 51 55 26 50 Hornsomeren 15 51 10 27 40 Hornstein 33 50 40 29 30 Hornstorp 07 53 50 28 40 Horoderen 41, 43 47 40 23 35 Horoselly 33 50 00 30 30 Horosshowitz 33 49 40 31 00 Horott 41, 43 47 50 23 35 Horrenbach 39 49 10 23 40 Alt Horrenbach 39 49 10 23 40 Horsa 20 51 35 28 00 Horscha 22 51 20 31 30 Horschepnik 32 49 20 32 20   33 49 30 31 50 Horschutz 2, 33 50 10 31 20 Horsel fl. 19 50 55 27 10 Der Horselberg Mons∣horrisonus 19 50 55 27 10 Horselgart 19 50 55 27 20 Horselt 19 50 55 26 40 Horssawski 1, 33 49 20 30 00 Horsmar 16, 19 51 15 27 30 Horst 5, 7, 8 53 40 25 40     53 5 25 30     53 50 26 00   07 53 50 29 00     54 00 29 40     54 05 28 50   08 53 10 32 30     53 40 33 00     54 10 30 00     54 40 34 00   9, 10, 13, 14, 38 54 10 31 00 Gross Lutke Horst 08 54 10 32 30 L. Horst 10 54 00 32 10 De Horst 03 53 50 27 00 Thor Horst 07 53 25 28 20 Horsten 05 53 05 25 10 Horstmar 01 52 00 23 30 Horz 2, 44 33 50 30 20 Horzelsowitz 33 50 10 30 50 Horzelbach 40 48 20 24 50 Hoseringh. 4, 6 53 00 27 20 Hosherdach 40 48 40 25 00 Hoshurst 41 48 25 24 20 Hoskirchen 33 48 20 31 10 Hosnicz fl. 32 49 50 34 30 Hospital 38 46 00 24 40 Hospital Vorwerck 28 51 15 34 50 Hospozin 02 50 10 30 00   33 50 10 31 00 Hosska 33 50 20 31 30 Hosstitz 32 49 50 34 50 Hostal. 42 48 50 24 25 Z. G. Hostatt 37 49 30 26 10 Hostaune 33 49 20 29 50 Hosterlitz B. Ho∣steradice 32 48 50 33 30 Hostet 41, 43 47 50 24 05 Hosteyn Mons 32 49 20 34 40 Hostim 33 49 00 32 40 Hostinny 2, 33 50 20 31 30 Hosvitz fl. 24 49 50 34 30 Hoswir 41 48 15 24 20 Hotebor 14 51 35 28 10   16 51 55 28 10 Hotenbach 19 51 20 27 00 Hotorf 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 15 Hottelem 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Hottelstet 19 51 05 28 00 Hottelusche 02 52 50 28 20 Hottenbach 39 49 50 23 20 Hotton 38 50 00 21 20 Hotzenburg 40 47 30 24 20 Hotzeplotz 24 50 10 34 30 Hoven 05 53 05 24 50   40 48 45 24 25 Hougede 16 51 20 26 20 Hour 38 50 00 21 00 Housdorff 23 51 15 32 20 Houtleben 15 52 20 28 00 Houwenstein 38, 41 47 20 24 20 Howart 41, 42 48 10 23 50 Howezy 32 49 20 35 10 Howil 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 35 Howiller 42 48 45 24 25 Hoxer 16, 17 51 35 26 10 Hoxter 01 51 40 26 00 Hoy 16 52 35 25 50 Hoya 01 53 00 25 40 Hoybleck 10, 11, 14 52 10 29 00 Hoydeminden 16 51 20 26 50 Hoye 4, 6 53 00 25 40 Hoye Comitatus 06 52 30 26 10 Hoym 15, 16, 20 51 50 28 00 Hozem 4, 16 52 20 27 40 Hraby 01 49 40 31 50 Hradak 2, 33 49 40 30 30 Hradeck 1, 2, 33 49 40 31 40 Hradetzky 33 50 30 32 30 Hradisch B. Hra∣disste 01 49 00 34 30   32 49 00 34 40 Hradissiko 02 49 50 31 20 Hradisst 1, 2, 33 50 30 31 50 Hraditzko 1, 33 50 00 32 30 Hresthenschlag 33 48 40 32 00 Hroby Grab. 33 49 20 31 40 Hrotowitz 32 49 00 33 20 Hrubrany 32 49 20 34 10 Hrusschou 2, 33 50 10 30 40 Hu fl. 34 50 40 26 00 Hub. 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 25 Huberch 44 48 20 24 30 S. Huberten Ar∣dennes 01 50 00 21 10 Huchting 05 53 05 25 20 Hudemole 4, 6 53 00 26 20 Hudessen 17 52 25 26 50 Hueb 40 48 25 24 35 Huesden 38 51 40 21 00 Huessen 1, 38 52 00 22 00 Aufdem Huffeisen Mons 19 50 40 27 50 Huffen 42 48 10 24 30 Hugelsh 39 48 30 24 30   40, 41, 42, 45 48 35 24 30 Hugelstorp 07 54 05 30 00 Hugesburg 15 52 00 27 40 Huglen 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Hugrest 41 47 45 23 50 Hugshoff 41, 42 48 10 23 50 Hugshof∣fen 41, 42, 43 44 48 10 24 20 Hugshoven 40 48 15 24 20 Hugstet 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 15 Hugstorff 43 48 10 23 45 Huissloter 05 53 30 24 40 Hukeshoff 07 54 05 29 50 Hukestorp 07 54 00 29 20 Hukeswagen 38 51 00 23 40 Hul. 22 49 50 28 10 Hulff Gottes 15 52 00 27 00 Hulin 32 49 10 34 30 Hullersen 04 52 40 27 20 Hulm 29 51 15 33 30 Hulsborch 07 53 25 28 10 Hulst 01 51 10 20 00 Hulstein 16 52 05 25 50 Humelberg 40 47 55 24 15 Humelsban 22 50 50 28 30 Humerisch 28 51 15 34 10 Humme fl. 17 52 05 25 50 Hummel 16, 24 51 25 26 40   26, 29, 31 51 25 33 00 Hummelsberg 19 51 25 27 30 Hummelscham 19 50 50 28 20 Humpeletz 1, 32, 33 49 30 32 10 Huna 2, 10, 21 51 50 29 20 Hun Brod 32 49 00 34 50 Hundeborg 06 52 15 25 10 Hundelost 10 51 20 29 40 Hunden 40 48 30 24 25 Hundercy 26 51 40 32 50 Hundorff 29 51 10 33 00 Hundsborg 10, 11 51 50 28 10   14, 16 52 00 28 20 Hundsfeld 24, 25, 28 51 10 34 00   40 48 20 24 15 Hundsleben 18 51 55 27 40 Hundsloch 01 51 40 33 20   24 51 50 33 00   25 51 40 33 00   27 51 45 33 15 Hundsruck 15, 16 51 40 26 00   17, 20 51 50 26 20 Der Hundsstrauch 26 51 45 33 00 Hundt fl. 06 52 50 25 10 G. New Hundtheim 37 49 40 26 00 Hundtorp 05 53 15 24 50 Hunenburg 41, 42 48 40 23 55 Hunenwihr 41, 43 48 00 23 50 Hunerkirch 39 50 10 24 30 Hunern 26 51 35 33 30 Hunernest 20 51 55 28 30 Hunes Ruck 39 49 50 23 40 Hunfeldt 34 50 40 26 30 Hungen L. 37 49 30 26 10 Hungern alias Rosen 29 51 15 33 15 Hungersee 16, 19, 20 51 30 28 10 Hungerstorp 07 53 35 30 00 Hungrest 43 47 45 23 40 Huniburg 21 51 10 28 30 Gr. Kl. Hunin∣gen 40, 41, 43 47 30 24 00 Hu Ninsted 18 51 40 27 40 Hunnera 27 51 35 33 35 Hunnersdorf 28, 29 51 15 35 10 Hunningen 16, 19 51 30 27 50 Hunsborg 15 52 30 28 00 Hunsgrin 22 50 20 29 00 Hunsloch 41 48 50 24 20 Hunstorp 15 52 10 26 00 Hunta fl. 05 53 05 24 50 Hunte fl. 4, 5 53 00 24 40 Hunteballie 05 53 55 24 50 Hunteborg 1, 4 52 30 24 50 Huntlosen 05 53 00 24 50 Huntsbach 40, 43 48 45 24 25 Huntsfelt 34 50 00 26 40   41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 15 Huntzholtz 45 48 35 26 10 Huob 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 35 Huppen 03 53 55 24 50 S. Huprecht 41, 43 47 40 24 15 Hupstet 19 51 25 27 10 Hurbache 41 48 15 23 20 Hurden 38 46 40 25 00 Hurlow. 06 52 25 25 10 Hurspl 19 51 00 26 50 Hurte 15 51 40 27 00 Husbergen 41, 42 48 25 24 10 N. O. Husbergen 44 48 20 24 10 Huschdorff 19 50 35 28 30 Cl. Huseburck 18 51 40 27 40 Huseling 4, 5, 6 53 00 26 00
Husen 5, 38 53 00 25 00 Husenaw 28 51 15 34 05 Husenbury 41, 43 47 45 23 30 Husgaw 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Husigen 40 47 35 24 15 Husinetz 33 48 50 31 10 Husing 38, 45 47 40 24 40 N. Huss. 41, 43 47 30 24 00 Hussen 41, 42, 43, 45 48 05 24 10 Hussenbad 45 48 30 25 10 Hussn 38 48 00 24 20 Huss Pol 16, 17 51 45 26 20 Hustorpecz 1, 32 49 30 34 50 Husum 01 54 50 25 40 Huting 41, 43 47 35 24 00 Hutsbach 41 47 30 23 50 Hutscheroda 19 51 00 27 10 Dle New Hutte 39 49 30 24 50 Die Huttekatze 19, 36 50 30 27 50 Hutten 22 50 40 28 30 Huttenheim 41, 42, 43, 44 48 10 24 00 Huttentorf 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Huttern 43 47 55 23 35 N. O. Huttern 41 47 55 23 55 Hutticken 40 47 35 24 00 Huttwyl 1, 38 46 50 24 20 Hutzberg 19, 20, 36 51 35 28 20 Hutzeborch 2, 3, 6 54 00 26 10 Hutzenbach 40 48 25 24 50 Huxer 15 51 40 25 40 Huy 15 53 00 25 40 Huynen 38 50 20 23 00 Huysduyne 38 53 00 20 20 Huystede 01 53 10 25 30 I   DE Jaa 38 54 00 23 40 Jaae Tieff 05 53 35 24 30 Jabei 07 53 30 29 40 Thor Jabel 07 53 10 28 10 Jablanck 33 49 50 33 40 Jablunc 25, 26 52 10 33 00 Jablunka 1, 24, 32 49 20 35 40 Jablunki 26 52 15 33 00 Jabnisch 27 51 50 33 35 Jackschenaw 28 50 55 34 05 S. Jacob 19, 22 50 35 28 30   40, 41 47 25 24 05 Jacobsberg 16, 39 51 30 26 20 Jacobsdorff 8, 10 53 20 33 00   11, 13 53 05 29 00   26, 29 51 30 32 50   27, 28, 29 51 35 33 35 Jacobshagen 8, 10 53 30 33 00   12, 13 53 00 30 30 Jacobskirch 25, 26 51 30 32 40 Jacobs Sandt 03 53 45 24 50 Jacket 28 51 20 33 55 Jade 05 53 20 24 40 Jadeler 05 53 25 24 40 Jagetschutz 25 51 20 33 40 Jagel 10 53 00 28 10 Jager 09 54 20 31 40 Jagersburg 1, 10, 13 52 50 33 00 Jaghmoclen 15 52 00 26 00 Jaglitz 30 50 25 34 30 Jagow 08 53 00 33 00 Jagsthausen 34 49 10 26 20 Jahser 26 52 15 32 20 Jalspitz B. Gewssowice 32 48 50 33 20 Jamais 38 49 20 21 20 Jamen 7, 8 53 55 29 40 Jamesche See 08 54 30 33 30 Jamnitz 32 48 50 32 50 Jana 22 51 10 30 00 Jancke 01 52 50 32 30 Janckendorf 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 30 Jangeln 16 51 55 27 40 Jankowitschy 32 49 10 32 40 Janly 01 47 00 21 00 Jannevitz 7, 8 54 05 29 00 L. Jannevitz 08 54 50 35 00 Janow 08 53 40 30 30 Janowiecz 01 52 30 35 10 Janowitz 1, 32, 33 49 40 31 50 Gr. Kl. Janowitz 29 51 10 33 25     51 10 33 05 S. Jansberg 39 49 50 24 10 Jansselde 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 30 Janstet 14, 16 52 20 28 00 Jappentzin 08 53 40 30 30 Jappezou 7, 8 53 40 30 20 Jaranieritz 32 48 50 33 10 Jarckevitz 09 54 25 31 00 Jarkowa 31 54 25 31 00 Jarkowa 31 50 15 33 00 Jarmendorff 10, 12 52 30 30 10 Gr. Jarmendorff 10, 12 52 40 30 10 Jermeritz 32 49 30 33 40 Jarnitz 09 54 35 31 20 Jaroczewo 24 52 10 34 00   25 52 00 34 00 Jaroczin 24 52 10 34 00 Jaromirz 2, 24 50 10 31 40   26 52 10 32 40 Jaromirz Nowe∣mesto 1, 33 50 10 32 50   33 49 30 33 30 Jarsdorp 02 54 30 26 20 Kl. Jarsow 04 53 20 28 40   1, 11, 14 52 45 28 20 Jarxleben 15 52 20 28 20 Jaschkendorff 28, 29 51 10 33 40 Jase 04 54 00 28 00 Jasenick 08 53 30 31 00 Jasenitz 1, 2, 7, 8 53 20 28 00 Jashagen 08 54 40 34 00 Jaske 07 53 40 30 50 Jaskolky 25, 26 52 10 33 20 Jasmunt 8, 9 54 40 30 30 Jaspervitz 07 53 50 28 20 JasterSam 26, 27 51 45 33 20 Jatzen 08 54 20 34 00 Jauchzendorff 28 51 20 35 00 Javering 31 50 20 34 10 Jauffenberg 01 46 30 27 50 Javoir 38 48 20 21 40 Ducatus Javra∣viensis 24, 25 51 10 32 00 Jaurnig 30 50 25 34 00 Jauschwitz 27, 29 51 30 33 10 Jauschwitzermuhl 29 51 35 33 15 Jauzin Deussing 33 49 50 30 00 Jawer 01 51 00 33 10 Alt Jawer 24, 25, 29 51 10 33 00   29 51 10 33 10 Jawernich 24 50 20 33 30 Jawernig 23 51 10 31 50 Jawornick Mons 32 48 50 34 50 Jaxt fl. 34, 38, 39, 45 49 10 25 50 Jaztfeld 39, 45 49 10 25 40 Jaxthausen 45 49 10 26 20 Iben 14 51 45 29 20 Iber 05 51 40 26 20 Ibesdorff 26, 27 51 30 33 20 Ibicz 20 51 30 28 40 Ibory 01 52 10 24 20 Ichenheim 40, 42 48 15 24 20 Ichtstet 16, 19 51 25 28 10 Ichtershausen 19 50 55 27 40 Ampt Ichtershausen 19 50 55 27 50 Ichtersheim 40, 41 48 20 24 10   42, 43, 44 48 15 24 10 Idenstein 01 50 10 24 30 Idria 01 46 00 31 20 Idro 01 45 20 25 30 Idtstein 39 50 00 24 30 M. S. Jean 01 47 00 20 10 Jeben 10 51 30 29 30 Jebsheim 38, 41, 43 48 00 24 00 Jebskragh 10, 12 52 50 30 40 Jeckelburg 15 51 20 27 20 Jechting 41, 43 48 00 24 05 Jeddesloe 05 53 05 24 30 Jederw. 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Jeesse 2, 7 53 20 27 40 Jegerdorff B. Know 01 50 00 34 10   32 50 00 34 30 Jegerndorff 24 50 00 34 30 Jeher 07 53 15 28 00 Gross Jehser 25 51 40 31 40 Jehseritz 25, 26 51 50 33 20 Jellen 13 52 40 31 30 Jello 38 53 00 24 00 Jelmerspach 40 48 20 24 30 Jeltsch 24, 25, 28 51 00 34 00 Jemeppe 38 50 20 20 40 S. Jen 01 46 20 20 20 Jena 1, 15, 19, 22 51 00 28 30 Ampt Jena 19 51 00 28 30 Jenckendorff 23 51 20 31 40 Jenckwitz 28 51 05 33 40 Jene 22 51 00 28 30 Jenikow 1, 33 49 40 32 20 Jensen 17 52 25 26 30 Jenssonen 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 50 Jentkaw 29 51 10 33 25 Jentsch 30 50 30 34 10 Jerchel 10, 11 52 00 29 00 Jerichaw 2, 10, 11, 14, 15 52 30 28 30 Jeritz 14 52 35 29 10 Jerschendorff 28 51 00 33 30 Jersdorff 10, 12 51 50 31 10 Jersleben 14 51 55 28 30 Jerspach 40 47 35 24 30 Jertsch 28 51 00 33 50 Jerve 38 49 40 21 20 Jerusalem 30 50 30 34 20 Jerxen 16 52 05 27 40 Jeschwitz 28 50 55 34 05 Alt New Jeschwitz 29 51 15 32 40 Jeser 2, 7 53 30 27 50 Jesfeld 45 48 55 25 50 Jesing 45 48 15 25 40 Jeslnick 02 51 50 29 30 Jesow 07 53 20 28 00 Jessen 02 51 40 29 20   10 51 10 30 40 New Jessen 2, 15 51 40 28 40 New Jessens 21 51 15 29 10 Jesslitz 22 51 30 29 20 Alt New Jesswitz 14 51 15 29 20 Jesta 34 49 00 27 00 Jesteborgh 2, 4, 5, 6 53 40 26 20 Jesterborck 01 53 40 26 30 Jestnick 21 51 15 30 10 Jeting 45 48 20 25 20 Jetschaw 26 51 40 33 0 Jetschkittel 28 51 05 34 0 Jetze 06 52 40 27 4 Jetze fl. 02 53 00 27 4   4, 15 53 20 28 2 Jetzhusen 05 53 20 24 4 Jever 1, 5, 38 53 50 23 5 Land Jever 05 53 30 24 1 Jever Wadt 05 53 40 24 1 Jexe 28 50 50 34 1 Isentzheim 40, 42, 45 48 35 24 3 Iseren 4, 14, 16 52 40 28 4 Ifstet 19 51 05 26 5 Igelsay 34 49 20 26 3 Igelsberg 40 48 20 24 5 Igersheim 37 49 35 26 1 Igg. 01 46 00 32 1 Igla 33 49 10 32 1 Igla fl. 33 49 10 32 2 Iglaw B. Gihlawa 32 40 00 32 4 Iglo fl. 32 49 00 33 0 Iglsloch 45 48 35 25 1 Ignum 41 48 55 24 3 Ihana 02 51 10 29 1 Gr. Ihne fl. 10 53 10 32 2 Iimmer 16 52 10 26 3 Ilantz 01 46 10 25 50 Ilaw. 02 51 40 28 50 Ilawa 32 29 00 35 20 Ilberstet 14 51 30 28 40   20 51 55 28 30 Ile fl. 10, 14 51 50 29 00 Ileseld 07 53 35 30 40 Ilemsch 08 53 30 30 30 Ilenriedt 40 48 20 24 30 Ilent 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 2 Iler fl. 45 48 10 26 50 Ilfeld 16 51 35 27 50 Ilffelde 19 51 45 27 30 Ilgen 25 51 50 33 00 S. Illgern 40 47 45 24 10 Iling 39, 41, 45 48 45 24 3 Ilkirch 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 10 Ill. fl. 38, 41, 43 47 40 23 40   40, 42, 44 48 15 24 10 Ill. Walt 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 00 Gr. Lutk Ille 16 51 55 26 50   17 52 10 26 50 Illeben 19 51 05 27 20 Cl. Illefeld 18 51 15 27 20 Illelt 19 50 55 27 30 Illerstct 19 51 10 28 10 Illsur 41, 43 47 35 23 45 Illhusser 41, 43 48 00 23 55 Illing 38 46 00 2 20   39, 45 48 40 25 50 Illingen 39, 40 49 20 23 20 Illmesen 16 52 15 20 50 Illmunster 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Illzach 41, 43 47 40 23 45 Ilm 1, 19, 22 50 40 27 50 Ober Ilm 19 50 45 27 50 Ampt Ilm 19 50 50 28 00 Ilm fl. 19 50 45 28 00 Ilmbach fl. 1 50 30 28 30 Ilme fl. 16 51 40 26 40   17 51 50 26 30 Ilmenaw 19, 34, 36 50 40 27 50 Ilmenaw fl. 2, 4, 6 53 20 27 10 Ilnersdorff 22 51 00 28 40 Ilow 07 53 55 28 40   10, 12, 13 52 20 31 20 Ilsa fl. 15 52 00 27 20 Ilsborg 10, 11, 14 52 00 28 50 O. U. Ilsdorff 22 50 50 29 40 Ilse fl. 17 52 20 26 50   18 51 35 27 10 Gr. L. Ilsen 16 52 10 27 00   17 52 30 27 00 Ilsenborg 15, 16, 18 52 00 27 20 Ilst 38 53 00 21 20 Ilstat 01 48 20 30 30 Ilten 06 52 05 26 30 Iltz fl. 15 51 30 27 20 Iltzach 38 47 40 23 40 Ilversheim 39 49 40 24 30 Iluvicz S. 20 51 40 28 40 Ilwicz 19, 20 51 40 28 40 Ilwing 34 48 50 28 20 S. Imber 38 46 40 23 00 Imberg 28 51 10 33 40 Imbsen 16, 17 51 50 26 40 Imdensoden 19 51 15 26 30 Imendorff 18 51 45 26 50 Imenstatt 01 47 10 27 10 Imesum 04 54 00 24 40 Imsantbach 45 48 25 25 00 Imsegstar 16 51 25 26 50 Imhain 35 49 50 25 00 Imhant 44 48 25 24 25 Imickhen 40 47 35 24 05 Immekaten 2, 4 54 40 27 50   10, 11, 15 52 20 27 50 Immelingen 41, 42 48 40 23 30 Immelshusen 16, 17 51 40 26 50 Immen 14 51 45 29 20 Immendorf 16 52 05 27 10 Immenhausen 15 52 00 26 20 Immenrod 16 51 20 27 40 Immenroda 18, 19 51 35 26 50 Immeroda 16, 17 51 55 27 20
Impsling 42 49 00 24 35 Imsen 01 54 00 24 30 Imsheim 41, 42 48 35 25 00 Imstal 41, 42 48 40 23 50 G. L. Imstadde 16, 17 52 05 27 00 In fl. 33 48 10 30 40 Inching 34 48 50 28 10 Inchlowitz 33 50 00 30 50 Inckwiller 39 48 40 24 00 Indendorff 19 51 20 28 30 Inderst fl. 15 52 20 26 20 India 23 51 00 32 00 Inenheim 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 05 Ingden 38 52 20 33 20 S. Ingelbert 39 49 10 23 20 Ingeleben 16, 18 52 05 27 40 Ingelsing 34, 45 49 10 26 10 Ingelheim 38 49 40 24 20 Ober Ingelheim 39 49 50 24 20   39 49 50 24 20 Ingeln 4, 16, 17 52 20 26 40 Ingenheim 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 00 Inger 23 51 25 32 00 Ingersheim 41, 43 47 55 23 55 Gr. Kl. Ingersheim 45 48 45 25 40 Ingersleben 14 51 55 28 00   16 52 10 28 00 Ingerwitz B. Gim∣ramow 01 49 20 33 10 Ingiriller 32 49 30 33 20 Ingnum 39, 42 48 50 24 30 Ingolsh 41, 42 48 45 24 25 Ingolstat 01 48 40 28 20 Innerste fl. 6, 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Inaichen 01 46 30 29 40 Inowlockz 01 52 40 36 10 Inschen 05 53 00 25 30 Insling 34 49 10 26 50 Insprugg 01 46 50 28 20 Inslad 01 48 20 30 30   33 48 20 30 40 Intelingen 40 47 30 24 10 Inter 05 53 30 24 50 Interbich 19 51 05 27 00 Intzling 41, 43 47 30 24 05 Inwenden 21 51 05 28 50 S. Joan 1, 38 46 40 25 50 S. Job. k. 22 51 00 28 00 Jobhausen 21 51 15 30 10 Joche 22 50 30 29 10 Jochmistahl 10, 12 52 40 31 00 Jochomsdal 33 50 10 29 30 Jockenum 1, 39, 40 48 50 24 40 Joesenum 38 50 00 24 00 Jognie 01 46 40 22 50 S. Johan. 19, 20, 38 50 50 27 20   39, 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 00 S. Johan Fur∣ster Berga. 36 50 50 27 30 Johansberg 24, 30, 31 50 20 33 30 Johansfelt 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 30 Johansthall 24 50 10 34 00 S. Johans Weiden 20 51 45 28 30 Johlum 42 48 55 24 30 Johmen 23 51 25 31 20 Joinville 01 48 10 21 20 Jonas 14, 21 51 25 29 20 Jonswalt 22 50 40 29 10 Jonchery 01 49 10 19 40 Jondorff 19 51 40 28 30 Jonenborg 16 51 40 26 20 Jonesdorff 23 50 55 31 40 Jonenwitz 30 50 45 34 10 Jonkersdorff 34, 36 50 10 27 20 Jonowic 33 49 10 30 20 Jonsberg 26 52 00 32 20 Jonsdorff 29 51 15 33 10   30, 31 50 30 34 10 Jonstein 31 49 10 29 30 Jorcke 2, 3, 6 53 45 26 00 Jorckel 05 53 35 26 00 Jordans Muhle 25 50 50 33 40 Jorden 28 51 05 34 10 Jore 21 51 20 29 20 Joren 07 53 20 30 50 S. Jorg 04 53 20 25 00   41, 43, 45 47 50 24 15 Jorrensdorp 07 53 40 30 10 Jorriesdorp 07 53 50 29 40 Joseck 22 51 20 28 50 Joslawitz 32, 33 48 40 33 40 Jossel 19 50 50 27 40 S. Joft 05 53 35 24 20 Joun 38 46 00 23 40 Jourgen 03 53 55 26 30 Iphoren 34 49 30 27 10 Ippenhaus 45 49 15 25 10 S. Ipolite 38 47 00 23 00 Ips 1, 33 48 00 32 20 Ipsendorff 22 51 00 29 10 Ipserwald 33 48 30 32 10 Ipuguricina 01 46 30 32 00 Irfersgrun 22 50 30 29 20 Irinen 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 05 Irmelshausen 36 50 00 27 20 Irmersdorff 23 51 35 32 10 Irmingen 39 49 00 23 40 Irmst 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 00 Irsingen 27 51 40 33 20 Irube 14 51 45 29 40 Irupke 16 51 55 27 40 Ifa fl. 4, 6 52 40 27 40 Ischel 01 47 30 31 00 I2chenheim 41, 44 48 15 24 15 Iseher fl. 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 05 Iseberg 39 49 20 24 20 Iselburg 38 51 40 22 20 Iseloirt 38 52 00 22 00 Isenartz 01 47 30 32 50 Isenberg 38, 39 49 40 23 40 Isenborg 01 50 30 24 00 Isenbutel 4, 6, 16 52 40 27 40 Isenhagen 1, 4, 6, 14 52 40 26 20 Isenroda 15, 16 52 10 27 20 Isentzh. 41 48 35 24 30 Iseo. 01 45 10 26 50 Iser fl. 1, 24, 33 48 00 28 40 Iseritz 16 52 20 28 10 I2ernhagen 6, 16 52 20 36 40 Iserton 38 51 00 24 00 Iserstall 38, 39 49 00 24 20 Iserwiesen 23, 24 51 00 32 10 Isige 4, 16 52 20 27 20 Ismgen 08 53 10 32 00 Isiroda 4, 16, 17 52 00 27 40 Isie 01 47 10 19 50 Isle de Brie 01 49 10 17 50 Isne 01 47 20 26 50 Ispringen 40 48 45 25 00 Issenburck Co∣mitatus 34 50 20 25 20 Issendyck 01 51 20 19 30 Isserhamer 10, 12 52 40 30 40 Issihorst 38 52 00 24 40 Issoire 01 45 10 19 00 Alt Isswitz 21 51 15 29 20 Istein 1, 38, 40, 41, 43 47 30 24 00 Istervliz 14 51 50 29 10 Istet 20 51 25 28 10 Itenh. 41, 42 48 25 24 05 Itenwiler 41, 42, 44 48 15 23 55 Itersw. 41, 42 48 10 23 55 Irsch fl. 34, 36 50 20 27 40 Itterspch 40 48 40 24 55 Itzehoa 1, 2 54 20 26 00 Itzlsperg 45 48 40 26 50 Itzum 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Itzum 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Juber 10, 11 52 30 27 30 Juchsen 36 50 25 27 20 Judeberg 21 51 15 29 20 Jude 27 51 35 33 15 Dutsche Vendische Juden 10 52 40 28 00 Judenbach 36 50 20 28 00 Judenburg 01 47 10 32 10 Juditz 22 50 20 28 50 Judoigne 1, 38 50 40 21 00 Iven 08 53 50 30 30 Ivenack 1, 7, 8, 10 53 50 30 20 Ivenfliet 02 54 20 26 00   03 53 55 25 50 Ivenrode 2, 15 52 30 27 50 Julbach 01 48 10 30 00 Julenpusch 23 51 05 31 40 Ducatus Juliarensis 01 50 50 22 20 S. Julian 19 51 10 27 10 S. Julien 01 46 00 21 10 Jumeln 21 51 15 29 30 Junckerhuser 10, 12 51 40 30 40 Junfferstein 02 51 20 30 10 Jung Brimozel 33 50 10 32 00 Jungerleben 19 50 55 27 30 Jungserdorf 30 50 20 24 00 Junging 45 47 55 26 00 Jungmul 37 49 45 26 00 Jungstaw fl. 19 50 30 27 50 Ivoire 01 46 00 22 40 Juppendorf 26 51 45 33 30   27 51 45 43 30 Jura Mons 38 45 40 22 00 Juren 05 53 15 24 30 S. Jurgen 05 53 10 25 20 Jurtsch. 25, 26, 29 51 20 33 20 S. Just 01 45 30 19 30 Justing 45 48 10 26 20 Jutroschin 24, 25 51 10 33 30 Juxthardt 45 48 50 26 00 Juyst 01 54 00 22 40 S. Iwan 33 49 50 31 00 Izenroth 40 48 40 24 50 K   KAarsen 07 53 05 28 00 Kabbelow 10 51 50 31 10 Kabelitz 15 52 30 28 40 Kabelstorp 07 54 00 29 20 Kabily 33 48 50 33 50 Kablow 22 50 40 31 30 Kabra 27 51 40 33 15 Kackenniste 05 53 10 25 10 Kackerbeck 05 53 30 25 50 Kadan 01 50 10 30 10 Kadel 28 51 10 33 45 Kadelsburg 34 49 20 27 40 Kadem 05 53 50 26 30 Kadendorf 16 52 15 28 00 Kadorf 4, 16 52 40 25 40 Kasegourtz 01 49 10 30 40 Kasel 27 51 45 33 15 Kaseleben 27 51 4 33 40 Kaserberg 27, 29 51 30 33 25 Kagerdorf 08 53 50 31 00 Kagel 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 20 Kagenfels 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 50 Kagenum 41, 42 48 40 24 25 Kahlaw 26, 27 51 50 33 20 Kahme 24, 25 52 40 32 30 Kahminitz 33 48 50 32 20 Kahra 26 51 40 33 10 Kain 22 51 15 30 30 Kaiserswalda 29 51 15 32 45 Kake 14, 21 51 25 29 30 Kakeldutte 07 53 15 30 10 Kaken 2, 15 51 50 28 40 Kakerbeck 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 00 Kakitte 21 51 15 29 40 Kalb 38, 45 48 20 25 00 Kalba 18 51 30 29 00 Kalbach 34 50 30 26 10 Kalbe 2, 15 52 40 28 10 Kalbefleck 1, 10, 11 52 50 28 30 Kalberpusch 23 51 00 31 30 Kalbskopff 35 49 55 25 00 Kalbsriet 16, 20 51 25 28 20 Kelbswiler 41, 42 48 50 24 30 Kalckbruck 23 51 20 31 50 Kalckevitz 09 54 15 31 00 Kalckgeberg 20 51 30 27 50 Kalckhorst 07 53 55 27 50 Kalckosen 29 51 20 33 55 Kalckreut 34 49 30 28 00 Kaldenborn 19 51 40 28 20 Kaldenhaus 34 50 00 28 10 Kaldnbad 38, 39 49 00 24 00 Kaldnhart 38 51 20 24 40 Nien Kalen 7, 10 53 50 30 00 Old Kalen 7, 10 53 55 29 50 Kalenberg 04 52 20 26 20   06 52 00 26 20   10 51 30 29 00   14 51 45 25 50   15 52 10 26 00   16 52 05 26 40   17 52 20 26 30   17 52 20 26 30   19 50 55 27 00   41, 42 48 45 23 55 Kalendorf 14 51 20 29 10 Kaleneltz 17 51 50 26 50 Kalevelt 16 51 40 26 50 Kalfur 06 52 15 27 50 Kalis 1, 8, 10, 13 53 10 33 30   22 50 50 29 00 Kalisch 24 52 00 34 30 Kalish 01 51 50 35 20 Kalka 30 50 20 34 10 Kalle 19 51 15 26 40 Kailsstorp 2, 4 53 50 26 50 Kalmbach 45 48 35 25 10 Ausdem Kalemberg 19 50 45 29 00 Kalmuntz 1, 34 49 00 28 00 Kalmus 41, 43 47 20 23 35 Kalnbach 40 48 35 25 00 Kalsdorff 10 51 50 31 40 Kalsleben 19 51 15 28 10 Kaltasche 28 51 05 34 10 Kaltbrun 34 50 10 27 40 Kaltebortschen 27 51 45 33 30 Die Kaltegraben 16 51 30 27 50 Kaltegraben fl. 20 51 30 27 50 Kaltehaus 29 51 15 33 20 Kaltemarck 20, 21 51 45 28 50 Kaltebach fl. 24, 27 51 25 33 05 Kaltenbach 40 47 40 24 15 Kaltenborn 20, 29, 31 51 35 28 20 Kaltenbrun 41, 43 47 25 23 20 Kaltenhusen 38 48 40 23 40   39, 41, 42 48 50 24 00 Kaltenhuss 41, 42 48 35 24 20 Kaltenleagsfelt 36 50 35 27 00 Kaltennortheim 34, 36 50 40 26 50 Kaltensoutheim 36 50 35 26 50 Kaltenstein 24, 30 50 10 33 30 Kaltenvich 16 52 20 26 30 Kaltenwesten 45 48 55 25 50 Kaltewasser 23, 25, 29 51 20 31 50 Kaltherberg 40, 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Haltntal 45 48 30 25 40 Kaltzbach 33 49 10 29 40 Kaltzbach fl. 25, 26 51 20 33 20 Kaltzendorff 20 51 20 28 40 Kaltzig 26 52 10 32 20 Kam fl. 33 48 20 32 40 Kamarow 01 49 40 30 50 Kamberg 05 53 50 25 30   19, 33 51 05 28 40 Ampt Kamberg 19 51 05 28 40 Kamelwitz 27, 28 51 35 33 15 Kamen Stein 33 49 20 31 50 Kamendorf 28 51 00 33 50 Kamenitz 1, 32, 33 49 10 31 50 Kamentz 24, 30, 31 50 30 33 50 Kamer 10, 11, 14 52 30 29 00 Kameyk 1, 2, 33 50 30 30 00 Kamiensk 01 51 20 36 30 Kamin 01 52 10 35 50 Kamitz 09 54 35 31 10   24, 31 51 20 31 00 Deutsch Kamitz 30 50 25 34 30 Ober Nider Kamitz 30 50 25 34 00 Kammelwitz 26 51 35 33 10
Kamnitz Boh. 01 50 40 31 10 Kampe 1, 4 53 10 26 20   06 52 05 27 10 Kampe 28 50 50 34 10 Kampern 29 51 10 33 30 Kampno 24 51 20 34 30 Kamsdorff 22, 23 51 00 28 20 Kanbarge 2, 3 54 20 25 40 Kanckel 27 51 55 33 30   39, 40, 41 48 50 24 40 Kandern 41, 43 47 35 24 10 Kandorff 22 50 40 29 20 Kanisia 01 46 50 34 30 Kanitz 27 51 40 33 15 Kannaw 33 50 00 30 20 Kannenbalge 03 53 50 24 50 Kannemoer 2, 23 54 40 25 50   24 49 40 36 00 Kant 24, 25 51 00 33 30 Kanten 07 53 55 30 00 Kanthen 27 51 25 33 35 Kanwerff 16, 19 51 15 28 10 Kappel 22 50 40 29 50 Kappeln 01 55 00 26 30 Kapldorff 28 51 15 34 10 Kapu 01 47 30 35 10 K. Karb 22 51 20 29 00 Karbach 34 49 50 26 20   37, 38 49 50 26 05 Karbitz 27 51 40 33 50 Das Karckgen 19 51 35 28 00 Kare 10, 14 52 00 29 20 Kareleben 2, 15 52 20 28 50 Karen 22 50 50 29 00 Karet 41 48 05 24 05 Karetz 22 50 50 29 20 Kargaw 25, 26 52 10 32 40 Kargitz 07 53 45 29 10 Karich 40 48 25 24 20 Karitsch 26 51 40 32 50 Karitt 14 51 50 29 00 Karl 41 48 35 24 35 Karlat 32 48 30 35 00 Karlaw 30 50 30 34 20 Karlebach Gross Karlebach 39 49 20 24 30 Karlsbud 22, 33 50 10 29 50 Karlsberg 33 49 00 30 40 Karlsberg M. 32 49 40 34 20 Karlstat 34 49 50 26 30 Karlstein 1, 33 49 50 31 10 Krochpostel 2, 4, 6 53 40 26 30 Karpenstein 01 50 10 33 50   24, 30, 31 50 20 33 30 Karpfn 38, 45 47 40 25 00 Karstbach 41, 43 47 30 23 40 Karstbeleben 19 51 05 28 00 Karschin 26 52 05 32 40 Karsdorf 20 51 20 28 40 Karsentz 27 51 40 33 50 Karsfe 25 53 00 32 20 Kars Zensky 24, 25 51 40 33 30 Kartich 40 48 35 24 35 Kartow 01 53 00 33 00 Kartzig 08 52 50 32 30 Karwe 10, 12 52 40 29 50 Karwitz 10, 11 52 20 28 20 Kasegowitz 33 49 20 30 40 Kasenorth 05 53 55 25 50 Kasselboom 07 54 00 29 20 Kassow 07 53 50 29 10 Kastede 20 51 25 28 10 Kastermuhl 27 51 45 33 15 Kastet 16, 19 51 25 28 10 S. Kal. 41, 43 47 40 23 40 Katelenburg 15, 16, 17 51 40 26 40 Katenoyss 22 51 10 29 00 Katerbaw 10, 2 52 40 29 40 Katerhagen 16, 17 52 05 26 00 Katernriet 19, 20 51 35 28 10 Katharinberg 2, 15, 33 50 30 29 30 Kathe 28 51 10 33 55 Kathes 28 51 15 33 50 Katingen 15 52 30 26 00 Katrinaw 19 50 45 28 20 Katsch vel Kitsch∣dorff 25 51 00 32 40 Katschach 01 46 30 30 10 Katschdorff 24 51 00 32 30 Katscher B. Ketre 24, 31, 32 50 00 34 30 Katschkaur 25, 26, 27 51 50 33 30 Katten 22, 23 51 20 31 10 Kattenhaven 15 52 10 25 40 Kattern 25 51 00 34 00 Katthern 28 51 00 34 20 Katthof 36 50 40 27 20 Katuzitze 33 50 10 31 40 Katwyck op Zee 01 52 10 20 10 O. Untern Katz 36 50 35 27 00 Katzbach fl 24 51 20 33 00   25, 26, 27, 29 51 20 33 20 Katzeberg 19 51 05 27 50 Katzen fl. 19, 36 50 30 27 50 Katzenbach 39 49 20 24 00 Katzenbrnech 16 52 00 26 00 Der Katzen∣hammer 19, 36 50 30 27 50 Die Katzenlire 19 50 40 27 40 Katzentha 41, 43 47 55 23 45 Katzerow 1, 33 49 50 30 20 Katzin 07 53 35 27 50 Katzow 33 49 40 31 50 Katzwang 34 49 10 27 50 Katzweiler 39 49 20 24 00 Kauder 25 51 00 33 00 Kaudersacker 37 49 45 26 20 Kaudewitz 29 51 10 33 15 Kaudi 38 48 40 24 20 Kaufbeurn 01 47 40 27 40 Kauffenheim 40 48 50 24 30 Kauffing 25 51 00 32 40 Kaulhoven 34 49 50 28 00 Kaulsdorf 22 50 30 28 20 Kaulwitz 28 51 20 35 00 Kaundorf 30 50 30 34 30 Kaunen 38 49 40 23 20 Kaunitz 32 48 50 33 40 Kaupr. 33 50 30 30 40 Kaurschimer Kraiss 33 49 50 31 30 Kaurzim 33 49 10 33 10 Kaurzimsky Krag 33 50 00 31 20 Kauschwitz 22 51 00 28 40 Kaustet 22 51 20 29 10 Kau Werss 20 51 20 28 10 Kawantz 08 54 00 33 00 Kawer 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Kl. Kawer 26 51 35 33 00 Kay 26 52 10 32 20 Kaya 33 48 40 32 50 Kaynberg 22 50 50 29 00 Kaystine 08 53 20 31 30 Keburg 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 35 Keckerod 19 50 35 28 20 Kedinger Pandt 2, 3, 5 53 45 25 30 Keffenh 41, 42 48 35 24 10   41 48 45 24 20 Keffenhuss 42 48 45 24 25 Keffersheim 44 48 20 24 25 Keglsberg 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 10 Kehe 14, 21 51 25 29 10 Kehrengraben 40 47 35 24 25 Keientz 38 46 20 24 40 Keigne 23 51 15 31 20 Keileag 19 50 45 28 10 Keim 22 50 20 29 20 Keindorff 30 50 20 34 20 Keinitz 22 50 50 29 20 Keinsh. 41 48 00 23 45 Keir 44 48 25 24 25 Keirtorff 39 50 10 24 10 Keiseritz 09 54 30 31 20 Keisersberg 1, 38 48 00 23 40   41, 43 48 00 23 45 Keisers Esch 01 50 10 23 10 Aufder Keisers∣gruben 19 50 45 27 40 Keisers Luter 1, 38, 39 49 10 24 10 Keiserstul 1, 38 47 20 24 50 Keisersweert 38 51 10 22 50 Keive 23 51 35 31 40 Kelb. 43, 44 48 20 24 30 Kelbach 40 48 20 24 35 Kelberbach 34 49 10 26 40 Kelberla 6, 16, 18 52 15 27 10 Kelbra 1, 16 51 30 28 00   15, 18, 19, 20 51 30 27 40 Ampt Kelbra 16, 19 51 25 28 10 Kelburg 01 46 30 29 10 Kelez 32 49 20 34 50 Kelhaim 34 48 50 28 50 Kelinghusen 02 54 20 26 30 Kellen 40 48 25 24 15 Kellenbach 39 40 50 23 40 Kellerfeld 19 50 55 27 10 Kelmen 20 51 35 28 50 Kelmin 22 51 40 28 50 Kelmuntz 1, 45 47 50 27 00 Kelnichen 22 51 10 29 50 N. Kelnichen 22 51 10 30 00 Kelnitz 22 51 00 29 20 Kelsterbach 35, 39 49 55 24 50 Kelterstein 23 51 10 31 20 Keltschen 26 52 15 32 30 Keltzen 10 52 30 32 30 Keltzk. 10, 13 52 50 32 50 Kemaprun 33 48 30 33 20 Kemateu 33 48 30 30 10 Kembad 01 49 50 28 30 Kemburg 2, 15 51 40 29 00 Kemel 39 50 00 24 10 Kemeren 34, 36 50 00 27 40 Kemerzell 34 50 40 26 20 Ober Nider Kemitz 31 50 25 34 00 Kemme 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Kemmerdorf 28 51 10 33 40 Kemmeritz 19, 20 51 20 28 40 Kemna 15 52 00 26 00 Kemnich 22 50 50 29 00 Kemnitz 4, 10 53 00 28 20   11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 52 40 28 00 Alt Kemnitz 22 50 40 30 00   01 47 10 28 40 Kempach 37 49 40 26 05 Kempendorf 08 53 30 33 00 Kempnik fl. 33 50 40 29 40 Kempsch 28 51 05 34 10 Kempten 01 47 30 27 20 Kems 38 47 20 23 40   40, 41, 43 47 35 24 00 Kl. Kems 40, 41, 43 47 35 24 00 Kemshause 15, 16, 17 51 50 26 20 Kemvade 10, 12 51 40 30 10 Kemvitz 07 53 45 30 10 Kemzelin 10, 14 51 55 29 10 Kender 11 51 55 29 20 Kendler 22 50 40 29 50 Kenings fl. 03 53 45 24 40 Kenitz 10, 12 52 20 31 40   13 52 20 31 30 Kennewitz 22 51 20 29 00 Kenningheim 37 49 35 26 05 Kensdorff 10, 12 51 50 30 10 Kentschke 28 51 05 34 05 Kentzelin 08 53 40 30 00 Kentzin∣gen 40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 15 Kepril 10, 12 52 10 31 00 Kerbein 28 51 00 34 10 Kerberge 08 53 00 32 00 Kerbitz 2, 15 51 40 28 40 Kerch 10, 13 52 40 31 50 Kerchagendorff 08 54 10 30 00 Kerch Wae 05 53 05 25 40 Kerck 05 53 05 25 10 Kerckdo 08 54 20 30 30 Kerckdorff 9, 16 54 05 31 10 Kercke 14 51 45 29 10 Kerckehagen 8, 10, 13 53 40 32 30 Kercken 05 53 25 26 20 Ob. Kercken 16 52 05 25 50 Kerekmolegitz 07 53 45 29 10 Kerckrode 17 52 35 26 30 Kerck Werder∣kirck 3, 4, 6 53 45 26 50 Kerckwitz 30 50 25 34 10 Kerkow 10, 12 52 50 31 10 Kerkum 14 52 40 28 30 Kerleberg 19, 20 51 45 28 20 Kern 26 52 00 32 40   38 49 40 23 20 Kerndorf 31 50 05 33 20 Kerpen 38 50 40 22 40 Kersdpach 34 49 40 27 50 Kerspe 38 51 00 24 00 Kerstlingerode 16, 19 51 25 27 00 Kertin 14 51 00 29 00 Kertzfelt 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 00 Kervendonck 38 51 20 22 00 Kervin 06 52 45 27 30 Kerwin 04 53 20 27 40 Kerwitz 21 51 15 29 20 Kerz 41 47 55 24 20 Kesack 40 47 40 24 10 Kescassel 39 49 00 23 30 Der Alte Keseberg 18 51 50 27 50 Keselitz 21 51 35 29 30 Kesen 19, 22 51 10 28 40 Kesernburg 19 50 50 27 50 Kesersbach 40 48 20 24 25 Keslingswalde 31 50 05 33 40 Kesow 08 53 10 31 30 Ober Unter Kessach 37 49 25 26 10 Kessach fl. 37 49 25 26 10 Kessel 1, 22, 31 50 50 28 20 Deutsch Polnisch Kessel 26 52 00 32 30 Kessel Mons 19 50 40 28 10 Kesselitz 13 52 50 31 40 Kesseln 22 51 10 29 00 Kessig 19 50 45 28 30 Kessin 07 54 00 29 20 Kesslngen 45 48 40 27 10 Kestadt 34, 35 50 00 25 10 Kestagh 01 45 30 32 30 Kestede 20 51 35 28 50 Kestenholtz 41 48 05 23 55   42, 43 48 05 23 50 Kestern 39 50 10 23 50 Kestet 19 51 35 28 50 Kestrzan 33 49 10 31 00 Keta 22 51 10 29 10 Ketelsh 41 48 25 24 00 Ketendorst 19 51 00 28 10 Ketheim 01 48 40 28 50 Ketsch 38, 39, 45 49 10 25 00 Ketseldorff 32 49 40 33 30 Kettebach 39 50 10 24 20 Kettel 27 51 40 33 20 Kettelsbuttel 02 54 40 25 50 Kettenborg 4, 6 53 20 26 20 Kettenheim 39 49 30 24 20 Kettershaus 45 48 05 27 00 Ketwik 38 51 00 23 00 Ketzelin 10, 11 52 40 29 10 Ketzerdorff 24 50 50 34 30 Ketzin 1, 10, 12 52 10 30 00 Ketzlin 10, 12 52 40 29 40 Keverdal 39 49 20 25 00 Keula 16, 19 51 20 27 30 Ampt Keula 16, 19 51 20 27 40 Keulendorf 28, 31 51 05 33 40 Gr. kl. Keuna 19, 20 51 20 28 50 Keuschberg 15, 20 51 20 29 00 Keydel 01 50 00 22 50 Keysperg 2 49 50 33 30 Kherheim 39 49 10 24 45 Kherstina 01 45 30 34 00 Kherweiler 39 49 00 24 40 Khomoelen 03 53 55 26 30 Kickutt 09 54 30 31 30 Kiddendorff 07 53 35 30 10
Kieolt 16 51 40 27 20 Kiel 01 54 40 26 40   38 49 40 22 40 Kiensch 38, 43 48 00 23 40 Kientze 10, 11 52 50 27 40 Oer Nider Kies∣dorff 23 51 10 31 50 Kiesen 38 46 20 23 40 Kierwihr 41, 43 47 55 24 00 Kifel 25, 26 52 05 32 50 Kignitz 32 48 50 33 40 Kikeinde Marck 07 53 15 28 50 Kilberg 22 51 10 29 20 Kilchberg 38 46 40 25 00   41, 43, 45 47 35 23 25 Kilchen 41, 43 47 30 24 00 Kilchoffen 41, 43 47 45 24 15 Kilchzarten 43, 45 47 50 24 20 Kile 07 53 35 29 30 Kilgensteden 35 50 00 25 10 S. Killian 36 50 30 27 30 Killiansroda 19 51 00 28 10 Killer 45 48 05 25 50 Kilste 44 48 25 24 15 Kilstede 39 49 50 24 50 Kilstat 40, 41, 42 48 30 24 15 Kilynie 33 49 10 30 10 Kinburg 41 48 05 24 15 Kindelbruck 15, 16, 20 51 15 28 00   19 51 20 27 20 Kinderbalge or Wa∣genreide 03 53 45 24 20 Kinderballie 05 53 55 25 00 Kinderbier 10, 13 52 50 33 10 Kinderhagen 05 53 05 24 50 Kindleben 19 51 00 27 30 Kindringen 40 48 00 24 20 Kindring 43 48 00 24 15 Kingen 45 48 30 26 00 Kinhausern 19 51 05 27 50 Kinigbruck 41, 42 48 40 24 25 Kinit 22 50 40 28 20 Kinittzk. 22 57 20 29 50 Kinroda 16, 19 51 25 27 40 Kinrotstein 33 49 10 32 10 Kinsdorff 12 52 00 30 50   42, 43, 44 48 20 24 25 Kinsh 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 50 Kinspach 40 48 45 25 00 Kinthuren 41, 43 47 30 24 15 Kinting 41 48 00 24 15 Kintwiller 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Kintz fl. 34, 35 50 00 25 20   40, 41, 42, 43, 45 48 10 24 35 Kintzkertal 45 48 05 24 50 Kipenbach 34, 36 50 20 26 40 Kipenheim 40, 44 48 10 24 25   41, 42, 43, 45 48 10 24 20 Kirburg 01 46 40 29 40   40, 41, 42, 43, 45 48 05 24 20 Kirch 02 52 00 28 40 O. Kirch 41 48 15 23 55 . Kirch 41 48 00 23 50 Kirchaim 01 50 40 25 30 Kirchain 01 51 40 30 40 Kirchamervorst 45 48 25 26 00 Kirchan 2, 21 51 40 29 50 Kirchau 22 50 50 29 10 Kirchbach 45 48 50 25 30 Kirchberg 1, 39 49 50 23 40   19 57 00 28 30   19, 22, 35, 38, 45 50 30 29 40 Kirchberg Mons 19 50 35 28 30 KirchberyComitatus 19 51 00 28 40 Kirchbespach 19 51 05 26 30 Kirchdorff 16 52 10 26 20   30, 34 50 40 34 30 Kirche 15 52 00 29 00 Kircheberg 01 48 00 26 50 Kircheer 38 50 20 24 00 Kirchel 39 49 20 23 30 Kirchelhoff 37 49 45 25 55 Kircheim 39 49 20 24 30 O. Kircheim 44 48 15 24 00 Kirchem 39 49 10 25 10 Kirchen 22, 34 50 20 28 10   39, 41, 42, 44, 45 48 25 24 00 Ober Kirchen 26 51 25 33 00 Kl. Naun Kirchen 22 50 50 29 30 Kirchenrod 16 52 15 26 20 Kirchensittenbach 34 49 30 28 20 Kirchentellensfurt 45 48 15 25 50 Kircher 28 51 10 34 25 Kirch Gan∣deren 16, 19, 51 20 27 00 Kirch Gattendorff 22 50 10 29 00 Kirchhasel 19 50 45 28 20 Kirchhausen 40 47 40 24 15 Kirchheim 19 50 55 27 50 Kirckhoff 2, 3, 5, 6 53 50 26 20   40 47 50 24 15 Kirchpolei 20 57 50 28 40 Kirchpuhel 01 47 20 29 00 Kirchremda 22 50 40 28 00 Kirchscheidingen 19 51 20 28 30   20 51 15 28 40 Kirchstritz 22 51 00 28 50 Kirchtal 20 51 25 27 50 Kirchwerderkirch 2, 3 53 40 26 50 Kirchwinden 34 49 10 28 40 Kirchwistede 05 53 30 25 20 Kirchworber 16, 19 51 25 27 30 Kirchzarten 40 47 50 24 25 Kirckow 22 50 50 29 20 Kirtiow 32 49 00 33 20 Kiritz 02 52 50 28 50 Kirn 39 49 40 23 30 Kirberg 41, 42 48 05 24 20 Kirschfurt 40, 43 48 05 24 10   37 49 40 25 55 Kirwill 42 48 35 24 00 Kislelbach 19, 36, 39 50 45 26 50 Kiselitz 23 51 10 31 50 Kishausen Desert 16, 19 51 25 28 00 Kisn haltz 40 47 35 24 20 Gr. Kislloch 1, 39, 45 49 00 25 10 L. Kisow 08 54 00 30 30 Kissenbruk 18 57 40 27 10 Kissick 34 50 10 27 00 Kissin 7, 8 53 40 30 30 Kissing 01 50 10 27 00 Kissingen 36 50 10 26 50 Kissperg 02 50 30 29 50 Kist 37 44 45 26 15 Kitchzarten 41 47 50 24 20 Kitelsheim 42, 44 48 25 24 00 Kitlitz 23 51 15 31 30 Kitlitztreben 25, 26 51 20 32 20 Kitsch 14, 21 51 20 29 20 Kittscher 22 51 10 29 30 Kitzchen 22 51 10 29 10 Kitzer 07 53 05 27 50 Kitzing 34 49 40 27 00 Kitzke 08 53 30 32 30 Kiwe 02 53 10 28 50 Klabbeck 10, 12, 13 52 30 31 10 Kladinitz 24 50 20 35 00 Kladki 32 49 30 33 50 Kladow 10, 12 52 00 30 20 Kladra 33 49 30 30 10 Klansthal 01 51 50 27 10 Klaptaw 26, 27, 29 51 25 33 10 Klaptermuhl 27, 29 51 25 33 15 Klastawa 25, 26 52 10 32 40 Klastenretz 33 50 10 30 00 Klatow 1, 33 49 20 30 30 Klaun 1, 15 52 30 26 50 Klausdorff 10, 12 52 20 31 20 Klauseg 01 47 10 31 20 Klautsch 26 51 45 33 00 Klebsdorff 14 52 00 29 10 Kleburg 39, 41, 42 48 50 24 50 Klecken 05 53 20 26 20 Klein 10, 12, 13 52 10 32 00 Kleinalnuitz 23 51 40 31 50 Kleinburg 28 51 05 34 10 Kleindese 23 51 10 31 30 Kleine 22 50 50 29 20 Kleinemuhl 29 51 30 33 10 Klein Gasron 25 51 30 33 00 Kleingorsdorff 31 50 15 33 10 Kleinitz 26 52 05 32 40 Kleinkirchen 40 47 35 24 00 Klein Schirstet 14 51 25 28 30 Kleinschwerzctor 34 49 10 28 00 Kleitscha 23 51 00 31 40 Kleken 1, 4 53 40 25 50 Klembach 39, 41, 42 40 45 24 20 Klemnsdorf 12 52 50 31 20 Klemmerwitz 29 51 15 33 20 Klempin 10 53 10 32 10 Klempzig 25 52 10 32 20   26 52 10 22 30 Gr. Klene 07 54 10 29 10 Gr. Kl. Klenie 22 51 20 28 50 Klenow 2, 7, 10, 11, 13 53 20 28 00 Klenowitz 32 49 20 34 10 Klentz 14 52 00 28 10 Klenz 33 49 10 30 00 Kleperhoff 33 50 40 33 00 Kleppelberg 25, 29 51 05 32 45 Kleps 10, 12, 14, 21, 8 51 30 29 50 Kleptow 10, 12 53 10 31 00 Klesberg 22 51 10 29 30 Kleschwitz 27 51 35 33 35 Klessengrundt 31 50 05 33 50 Klesten 07 53 35 29 10 Klestow 10, 12 51 50 30 00 Kletbach 19 50 55 28 00 Kletten∣berg 16, 18, 19, 35 57 35 27 40 Klettenberg Baro∣nia 16, 19 51 35 27 30 Klettendorff 24, 25, 28 51 00 33 00 Klettret 21, 22 50 55 29 20 Klettstet 19 51 05 27 20 Kletzen 13 52 30 32 20 Kleverens 05 53 30 24 10 Kleversultzbach 45 49 05 25 50 Kleijen 4, 10, 11 52 20 28 30 Kliben 43 48 30 24 00 Klicarnin 10, 13 52 30 32 10 Klicken 14, 21 51 25 29 30 Kliesche 26 51 30 33 10 Kliest 10, 12, 13 52 10 32 00 Ampt Kliest 10, 11 52 50 29 00 M. O. Klietz. 14 52 20 29 20 Kliiben 41 47 30 24 00 Klincken 10, 11 52 20 28 30 Klinckow 10, 12 53 10 30 40 Kling 42 48 55 24 30 Klingberg 33 48 20 32 00 Klingen 22 51 20 29 30   39, 41, 42 48 55 24 30 Klingenberg 34, 37 49 40 25 40   39, 45 49 00 25 40 Klingengurg 39 49 40 25 40 Klingenstein 45 48 15 26 40 Klinger 36 50 40 26 50 Klins 16 52 15 27 50 Klische 27 51 35 33 20 Kliteck 14 51 20 29 20 Klitsch∣dorff 23, 24, 25 57 25 32 20 Klitschena 2, 15 57 50 28 50 Klitz 10 52 30 29 00 Klitze 11, 14, 21 52 30 29 10 Klitznich 14 52 10 29 10 Klingewalda 23 57 15 31 50 Kloback 21 57 15 29 40 Klobauky 1, 32 49 00 35 20 Ober Nider Klobick 19 57 25 28 40   20 57 20 28 50 Klobotzko 24 50 50 25 30 Kloden 07 53 35 29 10   10, 11 52 20 28 30 Gross Klein Kloden 27 57 45 33 30 Klodno 2, 33 50 00 30 00 Klodwig 30 50 30 34 10 Kloppenberg 05 52 55 24 40 Kloptschen 26 57 40 32 50 Kloschvitz 14, 20 57 10 28 40 Kloster 2, 22, 33 50 30 30 50   8, 9 54 40 30 00 Klosterfelt 10, 12, 13 52 30 30 40 Kloster Neuburg 33 48 20 33 10 Kloster Nien∣burg 14, 21 57 25 29 00 Kloten 38 47 00 25 00 Kloterbach 15 52 30 29 40 Klotze 1, 6 52 50 28 00 Klotzen 1, 4, 10, 11 52 50 28 10 Klucken 10, 13 53 00 32 30 Nien Olden Kluc∣ken 10, 13 53 00 32 30 Kluckcow 07 53 40 30 50 Klucfeitz 09 54 35 31 00 Kluden 16 52 20 28 10 Kluctsch 31 50 35 33 40 Kluex 23 51 35 32 00 Klugks 23 51 50 30 20 Klukow 7, 10 53 25 30 00 Klundert 01 51 40 20 30 Klutschoff 2, 33 49 50 30 40 Klusee 16, 17 51 45 26 50 Klutze 4, 7 54 20 28 00 Klutzerhovet 07 53 55 28 00 Kluziwedij 33 50 30 31 40 Klyden 14 52 10 28 20 Klyngow 38 47 20 24 40 Kmevis 45 48 20 24 50 Kmij 14 52 05 29 20 Knabe 2, 15 52 50 28 30 Knappen∣dorst 20, 21, 22 51 30 29 00 Knatruphusen 05 53 35 24 20 Knattenmuhl 28 51 20 33 50 Knau 22 50 40 28 40     57 00 29 20 Knanblauch 14 52 10 29 20 Knaudenheim 40 48 55 24 50 Knebing 45 48 15 25 40 Kneignitz 29 57 30 33 15 Kneringen 45 48 20 27 10 Knese 07 53 35 27 50 Knesebeke 4, 6 53 00 27 40 Knesevum 2, 15 52 50 27 20 Knesel 14 51 55 29 10 Kneitling 16, 18, 52 10 27 30 Knichain 16 57 15 26 30 Kniebis 41 48 20 24 45 Knieg∣nitz 26, 27, 28, 29 57 30 33 10 Knin 1, 33 49 40 31 00 Knipens 1, 5 53 50 24 00 Knipigh 01 52 50 36 10 Knipsd 22 57 00 28 40 Knipsiel 05 53 30 24 30 Knirsh 42 48 30 23 55 Knischwitz 30 50 40 34 10 Knisdorff 10 52 00 30 40 Knistede 16, 17 52 00 27 20 Knitling 39, 45 48 50 25 10 Knobelsdorff 29 51 10 33 00 Knoffmuhle 28 51 05 34 15 Knoppendorff 19 51 30 29 00 Knoring 41, 43 47 30 23 50 Knulingen 40 48 50 24 50 Knuppeldum 07 53 15 29 30 Knutsendorff 31 50 35 33 20 Koband 07 53 35 28 40 Kobbegrave 15 51 50 26 00 Kobbelitz 4, 10, 11 52 40 28 40 Kobel 2, 15 2 30 28 30 Kobelberg 38 49 20 23 40 Kobelgura 24 51 20 34 30 Kobelin 24, 25 51 50 34 00 Kobeling 28 51 15 33 40 Kobelke 07 53 25 30 40 Kobelshage 09 54 25 31 20 Koben 1, 24 51 30 33 20   25, 26, 27 51 35 33 20
Kobencz 01 47 10 32 30 Koberwitz 28 51 00 34 05 Kobili 32 48 50 34 10 Koblanck 07 53 35 30 50 Kobnisch Heyde Vorwerg 27 51 35 33 25 Kobnitz 26 52 10 32 40 Kobra 22 51 10 29 30 Kobresen 23 51 15 31 30 Koburg 41, 42 48 50 24 10 Gross Koburg 15 51 30 29 00 Gross kl. Kochberg 19 50 50 28 20   22 50 50 28 10 Kocheburg 34, 45 48 40 26 40 Kovhelstorp 07 53 40 28 00 Obern Untern Ko∣chen 45 48 40 26 40 Kochen fl. 38, 45 49 00 26 00 Kochenteten 34 49 10 26 10 Kocher 28 51 55 34 15 Kocher fl. 34, 39 49 10 25 50 Kochersberg 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 00 Kochersteins∣feld 34, 39, 45 49 10 26 00 Kochlitz 27 51 45 33 30 Kochsandt 03 53 45 27 00 Kockstet 14, 16, 18 51 35 28 10 Kochte 10, 11 52 10 28 50 Ober Nider Koch∣witz 30 50 30 34 20 Kodlewo 27 51 40 33 40 alias Kafelebe 16 52 30 26 20 Kedewold       Kodisdorff 19 51 00 28 20 Koelebrand 03 53 50 26 20 Koendern 14, 21 51 20 28 50 Koenern 18 51 15 28 40 Koensen 16, 17 51 45 26 40 Koesdorf 10, 11 53 00 28 50 Koesel 09 54 40 31 00 Koeslatcher 04 54 00 26 40 Kofallen 28 51 10 34 15 Kofelitz 14 51 35 29 30 Kofell 10 52 30 27 50 Der. Koferberg 19 50 35 27 40 Kogel 01 47 50 30 40   4, 7 54 00 28 00 Kogenbuttel 3, 5 53 45 24 50 Kogenheim 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 00 Kohberg 14 51 40 29 10 Kohemulle 05 53 20 25 50 Kohlsurt 25 51 20 32 00 Kohlgruben 31 50 05 33 50 Kohlhaur 27 57 35 33 30 Kohlhauser Olim Oyser 27, 29 51 20 33 25 Kohlsdorf 30 50 15 34 20 Kohlstett 40 48 00 24 10 Koietin 32 49 20 34 20 Koisihwitz 24, 29 51 10 33 00 Koitz Oberun∣ter Koka 22 57 10 28 50 Kokenberg 19 50 40 28 20 Kokentzin 2, 7 53 10 28 10 Kokuri 32 49 20 34 20 Kokynitz 01 50 00 33 20 Kolbatz 08 53 20 32 00 Koibesleck 14 52 25 18 30 Kolben 22 50 40 28 20 S. Kolben 22 50 40 28 20 Kolbero 10 51 50 31 20   34 49 30 29 00 Kolbitz 2, 18 52 20 28 10   11, 13 15 52 00 28 50 Kolbsheim 41, 42 44 48 25 24 05 Kolckwitz 22 50 40 28 20 Koldeburg 01 53 20 23 20 Koldehof 7, 9 53 40 29 20 Koldenkercke 01 54 10 26 30 Koldenrade 06 52 40 25 20 Koldestedt 03 53 45 26 20 Koldingen 06 52 05 26 20 Kolehoff 09 54 50 31 00 Kolendorff 22 50 40 28 30 Kenlenw. 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 55 Kolesowitz 33 50 00 30 30 Kolfut 23 51 25 32 10 Die Kolgrube Sylva 19 51 00 27 00 Koliantz 01 46 10 34 50 Koliczin 32 49 20 34 20 Kolin 1, 2, 4 33 49 50 32 00 Kolingen 16 32 05 26 30 Kolisehen 24 50 40 35 00 Kollbitz 14 52 05 28 40 Kolleda 15 51 10 28 00 Kollee 07 50 40 32 29 Kolensted 16 52 00 26 00 Kolma 21, 22 50 50 29 40 Kolmichen 25, 26 51 50 32 40 Kolmitz 22 51 30 28 40 Kolnare 2, 33 50 10 31 50 Kolnberg 33 48 20 33 20 Kolno 24 50 50 34 30 Kolediege 2, 33 50 00 36 20 Kolowets 1, 33 49 20 30 10 Kolpack 38 49 40 22 00 Kolpincken 10, 12 52 00 31 30 Kots 01 46 50 29 40 Kolstut 15, 16, 19 51 10 20 00 Koltborn 06 52 45 27 40 Kolten 01 57 50 29 00 Koltzenberg 10, 12 57 40 30 40 Koltzig 24, 25, 26 50 00 32 30 Kolunkaw 27 51 30 33 20 N. Kolwis 21 50 55 28 20 Kolwitz 23 51 30 31 30 Komara 01 47 50 35 50 Komarau 33 49 40 30 50 Komolhewitz 28 51 05 33 45 Kommern 22 50 50 29 20 Kommernig 29 37 35 33 05 Komna 32 49 00 35 00 Komsteat 16, 19 51 30 27 40 Konarowitz 2, 33 49 50 31 00 Kondern 1, 2 51 40 28 50   15, 20 51 50 28 40 Kongerode 16, 19, 20 51 45 28 00 Konenstinz 32 49 00 33 20 Konetitzka 2, 33 49 50 31 20 Konetitzka Bora 32 49 50 32 50 Der Konickel Sylva 19 57 00 27 00 Konicz 01 53 30 35 40 Konigbrun 33 48 20 33 00 Konig Gratz 24 50 00 32 30 Kral Hradetz 32 50 00 32 50 Konigreda 18 51 10 27 50 Konigingretz 01 50 00 32 40 Konigingrack∣zerkraiss 33 50 00 32 50 Konigs fl. 05 53 55 25 10 Konigsaal 33 49 50 31 40 Konigsbaijn 25 51 10 31 40 Konigsberg 1, 2 50 30 30 00   8, 10, 12, 13 52 40 31 40   22, 24, 25, 31, 33 49 50 29 30 Konigsberg 34 50 00 27 10 B. Klunkowive 32 49 40 35 00 Der Konigsberg 19 50 30 28 00 Konigsborn 10 57 40 28 50   11, 15, 51 40 29 00   14, 18 57 50 28 50 Konigsbron 45 48 40 26 50 Konigsbruck 01 51 10 30 50   23, 24 51 20 30 50 Konigsbrucken Herrschaft 23 57 25 30 50 Konigsburg 22 57 10 30 50 Konigsfelt 22 57 00 29 40   38 50 20 23 00 Konigshagn 23 57 15 31 50 Konigshayn 23, 31 51 05 31 50 Konigsheyde 29 57 25 32 35 Konigshoff 22 57 00 28 50   33 49 50 31 00 Konigshofen 1, 36 50 20 27 20   34, 37 4 30 26 20 Konigslauter 18 51 50 27 20 Konigslutter. 6, 16 52 00 27 20 Konsgsmachern 1, 38 49 20 22 30 Konigsmuhe 34 49 30 27 50 Konigs Schantz 25 52 40 32 00 Konigsstee 19, 34 50 40 27 50 Konigstein 1, 2, 22 50 50 30 50   24, 33, 35 50 40 30 50 Konigswaldaw 25 52 30 32 00 Konigs∣walde 10, 13, 24 52 30 32 40 Konigswaldt 31, 32 50 35 33 10 Konigswardt 22, 23 51 05 31 40   2, 24 57 10 30 20 Konigsweich 20 51 45 28 40 Konigsweith 33 49 50 29 40 Konigswig 19 51 45 28 40 Koningberg 1, 24 50 00 29 30 Koninghoff 01 50 20 32 40 Konitz 09 54 35 31 00   19 50 40 28 20 Konone 08 53 50 32 00 Der Konestein Mons 16, 19 51 40 27 40 Kontzberg 45 47 45 25 20 Kontop 09 54 45 21 00   25, 26 52 00 32 40 Koppenbrug 15 52 10 26 00 Kopernitz 14 52 00 29 20 Kopetitz 33 48 50 31 50 Kopideno 1, 2 50 00 32 00   32, 33 50 10 32 10 Kopitz 08 53 40 32 00 Koplitz 33 48 40 31 30 Kopnick 01 52 30 30 50 Kopnitz 24 52 10 32 30   25, 26 52 10 32 40 Koponina 33 50 00 31 10 Koppen 26 52 15 32 30 Koppendorff 30 50 35 34 20 Kopper 23 51 05 32 00 Koppernich 30 50 25 34 10 Koppisch 29 57 10 33 00 Koppitz 30 50 35 34 20 Kopsen 22 50 50 29 00 Kopzani 32 48 40 34 30 Kotangeluitz 27 51 40 33 25 Korb 45 48 40 27 00 Korcklitz 14 57 50 28 50 Kordenrade 05 53 00 25 10 Koren 22 57 00 29 40 Korezan 33 49 00 33 50 Korffewoning 03 53 45 25 20 Korickzan 1, 32 49 00 34 20 Korin 22 50 20 29 20 Koritz 10, 12 52 30 29 20 Korevitz 07 54 15 29 Korn 02 57 20 29 Im Korn 19 57 20 27 Kornach 34 49 40 26 Kornburg 34 49 10 20 Oster Kornern 19 51 15 27 Kornhauss 1, 2, 33 50 00 30 Korntal 45 48 35 25 Kornuberg 33 48 20 33 Kornwesten 45 48 40 25 Koropist 33 49 49 29 Korpen 01 50 50 22 Korssen 16 52 30 26 Kortenbeck 10 52 40 27 3 Kortendorff 11 52 45 27   10, 12 52 10 31 5 Kortsche 13 52 10 31 Korzim 32 49 10 33 4 Koschdorf 30 50 30 34 2 Koschefen 27 51 35 33 3 Koschke 29 51 15 33 1 Koschmin 24 51 50 34 0 Koschperdorff 30 50 30 34 0 Koschten 26 52 15 32 4 Koschunberg 32 49 40 33 0 Koschwitz 25 51 10 33 2 Kosel 25, 26, 28, 30 51 50 32 2 Koseln 2, 14, 15, 20 57 40 28 2 Koselow 07 53 50 29 2 Kosendaw 29 57 10 32 5 Kosiglowa 24 50 00 36 00 Kosinoness 33 50 20 31 5 Kosischke 30 50 30 34 10 Koskau 25, 29 57 10 33 30 Kosla 1, 24 50 10 35 10 Koslack 03 35 50 26 50 Koslacherkirch 2, 3, 06 53 40 26 50 Koslitz 26, 27, 29 57 30 33 10 Kosmin 01 57 50 34 30 Kosmoness 29 50 20 30 50 Kosow 33 49 30 31 20 Kosse 21 57 05 29 40 Gross Kl. Kosschen 23 51 35 31 00 Kossebade 07 53 25 28 50 Kosselitz 10 53 00 31 50 Kosseu 22 50 50 29 50 Kossendaw 29 51 10 33 10 Kossow 10, 13 52 30 31 50 Kosstolou 02 50 20 29 50   33 50 20 30 40 Kossumberg 01 49 40 32 50 Kosswigh 02 51 50 28 50 Kost 22 50 20 31 00 Kostal 07 53 20 30 10 Kostel 32 48 40 34 10 B. Podiwin 33 48 40 33 50 Kosteletz 2, 24, 32 50 00 33 00   32, 33 49 20 34 00     50 10 31 30 Kosteletzwreden Klarez 33 49 50 31 40 Kostemblot 24, 25, 28 51 10 33 40 Kostemitz 33 49 40 31 00 Kosten 24, 25, 26 52 10 33 20 Konstenthal 24 50 10 34 30 Kosti 2, 33 50 20 31 00 Kostnblat 2, 33 50 30 29 50 Kostwijler 15 52 10 25 20 Koswiler 41, 42 48 25 23 55 Kotecz 01 52 00 34 50 Kotel 7, 22 53 45 29 40 Koten 2, 10, 11 57 50 28 20   14, 15, 18, 20, 21 51 20 29 00 Kotener Landt 15, 20 57 50 28 40 Kotendorf 07 53 30 28 10 Koteven 07 53 55 29 30 Koteij 2, 4 53 50 57 10 Kotingsdorf 1, 10, 13 53 10 31 50 Kotonci 22 50 50 29 00 Kotschen 20 51 25 29 00 Kotschen Borwitz 25, 26, 27 51 30 33 40 Kottersberg 16, 17 51 40 26 10 Kottwaine 25, 28 57 20 34 00 Kott∣witz 25, 26, 27, 28 51 40 33 10     57 15 34 00 Kleinkottwitz 26, 27 57 35 33 20 Kotz 25 57 20 33 20 Kotzbub 10, 11 52 40 28 20 V. Kotze 22 50 20 28 50 Kotzemeuschel 26 57 45 32 50 Kotzen 01 47 20 28 30 Gross Klein Kot∣zenaw 29 51 25 32 55 Kotzing 01 49 00 30 00 Kotzkenstein 02 50 10 31 50 Kotztirschoff 33 50 30 33 00   2, 33 50 20 31 30 Kotzin 10, 12 51 50 30 30 Kotznische Heyde 29 51 25 32 45 Kotzow 10, 12 52 30 31 10   32 49 50 34 20 Keutop 24 52 00 32 30 Kowacz 01 45 30 35 40 Kowal 09 54 10 31 00 Kownickel 10, 11 52 50 28 20 Koworzin 2, 33 50 20 29 30 Krackaw 24 51 20 30 20 Kracsun 10, 11 52 00 28 40 Kraen 34 50 00 27 20
Kra 40, 41, 42, 43 48 15 24 10 Krafftsdorff 22 50 50 28 50 Kragstt 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Krahiclwur 33 50 20 32 50 Kraiburg 01 48 00 29 20 Nider Ober Krain 29 57 10 33 05 Krainste 24 53 40 27 10 Krakenbeke 15 52 10 25 40 Krakendorff 19 50 55 28 10 Krakow 1, 7, 10 53 50 29 30   14 51 50 28 50 Krakowersee 07 53 35 29 20 Kralingeroeck 6, 16 52 30 26 30 Kralingerwald 04 53 00 26 20 Kralitz 32, 33 49 20 33 30 Kralowitz 1, 22, 33 49 50 30 20 Kralowyhradeiz 02 50 00 31 30 Kranigingretz 33 50 00 32 40 Kraludwur 02 50 10 31 30 Krampitz 28 51 10 33 55 Krampter 10, 11 53 00 28 50 Kramzig 26 52 10 42 30 Kran 10, 12 57 50 29 40 Kranckenhag 16 51 55 26 00 Kranenborg 04 54 00 25 20 Krangen 10, 12 52 40 30 00 Kranich 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 10 Kranichfeldt 19 50 55 28 00 Krannichbor 19 57 10 27 50 Kranewitz 24 50 00 35 00 Gr. Kl. Kranst 28 51 10 34 30 Kranstermuhl 28 51 10 34 30 Kransthal 41 48 40 23 50 Krantheim 19 51 10 28 10 Krantwalda 30 50 20 33 50 Krantz 25, 26 52 10 32 20 Krantzen 13 52 50 32 30   41, 43 47 55 24 10 Krantzin 10 52 50 32 40 L. Krantzin 2, 7, 10 53 20 27 50 Krapitz 24 51 00 35 30 Krappitz 01 50 20 34 50   24 50 30 34 30 Krasche 28 51 15 34 45 Krase 07 53 30 30 00 Kraseloff 33 40 00 30 50 Krassa 23 50 55 31 30 Krast 44 48 15 24 15 Krastschof 34 49 20 27 50 Kratscham 27, 28 51 35 33 15 Eich Kratscham 27 51 30 33 30 Juden Kratscham 29 51 35 33 15 Kappel Kratscham 29 51 30 33 00 New Kratscham 28, 29 51 20 33 30 ras Kratscham 29 51 15 33 35 Vaude Kratscham 27 51 35 33 25 Kratschmar 28 51 05 33 45 Kratschramza As∣chelaw 23 51 25 32 20 Kratschwitz 22 50 50 29 30 Kratza 24, 25 50 50 31 30 Krauffing 22 50 50 29 40 D. Kraus 45 48 20 25 40 Thom. Kraus 03 53 45 26 10 Gr. Kl. Krauschen 29 51 15 32 35 Krausthal 39, 42 48 40 23 00 Krauta 38, 45 49 20 26 00 Krautewalde 31 50 20 34 00 Krauthausen 19 51 05 26 30 Krautheim 34 49 10 26 10 Krawsoudow 32 49 20 32 20 Kreben 22 50 50 28 40 Krebich 16, 19 51 35 27 00 Krebier 22 50 40 31 00 Krebitz 1, 33 50 40 31 20 Krebs 1, 4 53 00 28 50   10, 11, 14 52 40 28 40 Krebsberg 26, 29 51 25 32 50 Krebsyk 10, 12 51 50 32 00 Kreburg 41, 42 48 45 24 30 Kreckwitz 23 51 20 31 20 Kreen 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 20 Kregling 34 49 10 26 40 Krehleb. 33 49 40 32 10   25 51 20 32 40 Kreibe 29 51 20 32 50 Kreibitz 02 50 40 30 10 Kreickaw 28 51 00 34 15 Kreidel 28 51 20 33 30 Gr. Kl. Kreidel 25 51 20 33 20   26, 27, 29 51 25 33 30 Kreidelwitz 25 51 30 33 00   26, 29 51 35 33 10 Kreideswitz 27 51 35 33 10 Kreiensen 16, 17 51 45 26 40 Kreilsheim 1, 34 49 00 26 50 Kreinich 10, 13 52 50 32 30 Kreinsdorff 31 50 35 33 20 Kreisbach 22 50 30 29 30 Kreische 27, 29 51 25 33 25 Kreischelwitz 28 51 00 34 00 Kreisefelt 20 51 35 28 20 Kreissenfelt 19 51 40 28 20 Kreitenbach 37 49 45 26 00 Kreitern 28 51 05 34 10 Krekow 10, 12 53 20 31 30 Krel 32 49 30 34 10 Krelaw 26, 27 51 30 33 30 Klein Krelaw 27 51 30 33 30 Kreipe 22 50 30 28 50 Krembs 1, 33 48 20 32 50 Kremersborn 10, 13 52 00 33 00 Kremkow 10, 11, 14 52 25 28 30 Kremme 1, 10, 12 52 30 30 00 Krempe 1, 5 54 10 25 50 Krempen fl. 34, 36 51 20 28 00 Kremsir 1, 32, 33 49 10 34 30 Krena 32, 33 49 30 33 30 Krene 07 53 15 28 20 New Krentzlin 02 53 20 27 50 Old Krentzlin 7, 10 53 10 28 20 Krentsch 25, 28 51 10 33 40 Krentzach 41, 43 47 25 24 05 Kreppalhoff 24, 25 50 50 32 30 Kreps 22 51 10 28 30 Kresbach 45 48 10 25 40 Kresen 07 53 20 29 10 Kresse fl. 30 50 45 34 30 Kressen 33 50 30 30 40 Kretzmar 1, 2 50 50 30 50   22, 33 50 50 31 00 Kreusen 34, 37 49 40 25 50 Kreusen fl. 34 49 40 29 00 Kreusetz 34 49 50 28 40 Kreussen 37 49 45 25 55 Kreuten 33 48 20 32 00 Kreutzfelt 42, 42 48 30 23 55 Kreutzkirch 15 52 10 27 20 Krewitz 7, 10, 12 53 00 30 20 Kreyez 01 47 40 34 20 Kribelwitz 28 51 00 33 55 Krichermuhl 28 51 10 34 25 Kricke 28 51 20 34 55 Ober Krickstet 15 51 20 28 40   19, 20 51 25 28 50 Nider Krickstet 19, 20 51 25 28 50 Krieben 24, 25, 26 52 00 33 30 Gross Kriechen 25, 26, 27, 29 51 25 33 10 klein Kriechen 29 51 25 33 05 Kriegheyde 26, 29 51 30 32 50 Krieglaff 01 47 30 33 10 Krieren 14 51 40 28 40 Kriersdorff 10, 12, 13 52 00 31 50 Kriesch 22 50 50 29 20 Kriesheim 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 10 Kriess 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 00 Krigulna 28 51 05 35 00 Gr. Krim 01 48 40 31 10 Krimitz 4, 10, 11 53 40 29 00 Krimmensen 16, 17 51 40 26 30 Gr Krin 33 48 50 31 20 Krinfelt 34 50 30 26 00 Krinkratscham 30 50 40 34 10 Krintsch 28 51 05 33 40 Krippen 28 51 05 34 00 Krippitz 25, 30 50 40 34 00 Krischitz 27 51 35 33 00 Krispeck 2, 33 49 40 32 10 Kristelwitz 28 50 55 33 55 Kritzkow 07 53 40 28 40 Krizanow 32 49 10 33 20 Krobblen 24, 25 52 40 32 00 Krobia 24, 25 51 50 33 30 Krochel 20 51 50 28 40 Krockstet 20 51 20 28 30 Krodorf 16 52 00 28 00 Kroeckeraa 05 53 45 26 00 Krogelstadel 22, 34 49 50 28 00 Kroitsch 29 51 15 33 05 Krolckwitz 28 51 00 34 05 Kromme Wele fl. 03 53 55 24 50 Krompachermuhl 28 51 25 33 55 Kronberg 19 51 00 27 20 Kronburg 45 47 45 26 50 Krone 8, 10, 13 53 40 34 00 Kroneberg 01 50 00 52 00 Kronenburg 01 48 20 33 40 Krontal 44 48 20 24 05 Krontzan 40 47 55 24 15 Kropelin 1, 7, 10 54 20 29 10 Kropenstede 15 52 00 28 00 Kropenfels 14 51 30 28 00 Krosel 14 51 20 28 50 Kroschdorff 31 50 35 33 10 Kroschen 30 50 35 34 20 Kroscian 01 52 10 33 40 Kross 22 50 40 30 40 Krossa fl. 10, 12 52 00 31 10 Krossen 02 50 30 29 40 Krothemuhl 27, 28, 29 51 30 33 15 Krotoschin 24, 25 51 50 34 00 Krottenbach 34 49 10 27 50 Krottorp 15 52 10 28 00 Krotzing 40 47 50 24 10 Krouwel 03 53 45 27 00 Krowsoudow 33 49 30 31 50 Kruschischanowitz 28 51 10 34 10 Dat Krut or Pa∣gen Sandt 03 53 50 25 20 Krutsandt 05 53 45 25 50 Krutsreit 22 51 10 29 20 Kruke 2, 7 53 3 28 00 Krulich 1, 2, 24 50 00 33 40   31, 32, 33 49 55 33 40 Krum 36 49 55 27 30 Krumant 33 48 50 31 20 Krumbach 45 48 05 27 10 Krumbeke 07 53 15 30 40 Krumberg 01 49 50 33 50 Krumdick 05 53 50 25 40 Krumeck 4, 10 53 00 29 00 Krumenaw 01 48 30 32 40 Krumental 34 50 00 26 10 Krumlaw 1, 24, 33 48 40 31 20 Krumlew 1, 32 48 50 33 20 Krummedick 2, 3 54 20 25 50 Krummelaw 25 50 50 32 20 Krummelinde 29 51 20 33 15 Krummensee 10 52 20 31 00 Krumpag 01 47 30 34 00 Ober Nider Krumpe 19 51 20 28 40 Krumschacht 20 51 35 27 50 Krumsick 05 53 55 25 50 Krumste 02 54 40 25 50 Gr. Kl. Krumstorff 19 51 00 28 10 Kruneck 11 52 35 28 40 Krunholtz 38 46 20 24 20 Kruprim 33 49 20 34 00 Krusbus 03 53 50 26 20 Kruselin 7, 10 53 10 30 40 Krussowitz 33 50 00 30 40 Kruswyck 01 52 30 26 10 Krutwil 41, 42 48 30 24 10 Krutzburg 32, 33 49 30 32 50 Kryen 21 51 10 29 20 Kryssaw 01 53 40 36 10 Krzan 24 49 50 35 30 Krzepice 01 50 50 35 40 Krzesow 33 50 40 33 00 Krzetin 32 49 20 33 30 Krziwm 01 51 50 33 40 Krziwokl 33 49 50 31 00 Krzizanow 33 49 10 32 50 Krzizm 33 49 40 30 30 Krzizna 31 50 15 33 00 Kuanblauch 10 52 00 29 20 Kubach 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 10 24 25 Gr. L. Kubbelkow 09 54 30 31 10 Kubbenow 08 53 40 30 30 Kubelberg 39 49 20 23 40 Kublhusen 10 52 30 29 10 Kubling 16 52 05 27 40 Kuchelberg 2, 9 51 20 33 15 Kuckerberg 19 51 35 28 40 Kuckesmohlen 08 53 00 33 00 Kuckow. 10, 13 53 00 32 10 Kudelstat 19 50 55 27 00 Kudenwisch 02 54 30 26 00 Kudlow 01 53 40 34 20 L. Kudlow 08 54 00 34 30 Kudlowitz 32 49 00 34 30 Kudowa 31 50 20 33 00 Kuehornshoff 35 50 00 25 00 Kuen 01 45 50 27 50 Kuendorff 36 50 35 27 20 Kuff 41, 43 47 20 23 35 Kuffstain 01 47 20 29 10 G. Kugel 1, 22 50 55 29 00 Kugschmatz 30 50 35 34 10 Kuhberg 27 51 30 33 15 Kuhip 23 51 10 32 00 Kuhlenbrun 40 47 40 24 20 Kuhlhusen 14 52 30 29 10 Kuhnaw 26 51 45 32 40 Der Kahthurn 25 52 20 31 20 Kuifrade 07 53 30 28 30 Kukenborg 20 51 30 28 40 Kukenhagen 07 54 15 29 40 Kulaborn 15 51 20 27 00 Kulc 09 54 50 31 00 Kulckelvitz 09 54 40 31 00 Kulckendorf 07 53 40 28 40 Kulenrodt 36 50 30 27 30 Kulgenauermuhl 28 51 00 33 50 Kulische 22 50 50 29 00 Kulpenaw 26 51 55 32 30 Kulrade 07 54 10 29 40 Kultra 21, 22 50 55 29 30 Kulsheim 34, 37 49 30 26 00 Kum 02 52 50 28 20 Kumerfelt 04 54 00 26 20 Kumese 27, 28, 29 51 15 33 30 Kumgwiserwald 33 48 30 32 00 Kumlos 04 53 20 29 20   10, 11 52 50 28 30 Kummel Mons 19 51 30 27 40 Kummer 2, 7, 10, 11 53 20 28 00 Kummerow 07 53 45 30 50 Kummernig 29 51 15 33 25 Kumero 08 53 10 31 30 Kunare 27 51 45 33 45 Kunaw 23 51 35 32 10 Kunckelwitz 28 50 55 34 05 Kunczitz 32 49 40 35 10 Kunen 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 00   42, 44 48 25 24 05 Kunern 27 51 30 33 30 Kunersdorff 10, 13 52 10 32 10 Kungslock 22 50 40 30 50 Kunigsban 22 50 50 29 50 Kunigsberg 36 50 00 27 20 Kunigshouen 34 50 20 27 20 Kunigstein 1, 3, 39 50 00 24 50 Kunischdorff 23 51 10 31 30 Kunitz 22, 24 51 00 28 30   25, 26, 29 51 20 33 20 Kunowitz 32 49 00 34 40 Kunsdorff 10, 12 51 50 30 10 Kunseck 45 47 45 26 20 Kunsschwitz 28 50 50 34 20 Kunst 30 50 10 34 30
Kunstat 32, 33 49 20 33 30   34, 36 50 10 28 00 Kunstet 19 51 20 28 50 Kunting 34 48 50 28 20 Kuntschitz 2, 33 50 00 31 20 Kuntze 19 50 45 28 00 Kuntzendorff 25, 26 51 10 32 20   28, 29, 30 51 20 34 50 Kunwald 32 49 30 34 50 Kunwerg 34 48 50 28 10 Kuped 39, 41, 45 48 30 24 40 Kupenberg 01 48 50 28 20 Kupendorff 19 51 00 28 20 Kupeserberg 14, 20 51 15 28 20 Kupsenberg 34 48 50 28 20 Kupserberg 01 50 10 28 20   15, 22, 24, 25, 33, 34 50 00 28 30 Kupserhamer 25, 30 50 50 33 20 Kuppenheim 40,, 45 48 40 24 40 Kupping 45 48 10 25 30 Der Kupterberg 16, 19 32 40 27 30 Kurbsdorff 19, 20 51 25 28 50 Kurchberg 45 28 10 26 50 Kurda 32 48 50 34 10 Kurlach 38, 39, 45 49 00 24 40 Kurlos 02 53 00 28 20 Kurnbach 45 48 55 25 20 Kurnberg 33 49 00 29 30 Kurowitz 32 49 10 34 30 Kurt 41 48 55 24 40 Kurtaw 8, 10, 13 53 20 33 30 Kurte 41 48 30 24 00 Kurtsch 28 50 55 34 10 Kurtz 42, 45 48 30 24 00 M. Kurtz 44 48 25 24 00 Kurtzel 40 48 15 24 20 Kurtzenhausen 40 48 15 24 20 Kurtzen∣husen 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 15 Kurtzan 32, 33 48 50 32 20 Kurtzweil 33 48 50 31 10 Kurtwiller 44 48 25 24 05 Kushel 38, 39 49 20 23 20 Kusnache 38 46 40 25 00 Kusow 07 53 50 28 00 Kussenburg 16 52 05 27 20 Kussendorff 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 20 Kusseritz 07 54 05 29 20 Kussow 10, 12 53 10 30 50 Gr. L. Kussow 08 53 10 32 30 Kusterting 45 48 15 25 50 Kustrin 1, 5 52 30 31 50 Kustrincken 1, 10, 12 52 30 31 30   13 52 30 31 20 Kutenentorf 42 48 45 24 25 Kutlaw 24, 25, 26 51 40 32 30 Kutow 32 48 50 34 30 Kutschel 26 52 15 32 20 Kutschen 25 52 50 32 20 Kuttenberg 1, 2, 33 49 50 32 00 Kuttenheim 34 49 30 27 10 Klein Kutzen 24 51 30 32 30 Gross Kutzenaw 26 51 25 32 50 Klein Kutzenaw 25 51 20 32 40 Kutzenhausen 40 48 45 24 25 Kutzloch 44 48 30 24 25 Kuwe 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 10 Kuyk 01 51 40 21 50 Kuylenborch 01 51 50 21 20 Kuynder 01 52 50 21 50 Kwozitz 32 49 10 34 30 Kyburg 1, 38 47 00 25 10 Kymwisen 33 48 20 32 00 Kynast 1, 2, 24 50 40 32 20   25, 29, 33 50 50 32 20 Kynboom 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 20 Kyrick 01 53 00 29 30 Kyrtnburg 01 47 50 32 40 Kysch 33 50 00 30 10 Kysel 24 52 00 32 30 Kytz 4, 10 53 20 28 40   10, 11, 12 52 30 30 10 L   LAas 01 45 40 32 30 Laaske 08 53 50 32 00   10 53 40 31 40 Laba 1, 32 48 40 33 40 Labach 38 49 20 23 00 Labentz 08 55 10 35 00 Laber 34 49 00 28 50 Laber fl. 34 49 00 28 30 Labest 1, 8 53 40 33 00   10, 13 52 30 32 40 Labeten 21 51 20 29 50 Labethal 28 51 15 33 40 Labisch 31 50 25 33 40 Lablanck 02 49 40 33 40 Lablitz 09 54 40 31 00 Labu 38 49 00 21 40 Lacca 22 51 00 28 30 Lach 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Lachelholtz 18 51 50 27 00 Lachen 15, 16 52 10 25 40   38 46 20 25 20 Lachendorp 4, 6, 16 53 00 27 00 Lachenem 23 51 15 31 40 Lacus de quo vulgo mi∣ra narrantur 40 48 30 24 25 Lacus de Geneve 01 46 00 22 40 Lada 22 50 10 30 20 Ladan 33 50 10 30 00 Ladebade 09 54 05 31 10 Ladelij 38 49 40 21 40 Ladenburg 1, 39 49 20 25 00 Ladentin 08 53 20 31 30 Ladverde 17 52 05 26 10 Laenstein 38 50 00 23 40 Laer 15, 38 51 30 27 20 Laeta fl. 05 53 00 24 40 Laete 45 53 00 24 20 Gr. kl. Laetke 07 53 15 28 30 Laffart 15 52 10 25 40 G. k. Lafferde 15 52 30 27 00   16, 17 52 10 27 00 Lafe 1, 7 53 55 29 30 Lagel 11 52 55 28 20 Lagen 38 52 40 24 00 Lagedorff 10, 11, 22 52 40 27 20 Lagerwick 12 52 30 31 00 Lagest 22 51 10 29 50 Lagnij 01 48 40 18 40 Lagow Commenda 25 52 20 32 00   26 52 20 32 10 Laha 33 48 50 33 20 Lahn 1, 24, 25 51 00 32 40 Laiching 45 48 15 26 20 Laienstain 34 50 30 28 10 Laiffach 34 50 00 25 50 Laits 45 47 50 25 50 Lakershurn 16 51 30 26 50 Lakerssandt 05 53 50 24 30 The Lake Sluoe 03 53 45 25 10 Lalle 16 51 15 26 20 Lam 33 49 00 30 10 Lamach 34 49 30 27 20 Lambag 01 47 50 31 20 C. Lambert 41 47 25 23 15 S. Lambert 39 49 00 24 30 Lamb. Spring 16, 17 51 55 26 50 Lamecow 08 53 10 31 30 Lamendorff 19 50 30 28 30 Lamensko 32 49 10 34 00 Lancert 16 51 20 26 20 Lamitgk 22 51 10 30 10 Lamlautra fl. 34 48 50 28 10 Lamme 16, 18 52 15 27 10 Lamme fl. 17 52 10 26 50 Lampach 33 50 40 29 30 Lamparthe∣im 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Lampersdorff 26, 28 51 25 33 20   27, 29, 31 51 25 33 25 Lampersloch 41, 42 48 45 24 20 Lamperten 40 48 30 24 15 Lampertheim 39 49 30 25 00 Lamprecht 01 47 00 42 00 Lamprechthausen 45 49 10 26 00 Lamprechtshagen 07 54 05 29 00 Lampsheim 38, 39 49 20 24 40 Lamstede 50 53 40 25 20 Lanbach fl. 45 48 10 25 10 Lanberg 2, 33 49 30 31 50 Lanca 38 46 20 23 00 Lancicia 01 52 00 36 30 Lanck 12 52 30 30 50 Lanckavel 07 53 20 30 10 Lancke 8, 9 54 10 34 30 Lancken 26, 27 51 45 33 20 Lanckevitz 09 54 20 31 20 Lanckhaim 34, 36 50 10 27 40 Lancko 28 51 15 35 00 Lancobardi 20 51 55 28 40 Ladave 09 54 30 31 00 Landaw 08 54 30 30 00   1, 38, 39 49 00 24 30   41, 42 49 00 24 35 Lande 38 50 40 21 00 Landeck 01 46 40 27 30   22, 33, 42 49 50 30 00   24, 30, 31, 33 50 15 33 50   41, 43 48 00 24 20 Landecke 08 53 50 34 30 Landegg 40 47 40 24 00 Landegge 01 52 50 23 30 Landen 01 50 40 21 10 Landenburg 38 49 20 25 00 Landrrshausen 02 53 40 27 20 Landeskron 26 51 50 32 50 Landrechy 01 50 00 19 50 Landisch Mons 19 50 30 28 00 Landsberg 1, 38, 39 49 40 24 00   8, 10, 12, 13, 16 52 40 33 00   2, 21, 15, 20 51 30 29 00   24, 25 52 40 32 00 Olden Landsberg 10, 13 52 10 31 00 Landschut 01 48 20 29 10 Landshut 1, 24, 25, 33 50 40 32 50   32 48 40 34 20   38 46 40 23 40 Landskron 07 53 45 30 30   23, 25 51 10 31 50   24, 32, 33 49 40 33 30   40, 41, 43 47 25 24 05 Landstal 39 49 10 23 50 Landstein 32, 33 48 40 32 30 Landstorff 32 48 40 34 10 Landstrais 01 46 00 33 30 Landsweilr 38, 39 49 10 23 40 Landthorst 12 52 20 50 29 Landto 28 51 00 33 5 Landtwehr 10 52 30 30 Landwersberg 36 50 35 27 1 Landwicht 22 50 10 29 2 Lanebreden 19 51 00 26 5 Landfag 33 48 20 31 Lang 45 48 40 26 4 Lange 38 53 00 23 2 Langebach 22 50 30 29 3   39 49 30 23 3 Langebose 08 54 50 35 0 Langebrucke 25, 31 51 00 34 0 Langedorp 2, 4, 7, 10, 11 53 10 27 4 Langefeld 19, 22, 34 50 45 26 5 Langeheide 07 53 20 28 0 Langelaensheim 39 49 50 24 0 Langelage 01 52 30 24 4 Langeleibe 22 50 50 29 3 Langeln 05 53 50 26 2   19 51 10 27 0 Langelse 23 51 10 32 2 Langemene 5, 8 53 30 24 5 Langen 26, 27 51 50 33 1   35, 39 49 50 25 0 Langeabel 4, 6 53 00 27 4 Langen Alb. 40 48 40 24 5 Langenapel 4, 10 53 00 28 2 Langenaw 23, 25 51 20 32 0   38 46 20 24 00   40, 41, 43 47 30 24 10   45 48 25 27 00 Ober Nider Lan∣genaw 31 50 05 33 40 Langebach 22 50 30 29 00 Langenberg 19, 22 50 45 28 00 Langenbeuge 15, 19, 20 51 30 28 40 Lrangenbrand 40, 45 48 30 24 45 Langenbrutz 2, 7, 10 53 30 28 10 Langendentz∣lin 41, 43 47 55 24 20 Langendorff B. Lauczka 22 51 00 29 10   30, 32 50 20 34 20 Langen eichstet 15 51 20 24 40 Ober Nider Lang∣gen Eichstet 19, 20 51 25 28 40 Unter Langen Eichstet 20 51 20 28 40 Langenflet 07 54 00 30 10   34, 38 49 30 27 20 Langenhag 4, 16 52 40 20 20 Langenhagen 1, 8 54 00 33 10   15 52 40 26 20 Langenhal 16 51 25 26 20 Langenheim 19 50 55 27 10 Langen Holtzen 17 52 05 26 40 Langenhorn 2, 4 54 00 26 40 Langenmorgen 03 53 45 26 30 Langern Nettern 22 51 00 29 00 Langen Saltza 19 51 10 27 20 Langen Schade 22 50 40 28 20 Langen Schivetz 34 50 40 26 20 Langen See 40 47 40 24 20 Langen Spitz 22 51 10 29 10 Langenstein 18 51 35 27 50 Langenstein∣ach 39, 40, 45 48 40 24 50 Langen Swalbach 39 50 00 24 20 Langentzen 34 49 20 27 40 Langenwalda 29 51 20 33 10 Langenwedel 05 53 05 25 30 Langerooge 1, 38 54 00 23 20 Langerwisk 10 52 30 31 00 Langesen 1, 15 52 10 27 00 Langesheim 16, 17 51 55 27 10 Langesm. 18 51 35 26 50 Langestein 15 52 00 27 20 Langewede 14 51 40 28 30 Langeweel 04 53 20 25 40 Langewiesaw 25 51 10 34 00 Langewysch 16, 17 52 1 27 00 Langgrun 22 50 30 28 40 Langheden 38 52 40 23 20 Langhurst 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 20 Langleben 2, 15 52 20 27 40 Langling 4, 16 52 40 27 00 Langlingen 06 52 20 27 00 Langlonwitz 33 50 30 29 30 Langmeil 26 52 10 32 30 Die Lang Owd 22 50 50 28 30 Langres 01 47 40 21 20 Langsee 05 53 40 25 10 Langsfeld 36 50 45 27 00 Langvarden 01 53 50 24 20 Langwater 05 53 35 24 40 Lanisch 28 51 05 34 20 Lanke 09 54 50 31 00 Lankewitz 10, 12 52 50 29 50 Lansaw 41 48 45 24 20 Lansdorf 14, 21 51 20 29 40 Lanshut 33 48 40 34 00 Lansperg 01 46 10 33 30 Lansser 41, 43 47 35 23 50 Lansw. 42 49 00 23 40 Lantpergh. 01 47 50 27 50 Lantersheim 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 00 Lantgravende 20 51 25 28 20 Lanthagen 07 53 45 29 30 Lanthut 01 48 40 34 30
Lantia 10, 12 52 20 29 30 Lantkow 07 53 35 28 20 Lantling 45 48 00 25 40 Lantsberg 34 49 30 27 10   41, 42, 44 48 15 23 55 Hohon Lants∣berg 41, 43 47 55 23 45 Klein Lantsberg 2, 15 52 40 29 10 Lantschutz 27 51 35 33 30 Lantze 7, 10 53 25 29 30 Lantzena 22 50 50 29 40 Lantzendorff 34 50 00 28 30 Lanzke 08 54 40 34 00 Laon 01 49 30 19 40 Lapitz 07 53 30 20 20 Lapoldeshausen 01 51 20 26 20 Lappen 38 46 00 24 20 Larg 38, 41, 43 47 25 23 40 W. Larg 41, 43 47 20 23 40 Larg fl. 41 47 30 23 35 Larbetal 38 46 40 25 50 Larbich 34, 36 50 30 26 40 Zar Largen Wiesen 19, 36 50 40 27 50 Largetz 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Larmen 08 54 00 30 30 Larte 22 51 10 29 50 Lasarmuhl 28 51 00 33 45 Laschwitz 30 50 30 34 10 Laschowitz 25 51 00 34 20 Lascowo 27 51 40 33 45 Lastzin 27 51 45 33 45 Lasdorf 22 50 50 28 30 Lase 07 53 45 28 00   27 51 35 33 30 Lasegraben 27 51 40 33 05 Lasen 25 51 00 33 20 Lasenitz 10, 11 53 20 27 40 Laswitz 27, 29 51 30 33 20 Lasferde 06 52 00 26 40 Laskawo 25 51 40 33 40 Lasko 33 49 30 31 00 Laskow 23 51 25 31 10   32 49 20 34 00 Laskowitz 28 51 05 34 55 Lasla 1, 24 50 00 35 00 Laso 09 54 40 31 10 DeLaso 08 54 40 30 30 Lassan 1, 8 54 00 31 20 Lassen 22 50 30 28 30 Lassenborg 19 50 50 28 20 Lassentin 08 53 40 33 00 Lassfelt 16 51 45 27 10 Lasset 30 50 35 34 30 Lastaen 07 53 45 48 10 Lastrow 07 52 55 28 30 Laswitz 26 51 55 33 20   30 50 30 34 10 Laszin 25 51 40 33 40 Laten 38 53 00 23 20 Latendorp 02 54 20 26 50 Latensen 16, 17 51 50 26 16 Lateraen 07 53 20 29 10 Laterburg 38 48 40 24 20 Lattenheim 22 50 50 29 30 Laverde 16 51 50 26 20 Latzen 17 52 30 26 30 Latzke 08 54 00 33 30 Gr. Latzke 08 53 00 32 30 Latzlick 10, 11 53 00 28 20 Latzmuhl 27, 29 51 30 33 10 Lavamynd 01 46 40 32 30 Lauba 26 51 50 33 20 Laubach 01 46 10 32 10   16 51 20 26 40 Laubach 01 46 00 32 00 Laubacherbad 45 48 00 26 40 Lauban 1, 23 51 15 32 10 Alt Lauban fl. 24, 25 51 10 32 00 Alubben 45 48 05 26 40 Laubeck 41, 43 47 50 23 40 Lauben 2, 22, 23 51 20 31 00   41, 42, 43 48 20 23 50 Alt Lauben fl. 23 51 15 32 10 Laubener Walde 23 51 10 32 10 Laubheim 01 48 00 26 40 Lauburg 2, 15 52 10 29 00 Lauca 32 48 50 34 40 Lauch 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Laucha 19, 36 50 55 27 20 Lauchart fl. 45 47 55 26 00 Lauche 15 51 10 28 40 Lauchhof 37 49 40 25 55 Lauchs 22 51 10 29 30 Lauchstat 19 51 30 28 50 Lauchstet 15, 20, 22 51 30 28 40 Klein Lauchstet 19, 20 51 30 28 50 Lauck 10 52 30 30 50 Lauckendorff 23 50 55 31 40 Lauda 37 49 35 26 10 Ober Lauda 37 49 35 26 10 Lauden 34, 38 49 40 26 10 Deutsch Polnisch Lauden 28 50 50 34 15 Laudenbach 34, 39 49 40 25 40 Laudick 01 52 10 35 40 Laudditch 19 50 25 27 50 Lavenitz 09 54 40 31 10 Lavenstein 2, 22, 33 50 40 30 40 Laus 1, 34 49 20 28 10 Lausenberg 41 47 25 24 30 Lauffenberg 1, 38 48 50 25 50   39, 44, 45 48 50 25 40 Lauffenburg 1, 40 47 20 24 30 Lauffeseil 39 50 00 24 10 Lauging 45 48 30 27 10 Laugingen 01 48 20 27 10 Lavis 01 45 50 28 10 Lauke 09 54 40 31 30 Laukow 32 49 20 32 20 Launitz 22 50 20 28 20 Launsen 45 48 25 26 40 Launstein 01 46 40 31 50 Launey 1, 2, 22, 33 50 10 30 40 Laupin 2, 4, 7, 10 53 40 28 20 Laupschke 28 51 15 34 45 Laur fl. 36 50 10 27 10 Laurina 34, 36 50 00 27 10 Lauringen 01 5 10 27 10 Laursitz 27 51 40 33 20 Lausanna 01 46 10 23 00 Lausaw 42 48 45 24 20 Lausche 23, 25, 26 51 30 32 20 Lausenberg 38 47 20 24 20 Laushutte 39 49 30 24 50 Lausney 31 50 25 33 10 Lausnitz 19 51 00 28 40 Laussigk 1, 22 50 30 29 50 Lausten 01 47 40 30 20 Lautam 38 50 00 20 40 Lauttelhode 15 53 00 26 40 Lautenbach 34, 37 49 50 26 30 Die Lauter fl. 39, 45 49 20 23 50 Lauterbach 1, 22 50 40 26 10   23, 25, 26, 34, 40 51 15 32 00 Der Lauterberg S. Petri 20 51 40 28 50 Lauterbich 33 49 50 29 50 Lauterburg 34, 36 50 20 27 50   40, 45 48 45 24 35 Lautereck 1, 39 49 30 23 50 Lauterseuffen 29 51 10 32 40 Lautershoven 34 49 00 28 20 Lautkow 33 49 30 32 00 Lautschitz B. Blac∣zina 32 49 00 34 00 Nider Lausnitz Marck Grasthumb 25 52 00 31 20 Ober Lausnitz Marck Grafthumb 25 51 30 31 20 Lautter fl. 45 48 05 26 10 Lauttern 45 48 40 26 40 Lauvitz 19 50 30 28 30 Lauwenaw 01 52 20 26 00 Lauwenburg 1, 2, 4 53 40 27 20   6, 11, 15 53 10 27 10   15, 16, 20, 21 51 45 27 50 Law 15 53 00 25 40 Law fl. 24, 25, 28 50 50 33 30 Lawaldaw 26 51 55 32 30 Lawborgh 21 51 50 29 10 Lawborgh 10, 14 51 40 29 20 Lawe 25 51 00 34 00 Lawenbrugge 4, 5, 6 53 20 26 00 Lawenrode 15 52 30 26 00 Lawenstein 06 51 55 26 10   19 50 25 28 20 Lawernig 25 51 00 33 00 Lawingen 16 52 15 27 40 Lawitz 23 51 15 31 40 Laxenburg 01 48 00 33 50 Layt 38, 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 25 Lazany 32 49 10 33 40 Laze 07 53 45 28 50 Lazewitz 26 51 30 33 20 Leaveline 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 30 Leban 27 51 55 33 35 Lebbin 8, 9 53 50 31 30 Lebbintz 21 51 05 29 20 Lebe 08 55 10 35 00 Leben 1, 11 52 25 28 10   41 47 50 24 25 Die Lebenback 15, 18 52 10 27 00 Lebene 1, 8 54 50 44 30 Lebenhausen 45 48 30 26 20 Lebentz 07 53 45 28 40 Lebentzin 08 53 20 31 30 Leberaw 38, 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 45 Kl. Leberaw 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 40 Leberg 14 51 30 28 40 Lebesche See 08 55 00 35 00 Lebgum 1, 2, 14 50 40 29 10   15, 19, 20, 21 51 45 28 50 Lebichaw 22 50 50 29 10 Lebine 08 55 00 35 30 Lebnitz 01 51 30 29 30 Lebren 07 53 35 31 00 Lebsitz 22 51 10 29 30 Lebssheim 40 48 00 24 05 Lebus 10, 12, 13 52 10 32 00   24, 25 52 20 31 30 Lecco 01 45 20 26 00 Lech fl. 01 46 50 27 30 Lechenich 38 50 40 23 00 Lechenow 01 51 30 25 30 Lechfeld 19 51 00 28 00 Lechgew 45 48 50 25 40 Lechin 07 53 50 30 20 Lechpruch 01 47 30 27 40 Lechtingen 40 48 00 24 10 Leck fl. 38 51 40 20 40 Leckno 01 52 40 35 00 Leckstedde 16 52 05 26 50   17 52 15 26 50 Leckwicz 20 51 40 28 50 Lecluce 01 50 10 19 00 Leddin 10, 11 52 40 29 10 Lede 10, 11 52 40 28 40 Ledeleben 2, 10 51 40 31 20 Ledetsch 01 49 30 32 10 Ledetz 2, 33 50 10 32 00 Lednice 32 49 00 35 20 Ledtkaudt 35 49 55 25 00 Leebenwert 21 50 50 30 20 Leendorf 21 51 10 28 50 Leenrad 34 49 10 27 20 Leer 01 53 20 23 30   6, 38 52 05 27 10 Leerdam 38 51 40 21 00 Leerte 4 52 40 26 40   16 52 15 26 50 Leerstedde 16 51 55 27 10 Leerwaldt 6, 16 52 05 27 20 Leesem 05 53 10 25 10 Leesten 04 53 00 25 00   09 54 40 31 00 Leetz 14, 21 51 35 29 36 Leetze 10, 11 52 30 27 40 Leewarden 38 53 20 21 40 Leewenborg 01 51 00 32 30 Legelsheim 40 48 20 24 25 Legelshurst 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 20 Legensdorp 10, 13 53 10 32 40 Leglitz 08 54 00 33 00 Leglo 01 53 00 22 20 Lehe 2, 4, 5 53 40 24 40     53 50 25 10 Lehem 23 51 20 31 10 Lehen 40, 43 47 35 24 15 Lehnberggericht 16 57 30 26 50 Lehndorf 16 52 10 27 20 Lehne 19 51 15 26 40 Lehnitz 33 48 50 31 10 Leibba 45 48 20 27 00 Leibede 22 50 10 29 20 Leibenstat 37 49 25 26 10 Leibers 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 30 Leiberstung 40 48 30 24 35 Lang Leibnitz 22 50 40 29 10 Leibros 34, 36 49 50 28 00 Leichbach 34, 36 50 10 26 30 Leichen 22, 23 51 10 31 20 Leichstet 19 50 45 28 10 Leichtnstal 38 47 20 24 00 Leiferte 6, 16 52 10 27 00 Leiftersweiler 39 49 50 23 20 Leigne 01 47 30 20 10 Leigow 38, 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 35 Leilia 19, 20 51 20 28 50 Leimbach 15, 18 51 40 28 20   19, 20 51 45 28 20   41, 43 47 40 23 35 Leimen 41, 43 47 20 23 50 Leimgruten 28 57 05 34 10 Leina 19, 22 50 35 28 40 Leina fl. 16, 17, 36 51 45 26 40 Leinach 34, 37 49 40 26 30 Leinde 16 52 05 27 20 Leine 08 53 10 32 00 Leine fl. 4, 6, 16 52 40 26 00   18, 19, 20 50 55 27 20 Leinerde 17 52 30 27 30 Leinsnhosen 45 48 20 26 00 Leintal 43 47 45 23 35 Leip. 22 50 40 31 20 Leipa 22, 23, 24, 25 51 20 31 00 Leipe 1, 2, 33 50 30 31 20   22, 23, 24 57 20 31 30 Leipen 22 51 10 29 20 Leipnitz 21, 22, 27 57 00 29 40 Leipoltzgrun 34 50 20 28 50 Leippe 28, 30 57 20 33 55 Leipshausen 39 50 00 23 40 Leipzig 01 51 10 29 20   02 51 20 28 40   15, 22 51 20 29 40 Leis 09 54 05 31 10 Leisla 22 51 10 28 40 Leislahe 16 52 10 25 50 Leisneck 22 51 10 29 50 Leisnick 1, 2, 22 51 10 29 00 Leising 34 48 50 28 30 Leiten 22, 31 51 0 29 40 Leitenhall 19 51 05 28 10 Leitenheim 40 48 40 24 30 Leitershausen 01 49 10 27 10 Leithomeritzer∣kraiss 33 50 20 30 30 Lek 14 57 30 29 20 Lekosh 10, 13 53 50 32 50 Lelgerheim 19 50 40 28 10 Lellen 10 52 40 31 40 Lelm 16 52 10 27 40 Lelsing 02 54 00 26 50 Lema 22 50 30 28 40 Lemaerder 05 53 10 25 10 Lemanus lacus 38 45 40 22 40 Lemback 40 48 50 24 25 Lemburg 04 52 20 25 00 Lemda 16 52 05 26 30 Lemene 22 51 20 29 30 Lemenut 41, 42 48 10 23 35 Lemersh. 41 48 55 24 45
Lemgow 01 52 00 25 20 Lemkule 07 53 25 28 20 Lemmet 14 51 35 28 50 Lemnitz fl. 22 50 20 28 30 Lemvorde 17 51 35 26 00 Lemsdorff 14, 30 51 45 28 40 Lemseel 21 50 55 29 10 Len. 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 20 Lenbach 38, 39, 41, 42 48 40 24 10 Lencesdorff 33 48 30 33 10 Lenckersheim 34 49 20 27 20 Lendenaw 22 50 30 29 30 Leneborch 38 50 20 24 20 Lenge 18 51 45 26 50 Lengede 4, 16, 17 52 20 27 00 Lengefelt 15, 19, 22 51 10 26 40 Lengelfelt 16, 19 51 35 28 20 Lengenbach 36 50 30 27 40 Lengenberg 41, 43 47 50 23 45 Lengenfelt 20 51 35 28 10 Lengers 19, 36 50 50 26 40 Lengerwisch. 02 52 20 29 30 Lenges 22, 34 50 10 28 40 Lengfeld 16, 19, 36, 37 51 15 27 20 Lengfurterhof 37 49 40 26 05 Lengsfeldt 19, 36 50 45 26 50 Lengsfelderholtz 36 50 45 27 00 Lengsleben 36 50 25 27 20 S. Lenhart 38, 39, 45 49 00 25 00 Lenichem 22 50 50 29 30 Lenick 33 48 30 32 40 Lenitz 12 52 30 30 20 Lenlunde 05 53 25 25 00 Lenn. 38, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 10 Lennbach 16, 19 51 30 27 50 Lenne 38 50 40 24 40 Lennes 1, 38 51 00 23 40 Lenning 38, 45 48 20 26 10 Lens 01 50 20 18 40 Lensaen 01 54 30 27 40 Lensen 16 52 05 26 30 Lente 17 52 35 26 20 Lentemberg 19 50 35 28 20 Lenterode 16 51 15 27 00 Lentershoven 34 48 50 28 10 Lentomys fl. 02 49 40 31 50 Lentz 7, 8, 10, 13 53 30 32 30 Lentzen 1, 4, 10, 11 53 10 28 30 Lentzke 10, 12 52 30 29 40 Lentzkow 07 53 25 28 50 Lentznburg 1, 38 47 10 24 20 Lentzwil 41, 42 49 00 24 25 Leobschutz 1, 24 50 10 34 30 Leodicensis Dioc. 01 51 00 21 10 S. Leonard 41 48 05 23 20 Leonberg 1, 45 48 35 25 40 Leonbergervorst 45 48 40 25 40 Leonhart 28 51 15 33 50 Leonsperg 01 48 30 29 40 Lepelow 08 54 10 29 30 Lependorff 14, 15, 20 51 50 28 40 Lepnitz 31 50 30 33 50 Lepoldes fl. 16 51 20 26 40 Lepontus 01 45 40 24 50 Leppin 07 53 25 30 40 Gross Leppin 10 52 40 29 00 Lepte 14 51 35 29 10 Lerba 22, 34 49 50 28 50 Lerchenberg 24, 25, 26 51 40 33 00 Lerchenbron 25, 26, 29 51 25 33 00 Lerchenfelt 20 51 45 28 30 Lerchenkopfe 16 51 45 27 20 Lerelpe 22 50 40 28 20 Lerneburg 19 51 00 26 30 Lernies 01 47 00 27 50 Lerstedde 17 52 00 27 20 Lesa 16 52 15 25 50 Leschen 01 51 20 32 30 Leschen 25 51 30 32 20 Leschnick 02 49 30 31 50 Leschnitz 1, 24 50 20 35 00 Leschne 32 49 30 34 50 Leschvik 33 49 40 33 10 Leschwitz 23, 27, 29 51 20 33 20 Lescowitz 26 51 40 33 10 Lesck 10, 13 52 10 32 10 Lese 04 53 20 24 40 Lesenitz 22 50 30 29 40 Leserling 16 52 25 26 00 Lesiutz 33 50 20 29 30 Leskowe 32 48 50 35 00 Leske 27, 29 51 35 33 20 klein Leske 27 51 35 33 20 Leskowitz 25, 27 51 40 33 00 Leslin 09 54 25 31 40 Lesnice 32 49 40 34 00 Lesschen 26 51 30 32 30 Lessen 25, 26 52 00 32 20 Lessen 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 35 Lessendorff 26 51 50 32 40 Lessetitz 33 49 30 31 00 Lesske 25 52 20 31 40 Lesso 01 52 50 36 00 Lestraye 1, 38, 41 47 40 23 00 Leswitz 29 51 20 33 25 Lethnitz 25, 26 51 50 32 20 Letin 19, 20 51 35 28 50 Letomeritz 1, 2, 33 50 20 31 00 Letowit 33 49 30 33 20 Letowitz 2, 32, 33 50 00 30 10 Letsenau 22 51 10 29 40 Letteaw 40 48 55 24 45 Lettigbrun 34 50 10 26 00 Lettin 21 51 05 28 40 Lettowitz 32 49 20 33 40 Letze fl. 11 52 35 28 10 Letzem 07 53 15 29 40 Letzing 1, 2 54 10 26 50 Letzke 14 52 20 28 40 Letzlingen 2, 15 52 30 28 20 Leube 22, 23 51 00 29 30 Leubel 27 51 35 33 40 Leubingen 19 51 20 28 00 Leubins 19 50 40 28 00 Leubnitz 22, 26 50 30 29 00 Leubus 1, 24 51 20 33 00 Leubus 25, 26, 27, 29 51 20 33 20 Leuch 1, 38 45 50 24 10 Leuchten∣bergh 1, 33, 34 49 30 29 10 Leuchtenburg 19 50 50 28 30 Leuchtenburg Ba∣ronia 19 50 55 28 30 Leuchtenburg 19 50 50 28 20 Leve 17 52 10 27 20 Levedachsen 17 52 10 26 20 Levenburg 4, 16, 17 52 00 27 20 Levenhagen 08 54 10 30 30 Levenow 8, 10, 13 53 00 32 00 Levesdorp 07 53 35 29 50 Levet 16 52 10 26 20 Leuffer 18 51 50 27 00 Leuge 17 52 05 27 30 Leugelern 16 51 35 26 50 Levikendorp 07 53 50 29 30 Levin 2, 7, 30 53 55 30 00 Levit 07 53 45 27 50 Levitz Sylva 07 53 25 28 30 Levitzow 07 53 50 29 50 Leukenberg 22 50 30 28 20 Leukendorff 22, 34 49 50 28 20 Leunburg 34 49 20 28 20 Leunitz 22 50 50 29 00 Leupotzhain 23 51 15 32 00 Leupusch 2, 22, 30 51 30 30 50 Leuse 01 50 40 16 40 Leusenibel 23 51 05 31 50 Leusersdorf 29 51 10 32 50 Leutbach fl. 25 51 10 33 20 Leutel 26 52 20 32 30 Leuten 2, 22, 23 50 00 28 50 Leutenberg 01 46 50 34 10 Leuterode 19 51 25 26 40 Leutersdorff 26 52 10 32 10 Leutershausen 34 49 00 27 20 Leuthen 25, 28 51 10 33 40 Leutking 01 47 30 26 50 Leutritz 30 50 30 34 30 Leutmansdorff 33 50 40 33 30 Leutmentz 22, 24 50 30 31 00 Leutomissel 1, 33 49 40 33 10 Leutsbach fl. 27, 29 51 20 33 20 Leutsch 30 50 25 34 00 Die Leutsch 23 51 00 31 40 Luttenberg 40 47 40 24 15 Leutzbach fl. 24, 26 51 10 33 00 Leuven 38 50 40 20 40 Leuvoerden 1, 4 52 40 24 50 Leuwarden 01 53 20 21 40 Leuwe 01 50 50 21 10 Leuwenstein 15 52 10 26 20 Leuze fl. 04 53 20 26 00 L. Lew. 33 48 30 32 30 Lewben 01 47 20 32 40 Lewefort 15 51 40 25 40 Lewen 4, 6 53 00 27 40 Lewenberg 10, 12 52 10 31 20 Lewenberg 24, 25, 29 51 10 32 30 Lewenbrok 10, 12 52 00 30 40 Lewenford 06 52 20 25 20 Lewenow 10, 13 52 30 32 20 Lewensolde 10, 13 52 40 31 50 Lewstein 41, 42 48 50 24 15 Lewin 1, 2, 24, 31 50 40 34 00 Lewitz 25 52 30 32 40 Lexow 07 53 20 29 40 Leyden 1, 38 52 10 20 20 Leye 16 51 55 27 30 Leyen 38 50 40 23 40 Leymen 39, 45 49 10 25 10 Leyn fl. 45 48 50 26 30 Leyst 16 51 25 26 50 Lez 38 50 00 21 00 Leznci 31 50 15 33 00 Leznik 32 49 30 33 20 Lhensen 16 52 10 26 10 Lheta 32 48 50 34 40 Lheto 33 49 30 34 20 Libbene 08 53 10 33 00 Libbenow 10 52 20 32 50 Libechowitz 33 50 10 30 50 Liben 33 50 10 31 40 Libena 22 51 20 29 00 Libenow 6, 16 52 20 25 50 Libenstein 33 48 20 31 50 Libental 10 52 40 30 30 Libentwiller 43 47 20 23 50 Libenwerdt 02 51 20 29 40 Libeschitz 33 50 20 31 00 Libesberg 45 48 30 25 10 Libestain 23 51 15 31 05 Libetz 10, 12 51 50 30 40 Libetzk. 10, 12 52 40 30 50 Libewalt 01 52 50 30 40 Libezitz 33 49 00 31 20 Libiechonitz 02 50 40 30 20 Libiechowitz 33 50 30 31 20 Libiehrad 2, 33 50 00 31 10 Libessow 2, 33 50 10 31 10 Libiny 32 49 40 34 00 Libite 09 54 30 30 50 Libitz 2, 33 50 00 32 00 Libnitz 09 54 40 31 10 Liboch 22 50 20 30 50 Libochowen 02 50 30 29 50 Libochowitz 02 50 20 29 50 Libok 25 52 30 32 20 Libonie 33 50 10 32 10 Libonotein 19 51 10 29 00 Libringen 19 50 45 28 00 Libsdorff 20 51 35 28 30 Liburg 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Lichte 19 50 40 28 00 Lichte fl. 19 50 30 28 00 Lichtel 22 50 10 29 50 Lichtenaw 10, 12 52 10 31 20 Lichtenbach 01 48 20 29 10 Lichtenberg 10, 12 52 10 30 40 Lichtenberg 16, 17, 22 52 05 27 00 Lichtenberg 15 52 20 27 00 Lichtenburg 21, 22 51 05 29 50 Lichtendam 19, 22 50 30 28 20 Lichtendanne 22 50 30 29 30 Lichtenfels 34 50 10 27 50 Lichtenford 1, 38 52 00 22 20 Lichtenbagen 07 54 05 29 10 Lichtensee 02 51 20 29 30 Lichtenstat 33 50 00 29 40 Lichtenstein 22, 33 50 40 29 30 Lichtenwalt 22 50 40 30 00 Lichterdorf 10, 12 52 00 30 30 Lichterfelt 10, 12 52 30 31 00 Lichtewalde 31 50 05 33 30 Licz 32 49 10 34 10 Lidelsheim 40 48 55 24 45 Liderow 32 49 30 33 50 Lidetsch 32, 33 49 30 32 30 Lidford 04 54 20 26 20 Lidtgrave 03 53 50 26 00 Lieba 22, 23, 25 51 10 31 40 Liebaw 01 51 00 31 50 Lieben 33 50 40 32 50 Liebenaw 16, 23 51 20 26 20 Liebenaw 24, 25, 26 52 20 32 20 Liebeneck 34 48 50 28 20 Liebenstein 34, 45 48 50 25 50 Liebenthal 24, 25 51 00 32 00 Liebentorf 43 47 20 23 40 Liebenweit 22 51 20 30 30 Liebentwil 41 47 20 23 50 Liebessch Wasser 23 51 20 31 30 Liebestien 41 47 20 24 35 Liebewald 10, 12 52 40 30 30 Liebnisch Wasser 25 51 20 31 20 Liebsdorff 19 51 40 28 30 Liebspach 23 51 40 32 10 Liebstet 19 51 05 28 10 Liebusch 10, 12 51 40 31 30 Liechstall 41, 43 47 20 24 10 Liechtal 01 47 20 24 10 Liechtenaw 40, 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 25 Liechtenberg 39, 41 48 40 24 00 Liechtenegg 40 48 05 24 20 Liechtenfels 01 50 10 27 50 Liechtenstein 45 48 10 25 50 Liechtenstern 45 49 00 26 00 Liechtenthal 40, 41, 45 48 35 24 40 Liechtewalda 29 51 20 32 40 Liechthan 16, 19, 20 51 35 28 20 Liederbach 35 50 00 24 50 Liege 01 50 40 21 50 Lieghtenstag 01 46 50 25 40 Liel 41, 43 47 35 24 05 S. Lien 41, 42 48 45 24 15 Lienez 01 46 40 29 50 Lienh 41, 42, 44 48 15 23 55 S. Lienhart 41, 42 48 05 23 55 Lienhusen 38 51 00 24 20 Liepern 39 50 00 24 00 Lier 01 51 10 20 40 Liere 38 51 00 20 20 Liers fl. 16 51 35 27 00 Lieshout 01 51 30 21 30 Liesses 01 50 00 20 00 Lietensche Heyde 21 51 00 29 30 Lievenow 01 52 40 25 30 Ligne 01 50 40 19 40 Ligni 01 47 30 19 40 Lignicensis Ducatus 24 51 20 32 30 Lignier 38 50 00 21 40 Lignitz 24, 25 51 10 33 00 Ligny 01 48 40 21 30 Lihn 05 53 20 24 50 Lihon 38 48 40 22 20 Liksim 41 48 40 23 40 Lilckendey 05 53 15 25 10 Lilers 01 50 30 18 20 Liliendal 01 53 20 25 10 Lilienstein 22, 24 50 50 31 00 Lillo 1, 38 51 20 20 20 Liltel 05 53 00 24 40 Limat fl. 38 47 00 25 00
Limbach fl. 18 51 40 28 00 Limberg 19, 39 50 50 28 00 Limburg 1, 4 52 20 25 00 Limburg 38, 39 49 00 24 00 Limburg 41, 42, 45 49 00 24 00 Limburg Herschaft 45 48 55 26 20 Limburg Ducatus 01 50 30 22 10 Limkoweitschy 33 49 20 32 10 Limmer 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Limmingeroda 16 51 30 27 20 Limo 01 46 00 27 40 Limpach 01 49 20 23 40 Limpach 19, 22, 39 50 30 29 20 Limpach 01 47 00 34 30 Limpurg 41, 43 48 05 24 05 Limritz 10, 13 52 20 32 20 Limsdorf 10, 12 51 50 31 30 Lincke 10, 13 53 30 33 20 Linckel 22 51 20 29 10 Linckelheim 39, 40 48 50 24 50 Lindascha 20 51 30 28 00 Lindaw 16, 17, 19 51 35 26 50 Lindbergh 19, 20 51 45 28 20 Linde 8, 10, 13 53 20 33 00 Lindebeke 07 53 25 29 00 Lindeberg 7, 8 53 45 38 10 Lindeberg 10, 12 51 50 31 40 Lindeberg 10, 11 52 50 29 00 Lindelbach 37 49 40 26 05 Lindelbrun 39, 41, 42 48 55 24 20 Lindelfels 34 49 30 25 10 Lindem 18 51 45 27 10 Linden 5, 16, 17 52 55 25 40 Lindenaw 1, 15, 22, 23 51 30 29 20 Lindenberg 10, 12 52 20 31 00 Lindelfels 01 49 30 25 10 Lindenhan 21 50 55 29 20 Lindepusch 29 51 15 33 10 Linderbach 19 51 00 28 00 Linderode 23, 25 51 40 32 00 Lindersen 16 52 05 26 30 Lindersfels 39 49 30 25 10 H. Lindert 16 52 15 28 20 Lindewiese 30 50 25 34 30 Lindewise 30 50 10 31 10 Lindhorst 2, 4, 5 53 40 26 40 Lindich 16, 19 52 10 26 10 Lindow 1, 7, 8 53 35 30 50 Lindre 38 48 40 23 00 Lindstedt 4, 10, 11 52 40 29 00 Lindt 34, 36 50 20 28 00 Line 41, 43 47 20 23 30 Linelhorst 2, 15 52 30 28 40 Linge 01 52 40 23 40 Lingelsheim 43, 44 48 20 24 10 Lingen 38 52 40 23 20 Lingestein 16 51 55 27 50 Lingewarda 19 51 20 26 30 Lings. 40, 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 20 Linke 10, 12 53 20 31 20 Linnich 13, 38 53 20 32 30 Linouw 01 54 00 27 10 Linsburg 16 52 25 26 00 Linsse 08 54 00 33 30 Linstorf 41, 43 47 25 23 50 Linstow 07 53 35 29 30 Lintal 41 47 45 23 35 Lintbergh 14 51 15 28 20 Lintdorf 4, 10, 11 52 20 25 00 Lintel 05 53 05 25 50 Lintgen 38 49 40 22 20 Linthart 29 51 25 33 05 Lintich 22 50 50 28 30 Lintlaw 38 50 40 23 40 Lintz 1, 33, 38 48 10 31 30 Lintze 06 53 00 28 00 Linum 10, 12 52 30 29 50 Linungen 15 51 30 28 00 Linungen 16, 19, 20 51 30 28 10 Lion 01 45 20 20 50 Lionnois 01 45 20 20 30 Lipe 8, 10, 12, 13 53 00 28 30 Lipegorre 08 53 50 31 00 Lipen 07 53 45 29 30 Lipenlacus 08 53 50 33 30 Lipendorp 07 53 35 29 50 Liperg 40 47 40 24 10 Lipheim 1, 42 48 10 27 00 Lipka 1, 33 49 40 32 40 Lipnik 32 49 30 34 30 Lipnitz 32, 33 49 20 32 40 Lipow 32 48 50 34 40 Lipowitz 24 49 50 36 00 Lippa 28 51 10 34 55 Lippe 38 51 20 22 40 Lippeen 10 52 50 32 00 Lippelsberg 15 51 30 26 00 Lippen 24, 25, 26 51 50 32 30 Lippendorf 19 50 55 28 40 Lippenspach 40 47 40 24 10 Lippesdorf 19 50 30 28 10 Lippestad 01 51 40 24 40 Lippetz 23 51 25 31 30 Lippieroda 16 51 30 27 40 Lippigeroda 19 51 35 27 20 Lippin 10, 11 52 40 28 20 Gross Lippin 11 52 45 29 10 Liprichhausen 34 49 20 26 30 Lips 10, 13, 23 53 40 32 50 Lipsberglin 16 51 30 26 30 Lipsche 23 51 03 32 50 Lipschowes 2, 33 50 20 29 40 Lipse 21, 22 51 00 29 10 Lipsheim 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 05 Lipso 10 53 50 27 20 Lipsteich 23 51 20 32 10 Liptal 32 49 20 34 50 Lipuwka 32 49 10 33 40 Lis 41 48 30 24 00 Lisa 02 50 00 30 40 Lisberg 34, 36 49 50 27 30 Lischna 32 49 00 33 50 Liscow 09 54 35 30 50 Liscowezort 09 54 30 30 50 Lisental 42 48 45 24 05 Lisle 01 47 20 22 50 Lisolen 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 10 Lissa Leszno 23, 24, 25 51 20 32 00 Lissa Leszno 26, 27, 28, 33 51 55 33 20 Marck Lissa 24 51 00 32 00 Lissa fl. 25 51 10 33 40 Lissan 10 53 50 30 50 Lissen 22, 25, 26 51 00 28 50 Lissenhage 09 54 20 31 10 Lissitz 33 49 20 33 20 Lissow 33 48 50 31 30 Listen 22, 24 50 20 28 20 Listerfor 21 51 15 29 50 Listringen 16 52 00 26 50 Lite 07 54 05 29 50 Litenschitz 33 49 10 33 50 Litentzitz 32 49 10 34 20 Literswiler 41, 42 48 40 24 25 Lith 05 53 45 26 10 Litichorn 33 48 50 32 30 Lititz 2, 32, 33 49 50 33 20 Litne 33 49 50 31 00 Litochorz 32 48 50 33 00 Litomerziczkikrag 33 50 30 30 30 Litsch 22 50 50 29 10 Litschen 23 51 30 31 30 Litsental 41, 42 48 50 24 20 Litta 1, 24, 32 49 30 34 00 Littenheim 41, 42 48 30 24 00 Littenum 41, 42 48 35 24 25 Littzen 22 51 20 29 10 Litzegerich 10 52 30 31 40 Litzegerich 13 52 30 31 30 Litzen 40, 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 20 Litzenem 22 51 20 29 10 Litzenh. 41 48 35 24 00 Litzenhus 42 48 35 24 05 Litzesdorff 33 48 40 33 00 Litzkow 1, 22, 33 50 00 30 20 Litzow 33 48 50 31 50 Litzowische Fehr 09 54 40 31 30 Liurgrin 22 50 30 28 30 Lixim 01 48 40 23 50 Lizytze 32 49 20 33 40 Lnaesch 33 49 10 30 50 Lobbe 09 54 20 31 40 Lobbenow 13 52 20 32 40 Lobbin 7, 8 53 35 30 30 Lobbis 14 51 55 29 20 Lobbune 08 54 50 35 30 Lobechin 07 54 00 29 50 Lobeda 22 50 50 28 30 Mons Lobeda 19 50 55 28 30 Lobedaw 30 50 25 34 10 Lobefelt 38 49 00 25 20 Lobendaw 29 51 20 33 05 Lobenfeld 39, 45 49 10 25 20 Lobenstein 1, 22, 33 51 00 29 20 Loberitz 16, 22 51 45 28 20 Lobern 06 52 15 25 20 Lobertintz 25 51 10 33 40 Lobethal 27 51 20 33 45 Lobich 22 51 00 28 30 Lobist 21 51 15 29 30 Loblitz 23 51 25 32 00 Lobnitz 21, 22 51 10 28 40 Lobo fl. 08 55 00 35 00 Loboditz 32 49 20 34 20 Loboschitz 33 49 20 34 00 Lobris 29 51 05 33 20 Lobrugge 03 53 50 26 50 Loburck 18 51 45 29 20 Locha 2, 14, 20, 21 51 40 29 20 Lochem 1, 38 52 10 22 30 Lochen 39 49 00 24 40 Lochenicz 14 51 20 28 20 Lochentin 07 53 45 30 30 Lochow 10, 12, 26 52 20 29 30 Lochowitz 33 49 40 31 00 Lochstedt 14 52 05 28 00 Lochten 17 52 05 27 30 Lochw. 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Lochwicz 14, 15, 19, 20 51 15 28 40 Locsin 08 53 50 30 00 Loczkendorff 20 51 20 28 50 Lochenitz 1, 8 53 30 31 30 Lockenitz fl. 10, 11 53 10 28 20 Lockenum 41 48 50 24 45 Lockfleth 05 53 25 24 50 Locklum 15 52 30 27 40 Locksted 16 52 15 27 50 Lockte 21 51 45 29 40 Lockum 1, 4, 16 52 40 26 00 Loden 23 51 30 32 00 Lodenitz 32 48 50 33 50 Loebenstein 1, 45 49 00 26 00 Loebenicz 20 51 05 28 20 Loeckueen 15 52 30 25 40 Loeflen 02 53 50 28 10 Loel 41 47 45 24 00 Loem 07 53 40 29 10 Loenaken 38 50 40 21 40 Loenberg 38 48 20 25 20 Loenen 38 52 40 24 20 Loertz 02 53 10 29 00 Loesen 07 53 15 29 50 Loesse 07 53 10 28 10 Loessen 45 49 05 25 00 Loesten 07 53 30 30 10 Loetz 07 53 45 28 50 Loetze 03 53 45 26 30 Loeven 01 50 50 20 40 Loevestein 38 51 40 21 00 Loffelsteltz 37, 40 49 35 26 15 Loffenaw 41 47 45 24 40 Loffing 45 47 45 24 50 Loga 23 51 20 31 20 Logden 02 52 10 29 10 Loge 05 53 05 24 20 Loge 23 51 15 32 20 Logisch 26 51 35 32 50 Logischen 27 51 45 33 25 Logitsck 41, 43 47 50 23 55 Loglen 24 51 30 32 00 Lohden 25 51 30 31 40 Lohe Die Lohe alias Das Wuske 28 51 15 34 10 Lohm 29 51 20 32 50 Lohmnitz 25 50 50 32 40 Lohmnitz fl. 25 50 50 32 40 Lohr 1, 37, 40 49 55 25 55 Loiver 05 53 35 25 30 Loisenheim 39 49 40 24 20 Loisheim 38 49 40 24 00 Loit 38 49 40 21 00 Loitz 1, 7, 8, 10 53 45 31 00 Loitzin 08 53 50 32 00 Lokenitz 10, 12 53 20 31 10 Loket Elnbogen 33 50 00 29 40 Loketskykrag 33 50 10 29 40 Loller 34 50 30 25 10 Lom 22 51 00 30 50 Loma 22, 38 50 50 29 10 Lomat 41, 43 47 30 24 30 Lome 02 50 50 29 50 Lomince 32 49 10 33 30 Lominitz 33 50 20 32 20 Lomit 31 50 15 33 30 Lomitz 31 50 10 33 30 Lommersdorf 10, 13 52 50 33 00 Lommersheim 39 49 20 24 40 Lomintz 02 50 20 31 10 Lomintz 33 49 00 31 30 Die Lon fl. 34 50 40 25 10 Londebach 19 51 05 26 40 Londo 16 52 15 26 30 Lone 06 52 10 26 20 Lonessen 15 52 00 26 00 Lonnevitz 09 54 25 31 20 Longchamp 01 48 50 21 20 Longe 10, 12 52 40 30 10 Longenapel 11 52 40 28 00 Longvic 01 49 30 22 00 Longwion 01 49 30 21 50 Loo 41, 42 48 20 24 30 Loom 10, 11, 14 52 40 29 10 Loon 38 51 20 21 40 Loone 10, 11, 14 52 35 28 30 Loor 01 48 10 24 30 Loos fl. 20 51 20 28 10 Loosn 22 50 50 28 50 Gr. Lopeke 17 52 30 26 50 Loppi 10, 13 52 30 32 20 Loppin 07 53 30 29 40 Loquitz 19, 22 50 35 28 20 Loquitz fl. 19 50 30 28 20 Ober Loqz 19 50 30 28 20 Lor 34, 38, 39 50 00 26 20 Lor 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 20 Lor fl. 34 50 10 26 10 Lora 1, 16, 19 51 20 27 30 Lora Herschaft 16, 19 51 25 27 40 Loranckwitz 28 50 55 34 05 Lorch 40, 45 47 30 24 10 Loremberg 01 45 50 31 10 S. Lorentz 19 50 50 27 30 Lorentzdorf 23, 25, 26 51 30 32 20 Lorentzen 39, 41 49 00 23 40 Lorhatta 34 50 10 26 10 Lorich 38, 39 49 50 23 50 Lorr 41, 45 48 10 24 20 Lorraine 01 49 00 22 00 Lorsch 39 49 30 25 00 Lortzendor ff 28 51 20 35 05 Losan 38 46 00 22 40 Losburg 45 48 10 25 00 Loschkow 10, 12 52 30 29 30 Loschowits 01 51 50 33 20 Loschwitz 25 51 50 33 00 Losenrade 10, 11 52 50 28 30 Losenstein 01 47 40 31 30 Losicz 19 50 35 28 20 Losla 22 50 20 29 10 Loslhat 33 49 10 33 10 Loss 23, 26 51 30 31 30 Loss fl. 15 51 10 28 20 Lossa 15, 19 51 10 28 20
Lossa fl. 19 51 15 28 00 Lossen 30 50 50 34 30 Losser fl. 19, 38 51 15 28 20 Losseren 38 52 20 33 00 Lossersleben 16 52 00 28 20 Lossichen 25, 26 52 20 32 00 Lossinetz fl. 31 50 00 33 20 Lossow 10, 12, 13 52 00 32 00 Losstitz 32 49 30 33 50 Losswitz 25, 27, 29 51 25 33 40 Lotharingia 38 48 00 22 20 Lotowicz 01 49 20 33 30 Lotsch 22 50 40 29 00 Lotsche 18 51 45 29 10 Cl. Lotsche 18 1 45 29 10 Lotscheim 01 49 30 23 00 Lotsk 10, 14, 21 51 30 29 40 Lottengrin 22 50 20 29 20 Lotterstoken 16 52 15 26 30 Lottin 08 53 50 34 30 Lotzkendorff 19 51 25 28 40 Lotzwyll 38 46 40 24 00 Loven 07 53 10 30 40 Lovenhusen 16, 17 51 50 26 10 Lovenstein 04 52 00 26 00 Lovero 01 45 20 26 50 Louffen 38 47 00 23 40 Lovitz 07 53 20 30 40 Loukow 32 49 20 34 40 Loup 38 50 20 20 20 Loupfheim 45 48 05 26 50 Louppen 38 46 20 23 20 Loupy 1, 38 48 50 21 10 Lousbuhel 40 47 40 24 15 Louvenstein 16 51 55 26 20 Louweburg 10, 12 52 30 30 21 Louwenaw 15 52 20 25 40 Louwenborch 08 54 50 35 30 Louwenborg 01 54 20 35 30 Louwenbroeck 03 53 45 26 30 Louwenforst 16 51 30 26 20 Louwenstein 17 52 10 26 10 Loux 38 46 40 22 40 Lowenborg 17 51 50 26 30 Lowensted 16 52 00 28 00 Lowenstein 22, 31 50 20 28 30 Lowin 25 52 30 32 40 Lowitz 7, 8 53 50 30 50 Loxstede 05 53 35 25 10 S. Loy 41 47 35 24 30 Loye 05 53 10 24 50 Loys 10, 12, 38 52 40 29 30 Loze fl. 03 53 45 36 30 Lubars 2, 15 52 10 28 40 Lubatz 10, 11, 14 52 25 29 10 Lubbas 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 10 Lubbas 14 51 55 29 20 Lubbeke 4, 6 52 20 35 00 Lubben 02 51 00 30 40 De Lubben 09 54 45 30 50 Lubbenow 10, 12 53 20 30 40 Lubbendorp 2, 7 53 30 27 50 Lubberas 10, 12 51 40 31 50 Lubberstede 1, 4 53 30 26 10 Lubbetene 07 53 15 28 00 Lubbetzitz 09 54 35 31 10 Lubbezin 8, 10, 13 53 30 32 00 Lubbrechtsen 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Lubeck 1, 2, 4, 7 54 10 27 20 Luben 1, 2, 10 52 00 31 00   24, 25, 26, 27 51 20 33 00 Luben 10 52 50 28 50   11 52 50 29 00 L. Luben 10 52 50 28 40 Lubenaw 25, 28, 29 51 00 32 00 Lubendorp 41, 43 47 20 23 35 Lubensis 29 51 30 33 10 Lubenthal 25, 26 52 00 32 00 Lubentzig 26 51 55 32 50 Luberas 01 52 00 31 20 Luberow 07 53 25 30 20 Lubezow 07 53 10 28 20 Lubichen 26, 27 51 40 33 20 Lubikow 10, 13 52 40 31 30 Lubin 24, 25, 26 52 05 33 40 Lubine 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 40 Lubitz 1, 2, 4, 7 53 40 29 10   10, 11 53 20 28 30 Lubkevitz 09 54 50 31 10 Lublinitz 1, 24 50 50 35 30 Lublitz 01 49 40 34 30   1, 24, 32 49 50 34 30 Lublow 07 53 20 28 30 Lubrow 08 53 50 32 30 Lubs 07 53 45 29 30 Lubs 10, 14 51 30 29 10 Lubschutz 32 50 00 34 40 Lubstorp 07 53 40 30 50 Lubtow 08 53 10 32 30 Lubtzitz 09 54 40 31 20 Lubtzow 10, 11 53 00 28 30 Luc 10, 13 52 20 33 00 S. Lucar 41, 43 47 30 23 35 Lucenay 01 26 40 20 00 Lucern 1, 38 46 40 24 40 Lucerner See 38 46 20 24 40 Lucha 22 51 00 29 10 Luchaw 02 52 50 27 50 Lucharche 01 49 00 18 20 Luchte 09 54 40 30 40 Luchteberg 05 53 51 25 01 Luchtenberg 33 48 40 32 30 Luchtenhaim 19 50 25 28 10 Luchteronge 15 51 40 26 00 Luchtringen 16, 17 51 40 26 20 Lucken 21 51 25 30 40 Luckenheim 45 48 55 24 50 Luchenitz 23 51 35 31 50 Luckenwalde 10, 12 51 40 30 30 Luckenzaitz 14 51 50 29 10 Luckewalden 02 52 10 29 30 Lucklum 16, 18 52 10 27 30 Luckmainer Mons 38 45 40 25 00 Luckosch 01 52 40 35 50 Luckow 10, 12, 13 53 10 31 20   14, 21 51 30 29 20 Luckstedt 10, 11 53 10 28 30 Luczelstein 41, 42 48 40 23 50 Luddenworden 04 54 00 27 00 Luddow 09 54 40 31 10 Ludenbach 34 50 20 28 00 Ludendorff 20 51 20 28 40 S. Luden 41, 44 48 15 24 10 S. Ludens 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 45 Luder 34 50 40 26 10 Luderbich 19 51 05 26 40 Luderburck 18 51 30 28 30 Luderflagen 39 48 50 23 20 Luderitz 10, 11 52 10 28 40 Ludermnt 34 50 40 26 20 Ludersborgh 1, 2, 4, 6 53 40 27 30 Ludersdorff 19, 38 51 40 28 20 Ludershagen 7, 8 53 40 29 20 Ludershusen 2, 4, 6 53 30 27 00 Luderstet 19, 20 51 20 28 30 Ludesborn 19 51 15 27 50 Ludlchsdorff 10, 12 52 40 30 20 Ludingwoordt 03 53 40 24 40 Ludvels 32, 33 48 40 32 30 Ludwigsdorff 30, 31 51 50 32 30 Lue fl. 03 53 45 25 50 Luen fl. 05 53 30 25 10 Luen d 05 53 30 25 10 Luenen 38 50 20 24 40 Lue Sandt 03 53 50 25 50 Luessen 34 50 30 27 20 Luetonne 03 53 50 25 50 Luffetorf 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Luffing 10, 11 52 20 28 10 Lug 38, 39, 41 42 49 00 24 20 Lugaw 01 45 30 25 30 Lugde 1, 16, 17 52 00 25 50 Luge 26 52 20 32 20 Lugh 34 49 30 29 10 Lugion 38 49 20 21 40 Luglic 15 52 10 28 40 Lugwil 41 48 40 24 00 Lugwin 08 53 50 33 00 Luhczowitz 32 49 00 34 50 Luhe fl. 2, 4, 5, 6 53 30 26 30 Luidersburg 20 51 25 28 30 Luissem 39 49 40 23 20 Luitersdorff 20 51 30 28 20 Luka 32 49 40 33 30 Luken 2, 10 51 50 29 50 Lukevitz 7, 9 53 30 28 00 Lukowetz 33 49 30 31 50 Lullemin 08 54 40 34 30 Lullstatt 37 49 30 26 15 Lulsdorp 10, 13 53 10 32 40 Lulzelberg 16 51 15 26 40 Lumen 38 50 40 20 40 Lumes 38 49 20 20 40 Lumhule 04 53 40 26 20 Lumhule Cast. 04 53 40 26 00 Lummensunck 36 50 45 27 50 Lummerthausen 16, 19 51 20 28 10 Lummitsch 02 51 10 29 20 Lumpersw. 41, 43 47 35 23 45 Lumzow 08 53 50 34 30 Lun 09 54 45 31 30 Lun fl. 04 53 40 24 40 Lunckwitz 22 50 40 29 40 Lund 15 51 20 26 20 Lunden 1, 2 54 40 25 30 Lune 2, 4, 6 53 30 27 00   10, 12 52 40 31 20   13 52 40 31 10 Luneburgensis 1, 11 53 20 26 10 Lunede 17 52 30 26 40 Lunen 38 51 20 23 40 Lunenborg 1, 2, 4, 6 53 30 27 10 Lunenborgerheide 04 53 40 26 40   5, 6 53 10 26 20 Luneville 1, 38 48 20 22 40 Lunging 45 48 05 25 05 Lungren 38 46 20 24 20 Lunichusen 38 51 40 23 40 Lunmausunck 19 50 45 27 40 Lunow 07 53 55 29 50 Lunsen 05 53 00 25 30 Luntenberg 01 48 40 34 20 Luntenburg 32 48 40 34 20   16 51 50 26 10 Luntorp 17 52 00 26 00 Luntzebock fl. 29 51 10 33 30 Luntzenaw 22 50 50 29 50 Lunsont 38 51 00 24 00 Lunstett 20 51 20 28 50 Lupa fl. 24, 25 52 00 31 30 Lupach 41, 43 47 25 23 45 Lupelow 07 53 35 30 10 Lupfstein 41, 42 48 30 24 00 Luposche lacus 08 54 30 35 00 Lupow 1, 8 54 10 35 00 Lupow fl. 08 54 40 35 00 Luppenitz 19 51 00 27 10 Luppurg 34 49 00 28 40   02 54 00 27 40 Lupsee 07 53 45 27 50 Lupsen 18 51 40 29 10 Lupzaw 2, 15 52 00 28 40 Lurange 38 49 00 22 20 Lur 01 47 30 22 40 Lurtsch 27 51 25 33 20 Lusatia 01 51 50 31 20   24, 25 51 30 31 00 Lusch 41, 43 47 20 23 35 Lusche 32 49 40 33 00 Lusdorff 23 51 00 32 10 Luse 14 51 35 29 10 Lucentitz 09 54 15 31 10 Lusse 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 35 Lussevitz 09 54 35 31 00 Lussow 07 53 50 29 10 Lust 18 51 30 28 30 Lustnau 38, 45 48 15 25 50 Lustri 38 46 00 23 00 Lutbach 41, 43 47 50 23 35 Lutchendorff 20 51 35 28 30 Lutelhus 41 48 20 23 50 Lutebach 40, 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 25 Lutenheim 44 48 25 24 00 Lutenwile 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 20 Luter 34 50 30 26 20 Luter fl. 45 48 50 24 20 Luterbach 42 48 45 24 10 Luterberg 16 51 40 27 20 Luterburg 39, 45 48 40 24 40 Luterode 16 52 00 27 20 Luterschwan 41, 42 48 55 24 20 Lutersen 16 52 10 26 30 Lutez fl. 38 48 40 24 00 Lutgendorff 19 51 40 28 30 Luthorst 16, 17 51 45 26 30 Lutitz 22, 33 50 00 30 10 Lutk 16, 17 51 55 26 10 Lutke Heyde 10, 11 52 50 28 30 Lutkenburckel 16 51 55 26 10 Lutkenbremen 15 52 20 25 40 Lutkendorp 07 53 35 29 40 Lutkenhagen 07 53 15 30 30 Lutkenlegden 19 51 35 26 30 Lutkeroide 04 54 00 25 00 Lutke Sandt 05 53 50 25 00 Lutkevitz 09 54 50 31 00 Lutkow 8, 10 53 50 31 30 Lutrihusen 16 52 10 26 20 Lutro 41, 43 47 30 24 30 Lutrode 17 52 10 27 20 Lutrum 16, 17 52 05 27 00 Lutschen 22 50 50 28 40 Lutschezthal 40, 42 48 10 24 25   41, 43 48 05 24 25 Lutten 15 52 00 27 00 Luttenewas 10, 11 52 10 28 20 Luttenstorp 07 53 50 27 50 Lutter 1, 16, 17 51 55 27 00 Lutter H. 16 51 3 26 50 Lutter fl. 40, 41, 42 48 45 24 30 Lutterbach 41, 43 47 35 23 45   41 48 45 24 30 Lutterbadt 41, 43 47 55 24 20 Lutterberg 18 51 20 27 20 Luttertho 4, 6 53 00 26 40 Luttrow 2, 7 53 40 27 30 Lutzelbrun 41 48 15 23 55 Lutzeburg 41, 42 48 35 23 45   43, 44 48 15 23 55 Lutzelhart 41, 42 48 50 24 10 Lutzelhus 41, 42 48 15 23 40 Lutzelstein 1, 39 48 40 23 50 Lutzen 1, 2, 15 51 10 29 00 Lutzenburg 1, 38 49 40 22 20   01 49 50 21 00 Lutzhorn 05 53 50 26 20 Lutzk 10, 11 51 50 28 40 Lutzke 08 54 00 33 30 Lutzmanstein 34 49 10 28 40 Lutzow 10, 12 52 10 30 30 Luve 22 51 10 29 10 Luverdun 38 48 40 22 20 Luvino 01 45 20 25 10 Luxevil 01 47 40 22 40 Luxeul 38 47 20 22 20 Luxtorff 41. 43 47 20 23 40 Luyck 1, 38 50 40 21 40 Luye 14 51 55 29 00 Luynen 01 51 30 23 50 Lwowek 25 52 30 32 40 Lychen 10, 12 53 00 30 20 Lyn 41 47 20 24 35 Lyn fl. 39, 45 49 00 25 30 Lyndaw 15 51 30 26 40 Lynden 4, 34 53 00 25 40 Lyningen 01 49 20 24 30 Lynow 2, 4 54 00 27 20 Lynste 2, 4 54 00 27 40 Lysten 4, 10, 11 53 00 28 40 Lysevitz 07 54 00 29 30 Lyssy 38 45 40 23 20 Lyw. 10, 12 52 40 29 40 Lzelim 33 49 10 33 00
M   MAalke 07 53 05 28 20 Mabling fl. 34 49 30 35 30 Macchenhe 39 49 30 24 10 Macha 31 50 25 33 10 Machault 01 49 10 20 30 Machelen 38 51 00 20 20 Machen 23, 25, 26 51 40 32 20 Machendorff 23 51 00 32 10 Machern 38 49 40 22 20 Machlendorf 30 50 30 34 10 Machmin 08 54 50 34 30 Machowitz 33 49 50 31 30 Machsen 17 52 25 26 50 Machtersen 16 52 05 27 10 Mackeln 22 51 20 29 20 Mackensen 17 51 50 26 20 Mackerode 16 51 30 27 00 Macksdorff 20 51 55 28 50 Maddel 10, 11, 14 51 50 28 50 Madel 15 51 00 28 00 Madeln 19 51 00 28 20 Madelungen 19 51 00 27 00 Madenburg 41, 42 49 00 24 25 Madese 01 46 00 26 00 Madia 01 45 30 25 00 Madia fl. 38 45 20 24 40 Madin lacus 8, 10, 13 53 10 32 30 Madrusso 01 45 40 28 00 Madtzperg 01 51 20 25 50 Maegdeburg 01 52 10 28 40 Maendorp 05 53 10 25 30 Maesleben 15 52 20 28 00 Maeslen 02 52 20 27 50 Maestricht 1, 38 50 50 21 40 S. Magdalena 33 48 50 31 00 Magdaletz 10, 12, 13 52 00 31 40 Magdeburg 10, 11, 14 51 40 28 40 Magdeburg Epis. 18 51 55 28 20 Magdeburgischholtz 20 51 45 28 10 Magdeburgscheford 14 51 55 29 20 Magnieres 38 48 00 22 40 Magnitz 28 51 00 34 10 Magny 41 47 25 23 15 Magsdorff 2, 14 51 25 29 00 Magstatt 1, 38, 39 49 00 23 00   41, 43, 45 47 30 23 50 Mahlberg 40 48 10 24 20 Mahlen 28 51 15 34 15 Mahlendorf 30 50 35 34 15 Mahnshaim 45 48 35 34 30 Mahr Budweis 33 49 00 32 40 Mahrdorf 16 52 20 26 00 Maideburg 32 48 40 34 00 Maidelfin 34 50 10 26 20 Maienfels 45 49 05 26 20 Mailie fl. 38 4 940 24 00 Main fl. 34, 35, 36 49 5 25 30   38, 39 49 40 25 40 Main fl. 34 50 10 28 30 Mainburg 34, 36 50 00 27 00 Mainhewind 19 50 45 27 50 Maisenhaldn 45 49 15 25 50 Maisieres 01 49 10 22 20 Maisis 23 51 15 32 00 3 maison 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 35 Maix 38 48 40 22 40 Makanow 10, 12 52 00 30 30 Makenow 10, 12 51 50 30 50 Makenrode 19 51 20 26 40 Makerling 20 51 20 28 50 Malans 01 46 30 26 20 Malberg 40 47 40 24 10 Malchin 7, 8, 10 53 45 30 00 Malchinsche See 07 53 40 29 50 Malchow 1, 2, 7 53 20 28 50 Malckwitz 28 51 05 33 55 Maldewitz 22 51 00 29 10 Malem 16, 17 51 55 27 00 Malendorf 10, 12 52 50 30 40 Malene 01 47 00 20 30 Malenowitz 32 49 10 34 40 Malerch 19 51 20 27 20 Malerten 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Maleschow 33 49 50 32 00 Maletin 32 49 40 33 50 Maletzin 10, 12, 14 52 00 29 30 Maletzung 2, 15, 38 52 40 29 20 Maley 38 49 00 22 20 Malines 01 51 00 20 20 Malitsch. 29 51 10 33 10 Malitz 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 30 Malledorf 21 51 25 29 30 Mallentin 07 53 45 28 00 Mallerbach 19, 20 51 30 28 20 Mallin 07 53 30 30 30 Malmedys 1, 38 50 20 22 20 Maleritz 09 54 45 31 10 Malmersbach 41, 43 47 40 23 30 Malmitz 29 51 25 33 15 Malnitz 25, 26 51 30 32 20 Malow 2, 7 53 20 28 20 Malpenaw fl. 24 50 40 35 00 Malpendorp 07 54 00 28 50 Malroy 01 50 30 21 10 Mals 01 46 20 27 40 Malscheim 39, 40, 41 48 40 24 40 Malschwitz 23 51 20 31 20 Malsdorf 10, 11, 12 52 10 31 00 Malsow 07 53 30 30 50 Malspach 40 48 30 24 45 Malsperg 41, 43 47 35 24 15 Malstetten 45 47 45 26 50 Malterdingen 40 48 05 24 20 Mattersdorf 01 48 30 29 30 Malterting 41, 43 48 00 24 15 Maltsch 27, 28 51 20 33 30 Maltsdorp 08 53 30 32 30 Malvin 08 53 40 33 00 Manaure 38 47 00 22 40 Manbach 41, 43 47 30 24 20 Manchen 40 47 40 24 05 Manchwiler 41, 42 48 55 24 25 Manckelwitz 29 51 10 33 15 Manckschutz 28 51 10 34 50 Mandel 39 49 40 23 50 Mandel 10, 12, 13 52 40 31 40 Mandelaw 28 51 00 34 10 Mandelcke 08 53 00 33 00 Mandelkow 10, 13 52 50 32 20 Manderoda 16, 19 51 35 27 40 Manderscheit 01 50 10 23 00 Mandesla 16 52 25 26 20 Mandeure 01 47 20 23 10 Mandorf 16, 18 51 55 27 50 Mandre 38 48 00 22 00 Manerden 17 52 10 27 20 Maneroda 16 52 00 27 10 Mangelsdorf 14 52 15 29 10 Mangelwitz 26 51 45 32 50 Manglet 41, 43 47 30 23 35 Manheim 39, 44 49 10 25 00 Maningen 19 50 25 27 10 Manitz 15 52 50 27 00 Manker 10, 12 52 30 29 40 Mankersdorf 22 50 50 29 30 Mankowitz 32 49 30 34 50 Manow 08 54 20 33 30 Mansans 01 52 00 29 50 Mansbach 34 50 40 26 40 Manschederkercken 17 51 45 26 50 Mansd. 22 50 50 29 10 Mansdor 22 51 00 29 10 Mansdorf 30 50 30 34 30 Mansfeldt 01 51 30 28 20   10, 11 53 00 28 40   15, 19, 20 51 40 28 20 Mansfeldt Com. 15, 19 51 40 28 20   18, 20 51 40 28 20   21 51 10 28 20 Closter Mansfeldt 19, 20 51 45 28 20 H. Mansfeldt 18 51 05 28 20 Mansholt 05 53 10 24 40 Manstain 38 47 00 26 00 Manstet 19 51 15 28 10 Manswert 33 48 20 33 50 Mansy 38 53 20 23 40 Mantargis 01 47 50 18 30 Manteow 10, 12 53 10 32 40 Mantl. 34 49 40 29 00 Mantze 28 50 50 34 10 Mantzel 38 47 20 26 00 Mantzing 40 47 55 24 15 Mantyn 1, 22, 33 49 50 30 10 Manum 39 49 30 24 10 Mapach 41, 43 47 30 24 05 S. Mar 41, 43 47 50 24 15 Marang 38 49 00 22 00 Marbach 38, 39 48 40 25 40   41, 43 47 50 23 45 March fl. 31, 32 49 55 33 50 Marchartz 33 48 50 32 20 Marche 01 48 00 21 50 Marchen Famine 01 50 10 21 30 Marchedorf 22 50 40 29 50 Marchia 01 51 10 23 30 Marchien 38 50 20 20 20 Marchtal 38, 45 48 00 26 00 Marck 16, 17 51 40 27 00 Marck 01 51 40 33 30 Marckdorf 01 47 30 26 10 Marckeldorf 16 52 30 26 30 Marckelsheim 1, 37 49 35 26 15   40, 41, 43 48 00 24 05 Marckenheim 41, 43 48 00 24 05 Marcken Com. 38 51 20 23 20 Marck Erlbach 34 49 20 27 20 Marckerdorff 23 51 15 31 50 Marckersdorff 22, 33 50 40 29 00 Marchewitz 09 54 35 31 00 Marck Lissa 23, 25 51 05 32 10 Marck Olendorp 16, 17 51 40 26 30 Marck Pibrach 34 49 30 27 20 Marckranst 22 51 10 29 10 Marckrolitz 19 51 15 28 50 Marckschainfelt 34 49 30 27 20 Marcksoul 19, 36 50 55 26 50 Marckwitz 28 51 15 34 55 Marco 09 54 35 30 50 Mardorf 3, 16 53 45 24 50 Mardyk 01 51 00 18 10 Mare Balticum 1, 9 55 00 30 00 Mare Germanicum 01 54 50 21 40 Marelsweisach 34, 36 50 10 27 20 Marens 05 53 20 24 20 Marenzee 07 54 05 29 00 Maresfeld 19, 34 50 25 27 30 Marg 41 47 25 23 20   02 54 20 25 50 S. Margarit 2, 3 53 52 50 10 Margenborgh 01 53 50 37 00 Margenow 22 50 20 29 20 Margerhochheim 37 49 40 26 30 Marggraf Peetz 10 52 00 31 30 Margienne 01 49 20 21 50 S. Margret 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 25 Margretahasen 45 48 00 25 40 Marheck 01 48 10 4 10 Mariaborn 16 52 10 28 00 S. Marie 01 45 50 20 00 Mariemont 01 48 40 23 10 Marienborn 14, 18 51 55 28 00 Marienburg 4, 6, 15 52 20 26 40   22, 33, 38 50 30 30 00 Mariendael 14, 16 52 00 27 50 Marienfeld 10, 13 53 20 32 20 Marienhagen 15, 17 52 00 26 20 Marienhusen 05 53 25 24 30 Marien Munster 17 51 50 25 50 Marienow 15, 16, 17 52 10 26 00 Marienrode 15, 16, 17 52 20 26 20 Marien See 15, 16 52 50 25 40 Marienstein 34 48 50 28 00 Marienstern 22, 23, 24 51 10 31 10 Marienthal 23, 24, 25 51 10 31 50 Cl. Marienthal 18 52 00 27 40 Marienwalde 10, 13 52 50 32 50 Marienwerder 08 53 00 32 00 Marienzell 19, 20 51 30 28 30 Mariethal 15 51 10 28 20 Marin 07 53 30 30 10 Marischau 31 50 25 33 40 Marisfelt 36 50 30 27 20 Maritzen 10, 12 52 10 31 00 Marka fl. 15 51 40 2 40 Markaw 19 50 45 28 10 Marken 38 52 20 21 00 Markersdorff 23 51 40 32 10 Markirch 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 40 Markowtz 33 49 10 33 50 Marlen 40, 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 20 Marlo 01 49 40 19 50 Marlou 01 54 20 30 10 Marlow 07 54 10 29 50 Marlz H. 16 51 20 26 50 Marme 01 45 40 29 30 Marne 05 54 00 25 30 Marneplateu 05 53 55 25 20 Marnewadt 05 54 00 25 20 Marnitz 2, 7 53 10 28 30 Marod 19 51 15 27 20 Maroncourt 38 48 00 22 00 Marpach 33 48 30 32 20 Marpich 19 51 00 27 40 Marpingen 30 49 30 23 10 Marpurg 1, 34, 38 50 40 25 20 S. Marq 41, 42 48 10 23 55 Marquain 01 50 40 19 10 Marquarstein 01 47 30 29 40 Marraes 07 53 20 28 20 Marry 05 53 05 25 30 Marsal 01 48 40 23 00 Marschwitz 28 51 10 34 00 Marsdiep 38 53 00 20 20 Marsdorp 08 53 40 32 30 Marsehacht 2, 3, 4, 6 53 40 27 10 Marsens 21 51 35 29 40 Marsow 07 53 25 27 50 Marsperg 01 51 20 25 20 Marstatt 39 49 30 24 40 Marswi 41, 43 47 55 23 50 Marswil 41, 43 47 34 23 30 Mart 15 51 20 28 40 Martendorff 22 51 10 28 40 Martensdorff 7, 10, 11 53 50 28 20 Martentin 1, 8 53 40 32 10 Martigny 01 45 40 23 30 S. Martin 41, 42, 43 47 35 24 00 Martinach 38 45 20 23 20 S. Martinberg 33 48 20 32 10 Martinkow 32, 33 48 50 33 00 Martinsriet 16, 19, 20 51 30 28 10 Martow 09 54 40 31 30 Mart Roelicz 15, 20 51 10 28 40 Martylle 38 49 20 21 20 Martzel 40 47 40 24 15 Marville 38 49 20 21 40 Marvitz 08 53 10 32 00 Marushausen 19 50 50 27 50 Marwicz 20, 21 51 45 48 50 Marwitz 10, 13 52 40 32 20 S. Marx 41, 43 47 50 23 40 Marxdorff 22 50 50 30 00 Marxen 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Marxheim 39 49 40 23 40 Marzan 10, 12 51 30 30 00 Marzel 41, 43 47 35 24 15 Masbach 41, 42 48 40 24 15 Mascan 01 54 50 20 50 Mascha 22, 33 50 00 30 20 Maschkeroda 18 51 50 27 00 Maschwitz 30 50 25 34 10 Masendorp 2, 4 53 00 27 00 Masevc 1, 38 51 00 22 00 Maselt 34, 36 50 20 27 30 Masgere 08 53 10 31 30 Masgerin 10, 13 53 00 31 30 Masieres 38 49 00 22 00 Maslaw 25 51 20 34 00 Maslow 07 53 45 28 40 Masmunst 41, 42 48 30 23 50
Masmunster 41, 43 47 35 23 30 Maspach 36 51 10 27 10 Mass 41 48 45 24 40 Massdorff 14 51 35 29 10 Masse fl. 19, 36 50 30 27 40 Masselwitz 28 51 10 34 05 Massem 39 50 00 24 40 Massenbach 39, 45 49 00 25 30 Massenem 35 50 00 25 05 Masserberg 19 50 30 27 40 Massin 10, 13 52 30 32 10 Masso 01 45 50 26 50 Massow 1, 2, 7 53 30 32 30   10, 11, 13 53 10 29 10 Masteroda 16 52 10 27 20 Mastorp 07 53 35 30 50 Maswitz 21 51 05 28 50 Matelitz 2, 15 51 30 28 20 Maten 07 53 35 28 00 Matentz 40 47 30 24 10 Matern 01 54 10 36 00 Matgow 09 54 55 31 00 Matha fl. 24 50 20 33 00 Matray 01 46 50 28 30 Matsee 01 47 50 30 20 Matstal 41, 42 48 45 24 15 Matten 38 45 20 24 00 Matthausen 01 48 10 31 30 S. Mattheis 40 47 45 24 00 Mattzberg 23 51 00 32 00 Matzbach 38, 39 49 20 23 40 Matzenheim 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 00 Matzkowitz 32 48 50 33 40 Matzmuhl 28 51 15 33 50 Maubert Fontaine 01 49 50 20 30 Maubeuge 01 50 20 20 00 Maubuge 38 50 00 19 40 Mavern 45 48 25 25 40 Mauffen 40 47 45 24 10 Maugenhart 40 47 35 24 10 Maukendorff 23 51 30 31 10 Maulbach 33 48 20 32 30 Maulbron 39, 45 48 50 25 20 Maulburg 40 47 35 24 15 Maulitz 22 50 50 29 00 Maupach 33 48 10 33 10 Maurade 16 51 25 26 20 Maurice 41 47 40 23 15 Mauschederkercke 16 51 40 26 50 Mausenow 10, 12, 13 52 20 32 00 Maut 1, 33 49 40 29 30 Mautern 01 48 20 32 50 Mauth 33 49 40 30 40 Mauthausen 33 48 20 31 50 Mautrn 33 48 20 32 40 Maxey Subs Brexe 38 48 00 21 40 Mayrs 33 48 30 32 40 Me 44 48 10 24 25 Meawe 01 53 40 36 40 Meaux 01 48 50 18 50 Mebberburg 19 51 00 27 50 Meceric 01 49 20 35 10 Mecchaw 7, 10, 12 53 00 31 00 Mechede 01 51 10 24 40 Mecheln 1, 22 51 10 30 00 Mechelgrun 22 50 20 29 20 Mechelin 10, 12 52 10 29 20 Mechelrode 19 51 00 28 10 Mechierstet 19 50 55 27 10 Mechitz 22 51 00 29 10 Mechze 27 51 50 33 35 Mechefeld 19 51 00 28 00 Mechenhausen 34 49 00 28 10 Meckhling 45 48 40 26 30 Meckmul 34, 39, 45 49 10 25 50 Meddoch 05 53 35 24 10 Medegast 14 51 25 28 50 Medels 38 46 00 25 20 Medelsheim 39 49 10 23 40 Medeme 05 53 50 25 20 Medeme fl. 03 53 45 24 50 Medenbach 39 49 00 24 30 Medenblick 1, 38 52 50 21 00 Medenegen 07 53 35 28 20 Medenitz 25, 26 51 40 32 00 Mederow 7, 8 54 00 30 10 Mederssen 39 49 40 23 50 Medewitz 10, 14, 21 51 45 29 20 Medingen 1, 4, 6 53 20 27 20 Medow 7, 8, 9 53 30 29 10 Meelbak 05 54 00 26 00 Meer 10 54 00 28 50 Meerdorf 16 52 05 27 40 Meerlese 05 53 10 25 10 Meersdorp 2, 4, 7, 11 53 20 28 20 Mefersdorf 30, 31 50 25 33 50 Meffebron 39 48 30 25 20 Meffle 38 50 20 21 00 Mege 8, 10, 13 53 10 32 30 Meghen 38 51 40 21 20 Megling 45 48 40 25 40 Mehdelstein 24 50 10 32 00 Mehseborh 1, 24 51 20 34 40 Meichicht 34 50 40 28 20 Meidelhofen 37 49 45 26 10 Meien 01 50 20 23 30 Meienborg 07 53 15 29 20 Meiendorf 14, 16 51 45 28 20 Meigalsem 16 51 35 26 10 Meilse 38 46 40 25 00 Meilingen 39 50 00 24 00 Meilsberg 20 51 45 28 20 Meimels 36 50 35 27 10 Meinbreren 17 51 45 26 00 Meinbressen 16 51 15 26 20 Meine 6, 16 52 10 27 10 Meinersen 1, 4 52 40 27 10   6, 16, 18 52 15 27 00 Meinheim 34 48 50 27 40 Meinoltzheim 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Meinssen 16 51 20 26 50 Meinungen 36 50 30 27 10 Meisberg 18 51 15 28 10 Meisen 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 30 Meisenget 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Meisenheim 38 49 20 23 40   40, 41, 42 48 15 24 15 Meisensheim 39 49 40 23 50 Meisling 33 48 20 32 40 Meiss. 33 49 40 30 00 Meisselbach 19 50 30 27 50 Meisselen 40 47 30 24 15 Meissen 1, 2, 22 51 00 30 20 Meissen 16, 18 51 15 29 00 Meissing 33 48 20 32 30 Meisterwalt 4, 6 53 00 27 40 Meistetzherzman 2, 33 49 40 31 20 Meistetzwogna 33 49 30 37 20 Meistorff 20 51 50 28 00 Meitersh. 41, 42, 43 48 15 24 00 Meitsam 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Meitzendorff 14 51 50 28 40 Meklenborg 07 53 45 28 30 Meklenborg Duc. 1, 10 54 00 27 40 Mekow 10, 11 52 50 29 10 Melaune 23 51 15 31 40 Melbeke 02 54 30 26 10 Melberoda 18 51 50 27 00 Melbingem 22 51 00 28 10 Melbitz 22 51 10 29 30 Melcey 38 48 40 23 00 Melch 39, 41, 42 48 40 24 00 Melchendorff 19 50 55 27 50 Melching 45 48 05 26 00 Melck 01 48 10 32 40   33 48 10 32 30 Melcke 22 51 20 29 30 Melckendorf 7, 22 54 05 28 50 Melden 31 50 25 33 00 Meldorp 1, 5 54 30 25 30 Mele 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Melferoda 16 52 10 27 20 Melibori 19, 20 51 45 27 50 Melis 19, 36 50 30 27 20 Mell 10, 13 53 00 31 50 Mellborn 19 50 55 27 10 Melle 1, 4 52 10 24 40 Mellenbach 19 50 35 27 50 Mellendorff 25 50 50 33 40 Mellens 07 53 00 28 20 Mellentin 10 53 50 31 00 Mellenton 05 53 45 24 30 Mellerstat 34 50 20 27 10 Mellenum 08 54 00 31 00 Melles 34 50 30 27 30 Mellingen 19 51 00 28 10 Mellingstede 05 53 40 26 30 Mellum 05 53 40 24 40 Melnick 2, 22, 24 50 20 31 10 Melrichstatt 1, 36 50 30 27 00 Melsdorff 19 50 55 27 40 Melsheim 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 00 Melsow 10, 12 53 00 31 00 Meltz 07 53 10 29 50 Meltzwigk 21 51 15 29 40 Melun 01 48 20 18 40 Membs 34, 36 50 20 28 00 Memelsdorff 34, 36 49 50 27 50 Memelshofen 41, 42 48 45 24 20 Memersdorff 22 49 50 28 50 Memerhusen 17 52 05 26 40 Memeting 33 49 50 30 10 Memleben 15, 20 51 20 28 20 Memmeleben 19 51 25 28 20 Memming 45 48 35 27 00 Memmingen 1, 45 47 40 27 00 Memmingeroda 18 51 20 27 30 Men 10 52 10 29 20 Menat 01 45 40 18 40 Menchenhoff 41, 42 48 40 24 00 Mencking 45 48 35 25 30 Menden 1, 38 51 20 24 00 Mendrisic 01 45 20 25 40 Menehou 01 49 00 21 00 Menene 01 50 50 19 10 Menes 32, 33 49 00 34 00 Menestou 01 47 00 18 10 Mengen 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 10 Mengitz 22 51 00 29 10 Menischitz 33 49 00 33 30 Menive 22 50 00 29 00 Menlucht 19 50 35 28 20 Mennera Gera 19 51 05 27 40 Mensa 45 48 55 25 40 Mensclagen 38 52 40 24 00 Mensdorf 22 50 50 29 40 Mensheim 45 48 40 25 30 Menswuz 19 50 35 28 20 Mentelwitz 23 51 20 31 40 Menteroda 16, 19 51 15 27 30 Mentin 2, 7 53 10 28 30 Mentsen 39 49 50 23 40 Mentz 10, 12 52 50 30 00   14, 18 51 50 28 50 Mentzdorf 21, 22 50 55 29 30 Mentzeldorff 23 51 15 31 40 Mentzingee 39 49 00 25 10 Menufosle 42, 43 48 10 23 30 Le Menut 43 48 10 23 35 Meppe 38 52 40 23 20 Meppel 1, 38 52 50 22 10 Meppen 01 52 50 23 30 Meran 1, 22 50 40 29 30 Merbisch 01 47 50 34 20 Merbitz 22 50 50 29 30 Merburg 40, 44 48 15 24 20 Merchdorff 10, 11, 14 52 00 28 00 Merchingen 37 49 25 26 10 Merck 41, 43 47 30 24 00 Merckendorff 12, 13 52 00 32 00 Merckers 19, 36 50 45 26 50 Merckersdorf 30 50 25 34 20 Merckewitz 21 51 15 29 40 Merckow 10, 11 52 20 27 30 Mereksheim 39 48 50 24 40 Merckshusen 16, 17 51 40 26 30 Mercktz 40 47 35 24 05 Merckwill 41, 42 48 40 24 20 Merckwitz 21 51 10 28 50 Mercxlebun 19 51 10 27 20 Merdingen 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 10 Mereburg 41, 42, 43 48 15 24 20 Merenbrun 41, 42 48 45 24 20 Meresen 15 53 00 25 20 Merfelt 38, 39 50 10 24 00 Mergenbrun 37 49 50 26 00 Mergenthal 40, 42 48 35 24 20 Mergentheim 34, 37 49 20 26 20 Merglstettn 45 48 35 26 40 Mergossa 34 50 20 26 10 Merhusen 16, 17 51 50 26 50 Merin 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 30 Mering 38, 45 47 45 25 40 Meris 38 49 40 22 00 Meritz 41, 43 47 30 23 40 Meritzh. 42 49 00 24 35 Merkercken 05 53 15 24 50 Merklin 33 49 20 30 20 Merla 34 50 30 25 30 Mer'ach 22 50 50 29 20 Merlefelt 19 51 20 26 40 Merle Plate 03 53 50 24 40 Merlmheim 39 49 00 24 40 Merlitz 22 51 00 29 30 Merlsen 05 53 30 25 40 Merlum 41 49 00 24 35 Mernach 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Merne 02 54 30 25 40 Merode 38 50 40 22 40 Merow 32 49 30 33 50 Merowitz 32 49 10 34 20 Mersburg 15, 19, 20 51 20 29 00 Merseburg 19, 20 51 25 29 00 Mersch 41 48 55 24 35 Merschina 27 51 35 33 40 Merschwitz 27, 27, 29 51 20 33 20 Mersdorf 22 50 50 28 40 Merselwitz 28 50 55 33 50 Mersfelden 39 49 50 24 50 Merspach 38 50 40 24 00 Merspurg 01 47 30 26 00 Mersted 16 52 00 27 50 Mertendorf 22 51 10 28 40 Mertenroda 19, 36 50 45 27 40 Mertensberg 24, 31 50 10 33 30 Mertitz 21, 22 50 55 29 30 Mertscheitz 29 51 10 33 20 Mertschutz 25 51 10 33 20 Mertzbach 34, 36 50 10 27 40 Mertzdorf 25, 26 51 00 34 00   28, 29, 30, 31 51 05 33 25 Mertzhu 41, 43 47 50 24 15 Mertzmul 10, 12 51 40 30 30 Mertzwiler 39, 41, 42 48 40 24 10 Merves 31 50 20 26 00 Mervillers 38 47 20 23 00 Merum 16 52 10 26 50   17 52 30 26 50 Mery sur Seyne 01 48 10 19 50 Mesbach 41, 42 48 25 24 30 Mescede 38 51 00 24 20 Mesceid 14, 21 51 15 29 30 Meschewitz 22 50 30 29 10 Mesdorf 22 50 50 29 40 Meseberg 14, 19 52 00 28 30 Mesel 10 54 00 30 50 Meselkow 08 54 10 31 00 Mesendorff 2, 15 52 20 28 20 Mesericz 1, 32 49 10 33 10 Meseritsch 33 49 10 32 40 Meseritz 1, 10, 13 52 20 32 50   10 52 20 33 00     53 50 32 30   13 52 20 32 50     53 50 32 20   24, 25, 26 52 20 32 20 Mesieres 01 49 50 20 50 Mesiger 7, 8 53 50 30 00 Meskenhagen 09 54 10 31 00 Meskow 07 53 50 30 00 Meskuch 45 47 50 26 20 Mesow 08 53 40 33 00 Mespelbrun 34, 37 49 50 26 00
ess 44 48 30 24 25 ssbach 37 49 40 26 00 siberg 14 52 35 28 50 35 49 50 25 05 sselbrun 37 49 45 25 55 sselh usn 37 49 35 26 15 Meln 22 51 00 29 40 Messenrod 22 51 00 29 40 Messentin 08 53 30 32 00 Messing 45 48 10 25 55 Meste 4, 10, 11, 14 52 10 28 00 Mestetzweiu 32 49 20 32 50 Mesta 07 53 30 29 00 Mesulfelt 36 50 25 27 10 Mesure 01 46 30 20 00 Merebach 19 51 00 27 20 Metel 07 53 40 28 20 Metha fl. 31 50 20 32 50 Metke 25 51 00 33 40 Metling 45 48 35 25 20 Metloch 38 49 20 23 40 Melock Abb. 01 49 30 22 50 Metsberg 16 51 40 28 20 Metschel 24, 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Metter fl. 39, 45 48 40 25 30 Metucze fl. 2, 33 50 00 31 40 Metz 1, 38 49 10 22 20 Metzdorff 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 40 Metzeldorff 1, 33 48 30 31 00 Merzerall 1, 38, 41, 43 47 50 23 30 Merzeran 41 47 20 23 50 Metzeray 43 47 20 23 50 Metzerlen 41, 43 47 25 23 50 Meting 45 48 20 26 00 Meuchwer 37 49 40 25 55 Meulan 01 48 50 17 50 Meulitz 22 50 40 29 00 Meunsosse 41 48 10 23 30 Meuningerperg 34 49 00 28 10 Meure 19, 22 50 35 28 00 Meurs 01 51 20 22 40 Meuselitz 23 51 20 31 10 Meux 38 50 20 20 40 Meydborg 02 53 10 28 40 Meydburg 02 52 10 28 10   15 52 10 28 20 Meydburg Arc. Epis. 10 52 00 28 10   11, 12, 21 52 25 29 20 Meydogh 01 49 20 25 40 Meyenberg 05 33 20 25 10 Meyenburg 10, 11 53 10 29 00 Meyendorff 15 52 20 28 00 Meyenfeld 01 46 30 26 10 Meyenh. 41, 43 47 45 23 50 Meylperg 33 48 40 33 00 Melucht 22 50 30 28 20 Meynersen 15 52 40 27 00 Meyrow 14 51 40 29 20 Mezels 36 50 35 27 15 Meziborci 32 49 10 33 20 Mheren 15 52 30 26 40 Mibach 44 48 15 24 25 Micchewitz 28 50 55 34 15 Michael 01 47 10 30 50   19, 20, 24 51 20 28 40   41, 43 48 00 24 10 Michalsky 23 51 30 31 10 Michefelt 41 47 30 23 55 Michelaw 24, 30 50 40 34 00 Michelbach 41, 43 47 25 23 55 Michelberg 23 51 05 32 00 Michelbrun 41, 42 48 25 23 40 Michelen 1, 14, 22 51 20 28 40 Michelfeld 34 49 40 28 40 Michelnstein 16 51 50 27 50 Michelriedt 37 49 45 26 00 Michelsberg 39 49 10 24 30 Michelsdorf 28, 29 51 05 33 30 Michels Romich 34 50 40 26 20 Michelstadt 34, 39 49 20 25 30 Michendorff 10, 12 51 50 30 10 Michern 22 50 50 28 40 Michfelt 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 25 Michlec Steucker 23 51 30 32 10 Michlitz 22 51 00 29 10 Michtbach 45 48 55 25 30 Mickeraw 1, 8 54 10 35 30 Miclowitz 01 50 00 36 00 Middelburg 01 51 30 19 40 Middelitz 10, 12 52 10 29 40 Middelkirch 05 53 30 26 00 Middel Sandt 05 53 50 24 30 Midebach 01 51 00 25 10 Midelum 05 53 40 25 00 Midlum 04 54 20 25 00 Midwald 2, 33 50 00 32 10 Miechorziewo 25 52 20 33 00 Miedzichol 24, 25 52 40 32 30 Mielstad 24 51 40 34 30 Mierbe 38 50 00 20 00 Miering 45 48 10 25 20 Mieslowitz 24 50 00 35 30 Miestadt 01 51 30 35 00 Mietersheim 42, 43, 44 48 10 24 20 Mieuxders 38, 39 48 40 23 20 Miezel fl. 08 53 00 32 30 Misburg 16 52 15 26 40 Mihrachen 23 51 20 32 10 Miilbock 23 51 25 32 10 Mikowitz 28 51 15 34 45 Milan 22 50 50 29 50 Milano 01 45 10 24 50 Milafchwitz 28 57 05 34 30 Milaus 33 49 20 31 20 Milaw 2, 15, 22 52 49 28 50 Milbach 41, 43 47 50 23 30 Milbitz 28 57 20 34 50 Milckaw 25 57 40 32 40 Milcke 22, 28 50 50 30 00 Milckwiz 31 50 20 33 30 Milde fl. 6, 11, 14, 16 52 30 28 00 Milden 01 46 20 23 10 Mildenaw 23 51 40 32 00 Mildenitz 07 53 25 30 50 Mildenstein 21 51 20 29 20 Mildorff 33 48 20 31 20 Milendonel 38 51 00 22 20 Miles 22, 33 50 00 30 10 Milessou 33 50 20 30 40 Miletmkonigsboff 2, 33 50 20 32 30 Mileus 01 49 10 31 20 Milhof 44 48 30 24 25 Milsin 33 49 30 31 00 Militiensis Bar. 24, 25 51 20 34 00 Mitsch 24, 25 51 40 34 00 Milkaw 24, 26 51 40 32 30 Milleback 39 49 20 23 50 Millelhausen 19 51 05 27 50 Millemberge 10, 12 52 50 30 10 Millen 42, 43, 44, 45 48 15 24 20 Millebach 40 48 30 24 35 Millingen 01 41 10 24 40 Milo 2, 15 52 30 28 50 Milotits 32, 33 48 50 34 20 Milow 07 53 00 28 40   10, 14 52 10 29 20 Milowits 24, 28 58 10 35 30 Milreich 33 49 40 29 10 Milrode 14 51 15 28 20 Milsdorf 22 50 50 28 50 Miltenberg 1, 37 49 40 25 50 Miltenburg 34, 38, 39 49 40 25 40 Milthen 23 51 30 31 30 miltitz 23 51 20 31 10 Miltz 34, 36 50 20 27 20 Miltzen 22 50 40 29 30 Miltzfelt 42, 43 48 20 23 50 Miltzig 25, 26 52 00 32 40 Miltzin 33 49 20 31 30 Miltzow 19, 20, 22 51 30 28 50 Miluerda 33 50 50 29 40 Milwitz 19, 22 50 50 28 10 Minching 45 48 35 25 40 Mindel fl. 45 48 25 27 20 Mindelheim 45 47 55 27 20 Minden 4, 6, 16 52 20 25 40 Minerloch 41 48 55 24 35 Mines 41 47 25 23 20 Minfelt 41, 43 47 45 23 40 Mingelsheim 39 49 00 25 10 Minka 28 51 05 34 40 Minitz 28 51 20 34 05 Minkouski 28 51 10 34 50 Minnevitz 09 54 55 31 00 Minsbach 33 48 20 32 00 Minsen 05 53 40 24 10 Minsingen 1, 45 40 10 26 00 Minska 02 51 30 30 40 Minsow 07 53 15 24 40 Mintzerberg 18 51 30 27 50 Minuersheim 41, 42, 44 48 34 24 05 Mirchaw 01 54 00 35 40 Mirebaw 01 46 30 21 50 Mirecourt 1, 38 10 10 22 20 Mirositz 33 49 20 31 00 Mirouw 01 53 20 30 10 Mirow 2, 7 53 30 28 10 Mirowitz 33 49 20 31 00 Mirsted 19 51 05 28 20 Mirtzach 41, 43 47 40 23 25 Mirwitz 01 49 20 31 00 Mirzin 32 49 10 33 00 Mirzino 33 49 10 32 30 Misa fl. 33 49 40 30 10 Misborch 17 52 35 26 30 Misdorq 07 53 45 29 50 Mislitz Mirorslaw 32 48 50 33 40 Miflowitz 01 49 50 36 00 Misiia Marchion. 01 51 00 29 10 Misieltin 10, 12 52 40 29 30 Misselwarden 05 53 40 25 00 Missenh 43 48 15 24 15 Mist 38 51 20 24 40 Mistelbach 33 48 10 31 20 Mistelgay 22, 34 49 50 20 30 Mistelitz 09 54 25 31 30 Mistelritz 22 50 50 29 10 Mistibowitz 33 49 00 32 50 Mistko 32 49 40 35 10 Mistmer 15 52 30 25 40 Misto 24 49 40 35 00 Mistog 07 53 50 29 50 Mitelbrun 41, 43 47 45 24 10 Miteleck 41, 42, 43, 45 48 15 24 30 Mitelhus 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Mitelwihz 41, 43 48 00 23 50 Mitenwalde 10, 12 51 50 31 00 Mitersholtz 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 00 Mithstorf 41, 42 48 45 24 20 Mtndrikingn 38 48 00 26 00 Mitrow 32 49 10 33 20 Mitwaldaw 26 52 10 32 10 Mitweida 1, 22 50 50 30 00 Mitzdorff 21 51 40 29 30 Mittel 29 51 15 32 45 Mittel Buchen 35 50 00 25 10 Mitteldorf 16, 19 51 25 27 20 Mittelhausen 15, 19 51 30 84 20 Mittellipha 31 49 55 33 40 Mittelstein 31 50 25 33 30 Mittelsti 36 50 40 27 20 Mittelstorf 36 50 35 26 50 Mittelstrew 36 50 20 26 00 Mittelwalde 1, 24, 31 50 00 33 30 Mittenwald 01 47 10 28 10 Mittersholtz 40 48 05 24 05 Mittersilt 01 47 00 29 50 Mitterteich 34 49 50 29 10 Mittewalst 02 52 10 29 40 Mittlpach 22 50 40 29 50 Mittlstat 38, 45 48 20 25 50 Mittwald 32 50 00 33 30 Mixdorff 10, 12 52 00 31 50   13 57 50 31 40 Mladiegowitz 33 49 00 31 00 Mladkoff 2 49 50 32 10 Mladkow 32, 33 49 50 33 40 Mlitsch 27, 27, 29 57 30 33 10 Mlodowitz 33 49 40 33 50 Mniderthalen 18 51 35 28 30 Mniska 33 49 50 31 10 Mnysfelt 2 54 10 27 10 Moble 10, 13 53 50 32 30 Moblen 10 54 10 33 00 Mocha 2, 15 51 50 28 40 Mochber 28 51 05 34 05 Mochel 19, 20 51 40 28 50 Mochoff 33 49 50 31 40 Mochow 8 53 50 31 00 Mochowitz 33 48 50 31 20 Mocker 22 50 50 29 20 Mockern 15, 18 52 20 29 00 Mockersdorff 23 51 00 32 00 Mockrene 22 51 30 29 40 Modelitz 14, 22 51 10 29 30 Modelsdorff 29 51 15 32 50 Modelwitz 22 50 50 29 30 Modenow 8 53 20 33 00 Modentin 7 53 45 28 30 Moderitz 7 53 20 28 50 Modersen 16 52 10 26 20 Modlaw 24, 25, 26 51 20 32 40 Modritz 32 49 00 33 50 Modrzicze 33 49 00 33 20 Moekericz 14, 20 51 20 28 40 Moekeritz 15 51 50 28 20 Moellerdorff 20 61 35 28 40 Moellingen 38 47 00 24 40 Moenus fl. 37 49 50 26 00 Moer 05 53 10 25 30 Moerasch 03 53 45 26 00 Moerborg 2, 5 53 25 26 10 Moerdera 20 51 40 28 50 Moerkerck 2, 3, 6 53 45 26 20 Moers 38 51 20 22 40 Moersburg 38 47 20 25 40 Moersleben 16 52 10 28 00 Moese 21 51 20 29 10 Moest 2, 14, 15 51 50 28 30 Meeynzy 38 48 40 22 40 Mogeno 38 45 20 24 40 Moguntinus Archiepisc. 01 49 50 25 10 Mogwitz 30 50 30 34 10 Mohagen 4, 16 52 20 26 00 Mohelno 32 49 00 33 30 Mohlendorff 33 48 30 33 30 Mohr fl. 24, 32 49 50 34 30 Moidin 07 53 55 28 50 Moienvic 01 48 40 22 50 Moiken 08 53 50 31 30 Moinbernheim 34 49 30 27 00 Moisdorff 18 51 20 27 50 Moisis 28, 29 51 00 33 30 Moiles 09 54 25 31 20 Moislite 22 51 10 29 50 Moisale 07 53 55 29 00 Moistelitz 09 54 40 31 10 Mokrositz 33 49 10 30 30 Molberg 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 20 Molbitz 22 51 00 29 20 Molckenberg 14 52 30 29 20 Molckenhaus 24, 25 50 50 32 30 Molckow 12 52 40 30 00 Molda fl. 2, 22 50 10 31 20 Moldeck 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 20 Mole 22 51 10 28 40 Molekow 10 52 40 30 00 Molenbeck 01 52 40 30 40 Molenrosin 07 53 45 29 20 Molensee 08 54 20 30 00 Molesme 01 47 40 20 10 Molikh 10, 11 52 50 28 30 Molin 38, 39 49 00 22 00 Molis 22 50 50 29 10 Molkenberg 10 52 30 29 10 Molkirch 41, 42 48 20 23 50 Molkow 33 49 50 31 00 Mollbeck 21 51 05 29 20 Mollebeke 06 52 00 25 40 Molleborf 19 51 40 28 40 Mollefeld 16 51 20 26 50 Mollem 16, 17 52 10 26 50
Mollen 09 54 30 31 20 Mollenbeke 07 53 10 28 50 Mollenberg 33 48 20 32 20 Mollensen 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Mollssdorf 21 51 40 30 00 Mollstett 14, 21 51 30 29 20 Molmerschwenden 14, 18, 20 57 15 28 00 Molmke 10, 11 52 30 27 30 Molnbeck 10, 12 52 20 30 40 Molndorss 19, 20 57 40 28 20 Molne 2, 4 54 00 27 40 Molnhagen 07 53 30 30 10 Molnhoff 09 54 40 30 50 Molnsdorff 10, 11 52 20 28 40 Molroy 38 49 00 22 20 Molsheim 44 48 15 24 05 Molfleben 19 57 00 27 30 Molssdorff 10, 12 57 40 30 20 Molsum 04 54 00 24 40 Moltaw 14, 21 51 15 29 20 Moltitz 23 51 15 31 40 Moltow 2, 7 53 45 28 30 Moltum 01 54 10 24 0 Moltzan 07 53 40 27 40     53 45 30 10 Moltzen 2, 4 53 00 27 00 Moltzh 38 48 20 23 40 Moltznow 07 53 35 24 50 Moltzow 07 53 45 30 10 Momenwer 01 53 40 36 50 Mornhol 15 52 50 26 20 Mon fl. 07 53 00 28 40 Monasteriensis Epis∣copatus 1, 38 52 30 23 00 Monbard 01 47 20 20 10 Monch Mutschelwitz 27 51 30 33 30 Moncholtz 19, 20 51 45 28 10 Monchy S. Pierre 38 49 40 20 40 Monckeberw 08 53 50 31 30 Monckehude 05 53 10 25 00 Monclay 01 47 10 22 00 Moncornet 01 49 40 20 00 Monfeldt 37 49 40 26 00 Monfelo 34 49 40 26 00 Monheim 1, 38 51 00 23 10 Monhorst 4, 6 53 00 27 00 Monial 01 46 10 20 00 Monickberg 10, 12 52 10 31 20 Monickhagen 10, 12 52 20 31 20 Monickhaive 10 51 50 31 20 Monickwincke 10, 12 52 00 31 20 Monieutin 01 47 30 22 30 Monikedam 1, 38 52 30 21 00 Moniou 38 50 20 22 20 Menkedorp 09 54 40 31 30 Monkelo 02 54 20 26 30 Monkenwudt 9, 10 54 25 31 40 Monkenhagen 09 54 05 31 10 Monkstragen 02 54 10 27 20 Monmirait 01 48 40 19 30 Monmorot 01 46 20 21 30 Monnekevitz 09 54 30 31 20 Monra 10 57 20 28 10 Monreal 1, 38 50 10 23 20 Mons 1, 38 50 20 20 00 Monsavion 01 47 30 21 20 Monsbach 41, 43 47 30 23 35 Moschendor 31 50 30 33 20 Monse 10, 13 52 00 33 00 Monspurg 01 46 20 32 10 Mons Sion 20 51 55 27 50 Monsted 22 57 00 29 20 Monsterberg 30, 31 50 35 34 00 Monsterbergensis Ducatus 24 50 30 33 00 Monsteroul 38 47 40 22 00 Monstier Saux 01 48 20 21 20 Mont 38 48 20 22 40 Montabour 1, 38 50 20 24 10 Montaigne 38 50 00 20 40 Montanach 01 46 30 23 20 Montbelgard 1, 38 47 30 23 10 Montbenoit 38 46 40 22 40 Montblet 01 46 10 20 50 Montbovan 38 46 00 23 20 Mont Brison 01 45 10 20 00 Montch 38 48 00 21 40 Montdediez 01 40 35 18 30 Mont des Torches 41 47 35 23 15 Monte Bello 01 45 10 28 40 Monteglen 38 46 40 26 00 Montegu 01 45 50 18 30 Monteno 41, 43 47 20 23 30 Montensis Duc. 01 50 50 23 30 Montesclaiz 01 48 00 21 30 Montes Sudetes 24 50 40 32 00 Mont Falcone 01 45 40 31 10 Mont Faucon 01 49 10 21 20 Montfort 01 46 50 26 30 Monthegny 38 49 00 21 20 Montigny 38 50 00 20 40 Montigny le Roy 01 47 50 21 30 Mont Martin 01 47 20 22 30 Mont Aledy 1, 38 49 30 21 30 Montreal 01 45 50 21 40 Montrevil 01 50 30 17 40 Montron 01 47 00 22 20 Montschutz 26, 27 57 25 33 30 Montsen 38 49 40 23 40 Montoy 01 45 50 23 30 Montzentheim 39 49 30 24 30 Montzingen 39 49 50 23 40 Moorberg 04 54 00 26 20 Moorborch 3, 6 53 45 26 20 Moorenfleterkirch 2, 3 53 50 26 40 Moorwerder 03 53 45 26 40 Moose 14 52 00 28 40 Moosel 22 50 40 29 20 Mora 31 50 05 34 00 Mora fl. 32 49 40 34 10 Moran 01 46 10 21 50 Morant 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Morasch 06 53 15 26 00 Moraffitz 32 49 40 33 10 Morat 01 46 40 23 30 Moratz 08 53 50 32 30 Morava fl. 32 49 10 34 30 Moravae fons 31, 32 50 00 33 50 Moravia March. 01 40 10 32 50 Moravia fl. 2, 33 49 40 32 10 Morawetz 32 49 10 33 20 Morawitz 24, 32 49 50 34 00 Morawski Mar. 33 49 40 33 30 Morbegno 01 45 40 26 10 Morbitz 10, 13 53 00 31 30 Morckaw 26 52 00 33 20 Mordal 20, 21 51 40 28 50 Mordorp 8, 9 54 30 30 00 Mordstat 34, 37 49 50 26 10 Morelebn 14 51 55 28 00 Morenbach 19 50 35 27 40 Morenbach fl. 19, 36 50 35 27 40 Morendorss 34 49 30 27 50 Morenfleth 05 53 30 26 30 Morenstein 33 49 30 29 30 Moret 01 48 10 15 40 Moretell 01 45 20 21 20 Morgenisse 08 54 00 31 00 Morgenstern 02 51 10 30 20 Morgex 1, 38 46 10 22 50 Morice 01 45 50 23 30 Moriesch 28 51 20 34 00 Morin 10, 12 52 40 31 40 Moringen 15, 17 51 30 26 20 Monitz 14 51 40 29 10 Moritzburg 2, 18 51 00 29 40 Morkering 19 51 20 28 40 Morkowitz 32 49 10 34 20 Morlenbach 39 49 20 25 10 Morlow 08 54 10 29 30 Morren 25 52 40 32 00   16, 20 51 35 28 10 Morungen 19, 20 51 40 28 10 Morta fl. 41, 42 48 10 23 25 Mortana fl. 38 48 00 23 00 Mortay 01 46 50 22 40 Mort Holtzgen 20 51 50 28 10 Mortz 10, 12 51 40 29 50 Mortzen 27 51 50 33 30 Morville 41 48 20 23 10 Morsburg 21 50 50 28 50 Morsoh 40 48 45 24 45 Morse 06 52 10 27 20 Morsen 39 49 30 24 20 Morsderg 34 49 50 28 30 Morspurg 41, 43 47 20 23 35 Morstein 34 48 50 26 50 Morswill 38, 41, 43 47 20 23 20 Morswir 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Mosa fl. 38 49 40 20 40 Mosalle 07 53 40 28 20 Mosan 10, 13 52 30 31 50 Mosaw 26 52 10 32 20 Mosbach 22 50 20 28 40 Mosberg 17 51 40 26 20 Mosbrun 41, 42 48 40 24 1 Moschendorff 29 51 15 32 50 Moschten 26 51 20 32 30 Moscke 14, 21 51 25 29 10 Mose 22 50 40 29 00 Moseborch 4, 5, 6 53 40 29 00 Moseborch 4, 5, 6 53 40 26 00 Mosella fl. 38, 41 47 40 22 40 Mosen 30 50 25 34 10 Moseneck 01 48 30 35 20 Moser Letz k. 21 51 45 29 00 Musetzan 33 49 30 31 20 Mosig fl. 44 48 20 24 05 Mositz 22 50 40 28 40 Moskammer 20 51 35 28 10 Moske 01 51 50 29 00 Moskowitz 33 48 50 33 10 Mosowitz 26 51 45 33 00 Mospach 1, 34, 45 49 20 25 40 Mospelt 14 51 55 31 40 Mosqua 1, 23, 25 51 30 31 40 Moss 41, 44 48 15 24 30 Mossow 32 49 40 35 10 Mostenitz 32 49 20 34 30 Moster Letzk 10, 14 51 40 29 10 Mostertlonne 03 53 50 24 10 Mostichen 25, 26 52 20 32 20 Mosweiler 34 49 10 28 20 Moszina 24, 25 52 20 33 30 Mota 34 50 20 26 20 Moter 18 51 05 29 00 Moterbrun 41, 42 48 45 23 55 Moterhusden 41, 42 48 50 24 00 Motern 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Mothe 1, 38 48 10 21 50 Mothen 33 48 40 30 10 Motherme 38 49 40 20 04 Moticht 29 51 20 33 2 Motren 41, 42 48 40 24 0 Motsche 28 51 00 33 3 Motschelitz 26 51 30 3 3 Motta 01 45 40 29 50 Motter fl. 40 48 35 24 20 Mouba 38 50 20 21 00 Mouldon 38 46 00 23 00 Moulin 38 49 40 21 00 Moulins 01 46 10 19 00 Moursse 15 53 00 25 20 Mouson 38 49 20 21 00 Mousscy 41 48 35 23 10 Mousier 38 46 40 22 40 Moz 22 50 40 28 30 Moyen 1, 38 48 20 23 00 Moyennostier Abb. 41 48 15 23 20 Msseni 2, 23 50 10 30 00 Msseno 33 50 20 31 20 Mstow 01 50 40 36 20 Muchel 15, 19, 20 51 20 28 40 Muchen 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Muchow 07 53 10 28 40 Muckart 40 47 45 24 10 Muckekule 2, 7 53 10 28 20 Muckenberg 22, 23 51 20 30 50 Muckenborg 4, 6 52 40 26 40 Muckendorff 27, 29 51 25 33 10 Muckenhan 23 51 20 31 50 Muckenschopf 41, 42 48 30 24 25 Mukensturm 39, 45 48 45 24 40 Muckera 01 52 10 29 00 Muckera 14, 21 51 50 29 00 Muckthat 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 20 Muckum 22 50 50 29 00 Muddel 08 54 50 34 00 Muden 6, 15 52 20 27 00 Mudt fl. 34, 37 49 30 25 40 Muel 35 49 55 25 00 Muer fl. 01 47 00 33 30 Muers 01 50 40 26 30 Mues 34 50 40 26 10 Muetersh 40 48 10 24 20 Muffellohn 21 51 10 28 40 Mugbenhoil 16 51 20 26 20 Mugeln 02 51 10 29 10 Mugenberg 15 52 40 26 40 Mugensturen 41 48 45 24 50 Muggenborg 7, 10 53 45 29 50 Muggenstum 40 48 40 24 40 Muglia 01 45 30 31 40 Muglitz 1, 24, 32 49 40 33 50 Mugserin 08 53 10 32 30 Muhlberg 21, 22 50 50 30 00 Muhlbock 25, 26 52 10 32 20 Muhldorff 22, 31 50 30 28 50 Muhle 23, 27 51 25 31 50 Muhlen 26 52 15 32 10 Muhlgast 26, 27, 29 51 35 33 20 Muhlheyde 26, 29 51 30 32 40 Muhlredlilz 25, 26 51 20 33 00 Muhlrose 24 52 10 31 00 Muhne 23 51 40 32 10 Muiderthale 20 51 35 28 30 Muisetoren 39 49 50 24 00 Mul 10 52 10 32 00 Mulbach 34, 37 49 50 26 30 Mulberg 1, 39, 40, 45 48 40 24 40 Mulbert 41 48 45 24 45 Mulburg 19 50 50 27 30 Mulda fl. 24 50 10 31 30 Muldawerkraiss 33 49 30 31 10 Muldorf 01 48 00 29 40 Mulebuk 10, 13 52 10 32 50 Mulen 38, 45 47 40 25 20 Mulenbach 41, 42 48 45 24 00 Mulenberg 16 52 00 25 50 Mulendorff 10, 12 51 50 29 50 Mulfelt 34 50 20 27 00 Mulh 31, 43 47 40 23 50 Mulhausen 41, 43 47 35 23 50 Mulheim 35 50 00 25 10 Mulhofen 41, 42 48 55 24 35 Mulhusen 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Mulingen 14, 18 51 35 28 40 Mull 12, 13 52 10 32 00 Mullem 38 50 40 23 00 Mullen 41, 43 48 40 24 05 Mulleras 10, 12, 13 52 00 31 50 Mullingen 17 52 30 26 40 Mulm 38 51 20 23 00 Mulmeck 16 51 55 27 40 Mulmke 18 51 35 27 40 Mulsault 01 46 40 20 40 Mulsdorff 10 51 20 29 30 Mulsem 05 53 40 25 00 Mulsen 22 51 10 29 00 Mulsow 07 53 55 28 50 Mplstorpe 15 52 00 29 20 Multa fl. 14, 22 51 20 29 10 Multendorf 14 51 25 29 00 Multhope 16 51 55 26 00   17 52 10 25 50 Multitz 22 50 50 29 20 Multorf 22 50 40 29 00 Mulyerstet 19 51 10 27 10 Mumbergk 10 52 00 33 00 Mumen 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Mumph 41, 43 47 25 24 25 Munbergk 13 52 00 32 50 Munchar 14 61 30 28 50
Munchberg 22 50 10 28 50 Munchebrauna 26, 27 57 50 33 20 Munchelaer 15 51 30 27 20 Munchen 19 50 55 28 00 Munchenbach fl. 19 50 55 28 00 Munchenhoitzhause 19 51 00 26 30 Munchen Hospach 19 51 00 26 30 Munchennaum∣burk 18 51 25 28 40 Munchen Neuborg 15 52 00 28 400 Muncheroda 19, 20 51 20 28 40 Munchesheim 40, 41 47 55 24 05 Munchoff 41, 42 48 25 23 55 Munchrott 1, 45 47 40 26 50 Munchroten 34, 36 50 20 27 50 Munchs 38 49 20 23 40 Munchsperg 41, 43 47 20 23 55 Munchstein 41, 43 47 25 23 50 Munchusen 41, 43 47 45 23 55 Munchuss 41, 42 48 05 24 20 Munchweiler 39 49 10 24 00 Munchwill 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 20 Munchwitz 28 51 00 34 15 Munckowitz 33 49 20 53 50 Mundan 05 53 30 24 40 Munden 15, 16 51 20 26 00 Mundenkirch 16 51 20 26 40 Munder 4, 6, 16, 17 52 20 26 00 Munderburg 15, 19, 20 52 20 28 20 Munderkingen 45 48 00 26 20 Mundersun 08 55 00 35 00 Munderting 41, 43 48 00 24 15 Mundlehaim 39 48 50 25 40 Mundlsheim 45 48 50 25 50 Mundoltzheim 41, 42 48 25 24 10 Munerstadt 1, 36 50 10 27 00 Munetzifag 33 50 00 30 50 Munich 01 47 50 28 10 Munichwalt 22 50 40 29 10 Munigeroda 16 51 30 27 10 Munkatz 33 50 30 31 10 Munnigerode 19 51 40 26 50 Munrede 15 52 20 26 00 Munst 41, 42 48 15 23 55 Munsted 16 52 10 27 00 Munstedde 17 52 25 27 00 Munster 1, 41, 43 47 50 23 35 Musterrpel 39 49 30 24 10 Munsterdorp 05 53 55 26 00 Munstereifel 01 50 30 23 00 Munsterol 41, 43 47 30 23 30 Munterdingen 40 48 00 24 20 Muntzing 41, 43 47 50 24 20 Munwill 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Munwiller 41, 43 47 45 23 50 Mur 38 46 40 25 00 Mura 19 50 50 27 00 Muraw 01 47 20 28 10 Murbach 41, 43 47 45 23 35 Murbart 01 48 50 26 20 Murcek 01 47 00 33 50 Murckevitz 8, 9 54 30 30 20 Muret 01 49 10 19 20 Murieldt 35 49 50 24 50 Murg 40, 43 47 30 24 20 Murst fl. 39, 45 48 40 24 40 Murhart 34, 38 48 50 26 20 Muritz lacus 7, 10 53 20 29 50 Muroch 33 49 10 29 20 Murow 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 10 Murstat 34 50 10 27 10 Murstet 19 51 20 27 20 Murten 38 47 20 23 20 Murtz 38, 45 48 40 25 40 Murtz fl. 45 48 45 25 50 Musaw 44 48 20 24 10 Musbach 40, 41, 43 48 50 24 30 Musberg 41, 45 48 25 24 50 Muscha 32 48 50 33 50 Muschel Landsperg 39 49 40 24 00 Muschtorf 41, 43 47 20 23 35 Musckersen 26, 29 51 35 33 00 Musenitein 41, 43 47 25 24 00 Musig 40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 00 Muslis 9 54 30 31 30 Musloch 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 45 Musse 41, 42 48 25 23 40 Musserberg 36 50 30 27 50 Mustha 01 48 50 33 50 Mustikow 10, 13 52 20 32 30 Mustin 07 53 40 29 00 Mustrlingen 38 47 20 25 40 Mutelhausen 20 51 30 28 20 Mutenitz 32 48 50 34 20 Mutentz 41, 43 47 25 24 00 Mutetin 33 49 20 29 50 Mutlgen 21 51 20 30 00 Muschen 02 51 10 29 00 Mutsenhuss 44 48 25 24 05 Mutterstat 39 49 10 24 40 Muttrin 08 54 00 33 30 Muttsen 22 51 10 29 50 Murz 10, 12 52 40 30 20 Mutzelborg 08 53 40 31 30 Mutzelmul 14 52 10 29 10 Mutzenhuss 42 48 30 24 05 Mutzescha 22 51 00 29 00 Mutzig 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 55 Muyden 01 52 20 21 00 Muyen 38 52 20 21 00 Muzon 01 08 40 34 50 Myenburg 01 53 30 29 40 Mykolay 24 50 10 36 00 Myla 15 51 00 27 00 Mylaw 1, 22 50 30 29 20 Mylerhaven 05 04 10 25 30 Mylfero 15 52 30 27 20 Mylow 10, 12 53 20 30 40 Mynburg 15 51 40 26 00 Mynden 15 51 20 25 20 Mynderick 15 51 40 26 00 Mynich 15 52 00 28 00 Mynsel 16 52 10 26 10 Myrow 10, 12 53 10 29 50 Myringen 01 46 10 24 40 Mysliboritz 32 49 00 33 10 Myssenrode 29 51 20 26 40 N   NAb fl. 22, 33, 34 49 50 29 00 Nabe fl 39 49 40 23 30 Nabegk 34 49 10 29 00 Nabern 10, 13 52 30 32 00 Nabin 01 45 30 35 00 Nabor 44 48 15 24 00 Nabpurck 34 49 20 28 10 Nachhare 2, 4, 12 53 10 27 30 Nachod 24 50 20 33 00 Nachtersted 16 51 50 28 10 Nachwinden 19 50 45 28 00 Nacke 02 52 10 29 10 Nackel 24 50 30 35 00 Nackum 38, 39 49 50 24 30 Nacschloss 16 51 45 27 30 Nadels 23 51 15 31 20 Nadhod 02 50 10 31 50 Nadrense 10, 12 53 10 31 20 Naelbach 38 49 20 22 40 Naerden 1, 38 52 20 21 10 Nagelstat 41, 43 47 50 23 35 Nagold 38, 45 48 20 25 00 Nagold fl. 39, 40, 45 48 40 25 10 Nagolter Vorst 45 48 25 25 10 Nahrtaw 26, 27 51 45 33 20 Naichew 12 52 40 30 20 Naken 10, 12 52 30 29 30 Naklo 32 49 30 34 00 Nalba 36 50 45 26 50 Nalie fl. 39 49 50 24 00 Nallendorff 20 51 20 28 50 Nalschow 33 49 10 30 40 Namen 1, 38 50 30 21 00 Namest 32 49 00 33 20 Namet 01 49 00 33 10 Namischt 33 49 10 33 00 Namsen 41, 43 47 45 24 05 Namslaw 24, 28 51 00 34 30 Namurcum Comit. 38 50 20 20 40 Nancy 1, 38 48 40 22 30 Nandel 26 52 15 32 40 Nansis 19 51 20 27 50 Nantenbach 34 50 00 26 20 Nantua 01 45 50 21 40 Napugedla 1, 32 49 10 34 40 Nara 19 51 00 28 00 Nardevitz 09 54 45 31 30 Nardim 05 53 20 25 40 Narn 33 48 20 32 00 Narsdyck 02 55 00 26 00 Naschwitz 28 50 50 34 15 Naskow 07 53 45 27 40 Nassach 37 49 35 26 20 Nassadel 28 51 10 35 00 Nassaw 1, 38 50 00 24 00 Nassdorff 30 50 25 34 20 Nassig 37 49 40 26 00 Nasteden 38, 39 50 00 24 00 Nataw 14 51 35 29 20 Natelvitz 08 54 00 32 30 Natenheyde 10, 11 52 30 28 20 Nater 19 51 05 26 40 Naters 1, 38 45 50 24 30 Nathod 33 50 10 33 10 Natrnberg 33 48 40 30 10 Natschk 30 50 35 34 20 Natsmegen 16 51 25 26 10 Natsmersd 08 53 50 33 00 Natta 45 48 35 26 50 Natzdorff 10, 13 52 30 32 20 Navenberg 01 48 40 30 00 Navendorff 20, 21 51 20 28 50 Naukirche 19, 20 51 30 28 50 Naukloister 39 50 00 24 30 Naumberg 22 51 10 29 50 Naumburg 15, 19, 22 51 10 28 40 Naumslaw 01 51 00 34 50 Naundorff 22 50 50 29 30 Naunhan 22 51 00 29 40 Naunhoffn 22 51 20 29 30 Navorow 24 50 40 32 00 Naura 22 51 00 28 30 Nausdorp 10, 11 53 00 28 10 Nauses 19, 20 51 25 28 10 Naufitz 22 51 00 28 40 Nauwendorff 14, 19 51 20 28 40 Naw 15 51 40 29 20 Nawarow 1, 2, 33 50 40 32 10 Nawen 10, 12 52 20 30 00 Nawenhein 35 50 00 24 45 Nayle 34 50 20 28 30 Nberstein 33 50 20 31 20 Nebelin 10, 11 53 00 28 20 Nebenitz 22 49 50 29 30 Nebilowy 33 49 30 30 30 Nebingen 39 48 50 23 10 Nebklist 21 51 15 29 30 Neblin 1, 13 53 30 32 20 Neblitz 23 51 25 31 00 Nebra 15, 19, 20 51 20 28 20 Neccari Fons 45 47 50 25 00 Nechamitz 2, 33 50 00 31 20 Nechel 23 51 15 31 30 Nechlaw 26, 27 51 45 33 20 Necla 09 54 30 31 20 Neckendorff 19, 20 51 40 28 30 Neckar fl. 38, 39 48 30 25 50 Necker 14 51 30 29 10 Necker Elts 39 49 20 25 30 Neckergemynd 39 49 10 25 20 Neckerhausen 39 49 20 25 00 Neckers Ulm 34, 39 49 00 25 40 Neckher 45 48 45 25 50 Necrow 08 53 20 30 30 Neda 19 51 05 27 50 Neddemin 07 53 40 30 30 Nedebow 07 53 15 29 40 Nedelitz 10, 21 51 40 29 30 Neder Elve 2, 3 53 50 24 50 Nedersleben 19 51 40 28 30 Nedlitz 28 51 10 34 25 Nedwetitz 33 49 20 33 00 Nedwizhausen 19 51 10 26 30 Nefenstat 15 51 50 26 40 Negelstet 19 51 05 27 20 Negengrave 05 53 25 26 20 Negirzk 1, 33 49 10 30 20 Nehausen 19 50 45 27 50 Mehenitz 01 49 50 29 20 Neheratz 33 49 50 29 30 Neherstil 36 50 40 27 20 Nehffiz d 33 50 00 31 40 Nehrsitz 26, 27 51 35 33 20 Nehusen 1, 20 51 40 28 40 Neickenrodt 34 50 20 28 10 Neideck 41, 42 48 25 23 50 Neidena 34, 45 49 10 25 40 Neiding 01 47 40 25 00 Neidling 38, 45 48 25 26 20 Neidmuhl 27 51 25 33 20 Neidthartshausen 36 50 40 27 00 Neiersen 16 52 05 26 40 Neikerid 22, 34 50 10 28 00 Neikeroda 19 50 50 28 20 Neim 1, 14 51 35 28 50 Neindorf 16 52 05 27 20 Neinstet 15, 20 51 50 27 40 Neissa 30 50 25 34 20 Neisbach 31 50 00 33 50 Neisse 10, 13 51 50 32 30 Neisse fl. 23, 25 50 55 31 50 Nissus 24, 30 50 35 34 00 Neisse fons 24 50 50 32 00 Neisteblein 01 50 20 27 50 Neisvonder Heyden 34 50 20 27 50 Neitzke 07 53 30 30 30 Neiuburg 41, 43 48 00 24 15 Nelares 22 50 50 29 20 Nelben 20 51 50 28 40 Nelbs 14, 20 51 20 28 45 Nelepe 10, 13 53 50 32 50 Nelich 14, 20, 21 51 10 29 00 Nellenburg 01 47 40 25 30 Nellin 01 52 20 30 00   10, 12 51 50 30 00 Nelling 45 48 30 25 50 Nelohozew 2, 33 50 10 31 10 Nelotitz 33 49 00 31 20 Nemeritz 1, 32 48 50 34 00 Nemero 01 53 30 30 30 Nemerow 07 53 25 30 20 Nemitz 08 53 50 32 00 Nemnet 22 51 20 29 50 Nemours 01 48 10 18 30 Nemsdorff 19, 20 51 30 28 30 Nenburg 33 49 10 29 30 Nenckersdorff 26 51 45 32 50 Nene 10, 12 52 00 22 00 Nenenlaus 21 51 05 29 10 Nenstad 16 52 05 26 10 Neplachowitz 32 49 50 34 40 Nepmissl 33 50 00 30 10 Nepperwese 8, 13 53 00 31 30 Nera 45 48 15 25 50 Nerat 40 48 50 24 45 Nerbron 31 50 20 33 10 Neresheim 45 48 45 27 00 Nerestadt 15 52 30 26 00 Nerhausen 45 48 35 23 20 Nerichen 2, 22 52 10 29 00 Neringen 7, 8 54 00 30 00 Nerkes 23 51 10 31 50 Nermsdorff 19 51 10 28 20 Nerrnsdorff 19 51 10 28 10 Nersen 16, 17 51 50 26 10 Nesasson 33 49 10 31 20 Neschwitz 23 51 25 31 20 Nese 2, 4, 7, 10, 11 53 10 28 10 Neselb 41, 42, 43 48 20 24 30 Neselfurt 41, 42 48 45 24 05 Nesen 4, 16 52 20 25 40 Nesle 01 49 40 18 50 Nesow 07 53 40 27 50
Nesrit 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 25 Ness 38 53 20 21 40 Nessa 22 51 10 29 00 Nessa fl. 19 50 05 27 30 Nessaw 22 51 10 29 00 Nessbrode 16 51 25 27 10 Nesse 04 53 40 24 40 Nesselberg 20 51 40 27 50 Nesselgrund 31 50 15 33 20 Nesselrede 19 51 00 26 40 Nesselrode 19 51 35 26 40 Nessen 15 52 20 25 20 Nessethof 36 50 45 27 20 Nessin 01 54 00 35 10 Ness Sandt 03 53 50 26 10 Neta fl. 17 51 40 25 50 Netelen 15 52 20 25 20 Netlingen 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Netka 24 52 00 32 00 Netkaw 25, 26 52 00 32 00 Netke 3 52 00 32 40 Netta fl. 17, 19 52 00 27 00 Nette 4, 15, 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Netz fl. 10, 13 52 40 33 10 Netzbach 41, 42 48 20 23 50 Netzboge 16, 19 51 40 27 50 Netza 16, 17 51 55 26 50 Netze fl. 2, 4, 6 53 30 27 10 Netzen 10, 12 51 50 30 00 Netzkow 22 50 30 29 10 Netzlingen 14 52 15 28 30 Neubaw 33 49 00 29 30 Neuberg 2, 33 49 40 31 40 Neubersdorff 31 50 15 33 30 Neuborg 02 52 00 28 10 Neubron 37 49 40 26 10 Netzlingen 14 52 15 28 30 Neubaw 33 49 00 29 30 Neuberg 2, 33 49 40 31 40 Neubersdorff 31 50 15 33 30 Neuborg 02 52 00 28 10 Neubron 37 49 40 26 10 Neubrugk 1, 4, 16, 25 52 40 27 10 Neubrun 36 50 25 27 10 Neuburg 14, 21 51 30 28 50 Neuchwitz 1, 2, 22 51 10 30 20 Neudeck 24, 31 50 20 33 30 Neudichen 28 50 50 34 10 Neudin 07 53 45 28 20 Neudorff 14, 19 51 45 28 00   28, 29 30 51 05 34 05 Nevels 38 46 20 25 20 Nevendorff 18, 22 51 30 28 00 Nevenhoff 34 50 30 26 10 Nevenkirch 22 50 10 29 30 Nevenstat 45 49 10 25 50 Neveren 38 50 00 23 40 Nevers 01 46 40 18 50 Nevestadt 1, 10, 11 52 40 29 20 Neuf Chasteau 38 48 00 21 40 Neufchastel 1, 38 49 50 21 40 Neufmolin 42 48 40 23 25 Neufville 41, 42 48 40 23 30 Neugarten 13 52 30 32 00 Neugraben fl. 26, 27 51 35 33 10 Neuhag 16 52 00 28 00 Neuhagen 4, 16 52 40 26 40 Neuhammer 29 51 25 32 50 Neuhausen 38, 45 48 15 26 00 Neuhauss 2, 15, 16 52 30 27 40 Neuhoff 33 49 50 32 10 Neuhoffen 39 49 10 24 50 Neuhuss 41, 43 47 45 24 15 Neukirch 29 51 05 32 55 Neukirchen 33 49 00 30 10 Neulant 27 51 50 33 40 Neuleben 02 52 50 28 00 Neulend 29 51 10 32 55 Neuleynigen 39 49 20 24 30 Neulin 10, 13 52 50 32 00 Neumarck 15, 28 51 00 28 00   34 49 10 28 20 Neu Mart Geissel 20 51 20 28 50 Neumburg 16, 19 51 25 28 00 Neumitz 30 50 25 34 30 Neumuhl 30 50 25 34 2 Neunberg 21 51 05 29 00 Neunbrun 34 49 40 26 20 Neundorff 19, 22 50 30 28 10 Neuneckh 45 48 10 25 10 Neun Furwerck 20 51 40 28 20 Neunhof 34 49 20 27 50 Neunkilch 41, 43 47 55 24 10 Neunkirch 34 49 30 28 00 Neunkirchen 34, 37 49 20 26 20 Neunstetten 34 49 20 26 00 Neuntz 22 51 10 29 40 Neupelik 10, 13 52 50 32 20 Neurode 31 50 30 33 20 Neuschloss 19, 20 51 45 28 10 Neusedt 33 50 20 30 20 Neuses 19, 34 50 45 28 00 Neusis 19, 36 50 45 27 40 Neusifferberg 19 50 45 28 00 Neussling 34 48 50 28 00 Neust 14 51 30 29 40 Neustod 04, 15 52 40 26 00 Neustadtander Orta 01 50 40 28 10 Neustadt CL. 37 49 50 25 55 Neustadts 38 50 00 26 00 Neushapow 33 49 30 31 30 Neustedt 1, 19 51 25 27 30 Neuster 02 50 50 30 10 Neusterel 22, 33 50 20 29 30 Neustettlein 34 49 50 28 50 Neuvendorff 20 51 40 28 40 Neuwalda 30 50 25 34 30 Neuwda 33 50 40 33 20 Neuwdorf 16 51 25 27 10 Neuwenburg 45 48 45 24 40 Neuwenburger See 38 46 20 23 00 Neuwenhosen 19 51 00 26 40 Neuwen Saltz 22 50 30 29 20 New Bisteritz 32 48 50 32 20 Newburg 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 30 Newburgweier 40 48 45 24 40 New Castel 42 49 00 24 30 New Celle 24, 25 52 00 31 30 Newclitsche 15 52 30 29 20 Newdorff 23 51 20 32 20 Newdorffel 25 51 50 31 40 Newe 28 51 00 34 05 Newenb 41 48 45 24 40 Newenburg 40, 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Newendorff 10, 13, 19 52 30 32 40 Newen Gendersleben 18 51 25 28 40 Newenhagen 06 52 20 26 40 Newenhain 39 50 00 24 50 Newenheim 39 49 10 25 00 Newenhof 16 51 50 27 30 Newenkirchen 05 53 15 26 00 Newenkirck 16 52 15 26 00 Newenkrog 05 53 20 25 20 Newenstat 34, 39 49 00 25 50 Newenwalde 05 53 40 25 10 Newenwog 40 47 40 24 25 Newerbron 35 49 55 24 55 Newerin 7, 8 53 40 30 40 Newgarbn 02 52 00 28 10 Newgart 41, 42 48 30 24 00 Newgarten 10, 12 53 10 30 30 Newgartenleben 15 52 00 28 20 Newgrab fl. 41, 42 48 30 24 15 Newgrunden 05 54 00 25 00 Newgutt 26, 27, 51 55 33 30 Newhausen 10, 11 53 10 28 30 Newhauss 23, 25 51 30 32 10 Newhlfurt 25 51 20 32 00 Newhoff 28 51 00 33 35 Newiller 39, 41 48 30 23 50 Newkirch 24 50 00 34 30 Newkirche 28 51 10 34 00 Newkircken 01 50 50 26 00 Newkretscham 23 51 15 32 10 Newkretschem 32 51 20 32 10 Newleben 15 53 00 28 20 Newmarckt 2, 15 52 40 28 40 Newmillm 24 52 40 31 00 Newmonster 01 54 20 26 30 Newmuhl 40, 42 48 25 24 20 Neword 19, 36 50 45 27 50 New Paradys 13 52 00 32 30 Newperg 01 47 40 33 10 Newrede 1, 24 50 30 33 20 Newsaltz 25, 26 51 50 32 40 Newsarz 40 48 25 24 35 Newsehen 2, 15 52 46 29 00 Newsmamer 23 51 25 32 10 Newsorge 26, 27 51 45 33 30 Newstadlin 25 51 40 32 40 Newstadt 2, 6 52 40 28 50 Newstatt 32 48 50 35 00 Newstetl. 01 49 20 33 00 New Vorwerg 28 51 05 34 40 Newweier 40 48 30 24 40 Newwerck 05 53 55 25 00 Newyklaw 1, 33 49 30 31 20 Newzelle 10 51 50 32 20 Newzitz 09 54 45 31 30 Newzydl. 01 48 00 34 30 Neydeckh.\ 45 49 05 26 00 Neyding 45 47 40 25 10 Neyem 38 51 20 24 00 Neyffen 45 48 20 26 00 Neynkirg 01 47 40 33 50 Neyperg 45 48 55 25 40 Neys 38 50 40 20 00 Nezamy litz 32 49 10 34 20 Nezebans 09 54 20 31 00 Nezyt 32 48 40 34 30 Nfeldt 33 49 20 30 50 Nibern 22 50 40 28 50 Niche 23 51 10 31 50 Nickel 32 49 40 32 20 Nickerdorff 23 51 20 31 00 Nickern 26 52 10 32 20 Nicklasshausen 34, 37 49 30 26 10 Nicklberg 22 50 50 29 30 Niclasberg 15 51 30 26 40 Niclasburg 1, 32 48 40 33 50 Niclasdorff 30 50 40 34 10 Niclasriet 16, 19 51 25 28 20 S. Nicolai 19, 20 51 30 28 40 S. Nicolaus 1, 38 48 20 22 20 Nicolsohmide 25 51 30 32 00 Nicolstad 24, 29 51 10 33 00 Nida 23 51 10 31 50 Nidda 35 50 00 24 55 Nidda fl. 34, 35 50 00 25 10 Nideck 16, 19 51 30 27 00 Nidedorff 19 50 55 26 40 Nidelitx 14 51 50 29 00 Nider 01 53 20 25 20 Nideradt 35 49 55 24 55 Nider Bachum 39 50 10 24 00 Nider Buhel 40 48 40 24 40 Niderdorff 22, 23 50 50 28 40 Nidergrundt 30 50 10 34 30 Nider Hasendael 03 53 45 27 20 Niderhofen 45 49 00 25 30 Niderhoff 28 51 05 34 05 Niderkirchen 39 49 10 24 30 Niderlag 10, 12 52 00 31 40 Niderlanckheim 34 49 40 27 00 Niderlauer 36 50 15 27 00 Niderlustat 39 49 00 24 40 Nidermarck 01 48 00 35 10 Nidermuhl 28 51 15 34 55 Nidero Spira 15 51 20 27 40 Nideroden 35 49 50 25 10 Niderreusen 19 51 10 28 10 Niderschonhusen 12 52 10 30 40 Nider Sichel 31 50 25 33 00 Niderstein 39, 41 48 50 23 30 Nidersten 31 50 25 33 30 Niderweier 40 48 40 24 45 Niderzadel 08 53 20 32 00 Nie 10, 11 52 20 29 10 Nieba 27 51 40 33 20 Niebel 10, 12 51 40 30 10 Niebroeckhusen 04 53 00 25 20 Nieburg 04 53 20 24 40 Niebusch 25, 26 51 50 32 20 Nie Closter 02 53 50 26 10 Nieder Dodleben 18 51 50 28 30 Niederhoff 27 51 45 33 30 Niederwitz 30 50 30 34 10 Niedewitz 10, 25 52 10 32 50 Nie Diep. 8, 9 54 20 30 30 Niedorp 3, 7 53 55 25 40 Niegammerkirch 06 53 15 26 40 Nie Hallerfleben 11 51 55 28 30 Niehoff 10, 13 53 30 33 20 Niehus 2, 7 53 05 29 00 Niehuys 2, 3 54 20 25 40 Niekercke 04 52 00 24 40 Niekesmiede 23 51 35 32 10 Niekrip 10, 11 51 50 28 40 Niem 01 51 50 25 40 Niemde 10, 12 52 10 29 40 Niemeck 10, 12 51 40 29 50 Niemes 1, 33 50 30 31 40 Niemitsch 22 50 40 31 30 Niemunster 02 54 20 26 40 Nienborch 4, 6 52 40 26 00 Nienbroeck 05 53 15 24 50 Niend. 08 53 30 32 00 Niendorff 7, 10 53 05 28 00 Nieneck 21 51 05 29 20 Nienfelde 05 53 15 25 00 Nienhagen 7, 17 53 40 29 10 Nienhave 7, 9 54 05 29 10 Nienhauss 13 52 40 32 50 Nienhof 9, 16 54 45 31 20 Nienhost 01 54 30 26 30 Nienhusen 10, 12 52 50 30 50 Nienhuss 5, 17 53 50 25 30 Nienhuys 01 52 30 23 00 Nienkalend 08 53 40 29 30 Nienkamp 09 54 20 31 20 Nienkarchen 02 54 50 26 00 Nienkerck 04 54 20 25 40 Nienkercke 7, 8 53 30 27 50 Nienkercken 4, 5, 9 53 20 24 40 Nienkilch 40, 44 48 10 24 10 Nienkirchen 01 54 40 31 10 Nienkloster 07 3 50 28 40 Nienrode 16, 17 52 00 27 20 Niensleden 2 34 00 26 20 Nienstedde 16, 17 51 40 27 00 Nienstede 1, 6 53 20 26 20 Nienswatsin 9 54 25 30 40 Nientot 5 53 30 24 30 Nienwedel 10, 13 53 00 33 10 Niermarck 11, 14 52 25 29 10 Nierting 45 48 25 26 00 Nieschun 12 52 10 30 50 Nieskawo 27 51 30 33 40 Nieske 2 54 40 25 40 Niessa 1 50 20 34 20 Niestadt 1, 14 53 40 28 30 Niestede 4 54 00 26 00 Nietleben 19, 21 51 35 28 50 Nietorn 14 52 00 28 30 Nieuhaus 33 49 30 29 10 Nieukerck 10, 13 53 20 31 30 Nieumohlen 3 53 50 26 20 Nieupeort 1 51 10 18 40 Nieusteden 3 33 50 26 10 Nieuster 19 51 35 28 20 Nieuwegronden 3 53 50 24 20 Nieuwe Werck 2, 3 54 30 25 20 Nieuw Land 3 53 45 26 40 Nieuwmark 1 49 10 28 25 Nifern 40, 41, 42 48 05 24 05 Niffern 41, 43 47 35 24 00 Nigerkirch 5 53 30 26 00 Nigir 22 50 50 29 00 Niglinteich 23 51 30 32 10 Nigsen 27 51 30 33 40 Nikel 7 53 25 27 40 Niklasburg 33 48 40 33 30 Niklasdorff 23 51 10 32 00 Nikolstadt 25 51 10 33 20 Nikow 10, 12 52 10 29 30 Nikowitz 33 50 10 31 00 Nilbe 26 51 40 32 50 Nilingen 1 52 30 22 50 Nimburg 1 50 00 31 50
Nimeritz 19, 22 50 50 28 30 Nimmersat 24, 25 51 00 32 30 Nimpka 27, 28 51 20 33 50 Nimptsch 1, 31 50 40 33 50 Nimwegen 1, 38 51 50 21 50 Nindorp 3, 5 53 45 25 20 Ninhagen 18 51 40 28 00 Ninove 1 50 50 20 00 Ninstet 18, 20 51 25 27 40 Ninus 22 51 00 29 20 Nipars 8, 9 54 20 30 00 Nipenburg 45 48 40 25 30 Nippn 28 51 10 33 50 Nisbel 7 53 45 28 40 Nise 17 51 50 25 50 Nis fl. 17 51 55 25 40 Nissa 19 51 00 28 00 Nissa fl. 30 50 30 33 50 Nissae fons 31 50 05 33 50 Nistad 18 51 50 28 40 Nistitz 26, 27 51 35 33 20 Nitleben 20 51 35 23 50 Nitmero 9 54 45 31 30 Nitte mons 17 52 05 26 10 Nitteritz 26 51 55 32 30 Nitzow 14 52 40 29 10 Nivelle 1, 38 50 40 20 20 Nivenhauss 22 50 20 28 40 Nivernois 1 46 50 18 50 Ninhuss 41 47 40 23 30 Niwnitz 32 49 00 34 50 Nobbin 9 54 50 31 10 Nobedenitz 22 50 50 29 20 Nobilz 22 50 50 29 30 Nobiskrog 16, 17 52 05 26 40 Nochterfeld 18 51 25 28 00 Noes 23, 25 51 25 32 00 Nogent le Roy 1 47 50 21 20 Nogent sur Seyne 1 48 10 19 30 Nolda 28 51 15 35 05 Nolkingen 41, 43 47 20 24 15 Nollendorff 19 51 20 28 50 Nolli 3 53 45 25 00 Nomeny 1, 38 48 50 22 30 Nonne 21 50 55 29 30 Nonnenbreite 20 51 45 28 30 Nonnend 10 54 00 30 40 Nonnendo 8 54 10 31 00 Nonnendorf 9 54 05 31 50 Nonnenforstmons 16 51 40 27 40 Nonnenthale 20 54 40 28 30 Nonnenwaldt 23 51 10 31 40 Nonnenwher 40, 41, 42 48 10 24 10 Nonwald 23 51 15 32 10 Noorder Elve 3 53 50 24 30 Noordorp 2 54 20 26 00 Noord See 1 52 50 18 50 Noorthem 4, 16 52 20 26 20 Noorthorn 38 52 40 23 00 Noortwyckopze 1, 38 52 10 20 10 Nopke 16 52 25 26 10 Nopnare 38, 41 48 00 24 40 Nora 16, 19 51 25 27 50 Nordorp 3 53 50 24 50 Norden 1, 38 53 50 23 10 Norderbursted 2 54 40 26 00 Norderdyck 2 55 00 25 50 Norderny 1, 38 54 00 22 50 Norditz 22 50 50 29 20 Nordlingen 1, 45 48 40 27 20 Nordloo 5 53 10 24 20 Nordzn 41, 42 43 48 15 24 30 Nordt Moer 5 53 10 24 00 Nordtorp 1 54 30 26 30 Norebantz 8 54 00 33 30 Norendorff 10, 11 53 00 27 20 Norfingen 40, 43 47 50 24 15 Norholtz 14 51 15 28 10 Norikawo 27 51 35 33 40 Norinberg 8, 10 53 30 33 00 Northusen 2 54 30 25 50 Nort 40, 42 44 48 15 24 10 Norta 45 48 55 25 50 North 41, 42 48 25 24 00 Northausen 1, 15, 16 51 30 27 40 Northeim 1, 17 51 40 26 40 Northen 15 51 30 26 20 Northoltz 20 51 45 28 10 Northorn 1 52 30 23 20 Northusen 3, 5 53 50 24 50 Nortlo 38 53 20 23 40 Norstemme 16, 17 52 05 26 30 Nort Strant 1 55 00 25 10 Norttrever 16 52 30 26 20 Nortwill 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 15 Nortwolde 4 53 00 25 20 Norwick 1 52 50 17 00 Nosenitz 10, 11 52 20 27 50 Nosislow 33 49 00 33 30 Noskow 8 54 40 34 00 Nosloy 2 53 40 27 20 Nossa 23 51 15 31 30 Nossdorf 39 49 00 24 40 Nossen 22 51 00 30 10 Nossendor 7, 8 54 00 30 10 Nossevitz 9 54 25 31 10 Nossin 8 54 40 35 00 Nosswitz 22 51 00 29 40 Nostitch See 24, 26 52 10 32 00 Nostoy 7 53 20 27 30 Notesius fl. 25 52 50 32 20 Notesius fl. 25 53 00 32 40 Notetz fl. 8 52 50 33 30 Noth. fl. 24 52 50 32 00 Nothagen 10, 13 53 40 32 50 Nothstein 23 51 00 32 10 Notte 2, 12 52 20 29 30 Notteleben 19 50 55 24 40 Nottigen 40 48 45 24 55 Notwiler 41, 42 48 50 24 15 Notwinckel 10, 12 52 20 29 20 Novagura 24 49 50 36 00 Novale 1 45 20 29 20 Novigrad 1 46 00 34 30 Novihialy 33 50 10 30 30 Nouwen 16 51 55 27 00 Nowag 30 50 30 34 20 Nowawes 32 48 40 34 20 Nowedwary 2, 33 49 50 31 00 Nowehrady 32 49 40 33 00 Nowemesto 1, 33 50 00 33 00 Nowlin 8 53 10 32 30 Noyon 1 49 30 19 00 Noyelles 1 50 20 18 50 Noyers 1 47 20 19 50 Nuborn 39 48 30 23 20 Nudaw 38 46 40 23 20 Nudow 10, 12 51 50 30 30 Nuernum 38, 39 49 40 23 40 Nufring 45 48 25 25 30 Nuitz 1 46 50 20 50 Nukilch 41, 43 47 45 24 15 Numburg 33 50 00 32 10 Nunburg 38, 39 49 40 23 20 Nundorf 10, 11 52 30 28 00 Nunkirchen 39 49 20 23 20 Nunnensche 9 54 45 31 10 Nuntschind 22 50 40 28 50 Nupultzborg 39 48 40 23 40 Nupstet 16 51 20 27 30 Nura 14, 21, 40 51 35 29 00 Nurnberg 1, 34 49 20 27 50 Nurrdorff 31 51 25 31 30 Nusbach 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 25 Nusla 32 48 50 34 00 Nusplingen 47 47 50 25 40 Nussloch 39 49 10 25 10 N. Nussperg 33 48 50 30 10 Nustat 41, 45 47 45 24 30 Neusteden 4 53 40 25 20 Nuta fl. 10 51 20 29 10 Nutschel 2, 4 54 00 27 00 Nuttel 5 54 00 25 50 Nutzkow 7 54 05 29 50 Nuys 1, 38 51 00 22 50 Nybruck 38 51 40 24 40 Nydeck 1 46 00 32 40 Nyeburg 1 53 30 24 50 Nye Grave 3 53 50 26 30 Nyekercke 1 53 00 25 10 Nyelbuck 2 52 20 28 40 Nyenburg 38 52 00 23 00 Nyendorf\ 2, 15 52 40 28 20 Nyenhusen 38 52 20 23 00 Nyenhuys 1 54 10 25 20 Nyestidhoren 2 53 50 26 30 Nympka 25 51 10 33 40 Nymptsch 24 50 40 33 30 Nyon 1, 38 45 40 22 20 O   OBel 2 52 40 29 10 Obelger 16 52 10 28 10 Oben 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 10 Obendorp 04 53 20 25 20 Obentorf 41, 42 48 40 24 15 Ober 27, 29 51 25 33 05 Oberadt 35 49 55 25 00 Oberaich 45 48 25 25 40 Oberberg 1, 33 48 20 31 30 Obercham 19 50 35 28 00 Oberdorf 34, 36 50 20 26 40 Ober Emse 39 50 00 24 40 Ober Esesshen 39 49 00 25 40 Oberfladungen 36 50 30 26 50 Obergem 17 52 25 27 00 Obergrund 30 50 10 34 30 Obergurck 23 51 15 31 20 Oberhaid 34, 36 49 50 27 40 Oberhasel 19 50 45 28 20 Oberhausen 40 47 40 24 20 Oberhofen 41, 42 48 50 24 20 Oberhoff 41, 42 48 55 24 25 Oberhoven 40 48 35 24 20 Oberingen 19 51 05 28 10 Oberit 41, 43 47 45 24 20 Oberkirch 42, 43, 44 48 25 24 30 Oberlanckheim 34 49 40 27 10 Oberlau 21 51 05 30 30 Oberlauda 33 50 40 26 10 Oberlitz 36 50 40 27 50 Oberlustadt 39 49 00 24 40 Obermat 38 46 00 24 40 Obermisse 33 48 20 31 10 Obermul 37 49 45 25 55 Obernburg 34, 39 49 40 25 40 Oberndorff 19, 36 50 50 27 50 Obernhofen 41, 42 48 35 24 20 Obernhoff 34, 36 50 40 27 30 Obernig 28 51 20 34 00 Obernigermuhl 28 51 20 34 00 Obernitz 22 50 30 28 20 Obernsteig 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Obernstray 34 50 20 27 10 Oberntzen 34 49 20 27 20 Oberoden 35 49 50 25 10 Oberreusen 15, 19 51 10 28 20 Oberrodt 36 50 25 27 40 Oberschupf 34 49 20 26 00 Oberschwartzach 34 49 50 27 10 Obersdorf 19, 20 51 40 28 10 Oberslach 45 47 45 25 10 Obersrode 20 51 20 28 40 Oberstatt 36 50 30 27 20 Oberstein 1, 39 49 40 23 30 Oberstenfeld 45 48 55 26 00 Oberszitz 24, 25 52 40 33 00 Obert 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 30 Oberthal 41, 43 47 40 24 20 Obertorf 41, 43 47 25 23 45 Obertzdorf 10, 12 52 20 31 20 Oberweidt 36 50 35 26 50 Oberweier 40 48 40 24 45 Oberwihr 41 48 40 24 40 Oberwiller 41, 43 47 25 23 55 Oberwald 16 52 10 25 40 Obisch 28 51 20 34 55 Oblingen 22 50 40 28 30 Obolock 24 51 50 34 30 Oborlitz 19 50 40 27 40 Oborniki 24, 25 52 50 33 00 Oborzicky 1 52 30 33 50 Obra 24, 25 52 00 34 00 Obra fl. 24, 25, 26 52 30 32 00 Obre fl. 16 52 15 28 10 Obrendorf 38 48 00 25 00 Obrenkochen 34 48 40 26 40 Obrenstrew 36 50 20 27 00 Obricken 34, 39 49 20 25 30 Obsendorf 25 51 10 33 20 Ochel fl. 24, 25 51 50 32 00 Ochel Hermansdorft 25 51 50 32 20 Ochnicz 15 51 30 28 40 Ochnstein 38 48 20 23 40 Ochsenfurt 34 49 30 26 50 Ochsenhausen 45 47 55 26 40 Ochsenperg 39, 45 48 50 25 20 Ochsensoln 34 49 20 28 50 Ochsenstall 28 51 10 34 15 Ochsenstein 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Ochsenthal 19, 36 50 35 27 40 Ochsenwerder 3, 5 53 45 26 40 Ochsenwerderkirch 2 53 40 26 40 Ochte 38 51 40 21 20 Ochtenhusen 5 53 25 25 30 Ochterhusen 5 53 35 25 40 Ochtersum 16, 17 52 05 26 40 Ochtmarsleben 15 52 20 28 20 Ochtrup 1 52 10 23 30 Ockaim 34 50 00 27 00 Ockenheim 39 49 50 24 10 Ockenfen 17 52 10 26 20 Ock worden 5 53 45 25 40 Ocrestel 35, 39 49 55 24 45 Odbergem 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Odeleben 16, 18 52 05 28 00 Odelno 1 51 30 34 40 Odenbach 39 49 30 23 50 Oder 24, 32 49 40 34 30 Oder fl, 10, 13 52 00 33 10 Oderae Fons 24 49 40 34 30 Oderberg 24 50 00 35 00 Oderchwart 3 53 45 25 10 Oderen 33 50 40 30 10 Oderitz 22 51 00 29 10 Odern 1, 22 50 40 30 10 Odernheim 1, 39 49 40 24 30 Odersleben 19, 20 51 30 28 00 Odertzh 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 00 Oderwart 5 53 50 25 40 Oderwitz 28 51 00 34 15 Odeskercke 7 53 55 28 40 Odlem 16, 17 52 10 26 50 Odolanow 24 51 40 34 30 Oebertshausen 35 49 55 25 10 Oechlicz 20 51 20 28 40 Oed 38 51 00 22 20 Oeder 16, 19 51 25 26 40 Oedere 2 50 40 29 10 Oednhusen 16 51 20 26 30 Oelbergh 20 51 40 27 50 Oelhoff 16, 17 51 55 27 20 Oelmanshausen 19 51 05 26 30 Oentz 38 46 40 23 40 Oenzingenberg 20 51 55 27 50 Oer 16 51 50 26 10 Oerle 4 53 40 25 00 Oesch 38 46 00 23 20 Oese 5 53 30 25 30 Oesen 2 54 20 26 20 Oesfeld 16 52 20 27 50 Oesing 4 53 00 27 20   6 52 25 27 00 Oest 19, 20 51 45 28 40 Oest fl. 4 53 40 25 40 Oeting 1 48 00 29 40 Oetinghen 34 48 50 27 30 Oey 38 46 00 23 40 Ofenbach 35 49 55 25 05 Offen 1 51 40 23 40 Offenbach 39, 41 49 30 23 40 Offenberg 33 48 40 30 00
Offenburg 40, 41, 42 48 20 24 25 Offendorff 40 48 30 24 20 Offenhausen 45 48 05 26 00 Offenschwenda 19 51 15 26 40 Offensted 16 52 10 25 40 Offenting 41, 43 47 50 24 10 Offentorff 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 20 Offerhoven 1 48 30 30 10 Offetingen 40 47 50 24 15 Offnen 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 05 Ofwiter 41 48 40 24 05 Ogen 30 50 30 34 10 Ogersheim 39 49 20 24 50 Ohe 3 53 45 27 00 Ohre fl. 2 52 50 27 40   15 53 00 27 40 Ohrschoten 40 47 50 24 10 Ohrschwolen 40 47 30 24 20 Oic 8, 9 54 30 29 30 Oien fl. 19 51 10 27 40 Oiler Heide 5 53 30 25 20 Oirschot 1 51 30 21 00 Oisthcim 16 52 20 26 20 Okel 21 51 15 29 40 Okense 16 51 55 26 20 Oker 16, 17, 18 51 50 27 20 Okorz 1 50 00 30 10 Ol 33, 44 50 00 31 10 Olaw 24, 25 50 50 34 00 Olae Fons 30, 31 50 35 34 00 Olbach fl. 40 48 30 24 45 Olbram 33 48 50 32 50 Oldebroechu2en 4 53 00 25 40 Oldebroker 3 53 45 24 40 Olde Clooster 2 53 50 26 10 Oldefles 10, 13 52 40 32 40 Olde Gamme 2, 3, 6 53 40 26 50 Oldhoff 10, 12 52 40 31 00 Oldelaedt 5, 6 53 30 25 50 Oldelanderbune 3 53 50 26 00 Oldenbesin 9 54 45 30 50 Oldenbroke 3 53 45 24 40 Oldenborg 5 53 10 24 40 Oldenborger Landt 5 53 15 24 20 Oldenburg 1 53 20 24 10 Oldenburg Comit. 38 53 20 24 00 Oldendick 5 53 30 24 40 Oldenborp 1, 15 52 10 25 50 Oldenhausen 15 52 40 27 40 Oldenhorn 2, 4 54 00 27 00 Oldenhusen 16, 17 51 50 26 50 Oldenkalen 8 53 50 29 30 Oldenkamp 9 54 20 31 10 Oldenkercke 3, 5, 6 53 45 25 50 Oldenkerckhoff 3 53 50 25 10 Oldenrode 16, 17 51 50 26 50 Oldenstadt 2, 4 53 00 27 00 Oldenswatsin 9 54 25 31 40 Oldenwerpe 8 53 50 31 30 Oldenwichshagen 8 53 40 31 00 Oldenzael 1 52 20 23 10 Olde oeghe 5 53 45 24 20 Olderaheim 38 49 40 24 20 Olderen 28 51 05 34 15 Olderhude 1 54 00 24 40 Olderleben 2, 15 53 00 28 20 Oldermitz 23 51 20 31 40 Oldershusen 16, 17 51 40 26 50 Oldersleben 16, 19 51 20 28 10 Oldersum 38 53 20 23 00 Oldesto 1, 2, 4 54 10 27 00 Oldevehr 1, 8, 9 54 30 30 50 Oldewerder 2, 3, 6 53 50 26 20 Oldeworden 5 53 30 26 20 Oldezeel 38 52 20 23 00 Old grapow 13 53 00 31 40 Oldorp 5 53 35 24 10 Olem 17 52 30 26 50 Olendorp 16, 17 52 00 27 20 Olenhagen 7 53 40 29 10 Olepe 1 50 50 24 20 Olersdorp 2 54 30 26 10 Olessnitz 32 49 20 33 30 Olffen 19 51 00 26 40 Oliben 33 50 40 31 30 Olingen 41, 42 48 35 24 10 Olinkusen 1 54 20 24 20 Olk 38 49 40 22 40 Olkesplaet 38 51 40 20 00 Olla fl. 5 53 10 25 00 Ollenberg 43 47 35 23 40 Ollenburg 41 47 35 23 40 Ollendorff 19 51 05 28 00 Ollenstein 16, 17 51 45 26 10 Ollenwiller 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Ollersroda 19 51 20 28 30 Olmenstedt 14 51 50 28 40 Olmet 38, 39 49 20 23 40 Olmitscherbach 19 50 35 27 40 Olmuntz 33 49 30 34 00 Olmutz 1, 24, 32 49 30 34 10 Olneroneken 3 53 45 25 20 Olnow 1 50 50 34 20 Olon 38 45 20 23 20 Olpach 40 48 15 24 30 Olper 16, 17 51 40 26 40 Olrnstedt 18 51 50 28 30 Olsbrucken 38 49 20 24 00 Olschow 22 51 10 29 30 Olse fl. 16 51 55 27 50 Olseborg 05 03 55 02 36 Olsesee 08 53 20 30 30 Olsfeld 01 52 40 28 00 Olsheim 41, 42 48 30 24 10 Olsnensis Duc. 24, 25 51 20 33 30 Olsnitz 1, 22 50 20 29 10 Olsp 44 48 15 24 25 Olssany 32 49 20 34 10 Olsse 1, 24, 25 51 10 34 00 Olsten 24 50 50 36 00 Olten 1, 38 57 10 24 10 Oltich 18 51 00 34 35 Olting 41, 43 47 30 24 00 Oltingen 41, 43 47 25 23 50 Oltri 01 46 20 29 50 Oltseborg 04 54 00 26 40 Oltstet 19 51 00 28 10 Oltzingerode 14 51 15 28 10 Oltweser 38 49 40 23 20 Olwiler 41, 43 47 40 23 40 Olzingerode 20 51 45 28 10 Omberg 19 51 35 27 10 Omenburg 38 50 40 25 20 S. Omer 01 50 50 18 10 Omfeld 16, 19 51 25 27 30 Omfster 19 51 00 28 10 Ommen 1, 38 51 40 22 20 Ommerschantz 01 52 50 22 30 Onarra fl. 15 52 30 27 20 Onen 38, 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 00 Onerekwitz 28 51 05 33 50 Ongerschulz 33 48 50 32 30 Ongstatt 39 49 20 24 30 Onitberg 14 52 15 28 50 Onoltbach 34 49 10 27 30 Onrose 08 53 50 31 00 Onsbach 38 50 00 25 00 Onspach 41, 42 48 45 24 25 Onstmet 45 48 05 25 40 Onters 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 30 Oon 38 52 20 23 20 Oostackere 01 51 10 19 50 Oosterburg 02 52 40 28 30 Ooster Eems 38 53 40 22 20 Oostermoer 02 54 30 25 50 Oosterwyck 17 52 05 27 40 Oosterwold 10 52 40 27 30 Oosteynt 38 53 20 20 40 Oostluter 16 51 55 27 00 Oost Zee 01 54 50 32 10 Opalinck 24, 25 52 20 33 00 Opatow 32, 33 49 00 32 50 Opdenberge 22 50 20 28 40 Open 38 50 20 22 00 Openrode 14 51 20 28 00 Openweihr 45 48 50 26 10 Opershusen 16 52 30 27 00 Op Ever 05 53 25 24 10 Opfershausen 36 50 35 27 00 Opffingen 45 48 00 26 30 Ophausen 38 50 40 24 00 Oplan 33 48 40 31 10 Opoliensis Duc. 24 50 20 34 30 Opolko 33 49 10 30 30 Opotschno 1, 2 50 00 32 50 Opotsclmo 24 50 00 34 00 Oppa fl. 32 49 50 34 40 Oppach 23 51 10 31 20 Oppau Frisenheim 39 49 20 24 50 Oppaviensis Duc. 24 49 50 34 00 Oppel 05 53 45 25 20 Oppelen 1, 24 50 30 35 00 Oppelitz 22 51 10 30 00 Oppen 21 51 00 29 00 Oppenaw 40 48 20 24 40 Oppen fl. 16 51 30 26 40 Oppenheim 1, 38 49 40 24 40 Opperhusen 16, 17 51 45 26 50 Oppern 28 51 05 34 05 Opperroda 18 51 20 27 50 Opperrode 16, 20 51 45 28 00 Oppersdorff 30 50 25 34 30 Oppershausen 19 51 10 27 10 Oppershusen 4, 6 52 40 27 00 Opplingen 37 49 30 26 10 Oprende 15 51 40 29 00 Opshusen 16 52 05 25 40 Or fl. 19, 36 50 50 27 30 Ora fl. 10, 11 52 00 28 10 Orahtshausen 19 51 15 28 00 Oranienburgh 10, 11 52 30 30 20 Orbe 38 46 20 22 40 Orchimont 01 49 50 21 10 Orcies 01 50 30 19 10 Ordingen 1, 38 51 20 22 50 Ordruff 19, 36 50 50 27 30 Orechow 32 49 00 34 40 Orede 02 54 10 27 10 Orem 16 52 05 27 20 Orengang 33 48 20 33 50 Oringen 1, 34 49 00 26 10 Orla fl. 19 50 50 28 20 Orlamunde 1, 19, 22 50 50 28 20 Orlawerd 19 50 50 28 30 Orle 04 54 00 25 20 Orlice 32 49 50 33 30 Orlik 33 49 20 31 10 Orlitz 1, 2, 33 49 50 33 30 Orll 05 53 30 25 30 Ormont 01 48 10 23 20 Ornans 01 46 50 22 20 Ornbaw 01 49 00 27 30 Ornberg 45 49 10 26 00 Orne 01 49 10 21 40 Ornshausen 36 50 45 27 00 Oroczlauka 01 48 50 35 20 Oron 38 46 00 23 00 Orsoy 1, 38 51 30 22 50 Ort 01 53 20 23 30 Ortburg 16 52 15 26 30 Ortenberg 1, 34 50 20 25 40 Ortenburg 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 50 Orth 38 53 20 23 29 Orthenavia 40 48 25 24 30 Orthenaw 40, 44 48 20 24 30 Ortrand 2, 22 51 20 29 50 Orum 17 52 20 27 30 Orwede 05 53 10 24 30 Osaw 05 54 00 26 10 Oscherod 22 50 30 29 40 Oschersleben 15, 16 52 10 28 00 Osceitz 2, 22 51 20 29 10 Oschmersleben 20 51 55 28 30 Oseck 32 49 30 34 30 Osen 15 53 00 27 00 Osenbrug 38 52 20 24 20 Osengeses 37 49 40 26 00 Osfeldt 37 49 35 26 15 Osla 34, 36 50 20 27 50 Oslawa fl 32 49 00 33 20 Oslawany 32, 33 49 00 33 30 Oslen 08 53 50 30 00 Oslerrodo 18 51 40 27 20 Osnabrug 01 52 20 24 20 Osnen 38 48 20 24 00 Osopo 01 46 00 30 20 Oss 40, 41, 45 48 53 24 35 Ossa 22 51 00 29 40 Osselsche 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Ossenbach 38 50 40 24 40 Ossendorff 16, 21 52 15 27 40 Ossfeli 6, 14 52 10 27 30 Osig 26, 28, 29 51 25 33 10 Ossiger Mahl 27, 29 51 25 33 15 Ossing 02 51 40 30 20 Ossmunde 21, 22 50 50 29 00 Ossowa 32 49 10 33 20 Ossstein 39 49 20 24 40 Ossweier 40 48 10 24 20 Ost 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 05 Ost fl. 06 53 10 25 50 Oste fl. 2, 3, 5 54 20 25 40 Ostein 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Ostelwitz 26, 27 51 40 33 30 Osten 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 20 Ostenborg 05 53 05 24 50 Ostenbroch 05 53 50 25 10 Ostende 01 51 20 18 50 Ostenfeldt 05 53 55 26 00 Oster 10, 13 52 20 32 30 Osterberg 45 48 15 25 40 Osterburg 11, 14 52 35 28 50 Osterfelt 19, 22 51 01 28 40 Osterhag 16 51 35 27 20 Osterhausen 15, 19 51 30 28 20 Osterheim 41 49 00 24 40 Osterholt 4, 5 53 20 25 20 Osterhoven 33 48 30 30 10 Osterloh 05 53 00 24 30 Ostermoer 03 53 55 25 00 Osternwerhave 03 53 50 25 00 Osterrode 15, 17 51 50 27 00 Osterstede 05 53 15 25 40 Osterting 45 48 10 25 40 Osterwalt 16, 17 52 00 26 20 Osterwedi 18 51 40 28 30 Osterwedling 14 51 45 28 40 Osterwitz 21 51 15 29 40 Osterwyck 1, 15 52 10 27 30 Ostfeldt 10, 11 52 10 27 40 Osthaim 34 49 40 25 20 Osthausen 19 50 50 28 00 Ostheim 34, 36 50 20 26 50 Ost herrn 14 52 15 29 00 Osthoffen 41, 42 48 25 24 00 Osthoven 39 49 30 24 40 Ostorf 11, 14 52 45 28 50 Ostorog 01 52 20 34 00 Ostorowo 25 51 30 33 40 Ostra 1, 24 49 40 35 20 Ostra fl. 24 49 40 35 00 Ostraun 20, 21 51 45 29 00 Ostrawitz fl. 32 49 40 35 10 Ostringsfeldt 05 53 30 24 20 Ostritz 24, 25 51 10 31 30 Ostrorog 24, 25 52 40 33 00 Ostrow 32 49 00 34 30 Ostrowo 27 51 40 33 40 Ostrum 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Ostwihr 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 15 Osulin 01 45 20 33 30 Oswalt 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 10 Oswentzin 24 49 50 36 00 oswetuman 32 49 00 34 20 Oswiler 42 48 40 24 05 Oswitz 28 51 10 34 10 Osyeck 01 53 30 36 10 Otbargen 15 51 40 25 20 Otentorf 41, 43 47 20 23 40 Oterleben 15 52 10 28 20 Oterot 41, 42, 44 48 15 23 55 Otfresen 16, 17 51 55 27 10 Othagen 16 51 35 26 10
Otilia 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 55 Otingen 40 48 45 24 40 Otmachaw 30, 31 50 25 34 10 Otmarsen 01 52 30 23 10 Otmarsheim 40, 41, 43 47 40 24 00 Otmesheim 45 48 50 25 50 Otorowo 25 52 30 33 00 Otrokawitz 32 49 10 34 30 Ottawa fl. 33 49 00 30 40 Ottelfingen 34, 37 49 20 26 20 Ottenaw 40 48 35 24 45 Ottenburg 01 47 40 27 00 Ottendorff 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Ottengrin 22 50 20 29 20 Ottenhagen 10, 11 52 30 28 40 Ottenhain 23 51 10 31 40 Ottenhausen 19 51 20 27 40 Ottenheim 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 15 Ottenschwangen 40, 45 48 05 24 30 Ottensen 2, 4 54 00 26 20 Ottensheim 01 48 10 31 10 Ottenwaldt 34, 39 49 40 25 20 Ottenweiler 45 47 55 26 20 Otterbach 41, 42 48 55 24 25 Otterberg 39 49 10 24 10 Otterendorff 1, 4 54 00 24 50 Otterhoff 37 49 35 26 00 Otterndorff 16 52 20 26 20 Ottersberg 05 53 15 25 30 Otterschitz 23 51 25 30 50 Ottersdorff 40 48 30 24 35 Ottersleben 18 51 45 28 30 Otterstet 19, 20 51 20 27 40 Ottersweier 40 48 30 24 35 Otterswir 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 30 Ottertorff 42 48 40 24 35 Otterwihr 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 20 Otterwis 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Otterwisch 22 51 10 29 30 Ottichersleben 18 51 55 27 50 Otticken 40 47 35 24 05 Otting 01 48 50 27 20 Ottingensis Com. 34 48 40 27 20 Ottingen 40 47 30 24 25 Ottmansdorff 23 51 05 32 10 Ottmonichausen 19 51 05 28 00 Ottnh. 38 48 00 24 00 Ottoslawitz 32 49 10 34 00 Ottstet 19 51 05 28 00 Ottweyler 1, 39 49 30 23 20 Ottwitz 28 50 50 34 10 Otzen 4, 16 52 40 26 40 Oude maes 38 51 40 20 20 Oudenaerde 01 50 50 19 40 Oudenbosch 38 51 20 20 20 Oudenbuttel 03 53 55 24 50 Oudetonge 38 51 40 20 00 Oudewater 01 52 00 20 50 Ovelauwe 05 53 50 26 00 Ovelgenne 16 51 20 26 10 Ovelgunne 1, 5, 7 53 30 24 10 Oveswicke 07 54 05 30 10 Oven 05 53 10 24 30 Overenfelde 16, 19 51 35 27 10 Ovestadt 01 51 40 24 30 Ourt 1, 38 50 10 22 20 Outzin 04 54 00 29 20 Ouwe 16 52 25 25 50 Ouwater 38 52 00 20 40 Ouwe 03 53 45 26 10 Ouwenbuttel 02 54 30 25 50 Ouwe Schantz 01 53 10 23 10 Ow 38 46 40 25 00 Oyas 29 51 15 33 15 Oybin 02 50 50 31 30 Oyen 19, 26 50 40 26 50 Oyest 1, 24 50 20 35 20 Oylin 02 54 20 27 20 Oymont 41 48 05 23 20 Oysemont 01 49 50 17 40 Oyser 27, 29 51 20 33 25 Oyte 05 53 00 24 20 Oywien 23 51 00 31 40 Oywin 24, 25 50 50 31 30 Ozwieczin 01 49 40 36 20 P   PAbenslein 02 52 00 29 10 Pacaudiere 01 45 50 19 40 Pachlarn 01 48 00 32 30 Pachstat 41, 43 47 40 23 45 Packel 19, 36 50 35 27 50 Packelente 08 53 00 32 00 Packlitz fl. 26 52 20 32 20 Pacoske 27 51 45 33 40 Paczlawitz 32 49 10 34 20 Padershausen 35 49 55 25 05 Padingbuttel 05 53 45 25 00 Padligar 26 52 05 32 30 Padwien 33 49 30 33 40 Paffedorff 22 50 50 29 30 Paffenbrun 41, 42 48 45 24 20 Paffenheim 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Paffenhoven 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Pafon 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Paggenhave 09 54 40 31 00 Paguset lacus 08 54 00 34 00 Pahren 10, 12 52 10 29 05 Pajersdorf 34 49 40 27 50 Paigny 38 48 20 21 40 Painsthaim 45 48 40 26 00 Pajow 07 53 30 29 20 Paist 08 54 40 34 00 Paka 2, 33 50 20 31 20 Paklitz fl. 25 52 20 32 20 Pakosch 01 52 50 35 30 Pakoswitz 27 51 35 33 40 Pal 42 48 30 23 50 Palatinatus Rheni 1, 38 49 20 24 30 Palatinatus Bavariae 01 49 00 28 40 Paludes 15 52 40 27 00 Paludes vastae 05 53 05 24 30 Papa 01 47 10 35 10 Papelitz 10, 14, 15 52 00 29 20 Papendorp 08 53 30 31 00 Papenheim 1, 34 48 40 27 40 Papenehim Baronia 34 48 40 27 40 Papenhoven 07 54 15 29 20 Papenower 03 53 45 26 40 Papenzin 07 53 45 30 40 Papiermuhl 10, 13 53 10 31 50 Papotz 01 47 30 35 20 Pappenberg 34 49 40 28 50 Pappenborck 16 51 25 26 30 Pappitz 22 51 10 30 00 Pappow 10, 11 52 20 27 50 Papsdorff 18 51 40 27 40 Paradies 10, 13 52 20 33 00 Paraw. 09 54 25 30 40 Parchaw 25, 26, 29 51 30 32 50 Parchermuhl 29 51 30 32 55 Parchim 10, 14 52 00 29 10 Parchum 15 52 20 29 00 Parchwitz 26, 27, 29 51 20 33 20 Parchwicensis Circ. 29 51 20 33 20 Pardowitz 1, 32 48 50 32 10 Pardubitz 2, 32, 33 49 50 32 50 Parc 14 52 25 29 20 Parensdorff 33 48 30 30 10 Pareschowitz 32 49 30 34 40 Pargmuhl 28 51 00 33 50 Pargou 08 53 10 31 30 Parichsdorff 22 51 00 29 20 Paris 01 48 40 18 20 Paritz 22 50 50 29 20 Pariz 33 48 20 30 40 Parkentin 07 54 05 29 10 Parkow 07 53 20 29 20 Parleberg 10, 11 53 00 28 30 Parlepe 16 52 20 28 10 Parmesens 39 49 00 23 50 Parn 07 53 15 30 50 Parne 10, 22 52 10 30 10 Parnssen 16 51 35 26 50 Paroye 38 48 20 22 40 Parpe 7, 10 53 45 27 50 Parreut 22 49 50 28 30 Pars 10, 11 52 20 29 20 Parsow 16 52 25 28 00 Partchuan 33 48 10 31 50 Partenheim 39 50 00 24 20 Partenkirch 01 47 10 28 00 Partenstain 34 50 00 26 10 Partscha 33 50 30 34 00 Parum 4, 7 54 00 28 20 Pas 01 50 10 18 30 Paschwitz 28 51 00 34 00 Pasenow 1, 7 53 25 30 50 Paskow 24, 32 49 40 35 00 Paslis 09 55 25 31 20 Passavant 41 47 20 23 10 Passaw 1, 33 48 20 30 40 Passawerwald 33 48 50 30 40 Passeleben 19 50 50 27 50 Passentin 07 53 30 30 20 Passewasck 08 53 30 31 00 Passihausen 15 52 40 26 00 Passow 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 20 Pasterwitz 28 50 55 34 10 Pasual 10, 12 53 30 31 00 Patbus 10 54 20 30 20 Patek 2, 22, 33 50 20 30 50 Patendorf 28 51 20 33 50 Paterborn Epis. 01 51 40 25 20 Patrow 4, 7 54 00 28 20 Pat2chaw 01 50 20 34 00 Patschen 8, 9 54 40 30 30 Patschkaw 24, 30, 31 50 25 34 00 Patten 01 53 00 20 30 Pattenhausen 1, 15 52 30 26 20 Pattensen 4, 16, 17 52 20 26 20 Patzke 08 53 50 33 00 Patzow 33 49 20 31 50 Paugurtenberg 01 48 20 31 50 S. Paul 41, 42 48 55 24 25 Paulinzel 19 50 40 28 00 Paulowiec 25, 26 51 50 33 20 Paulowitz 27 51 00 33 35 Paulpe 27 51 35 33 45 Paulsdorf 28 51 20 34 55 Paul see 16 51 55 28 10 paunach 36 49 55 27 40 Paunach fl. 36 50 00 27 40 Paungart 33 48 10 33 30 Paungarten 33 48 20 30 20 Paurwitz 24 50 10 34 30 Pausa fl. 24, 31 50 30 33 30 Pausdran 32 48 50 34 00 Pausen 22 50 30 29 00 Pausin 10, 12 52 10 29 50 Pausitz 22 51 20 29 40 Paustnitz 01 51 20 34 00 Pautke 27 51 35 33 25 Pautsen 01 51 10 31 20 Pautsko 01 54 20 36 10 Pawelsdor 8, 10 53 50 32 00 Pawlowick 33 48 50 33 40 Pawlowitz 32 48 50 34 10 Paxforde 10, 11, 24 51 50 28 20 Payenbuttel 05 53 50 25 10 Payrent 34 50 00 28 30 Peberg 41, 43 47 40 24 10 Peccatel 07 53 20 30 20 Pech 34 48 50 28 00 Pecher 23 51 35 31 50 Pechstet 19 50 35 28 00 Pecinow 32 49 00 32 40 Pedelske 1, 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 50 Pedernach 39 50 10 23 50 Pederschaw 22 51 00 29 10 Pedstitz 22 51 10 29 20 Pechul 10, 12 51 40 30 10 Peel 1, 38 51 20 22 00 Peen Moer. 10, 12 52 20 29 50 Pees 7, 10 54 10 29 20 Peetens 21 51 25 29 10 Peetzig 10, 13 52 50 32 10 Peetake 07 53 45 29 00 peffenhausen 01 48 30 29 00 Peffingen 41, 43 47 20 24 00 Pegaw 22 51 10 29 10 Peglow 08 53 30 32 30 Pgenitz 34 49 40 28 30 Pegoutter 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 30 Peil 31 50 40 23 40 Peilberg 22 51 00 28 40 Peilstein 34, 39 48 50 25 50 Peina 16, 17 52 15 27 10 Peine 4, 6, 16, 17 52 20 27 10 Peiskeraw 28 50 00 34 20 Peiskern 27 51 35 33 30 Peiskerwitz 28 51 15 34 00 Peiskretscham 24 50 20 35 30 Peisern 24 52 20 34 00 Peitsche 27 51 30 33 25 Peitke 27 51 35 33 10 Peitze 1, 2 51 40 31 20 Pekenson 10, 11 52 30 27 40 Pelau 22 50 40 29 30 Pelcka 28 51 15 33 50 Pellewitz 22 50 40 29 30 Pelrowitz 33 50 10 32 30 Pelrzimow 1, 33 49 10 32 00 Pelten 01 48 00 33 00 Peltrina 01 45 50 34 20 Peltzbrucke 25, 28 51 10 34 00 Peltsmuel 16, 19 51 35 27 40 Pempsting 45 48 20 26 00 Pencun 10, 12, 13 53 10 31 20 Pene fl. 8, 9 54 10 31 00 Penick 22 50 50 29 40 Penning 34 48 50 28 20 Pennla 22 51 00 29 50 Pentzin 2, 7 53 40 28 30 Pentzlin 1, 7 53 30 30 20 Penzig 23, 25 51 20 32 00 Penziggerhammer 23 51 20 32 00 Penzow 07 53 25 29 10 Perchiba 45 48 20 26 30 Percka 15 51 00 28 00 Pereimbt 01 49 20 29 10 Pcrelstet 19 51 05 28 00 Perga 22 51 00 28 00 Perhern 23 51 35 31 50 Peris 41, 43 47 55 23 35 Peritz 22 50 30 28 40 Perkhah 45 48 40 26 10 Perleberg 02 53 00 28 30 Perlen 22 51 20 29 50 Perlezhim 34 48 50 27 40 Perlin 08 53 30 32 30 Permont 38 50 00 23 20 Perneck 34 50 00 28 40 Pernes 01 50 30 18 20 Perone 01 49 50 19 00 Perriere 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 35 Persant fl. 08 54 20 33 00 Perschen 28 51 10 34 15 Perschkenstein 30 50 30 34 10 Perselin 07 53 50 30 20 Persenstein 2, 22 50 40 29 30 Persichen 23 51 15 31 20 Persno 32 49 20 35 00 Pertz 14 52 25 28 30 Peruse 43 47 25 23 25 Perwis 38 50 20 20 40 Perzelautsch 2, 33 49 50 32 20 Peschberg 38 49 20 22 20 Peschern 25 51 30 31 40 Peschwitz 22 51 00 29 30 Pesekendorf 15 52 10 28 00 Pesen 16 52 25 27 10 Peseneick 19 51 45 28 30 Peserb. 44 48 20 24 25 Pesfelt 05 53 55 25 50 Peskendorp 07 53 50 29 30 Pesme 01 47 00 21 40 Peta 01 47 20 33 50 Petelange 01 49 00 23 20 Peten 2, 7 53 15 29 00 petenhave 22 50 50 29 10 Peter 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 35 Peterberg 39 50 00 25 00 Peterkaw 08 54 20 34 30
Peterling 28 46 20 23 00 Petersberg 20, 21, 22 51 10 29 00 Petersborg 18 51 15 29 00 Petersdorf 2, 7 53 25 29 30 Petershagen 4, 6, 8 52 20 25 40 Petershayn 23 51 25 30 50 Petersheide 30 50 35 34 20 Petersmere 10, 11 52 30 28 40 Petersrode 21 51 50 29 10 Petersthal 40 48 15 24 35 Peterswald 31 50 10 33 30 Peterswalda 25 51 50 32 20 Peterwitz 25, 28, 29 51 10 33 00 Petmick 08 53 20 33 00 Petranowitz 27 51 25 33 40 Petrow 32 48 50 34 30 Petrowitz 33 49 50 33 30 Petschkendorf 27, 29 51 25 33 10 Petskow 22 51 10 29 30 Pettaw 22 50 50 29 30 Pettel 38 49 40 22 20 Petten 38 52 40 20 20 Pettens 14 51 25 29 10 Petterlingen 01 46 30 23 10 Petze 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Petzinow 33 49 10 32 10 Petzka 33 50 20 32 30 Petzke 07 53 10 30 00 Petzkow 07 54 00 29 30 Peute 03 53 50 26 30 Peuwerbach 39 50 10 24 30 Peyadel 26 52 00 32 40 Peyersh 45 48 35 36 20 Peylstain 45 48 55 26 00 Peyne 15 52 30 26 40 Pfaffenbergh 20, 29 51 45 28 20 Pfaffendorff 10, 12 51 50 31 40 Pfaffengrim 22 50 30 29 20 Pfaffenhan 22 50 40 29 40 Pfaffenhausen 34 50 10 26 10 Pfaffenhoven 39, 45 48 50 25 30 Pfaffenrot 40 48 40 24 50 Pfaffensteg 31 50 10 34 00 Pfaffenwiler 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 15 Pfahausen 45 48 30 26 00 Pfaltz 1, 38, 39 49 50 22 50 Pfaltzburg 1, 39, 41 48 35 23 50 Pfaltzen 38 49 20 22 20 Pfaltzgravenweiler 45 28 20 25 10 Pfaltzspoint 34 48 50 28 10 Pfaltzzu Sachsen 19, 20 51 30 28 20 Pfarkirchen 33 48 20 30 10 Pfarrogen 27 51 35 33 35 Pfascherode 22 50 30 29 20 Pfavers 38 46 20 26 00 Pfeddersheim 39 49 30 24 40 Pfeeffel 19 51 30 28 10 Pfeffikon 38 46 40 25 20 Pfeffing 38 47 20 24 00   45 48 20 25 30 Pferinfleben 19 51 00 27 30 Pfersdoro 14, 19, 20 51 15 28 20 Pfertz 40 48 5 24 45 Pfelsting 45 48 00 25 40 Pfetershuss 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Pefetterbac 40 48 40 24 45 Pfetz 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Pfin 01 47 20 25 30 Pfinitz fl. 40 48 55 24 50 Pfintzen 34 48 50 28 10 Pfirt 38, 41, 43 47 25 23 45 Pfleurstett 22 51 10 28 20 Pflichtendorff 22 51 00 29 20 Pflugschar 45 48 40 25 40 Pfoeffel 20 51 25 28 20 Pfolbach 34 49 30 25 50 Pfora 45 47 45 25 10 Pfort 22 51 10 28 40 Pforte 19 51 10 28 40 Pforten 24 51 50 31 30 Pfortz 41 48 50 24 40 Pfortzhaim 38, 39, 40 48 40 25 00 Pfraundorff 34 48 50 28 20 Pfraunfeld 34 48 50 28 00 Pfraunheim 35, 39 50 00 24 55 Pfreimbt 34 49 30 29 10 Pfucsendorff 20 51 50 28 40 Pfuczenthale 20 51 50 28 40 Pfuczenthale 20 51 35 28 50 Pfullendorff 1, 45 47 40 26 00 Pfulling 45 48 10 25 50 Pfurdorf 19 51 00 27 30 Philippeville 01 50 10 20 40 Philipsburg 1, 40 49 00 25 00 Phola 22 50 30 29 10 Pholucz 01 51 50 36 30 Phullewitz 10, 13 52 50 32 10 Pibelzidt 34 49 40 26 50 Piber 1, 34 50 00 25 50 Piberstein 33 48 30 31 20 Pibisheim 38, 39 49 40 24 40 Pibra 34 50 30 27 30 Picardie 01 49 50 17 50 Picher 07 53 20 28 20 Pickesteinerheyde 06 52 25 27 20 Pickholt 10, 13 53 10 31 50 Picquigny 01 49 50 18 00 Pideris 38 46 20 26 20 Piemont 1 45 10 23 30 Piere 01 46 30 18 50 Pierefort 38 48 40 22 00 Piermont 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 40 Pierpaum 34 49 10 28 10 Pierperse 41 48 20 23 20 Pierrepont 01 49 30 19 50 Piersdorp 07 53 25 30 10 Piesker Schinaw 26, 27 51 35 33 30 Pietreviller 39 50 10 25 00 Pietz 10, 12 52 10 30 00 Pieve di Candore 01 46 10 29 20 Pigento 01 45 20 32 00 Pihan 23 51 20 31 50 Pile 41 47 25 23 15 Pilgramsdorff 25 51 10 32 40 Pilhausen 34 50 20 27 20 Pilleben 14 51 20 28 40 Pilleborg 8 53 50 34 00 Pillnhoven 34 49 00 29 00 Pillnreut 34 49 10 28 00 Pilnikow 33 50 20 32 40 Pilfach 34 49 10 28 30 Pilsbach 39 49 20 23 40 Pilsen 1, 33 49 40 30 20 Pilsnerkraiss 33 49 20 30 10 Pilsnitz 25, 28 51 10 34 00 Piltzowitz 24 50 20 35 00 Pimsel 38 52 20 24 20 Pinckwaert 26 51 35 33 00 Pinnaw 25 52 10 32 00 Pinne 10, 13 52 10 32 30 Pinnenberg 1, 4 54 00 26 10 Pinnow 2, 7, 8 53 05 28 10 Pinowicze 32 49 30 34 10 Pinpach 34 49 50 27 10 Pintersleben 19 51 00 27 40 Piplist 07 53 45 29 00 Pippelsdorff 19 50 30 28 10 Pirben 26 51 50 32 20 Pirborn 30 50 40 34 10 Pirchstein 33 48 30 31 10 Pirckoch 34 49 30 27 40 Pirckenfelt 34 49 30 27 20 Pirenow 10, 13 52 30 32 20 Piring 45 48 10 25 30 Piritz 10, 13 53 00 28 50 Pirl 29 51 20 33 20 Pirn 1, 2, 22, 15 50 50 30 50 Pirnaw 23, 24 51 05 30 50 Pirnick 26 51 55 32 40 Pirno 33 50 50 30 40 Pirschen 25, 26 51 40 33 00 Pirschkaw 25, 26 51 50 33 00 Pische 10 51 50 31 30 Pischwitz 23 51 20 31 10 Piscina 25 52 00 34 20 Pisck 32 49 00 34 30 Piscophaim 38 49 40 26 00 Pisec 01 49 00 31 10 Pisentz 33 49 40 30 30 Pishofshaim 36 50 25 27 00 Pisiffel 16 51 30 28 10 Pisino 01 45 10 32 10 Pisport 38 49 40 23 00 Pisseldorp 07 53 30 29 00 Pissely 1, 33 49 40 31 30 Pissing 45 48 00 25 30 Pistlings 32 48 40 32 50 Pistorf 38, 39 48 40 23 20 Pita 22 51 10 29 10 Pitin 32 49 00 35 00 Pitlingen 39 49 00 23 20 Pitsch 23 51 15 31 20 Pitschen 1, 24 51 10 35 00 Pittingen 38 49 40 22 00 Pitzefol 14 51 55 29 00 Pitzerlin 08 53 20 32 30 Pitzpoel 2, 15 52 20 28 20 Piwanka 33 49 20 30 00 Placht 10, 12 52 50 30 30 Plackische 08 53 30 30 30 Plackwitz 29 51 10 32 40 Plaesten 07 53 30 30 00 Plaffey 38 46 00 23 20 Plage 2, 15 52 30 29 20 Plain 41 47 35 23 10 Plainfang 41, 43 48 00 23 30 Plaiske 07 53 10 28 50 Plan 33 49 10 31 40 Plana 33 49 40 29 50 Planchy 41 47 20 23 15 Placken 06 52 45 27 50 Plackenberg 19 50 40 28 10 Plackenham 19 50 55 28 10 Planckenloch 40 48 50 24 50 Plancy 01 48 20 20 00 Plandkow 10 53 0 29 20 Planech 39 49 40 24 00 Planias 33 49 50 31 50 Planich 7, 10 53 20 30 10 Planitz 22 50 30 29 20 Plantlunen 38 52 20 23 40 Plass 22, 33 49 50 30 20 Plassow 1, 8 54 10 34 40 Plastcow 08 53 50 32 00 Plat 22, 33 50 20 29 40 Plate 10, 13 53 40 32 20 Platsch 32 48 50 33 20 Platta 22 50 30 30 20 Plattenberg 11, 14 52 45 29 10 Plattenborch 15 53 00 29 00 Plaven 22 50 20 29 10 Plaueslein 02 52 10 29 20 Plaun 33 50 20 29 10 Plaw 19 50 45 27 40 Plawe 7, 10 53 20 29 20 Plawen 25 52 00 32 00 Plawen mons 43 47 40 24 10 Plawer See 07 53 20 29 30 Plawershagen 07 53 25 29 20 Plawetz 33 48 50 33 00 Pleche 28 51 15 35 10 Pleckenberg 33 48 3 32 40 Pleiburg 01 46 30 32 20 Pleinsfelt 34 49 00 27 50 Pleische 28 51 05 34 00 Pleischwitz 28 51 05 34 20 Pleishammer 10, 13 52 10 32 30 Pleiss 22 50 40 29 50 Pleisse fl. 10 52 00 32 30 Plemo 01 45 30 27 10 Plepkaw 01 51 50 28 40 Plesbar 01 49 40 36 00 Plesberg 33 49 30 29 30 Plesborg 01 49 40 29 20 Plesie 20 51 25 28 50 Pleslebe 19 51 25 28 50 Plessa 2, 22 51 10 30 00 Plessa Herrsch. 24 49 50 35 30 Plesse Comit. 15 51 30 26 20 Plessentz 07 53 55 29 20 Plessentz 07 53 55 29 20 Plessow 24 52 00 34 30 Pleswitz 28 51 00 33 30 Plesze 07 53 40 30 40 Pletenstein 37 49 30 29 30 Plettenberg 01 51 00 24 10 Plettnborg 38 51 00 24 00 Pletz 11, 14 52 30 29 00 Pleyswald 2, 33 50 30 31 10 Plez 01 46 10 30 50 Pliening 45 48 30 25 50 ;lietzhausen 45 48 20 25 50 Plisnitz 21 51 05 29 00 ;litenitz 08 53 40 34 00 Ploching 38, 45 48 20 26 00 Plochow 09 54 45 31 30 Plochrade 08 53 40 32 30 Plockzka 15, 20 51 50 28 20 Plodte 26 52 00 32 20 Ploen 01 54 30 27 00 Ploeta 22 51 10 28 50 Plogshagen 09 54 40 30 40 Plombaw 01 49 20 34 00 Plombiers 38 47 40 22 40 Pomitz 31 50 10 33 40 Plon 22 50 30 29 30 Plonnin 07 54 10 29 50 Plontzich 08 53 00 32 30 Plotintz 30 50 25 34 00 Plottendorf 22 51 00 29 30 Plotzkaberg 22 50 30 31 00 Plotzke 14, 18 51 45 28 50 Plouwen 10, 12 53 20 31 20 Pludentz 01 46 40 26 40 Pluggentin 09 54 30 31 10 Plumend 07 54 15 29 40 Plumlelaw 32 49 20 34 00 Plun fl. 10, 12 51 50 29 40 Pluske 27 51 35 33 40 Pluskow 07 53 45 28 10 Plutow 07 54 00 29 50 Pluviers 01 48 00 18 00 Plzenskykrag 33 49 40 29 50 Poberhausen 10 51 30 36 20 Pobolen 28 51 05 34 40 Pobzow 08 54 30 34 30 Pocka 22 51 00 29 30 Pockerode 22 50 50 28 20 Pod 01 47 00 30 40 Podberderkraiss 33 49 40 31 00 Podborzan 22, 33 50 10 30 20 Podbrdskykrag 33 49 30 30 50 Podel 08 54 40 35 00 Podelqiltz 22 50 50 29 00 Poderit 22 50 50 29 00 Poderit 22 50 50 29 30 Podewal 07 53 35 30 40 Podewels 08 54 00 33 00 Podhoren 32 49 30 34 30 Poling 38 46 20 22 20 Podias lacus 08 54 30 35 30 Podiebrad 24 50 00 32 00 Podiebroa 22, 33 49 50 30 50 Poding 08 53 20 32 00 Podltzhosen 45 48 10 25 40 Podmokl 26 52 15 32 30 Podrbao 38 50 20 23 40 Podstein 32 49 50 33 20 Poel 15 51 30 27 00 Poel fl. 15 51 40 27 00 Poelcde 15 51 40 27 00 Poeseritz 8, 10 54 20 30 30 Pofer 01 47 20 29 50 Pofnhofn 38 48 40 24 00 Pogel 27, 28 51 20 33 40 Pogerel 30 50 50 34 30 Poggelow 07 53 55 29 50 Poglana 01 45 20 32 10 Pogresse 07 53 30 28 00 Pogva 22 50 30 29 30 Poling 38 46 20 22 20 Poiske 07 53 20 30 20 Poiskendorp 07 53 55 28 50 Poitsow 09 54 45 31 30
Poitsdorf 30 50 35 34 10 Pohorlitz 32 48 50 33 50 Pohorzalitz 33 48 50 33 20 Pokersberg 23 51 00 31 30 Pokralitz 33 50 20 30 50 Pokrente 07 53 35 28 00 Pol 16 51 45 26 10   17 51 55 26 00 Polach 26, 27, 29 51 35 33 10 Polan 33 49 10 33 40 Polanka 32 49 40 35 00 Polanowitz 28 51 10 34 10 Polant 34 50 00 26 40 Polaw 23 51 15 31 10 Polchin 10, 13 53 40 33 00 Polchow 08 53 30 31 30 Polckendorff 28 51 10 33 45 Polde 16 51 35 27 10 Polderberg 15 52 00 29 40 Poldorff 31 50 15 33 20 Pole 01 54 20 28 30   07 53 55 28 30 Polehradice 32 48 50 34 10 Polei 20 51 55 28 40 Poles 21 51 25 28 40 Polescowitz 32 49 00 34 30 Poley 14 51 25 28 50 Pol. Grodzisko 24 52 10 33 00 Polgsen 27 51 30 33 40 Polina 3 49 20 30 20 Politeh 24 49 40 33 00 Politsch 32 48 40 33 00 Politz 8, 10 53 30 32 00 Politzka 1, 2, 33 49 30 33 10 Polizko 24, 25, 26 52 20 32 30 Polkow 10, 12 53 20 31 30 Polkowitz 32 49 20 34 20 Poll 45 48 05 25 50 Pollant 1, 39 49 30 24 20 Polleben 19, 20 51 45 28 30 Pollensdorff 21 51 25 29 30 Pollentz 07 53 15 29 00 Pollitz 10, 11 52 40 28 30 Poli Schullern 27, 29 51 20 33 15 Pollwitz 21, 29 51 05 29 40 Poln 33 49 20 32 30 Polna 1, 32 49 10 32 50 Polischdorff 27 51 25 33 35 Polnisch Graditz 25 52 10 33 00 Polisc Newstad 24, 25 52 30 32 30 Polnisch wasser 25 51 50 33 40 Polnisch wilkow 25 52 00 33 20 Polnow 08 54 20 34 00 Polnsted 18 51 20 28 40 Pologowitz 28 50 55 34 20 Polone 32 49 30 34 40 Polpevitz 09 54 45 31 30 Polsdorff 23, 28, 29 51 15 31 40 Polsnitz 22, 23, 24 51 30 30 40 Poltsch Wenitz 28 51 05 33 40 Poltring 45 48 20 25 30 Poltzenstein 24, 25 50 50 32 30 Poltzin 18 53 30 33 30 Polwerg 22 50 50 28 50 Pomelsprun 34 49 20 28 30 Pomerania 10, 13 53 10 31 40 Pomersfelt 34 50 40 27 30 Pomerensdorp 08 53 20 32 00 Pomerue 38 48 40 22 20 Pomess 34 50 00 25 10 Pommertzig 10, 13 52 00 33 00 Pommier 01 45 50 22 10 Pomsdorf 30 50 30 34 00 Pone 10, 14 51 50 29 00 Ponischwasser 26 51 50 33 30 Ponitz 22 50 50 29 20 Ponkowo 27 51 50 33 35 Pons 22 51 00 29 30 Ponserit 22 50 50 29 10 Ponstorp 07 53 45 29 50 Pont 38 46 00 23 20 Ponta Chosy 1, 38 49 00 22 40 Poatalie 01 47 00 21 20 Ponta Mouson 01 48 50 22 10 Pontarlm 38 46 40 22 40 Pontdain 01 45 40 21 30 Pont de Ville 01 45 50 21 00 Ponteba 01 46 20 30 30 Ponte Maso 01 45 20 24 40 Pont Losy 38 48 40 22 00 Pont Oyse 01 49 00 18 00 Pont Piere 38 48 00 21 40 Pont Rhodi 38 47 00 22 40 Pont S. Maixente 01 49 10 18 30 Pont sur Satne 01 47 30 22 10 Pont sur Seyne 01 48 10 19 40 Pont sur Yonne 01 48 00 19 10 Pont Vegicourt 38 47 00 22 40 Popelaw 1, 24 50 40 35 00 Popeln 22 50 50 29 00 Popitz 32 48 50 34 00 Poplow 8, 10 53 50 33 30 Poppe 25 52 30 32 20 Poppelvitz 09 54 25 30 50 Poppenberg 19 50 30 28 00 Poppenborg 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Poppengrin 22 50 20 29 20 Poppenrodo 16, 19, 20 51 40 28 00 Popperch 34 49 20 28 30 Popschen 22 51 00 29 30 Popschutz 26 51 45 32 40 Poren 19 51 20 27 20 Porentruy 01 47 20 23 20 Poritsch 34 50 20 28 40 Porlewitz 27 51 45 33 35 Pornke 18 51 30 28 20 Porsel 26, 29 51 30 32 50 Porsensein 33 50 40 30 10 Porst 14, 20 51 20 29 00 Porstond 22 51 00 28 30 Portenhagen 16, 17 51 45 26 30 Portitz 33 49 30 30 40 Port sur Seyles 38 48 40 22 20 Portz 10, 11 52 20 28 20 Portze 10, 12 52 30 29 40 Portzheim 01 48 40 25 10 Porzitzi 2, 33 49 40 31 30 Posa 22 51 00 29 10 Poschbaur 34 49 10 28 20 Posching 01 48 40 29 50 Poschwitz 22 50 50 29 20 Poselwitz 29 51 10 33 30 Posemazow 08 53 40 30 30 Posen 24 52 30 33 00 Poseritz 09 54 20 31 00 Posettedorff 23 51 15 31 50 Posewolt 09 54 25 31 20 Posna 01 52 20 34 30 Posoritz 32 49 10 33 50 Posseck 22 50 20 29 00 Possendorff 19 51 00 28 10 Possingen 16, 19 51 15 27 50 Postan 24 52 30 31 30 Postborn 32 48 40 34 10 Postdorf 14 51 55 29 00 Postelin 10, 11 53 00 28 20 Postersleit 22 50 50 29 10 Postham fl. 25 52 30 31 40 Posthusen 05 53 05 24 00 Postoloprty 33 50 10 30 30 Postowitz 32 49 00 34 50 Poteberg 19 51 05 27 50 Potenitz 07 53 55 27 40 Potenstein 1, 34 49 40 28 20 Potna 33 49 20 32 20 Potstam 1, 2 52 30 30 20 Potzarn 08 53 40 31 00 Potziatky 32, 33 49 00 32 20 Potzlow 10, 12 53 00 30 50 Potzsten 10, 12 52 00 30 20 Poubinberg 22 51 10 30 00 Poverstorp 07 53 40 28 40 Poville 01 47 20 21 20 Poxperg 34 49 30 26 00 Poydwiiscle 23 51 30 31 50 Pozze 36 51 00 26 50 Pozzerode 19 50 55 26 40 Prachalitz 1, 33 48 50 31 00 Prachenscherkraiss 33 49 00 30 40 Prachenskykrag 33 49 30 30 50 Praga 2, 22, 24 50 10 31 20 Pragstorp 07 53 30 30 40 Praitenstain 34 49 30 28 40 Pramon 41, 42 48 25 23 40 Pranbach 22 50 10 29 10 Prandeck 22 48 20 31 50 Pranssdorff 10, 12 51 50 30 50 Prant 22, 33 49 50 29 10 Prasselzaitz 34 49 40 26 50 Pratze 33 49 10 33 30 Prauska 1, 24, 27 51 00 35 30 Prausna fl. 24 51 50 34 30 Prausnitz 24, 25 51 20 33 30 Pray 41 47 30 23 10 Prebbershagen 07 53 45 28 10 Preclitzhoff 29 51 10 33 10 Preddil 10, 11 53 00 29 00 Predersdorff 19 50 35 27 50 Predist 22 51 00 29 10 Predobe 07 53 25 27 50 Preesn 22 51 10 29 50 Preest 08 53 50 30 30 Preetzig 08 53 10 32 30 Preichaw 25, 26 51 30 33 20 Preila 30 50 25 34 20 Preilm 10, 11 53 10 28 10 Preles 32 48 50 33 50 Prelin 04 53 40 29 00 Prelrig 10, 13 52 40 31 20 Preltisch 25 52 30 32 20 Premelln 10, 12 53 1 31 30 Premslichesen 02 53 00 28 20 Prenberg 1, 39 49 30 25 30 Preneck 22 50 00 28 40 Prengen 10, 12 52 20 30 40 Prenstorp 2, 4 54 10 27 10 Prentzlow 10, 12 53 10 30 50 Prentzlow 10, 12 53 10 30 50 Prerow 1, 32 49 20 34 30 Presborg 01 48 10 34 50 Presentze 09 54 50 31 10 Presincke 28 51 25 35 00 Presla 22 50 50 28 50 Pres2eck 22 50 00 28 20 Presseken 22 50 00 28 20 Pressel 21 51 05 29 30 Presset 34 49 40 29 00 Pressier 07 53 20 28 00 Prester 14, 18 51 45 28 50 Prestin 07 53 35 28 50 Pretberede 07 53 55 29 40 Pretz 09 54 25 31 40 Pretze 01 54 30 27 00 Pretzenitz 09 54 35 31 10 Pretzerbe 10, 12, 14 52 10 29 30 Pretzle 10, 11 52 50 28 10 Prevenschieres 43 48 10 23 35 Prevers 45 48 55 26 00 Preumery 01 46 50 18 50 Preust 38 48 40 25 00 Preutzwalck 10, 11 53 00 29 00 Prex 1, 38 46 00 22 40 Pribbenow 07 53 40 30 00 Pribberhow 7, 8 53 05 28 10 Pribbernow 08 54 00 32 30 Priberow 07 53 15 20 30 Pribitz 32 48 50 33 50 Priborn 10 53 10 29 40 Pribro 09 54 30 31 00 Pribrodischewedde 09 54 30 31 00 Pribsleve 08 53 40 30 00 Pridland 23 51 05 32 00 Pridom 27 51 40 33 00 Priemen 01 52 00 33 20 Priere 14, 21 51 20 29 10 Prignitz 2, 10 53 10 28 10   15 53 00 29 20 Prikenaw 24 51 30 32 30 Prilepy 32 49 20 34 40 Prillevitz 07 53 20 30 20 Prilup 10, 12 53 20 30 20 Prilup 10, 12 53 20 31 30 Prim 33 48 20 32 30 Primbkenaw 25, 26 51 35 32 40 Primen 08 53 50 30 30 Priment 24, 25 52 00 33 00 Primer 14 52 45 28 50 Primmelwitz 22 51 00 29 30 Primsdorf 25, 26 51 20 32 20 Primslis 01 49 20 32 30 Princkendorf 29 51 15 33 10 Prinda 33 49 30 29 50 Prinsenick 29 51 15 33 10 Prinstein 33 38 30 31 20 Priperl. 10, 12 53 00 30 00 Pripert 07 53 05 30 20 Prisen 3 50 10 30 10 Prismarck 08 53 30 31 30 Prisnitz 22 50 20 30 10 Prisow 10, 12 51 50 31 30 Pristelwitz 28 50 55 34 05 Pristobl. 21, 22 51 00 29 40 Pristow 08 54 30 34 30 Priswolck 09 54 15 31 10 Pritettz 22 51 10 28 50 Pritschen 26 51 50 33 10 Prittack 25, 26 52 00 32 30 Pritter 08 54 00 31 30 Prittes 23 51 20 31 00 Pritzer 11, 14 52 40 28 20 Pritzleck 07 53 10 28 40 Pritzlow 8 53 20 31 30 Priuck 10, 13 53 10 31 40 Probsthayn 25, 29 51 00 32 40 Probszell 19, 22 50 30 28 20 Procelden 34, 37, 39 49 40 26 00 Prockhusen 08 53 20 32 30 Prockstein 30 50 30 34 00 Procop 02 49 40 30 30 Procopsberg 15 51 00 27 20 Prodanitz 01 46 30 34 30 Proesch 25 51 10 33 40 Profen 29 51 05 33 20 Profetschin 28 51 05 34 20 Progoneck 01 46 10 32 40 Prokel 16 52 25 27 00 Proleso 01 45 30 25 30 Prolip 13 53 00 32 00 Proliwin 33 49 00 31 10 Prolup 10 53 00 32 10 Pronberg 34, 36 50 00 27 30 Prone 8, 9 54 30 30 00 Pronerwyck 8, 9 54 40 30 30 Prontzendorn 26, 27 51 30 33 30 Propost 32 49 30 34 40 Prorep 10, 11 53 10 28 30 Prostibor 33 49 30 30 00 Prostibor 33 49 30 30 00 Prostnitz 01 49 20 34 00 Prostegow 32, 33 49 20 34 10 Prostomeritz 32 48 50 33 30 Protiwanow 32 49 20 34 50 Protsch 28 51 10 34 00 Protzen 31 50 35 33 50 Protzke 2, 15 51 20 29 20 Provins 01 48 20 19 10 Proye fl. 38 46 20 23 00 Proscherow 2, 33 50 00 31 50 Prschibur 27 51 30 33 25 Pruberg 38 49 20 25 20 Pruck 34 49 30 27 50 Pruckander 01 47 20 32 50 Pruckh. 01 48 00 34 20 Pruckperg 34 49 10 27 30 Pruek 33 49 00 29 30 Pruel 34 48 50 29 10 Pruessel 39, 45 48 50 25 00 Prulfragheim 37 49 35 26 05 Prullevitz 08 53 10 32 30 Prum 38 50 00 22 20 Prumbach 34 49 40 26 00 Prummolste 09 54 45 31 30 Prun 34 48 50 28 40 Prunbach 34, 38 49 30 27 40 Prunitz 21 51 05 28 50
Preseu 07 53 50 30 20 Prusinowitz 32 49 20 34 40 Prutze 7, 8 53 45 30 20 Prutzke 10, 12 52 00 29 50 Prutzwalck 02 53 00 28 40 Pruymaab 01 50 10 22 40 Prybus 23, 24 51 35 32 00 Pryland 01 53 10 34 20 Przesnitz 33 49 30 30 30 Przestawlka 33 49 30 30 20 Przibentz 33 50 00 30 10 Przibin 26, 27 51 50 33 30 Przibslow 32 49 20 32 40 Przidoli 33 48 40 31 30 Przige 27, 28 51 20 33 45 Przikluck 1, 32 48 50 34 00 Psarski 25 52 30 33 00 Psczewo 25 52 30 32 20 Psiffel 19 51 35 28 00 Psin 38 47 20 25 20 Psingstal 22 51 00 28 10 Publing 18 51 40 28 00 Pucerbe 2, 15 52 30 29 20 Puch 34 49 20 27 50 Puchart 34 49 10 26 30 Puchelsdorff 28 51 20 35 00 Puchen 34 49 30 25 50 Puchenbach 34 49 30 27 50 Puchow 10, 12 52 10 30 10 Puchwitz 28 50 55 34 05 Puddeger 08 54 30 34 00 Puddemin 09 54 20 31 10 Puddevitz 09 54 20 31 00 Pudgla 08 54 00 31 30 Pudingen 1, 34 50 10 24 40 Pudlitz 10, 11 53 10 28 40 Puehperg 33 48 30 30 50 Puelsbuttel 05 53 40 26 30 Puffeleben 19 51 00 27 30 Puggen 10, 11 52 30 27 48 Puiltschleben 15, 20 51 20 28 00 Puiseaux 01 48 00 18 20 Pulbus 08 54 30 30 30 Pulich 38 49 40 23 00 Pulinitz fl. 22, 23 50 40 31 20 Pulitz 09 54 35 31 20 Pulka 32, 33 48 40 32 50 Pulkowski 28 51 15 35 10 Pultsch 31 50 15 33 40 Pulschnitz 28 51 00 33 45 Pulsdorp 32 48 40 34 00 Pulsnitz 02 51 00 30 00 Pulnitz fl. 2, 33 50 30 31 00 Pultz 31 50 25 33 50 Pulvitz 22 50 50 28 30 Pumtow 8, 10 53 10 32 30 Punckenborg 04 53 00 26 20 Punitz 24, 25, 26, 27 51 50 33 40 Puntlingen 16, 19 51 30 27 40 Puntzendorff 23 51 05 32 00 Purbach 41, 43 47 35 23 30 Purck 33 48 30 32 20 Purckgessa 34 50 20 26 20 Purmerent 1, 38 52 40 20 40 Purmont 01 52 00 25 50 Purschen 27 51 30 33 25 Pursewitz 27 51 55 33 30 Pusa fl. 31 50 30 33 10 Puschen 27 51 30 33 35 Puschiavo 01 45 50 26 40 Puschkowa 28 50 55 34 00 Puschmuhl 27 51 25 33 25 Puschwitz 28 51 05 33 55 Pusdorp 08 54 00 30 30 Puserin 2, 7 53 30 29 20 Puskow 07 54 00 29 00 Pusoritz 33 49 10 33 30 Pustimers 32 49 10 34 10 Pustmin 08 54 40 34 00 Pustowety 33 49 50 30 40 Puswang 01 47 20 27 40 Putbus 1, 9 54 30 31 10 Putenitz 07 54 15 29 40 Putgarten 09 54 55 31 10 Putlach fl. 34 49 40 28 20 Putscheln 26, 27 51 40 33 10 Putschke 23, 28 51 35 32 20 Putte 8, 38 54 20 30 00 Puttenhaim 34 49 50 27 50 Puttlitz 22 51 20 29 20 Putzar 07 53 45 30 50 Putzbach 34, 38 50 10 25 00 Puy 41 47 20 23 20 Pygel 22 51 10 29 20 Pyla 16 51 45 26 00 Pyrmont 17 52 00 25 50 Pyrow 10, 11 53 10 28 30 Pysdry 01 52 10 35 00 Q   QUaden 10, 12 53 10 30 20 Quadsow 08 54 30 35 00 Quaetdorff 2, 15 53 00 28 00 Quaetleben 15 52 10 29 00 Quakenburg 08 54 30 34 30 Quakendorf 28 51 10 35 05 Quale 2, 7 53 50 28 00 Qualin 26 52 10 32 40 Qualitz 07 53 15 28 00 Quallewitz 27 51 35 33 35 Qualtzow 07 53 15 30 00 Quanthosf 16, 17 50 00 26 30 Quappendorf 12, 13 52 20 31 30 Quaquenbrugge 01 52 50 24 20 Quaquenburg 01 54 00 35 50 Quarckenborg 1, 10 53 40 32 40 Quaritz 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Quartn 38 46 20 25 40 Quasendorp 09 54 40 31 30 Quassow 10, 12 53 10 30 00 Quast 2, 10 53 10 27 30 Quastenberg 10, 12 53 10 30 20 Quatzenheim 41, 42 48 25 24 05 Quatzlin 07 53 15 29 10 Quebruz 42, 43 48 05 23 35 Quedelinburg 1, 16 51 50 28 00 Quedelnburg Stift 20 51 55 27 50 Queich 41 49 00 24 35 Queichbrun 30 49 00 24 10 Queimbechschewart 20 51 55 27 50 Queinfelt 36 50 25 27 10 Queis fl. 23, 24, 25 51 10 32 10 Queisohwitz 28 50 55 33 55 Queise 22 51 10 29 10 Queissen 26, 27 51 35 33 10 Quelitz 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 30 Quentin 09 54 40 31 30 Quensted 16, 20 51 55 28 00 Querbach 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 20 Querk 22 50 50 28 50 Quermbeck fl. 20 51 55 27 50 Quernfurt 19, 20 51 30 28 40 Quernfurt Com. 19, 20 51 30 28 30 Quernhorst 16 52 20 27 50 Quersted 10, 11 52 20 28 30 Querum 4, 16 52 40 27 20 Quedow 08 54 30 34 30 Quesenitz 22 51 00 28 50 Quesnoy 01 50 10 19 40 Quest 10 51 40 29 20 Questenberg 15, 20 51 30 28 00 Questenburg 16, 19 51 35 28 10 Questin 07 54 00 28 40 Questling 07 53 45 28 00 Questzin 10, 13 52 30 32 00 Quickhorn 04 54 00 26 26 Quiess fl. 26 51 20 32 20 Quieta 22 50 50 28 40 Quilitz 24, 25, 26 52 30 32 30 Quilow 08 53 50 30 30 Quingey 01 46 50 22 00 Quinten 38 46 40 25 40 S. Quintin 01 49 50 19 20 Quirelsberg 19 50 35 28 00 S. Quirin 41, 42 48 30 23 30 Quislus fl. 26 51 25 32 30 Quissi fl. fons 23, 25 51 00 32 20 Quistelitsch 23 51 35 32 00 Quitselase 09 54 25 31 40 Quitzen 10, 11 53 00 28 30 Qulez 22 50 50 29 00 Quoltitz 09 54 45 31 30 Quoschwitz 28 50 50 34 20 R   RAade 05 54 05 25 05 Raak 10, 13 52 10 33 00 Raarbroeck 4, 6 53 40 27 00 Raasdorff 22 50 20 29 10 Rabbelow 12 52 00 31 10 Raben 2, 15 52 00 29 40 Rabenspurg 32 48 30 34 20 Rabenstein 10, 12 51 30 29 50 Rabeper 23 51 15 32 00 Raberg 22 51 10 30 40 Rabes 22 50 50 28 30 Rabi 01 49 00 30 40 Rabotz 2, 15 51 30 29 00 Rabstein 33 49 50 30 10 Raby 33 49 10 30 40 Rabzin 07 53 10 28 50 Rachitz 22 51 00 29 50 Rackaw 25, 26 52 10 32 30 Rackelsburg 01 46 50 34 00 Rackldorp 01 46 30 30 20 Rackschutz 28 51 05 33 40 Rada 05 53 25 25 30 Radach fl. 34 50 20 28 10 Radak 10, 13 52 20 32 20 Radberg 01 51 10 30 50 Radde 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Raddin 07 53 20 28 40 Raddun 08 54 00 32 30 Rade 05 53 20 25 00 Radeberg 2, 23 51 10 30 50 Radeburg 02 51 10 29 40 Radeck 01 49 20 31 00 Radefort 07 53 05 28 20 Radegast 07 53 15 27 30 Radekow 10, 12, 13 53 10 31 20 Radelnich 10, 13 52 10 32 30 Radelow 10, 12 51 50 31 30 Radelsd. 22 50 40 29 10 Radelubbe 04 54 00 28 20 Radelwitz 28 50 55 34 20 Rademitz 25, 26 52 00 33 20 Raden 1, 6 52 40 25 10 Radenberg 23, 25 51 10 31 40 Radenitz 25, 26 52 00 32 00 Rades 21 51 15 29 30 Radesleben 14 51 25 28 10 Radewell 21 50 55 28 50 Radewisch 26 52 05 32 30 Radichen 19, 29 51 15 32 50 Radmansdorff 26 51 35 32 50 Radmeil 32 49 30 33 20 Radnitz 33 49 40 30 30 Radomisko 01 51 00 36 30 Radonin 33 49 10 31 40 Radun 32 49 50 34 50 Radyn 1, 33 49 30 30 30 Radzitz 33 49 20 33 30 Raedweiler 39 49 20 23 40 Raelshausen 15 51 30 26 40 Raenstat 15 51 20 29 00 Raestorff 19, 36 50 35 26 30 Raet 39 50 00 25 00 Raezitz 32 49 10 34 00 Raffthorn 18 51 55 26 50 Ragatz 38 46 20 26 00 Rrgelen 10, 12 52 50 29 40 Ragetz 10, 11 53 20 29 10 Ragon 41, 43 47 30 23 25 Ragosen 10, 12, 14 52 00 29 30 Ragran 32 49 00 33 50 Ragun 2, 15 51 50 29 00 Raib. 41 48 30 23 55 Raigelsperg 34 49 30 26 40 Rain 01 46 00 33 30 Rainfelt 34, 36 49 56 27 00 Raischen 02 51 30 30 10 Raitenhausen 01 47 50 29 50 Raitschmansdorf 29 51 10 33 15 Rakonick 1, 33 49 50 30 40 Rakonikerkraiss 33 49 50 30 30 Rakow 7, 8 54 00 28 40 Rakowniczkykrag 33 50 00 30 40 Rakwitz 32 48 50 34 10 Ralawa 1, 9 54 40 31 00 Raltelsdorf 36 50 30 27 30 Ralusret 19 51 05 28 10 Rambeel 07 53 45 2 00 Ramberg 20 51 45 27 50 S. Rambert 01 45 30 21 40 Ramberviller 01 48 10 23 00 Rambin 09 54 25 31 00 Rambow 10, 11 53 00 28 40 Ramelburk 18 51 10 28 00 Ramelow 07 53 45 30 40 Ramelsberg 1, 15 51 40 27 20 Ramers 38 50 20 26 00 Rameru 01 48 20 20 20 Ramin 2, 7 53 15 28 10 Ramlow 10, 11 53 00 28 10 Rammansdorff 19 50 30 28 19 Rammelburg 19, 20 51 45 28 10 Rammelin 07 53 55 29 50 Rammelsberg 16 51 50 27 20 Ramnin 08 53 20 31 30 Rampach 19 51 05 26 40 Rampe 2, 7 53 35 28 30 Rampin 07 53 45 29 50 Ramschiez 19 50 40 28 10 Ramsla 2, 4 53 40 26 40 Ramsmatt 41, 43 47 35 23 30 Ramsola 1, 4 53 20 26 00 Ramsperg 45 48 35 26 30 Ramstein 41, 42 48 45 24 05 Rana fl. 20 51 30 28 20 Ranckaw 25, 28 50 50 33 40 Randaik 10 51 40 31 40 Randegk 34 48 50 28 50 Randen 10, 13 52 20 32 10 Randersaker 34 49 40 26 40 Randow fl. 08 53 10 31 30 Ranefeld 07 53 30 30 20 Ranes 19 50 40 28 30 Ranfels 33 48 30 30 40 Rang 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 00 Rangeding 45 48 05 25 30 Rangsdorff 10, 12 52 00 30 40 Ranis 22 50 40 29 20 Ranisdorff 22 51 00 29 20 Ranitzgrun 22 50 20 29 20 Rannungen 36 50 05 27 00 Ranpach 36 50 45 26 40 Ransaw 29 51 30 33 25 Ransbergen 15 52 40 25 40 Ransen 26, 27 51 30 33 20 Ransene 01 50 00 20 50 Ransern 28 51 10 34 05 Ranslebn 10, 12 52 30 30 00 Ranspach 41, 43 47 30 23 50 Ranssel 39 50 00 24 00 Ran2tet 22 51 10 29 20 Rantyn 39, 42 48 40 23 30 Rantzar 33 48 50 32 30 Gantzow 09 48 50 32 30 Rantzowhoff 05 53 45 26 10 Rantzwill 41, 43 47 30 23 50 Raon 38 48 00 23 00 Raon sur plaine 41 48 28 23 15 Raphode fl. 16 51 40 27 40 Rapwel 07 53 30 28 50 Rapoldenstein 01 48 30 32 20 Rapolinstein 33 48 30 32 00 Rapolkirch 43 48 05 23 45 Rapolswil 41, 43 47 25 23 45 Rapoltstein 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 45 Rapperswyl 01 46 50 25 10 Rappin 8, 9 54 40 30 30
Rappin Com. 1, 10 52 40 29 40 Rappinck 14 51 50 29 30 Raps 1, 32 48 40 32 50 Rapschitzk 27 51 55 33 35 Rapsen 26 51 45 33 00 Rapwyll 38 46 40 25 20 Raren 38 45 40 24 00 Rarvin 08 54 00 32 00 Rasburg 33 50 50 29 30 Rasch 34 40 20 28 20 Raschdorff 31 50 35 33 30 Raschen 26, 27 51 35 33 20 Raschke 28 51 10 34 10 Raschkendorff 28 51 10 33 40 Rase 32 49 40 34 30 Rasenitz 22 51 20 29 10 Rasmensdorf 10 51 50 31 40 Rasmoeseuffer fl. 19 50 30 27 50 Raspenburg 19 51 15 28 20 Raspenfeld 01 47 00 31 30 Rasperwendr 16, 19 51 30 28 00 Rasselwitz 28 51 00 34 25 Rassower Srom 09 54 45 31 00 Rasswick 09 54 35 31 20 Rastat 40, 41, 45 48 40 24 40 Rastede 05 53 15 24 40 Rastow 4, 7 53 40 28 40 Rastvitz 19 51 25 28 40 Rasuvicz 20 51 25 28 50 Ratag 33 49 40 31 50 Ratb, 42 48 30 23 55 Ratebur 08 53 40 31 00 Ratenow 10, 12, 14 52 20 29 20 Ratendorf 22 51 00 29 40 Rathaw 27 51 20 33 35 Rathen 25 51 10 33 40 Ratibor 1, 24 50 00 35 00 Ratiboriensis 24 50 10 35 00 Ratiagen 38 51 00 23 00 Ratkow 2, 4 54 10 27 20 Ratmansdorfl 01 46 20 31 30 Ratolst 38 47 20 25 20 Ratsch 27 51 40 33 20 Ratschutz 26 51 35 33 20 Ratsenhus 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 55 Rattel ab. 38 49 20 22 20 Ratzdorff 25 52 00 31 40 Ratzebur 08 53 50 34 30 Ratzeburg 1, 4 54 00 27 40 Ratzendorff 21 51 05 29 10 Ratzoch 08 54 20 34 00 Ratzuns 38 46 00 26 00 Raubschlos 27 51 45 33 05 Rauch Alb 45 48 15 26 20 Raucourt 01 49 30 21 10 Raudemuhl 28 51 10 33 35 Rauden 24, 25 51 30 33 00 Raudensis 27 51 40 33 15 Raudenberg 1, 32 49 40 34 30 Raudingen 34, 36 50 00 27 00 Raudnitz 1, 33 50 10 31 00 Ravensperg 01 52 00 24 40 Ravenspurg 39, 45 49 00 25 20 Ravenstcin 1, 22 50 40 30 10 Raversdorf 33 48 10 33 40 Ravesteyn 1, 38 51 40 21 40 Ravie 41, 43 48 10 23 30 Raville 38 48 20 22 20 Raukulm 34 49 40 28 40 Raun 22 50 10 29 20 Raunicz 20, 21 51 45 28 50 Raunitz 31 50 35 33 40 Raunspach 41, 43 47 40 23 25 Raupaw 33 49 20 30 20 Raurewan 23 51 15 31 50 Rauris Bod 01 46 00 30 20 Rausa 22 50 30 29 10 Rausche 23, 24, 25 51 30 32 10 Rauschwitz 19 51 00 28 40 Rauske 25, 27 51 10 33 20 Rausnitz 32 49 10 34 00 Raustka 32 49 20 35 00 Rauzieres 38 48 40 21 20 Rawen 10, 12 52 00 31 30 Rawenberg 37 49 40 26 00 Rawendorf 10 52 10 31 00 Rawinckel 08 53 30 33 00 Razfehr 10, 11 52 10 28 20 Ray 24, 32 49 50 35 00 Raytz 1, 32 49 20 33 40 Rebecque 38 50 20 20 00 Rebel 01 53 30 29 50 Reberch 07 53 45 30 40 Reberg 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Rebergk 14 52 30 29 20 Rebitz 22 50 50 28 50 Rebken 18 51 55 27 30 Relingen 15, 20 51 30 28 40 Rebshaim 34 50 40 25 50 Rebstock 35 50 00 24 55 Rechberg 1, 45, 48 30 26 20 Rechberghausen 45 48 35 26 20 Rechenberg 22, 33 50 40 30 30 Rechentin 10, 11 53 00 29 00 Rechyetzhoven 39, 45 48 40 25 30 Rechlin 07 53 15 29 50 Reehsin 08 54 50 35 00 Rechtbe 05 53 20 25 00 Rechte 23 51 15 31 40 Rechteren 38 52 20 22 20 Rechwag 39, 40, 41 48 35 24 30 Reck 37 49 40 25 50 Reckendorf 35 50 00 27 40 Reckin 14 52 10 29 10 Recklinchusen 01 51 30 23 30 Reckling 15, 16 52 40 26 00 Recklitz 25, 29 51 10 33 00 Reckum 05 53 15 25 10 Recow 08 53 50 32 00 Recsenstew 16, 19 51 25 27 10 Recz 01 48 40 33 00 Redchow 08 54 30 34 00 Reddelin 09 54 40 31 20 Reddelke 07 54 05 29 00 Reddevischouer 09 54 20 31 30 Reddevise 09 54 20 31 40 Reddgow 10, 11 52 30 27 20 Reddow 08 53 40 33 00 Redeber 18 51 35 27 30 Redeburg 22 51 10 30 40 Redel 10, 12 51 50 29 50 Redelzum 38 49 40 24 40 Reden 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Redentin 07 53 50 28 30 Redeper 16 51 55 27 50 Reder 16, 20, 22 51 45 28 00 Rederauck 07 54 00 29 00 Rederburg 14 51 35 28 30 Redern 40, 42 48 45 24 30 Redersdorff 10, 12 52 10 31 10 Rederwald 21, 22 0 55 30 00 Redevin 07 53 20 28 10 Redewicz 19, 20 51 45 28 40 Redewisch 2, 10 54 10 28 00 Redichen 22 51 20 29 30 Redigstorp 07 64 05 29 50 Redkaw 26 51 35 33 00 Redlin 2, 7 53 15 29 10 Redlingen 38 49 40 22 20 Redlitz 29 51 25 33 25 Rednitz fl. 34 49 00 27 50 Redwinckel 19 51 20 28 20 Redwisch 2, 7 54 00 27 00 Reeberg 07 53 20 30 40 Reendorf 22 51 00 29 50 Reens 39 45 10 23 40 Reern 16 52 00 26 00 Rees 1, 38 51 40 22 30 Reesen 14 52 00 29 00 Reetz 07 54 00 29 20 Reeweiler 39 49 20 23 50 Refenitz fl. 24, 25 51 00 32 00 Referstorf 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Rega fl. 08 53 50 33 00   10, 13 53 40 32 50 Regale 01 46 00 29 50 Regen 1, 22 48 50 30 10 Regen fl. 33 48 50 30 10   34 49 00 29 10 Regensperg 34 49 40 28 00 Regenspurg 1, 34 48 50 29 00 Regenstauf 34 49 00 29 10 Regenstein Com. 15 51 50 27 40 Regentorf 42 48 35 24 10 Regenwolde 1, 8 53 40 33 00 Regetz 18 52 10 28 50 Regis 1, 22 51 00 29 20 Regnitz 27, 28 51 20 33 35 Regsdorff 10, 12 51 40 30 00 Rehan 21 51 15 29 50 Rehbergh 07 53 35 29 40 Rehdorf 34 48 50 28 00 Rehel 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Rehem 34 49 40 25 10 Rehfelt 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 10 Rhenberg 19 50 55 27 30 Rehstet 19 50 55 27 40 Rehusen 15 52 20 29 40 Reibiadl 26 52 25 32 30 Reibnitz 25 50 50 32 20 Reichardtshaus 37 49 35 26 00 Reichaw 33 48 40 31 10 Reichberg 34 48 50 26 10 Reichebach 22 50 50 29 00 Reicheforst 31 50 30 33 20 Reichelsdorff 34 49 10 27 50 Reichelsheim 34, 37 49 40 26 00 Reichelschwang 34 49 20 28 20 Reichen 39, 45 49 00 25 00 Reichen 27, 29 51 20 33 15 Reichenaw 26, 27 51 45 33 20 Reichenbac 24 51 10 31 30 Reichenbach 10, 13 53 00 32 30 Reichenbag 01 53 10 32 50 Eichenbeig 2, 33 50 40 32 00 Reichenberg 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 10 Reibhenbergen 45 48 45 26 00 Reichenfeld 13 52 20 31 00 Reichenhausen 36 50 30 26 50 Reichenow 2, 33 50 00 33 10 Reichenstein 41, 43 48 00 23 45 Reichenthal 40 48 35 24 50 Reichenwald 10, 13 52 00 32 20 Reichenwihr 41, 43 48 00 23 45 Reichpotnbach 01 47 50 33 10 Reichshoven 40 48 05 24 10 Reithstein 30, 31 50 25 33 50 Reichstet 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Reichtal 24 52 10 34 30 Reichwalda 03 51 25 31 20 Reichwile 41, 43 47 40 23 40 Reide 38 53 00 30 22 Reider 18 51 25 27 50 Reidichen 28 51 20 33 35 Reidlevitz 09 54 50 31 10 Reidri 22 51 00 29 00 Reienmuhl 28 51 15 33 50 Reifenberg 16, 18 51 50 27 20 Reifeadorff 23 51 40 32 10 Reiffelt 41 48 10 23 50 Reifenbenberg 16, 18 51 50 27 20 Reifendorff 23 51 40 32 10 Reiffestein 16, 19 51 20 27 30 Reigel 41, 43 48 00 24 15 Reigenbach 01 48 20 24 50 Reigental 01 47 30 30 10 Reighenberg 01 50 40 32 00 Reigersberg 01 48 00 30 20 Reigersdorff 30, 31 50 15 33 50 Reigershagen 07 53 45 29 20 Reigl 38 48 00 24 00 Reigtal 01 51 00 35 00 Reigten 21 50 50 29 00 Reihoffen 41 48 45 24 10 Reiman 30 50 35 34 20 Reimbullen 39 49 50 23 50 Reimnitz 28 51 05 34 00 Reimscorff 30 50 30 34 20 Reimsweiler 39 49 10 23 40 Rein fl. 02 52 40 29 10 Reinake 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Reinartz 21 51 10 29 30 Reinaw 40 48 40 24 40 Reinbach 19, 38 50 20 23 00 Reinbecke 2, 3 53 50 26 50 Reinber 8 53 30 30 00 Reinberg 7, 9 53 40 30 20 Reinblat 34 49 50 28 50 Reindorff 33 49 00 30 00 Reine 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Reineberg 8, 10 54 20 30 00 Reineck 34, 38 50 10 26 30 Reineckenb 08 54 20 30 00 Reinefeld 08 54 20 34 30 Reinckend 08 53 30 31 30 Reinerbeke 16, 17 51 55 26 00 Reinereda 16 51 30 28 00 Reinershoff 37 49 40 26 00 Reinertz 31, 33 50 15 33 10 Reinetz 01 50 10 33 10 Reinfelde 1, 40 47 30 24 20 Reingravenstein 39 49 30 24 00 Reinhartzbrun 19, 36 50 50 27 20 Reinhartzwald 16 51 25 26 30 Reinhausen 38 49 00 24 40 Reinholtz 19 51 35 28 30 Reinikend 08 53 10 31 30 Reinicksdorf 10, 12 52 10 30 40 Reinl fl. 16 51 35 27 00 Reinow 40 48 10 24 10 Reinsa 22 51 00 29 30 Reinsbach 41, 43 48 20 23 40 Reinsberg 19 50 45 27 40 Reinsdorf 19, 20 51 20 28 30 Reinsfeld 19 50 45 27 40 Reinsted 14, 16 51 25 28 10 Reinstein 1, 16, 20 51 50 27 50 Reiptzig 24, 25 52 10 31 30 Reische 32 48 50 32 50 Reisern 19 51 20 27 10 Reisfelt 42 48 10 23 50 Reishoffen 39, 42 48 40 24 10 Reissen 22 51 00 29 00 Reistersdorff 22 51 10 29 30 Reistenhausen 37 49 40 25 55 Reistorf 41, 42 48 55 24 25 Reiten 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Reitenbach 41 48 20 24 25 Reitenberg 42, 44 48 20 24 30 Reitenfelt 22 51 20 29 20 Reitencart 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 20 Reitenhoff 42 48 40 24 15 Reiterhoff 41 48 40 24 25 Reitfeltz 41, 42 48 50 24 25 Reitling 45 48 15 25 50 Reitlingen 40 47 40 24 05 Reitten 41, 43 47 55 24 20 Reitzenhan 22 50 30 30 00 Reiwen 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 50 Rekelinkhusen 38 51 20 23 20 Reken 38 52 20 23 40 Rekenitz 07 53 40 30 20 Rekentin 10, 13 53 10 28 20 Rekentzin 10, 11 53 00 28 10 Releffen 16 52 05 26 30 Relewitz 02 51 30 30 10 Relingshan 22 50 50 29 50 Rell 41, 42, 43, 44 48 25 24 15 Rellihusen 16, 17 51 50 26 40 Rellinghusen 17 51 45 26 20 Reltzin 8 53 20 31 30 Remagen 38 50 20 23 20 Remba 19 50 45 28 10 Rembingen 39, 45 48 40 25 00 Remblingen 37 49 45 26 10 Remchingen 40 48 50 25 00 Remels 05 53 10 24 00 Rememont 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 30 Remig 41, 42 48 50 24 25 Remiremont 01 48 00 22 50 Remis 41 48 10 23 10 Remling 16 52 05 27 30 Remlingen 18 51 45 27 20
Remmecke 16 52 00 27 30 Remmelfingen 39 49 00 23 30 Remelin 07 53 46 29 20 Remmseck 45 48 40 25 50 Remmstal 46 48 35 26 00 Remocourt 41 48 30 23 10 Remomer 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 25 Remond 38 46 20 23 00 Rempershausen 36 50 25 27 10 Rems 39, 45 48 40 25 50 Remsa 22 50 40 29 30 Remseck 39 48 40 25 50 Remstet 19 51 00 27 20 Remus 01 46 20 27 10 Remy 38 50 00 21 40 Remysmont 38 48 00 22 00 Renchen 41, 42, 45 48 25 24 25 Renchenlioh 41, 42 48 25 24 25 Rencher 40 48 25 24 30 Rendel 35, 39 50 01 25 10 Rendorf 22 51 00 29 10 Rene 01 46 40 22 00 Renen 1, 4 54 00 28 00 Renersdorff 30 50 30 34 30 Renewindorff 36 50 00 27 40 Rengen 19 51 05 26 40 Rengersdorff 23, 25 51 20 31 50 Rengnitz 25, 29 51 20 33 20 Rengrik 38 52 00 24 00 Reningen 41, 43 47 35 23 40 Rennersdorff 23 51 05 31 40 Renning 45 48 35 25 30 Rensborgh 01 54 40 26 10 Rensdorf 19, 20 51 30 28 10 Rensewitz 30 50 30 34 10 Renshause 36 50 55 26 40 Rensow 07 53 55 29 40 Rentschen 26 52 15 32 20 Renrhen 43 48 25 24 25 Renti 01 50 40 18 00 Rentin 41, 42 48 3 23 50 Rents 09 54 40 31 00 Rentwinsdorff 34 50 00 27 30 Reniz 8, 9 54 20 30 30 Rentzel 05 53 45 26 20 Rentzen 40 47 45 24 10 Rentzin 1, 8 54 00 31 10 Rentzow 07 53 35 28 00 Repenbach 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 25 Reperen 38, 39 49 40 23 40 Repke 14, 21 51 25 29 00 Repken 16 52 10 27 40 Reppeli 8, 10, 13 53 20 32 30 Reppelin 07 54 05 29 30 Reppen 10, 13, 25 52 10 32 20 Reppersdorf 22 51 00 30 00 Reps 22 50 40 28 50 Repsholt 05 53 25 24 10 Requier 01 50 10 17 50 Rerfgehaus 34 50 20 26 30 Rerke fl. 34, 36 50 20 27 30 Rershause 19 50 55 26 30 Revins 01 49 50 20 10 Rerung 16 51 30 27 00 Remso 22 50 50 29 30 Resde 22 51 00 29 10 Rese 7, 10 53 25 30 20 Resen 21 51 20 29 20 Resenitz fl. 23 51 05 32 10 Reskowitz 33 49 10 33 20 Resse 09 54 45 31 10 Ressen 22 50 30 29 10 Restling 16 52 25 27 40 Reste 38 51 00 24 20 Restenberg 43 48 20 24 25 Resteritz 22 51 00 29 00 Restling 14, 16 52 15 28 10 Restorp 02 54 20 26 30 Retbach 19 50 55 27 40 Retberg 01 51 40 24 50 Rete Bruech 16 51 45 27 20 Retelissa 09 54 40 30 50 Retem 17 52 30 26 30 Retenbach 34 49 10 28 00 Retern 19, 20 51 40 28 40 Retersh 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Retert 39 50 10 24 10 Retha 27 51 35 33 05 Rethbrock 03 53 50 26 50 Rethe 01 53 00 26 00 Rethem 4, 16 53 00 26 00 Rethi 01 51 10 21 00 Rethmon 17 52 30 25 50 Rethmor 16 52 15 26 50 Retisboda 38 46 00 24 40 Retka 29 51 35 33 10 Retlach 41, 43 47 25 23 45 Retling 01 48 10 25 40 Retmans 16 51 25 27 00 Retmanshausen 19 51 35 26 40 Retmar 06 52 05 26 40 Retsbach 41, 42 48 20 23 45 Retschberg 22 51 00 30 30 Retschkaw 25, 26 52 00 33 20 Retschwiller 41, 42 48 45 24 20 Rettersheim 37 49 45 26 05 Retterspach 37 49 50 26 00 Rettlingen 10, 11 52 30 27 50 Retwil 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Retz 10, 12 51 50 29 50 Retzbach 34 49 50 26 30 Retzel 14 52 05 29 10 Retzkow 2, 7 53 15 29 20 Retzlingen 10, 11 52 00 28 00 Retznow 07 53 55 30 20 Retzow 1, 7 53 20 30 00 Retzuns 01 46 10 26 10 Retzwil 41, 43 47 30 23 35 Reubersreut 22 50 20 29 10 Reudenitz 23 51 10 31 50 Reudichen 27 51 25 33 35 Revecol Mons 08 55 00 34 30 Reven 02 53 50 27 40 Revenow 08 53 10 32 30 Reultern 21 51 05 28 50 Reuneck 34, 36 50 00 27 30 Reurit 36 50 25 27 30 Reurlt 34 50 30 27 30 Reusendorf 30 50 30 34 10 Reusenperg 34 50 00 26 40 Reust 22 50 40 29 10 Reuthe 26 51 40 32 40 Reutte 45 48 10 26 50 Rewesen 22 51 20 29 10 Rexheim 41, 43 47 45 23 50 Rex 10, 11 52 20 28 40 Rey 01 47 20 21 50 Reychenbach 45 48 30 26 10 Reychensapen 19 51 10 26 30 Reydt 38, 45 48 20 25 00 Reyfelt 10, 12 52 20 31 20 Reygerstieg 03 53 50 26 30 Reygerstigesland 2, 3, 6 53 50 26 50 Reyhrat 33 49 00 33 20 Reynbeck 1, 2, 4, 6 53 50 26 50 Reynefeld 2, 4 54 00 27 20 Reynertz 24 50 20 33 00 Reyneshayn 26 51 45 32 20 Reyngheinheim 39 49 10 24 50 Reynahusen 16, 19 51 25 27 00 Reynsbuttel 02 54 50 25 40 Reyoes 14 51 55 29 10 Reyt 45 48 20 25 20 Reysaw 28 50 50 34 10 Reyschoten 41 48 35 23 15 Reysicht 29 51 20 32 55 Reyssen 26, 27 51 50 33 30 Reystn 45 48 20 25 30 Rezecskowicz 01 49 00 33 20 Rha 02 54 10 26 10 Rhamsse 03 53 55 25 50 Rhasswiler 39 40 30 24 00 Rhaum 19 51 45 26 40 Rheberg 15 52 40 25 40 Rheburgk 1, 16 52 40 25 50 Rheda 01 51 50 24 40 Rhehutten 39 49 10 24 50 Rheid 38 51 00 22 00 Rheide 01 53 10 23 20 Rhein 39, 45 49 10 25 00 Rheinach 41, 43 47 25 24 00 Rheinfeld 41, 43 47 50 24 00 Rheinfelden 40 47 30 24 15 Rheinhausen 40, 45 49 00 24 55 Rheinow 01 47 20 25 00 Rheinwol 40 47 40 24 00 Rheinzabern 39, 40 48 50 24 40 Rhemen 38 51 40 22 40 Rhen 38 52 20 23 40 Rhene 01 52 20 23 50 Rhenen 38 52 00 21 20 Rher 17 52 05 25 50 Rhetel 01 49 20 20 30 Rhetum 15 53 00 26 00 Rhid 38 51 40 24 20 Rhien 41, 43 47 30 24 05 Rhinaw 41, 43, 44 48 10 24 10 Rhinek 38 47 00 26 00 Rhingaw 39 49 50 24 10 Rhinturckheim 39 49 30 24 50 Rhinwiller 41, 43 47 35 24 05 Rhodanus fl. 38 45 20 22 00 Rhor 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 20 Rhorbach 42 48 55 24 35 Rhuleben 15 52 00 28 00 Rhum fl. 15 51 40 26 20 Rhumspring 15 51 30 27 00 Rhynow 01 49 10 32 10 Riba 22 50 50 29 30 Ribearts 08 53 50 32 30 Ribemont 01 49 40 19 30 Ribenbatz 22 51 20 29 50 Ribesdorff 14, 18 52 05 28 00 Riberlhe 4, 6 53 00 27 00 Riberbitel 16 52 25 27 10 Ribigen 43 47 25 23 30 Ribnick 01 45 30 33 30 Ribnitz 8, 10 54 10 29 00 Ribow 11, 14 52 40 28 20 Richbach 34 49 10 26 30 Richelbach 37 49 35 26 00 Richelsh 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 05 Richemburg 32 49 40 32 50 Richemont 38 49 00 22 20 Richen 10, 12 52 00 29 40 Richenaw 31 50 30 33 50 Richenbac 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 25 Richenstein 41, 42 47 25 24 00 Rich 44 48 15 24 25 Richlen 40, 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 25 Richnow 1, 11 52 50 29 40 Richo 01 49 00 35 40 Richtberg 07 53 40 28 40 Richtenberg 8, 10 54 10 30 00 Richtmersleben 14 51 50 24 30 Rickelhuse 05 53 30 24 10 Rickenhuss 03 53 45 26 30 Rickers 33 50 20 33 20 Rickmansdorff 14, 16 52 20 28 50 Ricrers 41, 42 48 35 24 00 Ricspach 44 48 30 24 25 Riczkenrode 19, 20 51 45 28 10 Rid 34 50 30 26 20 Ridagesburg 19, 20 51 45 28 10 Ridberg 38 51 40 24 40 Ridderhude 05 53 15 25 10 Ridderingen 41, 42 48 55 23 50 Riddermanshagen 7, 10 53 35 30 00 Ridderscop 05 53 35 25 50 Rideberck 34, 36 50 20 26 30 Rideburg 21 51 05 29 00 Ridern 37 49 35 26 00 Ridernbruch 35 50 00 25 05 Ridling 01 47 10 34 20 Ridt 19 51 20 26 30 Ridtagshusen 16 52 15 27 20 Ridthoff 35 49 55 25 00 Ridtzbuttelerwadt 05 53 55 25 10 Riebenick 24 50 00 35 30 Riechbach fl. 19 50 25 27 40 Riechberg 19 50 25 27 40 Riechen 40 47 30 24 10 Riechheim 19 51 55 28 00 Ried 33 48 20 31 40 Riedeck 33 48 20 31 40 Rieden 1, 34 49 10 28 50 Riedesh 41, 43 47 40 23 50 Riedling 38, 45 48 00 26 00 Riedschutz 25, 26 52 20 32 20 Riedt 38 46 20 24 20 Riedwir 40 47 55 24 00 Riegel 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 35 Riegersdorf 26 52 15 32 20 Riegerswiler 39, 42 48 50 24 00 Rieldingen 01 48 00 26 10 Rielmanshausen 19 51 05 26 40 Riemberg 28 51 20 33 55 Riems 01 49 10 20 00 Rien fl. 15 52 50 29 40 Rieppuille 38 45 40 22 40 Riesea 02 51 10 29 30 Riesewalta 23 51 15 32 00 Riesia 22 51 20 30 10 Riespach 41, 42 48 35 24 30 Riessen 26 52 15 32 20 Riestet 19 51 40 28 10 Riestungen 19 51 20 26 40 Riet 19, 20 51 20 27 40 Rietbach 40 47 35 24 20 Rietenaw 34, 45 48 50 26 00 Rieteburg 16, 19 51 25 28 20 Rietn 45 47 45 25 20 Rietnorhausen 16, 10 51 30 28 10 Rietwalt 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 15 Rietzell 45 48 15 24 20 Rieviere 03 45 50 25 10 Riexing 38, 39 48 40 25 20 Rifer 41, 43 47 30 23 30 Rigel 22, 23, 25, 29 51 20 31 20 Rigelem 16 52 00 27 00 Rigelsreut 34 49 50 28 50 Rigerswil 41 48 50 23 55 Rigling 34 48 50 29 00 Riglitz 30 50 30 34 20 Rigntor 41 48 35 24 00 Rihnow 10, 12, 14 52 30 29 20 Rilling 04 54 00 26 20 Rilmont 41 47 25 23 15 Rilttzen 38, 39 48 40 24 40 Riltzer 40 48 53 24 45 Rimberg 29 51 10 33 00 Rimersheid 30 50 30 34 30 Rimesch 8, 9 54 20 30 30 Riming 41, 43 47 30 24 05 Rimitz 32 49 20 34 30 Rimlen 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 00 Rimmelin 39 49 00 23 40 Rimsingen 41, 43 47 50 24 05 Rin 41 47 20 23 05 Rinaw 38, 42 48 00 24 00 Rinckleben 15, 19 51 10 27 40 Rinderfeld 34, 37 49 30 26 20 Rindtbrucken 35 49 55 25 10 Rindten 40 48 50 24 50 Rine 21 51 00 29 10 Rineck 37 49 55 26 00 Rineereda 19 51 40 27 50 Rinfelden 41, 43 47 25 24 10 Ringelbach 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 30 Ringelburg 38 51 40 22 40 Ringelderode 19 51 25 26 40 Ringelderoe 16 51 20 27 10 Ringelem 17 52 10 27 10 Ringelheim 15 52 10 27 00 Ringelstein 41, 42 48 25 23 50 Ringelum 04 52 00 27 00 Ringenach 33 48 40 30 20 Ringenborg 01 51 40 22 50 Ringlaw 04 52 40 27 20 Ringelben 19 51 05 27 50 Ringntorf 42 48 35 24 05 Ringstede 05 53 35 25 20 Rinheim 40 48 05 24 20
Rinot 20 51 30 28 30 Rat 41 48 30 24 30 Rine fl. 19 50 40 28 00 Rinnerscorf 26, 27, 29 51 30 33 10 Rinsberg 10, 12 52 50 29 50 Riasheim 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 15 Rinshurft 42, 44 48 30 24 30 Rinshusen 17 51 30 26 50 Rinpach 41, 43 47 35 23 25 Rintelen 1, 4, 6, 17 52 10 25 40 Rintzel 41, 43 47 45 23 40 Rintzig fl. 44 48 20 24 5 Riom 01 45 30 18 50 Ripa 41, 43 47 30 23 25 Ripach 22 51 10 29 00 Ripeltgaw 40 48 10 24 40 Ripenborch 03 53 45 27 00 Ripence 41, 42, 43, 44 48 10 24 20 Ripersdorf 34 50 30 28 30 Riperswil 41, 42 48 45 24 00 Ripke 07 53 20 30 30 Ripas 10, 12 52 00 31 20 Rippers 19 50 45 27 40 Rippersdorf 29 51 10 33 10 Ripershausen 36 50 35 27 10 Rirtzel 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 15 Risch 38 46 40 24 40 Riscow 10, 13 53 00 31 50 Riscorff 21 51 15 29 30 Risenberg 24 509 10 32 30 Risentz 2, 7 53 15 27 50 Risk 14 51 25 29 30 Rismberg 2, 33 50 10 32 50 Rispa 41, 43 47 30 23 30 Rissen 25 52 10 32 20 Rist 21 51 20 29 30 Risten 05 53 30 26 20 Ristet 15, 20 51 30 28 20 Ristorp 2, 15 51 40 29 20 Ristow 08 54 30 34 00 Rite 08 53 40 31 30 Riteburg 20 51 25 28 20 Riteisbach 41, 42 48 20 23 50 Ritenhof 40 47 35 24 10 Ritersburg 42, 43 48 20 24 20 Ritgen 15, 20 51 10 28 00 Ritnorthausen 20 51 30 28 10 Ritscherhave 03 53 45 25 20 Rittburg 39, 45 48 40 24 50 Rttelsdorff 34, 36 50 00 27 40 Ritter 40 47 35 24 10 Ritters 02 54 30 26 20 Rittersbach 34 49 10 27 50 Rittersburg 40, 44 48 20 24 20 Rittersdorff 19 50 55 28 00 Rittershagen 16 51 20 27 40 Rittershoven 40 48 40 24 25 Rittershusen 6, 18 52 05 27 00 Rittmensdor 22 51 20 29 10 Rittsche 03 53 45 25 20 Ritwil 41, 43 48 30 23 55 Ritzeltz 40 48 50 24 30 Ritzenbuttel 2, 4 54 30 25 30 Ritzenbutler 03 53 45 24 30 Ritzenbutlerhave 03 53 45 24 30 Ritzenhagen 08 54 30 34 00 Ritzerlin 10, 13 53 10 32 10 Ritzerow 02 53 40 27 30 Ritzleben 6, 10 52 40 28 00 Ritznow 07 54 00 29 40 Riva 01 45 30 27 40 Rivelskirch 39 49 30 24 05 Riven 10 52 10 29 50 Rivo 38 46 40 25 40 Riwen 12 52 10 29 50 Rixdorp 10, 12 52 10 30 40 Rixen 41, 43 47 40 23 50 Roan 41 48 15 23 15 Roanne 01 45 40 19 50 Robatetz 32 48 50 34 30 Robecourt 38 47 40 21 40 Robel 7, 10, 11 53 15 29 50 Robelow 07 53 45 30 50 Robersdorff 10, 12 53 10 30 50 Robert 01 48 30 18 30 Robozetz 33 50 30 32 10 Roche 1, 38, 41 50 00 20 40 Rochefort 01 45 20 18 30 Rochejoan 38 46 20 22 20 Rochem 38 48 20 24 20 Rochenberg 09 54 45 31 20 Rochette 01 49 50 22 30 Rochlitz 2, 22 51 00 29 50 Rochow 04 53 00 29 00 Rockenburg 45 48 10 27 00 Rockendorff 15, 19, 20 51 30 29 00 Rockenhuasen 1, 39 49 20 24 10 Rockensuck 19 51 00 26 30 Rockhausen 19 50 55 27 50 Rockizan 33 49 40 30 30 Rocklem 16 52 05 27 30 Rocksforde 16 52 25 28 10 Rocksheim 38, 39 49 20 24 40 Rocroy 01 49 50 20 30 Rod 45 48 15 25 00 Roda 1, 19, 22, 40 50 50 28 40 Rodan 11, 14, 16, 17 52 35 29 30 Rodau 22 50 20 29 00 Rodawen 38, 39 49 00 23 40 Rodby 01 55 00 28 40 Roddachshausen 15 52 30 27 20 Roddelin 10, 12 52 50 30 30 Rode 4, 16, 17 52 20 26 40 Rodeck 40, 42, 44 48 25 24 35 Rodekrog 11, 14 52 25 28 20 Rodeb 14 51 30 29 10 Rodeizum 39 49 40 24 40 Rodemarrel 03 53 55 24 50 Rode merier 03 53 50 24 30 Rode mahl 27, 29 51 25 33 15 Roden 16, 17 52 10 26 30 Rodenacker 22 50 20 29 00 Rodenbach 34, 38 50 00 25 30 Rodenberg 39, 45 49 00 25 10 Rodenberg 6, 15 52 50 26 00 Rodenberg 16 52 10 27 20 Rodenfelt 21 50 55 29 10 Rodenhagen 07 53 40 30 40 Rodenkercken 05 53 25 24 50 Rodensted 4, 16, 17 52 20 27 00 Rodenthal 19 50 30 28 20 Rodern 39, 41, 42 48 40 24 30 Rodersnusen 16 51 35 27 10 Rodersleben 19 50 50 27 40 Roderstorf 41, 43 47 20 23 50 Rode Sandt 05 53 50 24 10 Rodesheim 39 49 50 24 00 Rodeuvel 20 51 45 28 30 Rodewagk 10, 12 52 20 29 40 Rodewarde 16 51 30 27 20 Rodewische 07 53 30 29 20 Rodewitz 23 51 10 31 20 Rodhost Mons 32 49 30 35 10 Rodichen 19, 20 51 40 28 20 Rodgersdorff 16, 19 51 35 27 50 Rodlin 07 53 15 30 30 Rodlitz 27 51 25 33 20 Rodorf 15 51 40 27 00 Rossow 33 50 30 31 00 Rodrstet 19 51 10 27 50 Rodshagen 16, 19 51 35 28 00 Rodt 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 30 Rodwald 15 52 40 25 40 Roeder Marck 35 49 55 25 10 Roef 10, 12 53 10 30 20 Roefhuesen 05 53 30 24 30 Roefkamer 2, 3 53 20 26 40 Roeles 01 50 30 20 10 Roelicz 19, 20 51 20 28 40 Roeling 38 49 20 22 40 Roen fl. 34, 36 50 20 26 50 Roepershoven 39 50 00 24 00 Roer fl. 38 51 00 23 00 Roerbach 44 48 25 24 10 Roerborg 07 53 40 30 20 Roerfurt 2, 15 52 00 28 00 Roermond 1, 38 51 10 22 10 Roeroot 38 51 20 22 40 Roersdorff 25, 26 51 50 33 00 Roersen 4, 16 52 00 27 40 Roersleben 14 51 35 28 00 Roesdorp 16 51 55 28 00 Roeting 1, 22, 34 50 10 28 10 Roetz 10, 12 52 00 30 50 Rogatziewo 25, 26 52 10 33 20 Rogaw 30 50 35 34 10 Roge 10, 12 51 50 31 00 Rogels 07 53 30 27 50 Rogentorf 41 48 35 24 05 Rogetz 10, 11 52 00 28 50 Rogeglin 07 53 40 27 50 Roggendorf 07 53 35 28 00 Roggenstorp 07 53 50 28 00 Roggentin 07 53 15 30 00 Roggow 10, 13 53 20 32 10 Rogiers 38 50 20 20 40 Rogoreto 01 45 40 25 20 Rogose 14, 21 51 55 29 40 Rogosno 01 52 30 34 40 Rogoso 10, 12 51 50 29 40 Rogsen 25, 26 52 20 32 20 Roherbach 39 49 10 25 10 Rohne 23 51 30 30 50 Rohnstock 25 51 00 33 00 Rohozetz 02 50 30 31 00 Rohr 36 50 30 27 20 Rohrburg 40 48 20 24 20 Rohrwiesaw 26 51 50 32 20 Rohozbten 26 52 10 33 30 Roicbio 38 47 20 25 20 Rodie fl. 15 51 50 26 40 Roidin 08 53 50 30 30 Roin 25 51 10 33 20 Rointzen 26, 27 51 50 33 30 Roitz 33 50 30 30 40 Rokel 15, 18 52 10 27 20 Rokisan 01 49 40 30 30 Rokitnitz 31, 32 49 55 33 20 Rolanscheheyde 2, 15 52 50 28 00 Roland 2, 15 52 50 28 10 Rolangesd. 33 50 00 30 00 Rolde 4, 38 52 20 24 20 Rolduc 01 50 50 22 20 Rolelsh 41, 42 48 30 24 10 Rolfeshausen 19 51 40 26 40 Rollbach 37 49 40 25 50 Rolle 38 45 40 22 40 Rolleberg 29 51 30 33 05 Rollsdorf 10, 12 51 40 30 30 Rollsleben 16, 19 51 25 27 40 Roltenburg 01 49 20 27 00 Romano 01 45 30 27 30 Romberg 28 51 05 33 55 Rome 2, 10, 11 53 20 28 32 Romenaw 28 52 05 23 55 Romers 34 50 22 26 10 Romersberg 39 49 30 23 30 Romerfratt 01 49 50 33 50 Romerow 24, 32 49 50 34 00 Romhilt 1, 34, 36 50 20 27 20 Romich 40 48 50 24 32 Romis 31 50 20 33 10 Rommelngen 39, 41 48 40 23 30 Rommeisberg 18 51 30 26 50 Romeitz 29 51 10 33 25 Romeheim 35 50 00 25 10 Romictitz 22 50 50 29 20 Romster 19 51 00 28 20 Romsweier 42, 44 48 20 24 30 Romswiler 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Rona 31 50 30 32 50 Ronckendorp 0 53 55 27 50 Ronhoff 36 50 35 26 50 Romenberg 16 52 10 26 30 Romenberg 23, 24 51 05 31 30 Ronoff 2, 33 49 50 32 20 Ronow 22, 23 50 40 31 20 Ronsin 0 53 15 28 00 Ronsperg 33 49 20 30 00 Ronstet 19, 20 51 20 28 50 Root 16 51 55 27 00 Roota 22 51 10 29 20 Ropenum 41, 42 48 40 24 30 Roppenheim 40 48 35 24 30 Roppich 15 51 10 29 00 Ror 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 05 Roraw 28 51 00 34 25 Roba fl. 41 48 30 24 00 Rorb 41, 44 48 20 24 25 Robach 19, 200 51 35 28 10 Rorbachshoff 35 49 55 25 05 Robeck 10, 12 52 10 30 10 Robeeck 21 51 10 29 00 Robeerg 10, 11 52 30 27 50 Robom 198 51 10 28 00 Robrun 34 49 50 25 50 Rorburg 41, 43 48 20 24 15 Rorck 41, 42, 43, 44 48 25 24 2 Rordan 10, 12 52 20 29 30 Rordof 1, 38, 45 48 20 25 10 Rorensee 19 50 50 27 30 Rorfurt 14 51 30 28 30 Rogast 15, 21 51 15 29 00 Rorhoff 33 48 40 33 10 Rorich 16, 19 51 15 27 00 Rorlak 10, 12 52 40 29 30 Rornich 39 50 00 23 40 Rornpach 33 48 30 30 50 Rorr 41, 42 48 50 23 55 Rorsdorf 18 51 35 28 00 Rofswihr 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 50 Rosa 30 50 40 27 00 Rosbach 19, 20 51 20 28 50 Rossbake 03 53 45 24 20 Rosbakertonne 03 53 50 24 20 Rosbrucken 39 49 10 23 20 Roschach 38 47 00 26 00 Roschdialowitz 2, 33 50 10 32 00 Roschhof 14 52 35 29 00 Roschwicz 20 51 55 28 40 Roschwitz 22, 31 50 30 28 20 Rose 21 51 05 29 20 Roseckh. 45 48 20 25 40 Rosefelde 08 53 40 33 00 Rosemhaim 01 47 40 29 10 Rosen 29 51 15 33 15 Rosenaw 07 53 35 28 10 Rosenbach 31 50 35 33 40 Rosenberg 2, 15 52 00 28 20 Rosenburk 38, 39 49 20 26 00 Rosendal 17, 38 52 30 27 00 Rosenfeid 45 48 00 25 20 Rosenfels 08 53 00 32 30 Rosengard 09 54 20 31 10 Rosenhgen 2, 7 54 00 29 00 Rosenha 23 51 15 31 40 Rosenig 29 51 15 33 20 Rosenkrantz 30, 31 50 20 33 50 Roseemul 37 49 40 26 00 Rosenstain 45 48 40 26 40 Rosenthal 26, 29 51 50 32 50 Rosenwiler 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 55 Rosethal 23 51 05 31 50 Rosfeldt 40, 42, 43 48 10 24 05 Rosheim 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 55 Rosiahn 14 51 50 29 10 Rosinkow 32 49 00 35 00 Rositz 32 49 00 33 40 Roskin 10, 13 52 40 31 50 Roskonitz 33 49 30 34 00 Rosla 15, 16, 20 51 30 28 00 Roslasin 08 54 50 35 30 Rosleben 2, 15 52 00 29 00 Rosnay 01 48 10 20 30 Rosow 08 53 10 31 30 Rosowitz 33 49 30 31 10 Rosoy 01 48 30 18 50 Rosperwende 20 51 30 27 50 Rosr 36 50 30 27 20 Rosriet 36 50 25 27 10 Ross 03 53 50 26 20 Rossaw 10, 11 52 30 28 20 Rossburg 22 50 50 29 40
Rosschop 10, 11 52 30 28 50 Rossdaw 21 51 30 29 20 Rossdorff 30 50 40 34 30 Rossenberg 41, 43 47 30 23 25 Rossing 16, 17 52 05 26 40 Rosslaw 14 51 35 29 20 Rossow 10, 12 52 50 29 40 Rossumberg 2, 33 49 50 32 50 Rosta 15 51 00 28 20 Rostal 34 49 10 27 40 Rostal Vorwerg 28 50 55 33 55 Rostani 32 49 10 34 00 Rostbach 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 40 Rostefelde 19 51 25 26 30 Rosteletz 01 49 50 33 00 Rostenberg 16, 19 51 20 27 00 Rostendorf 26 51 35 33 10 Rostersdorff 27 51 40 33 15 Rostock 7, 10 54 05 29 20 Rostorf 34, 36 50 40 26 50 Roswitz 28 50 50 34 05 Rosytz 33 49 10 33 10 Rot 45 48 05 27 00 Rota 19, 20 51 45 28 00 Rotach 34, 36 50 20 27 40 Rotang 43 48 20 23 40 Rotaugesd. 02 50 00 30 10 Rotbach 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Rotberg 31 50 15 33 30 Rote fl. 19 50 55 27 30 Rotebergh 19, 20 51 45 28 20 Roteborn 20 51 25 28 30 Rotehaus 14, 21 51 20 29 20 Rotehuss 03 53 50 27 00 Rotelsheim 44 48 30 24 10 Rotenackhar 45 48 00 26 20 Rotenbach 19, 22 50 40 28 00 Rotenberg 34 49 30 28 10 Rotenbuch 34, 37 49 50 26 00 Rotenburg 24, 25 51 20 32 00 Rotendorf 34 49 40 26 40 Rotenfels 1, 34, 40 49 50 26 10 Rotenfere 18 51 30 28 30 Rotenhan 21, 22 50 50 29 20 Rotenhau 1, 33 50 20 30 10 Rotenkappen 16 52 20 27 40 Rotenkirch 16 51 40 26 40 Rotenmunster 38, 45 47 40 25 00 Rotenschirmbach 20 51 30 28 30 Rotensen 14, 18 51 35 28 30 Rotensleben 14 51 45 28 30 Rotensoll 40 48 40 24 55 Rotenstein 19 50 55 28 20 Rotenthurn 01 47 20 35 00 Roterstorf 41, 43 47 20 23 45 Roteseuffer fl. 19 50 25 27 40 Roth 40 48 20 24 50 Roth fl. 45 49 00 26 20 Rothe fl. 22 50 50 28 30 Rothaus 40 47 30 24 05 Rothuss 41, 43 47 25 24 05 Roth Sithen 28 51 00 34 10 Roth Wasser 23, 25 51 20 32 10 Rotingen 01 49 00 29 30   1, 34 49 20 26 40 Rotionberg 40 47 35 24 20 Rotkirch 29 51 15 33 05 Rotleben 16, 19, 20 51 25 28 00 Rotleberoda 19, 20 51 40 27 50 Rotlen 41, 43 47 30 24 10 Rotloch 41, 43 47 50 23 30 Rotmanshagen 07 53 40 30 00 Rotmayn fl. 22 49 50 28 30 Rotpach 37 49 45 26 00 Rotrhadeck 33 49 30 31 20 Rotschen 19 51 25 28 50 Rotsches 36 50 50 27 30 Rotselar 38 50 40 20 40 Rotser Siel 05 53 30 25 50 Rotsich 10, 12 52 00 31 00 Rotstad 14 51 55 29 20 Rotstein 41 49 00 24 20 Rott 41, 42 48 50 24 25 Rotte 14, 21 51 15 29 40 Rottelen 40 47 35 24 10 Rottelsdorff 19, 20 51 45 28 40 Rottenberg 4, 16 52 2 26 00 Rottenburg 41, 43 47 35 23 25 Rottensfels 37 49 50 26 00 Rottenstein 36 50 05 27 20 Rotterdam 1, 38 52 00 20 20 Rotterort 36 50 40 27 20 Rotthaus 30 50 30 34 30 Rottichen 18 51 10 28 10 Rotorff 14, 16 52 05 27 50 Rotrum 1, 38 53 40 22 00 Rotwasser 30 50 20 34 10 Rotweil 1, 38, 45 47 40 25 00 Rotwitz 28 51 05 34 30 Rotwill 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 05 Rotz 22 50 30 29 00 Rotzdorf 14 52 10 29 20 Rotzenhuss 41, 42 48 45 24 20 Rotzing 41, 43 47 30 23 50 Rotzingen 16, 17 52 10 26 50 Rove 07 53 25 30 30 Rouvere 38 48 40 21 20 Rouvereid 01 45 30 28 10 Rovershagen 1, 7 54 20 29 50 Rovetal 15 51 50 27 40 Rougemont 01 47 20 22 30 Roust 40 48 05 24 15 Rouvray 01 47 00 19 50 Rowen 10, 13 52 40 31 50 Rowentdorff 12 52 10 31 00 Rowerorth 05 53 45 25 50 Royn 29 51 15 33 25 Roziere 01 48 30 22 40 Rschepin 2, 33 50 10 31 30 Rubekow 08 54 00 31 00 Rubekow 08 54 00 31 00 Rubenick 01 50 00 35 40 Rubenzal M. 24 50 30 32 30 Ruber 16, 17 52 20 27 10 Rubnitz 22 51 00 28 40 Rubrechts 36 50 30 27 00 Ruchendorf 34 50 10 28 10 Ruchowan 32 48 50 33 30 Ruckendorff 22 50 20 28 00 Ruckers 24, 31 50 20 33 00 Ruckersdorff 22, 23 50 40 29 10 Rucking 34, 38, 39 50 00 25 20 Ruda 22 51 10 29 50 Rude 10, 12 52 10 30 50 Rudelheim 39 50 00 25 00 Rudelsburg 22 51 10 28 30 Rudelsdorff 23 51 05 31 50 Rudelstat 22 50 40 28 20 Rudelstet 1, 19 50 45 28 10 Rudelswerd 01 45 50 33 10 Ruden 14, 16, 21 51 50 29 30 Rudenitz 10, 12 52 20 30 50 Rudenthal 37 49 35 26 00 Ruderbach 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Rudersdorff 15, 19 51 00 28 20 Rudigerode 19, 20 51 45 28 20 Rudoletz 32, 33 49 10 32 50 Rudolffsbach 29 51 15 33 10 Rudolfstat 33 48 50 31 30 Rudow 4, 10, 11 53 00 28 10 Rudtlem 35 50 00 24 55 Rudwikow 32, 33 49 00 33 10 Rue 01 46 20 23 10 Ruedelbach 39 50 10 24 40 Ruedersperg 45 48 45 26 10 Ruelez 16, 17 51 45 26 30 Ruemansfelden 01 48 50 30 00 Ruen 15 52 00 20 40 Ruerne 15 52 20 26 20 Ruertee 19 51 05 26 40 Ruetsdorf 22 50 30 29 20 Ruexen 45 49 15 25 50 Rufach 1, 38, 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Ruffle 38 45 20 25 20 Rugaen 2, 7 53 30 28 20 Rugarten 09 54 30 31 20 Rugeberge 23 51 25 31 00 Rugehoff 09 54 30 31 00 Rugelberg 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Rugen 34, 36 50 00 27 20 Rugenberge 03 53 50 26 20 Rugensee 07 53 40 28 20 Rugenwalde 1, 8, 10 54 40 33 30 Rugge 05 53 50 25 30 Rugia ins. 8, 10 54 40 30 30 Ruhberg 1, 24, 25 50 50 33 00 Ruhental 41 48 40 24 35 Rukersdorff 34 49 20 28 00 Rukh. 45 48 15 26 40 Ruland 22, 23, 24 51 20 30 50 Ruleug 02 53 50 28 00 Rullevitz 08 53 20 31 00 Rulnspringse 16 51 35 27 10 Rulow 7, 8 53 35 30 40 Rulsdorf 20 51 35 28 30 Rumbach 41, 42 48 55 24 15 Rumberg 25, 33 51 10 33 40 Rumbstein 33 48 40 33 30 Rumbur 33 50 40 31 40 Rumburg 33 50 20 32 30 Rume fl. 15, 16, 17 51 40 26 50 Rumeke 18 51 35 27 20 Rumelsborg 1, 8 54 20 34 30 Rumersheim 40, 43 47 40 24 00 Rumhaus 33 49 00 30 00 Rumishorn 38 47 00 25 40 Rumken 15 52 10 25 40 Rumlang 38 47 00 25 00 Rumltzhausen 45 48 35 26 00 Rummeke 16 51 55 26 00 Rummer 16 52 20 27 50 Rummersweiier 39 49 30 23 10 Rumpach 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Rumpelbron 24, 31 50 40 33 00 Rumpium 14, 19, 20 51 45 28 40 Rumpshagen 07 53 30 30 10 Rumting 33 49 00 30 00 Rumyke 08 55 10 35 00 Rumze fl. 32 49 20 33 50 Rundescuffer fl. 19 50 30 27 40 Runen 07 53 50 29 00 Runenberg 41 48 35 24 20 Runenburg 40, 42 48 35 24 20 Runing 18 51 50 27 00 Runnenberg 17 52 30 26 20 Runngen 16 52 10 27 20 Runow 07 53 30 28 40 Runsdutz 22 50 50 29 30 Runsen 25 51 30 33 20 Runstet 19 51 20 27 30 Runtz 07 53 40 27 40 Runtzenheim 40 48 35 24 30 Runtzenum 41, 42 48 35 24 25 Rup 01 47 30 21 50 Rupe 22 51 20 29 00 Rupelmonde 38 51 00 20 00 Rupenheim 41 48 40 24 40 Ruppersdorff 22, 23 51 00 29 20 Ruppersgrin 22 50 30 29 20 St. Rupert 40 47 45 24 20 Ruprechsauw 42, 44 48 25 24 15 Ruprechtshegge 15 53 00 26 40 Rurde 15 51 50 26 00 Rurelsh. 41, 43 47 40 23 50 Rurleben 16, 19 51 25 27 50 Rursdorf 22 50 50 29 30 Rus 41 48 20 23 45 Rus fl. 38 46 00 25 00 Rusawa fl. 32 49 10 34 30 Rusbrun 34, 37 49 40 26 20 Ruscken 22 51 00 30 10 Rusdorf 22 51 00 29 10 Ruse 2, 4, 9 54 00 27 20 Rusken 02 51 00 29 20 Ruskevitz 09 54 45 31 30 Ruspach 33 48 30 33 00 Russ 38, 42 48 20 23 40 Russ fl. 38 46 40 24 40 Russdorff 22 50 40 29 40 Russeln 15 53 00 26 20 Russelsem 39 49 50 24 40 Russen 22 51 10 29 20 Russenburg 42 48 40 24 00 Russevase 09 54 45 31 30 Russheim 40 48 55 24 50 Rust 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 10 Ruste 07 53 35 28 50 Rustede 05 53 25 25 20 Rusteleben 19, 20 51 25 28 20 Rustenbek 10, 11 52 20 27 30 Rustenborg 15 51 20 26 40 Rustern 29 51 20 33 10 Rusthall 28 51 15 34 10 Rutberg 40 48 45 24 50 Rute 17 52 25 26 30 Rutenberg 10, 12 53 00 30 40 Ruteng 07 53 45 28 10 Rutenich 10, 12 52 40 30 00 Rutenick 10, 12 52 40 30 10 Ruthei 07 53 35 30 50 Rutine 33 49 10 31 10 Rutmershaim 45 48 35 25 30 Rutschenhausen 36 50 30 27 10 Rutt 5, 10 54 40 29 30 Ruttingsleben 18 52 00 28 40 Ruttolff 22 50 40 29 50 Rutty 38 46 40 25 20 Ruttzengrin 22 50 20 29 30 Rutzen 24, 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 20 Rutzenberg 16 52 10 26 50 Rutzenfelde 07 53 35 30 00 Rutzenhagen 10, 13 53 40 32 40 Rutzinensis 27 51 40 33 20 Ruvie 41 48 10 23 30 Ruwenoort 03 53 45 25 20 Ruwenitz 33 50 20 30 10 Ruylandt 2, 22 51 30 30 40 Ruyt 45 48 30 25 50 Ruz 38, 41 47 40 23 05 Rychemburg 2, 33 49 40 32 50 Rychenbach 33 50 40 33 40 Rychnow 33 49 20 32 00 Ryckerswalda 30 50 30 34 30 Ryep 05 53 10 25 50 Ryffen fl. 16 51 20 27 00 Ryffenborg 15 52 00 27 00 Ryffenhausen 19 51 25 26 30 Ryffenstein 15 51 20 27 00 Ryfhausen 20 51 30 28 00 Ryken 22 51 10 29 20 Rynberg 01 51 30 22 40 Rynfelde 01 54 10 27 10 Rynow 38 47 20 25 00 Ryntelen 15 52 10 25 40 Rysenberg 33 49 20 30 20 Ryssel 01 50 40 19 00 Rytz 10, 12 52 30 29 20 Rzeczka fl. 31 50 00 33 20 Rzeczkowitz 32 49 10 33 50 Rzeczuze 01 49 20 32 00 Rzepe 33 49 10 31 00 Rzetzitze 1, 33 49 00 31 40 Rziczan 32 49 00 33 40 Rzitzany 33 49 10 33 10 S   SAal 36 50 15 27 10 Sacach 40 48 35 24 45 Sabechleb 32 49 29 34 40 Sabensen 22 51 00 29 10 Sabern 01 48 30 23 50 Saberwitz 26, 27 51 45 33 30 Sabische 22 51 00 29 00 Sabitz 09 54 35 31 20 Sabor 26 52 00 32 40 Sabotka 1, 33 50 10 32 00 Sabow 2, 7 53 45 27 40 Sache 21 51 10 29 40 Sacherwitz 28 51 05 34 15 Sachow 08 53 40 33 00 Sachs 15, 16 51 40 27 20 Sachsen 20 51 55 27 05
Sachsenberg 22 50 50 30 10 Sachsenburg 2, 33 50 50 29 50 Sachsenhagen 6, 16 52 10 26 00 Sachsenhausen 19 51 05 28 10 Sachsenheuser Wart 35 49 55 25 00 Sachsenwolt 3, 6 53 55 27 00 Sachserod 22 50 50 29 10 Sachwersten 16, 19 51 35 27 50 Sachwitz 08 51 00 33 55 Sack 16, 17 51 55 26 40 Sackenbach 37 49 55 26 00 Sacker 27 51 40 33 20 Sackeraw 28 51 00 34 30 Sackisch 28 51 05 33 50 Sackwitz 21 51 50 30 00 Sacramant 01 52 10 30 30 Sadek 32, 33 49 00 33 00 Sadelkow 07 53 35 30 40 Sadelou 08 53 20 32 30 Sadenroda 22 50 50 28 30 Sadewitz 28 51 05 33 55 Sadow 09 54 20 31 00 Sadowi 2, 33 50 10 32 30 Sadzow 10, 12 53 00 29 20 Saedenthal 01 48 20 29 00 Saerching 34 48 50 29 10 Saes 09 54 40 31 00 Saestingen 38 46 20 23 40 Saetzen 45 49 10 25 10 Saetztow 10, 13 52 30 32 10 Sagan 1, 24, 26 51 30 32 10 Saganensis 23, 24 51 35 32 00 Sagard 1, 8, 9 54 40 31 30 Sagaritz 08 54 50 34 30 Sagetzaw 33 49 40 30 40 Sagkisch 31 50 15 33 00 Sagnischekupper 26 51 40 32 20 Sagritz 27, 29 51 20 33 35 Sagwitz 28 50 55 34 00 Sahlisch 26 51 50 33 00 Saholm 01 55 10 25 40 Sahontal 33 49 10 29 40 Sahorzan 2, 33 50 20 31 00 Sahussenriet 38 47 40 26 20 Saido 2, 22 50 40 30 10 Saidares 22 50 50 30 10 Sain 01 50 30 23 50 Saintens 09 54 25 31 10 Saiss 33 50 30 30 20 Saitnaw 33 48 20 30 30 Sakenh. 42 48 05 24 05 Sakerow 12 52 00 30 20 Saklet 10, 11 53 10 28 20 Sakopy 01 50 40 31 30 Sakow 07 53 20 29 30 Sal 1, 34 45 10 27 20 Sala fl. 15, 18, 19, 20 51 40 28 40 Salanoe 01 45 30 22 50 Salberg 19 50 35 28 30 Salbing 22, 34 50 20 28 40 Salborn 19 50 55 28 10 Salbka 10 51 30 28 50 Salbtte 14 51 45 28 50 Salcke 14 51 40 28 50 Salcza fl. 20 51 35 28 50 Salczwerck 14, 19, 20 51 35 28 30 Sale 7, 10 54 20 29 40 Saleck 34 50 00 26 40 Salenbach 01 48 40 24 20 Saleronville 38 49 00 21 40 Salet 22 51 10 28 30 Saleta 16, 19 51 35 27 50 Salfeldt 10, 11 52 30 27 50 Salfelden 01 47 10 29 40 Salgast 02 51 30 30 00 Saligi 22 51 20 29 40 Salinae 20 51 25 28 10 Saline 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Salingstorf 38 50 40 24 20 Salins 01 46 40 22 00 Salk 14 51 25 28 00 Salkaw 26 52 20 32 20 Salkolsa 01 48 40 35 30 Salle 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 25 Sallenbach 40 48 45 24 30 Sallentin 8, 10, 13 53 10 32 30 Sallesitz 09 54 45 31 30 Sallez 34 50 30 25 50 Salm 1, 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 40 Salmaushause 19 51 00 26 40 Salmbach 38, 39, 41 48 40 24 30 Salme 21 51 00 28 40 Salmsbosrn 19 51 00 27 40 Salmunster 1, 34, 38 50 20 25 50 Salneck 40 47 40 24 15 Salow 07 53 30 28 10 Salpach 41 48 00 24 05 Salsbrucken 38, 39 49 00 23 20 Salschutz 26, 27 51 40 33 20 Salse 16 52 15 26 30 Salsenheim 40 47 50 24 05 Salsfordt 21 51 10 29 10 Salstet 22 50 40 29 10 Saltz 1, 14, 15 52 10 28 50 Saltza 39, 49, 45 48 50 25 10 Saltzberg 36 50 15 27 00 Saltzborn 20 51 25 27 50 Saltzburg 01 47 30 30 20 Saltz Detfurt 4, 17 52 00 26 40 Saltze 06 51 55 28 20 Saltzen 39 49 00 23 30 Saltzern 43 47 55 23 35 Saltzfeldt 1, 36 50 20 27 20 Saltzhemendorp 4, 16 51 55 26 20 Saltzig 38, 39 50 10 23 50 Saltzlibenhal 16, 17 52 00 27 10 Saltzmatt 41 47 45 23 40 Saltzmunde 15, 19, 20 51 40 28 50 Saltztor Hellen 15, 16 51 50 26 40 Saltzungen 1, 19, 36 50 45 26 50 Saltzwerck 20 51 50 28 20 Salweke 15 52 10 28 40 S. Salvator 1, 33 48 20 30 20 Sambeck 01 51 30 21 50 Samber 38 50 20 20 20 Sambitz 29 51 20 30 00 Samborst 08 53 40 34 30 Sambswege 15 52 30 28 20 Samek 33 50 30 31 10 Samekow 07 53 40 27 50 Samen 01 46 30 24 40 Samer 01 50 40 17 40 Samerow 10, 13 53 50 32 40 Samerstorp 07 53 45 29 20 Samitz 25, 26, 29 51 20 32 40 Sammentin 08 53 10 33 00 Samony 38 49 00 21 20 Samtens 08 54 30 30 30 Sampeleben 15, 16 52 20 27 40 Sampelhag 08 53 40 32 30 Sampter 24, 25 52 40 33 00 Samswege 2, 14 52 00 28 30 Sana fl. 38 45 40 23 40 Sancergves 01 46 50 18 30 Sancerre 01 47 00 18 30 Sanckamp 4, 16 52 40 28 00 Sanda 33 49 50 29 30 Sandaw 15, 25 52 50 29 00 Sande 05 53 25 24 30 Sandeborschke 27 51 40 33 35 Sandersdorf 21 51 05 29 20 Sandersla 16 52 10 28 20 Sandersleben 18, 21 51 15 28 20 Sandes 36 50 30 27 00 Sandewaldaw 25, 26 51 40 33 20 Sandfeld 07 53 35 27 50 Sandfrontze 27 51 35 33 40 Sandhubel 30 50 15 34 20 Sandmuhl 23, 29 51 20 31 00 Sandow 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 50 Sandqw 02 52 40 28 40 Sandschid 38 50 00 22 40 Sandstede 05 53 25 25 00 Sandthoff 35 49 55 25 00 Sandtouwe 03 53 45 26 20 Sandvliet 01 51 20 20 20 Sandvorwerg 27 51 40 33 25 Sanfeld 19 50 55 28 10 Sangerhausen 15, 16 51 30 28 10 Sangewald 02 53 10 28 40 Sanick 01 46 20 32 40 Sanitz 07 53 35 28 00 Sannen 10 52 40 28 10 Sanscheid 39 49 50 23 30 Sansdorp 07 53 50 29 50 Sanskow 07 53 55 30 20 Sanspach 33 48 30 30 40 Sanstede 01 53 30 24 50 Sant 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 20 Santen 1, 38 51 30 22 30 Santersleben 2, 15 52 20 28 20 Snthausen 19 51 35 27 40 Santhoven 38, 39 49 20 24 50 Santstede 04 53 40 24 40 Santstel 03 53 45 26 20 Santvoort 01 52 30 20 20 Santwihr 41 48 35 24 35 Santzstadt 38 46 20 24 40 Santven 11 52 49 28 30 Sapay 01 45 50 22 20 Sapel 07 53 30 28 40 S. Saphorin 01 45 10 21 00 Sapkow 07 53 10 29 40 Sar fl. 2, 38, 39 49 00 23 20 Sara 22 50 50 29 20 Sara fl. 41, 42 48 30 23 30 Sar Alben 1, 38, 39 49 00 23 30 Saramagny 41 47 20 23 20 Sarament 10, 12 51 50 30 20 Sarawa fl. 24 49 40 33 30 Sarbleben 18 51 55 27 20 Sarbrid 01 49 10 23 20 Sarbruck 38 49 00 23 20 Sarbrucken 39 49 10 23 10 Sarburg 38, 39, 41, 42 48 40 23 30 Sareck 1, 39, 41, 42 48 40 23 40 Sareinsmingen 39 49 00 23 30 Sargans 01 46 30 26 00 Sargeletzez holtz 09 54 25 31 30 Sargsted 18 51 40 27 40 Sarigo 01 45 40 26 00 Sarinsingn. 38 49 00 23 20 Saritsch 23 51 20 31 20 Sarlewitz 30 50 25 34 10 Sarmundt 02 52 10 29 30 Sarne 08 53 00 32 00 Sarnecow 08 53 20 32 30 Sarnen 38 46 20 24 40 Sarnhoff 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Sarnow 1, 24, 25, 27 51 40 33 50 Sarow 10, 12 51 50 31 30 Sarpeke 16 51 55 26 00 Sarraen 07 53 35 29 30 Sarrendorp 07 53 20 27 40 Sarrentin 08 53 30 31 30 Sarrentzin 08 54 00 30 30 Sarstede 4, 16, 17 52 20 26 20 Sarta 01 45 40 27 40 Sarungas 38 46 20 26 00 Sarwar 01 47 20 35 00 Sarwerden 38, 39, 41 48 50 23 30 Sasadka 2, 33 50 30 31 50 Sasbrun 2, 10, 11 53 00 27 40 Sasin 01 48 30 34 40 Saspach 40, 43 48 00 24 10 Saspag 44 48 30 24 25 Sasra 22 50 50 28 50 Sass 38 45 20 24 20 Sassen 08 54 00 30 00 Sassenberg 08 53 30 32 30 Sassenh. 41, 43 47 50 24 00 Sassenhagen 15 52 30 25 40 Sassi 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 30 Sassins 09 54 40 31 30 Sassuburg 38 52 00 24 00 Sastede 06 52 00 26 20 Sasterhausen 25 51 00 33 20 Satelese 41, 43 47 35 23 50 Saten fl. 16 51 30 27 00 Satenhausen 16 51 30 27 10 Satfeld 16, 19 51 15 27 30 Sathan 22 51 20 30 30 Satnelle 14 52 05 28 20 Satow 07 54 00 29 00 Sattel 31 50 10 33 00 Satteldorff 34 49 00 26 50 Sattelhoff 40 47 25 2 20 Sattelstett 19 50 55 27 10 Sattig 28 51 00 34 10 Sattlberg 19 51 10 28 40 Satwelle 16 52 15 28 20 Satz 1, 22 50 10 30 20 Satzdorff 30 50 15 34 00 Satzerkriss 33 50 00 30 10 Satzig 10, 13 53 20 32 30 Satzka 2, 33 50 00 31 50 Savansche 10, 13 53 30 32 50 Save fl. 01 46 10 32 20 Saul 27 51 45 33 35 Saulcy 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 25 Saulgen 45 47 55 26 20 Saulheim 39 49 40 24 20 Saulieu 01 46 50 29 50 Saultour 38 50 00 20 20 Saulxures 38 47 40 23 00 Saupsdorf 30 50 15 34 20 Saurbron 31 50 10 33 30 Saurshausen 29 51 45 26 30 Sausedelitz 21 51 00 29 20 Sausenberg 40 57 40 24 10 Sauser Tehr 09 54 40 31 20 Sauss 41, 43 47 40 23 50 Sauterbach 22 50 20 29 30 Sauvent 01 47 20 18 50 Sauveur 41, 42 48 30 23 25 Saada 25, 26 52 00 32 20 Sawing 16 52 05 27 10 Saxelen 38 46 20 24 40 Saxen 33 48 20 32 00 Saxenburg 01 46 40 30 20 Saxendorf 22 51 20 29 50 Saxenfeld 01 46 20 33 10 Saxenflur 34, 37 49 20 26 10 Saxenhausen 37, 38 49 40 26 00 Saxenheim 40, 45 48 05 24 10 Saxenhusen 39 50 00 25 00 Saxonia Duc. 01 51 30 29 40 Saxstede 15 52 20 26 20 Saztorp 2, 4 54 20 27 20 Saxum 01 53 20 22 30 Say 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 35 Sayn 25 51 30 33 40 Sazawa fl. 32 49 40 33 40 Sbraslaw 1, 2, 33 49 50 31 10 Sbunsyr 24 52 10 32 30 Scadeland 07 53 30 27 40 Scadenhagen 07 54 15 29 40 Scalon 09 54 40 31 30 Scandelow 06 52 00 27 10 Scanfeberg 44 48 20 24 25 Scansik 38 46 00 26 20 Scarel 38 53 20 23 40 Scaringenhusen 04 52 40 25 20 Scarpezec 38 52 00 21 20 Scauritz 41, 43 48 00 23 30 Sceid 38 48 40 24 20 Scerpenberg 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 30 Scetz 38 47 00 23 20 Schabeckl 45 48 50 26 00 Schabenaw 26, 27 51 45 33 10 Schabitz 25, 28 51 10 34 00 Schabitzen 26, 27 51 40 33 10 Schabo 09 54 45 31 20 Schachsartz 34 49 40 28 20 Schackenthale 20 51 50 28 20 Schaddberg 14 52 05 29 00 Schade 14 52 05 29 20 Schadeck 01 50 20 24 30 Schadel 22 50 50 28 50 Schadeleben 18 51 25 28 10 Schaden 2, 33 50 30 30 50 Schadendorff 19, 20, 21 51 25 28 50 Schadenthal 19 50 30 28 20
Schadewalde 23 51 05 32 10 Schadewinckel 28 51 10 33 35 Schadische heyde 21 51 00 30 30 Schaditz 21 51 00 29 30 Schadow 10, 12 51 50 31 20 Schaezlitz 2, 33 50 30 32 50 Schaepstede 05 54 05 25 50 Schafberg 14, 20 51 15 28 50 Schafferey 28 51 10 33 55 Schaffnersaw 40 47 35 24 30 Schaffstet 15, 19, 20 51 20 28 40 Schafhausen 36 50 30 27 00 Schafhoff 37 49 40 26 05 Schafhus 40 48 00 24 10 Schafhusen 34 50 30 26 50 Schafoltzheim 40, 41 48 25 24 05 Schafsdorff 19, 20 51 30 28 10 Schafsec 19, 20 51 35 28 40 Schagen 05 53 30 24 20 Schagritz 28 51 15 33 30 Schainfelt 01 49 30 24 10 Schainta 01 48 30 35 40 Schairen 40 48 35 24 40 Schakendale 14 51 20 28 30 Schakensted 14, 18 51 20 28 40 Schala 19 50 45 28 10 Schalbach 40 47 35 24 05 Schalhodenbach 39 49 30 24 00 Schalitz 01 48 50 34 30 Schalka 24, 25 51 00 33 30 Schalkaw 28 51 05 33 55 Schalkemdorff 19, 20 51 20 28 50 Schallenburg 19 51 10 27 50 Schallodenbach 39 49 30 23 40 Schaltorf 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Schaltzburg 45 47 55 25 40 Schambach 34 48 50 27 50 Schambach fl. 19 51 10 27 40 Schambuch 45 48 20 25 40 Schamy 10 52 10 32 50 Schampa 10, 13 52 00 33 00 Schampach 33 50 00 29 20 Schampnaw 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 35 Schandaw 1, 2, 22, 23 50 50 31 00 Schandeleben 16 52 15 27 30 Schanhausen 29 51 05 32 55 Schando 33 50 50 31 00 Schans 01 46 10 27 50 Schantze 18 51 35 29 30 Schaoltz 41, 42 48 30 24 10 Schaoltzh. 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 15 Schapen 16 52 15 27 20 Schapensleben 16 52 10 28 20 Schapernow 01 46 50 27 10 Schaprode 08 54 40 30 00 Schar 05 53 30 24 30 Scharczenfelt 34 50 20 26 20 Scharditz 32 48 50 34 20 Scharfelt 15 51 40 27 20 Scharfenort 24, 25, 29 52 40 33 00 Scharffenberg 2, 22 51 00 30 20 Scharffeneck 31 50 30 33 20 Scharhoff 39 49 20 24 50 Scharhorn 03 53 45 24 10 Scharkow 21, 22 51 00 30 00 Scharloche 14 52 10 29 10 Scharlube 10, 14 52 30 29 00 Scharmbeck 04 53 20 25 00 Scharmek 14, 16 51 40 28 10 Scharmeke 04 53 40 25 00 Scharmutzel 10 51 50 31 30 Scharnbeck 2, 4, 6 53 40 27 20 Scharnhausen 45 48 30 25 50 Scharpelonge 10, 11 52 50 28 40 Scharpzow 07 53 40 30 00 Scharrel 05 53 10 24 10 Scharsueck 39 49 00 24 30 Schartan 19, 20 51 20 28 50 Schartonne 03 53 50 24 00 Schartzfeld 18 51 15 26 50 Schasnat 41, 43 47 30 23 30 Schaffawitz 33 49 40 32 00 Schaste 19 51 15 28 10 Schatleben 16 51 55 28 10 Schatow 14 52 00 28 50 Schatz 26, 27 51 45 33 30 Schatzhagen 02 54 20 27 30 Schatzlar 24 50 40 32 30 Schaub. 27 51 20 33 40 Schaumberg 01 52 10 25 50 Schaurmuhl 29 51 20 32 40 Schauweren 39 49 20 24 40 Schawen 18 51 35 27 30 Schawenberg 15, 16 52 10 25 40 Schawenburg 6, 16, 19 52 05 26 00 Schawerwitz 28 50 55 34 00 Schazkow 02 51 35 29 20 Schebach 39, 41, 42 49 00 24 20 Schebela 22 50 50 28 30 Scheckenbach 34 49 10 26 50 Schede 03 53 45 25 40 Schedlaw 30 50 40 34 40 Schedlitz 24 50 00 36 30 Scheenefel 05 53 35 26 20 Scheer 45 47 50 26 00 Schefelt 08 53 20 32 30 Schefertzheim 41, 42 48 15 24 05 Scheffere 4, 10, 11 52 30 28 10 Scheffecker 23 51 30 32 00 Scheffentz 34, 39 49 20 25 40 Scheffersheim 34, 37 49 20 26 40 Schegeln 25 51 50 31 40 Schehounie 2, 33 50 00 32 10 Scheiba 26 51 45 32 40 Scheibhart 41, 42 48 45 24 35 Scheibenberg 22 50 30 29 50 Scheibesdorf 29 51 15 32 50 Scheidebach 23 51 10 31 20 Scheideck 38 46 00 24 20 Scheiderberg 19 50 45 28 20 Scheiderwinckel 31 50 30 33 10 Scheidingen 01 51 10 28 30 Scheidt 39, 40, 41, 42 48 50 24 30 Scheigh. 40 48 20 24 25 Scheitz 22 51 00 28 40 Schelchwitz 22 50 50 29 30 Schelde fl. 38 51 00 20 20 Scheleus fl. 36 50 30 27 40 Schelif 32, 33 49 10 32 30 Scheling 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 10 Schellenberg 01 50 40 30 10 Schellendorf 29 51 15 33 00 Schelleroda 19 50 55 28 00 Schellert 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Schellin 08 53 50 32 30 Schelling 01 53 30 21 20 Schelmberg 22 50 40 30 10 Schelschitz 32 49 00 33 50 Schelte 22 50 30 30 00 Scheltitz 22 50 50 29 20 Schena 21 51 10 29 30 Schenac 33 48 40 31 00 Schenchastenerck 33 48 30 31 40 Schenckendorf 10, 12 51 50 31 00 Schenckenschantz 1, 38 51 50 22 10 Schenckenzell 41, 45 48 15 24 50 Schenditz 15 51 20 29 00 Schenebeck 10, 11, 14 52 10 28 40 Scheneberg 40 47 50 24 20 Scheneck 45 48 00 27 10 Schenefelt 3, 5 53 55 26 10 Scheningen 08 53 10 31 30 Schenit 22 51 00 31 10 Schenitz 02 50 50 30 00 Schenperg 45 48 35 25 10 Schepan 16 52 15 27 30 Schepau 15 52 40 27 40 Schepelitz 10, 11 51 20 28 30 Schepen 21 51 00 29 10 Scheperg 10, 11 52 50 28 50 Schepery 12 52 40 29 50 Scheppested 16 52 05 27 30 Scheppesen 04 53 40 26 00 Scheprick 19, 20 51 35 28 50 Schepter 22 50 50 29 10 Scher 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Scherding 01 48 10 30 30 Schereck 41 48 55 24 45 Schernberg 15, 16, 19 51 20 27 20 Scherendorff 19 51 20 28 00 Scheretitz 33 48 50 33 50 Scherf Olendorf 16, 17 51 45 26 30 Schergischwelda 23 51 10 31 20 Scherkirch 20 51 25 27 50 Scherle 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 00 Schermbeek 01 51 40 23 00 Schermke 6, 18 51 55 27 50 Scherne 19 51 05 26 50 Scherotny 2, 33 50 10 30 40 Scherteych lacus 20 51 25 27 50 Schertzen 40, 41, 42 48 30 24 25 Scherwiler 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 55 Scheschen 27 51 40 33 30 Schesell 05 53 15 25 50 Scheslitz 34, 36 50 00 27 50 Schesroy 09 54 40 31 30 Scheting 45 48 35 25 30 Schetze 05 53 25 24 50 Scheuberg 20 51 45 28 20 Schevelingen 38 52 00 20 00 Scheveraen 23 51 15 31 10 Scheverling 05 53 15 26 10 Scheuren 40 48 35 24 45 Schewerin 33 49 00 31 30 Scewitz 22 51 30 29 10 Scheyerberg 39, 45 49 00 25 40 Schibackwitz 28 51 05 34 25 Schibasin 10, 13 52 00 32 30 Schiblborg 01 51 20 35 10 Schickelm 16 52 15 27 40 Schidel Lanckwitz 28 50 55 33 55 Schidenburg 04 54 00 27 40 Schidlow 25 52 00 31 40 Schidungen 16, 19 51 30 27 30 Schiedam 1, 38 51 50 20 20 Schiedel 22 50 40 29 20 Schieniken 01 48 00 27 50 Schiermatten 40 48 35 24 25 Schiermonick Ooge 38 53 40 22 00 Schiersleben 19, 20 51 40 28 30 Schifelbein 8, 10, 13 53 40 32 50 Schifelheim 01 53 40 33 20 Schifern 28 51 05 34 25 Schiferstat 39 49 10 24 50 Schifritz 22 50 40 29 10 Schiglin 24 50 30 35 30 Schila 16 51 40 28 10 Schilackwitz 25 51 00 33 40 Schilberg 40 48 40 24 50 Schilckh. 41, 42 48 25 24 10 Schilde 10, 11 52 50 28 30 Schildt 22 1 00 29 50 Schildtberg 2, 32 49 40 33 40 Schile 20 51 40 28 00 Schilffe 19 51 15 27 40 Schilgen 40 48 25 24 10 Schiligen 40 47 35 24 15 Schilkrop 34 49 50 25 50 Schillesdorp 07 53 15 30 00 Schillinger Siel 05 53 40 24 20 Schillingsberg 20 51 50 28 20 Schillingfurst 34 49 00 27 20 Schillingstat 34, 37 49 20 26 00 Schillingstet 15, 19, 20 51 10 28 00 Schilowitz 33 49 00 33 20 Schilt 10, 13 53 40 32 50 Schiltach 38, 41, 44 48 10 24 45 Schiltach fl. 45 48 05 25 00 Schiltbach 22 50 20 28 50 Schiltermuhl 24, 25 51 00 33 00 Schiltpach 22 50 20 29 20 Schima 15 52 50 27 20 Schimitz 22 50 40 29 30 Schimmelwitz 25, 28 51 20 33 40 Schimmeraw 25 51 20 34 00 Schimting 22 49 40 29 10 Schindelbrucke 25, 26 51 30 32 40 Schindelmuhle 27, 29 51 25 33 40 Schindershan 20 51 45 28 20 Schinhart 41, 42 49 00 24 15 Schinna 16 52 20 25 50 Schinow 33 48 20 28 30 Schipbeke 3, 5 53 50 26 40 Schipff 37 49 35 26 10 Schipfurt 10, 12 52 30 51 00 Schipstede 1, 15 52 20 27 40 Schiraw 29 51 15 33 00 Schirem 40, 41, 42 48 35 24 20 Schirmbach 19 51 35 28 30 Schirmeck 41, 42 48 20 23 40 Schirmting 34 50 00 29 00 Schirna 23 51 20 31 20 Schirsted 15, 18 51 50 28 20 Schisewirz 21 51 16 29 20 Schishelitz 33 50 00 32 10 Schisting 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 30 Schitemitz 33 50 20 31 00 Schitzing 39, 45 48 50 25 20 Schiwran 1, 33 49 30 31 00 Schkrschinetz 02 50 00 30 50 Schkworit 2, 33 49 50 31 40 Schlabetin 2, 33 50 10 30 40 Schlabitz 26, 27 51 45 33 20 Schlachtstal 45 40 20 26 10 Schlackverd 33 50 00 29 40 Schladem 18 51 35 27 10 Schladen 14, 15, 16 52 10 27 20 Schlaka 24 50 10 36 00 Schlanerkraiss 33 50 00 30 50 Schlangental 42 48 45 24 05 Schlani 02, 33 50 00 30 50 Schlanitz 15 51 20 29 20 Schlanstedt 16, 18 52 00 27 50 Schlantsch 28 51 00 34 00 Schlantz 22 50 50 29 20 Schlaponitz 32 49 00 34 00 Schlaritz 21, 22 50 50 29 10 Schlatal fl. 19 50 35 28 10 Schlatein 33 49 30 29 30 Schlatt 41, 43 47 45 24 10 Schlaub 28 51 15 33 40 Schlaube 27 51 40 33 30 Schlauka 26 51 45 33 30 Schlaumnitz 25 51 20 33 40 Schlaupa 26, 27 51 30 33 30 Schlauphof 29 51 10 33 05 Schlaupitz 25, 30 50 40 33 40 Schlauwe 01 54 10 34 20 Schlawa 24, 25, 26 51 50 33 00 Schlebroda 19, 20 51 20 28 42 Schlechach 40 47 35 24 25 Schlegel 31 50 30 33 30 Schleierbach 41, 43 47 35 23 50 Schleifflren fl. 19 50 35 27 40 Schleifreishe 22 50 50 28 40 Schlein 14, 22 51 20 29 10 Schleinicz fl. 20 51 40 28 30 Schleithal 39, 41, 42 48 58 24 30 Schlem 16 51 55 26 40 Schlemsdorff 27 51 45 33 35 Schlenwitz 30 50 25 34 10 Schlersse 19 50 35 28 30 Schlesda 22 50 50 29 40 Schlestat 38, 41, 42 48 05 23 55 Schleswitz 26, 27 51 30 33 20 Schletebach 39, 41, 42 48 55 24 20 Schleten 22 50 50 28 30 Schleetta 15, 19, 20 51 35 28 50 Schletz 34 50 30 28 40 Schleusingen 34, 36 50 30 27 40 Schleutz 22 50 30 28 50 Schleus fl. 29 34 50 25 27 40 Schlewsingen 01 50 30 24 30 Schleybs 01 48 00 32 20 Schleyfling 01 47 10 31 50 Schlibnitz 18 51 40 28 30 Schlichaim fl. 45 47 55 25 20 Schlichdorp 04 53 00 29 00 Schlichsdorp 10, 11 52 40 28 20 Schlichta 45 48 35 26 10 Schlickeren 04 52 20 26 20 Schlicz 34 50 40 26 20
Schliben 1, 2, 21 51 10 30 10 Schlicingen 40, 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Schlikeren 16 52 05 26 30 Schlirstat 37 49 30 26 05 Schlisa 28 50 55 34 15 Schlisefelt 01 49 40 27 20 Skhliwno 25 50 20 33 00 Schlochthaus 40 47 35 24 15 Schlocken 22, 23, 24 50 50 31 20 Schlockenaw 01 50 50 31 20 Schloen 26 51 40 33 00 Schloin 25, 26 52 00 32 20 Schlos 7, 10 53 55 28 30 Schlosnesler 19 51 15 28 30 Schlotelborg 06 52 15 25 50 Schlotheim 15, 19 51 10 27 00 Schlotnig 29 51 15 33 10 Schluchten 34 49 30 28 40 Schluchster 1, 34 50 20 26 00 Schluchtern 45 49 00 25 40 Schlukena 02 50 50 30 20 Schlucknow 33 50 50 31 20 Schlunsdorff 22 50 40 29 20 Schluselay 34 49 50 27 40 Schluselburgk 4, 16 52 40 25 40 Schlusen 21 51 15 29 30 Schluslelfeld 34 49 40 27 20 Schluterburg 01 52 30 25 30 Schmagerlin 26, 27 51 35 33 30 Schmal 36 50 45 27 10 Schmalbach 40 48 30 24 40 Schmalental 41, 42 48 50 24 00 Schmalesteth 03 53 45 26 20 Schmalfeld 16 51 55 27 40 Schmalkalden 19, 36 50 35 27 10 Schmaltzenrode 19 51 40 28 20 Schmarfelt 19 50 45 27 40 Schmarse 26 52 15 32 30 Schmartsch 28 56 05 34 15 Schmeckseissen 25 51 10 32 40 Schmehm 36 50 30 27 20 Schmelen 19 50 50 28 30 Schmellen 24, 25, 26 52 00 32 30 Schmeltzdorf 30 50 35 34 20 Schmeltzgrube 29 51 30 33 10 Schmeltzhutt 45 48 35 26 40 Schmelwitz 28 51 05 33 50 Schmergedorff 10, 12 52 40 31 10 Schmermen 20 51 20 28 40 Schmersh 41 48 25 24 05 Schmeyen 16 51 20 27 00 Schmeyha fl. 45 47 55 25 50 Schmida 45 48 40 25 50 Schmideberg 24, 25, 33 50 50 32 30 Schmidefeld 19 50 30 28 10 Schmidmul 34 49 10 28 50 Schmiegel 24, 25, 26 52 00 33 20 Schmieher 41, 42, 45 48 10 24 20 Schmielen 22 51 20 29 40 Schmiha 45 48 05 26 20 Schmilekendorf 21 51 25 29 50 Schmirbach 29 51 20 32 55 Schmitfelt 36 50 35 27 40 Schmitt 45 48 40 26 50 Schmochwitz 29 51 15 33 10 Schmoger 27 51 30 33 40 Schmogeraw 28 51 20 34 55 Schmogra 24 51 10 34 30 Schmola 27 51 35 33 10 Schmollen 25 51 10 34 20 Schmolm 10, 11 53 10 29 00 Schmolmuhl 27 51 30 33 40 Schmolln 22 50 50 29 20 Schmolow 10 52 30 27 20 Schmoltz 30 50 30 34 10 Schmon 19, 20 51 25 28 30 Schmorditz 22 51 20 29 40 Schmuhe 40 48 10 24 25 Schnabelichn Pinde 19 50 30 28 00 Schnabelwaid 34 49 50 28 30 Schnackenburg 02 52 50 27 40 Schnait 45 48 35 26 00 Schnakenburg 2, 4 53 20 32 55 Schnarslebn 14 51 45 28 40 Schnattach 34 49 30 28 20 Schnauten 22 51 00 29 10 Schnauter fl. 22 50 50 29 10 Schneberg 24 50 10 33 30 Schnec 41 48 30 24 35 Scheckapp 19 50 45 27 20 Schneckengrun 22 50 30 29 00 Schneckerbach 40 48 30 24 35 Schneeberg 22, 33 50 30 29 30 Schneekippe 24 50 40 32 30 Schneern 16 52 20 26 00 Schneidtingen 18 51 30 28 10 Schneie 34, 36 50 10 28 00 Schaelbach 36 50 45 27 20 Schnelenbihel 42, 43 48 05 24 00 Schnelle Fertel 23, 25 51 30 32 00 Schnellenberg 2, 4, 6 53 40 27 00 Schnellenfurt 23 51 30 32 10 Schnellenstein 24, 31 50 10 33 30 Schnelnroda 19, 20 51 20 28 30 Schnepfenreuth 34 49 20 27 50 Schnersh. 42 48 30 24 05 Schnockaw 28 51 00 34 20 Schnurga 22 50 50 29 10 Schobekirch 28 51 00 33 40 Schoboschitz 26 51 45 33 00 Schodeck 38 49 40 21 40 Schodervitz 30 50 35 34 30 Schoeleburg 38 52 40 24 00 Schoemburg 15 52 20 25 40 Schoenbeck 19 51 45 28 10 Schoenstede 03 53 55 26 50 Schofhusen 41, 42 48 30 24 00 Schoflarn 01 47 40 28 20 Schoidit 21, 22 50 50 29 00 Schoienflete 03 53 50 25 40 Schoinaw 39 50 00 24 00 Schoinecken 01 50 10 22 40 Schoinfisbach 39 50 10 24 40 Schoitnig 28 51 10 34 15 Schol. 38 52 20 23 40 Schola 22 51 00 30 00 Scholberg 41, 43 47 20 23 55 Scholbrun 37 49 45 25 55 Schole 04 52 40 25 20 Scholfing 40, 41, 43 47 35 24 05 Scholisch 03 53 45 25 40 Scholitz 21 51 00 29 20 Schollenbg 38 47 00 25 00 Scholling 19 50 35 27 50 Scholnbach 22 50 50 29 10 Scholss 08 53 30 32 00 Scholvin 01 49 50 33 50 Schomberg 11 52 30 27 30 Schomolow 29 51 15 33 35 Schona 41 47 35 24 20 Schonach 45 48 25 25 40 Schonaich 27, 28, 29 51 25 33 30 Schonan 33 48 40 38 40 Schonau 22 51 00 29 30 Schonaw 1, 26 51 45 32 50 Schonay 34, 36 50 20 26 40 Schonbach 22, 23 51 10 29 40 Schonbe 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 25 Schonbeck 14, 20 51 35 28 50 Schonberg 1, 22 50 10 29 30 Schonborn 27, 29 51 20 33 15 Schonbuch 41, 43 47 30 23 50 Schonburg 41, 42 48 45 24 25 Scondorff 23 51 30 32 20 Schoneb 08 53 20 32 30 Schonebeck 1, 10, 12 52 10 30 50 Schoneberg 10, 12 52 10 30 40 Schoneck 1, 22 50 20 29 30 Schonefeldt 10, 11, 14 52 35 29 10 Schoneflet 10, 12 52 20 30 20 Schoneflies 10, 12, 13 52 40 31 30 Schonehagen 12 51 50 30 40 Schonehusen 11 52 20 29 10 Schonemagdt 22 51 10 29 50 Schonemoer 05 53 10 25 10 Schonen 07 53 35 29 50 Schonenberg 2, 4 54 00 27 40 Schonenbuck 40 47 45 24 30 Schonenburg 40 48 45 24 30 Schonensteinbach 43 47 40 23 45 Schoner Lingaw 10, 12 52 20 30 50 Schonermare 10, 11 52 40 29 10 Schonsteinbach 41 47 40 23 45 Schonewald 23, 25 51 40 32 00 Schonewalde 23 51 00 32 00 Schonewerder 10, 12 53 10 30 40 Schonewyde 10, 12 51 40 30 40 Schonfeld 16, 19, 20 51 25 28 10 Schonga 01 47 30 27 50 Schonhagen 10 51 50 30 40 Schonhausen 2, 15 52 40 29 00 Schonheyde 30, 31 50 35 34 20 Schonhorn 28 51 05 34 15 Schonhurst 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 25 Schonhusen 10 52 20 29 00 Schonick 33 50 10 29 20 Schoningen 1, 6, 16, 18 51 50 27 50 Sdhonkirch 33 49 30 29 20 Schonow 10, 12 52 00 30 40 Schonperg 34 49 00 29 10 Schonrad 10, 13 52 50 32 40 Schonrein 37 49 55 26 00 Schonsez 33 49 20 29 30 Schonstet 19 51 10 27 10 Schontall 34, 35, 39 49 10 26 00 Schonter fl. 6, 16 52 05 27 10 Schonwald 12 52 20 30 10 Schonwalda 30 50 15 34 20 Schonwalde 31 50 05 33 40 Schonwer 08 53 10 33 00 Schonwerda 15, 20 51 20 28 20 Skhoonebeck 01 52 40 23 00 Schoonhoven 1, 38 52 00 20 40 Schop fl. 22 50 30 29 50 Schopen 42 48 15 24 20 Schopenwihr 41, 43 48 00 23 50 Schopflen 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 20 Schoppa 33 50 30 29 50 Schoppech 22 51 10 29 50 Schoppeln 22 51 10 29 50 Schoppendorf 19 51 00 28 00 Schoppensted 18 51 50 27 20 Schoppigen 38 52 00 23 20 Schops 23 51 15 31 40 Schopswasser 25 51 20 31 40 Schorain 34 50 00 26 20 Schorditz 22 51 10 29 40 Schore 14 51 40 29 00 Schorges 22, 34 50 00 18 20 Schorke 21 50 55 29 10 Schorlitz Ilau 21 51 15 29 30 Schorndorf 1, 45 48 40 26 10 Schorndorffer Vorst 45 48 40 26 10 Schotnsheim 39 49 40 24 20 Schorpach 39, 41, 42 48 50 24 00 Schorpsstorp 07 53 45 28 20 Schorrentin 07 53 50 29 50 Schorsel 09 54 20 31 10 Schort 21 51 40 29 00 Schorte 22 51 30 29 20 Schortens 05 53 30 24 20 Schorterei 19, 20 51 30 28 50 Schorwitz 22 51 20 29 10 Schorzow 07 53 40 29 50 Schorzow 07 53 40 29 50 Schoschantz 26 52 00 33 00 Schosnitz 28 51 00 53 35 Schossin 07 53 25 28 10 Schotkow 28 51 00 33 55 Schottware 05 53 35 25 00 Schovernis 08 53 50 33 00 Schoumburg 17 52 15 25 50 Schouwen 16 51 55 27 30 Schouwerda 19 51 30 28 20 Schowandek 38 37 20 25 20 Schowenburg 06 52 00 25 50 Schoweisse fl. 19, 36 50 35 27 40 Schramberg 45 48 05 24 40 Schrampe 4, 10, 11 53 00 28 40 Schrapelaw 15, 19, 20 51 30 28 40 Schrapelaw 20 51 30 28 40 Schraping 01 47 40 34 50 Schratendhal 33 48 40 32 50 Schratfeld 28 51 10 34 05 Schravesant 01 52 00 20 00 Schreck 39, 45 48 50 24 50 Schreckendorf 31 50 10 33 50 Schreckenfels 41, 43 47 50 23 40 Schreckenstein 24, 33 50 30 31 00 Schreckmul 37 49 45 26 00 Schregemuhl 10, 12 52 40 29 40 Schreibendorf 31 50 00 33 40 Schreibersberg 23 51 15 32 10 Schreibersdorff 25 51 10 32 00 Schreibitz 02 51 10 29 10 Schrems 01 48 30 32 00 Schrenaw 23 51 15 32 00 Schrentz 41, 43 47 40 24 15 Schrope 26 51 40 33 00 Schrickwitz 28 51 05 33 50 Skhriesheim 1, 45 49 20 25 10 Schrike 10, 11, 14 51 50 28 40 Schrobede 19 51 10 26 40 Schrock 40 48 50 24 45 Schroders 03 53 45 25 50 Schrosfstein 01 46 40 27 30 Schroth fl. 23 51 35 31 50 Schrozberg 34 49 10 26 40 Schuamburgh 01 46 50 33 00 Schuarthove 33 49 10 29 20 Schuberts Cross 30 50 20 34 10 Schuckheim 44 48 20 24 10 Schudhutten 34 49 30 29 10 Schulda 02 51 20 29 00 Schulenborch 07 54 05 29 50 Schulenborg 4, 16, 17 52 20 26 20 Schulenrod 16 52 10 27 30 Schullen 29 51 20 33 15 Schullermuhle 28 51 05 33 55 Schulow 2, 3 54 00 26 10 Schulowerot 03 53 50 26 00 Schulperzile 02 55 00 25 50 Schulsdorff 24 50 10 34 00 Schultzendorff 10, 12 52 00 31 00 Schumberg 33 50 10 30 00 Schun 10 52 10 30 50 Schunburg 2, 33 50 30 33 00 Schunbusin 10 52 10 33 10 Schunder 34, 36 50 10 26 40 Schunderlinger 34, 36 50 10 26 40 Schune 8, 10, 12 53 20 31 30 Schunnungh. 16 51 30 26 40 Schunow 10, 12 51 40 30 50 Schurgas 1, 24, 30 50 40 34 40 Schurow 08 54 50 35 00 Schurtzig 26 52 25 32 30 Schussenried 45 47 40 26 20 Schutdorp 38 51 20 23 20 Schutzlaw 24, 25, 26 51 40 33 20 Schutter fl. 43, 44, 45 48 05 24 30 Schuttern 40, 41, 42 48 15 24 20 Schutterthal 42, 43, 45 48 10 24 30 Schutterwald 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 20 Schutterzell 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 20 Schutzchan 23 51 15 32 10 Schutzendorff 29, 30 51 15 33 30 Schw 21 51 50 29 10 Schwabach 34, 45 49 10 27 50 Schwaben 22 50 50 29 30 Schwabendorff 19 51 00 28 10 Schwada 22, 27 51 20 30 00 Schwadefass 33 50 20 33 30 Schwahausen 19 50 55 27 30 Schwaig 34 49 20 28 00 Schwaigern 34, 37 49 20 26 20 Schwaighaus 40 48 35 24 15 Schwalbach 35 50 00 24 50 Schwalingen 34 50 40 27 10 Schwambach 20 51 45 28 10 Schwammelwitz 30 50 25 34 10 Schwan 40 48 35 24 55
Schwanbach 16, 18 51 40 28 10 Schwanbeg 18 51 40 27 50 Schwanberg 45 48 05 25 00 Schwanburg 33 49 40 29 50 Schwand 40 47 40 24 20 Schwanden 38 46 20 25 20 Schwandorf 30 50 20 34 10 Schwanebeck 15 52 10 27 40 Schwaneberg 1, 14, 16 52 01 28 00 Schwanebusch 03 53 45 26 40 Schwanen 41, 42 49 00 24 15 Schwanewedel 05 53 15 25 10 Schwangern 45 49 00 25 40 Schwanheim 35 49 55 24 55 Schwanheimer 35 49 55 24 55 Schwanhusen 4, 6 52 40 27 00 Schwansee 19 51 10 27 50 Schwanstett 19 51 10 27 50 Schwantitz 22 50 50 29 20 Schwanto 10 52 20 30 10 Schwarbach 40 48 30 24 25 Schwarch 33 49 10 29 40 Schwarmitz 25, 26 52 00 32 20 Schwarmstede 4, 6, 16 52 25 26 20 Schwarns 15 53 00 26 20 Schwartbach 33 48 40 31 10 Schwartenbeke 03 53 55 27 10 Schwartlos 10, 11 52 10 28 40 Schwartz 19 50 55 28 10 Schwartza 22, 34 50 00 28 10 Schwartzach 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 25 Schwartzach fl. 34 49 20 28 20 Schwartzaw 25 51 20 33 00 Schwartzba 36 50 35 27 10 Schwartzbach 22, 23 51 30 30 50 Schwartzberg 23 51 00 32 00 Schwartzbruck 34 29 20 28 10 Schwartzburg 22, 34 50 35 28 00 Schwartze 41, 43 47 45 23 40 Schwartze fl. 10, 12 52 30 30 50 Schwartzenbach 40 48 25 24 50 Schwartenberg 43 47 50 23 35 Schwartzenbrun 37 49 35 26 05 Schwartzenburg 34 49 40 27 10 Schwartzenfelt 34 49 20 29 10 Schwartze Strauch 26 51 50 32 50 Schwartzfeld 16 51 35 27 20 Schwartzhausen 36 50 50 27 10 Schwartzhole 23 51 30 30 50 Schwartzhusen 19 50 50 27 00 Schwartzkochen fl. 45 48 40 26 50 Schwartzsee 41, 43 47 55 23 30 Schwartzwald 40, 45 48 00 24 33 Schwartzwasser 23 51 30 30 50 Schwatz 01 47 00 28 40 Schwatzburg 33 49 20 33 20 Schwechat 33 48 20 33 40 Schwechlen 10, 11 52 20 28 40 Schwectsch 28 51 10 34 20 Schwedeldorf 31 50 20 33 30 Schwehusen 16 52 30 27 00 Schweidnitz 24, 25 50 50 33 00 Schweigen 41, 42 48 50 24 25 Schweighaus 40 48 10 24 30 Schweighof 40, 41, 43 47 40 24 10 Schweighuss 39, 42 48 30 24 10 Schweimberg 34, 36 49 30 26 00 Schwein 26 51 35 33 00 Schweinart 25 52 40 32 20 Schweinbach 41, 43 47 55 23 30 Schweinberg 28 51 15 33 40 Schweinbraten 28 50 50 32 15 Schweinbusch 22 50 40 29 10 Schweinern 28 51 15 34 05 Schweinfurt 1, 34, 36 50 00 27 00 Schweinhaus 24, 25 51 00 33 00 Schweinich 31 50 25 33 30 Schweininge 34 48 50 27 40 Schweinitz 01 51 40 30 10 Schweinotten 40 47 35 24 25 Schweinsroda 19, 20 51 30 28 20 Schweltz 10, 12 53 00 29 50 Schwemmenede 22 51 00 29 50 Schwenburg 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 30 Schwende 20 51 35 27 50 Schwenen 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Schwenning 45 47 50 25 00 Schwensal 21 51 05 29 30 Schwentnig 28 51 05 34 15 Schwerde 16, 19 51 35 28 00 Schwerhorn 19 51 05 27 50 Schwerin 1, 10, 13 52 30 32 40 Schwersina 24, 25 52 30 32 00 Schweringen 16 52 30 25 50 Schwerstatt 40 47 30 24 20 Schwerdster 19 51 10 27 40 Schwertha 23, 24, 25 51 00 32 00 Schwertz 41, 43 47 25 23 35 Schwet 1, 8 53 00 31 30 Schwetzko 25, 26 51 50 33 20 Schwibach 44 48 15 24 30 Schwibussin 24, 25, 26 52 20 32 20 Schwibustensis Circ. 26 52 20 32 20 Schwichelde 15 52 20 26 40 Schwickershausen 36 50 25 27 10 Schwickhen 45 48 45 26 00 Schwidnicensis 24 50 50 33 00 Schwieberting 45 48 40 25 40 Schwigel 16 52 15 26 50 Schwigeraz 23 51 20 31 10 Schwighuss 41, 43 47 45 23 35 Schwihoff 33 49 20 30 30 Schwinaren 27 51 40 33 45 Schwindart 41 48 35 24 05 Schwindartzheim 44 48 35 24 05 Schwindorf 29 51 15 32 40 Schwinge fl. 2, 3, 6 53 45 25 40 Schwingenberg 34 49 30 25 10 Schwinitz 10, 14 51 40 29 20 Schwinning 38 47 40 24 40 Schwinscheen 21 50 55 28 50 Schwirtsch 28 51 10 35 00 Schwirstat 38 47 20 24 20 Schwits 01 46 40 25 10 Schwitsersdorff 20 51 40 28 40 Schwoben 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Schwobh 40, 41, 42, 43 48 08 24 05 Schwoce 21, 22 50 55 29 10 Schwoller 18 52 00 27 00 Schworge fl. 19 50 40 28 10 Schworlinetz 24 50 30 36 00 Schwota 28 50 55 34 20 Schwowiler 41, 42 48 40 24 25 Schwulper 18 52 00 26 50 Schwusen 24, 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 00 Schyma 02 52 40 27 30 Schymen 15 52 40 25 20 Schyr 17 51 55 25 40 Sckamp 26 52 15 32 20 Sckoroschaw 28 51 20 35 05 Sclany 01 50 00 30 50 Sclirms 33 48 30 32 00 Schonaw 38 48 00 24 00 Scop 02 51 00 30 40 Scopa 15, 20 51 20 29 00 Scopfen 38 47 20 24 00 Scornsheim 38 49 40 24 20 Sdiar 2, 33 49 20 32 40 Sduni 24, 25 51 50 34 00 Seba 36 50 30 27 20 Sebach 41, 42 48 45 24 25 Sebaldbrugge 05 53 05 25 20 Sebastiansberg 22, 33 50 20 30 10 Sebbexen 16 51 45 26 50 Sebelding 41, 42 46 00 24 30 Sebeleben 19 50 55 27 30 Seben 20, 21 51 40 29 00 Sebickerode 19, 20 51 40 28 20 Sebitz 22 51 00 30 00 Sebkrschinetz 33 50 00 32 00 Sebtexen 17 51 50 26 50 Seburg 15, 20 51 30 28 40 Sechusert 22 51 20 29 20 Secka 40, 43 48 00 24 25 Seckow 41, 43 48 00 24 20 Seckbach 35 50 00 25 05 Seckehoff 41, 43 48 00 23 20 Seckig 37 49 30 26 05 Seckingen 40, 41, 43 47 30 24 30 Seckn 45 47 55 26 30 Sedain 01 49 40 21 10 Sedda 22 41 10 29 40 Seddelin 08 54 10 32 30 Sedletz 33 49 10 31 00 Sedlezany 33 49 30 31 20 Sedlitz 29 51 30 33 20 Sednitz 32 49 40 35 00 Sedorp 07 52 55 28 30 Seebach 40 48 45 24 30 Seebeck 10, 12 52 40 30 10 Seeberge 19 50 55 27 30 Seeborg 19 51 40 26 40 Seeborgh 16 51 30 27 00 Seeburg 01 47 50 29 40 Seedorf 2, 4 54 20 27 00 Seefeld 40, 41, 43 47 45 24 10 Seefelder 31 50 10 33 20 Seehausen 6, 10, 11 52 40 28 30 Seehuschefehr 10, 11 52 40 28 40 Seehusen 10, 12 53 00 30 50 Seelborst 16 52 00 26 10 Seelingen 40 48 50 24 55 Seelkirch 40 47 35 24 15 Seeren 10, 13 52 20 32 50 Seese fl. 2, 4, 6 53 40 26 20 Seessen 22 51 10 29 20 Seewald 28 51 00 33 40 Seesweiler 39 23 20 49 50 Sega 16, 19 51 20 28 00 Sege 20 51 25 28 00 Segeberg 1, 2, 4 54 20 27 00 Segefelt 10, 12 52 10 30 20 Segelin 01 53 10 30 20 Segenfelt 10, 13 52 40 32 40 Segern 6, 18 52 10 27 30 Segeste 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Segligest 01 47 00 35 20 Segna 01 45 10 33 20 Segnick 08 53 30 33 00 Segern 21 51 20 29 30 Sehausen 2, 15 53 00 28 40 Sehe 23 51 25 31 40 Sehehoff 35 49 55 25 00 Seheletaw 33 49 00 32 30 Sehem 39 49 40 25 00 Sehen 19 51 10 28 20 Schente 45 48 50 26 00 Sehermeke 05 53 20 25 10 Seherpse 09 54 25 30 50 Seherrn 26 52 25 32 20 Sehlem 17 52 10 26 40 Sehls 09 54 45 31 30 Sehmorke 23 51 25 30 50 Sehnepsethal 19 50 50 27 20 Sehusen 20 51 25 28 00 Seichaw 25, 29 51 10 33 00 Seidaw 01 51 50 31 10 Seiden 21 51 20 30 00 Seidenberg 1, 23, 24 51 00 32 00 Seidendorff 25 51 00 31 40 Seiffen 30 50 15 34 20 Seigerhult 19 50 30 28 10 Seilbe 22 50 10 29 10 Seilen 16 51 25 26 20 Seilerstorf 41, 42 48 40 24 00 Seille 38 48 20 23 20 Sein 38 50 20 23 40 Seiplendorf 22 50 20 28 50 Seiss 2, 22 50 30 30 30 Seissel 01 45 40 22 00 Seissenberg 01 47 40 31 50 Seissenburg 01 45 50 32 50 Seiten 09 54 20 31 10 Seitendorf 31 50 00 33 30 Seitsch 25, 26, 27 51 50 33 20 Seitschen 23 51 15 31 20 Seitz 24 51 50 33 00 Seitzenbach 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 25 Seitzenkilch 43 47 35 24 10 Seitzhoff 40, 44 48 25 24 20 Selbach 40, 42, 43, 44 48 10 24 30 Selbitz 34 50 20 28 40 Selbitz fl. 34 50 20 28 40 Selchow 10, 12 53 10 30 40 Selcksen 16, 17 51 55 26 10 Seldin 10,12 51 50 30 10 Seldisted 16 52 05 27 40 Sele 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Seleck fl. 16 51 40 28 10 Seleffdorff 12 52 10 29 30 Selen 21 51 00 29 10 Selendorff 07 53 50 29 30 Selendorffer 10, 12 52 10 29 40 Seletaw 1, 32 48 50 33 00 Selewitz 09 54 25 31 30 Selgenstat 34 49 40 26 40 Selgenthal 36 50 45 27 20 Selhac 41 48 10 24 25 Selhof 41, 42 48 40 24 00 Seligpforten 34 49 10 28 20 Selin 09 54 25 31 40 Selingstadt 34, 38, 39 49 50 25 20 Selke fl. 14, 15, 20 51 40 27 20 Sell 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 30 Selle 07 53 35 29 20 Sellen 09 54 30 31 10 Sellenstedde 17 52 10 26 40 Sellin 07 53 50 28 40 Sellingen 40 48 35 24 30 Selmanshaus 01 48 10 29 30 Selmstorp 07 53 50 27 40 Selnenrod 34 50 40 28 40 Selow 1, 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 40 Selowitz 32 48 50 33 50 Selsk 22 51 20 29 10 Selssitz 33 49 00 33 10 Seltenlein fl. 19 51 10 27 30 Seltewitz 14, 21 51 20 29 30 Seltz 38, 39, 40, 42, 45 48 40 24 30 Seltzbach 40 48 40 24 30 Seltze 7, 8 53 50 30 30 Semelow 7, 8 54 10 29 50 Semetin Mons 32 49 20 34 50 Semile 2, 33 50 20 32 20 Semiln 10, 12 52 20 29 20 Semmelwitz 28, 29 51 00 34 20 Semmersted 18 51 45 27 20 Sempach 38 46 40 24 20 Semper 09 54 40 31 20 Semur 01 47 10 20 10 Semy 38 49 20 21 40 Sencoing 01 46 30 18 30 Sendbach 41 48 20 24 35 Sendelbach 42, 43, 45 48 20 24 30 Sendt 38 51 40 23 40 Sene 07 53 40 29 10 Senecey 01 46 20 20 50 Senerpont 01 49 50 17 40 Senesse 19 50 55 26 40 Senewicz 20 51 40 28 50 Senftenberg 24 51 30 31 00 Sengen 41, 43 47 45 23 35 Sengerischforst 15, 20 51 20 28 00 Sengoben 39 50 10 24 10 Seugwitz 30 50 30 34 20 Seniana 19 50 35 27 20 Seniance 41 47 25 23 05 Senice 32 48 30 34 40 Senische 10, 12 51 50 31 10 Senitz 23 51 30 32 00 Senlis 01 49 00 18 20 Sennen 41, 43 47 40 23 35 Sennewitz 21 51 05 28 40 Senomat 22, 33 50 00 33 30 Senone Abb. 41, 42, 43 48 15 23 25 Senorie fl. 19, 36 50 40 27 40 Senoschat 32, 33 49 20 32 30 Senoville 38 49 20 22 00 Sens 01 48 00 19 10 Sensdorff 3, 4, 5, 6 53 40 26 30 Senselitz 02 51 10 29 30 Sensen Hammer 19 50 30 27 50 Sensheim 01 49 30 27 00 Senst 10 51 20 29 50 Sensted 16 52 00 27 30 Senstenberg 1, 2, 22 51 20 31 00 Senstettn 45 48 35 26 40 Sentile 38 49 00 22 00 Senten 41, 43 47 35 23 30 Sentenbach 41, 43 47 50 23 30 Senvelt 01 52 40 24 30 Senwirdt 05 53 35 24 30 Seon 38 47 00 24 20 Seoneck 38 50 00 23 20 Sepelin 07 53 50 29 10 Seppaw 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Sepshagen 07 53 35 29 40 Sept 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Sera 09 54 20 31 10 Seramse 09 54 25 31 30 Serbitz 22 51 00 29 20 Sercha 23 51 40 31 40 Serchaw 23 51 20 32 00 Serdoaff 10, 12 1352 10 31 50 Sergitz 22 51 00 29 00 Serichin 23, 25 51 20 31 50 Seringen 40 47 40 24 10 Serinwar 01 46 40 34 30 Sermersheim 41, 42 48 10 24 00 Sermut 22 51 10 29 40 Sernets 01 46 10 27 00 Serni 32 49 00 35 10 Serp 02 54 00 27 10 Serre 01 46 20 22 50 Serwerden 01 48 50 23 40 Serxm 18 51 45 27 30 Sesane en Brie 01 48 30 19 40 Sese 02 52 00 30 00 Sese fl. 05 53 20 26 30 Sesen 1, 16, 17 51 50 27 00 Sesenitz 2, 33 50 00 32 40 Sesing 05 53 25 25 40 Seflach 1, 34, 36 50 10 27 40 Sesselssheem 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 00 Sessenheim 40, 42, 42 48 35 24 25 Sessi 38 48 20 23 20 Sessin 09 54 40 31 10 Sestede 15 52 10 26 20 Sesum 15 52 00 26 40 Seth 05 53 45 26 20 Setsch 2, 33 49 40 32 30 Setten 14 52 25 28 40 Settin 07 53 25 28 40 Settn 38 49 00 25 20 Setzenow 10, 12, 13 52 00 32 00 Seuceer 22 51 20 29 40 Seven 3, 5 53 45 26 40 Sevenberg 38 51 40 20 20 Severin 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 20 Seuselitz 22 51 10 30 20 Sewekow 10 53 00 29 40 Seyaen 10 51 20 30 30 Seyden 02 51 50 29 20 Seydenberg 25 51 00 32 00 Seydling 01 47 40 33 40 Seyffersdorff 25, 27, 29 51 15 33 20 Seyffertsholtz 26 52 00 32 20 Seyfraw 25, 26, 27 51 30 33 40 Seyger 23 51 35 31 50 Seyne R. 01 48 10 19 10 Seytting 45 47 45 25 10 Sez Aush 33 49 20 31 40 Sharprode 09 54 40 31 00 Shaselitz 22 51 10 29 20 Shiltperg 33 49 50 33 30 Sholbalah 38 53 40 21 40 Shune 13 53 20 31 20 Shurwalden 04 53 20 25 40 Siahusen 02 55 00 26 00 Sibberin 07 53 25 28 50 Sibbessee 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Siben Berge 16, 17 51 55 26 40 Sibenhusen 16 52 30 25 50 Sibersdorff 10, 12 52 30 29 20 Sibitz 02 51 00 29 10 Siboldes fl. 16 55 25 26 50 Sibrou 02 54 20 26 30 Siburg 38 50 40 23 00 Sichelming 45 48 25 25 50 Sichen 01 51 00 21 00 Sicken 41, 43 47 35 23 25 Sicker 09 53 20 31 40 Sicheritz 20 51 45 28 40 Sickingen 39 49 00 25 20 Sickten 16 52 10 27 30 Sidaw 2, 15 52 30 29 00 Siddick 2, 7 53 35 29 00 Sidenborg 06 52 30 25 40 Sidentram 10, 11 52 20 28 00 Sidow 10, 13 52 50 32 20 Sierakowo 24, 25 52 40 32 30 Siebenaiche 25 51 00 32 20 Siebenhuden 29 51 05 33 15 Siecke 05 53 00 25 20 Siedenburg 01 52 50 25 20 Siegberg 01 51 40 23 40 Siegersdorff 24, 25 51 20 32 00 Sieghburg 01 51 20 23 50 Sieke 06 52 40 25 40 Siel 03 53 45 26 20 Siersen 16 52 10 27 10 Siersleben 14, 16 51 50 28 30 Siessen 45 48 30 26 30 Siewitz 23 51 20 31 10
Sigelbach 19 50 50 27 40 Sigellycz 2, 15, 20 51 40 28 40 Sigelsheim 41, 43 48 00 23 45 Sigen 1, 38 50 40 24 20 Sigendorf 29 51 20 33 05 Siger fl. 24, 25 51 50 32 30 Sigers 26 51 50 32 30 Siggelkow 07 53 15 29 00 Siggelow 09 54 20 31 00 Siggermogge 09 54 30 31 20 Siglitz 22 51 10 28 40 Sigmaringen 01 47 50 25 50 Sigmen 22 50 40 29 50 Sigmeringen 45 47 50 26 00 Signaw 1, 38 46 30 24 10 Sigritz 36 50 25 27 30 cihe dich fur 16, 19, 20 51 30 28 00 Siker 09 54 15 31 00 Sila 16, 20 51 40 28 10 Silbach 36 50 30 27 40 Silber 8, 10, 13 53 20 33 00 Silberberg 24, 31, 33 50 30 33 30 Silberbrun 22 50 10 29 20 Silberthal 19 50 40 27 40 Silberstras 22 50 30 29 30 Silbitz 22 50 10 28 30 Silchendorff 10 51 50 32 10 Silden 40, 41, 43 47 45 24 10 Sildorf 14 51 40 28 40 Sile 01 51 00 35 20 Silen 02 52 00 29 30 Silentz 8, 9 54 40 30 30 Silesia Duc. 01 51 20 32 50 Silestet 03 53 45 25 20 Silez 39 48 50 24 20 Siliem 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Silingen 04 52 40 25 20 Sillenstede 05 53 30 24 20 Sillery 01 49 00 20 10 Sillierthal 36 50 40 27 40 Silmenaw 28 51 00 34 20 Silmenitz 09 54 20 31 10 Silneviz 09 54 30 31 20 Silon 10, 12 51 30 30 50 Silow 07 53 15 29 50 Silsted 18 51 30 27 40 Siltz 38, 41, 42 48 55 24 25 Simbsen 24, 25, 26 51 40 33 00 Simens 07 53 45 27 50 Simetzhaiw 45 48 30 25 20 Simmelwitz 28 51 15 34 55 Simmere 1, 38 50 00 23 40 Simmeren 39 50 00 23 40 SimmerenDuc. 39 49 50 23 40 Simmeringen 73 49 35 26 15 Simmeneck 38 46 00 23 40 Simsdorf 28, 29 51 15 34 05 Simting 33 49 50 29 10 Sin fl. 37 49 55 26 00 Sinchrist 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Sindelbach 34 49 20 28 30 Sindeltzhcim 37 49 30 26 05 Sindering 1, 34, 38, 45 49 10 26 10 Sindlsing 45 48 30 25 30 Sinem 16 52 05 26 50 Singen 19 50 45 27 50 Singerberg 19 50 45 27 50 Sinling 45 48 20 25 30 Sinow 07 53 15 30 20 Sinsleben 18 51 20 28 00 Sinsz 38 46 40 27 40 Sintel Mons 6, 17 52 05 26 10 Sintzen 45 49 05 25 20 Sintzheim 39 49 00 25 20 Sintzleben 14, 20 51 25 28 10 Sion 38, 39 49 30 24 10 Sippach 22 50 50 29 00 Sipsen 07 53 55 29 30 Siradia 01 51 30 35 40 Sirchen 27, 28 51 25 33 45 Sirding 28 51 00 34 15 Sirey 38, 41, 42 48 30 23 25 Sirgwitz 29 51 10 32 35 Siriek 38 49 20 22 20 Sirsberg 01 49 20 22 50 Sirsdorf 07 53 45 29 30 Sisegh 01 45 50 34 30 Sisicken 38 46 20 25 00 Sislabbe 07 53 20 28 50 Sissach 38, 43 47 20 24 15 Sissbegk 16 52 20 27 50 Sissich 41 47 20 24 10 Sissow 09 54 20 31 00 Sisted 16, 18 52 15 28 00 Siten 08 54 00 31 00 Sitlist 07 53 25 28 30 Sitta 25 51 30 33 40 Sittaw 02 50 50 30 40 Sitte 27 51 35 33 45 Sittekow 08 54 10 33 30 Sitten 38 45 20 23 40 Sittendorff 16, 19, 20 51 30 28 00 Sitten Syon 01 45 40 23 50 Sittert 38 50 40 22 00 Sittichenbach 19, 20 51 35 28 20 Sittzen 41 48 25 24 05 Sitzerode 2, 22 51 30 29 50 Siversdorff 10, 12, 13 52 00 31 50 Sivershagen 07 53 45 28 10 Sivershusen 6, 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Sivirie 38 46 00 23 00 Sixti 41, 44 48 30 24 15 Skalenen 42 48 30 24 30 Skali 1, 24 50 30 32 00 Skalitz 32 48 50 34 30 Skalka 2, 33 50 20 30 40 Skall 2, 33 50 20 32 10 Skaly 2, 33 50 30 32 20 Skantz 1, 10, 11 52 46 28 50 Scassow 33 50 10 32 00 Skeiden 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Skol 29 51 15 33 30 Skotzow 24 49 50 35 30 Skrben 1, 32 49 30 34 10 Skriple 33 49 40 31 00 Skschiwan 33 50 10 32 20 Skucz 32, 33 49 40 32 50 Slabati 33 48 50 31 00 Slabnitz 01 48 40 32 20 Slackewald 33 49 50 29 40 Slage 08 54 30 34 00 Slages 09 54 25 30 50 Slagetin 14 52 10 29 20 Slakendorp 07 53 55 29 40 Slakow 08 54 40 34 00 Slamerow 21 51 50 29 30 Slamerstoop 02 54 10 27 00 Slammin 07 53 50 28 50 Slancy 31 50 15 32 50 Slanskykrag 33 50 10 30 40 Slatcow 08 53 20 33 00 Slate 07 53 20 29 00 Slatenitz 32 49 20 34 10 Slavin 08 54 30 34 00 Slavin lacus 08 53 10 33 00 Slavonia 01 46 20 34 00 Slaupnice 32 49 40 33 20 Slaupnitz 33 49 50 33 10 Slaustede 15 52 10 27 40 Slawanitz 33 48 50 32 20 Slawiczin 1, 32 49 00 35 00 Slecnberg 19, 36 50 35 27 40 Slewel 33 48 40 31 00 Slekelsdorff 2, 15 52 50 29 00 Slemmin 07 54 15 29 50 Slenborg 02 54 20 26 10 Slesen 07 53 05 28 20 Slesow 02 53 10 28 00 Slestat 01 48 15 24 00 Sleswicensis Duc. 01 55 00 25 40 Sleswick 01 54 50 26 10 Sleveke 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Sleuhusen 04 52 20 24 40 Sleyden 38 50 20 22 40 Slickau 22 50 50 29 10 Slickwerck 22 50 10 29 50 Sliken 16, 17 52 10 26 30 Sling 10, 12 52 40 30 40 Slisen 02 54 30 26 20 Sloer fl. 02 54 20 26 00 Slonnevitz 10, 13 53 40 32 40 Slooten 01 53 00 21 50 Slopa 10, 13 53 00 33 10 Sloten 38 53 00 21 20 Slotteruheim 19 51 05 27 50 Slowe 07 53 30 30 00 Slube fl. 10 52 00 31 50 Slucht 34 49 30 28 50 Sluchteren 39 49 00 25 40 Sluetelbeorg 15 52 30 25 20 Sluidorf 22 50 30 29 00 Slukip 02 54 00 27 30 Slukup 07 53 45 27 30 Slunitz 33 50 10 30 50 Slussowitz 32 49 10 34 50 Slute 05 53 15 25 00 Sluys 01 51 20 19 20 Smacht 09 54 25 31 30 Smachthagen 07 53 50 28 00 Smaddebeke 07 54 00 29 00 Smaggerow 12 53 10 31 10 Smalenberg 01 51 00 24 30 Smalkalden 1, 34 50 40 27 20 Smallnborg 38 51 00 24 40 Smalnau 34 50 30 26 30 Smantevitz 09 54 45 31 10 Smarle 07 54 05 29 10 Smarsow 06 52 45 27 50 Smatzin 08 54 00 30 30 Smedebergk 10, 12, 13 53 00 31 00 Smedenstedde 16, 17 52 10 27 00 Smedesdorf 14 52 15 29 20 Smellen 01 52 00 32 50 Smelletin 08 53 20 31 30 Smerin 02 53 20 28 50 Smersheim 44 48 25 24 05 Smersitz 32 49 20 34 10 Smert 19 51 00 27 40 Smertzke 10, 12 52 00 29 40 Smertzow 12, 11, 14 52 35 28 40 Smetznani 33 50 00 30 50 Smetznat 02 50 10 29 50 Smidany 2, 33 50 10 32 20 Smidssterth 05 53 40 24 30 Smidtberg 2, 15 51 30 29 40 Smierseberg 29 51 30 33 10 Smilgendorff 11, 50 21 40 30 40 Smit 07 53 35 29 20 Smokewitz 10, 12 52 00 31 00 Smolen 2, 10, 11 53 00 27 40 Smolsin 08 55 00 34 30 Smuggerow 8, 10, 12 53 20 31 10
Smuschutz 2, 33 50 10 32 40 Snadsberg 10, 12 51 50 31 50 Snaim 33 48 40 32 50 Snakenborg 06 52 55 28 00 Snakerode 14, 20 51 20 28 10 Snathe 25, 26 52 00 33 00 Sneeberg 01 50 30 29 30 Sneeck 1, 38 53 00 21 30 Snege 2, 6 52 45 27 20 Sneitlingen 16 51 55 28 20 Snena 01 52 30 35 20 Sneppenborch 22 50 40 29 20 Snoring 34 40 00 28 10 Snornitz 22 50 00 28 10 Soand 23 51 15 31 40 Sobelitz 01 51 20 31 40 Sobernheim 38, 39 49 40 23 40 Sobi fl. 24 49 40 36 00 Sobieslaw 33 49 10 31 40 Sobotischt 2 48 40 34 50 Sochan 08 53 20 33 00 Soden 35 50 00 24 50 Soder 16, 17 50 00 26 40 Soechoff 15 52 20 26 40 Soekefrund 03 53 45 26 30 Soelde 15 52 10 27 00 Soest 01 51 30 24 30 Sofersheim 34 48 50 28 00 Sofhoff 41, 42 48 50 24 25 Sofingen 01 47 00 24 20 Sofra 2, 33 49 20 32 40 Sohochleh 2, 33 50 30 30 40 Soida 33 50 40 30 10 Soingniers 1, 38 50 40 20 10 Soiffons 01 49 20 19 10 Soitz 32, 33 48 50 34 10 Soitzow 17 53 15 30 00 Sokelrade 07 52 55 28 30 Sokolnitz 32 49 00 34 00 Sokolom 32 49 30 34 10 Solach fl. 41 48 50 24 35 Soland 22, 23 51 00 31 20 Solbach 41, 42 48 20 23 40 Solchwitz 23 51 20 31 10 Solckow 09 54 25 31 00 Soldalem 16, 18 52 10 27 20 Soldin 1, 8, 10, 12, 13 52 40 32 00 Soleffdorff 10 53 10 29 30 Solem 14, 21 51 20 29 20 Solen 14 51 45 28 40 Wolentin 10, 11 52 40 29 00 Solgrben 20 51 25 28 00 Solinge 15 51 40 26 00 Solinge fl. 15 51 40 26 00 Solinger woldt 15 41 30 26 00 Sollinck Sylva 17 51 40 26 20 Sollingen 16, 18 52 05 27 50 Solm 26 52 25 32 30 Solmer 16 52 05 27 30 Solms 1, 38 50 20 24 40 Solmtz 2, 33 50 00 33 10 Solothum 1, 38 46 40 23 40 Solpke 10, 11, 14 52 10 28 10 Solske 16, 17 52 10 26 50 Solstet 16, 19 51 20 27 10 Soltawerheide 4, 5, 6, 54 00 34 30 Soltenitz 08 54 00 34 30 Soltow 1, 4, 5, 6 53 20 26 30 Soltwedel 1, 15 53 00 28 00 Soltzbach 39 49 20 23 20 Soltze 10, 13 53 30 32 40 Soluvicz 20 51 40 29 00 Solwitz 21 51 10 29 00 Soly 16, 17 52 05 27 00 Somerd 01 51 40 20 10 Someren 15 51 10 28 00 Somersdorp 08 53 10 31 30 Smme Py 01 49 10 20 30 Sommeraa 01 49 50 25 50 Sommerfelt 1, 24, 25 51 40 32 00 Sommeringen 19 51 15 27 40 Sommeritz 22 50 50 29 10 Sommersenborg 06 52 00 27 40 Sommersburg 1, 14, 16 52 20 28 10 Sommershausen 34 49 30 26 50 Sommersnborn 18 51 55 27 50 Somssin 2, 33 50 20 32 10 Sonberg 24 50 40 34 00 Sonder 18 51 45 27 00 Sonderriedt 37 49 40 26 00 Sondrio 01 45 40 26 30 Sonneberg 33, 36 50 20 30 00 Sonneborn 19 51 00 27 20 Sonneberg 8, 10, 12, 13 53 10 31 10 Sonnenburg 24, 25 52 30 31 30 Sonnewaldt 1, 2, 21 51 50 30 50 Sonfted 16 52 15 27 40 Sonthaim 45 48 15 26 20 Sontheim 36 50 25 26 50 Soostorf 19, 36 50 40 26 30 Sopkendorf 28 51 00 33 45 Soppelen 01 53 30 26 10 Sora 24 50 00 35 30 Soraw 23, 24, 25, 26 51 40 32 10 Sorbie fl. 19 50 35 28 00 Sorbitz 19 50 35 25 00 Sorga 30 50 40 34 20 Sorge 27 51 25 33 40 Sorhoff 16, 17 42 00 27 00 Sorin 07 53 30 28 00 Soritsch 31 50 15 33 30 Sorleg 01 50 10 20 10 Sorlin 01 46 20 21 50 Sormnitz fl. 19 50 30 28 30 Sorr fl. 40, 41, 42 48 30 24 20 Sorsem 16 52 05 26 20 Sorsum 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Sodorff 21 51 15 29 50 Sosinuck 01 49 50 23 10 Sosmar 16, 17 52 10 26 50 Sosna 22, 23 50 00 30 20 Sosnikowitz 24 50 20 35 00 Sosperg 33 48 40 30 40 Sospurg 01 48 30 34 40 Sot fl. 25 53 00 24 10 Soswald 33 48 40 30 30 Sotbrun 41, 42 48 25 23 50 Sotrum 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Sott 41, 43 47 25 23 35 Sottenberg 34 50 00 26 40 Sotterlin 18 51 35 27 20 Sotterlinburk 18 51 35 27 20 Sottmer 05 53 15 25 40 Soveneck 01 53 50 27 20 Soulenaw 15 51 10 28 40 Sour 38 49 40 21 40 Sources 01 47 20 20 30 Sousia 23 51 15 31 50 Sowelin 08 55 00 35 30 Sowin 25, 27 51 50 33 40 Spaa 01 50 20 22 10 Spadenlandt 3, 6 53 45 26 40 Spadlant 02 53 50 26 30 Spaiching 45 47 50 25 20 Spalt 1, 34 49 00 27 50 Spameke 15 51 30 26 20 Span 24, 32 49 40 34 30 Spanbeck 19 51 45 26 30 Spandow 1, 2, 10, 12 52 30 30 30 Spandowerhagen 09 54 05 30 40 Spangenberg 01 51 00 26 20 Spanheim 1, 39 49 50 23 50 Spantrow 08 53 50 30 30 Sparow 07 53 25 29 30 Sparenwolde 08 53 30 31 30 Sparnberch 34 50 20 28 40 Sparnitz 02 53 20 28 10 Sparrenselt 10, 12 53 20 31 20 Sparrishoepe 05 53 50 26 10 Spar Vesper 27 51 35 33 30 Spasbach 41, 42 48 40 24 15 Spatz 10, 12, 14 52 20 29 20 Specke 7, 8 53 25 30 00 Specken 05 53 05 24 50 Specksbrun 19 50 25 28 10 Spegel 10, 13 53 20 32 50 Speir 38, 39, 40, 45 49 00 25 00 Speir 19 51 25 27 30 Spelberg 10, 13 52 10 32 40 Spelsert 40 48 45 24 50 Spenshart 22, 34 49 40 28 50 Sperlingmuhl 29 51 25 33 10 Sperrenberg 10, 12 51 40 30 50 Sperrnsdorff 22 51 00 29 50 Spesbach 41, 43 47 35 23 40 Spesberg 41, 42 48 15 23 50 Speshart 34 50 00 25 50 Speshartwaldt 37 49 50 25 55 Spicher 19 51 00 26 50 Spichers 38 50 20 26 20 Spicke 05 53 45 25 00 Spickendorff 21 51 05 29 00 Spicker 09 54 45 31 20 Spickers 34 50 20 26 30 Spiegelberg 16, 17 52 00 26 20 Spieglaw 1, 33 48 40 30 40 Spiekz 01 48 10 32 40 Spiera 20 51 20 27 50 Spier Bach 39 49 00 24 40 Spiessem 39 49 40 24 20 Spietz 1, 38 46 20 24 00 Spiglitz 31 50 00 34 00 Spiker 08 54 40 30 30 Spilberg 19, 20 51 20 28 30 Spilimberg 01 46 00 30 00 Spillendorff 28 51 00 33 45 Spillermuhle 28 51 10 34 00 Spilmes 22 50 20 28 50 Spintvach 23 51 30 32 00 Spissen 39 49 20 23 20 Spital 38 49 00 23 00 Spitin 32 49 00 34 40 Spitke 28 51 10 35 05 Spittal 38 46 00 24 40 Spitteldorff 29 51 20 33 20 Spitzberg 23, 24, 25 51 00 32 40 Spitzigebreite 20 51 50 28 20 Splugen 1, 38 46 00 25 50 Spock 40 48 55 24 50 Spole 05 53 15 24 40 Spolenholt 07 53 30 30 40 Sponeck 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 05 Sponsberg 28 51 15 34 05 Sporensdorp 07 53 55 29 40 Spornitz 07 53 15 28 50 Spornuissa 22 51 00 29 10 Sporwitz 30 50 45 34 00 Sprakensee 1, 4 53 00 27 20 Spreehagen 10, 12 52 00 31 20 Sprehe 1, 22, 23 51 20 31 20 Sprehenberg 1, 23, 24 51 30 31 30 Spremberg 2, 33 51 10 31 30 Sprenlingen 35 49 55 25 00 Sprentz 07 53 55 29 20 Spresa fl. 22 50 50 29 10 Spreta 19 51 10 28 00 Sprinck fl. 16, 19 51 25 28 10 Springlingen 39 49 50 25 00 Sprinlingen 39 49 40 24 10 Sprinsenstein 33 48 20 31 00 Sprissevitz 09 54 35 31 20 Sprocod 33 49 40 31 40 Sprokhuevel 38 51 00 23 20 Sprote 21, 22 50 55 29 30 Sprotta fl. 24, 26, 29 51 30 32 30 Sprottae fons 25, 26 51 20 33 00 Sdrottaw 1, 23, 24, 25 51 30 32 30 Sprottaviensis Cir 26 51 40 32 40 Sprottichen 24, 25, 26 51 25 33 00 Sprottischkupper 26 51 35 32 20 Spyck 04 54 20 24 40 Spycker 2, 3, 6 53 40 26 40 Spykeroogh 1, 38 54 10 23 30 Squirsina 08 52 40 33 30 Srasbere 38 47 40 25 40 Srbitz 33 49 20 30 10 Srackhausen 19 51 30 27 40 Sshirshin 33 49 50 31 30 Ssip 32 49 00 33 40 Sstiablow 33 49 30 30 30 Sstibewitz 2, 33 50 00 32 10 Stabelwitz 25, 28 51 10 33 40 Stablo 1, 38 50 20 22 20 Stade 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 54 00 25 40 Stadeck 1, 39 49 50 24 20 Stadel 01 47 10 33 20 Stadelhofen 34 49 50 28 00 Stadelhoff 40, 41, 42 48 25 24 30 Stadentz 02 49 30 31 20 Stader Sannt 03 53 50 25 40 Stadertoll 2, 3 53 50 25 40 Stading 05 53 25 24 50 Stading Sandt 05 53 20 24 50 Stadion 45 47 55 26 20 Stadiaw 33 48 20 33 00 Stadle 1, 24 50 10 34 00 Stadlin 1, 24, 28 51 10 35 00 Stadloon 01 52 00 23 10 Stadmuhl 29 51 20 33 25 Stadt 38 45 42 23 40 Stadtgraben 23 51 15 31 50 Stadthagen 1, 4, 17 52 20 25 50 Stael 17 51 50 26 00 Staettelstet 36 50 55 27 10 Stafelfelt 41, 43 47 40 23 40 Staffelde 10 52 30 30 00 Staffelt 10, 12, 13 53 10 31 30 Staffelstein 34, 36 50 10 27 50 Staffurt 1, 39, 40, 41 48 50 24 50 Stagicht 14 51 40 29 20 Stagtatz 08 53 50 33 30 Stahl 32 49 40 34 20 Stain 22, 34 49 50 28 10 Stainach 22, 45 50 00 28 10 Stainam 34, 38 50 20 26 00 Stainbach 34 50 30 28 10 Staineck 38 48 20 25 20 Stainenbron 35 48 25 25 40 Staingloe 34 49 20 28 50 Stainhaim 38, 39, 45 48 40 25 50 Stainhofen 45 48 00 25 30 Stainhulben 45 48 05 26 00 Stainpach 22, 34 50 00 28 40 Stainreinach 45 48 40 26 00 Stainwisen 22, 34 50 10 28 10 Stakelitz 10, 14, 21 51 40 29 30 Staken 10, 12 52 10 30 20 Stal 01 47 00 30 30 Stalberg 38, 39 49 30 24 00 Stalitz 10, 12 52 40 29 30 Stallenow 15 52 40 25 20 Stambs 01 46 50 27 50 Stamel 22 51 20 29 10 Stamesd. 33 48 20 33 30 Stamfried 33 49 00 29 40 Stamhaim 45 48 40 25 40 Stamm 45 48 30 25 20 Stammel 10, 13 53 30 32 30 Stammen 16 51 25 26 30 Stampach 33 48 20 31 20 Stangendorf 22 50 40 29 40 Stangenhagen 10, 12 51 50 30 30 Stangenrode 15, 20 51 40 28 00 Stangerberg 45 49 00 26 10 Stangeroda 16, 18 51 40 28 10 Stankow 33 49 20 30 10 Stansdorff 10, 12 52 00 31 10 Stantz 01 46 30 24 50 Stapel 10, 11 52 40 28 30 Stapelnburk 18 51 30 27 20 Stapferich 40 48 45 24 50 Starawes 32 49 20 34 30 Starckaw 41, 43 47 40 23 25 Starckenberg 39 49 30 25 10 Starcket 33 50 30 33 10 Starcz 32 49 00 33 00 Starehrady 33 50 20 32 10 Starenberg 01 47 50 33 50 Staresteth 02 50 20 31 50 Stargard 1, 8 53 20 32 30 Stargert 08 53 50 33 00 Starnberg 01 48 00 30 50 Starpel 25, 26 52 20 32 20
Starrewitz 09 54 50 31 00 Starsl. 22 51 10 29 10 Starsow 7, 10, 12 53 00 29 50 Startz 08 53 50 32 30 Startzl 45 48 05 25 50 Startzl fl. 45 48 05 25 30 Starwitz 30 50 30 34 10 Starzedel 25 51 50 31 40 Stasenaw 02 53 10 28 20 Stasfurt 1, 2, 15 52 00 28 30 Stathagen 15 52 30 25 40 Stathospach 19 51 05 26 30 Statkyl 38 50 20 22 40 Statloo 38 52 00 23 00 Stats 33 48 40 33 30 Stattmatt 40, 41, 42 48 35 24 25 Statworbe 16, 19 51 25 27 30 Statworbys 16, 19 51 25 27 20 Statz 10, 11, 14 52 15 28 40 Stave 08 53 30 30 30 Stavel 09 54 40 31 30 Staven 07 53 40 30 40 Staveren 1, 38 53 00 21 20 Stauf 1, 34 49 00 28 10 Struffe 39 49 20 24 20 Stauffen 40, 41, 43 47 45 24 15 Stauffenberg 15, 16, 17 51 45 27 00 Stauffenburg 45 48 05 25 40 Stauffeneck 45 48 30 26 30 Stavenhagen 7, 8 53 40 30 10 Staw 24 52 00 35 00 Stawenow 10, 11 53 00 28 20 Steysling 45 48 10 26 20 Stebach 45 49 00 23 30 Stebiau 04 54 20 26 20 Stebra 22 51 10 28 30 Stechow 07 54 00 29 40 Steckaw 01 47 20 32 20 Steckburen 01 47 20 25 40 Steckbus 14, 21 51 30 29 00 Steckesberg 18 51 25 27 50 Steckenraidt 39 50 00 24 20 Steckersdorff 14 52 20 29 20 Steckhowitz 2, 33 49 40 31 20 Steckig 22 50 20 29 10 Steckoy 10 51 20 29 20 Stede 05 53 05 24 50 Stedefelt 19 51 00 26 50 Steden 17 52 30 26 50 Steder 09 54 35 31 20 Stederborch 15 52 30 27 20 Stedorp 17 52 35 27 00 Stedingen 05 53 05 25 00 Steenbeke 07 53 15 28 00 Steenberg 15 52 10 25 20 Steenbergen 1, 38 51 30 20 20 Steenfeld 4, 7 54 00 28 20 Steenford 38 52 00 23 20 Steenwyck 1, 38 52 50 22 00 Steffansdorff 25 51 10 33 40 Stefansfelt 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 10 Steffesdorff 28, 29 51 10 33 35 Steg 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Stegen 01 47 50 28 10 Steglitz 10, 12 52 00 30 30 Stegnitz 2, 15 52 20 28 40 Stehausen 39 49 00 23 40 Stehovel 08 53 30 33 00 Steigen 19 51 20 28 30 Steiger 15, 20 51 20 28 40 Steigerbeck 06 52 25 25 50 Steigerberg 4, 16 52 40 25 40 Steigerthal 16, 19 51 35 27 50 Steilitz 10, 12 52 50 30 50 Steimur 41 48 40 24 35 Stein 40, 41, 43 47 25 24 25 Steina 25, 28 51 10 34 20 Steinaw 1, 25, 26 51 30 33 30 Steinach 34, 39, 45 49 10 25 20 Steinb 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 45 Steinbach 25, 26 52 10 32 00 Steinball 05 53 45 24 20 Steinbeke 2, 3, 5, 6 53 50 26 40 Steinberg 10, 13 53 10 32 50 Steinbleiss 22 50 40 29 20 Steinborch 07 53 20 29 00 Steinborn 26 51 50 32 20 Steinbrucher 29 51 15 32 20 Steinbruck 06 52 00 26 40 Steinbruckel 41, 43 47 45 24 05 Steinbrucken 14 51 10 28 00 Steinbrugge 4, 17 52 20 27 00 Steinbrun 40, 41, 43 47 45 24 05 Steinbubel 30 50 25 34 20 Steincke 04 52 40 28 20 Steindall 2, 15 52 40 28 40 Steindem 19 50 35 27 50 Steindor 22 50 50 29 10 Steineck 40 48 40 25 05 Steinegg 40 47 35 24 25 Steinem 16 52 15 27 40 Steinen 40 47 35 24 15 Steinenstat 40 47 40 24 05 Steiner 41 48 15 23 50 Steinerdorff 28 51 10 35 05 Steinern Creutz 36 50 30 27 50 Steinfeldt 10, 11, 14 52 20 28 50 Steinfels 41, 42 48 50 24 30 Steinforde 6, 16 52 25 26 30 Steinbaghen 08 54 20 30 00 Steinheim 34, 35 49 50 25 10 Steinhorst 04 53 00 27 20 Steinhude 4, 16 52 40 26 00 Steinhuder Meer 4, 16 52 40 26 00 Steinmauren 40 48 45 24 40 Steinkautz 35 49 55 25 00 Steinke 10, 16 52 10 27 50 Steinkirch 23, 25 51 10 32 10 Steinla 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Steinlausig 14, 15, 21 51 10 29 20 Steinmuhl 27 51 45 33 20 Steinmur 42 48 40 24 35 Steinsdorff 19, 22 50 35 28 30 Steinseifersdorf 31 50 45 33 30 Steinstat 41, 43 47 40 24 00 Steinsultz 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Steintal 41, 42 48 15 23 35 Steintalleb 16, 19 51 25 28 00 Steinthale 20 51 30 28 00 Steinvoren 07 53 05 30 20 Steinwasser fl. 25, 26 52 20 33 20 Steinwedel 17 52 35 26 50 Steinweer 10, 13 52 40 31 40 Steinweiler 39 49 20 23 20 Steinwil 41, 42 48 55 24 35 Steinwitz 31 50 25 33 30 Steiredebuil 39 49 30 24 10 Steissberg 45 49 00 25 20 Stekelburg 16 51 45 27 50 Stekelin 08 53 00 32 00 Stekne 33 49 10 31 00 Steckstat 38 49 40 24 40 Stelen 19 51 10 28 50 Steling 16 52 15 26 30 Stellentz 07 53 30 28 00 Stellicht 04 53 20 26 00 Stellingen 44 48 30 24 25 Stelnbach fl. 19 50 30 27 50 Stelpen 10, 13 52 40 31 40 Steltingen 41, 42 48 35 24 30 Steltzeberg 29 51 10 33 15 Steltzen 22 5020 28 50 Stembach 36 50 30 27 40 Stemberg 20 51 45 28 20 Stemen 15 52 10 28 20 Stemitz 22 50 50 29 20 Stemlberg 41, 43 47 50 23 35 Stemme 15 52 10 25 20 Stemmen 14 51 35 28 40 Stemmerberg 06 52 15 25 20 Stemnitz 08 54 40 34 00 Stempel 16, 19 51 35 28 00 Stemplowetz 32 49 50 34 30 Stempruc 22 50 50 29 00 Stenay 01 49 30 21 20 Stenbecke 04 54 00 26 40 Stenborg 04 54 20 26 00 Stenbrug 01 52 20 27 00 Stendel 1, 11, 14 52 20 29 00 Stendorff 10, 12, 21 51 40 29 40 Stene 22 51 10 29 20 Stenfort 08 53 50 34 00 Stenfurt 10, 12 52 30 31 00 Stenheim 01 51 50 25 30 Stenhovel 10, 13 53 20 32 30 Stenhusen 05 53 20 24 30 Stenitz 14 52 15 29 10 Stentsch 25, 26 52 20 32 20 Stentzke 10, 12 52 20 29 40 Stepenitz 10, 11 53 10 28 40 Sterburk 18 51 50 27 00 Sterckbach 41 48 20 23 45 Sterckow 08 54 20 29 30 Sterdel 22 51 00 28 40 Sterkburg 4, 16 52 20 27 20 Sterkelin 10, 13 53 00 31 40 Sterknbergh 20 51 50 27 50 Sternbach 40 48 10 24 30 Sternberg 10, 12, 24 52 20 31 10 Sternbergk 10, 13 52 10 32 30 Sternbrucken 16, 19 51 30 27 50 Sterneberg 2, 4, 7 53 40 28 50 Sternenfels 39, 45 48 50 25 20 Sternin 08 54 00 33 00 Sterpferes 34 50 20 26 10 Stertzendorff 28 51 10 35 05 Stertzingen 01 46 30 28 30 Steruner 16 52 00 26 00 Sterzitezh 32 49 10 32 40 Stesfurt 21 51 35 28 20 Stesow 07 53 00 28 40 Stet 36 50 45 27 20 Steten 19 50 55 27 40 Stetenfels 45 48 55 25 50 Stetlingen 36 50 30 27 10 Stetln 45 48 00 25 20 Stetna fl. 33 50 30 33 30 Stetten 40, 41, 43 47 30 23 50 Stettin 10, 12, 13 53 20 31 40 Steuben 22 51 00 29 50 Steudelwitz 27 51 35 33 15 Steudnitz 29 51 15 33 05 Steurwolde 15, 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Steuten 22 51 00 29 50 Steweken 10, 12 52 00 31 10 Stewin 10, 12 52 40 29 40 Steyfeling 38 48 00 26 20 Steynuch 2, 15 52 40 27 40 Steynville 01 48 30 21 20 Steyr 01 48 00 31 40 Stibendorf 30 50 25 34 10 Stibnitz 31 49 55 33 20 Sticken 10, 12 51 50 30 30 Stickhusen 01 53 20 23 40 Stidenrode 16 51 15 26 50 Stiddium 16 52 10 27 10 Stiege 18 51 15 27 30 Stierstadt 35 50 00 24 55 Stilen 02 53 40 28 30 Stilhoren 03 53 45 26 30 Stilhorensekirch 2, 3 53 50 26 30 Still 41, 42 48 20 23 55 Stilli 38 47 00 24 40 Stillsted 16 51 50 27 50 Stilspringen 36 50 35 27 20 Stinbrucke 20 51 40 28 00 Stinoviensis 27 51 30 33 20 Stipa 32 49 10 34 40 Stipelitz 2, 7 53 15 27 40 Stirburg 34 49 30 28 20 Stirchmilaw 32, 33 48 50 32 20 Stiria Ducatus 01 47 20 32 00 Stistungg 40 48 30 24 30 Stiten 07 53 35 28 50 Stitzen 42 48 25 23 05 Stnitz 22 51 20 29 30 Stobelow 07 54 00 29 10 Stober fl. 24, 28, 30 51 00 34 30 Stobnicza 01 52 30 34 00 Stock 32, 33 49 10 32 40 Stockbach fl. 20 51 45 28 20 Stockelstorp 02 54 10 27 10 Stockem 1, 38 50 10 22 10 Stockemtrever 16 52 30 26 20 Stocken 4, 6 52 40 26 00 Stockenfels 34 49 10 29 10 Stockhausen 19 51 00 26 00 Stockerow 01 48 20 33 20 Stockesen 16 51 25 27 00 Stockey 16 51 30 27 20 Stockheim 36 56 25 27 00 Stockoch 45 48 55 25 40 Stockse 16 52 25 26 00 Stockstatt 39 49 40 24 50 Stockum 15 51 40 26 20 Stoczow 01 49 30 36 00 Stod 1, 33 49 30 30 10 Stoebnicz 20 51 20 28 40 Stoer fl. 05 53 55 26 10 Stohrlingburg 16 51 55 27 30 Stojentin 08 54 50 35 00 Stoissi 08 53 40 32 30 Stolan 2, 33 49 50 32 40 Stolbach fl. 19 51 45 28 20 Stolberg 1, 15, 19, 20 51 40 27 40 Stolham 05 53 10 24 50 Stolhoff 38 48 20 24 20 Stollhoffen 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 30 Stolinkr 02 50 30 30 10 Stolkow 08 54 00 32 30 Stollen 10, 12 52 20 29 20 Stollenburgh 20 51 45 28 30 Stolmkr. 33 50 30 31 10 Stolp 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 20 Stolpa 2, 15, 21 51 50 29 40 Stolpe fl. 08 54 30 35 30 Stolpe 7, 8 53 15 30 40 Stolpen 1, 2, 22, 23 51 00 31 00 Stolpmul 10, 11 52 50 29 10 Stolpmunde 08 54 50 34 00 Stolseiffen 31 50 05 33 30 Stolten 41 47 30 24 10 Stoltenberg 08 53 30 32 30 Stotenborg 08 53 30 31 00 Stoltenfelde 10, 13 53 00 32 40 Stotenhagen 08 53 20 33 00 Stoltenfelt 08 53 10 33 00 Stoltenow 1, 6, 16 52 20 25 50 Stoltezberg 10, 13 53 50 32 40 Stoltz 31, 36 50 35 33 50 Stoltzeberg 22 50 50 29 10 Stoltzenberg 23 51 15 32 10 Stolzenau 31 50 25 33 20 Stonacziow 33 49 10 32 20 Stonneren 1, 32 49 00 32 40 Stopfershausen 36 50 35 27 10 Stopschitz 28 51 05 33 50 Stoppelberg 36 50 45 27 00 Stor fl. 03 53 55 25 10 Storbeck 10, 11, 14 52 35 28 40 Storbeck Schepery 12 52 40 29 50 Storchnest 25, 26, 27 52 00 33 20 Storchow 10, 13 53 30 32 40 Storckaw 19, 20 51 20 28 50 Storckbach 42 48 20 23 45 Storckow 10, 13 52 20 28 50 Storhoff 41, 43 47 50 23 30 Storkow 1, 10, 12 51 50 31 20 Stormaria 02 54 10 26 20 Stormesdorp 07 54 00 29 40 Stormfelch 34 50 20 25 30 Storp 13 52 30 31 40 Storpel 10, 13 52 20 32 50 Stoswiher 41, 43 47 55 23 35 Stotel 1, 4, 5 53 40 24 40 Stotel fl. 04 54 00 24 40 Stothaue 07 54 10 29 20 Stotten 22 51 10 29 20 Stotzen 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 00 Stotzingen 45 48 25 27 00 Stoudernum 39 49 40 23 50 Stove 2, 7 53 40 27 50 Stowe 13 52 00 32 10
Strabut 18 51 40 29 20 Strachetvitz 09 54 40 31 30 Strachtitz 09 54 25 31 10 Strachwitz 28 51 05 34 00 Strack 21 51 30 29 40 Stradenmuhl 28 51 00 33 50 Stradenon 10, 13, 14 52 30 29 20 Stragut 02 52 00 28 10 Straisdorff 34 50 20 27 30 Strakevien 09 54 15 31 10 Strakonitz 01 49 00 31 00 Straldorff 10, 12 52 10 30 50 Stralen 38 51 20 22 20 Stralendorp 07 53 30 28 20 Stralsundt 1, 8, 9, 10 54 20 30 40 Stram 08 53 40 33 00 Strambeerg 24, 32 49 30 35 00 Strameissen 10 53 40 28 10 Stramelow 07 54 05 30 00 Stramentisch 01 46 00 28 30 Stramme 01 53 30 33 00 Stramoissen 07 53 50 28 50 Strancha 02 52 00 29 00 Stranow 33 50 10 31 50 Strasberg 45 47 55 25 50 Strasburg 40, 41, 43, 44 48 25 24 15 Straschkowitz 33 48 50 31 30 Strasdorff 45 48 40 26 20 Strase 07 53 00 28 30 Strasem 2, 7 53 05 30 10 Strasen 22 51 30 28 45 Strasendorp 07 53 10 28 50 Straskratscham 25 51 10 33 20 Strasnitz 1, 32 48 50 34 30 Strassitz 2, 33 50 00 30 50 Straubing 01 48 40 29 40 Straucha 15 52 00 29 40 Strauff 36 50 15 27 30 Straupitz 29 51 15 33 00 Strausberg 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 10 Strausfurt 19 51 10 27 40 Strausney 31 50 25 33 00 Strauwalda 23 51 05 31 40 Straues 15 52 00 29 00 Stray fl 34 50 30 26 50 Strazisko 32 49 20 34 00 Strebelow 08 53 20 32 30 Streeck 19 51 00 27 00 Strehe 25 51 50 31 40 Strehux 22 51 00 29 00 Streichen 45 48 00 25 40 Streichenperg 45 49 00 25 30 Streienperg 1, 34 49 50 28 00 Streiffelsdorff 25 51 50 32 20 Streisewitz 27 51 55 33 25 Streissberg 39 49 00 25 10 Streitberg 24, 25 51 00 33 00 Streitelsdorff 26 51 50 32 30 Streken 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 40 Strela 1, 33 49 10 30 50 Strelen 1, 15, 24 50 40 34 00 Strelitz 10, 12 53 10 30 00 Strempfelbach 45 48 35 26 00 Stengbag 41, 43 48 00 23 55 Strentz 07 53 45 29 10 Strepenitz 10, 11 53 00 28 30 Stresen 08 53 20 32 30 Stresow 15, 19, 20 51 30 28 50 Strete 09 54 30 31 20 Stretz 14 51 30 29 20 Streudnitz 25 51 10 33 00 Strew fl. 36 50 20 27 00 Striega 1, 24, 25 51 00 33 20 Strien 27 51 35 33 40 Striesa 28 51 15 34 10 Striesewitz 26 51 55 33 20 Strigendorff 30 50 35 34 10 Striggow 07 53 40 29 30 Strikow 25 52 20 33 20 Strilky 32 49 00 34 20 Strinnen 14 51 40 29 10 Strintz 20 51 50 28 40 Strissow 10, 11 52 50 28 20 Strittense 08 53 50 30 30 Strizow 33 48 50 31 30 Strobach 40, 44 48 15 24 30 Strobbel 02 54 50 26 00 Strobke 18 51 35 27 40 Strockhausen 16 51 25 27 50 Stroesdorp 07 53 40 28 00 Strokercke 07 53 15 28 10 Stromberg 39, 45 48 50 25 30 Strombeager Vorst 45 48 55 25 30 Stromburg 1, 39 49 50 23 55 Stromiendorp 07 53 55 28 30 Stronberg 23 51 15 31 30 Stropeke 16 51 55 27 50 Stroppen 24, 25, 27 51 30 33 40 Strosd. 08 53 10 32 30 Strowe 09 54 40 31 00 Strsch 33 49 00 31 40 Strubitz 30 50 30 34 20 Struckhusen 05 53 20 24 50 Struden 3 48 20 32 10 Struine 14 51 20 28 40 Strukdorp 02 54 10 27 10 Strukonitz 33 49 00 31 0 Strullendorff 34, 36 49 50 27 50 Struma fl. 15 52 30 29 20 Strumien 24 49 50 35 30 Struntz 25, 26 51 15 33 00 Strusa 28 51 00 33 45 Struschitz 33 49 40 30 40 Strushof 20 51 45 28 40 Strusmansdorp 09 54 35 31 20 Strut 38, 41, 43 47 25 23 35 Strutt 36 50 40 27 20 Strutz 32 49 00 33 40 Strzibra 1, 33 49 40 30 00 Strzitesch 33 49 20 32 20 Stubben 09 54 25 31 10 Stubbenitz 09 54 45 31 40 Stubbenkamer 08 54 40 31 00 Stubber 08 54 20 30 30 Stubbeson 09 54 40 31 00 Stuben 27, 28, 29 51 20 33 40 Stubengrund 31 50 15 33 20 Stublang 34, 36 50 00 28 00 Stubnitz 22 50 50 28 50 Stucken 16, 19 51 30 27 30 Stuckhaim 34 50 30 27 00 Studentz 33 49 40 32 40 Studernheim 39 49 20 24 50 Studhusen 05 53 10 24 10 Stuer 05 53 05 25 10 Stuesen 22 51 00 28 50 Stuke 07 53 00 28 30 Stulg 2, 15 52 00 29 00 Stulingen 1, 38, 41 47 30 24 50 Stultenhagen 10 52 30 30 40 Stum 01 53 50 37 00 Stumat 22 50 20 29 10 Stumbrun 41, 42 48 45 23 55 Stundwiler 41, 42 48 45 24 25 Stunuckewitz 09 54 30 31 10 Stunsyn 25 52 20 32 40 Stupselbrun 39 49 20 25 30 Studpach 37 59 30 26 15 Stuppendorp 02 53 50 27 20 Sture 10, 11 53 20 29 00 Sturtzelbrun 39, 41, 42 48 55 24 05 Sturwold 06 52 00 26 30 Stusa 28 51 05 33 35 Stutgardr Vorst 45 48 30 25 50 Stutgart 1, 45 48 35 25 50 Stuthagen 02 54 20 27 40 Stutz 14 51 30 29 10 Stutzengrin 22 50 20 29 30 Stuven 08 53 20 31 30 Stuvenhorn 02 54 10 26 50 Stwallangen 36 50 40 27 10 Stylhorn 05 53 30 26 30 Stynitz 10, 11 52 40 29 10 Styrten 15 51 00 28 00 Svantow 09 54 20 31 10 Svassange 39, 42 48 40 23 20 Suberstein 2, 33 49 20 33 00 Suchd 22 51 00 29 10 Suchdul 33 49 30 31 10 Sucheim 22 51 00 29 40 Suckaw 26 51 35 33 00 Suckwitz 10, 12 51 50 30 20 Sucou 08 54 30 34 30 Sucz 32 49 00 35 10 Sudderitz 09 54 50 31 10 Sudehof 07 53 20 28 10 Suder 09 54 20 31 10 Suderawe 05 53 50 26 00 Suder Elbe 05 53 55 25 10 Sudergrunden 05 53 50 24 50 Suderhattstede 05 54 05 25 50 Suderode 16, 20 51 45 28 00 Suderow 2, 3 53 55 25 30 Suderpippe 05 53 55 24 50 Sudersow 09 54 30 31 20 Sudtorf 16 52 20 26 20 Suerbrock 05 53 10 25 10 Sverin 2, 7 53 35 28 20 Sverinsche See 07 53 35 28 30 Suet 10, 13 52 50 31 30 Svetzingen 39 49 10 25 00 Svevus fl. 24 52 00 31 00 Sufelheim 38, 39, 42 48 40 24 25 Sufelum 40 48 40 24 25 Suffelweiersheim 40 48 30 24 15 Sug 01 46 50 25 00 Suiltz 09 54 50 31 10 Suine 09 54 25 31 10 Suinekendorp 07 53 40 29 50 Sukdol 33 49 50 32 00 Sukerow 10 52 00 30 20 Sukevitz 07 53 40 29 10 Sukow 2, 7 53 25 28 30 Sula 19, 34, 36 50 35 27 30 Sulauff 01 51 30 34 10 Sulckaw 26, 27 51 45 33 30 Sulckemitz 09 54 25 31 00 Sulckenhagen 08 54 00 33 30 Suldorff 18 51 35 28 30 Sulen 11 52 40 28 30 Sules 10, 13 53 00 32 10 Sulfelt 01 54 10 26 50 Suling 19 51 35 26 40 Sulingen 06 52 30 25 40 Sullichaw 01 52 00 32 40 Sullinckwaldt 16 51 35 26 30 Sulomiritsch 24 51 40 34 00 Sulow 07 53 40 28 50 Sulpeke 16 52 05 25 50 Sultbach 19 51 00 28 20 Sulte 1, 7, 8 54 05 29 50 Sultitz 09 54 25 31 30 Sultz 24, 25, 26 52 00 33 00 Sultza 19, 22 51 05 28 30 Sultzbae 41, 43 47 50 23 40 Sultzbarg 01 49 20 28 40 Sultzbach 34, 38, 45 48 50 26 10 Sultzbag 38 47 40 24 00 Sultzberg 41, 43 47 40 24 10 Sultzburg 34, 39 49 50 25 30 Sultzdorp 07 53 25 28 20 Sultzenbrucken 19 50 55 27 40 Sultzern 41 47 55 23 35 Sultzfelt 34, 36 50 30 27 10 Sultzgey 34 49 00 28 20 Sultzheim 39 49 30 24 30 Sultzmet 43 47 45 23 40 Sulvelt 2, 4 54 00 26 40 Sulvig 16 51 30 27 10 Sumada 01 46 00 26 30 Sumanda 01 46 10 26 40 Sumarein 01 48 00 35 10 Sumerau 01 49 00 30 00 Sumering 34 49 30 26 30 Summerow 37 49 40 25 50 Summersdorp 07 53 35 29 40 Sunberg 34 50 30 28 00 Sunderb. 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 25 Sunderen 16 51 25 27 00 Sunderhausen 1, 20 51 20 27 40 Sunderhoven 34 49 20 26 50 Sunderleben 15 52 00 28 00 Sundershausen 16, 19 51 20 27 50 Sundische Wisck 8, 9 54 30 30 00 Sundt 40 48 05 24 05 Sunenburg 18 51 45 28 40 Suningen 38 49 50 24 40 Sunlingen 35 50 00 24 50 Sunnenberg 10, 13 52 20 32 20 Sunolfing 45 48 15 25 50 Suntgaw 38, 41, 43 47 20 23 40 Sunthausen 19 50 55 27 20 Suutheim 41, 42, 43, 44 48 25 24 15 Sunthoff 41, 43 47 50 23 55 Sunthuss 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 05 Suntra 1, 19 51 00 26 30 Supling 14, 16, 18 52 05 27 40 Suplingenborg 06 52 00 27 30 Suppley 38 49 20 22 00 Supplin 15 52 30 27 40 Supplingburg 2, 16, 18 52 15 27 50 Sur fl. 38, 41, 42 48 40 24 20 Surbach 41, 42 48 20 23 50 Surbrun 39, 41 48 50 24 10 Surburg 39, 40, 41, 42 48 40 24 20 Surcy 38 49 40 21 20 Sure 07 53 25 28 00 Surharst 02 54 40 25 50 Surip 38 53 20 21 00 Surrendorp 09 54 35 30 5 0 Surrevitz 09 54 25 31 00 Sursee 1, 38 46 50 24 30 Sus fl. 42 48 40 24 25 Susance 38 47 00 22 20 Suschitz 1, 33 49 00 30 20 Susel 02 54 20 27 20 Suselheim 41 48 35 24 25 Susenhurg 41, 43 47 35 24 10 Susenhausen 40 48 20 24 30 Susitz 09 54 50 31 10 Susnhoff 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 25 Susow 07 53 50 28 40 Susred 33 48 40 31 50 Sussenborn 19 51 00 28 10 Sussera 16, 19 51 20 27 40 Suste 4, 6 53 20 27 00 Susteren 38 51 00 22 00 Stutendal 38 50 40 21 40 Stuterhausen 19, 20 51 35 28 20 Suthroda 17 51 40 26 50 Sutphen 01 52 10 22 10 Sutza 45 40 10 25 20 Suvel fl. 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Suvelwih 42, 44 48 25 24 10 Svenentzow 08 53 20 31 30 Suvehr 41 48 25 24 10 Suwerborg 4, 6 53 20 27 20 Suydthove 02 50 50 30 50 Suzerode 21 50 55 29 40 Swabenheim 39 49 50 24 20 Swaganow 2, 33 49 30 30 00 Swallen 39 49 40 23 20 Swan 1, 7, 10 53 55 29 10 Swanbeck 14 51 35 28 20 Swanebeke 07 53 45 30 40 Swanebok 10, 12 52 20 30 50 Swanenbecke 08 53 20 33 00 Swante 10, 13 53 10 32 10 Swantevitz 08 53 40 32 00 Swanto 12 52 20 30 10 Swanw 04 53 20 25 00 Swara 22 50 50 29 00 Swarb 09 54 55 31 10 Swarta fl. 32 49 10 33 30 Swartae fons 32 49 30 33 00 Swartegrunden 05 53 40 24 50 Swarte Masse Hem. 19 50 30 27 50 Swartendyck 01 53 10 22 10 Swartenhooven 01 49 20 29 20 Swartow 2, 7 53 20 27 30 Swarts 07 53 05 30 00 Swartsluys 01 52 50 22 00 Swartzburg 01 50 40 28 00
Swartenbron 01 50 40 26 00 Swas 07 54 05 29 10 Swasdorp 7, 10 53 25 30 00 Swatoboritz 32 48 50 34 20 Swats 01 47 10 28 50 Sweber 16, 17 51 55 26 00 Swechow 07 53 15 28 00 Sweel 01 53 00 22 40 Sweibe 04 53 40 24 20 Sweidnitz 24 51 50 32 00 Swemike 4, 6 53 00 27 20 Swemmin 2, 7 53 20 29 20 Swena 37 50 50 27 10 Swenons 10, 12, 13 53 10 31 20 Swenutz 33 50 50 33 20 Swera 1, 3 48 40 31 20 Swerin 1, 10 53 30 29 00 Swersborg 01 53 10 27 20 Swessow 08 53 50 32 30 Sweten 19 51 00 28 30 Swetl. 33 48 40 32 10 Swetlick 33 48 40 31 20 Swetlow 32 49 00 35 00 Swetzin 07 53 50 29 40 Swetzko 24 51 50 33 00 Swetznevitz 09 54 35 31 00 Sweybruck 01 49 10 23 40 Sweydnitz 01 50 50 33 20 Swichtele 01 53 00 22 20 Swichtenberg 7, 8 53 40 30 00 Swickaw 33 49 20 31 10 Swiert 01 51 20 23 50 Swigan 2, 33 50 30 32 00 Swigel 17 52 30 26 50 Swiggerow 07 53 40 29 20 Swine Ostium 08 54 00 31 30 Swingenberg 1, 39 49 30 25 10 Swirstn 08 54 20 34 30 Swirstat 41, 43 47 25 24 20 Swiry 33 48 50 31 40 Swisel 07 53 50 29 30 Swisow 07 53 50 29 10 Switawa fl. 33 49 30 33 20 Switawka 32, 33 49 20 33 30 Switta 2, 33 49 40 33 20 Swittersdorff 19 51 45 28 40 Switzge 05 53 35 25 50 Swoganow 32 49 30 33 20 Swoll 41 48 30 24 15 Swollin 08 54 10 34 00 Sworin 10 51 50 31 30 Swoysch 2, 33 49 30 33 00 Swraka 33 49 40 32 50 Swulpen 06 52 10 27 00 Swyneweyde 03 53 45 26 30 Sybisce 28 51 05 34 05 Sydow 10, 12 52 30 31 00 Syesdorf 10, 12 52 10 31 20 Sygersdorff 23 51 20 32 20 Syllens 05 53 30 24 50 Syller 23, 25, 26 51 40 32 20 Sympach 01 48 20 29 50 Syn fl. 34 50 10 26 20 Syp 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 30 Syratz 24 51 50 35 30 Syrawitz 32 48 50 33 10 Sychagen 02 54 10 27 30 Syrna 38 47 00 25 40 Sziewur 24 50 20 39 00 Szrzoda 01 52 10 34 40 T       TAber 28 51 00 34 15 Tablitz 22 50 20 29 00 Tabor 1, 33 49 20 31 30 Tachaw 33 49 40 29 50 Tagershaim 45 48 30 25 30 Tailfing 45 48 00 25 50 Tainach fl. 45 48 30 25 20 Takezyl 38 52 40 21 20 Tal 15 51 50 27 40 Tala 45 47 45 25 20 Talach 34 49 00 28 10 Talbach 19 51 45 28 20 Talbendorf 27, 29 51 30 33 15 Talborn 19 51 10 28 00 Talchenheim 23 51 10 31 20 Taldorff 19, 20 51 30 28 30 Talenberg 02 53 50 26 30 Talet 38 50 00 21 40 Talfing 45 48 25 26 00 Talheim 34 49 20 28 30 Talleben 20 51 15 27 50 Talleine 14, 21 51 15 28 50 Tallendorff 20 51 45 28 40 Talloire 01 45 30 22 30 Talmessing 34 49 00 28 10 Talwyl 38 46 40 25 00 Tambach 19, 36 50 45 27 20 Tamengermuhl 28 51 15 34 50 Tamm 45 48 45 25 40 Tammendorff 10, 13 52 10 32 20 Tammer 28 51 10 35 00 Tammersmuhl 28 51 10 35 05 Tammersbruck 19 51 10 27 20 Tamswegh. 01 47 10 31 10 Tana 45 48 05 25 40 Tanay 01 47 00 19 10 Tanbron 34, 45 49 00 25 50 Tanche 02 52 20 29 20 Tanckow 09 54 40 31 00 Tandorf 31 50 00 33 40 Tangedorf 10 53 00 28 30 Tangel 10, 11 52 20 27 50 Tangemitz 09 54 25 31 10 Tanger 2, 15 52 30 28 40 Tanger fl. 10, 14 51 10 28 50 Tangerdorf 11 53 05 28 50 Tangermunde 1, 15 52 40 29 00 Tangrun 07 54 05 29 50 Tanke 10, 13 52 40 32 30 Tann. 38, 39 49 00 24 00 Tanneberg 30 50 25 34 10 Tannetkirch 40 47 40 24 05 Tannstein 41, 42 49 00 24 15 Tanprun 34 49 00 28 30 Tanroda 19 50 55 28 00 Tanschow 33 49 40 30 10 Tanshim 02 50 00 30 30 Tantow 10, 12, 13 53 00 31 20 Tantz 31 50 20 33 00 Tanwald 38 51 20 33 50 Tanwaldermuhl 28 51 20 33 50 Tapolcha 01 47 00 35 30 Tarbitz 28 51 05 34 55 Tarchaw 09 54 45 31 30 Tarche 27 51 50 33 35 Tarlanok 26, 27 51 50 33 30 Tarn 30 50 40 34 20 Tarnr 24 51 50 32 30 Tarnaw 26, 27, 29 51 35 33 00 Tarne 21 51 15 29 40 Tarngw. 25 51 50 32 40 Tarnow 10, 13 53 40 2450 30 35 30 26, 27 51 50 33 20 Tarsow 07 53 45 28 40 Tartschen 23 51 30 32 10 Tartur 18 51 30 28 30 Taschopen 22 50 50 29 20 Taschwitz 23 51 35 31 00 Tasow 32, 33 49 10 33 20 Tassa 31 50 15 33 00 Tassdorff 10, 12, 13 52 10 31 10 Tassowitz 32 48 40 33 30 Tat 41 47 45 23 40 Tatenberg 3, 4 53 50 26 40 Tatenitz 32 49 40 33 40 Tating 02 55 00 25 50 Tattenroda 19 51 05 26 40 Taubach 19 51 00 28 10 Taubenthale 20 51 35 28 10 Tauber fl. 34, 37, 38 49 30 26 10 Taubetrencke 23, 25 51 20 32 10 Taucha 22 51 10 29 00 Tauchel 01 53 20 35 50 Tauchen 2, 15 52 20 29 20 Taucher 1, 15, 22 51 20 29 30 Tauchersreut 34 49 30 28 10 Tauchert 23 51 10 31 50 Tauchwitz 19 50 40 28 20 Tauheim 19 50 45 27 40 Taurow 22 50 50 29 50 Tauschkow obder∣miss 1, 33 49 40 30 20 Taushim 33 50 00 31 40 Tauss 1, 33 49 20 30 10 Tauten 22 51 00 29 40 Tautenberg 19, 22 51 00 28 40 Tautenhan 22 51 00 29 40 Taveln 02 51 20 28 40 Taversch 38 46 00 25 00 Tawikowitz 32 48 50 33 30 Taxin 32, 33 48 40 32 30 Tayach fl. 45 48 05 25 20 Tayax 32 48 40 33 40 Tayscy 38 48 40 22 20 Tbitz 19 51 35 28 40 Tchatlitz 22 51 00 29 50 Tebnitz 12 52 20 31 30 Techemphal 38, 39 49 40 23 10 Techentin 27 53 15 28 30 Techlin 07 54 05 30 00 Techlubbe 08 54 30 34 30 Teckh 45 48 25 26 10 Teckhempfront 45 48 25 25 20 Tecklenborg 1, 38 52 20 23 50 Tecklstain 34 49 00 29 00 Teddirna 23 51 35 32 10 Tedinckhusen 1, 4, 5 53 10 25 20 Teenen 38 50 40 21 00 Tegel 10, 12 52 10 30 30 Tegerloch 45 48 30 25 50 Tegern 01 47 30 28 40 Tegernaw 40 47 35 24 20 Teging 34 48 50 28 30 Teglio 01 45 50 26 40 Tegwitz 22 50 50 29 20 Teiba 22 51 10 29 20 Teich 21 51 05 28 40 Teichel 19 50 50 28 10 Teicheln 21 51 25 29 40 Teichenrode 16, 19, 20 51 30 28 10 Teichern 22 51 10 29 00 Teichreden 19 50 45 28 10 Teichweiden 19 50 45 28 20 Teiffenbach 01 47 00 27 10 Teikerfplath 05 53 45 24 40 Teile 22 51 00 29 10 Teilen 22 51 00 29 50 Teisschen 23 15 00 31 10 Teissel 16 51 25 26 20 Teissen 22 51 00 29 00 Telina vallis 01 45 40 20 30 Telkow 07 54 00 29 50 Tellendorff 19 50 40 28 00 Tellin 8, 10 53 50 30 30 Tellinstede 02 54 50 26 10 Telnice 32 49 00 34 00 Telschow 10, 11 53 10 28 40 Teltelbach 34 49 40 26 50 Teltens 05 53 35 24 10 Teltow 1, 2, 10, 12 52 20 33 30 Teltsch 1, 32 48 50 32 20 Temenitz 32 49 40 33 50 Temmertin 10, 11 52 50 29 00 Temnick 10, 13 53 20 32 50 Tempel 25, 26 52 20 32 00 Tempelberg 10, 12 52 10 31 30 Tempelborch 08 53 40 34 00 Tempelhoff 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 50 Templin 1, 10, 12 52 50 30 40 Temse 07 53 50 29 40 Tenden 19 51 35 28 40 Tenenloe 34 49 30 27 50 Tengel 05 53 05 24 40 Tenkenheim 39 49 20 24 30 Tennenberg 19 50 55 27 10 Tensbuttel 02 54 40 26 00 Tentschel 29 51 15 33 20 Tenstadt 1, 19 51 10 27 30 Tentzling 45 48 20 25 50 Tepla 22, 23 49 50 29 50 Teplitz 33 50 20 30 30 Terbod 10, 12, 13 52 30 31 00 Terbraem 16, 19 51 30 7 20 Terburg 01 51 50 22 30 Terchaw 23 51 05 31 50 Terhemful 01 48 40 23 10 Terhutten 02 54 10 26 40 Terlon 01 50 00 20 10 Terlou 01 53 40 30 40 Ter Neuse 01 51 20 19 50 Ternewitz 2, 7 53 55 28 10 Terschitz 32 49 30 34 20 Terten 14, 21 51 25 29 10 Tertzen 38 46 20 25 40 Tervenne 01 50 40 18 10 Terwang 01 39 00 27 10 Teschen 1, 24, 32 49 30 35 30 Teschenhoff 29 51 10 32 55 Teschevitz 09 54 35 31 00 Teschinensis 24 49 40 35 00 Teschitz 19, 22 50 35 28 10 Teschmuhl 28 51 05 34 40 Teschney 31 50 10 33 00 Teschwitz 25, 26, 27 51 30 33 20 Tesdorf 07 53 30 27 50 Teskenhave 09 54 30 31 10 Teskow 2, 7 53 50 27 40 Tesinesdorp 07 54 00 28 40 Tessenocz 01 45 40 35 10 Tessenow 07 53 40 29 40 Tessetiez 32 48 40 33 30 Tessin 2, 7 53 30 27 50 Tessotits 32 49 30 34 10 Testorp 07 53 45 28 10 Teterin 08 53 50 31 00 Teterow 1, 7 53 41 29 40 Tetin 33 49 50 31 00 Tetnang 38 47 20 26 20 Tettan 22, 23 51 20 30 50 Tetteborn 16 51 35 27 20 Tettenheim 34 48 50 27 50 Tettens Hecken 05 53 30 24 50 Tetterleben 19 50 55 27 20 Tetz 10, 12 52 50 29 30 Tetzkow 07 53 55 29 10 Tetzow 10, 22 52 30 30 00 Teubert 10 51 20 28 10 Teublitz 34 49 10 29 00 Teuschitz 22, 34 50 10 28 10 Teuden 20 51 30 28 40 Teudern 28 51 00 34 25 Teuffelsweer 23 51 25 32 20 Teupis 10, 13 53 10 33 20 Teupitz 10, 12 51 40 31 10 Teuriochoemoe 20 51 15 28 00 Teusen 19, 20 51 35 28 40 Teusing 34 48 50 28 30 Teutel 3, 5 53 40 24 00 Teutesdorf 01 48 30 33 20 Teutleben 15 51 10 28 20 Texel 1, 38 53 10 20 40 Teya 32, 33 48 40 32 30 Teya fl. 32, 33 48 40 33 50 Teyach o. 45 48 35 25 00 Teyfring 45 48 30 25 30 Teyn 1, 33 49 10 31 30 Teynelin 33 49 00 31 20 Tepnetz 2, 24, 33 49 50 32 00 Thal 41, 43 47 40 24 10 Thaleben 20 51 25 27 50 Tham 1, 2 52 00 30 40 Thambach 36 50 30 27 30 Thammendorf 29 51 20 32 50 Thammuhl 29 51 30 33 15 Thamp 26 51 35 32 50 Than 34, 36 50 30 26 40 Thatenweisach 36 50 05 27 30 Thatewysach 34 50 10 27 20 Thauhausen 31 50 45 33 20
Thaune 39 49 50 23 40 Thawer 25, 27 51 00 34 00 Theining 34 49 10 28 30 Themur 1, 36 50 30 27 20 Themwerick 08 53 30 33 00 Thenstat 15 51 10 27 40 Thevits 33 49 30 34 00 Thiebaut 01 48 00 21 40 Thielle 38 50 00 20 00 Thielt 01 51 00 19 10 Thiemendorff 25 51 30 33 20 Thiergarten 25, 27, 28 51 20 33 40 Thiers 01 45 30 19 20 Thierungen 16, 19 51 30 28 00 Thilaw 27 51 35 33 15 Thimendorff 29 51 30 33 20 Thinfeld 37 49 40 25 50 Thionville 01 49 20 22 00 Thirbach 22 51 00 29 00 Thizy 01 45 40 20 20 Thoesd. 08 53 00 32 00 Tholl 34, 36 50 10 26 50 Thomasbruck 15 51 10 27 00 Thomasdorf 10, 12 53 00 30 20 Thomaswalda 29 51 15 32 45 Thomesdorp 07 53 10 30 40 Thombnitz 27 51 30 33 35 Thomdam 01 53 30 28 00 Thomhagen 09 54 30 31 30 Thomsdorf 30 50 20 34 00 Thon 41 48 25 23 45 Thonhagen 09 54 35 31 20 Thonon 01 46 00 22 50 Thonsdorf 30 50 10 34 20 Thorbaben 8, 9 54 30 31 00 Thoren 19 50 50 27 40 Thorn 31 50 30 33 50 Thorvise 02 53 30 27 50 Thosper 10, 13 52 10 32 40 Threnbach 34 49 30 25 40 Thrisam fl. 40 48 00 24 15 Thufelsberg 01 46 20 24 50 Thuin 38 50 00 20 00 Thuint 16 51 25 26 50 Thuitschen 38 50 20 24 00 Thumb 22 50 30 29 50 Thumes 23 51 30 32 20 Thumburg 16 51 55 28 10 Thun 01 50 20 20 20 Thundorf 34, 36 50 10 27 00 Thugen 34 49 50 26 30 Thunnersee 38 46 20 24 00 Thur fl. 38, 41, 43 47 40 23 40 Thuren 34 49 30 25 50 Thuringerwald 19, 34 50 40 27 10 Thuringia 1, 19 51 20 27 10 Thurn 33 50 30 29 40 Thurstein 22 50 00 29 00 Thaville 41 49 20 23 10 Tichemont 38 49 00 22 00 Tichow 07 54 10 30 00 Ticinus fl. 38 45 40 25 00 Tidelsen 16 51 30 26 10 Tidesche 16 52 30 27 50 Tidingen 39 49 00 23 30 Tiebbin 10, 12 51 50 30 40 Tiefendorf 22 51 00 29 00 Tiefenaw 40 48 35 24 35 Tieffenfurt 23 52 30 32 10 Tieffengrub 19 50 55 28 00 Tieffenthal 19 51 05 27 40 Tieffenzee 30 50 40 34 20 Tieffort 19 51 00 28 10 Tiel 1, 38 51 50 21 30 Tieldorff 26 51 20 32 20 Tiemendorff 26, 27 51 30 33 20 Tienen 01 50 40 21 00 Tieraupten 01 48 20 27 50 Tiereleben 19 50 55 27 30 Tiergarte 05 53 05 25 00 Tiering 45 47 50 25 30 Tietbach 19 50 30 28 00 Tieten 22 51 00 29 00 Tietzdorf 28 51 05 33 35 Tietzenrode 19 51 20 26 30 Tifenbach 34 59 00 26 40 Tigeshaim 45 47 50 25 40 Tilgen 40 47 30 24 10 Tilisen 4, 6 53 00 27 40 Tille 38 49 40 20 40 Tillchast 01 47 10 21 00 Tillendorff 25 51 20 32 20 Tilliagh 01 46 30 30 00 Tilsan 09 54 30 31 20 Tilly 1, 38 49 00 21 40 Timendorff 23 51 10 32 20 Timesburg 19 51 05 27 10 Timmerla 18 51 50 26 50 Timmern 16, 18 52 05 27 30 Timmetwerden 03 53 45 27 00 Tinisste 24, 32 50 00 33 00 Tinratstauf 01 48 50 29 10 Tintz 25, 28 50 50 33 40 Tintzen 38 46 00 26 20 Tinunerlr 16 52 10 27 10 Tippach 19 50 50 26 40 Tiranow 01 45 40 26 50 Tirolis Com. 01 46 30 27 00 Tirnow 33 49 30 33 30 Tirnstein 33 48 20 32 40 Tirow 10, 12 15 50 30 40 Tirpitz 30 50 35 34 10 Tirriplin 22 51 10 28 30 Tirschtigel 24, 25, 26 52 20 32 30 Tirsen 04 54 20 26 00 Tischame fl. 23 51 35 31 40 Tischane 23 51 35 31 40 Tischendorff 22 50 40 28 40 Tisfte 34 50 40 25 50 Tisnow 1, 32, 33 49 10 33 20 Tisser Gurch 01 46 10 33 10 Titersberg 36 50 45 26 50 Titscheim 24, 32 49 30 34 30 Titschen 32 49 30 34 50 Titsous 09 54 20 31 50 Tittkow 10, 12 52 10 29 50 Titzing 45 48 35 25 40 Titzleve 07 53 40 30 30 Tizum 10 52 30 28 50 Tkhawitz 22 51 00 29 30 Tlinfershausen 36 50 40 27 00 Tloskow 1, 33 49 40 31 20 Tlumaczow 32 49 10 34 30 Toba 16, 19 51 20 27 40 Tobel 45 48 35 25 00 Toberiltz 22 50 20 29 00 Tobieschou 33 49 20 34 00 Tobitschaw 1, 32 49 20 34 20 Tochowitz 33 49 20 30 50 Tochwitz 22 51 00 29 00 Tockou 21 51 05 29 10 Toddin 07 53 20 28 00 Todendorff 19 51 45 28 20 Todsfelt 02 54 10 26 50 Todtmos 40 47 40 24 30 Toesen 14 52 00 29 10 Tofchfelt 22 50 20 29 10 Toilin 08 53 50 30 30 Toitkenwinkkel 07 54 05 29 20 Tolder 43 47 35 23 20 Tolder fl. 41 47 35 23 35 Tolen 1, 38 51 30 20 10 Toll 14 51 45 29 10 Tollensch fl. 10 53 40 30 10 Tollensee 07 53 30 30 30 Tollenspycker 2, 3 53 45 27 00 Tollenstein 23, 24 51 00 31 30 Tolmes 01 46 10 30 10 Tolmine 01 46 10 31 10 Tolstet 19 50 45 28 00 Toltz 01 47 30 28 30 Tomesdorff 23 51 20 32 20 Tonburg 15 51 50 26 00 Tondorff 15, 19, 20 51 20 28 20 Tonenborg 17 51 45 26 00 Tongeren 1, 38 50 40 21 20 Tonna 19 51 05 27 30 Tonnerg 01 47 30 19 50 Tonnevor de Oste 03 53 45 24 50 Tonnieshoff 07 53 45 28 40 Tonnige 01 54 50 25 40 Tonnigshoff 16 51 35 26 40 Tonninge 02 55 00 26 00 Tonnitz 08 53 50 32 00 Tooge 38 53 00 20 20 Topferberg 29 51 15 33 10 Toppadel 22 51 00 28 40 Toppel 10, 11 52 40 29 10 Toppelberg 25 51 20 34 00 Toppendorf 25, 26 51 30 32 40 Topper 1, 25 52 10 32 00 Topperbuden 25, 26 52 06 32 40 Topstet 16, 19, 20 51 15 28 00 Torgaw 1, 2, 22 51 30 29 50 Torgelow 1, 8 53 40 31 30 Torhutten 04 54 20 26 40 Torn 10, 14, 21 51 30 29 30 Tornau 21 51 05 28 50 Torhe 21, 22 51 05 29 30 Torner 41, 45 47 45 24 35 Tornow 1, 2, 33 50 30 32 10 Tornus 01 46 10 20 50 Torpin 7, 8 53 45 30 20 Torriesdorp 07 53 45 27 50 Torstede 01 54 20 26 20 Torstet 19 51 00 28 00 Tortow 10, 12 52 50 30 30 Tosdorff 19 50 50 27 40 Toser 19 51 15 26 40 Toss 38 47 00 25 20 Tossens 05 53 30 24 40 Toste 24 50 30 35 00 Torand 02 50 50 29 30 Tottelstet 19 51 00 27 40 Totteleben 19 51 15 27 30 Tottleben 06 52 05 28 00 Totward 36 50 40 27 10 Totwik 33 49 50 30 50 Toukowitz 33 49 00 32 50 Toul 1, 38 48 40 22 10 Toulon 01 46 20 19 50 Toupitz 01 53 00 33 50 Tour de Chalamont 01 46 30 22 10 Tour de Pyl 38 45 40 23 00 Tour de Vesure 01 49 00 22 10 Toussy 01 47 30 19 00 Trabstat 36 50 15 27 20 Trachenberg 24, 25 51 30 33 40 Trachenloch 37 49 45 26 05 Tracht 32 48 50 34 00 Trachtenberg 01 51 30 33 50 Trackendorff 22 50 50 28 30 Traerbach 38 49 40 23 00 Traffhausen 45 48 35 26 30 Trage fl. 8, 10, 13 53 10 33 30 Tragsdorff 19, 36 50 45 27 40 Tragssn ff, 33 48 10 32 50 Trahan 01 52 00 30 00 Tralfing 45 48 15 26 10 Tralou 02 54 00 26 50 Tramborg 1, 8 53 40 33 30 Tramin 01 45 00 27 40 Tramnitz 10, 12 52 40 29 30 Tramp 10, 12, 13 52 30 31 10 Tramunde 07 53 55 27 40 Trancault 01 48 10 19 20 Tranchyn 01 48 50 35 40 Trandorf 14 51 20 28 50 Tranowitz 33 49 30 33 50 Transisalania 1, 38 52 40 22 10 Transtede 04 53 20 25 20 Trantnow 1, 2 50 20 32 50 Tranune 07 53 50 27 50 Trarnleben 15 52 00 28 00 Trasemaur 1, 33 48 20 32 50 Tratol 33 48 50 31 10 Trattrgoist 01 47 50 32 50 Traub Ry 32 49 20 34 20 Traubsko 33 49 10 33 20 Trave 07 53 50 27 40 Trave fl. 2, 4 54 20 27 40 Travemund 1, 2 54 20 27 40 Travena 2, 3 53 50 26 20 Travena fl. 04 54 00 27 20 Traves 01 47 20 22 00 Travisa 01 46 20 30 40 Trauntain 01 47 40 29 50 Trutenaw 24 50 30 32 30 Trautenstein 16 51 40 27 40 Trautnow 33 50 20 32 50 Trautzen 22 51 10 29 10 Trauwen 21 51 45 29 40 Trauzendorff 23 51 00 31 50 Treb 10 52 20 32 30 Trebbelin 1, 8 54 30 34 30 Trebbenow 10, 12 53 20 30 50 Trebbin 01 52 10 30 30 Trebbow 07 53 10 30 20 Trebbus 10, 12 52 00 31 30 Trebbelow 1, 8 53 40 30 30 Trebenicks 20 51 50 28 40 Trebia 16, 19 51 20 28 00 Trebicz 1, 32 49 00 33 10 Trebin 02 52 10 29 30 Trebisch 25 52 40 32 00 Trebitsch 26, 29 51 30 33 00 Trebitz 10, 12, 21 51 40 29 50 Trebke 14, 21 51 30 29 00 Treblin 07 53 50 29 50 Trebnitz 2, 33 50 20 30 40 Trebochoff 2, 33 50 00 32 50 Trebra 20 51 20 28 00 Trebsdorff 16, 19, 20 51 35 28 00 Trebsen 22 51 20 29 40 Trebshagen 09 54 25 31 20 Trechow 07 53 50 29 00 Trecfurt 15 51 00 26 40 Trec Gemunde 34 50 40 25 40 Treckhorst 15 51 50 27 00 Treeps 07 53 15 28 00 Treffense 21 51 00 29 20 Tresurt 10 51 10 26 50 Treffelstein 33 49 10 29 40 Treges 22, 34 50 00 28 40 Treiber 19 51 05 28 20 Treiburg 45 47 50 24 20 Treibitz 22 51 20 29 10 Treigeleben 19 50 55 27 20 Treise fl. 19 51 15 27 40 Tremburg 34, 36 50 10 26 50 Tremhoff 37 49 40 25 55 Tremmen 2, 10, 12 52 20 30 00 Tremmes 2, 4 54 00 27 00 Tremps 09 54 15 31 00 Trempse 07 53 55 29 30 Trena 22 51 10 29 30 Trendel 18 52 00 27 30 Trenfelt 34, 39 49 40 25 40 Trent 8, 5 54 40 30 00 Trente 01 45 40 28 10 Trentel 16 52 15 27 50 Trentelborch 16 51 25 26 20 Trentschin 32 48 50 35 10 Trep 13 52 20 32 20 Trepitz 23 51 25 31 50 Treppendorf 19 50 55 28 10 Treptow 7, 8, 10, 12 53 40 30 30 Tresbach 36 50 35 27 30 Trescha 22 50 50 29 20 Treschen 28 51 05 34 20 Tresemicz 14 51 20 28 30 Tresen 14 52 05 29 30 Tresenick 01 45 20 32 50 Treski 33 50 20 32 10 Tressentin 07 54 10 29 40 Tresservitte 09 54 55 31 10 Trestadt 36 50 25 27 20 Tresund 01 51 00 27 00 Treten 08 54 20 34 30 Trettenburg 19 51 10 27 40 Trettey 10, 13 52 10 32 20 Trettin 10, 13 52 10 32 10 Trettze 10, 12 52 50 29 40
Treudel 20 51 45 28 30 Trevirensis 01 50 10 22 40 Trewen 22 50 20 29 20 Trewen Brietz 10, 21 51 30 30 00 Trewicz 19 51 40 28 40 Treyberg 41, 45 47 55 24 40 Tribaw 1, 24, 32 49 30 33 30 Tribb 10, 12 53 00 29 40 Tribbeken 10, 13 52 00 32 20 Tribberatz 09 54 30 31 30 Tribbesee 7, 8, 10 54 00 29 30 Tribbesis 01 54 10 30 20 Tribbevitz 09 54 40 31 10 Tribel 1, 2, 23, 24, 25 51 40 31 50 Tribohm 7, 8 54 15 29 50 Tribusch 25, 26, 27 54 45 33 30 Tride 18 51 45 26 50 Trier 4, 10, 11 53 00 27 50 Triessnitz 22 51 10 28 40 Trieste 01 45 40 31 40 Triet 22 50 30 29 00 Trifelstain 34 49 50 26 10 Trifenstein C. L. 37 49 45 26 05 Trifling 18 51 50 27 30 Trilitz 22 51 00 29 50 Trinem 20 51 55 28 50 Trinfeldt 37 49 45 26 05 Trinitz 22 50 40 29 10 Trinse 38 50 20 23 20 Tripbevitz 09 54 40 31 00 Tripkendorp 07 53 10 30 30 Tripse 09 54 30 31 20 Trissow 09 54 35 31 30 Tritau 1, 2, 4 54 00 27 00 Tritte 16 52 05 27 10 Tritze 10 51 40 31 50 Trizy 01 46 20 19 20 Trnawa 32 49 20 34 00 Trobitz 23, 25 51 30 31 50 Trobolowitz 32 48 50 33 00 Troch 09 54 45 30 50 Trockebern 22 50 50 28 30 Trochedorp 09 54 45 31 30 Trochtelborn 19 51 00 27 30 Troda 18 51 05 29 00 Troesemicz 20 51 45 28 30 Trogenhoffen 45 48 35 27 00 Trojani Castrum 39 50 10 25 10 Trondorff 14, 18, 20 51 25 28 20 Tronou 21 51 05 28 40 Tront 01 46 20 25 50 Troppau 1, 24, 32 49 50 34 50 Troppelwitz 24, 32 50 00 34 00 Trose 18 51 40 28 50 Trosky 1, 2 50 20 32 10 Trossen 22 51 30 29 50 Trossin 21 51 00 29 40 Trota 20 51 35 28 50 Trottn 15 51 05 28 50 Trotzendorff 23, 25 51 10 32 00 Troye 01 48 00 20 00 Troynon 01 48 50 21 50 Trschebechowitz 33 50 10 33 30 Trubach 34 49 40 28 20 Trubel 22 50 20 29 00 Trubetz 15 52 00 27 20 Truchtlfing 45 48 00 25 50 Truien 36 50 45 27 10 Trullenhagen 07 53 35 30 30 Trumperwyck 8, 9 54 50 30 30 Trumpitz 28 51 25 35 00 Trupe 09 54 40 31 30 Trusca 22 51 00 28 50 Truyen 38 50 40 21 00 Tryberg 01 48 00 24 50 Trzeboma 33 49 40 33 30 Trzebon 33 49 00 31 30 Trzeboten 2, 33 49 50 31 20 Trzebowaczesca 33 49 50 33 20 Trzeholowitz 33 48 50 32 40 Trzemessek 32 49 40 34 00 Trzesstie 33 49 10 32 20 Tschammerdorff 28 51 00 33 35 Tschanisch 28 51 05 34 15 Tscharnsmuhle 25 50 50 34 00 Tschauchelwitz 28 51 00 34 10 Tschauswitz 30 50 30 34 10 Tscheghigermuhl 28 51 05 34 20 Tschechnitz 28 51 05 34 20 Tschelesen 27 51 40 33 35 Tschepaw 25 51 50 33 00 Tschepliwoda 24, 31 50 40 33 30 Tscheppangwitz 28 50 55 34 05 Tschepplaw 26 51 50 33 00 Tscherben 19, 20 51 25 28 50 Tscherleben 21, 22 51 00 28 40 Tschertz 28 51 00 34 20 Tscheschdorf 30 50 30 34 10 Tscheschelitz 2, 33 50 10 31 30 Tscheschen 26 51 40 33 30 Tscheschendorf 29 51 15 33 00 Tscheschkowitz 27 51 40 33 35 Tscheschnitz 25 51 00 34 00 Tschibosdorf 23 51 35 32 20 Tschibur 26 51 30 33 20 Tschiefer 26 51 50 32 40 Tschielesen 25, 26 51 40 33 20 Tschichersig 25, 26 52 00 32 20 Tschiltz 30 50 30 34 10 Tschirbesdorf 29 51 20 32 55 Tschirnitz 22 51 00 29 20 Tschirske 29 51 10 33 15 Tschirna 24, 25 51 20 32 00 Tschirnaw 1, 26 51 40 33 40 Tschischitz 28 51 15 35 10 Tschischna 31 50 20 33 35 Tschistey 27 51 40 33 35 Tschockwitz 28 51 00 34 20 Tschoe 26 51 50 32 40 Tschoder 27 51 35 33 40 Tschwirtschen 26, 27 51 45 33 10 Tsigenruck 34 50 40 28 30 Tubeque 38 50 40 20 00 Tubingen 1, 38, 45 48 10 24 30 Tuche 10, 12 51 50 31 40 Tuchennahm 05 53 10 24 30 Tuchum 10, 11, 14 52 00 29 20 Tuckum 14, 21 51 30 29 00 Tuczapy 32 49 10 34 10 Tuelleda 16, 19, 20 51 25 28 10 Tugersleben 19 50 55 27 40 Tulendorp 07 54 05 29 30 Tullen 1, 33 48 20 33 00 Tullenstet 04 54 00 26 00 Tumansdorff 15 51 40 29 00 Tumeren 16, 17 51 55 26 10 Tuna fl. 15 51 40 29 00 Tunandorff 02 51 40 28 30 Tundorff 19 50 55 28 00 Tunendorff 21 51 05 29 10 Tungeda 19 51 00 27 20 Tunmunde 2, 15 51 50 29 00 Tunsebach 19 51 10 26 40 Tunstetten 45 48 20 26 10 Tuntzdorff 45 48 35 26 30 Tunzenhausen 19 51 15 27 50 Tupadel 22 50 50 29 20 Turckheim 1, 39 49 20 24 30 Turingenhausen 16, 19 51 15 27 50 Turitz 10, 11 52 30 28 10 Turkow 07 53 45 29 40 Turn 22 50 40 29 30 Turnaw 34 50 00 28 20 Turnay 22 49 50 28 10 Turow 07 53 20 30 20 Turquestain 1, 41 48 30 23 30 Turschitz 2, 33 50 10 31 40 Turstein 34 50 00 29 00 Turstlo 33 50 10 31 10 Tusenlabeck 02 54 00 27 20 Tuseron 41,43 47 20 23 35 Tusis 38 46 00 26 00 Tussing 45 48 10 25 40 Tussen 45 48 05 26 50 Tuste 16, 17 51 55 26 20 Tuthom 33 50 00 31 10 Tuttigeroda 16, 19 51 30 28 00 Tutze 07 53 45 30 10 Tutzepatz 08 53 40 30 00 Twardonitz 32 48 40 34 30 Twente 38 52 20 22 40 Twergersdorf 09 54 40 31 00 Twidorp 07 53 40 30 10 Twielo 38 53 00 24 00 Twilenfleth 05 53 35 26 00 Twyst fl. 05 53 25 25 40 Tybensee 02 54 50 26 00 Tyche 33 49 00 31 10 Tychow 8, 10 54 00 33 30 Tyde 16 52 05 27 20 Tyerbach 22 50 30 29 00 Tyerbaum 22 51 00 29 40 Tyhan 01 47 00 35 30 Tyl 02 54 40 25 50 Tyrnaw 32 49 30 33 40 Tyrel 01 46 20 28 00 Tzabelstain 36 49 50 27 20 Tzahan 10, 12 51 20 30 10 Tzan 02 51 50 29 10 Tzapfende 34 50 00 27 50 Tzapfendorf 36 50 00 27 50 Tzaselitz 22 51 10 29 10 Tzechtitz 32, 33 49 20 32 20 Tzedingen 39 49 00 23 30 Tzeil 34, 36 50 00 27 20 Tzelitz 22 50 50 29 50 Tzitze 12 51 50 31 50 Tzocha 23, 24, 25 51 05 32 20 Tzorn 39 50 00 24 10 Tzotztwerder 10 52 30 29 40 Tzschelne 23 51 35 31 30 Tzschirne 23 51 20 32 20 Tzun 14 52 30 29 00 V   VAch 19, 36 51 15 26 30 Vacha 1, 19, 34 50 40 26 40 Vachdorf 36 50 30 27 20 Vacqueville 41 48 25 23 15 Vaecka 16 51 25 26 40 Vaelbrock 16, 17 51 45 26 10 Vaern 28 52 40 23 20 Vagus fl 32 49 20 35 40 Vaigny 1, 38 48 00 23 10 Vaihing 1, 39, 45 48 40 25 20 Vahle 05 54 05 25 50 Valbert 38 50 40 24 00 Valckriedt 01 51 30 27 30 Valckenstein 01 47 30 29 10 Valckzitz 09 54 40 31 30 Valde Senon 41 48 15 23 25 Valeberg 18 51 50 27 20 Valenciene 01 50 20 19 30 Valery 01 50 10 17 30 Valesia 1, 38 45 30 23 30 Valhoven 01 48 40 32 10 Valing 14 52 10 28 50 Valkenburg 1, 38 50 50 22 00 Valkenhagen 16, 17 51 45 26 10 Vallenbron 45 48 50 25 50 Vallerschleben 18 52 05 27 20 Valstedde 16, 17 52 10 27 10 Valtersburg 22 50 40 29 00 Valterschans 01 53 00 23 00 Valt S. Martini 01 46 10 29 10 Vance 38 49 40 21 40 Vandelitz 10, 12 52 20 30 40 Vandeluse 38 47 00 22 40 Vandie 01 49 50 20 50 Vandieres 38 48 40 22 00 Vangorow 08 53 50 34 30 Vanselow 08 53 50 30 00 Vansenitz 09 54 45 31 00 Vapirelle 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 30 Varanbon 01 45 40 21 20 Varbelvitz 09 54 35 31 00 Varbsin 08 53 40 32 30 Varchow 07 53 30 30 10 Vardeilsen 17 51 50 26 30 Varel 05 53 20 24 40 Varenholt 07 53 45 30 20 Varenne 01 46 00 19 10 Vargila 19 51 10 27 30 Varholt 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 30 Varinwolde 16 52 15 26 30 Varise 38 49 00 22 40 Varmissen 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Varnkevitz 09 54 55 31 10 Varnstet 19 51 35 28 30 Vasnevitz 09 54 35 31 10 Vassy 01 48 20 21 00 Vastenow 38 52 40 23 40 Vasuar 01 47 00 34 50 Vcterode 19 51 20 26 30 Vating 10, 11 52 00 28 40 Vattenrode 19, 20 51 45 28 20 Vattis 38 46 20 26 00 Vaubecourt 01 48 50 21 10 Vaucouleur 1, 38 48 30 21 50 Vaudekratscham 26 51 35 33 20 Vaudemont 01 48 20 22 20 Vaufray 38 47 00 23 20 Vauvilliers 01 47 50 22 20 Vaux S. Denis 01 45 30 21 30 Vayure 41 48 10 23 20 Ubay 01 50 30 20 30 Ubechel 09 54 20 31 10 Uberach 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Uberkin 43 47 35 23 40 Uberling 1, 38 47 30 25 50 Ubermull 22 50 30 29 20 Uberschaar 29 51 20 32 55 Ubersdorf 29 51 10 32 50 Ubersheim 38, 39 49 20 24 50 Ubersteinfelt 39, 41, 42 48 40 23 30 Uberstrass 41, 43 47 25 23 40 Ubichen 02 51 30 29 30 Ubrdam 01 49 50 31 50 Ubricken 21, 22 51 00 30 10 Ucht 1, 16 52 15 25 40 Uchr fl. 2, 14, 15 52 25 28 50 Uchta 14 52 00 28 40 Uchta fl. 11 52 25 29 00 Uchte 06 52 20 25 40 Uchrdorf 1, 10, 11 52 00 28 40 Uchteritz 22 51 20 28 40 Uckermarck 10 53 10 30 30 Udars 09 54 40 31 00 Udenhaim 38, 39, 45 49 00 25 00 Udestet 19 51 05 28 00 Udina 01 46 00 30 30 Vechet 15 52 30 27 00 Vecht 4, 6 52 20 25 40 Vcchta fl. 10, 11 51 50 28 30 Vechtdorf 10 52 50 31 40 Vechtel 17 52 30 27 20 Vechtenhagen 10, 11 52 30 28 40 Veckernhagen 16 51 25 26 40 Veczell 34 50 30 26 00 Veddel 2, 3 53 50 26 30 Veelsheim 16 51 30 26 30 Veenda fl. 05 53 10 24 30 Vegesh 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Vehlin 10, 11 52 50 29 00 Vehr 05 53 30 24 30 Vehrden 05 53 00 25 40 Veichersdorff 22 50 40 29 50 Veichpach 01 48 20 29 30 Veidenheim 39 49 20 25 00 Veikevitz 09 54 35 31 10 Veilly 01 49 20 19 30 Veit 41, 42 48 35 23 50 Veit Fiume 01 45 10 32 30 Veitsberg 22 50 40 29 00 Veits Hochheim 34, 37 49 40 26 40 Velburg 34 49 10 28 40 Veldkirch 38, 40 47 50 24 10 Veldkirchen 33 50 20 31 20 Veldrumich 40 48 40 24 55 Veldy 01 48 10 29 20 Velebeke 07 53 40 28 10 Velegast 10, 11 52 30 29 10
Velgast 08 54 20 29 30 Velgentz 10, 12 51 40 30 10 Velin 38 50 00 22 00 Velitz 14 51 50 29 00 Velkeroda 19 51 20 27 10 Vallangin 01 46 50 23 10 Vellin 08 54 20 34 00 Vellingen 01 47 50 25 00 Vello 01 45 10 28 10 Velmersb 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 25 Velofans 10, 12 52 20 30 10 Velp 38 52 00 22 00 Velpeke 11, 14, 16 52 20 27 50 Velten 14, 16 52 15 28 10 Veltbach 41, 43 47 25 23 45 Veltberg 41, 43 47 40 24 10 Veltbergen 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Veltem 10, 12 52 20 30 10 Velten 2, 15 52 30 27 20 Veltenhoff 16 52 15 27 20 Veltkirch 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Veltstettn 45 48 15 26 20 Veluwe 01 52 10 21 50 Velwitz 10, 11 52 30 27 50 Vemersdorff 34 50 00 28 40 Venant 01 50 40 18 20 Venburg 38 52 00 24 00 Vency 38 48 00 22 40 Venedig 27 51 45 33 30 Venesone 01 46 10 30 20 Venetia 01 45 10 30 00 Venlo 1, 38 51 20 22 10 Venshaim 34 50 30 26 00 Ventz 09 54 40 31 10 Ventzkow 2, 7 53 40 28 40 Venusberg 27, 29 51 30 33 10 Veraden 1, 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 20 Verbach 41, 45 48 15 24 50 Verberie 01 49 10 18 40 Verden 24, 26 53 00 26 00 Verchen 1, 8 53 50 30 00 Verchin 01 50 20 19 30 Verchlaff 07 52 55 28 20 Vercil 01 47 00 22 40 Verdun 1, 38 49 00 21 20 Verhoff 09 54 45 31 00 Vering 38, 45 48 00 26 00 Vere 01 51 30 19 40 Vergetzer 10, 12 52 20 29 30 Verken 07 53 50 30 00 Verkerode 21 51 25 29 20 Verklip 10, 11 52 40 28 40 Verlangen 15, 20 51 30 27 40 Verlen 38 50 20 21 20 Verlinse 02 53 50 27 50 Verlon 01 50 30 21 40 Vermand 01 49 50 19 10 Vermenton 01 47 20 19 30 Vermes 2, 4 54 00 26 40 Vernevil 01 46 00 19 00 Verona 01 45 10 28 00 Verpilliere 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 30 Versin 08 54 30 34 30 Verssmeld 38 52 00 24 40 Vert 4, 38 52 20 24 40 Vertinse 07 53 45 28 00 Verton 01 49 30 21 50 Vertus 01 48 40 20 00 Vervins 01 49 50 20 00 Verviers 1, 38 50 30 22 00 Verzelet 01 47 10 19 20 Vescoux 38 47 40 23 00 Vesenburg 33 50 30 29 20 Vesenheim 40, 41, 43 47 45 24 00 Vesoul 01 47 30 22 10 Vesperweiler 45 48 20 25 10 Vesprano 01 46 00 26 20 Vestra 36 50 25 27 30 Vetsch 41 47 25 23 20 Vevay 01 46 10 23 20 Veyhang 45 48 30 25 40 Vezelize 1, 38 48 20 22 10 Uffenheim 34 49 30 27 00 Uffhofen 19 51 10 27 20 Uffingen 37 49 35 26 10 Ufflen 16 52 00 25 40 Ugedzd 33 49 40 33 50 Ugogna 01 45 10 24 50 Uhlelant 05 53 30 25 10 Uhrczitz 32 48 50 34 00 Uhrde 16 51 40 27 10 Uhrnagoldt 40 48 25 24 50 Uhrsp ingen 45 48 10 26 20 Viadrus Odera fl. 13 52 00 33 00 Vianden 1, 38 50 00 22 30 Vianen 1, 38 51 50 21 00 Vibeck 2, 4, 6 53 00 27 20 Vic 01 48 40 22 50 Vichery 01 48 20 22 10 Vichlnstein 33 48 20 30 50 Vickendorf 31 50 30 33 40 Viddekow 13 53 00 31 20 Vidrus de Vecht fl. 38 52 20 23 20 Viehweidemuhl 28 51 10 33 35 Vielbonn 10, 11 52 40 28 30 Vielgutt 25 51 10 34 20 Vielun 01 51 10 35 40 Vierraden Muhl 28 53 00 33 55 Vierssel 38 51 00 20 40 Vierwalstett See 38 46 20 25 00 Vierzelm Heiligen 19 51 00 28 20 Vignorys 01 48 10 21 10 Vihren 05 53 25 25 50 Vilantz 07 53 05 28 00 Vilbach 38 50 20 24 00 Vilbell 35, 38 50 00 25 05 Vilckraidt 38 50 40 23 40 Vileer 38 50 20 20 20 Vilfaltten 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Villagh 01 46 40 31 00 Ville 38 48 20 22 20 Ville Franca 01 47 40 18 50 Ville Franche 01 45 30 20 40 Villem lacus 08 54 00 34 00 Villeneuf 1, 38 46 00 23 30 Villeneuwe 01 48 10 19 00 Ville Nove 01 48 20 19 30 Villerchenun 01 47 10 21 50 Villeri 41, 43 47 30 23 40 Villeseck 01 49 30 28 40 Villing 45 47 50 25 00 Villminer 01 45 30 26 50 Vilmar 38 50 20 24 20 Vilmenitz 8, 9 54 25 31 20 Vilow 22 50 30 29 30 Vils 01 47 10 27 30 Vils fl. 34 49 10 28 50 Vilseck 34 49 30 28 50 Vilseckh 45 48 30 26 20 Vilshoven 33 48 30 30 20 Viltz 07 53 30 29 50 Viltzen 39 50 10 23 50 Vilvorden 01 51 00 20 30 Vincent 01 46 10 26 10 Vincenza 01 45 20 28 50 Vincknstain 01 46 30 31 10 Vinden 41 48 55 24 35 Vinding 45 48 05 25 50 Vinenborg 16, 17 51 55 27 30 Vinklar 33 49 20 29 30 Vinstingen 38 47 00 25 40 Vinstring 38, 39, 41 48 50 23 30 Vintel 04 53 20 25 40 Vinten 39 49 50 24 20 Vipera fl. 4, 6 53 20 27 20 Vippach 19 51 10 28 00 Vipperow 07 53 15 29 50 Viragrund 34 48 50 26 50 Virdenheim 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 00 Virei 09 54 45 31 10 Virevitz 09 54 25 31 20 Viritz 10, 11, 14 52 10 29 20 Virnaw 36 50 30 27 20 Virnheim 39 49 20 25 00 Visbach 34 49 20 28 00 Vischen 22 51 00 29 50 Vischpach fl. 45 48 55 26 10 Vischusen 05 53 35 24 20 Viscow 01 49 10 34 10 Vise 07 53 20 28 20 Viselbach 19 51 00 28 00 Visen 07 53 15 29 50 Visenbach 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 35 Viser 2, 15 52 20 29 40 Visp. 01 45 40 24 30 Visselhude 05 53 10 26 00 Visthbach 39 48 50 24 10 Vistula fl. 24 49 40 35 30 Vistulae fl. fons 24 49 30 35 30 Visurgis fl. 06 52 45 25 40 Visurgis fl. fons 36 50 20 27 20 Visurgis fl. Ostium 04 54 00 24 20 S. Vit 39 49 40 23 20 Vitenitz 10, 12 52 20 29 40 Vitigist 07 53 45 29 30 Vitis 33 48 40 32 00 Vitzkow 2, 7 53 25 27 50 Vitlubbe 7, 10, 11 53 20 28 50 Vitryle Francois 01 48 30 20 40 Vitsteinbach 34 50 20 26 10 Vitte 09 54 45 30 50 Vitz 10, 11 52 30 28 20 Vitzenburg 19, 20 51 20 28 30 Viviere 41 48 10 23 15 Uker fl. 8, 12 53 20 31 00 Uker Marck 8, 12 53 20 31 00 Ukermunde 1, 8 53 50 31 30 Ukers 08 54 00 30 00 Ukersee 8, 12 53 10 31 00 Ukerspring 15 51 50 27 20 Vlaerdinge 01 51 50 20 10 Vlaitz 14 51 35 28 40 Vlammersheim 39 49 20 24 40 Vlardigen 38 52 00 20 20 Vlassen 38 51 40 23 20 Ulbach 45 48 30 26 00 Ulbersdorff 22, 25 50 50 31 40 Ulda 36 50 45 27 00 Ulemul 14 52 00 29 20 Ulenburch 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 30 Ulenhorst 10, 12 52 30 30 30 Ulersdorff 23 51 05 32 10 Ulersheim 38, 39 49 50 24 40 Vle See 38 48 20 22 00 t'Vlie 38 53 20 20 40 Vlielandt 1, 38 53 20 20 40 Vlissingen 01 51 30 19 30 Vlitz 07 53 20 28 30 Ulla 19 51 00 28 00 Ullersdorff 30, 31, 32 50 30 34 10 Ullershalben 19 51 05 28 10 Ulm 1, 38, 39 49 30 23 40 Ulmburg 40 48 25 24 30 Ulmsdorf 22 50 50 29 30 Vloeten 15 52 10 25 20 Vloten 15 52 20 27 20 Vlothaw 01 52 10 25 30 S. Ulrich 41, 43, 45 47 45 24 15 Ulrichkirchen 33 48 30 33 30 Ulrichstein 34 50 30 25 50 Ulst 38 51 40 22 20 Ulsted 19 50 45 28 20 Ulster fl. 34 50 40 26 40 Ulstra 36 50 45 26 40 Ultrajectum 38 52 00 20 40 Ultze fl. 19, 36 50 30 27 40 Ultzen 1, 2, 4, 6 53 10 27 20 Ultzerkeman 19 50 30 27 40 Ultzersteig 19 50 30 27 50 Ulvegeling 04 54 00 25 00 Umbden 45 48 25 26 20 Umbhausen 01 46 50 27 50 Umblen 16, 17 52 10 26 50 Ummantz 8, 9 54 40 30 00 Ummedorf , 15 52 20 28 00 Ummendorf 16, 18 52 00 27 50 Umpfenbach 37 49 40 26 00 Umpfingen 37 49 35 26 10 Umstatt 39 49 40 25 20 Umstede 05 53 10 24 40 Unchristen 28 51 00 34 20 Underberg 36 50 45 27 00 Underkochen 34 48 40 26 40 Underplesfelt 34 49 40 26 40 Under Ridt 16 51 15 27 00 Undersberg 41 48 10 23 50 Under Sewen 1, 38 46 20 24 00 Undfindhelling 34 50 00 27 10 Ungrisch 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Unienew 01 51 50 36 00 Unker fl. 02 52 10 29 30 Unkermunde 02 52 10 29 20 Unkilch 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 50 Unnen 08 53 40 33 00 Unrow 09 54 35 31 00 Unseborg 14, 18 51 35 28 30 Unsleben 16 52 10 28 10 Unstruct fl. 16, 19, 20 51 10 27 20 Unterhasel 19 50 45 28 20 Unter Schupf 34 49 20 26 10 Unterum Duna 16 51 20 27 30 Unterweid 36 50 35 26 50 Unthausen 21 51 15 29 30 Untitz 22 50 40 29 00 Untreunborn 20 51 45 27 50 Untzhurst 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 25 Untzschen 22 50 50 29 10 Unwirde 23 51 15 31 30 Vockenrod 37 49 40 26 00 Vockstet 16, 19, 20 51 30 28 10 Voding 166 52 05 26 30 Voet Sandt 03 53 50 26 10 Vogdei 09 54 35 31 00 Vogdenhagen 8, 9 54 20 30 00 Vogdshausen 07 53 55 27 50 Vogelbach 41, 43 47 40 23 20 Vogelgesang 21 51 00 29 40 Vogelsandt 3, 5 53 50 24 10 Vogelsang 7, 10, 12 53 10 30 20 Vogelsberg 19 51 15 28 00 Vogelsdordorf 10, 12 52 10 31 10 Vogelsee 19 51 35 28 40 Vogelshagen 08 53 40 32 30 Vogelsperg 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 35 Voglach 40 47 40 24 10 Vogtsdalen 16, 18 52 05 27 40 Void 01 48 30 21 50 Voienkercke 07 53 00 28 20 Voigts Cross 30 50 20 34 10 Voitlandia 01 50 20 29 00 Voitswald 28 51 15 33 55 Voitzberg 22 50 20 29 10 Voitzdorf 25, 31 50 50 32 20 Voitzmuhle 28 51 05 33 35 Voklapruch 01 47 50 31 00 Volck 09 54 45 31 30 Volckach 1, 34 49 40 27 00 Volckensdorff 19 50 35 28 10 Volckeroda 16 52 15 27 10 Volckerode 16 51 25 26 50 Volckers 19, 36 50 45 26 40 Volckersbach 40 48 40 24 50 Volckershagen 07 54 05 29 30 Volckmarck 01 46 40 32 00 Volckmaricz 19, 20 51 40 28 40 Volckmars fl. 16 51 20 26 40 Volckmeroda 16 52 15 27 30 Volckstet 15, 19, 20 51 40 28 20 Voldagessen 16, 17 52 00 26 20 Voldberg 40 47 40 24 10 Voldekow 08 54 10 34 00 Volensdorf 04 53 20 28 40 Volffersgrin 22 50 20 29 30 Volkaroda 15 52 20 27 00 Volkersd. 08 53 30 31 30 Volkersen 16, 17 51 55 27 00 Volkestorp 07 54 00 30 10 Volkmansdorff 30 30 30 34 30 Vollen 38 53 00 23 20 Vollenhoven 1, 38 52 50 22 00 Volmansdorf 22 50 30 28 40 Volmaring 45 48 15 25 20 Volmede 38 51 00 24 40
Volmetein 38 51 00 23 40 Volsendorf 10, 11 52 40 27 50 Volsinghusen 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Volsdorst 23 51 20 31 00 Voltershausen 36 50 25 27 00 Voltz fl. 33 48 30 30 00 Voltzem 16 52 10 27 30 Voltzkow 7, 10 53 10 28 00 Voordehoge Schar 03 53 45 26 30 Voorn Schae 38 51 40 21 20 Vorbeke 07 53 45 28 30 Vorbruck 41, 42 48 20 23 45 Vorde 5, 6 53 15 24 40 Vordenperg 01 47 30 32 50 Vorenbach 40 48 25 24 30 Vorenberg 16, 17 51 55 26 20 Vorendorf 10, 11 52 30 27 20 Vorfeld 39, 45 48 05 25 40 Vorgarten 10, 12 52 10 30 30 Vorkerode 14 51 25 29 20 Vorlandt 08 54 10 30 00 Vorlarenborn 08 53 50 34 00 Vorselaer 01 51 10 20 50 Vorsgrun 22 50 30 29 20 Vorst 15, 16, 17 51 50 26 10 Vorste 16, 17 51 50 26 40 Vorsten See 07 53 10 30 20 Vorum 16, 17 52 15 26 00 Vorwarck 05 53 20 24 50 Vorwerck 10, 12 53 10 30 30 Vorwergnach 28 51 10 34 55 Vossem 15 52 10 25 20 Votenspach 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 25 Voytsperg 01 47 00 33 00 Upawa fl. 2, 33 50 30 32 50 Uphausen 15, 20 51 20 28 40 Uphusen 04 53 20 25 20 Upleggen 05 53 15 24 10 Upling 14, 16, 18 51 55 28 00 Upost 07 53 55 30 10 Uppen 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Upperborch 07 53 35 29 40 Upstedde 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Urach 41, 43 48 00 23 35 Uratislaviensis 24, 25 51 10 33 00 Urb 1, 34 50 10 25 50 Urbach 41, 43 47 55 23 35 Urbaw 32, 33 48 40 33 30 Urberg 20 51 40 27 50 Urbich 16, 19 51 15 27 40 Urbis 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Urbrich 35 49 50 25 05 Urck 38 52 40 21 20 Rrzitz 32 49 20 34 20 Ure 16 52 20 27 40 Urede 38 52 00 22 40 Ureden 17 52 20 27 10 Urederycstadt 02 55 00 26 10 Ureeden 01 52 10 23 00 Urfar 37 49 40 26 05 Urien Oel 38 51 20 24 20 Urinersheim 39 49 40 24 30 Uring 06 52 05 27 30 Urkevitz 09 54 35 31 00 Urla fl. 22 50 40 28 40 Urlafe 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 25 Urlauffen 40 48 20 24 25 Urle fl. 16 51 35 26 40 Urleben 19 51 10 27 30 Urmat 41, 42 48 20 23 45 Urnhausen 36 50 45 27 00 Urose 15, 20 51 50 28 00 Urschka 26, 27 51 40 33 10 Ursel 16, 19 51 20 27 30 Ursheim 40, 41, 43 47 55 23 55 Ursin 01 47 40 27 30 Urska 25 51 40 33 20 Urspringen 36, 37 50 25 26 50 Urspung 34 49 50 26 20 Ursseer 17 51 35 26 10 Urssleben 14 51 55 28 20 Urswihr 41, 43 47 45 23 40 Urt 10, 13 52 00 32 20 Urwiler 41, 42 48 35 24 10 Usdorff 23 51 25 31 50 Usedom Ins. 1, 8 54 10 31 30 Usedona 8, 10 53 50 31 00 Uselitz 09 54 20 31 00 Userin 7, 10 53 10 29 40 Uslingen 38 47 00 25 20 Ussennausen 34 50 30 27 10 Ussigheim 37 49 40 26 05 Ustar 16 51 35 26 30 Usterungen 16, 19, 20 51 40 27 50 Uszcie 01 52 40 34 00 Utenbach 19 51 00 28 20 Utenhof 41, 42 48 40 24 10 Utentorf 41, 42 48 35 24 05 Uter 3, 5 53 45 26 40 Utersen 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 54 00 26 00 Uterode 19 51 00 26 50 Uthausen 21 51 05 29 40 Uthlede 05 53 20 25 10 Uthmey 14 52 10 28 30 Utingen 37 49 45 26 10 Utrecht 38 52 00 21 00 Utsel endorf 31 50 20 33 20 Utsen 04 52 40 27 00 Uttenbeurn 45 47 50 27 10 Uttendorff 36 50 35 27 10 Uttenheim 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 05 Uttenreuth 34 49 30 28 00 Utterode 16, 19 51 20 27 40 Uttich 22 50 40 29 00 Uttweil 38 47 20 25 40 Uttwil 41, 42 48 40 24 00 Utzberg 19 51 00 28 00 Utzen 6, 15, 16 52 15 26 50 Uudfinhelling 36 50 00 27 20 Uxem 39 49 10 23 40 Uy 38 48 40 22 40 Uyter 05 53 25 25 00 Uytrecht 01 52 10 21 10 Uzadel 07 53 20 30 20 Uzedlow 08 54 00 30 00 W       WAbel 07 53 15 20 40 Wabern 01 48 00 27 50 Wacenowitz 32 48 50 34 30 Wacha 22 51 00 28 30 Wachbach 37 49 30 26 15 Wachbaun 36 50 25 27 20 Wachenbach 34 49 20 26 20 Wachenbuchen 35 50 00 25 10 Wachenheim 39 49 10 24 30 Wachlin 08 53 30 32 30 Wachollerhagen 08 54 10 32 30 Wachtedonck 38 51 20 22 20 Wackbach 41, 42 48 20 23 40 Wackersleben 14, 16 51 45 27 50 Waddekette 10, 11 52 40 27 20 Waden 05 53 30 24 50 Wadewitz 06 52 50 27 40 Wadislaw 32 49 00 33 10 Wadworden 05 53 30 24 20 Wael 04 54 00 26 00 Wael fl. 38 51 40 21 00 Waembach 16 51 30 26 30 Waenro 38 50 40 21 00 Waereken 19 51 40 26 30 Waeswiler 38 50 00 22 20 Wage 16 52 15 27 20 Wagen 19 50 55 27 50 Wagenbach 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 45 Wagenbach 37 49 40 26 50 Wagencel 4, 16 52 40 26 20 Wageninge 38 52 00 21 40 Wagenstat 40, 41, 42 48 05 24 15 Waggis 38 46 20 24 40 Wagnitz 02 54 00 27 30 Wagrun 07 53 50 30 00 Wagshorst 40, 41, 42 48 25 24 25 Wagstat 24, 32 49 40 34 30 Wahlsen 16, 17 51 55 26 10 Wahren 27, 28 51 20 33 45 Waibling 38, 39, 45 48 40 25 50 Waicomar 19 50 55 27 30 Waidhoven 01 47 50 32 20 Wakendorp 02 54 10 26 40 Wakenfen 17 51 40 26 50 Wakerow 09 54 05 31 00 Wala 38, 45 48 40 25 40 Walb 39 49 50 24 20 Walbach 40, 41, 43 47 30 23 50 Walbeck 14, 20 51 15 28 20 Walbrun 37 49 45 26 15 Walburg 40, 41, 42 48 05 24 20 Walck 41, 42 48 40 24 05 Walckendorp 07 54 00 29 50 Walckenred 18 51 15 27 10 Walckenriedt 15, 16 51 40 26 20 Walckmuhl 27, 29 51 25 33 10 Walcourt 28 50 00 20 20 Wald 45 47 40 25 50 Waldaw 25, 29 51 10 33 00 Waldastain 38, 45 48 45 26 10 Walddorff 26 51 40 32 30 Waldeck 30, 31 50 20 33 50 Waldekette 04 53 00 28 00 Waldenzee 38 46 20 25 40 Waldedberg 1, 24, 25 50 50 33 00 Waldenburg 22 50 50 29 40 Waldenhagen 1, 7 53 45 29 30 Walderfingen 01 49 20 23 00 Waldesborn 19 51 05 28 10 Waldichn 28 50 50 34 15 Walditz 31 50 30 33 20 Waldkirch 40 47 55 24 30 Waldkirchen 33 48 30 30 50 Waldmanshofen 34 49 20 26 40 Waldmuhl 29 51 25 32 40 Waldmunchen 33 49 10 29 50 Waldorf 45 48 20 25 50 Waldoschof 37 49 45 25 50 Waldow 08 54 20 34 30 Waldowitz 24 50 40 36 00 Waldperg 33 50 50 33 20 Waldreinach 45 48 35 25 10 Waldrfang 38 49 20 22 40 Waldrumich 40 48 40 24 55 Waldsassn 34 49 50 29 10 Waldsaxen 22, 33 49 50 29 20 Wald Schwartz 19 50 40 27 50 Wald See 45 47 45 26 30 Waldshausen 39 49 00 23 40 Waldshout 1, 41 47 20 24 40 Waldstein 2, 33 50 20 32 10 Waldstet 45 47 55 25 30 Waldt 16 52 05 16 50 Waldtbach 45 49 05 26 00 Waldtmath 40 48 25 24 35 Waldt Michelbach 37 49 45 25 50 Waldvorwerg 27 51 40 33 20 Wale 4, 16 52 40 27 20 Walecz 32 49 00 33 20 Walen 15 52 10 27 00 Walende 22 51 20 29 00 Walensau 34 49 00 27 50 Walenzee 38 46 20 25 40 Walersdorf 31 50 25 33 30 Walestein 01 50 50 26 10 Walfrode 01 53 10 26 20 Walfshusen 16 52 00 26 50 Walhausen 15, 16, 19 51 30 28 00 Walheim 41, 42 48 35 24 10 Walhoven 32, 33 48 40 32 30 Walich 19 51 05 28 00 Walitz 14 51 50 28 50 Walke 10, 12 52 30 29 40 Walkpe 16 52 15 27 10 Wall 2, 9 54 50 25 50 Wallachsche 08 53 40 34 30 Wallen 41, 43 47 35 23 45 Wallenbuoch 38 46 20 23 20 Wallenburg 15 51 10 26 20 Wallendof 26 51 45 32 10 Wallensen 16, 17 51 55 26 20 Wallenstadde 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Wallersleben 15 52 40 27 20 Wallerstain 1, 45 48 45 27 10 Wallhausen 18 51 00 27 50 Wallin 10, 12 53 00 31 10 Wallmerspach 34 49 20 26 50 Wallsleben 19 51 05 27 40 Wallstadt 29 51 10 33 15 Walmeden 16, 17 51 55 27 00 Walmenack 39 50 00 24 00 Walmersdorff 26 52 15 32 30 Walmhausen 16 51 15 26 30 Walmsted 16 52 00 27 40 Walmstorp 07 53 50 28 10 Walnow 10, 12 53 00 31 10 Walop 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 40 Walow 07 53 20 29 30 Walpeke 1, 14, 15 52 15 28 00 Walperhaltz 19 50 50 27 40 Walrot 34 50 40 26 00 Walsh 16 51 30 26 30 Walsin 38 50 00 21 00 Walstorf 10, 14, 21 51 30 29 40 Walsleben 10, 11, 14 52 30 28 40 Walsleve 08 53 40 32 30 Walsrode 4, 6 53 00 26 20 Walstatt 24, 25 51 10 33 00 Walstetten 37 49 35 26 00 Walta 23 51 20 32 10 Waltase fl. 36 50 35 27 50 Waltasschafft 34 49 50 25 50 Waltburg 41, 42 48 40 24 15 Waltbeckelheim 39 49 40 23 50 Waltenhausen 37 49 40 26 00 Walten 36 50 30 27 40 Waltenbuch 45 48 25 25 50 Waltenheim 41, 42 48 30 24 05 Waltenhusen 34 49 40 26 00 Walterbach 41, 42 48 15 23 40 Walterdorf 23, 34 50 55 31 40 Walter Neumburck 18 51 40 29 00 Waltersberg 41, 43 47 30 23 30 Waltersdorff 2, 22 51 00 29 20 Waltershausen 19, 36 50 55 27 20 Waltershoff 34 50 40 27 10 Walterskirch 33 48 40 33 30 Waltersleben 19 50 55 27 50 Waltersweier 40 48 40 24 45 Walterswir 41, 42, 44 48 20 24 20 Walthausen 45 48 45 26 10 Waltheim 2, 22 51 00 29 50 Walthurn 1, 37 49 35 26 00 Waltighoffen 41, 43 47 25 23 45 Waltkappel 19 51 05 26 30 Waltkilch 1, 38, 41, 43 47 55 24 25 Waltkirchen 22 50 30 29 20 Waltmat 41 40 30 24 35 Waltmunchen 01 49 20 29 40 Waltols 42 48 35 23 55 Waltorf 36 50 35 10 27 Waltose fl. 19 50 35 27 40 Waltsaxen 22 50 40 29 20 Waltstatt 39 49 20 25 00 Waltsteg 41, 45 48 30 24 35 Waltstein 41, 43 47 40 23 25 Waltzen 4, 16 52 05 27 40 Walt Ulm 41, 42, 45 48 25 24 30 Waltw 40 48 20 24 25 Walwinckel 19 50 55 27 20 Walwitz 10, 14 51 40 29 10 Wambach 40 47 40 24 15 Wamekow 07 53 35 28 50 Wamel 38 51 40 21 20 Wammen 30 50 45 34 00 Wandeitsh 25 51 10 33 20 Wandekow 07 53 50 28 20 Wandersleben 19 50 55 27 40 Wandesbeke 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 53 50 26 40 Wandow 07 53 35 28 10 Wandritsch 27, 29 51 35 33 15 Wandsleben 18 51 40 28 20 Wanecz 32 49 00 33 20 Wanefeld 16 52 25 28 10 Wanewalsda 23 51 10 31 20
Wanfriede 19 51 10 26 50 Wang 38, 35 48 35 26 10 Wangelin 07 53 15 29 20 Wangeln 25, 26 51 30 32 40 Wangelstedde 16, 17 51 45 26 30 Wangen 40, 41, 43 47 50 24 10 Wangenburg 41, 42 48 30 23 50 Wangenheim 19 51 00 27 20 Wangenheimer See 19 51 00 27 20 Wangerin 08 54 00 32 30 Wangeritz 08 53 40 32 30 Wangern 24, 25, 28 50 50 33 30 Wangeroeg 05 53 45 24 10 Wangerogh 1, 38 54 00 23 40 Wanghaim 45 48 35 25 50 Wangten 29 51 15 33 25 Wannefelt 10, 11 52 10 28 20 Wannewitz 21 51 00 29 20 Wans 36 50 35 27 10 Wanschelburg 01 50 20 33 20 Wanschewitz 28 51 10 34 55 Wansem 01 51 30 22 00 Wansen 1, 24, 25, 30 50 40 34 00 Wanser 10, 11 52 40 28 30 Wanske 07 53 20 30 30 Wansleben 1, 2, 5, 15 52 10 28 20 Wanssdorff 10, 12 52 10 30 00 Wantlitz 07 53 05 28 30 Wantzenaw 40, 41, 42 48 25 24 15 Wapach 40 47 35 24 10 Warasdin 01 47 30 34 00 Warbeke 4, 6 53 20 27 40 Warbelow 10, 12 53 20 30 50 Warben 08 53 10 32 30 Warbendorp 07 53 20 30 30 Warberg 18 51 5 27 30 Warbergen 6, 15, 16 52 20 27 40 Warbitz 10, 13 52 40 32 00 Warburg 01 51 20 25 40 Warckout 14 52 05 29 30 Ward 16, 19 51 10 26 30 Wardberg 19 50 55 27 00 Warde 38 50 00 22 00 Wardeilsen 16 51 45 26 40 Wardenberg 01 48 10 29 00 Wardenborg 05 53 05 24 50 Wardorf 19 50 40 28 10 Wardow 07 53 55 29 40 Wardperg 01 48 20 35 20 Waren 1, 7, 10 53 25 29 50 Warenberg 10, 11 52 50 28 30 Warendorp 14, 38 54 25 28 40 Warfleth 05 53 10 25 00 Wargelow 7, 10 54 00 30 00 Wargentin 07 53 40 29 50 Warin 10, 12 52 20 31 30 Warkisch 28 50 45 34 15 Warlin 07 53 35 30 40 Warlitz 2, 7 53 35 28 20 Warlow 07 53 15 28 20 Warm 16 51 30 27 20 Warmbach 24, 25, 33 50 50 32 30 Warmbuchen 15 52 30 26 20 Warmsdorff 14, 18, 20 51 15 28 30 Warnckow 7, 10, 12 53 00 29 20 Warndorff 23, 24 50 55 31 40 Warnemundt 7, 10 54 10 29 20 Warnestein 39 50 10 24 30 Warnetwaldt 39 49 20 23 00 Warnike 10, 13 52 30 32 00 Warnikenhagen 07 53 50 29 30 Warnin 2, 7 53 30 28 40 Warnitz 8, 10 53 20 32 30 Warnow 10, 14 52 30 29 10 Waroin 10 53 30 28 10 Warschleben 14, 16, 18 51 50 28 00 Warsin 10, 13 52 50 32 20 Warslelt 04 53 20 20 40 Warsow 07 53 05 30 10 Warstain 45 48 05 25 20 Warsted 16 52 20 27 50 Warta 24, 33 50 30 33 30 Warta fl. 10, 13 52 30 32 20 Warte 1, 31 50 25 33 40 Warte fl. 08 52 40 33 00 Wartenberg 24, 25, 26 51 50 32 20 Wartenburg 21 51 15 29 40 Wartenstein 39 49 40 23 30 Wartha 25 51 10 32 40 Warthausen 45 47 55 26 40 Wartlaw 2, 15 52 00 29 00 Wartleben 19 51 00 27 30 Watkenstedde 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Wartten 22 51 20 29 20 Wartzen 16, 17 51 50 26 30 Warvelow 08 54 20 34 00 Warzimow 01 52 20 35 50 Warzin 08 53 10 33 00 Waschke 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 40 Wasen 09 54 35 30 50 Waseneck 40, 41, 42 48 20 24 15 Wasenweil 40 47 55 24 15 Waserkunst 16 51 25 26 30 Waserwitz 29 51 20 33 30 Wasingen 34 50 40 27 10 Waskow 07 53 25 27 50 Waslenh 38, 41, 42 44 25 23 55 Wassel 16, 17 52 15 26 40 Wassen 41 47 50 23 35 Wassenb 41, 43 47 50 23 35 Wassenberg 38 51 00 22 20 Wassenburg 41, 42 48 45 24 05 Wassenhausen 19 51 10 28 30 Wassenstein 41, 42 48 50 23 10 Wasser Ahelfing 45 48 50 26 40 Wasseraw 38 49 40 22 40 Wesserberg 30 50 30 34 20 Wasserbillich 1, 38 49 40 22 40 Wasserbrun 33 49 10 29 50 Wasserholtz 20 51 40 28 00 Wasser Jentsch 28 51 00 34 10 Wasserthalsleben 16, 19 51 15 27 50 Wasserwitz 32 48 50 33 50 Wassighy 01 49 40 20 30 Wassin 07 53 25 29 10 Wassow 09 54 35 31 00 Wassungen 36 50 40 27 10 Wasswis 22 50 50 29 00 Wastet 15 51 10 26 40 Wastleben 10, 11, 14 51 50 28 40 Waterhorst 4, 5 53 20 25 00 Waterlehn 18 51 35 27 30 Watersuge 10, 12 52 20 29 30 Watkenstede 15 52 20 27 00 Watling 4, 16 52 40 27 00 Watlingen 06 52 20 26 50 Watteheim 39 50 00 24 10 Watteleben 16, 19 51 35 27 40 Wattenbuttel 15, 16 52 40 27 20 Watterdorff 36 49 55 28 00 Watteritz 21, 22 50 55 29 10 Watterleben 15, 16 52 00 27 20 Watwil 41, 43 47 40 23 35 Watwyl 38 46 40 25 40 Watzenkirchen 33 48 10 31 00 Waxenburg 33 48 30 31 30 Wazany 32 49 10 34 10 Wazen 16 51 40 26 50 Weberling 18 52 00 27 50 Weberstet 19 51 10 27 10 Webicht Sylva 19 51 00 28 10 Webischensted 19 50 30 28 10 Webps 22 51 00 29 50 Wechlungen 16, 19 51 30 27 40 Wecselburg 33 50 50 29 30 Wechtach 33 48 50 30 00 Wechterswinckel 34 50 20 27 00 Weckveck 16 51 30 27 10 Weckelheim 41, 43 47 50 24 00 Weckental 41, 43 47 40 23 40 Wedalhoep 05 54 00 26 00 Wedbergen 17 52 30 26 20 Wedde fl. 17 52 05 27 30 Wedden 04 52 20 25 00 Weddy 16, 17 51 55 27 20 Wedegast 20, 21 51 25 28 50 Wedel 2, 3 53 50 26 00 Wedelerhave 03 53 50 26 00 Wedeler Sandt 03 53 50 25 50 Wedelsheim 41, 43 47 50 23 45 Wedelssen 15 51 30 26 00 Wedendorf 14 52 15 28 00 Wedern fl. 24, 25 51 50 31 30 Wedersleben 15, 16, 29 51 50 27 40 Wedtzkendorf 21 51 30 30 10 Weed 38 50 20 23 40 Weedel 01 54 00 26 00 Weehneck 19 51 35 26 50 Weel 2, 5 53 30 25 26 50 Wells fl. 05 53 05 25 10 Weenen 05 53 10 24 30 Weer fl. 41 48 25 23 45 Weerstorff 39 50 10 24 30 Weert 01 51 10 21 50 Weesp 01 52 20 20 50 Weeswe 38 52 40 23 20 Weetzen 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Wefensleben 14, 16 51 50 28 10 Weferwinckel 36 50 20 27 00 Wefferling 16 52 05 27 30 Wegelburg 39, 41, 42 48 50 24 15 Wegelelen 16, 18 51 55 28 00 Wegensted 16 52 20 28 00 Wegesack 05 53 15 25 10 Wegestein 06 52 05 25 30 Weggenzin 08 53 50 30 30 Weggun 07 53 15 30 50 Weginburg 39 48 50 24 20 Wegran 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Wehanne 21 51 00 29 30 Wehentzhuss 43 47 25 23 50 Wehing 45 47 50 25 30 Wehlefrontze 27 51 35 33 40 Wehlen 22 50 40 29 20 Wehnlingen 40 47 35 24 00 Wehr 22 50 20 29 20 Wehr fl. 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Wehrsted 16 51 55 28 00 Weiberg 16 52 10 26 30 Weibersdorff 19 50 50 28 20 Weichaw 25, 26 51 40 32 20 Weiche 28 51 00 33 35 Weichelsdorff 26 51 40 32 30 Weichsel fl. 24 49 50 36 00 Weickersd 33 48 30 33 00 Weickersheim 34, 37 49 20 26 30 Weiczendorf 19, 20 51 20 28 30 Weida 1, 22 50 40 28 50 Weida fl. 24, 28 51 10 34 00 Weidberg 33 48 30 31 40 Weide 38 49 20 24 20 Weiden 1, 33, 34 49 40 29 10 Weidenaw 24, 30 50 20 33 30 Weidenbach 19, 20 51 30 28 40 Weidenberg 22, 34 49 50 28 50 Weidenhausen 33 49 30 29 40 Weidenholtz 33 48 10 31 10 Weidensol 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 00 Weidental 38, 39 49 10 24 20 Weidern 34, 38 49 10 25 50 Weides 39 49 30 24 20 Weidesmuel 16, 19 51 35 27 40 Weidicht 30 50 30 34 10 Weidt ff. 19 50 55 27 40 Weiefelde 20 51 40 28 20 Weien 16 52 00 26 00 Weier 40 48 00 24 25 Weierhoff 40 48 20 24 30 Weierstetten 37 49 35 26 05 Weierzumthum 40 40 30 24 20 Weigelsdorff 25, 28 51 10 34 00 Weignitz 25 50 50 34 00 Weigwitz 28 51 00 34 15 Weigsdorff 23, 25 51 05 32 00 Weihen 16 52 00 26 00 Weihusen 16 52 25 27 40 Weikenmohl 08 54 00 32 30 Weil 40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 10 Weila 38, 45 48 25 26 10 Weilar 36 50 45 27 00 Weilbach 34, 37 49 30 25 40 Weilbrock 38 50 20 24 20 Weilburg 01 50 20 24 40 Weilen 41, 43 47 30 23 35 Weileenh 41, 43 47 40 23 45 Weiler 40, 41, 42 48 50 24 25 Weilerbach 39, 49 10 24 00 Weilheim 01 47 30 28 10 Weiller 41, 42 48 35 24 30 Weimar 15, 19, 22 51 00 28 10 Weimer 38 50 20 25 00 Weimneim 39 49 20 25 10 Weinberg 29 51 10 33 05 Weindorff 10, 12 52 10 30 20 Weineck 41, 43 47 55 23 45 Weineer 38 50 00 24 00 Weingarten 45 47 40 26 20 Weingattainleite 19 51 25 27 50 Weingertten 40 48 50 24 55 Weinheim 38 49 20 25 00 Weinick 22 51 00 29 40 Weinlache 29 51 15 33 15 Weinsberg 34, 39 49 00 25 50 Weinsletten 40 47 45 24 05 Weinwitz fl. 28 51 10 34 00 Weira 22 50 40 28 40 Weirsweiler 39 49 30 23 20 Weis fl. 41, 43 49 35 24 20 Weisbach 10, 22 50 35 28 30 Weisbrod 31 50 10 33 40 Weischenfeld 34 49 50 28 10 Weisenborn 22 50 40 29 20 Weisenburg 15, 22 52 10 29 20 Weisenstein 45 48 35 26 30 Weisent 01 48 50 29 30 Weisfurt fl. 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Weisholtz 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 05 Weiskirch 23, 25 51 00 31 50 Weiskirchen 34, 35, 38 49 55 25 10 Weiskrescheim 01 50 20 34 50 Weislitz 22 50 20 35 40 Weisman 1, 34, 36 50 00 28 00 Weispurg 34, 45 49 10 25 40 Weissbach 30 50 25 34 10 Weissdorff 23 51 20 31 30 Weisse 19 50 45 28 20 Weisse Ilster 23 51 25 31 20 Weissel 39 50 00 23 50 Weisse Leippe 29 51 10 33 30 Weissenau 39 49 50 24 30 Weiesse Neisse 23 50 55 31 50 Weissenbach 40 48 35 24 45 Weissenbergh 16, 19 51 40 28 10 Weissenborn 22 51 00 29 00 Weissenburg 1, 39, 40 48 50 24 25 Weissensels 1, 15, 19, 20 51 10 29 00 Weissenhorn 45 48 10 27 00 Weissenoe 34 49 30 28 10 Weissenrode 14, 16, 20 51 40 28 10 Weisse Schirmbach 19 51 15 28 30 Weissen See 1, 19 51 15 27 50 Weissenstein 33 48 40 30 20 Weissenthal 1, 22, 29 50 20 29 50 Weissig 25, 26, 29 51 30 32 40 Weissnbrun 22 50 40 29 10 Weissnfels 01 49 50 28 20 Weissritz 22 50 50 30 40 Weiss See 41, 43 57 44 23 30 Weistadt 22, 34 50 00 28 50 Weisten 7, 10 53 20 30 20 Weistenroth 45 49 05 26 10 Weistitz 25 51 10 33 40 Weistritz 25, 28, 31 50 50 33 50 Weistwasser 2, 23, 33 51 35 31 40 Weistwill 40, 41, 42 48 05 24 10 Weita fl. 20 51 30 28 40 Weitbruch 42 48 35 24 15 Weitburg 41 48 35 24 15 Weitcow 08 53 50 32 00 Weitenbach 22 51 30 28 40 Weitendorp 07 53 45 28 50 Weitneck 33 48 10 32 20 Weitenhage 08 53 30 32 30
Weitnung 40 48 30 24 35 Weitnaw 40 47 35 24 15 Weiter 40 47 50 24 30 Weiterstorf 41, 43 47 30 23 45 Weitersen 22 51 20 29 20 Weitersh. 41, 42 48 35 24 10 Weitin 07 53 35 30 30 Weitlicken 40 47 35 24 10 Weitra 33 48 40 31 50 Weitrfeld 01 48 30 31 50 Weitschen 22 51 10 29 50 Weitz 22 51 00 29 50 Weixelburg 39, 45 49 00 25 50 Welbartitz 33 49 10 30 30 Welchenberg 33 48 40 30 00 Welchingen 37 49 30 26 10 Welchradek 02 50 20 31 30 Welcke 21 50 55 29 30 Welckershausen 36 50 35 27 10 Weldanitz 33 48 40 31 00 Welden 01 48 20 27 30 Weldentz 01 49 50 23 10 Welder 09 54 40 31 30 Weldsperg 01 46 50 30 40 Welebradeck 33 50 20 32 40 Welehral 32 49 00 34 30 Welekramshausen 19 51 25 27 50 Welferstal 42 48 25 23 50 Welge fl. 19 50 50 27 40 Welgendorf 19 51 00 28 10 Welhartitz 01 49 10 30 30 Welhn 38 51 20 23 00 Welica 32 48 50 34 40 Welichowo 25, 26 52 10 33 00 Welicz 19, 20 51 40 28 40 Welinia 25 53 00 33 00 Welingen 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 10 Welisch 1, 2, 33 50 10 32 10 Welissin 33 48 50 31 40 Welkersdorff 23 51 10 32 20 Welkos 32 49 20 34 30 Well 38 51 20 22 00 Wellaw 38 46 40 25 40 Welle 10, 11 52 10 28 40 Wellehagen 10, 11 52 20 28 30 Wellen 14 51 45 28 30 Wellenh. 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 00 Wellesweiler 39 49 20 23 30 Wellien 15 52 50 25 20 Wellin 18 51 50 28 20 Welmdorff 02 52 20 29 30 Welmenach 38, 39 50 00 23 40 Welmersleben 18 51 30 28 30 Welmerstet 19 51 25 28 20 Welmstorp 07 53 25 30 10 Welnen 16 51 30 26 50 Welnitz 22 51 00 28 30 Welon 24 51 20 35 00 Welphesholtz 19, 20 51 45 28 30 Welphsleben 16, 20 51 45 28 10 Welphslebenwirfreb 14 51 25 28 40 Wels 01 48 00 31 20 Welsbach 19 50 35 28 00 Welsborn 39, 42 49 00 23 50 Wels fl. 8, 12 53 00 31 30 Welsekendorff 10, 12 52 20 31 20 Welsen 15, 16 51 50 28 40 Welsenach 2, 15 53 00 29 00 Welsdorf 22 50 40 29 10 Welslebn 14 51 40 25 40 Welsprinck 19 50 35 27 50 Welsum 01 52 20 22 00 Welte 21 51 00 29 20 Welteck 34 49 00 25 50 Weltenburg 01 48 40 29 00 Welferstall 41 48 25 23 50 Weltert 39 50 00 24 00 Weltzach 34, 45 48 50 26 20 Weltzin 7, 8 53 45 30 30 Weltzkendorff 12, 21 51 30 30 40 Welwary 1, 33 50 10 31 00 Wem fl 05 53 10 25 20 Wemingen 17 52 30 26 40 Wemme fl. 04 53 20 25 20 Wemstlitz 32 48 50 33 30 Weperitz 10 52 40 32 20 Weppersweiler 39 49 20 23 20 Wenceslaushagen 13 53 40 32 50 Wenckheim 37 49 40 26 10 Wendehansen 16, 19 51 30 27 50 Wendel 1, 38, 39 49 30 23 20 Wendelsheim 38, 39 49 40 24 10 Wendelstein 19, 20 51 25 28 20 Wenden 6, 16 52 05 27 10 Wender 18 52 00 27 00 Wendesen 16 52 05 27 20 Wendethorn 18 51 55 27 00 Wenhausen 16, 18 52 20 27 30 Wendheim 04 52 02 25 40 Wendhing 40 47 55 24 20 Wendischboddem 04 53 00 28 20 Wendischburg 19 50 40 27 40 Wendische Gottsch. 11 53 05 29 00 Wendische Juden 04 53 00 28 40 Wendische Willemsd. 12 52 00 30 40 Wendisch Lot 14 51 55 29 20 Wendling 1, 45 48 30 26 00 Wendorf 4, 16 52 40 27 20 Wendrike 10, 12 51 50 30 30 Wenendorp 07 54 00 29 30 Wengeln 29 51 30 32 50 Wengi 38 47 00 25 00 Wengstat 27 51 40 33 15 Wenigen Denuftet 19 51 10 27 30 Wenigfrien 16, 19 51 15 27 50 Weningen 01 53 30 28 10 Wennesm 18 51 45 27 10 Wenningen 19, 20 51 20 28 40 Wenniroda 17 52 05 27 30 Wennissen 15 52 30 26 00 Wensdorp 10, 12 51 40 30 50 Wense 4, 6 53 20 26 20 Wenselow 14 52 00 29 30 Wensin 02 54 10 27 00 Wenstein 16 51 40 28 40 Wentdorf 10 52 50 28 30 Wenthausen 15 52 40 27 20 Wenthusen 16, 17 52 05 26 50 Wenting 01 48 40 27 30 Wentorp 3, 7 53 50 27 00 Wentzel 15, 16, 19, 20 51 40 27 40 Wentzen 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Wentzwiller 41, 43 47 25 23 50 Wer fl. 37 49 55 26 05 Werbek 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 40 Werbelin 21, 22 51 00 29 30 Werben 2, 10, 11, 14 52 40 29 00 Werberg 34, 36 50 20 26 30 Werblitz 10 52 40 32 00 Werbowe 32 48 50 34 50 Werchern 16, 19 51 30 27 50 Werckbalgerbake 03 53 45 24 10 Werckrow 09 54 20 31 00 Werd 01 46 40 31 10 Werda 22 50 40 29 20 Werde 38 51 40 22 20 Werdeck 31 50 15 33 40 Werden 1, 38 51 20 23 10 Werdenberg 01 46 40 26 00 Werdling 41 47 50 24 15 Werder 4, 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Werdern 45 49 15 26 00 Werdersberg 22 50 20 28 20 Werdestein 38, 39 49 40 23 20 Werdolhe 1, 38 51 10 24 10 Werdt 38 51 00 21 40 Wercisen 16 51 30 26 20 Weretz fl. 34 49 50 26 40 Werfeld 34, 37 50 00 26 30 Werfeldt 34, 37 49 55 26 05 Werffnawhaus 40 47 35 24 15 Wergel 01 47 10 29 10 Werholtz 41, 43 47 40 23 30 Werigsbuttel 06 52 05 27 00 Wering 14 52 00 28 30 Weringen 38 47 00 24 40 Weringsleben 19 50 55 27 50 Werle 39 50 00 23 50 Wermersbach 40 48 30 24 45 Wermersdorff 22 50 40 29 00 Wermlitz 21 51 00 28 50 Werna fl. 17 52 10 27 30 Wernbeck 34 49 30 29 10 Wernberg 33 49 20 29 10 Werndorp 22 50 50 29 40 Werneck 34 49 50 26 50 Werneritz 2, 33 50 30 31 00 Wernersberg 41, 42 49 00 24 25 Wernersdorff 10, 12 52 00 31 00 Wernerslebn 14 51 45 28 50 Wernichshausen 19 51 10 27 50 Wernigeroda 1, 15, 16 52 00 27 40 Wernitz 10, 12 52 10 30 00 Wernitzgrnn 22 50 30 29 30 Wernrode 19, 20 51 45 28 20 Wernsdorff 19, 20, 22 51 20 29 50 Wernshausen 36 50 40 27 10 Werow 8, 13 53 50 33 00 Werpach 37 49 40 26 05 Werpachhausen 37 49 40 26 10 Werra fl. 19, 36 50 25 27 10 Werraucks Hutten 36 50 40 27 40 Werringeroda 18 51 30 27 30 Werrische Holtzer 16 51 30 26 30 Werse 27 51 40 33 35 Wersebe 05 53 20 25 00 Wersof 38 50 20 24 40 Werstadt 1, 24 51 20 35 00 Werstedt 18 51 35 27 50 Wert 34, 38 49 40 25 40 Wertelow 14 51 30 29 10 Wertem 15 51 30 27 20 Wertingen 1, 34 49 10 27 00 Wertheim 1, 34, 37 49 40 26 00 Wertow 22 51 20 29 10 Wertz fl. 34 50 40 27 00 Wesborn 01 49 00 24 00 Weschke 26, 27 51 50 33 20 Weschlitz 32 49 10 34 10 Wesel 1, 38 51 30 22 40 Weseli 32, 33 49 20 32 40 Weseling 16 52 15 27 50 Weselitzko 32 49 30 34 30 Weselsfeld 07 53 40 28 10 Wesenberg 07 53 10 30 10 Wesenbutel 6, 16 52 10 27 10 Wesendorff 10, 11 53 00 29 00 Wesenfelt 19 51 20 26 40 Weser fl. 1, 4, 5 53 20 25 20 Wesingen 40 48 50 24 55 Weflingbure 1, 2 54 40 25 30 Wesp. 38 52 20 21 00 Wesselem 16, 17 52 00 26 50 Wesselingk 38 50 40 23 00 Wesselnthal L. 37 49 40 20 00 Wesselzburg 01 47 40 27 50 Wessem 38 51 00 22 00 Wessemino 32 49 10 34 50 Wessig 28 51 05 34 10 Wessing 45 48 05 25 40 Wessn 02 51 50 28 20 West 41, 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 00 Westalt 41, 43 47 45 23 45 Westdorff 18 51 20 28 10 Westechude 05 53 45 25 00 Westede 05 54 05 26 10 Westen 1, 34, 36 50 10 26 50 Westenbrugge 07 54 00 28 50 Westendorf 19 50 45 28 00 Westenfeldt 36 50 20 27 20 Westenhagen 8, 9 54 10 30 00 Westenholt 05 53 10 24 30 Westenlo 38 53 20 23 40 Westerburg 16, 18 52 00 27 40 Westerdick 05 54 00 25 30 Westeregeln 18 51 35 28 20 Wester Eems 38 53 40 22 20 Westerhausen 15, 20 51 55 27 50 Westerholtz 05 53 05 24 40 Westerhaim 45 47 55 27 10 Westerhoven 15, 17 51 50 26 40 Westerhusen 16, 18 51 50 28 00 Westerhuysen 09 54 05 31 40 Westermarck 02 52 30 29 20 Westerode 16, 19 51 30 27 10 Westerstettn 45 48 25 26 50 Westerstede 38 53 20 23 40 Westerwalt 38 50 20 24 00 Westgreusen 19, 20 51 20 27 40 Westh. 42 48 30 23 55 Westhausen 19 51 00 27 20 Westheim 36 50 35 26 50 Westhoff 41, 42 48 25 23 55 Westhoven 39 49 30 24 40 Westin 2, 7 53 30 28 20 West Insel 10, 11, 14 52 10 28 40 West Oeffelen 16 51 15 26 20 Westorp 03 55 55 24 40 Westphalia 01 51 10 24 20 Westricz 01 46 10 33 50 Westrlo 38 51 40 25 00 Westrum 05 53 30 24 10 Westvelt 16, 17 52 00 26 40 Wetelumsted 15 52 30 27 00 Wetin 19, 20 51 45 28 50 Wetlensted 16 52 15 27 10 Wetlerwalt 22 50 50 29 10 Wetschutz 26 51 40 33 10 Wetsweiler 39 49 30 23 40 Wetta 22 51 50 28 40 Wettaw 32 48 40 33 10 Wette 22 51 30 29 30 Wetteborn 16, 17 51 50 26 40 Wettelbrun 40 47 50 24 15 Wetteldotf 22 50 50 29 50 Wettelfeld 33 48 30 31 50 Wettelrode 16, 19, 20 51 35 28 10 Wettlsee 34 48 50 27 40 Wettendorp 02 54 00 28 10 Wettenhausen 45 48 15 27 10 Wettensen 16, 17 51 55 26 30 Wetter 1, 38 50 40 25 20 Wetteravia 01 50 40 24 20 Wetterspach 40 48 45 24 55 Wetti 18 51 35 27 00 Wettin 1, 18 51 05 28 40 Wettingen 38 47 00 24 40 Wettschutz 27 51 40 33 15 Wettwitz 22 51 20 29 00 Wetzen 38, 39 49 00 23 30 Wetzhausen 34 50 10 27 00 Wetzla 1, 38 50 30 25 00 Wetzwalde 23 51 00 31 50 Wevelflicte 2, 5 53 55 25 50 Weversfliet 23 53 50 25 20 Weut 38 48 20 25 20 Wewersy 33 49 20 33 00 Wexelburg 22 51 00 29 50 Weydem 1, 39 49 10 25 50 Weyen 33 48 20 22 20 Weyer 01 47 50 32 00 Weyhing 45 48 40 25 50 Weyl 45 48 30 25 30 Weyla 45 47 55 25 30 Weyler 39, 41 48 50 23 30 Weyller 45 49 00 26 00 Weynsperg 45 49 00 25 50 Weyschedorf 34 49 50 28 20 Weysroda 15 51 20 27 00 Weyssen 39 49 20 24 40 Weyssenberg 01 51 10 31 30 Weyssmayn fl. 22 50 00 28 30 Weystrick 01 47 10 32 10 Weystryn 01 47 00 34 10 Weyt 45 48 05 25 30 Wezl 33 48 40 32 10 Wffenheim 01 49 20 27 00 Whye 1, 4 53 00 25 20 Wiach 38 47 00 24 40 Wiaersberg 22 50 20 29 10 Wibboise 09 54 25 31 40 Wibelbach 37 49 45 26 00 Wibendorp 07 53 20 27 40
Wibersberg 39 49 10 24 30 Wibersweyler 39 48 50 23 20 Wibling 45 48 10 26 50 Wiblingen 39 49 10 25 10 Wicemelitz 32 49 10 34 10 Wich 41, 42, 43 48 20 23 45 Wiche fl. 41, 42 48 25 23 45 Wichelsdorff 25 51 30 32 20 Wichemsdorff 10, 12 53 10 30 30 Wichendorff 22 51 00 29 00 Wichersh 42 48 35 24 00 Wischmansdorp 07 54 05 28 50 Wichtenstein 01 48 20 30 50 Wichting 41 48 15 24 45 Wichtshausen 36 50 35 27 20 Wick 1, 8, 9 54 50 30 30 Wickeborg 04 52 40 26 20 Wickelin 27 51 40 33 40 Wickenbergk 16 52 25 26 40 Wickenborg 06 52 25 26 30 Wickendorff 07 53 35 28 20 Wickensen 16, 17 51 45 26 30 Wicherode 16, 19, 20 51 40 28 00 Wickerodt 39 49 40 23 30 Wickersdorf 22 50 50 29 30 Wickerstet 19 51 05 28 20 Wickerswihr 41, 43 47 55 23 55 Wickraid 38 51 00 22 20 Wickum 39 50 00 24 30 Widdekow 10 52 50 31 30 Widel 15 52 10 27 20 Widela 16, 17 51 55 27 20 Wideraw 22 50 50 29 50 Wideren 40, 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 00 Widergrun 40, 44 48 20 24 30 Widersdorff 22 50 50 29 50 Widerstet 14, 20 51 15 28 20 Widim 2, 33 50 20 31 20 Widlaw 18 51 30 27 10 Widmer 21 51 00 29 10 Wiechs 40 47 35 24 20 Wied 01 50 30 23 50 Wiedebruck 16 52 15 26 00 Wiedeburg 38 51 40 24 40 Wiedensaal 16 52 10 25 50 Wiedmutmuhl 28 51 00 33 50 Wiel 38 47 20 25 20 Wielen 40 47 30 24 10 Wielen Comitatus 19 51 15 28 50 Wielmersen 10, 11 52 30 27 30 Wielnig 14 51 35 28 50 Wielwal 4, 10, 11 52 50 27 30 Wien 33 48 20 33 30 Wienschendorff 23 51 15 32 20 Wierden 05 53 40 24 10 Wieringe 38 53 00 20 40 Wiershusen 16, 17 51 45 26 50 Wiersperg 39 48 50 24 10 Wiesa 30 50 20 34 10 Wiesaw 26 51 35 32 50 Wiesbach 22 51 20 29 40 Wieschutz 25, 26, 27 51 35 33 30 Wiese 32 49 00 32 50 Wiesen 23 51 35 32 00 Wiesen fl. 40 47 40 24 30 Wiesenberg 24, 30, 31 50 10 34 10 Wiesenburg 10, 14, 21 51 50 29 30 Wiesenrode 20 51 40 28 10 Wieshagen 05 53 45 25 40 Wiesp 23 51 05 32 20 Wiette 16 52 10 27 10 Wifetz 40 47 35 24 15 Wiflisburg 01 46 30 23 20 Wigeleben 19 51 05 27 20 Wigelitz 14, 16 52 10 28 20 Wiger fl. 38 26 40 24 20 Wigers 41 48 30 24 05 Wiggersdorff 16, 19 51 35 27 50 Wigstein 24, 32 49 40 34 30 Wigtichen 45 48 10 24 50 Wihe 1, 15, 19 51 20 28 20 Wihe Baronia 19, 20 51 25 28 10 Wihersberg 41, 42, 43 48 05 23 50 Wihersheim 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 15 Wihmhausen 19 51 35 26 40 Wihr 38, 41, 43 47 55 23 40 Wihrbach 40, 41 48 15 24 30 Wilbach 19 51 15 26 50 Wilbad 38, 39, 45 48 30 25 00 Wilberg 36 50 10 27 20 Wilbing 19 50 45 27 50 Wilchwitz 22 50 50 29 30 Wilck 28 51 05 33 45 Wilcka 27 51 45 33 05 Wilckaw 26 51 45 33 10 Wilckawa 28 51 25 33 50 Wilckwitz 28 51 00 34 15 Wilcz 19, 20 51 40 28 40 Wildbad 40 48 35 25 00 Wildberg 10, 12 52 40 29 40 Wildeloe 05 53 05 24 40 Wildeman 16, 17 51 50 27 10 Wildenach 15 51 30 27 40 Wildenbach fl. 20 51 35 27 50 Wildenberg 01 50 40 24 10 Wildenbock 10, 13 52 50 31 50 Wildenbrock 1, 8 53 00 32 00 Wildenfe's 1, 22 50 40 29 40 Wildenhagen 10, 13 52 00 32 20 Wildenhusen 1, 4 53 00 24 40 Wildenow 10, 13 52 40 32 40 Wildenstein 41, 43 47 45 23 25 Wildin 01 47 00 30 00 Wildkohl 10, 11 53 20 29 10 Wildshusen 06 52 40 25 20 Wildstein 33 49 30 30 30 Wildstet 40 48 20 24 25 Wildthoff 35 49 55 25 05 Wildungen 01 51 00 25 40 Wiler 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 25 Wilerhoff 42 48 10 24 00 Wilering 33 48 10 31 30 Wilgersp. 41, 42 48 15 23 40 Wilgerswiesen 39 49 00 24 20 Wilgoth 42, 44 48 35 24 05 Wilhelmsburck 19 50 35 27 10 Wilhelmsdorff 29 51 10 32 45 Wilhelmstadt 31 50 05 34 00 Wiling 38 47 40 24 40 Wilinow 33 49 40 32 20 Wilisaw 01 46 40 24 10 Wilka 23 51 10 32 00 Wilkaw 25 51 40 33 00 Wilke 10, 13 52 20 32 50 Wilkenburg 16 52 15 26 30 Wilkow 33 48 40 31 10 Will 38 46 40 24 00 Willems fl. 16 51 20 26 40 Willemsdorff 10, 11 53 00 29 00 Willemstat 01 51 40 20 30 Willen 22, 23 51 10 31 20 Willenborg 39 49 50 23 20 Willensen 16, 17 51 40 26 40 Willensgrin 22 50 20 29 20 Willer 38, 43 48 10 23 50 Willer fl. 19 51 20 27 30 Willeroda 19 50 55 27 50 Willershag 07 53 40 30 50 Willershagen 07 54 10 29 30 Willershausen 19 51 00 26 50 Willershusen 16, 17 51 40 26 50 Willersy 38 49 40 20 40 Willewater 17 51 50 26 50 Willikensdorp 2, 7, 10 53 05 28 00 Willissaw 38 46 40 24 20 Willpern 22 51 20 29 40 Willteckh. 45 49 00 26 00 Wilmar 34 50 30 27 00 Wilmarck 36 50 25 27 00 Wilmers 01 50 30 27 00 Wilmersdorff 10, 11 53 00 29 10 Wilmerslebn 14 51 35 28 30 Wilmsdorff 30 50 25 34 00 Wilnersdorff 19 50 35 27 50 Wilnu 16 51 25 27 00 Wilp 01 52 20 22 10 Wilperg 34 50 10 37 10 Wilrhoff 44 48 20 24 25 Wilrode 20 51 45 28 10 Wilsbach 39 50 00 24 40 Wilsche 26 51 35 33 00 Wilschnitz fl. 19 50 30 28 30 Wilschwitz 28 50 50 34 30 Wilsdorf 02 51 00 29 30 Wilsen 41, 42, 44 48 35 24 00 Wilshoven 01 48 30 30 10 Wilsleben 14, 18 51 30 28 20 Wilsnach 10, 11 52 50 28 50 Wilspach 34, 45 49 00 25 50 Wilsrebe 20 51 50 28 40 Wilstede 05 53 20 25 30 Wilstein 38, 39 49 40 24 10 Wilstet 42, 43, 44, 45 48 20 24 20 Wilster 1, 2, 5 53 55 25 50 Wilstock 01 53 10 30 00 Wiltbader Vorst 45 48 30 25 00 Wiltberg 1, 45 48 25 25 20 Wiltendorsf 22 51 00 29 20 Wilterdorff 19 50 35 28 10 Wiltheim 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 00 Wiltig fl. 23 51 05 31 50 Wiltigh fl. 25 51 00 32 00 Wiltkule 07 53 15 29 40 Wiltschaw 28 51 00 34 10 Wiltsche 29 51 15 33 05 Wiltschen 28 51 10 34 20 Wiltschke 29 51 15 33 30 Wiltschutz 30 50 20 34 00 Wiltstein 01 49 30 30 30 Wiltz 01 49 50 22 00 Wiltzberg 31 50 25 33 30 Wiltzburg 34 48 50 27 50 Wiltzerschoven 33 48 40 33 10 Wiltzleben 16 52 05 27 30 Wilxen 28 51 20 34 05 Wilxenhmuhl 28 51 20 34 00 Wilzina 25 52 30 33 00 Wilzow 08 53 50 30 00 Wimbay 01 48 50 21 40 Wimberg 33 49 00 30 50 Wimelburg 19, 20 51 40 28 30 Wimelrode 20 51 40 28 10 Wimenaw 42 48 40 24 00 Wimgerutafft 19 50 40 26 30 Wimmenau 39, 41 48 50 23 40 Wimmenthal 39, 45 49 00 25 50 Wimmis 1, 38 46 20 24 00 Wimpren 1, 38, 39, 45 49 10 25 40 Win 41 48 30 24 35 Winada 45 48 45 26 10 Winadaw 45 48 15 26 30 Winante 22, 34 49 50 29 00 Winberg 07 53 00 28 30   42 48 40 24 00 Winchst 03 53 45 25 00 Winckel 19, 20 51 35 28 20 Wickeldorff 31 50 10 33 50 Winckelmuhl 29 51 20 33 25 Wincksted 10, 11 52 40 27 30 Windburg 02 54 40 25 50 Windeberg 16, 19 51 20 27 10 Windeck 1, 38 50 40 23 40 Windegg 40 48 30 24 40 Windelsheim 39 49 40 24 30 Winden 37 49 45 26 00 Windhagen 16 51 55 26 20 Windheim 16 52 10 25 50 Windisch 22 51 00 29 30 Windisch Baddensted 11 52 35 27 50 Windisch Boraw 25, 26 51 40 32 40 Windisch Brock 1, 12 51 50 30 00 Windisch Buch 37 49 35 25 55 Windisch Juden 11 52 40 28 10 Windisch gracz 01 46 30 32 40 Windisch moste 23 51 35 31 50 Windn 38 48 40 24 20 Windon 40 48 35 24 35 Windorff 14, 20 51 20 28 50 Windplassing 33 48 30 33 40 Windtbargen 05 54 05 25 40 Wineborg 15 52 10 27 00 Wineck 44 48 30 24 35 Winerstorf 41, 42 48 40 24 30 Wineta 08 54 10 31 00 Wing 05 53 35 26 00 Wingart 40 48 20 24 25 Wingarten 39, 45 48 50 25 00 Wingedorff 23 51 10 32 20 Wingen 39, 41, 42 48 45 23 55 Wingersen 44 48 25 24 50 Wingerts 42 48 30 24 05 Winhusen 4, 6 52 40 27 00 Winhusen 4, 6 52 40 27 00 Winkel 38 46 20 24 20 Winnenberg 01 51 30 25 10 Winni 14, 18 51 30 28 20 Winnigen 16 51 50 28 20 Winnisted 18 51 45 27 30 Winom 39, 45 49 00 25 10 Winschelburg 33 50 30 33 20 Winschlig 40, 44 48 20 24 25 Winschote 01 53 10 23 00 Winseler 16 52 15 26 00 Winsem 04 53 00 26 06 Winsen 1, 2, 6 53 10 26 50 Winshaim 34 49 10 25 40 Winsingen 39 49 00 24 30 Winssen 03 53 40 27 00 Winstein 41, 42 48 45 24 10 Winsfenerbach 41, 42 48 45 24 10 Winstock 13 52 30 31 40 Wintdorf 11 52 55 28 40 Wintel 01 53 30 25 50 Winter 41, 42 48 20 24 35 Winterbach 45 48 40 26 10 Winterberg 38 51 00 24 40 Winterfelt 10, 11 52 40 28 00 Winterhausen 34 49 30 26 50 Winterhorst 2, 3, 6 53 50 25 50 Winterling 45 47 55 25 50 Winternheim 39 49 50 24 20 Wintersdorf 22 51 00 29 10 Wintershagen 08 54 50 34 00 Winterh. 42 48 35 24 10 Wintersow 01 50 00 30 20 Wintersweiler 40 47 35 24 05 Winterswil 41, 43 47 20 23 55 Winterthur 01 47 10 25 10 Wintgrebn 14 51 55 29 10 Winthagen 17 52 10 26 20 Wintheim 34 50 30 28 10 Wintrtzow 33 50 00 30 20 Wintschendorf 22 50 50 29 30 Wintsebed 22 50 40 29 10 Wintz 44 48 25 24 00 Wintzenbach 41, 42 48 45 24 30 Wintzenberg 24, 30 50 30 34 00 Wintzenborg 16, 17 52 05 26 40 Wintzenheim 41, 43 47 55 23 45 Wintzig 24, 25, 26, 27 51 30 33 30 Wintzingen 39 49 10 24 30 Wintzingensis 27 51 35 33 35 Wintzheim 01 49 20 27 10 Wintzler 45 47 50 25 30 Wintzelhausen 45 48 55 25 50 Wintz Vorwerg 30 50 35 34 20 Wipertus 20 51 55 27 50 Wipke 10, 11 52 20 28 10 Wippach 20 51 20 28 30 Wippels 05 53 35 24 20 Wippenkarn 05 53 35 25 50 Wipper 16, 18, 19, 20 51 30 28 40 Wipperfurd 1, 38 51 00 23 40 Wipperode 19 50 50 27 30 Wipping 38 46 00 23 20 Wipfeld 34, 36 49 50 26 50 Wipra 19, 36 50 45 27 50 Wippra 15, 16, 19, 20 51 40 28 10 Wipshusen 16 52 20 27 10 Wira 22 50 50 29 30 Wirben 25 51 00 3 20 Wirbental 32 49 50 34 20 Wirbitz 25, 28 51 00 33 40 Wirbot 41, 43 47 25 23 25
Wirche Teich 25, 29 51 10 33 20 Wirckhausen 22 51 00 28 40 Wiringen 16, 17 52 10 26 40 Wirm 38, 39, 45 48 40 25 20 Wirm fl. 38, 39, 45 48 40 25 10 Wirnenburg 01 50 20 23 20 Wirnsdorff 22 50 20 28 40 Wirpersche 08 54 20 35 00 Wirsewitz 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 30 Wirsnitz 22 50 20 29 10 Wirsrebe 20 51 50 28 30 Wirsweiler 39 49 10 23 30 Wirtemberg 38, 45 48 35 25 50 Wirtsch 29 51 20 33 10 Wirtzach 01 47 30 26 40 Wiry 4, 16, 17 52 00 27 20 Wisbach 38 50 00 24 40 Wisbaden 1, 38, 39 50 00 24 30 Wischa 33 49 10 33 40 Wiscne 38 51 40 23 40 Wischen 03 53 45 26 40 Wischitz 33 50 10 30 00 Wischnow 32, 33 48 50 33 30 Wiseloch 38, 39, 45 49 10 25 10 Wiscnaw 41, 42 48 35 23 55 Wisenbach 22 50 50 29 30 Wisenfelt 34, 37 50 00 26 20 Wisenrode 15, 19 51 40 28 00 Wisenstaig 45 48 20 26 20 Wisent fl. 34 49 40 28 00 Wisenthal fl. 22, 36 50 40 27 00 Wiseroda 18 51 15 28 00 Wishagerhaven Sluse 03 53 45 25 20 Wisick 21 51 25 29 40 Wiske 2, 15 51 40 28 40 Wiskow 32 49 10 34 10 Wismanshove 16 51 25 27 00 Wismar 1, 2, 7 53 50 25 30 Wispenstein 15, 16, 17 51 50 26 20 Wisselhover 4, 5, 6 53 20 26 00 Wissendorp 2, 7 53 55 28 20 Wissenhausen 15 51 20 26 20 Wissenroda 25 50 50 33 20 Wissnburg 38 48 40 24 20 Wissneck 41, 43, 45 47 50 24 25 Wissowitz 32 49 10 34 50 Wistat 33, 34 49 40 29 10 Wisternitz 32 48 40 34 00 Wistisburg 38 46 20 23 20 Wistringen 5, 6 52 55 25 10 Witawsky Krag 33 49 30 31 20 Wittrectzen 21 51 50 30 00 Witbriezen 10, 12 51 40 30 10 Witelsh 41, 43 47 40 23 40 Witelspach 40, 41, 42 48 05 24 25 Witenhagen 08 54 50 34 30 Witersbach 36 50 25 27 40 Witerswitter 41, 42 48 40 23 55 Witgendorff 23, 26 51 05 31 50 Witgenow 23, 24 51 30 31 10 Witgenstein 1, 38 50 40 25 00 Witgow 08 53 20 32 30 Withausen 36 50 05 27 10 Witigenaw 01 48 50 31 50 Witkercke 41, 42, 43 48 10 23 30 Witlage 01 52 30 24 50 Witlich 38 50 00 23 00 Witlig 23 51 00 31 50 Witlsweiln 45 48 15 25 00 Witmer 4, 16 52 20 27 40 Witmmshone 19 51 35 26 40 Witmund 01 53 50 23 40 Witring 38, 39 49 00 23 30 Witshagen 04 54 00 26 40 Witstatt 34 49 20 25 50 Witstock 2, 7 53 00 29 30 Witte 05 53 45 25 30 Wittebeke 07 54 05 29 00 Wittegrunden 3, 5 53 45 23 50 Witttelhoe 1, 15 53 00 25 40 Wittemberge 10, 11 52 50 28 30 Witten 38 51 20 23 20 Wittenberg 1, 2, 15 51 50 29 40 Wittenberge 1, 2 53 10 29 10 Wittenbh 08 55 10 35 30 Wittenborh 1, 2, 7 53 25 28 00 Wittenfelde 08 53 50 32 30 Wittenferd 07 53 30 28 20 Wittenhagen 07 53 15 30 40 Wittenh 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 30 Wittenk 10, 12 53 10 30 10 Wittenfee 05 53 00 25 20 Wittenstede 02 54 50 26 00 Wittenweier 40 48 10 24 15 Wittenwihr 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 15 Witterspach 40 48 40 24 55 Wittersten 18 51 30 28 00 Witte See 06 52 45 24 40 Witte Tonn 05 53 55 24 20 Wittewacht 10, 11, 14 52 10 29 00 Wittichausen 34 49 30 26 30 Wittichenaw 02 51 20 30 20 Wittig fl. 24 51 00 32 00 Wittigenaw 33 49 00 31 40 Witting 4, 6 53 00 27 40 Wittling 45 48 15 26 10 Wittmer 18 51 45 27 10 Wittow 8, 9 54 50 30 30 Wittowitsche Tehr 09 54 45 31 00 Wittpach 37 49 45 20 00 Wittstat 37 49 30 26 10 Wittstogk 10, 12 53 00 29 30 Witzbaoh 22 50 20 28 30 Witzdorff 22 51 00 28 50 Witze fl. 16 51 15 27 00 Witzelrot 36 50 50 27 10 Witzen 40, 41, 42, 43 48 05 24 05 Witzenbroctk 4, 6 52 40 26 20 Witzendorff 4, 6 53 20 26 40 Witzke 34 49 20 28 10 Witzleben 19 50 50 28 00 Witzmitz 08 53 50 33 00 Wivelstede 05 53 15 24 40 Wiversh 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 05 Wiwel 40, 41, 42, 43 48 20 24 10 Wlachowitz 32 49 10 35 00 Wladiflaw 33 49 10 32 50 Wlimode 16 52 15 28 10 Wlozitz 2, 33 50 20 32 50 Wmstat 01 49 40 25 20 Wnderwelz 01 47 20 31 50 Wnteraw 19 50 45 28 20 Wobberin 07 53 35 28 40 Wobberlin 07 53 20 28 30 Wobbeser 08 54 40 34 30 Wobetznitz 33 49 20 31 20 Wobkendorp 07 54 05 29 40 Wobramin 10, 13 52 50 32 00 Wobrzitwi 33 50 10 31 20 Wodarch 08 53 40 30 30 Wodke 10, 11 52 50 29 00 Wodnany 1, 33 49 00 31 10 Woelde 4, 16, 17 52 20 27 00 Woerden 1, 38 52 10 20 50 Woes 07 53 05 28 10 Woese 2, 10, 11 53 10 27 50 Woesterwitz 08 52 50 32 30 Wogran 10, 13 52 50 32 40 Wohrzitwi 02 50 10 30 20 Woidnia 27 51 40 33 40 Woidsdorff 28 51 20 34 50 Woikwitz 28 51 00 33 55 Wischwitz 28 51 05 34 15 Wisenbrug 02 52 00 28 50 Woitz 30 50 30 34 10 Woitzdorff 29 51 15 32 55 Woitzel 08 53 40 33 00 Wokenitz 09 54 40 31 00 Woker 07 53 40 29 40 Wokrente 07 53 55 29 00 Wokule 07 53 10 30 30 Wolaviensis 24, 25, 27 51 30 33 00 Wolbach 41, 43 47 30 24 10 Wolbeck 01 51 50 24 00 Wolbersdorff 8, 10, 13 53 20 32 20 Wolbranitz 32, 33 48 50 33 40 Wolckelsberg 41, 43 47 25 23 50 Wolckelsheim 40, 43 47 50 24 00 Wolckenburg 33 50 40 29 30 Wolckenshausen 19 51 40 26 40 Wolckenstein 33 50 30 30 00 Wolckersdorff 34 49 10 27 50 Wolckewitz 08 53 40 30 00 Wolckow 08 53 50 30 00 Wolcksh 41, 43, 44 48 25 24 00 Wolckstein 33 49 40 29 50 Wolde 07 53 50 28 20 Woldeck 7, 10, 12 53 20 30 30 Woldenberg 4, 16, 17 52 00 27 00 Woldenitz 09 54 45 31 10 Woldenstein 16, 17 51 55 26 50 Woldtsteg 40 49 30 24 40 Woleczow 33 50 20 32 00 Wolen 07 53 45 29 40 Wolendorp 5, 6 52 55 26 00 Wolensen 16, 17 51 55 26 50 Wolersen 17 52 05 26 50 Wolersleben 16, 19 51 25 27 50 Woleschnitz 2, 33 50 20 32 40 Wolfang 02 47 30 30 50 Wolfdorf 14 51 20 28 50 Wolfensted 16 52 00 28 00 Wolferhofen 41, 42 48 45 24 10 Wolfersdorf 1, 25, 26 51 20 32 40 Wolfersteten 37 49 35 26 05 Wolfert 40 47 55 24 15 Wolfes Baringen 19 51 00 27 10 Wolffach 28, 42, 45 48 10 24 40 Wolffach fl 45 48 10 24 50 Wolffbach 16, 19 51 35 28 10 Wolffberg 15 52 40 27 20 Wolffelde 2, 15 52 40 27 40 Wolffen 16 51 35 27 00 Wolffenbuttel 14, 15, 17 52 20 27 20 Wolffenwiler 40, 41 47 50 24 15 Wolfferen 19 51 45 26 40 Wolfferode 20 51 35 28 20 Wolffershausen 19 50 50 28 00 Wolfferstet 19, 20 51 35 28 20 Wolffertsweier 40 48 45 24 50 Wolsses 19 50 50 27 30 Wolffesburk 18 52 10 27 30 Wolssgang 41, 43 47 55 24 15 Wolffholl 07 52 55 28 10 Wolffkerode 19 51 15 26 30 Wolffnen 41, 43 47 50 23 55 Wolffrode 19 51 40 29 30 Wolffsburgk 16 52 25 27 40 Wolssegk 34 49 00 29 00 Wolffshagen 07 53 15 28 50 Wolffsheim 40 48 25 24 10 Wolffsmuhl 27, 28, 29 51 25 33 20 Wolffgans 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 00 Wolffgarsdorff 33 48 30 33 30 Wolffhag 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 30 Wolfh 41 48 30 23 55 Wolfkirchen 38 48 40 23 20 Wolfkratz 40 47 40 24 15 Wolfmanshausen 36 50 20 27 10 Wolfsbroeckerhave en Sluce 03 53 45 25 20 Wolfsbrunnen 39 49 10 25 10 Wolfsburg 1, 4 52 40 28 20 Wolfschwendt 19 51 20 27 30 Wolfsdorf 23, 28 51 40 32 10 Wolfsforde 14 51 40 29 20 Wolfsgeford 22 50 40 28 50 Wolfshagen 01 51 10 25 40 Wolfsham 20 51 45 28 20 Wolfsheim 41, 42, 43 48 25 24 10 Wolfsholl 2, 10, 11 53 00 27 30 Wolfsperg 01 46 50 32 20 Wolfspruck 01 48 20 35 40 Wolfsteid 1, 39 49 30 23 50 Wolfuscies 38 46 20 24 40 Wolgast 1, 8, 9, 10 54 10 31 00 Wolin 33 49 00 31 00 Wolkaw 2, 15 52 40 29 20 Wolkelsh 41 47 50 24 00 Wolkenshausen 16 51 35 27 00 Wolkensin 07 53 30 30 30 Wolkirchen 41 48 55 23 30 Wolkwitz 2, 7 53 50 30 10 Woll 42, 44 48 30 24 15 Wollenberg 4, 10 53 00 29 00 Wolleroda 16, 19 51 25 27 30 Wollersen 16 51 55 26 50 Wollin 1, 8, 10 53 50 32 00 Wollinische Werder 08 54 00 31 30 Wolln 11 52 15 28 00 Wolmersdorf 30, 31 50 20 33 50 Wolmerstede 1, 2, 15 52 20 28 20 Wolmersted 10, 11, 14 51 50 28 50 Wolmish 42 49 00 24 35 Wolmunsh 38 49 00 23 40 Wolmanster 39 49 00 23 50 Wolpe 6, 15 52 25 26 00 Wolpeke 16 52 25 26 00 Wolpersdorf 31 50 35 33 30 Wolpirode 15 52 00 27 20 Wolpsted 16 52 20 27 50 Wolsach 01 48 00 24 40 Wolsberg 09 54 20 31 10 Wolschdorff 19 50 40 28 10 Wolchinger 40 48 35 24 40 Wolsdorff 16, 18 52 10 27 50 Wolsfsburg 06 52 10 27 30 Wolsh 33 49 30 29 50 Wolskirchen 39 48 50 23 30 Wolssham 14 51 15 28 20 Wolssy 2, 33 49 20 32 50 Wolstorp 05 53 30 25 00 Wolszim 39 49 40 24 10 Wolteich 23 51 25 32 10 Wolterong 01 53 20 26 20 Woltersdorf 10, 12 51 40 30 30 Woltershusen 16, 17 51 55 26 40 Wolterslagen 10, 11 52 40 28 40 Woltersum 01 53 20 22 40 Wolthoff 16 52 25 27 40 Wolthusen 4, 16 53 00 26 40 Woltin 10, 12, 13 53 00 31 40 Woltkeroda 16, 17 51 55 27 20 Woltkow 08 53 20 32 30 Woltorp 4, 16, 17 52 20 27 00 Woltsesch 19, 36 50 50 27 00 Aeoltun 08 53 10 32 00 Woltzegaern 07 53 20 29 40 Woltzin 2, 7 53 30 28 10 Wommen 19 51 00 26 40 Wondorp 09 54 20 31 10 Wonenthal 40, 41, 43 48 00 24 15 Wonmena 16 52 25 27 40 Wonside 22, 34 50 00 29 00 Wonssleben 14 51 45 28 30 Wonst 10, 11, 14 52 10 29 10 Woperitz 13 52 40 32 10 Wopper fl. 38 51 00 23 00 Worbach 19 50 45 28 10 Worben 38 46 40 23 20 Worblitz 10, 11, 14 51 40 28 50 Worcom 38 53 00 21 20 Worcum 1, 38 51 50 21 00 Wori 16 52 05 26 40 Worlitz 14, 15, 21 51 25 29 20 Worlitz fl. 24, 31 50 00 33 00 Wormberg 16 51 45 27 30 Wormbs 1, 38, 39 49 30 24 50 Wormsleben 19, 20 51 40 28 30 Wormelicz 15, 19, 20 51 35 29 00 Wormlitz 2, 15 52 20 28 40 Wormsfelt 10, 13 52 40 32 20 Wornitz 12 53 00 30 50 Worow 10 53 40 32 40 Worpen 14, 21 51 35 29 40 Wort 05 53 45 25 10 Worth 01 52 40 17 30 Worwerck 21 50 55 29 30 Wosenzno 2, 33 50 30 31 50 Wosetzan 01 49 20 31 20 Woslawa fl. 33 49 10 32 40 Wosmer 07 53 50 28 10
Wosseen 07 53 55 29 40 Woffen 07 53 30 29 10 Wossick 22 51 00 29 00 Wossow 07 53 20 30 40 Wostenfeld 07 53 50 29 40 Wostenmarck 07 53 25 27 50 Wosterhusen 08 54 10 30 30 Wosteritz 09 54 40 31 30 Wostervitz 08 54 30 34 00 Wosth 41 48 30 23 55 Wostervitz 08 54 30 34 00 Wosth 41 48 30 23 55 Wostomirtz 1, 33 50 10 32 30 Wostrow 2, 33 49 10 32 50 Woten 07 53 30 28 50 Wotens 07 53 45 29 30 Wotevitz lacus 07 53 20 30 00 Wotitz 1, 33 49 30 31 30 Wotmethausen 36 50 30 27 00 Wottaw 32, 33 48 40 32 40 Wottenburg 37 49 45 26 00 Wotzechow 1, 33 50 10 30 20 Wotzendorff 19 50 35 28 10 Woupke 16 52 05 27 40 Woyke 10, 11, 14 52 20 29 20 Woynowo 265 52 10 32 30 Woyselwitz 30 50 40 34 20 Wrahowitz 32 49 20 34 10 Wraz 2, 3 49 50 31 00 Wredenhagen 2, 7, 10 53 10 29 40 Wreck 10, 13 52 40 31 30 Wreken 09 54 25 31 20 Wreme 05 53 35 25 00 Wrischbergholtzen 16 52 00 26 40 Wrodow 07 53 30 30 10 Wronki 1, 24, 25 52 40 33 00 Wrzeschoss 02 50 10 31 30 Wrzeschtioff 33 50 10 32 40 Wrzissst 2, 33 49 30 32 50 Wsetin 32 49 20 35 00 Wssechowitz 32 49 20 34 40 Wsserub 33 49 50 30 00 Wsssulow 33 49 50 30 30 Wten 17 52 35 26 40 Wtter 38 57 20 23 40 Wuden 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 50 Wuetzbac 39 49 10 23 30 Wulchow 14 52 15 29 10 Wulckaw 26 52 20 32 20 Wulckenborg 22 50 50 29 40 Wulfeld 1, 16 52 25 26 20 Wulffborch 15 52 50 27 40 Wulffendorff 33 48 40 33 40 Wulfferoda 16, 19 51 35 27 40 Wulffersweiler 39 49 30 23 20 Wulffrode 17 52 30 26 30 Wulfshusen 17 52 15 26 15 Wulfinckhusen 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Wulfingen 16, 17 52 00 26 30 Wilfsdick 05 53 10 24 50 Wulfsdorf 10, 11 53 15 29 30 Wulfshagen 10, 11 53 00 28 40 Wulfssheim 22 51 20 29 30 Wulfswet 14, 21 51 30 28 50 Wulken 12 52 10 31 50 Wulkow 10, 13 52 00 31 50 Wulle 22 50 40 29 20 Wullersleben 19 50 50 27 50 Wullstein 24, 25, 26 52 10 32 40 Wulpedorf 22 50 50 29 30 Wulperoda 16, 17, 18 51 55 27 30 Wulssborg 02 52 40 27 50 Wulssdorff 12 51 50 31 40 Wulsten 17 52 30 26 30 Wulstendorf 01 48 30 34 00 Wulstingen 45 48 00 26 00 Wultenike 07 54 00 30 10 Wulvertzrade 19, 36 50 45 27 00 Wun fl. 22 50 50 29 40 Wundersleben 19 51 10 27 50 Wundisene Bicle 23 51 25 32 00 Wundsch 19, 20 51 25 28 40 Wunen fl. 38 46 40 24 20 Wunrow 10, 12 53 00 30 00 Wunscheburg 24 50 20 33 00 Wunschelburg 31 50 25 33 20 Wunsdorp 6, 16 52 15 26 10 Wuntschessing 23 51 10 32 00 Wuppringhusen 16, 17 51 40 26 50 Wurben 30 50 25 31 10 Wurche 08 54 00 34 00 Wurdeler 05 53 25 24 40 Wurm 40 48 40 25 05 Wurm fl. 40 48 40 25 05 Wurmbach fl. 19 51 15 27 40 Wurmersheim 40 48 45 24 40 Wurmling 45 47 45 25 20 Wurmspach 38 46 40 25 20 Wurschngrun 33 49 40 29 40 Wurstel 01 53 00 17 10 Wursterlandt 05 53 40 25 00 Wurtzach 45 47 45 26 40 Wurtzbach 34 50 30 28 20 Wurtzburg 1, 34, 37 49 40 26 40 Wurtzburg Episcop. 01 49 50 26 40 Wurtzen 2, 22 51 20 29 40 Wuscheldorff 19 50 55 29 00 Wushung 23 51 00 32 00 Wuskow 10, 12 52 20 31 30 Wusse 09 54 35 30 50 Wussecken 08 53 40 31 00 Wusselfdorf 30 50 40 34 20 Wussow 08 53 30 31 30 Wust 2, 10, 12 52 00 29 40 Wustal 34 50 00 26 00 Wustebraad 22 50 40 29 40 Wuste Girsdorf 24, 31 50 40 33 00 Wustelen 22 50 10 29 10 Wusten 22 50 50 29 40 Wustendorf 28 51 10 34 20 Wustensachsen 34, 36 50 30 26 40 Wustenwitz 10, 12, 14 51 00 34 20 Wusterhaus 01 53 10 29 50 Wusterhausen 10, 12 52 40 29 20 Wusterhusen 10, 12 51 50 31 00 Wustranse 08 54 00 34 00 Wustrow 1, 10, 12 52 30 29 50 Wutenow 10, 12 52 40 29 50 Wuterdorf 01 48 30 33 30 Wutkenaw 26 52 00 32 20 Wutlingen 45 47 55 26 20 Wutschdorff 26 52 20 32 10 Wutschowitz 33 49 10 33 40 Wutten 26 52 20 32 30 Wuttenicke 08 54 00 30 00 Wutzow 14 51 55 29 30 Wy 10, 11, 14 51 50 28 30 Wybels 05 53 30 24 10 Wychmanshausen 19 51 05 26 30 Wyck 1, 38 50 50 21 59 Wyckopzee 1, 38 52 40 20 20 Wyckte 01 51 50 21 30 Wyden 19 51 15 26 30 Wyebeke 15 52 10 25 40 Wylen 38 46 40 25 20 Wyldeman 15 51 50 27 00 Wyll 40 37 30 24 05 Wymar 01 51 00 28 10 Wymer 38 53 00 23 00 Wynoxbergen 01 51 00 18 20 Wynthum 15 52 30 25 20 Wynystrzitz 33 49 00 33 00 Wyren 02 52 50 27 20 Wyrnhausen 34 50 40 27 00 Wyrsberg 22, 34 50 00 28 30 Wysaky 2, 33 50 30 32 30 Wyss 05 51 25 27 10 Wyssenhasel 19 51 00 26 30 Wyssenhorn 19 51 05 26 30 Wytingsdorf 10, 12 52 40 30 40 Wytmar 1, 15 52 50 26 20 Wytterschap 15 52 20 25 20 Y   YAckergde 19 51 35 26 30 Ybingen 23 51 25 31 20 Ychaven 38 53 20 23 20 Yerouth 01 52 50 17 30 Yler Moelen 04 53 40 25 20 Ylversheim 39 49 20 25 00 Ymenstat 38 47 20 26 00 Yntze 10, 11 53 00 28 40 Yperen 01 50 50 18 50 Yrst 38 52 20 22 00 Ysel fl. 38 52 00 22 00 Yselmonde 01 53 50 20 30 Yselstein 1, 38 52 00 21 00 Yserschmit 10, 11 52 10 28 20 Ysy 01 46 20 19 50 Ytzdorff 10, 12 52 30 30 40 Yve 38 50 00 20 20 Yverdon 38 46 20 22 40 Yvois 01 49 40 21 20 Yuyst 38 54 00 22 40 Z   ZAbekok 14 52 10 29 20 Zabel 07 53 55 29 20 Zabelsd. 08 53 30 32 00 Zabelstain 34 49 50 27 10 Zabenstet 14, 20, 21 51 15 28 40 Zaber fl. 39, 45 48 50 25 30 Zaberfeldt 45 48 50 25 30 Zabern 38, 41, 42 48 35 23 50 Zabern Rhein 38, 41, 45 48 55 24 45 Zabolski 01 45 40 35 30 Zabrech 32 49 40 35 10 Zachan 07 53 25 28 20 Zacherei 07 53 55 30 10 Zacherin 08 53 40 34 00 Zachow 10, 13 52 40 31 30 Zachwicz 19, 20 51 45 28 40 Zack fl. 33 50 50 32 40 Zacken fl. 24, 25 50 40 32 30 Zackow 10, 12 52 00 30 00 Zadery 10, 13 52 30 31 30 Zadowitz 32 48 50 34 20 Zaern 07 53 25 29 10 Zaflstain 45 48 30 25 10 Zageritz 08 53 40 33 00 Zagest 10, 11 53 10 28 40 Zahn 26 52 00 32 40 Zahorowitz 32 49 00 34 50 Zaining 45 48 15 26 10 Zakocz 01 46 00 35 20 Zalen 10 52 40 28 20 Zalesky 33 49 00 31 00 Zalesy 32 49 10 35 00 Zalkawitz 32 49 20 34 30 Zalky 24 50 40 36 00 Zalland 38 52 20 22 20 Zalopy 2, 33 50 30 31 30 Zamberg 32 49 50 33 30 Zampach 32 49 50 33 30 Zanclebe 2, 7 53 05 28 40 Zandock 01 52 50 33 30 Zanow 1, 8 54 20 33 30 Zantoch 1, 10, 13 52 40 32 40 Zantzentorf 42 48 40 24 05 Zapplaw 25, 26, 27 51 40 33 20 Zaranowitz 32 49 10 34 40 Zarbeck 38 52 00 23 40 Zarben 08 54 10 32 30 Zarchlin 07 53 25 29 20 Zarcke 26 51 40 33 00 Zarma 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Zarneckow 7, 8 54 05 30 10 Zarnewantz 7, 8 54 00 29 40 Zarnin 07 53 45 29 00 Zarnwantz 07 53 50 27 40 Zarpe 07 53 25 30 40 Zarre 28 51 10 33 55 Zarsens 10, 13 53 20 32 50 Zarsis 09 54 30 31 20 Zartevitz 1, 7 53 20 30 00 Zasfeld 19 51 20 28 50 Zasitz Goez 22 51 10 29 50 Zassen 02 52 10 29 40 Zastrizel 32 49 00 34 20 Zaterz kykrag 33 50 10 30 00 Zathow 24 49 50 36 00 Zatony 33 48 40 31 30 Zatwor 32 49 50 33 20 Zaucha 25 51 30 32 20 Zauchtel 32 49 40 34 50 Zaugen 01 47 50 26 10 Zaulicz 20 51 55 28 50 Zaupitz 30 50 30 34 20 Zauritz 30 50 30 34 10 Zaursteden 16, 19 51 20 27 30 Zawicz 20 51 45 28 40 Zbiroh 33 49 40 30 50 Zchutterzell 41 48 15 24 20 Zdanice 32 49 00 34 10 Zdar 32 49 20 33 00 Zdaunky 1, 32 49 10 34 30 Zdiarpluhowy 33 49 10 31 40 Zdiarz 31 50 25 33 00 Zditze 33 49 50 31 00 Zebbensitz 16 52 20 28 10 Zeber 2, 15 52 30 28 40 Zeberstorf 41, 42 48 35 24 00 Zebicker 19, 20 51 20 28 40 Zebrach 1, 33 49 40 30 50 Zeehelin 10, 12 52 50 29 50 Zeehelwitz 27, 29 51 35 33 20 Zechen 26, 27 51 45 33 35 Zechin 10, 12, 13 52 20 31 50 Zeehow 10, 12 52 40 30 00 Zechlinjaght 02 53 00 29 10 Zeckel 26 51 50 32 40 Zeckenheim 39, 45 49 20 25 00 Zedemen 14 51 50 29 00 Zeden 10, 11, 14 52 35 28 50 Zedenich 10, 12 52 40 30 20 Zedenick 2, 15 52 10 29 00 Zedorff 2, 15 52 30 29 00 Zedlitz 25, 26, 27 51 30 33 10 Zeedorp 07 53 50 27 50 Zeehave 05 53 25 24 00 Zeel 01 48 10 24 30 Zeeland Comitat. 1, 38 51 40 19 30 Zeene 10, 11 52 40 28 30 Zeesdow 10, 12 52 10 30 10 Zegendorp 07 53 15 28 50 Zegenhagen 08 53 20 33 00 Zegenort 08 53 40 31 30 Zegrowo 26 52 05 33 20 Zehenacker 41, 42 48 30 23 55 Zehting 40 47 55 24 20 Zehring Zogthumb 40 47 55 24 20 Zehuschitz 2, 33 49 50 32 10 Zehwal 22 50 50 29 20 Zeil 01 50 00 17 50 Zeilsdorf 22 50 40 28 50 Zeilsheim 35 50 00 24 45 Zeina 02 52 00 29 30 Zeinen 41, 42, 44 48 30 24 00 Zeisdorf 23, 24 51 40 31 50 Zeisgengrund 25 50 50 33 00 Zeiticz 14, 20 51 20 28 40 Zeitlez 1, 34, 38 50 10 26 20 Zeitschen 19 50 50 28 20 Zeitz 1, 19, 22 51 05 29 00 Zeitz fl. 22 50 50 28 40 Zele 45 48 35 25 20 Zelendorf 10, 12 52 00 30 30 Zelezin 2, 33 50 20 32 20 Zelgrun 22 50 30 28 50 Zell 40, 41, 42, 43, 45 48 15 24 30 Zell Blasi 36 50 35 27 30 Zellendorff 10, 12 52 30 30 30 Zellenwiller 42, 43, 44 48 15 24 00 Zellerbad 39, 40 48 35 25 05 Zellerberg 19 50 45 28 00 Zellin 10, 12, 13 52 30 31 40 Zellingen 37 49 50 26 10 Zellingh 34 49 50 26 30 Zellnaw 33 48 40 31 00 Zelsenh. 41, 42, 43 48 10 24 05 Zelt 38 48 40 25 00 Zeltz 41 48 40 24 30
Zelye 01 46 40 35 10 Zendlbach 38 48 20 24 20 Zemitz 22 51 10 29 40 Zemss fl. 40, 41, 42, 44 48 15 24 10 Zenn fl. 34 49 20 27 20 Zentenitz 22 51 10 30 00 Zepernich 10, 12 52 20 30 50 Zepperlin 21 50 55 29 30 Zeprick 20 51 55 28 40 Zepten 19, 22 50 30 28 10 Zepzick 14 51 25 28 50 Zerawitz 32 48 50 34 30 Zerbee 10, 13 52 20 32 20 Zerbn 10, 11, 14 52 00 29 00 Zerbst 1, 2, 14, 21 51 40 29 10 Zernekow 10, 11 52 40 28 10 Zerin 22, 23 51 10 31 10 Zering 41, 43 47 55 24 20 Zerne 10, 13 52 20 32 20 Zernow 10, 12, 13 52 50 31 40 Zernowitz 01 54 20 36 10 Zerrendorf 21 51 05 29 10 Zerwick 18 51 20 29 00 Zerwitz 33 49 40 30 50 Zeston 10, 12 51 50 31 10 Zetel 05 53 25 24 30 Zetelvitz 07 53 55 30 10 Zetsen 22 51 20 29 10 Zettlenroda 22, 34 50 40 28 50 Zettsch 22 51 00 29 20 Zetz 10, 11 53 10 28 10 Zetznow 08 55 00 35 00 Zevenar 38 52 00 22 00 Zeufelt 15, 20, 22 51 15 28 50 Zeupaw 23 51 40 32 10 Zeutendorf 23 51 20 32 00 Zewen 05 53 20 25 40 Zeybendorff 23 51 05 31 50 Zeyperen 25, 26, 27 51 45 33 10 Zeysa 23 51 25 30 50 Zeyse 23, 25, 26 51 30 32 20 Ziats 18 51 50 29 10 Zibelle 23 51 40 31 50 Zibrigen 10,, 12 52 00 32 30 Zibule 07 53 50 29 00 Zicha 16, 19 51 20 27 50 Zichow 10, 12, 13 53 00 31 10 Zichowitz 33 49 00 30 40 Zichtow 10, 11 52 20 28 00 Zickow 14, 21 51 30 29 30 Ziczdorff 20 51 20 28 50 Zidlirz 07 53 35 23 30 Ziebendorff 26, 27, 29 51 30 33 10 Ziechen 27 51 40 33 20 Zieder fl. 24, 25 50 50 32 30 Ziegel 09 54 20 31 00 Ziegelrode 20 51 35 28 20 Ziegenbrugk 22 50 30 29 40 Ziegenhalss 24, 30 50 20 34 00 Ziegenhaim 01 50 50 25 50 Ziegesin 18 51 55 29 30 Ziencken 40 47 45 24 05 Zierestlhof 41, 42, 44 48 25 24 20 Zieretz 41, 43 47 35 23 55 Ziergoren 34 49 50 29 10 Zierickzee 1, 38 51 40 20 00 Zierus 26 51 50 32 30 Zietz 14 52 05 29 20 Ziewitz 24 49 30 36 00 Zigelbrun 37 49 45 26 10 Zig lhan 22 50 50 29 30 Zigelhut 35 50 00 25 00 Zigelrodo 19 51 40 28 20 Zigenhalsen 19 50 30 27 50 Ziegenhan 22 51 00 28 30 Zigenrick 1, 22 50 30 28 30 Zigesar 2, 15 52 20 28 20 Zigling 39, 45 49 10 25 40 Zilbach 34 50 20 26 20 Zileiss 41, 43 47 35 23 45 Zielfeldt 36 50 20 27 20 Zilhausen 45 48 00 25 40 Zilien 16 51 55 27 40 Zillentig 24, 25 52 20 31 30 Zili 18 51 35 27 30 Zillinitz 22 51 00 29 50 Zilltzing 40 47 45 24 05 Zilzendorff 30 50 40 34 20 Zimerbach 41, 43 47 55 23 45 Zimern 41, 42, 43, 44 48 20 24 25 Zimin 24, 25, 26 52 10 33 00 Zimmern 34, 37 49 50 26 10 Zempel 23 51 25 31 20 Zimrisen 41, 42 48 35 23 50 Zimsere 41, 43 47 25 23 25 Zimsin 07 53 20 28 50 Zincicz 19 51 45 28 40 Zincken 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Zincker 22 51 20 29 10 Zindel 25, 30 50 40 24 20 Uinssel fl. 42 48 45 24 05 Zingelsdorff 14 52 00 29 10 Zinne 10, 12 51 40 30 30 Zinnenbergwerck 23 51 00 32 20 Zinow 10, 11 52 10 28 10 Zinrhen 22 50 40 29 15 Zinsi 44 48 30 24 30 Zinsich 38 50 20 23 20 Zinsow 08 53 40 30 30 Zinssel fl. 41 48 45 24 05 Zinswil 41, 42 48 40 24 00 Zintsch 19, 20 51 40 28 40 Zintzheim 01 49 00 25 30 Zinzow 07 53 45 30 50 Zipling 4, 16 52 10 28 20 Zipnow 08 53 40 34 00 Zippel 14 51 50 29 00 Zippendorf 07 53 30 28 30 Zirchow 08 54 40 34 30 Zirckaw 24, 25 52 40 32 30 Zircke 26 51 30 32 30 Zirckwitzohn 25 51 20 34 00 Zirekow 33 49 20 30 30 Zirendorff 34 49 20 27 50 Zirgerot 33 49 40 29 20 Zira fl. 25 51 00 33 20 Zirowitz 32, 33 49 00 32 20 Zirsow 07 53 10 28 40 Zirtze 07 53 20 30 20 Ziserwitz 28 51 05 33 35 Zissendorff 26 51 40 32 30 Zitaw fl. 20 51 50 28 40 Ziten 10, 12 52 40 31 00 Ziterstorf 41, 42 48 45 23 55 Zitlingen 11 52 35 28 20 Zitkow 1, 7 53 20 29 40 Zittaw 1, 23, 24, 25, 33 51 00 31 40 Zittling 45 49 15 25 50 Zittenssen 05 53 20 25 50 Zitz 10, 12 51 40 29 50 Zitzenkirch 40 47 40 24 10 Zitzow 10, 11, 14 52 40 28 20 Zizendorp 07 54 00 29 10 Zlabaten 32 48 40 32 50 Zlabnitz 32 48 50 32 40 Zlin 32 49 10 34 40 Znaim 1, 32 48 40 33 20 Znim 01 52 40 35 20 Zobbenitz 10, 11 52 10 28 20 Zobeling 28 51 00 33 30 Zobelitz 23 51 30 31 40 Zobelsdorf 10, 12 53 20 31 40 Zobla 10, 13 52 10 31 20 Zobten 24, 25 50 50 33 30 Zobtenberg 24, 25 50 50 33 30 Zoche 10, 13 52 40 32 30 Zochen 22 50 30 29 40 Zodel 23 51 20 32 00 Zoelwicz 14, 20 51 20 28 40 Zoergang fl. 15 51 30 27 20 Zoest 3 51 20 24 20 Zoffingen 38 46 40 24 00 Zolbruck 36 50 25 27 30 Zolchow 10, 14 52 10 29 20 Zoldern 23 51 35 32 00 Zolhaus 16 52 00 28 10 Zoll 41, 43 48 00 23 50 Zollenow 10, 13 52 50 32 00 Zollern 1, 38, 45 48 05 25 40 Zollern Comitat. 45 48 05 25 30 Zollhuys 39 49 30 24 50 Zollickhoen 38 46 40 23 40 Zollickom 38 46 40 25 00 Zolnig 25, 28 51 10 34 20 Zombgarten 28 51 00 34 05 Zommen 10, 125 52 20 30 40 Zons 30 51 00 23 00 Zonsbeck 38 51 20 22 20 Zopten 22 50 30 29 40 Zorbato 19 51 20 28 40 Zorbaw 20 51 20 28 40 Zorge Mons 1 51 45 27 00 Zorge fl. 16, 19 51 40 27 30 Zornicz 19, 20 51 40 28 40 Zornitz 22 51 00 29 20 Zosniuck 2, 33 49 50 32 00 Zossen 1, 10, 12 51 50 30 50 Zottelstet 19 51 05 28 20 Zottl 22 51 00 29 10 Zottsted 22 51 10 28 20 Zottwitz 28 51 10 34 15 Zschimichen 22 50 50 29 30 Zubern 26 51 40 32 20 Zublow 10, 13 53 00 32 10 Zuchou 22 50 50 29 20 Zuck 40, 41, 43 47 55 24 20 Zuckmante 1, 24, 30 50 10 34 30 Zuenicke 22, 33 50 20 29 40 Zuffenhausen 45 48 35 25 50 Zug 38 46 40 24 40 Zuger See 38 46 40 24 40 Zhurstein 32 49 20 33 20 Zukleibe 23 51 40 32 00 Zulauff 24, 25 51 30 34 00 Zulberg 22 50 20 29 00 Zule 0 53 30 28 10 Zullich 10, 135 52 10 33 00 Zullichaw 24, 25, 36 52 10 32 20 Zulichendorff 10, 12 52 40 30 20 Zulin 10, 125 52 50 29 50 Zultenhagen 12 52 30 30 40 Zultz 24 50 20 34 00 Zumflin 22 50 30 29 30 Zumloch 38 50 20 23 20 Zumsw. 42 48 15 24 5 Zumteich 20 51 40 28 50 Zuntzen 41, 43 47 40 24 05 Zuntzentorf 41 48 40 24 05 Zuatlangenhain 19 51 10 26 40 Zur 16 52 10 25 50 Zur fl. 41 48 40 24 20 Zurbach 40 48 10 24 30 Zurich 1, 38 47 00 25 00 Zuricher 38 46 40 25 00 Zurlag 41, 42, 44 48 10 24 25 Zurlein 38 50 00 23 20 Zurlied 16 52 15 26 20 Zurmarhausen 01 48 10 27 30 Zurmulen 05 53 25 25 20 Zurzach 38, 41 47 20 24 45 Zusweier 40, 41, 43, 44 48 15 24 25 Zuten 10, 12 52 00 31 00 Zutern 38, 39, 45 49 00 25 10 Zutphen 38 52 00 22 00 Zutzevitz 08 53 40 33 00 Zuverhusen 16 52 30 25 50 Zuyder Elbe 03 53 45 26 30 Zuyder gronden 3, 4 53 45 24 00 Zuyder Zee 1, 38 52 40 21 10 Zweckfrontze 27 51 35 33 40 Zwehofel 28 51 00 34 15 Zweibrucken 39 49 10 23 40 Zweidorf 16 52 15 27 10 Zweilitschinnen 38 46 00 24 00 Zwenfurt 22 51 20 29 30 Zwenick 22 50 30 29 50 Zwerbenberg 45 48 25 25 10 Zwergen 16 51 20 26 20 Zwetel 33 48 30 31 30 Zwettenicht 23 51 25 32 10 Zwetzen 15 51 00 28 20 Zweybrodt 28 51 05 34 05 Zwicka 22, 33 50 30 29 10 Zwlckaw 22 50 40 29 30 Zwidel 33 48 50 30 20 Zwiebrucken 38 49 00 23 40 Zwifalten 45 48 05 26 10 Zwifalten Torst 35 48 05 26 00 Zwikowetz 33 49 50 30 40 Zwingr 40 48 00 24 25 Zwirzetitz 2, 33 50 20 31 50 Zwitta 32 49 30 33 30 Zwitta fl. 32 49 20 33 40 Zwole 32 49 40 33 50 Zwoleniowe 2, 33 50 00 31 00 Zwoll 38 52 40 22 00 Zwyckow 2, 33 50 40 31 30 Zwynge fl. 04 54 00 25 40 Zypel 15 52 10 28 40 Zyra 22 50 30 29 00
Additional Subscribers since the Publishing of the first Volume of the Atlas. MICHAEL Lord Arch-Bishop of AR∣MAGH, Lord Primate, and Lord Chancellor of Ireland. -Earl of ARRAN Eldest Son to D. Hamilton. —Earl of ANNANDALL in Scotland. Sir Joseph Ash of Twittenham, in Middlesex. Richard Atkins of Newport-Pagnell Esq Sir Robert Atkins. Tho. Allen M. D. and Fellow of the Colledge of Physitians, London. Ashburnham Esq Sir Thomas Allen of Sumirliton-Hall, Suff. John Berkly, Esq Robert Berkly Esq Nich. Barbon M. D. London. Roger Braddyl of London Esq Sir John Brownlow. Tho. Buck of Westwick Cambridge sh. Esq David Bruce M. D. London. Sir Will. Barkham of Norfolk Baronet. Charles Cockaine Esq Son and Heir to Obrian Vicount Cullen of Righton Nor∣thampton shire. Sir Charles Caesar of Benington, Hartford sh. Sir Robert Cotton of Hattly St. George in Bedford shire Baronet. Sam. Craddock B. D. of Wickhambrook, Suff. JAMES Lord Duffes of Scotland. The Honourable MARGARET Danby Widdow. Sir Will. Domvile his Majesties Attorney Ge∣neral in Ireland. Duncan Dee of the Inner Temple, Esq —Davis M. D. of Exeter. John Donelan of the County of Galaway in Ireland, Esq Peter Falaiseau Esq Fergus Faril of the County of Longford in Ireland, Esq —Ford Esq Andrew Forrester Esq Secretary to the Duke of Lauderdale. Henry Ferneley of Dublin in Ireland Esq Henry Goldwell, Esq Jo. Goodwin Rector of East Barnet, Harford∣shire. Sir Henry Gough of Pury-Hall, Stafford-sh. LEWIS Gordon Marquis of Huntley. James Griffin Esq Tho. Groundes Esq JOHN Lord Haughton eldest Son to the Earl of Clare. Sir PHILIP Howard Coll. and Capt. of the Queens Troops of his Majesties Guards. John Goven of Scotland Esq —Husbands Esq in Barbados. John Hillersden of the Inner Temple Esq Will. Hyde of Langtoft, Lincoln-shire Esq John Horne Esq Sir John Hobart of Norfolk Baronet. —Holt of Brazen-nose Coll. Oxon. Tho. Ibbot Rector of Beecham-wells, Norf. JOHN Earl of Kildare, in Ireland. Tho. Ken D. D. Chaplain to her Highness the Princess of Orange. Sir Will. Litton of Harfordshire. John Launce Merchant in Marseille. Tho Lardners Citizen of London. Oliver Long, Captain of a Company in his Majestie Foot-Guards in Ireland. ALEX. Stuart Earl of Murray. Sir Tho. Murray Lord Register of Scotland. Christopher Merret M. D. of the Colledge of Physitians London. Streynsham Master Esq Agent for the East-India Company in the East Indies. John Madden of Dublin Ireland, Esq Patrick Murray of Scotland Esq RODERICK Mackenzie of Scotland, Esq Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of Norwich. Jerome Neschu Esq Secretary to her Royal Highness. —EARL of Panmeur. —Lord PITMEDEN of Scotland. Will. Pincke of London. John Parr Citizen of London. Sir John Parsons Knight and Baronet. Will. Prince Esq Gentleman-Usher to her Royal Highness. Richard Palfrey of Dublin Ireland, Esq Henry Parker Esq Secretary to the Lord Bi∣shop of London. Will. Paynter, Fellow of Exeter Coll. Oxon. Sir John Parker of Dublin in Ireland. Francis Puy of Isham, Northamptonsh. Esq JOHN Earl of Rutland. ALEX. Lord Bishop of Ross in Scotland. Matthew Reeve Goldsmith in Bath. Charles Roderick of Eaton. Charles Rogers Esq Gentleman-Usher to her Majesty. Jo. Speccott Esq of Penble Cornwal. Jo. Stronge of Trinity Coll. Cambridge. Jo. Staindbrook of Westminster. Will. Stokeham M. D. London. —Stephens Fellow of Exeter Coll. Oxon. Sir Tho. Spencer of Yarnton Bar. Oxfordsh. Sir Edward Smith of Hill-Hall Bar. Essex. Sir Bryon Stapleton of Milton Bar. Yorkshire. Ralph Stowell of Lawham Esq Somersetshire. Tho. Sampson Citizen of London. James Scott Esq in Bristol, Scotland. Will. Strickland Esq of Exon. Coll. Oxon. Sir Jo. Topham one of the Masters in Chan∣cery in Ireland. Sigismund Trafford of Lincolnshire Esq —Trinity Coll. in Dublin, Ireland. Charles Toriano of London, Merchant. Sir Edward Villiers. Peter Vande-Putt, Merchant in London. —Usher Esq of Ireland. HENEAGE Earl of Winchelsea. OTHER Windesser Esq Philip Ward Esq Sir George Walker of Bushy-Hall Harfordsh. Savil Whittle Chyrurgion to his Majesty. —Waterhouse M. D. of Exon. Devonsh. Will. Warder of Westminster Esq Rob. Warden of Chester Esq Dean and Chapter of Worcester. Charles Willoughby M. D. of Dublin in Ire∣land. Edw. Wright of Scotland Esq JOHN Lord Yester of Scotland. Benj. Young Minister of Enfield Middlesex. Books Printed at the Theatre in Oxford, since the Publishing of the first Volume of the Atlas: And are to be sold by Moses Pitt at the Angel in St. Paul's Church-Yard, London, A Short View of the late Troubles in England, briefly setting forth their Rise, Growth, and Tragical Conclusion. As also, some Parallel thereof with the Barons Wars in the time of King Henry the Third. But chiefly with that in France, called the Holy League, in the Reign of Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth, late Kings of that Realm. To which is added, a Narra∣tive of the Treaties at Uxbridge, An. 1644 by Sir Will. Dugdale, Garter King at Arms, fol. price bound 16 s. The Book of Common-Prayer, and Admi∣nistration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the Use of the Church of England, with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, in folio, of a large Roman Letter, both upon ordinary and fine Paper. Plantarum Historiae Universalis Oxonien∣sis, Pars secunda, seu Herbarum distributio nova, per Tabulas cognationis & affinitatis ex Libro Naturae observata & detecta. Au∣thore Roberto Morison, Med. D. & Professore Botanico Regio. folio. Lactantius de mortibus persecutorum liber, accesserunt S. S. Perpetuae & Felicitatis S Maximiliani. S. Felicis. Of the Unity of the Church, a Discourse. written 1430 years since, in the time of De∣cius the persecuting Emperour. By Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage and Martyr; most useful for allaying the present Heats, and reconciling the Differences among us. quarto, price 6. d. Directions for the Book-binder to place the Maps of this second Volume of the English Atlas. 1 GErmania pag. 1 2 Albis Fluvius Generalis pag. 4 3 —Circa Hamburgensis pag. 4 4 Saxonia Inferior pag. 53 5 Bremensis Ducatus pag. 56 6 Lunenburgensis Ducatus pag. 64 7 Mecklenburg Ducatus pag. 69 8 Pomerania pag. 76 9 Rugia Insula pag. 81 10 Marchia Brandenburgensis pag. 85 11 Vetus vulgo Altmarck pag. 88, 89 12 Mittle Marck pag. 88, 89 13 Nova vulgo Newmarck pag. 90 14 Anhalt Principatus & Magdeburg Ep. 92 15 Brunsvicensis pag. 96 16 Luneburgensis pag. 101. 17 Hildesheimensis pag. 105. 18 Halberstadiensis pag. 107. 19 Turingia pag. 109. 20 Mansfeldiae Comitatus pag. 111. 21 Saxonia superior pag. 113 22 Misnia & Voitlandia pag. 115. 23 Lusatia pag. 119. 24 Silesia Ducatus pag. 121 25 — Inferior pag. 121 26 Gloganus Ducatus pag. 124 27 Volaviensis Ducatus pag. 124 28 Breslaviensis Ducatus. pag. 125 29 Lignicensis pag. 125 30 Grotganus pag. 126 31 Glatz Comitatus pag. 127 32 Moravia pag. 129 33 Bohemia pag. 133 34 Franconia pag. 137 35 Terriorium Francofurtense pag. 139 36 Henneburgensis Ducatus pag. 140, 141 37 Werthemiensis Comit. pag. 140, 141 38 River Rhein pag. 4 39 Palatinatus Rheni pag. 4 40 Badensis Marchionatus pag. 145 41 Alsatia pag. 148 42 Upper Alsatia pag. 148 43 Lower Alsatia pag. 148 44 Strasburg pag. 149 45 Wertenburgensis Ducatus. pag. 150
