e1064_40 99869181 169240
seal of the Commonwealth AN ORDINANCE For further DOUBLING UPON Deans & Chapters Lands. HIs Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, having taken into conside∣ration, and being fully sa∣tisfied, That over and a∣bove the several Sums of Three hundred thousand pounds, One hundred and twenty thousand pounds, Twenty thousand pounds, and Two thousand pounds, by se∣veral Acts and Ordinances appointed to be
borrowed upon the securities held forth in seve∣ral Acts of Parliament, and Ordinances of His Highness and the Council; as also the sum of Six thousand eight hundred ninety two pounds and five shillings, charged upon the Lands of Deans, Deans and Chapters, Ma∣nors of Rectories, Gleab Lands, &c. there is yet a further sum wanting to enable the Pur∣chasers to satisfie the money due upon their re∣spective Contracts; which the remainder of the said Lands, after all the moneys and debts already charged thereupon, will be sufficient to satisfie: Be it therefore Ordained by His Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the Advice and Consent of His Council, That over and above the said several sums of Three hundred thousand pounds, One hundred and twenty thousand pounds. & Twenty thousand pounds, and Two thousand pounds borrowed as aforesaid; as also the said sum of Six thou∣sand eight hundred ninety two pounds five shil∣lings, charged upon the said Lands of the Cre∣ditors of Peter Smart deceased, the sum of Five thousand pounds shall be further borrowed up∣on the security of the premises exposed to sale by the said Acts and Ordinances, or either of them, in such sort, and according to the Rules, Di∣rections, Restrictions, Clauses, Conditions and Penalties, mentioned and contained in the Ordinance, whereby the Twenty thousand pounds aforesaid was appointed to be bor∣rowed: And that all and every Person and Persons, Bodies Politique or Corpo∣rate, to whom any Debts capable of Doub∣ling by the Rules aforesaid shall be due; and his and their respective Assigns, and all per∣sons
doubling such Debts, and their respective Assigns, shall have all and the like Liberties, Priviledges, Benefits and Advantages respe∣ctively, in reference to the premises, as any person or persons, Bodies Politique or Corpo∣rate, their or any of their Assigns might or ought to have by the afore recited Ordinances, appointing the doubling of the said Twenty thousand pounds, and Two thousand pounds, or either of them. And be it further Ordained, That the respe∣ctive Trustees, Contractors, Register Trea∣surers, Registers-Accomptant, Survey or Ge∣neral, and all other Officers attending the sale of the premises, and every of them, be here∣by authorized and required in all things relating to the sum and sums of money which shal grow due upon doubling of any such Debts, by force of this Ordinance to pursue the Directions in the before-mentioned Ordinances, given in re∣lation to the moneys doubled, or which shall grow due upon the security thereof. And whereas there is due unto Richard Shute of London, Merchant, the sum of One thou∣sand pounds by him advanc'd, upon an Ordi∣nance of Parliament of the One and Twenty∣eth of October, One thousand six hundred forty three, to the use of Sir Thomas Middleton Kut. which by the said Ordinance the Committee for Sequestrations for London were to repay with∣in Six moneths, with alowance after the rate of Eight pounds per cent. Whereupon neverthe∣less no money hath been yet paid; Be it Or∣dained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Richard Shute, his Executors or Assigns, shall be admitted to double the said sum of One
thousand pounds, and the Interest due for the same in part of the sum to be doubled upon this Ordinance, as money due upon the publique Faith: And that the Trustees, Treasurers, Registers-Accomptant, and all other whom it may concern, do admit and alow the said Ri∣chard Shute or his Assigns, to double the same accordingly. Saturday Septemb. 2. 1654. ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, That this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Pub∣lished. Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council. London, Printed by William du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness the Lord Protector, 1654.
