e1063_27 99868448 169193
AN ORDINANCE Impowring COMMISSIONERS TO Put in Execution an Act of Parlament, Intituled, An Act Prohibiting the PLANTING OF Tobacco in England. blazon of the Commonwealth Tuesday 11th April,1654. ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Coun∣cil, that this Ordinance bee forthwith Printed and Published. HEN. SCOBEL, Clerk of the Council. LONDON, Printed, by William Du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness the Lord Protector. 1653.
blazon of the Commonwealth AN ORDINANCE Impowring Commissioners to put in Ex∣ecution an Act of Parlament, Entituled (An Act Prohibiting the Planting of Tobacco in ENGLAND.) UPon consideration had of the great prejudice arising to the English Plantations in Forreign parts, and the great Damage and Loss to Trade at home, by the planting of Tobacco in this Nation; Bee it Ordeined by His Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the advice and consent of His Council, That Sir Wil∣liam Robert, John Stone, Gervas Benner, Henry Elsing, Adam Baines, and John Bocker, Esquires, or any three or more of them, bee, and they are here∣by appointed Commissioners, and impow∣red, authorized and required, by all fit and lawful wayes and means, to put in Executi∣on
an Act of Parlament, Dated the first of April, 1652. Entituled, (An Act prohibiting the Planting of Tobacco in ENGLAND) and everie Claus, Article, matter and thing therein con∣teined, any Act or Ordinance to the contra∣rie notwithstanding; And all Officers, Ci∣vil and Militarie, and all other persons, are hereby required to bee aiding and assist∣ing unto the said Commissioners, or any per∣son or persons imployed by them in this ser∣vice, for the effectual execution of all the powers and authorities, by the said Act or this Ordinance, granted and intrusted to the said Commissioners. Tuesday 11th April, 1654. ORdered by his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the COUNCIL, that this Ordinance bee forthwith printed and published. Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Council.
