A3178 E643_7 99860499 112620
Anglia Liberata, OR, THE RIGHTS Of the People of ENGLAND, MAINTAINED AGAINST the Pretences of the SCOTISH King, As they are set forth in an ANSWER TO THE LORDS AMBASSADORS PROPOSITIONS of ENGLAND. Which ANSVVER was delivered into the Great Assembly of the Ʋnited Provinces at the Hague, by one MAC-DONNEL, who entitles himself Resident for his Majesty, &c. June 28/18 1651: And is here published according to the Dutch Copy. WHERETO IS ADDED A TRANSLATION OF CERTAIN Animadversions upon the Answer of Mac-Donnel. Written by an ingenious Dutch-man. AS ALSO AN ADDITIONAL REPLY To all the pretended Arguments, Insinuations and Slanders, set forth in the said SCOTISH ANSWER Written a while since by a private Pen, and now presented to the PUBLICK. London, Printed by T. Newcomb for Richard Lowns, at the White Lion in Pauls Church-yard near the West end, 1651.
The Publisher to the READER. THou hast here first, the Answer of Mac-Donnel (whom in the Dutch they call Mac-Dowel) to the Propositions of our English Ambassadors, as it was delivered by him, in the Great Assembly of the United Provinces; which having been published beyond Sea in Dutch, and translated since into an English Print, is here presented to a more publick view, with a few Correctives added thereunto to prevent the poison. And therefore in the second place, thou hast also a Transcript of certain ANI∣MADVERSIONS upon Mac-Donnel's Answer, written by an honest Dutchman in his own Language, and now translated into English. Those ANIMADVERSIONS are indeed very pithy, per∣tinent, and ingenious; but because they are only the Hints of Things, and not Discourses so drawn at full, as to convince such as are not easily perswaded of the Truth of matters in Controversie; therefore it was thought fit in the third place, to bring up the Rear with an Additional Reply; partly to dis∣cusse the main points more fully; and partly, to touch upon ma∣ny other particulars of Mac-Donnels Answer, wholly neglect∣ed by the Dutch Animadvertor. The truth is, these Papers have lain by for some time, by reason of the late disturbances, they having been all ready prepared for the Press before, except the latter part of the fourth Chapter of the Additional Reply, which was lickt up, upon the close of this last grand determination of Affairs at Worcester. Perhaps, some expressions therein touching the Power of the Sword, at the first sight, may not please all; but that all may be pleased, let them know, the Rights of the peo∣ple are no way wronged, as long as the Sword is asserted, and acknowledged to be in the hands of the Parliament; who by the Law of the Sword have so nobly over-turned the Law of the Prerogative, and recovered the good old Laws, Liberties, and Priviledges of the people. And whereas it is here inde∣voured
to prove our English Relation to the old Treaties made withour Neighbours of Holland; know the intent is not in a∣ny wise to court that Nation to maintain Amity, but onely to refell the futility of those Arguments of the Royal Party, who pretend to prove, that by vertue of those Treaties, the Dutch are tied still to the late Kings Family, as if they stood radicated in full force, in the person of the present young Pre∣tender. If there be any fault then in the Author of the Additionall Reply, it is only his presumption, that a private Pen should meddle with matters of a publick Import: But the henest Dutch man having shewn him the way, he could not chuse but follow him, and lay hold upon this opportunity, throughly to canvasse the princpall Points, Parts, and Pretences, that pass up and down by Tradition, to support the cause and interest of the Common Enemy. Perhaps they may at present seem as dead to some, having been Thunder strook by the late fatall blow at Worcester, and therefore this Piece by way of Reply, may be suppo∣sed now also to be of the less use and consideration. But let such consider, that though the Cause, and many of its grand Abettors be laid flat, yet as long as so many Pretenders of the Family are in being, they will be always upon every opportu∣nity, reviving and setting on foot the same pretences; so that if we subdue these by Reason, as well as their Persons and Partisans by Force, they will be the less able to drive on fu∣ture designs, and draw Parties, either here or abroad, to the disquiet of England.
AN ANSWER TO THE PROPOSITIONS MADE BY THE ENGLISH AMBASSADORS (as they stile themselves) the 30/20 of March, In the great Assembly of the High and Mighty Lords, the States Generall of the United Provinces. AS ALSO, To their Memorials of the 27/17 of April, and 20/10 of May 1651. respectively. And likewise, To the 36. Articles of the desired Treaty. As it was delivered by the Honorable Sir William Macdowel Knight, Resident for his Majesty of Great Britain, after his return to Holland, in the said Great Assembly, June 28/18 1651. Prov. 24. verse 21, 22. My Sonne, feare thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knoweth the ruine of them? HAGH, Printed by Samuel Brown, English Book-seller, 1651.
AN ANSWER TO the Propositions. THe said pretended Embassadors have offered, and with∣all required a strict Confederacy & Holy League (as they term it) betwixt the Commonwealth of England, and the Ʋ∣nited Provinces, alledging to that end, I. The ancient and successive Contracts, and mutuall Friendship betwixt both. II. The advancement of Trade and Traf∣fique. III. A Conformity in the Reformation of Religion. IV. The like Successe and Blessings upon both. V. An answerable change in the conditi∣on of both States; as likewise, in the restored Liberty of the People. Hinc inde. Which specious motives, and inducements, viewed aright, and laid in a just ballance, will appeare (by their favours) to have no warrantable ground: For the clearing of which, the High and Mighty States are desired to look back, and con∣sider: I: That formerly, all Contracts, have been made, betwixt the successive Kings of England, their lawfull Heires, and the
High and Mighty State Generall, and not with England, as is alledged: Not to look further back, the Soveraignty of these Countries was offered to Queen Elizabeth, of happy memo∣ry, in the year 1585, which she in wisdome thought fit to de∣cline; but, withall, assisted the States, with 5000. Foot, and 1000 Horse, as likewise advanced to their Lordships before the yeare 1596 in the space of eleven years, eleven hundred thou∣sand pounds Sterling, according to the calculation of her Majesties Councellors, and high Treasurer for the time. Her Royall Successors, James and Charles, of Immortall memory, in the years 1608, 1614, 1635, respectively, have not onely assisted these States in their great straits, in a very considerable way, but also engaged with their Lordships, of∣fensivè and defensivè, and that without the least communica∣tion had with the people of England concerning it. And, if a ratification of such an alliance, should be concluded with a fa∣ctious Commonalty here, and that they might at pleasure di∣sturb the Republick, and turn matters upside down, what an Anarchy and wofull confusion would ensue, as now alas, we see too plainly followes in England? Truly, if that people had been so inclined, and governed, as they now are, (by those who Regni causa have violated the rights; and to make pur∣chase of the Lords Vineyards, have murthered him, and oppose with their utmost power and malice, the enthronement of his lawfull Heire their undoubted Soveraigne) the Low Coun∣tries should not have obtained such reall friendship and ad∣vantage from them. Besides that, the now prevailing Party is not the hundreth part of the people in England, in comparison of those, both of the Clergie, Nobility, Gentry, and Commons, who cordially adhere to the Kings just interest, and passionatly groan to be delivered from the continued oppressions of those cruell Taskmasters, whose little finger lies heavier upon them, then all their Kings whole loins: And an eminent Member of the late House of Commons, (formerly a sufferer) in his Memento affirms, that there is in the three Kingdomes, ten thousand to one, who firmly and affectionatly cleave to his Majesty.
In Kingdomes and Republicks (as Polititians speak) it is the very same people now, as those that lived an hundred years agoe; as likewise that it is the same ship, although all the planks be renewed; but if the Keel be destroyed, and the form of Government and Fundamentall Lawes be utterly a∣bolished, non idem populus, nec eadem navis, it is not the same people, nor the same ship. Moreover, by all proofs it is sufficiently known, that the Predecessors of the now prevailing Party in England, were then so mean and inconsiderable among the people, that they were thought utterly uncapable of having the least hand in the former favours shewn to these States. II. Trade and Traffique (which they call (the Com∣mon interest of a State) are Juris Gentium, common to all Nations; consequently, not to be carried on by Monopolies, and dammage of a third party especially the eldest, and some∣time the most considerable allye of this Estate. Amicitias (faith Polybius) it a institui par est, ne qua vetustior amicitia, & societas violetur. It is remarked by most of the Authors of the Netherlands History, that their Lordships Predecessors upon a time, being more moved by the Impositions of the Duke of Alva, of the 10. and 100. penny respectivè, then for the violence offered to Religion, (and therefore compared to the Gargasens, who proferred their swine before their Saviour) were the more severely punished by God. And shall the High and Mighty States now hazard their religious and high esteem in the savour of those, who in re∣gard of Commerce, inlarging of their limits and usurped power, are big with such monstrous mysteries: and of whom it was said long before their troubles. Gens tacit is praegnaus arcanis ardua tentans. Who derive their power and authority meerly from them∣selves, as formerly hath been said, in the dominion of the Chaldeans over the Iewes, and of Cinna and Carbo amongst the Romans, who in the time of Sylla made themselves Con∣suls without any Court election; Violenta imperia (saith one
to Caesar) sunt magis acerba quam diuturna. The rather be∣cause no Nation under the Sun is so subject to a change as England, even while they lived under their lawfull Sove∣raignes. The Earle of Warwick (called the Titular King) in eleven days, Edward the fourth in twenty, Henry the seventh in one day, (as a Caesar veni, vidi, vici) brought the English successively to their obedience. Commerce and Traffique are plausible pretences, but often accompanied with great jealousies, especially betwixt neigh∣bouring Republiques; the which like Twins strugling for the primogeniture, are in a continuall emulation for profit and preheminence. And therefore compared to an Alluvie, where the increase of one is the decrease of the other. Insomuch, that grave and judicious Statesmen have judged it would he more safe, and profitable to these States, that England continued a Monarchy, then to be tumbled into a Common-wealth, con∣firmed by a Prognostication of a person of credit with them, living at London, given out the 16 of October last, alledging and applying with much confidence, against the Ʋnited Pro∣vinces, Ierem. 51. vers. 13. III. Concerning the pretended conformity in Religion in the third place, which, under the blessed and glorious Go∣vernment of Kings, as a Palladium and Lamp, did out-shine all other Nations, is alas, now become a Pandora, out of which, tanquam ex equo Trojano, do issue so many monstrous Sects, Heresies and Blasphemies, and is consequently so defor∣med, (as being utterly destitute of Discipline, and differing in most points of Doctrine) that it is nothing like the Religion here professed, nor indeed Religion it self. A good Religion, as an upright and lively faith, issues forth into good Works; insomuch that in the Primitive Church, the Christians were discerned from the Infidels onely by their holy life, according to the proverb, Christiani non sunt Cassia∣ni; but alas, how many not onely Cassii, but also Albii, and Nigri, are now adayes to be seen, witnesse, besides the Trea∣ties intituled; Defensio pro Carolo Rege, Vindiciae pro capite Regis Angliae, Elenchus motuum, Master. Prinns Me∣mento, Theatrum Tragicum, Vox Veritatis, and others,
two Declarations also of the 18. of Ianuary, 1648. (long be∣fore that lamentable Catastrophe) by divers Preachers and learned Divines, in and about London, subscribed by 126 of them, mourning over, and complaining of horrible and scan∣dalous abuses; as in the Church, so in the Civill, or rather Military Government, and strongly refuting their flattering of themselves in their continued successe, which may next be considered of. IV. For as Solomon saith, That there be just men, to whom it happeneth, sometime, according to the work of the wicked: So again, there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according the work of the righteous. Successes often are a punishment, as sometimes given for a blessing, where onely those are to be valued, whose princi∣pall aim appeares to be, the true advancement of Gods revea∣led will in his word; which, as it strictly commandeth obedi∣ence to Kings, and those in authority under them, so it doth severely punish sedition and rebellion against them, not spa∣ring the curse of condemnation to those, who comply with, and adhere unto them. Neither hath the great Turk come far short of (that undoubted blessing) good successe, the now prevailing party justifie their cause, and measure its righte∣ousnesse by, though they may seem to disavow him. Finally, the resemblance made from the manner of the re∣covered liberty of both States (to use the expression of a great personage) is not more different then Mike and Ink, both in regard of the ancient condition of the people on both sides, and the way of attaining to it. The Law Countrey men, (especially the Batavi) have been reputed by all ancient Writers, for a free people, neither sub∣ject to the Romans, (whom they did acknowledge onely Ci∣villi, as Tacitus saith) nor to any Directors, Counts and Go∣vernors, which were constituted by themselves. The English have more then a thousand years been gover∣ned by Kings, all sprung from the same Royal Stock, to whom they have successively sworn Obedience and Loyalty. The King of Spain, after a war of almost eighty years, hath in two solemne Treaties (the one before the twelve yeares
Truce, and the other in the late concluded peace) acknow∣ledged the Ʋnited Provinces to be a Free State, and that privative. Whereupon his Catholique Majesty for him∣selfe and his Successors, hath disclaimed all Pretences of Sove∣raignty here. Whereas Charls the first, that blessed Martyr (whose inno∣cent blood (like that of Abels, cries loud to the highest Heaven for vengeance against those who now sit upon his Throne) not onely was, but was ever by them acknowledged for their lawfull Soveraigne, instead of disclaiming his Royal∣ty over them, (as must be if the resemblance stand compleat) was both devested of his power, deprived of his life, and his Princely Successor (so far as in them lieth) kept back and disenabled from the exercise of his undeniable power over them, whereof let them find an absolute parallell from the Creation untill now. In Israel King Ahab did tyrannize, and (as a man sold unto sin) above others provoked Gods wrath against him. In Rome there was Nero, more like a Monster then a Man. Amongst the Christans, Christiernus in Denmark, Wencelaus in Bo∣hemia, (who was likewise Emperour) behaved themselves so wickedly, that it was said of them, that they had east off hu∣mane nature; Not much unlike to them was Richard the third, called the Tyrant of England, yet none of all these was ever condemned to die by the sentence of their subjects: In∣somuch that it is observed, that the Israelites after they had deserted their King Rehoboam (although an oppressor) never enjoyed a happy hour, but were infested with continual wars, both civil and forraign, til at last they were utterly destroyed, and carried captives into Babylon. Of Nero it was said, primum damnati Principis exemplum, I adde postremum, non mactati tamen, as in this case. The Confederate Provinces were first forced in their Religion, their persons and goods seized, and 100000. of them killed; The prevailing party in England, (after those insolent and high affronts done to his Majesty, ere his constrained removal from his Court at White-hall,) took up Arms, gave out Com∣missions, levied men, according to his Majesties last true and
undeniable words) and seized upon the Regalia, before He once put himselfe into a posture of defence. In the Low Countries their liberty was More Majorum, fully restored to them without prejudice to any man. In England Religion and Liberty are shamefully trampled under foot, and the House of Commons so dismembred, and its priviledges violated, that the eighth part of ten, were be∣yond all parallel cast out, as the Declaration and Protestation of the secluded members, Feb. 13. 1648. doth testifie. The proceedings of the High and Mighty States, are ap∣proved and justified by all the World; on the contrary, those of the English condemned and abhorred, and by themselves confessed as irregular and unwarranntable; a most pregnant proof and probatio probata, of their wrong, as is contained in the said Declaration of the Ministers. The which premises the High and Mighty States being pleased to take into serious consideration, according to their accustomed wisdome and justice, and calling to mind those divers Treaties betwixt the Kings Royall Predecessors, and their Lordships, (in his Majesties person yet firmly standing.) And seeing likewise divers of their Lordships resolved for a punctuall observation of a neutrality, since the yeare 1642. betwixt the late King, his Majesties Father of blessed memo∣ry, and his Parliament, the which by the partial confederacy with the one party, now laboured for, wil in all appearance be violated and infringed. Therefore their Lordships are earnestly intreated not to hearken to the said Propositions, as being prejudiciall to the King my gracious Masters interests, and dangerous to this State; likewise that the acknowledging them for a free Re∣publick, (which possibly the condition of the times, and be∣nefit of Trade, hath occasioned,) be not drawn into a further consequence, much lesse an occasion given therby, (forgeting Iosephs sufferings,) that the afflicted be yet more afflicted, their Liberty retarded, and their calamity lengthened. His Majesties affairs (God be praised) are yet in a very good and hopefull condition, farre better then some of his Royall Predecessors, who have notwithstanding run through
all difficulties, and became considerable to their friends, as formidable to their enemies. King Robert the Bruce, about three hundred years agoe, being likewise by the Rebellion of his subjects, and the dis∣loyaltie of the Baliol and Cumming, and their adherents, fiercely assailed by King Edward of England, who at once was possessed, of most of the Towns, and strengths in Scot∣land, kept a Parliament in Saint Andrews, took his Queen prisoner, killed four of his brethren, amongst whom were those duo fulmina belli, defaced or removed all the Monu∣ments, and Registers of that Kingdom, was constrained with one or two servants to hide himself among the Hills; yet not∣withstanding all this, in a short time after, recovered his whole Kingdom was Crowned with Honor, and Glory, and forced his insolent Enemie in confusion to fly from Sterling to Dumbarr, and thence in a Fisher-boat, (Xerxes like) e∣scaped narrowly with his life. I say Sterling, Invictum, & fatale Scotorum propugnaculum: Of which 'tis said: Hìc latium remorata est Scotia cursum. His Majesties Royal Grand Father, Henry the fourth, King of France and Navarre, (yet of fresh memory) was in a lower condition, and had less power to resist those of the League and the powerfull King of Spain; yet at last became victorious, in the overthrow of his enemies, to the great ad∣vantage, and very considerable succour of the Netherlands. The distressed condition of the Predecessors of the High and Mighty States General, whom after so many changes the Almighty God hath (to the admiration of the whole World) brought into a safe Haven, (however Sirius a Spa∣nish Writer jesting with those of Holland and their confede∣rates, did say, What can the Hollanders do against the King of Spain? as, now, some scoffingly aske, how can the Scots stand against the powerfull English?) Is an eminent, and visible example, that it is all one, with the Lord, to help with few or with many, and that when all strength, and humane hopes do fail, he will arise Gloriously, for the deliverance of the righteous, crowning them in the end, with honor and good success.
I. Shal we then look upon the present successes, and pro∣sperity of that party, as alone unchangeable, for the which such strange grounds are by them pretended, as are no where found, being so Diametrically opposite, according to the De∣claration of the said Divines, in, and about London. TO I. Gods holy word. II. The instinct of nature. III. Natural reason. IV. The Laws of all Nations. V. The constitutions particularly of the Kingdome of England (who above all other people most obsequiously, and affectionate∣ly regard and reverence their Kings) as in those maxims of their Law. Rex non mo∣ritur, Rex nulli facit injuriam, &c. VI. The Judgement of all Casuists. VII. Their Oaths of Fealty, Supremacy, and Allegiance, repeated particularly at the admission of every Member into the House of Commons, their Protestation, their Co∣venant, their Solemn League and Cove∣nant, and an hundred Declarations (besides the Pulique Faith of the Kingdom of Eng∣land, solemnly given to the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, upon their receiving his Majestie at New-Castle) in all which, they professed to the world, that they
would maintain and preserve, with their lives, and Estates, the Kings Person, Ho∣nor, Rights, and Royal Posterity. II. Or, shall we rest satisfied in the Sophistry of those Sectaries? who out of Christs answer to the subtil question of the Herodians and Pharisees, (if it were lawfull to give tribute to Cesar,) answered, ostendite mihi numisma, cujus habet imaginem? inferre, that fide implicitâ, the party now in England, is to be acknowledged, without any further en∣quiry, or examination, since our Saviours answer speaks no∣thing for their advantage. But on the contrary, his com∣manding Tribute to be given to Cesar (whom the Jewes formerly acknowledged to be their King) confirmeth, and establisheth lawfull power, and consequently condemneth sedition and rebellion; else David should have submitted unto, and acquiessed in the usurped power of Absolom, who was possessed of all the land, even unto Iordan, and carried away all Israel after him, and Solomon in the power of Ado∣nijah, Iehoiada in Athalia's, and the Machabees in the power of Antiochus Epiphanes the grand enemy of the Iews, yea the Estates of the United Provinces should have then obey∣ed the force of the Duke of Alva, who by the emblem of his Statue formerly set up in Antwerp, did signifie that he had invested himself with the absolute power. It is well said, by one of the Ancients, Omnis potestas est à Deo; sed acquisitio potestatis, furto, raepina, incendio, aut perduellione, non est à Deo, sed ab hominum affectibus & Satanae malitiâ. III. Or, may we suffer our selves to be abused by the ex∣amples and presidents, which the said Sectaries alledg of the Kings, Edward the second, and Richard the second, who, by reason of their incapacity, were forced to resigne their Crowns, the one to his son, the other to his Competitor King Henry the fourth, but neither of them to an inconside∣rable,
small remainder of an house of Commons, or the Peo∣ple. Onely in a full Parliament both their resignations were confirmed, and neither executed, but were alway afterwards honorably entertained; yea, one Roger Mortimer (which is worth the observing) the chief Author and actor in depo∣sing of Edward the second, and Crowning his son Ed∣ward the third in his fathers place, (according to which Pre∣sident his Majesty, Charls the second, ought by these to have been Crowned) was by a Parliament four years after, toge∣ther with his fellow-murtherers, condemned as a Traytor, and enemy to the King and Kingdome, because he killed the said deposed King in Berkley Castle. Besides, the now prevailing Party, by Solemn Protestati∣ons, did publish and declare to all the world, that they did not intend to follow those accursed Presidents, although they should suffer never so much by the King and his Party: Exact. Collect. p. 69. IV. Should we not rather deeply apprehend, and with fear look upon those exemplary punishments inflicted upon perjury, and Covenant-breaking in Gods holy word, as may be seen (to omit others, in the person of Saul, who toge∣ther with his posterity, as also the whole Kingdome of Isra∣el, was so severely punished because he destroyed the Gibe∣onits, against the Covenant made with Joshua, above 200 years before, notwithstanding they procured the same de∣ceitfully. As likewise in the History of England, and o∣ther Kingdoms, many pregnant examples to that purpose might be alleadged; particularly that of William Thorpe, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench in that Realm, who for taking a bribe of 80 pounds Sterling, was put to death, and all his goods confiscated to the Kings use, in regard that in so doing he violated the Oath of a Judge as the words run, Quod Sacramentum Domini Regis, quod erga populum habu∣it custodiendum, fregit malitiose, falso & rebelliter. Parl. 23. Edw. 3d.
An Answer to their Memorials.. THe Memorials I pass over, as monstrous, and which by inevitable consequence, not onely tend to cut off all Treaties and alliances betwixt the Kings Majesty and this State, and all commerce with his loyal and faithfull Subjects, but likewise in some cases to the not suffering of them to dwel or reside in these parts. A demand which is against the band of common society amongst men, the Soveraignty of the united Provinces, and Liberty of the same, which have ever been a Sanctuary for honest men, and a receptacle of all Nations whatsoever: In a word such, quale victor victo dare, non socius socium rogare solet. The cruelty of Tiberius, Nero, Domitian, and others hath for the most part been confined within the walls of Rome, or the borders of Italy, without persecuting their opposers, in a strange land as an, omnibus umbra locis adero. Concerning the thirty six Articles of the Treaty. The thirty six Articles evidently bend, I. TO hinder his Majesties Just Right, and Restituti∣on to his hereditary Crown, and Kingdom of England. II. To involve the High and Mighty States Generall in a Labyrinth and great inconveniencies, who at present have no enemy. III. To encourage and strengthen the Kings irreconcila∣ble enemies, and Rebels, as the 4, 5, 6, and 31 Articles doe import. IV. Against the forementioned resolutions of the High and Mighty States, in the year 1642, concerning the kee∣ping a Neutrality betwixt his Majesties Father of blessed
memory, and his Parliament of England, namely those of the 1 of November, and 30 of December 1642 and the 6 of No∣vember 1648. V. Against a Declaration and Protestation of the Noble and Mighty States of Holland and West-Friesland, dated the 6 of November 1649 to the same purpose. VI. Against all former Treaties, and Alliances betwixt his Majesties Royall Predecessors and this State. As amongst others, that of the 14 of February 1593 (like∣wise consisting of 36 Articles) betwixt King Henry the 7 of England, his Heirs and Successors, made in his name, and by his Authority (as the words of the said Treaty do bear) and Phi∣lip Arch Duke of Austria, and Duke of Burgundy, which binde and obliege to this very day, divers of the United Pro∣vinces, and the chief Members and Towns thereof, to assist the said King Henry the 7 and his Heirs (which unque∣stionably pleadeth for my Master, Charls the second, he being the sixth from him in descent in linea recta) and to afford them all favour and friendly assistance, as well by Sea as by Land, and prohibiteth any Treaty and Alliance to be made with the Rebels, and the Enemies of one another. Whose undoubted right, according to Gods sacred word, the Lawes, and the Fundamentall Constitutions of the King∣dom of England as, (Rex non moritur, &c.) is firmly radica∣ted in his Majesties Person, however he by violence be kept from it. Non unquam perdidit ordo Mutato sua Jura loco. In so much that the ancient Romans by the light of nature did refuse to enter into any Alliance with Nabis the Ʋsurper of Lacedaemon, but continued the same with the Just and law∣full King Pelopides. Amicitia & societas nobis nulla tecum est saith Tit: Quintius in the behalf of the Roman Empire, apud Livium lib. 34.) Sed cum Pelopide Rege Lacedaemoni∣orum justo & ligitimo facta est. Finally against the renewed Treaty in the year 1550. De∣cember 15. made at Bins in Henegow (called the Perpetuall
Treaty) betwixt the tutors of Mary Q of Scotland, in her mi∣nority, and Queen Mary of Hungary, Regent for Charls the fifth in the Low-Countreys, renewed again in solenni for∣ma (word by word) at Edinburgh 1594. betwixt King James the sixth and the High and Mighty States, after the Bap∣tisme of the Late Prince Henry, his Majesties son, celebra∣ted at Sterling. In the which it is promised and agreed upon, inviola∣bly to maintain and preserve mutuall friendship one with another, for all ages to come, and as farre as in them lay, to prevent, and hinder any dammage that may befall either of them, that they shall Trafique in safety and se∣curity, and likewise, that they shall assist each other with Ships, and all sort of Ammunition, as may be seen at length in the Treaty it self, inserted by Peter Borr in his 30 book. But how opposite this is to their 4, 5, and 31 Articles pro∣pounded to your Lordships, appeareth clearly out of the words there contained, where they not onely deny to the King and his Subjects, privativè, all favour, friendship, and provision of War, but likewise endeavour to obliege your Lordships, De facto, to infest and make war upon them, as having now no other Enemies (as they themselves give out) but Scotland. But expecting better things of the High and Mighty States, and a Religious observation of all Treaties, Reso∣lutions, Protestations, and Declarations; Your Lordships are intreated not to give ear to the said Propositions, and Memorials, as also that the said 36 Articles perishing in their birth, may not be taken into any further Conside∣ration. The Lord will reward every one according to his works, and I wish that he may ever bless the High and Mighty States with his Fatherly Protection, and keep them from contra∣cting any League and Alliance, which may be attended with Dishonor and Dammage unto them. THE END.
ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A CERTAIN SCOTTISH ANSWER, SET FORTH AGAINST The Propositions & Memorandums OF THE English Ambassadors, &c. SERVING For a right Information of the plainer Sort. ROM. 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Pow∣ers: For there is no Power but of GOD, and the powers which are, are ordained of GOD. PROV. 24.21. Fear the King, [that is to say] All Magistrates. Written and printed first in Dutch by a Gentleman of Holland, and now translated into English. London, Re-printed 1651.
Animadversions Upon a certain Scottish Answer, put forth against the Propositions and Memorandums of the English Ambassadors, &c. THe Answerer hath this expression in the Title of his Answer, [By the English Ambassa∣dors, as they stile themselves] just as if no body else did acknowledge them for such. Such an untruth appearing presently in the Front, makes every one guesse the House is alike furnished within. Not they themselves, but the K of Spain, the K. of Portugall, the State of Venice, the Duke of Florence, the Republick of Genua, doe thus ac∣knowledge them. And the Answerer himselfe knowes very well, that the supream power of this Place hath done the same. From the Text, Feare God and the King, the Answerer would fain inferre, that they ought both to be feared in one and the same degree, taxing thereby this very State as much as the English, We must fear God more then men. The King is a man: the Scots themselves did understand it so, when as in the late troubles they persecuted their King by warre, and at last delivered him up unto the English for money; as the said King himself professeth in the 23 Chapter of his printed Book of Meditations. In the beginning of the Discourse the Answerer alledges, That the ancient Contracts and Friendships were not made between England and this State, but between the Kings of England and this State. And wherefore saith he not, between the Kings of England and Spain respectively? but that he is convinced that State, that is to say, the Repre∣sentatives of the Countries, and the People, areA Dutch phrase. the Bride for whom is danced, The King or Prince is for the peoples sake, not the people for the Kings sake. The King of Denmark said likewise in the beginning: He
and his Predecessors had contracted with the Duke of Bur∣gundie, with the King of Spain, not with the States; he knew no States, and denied any treaty with them. But his Majesty hath been better informed since, having of his own accord often desired a Treaty with these States, as other Kings and Potentates have done, who thereby doe and must acknow∣ledge, that a King or Prince doth and ought to do all in dea∣ling, treating, or transacting, propopulo, pro salute populi: For the people, for the weale of the people (which is the su∣pream Law) not for himselfe. That the name of the King or Prince is used therein, no otherwise but Nomine procuratorio, vel tutorio, as a Trustee, or Guardian. So their Lordships the Staes understood it also, when on May 2. last past, they pre∣sented unto the English Embassadors, the ancient Treaty of 1495. made in the Names of the King of England, and the Archduke of Austria. King James of Scotland implied as much when he sought in Anno 1594. to renew the old Trea∣tie (with the States Generall) formerly made in the name of Queen Mary of Scotland, 1541, which agreeth in every re∣spect with the practice of all other Princes. The Answerer saith, That the States in Anno 1584, did offer the Soveraignty of these Countries to Q. Elizabeth. To what purpose he utters this, I cannot imagine; For, it will not follow thence, that this State cannot be allowed to treat with the State of England, though there be no King; since the said Queen, and the Kings after her treated with us, even af∣ter we had cast off our King, as the English have now done theirs: If this State made offer of the Soveraignty to Q. Elizabeth, doubtles it was on certain conditions; which if she or her Suc∣cessors had not kept, we should not have scrupled to have reco∣vered the same into our hands again, even as the English have don. Among the Barbarians and Savages it is confest indeed, that their Kings wil be bound to no Laws, (though oft-times they fare accordingly: For, how many have there been even in our times, of Turkish & other Heathen Emperours & Kings made away?) But among Christians no King or Prince was ever heard of, but he must swear to maintain the Laws. If any
Prince prove perjured and break them, so soon as the breach is made, the people are freed from their obedience. The supply both of men and money which the Queen sent for our reliefe, came from the people themselves, and out of the peoples purse; the people did consent unto it, and grant it. Ʋntrue therefore it is, which the Answerer affirmes, that the said succour and assistance was sent without the co-opera∣tion or consent of the people of England. If the people of England had any Monarch at this instant, to whom they had given up the power of Treating, then our addresses of Treaty should be made to him; but there being no such thing, and we not able to subsist without the friend∣ship of England, therefore we must treat with England as it is now governed. And truly the late Summers proceedings and attempt in this Countrey, (when our own Freedom ran greatest hazard) may well awake us to circumspection, and cause us to rejoyce that England is no Monarchy now, but a Free State, of the same constitution with ours, and to wish that thus it may con∣tinue; For, all the dependants and kindred of the young Prince of Orange, maintain still, we ought, must, & are bound both by the merits of the House of Nassau, and for our own subsistence sake, to take the young Prince again for our Head, Generall and Governor: And were the King of Scot∣land master of England, he would maintain it as strongly as any, and seek to force the child upon us. As for the favours and assistances that King James and Charles afforded us, they doe not merit naming; we had more hurt then good by them. And King Charles never kept touch with us, as is well known. If in those times the people or Parliament had been in Government, as now they are, they would have better managed the Revenews of England (which Kings waste, or play away) to procure our effectuall liberty, such as now both England and we enjoy, but not after the method that Leicester intended. The Answerer saith, that the prevailing party make not up the hundreth part of the people of England. Why truly then the Ninety-nine Royalists that suffer one Parliamenteer to do∣mineer
it over them, must be very notable Cowards. I am sure there were seven or eight Royalists at the hague made a shift to dispatch one Dorislaus, and at Madrid onely five or six did murther Ascham; but an hundred to be over∣come and kept under by one, how is it possible? This Tale hath for these many years been pin'd to our sleeves; yet still the Parliamenteers get the better, and keep the better. Englands greatest Power, the flower of the Parliaments Forces, is now in Scotland; I marvell the ninety-nine to one are so tame and quiet still in England; as nowhere to shew themselves. The comparison of England with a ship, doth hold as good a proportion as the ninety-nine to one. The English people and Nation is and abides the same it was; the individuals de∣cay, the species remains. A Ship and a People fit as well as a Cat and a Duck; but I conceive the Answerer means the Trees whereof the ship is built: for they do propagate and multiply according to their kind, like men, and that is more sutable to the opinion of some soothing Court-Parasites, such as our Answerer proves himselfe, that subjects are no other∣wise then trees: others compare them to beasts, as if a Prince were so much better then the subjects, as another man is bet∣ter then a beast: that is to say, The beasts are beasts to men, but the subjects are their Princes beasts; A beastly opinion. The entercourses of Commerce, saith the Answerer, are common to all Nations; Why then the King of Scotland doth very ill in stopping and molesting the free and common com∣merce of all Nations from the Sillies, Iersie, Ireland, Dun∣kerk, &c. to so great prejudice of the Seamen, that the dam∣mage in this kinde can no longer be endured. The English have the same aim with us, for clearing of the sea. I cannot tell what he means by his Gargazens Trade. Navigation is the life of this State: Religion and Trade doe not destroy one another, as it seems he would inferre; and how doth he talk of Religion? He himselfe is professedly against the Episcopall way (which all the Royalists and the Princesse Royall, and the Queen of Bohemia are still addicted to) and holds with the Presbyterians; with whom our own people (for matter of
Excommunication and Discipline) do not agree. He saith farther, Violent Governments are not lasting: By that rule, no Monarchicall Government should be lasting; for their Sword onely doth support them. He saith England is sub∣ject to great alterations, yea, more than any Countrey under the Sun. He means under Kingly Government: But by and by he sowes jealousies, by saying, that England continuing a Commonwealth, it is like to increase mightily in Trade and Navigation, and that the increase of Trade in England, will make ours to decay in Holland. These assertions do mighti∣ly thwart one another. First, he says; There is 100 Roya∣lists to one Parliamentier; then, England is extreamly sub∣jects to changes and alterations; within the space of 11 or 20 days, it hath been lost and won; and then presently after he saith, England continuing a Republique, will make our Trade decay. Ergò his minde and fear prompts him, that the En∣glish Republique may well endure somewhat more then 11 or 20 days. These Passages of his contradicting each other, are an Argument of a short memory, or that he goes about to abuse us with flim flam tales. For, how doth it appear that our Trade shall be spoiled by the English? They send and offer us reall assistance and protection against the mani∣fold depredations we suffer by others. If both these Republicks were well united, yet the num∣ber of Monarchies round about them, will finde work e∣nough for both to maintain their Negotiations jointly: How much less then is England alone like to get all the Trade to themselves? The English may be strugling a good while yet, before a secure setling; they will not want enemies at home and abroad, to make attempts upon them; as the An∣swerer himself confesseth. The Prognostick of October 16 which he speaks of, is an in∣sinuation of the same nature with those Victories, successes, and advantages which he daily forged, and printed here last Summer, which by the Blow at Dunbar evaporated all im∣mediately. Those that tell us of Almanacks and Prognosticks, shew they have but few and slender Reasons left them to produce. I could reply to him out of Spinrock's Gospell.
Religion, saith he, was wont to shine forth under the Kingly Government. How comes this Answerer to praise the Kings Religion, when as himself as well as the rest of his Scots Countreymen, have not onely made the first insurrecti∣on against the Kings Religion; but entred into a Covenant and raised war, and at last sold the King for money (accor∣ding to the Kings own published profession; Principally against the Kings Religion, or against the innovation there∣of at least. And what the King said further of the Scots Religion, and consequently of the Answerers Religion, you may read at large in the 14 and 16 Chapters of his printed Book. It is well known what harsh and bitter Sermons and Books were made but lately at Breda and the Hague, against the Reformed Religon, whom they still hatefully termed Calvinists. Are there in England divers Sects? there are here also not a few, God mend it; and even as the Governors here would gladly see it otherwise, so like∣wise those in England; in the mean time, we are assured, that in England divers books are forbidden, and were burnt by the Hangman, which here passe up and downe yet every where. The Ambassadors have in the Name and behalf of the whole English Government, declared the Conformity of their Religion with ours. They tolerate some others; and so do we; onely we allow more and greater toleration then they: Neither we nor they approve of a Spanish Inquisi∣tion. They do not allow the Church an absolute power of Ex∣communication; no more do we; and the Scottish Kirk al∣so was fain to remit it now themselves. So that the Presby∣terians rage and roaring against Sects and Sectaries is groundless; for between themselves and the Independents (so named) there is not difference in the main of Religion, or profession, besides Discipline; but it should seem the Presbyterian Boutefeus, aim at a Papall Power, to admini∣ster the Jus Clavium at pleasure, as the Scots have: But their young King hath already taught them another Lesson; disapproving thereby also the English Presbyterians, It were
much to be wished indeed, that all men were of one minde; that there were but one Religion: Our Answerer I believe knows as little how to advise or compass it, as others. Nay, he himself refusing to go to the same Church where the King went, during his abode here, and the Queen of Bohemia and the Princess Royal, and all the Royalists, doth thereby suf∣ficiently evidence, that there are sects and divisions, as well between his party and the Kings, as there is between the En∣glish and the Presbyterians. That which he mentioneth of the good life of his Royal Christians, I profess, I understand not: If by a good life he means, a merry, joviall life, (dum vixit, vixit bene) I yeild, that at Court they live more merrie and frollick then elsewhere; and thence it is, that at London they have put down all the Play-Houses, and such like pla∣ces and practises of profane and scandalous recreation. That otherwise the life and fruitfull Conversation of the Royalists should be more holy and exemplary, then that of the En∣glish Independents, as they call them, I never heard of be∣fore. Were they not the Kings evil Councellors, his flat∣terers, and seducers (whom I return to the Answerer for his Albii, Cassii, Nigri) that made as well the Presbyterians, as the rest, complaine so much against him from time to time? And I pray, were not the Presbyterians the first and the onely men, that took the King to task? The Answerer himself was one of them, and of those Covenanters, that supplanted the King, for his maintaining the Episcopal Hi∣erarchie: And when the Presbyterians afterwards went a∣bout to introduce the Presbyterian Hierarchie (changing onely the Name, and maintaining the Substance) then said the others whom he calls Independents, Soft my Masters; we have freed our selves from the Bishops Yoke; shall we put our necks under the Presbyterians? The Answerer alledg∣eth some other books which make for him. How many o∣ther blew books might easily be produced against the same, and to his prejudice? The King himself complains in his book ch. 15. and 21. how much hurt these books did him; so that I know not why the Answerer so highly esteems these blew books, and
that publickly in print too now, as well as in the Generall Assembly; odiously checking the Soveraign Government here, for having begun to treat with the English; and pre∣sumptuously spreading the same abroad among the Com∣mons; as though the Magistrates were regardless of their Office; and as if he intended to incense and raise the Com∣mons against the Governors▪ contemning the publick Odi∣nances in this behalf. As for the Successes; the Answer∣er knows well enough that several other Kings, Republicks, Princes and Potentates had beforehand acknowledged the Republick of England and honored the same with their Am∣bassies, and Credentials: And England also sent first unto this State, before this State sent to England. We have not looked upon the successes, but upon the Example of others. The Answerer saith, that the English thmselves do disa∣vow the great Turk: Again, the Gentleman throwes it beyond my reach, or he knows not what he avers himself. I never heard of any such Disavowing; but this I know well on the contrary, that all Christian Potentates, acknowledge the Turk for what He is, and accordingly honor him with their Ambassies: The Answerer's King himself, scrupled not to send to the Turk; no more doth the English Republick. Men, Laws, Governments, must every where be taken and used as they are. As long as the Answerer and his King are forced to let the Government remain as it is, so they must give us leave to do the same. The Answerer saith, that there is as much difference be∣tween the English Government and Liberty, and that of ours, as there is between Milk and Ink, according to the saying of one Salmasius, calling him a great Personage. Sure the Answerer knows well that Salmasius his Book, where he had this crotchet, is publickly declared a Libell and scanda∣lous here. Do great Personages use to write Libells? Furthermore, He saith, That the Batavians or Hollan∣ders, have been a Free Nation from all ages, and under the subjection of none. Certainly he is a dreaming; or else he hath the art to make white black, and black white, at plea∣sure: or, Milk and Ink is all one to him. What, hath not
Holland been under Earls above eight hundred years? And lastly, under the House of Burgundy, Austria, and Spain? Indeed the Earls were tied to Laws, and so were the Kings of England; if he say, an Earl is no King; I answer, Eng∣land is divided in more then fifty Counties, or Earldomes; so France is divided into many principalities and Counties. He that gets the command over them, soon gets a Title, King, Prince, Earl, or Lord; it comes all to one, if they have no Superiours. But all of them are bound to their Oaths, and the Laws. Neither in France, nor in Spain, nor anywhere else, are Kings allowed an unlimited power. The Examples in France are too fresh to rehearse them. The Kings of Spain have been Earls of Holland, and ac∣knowledged no superiors; now being freed from Spain, there is none appearing that pretend any right to Holland. Ne∣verthelesse he was bound to the laws by an oath. So that King of England was Earle of Essexshire, Sussex, Yorkshire, and of all the rest, compendiously called King of England, Scotland, Ireland, but bound to the Lawes. They of Holland perceiving their King had infringed the Laws, thereupon they opposed him, and fought themselves free; Bene & feliciter (saith the King of Spains Embassador Count Pigneranda) pro libertate pugnastis; ea vobis debetur. The English in like manner perceived their King had trespassed against the laws, and falsified his oath, whereupon they op∣posed him til they fought themselves into the same condition of Freedom. I could say somewhat more here: That the King of England out-did Spain. He of Spain had sworn to the Roman Religion, and conceived himself bound to protect it according to his Oath: but the King of England being sworn to the Protestant Religion, is charged to have acted against it, innovated it, and had he gotten the mastery, would have changed it. That this Assertion (owned as well by the Scots as the English) is most true, appeares by the Covenant, first made by the Scots, and afterwards embraced also by the English: Look upon Chapt. 14. of the Kings Book, see what he saith there himselfe of the Covenant: Again, the Covenant very expres∣ly
shewed, that the King had an intent to alter Religion and Laws. The Answerer himselfe was a Covenanter and Par∣liamenteer, and blew as fiercely and zealously as any against the Kings designe of Innovation, as they termed it. The se∣cond and third Article of the Covenant speaks very plain. And there have been a thousand books written both by the Scots & English Presbyterians on that subject. Nay, the Scots them∣selves have even since the late Kings death, excommunicated all that had and did adhere to the King (calling them Enga∣gers) and declared them Given over to the Devill. And for this cause they put poore Montrosse to death, and refused him Absolution. And what afterwards the King himself, and Ha∣milton, Middleton, Lauderdale, & others of this party, have suffered, is notorious to all the world. Also, how this King was fain to do penance, and to confess the bloud guiltiness of his Father's House. How ever, all the difference betwixt the Kings of England, and Spain, was only this; that He of England did more, and He of Spain, less against the Re∣ligion that each of them was sworn to. It is well known, that the Scots were the first, that made a Covenant, and thereupon took up arms, even as the No∣bility heretofore in the Netherlands, made a League or U∣nion, and took up arms to defend it. The Scots having clea∣red their own Land of all the Royall designs and adherents, were not content therewith, but proceeded to assist the Eng∣lish, who were as eager to be rid of the same incumbrances. Which being effected, and the King brought to this pass, that he saw no remedy left him, then he betook himself to the Scots at last, his own Country men, as confiding more in them. Why did not the Scots then take him home along with them? They said, it was not expedient; the King might easily put Scotland into new broils, as the English found afterwards among themselves; for then broke first out those differences betwixt Presbyterians and Independents; the former would have a new Hierarchy introduced, like that of the Scots; the later would have the Reformed Religion maintained, as it now stands among them, only they would bear with tender consciences, and some others, as wee doe likewise here.
The King of Spain hath given up his Right, and acknow∣ledged this a Free State: had the King of England done the like, or would this King content himself yet with the Scot∣tish Crown, as his Fore-fathers did, the war would soon be at an end. And herein Philip shewed himself more reaso∣nable and righteous, then Charls, whom nevertheless hee styles, that Blessed Martyr, so highly wronged and perse∣cuted, not remembring, at least concealing, that they were the Scots, who began this violent dealing with him. But none of this concerns us, not can we help it. If the Scots vvill begin troubles and war, and the Neighbour Kings and Potentates, will wink at it, vvhat is that to us? What is farther said by the Answerer, about the Kings death, concerns not us of Holland at all. If a King wageth war with his subjects, he must needs resolve to run the ha∣zard. Kings and Princes are flesh and bloud, and mortal as well as others. As much might have been done in a Charge by the Sword of a private soldier, as was afterwards by the hand of the Executioner. The Quality or Majesty of a King or Prince, is of no consideration to the steel or lead of the meanest soldier, & nostro sequitur de vulnere sanguis. Majestate nihil contemtius, nec infirmius, si sint qui contem∣nant. A living Dog is better then a dead Lion. A Pesant, owner of some Land, is better then a King, vvithout Land. He that vvill not submit himself to the Discretion of a Con∣querour, should not runne the hazard of being conquered. The Conquering party saw no other Expedient, no farther trust given; even during the Kings restraint, there was fa∣ction upon faction, division upon division, insurrection upon insurrection raised. The meanest creature, the poorest worm seeks for self-preservation. How much more a Man? If there had been any means left under Heaven, whereby a firm confidence could have been recovered, it is very proba∣ble, the Prevailing party would have yeilded to it. But to put all their Fortunes, Reputation, Freedom, Life, and Be∣ing, upon a new hazard again, no Reason could advise them. Now, as to the matter of deposing, and destroying of Kings, it is so common, both in England and Scotland, that
I admire, why the Answerer makes it so strange and prodi∣gious. But all these things are so largely set forth in print∣ed Boooks and Pamphlets, that the Answerer hath little rea∣son to make a wonder of it. Omnia jam vulgata. To make an alliance with England were unnecessary if our Commerce and Liberties were not in danger. We are bound to look to their preservation. The Depredations are unsup∣portable! We do not afflict the afflicted; but those whom he calls the afflicted, afflict us. As for the affliction of Joseph, we know not what it means, unless he make Joseph a Cavalier; and under that notion the Scots themselves were the first that persecuted him. And that party in Scotland which the Answerer himself doth esteem the honester, viz. the kirk party, they abhor the Royalists, calling them Malignants. The English Ambassadors have declared here in their first Proposition, they came not out of necessity, but to shew, they were willing to choose this State for their best friends. They have not desired to ingage us against the Scots. But it is well known both to them and us, what practices and mighty indeavours, the Royal party hath used these many years to ingage this State against the Parlia∣ment, now the Common-wealth of England. What par∣tial proceedings were there a foot? All that came from the King, had audience at pleasure; the Parliament none. The States-men of war, were (though mostly besides the States knowledge) imployed in the service of the King and his Party, as if they had been his own. What would have been the issue think you, if they had ingaged us to make war against the Parliament, but to sacrifice our Power, our Treasure, our Freedome, for the inslaving both the Parlia∣ment and our Selves? Is it forgotten already, what past here among us last Summer? Had Amsterdam, and the Bank of Amsterdam, been but surprised once, nay, had but one man continued alive, we should have been in a case sad and bad enough. After that this danger was over, and we had called the Grand Assembly together, for the settlement of our Free∣dom, they acknowledged the Common-wealth of England,
and resolved to send an Ambassador to them; the Parliament shewed themselves so honourable and civil, that they pre∣vented us, concurring with our own desires, of settling both these Republicks, in a posture against all that should at any time attempt ought against them. They considered who was their present Enemy, and how near the King of Scots was allied to him, that by his late practises disclosed so much of his Designs against Holland, Amsterdam, and the whole State. Also what special correspondence there past between these two, to reduce both Republicks to a plenary Subjection. Afterwards when the English had gotten the start of their Adversary, by the great Victory at Dunbar: Then it is to be observed, that they came out of a cordially zeal and affection to deliver us likewise, and to further the settlement of our State, and by an union with them, render us secure at home, and feared abroad. How, and by whom the effect thereof hath been protracted hitherto, is well known; namely, by those who still are Preaching to us, that we should submit our selves under the young Prince of O∣range; that is to say, under the sister of the King of Scot∣land, the Guardianess of him, whom they would fain force upon us for our Head and Guardian. The following both Scripture and prophane Allegations and Histories registred by the Answerer, are to no purpose, being a thousand times refuted. Gods holy Word, the in∣stinct of Nature, right reason, the Laws, the Judgements of the Casuists, the Oaths, Covenants, and all these are things the Parliament alledge for themselves, with more reason and advantage, then the Royalists. Those sayings, Rex non mo∣ritur, & Rex nulli facit injuriam, are known to be rank flat∣teries, and neither in England, nor in any other Kingdome allowed of. I wonder how this man durst avert such things in the face of this Republick. As also, that he durst call that a Sophise, which the States of Holland had made use of, to induce the rest of the Pro∣vinces to the Acknowledgment of the English Republick, viz to give unto Cesar, (that is, the present Possessor or In∣cumbent) that which is Cesars. Why did he not first make
known this subtle solution of that Sophism to Spain, Portu∣gal, Venice, Florence, Genua? (France would fain come on too.) Did they understand the Date Caesari thus? we had more reason for it. As for those other allegations, taken out of several Ser∣mons, I shall direct him to infinite other Sermons, that were and are daily made in the behalf of the Parliament. The An∣swerers, and others wresting of the Scriptures, like a Nose of wax to serve their turns, is a kind of Prophanation. The Memorandums he calls Monstrous things. A bold expression. They contain the very words, set down in the Treaty of Anno 1495. and consequently the States own words, delivered unto the English Ambassadors, May 2 last, which are not monstrous, but grounded on very weigh∣ty Reason. For, we do plainly find, that for divers years now all along, the English and Scots Malignants, do not only seek to imbroil us in war, but labour likewise daily here to reduce us again under the subjection or Guardianship of the young Prince of Orange, that needs a Guardian himself: So that it seems Lex Julia de ambitu, lies asleep. Otherwise this State ought to rid themselves of those strangers, that seek to obtrude a new Domination upon us. And the English deserve our thanks, for having reacht forth their helping hand thus unto us. In the Rear now our Answerer falls upon the thirty six Articles, and says, That the same do prejudice or hinder his Kings Right to the Crown of England. All the Kings and Potentates, which acknowledge England a Republick, do in effect the same thing: But indeed neither any of those Kings and Potentates, nor we our selves, but the Kings ow evill Councellors, or Proceedings, are the cause of all this. When the Anserer, the rest of his partners, the Scots and Cove∣nanters, have hurried their Waggon into precipices of ru∣ine, it is past our redress. To enter into alliance against those that go about to ruine our Commerce, and bereave us of our Freedom, as much as in them lies, is both necessary and com∣mendable. If some will needs live under a King, let them; as for our parts, we are resolved by Gods help, to maintain our Freedom.
A League with England will not bring us into a Labyrinth, nor make us subjects of Depradation and Slavery; but free and secure us from both. The Resolutions of Neutrality, which he mentioneth, are limited with conditions; in case the Scots, Irish, and o∣ther Pirats, perform Neutrality to us also. All the former alliances are between the Nations; so their Lord ships the States understand it; so also do all the Kings and Potentates understand it, that Treat here with the States upon the ancient Treaties, as made in those times under the name of the Duke of Burgundy, and Austria. The Answe∣rer himself implies as much above, where he takes the Trea∣ty vvith Duke Philip, Anno 1495. as made with their Lord∣ships the States; and so likewise the renued Treaty with Scotland, in Anno 1594. which Queen Mary had made, as Governess in the Netherlands, and the King of Scotland notwithstanding renued it with their Lordships Non populi propter Regem sed Rex propter populū. Kings & Princes enter into Treaties, as Representers of the People, for the peoples sake. This Kings forefathers were contented with the Crown of Scotland. It grieves the Scots to see themselvs involved in war about a quarrel that doth not concern them; but only for the Kings sake, who by Pr. Rupert, and by other Pyratical ships and other ways, plaguing and provoking the English, did force them at last, to fall with an Army into Scotland, for to prevent that Kings falling into England. Even so did the great Gustave of Sweden; he came with an Army in∣to Prussia, and forced the King of Poland his Cousen, to relinquish his pretensions to the Crown of Sweden. To conclude, the English well knowing, that the Scots joyned with English Fugitives, and Malignants, seek nothing but on the one side to ingage us against the parliament, or to make us still subject to their depradations; and on the other side, to bring us again under the subjection of the Prince of Orange: Therefore they very lovingly came and invited us to mutual union, to prevent both the one and the other. This, in effect, is the Sum and Truth of the Business.
AN ADDITIONALL REPLY TO All the pretended Arguments, fals Insinua∣tions and Slanders, set forth in the Printed Answer OF MACK-DONNELL the Scotish RESIDENT, To the Propositions of the Ambassadors of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND; Presented at the Hague, March 30/20. 1651: CHAP. I. The Necessity, Nature, and several Forms of Ambassy, stated. IT being impossible to preserve Intercourse and A∣mity betwixt Nations, for their mutual weal and safety, without the intervention of such a per∣son, or persons, that may represent the sense of either, so as to beget a right understanding betwixt them: And because if the Supremacy be delegated or invested in one single Person (whether a King, Duke, or Emperour) it were for many reasons most inconvenient that he should quit his Charge at home to treat personally abroad in foràin Parts; Or if the Supremacy be intrusted in the hands of divers Persons, it were absurd to imagine they should all undertake a Voiage upon the like occasion: Therefore it must needs be obvious to every mans reason, how great a necessity lies upon the Nations of the world, to make choice of some intermedial Person or Persons, to be commissiona∣ted with full Power, and sent abroad with such Iustructions,
as may inable them, on the behalf of their respective Coun∣tries, to confer and debate with forain States and Princes, of such matters as tend to mutual Commerce and Communi∣cation. Without such a course as this, saith Petrus Aerodius (an old Author) no League can be made, nor any thing de∣termined touching Peace or War; Enmities would prove im∣mortal; Murthers, Violence, and Treachery, would perpetu∣ally alarm the world with new Combustions. Hence it is, that in regard of the necessary use of such Ministers, and in re∣gard they represent the Majesty of the State that sends; them, a kind of sanctity hath been annexed to their Persons; they have in all Ages and Nations been had in special Veneration, indulged with large Priviledges and Immunities, even among the Heathen, and secured from the reach of violation, by as high a reverence as they paid to their very Gods and Tem∣ples, as may be seen in an Epistle of King Philip the Mace∣donian, to the people of Athens. A Legat or Ambas∣sador is Sanctum populis per saecula nomen: As for the several Forms of Ambassy, or Ambassadors, though they pass by divers names, yet they are specifically one and the same Office or Function, having all the same rea∣son, aim, or end; which is, to transact affairs abroad, for the good of the Common-wealth, according to the directions of those that send them. In ancient time, a Legat or Am∣bassador, many times passed under the name of an Orator; according to that of Virgil 11. Aeneid. Jámque Oratores aderant ex urbe Latinâ. And he usually retained this name, either from the nature of his imploiment, in case he were sent to desire or depre∣cate any matter, or else from his Eloquence, which is the prime requisit and glory of an Ambassador. The other usu∣al name of old, was that which the Pope still retains, viz. the Nuntio, which in English is a Messenger, according to that of Livy, lib. 34. Rhodios Nuntios in Orbe terrarum ar∣bitria belli pacisque agere, which was spoken in contempt of the Rhodians, or rather indignation, that so inconsiderable a people should be so busie and medling; for, those usually
they called Messengers, that were sent from such as either were not acknowledged Supream in power, or were but an inferiour Nation, or who came with small pomp about matters of the lesser concernment; or for the delivery of some dispatches, about which they made no long stay. But those old titles being antiquated, we have new a suc∣cession of new ones, which are thus divided, according to the pesent custom of Nations, viz. the Agent, or Ambassa∣dor in ordinary, and the Ambassador extraordinary: both which, are one and the same in effect, differing only in pomp and splendor, but equal in priviledge. The Agent or Am∣bassador in ordinary, is usually a person eminent for prudence; one that undertakes and performs the Ambassy with less out∣ward ostentation; who if he be Commissionated to reside with any Prince or Republick, is then called a Resident. But this Rsident being for the most part as a Spy, to pry into the Affairs of those to whom he is sent, it were far better if that custom of Residence were rather exploded, then continued any longer, it tending more to the prejudice, then the be∣nefit of Nations. But of all others, the Resident ought to be avoided, and not admitted in new and unsetled states and Commonweals, if they mean to be safe, or preserve their re∣putation. For this cause it was, and in this case, that of old, Ambassadors had a retinue assigned them by the State where they resided, under pretence of honour and respect to their Ambassy, but really to keep an eye over them; and so strict∣ly, that they could not so much as drink, or do any other necessary, but with the privity of these Attendants. Procop. l. 1. de Bello Goth. It was the same reason also, wherefore our Henry 7. cared so little for their company here in Eng∣land, at the beginning of his unsetled Government: And questionless, it was in him a most notable point of Prudence; in all parallel cases most worthy of imitation. Now he whom we call the extraordinary Ambassador, is (for the most part) a Person of some higher rank and interest in the Common∣wealth, and therefore a far greater stipend and retinue is as∣signed him, to uphold a Majestick Port, answerable to his own Quality, and for the honour of his Nation. The for∣mer
(according to the common acception) are styled ordina∣ry Ambassadors, Agents, and Residents; the later Extraor∣dinary, sent usually upon eminent and extraordinary occasi∣ons. Thus you see all the difference betwixt them is onely extrinsecal and formal, in respect of Ceremony; but de Ju∣re, according to the nature and end of the thing, they have the same intrinsecal value, and an equal right to the same im∣munities and priviledges. An example of the former wee have in the late Agencies of those two Learned, but unfor∣tunate Gentlemen, Doctor Dorisla, and Master Anthony Ashcam, the one most barbarously assassinated in Holland, the other in Spain. And of the later, in the late solemn Am∣bassy into Holland, performed by two Honourable persons, the one being Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, but both of the Parliamentary or Senatorian Order. Now if you would know the reason why we have thus briefly discus∣sed the Point of Ambassy under the several Forms, it is part∣ly for Method sake, as an Introduction to the other Chap∣ters which follow; but especially to let both the Dutch and Spaniard understand, that the English have as much reason to expect justice and satisfaction for the butcheries of their two Agents, as if they had appeared in as glorious and so∣lemn an Equipage, as the greatest Ambassadors in the world. And truly, their expectations might be the more heightned in this particular to hear from the Spaniard, in regard the matter hath been so plainly laid open by a Doctor of their own, of no mean rank and abilities, by name Don Augustin de Hierro, Knight of the Order of Calatrava, and Fiscal (or Attorney General) of the Councel Royal, in a Charge by him exhibited against the Murtherers of Master Ashcam; in which Charge, he thus determins it: That whether the per∣son sent lately by the Parliament of England, was an Am∣bassador, an Agent, or Resident, as the Murtherers term him, or most properly anMaster Ashcam was verus Lega∣ius. Orator, (for, he came (saith he) to deprecate Peace.) Or, whether he were all these, or any of these, it matters not; for, any of these may style him a Legat, & make him deserv that title; and the same security is due unto all those titles,
the same Priviledge, the same Immunity. And therefore, since the same Doctor hath also very clearly proved, that the Church cannot give sanctuary to the Murtherers of the mea∣nest of Publick Ministers, (who are all equall in point of indemnity) the more highly it reflects upon Spain, that the Rights of Ambassadors should receive so high a violation, and yet that there should have been so long a delay of justice (up∣on an unjustifiable pretence) against Master Ascham's Mur∣therers. CHAP. II. That All Supream Powers in possession (Jure vel Injuriâ) have a Right to send Agents or Ambassadors, to negotiate with Forain States and Princes. BEcause, upon perusal of the Printed Answerer, set forth by that Scot, who entitles himself the Lord Mac Don∣nel, and Resident of the King of Great Britain; it appears he will not vouchsafe our late Ambassadors at the Hague, to wear the style of English Ambassadors, but in his Title page disdainfully calls them the English Ambassadors [as they style themselves.] And in the beginning of his pretended Answer, nick-names them Ab-Legats in the Diminutive, and calls them pretended Ambassadors, as if they merited not the title of true Legats or Ambassadors; it cannot be a∣miss therfore, to shew this Scot, and all the world, upon what frail terms, both his Lordship and the Residentship must needs stand, having so aiery a foundation to support them, as his Master's Kingship of Great Britain; for we suppose it will be a hard matter for him to prove his Residentship, till his young Master can make good the Kingship; it being a Maxim received by all Civilians and Statesmen, that the Right of Ambassy in all Countries, as do all the other Rights
of Supremacy, ever follow such as are in possession. Hugo Grotius (lib. 2. de Jur. bel. cap. 18.) is very positive to this purpose, where he tells you, Reges qui bello solenni victi, reg∣nóque exuti sunt, cum alis Regni bonis & jus Legandi per∣diderunt, that is, Kings who submit their Fortunes to the tri∣all of a set-war, and then are driven out of the kingdome by force of arms, as they forfeit all other right of soveraignty, so also they lose the very right of Ambassy. The reason to me is evident, because the chief end of Ambassies (for the most part) is to make Contracts; and it is absurd to imagin, that one man will contract with another, when it is not in the power of that other to make good the Contract, because there is a third Power in possession, which will hinder him from the performance. Now, all States and Princes mea∣sure the points of Ambassy and Negotiation by convenience and Reason of State. They consider not what right or wrong is done to a Brother-Prince, in his title, in the great Revoluions of Government, but how to frame themselves after the motion of the Great Wheel, as may tend most to the security of their own titles, and advantage of their own estates: For, if in stead of receiving Ambassies and Addres∣ses from Forain Powers, they should first require satisfaction touching the rights of those which send, then the whole time of Princes would be spent in admitting mutual appeals to and from one another, to no purpose; since if that were admit∣ted, there would be no end of dispute in the world touch∣ing titles; which were they all ravelled to their Originals, would puzzle the ablest head-pieces under Heaven to prove their equity and innocence in the Cradle. Very suitable hereunto is that passage of Cardinal D'Ossat in one of his E∣pistles, who tells you, That Princes, when Ambassadors are addrest to them, never inform themselves of the rights and titles of those Princes from whom they are sent; But whe∣ther they have possession of the Forces and Power of those places from whence the Ambassadors are imployed. For, it would be an endlesse task, and require an infallible true Hi∣story of the world (which is not to be made by man) if all the Ambassadors, before their Receptions, should be obliged first
to prove clearly to the world, the just right by which their masters derive those Titles and Jurisdictions, which they as∣sume to themselves. Thus far it seems by reason of State, that the right of Am∣bassy unquestionably follows such only as are in possession; let us confirm it farther (as briefly as may be) by testimonies of Writers, with the practises of States and princes, both ancient & modern, who never used to inquire who they were that sent, but whether the senders of an Ambassage were inve∣sted with a Power to command the places from whence they sent: In this case, they always treat with the Power, but never dispute it, well knowing few of their own Dominions have had an unquestionable beginning, Respectu primae Causae om∣nia Imperia legitima esse concedo, sed si quer as de causis in∣termediis, &c. All Governments (saith Bodin, l. 1. c. 6.) are lawful in respect of the first cause, viz. God; but if we regard secondary causes, most Governments have had their founda∣tion upon Force and Violence: which must needs be granted, considering how from time to time the Sword hath given Law to all the world. Whereupon, the Civilians, weighing, that the course of Government hath run altogether in this Chan∣nel, have proportioned their Maxims more suitable to the ne∣cessities and publick conveniencies of mankind, then satisfa∣ctory to the reasons of private and particular men; because, will they, nill they, such must be concluded within the rules of submission, to what form of Government soever shall be ere∣cted by those that cary the Sword. For, in this case, if a Par∣liament, or Senate, that hath the Sword, shall resolve one way, and those that are un-armed, resolve another, then there can be no Government at all, but all will be left at ran∣dom, to a continued succession of discontents contests, and confusions, which must needs end in the ruine of the un∣armed party. Wherefore, it is a Rule with them, That the ancient Majesty of a Kingdom or Commonweal, continues no longer, if it be changed either by a greater Power, or by con∣sent of the People: where you see, Force and Power are put in equall ballance with popular consent, in relation to Go∣vernment. And as if it were the best pedigree of Supremacy,
they define the Supream Authority to be that which holds claim from God and the Sword; and therefore is as it were the Authour of its own Original, without dependance on any o∣ther; so that (say that) every Commonwealth, be it never so small, which acknowledges no Superiour, but God and the Sword, hath a right of Majesty, or Political Supremacy. So saith Besoldus, de Juribus Majest. cap. 1. Arnisaeus, de Ma∣jest. cap. 1. and Cammonus de Majest. Disput. 1. Thes. 70.75. &c. with many others. Seeing therefore, that an uncontrolable Power of the sword, in plenary possession of any Nation, instates him or them whos Sword it is, wth all the rights of Majesty, much more then may they be claimed by the Parliament of England, to whom God hath given a commanding Sword, which they lawfully hold in the behalf, and by consent of the people. And there∣fore questionless, no State, or Prince, where he seeth such an established Power, can in reason question those rights, or pretend ground not to own the Power, as in all other rights, so more especially in the right of Ambassy, which is one of the fairest Flowers in the Garland of Majesty. For, (as it hath been observed by the Oracle of our Laws, 4. Instit. c. 26.) they, and none but they, who enjoy the rights of Ma∣jesty, or Supremacy, have a right of Ambassy. It must be from a Soveraign, to a Soveraign Power and Authority. Thus far now, our Assertion stands unquestionable; there∣fore, for illustration, it must needs be much more clear, if we consider, that the benefit of Ambassy hath been often al∣lowed, even to such as were not solely Supream, nor in the plenary possession of any Nation. Thus in a Nation divided by Civil War, where the Supream Power is in Controversie, both the Parties are allowed an equal right of Ambassy, by Hugo Grotius, l. 2. c. 18. Thus in a popular division at Syra∣cusa, the one Party within the City sent an Ambassage to the other Party without, under the command of Andronodorus. The like was done by Caius Manlius, one of Catiline's Fel∣lows, to Q. Martins; and by Brutus and Cassius to Lepi∣dus and Antony, Livius, l. 14. Salust Catil. who give them that were sent the name of Legats, which were the same that
we now call Agents and Ambassadors. Also, according to this Rule, during the late Contest here betwixt King and Parliament, it was, that the Hollander made no scruple to entertain Agents equally from both the Parties. Nor hath this Priviledge been allowed those only, who in National si∣dings, have had some tolerable pretence to a formal Autho∣rity; but hath been indulged also to meer Out-Laws, such as the Montaneers in the Alps, the Assassins of old, the Pickeroons in France, the Banditi in Italy, the Tories in Ireland, and the Mosse-Troopers in the Marches between England and Scotland. Q. Curtius, lib. 7. tels us of twenty thousand such Fellows, that were got into a Body to make Head against Alexander the Great, and it came to a Fight, in which Alexander himself being wounded in the Forlorn, it came to a Parley. Itaque postero die miserunt Legatos ad Regem. Whereupon, the next day they sent Ambassadors to the King, who received them with all Ceremony, and caused them to sit in his presence. This were the more to be admired, but that we find Cesar himself, lib. 3. bell. civ. giving the like honour to those Fugitives, that lurked in the Straits and Passes of the Pyrenaean Mountains, and affirming it lawful. Yet questionless, these instances are not to bee drawn into custom, but may be imitated and approved, only upon the like occasional accidents, and emergents of neces∣sity. How ever, in regard some have openly in Print indeavoured to abridge us in England of our right and interest in this particular, it is requisit we should draw the Lines of Am∣bassy, in its utmost Extent and Latitude, that our Inferences and Inductions may arise the more easie: For, if they who upon the occasion of a National Rupture, can (at the most) lay claim to no more but the name of a Party, have been, and are admitted into a participation of this right by States and Princes: and if so bee, that an irregular number of Out-Laws, and Renegade's, formed into a formidable Body, have been received likewise into the same Priviledge by the great∣est Monarchs, then à minori ad majus, the Argument must needs hold good as to those in England, who are actually,
and justly invested with the Supream Power, and setled in the Noblest form. If scattered Recollections of Fugitives, Male-Contents, and frighted Remnants, have assumed this honour to themselves much more may this Noble Nation of England, who though she grew old, crooked, and defor∣med, under the pressures and oppressions of successive Ty∣rants, yet having shaken them off, baffled them beyond re∣covery, and setled her self in the condition of a Soveraign Free State, seems now to renue her Age again like the Ea∣gle, under the sweet Influences of Liberty. She is now her self, in full possession of her own; therefore let the world know in this case she understands, that Possession is more then eleven points of the Law. For, why was it, that the late King of England (as one observes) having sworn a League with the King of Spain, expresly also as he was King of Portugal, did notwithstanding receive divers Ambassadors from the new King of Portugal, yet was not judged, either in Eng∣land or Spain, to have broken his former Oath and League? Why was it (I say) but only to shew that Contracts and Oaths made betwixt Political persons, are made in a Politi∣cal sense, viz. with a tacit condition of holding their Posses∣sions? These being gon, their Publick Relations and Con∣cernments immediatly expire. How came it to passe that the Spaniard being driven out of the Ʋnited Provinces, and they by him declared Rebels, that yet they assuming to themselves a right of Ambassy, had their Ambassadors so readily recei∣ved by Henry of France, and Elizabeth of England, but that both those Princes well understood the lawfulness of the acti∣on, and that they had Jure Gentium, a right so to send, the Spaniard being dispossessed there? It was the same reason too, that moved the Hollander to entertain Agents and Am∣bassadors from this State; before the death of the Tyrant, for that part which we then possessed; and since his death, for the whole now in possession; in this acknowledging possession a sufficient ground for us to send, as for themselves to receive our Ambassadors. The acknowledgements given us like∣wise by the Ambassadors and Agents of Spain, Portugal, Ve∣nice, Florence, and Genoa, do declare the same.
How then comes it to passe, that the name of a King of Great Britain, hath been so rife among the Provinces, when they know the young Scot, is so farre from having a Foot in the Noblest part of Britain, England, that he is in a manner outed too in Scotland? What face too, (but that a Scot can face any thing) had this Scot, to deny our Em∣bassadours the name of English Embassadours, and dubbe himself with a Title including a Right to England, where, his Master is never like to take the Air again, if (he have his due) unlesse it be upon a Scaffold? But well may hee own the Title, when some of the Dutch have been so for∣ward to give it; yea, and under that name, doe more then give him Audience in their great Assembly. Though they have many Bodies of Supremacy in the Ne∣therlands, yet we can acknowledge but one Supream in Eng∣land, which is the Parliament; who being seated with full Power in the Peoples Right, can admit of no Competitor, nor permit any other Nation to impose one upon them, or dispute their Title; but have reason to expect the same ac∣knowledgements, that ever have been given to all Supream Powers in possession, according to the Custom of Nations; which if any Nation shall deny, or take occasion to prevari∣cate in this point, they may in time understand, that Eng∣land, established in this new Form, stands fully possest, not only by Right of Warre, but also according to the Right of Nature, and the ancient Laws and Customes of the Nation, being eminently adorned with all the Rights and Priviledges of the People; And that she may now have as great abilities as ever, to assert her own Independency upon other Powers, and make her self as considerable, either in enmity, or friend∣ship, as the proudest of her enemies.
CHAP. III. That Contracts and Alliances made betwixt States and Princes, doe not relate singly and personally to themselves; but are made Jure Populi, in the behalf, and for the be∣nefit of the People. VVHere as it hath been alledged by the Resident of the King of Scots, that the ancient and successive Con∣tracts and Friendships betwixt England and the Ʋnited Pro∣vinces, were made between them and the successive Kings of England, and not with England otherwise considered; wher∣by he seems to affirm, that the validity of such Contracts de∣pends upon, and expires with the persons of the Kings of England, or with the Kingly Government, excluding the interest of the People from being Principal in them; ther∣fore it cannot be inexpedient in that point, to manifest the ig∣norance of this Scot, with the absurdity of his Pretence, which so highly reflects upon the Majesty and main Concern∣ments of the People. For, without question, it is to be understood, that as all the acts of Government ought to tend; so Governours them∣selves, (by what names on titles soever they be called) are ere∣cted and intended only for the behalf and benefit of the peo∣ple. Even Kings themselves (notwithstanding all their flou∣rishes) can arrogate nothing to their Persons or Families, se∣parate from the Peoples Interest: For, a King is no more but a Creature of the People, by them created for their good; He is their servant, for which they give him a Sala∣ry, or Revenue, adorning him with splendid Titles of Ma∣jesty, and with all the Immunities, Priviledges, and Prero∣gatives of Government, which are no way inherent in his own Person or Family, but Ornaments bestowed upon him, as the Peoples Livery, in reward of his service.
The truth of this very evidently appears in the Coronation-solemnities of Kings, which all the world over are the same in substance; and here in England the custome was thus. First, the agreement was made between the people and him that was to be entertained as their King: he was made acquainted with the work and service of the Commonwealth, which was to regulate himselfe and his Charge according to such Lawes, (that is, such Rules and Direction) as were or should be ap∣pointed by the people; and for the true performance of this an Oath was given him. Then the peoples consent being asked, and had (which in old time here was wont to be demanded thrice) he was immediatly taken into the service, and his Li∣very given him, viz. The Royall Robes, the Sword, the Ring, the Scepter, and the Crown. This hath been the manner of admission in England, most solemnly performed in receiving all the Kings and Queens from the days of Edward the Con∣fessor, and long before: So that you see the relation wherein a King stands to the Commonwealth, or Kingdom, is the same with that of a Servant to his Master; onely here is the diffe∣rence betwixt Kings and privat Servants, That those pub∣lick honorary Servants having great honour confer'd upon them by the service, are necessitated to maintain a large reti∣nue, and hold many in pension and imployment, for which purpose they are allowed an extraordinary proportion of wages for their pains and expence in the performance of their duty, with a surplusage of Subsidies or Supplies (many times) upon emergent occasions of necessity. This will further appeare if we consider, that Kings hold not the possession of a Kingdom by the same right as privat men doe their patrimonies. But yet it is not meant, as if Kings might not have possessions as other men have; for that is al∣lowable, and hath been known here in England, as may be seen in the time of Henry the fourth, who from the Title of Duke of Lancaster, arriving to that of a King, enjoyed still an inheritance in his own rights, as Duke of Lancaster, distinct from that of the Crown; and fearing the return of Lex talio∣nis upon himself and Family, that as he had dispossessed others of the Kingdom, so his heirs might in time be dispossessed
again, therefore out of a prudent forecast he so ordered the matter, as to keep the Revenues of his Dutchie entire, and setled them in such a way, as might preserve them distinct from those of the Crown, that in case any new Turn should happen, his posterity might (if they lost the Kingship) know where to lay claim unto their ancient Patrimony. So then, we doe not deny but Kings may have possessions of their own, as well as other men, by inheritance or purchase; but those which they hold in the right of the Kingdom, or Kingship are none of their own: The Patrimony of the Publick Exchequer is one thing, that of the Prince another, Henry the fourth held the Dutchy of Lancaster, as he was Henry, but the revenues of the Crown as he was the King, or publick servant of the Kingdom, not out of any peculiar propriety that he had in them. Nor can it in reason be imagined, that Kings should have any thing of Proprity in what concerns the Kingdom, seeing in the first place the Regall dignity is no more but a Function, or Office, and he himself is but supremus officiarius, the highest Officer of the Kingdom, and you known, an Officer hath no right to what he is intrusted with for the benefit of another. Besides, we know, that if any man be invested with a Propriety, he hath a power to alienate or sel away his right; but Kings have no such power as to alienate any part of the publick Revenue. Kings that have endevoured it in England, have been restrained; and not onely in that, but even in their immoderate expences, by Parliament. Nor is it so onely in England, but many laws have been made and renewed against it in Poland, Hungary, Scotland, France, Spain, and the Em∣pire; for we read what Wenceslaus the Emperour, Malcolm of scotland, and Henry the sixth of France, suffered by at∣tempting it, and what miseries they brought thereby upon themselves and the people. Innumerable testimonies might be produced against this power of Alienation in Kings, but that of Grotius, lib. 2. de Jur. bel. c. 6. may the better pass instead of all the rest, in regard he is in most other particulars a little too rank of the Royalist. Patrimonium populi, cujus fructus desti∣nati sunt, ad sustentanda reipub. aut regia dignitatis onera, à regibus alienari, nec in totum, nec in partem potest. The patri∣mony
of the people (saith he) whose revenues are appointed to ease the burthens of the Commonwealth, and support the Recall dignity, cannot be alienated by Kings, either whole, or in part. Num & in hoc jus majus fructuario non habent. For in this, (viz. the peoples publick Patrimony) they have no more then the right of an Ʋsu-fructuary, who indeed receives the rents and profits, but hath no propriety in the lands. Seeing now it appears that a King is no more but , the Ordinance of man, (a creature of mans making, as is to be inferred from the words of St. Peter;) seeing he is but a servant to the people, bargains with them to doe their work according to Laws (or Directions) & to that end wears their Livery, and receives wages from them; seeing also that the right and propriety of the Kingdom remains in the people, not in him; and that the most which can be made of him, is but an Officer, or an Ʋsu-fructuary, one that hath no right in what he possesseth, save onely to receive the Profis, or Reve∣nues, in lieu of service to be done for some other, viz. the Community; then it may plainly be inferred, that the ends of Kingly Government, and consequently all the acts of it, doe in no wise relate to the Person, Kingship, or Family of any King, but are terminated jure populi, in the right or behalf, and for the benefit of the people. Thus far our Assertion stands undeniable; and therfore for application of it to the present matter in question between us the Scottish Resident, let us consider, that if Kings are not for themselves, but for the people, if they be Kings publico ju∣re, in the peoples right, not in any particular personall qualifi∣cation of their own, then it merrily follows, That as the Of∣fice, so all the Acts of Government, and consequently the making Peace or Warre, the allaying of enmities, the making Contracts and Alliances with forein States and Princes, are founded and concluded in the right of the people. It is they which treat, contract, & confederate, only they agree that he shal transact and sign it: The power is originally, really, and fundamentally in themselves; it is but Ministerially in the King, as a Publick servant; it is for the publick benefit, not his own privat, that he is intrusted to make a Contract; so that
whether you consider the publick relation he stands in, with∣out which he can be no king, nor contract, nor do any other act of Government. Or whether you consider the publick end and scope of the Contract, it must needs follow, that his own particular, or the interest of his Family, cannot be separatly or singly concerned in the business, though it run in his name, seeing all is done by the right, and for the good of the Com∣munity. But our Scotch Resident alledges out of Grotius, l, 2. c. 16. That a league made with a King holds firm to him, though he be driven by his subjects out of the Kingdom: For the right of the Kingdom remains with him, though he have lost the pos∣session, according to that of Lucan — Non unquam perdidit ordo Mutato sua jura loco.— To this I answer in the first place; that if you consider what is said before, it must be granted that the right and propriety of a Kingdom remains in the people alwayes, be the King in or out of possession. Secondly, it is much to be wondred that Grotius should so farre forget himselfe, as in this place to set down a position quite contrary to what he affirms in another, viz. c. 18. in that instance before cited, where he saith, That Kings, who submit their fortunes to the tryall of a set-warre, and then are driven out by force of Arms, doe not onely lose the right of Ambassy, but all other rights of Soveraignty. And if so, then without question also a King loseth all claim or pre∣tence to any Forein Contracts or Alliances made with him, in the behalf of the Kingdom while he stood possessed: For by the same reason that he loseth or forfeits one right, he lo∣seth all. Besides, in another place (viz lib. 1. cap. 18.) he enume∣rates no lesse then seven or eight casts, wherein a King may forfeit, and be justly driven out of his Kingly interest and Kingdom; As in case a King assume more to himselfe then of right belongs to him: Or in case he infringe those lawes that he was sworn to: Or incroach upon the Senaticall part and right of the people: Or if he relinquish the Helm of go∣vernment: Or give over the protection of the people: Or
make warre against them: Or behave himselfe as a Tyrant or publick enemy of the Nation. In all these Cases, Grotius grants, that a King may justly be deprived; and not any of these, but might be verified upon the late King of England, and his Son the Young Pretender; who not onely lost all Right, as being the Son of such a Father; but by tracing him actually in the same steps of enmity, hath made the for∣feiture compleat, both for himself and the whole family: whereby, as he loses all other interests, so without question, his interest in all those forein leagues and contracts, that were made with his Father while he was in possession. But to return where we left; the rights and acts of Go∣vernment (as we have proved) being properly the interest and acts of the Community or People, and relate no farther to the King, than as a delegated Person, a Deputy or Trustee, to treat and transact in their behalf; then, without question, when this Officer the King, shall either for male-administra∣tion, or treachery in his trust, be put to death, or banished, with his whole family, the Treaties, Contracts, and Alliances, made in his name with any Forain State, must needs continue in full force and power, to all intents and purposes, as long as the People and Community are in being, whose Contracts they are. To this accords that of Grotius likewise, l. 2. c. 15. Si cum Rege contractum sit, non statim personale erit censen∣dum foedus, i.e. If a League be made with a King, it must not be presently looked upon as a personal League. For, as he saith in the same place, after Pedius and Ʋlpian, plerumque persona pacto inseritur, non ut personable pactum fiat, sedut de∣monstretur cum quo pactum est. The person of the Prince is usually mentioned in the League, not that the League should become personal, but only to shew with whom it was made. But it may be objected, that the League with Holland, ex∣tends not only to the King, but to his Successors also. 'Tis true, it doth hold, as to the succession; that is, as long as the succession holds; for, Leagues must hold to the persons of Princes and their successors, as all other Political Compacts between them do, viz. with a tacit condition of holding their possessions. If the King of Scots can with the peoples con∣sent, make good his succession in England, then he may lay
claim to the Treaties made betwixt England and Holland; but in the mean time, Hee and his Family being driven out for their Tyranny, all the Right to those Contracts is to be ex∣ercised by another Succession and Form of Government, that is established in the Right, and by Authority of the people. Nor can this Alteration of Government any whit alter the Case, it being a right naturally inherent in all Nations, to alter their respective Governments (upon occasion) into what form they please. As long as the people remain the same specifical (I do not mean the same individual) people of England, that they were when the right of Treaty was used, and the Treaty with Holland made and ratified by the King in their behalf, so long the effects of the Treaty or Trea∣ties are in force, to the same ends and purposes that they were at first intended: Seneca saith, by way of comparison, Manet idem flumen, aqua transmissa est, the River remains the same, though the water pass away; and Aristotle 3. lib. Pol c. 2. traceth him in the same quaint way of allusion, like∣ning the People to a River which retains its old name, and is said to be the same that it was long since, though a continued succession of new waters doe flow in the Channel; so the People that is now, is the same in specie, that it was an hun∣dred or perhaps a thousand years since, and is so called and reputed; except it lose the name and estimate of a Nation, by being captivated and caried away from their Countrey, as the Jews were all in time from Jerusalem, and the Holy Land; or inslaved in their own Countrey by some Forain Power, that holds them in Vassalage, as the Olynthians were under Philip, the Thebans under his son Alexander, the Ca∣puans under the Romans; or as the old Britains were un∣der the Saxons, the Saxons under the Danes, and afterwards under the Tyranny of the Norman Conquerour: When their National Power and Authority is once extinct, they no longer retain their former interest, priviledge, or dignity. But none of these exceptions (blessed be God) can be verifi∣ed upon the people of England, who are seated pleno Jure, in their own fortunate Island, and established now in a grea∣ter measure of Honour, Power, and Freedom, then ever we
enjoyed for many hundred years before; Foelices nimiùm, bone si sua nôrint. And therefore, of necessity, they must be accounted specifi∣cally the same Nation or people, that they were, when the Treaties were made and concluded betwixt England and the Netherlands, though they be not the very same Individuall People and Government. No matter (saith Grotius, l. 2. c. 9.) how the Nation be governed, whether by a King, or by ma∣ny, or by the multitude: For, the people of Rome remained the same still, in the various changes of Government, under Kings, Consuls, and Emperours. When the former is ex∣tinct, a new form ever succeeds, with power to govern, act, and transact, in and for the behalfe of the people; who being still the same, not tied to Forms, nor altered by Time, over-look all Circumstances, and lay hold upon the Substan∣tials of their Interest and Government, as they stand qua∣lified, and related, both at home and abroad. And truly, it is very pleasant to observe in this particular, how even Prin∣ces themselves acknowledge as much in their Practises to∣wards each other in the changes of Government: For, the Duke of Burgoin having concluded amity with England in the person of Henry the 6. no sooner was Henry disposses∣sed, and Edward the 4. invested, but he immediatly renues the same League with England in the person of Edward: Afterwards, Edward hapning to be driven out, it was so brought about by Burgoin, that the Truce formerly conclu∣ded betwixt him and King Edward, should in all things bee ratified and confirmed, the King's name onely changed to Henry. At length, Edward made shift to recover all again, and then Henry was once more dethroned; which was no sooner done, but Burgoin sent again a solemn Embassage, to renue the Treaty, and establish a firm League with England in the person of Edward? It is to be observed likewise that during all these Changes, Ambassadors went to and fro, and all Forain Contracts and Alliances were kept entire, without the least question, on either side; which may serve to inform us of these two particulars; That in National quarrels about Title to Government, Princes use not to dispute who is in
the right, or wrong, but apply themselves (without farther scruple) to the parties in possession. And secondly, that however the Governours of a Countrey may be changed, yet all the points of Alliance and Contract, being centred in the right and benefit of the people, continue unchangeable and entire under every alteration. It were endless to reckon up all the examples that might be derived from the practises of States and Princes to confirm this particular; we might shew you how the matter of Government being in dispute betwixt Queen Mary and her son James, (or rather his Guardians) though Mary were dethroned, and her Sons Guardians got the better, yet the amity betwixt us and Scotland continued firm, notwithstanding the deposition of the person of Ma∣ry: But because the Scottish Resident seems to grant that Leagues may hold entire in State-Ruptures, though a parti∣cular Prince be laid aside, but not so, if the frame of Go∣vernment be altered; therefore he may be pleased to con∣sider, that in the various revolutions of the Florentin Go∣vernment, when the whole frame was changed, yet most of their old Alliances and Contracts were renued still, and re∣tained in full force and vigour, as well with the States and Princes of Italy, as those of other Nations. And as for the Hollanders, though of late they boggled with us in the main, yet they would gladly have renued so much of the old Trea∣ties with the people of England, as might have served their own turns, & not have ingaged them too far; the reason why they kept off, seems not to have been from any strength of Argument used by this Statizing Pretender; but they had a stronger Argument of their own, whose Premises and Con∣clusion lay a long time in Scotland, from whence every Post they expected a resolution. I shall close all with the testimony of that Learned Spanish Doctor Don Augustin de Hierro, Atturney General of the Councel Royal in Spain, &c. produced by him in his late Charge against the Murtherers of Master Ashcam; where insisting upon the point of Friendship betwixt England and Spain, he proceeds thus: That England (saith he) should be our Friend in statu quo nunc, and that Peace should bee
continued with her, proceeds from right; For, Peace is not only made with the King, but with the Kingdom also, and though the first expires, the last remains. For, put case, that Peace be concluded with a Country, without including the King, either b carelesness, or some other accident, yet the Peace stands good; For, so the Polish Ma∣gistrates answered the Emperour Ferdinand the second. Faltando el Ray, se conservan con el Reyno, i. e. the King failing, yet Peace is to be conserved with the kingdom. So Bodin holds, and urgeth a pregnant example to this pur∣pose, lib. de repub. cap. 4. fol. 63. where he alledgeth the Answer which the Ambassadors of France, made to Edw. the 4. King of England, desiring aid from France against some rising subjects of his, that had driven him out of pos∣session, and this desire he pressed by vertue of the League between them; Which Answer was, that the King of France could not help him, in regard the confederations be∣twixt France and England, were made betwixt the Kings and Kingdoms, so that though King Edward was dispossessed therof, yet the league & amity remained stil with the kingd. & with the King Regnant. Just so, the Peace 'twixt the Kings and Kingdoms of Spain and England, though Charles Stuart the King be wanting, yet it may be kept intire with the Kingdom: And his Majesty himself insinuates so much unto us, continuing still his Ambassador in England; For, when a Peace is established 'twixt Kings and Kingdomes, People, Persons and Vassals, though the King fail, and the Kingdom receive a differing Form of Government, yet the Peace holds good still, because it aimed principally at the people and persons of both Nations; and upon these terms the Peace was renued 'twixt Spain and England, in the year 1630. as the French Mercury relates it. The Result of all then, out of the foregoing reasons, te∣stimonies, and examples, will be undeniably this; that Con∣tracts made betwixt States and Princes, doe not relate sing∣ly and personally to themselves, but are made Jure Populi, in the behalf, and for the good of the Community. Though Governors and their Families may fail, yet their Treaties are
as eternal, as the peoples interest, which is their moving cause, and their ultimate end. And therefore, as to our particular, it must undeniably follow, that those former Treaties made betwixt our Kings and the Ʋnited Provinces, belong to us now of right, if we please to claim, or renue them, having been ratified at first, in respect only to the people of England. No King can lay any claim of this nature, but as he is an Officer of the people; For, that relation being once extinct, there remains no Foundation for any future pretences. CHAP. IV. THE two former Chapters, being as the two Hinges, whereupon hangs the main of the Controversie; and having therein vindicated the principal points of the peo∣ples interest in England, our design in the next place is, briefly to refute all the petty falshoods and insinuations, which lie scattered here and there, in the pretended Answer of our Scottish Pretender. That which occurs in the first place, is this; where hee tells the States of the Ʋnited Provinces, that the Predeces∣sors of the present Governours in England, were very in∣considerable in those days when the Treaties were made; and that they had neither part nor participation, in any of the favours and friendship afforded to the Netherlands: This he saith, by all circumstances may strongly be presumed. A very strong presumption indeed, it must needs be, till he can name those Circumstances. The Parliaments of Eng∣land, which were the Predecessours of our present Gover∣nours, were not so considerable indeed, as now they are, and will be, we shall easily grant; because their glory and freedom was eclypsed by those unbounded Prerogatives, which Kings and their House of Peers, did usurp unto themselves, over the Commons, who naturally, really, and
properly, were to be esteemed the Parliament; because they only sate, and represented the people in their rights; whereas the Lords sate only in their own rights, or rather by vertue of that pretended right, which Kings (forget∣ting whose servants they are, and for what end they were made) had arrogated unto themselves, in and over the peo∣ple: This was the reason, why the Commons of England became more inconsiderable then by right they ought to have been. Yet take them in their most inconsiderable state, or in the lowest ebb of their Fortunes, and we never see them so low, but we find them admitted as partners in enacting of Laws, and reputed as principal in granting Sub∣sidies, and other Supplies, for the necessities and support of the Crown, insomuch that no Aid-monies could be required of the people, but by the Commons consent. In Queen Elizabeth's time, they were brought low enough, as ap∣pears by her strange proceeding against Wentworth, that was one of their Members; which (perhaps) had not been so tamely taken from a Prince, that had less influence up∣on their affections: yet, as low as they were, the ancient Treaties betwixt Elizabeth and those Provinces, were not made and renued; nor were the favours and supplies, both of men and money, afforded unto that State, but in the behalf of the Community, out of the Purses of the Com∣mons, in whose name and right they were granted: so that we leave the world to judge, how nearly those Trea∣ties did concern the the Commons; and whether they be∣ing the undeniable Predecessors of the present Governours in England, did not both partake, and participate, yea, and were the Principall Party concerned in those tokens of fa∣vour and friendship, which were then sont unto the Low-Country Provinces? But to fright them from our friendship, he tells them a strange Tale, How big we are grown with monstrous mysteries of enlarging our Trade and Power. 'Tis more then probable, that England, in this new form, will improve its self fat be∣yond its wonted wealth and interest; forasmuch as for these many hundred years, it hath continued labouring and strug∣ling
under the yoak of a Tyrant, so that it could not possibly arive to such a height and measure of happinesse, as it may now attain in a condition of Liberty. But why should Eng∣lands happinesse be counted an eye-fore to the Netherlands, as our Scot would have it? Surely the world is wide enough for them both; and questionlesse, if England shall thrive (as the enemies of it feare) in this new form the Dutch will then see it much more concerned them (both in honor and inte∣rest) to have settled with us in the relation of a friend, then remain in a state of neutrality. 'Tis but a crude supposition, that they shall lose any thing by our Amity; but very proba∣ble they may lose much without it. Yet in another place he alledges to the States, that their Lordships having no enemy at present, will by uniting with us, involve themselves in a laby∣rinth. But their Lordships may be pleased rather to consi∣der, it were a strange Wild-goose-chace, to be led about by the way of Scotland, to settle an interest for themselves in Eng∣land, upon the uncertain favour of a subtile Tyrant and his followers, who in times past at Court here were wont to dart the name of Rebell as freely at them, as they doe now against us; being men of opposite principles to Freedom, such as ha∣ted the very name of the Ʋnited Provinces; And if the States please to remember the carriage of King James, they will find that he himself was of the same humor and opinion, and the first that set an edge upon the tongues of the Courti∣ers. In vain therefore doth this Resident tell them, that their Lordships have no Enemy at present: For, however, our Eng∣lish Fugitives and Desperado's (for present ends) may seem to court them; yet if they had a while since regained posses∣sion in England, and should the young Prince of Orange have lived to see it, it would have appeared to purpose, that they are the very worst of all their enemies. How much more se∣cure then had it been for their Lordships to have embraced the late offer of England in its present establishment, as a sure friend, then to depend upon the good will of a deceitful Ene∣my. And whereas it is insinuated, that a League with us would draw enmities upon them elswhere, they having no ene∣my at present; it will concern them to remember, what a
friend they have of the French, who onely gives faire words, but hates them mortally in heart, as appeares by the continu∣all depredations made upon them at Sea, by those of the French Nation. Also, it were worthy consideration, upon what ticklish termes they stand with Denmark and Sweden; and in manifest discontent (especially) with Portugall. Not a∣ny of these will, or can, be more a friend or enemy, for the sake of the King of Scotland: they are all swayed by their own interest, and accordingly measure both their love and hate, not out of respect to any single Person or Family: Therefore it wil concern the States more rationally to weigh what advantages they might have reap't by an union with England; which had it been concluded upon such terms as were offered, would have rendred them so considerable in the eyes of the world, that not any of all the Friendly Preten∣ders round about, but would have been the more inclined to continue their Pretences, and the lesse apt to break them. Most absurd therefore is that affirmation of the Scotish Re∣sident, in saying, The States may promise themselves more pro∣fit, repute, and security in Commerce, England abiding a Kingdom, then being transform'd into a Republick: For, as a Kingdom, the actions both of James and Charls will tell them, Kings were no cordiall friends, nor indeed can they be; whereas being in the form of a Republick the Provinces (had they embraced our offers) might have been admitted into a neerer union and complication of interests, then ever they can hope for from a Monarchy. He tells us farther, there is a wide difference betwixt the Hollanders and us, in the manner of acquiring our Freedom, The Hollanders (saith he) were a free people time out of mind but we in England have been under Soveraign Kings for a thousand years, and were bound to them by oaths. Besides, he saith, the K. of Spain after a tedious warre of 80. years, hath declared the Provinces free, &c. But the case is otherwise with us in England. To this we say, If the Hollanders have of old been a free people, so have we been in England, and both they and we in the same manner. They were of old un∣der Earls or Princes, but such as were limited by the laws. Auctoritas Principum er at plurimis pro libertate legibus re∣petitis
definita, saith the Author de Statu Belgii 1650. So were we in England under Princes called Kings, but such on∣ly as were limited by lawes. It was a Politicall Kingship, not Despotick or Tyrannick, as may be seen in all our Law∣books. Let one or two old instances serve for all. Bracton l. 2. c. 16. Fletal. 1 c. 17. say, that the King of England hath the Law and the Parliament for his superiors; and therfore if the King have the reins loose, and be without a Bridle, they ought to bridle him: For (as Bracton saith again, l. 3. c. 9.) The King can do nothing but what the Law permits him. Thus only, and with this limitation implied, wee we sworn to our Kings, as the Hollanders were first to their Earls, and after∣wards to the King of Spain; but finding the Spaniard to op∣presse them contrary to Law and Liberty, therefore they con∣ceived themselves acquitted of their former Oaths. Et Philip∣pi, simul & omnium Principum Imperium ejuravere, and (as our former Author saith) bound themselves by a new Oath to abjure the Government not onely of Philip, but of all Princes for ever; which cours exactly parallels our case here in England: all the difference now then, is onely in a circum∣stance of Time; We have not had 80 years Warre to make good our Freedom; but (alas) this alters not the verity of the thing: For, as the Freedom of the provinces (being real∣ly free from the very first moment wherein they drave out Philip) did not depend upon the Spaniards acknowledge∣ment; so neither doth ours upon the acknowledge∣ment and declaration of Charls, or any future Preten∣der of the Family. Yet notwithstanding this, the Resident saith, our case, in reference to the recovery of our Freedom, is no more like to the Hollanders, then Milk is like Ink. But for illustration, take this farther; were they oppressed in matter of Religion? So were we; tied up to strange forms and inno∣vations. Were they crucified with an Inquisition? So were we with a High Commission. Were they squeezed with Im∣positions? So were we; such as Ship-money, Privy-seals, Coat and Conduct, Monopolies, and a thousand other devices. Besides, the Priests proclaimed at Court in their Sermons, that All was the Kings, no man had any propriety in what he possessed: so that the lesse credit is to be given to the Declara∣tion
of those pious Ministers (as they are called) against the Parliament, whose partiall testimony is so much applauded by the Resident of Scotland. Did Philip of Spain endeavour (through his Agent D'Alva) to settle his Tyrannies over the Provinces by force of Arms? so did the late Tyrant Charls in England, first plot a war, and then set up his Standard, and put the Parliament upon the Defensive, as appears by the whole Series of his Councels and Actions; whereto more credit is to be given, than to his Posthume Book of Meditations, which the Resident hath quoted with more af∣fection than discretion. Lastly, are our Proceedings in England distasted by some of our neighbours, through the malice and mis-representa∣tion of our English Fugitives? So were those of the Hol∣landers, through the malicious subtilty of the Spanish A∣gents and Ministers, who laboured to incense all Christendom and draw the world about their ears, till Forain Princes came to have a right understanding of the business: So that you see Master Resident might have spared his Milk and Ink too; for, nec Ovum ovo similius; one Egge cannot more exactly resemble another, than the case of England, in all particulars, doth that of Holland, in the manner of acquiring our Liberties and Freedoms. Now he rails at our judging and beheading the late King, and banishing his Family, calling it abominable violence, and such as the like was never heard of since the beginning of the world. Therfore, to rectifie the ignorance and malice of him∣self, and his deluded party in this particular, some few In∣stances and Examples shall be here inserted, to shew, it is no new thing, that Kings have been, and may be deprived or punished with death, for their crimes in Government. We read of Amon King of Judah, that was slain by a part of the people, because he walked not in the way of the Lord; and though another part of the people were angry at it, and avenged his death upon those that did it; yet without questi∣on, the execution was just, according to the Law of God, which was (without respect of persons) that the Idolater should die the death; and no doubt, the punishment had been inflicted by a Judicial Process, had not so great a party
of the people been addicted to his ways, & opposed it: which opposition of their, is usually the cause, in all cases of this nature, why Kings are not to be attached, as well as other Mefactors, by an ordinary course of Justice. Consider Ahab likewise, who though he were taken off himself by divine Justice in the battel at Ramoth-Gilead, and so escaped punishment by man for his idolatry and cruelty; yet it was executed afterward to the full by John, upon his Queen and the whole Family, who were utterly rooted out, and a blessing annexed to him and his heirs that performed the execution. But some may say, this fact was extraordi∣nary, being done by immediate command from God, and so not fit for ordinary imitation. Yet, for Answer, it is suffici∣ent, I say, that it had a Legal ground, viz. the ground of Gods ordinary judgement, which commanded, that all offen∣dors of the same nature, should die the death. Gods extra∣ordinary command, being superadded to his ordinary Law, doth (as to us) rather confirm then weaken the equity and justice of such a proceeding. In like manner we read, that the whole people took Amaziah King of Judah, and slew him for his idolatry: whether they did it by a way of Judi∣cial process, or not, is not material, but done it was: and if it were done without process, then much more are they to he justified, that have the courage to imitate such noble acts of Justice, by a solemn and serious proceeding. The like had been executed upon Joas, the father of Amaziah, by a part of the people, for his Murther and Apostacy. Profane stories, both ancient and modern, are full likewise to the pur∣pose. Romultes, the first King of Rome, was for his tyranny cut in pieces by the Senate; and Tarquin (their last King) was with his whole family, cashiered, the form of Govern∣ment changed, by the same power, and upon the same oc∣casion. Many years after, Nero the Roman Emperour, was sentenced to death by the Senate; which was not primum damnati Principis exemplum, as the Resident alledges out of Suetonius. The Senate being afterward in time cowed down by Heliogabalus their Emperour, so that they could not take the ordinary course with him, used means by corrupting the soldiery, (upon whose strength he depended) to put him to death.
The two famous changes made in the Royal line of France, depend upon two such noble pieces of Justice; executed upon their Kings; the first upon Childerick, the third King of France, who being judicially deposed by the Nobility and Clergy in Parliament, the succession was then cut off from the family of Pharamond, and confirmed to the race of Pe∣pin, till Charls of Lorrain, the last of Pepin's race, was in the like manner chastised by Parliament, and the Crown tran∣slated to the successors of Hugh Capet, who hold the same to this day; though two of them likewise, viz. Lewis the third, and Charles le Gross, have been judicially proceeded against in Parliament. And though the people were so tender to∣wards them, as not to put them to death; yet they were bu∣ried alive, being mued up within the melancholy walls of some Monastery, or else closely confined within the Ca∣stle of Orleans. In Spain too we read of Suintila, Don Alonson, the ele∣venth, and Don Pedro, judicially proceeded against; the first by the fourth National Councel of Toleao; the second by publick Act of the Estates of the Realm in the Town of Validolid; the third, by the Estates of Castile, all for their Tyrannical Government. The like proceeding also was had against Don Sancho the second of Portugal: also against Henry of Poland, that was King of France: Henry of Swethland: Christiern of Denmark, and Wenceslaus of Bohemia: as also Edward the second, and Richard the second of England. These last are mentioned by the Resident himself; but that which he mainly insists upon, is, that neither Christiern, Wenceslaus, Edward, nor Richard, were beheaded upon a Scaffold, as was the late Tyrant Charls. However, it is sufficient they were judged more worthy of a Scaffold, than the Throne: and therefore it must needs be more honourable (after the late Heroick Example of England) that the Judgements of God should be execu∣ted in publick before all the world, than that they should be stiffled in a Dungeon, or the Majesty of them be less'ned by paltry private Assassinations, or poisonings, acted upon Royall Tyrants and Offenders.
Even the practise of Scotland it self, will furnish us with Examples enough of this nature; where no less than fif∣ty of their Kings have been punished with death; and the greatest part of them by a solemn Iudiciall Proceeding: as it is set forth by Buchanan, their own Historian, who af∣firms it to be, More Majorum, according to the custome of their Ancestors: So that of all other men in the world, this Scot Resident, hath the least reason to wonder at our Ca∣pital Proceeding against a Tyrant, as a thing never heard of before in the world, since it hath been (from all Antiquity) the common practice of his own Country. Whereas, he farther alledgeth, the Parliment's mani∣fold reiterated Oaths, and their Covenants, with above an hundred Parlimentary Declarations and Protestations, to protect the King's Person and Posterity, &c. This must be understood, with that tacit Supposition, which is naturally included in all those Oaths and Protestations, viz. That he do not by any enormous crimes and continued Acts of Ty∣ranny, devest himself of his Kingly capacity. And in the Covenant it self, as much as this comes to is implied by un∣deniable consequence, the whole scope of it being qualified with this special clause [In the preservation of Religion and Liberty] to shew, that if the King should proceed so far, as to render himself an irreconcileable enemy to both, the Covenant did no longer oblige the Covenanters, in any relation to him; or his Posterity. But he saith, The Laws of England favour Kings above the Laws of all other Nations; and for this he alledges the pa∣rasiticall maxims used by Courtiers, Rex non moritur, Rex nulli facit injuriam: Whereto let us oppose others out of our old Laws more rationall and sound; Non debet esse re∣ge major quisquam in exhibitione Juris; minimus autem esse debet in judicio suscipiendo, si peccat. Rex habet superiores, Legem; per quam factus est Rex, & Curiam suam, &c. Nihil aliud potest Rex, nisi id solum quod de Jure potest, say Bracton and Fleta. and whereas he is up again with his pious Di∣vines in and about London, whose Declaration he much boasts of in the behalf of the late Tyrant and his Cause; In Answer to this, he must give us leave to reply in such a sence
as out own experiences have taught us; that those whom he calls Divines, were the greatest Carnalists, Formalists, and Fanaticks, that ever appeared in any Nation; Court para∣sites, Trumpets of Tyranny; the onely Patrons and Promo∣ters of Slavery, both Spirituall and Tempporall. They were such (as most of the same Tribe ever have been and are) men ignorant in the more necessary and solid parts of Learning (both Sacred and Civill) who make a Trade and Traffique of certain Set-forms, and maxims of Divinity; wherein be∣ing Travell'd, as in a Road, they cannot out of their old way, but immediately they lose themselves and their sences. If a Truth (though never so bright and glorious) come to clash with any of those trading notions which they call Orthodox, then immediately like the men of Ephesus, they grow stark mad, and can sing no other Tune to all the world, but Great is their Diana. Therefore, In those high and weighty Controversies which arise concerning the Rights and Con∣cernments of Commonweals and Kingdoms (where their motions are eccentricall) little regard is to be had to their fri∣gid Conceptions, where in they are wont, even in Luce meri∣dianâ, toto coelo err are; and in this particular it might be made good (contrary to their Affirmations and Invectives) even as clear as the Sun, According to the holy word of God; the Instinct of Nature; Right Reason; The Laws of all Nations, and par∣ticularly of England; That Parliaments, or other Supream Assemblies, have a Power of Jurisdiction (both coercive and punitive) over their Kings, and of altering Forms of Go∣vernment, according to the Publique exigents and Conveni∣ences of their respective Nations, In the meantime this Scot may do well, since he often quotes William Prynn, to consult that great Scotiser; in his Book entitled, The Soveraign power of Parliaments; as also his own Countriman Rutherford in his Lex, Rex: who will give him another Account, than the raw Pulpiteers of London. Next, he affirms, that the saying of our Saviour which commands the paying of Tribute to Caesar, confirmeth and establisheth Lawfull Power. Herein we agree with him; For, though the means whereby that Power of the Caesars was gained were unlawfull, and the manner of its Acquisition unjust; yet it being once established beyond the
controll of any Publique Power, and having all Authority seated within it self, it immediately became lawfull by way of dispensation, having a right to the dispensing of Justice, and to the exercise of all Acts of Jurisdiction concerning privat and particular Persons. But then (saith he) should Da∣vid have acquiessed in the usurped power of Absolom, and Solomon in the power of Adonijah; Jehoiada in Athalia's, and the Machabees in the power of Antiochus Epiphanes. Alas, the case of these is far different; for neither Absolom, nor Adonijah, were ever seated in a plenary possession, nor had they been acknowledged Supream, as were the Caesars; nor had the Jews made any recognition of Antiochus his Autho∣rity, nor did he ever bring them under a totall Subjugation, as afterwards did the Roman power, to whom they then paid a finall submission, though they refused it before to An∣tiochus: As for that of Athaliah, we finde she had a sub∣mission paid for no less than 6 years, though her power were usurped; and one main reason why the people denied it af∣terward was, becaus she had agrieved the whole Nation with her practises of Idolatry and Tyranny: for which cause, she was lawfully deposed and put to death in a full Assembly of the Princes and People. 2. Kings 11. after which, they redu∣ced the Government into its former course of succession. Thus much we thought fit to answer, as to this particular: But what hath this Scottish Resident to do to introduce these In∣stances of Absolom, Adonijah, and Athaliah, as Arguments against us in England? They touch not the matter at all, there being as vast a disproportion betwixt them and us, as betwixt light and darkness; for they were single Usurpers over the People; but here in England the People have recovered their own Rights, by ridding away an old Tyrannical Usurpation. He compares also the Religion that was under Kings in Eng∣land, with the present, and saith that in the Kings time it shone as a Lamp, more clear then in any other Nation: But that now it is nothing like the religion professed in Holland, nor indeed Religion it self. What the state or religion was in the Kings time, I suppose we need not now dispute, it having been long since condemned, not only by our Presbyterians themselves, but in the Iudgement also of Forain reformed Churches, as a
profane medley of superstitious Innovations. And as to the present, though we glory not in an external pretended Natio∣nal Ʋniformity (the great Diana of the Clergy, and wherein they place all religion, because it makes for their profit) yet it bears a proportionable conformity to the mind of Christ, and the tenor fo his Gospel, which teacheth us to gather Believers into Congregations by the power of the Word, and not force men promiscuously into a pretended Church-relation by the power of the sword, or commands and constitutions of any worldly Power. This, together with a prudent Toleration of different opinions, is the present state of Religion in Eng∣land; so that whosoever takes a view of the practises of both Nations, will easily grant a conformity of profession betwixt us, and our neighbours of the Ʋnited Provinces. He alledges farther, It would be more safe and profitable for the States, that England should continue a Monarchy, than become a Republick, for that the increase of England in a free State would be the decrease of the other. See here, O ye peo∣ple of England, what a Confession here is out of the mouth of the Common Enemy, of the possibility of that increase, both in wealth and honour, which our Nation may expect in the settled Form of a Free State, or Commonwealth. And if so, then by consequence it follows, that all this stir for a Royal Family, and Monarchy, is not out of any respect to the increase of the publick weal, but only to satisfie the ambition of a single Tyrant and his Followers. And rather than not be so satisfied, he here (by the mouth of his Orator, Mac-Don∣nel) offers up the future interest and glory of England, as a prey unto the Dutch, in hope to allure them unto his party, for the restoring of him into a Tyranny: so that you see clear∣ly, it is a thirst of Dominion and Revenge, not the people's benefit, that transports him in all his undertakings. It is here acknowledged by himself, that his own restitution will be a means to keep England from growing richer and greater; the fear whereof, he useth as an argument to provoke the jea∣lousie and emulation of Holland. The inference therefore is natural and easie, out of his own mouth; that the interest of himself, and family, is inconsistent with the increase, and in∣terest of the English Nation:
In the next place, he indeavors to darken the glory of God in our many wondrous successes; saying, they are no good ar∣gument to justifie a cause, because the Turk hath had as great successes as any. But what ever this Babler saith, we cannot be so ignorant of the good hand of God upon us, as to let those glorious works of Providence, whereby he hath pleaded the Cause of this Parliament and Commonwealth, pass under the common title of Fortune de la guerre; The Lord having cari∣ed on this marvellous work for time and place, with a concur∣rence of such remarkable circumstances, that the very enemies have at length acknowledged it to be digitus Dei, as did D. Hamilton (before his death) and others, who saw the stretch∣ed out arm of God in the late defeat at Worcester. We justi∣fie not our cause by successes; but only behold them as the ef∣fects of Gods mercy and goodness, owning us in a just ingage∣ment, against the enemies of himself and people. The Turks design was to propagate Tyranny in Christendom; ours to pul it down. His, only to increase his own Dominion; ours, to ex∣alt the Dominion of Jesus Christ. What he did, was by main strength, multitudes, and help of human policy. What we have done, hath been by a despised remnant, inconsiderable, both for knowledg & number, against all the wise and mighty men of this generation, who to their power & wisdom, have had so many great advantages from time to time, that the decision of every success, in our behalf, hath been so manifestly written with the finger of God, that all must confess, it could be no o∣ther hand but his that did it: witness the great advantage the Enemy had of us at Naisby; the miraculous sally at Dub∣lin, with the many glorious defeats that followed in Ireland; the great deliverances wrought in 1648, when by a small army divided into two handfuls, we with one part quieted South-Wales, and vanquisht Hamiltons galiant army; and with the other part, suppressed the many numerous Insurrections in Kent, Essex, &c. Witness also that glorious deliverance (be∣yond all reason) given last year at Dunbar, when by a poor handful of sick men, wearied out with watchings, hunger, and incessant marches in tedious weather, & at length impounded within a narrow neck of Land, surrounded by the sea, they did notwithstanding (in the strength of God) defeat the nu∣merous
Scottish Army, it being accommodated with all neces∣saries and advantages, and one of the best accomplisht armies, that ever appeared in Scotland. Add to-these (omitting many other) the late memorable defeat at Worcester, attended with a series of many other wondrous successes: and it is so much the more observable, in regard of that miraculous power of God upon the heasts of the people, fastning them to the Go∣vernment, in a most notable time of trial, to the shameful con∣futation of this shameless Resident, who had the impudence to affirm, that not the hundreth part, or (as he saith a little af∣ter) not the thousandth part of the people, but do cordially ad∣here to the Royal Interest, and passionatly groan to be delivered from the prevailing party in England, as he is pleased to call the Parliament: whereas, all the time of the Scot's King be∣ing among us (which was about 28 days) courting and wood∣ing the people with all manner of insinuations, intreaties, and pretences, he was not owned by any considerable number of his old friends, or his new-reconciled Enemies of the Pres∣byterian party. From all which particulars, (what ever other men may deem) we cannot but see the hand of God reached out unto us, for the upholding of this Government, in a pe∣culiar manner, contrary to all the expectations and reasonings os worldly wisdom. Since the drying up of the red sea, with the wonders that were wrought in Aegypt, and in the Wilder∣ness, never have there been more glorious appearances of Gods presence, than among his people in England: And therefore, none but a profane heart will presume so much to detract from the glory of these dispensations, as to rank them among the ordinary passages of a permissive, or Turkish Pro∣vidence. The last that we shall take notice of, is one of the principall arguments that he useth to hold the Dutch to his young Ma∣ster's party; hinting unto them by way of insinuation, that no Nation is so subject to change as England; that the Earl of Warwick in 11 days, Edw. 4. in 20, and Hen. 7. in 1 day, suc∣cessively subdued the English Nation. Tis true, England hath received many a sudden change, but never such a change as now. Heretofore, the poor people toiled themselvs, in shif∣ting one Tyrant out of the saddle to set up another; but
now they have driven out, not only the Tyrant, but Tyranny it self, and cashiered not only a single King, but all Kings for ever. It is an easie matter for particulars to supplant one a∣nother in Government, because the interest stands deposited in a single hand; but when the whole frame of Government is altered from what it was, and the interest of State lies diffu∣sed in the hands of the people, it is almost impossible to alter it again, without such a tract of time, as may produce new dispositions and opportunities for the effecting a new altera∣tion. Besides, it is very rarely observed in the whole course of History, that ever Kingly Government was suddenly resto∣red in any Country, after it had been once cashiered by the people. As for Robert Bruce, his recovery of all Scotland, 300 years ago, out of the hands of the English; you know it could not be effected as long as Edw. 1. lived; but advantages being ta∣ken the infirmities, debaucheries, and civil broils of Edw. 2. the Scots made a shift to shake off the yoak; wherein they were more beholding to that Prince's vanity, than the valour and vertue of their own Nation. And whereas he calls Ster∣lin the unconquered, and fatall Bulwark of Scotland, and tells us, that there they stopt the current of the Roman Victories; yet their own Historian Buchanan confesseth, that both Edw. 1. and 2. were possest of Sterlin by force of arms: and both their and our Historians will be able to relate in time to come how that the Commonwealth of England hath done more than Rome, and made another Conquest, not only of Sterlin, but far beyond it; which I dare be bold to second with this Omen: That as Scotland's happiness will be promoted by a subjection to England; so now it is the design of God, for the better carrying on of his great work, and the good of that people, to bring them into an universal submission to the Laws and Government of the English Nation. — Nec sit Terris Ʋltima Thule. FINIS.
