A3958 E818_3 R207388 99866442 118717
Gray Hayres CROWNED WITH GRACE. A SERMON Preached at Redriff, Aug. 1. 1654. At the Funerall of that Reverend, emi∣nently Learned and faithfull Minister of JESUS CHRIST Mr THOMAS GATAKER PROV. 20. 29. The beauty of old men, is their gray head. PROV. 12. 26. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbour. ISA. 43. 4. Since thou wast pretious in my sight, thou hast been honourable. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for George Sawbridge at the Sign of the Bible on Ludgate-hill. M. DC. LV.
To the Reverend, and my much HONOURED BRETHREN, the Presbyterian MINISTERS of the Gospel within the Province of LONDON. Brethren, THe sad occasion of this Sermon, and not any opi∣nion of its worth, hath moved me to presume upon this Dedication. I know that you are sensible of the smart of that providence, which having, not long since, removed worthy Dr Gouge and M. Whitaker, hath also taken from us famous Mr Gata∣ker; and the rather, because they all were not only mem∣bers of, but also cordiall friends unto our Provinciall As∣sembly. And these our late losses, may well minde us ofMr George Walker. M. Herbert Palmer. M Edwards. M John Gere. M. Robrough. M. Love, &c. the death of many more of our brethren, whose hearts, heads and hands, went along with us in the setting up and exer∣cising of the Presbyterian Government in our respective Congregations, with mutuall assistance, Classicall and Pro∣vinciall, both for the Ordination of Ministers, and the more pure administration of the Sacraments. Hereby doubtless the Lords voice crieth to the City,Mic. 6. 9. more particularly unto us the Ministers thereof: Oh, that his Majesty would make us men of wisedom, exemplartly to see his Name! This is the advice of the Holy Ghost, Hear the rod and who hath appointed it.
Brethren, I will not undertake to teach you who are able to instruct others, what use should be made of these dolefull dispensations. Have we not cause to complain, that we did neither thankfully prize, nor fruitfully improve their Mi∣nisteriall gifts, graces and experiences, as we should and might have done? And seeing they (though dead) do still speak, by their usefull Books printed, or their holy Lives remembred, or by both; should not we be conscientious imitators of their con∣stancy and fidelity, in those wayes of holy truth, discipline and worship, which were heartily approved by them, even unto their death? Moreover, Because so many active members of our Pro∣vince are translated, ought not we who survive, to streng∣then one anothers hands the rather, unto double industry, with undaunted courage, in our whole Ministeriall imploy∣ment, and to be the more affectionately frequent in prayer, that our good God would make up our loss, by the more abun∣dant communications of his peculiar grace? And although this saying may be sighed out with sor∣row, we heretofore had the society and assistance of the forementioned fellow-helpers, because now we have them not: yet may it also be a matter of incouragement, because our Presbyterian path, hath been trodden without fainting (yea with joy,) by the foot of them, whose remem∣brance will be as a sweet perfume unto posterity. Having spoken thus much, give me leave (upon the same account,)Mr Cortwright. M. Hildersham. M. Dod. M. Gleaver. M. Dorrell. M. John Paget. M. Bradshaw. M. Ball, &c. to minde you of some few good old Nonconformists (unto whom many more might be added) who many years since (when under Prelaticall power and oppression) endeavoured, by preaching, printing, praying and suffering, to introduce this Presbyterian government which we do now exercise.
Though those men disliked the use of superstitious Ceremo∣nies, yet they opposed their tenents and practice, who sepa∣rated from the Church of England, condemning it, and the Ministry of it as Antichristian: But they studiously sought to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, whose labours God blessed to the conversion of thousands of souls and to the maintaining of the power of godliness all their dayes, and whose profitable Works do still praise them in the gate? But what need I look so farre backward, seeing we can easily remember a great company who formerly joyn∣ed with us here in London, in setting up and exercisingDr Harris. D. Arrowsmith. D. Tuckney. D. Wilkinson. D. Chambers. D. Wallis. M. Lea. M. Timothy Dod. M. Cawdry. M. Blake. M. Burgess. M. Gower. M. Roberts. M. Burdall. M. Strickland. M. Cauton. M. Fisher. M. Allen Gear, &c. the Presbyterian government (besides the many others in the severall parts of the Land) who now are of chief note for Learning and Piety, in both Universities and other pla∣ces; whose hearts and prayers (I am confident) still go along with us, for our incouragement. As this bright clowd of so many witnesses (some in Hea∣ven and some on earth) may be relieving unto our mourn∣ing hearts under our great loss; so (blessed be God) we have not yet cause to complain with the Prophet, that there is no cluster Mic. 7. 1, 2.: for though much contempt is cast upon us (by ma∣ny, who rather seek great things for themselves in the world, then the things of Jesus Christ) as an inconsiderable number, yet we have (I will speak it to the praise of the Lord) threescore Presbyterian Ministers within the pre∣cincts of our Province, who preach profitably, and live godly, who are not tainted with the erroneous tenents ei∣ther of the Arminians, Antinomians or Anabaptists. And the most high will (I humbly hope) incouragingly appear farther for us in these pathes, which (as our consciences be perswaded) are chalked out in the Scriptures of truth, for the welfare of his Churches, and the honour of his own Name by
Jesus Christ. Upon all the glory shall be a defence.Isa. 4. 5. I will conclude this my address unto you (my much ho∣noured brethren) with this hearty prayer, that you may hold on in this good old way, till you be gray-headed; nothing doubting, but that your heary heads will be a Crown of glo∣ry, being found in these wayes of righteousness. Your loving brother, and fellow labourer in the work of the Gospel, SIMEON ASHE. Novemb. 24th 1654.
PROV. 16. 31. The hoary head is a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousnesse. WHosoever knew this Reverend man (either by his own acquaintance or the true Report of others) whose Funerall doth occasion this great Assembly, will acknowledge that my Text is suitable unto the occasion of our meet∣ing. The Lord make my Sermon as service∣able as I know my Text to be seasonable. These Proverbs are grave Sentences full of worth and weight, which are the rather to be pondered seriously be∣cause of the Authours wisedom and authority; The Proverbs of Solomon, the Son of David, King of Israel; They are in∣tireProv. 1. 1. Propositions (especially from the beginning of the 10th Chapter) and therefore (for the most part) to be considered without any context or coherence at all. Every Proverb is like a precious Pearl tending to inrich all them with spiritual wisedom, who shall make faithfull improvement thereof through Gods speciall grace. In the handling of this Proverb (which I have chosen to be the matter of my present discourse) I desire you to at∣tend 1. The division of the Text. 2. The interpretation of the words. 3. And the divine truth from hence tendred unto our con∣sideration. The parts of the Text (being an intire Proposition) are two.
1. The Subject. 2. The Predicate. The Subject or the matter spoken unto is, The hoary head. And the Predicate or that which is asserted lieth in the words following, It is a Crown of glory if it be found in a way of righteousnesse. Wherein two things are notable. 1. The high commendation given of old age, The hoary head is a Crown of glory. 3. The limitation which is warily added, If it be found in the way of righteousnesse. Thus from the Text divided I put forward to the explica∣tion of the words herein used; And because the proposi∣tion is conditionall, I will first open the words in the asserti∣on, and secondly, those which are in the condition. First, In the assertion two things are inquirable. 1. What is meant by the hoary head? 2. What is to be understood by the Crown of glory? In this phrase the hoary head there is a double Metonymy. 1. A Metonymy of the effect for the cause, viz. hoary head put for old age the cause thereof. 2. And a Metonymy of the adjunct for the subject, the hoary hairs for the person upon whom they are to be found. There is also a Synecdoche in the expression, viz. one part put for the whole; The head for the whole person aged. And the language is likewise Metaphoricall, for man in his declining age seemeth to be compared unto the Winter, the latter part of the year, wherein the superficies of the earth is white, being covered with hoary frost. This Interpretati∣on is according to sundry parallel passages in the holy Scri∣ptures. I am (said Samuel) old and gray-headed; And with1 Sam. 12. 2. Job 15. 14. us (said Eliphaz) are the gray-headed and very aged men much elder then thy Father. Therefore the Rhetorick being taken off the words, it appeareth, that by the hoary head is signi∣fied the aged person. If enquiry be made, what is meant by the Crown of glory? I answer, that there is an Hebraism in the words, viz. a Crown
of glory put for a glorious Crown: The word glory noteth credit or excellency, as when the strength of the young manProv. 20. 19. is called his glory. Some do render the phrase, A Diadem of glory, The Diadem properly signifying a wreathed hatband,Diadema a  circum, &  ligo. with which the ancient Kings did content themselves, as thinking that a Crown only belonged to their gods. Let it be noted that it is more then a garland which may belong to some Con∣querour in one exploit, though in all other regards a per∣son mean and considerable. The Crown is appropriated rather unto Kings and Queens amongst the children of men,Corona dccoris, est metaphora a regibus. Cartw. Corona ornatis∣sima vel ornatus vtl Corona or∣nans. Pisc. and here it is set upon the head of the aged person to beto∣ken peculiar honour appertaining to old age; Although the phrase is variously rendred by Interpreters a Crown of glory, a Crown of comelinesse, a Crown of ornament, yet the sense is the same in the judgement of all, viz. that old-age is honour∣able. And to this purpose is the Crown applied unto others in the holy Scriptures, viz. by Solomon unto Parents and their children mutually. Childrens children are the Crown ofProv. 17. 6. Phil. 4. 1. old men, and the glory of children are their Parents; and upon the same account the Apostle Paul calleth the Philippians his Crown, esteeming it his high honour that they were brought to Christ by his Ministry. Secondly, In the condition annexed, If found in the way of righteousnesse, there are three things enquirable, viz. 1. What is signified by righteousnesse. 2. What the word way doth suggest. 3. What is hinted in this expression, viz. of being found in this way. For the first, I will not spend time in reporting either the various acceptions or uses of the word Righteousnesse in the holy Scriptures. In this place it noteth a carefull conformi∣ty unto the revealed will of God, all whose Commandments are righteousnesse; In which respect Moses saith, This shallPsa. 119. 138. Dan. 6. 25. be our righteousness if we observe to do all these Commandments. For in so doing we do suum cuique trihuere, give every one their right, viz. God, our selves, and our neighbours, re∣ceive due respect by obedience rendred unto laws divine.
Now before I apply Righteousnesse in this sense unto the truth in the Text, I must necessarily distinguish betwixt righ∣teousnesse Legal and Evangelical. 1. Legall righteousnesse consists in a compleat conformi∣ty unto Laws divine in their utmost latitude; And thus ourEccl. 7. 29. 1 Joh. 2. 1. first Parents were habitually righteous at their first creation, and our blessed Saviour was actually Christ the Righteous, But all Adams posterity fall short hereof both in their nature and practice. As in the estate of unregeneracy the Apostle concludeth all under sin, and saith both of Jews and Gentiles, There is none righteous, no not one; So in the estate of Rege∣neration,Rom. 3. 9, 10. so many are the imperfections of them who are most compleat on earth, that in the sense aforesaid they can∣not be accounted righteous. Though David is called a man after Gods own heart, yet his praier and testimony do attestAct. 13. 22. Psa. 143. 2. this truth, Enter not into judgement with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. 2. But in a Gospel sense, according to the indulgence and construction of free rich grace, Gods gracious servants are said to be righteous. Thus God himself speaketh of Noah, Thee have I seen righteous before me. And this character theGen. 7. 1. Luk. 1. 6. holy Ghost giveth of Zechary and Elizabeth, They were both righteous before God. And this Evangelicall righteousnesse doth consist 1. partly in their sincere endeavour to reach perfection, in which respect they are described to be suchIsa. 51. 1. who follow after righteousnesse, whereupon God accepting the will for the deed doth call them rigbteous. 2. And principal∣ly, in the imputation of Christs righteousnesse unto them upon2 Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 3. 9. Jer. 23. 6. their humble fiduciall closures with him by faith unfained, who is the Lord our righteousnesse; Now of this righteous∣nesse is the Text to be understood. The se second Quaery was, What doth the word way suggest? I answer, That Gods Servants being as strangers and sojour∣nersPsa. 39. 12. in this world, and their life being a travelling toward hea∣venHeb. 11. 9, 10, 13, 14. their long home, where they look for their everlasting abode; their holy conversation on earth is ealled their way,
which suggesteth both the activity and progresse of Gods grace in the fruits thereof. This Solomon seemeth to speak unto, very clearly and fully, The path of the righteous is asProv. 4. 18. the shining light which shineth more and more unto the per∣fect day. And to the third demand, I answer, That a person may be said to be found in the way of righteousnesse, when there is conspicuity and permanency in a godly conversation; when the candle of grace lighted in the heart doth discover it self by its shining, and is kept burning (according to the advice of Christ) that men may see his good works, as it is said, thatMat. 5. 16. Act. 11. 23. Paul saw the grace of God, in the Christians at Antioch; so here when the seed of righteousnesse rooted in the hearts of aged persons doth so bud and fructifie in their lives that such who converse with them do or may finde apparent ef∣focts of Gods grace in them, then they are found in the way of righteousnesse. I shall not bestow any more words, or time, in the Exposition of the Text, but proceed according to promise, unto the handling of that seasonable Point of Doctrine which is held forth from this Text. The hoary head is a Crown of glory if it be found in the way of righteousnesse. That Old age attended with the power of grace and the pra∣cticeDoct. of Religion, is a matter of much honour and commen∣dation. Let it be considered from the language in the Text how farre this Truth doth extend, viz. indefinitely to all aged per∣sons who be truly pious; 1. Of both Sexes, both men and women. 2. Of all ranks and conditions in the world, whether high or low, rich or poor, whether more nobly descended or more mean and contemptible in regard of descent, whether on the Throne or at the footstool. 3. Of all qualities, in regard of naturall or acquired ac∣complishments, whether corporally beautified, or deformed, whether more or lesse enriched with the ornaments of the minde, viz. learning and other abilities for employment ei∣ther in Church or in Common-wealth.
4. Of all callings and negotiations amongst men, whether sacred or civil, whether by land or sea, whether in times of warre or peace. 5. And this truth, in this latitude, hath been, is, and will be appliable unto all aged persons, found in the way of righte∣ousnesse, in all the ages of the world. This is notable from the Original, for as the proposition is universall in reference to all hoary heads found in the way of righteousnesse, so there is no verb to limit it unto any term of time, either past, present, or to come, but the holy Ghost asserts this truth, in relation to all ages and times of the world: That hereto∣fore, and for the present, and for the future, the hoary head in the way of holinesse, hath been, and now is, and hereafter to the end of the world will be a Crown of glory. I shall proceed gradually in the proof of the Point, in re∣ferenceQuo magis ho∣mo festinat ad finem, tento est vere venerabi∣lior, Clem. A∣lexand. Eccl. 12. 5. Flores camite∣rii. Isa. 9. 15. Gen. 25. 8. Judg. 8. 32. 2 Chro. 29. 28. Summa est, se∣nectutem illam praesertim quae piis a Deo dona∣tur, honorandam esse. Cartwr. in Text. Prov. 12. 26. Acts 21. 16. Luk. 2. 36, 37. to the two branches of it. First, Old age in it self, is a matter of commendation: The beauty of old men is the gray head: In which respect (as some Expositors judg) the hoary head is compared by Solomon, to the Almond tree flourishing, when the white blossoms do ren∣der it very beautifull. And hence also it is, that according to the Heraldry observed in the holy Scripture, the Ancient and the Honourable are both placed together, and many of Gods Worthies there recorded, have this character of ho∣nour put upon them, that they died in a good old age and full of dayes (viz.) Abraham, Gideon, David. Secondly, The addition of holinesse unto the hoary head, addeth much unto the glory of the aged person: and this the holy Ghost doth chiefly intend in the Text. For the righ∣teous eatenus, because righteous, is more excellent then his neigh∣bour. And therefore under this Notion, many are registred in holy writ to their everlasting credit in the Church of Christ, (viz.) Mnason of Cyprus that old Disciple; and An∣na, a Prophetesse of a great age, a widow of about fourscore and four years, who departed not from the Temple, but served God, with fastings and prayers night and day. Now that righteousnesse giveth weight unto the Crown
which aged persons do wear, may be abundantly mani∣fested. 1. Because it is one part of Gods image in man, with whichEccl. 7. 29. Rom. 3. 20. Eph. 4. 24. he was adorned at his first creation, which was his glory, lost by his fall, and which is restored by his Regeneration. The new man, after God, is created in righteousnesse. 2. Because aged persons, thus qualified, are the Emblems of God himself, who is called the ancient of dayes; and of Je∣susDan 7. 9, 13. Christ, in whose metaphoricall description, this is one ex∣pression; His head and his hairs were white like wool.Rev. 1. 14. 3. Because the righteous are admitted into near relation and affection with God who is their Father, and loveth themMatth. 13. 43. Psal. 146. 8. dearly. The Lord loveth the righteous. The righteous shall shine in the Kingdom of their Father. Now it was Davids honour (as he valued it) to be Son in law to King Saul: And who1 Sam. 18. 23. doth not judge, that it was much to the repute of Daniel, to be called A man beloved by the Lord. Since thou becamestDan. 9. 21. Isa. 43. 4. mine (saith God himself to his people) and wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable. From these three heads of Arguments jointly considered, the truth under hand, may be undeniably concluded. That the hoary head is a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousnesse. The Application followeth, which I will give, in manifold Uses, under four heads. The first sort of Uses are for Information in three particu∣larsƲse 1. Information. well worthy our consideration. 1. Hence it followeth, that no qualification whatsoever, wherewith the children of men can possibly be adorned, is of so great worth as godlinesse; because this is said to set a glo∣rious Crown upon the heads of them who are blessed with it. I grant that there are many natural ornaments and acquired accomplishments, which may gain respect, but it is righteous∣nesse which wins the Crown. Therefore Solomon saith not, The hoary head is a Crown of glory, if found in the way of raised parts, of great learning, of martiall courage, of large commands in the world, or of successefull trading to become
wealthy, but if it be found in the way of righteousnesse. Though people who are under no higher principles then sense and humane reason are of another opinion: They blessePsal. 10. 3. Mal. 3. 15. Psal. 49. 6. with 18. the covetous whom God abhorreth, and they do call the proud hap∣py, because set up, when others are abased; because delivered when others are in distresse: yea though many boasting themselves in the multitude of their riches, do blesse their own souls; yet both God and all those whose judgements are guided by his word, are of another minde. My text tel∣leth you the thoughts of wise Solomon, and if you will hear∣ken unto his father David, you shall understand, that his ap∣prehensions were not different. The Saints (saith he) and the excellent in whom is all my delight. Whence it is notable, that thePsal. 16. 2. Psalmist there doth not only express his judgment personally, but he typically reports the sense of Christ, to give to un∣derstand, that himself a man according to Gods heart, yea and Christ Jesus infinitely above himself, give this estimate of holy persons, that they are incomparably excellent. And if this be not sufficient to clear the truth of my inference, consider his confident assertion to Saul his Courtiers, who prided themselves in their Courtship, and despised him as a man rejected. Know that the Lord hath set apart him that isPsal. 4. 3. Exod. 19. 5. with ca. 33. 16. godly for himself: whereas all other persons whatsoever are looked upon by the Lord as lumber, these are his peculiar treasure. 2. The second corollary is this: If righteousnesse be a Crown, though it be attained in old age only, then how much more honourable are they, who have been found in the way of righteousnesse all their life long; from their youth, till their heads are gray. This great commendation, did apper∣tainPsal. 71. 18, 18 unto David. O God (saith he) thou hast taught me from my youth, and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. Now when I am gray headed, O God forsake me not. And this honour St Paul putteth upon Andronicus and Junia, They are of note among the Apostles, who also were in Christ before me. It ma∣kethRom. 16. 7. very much to the credit of Christians, when grace which blossomed upon them in the spring of their youth, doth abide
green and flourishing in the winter of their age; This might be many waies illustrated, 1. They have served the Lord sun∣dry Apprentiships; It is an honour to stand (to have a set∣led abode as servants) before Kings: Thus the Queen of She∣baPro. 22. 29. expresseth her self in reference unto them who alwaies waited upon King Solomon, Happy are thy men, and happy are1 Kin. 10. 8. these thy Servants who stand continually before thee. Now this, and greater then this, is the renown of them who have been for many years not only retainers but dwelling-servants with the Almighty. 2. They have often been in the field with Christ their Captain, they have fought many battels, and have re∣ceived many wounds under his Colours and command: The holy Ghost hath seen cause to record in holy Pages some of Davids Worthies who had made many brave adventures, and2 Sam. 23. done famous exploits in years past and gone. And what more ordinary then for Souldiers to set forth their own commen∣dations, by relating how many years attending on the Army, with hazards run and wounds received; Now the old Soul∣diersEnumerat milec vulnera. of Jesus Christ are much more worthy high respect, having been found all along in the waies of righteousnesse; Such a standard-bearer was Samuel who received press-mo∣ney1 Sam. 3. from God while he was a childe, and could when gray∣headed so pleade his righteousnesse that it will be alwaies re∣membred to his credit and reputation. I am old and gray∣headed,1 Sam. 12. 2, 3. Behold, here I am, witnesse against me before the Lord, and before his Anointed; whose Oxe have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppres∣sed, or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blinde mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you: But alas how few amongst them who have had power in their hands can we finde, that in their age are thus found in waies of righteous∣nesse? 3. They have endured manifold oppositions, losses, and hardships from cruell persecutors; Many hot Summers have scorched them, and many cold winters have pinched them, they have suffered much from open enemies and fain∣ed friends, because of their couragious faithfulnesse to Jesus Christ, not daring to depart from the way of righteousnesse.
The Apostle Paul reckoneth up his sufferings as so many Ensigns of honour, I will glory also; (saith he,) And in what1 Cor. 12. 18. doth he glory? why, he tels you, In stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft: Of the Jews five times I23, received fourty stripes save one: Thrice was I beaten with rods,24, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwrack, a night and a day I have been in the deep; In journeying often, in perils of25, waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own Countrey∣men, in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils26, in the Wildernesse, in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst false brethren; In wearinesse and painfulnesse, in watchings often,27. in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakednesse: And Paul the aged and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.Philem. 9. Thus this ancient Champion of Christ seems to look upon his severall many years hardships as so many Pearls with which his Crown was beautified and enriched. And doubtlesse they are so in the account of all them whose judgements are recti∣fied by the word of truth. The Third Consequence or Use of Information is this, That it is a very advantagious service to be instrumental in promoting the work of Gospel-righteousnesse in the hearts and waies of men, because by means hereof they receive no lesse then a Crown of glory. Hence it was that Saint Paul writeth thus to Philemon, Thou owest unto me thine own self;Philem. 19. How infinitely beyond all sublunary accomodations are the revenues which come in by grace! The Crown is the high∣est honour that can be bestowed upon the children of men, and no gain is comparable to that which is received by god∣linesse; Godlinesse is profitable unto all things, having the pro∣mise1 Tim. 4. 8. of the life that now is, and of that which is to come; yea, the greatest profit which we are capable to receive from God himself, is to be made partakers of his holinesse, and the fruitHeb. 12. 10, 11. of righteousnesse is from peculiar paternall love, proper to them whom God doth discipline as his Adopted children: This I note, both to discover unto the people of the world who are their best Friends, and to work in their hearts more high estimations of the Ministers of the Gospel whom God
hath ordained to bring sinuers to Christ, that they might be2 Cor. 5. 19, 21 the righteousnesse of God in him. And howsoever the carnall and unthankful world disregard us, yet the Lord doth so highly value this our work, that he will certainly abundantly recompense it, They who turn many to righteousness shall shineDan. 12. 12. as the Stars for ever and ever: Whereas men do most esteem and most liberally reward such who are instruments to restore their health, to raise their outward estates, and to preferre them unto places of greatnesse in the world; The most high God who setteth a higher price upon holinesse, will make it manifest at the last day, that those who study to bring men into the waies of righteousnesse shall be most advanced. It hath been looked upon as an honourable employment to set the Crown on a Kings head, and doubtlesse it is no lesse but far greater to be an instrument according to divine institu∣tion to crown sinners with righteousnesse. Consider that this was foretold by an Angel as an exceeding great honour to be put upon John the Baptist Christs harbinger, Many ofLuk. 1. 16, 17. the Children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God, and he shall go before them in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the disobedient to the wisedom of the Just. The fourth and last inference by way of Information is this, viz. That therefore the death of aged godly persons should be much lamented. David and all Israel wept over dead Abner upon this consideration, A great man is fallen;2 Sam. 3. 31, 34, 58. Now who are to be esteemed great if not those who are rightfully crowned? And such are the aged being found in the way of righteousnesse. The Prophet Isaiah bringeth in the ancient amongst those persons of highest place and pow∣er,Isa. 3. 2. whose removall doth weaken both Church and State. And this is one strain in Jeremiah his Lamentations, The Crown is fallen; Now in a safe sence, though not the same,Lam. 5. 16. we may apply it unto the death of the meanest, whose hoary heads were found in the way of righteousnesse; but it is sin∣gularly applicable, when an ancient, prudent, pious Minister is translated by death: Such a providence upon the death ofIsa. 3. 2. 2 Kin. 2. 12. Elijah caused Elisha to cry out, My Father, My Father, the
Charet of Israel and the horsemen thereof. And truly such oc∣casion of mourning is administred this day upon our losse of the Reverend, Learned, and godly man, whose Funerall we now celebrate. Neither doth his death alone but the dis∣solution of sundry other grave and gracious Ministers of theMr Walker. Dr Gouge. Mr Whitaker Gospel, not long since, in the Neighbourhood, call for our tears and lamentations before the Lord. The Lord rightly affect us with these stroaks, and give us the sanctified im∣provement of them through his grace. The second Use followeth, which is for reproof of threeƲse 2. Of Reproof. sorts of people. 1. Of those aged persons who seem to be ashamed of their old age, by taking courses to hide it, that they might be ac∣counted young, whereas my Text tels us, that the hoary head is a Crown, and the same wise Solomon saith elsewhere,Pro. 20. 29. The beauty of old men is the gray-head: And the Apostle Paul speaketh of his old age as his credit, and that which should render him the more respectfull, Being such a one asPhilem. 9. Illi canos tin∣gendo, praeci∣puam reverentiae praerogativam dedecore affici∣um. Vellendi sunt non pili, sed cupiditaces. Clem. Alex. Paul the aged. Some of the Ancients took occasion in their daies to blame very sharply such persons who either picked out their gray hairs, or else did colour them artificially, that they might not be reputed old; And this advice was added to the reproof, that they should rather pluck up their lusts then pick out their gray hairs, as rendring them many thou∣sand times more unlovely and dishonourable: Beleeve it you gray-headed persons, that your covetousnesse, frowardness, hypocrisie, and unrighteousnesse do make you reproachfull, whereas your age with holinesse would be your honour. 2. Of those whose wicked conversation doth cast dis-re∣putation upon the Crown which God by their many years hath set upon their heads. That Proverb is appliable unto them, As a Jewell of Gold in a Swines snout, so is a fair womanProv. 11. 22. Dignitas in indigno, est or∣namentum in luto. which is without discretion. Complexion doth not so much beautifie as folly doth blemish such a person: In like manner it is very unseemly to see silver hairs soyled with a sinfull, de∣bauched conversation; How do oaths, lies, scurrilous cur∣sed speeches and other wickednesses cast mire and fasten rust
upon the Crown of old-age. In dealing with these gray∣headed sinners I may apply those words of Moses, Do ye thus reward the Lord ye foolish people and unwise? Is this the requi∣tallDeut. 32. 6. which you return unto God for his many years patience exercised towards you, and the manifold experiences with long-continued goodnesse showred down upon you? Do not you your selves look for better fruit from the trees which you have carefully preserved many winters, and painfully watered many Summers? But if these convincing expostu∣lations will not awaken and reform these people who are weather-beaten in wickednesse, and by long soaking in sin are habituated to do evil, I must minde them of that heavy mes∣sage delivered from the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah, The sin∣ner being an hundred years old is accursed. The old impenitentIsa. 69. 20. sinner, whatsoever his place, his parts, or his respect in the world be, is accursed. Gods curse is not only threatned, but already in a great measure executed upon him, He is cursed, cursed in his soul, and cursed in all his enjoyments and con∣cernments, during the time of his impenitency and unrefor∣mednesse.Patientia laesae, vertitur in su∣rorem. Here I might be large in discovering the expressi∣ons of divine displeasure against people, old in evils as in years, whose decayed, decrepid, withered, weakened bodies might expect pity. The Prophet Jeremiah saith, I am full ofJer. 6. 11. the fury of the Lord, I will pour it forth upon the aged and him that is full of daies. And Gods threatning runneth thus, that neither he himself nor those whom he will incense against them, shall have any compassion upon the old man, or him that2 Chro. 36. 17. Deut. 32. 25. stoopeth for age or the man of gray hairs. 3. Of them who make the aged the objects of their de∣rision. Mr Cartwright hath this note upon the Text, that God hath by this Crown of gray hairs vindicated the aged from all the discredit which their stooping or other infirmities might seem to expose them unto: And it is observed by someNatant Hebraei non senilem, sed decrepitam sig∣nificari aetatem. Cajet. in Text. that though decrepid old age be suggested in the language of the Text, yet Solomon doth assign it the Crown. This I sug∣gest the rather to give a check unto the young wanton wits which are apt to break jests upon the aged, because of some
seeming uncomelinesses which accompany that condition of life. Guilty in this kinde was he who scoffingly asked the old man whose body was crooked by reason of old age, Whe∣ther he would sell him a bow? These green heads do not con∣sider the greatnesse of this sin in Gods account, who puts this fault into the catalogue of such miscarriages which usher in desolating judgements, viz. The childe shall behave himselfIsa. 4. 5. proudly against the ancient; And this sin is the more hainous and provoking, when those aged persons are abused, whose near Relations, Offices of honour, accompanied with the power of godlinesse, do call for all expressions of respect and esteem. Solomon is smart in his reproof of children, who in this kinde offend towards their naturall parents, The eye that mocketh at his Father and despiseth to obey his mother, thePro. 30. 17. Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. How many times are those brought unto the Gallows (as the confessions of some in such cases have manifested) through Gods just judgement who have been chargeable with guilt of this kinde? And how heavy was the hand of God upon many little children for mocking Elisha the Pro∣phet, There came forth little children out of the City, and mock∣ed2 Kin. 2. 23, 24 him, and said unto him, Go up thy bald-head, Go up thou bald∣head; And he turned back, and locked upon them, and cursed them in the Name of the Lord, and there came forth two she-bears out of the wood, and tare fourty and two children of them. How far this derision of the man of God did reach, I now enquire not, whether to his Function, with relation to his Master Elijah lately taken up into heaven, or only unto his baldness, But this is notable, that childishnesse and ignorance will not secure such from divine revenge who do dare to deride the aged: What therefore may they expect who have more years on their backs, and should have more grace in their hearts, then to adventure upon this sinfull provocation. But yet there is a higher step of aggravation to be added, viz. when righteousnesse it self which is the chiefest Crown of the aged, is the object of mens derision; when meerly the tenderness of mens consciences and their exact walking ac∣cording
to the Word of God doth lay them open unto the jears of men. The Apostle telleth us that such despise not man1 Thes. 4. 7, 8. only but God also, and he rendreth a double reason thereof, viz. because God hath called us to holinesse, and hath likewise given us his Spirit to work it: I remember the words of So∣lomon, which are appliable to my purpose, whoso mocketh theProv. 17. 5. poor reproacheth his maker; And the speech (as Mr Cartwright noteth upon the place) extends unto jearing at any bodily defect or deformity whatsoever, whereof God is willing to be accounted the Authour. How much more will the Lord interpret those derisions to reach himself, which people shall dare to cast upon his own image in his servants, which isQuiopus aliquod ridet, ridet illius opificem. Mercer their Crown and beauty? For if God take himself to be con∣cerned in the creatures affliction, how much more then in that which tends to his perfection? This way of wickednesse argueth a gracelesse frame of heart, and to them who walk in it may be applied the sharp words of the Prophet, Against whom do you sport your selves? Against whom make you a wideIsa. 57. 4. mouth, and draw out the tongue? Are ye not children of trans∣gression, a false seed? Ishmael by mocking Isaac made wayGal, 4. 29, 30. with Gen. 21. 9, 10. Psa. 1. 11. for his own rejection, and doubtlesse they are not farre from ruine who have travelled so long in sinne that they are got into the Chair of Scorners; When I remember the heavy curse given out against Cham for mocking his old FatherJer. 9. 21, 22, 25 Noah (for it's conceived that he was thus far guilty) when in an uncomely posture by reason of his drunkennesse; I tremble to think what will become of them who break brinish jests with prophane Satyricall spirits upon Gods servants for their sanctity. We reade in holy Story that Michol Davids wife despised him in her heart, and spake tauntingly to him upon his zealous dancing before the Lord, and the holy Ghost hath concluded the History with this report, There∣fore2 Sam. 6. 16, 20, 23. Michol the daughter of Saul had no childe unto the day of her death. And ordinarily this cursed course is attended with the heavy curse of everlasting spirituall barrennesse. The Lord grant that these hints may through his blessing, give some check unto that prophane boldnesse, which too fre∣quently
breaketh forth amongst the children of men. I proceed to the third Use which shall be for triall; ForƲse 3. Of Examina∣tion. it much concerneth all sorts to know how this righteousnesse may be discerned, which is a Crown of glory to the hoary head. The necessity of this enquiry may be manifested by these two considerations. 1. Because there are several mistakes in this matter of righ∣teousnesse amongst men. For there are many who only ap∣pear outwardly to be righteous, when the inside discoverethMat. 23. 28. the contrary, being full of hypocrisie. And there is something like unto justice, which is highly esteemed amongst men, though it be abomination in the sight of God.Luk. 16. 15. 2. That we may neither arrogate nor deny this Crown to our selves groundlesly, and also that we may be the better able to judge unto whom we are bound to give this honour which God hath put upon them. For as it is the duty of all, so it is the care of Gods people in this particular (as in other cases) to guide themselves by discretion and judgement.Psa. 112. 5. Four notes of the righteous. Now those whom God accounteth truly righteous may be known, 1. By their unlimited respect unto Gods whole will reveal∣ed in his word, as the rule of their obedience for the matter of it. This is the character given of Zachary and Elizabeth, They were both righteous before God, walking in all the Com∣mandmentsLuk. 1. 6. and Ordinances of the Lord: Therefore here the Query must be, both What is the rule of our conversation? and Whether our endeavours be extended according to the rules of the Scripture universally? For multitudes steer their course rather according to the compasse of humane Ordinan∣cesIsa. 29. 15. then divine Institutions; And amongst them who seem to have recourse unto Scripture guidance, many are meerly partiall, picking and choosing according to their pleasure, as Herod who heard John the Baptist, and did many things, butMar. 6. 20. Matth. 19. 20, 21, 22. there was one defect wich undid him. And the like might be observed concerning the young man, who fell short in regard of his worldly-mindedness. 2. By minding the manner, together with the matter of
their obedience. To this purpose are the words of Moses, This shall be our righteousnesse if we observe to do all these Com∣mandmentsDeut. 6. 25. before the Lord our God as he hath commanded us. As this Scripture speaketh to the former note, viz. there is an observing to do all, q. d. there is a respect unto all Gods commands, as David expresseth it, So it suggesteth refe∣rencePsal. 119. 6. to the modality with the materiality of our performan∣ces. A principle of righteousnesse will move a man to doeQuemadmodum Calv. Sicut, Vatab. Isa. 1. 17. Gods Commandments as before him, and as he hath com∣manded: Whereas his Majesty requireth that good duties should be well done, they esteem it just and equal to endea∣vour this, not daring to satisfie themselves with outward∣nesse and formality, opus operatum will not down with the person who is regularly righteous; Therefore people in the proof of their righteousnesse must consider what care they take to be reverent, humble, affectionate, spirituall and up∣right in their services before the Lord. 3. By labouring after growth in grace and a more full conformity unto the Laws of the Lord and his deservings; The path of the righteous (saith Solomon) is as the shining lightPro. 4. 18. which shineth more and more unto the perfect day. The Sun doth not more naturally in its progresse move towards high noon, then a gracious heart worketh towards perfection. The A∣postle Paul having reported his own practice in pressing for∣ward towards the mark, addeth, that those who are sincere are thus minded, and he calleth them perfect because thus theyPhil. 3. 23, 14, 15. are in their own aims and endeavours, as in divine accep∣tance. Because (as Mr Bayns expresseth it) they take up their arrows alwaies on this side the white, therefore they strive to shoot better that they might hit the white, that they might in all regards exactly answer the minde and expectation of the Lord in their conversation; Therefore those are farre from righteousnesse who stroak their own heads as though they had fully accomplished the minde of God, and speak the language of the Laodicean, I am rich and encreased withRev. 3. 17. goods, and have need of nothing; Setting aside their staves, as though they were got to their journeys end, not looking after
encrease of grace, as though they had gained enough alrea∣dyUbi incipis, nolle ficri mel or, ibi defines esse bonus. to serve their turn. And it will be no violation of the Law of charity to affirm, that he was never truly good who doth not strive to be better. 4. By an humble self denying dependance upon Jesus Christ, looking for divine acceptance through him alone. The holy Apostle notwithstanding his unreproveable course be∣fore his conversion (as to men, and according to his light) and his unwearied industry upon his spirituall change, to hit the mark, at which he sincerely levelled, attended with a ho∣ly life, free from outward scandall, yet this, this was in his eye and endeavour, to be found in Christ (saith he) not havingPhil. 3. 9. mine own righteousnesse which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousnesse which is of God by faith. And thus it is also with all other Christians who are Evangelically righteous, because they do daily experience their own defects both in the matter, manner, measure, and end of their obedience, both to the Commandements of the first and second table, therefore in their addresses unto God either for recompence or acceptance, they take up the words of the holy Martyr, None but Christ, None but Christ. This our Apostle himself asserteth, speaking of others as of himself, We rejoyce in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence inPhil. 3. 3. the flesh, &c. And he is bold to conclude those to be void of true righteousnesse who do trust unto their own parts, privi∣ledges, or performances whatsoever: Israel which followed after the Law of righteousnesse hath not attained to the Law ofRom. 9. 31, 32. Righteousnesse; wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith but as it were by the works of the Law. By these four chara∣cters of the person who is Evangelically righteous, being faithfully applied, we may be able to know in regard of our selves, and to guesse in reference unto others (upon conver∣sings with them) unto whom the Crown of glory (set upon the hoary head found in the way of righteousnesse) doth appertain. The last Use followeth which is for Exhortation, and it isƲse 4. Of Exhorta∣tion. to be directed,
1. To them who are old. 2. To them who are young. I shall begin with the aged, both such who are unrighte∣ous and such who are in the way of righteousnesse. First, The aged persons who abide irreligious are to be perswaded to endeavour a change both of heart and life; Hearken unto me you who are farre from righteousnesse; Re∣memberIsa 46. 12. Qui pulcher esse velit, ei quod est in homine pulcherrimum, adornandum est, nempe mens, quam oportet, pulchriorem, & magis decoram ostendere. Clem Alexand. 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25 Aetas senectu∣tis est vita im∣maeulata. Venerabilis se∣nectus virtutum non annorum numero, compu∣tata. Non omnis cani∣ties promiscuè. Jun. & Trem. in Text. Rev. 12. 9. & 20. 2. Ʋtrumque simul Sumptum. Merc. in Text. 1 Sam. 15. 30. the fore-mentioned particulars, wherein true righ∣teousnesse doth consist, and strive with all your strength to attain them, as you do desire a Crown of glory. The Apo∣stle Paul propounds the practice of such who run a race to obtain a corruptible Crown, as an argument to presse the like duty. And Scripture-Histories together with the Stories of all ages do record the strange adventures, yea, attempts both ungodly and unnaturall to advance unto a Crown: Should not we therefore in the way of God seek this Crown of glo∣ry? Now that my advice may be the more prevalent, let these considerations be well weighed. 1. That the greatest age attainable on earth without righ∣teousnesse will not procure this Crown; Antiquity without piety doth yeeld no more credit then the devil is capable of, who is often called the Old Serpent, having had many thou∣sand years continuance in the world: But when holinesse is annexed to the hoary hairs, they honour the head with a Crown. How ambitious are proud men (like Saul) to be honoured amongst the people. Therefore as the laborious Bee sucketh honey out of weeds, let us graciously improve such like examples, to provoke our selves to seek the honor which cometh in by righteousnesse. 2. This righteousnesse which is attended with a Crown of glory upon earth will undoubtedly bring that which is very much better in heaven. Hearken what our Saviour promi∣seth, The righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the KingdomMat. 13. 43. of their Father. And observe the expectation of David upon this account, As for me I will behold thy face in righteousnesse,Psa. 17. 15. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likenesse. Though I may not spend words in illustrating these passages, yet I wish
that the aged would seriously consider how much is compre∣hended in this glorification and this satisfaction assured up∣on the righteous at the generall resurrection. 3. Who doth not (upon such grounds as have been hint∣ed) desire to die the death of the righteous, as that wretchNum. 23. 10. Balaam did? therefore wisedom would work endeavours to attain righteousnesse in the time of life. I remember a passage in the promise made by the Angel concerning the successe of John the Baptist his Ministry, He shall turn the disobedientLuke 1. 17. to the wisedom of the Just; There is singular wisedom amongst the righteous; as in other regards, so herein, because as they intend the best good as their end, so they seek to accomplish it, not only by wishings and wouldings, but by the reall use of the means sanctified for the obtaining thereof. Let us therefore herein make, imitation. 4. The unrighteous shall not finde any favour with God, because of their gray heads when he cometh to judgement. Somewhat was before suggested to this purpose, therefore now I will onely mention two Scriptures, which may be awakening to aged persons sleeping in security. Though aEccl. 8. 12, 13. sinner do evil an hundred times, and his daies be prolonged, yet it shall not be well with the wicked: Forbearance is no acquit∣tance, but God will be sooner or later upon their bones with blows of vengeance; And their shutting out of heaven is so certain, that the Apostle taketh it for granted that none will question it, Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not in∣herit1 Cor. 6. 9. the Kingdom of God? How can you old people give credit to these expressions of divine severity without resolu∣tions to look out after righteousnesse? 5. You aged ones are the greatest monuments of divine patience, which should leade you unto repentance; and the Apostle giveth in two considerations, to adde strength unto this argument, viz. 1. Because otherwise your hearts will be more and more obdurate, and your selves become lesse and lesse able to reform. 2. Because through your abuse of Gods forbearance his
wrath will be kindled and encreased against you. Weigh I pray you his words, Despisest thou the riches of his goodnesseRom. 2. 4, 5. and forbearance, and long-suffering? not knowing that the good∣nesse of God leadeth thee to repentance; But after thy hardnesse and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgement ofJer. 13. 23. God: I have been the more earnest in pressing the refor∣mation of the aged sinners, because it is attained with diffi∣culty through their accustomed continuance in wicked∣nesse. Secondly, I shall bend my advice to the aged who are through Gods grace really righteous. These persons are to be perswaded unto reall gratitude to the Lord, who hath set a Crown of glory upon their gray-heads. The Psalmist calsPsa. 148. 12, 13 Senes ad grati∣arum actionem excitare. upon old men to praise the Name of the Lord; This is one of Mr Cartwright inferences from the Text. And doubtlesse such aged people have abundant cause to be thankfull unto the Almighty. 1. For drawing forth the thred of their lives to so great a length. 2. And especially for converting them unto the way of righteousnesse. First, You may be moved to praise God for your old age by these Meditations. 1. Because his Highnesse is the maintainer of our lives, and the lengthener of our daies. Notwithstanding the meansDeut. 30. 20. Act. 17. 28. used whether ordinary or extraordinary, food, Physick, &c. to continue our daies upon earth, yet it must be acknowled∣ged that the Lord holdeth our soul in life. And here let it bePsal. 66. 9. Deut. 8. 3. remembred, that Gods blessing giveth strength to bread, and efficacy unto all other means of health. Consider also how much of Gods wisedom, power, goodnesse, patience, &c. hath been daily, yea hourly exercised for your preservation. Minde likewise from how many thousands of dangers his hand of providence hath secured you, both in the time of fool-hardy youth and unwieldy old age. Upon such like thoughts the holy Psalmist thus expresseth himself to the Lord, Let my mouth be filled with thy praise and with thy honourPsal. 71. 6, 8. 9. all the day.
2. Because by stroaks of death ten thousand have fallen on your sides, on your right hands, and yet it doth not comePsa. 91. 7. nigh to you. What multitudes of men and women, and chil∣dren more likely to have lived long then your selves, are dead and gone, but your selves still abide in the Land of the living? The good young King Josiah is deadly wounded by an Arrow; And old Eli the Priest of the Lord fell from his2 Chro. 35. 23, 24. 1 Sam. 4. 18. seat backward, and his neck brake; What great numbers have lost their lives, some in war, and others in times of peace; yea, very many, much more fitted for the service of Church and Common-wealth then your selves. In this regard you should look upon your selves as reserved to magnifie the God of your lives and mercies. 3. It is threatned as a judgement upon a Family when there is not left one aged person belonging to it; There shall not be an old man in thy House; These words speak much dis∣pleasure1 Sam. 2. 31. against Eli; Whereas it is an honour to have old stakes standing to support a Family which issued out of an ancient stock; Like as old Oaks are accounted an ornament to a Park, though they bear neither fruit nor leaves. This is one promise made to the man who feareth God, Thou shaltPsa. 128. 6. Pro. 17. 5. live to see thy childrens children. And Solomon tels us, The glory of children are their Fathers. 4. Because your many years have enriched you with ma∣nifoldEt senes magis experientiâ valent, itaque major corum solet esse dig∣nitar. Mercer. experiences, and this is judged by some Expositors to add much unto the Crown of old age. This I might enlarge, by manifesting the advantages of old mens experiences, both in reference unto their own comfort, and the service of o∣thers: The holy Psalmist relieveth his drooping spirit, in an estate of desertion, by improving of Gods ancient admini∣strations. I have considered the dayes of old, the years of ancientPsa. 77. 5, 10, 11. Plena est volu∣ptatis senectus, Si illâ scias uti. Seneca. times. I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High, I will remember thy wonders of old. Yea the Heathen could knowingly speak of the sweet fruits of old age if men had wisedom to reap them. And all ages do demonstrate, that ancient men, are most meet by their grave counsels to be serviceable unto the publick. This Reverend man (whose
Funerall we now celebrate, was wont to say, That a few gray hairs would do more work then many young locks. Besides other proofs hereof, the History concerning the different ad∣vice given to Rehoboam, by his young and old Counsellors, will1 Kin. 12. 6, 8. sufficiently witnesse this truth. These considerations may quicken the godly aged to grati∣tude for their hory heads: but I must add, that they have much more cause to magnifie God, for making them godly, because old age may be the guift of common bounty, whereas righte∣ousnesse is the product of peculiar grace. The wicked may be∣comeJob 21. 7. Mat. 13. 43. old, but the righteous are the adopted children of God and the heirs of heavens glory; Therefore their souls should praise the Lord, because when their lives are redeemed fromPsa. 30. 11. with 4. destruction, they are also crowned with loving-kindenesse and tender mercies. Now that I may prevail with you to honour God whose hoary heads are crowned with righteousnesse, I will briefly propound to your most serious thoughts these following meditations. 1. That your selves in the estate of depraved nature were of that number of whom it is most truly said, There is noneRom. 3. 9, 10. righteous, no not one, and that this righteousnesse which is yourEph. 5 9. Crown was the fruit of Gods Spirit; Therefore the glory thereof is due unto the Lord and not unto your selves, be∣cause he and not your selves hath made the difference betwixt1 Cor. 4. 7. you and others. 2. That the greatest part of mankinde doth abide in the waies of unrighteousnesse; The whole world (saith the Apo∣stle)1 Joh. 5. 19. Gen. 18. 32. lieth in wickednesse; The small number of ten righteous persons could not be found in Sodom and Gomorrha with their Suburbs; And before the Floud God himself could not espy any other besides Noah, Thee only have I seen righteous beforeGen. 7. 1. me in this age; Now by how much the more rare righteous∣nesse is amongst men, by so much the more thankfull should we be if God hath wrought it in us. 3. Can you remember either your own many, strong, and long-continued resistances made against divine assaults, or the manifold Providences and Ordinances, by means where∣of
you have been brought into the way of righteousnesse; May not Christ speak unto you as once to Jerusalem, HowMar. 23. 37. often would I and ye would not? yea, for a long time might not this be charged upon you, You alwaies resisted the holy Ghost?Act. 7. 51. And by how many hammerings and humblings, by what showrs and Sunshine, by what shakings with meltings in the Ministry of the Gospel have you been won to the Lord; Now should not all this patience and goodnesse of God leade you unto thankfulnesse? 4. Lastly, Take notice of the various and precious privi∣ledges whereof you are made partakers by means of righte∣ousnesse; These I will only mention without amplification:Pro. 3. 16. & 4. 22. Gen. 15. 15. Job 5. 26. Hereupon you may be confident. 1. That your lives are lengthened, not only by common providence, but in the pursuance of special promises made unto them who have received peculiar grace. 2. That you shall be supplied with all necessary accom∣modations in your passage to heaven; These are Christs own words unto them who seek righteousnesse, All these things shall be added unto you.Mat. 6. 33. . 3. That you shall undoubtedly persevere to glory, The righteous shall hold on his way. 4. That all occurrences shall be sanctified to your spiri∣tualJob 17. 9. advantage, Say ye to the righteous that it shall be wellIsa. 3. 10. with him. 5. That Gods vigilant eye of providence shall never be withdrawn from you, in which respect you may be the ratherJob 36. 7. assured of the seasonable and full accomplishment of all his promises. 6. That upon Natures dissolution your souls shall be perfect,Heb. 12. 22. and that at the generall Resurrection your bodies and souls shall inherit life eternall. Now who can beleevingly look up∣onMat. 15. 46. Express thank∣fulnesse by a conversation ordered accor∣ding to Scri∣pture. himself interested in these glorious obligations of Gods grace without a thankful heart? If by these many Arguments the hearts of any aged ones, being resolved upon gratitude, shall enquire how they may in realities expresse their thankfulnesse unto the Lord, both
for his long-sufferance and loving-kindenesse towards them. My answer is this, That you shall be regularly and acceptably thankfull unto God both for your gray-hairs and your gra∣ces, by studying and endeavouring such a frame of heart and course of life as may answer that counsell which himself hath left on record for your guidance in the holy Scriptures which I shall plainly and faithfully impart unto you. But before I mention particulars to direct your behaviour, I shall premise these two things to move attention with reso∣lutions to practise them. 1. That howsoever, too often, men themselves do not observe when gray hairs are here and there upon them, andHos. 7. 9. many times the aged may seem youthfull unto others; yet God doth take exact and particular notice of every aged person in the world. The holy Ghost recordeth when Jo∣shua waxed old, and was stricken in age, and about what timeJosh. 23. 1. 1 Sam. 17. 12. Gen. 17. Luk. 2. Jesse (the Father of David) went for an old man in Israel. The like I might discover in regard of Abraham, Sarah, Anna, But I forbear. 2. That the Lord doth punctually observe all the good,Gen. 17. 24. 1 Chro. 23 1. 1 Kin. 13. 11. Gen. 19. 4. Eze. 23. 43. and all the evils of them who are stricken in years, whether they be his own people or others. This I enlarge not by specifying instances, because the naked quotations may be sufficient. Having thus briefly premised these things, I proceed to the directions which I finde registred in the Word of God, that the aged may know how to order their conversation in some measure of answerablenesse unto that Crown of glory which the Lord by his grace and their gray hairs hath put upon them. In generall, They must be of such behaviour as becomethTit. 2. 3. holinesse, whether they be aged men or women, therefore they ought to advance and expresse the power of Gods grace by a diligent improvement of all such means as God hath sanctified. The Apostle John writeth to the Fathers who were knowing men, that they might become more holy.1 Joh. 2. 13, 14 Luk. 2. 37. And old Anna, though truly good, yet waited daily at the
Temple, that she might grow better. This I might perswade by many Arguments. 1. There is no one who hath lived the longest and hathDr Taylor on Tit. 2. 2. made the best proficiency in Christs School, that is come to that pillar on which he may write, Ne plus ultra; But when he hath summed up all his rich endowments, shall finde cause to conclude with the words of the Apostle, Not asPhil. 3. 12. though I were already perfect. 2. The grievances of old age are such, and so many, as will call for the exercise of the strongest graces attainable in this life. Solomon reckoneth up some of them, and telleth the aged person, that they will take away the pleasures of hisEccl. 12. 2. 3, 4, 5. life; Then all the faith, patience, and other graces which have been gained will be found weak enough, to wield, the burthens of that estate: This, this was the only support of the Psalmist, when strength and heart did fail, that God was the strength of his heart, and his portion (to live upon) for ever.Psa. 73. 26. In this respect pains should be taken, that as the outward man decayeth, the inward man may be renewed daily.2 Cor. 3. 16. 3. The aged will lie open unto derision and disrespect in regard of the imperfections and weaknesses which attend that condition of life, therefore they should labour by eminency of holinesse to secure their credit amongst all sorts of people whatsoever; For nothing doth more awe the hearts of the children of men then the power of godlinesse appearing in the conversations of Gods Servants; As Paul advised young Timothy hereby to prevent contempt, Let no man despise thee,1 Tim. 4. 12. but be an example of the beleevers in word and conversation, &c. So by means hereof Job had won great estimation amongst all sorts; The young men saw me and hid themselves, and theJob. 29. 8. aged arose and stood up. 4. The miscarriages of old people are in Gods account the more hainous, because they have had most frequent and most ancient experiences of his goodnesse. By this cir∣cumstance the evils of Israel are once and again aggravated. God carried them all the daies of old, but they rebelled and vexedIsa. 63. 9, 10. his holy Spirit: Know that it is an evil thing (more then or∣dinarily
evil) that my fear is not in thee, for of old time I haveJer. 2. 19, 20. broken thy yoke, &c. 5. And I might adde that their wickednesse will do muchPersenem vitio∣sum religio san∣cta destruitur. Bern. more mischief tending more to the dishonour of God and the infection of others. In all these regards it nearly con∣cerneth them whom God hath crowned with age and the profession of his Name, to heed their conversation, that it may be suitable unto that dignity which the Lord hath put upon them. It may well become every one of them upon this account, frequently and affectionately to make Davids prayer, Now I am old and gray-headed, O Lord forsake me not,Psa. 71. 18. until I have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to come. This in general, the particu∣lars follow. First, The aged should be full of knowledge as they are full of years; This is taken for granted in many Scripture∣passages, With the ancient is wisedom, and in length of daies isJob 12. 12. Isa. 3. 2. understanding; And thence it is that the ancient and the pru∣dent are conjoyned. Ignorance is much more excusable in the young, who may thus pleade, We are but of yesterday,Job. 8. 9. and know nothing, because our daies upon earth are a shadow; but an old Ignoramus is a thing intolerable: Better is a poor and wise childe, then an old and foolish King. When God hathEccl. 4. 13. set a Crown upon a mans head, and he knoweth not how to wear it; Honour (saith Solomon) is unseemly for a fool: AndProv. 26. 1. this disgrace is the greater when means of knowledge are enjoyed, yea, enjoyed for many years. You (saith the Apo∣stle to some who were members of the Church at Corinth) have not the knowledge of God. I speak this to your shame. And1 Cor. 15. 34. in like manner he greatens this defect in others; When for the time ye ought to be teachers of others, ye have need that one teachHeb. 5. 12. you again which be the first principles of the Oracles of God: Remember how sharply Christ reproveth Nicodemus, Art thou a Master in Israel and knowest not these things? It wouldJoh. 3. 10. be accounted a great disparagement unto a young man ha∣ving served out an Apprentiship, to be unacquainted with the mysteries of his Trade; Now fifty years is above seven
years in Sabbath-daies, and yet how many of that age (who have had an addition of many weekly Lecture-daies) are yet palpably ignorant in the mysteries of salvation? These things I suggest to shame the aged unto endeavours to become rich in understanding. Secondly, They should not only be knowing but fruitful, The righteous shall flourish like the palm-tree, they shall bringPsa. 92. 12, 14. forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing. This may upon good ground be looked for, from them who are truly good, for though the natural radical heat doth abate in old persons, yet the spirituall vigour which they receive from Christ decaieth not. His branches shall spread and hisHos. 14. 6, 8. beauty shall be as the Olive-tree, for from me is thy fruit found. Although age taketh them off from sundry emploiments, yet they should be doing something according to their abilities. The holy Ghost telleth us of an old man who came from his work out of the field at even; In the evening of our age, to∣wardsJudg. 19. 16. Sun-setting, we should be found acting in one kinde or other for God; and happy is that Servant whom his LordLuk. 12. 43. when he cometh shall finde so doing. Here I will instance in three particulars. 1. The aged must be Teachers of good things, Daies should speak, and the multitude of years should teach wisedome; ThisTit. 2. 3, 4. Job 3. 2. 7. Gen, 49. Deut. 32. Josh. 23. 1. Iob 29. 15. Mat. 12. 35. & 13. 52. 1 Tim. 4. 7. was the practice of old Jacob, Moses, Joshua, &c. And Job reporteth this as a ground of his comfort, I was eyes to the blinde, unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my counsell. You must bring forth of your treasure good things, both new and old, and not trifle out the latter part of your daies in telling old wives Fables. 2. They must communicate their experiences, Hear this, ye old men, Hath this been in your daies? Tell ye your childrenIoel. 1. 2, 3. of it, and let your children tell their children, and their children another generation. This hath been the custome of GodsPsa. 78. 1. Psa. 66. 16, 20. Num. 33. 1, 2. Worthies in all ages, according to his command, whereby themselves have received comfort, others benefit, and God glory. And this I seriously perswade, though I have not leasure to enlarge it. Let future ages understand the most
remarkable passages of Gods Providence which you have ex∣perienced, whereby sin may be rendred odious, and Christ with the waies of faith and holinesse may be represented precious to the souls of succeeding ages. 3. They should endeavour to clear both their own credit and consciences, in reference unto all their conversings in the world. This I propound from the example of Samuel, when he was old and gray-headed, pointing only at the Story,1 Sam. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. which is well worth consideration and imitation. And in this practice let the honour of Religion be rather vindicated then your own. Give God the glory of your own unreprovable conversation, and for your known miscarriages expresse your repentance, which will produce both present inward peace and future reputation. Thirdly, The aged should possesse their souls with patience, This is one of the particulars which St Paul adviseth Titus to presse upon old men, viz. that they be sound in patience. ThisTit. 2. 2. grace of patience considered under a threefold notion, is needfull, and would be commendable in them. 1. Patience in waiting for the full accomplishment of all Gods Promises. You have need of Patience (saith the Apostle)Heb. 10. 35. that after ye have done the will of God, you might receive the promise. And St James propounds the practice of the Hus∣bandman to perswade this; Behold, the Husbandman waitethIam. 5. 7. for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it. I may tell you whose heads are gray, whose lives have been a long seed-time in waies of well-doing, Behold, the fields areIoh. 4. 35. white already to harvest; Your time of reaping is at hand, therefore hold up your heads and hopes in a patient expecta∣tion of your recompence of reward. 2. Patience in forbearing those who load you with pro∣vocations. In this case let David be your Example, who si∣lently2 Sam. 16. 10. without yeelding unto motions made for revenge, sub∣mitted unto that affliction with which God did exercise him, through the cursings of Shimei. With how much contempt doth the Lion (the King of Beasts) passe on his way, not∣withstanding the barkings of angry dogs? Therefore you
aged ones who are crowned both with gray-hairs and graces, Look upon your selves as ready to set foot into your palace, and to take possession of the Kingdom prepared for you; and hereupon with a holy scorn slieght all the clamors and snarlings of them, who speak evil of you because you refuse1 Pet. 4. 1, 4. to run with them into the same excesse of riot. 3. Especially Patience in a calm and chearful bearing of all those infirmities and afflictions which are wont to accompa∣ny old age. Remember that your age is your Crown, and therefore carry it with contentment, though it cause your heads to ake. M. Cartwright upon my Text hath this note,Adversus sene∣ctutis incom∣moda, & diffi∣cultates, recre∣are debet. That the holy Ghost doth purposely tell the aged, that the hoary head is a Crown, that by this consideration he might releeve them under all the grievances which attend that con∣dition of life. M. Muffet upon my Text speaketh thus, Old age is born up by these two staves, 1. Life well-spent, 2. Hope of future glory. And Bishop Hall hath this expression in his Meditations and Vows: I account old age the best age, 1. Be∣cause the inconveniences of it are only bodily, with a better estate of minde. 2. Because nearer to dissolution. Hereunto he addeth this Story, When a man told a Philosopher, that he was sorry to see him so old: he returned this answer, Be sorry rather that ever I was young to be a fool: Many such like Meditations might be added to check frowardnesse, to maintain patience under all the pressures of old age, but I shall referre to the fore-men∣tioned priviledges which appertain unto them whose hoary heads are found in the way of righteousnesse. Fourthly, They should be sound in faith; 1. Both in the do∣ctrineTit. 2. 2. of faith, in the truth of the Scripture, having had long time for triall, to discern betwixt things which differ, and therefore in reference to Fundamentals at least they should be able to say with David to God, Concerning these thy Testi∣monies,Psa. 119. 152. Rom. 4. 19. Luk. 2. 25. Deut. 34. 1. I have known of old that thou hast founded them for ever. 2. And in the grace of faith, being strong in confi∣dence, whereby they shall with old Abraham glorifie God, and with old Simeon go singing to heaven; It was an easie thing with Moses to die when God had shewed him the pro∣mised
Land: And it's a good sight to behold ancient Chri∣stians carried out of this world with full sail of assurance, hearing them to speak, as Job did, I know that my Redeemer li∣veth,Iob 19. 25, 26, 27. and though after my skin worms destroy my flesh, yet in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see for my self, &c. It well becometh them likewise in times of trouble to pleade their old experiences with bold confidence, Why withdrawest thouPsa. 74. 11, 12. & 71. 17, 19, 21 thine hand, even thy right hand, pluck it out of thy hosome, for God is my King of old. Whereas their infidelity is the more inexcusable in it self, and the more provoking unto God, because manifold providences both in former and later years, have evidenced unto them Gods power and truth; TheyPsa. 106. 21, 22 23, 24. forgat God their Saviour which had done great things in Egypt, wondrous things in the Land of Ham, and terrible things by the Red Sea, therefore he said that he would destroy them, &c. they beleeved not his Word. And hence it was that both Mo∣sesNumb. 20. 12. Luk. 1. 18. and old Zechary were so severely dealt with for their in∣credulity. Fifthly, They should be sound in charity, This the ApnstleTit. 2. 2. addeth to the former. And it is very reasonable in many re∣gards; for as they have long lived upon Gods love, so they have received most kindenesses from men in manifold exigen∣ces, and the necessities of their old age do call for continued and renewed compassion from time to time. Here I shall on∣ly touch upon three Rules to guide this grace in its exercise. 1. For purity, their love should be most enlarged upon the account of piety. As it was the praise of Titus, that his2 Cor. 7. 15. inward affection was more abundant whilest he remembred the obedience of the Corinthians; When speciall kindenesse is shewed towards them who are of the houshold of faith.Gal. 6. 10. 2. For perpetuity, they must not be weary of works of cha∣rity:Gal. 6. 9. Charitas quae defini potest nunquam vera fuit. Aug. And doubtlesse if love be true it will be constant, for a friend loveth at all times. 3. For quantity, it should be encreased, and it will be to their high commendation if their works of mercy (as of other kindes) be more at the last then at the first. And thereforeRev. 2. 19. covetousness should be cashiered, as the cut-throat of charity.
Moreover, I might perswade from the authority of Saint Paul, sobriety, temperance, and gravity. For temperance letTit. 2. 2. 2 Sam. 19. 35. old Barzillai be an example unto the aged, whose modera∣tion in reference to the dainties of a Court tendred unto him, was very great. And let the sad consequences of NoahGen. 9. 21. Alto aetas alios mores postulat. his intemperance give caution for sobriety unto all ancient persons whatsoever. As for gravity, it's a vertue opposed to lightnesse and apishnesse; It should be expressed in counte∣nance, speech, and apparell, &c. But these things I must not enlarge. And I will only name what the Apostle addeth in relation to old women. They must not be false accusers; His word suggests that false accusers are devil-like, having. Tit. 2. 3. Ioh. 8. 44. Iam. 3. 6. tongues set on fire by hell. This may be a sufficient watchword to warn them to keep at a distance from such exorbitances; The last thing which I will advise all ancient persons unto, is constancy and perseverance in waies of righteousnesse, ac∣cording to all the former directions; I would propound the resolution of David when old and gray-headed for your imi∣tation, I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more andPsa. 71. 9. - 14. more, &c. You should be unmoveable like unto old Oaks, deeply rooted, which are not turned hither and thither, this way and that way, by every contrary winde. Remember the speech of old Polycarpus when tempted to Apostasie, God hath been my good Master for 85 years, therefore I will not forsake him: As Arguments to move endeavours after steddinesse both in the profession and practice of the truth, take these short particulars into your serious conside∣ration. 1. In the winter of your age, you may probably be as∣saulted with violent storms. When thou shalt be old (saith Christ to Peter) another shall gird thee and carry thee whitherIoh. 21. 18, 19. thou wouldest not: This spake he, fignifying by what death he should glorifie God. 2. You are in danger of declining. Good old Ely towards1 Sam. 2. 22. with cap. 3. 13. the end of his life was wofully cooled in his zeal for God, as his indulgence towards his Sons, did manifest. And when Solomon was old, his wives turned away his heart after other1 King. 11. 4.
gods, and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his father. These examples may give you an Alarum; for neither high parts, nor saving grace, will secure you from porttall apostacie, therefore you should be watchfull. 3. God doth not change or abate in his goodnesse toward you, but he speaketh unto you as to old Israel. You are borneIsa. 46. 3, 4. by me from the belly which are carried from the womb. And even to your old age I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you. Now should not Gods immutability in his favours notwith∣standing your great unworthinesse, engage you strongly to hold close unto his Majesty without any backslidings! 4. Your fruitfullnesse in age, will add to your comfort when you die, and to your honour afterwards. The promise of God speaketh thus much: Thou shalt come to thy grave inJob 5. 26. a full age, like as a shock of Corn cometh in in his season. Unto which might be added St Pauls experience; I have fought a2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousnesse, which theMortem plenus expeto. Seneca. Lord the righteous Judg shall give me at that day. Having finished my Exhortation to the aged, I shall direct my counsell unto them who are young; wherein I will be the shorter, because I have been so large in the former, and I will cast mine advice under three heads. First, To seek the lengthening of their lives, that they may attain the Crown of glory, which belongeth to the hoary head. And for this end, 1. Let them warily decline all life-endangering practises. I will instance in some. Quarrellings, fightings, whereby many in the flower of their age lose their lives, wherof there are sad experiences every where. Whoredom is another life-short∣ningPro. 2. 18. Pro. 7. 11. sin: Solomon telleth us, that the Harlots house inclineth to death, & her paths unto the dead. And he foretelleth the young man, what will be the consequence of that course; Thou shalt mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed. And unto both the former, I may add drunkennesse and gluttony,
for as the strength of nature is wasted, and the body is filled with diseases through intemperancy; and by reason hereof the forementioned evils of quarelling and whoring are much fomented. The words of Solomon are here conside∣rable:Pro. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Who hath wo? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions, who hath wounds, who hath rednesse of eyes! They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixt wine, &c. At the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. Thine eyes shall behold strange women, yea thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast. Finally, Take heed of all such wayes of wickednesse, which may justly bring you under the Magistrates sword, or expose you to the deadly blows of divine displeasure: BloodyPsal. 55. 23. and deceitfull men shall not live out half their dayes. 2. Let them betake themselves unto such courses, where∣unto God hath promised length of dayes. The Lord in the fifth Commandement, perswadeth every child to honour and obey his parents, upon this consideration, that thy dayesDeu. 5. 16. may be prolonged. Yea the whole course of obedientiall con∣formity unto all Gods Commandements, is pressed by this argument; What man is he that desireth life, and loveth manyPs. 34. 12, 13, 14. dayes that he may see good? keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil and do good. AndDiodate. Contingere so∣lum iis qui justè viverunt, &c. quod sit . Pisca∣tor. Hujus vitae bre∣vitas, longiore in summa beati∣tate, vita com∣pensatur. Cart. 2 Tim. 2. 22. some Expositors do suggest from my Text, that walking in the way of righteousnesse, is a means to obtain the honour of an hoary head. God ordinarily granteth long life unto good men. This is most certain, that God will either lengthen the lives of such upon earth, or else crown them with life eternal in Heaven. This lets in the second head of advice to be be∣stowed upon young persons. Secondly, To seek righteousnesse. This was St Pauls coun∣sel unto young Timothy, Follow righteousnesse. And the do∣ctrine under hand is a strong argument to back it, which David pressed upon his sonne Solomon, when young and ten∣der; who speaking of sanctifying grace under the name of wisedom, useth these words; Exalt her and she shall promoteProv. 4. 3, 4, with v. 8, 9. thee, she shall bring thee to honour when thou doest embrace her.
She shall give to thine head an ornament, a Crown shall she deliver to thee. Righteousnesse therefore will be a Crown of glory, unto the green-headed, as well as unto the gray-headed, which should move the young to look out after it. Now that my perswasion may be the more prevalent with young ones, I shall commend these following particulars un∣to their serious consideration. 1. Gods expresse command: Remember now thy CreatorEccl. 12. 1. in the dayes of thy youth. If you acknowledge his Soveraign∣ty over you, as your Maker, is it not rationall that you should suddenly submit unto his government? 2. The examples of such young ones, who came in unto2 Chron. 34. Dan. 1. & 3. 2 Tim. 3. 15. God graciously in the morning of their age: Josiah, Daniel, Shadrack, Meshach and Abednego, as also Timothy; but especially set Christ before your eyes, who when he wasLuk. 2. 42, 51. twelve years old, did famously expresse the power of grace. Do you judg godlinesse commendable in them, wherefore then do you not endeavour imitation? 3. The advantages of seeking grace betimes, early in theHeb. 3. 7, 8, 13. Qui non est ho∣die, cras minus aptus erit. 1 King. 14. 3, with 13. Mark. 10. 21. Discipulum mi∣nimum Christus amavit pluri∣mum. Joh. 21. 20. Pro. 22. 6. Quo semel est imbutae recens, Joh. 15. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 58. morning of youth. I shall name some of them without en∣largement (viz.) The work will be to your selves the more easie (as the bowing of the twig while tender,) and to God the more acceptable, when the first fruits are consecrated unto his Majesty. Christ is said to love the moral young man; and it is conjectured, that John had the more tender respect, because he came unto Christ so soon. The gracious seasonings in youth, will also make the conversation more savoury afterwards: And the sooner you undertake Gods service, the more glory you shall bring unto his Name, the larger recompence likewise your selves shall receive. Finally, this will be an encouragement, unto your hopefull addresses unto the Lord, as need may require. Mark Davids manner of pleading in prayer; O God thou hast taught me from my youth, and hitherto I have declared thy wondrous works. NowPsa. 71. 17, 18. also when I am old and gray headed O God forsake me not. 4. The necessity of endeavouring to be godly in the time of youth. This might be sundry wayes manifested: Because
then most subject to satisfie many sinfull corrruptions. As the boyling pots cast up the most scum, so in the heat of youth, there are strongest inclinations to passions, revenge, lasciviousnesse, intemperance. &c. In which respect the A∣postle saw cause to give Timothy this counsel; Fly youthfull lusts, but follow righteousnesse, faith, charity, peace, &c. And the2 Tim. 2. 22. breaking forth of wickednesse in youth, will breed bitter com∣plaints in old age. As the aged are wont to feel pain in those bones which were bruised or broken, when they were young. Thou writest bitter things against me (saith Job) and makest meJob 13. 26. to possesse the iniquities of my youth. Ephraim also maketh pit∣tifull moan, bearing the reproach of youth. Yea, suppose youJer. 31. 19. should be secured from all grosse evils, while young; yet if ever the Lord bring you home unto himself, by the power ofNimis serò, ad te veni Domine. an effectual calling, this will be a cut upon your hearts (as it was to Augustine,) that you came in to God no sooner. How will you bewail your folly and great ingratitude untoMal. 1. 8, 13, 14 God, that the devil hath been gratified by your first-fruits, and that only the refuse, dregs, and withered stuff of old age, is reserved for God. And if the Lord should punish your obstinacy in youth, with finall impenitence, how sad would your reckoning be at the last day? for this is most certain, that when you have sowed your wild oats, and satisfied the sinfull desires of youth, for all these things God will bring youEccl. 11. 9. to judgement. The Lord give young ones to dwell upon these meditations, and to lay them seriously unto their hearts. Here I might justly take up a great lamentation, considering that aversness unto the power of piety, which is every where to be found amongst young people, notwithstanding instructions, convictions, ministerial perswasions, together with some mo∣tions of Gods Spirit upon their hearts, with which their souls are assaulted for good from time to time. They will acknow∣ledge the reasonablenesse of our advice; they will shed tearsImpius & foe∣lix, sic simul esse cupit. being reproved for their regardlesnesse of God and of their own souls; yea they will make fair promises of amendment for time to come. But, alas, alas, poor foolish creatures, how carelesse in seeking to keep these spiritual sparks alive in their
own bosomes. How soon do these good motions die withinBonum quaris, malum facis, in contraria curris. August. Inter mortis metum & vitae tormenta miscre fluctuant. Se∣neca. them. They would have the Crown tendered, but will not resolutely hold on in the use of Gods means to obtain it. Fain they would save their souls, and yet satisfie their sinfull lusts also. And thus they fluctuate as a wave upon the sea, carried hither and thither by contrary windes. Whereas they should upon a serious consideration (whether it be better to serve God or the devil, to save the soul, or to hazard the losse of it unto eternity) work themselves unto an unmoveable deter∣mination, to seek the Crown of glory in the way of righteous∣nesse. Thirdly, To yeeld due, reverent respect unto aged persons, especially to such in whom the power of grace doth most eminently appear. Mr Cartwright upon my Text presseth this duty, arguing from our honouring them whom men Crown, unto such to whom God assigneth the Crown of glo∣ry. As there should be testifications of high respect unto all such, so especially 1. To our natural parents Honour thy Fa∣therExod. 20. 12. 1 Tim. 5. 17. and thy Mother. 2. And to those whose Office and faith∣fulnesse in discharging it, doth call for double honour. Now this honourable respect of the aged (especially if godly) must be expressed, 1. By reverent gestures: Thou shalt rise up before the hoaryLev. 19. 32. head, and honour the face of the old man. 2. By giving them the precedencie, in speaking in all cases to be debated. Elihu said, I am young and ye are very old,Job 32. 6, 7. Adolescens bis interrogatus re∣spondeat. Bern. wherefore I was afraid and durst not shew mine opinion. I said, Dayes should speak and multitude of years should teach wisedom. 3. By testimonies of due estimation to their persons, even at those times when there may be occasion to blame some of their practices. Rebuke not an Elder, but intreat him as a Fa∣ther.1 Tim. 5. 1. 4. By submitting unto their grave and gracious counsels. Likewise ye younger, submit your selves unto the elder. The Apo∣stle1 Pet. 5. 5. Philem. 9. stileth himself Paul the aged, to prevail with Philemon to yeeld unto his advice. 5. By preferring them (if in all other regards comparison
be equall) in discoveries of love and estimation. As it was agreed upon betwixt Paul and the Disciples, that he should rather lodge at the house of Mnason an old Disciple, then anyActs 21. 16. where else. By thus doing, we shall witnesse to the world that our judgements are rectified, and our conversations are ordered by the word of truth, and that therefore we account the hoary-head to be a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousnesse. Now having concluded my discourse upon the Text, I know it is expected, that I should speak unto the occasion of our meeting concerning this Reverend Father (whose Fu∣neral we now celebrate) I will premise this, that a full Nar∣rative of his long well-spent Life, cannot be expected from my report at this time, but I hope that it will in due time be drawn up and handed unto you for his honourable remem∣brance, and for imitation unto posterity, by One who was∣fully acquainted both with his Life and Death. In generall this I dare assert with confidence (wherein I doubt not your consent) that his hoary head was a Crown of glory, for it was found in the way of righteousnesse. Through Gods good providence, he had a long time worn this his Crown, for he was well nigh Fourscore years old. Notwith∣standing this his great age, yet (through unusuall divine indulgence) his strength was not labour and sorrow, for hePsal. 90. 10. was neither afflicted with the Stone, or Gowt, or Cramp, or any Cough; but he laboured only (as I have often heard him say) under the disease of weak old age. That which is recorded of Abraham, may be applied to him, That he died in aGen. 25. 8. good old age, an old man and full of years. Neither were the abi∣lities of his minde abated, but his understanding and memory continued strong, even unto his end. As all his Works published, do proclaim his incomparable learning in all kindes: so those which were lately printed do witnesse that Academicall studies (when he was young) were fresh and ready for improvement in his old age. And the promise made to the righteous man, was verified in him, He shall bring forthPsal. 92. 14. fruit in old age, he shall be fat and flourishing. In all which re∣gards,
whether we consider the continued healthfull frame of his body, or the uninterrupted fruitfullnesse of the gifts and graces of his spirit, it may be truly said of him, in reference to his death. That he is come to his grave in a full age, like as aJob 5. 26. shock of Corn cometh in in his season. But that I may not antici∣pate the intended Narrative of his whole Life, I shall only declare two or three passages towards the end of his dayes. When he looked upon the weakning distempers (which had caused him to keep his bed) as the Arrest of death, he was pleased (through his love to my worthlesse self) to give order that I should be certified of his weaknesse, that he might be remembred before the Lord in my prayers; and also that I might be requested, as from himself, to perform the like office of respect for him, which I had lately done for his Reverend neighbour Mr Whitaker, by preaching his Fu∣nerall Sermon. Upon this intelligence the next morning I hastened unto him, to witnesse mine unfeigned love and ho∣nourable respect of him, as also to put this work (which I have now performed) with his approbation, upon an abler hand: but finding him altogether unwilling to excuse me, I thought it more meet to undertake it, then to distemper his spirit by my refusall. By reason of his very great weaknesse he could not speak much, but that which he said was weighty and savoury, which I will faithfully relate: His words were these; I am now conflicting with my last Adversary, though I beleeve the sting is taken out. Nature will struggle, but I hum∣bly submit unto the good pleasure of God. I heartily beg the par∣don of my many sinnes, especially of my want of sedulity and fideli∣ty in my publick and private charge, hoping to be washed with Christs blood, and desiring to be translated out of this restlesse condition. I expect daily, yea hourly to be translated into that everlasting rest, which God hath prepared for them who are interested in his Christ: And I pray God to blesse you, and his whole Ministery every where. These were his last words unto me, upon which I might much enlarge my self; but I leave the improvement hereof, and of his laborious exemplary Life, unto your conscientious
endeavours. Although he be now dead, yet he still liveth by his worthy Works already printed, unto which I hope many more (which be left ready for the Presse) will be added for future profit in the Church of Christ. I conclude, with hearty desires, that this sad providence, in his death, may be sancti∣fied unto us all, and especially unto his nearest Relations, through Gods rich grace in Jesus Christ. FINIS.
The Narrative of the Life and Death of Mr GATAKER. Mr THOMAS GATAKER or GATACRE (for so he wrote himself, till of later years to prevent mis∣calling occasioned frequently by the view of the letters he changed it into GATAKER) was a branch of an ancient Family, so firmly by Gods providence planted in Shropshire, that the stock hath continued in the same House, carrying the Name of its owner, and known by the title of Gatacre-Hall, by an uninterrupted succession from the time of K. Edward the Confessor. His Father Mr Thomas Gatacre (being not the eldest sonne of William Gatacre) was designed by his Parents to the study of the Law, in order to which he was a student at the Temple. During the course of that institution, he occasionally coming to visit some Kinred (then high in place and power,) was often present at the examination of some Christian confessors of the Gospel, in those severe times wherein Satan armed all his forces to suppresse that dawning light which threatned ruin to his kingdom of darknesse. The harshnesse of those proceedings, together with the constancy of the good, though simple Christians, that with evidence of truth and resolution of minde maintained Faith and a good conscience, were of great moment with him to facilitate the entertainment of that purer doctrine of the Gospel which began to shine in∣to his soul. This being apprehended by his Parents, they jea∣lous of his change, sent him over to Lorain in Flanders, and to win him to a compliance in religion, setled upon him an estate in Lease of 100lb per annum old rent. but like St Paul, Phil. 3. he counted all outward advantages as nothing in comparison of the knowledge of Christ Jesus. Therefore his Father per∣ceiving his unchangeable stedfastnesse in that choice (which
had nothing to prejudice it but the seeming novelty,) recalled him, and with great displeasure revoked his own Grant, which yet could not take effect without the Sonnes consent. But the young disciple had already learned the hard lesson of self-denyall and forsaking all to follow Christ. Therefore to preserve his conscience, he gave up that which had been the bait of Apostasie. Now the Lord (that hath promised to his faithfull followers satisfaction for all their losses) raised him up Friends, by whose means and advice he pursued his studies at Oxford, and in process of time, (when not only the clowds of ignorance and superstition were dispelled, but also the showers of blood were blown over) he took upon him the publick Ministry of the Gospel. He was houshold Chaplain to Robert Earl of Leicester, and Pastor of St Edmunds in Lumbertstreet London. In that Parsonage-house by his Wife Margaret, being of an honest Family of the Pigots in Hert∣fordshire, (among other Children) he had this Sonne Tho∣mas, born Sept 4. A. D 1574. In his Childhood he was so addicted to those means which his Parents applied him unto, for the implanting in him the seeds of good literature, that he needed a bridle rather then a spur; for his love of Learning (equall to that admirable ca∣pacity wherewith the Father of Lights had furnished him) was so active in the acquiring of it, that his Father hath often gent∣ly chidden him from his book. Neither were his nimble wit,. Greg. Naz. Epitrph. Basil. sharp reason, and vast memory perverted to be the instruments of that debauchery wherewith the corruption of our nature doth too often stain and deflower our first dayes: for he had a lovely gravity in his young conversation; so that, what Greg. Nazianzen said of the great Basil, might be averred of him, that he held forth Learning beyond his age, and a fixedness of Manners more considerable then his Learning. Having happily dispatched his tyrocinnia of first exercises in the Grammer-Schools (wherein he overcame by strange in∣dustry the difficulties which that age, destitute of many helps our present dayes enjoy, conflicted withall; and outstripped many that ran in the same course,) before he had compleated
sixteen years. A. D. 1590. He was by his Father placed in St Johns Colledge in Cambridge. Not long after his settle∣ment there, his Father (being called by God to receive the reward of his labours) left him not wholly destitute, yet not sufficiently provided for any long continuance of his studies there. But God that hath engaged his truth and mercy to the upright, even for their seed also (Psal. 112. 1, 2.) (espe∣cially when the Sonne doth not degenerate or thwart the providence of God, by a forfeiture of his title to the Promi∣ses,) provided friends and means for him, who was by an hidden counsel then designed to be an instrument of doing service to the Church of Christ. Thus the fruit was not nipped in a promising bud, by the frost of want. Now, not from meer favour, but from merit (upon the proof of his Learning) he was chosen Scholer of that worthy Society, wherein he continued his Studies with unwearied dili∣gence and happy success, till he with Abilities answerable to his Degree, commenced Master of Arts. Take for an instance of his Industry this (viz. that he was a constant Auditor of that eminent Light of Learning Mr Jo. Boys, who read a Greek Lecture in his bed to certain young Students that preferred antelucana studia before their rest and ease. The Notes of those praelections he kept as a treasure, and being visited by Mr Boys many years after, he produced them, to the no small joy of the good old man, who professed himself made some years younger by that entertainment. Then was contracted that streight friendship betwixt Mr Gataker and that faithfull servant of Christ Mr Rich. Stock, which continued untill the death of this Reverend Minister, as appears by the testimony given unto him at his Funeral. An evidence of the good esteem which Mr Gataker had now acquired for his Learning and Piety was this, that a College be∣ing then to be erected by the munificence of the Countess of Sussex, the Trustees of that Foundress (Persons eminent for Zeal and Prudence,) did choose him to be one of that Society. They transplanted him into that new Nursery of Arts and Re∣ligion, being confident that he would (as he did by Christs assi∣stance)
prove fruitfull for the ornament and benefit of that Se∣minary. Indeed they laid hold of him before the house was fit for inhabitants, fearing lest so fair and promising a flower should be taken up by some other hand. But while the College was in building (that he might not lose any opportunity of do∣ing good,) he retired to Mr William Aylofes house in Essex, who had gained him that he might instruct both himself in the Hebrew Tongue, and his eldest Sonne in Literature proper to his age. In this Family, partly by his own inclination, and partly by the incouragement of the Governours thereof, he performed holy Duties for the instruction of the whole houshold, expounding a portion of Scripture every morning, that the Sunne of Righteousness might as constantly arise, as the day brake in upon them. In this Exercise, whereby he laboured & proficere & prodesse (both to edifie others and himself) he dispatched the Epistles of the Apostles, the Pro∣phecies of Isaiah, and a good part of the book of Job, rendring the Text out of the Original Languages, and thence delivering cleer explications,, and also deducing usefull observations. Dr Stern then Suffragan of Colchester (visiting the Mistress of the Family, to whom he was neerly related,) happened to be present at this Exercise, when Mr Gataker explicated the first Chapter of St Pauls Epistle to the Ephesians, which is known to be most pregnant of deep divine mysteries. This portion of holy Writ he treated upon with so happy elucidations, that the judicious Doctor much satisfied with the performance, and ad∣miring the indowments of Mr Gataker, exhorted him instantly to take holy Orders, whereby those Gifts might be authori∣zed for publick use, and improved for the building up of the Church, and withall offered him his assistance in that busi∣ness. But he well weighing the burden of that Calling, and modestly judging of his own ability, which he conceived dis∣proportionable to that Office (to the full discharge whereof the Apostle hath set, ; who is sufficient?) thanked the Doctor for his kind offer, but deferred the matter to fur∣ther confideration. Afterward by the advice of the Reverend Mr Hen. Alvey, formerly his Tutor, and in this business taken
for a Counsellor, upon his remonstrance of divers reasons, and the instances of Dr Stern afresh reiterated, he assented to be Ordained by the said Suffragan. The Fabrick of Sidney-Sussex-Colledge being now consum∣mated, he betook himself to the station designed him, and to the work depending thereon, wherein his pains for seasoning young Students with principles of piety and learning were both great and prosperous; for some of them that watered their gardens at his Spring, or lighted their Lamps at his Light, grew up to eminency, as M. Jo. Hoyl and M. Tho. Pell afterwards worthy Fellows of the same Society. About that time certain persons zealous of promoting the glory of God and gaining souls to Christ, that lay in a sad condition through the defect of Pastors able to teach and leade the people in the waies of truth, life, and peace, espe∣cially M. Abdias Ashton of St Johns, and M. William Bedel of Emmanuel, set on foot a design of preaching in places adja∣cent to the University even to a considerable distance; These invited M. Gataker to be a partner in this labour; Being drawn in and encouraged by them, he preached every Lords day at Everton (a village in the meeting-confines of Cambridge, Bedford, and Huntingtonshire) where a decrepid man (re∣ported to be 30. years above an 100.) sustained the Name of Vicar, Vix magni nominis umbra. Here a Family of Burgoins resident in that place deserveth this Honourable remembrance, that M. Roger Burgoin during that time used M. Gataker with great humanity, which by him was construed to be the effect of his piety. After half a year thus religiously employed with manifesta∣tion of a publike spirit, finding some causes to retire from the University, at the motion of M. Ashton above-mentioned (that had been Tutor) he removed to Sir William Cooks Family then resident in London. This place and employment occasioned the more publike discovery of his Ministerial gifts, with the sin∣gular approbation of many persons of note, not only for outward estate, but also for affection unto, and judgement in Religion: Hereupon the Lecturers place at Lincolns Inne
falling void, some principall persons of that Honourable So∣ciety (which had been his Auditors occasionally) made ad∣dresses unto him, inviting him to that place, offering their assistances, and alledging the facility of his Introduction by the Lord Chief Justice Pophams interessing himself in the bu∣sinesse, whom they knew both to have loved the Father Thomas Gataker (being his intimate once, and contemporary in the studies of Law) and to favour the Son very highly for his own worth and work in the Ministry. But he according to his usuall modesty declined the undertaking, and resisted the importunities even of his Friend M. Stock, till D. Mountague Master of Sydney-Colledge, repairing to London, and being acquainted with the design in hand (though he had it in his thoughts to invite M. Gatacre back to the Colledge, that he might reade an Hebrew Lecture that had a Salary annexed by the Lord Harrington, yet (laying that aside) prest M. Gata∣ker with Arguments and Authority, encouraged him against his own diffidence, and wrought him at last to an assent that without any suit made by him the Lord Popham should re∣commend him to that society. Thus was he chosen Preacher at Lincolns Inne, where he spent ten years to the advance∣ment of piety, and with a happy Reformation of some abu∣ses of the Lords day, as he himself testifies in his Apologeti∣cal discourse against Lilly, pag. 16, 17. But notwithstanding that Engagement M. Gataker did not totally abandon the Family of Sir William Cook, to whose Lady he was neer by bloud, and dear to both, upon the ac∣count of his pious labours amongst them. Therefore in the vacations being disengaged from attendance at the Inne of Court, he resided in that Family, exercising his Ministry ei∣ther in thier Chappell or in the Parish-Church, as occasion re∣quired; and this with an Apostolicall minde, not for filthy lucre, but freely making the Gospel a burthen only to the dispenser: Yet such was the devotion of that religious pair, that they also would not serve God without cost, for they afterwards in consideration of those pains freely taken setled upon M. Gataker an Annuity of 20lb per annum, which he in∣deed
received for some few years, but after (for certain Rea∣sons) remitted unto the Heir of that Family, forbearing to use the Right he had, and forbidding his Executor to claim any Arrears of that Annuity. This is mentiooed the rather that the generous temper of his Christian Soul aiming at the highest good of others more then his own temporall advan∣tage, and infinitely removed from sordid acquisition of gain, or the prostitution of his sacred Function unto secular de∣signs, may be opposed to stop the impudent clamour of some whose consciences being both galled and cauterized, prompted them to calumniate him as guilty of covetousnesse. But his own pen writ the best Apology, as indeed (according to that of Nazianzen) they that give him a just character and dueGreg. Epita. Basil. commendation, had need to have also his Eloquence. While he attended on that Flock at Lincolns-Inne, Sir Wil∣liam Sidley a Learned Mecaenas and pious Patron of the Church offered him a fair Benefice, and because M. Gataker de∣clined the burthen of a Pastoral Cure, and pleaded an unwil∣lingnesse to be taken off from those worthy Gentlemen (of whose favour he had good experience) he endeavoured to per∣swade him that the taking of an assistant would salve all in∣conveniences, so that he needed not to desert the Society which in Term-time only, required his labours. But he that poised that burthen in the Scale of the Sanctuary, alwaies thought that one Cure of souls was enough for one man, and adventured the unkinde resentment of the Noble Gentleman upon the refusall, rather then the accumulation of prefer∣ments. After ten years labours profitably employed at Lincolns Inne, not only for the benefit of the then living Servants of God, but also for the behoof of posterity, especially by that Learned Discouse of Lots there and then conceived, and form∣ed (wherein what satisfaction is given to conscience in many cases, let the judicious acknowledge) M. Gataker thence re∣moved to undertake the Rectory of Rotherhith in Surry, of the grounds, motive, and manner whereof he himself hath largely given an account to the world in his Apologetick a∣gainst
Lilly, p. 44. 48. of which this is the Summe. The Rectory of Redrith in Surry (as it is commonly cal∣led) being void, and one of an infamous life labouring hard to succeed in it (in order to which he before the Incumbents death had set on foot a transaction with the mother of certain Orphans in whose hands the Patronage was supposed to rest,) some of the Religious Inhabitants valuing the means of grace above all other enjoyments, cast their eyes and thoughts upon M. Gataker, to gain whom they added to their own entreaties the mediation of his good Friend M. Richard Stock. And when he had by many reasons remonstrated unto him, that God did call him to the work, whose honour and Ordinances might suffer prejudice by the intrusion of an un∣worthy man, he at last suffered himself to be perswaded to engage himself in that charge, which being represented to Sir Henry Hobart then Attorney-Generall by M. Randolph Crew (afterward Lord Chief Justice.) Sir Henry that before favoured other pretensions to gratifie some Tenants of his in the Parish, did yet readily embrace the motion concerning setling of M. Gataker there, according to his contentment, and wrote a Letter to the Bishop for the removall of all ob∣structions that lay in the way or might hinder the acceptance of the Presentation of M. Gataker, which signed with the hands of all the three Brethren who had Right in that Advo∣cation, was tendred on his behalf. The report of his remove was no welcome news to many of that society, who fain would retain him, some whereof offered an enlargement of his maintenance for an argument to keep him, and others represented the consistence of both employments by the help of an Assistant. But he that made not his Ministery  a meer Trade of living here (as Gregory Naz. complained some did in his time, and too many in our times do,) nor would multiply burthens when he deemed himself unfit for the least, would not be wrought to a new resolution. Therefore Ann. Dom. 1611. commending his former charge to the grace of God, he be∣took himself to the sole attendance on that Flock of which
God had now made him overseer. His industry in discharge thereof was constant and great, notwithstanding an almost per∣petuall headach, wherewith God had exercised him from his very youth, and for which he had this only poor comfort from his Physicians, Dr Goulston his singular good friend (with whom he communicated his studies on Galen, and to whom he contributed his assistance for the edition of some parts of Ga∣len,) often telling him, that the incurable disease of age would be the remedy of his distemper, because together with the a∣batement of naturall heat, his indisposition would grow less vigorous or violent. To the work of his Ministry in publick upon the Sabbath, he added a weekly Catecheticall Lecture on Friday in the evening, designed by him to lay the foundation of saving knowledge in the hearts of Children, a certain number whereof every Lecture day did give an account of their know∣ledge by set Answers to Questions delivered out unto them be∣forehand for their instruction. (This course of holding a sound form of words, agreeable to the doctrine of the Gospel consigned in holy writ, of what importance it is, we may conclude from that ignorance and error that have invaded the Church of later times, these mischiefs being imputable scarce to any thing so much as to the omission of that usefull duty of Catechising.) But that exer∣cise was performed by him, with such an accurate and methodi∣call explication of the whole body of Divinity, that Christians of riper years and long standing in Christs School, did resort to be partakers of those discourses, wherein their well exercised senses found not only milk fit for Children, but also solid meat suitable to grown men in Christ. This he continued till he had absolved a perfect summary of Theologie, and gave it over when he observed the least part of his Auditory to be those forSolunt ultrae putere rces. Hieron. whom he mainly intended the work, his Parishioners being grown to a neglect at least of his free labours in that kinde. Mr Gatakers constant retirement in his study, made the choice of a help meet for him, that might oversee his Family, a necessary act of prudence. Therefore not long before he left Lincolns-Inne, he married the Widdow of M. William Cupper, to whose two Daughters he was so providently kind in their education
and disposing in marriage to two Divines of note, and conti∣nued such a fatherly love to them and theirs, that the world mistook them for his own children. That Wife died in childbed of a Sonne, that bore the Fathers Name, who after that he had seen the most remote parts of the world wherewith we keep commerce, returned home to his Father and died in peace. The same motive still being in force, he after a decent inter∣val of widdowhood, chose to himself the Daughter of a Reve∣rend Divine M. Charles Pinner, who was then brought up in the worthy and religious Family of M. Ellis Crisp, Brother to Mrs Pinner. It pleased God to give him a Sonne by her (who in process of time was dedicated to Gods work in the Mini∣stery) but immediately to take away the Mother, so that the Mothers Funerals and Childs Baptism were celebrated toge∣ther: Thus our wise and gracious Father tempers the cup for his Children, lest they should surfet upon earthly enjoyments, as they might easily do if they were meer and unmixt with oc∣casions of sorrow. He remained then for many years in a disconsolate solitude, till he again adventured and married a Gentlewoman of a very considerable Family, being Sister to Sr George, and Sr John Far∣wel, and of a good esteem for understanding and piety. By her he had three Children, whereof a Sonne and a Daughter were carried to the ground before their Mother, but the third yet lives to walk by the light of her Fathers life and doctrine. This Gentlewoman being of a contemplative minde fell into a Con∣sumption, which wasted the body so that the soul took flight from thence to Heaven. Last of all he took to Wife a Citizens Widow, whose com∣fortable conversation he enjoyed twenty four years, but with∣out Issue by her. The love to her was one motive, why he re∣treated out of his Parsonage-house to another habitation of his own revenue; for supposing that she might be the survi∣vor, he would make a convenient provision for her that she might not be subject to anothers curtesie for removal. And that affection extended it self in great liberality to divers of her kinred that were capable of support from him, both in her
life time and since her decease. Her he survived two years within a few dayes, and because he numbred his dayes with wisedom, presuming that the time was approaching of his soul being maried to the Lamb, he could not endure to listen unto the motion of some that advised him to a new entanglement in the world. Having thus related his severall Marriages, in a continued Narrative; I must step back to the report of some passages, in time antecedent unto the last of them. In the year 1620, having a justifiable curiosity to see our neighbour Church in the united Provinces, and something of the other Provinces in Belgium, he took the advantage of the Truce then between the Spaniard and the Hollander, for a free passage between both countries: Therefore with his entire friend Capt. Josua Downing, and an old acquaintance M. RogerActs 21. 16. Hughs (his Mnason, whose house he used frequently in London) he took his voyage, taking withall a Nephew of his being a young Student to be a partaker of that travell. His Mother then alive had some fears, lest he being a known adversary to the Popish cause (which he had mortally wounded with va∣rious weapons) should suffer inconvenience from that genera∣tion of vipers, whose virulent malice often prompts them to base courses of secret revenge. But God was his guide and his shield, and prospered his journey so, that within a moneth (for they took boat July 13. and returned safe Aug. 14.) he had viewed the most considerable places in the Low Countries. In this travell he gave better satisfaction to the English Church at Middleburgh, where he gave way to the importunity of friends, desiring to hear him as well as glad to see him, then he did to the English Papists in Flanders, with whom he had divers debates, wherein he drove some to a confusion whom he could not gain to conversion. Anno 1642. a violent fit of the Colick assaulted him, and brought him to the very brink of the grave: but God brought him back again that he might do him further service. For the year ensuing, before he had well recovered his strength, he was called by the Parliament to sit as one of that Assembly, which
was summoned to be consulted about Religion; where his en∣deavours for promoting Truth and suppressing Error were sin∣cere and serious: And his study of Peace with modesty was in this remarkable, that when his Reafons delivered concerning Christs obedience in order to our Justification (wherein he dif∣fered from his brethren) could not obtain assent from the major part which determined the Question contrary to his sense, his own love of unity imposed upon him silence; and wrought him likewise unto resolutions, not to publish his discourses of that subject from Rom. 3. 28. that he might not publikely diseover his dissent from the Votes of that Reverend Assembly. During his attendance upon the work of that Convention, the Earl of Manchester (being acquainted with his great worth and fitness in regard of his Learning in all kindes, for Academicall transactions) offered him the Mastership of Trini∣ty College in Cambridg, which is the greatest preferment of that University: for that Noble Lord being intrusted by the Par∣liament, with the care of that Academy, was not passionately transported with a blind partiality of mens persons, upon any sinister respects, but desired to prefer them, whom he judged most worthy and most hopefull to do Christ service there: and therefore being perswaded that M. Gataker might (both in re∣gard of his gravity and vast Scholasticall abilities) be a choice ornament of that University, and a fair Copy for others to write by, he was very desirous to place him there. But this good man (though often importuned by many friends, to ac∣cept of the motion) according to his accustomed modesty, with many thanks unto the Earl, refused to undertake that place of much honour, service, and outward advantage, pleading toge∣ther with his unworthiness, the weakness of his body by reason of age, and thereupon his inability to take journies. And because he looked upon himself as having one foot in the grave, he humbly desired, that a younger man might be thought upon, more likely to be long serviceable then himself, in that place of great eminency and trust. And indeed the sense of his own weakness was not a vain presage of his decayes, for not long af∣ter he was again surprized with the Colick, which before had
shaken him and made his crazy body less able to endure new conflicts: and these were so sharp, that his restauration ap∣peared desperate, not only to his other friends, but also to his Physitians. Yet it pleased God chastening him sore, not to givePsal. 118. 8. him over unto death. His studies which seemed to have been as his meat and drink in his health, were his physick too, when heGreg. Naz. de Basilio in Epi∣taph . was sick; for while he was confined to his chamber, he fitted for the world the Dissertation de Tetragrammato, and a Grammaticall discourse de Bivocalibus. And though this for the subject be not comparable with the other, yet it may be averred that what he did by the bye, and for the refreshment of his languishing body and minde, was more worth then the main work of many students. But after a long time of being prisoner to his own home, he by Gods assistance recovered so much strength as to go to Gods house. And now he beleeved himself bound to employ his Ministeriall gifts in Gods service: Therefore he again ad∣ventured into the Pulpit, where he spent himself so farre, that he streyned a vein in his lungs, for which being then about Se∣venty three years old, he suffered an emission of blood, by which and other means God enabled him to overpass that danger. But when he had recruited his veins and sinews with fresh ability, he unwilling to fall under the wo for not preaching, acted more ac∣cording1 Cor. 9. 16. to the willingness of the spirit then proportionably to the weakness of his flesh, till a relapse into that spitting of blood (for which he again permitted a vein to be opened for revul∣sion,) laid on him the necessity of forbearing the Pulpit. But he never gave over the administration of Sacraments, nor his usuall short discourses at Funerals suitable to the occasion (whensoever he was solicited unto them,) though those shorter exercises of his Lungs were painfull and wastfull of that oyl, which like a burning light he spent for enlightning others. The main of his time now was spent in study, and that designed not to a meer entertainment of himself in a quiet privacy, but to the publick benefit of the present Church and posterity, as, a∣mong other Works, those exquisite Annotations on the Pro∣phecies of Esay, and of Jeremy with his Lamentations, do a∣bundantly
testifie. And we should have gained more by his latest industry, if the malitious slanders of the enemies to the truth had not diverted his studies to some necessary Apologies. Neither did he, being disenabled to preach, desert his flock, or betray it into the power of Wolves, that would make a prey of precious souls: For troubled at the apprehension of the possi∣bility that the foundation which he had laid (after the example of the wise master-builder St Paul) might either not be built up∣on, or ript up, he retained the Title of Rector with a charge beyond the Revenue (as it was sometime paid,) till provision was made of a faithfull and orthodox Minister to whom he might devolve both burden and benefit. To his care of feeding his flock in publick, very agreeable was his diligence to instruct his family in private: for on Friday night weekly he did expound after supper that short Catechism which he had published for the use of his Parishioners; in which course he so laid forth the Nature and Attributes of God, the conditions of man intire and corrupt, the means of his fall and recovery, the nature of Faith and Repentance, with the do∣ctrine of the Sacraments, that his Parlour was one of the best schools for a young student to learn Divinity. And indeed his house was a private semminary for divers young Gentlemen of this Nation, and more forreigners did resort to him and so∣journ with him, to receive from him advice and advancement in their studies: And many that afterwards were eminent in the Churches both here and abroad, were brought up under his eye at least, as Paul was at Gamaliels feet. Persons of note that had been his Assistants; M. Young. M. Goodal Minister at Horton by Colebrook. M. Sy∣monds, (of whom yet in these later times of division M. Gataker hath been observed to say, It was pity that our Church had lost him, intimating his turning aside to ways of separation.) Mr. Grayle, and others yet living labourers in Gods vineyard. Of foreigners that sojourned with him, and were as ambi∣tious of being entertained by him, as of being admitted to an Academy, these were some: M. Thyloin, after a reverend Pastor of the Dutch Church in
London, (whose Sonne was brought by his Mother but a fort∣night afore M. Gatakers decease, intreating the same good of∣fice in the behalf of him, which the Father had with much com∣fort enjoyed.) M. Peters, M. And. Demetrius, M. Hornbeck, M. Rich, M. Swerd, M. Wittefrungel, M. Severinus Benzon, M. George De Mey, D. Treschovius. The strength of his Memory was extraordinary, as may appear by this demonstration (viz.) That though he used no Common-place book; yet he had in readiness whatsoever he had read, as his manifold quotations do manifest. His gifts for Edification may be conjectured by his Works extant, in which he hath shewed himself most like the ingenu∣ous and industrious Bee, for the rare extraction of all manner of knowledge from almost all Authors, and the solid digestion of it first, and then storing it up for the publike good. His polite literature was admired by the great lights of Learning abroad, as the excellent Salmasius and others, with whom he held cor∣respondence. And the exercise of it with condescension to chil∣dren hath been enjoyed with wonder and pleasure at his visita∣tion at Tunbridg School with the Right Worshipfull Company of Skinners the worthy Patrons thereof. That, which made all his knowledge both usefull and gratefull, was, that he was nei∣ther vain in ostentation, nor morose, nor illiberal in reservation. But beyond all he sacrificed his Talents to God, while he made Hagar serve Sarah, and contributed the Aegyptian spoyls (all his foreign Learning) to the building of the Tabernacle: for with a strange felicity, he made his humane literature, (both his moral and critical studies,) become subservient to Religion, and instrumental to the explication of heavenly Truths. His graces of Sanctification were very eminent in all condi∣tions, to all purposes, and toward all relations. In his life, as to his private course, most remarkable were his Piety, Humility and Charity. His Piety appeared, not only by his diligence in preaching, but also by his own frequenting Gods Ordinances dispensed by others; in order to which he did once at least weekly repair to some Lecture in London, so long as he had liberty to look be∣yond
the bounds of his own Parish. A sign of that Piety, was his great devotion in observing the Lords day, which he conse∣crated totally (excepting the seasons of repast) unto holy em∣ployments. And a fruit of it was his free contribution upon divers occasions to the maintaining of the Lords house of Pray∣er. And because there is a connexion of sacred persons and things, his love to religious and faithfull Ministers may be look∣ed upon as an act of Piety as well as of Charity. An evident instance of his zeal for Gods glory, was a con∣stant consideration of Gods Churches abroad, with a diligent inquiry after their estate, and a tender sense of their affliction, which begat that meditation on Amos 6. 6. intituled Sorrow for Sion His eager desire of a Reformation of things amiss amongst us, was doubtless acceptable to God, though this sinfull nation is yet unworthy to have it satisfied. One special and proper effect of his Piety, I take to be that Holiness of life exprest in a constant tenour of good duties, with the abridgment of his li∣berty in things indifferent, especially of recreations (for he un∣derstood no recreation besides study, and made the amaener part of studies, the sauce to the more austere) that he might give no scandall to the good, nor encouragement to the bad, citing of∣ten those two golden Rules of St Paul, All things are lawfull,1 Cor. 9. 6. & 10. 23. but all things are not convenient or expedient; and, All things are lawfull, but all things edifie not. His Humility was apparent: 1. In that low esteem he had of his own gifts, which all that knew him admired. He was a true Moses, that took not any notice of the shining lustre of his own countenance: like a fair ear of Corn loaden with grain, he bended his head downward: for he had nothing of the Pharisaicall temper, either to ad∣vance himself, or to vilifie his meaner-gifted brethren. 2. In his freedom from ambition of outward advantages; for he declined not only large means in the Countrey, but alsoƲt de Marcello Virg. Aen. 9. Hunc tantum terris ostendent fata nec ultra, Esse sinent— both Ecclesiasticall dignities, and Courtly preferments. For he studiously waved the counsell of some that had given notice of him to that hopefull Prince Henry (whom God only shewed to this Land, and snatched away to himself,) and had it in design
to make way for his being admitted Chaplain to his Highness. For the same reason he constantly declined publike appearan∣ces, so that he could not without much reluctancy, be drawn by those who had interest in him unto more solemn Assemblies. 3. In his meek conversation with the meanest Christians, for he refused not to treat with the poorest Christian that repaired unto him for counsel or satisfaction. His Charity was large, though for the most part secret, both in giving and forgiving to poor persons; for he would not per∣mit it to blaze, only allowed it to shine, when his example was requisite to lighten and lead others to glorifie God and gratifie men. In redemption of Captives, relief of poor Protestants, especially those of the Ministry; to the repairs of publick or common losses and general calamities, and to the setting for∣ward of any good work, he was strangely liberall, the fruit whereof the Lord returned into his own bosome, according to his own word, that the liberal shall be made fat. For he did not so exhaust himself in his life, but that in his last Will, he did also bequeath unto the poor of the Parish of Redrith 50lb, to Ten of his Bretheren in the Ministery, whose wants and distresses, espe∣cially if occasioned by the iniquity of the times, he did consider with compassion, 50lb; i. e. to each of them 5lb; and to eight Widows of Ministers 5lb apeece, in all 40lb to them. Thus his good works both went before him, and followed him also to Heaven, whereby likewise he hath left behind him the lustre of a good Name, for the imitation of them who survive. Justice is presupposed to Charity, for God hates robbery forIsa. 6 8. sacrifice. And Mr Gataker was exactly just in giving every man his due, though he remitted of his own right very frequently, so that he was according to the Hebrew phrase, imitated by the writers of the N. T. a just man, that is, a kind, equitable person, of a mild disposition; no severe exacter of his own, and a free dispenser of Gods gifts, so that his Righteousness endures for e∣ver, both to his honour upon earth, and to his happiness in Hea∣ven. In and about his death, to which the course of his declining days leads us, eminent were his Patience and Faith, the latter at∣tended
with a deep sense of his own sinnes, which he acknow∣ledged unto God, and to him only was that confession need∣full: for as to men his conversation was, as a Bishops ought to be, irreprovable.1 Tim. 3. 2. The first stage to his decease (for morhus est via ad mortem) was a fainting fit that surprized him on Friday night July 7th, or rather on Saturday morning July 8th. This he made no great account of (for he disturbed not the rest of a servant by calling for assistance) because he had at sundry times such deliquia or faintings, wherein he gave Nature leave to work out her victo∣ry over those vapours or viscous humours that oppressed her. Yet thus far he made use of it, that he compared his infirmity to that of Seneca, which according to his relation, the Physi∣cians of that age called meditationem mortis, and wished it might prove to him a preparation for his dissolution. The indisposi∣tion not ceasing with that fit, discovered it self within a short time to be a Tertian, which how gentle soever, yet falling upon a person of his age and crazy temper (that had long supported a weak frame with a very regular course of diet) made his con∣dition doubtfull to his Phisician, one of learning and worth, that imployed his best care and skill about that Patient, that he look∣ed on as a considerable Person to the whole Church. July 17. Having published his Will, and taken such order as he thought fit for the settlement of his outward estate, he composed himself to God. His Tertian, growing too strong for Nature and Art both, resolved it self into an almost continued Feaver, the extream heat whereof was very painfull: Yet during those conflicts he shewed a sweet calmness of minde, a heart weaned from the world, to which he had no affection, though he had a remembrance exactly serving for ordering his Charity even to the last; and in one word, he represented a soul wholly submit∣ting to Gods good pleasure. He profest more then once, that no outward thing troubled him so much, as the condition of that Reverend Minister Mr Sainthill, who had but lately under∣taken Mr Gatakers Charge, upon the uncertain title of Life, which now failing so early, besides the expectation of his friends, that Minister he foresaw was likely to be unsetled and to suffer some inconvenience.
Though friends and Physicians give him incouraging words at visits, yet he sensible of his inward decayes, could not be flat∣tered into vain hopes of long continuance, earnestly contending that he was not to expect miracles. His expectation of Gods dismission was so fixed, that being consulted whether he would appoint any one Person to perform the last office for him; he not startled at the question, appointed Mr Ashe to be intreated to undertake that work, because he had done the same at his last Wives funerals. And one opportunity casually offer∣ed it self to set forward that design: for July 18. Mr Ashe out of a kinde respect to Mr Gataker, sent him two Funerall Sermons preached by him, one at Mr Whitakers, the other at Dr Spur∣stows Childes interment. This gave occasion to Mr Gataker (in the return for that favour) to request the last that he could be capable of. Upon the receipt of a Letter to that purpose, Mr. Ashe on the Saturday following, visited his deer and dying friend; who then told him, That he found him conflicting with his last adversary. He knew the sting was pulled out, but nature would struggle. These and other expressions Mr Ashe writ down and related at the end of his Sermon. That day being 22th of July in the afternoon, he called for some Papers of Mr Baxters, sent to him by the Author, with a desire of his judgment concerning them: He wished some short Notes (for the perusal of them had been his last work) to be read over to him, in which something he altered; and having di∣ctated a Letter to that his Learned and much Reverend Friend, appointed that with the Animadversions inclosed to be sent un∣to him: So vigorous was his minde in a body drooping and dropping into the dust. He had now given over the use of Physick, as to any prolon∣gation of life, for he said he would struggle no more, because he found, that what was prescribed for the refreshing of nature, opprest it rather, therefore he would wait the Lords leisure. An ancient servant that attended on him, desiring leave to rectifie the bedcloathes, and saying withall, Sr, Your head doth not lye right; he answered, It will lye right in my Coffin. July 25. at One in the morning, death began to seize on his
left foot, from which the spirits retiring, he felt the deadness of that part, and a very sharp pain in the part of the leg adjoyning to it. He called for his Sonne, and told him he feared he should have a difficult death. He then commanded two Surgeons to be sent for to look upon his leg, whom he required to tell him, whether or no his foot were any whit discoloured. It seems he had conceived some fear of a Gangrene, but being satisfied that there could not be any ground for such an apprehension, he rested with patience. In the evening of that day, being visited by Mr Sainthil, and lying in great anguish with violence of heat, he prayed for pity and patience, support here, and a comfortable issue. July 26. Early in the morning, full of pain, gasping and pant∣ing, he cried out, How long Lord, how long? come speedily. But though death had made an incroachment upon his out∣ward perishing part, yet his inward man felt no decay: for with a full use of reason, he that morning ordered the continu∣ation of a weekly relief to certain poor, and also of some small monethly Pensions to some Widows for a season, caused his Physician to be consulted about taking something that might procure rest, was erected to a more cheerfull disposition; in∣quired after News, and discoursed freely, yet confest himself to be in pain. About three of the Clock that afternoon, feeling some great change after that putting forth of nature, he called for his Sister, Sonne and Daughter, to receive his last charge: Thus he spake unto them; My heart fails, and my strength fails, but God is my fortress and the strong rock of my salvation: Into thy hands therefore I commend my soul; for thou hast redeemed me oh God of Truth. To his Sonne he turned his discourse thus; Sonne you have a great charge, look to it, instruct your Wife and fa∣mily in the fear of God, and discharge your Ministry conscien∣tiously. To his Sister (a Gentlewoman two years elder then himself) he said; Sister, I thought you might have gone before me, but God calls for me first, I hope we shall meet in Heaven, I pray God bless you. His Daughter he admonished to minde the world less and God more, for that all things with∣out piety and the true fear of God are worth nothing. He ad∣vised
that his Sonne Draper (being a man of means) would en∣tertain some godly Minister into his house, to teach his chil∣dren and instruct his family. He exhorted them all to concord: which he hoped the rather, because he had cleerely setled his Estate, so as to prevent differences. He inlarged himself in each a little, wishing all to lay to heart the words of a dying man. Af∣ter this he desired that all should withdraw, and leave him to his rest, which he hoped was at hand: but all his conflicts were not yet accomplished. July 27. His voice began to be less intelligible, the putrid preternatural heat having furred up his mouth, as is usuall in Feavers: yet his understanding and senses also were very quick and active. About six of the Clock in the evening, he called for his Sonne to recommend his soul unto God by prayer, and en∣deavoured to express what he desired, but not so cleerly as to be well understood: yet by his gestures he gave assurance, that he understood perfectly, and concurred fervently with the de∣votions used on his behalf. Within an hour after, nature being quite spent, he gave up the Ghost, and was translated into that Rest which he so often and earnestly had desired to finde in a∣nother world, because he could obtain none in this.Greg. Naz. in Epitaph. paren∣tis. , Thus after the 43 years inspection of this pious and diligent Pastor of Redrith, he left his flock, returning to the great and chief Shepheard of our souls, from his gracious hands to receive an incorruptible Crown of glory: And of his flock I may take up the words of Greg. Naz. to Basil, concerning the condition of that Church whereof Gregories Father had been Bishop; You see how full of sadness and trouble this destitute flock appears—making question whether ever it shall enjoy ano∣ther discreet shepheard, but very confident it shall not receive an equal to their deceased Paster, and resolved to acquiesce satisfied in their lot, if they can obtain one that shall be not much worse. For his Person, the express whereof (though often importu∣ned by deer friends) he would never allow to be taken either by pencil or sculpture: He was of a middle stature, of a thin body, and of a lively countenance, fresh complexion, that looked
young when he came to teach at Lincolns Inne, and yet was grey betimes, that made him be thought elder then he was, be∣cause he had long appeared ancient in the eye of the world; of a choicely temperate diet; of a free and cheerfull conversation, addicted to study, but not secluding himself from fit company; of a quick apprehension, sharp reason, solid judgment, vast me∣mory, which by Gods mercy continued fresh to the last of his days: He was helluo librorum, one that did not vainly increase his Library for shew, but chose Books for use, which he made of them so happily, that he had conquered a strange portion of Learning, and made it serve him upon all occasions. He was not so great a Treasurer, as a free dispencer of those riches of the minde, which he did communicate readily, expeditely, cleerly. He was an ornament of the University, and of that Society de∣signed for the study of Law; a light of the Church, the Salt of the place where he abode: a loving Husband, a discreet Parent, a faithfull Friend, a kind Neighbour, a curteous entertainer of strangers, a candid encourager of Students, a stout Champion for the Truth, yet a lover of Peace, preserving the unity of Cha∣rity where there was a difference of judgement; an adversary to novel fancies as well as to antiquated superstitions in Reli∣gion: of a Christian magnanimity to despise the world, and therefore resolute through bad report as well as good to main∣tain a cleer conscience. Briefly, he was a faithfull Shepheard, and a fit myrror for Pastors, as well as an exact pattern for people;Satur vitae tan∣quam conviva recedit. Hor. who having almost completed 80 years, departed full of life, but being dead yet speaks in his living monuments of sound Learn∣ing.
A Catalogue of the Works of Mr THOMAS GATAKER B. D. now extant. OF the nature and use of Lots 4o. 1. Edit. 1619. 2d Edit. re∣viewed, corrected and enlarged, 1627. A just defence of the same against Mr J. Balmford 4o, 1623. Thomae Gatakeri Londinatis Antithesis, partim Gulielmi Ame∣sii, partim Gisberti Voetii de Sorte Thesibus reposita, 4o 1638. A discourse of Transubstantiation, with a Defence thereof, 4o 1624. . Davids Instructer. The Christian mans care. The Spiritual watch. The Gain of Godliness, with Self-Sufficiency. The Just mans Joy, with Signs of Sincerity. Jacobs Thankefullness. Davids Remembrancer. Noahs Obedience. An Anniversary Memorial of Englands delivery in 88. Sorrow for Sion. Gods Parley with Princes, with an Appeal from them to him. Eleazers Prayer, a Marriage Sermon. A good Wife Gods gift. A Wife indeed. Marriage Duties. Deaths Advantage. The benefit of a Good Name, and a Good End. Abrahams Decease. Jeroboams Sonnes Decease. Christian Constancy Crowned by Christ. These published first severally in 4o, were after collected into one Volume in Folio.
The Decease of Lazarus in 4o. St Stephens last Will and Testament 4o. A Defence of Mr Bradshaw against J. Canne 4o. Gods Eye on his Israel 4o. A Mistake removed, and Free-Grace, &c. in Answer to J. Salt∣marsh 4o, 1646. Shadows without Substance, a Rejoynder adversus eundem 4o, 1646. Mysterious Clouds and Mists, &c. an Answer to J. Simpson 4o, 1648. M. Anthony Wottous Defence. 8o. 1641. A true Relation of Passages between Mr Wotton and Mr Wal∣ker 4o, 1642. An Answer to Mr. G. Walkers Vindication 4o, 1642. A Vindication of the Annotations on Jer. 10. 2. 4o, 1653. A Discourse Apologetical 4o, 1654. Marcus Antoninus Imp. cum Commentario 4o, 1652. De Novi Instrumenti Stylo Dissertatio adversus Pfochenii dia∣tribam. 4o, 1648. Cinnus, sive Adversaria Miscellanea Lib. 6. 4o, 1651. De Baptismatis Infantilis vi & efficaciâ disceptatio inter D. S. Wardum & Th. Gatakerum 8o, 1652. T. G. Strictura in D. Davenantii Epistolam 8o, 1654. De Tetragrammato 8o. Ejusdem Vindicatio adversus Capellum 8o. De Bivocalibus dissertatio Philologica 8o. Animadversiones in J. Piscatoris & L. Lucij scripta adversaria de causa meritoria Justificationis, cum responsione ad L. Lu∣cij vindicias 12o 1641. Francisci Gomari disputationis Elencticae, de Justificationis ma∣teriâ & formâ, Elenchus 8o. 1640. Stricturae in Barth. Wegelini Sangallensis de Obedientiâ Christi disputationem Theologicam 8o 1653. The Prophcies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, with the Lamentations, which were the portion assigned him in the great work of Notes upon the Bible.
A PIOUS EPIGRAM OF Mr GATAKER: Presumed to be His, both because it is a just ex∣pression of the intimate frame of his soul, and because it is found written with some alterations of the words by his own hand, and that not long before his end, as appears by the spelling. I Thirst for thirstiness; I weep for tears; Well pleasd I am to be displeased thus: The onely thing I fear is want of fears; Suspecting I am not suspicious. I cannot choos but live, because I die; And, when I am not ded, how glad am I! Yet, when I am thus glad for sens of pain, And careful am, lest I should careles be, Then do I griev for being glad again, And fear lest carelesnes take care from me. Amids these restles thoughts this rest I find, For those that rest not here, ther's rest behind. In Funere THOME GATAKERI S. T. B. Viri Doctissimi Octogenarii Vegeti & venerandi Senis. QƲaliter ales Arabs longae pertaesa senectae, Et cupiens vitam morte parare novam,
Ʋndi{que} congesto pretiosa in funera thure, Ardet in optato victima grata rogo: Sic inter Sacros famae & virtutes odores Exuvias ponis tu Gatakere tuas. Spiritus eluso tumulo remeavit ad astra, Circumfert nomen Fama per ora virûm. Tu Magnus quoties evolvitur Antoninus, Scilicet a Doctis us{que} legére viris. Non tua sat tristi deflerem funera versu, Sufficeret totas si mihi Camus aquas. Ast aliquâ volui cineres tibi spargere guttâ; Hanc tibi non ficti pignus amoris habe. G. DILLINGAMUS T. B. Coll. Eman. Praef. In obitum Reverendi admodum senis, & praestantissimi Theologi, nec minùs pietate quàm omnifaria eruditione eximii, THOMAe GATAKERI, Sacrae Theologiae Baccalaurei, & Ecclesiae Rotheriensis propè Londinum Pastoris vigilantissimi Epicedium. QƲò fugis, (ah!) Phoebi & Musarum magne Sacerdos? O quid agis? sic tecum unà coelum{que} diem{que} Eripis Anglorum ex oculis, servas{que} sepulchro Doctrinae jubar, & miseros in nocte relinquis? Vidimus (en!) atras vel te vivente tenebras Ingruere, & densas paulatim crescere nubes; Te semel extincto quanta haec caligo futura est! Lumine tam grandi aut quid non metuamus adempto? Hei mihi, nunc iterum invisum caput exeret Orco Horrida barbaries, ima{que} excita barathro Desidia, & Lethe, & languor, soius{que} soporis Torpor iners, rudis error, & ignorantia mater, Et soror, & conjux vitii, velut agmine facto
In nos juncta ruent, post quàm te fata tulêrunt, Gentis Apollineae columen: Tu nempe domare Herculeâ hanc Hydram dextrâ, divine, solebas, Ingenui{que} acie, & calamo configere monstra, (Hae tibi erant artes) & Lernam pellere mundo; Tam benè cavisti nè barbara secla redirent, Discutiens caecas Linguarum Luce tenebras. Scilicet haec pridém didicit te praeside clerus, Exemplo{que} tuo, stolido quae aenigmata vulgo, Philologo licet esse pio; legisse profanos, Non facit: & veteres fas est versare poëtas, Fas{que} illis etiam, Christi qui castra sequuntur, Colligere & sacras Gentili è stercore gemmas, Aegypti spolia at{que} aurum. Sic Paulus Aratum, Sic & Aristophanem Chrysostomus, & Gatakerus Euripidem, & magnum (quid, Zoile, frendis?) Homerum, Et Sophoclem, & quem non Graecorum heroa revolvit; Cuncta animo expendens, Critices & pumice limans, Omnia pervolitans, mistas & floribus herbas Delibat patiens, herbas apis instar amaras, Mellificans, nectar{que} bibit sine felle salubres Et carpit succos, & Cinnum conficit ore. Quot, quantos{que} duces è Gentibus, at{que} tribunos Ille catenatos disponit margine longo, Ingentis animas, captiva{que} nomina ducit Post Evangelii currum, Christi{que} triumpho Et Latium, & doctas famulari cogit Athenas! Sic ille, Hesperiae ditatus munere gazae; Nec minùs ex Oriente potens, seu fortè Jehovae Vindicet Augustum nomen vocalibus ornans Ritè suis, sacram{que} superstitione Tetractyn Liberet, & caeci castiget dogmata verpi: Seu doceat Graecos Eoo ex sonte rigatos, Saepe etiam & Pauli phrasin ex Oriente petitam, Et tessellatos Hebraeo idiomate libros Foederis ille Novi, frustrà obnitente Phoceno. Nunc etiam cordi est Aurelius unus & alter,
Quos ille inter se solerti indagine mentis Comparat, & quantùm aeficerit Antoninus Advertit, quantùm{que} Stoam superaverit Hippo, Et Paulus Senecam, & quantùm à cognomine Marco Distet Philosophus, tamen hic non sordidus autor Morum, & divini radens confinia veri; Proptereà & noster limâ{que} & luce, ejus{que} Dignatur curis, (opus aere perennius omni, & Marmore) & egregiis mirè centonibus ornat. Nec minùs intere à coeli mysteria pandit Sedulus è rostris, & Christum personat ore, Ore, sed & scriptis; quot enim monumenta reliquit Mysta sacer? quot sermones, quos fuderat ardor Entheus, aeternae divina volumine famae? Deni{que}, nec vocis tonitru quàm fulgure vitae Clarior, exemplo morum, & probitate coruscat Exornat{que} fidem factis, & verba coronat. Talis eras, Gatakere Pater, dum vita manebat, Vitâ chare magis; transcendens computa Mosis, At{que} vigorem aequans, veget â viridi{que} senectâ, Ingenio florens etiam vergentibus annis, Tertius inter nos, dum vîxti Varro superstes, (E reliquis alter Themidos decus, alter Iernes.) Doctrinam at superans meritis, & pectore puro, & Moribus integris: O mentis aoumine felix, Sed pietate magis! debetur laurea doctis, Sed major sanctis. O ter{que} quater{que} beate! . Anag. . O felix quicun{que} bonus! sic itur ad astra. Macte ergo virtute tuâ, Pater; i pede fausto, Quò tua te pietas simul & doctrina vocavit. I bonus, i felix, caelestibus utere fatis; Praemia virtutis sic nominis omen habebis. JAC. DUPORT Collegii Sanctae at{que} individuae Trinitatis apud Cantabrigienses senior Socius.
DESIDERIUM; SIVE, In morte GATAKERIANA Fletus. ERgòne stylo Sulcandus Dei Fundus? Hoc enim propè nomen sonat. Ergóne votorum plaustris in coelum evohenda Dei Messis? Hoc enim excidium indicat. Ergóne lacrymarum nimbis irrigandum Dei semen? Hoc enim sepulchrum monet. At veró impares nimis sumus tantae Agriculturae, Nec arista haec nostro indiget vehiculo: Fundamur igitur in fletus, viator. Mecum flebis, ubi flendum noveris. Flebimus Gatakerum: (Scilicet Te nobis (Bone vir) non Tibi:) Seculi nostri Desiderium & futuri. At fortiùs expetunt superi, Suósque continuò in amplexus rapiunt. Nobis desiderare est carere. Quanta, quanta jactura! Adsideas, querule Mercator, Et discas tandem naufragia vera. Perijt, (si tamen hoc sit perire,) Pius, Probus, Literatus: Quae triasunt omnia. Hunc desideramus, lugemus has virtutes; Raramque simul in senectute senectutem. Pium quis dubitat? accersivit Coelun. Probum quis negat? testantur superstites. Eruditum quis rogat? loquuntur scripta. Viator, huc oculos. En amicam istam litigationem de Magno Tetragrammato Salmuriensi cum Capella initam. Cessavit verò tandem de Nomine lis, Rem tenet. Tranquillam ecce in re Baptismali argumentorum vim,
Wardum quâ petijt Cantabrigiensem; Strenuum hunc, & virum Majorum gentium. Sed & hanc litem diremit utrumque amplexum Coelum. Validam dein & impetuosam cerne machinam, Quâ dum Astrorum Aristocratiam deturbare satagit, Infamem istam Tyrannidem, Et habenas revocare in manus Monarchae Jovis, Insiliunt undique astrorum (uti audiunt) periti, Novisque suis impetunt argumentis, Dicterijs & Spurcitie. Ille autem discessit Astra propiùs intuiturus: Desiderantque jam Astrologi in quem venenum exscreent. Nobilem tandem & ultimum en tibi laborem, (Certò oculis nostris ultimum) Antoninum Optumum Maxumum, (Ingens Imperij decus, & Musarum delicias) Quem alii in Maedium tulere, luce donatum. Detineo Te, Viator? Catervatim cerne quae scripsit quaeque est Meditatus, Tuisque demum relaturus abi, Caeteros parâsse sibi Bibliothecas, Gatakerum fecisse. Quod si haec talia nobiscum flere renuas. At saltem vices tuas defle. Jacet hic Viatorum Desiderium, Advenarum Hospes frequens, lubensque: Necessum jam ut fleas, Abeasque. A. M.
ON THE Death of the most Reverend, Learned, Holy Mr THOMAS GATAKER. NExt to my dear, and dearer Uncle thanM. Richard Dugard B. D. Rector of Fulleeby in Lincolnshire, a long time Fel∣low of Sidney College in Cambridge, as also M. Ga∣taker was. I could expresse though I were more then Man; Whose Life by all so preciously esteem'd I with mine own would gladly have redeem'd: And were not Death well undergone to save So great a Treasure from the hungry Grave? Next unto Him, my Soul doth mourning wear For his dear Friend the Famous Gataker. Till now the Adage I did scarce beleeve, Which saies, To fronts we must no credence give. To my great grief too true I finde it now, So much deceived by his smoother brow; Which with the Rose and Lilly that did deck His, and would have becom'd a Ladies cheek, Did promise fair, and made me hope that He Might raise eight Decads to a Century. Doubtlesse most perfect was the Harmony Of's Elements, as was his Symmetry: Thus Body and Soul in him were bravely met And matcht, but that the one though very neat, No large dimensions had, the other was More like an Angel clos'd in such a case. A neat small mansion this doth entertain Sometimes a stately Lady with her Train. He was (ah killing word, He was! alas, That now I cannot say, He is, but was.) A Living Star, and that as eminent As any shin'd i'th British Firmament. But that's too modest and angust; 'Tis thought That even Europe, though so fully fraught With rarely Learned Children, yet hath none
That could in all things parallel This Son. Beleeve I do, more truly none then He Could ere be cal'd a Living Library. His industry long since had treasured All Learning in his comprehensive Head; The crucified three Languages spake aloud His matchlesse skill, and seemed of Him proud. The Arts a better Master have not known; The Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, were his own. All Neoterick Worthies he did know As perfectly as they themselves could do. Now though he were (none ever more then He) A perfect Body of Divinity, And such a Phoenix, yet his Lowlinesse Was such as if he had been nothing lesse. Great Parts and Acquisitions commonly Attended are with a proud Tympany, So were not his, but such that God he knew, And knew himself, and his mean Brother too. Nor did his worth lie buried in his Breast, As Misers Gold's confined to their Chest: His light did shine as freely as the Suns, Or as the water from the fountain runs; Witnesse his Pulpit-pains, which ne're did cease Till Sicknesse serv'd him with a Writ of Ease, And pains in's house, which a Gymnasium Or Schola Illustris was, whither did come Many from far, whose joy it was to sit, And reap rare notions at Gamaliels feet, And Pains at's Pen; his most transcendent Pen, Which doth demonstrate Him a Man of Men. As God did once the Cherubims employ, Arm'd with a flaming Sword to guard the way O'th Tree of Life, So did he this man raise With his choise Pen to vindicate his waies, And sacred Truth; which none could ever do More faithfully, for he refus'd to know
His dearest friends, (as Levi once,) though none Were more exact in that Relation. He knew that Truth most Lovely is, and that What ere we weigh, It must preponderate. And as his Pen was often militant (Nor less triumphant,) so edificant It also was; like those blest Builders, who Stood on their Guard, and stoutly builded too. What Pious, Pretious Peeces have there come (All trimmd with richest Fringe) out of his Loome! But above all his Notes on the first paire Of Major Prophets justly valued are, As the most golden Key that ere was made To open Gods deep Treasure therein layd. How doth the Church in Them rejoice! how grieve That he did not a greater measure give Of such like Quintessentiall Annotations! Too soon he left us in the Lamentations. But now he leaves us worse leaving us quite, And bidding us for evermore Good Night. It must be night when such a Sunne doth set, A Night of Woe and Lamentation Great. Which is the more, because we greatly fear We nere shall see another GATAKER. Whose Grave may proudly say, Lo, here doth lye Great Gataker, that University. THO. DUGARD, M. A. R. B. NEque Funeri Tanti Viri, ne{que} Muneri Meo Colentis arbitror factum satis, Vernaculis nisi paucula adjiciam modis Latialibus vestita saltem vocibus. At quum perinde, ut displicet silentium, Non Verba suppetant, paria votis, mihi: Visum est ab ipso mutuari Mortuo Quae vivus olim fudit: Et sic optimè Illius expedire se Laudes valent, Ʋt proprio Sol explicat se Lumine.
Squalida luctifico tundantur pactor a planctu:Habeutur hi versus D. Ga∣takeri, inter a∣lios tum ipsius tum aliorum in calce Prlectio∣num D. Whita∣keri de Ecclesia. Perfundat teneras lacryma salsa genas. Omnibus in vicis adsit pullata caterva: Pellantur subitò gaudia cuncta procul. A terris superas abiit Whitakerus ad auras, Aetatis nostrae gloria, fama, decus. Quo magis ornatum vix fando accepimus unquam Doctrinâ, ingenio, religione, fide. Linguarum nemo plus cognitione valebat. Arsoniam spectas? Tullius alter erat. Cum Graiis quisquis sermones nectere Graios Audiret, patrio crederet ore loqui. Hebraeae nemo feliciùs abdita linguae Exploret sensus elicitátve probos. Ingenium quantum, facundia quanta, quot esset Artibus excultus, scripta relicta docent. Praecipuè ornabat divina scientia mentem, At{que} huic juncta soror religionis amor. Fidus praeco Dei, humani figmenta cerebri Rejecit, pendens semper ab ore Dei. Sincerè populo divina oracula tradens Ad Christum docuit quae via recta ferat. Exemplum pietatis erat, virtutis imago, Doctrinae culmen, religionis apex. Mens humilis: purus{que} animus: patiens{que} laborum Corpus: & immuneris vita referta bonis: Frons hilaris: faciles aures: pectus{que} fidele: Sermo pacificus: lingua diserta fuit: Os verax: mites oculi: gravitate refulgens Vultus: cor placidum: dextra benigna bonis. Cum virtute at{que} arte alios superaverit omnes, Haec, dubium, laus an latior illa sit. Sed quid ego conor Whitakeri exponere laudes, Quem laudare satis nemo poeta queat? Quid laudo, cujus cunctas celebratur ad oras Nomen, quae Christi numina sancta colunt:
Cujus scripta diserta, opus aere perennius omni,Anno Dom. 1594. Jam passim volitant docta per ora virûm? Scripserat haec quondam Gatakerus de Whitakero, Heros quum superas scanderet ille domos. Scriberet haec pariter Whitakerus de Gatakero, Si nunc in vivis esset ut antè fuit. Convenisse tibi constat Whitakere, vicissim Quám bene conveniunt & Gatakere tibi! T. D. ON THE Death of the Excellently Learned and Pious Mr GATAKER. IF Man created Upright so had stood, Should This, though less Ill, yet have had more Good? For what, while militant on earth, he knew, Angels themselves desire to look into. And above Natures best his Grace so high, Hath of her worst obtaind the Victory. Whereto while Death it self Perfection gives, By's Doctrine and Example still he lives, With us too: though departed, that is, gone, (Having learn'd all here) where more is to be known. W. W.
Carmen Elegiacum in obitum Mri THOMAE GA∣TAKERI, Rdi Theologi, politioris literaturae Fautoris simul ac Restauratoris optimi. OCcidit heu! summi fulgoris stella corruscans, Occidit, ut surgat stella decora poli. Lumina non pereunt, è terrâ sumpta, fruuntur Majori coelis luce, micante Deo. Vixit, & ignaros, potuit quoscun{que}, docebat Tàm vitae exemplo, quàm prece, voce, manu. Juppiter in terris, linguâ sua flumina vibrans, Voce tonans, pravos terruit; inde pii. Justitiae celebrem retulit pietate Noachum Praeconem; Moses moribus alter erat. Quàm docuit, didicit Gatakerus! vivere multos In Christo docuit, sic didicit{que} mori. Docto scribenti calamo de sortibus olim Supremum tandem sors tulit atra diem. Non sic fata solent: quae te Gatakere merentem Siverunt Juvenem, maesta tulêre senem. Ʋllo si doluit Pietas, vel maesta querelas Tempore perfudit, jam bene flere decet. Si literae lacrymas unquam sparsere politae, Cum fulcrum recedit, jam doluisse licet. Te dolet Ʋrbs celebris, dolet Anglia maesta Prophetam Ereptum templis te decus ipsa suis. Cuncti te flemus, te ploraremus in aevum, Si non constaret te coluisse Deum. EPITAPHIUM. HIc situs est, qui dum docuit, dum scripsit, ab omni Omnigenae laudis puncta recepit. Abit: Intravit coelum postquam Gatakerus amaenum, Quod loquar? omnigenae puncta salutis habet.
Expirantis GATAKERI Apostrophe ad Fratres superstites, Pastores Anglicanos. THOMAS GATAKERUS, Anagr. Ʋrge, mak hast to us. FArewell; bright-shining-stars! yet ere I part, Ile leave the sense of my last gasping heart, With you dear souls: For strayt my spirit must Be thron'd in bliss, my body turn'd to dust. Behold the wildbore-hereticks, whose powre Deeply's engag'd Gods vineyard to devoure. Ʋrge, and be valiant: 2 Pet. 2. 5. Noah's now had need Prove mighty Nimrods to run down this breed. Behold ye Fox-like-Schismaticks, who trade 2 Cant 15. Gods vine to ruine; Ah our Church is made A den of theeving Foxes: These conspire Like Sampsons Foxes to set all on fire. Ʋrge here, pursue them by all means you may, Dumb-dogs prove useless to devour this prey. Since Sheepe-skin-Wolves do ramble; Sheepheards look Now to your Lambs, use well your Sheepheards crook. The Tyger-Ranters rage: This Hectors face Is much disguis'd to th'Churches sad disgrace. Pluck off his vizard, and unrip his state, That all Gods flock may see this Tygers fate. Romes ravenous blood-hounds, from their hellish den Are rays'd by th'sound of th'Devils horn: oh then You Israels Watchmen! their hid traces find; Wound them, and make them leave their prey behind. The Pope hath got Arithmetick in's Crown, Who multiplies his Popedoms up and down. Each Church erects a chair: 'tis sad to see So many plead infallibilitye.
Divide and multiply, this Artist cryes, From such division, do my summes arise. United force is strong, let your band be A threefold cord of love and unity. See and condole our shaken Churches state, Which walking-earth-quakes totter'd have of late: These sure would counted be an heav'nly nation, 'Cause all their motion is meer trepidation. Isa. 66. Who trembles at Gods word shall favour find Whilest word-less Quakers shall go down the wind. Ʋrge here, fear not, i'th strength of God be strong, A quaking host can never stand out long. The Church a Lilly is 'mongst thorns: oh strive To lop these thorns and make the Lilly thrive. Ye Pilots are i'th'Churches Ship; sayl on Though through a sea of blood to mount Sion. And now methinks grim death 'gins to appear, Which once was dismal, now my soul doth chear. Its sting is gone, and now 'twill me advance, To just mens souls made perfect, in one glance. My last sand's run, my life i'le breathe out thus, Ʋrge Souls in preaching and mak hast to us. Ʋrge God in praying and mak hast to us. Ʋrge Christ in all things and mak hast to us. J. STILLINGFLEETE D. Joh. Coll. Cant. Socius. On the Death of that Reverend and eminently Learned Divine Mr THOMAS GATAKER. WHo's this that lyes thus breathless? dolefull sight! The worthy Gataker; That beauteous light Hath left our Hemisphere. Ah! he is gone, Who was the glory deem'd of Helicon.
The Muses joy is fled; a magazine Of Learning's here blown up. The Sisters nine, Could they but rate their loss, (such hath it been) With tears they'd make an other Hippocrene. Poor house of clay! oh, how it empty lyes! The furniture's remov'd to Paradise. Angels have hence convigh'd the jewell-mind; Nought but the cabinet is left behind. Adieu young Nestor; seldom have we seen An head so gray, and parts so fresh and green. His speech to deck such flowers he could bring, In ages winter one would swear 'twere spring: But now, for florid language, we may find, Dumbe Rhetoricke; with silence cryes her: mind, Oh! mind your latter ends; death's sometimes late, But who could ere his life perpetuate? We thought his preaching done, but here we have One Sermon more, and for his text, the grave. Be faithfull, you, who Sions walls do keep, Watchmen themselves must once be laid to sleep. W. TWYNE Fell. of St Joh. Coll. in Camb. In obitum Viri Clariff. Doctissimi{que} Mri THOMAE GATAKERI . PLectro paulisper posito festiva sonante, Jam melos, attonitae modulantur triste Camaenae, Ingeminat{que} Caput praeclarum linquere terras; Tum sic effatae, Quae vestram insania mentem Exagitat, Parcae, vel quae malesana medullas Intùs agit rabies, ut converratis in unum Quisquilias, gemmas{que} Rosam Carpatis, & algam? Delicias mundi, sécli miracula quaevis Haud secus ac faeces vulgi, Sordes{que} profanas
Amoveatis? adhuc tantaene sororibus irae? Quò tandem effûgit, quaeve occupat iste locorum Abdita, qui quondam praeclarâ nominis omnes Famâ praestinxit, nulli pietate secundus? Mens polita, Deûm proles germana, Minervae Mercurii{que} domus, Musis & digna teneri Pieria, ac charitum sedes & hortus amaenus! Tam docto Calamo referunt accepta Camaenae Cedro digna, sed & meruere insculpier auro. Hic, quoniam Culmen virtutis Contigit altum, Quo nullum patitur sublimius infera moles Terrestris, sedes quaerit recipit{que} Deorum. Hunc inter populos illustris fama perennat, Longéque transfert multùm venerabile nomen. J. T. Ad Tumulum THO. GATAKERI, Londinatis, S. S. Theol. Bacc. EXuviae cujus? GATAKERI. Plura referre Haud opus: ad laudes vox ea sola satis. GUIL. DUGARD, Schola Merc. Sciss. Moderator. FINIS.
