A585 E428_2 99864070 116289
A SPIE, Sent out of the TOWER-CHAMBER in the FLEET. Diogenes-like ARGVS is sent to spie, The sequell tells you both by whom and why: If thou canst help him to his wished end, Thou'lt prove the Prisoners and thy Kingdoms friend. Though hard my busines, tedious be my way, I'le on, and make Return without delay: No rest I'le give to feet, nor eyes, till I Have done the duty of a watchful Spy. If any one there be that wants my Spies, Let him repair to me, I'le spare him Eyes. Printed in the seventh year of the Authors Oppression, being the 8th year of this Parliaments Reformation: And in the year of our Lord, 1648.
THE AUTHORS NAME. H He that would know by whom the Spy is sent, E Expect withal to know the Spies intent; N Nor need he seek much further, he may be R Resolved speedily, 'tis I am he, Y Your fellow subject, spoild, and unjustly spent, A And by Injustice am to prison sent. D Diogenes-like, My Argus goes to see I If any Justice in the Kingdom be: S Such is his care; In his Epilogue.and he doth promise thee That HENRY ADIS shall his answer see. The AVTHOR to the READER, Vpon his Infant-Muse. MY Maiden-Muse, whose subject was divine, Is now by reason of our unjust time With it distracted, all turn'd into passion, As if contention onely were in fashion. Her fancies that did soar beyond the skies, By my undoing, haste to satyrise, How could she thunder out injustice store, In such a strain that ne'er was reach'd before? Did I not curbe her in, she'd plainly tell Each man his faults, and who do ill or well: How could she praise the one, display the other, Without partiality, though 't were my brother, Or best of friends, the neerest of my kin? She so detests and hates that hell-bred sin. How doth she blush to see Gods Image, Man, By his injustice like the Divel to stand!
Perverting Truth into a shamefully, How much laments she when she hears men cry They 'r Plundered, Rob'd, and spoyl'd of all they have, and of a Free-born Subject made a slave. Life, Liberty, Estate, and Kingdomes Law by greatnesse too unjustly kept in aw. This moves her passion, makes her grow unruly, and now I taste her disposition truly: How froward is she, waspish, in the Pet, to see that Christians worse then Heathens set Themselves to rob their God, of these his due, Iustice and Mercy, only by which two Most glorious Attributes he's pleas'd alone To make himself to us most cleerly known? Beshrew them for disturbing of her rest, for she for heaven and heavenly things was prest: If thus in Infancy she's forc't to chide, in riper years who may her taunts abide? For in her youth if she such frownes do show, in older age she needs must rougher grow. And now her passion's rais'd, 't is not in me to mod'rate or alay it, till she see True Iustice done, and I from Prison freed: the which, that it be gain'd with greater speed, I beg thee gentle Reader, presse and cry for Iustice, as if thou thy self didst ly In my Estate, from which thou canst not be till better Justice done, secur'd or free: It is a general good, be then inclin'd to have the Ruin'd Prisoner in thy mnid: For what thou dost for him, thou'lt plainly see is for thy self, and thy posteritie.
The AVTHORS CHARGE TO HIS ARGVS. QVick sighted Argus haste, Make no delay, Like to the Lyon, greedy of his prey, Range far and neer, in every corner spy Where Iustice innocent may lurk or ly: For sure I am he's hid, and hath not been In this our Climate I speak by wofull experience. scarce these seven yeers seen. The noise of Drums, and Guns, the smell of Powder, Or Match, our Cannon-shot, which are far louder. Or our innumerous tearing Ordinances, The horsemens clatt'ring Armes, or horses Prances, Our Thundrings, Blundrings, Plundrings every day, I fear have scar'd him from us quite away. Sweet Argus haste thee, and perform the charge That I do give thee: Thy commission's large: And be not absent from me many yeers, To raise in me new Jealousies and Fears; But take it as a branch of thy Commission, To act thy careful part with expedition: Continue faithful, prove as true as steel, Constant, like him that turneth Fortunes wheel. Remember Iuno's bird, and never be Deceiv'd again by any Mercury: Let no deluding Musick more inchant thee, Nor Threats, nor frowns of any greatness, daunt thee:
I do conjure thee to perform the trust In thee repos'd, be faithful, true, and just: Be watchful, careful, let no eie be sleeping, But all employ'd, in every corner peeping, Where any probability may be That Iustice lurks, or thou just acts may'st see. Haste to th' Army, to th' head-quarters hye: Search out the Reformadoes where they lie; Be frequent at their quarters, learn if they Have not conniv'd, and let hm steal away, Who if h' ad staid, and wars been hust and left, Their often Plundrings had been prov'd plain theft; Enquire amongst them if they do not know That he was banisht th' Army long ago Before this Model, if he exiled, then Why should we seem to blame these other men For not performing what they have declared? In Conscience then these men may well be And lay down Armes.spared. But shall I tell thee Argus the conceit That came into my musing troubled pate? I fear those Members lately sent away, Banisht Him first, and after durst not stay. But to thy charge, post further into th' West, There take what speedy course thou thinkest best To find him out, but ere thou further go, Take some instructions how thou maist him know; Be not mistaken, 'tis not every he That sits in Iustice seat, that just will be, Thou seest it proved true, thou know'st how I Have suffered in a Court of Equity: How I am ruin'd, and turn'd out of all, And yet turn'd in again to bondage thrall
Bereav'd of house, and goods, and remedy, And as unjustly caus'd in Goale to lie. Which maketh many think that I have spent all, Truth is, I'm ruin'd by unsavory Lenthal. That partial Iudge, who with his Ianus face, Relents no wrongs, blusheth at no disgrace, Whose wills his Law, and be it right or wrong, He'll still be taking part with them that's strong, Who lately went to th' Army, 'tis well known, Which was dislik'd by many of their owne: And when Sir Thomas printed forth his praise, The People could not hope for better daies, When as this So I shall prove him. Machiavel is so detected For his injustice, yet is still respected, And honour'd as the Kingdoms deerest friend, When as his aime is nothing but self-end. Whose actions are so vile, so fouly base, That they do live engraven in his face. His greatness, nor his power cannot blind them, But all the Kingdom both remark and mind them, Whose powerful influence flows to such a rate, That our inferior As Iustice Hooker Iustice Parker, the Sheriffe of Mid∣dlesex, and Klin∣kerd the Bayliffe of VVestminster, but of them at large in the Spies answer. Ministers of State Dares not to cross, nor his injustice alter, But rather with him by injustice falter. Who by his power doth hope to beset free From that injustice they bestow on me. Argus be wise, and be not eas'ly charm'd, Fore-warned be, as thou art now fore-arm'd, Observe the marks that I shall give to thee, To know true Iustice from Partialitie. A Rev'rend Iudge is he whom thou dost find Thus qualifi'd in outward act and mind,
This is his wish, and in his heart 'tis treasur'd, To have his greatness by his goodness measur'd: He's one that doth appear to thee and me, None other then he'd have us both to be. And yet this is his care, his greatest fear, Lest he prove other then he doth appear, True Justice cannot one thing seem to be, And yet prove other, that's hypocrisie: And as his heart's inclin'd to give content, So are his outward acts as innocent, Like to his Embleme, thou shalt cleerly finde To all respect of Persons he is blind, His ears are open all complaints to hear, And from bribe taking both his hands are clear In one a tickle Ballance thou shalt spy, To weigh all diff'rences with equity, A two edg'd sword there doth possess the other, To cut as well to stranger as to brother His equal due, such is his circumspection▪ The innocent to shroud by his protection From all abuses, but the nocent he Doth punish with as much severity: In fine, he gives no leave to me or you To cozen any of his real due: He is endow'd with vertue, and such art That he devides to each his equal part With innocence, without Partiality. And if thou chancest such an one to spy, Take Eagles wings if thou be'st in the West, And bring me word, for they will speed thee best, And as quick Titan in his course doth hie, So do thou quickly cut the starry skie,
If in the East thou find'st such creatures are, Get up betimes, haste with the morning star, And with Aurora's light let me have word. This Phoenix if the Southern part afford, Call to this welcom sight swift Mercury, And whilst his senses ravisht are to see This seldom seen, strip off his swifter wing, And poste away to me the news to bring, By which thou shalt his cunning equalize, When he bereav'd thee of thy hundred eyes. If in the cold and ruder North thou find This Heaven-bred creature, swiftly be inclin'd To make thy speed, which that thou maist improve, Go hire the wings of that swift Scottish Dove, And soar my towring Ark, and there present me With that, which nothing better can content me: This Olive-branch alone is that will presse, And give both me and all the Kingdom ease. But ere thou com'st away, incline his heart To stay till thy return, and not to part From that his residence, do thou intreat him, And in these gentle begging words bespeak him. Sweet Justice, thou great stranger in our Land, By whose great power all Kingdoms firmly stand Vnder their great Creator, thou art he That canst annihilate our misery. And canst restore the wrong'd to right agen, And glad the hearts of discontented men, Who by Jehovah's power canst with a smile Both King and People forthwith reconcile: Who canst unlock the prisons, and canst see The many poor oppressed, subjects free:
Where hundreds are enslav'd this instant houre By tyrannie and arbytrarie power, I do conjue thee now, as thou art true, That hence thou part, nor bid this place adieu, Till I but carryword, and come agen With thousands of poor discontented men, Who are bereav'd of all for want of thee, And brought to slavish wo and misery. If thou didst view our discontented land, Longer thou couldst not thus remotely stand: Didst thou behold thy judgment seat abused, Thy self disgrac'd thy name profanely used, By those that are not what they seem to be, Surely thou wouldst no farther from us flee, But rather haste to vindicate thy name, And to restore thy self, thy ancient fame, To terrifie that crue that have abus'd thee, And thus disgracefully so long have us'd thee. If thou with confidence these words canst say, I am assur'd he cannot then away, For when the poor oppressed to him cry, He must in Iustice give them remedy, Nay 'tis his kind, This makes him Iustice be, To right the wrong'd, to set the bond-man free, To ease the heavie burd'ned and oppressed, And mercy shew to him that is distressed: If he be Iustice just, he will be be known The onely He the poor mans cause to own; Else he must cease from what he seems to be, And then he is not what he shews to thee: Therefore if he shall seem to slight thy speech When thou do'st press, entreat, or thus beseech,
Or else pretend some other weighty thing, Either for People, Kingdom, or the King: Believe him not, though he make protestations, Vows, Covenants, and several Declarations: Though he pretend Religions purity, And that a very Saint he seems to be, In observation of each Fasting-day, Or by the Spirit though be seems to pray, Though he be zealous to destroy the Crosse, And blot out names of Easter, Lent, and Mass, To banish superstitious holy-daies,Or Christmasse. With fingle-fangling Rosemary and Bayes, That root and branch hath pul'd the Bishops down, That Presbyters alone might wear the Crown, Of government, or if the onely he That standeth most for Independency, And yet neglects the poor mans cry to hear, All his religion's van, 'tis plain and clear, He wants the fear of God, and Charity, And all his shews are but hypocrisie: Believe him not what ever his pretences, Let him not cozen nor delude thy senses. Too many such we have, 'tis too well known, That makes both me and thousand subjects groan, Who hears, and sees, and knows our misery, And can give ease, yet suffers us to lie; Such is their sordid baseness, whose self ends, Is how to pleasure greatnesse, and their friends To raise to honour for the time ensuing, Though by their Princes, and his peoples ruine. As for my M. Bell Burgess of Westminster, but more of him in the Spyes answer Trustee, he on whom I doted, To deal for me, to greatness is devoted.
Who when I told of this my rued story, He answer'd me, I was too peremptory To send to him to help these my decaies, Who gives me over, and my trust betraies. I charge thee once again, believe not these Who Justice slights, themselves alone to please: And will not mercy shew, but pass them by As those ordain'd for wo and misery. And forthwith poste both North, and East, and South, And as thine eies, so open wide thy mouth, And send out Proclamations, Hue and Cry, If any one that see him passing by Can bring thee tydings of him, he shall see By thousand prayers himself rewarded be, And shall be counted as is Kingdoms friend, Her differences and discontents to end: The Kingdom then shall flourish, and the King Aud People, shall enjoy their own agen: And then the King shall into favour take him, And as he's good, so he as great shall make him, And crown him with an olive wreath, and then The ruin'd Subjects all shall cry Amen. And thus it shall be done alone to him That Justice brings to Kingdom, and the King. FINIS.
ARGVS his EPILOGUE to the Reader. A A Trustee I am made, thou see'st I'me sent, R Resolve I do, and 'tis my full intent G Great care to take to finde out Justice clear, V Vnlesse he quite forsaken hath our Sphear: S Such love I bear him who in prison lies, ARGUS will not be sparing of his eyes T To search and seek to note, to pry and spy, O Observe, and Mark, I'le lend each place an Ey, T That so, if any place will Jus afford H He taht hath sent me forth may have quick word. E Each house I'le slyly pressè, and each Committee, The greatest both in Parliament and Cittie. R Resolv'd I am to try my utmost skill E Each day and hour, till I have view'd my fill: A And as I finde each place to Right inclinde, D Distressed Adis shall impart my minde: E Expect it speedily, Ile not delay, R. Reader farewell untill some other day. Errata. In the fifth marginal Note, for Justice Par∣ker, read Justice Carter. also in the same pag. l. 28. r. Fore-armed be, as thou art now fore-warn'd. As also these following 6. lines, after the afore-said line, 'Tis not the Judgement-seat, the reverend Gown, The Judges countenance, his smile or frown, Nor is it greatnesse makes the sentence just: In all, or any of these, repose no trust: Let none of these thy cleerer Ey-sight charm, for then thou'lt bring me but a false Alar'm. In the 2d following pag. l. 17. for presse, r. please.
WHereas this Author, Henry Adis, late of Covent-Garden Vpholder, being imprisoned in the Tow∣er chamber of the Fleet, by an Arbytrarie power: and most unjustly turned out of his house, and ruined by that power∣ful Man of our times, the honourable William Lenthal, Esquire, not as he is Speaker of the Honourable House of Commons, but as he is a Commissioner for the custo∣die of the great Seal, and Master of the Rolls. And be∣ing denied the benefit of going abroad with his keeper by him (though petitioned for) so that he cannot have any benefit of his Trade and Customers, who for the present relief of himself, his wife, and three small chil∣dren, was lately enforced to publish in print some of those Arts which it hath pleased God to endow him with; amongst which are these ensuing, which have been found very commodious and beneficial to all that have used him therein, viz. He hath found out a new way by fire to purge out all manner of grease, wax, oil, or other spots of sweet meats, Ale, Beer, or Wine, or any other filth or soil, out of wearing apparel, or other things, without slabb'ring or wetting them, so that the colour shall not be thereby en∣dangered, though not in grain, and with that expedition, that if he have a suit over night, it shall (if necessity re∣quire) be restored by the next morning compleatly cleansed, and as well over all the suit, as the spotted pla∣ces; so that the whole garment shall be well nigh as fresh as at first: and as speedily all clothes of Leather. He also cottoneth Frise, Bayes, or Penistone in gar∣ments, without taking them to pieces: and also raiseth a wool upon Cloth or Stuffes in suits that are not too low worn upon the thred; so that if he have a suit but about
half worn, he bringeth it to a very good perfection; yet if never so low worn, he so clenseth and ordreth it, that it may be long worn with credit. By the foresaid Art he also doth as much in Silks, Sattins, Taffates, and Velvets, as ever was done by any, to clense it from grease, wax, or oyl, which he doth in wearing apparel, or otherwise. By which Art also he refresheth silver and gold lace, or fringe upon wearing apparel, beds, or other things, though never so black and tarnished, and bringeth it to a very good lustre, and to continue long. All which by reason of the expedition and easie charge hath and will be accounted very commodious for peo∣ple of all ranks and qualities; especially those who are desirous to wear their apparel neat and clean, and are not willing in these distracted and hard times to make new, or bestow much in altering those they have. He also scoureth, refresheth, and mendeth all sorts of Tapestry, Turkey-work, or Needle-works, and riddeth them clean from moths.
