B4614 E106_10 99860570 112693
A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF The late Treacherous and Horrid DESIGNE, Which by the great Blessing and especiall Pro∣vidence of God hath been lately discovered: And for which, Publike Thanksgiving is by Order of both Houses of Parliament appointed on Thursday the 15. of June, 1643. Together with a true Copie of the Commission under the great Seal, sent from Oxford, to severall persons in the Citie of LONDON. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Nar∣ration and Commission be read in all Churches and Chappels, in the Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs thereof, on the day abovesaid. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON: Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his Shop in the Middle Temple. June 15. MDCXLIII.
❧ A brief Narrative of the late Treacherous and horrid Designe. AFter a continuall succession of se∣cret Conspiracies and open Vio∣lences, Plotted and Attempted against The true Protestant Reli∣gion, Lawes and Liberties of this Kingdom, there hath of late risen up, under the plausible Pretences of Moderation and Peace, a most dangerous and wic∣ked Plot of divers Persons, to joyn themselves with the Armies raised by the King, and to destroy the Forces raised by the Lords and Commons in Par∣liament, to surprise the Cities of London and West∣minster with the Suburbs, and by Arms to force the Parliament; and in a word, To have delivered up Re∣ligion, Parliament, Citie and Kingdom, into the meer
will and pleasure of the King, now in the hands of most desperate and pernicious Councellors. Towards the effecting whereof; There was framed a mixture and conjunction of Persons of severall qualities, some whereof were of both Houses of Parliament; others of the Court and of the Citie, who were in their respective Places and Imployments to form and perfect this Work, raised out of the Ashes of the late Petition of London for Peace. The Method observed by them for the Conduct and carrying on their Designe, was first for severall persons in the City, to dispose of themselves into a Committee, being those who had been Principall Movers and Fomentors of that Petition. The part which this Committe was chiefly to act, was; First, To hold intelligence with both Armies, Court, and Parliament. Secondly, To take a generall survey of the Affe∣ctions and numbers of persons, within the severall Wards and Parishes of the City and places adjacent, by the Weekly Bill of Mortality, under three Ranks; of, Right men, (or the Kings Party) of, Averse men (or the well affected to the Parliament) of, Moderate men, (or Neutrals) as they called them. Thirdly, To consider of Arms, Ammunition, and all other Provisions of War requisite thereunto. Fourthly, Out of themselves to appoint some se∣lect persons to treat with Master Waller and Master Tompkins, with relation to the Citie, Court, and
Parliament, as also with Crispe, Roydon, Broome and Benion, then at Oxford. Master Wallers part in this businesse was; First, To ingage a considerable Partie of the Lords and Commons in the Designe. 2. To be the means of conveying all Councells, Resolutions, and Intelligences between the said party of Lords and Commons, and the Committee of the Citie. Master Tompkins was not only an Assistant to Ma∣ster Waller in the premisses, but an Instrument to convey by Hazel, and others, the particulars of their proceedings to the Court by addresse princi∣pally to the Lord Faulkland, and to receive from Court directions, Powers, and Commands, for the compleating of the work. For preventing disco∣very, Protestations of secrecy were taken by them to this effect, As they were Christians, not to disclose it. Secondly, No man to indeavour the ingaging above two, whereby no one man could impeach many. The part which was acted from the Court was, 1. By Master Herne, Master Alexander Hampden, and others imployed upon Messages from the King to the Parliament, under pretence of Treaties for Peace, to convey their directions, incouragements, and Councells unto their Partie in London. 2. To give Power and Authoritie by Commissi∣ons under the great Seal, by Warrants under the Kings Hand; and otherwise for setling of a Coun∣cell of Warre; naming of Generalls (and other Officers). Execution of Marshall Law; Raising of
Moneyes, and Provision of Arms and other neces∣saries. 3. For the disposing of some part of the Kings forces at Oxford, to be neer the Citie, and in ready∣nesse to assist the Partie here, as cause should re∣quire. The steps and degrees to bring this into Action were. 1. A Commission under the great Seal brought from Oxford, about a fortnight ago, by the Lady Aubigny, with the Authorities aforesaid, thereby inabling and commanding them by force of Arms to destroy, kill, and slay, the forces raised by the Parliament, and their Adherents as Traitors, and Rebels. 2. Severall Propositions, most of them agreed, and resolved by Master Waller, in behalf of the said Partie of the Lords and Commons, and the Com∣mittee of the Citie, in behalf of the Partie depen∣ding upon them, for the more ready and orderly execution of the designe. As first, Concerning the number of men Armed. Secondly, The places where Magazines were laid, The places for Randevouz, and for retreat upon occasion, The Colours, the Marks and Tokens for distinction from others, The strength to be relyed on within the Walls, and without, What to be done with the Tower, Where the chief Commanders affected to the Parliament dwelt, The time of executing the de∣signe. 3. A Declaration was framed by them under
pretence of asserting and maintaining the heads of the Protestation, thereby the better to Colour their mischievous intentions to the people. 4. A Message was sent to Oxford, on Saturday was fortnight to acquaint the Lord Faulkland by Hazel, that the designe was come to good perfecti∣on, unto which, Answer was returned, That they should hasten it with all speed. The particulars of the designe it self were. 1. To seize into their custodie the Kings Chil∣dren. 2. To seize severall Members of both Houses, the Lord Major, and Committee of the Militia, under pretence of bringing them to a legall Tryall. 3. To seize upon the out-Works, Forts, Tower of London, Magazines, Gates, and other places of Importance in the Citie. 4. To let in the Kings forces to surprise the City, and to destroy all those that should oppose them by Authoritie of the Parliament. 5. By force of Arms to resist all Payments im∣posed by Authoritie of the Houses of Parliament raised for the support of the Armies imployed for their just defence, and preservation of the true Pro∣testant Religion, and Liberties of the Subject; To suspend, if not alter, the whole Government of the Citie, and with assistance of the Kings force to awe and master the Parliament.
All which hath been made appear to both Houses of Parliament, by the Examinations and Confessions of Master Waller, Master Tompkins, Master Challenor, Master Hazel, and other persons, principall Actors in the same now under restraint; The publication of the evidence being deferred till after their Tryall.
A true Copy of the COMMISSION UNDER The GREAT SEAL, Sent from Oxford to severall Persons in the City of LONDON. Charles Rex. CHARLES, by the grace of GOD, King of England, France & Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To our trusty and well-beloved, Sir Ni∣cholas Crisp, Sir George Stroude, Knights, Sir Tho: Gardener Knight, Recorder of London, Sir George Binion, Knight▪ Richard Edes and
Marmaduke Royden Esquires, Tho: Broom Esq, Peter Paggon, Charles Ginnings, Sir Edw: Carlton, Robert Abbot, Andrew King, Will: White, Steven Boulton, Robert Alden, Edmund Foster, Tho: Blink∣horn▪ of London, Gentlemen; and to all such other person and persons, as according to the true intent and purport of these presents, shall be nominated; and appointed to be Ge∣neralls, Colonells, Lieutenant-Colonells, Sergeant-Majors, or other Officers, or of Our Councell of War, Greeting; Whereas in Our cities of London and West∣minster, and Suburbs thereof, our Borough of Southwark and county of Middlesex, there are raised and continued great number of Mili∣tary Forces, both Horse and Foot, who un∣der the command of ROBERT▪ Earl of Essex as their Generall, and under the con∣duct of divers others, pretending to derive their Authority from the two Houses of Parliament, have Traiterously levied War, and rebelled against Vs their naturall Leige Lord, and many of our Subjects have been feduced by false informations, by the pra∣ctise of a few, who have been the contrivers
of the mischievous plots, and have joyned with them, either in person, or by ayding of them with men, money, horses, or other things, and many of our good and loyall sub∣jects over-awed by the power of the Rebells, have been enforced to contribute to them for the maintenance of this unnaturall War, and others refusing have beene Plundered, and robbed of their estates, and some committed to severall Prisons, and other barbarously used contrary to the liberty of free-born men, the laws of the Land, and contrary to all hu∣manity, of which injuries and calamities fal∣ling upon our good Subjects, wee are very sensible, and are desirous to give relief to our good Subjects by all the best meanes we can, and to resist the violence and insolencie of the Rebels and their adherents, We having no other end therein but to preserve the true Protestant Religion in the integrity and pu∣rity thereof; to maintaine the Laws of the Land, and the liberty of persons, and the pro∣perty of the estates of our subjects, and the just priviledges of Parliament. Wee have thought fit for our better service, to settle a
Councell of War in or about Our City of London, who may take these things into their sad considerations which may conduce best to this end, and to have such Commanders and Officers setled in the places aforesaid, which may both raise, governe, and lead such forces as may be raised there. Know ye therefore, that we reposing spe∣ciall trust and confidence in your fidelities, industries, and good discretions; have made choise of, nominated and appointed you to be Our Councell of War for the said cities of London and Westminster; and Suburbs thereof, Our said county of Middlesex and Borough of Southwark, and do hereby give and grant authority to you; or any four of you, to make choise of such other able and discreet persons as you shall think fit to nominate under the Hands and Seal of any four of you, which with your selves shall make up in all the number of Twenty one and no more; And We do give and grant to you, or any four of you, power and authority at such times, and in such places as you shall think convenient, to assemble and meet to∣gether,
and there to consult, advise, and re∣solve of all such things, and of such wayes and means as you or any four of you shall think fittest, for the raising of Forces both of Horse and Foot, either of the Inhabitants of the said ities, county, and Borough, or any the adjacent counties or other places, who will voluntarily associate themselves to that purpose, and these Forces to Arm, Muster, Conduct, Order, Lead, and Govern in the places aforesaid, or in any the counties adja∣cent or elswhere, in such manner as you your selves, or such other able and fit persons, as you or any four of you shall to that purpose appoint, according to these pre∣sents shall think fit; And the better to ffect this Our Service, We do further give and grant to you or any four of you power and authority under your Hands and Seals, to make choise of and appoint such a fit person as you shal think meet to be Captain Generall of all these Forces thus to be raised, and such other persons as you or any four of you shall in like maner make choise of & appoint to be Colonels, Lieutenāt Colon: & Sergeant Ma∣jors,
over the forces in such maner & in such places as you shall so appoint▪ who by vertue thereof, and by vertue of these presents shall have power and authority to do, execute, and performe all such things, which to these se∣verall offices and imployments, according to the law martiall do belong; and we do here∣by promise and grant, that withall conveni∣ent speed after we shall have notice from you or any 4 of you, under your hands and seales of your nomination, of any person or per∣sons whose severall places we shall grant & confirme unto them and every of them respe∣ctively, those severall places to which you have so nominated them as a foresaid, under our great Seale of England, or otherwise as shall be reasonably devised and required of us. And We do further by these presents give and grant unto you full power and authori∣ty by all such good wayes as you, or any 4 of you under your hands shall agree up∣on to raise mony for the clothing, arming, furnishing, and paying of all such souldiers as shall be thus raised, and for the providing of all ammunition and other necessaries for
the war; all which mony upon a just account we do for us, our Heirs, and successors, pro∣mise, grant and agree▪ well and truly to re∣pay so soon as we shall be inabled thereunto, and in the meane time to secure the same to those who for our service and by your medi∣tation and industry shall lend or disburse the same; and we do further by these presents grant that such Generals, Colonels, Leivte∣nant Colonells, and other officers so by you nominated as aforesaid shall have full pow∣er and authority by vertue of the presents to lead and order the souldiers severally under their charges, and with them to fight against our enemies and Rebels, and them to slay & destroy, or them to save according to the law martiall, or course of war; For the doing of all which, this shall be to you, them, and e∣very of them a sufficient warrant, willing & commanding all such officers and souldiers, which by vertue hereof you shall retain, to obey readily to receive & accomplish your directions, commands, and summons in all things hereto appertaining or necessary to be done; as also all Majors, Sheriffs, justices of
peace, Commissioners of Array, and all o∣ther our officers and loving subjects to be ay∣ding & assisting both to you and to all such officers & other persons whom you shall appoint under any four of your hands and seales, for the furthering and advancement of this our especiall service, for which this shall be to you, to them, and every of them a suffi∣cient warrant. In witnesse whereof We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents. Witnes Our Self at Oxford the 16 day of March, in the eighteenth year of our Raigne. FINIS.
