C1494 R222975 43077486 151545
CATHOLICK HYMN ON THE BIRTH OF THE PRINCE OF WALES WHen inraged Southask In his Female's Womb cast, A Clap which cost twenty Guinny's A project he had Of Revenge on the Dad, And to blow up the Race of the Ninnys. (2) The Poyson soon wrought Which his Highness had caught, And Nancy was tainted soon after; Soe the Infection prevail'd That the Pox was intail'd Sans distinction on Son and on Daughter. (3) The Vaults in the Abby Receiv'd many a Baby, Brought forth in a Stinking condition And if ye have not forgot it The Dutches too Rotted, Soon after in spite of Physitian. (4) Tho' a Convert she dy'd If she be not bely'd, 'Twas resolv'd in cabal soon after To raise up a breed Of true Catholick seed, To Supplant the two Heretick Daughters. (5) Then from Lambardy came A Dutches of Fame, Instructed in arts Italian Who rather than Church Should be left in the lurch, Might be'indulg'd the use of a Stal∣lion. (6) At first She' had ill success With his Royal Highness, For no sooner was She a Mother But Her Children all Di'd, Like those of Nan Hyde, 'Twas said of something or other. (7) The Poyson entail'd So far had prevail'd, 'Twas high time to seek out for a wonder Our case must be sad If a Boy can't be had, To keep the Hereticks under. (8) Then streight we repair To the Infallible Chair, Who advise we must not forget o To present at the Shrine Of the Lady Divine, That Miracles works at Loretto.
(9) The Present was sent And Mother Duchess went, On a Voyage from this World to th' o∣ther Where She made a Prayer For a Catholick Heir, That the Queen might once more be a Mother. (10) The Request was soon granted And Modenae Sainted, And streight the glad tidings came down here Which at Court was full hot Before the Child was begot, That we must have an Heir to the Crown here. (11) The Fathers kept Reckoning Some of them were speaking, O' th' other side of the Water That Trinity Sunday wou'd bring forth a young Boy, Shou'd convert the Nation hereafter. (12) Much of this may be done By way of Dragoon, As France hath taught us the fashion Religion to Plant By true Church Militant, Far better than Convocation. (13) The Church has still took care To provide for an Heir, When Crowns are in dispute Sir This made the French Queen To take Mararine For Cardinal Coadjutar. (14) From hence Sprang the Man And who knows but it may be Given in Commission T' answer Duches's's Petition, To his Eminence Nuncio Data. (15) Some think 'twas an Omen Of no good to some Men, That before the Critical hour When the Queen was to lye Down Are the Prince came to Town, The Bishops were clapt in the Towner. (16) And now he's come out A Blessing no doubt, And an Hero as sure as may be As big and as Bold As a Boy a Month Old, More like than a new Born Baby. (17) Let no Woman despair Of having an Heir, Altho' She be never so Barren So long as there are Fathers There'l not fail to be Mothers, Without any fear of Miscarrying. (18) May all Catholicks Pray All Night and all Day, (Or else our Projects come short all) That the Goddess which sent him Would Graciously grant them, That the Boy may be Immortal. (19) Then we will not forget ho To sing Praise to Lorreto, And set up great Winnifreds Fame And let all Men be willing That new Pauls which is Building, Henceforth be call'd Nostre Dame. White-Hall, St. Barnabas's Festival: June the 11th. 1688.
