C4410 E896_8 R206682 99865797 118048
A short and full VINDICATION Of that sweet and Comfortable ORDINANCE, Of singing of Psalmes. Together with some profitable Rules, to di∣rect weak Christians how to sing to edification. And a briefe Confutation of some of the most usual cavils made against the same. Published especially for the use of the Christians, in and about the Town of Wramplingham in Norf. for the satisfaction of such, as scruple the said Ordinance, for the establishment of such as do own it, against all Seducers that come amongst them; and for the instruction of all in general, that they may better improve the same to their spiritual com∣fort and benefit. By Io. Clapham, M. A. and Minister of Christ there. 1 Cor. 14.15. I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with understanding also. Decemb. 9 LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1656.
To the Reader. REader, I desire thee to take notice, that this short Vindication of that pre∣tious Ordinance of singing of Psalms, was not intended by me for the Press, but was transcribed for the private satisfaction of my neighbour, Ca. I.L. which my relation to him engaged me to endeavour. For having some contest with him about this Ordinance, he desired my Arguments for the same, and promised me before several witnesses, if he were not satisfied therwith, to give me an answer under his own hand. But instead thereof, my Papers were given to some of those persons commonly called Quakers, and part of them were printed without my knowledge and consent (the other part being left out) and an answer framed thereto by two of them, viz. Chr. Atkinson, and George Whitehead, which I think no rational man could have taken for an answer to my Arguments, if they had not so called it in their Papers. Reader, it is not my desire to have any contest with this generation of men, as having found them by sufficient experience (such as the Apostle, 2 Thes. 3.2. speaks of, viz.) absurd and unreasonable men; such as are not worthy to have place amongst men, being more like bruits then men, whom no reason will satisfy; The word the Apostle there useth, is , and signifies men of no setled abode, vagabond persons, absurd fellowes, compact of meer incongruities, which how fit∣ly it agrees to them, I leave to thy descerning: Only I request of thee (Christian Reader) thy prayers that we may be delivered from such absurd and unreason∣able men. If any boast, that the reason why I did not answer them, was because I could not, and so impute it to the weakness of the cause I maintain, and make it a tem∣ptation to any of my neighbours to cast off this Ordinance. I here declare. 1. I have with utmost diligence and impartiality, weighed what might be worthy the name of an answer in their papers, & laying aside all their absurd non-sense, vain repetitions, foolish impertinencies, and wicked railings, (with which this, and all other their papers (that I have seen) are stuffed) I cannot e∣spie any thing that looks like an Argument against singing, except it be that they do often, even in every page, over and over again in some pages, usque ad nauseam, urge the unfitnesse of singing of Davids conditions, and cavil against profane persons singing with us, both which I had sufficiently answered in the latter part of my vindication; but they would not print it with the rest of the Ar∣guments, lest (peradventure) these their simple cavils being removed, they should have had nothing to have stumbled the weakest reader, and so their folly should be made manifest to all. 2. I judge it not wisdom to meddle with such irrational men, from whom a man can expect no reasons but railings, no answers but accusations; one had as good deal with those mad men of Bedlam, as with men mad with error & strong delusions: upon this account I have declined to deal with them; only the first time when they came to this Town, I went to oppose them (judging it my duty) but when I found them such absurd, & unreasonable men, I presently turned my
back upon them, although those that were deluded by them, did boast (oh the misery of being given up to delusions!) that it was because I could not an∣swer them. And since that time being reviled in the publick Assembly, and cursed, I have departed with silence, not replying, as men use to depart from angry dogs that bark at them, and not regard them; and lately have per∣mitted them to affixe their revilings against me, upon the Market Crosse, rather then I would condescend to answer a simple paper sent to me, consisting of 23. Quaeries, with this threatning annexed [That if I would not an∣swer them, I should be set upon the Cross] This (Reader) is the custom of those Rabshakehs whose trade is to raile and revile; and therefore what ingenious man can fault me, if I refuse to deal with such bawling creatures. 3. I have several times offered my neighbour aforesaid, That I would shew so much respect to him, that if he asserted any of their opinion; I would give him my Arguments in writing under my hand, for vindication of the Truth, and confutation of errors, provided he would answer them under his hand, and I would allow him liberty to advise with as many as he plea∣sed, (himself owning the answer) but as for those men, I judged them such as were not responsible for reason or repute, and therefore it would be but a scandal for me to deal with them. 4. I conceive it the best way to remove their cavils, and to satisfie the scrupulous Reader, to print over my Arguments entirely by themselves (part of which only were printed in their books) and not at all to meddle with them, there being sufficient (I hope) in these Arguments, to vindicate the truth, and to silence their objections: Only I desire of the Lord, to give thee an heart to submit to what Scripture evidence is held forth in them, or else all that I can say, will not give thee satisfaction, and also to help thee to improve these brief Rules laid down, that thou mayest sing more with understanding for the future. For let me tell thee what my observation is, the chief cause why so many scruple or deny this Ordinance, is, their own ignorance, nor having yet learned the right use thereof, how to sing under∣standingly, and to edification; the more knowing and godly sort of Christi∣ans being able witnesses by their own experience, That it is a most excellent and heavenly Ordinance. Reader, I shall detain thee no longer in the porch, only (seeing it is the will of God to make this discourse publick) I shall pray that his blessing may be with it to make it profitable. From my study, March 26. 1654/5. I am, thine in Christ J. C.
Arguments to prove, that Singing of Psalms is a Gospel Ordinance, and a part of Divine Worship to be used in Gospel times. SInging of Psalms was once an ordinance of God in the Church, and a part of Divine Worship. And (1) was never repealed un∣der the Gospel. (2) Nor was of a typical nature and use, as were the Ceremonies, and so to cease with them. (3) But ever reckoned amongst moral and perpetual duties; as, Prayer, and Hearing of the Word. See Ps. 95.1, 2, 6, 7. (4) Such a duty as the very light in all men taught them to practice, witnesse the custome of all Nations (for which, see Goodwins Rom. Antiq. and read Homers Hymns, Horace's Odes) which sheweth it to be of an universal and perpetual obligation; Therefore it contiues an Ordinance of God still, as well as prayer, and hearing of the Word, and should not be abolished under the Gos∣pell. Arg. 2. The Prophesies in Scripture, that foretel the state of the Church in the New Testament, do speak of Psalms to be used, as a part of Gods worship then, Psal 98.1, 2. Psal. 100.1, 2. Ps. 108.1, 2, 3. where mention is made of the Gentiles when converted, singing Psalms to God. So Rom. 15.9. See Isa. 26.1. and 35.10. Rev. 14.13. and 15.3. Arg. 3. It hath been a duty practised, not only in the time of the Law, but by the people of God under the Gospel. Under the Law we have the Songs of Moses, Deborah, and Barak, of David the sweet sing∣er of Israel; of Solomon, who composed to the number of 1005. songs; of Asaph and Heman, of Habbakkuk, &c. Under the Gospel we read of the songs of Mary, Simeon, Zachary, of Christ and his Apostles, sing∣ing an Hymne after the Lords Supper, Mat. 26.30. according to the Jewish custom, who sung some of Davids Psalmes, the night wherein the Passeover was eaten (as those who are skilled in their customes, write) We read of Paul and Silas, Act. 16.25. singing in Prison. Of Psalms used in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. and in primitive times, before Antichristian Apostacy, it was commonly practised; as Philo, Tertul. Just. Mart. Chrysost. testifie; yea the very Heathen took notice of this practise amongst the Christians, and write of it. Pliny in his letter to Trajan the Emperour, writes of the Christians Hymnos antelu∣cannos,
morning songs or Psalmes, according to Davids practice, early will I praise thee, &c. Arg 4. If all this suffice not, know further, there is expresse Scrip∣ture command (as well as example) for this duty of singing of Psalms, Ephes. 5.18, 19. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excesse, but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalmes, hymnes, and spiritual songs, singing, &c. where the Apostle alluding to the custom that drunkards have, when they are filled with wine, they have their songs: So when Christians are filled with the wine of the spirit, they should have their spiritual songs, Psalms and hymnes. The Hebrewes had three words to divide Davids Psalms into, Sherim, Tehillim, Mizmorim, answerable whereto, the Apostle calls them Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs. So Col. 3.16. in Psalmes, hymnes, and spiritual songs, singing, &c. And Jam. 5.13. If any be afflicted let him pray, if any be merry, let him sing Psalmes. It's spoken generally, if any, &c. let him sing; not that it is unlawful to sing at other times, for then it might be argued as well, its not lawful to pray but when sad; but mirth is the most proper season for singing: In other places we read of singing when sad, as David often, and Christ a little before his sufferings, when his heart was sorrowful; and Paul and Silas, when in prison. See Ps. 102. title. Thus we have express command for it. Arg. 5. There are several rules given in the New Testament, di∣recting how to sing aright, as 1 Cor. 14. with the spirit, and with un∣derstanding, and Col. 3. with grace in our hearts, which directions were needlesse, if it were no Gospel-duty. Arg. 6. Much profit and benefit may be had, by the right using of this Ordinance; there's an efficacy in it, to lift up the heart more, and elevate it in Gods praises; an holy delight it brings to the soule in God; therein is a more deliberate and distinct meditation of Gods word and works, then when we read or hear, a more solemn profession of God, and of his praises; mutual edification, Col. 3. and provocati∣on to rejoyce in God, as drunkards by their songs, stir up carnal and sinful mirth, so these help spiritual joy, to which alludes the Apostle, Eph. 3.18, 19. These Arguments being so clear and cogent, might silence all objecti∣ons; yet these things I find most commonly urged against this duty, to which I briefly answer. Object. If singing be a duty, yet we should not sing Davids Psalms, but such as God gives the gift to, of making Psalms, should endite them for the Churches use?
Ans. This objection grants then singing to be a Gospel-Ordinance, but denies the expediency of singing Davids Psalmes. I shall therefore annexe to the former six Arguments, proving the warrantablenesse of singing in the generall, six other. Arguments to prove the warrantablenesse of singing Davids Psalmes. Arg. 1. The singing of Davids Psalms, is no where in Scripture for∣bidden; tell then a reason why we should not sing them, if singing be a duty? Arg. 2. If any Psalmes be lawfull to be sung, then certainly, those that were inspired by the spirit of God, as being most excellent, con∣taining variety of matter, suiting every condition the Saints usually are in, of a large comprehensive scope, affording advantage to enlarge the thoughts and affections upon, infallible for the truths contained in them, and exceeding heavenly and spirituall, able to ravish the graci∣ous heart in singing of them. Arg. 3. Its exceeding propable, that the Psalmes sung by Christ and the Apostles, were Davids Psalmes. (1) Because Christ and the Apostles followed the Jewish custome in singing after supper, as they did after the Passeover; and therefore its likely they did also intimate them in singing Davids Psalmes, which the Jewes used to do. (2) And the rather, because we read not of any other Psalmes used by them, which might have been recorded by some of the Evangelists, as well as his prayer, John 17. if other Psalmes had been used. Arg. 4. The Apostle Eph. 5. and Col. 3. where he commands singing of Psalmes, doth clearly point us to Davids Psalms, by using those three words, Psalmes, hymnes, and spirituall songs, which answer to the three Hebrew words, Shirim, Tehillim, Mizmorim. whereby Davids Psalmes were called. Arg. 5. Where the Scripture cites any where the Psalmes (as Act. 13.33, 35. and in other places) none question but Davids Psalmes be understood; why then should not these be understood, when we are commanded to sing Psalmes? Arg. 6. How much better is it to sing Davids Psalmes (since singing is a duty) then Psalmes of any private mens composure? the experi∣ence we have in these times of those Psalmes, that some have taken on them to compose, and to sing in the congregations, may easily per∣swade us to preferre Davids Psalmes before such whimzies, &c. Ob. But it is unlawfull to sing with a mixed multitude, you admit ig∣norant and profane persons to sing with you, and this is unwarranta∣ble.
Ans. This objection denies not the lawfulness of singing of Psalms in generall, nor yet of singing Davids Psalms in particular; only scruples at singing with profane persons, I shall therefore in the next place, add Arguments to prove the lawfulness of singing in a mixed Congregation. Arg. 1. David cals on all creatures to sing praises to God, Psal. 148. and on every thing that hath breath, to praise the Lord, Psal. 150. ult. Arg. 2. Hath God any where forbidden their singing? shew a Text for it. Arg. 3. Hath not he rather enjoined it by the very dictate of na∣ture, it being (as was before shewed) an homage, that the light in all men teaches to offer unto God, even as prayer, and not an instituted worship only? why then should i not be as lawful for them to join with us in singing, as well as in prayer? Let them that cast off singing upon this account take heed they cast not off ere long, prayer also, in our Congregations. Arg. 4. Singing is not an act of Church-communion properly, as the Sacraments be, because it's a duty common to all men, as before was declared; but the Sacraments hold forth visible communion of Saints, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and therefore we need not be so scrupulous of our joyning with others in singing as in receiving the Sacrament. Arg. 5. Why should any fear that mixture of wicked men in sing∣ing (who are bound to sing Gods praises, as well as to pray, though they sin in both) should pollute an Ordinance more then the mixture of their own corrupt hearts? if you forbear singing in respect of the for∣mer scruple, you should rather forbear it in respect of the latter. But this ought not to be, and therefore not that. Arg. 6. Wicked men may read a Psalm, give then a reason why they may not sing it? Arg. 7. Moses and the children of Israel joyned together in singing, the whole Congregation; and Miriam and all the women, Exod. 15.1, 20. and yet with many of these, God was not well pleased, their carcasses fell in the wildernesse. Now Moses and Miriam were not offended at this mixture in singing, why should any now? Arg. 8. All the earth are bidden sing to the Lord, Psal. 68.32. and 96.1. who then dare take upon them to forbid any? Ob. But some Psalms you sing, do not suit our conditions, is it not ab∣surd to give to people; Davids conditions to sing, and for them to tell God, it is so or so with them? Ans. This objectinon doth not argue for the unlawfulnesse of sing∣ing such of Davids Psalms, as suit with our condition. Therfore let such wisely make choice of such Psalms, as do suit their condition, and not
east off the duty of singing, altogether upon this account, seeing there is such variety of matter in Davids Psalms, as may suit every condition that the Saints usually are in. Ans. 2. But this objection discovers too much ignorance in them that make it; for we must not think that every Psalme sung, should suite our condition exactly, no more than every Scripture read, doth it. All Scriptures are profitable for doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction, &c. 2 Tim. 3.16. and written for our learning and comfort, Rom 15.4. and therefore all the Psalmes. We are to meditate on what we sing, to our edification, we may make application of it to our spiritual benefit, though what we sing, suites not ever our present estate exactly. Now that we may sing to edifica∣tion, and with understanding, I shall in the next place lay down a few Rules of Di∣rection, to help weak Christians in singing. Some general rules directing weak Christians how to sing profitably. 1. Some Psalms are Laudarory, that is, containe especially matter of praises, set∣ting forth the praises of God, from the consideration of his nature and attributes, as his power, wisdome, holinesse, goodness, justice, mercy, truth, &c. Now in singing these Psalmes, we should get our hearts affected to love, feare, and honour this God, to trust in him, and with our tongues speak out his praises: or from the consideration of his works, as creation, providence, redemption. Now we should get our hearts ta∣ken up with the meditation of these works, till al holy affections be enflamed towards him. 2. Some Psalms are Supplicatory, containing petitions for good things, either spi∣ritual, as pardon, grace, communion with God, &c. Now here we should get our hearts affected with the excellency of these things so much desired by the Saints, and with them beg the same blessing of God: Or temporal, as deliverance, protection, provision, &c. And here we should eye God as the author of these blessings, and in the want of them, pray to him for the same, as the Saints did. 3. Some are Imprecatory, praying for judgements on enemies, and containing dire∣ful imprecations, &c. Now in singing them, we are not to wish the same curses on our private enemies, but see the horrible judgements of God on ungodly men; and trem∣ble at them, see what will be the end of wicked ungodly men, though they prosper for the present, and we may pray for the like judgements on the implacable enemies of Christ and the Church. 4. Some are Eucharistical, containing thanksgivings for mercies, private or pub∣lick, temporal or spiritual. Now herein we may meditate how good God is to his peo∣ple, how comely praise is for the upright, and be provoked to offer up in these Psalms, thanks to God for what mercies we have received. 5. Some are Doctrinal, containing instructions to fear God, love God, walk in the waies of God, backed with promises to encourage us: Or shewing the way of sinners, and their sad event, to deterius therefrom. Now in singing of these, we should be pro∣voked to shun the one, and embrace the other. 6. Sme are Querulatory, containing the sad complaints of the sufferings of Christ, or the Chu ch, or of particular Saints. Now when we sing these, we do not ever re∣monstrate our own condition, but should meditate on the suffering of the Saints for our edificat on, and on the love of Christ to us for our comfort. I might instance in all the Psalms; (as indeed it were an excellent and profitable work, i some able pen would (according to these general rules) give some directi∣ons upon every particular Psalme, to help weak Christians in singing, it might con∣duce as much to the upholding this Ordnance as 100 Argument.) But I do now stu∣dy brevity. This may suffice to teach how to sing other Psalms to edification and con∣solation. Let none therfore cast off an Ordinance, because themselves or others have abused it, but learn the right use thereof, that they may sanctifie Gods name therein, . FINIS.
