C4776 B4541 E687_2 E687_3 R206875 99865970 166430
THE CIVIL MAGISTRATES POVVER In matters of Religion Modestly Debated, Impartially Stated according to the Bounds and Grounds of Scripture, And Answer returned to those Objections against the same which seem to have any weight in them. TOGETHER WITH A Brief Answer to a certain Slanderous Pamphlet called Ill News from New-England; or, A Narrative of New-Englands Persecution. By JOHN CLARK of Road-Iland, Physician. By Thomas Cobbet Teacher of the Church at Lynne in New-England. Take us the foxes, the little foxes which spoil the vines, &c. Cant. 2. 15. Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evill, &c. Rom. 13. 3. This Treatise concerning the Christian Magistrates Power, and the exerting thereof' in, and about matters of Religion, written with much zeal and judgement by Mr. Cobbet of New-England, I doe allow to be printed, as being very profitable for these times. Feb. 7th. 1652. Obadiah Sedgwick. LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Philemon Stephens at the Gilded Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE OLIVER CROMWEL, Captain General of all the Forces of the Commonwealths of England, Scot∣land, and Ireland, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied. THrice noble Sir, whom not Man a∣lone hath honored with greatest dignity of highest Military Com∣mand, but the God of Glory al∣so hath dignified, as with pecu∣liar Interests in his speciall Grace and Favour in Jesus Christ, and with an a∣bundant measure of the saving Graces of his bles∣sed Spirit, so with a glorious and prosperous suc∣cess in all your weighty undertakings; let it not seem overmuch boldness in me who am a stranger to you by face, that I send forth this following
Discourse into the world, under the shadow of your Lordships Name. It seemeth, according to our best intelligence here, that the subject of this Discourse, beginning to grow the great contro∣versal business of these polemick times, your Ho∣nour, with some other of the Lords Worthies in England, have expressed some desire of yours, that something might be spoken thereunto: Now I having begun to do something that way former∣ly, and (though the most unworthy of any such respect from such choice Favourites of the Lord) being often moved by some of our honoured Ma∣gistrates, and reverend Elders here, to present it to publique view, I began to conclude, that it might be now seasonable, so to do; And although I were a very babe in comparison of others, for abilities and wisdom to manage so weighty a cause of the Lord; yet I remembred him that said, Out of the mouthes of babes and sucklings thou hast ordained strength, that thou mightest still the voice of the enemy and the avenger; so that I was incoura∣ged, not alone to put forth this discourse, but to make use of your Lordships Name therein. Be∣sides, we receiving certain information (Renow∣ned Worthy) of your dear respects to the Chur∣ches here, as also to our Civill State (which I trust New-England doth not, nor ever will for∣get)
even your cordial appearing for us, who are so much subject to the reproach of tongues at so great a distance, together with your charitable & frequent expressions of the good opinion you have of us; This also (Right Honourable) the rather moved me, as a Member of this Polity, even in way of Gratitude, to dedicate to your Excellency this Apology for Civill Christ an Governments, why they ought, in their Ci∣vil, and Political way, to restrain and punish abuses and enormities, even in matters of the Lord & of the Church. You (truly noble, and valiant Sir) have quit your self like a man of God, in managing your Military weapons, in defence of the Civill State in England, against all opposers of them, for their ex∣emplary acts of Justice, which they did, both upon delinquent Statesmen, and (as they are called) Churchmen too; even the Prelates, and their reti∣nue: Yea you have to your utmost, in your Military way, managed that cause, at first covenanted by the State, which was, not alone the bringing of all sorts of Delinquents to their condign punishment, but the reforming of matters of Religion in Engl accord∣ing to the Word of God, & the pattern of the purest Churches: wherfore (right worthy Sir) what you have fought so many bloody battels for in the field, now stand couragiously, and plead stoutly for it in peace. Israels General Joshuah was not more famous for his prowess & victories over the Canaanites in the field,
than for his care of setling Religion in the people, ac∣ding to Gods mind, when the War was ended; wit∣ness those memorable passages that way, recorded Josh. 23. & chap. 24. King David is renowned for the like care, who after the inhabitants of the land were given into his hand, and the land was subdued before the Lord and his people, 1 Chr. 22. 14. Now (saith he) set your hearts and souls to seek the Lord your God, and arise and build his Sanctuary, &c. And chap. 27. he ga∣thereth the chief Civill and Military Commanders before him, and ver. 8. he chargeth them all (in their severall places, callings, and conditions) to keep, and seek for all the Commandements of God; and he joy∣neth with him, in special, the chief Commanders of the Army, in a Civil way, to help on the Work of Religi∣on, and of the Church, mentioned 1 Chr. 25. 1, &c. Let not therefore the least thought arise in your Noble breast (Right honorable Sir) that it is  for you to meddle in such matters, or to maintain things of that nature: But let Holiness, and the defence and maintainance thereof, be written upon your hors. bridle, as it will be upon theirs whose Conversion we are even waiting for, Zach. 14. 20. Who will be presently up in arms for Christ and his cause, against which they were so long hardened. That returning Shulamites Portraiture is represented by the company of two Armies, Cant. 6. last; of whom more also is
spoken, Zac 12. 5, 6, 7, 8. Jesus Christ himself is repre∣sented as the Generall of the Field, and owning the godly Souldiery as his Army, who, in a cause of Reli∣gion, shall, by the dint of the sword, be instruments to bring Antichrist and his Abettors to their deserved ruin, Rev. 17. & chap. 19. Yea, but could not Jesus Christ destroy them by his own immediate hand, and is not his Truth and Word of force to overthrow all that is contrary to it? Yea verily, yet is it the will and pleasure of Jesus Christ, by humane, externall, forcible means, to restrain, and punish such offen∣dors in matters of Religion; wherefore, neither the State, nor Souldiery of England, have any cause to re∣pent of their Covenant Ingagements, in their several respective ways, to endeavour the bringing it about, that Religion there may be reformed according to the Word of God, and the best patterns of the pu∣rest Churches. Nor hath the State of England any cause to retract any wholsom penall Laws which they have made the 2. of May 48. or since, against so many blasphemous, and false Doctrines, and corrupt Practi∣ses, in matters of Religion, mentioned in those seve∣rall worthy Laws. Nor hath either State or Soul∣diery any cause to condemn their own renowned acts of Zeal for the Lord, in some exemplary punish∣ments which accordingly they have already inflicted upon some persons for such like offences; but they
shall assuredly find it good, to be alwayes zealous in a good thing. And as they have begun to shew themselves, to be indeed with Christ, and not against him, so to continue, and go on, in despite of all false, or malignant spirits or tongues. And as for you (most Noble Sir) who in your Military way, have had so many Military disputes for the Causes of the Lord, if it be vile to be for Jesus Christ, be you yet more vile, only still keeping (as through Grace you have done hitherto) low in your own eyes; so shall you at length, after you have stood, and in your way also have fought for Christ and his Cause, com to receive that incorruptible Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give you at that day; and not to you onely, but to all those which love his appearing: Which shall be ever his prayer who is, Sir, Lynne in New-Engl. this 4th of the 8th 52. Your Excellencies humbly devoted Servant, THOMAS COBBET.
To the Reader. CHristian and Courteous Reader, thou canst not but see (if thou wisely observest the designs now on foot in these last and perillous days) that Satan being disturbed, and in a maner dethroned from his so large Dominions, possessed under him by his eldest son, the Great Antichrist, he is now stirring up many petty Antichrists, who being in pretence for Christ, do some way or other oppose and undermine Christ in his Person, Titles, Offices, or Truths: And surely, It is none of the least amongst those re∣nowned Titles of his, that he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; he, under, and for whom, higher Civil powers do, and must rule. That Great Antichrists master-piece was, in the first place, to ham-string Civil powers from having any thing to do in matters of Religion, or of the Church, further than as servants, and indeed vassals, unto the Pope, as visible Head of the Church, or to the Mother Church of Rome, or at least to Church, Councils and Synods, to execute onely their Decrees and Laws: But since that Civil powers have broken those cursed bonds of Antichrist, and shook off that tyrannical yoke of that man of sin, and have through grace seen it their approved dignity from the Lord, and duty to him, to improve their Civil Authority to the utmost, against that man of sin, and all his usurpations and inventions, Satan stirreth up others to prosecute the same design, insubstance, albeit, under more specious pretences, even to despoil Civil powers of that which is their glory and crown, even as Civil powers, to serve the Lord Jesus, their Lord, and to improve their Authority, to establish his Laws and Government onely, within their jurisdicti∣ons, and to root out whatsoever opposeth, and undermineth the same. The Devils name is Belial, one without yoke, at least, in his desire and indeavor, and he breatheth that masterless, licentious spirit in such as he effectually worketh. They were children of Belial, that
sayd of Saul, 1 Sam. 10. 27. How shall this man save us? and they despised him, and brought him no presents; thence that Spi∣rit and Speech of theirs of old, Psal. 12. Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? we will maintain, hold and say what we please, without controul from any; this Spirit was in Corah and his Company, who at once contemned and condemned those two main Ordinances of God, Magistracy and Ministry; they were Levellers, they would have none in office above others, in the Common-wealth or in the Church. Num. 16. 3. They gather a∣gainst Moses and Aaron saying unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them, wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? the self same spirit, Jude saith, shall be in some licentious Preachers, and pro∣fessours, who shall turn the grace of God into wantonness, Jude 4. Walk after their own lusts, ver. 16. and ver. 8. Despise do∣minion, and speak evill of dignities; namely, not so much of persons in Office, in Church or Common-wealth, as of their ve∣ry Offices; and ver. 11. They perish in the gain-saying of ore; these have Corahs speeches up, in substance; what, are not all the Lords people Saints, and must one Saint be so much above another? are they not all one in Christ Jesus? is not the Lord among them as their onely Lord, Judge, King, and Law-giver; and must they have any other? of these also, Peter, another witness testifieth, 2 Pet. 2. 1. There were false Prophets among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who shall privily bring in pernicious Heresies; and ver. 10. some of their black marks are; that they despise Government Civill or Ecclesiasticall, Presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evill of Dignities, and ver. 19. they promise (their fellows) Liberty, they themselves are the servants of cor∣ruption, Seducers and erring spirits; they know well enough, that under Christ, there is no ordinary means left, to restrain and pu∣nish their extravagancies, but Government in Church and Com∣mon-wealth, therefore it is wont to be a constant concomitant of Errour and Heresie, to become a back friend to Magistracy and Ministry, to civill Jurisdiction, and to Church Discipline; common experience in these dayes witnesseth this; when Magi∣stracy and Ministry both are either wholly cryed down, by too many erring spirits, or so enervated and dispoiled of their proper
worth and power, by others, that they have little left but the bare title and name of such; if the Magistrate be allowed by some, his power in matters of the second Table▪ yet the other half of his politicall power in matters of the first Table, he may not assume. Religious States may not, they think in wisdom, tolerate State errours and the ventings of them; but if dangerous errours in Religion are scattered and spread, they must let them alone. As if civill maxims were more near and dear to Christ, under whom Magistrates rule, than the matters of his own sacred truth; or that matters in politiques, were more blisfull or fatall to their Christian subjects, than those in Religion, or that Christian re∣gulated Magistrates should leave that at a loose end, (even mat∣ter of sound doctrine) which is the very bond of Christian societies under their power; bodily murtherers they will yield, must be ca∣pitally punished, but if the Wine of Intoxicating and Infatuating doctrine of errour, vented and broached by corrupt members of Deut, 32. 33. the Church, be the Poison of Dragons and venom of Aspes; if whosoever eateth of those Cockatrice Eggs which they hatch, dyeth, spiritually; if they commit a thousand soul murthers, yet Isa 59. 5. who must say, why doe you thus; unclean practises respecting the flesh, may be punished, but unclean spirits and doctrines must be suffered in the Land; they would not have such as rob and spoyl others of their goods, escape; but its no matter what havock any make of Church Ordinances, Privileges, and Liberties, by any Tenents of theirs: If they rob us of the Law, and the Prophets, and take away a great part of the holy Scriptures, which was all given by Divine Inspiration, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Isa. 49. 23. & 3. 7. Rom. 13. 3, 4. Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; or if they plunder and strip us of the office, Political power, and care of the Churches Civil Nurse-fathers, Physicians, and Shepherds, for their best good, none must punish them for such like outrages. And if at a dead lift, Magistratical power, be, with much ado permitted to come within the range and reach of the first Table, yet they will have it under so short a tether, and lay such strong chains and heavy bolts upon it, that its there rather as in its prison, than any way as in its privileged place; they shall be permitted to punish Witches, Sorcerers, and Inchanters, else say they, what mischiefs will befal our Estates, Families, and Bodies? But as for those good, those white Witches, that out of pretence of conscience, bewitch souls Gal. 3. 1, &c. to death, by their inchanting doctrines, let not Civil powers med∣dle with them. Men of our times, will not speak these, in so many
words; but in their tenents and practises, they speak in effect as much. But good Reader, be thou ware of such false Prophets, that come in sheeps clothing; will carry it towards thee, as fruitful and Matth. 7. 15. spiritual Christians, as humble, meek, gentle, harmless, self-deny∣ing, mortified persons, for a season, till they have attained their ends; will tell thee, it is new light, what the Spirit revealeth to them; it is the tenderness of their consciences, which maketh them scruple such and such things, which others have long held, &c. And all this while, they are inwardly ravening wolves. I hope, pious Reader, I speak to one who yet hath an ear open to hear what may be spoken in the defence of that truth so much questioned and opposed now adays: That the Lord hath not left Christian regula∣ted Civil Commonwealths, without their respective ways of Au∣thoritative Redress of such like mischiefs in Religion; for which end, read and consider (in thy retiring hours and times) this little Treatise, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Thine in Christ Jesus, Tho. Cobbet.
The Method and scope of the ensuing Discourse concerning the Civill Magi∣strates Power in matters of RELIGION. By way of Introduction, THe example of our Head Jesus Christ (Iohn 2. 13. ad 17. who made it one of his first works to reform matters amiss in Religion) is opened and applyed in many pious and sea∣sonable observations. pag. 1. ad 6. That this act of Christ is presidentiall and imitable, accor∣ding to the judgements of the Godly Learned Pareus, Bullin∣ger, Tossanus, Marlorate, Dyke, Ainsworth, Musculus, Suecanus, and Beza. pag. 6. ad 9. 2. Objections answered. pag. 9. ad 12. The Thesis and Position propounded to be cleared is this, That Cor∣ruptions in Religion outwardly breaking forth and expressed, may, yea and must be restrained and punished, by such as are thereunto called. pag. 12. In handling whereof, the Author first propoundeth some 1. Distinctions. pag. 12. 2. Some Conclusions about it are laid down 1. Negatively, what may not bee done this way. pag. 13. ad 16. 2. Positively, what may and must. pag. 16 3. The main Assertion is explained. pag. 16, 17. And proved by Seven Reasons grounded upon Scriptures. pag. 17. ad 34.
Five Corollaries or Instructions drawn from the Premises. 1. The first is by way of Refutation and Answer to sundry Ob∣jections, tending to undermine the Cocrcive Power of the Civill Magistrate in matters of Religion. pag. 35. ad 46. 2. The second Instruction chargeth Rulers with the Duty of En∣deavoring the exact knowledge of Gods law, word, and rules. pag. 46. 3. The Third Instruction or inference from the premises, That then the Highest Civill Authority are to make Coercive Lawes about matters of Religion. pag. 46. Touching this particular, The Author distinguisheth, 1. Of Civill Magistrates. pag. 47, 48. 2. Of Kingdomes or Commonwealths, in which they rule. pag. 49. 3. Of Legislative power in matters of Religion. p. 49. 4. Of Lawes about Religion. pag. 50. Conclusions are laid down about this weighty matter, 1. Negatively, pag. 51. ad 54. where it is proved that humane laws, formally and as such, cannot bind the conscience. 2. Positively. Positive Conclusions about this Nomothetique power are sour. 1. That Politicall Laws, properly such, may be made about mat∣ters of Religion: pag. 54. This Conclusion is confirmed by seven Reasons. pag. 54. ad 58. 4. Objections against this Conclusion are answered. pag. 58. ad 67
2. Conclusion, That in doubtfull matters, Ecclesiasticall As∣semblies are to bee called, whose Counsels unto the Magi∣strate are Ecclesiastically Authoritative. pag. 67. 3. Conclusion, Civill Magistrates are to call upon Ministers to expound the whole Counsell of God. pag. 68. 4. Conclusion, Civill Authority must establish their Lawes with the consent of their people or their representatives. p. 68. 4. A fourth Instruction from the Premises,—Then are the Civil Authority in their Politicall way to Judge, which things acted by the outward man in cases of Religion are contrary to the word, and which are not. pag. 70. For further clearing of this from all gainsayers, 1. Some distinctions are laid down. pag. 71. 72. 2. The Conclusion is stated and cautioned pag. 73. 3. Five Reasons for proof thereof, and the Objections against them answered. pag. 73. ad 82. 5. The last instruction from the premises—Then are not persons to be left to the liberty of their own Judgements or consciences. pag. 82. For the better clearing of this weighty Conclusion so many waies opposed now adayes, 1. Some distinctions about it are propounded, and Rom. 14. 3. &c. cleared. pag. 82. ad 86. 2. The Conclusion is stated against a set fixed Toleration, and proved by 10. Reasons from Scripture, all which are vin∣dicated from the severall Objections against them. pag. 86. ad fin.
Errata. In the Epistle Dedicatory pag. 4. line first adde cor. pag. 29. for  reade pag. for  read . p. 32. for 1 John 14. 1. read 1 John 1. 14. This Treatise concerning the Christian Magistrates Power, and the exerting thereof, in, and about matters of Religion, written with much zeal and judgement by Mr. Cobbet of New-England, I doe al∣low to be Printed, as being very profitable for these times. Feb. 7th. 1652. OBADIAH SEDGWICK.
A Discourse concerning the Nature and Latitude of Civil Powers in matters of Religion. IF ever it were a time, wherein the Zeal of Gods house should burn in the hearts of the sincere members of Jesus Christ; or if ever the Lord cal∣led for the flaming forth of that holy fire, in their zealous expressions and actions (according to their several places and callings) in way of vindication of the Lords abused Name, Truth, Ordinances and Wayes, surely this is that time; when under pretence of Spirituall Light, so much hellish darknesse beginneth to overspread the face of the Churches of Christ. Wherefore before that I do enter upon the main point which I intend in this Discourse, I shall first pre∣sent a memorable example, of such holy zeal in our Head Jesus Christ▪ to the Intent, that such of his Members, who are by office and place most concerned therein, may in the fear of God wisely and seriously ponder, whether that holy Zeal which was in Jesus Christ, as in a Well-head, and is doubtlesse (in their measures) derived to them also, should not now be more abun∣dantly exerted and exercised that way. The example I intend is recorded in Joh. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And Iesus went up to Jerusalem. And found in the Temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and Doves, and the changers of money, sitting. And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of the Temple, with the sheep and the oxen, and poured out the Chan∣gers money, and overthrew the tables. And said to them that sold Doves, Take these things hence, make not my Fathers house an house of Merchandise. And his Disciples remembred that it was
written, The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up. This History of Christs purging the Temple, being the relation of one of his most glorious Acts, in which he put forth his hand in publique view, after his most solemn entrance upon his great work: It is the more observable, and doth call for more then ordinary Improvement, by all such, whose property it is as Saints, to make narrow search into all the great Works, as of God a Crea∣tor, Psal. 111. 2. so of Jesus Christ God-man their Redeemer: but especial∣ly by all such, whose duty it is by their office and place, to be Reformers of matters amisse in the house of the Lord. Twice at least (it is clear) Christ acts thus, once in the beginning of his Ministry, as John noteth in this Chapter: and another time towards the end thereof, as the other Evangelists shew, Matth. 21. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Mark 11. 15, 16, 17. Luke 19. 37. to 47. Jesus Christ then when acting his publick Ministry up∣on earth, he made it one of his first, so one of his last works to reform matters amisse in Religion. At first, buyers of oxen and sheep are outed the Temple; but at last, sellers too. At first Dove-sellers are gently spoken to, to carry away their Truck, but at last their seats also are overthrown. Christ saith at first, you have made my Fathers house an house of Merchandise; but at last, ye have made it a den of theeves. He is then more se∣vere at a second time, against such who reform not by his for∣mer check. If any enquire after the time when this was: It was imme∣diately upon Christs first coming to Jerusalem, after his solemn Initiation into his office, Joh. 2. 11, 12, 13. compared. If any ask what the occasion of this Act was, It is noted in that, he found in the Temple those that sold oxen, &c. if any would know in what manner he Acted; that also is expressed; with some he dealeth by blowes; violently driving them out with his scourge made of small cords: so that the Instrument he maketh use of to correct them in such sort, is a whip or scourge: the mate∣rials thereof were small cords; namely, which those traders brought with their Cattel: with this scourge so made, he layeth on so violently, that he driveth out not so much the beasts, as the Beast-sellers also; he drave them all out, and the sheep and the oxen, or with the sheep and the oxen; which the Greek text cleareth, using the word , in reference to , as also to , the Beast-sellers, and money-chan∣gers.
If any would demand the ground why Christ did thus: It is given partly in that himself spake; Make not [my Fathers house] an house of Merchandize. It was his Fathers house which was so profaned and polluted; and he, as his son, is nearly con∣cerned in it; and partly in that which the Spirit of God sugge∣sted seasonably to the Disciples from the Book of Psalmes; The Zeal of thine house hath eaten me up. And now may not the Saints learn for their Instruction sun∣dry things hence, which concern them also, even all of them in their several callings▪ especially those in higher place? Yes ve∣rily. From a more general Consideration of this history, as hold∣ing forth, the dealing of Jesus Christ, with sinners amongst his people: we may all note, that which godly Interpreters hint hence to us. As from this that is said, he found such and such, and dealt so with them: Learn first, That the sight and assured knowledg of sinnes acted, especially by persons pretending to Religion, it pro∣voketh the Lord Jesus some way or other to expresse his deep displeasure against them. Secondly, that sometimes the Lord Jesus dealeth with sinners, and punisheth them in the very Act of sinning; as he scourged them here, which he took in the manner. From what is here said; he took small cords and made a whip thereof, even of the very Cords, which they sinfully abu∣sed to bring their Cattel into a forbidden place for any such use: Learn, that sometimes the Lord Jesus maketh punishing scour∣ges for sinners, even of the very instruments themselves, abused to sinne. From the manner of Christs dealing here, that with his whip he driveth out the beast-sellers, as the beasts, using them therein as their beasts; Learn that such as under the means of grace, grosly abuse and prophane the same, they are of basest esteem in the sight of the Lord Jesus. Furthermore, these abuses were not without religious preten∣ces of Scripture grounds: God had of old said, Deut. 14. 24. 25, 26. If the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to carry it, (namely, the tythe of their corn and firstlings of their flock which they
were to eate before the Lord, v. 23.) Or if the place be too far from thee which the Lord thy God shal chuse to set his name there: (which after∣wards was Jerusalem and the Temple there) then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up the mony in thy hand, and shalt go to the place which the Lord thy God shall chuse: And thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for Oxen or for sheep, &c. And thou shalt eat it before the Lord thy God, &c. It might therefore seem convenient to have the beasts at hand to be sold there where they were to be used; besides every one was to offer half a shekel after the shekel of the Sanctaurie, to make attone∣ment for their souls; Exodus 30. 13, 14, 15. and were it not convenient to have some money changers, to have so many hundred thousand such like pieces in readiness for each one that needed them, who though they might have either greater or lesser pieces, yet possibly not such as weighed neither more nor lesse then half the shekel of the Sanctuarie. But yet for all such pretended conveniences and seemingly good ends propounded, those abuses were so distasted and corrected by Jesus Christ: And may not all thence learn; 1. That good ends propounded or pretended, cannot justifie actions seemingly good, but really bad, nor exempt the Actours of them from the check and scourge of Jesus Christ? Secondly, that such are in special wise distasted and detested by the Lord Jesus, who under religious pretences corrupt Re∣ligion. From the ground expressed which moved Christ to do thus, in that through their covetousness his Fathers house designed to holy ends and uses, is perverted to common and prophane uses: Learn: 1. That worldlinesse or covetousnesse is, and hath ever been wont to be the common inlet of corruptions in Religion, what∣soever they pretended for this Temple trading, the gain of their merchandize is intended. 2. That worldly and covetous professours of Religion are of vile account with Jesus Christ; he whippeth them as he doth their beasts out of the Temple. From this Historie considered with more special reference to Reformation of things amisse in the Lords house; and therein from the circumstance of the time when Jesus Christ acted thus in way of purging the Temple even upon his first solemn coming into publike view at Jerusa∣lem,
after his actual entrance upon his publike work: may not we learn, That Reformation of things amisse in Religion are very spee∣dily, and as in the first place to be set about, by such as are there∣to called of God? From the occasion of what Christ here did, he found matters at so bad a passe in the Temple: may not we learn 1. That corruptions in matters of Religion are very apt to creep into true Churches, and being once let in, to be connived at, and tolerated? These abuses were of long standing, and notwithstanding those whose charge it was to have looked bet∣ter to it, yet Christ when he came into the Temple, he findeth such corruptions there. 2. That when such as are called to redresse things amisse in religion, doe grosly neglect their dutie therein; the Lord him∣self is wont some way or other to put forth his hand, in purg∣ing out the same, when the Priests rather further then hinder these corruptions, and civil authoritie suffered the same to con∣tinue; then cometh Jesus Christ with his whip and purgeth the Temple. From the manner of Christs purging the Temple: Learn; 1. That Church Reformers work, may in some particulars thereof be sometimes despicable, but yet is never disdained by persons truely gracious. Christ with his own hand refuseth not to gather up small cords to make a whip of them, and with it to drive out men and beasts out of the Temple. Reformers work is in Scripture language, Refiners, Fullers, Hedgers, Vine-dressers, Shepheards, Sink-cleansers work, yet very acceptable to Godly ones. 2. That Reformations of things amisse in Religion, are to be carried on with expressions of greatest indignation and distaste, as of the abuses themselves, so of the instruments, and of the ap∣purtenances thereof, hence Jesus Christ used a scourge: hence such distaste of his expressed against the very Oxen and Sheep so abused: hence also his overthrowing the money-changers tables, and pouring their money upon the ground. Besides the use of Christs whip was both an outward means of forcible re∣straint and punishment of these abuses in Religion; and that in respect to persons themselves, who were chief actours therein; for Christ violently drave out them also with his whip; and
therefore Matthew relating this act of Christ as renewed a second time, Matth. 21. 12, 13. He onely mentioneth Christs cast∣ing out both all them that sold, and all them that bought in the Temple; and the word, , used there and here denoteth some special violence, he cast them out as a stone out of a sling, the word is oft used in Scripture to expresse some violent way of dealing. Its frequently used in Matthew, Chapter 8. and 9. and 10. and 12. for casting out of Devils; Its used for casting out the unprepared guest into outer darknesse, Matthew 22. 13. and for casting out the unprofitable servant, Matthew 25. 30. and for casting out the bond-woman and her sonne, Gal. 4. 30. and for expelling of Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13. 50. &c. And may not this Act of Jesus Christ thus forcibly restraining and punishing these abuses in persons manifestly guiltie thereof, afford this instruction also, as clearly deducible thence? That corruptions in religion, outwardly breaking forth, and expressed, they may, yea, and must be restrained and punished by such as are thereunto called. Now this being a point of much weight, and (albeit abun∣dantly attested and confirmed by Scripture) yet now adayes too too much disrelished and opposed, I shall God willing propound it to further consideration and disquisition. Onely before I leave this considerable and memorable example of Christs zeal this way; It will not be amisse to set down the judge∣ments of sundry godly learned writers touching the way and re∣spect wherein it may be said Christ did act thus, and how farre forth this Act herein is presidential or imitable. Pareus upon Matthew 21. 12, 13. (where the second time of Christs purging the Temple is recorded) saith, This exam∣ple cannot be drawn into imitation by every private man, be∣cause they can in no wise say, that the Temple is their house; but such to whom the house of God is given and commended by vertue of their Office: As are Princes, and Pastours, and Governours of the Church, who as they are to governe the Church according to the word, so also in case of abuses creeping in, should they reform the sinne; onely according to the word. Bullinger upon the same place, having said that Christ did thus as a King, and as an high Priest, &c. He would have that noted; lest every private man should thinke it lawfull for him to doe the like, &c. And because God hath not armed every
ones hand, private persons, and such as are not in publicke authoritie, are rather to oppose it with their tongue, and to sigh and crie before the Lord till he afford remedie thereof: he denieth it as imitable by private, but yields it as imitable by such as are in publick authoritie. D. Tossavus (in loc.) It may be demanded saith he, whether it be not enough to purge the Temple or Church from corrup∣tions by word and doctrine, and why Christ did it by fact also, and by any force? It is answered, saith he, that by this example is shewed that abuses even in externals are by all means to be reformed; in which matter godly Magistrates are to lend their help to the Ministers, that as they by preaching, so Magi∣strates may even by external repurgation remove those things which are repugnant to the regular worship of God. But as for that Christ did, it appertaineth not so much to his Priest∣ly Office, as to his Kingly. Marlorate (on the place) from this that Christ as well by fact, as word, casteth out Temple abuses; saith, They are hence taught, who have received authoritie from God in the Church, how they ought by work as well as word to purge the Church▪ Although they know the corruptions, as superstition, idola∣trie and such like have taken deep rooting in the hearts of the wicked. For therefore hath the Lord armed their hands, that they might take chief care of his worship. Master Dyke writing upon this fact of Christs purging the Temple, and having declared how this fact of Christ was not imitable, as Christ did thus as the Sonne of God; he pro∣poundeth this question, how far forth this fact of Christ is imi∣table. And Ainsworth▪ men are either publick persons or private; publick either in the Magistracie, or in the Ministery; As for Magistrates, they being Christs Vicegerents (as God) in spe∣cial manner, the imitation of this fact belongeth to them; For God hath given them the sword, not to let it lie rusting in the scabbard but to strike, and he hath put the whip into their hands to scourge withall, &c. Then he sheweth how Ministers in their way of preaching are to doe thus, and then how pri∣vate men in their way of prayer and sighings (but not by other violence) are to be doing this way. Musculus upon Iohn 2d. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. upon that; he
found in the Temple, as soon as Christ came into the citie, (saith he) he visiteth the Temple. This should be the first care of all godly ones, not of Pastours onely, but of all Magi∣strates whatsoever, that the Kingdome and worship of God be sought after. And upon that, and when he had made a scourge of small cords, he cast them all out together with the Sheep and the Oxen; he observeth we see by this fact of Christ how distasteful they are, and how unsufferable in the Church, who under pretence of divine worship exercise mer∣chandize. Doubtlesse there were many other crimes, by which God was commonly provoked; and yet we reade not that Christ used like severitie against them; but forthwith he cast∣eth this loathsome plague of such Merchandize out of the Temple. Who seeth not hence that those things which con∣cern the Glory and Worship of God are not alone before all other things, but with greatest severitie to be purged away, and that not without cause, since in these sinne is committed against the first Table, and under pretence of Divine worship, service is done to the Devil and to worldly lusts; and beside the plague which ariseth here spreadeth into the whole body more speedily and dangerously then can be imagined. Again, let such who would have nothing done in a compulsive way against Idolaters and corrupters of Gods worship in the Church, but thinke such as doe evil are to be intreated willingly to desist: let such answer, Why Christ did not here doe thus; why he did not meekly request these merchants to carrie their Oxen and Sheep, and money out of the Temple; None say they are by force to be compelled to godlinesse; be it so, but are they not by force to be restrained, yea and driven away, who exercise gainfull trades in the Temple; what shall we say that Christ here sinned? God forbid! he compelled them not to Pietie, yet he casteth that merchandize out of the Temple. Furthermore, they have hence ground to change their opinion who teach, that external evils in the Church, are not to be taken away, unless they be first taken out of mens hearts? for according to this Doctrine, Christ should first have cast that inward evil of covetousnesse out of the Jewes hearts, and then have cast them out of the Temple; but we see it quite otherwise in what Christ did here, he cast these mer∣chants out of the Temple, although they kept their covetous∣nesse
still in their hearts: giving hence an example, whereby he might teach us, that publick evil is not to be suffered in the Church, although it cannot be rooted out of mens hearts. If any reply, It is but vain to remove it out of the Church, if it be not removed out of the hearts of men; surely (saith he) Christ knew this well enough, yet he did his office, having made a scourge, he hunted these dogs out of the Tem∣ple. Snecanus in his Tract de Magistratu, he maketh use of this example of Christs purging the Temple with a scourge in his hand, to prove the Magistrates power now under the Gospel, in matters of both tables. Beza in his Tract de haereticis à Magistratu puniendis saith; In or by what right did Christ twice take the Whip in hand? both John 2. 14. and Matth. 21. 12, 13. by what right did Peter kill Ananias and Sapphira? by what right did Paul strike Eli∣mas blind? what? by that of the Ecclesiastical Ministry? surely no, unlesse you would confound the Jurisdictions; therefore by the right of the Civil Magistrate: for there is no third. Yet I acknowledge this power put forth by Ministers of the Word, was in them extraordinary, and the manner of exercising it after a sort divine: but I prove, that though the Lord doth not alwayes make use of the help of the Ma∣gistrates, yet in all ages, he doth make use of the Power where∣of the Magistrate is the onely ordinary Minister, accord∣ing as himself seeth it meet, for the preservation of his Church. Now then if any object against this example as Imitable; be∣cause  Christ did this as God, or at least as the Messiah. It is answered, first, That Civil Rulers are Christs Vice∣gerents,  considered as God; and are therefore called gods, Psal. 82. 1, 6. and said to judge for God, 2 Chron. 19. 6. and called the Ministers of God, Rom. 13. 4. the ordinary publick Aven∣gers who are to take vengeance; namely in Gods stead, to whom alone vengeance doth belong: so are they Christs Vicegerents as Mediatour: as one that hath all power committed to him in earth, as well as heaven, Matth. 28. 18. and from him therefore as political head of his people, Magistrates power on earth must come, Prov. 8. 15, 16. by me (saith the essential wisdom of God) Princes rule: hence called King of kings, and Lord of lords, 1 Tim.
1. 16, 17. Rev. 19. 16. yea he maketh Civil Rulers nursing Fathers and Mothers to his Church, and so committeth his Church which Esay 49. 23. 1 Tim. 3. 15. is his house, into their hands, as those, who in their civil officed way, are every way to further its welfare. What Christ did here immediately, as an act appertaining to his Soveraignty, to purge out Church corruptions, he now doth by his Vicegerents hands, mediately. Secondly, It is answered; he that was God and man, who  acted did act thus in a mixt way, not onely as God, but partly also as Man: as man he gathered up the small cords, as man he twisted them, and made a scourge of them; as man he laid on with his bodily hand in such sort, as thereby to drive the beast-sellers out of the Temple: herein therefore imitable, in such mere humane acts, by men of place. Like acts for substance, were put forth by David, a man of place, (before Christs coming in the flesh) and if typical in David, yet verified partly in Christ as the son of David; and so as man. Yea the reason here sugge∣sted by the Holy Ghost to the Disciples, as justifying Christs act, namely the zeal of Gods house, Joh. 2. 17. it must needs be yeel∣ded to be an apt, and just reason suitable to the act: as the rea∣son therefore is appliable to Christ as man, the Antitype, even as it was to David the type: so is the Act grounded upon that rea∣son, and justified by it, in the same way appliable to the Anti∣type Christ, as to the type David. Christ could have cast out these out of the Temple, by a word of his mouth, as he did cast Devils out of living temples, of his peoples bodies: or as he cast down those who came to take him, Joh. 18. or he could by a Judicial cord have punished them spiritually; as when he bid them fillup the measure of their fathers sins, Matth. 23. 32. but he chose to act in such a humane way, imitable by others there∣unto called. Secondly, If any object that it was extraordinary in Christ as  man, then to restrain, or punish abuses in Religion, in any for∣cible and corporal way. I answer, Admit it were so, 1. Yet at least the act it self of such  outward restraint and punishment of abuses in Religion, must needs be in it self, that whereon the Image of Christs zeal is en∣stamped; that which is in it self good, and allowed of God in special wise; (for else Christ could not at all have acted thus, without sin,) and if in it self it be of that nature, why not imi∣table
by such as are thereto called of God, to do that in an or∣dinary way, which he did in an extraordinary. Secondly, Be it that it were extraordinary in Christ as man, to act thus; so was Phinehas his act of killing Zimri and Cosbi, Numb. 25. 7, 8. and Samuels, in hewing Agag in pieces, 1 Sam. 15. 33. and Elijahs slaughter which he made among Baals Priests, 1 King. 18. 40. yet it must be yeelded, that there must be some, who by office might, and should, in an ordinary way, have punished such filthinesse, murthers, or Idolatries; the Lord not using to stirre up any, to an extraordinary way, to do any such like acts, but in the defect of acts of ordinary power: and so here; the same Spirit which stirred up them to supply that defect of the acting of ordinary power, by extraordinary motions and acts; did also stir up Jesus Christ, in an extraordi∣nary way, to restrain and punish these corruptions in Religion, which the present Civil power, in duty unto the Lord, as his Ministers, ought to have restrained and punished; and so to have revenged the Indignity therein done to the Lord, whose house was so profaned. According to that Rom. 13. 4. but they failing in their duty this way, the same Spirit of zeal that stirred up David his type, in the corrupter times of Saul, to be vindicating such indignities against the Lord, stirred up Christ his Antitype, to do like work for substance, in those corrupter times, upon which he was cast. Nor was this an extraordinary supply of the defect of ordinary Ministerial and Priestly power, considered as Priestly and Ministerial: for what had they to do, as such, with external and corporal restraint, and punish∣ment, in any ordinary way: in that way, if Peter use the sword, he must perish by it, Matth. 26. 52. but it must needs be a supply of the defect of Magistratical power, which in an ordinary way, maketh use of the sword, or whip, or like instruments of corporeal punishment, and vengeance, Rom. 13. 4. rather then such like abuses in Religion shall not be, in an external coercive way, curbed and punished, Jesus Christ himself will do some∣thing extraordinary to supply that defect. So far is that from being Mosaical, Jewish, and much lesse tyrannical work, out∣wardly to restrain and punish such abuses in Religion, for which yet conscience to the Word might be pretended, (as that Law Deut. 14. 24. 25, 26. might be for these) that Jesus Christ thought it fit to become himself, to put forth his hand, to so good and
blessed a Work, when those whose duty it was to do it, would not discharge their trust. And now having thus far waded, to find out some part of Gods Counsel, in this famous History of Christs purging the Temple; I shall leave the same to the Judgment of the godly wise. The Thesis and Position, which I shall propound to be cleared and confirmed from the Scriptures, shall be that, which before I hinted, namely, That Corruptions in Religion, outwardly breaking forth and expressed, may, yea and must be restrained and punished, by such as are called thereunto. Now for the better Handling, and the more full discovery of the truth of this point; we shall first propound some distincti∣ons. 2. Lay down some conclusions about it. 3. Confirm the point from Scripture. 4. Draw three or four Corrolaries thence. Touching the first. 1. Corruptions in Religion are either Dogmatical, or Practi∣cal. And these again, are either such as are more grosse, and strike at the very fundamentals, or vitals of Religion, whether directly or collaterally; or such as are of a more circumstantial and lighter nature. Again; Corruptions in Religion, are either such as are se∣cretly taken up, and imbraced, and so kept close in the minds and hearts of persons; or such as come under mans kenne and view: being outwardly expressed in word, writing, Action, or the like. And these again which come thus into open view, are either such as are held forth with meeknesse, peaceablenesse, and real expressions of cordial readinesse to lay them aside, and re∣form them, upon better information; or such as are carried on in any insolent, and turbulent way; or with expressions of con∣tempt of Civil, or Church order. 2. Restraint and punishment of these, is, either that which is merely and immediately divine, or that which is mixt, partly divine, partly humane, in respect either of the agent, or manner of Acting; or that which is properly in the na∣ture of the act, person, and manner of Acting, Humane. And this is either Political, which is carried on in a civil way, and by
political means; or Ecclesiastical, which is carried on in a Church way, and by Ecclesiastical meanes. 3. A Call of God, to restrain and punish abuses, is, either immediately Divine, as when by divine vision, revelation, pro∣phesie, inspiration, instinct, and the like: or that which is me∣diately divine, in respect of God the Authour, but immediate∣ly humane, in respect of man designing and inviting. Now let us in the second place lay down some Conclusions: 1. Negatively; what may not be done this way. 2. Affirma∣tively; what may and must. In a negative way we say. 1. No private person now, in these dayes, under any pretence whatsoever, may take upon him to restrain and punish Cor∣ruptions in Religion, in those who are not under his personal charge. Calls which are immediately Divine, are now ceased; men are now to look for a call from man; and by man to act in way of restraining and punishing the faults of others which are not under them, either as Parents, Guardians, Masters, Tutors, or the like. It is rash zeal; zeal without knowledge, to do any thing that way, without the bounds of ones particular calling; in the limits whereof, every one should abide with God, 1 Cor. 7. 20, 24. It tendeth to confusion in Churches and Common∣wealths; and God is no Author of that, 1 Cor. 14. 33. In those dayes, when God was pleased to give forth some∣times extraordinary Calls to such work: yet those zealous Le∣vites await their call from him, whose proper work it was, in a forcible and corporal way, to punish such abuses; even from Moses the Magistrate, Exod. 32. 26, 27, 28. and Deut. 33. 9. com∣pared. Uzzahs sad punishment by the Lord (even in those dayes) for putting forth his hand to stay the Ark from falling, having not a call thereunto, 1 Chron. 13. 9, 10. is of publick Admonition to all of us, to take heed we break not the bounds of our calling this way; out of a pretence to preserve Religion from Injuries: he that so useth the sword, shall perish by it, Matth. 26. 52, 53. 2. No Civil Authority whatsoever, nor persons thereto cal∣led, Conclus. 2. may, as persons in Civil Authority, curb or punish abuses in Religion, in any Ecclesiastical manner, or by meanes properly Ecclesiastical; as excommunication or the like. What he who is a godly Ruler may do, considered as a member of a particu∣lar
visible Church, with joynt concurrence of the Church whereof he is a member, is another case. Christ never gave the power of the keyes, to any Civil Common Wealths or King∣domes, as Civil Societies: but to his Church, as an Ecclesiastical society, Matth. 16. 18, 19. and chap. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 4. nor on the other hand may Churches, or Church Officers, take upon them to restrain, sentence, or punish Church abuses, or corrup∣tions, in any external, forcible way, or by any corporal punish∣ments, as Imprisonments, Fines, Mulcts, Stripes, Sword, Whip, Fire, Faggot, or the like. And in vain do the Rhemists in their glosse upon that Scripture in Joh. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. plead for their Father the Pope, as having ground from thence, to make use of both swords, the temporal and the spiritual sword; Even Peter himself, whose Successour he falsly pleadeth to be, he may not use the temporal sword: no not when pretending zeal in the cause of Christ, his Master, but is chidden, and threat∣ned by Christ for it, Matth. 26. 52. the Church of Rome, and all her Officers, must subject themselves to Civil Authority; and if they themselves do any manifest evil, they are to fear the Ma∣gistrates sword, Rom. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. which with the rest of the Epistle is directed to the Church at Rome, Chap. 1. 7. the ordi∣nary use of the Whip and Sword, is a Lordly and Masterly Act; it is one exercise of a Lordly Dominion and Authority; and it may not be so with Peter, or any other of Christs Apostles, or their Successours, Matth. 20. 25, 26. where if the words , and , would be evaded as understood of any tyrannical use of such power; Luke in his 22 Chapter, verse 25. taketh off all scruple; when he saith of the Kings of the Gentiles, that, , and , they barely exercise Lordship and authority over you, namely in their Civil way: he addeth, vers. 26. but it shall not be so with you: you may not imitate them, in any such use or exercise of their power. Nor was the Question moved to Christ, by the Disciples, who should be tyrants over the rest, but, who should have Dominion over the rest: to which Christ answereth, It shall not be so with you. 3. Neither Civil, nor Church power may curb, or punish, a mere supposed Corruption in Religion, but that which is so really, and manifestly appearing from grounds of the Word: the contrary is condemned, when men are made offendors for
a word rightly uttered by the just, Esay 29. 21. when Assem∣blies shall ignorantly and rashly passe censures, out of a bare supposal of service therein done to Christ, Joh. 16. 2, 3. they that kill you shall think they do God good service. 4. Neither the one power, nor the other, may censure and punish real corruptions in Religion, till breaking forth into outward expression, and brought into more open view: for then they are Judicially certain, then they are of legal proof: then they are scandalous and Infectious. Hence that Law about civil punishing corruptions in Religion, Deut. 13. 13, 14 and 17. 2, 3, 4, 5. If it be told unto thee, and thou hast heard it, then shalt thou enquire diligently, and if it be true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel, then shalt thou bring forth that man or woman, and stone them, &c. 5. Though such as are in place may be, and should be in a holy wise jealous, and carry a more watchful eye, in case of hints given of such corruptions, as creeping in amongst them; as were the heads of the Tribes upon some information given, touching a new Altar made by the two Tribes and half, Josh. 22. 11, 12, 13, 14. and as was Paul in his way of the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. yet is it not meet by any external vio∣lent means, as by Oathes ex officio, close Imprisonments, wracks, Strappadoes, and other preposterous wayes of Inquisition, to bring that under Censure, which Gods providence ripeneth not for it. Neither Claudius Lysias the Centurion, nor Felix, nor after him Festus the Governour of the Jewes, would any of them use any such wayes, to extort self-accusations (so contra∣ry to the light of Nature, and Law of Nations,) from Paul, a supposed and accused Delinquent many wayes. See Act. 22. 30. and 23. 28, 29, 30, 35. and 24. 22, 23. and 25. 5, 7, 8. 6. Although the Corruptions in Religion, may be mani∣fest either to the Civil, or Church Court, yet not actually pu∣nishable, till sufficient meanes of conviction be used. Thus did the Heads of the ten Tribes, although preparing to strike and punish that Innovation and new way of Religion, (as was supposed) yet what effectual meanes they did use of convicti∣on, may appear by that gracious speech made to the two tribes
and half, by their Messengers, Josh. 22. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. verses compared. So in Church Courts, an He∣retick must be rejected, but yet not till after once, or twice Ad∣monition. 7. Although neither powers Civil, or Ecclesiastical, may inforce upon Aliens from the true Religion, any of the wayes of it, yet may not the Civil power suffer Aliens, either openly to vilifie or blaspheme the true Religion, or to abase the Prea∣chers and professours thereof, or any way to disturb them in the holy exercise of it. Christ would not suffer the man pos∣sessed, to make disturbance in the Sabbath solemnities, but casteth out the devil, Mark 1. Or least of all may they in∣duce them to practise openly their Jewish, or Pagan Reli∣gions. 8. Neither Powers may equally censure or correct all sorts of corruptions in Religion, which come into publick view: but as the corruptions are more grosse, or the persons more con∣temptuous, and turbulent in their way, so to lay on the more load upon them. Some are Seducers and Ringleaders in the offences and abuses, some seduced; neither all errours, nor all erring persons, are of equal guilt, and Justice must suum cuique tribuere. Positively we affirm, that both Church Officers with their Affirmat. Conclus. Churches, in a Church way, and highest Civil Authority and Rulers, in their political way, they may, yea they must restrain, and seasonably and suitably punish all grosser corruptions in Religion, manifestly crosse to the Word, when they are out∣wardly, and openly expressed, to the Just offence of the Saints, and hurt of others. To explain this a little. We say, they may do so; not as a matter of their own li∣berty to do or not to do so; a thing may be lawful, which in case is not expedient: but this is a duty to which they are bound, and with which they cannot wholly dispense: its there∣fore added, they must do it; oft times indeed they do it not, but in duty they are bound to it: Albeit they may for a time sometimes suspend the acting of it; yet its added, they must seasonably do it: not too suddenly, before some paines and patience be used; nor yet too slowly, delaying over-long, till such evils spread too far, grow to too strong an head, or be∣come
incurable, or at least uncontroulable. They must also doe it suitably, that is, observing proportions of persons offend∣ing, of matter, manner, times and places of offence that way. And they must so deal, not with every lighter matter of offence, but in case of grosser offences, striking at the weightier matters of God, tending to invalidate and undermine, or to invert or pervert his choicer institutions. And they must so punish cor∣ruptions manifestly crosse to the word, not matters which in themselves are meerly disputable both wayes, but which are in themselves clearly crosse to the Word, if not in the expresse letter of it, yet in respect of conclusions unavoydably, and ne∣cessarily deducible from the Word. It is further added when they are outwardly expressed, &c. Namely in word, writing, in gesture or deed; uttering or acting the evils themselves in an open and offensive way; or else con∣temptuously and turbulently expressing distaste some way a∣gainst the contrary truth and way professed and practised by Religious Common-wealths, or by the purer Churches in them. But because in these latter times so many depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils, and because that civil government is now so much despised, and too many are not afraid to speak evil of dignities in Kingdomes and Common-wealths, making them usurpers for medling in such matters of Religion, or for daring to improve their civil power to restrain and punish such enormities in Religion; I shall therefore onely addresse my self at present to prove and confirm this Position; that it is the dutie of highest civil autho∣ritie, and of the civil Rulers in a religious State, to restrain and punish corruptions and abuses in religion, breaking forth within their jurisdiction, according as even now explained and stated in the foregoing conclusion. This I prove by several reasons grounded upon the Scrip∣tures.  The first reason hereof is taken from the nature of such work of such political restraint and punishment; It is a choice piece of service to the Lord from them: therefore no usurpation; nay rather therefore their dutie: therefore well becomming them. When Moses the chief Magistrate would be putting forth his authoritie to call forth some as instruments of his authoritie,
to punish by the temporall sword, those open corruptions in re∣ligion in the Actours thereof, Exodus 32. 4. &c. verse 26. He asked, Who was on the Lords side.  Who is for the Lord? It is therefore in the very nature of the thing to be for the Lord, or on his side to punish such corruptions in such offenders. And verse 29. speaking of the same work; Moses authoritatively bid∣deth them, Consecrate your selves to day to the Lord, even every man upon his sonne and upon his brother: (adding this blessed motive to that work) That he may bestow a blessing upon you to day. It is in the Hebrew Text,  Fill your hand; a phrase bor∣rowed from sacrifices, and such as offered sacrifices, or had their hands filled for that end. Hence when Aaron and his sons are to be consecrated to the Lord for offering sacrifice, Exod. 10. 9. It is said in the Hebrew, and thou shalt fill the hand of Aaron, and the hand of his sons. Acts of justice against enemies to the Church; watching to make advantages of their weaknesse, as did the Amalekites They are a choice service and sacrifice to God, yea, preferred by Samuel before Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15. 2. 3. 18. there is Gods charge: And verse 22. Obedience to that Charge, is made better then Sacrifice. Hence when God by others sword doth punish the Churches enemies; Esay 34. 6. He saith of it, The sword of the Lord is filled with bloud: He calleth it his sword, and addeth, For the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozra, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. That Act of justice is owned by the Lord as his Sacrifice; and Ezechiel 39. 17. speaking of those grand enemies of his Church, Gog and Magogs just slaughter: He calleth to the Fowles, Come to my sacrifice, &c. And this place is the more observable, In that the like speech is expresly applied, when the overthrow of such as follow the whore and beast, and false Prophet of Rome, in his wayes, wor∣ship and government; and when the overthrow of all such as support that man of sinne is described, Revel. 19. 17, 18, 19. It is there called The Supper of the great God: come and gather your selves unto the Supper of the great God. So delightfull and contentfull, and pleasing to the great God, are such acts of po∣liticall Justice by the civill Sword, upon such as are grosly cor∣rupt in matters of Religion; It is to him as a Sacrifice, as a Sup∣per. If any say that was Old Testament, surely this is New Testa∣ment Doctrine, and that with Jesus Christ himself commended
to John, to communicate to his Churches. If such Acts be in their own Nature acts of persons for the Lord, or on the Lords side, or if as a very acceptable sacrifice to the Lord, then; It is so now; would not underminers of Magistrates power this way, have godly Magistrates for the Lord, and on his side now, as well as formerly, or to do him such choice service which may be to him as a very sacrifice now, as well as then? Be∣sides such as are zealous this way, in doing such acts of civill Justice upon corrupters of Religion, and persons grosly cor∣rupt in Religion; (such as were Antichrists Abbtters and followers:) they also are said to be with the Lambe, or on his side, Revelations 17. 14. And they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and faithfull. and Chapter 19. 19. They are called Armies. And those not rude, prophane souldiers, but as before called, chosen and faithfull, or the Armies which were in heaven followed him, persons of heavenly Spirits, aimes, and conver∣sations arrayed in white: single sincere hearted ones in the cause of Christ, nor will this be evaded: As meant of a Spiri∣tuall way of fighting against Antichrists Adherents, by the sword of Christs mouth, taken onely for his Word, and his sword considered onely as a Prophet, or taken for his Word applied in sharpest Church censures of Excommunication of them: and so his sword of his mouth considered as King of the Church; but it is by the Temporal sword of Christ, considered as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: For therefore in this war, It is his blessed Motto, (as I may say,) and that which he giveth in his Banners; King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. This sword also is in some respect, the sword of his mouth; for as Supream over all civill powers, he sentenceth that whore, and beast of Rome, with his Adherents, to such a doome to be executed by such as have power under him, and from him, to avenge his quarrells by the Temporall sword, which onely are civill Magistrates, Romans 13. 4. He giveth the word of Com∣mand to them, and biddeth them smite: and the judgement so ex∣ecuted; it is the Lords according to the expression, Deutero∣nomie 1. 17. The retinue of Antichrist, fight not against Christ, his Lawes and Subjects onely by dogmaticall and do∣ctrinall weapons, or such like: but as Revelation 17. 14. By external violent wayes and weapons; they have their Captains,
their mightie men, their horses: the Fowles also are called upon to devour, not their soules, but their carkasses; Revela∣lation 19. 17, 18. which surely are slain by that opposite Ar∣mies, by like wayes of violence; without which so great tem∣poral forces and power, would not be brought to become meat for the Fowles. And this punishment upon persons so corrupt in matters of Religion is in the dayes of the New Testament, set forth as so renowned and acceptable a piece of service to the Lord. To like purpose Esay Prophesieth of these dayes of the Gospel, Esay 66. When the glory of God shall be declared among the Gen∣tiles; Verse 19. When they shall be brought to his Holy Mountain or Church; Verse 20. yea, When some of them shall minister to him there; Verse 21. When there shall be a new face of all things; Verse 22. And all flesh shall come and worship before the Lord; Verse 23. Now will the Lord judge with his sword all flesh, and his slain shall be many; Verse 16. Namely, Of such as sanctifie and purifie them∣selves in Gardens, eating unclean things as the Swine and Mouse, (alluding therein to the forbidden meats of the Jewes, Levi∣ticus 11.) These shall be consumed together, even these that are cor∣rupt in matters of Religion, shall be punished by Gods sword; As Verse 16. Not alone immediately, but mediately, even by the civil Magistrate, who beareth Gods sword for that end; And as Verse 24. Expresseth this punishment to be corporal, is their carkasses, which others shall look upon; and so hear and fear. That speech, Canticles 2. 15. Take ye us the Foxes, the little Foxes which spoile our Vines, for our Vines have tender Grapes; Is of weightie consideration here. Some would have it to be spoken to the Ministers of the Church; but there is no reason so to restrain this indefinite speech; some would have it to be the voyce of Christ, some of the blessed Father, Sonne and Spi∣rit; most agree, that it is to be referred, either to God, or to Christ, the owner of the Church. Now the word, Take ye,  In the most usuall and proper rendring of it, signifieth an externall forcible taking, as with the hand, or something equivalent; As when David tooke the Ama∣lekite, and after slew him; 2 Samuel 1. 10. So when the men of Gi∣lead tooke the Ephraimites, and after slew them; Judges 12. 6. So when the Philistims took Sampson; Judges 16. 21, And so when Babylons Children are commanded to be taken and slaine; Psalme,
137. 9. The same Hebrew word is there used. As it is likewise used of Moses his taking the Scrpent by the tail; Exodus 4. 4. Of Ja∣cobs taking his brother by the heel; Genesis 25. 26. Of Sampsons taking the Gates of Gaza; Judges 16. 3. Of Abrahams taking the Ramme by the hornes; Genesis 22. 13. besides divers like instan∣ces of forcible taking, and therefore the Hebrew word is ren∣dered by the Septuagint  which in the New Testament is constantly used of such forcible taking; Twise of taking Fishes; John 21. 3. 9. Sixe times of their taking of Christ, which at least they desired and intended; John 7. 30. 32. 44. and 8. 20. and 10. 39 and 11. 57. Of Peters taking by Herod; Acts 12. 4. Of Pauls taking at Damascus; 2 Corinthians 11. 32. which yet both nar∣rowly escaped. Of the taking of the Beast and false Prophet; Re∣velation 19. 20. And never but of an externall taking, as with the hand. And indeed such externally forcible taking, must needs be most proper to the nature of the resemblance, in that Text of Canticles, which is the taking of the Foxes which spoile the Vines. Evident then it is, that this taking of the Foxes there injoyned, is not to be restrained to Church Offi∣cers acts, if at all understood of them; but must be referred to such at least, whose place and work it is, to act in an externally forcible way of taking, or of restraining and punishing such Foxes, which spoile the Vines or Churches of Christ: com∣pared to Vines, Psalm 1. So Esay 5. Matthew 21. John 15. Some would have these Foxes to be errours, heresies, and other hurtfull offences, against the first or second Table; which must be thus restrained and punished, in the Actours and Authours of them. Others, understand the persons rather so offending, which must be so taken as Hereticall persons, blasphemers, and such like. Whence false Prophets compared to Foxes; Ezekiel, 13. 4. Concerning these the Churches well beloved; Canti∣cles 2. 10. Even Christ the Churches Spouse, whose Dove is the Church; Verse 14. He giveth this order; Verse 15. Take ye us the Foxes. Whether the speech he utter, were in his own name, as some think; or in the name of the blessed Father and Spirit also: as others think, or whether spoken with respect had to his Spouse the Church: Take ye us; that is for me and my Church, or for my sake and hers, or on my behalf and hers; yet to be
sure, Christ spake this, as Spouse to the Church, his welbelo∣ved Dovelike Spouse; and so he spake it as head, at least as political head of the Church, and so also as Mediatour; and therefore what herein he injoyneth, is to be the more obser∣ved: undeniably holding forth: First, That this is a charge of Christ as Mediatour, unto all such, who by place and office under him, are to restrain and punish, not by the use of a spiritual rod, or sword so much, as are Church Officers; but specially by the use of the temporal sword, as our Civil Rulers, who in their political way, are here injoyned forcibly to take such corrupters, and disturbers of Religion, as well as of good manners. Secondly, That such taking of such Foxes, is in the nature thereof, a special service to Christ Jesus, as Mediatour, and Political Head of his Church. Yea and to the blessed Father and Spirit, in whose name, and to the Church it self also, on whose behalf, he may seem to speak; not thus, Take ye for me: but thus, Take ye for us, the Foxes, yea the least of them, which may seem not to do so much hurt as others: the taking of all sorts of such Foxes then: who by their tenents or practises do hurt, and spoyl in the Churches, or the re∣straining, curbing, and punishing of them in some external forcible way; this must needs be very acceptable service to the Lord. So Numb. 25. 11. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8. verses compared: that extraordinary act of zeal in Phinehas, corporally punish∣ing, not merely an act of corporal fornication, which then was not of it self death, (though Adultery was) but a joynt act of spiritual whoredome too, in that Idolatry there men∣tioned; (which then was punishable with death by the civil Magistrate in an ordinary way, Deut▪ 13. & 17.) I say this that he did, is by God reckoned, under this head, as for him, or for his sake, vers. 11. while he was zealous for my sake; and vers. 13. because he was zealous for his God. God then looked at himself, as in a very special manner, both concerned, and respected, in that service of Zeal. All which places thus cleared, may help to expound that, Psal. 2. 10, 11, 12. where the Kings and Judges of the earth are required to serve the Lord, the Son, Gods Anointed, vers. 6. Now this service being not injoyned them as men barely, but as Kings, even Kings upon the Throne, Job 36. 7, 11. com∣pared.
It cannot be restrained to service in common with other godly persons, but looketh also to Authoritative ser∣vice, as Civil Rulers. Whence this Argument may be formed, in reference to that before spoken. All Authoritative service whatsoever, of civil Rulers, unto Christ, is by command required of them: For serve the Lord, (that is, Christ,) is indefinite, and so extendible to all such ser∣vice also: but, (as hath been before proved) forcible re∣straint and punishment of corruptions in Religion, by the tem∣poral sword, is one special part of such service; therefore forcible restraint and punishment of corruptions in Religion, by the use of the temporal sword, is by command of God re∣quired of Civil Rulers: And it must here further be noted, to what times this Psalm must be referred: the comminatory and threatening part of the Psalm, vers. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Peter ap∣plyeth to the times of the Gospel, Acts 4. 25, 26, 27, as is that, Psal. 2. 9. by John, Revel. 2. 27. & 12. 5. and 19. 15. The Instructive part of this Psalm, as that, vers. 7. is by Paul applyed to Christs Resurrection, Acts 13. 33. that, verse 8. concerning the Heathen, or Gentiles becoming Christs posses∣sion, and the utmost coasts of the earth his Inheritance, all will yeeld must respect the times after the partition Wall, twixt Jewes and Gentiles, was broken down; and the Gentiles made the Lords habitation, Ephes. 2. this was the time to which that [Now] verse 10, 11. looketh. Be wise [now] ye Kings: serve the Lord with fear. Kisse the Son, &c. verse 12. namely thus risen, and reigning; as vers. 6, 7, 8, 9. do expresse. So then, it was not a Mosaical Injunction, respecting the Kings of Israel and Judah, who might be types of Christ; but it is a command lying upon Gentile Rulers, in the dayes of the New Testament, to serve Christ with their Authority, in re∣straining and punishing corruptions in Religion. And the Argument hence is undeniable. That Command of God, which is expressed with peculiar reference to Gentile Rulers, which should rule after Christs Incarnation, that command must needs be of force in the dayes of the New Testament: But this command unto Princes and Judges, in their Authoritative way also to serve Christ, is of that nature, or is referred to the dayes of the New Testament;
therefore that Command is of force, or bindeth in these dayes of the New Testament: The Proposition is evident, because the Commands of God must needs bind the persons respected and intended in those very commands. The Assumption was before cleared: So that the Conclusion remaineth undeniable; and there wanteth not now a binding command of God, re∣quiring such Authoritative service of Christ, by Civil Rulers, as that is, and was proved to be; namely Authoritatively to restrain and punish such corruptions in Religion. A second Reason of the Assertion is taken from the end, to  which the Civil Magistrate is appointed of God: whether that end be more General or Special. In the General, he is appointed for the good of such as are under his subjection: he is the Minister of God to thee for thy good; Indefinitely, Rom. 13. 4. whether that good be natu∣ral; as life and safety of their bodies: or moral; as tempe∣rance, chastity, honesty, and the like: or civil, as civil peace, civil liberties, mens Lands, goods, estates, &c. or Spiritual; as the free passage of the Word and Ordinances of God, the purity of all the worship of God, and of the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ dispenced, and the like. Now if God make the Civil Magistrate, the Minister of all this good to the subjects, then hath he armed them with civil power, in a civil way, and by political meanes to promote that good of the Subjects; and to rescue from whatsoever externally breaketh forth, tending to impair that Good of the subjects; and who seeth not, that Corruptions in matters of Religion, do some way or other strike at all that good? not alone, by provoking God in Judgment either to blast all that good unto a people, amongst whom such corruptions prevail; but the corruptions themselves occasion breaches upon mens natural, and civil good; even their lives, safety, estates, civil peace and liberty, and the like. Witnesse the sad fruits of Popery, too oft in England; of Anabaptisme in Germany, in John of Leyden and Cnipper Dollings dayes; of Levellisme not long since in England, when the better part of the Army were sent down towards Oxford (as I remember) to suppresse the stirre rai∣sed by the Levellers, and I wish that might have been the last of the destructive, turbulent, seditious, or trecherous designes
of men grosly corrupted in their Judgments, in the matters of Religion. As for the moral good of subjects under Civil Authority, how much such corruptions do intrench thereupon, let the woful experience of the loosenesse, and even profanenesse of too many in both Englands, amongst whom corruptions in matters of Religion, have taken place, testifie; besides the scandal upon Religion, which such have brought in the eyes of the common sort, which have made little or no profession, and the woful miscarriages thereby occasioned amongst them al∣so. But how such corrupt persons are branded in Scripture, for such mischiefs and miscarriages, let these places be duly considered, Rom. 16. 18. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. compared with verse 10, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19. Jude 4. with verse 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19. 2 Tim. 4. 3, 4. 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. whence also such pe∣rilous times, 2 Tim. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13. whence railings, strifes, and the like, 1 Tim. 6. 3, 4. whence increase of un∣godlinesse, 2 Tim. 2. 16. And is not then the Civil Magistrate, whose end, partly, is the subjects natural, and civil good, bound, in his political way, to restrain and redresse the causes of the contrary evil? but specially as the Magistrate is a political Minister of God, in his civil way, and by his Civil means, of the subjects spiri∣tual good; so he is to improve his Authority, that the liber∣ty, purity, and peace of Gods own instituted worship, and wayes, wherein their spiritual good, externally, doth much lye, be maintained and defended against all Infesting, infrin∣ging, Impugning or Impairing principles, or practises break∣ing forth to the contrary; the Civil Magistrate, in Gods Ap∣pointment, is a Minister to the Churches good, as that of Rome, to which Paul writ, Chap. 1. 7. & 13. 4. compared, he is the Minister of God to thee, for thy good. Esay 60. 11. the Gentile Kings shall be brought to the Church, to be added to it: they shall also as Kings (in some respect) serve the Church: else as verse 12. the Nation, and the Kingdome (or Authoritative part of the Nation) that will not serve thee, (speaking of the Church) shall perish: and verse 10. Their Kings shall minister to thee: Yea in point of the very Disci∣pline of the Church: which is to it as its walls, they shall help in the building thereof; by their Civil Authority, setting up
that in their Jurisdictions, strengthening, setling, and esta∣blishing the same there. Hence vers. 10. And the sonnes of strangers shall build thy walls, their Kings shall minister to thee; namely in that matter of building her walls also there mention∣ed: hence also they are called the builders of the Churches walls, Esay 49 16, 17. compared. Thy walls are before me: Thy chil∣dren, or (as in the Hebrew) thy builders (namely of those walls) make haste. As builders, by their Civil Authority, they shall break down all manifest unevennesse in the Churches fabrick, curb all palpable Intrusions of any bad stuffe therein, and re∣dresse whatsoever might visibly undermine the same: and all this spoken with reference to the Dayes of the New Testa∣ment, when the Gentiles should be thus behoveful to the Church, verse 22. I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles. Verse 23. and Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers,—they shall bow to thee with their faces toward the earth. So Esay 60. 3. The Gen∣tiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightnesse of thy rising. Verse 9. Surely the Isles shall wait for me: verse 10. The sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their Kings shall minister to thee. So Rev. 22. 24. And the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory to it: namely, to that new Jerusalem or purest Gospel Church: not in heaven; but which cometh from God, out of heaven, vers. 2. Now the glory of the Kings of the earth, is chiefly their Soveraignty and Civil Authority; which Christ by John saith, they shall bring to the Church: not to be resigned to them, or usurped by the Church, or any of her Officers: they shall be Kings still, although ministring, as Kings, to the Church, Esay 60. 10. but they shall bring this their glory to the Church, to be improved for the Churches good; or for the maintaining the doctrine, discipline, and waies of God held forth by the Church in the purity, and liberty thereof: against all opposers, impugners, despisers, depravers, disturbers, and corrupters thereof. And let none say; What need the Church any such terre∣strial  Help: It hath carried on Church wayes and worship, when it had none to help, but rather had the Rulers of the earth hindring it. Besides, the Church is a compleat Polity within it self; and hath weapons to avenge all disobedience, in its own way and sphear, 2 Cor 10. 6.
It is true, (say I) this help from Civil Authority is not of  absolute necessity to the esse of the Church, or to the esse of its operations: but it is an accumulative good, conferred of God upon the Church, to have such builders of her walls, and such nursing fathers, to curb and hinder whatsoever is destru∣ctive to her good: and so it is necessary to the optimum esse of the Church. Besides, when the Church hath used all her power, against corrupters of her purity, or disturbers of her peace, by excom∣municating of them from her Society, which were of it; yet such may grow the more insolent, and commonly do wax the more turbulent, and pragmatical that way; and do more hurt after the Church hath gone to her utmost limits, to censure them, then before: yea turbulent seducers may go from sea to sea, to make proselytes, and draw disciples after them, where the particular Churches have no immediate power over them; either then the Civil Magistrates sword and service, is needful, or else there will be left no ordinary and orderly power to restrain, and punish such grosse Abuses, in such ca∣ses. A third Reason of this Assertion may be taken, both from  the Prayers which the Lord chargeth his people to make for this end; and from the praises also which they return to God when such an end is Attained. The former is held forth, 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2. I exhort there∣fore that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet, and a peaceable life, in all god∣linesse and honesty. Whence it will necessarily follow: First, that it never cometh of God, for any to desire to lead a quiet and peaceable life, or to be let alone without any mo∣lestation from Civil Authority, in any way contrary, either to godlinesse, or honesty; the contrary desire, being that onely which God here putteth his upon. Secondly, that civil Rulers by their Office and place, now in the dayes of the New Testament, are to looke to matters per∣taining to Godlinesse: whether Doctrinal, or practical, so far as acted by the outward man, and appearing in outward view in their life or the like, as well as they are in the like way, to looke to the matters of honestie. As he that is taught to pray
that he may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all Godlinesse, and Honestie, prayeth that he may lead a life in all Godli∣nesse and honestie, (without which to pray for peace and quiet in any other life, or to pray to be let alone unmolested, in any ungodly or dishonest way of his life, even but to aske leave and libertie to sinne.) So he that prayeth to the Lord, for all that are in highest civil Authoritie, as for Kings or the like; for this end, that he may live in all Godlynesse and Honestie, quietly, and peaceably, he prayeth to God, to cause the persons in such civil authoritie, to further by their civil authoritie such an end, to which under God they are an externall means, and surely then he prayeth, that persons in civil Authoritie may in such sort attend and look to matters as well of pietie, as of honesty, appearing in any acts or wayes of their subjects lives; as that their subjects may in such godly and honest acts and wayes of their life and in no other injoy peace and quiet. If this kinde of prayer here exhorted unto, be in the matter according to Gods Will (as it must needs be, being what the Holy Ghost by part exhorteth unto;) It is then according to Gods own Will, that civil Magistrates should Authoritatively see to it, that their subjects lead a quiet and peaceable life in all Godlynesse and honestie; which quiet and peaceable life is not alone a life free from disturbance, by persecution, for any act or way of Godlynesse or honestie ap∣pearing outwardly, but a life free from disturbance in any such acts or wayes of Godlinesse or honestie by any other open, and manifest disturbers thereof, whether such as by open violence combine together to hinder the Godly from meeting together publikely or privately to worship the Lord according to his mind, or such as prophanely rise up in their Assemblies or Families, and openly disturb them in that wor∣ship, or interrupting them by unseemly and unconvenient ge∣stures; talking, showting, singing or the like; or such as openly revile them, rail upon them, or at least rashly censure and con∣demn them, and openly protest against them, and the worship and wayes of God held forth and practised by them, and by the rest of the Assemblies and Families of the Saints amongst them, or take any other wayes, undermining and striking at their quiet and peaceable living in all godliness or honestie. The
Greek words in this text, 1 Tim. 2. 2.  are observable,  is that quiet of a Serene sea, when free from turbulent winds, and by proportion it is a quiet life in all godliness and honestie; when not alone gusts of persecution disturb it not: but when winds of false doctrines too, (as Eph. 4. 14. They are called, are not suffered to molest and unsettle the same. This then is the sum that the truly godly do even beg of God on the behalf of Magistrates: that they may discharge their dutie in their authoritative care and indeavour, that their Subjects may first lead godly and honest lives: secondly, Lead their godly and honest life in such sort as to be free from what ever may undermine, unsettle or disturb their quiet and peace therein. Touching the latter, namely the Saints praises when such an end is attained: we se it is in Ezras time, they thankfully acknowledge it, as put into their Rulers hearts, not from Satan, the world or the slesh, but from the Lord himself, to take such effectual and exact care of pure, peaceable and comfortable car∣rying on the whole work of God committed to them; Ezra 7. 25, 26, 27, 28. verses compared Revel. 11. 15. It is acknowledged to the Lords praise, that the kingdoms of the earth are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and that as v. 17.) He taketh to him his Kingdome. Now the kingdoms of the earth become Christs Kingdoms, not alone when either the people thereof become godly, or when their Rulers with them subject themselves as godly to Christs government in his Churches: but when the Rulers, who rule under Christ, and by Christ, doe rule likewise for Christ; and by their civil power seek to sup∣press such as openly oppose, or cross, or attempt to subvert, or pervert his royal lawes and blessed rules and institutions, held forth in his holy word. Surely where substitute Rulers doe rule for another, they must needs be such as do authoritatively vin∣dicate all injuries done to the lawes of their Soveraign. So is it in the case of civil Rulers, ruling under and for Christ. It is in∣deed a mercy to the Saints and Churches of Christ, when king∣domes in their ruling part give free libertie to hold forth and exercise the wayes of Christ: but yet this is not enough to make it out all here spoken: yet their Christ taketh to him his King∣dom, or that such kingdoms be become thereby the Kingdoms of Jesus Christ; for beside that such a toleration in case, may put no more honour upon Christ then upon Antichrist: (For
they may happily tolerate and often do tolerate in their domi∣nions, properly as well as the pure worship and wayes of Jesus Christ;) such a toleration of the purer wayes and doctrines of Christ, may be yielded unto and allowed by the authoritie of kingdoms, which professedly avow the Pope to be head of the Church, and prefer the Decrees, Lawes and Customes of the Church (as they call it) above the Lawes of Christ; and by their secular power maintain the power and kingdome of the beast openly: as doth the kingdome of France at this day; and yet none will say that Christ hath taken to him his Kingdome in France; or that France is become already the Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Christ in any other way, then in that general way, in which all power in earth as wel as heaven is his which is not that, at which that text Rev. 11. 15. looketh. The like might be said of the Mahumetan kingdome of the Turks, which pro∣fessedly adoreth Mahomet, this also should be Christs Kingdom in a special respect, because they tolerate all religious, and a∣mongst others the true Christian Religion. Surely then by the Saints praises here; for this authoritative service and subjection to Jesus Christ before mentioned, it appears to be in the dayes of the New Testament not alone lawful, but a praise worthie blessing of grace. A fourth Reason of that assertion, is taken from the zeale,  foretold to be in inferior Christians in the purest times of the Gospel; whereby they should provoke civil authoritie to such a work, as the use of the civil sword to curb and punish persons notoriously guiltie of corruptions in Religion. Zacharie pro∣phesieth of times, when those both of the ten and of the two tribes shal be brought on to Christ, and their Rulers with them; whence such holy mourning of that Tribe of Shimei, and of the other families, yea and of all the land, together with that of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Zech. 12. 10, 12, 13, 14. compared; and as that in the people so in their Rulers; those of the house of David mourn over Christ crucified also; verse 10. and are such as the Godly can safely confide in; vers. 5. 6. Now in that very day and time when it should be thus with them; as the Lord will purge them by the bloud of Christ from their sin; Zech. 13 1. so in the same dutie shal they be all zealous to purge the land from all corruptions in Religion which may provoke the eyes of Gods glory, Zech. 13. 2, 1. and if notwithstanding exemplary
punishments that way mentioned, verse 2. Any under pretence of the name or of ground from the word and counsel of God, shall hold forth false Doctrine then (as verse 3.) If any shall yet prophesie (or speak lies in the Name of the Lord) his father and his mother that begot him, shall say unto him, thou shalt not live, for thou speakest lies in the Name of the Lord: and to shew that it is no rash threatning of capital punishment for such false Do∣ctrines; they will be active also to bring them to condigne punishment; for so it followeth: His father and his mother that begot him, shal thrust him through when he prophesieth. Nor can these punishments of corruptions in Religion, in per∣sons notoriously guiltie thereof, be meant of punishments im∣mediately Divine, by some immediate stroak of God or Christ; for the father and the mother in some cases thrust them tho∣rough; verse 3. In other cases they are branded and wounded in the hands, by their friends, verse 6. Nor yet are they ecclesia∣stical punishments, or censures here spoken of: for what have Churches, or any Church members, as such, to doe, to slay per∣sons, or to thrust them through, or to inflict upon any delin∣quents, visible, corporal punishments: such as leave their marks in persons hands as verse 3. and 6. expresse. Nor yet are these corporal punishments of such persons meerly aeconomical and parental corrections of their children in a private way; unless any will say, that even in times wherein godly civil Rulers (who put forth their civil power of the sword against open enemies, Zech. 12. 5, 6.) are to be had and made use of, godly parents may execute death upon their children, for holding corrupt Do∣ctrines; without making use of civil authoritie, for that end. It remaineth therefore, that the punishments here mentioned, are such as are of a civil and political nature, by the use of the authoritie of the civil Magistrate; whereas even godly parents and friends shal be active; and shal in a sense punish them, af∣ter that manner of witnesses against them, having been conven∣ted, convicted and censured, by lawful civil authority, alluding to that Deut. 13, 6. where when a man or womans, son or daughter, &c. should be themselves corrupt in Religion, and seek to cor∣rupt others, they were not to conceal or spare him, but they were to kill him. verse 9. which is expounded by that follow∣ing, Thine hand shall be first upon him, to put him to death, and af∣terwards the hands of all the people: which is further expounded
in a like case of capital punishment of a persons worshipping Idols, &c. Deut. 17. 2, 3. As he must die for it upon legal proof, ver. 5. 6. so verse 7. Its said, The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him, to put him to death; and afterwards, The hands of all the people. So that a private man or woman in such cases, did regularly stone and kil another; as giving in casting evidence a∣gainst him for his fault, and then as witnesses by order of that politie, did cast the first stone at him, and so killed him: and as much, and no more is here held forth as orderly in the dayes of the Gospel. This use therefore of the coercive and vindica∣tive power of civil authoritie, in matters of the first Table, is the more observable, as that which wil be called for by the Saints in the best times, and likewise exercised by godly civil Rulers, even when the Jewes shal come home to Jesus Christ; and observable it is who it is that ingageth that these things shal be so done; even the same Jehovah mentioned Zech. 12. 1. Who saith, verse 10, That he will powre out the spirit of grace and supplication upon them, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, (which John applieth to Jesus Christ the Son of God, John 19. 17. and Rev. 1. 5, 6, 7, This same Jehovah saith Zech. 13. 2. I will cause the Prophets, and the unclean spirit to depart out of the land. By Prophets are understood such as vers. 3. Prophesie lies in the Name of the Lord. By the unclean spirit, is meant that pack and knot of corrupt Teachers, which then shal arise to hinder that glorious work of the puritie of the Religion of these times: by their several false Doctrines: so 1 John 14. 1. Trie the spirits, namely, the Teachers or the Doctrines of your Teachers, and every spirit that confesseth, &c. That is every Teacher that so confesseth figu∣ratively noting the effect for the impulsive cause; every Tea∣cher and the Doctrine he teacheth, cometh from some spirit; either pure and holy, as is the holy Ghost; or unclean and im∣pure as is the Devil. Hence corrupt doctrines, called doctrines of Devils, 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Now Christ here ingageth to curse his peoples land to be rid of these false Teachers; so that so far as political Governours in the civil sence of the converted Jewes, shal rid their land of such false Teachers, whether they doe it by banishment, or death, according to their seve∣ral demerits, the Lord Jesus owneth their juridical vindicative acts, as his acts he causeth this; That Government is Christs
Government, as John phraseth it, Revel. 11. 15. he banisheth when they do it, he killeth them, and thrusteth them thorough when they do it: or if their punishment run not so high, but be in some part onely of their bodies, as in their hands, or the like; yet he saith of it, that it shall be a means of good to some so punished corporally, vers. 4, 5, 6. thus was I wounded in the house of my friends. A fifth Reason is taken from the publick evil removed, and  good attained on the one hand, by the due use of such power, and the sad mischiefs attending, either the want, or grosse neglect thereof, on the other hand. When Idolaters are commanded to be stoned, Deut. 17. 2, 3, 5, 7. its added, so shalt thou put the evil away from among you: and as evil is removed hereby, so is good attained; both moral, Deut. 17. 10. All Israel shall hear and fear, and do no more any such wicked∣nesse: and civil good, as that in outward estate; as when theirs was impoverished by that drought and famine, yet upon the execution of Justice upon those Idolaters, reparation is there∣in made by that ruine, 1 King. 18. 40, 41. also that of Civil peace, 2 Chron. 14. 3, 4, 5. Therefore the Kingdome was quiet before him. Again, what a deluge of evil overfloweth all where the use of such power is wanting, or neglected: thence that Idolatry in Israel, when no Supreme Magistrate, no King in Israel, Judg. 17. 45, 6. thence such corruption in Church discipline; as the consecration and administration of that hedge Priest, vers. 12. and Chap. 18. 1. compared: and as mischiefs arise thence in spirituals, and Ecclesiasticals, so also in temporals: for when none is found to stand in the Gap, and Authoritatively to make up the hedge, which is broken by such prophanations of Gods holy day, and holy things and lawes, then cometh an inundati∣on of ruinating Judgments upon that State; as Ezek. 21. 25, 26. compared with vers. 30, 31. yea and as mischief to State and Church in general; so to corrupt and indulgent Rulers in particular, as also to their houses. What mischief came upon that indulgent Judge Eli, for his too grosse connivence at such corrupt customes in Religion, as well as at other lewd pranks of his sons: read, see, and consider, 1 Sam. 2. 22, 23, 24. with 27, 28, 29, &c. A sixth Reason may be taken from the unwonted dispensa∣tion
of Gods providence, when the zeal in the ordinary Mini∣sters of Gods vengeance faileth this way, he stirreth up zeal in others in a more then ordinary way, to execute such vengeance: as when Ahab faileth to punish such abuses in Religion, Elijah is stirred up to do it, 1 King. 18. God would have it some way done; so far is he from prohibiting the doing of it. The last Reason may be taken from the examples both of such as have acted this way by the light of grace, and are com∣mended  for it in Scripture, and of others, who being themselves Pagans, yet have done somewhat this way, by a mere common light, at least of Nature, and Nations. Of the former sort, read that of Moses, Exod. 32. 20, 21, 22. and that of that general assembly of the Tribes, at least in their Heads and Representa∣tives, recorded to their honour▪ Josh. 22. 10, 11, 12, &c. unto ver. 34. besides that of Asah, 2 Chron. 15. 12, 13, 16, &c. and of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chron. 19. 3, 4, 5, 6 7, 8. and of Josiah, 2 Chr. 34. 33. vers. 4. with 2 King. 23. 20. and of Nehemiah, Chap. 13. 21. and that of the converted Kings in the dayes of the Gospel; who as they shall hate the corrupt and false Church-state of Rome, so shall they execute corporal vengeance of God upon that Whore, Rev. 17. 16. Of the later sort, we need not instance in Numa's Lawes against the use of Images, in any religious way, or in others in the Roman or Grecian States, since scarce any Pagan State whatsoever, but have enacted and executed Civil punishments, upon the despisers, or depravers of their gods, or of the worship or worshippers of Dan. 3. 1, 2. &c. them: which though it shew the miserable fruits of mans Fall in this their misguided, and misplaced zeal, yet by these ruines we may judge, that it is a principle deeply engraven in mans heart, that as there should be some to rule, and some to be ru∣led; some God, and some worship of that God: so by the Law of Nature and Nations, there should be the external ex∣ercise of some external coercive power, in cases of prophana∣tions and abuses of the name and worship of that God, who is to be adored. And let none now object; that such Authoritative acts in  such persons were typical. For, 1. We speak not of David, and Solomon, and such  like, but of others: and will any say that Moses in his Act, or the Heads of the Tribes in their act, or Nehemiah in his act;
that these were types of Christ: we might have instanced in the Judges in Jobs time; that corruption in Worship, as the worship of the Sun, or Moon, &c. was an Iniquity to be punish∣ed by the Judges: so our last Translation rendreth that place, Job 31. 26, 27, 28. yet were not those Judges types of Christ. 2. Those Worthies mentioned, did exercise power in mat∣ters of the second Table also; yet not therein Types of Christ: for then the substance being come, the shadow vanisheth, and so all Civil Power and Jurisdiction in matters of Righteousness, as well as Religion, would be turned up by the roots. 3. Those zealous Acts of the converted Kings against all su∣perstitions, and the fomentors and Abettors of them, prophe∣sied of Rev. 17. 16. can under no pretence, be called Old Testa∣ment types; or Old Testament Zelots. The point propounded being explained in the Distinctions and Conclusions before laid down: and being thus confirmed; we shall now consider of some doctrinal Instructions arising thence. 1. Then if this be so; It serveth to refute and remove many  pretences, aod answer many Objections, tending to undermine the Coercive Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Re∣ligion. Such as these following. 1. If you grant Magistrates such Coercive power in matters  of Religion, you will make them Church Officers. The second Conclusion denyeth to them any way of exerci∣sing that power, which is properly Ecclesiastical, allowing them only a Civil way of doing what they do, in matters of Religion. When Church Officers with the Church do Ecclesiastically pu∣nish one of their members, for that which is also a civil offence: as when they cast him out for lying, drunkenness, Incest, &c. they are not therefore Civil Officers; because they do it in their own proper way; namely Ecclesiastically. So when Civil Courts censure persons for heresie, schisme, &c. which also is an Eccle∣siastical offence, they are not therefore Church Officers; be∣cause they do it in a Civil way; and as it is a breach of humane Lawes made against the same, and as it tendeth to break civil peace. In the one Court they are censured as matters of the Lord properly; in the other, as they come under other politi∣cal 2 Chron. 19. 8, 9, 10, 11. respects. Nor is either Court clear of that Guilt, unlesse both Courts in their several wayes, as several witnesses of
Christ, do bear their respective Juridical and Authoritative te∣stimony against the same. If you grant such power to Civil Authority, you make them  Lords over peoples faith, and conscience; and that is onely Gods peculiar, to reform or restrain, or punish conscience; and Paul though an Apostle, and more then another ordinary Officer, he disclaimeth this, 2 Cor. 1. 24. not for that we have dominion over your faith. God, that of old injoyned such restraining and punishing  of Idolaters, Seducers, Blasphemers, and Prophaners of his Sabbath, Deut. 13. 9, 10. & Chap. 17. 5, 6, 7. Numb. 15. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Levit. 24. 11, 12, 13, 14. and Christ that requireth the taking of such Foxes, did he injoyn Civil Authority there∣by, Cantic. 2. 15. to Lord it over mens faith, and conscience? Surely none dare say so: or did Asah, who 2 Chron 14. 4. commanded Judah to seek the Lord, &c. Lord it over their faith? or did Josiah, who did compel some to stand to their Covenanted worship of God, 2 Chron. 34. 32. he made all that were pre∣sent to stand to it; and vers. 33. he made them serve the Lord their God: and 2 King. 23. 20. he slew the idolatrous Priests there; did he therefore sit in Gods Throne of mens conscien∣ces, and Lord it there? surely then he had never been so re∣nowned for it, as he is, but blamed rather: and say not this is Old Testament; for if it be in it self a lording over mens con∣sciences; to require persons to carry it orderly before the Lord in his worship, with their outward man: and neither to hold forth or expresse, in any scandalous way, what is contrary ther∣unto: or if they do, to punish them for it: It is of this na∣ture wheresoever it is, or whensoever it is found: times of Old or New Testament, make no difference in the nature of things. What is in it self tyranny, or murther, is so. It was so then, and is so now: and if so now, it was so then. Yea if it be in it self Lording over conscience, to punish grosse corruptions in Religion, for which men pretend conscience: then if Churches in a Church way punish hereticks, cut them off from Church communion, or deliver them up to Satan, they lord it over mens faith and consciences; they would force others to be∣lieve, as they do believe, when yet those others professe that in conscience they cannot do so; and so will force other mens consciences. But will any say, that this is forcing conscience,
or lording over it, verily then, Thyatira had not been so much to blame: or why doth Jesus Christ blame that Church, for suffering Jezabel to vent her corrupt doctrines, especially in such lesser matters, as eating things sacrificed to Idols, Rev. 2. 20. if Thyatira might reply; Jezabel professeth her self a Prophe∣tesse, to be extraordinarily inspired; to have the Spirit, promi∣sed in Joel, poured out on her, one of the Lords handmaids, whereby she prophesieth; and so to hold forth what she doth, out of conscience, to the dictates and manifestations of the Holy Ghost, in her spirit and conscience: besides the matters are of no great weight; to eat things sacrificed to Idols, which Paul himself made a matter of indifferency, in some cases, 1 Cor. 8. & chap. 10. & Rom. 14. And should we not let such blind guides alone, in their seducing of other blind ones, like them∣selves; as Matth. 15. 14. they were required: or if we should deal with them, and force them out of the Church for such matters of conscience, shall we not seem to force mens conscien∣ces, and to lord it over that which is thy peculiar to manage, and over-rule, even conscience. Besides, if such Church restrictions of the corruptions in Religion, or punishing of them Ecclesia∣stically, when yet they are matters of conscience, be forcing of other men to our belief, and forcing mens consciences: why are Churches to censure hereticks? first, by that censure of Admonition, once, or oftner; and after that, of excommunica∣tion, Tit. 3. 10, 11. or why did not Paul himself let Himeneus and Alexander alone? or why is he so earnest that such false teachers who troubled the Galatian Churches, might bear their (Ecclesiastical) Judgment and be (Ecclesiastically cut off, Gal. 5. 10, 12. 2. It hath been declared already, how such Rulers do therein act, but as Gods Ministers, and by vertue of their office and charge from God; and de Jure, do not restrain or punish what seemeth to be crosse, but what is evidently crosse to the Word of God; according to the third Conclusion: and so they do restrain and punish that only, which if others had any consci∣ence, (as we say) they would refrain from: as first, Forbidden by him, even God and Christ, who is Lord both of their Faith, and Conscience too; and will one day be a Judge of both: and in the mean while doth make lawful Civil Powers, his Substi∣tutes,
and Ministers, and under-Avengers to execute wrath up∣on him that doth evil, Rom. 13. 4. the Lord maketh no excep∣tion, in their Magisterial work: but speaketh indefinitely; if corrupt persons in Religion, even as they hold forth such cor∣ruptions in word, or deed, be evil doers, the Lord ordaineth Civil Rulers to be Ministers of his vengeance, against them: albeit he himself be an avenger, and could execute divine ven∣geance upon them immediately, as he is Supreme Lord of mens Consciences. 3. It hath been already said in the sixth Conclusion, that the use of such Coercive power in punishing, it is to be after due means of conviction first used; which being used, and yet per∣sons persisting still in their evil wayes, they are according to Gods own Censure, accounted as persons self-condemned, or condemned in their own consciences, Tit. 3. 10, 11. so that their punishment then, is not lording it over their conscien∣ces, but a just censure of persons sinning against their Con∣sciences. If this power be so exercised, it would make Christians ser∣vants to men, or like their servants they must be forbid this or  that; and if not obedient, then punished: now 1 Cor. 7. 23. we are charged not to be servants to men. First, The Lord of old required as much as now we plead for: did not he then and thereby make his Saints of old ser∣vants  to men? albeit they, as well as we, were bought with the price of Christs blood. Secondly, such a like Argument, if of any force, would also undermine Church restraints and punishments of corruptions in Religion; for it will be said, the Church is but a Society of men: they forbid this or that to their members, which if they obey it not, they censure them; and will any become such servants to men? Thirdly, It is evident that now also men may be servants to men, 1 Tim. 6. 2. Ephes 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. Tit. 2. and yet in a sense, they may not be servants to men, whether Family-Masters, or State-Rulers; namely in way of base, servile compliance to mens vain humours, to the sinful lusts of their wills, or carnal Fancies of their minds; if either Masters or Magistrates, will forbid what they please, and not what God would have them
be not the servants of men: better obey God then men, Act. 4. 18, 19, 20. yea but when according to the former Conclusions, they forbid and punish onely, what their Lord and Master and yours also injoyneth them; now you shew not a servant-like spirit, to your professed Supreme Lord and Master, if you sub∣mit not. Grant such Power once, and it is the way to make Christians,  either basely to dissemble, or else to do something against their consciences. 1. As much might be said against that way, which that  State took, 2 Chron. 15. 12, 13. they made this order; that whosoever would not seek the Lord should be slain; this Asa took courage to do by the prophesying of Oded, vers. 8. and as a fruit of this the Lord gave them rest round about, vers. 15. Josiah also he caused his Subjects to serve the Lord their God, 2 Chron. 34. 33. this made the subjects either dissemble or sin against their consciences: or if Churches assay to cast out blasphemers, or trouble-Churches, Gal. 5 10, 12. 1 Tim. 1. ult. they will but cause them either to dissemble, or else sin against their consciences. 2. According to the former Conclusions, the Magistrate restraining and punishing things crosse, manifestly crosse to the Word, he punisheth onely such things which men out of conscience should avoid: and the Magistrate also punishing such transgressours after due means of conviction; the persons now punished become sinners against their own consciences: and is punishing sin or sinners against conscience, a means or cause, in it self, to make them either to dissemble, or else to sin against conscience? what more ridiculous? The use of such Coercive power, is to introduce an external  compulsion of persons to grace and truth, when perswasion is rather to used. 1. That godly regulated Rulers they are wont to injoyn the  use of all perswasive means to the Saints, as the use of the Ministry of the Word amongst their Subjects, that none may plead excuse: we have had no instructive meanes to draw us on to the wayes of the Lord. So did Jehoshaphat, 2 Chron. 17. 7, 8, 9. after which he sends forth Judges to censure offen∣dors against God, or man, or both, 2 Chron. 19. 5, 6.
2. Even before they do actually sentence offendors, they use all means of Conviction, Conclusion sixth; and consequent∣ly perswasion is used with such: wherefore this maketh no∣thing against what we plead for. 3. If the Objection argue ad idem, it stands thus; persons may not, cannot be outwardly constrained by men to grace and true faith; therefore they may not be externally restrained from ungodly practices, such as venting of pernicious and blasphemous doctrines, quite crosse to the Faith of the Saints; the very naming whereof is a sufficient refutation of it. This is to make the weapons of our warfare to be carnal and  not spiritual, contrary to that, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. and to make Christs Kingdome of this world. We might answer, that 2 Cor. 10. speaketh not of the use of civil Power, but of Church Apostolical Power; and rather im∣plieth,  that though the weapons of Apostles and Churches, considered as Apostolical and Ecclesiastical, are of a Spiritual nature, yet there are others, who have weapons for suppressing of sinne by other means and wayes, even by weapons, which in some sense may be called carnal, namely as contradistinct to Spiritual; that is, weapons of an external and corporal na∣ture; such as men make use of to exercise or establish their po∣litical jurisdiction over others. But the answer is easie: First, if this argument be of force against Magistratical power in punishing open sins of the out∣ward man against the first Table, it is of like force against their punishing of such sins against the second Table: Christs Kingdome being not of this world in way of punishing the sins of the one, more then the other; and Apostles and Churches having power from Christ by spiritual weapons to avenge all disobedience, whether against first or second Table, 2 Cor. 10. 6. 1 Cor. 5. 12. 3. 4, 5. It would follow that Magistratical wea∣pons must be used against neither sort of sins. Secondly, when Christ himself did use carnal instruments to curb and convert those Temple abuses and corruptions in Religion, John 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. yet did he not cross him∣self in his speech, John 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this world, nor did he cross this in 2 Cor. 10. 4. which he spake by Paul. Thirdly, though Jesus Christs Kingdome of which he spake
to Pilate, before whom he was accused of assertation of a Cae∣sarian kingdome and dominion, John 19. 12. were no such kingdome, nor he any such terrestrial Monarch; yet that hin∣dreth not, but that both as God, he ruleth over all Nations, and as God-man all power is committed to him, Matth. 28. And he is King of earthly kings, and Lord of lords, Revel. 19. He by and from whom, the Princes doe rule; yea, All the Judges of the earth; yea by whom it is that such Princes do de∣cree Justice, even any just Lawes against open sins acted by the outward man, against God or man, first or second Table, or any just censures against the same: (for so saith Proverbs 8. 15, 16. By me Princes Decree justice, (that which giveth every Subject his due incouragement or punishment.) Yea, he who taketh to himself his Kingdome in special form; when the king∣doms of the earth become his, or are subservient to him, in establishing and vindicating his Royal Lawes and Institutions, so far as they come under their view, Rev. 11. 15. 17. compared. This is a way to let in false Religions and corruptions in worship, since Rulers may seek to restrain and punish all purity of Doctrine and worship, and to constrain Christians to the contrary, as do Popish Rulers and the like. If the Objectors argue ad Idem, they argue thus: that to re∣strain  and punish grosser corruptions in Doctrine and worship, is a way to bring in corruptions in Doctrine and worship; And will not any blush to argue thus? The exercise of such coercive power in matters of Religion,  is the way to bring in persecution for Christs cause and for a good Conscience sake. The limiting of civil peace, as of dutie only to punish things manifestly crosse to the Word, and that after due means used  of information and conviction, is rather to lay the bonds of God upon them to restrain them from persecuting the Saints for a good cause or conscience: If accidentally any enemies to Pietie or Truth, will take occasion thence to pervert and abuse their power contrary to the mind of God. That abuse of their power must not invalidate and take away the due use of their power. Churches are ecclesiastically to cut off such as trouble the Churches, but they may abuse their power, to cast out their best members for the truths sake: yet this their sinne dischargeth not Churches from the dutie. It is alike here:
abuse of civil power taketh not away this due use of it. 2. Just persecution of men sinning against Gods Rules and the Dictates of a right guided conscience, which require persons to obey Superiours in all their lawful commands, is not to per∣secute men for attendance unto Gods Rules or to the Dictates of a good conscience, and it were absurd to reason thus. Men may not be persecuted for a good cause and conscience, therefore they may not be punished for maintaining a bad cause, and that which is (interpretatively) against their con∣science. The exercise of any such power by godly Rulers, is cross to  the meek Spirit of Christ, and to that merciful and peaceable Spirit which he requireth of his Saints, Rom. 15. 1. Gal. 6. 1, 2. Eph. 4. 32. 2 Tim 2. 25. James 3. 15. 17. 1. All that is required of Church Officers and Members,  such, & to them so considered, are those speeches in special wise directed (as the contexts shew) yet are Church Officers and Members, as those of Ephesus, commended also for their zeal, when through zeal they could by no means bear with corrupt Tenents and Doctrines of the highest strain, and held forth with the highest pretences of Divine Truth, and no lesse then Apostolical, Revel. 2 2. Thou canst not bear them that are evil, and hast tried them that say they are Apostles and are not, and hast found them liars, and they are required to avoid, and re∣ject and cut off such as vent corrupt doctrines and the lke, Rom. 16. 17. Gal. 5. 10. Tit. 3. 10, 11. 2. Zeal of God in sharp punishing of such like corrupti∣ons stood very well with Christs Dove like Spirit; none so meek as he, yet none so zealous this way. The zeal of Gods House even consumed him, and made him lay on so hard with his scourge upon those who polluted the Temple, Iohn 2. 16. with 14. 15. 16. 30. so Moses that King in Iesurun, the meekest of mere men in his own cause, Numb. 12. 3. yet how Lion-like in that cause of pollution of Gods worship, Exodus 32. 26, 27, 28, 29. So in Hezekiah, who was such a shadow to the Saints, Esay 32. 2. yet a very fierie flying Serpent against the enemies of God and the Church, Esay 14. 29, 30. This is contrarie to what was Prophesies of us Gentiles;  That our swords should be beat into plowshares, Esay 2. 4, and that none should hurt or destroy in all Gods Mountain.
1. Although all sinful and rash quarrelsomness, all self aven∣gings  or means thereof, and all injurious and unwarrantable slaughters should be excluded Gods Mountain, yet this hinders not, but that gentile Rulers as ordained of God must bear his sword; not in their scabbards, and at their girdles, suffering it to rust for want of use, for that were to bear the sword in vain, contrary to Gods own order, Rom. 13. 4 but to be used against all evil works coming under their Cognizance, whether respe∣cting God and Religion more specially; or man and righte∣ousnes; whether in way of the vengeance of God against dome∣stick offenders, or in way of just war against other enemies of God his Cause or Saints. If any reply hereto, that this place in the Romans intendeth not any matters of Religion at all, but onely matters of civil righteousness, 1. Evident it is, that as good and evil doing, whereof the ci∣vil Magistrate taketh cognizance, are opposed Rom. 13. 3, 4. so are incouraging rewards to weldoers, as by that of prayses and vindicative rewards to evil doing, and to evil doers opposed: now none will deny that the civil Magistrate is bound to in∣courage the Preaching Profession and practice of the Truth, worship and wayes of God; and therefore by paritie of rea∣son, is he to be an avenger of what cometh under his cogni∣zance contrary thereunto. 2. The persons more specially spo∣ken to upon that ground to doe well, because then they have praise of the same; or in case they do evil, then they are to fear the vengeance of the Lord to be executed by his Minister, the Magistrate; they are Professours, Officers and Members of Churches, such as they were at Rome, Rom. 1. 7. and 12. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. compared with chap. 13. 3, 4. If thou do that which is evil, fear, &c. which all will confess to be liable to evil doing against the first as well as the second Table. 3. He is by Gods Ordi∣nances to be a terrour to evil works indefinitely: For rulers are not a terrour to good works, but to evil, vers. 3. & v. 4. He is the Minister of God, the avenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evil; be he who he will be, coming under his power; or be the evil what it will be, coming under his view. Now the Scripture reckons especially the doing of persons of corrupt judgements; as persons so corrupt to be evil deeds. Hence if a Christian bid God speed to persons, who bring not the Do∣ctrine of Truth, he is partaker with him in his evil deeds. 2 Joh.
10. 11. Hence Paul calleth those corrupt circumcision teachers. evil works, Phil. 3. 2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. And the opposition, Rom. 13. 3. evinceth this, Ru∣lers are not a terrour to good works, but to evil; whence the argu∣ment is strong. Those good works and acts which ciuil Rulers are not to be a terrour unto, unto the contrary evil works they are to be a terrour; to good works and acts, (civilly such) re∣specting the Truth, worship and wayes of God, civil rulers are not to be a terrour; therefore to evil works, contrary to the truth, waies and worship of God, are they to be a terrour. If any yet reply, that this in Rom. 13. is spoken with refe∣rence to the present power that then bare chief sway at Rome; or at least with sole reference to such like civil powers that were christian, and looketh not to civil powers becoming chri∣stian; and so is no rule for christian rulers: The Answer is ready, albeit those who were in highest power, when Paul writ this Epistle, were Pagan, and not Chri∣stian; yet the context carrieth the words spoken about higher Civil Powers, to be extendible, yea especially appliable to Chri∣stian civil Rulers. 1. When the Apostle saith, Wilt thou not be afraid of the pow∣er? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same: Who knoweth not, that Nero, then ruling, was so far from gi∣ving encouragement to any Christian Romans, either in a way of piety or honesty, that he was a very Lyon rather, cruelly to devour them, 2 Tim 4. 17. and that way rather to have en∣couragement from Pagan Rulers, would be to comply with them in the wayes of their prophanenesse and heathenish out∣rages and abominations; which God forbid! 2. As the Civil Powers in or with Christians are ordered of God, (for there is no power, saith Paul, but is of God; mean∣ing especially civil power, Rom. 13. 1.) and as every soul by vertue of that word is also to be subject (in all lawful things) to Higher Powers amongst Christians; and exercised by Chri∣stians: so Anabaptists themselves will acknowledge, that Rom. 13. 4. taketh in the Christian Magistrate as bearing Gods Sword, and being Gods Minister for Civil vengeance against evil doers against the rules of the second Table; and so the case is yeelded by them, that the place in Romans 13. looketh at the Christian Magistrae also.
3. Those Rulers, to whom, what is here spoken touching their Magistratical work, doth best agree, and by whom, it is best performed, they must be here principally intended by the Lord: but to the godly Christian Magistrate, the Magistra∣tical work here mentioned doth best agree, and by him is it best performed: therefore the godly and Christian Magistrate is here principally intended. As for instance: [Rulers are not a terrour to good works, but to evil.] who maketh more conscience of this order of the Lord, the highest Ruler, then the Christian godly Magistrate? who is wont else to fulfill that so fully and faithfully unto the Christian and godly Sub∣ject: [if thou do that which is good, thou shalt have praise of the same:] who is actually and effectually [the Minister of God for thy good] the Best good, as well as other Inferiour good, of the Subject: so properly, as the Christian godly Ma∣gistrate? Who maketh conscience, but he, to come up fully and regularly to that also, vers. 4. he is the Minister of God, the Avenger, to execute wrath upon him that doth evil. A second Answer to the Objection from Esay 11. is, That  the just execution of offendors by the Civil Magistrate, is not doing of hurt to any, but a meanes in it self of good: yea as to others; who hear and fear, and learn to do no more so wickedly: so sometimes is it sanctified of God, to the good of the delinquents themselves, who are corporally punished by them: as some in the dayes of the Gospel, who shall be punish∣ed by their Christian Rulers, shall acknowledge it to Gods praise, Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends, Zech. 13. 6. This is crosse to that Rule, Judge nothing before the time,  1 Cor. 4 4. It is spoken in opposition to rash censuring of others; ac∣cording  to that, Matth. 7. 1. Judge not, that ye be not judged: but Paul never intended, that no matters of a sacred or civil na∣ture, should ever be judged of by such as were called thereto of God, but all left unmedled with to the Judgment day; for 1 Cor. 5. 4. he chargeth in Church matters, that the Church proceed to censure the incestuous person: and 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. he would have some of the Saints to be chosen by them to judge in their civil matters amongst themselves; the rather, because the Saints shall (as Assessours) judge the world at the last day.
A second Instruction from the premises, is, that surely then persons in Civil Authority are in duty bound, even as they are persons in civil Authority under God and Christ, as they are Ministers of God, to indeavour the exact knowledge of his Law, Word and Rules; as other under-Rulers, are to know the Lawes of their Soveraign: for if they must restrain and punish, what is crosse to those Rules, they ought to know the Rules; else how should they know what is crosse to the Rules of the Word? or before they punish the same, how will they be able to use such means of conviction of offendors against those Rules, as God requireth? God put this principle into the heart even of Artaxerxes; that such as knew the Lawes of God, should be set in Authority to punish such as did contrary to the Law of God, Ezra 7. 25, 26, 27, 28. compared. God by Jethro counselled, that Rulers should be men of Ability; even in Scripture, as well as other Lawes and learning, Exod. 18. 21. and Deut. 1. 13. compared; the book of the Law was ever to be with the Rulers set over Gods people, Deut. 17. 18. Josh. 1. 7, 8. Esay 32. 1, 2. & 33. 6. wisdom and knowledge in such as rule, is the stability of their times. It is Gods Ordinance to Gentile Rulers, that they should be wise and instructed; even in the things, wayes and words of God, Psal. 2. 10, 11. Pagan Rulers indeed, whilest Pagan, do not know the Word, and so cannot so well punish what is crosse to it; but of right and duty they are bound to know both. A third Instruction hence, is; that if such corruptions in Religion, are to be so restrained and punished by highest Ci∣vil Authority, then are highest Civil Authority, which chiefly require such punishment to be executed, to make Coercive Lawes about matters of Religion. For if so to punish, then in an ordinary way to do it, either by vertue of some political Law established and promulged for that end: and then the case is granted; or else without such a Law: and then way is made to bring in Arbitrary and tyrannical Government. Yea when a Civil State doth agree, in such or such matters of God, to be guided by the Word of God, and necessary deductions thence, what punishments to inflict upon such or such corrup∣tions in Religion: Now that which is materially considered, the Law and Word of God, yet formally considered, as thus
politically ratified and promulged; It is so far forth of the nature of a political law, and doth but strengthen this Con∣clusion; That what a Civil State must punish, they must make political Lawes for that end; in that extraordinary case, Moses without a law must punish that blasphemer, Leviti∣cus 24. 11, 12, 13, 14. but in reference to ordinary exe∣cution of Justice that way for the future; God biddeth Moses to promulge a solemn Law in Israel, that whosoever blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall surely be put to death, vers. 15, 16. Touching this particular, 1. we distinguish of Civil Magi∣strates. 1. Civil Magistrates are considered either Indefinitely, or in a limited sense. Indefinitely considered, they are the Ordi∣nance of God; the Civil Powers that be are ordained of God; there is no power but of God, Rom. 13. 1. yea they are of Christ, under whom they rule, and by whom they decree whatsoever. Justice they do decree, Prov. 8. 15, 16. by me; who that is, is explained, vers. 30. then I was by him, and I was daily his delight: and vers. 31. Rejoycing in the habitable part of his earth, &c. by this essential wisdom of God, Princes decree Justice; whether just Lawes against evil doers, or just censures, according to those Lawes: he is King of kings, and Lord of lords, 1 Tim. 1. 15, 16, 17. Rev. 17. 14. & 19. 16. if considered in a limited sense, under this or that form of Rule or Magistracy, whether Monarchical, Ari∣stocratical, Democratical, or mixt of Aristocracy and Demo∣cracy: so it is a humane creature, as the Greek termeth it, 2 Pet. 2. 13. 2. Civil Magistrates are considered either as rightly ordered according to God; or as some way defective to his order▪ Regulated Magistrates, ordered according to the Rules of God and Christ, whose Ordinance they are, and by whom they rule; they are well versed in Scripture, Deut. 17. 18, 19, 20. men of choyce Abilities for wisdom and understanding; yea even in the things of God, Exod. 18. 21. & Deut. 1. 13, compared: such as fear God, ibid. such as rule in Gods fear, 2 Sam. 23. 3, 4. such as do spiritual homage to Jesus Christ, Psal. 72. 10, 11. are spiri∣tually wise, and well instructed, Psal. 2. 10. Kisse the Son, with the
kisse of faith, love and obedience, verse 12. serve him, vers. 11. not as men only, but as Kings and Judges Are nursing Fathers to the Church, Esay 49. 23. are brought to the Church to joyn with it, Esay 60. 11. stoop to the Government of the Church as members of it, Esay 49. 23. bring the glory of their Autho∣rity to the Church, Rev. 21. 24. thereby to minister every way, in way of protection, preservation, and establishment thereof, Civilly, in peace, and purity of doctrine and discipline, and the like, Esay 60. 10. 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2. every way in their political manner, Ministers even to Gentile Churches, such as that of Rome was, for its good, Rom. 13. 4. and a terrour not to good works but to evil, Rom. 13. 3. In this respect, its so far from truth, that a godly man and member of Jesus Christ, should not be a Magistrate; (when yet godly Moses, Joshuah, David, Asah, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, and others of old were: and so in and after Christs Incarnati∣on, was Joseph of Arimathea, Joh 19. 38. so was he, Joh. 4. 46, 53. compared: so was Cornelius, Act. 10. 2. and Sergius Pau∣lus, Acts 13. 7. 12. compared, that Eunuch, Acts 8. 27. 37. compared, Erastus, Rom. 16. 23. &c.) that according to Gods rule, such an one should be the only man for that office. The Conclusion in special wise respected regulated Magistrates, and not so much such as are defective to their supream Lords order and rules, and sundry wayes grosly transgressing the same. 3. Civil Magistrates are considered in the perfection ei∣ther of the Essence of their Magistracie, or of their Magi∣straticall Operations. In the former sence Pagans and other Rulers not regula∣lated according to Gods Rules, and perfect Rulers, and have a perfect right to establish true Religion, and to make good our Lawes to that end; Albeit for want of light, they know it not, or for want of a better heart they doe it not: Ac∣cording as out of the like defects, they establish not many wholsome Rules, and Lawes of civil Honestie and Iustice; albeit as Rulers, they have a power to doe it. In the lat∣ter sense, if regulated, they are compleate, if not regu∣lated, then in so farre forth, sundry wayes imperfect, and deficient.
Secondly, we distinguish of Kingdoms or Common-wealths in which they rule. They are either greater or lesser, the Rule concerneth both alike. Again, they are either Pagan, not intended in the point; or Christan, and these again either more pure, and better squared according to Gods rules, whose they are; or they are more cor∣rupt, and Apostatizing from truth, or from purity and power in Religion; that point reacheth both. Again these corrupter States are considered as so corrupt, either in the body of the Spirituall guides thereof, or in the bo∣dy of the People, or in both: Neither the one nor the other are in Religion; excluded the point. Thirdly, we distinguish of Legislative power in matters of Reli∣gion. It is either Absolute, and meerly Soveraign; and so onely God, and Christ is Law-giver unto his people, both for matters of Religion and Righteousness, Piety and Honesty, First and second table. Jam. 4. 12. There is one Law-giver. Esay 33. 22. The Lord is our Law-giver. Or it is subordinate and subservient, and in a way of conformity and respect to the Laws of God al∣ready made by God, and so as men may be Kings and Judges, though in other respects the Lord alone be King and Judge. Esay 33. 22. so may men also make just decrees, & be Law-givers. Again, Law-givers are considered, either as Infallibly and im∣mediately inspired: such a one was Moses, Numb. 21. 18. or as bound indeed to the Rules of God, which are of Infallible In∣spiration, but not alwaies Infallibly caried out, according to those Rules, and so others in highest place are Law-givers, as where those Jewish Rulers long after Moses time, with whom the civill Scepter was, they were Law-givers, and long after Davids time and Solomons (who had their inspirations) so far as the Scepter, or Higher Civill power departed not from them, a Law-giver was among them. Gen. 49. 10. Prov. 8. 15, 16. These Humane just decrees of highest Civill Rulers are by Christ. Again, there is a power simply Ecclesiasticall, respecting the decent, and orderly carrying on of the worship of God, accor∣ding to generall Rules of the Scripture, and the prescripts of ho∣ly prudence, left to the Churches liberty, 1 Cor. 14. 40. (though these constitutions are not so properly Laws but rather are Ec∣clesiasticall directions of order, and decorum, about externall
Rites, and circumstances of worship,) which we grant, there is a Nomothetique power about matters of Religion, which is meerly Politicall and Civill, to which the conclusion looketh. There is a power supposed which is mixed, that is, partly Ec∣clesiasticall, and partly Civill, which some give to the Pope, as do some Papists, some in name Prostestants, do give to Christi∣an Princes; but this confusion of the two powers and swords, we deny to be from the God of Order. Fourthly, we distinguish of Laws about Religion. They are considered either materially or Formally. Concerning such Lawes materially considered, they are either of such things which are manifestly cross to divine Laws, which are the onely Authentique and presidentiall Laws, condemned in Jereboam and other wicked Princes, 1 Kings 12. 28. to the end; of such Laws see allso Hos. 5. 11. Or they are Humane Sanctions of the Laws of God, and of that which is according to those Laws which we assert. Secondly, Things according to the Word, properly respect either Fundamentalls, or Circa-fundamentalls; matters bor∣dering upon Fundamentalls, and circumstantially in Reli∣gion, or matters respecting Religion, of greater or lesser weight; we would not exclude either from being materialls of Humane Civill Sanctions. 3. Matters of Religion are either such as are manifestly in the Word, or such, which though in thmeselves, in the word, and grounds of it, yet not so clearly, but very disputably; the regulated Magistrates or∣dinate Power, extendeth to deal about both, onely in a diffe∣rent manner. 4 Disputable matters in Religion are, either such which are so really and in themselves, or so onely Imagi∣narily and meerly from Humane defects and corruptions, as when not so to the most and best Judgements of the ablest Saints and servants of God, but to some few, and that either through weakness of Judgement, or through sophisticall argumen∣tations of men of corrupt minds, or through gross neglects and contempts of means of Instruction; these allso admit of severall Considerations in Politicall times about matters of Reli∣gion. Secondly, Concerning such Laws about Religion formally considered, we distinguish. They are either such which are made of equall Authority with the Word, and such which of
and in themselves doe bind Conscience, which Popish Tenent we abhor; or they are such which are no other but humane Ci∣vill Sanctions, and Ratifications, and Promulgations of Di∣vine Laws, commanding, or forbidding what the Law or Word of God, either expresly, or by just consequence commandeth, or forbiddeth, so far as openly acted by the outward man, with suitable humane rewards or punishments annexed, bind∣ing Conscience onely so far as the Word it self allowing the Authority, and the Laws likewise made by the Authority bind∣eth the same. This we assert. Again, Humane Laws this way, are either such as being made by Civill Authority, yet are supposed to come from some Church power residing in the sayd Authority, and so to be by virtue of that Civill Authority Properly and Formally Eccle∣siasticall Laws, which we deny: Or such which are materially, and Objectively Ecclesiasticall Laws, that is, politicall, humane Sanctions of Gods Rules and Laws respecting the Church also, and Church Ordinances, which we assert. And now having layd down these distinctions, let us come to some Conclusions about this weighty matter. 1. Negatively. Concl. 1. Highest Civil Authority may not impose what form of Worship, or of Church Discipline, they please, as Erastus and some others since him affirm: For both the Matter of the Worship of God, and the Means of Worship, whether Church Discipline, or any other Means, are limited by our own Law-giver to such and such Rules and Laws made to hand, and not left to any humane power to make it way. Neither may any humane powers, which are his Ministers, transgress the Laws of this their Supreme, either by adding thereto any Law of their own, or taking there-from; they may, and must in their way, d place, look to the due execution of his Laws, but foist in no new Law of their own, in things of his Worship. Hence that Injunction given to Joshuah as Judge and Ruler, Joshuah 1. 7, 8. Observe to doe according to all the Law which Moses my servant commanded thee: He is therefore to look to the keeping of both Tables, commanded of God by Moses; but must not turn from it to the right hand, or to the left. So gentle Princes must first be instructed (even in the Laws and mind of Christ) and then serve him as their Lord, Psal. 2. 10, 11. God rooted out Jero∣boam
for this, and Israel for following such like Commande∣ments, Hos. 5. 11. and brandeth such Ordinances in such mat∣ters, which are not according to his Word, but mans device and will, to be Will-worship, Col. 2. Concl. 2. Civill Authority may not impose, either what cir∣cumstantials, or significant Ceremonies in Religion they please, such significant Washings injoyned are forbidden, Mat. 15. 2. 7. 9. God left not them of old, either in matter of a very Cur∣tain, or the like, in the Tabernacle; or in the matter of any sig∣nificant Ceremony to their own wits; but if he thought meet of teaching them any such way, he himself told them thereof, and required it of them, as in those significant Ceremonies at the Passeover at first, of eating it with their loyns girt, with staves in their hand, and shooes on their feet, to note their hasty com∣ing out of Egypt, Exod. 12. 11. And in that of the Plates for a covering of the Altar, made of those rebellious ones; Censers, to signifie, that none not of Aarons house, might ever after that dare to offer Incense, Numb. 16. 38, 40. And of like significancy was Aarons Rod that budded, Numb. 17. 10. Concl. 3. Highest Civill Authority hath no power formally Ecclesiasticall to make Church Laws, so called, under pain of Excommunication, to be by virtue of their Authority executed by Ecclesiasticall persons, as those who should in their names summon, examine, and censure such as will not actually con∣form to such orders. This confusion of Civill, and Church-power, and tyrannicall abuse of Civill Authority, will bring confusions upon States, which against all admonitions of Gods faithfull servants persist therein, as it did to Jeroboam and his house, and all the rest of Israels Princes which went in his footsteps, Zach. 11. 14, 15. & 13. 4. 9. 12. 20. Concl. 4. No Civill Authority can by their Laws free any of their subjects, either from Ecclesiastical duties to the Church, as Members thereof; or from Church censures; nay, they can∣not by any such Law exempt themselves, if Church members, from any such Church duty or censure, much less can they ex∣empt others; those just duties and censures being authorized by the Soveraign Authority of Christ, as King, and Law-giver of his Church, and laying that bond upon Conscience, which no humane, no nor Angelicall power can unloose, though they should assay it. Christ requiring Peter and John to preach him
to the people, the Jewish Rulers forbid them, it is not right in Gods sight, themselves being Judges, that man should be obey∣ed rather than God, Acts 4. 18, 19, 20. This Christ condemned of old in them, that by their Injunctions would invalidate the Commandements of God, Mat. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Concl. 5. Highest Civill Authority cannot make any Laws a∣bout Religion, which do formally, and as they are humane Laws, bind their subjects Consciences. For first, neither men, nor any Laws of men, can loose Con∣science from any guilt upon it, and therefore neither can they by any power of theirs bind it under guilt; For eusdem est ligans & solvens: Who can forgive sins but God onely? Mat. 9. 6. Who can ease the heart of its burthens, or from its yoaks, but Christ onely? Math. 11. 28. Who can open that door but Christ alone? who can shut it, and when he shutteth it, no man can open, Rev. 2. 7. Church Officers, with their Churches may indeed bind and loose in earth, remit or retain sins mi∣nisterially and declaratively, but not effectually and regally, Mat. 18. 18. John 20. 23. 2. Because men cannot take cognizance of the obedience, or disobedience of Conscience it self, within it self, to their Laws; nor can any humane testimony from without be produced, how Conscience doth carry it in its internall acts; God and Christ onely know, and try the heart, Jer. 17. 10. Revel. 2. 23. No man knoweth what is in man but the spirit of man, 1 Cor. 2. 11. 3. Because man cannot force either the mind or heart, where∣in Conscience partaketh, either to think. judge, or chuse after their mindes or Laws, other than what themselves chuse; though they may force the outward man. Nebuchadnezar doth his pleasure with their bodies, in Dan. 3. yet ver. 17, 18. they will not serve his Gods. 4. Because men cannot reward Conscience with any reward suitable to it, as inward peace or comfort, &c. in case of obe∣dience to their Laws: God alone giveth soul-comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3. 5. Because men cannot punish the soul and spirit, thought it should disobey their commands, they can onely kill the body, but not hurt the soul, Mat. 10. 28. 6. Because if mens Laws of themselves bound Conscience,
then at the day of Judgement men should not be judged onely according to the Word and Laws of God and Christ, as is affir∣med Rom. 2. 14, 15. John 12. 48. but according to mans Laws also. 7. Because it is possible that mens Laws though supposed to be according to the Word, yet they may not really be so: Now if mens Laws did formally bind Conscience, then men should stand Conscience bound sometimes to transgress the rules of Gods Word, by virtue whereof alone all mans Laws do bind. True it is, that Rom. 11. 3. Subjects are to obey Authority for conscience sake, but not as out of Conscience to mans Laws, as humane, but by virtue of the fifth Commandement requiring honour of subjection to their Superiors lawfull Authority and commands, and by virtue of any such particular Scriptures upon which any particular Laws of Churches are grounded. Now let us lay down some positive Conclusions about this Nomothetique power. Concl. 1. First then in the general we affirm, That highest Civil Authority in a Religious State may make Political Laws, pro∣perly such, about matters of Religion, and matters respecting the Churches of Christ. R. 1. Because supreme Political, or Civil power of Authori∣tative keeping the first, as well as the second Table, is the Civill Rulers both duty and privilege, But Nomothetique power a∣bout both Tables is such supreme power; And hence the King and Judge in Israel, is charged with keeping the whole Law of Moses, Deut. 17 19. & 1 Kings 2. 3. Josh. 1. 7, 8. Hence that Co∣ronation Ceremony of delivering the Book of God into the Kings hand, when to be installed in his Throne, 2 Chron. 23. 11. Hence 2 Chron. 13. 10, 11. For we (even King Abijam and the rest of his Princes, and others) keep the charge of the Lord our God, but you have forsaken him. Why, did Abijah minister to the Lord in burning Incense? &c. No, he expresly saith the Priests did it. How did he and the rest of the Civil State keep the charge of the Lord? Surely in a way opposite to Jeroboam, and the Israelite states forsaking the same (as the opposition of the one to the o∣ther in the Context sheweth) now this was by Authoritative commanding the setting up of corrupt Priests, and injoyning the corrupt Worship and Service, and inhibiting, deposing, and banishing the fruitfull Ministers of Gods appointing, 2 Chron.
13. 9. and chap. 11. 14, 15. & Hos. 5. 1, 2. 11. compared. Abija's keep∣ing then with his Princes that charge of God, was by a contrary Improvement of his Authority, in establishing the matters of God and of the Church, and of the Ministry thereof, and the E∣brew text is Emphaticall. VVe have kept () the keeping of the Lord our God. God required the highest Ruler to look to it () that he keep all the words of this Law: King Abijah saith, we have kept the keeping of the Lord our God, or the keeping of Gods Laws, injoyned us by the Lord our God. Now Nomothetique power in matters of the first, as well as the second Table, is supreme Politicall power in keeping of both Tables; Ergo, Nomothetique power in matters of both Ta∣bles, is the Civill Rulers dignity and duty, why else is the Law-giving power Indefinitely considered, respecting mat∣ters of Religion or righteousness, annexed by God to the Scepter, or highest Civill power, in a State of his own appoint∣ment, Gen. 49. 10. Papists indeed generally give Nomothe∣tique power in matters of the Church, and of Religion, to the Pope, as the head of the Church: and no wonder, in that they give him Supremacy above highest Civill Rulers, as Emperors or Princes; other Papists give that Legislative power to the Church Representative in Synods: and no wonder, in that they ex∣empt the Clergy from the secular Arm, unless first degraded, and delivered to them by the Pope: but we that know that Church Officers and Members, as that of Rome was, must be subject to higher powers, and that for conscience sake to the Lord, who hath so Marshall'd (as the Greek word beareth it) them and us, making them as Laws. in an Army to lead us the way, and (according to this great Generall of the fields order) Politically to choose out our way for us, Job 29. 25. Rom. 13. 12. we may have learnt better things. We know that when God commended his Laws about Religion at first to his People, all∣though he had Aaron the High Priest, as well as Moses the high∣est Magistrate before him, yet Aaron must not promulge those Laws, and give them in charge Autoritatively to be kept, or else in such and such cases to be corporally punished; but Moses the Magistrate is chosen to be the man, Manifestly shewing thereby, that the care of Civill Injoyning and ordering the matters of God, formerly injoyned by himself, is committed by God to the chief Magistrate, and to no other; when Moses was dead and
Aaron both, God took the like course, he layeth not the charge of highest Politicall keeping both tables (even all his Law) upon Eleazar the high Priest, or upon the rest of his Bretheren with him; but upon Ioshua the chief Judge and Civill Ruler, Iosh. 1. 7, 8. R. 2. If Highest Civill power may, and must root out all abusive practise, yea Monuments of Religion, then may they make E∣dicts & decrees to that end, with reference to Civill punishments of such as maintain or uphold them; But the former is true, therefore the later. The proposition is evident, since the Poli∣ticall Humane Law must Politically & legally give force & Au∣thority to such proceedings, and leave the Actors and Abettors the more inexcusable. The Assumption is evident, by the rule of Gods proceeding in Church-Reformations, Esay 1. 25. God saith there to the Church, I will partly purge away thy dross, and take away all thy Tin: even all Church corruptions and corrupt mixtures in Religion; what course will God take for this end? he saith, verse 26. I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counsellors as at the begining, after that, &c. they should be then such as their first Judges were, Moses, Ioshua, &c. who were zea∣lous that way, Exod. 32. Numb. 22▪ and such like as their first San∣hedrin of 70 Elders, Numb. 11. what such Godly Rulers do, God saith he doth, I will take away all thy Tin. 3. R. If Highest Civill Authority ought to repeal persecuting Laws, respecting Religion, and so free their Subjects from be∣ing any more liable to punishment in neglect thereof, then may they make Laws in matters of Religion; But the former is true Ergo, the latter. The consequence of the proposition appeareth, in that it must be one and the same power to make Laws about Religion, or the Church, as to unmake Laws about the same, or to repeal them; nor can a Law be legally or regularly repealed, but by a Law of Equall Authority with the Former; the Assumption we have all cause thankfully to acknowledge to Gods praise, in the Laws of Edward the sixt, of Q. Elizabeth, and of this present Parliament of England, besides those of other godly Reforming States. 4. R. If Civill Authority may make Laws about Religion and the Church, to incourage or reward the same with Civill favours, who shall observe the same, then may they make Coer∣cive Laws with reference to Civill punishments to such as trans∣gress
the same; but the former is true, Ergo, the consequence ap∣peareth, in that it is the work of the same civill power to render praise to Publique commanded weldoing, to be in a like Au∣thorative way, a terror to evill doers, Rom. 13. 3. 4. the As∣sumption none will deny, if they would; Its Scripture proof, witness the example of Darius the Mede, Dan. 6. 26. 5. of Cyrus the first Ezera. 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. so of that other Darius, Ezra 6. and Artaxerses, Ezra 7. 5. R. If Civill Authority may not make such Lawes with reference to Civill punishments or rewards, to ratefie what the Lord that way Injoyneth or forbideth in Religion, it is because therein they either usurp Church-power or transgress some rule of God; but they do neither thereby, Ergo, the Assumption is proved thus: they usurp not Church-power therein, because what ever the Church may do, in a Church way, is not now the question, but to be sure the Church can make nothing like a Law, in any Civill and Politicall way, or with reference to Ci∣vill rewards or punishments, and what rule of God they trans∣gress, is yet to be instanced in. 6. R. Bcause if not alone particular Ministers, but a very Synod and Assembly of the Officers of the Churches in a Religi∣ous State; who in an ordinary and oderly way, are to guide and lead the godly Civil Rulers, and Ecclesiastically to determin what is the mind of God, touching matters of Religion, a∣bout which their Rulers are to make Laws, if such an Assembly (I say) should be corrupt in the Major part of it, who must Authoratatively reduce them into order? not an Universall Bishop as the Pope, nor an ecumenicall Counsell, which is scarce Imaginable to be said now adaies; Nor the Minor part of the Church Officers there met, or of their Churches to whom they do belong: The Minor part being in Foro externo & humane, the weaker and lesser force and weight, and since in a Church-way they cannot do it, by way of other force, they must not assay it. They may not use the temporall sword, as they are either Churches, or as Ecclesiasticall Synods, Math. 26. 53. now the Civill Magistrate, or none upon Earth, in an orderly way must help, and if the Civill Magistrate legally help and re∣gularly, then by Virtue of some State-Law provided for that purpose: Yea if such a Synod should in the Major part of them make decrees flatly cross to the word of God, they must make
Civill Laws to make them null, if not one or two, but an Assem∣bly, of the Nurses of the Churches children, should combine to∣gether to prison them, as a very Kennell of Wolves, or a com∣pany of Foxes Agree to destroy the Lambs of the Flock, these Politicall Nurse-fathers, Esay 25. 12. And Shepheards, Mich. 7. 5. must help against such mischiefes seasonably, and provide to restrain the same, by holsom Laws, Edicts, and the like; and suitable punishments executed. Object. Yea, but Civill Authority may be Corrupt. Ans. True saith, Reverend Mr. Beaza (lib. de haereticis Ma∣gistratu puniendis) For the Churches suffering for sins provok∣ing to that Judgement, and for triall for such as are godly; but in the mean space (saith he) For fear of Tiranny, to spoil the Magistrate of one Chief part of his Jurisdiction, and lea∣ving the Ordinary Remedy to look for an extraordinary one is not good: with divers other passages to like purpose. R. 7. Because the rule of Relates requireth, that those to whom we are Politically subject, as to the highest Civill pow∣er; do in like sort as we are subject to them, give forth Laws for our Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall good, or restraint of the contrary evill, as under a Civll respect, and coming under their Cognizance, but to highest Civill Authority, are all sorts, Churches, Members, or Officers of Churches, &c. even every soul, to be subject in a Politicall way; Therefore in the like Politicall way, may they make such Laws for the Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall good of Churches, and of their Officers and Mem∣bers, and for the restraint of the contrary evills; both propositi∣ons are grounded upon, Rom. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. Let us now briefly Answer, what some may object against this Conclusion. Obj. 1. We have one Law-giver in the matters of God and the Church, and therefore not so many as highest Civill Courts to give us Laws that way. Ans. True, we have one onely Law-giver, who is Absolute, Supreme, and Infallable, which alone giveth us forth Laws, in matters of God, or the Church; Nor may any other give forth other Laws that way for substance, then what he first delivereth to them. Yet this hindreth not, but this onely Law-giver ha∣ving delivered his royall mind and will therein, that other Po∣liticall Ministers of his, and whom he substituteth under him,
to look to it that these Laws be executed, should, yea and ought, in their Politicall way to ratefie, and promulge these Laws of their Soveraign and ours, and improve their utmost power, Po∣litically to incourage, such as shall, Externally at lest, observe the same, or discourage such, as shall openly, and obstinately transgress the same. Civill Magistrates are Earthly Gods, under the God of Heaven and Earth, Psal. 82. and are according to God to improve all their power for God, and against open scan∣dalous sinners against him; And one chief part of their power, being Legislative power, they are in their Politicall way to im∣prove that power for God, as well as to put forth their remuna∣rative, or vindicative power, actually for God, in matters of God or man, of Religion or Righteousness, of the first or se∣cond Table, both Tables being committed to their keeping, as their Politicall charge. 2. God onely gave Laws to his Church in matters of God, of old, and was the onely Law-giver, yet alowed the name of Lawgiver, even in respect of Religion also to Moses the highest Magistrate, Num. 21. 18. Object. True you will say, he was immediately inspired by God that way, and so are not others. Ans. Yea but this proveth, that Gods being the onely Law-giver to his Church, it hindreth not but that the Civill Ma∣gistrate under him, and from him, may and must promulge his Laws, and that under penallties of Civill punishment; For God inspired no other powers of old, than highest Civill power, to do that work Secondly, though God were the onely Law-gi∣ver in matters of Religion and of the Church, yet that hindreth not, but that he allowed others in highest Civill Authority to make Laws, and Orders, and Edicts, respecting Religion, and that under penallty of Civill punishment. Honor that Order solemnly made, and ingaged unto by Asah, and that Generall Assembly of the Heads, and Members of that Kingdom, that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, 2 Cron. 15. 13. Yet were not these immedtately in∣spired, as was Moses. Ioash also gave forth royal Edicts, and made Proclamction of it, concerning collections to be made for the house of God, Politically ratifying, and promulging a Law of Moses in substance. Exod. 30. 13, 14, 15, 16. And 2 Cron. 24. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. &c. Albeit David might, from immediate Inspi∣ration from God, or direction from some Inspired Prophet,
make those Decrees and Orders about Church matters, matters of Gods Worship, of the Ministery, of Discipline, and the like, mentioned 1 Chron. 16. 4, 5, 6, 7, &c. and chapter 23. & 24. & 24. & 2. Yet Hezekiah, who added his politicall Sancti∣on to those orders, he was not so inspired, 2 Chron. 29. 25. God made a Law about Ministers maintainance by Tyths and the like; But Hezekiah also addeth his Civill Sanction thereto, 2 Chron. 31. 4. and causeth his Edict to be spread, or published, or pro∣mulged, ver. 5. The like Magistraticall power did Nehemiah put forth, in making Orders about Ministers Maintainance, Neh. 13. 13. and about the Sanctification of the Sabbath, threat∣ning Civill punishment to the transgressors thereof, ver. 19. I commanded to shut the gates, and charged that they should not be opened till after the Sabbath; and ver. 21. he threatens to lay hands on them that shall persist to prophane the Sabbath; and ver. 22. he chargeth the Levites to look to the sanctification of the Sabbath; and to make it appear, that though God had made a Law about Sanctification of the Sabbath, yet he as a chief Ci∣vill Ruler, did but his duty in making Politicall Orders about the same; he pleadeth with God, ver. 22. Remember me O my God for this. It was a Politicall Order and Decree which the State of Niniveh made for that penitentiall Fasting, and seek∣ing of God, Jonah 3. 7. The King caused it to be proclamed and published throughout Niniveh (by the Decree of the King and his Nobles) saying, let neither man nor beast tast any thing, let man and beast put on sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, let them e∣very one turn from his evill way, &c. And how well God took this, see ver. 10. For hereupon he repented him of the evill that he had said, &c. The like politicall Injunction of Fasting and Prayer by good King Jehoshaphat, 2 Chron 20. And the like po∣liticall Act in matters of Religion see in the State of Judah in Hezekiahs time, who having first called a Councill of State a∣bout it, 2 Chron. 32. 2. afterward, they, ver. 5. established a De∣cree to make proclamation through all Israel, that they should come to keep the Passeover at Ierusalem; though upon just rea∣son given, ver. 2. 3. it were not the very same moneth appointed in the Law of God; and how acceptably God took this, the se∣quell shewed. Mordecai also having by Queen Easters means been advanced to highest Authority under Ahashuerus, he maketh a solemn Law, and standing Decree, about solemn yearly dayes
and exercises of the duties of Thanksgiving, to be observed by all the Jews, Est. 9. 30, 31, 32. and he sent letters unto all the Iews, &c. to confirm those dayes of Purim in the times appointed, accord∣ing as Mordecai the Iew, and Ester the Queen had injoyned them, &c. of which see more, ver. 21, 22, 23. and is commended for it, Est. 10. 3. It was a Law, a coersive Law about matters of Re∣ligion, under Civill penalties to those that transgressed it, which Artaxerxes made, Ezr. 7. 26. Whosoever will not do the Law of thy God (which all know commands matters of Religion as well as Righteousness) and the Law of the King (respect∣ing it commanded by God, in reference to his house, the Tem∣ple, and Worship of it, &c. mentioned ver. 23.) let judgement be speedily executed upon him, whether it be to death, or to banish∣ment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. And lest any should say, that he did this of his own head, ver. 27. Its thank∣fully acknowledged to be of God; Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, which hath put such a thing as this into the heart of the King, to beautifie the house of the Lord, which is at Jerusalem: Darius also maketh a politicall Decree respecting Religion professed and practised by his subjects the Jews, and that under penalty of Civill punishment to such as shall any way alter his Decree, Ezr. 6. 11. compared with ver. 8, 9, 10. this is recorded in his commendations. That was a politicall Order and Decree made by that other Darius the Mede, for which he is commend∣ed in Dan. 6. 23. [It is about matters of Religion] I make a De∣cree, that in eveery dominion of my Kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel. That was a coersive Decree about mat∣ters of Religion which Nebuchadnezzar made, under the penal∣ty of Civill punishment, and he is commended for it, Dan. 3. 28, 29. Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who hath sent his Angell, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, &c. And therefore I make a Decree, that every People Nation, and Language which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses be made a dunghill, because there is no other God that can deliver after this sort. So that the Conclusion is but further strengthened by this Argument. That which the Lord himself hath either put higher Civill powers upon, or hath owned, or commended either in such as were within, or without the
Church, in so doing; that must needs be according unto the Mind and Word of God: But the exercise of Legislative pow∣er, by higher Civil powers, about matters of Religion (yea and that in a coersive way, and under Civill penalties) is that which God hath put into the hearts of such higher powers, or hath owned, and commended in them (as the Instances before do declare) therefore the use of Legislative power by Civill power, about matters of Religion, yea in a coersive way, it is according to the Mind and Word of God. And this now sayd, may help also to take off another Ob∣jection. Obj. 2. Some object, That then Heathen Kings, as they are Civill Magistrates, have right to make Laws about matters of Religion, and of the Church, although not able to doe it, not knowing the Matters of God or of Churches, and not Members of the Church, and so not censurable by the Church; which were to make a King-Pope to give out Laws to the Church, and not to be censured by the Church. Ans. 1. We especially intend the Conclusion, of a Magistrate regulated according to the rules of the Word of God, whose Minister he is; and so the Civill Magistrate is no Heathen, or Ignorant of Religion, or out of the Church. If he be other∣wise, it is his sin that way. See more pag. 48. 2. Although the Civill Magistrate fail in that part of his duty, that he knoweth not the Lord who girdeth him with that Princely girdle, yet that sin in that particular doth not wholly Is. 45. 1. 4. 5. excuse another sin of omission of another duty, namely Autho∣ritatively to keep the first, second, third, or fourth Comman∣dement. Rulers may be Ignorant of many matters of the se∣cond Table, and disabled so far, from making good coersive Laws about them, yet both are sins of omission. In both he hath a right essentially, and actu primo; but in respect to the execution of that Nomothetique right in reference to matters of the first or second Table, he hath that power virtually onely. 3. Heathen Kings not of the Church, and not censurable by the Church, may give out Laws to the Churches under their jurisdiction, touching matters of Righteousness and Honesty; yet that maketh them not King-Popes, no more doth the other. Nebuchadnezzar might as commendably make a coerfive Law
upon civill penalty against the Jewish Church Officers or Mem∣bers under his jurisdiction, as execute any such corporall pu∣nishment upon them both for false Doctrines vented by them under pretence of Gods name (a sin against the first Table) as also for committing Adultery; for a Law made that way, doth leave the subject more inexcusable, and had been no other than a politicall Legislative Sanction of the Laws of God, whose Minister (considered as a civill Magistrate) he was; the Lord himself by law having made such sins capitall, Deut. 13. 5. Lev. 20. 10. Now that exemplary act of Justice in Nebuchadnezzar up∣on a member of the Jewish church under his jurisdiction, as well for false Doctrine as for Adultery, is renowned, and a form of Imprecation thence borrowed, Ier. 29. 22, 23. The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon rosted in the fire, because they committed adultery with their neigh∣bours wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I commanded them not, even I know, and am a witness, saith the Lord. 4. When Heathen Kings come to know their duty in matters of the first, or second Table, and accordingly they establish Laws about Religion, they doe it not now by any new right, when Christians and knowing Christ, no more than a Parent be∣coming Christian, and knowing Christ, giveth out parentall commands to his children, with respect to bodily corrections, if they do not such and such Religious duties, doth this, by any new Parentall right which he had not intrinsically when Pa∣gan: The case is alike in those Fathers of the Common∣wealth. 5. Heathen Kings, whilst Heathen, may and must make Laws about the matters of God and his Religion, so far as their right guiding light extendeth; else should they hold the truth of God in unrighteousness; now its certainer, that they whilst Heathen have, or may have much light, so as to see into matters of the true God, and of his Religion. 1. By the light of Nature Heathens know, and have known that there is a God, that he is one God, that he hath made all men as his Offspring, that he is to be worshipped according to his spirituall nature, that he is to be called upon, that he is not to be blasphemed, nor belyed, nor called to witness in a
false thing, that images of him are not to be made, that men are not to take his name in vain by rash, or false Oaths, that some time is to be set apart for his Worship, and the like, Rom. 2. 14, 15. By the work of the Law within their hearts, many things contained in the Law, may be, and have been done. 2. The light of Gods Works, both of Creation and Provi∣dence, may help them much this way, Rom. 1. 18, 19, 20. see more Ezek. 36. 23. 36. & 38. 16. & 39. 21. 28. The notable Providence of God rescuing by his Angel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego from Nebuchadnezzars fury, for not worshiping his Idoll of gold, made him make that coersive Law mention∣ed Dan. 3. 28, 29. Therefore I make a Decree, that whosoever shall speak amiss of the God of Shadrach, &c. shall he cut in pieces, &c. 3. They may have some common light of the Spirit that way, communicated by means of some of their godly subjects, whence such expressions of that Darius mentioned in Ezra 6. 10, 12. and no wonder then he make that penall Decree, ver. 11. Also I have made a Decree, that whosoever shall alter this word, let tim∣ber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged thereon, and let his house be made a Dunghill. 4. None will deny to Pagan Princes a right of Authoritative praising, and incouragement of such as doe well, in regard of duties either of the first or second Table, to which also God in speciall wise stirred up the spirit of Cyrus the first, Ezra 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. Though he knew not the Lord savingly then, Isaiah 45. 4. & 44. 28. compared. And why shall not Heathen Rulers have a right with like latitude of respect to first or second Table, to be a terror to evill doers, by making coersive Laws for that end, so far at least as their right guided light extendeth; yea we have shewed before divers of them are in Scripture commended for this. So that the truth hereby is further strengthened thus. That which Heathen States, Kings and Princes remaining Heathen, have done, and been commended in Scripture for do∣ing it, as Princes, or higher Civill powers, that must needs be essentiall to them as higher Civill powers, and imitable by o∣thers in like Civill power; but (as hath been formerly declared) such use of Legislative power, by Heathen Higher powers, as
Higher powers, making coercive Decrees in matters of the Reli∣gion of the true God, hath been commended in Scripture; there∣fore such use of the Civill Legislative power is essentiall even to Heathen Rulers, and imitable by all others in like Civill power. Obj. 3. God hath left others to Govern and Feed his Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Eph. 4. 8, 11, 12, 13. who must give an account of their soules: And the Civill Ma∣gistrate is not among those Officers which Christ hath left to edifie his Church; nor is he a Preacher or Expositor of the Scriptures: What should the Civill Magistrate doe governing them, or seeking to edifie them, or expound Scriptures to them by such Law-making in matters of Religion, or of the Church? Ans. 1. Church Governours are in an Ecclesiasticall way to watch over, and censure Church members for matters of the second Table, as well as those of the first Table; and by this Argument therefore Civill Rulers may not watch over, govern, and censure Church Members, in matters of the second Table neither, because there are others by Office to doe it Ecclesiasti∣cally, and he is not reckoned among them. 2. Civill Magistrates, as well as Church Officers are Ru∣lers, Elders, Watchmen, Shepheards over Gods people and flock, and therefore in a Politicall way are to rule over, watch over, yea to feed the people of God, and to hold forth the same by their wholsom Laws, and Executions in matters respect∣ing both Tables. 3. The Magistrates end being matters of Piety as well as Ho∣nesty, 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2. And he being a Minister of God, even to Gentile Churches, Officers, and Members for their good, and so most of all for their best Spiritual good, as externally held forth, helped, exercised, or expressed, Rom. 13. 4. and being charged with the things of God and the Church, 2 Chron. 13. 10, 11. he is in his politicall way to attend his charge, to look to the externall fulfilling of it (at least) yea in so far is he charged as a politicall Father and Shepheard with his incharged, or Christian subjects, as his politicall children and flock commit∣ed to him, Ezek. 34. 9, 10. I will require my sheep at the Shep∣heards hands; the Princes as well as the Priests; hence the sins of Church Members in Church matters are charged upon their
Civill Rulers, as their sins, when the people neglect their Mi∣nisters, Nehemiah 13. 10. he chid the Rulers, ver. 11. saying, why is the house of God forsaken? when there was such buying and selling upon the Sabbath, ver. 15, 16. Nehemiah saith, ver. 17. Then I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, what evill thing is this that ye do, and prophane the Sabbath. 4. Their Laws are not Ecclesiasticall expositions of Scripture, but the mind of God in the Scriptures, being in ordinary and orderly way first sought and had from the body of the ablest, and best guides, and lights in the Churches in their Juris∣diction, conclusively declaring the Law and rule of God, touching the question, their Laws about matters of Religion, are Civill Sanctions, under Civill rewards or punishments, of such Laws of God so declared and commended to them. And by the execution of such Politicall Laws, others may and should be edified, honour, and fear, and learn to do no more so wickedly, Deut. 13. 10, 11. Some delinquents themselves, even some false teachers, shall acknowledge as much, thus was I wounded in the house of my friends. Zac. 13. 4, 5, 6. 4. Object. The Church hath sufficient power to attain her ends within her self, what need Civill coercive power in mat∣ters of the Church? Ans. 1. The Church hath that power in matters also of the second Table, sufficient to attain its ends, offending Members therein, yet none will therefore make Civill coercive power in such matters needless. 2. The State as well as Church is injured, by witchcraft, by perjury, by schism, and other sins, against the first Table, and notwithstanding the Churches power, Ecclesi∣astically to attain her ends, the State must have its defensiue and vindicative power, Politically to attain its ends too, the good of safety and peace of the Subjects; and so both perfect within their own Spears. 3. When the Church hath gone to her utmost extent of power in casting out Blasphemers, Seducers, Perjured persons, Scismaticks, &c. yet they may do more hurt in Church and Common-wealth than before, unless Civill co∣ercive power help; The Church may attain her ends in an Eccle∣siastiall way and yet the Civill State not hindred of attaining its ends in a Politicall way, but both polities be reciprocally helpfull to each other; The Civill polity ratifying the Churches
cases, by Civill Laws and punishments, the Ecclesiasticall polity lending help to State and Common-wealth cases, by declaring the Laws and rules of God, and by reasonable administration of Church censures upon her delinquent Members. Conc. 2. That in matters of Religion which are doubtfull, and not so directly, plainly and expresly laid down in the word, Civill Authority, in purer times of the Church, must call for the Counsell of the Churches, at least of the Officers of the Churches under their Jurisdiction; who are most faithfull and able to give Counsell therein; and they are bound in conscience to follow what they according to God do clear up to be his mind, in all such matters of weight, about which they do in∣quire, not alone as that which such a Synod or Assembly of Church Officers do determine that way, is for the matter of it according to God, but as it is given in the way of an Ordi∣nance; Namely of the Counsell of a Synod of the Officers and Ministers of the Churches, whereof they, as regulated Ma∣gistrates, are Members; Whose Counsells unto them are Eccle∣siastically Authoritative Counsells. And herein also Godly Ru∣lers do lick the dust of the Churches feet, in attending faithfully to the well grounded Counsells of their Pastors, not alone distributively given in their respective Churches, but col∣lectively also, when joyntly delivered in a Synod. Herein also Church power Ministreth help to the Common-wealth, Eccle∣siastically, as the Common-wealth administreth help to the Churches Civilly, in exerting its Politicall power, in fram∣ing Civill Laws answerably to their Counsells. Deut. 18. to 13. The Counsell and sentence of the Priest, or Councill and Assembly of Priests, delivering the mind of God in doubtfull matters, was to be required and followed. Joshua the chief Ma∣gistrate must stand before Eleazar the Priest, who should ask Counsell after the Judgement of Urim, and according to his word from the Lord, they were to go out and in, Num. 27. 21. Hence Iehoshaphat (according to that Law for that end, Deu. 17. 89, 10.) Placeth at Ierusalem, some of the Priests and Levites and chief Fathers of Israel, to be for the Judgement of the Lord, and for controversie, not meerly in point of doubtfull actions, as between blood and blood, 2 Cron. 19. 10. But in point of doubtfull rules, according to which Civill decreees and
sentences also were to be regulated: causes between Law and Commandement, Statutes and Judgements. Onely that Coun∣cill is limited to Gods word, they must still warn them, that none Trespass against the Lord. True it is, something peculiarly Jewish was in this, whence that Law of Capitall punishment, to such as presumptuously disobeyed their sentence, Deut. 17. 12. But there is something also for our learning and instruction held forth therein, not alone respecting Christ our blessed Pro∣phet and high Priest and Counsellor, Esay 9. 6. Which Prophet, whosoever shall not hear, shall be destroyed from his People, Acts 3. 22, 23. But respecting the Ministers of the Churches of the Gospel, from whom the mind and sentence of God, in contro∣versall cases, is to be sought by all sorts, and being found, is to be followed by all sorts, whence that, by allusion to the Priests under the Law, yet respecting the time of the Gospell, Ezek. 44. 23, 24. And the (id est the Priests) shal teach my People (id est Mem∣bers of Churches, whether Civill Rulers or Subjects) the diffe∣rence between the clean and unclean, and cause men to discern be∣tween clean and unclean. And in controversie, they shall stand in Iudgement, and they shall Iudge it (onely with this limitation) According to my Iudgements, where by Judging he intendeth the Ecclesiasticall Judging, which appertaineth to Church-Officers, and not a Civill and Politicall Judging, which is peculiar to the Civill Magistrate, of which more anon. Conc. 3. That Civill rulers are to call upon the Ministers of the Churches under their Jurisdiction, to expound the whole Counsell of God to their people, especially about such mat∣ters of Religion, or of the Church, as they are by Law to Esta∣blish. Hence that Act of Iehoshaphat, sending abroad the Priests and Levites to teach those Cities the mind and Counsell of God, what was according, or repugnant thereunto, before he sent out Civill Judges. to deal in their Judiciall way with them, concerning matters of that nature, 2 Chron 17. 7, 8, 9. compared with Chapter 19. 4, 5, 6. Conc. 4. That in all matters of Religion, or of the Church, the Laws which Civill Authority do establish, they must esta∣blish them, by, and with the consent of the people, either in themselves or their representatives, this strengthning their Po∣liticall Laws, that they bind Scientes & Volentes. As Asah will∣ing
to make a binding Capitall Law about Religion, by his Authority he summoneth the people, with whose consent it is made, 2 Chron. 15. 9. He gathered all Judah and Benjamin, &c. and they decreed that, vers. 13. That whosoever would not seek the Lord should be slain. So Jonah 3. 4. Its said, the people believed the Lord and proclaimed a Fast, but vers. 7. that business of the de∣cree for the Fast, is applied to the King as his Act, by the con∣sent of the Nobles, or chief heads of the people, and so repre∣senting the people; by the light and Law of Nature, these Pagan Ninevites learned this to be an orderly way of making such like decrees, in such like matters of Religion it self; whence also was that course taken, in the case of a coercive Law to be made, about a business of Religious worship, for the matter of it (all∣though in the form of that worship to be decreed of, it were de∣vilish) It is to be made, by the representative Estates of the Persian Kingdom, which being a Kingdom, was then to be esta∣blished by the King. Dan. 6. 7, 8, 9, The rulers of thy Kingdom, the Officers and Governors, the Counsellors and Dukes have consulted together, to make a decree for the King, and to establish a Statute, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man, for thirty dais, save of thee, O King, he shall be cast into the Den of Lions. Now O King, confirm the decree, &c. When Iehoshaphat was to make that Order, about the particular matter of Religion, He consulteth with the people, 2 Chron. 20. 21. And When he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto the Lord, and that should praise the beauty of holiness as they went before the Army, and to say, Praise ye the Lord, for his mercy indureth for ever. Which may serve to take off that offence of some, against politicall Laws to be made this way: because it will be a forcing of Christian people in matters of Religion, since the Laws which are made that way, are virtually and interpretatively made with their own free consent; As made either by their own free consent personally, if not too great a body to be ordinarily called toge∣ther in one Assembly; or at least, by their own free consent in their Representatives, where the body of the people eannot ordinari∣ly be called together to debate such matters, or express perso∣nall consent to the Laws which Civill Authority do make about matters of Religion or of the Church, which are in themselves doubtfull, and not meerly made so by mens wiles and Satans
sleights; They must be made with great latitude, and tender re∣spects, to such as are really and truly tender in conscience, even Politicall hepheards must not over-drive their Flock, and such Lambs would be carried in their armes. A fourth instruction from the Premises, if Civill Authority are so to restrain and punish such matters, then are they in their Politicall way to Judge, which things acted by the outward man in cases of Religion are contrary to the word, and which are not; Else shall they sin in a high degree, in censu∣ring Politically that as contrary to the word, of which they have no right nor power to determine politically, either one way or other. Job who was a right godly man, Job 1. 1. and a man of chief Civill rule in this Country, as chap. 29. 7. he had a chief place in the Gate in the seat of Judge∣ment, verse 9 even Princes kept silence, when he was to speak. He Judicially delivered the Fatherlesse, verse 12. Brake the Laws of the wicked, verse 17. and verse 25. I chose out (or as the Geneva Translation hath it, I appointed out) their way, and sate as a King in an army, as the Generall of the Field hath with his Councill of War, being the highest Mi∣litary power, chief Military Judgement, both what Military Orders to make about the common Souldiery, and what courses are most advantageous, or disadvantageous to the good of the whole, or what acts of the Souldery are to be punished, or con∣trariwise incouraged, and what particular rewards or punish∣ments such or such particular facts of the Souldiery deserve, in way of subordination and conformity unto the Laws of that higher Civil power, whose Military Ministers they are; so have highest Civill Authority in religious States the like highest politicall Judgement, what acts of the outward man, respect∣ing Religion are to be incouraged or discouraged in their sub∣jects, and in what way, and what orders to make for that end, so as in way of general conformity, and subordination to the Laws of God and Christ, whose Ministers they are, and so as may be warranted from the Word of God, either expresly, or by just consequence. Job did not leave every one under his authority to chuse what way themselves pleased, or judged the best, either in matters of Religion, or of Righteousness; but he in his authoritative politicall way determined that for them; he ap∣pointed
and chose out their way. Nor doth he mention this as any injustice in him, or as any tyrannicall course of his, but as one peece of his right guided politicall wisdom, justice, and power, as the context sheweth; and this course he took is re∣corded in his commendations, and as his comfort in his very trouble, before Moses his Judiciall or Ceremoniall Lawes were made; for after them that sacrifising so approved of by God, chap. 42. had been unlawfull to be performed by such as Job was, who was not under that religious State, and Church poli∣ty of the Jews, Levit. 17. 8, 9. It was a capitall offence for any Jew or stranger among them to offer sacrifice unless he brought it unto the door of the Tabernacle. See more in the Notes of Junius and Tremellius upon the first of Job. But for the further clearing of this from all gainsaying of o∣thers, let us first lay down some distinctions, and then the con∣clusion respecting this. 1. Then there is the divine Rule of Judging, which is the Scripture; the Judge of all Controversies; and the act of Judg∣ing, what is, or what is not according to the Word. Herein quaeritur who is Judge. 2. There is an absolute, supreme, praetorian, and infallible Judge thereof, which is no other but Jesus Christ, and his Spi∣rit speaking in the Word, and there is a visible, limited, sub∣ordinate, and Ministeriall Judge, what is, or what is not ac∣cording to the Word; of which quaeritur who is Judge. 3. There is a more private Judging thereof, whether apprehen∣sive, discretive, directive, or corrective, proper to each parti∣cular Christian, in respect to his own particular actions, and of which there is a publique judgement of what is, or what is not according to the Word; of which quaeritur. 4. There is an Ecclesiasticall, and there is a Politicall, or Civill judging of what is, or is not according to the Word. Ecclesiasticall judging is either by virtue of Office, defining Ecclesiastically what is the counsell of God, as is that of Church Elders; or by virtue of Ecclesiasticall deputation, and designa∣tion, as that of the Synod and members of it, or by virtue of Ecclesiasticall union and communion, as that of the Church colectively, and the members distributively considered, 1. Cor. 10. 15. I speak as to wise men. Judge ye, the present quaere is of po∣litical Iudging also.
5. Politicall Iudging in such matters, is either that which is in the politicall Law-makers, whether in any stated, stand∣ing, higher Civill Office, or otherwise, as in Parliamentary and Generall Courts or the like, or that which is in higher Civill Officers in a state, we look at both. 6. Authoritative politicall Iudgement, is either Definitive, Au∣thoritatively stating in a politicall way, what is or is not to be acted by the outward man, in weightier matters of a religious State-concernment, whether of first or second Table, or pre∣ceptive injoyning those politicall determinations, with respect to Civill incouragements, or punishments; Both which acts of politicall Iudging are appliable to State-lawmakers; onely de Iure, they are limeted to the sole rule of Iudging; even the whole Scripture. 7. There is a Iudging what is true or false, to be believed, or not, simply, as teaching and binding conscience with refe∣rence to Spirituall and Eternall rewards: Which is the Mini∣sters business officially, and each Christians work privatly and personally, and is not the Magistrates work, as a Magistrate. There is a Judging what is to be professedly believed, and main∣tained, as true or false, with reference to Civill rewards, or punishments; And thus the Civill Magistrate Judges. 8. There is a Judging what is or not to be done by soul and body, both in reference to inward sence, and Divine Approba∣tion or rejection; Officially the Ministers work, in a private directive and discretive way, each Christians duty; There is a Iudging what is or not to be acted or expressed by the outward man, with reference to Civill rewards or punishments proper to Magistrates. 9. There is a Judgement what is or is not a Christians duty, either onely as Godly, or onely as a Church member, diversly appliable to Churches, Church-elders and private Christians, and there is a Judging what is or is not the duty of a Member of a Christian State, as a member of that politicall society, to be ordered or curbed thereby: Appliable to the Civill Ma∣gistrate. Conc. 6. That regulateed Civill Magistrates and higher powers have not alone a Judgement in Common with other Christians and Members of Churches considered as Christians and Church
members, what is, or is not according to the Word, but as Ci∣vill higher powers. Magistrates also have a publique politicall Judgement, both Definitive and Preceptive, what is, or is not to be acted or expressed by the outward man of each particular person whatsoever coming under their jurisdiction: as those persons are politically subjected to that Civill state, and as those their acts reflect upon the body politique. This caution here annexed, that in all matters of difficulty respecting Religion, higher Civill powers be not too sudden in determining the same, without the best counsell first had therein, of those who are over them in the Lord (according to the second Conclusion before mentioned, pag 67.) ever remembring that regulated Civill Magistrates may not politically determine that to be according to the Word, in the letter or consequence of it, which is not Scripture proof, Josh. 1. 7. The Conclusion thus stated, and cautioned, I doubt not will stand as Scripture proof, against all objections to the con∣trary. R. 1. Because as much is yeelded in effect, even by opposers of Magistraticall Judging, as, 1. That they may make incouraging Laws in matters of God, and of the Church; surely then they may so far determine of the matters of God, and the Church, which they are, that they are to be incouraged as such matters of God, or of his Church, and what incouragements are due to the same: And surely then they are to be equall Judges in the other part of distributive Justice, respecting matters of God, or of the Church; which fall under vindicative justice, as Rom. 3. 3, 4. proveth. The same Rulers are in a Civill way to be a terror to evill works, which are in a like way to give praise to such as doe well. 2. Its yeelded in matters fundamentall, and such as are set down in so many words in Scripture; and why not as well to judge in other matters set down by clear and necessary conse∣quence, as are many weighty matters, reducible to the four Commandements of the first Table, of which the Civil Magi∣strate is a keeper, and had need be allowed his politicall Judge∣ment, what is, or what is not his politicall charge which he is to keeep. 3. It is yeelded in matters of the second Table, yet that Table
also is as well a part of Scripture, and therefore all the duties expresly or consequently therein commanded, and the prohibi∣tion of the sins in like sort forbidden in those six Commande∣ments, are so far forth Scripture as they are reducible to Scrip∣ture, or to any Morall part of it. He is then a politicall Judge of that which is, or which is not according to the Word in the lat∣ter, and why not upon like grounds in the former; both being equall in this, that they are both Gods Tables, Mat. 22. 38, 39. the second is like to this, saith Christ: As Gods Tables they are the Magistrates charge from God. R. 2. Because supposing Churches in their Messengers, met in an assembly to debate of matters of Religion, and in particular of the matters of the Church, and the Civill Magistrate after their debates and determinations thereof, as according to the Word, be desired to establish their Determinations for Laws, now must the Civill regulate Magistrate either examine, and censure such Conclusions of the Synod, whether they are, or are not Scripture proof, before he doe politically establish them for Laws, and so he is a politicall Judge, what is, or what is not according to the Word; or he is not at all to meddle thus to try and judge of such Decrees, whether according to the Word or not, but to establish them at random, and at a peradventure, upon a bare supposall of the Synods fidelity, which is to establish implicite faith, and to make the Civill Magistrate, according to Popish doctrine, a servant to Councils, which would make Princes have no light, but as the Moon, what they borrow from the Sun, either of their representative Church, or of the Catho∣lick Church of Rome, or of the Head thereof, the Pope; yea this were to deny to the regulated, and so to the godly Magistrate in his publique way, what is recorded as a commended duty in private Christians, and what is plainly commanded them of God in their private way, namely, to try all things, and to hold fast that which is good, 1 Thes. 5. 21. yea though delivered by such a one as Paul an Apostle, yet to search the Scriptures dayly, whether those things were so, Acts 17. 11, 12. Yea, but it may be the Civill Magistrate will judge that the Decrees are not according to the Word, when indeed they are, and proceed to punish such as had a hand even in such Conclu∣sions, because he judgeth them cross to the Word.
Ans. 1. The regulate Magistrate (of whom we speak) who studi∣eth the Word day and night, is godly, wise, &c. hath Gods war∣rant for it, as possible and ordinary to him, as subject and faithful to the Head; that a divine sentence is in the Kings lips, his mouth Deut. 17. Psal. 2. Pro. 16. 10 transgresseth not in judgement, and that Princes shall rule in judge∣ment, Esay 32. 1. 2. If transgressing his Rules, and leaving his Guides and Counsellors, God, his Spirit, Word, and Servants, he will fol∣low a corrupt and misguided judgement, or will of his own or others, he lyeth open, as to divine judgments, so to humane censures allso, whether from the body of the Commonwealth, orderly assembled, or represented, or the like; and in case of ob∣stinate persisting in any such publique and palpable breaches of the Lords Rules, the particular Churches, whereof either such highest, or inferiour Magistrates are, they have their Church way of censuring, and healing such offending brethren of theirs. R. 3. If the Magistrate as a publique politicall Nurse-father to the Church be to rescue the Church from noysom milk provided for the Church of Beleevers, by such as should be Nurses, yea though met in a Synod, and decreeing it to be the Word, then is he politically to judge what is, or what is not according to the Word; yea in case wherein others judge the contrary; but the former is true (as Is. 49. 22. sheweth) ergo, the latter. The con∣sequence, if to rescue from such food, then to judge of it, is evi∣dent; for if he may not, or cannot judge it to be corrupt food, how can he rescue the Church from such food as is corrupt? R. 4. If the Magistrate as the publique keeper of the peace of the Commonwealth (as all grant him to be) is to punish the di∣sturbers of it, when some pretending grosser errors in the contra∣ry party, do carry it schismatically; then is he to be politicall Judge in matters of Religion; as say in Christian Com∣monwealths, Assemblies, or Synods, there should be rents a∣mongst those they call Independents, among themselves, or those they call Presbyterians, amongst themselves, differing upon some points amongst themselves, and both sides violently carryed in their apprehensions, and both sides pleading Scrip∣tures, both for what they hold, and for what they doe thus vio∣lently in pursuit of what they hold; the Magistrate now, o
none, must be a politicall Judge and helpless, like careless Gal∣lio, when even insurrections are made, amongst the Religious party, (as were the Iews) upon pretence of false doctrine held forth, in matters of divine worship, by an adverse party (as was Paul and his companions) the Civill Magistrate must think it reason, to Iudge onely in matters of injuries twixt man and man, or the like, but by no means to be a Judge in any such matters of the worship of God (For I will be (saith Gallio) no Iudge of such matters, Acts 18. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.) But who seeth not that this is recorded as a blemish in that careless deputy of Achaia? Yea but the Churches may call their respective Members or Officers to an account for such outrages, and as cause is, censure them. Ans. Its possible the schism and Rent may be such, that the Major part of the Church or Churches may be the corrupter part, and the Minor part too weak to carry it in a Church-way against them. Bue if the Churches had strength to carry it against the respective delinquent Members, yet the Churches Iudgement is onely Ecclesiasticall, and the means of prosecution of its Iudgement, onely Ecclesiasticall, the Church cannot Iudge Ci∣villy, or use Civill and politicall means to prosecute such a Iudgement to effect, and so cannot heal breaches of the Civill peace, made by such outrages. Yea, but the Magistrate should call the sincerer part to meet again though the Minor part. Ans. If he do, yet he must be supposed to Judge which is the sincerer part, how else knoweth he whom he should call together, as the sincerer part? and if he politically Judge, and act Magistratically from his politicall Judgement, in calling that sincerer part together, and the Magistrate siding with the Minor part, as politically Judging them the sincerer part, and politi∣cally condemning the erring part, although the Major part▪ and although pleading Scripture also, both for what they hold and do in violent prosecution thereof; Now the Civill Ma∣gistrate doth both politically Judge what doctrines and practices are, or are not according to the word of God, yea, he herein doth politically Iudge the usuall and ordinary Ecclesi∣asticall
Iudge, either in a Church or Synod; Namely the Major part. 5. R. If the Civill Magistrate be to punish transgressors of the Law, indefinitely, and to take vengeance upon open evill doers, then even upon erring Synods also, for any hereticall decrees of theirs tending to hurt the State, or disturb the Christian socie∣ties under his charge: and if so, then he is in a politicall way to Iudge in matters of Christ and of his Church; But the former is true, Ergo the latter. But is not this to make the Civill Magistrate a Pope? Ans. No, he is by duty tyed to his rule, the word, and to Iudge according to that. Yea, but he may erre, and the Synod be in the right. Ans. He may so, and so may Ecumenicall Synods erre, yet ma∣ny make them the highest Ecclesiasticall Iudge; so here, possibi∣lity of erring hinders not, but that the Civill Magistrate, and highest Civil Authority in a State, or Commonwealth, should be the highest politicall Iudge. For standum est in aliquo primo, If er∣ring Churches should Ecclesiastically censure godly Rulers, for righteous politicall Iudging or censures, there is no higher Church, Court, or Iuridicall Iudge; If erring Rulers and highest Civill Courts, politically censure the Churches met in their messengers in a Synod, for their Godly determinations there; or if they censure particular Churches for any righteons cen∣sures of offending members at home, there is no higher Court or Iudge than the highest in that kind. Object. The same power that maketh Church Canons, must define them, and Iudge of them: The Synod, not the Civill Magistrate maketh Church Canons, Ergo the Synod, not the Ma∣gistrate must define and Iudge of them. Ans. If this whole argument were granted, Yet this hinders not, but that the Civill Magistrate may both make Laws about the Church, and Church matters, in a politicall way, and in the like way Iudge of such matters, albeit he may make no Laws Formally Ecclesiasticall; Nor is his Magistraticall Iudge∣ment, as such, an Ecclesiasticall Iudgement. So that this rather confirmeth the conclusion in hand, thus, Such as may make politicall Laws about Religion or the
Church, they may politically also define and Iudge of matters respecting the same; but the Civill Magistrate and higher Ci∣vill powers may do the former (as hath been proved) Ergo they may do the latter. Object. He may (say some) deny his Civill Sanction, to the Synods erring Canons; albeit he make no penall Laws that way. Ans. Even this also suffiseth to make him politicall determi∣miner and Iudge in such matters, yea to make him politicall Iudge of such, which dogmatically are the highest Ecclesiasticall Iudges, surely he must Iudge the Synods Canons to be erring, if he be allowed to deny his Civill Sanction to them, as erring. Object. But the regulated Civill Magistrate being by duty a Member of the Church, he hath covenanted subjection to the Church, and to the Elders of it, Ergo he is bound to own their determinations of things in controversie, according to the word, else as an offending Brother, is he liable to be dealt with in a Church-way. Ans. It is true, supposing they judge according to Christs judgement, in the words He that hearreth you beareth me, and he that despiseth you despiseth me: and so as a covenanted Member Luk. 10. 16. he is bound to hear them; and if he by gross contempt of their Counsells, when according to Christ, do give them offence, they may by all good meanes seek to convince such an offending bro∣ther: and in case he hear not, bring it to the Church, of which this or that Magistrate is a member, and if he hear not the Church, he may be cast out of the Church. Math. 18. Yet secondly this hindereth not, but that that Civill Magistrate is a politicall Judge of others pastorall Judgements, whether indeed accor∣ding to the word, before he do establish any conclusions of theirs for Politicall lawes. Thirdly, Nor doth this warrant any Church to proceed against any Civill Ruler whatsoever for re∣jecting their erroneous determinations, but that it being clavis errans, it is an abuse of Church power, and bindeth not before God. Nor is that, What yee bind on earth is bound in heaven, verifi∣ed in the abuse, but right use of the power of the keyes: whence Christs owning of him whom the Synagogue cast out, Joh. 9. 35, Luk. 6. 21▪ 37. 28. 39. Hence a blessing pronounced to some unjustly censu∣red.
Fourthly, Nor doth this hinder but that Civill Authority may and must politically judge of the errors of Synodicall de∣terminations, and censure civilly such as make them. To shut up all that we would say to what is thus objected. In case of a right administration, the Civill Magistrate, in duty subjecteth his Memberly Judgement to his Pastors ministeriall Judgement, but in case of Aberration, he may not deliver up to any the supremacy of his Politicall Judgement. They herc con∣clude right who say, that neither the Civill Magistrates Politi∣call Judgement is a certain rule, either to Synods or Churches Judgements: nor is their Ecclesiasticall Judgement an infallible rule to his Politicall Judgement, but the revealed word is the onely infallible rule to both. Leaving then to either the supre∣macy of their severall Judgements, to the former Politicall, to the latter Ecclesiasticall, the Magistrate as a Magistrate cannot de∣fine ecclesiastically, with reference to Church censures, in refu∣sall of such determinations of his: the Church as a Church can∣not define Politically with reference to Civill rewards and punishments. Ob. It may seem that each particular Christian subject is to judge rather what is, or what is not according to the word, be∣cause they are to obey those edicts, & none are to yield blind o∣bedience, to obey this or that Politicall law concerning Religi∣on, or the Church, as in this or that particular according to God, because others Judge so, but because himself judgeth so: a mans own Judgment is to him his own immediate personal Judge of what he is to act, or forbear: let every man be fully perswaded in his mind: and whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And the Contrary Rom. 14. tenent, making Civill powers, highest earthly Judges what par∣ticular things are contrary to the word, were a way to open a gap to most bloody persecutions without redress, since they may Judge that to be contrary to the word, which is not: And it were a way to justify the Civill acts, and Ecclesiasticall too, of Popish governments, whereby they have made and executed fiery lawes against the Saints for Heresie, as judging it to be Heresie and de∣serving the Faggot, as in the Mariau dayes. Ans. 1. Be it that a Christian, be his own next Judge of what he is to do or not, as he is a Christian and in reference to his in∣ward Peace, or the breach of it: nor is he to pin his personall
Judgement of matters of Christ or of his Church upon any others Judgement meerly or chiefly: but though he have his particular Iudgement as a private Christian, in a Christian way, yet that hin∣ders not but that the Civil Magistrate hath his publique Political Judgement, in reference to Civill rewards and punishments, of what is or is not to be expressed and acted by the outward man of each Member of the State, as he is a Member of the State, and as his act reflecteth upon the Civill State, or its peace and good; no more than the same priviledge of private Judging hindereth the Church to Iudge Ecclesiastically of what a Member, as a Member of the Church, is to do, or not to do, or hath done amiss; as his act doth concern, or reflect upon the Church. Secondly, If because each one as a Christian, is in a private way to Iudge of his own act, the Magistrate Legislatively and Iuridi∣cally may not determine in his Politicall way that any thing is duty or not, in matters of Religion, unless according to such particular Christians Iudgements: then it is unlikely, if not im∣possible, that any law about Religion should be made, or any po∣liticall determination thereof given: since some will be of diffe∣rent minds, yea about fundamentalls; as for example, some will Iudge the Pope to be head of the Church: some that Christ is not very God, some that he is not very man: some will hold such Incouragements to well doers should be given, others will differ from them: yea the like will fol∣low in matters of the second table, upon like grounds, Chri∣stians therein also are to follow their own Iudgements and not other mens: and whatsoever in such matters also, is not of faith, is sin: therefore it must not be Politically determined, that lying with another man wife is sin, or to be punished at all by State or Church, since some Iudge a community of the use of the bodies of Sisters (at least) to be lawfull, nor must the taking a∣way of others goods or cattell from them for others use, be Politically determined or punished as evill, since sundry Chri∣stians Iudge a community of such things also to be good: nor must the taking away of Heretique-princes lives by Assassinates be Politically determined and punished, as evill, since Christians of Popish Iudgements, think it a meritorious act. Thirdly, Then could not it not be orderly determined, no not 2 Chron. 15. 13. with consent of the body of the people, that such as would not
seek the Lord—should be put to death: since sundry might judge it too harsh, yea in determining thereof▪ they implied that some would be of another mind, & ly open to that censure: yet its recorded to their honour, that they did so. Exo. 34. 1, 2, 3, 4. These are thy Gods O Israel that brought thee out of Egypt: that was their Iudgement, yet Moses Politically determining otherwise of it, as punishable with death, ver▪ 26, 27, 28, 29. did well in it. Ob. True, you will say: but the Israelites erred in either thin∣king or speaking so. Ans. Yea, they did so: but say we, that was their particular Iudg∣ment, though erring: and they as well as we must walk in the light of their own judgements, and not of any others (if the objection be right) and therefore according to the objectors mind, should not have been accused or punished. Fourthly, Then all Ecclesiasticall Judging of men in matters of Religion, which in Iudgement and Conscience, though er∣ring, men hold forth, is cut off, and why then did Paul wish that those should bear their Judgement? Gal. 5. 10, 11. since many of them held no more, than what they Judged to be right. Fiftly, Then such mens Iudgements (at least) are not to be a rule to the Christian Magistrates Iudgement, but as he is per∣swaded in his heart, he also (as any other Christian) must do. If he can make it a matter of his faith, it is no sin in him, Politically to Iudge, what is, or what is not according to the word, or accor∣dingly to be civilly punished or praised, in Members of the Civil State, when expressed in such sort by the outward man, as it meer∣ly concerneth the State, or reflecteth upon it: and this in matters of both tables, and what then is gained? Nay by this indefinite principle in the objection much would be lost if the Civil Chri∣stian Magistrate, and State, be in mind perswaded, and do verily Judge, that the bread in the Sacrament is turned into the very flesh of Christ, & that whosoever holdeth forth the contrary shall be burned at a stake, must they not do whatsoever they are per∣swaded in their minds? and if of faith to them, then not fin to them to do it, according to the bottom of the objection. Nay but you will say, their perswasion must be rightly founded upon the word, which is the object of faith: else it is not right. Ans. Very good, and in that meaning, your objection is no ob∣jection; unless better warrant be shewed from the word, why each
mans Judgement, is so to be his own guide, that as a Member of the Civill State, his Judgement also is not in a Politicall way to be ordered by the Politicall determinations of regulated Civill Authority. As for the sequels urged: persecution, or ju∣stifying of persecutors thereby, they are urged from that which is not a proper cause, as if it were a cause. It is not the use of such a power of Judging, in regulated Civill Authority, that causeth persecution for matters of the first table, more than tyranny in matters of the second table, but the Abuse of that power rather: & from the abuse of a lawfull power or privilege, to reason a∣gainst the use thereof, is not right or regular. Churches also may abuse their power, and persecute a Saint of God, by a wicked de∣termination, and answerable censure, in a matter of God or the Church: but that doth not therefore hinder, but that the Church is highest Ecclesiasticall Judge in such matters. The last instruction from the premises; If abuses in Religion are thus to be restrained and punished by regulated Authority, then are not persons, in an ordinary way, to be left, by regulated Civill Authority, to the liberty of their own judgements, or consciences, to profess or practise in matters of Religion, accord∣ing as their severall minds and spirits, yea though seduced and erring, shall think meet; no, though those persons profess the Christian Religion, and the fundamentals (at least) there∣of. For the better clearing of this weighty Conclusion, so many wayes opposed now adayes, we shall first propound some di∣stinctions about it; and so the better state the Conclusion. 1. Then let us distinguish of Liberty, which (according to Scrip∣ture grounds) is either lawfull and regulate liberty, or a liberty that is sinfull, lawless, and boundless. Lawfull liberty is either that which is of a more civill, or spi∣rituall, or mixt nature. 1. That of a more civill nature is either oeconomicall, or po∣liticall properly such; oeconomicall, as that of servants, Ex. 21. 11. Jer. 34. 10. or that of wives, Rom. 7. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 36. Politicall, properly such; whether more generall, as that of a free denison of a State; or of more speciall privilege, as freedom from taxes, Act. 22. 28. Math. 27. 26. 1 Sam. 17. 21. Ezr. 7. 24. from going to war, Deut. 24. 3. to this the Conclusion properly looketh not.
2. That of a more spirituall nature, taken 1. For immunity from sundry evils, pressing hard upon the Saints, or enslaving them; If the Son make ye free, then are ye Joh. 8. 36 1 Cor. 7. 22. Rom. 6. 18. Rom. 8. 2. Is 61. 1. 1 Thes. 1. 10. Gal. 3. 10. 13. Ibid. Rom. 7 6. Gal. 5. 1. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Ibid. Gal. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 7. 22, 23. free indeed; the Lords Freeman; which liberty is either inchoa∣tive or perfected; inchoative spirituall liberty is, that from sins guilt, or power, being made free from sin, and made free from the law of sin, and of death, he shall proclame liber∣ty to the captives; That from Gods wrath, Jesus which de∣livereth us from wrath to come; That from the Morall Laws curse, Cursed is every one that continueth not in every thing written in the Law to doe it; Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; That from the rigo∣rous exaction of the Laws righteousness and personall perfecti∣on from us, we are delivered from the Law; That from the Ce∣remoniall, and Judiciall Law too, as far as it was properly Jewish, Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free; That from the power of hell, who hath delivered us from the power of darkness; That from the power of death, delivering them who were all their life long subject to bondage, by reason of the fear of death; That from the world, redeemed from this present evill world; That from mens inventions and lusts, the Lords freemen, bought with a price, become not the servants of men; That from all our enemies, being delivered out of the hands of all our enemies, Luke 1. 74. This spirituall liberty per∣fected, is the glorious liberty of the sons of God, of which Rom. 8. 21. see also 1 Cor. 15. end. This first spirituall liberty of each Saint, is not that to which the Conclusion looketh. 2. Spirituall liberty is taken for freeness, readiness, and vo∣luntariness to the holy, and good things of God, that what we doe therein, it should be freely, with a ready and willing mind; not as at liberty to do, or not to do any duties required of us, according as we list; for that were rather in part licentiousness, a cursed liberty of servants to sin; When ye were servants to sin, Rom 20. ye were free-from righteousness; Nor yet as persons to be haled to do our duty; Thy people are  people of free obla∣tions. 3. Spirituall liberty is taken for that which standeth between two extremes, wherein a Christian may be sayd to be properly
free; as when free to chuse; or refuse, or suspend, to use or doe such or such a thing, or to forbear; And it is Christian liberty strictly taken, or liberty of Christians in matters which in them∣selves are of an indifferent nature; of which is that place so oft applyed too largely, Rom. 14. 3, 5, 6, 14, 17 Of which nature were the Jewish meats and dayes, formerly observed, but then abolish∣ed, although every beleeving Jew was not presently convinced thereof. And here a little to digress, let us clear this place so often wrested; that it is meant of things of an indifferent nature in themselves; this appeareth in that they wcre such things, as whether observed or not, the Lord might be exalted, he might be praised, ver. 6. He that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks: They were not such things which were not in them∣selves Morally good, or evill, ver. 14. I know there is nothing un∣clean of it self; namely, nothing of that sort before mentioned, as were Dayes, and Meats, and other like things of an indiffe∣rent nature; else it might be sayd, many things are in themselves unclean, whether he that dealeth with them think so of them or no, as Idolatrous, Adulterous, Murtherous acts, &c. morally e∣vill, and so unclean. They were such things in which the King∣dom of God consisted not, ver. 17. meats sacrifised to Idols, made not any more or less accepted, 1 Cor. 8. 8. Meat commendeth us not to God, for neither if we eat are we the better, or if we eat not are we the worse; and 1 Cor. 10. 25. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles eat, &c. 3. Mixt liberty, which is partly of a spirituall, and partly of a civill nature, as it respecteth things spirituall, wherein it is exercised, so spiritual, as it respecteth family authority, by which it is exercised, either privately or publiquely, so it is of a civill nature, as when the Saints of old had from Cyrus Autho∣rity, liberty to goe up to Jerusalem, freely to build the Temple, Ez. 1. 3. Ezr. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. anu worship the Lord there; and when they had liberty from Darius without disturbance from enemies freely to carry on that good work, and to offer sacrifises to the Lord. Hitherto also that in 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2. may partly be referred, and if that were all the liberty which were pleaded for, that by the influence of Civill
Authority we might lead a quiet and peaceable life in all god∣liness and honesty, without any kind of disturbance, or molesta∣tion from any, we would joyn in that plea in the Court of God and man. As for that sinful, lawless, and boundless liberty, that is a liberty (indeed and reallity) to the flesh, or the motions and fruits of cor∣rupt nature, a liberty to sin, a liberty for men to do what they list, and the like, this is it which the Scripture every where decryeth and condemneth, Judg. 17. 6. In those days there was no King in Is∣rael, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes. So was Micha's Idol, and Idol worship, and Ministry, right in his eyes, ver 5. 12, 13. Now I know the Lord will be good to me, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. He verily thought he was right in all, and might look for a blessing of God in that way. Mich. 4. 5. All people will walk every one in the name of his God. Rom. 6. 10. Ye were free from righteousness; and 2 Pet. 2. 19. They promise them liberty. Jude 4, 5. Turning the grace of God into wantonness. There wanted not some in the Apostles dayes who would pretend their own, and others spirituall liberty, whereby to bring in, and carry on, and covertly to exercise this liberty to sin; and for that end plead liberty from Authorities which should curb or restrain sin; whence that item of Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 16, 17. As free, but not having for a covering of wickednes the Liberty, but as the ser∣vants of God, honour all men, love brotherly fellowship, fear God, ho∣nor the King. Whence that bait of Seducers to draw on disci∣ples after them? they promise them liberty, they themselves de∣spising 2 Pet. 2. 1▪ Government in Church or State, speaking evill of Dig∣nities, &c. How like that was to the Spirit breathing in these dayes in too many professors of Jesus Christ, and liberty pur∣chased by him, I leave to consideration. Secondly we distinguish of conscience: which is to be consider∣ed either as rightly guided, or as misguided and erring, to Conscience rightly guided by the Lord, and according to his word, Civill Authority must give all incouraging Liberty. 2. Misguided and erring conscience is either erring out of meer infirmity and weakness; in which case great tenderness is to be used on all hands for a time; or of wilfulness, and in way of pertinacy, contempt, and turbulency; of which in the Conclusion.
3. We distinguish concerning Authoritative leaving persons to some liberty, in abuses of this Allusion. It is either a kind of temporary Connivency, or forbearance for a time to punish them, which in cases of weakness must be granted, till suffi∣cient means used of Conviction; or it is a kind of more fixed to∣leration, without certain limits of time. This later is supposed to be; either in some cases of an extraordinary respect; as in cases of Universall obduracy, spreading over the face of a whole professing State, as was the Toleration of that sin of causless Divorces, by Moses, as a politicall Ruler, for preventing of a worse misehief, of insupportable Tyranny and cruelty over their injured Wives, Math. 19. 6, 7, 8, 10. Moses, for the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your Wives.—Or in case of some Evills, either acted or owned by a more prevailing and potent party, in a Civill State, which if exasperated and cross∣ed, would imbrue the State in blood or confusion; as in the case of Joabs murther of Abner, owned by Abisha, who with their faction, were too strong for David, 2 Sam. 3. 39. In which case also, Godly Emperors have born with some Errors, whilest their State was royled, and the foundations thereof even shake∣ing, by reason of strong factions and tumults in it. Or secondly, this fixed toleration is supposed to be in an ordinary way, and in common and usuall cases, which is that which the conclusi∣on denyeth. Now then to State the conclusion, and accordingly confirm it, we say, That in ordinary way, a set fixed Toleration, is not to be gi∣ven, by the Regulated Magistrate or higher Civill powers, that their Christian Subjects should hold and profess in matters of Religion, what themselves may pretend conscience for so do∣ing; When indeed grosly erring, and contemptuously and perti∣naciously holding the same forth. Reasons from scripture of the conclusion so stated, may be these. R. 1. Because liberty to the flesh is not to be given in such a way, by such Rulers, for such Rulers, to give such a liberty for all such persons, to hold and profess corrupt opinions, is to give li∣berty to the flesh; Ergo that may not be done; the proposition is grounded upon the Rulers duty to keep both Tables, and so
not in an ordinary case and way, to suffer fleshly sinfull breaches of the Rules therein. The Assumption is grounded upon Gal. 5. 20. Where Heresie and Schism are counted fruits of the flesh, to give liberty therefore to such fruits of the flesh, is to give liber∣ty to the flesh. R. 2. That liberty, which suffereth men, ordinarily, in a Christian State, to draw persons away from God, is not to be given by Regulated Rulers thereof; but in such a way, as before mentioned, to tolerate persons, under pretence of conscience, pertinaciously to hold forth corrupt opinions, is to suffer per∣sons to draw away others from God; Ergo it may not be done. The proposition is evident, such a one as would go about to thrust others from God, must not be pitied or spared, Deut. 13. 9. Object. True, you will say, in respect of the witness, which was not to conceal him, Ibid. but what is this to Authority? Ans. Yes, that which is here injoyned every private person, is with respect to it, as to be brought before Authority (as it is evident) and if a private person be not to let such alone, but to bring him to light, to complain of him to Authority; surely that Authority was not to spare them, when detected; if Autho∣rity had been to intreat such, tolerate persons needed not to be charged not to spare them, nor to conceal them; for if they would not forbear them, but complain of them, if the Ma∣gistrate would or might forbear them, theyr non forbearance of them was to litle purpose. Secondly, it appeareth, that both private and publiquc per∣sons are taken in, in that Collective [Thou] shalt not spare him, vers. 8. The same phrase with that, vers. 10. [Thou] shalt stone him with stones that he die. No private person could do thus up∣on his own head or will; that had been confusion: It was then by influence of the higher powers, that it was so done. But why are they to be so strict, why is there to be no sparing or tolerating, but Capitall puinshing? Ans. ver. 10. Because he sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God. Hence also was that blamed in those, which under Moses had power of life and death, for spa∣ring those Midianitish women, Numb. 31. 14. Moses was angry with the heads of thousands, and vers. 15. Have ye spared the wo∣men
alive. But why are they blamed? Ans. v. 16. These through Ba∣laams Counsell [Caused the Children of Israel to transgress against the Lord in the matter of Peor] which is explained, Numb. 25. 1, 2. They called the Children of Israel to the sacrifices of their Gods, and they did eat, and they bowed down to their Gods. The Assumption is evident, and needeth no proof, Acts 20. 29, 30. Speaking perverse things to draw away (namely from Christ and his Church) Disciples after them. Although for this also, such may pretend Conscience, Scripture, &c. be Wolves in sheeps clothing, transform themselves into Messengers of light, of whose mischievous sleights reade Ephes. 1. 14. 2 Tim, 3. 5, 6, 7. R. 3 That liberty which suffereth the sheep of the Lord, in an ordinary way, to wander from their Fold and Pasture, with∣out restraint or effectuall care to reduce them, that is not to be allowed off, by such as God calleth to be politicall Shepheards Math. 7. 15. 1 Cor. i. 13. to them: but the liberty mentioned doth thus, Ergo. The propo∣sition is evident, as being that for substance, which was blamed in those Shepheards of old, Ezek. 34. 5, 6, 7, 8, There was no Shep∣heard, neither did my Shepheards search for my Flock: but they wandred and became a prey—were driven away—devoured, &c. For there was no Shepheard, not simply, for there were Shepheards, but as good as none, they did not execute their Shepheardly Office, but suffered Gods Flock to go to wrack, by false Pro∣phets, false Teachers, Idolaters, &c. Nor were these Shepheards onely Church-Rulers, but State and Civill Rulers, even the same with those vers. 4. who in Civill respects also, tyrannized over them, ruled them with force and cruelty, which were es∣pecially oppressing Princes; such were those Ier. 50. 6. Their Shepheards caused them to wander; of whom see more, Ier. 23. 1, 2, 3. & 22. 22. & 12. 10. And the title and Office of Shepheards, as appliable to Civill Rulers, is usuall in Scripture, Ioseph is so called, Gen. 49. 24. So is Cyrus, Esay 44. 28. so is Moses, that King in Jesurum, Deut. 33. 5. with Isa. 63. 11. So David, Psal. 78. 72. and Ahab, 1 Kings 12. 17. and Numb. 27. 17. Without a Shepheard, that is, chief Ruler. The Assumption is evident, because such liberty tolerateth Rents of Members from Churches, as in Shisms is usuall, Acts 20: 30.  to rent away, as members from the body, Disciples after them, it also tolerateth wandring from Gods ways, truth and Ordi∣nances.
R. 4. Such a liberty mentioned carryeth the mark of an Anarchy in the State, so far forth: yea of a sad Judgement of God upon that State, for provoking sins of Rulers and people, Ergo, it may: the Consequence is evident, if it carry a mark of Anarchy, and Di∣vine Judgement, then to be avoyded: unlesse the very shadow of an evill, coming crosse to the very light and law of nature and Nations, by which all shun Anarchy, and set up Government, or of that which is commonly the punishment of sin, as deprivall of Govern∣ment is, be not to be shunned, which none dare affirm. The antecedent is evident in both the branches thereof. 1 It is one brand of an Anarchy, as Judg. 17. 6. sheweth. Then was No King in Israel, eve∣ry one did what was right in his own eyes, even the eyes of his own mind, judgement, or conscience, how corrupt soever; hence when through Gods Judgement, that perishing people of his should not have the benefit of his feeding Government, so as to hinder them from sining, to their ruine, Zech. 11. 9. I will not feed you, that which dyeth let it dye, &c. It is accomplished by his judiciall breaking of the staffe, Beauty, namely both of civil as well as sacred order, injoyned of God. 2 It is a sad judgement of God, as that place, Zech. 11. 9. 15, 16, 17. compared, doth shew, God in judgement is said to let those of the sinfull people, or flock of his alone to themselves (as it were) That which dyeth let it dye, or let them take such killing courses of sin, as tend thereunto. Now the judiciall means he useth, is, in judgement to raise up a foolish Idol Shepheard, Vers. 15. 17. That is, such kind of Rulers in Church and Common-wealth, Kings (as well as Priests) into whose hands the Flock is delivered to be spoy∣led, vers. 5, 6. I will deliver them into the hand of their King, which though they be by place and office Shepheards, yet in effect are Idols, nothing, no Shepheards; as Ezek, 34. 8. 10. he calleth them, of which see before, such as shall be wholly carelesse what becommeth of the Flock, Zech. 11. 16. If they be cut off by any spirituall mis∣chiefe, let them, for them, they will not visit and look after them; if being young, and so weak and unexperienced, they will take any wrong path in stead of the right, and so loose themselves, let them, for them, they will not seek their young one: if they be in any mea∣sure broken in judgement, or otherwise, let them be so, for them, they will not endeavour to heale them: if any of the Flock yet keep their standing in the fold and pasture of God, they will not cherish and encourage them, and by their Authority seek to keep them there, they will not feed that which standeth still, they will
rather make a prey of them, what they can: Even the flesh of the fat, &c. Such a Shepheard or Ruler (as vers. 17.) who leaveth the Flock, namely to themselves, he careth not for them, looketh not after them: he hath a sword upon his eye, or not the use of that, even of his wisdome and parts: and upon his arm, or power, he putteth not forth that. One place more to prove this, that so to be left of Authority, to take up Corruption in Religion, under pre∣tence of Conscience, this is a sad judgement of God, for the sins of a professing people. For this let that place in 2 Chron. 20. 33. be con∣sidered of. Howbeit the high places were not taken away, for as yet the peo∣ple had not prepared their hearts to seek the God of their Fathers, 2 Chron. 33. 17. seemeth somewhat to explain that about the High places, Neverthelesse the people did sacrifice in the high places, yet to the Lord onely. Now what these High places were where they thus sacrificed, may be known by comparing Scriptures: namely, such places where they had wont in a manner to sacrifice to the Lord, before the Tem∣ple was built by Solomon, where God allowed his people to sacrifice before, but after that was built, it became unlawfull to them, and sinfull, as expressly forbidden of God. They had formerly an High place at Ramah, in the Land of Zuph, in the Tribe of Ephraim, called one of the two Ramah's of Zuphim, in Mount Ephraim, to distinguish it from that in Benjamins Tribe; compare 1 Sam. 1. 1. and Chap. 9. 5. 6. 11. 12. there was another High place, where then also they lawfully sacrificed, in Gibeah of Benjamin, for which see and com∣pare 1 Sam. 10. 5. 12. 13. 14. 26. Gibeah, Sauls home, vers. 26. even where his Unkle with whom he lived, dwelt, vers. 14. is the Altar where the high place was, vers. 13. Another, and the great High place, was at Gibeon, where also the acceptable sacrifice was offered, 1 Kings 3. 4. Not to mention other places of like use for sacrifice then, as Gilgal, &c. 1 Sam. 11. 15. but the reason of that use of High places then allowed of, is given 1 Kings 3. 2. only the people sacri∣ficed in High places, because untill those dayes there was no house built to the Name of the Lord: but after such a place should be built, where God should place his Name, as was the Temple at Je∣rusalem (as 1 Kings 8. 29. shewes) It was unlawfull, and a breach of rule, in point of Religion and worship of God, to sacrifice else∣where, as it was long before charged in reference to that time, Deut. 12. 11, 12, 13, 14. Offer not thy Burnt-offrings in every place which thou seest, but at the place which the Lord shall choose, &c. Hence God saith of Solo∣mons Temple, I have chosen this place for my self, for an house of sacrifice,
2 Chro. 7. 12. Hence also after the Temple was built, all former places for their religious use, such as Bethel, Gilgal, &c. must not be sought to, Amos 5. 5. And it is in a judiciall way, and wrathfull irony, that God in Amos 4. 4, 5. saith, Come to Bethel and transgresse, at Gilgal mul∣tiply transgression, and bring your sacrifices every morning, and offer a sacri∣fice with leaven, and proclaim and publish the free offrings, for this liketh you, O yee Children of Israel, saith the Lord. Jehosaphat then a good Prince, yet leaveth the people to their for∣mer liberty of the corrupt use of those High places, not as for Idols, that was too grosse, he would never have born that (nay, 2 Chron. 19. 3. He took away the Groves out of the Land) but as for sacrifice to the Lord, onely as in Manasses time, after his repentance, they had the like liberty. Yea but the people might well enough in con∣science, though erring, doe thus much; the places were in Samuels time, and others after him, yea in the beginning of Solomons time, of good use, and God had there accepted sacrifice, Ierusalem was far off, they could not be at it morning by morning, as they desired. Compare 1 Kings 12. 28. and Amos 4. 4, 5. Yea but the Israelites might abuse that to Ieroboams Calves: Ans: Be it so, but they of Iudah, in their High places, sacrificed to the Lord onely, 2 Chron. 33. 17. and so long, will not God accept it? They thought he would. Yea but as small as this corruption might seem to be, and as much as they might in conscience plead for it, it was a corruption in wor∣ship, crosse to rules before mentioned, and that they were so left to this their liberty, it was Gods just hand upon them, as 2 Chron. 20. 33. because they had not prepared their hearts to the God of their Fathers, they were securely slight in his worship, loose hearted to God-wards, not cordiall and intire to him, and thence they have their desires and minds in it; their very godly power, that was in many respects zealous for God, yet herein through Gods displeasure against them for their unheartednesse, shall leave them to their own liberty. It is in judgement, if they are suffered to sacrifice in such forbidden places, and left to have their own minds therein, & much more, when men have their owne likings in grosser corruptions, in worship through the unfaithfulnesse of their Civil Rulers, as they of Israel had, in Bethel and Gilgal, in the times of Ieroboams succes∣sors. It was Gods judgement upon them for their sins, as Amos 4. 4, 5. Goe (saith God, in judgement against them) to Bethel and transgresse, and at Gilgal multiply transgerssion, and bring your sacrifices e∣very morning, &c. for this liketh you O yee children of Israel, saith the
Lord God. One would now think that none that had a heart awfull of Gods displeasure, should ever plead for such a sad judgement of God, upon themselves, or others, as to be left to Princes or Ru∣lers, to have their own likings in corruptions of Religion. R. 5. The Toleration mentioned would make Christian Rulers not to be for Christ, but in that respect to be against him; Ergo not to be permitted by them; the Consequence will not be denyed, un∣lesse any make nothing of that sin, not to be for Christ, but against him. The Antecedent is evident in that such a Toleration would make such Rulers, in their place, not to be for one chief end of his coming, which was to destroy the works of the Devil, and ergo not for him. The Consequence is undeniable, because if therein not for so chief an end of his coming, then not for him: The Antece∣dent is evident: as that such Toleration of such errors, and cor∣ruptions in Religion, so held out, is a like Toleration of the works of the Devil, and ergo not a dissolution and destruction of them; the Consequence is evident, because such a Toleration of the works of the Devil, giveth full scope and liberty to them, to have their de∣vilish operations and energy, cherisheth them, suffereth them to spread, and to gather strength in parties, which thereby come to side with them, to stand and plead for them, to despise all the Ministers shall speak against them, &c. which none will say is a way to dissolve enervate or destroy those works of the devil. Because sentence against an evill work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil, Eccl. 8. 11. The Antecedent is evident, namely, that such a Toleration of such errors, &c. is in like sort a Tolerati∣on of the works of the Devil, because erroneous doctrines, &c. are hammered, forged, and generated by the Devil, they are some of those lyes of which he is father, Iohn 8. 44. those doctrinall lyes, 1 Tim. 4. 2. are Doctrines of Devils, vers. 1. those unclean Frogs are spit out of the mouth of the Dragon, Revel. 16. 13, 14. nor is this true only of grosser errours, in fundamentalls, but all, even lesser errours, delivered about meats and marriage, these are of the Devil, 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3. Among those doctrinall lyes, or doctrines of de∣vils, forbidding to marry, and to abstain from meats, are the onely Instances; if it had been said, forbidding to believe Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh, or to be very God, and very man, or God and man in one person, or to be our onely Mediatour, &c. this had not been so much, but to instance in such petty errours, as the world would think them as doctrines of the devil, is the more ob∣servable,
to stirre up to utter defiance of all manner of errours; seeing men use to say they defye the Devill. R. 6. Such a toleration, in such sort, of such things mentioned, is a toleration of that which woundeth a State body, in the very Continuity of it; of that which directly tendeth to breake the peace of such societies (of which the regulate Magistrate is the preservour) and of that which breaketh the very Hedge and walls of a State; ergo is not to be yeelded by them, the consequence that if such a toleration letteth in so much mischife, it is not to be yeilded to, by godly regulated Rulers, none will deny, unlesse they would have them knowingly, to concurre, contrary to their duty and place, to such state mischiefs: the Antecedent is proved in all the three parts of it (which might have been seven argu∣ments) the first branch is evident: because such corrupt doctrines, so let alone, doe mingle, corrode, and what in them lyeth, ener∣vate sound doctrine, pure religion, the Covenant of God held forth to, and by such a religious polity, which are the very liga∣ments of a Christian State: hence so opposed by wicked rulers and people, because as coards and bonds, Psal. 2. 1, 2. 3. thence Je∣rusalem, by these especially, becometh a City so compacted, Psal. 122. 1, 2, 3. Now these veines and Arteries of such a religious body politique, which should and would convey vigour and spirits, and good every way, doe these poisons and venoms of Asps exceedingly injure. Esay 59. 5. that which eateth of their cockatrice eggs dyeth, 2 Tim. 2. 17. their word will eat, as doth a canker, and vers. 16. they will increase to more ungodlinesse; wherefore no wonder that Paul chargeth Timothy, to doe what in him lay, to stay them,  restraine them, The second branch is as evident: that it is a toleration of that, which tendeth to break the peace, &c. for errours and such like corruptions in religion, trouble the Churches which are the choicest societies in that polity; hence that Gal. 5. 10. 12. I would to God they were cut off which trouble you, speaking of seducers; and Acts 20. 30. they draw away, or rent away as members from the body, disciples after them; hence that reasoning of Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 18. I hear there are divisions () schismes amongst you; which he proveth vers. 19. thus; For there must needs be heresies amongst you, &c. as if the one is a necessary cause of the other; where there are heresies amongst Church-Members, there will be Schismes. True it is, Churches have their wayes of healing such evills in their
members, as they have to heale other scandalous evills in them, as drunkennesse, lying, &c. but that hinders not Gods civill ordi∣nance of the Magistrates coercive power also, more in the one, then in the other, yea, errours and heresies are wont to breed troubles and divisions in civill societies. Hence those seducers and their fol∣lowers, who turne the grace of God into wantonnesse, Jude 4. and are filthy dreamers, vers. 8. are branded for seditious persons in Com∣mon-wealths: even such as come justly to perish, as sometimes se∣ditious Corah did, vers. 11. perish in the gain-saying of Core. Hence those black brands of seducers, who have a forme of godliness; that they are traitourous, heady, high-minded, truce-breakers, false accusers, fierce &c. making their times perilous, 2 Tim. 3. 1. 3, 4, 5. and that he speaketh that of seducers, vers. 6, 7, 8, 9, 13. declare: Hence those also in Jude are branded for murmurers and complainers, Jude 16. ever and anon quarrelling against matters in Church and State, 1 so Tim. 6. 3, 4. the very fruits of false doctrines are reckoned to be envy, strifes, railings, evill surmises, and perverse disputes, and as that Apostle reckoneth those fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19. as conco∣mitants: so doubtlesse, by purety of proportion, those adjoyned, v. 26. contentions, seditions Heresies &c. those Antichristian sedu∣cers Revel. 16. 13, 14. are persons of turbulent spirits in civill states, stirring up to warres and the like; that Impostor and sedu∣cer Theudas mentioned Acts 5. as a murtherer and seditious per∣son. Histories ancient and moderne are full of examples of this nature: of persons of corrupt Principles in religion, becoming movers and Abettors of civil Seditions. The third branch: that it is a toleration of that which breaketh religious States hedges and walls, &c. appeareth: that hedge Job. 1. 10. Zech. 2. 4. 5. and wall of fire of Gods gracious protecting providence over such a State, is undermined by such things. As Adam was naked in that respect, Gen. 3. 10. so was the State of corrupted Israel naked, Exod. 32. 25. before their Idolatry was punished, Moses saw that they were naked, and as a meanes of recovery of their wonted covering, he commandeth the civill execution of Justice upon some, for terrour to all the rest, vers. 26, 27. those fox-like false Pro∣phets (Ezek. 13. 4, 5.) let alone, did spoile the vines, and break the hedges: and saith God, both to Church and State Rulers, Yee have not gone up into the gap, neither made up the hedge, for the house of Israel, to stand in the battle, in the day of the Lord. Their care should have been to have prevented such breaches thereby, but yet though
the hedge was broken, a gap made, and warre from God prepared against them, all might have done well enough, had not State and Church Officers both, been too indulgent and remisse, in pu∣nishing the causes of such mischiefs. Hence also, when such cor∣ruptions in Ministry and Worship mentioned Ezek. 22. 26, 27. are let alone, verse 30. we read of a gap made, and no man of Au∣thority, being found to make it up for the Land, that God should not destroy it: Therefore saith God (vers. 31.) I have poured out 1 Kings 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. &c. mine Indignation upon them. Corruptions in religion connived at, and too much countenanced by Solomon, in his wives, rent that Kingdome in pieces; whence, by punishing such corruptions in religion, evill is said to be put away from Israel, Deut. 17. 2. 3. 7. as if otherwise, Israel had been exposed to that evill. R. 7. Such a toleration of such corruptions, before mentioned, it interpretatively by God himselfe, a kicking at Religion, and honouring of such, as hold forth, and practise those corruptions in religion, above the Lord himselfe, and therefore undeniably not to be yielded unto, by regulated civill Rulers, the consequence, none but profane spirits will deny; the antecedent is evident by that, 1 Sam. 2. 12. to 16. compared with 23, 24, 25, 29. verses. It was a corrupt religious custome, to snatch out in that sort, what first came to hand, and forcibly to take the fat of the peoples sacrifices, for the Priests use: the matter was not fundamentall, nor contrary to the light of nature, but very justly offensive to God and men; ver. 17. Eli is told of all that, as well as of other sins of his sons, against the second Table: he chideth them a little, as a father, but doth not as he was a Judge (1 Sam. 4. 18. He judged Israel forty yeares) punish'd them according to their deserts, he is indulgent, they are let alone, what is Gods censure of this, v. 29. Wherefore kick [yee] (not Hophni and Phineas only, but Eli too) at my acrifice and at mine offering &c. and honourest thy sons above me, to make your selves fat with the choicest of all the offerings of Israel; God instanceth in this his indulgence, towards his sons, in that matter of that corrupt religious custome onely; as if that was, as vers. 17. of most heinous guilt before him; the sin of your young men was great before the Lord, and it is observable, since there is a purity of pro∣portion. Such Rulers as can be indulgent to gosse errours, and corruptions in religion, in Gods worship and sacrifices, they little regard Gods truth or worship, they kick at i, in Gods account; and if they will needs b soever-tender of such as are not fit ob∣jects
of their tendernesse, they shew little tendernesse of Gods name, truth worship or honour; they it seemeth more regard them, and their ease &c. then God [thou honourest thy sons above me] now who would be so thought of by the Lord. R. 8. Such a toleration of such evills mentioned, causeth the very evills themselves to be charged upon Rulers, and bringeth the wrath of God upon them also: ergo not to be yielded to, by any godly wise Rulers; the consequence, none, not prodigall of Ru∣lers welfare, will deny. The Antecedent appeareth. Solomon is said to goe after Ashteroth, &c. which as its thought, was onely in re∣spect of his connivence at, and countenancing of such abomina∣tions in his wives. To be sure; God guided Nehemiah, to contend with the Rulers, for those corruptions, in neglect of the Mini∣stry of their Sabbath duty, Nehem. 13. 10, 11, 12. 16, 17, 18. compared, as if, that where such things were, and not seasonably and suitably restrained, and punished by them, those became their sins; hence that indulgent Judge Eli is put in: yee have made your selves fat with the chiefe of the sacrifices, 1 Sam, 2. 29. yea but verse 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. with 17. It is said to be the young mens, his sons sin. Answ. True, but laid upon him too, who should have redressed it, but did not, and hence he also is punished, as the sequel, vers. 30, 31. &c. shewerh; so in these carelesse sheapheards, the wandrings and evills of their sheep, lost thorough their neglect, of seasonable prevention thereof, are charged upon them, Ezek. 34. 10. I will require my sheep at the sheapheards hands, saith the Lord. Observable is that place in Hosea 5. 10. compared with chap. 1. 1. The Princes of Judah were like them, that removed the bound: wherefore I will poure out my wrath upon them like water; not alone Ahaz who did gros∣ly transgresse, in bringing in another altar for offerings then God had oppointed,, 2 Kings 16. 15. 16. &c. but more [Princes] of Judah saith Hosea, were such. Now chap. 1. 1. he prophesied in the dayes of Ʋzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Ju∣dah; as for Hezekiah, he was rather exact in point of Reformati∣on, yea, even of what other Princes before him had omitted in theirs, 2 Kings 18. 3, 4. 2 Chron. 29. 30, 31. It must then fall upon Jotham and Ʋzziah, one or both, since Princes of Judah were as those that brake their bounds, even in Hosea's time; but how was Jotham such a one, in matters of Religion, of whom that is te∣stified, 2 Chron. 27. 2. 6. He became mighty, because he prepared his
wayes before the Lord his God. and vers. 2. he did that which was right in Gods sight, as his Father Ʋzziah had done. Answ. The people did yet corruptly, (namely in matters of God) which he suffering, the blame thereof is laid upon him, as one blemish in him: and 2 King. 15. 34, 35. this corruption in the people is mentioned more clear∣ly, speaking of Jothams reigne: its said, and he did that which was right in Gods sight, as his Fath Ʋzziah had done, what then was his blemish? Ans. Howbeit e high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and burnt ince still in the high places; not to Idols, that assuredly he would never have indured in them: but as 2 Chron. 33. 17. to the Lord onely, not in Idlatrou high places but in such, which were formerly devoted to God, and of acceptable use: as Rama, Gibea, Gilgal, Gibeon, &c. which the people might in both respects thinke well of; but being let alone, and connived at in the, its charged upon Jotham, and so upon Ʋzziah before him, 2 Kings 15. 34. and though they were but as those that brake the bounds, and did not themselves so directly set up false or corrupt worship, but suffer a little way in others: therefore saith Hosea from God, as in their times still to come: I will poure out (not I have poured out upon others) upon them my wrath like water. R. 9. Such a Toleration of such evils, which make men abhor Religion, and speak evill of the way of truth, by reason of them, yea which are in ordinary way destructions and ruine to such as obsti∣nately persist in them, ergo, not to be yielded to, by Regulated Civill Authority. The Consequence will not be denyed, unlesse such Ru∣lers should bear such Abhorring to come upon Religion, or scandall to Gods truth and way, or ruine to their subjects. The Antecedent appeareth by that instance in those corruptions connived at in Elies Sons, which made men abhor the Lords Offring, 1 Sam. 2. 17. and by that, 2 Pet. 2. 1▪ 2 3. speaking of Heresies, vers. 1. he addeth, And many shall follow their pernicious wayes (or destructions) by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evill spoken of, or blasphemed. R. 10. Such a Toleration of such like corruptions in matters of Religion, in such as so pertinaciously hold them forth, is a like To∣leration of such who spoile the Vines under such Rulers charge: of Wolves which spare not the Flock over which they are politicall Shepheards: of spirituall Sorcerers be witching them: of so many Jezabels, which seduce their people, Ergo not to be allowed, or yield∣ed to by Regulated Rulers. The Consequence is evident, unlesse
any would have such Rulers to be so unfaithfull in their charge, or carelesse of their duty, respecting their people. The Antecedent is grounded upon Scripture; they are Foxes spoiling the Vines, and rather to be taken downe by civill officers of a professing State, then Cantic. 1. 2. 16. let alone in that way of spoiling, so are they such Wolves, not spa∣ring the Flock, of the Churches, which are also politically under their care, Acts 20. 30. with Ezek. 34. 8. 10. before explained; so are they Sorcerers, Revel. 22. 15. Without are Sorcerers, 2 Tim. 3. 13. Evill men . and inchanters, such as can by sleights of the Devil, deceive the eye, hence that of such Gal. 3. 1. Who hath be∣witched you, that you should not obey the truth. They are also as Jezabell, whom God will punish; if men faile in their duty, Revel. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. and say the Church in a Church way, was to censure such; yet that hindereth not the discharge of the Magistrates duty, in po∣liticall punishing such as are so injurious to Church societies, yea and the State also, of which he hath a politicall charge; as of old, Jehu a chief Magistrate, did politically punish Jezabell, who was in∣strumentall in the spirituall whoredome of the religious State of Israel, and therefore called, her whoredomes and witchcrafts, 2 Kings 9. 22. of whose punishment by Jehu's command, read vers. 33. That which is mainly objected against what we have now sayd, is,  that a Christian being bound to attend and follow the dictates of his conscience, yea though erring, yet he not knowing so much, it is to him as rightly guided, and he that would out of any respect whatsoever, crosse the suggestions of his conscience, when he at least supposeth it speaketh right, though really it doe not; would as well crosse it when it doth suggest that which is right and truth. Now therefore being bound to follow the suggestions of his owne Conscience, if man may restrain and punish him for this, though re∣ally he doe follow his conscience in any way of errour, then man may restrain Christians from doing their duty, yea and punish them for so doing; yea since a Christian sinneth, when he doth or hold∣eth any thing crosse to his conscience, though erring: Now must a Christian be punished for not sinning, or because in not forbear∣ing to doe or hold something against his conscience, he would not sin? And should he not in such a case rather be left to the liberty of his conscience, and of what his conscience doth so dictate? This Objection being of some seeming weight, for the better clearing the whole, take these Conclusions. Concl. 1. The highest Rule, to which all are in conscience bound,
is the very Word of God. Conscience is to a Christian, Regula regu∣lata, and not Regula regulans, which rather is the word; conscience it selfe must be subject to that: hence it is made the naturall mans sin, that it is otherwise with him, Rom. 8. 7. The carnall mind is not sub∣ject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be. Hence is it that God layeth Commands upon Conscience also, Mark 12. 30. the whole soule, heart and mind of man, must love the Lord, or is by duty bound in its way to expresse dearest, highest respect to him, even by its re∣spect to Gods Commandements, in its way, 1 John 5. 3. This is love, that we keep his Commandements: Otherwise love simply and strictly considered, is not appliable to the whole soule and mind, but is an affection of the will onely. Now if all the soule, minde, and heart must doe thus, the conscience too, which is one faculty thereof. Hence the Law is called spirituall, as reaching the sins of the Spirit, the mind and conscience, &c. of man also, and enjoyning the Spirit its duty, as well as the body and outward man: Hence that writing of Gods Law in his peoples hearts and minds, to be a Soveraigne commanding Law therein. Concl. 2. Whatsoever therefore is really contrary to the very Word of God, it must needs be sinfull to him that doth it, as having the form of sin in it. Sin is (formally) , the transgression of the Law, or Word of God; yea albeit the conscience of him, who holdeth or practiceth that Anomie in doctrine or life, doth tho∣rough errour, tell him, that it is good and according to the Law or word, for no Creature, and so not conscience it selfe by its di∣ctates, can make that which is formally, simply, and in its selfe sin∣full, to be other then sinfull: yea albeit a man should come after∣wards to see, and bewaile his errour, and evill, yet the sin is still in it selfe and nature, a sin, although God in Christ, will not impute it to penitent beleivers in Christ. Hence expiation of old, made by blood, for such breaches of Gods Commands, when yet the party did not think that they had been sins, Levit. 5. 17, 18. When a soul sin∣neth, and doth in any of those what is forbidden by Gods Com∣mandements [though he wist it not] yet he is guilty. Hence Con∣fession made by penitent Saints, of sins, as sins, which yet they did out of conscience and judgement, as duty, Acts 26. 9, 10, 11. I ve∣rily thought I ought to doe many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Na∣zareth, which thing I also did, &c. And being exceeding mad, I persecuted the Saints, &c. He saith it was really in his heart, as duty to him, yet confesseth, that it was in deed, and before God, his exceeding madnesse.
Concl. 3. Each ones conscience therefore is bound to suggest, that to be held, professed, or practiced, and that onely, which the very written word of God, doth really hold forth, to be so held, pro∣fessed, or practiced, and to deter from whatsoever is really contra∣ry to the word, and to that onely; else conscience doth not ex∣presse its boundlesse respects and love to God, which is the first and great Commandement of God, Mark 12. 30. Concl. 4. Each Christian is bound to hearken to the voyce of Con∣science, thus speaking and suggesting the mind of God, not alone, as that is the word which conscience doth speak, but as it is the voyce of conscience, so speaking from God. Hence it becometh sin, if what we doe be not from a good consciences perswasions, grounded upon the very Word of God, the rule and object of Faith, Rom. 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, or that which is not grounded upon the Word, which is Faith in the object, and suitable perswasion built upon the Word, which is Faith in the subject, it is sin. Concl. 5. Neither Conscience it selfe simply considered, nor the directing, instigating, and perswading acts of conscience, in them∣selves nakedly considered, without respect to the Word of God, and their conformity thereunto, are an immediate rule approved of God, for Christians to regulate their apprehensions, or actions thereby; for to make that such a rule of Gods approving, were either, 1. To suppose the dictates of Conscience to be infalliable, where∣as Conscience in unregenerate ones (such as Hypocrites are) is wholly defiled, Their minde and conscience is defiled, Tit. 1. 15. And in the Regenerate, it is in part corrupted, and hath a law of sin in it, as well as any other faculty, Rom. 7. 14. 23. Paul a Regenerate man, saith, I am carnall, sold under sin, his whole soule also as far as yet car∣nall, was sold under sin; and the heart taken for the conscience, will be shewing it selfe, in it selfe, wicked and deceitfull in such dictates, Jer. 17. 9. What godly person findeth not this guilefull dealing of Conscience it selfe, so far as unregenerate; that it will be accusing when it should excuse, and excusing when it should ac∣cuse. Whence that of David, chiding his soule for such like evills, Psal. 42. 5. Why art thou cast downe O my soule? and why art thou so dis∣quieted within me? &c. Or 2. This at least were to suppose Conscience to be fallible (as what other thing can be supposed of it, as in part unregenerate in the best here on earth) Now if so, then 1 it is to suppose, that God
should set up to his people a fallible, deceitfull rule. 2. It is to make God the Author of Confusion in Religion: since diverse per∣sons consciences, being diversly led, become diverse rules, yea (ac∣cording to that supposition) approved rules of God: yea then there are approved contradictory rules in Religion: As that no Saints are to be worshipped with Religious worship, according to some Christians Consciences who are Protestants: and that Saints are to be so worshipped, according to other Christians consciences, who are popish, that the Lords day is of Divine institution, accor∣ding to some, and that it is not of Divine institution, according to other Christians consciences. 3. It is to make God the Author and allower of rules, requiring palpable breach of his owne sacred infal∣lible rules, as Fornication, Heretique-King-killing, plurality of Wives, living without any proper calling, refusall and neglect of publique and private worship of God: since the consciences of too many Christians dictate these as meet and lawfull, although the word of God speak the contrary. 4. It is to make God himselfe to acquit the most horrid blasphemies and heresies, and other penati∣call enormities in Religions of any guilt, supposing they are, as too often they are, and the objection supposeth them to be, the dictates of Conscience, though erring: for then according to this suppo∣sall, they are made to be according to Gods rule, and so not irregu∣larities, not sins. 5. This were to make God the Author or allow∣er of that, which too often proveth fatall in the issue. For be it that sometimes such evills mentioned, be no other then such as are right in the eyes of a Christians minde, judgement, and conscience, yet God saith, There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death, Prov. 11. 12. and 16. 25. 6. This were to cut off all ordinary wayes of conviction and conversion from such as goe astray thorough an erring conscience: For their errours and corrupt wayes being according to conscience, are by this supposition according to Gods allowed rule: And would you convert men from following a rule of God? 7. Then in case of a more then ordinary conversion from errours and heresies, and cor∣rupt practices thereof, held in and acted in conscience formerly, yet are not those errours to be bewailed, or that conversion to be look∣ed at as of grace, since before that conversion such walked according to Gods rule (as it's here supposed) namely consciences dictates, though erring: the contrary whereunto is evident in the former instance of Paul, who Acts 26. 9, 10, 11. confesseth that to be his
madnesse, and 1 Tim. 1. 13, 14, 15. magnifieth Gods rich grace, as shewed in his conversion. 8. Then persons dying for the mainte∣nance of the most horrid blasphemies, which an Arrian and popish conscience, may hold unto the death, they dye for Righteousnesse sake, as following (as is here supposed) an allowed Rule of God, conscience. 9. Then corrupted, deserted christians consciences, pres∣sing thorough strength of temptation, to contradictings of what hath formerly been spoken effectually to them, and done for their souls, are rules of God whereby to conclude their estates according to God, and so not blameworthy, or to be crossed or curbed by the Saints, contrary to that, Psal. 31. 22. where David blameth such like conclusions as rash and sinfull; I said in my hast I am cut off from thy sight, and Psal. 116. 1. I said in my hast all men are lyars (albeit in a case wherein they held forth no other promise of God, then for∣merly himselfe had beleived and professed, vers. 10.) To which purpose it is that David chideth his soule for such like disquieting thoughts and conclusions, Psal. 42. 5. Why art thou, O my soule, so disquieted within me? If then it appear by these reasons, that the bare dictates of conscience, without their due and just grounding upon the word, are not an approved rule of God, we have what we would; otherwise these absurdities must needs follow the con∣trary. Concl. 6. Albeit there be some binding nature in conscience, though erring, so that in that estate of conscience, not to omit a thing in it selfe good, from which erring conscience disswadeth, would become to that person, an offence against conscience, and a present resolution never to doe something in it selfe evill, to which the erring conscience doth perswade, would be of the like na∣ture to him, yet may regulated civill Authority, yea they must re∣strain and punish, both manifest neglect of weighty duties, in mat∣ters of God or man, required by God, and under God enjoyned by man: and likewise evidenced commission of any forbidden evils, both by God and man, committed by the outward man in any scan∣dalous manner; and yet therein such Authority doth not restrain any from doing, or punishing for doing their duty, or for not sin∣ning, and we shall in confirming this Conclusion, Answer the weight of the Objection. Now the First Reason hereof is, Because Civill regulated Autho∣rity, doth restrain and punish sins against either Table, not under that notion, as the dictates of Conscience, which are secret, and as
such passe mans view, scaning or censure, but as the outward mans neglect of what God himselfe immediately, and by his Ministers, Civill Magistrates, mediately, and as the outward mans commission of evills forbidden, first by God, and then by Civil Authority, from, and under God, also as evils infringing the civill power, and crosse to the end for which Civill Authorities and societies are appointed: Likewise as hurtfull to Civill States, and bringing many mischiefes upon the same, if they are not thus restrained and punished. 2. Because, that together with their coerceive Lawes binding to Civil punishments, they doe provide for all due means of convicti∣on, of persons pretending Conscience for what they either refuse to doe, or for what they actually doe contrary to God: whether it will appear (at least interpretatively) to them, as well as others, such punishable acts of theirs arise not from conscience regulated, but stiffned against its duty. Nor 3. Doe such persons, in such omissions or commissions, their whole duty, but many wayes contrary to their duty, in regard of some of which contrary walkings to their duty, they may be justly punished for them. In some sence it is a part of duty to doe nothing against conscience, and to doe what one doth according to con∣science, yet the stresse and force of that duty lyeth here: because conscience it selfe by duty, is to be subject to the word, and bottom all its dictates upon the word, and to attend to all as well as any of the rules of the word; to all which, each man therefore is in conscience bound to attend: so that such erring and corrupted persons, they doe not their whole, nor doe they their maine duty, in that they doe not therein what is according to the word, but contrary rather to the word, both as requiring first such and such duties of them: as for instance, to swear by the name of God, to goe out to War, and the like, when called to it, under paine of Gods displeasure; and then in a second part, requiring obedience out of conscience to such or such things, as lawfully required by his Civill Ordinance and Ministers, even higher Civill powers, and in case of doing contrary, leaving them to the dint of his sword in their hands, Rom. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. compared. 2. Since in that con∣dition (mentioned) of their erring consciences, whilst erring, they offend their conscience, if they should then resolve against the doing of something in it selfe evill, they may and should take a middle course rather at present; namely, to use all the best means of
better information of their erring minds, that so they may refuse to act or hold: not where an erring conscience requireth, or on the other hand, may doe, not what an erring conscience then for∣biddeth, but what the same conscience upon better sight, seeth cause to refuse to doe, or else to doe; as in the former instances of taking an Oath, going to War (to which we may add) putting away a wife upon a slight cause, or the like: they will not stiffly refuse an Oath, or to goe for a souldier when Authority lawfully requireth it, nor yet forthwith actually doe it, but humbly desire time and help to be cleared in the lawfulnesse of it, and afterwards give in their Answer, and accordingly seriously and conscionably using the best means, usually and ordinarily accompanied with the Lords speciall blessing, they groundedly doe what is required. So in case of such putting away a wife, to which erring conscience urgeth, they resolve not wholly to forbear such a thing, but at pre∣sent to suspend, upon desire of the best information, which attain∣ed, they forbear now upon a well informed Conscience, what they durst not have wholly refused in the former state of their erring Conscience. Now if such persons, through pride, wilfulnesse, pe∣remptorinesse, contempt, falshood, or false conceit, will refuse the due and reall use of such means, and of the ordinary way of God, to help them out of this Labyrinth, they refuse a manifest, knowne duty, and expose themselves the rather to Civil Justice. 4. Because, else according to the ground work layd in the obje∣ction, what horrid outrages, blasphemies, idolatries, and the like enormities, can ordinarily come under the curb or lash of Civill Authority. In case of murders of a Protestant Prince, or person, or people, by Papists, in whose Conscience they are acts more then or∣dinary pleasing to God, and meriting heaven, so in case of commit∣ting of filthinesse with the wives of others of their Judgements, by persons of famalisticall consciences; or in case of sins which yet are not against Natures light, as in Arrians, out of Conscience deny∣ing Jesus Christ to be the Son of God; or in others out of con∣science crying downe all Church Societies, and Ordinances, and from the same erring conscience, peremptorily, yea seditiously, op∣posing and despising them, and all Civill Authority which would or doth maintaine the same; will you now have them punished for doing their duty, in hearkning to their Consciences? O for not sinning against their Consciences, in not doing those things which they in conscience stand bound to doe. If the Objectors say,
yea, God forbid it should be otherwise; all Civill and Church peace, and priviledged proprieties, are else undermined, if such be not punished, then have they the weight of their owne objection ta∣ken off: if they say no, none of them may be punished by Civill Authority, but they must be left to Gods Judgement, I doubt not, that godly wise Rulers are otherwise minded, and know and will do their duty therein. Now let us also briefly clear up some few Scriptures wrested against the Conclusion. Object. The Parable of Tares, Matth. 13. is Objected, Let them (saith Christ) grow till harvest; and therefore Heretiques, Schisma∣tiques, persons otherwise corrupt in matters of Religion, such in judgement and practice are to be continually tolerated by Au∣thority. Answ. 1. If this prove any such matter of Toleration, it must prove immunity of all the children of the wicked one, of all that are to be cast into hell, of all that offend, vers. 38. 41. All these as well as Heretiques, which are but some of that sort, must be let aln, they must also all be free, not alone from the Civil sword, but from Church-censures: yea whether the persons, those tares, and wick∣ed ones, within the field of the visible Church, doe sin against the first Table, by professed Atheisme, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Perjury, Witchcraft, &c. Or against the second Table, by Murther, Adulte∣ry, Treachery, Robbery, or the like: yet both Church and Com∣mon-wealth, must let these Tares in the visible Church-field alone to the last day, and dare any say so? Observable it is, that Christ Expounding all the rest of the Parable, cometh not over that sen∣tence againe [Let them alone to the Harvest] as practically appliable thereunto, or enjoyning any such to be rationall, 2. The drift and scope of the Parable is to shew, what by Gods providence will be ordered, not in this or that particular religious State or Church in it, but what will fall out in the field of the whole visible Church, thorow out the world, over which no one Civil State, or Church, hath power: that even in this great field, taken in from the rest of the world, and this field sown by God, and which in a more speciall manner is his Kingdome, there will be mixtures of good and bad; and the rooting up, not of this or that Tare, or wicked person, but of all the Tares in generall, or of all the children of the Devil, within the pale of the Church; will ne∣ver be, till the generall day of Judgement, which will be an univer∣sall
and infallible kind of severing, sorting, and censuring; and when there shall be a totall and finall ridding of them from amongst the Children of the Kingdome, or the righteous: Although God in the mean space, by his own hand, immediately, and by the hands of men sometimes, mediately, will be cutting off this or that Child of the Devil, this or that Witch, Traytor, Atheist, Blasphemer, Murderer, or the like: As he will be gathering in many particular godly ones, as good wheat and seed into his Garner, leaving the generall severing and gathering of both good and bad, wheat and tares, unto that generall, last, and great harvest day. The like is held forth in that Parable, Matth. 13. 48, 49, 50. Object. That speech of Gamaliel, Acts 5. is objected, Let these men alone, &c. if of God, yee cannot resist, if of men, it will come to nothing. Answ. 1. He spake this in a doubtfull, newtrall way, not closing with either; hence he saith, If it be of God, and if it be of men, is this therefore a ground to godly, wise, or regulated Rulers, either to be of Gamaliels doubtfull spirit in matters of God, or of the Church, when all Christians are required to be established in the Faith? Yea in that Doctrine of God, which respecteth Church-order also, Col. 2. 5, 6, 7. in which they are to be men of understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 20. sheep who know Christs voyce, John 10. 4. Or is this any ground that they should be of a newtrall spirit, leaving all to God, either to de∣termine the right therein, or to maintaine his owne cause, and to ruinate the contrary, which was Gamaliels ground of his newtrality, If this thing be of men, it will come to nought, God himselfe by his pro∣vidence will bring them to ruine. Upon which ground, what need is there for Magistrates to punish Adulterers, or fraudulent dealers, or the like; for God professeth himselfe to be an Avenger of such evils, Heb. 13. 4. 1 Thess. 4. 10. Yea but Rulers (say we) are Gods Ministers, to avenge such like evils. And so in matters of God, it is alike as was shewed, in thesi it might be truly said, What is of God, cannot be resisted, what is of men will come to nought, and God is an avenger of such things, he can defend his owne worship and wayes, and his truth is able to defend it selfe, else who would regard either, yet God also would have Moses to promulge Lawes, and to look to the due execution of Lawes, providing for Civill punishment of persons who came with their own lying fancies, though in his Name, to thrust his people away from God, Deut. 13. or draw away his people from his instituted worship to idolatrous worship, Deut. 17. and in the times of the Jewes coming home to Christ, Christ and
his truth will be able to defend themselves, he will be the chiefe avenger of evil, yet shall false Prophets be punished differently ac∣cording to their demerits, by the Civill Magistrate, Zech. 13. Gama∣liel might rather have added, that yet such seducers as Theudas and Judas, with their obstinate abettors, doe justly perish by the sword of the Civill State, as himselfe intimateth, vers. 37, 38. and so are not, in such pernicious wayes which come from beneath, to be left onely to Gods judgement: to be sure Christs sentence, He that is not with me is against me, Matth. 12. 30. requireth more of his people then such a newtrall spirit. 2. These of whom good Gamaliel spake, howsoever thought of by the blind bemisted world, yet were such as in the judgements of the whole body of the Saints then, who were of discerning eyes and spirits, did indeed preach the truth; and so no fast ground hence, that such which both really and in the judgement of the most dis∣cerning Saints and Servants of God, doe hold forth falshoods and blasphemies, should be let alone in any such scandalous or mischie∣vous courses. Object. That also 1 Tim. 1. 4. is objected; That the Law is not for the righteous: and so mans Lawes, if according to Gods Law, should not provide to restraine and punish such, for their Opi∣nions, &c. Answ. 1. The Law is not for the righteous, as righteous, and re∣gular (through grace) to it: nor is there any Law against the fruits of Gods Spirit, Gal. 5. 23. yet if he that is either really or seemingly a righteous man, commit murther or adultery, or if any such Members of the Jewes Church commit idolatry, or blaspheme the name of his God, by the Law, promulged by Moses that Magi∣strate, he was a man of death, and that by the hand of the Civill Magistrate. 2. The Law being said in this quoted place, to be for whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine, surely the politicall keepers of the Law of God are rather in duty bound to make Lawes, ratifying that sum and scope of the Law of their Soveraigne, and their Lawes, as consonant to their pattern Law of God, are to be for whatsoever is openly and grosly held forth and acted contrary to sound doctrine. Object. That also 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. Charity suffereth long, think∣eth no evill, beleeveth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things, is objected as a ground of such liberty. Answ. That will not follow, because we should doe nothing of
malice against any person, nor rashly, and upon bare surmises, nor without a due distinction and consideration of the matter of fact in judgement, or the like, therefore we must not call evil, evil, there∣fore a godly Ruler, as a Ruler, must endure all things how scanda∣lous soever, or hurtfull, without respecting either second or first Table, and how palpably evill or grosse soever it be, yet that he must hope the best of it, and how dangerous soever to State or Church, yet he must let it goe unpunished. Suffer long, even defer a righte∣ous sentence upon an evidenced evill doer, contrary to Eccles. 8. 11. Because sentence against an evill doer is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to doe evill. Object. That of Moses politically tolerating divorce is urged, that therefore all sorts of errors, and the like are to be tolerated and not in an ordinary way punished. Answ. We Answer, that that conclusion speaks of that which is to be done in a way of ordinary use of Civill Authority, and in ca∣ses ordinary, and not as that of Moses in such like politick permis∣sion of things otherwise evill, of an extraordinary nature, nor may any reason, because Moses tolerated a sin against the second Table, or 5th, 7th, and 9th Commandement (as was the divorce of Moses, for every cause, even every slight cause, Mat. 1. 9.) therefore Civill States in an ordinary way and case may tolerate in the grosser sence, against the first Table, as Blasphemy, Perjury, the Masse, Witchcraft, &c. or against the second Table, as Robbery, Adultery, &c. Nay, if Moses his toleration be urged for a ground of toleration, it must be rather a toleration of sins against the second Table, then for Tole∣ration of sins against the first Table. David in an extraordinary case let murther a time unpunished in Joab and Abishai all his dayes, but it will not follow that therefore godly Princes and Rulers may in an ordinary way and case let another alone unpunished. Now to the High, Eternall, Immortall, Invisible, the Onely wise God, be Honour and Glory for ever. FINIS.
