c5959 45097643 171247
The continuation of our Forraine occur∣rences: VVith the confirmation of the late cruell and bloody Battell fought betwixt Wesell and Collen. And The particulars of the losses on both sides, and what Townes the Weymarish and Hessish have since taken. Also ome Letters and passages of note from other parts of Christendome. Translated and collected out of good Originalls. ondon printed for Nath. Butter, at t. Austins Gate in Pauls Church yard, at the signe of the Pyde Bull. 1642.
Vienna Inne 13.23. THE generall Treaty of peace betwixt the Emperour and the King of France, and the Crowne of Sweden is ppoin∣ted to beginne the 25. of March with the French, they will treat at Munster, and with the Swedes at Osnaburg, and during the treaty the garrisons shall be drawne out of both places, and the said places shall in the meane time remaine neutrall, yet if so be that contrary to all expectation the treaty should be dissolved without an happy effect, the said garrisons shall enter those Townes againe as they marched out, and the first day of May an Imperiall Diet shall be held at Frankford on the Maine, or Speier, what good successe it will have time will shew. Basil Ian. 12.22. The French and high Dutch troopes under the com∣mand of Generall Major Erlach, which relieved the Fort of Hohenwiel, and provided the same againe with all ne∣cessaries, have fired the Imperiall Campe, demolished the Sconces, & thereupon are gone again to their old quarters, Erlach to Brislack, and Oissonville and Lieutenant Colonell
Rosa (unto who is given Colonell Mullers Regiment of horse) are gone for Paris: in this siege hath beene in the Fort of Hohenwiel 400. souldiers; 300. women and children, and a good store of provision, and most that they wanted was water. Hamborough Ian. 15.25. The King of Denmarke is at Christian Pries, and is wil∣ling now to enter into a friendly treaty with this City: They write for certaine that the Count of Aversberg (as Imperiall Embassadour) is appointed for the treaty of peace betwixt the Emperour and the King of France and the Crowne of Sweden, and is arrived at Wolffenbuttle to goe to Munster. Some few dayes agoe divers Swedish re∣giments marched towards the Bishopricke of Magdeburg, where they tooke away many horses and cattell at Hln∣stat also: they have ruinated two Luneburgish companies, insomuch that the Swedes and Luneburgish are now ene∣mies one against another: The Imperiall Army is broke up, and is marching towards the Bishopricke of Halberstat directly against the Swedes; the sicke souldiers and dis∣mounted horsemen are sent to their appointed quarters: The strong Castle of Mansfeld remaines besieged by the Imperialists, which they have begunne now to undermine; some are of opinion that it will not bee able to hold out long. Vienna. Ian. 19, 29. Concerning the Palatine treaty there is now good hope; it is reported that the Duke of Bavaria will restore both
the upper Palatinate, and that part which he hath in the lower Palatinate, if so be that the King of Spaine will ac∣commodate himselfe in like manner: Incontinueth that the generall treaty of peace shall be reassumed a new at Mun∣ster and Osnaburg the 20. or 25. day of March, to which end the letters of safe conduct are delivered out already for France and Sweden. Leipzigk Ian. 13.23. At this instant we receive letters from Magdeburg cer∣tifying that the whole Imperiall Army hath kept generall randevous at Ashersleben, being resolved to goe in three severall places, as namely at Stasfurst, Egglen and Gen∣nersleben over the River of Pude, and to march against the Swedes, to which end they labour here to repaire a shipbridge for them; the Swedrs are resolved to expect the comming of the Imperiall Army: From Silesi they write, that Carlach hath yeelded upon discretion, and Stol∣hans hath likewise forsaken at Beuthen one of the Sconces, the rest the Imperialists hope likewise to muster shortly; it is reported that the Imperialists have taken prisoner the Swedish Colonell Shulman, together with 500. horsemen of Stolhans his army. Collen Ian. 14.24. The great flving of he inhabitants both of Cities, Villa∣ges and Cloysters by water and land towards this City continueth still because of the great progresse of the Weymarish and Hessish forces which take one place after another: Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld with his troopes is reti∣ring
towards the Yffell and Mosell to joine with the Lor∣raine troopes which are arrived about Wormbs: The Ci∣ty of Bonne is to take in a 1000. foote, and 300. horse of Hatzfelds forces: The Magistrates of this City cause the Drummes to bee beaten day and night to take up some 1000. voluntiers for the securing of this City; within the space of three dayes the price of the corne rose from 8. to 10. florens: this City is so full of the Country people that are fled hither, as it hath beene by mens memory, and these troubles stop now all trading: the City of Doringen the Imperiall souldiers themselves have fired: The princi∣pality of Bergk and the Duke of Newburg have already agreed with the Weymarish and Hessish forces to pay con∣tribution unto them: The overthrow of Lamboy is farre greater then at first was mennoned, some that lay amongst the dead, and afterward through a secret way came hither to this City, looke most miserable and pittifull, which say that their army is totally ruinated, and that not above three or foure hundred men could escape. Generall Lam∣boy with eighteene other Colonells was brought prisoner into the Cloyster of St. Tunes, and from thence was carr∣ed towards the Rhyne: The Nobility and Gentry, upon which heretofore we did much rely, runne now all away, and will not fight, leaving behind them all their lands and goods. Dusseldorp the 14.24. of Ian. What great overthrow Generall Lamboy had neare Huckelsheim the 7.17. of this moneth, hereof we see daily sufficient witnesse. In this overthrow about 5000. of his men were taken prisoners, and he lost all his baggage, ar∣tillery,
and the most part of his Standards and Ensignes: The City of Ordingen was forced to pay 3000. Rixdallers for a ransome. The flying of the poore inhabitants both women and children, and a number of the Clergy, which for divers yeares together did not once come out of the Cloyster, we have continually seene from the 8.18. of this moneth till yesterday. Our Prince the Duke of Newburg hath obtained the Neutrality for his subjects, but the No∣bility and Gentry are excluded. Collen the 15.25. of Ian. Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld hath propounded three points to our Magistrates. 1 To grant him a free ferry before this City over the River of Rhyne. 2 That in case of ne∣cessity he may retire under the protection of this City. 3 That they shall take into this City two or three thousand men of his forces for a guarrison: the two first points they have granted him, but the third they have denyed. The townsmen at Bonne flee for the most part hither to this City. Emmerick the 15.25. of Ian. The 9.19. of this moneth two Weymarish Colonells went from hence towards the Hage to the French Ambas∣sador, to fetch order whither the imprisoned Comman∣ders shall be carried. Generall Lamboy was wounded in his thigh. The 10.20. of this instant, the City of Kempen was surrendred unto the Weymarish by composition, wherein they found above 3000. sackes with corne, and other
rich bootie. Colonell Newenheim Governour of Kem∣pen, who heretofore ransacked the Palatinate, and made great spoile in it, seeing that the battell was lost, fled with his best goods from thence, but hee was overtaken by the Weymarish, and himselfe and his wife with much adoe saved themselves into Gelder. Duyren the 15.25. of Ian. Divers of Lamboyes souldiers that fled out of the battell, and came hither, unanimously relate, that in many yeares so many men were not slaine and taken prisoners, as in this battell, they could not save one Wagon. On Sunday last Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld lay round about this City, and re∣tired in a great confusion. Three dayes agoe the dispersed Lamboyish troupes re∣collected themselves before this City, and did great mis∣chiefe in the Suburbes, which have beene 600. horse, and 400. foot, and 1000. horsemen of Hatzfelds forces were with them to conduct them to the Army: in Dormagen the Weymarish have surprised and totally routed and de∣feated 800. dragooners, and afterwards fired the Towne: The other day 3000. Weymarish horsemen came before this City, and having understood which way the remain∣der of Lamboy's forces had retired, pursued close after them as farre as Seligh, where at last they lighted upon them, totally touted and defeated them, and obtained twelve standards more: Colonell Rosa sent a trumpeter hither into this City demanding quarter for his men, whom the Magistrates answered, that Lamboy and Hatzfeld had demanded the like, but being they were neutrall, they hoped that he would likewise spare them, whereupon Rosa
replyed, That hee would shortly breake the Neutrality with his Canons. The other day the Weymarians passed here by with a great booty. A perfect List of the Imperiall Commanders and Officers that were slaine and taken prisoners in the last over∣threw of Lamboy, as the same was delivered up to Count de Guebrian the 7.17. of Ian. The prisoners are Generall Lamboy, Generall Mercy, 16. Colonels, 9. Lieu. Col. amongst which is Paradyser and Beuting, 8. Sergeant Majors, 28. Captaines of horse, 38. Captaines of foot, a Captaine Lieutenants, 1 Gener∣all Adjutant, 4. Regiment Quartermasters, 46. Lieute∣nants, 31. Standardbearers, 35. Ancients, 46. Standards, 97. Ensignes, 17. Trumpetters, 3. Masse Priests, Upon the place of battell were slaine 423. high and under Offi∣cers, as namely, Sergeants, Adjutants, Quartermasters, Corporals, and such like, and about 3000. Souldiers; and above 4000. are taken prisoners of the common Souldi∣ers, which have taken pay under the Weymarish. On the Hessish and Weymarish side were slaine Colonell Fleshei∣mer, Major Bushell, Major Conrad Kauffman, 3. Captaines of foot, 2. Captaines of horse, 4. Lieutenants, 3. Ancients and Standardbearers, and about 50. common Suldiers. Those that are wounded, are Lieutenant Colonell Lato∣mus, Lieutenant Colonell Beuthen, the Lieutenant Colo∣nell of Conte de Guebrian, Rittermaster Costputh, Captaine Frease, 2. French Captaines, 1. Regiment Quartermaster, and about 260. common Souldiers.
Collen the 17.27. of Ian. The Hatzfeldish Infantery lyes enquartered at Bonne, Andernach and Lins, on this side of the River of Rhyne, and the Chavallery is gone to Andernach to the other side of the River. The dispersed Lamboyish troopes which recollected themselves here and there, are totally routed and defeated againe by the Weymarish. All the Wey∣marish forces lye now about Nuys, which they batter fiercely. Here in this City the Drummes are continually beaten to take up 4 or 5000. men. Every night watch here in the City 6. Companies of Citizens. On Friday last the Elector of Collen and Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld came hither into this City to put all things in order. Collen the 18.28. of Ian. When the Weymarish and Hessish forces lay with the maine Army about Neus, and caused the said City to bee summoned, but the besieged resolved to defend them∣selves to the last man: wherefore in the meane time Colo∣nell Rosa with 3000. horsemen, pursued after the remain∣der of Lamboyes Army, which under the command of Co∣lonell Zell, and Sergeant Major de Grange 2000. horsemen strong were marching to joine with Hatzfeld, upon which he lighted about Zulch, encountred with them, and pursu∣ed after the fugitives as far as Munster Eyffell. It is said that he hath obtained 12 Standards more, insomuch that of Lamboyes whole Army very few are remaining. It is not yet knowne whether the abovesaid Colonell Zell and
Grange are taken prisoners, or escaped. The foresaid City of Zulch hath paid for a ransome 5000. Rixdallers: hereupon they summoned the City of Duyren, but it is doubted whe∣ther they will accommodate themselves before the Canons are brought before it. Generall Tupadell lyes before Neus, which City he batters fiercely, that we can heare under the gates of this City: meane while the parties over-runne the whole Country, and take away all what they finde. The o∣ther day they met with some Carts and Wagons comming from Cleve hitherwards, which they tooke away. Field∣marshall Hatzfeld is yet here, and his Infantery at Ander∣nach, Bonne, Breul, and other places, using the inhabitants very cruelly. The Cavallery is gone to the other side of the Rhyne into the Country of Bergk, insomuch that the Wey∣marish have no resistance at all. Wesel Ian. 19 29. All the Colours and Standards which were taken from Generall Lamboy, are brought to Oysey, about 130. in num∣ber: the Standard of Lamboyes Life Regiment, together with others, shall be sent to Cassell to present them to the young Landgrave of Hessen. The Governour of Gelder offers to pay a ransome for those that were taken of his guarrison. In the Cloyster of Knechlenberg & Brouwyder the Weyma∣rish found great store of provision, and not one man. The faire Castle of Dyck, and the little City of Hulckerat they have likewise taken, the houses of Ners, Hulcdunck and Ca∣lenburg they have pillaged, and Nelen they have burned: in a word, the whole County of Kempen is under their devo∣tion, which in all this war hath suffered almost nothing▪ The Duke of Newburg hath bestowed upon Cont de Guebrian a great Vat of wine, and stands now in a treaty with him.
Collen the 19.29. of Ian. The 16.26. of Ianuary the Weymarish forces begunne to batter fiercely the city of Neus and to fling fire balls in∣to it, whereupon the 17.27. of this instant about ten of the clocke in the forenoone it was surrendered by compositi∣on, the besieged wanted powder and shot: Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld who is expecting out of all garrisons, and from the river of Rhyne more assistance, will goe to field very shortly against the Weymarish, and being the Weymarish are for the present Masters in the field, and no resistance can be made, we must let them domineere as they list, wee looke onely to the principall cities to keep them strongly guarded: Into Nuys the Weymarish have laid 1500. men for a garrison, and yesterday they came before Sons: the citizens in Nancy plotted to the said city and castle, and to deliver it over to the Duke of Lorraine, but the French garrison was too strong for them, and kill'd a great number of them. Amsterdam the 20.30. Ian. The 17.27. of Ian. the city of Nuys was surrendred un∣to the Weymarish and Hessish forces. The Swedish army under the command of Generall Terstensehn is broke up, but which way it will take wee shall shortly heare: 6000. men of the States forces lie likewise ready to goe to field, if the Spaniards stir to aid Hatzfeld, in so much that the seat of warre will wholly bee removed into the Bishopricke of Collen, and it is certaine, that Colonell Rosa hath to∣tally wasted and defeated againe about Zulch 2000. of Lamboyes fugitive horsemen, and obtained twelve stan∣dards, in so much that they have got now about 130. en∣signes
and standards, and the 14.24. of this moneth they lighted also upon 600. Spanish foote with fire locks, the most part whereof they have put to the sword. Collen the 23. of Ian. the 2. of Feb. The 17.27. Ian. the Imperiall garrison marched out of Nuys, which was conducted to Duseldorp and used very well: the said City is to pay for a ransome 30000. Rixdal∣lers, which City the Weymarish fortifie exceedingly, and is guarded by Colonell Oheim with 1500. men: Zons, Kempen, Bergem, Caster, Grevenbruck, Betper and o∣ther places have likewise accommodated themselves: the Weymarish horsemen ride in and out at Dusseldorp, at Orringen; some of their troopes are passing the River of Rhyne, it is thought that they aime either at Keyserswerth, or intend to assault Hatzfeld; in their campe they have published upon paine of high punishment, that none of their souldiers shall undertake to attempt any thing upon this City of Collen: the other five Commissioners were sent from hence to the said army to desire that this City might stand neutrall with them, which the Weymarish will not condiscend unto: I beleeve wee shall not escape without paying them a great summe of money. Generall Tupadel and Rosa are marching now towards Duyren and Herpen: It is reported that Mashall de Chastillion is like∣wise to come unto them from France with 18000. men, meane while the Spanish troops draw together on the Ri∣ver of Maase to joine with Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld, who lyes yet still expecting the Duke of Lorraine with his troopes.
Wesel the 23. of Ian. the 2. of Feb. After that the Weymarish had left their regiments in Nuys for a garrison, the maine army broke up againe and came the 19.29. of Ianuary before Kempen, and yester∣day they battered the said place fiercely that wee could plainly heare it here; it is said, that some Spanish forces have got into it, how they will speed time will shew. At this instant a horseman comming from the Bishopricke of Collen, relates that those of Kempen stood in a parly, so that it is not doubted but that the Weymarish have already taken possession in it. There is not one Boore to be seen all the way long from Collen as far as Aken; the souldiers finde every where the houses so full of victualls, bacon and smoak'd flesh, that it is not to be expected: Our bridges with some men of warre are gone up higher the Rhyne, it is thought the Weymarish have an aime either at Keyserswerth, or that they intend to assault Hatzfelds forces, which time will shew. Amsterdam the 29. of Ian. the 8. of Feb. The Duke of Newburg hath obtained the neutrality with the Weymarish and Hessish forces: He hath delivered unto the Weymarish for their quarters the Cities of Gleb∣beck, Grevenbreck, Custer, Bebber, and the strong Castle of Reidt: The City of Duyren hath paid a summe of mo∣ney to be freed of enquartering: Those of Collen have
likewise desired the neutrality: Some letters mention that the Bishop of Collen is dead, others he is very sicke, if hee should dye it would cause a great alteration in his coun∣try. From Munster they write that Captaine Iohn Tersiegh hath defeated betwixt Borcken and Wesel a Hessish con∣voy of 100. foote and 40. horsemen, in which encounter the said Captaine himselfe also was slaine. FINIS.
