C6153 E156_8 99871638 156871
THE COPIE OF A LETTER SENT FROM The Roaring Boyes in ELIZIUM; To the two arrant Knights of the Grape, in Limbo, Alder∣man Abel and M. Kilvert, the two great Projector for wine: And to the rest of the worshipfull Brotherhood of that Patent. Brought over lately by Quart-pot, an ancient servant to Bacchus, whom for a long time they had most cruelly Rackt, but hope shortly to be resto∣red to his ancient liberties. Whereunto is added, the Oration which Bacchus made to his subjects, in the lower World: published for the sa∣tisfaction and benefit of his subjects here. Brought over by the same Messenger 1641.
A LETTER &c. BAcchus into Elizium tooke his way, And to his crew proclaym'd a holy day And taking up his Horne that held a Tonne Of right Canary, drunk't off, and begunne To wind it so loud that Elizium Rang with the Noyes, and every Blade did come: First came the Poets, of each land, and tooke Their place in order, learned Virgill struck In for the first, Ben Iohnson cast a glout, And swore a mighty oath hee'd pluck him out, And wallowing towards him, with a cup of Wine, He did so rattle him with Catiline, That had not Horace him appeas'd, 'tis said He had throwne great Sejanus at his head. Next to these marcht a band of corpulent ghosts In scarlet faces furr'd with blew, brave hosts, With each his signe, and but they were so swarmy They might have been ghest ancients o' the Army. Next after these in wrathfull hast did puffe A band in scarlet hose, and coates of buffe, With bastinadoes waving with their plumes And stay they cry'd; that Rascall that presumes To stirre a foot Dyes, Damme us shall we be thus Abus'd when we doe carry Bacchus with us? In this troop Bacchus was; and none need doubt him, Because they never went to th' field without him. Then strutted forward men of lofty gates, And gallant, trayling after em, their estates Like broken pikes, which they in tossing had Made shorter, and in handling them grew mad. From these, a pretty distance, sneaking follow'd Some of the Clergy, not so truly hallow'd But that they might entreated be to take A small refection for their learnings sake, And lest they should be brought (for due contrition Of their faults) unto that Low-high-Commission
They cast away their coates lest any gull Should find holes in em, cause they were so full: But then lep't in a noble Citty crew That spent all one day what they got in two, Who having ask't so long what doe you lack Had lost their words, and had receiv'd a crack. The last that came of all these warlike Soemen Was a huge band of sargeants with their Yoemen, But a mad Poet did begin to rayle That they would bring Mace when there was no Ale; And were condemn'd as most pernicious stinkers Cause in their lives they were but taplash drinkers, They storm'd; but one of them (being a mounter Told them they car'd not for em of a counter; At which great Bacchus laught; and bad the sinner He and his fellowes should goe fetch up dinner. Neates tongues by thousands came; but most were taken With a salt gamon of Westphalia baken: The Poets and the Soldiers flashing stood, And great Ben: Iohnson swore that it was good, Anchovies swom in oyle; but to be briefe Most of the Soldiers fell to powder'd-beefe And (as an Host was talking like a Parrat) One snatch't his beard, and eate it for carret: Bacchus drank round a health, and each one pledg'd it And after, with another cup he wedg'd it Untill their braines, by their cups often chiming Left off their sack and forthwith fell to ryming, And one amongst the rest, amidst his mirth Talk't of the dearth of wines upon the earth, A sargeant that was thither late departed For griefe, for 'las they ever were kind hearted, Told them, that now amongst the worlds great vices Its authors were shrowd scar'd with their complices And certifi'd em all, with good assurance Two of the greatest of them were in durance,
At which there such a shout arose, for joy That on a suddain it awaken'd Ny; Who coming thither, in amongst 'em cram'd And asked if the Shipmoney were dam'd, They answer no, but those that did ware Sattin And stood on Pantofles have lost their Patten, Whereat he laugh't, and his old jests did use Why then, quoth he, they will be over shoes, Then at the bord there grew a disputation If they should send a letter of consolation, Unto these two late Prisoners, 'twas agreed And thus with matur judgement they proceed. THE SƲPERSCRIPTION. TO him whose name (I now directed am) Has the first Letter of an Alderman, Which is A—what you please, I crav'd to bee Unto that hand deliver'd speedily, Whom all doe hope has hither been preserv'd To be deliver'd to what 'has deserv'd, And to his brother likewise I would be Because he hath as great a share as he. THE LETTER. MOst worthy Sirs to be what you deserve Our ancient loves to you cannot so swerve, From you, but that wee joyous should be't see Your sudden coming to our company, We have good Sack here for you where, you may Drink a full Quart, and when you come to pay, Not breake two shillings, but alas we know Y'ave swallow'd Wine so long you cannot goe, And it is said, by some who wish your paine You'l never stand on your owne leggs againe. Indeed we stagger at it, for 'tis pitty That two such worthy members of the Citty,
Are so neere gelding of so many pounds Of your estate, for sure it much confounds, U here below; that that should be a crime You did t'abate the Luxury of the Time, For when wine is pull'd downe, sure youth will rage And then no doubt 'twill prove a drunken age. Indeed you in our pints of Sack did strip's And made our purses serve apprentiships, Of sev'n pence to the Drawer, which yet bred This care and thrift to keep't unforfeited, When oft we would have venturd, and truly This smells of Cardinall Wolsye's policy. But Sirs we pray you in great Bacchus name Be carefull of your selves, and to your name, Add mettle; for if you should suffer in this traine It would be but much wine cast up againe, And let it come, tis better it were out Then choake you, and let silly people flout, Yet good Physicians of the state have s'd Casting of coyne doth cure the paine ith head, And take my word; Empson and Dudley here Say such a Purge had sav'd their lives then cheere, Your drooping spirits, we speake this to confirme Your fortitude which since the Candel-mas terme, Hath been assaulted, and y'have borne it out Courageously, and like tall men and stoute, Yt one thing, as your friends, (and we could wish We could not lay it now within your dish,) It was not well done of you to undoe So many poore men, of your owne trade too. And yet some might deserv'd; for they might bee (As we doe very well know) sawcy as wee, And then (our worthy Cittizen) wee hope yee Might very well undoe them by your copie, And make em free of Beggers-Hall. This may Be true; yet you doe not heare me say,
It is; No; we, that here doe feare no score, Have found your Citizens honesty heretofore, And will not now suspect it. 'Tis our prayers That we may heare sometimes of your affaires Wee heard how ready all your brethren were To lay their Patents downe when they did heare O'th Parliament, and some, in time agreed With those th' had injur'd, ere they did proceed, And we admire to see you so are shot To thinke your caskes would hold when theirs would not. Your former courses, question'd now, may be Compar'd to Sack, which when at libertie, Stirres not; but being stopt as you are now It bursts the caske, as your owne wine, has you. And one thing wee'l advise you; that you feed As happily as you can, and sleepe at need; For you are so much hated here by those That dy'd for griefe when prices of Wines rose, That they doe sweare it ever as they drinke You shall not eate a bit? nor sleep a winck, When you come hither; this upon our oath They oft protested have against you both. This is All that time gives us leave to write Which we conjecture is no warning slight And therefore thinke of it, and use as they That wish your welfare; and doe lastly pray These Letters may be read to informe you all, That we below rejoyce at no mans fall; And therefore tell those fellowes that employ Their idle quills for to bely our joy, They doe amisse in laying of their tricks On Charons boat, and Acheron and Stixs, And so we bid farewell, and see you doe Make much of Justice, shee'l make much of you. Given at our Rendevous in Bacchus Palace in Elizium.
This sea'd, was straight deliver'd to Quart-pot To beare away; when Bacchus with a hot, And fiery looke gap't thrice, and gave two knocks Made 'em all shake and stand like senseles stocks Whilst with a gravity he did reherse, This short Oration (as it is) in verse. THE ORATION. ANd yet, my Prudent Councell, let me tell 'ee I see my bounty here doth too much swell yee, Tis strange that you should favour such a cause And men that have so deep transgress't my lawes, As these have; and to gives 'em such kind words In their just punishment, their crime affords, No mercy; for the naked truth to tell I well could wish there were a whip at Abel, To jerke em, and to firke em, and to raise Their memory as they rais'd wine of late dayes, When like to Bakers (they the world to cozen Did sift wine, making foureteen pence to th'dozen, Which is an innovation, for their good To hoist up wine above the price of blood; For their ten pence; you know, throughout all ages Hath ever been, and is, the Hangman's wages. Consider of it: England, some of you Nay I my selfe have been abused too, How many of my subjects have refrain'd The Taverne, my deere temple, cause 'twas stain'd, With such extorsion? and were faine For want of two pence to goe home againe? Two pence? why I will tell you, tis no lesse Then halfe a groat, and boldly I professe, For two pence more, a man might fully dine Or purchase three parts of a pint of Wine, Claret I mean white: how many here
Now in this place have kill'd themselves with Beere, Ev'n for this cause? Besides we well may gather That men oft times gave oe, when they had rather, Have serv'd mee still, I speake it from my heart In seven pints th'are cheated of a quart, O injury! and ye you wish these men Here, that they might revive their trade agen, That by their cunning having wrong'd you too You then might curse em as the Citty doe, Write me a letter that may fully crush em And not such tickling lines as onely brush em, Can you that are the Poets thinke upon This sad restraint upon your Helicon, And not revenge it? can you stay And see a weeks pay drunke out in a day, By superarogation? you that are The lusty cap and feather-men of warre? Can you my worthy hosts fit and see those That make you weare od money in your nose, Under your nose triumphing? can you men You little lecturers that have but ten, A yeare endure it; no, it shall not be Weel have 'em downe, and now me thinks I see, Your mind bent too't, drinke deep my subjects all That wines ifaith shall with a ding-dong fall. FINIS.
