C6274 E388_16 R201511 99862013 114160
A LETTER FROM HIS MAJETTIES COVRT AT HOLMBIE WITH Advertisement of Propositions from the King to the Parliament; in Answer to the Propositions for Peace. With His Majesties consent to have the Presbyte∣rian Government setled for three yeares. And other particulars concerning the Queenes Letter to His MAJESTIE. C R printer's device, consisting of a central circle flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish unicorn on the right and containing the initials of King Charles, all of these figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by angel on the left and right London, Printed by B. A. May 21. 1647.
Right Honourable; I Had thought to have been at London before this, but seeing that I have been prevented, I shall make this use of my stay, to acquaint your Honour, that about 3 weeks since, one (who cals her self the) Lady Cave (as she saith) received a letter for the King, which letter was brought to her from the queen in France, by a French Gentleman, (but) he said, by her servant, perhaps he, was so (in some sence.) This Lady Cave is a Gentlemans daughter about Stamford, whether she hath marryed some Knight, or Col. of the Kings party, or how she comes to be a Lady, I know not, but it seems that upon the receit of the said letter, from the Queen to his Maj. she addressed her selfe to another Gentlewoman who liveth in these parts, an acquaintance of hers, who was to be the Usherer of her busi∣nesse, thus.
The said Gentlewoman being as great a Royalist as her selfe, came (before the Lady Cave) into these parrs, and visited Captaine Abbots Landlady, some five miles from Holmby House where he quarters, being one of the Captaines who are under Collonell Graves for this busi∣nesse of wayting upon His Majesties Person at Holmby, and (it seemes) confiding in her, that she would be faith∣full to her designe, lay there some nights, untill shee had prevailed by her Laudladies meanes with Captaine Ab∣bot, who is a very honest faithfull Gentleman, but being ignorant of any designe (by her importunity) she prevai∣led, to procure with him, to get her to kisse the Kings hand, which she did at Holmby. After she saw how the way lay for the Lady CAVE (by doing the like to put the Letter into the Kings hands, which she had to deliver to Him from the Queene, shee againe addressed her selfe to the Lady Cave, having first contracted with this Gentlewoman to lye at her house, end by her meanes to prevaile with Captain Abbot, to make way for her to kisse the Kings hand if she could. The Lady Cave accordingly came, and lay there, with the Letter, and the Gentlewoman had importuned Capt. Abbot to procure way for her to kisse the Kings hand, which the Gentleman (thinking no harme, as any other, in civility to his Landlady, desiring it would have done, was willing to try an offer of it; in her behalfe. His Landlady conceiving that a businesse of so great weight was fit to be imparted to her husband, to require his assistance, for the better carrying of it on, acquainted him with it, and with the manner of the progresse that was made in it.
The man (however it is supposed, that hee is so farre a Royalist, that he had a good will (probably) to have as∣sisted it, yet) considering that if it should bee discovered, which by all likelyhood it would, because of the Com∣missioners about the King their vigilant eyes, he durst not run the hazzard of secrefie to the businesse, but acquaint∣ed Capt. Abbot with the businesse. The time being come wherein thr Lady Cave should go to Holmby to the King (shee little thinking that Capt. Abbot knew her businesse) to Holmby they went, and be∣ing alighted, the Captain addressed himselfe to the Com∣missioners, to acquaint them with the designe shee had, to deliver a Letter to the King, and that under pretence to kisse his Majesties hand, shee was then come to deliver it. Hereupon she was appointed presently to be taken into a room to be searched for the said Letter. But notwithstanding all this care, and that she had the Letter about her when she went into the roome, yet she (they being by) had so conveyed away her Letter, that nothing was found about her; but she said, that she had a Letter to deliver to the King, and that it should be delivered. So the Commissioners after they had exami∣ned her, sent her prisoner to the Mayor of Northampton, she is a very handsome Lady, and wondrous bold.
Some 2 or 3 dayes after (upon an accident) the Letter was found behind an hanging, in the room where she was searched, where it seemes she had put it, when she stood with her back to the Hang∣ings, and conveyed it with her hands behind her, whilest she talked with the Gentlewomen. The letter is all Charactors, so that none can understand what they import. After this, His Majesty was two or three dayes very private in writing, and then told the Earle of Denbigh, and the rest of the Com∣missioners, that be wondered the Propositions were not sent to him. And that he had drawne up Propositions (from what was presented to him formerly at Newcastle) to be sent to the Parliament, appointing them to be sent forth∣with. And accordingly on Thursday last, a messen∣ger was dispatched, with a letter from his Ma∣jesty, directed to the Speaker of the House of Piers, pro tempore, to be communicated to the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster assem∣bled, and to the Scots Commissioners. His Majesty told the Commissioners that He hoped, they would justifie him to the Parlia∣ment, the City, and the Kingdome.
The letter propound (by His Majesty) to consent to have Militia setled for ten yeares, the Presbyterian Government for three years, the Publique Debts satisfied, His owne paid, and many other particulars very large. Concerning the question your Honour de∣sires to be satisfied in, whether the Army, or a∣ny from them, did send, or offer to send any Petition, or any thing else to the King, or rece∣ved any thing from the King, I can assure you, that there is not so much as any resemblance of such a thing, nor hath his Majesty spoken any thing relating to any businesse in that kind of himselfe, nor any wayes any shaddow or colour for such a businesse to be related; and therefore, who ever report it, do much traduce, both the King, and also the Army. His Majesty told the Commissioners the o∣ther day, that He could wish He was at London, that the Church and Kingdome were setled. And they told Him, that the Propositions would speedily be sent to Him, to be passed for that purpose. His Majesty is very inquisitive concerning the affaires of Ireland, the Officers, and number of Forces. His Majesty writes all his owne pa∣pers
himself. This is all that I have to trouble your Honour with at present, who am at all times. Holmby, 15 May 1647. Your Honours humble servant, ROGER CORBET.
