C7056 E573_24 99865439 165405
❧ A Declaration By the Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND. Concerning His Resolutions for the peace and safety of Ireland, And the free injoyment of the Rights of the People. Together with the Copies of severall Letters taken in Ireland, of great consequence. THis Declaration is appointed to be Printed and published throughout all Ireland, by speciall direction from O. CROMWELL. Printed at Dublin by William Bladen, and Re-printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, dwelling in Smithfield. 1649.
A DECLARATION By the Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND. O: CROMWELL, WHereas I am informed, That upon the marching out of the Armies heretofore, or of Parties from Garrisons, a liberty hath been taken by the Souldiery to abuse rob and Pillage, and too often to execute cruel∣ties upon the Country people, being resol∣ved by the grace of God diligently and strictly to restraine such wickednesse for the future, I doe hereby warne and require all Officers, Souldiers, and others under my Command henceforth to for∣bear
all such evill practises as aforesaid, and not to doe any wrong or violence toward Country people or persons what∣soever, unlesse they be actually in Armes or Office with the Enemy, and not to medle with the goods of such without spe∣ciall order, And I further declare that it shal be free and law∣full to and for all manner of Persons dwelling in the Coun∣try as wel Gentlemen and Souldiers, as Farmors and other people (such as are in Armes or Office with or for the Ene∣my onely excepted) to make their repaire and bring any pro∣visions unto the Army (while in March or Campe) or unto any Garrison under my Command, hereby assuring all such that they shall not bee troubled or molested in their persons or goods, but shall have the benefit of a free Market and re∣ceive ready money for goods or Commodities they shall so bring and sell, And that they behaving themselves peacea∣bly and quietly, and paying such Contribution proportionably with their neighbours as have been, are, or shall be duly and orderly imposed upon them for maintenance of the Parlia∣ments Forces and other publicke uses, shall have free leave and liberty to live at home with their families and goods, and shall bee protected in their persons and estates by vertue hereof untill the first day of Ianuary next, by or vertue which time all such of them as are minded to reside and plow and sow in the quarters, are to make their addresses for now and further Protections, to the Atturney General residing at Dublin, and such other persons as shall bee Authorized for that purpose, And hereof I require all Souldiers, and others under my Command diligently to take notice and observe the same as they shal answer to the contrary at their utmost per∣ills, strictly charging and Commanding all Officers and o∣thers in their severall places carefully to see to it, that no wrong or violence be done to any such person as aforesaid contrary to the effect of the premises, and being resolved (through the grace of God) to punish all that shall offend con∣trary hereunto, very severely according to law or Ar∣ticles of Warre, to displace and otherwise punish, all such Officers as shal be found negligent in their places to, and not see the due observance hereof, or not to punish the offenders under their respective Commands. Given at Dublin the twenty fourth of August, 1649.
The copies of severall Letters taken in Ireland by the Lord Lieutenant. The Marquesse of Ormonds Letter to Prince Rupert May it please your Lordship. I Hope the course formerly laid down when Dene Boyle went hence, and the Horse and Foot drawne into those parts, will prevent the inconveniencies and dangers threatned upon that coast, whatever else seems fit to your highnes I will upon the least notice of your pleasure, put into immediate execution, I am exceed∣ingly sorry for Wil. Legs mis-fortunes, wherein by the miscarrying of his dispatch we have a great share, be∣sides the danger of his losse. This gentleman, I beleive formerly knowne to your highnesse, is particularly re∣commended too by her highnesses Majesty, and brings with him assurance of his Majesties being in France, be∣fore his imbarking: I have indeavoured another way to send over a relation of our condition here, and some∣thing I ventured to say of the Fleet, I hope it wil issue seasonably to prevent any prejudice may arise to his Person or service for want of intelligence, we are now removing nearer Dublin, with desire if we can to take the Sea, and consequently any hope of releife from the enemy. There are 12 small vessells come in this morning, but whither with supply of men or provisi∣on we do not know. I humbly beg your highnes par∣don for this unmannerly paper, the best I could get at present, and your beleife of my being, Your Highnesse most faithfull and most humble Servant, ORMOND. Finglasse 25 July. 1649.
Prince Ruperts Proposals: THe ordinary way of his Majesties victualling the Fleet, with the allowance to every man per diem is, Beer one gallon; Beefe two pound twice in the week; Pork one pound two days in a week; of Pease that day to each man one Pint; Cheese foure ounces, Butter two ounces; Fish if of a size one to eight men; Bread one pound. These provisions will not be had under 7 d. per diem, as the Market goes yet. To set out his Majesties Fleet now riding at Kingsale, will require at least 1200 men, which will require 1000 li. per mensem to victuall them▪ with other petty charges. The Fleet hath not at present victualls for above one month, and when it is expired, if there bee not provisions made to re-victuall, there will be a necessity of discharging the men, and laying up the ships, the former not to be got together without a vast charge; the latter by that means re∣newed. The summe of 3000 l. in victualling will remedy this, and whosoever will furnish the same, may be assured of sud∣den satisfaction as soon as time of the year (which grows on) shall call away the ships now riding before Kingsale, it being then a fit season for our Fleet to put to sea, when the Enemies dare not venture so far from their owne coasts; and we by reason of our safe harbours, and short voyages be∣tween the coasts of Spaine and France, and these parts shall be able to crosse the whole trade, through both channels; and every South and Westerly wind which shuts them up in their harbour, if they were ready shall bring ships from all Sou∣therne and Easterne parts into our laps. The middle or latter end of September will be a fit time to go out, till which time there must be some course taken to supply the Fleet after that this months victuals that we have shall bee expended, besides the 3000 l. formerly menti∣oned.
September will likewise bee a fit time to bake Bread, brew Beer, and make all sorts of provisions for the Fleet. In the mean time we shall take occasion, as it shall offer it selfe by force or violent winds, or the Enemies going a∣way with their ships, to send out some of our small vessels to look after purchase, out of which the first that comes to be imployed, to repay such as shall engage for the victuals. RƲPERT. July 18. 1649. Prince Ruperts first Letter to my Lord of Ormond. My Lord, THe certaine ruine of this Fleet being to follow the ex∣pence of those few provisions we now feed on, which have exalted the rest of his Majesties monies, besides that lit∣tle I had, I thought fit to dispatch this bearer Mr. Roach to the Lord President to propose the only remedy now in view to put this Fleet in a condition of the King and this King∣domes service: If your Lordship approve the Propositions, I shall earnestly desire that this season may not be lost, in which provisions are easiest to bee had: The particulars of this businesse your Lordship will receive from this bearer, to whom you may give credit; and if conveniently your Lord∣ship may grant these desires, it will infinitly oblige, My Lord, Your Lordships most faithfull friend and servant, RUPERT. Kingsale 22. July 1649. Prince Ruperts second Letter. My Lord, THis bearer Mr. Parker hath all his businesse ready, and I hope to your Lordships satisfaction, though wee
are in these straits, that after a month we shall hardly know where to get subsistance for our Fleet, though never so much reduced. I thought your Lordship might want for the pre∣sent service, which I preferred, and am resolved to finde out some other way to supply our wants hereafter, by the first I shal let your Lordship know our resolutions; Your Lordship will remember that I told you something concerning the Gover∣nour here, since which time I have received intelligence out of the Rebels Admirall, that they are in hopes of him, and that his Gunner at the poynt will shoot but loose powder, And when that is setled, they will come to us, these and some other reasons I have of suspition, made me send Will. Legge to him to desire him that since my men must doe duty in other places for him, that they may do it at the point, where he hath but five fellows that he knows not, and upon which all our security depends, there is not a horseman here abouts to hin∣der the Rebels to fetch water, which they should want ex∣treamly if Tymoley were not open, from whence they fetch it daily as well as their Intelligence. Your Lordship will bee pleased to give Your Orders for the best, I am your Lordships Most faithfull Friend and Servant RUPERT. FINIS.
