c7447aa 99899922 135707
These Girdles have been Experimen in severall Waters, at Portsmouth lately, & at Bristoll publicly beforThousands, by a Man weighing One Hundred & half, Bound Hand & foot. Those that are desireous may see it tryd in the Thames at Highwater or any time, ten or twelve persons for a Guinnea: giveing Norice beforehand to  Davis at the Red Lyon Inn at Charing Cross. Where further satisfaction may be ha Vivat Rex
Ars Nova Natandi, OR, New SWIMMING GIRDLES, That will safely support a Man from DROWNING, In any kind of Water; with many other Conveniencies. By FRANCIS CRUYS, Gent. sworn servt in Ord: to his Maty. BRISTOL, Printed by Will. Bonny on the Back, 1698.
THE PREFACE. Courteous Reader, THere's no Room for Harangues, and Long Speeches, in a Pre∣lude to so sman an Overture, as may be contain'd in less than a sheet of Paper: Therefore I desire you, dispise nor condemn not the poor Advices of a True Fried, that has taken several Years pains, for the Preservation at a time of need: If thy Lfe be concern'd, or thy Calling be in that useful and good Servan, but worst of
Masters, the Water. I did it out of a Charitable Design, which I pray thee so accept; and not censure and ridicule a thing before thou Read'st or Understands it. It is from the beginning to the end thereof my own, without the help of any: and this the first I ever appear'd in Print in; Tho' I confess, these last Ten Years I have spent most time in Study and New Inventions, for the Publick Good; and as this gains Acceptance, shall proceed farther in seve∣ral others, (too many and tedious here to Relate.) If thy Condition be Rich, the charge is little more than nought, if but in∣different, tis not much, and if Mean or Poor, I'll shew thee a way that it shall be Imperceptable, or easy to be borne: To pur∣chase the Dearest GIRDLE, save but One Penny per Diem, out of thy com∣mon Expences, and in about Fourteen Months 'twill be over, which may serve the
thy Term of Life, and perhaps thy Sons too; and for the Cheapest, One Half-pen∣ny a Day for Nine Months will defroy it: And if thou makest out that thou art not able to do that, I will freely give thee, as thou art my Brother Christian: I shall endea∣vour to Answer the end of my Creation to my Neighbour, but must not forget my Duty to my Creator, and my Self. If 'tis accepted by the Ingenuous and Sober, I care not much what the contrary Parties say or think. If I am Encouraged, I will proceed and make Thousands, but if none approve, I hope they will pardon me if I forbear: and if those I herewith propose, will be taken, Directions for their true use shall he given with them, and will (God willing) Publish in the Gazzet where I may be spoken with in London next Spring: designing to disperse these on
the Sea Coasts this Winter. Who am Your Real Friend to serve you. FRANCIS CRUYS. Pounley near Newent in Gloucester-shire, Octo∣ber, 2th. 1697.
ARS NOVA NATANDI, OR New SWIMMING GIRDLES. That will safely support a Man from Drowning, in any kind of Water, with many other Conveniences, &c. OF Two sorts. The one an Airy Tube, fil∣led with the Man's Breath in a moment, and Equipt as soon; (which if time should be wanting) if 'twere on empty, and the Man Twenty fathoms or deeper, one puff will bring him up safely on the surface of the Water, to do any reasonable thing for his Preser∣vation; weighing near three pounds▪ and made so portable, that 'twill go in a Coat Pocket, or if put on under a Surtoot Coat▪ cannot be discovered. The other, stufft with above Ten thousand Particles; nor subject to any Accident; that does as well or bet∣ter than the other, except its bulk: But in a Ship or Boat will take up little room, intended to ly under the Pillow of the Hammocks, and with either, a Sailor may act his labour in a Storm without hinderance.
The Benefit of these, are not only to those that use the Seas, but to those who are occupied in Rivers, Lakes, &c. As also for Passangers over broad Ferrys, and Arms of the Sea, where sometimes (without a Mira∣cle) many perish with a sudden blast of wind. Like∣wise for those that must travail when Rivers are over∣flown; with which a Man may not only save his own Life, but his Horses too, without loosing time. Lastly, For the Instructing Youth in the most useful Art of Swimming; and for Gentlemen, Others, and Ladies too (if they please) in hot weather for Bathing, and Cooling. And either sort lasting many years, (if not abused.) Moreover, if any small accident should happen, they shall be repaired for the first time gra∣tis; and afterwards at Reasonable Rates, by the Pro∣jector or his Assigns. Who by five or six years Study and Practice, has perfected them, and will expose them to the World for the benefit of Mankind; and by his often amend∣ments has made them so Cheap, that the dearest will be afforded for a Guinea and half, and the cheapest at half a Guinea: And for his first Essay, will make a Lottery of 1600 Los for 1600 Guineas, all Prizes (and not one Blank.) without Decit or Cheat, getting nothing by the Lottery, only the Sale of his Girdles.
  Guineas. One, the greatest Lot 50 Guineas. 50. 2 Lots at 25 50. 4 Lots at 12½ 50. 8 Lots at ¼ 50. 21 Lots at 3 63. 312 Lots at 1½ 468. 486 Lots at 1 486. 766 Lots at half a Guinea 383. Lots 1600   Guineas 1600. He gains only by the last▪ Saves by the last save one, and looses by all the rest, yet equally Balanc'd. Those Noblemen, Ladies, Gentlemen and Others, that will please to encourage▪ Charitable an Action, (that will set many Poor people at work; and by making these gain a good livelyhood;) may adven∣ture what they plea till 'tis full: But in case the Subscriptions amount not to the aforesaid Sum, the Girdles only Subscribed for can be expected, and not the Advantage of Lottery, for its equal to the Proje∣ctor Lottery or not. He can give sufficient satisfa∣ction to any Person concern'd of himself, and cir∣cumstances in the World. What Tickets soever any Person Subscribes for, He or She, must lay down at the Subscribing One Third part; The Second Third part, at his Office in London, after the Subscribers have One Months Notice in either Let∣ters or the Gazet, and who ever pays not in to the Projector or his Assigns in Fourteen days over and a∣bove
the said Month before-mention'd, Forfeits their First Third part in hand paid; the Last Third part after the Lottery is drawn, and at the delivery of the Girdles. Those Persons that shall draw the great PRIZES, and shall think them too many for their own use, or their Friends, to give to poor Seamen, shall (if they please) have an Allowance in the Patent to the Value of their Lots, if the whole Project may be Esteemed and Computed, at such a Rate as may be agreeable to both Parties, Projector and Subscribers, if they'll be pleased to trust to the Projector's Care and Honesty: who will at any seasonable time give sa∣tisfaction to any Person willing to be concern'd. Who ever Adventures but One Guinea may have the greatest Lot; but if the worst of Fortune hap∣pens; he will have a Girdle of half a Guinea, and if that is dislik't, for a Guinea more may have one of the dearest sort; and the loss can be but half a Guinea. But those that are willing to Adventure no more than one single Guinea, are desired to pay it at Sub∣scribing, to avoid trouble and charge on both sides. Those Cities, Corporations, or Fraternities, that give Encouragement, shall have Allowance for their Poor that use the Seas, from the Projector, according to the value and number they take off; of the Tenth Part of the Profit of them. For what Sums the Projector or his Assigns shall re∣ceive, satisfactory Acquitances shall be given as occa∣sion shall require. With every Girdle a small Volume, but an Excel∣lent Pious Book, called. The Christian Monitor, with a Plain and Honest Sermon, affixt on this Text, Vigi∣late & Orate, shall be presented Gratis by the Projector.
A Copy of the Instrument for Subscrip-tions. WE whose Hands are hereunto under written, Do Covenant, Bargain, Con∣tract and Agree to and with FRAN∣CIS CRƲYS, of White-Hall, Gent. That for as much as he the said FRANCIS CRƲYS Intends in as little time as conveniently he can pass a Patent under the Broad Seal of England; for his New Invented SWIMMING GIRDLES, soley to the use of him the said F. C. or his Assigns, for 14 Years, by Virtue of a Statute made for that Pur∣pose, &c. and making a LOTTERY of 1600 Lots, for 1600 Guineas, all PRIZES, according to the afo'd Page 11. at 50 Guineas Value in Gir∣dles, 2 at 25 Guineas value in Girdles, &c. which shall be made as soon as wth good speed they can be conveniently: We will pay him at our several Subscribing One Third part in Hand as anest or Con∣tract-Money, for the several Lots we underwrite; and the Second Third part at such Place or Places he shall due, after we have account ven us by Let∣ters, or Publication in the Gazet, oy-Boy, &c. of the Time and Place or Places for the Receipt thereof, or within One Months time  fourteen Days over and above such Advise or Publication: And that in case we fail of our Second Payment of our several Second Third parts to him, as aforesaid, we Allow and Agree that the First, Third part shall be Forfeited to him the said F. C. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, as his Proemium.
And also that our Last Third part shall be paid in like manner, within Three Days after the Lottery is drawn, and on the receiving our Girdles, excepting only those that Adventure but One single Guinea. And the said F. C. does hereby further Agree to and with the several Subscribers, that he the said F. C. shall make and deliver to all the said Subscribers the Number of Girdles stated as above, if the full num∣ber of the Lottery is Subscribed for: but if not full, no Advantage of Lottery, but to the Value of Gui∣neas Subscribed, firm, substantial, and good for use, with all convenient speed, without Fraud or Coven: And does further Agree and Covenant to and with the said Subscribers, that if any small acci∣dent should happen, that any of those Girdles deli∣ver'd by him in Lots should be damag'd (using his Directions) they shall be amended and made useful (if repairable) for the Fir time  and for the future at Reasonable Rate, by him the and F. C. or his Assigns. Moreover that if any Person or Persons concern'd shall dislike their sorts of Girdles as they are Lotted, they shall freely exchange the Dearer for the Cheaper, or the Cheaper for the Dearer, without any allowance of Loss, Three of the Cheaper for One of the Dearer, or One of the Dearer for Three of the Cheaper, as soon as they can be conveniently made. leaving their Girdles unused. And lastly the said F. C. voluntarily Engages, that One-Tenth part of the clear profit that shall arise to him by these Girdles, as near as he can possible compute, shall be disposed of in Prous and Charitable uses.
The Appartenances to the GIRDLE are an Atten∣dant to carry all Necessaries dry, and to be had at pleasure, and may be made to contain, half a Hun∣dred weight, more or less, following the Man, and when occasion requires its use is to be lasht on the Starbord-side of the Man. and when its present use is over, to follow as it did: Any quantity of Li∣quors may be tack't to it without, in Wooden Bot∣tels, without Prejudice. A Pillow, exceeding light, to supporr the Head, and to keep the Neck from Akeing if a Man should lye long on his back. Light Oars for the Hands to make way; very convenient. A small Horn light and Cheap, to give Notice to a Vessel, much further than a Man's Voyce. Some of these needless in a Fleet, or in Company of others, but highly seful and convenient in a single Ship: and of sma Charge. FINIS.
Postscript. THose that are not willing to Adventure in Lottery, may be Furnisht with Girdles at a Certainty, paying One third part at Sub∣scribing, and the rest as aforesaid; and Subscriptions will be taken by Mr. William Jordan, at the Talbot in Worcester. Mr. William Roberts, at the Swan in Tewksbury. Mr. Richard Cosnet, at the Bell in Glou∣cester. Mr. John Morgan, at the White-Hart, and Mr. John Olave, at the Nags-head in Bristol. and in most Cities and Sea-Port Towns, as soon as Time and Opportunity will permit. The Projector may be spoken with in Tendon, at Garway's Coffee-House, or on the Royal Exchange, in the Turkey Walk. near the North-west Corner.
