d590 e445_2 99864226 161737
A DECLARATION From the City of LONDON WITH Instructions from the Court of Com∣mon Councell. For the defence of the Parliament and City, against the Complotters that are Rising, Listing, and Arming themselves by a bloody Confederacy to plunder and massacre the famous City of LONDON. ALSO A Message concerning Prince Charles, Read in the House of Lords; from Sir Thomas Dishington. And Propositions for Vindication of his Ma∣jesty, and the honour of the Kingdome. May. 27.1648. Imprimatur, Gilb. Mabbott. Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, neer the Queenes-head Tavern, 1648.
To the Right Honourable the Earle of Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peeres, pro tempore. My Lord, SAturday last, the Mayor of Dover hearing that the Prince was at Sandwich, sent an Expresse to the Mayor of Sand∣wich to know the truth: At foure in the afternoone the Message came backe and (from the Mayor of Sandwich) assur∣ed him that it was the Prince of England as he called him. The Mayor and Jurats of Dover were very earnest with me to go to Sandwich to see the truth: I told them it could not be, having the day before received Letters from France, that the Prince was then still at St. Jermans, yet they pressed me so that I went, where when I came, I found him whom they will have to be Prince. A little man, flaxen haire, shorter then the Prince by the head, a little bowed in his Shoulders, with hands like to a Butchers boyes hands, with a narrow blew ribband about his neck, without a George. I told the Mayor, that he was an Im∣postor, and a villaine: And required the Mayor (as he would be answerable to King and Parliament,) that they would make him sure, and forth comming, for which the Mayor (being ac∣companyed with 20 or 30 Mariners,) came to me, the Mayor himself seized on my sword, with their assistance took it from me, and presently committed me to the common Gaole. One Mr. Richards who knew me, offering to be bound body for bo∣dy for me, could not be heard; so to Gaole I went, where I remained till Sunday at night. On Sunday many of Dover where I am well knowne, came to Sandwich to me, while yet I was in prison, and likewise out of Cauterbury, hearing of it
that morning. They went to the Mayor, and told him what I was, and how I belonged to the Court: And they knew what I had done for the State since the beginning of these wofull troubles, and moved them to release me while this day. And took my word to be this day againe at Sandwich: Then I did give them 13 Queries to aske of the Impostor, which I knew, and did know that he knew not, to let them see he was but a Frixon: Which Queries I send to your Lordships, with the copy of their Answer, and leave the consideration to your Lord∣ships wisdome. This day when I was in Sandwich, the women, and Mariners would have stoned me in the streets, for not confessing that Rogue to be the Prince: when we got to our Horses, they re∣fused to let us out at Dover gate, and beate us back with Hal∣berts, we were forced to take us to Canterbury gate, where with much adoe, we got out. My Lord, I doe not write this at so much length to trouble your Lordship for any particular that may concern my selfe, as that you may know the truth; and have a speedy care to cause to send for this Impostor from thence, or else doubtlesse it will make some miserable combustion in these quarters. My Lord, I doubt not but in its time, that your noble house of Peeres will doe me justice, and right me of the affronts and injuries that I have received, in maintaining the unparalleled blood of our Soveraigne, and the Kingdomes honour in it. This day I did shew to the Mayor, and Jurats, some Letters that I had from France, of the 17 of May, that the Prince was then still at St. Jermans; But it could not prevaile with the Sandwichers: Hoping that your Lordships will take in good part the zealous affections to serve this Kingdome: And in it to shew my self, My Lord, Your most humble and affectionate servant, Thomas Dishington. Dovr 22 May. 1648.
May 22. 1648. The Queries of Sir Thomas Dishington, delivered to the Mayor of Sandwich to bee propounded to the Impostor that calls him∣selfe Prince Charles. 1 WHether ever he saw this ancient Gentlemen, when, where, and what his name? 2. When, where and what you last spake with him, and what the last dis∣courses were betwixt you? 3. Whether ever he received any favour from you, where, when and what it was? 4. What was the form of your and his last parting? 5. What Lords you left, behind you? 6. What are the names of your bed∣chamber? 7. What are the names of your querries? 8. What are the names of your footemen. 9. What are the names of the grooms of four stable. 10. What are the names of them that keep your Armes? 11. What were your last acti∣ons at the Court of France? 12. When you were a hunting where did you use to eate? 13. Who is the master of your Hounds. Sandwich May 22. 1648 It was humbly desired by the Mayor and Jurats of Sandwich, that the Gentleman which doth now declare himselfe to bee Prince Charles (for the clearing of all doubts and scruples) would returne his Answer: To which queries bee did absolutely refuse to give any Answer, unlesse it was to the fift query. To which hee answered, that be left the Lord Hopton, but refused to name any other, or to give further answer to any of the said queries. A Declaration from the Court of Com∣mon Councell of the City of London. FOrasmuch as to the Court of Common-councel of the City of London this day assembled, as well upon the in∣formation of the Committee for the Militia of the said
City, upon examinations of divers persons brought before them, openly read in the said Court, (as otherwise) it did plainly and evidently appeare, that the Parliament and Ci∣ty is in great and imminent danger by a desperate Plot and Designe, intended and carried on by evill disposed persons against the same, in a secret and under-hand Listing of Ap∣prentices and other persons within the said City, and Li∣berties thereof, under Oath of a Covenant and Secresie; A copy of which Oath and Covenant (being found in the hand of some the Actors) was there also openly read: The which persons so Listed (as was expressed in the Exa∣minations) were many Thousands, deluded and drawn in under specious pretences, and were to be under the com∣mand of severall persons, who have been Commanders and actors in the Kings Army against the Parliament; with an intent to joyn with severall disaffected persons in severall Counties near this City, who are by the said Plotters ex∣pected suddenly to approach in great multitudes, and to seize the Bridge and Tower of London, and thereby to make the City their owne, and to worke their wills thereupon: And to that purpose doe buy up many pocket Pistols, and Daggers, and other Armes and Ammunition for Horse and Foot. And at the meeting of divers Irish Papists, severall Daggers were laid upon the Altar, and by the Priest deman∣ded if they were sharpe, and by him were sprinkled with holy Water; with an intimation, That many others would be ready for the same purpose. All which, and many other the like dangerous Passages (made knowne unto said Common-councell) do threaten the like massacre as was in Ireland, and the utter ruine and destruction of the Parlia∣ment and City, if not timely and speedily prevented: And to the intent that the Inhabitants of this City may have knowledge of the dangers, they are in, and be more sensible thereof, then yet they are; And that my selfe, the Alder∣men, and Common-councell-men may discharge our re∣spective duties herein; and every one in their severall places and conditions may adde their endeavours for the preven∣tion
of the said wicked Designe: These are by the direction of the said Court of Common-Councell to will and require you, That presently upon sight hereof, you cause the Deputy and Common-councell-men of your Ward, with the Constables thereof, forthwith to repaire into their severall Precincts, and make knowne the Con∣tents hereof unto the severall Inhabitants within the same; And to desire them to suffer their Sonnes, Servants, and o∣ther persons (fit to beare Armes) not Listed in the Trained Bands, to be Listed in the Auxiliaries, under such faithfull and honest Commanders, as are and shall be appointed for that purpose by the said Committee for the Militia, accor∣ding to their late Warrant, and to be in a readinesse for the defence of themselves, the parl. and the City, against all Tu∣mults, Invasions, and Insurrections that may happen with∣in, or against the same: And for that purpose, to follow such Directions as by the said Committee, and their several Commanders shall be given and required; with this inti∣mation, That every person that shall not willingly further the said Service, will thereby give just occasion of suspition to be engaged in the said horrid Designe: And that you certifie unto Me, or some other of the Justices of the Peace, or Committee of the Militia, the Names of such persons as shall either oppose, or not act in the furthering of the said Service. And that you doe cause a strict charge and command to be given to every Inhabitant within your Ward, That they doe carefully examine all their Sons and Servants, or any other under their command, whether themselves, or any o∣thers (to their knowledge) are within the said Design and Plot, Covenant, Listing, and Oath of Secresie; or what they know or have heard concerning the same: and do make diligent search for any Weapons or Papers that may bee found in the custody of any of them touching the Premi∣ses. And that what shall be herein discovered, be certified from time to time either to my Selfe, or some of the Ju∣stices of the Peace, or unto the said Committee of the Mi∣litia.
And further, That every Housholder be command∣ed so to order and dispose of their Sonnes Servants, and others under their charge and command, as that they bee not found to be any Actors in the said desperate Designe, nor so farre (as shall be in their power, by perswasion, or otherwise) any consenters thereunto, or concealers there∣of. And that you cause diligent search to be made in all Places (whereof you shall have notice, or that you have cause to suspect) for all such Weapons, and other Ammuni∣tion of War, and persons that you shall find, that may dis∣cover any such Intention or Design, as is before declared: And to seise the things, and secure the persons, and spee∣dily to acquaint Me, the said Justices, or the said Commit∣tee of the Milita therewith, that such order therein may be taken, as shall be fit. And lastly, That according to former Precepts, you take speciall care, that your Deputy, and Common-councell-men, and Constables do with all diligence take care, and use their best indeavour, That all persons within your Ward of the Trained Bands, doe spee∣dily upon the beat of the Drum repaire to their Colours: And also, That the double Watch and Ward in every Pre∣cinct be carefully observed, and duly set and continued; and the Gates, Chaines, and Landing-places, maintained and kept from time to time, untill you receive order from Mee to the contrary. And that all other things be done with care, faithfulnesse, and diligence, that may conduce to the safety and preservation of the Paliament and City; and to the preventing of this present dangerous and hor∣rid Plot and Design, and other dangers that are threatned and intended against the same. And hereof fail you not, as you tender the welfare of the Parliament and City, and wil answer the contrary at your perill: This foure twentieth of May. 1648: MICHEL. FINIS.
