E3767 E470_8 99864887 162381
Exceeding Joyfull NEVVES FROM THE TREATY CONTAINING The Acts of Agreement, between the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Parliaments Commissioners, on Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday last. Brought by the Post on Sunday Novemb. 5. 1648. With His gracious Speech at the Councell Table, for His present comming to London, and proclaiming of Peace throughout His Realmes and Dominions. And the Earl of Northumberlands Declaration thereupon. blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT C. R. HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE Imprinted at London, for P. LOVNDEL, 1648.
JOYFULL NEWES FROM THE TREATY Communicating the proceedings of the Kings Majesty and the Commissioners, on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday last. Right Honourable, ON Wednesday morning last the Kings Majesty and the Commissioners met in the Treaty Chamber, and taking their places at the Councell Table according to the usuall manner, the Earl of Northumberland rose up, and made a short Speech, Humbly defiring his Majesty to remove his a∣versnesse
from the setling of Religion, and to hearken unto the advice of His great and loyall Councell, so much tending to the honour of His Majesty and Posterity, and the setling of a true and lasting peace throughout all His Realms and Dominions. Which done, his Lordship presented a Copy of the Parliaments last Votes brought by Sir Peter Killegrey, on Tuesday night last, in answer to his Majesties En∣largement of Concessions touching Episcopacy. His Majesty (after reading the same) rose up out of the Chair of State, and made a very learned and excellent Speech to the Commissioners, the effect whereof was as followeth. My Lords and Gentlemen, WHereas I find (by your present paper) that the two Houses of Parliament are not satisfied with my last Concessions, I shall therefore indeavour (as a fur∣ther testimony of Our candid Desires for peace) to give you a more ample and satisfactory Answer touching the said particulars; especially that concerning Religion, and therefore (considering the period of our dayes) desire no longer detraction of time, but that we may forthwith insist thereon, to the end, that all differences may be composed, and peace and unity established throughout Our Realmes and Dominions, which God of his infinite mercy grant. His Majesty having thus graciously declared Him∣self, the Commissioners began to proceed according to their Instructions, and desired a more fuller and sa∣tisfactory Answer, touching the utter extirpation of
Episcopacy, which took up some time of debate in pro and con, and the day being far spent, they referred the further results thereof to the happy succession of the morrow following. And (accordingly) yesterday morning they met a∣gain, where the streames of joy issued from the cur∣rent of the hearts both of Priuce and People, who came to a finall close upon all the Proposals, His Ma∣jesty promising upon his Royall Word to passe those Bills into Acts which He had already assented to. And being further pressed by the Commissioners so signe to the Bill for the establishing of Episcopacy, his Ma∣jesty desired respite of time till Saturday morning, which was accordingly granted. And this morning (about the accustomed houre) his Majesty gave the Commissioners a visit, and sitting down in the Chair of State, presented a Paper to them, which is said to be very satisfactory, containing His Royall Assent to the Proposition of the Church, and likewise to all the rest of the Bills and Proposals. This joyfull tydings were soon eccho'd throughout the I∣sland; insomuch that the Bels rang tryumphantly in all the respective Parishes. But by reason of the sud∣den dispatch of the Post, I am forced to conclude, and remain Your Honours devoted servant, J. RISHTON. Newport 4 Octob. 1648.
The voice of the Kingdom touching King Charles. VVHereas base degenerate Spirits would sell or their Birthrights for a messe of pottage, or a deceitfull smile of a shadowing Prince induce them to a belief that He would fight for their free∣doms, when they know that the people throughout all Na∣tions are now staves to their Princes, and cannot be igno∣rant likewise how for many Ages together this Design hath been violently prosecuted against the free Commoners of this Nation. And could it ever be expected that Chri∣stians should be so inhumane, and self destructive to sheath their swords in their own bowels, and fight with their E∣nemies against themselves, to make themselves, staves to their enemies and their posterities for ever, but that they were not sensible of their own freedomse, both by the Law of God, Man, and Nature, but deluded by false prophets, who taught the works of the Law, and not of Grace, ma∣king the people believe that all power were ordained of God, and to resist these powers. And lest there should be any of this seed yet left in the Nation, spreading abroad this doctrine to deceive the people with these fallacies, I shall give them an explanation of the true sense thereof, and represent these ensuing Articles or Charge, against a perfidious Prince, or an unfaithfull Parliament, viz. 1 God hath ordained all things in heaven and earth for the good and well being of man; and what power soever is contrary to, or acting against the same, is no power of God, but again his expresse will and pleasure, and therefore most lawfull to be disobeyed; whereupon the Parl. levyed war against the King, and disobeyed his pretended power. 2 Every Officer appointed for the good of the republike
and well-government of the people, as the King, parlia∣ment, Iustices of peace, &c. is elected by the people; the King by three severall voices, by way of consent and appro∣bation of the people, before his Coronation. 3 The Kingly Office as it is a great trust, so the people will not admit him to the execution thereof, without He swears to be faithfull in performing the trust reposed in Him, executing their Laws and Statutes, for their peace∣able government, and not otherwise. 4 In case any of the Trustees shall forfeit their trust reposed in them by the people, in breaking their Oaths, vio∣lating the peoples lawes, faeedoms, and priviledges, leavy∣ing war against them, to destroy them; the people are bound by the Law of God, Man and Nature to disobey them, and bring them to speedy tryall for breach of that trust which they reposed in them. 5 It is lawfull for the people after such breach of trust to use all Coercive power for bringing to condigne pu∣nishment such Trustees, and to fight with kill and slay all such as shall oppose them therein. And it it is further declared, That if God hath ordai∣ned all things for the good of the people; what earthly principalities or powers which the people have chosen for their good, can injoyn them to obedience in destructive and unlawfull? Is not Salus populi suprema Lex, The peoples safety the supream Law? And what Lawes and powers there are contrary hereunto, are not they all void, being against the supreme and highest of all Lawes, to which all other must give place and precedency, and all Kings and Parliaments vaile to, and stand in feare of.
SIR, SInce my last, Here hath hapned severall Overture; between his Majesty and the Parliaments Commis∣sioners; they have had much debate upon the Propo∣sitions, especially that concerning the Church, which the King stuck much at; but the dark Cloud being ex∣pelled, and the splendor of the Gospell shining most gloriously in the eyes of his Majesty, He was graci∣ously pleased to declare his Royall Assent to all the Propositions, and to grant His Royall Word to passe all things desired by his two Houses, that may be agreeable and consonant to the fundamentall Lawes of this Kingdom. And as to the busines of the Church (which is all they stick at) the King hath promised to give his concurrence therein, rather then his People shall suffer for his dis-assenting. Just upon the close hereof, news came that all things were agreed on, but the Treaty not to break off till ten at night. Brought by the Post on Sunday Novemb. 5. 1648. And dated from Newport on Saturday last, at 3. of the clock in the Afternoon. FINIS.
