E80B E110_8 99862011 114158
THE Earle of Portlands CHARGE. Delivered to the Lords House by M. Pym. ALSO A NEW PLOT DISCOVERED. Being the Relation of the Earle of Northamptons surprizing the Magazine at Banbury by the forging of a false Letter. Also the taking of Warwick Castle by the said Earle, and his carrying of the Magazine to the said Castle. With certaine Propositions propounded by the Earle of Northampton to the Lord Brooke at their meeting, and the Lord Brooke his iudicious and religious answer thereunto. Joh. Brown Cler. Parl. August 11. Printed for John Jones 1642.
A NEW PLOT DISCOVERED. TOGETHER WITH THE CHARGE of the Earle of Portland. WE are not yet safe, but every day and houre doth beget new dangers, and doth strike the fearfull and trem∣bling subject with new horrour and a∣mazement. The bleeding heart of this kingdom doth daily receive new wounds: and time, which we hoped would put a finall period to all her distractions, doth either con∣tinue the old, or els beget new, to the danger of the generall subversion of the whole king∣dome. Peace is exlled our habitation, and we
can receive from abroad no other sounds, but such as bring unto us affrightment, and not satisfaction or content. Neither can we ex∣pect any respit or release from these unsavou∣rie troubles, untill the power and edge of the malignant party be taken off, whose destru∣ctive counsels nnd actions onely tend to the disquiet and trouble both of the Church and Common-wealth. Mifery must needs be the portion of that kingdome, wherein vertue, goodnesse and religion are not onely not en∣couraged, and countenanced, but neglected, scorned, and trampled down. The laborious and pious cares and counsels of this Parliament have from their very be∣ginning found slender and undeserved wel∣come with a great many, and their aimes and endeavours tending onely to the reformarion of such abuses as have disturbed the unity and peace both of Church and Common-wealth, have beene opposed by malice and discontent. The reason of this discontent and oppositi∣on is decided and out of controversie. The Actors know their own guilt, and know they cannot be secure, but by the abetting and pro∣secuting these publike troubles. My Lord Brooke some time after his return to London, being appointed Lieutenant of Warwick-shire, and so by consequence had the trust and charge of the Militia committed to
him, in the execution and performance, accor∣ding to the appointment of the House of Par∣liament, by whose power and authority he was thought worthy of that trust, and had it conferred upon him; in the execution, I say, of that tust he spent his faithfull and respe∣ctive service. His opposition was much and dangerous: for when he began to put the Or∣dinance of Parliament in execution, and to ex∣ercise the Militia in the County of Warwick, the Earle of Northampion and the Lord Duns∣more, who had a Commission from His Maie∣sty to put the Commission of Array in exe∣cution, opposed him, not with meane and or∣dinary strength and power, but had so well ar∣med themselves, as they thought their designe and intentions did deserve or desire. For they had gathered together into one entire body for that present service and execution, many hun∣dreds of men out of severall Shires and Counties, whom not onely by faire and allu∣ring speeches, but also with an extraordinary salary they had hired and ingaged to partake with them, and to assist them in this their de∣signe. They gave them extraordinary wages, which is not commonly exhibited unto soul∣diers, for they allowed them two shillings a day, to the intent that they should assist them in the hindrance of the Lord Brooke from the removing of the Magazine from Banhurie.
The competition of this thing was very long and full of terrour, for the Earle of Northampton was very violent, and offered the Lord Brooke to encounter with him, and to de∣cide the present controversie by single combat, and not to ingage so many mens lives as were on both sides then preset in that same quar∣ell; which the Lord Booke out of judgment and wisdome did refuse to do, advising the said E to  from the prosecution of so bad a , which he had undertaken, which must of necessity tend to the subversion of his Lord∣sp nd his psterity. Thi modest answer did not allay or quali∣fie the violent spirit of the incensed Earle, but he  offered him to draw out of their sor∣  select men of each side, and by them to ecide that dayes difference. But that  of the Earle was also denied by the Lord Brooke, who would not hazard that  trust imposed upon him upon such in∣siderate rmes. Upon such and the like discours, the day was spent, and at the close of the day they pie: B tis since reported, that  hath seized up∣ and hath carried  were there repo∣ to have pass much blood had  God did divt it
for the present. It is likewise reported, that since the Lord Brooke his coming up to Lon∣don, at the Earle of Northampton hath sei∣ the castle of Warwick, and withall  ken possession of the Magazine of that Coy. After Colonell Goring had delivered up the haven-town of Portsmouth into the kings pos∣session, this unfaithfulnesse in him not with∣out just grounds, did move the House of Commons to enter into consideration concer∣ning he securing of the Isle of Wight, and the discharging of the Earle of Portland from the government of the said Island. Whereupon after much and due consultation and delibera∣tion, a Charge was drawn up against the said Earle of Prland, which was to this effct, That his Lordship was conceved upon ve∣ry strong grounds and motives to be much Po∣pishly ffected: and that the reason which did induce them to this opinion was, because that his wise and the rest of her kindred, and his mo∣ther, and the most of her friends and kindred were of that religion: so that being induced to thi opinion by these grounds, they thought it convenient and very requisite to place the Cstle of that Island into such hands as might no wayes be suspected, but such as they might confide in: and that they did think it very fit∣ting that his Lordship should be kept in custo∣dy
for a time, whereby he was committed to Sheriffe Garret to be kept in safe custody. This Charge was delivered to the House of Lords by M. Pym against the Earl of Portland. That Sir Ralph Hopton, M. Tho. Smith, & Captain John Digby shalbe disabled to sit as members of the House of Commons during this Parliament. That Captain John Digby, Sir Ralph Hopton, M. Tho. Smith, Sir Ferdi∣nand Gorges, Sir Francis Dodington, Richard Board, Hercules Whiting, Nicolas Dounton, James Stroud, John Walker, and John Cooth Parson of Shipton-Mallet be forthwith sent for as Delinquents. Ioh. Brown Cler. Parl. FINIS.
