G1052B R43861 42475523 151150
Good NEWS for England, OR THE Heads of a PEACE PROPOS'D by the FRENCH KING. THE Kings of Sweden and Denmark have lately had a Project of Peace presen∣ted them by the French Envoys at their Courts, Monsieur D'Avaux, and Monsieur Bowrepos: And to shew the world that their Master is in earnest they tell the Northern Kings 'tis their Honor and Interest to press the Allies to accept it. They are almost angry with, tho they don't threaten those Princes, but tell 'em it behoves 'em to procure this Peace, or else to joyn with one of the two Parties. The French charge the Dutch with being the occasion of this War; but how fairly every common Eye can see: however they are willing to re-establish Peace and Traf∣fick with the States General, as they were agreed on before this war begun. And the Most Christian King desires only the Restitution of what England has taken from him in the Islands and Continent of America, viz. St. Christophers, &c. and then he will restore and confirm the Treaties that have been broken by this war. France pretends to be kind to Spain, tho she does not deserve it at her hands; for she declar'd war against France. Mons and Namur, (which last is theirs already) shall be theirs again. They will keep Luxembourgh, which is a City and Province; a Dukedom of very large extent, and advantageously seated to assist them to carry their Arms into Germany. The French King is kind to the young Duke of Lorrain, and offers him very largely, and says, he cannot but return Thanks for his generous man∣ner of dealing with him upon this occasion. France demands that the Treaties of Westphalia and Nimiguen may remain in their full force; and that which was concluded at Ratisbon in the year 1684 under the name of a Truce for Twenty years, may be chang'd into a definitive Treaty of Peace. They wou'd fain keep Strasburgh? which cannot be permitted, the States of Swabia and Franconia having pray'd His Imperial Majesty by no means to agree to that; and add, they will rather make a new Levy of Ten Thousand Men against the next Spring to carry on the war; and they are much in the right, for if Strasburgh remain in the French hands, the Empire will always be the stage of war. Next the most Christian King offers to restore the Palatinate, and its dependences to the Duke of Newbourgh. In compensation for the City of Strasburgh, and the Forts, of which the Most Christian King is in Possession, and which he will hold immutnably both for himself and his Suc∣cessors: first Montroyal, and Tarback, shall be demolish'd, and restor'd to the Prince to whom they belong, never to be Fortified again, during the Peace. Secondly, that all the Works of Fort Lewis, and Hunninghen that lie beyond the Rhine, in respect of France, shall be demolish'd: Thirdly, Philipsburgh with the Fort shall be surrendred, Fortified as they are; and Friburgh in the same condition it is.
As for the Dutchy of Deux Ponts, the French King to resign it to the King of Sweden in the same condition now it is, and never to lay claim to it for the future, tho by the Deeds and Evidences it appears that that same Dutchy depends upon the Bishoprick of Ments. The Emperour having signified, that he is not willing the French shou'd remain in Possession of Strasburgh, many reasons are offer'd by the French, but nothing will do, for that City is too considerable to be quitted by the Empire. The Most Christian King declares, that he has a cordial desire to establish a Peace that may maintain France, and the Empire in a lasting repose; that his Majesty choses rather to preserve one City, viz. Strasburgh that lies next to France, and surrender up two, viz. Philipsburgh and Friburgh that lie next to Germany, to demolish so many strong Fortresses, and restore so large an extent of Country. He is resolv'd inviolably to observe the Peace, and hopes the Emperor will do the same, to prevent the effusion of Christian Blood. His Majesty offers to restore to restore to Spain all the Places without any exception which he has won from that Crown. The French are very unwilling to revive infinite Disputes, which might sup∣ply matter for a new War, rather than a means to end this; they are not for cut∣ting out Negotiations that might last long, or take up too much time, they are for Demolishings and Restitutions, to reconcile all matters contained in former Treaties, and provide for the diuturnal security of the Empire, as well as that of France, and consequently for a perpetual endurance of a firm and perfect Corre∣spondence. LONDON: Printed for the Author. 1695.
