H1159 669.f.11[25] 99869279 162675
Have amongst you my Masters. GIve eare, give eare, unto my Ditty, All you good people love this City; 'Tis high time you repent. For if th'offended Army come This City will be quite undone: Your cases I lament. When you your out-works should defend, Some Villaine whom you think your friend May set the Towne on fire. Then will they straight to plunder fall, And in an instant rob you all: Then they have their desire. If once the Army doe appeare Within ten miles, they come too neare, They have so many friends. Send all they call for, with new Ropes About their necks; there may be hopes That may make some amends. For thus much from me understand, What e're they aske they may command; Take heed you doe not dally. If they shall finde with them you halt, And take you tripping in a fault, You'll pay deare for your folly. Make ready those who laid the plot (Who e're they were) to call the Scot. They have undone the Nation: Then make the Synod ready next, Who have so much abus'd the Text For th' Churches Reformation. To bring the Scotch Presbytery in, They with Rebellion did begin, Then preacht the Myter downe. These new Popes thought they could dispence With Treason or the like offence; Especially their owne. Or else (methinks) they durst not sure The King, and Bishops both abjure When they the Covenant took. Though many oathes they all have taken, By this they have the King forsaken, If they be pleas'd to look. Next bring in those who did devise Your Sequestrations, and Excize; Downe with their Goldsmiths Hall, Or rather hell, for none comes there, But he himselfe must first forsweare; And that's the worst of all. Besides he must himselfe confesse A grand Malignant, that's no lesse Then Traitor in their sence: And make himselfe a Traitor, more Then ever he was yet before, By a farre worse offence. He must use their forg'd Seale e're he From their Committees can be free: That's Treason Paramount. This favour they to us afford. To make us Traytors on Record, And in the Lawes accompt. But oh! those subtile men must not (Above all others) be forgot, We Jewes of Malta call; Who lately have a new trick found, To make men for their owne compound. These get the Devill and all. The State we know it lately hath Borrowed too much on publique Faith; These jugling Jewes they say, By Ordinance of Parliament Get threescore pounds at least per cent. And they have present pay. Th' abused who the money lent, Are with this great losse well content They may some part secure: Thus are their private Stocks imploy'd, And all their Creditors destroy'd, By those their Loans ensure. Brave Souldiers couple these together Like Hell-hounds, and then send them hither; Try them but in the Tower. Let brave Judge Jenkins give them Law, And honest Will▪ th' Inditements draw, They 'll dispatch in an houre. Yet I dare sweare that they should finde Ith' good old Judge a noble minde, And should more justice have With mercy and with judgement mixt, (For so true Justice should be fixt) Then ever yet they gave. If th' Army doe their Soveraigne owne, And shall restore him to his Crowne, 'Twill be a glorious thing. Though in their hearts the Prophets ly'd, It will prove true they prophecy'd Hee'll be a glorious King. Thou wilt deserve immortall glory, And famous be in every story, If this be done by thee. Though th' English were well-neere as bold, As the Scots were their Soveraigne sold, Fairfax will glorious be. Wee'll Bonefires make, our Bells shall ring, Our Children shall thy praises sing; I hope that day to see, That we who now thy Prisoners are, Shall have in thee so great a share, To love and honour thee. FINIS.
