H1477 669.f.19[49] 99870778 163386
To the PARLIAMENT of the Com∣mon-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The Humble Petition of Anne Henshaw Widow, late Wife and Exe∣cutrix of Benjamin Henshaw Esquire deceased, on the behalf of her self and her seven children. In most humble manner sheweth, THat your Petitioner was left the distressed Widow of her said husband, having the sole care of 8 children left to her to be provided for, out of certain debts due to her said husband; the chief of which was owing by the late Earl of Carlisle, which she could no way get assured, unless she could procure 4000l. more, which she did raise, by getting together her childrens portions secured in the Chamber of London, and by the credit of her friends, and engaging of her whole estate, by which means the debt was made 12000l. And an assignment legally passed to your Petitioner from the said Earl of 2000l. per an: (til the said debt of 12000l. should be fully satisfied) out of an Annuity of 3000l. per an: granted upon valuable considerations to the said Earl by the late King, out of the old and other Customes; The which Annuity was received untill 4000l. of the said 12000l. was paid and no more: And then in the year 1641. the House of Commons alone took all the said Customes into their own disposall, and ever since that time have imployed them wholly for supply of the publick necessities, though the Order it self exempts the old Custome, out of which your Petitioner was to be paid, and which were legally vested in the Crown, and by due course of Law passed and confirmed to your Pe∣titioner; And by reason of which diversion and occasion of the late troubles, she hath lost above 20000l. in good debts, which are now desperate and irrecoverable, whereby she and her children are re∣duced to a very mean condition. The Petitioner therefore most humbly prayeth, that the said debt of 8000l. which is JUSTLY DUE unto her, and interest for the same, ever since the year 1641. may be allowed for the relief of her and her children; And that your Honours will be pleased to give Order that she may receive the same out of the said old Customes, according to the former assignment made to her, and which are chargeable therewith by LAW, being continued by the Book of Rates agreed by the Commons in Parliament, Anno Dom. 1642. otherwise your Petitioner and her children who have never been Delinquents in the least degree, must inevitably be ruined, unlesse it shall please the Lord to stir up your hearts to commiserate the sad condition of her and her 7 children. And they shall pray, &c.
