H2446 E131_31 R9030 99873453 156346
THE HOLLANDERS EMBASSAGE TO ENGLAND. Concerning, The good will which they bear to the Protestants in Ireland: Signified in a Letter which they sent to Sir Iohn Penington, Vice-Admirall of his Majesties Fleet. ALSO, His LETTER, and their ANSWER. AS ALSO. The Description of the Sea-fight, which was between the Hol∣landers, and the Navie belonging to Dunkirk, which was provided to ayd the Rebels in Ireland: the Hollan∣ders getting the Conquest, and they the Overthrow. WITH, The humble Petition of the inhabitants of the Countie of Essex: To the honourable Knights and Burgesses of the House of COMMONS in Parliament. London printed, for Iohn Smith. 1642.
THE HOLLANDERS Embassage to ENGLAND. LET no Roman Catho∣like look or cast a view upon these lines, lest he find himself more shook, than one trou∣bled with a Tertian Ague: for he shall find here no comfort, but many crosses, no Pope worshipped, but in the Highway to be confoun∣ded. No treason broaching, but traytors set on tilt, all Popish dregs being cast forth for the di∣vell to feed upon. No Peace proclaimed to the Babylonish Whore, but a bloody warre; no Comedie but a Tragedie. Performed not alone by the English, but also by true and noble spi∣rited Hollanders, whose love to England hath, and is daily expressed, which the Spaniard is able
to witnesse; but not delight to heare of, in regard that their plate hath so often supplyed the Hol∣landers coffers, in spite of Spains proudest Dons or Romes malicious curses, who are able to do as much harme as their blessings good. O what a heart-aching to them was that hap∣py Marriage; of our High-born Princesse the Lady Marie to that worthy Prince William of Nassau Prince of Orange, sure it was as pre∣judiciall unto them, as their overthrow in eigh∣tie, eight: but it is ours and Hollands joy, whose loyaltie late proffered for the good both of our King and Country, I thus relate. The newes being arrived in Holland, of the Protestants in Irelands calamity, they, the States of Holland, were very much grieved, as if that they had been partakers of the others miserie. And truly, so it doth behove each well-affe∣cted Christian, who is ambitious of nothing, but to embrace true Pietie, to assist and ayd his friend being in adversitie. The heathen Queen Dido having been once in trouble her self, did the rather give ear to the Trojan Prince Aeneas his misfortunes, saying thus; — Miseris succurrere disco. Having been in trouble my self, I learn now to succour those which are troubled.
And yet there are a sort of people in the world, which are friends to none but those which are in prosperitie, which Ovid having had experience of, writ thus; Donec saelix multos numerabis amicos, Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris. As long as a man is happie, that is, worldly rich, he shall be sure to want no friends: but his prosperitie being eclipsed with clouds of ad∣versitie, then his former sycophanrs will answer him, with a truely I have forgot you. But the Hollanders prove themselves to be of another Nature, making this loving proffer. That if they might have priviledge to fight upon his Majesties Seas, there should neither passe by them, Spanish or French fleet, to do either the Protestants of England or Ireland any harm. Thus they proffered not when the Prote∣stants of Ireland were in prosperitie, but now being in adversitie, which is true friendship in∣deed, and now to make their proffer good, they have proceeded to action. Thirtie of the Hollanders men of warre scou∣ted up and down the Seas toward Dunkirk,
because it was reported in Holland, that a Navie was dispatching from Dunkirk to aid the Rebels in Ireland. Whose Navie these Hollanders with their prospective glasses discovered, and presently dis∣patched their packet-boat unto Sir Iohn Pen∣nington, Vice-Admirall of his Majesties Seas, to know whether they should set vpon them or not, who having no Commission from the King or Parliament, gave them no Answer presently, but first sent Letters to know whether their passage should be stopt or no, whose Answer was, that it should. Then to the same effect did Sir Iohn Penning∣ton answer the Hollanders Messenger, of which they were as joyfull as the birds of the Spring, sayling bravely towards them, to the great a∣mazement of the Dunkirk Navie. Who stood upon their guard as well as they could, but the Hollanders made such havocke a∣mongst them, at length they had little courage to go to assist the Rebels in Ireland, having so much to do at home, the fight lasted above forty eight houres, many of the ships which be∣longed to Dunkirk were taken, and many sunk, to the eternall honour of the Hollanders, but disgrace of themselves: thus doth God revenge their cause which put their trust in him.
THE HUMBLE Petition of the inhabitants of the Connty of Essex. To the Honourable Knights and Burgesses of the House of COMMONS in Parliament. The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentle∣men, Ministers, and other Inhabitants in the County of Essex. SHEWETH, UNto your Honorable House, that we are truly sen∣sible of your great care, and extraordinary endea∣vours, to settle our Religion, and Peace, and daily give thanks to God Almighty for it; And we do further in all humility present to your Honourable considera∣ions, which wee do apprehend a great stop in Refor∣mation of matters of Religion, and our selves together with you, and the whole Kingdome, to be in great dan∣ger of the Papists, and other ill-affected persons, who are every where very infolent, and are ready to act the parts of those cruell blood-suckers in Ireland, if they be not speedily prevented: by means whereof our Tra∣ding, especially of Clothing, and Farming, grew a great pace, to so great a damp, as many thousands are like to come to suddain want. Nor can we expect any redresse therof, unlesse the Bishops and Popish Lords be remo∣ved out of the House of Peers. Therefore wee humbly pray, that you would ear∣nestly mediate His Majesty and the House of Peers,
That our Brethren in Ireland may speedily be relieved, and the Papists throughout the Kingdome be disar∣med, and that such defects of Arms, as in your discreti∣ons, shall appeare to be meet, may be supplyed, and this County and Kingdom, put into such a Warlike posture, as may be best for its defence, and safety, and that the Bishops, and Popish Lords who as wee conceive, have hindered the successe of your Godly Endeavours, may be put out of the House of Peeres: Not doubting but then our Petition formerly presented to your House, will receive a more full and speedy Answer. And your Petitioners resolving in all just and honourable wayes, according to the late Protestation, to assist you, with our lives, and Estates, against the Enemie of God, the King, and State, humbly pray to Almighty God, for your good successe. FINIS.
