H2601bA 99896419 154202
HONOURS INVITATION, OR A Call to the Camp. VVHEREIN The Triumphant Genius of Great Brittain by a Poetical Alarm AWAKENS The Youth of the three Nations, to Generous Attempts, for the Glory of their Countrey: With a Prospect of the present Gallant Campagne on Black-Heath. VVritten by a young Gentleman of Quality now in the Service; Dignos Laude Viros Musa vetabit Mori: LONDON Printed by H. B. for John Clark at the Harp and Bible in VVest-Smithfield. 1673.
HONOURS INVITATION OR A Call to the Camp, &c. BRED by fond Mothers too Indulgent Care, My vainer life spun on its thirtieth Year: Charm'd with the Poysonous sweets of barren Ease, And all the luxuries of wanton Peace; To duell Rampant miss on a soft Bed Hector the watch, or break a Drawers Head To drown a younger Brother in a Look Kick a poor Lacquey, or berogue a Cook Top a small crew of Tenants that dare Stir In no language, but, please your Worship Sir, To chase the Stagg, and now and then pursue The timerous Hare, were all the Warrs I knew; When drunk or'e night with generous Burgundy I thought (as Gallants use) to sleep all Sunday
But scarce could Morpheus leaden plumets close My Eye, and lock my Senses in repose, VVhen, lo! A reverend Spectrum did appear Surprizing me with equal joy and fear; It seem'd a Personage of Noblest Race A Manly presence, and Majestick Face An Azure Mantle flowing round his VVast And his strong hands with Neptunes Trident Grac'd Three Crowns he bore, and under them his Brow Circled with Laurels fresh pluck't from the Bough. I gaz'd a while, till it approacht more near And thus (with voyce like Thunder) peirc'd my ear VVilt thou, Degenerous Youth! Ignobly Blot The Trophies which thy Ancestors have Got? Prove them the Sires of a spurious Race? Ore'turn their Statues, and their Tombs Deface; Forfeit those Honours which they left to thee By sleeping in a senceless Lethargy? Now, when each Noble Soul, greedy of Fame Feels his brest glowing with a generous Flame VVhen Sceens of blood on neighbouring shores appear And furious Mars sways all our Hemisphear; VVilt thou alone, stupidly drown'd, prefer Sordid delights to the Glory of the warr? Decline that Road of Honour which Displays To every daring hand a wreath of Bays And in a wretched sloth consume thy days? Can the poor yelpings of a deep-mouth'd Hound Vye Musick with the warlike Trumpets Sound? Or faint Applauses of a Horse race won (VVhen sprightly Sorrel out-flew nimble Dun) Equal those Acclammations that are sent In Vollies to the Ecchoing Firmament? VVhich every Victor justly calls his own? For Kingdoms conquer'd, and proud States ore-thrown? Shall Troops of Heroes from all parts resort, That quit the softer pleasures of the Court?
Charge death ith face, and forward still Aspire Through midst of dangers swift as Heavens Fire? Shall the Drums Rattling Summons nimbly bring Crouds of vulgar in, to serve their King? That laugh at hardships, and dare bravely dye, If Fate requir't, to purchase Victory? And their Example neither move thy spirit Nor Emulation of the others merit? VVhat drowsie Opium has possest thy Brain Dull soul! That all these Joggins are in Vain? For shame at last awake lest it be said Your courage does not slumber, but is dead; From befoe paltry Beauties raise your seige VVho thinks by feign'd resistance to oblige Nor let the kinder Ladies tempting Charms Confine you still to their enfeebling Arms: (VVhen Fate turn'd prodigal, freely affords) The Destinies of Nations to your swords▪ Let mighty cities be your Mistresses VVhose dowry brings the spoils of Provinces; Level their prouder walls, and let it be A doubt hereafter to Posterity When only shatter'd Monuments they vieu Whether Joves thunder hath been there, or you; These are atcheivments fitting to be done By each dares call himself stout Englands son. As a brave courser standing on the sand Of some swelling Sea-channel vieus a land Smiling with sweets upon the distant side Garnish in natures best Embroider'd pride Larded with springs, and fring'd with curled woods Impatient bounces into the capering floods Bigg with a nobler fury than that stream Of shallow violence he meets in them Thence arm'd with scorn and courage ploughs a way Through the Impostum'd Billows of the sea And makes the grumbling surges, slaves to Oar And waft him safely to the further shoar
Where landed in a sovereign disdain He turning back surveys the foaming main Whilst the subjected waters, flowing, reel Ambitious yet to kiss their Conq'rours heel. At such a generous rate shouldst thou ingage, In the grand Expedition of our age, Thy active soul in gallant fury hurl'd To club with all the Worthies of the world Then rouz at last from this Lethargick dream And let Heroick actions be thy theme. No more to base Effeminate follies yield Thy countreys GENIUS calls thee to the field. No sooner these last Accents had I heard But streight the glorious vision disappear'd; And round about methoughts a glittering ray Was spread, creating in my soul new day. As Caesar once on banks of Rubicon Stood shivering and scarce durst venture on, Till lucky Daemon by a signal chance Becken'd him or'e and made his Troops advance, So I confirm'd by this good Omen found Those mists exhal'd which had my courage drown'd. Blushing I rise, and to the Eastwards spy As brave a sight as ever courted eye. Encamp'd there lay upon a spreading plain Of sprightly warlike youths a numerous train; Drest in such arms as those where with Mars lays Worlds wast, and new ones from their dust can raise; Led by a Chief whose valorous fervour can Hatch him whom nature broach'd but half a man, VVhose trumpets, like the Angels at the last Make the soul rise by a miraculous blast Were the mount Athos carv'd in shape of man (As fancied by the Macedonian) Whose right hand should a populous land contein And the left be a channel to the Main His spirit might inform so vast a figure Yet still streight lac'd sweat for dominion bigger Like
Under this sun a thousand sparks bare place Like starrs, Honours bright Firmament to Grace Whilst common Souldiers from their Tents arise As small Sporad's to Beautify the Skies. Ah Glorious Art of war I cry'd! from whence All Honour and all Power did first Commence, By which the Grandeur of each state doth grow And unto which Nations their safety owe, Henceforth my Mistress thou alone shalt be And all my strength I consecrate to thee, Hence then you gay diversions of the Town Your bubling vanities I must disown, Morning long sleeps adieu, let sordid Ease Silken Buffoons, and painted Peacocks please, Whose labouring souls being stiffled with Excess Scarce keep from stench their rotten Carcasses, Whilst I'mid'st blood and sweat and toils of war Through storms, cold, hunger, and many a scar, Pursue my Fate, resolved thus to have An Honour'd Life, or else a Noble Grave. VVith Allowance, June 21. 1673. FINIS.
