H3735 E448_14 99864429 161834
A SERMON GATHERED And set forth by that Divine Spirit which God hath given to me JAMES HƲNT, AND Dedicated to all those which do love God and the Truth. JT is written in the 3. Chapter of Iohn and the 3. vers. Iesus Christ who is the powerfull God of Heaven and of earth, he doth tell you plainly, except a man be borne a∣gain he cannot see the Kingdom of God; for that which is borne of the flesh, is fleshly, and that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit, vers. the 6. and now my new birth which God hath wrought in me, I hope the same will be a plain pa∣terne for all those which shall read my book, or heare it, read; for I acknowledge, that first I was the Sonne of man bearing the Image of the earthly, but by the Divine power and glory of the word of God, which is made manifest in the New Testament; I am made the Sonne of God,
and bare the Image of the heavenly, for the Image of God is the soule, which is the inw man, which is justified and glorified by the Divine power and glory of the word of God, for whom God doth call, them he doth justifie and whom he doth justifie, them he doth glo∣rifie. Romans 8. Chapter and the 30. vers. Again, St. Paul doth tell you plainly, in the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, the 3. Chaper and the 18. vers. We all with open face behol∣ding as in a glasse, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the Image of God from glory to glory, by the divine power and spirit of the Lord: now if the Apostle should have said, we shall be changed, that would have signified, in the world to come; but its saith plainly, we are changed, which doth plainly signifie, here in this world; it is plainly written in the first Epistle of Peter, the 1. Chapter and the 23 vers. Being born again not with corruptible seed, but by the word of God which liveth and abideth for ever, and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you, vers. 15. And it is plainly written in the 1. Epistle to the Corinthians, the 6. Chapter and the 17. vers. He that is joyned to the Lord, is one spirit; and now I shall make it plainly appeare, Gods true Preacher, he is both man and woman in signification of Scripture; for Saint Paul doth tell you plainly in the 1. Epistle to the Corinthians the 4. Chapter and the 15. vers. Though you have ten Thousand Instructers, yet you have not many Fa∣thers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel, and for to beget doth signifie a man: Again in the 4. Chapter to the Gallathians, there he saith, my little Chil∣dren in whom I travell in Birth, untill Christ be formed in you, and to travell in birth doth signifie, a woman, for as every naturall Child, hath a Father and Mother of the flesh, so on the other side, God is the Father and Mother of the spirits, I say again, of the spirits of all those people which are and shall be reconciled to Jesus Christ, and to the Ministration of the New Testament, which is our glorious Gospel of love and peace, it is plainly written in the 1. Chapter of James. Every good and perfect guift is from above, and com∣meth
down from the Father of lights; and if his free will we are begotten by the word of truth, for Christ is the Word and the Truth; for it is plainly written in the 1. Chapter of Iohn and the 14. vers. The Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, and thus I have proved in briefe, Christ is the Word, and Christ is God: And Gods Word doth tell you plainly, in the 4. Chapter to the Gallathians, and the 26. vers. Ierusa∣lem which is above is free, which is the Mother of us al, but of what all, I say of all those which are and shall be borne again by the Divine power and glory of the Word of God, and by Gods helpe, I have made it plainly appeare, Gods true Preacher, he is both man and woman in signification of Scripture; for now I say again, Christ is the Word, and Christ is God, and he that is joyned to God is one spirit, and a man is begotten and born again by the Divine power of the Word of God, and now by Gods help, I will boldly say, as it is written in the 2. Chapter of Peter, and the 2 v. Even as new born babes desire the sinsere milk of the word that ye may grow thereby; and now I say again, that ye may all grow thereby in heavenly wisdom, untill you come into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Sonne of God unto a perfect man, even to the measure, and statute of the falnesse of Christ, as you may read in the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians; but yee Clergy and some of yee great men of the world, which have been bread up in the latin Schoole, you say a man can come to no true perfection here in this world; but I shall plainly prove, you are all deceived in your judgement, for it is plainly written in the same Chapter, Je∣sus Christ, he ascended up on high, and gave guilts unto men, some Apostles, and Prophets, and Teachers, for the work of the Ministery, and for the perfecting of the Saints: And now ye Clergy, you say you are Gods Ministers; but now I say, are not you ashamed for to judge your selves for to be such poore dunses that you are not able for to teach the people for to grow up into no hight of heavenly perfe∣ction; but now ye deluding Clergy, by the power of God I shall make you see and understand, God hath made me a perfect man; for Gods word doth tell you in the 10. Chap∣ter
to the Hebrews, and the 14. vers. by one offering, Christ hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified; but how, and by what means are we sanctified, I say by the true light and glory of Gods Word; for it is plainly written in the 17. Chapter of Iohn and the 17. vers. Christ saith, sanctifie them hrough the truth, thy Word is truth, for Christ is the word and the truth, and Christ doth tell you plainly, the glory which God his Father gave unto him, he doth give to his Saints, that they may be all one in us, that the world may believe that thou hast sent me; now here in this Chapter, I have proved that for all true believers, we are joyned to God the Father and to God the Sonne, and now ye Clergy, I pray what say you, am not I come to true and sound per∣fection, and do you not know a handfull of Wheate is as perfect Wheate as a whole Bushel; for it is of the same sub∣stance, though it be not so great in substance, and I hope ye all know a naturall Child as soone as it is born, it hath the perfect shape and Image of a man; but he doth grow by degrees in stature and tallnesse, untill he come unto the ful age and stature and talenesse of a man: even so, in like manner, as soone as a man is truely sanctified by the devine power of the word of God, he is a new borne babe in Christ, but then he doth grow up in glory by degrees, until he become to be a perfect man in Christ Jesus, even to the measure and stature of the fulnesse of Christ, which is a∣greeable unto that portion of Scripture which I have a∣fore mentioned; and now I say againe, which is agreeable unto the devine power and glory of my new birth, which God my Father, and Jesus Christ hath wrought in me. And now by Gods helpe, I will boldly say, with Saint Paul, as it is written in the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians the 4. Chapter. and the 6. vers. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkenesse hath shined in our hearts for to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Je∣sus Christ. And now I say again, Which knowledge doth shine in me so cleare that I doe behold Gods glorious face, not with my bodily eyes, which are temporall, but with my spirituall eyes which are heavenly and eternall. And
now ye learned Schollers which have been bred up in th Greek and Latin Schoole, I must tell you plainely, if you can be able for to proove, that there is no true God, nor no true Gospell, why then you may prove, that a man can come to no true perfection here in this world, But now ye deluding Synod, from your Antichristn stoole, I pray stand up and arise: For by the true light and glory of my new birth. I shall set open your eyes, for Christ doth tell you plainly, Except a man be borne againe, he cannot see the Kingdome of God, and now ye Lords Knights, and Burge∣ses in Parliament, I must tell you plainly, and boldly, by the true light and glory of my New birth, God hath made me able to shew you the true light and glory of the King∣dom of God; For it is plainely written in the first Chaper to the Coloss. and the 12. and 13. vers. God our Father he hath translated us into the Kingdome of his dear Sonne; but how are we translated into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; I say by the true light and glory of his word, for Christ hath a Church heere on earth, which is visible and invisible; the visible Church doth signifie all those people which are, and shall be reconciled to Christ, and to the ministration of the new Testament, which is the booke of life; the invisi∣ble Church, that is the soules of the people, which is to be discerned by the eye of Faith, for Jesus Christ hath a glo∣rious Church in himselfe, for God our glorious Father he gave us his Son for to be head over all things to the Church which is his body, as you may reade in the first Chapter to the Ephesians, and the 22. verse, and now ye High Court of Parliament, I pray marke this point of Scripture, for the Apostle doth call the true Church the body of Christ: for as a temporall tree hath many bowes and branches, and all make but one tree; even so in like manner, for all those that will be reconciled to Christ, and to the obedience of his Word, your soules which is the inward man shall be ingrafted in to the Mysticall body of Christ, although we be thousand in number, and now ye deluding Synod, I understand there is many opinions amongst you about Religion, but now I shall make to plainely appeare, there
is but two sots of people heere in this world; for all those that are not in Christ, they are out of Christ, and all those that are out of Christ, they are yet under the bondage of the Devill; and Gods Word doth tell you plainely in the 5. Chapter and the 17. vers. of the 2. Epistle to the Corin∣thians, If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; now this word any man doth signifie any man which is here on earth: let him be rich of poore, if he be in Christ, he is a new creature, and for to be a new creature is to be recon∣ciled to Christ, and to the ministration of the New testa∣ment, and with all those that are new man in Christ, old things are past away and behold all things are become new, vers. 17. For as Circumcision, and the blood or Bulls and Goats, and those Ordinances which you may reade at large in the 9. Chapter to the Hebrews, did belong to the old Law and Testament, which Christ hath abolished by his suffering on the Crosse; Now on the other side, Baptisme, and the Bread and Wine, they are those Ordinances which doth belong to the Mysticall body of Christ, and to the ministration of the New Testament, which shall stand and abide for ever. And now ye high Court of Par∣liament, it is plainely reported, you doe intend to set forth and order, that there must be Elders in every Parish, and the Elders and Clergy they must examine the people before they come to receive the Sacrament of Bread and Wine, but now, I hope, you shall plainely understand, God hath made me a preaching Elder for to try and prove the Clergy; for now yee Clergy, I must tell you plainely, no man hath any right in the sight of God, for to bee partakers of the holy Communion of Bread and Wine, but those that will bee reconciled to Christ, and to the ministration of the New Testament, whereunto the Sacrament of Bread and Wine doth belong, for Christ doth tell you plainly in the 22. Chap. of Luke, This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you; and now by Gods helpe, I will shew you in brief what a great error the Clergie are in, for every Lords day they read a Chapter in the old Law and Testa∣ment, and another in the New, and when they are up in
their Pulpits, in their Doctrine they joyne the old Law and Testament, and the New together, as if they were both as one, and in so doing, they have most shamefully blinded, and deceived all those people which are as yet held under their power. For now I say plainly and boldly, if there be any one of ye Clergy or any other man that can finde any one place of Scripture in the New Testament, for to prove that the old Law and Testament is allowed of God for to be joyned to the mysticall body of Christ, which I have plainly proved for to be the true and glorious Chuch, if I cannot finde five other plaine and cleare truths of Scripture, for to prove that you are utterly deceived in your judgement, why then I will be content to be put to death, under the judgement of ye Lords, Knights, and Burgesses to Parlia∣ment, which are gathered togeather, for the tryall of the Spirits. And new ye Synod, you say old Ceremonies they must be laid aside: and now I say, I pray forsake your Tenthes and Tythes, for you shall be sundly tried. For Gods Word doth tell you plainly in the 7. Chapter to the Hebrews, and the 5. verse, The Sonnes of Levi they had a commandement to receive tithes of the people, according to the Law. And now yee learned Synod, I hope you know the Leviticall Priesthood was in force in the time of the old Law, for the 11. ver. doth tell you, Ʋndr the Leviticall Priesthood the people received the Law, but the 12. verse will tell you palinely, The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law, for Christ hath quite abolished the old Law by his suffring on the Crosse, and yee Synod and Clergy, I must tell you plainely, your Tenths and Tithes shall vanish away with the olde Law; And now yee high Court of Parliament, I pray remem∣ber that you have made open profession unto all the world that you have a desire for to pull downe the Kingdome of Antichrist, but by you power, you force the people for to pay Tenths and tithes to the Clergy, and in so doing you doe very powerfully uphold the Kingdome of Antichrist. For now I must tell you plainely, and boldly, Tenths and Tithes doth not belong to the glorious Priesthood of our
and Saviour Jesus Christ. But then some man may say, what meanes shall the Clergy have for to live upon? My answer is, for all those that shall be found to be true prea∣chers, for to shew the people by what meanes they may grow up in heavenly perfection untill they come to bee perfect men in Christ; there shall be money gathered for you, which shall be sufficient for to maintaine you with meat, drinke, and apparell, and the holy Apostles of Christ they were well content with those things, and so I hope will ye Clergy: for your coveting after Tenths and Tithes, the same doth strongly blind your eyes. And now yee Magistrates and Church wardens, I pray take not that thing in hand: For to fight against the power of God, which you are not able to withstand. For God hath made me a powerfull instrument, as you shall know and finde, For to open the peoples eyes, whom the Clergy hath kept blind. But some of you doe say, I shall preach in the Church, and you will be well content, if I can get authority from the high Court of Parliament: but by the power of God you and the high Court of Parliament shall see and under∣stand, Gods authority doth farre exceed the authority of of any mortall man; for it is not in the Parliaments power for to make a man a Preacher, for they shall finde, God hath made me able for to be their teacher: for to shew them, and you, the plaine and perfect way, how true peace and sound religion you may quietly enjoy. For these things God hath made me for to behold with my spiritall eye, for which I honour my King, and worship the holy and powerfull Tirnity. FINIS.
