J49A R230334 99896255 154004
Lisbourn, April 3. 1690. AN EXACT LIST OF Their Majesties Forces NOW IN THE Kingdom of Ireland, And where Quartered. Of English HORSE, the Regiments of, Where Quartered. Schonberg, At Luragan, Killultagh, Glenevy, Camlin, Collerush, Kilmacavit, Killeleagh, and Killead. Sir John Lancer's, Down Patrick and Lekeale. Coll. Villier's, Donaghadee, Ballywater, Ballyhalbert, Ineshargy, Ballynestor, and Gray-Abby. Coll. Russel's, Ditto places. L. Hewit's late Regiment, Killeleagh, Killinchey, Armillan, Newtown, Kirkdonnel, Knockbridge, and Bradagh. Coll. Coy's, Strangford, Bally Culler, Killcliffe, Dounsford, and Port a Ferry. Langston's Castle-Fin, Cavan, Stranerland, and places adjacent. Lord Cavendish's, Barony of Drum, Dirachy and Mylone. Harbora's Troop, Cumber Parish and Killmuddy. The Train of Atrillery, Belfast and Hilsborough. Provost Marshal, Lisburn. DRAGOONS. the Regiments of, Where Quartered. Royal Regiment, the Isle of Maghee. Levison's, Moiragh, Maharalin and Warigstown: FOOT. the Regiments of, Where Quartered. Batalions of Dutch Guards, Antrim 250; at Belturbet 250. Grebens Regiment. Regiments of Princess Anne, Londonderry. Regiments of Brigadier Stuart's, Narrow-water, Green castle, Rosetrevor, and Annalong. Regiments of Sir Joh. Hanmore's, Gilsford, and places adjacent. Regiments of Wharton's, Waringstown, Clare, and places adjacent. Regiments of Earl of Meath's, Lisburn. Regiments of L. Kingston's, Lisburn. Regiments of Hastings, Belfast. Regiments of Hamilton's, Clownish. Regiments of Bellasys, Carrickvergrass, 150 Men to guard the Passage at or near the isle of Rathlin. Regiments of Lord Lisbourn's, Ballenderry and Portmore.
Regiments of Herbert's, At Rathvillan and Ballymabinch. Regiments of Deering's, Portadowne, Regiments of E. of Drogheda's, Tendaraghee. Regiments of Coll. Earle's, Six-mile water, 200 Belturbet. Regiments of De la Melloniere's, Drummore and Hilsborough. Regiments of Du Camuon's Legacory, Drumalley-castle, and Castle-Reagh. Regiments of De la Calimot's, Mountjoy, Dungannon. Inniskilling and Londonderry Forces. the Regiments of, Where Quartered. Col. Wolsley's Re∣giment of Horse, At Belturbet. Sir Albert Cunningham's. Coll. Wynn's, Ballyshannon 2 Troops, Ardmagh 2. Monaghon 4. Hamilton's, Belturbet. Lloyd,'s, Monaghon 6 Companies, Glasclough 3, Tynan 3, and 3 at Callidon, White's, Inniskilling. Michelburn's, Lough bricklen, Newry, &c. St. John's, Armaugh, and 30 Men at Binburb. Tiffin's Ballyshannon, Dunagall, and Balleck. The Danish Forces. FOOT. the Regiments of, Where Quartered. Guards, At Dowagh, Billicori, and Rashee. Queens, Dunagar, Killbreed, Wibtin. Prince Frederick's, Lain, Carn-Castle, and Killwoghterm, Barony of Glanarm. Prince Christianus, Glanarm, Solor, Ardelinis. Layd, and Temple-Woghtra, all in the Barrony of Glanarm, Prince George's, Armoy, Billy, and Derryckighan; at Armoy, part of Billy, and Derryckighan in the Barony of Cary. Zeeland, Colerain Killowen, Matosquin, Magilligan, and Dunbo, all in the Barony of Colerain. Jutland, Loughell. Dunaghis, Killagan, Dundermount, and Killreghtees; first and last in Dun luce, the rest in the Barony of Kilconway. Fuhne, Killuca, Garwaghey, Bosagh, Aghadowes, Ballyaghy, Dawson's Bridge, and Magheraselt. Adenburgh, Skerrie and Rackhaven in the Barony of Antrim. HORSE. the Regiments of, Where Quartered. Jewell's, At Maghrahoghill (except Mr. Adare's Estate) Kert Konner, Kells, and Grainge. Donoy's. Ballymony, Tenvoy, Magresteik in Tenvoy in the Barony of Kilconway. Seesset, Dunluce, Ballyaghran, Balleywoolin, Ballyreashane, and Grange of Killdologh in the Ba∣rony of Dunluce, and Liberty of Colerain. Pr. Wirtemburgh's, Head-quarters at Castle-Golgorme. General-Officers, at Balleymenagh. If the Reader will please to examine this List, and allow every Regiment to be full, as they must be at opening the Campaign, upon pain of Breaking; each Regiment of Foot, Officers and all, will be 800, and each Regiment of Horse 300; It will be found that the Forces at present in Ireland are 35000 and up∣wards: Enough to reduce that Kingdom, without other help than Horses and Carriages for Provisions. The General is gone to view the Artillery and Shipping at Belfast. I am Your humble Servant, W. J. LICENSED, April 12. 1690. J. F. Edinburgh, Re-Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, 1690.
