L1467 E676_4 R206791 99865897 166317
A LETTER FROM General Blakes Fleet WITH The Particulars of the Great and bloo∣dy Fight with the Dutch, neer Goodwin Sands, on Tuesday night last. AND The pursuit of the Hollanders by the ENGLISH then and since. ALSO The Particulars of the Losse on both sides. LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smith∣field neer Hosier Lane. 1652.
A Letter from Gen. BLAKES fleet Dated in the Downes the third of October 1652. SIR, ON the 25 of Septemb. 1652. There was a great meeting of the Of∣ficers of the Fleet with General Blake, about engaging with the Hollanders then about Goodwin Sands, and it was resolved after severall mee∣tings, that on Tuesday last we should ende∣vour to ingage with them. And accordingly, on Tuesday last we sai∣led towards them, and the Hollanders stood to us; being well manned, and every ways very well fitted, and about our number, each party being between 50 and 60 sail, and the Hollanders had two Admirals.
First Major Bourne with the Andrew led on, and charged the Hollanders stoutly, and got off again without much harme. Captaine Bodily with his ship also (for we have one of the Bodelies a Captain with us, besides Capt. Bodely in the Straits,) hee char∣ged exceeding gallantly; but was in very great danger to have lost his ship, for the Hollanders were so close on both sides of him. charging against him, that one might have flung biskets out of his Frigot into the Dutch ships. All his sailes were so torne and shattered, that he could not sail either too or fro, or any more but as the Tide drove him, and there were about 60 men killed in that Frigot, and she had near 100 shot in her Hul, and was in danger of sinking or taking. But blessed be God they got her safe to Harbour, the fight being not above 6 leagues from the shoar. The wter being shallow upon the sands, we were in some danger of sustaining great losse, In so much that the Sovereign, and the
ship in which Gen. Blake was, with the Ad∣miral began to stick, but blessed be God were got off again without any great harm there∣by. The Sovereign that great Ship, a delicate Frigot (I think the whole World hath not the like) did her part, she sailed through and through the Holland Fleet, and played hard upon them. And at one time there were about 20 Holland Frigots upon her, but blessed be the Lord she hath sustained no very great losse, but in some of her Tacklings, and some shot in her which her great bignesse is not much preju∣diced with. We had some other losses in several other ships, some 2 or 3 in some ships slaine, and in others twice or thrice that number: and some of the ships had losse more, and some lesse, in their Sailes and Tacklings. We fought them stifly as long that night as from foure a clock untill we could not see to fight longer. I am perswaded that if we had had day to
have prosecuted the fight, we had ut∣terly spoyled them, and yet I am per∣swaded that their losse is very great. The Hollanders Vice-Admirall was sunk in our sight, a very great and stout ship. Also another very good Frigot, and of a good bulke, we saw sink in our view. Two of their ships we have taken, one of 30 guns, and the other of 36 guns, neither of which did much op∣pose us, after we attempted to board them. By which we perceive that their hearts are much broken, and they are much discouraged. VVe hear of two ships more of theirs since sunk, some say three, but of that I cannot yet assure you the certainty, but blessed be God we lost not one ship.
VVe pursued them the next day, and made some discovery of them, and sent out some vessels towards them, but they fled, and sailed away, we pursued them neer Holland, but could not get them to ingage. I beleeve it will be sad news to the States; and although they thought to have foundered our ships in the sands, yet blessed be God, we have gotten the Victory, and they are fled home by the weeping crosse. VVe are come back now to the Downes where we are to take in sup∣plies, and then shall indeavour to act further service, as God shall give us occasion. I am perswaded that the Hollanders were drunk generally the most part of them when they fought, for at first
they fought exceeding desperately, as ever I saw; but after some hours, were nothing so valiant. But let God have all the glory, we went forth in his strength, and I hope shall still wait on him, who hath thus far manifested his presence with us, and blessing upon us. All our Captains generally played their parts, and so did the Sea men and the Soul∣diers, who plyed their work, in discharging upon the Enemy, though some of the men were up to the middle in water in some of the ships. Dated in the Downes the third of October 1652. FINIS.
