L1622 E392_16 99862070 160280
A LETTER SENT To the Right Honourable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the Com∣mon Councel of the City of London, Iuno 10. By His Excellencie T. Fairfax. O. Crumwell T. Hammond H. Ireton T. Rainsborough H. Waller. N. Rich. R. Hammond R. Lilburn, T. Pride, T. Hewson. L. Disborow. June 14th LONDON Printed for George Whittington at the blew Anchor in Corne-hill, neere the royall Exchange.
Right Honourable and trusty Friends. HAving by our letters and other addresses presented by our noble Generall to the ho∣nourable House of Commons, indeavoured to give satisfaction of the clearnesse of our just de∣mandes, and also in papers published by us, remon∣strated the grounds of our proceedings in prosecuti∣on thereof: All which having been exposed to a publike view, (we are confident) have come to your hands, and (at the least) received a chatitable con∣struction from you. The sum of all which desires as Souldiers are no other then a desire of satisfaction to our demandes as Souldiers, and reparation upon those who have to the uttermost improved all op∣portunities, and advantages, by false suggestions and misrepresentations, and otherwise for the destructi∣on of this Army with a perpetuall blot of infamy up∣on it, which we should not value i it singly concer∣ned our own particulars (being ready to deny our selves in this as we have done in other Cases for the Kingdomes good) but under this pretence, finding no lesse involved in it then the overthrow of the pri∣viledges both of Parliament and people, whom ra∣ther
then they shall faile in their designes, or we re∣ceive what in the eyes of all good men is just, endea∣vours to ingage the Kingdome in a new warre, and this singly by those who (when the truh of these things shall be made to appeare will be found the Authors of those Evils that are feared as having no o∣ther way to protect themselves from quetion and punishmen but by putting the Kingdome into blood (being) under pretences of the honour of, and their love to the Parliament, as i that were darer to the a then us; if they had gven greter proofe of their faithfulnesse to it, then we, then we perceive, that under these vailes and pretences, they secke to inter∣nesse their designe in the City of London, as if that City ought to make good their miscarriages, and should preferr a few false seeking men, before the wel-farre of the publike, and inded e have found these men so active to accompish their deignes, and to have such apt Instrument for their turn in that City, that we have cause to supect they maingge many therein, upon mstks, whch are esiy swal∣lowed in times of such prejuice against mn that have given (we may speake it without vaiy) the most publike Tstimony of their good affction to the publike, and to that City in particular. For the things we insist upon as Englishmen, (and meerly our bing Souldiers hath not strip us of that interest, although our malicious enemies would have it so) we desire a settlemnt of the peace of the King∣dome, and of the librties of the subjects, according to the votes and Declarations f Parliament, which before we tooke up Armes were by the Parliament
used as Arguments, and inducements to invite us, and divers of our deare friends out, (some of which have lost their lives in this warre) which being by Gods blessing finished, we thinke we have as much right to demnd, and desire to see an happy settle∣ment of, as we have to our money, or the other com∣mon interests of Souldiers, which we have insisted upon, we finde also the most ingenious and honest people in almost in all the parts of the Kingdome, where we come full of the sence of ruine and misery, if the Army should be dibnded bfore the peace of the Kingdome, and those othr thig before menti∣oned, have a full and perfect stlement. We have said before, and professe it now, we desire no alteration of the Civill Go∣vernment. We desire not to intermeddle with, or in the least, to interrupt the setling of the Pres∣byteriall Government; nor do we seek to o∣pen a way to licentious liberty, uner pre∣tence of obtaining ease for tender Conscien∣ces, we professe (as ever) in these things (when the State has once made a setlement) We have nothing to say, but to submit or suffer, only we could wish, that every good Citizen, and every man that walkes peace∣ably in a blamelesse Conversation, and is be∣neficiall to the Common-wealth, may have of
liberties & encouragements, it being accor∣ding to the just policy of all States, even to justice it self. These in briefe are our desires, and the things for which we stand, beyond which we shall not goe; and for the obtaining these things, we are drawing neer your City, pro∣fessing sincerely from our hearts, we intend not evill towards you, and undertakig to you; Decaring with all confidence and as∣surance, That if you appear not against us in these our just Dsires, to assist that wicked party that would embroyl Us, and the king∣dome; nor we, nor our Souldiers shall give the least offence. Wee come not to doe any act to preju∣dice the Being of Parliament, or to the hurt of this in order to the present settlement of the Kingdome. Wee seek the good of all, and we shall here wayte, or remove to a further distance, there to abide (if once we be assured that a speedy setlement of things be in hand) until they be accomplished; which done, we shal be most ready eyther all of us or so ma∣ny of the Atmy as the Parliament shal think fit, to disband, or go for Ireland.
And although you suppose that rich City may seeme an inticing bayt to poore hungry Souldiers, to venture far to gaine the wealth thereof, yet (if not provoked) we do profess rather then any such evill should fall out, the Souldier shal make their way through our bloud to effect it: And wee can say this for most of them, for your better assurance, that they so little value their pay in comparison of higher concernments to the Publique good, that rather then they will be unrighted in the matter of their honesty and integrity, which hath suffered by the men they ayme at, and desire Justice upon, or want the set∣tlement of the Kingdomes peace, and their with their fellow-subjects liberties they will lose all, which may be a stronge assurance to you, that its not your wealth they seeke, but the things tending in common to your and their welfare; which that they may obtaine, you shall doe like fellow-subjects and Bre∣thren, if you solicite the Parliament for them and on their behalfe. If after all this, you or a considera∣ble part of you be seduccd to take up Armes in opposition to or hinderance
of these our just undertakings, we hope by this Brotherly Admonition, to the sincerity whereof, wee cal God to wit∣nesse, we have freed our selves from all that ruine, which may befal that great and populous City, having hereby washed our hands thereof. Royston June 10. 1647. Your affectionate friends to serve you. T. Fairfax. Oliver Cromwell. Thomas Hammond. Henry Ireon. Tho: Rainsborow. Hardres Waller. Nath: Rich. Robert Hammond. Robert Lilburn. Thomas Pride. Thomas Hewson. John Disborow. To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mon-Councell, of the Citie of London.
