l383 e448_21 99864432 161841
THE RESOLUTION OF Sr Marmaduke Langdale Concerning the relieving of The Lord Goring. The Lord of Loughborough. The Lord Capel. Sir Charles Lucas, and the rest of the Officers and Soul∣diers NOW Blocked up in the Town of Colchester, by the Lord Generall FAIRFAX. And their further proceedings touching Major Generall Lambert; agreed upon by a Councel of War, and assented to by most of the Colonels and Officers in the Northern Army. Likewise the Lord Goring's Letter to Sir Marmaduke Lang∣dale, and his further Resolution and proceedings thereupon. LONDON, Printed for G.N. MDCXLVIII.
THE RESOLVTION OF Sir Marmaduke Langdale, concerning the Lord Generals blocking up of the town of Colchester. Honoured Sir, SIr Marmaduke Langdale having received Letters from the Lord Goring, intima∣ting their unfortunate successe in their late. Engagement with the Kentish∣men, and how they had crost the River of Thames, thereby to carry on their Design with more safety, and pre∣vent the sudden falling on of the Lord General with b ar∣my, resolved not to engage with his army against Major
Gen. Lambert, but to keep them in a compleat and intire Body, for their future preservation, and present encreasing; and thereupon summoned in most of his Colonels, Lieute∣nant-colonels, Majors, and Captains, who presently called a Councell of War, at which it was resolved to retreat to∣wards Carlisle, which they did accordingly, but in their Re∣treat, some of their Rear-guard who lay plundering up and down the country, had quarters provided for them by a par∣ty of Major Generall Lamberts Horse, who fell upon them neer Braugham castle, and took divers prisoners, with great store of good pillage which they had taken from divers wel affected of the country. Divisions and distractions increase dayly in their army, especially amongst the Superiours and Officers, who have continuall disputations upon severall differences, some being desirous to have a strong party of Horse and Dragoones sent Southward for the relief of the Lord Goring and his ar∣my; others declaring against i, saying, That they had ra∣ther keep one Body in a defensive posture, then to hazard both, which indeed was the expression of Sir Marmaduke him∣self, who stands much against the dividing of his Army, and will by no meanes assent to those Propositions for the send∣ing of a party into the South, but hath resolved to oppose the proceedings thereof, and to keep his Army in the North, untill such time that the additionall Forces from Scotland are joyned with him. Hee hath had severall invitations (as we hear) from Sir Charles Lucas, to send Sir Philip Stapleton with a party of Horse and Dragoons to their assistance, but would not assent thereto. As also, a Letter from the Lord Goring and Generall Ha∣stings to the same effect: wherein they intimated their De∣sires to have some additionall Forces sent downe unto them
for the better and more secure mannaging of the greatwork in hand, declaring That if it pleased God to give them victory in the South, they need not fear the day in the North; but all could not prevaile for he had fixed his resolution to the contrary; and therefore called a Councell of War, to consider what should be done for their greatest advantage and safety, & after some disputation thereupon, it was resolved by the major part, that no Forces should be sent Southward, untill such time that the additionall Forces were come in unto them from Scot∣land, together with some Armes and Ammunition, but it is ho∣ped that he will come short of his expectation. VVe have seized on two Castles in the North, which was in the possession of Langdale and his party, we pursed him through the greatest part of Westmerland, untill he came within 12. miles of Carlisle, where they received a strong Allarum, and barracado'd up their Gates. The Major Generall is now in Penreth, and his Army quar∣tered in the towns adjacent, nsisting of about 3000. Horse and Foot. Col. Dodding, Col. Booth, and the rest of the Lanca∣shire Forces are expected to joyn with us very suddenly, and I hope they will be here seasonably. The happy tydings of reducing Kent, and the ill successe of Goring in Essex, hath quite broke the hearts of the Eneny here, who are fearfull that the Lord General will advance with a great strength towards them, which causeth divers to dissert the service. Sir, I am Your devoted Servant, M. Simcock. From the Head-quarters neer Penreth, 16. Junij 1648.
SIR, HIs Excellency the Lord Generall hath sent a party round about on Suffolk side of the ci∣ty, which have made good Mersey Iland, and taken some prize of the enemies, which was carrying away by water: We have also another party on the other side of the water, neer the Heath which is the har∣bour, or Key, to which the shipping comes, and is not half musket shot over for at least a mile from the town: there is at the Key two or three ships, which ly so low on the Water, that they cannot much annoy us. We have also made good the bridg on Norwich Road, and are drawing a line round a∣bout the City, the Sububs being already in our possession: those which come out to us, do certain∣ly affirm, that about sixty of the enemy were buri∣ed in St. Margarets Church yard that night which we fought with them, and many others elsewhere besides those they left behind them, which they got not again into the City. Sir William Campion (once Governour of Bostol house for the King) is dead, and Major Eyes, whole losse they much la∣ment. Col. Baxters Reg. was far ingaged with the enemy, & quit∣ted themselvs with great valour: we lost in all a Major, and one or two captains, and some other officers, besides comon soldiers: the L. Goring, the L. Loughorough, Sir Charles Lucas
& several other eminent commanders are said to be still re∣maining in the town: they have taken Mr. VVigmores Waggon horses, and severall others, and mounted men upon them; but since that night they have been very quet in the city, & not offered to salley forth: those within do intimate that they would have conditions, especially the Horse which are very desirous to depart. A Trumpeter was sent out of the towne with a message to the Lord Generall, and his Excellency pi∣ties the sadcondition of many imminent and harmless souls in the city. The Lord Generall hath hereupon sent Letters to the Parliament this morning, to acquaint them with the affairs here, and within a day or two I shall be able to com∣municate more unto you, and the rest of our friends, from hence, I remain Your affectionate friend. T. N. From the Headquarters neer Colchester June 19. 1648. The L. Gen. sent a Letter to the L. Goring, and others in the town in these words, viz. Sir, I understand you have in custody Sir W. Masham, a Parl. man and some other Gent. prisoners, I desire you to permit this bearer, to see in what condition they are, what necessaries they want, that care may be taken for supplying of them, I have about 500 priso∣ners of yours, if you have any of my souldiers prisoners, I desire to know the number and quality of them and shall send as many in exchange which shall be performd by me. Tho; Fairfax, 17. of June 1648. To which answer was returned in these words, My Lord I desire you will by the trumpeter send up a List of all those Gen. Officers, and souldiers of our party, and under our command, that are now prisoners in your Army, we shall upon the like occasion, shew the same respect to you, and we desire the Trumpeter may speak with the best of quality of our prisoners to
let them know our endevvours for their enlargement wee have de∣tayned your Trumpeter longer by reason of our hou?ely motion and action my Lord wee rest. Your servants Norwich. Arthur Capell. Loughborough. Charles Lucas. 17. June 1648. SIR, SInce my last here hath been some action: On Fryday night last a party of the Enemies Horse made a salley out of the town, thinking to make an escape away, but being discovered by one of our Scouts, he presently rode up to the Horse-guard, and gave notice thereof to the Commander in chief, who immediatly mounted three Troops, and left two upon the guard to maintain that passage, and advanced towards the Enemy, who meeting with them, our Frontiers fired, and the rest of the Body charged in amongst them, and after a short dispute the Enemy retreated and in agreat disorder made towards the town, but our men per∣sued them even to the very gates▪ doing some execution, and took divers prisoners, with very little losse. Our men are very vigilant, and keeps provisions from going to them, the towne is much straightued thereof, which causeth a most dolefull & hea∣vie cry amongst the Inhabitants. Lexton 18. Junij 1648. FINIS.
