L477 E671_22 R207089 99866161 118425
The last BLOUDY FIGHT At SEA, Between the English and the Dutch, on Tuesday last, upon the Coast of Denmark: The manner of the Engagement; the particulas of the Fight; the taking of one hundred and seven ships, and above two thousand prisoners; with the pursuing of three hudred Syl to the Coast of Scotland, and besieging of them in Bressie-Iland; The re∣solution of the Dutch-men to fight it out to the last man, and their preparation and proceedings thereupon. The cncluding of a League between the States of Holland, the King of Denmak; the Queen of Sweden; and a Declaration of fourscore of the Swedsh Men of War. Naval battle London, Pited for George Horton, 1652.
Another bloudy fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch, upon the Coast of Denmark; the particulars of the En∣gagement; one hundred of the Hollan∣ders ships taken, and fifteen hundred prisoners taken, &c. SIR, AFter a long pursuit of the Hollan∣ders upon this Northern Ocean, with great difficulties (at last) we came to act the Theater of Europes Tra∣gedy, and to dispute the ground-work with fiery Arguments, and Canon Darts, which was with great resolution performed both
by the Assailants and Defendants. But af∣ter a sharp fight, with som of their best men of War, (having taken five, and sunk three) we bore up to them, with such Thunder∣cracks, and shouts of joy, that the lightning of our Canon, soon deaded the spirits of the Dutch-men, and in less then half an ho: we became victorious, dispersing the whole Navy; upon which atchievement, we took seven gallant Men of War, one hundred of their fisher Vessels, and about two thousand prisoners; the chief Officers whereof are committed to safe custody; most of the pri∣vate souldiery have taken up Arms for the Commonwealth of England. In this con∣flict we had many killed and wounded; but lost not one ship. The Enemy declining Engagement, our Gene∣ral was the first that bore up to them, in pursuit of Victory; the James headed the Resolution; and made up to the Enemy, with the rest of the Fleet
attending the motion; which the Enemy perceiv∣ing, endeavoured to recover the Sound, and accord∣ingly effected the same; but General Blake being advertised of their Design, sent a Message to the K. of Denmark, beseeching his Majesty to prohibit sanctuary for any such Assiniators. Whereupon he drew off from the Sound, to the end that he might invite them to the Ocean; the Dutch having notice thereof, weighed anchor, and then resolved to play out their Game; but our General (though an ene∣my to the Card, plaid the Trump between Hanse and the Sound; so that 300 of the Hollanders flew up, and descended at Bressies Bay (an Iland) in Scot∣land, where they are fortifying; and intrenching themselves, resolving to dispute the Game with Us. But believe me Sir, if Mr. Vantrump receives such bussing after this rate but a little while longer, his mighty Masters will hardly embrace him, for his great pains in neglecting their unsatiable belly-tim∣ber. Aboard the Garland July 20. 1652. At Anchor neer Bressies Bay.
By an Express from Portsmouth it is certified, That on the 21 instant Sir George Ayscue came upon the Western Coast with fifty gallant Men of War, and intends to expedite after the eighteen sail of Dutch, sent from Vantrump to convoy the East-India ships to their desired Ports: the wind was very fair for him, till he came neer the Road of Portsmouth, but then turn'd full against him; so that he stood in to the Bay for an hour or two, and then taking the be∣nefit of the Tyde bore up again to Sea, and by that time it was dark got cleer of Bem∣bridge point: indeed his putting in there, though not intended by him, proved very providential for the Councel of States Let∣ters to Sir George, coming an hour before night, were immediatly sent to him: He stil beares up after the Enemy, and its believed a good account will be given of his heroick Atchievements very suddenly; for he em∣braceth
braceth all opportunities, and exceeding vi∣gilant in his motion. The Zealanders have put to Sea a Fleet of Threescore sayl, which lye hovering a∣bout their own Coast to secure their Mer∣chants and Fisher-men, rather then to en∣gage further in the publique service. Van heer de Witte is Commander in chief, and a great favourite he is to the Royal family, as appears by his carrying on, and declaring for the King of Scots interest; who is expe∣cted daily at the Hague, where great prepa∣rations are making for his reception and en∣tertainment; for indeed he hath been much solicited by the Estates of the United Pro∣vinces; and upon advice with his Councel, it was determined; what the issue will be, few dayes will manifest. We have likewise received Advertise∣ments, that the Queen of Sweden hath set forth fourscore sayl of ships, all Men of
War, but whether they are bound, they are not pleased to declare, but ride on still with Commission in pocket, having already pas∣sed the Zound. The Dutch have made a League with the King of Denmark, and having hired the Zound for 140000 Pattacoons, or dollors per annum, by which meanes the Swedes will be inforced to pay Toll; yet notwith∣standing they are in a League defensive with Sweden against Denmark, and defensive with Denmark against Sweden; they are al∣so in a League offensive and defensive with France; and a League de non offendo with Spain. FINIS.
