l646 e446_6 99864290 116517
A LAWFULL LEAGUE AND COVENANT▪ To bee entred into, and taken, by all Men that have eyther Religion, Loyalty, or Honesty: For the freeing themselves and their Poste∣rities, from Tyrannie and Slaverie. with an Exhortation for taking the same. Servants have ruled over us, and none would deliver us out of their hands. Lament. 5.8. The breath of our Nostrills, the Annoynted of the Lord, was taken in their netts: of whome wee said, under his shad∣dow, wee shall bee preserved alive among the hea∣then. Lament. 4.20. But the wicked men said, How shall hee save us? so they despised him, and brought him no presents: but hee held his tongue. 1. Sam. 10.27. Printed for the People, and are to bee sold in the Streets, to such as will buy them. Anno 1648.
THE Lord hath destroyed his Tabernacle as a garden, hee hath destroyed his Congregation: the Lord hath caused the Feasts and Sabbaths to bee forgotten in Zion and hath despised, in the indignation of his wrath, the King, and the Priests: Lam. 2.6. The Lord hath forsaken his Alter; hee hath abhorred his Sanctuary verse 7. Hee hath destroyed and broken her barres; her King and her Princes are among the Gentiles; the Law is no more: verse 9. Let us search and try our wayes and turne again to the Lord, let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the Heavens. Lam. 3.40.41. Come let us joyne our selves unto the Lord in a perpe∣tuall Covenant that shall not bee forgotten. Jer. 50.5. The Praeamble. WEE Noble men, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospell, and Commons of all sorts, in the Kingdomes of England, Scotland, and Ireland; having by the Faction and Rebellion of divers wicked people under the specious colour of Reformation beene deprived of our Religion, King, Lawes, and Liberties; ha∣ving for seaven yeares last past: now before our eyes the glo∣ry of God, and the advancement of the Kingdome of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the honour, and happinesse of the Kings Majestie, and His posterity; and the true publique liberty, safety, and peace of the Kingdomes; wherein every ones private condition is included: And calling to minde, the Barbarous, and cruell, inhumanity; of these enemies of God
against the Kings Majestie; with their bloody plots, conspira∣cies, and practices against the true reformed Religion, and the professors thereof, in all places, (especially these three King∣domes) ever since this pretended reformation; and how much their rage, power and presumption, is of late and at this time increased and exercised: whereof the desperate, and deplora∣ble estate, of this Church and Kingdome of England; the in∣constant, and unsetled estate, of the Kirke and Kingdome of Scotland, and the bleeding condition of the Church and King∣dome of Ireland, are present and publique testimonies: wee have now at last, after other meanes of expectation supplica∣tion, complying, prying, paying; and suffering, for the restau∣ration of our Religion, and King, and the preservation of our Lawes, Estates, and, Persons, from utter ruine, and destructi∣on, according to the cōmendable practice of these Kingdomes in former times (and especially that in the yeare 1643.) and the example of Gods People in other Nations; after mature deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutuall and solemne League and Covenant: Wherein wee all sub∣scribe, and each one of us for himself with our hands and hearts lifted up to the most high God doe sweare. The Covenant. 1. THat wee shall sincerely, really, and Constantly, through the grace of God, endeavor in our seve∣rall places and callings, the Restauration of the reformed Religion in the Church of England; in Doctrine, wor∣ship, Discipline, and Government, as the same is by Law established: The reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of Scotland, and Ireland, in Doctrine, worship, Disci∣pline and Government (if wee shall be thereto Lawfully call'd) according to the word of God: And shall endeavor, to bring the Churches of God, in the three Kindomes to
the neerest conjunction and uniformity, in Religion, Con∣fession of Faith, forme of Church Government, Liturgy, and Order, that may stand with the word of God, and the Lawes of the Nations; That wee and our posterities after us, may as Brethren live in Faith, and Love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us. 2. That wee shall in like manner, without respect of per∣sons, endeavor the Extirpation of Popery, Presbyterie, (that is to say Church and Kingdomes Government, by Presbyters, lay Elders, and unlawfull Synods and Assem∣blies, whether Congregationall, Classicall, or Nationall; or any of them) Independency, Superstition, Heresy, Schisme, Prophanenesse; and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godlinesse, least wee partake in other mens sinnes, and thereby bee in danger to receive of their plagues, and that the Lord may bee one, and his name one in the three Kingdomes. 3. Wee shall, with the same sincerity, realty, and con∣stancy, in our severall vocations, indeavour with our E∣states, and lives, mutually to preserve, the known rights and Priviledges of Parliaments, according to the primitive constitutions thereof; and the Liberties of the Kingdomes, And to restore, preserve, and defend, the Kings Majesties Person, and Authority, in the preservation and defence of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdome, And in all other causes as well Eclesiasticall as Civill (according to our Oath of Allegiance) hee being therein, in these his Kingdomes next and immediately under God Supreame head and Governor; That the world may beare witnesse with our Consciences of our Loyalty, And that wee have no thoughts of introducing Popery by acknowledging any person, or power in these Kingdomes to be above the King. 4. Wee shall with all faithfullnesse indeavour the dis∣covery of all such as have beene, or shall bee, Incendiaries, Malignants or evill instruments, by hindring, or obstructing the exercise of Religion, and worship, according to Law
established; dividing the King from his People, or one Kingdome from another, or making any faction or parties among the People, contrary to the Law of the Land▪ that they may bee brought to publique tryall, and receive condigne punishment as the degree of their offences shall require, according to the known Lawes of the Land, and by no other power or Judicatory whatsoever. 5. And whereas the happinesse of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, so well setled formerly by his Majesty, is by the Faction of these Incendiaries, broken and violated, and all the three Kingdomes, involved in Blood, and confusion, wee shall each of us according to our places, and intrest, indeavour that Peace may bee restored; and the Kingdomes conjoyned in a firme and lasting League, and Union, un∣der his Majestie and his posterity for ever. And that Ju∣stice may bee done upon the wilfull opposers thereof, in manner expressed in these Articles, and not other∣wise. 6. Wee shall also according to our Places, and Callings, in this common cause of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdomes; assist, and defend, all those that enter into this League, and Covenant, in the maintaining and pur∣suance thereof and shall not suffer our selves, directly, or indirectly, by whatsoever combination, perswasion; or terror, to bee divided and withdrawne from this blessed Union, and conjunction; whether to make defection to the contrary part, or give our selves to a detestable indifferen∣cy or newtrality in this cause; which so much concernes the Glorie of God, the Good of the Kindomes, and Ho∣nor of the King: But shall all the dayes of our lives, zea∣lously, constantly, continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same, according to our power; against all letts and impediments whatsoever. And what wee are not able our selves to suppresse, or overcome, wee shall reveale, and make known, that it may bee timely preven∣ted, or removed: All which wee shall doe as in the sight of God.
And because these Kingdomes are guilty of many sinnes and provocations against God, and His Sonne Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses, and dangers, the fruits thereof: wee professe, and declare before God and the world, our unfeined desire, to bee humbled for our own Sinnes, and for the sins of these Kingdomes, especially that wee have not as wee ought, valued that enestimable benefit of the Gospell; that wee have not labored for the purity and power thereof, and that wee have not indeavo∣red to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walke worthy of Him in our lives; which are the causes, of others Sinnes and Transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; and our true and unfeigned purpose, desire and indeavour for our selves, and all others under our power and charge, both in publique and in private; in all duties wee owe to God, and man; to amend our Lives, and each one to goe before another, in the example of a Reall reformation, that the Lord may turne away his wrath, and heavy indignati∣on, and establish these Churches, and Kingdomes, in truth and Peace. And this Covenant wee make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to Performe the same, as wee shall answer at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall bee disclosed most humbly beseeching the Lord, to strengthen us by his holy spirit, for this end, and to blesse our desires, and pro∣ceedings, with such successe as may bee deliverance and safe∣to the King, and People; and incouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under or in danger of the yoake of Antichristian Presbyterie and Tyranny; to joyne in the same, or the like association, or Covenant; to the Glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdome of Jesus Christ, and the Peace and Tranquility of Christian King∣domes and Common-Wealths.
The Exhortation to the taking of this Solemn League and Covenant; for the Restau∣ration and Defence of Religion, the Ho∣nour and Happinesse of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three Kingdoms. IF The Power of Religion, or solid reason, if Loyalty to the King, and piety to their Native Countrey, or love to themselves, and naturall affection to their posterity, if the example of men touched with a deepe sence of all these, or extroardinary successe from God thereupon, can awaken an imbroyled bleeding remnant, to imbrace the Soveraigne and onely meanes of their recovery, there can bee no doubt, but this Solemne League and Covenant will finde, wheresoever it shall bee tendered, a People ready to entertaine it with all chearefullnesse and duty. And were it not commended to the Kingdome, by the concurrent incouragement of the renowned city of London, the County of Essex, the Principality of Wales, and mul∣titudes of persons of eminent ranke and quality in this Na∣tion. And the whole Body of the Kingdome of Scotland except the Assembly of Presbyters, who pretend Jure Divino to governe Kirke and Kingdome) with the Kingdome of Ireland, who are all ready to joyne in it, with rejoycing at their undertakings, so graciously seconded from Heaven already, by blasting the Councells, and breaking the power of the enemy: Yet it goes forth in it's own strength, with such convincing evidence, of equity, truth, and righteous∣nesse, as may raise in all (not wilfully ignorant or misera∣bly seduced) inflamed affections to joyne with their fellow Subjects, in this happy Bond; for putting an end to the present miseries, and for saving both King and Kingdome
from utter ruine; now so strongly and openly Labored by the two factions of Presbytery, and Independency, and such as have beene bewitched, and besotted, by those bloody and viperous Traytors. For what is there almost in this Covenant, which was not for substance, either expressed, or manifestly included, in that solemn Protestation, of May the fifth 1641. where∣in the whole Kingdome stands ingaged, untill this day: The sinfull neglect whereof, (as wee may justly feare) opens one Flud-gate the more, to let in all these Calamities, upon the Kingdome, and cast upon it, a necessity of renuing Covenant, and entring into this. And if it bee said the extirpation of Presbytery (which hath not so much as the face of a Law to countenance it, nor any colour to introduce it in this Kingdome but cer∣taine scandalous petitions preferred to the Parliaments in Queene Elizabeth and King James His time, by factious and seditious persons, that neither feared God nor his Vice∣gerent, but were wholy adicted to change, and who by the wisdomes of those Parliaments received their just rewards) is unwarrantable, or not necessary: The assertors thereof will not onely appeare to bee defective in their own Judge∣ments, but lay an aspersion upon the wisdome and temper of the Parliaments of those times, by the moderation and Justice whereof under God wee reaped those blessings of Peace, and Plenty, which wee injoyed, untill wee were deprived thereof, by the industrious malice of these pretend∣ed Reformers. And as for those Clegy-men and others, who may pre∣tend that they cannot Covenant, to extirpate that govern∣ment which themselves have sworne to set up. They can tell if they please, that they that have sworne obedience to the Lawes of the Land, are not by any voluntary, or inforced oath, or Covenant, to bee after taken, bound to extirpate those Lawes, though they bee inconvenient. And if any Minister, or others, have entred into any such oath,
or Covenant, not warranted by the Lawes of God, and the Land: In this case they must teach themselves; and others, that such oathes call for repentance, not pertinacy therein. That scruple, that this is done without the Kings consent will soone bee removed, if it bee remembred that the Pro∣testation of the fifth of May before mentioned, was voted and executed by both Houses, and after by order of one house sent abroade, to all the Kingdome: His Majestie not excepting against it, or giving any stop to the taking of it, all be it he was then resident in person at White-Hall: But now, his Majesty being imprisoned, and it being voted, that no addresse shall bee made unto him; the People are discharged before God and Man, if of themselves, they enter into a Covenant to restore this Religion, and to free their Soveraigne, themselves, and their posterities, from Tyranny and Slavery. Therefore however some men, hoodwinckt; and blinded, by the Artifices, of these Jesuiticall Engineeres; who have long conspired, to Sacrifice our Religion, Lawes, Liberties and persons to Arbitrary slavery; and our Estates to their insatiable avarice; may possibly bee deterred, and amused, with high threats and Declarations, flying up and downe upon the wings of the Priviledge, and power of Parlia∣ment (now captivated and prostituted to serve all their lusts) to proclaime all Malignants, Incendiaries, and ene∣mies to the State, who take This Covenant. Yet let no faithfull English heart be afraid to joyne with their loyall fellow Subjects of the three Kingdomes, in this Solemne Lawfull League. What though those tongues set on fire by hell doe raile and threaten: That God who but even as yesterday vouch∣safed to disperse those darke Clouds, and Foggs, which overshaddowed the Kingdome of Scotland, and made their Loyalty appeare as cleere as the Sunne at noone day, in the very eyes of their purblinde brethren. And hath so
miraculously turned the hearts of those that fomented the disloalty of our fellow Subjects of Ireland; will doubtlesly stand by all those, who with singlenes of heart, & a due sence of their own sinnes, and a necessity of restauration of Reli∣gion, shall now enter into everlasting Covenant with the Lord, never to bee forgotten, to put an end to all these un∣happy and unnaturall breaches, betweene the King and his People, causing his righteousnesse and praise to spring forth before all the Nations to the terror and confusion of those men of Blood, the confederate enemies of God, and the King, who have long combined, and have now raked together the dreggs and scum of many Kingdomes, to bury all the Religion, Glory, Honour, and Liberty of this Nation, in the eternall grave of dishonour and Destruction. READER, I desire thee to compare this Covenant, and the exhortation for the taking thereof, with that, which was with such violence imposed upon these Nations, in the yeare 1643. (and is now againe threatned) and thou shalt finde, the reasons heere given, to bee really the same, that were then pretended, for the obtruding that upon us, But the legallity and necessity of this, to bee so great and just: That it needed no reasons to perswade any man to enter into it but if yet thou wantest reason: Reade over a booke lately printed intituled Good English: and if that give thee not satisfaction, that there can be no setled Peace but this way, I shall conclude that thou art willfully blinde or deperately wicked to thine own destruction. Luke 19.27. The King said: moreover those mine enemies which would not that I should reigne over them, bring hither and slay them before mee. Sam. 10.24. And Samull said, see you not him whom the Lod hath chosen that there is none like him? And all the people shouted and said. GOD SAVE THE KING.
