M1415 E69_13 99860397 112517
A True RELATION FROM HVLL OF The present state and condi∣tion it is in. AS It was written in a Letter from thence by one of good quality, to a Citizen in London, being dated the 19th of this instant Moneth of Septemb. 1643. VVhich Letter was brought into London the twenty eight of this Moneth. Ordered to bee Printed. LONDON, Printed by G. Dexter, for Iohn Bull. Anno 1643. Sept. 30.
Hull the 19th. of Septemb. 1643. AS for newes from hence, I shall informe you as followeth: We found this town beleagured by the Earle of New castles Forces, to the num∣ber of 15 thousand, as is credibly reported, they lye at Cot∣tingham, and Newland, and those that lie nearest, are about a mile off from the Town, they have cast up leverall works against the Towne, and planted di∣vers Pieces of Battteries in them and daily make many shots against it, but blessed bee God have done little hurt, although they have shot many 36 pound
bullets, especially upon the last Lords Day when wee were at Church, they came flying over it and flew into the Market place but did no hurt but to a Malignants Chimneys. Every Day many shots with the great Pieces are made from the Towne and Blockhouse against the Enemies Workes, and the Town where they are but wee cannot heare certainly what execution hath vin done, our musqueteers and theirs play∣ing continually at one another in the mid way, so that they are yet kept at a dist∣ance that they cannot shoote their Gra∣nadoes into the Town to fire it: They have spoyld all the Country neere Hull, and most miserably plundered Beverly, they have cut off our fresh water, but (God be blessed) here is no great want of provision for men as yet, bread is the scarcest, there is Corne enough in the Towne, but they cannot get it grinded fast enough. Newcastle is exceeding mad that he cannot get this Towne for his winter quarters as he did hope, or to be
a sanctuary for him from the Scots: Its reported that he cares not for the losse of ten thousand Men, so that hee could but possesse himselfe of the Town for by the Commission of Array, the Lord Dunbare brings in all the country men to make his number great. The last weeke we cut the Banks to let out the water into the grounds, which overflowes indiffe∣rent well, but it's thought they use some meanes to let it in againe, it will be some hindrance to them as it is. There is no feare of the Towne in probability, if the Lord have not designed to give it into the enemies hand; and I am perswaded they will returne again to Yorke ere long with losse and shame: Colonell Cromwell is come into Lincolne-shire with 5000. horse and foot, and hath sent some troops to Barton yesterday to meete with our horse, which are going over to them at every tyde, as many as can goe in the boates. There goes away 21 Troops, and 4 troops stay in this town we heare that Lyn is in the Earle of Manchesters
power, they are willing to yeeld to two Propositions, as to acknowledge their offence against the Parliament, and to pay the fine, which he shall impose upon them, but they are unwilling to deliver up their Delinquents, which the Earle stands most upon, for the greatest Ma∣lignants in the associated Counties are fled thither. Here was an accident hap∣ned on Saterday last at the North block∣house, which if the Lord had not pre∣vented might have been the ruine of this Town: there was 40 odd Carthages of powder blown up, and some Granadoes being in the place, fired, brooke downe a great part of the Block house both with∣in and without, which is thought will scarce be repaired with 2000 pound, but the especiall providence of God appeared herein, in that it was blowne up on that side that lay next to the Towne, other∣wise it would have beene very advanta∣geous to the Enemy. But this is re∣markable aboue the rest, and in it the hand of God was emminent, that it
blew open a doore in which Roome was 14 barrells of powder, some with the heads open and yet tooke not fir, which if it had done it would have blowne up the whole house, and spoyled some of the Towne: It was conceived at the first that there was Treachery, but it appea∣red to bee done by the carelesnesse of a Gunner: there were foure kil'd, and as many hurt. We have a report of good news from the Earl of Essex his Army, I shall be much ingaged to you, if you will by the first give a testimony thereof, and also what other newes is stirring with you in print, and you shall oblige me to answer your expectation in the like kind. And so at present having not else to en∣large, I commit you unto the Almigh∣ties protection, and ever rest. Your assured Friend THO. MAY. FINIS
