M1659 E1475_1 R209516 99868392 170004
A MEMENTO FOR HOLLAND: OR A True and Exact Histo of the most Villainous and B¦barous Cruelties used on the Eng Merchants residing at Amboyna in the East-Indies, by the Netherland Governo and Councel there. Wherein is shewed What Tortures were used t make them confess a Conspira they were never guilty of; by putting them on the Rack, and by a Water torture to suffocate them; and by burning them under their Arm-pits, and Soals of their Feet, till their fat by dropping extin∣guished the Candles. London, Printed by JAMES MOXON, 1.
woodcut of scenes of torture
The PRINTER TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, I Here present thee with a Story, which cannot be paralleld; that a Nation with whom we have had so long confederacy; and for whom we have ventured our lives; and in whose quarrel so much English Blood hath been spent, for the Defence and Regainment of their lost Liberties; without whom they could not have subsisted; by whose Valour they have been maintained; and to whom they Owe their very Being; should thus be requited! for (only upon a pretended Conspiracy) to take away the lives (and that a Favour, their Tortures consi∣dered) of so many innocent (eminent) men; meerly out of a Covetous Desire to Ingross the whole East-India Trade to themselves. Let them pretend what they please; God is
a just Revenging God: And although hitherto i h been past by, and their execrable detesta∣ rranny (a name too good for such Rulers) h buried in the ashes of Oblivion; yet (I  the Generation alive are not so degenerate,  will both Remember and Requite their ie. ey might have remembred tht if we had  ssisted them in thir lowest Ebb against r puissant Fee, One who (in his thoughts)  swallowed the Empire of Christendome;  would: Yet since the beginning of our  happy Troubles, what Ayd have they sent  recover our Rights and Liberties? Surely . Nay, have they not assisted those who sgt to enslave us? hope the Lord will put it into the hearts of tos Worthies sitting at the Helme, to take th siness into their Serious Consideration. I lv the issue to God; having done my Duty as a rue born Englishman, and a Lover of my Counry; Farewel. Thine, J. M.
An Exact and more full R∣lation of the most Horrid, Cruel, a Barbarous Proceedings against the English  Amboyna by the Netherlanders, for the pretended Conspiracy of the English there inhabiting. Getlemen and beloved Countrymen, IT is not out of any prejudice that I thus recount their barbarous proced∣ings against the poor English Mer∣chants in Amboyna, but to remem∣ber them of their former cruelties to that Nati∣on, which now they seem to Court and Sue to. I shall give you a true Relation thereof, and let the world judge between us, whether we have not cause to remember their former courtesies. After the progress of two several Treaties, the first being in 1613. in London; and the other at the Hague in Holland, concerning matters of Trade between the English and Dutch in the East-Indies; and at length by a third Treaty in London, 1619. all differences in matter of Trade were composed; and solemn∣ly agreed upon the future proceedings of both
Companies in the Indies, as well in matter of Trade and Commerce, as otherwise: and in regard of the great blood shed, and pretended cost the Hollander had been at, in obtaining the Trade of the Isles of the Moluccos, Banda, and Amboyna from the Spaniards and Portugals, and in building of places of Strength to keep out the enemy, and all such as should oppose them; the said Hollanders should have the two third parts of the Trade, and the English the other third; and whatsoever charges they were at in relation to their defence, should be impos'd upon the Merchandise. Wherefore in order to this Agreement, the Eglish East India. Compa∣ny placed certain Factories for their part of Trade, some at the Mollucco's, some at Banda, and others at Amboyna; which last will prove the Scene of an unparellel'd Tragedy. Now a little to digress, I will acquaint the Reader what part of the Indies this Amboyna lieth in: 'Tis an Island adjacent to Seran, the compass about forty leagues, from whence some other Islands derive their name; for Commo∣dities, Cloves abound, and great Trade there is for them; for buying and gathering in thereof, the English Company had setled five several Factories, the head and chief place of meeting was at this Town of Amboyna; where first M. Geo, Muschamp, and after him M. Gab. Tower∣son
were Agents; to whom Instructions were given for the Government of the smaller Facto∣ries in the respective Island, and the neibouring Island of Seran. Upon the Islands of Amboyna and point at Seran, the Dutch had fortified themselves in four several places but their chiefest Fort was at the Town of Amboyna, which they had made impregnable, having four Bulwarks, and on each point six pieces of Ordnance mounted, upon the side of the Castle the Sea beats, the other is di∣vided from the Land with a kind of deep Graft of five fadom broad, exceeding deep and filled with the Sea. The Garison of this Castle con∣sisted of about two hundred Dutch souldiers, and a company of free Burgers, and about four hundred Mardijkers, for so they call the free natives in the Town who are ready to serve the Castle at an hours warning; There likewise lay in the Road divers strong Holland ships as well for defence as Traffique. This being the place of general meeting, as well for the Island of Banda, as the rest of Amboyna. Here the English inha∣bited, not in the Castle, but under its protection, in an house of their own, thinking themselves safe, and resting upon the credit of the Dutch; first in respect of the affinity of both Nations; secondly, in regard of the late Treaty. Here they continued with a seeming loving
respect; the English conversing and trading with the Hollander and the Hollander with the En∣glish; and all by vertue of the late Treaty. But in the mean time there hapning some difference beween them. The English not only complain of the Hollanders squandring away much mo∣ney in building of unnecessary charges upon Fors, thereby to bring in unreasonable reckon∣ings to the common account; but also did for their part pay the Garisons with Victuals, and Cloth of Coromnde, which they put off to the souldiers at four times the price it cost them; yet would they not allow the English part of the same charge▪ thereby drawing from the English (which in right ought to pay but one third part) more the two thirds of the whole true charge. Hence began the feud between the Hollander and the English; and upon like usages of the English by the Hollanders grew further discon∣tens Te complaints were sent to Jacatra, in the Island of Jva Maor, to the general Coun∣cel for the Defence of both Nations there resi∣ding; Who not agreeing upon the great differ∣ence between the two Natons, sent the same o∣ver into rop to be debated, and the differen∣ces to be composed here by both Companies; and in case they could not end the controversie, to the Kings Majesty, and the Lords, the States General, according to a former Article in the
Treaty in 1619. In the interim the coals of dis∣content increased between the English and the Dutch, and there wanted not those that kept them burning; for their differences augmented about these and other things, until at length the knot of concord was cut asunder by the sword of discord. The full relation take as followeth. About the 11. of February stil. vet. a Japoni∣an Souldier of the Dutch, in the Castle of Am∣boyna, walking in the night upon the Rampire, took an occasion to speak to the sentinel (being an Hollander) and among other discourse, asked him some questions touching the strength of the Castle, and concerning the people of the Gari∣son; but by the way 'tis here to be noted, that those Japoneers, of whom there were not thirty in all the Island, were for the most part imploy∣ed by the Dutch in the condition of Soldiers, yet were not of those that they confided in, and al∣waies lodged in the Castle; but upon some ex∣traordinary occasion were called out of the Town to do some duty in the watch; This Ja∣poneer aforesaid was suspected upon his confe∣rence with the sentinel, and apprehended upon surmise of treason, and put to the water torture, whereby through extream anguish and pain, and the cruel usage of the tormentors he was brought to confess himself, and some of his Countrymen there, to have conpited the taking
of the Castle; upon his confession, other Japoniers were examined, and put to the torture; together with a Portugal, the keeper of the slaves under the Dutch. Now all the while this business was upon examination, which was four days, some Englishmen having business in the Castle, had leave to go to and from the Castle, where they saw the prisoners and heard of their tortures, and of the crime laid to their charge, but never dream'd or surmised any thing that they were concerned, or that their turn should be next, since they never conversed with the Japoniers, or the aforesaid Portugal. At the same time there was one Abel Price, Abel Price Chyrurgion of the English, for a mis∣examind demeanor of offering to fire a Dutch man's house, this fellow the Dutch took, and shewed him some of the Jponiers whom they had grievously tortured, and to paliate their in∣tentions and designes upon the English, told him they had confessed the English to be confederate with them in the taking of the Castle; and if he would not confess, they would torure him worse then the Japoniers. He denies their accu∣sation, they put him to the torture, through the extremity whereof they soon make him confess that which neither he or any of his Countrimen were ever guilty of; this was Febr. 15. 1622. Scil. vet. Soon after nine of the clock in the
morning they sent for Capt. Towerson, and the rest of those English that were in the Town to come to speak with the Governor of the Castle, and they as innocent of any conspiracy, never mistrusted any plots against them; all went save one that staid behind to keep the house. They being come to the Governour, he told Captain Towerson that himself and others of his Nation, were accused of conspiracy about surprisal of the Castle, and therefore till there could attest be made appear of their innocency, they must remain in safe custody and so were made pri∣soners. Immediatly also they apprehended him that was left at home in the house, and took all the Merchandise that belonged to the English Company into their custody and took an Inven∣tory of their goods; seising upon all their Chests, Boxes, Books, Writings, and other things that were in custody of the English, or belonged to the English Merchants. Cap. Towerson was com∣mitted to his chamber, and a Guard of Dutch Souldiers appointed to watch him; Emanuel Tomson was kept prisoner in the Castle, and the remaining party, viz. John Beomont, Edward Collins, Will. Webster, Ephraim Ramsey, Tim. Johnson, John Fardo, and Rob. Frown, were carried aboard the Hollanders Ships then ridg in Harbor, and distributed (as to them seemed
best for their own designs) to several Ships, and laid fast in irons: Also the same day the Gover∣nor sent to the two other Factories in the Island, to apprehend the rest of the English there, so that Sam. Colson, John Clark. Geo. Sharrok that were found in the Factory at Hitto; likewise Edw. Collins, Will. Webber, and John Sadler at Larica, were all brought prisoners to Amboyna, Febr. 16. Upon which day also John Powel, Iohn Wetheral and Thom. Ludbrook were ap∣prehended at Cambello; and Iohn Beomont, Will. Gregs, Ephraim Ramsey at Loho, and brought in Irons to Amboyna, Febr. 20. In the mean time the Governor and Fiscal went to work wth the prisoners that were already there, and first they sent for Iohn Beomont, and Tim. Iohn∣son from aboard the Unicorne, who being come into the Castle, Beomont was left with a guard, and Iohnson carried into another room; where presently Beomont might hear him cry out pitti∣fully; then again while they surceast his tor∣ment, to be quiet for a little while; then upon the pinching him again, to tire the ears by the shrilness of his voice and lamentable complaints. After a taste of his tortures, Abel Price the Chyrurgion that was first examined and tortur∣ed, as before rehearsed, was brought to confront and accuse him; but Iohnson not yet confessing any thing, Price was quickly carried out, and
Iohnson brought again to the Rack; where Beomont heard him cry aloud then again to cease, then to cry afresh; at last some time be∣ing spent in his second examination upon some further busines, he was brought forth bewailing his evil fortune to be thus tortured for nothng, and being all wet with the water torture, and cruel burning in all parts of his body, he was a perfect Embleme of the Spaniards cuy to the poor Indians; for they ued not m with more cruelty, then the Dutch did our poor English Merchants. Now this poor soul being thus tormented, was laid as de in a hole with a Soldier to guard him, that he should not speak with any body. Then was Samuel Tomson brought to Act his part upon this Tragick Scene, and to be examined;Sauel Tomson examined but not suffered to come into the same room where Iohson had bin, but something farther from the Hall; Yet Beomont beig in the Hall, heard him roar out most lamentably at last, after an hour and an half torturing he was carried away into another room a contrary way, so that he came not by Beomont through the Hall. Next was Beomont called in, and being ex∣amined of many things which he denyed by deep Oaths and protestations, he must taste of the same sauce his Countrimen had, and be made
to suffer those extreme torments; which was to have a cloth tyed about his neck, and two men ready with Jarrs of water to pour on his head: But yet such cruel pity, or pitiful cruelty had the Governor (being almost a Christian) to command to loose him, and he would spare him a day or two, because he was an old man. This was finished on Saturday the fifteenth of Febru∣ary aforesaid, as a preparative to their Sundays exercise. Upon Sunday the sixteenth of Februry, Will. Webber, Edw. Collins, Ephr. Ramsey, and Rob. Brown, were fetcht from aboard the Rotterdam to be examined. At the same time came Sam. Colson, Will. Griggs, Iohn Clark, Geo. Sharock, and John Saddler, from Hitto and Larica, and were immediately upon their arrival, brought into the Castle Hall. Robert Brown Examined.Robert Brown, Taylor, was first called in; and being tortured with water he confessed all was asked him. Edward Collins Examined.Then was Edw, Collins called; and they by their insinuating pra∣ctises told him, that those that were formerly ex∣amined, had confest him as accessary to the plot of taking the Castle; which when he denied with great oaths and execrations (as what will not a man say that is guiltles? yet notwithstanding all the cries of that poor disconsolate soul, they
they made his hands and feet fast to the Wrack, and bound a cloth about his throat, ready to put to the torture of water. Thus this poor man being prepared for the torture, he requi∣red respite, and he would confess. After Such a small courtesie required, the Hoghen Mo∣ghens gave leave. But being again let down, he was so far from confessing any thing, that he vowed and protested his innocency: yet said, that because he knew that they would by tor∣ture make him confess any thing, though never so false, they should do him a great favour to tell him what he should say, and he would speak it, to avoid the torture. The Fiscal made answer, What, do you mock us? and bade up with him again, and gave the torture of water; which his tender nature not endu∣ring, he prayed to be let down, and he would confess all. Then he consulted with himself, and told them, that about ten weeks before, himself, Tomson, Johnson, Brown, and Fard, had plotted, with the help of the Japoners, to surprise the Castle. And here the Fiscal inter∣rupted him, and asked him whether Captain Tower were not a complotter with them. He answered, No. You lye, (said the Fiscal;) did not he call you all to him, and tell you that the Dutch-mens baseness to you had caused him to think of a plot; and desire you to se∣cure
its discovery, and to swear on a Bible to be secret to him? Collins answered, with great Oathes, that he knew nothing of it. Then they commanded to make him fast again: and when he saw he must go to torture, he said all was true that they had spoken. Then the Fiscal asked whether the English in the rest of the Factors were not consenting to this plot. He answered, No. The Fiscal then asked him whether the President of the English at Jac∣catra, or M. Welden Agent in Bandu, were not plotters consenting to this business. Once more, he replies negatively. The Fiscal asked them by what means the Japoners should have executed their purposes. Whereat when Collings was at a stand, he devised with him∣self some probable fiction. The Fiscal holp him, and said, Should not two Japoners have gone to each point of the Castle, and two to the Governours chamber-door; and when the hurly-burly had been without, and the Governour coming to pacifie the business, the Japoners to have killed him? Here one said to the Fiscal, Do not tell him what he should say, but let him speak for himself. Whereupon, the Fiscal, without attending his answer to the former question, asked him what reward the Japoners should have received. Collins answered, A thousand Royals apiece.
Lastly, he asked when this plot should have been effected. Whereunto though he answer∣ed nothing, not knowing what to devise upon the sudden, yet he was dismissed, and glad to become clear of the torture, though he should certainly die for this confession. Next, in order to our Tragedie, was Samu∣el Colson examined, being brought before them, having newly arrived from Hitto, as is before touched; who being the same day brought to the torture, was so appaled at the sight of Collins, (whose eyes were blown out of his head with the torture of water) that he chose rather to confess all they asked him, then to be tortured: and so he was dismissed; but he went out weeping, protesting his innocency. Now comes John Clerk, who came with Colson from Hitto, to be examined, and put to the torture, so that he was heard by those without the hall to cry out in an extreme man∣ner; for they tortured him with fire and water for the space of two hours. The manner of his torture, as also of Johnsons and Tomsons, was as followeth. First, they twisted him up by the hands with a cord on a large door, where they made him fast to two staples of iron, fixt on both sides on the top of the door-posts, stretch∣ing his hands asunder as wide as they could: and being thus made fast, his feet hung about
two foot from the ground, which also they extended as far as they could, and so made them fast unto the bottom of the door. Then they bound a cloth about his neck and face, so close, that little or no water could go by. When they had done this, they poured the water softly upon his head, until the cloth was full up to his mouth and nostrils, so that he could not draw his breath, but he must suck in the water; which being still continued to be poured in softly, forced his intrails to come out at his eyes ears, and nose, almost to strang∣ling. Never were there such horrid cruelties exercised among the Turks and Barbarians, as among those that pretend Christianity. They were so cruel to him, that they tormented him till his breath was gone, so that he fainted: then they took him quickly down, and made him vomit up the water; and being a little recovered, they pull'd him up again, and char∣ged him with the water again, till they had stifled him as before: and this was exercised on this poor wretch three or four several times, till his body was swoln twice as big as ordina∣ry, his cheeks puft up like a pair of bladders, and his eyes starting and strutting out beyond his forehead. Yet such was the constancie of this poor soul, that, rather then he would con∣fess, or betray any of his Country-men, he
weuld suffer all the injuries could be inflicted upon him; insomuch that the Fiscal and Tor∣mentors reviled him, saying he was a devil; (when indeed they shewed themselves to be so) and that no man but a Witch could endure such torments: wherefore they, in relation to some Charms about him, cut off his hair short from his head, and hoysed him up again as before. Then they burnt him with lighted Candles in the bottom of his feet, until the fat dropt out the Candles: yet, as if these cruel∣ties had not been enough, they called for fresh lights, and applied them unto him. They burnt him also under the elbows; likewise in the palms of his hands: they moreover burnt his arm-holes, till his intrails might be seen. At length, when they saw all their cruelties could not do any good upon him to make him con∣fess of himself, they led him along with circum∣stances plotted and contrived by themselves; and being thus wearied and overcome by the torment, he (rather then he would suffer more) answered Yea to whatsoever they asked him. The confession that they drew from him, was to this effect, viz. that Captain Towerson had, upon New-yeers day last before, sworn all the English at Amboyna to be secret, and to be assistant to a plot that he had projected, with the help of the Japoners, to take the Castle,
and to put the Governour and the rest of them to death. And thus have I shewed you the cruel handling this poor English Marchant. Now after they had thus macerated his body, they sent him out by four blacks, who carryed him to the Dungeon, and there laid him in heavy irons for five days without any Christi∣an pity, so much as to send a Chyrurgion to dress his putrifyed wounds, which were filled with great Maggots, which dropt and crep from him in a most loathsom manner, and this they made their Sabbath days work, it now grew dark, they sent the rest of the English that came from Hitto (attended in the Hall) to the Smiths, where they were loaded with Irons, and then carryed to the Prison where the rest of the tortured prisoners were, with the Japoners, lying miserably putrified. The next morning, being Munday the 17 of February, William Grigs, and John Fardo were call'd to examination. The Japoners were first cruelly tortered to accuse Greggs, which after a great deal of torture, were constrained, in hope to avoid the cruelty of the torture, to accuse Griggs, to avoid the torture, confessed all that he was de∣manded. John Fardo comes next with some other Japo∣ners; himself endured the torture of water,
but being not able to undergo any further tor∣ture, confessed what was askt him by the Fiscal and so was sent to prison again. The same day also, was brought John Bea∣mont the second time to the Fiscals Chamber, where one Captain Newport a Dutchmans son but born in England, was interpreter. Willi∣am Griggs was brought to accuse him, who said, that when the consultation for surprisal of the Castle was held, he the said Beomont was present: Beomont denies it with deep im∣precations, the other faintly affirms it; upon which, Beomont is tri'd, and fil'd with water till his intrails began to crack: so devilish were these hell-hounds. (for other terms I cannot give them.) Well, so tortured he was, that he answered affirmatively to all Interrogatories; yet being let down, swore to Newport, and Johnson a Dutch Marchant, that the things were false which were extorted from him, yet he was constrained to put his hand to his con∣fession, or else to the torture he must go: which to avoid, with a sorrowful heart he subscribed, and so had heavy Irons put upon him, and carried to the Dungeon. Next to Beomont, was George Shrock brought to the stake, he was an assistant at Hitt; he being call'd to question, saw how others had been tortured, made his prayer to
God (as since upon oath he hath affirmed) that he would permit him to tell some proba∣ble lies against himself, as the Dutch might give credit to, and by that means escape the torture; but being brought to the wrack, the water provided, and the Candles lighted. he was by the Governour and Fiscal examined, and charged, That he with the rest of his Countrymen had contrived the surprisal of the Castle: he on his knees protests his innocency, upon this they command him to the wrack, and expresly told him, unless he did acknowledge himself, and confess the other Conspirators, he should be tormented with fire and water, to death, and after to be drawn to the Gallows, and there hanged up as a monument of their rebellion; all this works not with this noble minded English man, he still maintains his in∣nocency, the Fiscal commands him to be hoy∣sed up, then he craved a little time, and told him that he was indeed at Hitto, and not in Amboyna upon New-yeers day, when the consultation was pretended: neither had been there since November before, as was well known to many of the Hollanders themselves, yet there remaining with him: they again com∣manded him to the wrack; but he desires once more some time, and he would tell them the truth so neer as he could: 'Tis true said he, I
have many times heard John, who was with me at Hitto, say that the Dutch do them ma∣ny unsufferable wrongs, and that now was the time to think upon revenge, in order to which, he had spoke with Captain Towerson concern∣ing a brave Plot, at which words the Fiscal and the rest were attentive, and much hastened him on to proceed: so he went on, saying, That John Clark had intreated Captain Towerson, that he might go to Manasser, there to advise with the Spanyard to come with Gallies, and pillage the small factories of Amboyna and Serac, when no ships were there. Here again they demanded, What Captain Towerson said to this; he said, That Towerson was much offended with Clark for this motion, and from thence forth, could never abide him, hereupon the Fiscal was much offended with him, and told him he was much from the mat∣ter, and therefore should to the torture; he once more craves favour, and began another story, viz. Thar upon Twelf day last past, John Clark told him at Hitto, that there was a practice to take the Castle of Amboyna, and asked whether I would consent thereun∣to, wherefore he demanded of Clark, whe∣ther Captain Towerson had any knowledge of the same, which Clark affirming, then he the said Sherrock said he would joyn with
them in the Conspiracy, then the Fiscal asked him when the consultation was held, he an∣swered, in November last, the Fiscal replyed, that could not be, for the consultation was up∣on New-yeers day, the prisoner replyed as be∣fore, that he had not been in Amboyna since the first of December, till now that he was brought thither, why then quoth the Fiscal, did you contrary your self? whereto the priso∣ner with a bold and stedfast countenance, told him, that all that he had spoken about Treason were but fictions, and what he spake was to a∣void torture. Then went the Fiscal out into a∣nother room to the Governour, and by and by returned, and sent Sherock to the prison again. The next day was ge call'd again, and a wri∣ting presented to him, wherein the Fiscal had cunningly framed a Confession of his dealing with Clark at Hitto, touching the taking of the Castle of Amboyna, which being read un∣to him, the Fiscal asked him whether it were true or no, he answered no: Why then did you confess it? he answered, for fear of tor∣ture: The Fiscal and the rest in fury told him, he lyed; for his mouth had spoken it, and it was true: therefore they commanded him to subscribe. Which he had no sooner done, but he fell into great passions, charging them all to be guilty ot his Countrymens blood, for they
had extorted this from his hands, which his heart abhorred, and bid them look to it; for they should answer for this at the last day: withal he grapled with the Fiscal and would have staid him from carrying in his Confession to the Governour, with whom he also desired some discourse; but was presently laid hold on and carryed away to the prison. William Webber being next examined was told by the Fiscal that John Clark had con∣fessed him to have been at Amboyna on New-yeers-day, and that he had been sworn to Ca∣ptain Towerson's plot: all which he denied, and said that he was that day at Larica. But be∣ing brought to the Wrack, he then confess'd he was at the consultation on New-yeers-day at Amboyna: whatsoever was asked, he confes∣sed in every respective circumstance. He also confessed that he had received a Letter from Clerk, to which was annexed a Postscript ex∣cusing his brief writing in respect of the great business. But one Reyner a Dutch Merchant then standing by, told the Governour, that up∣on New-yeers-day (the time of this pretended consultation) Webber and he were merry at Larica. So the Governour left him, and went out; but the Fiscal had another card to play touching the Postscript of Clerk's Letter, urg∣ing him to shew the same: which when he
could not produce, though often threatned the torture, he promised to save his life, if he would produce the Letter. And now must Captain Towerson act his part in the tragedie; for now he's brought to be examined by the Fiscal: and in order there∣unto, he is shewed what others had confessed. To clear himself from these accusations, he im∣precates dire judgements to fall upon him. if he be any way guilty of what is laid to his charge. Samuel Colson is brought to con∣front him; but before, is told, that if he will not make good what is extorted from him, he shall again to the torture; and for fear, he faintly affirmed it; and so was sent to prison again. They also brought Grigs and Fardo to justifie what they confessed of him; and be∣ing come face to face, Captain Towerson char∣ged them as they would answer it another day before God, that they should not belie him. They being both striken for their false accu∣sing him, fell down upon their knees, and ask∣ed him forgiveness, and protested that whatso∣ever was before confessed, was as false as God is true; and what they spake was to avoid torment: with that the Fiscal was so mad, that he threatned torture, which they would not endure, but affirmed their first Confessions to be true.
When Colson (who had accused Captain Towerson before) was commanded to set his hand to his extorted Confession he said, The sin I hope shall not lie at my dore, for who are the greatest sinners, you that compel me by torture to accuse those which were never guilty, and to subscribe, or me that am com∣pell'd, let God judge between us. Febr. the 20 comes Iohn VVetheral to be examined, he was a Factor of Cambello in the Island of Seran: he is likewise forced to con∣fess he was at Amboyna upon New-yeers-day; but that he was engaged by way of consulta∣tion, he utterly denies; and all the business he had there, was about some cloth of the English Companies that lay in some factories rotting and spoiling, which they advised for the put∣ting off at the best advantage. The Gover∣nour said, We question you not about cloth, but about treasonable actions of you and your complices. He protests his innocency, and is for that time dismissed: but the next day he was sent for again, and Captain Towerson was called to confront him, having already spoken something concerning him: but Towerson spake onely these words: Master Wethral, Master Wethral, speak the truth, and nothing but the truth, as God shall direct you. So Capt. Towerson was put out again, & Wethral call'd
in and put to the water-torture, with menaces that if water did not make him confess, fire should; be prayed them to tell him what he should say, and he would do any thing, rather then be tormented: they told him he knew what to say without being directed; but when they had hoysed him up three or four times, and they saw he was to seek what to say, they red other mens Confessions to him, and ex∣amined him from point to point what they had confessed, and he answered positively that he was engaged, meerly to avoid the torture. Next John Powel, Wetherels assistant at Cambello, was called; but he proving that he was not at Amboyna since November las, and being solicited for by one John Joost, was dismist without torture. Then was Thomas Ladbrook, servant to Powel and VVetheral at Cambello, brought to be examined, but proving that he was at Cambello at the time of this pretended en∣gagement, and serving in such a condition, as that he was not acquainted with letters of so high consequence, he was dismist. After him comes Ephraim Ramsey to be ex∣amined, and particularly concerning Captain VVelden the English Agent at Bandu, but he denies, and proves he was not at Amboyna, at New-yeers tide; he was likewise mediated
for by Iohn Ioost, and discharged after he had been tortured a good space. Thus gentle Reader have I given you a re∣lation of the examinations tortures, and con∣fessions, being the work of eight days; after which, two days expired, then Sentence was pronounced; Iohn Powel being acquitted, went to visit Iohn Fardo in prison, which Far∣do had accused Towerson, for Fardo was much troubled, and protested his innocencie and sor∣row for accusing him: for, said he, the fear of death doth nothing dismay me; for God, I trust, will be merciful unto me: the onely thing that torments my spirit, is, that I have accused that honest and godly man, Captain Tower∣son, whom I think in my conscience was so ho∣nest, that no thought remained in his brest to do any man the least injury, much less would he attempt a business of such a nature as he is accused for. He further said, he would before his death receive the Sacrament, as an acknow∣ledgement of the injury he had done Captain Towerson, in accusing him wrongfully through fear of torment. The five and twentieth, old stile, all the pri∣soners, as well the English, as the Portugals and Japoners, were brought into the great hall of the Castle, and there solemnly condemned, except Iohn Powel, Ephraim Ramsey, Iohn
Sadler, and Thomas Ladbrook formerly ac∣quitted, Captain Towerson while he was im∣prisoned, was never permitted to see, much less to speak with any of his Countrymen, and fellow prisoners, yet he writ much in his cham∣ber to vindicate himself, but all was suppress'd except a bill of debt, which one Thomas I∣chison a free Burgher, by favour of the kee∣pers, got as an acknowledgement that the En∣glish Company owed him mony, in the end of this bill he writ thus: Firmed by the firm of me Gabriel Towerson, now appointed to die, guiltless of any thing that can be justly laid to my charge, God forgive them their guilt and receive me into his mercy, Amen. This bill being brought to Mr. Welden the English Agent, at Bandu, paid the mony, and received in the acknowledgement. William Grigs, who before had accused Cap. Tow∣esson, writ these words following in his Table-Book, We who are here specified, John Beamont, Marchant of Loho, Will. Grigs Marchant of Larica, Abel Price, Chy∣rurgion of Amboyna, Robert Brown Taylor, which here lie Prisoners in the ship Roterdam, being apprehended for Conspiracy, for blowing up the Castle of Amboyna, being judged to death this 6 of March 1622. which we through the anguish of the the torments were constrained to speak that which never came into our thoughts, which we take upon our deaths and salva∣tion, they tortured us with those extream tortures of fire and water, that humane flesh is not able to see it, and this we take upon our deaths, That they have put us to death guiltless of our accusation.
This Table-book was afterwards delivered to Mr. Welden aforenamed, by one that served the Dutch. Samuel Colson also, that through tortures accu∣sed Captain Towerson, writ in wast leaves of Com∣mon Prayer and Psalmes, these insuing lines in one page thus; March 5. Stilo novo being Sunday, aboard the Roterdam, lying in irons: UNderstand that I Samuel Colson, late Factor of Hitto, was apprehended for suspition of conspiracy, and for any thing that I know must die for it: wherefore having no better means to have my innocency known, have writ this in this book, hoping some good English men will see it. I do here upon my salvation, as I hope by his Death and Passion to have redemption for my sins, that I am clear of all such conspiracies; nei∣ther do I know any English man guilty thereof, nor other creature in the world. As this is true: God blesse me. Samuel Colson. On the other side, upon the first page of the Catechism, is thus written: IN another leaf you shall understand more, which I have written in this book. Samuel Colson. In the beginning of the Psalmes, and in the leaf so referred unto, is thus written, viz,
The Japons were taken with some villany, and brought to examination, being most tyran∣nously tortured, were asked whether the English had any hand in the plot, which torture made them say, Yea. Then was Mr. Tomson, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Collins, John Clark brought to examination, and were burn'd under the armes, armpits, the hands, and the soles of the feet, with another most miserable torture, to drink water; some of them almost tortured to death, and were forced to con∣fesse that which they never knew, by reason of the torment which flesh and bloud is not able to in∣dure. Then were the rest of the English men cal∣led one by one, amongst which I was one, being wished to confesse, or else I must go to torment; withall caused Mr. Johnson, who was tormented to witnesse against me, or els he should be tormented again; which rather then he would indure, he said what they would have, he would speak: then must I confesse that I never knew, or els go to torment; which rather then I would suffer, I did confesse that, which, as I shall be saved before almighty God, is not true, being forced for fear of torment. Then did they make us witnesse against Captain Towerson, and at last made Captain Towerson con∣fesse all for fear of torment, for which we must all die. As I mean and hope to have pardon for my sins, I know no more then the child unborn in this businesse. Written with mine own hand the first of March, Stilo novo. Samuel Colson.
Yet in another page were these words: I Was born in New-Castle upon Tyne, where I desire this book may come, that my friends may know of mine innocency. Samuel Colson. This book he delivered to one that served the Hollanders, who sowed it up in his bed, and soon as occasion offered it self, he delivered it up to Mr. Welden before named. All which writings are extant in very good hands. The six and twentieth of February, Stilo veteri, the prisoners were brought into the great Hall of the Castle, only Captain Towerson, Emanuel Tomson, were to be prepared to death by the Mi∣nisters. As for the Japoners in generall, they cry out un∣to the English concerning this plot: Oh you Eng∣lish men, where did we ever in our lives eat with you, talk with you, or to our remembrance see you? the English men answered, why then have you accused us? the poor men perceiving they were made believe, each had accused others, be∣fore they had done so, and shewed them their tor∣tured and masserated bodies, and said, if a stone were thus burrt would it not change his nature? how much more we that are but flesh and bloud. Whilest they were all in the Hall, Captain Tow∣erson was called to examination, and two Jarres of water carried after him to fright him, but what they did to him no man knows, but they made him subscribe.
After the Governour had supped, John Powell, Ephraim Ramsey, Thomas Ladbrook, and John Sad∣ler, who were found not guilty, were taken from the rest, and put into another room, presently Sa∣muel Colson and Edward Collins were brought from the rest, and put where Emmanuel Tomson lay. The Fiscall told them though they deserved little mercy, yet it was the Governours mercy to save one of them three, and 'twas not to him which he saved, but it was his pleasure they should draw lots for it, which they did, and it fell upon Edward Collins to be saved, who was then carried to John Powells Chamber, where the rest lay that were quit, he was told he was beholding to Peter Johnson the Dutch Merchant of Loho, and to the Secretary, for they had beg'd his life. Now there remained in the Hall ten of the Eng∣lish, for Towerson and Tomson were kept in rooms by themselves, apart from the rest. To those in the Hall the Dutch Ministers came, and they admonisht them to confesse unto the world what they were guilty of, for their time was but short, and to dissemble now with God 'twould lie heavy upon their consciences, and took the Sacrament thereon, but especially as a seal of the forgivenesse of their sins, and to show to the world their innocency: but by the way Samuel Colson spake to the Minister, saying, you tell us of the danger of dissimulation, but tell us if we suffer guiltlesse, being otherwise true believers in Christ Je∣sus,
what shall be our reward? the Preachers replied, so clear as you appear now before God, by so much shall your Resurrection be the more glorious: this rejoyced Colsons heart, insomuch that he imbraced the Preacher that had given this comfortable glance upon him, and gave him his purs with such money he had in't, saying Domine, Lord blesse you; and tell the Governour I do freely forgive him, and I do earnestly desire you to exhort him to re∣pent him of this bloudy tragedy brought upon us poor souls that are innocent of any such action. Upon this speech of Colsons all the rest of the prisoners stood up, and signified their consent to his speech: then spake Fardo to the rest in presence of the Ministers, as followeth, Countreymen and Brethren, all you that are condemned to die, I charge you all as you will answer it at the dreadfull day of Iudgement, if any of you be guilty of this we are ac∣cused, clear your consciences, and speak the truth to satisfie the world. Hereupon Samuel Colson spake with a loud voice, saying, if I he guilty of this treason, let not my soul live in the Kingdome of heaven, at which words every one of the rest cryed Amen, Amen for me, Amen for me Lord. When this was done, every one went to imbrace each one whom he had accu∣sed, and beg'd forgivenesse of one another, for their false accusation being extorted from them by the pains of fear and torture, and they all freely forgave one another, for none had so falsly accu∣sed,
but himself had accused another falsly; impar∣ticular George Sharrock, who survived to relate this nights passage, kneeled down to Iohn Clerk whom he had accused of the tale at Hitto, above menti∣oned, and desired pardon at his hands, as he lookt for forgivenesse of God; Clark freely forgave him, saying, if I should not forgive you, how should I look to be forgiven of God, for I have as falsly accused Towerson, and others? After this they spent the rest of the dolefull night in Prayer, and singing of Psalmes, comfort∣ing one another, though the Dutch that guarded them offered them wine, and bid them drink lu∣stick and drive away the sorrow according to their custome, but 'twas contrary to the nature of the English. The next morning being the execution day, 27. of February, Stilo veteri, John Powell being freed, as is above recited, came into the room where the condemned persons were, and found them at prayers: they all desired him to relate to their friends, how they vvere put to death for that they vvere never guilty of, taking upon their deaths that vvhatsoever they had confessed concerning themselves, or accusing of others vvas false, and only done to avoid the cruell torments they vvere put to. Likevvise this morning vvas William Webber called into the Fiscalls room, and there urged to produce the letter vvhich he had received from
Iohn Clark, in the postscript whereof there was some businesse of consequence; they made great promises, as to save his life if he would shew them that letter, which though he did not (for could he produce that to them he never received?) yet they pardoned him his life, and sent him to the rest that were pardoned, and Sharrock with him. Emanuel Tomson hearing that Beomont was par∣doned, desired that he might speak with him, which he obtained with much entreaty. Beomont found him in his Chamber in a miserable conditi∣on, with his wounds bound up, but the matter and bloud issuing through the Rowler; he took Beo∣mont by the hand, and prayed him when he came into England to do his duty to the honorable Company, his Masters, to Mr. Robinson, and his brother Billingsley, and to certifie his innocency by his own knowledge. All things being prepar'd for execution, the prisoners were brought forth of the Hall, by the chamber where the quit men were, who took their farewell of their Countreymen now going to ex∣ecution, and staying a little before the chamber, they charged those that were their friends to bear witnesse to their friends of their innocency, and that they were meerly murthered by the Hollan∣ders upon a pretended treason, whom he pray'd God to forgive. Being brought into the yard, sentence vvas read unto them from a gallery, and from thence they
vvere carried to the nine Iapons, and one Portugal condemned vvith them, and in procession, to shew them to the people of the tovvn, guarded vvith a strong guard of Dutch and Amboyna souldiers, and such vvas the concourse of people vvhich re∣sorted to this triumph of the Dutch over the Eng∣lish that 'tvvas admirable. Samuel Colson having conceived a prayer vvhich he read to his fellovvs before his execution, it vvas a protest of his innocency, and novv at the place of execution pronounced the same, vvhich done, threvv avvay the paper, vvhich the Governour cau∣sed to be brought unto him, and kept it. Emanuel Tomson he doubted not but God vvould shevv some sign of his innocency, and every one severally of them at their death protested their clearnesse of any fact or treason against the Dutch, and so one by one with great chearfullnesse suffe∣red the fatall stroke. The Portugall he prayed over his beads, and kiss'd the Crosse, swearing thereon, declar'd that he was clear from this treason laid to his charge, but yet took this punishment as a just judgment of God, for leaving his wife in his own Countrey, by the perswasion of the Governour had taken ano∣ther, his first wife living. The Japons according to their Religion con∣cluded with the like profession of their innocency: so there suffered ten English men, viz. Gabriel Towerson, the English Agent at Amboyna, Samuel
Colson Factor at Hitto, Emanuel Tomson Assistant at Amboyna, Timothy Johnson Assistant, John We∣therall. Factor at Cambello, Iohn Clark Assistant at Hitto, William Griggs Factor at Larica, John Fardo Steward of the house, Abel Price Chyrurgion, and Robert Brown Tailor. The Portugal was Augustin Perez, born at Ben∣gala. The Japonesses names were Hitieso, all born at Firanda. Tsiosa, all born at Firanda. Sinsa. all born at Firanda. Sidney Migiel, all born at Nagansacque. Pedro Congie, all born at Nagansacque. Thome Corea. all born at Nagansacque. Quiondayo Native of Coreats. Tsabinda of Tsoucketgo. Zanchoe of Fisien. Besides these there were two other Japoneses, the one named Soysimo born at Firando, and the other Saceube of the same place: the former of which being tortured, confessed both to have been privy to this pretended treason, and offered his service unto the English to aid them in taking the Castle; and the other confess'd he was privy to the consultation of the other Japons to this purpose: but neither of them were executed, nor so much as condemn'd, but the reason why was kept from the English.
The Dutch had prepared a black cloth of velvet for Captain Towersons body to fall upon, which being defaced with his bloud, was put to the ac∣count of the English Company. At the instant of the execution there arose a great darknesse, and a violent wind and tempest, that two Dutch ships were driven from their an∣chors in the harbour, and with great labour saved from the rocks. Presently after all this, William Dunkin, who told the Governor that Robert Brown the English Tailor, had said, that within six moneths the Eng∣lish should have as much to do in the Castle as the Dutch: this fellow coming one night to the grave, where the English were in a pit together, except∣ing Captain Towerson, fell down upon the grave, and after rise again stark mad, and so continued three daies and died, this was remarkable: next follows a new sicknesse, which swept away a thou∣sand Dutch and Amboyners in as short a time as thirty died at other times. These signs were by the surviving English taken as the confident presage of Emanuel Tomson before spoken of, and were by the Amboyners reputed to be a token of Gods wrath for the Hollanders barbarous tyranny. The next day, as if these Judgments had been nothing, was spent in triumph for the new Gene∣rall of the Dutch then proclaimed, and in publike rejoycing for their deliverance from this pretend∣ed treason.
The day following, Iohn Beomont, and George Sharrock, Edward Collins, William Webber were brought to the Governor, who told them they were pardoned in honor of the new Generall, and Collins he was to go to Jaccatra to stand to the fa∣vour of the Generall, so the Governor made them drink wine with him, and dismiss'd them, and bid them go and consult with those that were saved, who were fit to be planted in the rest of the facto∣ries. Which done, he accordingly appointed them each to their place, adding that he would hence∣forth take upon him the patronage of the English Companies businesse; to which purpose he had in∣tercepted a letter come from the English President at Jaccatra to Towerson, wherein he found nothing whereby to accuse rhem, but said he was glad that the English at Jaccatra were innocent in this busi∣nesse. The Governor and Fiscall having thus made an end at Amboyna, dispatched themselves for Ban∣da, where they made enquiry against Captain Wel∣den, the English Agent there, yet found nothing to accuse him justly of, but at last courteously en∣tertained him, and told him they were glad they found him as well as the English at Jaccatra with∣out suspition of treason: Captain Welden taking into consideration the great disorder of the Eng∣lish Companies at Amboyna, by reason of these practises, goes to Amboyna in a Dutch Pinnace,
which he hired at Banda, where he recalled the Companies servants, sent as before this to the un∣der Factories. And having enquired of the whole proceedings lately passed, he found by the agreeing speeches of them all, there was no such treason as was pretend∣ed, as also hearing what strict charge the Governor had left to the surviving English, not once to talk about this bloudy businesse, although they were daily reproached by the Countrey people of trea∣son, and a bloudy intent to have murthered all the Natives, and to have ripped up women with child, and such fopperies did the Dutch possesse the vul∣gar, to make the English odious to them. M. Welden holding it neither for the honor and profit of the English Company to continue at Amboyna, he took his poor remnant of the English with him in his Pinnace, and went for Jaccatra, whether the o∣vernor had sent Iohn Beomont and Edward Collins as condemned men to stand to the mercy of the Generall. When this news of Amboyna came to Jaccatra, and the English President sent to the Generall of the Dutch, to know by what Authority the Go∣vernour of Amboyna used the English thus, and how he and the rest of the Dutch resent it; The Governor of Jaccatra answers the Governor of Amboyna, he derived his Authority for the Lords and States of the united Neatherlands, under whom he had lawfull Jurisdiction in all causes criminall as
civill, and their proceeding necessary against Trai∣tors, such as the English, executed at Amboyna, were as may appear by their own confessions: a Copy whereof he sent the English President, who sent it back to be authentickly certified, but never could obtain it again. Hitherto gentle reader hast thou the bare and naked Narration of the progresse of these actions, of the date, and for the truth of them, as 'tis taken from the Depositions of the six English factors, whereof four condemned, and the other two quit∣ted in the processe at Amboyna, all since returned into England, examined upon Oath in the Admi∣ralty Court; Towersons and Tomsons examinations are not yet come to light, because they were kept from all the rest, and not any of the English suffe∣red to come neer them, except that short farewell which John Beomont took of Tomson the morning before the execution then mentioned. But because the Hollander will seem to palliat their cruelties over English Merchants, as they ac∣knowledge their treasons under their hands; 'twill not be impertinent to recall certain circumstances from what hath been related, whereby to clear the English from any such crime as was laid to their charge. First, Let's remember the Japons were apprehen∣ded and tortured three or four daies before the English were troubled, and their torture were known in Amboyna, for what they were used so,
and Tomson went into the Castle to ask leave of the Governor to land some rice, just as the Japo∣ners were in their torture, and brought back the news to the English house, of the cruell handling of the Japons, which if they had been guilty, they might with ease have escaped by the Corricorries or small boats that lie along the Strand, but in that they fled not, it proves their innocency. Next how unpossible 'twas for the English to take this Castle, seeing it was of such great strength, how vigilant they were upon the watch to take a∣larum at the foolish word of a Japon, and how they shot one of their own souldiers to death for sleeping on the watch. Durst ten English men, whereof not one souldier, do you think, attempt such a strength, having but three swords in the English house, when seized on, and half a pound of powder two muskets? so these Japons were not suffered to bear arms, but in the Castle, and in their service, and none to sel them arms nor powder but on great penalty, no Ships in the Harbor of the English, not twenty Japons in the Island, and not many more English, the rest of the English forty leagues off, and those but nine persons, which were afterward clear'd by the Governor himself, 'twas not likely that these could surprize a Castle of such strength, and those at Jaccatra likewise. Again, the Hollander hath three other strong, Castles in the Island vvell furnish'd vvith souldiers and eight Ships in the harbor, besides a Pinnace, al∣though
the English have been approved for their valiant acts, vvhich the Hollanders are vvitnesse of forth it service done them against the King of Spain, yet that so fevv persons, and unarmed, should be imagined to surprize such a Castle, to me seemeth incredible. But let it be granted they might have obtained it, to what end should they endanger themselves, vvhen the Companies had agreed the Forts should remain in the hands of those in possession, and they had the Kings Majesties, and Lords States General to ratifie it, vvhat peace could they expect to keep in. But let these English men be so foolish in their plot, that vvhen they vvere condemned to die, and at the hour of their execution to persist to justifie their innocency, to a dissimulation, and to spend their time in prayer, and to take the Sacrament on it, that they were free, and asking one another for∣givenesse for their accusing one another, and their conjuring one another to discharge their conscien∣ces, craving Gods mercy or judgement according to their innocency, and to do this in the point of death, what horrid dissimulation had there been, if some one had been so desperate amongst ten, but all to agree and protest their innocency? What hope had they when they saw Towersons head cut off, what hope had they to live, nay, why should they desire it, being so mortified, it was no time to dissemble with God then, when they must answer it at his Tribunall to me this seemes a rid∣dle that they should be guilty.
But now to colour this businesse over, and to smooth their barbarous proceedings, it is given out, the Governor and Fiscall found such evidence of the plot, & proceeded so evidently, that they spa∣red not their own Countrey men, partakers of the treason, in the same manner as the English: but this as the relation is true, and grounded on sworn testimony of six credible Witnesses, and as many Merchants of quality that come from those parts can testifie. And what the Hollander can do to colour these their barbarous proceedings, it is but the unsatia∣ble covetousnesse of the Hollander to obtain the whole trade of the Molucccos, Banda, and Am∣boyna, which is now become the event of this bloudy processe. Now to conclude in a word, gentle Reader, I have given thee a true relation of a fact so odious and barbarous, and inhumane, executed by Hol∣landers upon the English, in a place where both lived in a seeming amity of partnership, and con∣firmed by a most solemn treaty, it must needs cast an Odium upon them, and never to be forgotten by a true born heroick spirited English-man. FINIS.
