M1769 E33_19 99859923 112025
Mercurius Propheticus. OR, —A Collection of some old Predictions. O! —May they only prove, but empty fictions. Consensu populi regnum subsistit. That Kingdome will establisht be Wherein the people well agree. Printed in the Yeere, M.DC.XLIII.
The Preface. GEntlemen! Some of these Collections are well known to have seen printed many yeares agoe; others I have heard when I did give as little credit to them as to old wives tales; yet for as much as they all agree in very many particulars; and have all of them been of longer standing in mans memory then my great Grandfather, in whose dayes they were frequent: and further, since they all do speake so directly of the present times as if they had but now been minted; they doe, I must confesse, a little take upon my feare, who am as far from su∣perstition as any man alive can be; whence it is, that I held them worthy your considerations; whether you beleeve them to have the least affinity to Prophesies or not, which you know must needes be true, because they spring from the Fountaine of Truth it self; And if you thinke they savour of verity, O then reflect, for Heavens sake, what a lamentable condition England shall be in, when she becomes the subject verifying every tittle of those dreadfull times that these Predictions doe delineate; I shall onely, upon this occasion, take the boldnesse to insert one truth, if not a Prophecy, which I am sure is as true, as that our Saviour Jesus Christ is God, as well as man, a truth no Christian dares deny. Lucae. 11. v. 17. Omne Regnum in seipsum divisum desolabitur, & domus supra domum cadet. And as true it is that England stands now divided, as that division in a Kingdome is the infallible desolation thereof. This present inevitable truth makes me suspect
a shrewd ayme at the present times, in these other predicti∣ons, but abstracting from them, and insisting onely upon this that is undoubted; Tell me Gentlemen, if desolation or to have your own houses fall upon your heads, be the things that any of you aym at, who do promote the present divisions: No, you all flatter your selves (no doubt) of seeing this a flourishing Kingdom by the bargaine; is not this grosse flat∣tery indeed, when he that cannot lye tells you, Desolation must be the sad event of your divisions? who so denyes this, must be like the stupid Gentiles, that had eyes, and would not see, eares and would not heare, hands and would not feel. As therefore none, for desolation fight, Please all, for consolation to unite. Since, till united, these predictions are Of your destruction, Truth's Oracular.
MOTHER SHIPTONS PROPHECY. WHen she heard that Cardinall Wolsev intend∣ed to live at Yorke, Note that this Prophcy was never exactly printed before. she said that the Cardinall should never come thither, which the Cardi∣nal hearing of, was angry, and desired the King to send the Duke of Suffolke, Lord Peircy and Lord Darcy to her, who came with their men disguised to the King-house neer Yorke, where leaving their men, they went to Master Beasly to York, and desired him to goe with them to Mother Shiptons house, where when they came, they knocked at the doore, and shee said, Come in Master Beasly, and those Honourable Lords with you; and Master Beasly would have put in the Lords before him; but she said, Come in Master Beasty, you know the way, but they doe not. This they thought strange, that she should know them, and never saw them. Then they went into the house, where there was a great fire, and shée bade them welcome, calling them all by their names, and sent for some Cakes and Ale, and they dranke and were very merry. Mother Shipton, said the Duke, if you knew what we came about, you would not bid us so welcome; and she said the messenger should not be hanged. Mother Shipton, said the Duke, you said, the Cardinall should never see York; Yea, said she, I said he might sée York, but never come at it:
But, said the Duke, when he comes to York thou shalt be burnt: We shall see that, said she, and plucking her kerchief off her head, she threw it into the fire and it would not burn: then she took her staffe and turned it in the fire, and it would not burn: then she took it and put it on againe. Then said the Duke, What meane you by this? She replyed, If this had burned, I might have burned. Mother Shipton quoth the Duke, what think you of mée? My Lord, said she, the time will come, you The Duke was . will be as low as I am, and that is a low one indeed. My Lord Peircy said, And what say you of me? my Lord said she, shooe your horse in the quick, and you will do well, if not, your This pro∣ved true, for he rose in re∣bellion in the Nrh, and  when he migh, he was taken and beheaded at York, wher his body was bury∣ed; but his head was stoln away and carryed into France, . body will be buried in York pavement, and your head shall be stolne from the bar and carried into France, at which they all laughed, saying, that would be a great lop betwirt the head and the body. Then said the Lord Darcy, And what think you of me? She said you have made a great gun, shoot it off, for it will do you no good, you are going to warfare, you will pyne many a man, but you will kill none; so they went away. Not long after the Cardinall came to Cawood, and going to the top of the Tower, he asked where York was, and how far it was thither, and said, that one said, he should never see Yorke, nay said one that stood by, she said you should sée York but never come at it, then he vowed to burne her, when he came to Yorke, then they shewed him Yorke and told him it was but eight miles thence, he said he would soone be there, but being sent for by the King, he died in the way to London, at Leicester of a Lask. And Shiptons wife said to Mr Beasly, yonder is a fine stall built for the Cardinall in the Minster, of Gold, Pearle and precious stones, goe and present one of the pillars to King Henry, and he did so. Master Beasly seeing these things fall out as she had fore∣told, desired her to tell him some more of her prophesies.
Master Beasly said she, before that This came to passe, for Trinity steeple in York was blowne downe with a tempest, and Owse Bridge was broken downe with a great flood; and what they did in repairing the Bridge in the day time with the stone of the Steeple, fell downe in the night, untill they (remembring this Prophecy) layd the highest stone of the Steeple, for the foundation of the bridge; and then the work stood. And by this was partly verified another of Mo∣ther Shiptons Prophecies, (viz.) That her maid should live to drive her Cowe over Tri∣nity Steeple. Owse bridge and Tri∣nity Church meet, they shall build in the day, and it shall fall in the night, untill they get the highest stone of Trinity Church to be the lowest stone of Owse bridge. Then the day will come that Hares shall kennel on cold hearth Supposed to be meant by the suppression of Abbies and other Religious Houses. And at the Lord William Howards house at Naworth, a Hare came and kinnelld in his Kitchin upon the hearth. stones, & lads shall marry Ladies, and bring them to their homes. A joyful day will be séen in England, a King and a Queen. The first coming in of the King This was fulfilled in K. James his com∣ming in, for such a multi∣tude of people stood at Holgate Bar to behold him, as that to avoid the prease he was forced to ride by another way. of Scots shall be at Holgate Towne, but he shall not come through the bar. And when the King When King James was at London, his children were at Edenborough, preparing to come into England. of the North shall be at London bridge, his tayle shall be at Edenborough. Water This is ve∣rifyed by the conducting of water into York streets, through boared Elmes: And the Conduit-house hath a Windmill on the top that draws up the water. shall come over Owse bridge, and a windmyll shall be set on a Tower, and an Elme frée shall lye at every mans door. At that day — Women shall wear great hats and great bands. When there is a Lord Major A Lord Mayor whose house was in Mynster-Yard in YORK, was killed with three stables. living in Minster yard in York, let him beware of a stab.
When two knights Sir Thomas Wentworth and Sir John Sal in choosing Knights for the Shire in the Castle-yard at York, did so fall out, that they were never after well reconciled. shall fall out in the Castle yard, they shall never live kindly all their lives after. When all Colton Colton g in her time was a Woodland ground full of trees, which bore corne seven yeeres, and the seventh yeere after that was the yeere of the comming in of the Scots, and their taking of New-castle. hag hath borne Crops of Corne seven yeares, seven yeares after you shall hear newes. There shall two Iudges In the yeer 16  Jud∣ges of Assize went out at a gate in York, where never any Judges were known to go out before or since. go in and out at Walmgate bar. The day will come, The North shall rue it wondrous sore, But the South shall rue it for evermore. When Wars shall begin in the spring, Much wo to England it will bring: Then shall the Ladies cry well-a-day, That ever we liv'd to see this day. Then best for them that have the least, And worst for them that have the most. You shall have a yeare of pining hunger, and then a dearth without corne. You shall not know of the war over night, yet you shall have it in the morning, and when it comes it shall last three yeares. Between Codran and Are, Shall be great warfare: When all the world is aloft, It shall be called Christs croft. When the battell of warfare begins, it shall be where Neer Lei∣cester, where Richard the third was slaine in battell, there Colonel Hastings was one of the first in arms, endeavouring to settle the Commission of Array, in opposition to others that were then set∣ling the Militia. Crookback Richard made his fray.
They shall say to warfare for your King for half a Crowne a day, but stir not. They will say to warfare for your King on paine of hanging, but stir not, For he that goes to complaine, Shall not come back again. The time will come when England shall tremble and quake for feare of a dead man, that shall be heard to speake, Then will the Dragon give the Bull a great snay, And when this battaile is done, they will all go to London town. There will be a great battell betwéen England and Scotland, and they will be pacified for a time, and when they come at Braman more they fight, and are again pacified for a time, then there will be a great battell betwéen England and Scotland at Knavesmore, then they will be pacified for a while, then there will be a great battaile betwéen Eng∣land and Scotland at Storcktonmore, then will Kavens sit on the It is to be noted & ad∣mired, that this Crosse in the North in Mother Shiptons dayes, was a tall stone Crosse, which ever since hath been by de∣grees sinking into the ground, and now is sunk so low, that a Raven may sit upon the top of it, and reach her bill to the ground. Crosse & drink as much blood of Nobles as of the Commons, then wo is me for London shall be destroyed for ever after. Then will come a woman with one eye, and she shall tread in many mens bloods to the knée, and she shall méet a man leaning on a staffe, and shall say to him, what art thou? and he shall say, I am King of the Scots, and she shall say, go with me to my house, for there are three Knights, and he will go with her, and stay there three dayes and three nights, then will England be lost, and they will cry twice in one day, England is lost. Then there will be three Knights in Petergate in Yorke, and the one shall not know of the o∣ther, there shall be a child borne in Pomfret with three thumbs, and these three Knights will give their horses to
this There is a child not many yeers since born at Pomfrait with 3 thumbs. child (with three thumbes to hold, whilest they win England again, then come in clubs and clouted shooes, and they with the three Knights win England again, and all noble blood shall be gone but one, and they shall carry him to Sherif Huttons Castle six miles from York, and he shall dye there, and they shall choose their Earle in the feild, and hang their horses on a thorne, and rue the time that ever they were borne, to see so much blood shed. Then they will come to York to beseige it, and they shall keep them out for three dayes and three nights, and a penny loaf shall be within the bar at half a Crowne, and without the bar at a penny, and they will swear if they will not yéeld to blow up the towne walls: Then they will let them in, and they will hang up the Major, Sherifs and Aldermen; there will three Knghts go in to Crouch Church, and but one of them come out again, and he will cause Proclamation to be made, that any man may take house, tower, or bower for 21. yeares, and while the world endureth there shall never be warfare again, nor any more Kings or Quéenes, but the Kingdome shall be governed by three Lords, and then Yorke shall be London. And after this, shall be a white harvest of Corne gotten in by women. Then shall be in the North, that one woman shall say unto another, Mother I have séen a man to day, and for one man there shall be a thousand women. There shall be a man sitting on Saint James Church hill, wéeping his fill. And after that a ship come sayling up the Thames till it come against London, and the master of the ship shall wéep, and the marriners, shall ask him why he wéepeth, be∣ing he hath made so good a voyage-and he shall say; Oh what a goodly City this was, none in the world comparable to it, and now there is scarce left any house that can let us have drinke for our money. Unhappy he that lives to see these dayes, But happy are the dead, Shiptons wife sayes.
An ancient Prophecy to be seen in Master Harres discourses upon Prophecyes, printed anno. 1588. Fathered upon Merlyn. Anglia! te prodit tua gens, quia quaelibet odit: Te circumfodit gens Scotica: Gallia rodit: Wallia minatur: Hybernicus insidiatur: Ecce repentina validis mors: at{que} ruina Te citò prosternit; nec gens tua talia cernit. Pax simulata fluet; pax haec, pax falsò probatur, Pax clam nam{que} ruet, graviorque poena paratur. Enlished thus. England! thy proper native thee betrayes, Because all Nations hate thee, and thy wayes; Scotland doth undermine thee: France doth gnawe: Wales threats: the Irish thee by snares doth awe: Thy bravest men do on a suddain dye, And thou thy self doth wholly ruin'd lye, Yet seest it not, but under fayned peace, Dost thine own misery still more increase. The glosse upon the Text. Say, gentle Muse, is this a prophecy? Or is't a witty, studious, fained lye? If it be true, What state is England in? If it be false, 'tis high time time to begin To prove it so: nor is't too late as yet, (Though a true Prophecy) to frustrate it. For Ninivy was thus foretold her end In forty dayes, yet found a way to send Th' approaching ruine back; and so mayest thou, If thou like knee, like heart to heaven bowe; And then this prophecy do strayght present, To (heavens Vice-Gerent) our high Parliament;
Where, it may wisely be discust, and try'd, Whether in part it hath been verify'd As yet; if so, then how they may prevent, The ill not come, but likely consequent. Another old Prophecy transcribed out of an ancient manuscript. Flan: Fran: consurgent: Hispani viribus urgent: Scotus vastabit: dum Wallicus arma levabit: Inter nodosum mentem, pontem. fontemque petrosum, Corruet Anglorum gens perfida, fraude suorum. Translation. Flanders shall rise with France, Spaine fight amaine, The Scots wast all, while Brittans arme in vaine. Between a knotty mount and stony spring False England shall her men to slaughter bring. Another translation of the same. Flanders shall rise with France: Spaine powers advance: The Scots shall wast the land, while Brittans armed stand: 'Twixt knotty mountaine, and a stony fountaine, Perfidious English, shall themselves extinguish. This following Prophecy was shewed by Sir William Norris to King James, upon the uniting of the two Crownes of England and Scotland under the name of Great Britaine. A Peace shall be dissembled, That Peace may well be trembled: That Peace shall false be proved,
All Peace shall be removed. For why? A most grievous sight Shall rise up right. Great Mars omnipotent, He shall be vigilant: His bloody brands of steel To whet, thou shalt them feel So sore upon thy side, That wo shall thee betide; Nation shall rise with Nation, And make confederation. That all English scituation, Shall be taught by operation, To read upon the Passion. Flanders shall joyne with France, With bill, speare, gun and lance, With Almany, and Gassogny; Spaine shall eke employ, His force thee to destroy; Thou shalt have the Brittans to annull thee, The Scots to pluck and pull thee, England, thou shalt be sure, These torments to endure. An old Scotch Prophecy delivered many yeares since by the Bishop of Rosse to a great Lady. When pride is in price, And wit is in vice; When robbery as rise, as rie in the rise, When great men are lawlesse, And holy Kirk awlesse, Gods body and blood not given the heeding, And Laicks have the Kirke in leeding. Then fall sorrow sit upon seele. But fall fortune turne her wheele.
When the yeare of our Lord God is comed and ganne, One thousand six hundred forty and twayne, Then fall up what was down, Then fall lettith weare the Crown, i.e. Truth. And zeale fall last for ever and aye, Till the Sonne of God take all away. To these may be added another Prophecy of great antiquity out of our famous Historiagrapher, Henricus de Huntingdon, which before the year of our Lord 1000. foretold thereby that this Kingdom of England (for its manifold wicked∣nesses) should be conquered by the Normans, and should also by the Scots be afterwards brought to a deserved chastizement, &c. He delivers the Prophecy thus. Anno millesimo incarnatione Dom. &c. Genti Anglorum pre∣dixit quidam vir dei, Hen H. libr. 6. Sectio 1. quod ex scelerum suorū immanitate, non solum quia semper caedi & proditioni studebant, verum etiam quia semper ebrietati & negligentiae Domus Domini dediti erant, eis insperatum a Francia adventurum dominium, quod & eorum ex∣cellentiam in eternum deprimeret, & honorem sine termine resti∣tutionis eventilaret. Praedixit etiam quod non ea gens solum, verum & Scottorum (quos vilissimos habebant) eis ad emeri∣tam confusionem dominaretur. Praedixit nihilominùs varium adeo saeculum creandum, vt varietas, quae in mentibus hominum latebat, & in actibus patebat, multimoda variatione vestium & indumentorum designaretur. The first part of this Prophecy was notoriously verified in the yeare 1066. when the Normans under the conduct of Wil∣liam the Conquerour Invaded and Subdued this land. This is also ancient, though common. In Germany begins a dance, Which passeth through Italy, Spaine and France; But England shall pay the piper.
Another Prophecy very ancient, in old Meeter. In that same yeare that fully shall expire, The sixth great wonder of the worlds Empire; Then Tyders i.e. Hen. Ed. Mar. Phil. Eliz. HEMPE shall end I dare aread, Then After Q. Eli. K. James. E shall fall, and I shall stand in stead: In that same yeare a great plague shall raigne, The which a thousand dayes shall remaine: At Maries Masse a Court they hold, The which in bloody Inke shall be inrolled: There many a plea shall passe with brawling words, And short daggers shall be better then long swords: On Hunsloes heath soon after shall be seen, A fierce fought battell by a King I weene: Of Knights there shall be three thousand there, Of which there shall but ten back again appeare: There shall many a battaile and brawle be, And then a huge host shall passe over the Sea, Concluding a peace: but in this wise, Betwixt two C. C. two L. L. so long shall last two I. I. Another very ancient Prophesie. When the eighth letter of the Christcrosse rowe eight times is past, And every one at liberty to reason as he will, Then the Church without sacrifice six years shall last: Untill the follower of Gods lawes it do fulfill: But then alas soon after it shall decay, By the space of one Lustrum, as stories doe say: Then mark the day of the next desolation, And count them as they lye in the grewe, Take M. only with its signification: And twice two C. C. which is very true: And from that day as Stories do say, The Sacrifice shall last for ever and aye.
Another. Ever shall {:::} be called the first of the dice, When {·} shall beare up {:::} Then shall England be clepid Paradise: When {:·:} and {::} be set on side: The name of {:::} shall spring full wide: And when {::} and {˙.} drive out {˙·.} Then may England sing well away: Then it is all shent, For then shall be another Parliament: {:::} shall up and {·} shall under, The Lyon, the Rose, the Flowerdeluce: The lock shall undoe. Then shall {:::} beare the price And {·} shall help thereto. This Prophecy is Fathered upon Ignatius, and was long since found in St. Benets Monastery in Norfolk. When Eighty eight be past, then thrive Thou maist, till forty four or five. After the Maide is dead, a Scot Shall govern thee: and if a plot Prevent him not, sure then his sway Continue shall till many a day. The ninth shall dye, and the first Perhaps shall reign: but (oh) accurst Shal be the time, when thou shalt see To sixteen joyned twenty three. For then the Eagle shall have helpe By craft to catch the Lyons whelpe, And hurt him sore; except the same Be cured by the Maidens name. In July month of the same yeare Saturn conjoyns with Jupiter. Perhaps false Prophets shall arise. And Mahomet shall shew his prize; And sure much alteration Shall happen in Religion: Beleeve this truly if then you see A Spaniard a Protestant to be. FINIS.
