M1904 E469_22 99864840 162374
A MESSAGE SENT From the City of London, to the King Majesty in the Isle of Wight, Declaring their Resolutions touching the spee∣dy bringing of His Majesty to His Royall Palace at White-Hall, and the manner thereof. Subscribed by the Royall-hearted Citizens. ALSO, The Declaration of the Queen of England, concerning Her Royall Consort King Charles; and Her Letter to the Prince of Wales, touching the Earl of WARWICK. AGreed upon by the Queens Maiesty, and Her Councell a St. Jermins, and published throughout the Kingdome of France. M R depiction of Queen Henrietta Maria, wife of King Charles I of England C R depiction of King Charles I of England Printed in the Year, 1648.
THE QUEEN OF ENGLANDS Declaration at Paris in France. Concerning Her Royall Consort the King of Great Brittain; Declaring her Resolution touching the Treaty at Newport, and the Par∣liament at Westminster. Endeared Sir, VVHereas (with much patience) I have long bedeld the miseries of your distracted Kingdom, and finding
nothing more instrumentall for the setling of a firme and lasting peace, then the blessed Treaty now on foot, I therefore thought requisite, to cast my thoughts thereon, and to make it the chiefest Object of my af∣fections, by indeavouring the propagating thereof in these parts, and cleering all scruples that may arise from the adverse party, which I find to be many. But ker Majesty the Queen of Great Brittain, hath decla∣red the sense of her Royall Breast, touching the pre∣sent Work in dispute between the King and Parlia∣ment, and is pleased to cast a favourable construction thereon; and by reason of the many aspersons laid up∣on her Majesty, representing her as an Enemy to the peace of England, after consultation with her Councel at St. Jermins, she resolved to declare her intentions & determinations to the view of the World, and gave expresse command to her Secretary to draw up a De∣claration to be forthwith printed, the heads whereof are these. 1 That Her Majesty desires nothing more then a com∣posure of all differences betweene, Her dread Soveraigne Lord the King, and his two Houses of the Parliament of England assembled at Westminster. 2 That Her Majesty shall indeavour the propagating of this present Treaty, and desire a speedy agreement, be∣tween Her Soveraign and His two Houses, that so peace may be established throughout His Realmes and Domini∣ons. 3 That Her Majesty shall indeavour the removing of all Obstacles that may retard or hinder this present work in hand; provided, that She may enjoy the liberty of Her Conscience for Her Self and Her Family, according to the Articles of both Kingdoms.
That Her Majesty may be admitted to come for Eng∣land so soon as the Articles of Agreement are signed and that She may be admitted to Her Royall Consort, in honor, freedom, and safety. These and many other particulars are contained in the said Declaration, which is now extant amongst us, and are very satisfactory. We hear that Her Majesty hath sent a Letter to the Prince of Wales, dehorting him from an Engagement with the Earl of Warwick, and to endeavour the setling of a peace between the King and Parliament, and it is hoped he will much incline to the said advice and councell. But here is a rumour, that his Highnesse hath sent Propositions to the States of Holland, purporting His Desires, for the Dutch Fleer to continue betweene the two Navies, to hinder an Engagement, that so the state∣ly Fabrick of his Fathers Shipping may be preserved and the mutuall League and Covenant between the States and the Crowne of England firmly kept and maintained. In a word, Great are our expectations for the Ty∣dings of peace, whose hearts thirst after unity and con∣cord, which I desire may be communicated to him who remaineth, Your most obliged and devoted friend, L. VANDIEU. Paris 26 Octob. 1648.
The last Newes from the Treaty. SIR, THE Commissioners proceed according to their Instructions, desiring His Maj. to give His Royal Assent for the confirming of the Presbyterian Govern∣ment, and the abolishing of Bishops and Episcopacy for the future. This motion causeth some scruple to arise from His Majesty, but after mature deliberation thereupon, re∣turneth a satisfactory Answer to the Commissioners, in∣somuch that it is conceived, He will give His Royall Word for passing the said Bill, according to the time and manner prefixed by both Houses of Parliament; which causeth a dismall frown to proceed from the adverse party. And His Majestic being sensible of their present dis∣contents and murmurings, gave expresse Command, that proclamation should be made throughout the said Island, for the preventing of all Insurrections and com∣motions during the time of the Treaty, which was ac∣cordingly done. So that there is great hopes that all Obstacles will be removed, which may prove prejudiciall to this Treaty, or frustrate the endeavours and consultation of the great Councell assembled, who are even upon the close of a finall end and Agreement. His Maiesty saith, that He hath some few things to propound to the Commissioners, which will give great satisfaction to His two Houses, and remove all jealou∣sies and fears whatsoever from amongst His liege peo∣ple of England; the said Proposals are to be debated at the Councell Table, so soon as his Maiesty hath recei∣ved
the sense of His two Houses, to his last Concessions for abolishing of Episcopacy. His Majesties Counsell hath declared a great liking of this their Soveraigns Resolution, and in particular, the Bishop of London, who this morning told the King. That he had seriously meditated upon the Originall Grounds of Presbytery, and found them consonant to the Word of God, and agreeable to the sacred Rules Ordained by the Apostles and Evangelists in the holy Scriptures, and therefore conceived, that his Majesty might in honour and conscience give his Royall As∣sent for the more fully and firm setling of the Dire∣ctory, &c. These condescensions from the pillars of Episco∣pacy, doth betoken a happy uniting and concurrence to Presbytery; which being once assented to, there's no doubt but all other Obstacles will soon be removed, and the silver cords of Amity firmly knit, and unite the hearts both of Prince and people, in peace and tranqui∣lity. We hear that there hath been a late Design com∣plotting by the Enemies of Religion, against the King and Kingdom, who had conspired to raise a great army throughout the Kingdom of England, by tendering an Oath of Secresie, a Party whereof to gather to a head in the West, and severall other parts of the Kingdome for the rescuing his Maiesty from the power of the Parliament, and to bring him to London by force, if they do not condiscend to his Desires, and to put most of them to the sword. But by the divine providence of the All-seeing Iehovah, their Plot is discovered, and by his omnipotency quite frustrated and prevented. Newport 30. Octob. 1648.
Tuesday Octob. 31. Letters from the West say, That it is conceived his Majesty will go neer to sign to all the propositions upon Friday next, notwithstanding what hath verbally past to the contrary. The Lord Duke of Rich∣mond, and the Marquis of Hartford, admire his Maje∣sties wisdome in carrying on this Treaty, and have prote∣sted that they do not know by what Counsell the King go∣verns his actions. Divers Agents are said to be sent from the Queen and the Prince to the King, with Letters of great im∣portance. As also a message from the City of London subscribed by the Royall party, intimating, Their pri∣vate design in listing of new forces, for the advance∣ment of his Majesties Cause, and re-investing Him in his Royall Throne; but by an unheard of stratageme their design is prevented, and their plot revealed. FINIS.
