N497 E458_20 99863112 115294
PROBLEMES Necessary to be Determined By all That have, or have not taken part on either side In the late unnaturall Warre. For the making of their Peace with God and disposing them to a hearty Peace one with another. By reflecting upon what they have done, before they engage in a new more dangerous and doubtfull Warre: dedicated to the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common-Councel of the Hono∣rable City of LONDON. By P. D. A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into the way that is not good. Prov. 17.29. If I yet pleased men I should not be the servant of Christ. Gal. 1.10. Printed in the yeare 1648.
TO THE Lord Major, ALDERMEN, and COMMON-COUNCEL that now are, and that have been since the beginning of the late, not yet ended unnaturall Warre. My Lord, and Gentlemen, THe ensuing Problemes are a part of those enquiries, which the Writer of them thought necessary for him to make, before he engaged in the above mentioned Warre: although he had observed that thousands made no bones, to declare themselves on the one side, and on the other, before either had given any account to the world, of the grounds of their having taken up Armes; and so before it was possible for any man to judge, whether side had the better of the Cause: And though after this he had yet further observed, by discoursing
with sundry persons of all rankes, and qualities, en∣gaged on both sides, that not one of an hundred of them, could tell what the quarrell between them was; nor one of a thousand state it aright. Whether you, my Lord, Aldermen, and Common-Councel men, were more carefull to inform your understandings of the truth of these, and other generall Problemes, and to make ap∣plication of them to the particular case, or matter of fact, and right in question, before you enclined your wills, either singly, or in Body to make choyce of the part you have taken, and given example to others to take in that great action, wherein your part hath been so great, and upon what motives you took it, God knowes, and you can tell. If you were not, it doth the more import you to put these Questions home to your consciences now, before those everlasting Books be sealed up by death, as they will be opened when we must all come to judgement. And what I take the liberty to say to you, I here aske leave in all humi∣lity to wish that all other men, in City and Coun∣trey, whom it may concerne, would say, and say in earnest to themselves, The Kings most Excellent Majesty and the Lord and Commons now, and heretofore, assembled in this Parliament, not except∣ed; of whose pardon for this so high presumption, I shall not doubt when I have made this sincere
profession: That it is not my intention in making this most humble Request, or in publishing these Pro∣blemes to reflect any otherwise upon either of their Proceedings, then as in reference to the meanes of advancing a Peace between them, and with Him, whose displeasure neither of them can more en∣dure then I can theirs. I humbly beseech all others in∣to whose hands this Paper may come, to read it to the same end, and with the same temper of spirit one to∣wards another, that I beare in my breast towards all, and every one of them. And then perhaps it may not be impossible, that all parties interessed, and engaged in the late warre in any fashion, may find it easier to ob∣serve an errour in their neighbours reckonning, then to passe their own: nor that thereupon they may be de∣sirous of the leasure of a cessation of Armes for the perfecting of their accounts, before they be called for at their day, or at His, who is coming, and at the doore to keep the great Audit of the whole world: nor that in fine they may all conclude, it is much safer to seek out meanes to expiate the blood that hath been already spilt in so nice a quarrell, then to run the danger of drawing the guilt of any more upon themselves, and their posterity: nor that after every of us shall be inclined to forgive one another, pray for one another, and to beare one anothers burdens, God may be enclined
to forgive us all, to heare our prayers to remove all our burdens, and to give us the grace when we have first made our peace with him, at last to be at peace againe one with another. Which through the help of his Spirit hath been, and shall be a part of his daily prayer who by his grace is unfaynedly desirous to live and dy a good subject, a good Englishman, and a good Christian, and who is, as he here subscribeth himselfe, My Lord Your Lordships, and the Cities most humble servant P. D. 12. August. 1648.
THe Lord shall smite thee with madnesse, and blindnesse, and astonishment of heart: And thou shalt grope at noone dayes, as the blinde gropeth in darknesse, and thou shalt not prosper in thy wayes: and thou shalt be onely oppressed and spoyled evermore, and no man shall save thee. Deut. 28.28, 29. Put up againe thy sword into his place. For all they that take the sword shall perish by the sword. Matth. 26.52. And David the King stood up upon his feet and said. Heare me my brethren, and my people. As for me I had in my heart to build an house of rest, for the Arke of the Covenant of the Lord, and for the foot-stoole of our God, and had made ready for the building, But God said unto me, Thou shalt not build an house for my name, be∣cause thou hast been a man of warre, and hast shed blood. 1 Chron 28.23. Therefore if thou bring thy guift to the Alter, and there remembrest that thybrother hath ought against thee; Leave there thy guift before the Alter, and goe thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy guift. Matth. 5.23, 24.
OMnia sunt misera in bellis civilibus, sed miserius nihil quam ipsa victoria, quae etiamsi ad meliores venit, tamen eos ipsos feroeiores, impotentiores∣que reddit ut etiam si natura tales non sint, necessitate esse cogantur. Multa enim victori eorum arbitrio per quos vicit, etiam invito, facienda sunt. Cicero Mar∣cello. Quid viro bono, et quieto, et bono civi magis expedit, quam abesse à civilibus controversiis? Caefar Imp: Ciceroni. Ostendisti sapientem et bonum civem initia belli ci∣vilis invitum suscipere, extrema non libenter perse qui. Cicero Marcello. Sepe inter nos impendentes easus de slevimus, cum belli civilis causas in privatorum cupiditatibus inclu∣sas, pacis spem a publico consilio exclusam videremus. Cicero in Bruto. Dominus Maris Dominus Vniversi.
Problemes Necessary to be determined by all that have or have not taken part on either side In the late unnaturall Warre. 1. WHether uncertaine feares, and jealousies of wrong intended to be done, contrary to a mutuall Co∣venant interchangeably sworne, be not an in∣sufficient plea for the justification of doing the least wrong in violation of that Covenant, by way of prevention; and much more for one of the Cove∣nanters hazarding the life of the other, because he was jea∣lous, or afraid that the other would have killed him. 2. Whether it be lawfull for a private Christian to go to law with his neighbour, upon the occasion of any wrong actually done to him, if he may recover his right, or be offered, just and full reparation of the wrong done, without
Law: And whether the plaintife may refuse the offer of an equall Arbitrement in a doubtfull case. 3. Whether it be not more unlawful for a Christian Prince, and his people to go to warre one against the other, either for the maintenance of their respectively claimed rights, or for the reparation of pretended wrongs, or for any cause whatsoever, that might have been determined by the law of the Land without warre. And whether the party that refuseth the offer of reparation, or arbitration, or any other indiffe∣rent meanes to avoid warre, be not so much more to blame, as a warre is more hard to be managed without the sinne of the parties, and the damage of many other inno∣cent persons, then a suit in law. 4. Whether it be not more common for Superiours to op∣presse their inferiours, but more monstrous, as well as more rare, for Inferiours to oppresse their Superiours, and so ad∣judged in our Law. And whether the later be not the more abhominable before God, though the former be the more generally hatefull among men; because he that hath the most power, is commonly presumed to have done, even when he hath suffered wrong. 5. Whether it be not at least as lawfull for a Soveraigne Prince to defend the just rights of his Crown against his people by those Armes wherwith he is intrusted by the positive Law of the Land, as for a free People to defend their just Liberties a∣gainst their Prince, by having recourse to the unwritten equity of that Law, or to the Law of nature. And whether if severall sorts of the people have severall laws, Customs and Franchises, which their Prince hath confirmed to them by his Oath, he be not thereby obliged to protect every sort of them in their respective rights, against the other, though greater in number and power, till the Rights of the
weaker party may be found incompatible, with the good of the whole State, by the free judgement of the major part of them in whom under him, or with him the legislative power is, after a full hearing of all interessed parties. And whether the Prince having the whole Soveraignety in him, may disassent, if after this, he yet be of a contrary judge∣ment. 6. Whether a Soveraigne Prince, may not be as well de∣posed by the States of his Countrey, taking the power be∣longing to him, to themselves, as by setting up another Prince in his place: And whether a free people under a Monarch may not be aswell enslaved by their own lawfull Prince usur∣ping an arbitrary power over them, as by the Conquest of a for∣reine Prince or State; And whether it be equally lawfull for Prince, or people to resist in either case. 7. Whether a Soveraigne Prince whose Crowne is not forfeitable can forfeit any of the known, and acknowledged rights of his Crown, by any unwarrantable act he may have been drawn into, through the misinformation, and seduce∣ment of evill Councellors; And whether he be not bound in conscience to discover, and deliver up such evill Counsel∣lors to a due Tryall by Law, in charity to himselfe, and to his people. And whether the people be not under the same ob∣ligation, and may not be aswel seduced by their Leaders, or Demagogues; and whether their rights ought not to be as un∣forfeitable in the same case. 8. Whether any man ought to be punished for having gi∣ven evill counsel either to Prince, or people, unlesse it can be made appeare, that he gave it against the light of his owne conscience; or with an evil minde either to hurt the one, or the other of them; or to advantage himself, or others; or unlesse his Counsel were wicked aswel as damagable, and such as is
punishable either by some law of the land already made, or de∣serveth that a new law should be made upon that occasi∣on to punish his offence, and all of like nature in time to come. 9. Whether it be probable that in a well established go∣vernment of long continuance, the manner of legall procee∣ding in any common, great, criminal cause should be doubtful, or unknowne: And admitting it to be so in some case fal∣len forth, whether all and every of the respective States in whom the Legislative power is, being assembled together at the time, be not bound in Conscience to agree the difference by such an indifferent Law, or Ordinance, as may be enacted by their joynt consent, rather then to go to warre one against another, and to draw the whole State into partialities upon such an occasion. 10. Whether he who giveth the first stop to the proceed∣ing of justice according to law in that Cause, which thereup∣on becomes a pretence to begin a just Civil warre, and will not agree to remove that stop, be not the offender. And whether the other, though he happen to be the aggressor in the action at warre, as he was to have been Plaintife in the action at Law, if the cause had been tryed by law, yet be not on the defensive part in the warre. 11. Whether any warre of any Prince upon his own peo∣ple, or of any people against their Prince can be lawfull, but a pure defensive; and whether it be possible, or can be conceived, how a warre between them, should be purely defensive on doth parts, without supposing a failing on both sides, in giving way to the course of Justice, or a great mis∣understanding between them. 12. Whether it be not as possible, that a Civil warre be∣tween Prince and people may be unjust on both sides, as a
forraine warre between Prince and Prince, State and State, or a Suite in law between man and man, and all these upon many and all the same grounds: as if the matter in question be not worthy to be striven about by law or armes, or if some third person be wronged by their strife, or have better right to that they strive for, then either of the parties, &c. 13. Whether obedience to the forcible commands of Prince, or people, will be a sufficient-plea for having shed, or any way communicated in the shedding of blood in such a warre, at his tribunal, who will not admit of obedience to any Law made by their joynt Authority, for a defence of the least breach of any law of his. 14. Whether Neutrality, or Partialitie be more agreea∣ble to the duty of good subjects, in such a Warre as aforesaid; and whether willing contributers to both sides in such a War, be not guilty of the sinnes of both, and greater sinners then the partakers on either side caeteris paribus, if they con∣tribute to both sides for meere private respects; and whe∣ther such be properly called Neuters, being indeed Vter∣ques. 15. Whether the personall, or the Authoritative com∣mand of the Prince issued out of his supreme Court sitting in the time of such a Warre, will more excuse (though nei∣ther of them can absolve) them on either side, that have sin∣ned of ignorance in such a Warre as aforesaid: And whether the person, or the Court of the Prince will be lyable to a more heavie judgement for having drawne others into sinne, at that day when there will be a review of all things done in this world, before him who is no respecter of persons. 16. Whether a Soveraign Prince, or State, being a Poli∣tique head, can, or cannot do any wrong? And whether the major part of the true body of the State can, or cannot be in
rebellion? And whether the major part of the representative body of the State, or of the supreme Court of Judicature, taking the major part as it standeth for the whole, can, or can∣not erre in judgement, or be, or be not lyable to any guilt: And in what sense, or senses, all these are, or are not true. 17. Whether the sinnes of a Community, as a Communi∣ty, can be done away by the Confessions of the particular guilty persons of the Community; Or whether they by confessing their sinne, and the innocent particular persons by not consenting thereunto, shall thereby onely save their owne soules; and such a publique acknowledgement of the sinne by the Community, or at least by their heads, and Repre∣sentants, as was enjoyned under the Law, be not still requi∣red in the time of the Gospel? 18. Whether there be not, or ought not to be such a supreme Judicatory erected in every Christian State, as was among the Jewes for the finall determining of all controver∣sies whether Ecclesiasticall, or Civil, that may happen be∣tween man, and man; or between Community and Community; or between private man and Community, for the preventing of civill Warre: And whether in mixed governments, where the whole soveraign power, or the use of any part, or parts thereof, is either equally, or unequally divided between seve∣rall Estates, there ought not to be such a Judicatory erected, for the preventing of their encroaching upon one anothers power, and of discord and warre between the said respe∣ctive States upon that occasion, if there be any Christian State which is yet defective in this point? 19. Whether the plotting, and attempting to empeach the freedome, and to corrupt the sentence of such a supreme Judi∣catory by open violence, be not a much greater crime, then the doing any thing presumptuously contrary to the judge∣ment
of such a Court as was instituted Deuteron. ch. 17. ver. 8, 9, 10, & 11. which was death by the Law of Moses, v. 12; or then the slaying of the Chancellor, Treasurer, or the Kings Justices of the one Bench, or of the other, or of any other justices assigned to hear, and determine, being in their places doing their offices, which is high treason by the law of the Realme. 20. Whether the like practising, and indeavouring to overawe that Soveraigne Majesty in which a State hath placed the whole arbitrary legislative power, whether they have placed it in one, or in the major part of many persons consenting in one, be not the highest treason that can be committed in any State. And whether this may not be done by seditious tu∣mults of the common people, as well as by men of higher rank. And likewise whether the contriving and indeavou∣ring to do the same things by cunning and malicious practi∣ces, be not a hainous crime also, though of an inferiour na∣ture? 21. Whether the refusing to deliver up notorious Delin∣quents to justice, be not a just cause of making Warre with rigor against a whole City, or Countrey so protecting them, though no otherwise partaking in the sinne, in the judge∣ment of God himselfe in the Cases of Gibeah of Benjamin, and of the City of Abel protecting Sheba: And whether pro∣tectors of such Delinquents have good ground to promise themselves a good issue of such a Warre, by their prosperous successe in a battel, or two, if they doe well consider the for∣mer of those stories? 22. Whether the keeping of persons duly accused from being brought to a due legall triall, either upon presum∣ption of their innocence in respect of their former good life, and fame, or for their good deserts, or for feare and jealousy of vn∣due
proceedings against them, or upon pretence of some questionable priviledge, or all these laid together, can amount to any more then a probable ground of a just defensive Warre? And whether it be safe to run into a demonstrable great sinne in the generall upon a probable ground that in this, or that speciall Case it is no sinne? 23. Whether it be possible that a suit in Law, or a Warre may be just on both sides, in respect of the matter in question, to which it is impossible that both parties can have a good ti∣tle, or cause of action: And whether their thinking they have so, which may in some measure justifie both parties in an action at law (especially if both, or either of them be trustees, who may with good conscience stand for the questionable rights of those for whom they are trusted) can be a sufficient justifica∣tion in an action at Warre, which in respect of the many un∣avoidable mischiefs that ever accompany all armes ought not to be commenced, or continued but upon clearly just, great, and necessary causes. 24. Whether the justice of every action at warre, as well as at Law, doth not depend intirely upon the tryall of the point in issue between the parties: and whether all other, whether interessed persons, or by-standers, ought not to take that as it may be found in their respective Declarations, ma∣nifestoes, and other pleadings, leaving the judgment of secret motives to God who only can judge of their hearts, and who may judge otherwise of the justice of warres, then man may, because he seeth not as man seeth. And whether they be not bound in conscience to give equall credit, to the respective Declarations of both parties, in all matters of fact that have not fallen within their own private certain knowledge; and to use the same weights and measures in pondering the validity of their respective allegations, and to judge of them without passion, prejudice, or partiality.
25. Whether all other things that may come into consi∣deration in a warre, besides the point in issue, how important soever they may be in themselves, yet in this triall by battell ought to be regarded either by the parties, or by any other per∣son interessed in the warre so far as to sway him in the giving of his assistance to the one side, or to the other, any more then the like things ought to sway a Juror in the giving of his verdict in a tryall at Law. And particularly, 26. Whether the extrajudiciall qualifications of the per∣sons either between whom a suite at Law, or a warre is, or by whom the one or the other is managed, as whether they be Protestants, or Papists, religious, or prophane, civill, or debauched, make any thing to the justice of the warre, or suit, or ought to encline Jurors, or Partakers to the one side or to the other. 27. Whether the good, or ill manner of managing a suite, or a warre ought to be of any more weight with Jurors, or Partakers, seeing a good Cause may be ill managed, and an ill well: And whether a Suite, or a Warre undertaken, and commenced upon just grounds can turne to be unjust by any subsequent miscarriages in the one, or in the other, except the point in issue happen to be altered through the cleare dis∣covery of some concealed further designe in one, or other of the parties, or some other intervening accident, as it frequent∣ly falleth out in long-breathed suites at Law, and came to passe in the Bohemian warre by the death of the Emperour Matthias, which made a very considerable difference in the Case from that it was when the troubles began in his life time. 28. Whether the accidental present interest, or the future advantages, or disadvantages, of what kinde soever, which may accrew either to the parties themselves, or to the parta∣kers,
or to any third person, or to the publique by the respe∣ctive issue of a warre, or suite; and whether the suspected or knowne designes, or intentions either of the parties, or of their partakers to make ill use of the victory, ought to be of any more force with Jurors, or Partakers, or whether they ought to be blinde to them also, and to all other like cir∣cumstances, and respects. 29. Whether the consideration of the accidental, and consequential interest of God himselfe in the issue of a matter in debate between two parties that are in warre ought to engage souldiers, or contributers to take part with the one, or with the other, more then Jurors in a like case, the reason to the contrary being the same in both, to wit, because God hath no need of mans sinne in either to maintaine his Cause, or glory, and it being a manifest sinne in a Juror to have a∣ny respect thereunto, how considerable soever such interest of God may be, as will be cleare to the meanest capacity by putting the case between an Atheisticall Church-Papist and a godly zealous Protestant, or Puritane touching the per∣petual advowson of a great Rectorie, and no lesse cleare in the case of a warre between two Princes semblably qualifi∣ed touching their title to a Kingdome divided in the profession of Religion. 30. Whether a meerly civil cause of cleare justice in which true Religion is much interessed, though but by consequent, may not justly be called Gods cause, and ought not to be un∣dertaken more heartily, and maintained more vigorously by all good Christians in that respect, especially when the inte∣rest of religion is the onely, or maine motive to the opposition made by the adverse party, which was the case of the great Henry the fourth of France, who in that regard was com∣monly prayed for as fighting the Lords battels, and is the case
of the Prince Elector Palatine, and of Prince Rupert his bro∣ther, who in all appearance might ere this have recovered their ancient estates and dignities (to which by the lawes of the Empire their title is unquestionable) by the same means that the said King did his Crowne, if God by his grace had not made his example too fearfull to them. 31. Whether the entitling of God to any purely ci∣vil, and clearly unjust cause in respect of the interest of his true Religion involved by consequent only in the successe thereof, be not a sinne against the third Commandement, and of a high nature; and whether any damage which may happen to accrew to Gods true Religion by occasion of the issue of such a Warre will not be put to his account that was in the wrong in the point of the justice of the Warre, though he were in the right in the point of the truth of his religion, and whether that will not be a heavie aggravation of his sinne. 32. Whether the parties, and others interessed in a purely Civil Cause of dubious justice, wherin Religion is no otherwise concerned then as abovesaid, do well to engage themselves, and to indeavour to ingage others therein under the title or colour of religion; or whether it be not a great sin to do this wittingly and wilfully, especially in them who being Am∣bassadours of a King that hath publiquely declared his king∣dom not to be of this world, and that accordingly refused to make himselfe a Judge of Civil inheritances between bre∣thren, will hardly be able to shew that they have any Com∣mission from him to entangle themselves, and much lesse to interesse his name in such affairs of this world, and it be∣ing well knowne that in the old Law it was death for a Pro∣phet to presume to speak a word in his name that he had not commanded. Deut. 18.20.
33. Whether it be lawfull for Christian subjects to take up Arms against their Soveraign for reformation of the Religion by law established, or in defence of their Religion not established by law, or of their lives, or livelyhoods in danger by due execu∣tion of Law, our blessed Saviour having expressely forbiden them to save their lives by such meanes, with the addition of a most peremptory threatning if they do, and of most gracious promises, if they patiently lose their lives or livelyhoods, for his sake. And whether the truth or falsehood of their Religion or the power, or number of them that attempt any of the things aforesaid doth make any difference in the case, though they be the Major part of the true, or of the repre∣sentative Body of a kindome: Or whether all these be not Anti-Christian proceedings directly contrary to the doctrine and practice of Christ, and of all his holy Apostles, and of the whole Church of God for many ages, and particularly of the Church of England since the Reformation. 34. Whether the defence of the Religion by law established be not more properly a defence of the law then of the Religi∣on: And whether it be not lawfull for Subjects of one Religi∣on, or profession to take up armes in defence of their lives, or livelyhood against the violence and force of their fellow-sub∣jects of a contrary Religion, or profession though established by Law, and though they pretend to have, or have autho∣rity from their Soveraigne to massacre or plunder them for that Cause, unlesse their said fellow-subjects first bring, or endeavour to bring them to a due Legal triall: And whether the truth or falsehood of their Religion, or the number of the thus oppressed doth make any such difference in the case in point of justice, that one man of what Religion soever hath not as much right to defend himselfe against violence as an∣other, or as a multitude: or that a multitude of what Reli∣gion,
or number soever ought not to forbeare such defence of their persons or estates as well as any one single man of the same Religion or profession if proceeded against one by one in a due Legall course: And whether in some occasi∣ons where summary proceedings against many at once are u∣sed, and allowed in other matters the same ought not to be submitted unto in this also for conscience sake, provided that the proceedings be such as may make it appeare that they suffer as Martyrs, or confessors for Christs sake: And whether there be any danger that the gates of hell should prevaile against the Church of Christ, if all true Christians should suffer themselves thus to be killed like sheep, or whe∣ther it have not ever been most enlarged at those times when Christians were most willing to yeeld to be so robbed or killed. 35. Whether all they who by a mistake of the quarrell doe any way engage themselves, or others in a just Warre up∣on unjustifyable grounds be not murtherers before God, though not before men, as a man may committ adultery with his own wife if in the darke he chance to take her for another mans: And as a Juror may do unjustly in giving a just verdict if he do it upon unjust grounds through a mistake of the evidence, or through ignorance of the Law. 36. Whether they who engage themselves in an unjust Warre upon just grounds be therby wholly absolved from the guilt of blood any more then a Juror is that giveth an un∣just verdict to the taking away of his neighbours life upon just, but untrue grounds, or then he is free from adultery that lyeth with his neighbours wife taking her for his own, if the mistake happen through their own fault in either case.
37. Whether all they, who though they understand the right of the quarrel in a just Warre, yet engage themselves or others therein upon unjustifiable motives, as for private re∣venge, or gaine, or with minds any otherwise disposed then purely to procure a yeelding to the justice thereof, be not also guilty of all the bloodshed therein: as a Juror may be a murderer in consenting to the taking away of his neigh∣bours life by a just verdict how cleare soever the Law, or evidence be to him, if he be induced thereunto by his owne private spleene, or by the bribery, or sollicitation of some o∣ther revengefull third person, or by any other by-respect, and not meerly by the merits of the cause. 38. Whether they who at one time have allowed, or ap∣proved of the same proceedings, or actions, in themselves or others of their owne opinion or party, which at another time they have condemned with severity and punished with rigour in others of a contrary opinion or party, in the managerie of one and the same true, or pretended cause of Warre, have not in so doing pronounced sentence of condemnation a∣gainst themselves; or can have any well-grounded hope long to escape the heavie judgement of God, and his re∣venging hand, for this so wicked partiality, how holy, righ∣teous, or sober soever they may be in other passages of their lives. And whether they who will by no meanes a∣gree that others should have an act of Oblivion in this world, for those faults or crimes whereof themselves are no lesse guilty then their neighbours, can have any hope of par∣don for their owne transgressions of either sort in that world which is to come. 39. Whether it may be lawfull for a People to depose that Prince to whom they, or their Representants have sworne Allegiance, in any imaginable case, considering and com∣paring
what is writen Exod: 20.7. Psal. 15.4. Joshua 9.1. to the end. 1 Sam. 8.10. to the 18. Deuteron. 17.14. and 15. Ezek. 17.11. to 21. Jerem. 52.3. to the 11. there being perhaps few stronger cases to be imagined for the dis∣pensing with the obligation of an Oath then that was of Joshua, and of the Princes of the congregation having sworn to the Gibeonites, & Zedekiah to Nebuchadnezar: the first upon meere circumvention, both contrary to the expresse command of God, and yet the wrath of God having been revealed from heaven against the breakers of those Oaths. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 40. Whether in the late great controversy between his Majesty and his two Houses of Parliam. it was not the duty of every good Christian and loyall subject of this Kingdome, desirous to approve his heart to God, and his actions to men, especially to those whom God hath set over him, to the end before he took any part in that War carefully to peruse, and with indifferency to weigh the respective Allegations, con∣tained in those many severall Declarations published by the Kings Majesty on the one part, and by the Lords and Com∣mons on the other part since the first breach between them, and particularly those whereby they have respectively given the people of this Kingdome, and the whole world an ac∣count of the Reasons of their having taken up Armes, whereof that of his Majesty beareth date 12 Aug. 1642. being also the date of the Proclamation whereby his Ma∣jesty gave notice of his resolution to set up his Royall Stan∣dard at Notingham upon the 22th of the same moneth: And that of the Parliament was set forth in the beginning of the same moneth, I think before his Majesties.
41. Whether upon the attentive reading of the said respe∣ctive Declarations it will not be evident to every intelligent man capable to judge of affairs of this nature that the present unhappy Warre is not, or at least was not a Warre of Religion, otherwise then as Religion may be much concerned by con∣sequent in the issue thereof. And whether this will not be yet more evident by comparing the conclusion of his Ma∣jesties said Declaration of the 12.th of Aug. from the para∣graph beginning in these words [Our Case is truly stated, &c.] to the end thereof, with the Preface, of the Ordi∣nance of the Lords and Commons for a weekly Assessment throughout the whole Kingdome for the maintenance of the Army raised by the Parliament 4. Martii. 1642. which beginneth in these words. [The Lords and Commons now Assembled in Parliament being fully satisfied and resolved in their consciences that they have lawfully taken up armes, and may, and ought to continue the same for the necessary defence of themselves, and the Parliament from violence and destruction, and of this Kingdom from foreigne invasion, and for the bringing of notorious offenders to condigne punish∣ment, which are the only causes for which they have raised, and doe continue an Army, and forces, which cannot possi∣bly be maintained, nor the Kingdome subsist without the speedy raising of large and considerable sums of mony pro∣portionable to the great expences which now this Kingdome is at for the supporting of the said Army, and for the saving of the whole Kingdome, our Religion, Lawes, and Liber∣ties from utter ruine, and destruction.] In which words the Lords and Commons (it may be) occasioned by many in∣discreet defences of their proceedings made by well-mean∣ing, but unskilfull men, have with great prudence distin∣guished the justifying causes of their having raised, and con∣tinuing
an Army, and forces from the things which might by consequent have come into danger, if they had not raised an Army, and forces to defend them, among which Religion is one. And this the penner of his Majesties said Declaration had done as carefully from the beginning, in these words [Our quarrel is not against the Parliament, but against par∣ticular men &c.] 42. Whether by the perusall of the said respective De∣clarations, and of the said Preface it be not also most evi∣dent, that his Majesty, and his two Houses of Parliament do both pretend to have taken up defensive Armes, and in defence of all and every the same things; And whether it be not also evident, that his Majesty in his said Declaration maketh the protecting of Delinquents, whom he nameth, from being brought to a Tryall by their Peeres, according to the Law of the Land, the onely cause of the setting up of his stand∣ard, and raising defensive Armes against them, and as many of his subjests as should rise in Rebellion against his Majesty, and the Law, in behalfe of the said pretended offendors, and in justification of their actions specified at large, and alledg∣ed to be High misdemeanors and Treason. And whether the three causes, upon which onely the Lords, and Commons pretend to justifie their having taken up defensive Armes, in their said Declaration of the fourth of March 1642, be not also reducible to one, to wit, that of bringing noto∣rious offenders to condigne punishment, whose practises are set forth at length in their declaration of the fourth of Aug. 1642, and of whom they then named none but the Lord Digby. For the pretended violence, and destruction of the said Lords and Commons, and of the Parliament, and the pretended foreigne invasion of this Kingdome (which are the other two Causes) neither were then, nor by Law
could have been charged on his Majesty, but on the said Lord Digby, and other unnamed Incendiaries; And whe∣ther it be not thereby manifest, that there were two Actions at Warre on foot at the same time, the one between the King, and his Parliament, the other between the Parliament, and his Majestie. 43. Whether the penner of the said Declaration of the Lords, and Commons, of the fourth of Au∣gust 1642, did not with great prudence carefully, and frequently disavow, and indeavour to disprove their having possessed themselves of Hull, or of the Militia, or Magazine, to be the grounds of the Warre: first in these ex∣presse words to that purpose page. 496. of Husbands Col∣lection, Then if they will not come to help the Parliament, and save themselves— especially now that the question is so clearly stated, and that it appeareth, that neither Hull, nor the Militia, nor the Magazine are the grounds of the Warre, which is so furiously driven on against us by a Malignant party, &c. And afterwards page 497— All this before we med∣dled with Hull, or Magazine, or Militia &c. to those words [But to destroy the Parliament.See the words at the end of page 24.] And yet more fully and clearly ibidem: —Yet willingly would we give his Ma∣jesty satisfaction in these particulars, (and so have we offer∣ed it) could we be secured, that disarming our selves, and delivering them up to his Majesty — we should not for our own destruction put the military sword into the hands of those evill Councellors, and ill-affected persons, who are so prevalent with his Majesty. And whether the Penner of certain late Declarations of the Lords and Commons, par∣ticularly that 4o Martii 1647. concerning the Papers of the Scots Commissioners, wherein are these words, page 68. [As to the Militia, although that be the foundation of security
to vs, and our prosterity, and was the principall immediate ground of our Quarell, &c. And these in the same page— Have we fought all this while with the King for the Militia, to subject it to the arbitrement of the Scots Commissioners?] were well advised in those, and other like passages; there be∣ing, as I humbly conceive, nothing more cleare, then that the Militia (by which word, brought into use, by this Parlia∣ment, I doe not understand the power of araying, or charging the subjects of this Kingdome with such, and such armes, which regularly cannot be imposed without the joynt authority of King, Lords, and Commons; but the power of assembling, and conducting the subjects so armed, for the suppression of all Rebellions, insurrections, and in∣vasions:) undoubtedly ever was in the King alone, and was clearly acknowledged to be so, by this very Parliament, when they petitioned his Majesty to put the whole Militia into the hands of such persons as should be recommended to his Majestie by both Houses of Parliament 1o. Martii 1641: When they made their first Ordinance for the order∣ing of the Mllitia, whereby they give power to Collonels, and Captaines to lead, conduct, and employ his Majesties subjects according as they from time to time shall receive dire∣ctions by his Majesties authority signified by both Houses of Par∣liament, 2o Martii 1641: And when they resolved upon the Question, That in this case of extreme danger, and of his Ma∣jesties refusall, the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses for the Militia doth oblige the People, and ought to be obeyed by the fundamentall Laws of this Kingdome 15o. Martii 1641. And whether the true ground of the fracture of the Parliamentarian party into Presbyterian, and Independent, and of the sharp controversy arisen between them, upon other pretences, be not which of them should have the Li∣ons
skin, before he be dead. And whether if the Indepen∣dent could have gone sheere away with it whole, it be not already manifest, that they would have been subdivided againe upon the same ground. And whether there be any hope of seeing an end of these bitter disputes, till the sword be put again into the hand, where it hath been of old: And whether there be not meanes to place it there in such a way, as may be much safer for the people, and no lesse safe for the Houses of Parliament, then to have it in their hands, who being Two, may at length also come to strive about it. 44. Whether the penner of his Majesties Declaration of the twelfth of August, did not with like prudence also di∣stinguish the Delinquents named therein, into two ranks, charging the former of them to have been the Contrivers, Fosterers, and Fomentors of mistakes, and jealousies be∣twixt body, and head, his Majesty, and his two Houses of Parliament, whom his Majesty thereby requireth to be deli∣vered into the hands of Justice. All the charge against the later rank being, their having levied Warre against the King, contrary to the Statute of the 25. yeare of King Edward the third, as is pretended, but in obedience to severall Ordinan∣ces of this present Parliament, as is confessed; which Or∣dinances they are therefore allowed to pleade. And whe∣ther those noble Lords, and others, so empeached of treason, might not then without danger have submitted to their try∣all appointed by Law, supposing the formerly accused Mem∣bers, had also then submitted to a Legal tryal, and should have been tryed first, and would have been acquitted by their Peeres, so as there had been no pretence of a just Warre on his Majesties part for their detainer. 45. Whether the sixth Article preferred against the said accused Members, be not by his Majesty avowed to be the
chiefe head of their Charge, aswell in his Majesties said Declara∣tion as in the Articles themselves, the said Article being com∣prised in these words, That for the compleating of their trai∣terous designes, they have endeavoured, as farre as in them lay, by force, and terror to compel the Parliament to joyne with them in their traiterous designes, and to that end have actually raised, and countenanced tumults against the King, and Parliament. And whether the maine Charge against the Lord Digby, and other Incendiaries in the Parliaments said Declaration of the fourth of August 1642. be not the very same, viz. their combining to bury the happinesse of this kingdome in the ruine of this Parliament, and by forcing it to cut up the freedom of Parliament by the roote, as it is expressed page 494. And whether the maine charge of the Army against the eleven Mem∣bers be not to the same effect: And whether in common discourse some do not charge Others to be as guilty of the same crime, as any of the accused by the Army, by the Houses, or by his Majesty. 46. Whether they who in their private judgements have absolved the Speakers of the two Houses, (in which they are but the shadowes of his Majesties sacred person) from all blame, in what they did the last summer, can with much equity, or justice condemne his Majesty, for having with∣drawne himselfe from the tumults at Westminster, when time was, allowing all to be true which hath been alleaged by his Majesty, and others in his behalfe, for motives inducing him thereunto. And whether any thing, and what, and how much is wanting to make the retirement of a part of the Members of both Houses, to an old Army, which had refused to be dis∣banded at their appointment, a just parallel to the retirement of a much greater part of the Members of both Houses to Yorke, or Oxford, and there contributing their assistance to∣ward
the raising and maintaining of an Army. And whe∣ther if this last mentioned Army had found no more op∣position in their march to Westminster, and through London, then the forementioned Army did the last year, the said Mem∣bers needed to have done any more, then was then acted by the General, and Officers of the said Army, for the compas∣sing of their designe. **** Desunt nonnulla. **** 47. Whether upon the whole matter, Whereas it was alleaged on both sides, that they took up Armes in defence of his Majesties person, of the true Protestant Religion, (which words ought to be understood of that which in this Kingdome is established for true) of the Lawes, and Liber∣ties of the Kingdome, and of the power, and Privilege of Parliament, The truth be not, That the last onely, to wit, the Privilege of Parliament, was in Question; (if the que∣stion were about matter of right) none of the former ha∣ving been, or having on either side been said to be, in any danger otherwise, then as the freedome of Parliament was by both sides pretended, to have been intended to be by the ther impeached. And whether, freedome being the maine Priviledge of Parliament, and the providing for the free∣dome of the Parliament, and of all other Assemblies, having been said to belong to the King by the Prelates, Earles, Ba∣rons, and the Communalty of this Realme assembled in Parliament at Westminster, of purpose to take advice of this busines, in the seventh yeare of King Edward the first, And that by the Statute then made it was declared, that it is the Kings part through his Royall seigniory straitly to defend force of armour, and all other force against his peace, and to punish them which shall do contrary, according to the Lawes, and
usages of this Realme, and that all the Subjects thereof are thereunto bound to aide the King, as their Soveraigne Lord, a all seasons when need shall be, Whether I say in the late action at Warre, taken as commenced on the part of the Parliament, the onely point of fact in issue were not, whether his Majesty ei∣ther did proceed, or would have proceeded according to the Laws, and Usages of this Realme, in the accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, (now Earle of Manchester,) and of the five Members of the House of Commons, charged with an in∣deavour by force, and terror to compell the Parliament to joyne with them in their Traiterous Designes, and with having to that end actually raised and countenanced Tumuls against the King, and Parliament. I say would have proceed∣ed, Because his Majesty taking notice that some conceived it disputable, whether his proceedings against the persons aforesaid by his Atturney were legall, and agreeable to the Priviledges of Parliament, was pleased to wave those his pro∣ceedings, and to Declare That when the minds of men were composed, he would proceed against them in an unquestionable way. And whether in the late action at Warre, taken as commenced on his Majesties part, the onely point of fact in is∣sue were not, whether his Majesty did ever refuse to deliver the Lord Digby, or any other duly accused Incendiary to a Legall tryal, before the beginning of the Warre. 48. Whether his Majesties Sollicitor have not fully de∣clared his being of opinion, that the justice of the great Cause yet depending between the King his Master, and his two Houses of Parliament, must come at last to be determined by matter of fact, in a speech by him made at Guild-hall at a Common Hall there held, on Friday 6. October 1643. upon the occasion of desiring the assistance of our Brethren of Scotland in this Warre, in the words to be read, page 5. of
the Copie of that Speech published according to Order, and printed by R. Cotes in 1646. And whether the truth of any matter of fact be not more surely determined by pro∣ducing witnesses upon Oath, then by Tryall by Battell. The words last cited. In case they be called in, we are to consider then what alteration this is like to make; we are therefore to consider how it comes about that the Party comes to be so equall, that so many should engage themselves on the other Parry, as we see they do; certainly a great many of them do it, being uncertain in their judg∣ments to which side to cleave. Another Party they do it, because that they out of feare desire to keep their estates, and stand Neuters: For the first of those, certainly both at home and abroad, those that are a∣verse, they look upon us as a Protestant Kingdom, but divided among our selves; they heare Protestations on both sides, that both Parties do protest to maintaine the Protestant Religion, the Lawes of the Kingdome, and the Liberty of the Sub∣ject; and they see and read the Declarations that go out on both sides, and the matter of fact being that that makes the cause, they know not what to believe of that; The words cited page 18. All this before we meddled with Hull or Magazine, or Militia, shew plainly that our Act in securing them, was not the cause of the Kings taking up Armes, and exercising hostility upon his loving, and loyall subjects, which was in the thought and endeavours of those about the King who then had and still have the greatest influence upon his Councells; before we thought of Hull or Militia, or any thing else of that nature; And then that our resigning of them now, would not prevaile with him to make him lay down his Armes, and return to his Parli∣ament and gratifie the earnest and longing desires of his people to enjoy his pre∣sence, favour and protection: But that if he could recover either by our resig∣nation, or any other way pieces of so much advantage to him, and weakning to us, use would be made of them to our infinite prejudice, and ruine, the intention being still the same, not to rest satisfied with having Hull or taking away the Or∣dinance of the Militia; But to destroy the Parliament, &c. FINIS.
