P1507 E378_24 R201389 99861909 159977
A PERFECT RELATION OF Severall Remarkable Passages, which passed betwixt the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Commissioners, the last Fast-Day at Holmby, about the Directory and Forme of Prayer. And His Maiesties Resolution therein. ALSO, Some other Passages of Note, concerning the Kngs Majsty, and the Earl of Pembroke upon Sunday last, upon hi Majesties giving this worthy Peer a Visite, as he lay upon his Death-bed. With divers other remarkable Occurrences from the Kingdomes of Scotland and Ireland. Published by Authority, March. 5. London, Printed for H. R, 1647.
Another MESSAGE FROM HOLMBY. HOLMBY (the chiefe and sole Object of the Kingdome, as the affaires now stand) is the only place upon which we fix our eyes, by reason of the residence of our Soveraign, and the great businesse of the whole Kingdome, now in dispute betwixt his Majesty, and his Great Councl, assembled in the high and honourable Court at West∣minster,
for the composing of all differences within his Majesties Realmes and Domini∣ons. Therefore, for generall satisfaction of the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales, I shall here (briefly) insist upon, the Kingomes Occurrences, proceeding from his Majesties Royal Court at Holmby, communi∣cating the remarkablest assages, and chiefest Observations, which hath pssed betwixt the Kings most excellent Majsty, the Commis∣sioners, and the English Divines, about com∣posing of the Kingdomes Grievances, and setling the disractions both of Church and State; which (indeed) will be a gallant work when once ffected. And therefore in the first place, I shall give you the Kings Maiesties Message and Propo∣sitions to the house of Peeres, wherin is pro∣posed his Maiesties Desires, concerning the present state and condition of His Royall Court at Holmby, viz. 1. That their Lordships would be plea∣sed to condescend to his Maiesties Desires for the granting of a competent number of
Domestic Servants. And 2. That their Lord∣ships would be pleased, to admit of such ser∣vants, as are specified in the List, and such as his Maiesty shall make choyce of, namely Ma∣stes of his Horse, Querries, &c. His Maiesty is in health, and very pleasant, (yet not so merry, as formerly, by reason of the great weaknesse of the Earl of Pembroke) His Maiesy hath many Discourses with the Commissioners, and hath declared his reso∣lution to them. Th Kings Maiesty was earnestly desired by the Commissioners to keep the Fast upon Wednesday last, as being a thing consented to by himself, or past by Act of Parliament, and for the distressed Kingdome of Ireland; His Maiesty was content to fast, but hee would not joyn in the prayers, because they were not by him onsented unto. Vpon Sunday last, (after Sermon) the Kings Maiesty visited the Earl of roke, and coming to his bed side, shaked his head, asking him how he did, being much grived at his sicknesse; who (indeed) by  dangerous sick, for which, the for owes of England are
Mr. Marshrl, and Mr. Caril, hath had ano∣ther Conference with the King, about the Directory, Presbyterian Government, and the Worship now set up within this Kingdom; yet no wayes can prevaile with his Maiesty for the perfecting of that happy Work, that all true subiects desire to hear of. But his Maiesty hath again made Reply and Answer to them, declaring, that untill such time, that some of the Bishops and Do∣ctors, which he formerly desired, were sent unto him, he could not be satisfied in Con∣science, and therefore desired, that they might be hastened down with all expediency. His Maiesty in his vacant houres remaines very pleasant, often desiring some familiar discourse with his Nobles and Peeres now attending his Royall Person, which (indeed) they have. It is said, the King desires to remove His Court more Southward, and to come some∣what neerer London. Here is great resort of people, but none admitted to the presence of the King, order being given, hat none shal presume to come eer the Court, but such that are imployed
by the Authority of both houses of Parlia∣ment, for the safeguard of his Maiesties Roy∣all person. Thus having given you the remarkablest passages now in dispence at Holmby, I shall in the next place, insert one passage of note, for satisfaction both of the adiacent and re∣motest Counties within the Kingdome of England, as followeth: A Petition was presented to the house subscribed in the name of a great number of the Apprentices of London (a∣mongst other things setting forth by way of agrievance the too much prevalency of that Party, who have dealt in the late wars) declared themselves disaffected to the peace, and welfare of the Kingdom, who seem to be in hopes of obtai∣ning that by policy which they have not been able to doe by force. Cunningly contriving to aggravate and encrease dif∣ferences betweene the well-affected party, and striving to bring an Odium upon all good men, under the distinction of severall tearms of obliquie and disgrace by such subte en∣deavours, labouring to avert the edge of Justice from them∣selves (who come deservedly under the stroke of it, and to turn it upon those who are most innocent. Strongly endea∣vouring (and have already affected it in part, to justle all ho∣nest, faithful, and wel-affected men out of places of trust, of∣fice and authority, and to put in Newters, Ambodexters, or persons apparently disaffected. In the next place, I ssiall close, and sum up all, with some particular Observations about the Kingdome of Ireland, which followeth in these words.
Letters from Ireland to the Parliament, laid open the necessity of Supplies for reducing of that distres∣sed Kingdom, pressing the Parliament with much ear∣nesse to hasten reliefe to them, of which they were not unmindfull before, and therefore to satisfie those wor∣thy persons, which importuned all this while by Let∣terr, The House ordered that the Messenger which brought these Letters should speedily return to those that sent him, and signifie to them, that the Parliament of England have a speciall care in using all possible meanes to hasten over the desired Forces and have ta∣ken speciall order, that the Contents of these Letters be effectually answered. Ordered that such Armes as can bee spared, shall forthwith be sent for the reliefe of Ireland, and that the Committee for those Afaires, give an account what forces are n a readinesse to go over thither. Directions are ordered to be sent to the Lord Lieu∣tenant of Ireland (who is shipt for Ireland) and the L. Inchiqueen, to consumate the businesse. Letters out of Scotland certifie, that the Parliament of that Kingdome having disbanded the rced Sol∣diers and Officers, and stablished the New Modell, are now setting the Excise for maintaining the vast ex∣pence they are like to be at, in driving the revolving Party out of the Mountaines, and repairing the great losses of those which have suffered for their good af∣fecion to the common Cause, in which both King∣domes are engaged. FINIS.
