P1726 E410_16 99863886 116102
A word for the ARMIE. And two words to the KINGDOME. TO Cleare the ONE, And cure the OTHER. Forced in much plainesse and bre∣vity from their faithfull SERVANT, HUGH PETERS. —Nunc nunc properandus & acri Fingendus sine fine rotâs— LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for Giles Calvert at the black Spread-Eagle at the Westend of Pauls, 1647.
A Word for the ARMIE, and two words for the KINGDOME. THough I have looked upon the Scriblings of this age as the fruits of some mens idlenesse, and most mens folly, and therefore should not willingly have owned my selfe, if found among that Rab∣ble. Yet when it grows so unlimitedly high, and impudently brazen, that some men I know, men even above flattery, and so sleek & smooth, in their uprightnesse (Among whom I place the present Generall and his Second) that I had thought nothing of that kind could stick; and yet these be∣smeared by uncircumcised pens. 1. Two things I resolved which now I offer to the World. The first is an humble Petition to the Parliament, that they would please to try their now well-backt authority, that some one faith∣full discreet man may be chosen to divulge Gazets, Corants, or newes: who shall be accountable to the State for what he prints or communicates to the Kingdome, and that two of each party (for parties there are) shall undertake for what is Printed on the be∣halfe of either, that so all scandalous and slanderous personall af∣fronts may be avoyded, and matters worth time and reading may be published; or if none of these may be gotten, at least men may put their names to their Papers; that honest men may know where to find an accuser, for si sat sit accusare, quis erit innocens? I list not to answer objections may be made hereunto, since this boundless kind of boldnesse were better curb'd to some inconvenience, then continued to a mischiefe, even the poysoning the whole Nation: It should not be a wise mans Que, what strength, wit, acute∣nesse, &c, runs through such a paper: but cui bono?
2. My second Resolve is, though not to answer every late Pam∣phlet punctually, which rather then doe, I might undertake to cleanse the stable in the story: yea though my Share lies so much in them, that it would be costly to purchase cleane handkerchiefs to wipe off every spattering on my face, and could as shortly and more truely answer all as he did Bellarmine with thou lyest; know∣ing no publike instrument in no age, in no place can travel with∣out others dashing and dogs barking: Yet to prevent stones from speaking, and graves from opening, or some horrid unheard of thing from appearing, to satisfie the wide-mouth'd world, and the black-mouth'd Pamphleteers. I shall in plainenesse and faith∣fulness shew you the Armies wounds since they put up their sword, and with them the States diseases; and in humility offer the cure, and leave all to a wonder-working God. First, Let me tell you negatively the evills commonly charged upon the Army, are not the Armies evills. Wee have generally Causam pro non causa, in which Mr. Prin was wont to exceed, who spake much more then he meant to stand too: the summe of all his is the Armies rebellion: another Pedanticke sounds a Retreat, who being namelesse will not endure a Charge; the marow of his Divinity, Non-obedience; another brings the Army to the Barre, where he pleads with a company of bal'd threatnings, and would fright Fairfax with a sight of a King at White-Hall; One cryes they sin against Caesar; another, they have deflowred the Parliment; another, they have ravisht the City; another, they are Sectaries, enemies to Government, false to God, to man, friends, enemies to themselves. They have lost Ireland, ruin'd England; oh! taxes and free quarter; oh! this trinkling with the Court cryes one; oh! their doubtfull carriage with the Court cryes another; Cavalliers shall up cryes one; we shall never see good day sayes another, I doe not think Paul heard such a confused noyse, when himselfe could hardly get leave to speake; That the word Army must answer all the doubtfull mischievous deadly questions in the World. For Example. Who brings Famine? the Army. Who the Plague? the Army. Who the Sword? the Army. Who hinders Trade? the Army.
Who incenseth Scotland? the Army. Who hardens the King? the Army. Who confounds all? the Army. And if it should be askt the Cavalliers and Malignants who con∣quer'd you: they would answer, the Army. If the Presbyters, who disappointed you? the Army; If the Independents: who leaves you in the darke? the Army; And if Haman were askt what he would doe with these Jewes? we know the Answer: alas poore Army: qualis de te narratur fabula? But to my purpose; The grand com∣plaint, which, as most insisted upon, so is most likely to have vul∣gar acceptance: is the Armies disobedience to the Parliament, by which the State was endangered to loose all consistency; In respect of which, the Apprentices routing the House is but duty or inno∣cency; or at worst a parallell practice. To which this is my plaine and full answer. It is confest, they were not willing to disband at Walden, being urged thereunto, and denyed in Essex, when expected and prest: But consider. 1. It was required but conditionally, with regard to their security, indempnity, and Arreare, and none of these per∣formed; It was not such a Monstrum horerndum: 2dly. They were free English-men as Souldiers, and must main∣taine their obligation to the State, as wel as answer the Major and more corrupt Votes of the House. 3dly. Nature commanded their selfe-preservation, when such Instruments were sent to disband them, and command them for Ireland, of whose non-integrity they had good experience. 4ly. When not long before they could not have leave to Petiti∣on their faithfull Generall, how shoul they expect any thing be∣ing disbanded. 5ly. This piece of disobedience  not new unto them, when the same practice was familiar from men more mercenary in the North, and their denyall never counted rebellion: but glibly swallowed. 6ly. I answer, and I desire it may be observed: The first force ever put upon the Parliament was long before this, and that neerer hand: did not the City Remonstrance hang like a Petard upon the Parliament doore weeke after weeke, and every Ward in course to
attend and fire it; speake (Gentlemen of the House) how you were accosted and saluted, and in what language, till you were forced to speak pure London. 7ly. I doe here offer to make good upon oath, that the Com∣manding party in the House, had more force put upon them to disband us, then we put upon the House in refusing. For proofe whereof, Master Anthony Nicholls lately with us at Kingston be∣fore his flight, being urged by my selfe before an other sufficient witnesse, to speak to this point, calling for a testimony from hea∣ven) Profest, that when the Army offered at first to goe for Ireland, he with the other impeached Members fully condiscended to it, and they gave him the agitation thereof: but (as he protested) the Ministers in London came to them with violence, pressing the con∣trary upon this ground: That this Army would soone conquer Ireland, fill it with Schismes: and not only command it: but in a short time give law to England: and therefore would heare of no∣thing but the disbanding it, wch (quoth he) put us upon that vio∣lent course; Now who forced these Ministers? I doe not say, but you see who forced those Parliament-men, & we know they would force the Army: and upon denyall the Army are the forcers. And if the City-Remonstraters durst speake, they can tell you who forced them to force the Parliament: and if the Apprentices would breake silence, they could tel you who spet in their mouths, and clapt them on the back. In all this I speake not my delight, but my griefe, that so many Pulpits should as plainly witnesse this force, as History tels us who poysoned King John. And though we have not been ignorant of this kind of violence (which I had rather attribute to my Brethrens zeale, then their malice) yet you see how tenderly wee have dealt with those: we knowing many godly amongst them, who have not yet declared against them, complained of one of them; Nay though this Army from first to last never had any of these Brethren to offer one Sermon to us to encourage in dangers, to rejoyce with us in our successe. Nay, though they know wee want helps, and have been forced to use such help, as they have reviled us for; and so would have us make bricke without straw; Nay though wee know most hard measure met us. I doe professe I conceive even Gangraena himselfe might have marcht through the Army unmole∣sted,
though we are not ignorant: hinc nostri sundicalamitas. The Lord pitty and pardon, the Army doth. 8ly. Lastly, the Army durst not disband, not seeing a suitable power to stand betwixt honest men and their dangers; the Garri∣sons not possest by men of trust, and the 5000. horse intended not in such hands as to be wished: and the best of them might bee soone disbanded when the foot scattered. No, no, this is not the Armies wound or sore; and to answer the Retreaters grand question, whence are Wars. I answer with the Apostle James; and adde Peace begets plenty, plenty, pride, and pride, warre, and warre begets peace, and so round againe. The Schoole-boy that helped him to so many Latine ends out of Tully, can answer a harder Quaere: but since hee pretends to Religion, I wonder this offended Brother doth not attend the Rule, Matth. 18. Why cannot he as well speak to a brother offending, and so tell him, as to tell all the world of him; I have beene satisfied in mine own spirit, that the godly could not be much offended with us, since none have taken the liberty of speaking to us, which I dare say from the Generall to the meanest Officer, professing god∣linesse, had not been unwelcome. But I looke upon that Author as great a stranger to the Armie, as he is often to his owne principles, and his whole course to be a trade of Retreating, and leave him to another pen; nor is a generall toleration the Armies Gangraena, when as they never hindred the State from a State Religion, having onely wished to enjoy now what the Puritans beg'd under the Prelates: when we desire more, blame us, and shame us. Neither was it the evill of the Army, that being modell'd, they suddenly clos'd, and marcht at that time when the boldest complainer now, would have given them two parts of what they had to have secured the third; (Friends) it was not their evill to divide part of their Force to Taunton, & with another part to fight at Naseby, and after that (by Gods blessing) to deliver up a free Kingdome to an ungratefull Inhabitant, and to an envious cruell piece of a Parliament; nor did those honest-hear∣ted so much asperst Fairfax and Crumwells sin in owning the Army at New-market; nor in their march from thence towards London; nor in their respects to those noble Commissioners of Parliament sent to them; nor in their courtesie to those discreet Citizens from
London (who deserve much) nor their condiscending to their desires to march off upon promise of two things; First, That they would put out the imperious Reformadoes. 2dly. In securing the House, though neither performed, nor in scattering their Forces at 200. miles distance, and providing for Ireland; nor in their returne upon those confest insolencies; nor in marching unto, and through the City, to shew their harmlesse intentions; nor in securing the King in that juncture; nor in hearkning to their Agitators in their just Proposalls; nor in asking money to avoid free Quarter and other burthens; nor in bringing those of the House that fled to them, home againe; nor in desiring a sound Parliament, and cleering it from such persons as had sha∣ken their publique interest; nor in propounding wholsome means to the House, and leaving them to their feete to be enlarged, alte∣red, or explained to the Kingdoms advantage; nor lastly are com∣plaints against private Souldiers the proper evil of the Army: since when I speak of the Army, I mainly intend their Councell & con∣duct; For you know in such a body that sickenesse in pay causeth death in Discipline. But positively we will turn up our lap, and shew you our nakednesse, et habebitis confitentes, reos. We acknow∣ledg we are reaping the ill fruits of our want of action. Saevior Ar∣mis luxuria incubuit victos{que} ulei vitur. It may be some of us have had our Lordly dish in Jaels Tent, and our head may be nayled to the ground; wee may thinke (the war being ended) we may begin to look to our own comforts, and subsistance, and we are apt to plead, who shall enjoy honour and other advantages: but those that have wonne them through hazards, and think they may be confided in; It may be some of us looke upon our shops and Trades as things below us. Wee want that communion with God, and one with another which we had in sad hours: we are forgetfull of our mercies: we may be apt to quarrell one with the other for want of an enemy. We may have such a neighbor of the Court, as some of us may be Planet-struck, yet I hope not principle shaken; we may wander too much from our own first undertakings in the opinion of others. We are not without varieties of thoughts about the matters of God, which never appear'd when we had no time for talking, ha∣ving so much to doe and act. We cannot (we confesse) live beyond
our frailties in many kinds. To be short, we have prayed more, loved more, believed more then we doe. We are grown effeminate with ease, and are more cowed with a dead dog, then wee have been with a living Lyon. We are lesse in heaven and more in earth, and these truely are our wounds deare friends. Some other diseases there are as much considerable among o∣thers, which may be of greater and stranger influence, as First, All mens unbeliefe in God for the carying on his worke, he is not minded in the whole businesse. 2. Our not designing a government from first to last. 3. Our general, proud, and carelesse carriages towards the pre∣sent differences which make so much noise among us. 4. A selvishnesse & negligence in Committees and men intru∣sted, behaving themselves as if they could keepe their painted and well-stuft Cabbins when the ship is sinking. 5. A generall want of the fear of God, and that spirit of trem∣bling before him, which whilst it was upon Ephraim, he was a glo∣rious Tribe. 6. An oscitant and untrust kinde of deportment in all men to∣wards publique affaires, the truth is, the want of a publique spirit threatens ruine very much. 7. Unwarranted Jealousies of all men and all actions: yea though convinced of each others faithfulnesse. 8. Common unthankfulnesse & ingratitude to God and man, I feare shortly the greatest errour in the Kingdome, will be the famine of Love. 9. Delay to the distressed, making them more miserable then the matter of their complaints doth. 10. A spirit of lying and false witnesse-bearing, reaching to the undervaluing of our enjoyments, to say England is growne so poor by the Warre, is false, excepting what is blasted by some Northern winds, our treasure is yet in the Kingdome: London as rich as before; witnesse cloaths and dyet: witnesse marriages and disposing of children, where piety, proportion, parentage take little place, unlesse mingled with much red clay; witnesse the rea∣dy money for purchases if cheape: though shaken Titles in totte∣ring times.
The Cure may lye in these? The Army (you say) must yet be maintained, and wee have thought of Establishments, &c. to take off all offences occasioned by the Army; either you must find action for it, which will an∣swer much, or repartite it upon several Counties according to pro∣portion, that every County may know their owne men and their charge, by which the Hollanders have kept their Army these 70. or 80. yeares; I have formerly answered all objections may bee made against it. The immediate pay of the Souldier in every County, as it will cut off many unnecessary charges, so it wil be easie and contentfull to both parties, I meane the Souldier and the Land-lord. Secondly, Good men, not good Lawes must save Kingdomes: not that I would separate them; therefore I thinke that the first work to be attended: For as the Venetians live upon their curious elections: so the Netherlands by keeping their governement in such hands as they doe, though perpetuating offices to them, have pro∣ved dangerous. Good Justices, good Majors, &c. had it been our first work, it would have been our best, & English-men can as soon conform to just & honest government as any other people. See it in the Army, how serviceable the worst imprest men have been under example, and Characters to be given out for the Elector, and ele∣cted, and for the manageing of chiefer Burgesses. What if every fifty in every County chose one to choose for them, &c. most men being ignorant of the worthiest men. 3dly. That all men from the highest to the lowest may know what they may trust too without delay, and to trust God with the management of it if according to his will. 4ly. Tithes or something of Analogy to them brought into a common stock in every County will doe two things, viz. keepe a good proportion of money ready in every County, & content the Preacher and his Widow better, when in Towns 200.l. or 150.l. per annum, and in the Parish 100.l. shall certainely be paid, and 40.l. to the Widow, &c. as in other Countreys they doe, and hence raise a stock to set the poor on work in every County, the want of which hath been so much complained of. 5ly. That Salaries may be appointed to all places of trust, that temptations to deceit take not hold of Officers.
6ly. A Committee for union betwixt all men truely godly; that we may swim in one Channell (which is in hand) with free and loving debates allowed in every County, that wee may convince, not confound each other, two or three Itinerary Preachers sent by the State into every County: and a Committee of godly men, Ministers, Gentlemen and others, to send out men of hone∣sty, holinesse, and parts, into all Countreyes recommended from their test. 7ly. Three men yearely chosen in every Parish to take up diffe∣rences, which may be called friend-makers, as they do in other places with good successe. 8ly. That the Customes (by which great sums come to hand) may be in very choise hands, and their Under-officers in all parts may be presented from those Ports to them: and out of 2. or 3. so presented, they choose one, if not just exception against him. 9ly. That my former modell for the Navy may be review'd and accepted, which was presented about two years since, whereby the Navies debts may be paid, and two parts of three in the charge sa∣ved for future, and the work better done. 10ly. That Merchants may have all manner of encouragement, the law of Merchants set up, and strangers, even Jewes admitted to trade, and live with us, that it may not be said we pray for their conversion, with whom we will not converse, wee being all but strangers on the Earth. 11ly. That Forraign Nations may have due respect by all faire correspondences with them, and Intelligencers kept among them, especially that Scotland may be used in al things as neighbours and friends, though not as Masters and Commanders. 12. That Academies may be set up for Nobility and Gentry, where they may know piety and righteousnesse, as well as gallan∣try and Court-ship; wee commonly fetch over the dirt of France, rather then their Excellencies, and that shorter wayes to learning may be advance'd; and that godlinesse in youth give them place in Colledges before letters and importunity of men. 13. That the worke of Ireland may not thus still be made a mock-work: but that the businesse may be carried on strenuously & vigorously by men to be confided; who may take it upon them by
the great, or day-work, either of these; there are good men will undertake it upon them, if fully countenanced with a good Ma∣gazine and some money; for what we send now is but like a worm in a hollow tooth, it takes up no jaw? 14. That no Magistrate in matters of Religion meddle further then as a nursing Father, and then all children shall be fed, though they have severall faces and shapes. 15. That all men intrusted, may have set time, place and per∣sons appoynted to give up their accounts unto, of their employ∣ments. 16. Since the vast and even incomprehensible affaires of this Kingdome by the present Councell, must have so many agitations and so many varieties passe upon them; two wayes it may be cu∣red. 1. If nothing be taken into the Houses consideration but res verè arduae, wherin the heart-blood of the Kingdome runs, and no petty matters. 2. If a Councell of State of 10. or 12. honest and godly well∣byast men might sit neer the House, and these, not invested with power, might commend matters of high concernment to the House, and receive their scruples, and those to state also government of Churches. 17. That Burgesses of Parliament may be better proportioned, 6. 4. or two for Shires, and some for great Cities, that they give monthly some account to the places intrusting them, and that some Lawes may be probationers for a month or two. 18. That some of the Parliament may be appointed to receive such suggestions from friends for the good of the whole, which they cannot constantly bring in by way of Petition. 19. That prisoners, especially for debt, may have dispatches, & not loose heads, hearts and hands as well as heeles in Gaoles, and that the Creditour may maintain them in prison: that poore Thieves may not be hang'd for 13.d. ob. but that a Gally or two may be provided to row in the River or Channell, to which they may be committed, or employed in drayning lands, or banished. It were also to be wished that our Gentry find our Callings, and that younger brothers may be better provided for by their parents, that some of them fall not on learning & the Ministry as a shift, &
some (which is worse) take up their employments in high wayes, or (at best) pester Ireland or Forreigne Plantations; and all to maintaine the paintry and glister of the Family, and too often to keep up the name and honour of it in a sottish and luxurious heire. 20. Quicke Justice makes quiet Common-wealths; I look upon that as contenting the Hollanders under their vast Taxes, & Excises; what they have they can keepe; where (in every Towne) you may get Justice as often and as naturally as their Cowes give milke; The few advocates in Amsterdam will tell you what little use they make of Lawyers, where I have knowne a Merchant dea∣ling for 30000. pound per annum, & in seven yeares not spend 20. shillings in Law. And if I might not offend the Court and Gentry, I would say the wrapping up of so many of them in Gownes, and scufling at Westminster, is rather a mark of their meanenesse and Jejune∣nesse, and our slavery and folly, then of any Nationall glory; That to this day wee can neither buy nor sell, convey nor make Testaments, without great and questionable Parchments? And for Law must jurare in verba, either of Littleton, Cooke, or Casuist, ejusdem farinae, which would finde a Cure in keeping Records in all Counties of all mens estates and alienations, &c. and those transmitted to a grand or leiger Record at Westminst: the strength and time spent in Term quarrells, were better bestowed upon the West Indies to which we have beene so often called, and would soone make an end of Europes troubles by drying up that Eu∣phrates. I know not what engagements the King hath upon any, nor how the entercourse lyes: but before the close of new addresses, I wish the people might have two things granted them, viz. 1. To understand by some wise Statist what the true English of prerogative, priviledge and liberty is. If these three bawling children were well brought to bed, the whole house would bee quiet. 2. That a certaine time might be appointed to chuse their Bur∣gesses undenyably if they please to make use of it, with writs or without: what year this shall begin I say not: but if not granted, you shall hardly keepe tyranny out of doores.
To close all and cure all; would this Nation but follow the plaine foote-steps of providence in one thing, the worke were done. Let us but consider whither the Lord hath not pointed out his worke unto us, viz. putting righteous men into places of trust, making way thereunto, as if the fulfilling of the many prophesies and the expectation of the just, were now to be answered. Wit∣nesse the first and now second gaubling the Parliament, the like in the City, the same in the Armie, not lesse in the Ministry, as in the choise of Jesse's sons: neither this nor that must serve but the least, that the whole Kingdome hath been in the refiners fire. The Lord would doe us good against our wills: but wee content our selves to give him a Female when wee have a Male in the flocke: This broke the Axle-tree of the Jewish State and Church, and that bought Akeldama. However I am confident God will carry on this work which is his owne, and to that end I looke above all present agitations, knowing if we enter into our chambers, and shut our doores for a little moment the indignation shall be over-past. FINIS.
