P291 E356_2 R201133 99861684 159910
PAPERS FROM IRELAND, OF The Marquesse of Ormonds coming in to the Parliament: Major Generall Willoughby, and two Knights come over to us, and 56 Barrels of Gunpowder sent to secure Dublin. AND The manner of taking of Mariborough Fort, and the Castle of Athlone. Where a thousand Protestants, Men Women and Chil∣dren, were at the mercy of the bloody Rebels. Besides the losse of the Lord Dillon, Viscount Castaelon, Sir William Gilburt and his Son, 4. Ministers, and divers Officers. And a List of their Names. October 6. 1646. These Papers concerning Ireland are printed and published according to ORDER. LONDON, Printed for E. E. Anno Domini 1646,
PAPERS FROM IRELAND: Concerning the Marquesse of Ormonds coming in to the Parliament. SIR, VVEE understand here from Dublin, that the Marquesse of Ormond is incensed against the Rebels (as he hath just cause) that he offered to capitulate with us, and hath given so good satisfaction of his resolution to prosecute the wars against the Irish Rebels, who have broke the Articles of Peace, and seek his life, that he is now sensible of it, and offers so much to us, that Captain Willoughby, and
Captain Wood 2. Sea Captains with whom he hath had some overtures, have very good satisfaction, that he will deliver with both Dublin, and cause to be delivered up the rest of the Garisons in Ireland in his power, to the Parliaments use, only trate with the Parliament for a be∣ing for himselfe. There are already come from Dublin, and are with us. Quartermaster Generall Willoughby, Sir Gerhard Lou∣ther, and Sir Ioab David, 3 sufficient Pleadges of the Realty of this truth, that the Marquesse of Ormond doth really intend to comply with the Parliament against the Rebels. The Marquesse of Ormond desired 50. Barrels of Gun∣powder to be sent in to Dublin, to secure it against the Rebels, and satisfaction being given by the said Gentle∣mens coming to us, and remaining with us (I meane those of the Fleete that tracted with them, since which they are come over, and will shortly be at London) there are 20. Barrels of Powder sent into Dublin, and 30. Bar∣rels more are to be sent in afterwards, which I doubt not but they will be there in convenient time. It is desired that the Supplies of the Regiments, and o∣thers about these parts, and Liverpool, as also about Bri∣stol, and Minhead, that are not yet gone over, that they may be taken into consideration, and either those or some others be sent over to Dublin, and other parts pos∣sessed by Ormond and his party, to secure them for the Parliament. Within few dayes you shall hear the parti∣culars more at large, from Chester the last of Septemb. 1646. Your humble Servant, E. A.
Honoured Sir, A Little help will save this Kingdom, neglect will hazard the losse of it; the ruine of which will be a fearfull Alarum to both the other. Sir William Gilburt Governour of the Fort of Mariborough in the Queens County, in the Province of Leimster, had before the Cessation three compleat Companies of Foot, and a Troope of good Horse, with which he did not only secure his own Gar∣rison, but preserved the Lord Dillon, Viscount Castle low. and his Forces in the Castle of Athlon, in the Countie of Conaught upon the borders of Leimster, a Protestant Garison some ten miles, or more from him; but the Ces∣sation being agreed, two of those three Companies, and the Troop of horse were called off by the Marquesse of Ormoud, and not only the Castle of Athlone was (by this meanes left naked) but Mariborough Fort in great dan∣ger. Sir William Gilburt having only one Company left to keep the Garrison, and the Lord Dillon not 100. men in Athlone. Sir William Gilburt therefore sent up his eldest Son, his Deputie-Governour, and a Gentleman that hath done good service against the Rebels, to the Parliament of Eng∣land, whose dispatch for employments hath been much wished for by us. Supplies so much, and so long desired, not coming, makes the old Irish to insult the more, though one rout would (I very believe) turn the skales. But a Peace being concluded between the supreame Councel, and the Marquesse of Ormond, it puts us into a far worse condition: Ormond and Digby with their for∣ces
are got safe to Dublin, and there they are fortifying, and mending their workes from the Colledge to St. Ke∣van, and Newstreet, and so to St. Iames Gate, and since their return from Kilkennie the guards have been stron∣ger about the Citie; For the Maquesse of Ormond and the Lord Digby are in some feare of the Rebels that are risen against the peace concluded. The Rebels missing their design of murdering the Marquesse of Ormond, and Digbie, with them in Kilken∣nie, as was plotted, they with their forces marched into the Queenes Countie in Leimster; within 0. miles of Kilkennie, and there tooke the Fort of Mairborough by surprize, notwithstanding the peace concluded, Sir Wil∣liam Gilburt, with all the Officers, and Souldiers, Mi∣nisters, and Inhabitants to the number of 1000. men, women, and children of the Town that are Protestants, all being at the mercy of the Rebels. And the Castle of Athlone in Conaught was also ta∣ken by them in the like manner. The Lord Dillon and all his Offcers and Souldiers are surprised, and are at the mercie of those bloody Rebels. These Forces of the Irish (in number almost 1000. and all armed) are within little now then twenty miles of Dublin. These two places which they have taken, the losse of them is great, Athlone stands upon the River side just upon the mouth of Lough Ree, towards Castle More, and Mariborough Fort is in the hart of Leimster. Sir, for your further satisfaction herein, I referre you to the Papers here inclosed, and shall ever apply my selfe to be Cork the 2. of Septem. 1646. Your most humble Servant, N. T.
A List of the Names of the Families of the Rebels that rose against the Peace. THE Family of the O-moores. The Family of the Fitz-Patricks. The Family of the Brennons. The Family of the O-Conners. The Family of the O-Ryleyes, A List of the Places out of which these Rebels rise. In Leimster. The Kings Countie. The Queenes Countie. Countie Catebagh. The Countie of Wexford. The Countie of Kilkennie. The Countie of Westmeath. The Countie of Raymond. In Conaught. The Countie of Galloway. The Countie of Clare. The Countie of Twmund. They had their Rendez∣vouzes between Cater∣lagh and Kilkennie in Leimster. A List of the chiefe places from whence these Rebels are relieved. O-Carolus, O-Drone, Kilkennie, Caterlagh. O Kirne, Slewmerosle, O▪ Donne, Laghlin, Ido.
A List of what was taken in the Castle of Athlone, in the County of Roscomen, which is taken by the Rebels. The Lord Dillon, Vis∣count Castelon. The Governour of the Castle. 8 Officers. 80 Souldiers. 100 Armes. With the rest of the Am∣munition of the Castle, A List of what was in the Fort of Mariborough in the Queens County, which is taken by the Rebels; As also in the Town, where they were all at the mercy of the Rebels. Sir William Gilburt, Go¦vernour of the place. Mr. William Gilburt his Son. An Officer under him. E. Fitz-Gerhard. All Sir William Gilburts Officers and Souldiers. All the Armes and Ammu∣nition in the Fort. 4 Protestant Ministers. (VIZ.) Mr. Humphrey Gore. Mr. Hugh Gun. Mr. Essex Digby. Mr. Iohn Birkhead. 1000 Protestants, men, wo∣men, and children. FINIS.
