P3894 E916_1 99863334 115527
AN APPENDIX TO A SEASONABLE VINDICATION OF FREE-ADMISSION, TO, AND FREQUENT ADMINISTRATION OF THE Lords Holy Communion, To all Visible Church-members, Re∣generate or Unregenerate. By William Prynne Esquire, a Bencher of Lincolns Inne. Augustin. in Psal. 48. Enar. Concio. 1. Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 535. Manducant illi et adorant; manducant isti et saturantur, tamen Omnes manducant. Exigitur de manducante quod manducat; non prohibeatur manducare a Dispensatore; sed moneatur time∣re Exactorem. Audiant ergo ista Peccatores et Justi; Gentes et qui habitant orbem, terrigenae et filii hminum, simul in unum dives et pauper, non divisi, non separati: Tempus Messis hoc faci∣et, manus ventilatoris hoc poterit. Nunc simul in unum audi¦ant Dives et Pauper, Simul in unum pascantur Haedi et Agni, donec veniat qui segreget alios ad dextram, alios ad sini¦stram. Simul in unum audiant docentem, ne segregati ab invicem audiant judicantem. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1657.
An Appendix to a Seasonable Vin∣dication of a Free—Admission to, and Frequent Administration of the Lords Holy Communion, &c. HAving at large demonstrated the con∣stant practice of the Primitive Church in the frequent administration of the Holy Communion to all Visible unex∣communicate Church Members, by the testimony of Fathers, Councils, & other Writers of all sorts, with the continua∣tion, approbation of this laudable Practice in our own and other reformed Churches, till of late years; I can∣not but with much grief of heart, behold the discon∣tinuance and disusage of it in sundry of our Churches for divers years together, as a sad symptome both of the Corruption, Degeneracy, Apostacy, unzealousness of our Church and Ministers in these reforming times; It being In his Ca∣techism, Vol. 1. f. 463. Tho. Beacon his true observatior; That when the Church of Christ was most pure, the Sacrament of the bo∣dy and bloud of Christ was most often received of the Chri∣stians. Therefore the rare using, suspending, and quite
casting aside of this Sacrament for sundry years together in many Churches, is an undoubted evidence, not of the reformatiō, but corruptiō, apostacy of those Churches (espe∣cially of their Ministers, the chief Authors of it through ambition, faction, design, Anabaptistical, or Popish principles: which I hope those who profess themselves Judges of the Law will now take care publikely to re∣dresse, upon the peoples See My Le∣gal Resoluti∣on of two Im∣portant Quae∣res. sad complaints of their Mini∣sters neglects herein, on the one hand, as well as to give them relief for their Tithes, when or where inju∣riously detained, on the other hand. For their better incouragement herein, I shall for the Honor of the Pro∣fessors of the Law of that honorable Society of Lincolns Inn, whereof I am a Member, present the world with some Memorable Orders, made by the Benchers of that So∣ciety in the Reigns of Q. Eliz. K. James, and K. Charls, for the frequent receiving of the Lords Supper in the Chapel therof, by every Member of the same; and ex∣pulsion of all such out of the Society as unworthy to be Members, who refused frequently to receive it; or for∣bore to Communicate in the Chapel there; (according very well with the Discipline of the Primitive Church and times) now fit to be revived in the said Christian Society, where two or three Sacraments for many years past have been, and still are constantly administred e∣very Term, to give good Example to all other Church∣es, Chapels throughout the Nation, and convince all present Members of that Society, who negligently, or obstinately forbear to repair to the Ordinances, and Sa∣crament there administred in this age, how well they deserve to feel the rod of the antient Discipline of the Society, inflicted upon such delinquents in former times, comprised in these following Orders entred in the Black Books thereof for that end, and the benefit of Posterity. Lib. Niger 5. f. 111, 112. Ad Concilium ibidem tentum in fest. AscentionisLincolns Inne. Anno 12. Reginae Elizabethae, in praesentia of 12. Benchers, this Letter from the Lords of the
Queens Council was read and entred in the Black Book. To our loving Friends, the Antients and Benchers of Lincolns Inne, VVHereas of late time knowledge hath been given to us of her Majesties Council, and the same also manifestly and orderly declared this day in the Starred Chamber at VVestminster, being then accompa∣nied with the most Reverend Father in God the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops of the Realm, and certain of her Majesties Iustices, and others of her lear∣ned Counsel, that these persons hereafter named, that is to say, Roger Corham, Gerrard Lother, Henry Harper, John Brown, and Thomas Egerton, being Fellows of Lin∣colns Inne, have of long time misused themselves, in contempt of the Lawes of this Realm, and contrary to the Laws ecclesiastical; partly in not resorting to the Church, or other place of Common Prayers at accusto∣med times; partly in not receiving the blessed Com∣munion at times convenient, but contrariwise, using other Rites and Services, which are by the Laws of the Land prohibited, and in these disorders, have lived and continued a long time, to the evil example of others in their Society. We have upon good deliberation or∣dered and decreed, and by these presents do ordain and decree in the Queens Majesties name, that every of the said persons shall immediately for these their former long and manifest contempts and offences, be exclu∣ded out of Commons in that House, and shall forbear to give any Counsel in the Law, or to resort to any barr or place of Iustice, there to plead by Plaint, De∣fence, or Demand, in any Sute or Cause belonging to the Law, other than for themselves, if they shall be by ordinary Processe thereto called; And that they and every of them shall obey this Order, untill they shall by Gods goodnesse reconcile themselves, and amend those their defaults; which is a thing more desi∣red, than any punishment of them: & the same their re∣conciliation
to be testified by the Bishop of London their Ordinary: Whereupon they shall be received a∣gain into Commons, and allowed to give Counsel, and plead to all purposes, as before this Order they might have done. And otherwise upon continuance in their obstinacy▪ to be utterly excluded for ever from the So∣ciety, with such further punishment as shall thereto belong. Furthermore, to avoid the increase of these con∣tempts in that House, we have thought meet, and so we doe by these presents command, that no person of your Society being commonly or wittingly known or vehemently suspected to mislike of the Rites and Or∣ders established in this Realm for Religion, be called, or allowed from henceforth, to any degree in that house until the same have sufficiently purged himself of the said suspstion. And to the intent that this our Order and Decree may be duely executed, we will and straitly command you with all convenient speed openly in the accusto∣med place of your Assembly, to notifie the same to the parties above-named, and to all others of that Fellow∣ship, to the end they may thereof take knowledge, and avoid all occasions of offence in the like on their own part, or otherwise they must look to be ordered, accor∣ding to their deserts. At Westminster the 20th of May, 1569. Your loving Friends, Nicholas Bacon, C. S. J. Pembrook. W. Northampton, E. Bedford. R. Leicester. G. Clinton. William Howard, F. Knowels, W. Cicill, R. Sadler.
After this Letter: Lincolns Inne. Lib. Niger 5. f. 151. b. Ad Concilium ibidem tentum 4 die Junii, Anno(b) Lib. Niger 5. f. 113. b. Regni Elizabethae Reginae 12. in the presence of 14. Benchers. It is Ordered, that for as much as Mr. Cortham, Mr. Gerrard Lother, and Mr. Brown have been out of Com∣mons, and sequestred from practise by the Councils Letters for Ecclesiasticall causes, by the space of one year and more, that unless they bring certificate of their Re∣conciliation in Religion from the Bishop, before the last day of this term, that then they three shall be utterly expulsed the House, without all hope of readmission. And that all others which have been called before the said Bishop, and other Judges in causes ecclesiastical, for suspition of their sincerity in Religion, or their Offences in these matters, shall be likewise expulsed the Fellowship, unlesse they bring certificate of their Reconciliation from the said Bishop, before Quindena Michaelis. And if Mr. Egerton shall bring Certificate from the Bishop that he is reconciled in Religion before the end of this term, then he likewise to be called to the barre at the next Moote. One chief cause of these Gentlemens suspension from Commons, Practice, and Final expulsion, is expressed to be, Their not receiving the blessed Communion at times convenient. Which was seconded with other succeed∣ing Presidents of Expulsion for this very cause. (d) Ad Concilium ibidem tentum 28 die Octobris, An∣no Regni Elizabethae 14. in praesentia Gubernatorum (being 13. in Number, whereof three were not long after made Judges under the Queen.) Inprimis it is ordered, that if Mr. Blackwell upon Saturday next be not at Service in the Chappel here, and upon Sunday next at the Service and Sermon in the Chapel here, and there decently behave himself all the Service while, and receive the Communion here upon Sunday next, that then he shall stand out of Commons
and forbear the benefit of his Chamber. And unlesse he receive the Communion here openly some Sunday this Term  He shall be no fellow of this House, and stand expulsed from thenceforth. Lib Niger 5. f. 200. Ad Concilium ibidem tentum 17. die Novembr. Anno Regni Dom. R. Elizabethae 18. at which 11 Benchers were present, Richard King smell Attor∣ney of the Queens Court of Wards and Liveries, being the first. Mr. Vicars is expulsed the Fellowship of this House, for that he hath obstinately refused to receive the Com∣munion according to the Orders of this House. Lib. Niger 5. f. 248. b. Ad Concilium ibidem tentum: die Jovis 8. die Maii Anno Regni Dom. Reginae Elizabethae, &c. 2c. in the presence of 13 Benchers. It is ordered, that Every Man of the House shall at the least once in the year ( be in Commons re∣ceive the Holy Communion in some Term time, with∣in the Chapel of Lincolns Inne. Ibidem, f. 358. b. Ad Concilium ibidem tentum 28 die Maii, Anno Regni Elizabethae, &c. 26. in praesentia Thomae Egerton, then Sollicitor, and ten more Benchers. Mr. Henry Stephens sometimes a Gent. of this Fel∣lowship for not Communicating by the space of two years, being also moved, to communicate, he refused; and therefore it is ordered, that for those causes he shall be expelled out of this Fellowship. These Presidents I find in Queen Elizabeths Reign; from which I descend to King James. The Benchers of the Society taking Notice of the Paucity of those who resorted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper when ad∣ministred every term, thereupon made this ensuing Order. Lib. Niger 6. p. 308. 2. Ad Concilium ibidem tentum, 2 die Maii AnnoLincolns Inne. Regni Regis Jacobi, &c. 3. in the presence of 15 Masters of the Bench presen.
For as much as it appeareth at this Council, that there is in Commons in this House of Benchers, Barre∣sters, and young Gentlemen every Term to the num∣ber of 140 persons and above; but there having been in every Term a Communion in the Chapel of this House; that of the said 140. persons there commu∣nicateth not usually above the number of Forty. Thereupon Sir John Tindal Knight Dean of the Chapel, Mr. Irbie, Mr. Hughes, and Mr. Winch, four of the Ma∣sters of the Bench, are intreated to call before them all such as have so neglected to receive, and to examine their Religion, and life, and of their Opinions and proceedings in this behalf to certifie the Bench, so soon as conveniently they may. Further, at this Council it was ordered; That all such as are now in Commons in this House every one of them shall communicate in our Chapel on Sunday next, or on Thursday following, ing cension ay, A if any shall refuse or neglect so to Receive, he shall be expelled this House and Fellowship, unl shall shew good  the Bench of such his refusal, or forbearing to communicate. Lib. Niger 7. f. 46 At a Council held in Lincolns Inne, 30 Januar. An∣no 18. Jacobi Regis. Mr. Clinton a Popish Recusant; who would not conform himself (in repairing to the Chapel, and receiving the Sacrament) was declared, not to be cal∣led to the barr, and likewise expelled the Society: And at a Council there held, 23 Aprilis 19 Jacobi▪ Mr. An∣thony Hunt for the self-same cause; was expelled the House, by a special Order. After this, during the reign of King Charls, Mr. An∣drew Brown. and Mr. Richard Minshaw were both by se∣veral Orders of the Council of Benchers in Lincolns Inn, first suspended the House, for not repairing to the Cha∣pel, and Receiving the Communion of the Lords Sup∣per, and continuing still obstinate (notwithstanding the Queens Letter and intercession) finally expelled the So∣ciety,
as appears by the Lib. Niger 7. f. 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 199, 294. Orders of 29 Julii, & 30 Octo∣bris Anno 2. Caroli Regis, entred in the Black Book. Lib. Niger 7. f. 493. Novembr. 18. 1641. at a Council held in Lincolns Inne before Mr. Oliver Saint-John, then Sollicitor to the King, Sir Rowland Wainsford, Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and the rest of the Benchers, the Butler was ordered, to deliver the Names of such to the Bench as had not received the Communion in the Cha∣pel of this House, within one year last past; to the end that they might tender the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegi∣ance to them, by a special Commission then directed to them to administer these Oaths to all Members of the House, and of the Innes of Chancery thereto belonging, who were suspected in their Religion. The not receiving the Sacrament at least once a year in the Chapel of the House, being then and in all former times, reputed a sufficient badge of suspition in Religion, and inclination to Popery. How then it can be now reputed a Character of Saints, or Protestants of the highest Form, and of the most refined sublimated orthodox Christians, transcends my Capacity to comprehend. By these Presidents (omitting See Lib. Niger 5. f. 181, 182. others of like Na∣ture,) it is apparent, That Queen Elizabeth, with her Council, Judges, & the Masters of the Bench of the Hono∣rable Society of Lincolns Inne, during hers, King James, and King Charles successive reigns, reputed all those ad∣mitted into it, of what quality soever, unworthy to be called to the Barr, Bench, or permitted to reside in, or continue Members of the Society; who neglected or pe∣remptorily refused to repair constantly to the Chapel to Gods publike Ordinances, or to receive the Lords Sup∣per there with the rest of the Society, at least once every year: Whereupon after due admonition and perseve∣rance in this their irreligious neglect, they finally expel∣led them the House, as putrid Members, suspected, taint∣ed in their religion, lest they should corrupt and leven o∣thers; even as the Primitive Church, and Christians
constantly excommunicated, expelled all those from their Church, Society, who neglected or refused to communi∣cate constantly with them in the Lords Supper, when it was administred. Which Godly Discipline, I heartily wish may now be carefully revived, severely executed in all our Innes of Court, and all Churches throughout the Realm, as well on refractory Ministers, who obstinate∣ly refuse to administer the Sacrament to their people, as on negligent or obstinate Non-Communicants, who re∣pair not to the Communion, when and where it is admi∣nistred; All of them forgetting that memorable saying of St. Bernard, recorded by In his Catechism, Vol. 1. f. 463. Thomas Beacon; He that hath a wound, seeketh a Medicine: We have a wound whiles we are under sinne; The Medicine is The Sacrament, Daily receive, daily thou shalt be healed; Bernard. in Coena Domini Ser. f. 38. Duo enim illud Sacramentum operatur in nobis; ut videlicet ita sen∣sum minuat in minimis, et in gravioribus peccatis tollat omni∣no consensum: Si quis vestrum, non tam saepe modo, non tam acerbos sentit iracundiae motus, invidiae, luxuriae, aut cetero∣rum hujusmodi, gratias agat Corpori & Sanguini Domini, quoniam virtus Sacramenti operatur in eo; et gaudeat quod pessimum ulcus accedat ad Sanitatem. Tanta siquidem est vis Sacramentorum qui diebus istis recoluntur, ut possint ip∣sa quoque lapidia scindere cordae, & pectus omne licet ferre∣um emollire sufficiant: as the same Bernard elegantly re∣solves. Those Ministers then may justly fear their hearts are harder than stone, and brests more obdurate than i∣ron, who Si lucri spiritualis gratia hoc fa∣ciunt, laudan∣dus est zelus, sed praesump∣tio corrigen∣da, Bern. E∣pist. 42. neglect or refuse diligently, frequently, con∣stantly to administer this Sacrament to their people to break their stony hearts, soften their iron brests, abate the power of their greatest sinnes, close up and cure their wounded souls; and those Christians doubtlesse are the greatest Enemies to their own Salvation and Spiri∣tual Cure, who make the greatness, heinousness of their sinnes, the only Argument to keep them from the con∣stant use of this holy Sacrament, which should be the strongest motive to invite them thereunto, that they
might be healed and reformed by it. It is' acknowledg∣ed by all Divines, that this Sacrament is both a special means of Grace, and Soveraign Balsom to cure all woun∣ded sin-sick Souls. Therfore for any Ministers, or Spiri∣tual Physicians to suspend their people, or for any visible Churchmembers to seclude themselves totally from this means of Grace, and Soveraign Medicament, till the work of saving Grace be visibly wrought in them, and their Spiritual wounds and maladies perfectly cured, is professedly to keep them from the means, till they have attained the end therof without them, and diametrically to contradict both our Saviours Doctrine and Practice, Mat. 9. 12, 13. They that be whole need not the Physician, but those that are sick: For I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Wherefore Bernard Epist. 42. Nolite illorum acquiescere consiliis qui cum sint Christiani, Christi tamen vel sequi facta, vel obsequi dict is opprobrio ducunt. FINIS.
