P4237 E1575_1 99868108 170103
A LITTLE CABINET RICHLY Stored with all sorts of Heavenly Varieties, and Soul-reviving Influences. Wherein there is a remedy for every Mala-dy, viz. Milk for babes, and meat for strong men, and the ready way for both to obtain and retain assurance of Salvation: Being an Abridgement of the Sum and Substance of the true CHRISTIAN Religion; Wherein The Cause of our Salvation, the Way, the Guide, the Rule, the Evidence, the Seals, &c. and the connection of these points together, and De∣pendancy of them one upon another: This I have endeavoured to do orderly, exactly, methodically, with much plainness and clearness. By ROBERT PURNELL. John 14. 6. I am the way the truth and the life, no man cometh to the Father but by me. John 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. London, Printed by R. W. for Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles, at the West end of Pauls, 1657.
Purnel's Cabinet.
The EPISTLE Dedicatory. To all the Churches congregated, according to the order of the Gospel, with all that in every place call upon the name of the Lord Iesus, viz. to the strangers scattered throughout England, Scot∣land, Wales and Ireland, that are in love sweetly united, or that yet have their Spirits too much imbittered. OF all people in the world, those are the only happy people, whose God is the Lord, Psal. 144. 15. Whether they are high or low,
learned, or in the worlds account illi∣terate: that are tempted or deserted, afflicted or oppressed, they are pretious in the account of God, though vile and contemptible in the eyes of men, &c. my brethren, for your sakes this piece is come to publike view, which is neither deficient in necessaries, nor abundant in superfluities: the con∣sideration of the shortness of our time, and the largness of volumes, and the weakness of our memory, engaged me in this work; Our ten∣der father, who knows what is best for us, hath gathered up all pra∣ctical Divinity into ten precepts; and our Saviour hath reduced those ten into two, and all that we can pray for, or against, into six heads or petitions; my dear friends, labour to keep close to God in this loose age,
spend not your pretious time in complaining on others, but endeavour in the use of all means to reform your selves; beware of scandals, take them not where they are, make them not where they are not; lay the foundation of mortification deep, reserve no lust from the stroke of Jesus Christ; take heed of pleasing your selves in a bare formall professi∣on, labour to be rooted in Christ and abide in his doctrine, let your speech be alway with Grace, and a word or two of Christ in every company; beware of sleighting or neglecting of any of the ordinances of God, or giving those to sinners that belong to Saints; consider▪ the truth is the same in all ages, only it shines more and more clear from age to age, untill that which is perfect is come,
and that which is imperfect be done away; the truth held forth is the same, though with more of God and less of man; such addition is no innovation, but an illustration, not new light but new sight; a man may not be said to make a new world, when he makes a new discovery of the old world; despise not the providences of God in the world they are signs of Gods mind, if not of his love, read your own hearts in the defects of others, put your confidence in no∣thing beneath God himself: Can the stone rest without its center, the Ca∣melion without air, the Salamander without fire, or the Fish without wa∣ter? surely they cannot; Our center is God, all things beneath him are mu∣table, and fleeting and failing, viz our best friends may fail us, our eyes fail,
our tongues fail, our strength fail, our flesh and our heart may fail, nay our spirits may fail, Ps. 143. 7. But the Lord, if we trust in him, will neither fail nor forsake us, Heb 135. In a word, he is a Sanctuary to the oppressed, he is life indeath, health in sickness, joy in grief, liberty in bondage, comfort in despair, riches in poverty, honour in disgrace, heaven in hell: I will hold you no longer in the Porch, but invite you in∣to the house, & such as I have, I will set before you, desiring you to taste of eve∣ry dish before you spend your judge∣ment of the Feast, for what is want∣ing in the first course, may be made up in the second; account nothing so pretious as Gods favour, nothing so fearfull as his displeasure, nothing so hatefull as sin, nothing so desirable as grace; beware of partial obedience,
mercenary love, pretended zeal, legal sorrow, and feigned humility, for ex∣cept your rig hteousness exceed that of the Pharises, your Sacrifice that of Cain, your Confession that of Pharaoh, your Fasting that of Ahabs, your Weeping that of Sauls, your Reformation that of Iebu's, your Restitution that of Iu∣das's, your Faith that of Simon-Ma∣gus's, your Fear and Trembling that of Felix's,  ye may die in your sins. Read well this book, and mark di∣ligently what variety of heavenly treasure there is comprized in this Cabinet, and forget it not, for you shall buy much for little cost, and read much to thy great gain: If I may prevail with thee to to read it once, thy Love to it will constrain thee to read it again and again: thou shalt find it for or∣der
Methodicall, for matter Spiritual, for brevity Compendious, and for use Precious. I leave you to him that never forsakes his, and re∣main Your Servant for Christs Sake, ROB. PURNELL.
The Epistle to the Impartial Reader. Ingenious Reader, IT was in my thoughts, if I did ever present any thing to publike view again, to have written only of the Kingdom, and coming of our Lord Iesus Christ in the glory of his Fa∣ther, attened with the Arch-Angels, and all the host of heaven so much spoken of in the Scrip∣ture, and confirmed by the testimonies of the Pro∣phets, Apostles, and Angels; but since there is a Doctrine sprung up and carried on with a high hand, that in part or whole denies the Scriptures of truth to be the word of God, and so neglect and slight the Ordinances of God therein contained, and so endeavour to undermine the Doctrine of Christ, I thought good to make a speedy and safe retreat back again, to guard and defend the first principles of Religion, that so I might retain that which I had spent many years to obtain, and not change a rocky foundation for a san∣dy foundation, and the pure, perfect, safe and
sure ruleof the written word, for a supposed or pretended light within, who not contenting themselves with those plain and precious rules, and that clear light that shines in the word, they are only led by their own phantasies, daily crea∣ting to themselves diversity of new opinions, and so break the bonds of love, and fall off from the communion of Saints, as though it were no Ar∣ticle of their Creed, and so fall to judging, rail∣ing, and condemning men for not doing as they do; contending for Cummin and Annis, putting off a hat, and wearing ribans, &c. and not only so, but also hate, malign, and most bitterly and uncharitably censure all those that differ from them. Reader, I shall here in this Book present thee with all that I have learned, or at least with the sum and substance of all that I have gained this four and twenty years, by reading the Scrip∣tures, hearing of Sermons, conferring with Chri∣stians, and perusing their writings, together with several things that God hath immediately darted in upon my heart; but I have not received as I know of, nor here presented any of the medi∣ate or immediate teachings, save that, and only that which is agreeable to the word of God, as far as I understand his mind therein: neither have I made it my work to contend for, or cry up any par∣ticular interest, but rather it doth much grieve my heart to see what a state most menare in here,
each tugging for his interest, and so whilst they are contending for the garment, the power of Re∣ligion is much abated. I would intreat thee Reader to weigh things in the ballance of Righteousness, love and imparti∣ality, and then I am confident that there will be none that hath the work of grace upon their souls, unless they be under some violent fit of temptation, but in the main will sweetly own, and spiritually bless God for the revelation of the precious things contained in this little Book; here being something of every thing needful to be known and practiced, for the obtaining of which I have imitated the Bee, that goes forth of the hive, and gathers ho∣ny from several sorts of flowers, and hearbs, and sometimes from weeds. And for the compiling of these things together, as they have a connexi∣on and dependance one upon another, I have borrowed a little time from my particular calling, and from my sleep, and recreation. If I have done this work well, it is that which I desired, but if slenderly and meanly, it is because I could do it no better. I must confess I rather lisp then speak plain in the things of God, where∣fore cover all my imperfections with a man∣tle of love. for it hath been compiled in the midst of many personal tryals; if thou find any imperfections, yet let not the truth of God suffer through my weakness; to the Law and to
the testimonies: wherein I come short of writing ac∣cording to that rule, it is for want of light: I hope I shall be content to decrease, so the glory of God in the gift of Christ, and Covenant of grace may increase: let my name perish, so his may flourish, let me cut off like a Weaver and dye, so his name and glory may live: I shall no longer de∣tain thee from the thing it self, which treats of that which is of great concernment to all, in the reading of which if thou shalt receive any light, or reap any spiritual benefit▪ give all the praise to the Lord, and pray for him who is a lover of all that fear the Lord, under what form soever they be, or by what name or title soever they are known. ROB. PURNEL.
A Table of the principal heads in general, and the connection of these points together and depen∣dence of them one upon another. OF God the Father. Of God the Son. Of God the Holy-Ghost. Of Gods decrees. Of Election. Of the Creation. Of Angels. Of Man. Of the Sou l. Of Mans fall. Of Providence.
Of Mans recovery. Of Vocation. Of the Covenant of Grace. Of Justification by Grace alone. Of Sanctification or a holy Conversation. Several strong reasons why the Saints should walk holily. Of Justification and Sanctification, wherein they differ, and wherein they agree. Of Faith. Of Repentance. Of Sin, the nature of it. Of Knowledge. First Of God. Secondly Of our selves. Of Experience. Of Enjoyment Of the grace of love, 1. First to God. 2 To his People. Of the Grace of hope. Of Perseverance. Of the several gifts and Graces of the Spirit. Of the several Ordinances o the Gospel 1. Of the assmbling of our selves together. 2. O preaching and prophecying. 3. Of Prayer and supplication. 4. Of singing and praising God together. 5. Of the Ordinance o Baptism. 6. Of the Ordinance o the Lords Super. 7. Of the Collection or the poor. 8. Of reading the Scriptures. 9. Of Admonition, private and publike.
10. Of Suspension. 11. Of Excommunication. Of Assurance of Salvation. Of the difference between the Law and the Gospel, and of the several sorts of Laws. Of the ten Commandments, and what each of them doth prohibit and enjoin. Of the Lords prayer, and the several petitions therein contained. Of the World, Flesh, and the Devil, the three great enemies of man. Of afflictions, and why the Lord doth afflict his own people. When a man may be said to suffer for well-doing, and when for ill-doing. The Lord is many times better then promise, never worse. Mercies and deliverances are many times nearest to us, when we think they are farthest of. The Lord doth hand forth mercies by the rule of con∣traries. He doth not despise the day of small things. The order of causes, how the Lord comes down-ward from the causes to the Effects, and how we must go upward from the effects to the causes. Mans life is or should be guided by seven vertues. Several Divine Sentences. Divers knotty questions answered and seeming contra∣dictions, reconciled, and many scruples of conscience removed. Of the shortness of mans life, and of the misery that doth attend every age thereof. Of the misery attending both body and Soul at the hour of Death.
Of a Bill of inditement at that time brought against us. Of the sad condition and misery of all out of Christ af∣ter death. Of our preparation for death, that we may be ready when it comes. Death to a Christian is but a house, a bed, a sleep. The great and terrible day of the Lord is near; proved 1. By the testimony of the Prophets. 2. By the testimony of the Apostles. 3. By the testimony of Angels. 4. By the immutability of Gods decree. 5. By the infallibility of his promises. 6. By the impartiality of his justice. There are four things that Christ hath already done, and five things he is now doing, and six things more that he will do when he comes. Of the resurrection of the dead at Christs second coming. Of the first and second resurrection. Whether there be any such things as the personal reign of Christ: and if so, what it is. Of the last judgement. 1. The signs that go before it. 2. What is meant by it 3. O the place where it shall be. 4. Of the person, who it is that shall judge the world. 5. Of the time how long the judgement shall last. 6. Out of what all people shall be judged. 7. The day of judgement will be a great day. The sad condition of all Christless, after the Sentence is pronounced. 1. The unspeakable pains they shall endure.
2. Their companions, what they shall be. 3. The duration of this miserable estate. Of the happy and blessed estate of the Godly after judge∣ment. 1. Their bodies shall be made glorious. 2. Their Soul shall be far more perfect then it was in the state of innocency. 3. Of the place where we sha be after the last judgment. 4. In whose presence we shall be. 5. Whether the Saints shall know one another. 6. Whether they shall speak one to another. 7. The varieties of joyes, that there shall be in hea∣ven. 8. The duration of this blessed estate. And lastly what the consideration of all this should teach us.
Reader, do me that favour as to correct these greater faults that appear at first view: for I have not op∣portunity to peruse it all; And cover lesser faults with the mantle of love: and let not the truth suffer through my weakness, &c. Errata. Page 5. l. 1. r. 1 Iohn 5. 7. p. 22. l. 12. r. Ier. 32. 40. p. 23. l. 29. r. Iohn 6. 27. p. 25. l. 6. r. 2 Cor 5. 19. p. 29. l. 6. r. Heb. 13. 20 p. 29. l. 16. r. Inherent. p. 36. l. 21. r. undertook. p. 48. l. 11. leave out in. p. 50. l. 5. r. use. p. 55. l. 4 r. Iohn 1. 16. p. 61. l. 31. r. Eph. 28. p. 62. add the word (that) In l. 22. p. 72. l. 17. add the word (he) p. 73. l. 26. add the word (the) p. 73. l. 12. r. (him) p 84. l. 6 r. 1 Kings 8. 56. p. 91. l. 7. r. Col. 3. 10. p. 101. l. 17. add the word (the) p. 108. l. 4. r. Facility. p. 122. l. 3. r. Tl∣tu. 3. 8. p. 143 l. 15. r misery p. 175. l. 12 r. 2 Cor. 8. 8. p. 188. l. 28. leave out the word (the) p. 229. l. 14 r. call p. 24. l. 9. r. ph. 3 14. p. 258. l. 16. r. deductions p. 260. l. 30. r. Col. 2. 12. p. 28. l 16. r. Rom. 4. 21. p. 295. r. 1 Chror. 28. 8. p. 300. l. 24. leave out the word (set) p. 306. l. 1. r. Isaiah 58. 13. p. 330. l. 22. r. other p. 343. l. 19. place and after time. p. 350. l. 17. r. Psal. 45. 13. p. 356. l. 6. r. lohn 5. 45. p. 376. l. 29. add the word (If) p. 381. l. 27. r. of God p. 385. l. 5. put (the) before sincere p. 391. l. 8. r. (and)
A LITTLE CABINET Stored with all sorts of Heavenly Varieties. Of God the Father. GOD is a Spirit, having his being in himself, and giving being to all things, Ioh. 4. 24. Exod. 3. 14. In a word, he is, 1. Without composition. 2. Infinite, Psa. 147. 5. & 145. 3. Exod. 3. 14. 3. He is eternall, Pro. 8. 20, 22, 23. Rom. 16. 26. 4. Incomprehensible, Exod. 33. 22, 23. 1 Tim. 6. 16. Isa. 66. 1. 5. Unchangable, Jam. 1. 17. Mal. 3. 6. He comprehends all things, and is comprehended
of nothing. He is without beginning and end, for by him, and in him all things begin and end, Act. 17. 28. For in him we live, and move, and have our being; he is present in all places, at all times, beholding and seeing all things, Prov. 15. 3. Psal. 139. 4. Job 9. 11. 2 Chron. 16. 9. Jer. 23. 23, 24. Two things in God. 1. There is something incommunicable, as infinite∣ness, immensity, eternity, 1 Kin. 8. 27. & 1 Tim. 1. 17. 2. There is something in God communicable, as love and mercy, Exod. 34. 6. Wisdom and Power, Job 36. 9. Perfection, glory, and blessedness, this God is to be known in the first Adam; and in the second Adam in his ordinances, and in his Saints: Now we must know God, otherwise we cannot. 1. Desire him, Joh. 4. 10. 2. If we know him not, how can we obey him. 3. If we know him not, how can we have com∣munion and fellowship with him, 1 Joh. 1. 5, 6, 7. All nature is not able to teach us what God is in himself, neither can man in nature comprehend him, Job 36. 26. 1 Tim. 6. 16. Yet may he be known by his properties and actions, God is a spi∣rituall substance, having his being of himself, infi∣nite, great and good, Ioh. 4. 24. & 8. 58. Exod. 3. 14. & 34. 6, 7. Psal. 145. 3, 8, 9. Of the Son. THE Father, Son and Spirit, are but one essence or substance, although distinguished, into Fa∣ther, Son, and Holy-Ghost, 1 Ioh. 5. 7.
In Christ two things are to be considered, 1. His Person. 2. His Offices. 1. In his Person consider the two natures, Divine and humane, 1 Tim. 2. 5. & Mat. 1. 13. He was to be God, because the greatness of the evill could not be taken away but by himself; the wrath of God being infinite, it could not be taken away by any finite thing. Again it must be finite, for it could not stand with Gods justice to punish Christ for our sins, if he had not our nature, neither could it have been satisfacti∣on for us, if it had not been in our nature and stead; so that Jesus Christ is very God, and very man, of the very substance of the Virgin Mary, begotten by the Holy-Ghost. The unity of the two natures in Christ, is not the confounding of them, for the God∣head remaineth infinite, invisible, incomprehensi∣ble, the Body finite and visible, Acts 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 26, 28, 29. As God is in Christ, so he is infinite, eternall, Almighty, wisdom, goodness, mercy, truth, Justice, equall with the Father, in being, majesty and glo∣ry, in whom the Father delights from all eternity; his own, and his only begotten Son, promised be∣fore to Adam, preached to Abraham and the Pa∣triarchs, typified in the Legall Sacrifices, and pro∣phesied of by Moses and all the Prophets, pointed at by Iohn, manifested in the flesh, Justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory, 1 Tim. 3. 16. Let us get a distinct knowledge of this Christ without us, and a sensible feeling of his vertues in us.
Of the Holy Ghost. THE Father sent forth the Son, and the Son sent forth the Holy-Ghost, yet Father, Son, and Holy-Ghost was never separated one from the other. As there is one God Father of all, and one Lord Je∣sus Christ redeemer of the world, so there is one sanctifying Spirit of grace: and as it is the office of the Father to elect, and the office of the Son to re∣deem, so it is the office of the Holy-ghost to sancti∣fie those, and only those, whom the Father hath elected, and the Son redeemed: and as the Father doth love freely, and the Son manifest that love, so the spirit doth evidence that love to, and in the souls of the Saints: the Father loves a Christian as redeemed by Christ, Christ looks upon him, and loves him as given by the Father for him to redeem: the Holy-Ghost seeing the love of the Father, in choosing him, and the love of the Son in redeeming him, he also sets his love upon him, and manifests it unto him. So that as election to life is by God the Father, and redemption by God the Son, so justification, sanctification, and restauration into the Image of God is by the Holy-Ghost. So that in the unity of the God-head there be three of one substance, power and eternity; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy-Ghost; the Father is of none other, begotten nor proceed∣ing; the Son is eternally begotten of the Father; the Holy-Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son: See Math. 3. 16, 17, & 28. 19.
2 Cor. 13. 1, 4. 1 Joh. 1. 14. And that the Holy-Ghost is God, will appear by these Scriptures, Act. 5. 3, 4. Peter reproving Annanias for lying, said, he did lie to the Holy-Ghost, and so he lyed not to men but to God: so again, Isa. 6. 9. I heard the Lord speaking, which place Paul expounds of the Ho∣ly-Ghost, Act. 28. 25. Of Gods Decrees. WHatsoever God doth in time, that did he de∣cree to do from all eternity. So that Gods decree is that whereby he hath from all eternity set down with himself whatsoever shall come to pass, Ephes. 1. 11. If any ask what things are decreed by God; I answer, (1) all things, (2) with their causes, (3) with their effects, (4) circumstances, and (5) manner of being, Act. 2. 23. & 4. 27, 28. Ephes. 1. 11. 1. This decree is most wise, Rom. 11. 33. 2. Just, Rom. 9. 13, 14. 3. Eternall, Ephes. 1. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 2. 7. 4. Unchangeable, Heb. 11. 17. 5. Most free, Rom. 9. 18. 6. The cause of all good, Iam. 1. 17. Now the parts of this decree is two-fold; first, concerning Angels; Secondly, concerning man; and of this decree concerning man, there be two parts: First Election. Secondly Reprobation: 1 Thes. 5. 9. Iudg. 4. 5. As concerning Angels, they also are of two sorts. First good. Secondly bad. First good or excellent.
1. For their nature. 2. For their gifts. 3. For their offices. 4. For their estate. Secondly, bad or evill Angels. God from all eternity hath determined of all things, together with their causes, effects, circum∣stances of place and time, means, manner and end, to the manifestation of his own glory, Psal. 99. 4. Mat. 10. 29. Rom. 9. 20, 21. & 11. 36. Pro. 16. 4. Of Election. ELection is the decree of God, of his free love and grace, and mercy, choosing some men to Faith, holiness, and eternall life, for the praise of his glorious mercy, 1 Thes. 1. 4. 2 Thes. 2. 13. Ephes. 1. 4, 5, 6. Rom. 8. 29, 30. The causes of election was none other, but his meer good will and pleasure, Luk. 12. 32. Rom. 11. 5. & 9. 11. 16. Ephes. 1. 5. 2 Tim. 1. 9. The end of election is the manifestation of the riches of his grace and mercy, Rom. 9. 23. Ephes. 1. 6. Quest. Was not Christ, and faith, and holiness, the causes of election? Answ. No, the sending of Christ, faith, holi∣ness and eternall life are only the effects of Gods love, by which he manifesteth the infinite riches of his grace: Ioh. 3. 16. 1 Ioh. 4. 10. Acts 13. 4. Titus 1. 1. Col. 1. 12. Rom. 6. 23. God eerly out of his good pleasure, without the fore-fight of any good in the creature, according
to his unlimited soveraignty, elected a certain number by name unto eternall salvation, and he hath decreed to effect all the wayes and means for them, and in them, to bring them thereto: see 2 Tim. 1. 9. & 1 Pet. 2. 8. So some are elected unto life out of all sorts of peo∣ple: Mat. 20. 16. Rom▪ 9. 24. Rev. 7. 9. That unto which God hath elected them is, 1. To the Adoption of Sons. 2. Sanctification of life here. 3. And eternall life hereafter. The first and only moving cause of Election is the good pleasure and love of God: Ephes. 1. 5. Rom. 9. 18. Ephes. 1. 11. So that Faith is not the cause, but the effect of election: Act. 13. 48. God is no respecter of persons, and yet he elect∣ed some, and left others, when he found no dif∣ference. A man may come to know in time, that he was elected before time. 1. We come to apprehend this by Faith, 1 Thes. 1. 4. 2. By our effectuall calling. 3. By our justification, 4. By our sanctification, Rom. 8. 30. 5▪ By the testimony of Gods Spirit: Rom. 8. 9, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12. 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3. 2Cor. 1. 21, 23. Of Reprobation. REprobation is the wise, just and absolute de∣cree of God, passing by, and leaving some men unto themselves, to suffer them to fall, and to
enflict upon them eternall punishment, deserved by their sins, for the praise of his unspeakable great ju∣stice, Rom. 9. 11, 13, 22. Iude 4. Ier. 6. 30. The causes of this decree is the absolute will and good pleasure of God, Mat. 11. 26. Rom. 9. 13. The end of this decree is not the condemnation of the creature,  ifestation of Gods Justice: Rom. 9. 22. Yet election and reprobation, in a sense, are not the causes of salvation and damnation, but Christ is the proper and meritorious cause of salvati∣on, and sin the proper and meritorious cause of dam∣nation. Election and reprobation, they are but pre∣cedent acts or decrees, and the causes of salvation and damnation, they come in between the causes, and the execution thereof. It is the fore-appointment of cer∣tain Angels and men, unto everlasting dishonour. God of his own free will determining to pass them by, re∣fuse, or cast off, and for sin to condemn and punish them with everlasting death: Prov. 16. 4. Exod. 9. 16. Rom. 9. 17. 2 Tim. 2. 20. Mat. 25. 41. Of the Creation. ALthough God made man of the dust of the earth, yet he could have made him of no∣thing, as he made all things else of nothing, in six daies, Heb. 11. 3. Exod. 20. 11. 1. In the first day, were created the heavens and the earth, and light, Gen. 1. 1, 2. Iob 38. 7. 2. In the next day was the out-spreading firma∣ment or heavens, the division of the waters above, from the waters beneath, Gen. 1. 6, 7. 3. In the third day there was a two-fold work,
first a gathering of the waters in one place, second∣ly a bringing forth of hearbs, Gen. 1. 9, 10, 11, 12. 4. In the fourth day was made the Sun, Moon and Stars to give light on the earth, and to be for signs and seasons, and for dayes and years, Gen. 1. 14, 15, 16, 17. 5. In the fift day, there was a twofold work, the creation of all sorts of fish in the sea, and fouls in the air, Gen. 1. 22, 23. 6. In the sixth day, there was also a twofold work, the creation of all sorts of beasts upon the earth, and the creation of man, whom the Lord made in his own Image, Gen. 1. 24, 25, 26, 27. 7. The seventh day the Lord made a Sabboth of rest, and blessed that day above all other dayes, and did also sanctifie it. The causes of this great work of creation, was first his love to man, and the shewing forth his own glory, and the fulfilling of his decree, to the end that God may be known and honored of his crea∣tures, &c. his eternall power and God-head is seen in raising all things out of nothing. By his word alone, Isa. 40. 12. Rom. 1. 20. Ier. 10. 12. & 51. 15. And his infinite wisdom is made known by them, Psal. 104. 24. Of Angels. ANgels are spiritual creatures, compleat and im∣mortall, yet finite: Heb. 1. 13, 14. Col. 1. 16. Mat. 4. 11. & 26. 53. Psal. 68. 17. Mat. 22. 30. Luke 20. 36. Heb. 1. 7. Psal. 104. 4.
There be two sorts of Angels, first good, se∣condly bad. The good Angels they praise God, worship the Son, they are heavenly messengers from the Fa∣ther to defend the faithfull, they have wrestled, eaten, been received as strangers, had their feet washed, they shall gather the elect from the four corners of the earth, they shall come with Christ to judgement, they be excellent creatures. 1. For their nature, Isaiah 6. 2. Daniel 9. 21. 2 Thes. 1. 7. 2. For their gifts, 2 Sam. 14. 17. Mat. 6. 10. Luk. 15. 10. 1 Cor. 13. 1. 3. For their offices, Dan. 7. 10. Rev. 5. 11. 4. They be excellent for their estate, Mat. 18. 10. 5. They be wise and of great understanding: 2 Sam. 14. 20. They were the first creatures that ever God made; there be also severall orders of Angels, viz. Archan∣gels, Cherubims and Seraphins; yet lay all these things together, it will appear that righteousness of An∣gels is but the righteousness of creatures; but the righteousness that the Saints are cloathed with, is the very righteousness of Christ, and in this respect the meanest Saint is more excellent, then the most glorious Angel in heaven: they are by God sent forth for the good of his people, hence they are called ministring spirits, and they minister to the Saints many wayes. In their life, by defending them from their ene∣mies; the Angels of the Lord pitch their tents about them that fear him, Psal. 34. 7. An Angel it was that slew the army of the Assy∣rians.
That delivered Peter out of prison, as also preserved Lot, Psal. 91. 11. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy wayes, Gen. 32. 5. An Angel encouraged Iacob, when he feared his brother Esau, an Angel it was, Luke 1. 30. who bid Mary not to fear, and who stood by Paul and bid him be of good cheer, Act. 27. 24. By an Angel was the incarnation of Christ foretold to the Virgin, and by a multitude of An∣gels was it proclaimed; afterwards an Angel leads Philip to expound the Scripture to the Eunuch, sets Peter at liberty to preach the Gospel, bids Cornelius send for Peter to be instructed by him, and prayes Paul to come over to Macedonia to help them; none are so nobly attended as Saints, they have a life∣guard of Angels to encompass them about; Angels are as carefull of the faithfull, as a nurse of her suck∣ing child, they bear them up in their arms, that they dash not their feet against a stone. Of Man. ALL men by nature are equally made of one earth and blood, and every poor Christian is as dear unto God as a mighty Prince. Man was wonderfully created, and more wonderfully redeem∣ed: The Lord hath assigned his heart to wisdom, the belly to avoidance, the breast to health, the li∣ver to anger, the gall to bitterness, the spleen to laughter, the kidneys to craftyness, the loyns to strength, the ribs to comeliness: the Lord having fi∣nished the excellent frame of heaven and earth; he cals a counsel, to build that excellent tabernacle Man,
into whom he breathed the spirit of life; this man did far exceed all other creatures, that amongst them all, not found any one fit, or meet to be a companion for him, or to have society with him, and so the Lord made him a help meet for him; this man was the master-piece of all Gods works, to whom the Lord did give an unlimited prerogative over the beasts of the field, the fouls of the air, and the fish of the sea, but man by his disobedience be∣came inferiour to the most despised creatures; and we, all his posterity are more miserable, and fuller of vanity then any of the unreasonable creatures: viz. other creatures by the benefit of nature can stand upon their legs, and seek after their food, when young, but man the Lord of them all must be swadled in clouts, being no way able to help himself; the young chickens as soon as ever they are hatched, can run after their dam, to seek for food, and have that wisdom to hide themselves under her wings at the fluttering of the Kite; the lambs, calves, and young costs, stand suddenly upon their legs, to seek their dams teats. But man would perish if his mo∣ther by her naturall affection did not bring the nip∣ple of her breasts to his mouth, and rock him upon her knees. Of the Soul. THE soul of man is a spirituall substance, immor∣tall and invisible, endued with memory, understanding and will; or the soul is a substance immortall, invisible, united to the body, and endu∣ed with many admirable faculties, as life, sense,
and reason; to this end principally, that God might be truly honored, and duely worshipped. Or the soul is a spirituall, invisible and immortall substance, endued with power to understand, and will: this soul is at one instant both created and uni∣ted to the body, and by the power and faculties of the soul, man is capable of happiness, or of the the cheif good, or greatest misery: or thus, the soul of the Saints is a spirituall and immortall sub∣stance, created after the Image of God, and renewed after the immortall Image of God in Christ: the soul is a real and very being as the body is, only of an higher kind; the body is of the earth, the soul is imme∣diately from God. Of Mans Fall. THE devill himself being fallen, cometh to the garden in the form of a Serpent; Adam and Eve being in Paradise, and looking upon themselves, as indeed they were, the most excellent piece of all the creation, bearing the Image of God their Crea∣tor; the Lord having left them a law, he leaves them to the fredom of their own will; the devil boards the woman thus: hath God said ye shall not eat of such a tree, it is a likely thing that the Lord cares what ye eat; what, do you think he stands upon an apple? this is the first assault, which the woman weakly re∣sisteth, and answered doubtfully, we must not eat lest we die: then the devil perceiving the woman to stagger, and the ground of her faith to shake, he plants all his pieces, and purposes for a second storm, and stands up, and saith to the woman, ye shall not
die at all; can there be any hurt in an apple? Oh silly woman! God he affirmeth and faith, ye shall die; the woman saith I must not eat, lest I die; the devil saith ye shall not die; upon this the woman did eat, and gave to her husband, and he did eat; and thus, through Satans temptations, our father and mother rebelled against our God: Oh father Adam what hast thou done! For through it (wast thou that didst sin) yet thou art not fallen alone; but we all that came of thee, as being then in thee, we are infected by thee, and so are become Satans conquest, out of whose hands there is no redempti∣on, unless the Lord Jesus Christ come down from heaven, and lead captivity captive, and open the prison doors, and let the prisoners go free, all A∣dams posterity are pertakers of his sin and misery. Of Providence. IF we look upon Gods providence in some few par∣ticulars only, we shall wonder, seeing Joseph disgraced and imprisoned, David persecuted, Christ arraigned and condemned, Paul accounted one of the worst of men, Innocent Naboth stoned, true Churches, as in Hesters time, ready to be swallowed up: Many things may fall out by Gods providence contrary to our desires, that are not contrary to our good. 1. Consider that God takes notice and knoweth all things. 2. He upholdeth and governeth, and disposeth of the world, so as it pleaseth him. 3. This providence reacheth to every thing, so
that the smallest things are governed and upheld by him. 4. That of all creatures God hath most care and respect to man. 5. We are to consider that the good or evil that befals a bad or good man or woman, is not without, but by Gods providence. 6. That God doth whatsoever pleaseth him in heaven and earth. 7. God in his ordinary providence maketh use of means, and yet he is free to work without, above, and against them as he pleaseth. 8. As the providence of God doth reach to all creatures in all things: so after a more speciall man∣ner he taketh care of his Church and people, and disposeth all things to the good thereof. God can look sowrly, and chide bitterly, and strike heavily, even when and where he loves dear∣ly, Abraham, Job, Jacob, and David, Moses, Ieremiah, Ionah, Ioseph, Paul, and many others, met with many things that were contrary to their desires and endeavours, that were not contrary to their good: God hath a continuall care over all his creatures once made, sustaining and directing them, with all that belongeth to them, and effectually disposeth of them all to good ends: Ephes. 1. 11. Rom. 11. 36. Ier. 23. 23. Col. 3. 11. Psal. 139. 2. & 119. 91.
Of Mans recovery. GOD who at first made man in his own Image, and made him Lord of the creation, endued him with wisdom, knowledge, and understanding above all other creatures, and made him for so no∣ble an end, as to serve him here, and reign with him hereafter: man soon fell from his blessed state, yet was not the love of God obliterated, but more abundantly manifested in sending his dear Son to take our nature, and yield obedience to his righte∣ous law; make satisfaction for our transgression; and to bring in an everlasting righteousness, and to make proclamation to us that his Father so lo∣ved the world, that he gave him, his only begot∣ten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should have everlasting life, Iohn 3. 16. And whosoever did come to him should in no wise be cast off, Iohn 6. 37. Adams righteousness from which he fell, was but a righteousness of the creature; but the righteousness of Christ, is the righteousness of the Creator. Adams righteousness was a mutable righteousness that might be lost, a righteousness that might be sinned away; but the righteousness of Christ is an everlasting righteousness, that can∣not be sinned away: Prov. 8. 18. Dan. 9. 24. Psal. 119. 142.
Of Vocation or effectuall calling. VOcation is Gods acquainting men with his gra∣cious purpose of salvation by Christ, and so inviteth them to come unto him, Heb. 2. 14. and so revealeth unto them his Covenant of grace, Mat. 11. 27. & 16. 17. John 14. 21. Psal. 25. 14. and so bringeth them out of darkness to light, Acts 26. 18. So God becomes in Christ, their Father; he doth not only outwardly by his word invite, but inwardly also, and powerfully by his spirit, allure and win their hearts to cleave to him inseparably un∣to salvation, Psal. 25. 14. & 65. 4. Acts 2. 39. Or effectuall calling is the work of Gods spirit in us, whereby he doth, first, convince us of our sins and misery, enlightning our minds in the knowledge of Christ, and renewing our wills, he doth perswade and invite us to embrace Jesus Christ freely tendred to us. We read that many were called to the wed∣ding, but they made their excuses, and most of those that came were compelled to come in, Luke 12. 23. the Lord doth force none by violence, but draw them by perswasions. The Gospel cals many outwardly, that after pe∣rish eternally. Our vocation depends upon Gods election, not upon our preparations: how was Paul disposed and affected, when Christ called him? God is for us, in predestinating us; God is for us, in calling us; God is for us, in justifying us; God is for us, in glorifying us; if God be thus for us, who can be against us? he hath predestinated us before we were, he hath called us, when we were averse
to him, he hath justified us when we were sin∣ners; he will glorifie us and cloath us with his own righteousness. That we may be neither drawn, enticed, or forced from our Religion, let us build upon a right foundation. IT is impossible that any soul should enjoy a firm and setled peace, whose confidence towards God is grounded upon conditionall promises, or his own best and choicest performances. For the wanting in himself, the condition of the one, and not yeild∣ing a perfect, exact, universall, perpetuall obedi∣ence to the other, the Law will be condemning, Conscience accusing, and the heart misgiving, and all proclaiming that there is still in all thy duties imperfection, something polluted, and something defective, so that thy most spirituall duties are not wound up to command, they are all tainted with disproportion to rule, and beleprosed with spots, so that it is in vain to expect a bed of rest in the barren wilderness of our own performances, for that bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it, and the covering is narrower then that a man can wrap himself in it; Oh the spots, the blots, the blemishes that are to be seen upon the face of our fairest duties! so that we may say with the Church, Isa. 64. 6. all our righteousness are as filthy rags, which if rested upon will as certainly undo us, and everlastingly destroy us, as the greatest evill that can be committed by us: the consideration of this was the cause of those words, Hos. 14. 3. Neither
will we say any more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods. For in thee the fatherless find mercy▪ Jer. 3. 23. Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the Hills, and from the multitude of mountains; truly in the Lord our God only is the salvation of Israel. Now that I my self, and others that read these lines, may be grounded, rooted and established upon the true and only foundation, is the desire, and endeavour of my heart and soul. In the ensuing Treatise, and for the accomplish∣ment of this great work, which is of highest concern∣ment, let us first endeavour to unravell, unmask and unbowel the Covenant of Grace, and for our more orderly proceeding therein, let us enquire into these particulars. 1. What is the sum and substance of this new Co∣venant. 2. With whom this Covenant was first made. 3. When this Covenant was made. 4. Whether there be any conditions of this Co∣venant, and if so, what they are. 5. Whether it be one and the same Covenant of grace that was in force before the Law, and under the Law, and under the Gospel. 6. Whether this Covenant may not be broken, as was the Covenant of works. 7. What means one should use to get into this Covenant. 8. When may a man or woman be said to be in this Covenant. 9. Wherein the Covenant of Grace and the Co∣venant of works do differ. Question 1. What is the sum and substance of
this Covenant of Grace, or New Covenant? Answ. The Covenant of Grace is called a testa∣ment or will: indeed the will of the Father, reveal∣ed to the Son, and by the Son revealed to the world, to manifest the Fathers love unto the sons and daugh∣ters of men, and testified to the world, that what he declared was the mind of God, and so sealed it with his blood, Heb. 10. 29. So that his blood that he shed, is called the blood of the Covenant; yea of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. Or, The Covenant of grace is full of sure mercies, and sweet promises, that God will give a new heart, a heart to know him, and that he will write his Law within us, put his fear into us, cause us to walk in his statutes, forgive our iniquities, cleanse us from our filthiness, be our God, and make us his people, Ezek. 36. and Jer. 31. This Covenant doth fall into these six parts, viz. 1. It is a free Covenant. 2. It is a full and compleat Covenant. 3. It is a well ordered Covenant. 4. It is a sure and firm Covenant. 5. It is a peaceable Covenant. 6. It is an everlasting Covenant. 1. First it is a free Covenant. 1. Because the foundation of it is free. 2. Because it is freely given to those that do partake of it, Isa. 42. 6, Isa. 49. 8. 3. Because there is no active condition required on our part, Jer. 31. 33, 34. 4. It is free in respect of his entring into Covenant with us, Isa. 65. 1. 5. It is free in respect of his performances of it, Mich. 7. 20.
2. It is a full and compleat Covenant, richly and plentifully stored with all sutable promises, both for this life, and that which is to come, for soul and bo∣dy, being and well being, there is some remedy in it for every malady. 3. It is a well ordered Covenant. 1. In respect of the Persons with whom it is made, and that is first with Christ, then with his seed. 2. In respect of the promises, and parts of the Covenant. First God becomes our God, then we become his people, Jer. 32. 38. 3. In respect of manifestations, he first reveals it, and then seals it by his Spirit, Ezek. 16. 8, 9. 2 Tim. 1. 10. 4. In respect of the ends of it, which is God the Father, and the Sons glory, in the riches and free∣ness of his Grace; which should caution us not to darken the Glory of free Grace. 4. It is a sure and firm Covenant, founded upon that Rock Jesus Christ, Isa. 26. 4. Rom. 4. 16. Our salvation is by Grace, to the end that the promi∣ses might be sure to all the seed, Isa. 55. 3. I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Now it is sure and firm: 1. Because it is made by an Immutable God. 2. He hath confirmed this Covenant with an oath, Heb. 6. 17, 18. 3. He hath sealed it with the blood of his Son, Heb. 13. 20. 5. Fifthly, It is a peaceable Covenant, in this Covenant he doth freely give peace to the soul, and
so keeps the soul in peace, the heart being stayed on him, Isa. 26. 3. In this Covenant there is a three-fold peace con∣veyed to the soul, Eph. 2. 14. he is our peace who hath made both one. 1. He is our peace with the Father. 2. He gives peace of Conscience, he stills and qui∣ets that. 3. He is the Author and cause of our peace with men. 6. Sixthly, It is an everlasting Covenant, Jer. 3. 40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good, but I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. The motives that did move God to make this Covenant, was his ever∣lasting love; the Righteousness upon which it is grounded, is everlasting Righteousness. In this Covenant is presented to us everlasting pardon, everlasting kindness, everlasting mercy, everlasting joy and consolation, and everlasting life and salva∣tion, all these are fully proved, by these and the like Scriptures, Psal. 105. 8. Isa. 40. 18. Heb. 8. 12. Isa. 54. 8. & 35. 10. 2 Thes. 2. 16. What shall I say more to the nature of this Co∣venant; it is sometimes called a New Covenant, some∣times it is called a better Covenant, as appears by Heb. 12. 24. compared with Heb. 8. 6. Sometimes it is called a Covenant of grace, now by a New Covenant, a better Covenant, a Covenant of grace. All serious Christians do understand the engage∣ments which God hath laid upon himself: to be∣stow on them for whom Christ died, all good tem∣porall,
spirituall and eternall blessings, so that by this God doth make himself debtor to his people, in Covenant with him, and is bound in justice to perform his word and promise. Now this Covenant is sometimes called a New Covenant, because it succeeds in the place of the other Covenant of works; and it is called a Cove∣nant of grace, because all the effects thereof do flow down to us, meerly of free Grace and favour of God, and the merits of Christ, Zach. 9. 11. In the Covenant of Grace we may find the mouth of the Law stopped, and all the accusations of Satan answered, and the justice of God ully satisfied. God will have all blessings and happiness to flow to us, through and by the Covenant of Grace. 1. That the worst of sinners may have strong ground of hope. 2. For the praise of his own glory. 3. That vain man may not boast. 4. That our mercies and blessings may be sure to us, our salvation is by grace, saith Paul, Rom. 4. 16. that the promises might be sure to us; for if it in any sense depended upon works, we could not be sure thereof. Reader, understand these four choise things, viz. 1. That Christ by the will of God gave himself a Ransome and sacrifice of a sweet smelling Savour unto God, in behalf of the Elect, Joh. 6. 7. Heb. 5. 10. & 10. 9, 10. Eph. 5. 2. 2. That this ransome was alone, and by it self a perfect satisfaction to Divine Justice for all their sin, Heb. 1. 3. When he had by himself purged our sins,
sate down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 10. 10. by the which will we are sanctified, by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, verse 14. For by an offering he hath perfected, for ever, them that are sanctified, 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Christ cleanseth us from all sin. 3. That God accepted it, and declared himself well pleased, and fully satisfied therewith, Mat. 3. 17. And loe a voice from heaven, saying, this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Isa. 4. 2. 1, 4, 6. I will give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, &c. God was so well pleas∣ed in him, that he hath Covenanted and sworn that he will never remember their sins, nor be wroth with them any more, Isa. 43. 25. 4. That by this ransome of his we are delivered from the curse of the Law: Gal. 3. 13. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. To close up all as to the nature of this Covenant. Let me tell thee the main substance of the Covenant is in these words, I will be their God, and they shall be my people, but sprinkling with clean water, taking away the stony heart, and giving a heart of flesh, all these are nothing but the fruits of the Covenant. So Christ is given for a Covenant to the people: that is the Covenant of Grace takes its being from Christ to us: Adam was all mankind, as all mankind was in Adam, in the loyns of Adam; so Christ is the Covenant, and all the Covenant is as it were in the loins of Christ, and springs to us out of him; in this sense he is the Covenant-maker, he is the Cove∣nant-undertaker, he is the Covenant-manager, he
is the Covenant-dispenser, he doth every thing in the Covenant, he makes the articles, he draws God the Father to an agreement unto the articles, Psal. 110. 3. thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power, and God is in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself: 2 Cor. 5. 9. Hence Christ is also cal∣led the Mediator of the Covenant, that is, he is one that hath the managing of it on both sides, and he alone is able to bring both sides together, and make up a conclusion, and thus Christ is the Covenant, and the Mediator of the Covenant, &c. The second thing to be enquired into, is with whom this Covenant was first made. THis Covenant was not made with us, but with Christ for us; God did not immediately make this Covenant with us, we were children of disobedi∣ence and of wrath, who were not capable of any such Covenant and conditions, but it was made with Christ for us, that upon the making of his soul an offering for sin, he would give unto his seed eternall life, Zech. 9. 11. As for thee also by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water: Adam lost his righteousness▪ the foundation of the first Covenant: But the righte∣ousness of Christ the second Adam, can never be lost, it being grounded upon better promises, Heb. 8. 6. The Covenant made with Christ, hath these pro∣mises, Gen. 12. 3. In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed, 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the promises of God, are Yea and Amen in him; so then this Cove∣nant
was made with him actively, as a person that performed all the conditions upon which the pro∣mises were grounded; but with us passively, as the Persons to whom the benefits of these promises do belong: if Christ merited nothing for himself, but wholly for the Elect of God, then all the promi∣ses made to him do belong to them; or the Cove∣nant which was made with him as Mediator, doth belong to us, for whom he doth mediate. Now the parties concerned in this Covenant, are first God the Father, and Jesus Christ the Mediator, and the Church or body of Christ, for whom he was to me∣diate. Now this Covenant being made with Christ, he as a Surety is bound to perform and see perform∣ed, all the duties that God requires of believers; so he was arrested, and brought to the bar of Gods ju∣stice, where he is convicted, adjudged, and ar∣raigned as a sinfull transgressor, so he suffered the uttermost rigor of the Law, and not one grain of justice abated him, nor a farthing of the debt for∣given him, no nor so much as one sin unaccounted for or blotted out, till satisfaction was first made and given. But after the full account and perfect payment, this Surety Christ Jesus pleaded for a dismission, and discharge, and so got a generall discharge, acquit∣tance, and releasment, under the King of Heavens hand and seal for us, &c. If any man desire further satisfaction, whether this Covenant was first made with Christ for us, yea or no. Let him consult with these precious Scrip∣tures, Psalm 89. 24, 27, 28. Hebr. 13. 20. Isaiah 42. 6. Isa. 55. 3. Zach. 6. 13. Isa. 50. 56. Zach. 9. 11. Isa. 53. 10.
Now if any one ask, what were the conditions between the Father and the Son, when this Cove∣nant was made, they are as followeth. First see what God the Father promised unto Christ on his part. 1. That he would anoint him, and fill him with the Spirit above all others, Heb. 1. 9. Isa. 11. 2. 2. That he would prepare him a body to sacrifice for sins, Heb. 10. 5, 10. 3. That he would uphold him, and strengthen him, that he should not be ashamed by the things he should suffer, Isa. 42. 6. & 50. 5, 7. 4. That he would justifie and glorifie all his seed, Isa. 50. 8. Joh. 17. 22, 24, Isa. 53. 11. 5. That he should see and enjoy the travell of his soul, and the purchases of his blood, Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 7. 6. That he should have all power in heaven and in earth given him, till all his enemies were made his footstool, Ephes. 5. 25, 27, Matthew 28. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 28. Next let us examine what Christ did perform or promise to perform on his part, 1. To become a Mediator, Surety and Saviour for all those that his Father should give him, Heb. 8. 6. Heb. 7. 22. Act. 13. 23. Ioh. 17. 11, 12. Ephes. 1. 10. Col. 1. 20. 1 John 2. 1. 2. To take upon him the nature of man, and so to become flesh, in his Fathers appointed time, Gal. 4. 4. Mat. 11. 27. John 17. 4. 3. That he would glorifie his Father, by keep∣ing, revealing and doing his will, John 15. 10. John 6. 39.
4. That he would suffer and satisfie personally and perfectly for the sins of men, Luke 24. 46. Hos. 13. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 24. 5. That he would bring himself, and all those gi∣ven him by his Father unto glory, Heb. 10. 14. Joh. 14. 4, 9. Iohn 10. 18. The word of God doth contain the Articles of this Covenant; those that desire further satisfacti∣on, search the Scriptures, wherein you shall find that Christ did willingly undertake this work, Heb. 10. 7, 9. and did faithfully discharge it, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, &c. so our reconciliation was wrought by the Son, Isa. 61. 1. Iohn 1. 3. Iohn 5. 36, 37. Col. 1. 16, 17. Hebr. 1. 3. Iohn 5. 17. & 3. 17. and seal∣ed by the Holy-Ghost, Ephes. 1. 13. & 4. 30. The third thing to be enquired into, is when this Covenant was made with us. THere be three set times wherein God may be said to make this Covenant: viz. 1. Immediately after the fall of Adam, Gen. 3. 15. the seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head; these few words comprehended the sum of all Law and Gospel, and the Covenant therein contained: Tit. 1. 2. in hope of eternall life, which God that can∣not lie promised before the world began, 2 Tim. 1. 9. who hath saved us, and called us with an holy clling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Iesus before the world began. 2. This Covenant in a sense may be said to be
made with us at the death of Christ, because there∣by all the benefits were merited and procured for us: so this Covenant came to be confirmed by the death of the Testator, Heb. 9. 16, 17, 18. Hence his blood is called the blood of the everlasting Cove∣nant, Heb. 11. 20. And the blood of the New Te∣stament, Mat. 26. 28. 3. This Covenant may be said to be made with us, when God doth confirm upon us the benefits which are therein promised, which are many; I will instance but in three. 1. There is the matter and blessing of the Co∣venant on Gods part, in these words, I will be their God, and they shall be my people, Ier. 31. 33. 2. In this Covenant Christ doth first give us grace imputed, and then grace: inherit all the bene∣fits of the Covenant, are the fruits and effects of Christs death. 3. There is also the promise that God will work out the manifestation, by which man shall see his interest in this Covenant, and his right and title to all the blessings thereof. Now if we would yet farther know when this Co∣venant was made with Christ for us, let us weigh that text, Ephes. 1. 4. We are chosen in him, before the foundation of the world. Now if Election be be∣fore the foundation of the world (sure it is) then also by the same ground the Covenant or promise was made before the foundation of the world, for the word doth prove the one as well as the other; these promises were made first to Christ on our be∣half, before they are made to us, because the whole work of our redemption and salvation, was trans∣acted
between the Father and the Son, before the foundation of the world, and is afterwards reveal∣ed to us in due time, as is evident, Tit. 1. 2. 2 Tim. 19. The fourth thing to be enquired into is, whether there be any conditions of this Covenant on our part, and if so, what those conditions are. WHat this Covenant is, with whom it was made, and when it was made, hath been laid down before: now it follows in order to exa∣mine whether there be any conditions on our part; and for answer unto which, let me give my judge∣ment, viz. In this Covenant the Lord doth bequeath grace and glory on no other condition, but the death of the Testator, that is, Christ Jesus: as the first Co∣venant was built upon the righteousness of the first Adam; So the second is built upon the righteous∣ness of the second Adam: and it will plainly appear in this Covenant of grace, that there is no condition on our part to entitle us to the blessing of it; it is true, to our head Christ this Covenant was conditio∣nall, though to us it is free; to him it was a Cove∣nant of works, hence Christ is called the Mediator, Witness and Surety of this new Covenant, and that this Covenant is without conditions on our part, will appear more fully by these ensuing reasons. 1. Because a Covenant of free grace cannot stand with conditions, for if it had conditions it would not be of grace, for grace is not grace, if it be not
every way free, Rom. 11. 6. and if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace, &c. 2. Because to give a thing freely and condi∣otinally are contradictions; and to say there is conditions as to us, is to ecclipse the grace of God, and to open a door for vain man to boast. So that the whole glory of our justifiction and salvation ought to be given to the grace of God, and to the merits of Christ. If either of them did depend, and were obtained by works and conditions performed by us, it would not be of grace. 3. Because that justification by grace, with∣out conditions on our part, is the life and soul of the Gospel, Galatians 1. 6, 7. I marvell that you are moved from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel, which is not another, but there be some that would pervert the Gospel: how can there be another Gospel, and yet not another Gospel? First it is not a∣nother, because it is not possible there should be two Gospels; yet another Gospel, because men did turn it aside in point of justifica∣tion. 4. Because if any qualification or grace in us be a condition, Faith must needs be the condition, or one of the conditions; but if faith should be the con∣dition of the Covenant of grace, then it differ∣eth nothing from the Covenant of works, for it is as hard a thing for a man to believe, as it is to keep the whole Law. Again, Faith cannot be the condition of the Cove∣nant,
because we obtain it by the same means we obtain all other good things else, to wit by the righ∣teousness of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Ephes. 1. 3. Rom. 8. 32. Ezek. 36. 25. Jer. 31. 31, 34. Again, Faith and repentance, justification and sanctification, are things purchased by Christ for us, and freely given to us, and are the effects and conse∣quences of the Covenant, as doth appear, Ezek. 36. 27. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40. Hos. 2. 18, 19, 20. It is true, Faith and repentance are means of our enjoying the comforts of the Covenant, but not the conditions flowing out of the nature of the Cove∣nant; for every means is not a condition, though every condition be a means; so that we are not justi∣fied by faith, as the condition of the Covenant, but organically and instrumentall. So that all the blessings of the new Covenant are called gifts, not conditions, Rom. 5. 17, 18. com∣pared with Rom. 6. 23. and these are gifts that are given freely, 1 Cor. 2. 12. we chuse him, because he first chuseth us; and we love him, because he first loveth us: we cannot say God is our God, till he doth first say, we are his people; we cannot say we will run after him, till he doth first draw us; nei∣ther can we bring forth fruit, unless we abide in the Vine; nor purifie our selves as he is pure, unless we have this hope in us; so that we may not expect the effects before the cause, nor the light before the sun, or heat before the fire. 5. There be no conditions in this Covenant, be∣cause it works and effects in us all things requi∣red of us. Now faith, repentance and obedience doth de∣scribe
the Persons that are saved, but not the terms or conditions upon which they do obtain salvation; that interpretation of any Scripture, that doth in∣volve a contradiction, is not to be admitted; but to say faith is the condition of the Covenant, is an ex∣press contradiction. Ob. But are there not conditions required on our part? pray read these two Scriptures Psal. 25. 14. The secrets of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will shew them his Covenant, Isa. 55. 3. Incline your ear and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live. And I will make an everlasting Cove∣nant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Ans. It is true, in these Scriptures there are three things required of us. 1. To fear him. 2. To incline our ear and come. 3. To hear, and our soul shall live. But are not all these three things promised to us in the Covenant? and doth not God by his Spirit, work these things, with many more, in us? is there any one thing required of us, that he hath not pro∣mised to work in us? surely no. Ob. But if faith be not an active, it is a passive condition. Ans. I have heard some say so, but could never see a man able to prove it to be so. Object. Some say that this Covenant is conditio∣nall, no otherwise, then in respect of Gods order and method, in bestowing the blessings of it upon us. Ans. In this sense it may be granted (it is so) still keeping close to this, that not in a proper, but in an
improper sense, the Covenant may be said to be con∣ditionall; for as hath been said before, the Covenant of grace and life by Christ is every way free, and unconditionally on mans part, else how doth it differ from a Covenant of works? Rom. 11. 6. And if by grace, then it is by gift, for grace and gift you must understand are all one: grace is nothing but the fa∣vour of God, freely given, and of his own accord communicated; and if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace, &c. If you bring grace unto works, or works unto grace, ei∣ther the one or the other, or both, are made void; as much as to say, these two things are inconsistent, they cannot stand together; that we should partake of Christ through grace, and works both, they will not stand together; grace must stand alone, or works alone, for one doth directly stand in opposition to the other; and the Scripture is plain and clear, that the Father expects nothing of men, no qualification, or spirituall disposition, before or upon the commu∣nicating of his Son; the condition on our part is to receive it, and to improve it, and walk worthy of it, and when we come short herein, we are said to break Covenant on our part, Psal. 44. 17. & Isa: 24. 5. and in Deut. 29. 25, &c.
The fifth thing to be enquired into is, whether it be one and the same Covenant of grace that was in force before the Law, and under the Law, and under the Gospel. THere is but one Covenant of grace, and a three∣fold administration of that Covenant; the one before the Law, the other under the Law, the third under the Gospel. 1. Before the Law the promise of grace was, that notwithstanding man had thus rebelled against God, yet the seed of the woman, which was the Lord Je∣sus Christ, should bruise the head of the Serpent, Gen. 3. 15. 2. This Covenant was given or published by Mo∣ses, and made with the Jews, till Christs resurrecti∣on, being placed in ceremonies, types, figures and shadows, all pointing at the substance that was for to come, all the Laws and Ordinances re∣maining in full force and vertue; for he that did but neglect circumcision, was to be cut off from the Is∣real of God, Gen. 17. 14. 3. This same Covenant in the dayes of Christ and his Apostles is renewed, and the substance of the Covenant more fully opened and cleared, where∣by more persons are renewed, and more graces be∣stowed, being alwaies to endure one and the same; hence it is called a new Covenant, Heb. 9. 13. Jer. 31. 31. Now it is the same Covenant of grace both in the old and new testaments, only the difference stands thus.
1. It is larger in the New Testament, even ex∣tending to the Gentiles, and not confined to the Jews as then it was, 1 Thessal. 4. 5. Ephes. 2. 11. & 2. 12. 2. It is plainer now, then it was in types and sha∣dows, blood of beasts, incense, washing with wa∣ter and other rudiments; so that now things are seen more plainly in their substance, then in paint∣ing or prospective glasses. 3. It is stronger, this makes perfect, the other could not, being weak and unprofitable, and there∣fore in that administration it is now disanulled, Heb. 8. 7, 13. 4. It is more firm, being confirmed with an oath, and by the death of Christ. 5. It gives more knowledge, that in comparison of the Law, they shall not need to teach one another, Heb. 8. 10. 6. It hath a better Mediator, even Christ, who by his intercession reconciled the disagreeing par∣ties, and undertaken for both sides; on Gods part, that these and these things shall be done, which he hath promised; on our part, to give satisfaction by his own death, and make us obedient to his Father. Oh that God should ever enter into Covenant with us, so sinfull, vile and miserable! Covenants make unequall persons equall, as Jonathan and Da∣vid; the Lord abaseth himself, when he looks thus upon things below, as in Psal. 113. 6. Although the Covenant of grace be the same then and now, yet there is a difference in regard of the manner of dispensation and revealing it: being se∣verall waies propounded, according to the severall
times, ages, states and conditions of the Church: delivered one way, before the coming of Christ, and another way afterward. And therefore in regard of the old way and manner of administring of it, it is called the old Covenant; and in regard of the new manner of dispensing it, its called the new Covenant; the same Covenant is therefore called both new and old, Heb. 8. 8, 13. Quest. Wherein stands the difference between the old and new administration of this Covenant of grace? Answer 1. One more burthensome, another more easie. 2. In regard of the extent of the dispensation; the one to the Jews only, the other to all Nations. 1. The Covenant in the former dispensation was more burthensome, as will appear by these things. 1. The burthen of their costly sacrifices, sutable to the quality of the person, and nature of the sin. 2. They had long and tedious journeys to Jeru∣salem, thrice a year, Deut. 16. 16. 3. They were restrained from many liberties which we now enjoy; we are allowed many crea∣tures for meat, which they might not eat, as the Hare, Swine, &c. Differences of meats is now taken away. 4. They were tyed to the observation of many daies, new moons, and ceremonies, which we are freed from. 2. The second difference is in regard of the ex∣tent of it in the old dispensation, the Covenant of grace pertained to the Jews only, Rom. 9. 4.
Rom. 3. 2, &c. but now under the Gospel-dispen∣sation this Covenant extends to all Nations, or at least some of all Nations; whosoever will, saith the Scripture, let him come and take of the water of life freely, Rev. 22. 17. Isa. 55. 1, 2. The sixth thing to be enquired into is, whether this Covenant may not be broken, as the first Covenant of works was. 1. AS this Covenant was not made with us, but with Christ for us, so it cannot be broken by us; and as it was not made for our good works, so it cannot be disanulled by our sins, because the Lord hath founded it upon his own immutable word and promise, which he hath confirmed by an oath; hence it is called an everlasting Covenant, because his everlasting love caused him to make it, and because it ceaseth not when we are in glory, for our con∣tinuance in glory is promised in this Covenant. 2. This Covenant cannot be broken, because the righteousness upon which it is founded is an everlast∣ing righteousness, and everlasting pardon, Heb. 8. 12. And everlasting kindness, and everlasting mer∣cy, and everlasting joy, and everlasting consolati∣on, 2 Tim. 2. 16, 17. Isa. 35. 10. Psal. 100. 5. Dan. 9. 24. Jer. 31. 3. 3. This Covenant cannot be broken, because he that made it is an everlasting God, the motives that did move him to make it was everlasting love, and the Righteousness upon which it is grounded, is, as is said before, everlasting, yea all the legacies and blessings
thereof are everlasting: to have and to hold salva∣tion by Christ our head is more secure and lasting then in our own keeping; God will no more trust us with our selves, nor with our righteousness, by which we shall stand before him. For if when we were truly good, and had no cor∣ruption nor sin in us, we did then fall, much more should we do so now, were not Christ our under∣taker; he will keep it for us, and us for it, so that now the promises of righteousness, life and salvation, are sure to all the seed of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Rom. 4. 16. 4. This Covenant cannot be broken, because the Lord hath sworn it shall not, Isa. 54. 9, 10. For as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I will not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee, for the mountains shall de∣part, and the hils be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mer∣cy on thee. Object. Do we not read in Scripture, that the Lord will break Covenant with the people that break Covenant with him, viz. Ezek. 16. 59. Zach. 11. 10. Isa. 24. 5. Answ. 1. Consider, that as this Covenant was not at first made with us, so it cannot at last be bro∣ken by us, and as it was not made for our good works, so it cannot be disanulled for our sins; and for answer to the three places of Scripture, in this objection alleadged, let us consider them with an un∣biassed judgement; the first Scriptures is that in Ezek. 16. 59. For thus saith the Lord God, I will even
deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath, in breaking the Covenant. Now compare these words, with 60. and 62. verses, and you will find, that although man doth break the Covenant on his part, yet God will not break Covenant on his part, nevertheless saith the Lord, I will remember my Covenant with thee, and establish my Covenant with thee, saith the Lord. The next Scripture is that in Zach. 11. 10. And I took my staff, even beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my Covenant which I had made with all the people. For answer unto this, consider, the people often∣times broke it on their part, as doth appear, Lev. 26. 44. Deut. 31. 16, 20. Judg. 2. 20. Jer. 11. 10. & 31. 32. But for all that, God never did nor would break it on his part totally, see Judg. 2. 1. Psal. 89. 34. Jer. 33. 20, 21. Exek. 16. 60, 62. And this Covenant here doth relate more immediately to that peace which he hath granted to his Church, that she should be no more assaulted nor molested by any strange Nation, &c. and so for that place, Isa. 24. 5. the Covenant was broken but on the peoples part, as appears by the express words of the text. What shall I say more, the old Covenant was for to last but for a time, till the time of reformation, Heb. 9. 4. but the new Covenant is to last for ever; this makes much against that dangerous opinion of those that slight and neglect the ordinances of the Gospel, under a pretence of setting up Christs Kingdom.
The seventh thing to be enquired into is, what means should one make use of to get into this Covenant of Grace. THE safest and speediest way to get into this Covenant, is to rest upon Christ alone, and to fetch the comfort of our justification from his perfect obedience, only we may not put our selves or others upon the evidencing of our justification by our election, nor our election by our justifica∣tion, but both justification and election by a sted∣fast reliance upon Gods free grace and love held forth in absolute promises. 1. The first means, Let a man get up, and keep up a holy fear of God upon his heart, and then thou comest under the promise, Psal. 25. 14. The secrets of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will shew them his Covenant. 2. Consider what a pickle poor man was in, even as bad as thy self, when God did first enter into Co∣venant with him, or when God did manifest him∣self to be in Covenant with him, see Ezek. 16. from verse 2. to the 11. Luk. 10. 30, 33, 34. It is an apparent truth unto all experienced Chri∣stians, that when God first enters into Covenant with men, he finds them in their blood, and in their infidelity. 3. Means to get into this Covenant, endeavour to believe, for although faith be not an instrument to procure it, yet it is to receive justification and salvation, which is freely given us by Jesus Christ,
and so peace in the soul doth come by believing: God is the Author and giver of peace, Christ the Prince and promiser of peace, the Spirit the worker and sealer of peace, and the Gospel the word and ground of peace, and the Ministers the messengers of peace, and this blessed Covenant is sometimes cal∣led a Covenant of peace: but if thou endeavour to believe and canst not, consider, God doth not take men into Covenant because they believe and are ho∣ly, but that they might believe and be holy; in this Covenant he doth promise faith and holiness to men, and through it he doth convey it to them, and this Covenant being without conditions, it doth give a man the greatest encouragement to believe, and cast himself into the arms of Christ, and to put on a strong confidence of inheriting the precious promi∣ses; seeing that in their accomplishment, they de∣pend not upon works and conditions on our part, let us then do as Benhadads servants did, 1 King. 20. 31, 32, 33. Yea let us resolve with the woman of Canaan, not to be beaten off with any discouragements; this act of faith is stiled a taking the kingdom of heaven by force, Job 13. 15. though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, see 2 King. 7. 4, 5. 4. Dwell much upon the consideration of those promises that God hath made, viz. To bring men into the bonds of the Covenant, and to work a wil∣lingness, and an ability to receive what he gives: to believe what he saith, and to observe and do what he commandeth. What shall I say more, would we indeed get into this Covenant? then the work we have to do is two∣fold.
1. To get a Title to Gods love. 2. To get assurance that we have a title: the first is done by consideration and believing: the second is done by examination and diligence to make our cal∣ling and election sure. Object. But you have said before, that there is no condition of this Covenant on mans part: and now you put men upon the use of means to get into this Covenant: now I would fain know what difference there is between means and conditions, are they not as one? Answ. Every means is not a condition, though eve∣ry condition be a means. Now Gods order and method in bestowing the blessings of the Covenant upon a person, or a peo∣ple, is in the use of means, in Exek. 36. there are some sixteen promises one after another, made to the people without any condition on the peoples part. Be it known saith the Lord to them, not for your sakes, but for my own names sake, I will do this for you, but I will hand these mercies to you in the use of means, verse 37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. And surely mistaken is Mr. Samuel Richardson, that saith in his book called the Saints desire, pag. 46. that there is no means to be used by man to get an interest in this Covenant, or to partake of it. 1. Break your Covenant with your old sins and your lusts, or else God will not enter into Covenant with you, Mat. 6. 24. 2. Come with an humble submission to yeild up thy self to the obedience of the will of God. If
any will be my disciple, he must deny himself. 3. Come before God in the name of a Mediator, and make a Covenant with him by his sacrifice, Psal. 50. 5. 4. By faith look at the gracious invitations of God, and consider his readiness and willingness to enter into Covenant with us, 2 Chron. 30. 8, 9. John 6. 39. The eighth thing to be enquired into is this, when may a man or woman be said to be in this Covenant. 1. A Man or woman, old or young, is then pro∣perly, actually and expresly in Covenant with God, when God hath come to it in a promise of the Gospel, so that the soul doth feel it self un∣der the power of the promise, then it begins to know he is in Covenant; so the Lord in and through this Covenant, brings a poor soul to see, and seeing, to admire the superabundant riches of his free grace and love, and so humbly and thankfully embraceth the same: and the heart thus wrought upon, exceed∣ingly desires that such kindnesses of God might not slip out of mind, but that the consideration of this soul-ravishing, heart-melting grace and loving kindness might carry him forth stedfastly to believe, and dearly to love, cheerfully to honour and obey this God of mercy in soul, body and spirit, so long as the Sun and Moon endureth: so the soul begins to be carried forth out of self unto God, and in God alone finds rest and satisfaction.
2. Faith and works doth evidence our being in the Covenant; faith doth evidence it to our selves, and works to others, but faith and works do evi∣dence no otherwise then organically, as it is an or∣gan or instrument by which we do appre∣hend it. 3. Then may a man be said to be in the Cove∣nant, when he doth find his soul carried forth to a secret resting, relying, leaning, staying and hang∣ing upon Christ alone for life and happiness. 4. A man may be said to be in this Covenant, when he doth find within this frame of spirit. Oh that I had more of God, that I were filled with Christ: oh that I had his righteousness to cover me, his grace to pardon me, his power to support me, his wisdom to counsell me, his loving kindness to refresh me, and his happiness to crown me. 5. Again, a man may be said to be in this Cove∣nant, when in some good measure a soul doth come to see that Christ did legally interpose and put him∣self between God and man, to mediate and inter∣cede for them, and so voluntarily became obedient unto his Fathers will, and by undergoing, bearing and suffering the warth and curse due to him for his sins. And so Christ took away the sins, reconciled him to God, redeemed him from the Law, and de∣livered him from the wrath to come. 6. A man may be said to be in this Covenant, when he doth freely accept of free pardon, and a surety under the Gospel: Gospel grace neglected is the great condemnation of the world: how mindfull should we be of the Apostles counsell? Receive not the grace of God in vain, that is, receive it not
only in word, but in power, as it is a quickning spirit, or spirit and life; not begetting a form only of a profession, but as changing and transforming into the Image of God, and altering the inward dis∣position of the heart. 7. A man may be said to be in this Covenant, when he finds in himself a conscientious improve∣ment of the word of God, for self purifying: the word hath a purifying faculty in it, John 15. 3. Ye are clean through the word that I have spo∣ken to you: now the word doth purifie these seve∣rall wayes. 1. As an antidote against sins, Psal. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. 2. As a lamp discovering the spot, Rom. 7. 7. I had not known sin but by the Law. 3. As a star conducting to Christ the fountain of purifying, 1 Joh. 2. 1, 2. Zach. 13. 1. 4. As a rule according to which we are heedfully to order our conversation, Psal. 119. 9. wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way, but by taking heed thereto, according to thy word? 5. As a motive in the precious promises of it, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of esh and spirit.
The ninth thing to be considered of, is this, wherein doth the Covenant of grace, and the Covenant of works differ. FOR answer hereunto, consider the vast diffe∣rence between the Law and the Gospel, viz. the Law affords not a drop of grace, it bestows no∣thing freely: the language of the Law is, do thou and live; if not die; no work no wages; but in the Gospel, the yoak of personall obedience is tran∣slated from believers to their surety; there is no∣thing for them to pay; all that they have to do, is to hunger and feed; their happiness is free, in re∣spect of themselves, though costly to Christ, who by his merits hath purchased for them whatsoever they would obtain, and by his Spirit worketh in them whatsoever he requires. The First Covenant of works is old, the Cove∣nant of grace is new: the first is the Law of the let∣ter, the second is the Law of the Spirit; the first is a Law of death, the second is a Law of life: the first was wounding, the second is healing; the first a naturall law, the second a spirituall law; the first a law of types, the second a law of substance: the first was to be done away, the second is to continue; the first a Covenant of earthly blessings, the second a Covenant of spirituall blessings: the first was to stand for a time, the second was to stand for ever. Again, this Covenant of grace doth differ from the Covenant of works in the universality and large extent of it: the first Covenant requires a righte∣ousness
in us, the second doth give and accept of a righteousness which is anothers, and imputed to us. It is true, that Religion for the substance thereof, was ever one and the same, and unchangeable, as appears, Heb. 13. 8. Ephes. 4. 5. Jude 3. Acts 26. 22. Tit. 1. 1, 2. And so the word of God written by Mo∣ses and the Prophets, did contain whatsoeever was needfull for the salvation of the Israelites, Deut. 4. 2. & 12. 32. Psal. 1. 2. Mal. 4. 4. Hos. 8. 12. Luk. 10. 26. But the in New Testament our Saviour made known unto his Disciples, the last and full will or Covenant of his heavenly father, Iohn 14. 26. & 15. 15. & 16. 13. & 1. 18. and what they received of him, they faithfully preached unto the world, Acts 20. 27. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2. 3. Gal. 1. 8. 1 John 1. 3. And the sum of what they preached is commit∣ted to writing, and left upon record for our learn∣ing, Act. 1. 1, 2. Joh. 20. 31. 1 Joh. 5. 13. Act. 8. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 2. Rom. 10. 8, 9, 10. The difference between the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace, may be reduced to these three heads. 1. The first was a ministration of the letter, a naked Commandment, carrying with it no aptness, disposition, or ability to keep it. 2. It breeds enmity and fear; looking on God as a hard taskmaster, and so fils the soul full of terrours. 3. It is a ministration of death, namely by the curse, to them that keep it not. But the Covenant of grace is a ministration of the Spirit, requiring no more then what it pro∣miseth
to give. In a word, it is a ministration of the Spirit, of love, freedom, and righteousness, and of life; for that it shews the guilty a righte∣ousness to satisfie the Law, and the way to obtain a Pardon. 4. The first Covenant was made altogether upon condition on both sides; the condition on Gods part was, they should live; the condition on mans part was, he must do this: but in this Covenant there is not any condition, I mean in the Covenant of grace. True it is, could we justifie the Law by keeping it; the Law would justifie us, in and by that obe∣dience to it. But now the Law is become weak and unable to justifie any man, though powerfull and strong enough to condemn every man. 5. In the Covenant of works a man is left to stand by his own strength; but in the Covenant of Grace, God undertakes to keep us through faith to salvation. 6. In the Covenant of works, Gods highest end is the glorifying of his Justice; and in the Cove∣nant of grace, it is to glorifie his grace. The voice of the Covenant of works, is like the first speech of Nathan to David, Thou art the man; the voice of the Covenant of grace is like his after-speech, The Lord hath put away thy sin: the voice of the Cove∣nant of works, is, the soul that sinneth shall die, Ezek. 18. In the Covenant of grace, he saith, Ezek. 33. 11. As I live saith the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner. 7. There is help for such as break the Covenant
of works, but no help for such as make void the Co∣venant of grace. The tenth thing to be enquired into is this, what is Gods oraer and method, that he generally makes us of, to bring his people into the bond of the Covenant, and to bestow the blessings of the Covenant upon them. FIrst, in the making up of the Covenant between God and us: God is the first with us, he is the first mover, he begins with us, before we begin with him: we should never seek to be in Covenant with him, if he did not first allure us, and draw us, invite us, and intreat us, Ezek. 20. 37. I will bring them (saith the Lord) into the bond of the Covenant: it is the Lord that brings them, they do not first of∣fer themselves. 1. God prepares his own way for entring into Covenant with us, and then he finisheth the work, and in this preparation he doth these three things. 1. He breaks us of our Covenant with hell and death, and makes us sensible of our undone estates, & makes us to see that we are without God, without Christ, without hope, that we are not under mercy, that we are not as yet of his people, Eph. 2. & 1 Pet. 2. 2. He opens to us his mind and will, shewing himself willing to receive us to grace, and to enter into a new Covenant with us, yet again to take us to be his people, and he to be our God: and so he goes into the streets, and open places, as it is in Prov. 1. 20, 21. and there makes publike procla∣mation: ho, every one that will, come ye to me,
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, Isa. 55. 3. Isa. 65. 1. and if we come not at this first invitation, then he comes and beseecheth us to be re∣conciled to him▪ 2 Cor. 5. 20. and speaks to us as pittying us, Jer. 3. 12. and lamenting over us, Ezek. 33. 11. and all this he doth to perswade us to come and strike a Covenant with him. 3. By the hearing of these promises and offers of grace, the Lord usually scattereth some little seeds of faith in the hearts of those that he will bring unto himself; which seeds being sown, do quickly put forth, and act towards the Covenant, before by the Father tendred, and layes hold of it, as we see in Lydia, the Jaylor, Zacheus, &c. So by an act of faith, we come to close with the Covenant, re∣vealed and offered freely unto us, by accepting the grace offered, resting upon God for all the mer∣cy which he hath promised; and then taking God to be a God over us, submitting to his government and authority, to command us, and to rule us in all things according to his own will; these two things faith doth, and so takes hold of the Covenant more firmly, in the same way and order as God offers it. First God makes himself known to us as a God of mercy, gracious, long suffering, pardoning iniqui∣ty, transgression and sin, and so offers himself to be reconciled to us, though we have rebelled against him, promising to be a Father unto us, and to ac∣cept of us in his beloved, as his sons and daughters: and thus is the Covenant made up between God and us; and the soul now begins to say in it self, I that was an enemy, he hath now reconciled unto himself; I that was in times past, without God, without Christ,
without promise, without Covenant, without hope, and none of Gods people—Yet now I have God for my God, Christ is my peace, and I am now become one of Gods people, the Covenant of his peace now belongeth to me, and the Lord is become my salvation, saying as Jacob, Gen. 33. 11. The Lord hath had mercy on me, therefore I have enough, I have all that my heart hath desired. The Lord doth acquaint the soul with those absolute pro∣mises, which shew unto us the only cause of our salvation, even free grace and no other thing. Se∣condly, they are a foundation for the faith of adhe∣rence or dependance to stay upon, they yield a singular encouragement to a poor dejected soul, that finds nothing in it self but sin and misery, with hope to cast it self upon the free grace of God, see∣ing he looks at nothing in us, for which he should save us: there be two acts of faith, one of adherence or dependancy, another of assurance; there be also two kinds of promises, absolute, and conditionall: mark now how these do fit and answer one to the o∣ther, the absolute promises to the faith of adherence: the conditionall to the faith of assurance. Now faith helps us to close with the Covenant, and ena∣bles us to walk with God according to the Covenant which we have made; there is a keeping of Covenant required of us, as well as a making a Covenant with God, Gen. 17. 7, 9. Psal. 50. 5. The Saints are said to make a Covenant with God, but in Psal. 103. 18. they are said to keep his Covenant; so there is a making and a keeping of Covenant, and both by Faith.
The eleventh thing to be enquired into is, what are the blessings and benefits of this Covenant to us-ward. Answ. WE can never know the things which are given to us of God, but by knowing of the Covenant, which conveys all the blessings from God to us. O let us lift up our hearts, to look for great things, great blessings, such as the great God hath promised; the blessings are su∣table to our wants, the things of the Covenant are great things, Hos. 8. 12. The Covenant is as full of blessings as of letters, or syllables, and more; it is a rich storehouse, reple∣nished with all manner of gifts and graces, spirituall and temporall; it is as a tree of life to those that feed upon it, they shall live for ever; it is a Well of salvation, it is a fountain of good things, to satisfie every thirsty soul, Zach. 13. 1. it is a treasure full of goods, as Deut. 28. 12. here is unsearchable riches, unspeakable mercy, which can never be fathomed, or emptied: all these blessings of the Covenant are wrapped up in the promises of it, every promise of grace containing a blessing; as every threatning of the Law contains a curse. Now the promises and blessings of the Covenant are of two sorts: First, of things spirituall and eternall. Secondly, of things tem∣porall; the spirituall blessings of the Covenant are cheifly comprehended in these places of Scripture, Jer. 31. 31, 33. Ezek. 36. 25, 26, 27, 28. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40. Gen. 17. 7. God in Trinity enters into Covenant with us.
1. The Father enters into Covenant with us, and promiseth to be a Father to us; hence saith the Lord, Exod. 4. 22. Israel is my son, my first born, and Jer. 31. 9, 20. is Ephraim my dear son, is he my pleasant child? so the Lord hath a care to pro∣vide both heavenly and earthly inheritance for his children: he hath also a care to nurture and instruct them in his wayes, Deut. 32. 10. 2. Christ the son enters into Covenant with us, and speaks to us, as in Isa. 43. 1. Thou art mine: and Hosea 13. 14. I will redeem them, I will ransome them. Oh death, I will be thy death; thou hast destroyed my people, but I will destroy thee; so he undertakes to take up all controversies, which may fall between God and us, he promiseth to restore us to the adoption of sons, and to the inheritance of sons, that we might be where he is, Joh. 17. 24. 3. The holy ghost makes a Covenant with us, as Heb. 10. 15, 16. whereof the Holy-Ghost also is a witness to us, testifying of this Covenant, which he makes with us; although the Father be imployed in it, yet here is the power and work of the Holy-Ghost; what the Father hath purposed from all eternity, and the Son hath purchased for them in time, that the Holy-Ghost effects in them, and applies to them, viz. he enables them to apply the blood of Christ for the remission of sins, he writes the Law in our heats, he teacheth us, he washeth us from our filthiness, and comforteth us in our sadness, sup∣ports us in our faintings, and guides us in our wan∣drings, &c. I may say as Moses to the people, Deut. 33. 29. happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord? and as David,
Psal. 33. 12. Blessed is that Nation whose God is the Lord. By faith we look at Christ, as having all fulness of grace in himself, Joh. 16. & Col. 1. 19. all other An∣gels and Saints have but their measure, some more, some less, according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Eph. 4. 7. but Christ hath received the Spi∣rit, not by measure, but in the fulness of it, Joh. 3. 34. Now whatsoever fulness of grace there is in Christ, he hath received not for himself, but for us, that he might communicate unto us, and we might receive from him, Psal. 68. 18. it is said he received gifts for men; not for himself, but for men, that we might receive from him; and thence it is, that in Joh. 1. 16. of his fulness we receive grace for grace, his wisdom is to make us wise, his meekness and patience, is to make us meek and patient, and Christ is faithfull to distribute to us all such graces that he hath received for us, he is faithfull in all his house: what shall I say more in this Covenant, God unbosoms himself unto us, and shines forth upon us, and there is now and then a sweet entercourse of love between him and thy soul▪ in the blessing of this Covenant there is remedy for every malady, pro∣mises sutable to every condition, for being and well being, for this life, and that which is to come. I omit here to mention such blessings of the Covenant as I might, and the nature of the same, having spo∣ken something to it inthe former part of this Trea∣tise, &c.
The twelfth thing to be enquired into, is this, viz. notwithstanding this blessed Covenant of grace contained in the Gospel, whether most men and women in the world be not un∣der a Covenant of works. THE Covenant of works remains in full force and vertue, to all unbelievers, Rom. 10. 4. For Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness, to none but to those that believe. Oh, did we but con∣sider the misery of all such as are under the Law, it might awaken us. He that is under the Law, is un∣der a Covenant of works, and they must come and stand before God the Judge of all, and have their sins set in order before him, and the Law pass sen∣tence of death upon them, and their own conscien∣ces terrifying them, and there shall be none to plead for them, or to stand betwixt Gods warth and them; but they shall be left to themselves, to die and perish in their sins: this Covenant hath no Mediator; for then Christ hath not a word to speak for them, he telssuch, John 17. 19. he prayeth not for them, he pleads only for them that fly to grace, and take hold of that Covenant; but as for all others they have God against them, the Law against them, they have all creatures to accuse them, and to testifie against them; but have no Christ, no Mediator to appear for them, and there shall be no grace shewed, but strict Justice without any mercy: Oh that such would bethink themselves, what a God they must meet withall, even a just God, a God of judge∣ment,
a God of vengeance, that will not spare their misdeeds, what ever Justice can require of them they must satisfie to the uttmost farthing; there will be Justice without mercy. Oh when nothing but Justice shall judge you, who can stand, what flesh may abide it? Psal. 78. 5. A wicked man hath no true right before God, unto the good things of this life, for if any say they have, I ask by what Cove∣nant? is it by the Covenant of works? then they must fulfill it, which they do not, nor can do; is it then by the Covenant of grace? but they are not within that Covenant, they are within the Covenant of works, but cannot fulfill it; they are without the Covenant of grace, and therefore they can claim nothing by it; again, faith and holiness can no more be separated, then light can be separated from the Sun. Such as lay claim to the Covenant of grace, and yet live loosly, carnally, unconscionably, they do but deceive themselves, they may be in Covenant with hell and death, but have no part in the Covenant of life and peace, John 5. 45. Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father, ther is one that accuseth you, even Moses in whom you trust; the Law in which you trust will condemn you, if ye continue not in every thing written therein, and yield a perfect, personall, perpetuall obedience thereto, it will accuse you to the Father.
Of Justification by Grace. THE question is not so much about the time, and terms, and matter of our Justification, but how we are made righteous in the sight of God, which the Scriptures do affirm, to be by the per∣fect righteousness of Christ alone, which God doth impute to all his seed freely, without works and con∣ditions performed by us. 1. Consider if the righteousness by which we are justified, be a perfect righteousness, then we are not justified by our obedience to Gospel pre∣cepts, but the righteousness whereby we are justi∣fied, is a perfect righteousness, which is the righ∣teousness of Christ alone, Heb. 1. 8. Mat. 6. 33. Rom. 4. 6. and everlasting righteousness, Psal. 119. 142. Psal. 22. 31. & 35. 28. that righteousness which justifieth us before God, as it is not ours, so it is not in us. But as it is Christs righteousness, so it is in him, In me you shall have righteousness and strength, Psal. 71. 15, 16, 19, 24. I will make mention of thy righte∣ousness, even of thine only. Justice and mercy do both meet in this Justification; Justice, in that he will not justifie a sinner, without a perfect righteousness; and yet mercy, in that he will accept him for such a righ∣teousness, that is, neither in him, nor done by him, but by his surety for him. 2. Consider the Apostles all along were very carefullto keep this Doctrine of Justification by grace distinct from all other things, they all along do oppose the Law and grace, works and faith,
our righteousness and Christs righteousness, teach∣ing us thereby how needfull it is they should be kept asunder. Justification by grace hath been and will be the bone of contention till the next coming of Christ: why so? because learning cannot reach it, naturall wis∣dom is confounded at it, evill Angels do not know it, most men do persecute it, as being bereaved of the knowledge of it, or else corrupt in the simpli∣city of it. The Papists say, if we be freely justified by grace, we need not do any good works, and if we can∣not fall from grace, we need not fear to com∣mit sin. And they hold that we are not justified by the righteousness of Christ imputed, but by the righte∣ousness of Christ inherent in us, and righteous acti∣ons done by us. 3. Consider we should not be justified by grace, if any condition were required of us, in order to our justification; for the condition whensoever persorm∣ed, makes the Covenant a due debt; then justifi∣cation should not be of grace, but of debt, contrary to the express words of Scripture, Rom. 4. 4. 4. Consider the nature and cause of justification more particularly, viz. Justification, is when God meerly of his own grace and free will, forgiveth our sins, and pronoun∣ceth us just and innocent. Though Gods Law was by us violated, we are absolved from sin and punishment by the grace of God, and merits of Christ apprehended by faith: and so by him all that believe are justified in all
things, in which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13. 39. Justification is an act undivided, and all at once, and so it differs from sanctification, which is done by degrees; all diffe∣rent eminent acts, as justification, sanctifica∣tion, renovation, are but one act in God. I shall close up what I have to say to this thing, by de∣siring the reader seriously to consider these precious Scriptures, all speaking to the same thing, Rom. 4. 5. Now to him that workoth not, but beleiveth on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness. Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he sa∣ved us. Rom. 11. 6. And if By grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace. So having spoken to the nature of justification, give me leave also to lay down the usefulness of it as to us, and the benefits every beleiver have by it, the greatest thing that we can desire (next the glory of God) is our own salvation, and the sweetest thing we can here obtain, is the assurance of our salvati∣on. In this life we cannot get higher then to be as∣sured of that which in the next life is to be enjoyed; all godly people shall enjoy a Heaven when they leave this earth; some enjoy a Heaven whilst they are here on earth; that Christians may enjoy two Heavens, let them enquire after, diligently seek for, and cheerfully embrace this Doctrine of justi∣fication, freely and only by the grace of God, as the cause, through Christ as the way, the Holy-Ghost as the worker and evidencer. 1. This Doctrine is as the foundation and basis of all Christian Religion.
2. This Doctrine is the inlet of all spirituall di∣vine peace and consolation. 3. This is the root and spring of all Gospel obe∣dience. 4. This Doctrine is the great stop and bar to keep out all floods of errour. 5. This Doctrine is the main support of a soul under all trialls. 6. This is the great Doctrine by which Sa∣tans kingdom is undermined and overthrown. 7. This is the Doctrine that Satan doth most war against, either to pervert or corrupt. 8. This Doctrine is the most hardest piece to be learned, it being wholly supernaturall in every part of it, above the reach of nature, and all things in us do oppose it. 1. This Doctrine is the foundation and basis of all Christian Religion, as doth clearly appear by these severall instances. 1. To begin at the bottom, our Election is the Election of grace, and according to the good plea∣sure of his will, Ephes. 2. 4, 5. 2. Our Vocation is according to his grace, 2 Tim. 1. 9. who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, given us in Christ, before the world began. 3. Regeneration is of Gods own will, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us, by the word of truth. 4. Faith it self is the gift of God, Philippians 1. 29. Ephes. 2. 28. 5. Justification is freely by his grace, Rom. 3. 24. and a free gift, Rom. 5. 15.
6. Forgiveness of sins is according to the riches of his grace, Ephes. 1. 7. In whom we have redemp∣tion through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his grace. 7. Eternall life is the gift of God, Act. 15. 11. But we believe that through the grace of our Lord Je∣sus Christ, we shall be saved, even as they, Rom. 6. 23. The gift of God is eternall life through Jesus Christ our Lord. If any ask what is the nature of this free grace? I answer, grace in its proper notion signifies that free goodness, favour or good will, whereby God is moved to open the eyes of the blind mind, and to let him know the love of God that passeth know∣ledge. If any ask why the Doctrine of the Gospel is called by the name of grace? I answer, because it was only Gods free good will, to bestow it upon those that did most want it. If any ask farther, why this free grace was ever bestowed at all? or why one age or place of the world should receive is rather then ano∣ther? or why God should discover this great misterie, was kept secret since the world began, to those who were sinners of the Gentiles, who served dumb Idols? or why God should be found of them that sought him not, or be made manifest to those that ask∣ed not after him? I can give no other answer then that, 1 Cor. 1. 29. that no flesh should glory in his presence, or that in Mat. 11. 35, 26. Even so Father, because it seemeth good in thy sight. Whoever builds, and builds not upon this foun∣dation, doth build upon the sand, and his house in a storm and tempest will fall, Mat. 7. 27. or if any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, pre∣cious
stones, wood, hay, stubble, the fire shall try every mans work of what sort it is: see 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 2. This Doctrine is the inlet of all spirituall divine peace to the soul. There is a vein through which this peace that pas∣seth understanding, is conveyed to the soul, which the men and women of the world know not, Isa. 59. 8. The way of peace they know not; they have made to themselves crooked paths, whosoever goeth therein shall not find peace, Rom. 3. 17. the way of peace have they not known: in a word, no man or woman under heaven can know the way to this peace, untill the Lord give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide their feet into the way of peace, Luk. 1. 79. No man can receive, retain and enjoy this peace of God unless he wait on God at the springs of peace. 1. The first spring of peace is faith, Rom. 5. 1. being justified by Faith we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: faith seeth Christ to be our peace, Ephes. 2. 14. and from him freely given to us, John. 14. 27. and the vein through which it runs to the soul, is the vein of faith; laying hold on, and applying of the free grace of God to the soul, Rom. 15. 13. 2. The second way of peace, is this, a man must not only know it, where it is, and believe it, but he must stay himself wholly upon God in the con∣stant expectation of the increase and supply of it, Isa. 26. 3. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose heart is stayed on thee.
3. The next vein or spring of peace, ariseth from a souls resting satisfied in Christs righteousness, ad∣ding nothing to it, Psal. 71. 15, 16, 19, 24. and Psal. 119. 142. I will make mention of thy righteous∣ness, even of thine only, for thy righteousness is an ever∣lasting righteousness, See Jer. 33. 16. the perfection of Christs righteousness is held forth unto us, and alwayes lieth before us, that we may be thankfull for it, and peaceable with it, and rejoyce in the be∣stower of it; the Lord Jesus having spoken peace to the soul, and acquainted the soul that he hath paid all his debts for it, and that his sins which were so many shall be remembred no more, then the soul begins to be filled with joy and peace, in beleiving, beholding, and enjoying Christs righieousness, which begets in the soul, a perfect peace, a precious peace, a full and compleat peace, and an everlasting peace. 4. The next vein through which peace is conveyed to the soul, is by our acquainting our selves with him, Job 22. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace thereby, so good shall come unto thee; now by thy acquainting thy self with him, these things will fall in. First, thou wilt see that thou wast cast out to the loathing of thy soul, and no eye pittying thee, much less to relieve thee; that then, even then, when man was ready to perish, should be the time of love with God, whereby he cast his skirt of compassion over him, and said unto him again, live. Oh ye Heavens stand amazed! and oh thou earth, flesh and blood rejoyce and triumph, for when there was no eye to pitty thee, the arm of the Lord hath brought salvation, by raising up a mighty one out of the house of his servant David, even Christ the
Lord, the wondefull Counsellor, the mighty God, mighty to save, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, who became man under the Law, and obliga∣tion to obedience; and not only so, but also became our Surety for us; to do, suffer and fulfill that for us, which we were no waies able to do for our selves. The Covenant of works rested in and trusted un∣to, can never work settled comfort, and peace, and quietness of heart; let a man walk as exactly as ever flesh and blood can attain unto, let him as confident∣ly build on this foundation as he possibly may, yet the heart will be still in suspition, in doubt, in fear, uncertain what to trust unto, but the Doctrine of grace rested in and trusted unto, doth settle a soul in peace, this is a sure Anchor for the soul to rest upon, let waves swell, and winds blow, he retains a firm peace, stand here and we are safe for ever, Rom. 5. 1, 2. 3. Thirdly, This Doctrine is the Root and Spring of all Gospel obedience, whatsoever men call obedi∣ence, if it ariseth not from hence, it is but forced and legal; we must get up Gospel principles, if we would keep up Gospel practises. Wheresoever this Doctrine of grace is received and retained in the love and power of it, it works these five things in the soul, viz. Faith, Love, Fear, Willingness and Chearfulness, and from these five things, as from five Springs, doth all Gospel obedi∣ence arise. 1. True obedience doth flow from Faith; hence it is called the obedience of Faith, Rom. 16.26. in the latter part of this Chapter we read of a mysterie
revealed, and what that mysterie was, it was the Doctrine of Gods grace; and the end why it was re∣vealed, was for the Obedience of Faith, see Rom. 1. 5. 2. As Faith in Christ doth put the soul upon hea∣venly and spiritual actings, so also love constrains them in whom it is, to keep the Lords command∣ments, John 14. 21, 23. compared with Psalm 26. 3, 4. If ye love me, keep my commandments: For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, saith David, and I have walked in thy truth. 3. As true obedience doth spring from Faith and Love, so it is attended with an holy fear, Psalm 119. 161. My heart, saith David, doth stand in awe of thy word, Heb. 11. 7. Noah being warned of God, touching things not seen, was moved with fear, and so prepared an Ark. 4. As Gospel obedience doth spring from Faith; Love and Fear, so it ariseth from a willing mind, Psalm 27. 8. when thou saidst, seek ye my face, my heart answered, Lord thy face will I seek; as David had said, O Lord it is thy great command, (seek ye my face) my heart saith unto thee, it is the desire of my soul, thy command is become my request, thy face Lord will I seek. 5. As Gospel-obedience springs from Faith, Love and fear, and a willing mind; so it is performed chearfully, and delightfully, Psal. 40. 8. I delight to do thy will O God, thy Law is in my heart, as well as in thy Book. What shall I say more, a soul receiving, believing, retaining and standing in the true grace of God, shall be every way furnished and supplyed with strength to perform any duty, to exercise any
grace, to subdue any lust, to resist, any temptation, to bear any affliction. &c. Sure, if the bowels of mercy do not melt, win and draw us, Justice will be a swift witness against us: And as the Branch cannot bear fruit except it abide in the vine, John 15. 4. no more can ye, except ye abide in me: Gods free love manifested to us, and by his Spirit shed abroad in us, is the cause of our love to him, 1 John 4. 10, 19. And our love to him is the cause of our obeying him, 1 John 5. 3. & John 14. 15, 21, 23. we read in Jer. 31. 19. After that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was in∣structed, I smote upon my thigh. That is as if he had said, after that thou hast wrought a gracious change upon my soul, by thine afflicting hand, out of thy love to me, Heb. 12. 6. Or after I came to my self again, Luke 15. 17 and considered seriously with my self how it was with me, I was touched with repentance, with sorrow, and with shame for my former miscariages. 4. Fourthly this Doctrine received, and the heart therein established, will be a stop and bar to keep out all floods of errour. The floods of all errour flow in at the pipe of ignorance, and especially ignorance of this very thing, viz. The Doctrine of grace; the errour of the Papists of building and resting upon works, springs from their ignorance of this blessed Do∣crtine; the errour of the Quaker springs purely from hence; the errour of the Arminian springs in at the same pipe, partly by works, and partly by grace; they not seeking salvation by grace, but as it were by the, works of the Law, they stumbled and
fell, Rom. 9. 32. And all the unstability, formality, legality that there is at this day appearing amongst the Presbyterian, Independant and Baptist, or any other people professing godliness, doth arise from their ignorance or their little knowledge in this great mysterie; nay farther, did you ever read, or from any true Christian hear, that any man or wo∣man that was acquainted with, and in some good measure established in (this Doctrine of grace) infected with, and overcome by these floods of er∣rour, that doth now swarm among us? Oh how doth Satan pollute and defile the souls and judge∣ments of men, with Christ-dishonouring and soul∣undoing opinions, viz. That Ordinances of the Go∣spel are poor, carnal, low things; wholly denying some, and slighting the rest, saying, that the Scri∣ptures are not the Word of God, nor the ground of Faith, nor the Rule of life, nor a true Judge in dif∣ferences and controversies, also denying interpre∣tations and expositions of the Word, which is, 1. First, By God commanded, 1 Cor. 14. 1. 2. This was practised by the godly, Matth. 1. 23. 3. This is profitable for the unfolding of obscure places, Neh. 8. 8. Now these and the like things the Lord in his Word doth call ungodliness, because it in part or in whole denies what he hath commanded, and opens a door for men to do the contrary. Now for a remedy herein, let every Christian study, pray and enquire for, and stand in the grace of God: See that bles∣sed place, 1 Peter 5. 12. Exhorting and testifying
that it is the true grace of God in which ye stand, or wherein ye stand: Agreeable is this text to the for∣mer, Rom. 5. 2. By whom we have access by Faith in∣to this grace wherein we stand: now their standing in this grace, did fence them from all false doctrines and erronious opinions. Papists and Arminians, which hold a falling away from grace, know not the difference between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace; their errour is this, they teach as a principle of Re∣ligion, that those that are adopted, sanctified and planted into Christ may fall away and perish; this Doctrine is contrary to the whole tenor of the Co∣venant of Grace, injurious unto God, and uncom∣fortable unto the Saints: it would shake the foun∣dation of Gods election, if those that are once san∣ctified should fall away and perish, for those only whom he knew before, those only doth he sanctifie; now if he hath in mercy drawn us to himself, it is a sign he hath loved us from everlasting, Jer. 31. 3. our calling and sanctification is according to his pur∣pose, Rom. 8. 28, 30. 2 Tim. 1. 9. and those that are sanctified, justified and called, are all first chosen, and thence faith is called the Faith of Gods elect, Titus 1. And those that are sanctified, are said to be chosen unto it, Eph. 1. 3, 4. so that the founda∣tion of Gods election standeth sure, and so our state in Grace is sure also, as being built on that foun∣dation which cannot be removed, and this doth Christ make good in that speech of his, Mat, 24. where speaking of the strong delusions which many should be deceived withall, he saith, that those de∣ceivers should shew forth such signs and wonders, that
if it were possible they should deceive the very elect: (if it were possible) but that they cannot do, the elect cannot perish, &c. 5. This Doctrine is the main support of a soul under all tryals; when all things fail, Gods grace and free love doth never fail. I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, saith the Lord, Heb. 13. 5. compared with Joshua 1. 5. 1. Gold and Silver may fail, yea all earthly trea∣sures do make themselves wings and flieaway, and the labour of the Olive may fail, Hab. 3. 17. 2. Our nearest and dearest friends may fail, Job 19. 14. 2 Tim. 4. 16. 3. Our eyes may fail, Psalm 119. 123. mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness. 4. Our tongues may fail, Isa. 41. 17. 5. Our strength may fail, Psal. 31. 10. My strength faileth because of mine iniquity. 6. Our flesh and our heart may fail us, Psal. 73. 26 My flesh and my heart faileth, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. 7. Our spirits may fail us, Psal. 143. 7. Hear me speedily, my spirit faileth me, hide not thy face from me. But now saith the Lord, although the labour of the Olive may fail, and thy nearest and dearest friends fail, and thine eyes fail, and thy tongue fail, thy strength fail, and flesh and heart fail, yet I will be with thee, I will never fail thee, as thou mayst see, by what I have left written for thy learning in these following Scriptures, Josh. 1. 5. Josh. 21. 45. & 23. 14. 1 King. 8. 56. Heb. 13. 15.
Yea, search the whole Scripture, and enquire of all the Saints, whether I did ever fail any one soul, that did put his trust in me; thus thou mayest see, that a Believer is blessed, only in a help without him, not within, and all his assurance, confidence and comfort doth flow to him from the fountain of free-grace, through the channel of faith, and not of works, be∣lieving himself happy for what another (even Christ) hath done for him; not for what he hath done or can do; the joy of a Believer would alwaies be unspeakable, did he alwaies apprehend his happi∣ness in and by Christ alone. In a word, the pure, glo∣rious, matchless and spotless righteousness of Christ is a souls righteousness and resting place, when the soul finds that he wanders no more from mountain to hill, as formerly he did. Whoever you are that read these lines, search whether you are gotten into this rest, if not, with all speed get into this rest∣ing place, for Satan is walking about as a roaring Lyon, and though he cannot rob a Christian of his Crown, yet he will do what he can to rob him of his comfort and peace, to make his life a burden, and an hell to him, to cause him to spend his daies in sorrow and mourning, sighing and complaining, in doubt∣ing and questioning, saying in these or the like words, surely I have no interest in Christ, my graces are not true, my hope is but the hope of an hypo∣crite, my confidence is but presumption, and my en∣joyments are but delusions. Then when a soul is thus beweldred and troubled, the Lord many times discovers his free grace and love, and that expells ignorance, and slayeth the souls enemies, and by this love the Lord draweth
the soul to himself in love; again, Gods way of support of a soul in trouble and tryal, is a way of love, therefore he saith, Behold I will allure her, and speak comfortably unto her, Hos. 2. 14. his love is free, full and eternal. I will, saith he, love them freely, Hos. 14. 4. I will draw them with the cords of a man, with the bonds of love, Hos. 11. 4. And so the soul comes to have great joy and plea∣sure, Psal. 16. 11. No misery, as hunger, cold, nakedness, pain, grief or weariness, shall much dis∣quiet the soul, it will rest fatisfied in God alone, in this rest there is tranquility, in tranquility content∣ment, in contentment joy, in joy, variety, in variety security, in security eternity, &c. 6. This Doctrine is that by which Satan is over∣thrown, and his Kingdom turned up side down. So that being a Reprobate and a fallen Angel, maketh it his great work to bring all that possibly he can into the same state with him, although through this grace of God, he can do nothing but by permssiion, God doth keep him in a powersul chain, wicked Angels are Potent, only our good God is omnipotent; when he doth give way, one Devil doth overthrow a Legion, a million of men; but till God doth lengthen out his chain, a Legion of Devils cannot hurt one man: Satan cannot hurt us, unless he get us within the compass of his chain, if we go not to him, he cannot come to us. All the wais of Satan are swarving from the way and rule of the Word, he cannot touch one man or woman that endeavours to walk according to rule, he can but suggest sin to us, he cannot force us to sin, he cannot infuse wickedness into us, but only stir up sin
in us. All the forces of hell cannot scale the walls of heaven. Its true, Satan will sometimes stand up, as the Philistian did, and say, Who is the man that will redeem this and that soul that are in my snare, and in my power; am not I the God of this world, and is it not written that I am the Prince of the air, who shall rescue them out of my hand? then cometh the Lyon of the tribe of Iudah, as David against the Philistian, and saith to Satan, thou hast defied the Armies of Israel, I will try thy power, and pull down thy pride; here Christ hath a single duel with them, and the issue was, that Satan bruised the heel of Christ, and Christ wounded his head, and so ful∣filled that Prophesie, Gen. 3. 15. And so Chtist after he wounded his head cast him out, John 12. 31. The Prince of this world is cast out, so that now Satans power is already taken away, the Devil, it is true, doth challenge a right to many of Christ servants, till they are called, converted and brought from under the power of darkness, by the appearance of this free grace, Titus 3. 4, 5. But after the kindness and love of God our Saviour appeared, according to his mer∣cy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy-Ghost; it was Satan that tem∣pted our first parents to rebell; it was Satan that pro∣voked David to number People: it was Satan that put Peter upon perswading of Christ not to suffer: it was Satan that put Cain upon murthering Abel, therefore he is called a Murtherer from the begin∣ning; it was Satan that put treason into the heart of Judas against Christ; it was Satan that put An∣nanias upon lying. Now there is no weapon but spiritual weapons that will steed the soul
in combating with the Devil, Ephes. 6. 13, 16. It was not Davids sling nor his stone that gave him the advantage of setting his feet upon Goliah, but his faith in the free grace of God, 1 Sam. 17. 45. Luther reports of a German Minister, that he ac∣knowledged himself, that before he came to under∣stand aright the free and powerful grace of God, he vowed and resolved above one hundred times against some particular sin, and never could get power over it; at last he saw the reason to be his ignorance in the Doctrine of grace, and his too much trusting to his own resolution; at last he could resist Satan sted∣fastly in the faith, and he would flie from him, James 4. 7. we read in 1 John 5. 4. This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our Faith. 7. This is the Doctrine that Satan doth make war against, either to pervert or corrupt. 1. He seeks to pervert it by putting out of order, or turning up-side-down, to bring in that which should be kept out, Prov. 10. 9. He that perverteth his way shall be known. 2. If he cannot prevail with men to pervert this Doctrine, he shall leave no means unattempted, no stone unturned to corrupt it, by keeping people in a foolish unsound perswasion, that all is well with them, Psalm 143. They are all corrupt; that is, they have not understanding to perceive the things which God offereth to them. There be two main things in which Satan doth busie himself to deceive souls. 1. By laying the greatness and vileness of a mans sins before him, and then falls to perswade
him there is no mercy in God for such a sinner. 2. By presenting God to the soul as one made up all of mercy. 1. By laying the greatness and vileness of ones sins before him, and then perswades him, there is no mercy in God for such a sinner: What saith Satan, dost thou think that ever thou shalt attain mercy by Christ, that hast sinned with so high an hand in slight∣ing the tenders of grace, and grieved the Spirit of grace, and despised the Word of grace, that hast trampled under foot the blood of Christ, by which thou mightest have been pardoned, purged, justified and saved? What dost thou think, saith Satan, that ever Christ will own, receive or embrace such an un∣worthy wretch as thou art? Thou art unworthy to entertain Christ in thy house, much more unwor∣thy to entertain him in thy heart; thou fool, thou knowest thou art not prepared, thou art not thus and thus humbled, thou art not heart sick of sin, thou hast not been under horrors and terrors, as such a man and such a woman, thou must stay till thou art prepared, and qualified to receive Christ; for albeit Christ is able, yet he is not willing to save such a rebell as thou art, that hast been in open Rebellion against him all thy daies: now for answer hereunto. That there is mercy for such miserable creatures, if they will receive it, and not dispair, will more at large appear in these choice places of Scripture, Micah 7. 18, 19. Isa. 43. 25. Jer. 3. 12. Joel 2. 13. Isa. 55. 7. 1 Tim. 1. 13, 15. Psalm 66. 18. Iohn 6. 37. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Heb. 7. 25. Isa. 1. 18.
It is hard to find any one place in the whole Book of God, requiring any worthiness in the creature, before a souls believing in Christ, and resting upon him for happiness and blessedness; I read of none that obtained mercy and pardon from Christ but un∣worthy souls; pray what worthiness was in Zachens, Mary Magdalen, Paul and Lydia before their com∣ing to and believing in Christ. 2. If Satan cannot catch men in this first pit, then he turns over leaf and comes a new way to work, viz▪ by presenting God to the soul as one made up all of mercy; Oh saith Satan, you need not make such a matter of sin, nor to be so unwilling to sin, for God is a God of mercy, a God that delighteth in mercy, ready to shew mecry, a God that is never weary of shewing mercy, he is a God more prone to pardon his people, then to punish them, and why then should you make such a matter of sin? by this Satan doth cause many a soul to turn the grace of God into wantonness; but for a remedy herein, consider that God is as just as he is merciful, as the Scripture doth speak him out to be, a very merciful God, so they speak him forth to be a very just God, witness his casting the Angels out of heaven, his turning Father Adam out of Paradise, his drown∣ing the old world, his raining fire out of heaven up∣on Sodom. It is true, his general mercy is over all his works, but his special mercy is confined to those that he hath divinely qualified, Exod. 34. 6, 7. Psal. 32. 10. Psal. 103. 11. 8. This Doctrine is the most hardest thing in the world to be learned, it being wholly in
every part of it supernatural, and all things in us do fight against it. To do well and have well is natural, but to be∣lieve and have well is supernatural; man remaining in his natural state, is altogether unable to receive and comprehend those glorious and gracious myste∣ries of being righteous by anothers righteousness, and of being saved by anothers suffering; all men both Jews and Gentiles are set upon seeking life and happiness by their own doings and performances; for although man did fearfully fall by transgression, yet he retained certain foot-steps, marks and impressi∣ons, of that moral and eternal Law of righteous∣ness, which was at first engraven in his heart, by the finger of God Almighty. So that although as to everlasting felicity man is dark and dead, being un∣der the power of the God of this world, whose Kingdom is a Kingdom of darkness, who rules in men by ignorance, yet there remains in every man so much light as doth lead him to the knowledge of a God; but when the Lord doth reveal this mysterie of his grace by his Spirit to and in man, then he doth over and above that common work of the Spirit, by which he enlighteneth every man; I say, Christ doth give unto those given him of the Father, the mind and understanding to know him and to receive him, and to lay hold on him, for life and salvation. Now in this sense the natural man perceiveth not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 1. 21. The world by wisdom knoweth not God, &c. Now this Doctrine of grace is the hardest thing in the world to be learned, because we are naturally apt to
hunger and thirst after a righteousness of our own, but it must be renounced; I confess this self denyal is very hard: Oh how hard is it for the soul to be taken off its own bottom of works and qualificati∣ons, and to strip them of all that is their own! ye take away their lives, they must and will have something; some humbleness and brokenness of heart, some tears, some good works or abilities, or good heart, as many say; and this doth argue as yet thou art not pluckt off thine own stock, and therefore art not planted into Christ; thou art igno∣rant of the righteousness of God, and so goest about to establish thine own righteousness; consider, consider our works make us not the better before God, neither the more beloved of the Lord, but declare us to be what we are made by God, and so are profitable to men, but not to God. But what saith the Scripture? now to him that worketh is not the reward reckoned of grace but of debt; but to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is account∣ed for righteousness, Rom. 4. 2, 3, 4, 5. We are saved, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, 2 Tim. 1. 9. Again, we read, Rom. 5. 10. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Isa. 43. 25. I will blot out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins; a new heart also will I give thee, Ezek. 36. 26, 27, 31. Again, Isa. 57. 18. I have seen his waies and will heal him, Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy trans∣gressions, return to me, for I have redeemed thee, Ezek. 16. 6, 8. When thou wast polluted in thy own
blood, I said unto thee live; when thou wast in thy blood, thy time was the time of love: and I covered thy nakedness. Now consider the Lord doth this that he might have all the glory of our Election, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification and Salvation. See Eph. 1. 6. Jer. 9. 24. Rom. 3. 9. Luke 1. 74. 1 Cor. 4. 7. Iames 1. 17. And as this Doctrine is the hardest thing in the whole world to be learned, so it is the hardest work (where it is not learned) to obey God in any of his commands; to instance in one for all, God doth command men every where to repent: but is not repentance a mighty work, a difficult work, a work that is above our power? Surely there is no power below that power that raised Christ from the dead, and that made the world, that can break the heart of a sinner, or turn his heart. It is as easie to turn the stream that runs swiftly for∣ward, and make it run as swiftly backward, as it is to repent indeed, and to melt thine own heart; it is as easie to turn a flint into flesh, as to turn thine own heart to the Lord; it is as easie to raise the dead, and make a world, as to repent; it is a flower that grows not in natures Garden, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethio∣pian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evill. But this work that is so difficult, and so hard, above our reach, is easily wrought in the soul, when God gives it to see his grace and love in giving Christ, Act. 5. 31. Him hath God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Gal. 1. 8. If I or any other, or an Angel of heaven preach any
other Gospel then this, that we have preached un∣to you, then salvation and participation of Christ by grace, and free gift, for that is the Doctrine he had established, before and through the whole Epistle to the Galathians: What shall I say more? there is nothing in men, though never so vile, that can debar a person or a people from a part in this Christ; some will not have Christ except they can pay for him, others dare not meddle with Christ, because they are so vile and sinful, and therefore they seek to get an inherent righteousness, they run to their qua∣lifications, to their prayers, to their tears, to their humiliations, and sorrows, and reformations, and will not come at Christ untill they have spent all up∣on these Physitians, and are sensible with the woman in the Gospel, that they are nothing the better, but the worse; then they begin to think of the back parts of Christ, and wait for a time to come behind him in a throng, that they may not be seen to touch the hem of his garment. You know when a pump is drie, men use to fetch a Bucket of water, and pour it into the dry pump, and then they fall to pumping, and by vertue of the water poured in, there comes more water up, and by continual pumping they fetch out abundance: So our hearts many times are dry, there is no sap, no moisture, no life: the vertues of Christ must first be poured in, before you can get any thing out. Wherefore stand we labouring and tugging in vain? O stay no longer, go to Christ, it is he that must break thy rocky heart: in a word, we must consider Christ as freely given us by the Father, before we can believe the life of grace.
This Doctrine speaks out with open mouth the exceeding freeness and riches of Gods grace, as will appear, if we consider; 1. That God is first in seeking after us, to draw us into Covenant with himself; we seek not him, but he seeks us; we chuse not him, but he chuseth us; we wait not on him, he waits to be gracious to us: we beseech not him, he doth beseech us to be recon∣ciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. John 15. 16. and 1 Joh. 4. 19. So that he is found of them that seek not af∣ter him, because he first reveals and offers himself in mercy to us, Isa. 65. 1. 2. Consider, the time wherein the Lord doth seek to us, and take us by the hand, to bring us into Covenant with him, and then we shall find, that when we are most averse and backward, and have least thought of seeking after him, then it is that he seeks us: thus the Lord called Saul, when he was persecuting, raging, and breathing out slaughter against the Lord, and against his Saints; then the Lord takes him by the hand, and enters into Cove∣nant with him, Acts 9. and so it was with those mockers, Acts 2. 13, 37. Here were no dispositi∣ons and preparations on their part, but free and un∣expected grace from God. 3. Compare those that are taken into Covenant, with those that are left out, for all are not taken in, Ephes. 2. 12. And this also will make it manifest it is Free grace by which any are taken in, Rom. 3. 22, 23. We have all sinned, and there is no difference; no reason therefore—in us, why one is taken in∣to Covenant, and not another, but only free grace in God, God owes nothing to any man: he may
truly say to all, I do thee no wrong, Mat. 20. 13. Thou hast as much as I owe thee. So then it must needs be free grace to those that are taken in: apply John 14. 21. Mat. 11. 5, 25. Nay sometimes God chuseth the worst, and takes in the most unworthy, and leaves those that are better then they, viz. Paul a chief of sinners, 1 Tim. 1. 15. Publicans and Harlots, Mat. 21. Mary Magdalen possest with seven Devils: these were taken in, and the righteous generation, as they were reputed, which justified themselves, and were justified by others, were left and passed by. The reasons why the Lord would have his Covenant to stand upon this foundation of free grace are these. 1. To be a ground of hope, to such as see them∣selves unworthy of acceptance with God, if the grace of the Covenant were not free, such unworthy ones could have no hope. 2. It is the glory of grace to be freely communi∣cated, Isa. 55. 1. Come and buy without mony, it darkens the glory of grace, to have it bestowed upon worthy ones. Be it known unto you saith the Lord, not for your sakes I bestow this, but for my own names sake. 3. That vain man may not boast. 4. That our mercies and blessings may be sure to us, Rom. 4. 16. Our salvation is by grace, to the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed, im∣plying thereby, that if it depended never so little upon works, we could not be so sure of it. Oh the rich mercy, the great love, exceeding riches of his grace, great goodness, tender love, great mercy, multitude of loving kindnesses. Oh then not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be the praise, it is enough for us that we have life, let grace
alone have all the praise and glory, and let every one that readeth these lines, endeavour to imitate this free grace of God, which is shewed to us. First, Lo∣ving the Lord, not for his gifts and rewards, but with a free love, as he hath loved us, and serving him with a free spirit, and a willing mind. Secondly, Let us be free in doing good unto all men, even to such as have deserved nothing, though they be aliens and strangers, and such as we never hope to receive any good from, yet freely to do them good, even where we look for nothing again, as God hath done to us, Luke 14. 12, 14. 10. As this Covenant and grace is free, so it is sure and certain to be performed, it cannot, it will not fail those that rest upon it. The Covenant and promise of grace, are built up∣on the unchangable purpose of God, which is a foundation remaining sure, and cannot be shaken, 2 Tim. 2. 19. Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord know∣eth them that are his, Tit. 1. 2. The Lord is said to have promised eternal life, before the world began. So then it is free, and it is sure, and the freeness of it doth prove the sureness of it, it is free that it might be sure; so here it is sure because it is free; nothing can hinder free grace from giving eternal life to whom it will. So that the accomplishment will eve∣ry way answer their expectation and hope, thus said David, 2. Sam. 23. 5. God hath made with me a Covenant perfect in all points, and sure; and in Isa. 55. 3. The promises of the Covenant are called the sure mercies of David; the promises of
free grace, are not (yea and nay) various and un∣certain, but they are, Yea and Amen, sure to be fulfilled, there shall not fail so much as one word of all that good which God hath promised to do for his people: See Joshua 21. 45. and 23, 14. and 1 King▪ 18. 56. The stability of grace is compared to the firmness and unmoveableness of the mighty mountains, Isa. 54. 19 And to the unvariable course of the day and night, Jer. 33. 20. So that it is as eae, yea more easie for the mountains to remove out of their places, and the course of day and night to cease, as for the Covenant of grace to fail; God hath given us many pledges to assure us of the certainty of it. 1. His word is gone out of his mouth, he cannot alter it, Psal. 89. 2. He hath written it, to make it more sure▪ and what he hath written, is written never to be blot∣ed out. 3. He hath sealed it with his own seal, and so it is become as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which alter not. 4. He hath sworn to make it good in every part of it, Psal. 89. 3, 35. Heb. 6. 17, 18. 5. He hath given us the vertues, or earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 22. 6 Christ the Mediator and Testator of it, hath confirmed it by his own blood, Heb. 9. 16, 17, 18. This Covenant is said to be everlasting. First, in respect of the promise made to Christ for us, which was done before the foundation of the world, Tit. 1. 2. Secondly, as being to continue from ever∣lasting
to everlasting: though the Covenant in respect of our own personal entring into it, is made with us now in time, and hath a beginning, yet for continuance it is everlasting and without end, it is ne∣ver to be broken if once made in truth, 2 Chron. 13. 5. It is called a Covenant of salt, because it corrupteth not, it faileth not, as things that are salted use to last and continue: hence it is that all the blessings of the Covenant are said to be everlasting; forgiveness of sins is everlasting, being once forgiven, they are never remembred any more, Jer. 31. 33. The peace and joy which comes thereby is everlasting, your peace shall no more be taken from you, and your joy is everlasting, Isa. 35. 10. Our salvation is an everlasting salvation, Isa. 45. 17. Our life is an ever∣lasting life, Joh. 3. 16. Several strong reasons why the Saints should walk holily, notwithstanding the Covenant is free, and justification is free▪ and salvation it self is of grace, not of works. ALthough our qualifications doth not cause Gods love, yet we might question whe∣ther God did love us, if we were not qualified. Some men will be ready to say, if the Covenant of grace be thus every way free, in those several parti∣culars, and if we are so freely justified by grace with∣out works, qualifications, and conditions on our part, we may live as we list, &c. To which give me leave to lay down the grounds and reasons why all men ought to walk holily and humbly in this
present world, and that for these ten strong reasons. 1. Because the Lord hath commanded us in his word, to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God, Mic. 6. 8. 2. Because the Lord the Mighty God is glorified thereby, Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in heaven, 1 Pet. 2. 12. That they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorifie God. 3. Although the Covenant of grace is free, and we are justified freely by grace, yet we are to walk holily and without blame, before him in love, Ephes. 1. 4. John 15. 16. Because it is the end of our election. 4. Because it is the end of our Redemption, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 15. He dyed for us, that they which live, should not live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them. 5. Because it is the end of our Vocation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. But as he which hath called you is holy, so be you holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Thes. 4. 7. God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto ho∣liness. 6. Because it is the end of our Creation, Eph. 2. 10. Created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained, that we should walk in them. 7. Because if our conversation be not answerable to our profession, we walk.
1. Unworthy of God, Col. 1. 10. and 1 Thes. 2. 12. 2. Unworthy of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. 3. Unworthy of our Vocation, Ephes. 4. 1. 8. The Saints should endeavour to out▪strip in all good things, because they be the salt of the earth, the light of the world, a City set upon an hill, that cannot be hid, Mat. 5. 13, 14. 9. Because of the great dishonour that we shall bring to God, if we do not walk holily: we cause his name to be blasphemed, we crucifie Christ afresh, and cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of, and grieve the Saints, and harden sin∣ners, &c. 10. Because the end of our lives, and the dissolu∣tion of the world is at hand. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness: See 1 Pet. 4. 3. 2 Pet. 3. 11. I know no further reasons, unless it be these that I shall but name, viz. First, it is the way in which God hath appointed men to walk in, as in Ephes. 2. 12. Secondly, that we may declare our selves to be the children of our heavenly Father, as in 1 Pet. 1. 14. and Mat. 5. 45. Thirdly, that we may be profitable to our brethren, Tit. 3. 8. compared with 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. Fourthly, that we may adorn the Gospel, and stop the mouths of wicked men who will condemn sin in a professour, although they will approve of it, and delight in it themselves. Fifthly, because God will give unto every man according to his works, Mat. 16. 27. Sixthly, a Christian should walk holily: that so he might give a check, convince and put to
shame, and silence ungodly men, 1 Pet. 2. 15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. I might, had I time, add some motives to these undeniable rea∣sons, to put those that read these lines upon holy walkings; as, First, he that doth order his conver∣sation aright shall see the salvation of the Lord, Psal. 50. 23. 2 Pet. 1. 11. For so an entrance shall be administred to you abundantly. Secondly, it will be a great incouragement to others to walk so too, 2 Cor. 8. 7. compared with verse 3. Thirdly, it will be very profitable to thy self, not only after∣wards, but in the present tence, Psal. 19. 11. And in the keeping of them there is great reward. Of sanctification, or a holy conversation according to a Gospel Rule. But in all our actions and holy walkings, let us be sure we have an eye upon these three things, viz. 1. We must act from a right ground or principle. 2. We must act by a right rule, by precept rather then from example. 3. We must be sure we have right ends: low base ends spoil the highest undertakings. 1. We must act from a right ground or principle: there be three principles from which men do act: two of them are too low and beneath a true Christian to act from, viz 1. A natural principle, from which the Phyloso∣phers and heathens did many commendable things.
2. Many men act from a legal principle, as the Papists, Quaker, and Arminian; these do many things that are commanded, but not as it is com∣manded, and so with God not accepted. 3. There is a spiritual, or supernatural principle, from which Christians do or should act: now the right ground or principle, from which all holy and righteous actions should flow, is either from 1. A pure heart. 2. A good conscience. 3. Faith unfeigned. 1. A pure heart, not absolutely and compleatly purified from all sin, but comparative, and respec∣tively purified by the blood of Christ, by way of justification, Psal. 51. 7. Purified by the blood of Christ; his gracious habits as principles purity, being infused by way of sanctification, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Purified by faith, Act. 15. 9. 2. A good conscience, I mean not naturally good: so every mans conscience is in a sense good: but spiritually and supernaturally good, being pur∣ged by Christs blood from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. And when we find conscience to give a comfortable testimony of the hearts simplicity, and godly sincerety in what it doth. 3. Faith unfeigned that is without hypocrisie, ac∣cording to that, 1 Tim. 1. 5. Now the end of the Commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: now faith is then unfeigned, when it hath the true nature of faith in it, viz. 1. Assenting to the truth revealed, 1 John 5. 10, 11.
and applying this truth assented to, John 1. 11, 12. Gal. 2. 20. 2. When it doth produce the effects of a living faith, which is good works, Jam. 2. 20, 26. Now examine whether thou hast such a pure heart, such a good conscience, such a faith unfeigned, from whence all thy righteous actions do spring, (other∣wise) thee and I may be said with Amaziah, 2 Chron. 25. 7, 8, 9. He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart: And so much to the first of these, the principle from which we should act. 2. We must act by a right rule. Some make their own wils their rule, others make the example of men their rule, others make the light within their rule, but we are to make the word of God our rule, and so to go forth by the footsteps of the flock, Cant. 1. 8. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them, Galat. 6. 16. And again the Apostles tell us, from Christ, whose mouth they are, we ought so to walk as we have them for an example. And he that walks or speaks not according to this rule, it is because he hath no light in him, Isa. 8. 20. This was Noahs rule, Hebr. 11. 7. and Abra∣hams rule, Heb. 11. 8, 17. and Davids, Psal. 40. 8. and Pauls, Rom. 7. 22. The Lord doth not bid us make the light within the rule, but he hath placed a light within us, to see the rule without us, which will appear, if we a little consider, that there is a threefold illumination.
1. General and natural, which is a natural light, or a light of reason; and with this light, the eternal word, the Son of God hath enlightned every man that cometh into the world, Joh. 1. 9. 2. There is a special and supernatural light which is planted in the souls of those whom he hath before time elected, and in time called. See Col. 3. 19. and have put on the new man which is renew∣ed in knowledge, after the Image of him that crea∣ted him. 3. There is a kind of a middle illumination be∣tween these two, more then meerly natural, but less then truly supernatural, which is the common gift of the spirit, even to hypocrites: Judas was thus enlightned, and those hypocrites we read of in Mat. 7. 22, 23. and Simon Magus, Acts 8. 13. and by means of this light they may attain to these five things, and yet perish at last. 1. They may attain to a great measure of literal knowledge of Christ, of the truth, and of the way of righteousness, as doth clearly appear by these Scriptures, Heb. 10. 26. If we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. See Heb. 6. 4. 2. They may by means of this knowledge, at∣tain to great degrees of reformation in their life and waies, 2 Pet. 2. 20. For if after they have escaped the pollution of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again intangled therein and overcome, the latter end with them is worse then the beginning, for they were only outwardly reformed in the sight of men,
but not inwardly renewed in the sight of God. Sin may be chained up and restrained, yet not cast out and mortified. 3. They may go so far as to taste of the hea∣venly gift, Heb. 6. 4. Note, here the Holy Ghost doth not say of them as of true Saints, they have eaten or drunken, but only tasted, that is, they have had some kind of Relish or small sense, by a temporary Faith, of the excellencies of Christ. 4. They may be said by the improvement of this light, to be partakers of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4. that is, they are made partakers of the common gifts of the Holy Ghost, as common illumination, hystorical faith, and faith of Miracles. See Mat. 7. 22, 23. compared with Act. 8. 13. 5. They may in a sense be said to have tasted the good word of God, Heb. 6. 5. for these men hear∣ing the Gospel powerfully preached, and the match∣less love of God in Christ to sinners displayed, the worth and excellency of Jesus Christ and his benefits unfolded, they come to be sometimes moved, pleas∣ed, and for present affected with some pangs and moods of joy. Herod heard John-Baptist glad∣ly, Mar. 6. 20. Mat. 13. 20. compared with Ezek 33. 31, 32. but all this is but an imperfect taste, and so they do nothing from right principles, neither by a right rule. 3. As we ought to act from a right principle, by a right rule, so in the last place to a right end; low base ends spoyl the highest undertakings: now he that doth a good action to a good end, doth mind these two things in his action. 1. He doth it to the glory of God, accord∣ing
to that Command of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. and Mat. 5. 16. 2. He doth it for his own and others good, Rom. 2. 7. Mat. 5. 16. Now bring these things home, and lay them upon your hearts: make a curious, nar∣row, impartial, diligent search, and see whether thou dost act from such a principle, by such a rule, to such an end. If not, thou dost the thing that is commanded, but not as it is commanded; thou dost with Ama∣ziah, 2 Chron. 25. 7, 8, 9. That which is right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, or else thou dost a good action to an ill end, as in Phil. 1. 16. And yet say to others and think in thy self that thou hast done well, as Jehu to Jonadab the son of Racab. Hence it appears that the strength and con∣fidence of a deluded man or woman may be so great, that it may seem unto himself an unreasona∣ble thing once to question whether his heart be right, or the action good, even in those actions wherein he came short both of the matter, ground, form, and end. Quest. Cannot a natural man do an action that is good? Answ. A man by nature may do an action that is good for the substance thereof, as appears, Dan. 4. 27. But he cannot do that which is truly and spiritually good, Mat. 7. 18. A corrut tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethi∣opian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots; then may ye do good, that are accustomed to do evil. See also Rom. 3. 10. Prov. 15. 8. and 21. 27.
Quest. Why cannot he do that which is spiritu∣ally good? 1. Because his person is not accepted, Gen. 4. 4. compared with 1 Pet. 2. 5. 2. Because his person is not sanctified, so the actions he doth proceed not from a good root, viz. Faith and the spirit of sanctification, 1 Tim. 1. 5. Jam. 4. 3. 3. Because he doth it not to a good end, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Col. 3. 17. Phil▪ 1. 16. Object. You have been speaking to us of the principal from which, the rule by which, and the end to which we should act, and of our remissness and defection herein, but pray if you can, tell us by what power we shall do all these things. I find my self altogether unable to do these things; and I read in Scripture, that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man to direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23. And Paul tels us from the Lord, that we are not sufficient as of our selves, to think so much as one good thought, and that it is God that worketh in us both to will and to do. Answ. Strength to perform any duty, to exer∣cise any grace, to subdue any lusts, to resist any temptation, to bear any affliction, &c. Is derived only from Christ, (viz.) 1. Consider that either he hath already enabled thee to do the thing commanded, for he hath gi∣ven a talent, or talents, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. Rom. 12. 6. compared with Mat. 25. from ver. 15. to 28. 2. Consider that many times the Lord conveyes a power together with the command, to enable thee to do the thing commanded. So when he bid La∣zarus
to come forth, he conveys a power together with the command, and he came forth; so again in Luk. 5. 24. he commanded the man that was sick of the palsie, to take up his bed and walk, and conveys a power together with the command, whereby ver. 25. he did immediately arise, took up his bed, went to his house, and glorified God: so again in Ezek. 2. 1, 2. And he said unto me, Son of man stand upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee, and the Spirit entred into me when he spake, and set me upon my feet, and I heard him that spake unto me, &c. 3. When the Command lyeth before thee, if thou findest no power in thy self already given to thee, neither any power conveyed to thee together with the Command, then bring the precept to the pro∣mise, and search what there is in the promise, an∣swering to that which the precept requires, and so to sue out by prayer the blessing of the promise, that we may be enabled to do the duty of the pre∣cept. Precept, it is mans duty to believe, Mark. 1. 15. Promise, the Covenant holds forth believing as a free gift, Ephes. 2. 8. Prayer sues it out, Lord help my unbelief. Precept. It is mans duty, to wash and be clean, Isa. 1. 16. Promise. It is Gods promise to sanctifie and cleanse us, Ezek. 36. 25. Prayer. It is the business of prayer to sue out this promise; wash me and I shall be clean, Psa. 51. 7. It is mans duty to repent, and turn to God, Act. 17. 30. The promise holds forth repentance as the gift of God, Act. 5. 31, 2 Tim. 2. 25.
Prayer sues it out, turn thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31. 18. It is required of man as a duty to make him a new heart, Ezek. 18. 31. It is Gods promise to give a new heart, Ezek. 36. 26. Prayer riseth up sutable to the promise: Psal. 51. 10: Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me. It is mans duty to love God, Mat. 22. 37. Promise, It is Gods Covenant to circumcise the heart to love him, Deut. 30. 6. Prayer works out in the strength thereof, that God would direct the heart to love him, 2 Thes. 3. 5. It is mans duty to fear God, Deut. 10. 12. It is Gods promise to put his fear into our hearts, Jer. 32. 40. Prayer seeks for it, Psal. 86 11. Ʋnite my heart to fear thy name. It is mans duty to draw neer to God, Jam. 4. 8. It is Christs promise to draw men unto him: John 12. 32. Prayer falls in sutable hereunto, Can. 1. 4. draw me, we will run after thee. It is mans duty to walk in Gods Statutes, Psal. 119. 4. It is Gods promise to enable him so to do, Ezek. 36. 27. Prayer works up accordingly, Psal. 119. 5. O that my waies were directed to keep thy Statutes. It is mans duty to be strong in the Lord, Ephes. 6. 10. It is Gods promise to make him strong, Psa. 29. 11.
Prayer fetcheth strength from him, Psal. 86. 16. Give thy strength to thy servant. It is mans duty not to depart from God, Heb. 3. 12. It is Gods promise to his people, that they shall not depart from him, Jer. 32. 40. Prayer answers hereto. O let me not wander from thy commandments, Psal. 119. 10. I might instance in all, or almost every thing re∣quired of us, that there is a promise left us, and to many precepts there is two or three promises; the one to enable us the other to reward us, and all to encourage us to do our duty. Behold all ye whose faces are Sion-ward, here is a new and living way paved with promises. A way of strength to the upright, wherein they may walk from strength to strength, till they appear be∣fore God in Sion. Let no discouraging thoughts concerning the difficulty of the work which is set before you possess your hearts, so as to hinder your application to it, and cheerfull progress in it. A yoak we are commanded to take upon us, but such as is made most easie to bear, because, that God which layeth it upon us, hath promised to strengthen, supply and support us; he who is righteous in com∣manding, is gracious in promising: let us be strong in believing, and fervent in praying, and our work will be our meat, our duty our delight, and God will let us see that he hath either the Castle of provi∣dence, or the Ark of a promise, or the al-sufficiency of his own grace, for a retirement of his people in the greatest storms and tempests. Paul and Silas said to the Jaylor, Act. 16. 30, 31.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be sa∣ved. Now might not the Jaylor have replyed as many do now in our daies, and say, I can as well make a world, work miracles, overturn moun∣tains, as believe by mine own power; therefore Paul and Silas, why bid ye me believe? To this I answer, though it be true, that every commard of God is alike difficult to flesh and blood, that a man can indeed as well make a world, as make a prayer aright, a man may as well subdue an army of men, as subdue one lust, did not the Lord convey a power into the soul, together with the command, viz. If God command a man to believe, and gives him power to believe, the work will soon be done, Ezek. 36. The Lord commands to make a new heart: now a man is no more able to make a new heart, then to make a new world: therefore as we said before, he promiseth in the same place to give a new heart: and in another place it is said, mortifie your lusts: now this a man cannot do of himself: but the same God that commands us to kill our lusts, will kill them for us, Micah 7. 18, 19. He will subdue our iniquities, and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depth of the Sea. Again, God commands us to repen, but we are no more able to repent, or to shed one tear for sin then a rock is to give out water, or we are no more able to repent, then to turn the stream, or to make a slint flesh, till the Lord give us a repenting heart: he hath promised to give repentance to his peo∣ple. So that the commands in Scripture, doth not shew what the creature can do, but what he should do, yet not by our own natural power,
but by his assisting grace to enable us to do, what of our selves we cannot do, therefore we should pray with Saint Augustine, Lord give what thou com∣mandest, and then command what thou pleasest. To draw towards a conclusion to this point, let me acquaint the Reader of what I have observed a∣mongst all sorts of men with whom I have more or less conversed, viz. First the Papist, both in their writings and discourses, cry up and press all people to be doing good works. The Arminian his cosen Jerman, pleads for the same, and that almost, if not altogether, from the same principle, to the same end: the new upstart Quakers, fals in and closeth with these old errors, pressing people to do the thing that is commanded, but not as it is commanded; so many of our brethren of the Presbyterian party be∣ing in and under a spirit of bondage themselves, preach the Law before the Gospel, and put their hearers to act for life, but not from life. So also our brethren of the Independant party, and those of the Baptist party, many of them to my own knowledge do more mind the things they do for God in way of obedience to his commands, then they do the prin∣ciple from which, the rule by which, and the end to which they do it; and when they have done it, even these also are apt to lay too great a stress upon it. So then the Papist, freewiller, Quaker, Presbyteri∣an, Independant, Baptist, all these preach, teach and cry out to all their hearers for a holy conversa∣tion; nay to come a little nearer home, the word of God cals upon us for it, our own consciences call for it, and check us for our remissness therein; nay the Christians with whom we converse expect it from
us, what remains then but that we be found in the pra∣ctices of it, but let us beware we rest not upon it, for as we are not to conclude our justification from any effects of sanctification, so we are not to conclude that apprehension of justification to be from God, which takes us off the means, waies and rules of san∣ctification: the Ranters error springs up in them for want of this distinction. In a word, to say no more; duty is the matter of promise, as well as Gods mercy, as doth most clear∣ly appear by these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Ephes. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29. Acts 5. 31. Joh. 8. 32. And our ho∣ly conversation is not the cause of our salvation, but the effect; neither do I hold that there is any free will in man, neither do I believe that any man hath, or ever since the fall, had any will or power of him∣self without God to do any thing that is good, for in him, as the Scripture saith, we live, move, and have our being; so that in, through, and by God and Christ we may do all things, for he is a Sun, and a shield, and will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that wait on him, Psal. 84. 11. Yet God hath given all men enough, to leave them without excuse; what man is there that knoweth not, that if he make use of all the opportunities, will, power and understanding that God hath given him, but he may avoid more evil, and do more good then he hath done, or doth now do?
Of Justification and Sanctification, how they differ, and wherein they agree. GOD in Justification imputeth the righteous∣ness of Christ to us; in Sanctification his Spi∣rit infuseth grace in us. In Justification we read sin pardoned, in Sanctification we read sin subdued; the one doth free all Believers from the warth of God that they never fall into a state of condemnation; the other neither equal in all, nor in this life perfect in any, but going on and growing up to perfe∣ction. Again, Justification and Sanctification differ thus; to wit, Justification is the imputing of anothers ju∣stice to us, to wit Christ. Sanctification is the impression of Justice, that it may be in us. In Justification, there is satisfaction of Christ. In Sanctification, there is the obedience of a Christian. Justification is a perfect and absolute undivided act at once; Sanctification is a work begun, not equal in all, but carried on in all by degrees. Justification is first; Sanctification afterwards: consisting in separation from sin, filthiness, and com∣mon pollution. Justification and Sanctification are two inseparable companions, where one doth dwell, the other will lodge; and as Election is the proper work of the Father, as Eph. 1. 3, 4. Redemption of the Son, 1 John 2. 1, 2. So Sanctification is the proper work
of the Holy-Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Now there are four things considerable to shew us wherein we are to keep our Justification and Sancti∣fication distinct the one from the other. 1. We are to keep Justification and Sanctification distinct, in respect of the subject and matter of this, which is not any thing in us, or done by us: but the personal and spotless righteousness of Jesus Christ made over to us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2. It is our duty to keep up our Iustification di∣stinct, although it be not accompanied with Sanctifi∣cation, although there be failings in us; the Prodigal in Luke 15. came and confessed his sin as a son, and said, Father I am not worthy to be called thy son. 3. We should keep our Iustification distinct, and not go to reason out our Iustification from our Sanctification, but we should look to Jesus Christ, the Rock upon which a Christian should build his soul. 4. We should alwaies keep up, and keep distinct our Justification, as the spring and way to Sanctifi∣cation; for the fruit of Justification, is peace, joy, boldness and strength to do the will of God; all this doth come in from Jesus Christ in a way of believing, and not from Sanctification; for as we are not to conclude our Justification from any effects of San∣ctification, so we are not to conclude that apprehen∣sion of Justification to be from God, which takes us off the means, waies and rules of Sanctification: therefore although they be distinct in these four fore∣mentioned heads, yet they agree, and go hand in hand in these ensuing things.
1. They go together in these; he that is justified, doth as earnestly desire Sanctification and holiness, as he doth heaven and happiness. 2. He doth as well desire, that is justified by Christs righteousness, to chuse Christ as a King to rule over him, as a Saviour to save him. 3. They go together in this respect also; a soul is not content with the apprehension of his Justificati∣on, unless he finds some measure of, and growing up in Sanctification. 4. They go together, as doth appear by this; the man that is truly justified, he doth make as much care and conscience to practise holiness, as ever he did to get Christs righteousness. 5. They go together in this respect also: every discovery of Christ and his righteousness to the soul for Justification, doth fit and heighten the souls reso∣lution for Sanctification and holiness. 6. A man may be said to keep his Justification and Sanctification together, when he doth trust his soul in the hands of Christ for salvation, and makes it his work to die to the world, and to honour Christ in the world. 7. When a soul hath found out Christ, for his Ju∣stification, he doth make it his great business to be conformable to him in his conversation, Phil. 3. 10. being made conformable to his death. Now if any ask, 1. Why a soul should keep his Justification and Sanctification distinct in some things. 2. Why in other things we should keep them to∣gether. 3. How a soul should come to keep his Justifica∣tion
and Sanctification distinct, and yet to keep them together. Then I answer, 1. Why a soul should keep them distinct: to which I answer. 1. Because the Spirit of God is distinct in laying down these things in the Scrptures, viz. in exhort∣ing us to come without money, and without price; and if we walk in darkness, and see no light, yet to trust and stay our selves upon him, because he doth love us freely, and pardon us graciously, and is found of them that sought him not. 2. Because otherwise our souls can never be truly established, rooted and built up in him, Isaiah 7. 9. Eph. 3. 17. Col. 2. 7. he that doth mix Justification and Sanctification together, can never be establish∣ed. 3. We should keep them distinct, that so we might give God the whole glory of our Justification and salvation. Quest. 2. Is, why we should in other things keep them together? Answ. 1. That we might glorifie God before the world; its true, a soul doth most glorifie God by believing, but he doth more glorifie God before the world by his holy conversation, Matth. 5. 16. John 15. 8. 2. Because holiness and sanctification is the way in which the Lords people shall be saved. I do not say that this is the way by which, but the way in which salvation is manifested, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. 3. The next reason why we should keep them toge∣ther, is, because thereby we shall stop the mouths of
wicked men, 1 Peter 2. 15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing you may put to silence the igno∣rance of foolish men. 4. We are to keep them together, because this is the will of God, that all that do profess his name, and lay hold on his Mercy, should live holily, 1 Thes. 4. 3, 4. For this is the will of God, even your sanctifi∣cation, that every one of you should know how to pos∣sess his vessel in sanctification and holiness. 5. We are to keep up Sanctification as well as Justification, because thereby the Lord will stop the mouths of wicked men at the last day, saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, you have done thus and thus for me and mine, Matth. 25. 34, 35. Quest. 3. Is, how should a soul come to keep his Justification and Sanctification distinct, and yet keep them together? Answ. 1. Meditate much on the free love of God, when we were in our blood, he was in his love; freely to love us, and graciously to justifie us: and then in the second place the soul will say within it self, shall I sin against him that hath freely justified me? No, no, how can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? 2. Dwell much upon those engagements that God hath put upon us in the many great things that he hath done for us, Titus 3. 3, 4, 5. For we our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another; but after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour appear∣ed, not by works of righteousness which we have done, &c. Ver. 8. These things I will that thou affirm con∣stantly,
that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works. 3. Think much upon the littleness of our work or services we can do to him, and the unspeakable things that he hath done and promised to do for us▪ what a disproportion there is between his mercy to us, and our obedience to him; the one is like the Ocean Sea, the other as a grain of mustard-seed; the one infi∣nite, the other finite; the one as a great mountain that fills the whole earth, the other as a Pepper∣corn. 4. Dwell much upon the great difference there will be between those that make it their work to keep up their Faith and obedience, and those that do not; at the coming of Christ, the one he will bless, and make them sit down to meat, and will serve them, see that blessed place, Luke 12. 37. The other hath neither Justification nor Sanctifi∣cation, the Lord will cut them asunder, and will ap∣point them their portion with unbelievers, Luke 12. 46. O what remains then, but that we labour to di∣stinguish between our Justification, and our personal Sanctification. The first is quite out of our selves, consisting in the imputation of Christs righteousness inherent in him, who sits at the right hand of God, far above the reach and sphear of sins activity, and is therefore perfect and compleat, yea the foundati∣on of all blessedness; the latter is in our selves, and therefore weak and uncertain; he that understands not the true nature and doctrine of Justification, cannot enjoy true, stable and constant peace; but remains unstable, apt to be led away with every
wind of Doctrine; in the right understanding of this point, is treasured up a fountain of soul-reviving consolation. Surely, by what hath been said, it doth most plainly appear, that a Christians happiness depends not upon his own doings, but on Christ, who is of God, made unto us Righteousness, Sanctification, &c. who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace. See 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Tim. 1. 9. Heb. 13. 8. Sanctification admits of degrees, Justification neither of Rules nor degrees; when we cannot apprehend God in a way of San∣ctification, yet we are then comprehended of God, though our actual righteousness be but as men∣struous rags, and often fail us, yet then, even then, we have the righteousness of Christ presented to us, Isa. 45. 24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength: their righteousness is of me saith the Lord, Isa. 54. 17. And this Righteousness, as it is ours by imputati∣on, so it is perfect and endureth for ever, and is the foundation of all blessedness, therefore let us rest satisfied with Christs righteousness, and add nothing to it, let our hearts say with David, Psalm 71. 15, 16, 19, 24. I will make mention of thy righteous∣ness, even of thine only, and wait upon him in Faith, prayer and patience, who hath promised that he will be as a dew to Israel, and that he shall grow as a Lilly, and cast forth his fruit as Lebanon, Hosea 14. 6, 7.
Of Faith, the quality, object, acts, seat, subject, inseparable concomitants and degrees of Justi∣fying Faith: the difficulty of believing, and the faculty of mistaking about it. FAith gives courage and confidence in greatest difficulties and dangers, but unbelief raiseth fear where no fear is, Psalm 23. 4. Believing is the ready way, the safest way, the sweetest way, the shortest way, the only way to a well-grounded assurance; now Faith is, An habitual frame, or a believing disposition of heart, whereby man is inclinable to believe whatsoever God hath said in his word. Or, It is a grace of God, whereby the heart and will of a sensible sinner, doth take and embrace Jesus Christ as tendred in the Gospel, in his person and offices, and doth wholly and only rest upon him for pardon of sin, and for eternal life. Gods eternal decree is the original cause of it, Acts 13. 48. The instrumental cause of it is the Word of God, Rom. 10. 17. The immediate and singular cause of it is the Spirit of God, Gal. 5. 22. That the will or heart of a man should be brought off from it self, and to abhor its own condition and suf∣ficiency, and to take Christ as God tenders him, to be the only rock upon which a man must build his salvation, and to be the only Lord, to whose Law and will we must resign up our whole soul, this ariseth not from natural causes, or mans own free will.
Of the Object of Faith. NOW the object of Justifying Faith is the whole Trinity; God the Father the ultimate object: God the Son the immediate, as he is joynt∣ly one with the Father in justifying a sinner, John 14. 1. ye believe in God, believe also in me; now whole Christ is the object of Faith: Christ you know is God and man, and he is to be considered as a Priest, as a Prophet, and as a King; now God tenders him in all these to sinners, and Christ is willing to bestow himself on them, as one who can and will assuredly save all that come to him; but saith Christ, if you would have me to be your Priest to save you, you must also be willing to have me to be your Prophet to instruct you and direct you, and to be your King and Lord to command you; you must resign up your selves to my Scepter and Government, for I am a Lord as well as a Saviour, and I will be taken as both, or else you shall have part in neither. I will be taken as Lord and King, to command all the heart, to dis∣pose all the waies, to rule the very thoughts. Of the subject of this Faith. THE subject of this Faith is a sensible sinner; there are two sorts of sinners. 1. Some generally corrupted, both in their na∣tures and in their lives, and they are as unsensible as they are sinful, they know not their own vileness; these are not the subjects of this precious Faith. 2. There are sensible experienced sinners, who
loath themselves, and groan under the burden of their sins; I must confess there are several degrees of this sensibleness, neither dare I to assume the height and latitude of it, unto the terms, or horrour, and terrour, and dejections, before he can believe in Christ; no, though these sharp throws are manifest in some, yet let us not make them a rule for all; but this be sure, that the heart looks not towards Christ, until it feel it self to be sinful and lost, then and not till then, the soul looks out and enquires after a Savi∣our; and anon he finds it written, that Christ ame not to call the righteous, but sinners; and that Christ was sent to find that which was lost; and that the whole need not a Physitian but the sick▪ and that he is sent to preach liberty to the Captives. Of the Seat of Faith. THE seat or habitation of Faith is the heart, or will, or both, Rom. 10. 10. with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, Acts 8 37. and Philip said, if thou believest with all thy heart, thou mayst: now before Faith takes up his seat in the heart, or in order to it. 1. There is a looking to Jesus, John 19. 37. 2. There is a coming to him, Mat. 11. 28. John 6. 37. 3. There is a leaning upon him, Cant. 8. 5. 4. There is an embracing of him, Cant. 2. 6. 5. There is a taking hold of him, John 1. 12. Col. 2. 6. 6. There is a believing in him, and that with the heart, and there is the seat of Faith.
Of the ground of Faith. THE ground of believing is the word of God, the Scriptures of truth; he that doth say he doth believe in God, having no Scripture ground, he doth deceive himself; the ground of Faith is without our selves, not a light in us, or any thing done by us: the ground of Faith is, God in his word doth offer us Christ, and Christ cals us unto him, and saith, he will in no wise cast us off, but if we believe in him we shall have eternal life; now this is a word of truth, and this word of his is wor∣thy of all acceptation, and whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, John 20. 31. But these things are writ∣ten that we might believe, and that believing we might have life through his name. 1. The Scriptures of truth are the ground of Faith; as they do give a man sufficient ground and warrant to believe whatsoever is contained in them; this was the ground of Abrahams faith, and of Da∣vids faith, remember the word upon which thou hast caused me to hope, Psal. 119. 49. 2. The Scriptures are the ground of Faith, as it is a sure word: as we are not to believe any thing that is not contained in Scripture, so we need not doubt of any thing that is promised in them: they are the faithful sayings of God. 3. The Scriptures are the ground of Faith, as it is a touchstone to try all doctrines by, Isa. 8. 20. John 5. 39.
4. They may be said to be the ground of Faith, as they hold forth all things necessary to salvation, and all things necessary to be believed. Again, they may be said to be the ground of Faith, because in them the Lord doth command us to be∣lieve, 1 Joh. 3. 23. Joh. 6. 29. Again, in the Scriptures there are many so∣lemn invitations to poor sensible sinners, to come and take milk and wine, and the water of life freely. And many precious promises to those that do come, with many examples left upon record, how well those have sped that did come; all these are grounds and encouragements to believe. The Springs of Faith, how God doth beget it in an unbeliever. THere is no natural power in man to produce a cause within its self; this great grace of Faith is no fruit of the wisdom of the flesh, nor is it the birth of a corrupt will. The immediate and sole cause of Faith is the Spirit of God: He it is who is greater then the heart, who can perswade and draw the heart, and change and renew the Spirit: There be means appointed by God which he doth ordnarily bless, for the production of faith; as he hath ordained means for the revelation of Christ, so he hath sanctified means to lead the soul unto him, to implant Faith. 1. God lets the soul see that it is the command of God, that he should believe, and that faith is the
gift of God, without which we can do nothing accep∣tably; it is through grace that men believe, yet men are to use the means; now the great and ordinary means by which God works faith in the hearts of men, it is the preaching of the word▪ See Act. 13. 48. When the Gentiles heard this they were glad, and glo∣rified the word of the Lord, and as many as were or∣dained to life believed, Rom. 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Ephes. 1. 13. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salva∣tion. 2. The preaching of the word doth discover to the soul, its extream misery, and great need of Christ, and makes him say, men and brethren, what shall I do to be saved. 3. It is that which casteth down all the rea∣sonings, arguments, and disputes of the mind against the conditions of Christ, and renders all the terms of Christ upon which he will be taken, as most equal, fair and resonable. 4. It is that which clears the way for the soul against all its fears, and unbelieving doubts; it layes before the sinner, the freeness of Gods mercy, the fulness of Christs Redemption, the willingness on Christs part to accept of him. 5. It is that sets the soul in a patient expectati∣on, to lie at the Pool, for ever to attend the as∣semblies of the Saints, and to enquire in his Temple, till the soul can take a close with Christ, by true be∣lieving. 6▪ Means to get faith; take one promise, and charge that upon the heart, and if the heart be stub∣born,
and will not yeild, then take another, if that will not do, then take another; and lay that home upon the heart, and never leave this work till you have gotten some smal measure of Faith. 7. Make as much conscience of those commands that require you to believe, as you do of those com∣mands that do require you to hear, read, and medi∣tate, and pray. Lastly, consider for thy encouragement that bles∣sed text, Psalm 147. 11. The Lord taketh plea∣sure in those that hope in his Mercy. See Psalm 33. 18. The Impediments, Lets and Hinderances of Faith. AS the Eunuch said to Philip, here is water, what hinders me that I may not be baptized? so may I say to my self and others here in the Gos∣pel: is Christ set out to the life? here are argu∣ments fair enough to draw on our souls to Christ, what hinders that we do not believe and receive Christ? The first impediment to the getting of Faith, is gross ignorance; whatsoever is contrary to know∣ledge, the same is contrary to Faith: the soul must have light for all its motions, for the eye to see, and the understanding to perceive; and for the heart to embrace those ignorances that is a hindrance to faith, fals in these three parts. 1. They are ignorant of their own sinful condi∣tion 2. They are ignorant of Gods just disposition towards them.
3. They are ignorant of Christ and all his excellencies: what he is, God, or man, or both: they know not him in both his natures, neither in his Offices, Actions, Passion, Benefits, Vertues: they understand not how God hath manifested love in Christ; to what end he was made man; what is in him more then in any other. Alas they think not of these things: Now how is it possible for the soul to believe, or to be perswaded to be∣lieve in Christ, or to labour for this precious faith, which is a stranger to it self, to God, to Christ? 2. A second impediment of Faith is a vain con∣fidence of natural righteousness; this was it which kept off many of the Pharisees; the text saith, that they trusted to their own righteousness, they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own rigteousness, have not submit∣ted to the righteousness of God, Rom. 10. 3, 6. 3. A third impediment of faith is the honour of the world; how can you believe, saith Christ, which receive honour one from another, John 5. 44. again, Mat. 19. 22. He went away sorrowful without faith, for he had great earthly possessions, John 7. 48. Have any of the Pharisees believed on him?
Motives to believe, or divers Arguments from Jesus Christ himself to perswade us to believe. 1. OUR Lord Christ doth lay his command up∣on us, John 14. 1. ye believe in God, be∣lieve also in me, John 6. 29. this is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent. 1 John 3. 23. this is his Commandment, that we believe on the name of the Son of God, even Jesus Christ. 2. The second motive is or may be thus; consider that Christ plainly saith, that he that will not believe shall be damned, John 3. 18, 36. Excellency prevails much with an ingenious na∣ture, and necessity with the worst nature: When the Leapers saw that they must either venture their lives or dye, they would out into the Camp: when the Prodigal saw he must famish abroad, or repair home, he would then back to his fathers house; when the woman with the issue of blood had spent all, and grew worse, and knew not whither to go, or what to do, then she comes to Christ: now if thou hast not so much ingenuity as to come to, and believe in Christ, in obedience to his command, yet let thy ne∣cessity prevail with thee, or else the Leaper and Pro∣digal shall rise up in judgement against thee: were we in Adams created innocency, then we need not to look after a Saviour, but we are fallen, but we are bro∣ken, but we are sold under sin, but we are trans∣gressours from the womb, but we are by nature the children of disobedience and wrath.
3. He doth invite us to come, and to believe by the Prophets, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. He beseecheth us by the Apostles to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. He cals upon us by his Church and spirit to take of the water of life, Revelat. 22. 17. and after all this, he waits upon us to be gracious to us; Isaiah 30. 18. 4. Our unbelief grieves the very heart of Christ; he grieved at their unbelief, he complains at our backwardness to believe, (O fools and slow of heart to believe) Nay, and he sheds tears because we believe not on him; when he came neer the City, he wept over it, &c. 5. Motive, Consider there is none who have right to thy soul but God and Christ; our souls are Gods workmanship, and Christs purchase; why then should we not give to God and Christ that which is their own, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price: God put forth his own power to make thy soul, and Christ shed his heart blood to redeem thy soul, and wilt thou through unbelief withhold it from him? 6. Christ outbids all Merchants for thy soul, he outbids the world, sin and Satan: is there any one of them that presents Redemption unto thee? is there any one of them that can procure remission and pardon∣ing mercy for thee? is there any one of them that can satisfie the wrath of God for thee? which can make thy peace, which can present thee righteous before the judgement seat, which can settle eternal life upon thee? all this can Christ do: none of this can they do.
Behold here is laid before thee life and death, life if thou dost believe, death if not; now chuse you whether; what shall I say more, by believing we ho∣nor God, Iohn 3. 33. by believing we come to be established, Isa. 7. 9. by believing we are kept in perfect peace, Isa. 26. 3, 4. Rom. 5. 1. Our naked cleaving to God in his free promise, will carry down all our distempers at once, and fill our souls with peace in believing. O how can we look so many sweet promises in the face, and harbour so many mis∣givings in our hearts? Rom. 9. ult. whosoever believ∣eth in him shall not be ashamed. Of the evil of unbelief, and the springs of it, and the misery that doth attend it. VNbelief doth rob the soul of all joy, comfort and content: Nay further, unbelief doth throw reproach upon God, Christ and the promises, and gives Satan the greatest advantage against us; he that lives without Faith, lives without comfort, joy, peace and content; by unbelief we add sin unto sin in the highest nature, 1 John 5. 10. Unbelief straightens the heart, stops the mouth, and hinders thankfulness; thou shalt be dumb, because thou believest not, Luke 1. 20. Unbelief is the door that lets in condemnation. John 3. 18, 30. He that believeth not is condemned. Rev. 2. 8. The fearful and unbelieving shall be cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone. 1. It is the greatest sin in the world, because it is a sin against the greatest love in the world, John
3. 16. Rom. 5. 8. It is a sin for which there can be no remedy, for asmuch as it is a sin against the only remedy; the Sentence of the Law may be repealed by the Gospel, but the sins against Gospel remedy there is no appeal, it is a sin that makes void and vain all the Covenant of grace, turning all the sweetness thereof into bitterness, and all the truth of it to a lie, 1 John 5. 10. Unbelief binds all our sins upon the soul, and so murders the soul, it grieves the heart of Christ, leaves all our sins upon record, leaves us to answer for our selves: it is a sin against the greatest love, against the only remedy, makes void the Doctrine of grace, and breeds an indisposition towards all ho∣ly duties: it is a dishonouring to God, a denying of Christ, a murderer of the soul, a belying of God, a denying of Christ, and a crowning of Satan; it doth without doubt proclaim the Devil a Conquer∣or, and lift him up above Christ himself. Judas did sin more by unbelief, and despairing, then by betray∣ing of Christ. In a word, doubts, fears and dis∣couragements, proceed neither from God, Christ, nor the Spirit of truth, but they do proceed, First, from the Devil, he either tempts us to sin, and that will cause us to doubt, or else he doth tempt us to doubt, and that will cause us to sin. Secondly, they proceed from our own hearts, Heb. 3. 12. Thirdly, from the lying vanities that we hearken unto, Jonah 2. 8. Fourthly, from ignorance, heedlesness and forgetfulness. Fifthly, from unskilfulness of the word of righteousness, Heb. 5. 12. 7. Sixthly, from want of watchfulness. Seventhly, from building our hopes and comfort upon that which is mutable and
uncertain, viz. our own personal Sanctification, and not upon Christ, and our free Justification. Eighth∣ly, from our own false reasonings, making Sense, Reason, and Feeling the Judge of our spiritual con∣dition. Ninthly, from our ignorance of the love of Christ and the Covenant of Grace. The Characters, Marks or Signs of true Faith, &c. THere are many characters or discoveries of this Faith of the Gospel, called the Faith of Gods Elect, which worketh by love. First, the ha∣bit of this Faith is infused into the soul, by God in regeneration, Eph. 2. 8. John 1. 12, 13. Secondly, this habit so infused, is brought to act by the Fathers drawing the soul to Christ, Iohn 6. 44. Thirdly, faith being thus infused and acted, doth chearfully accept of Christ upon his own terms, viz. self-deny∣all, bearing the Cross and following Christ, Luke 9. 23. Iohn 1. 12. Faith having thus accepted and re∣ceived Christ, begins to taste such sweetness and plea∣santness in him, that Christ is most pleasant to the soul, 1 Pet 2. 3, 7. So the soul by degrees comes to be filled with joy and peace in believing. Again, Faith having thus taken and tasted Christ, contends after a fuller perfection, even after assurance, Col. 2. 2. Heb. 10. 22. 1. True Faith is not only a justifying grace, but a sanctifying grace, Acts 15. 9. & 26. 8. the blood of Christ i a pure blood as well as a precious blood. It is a cleansing blood, as well as an expiating blood.
So faith is a grace not only to acquit, but also to purge and renew the person where it dwells. It is not only an enlightening grace, but it is also a conform∣ing grace; therefore we read that it doth ingraft us into the similitude of his death, and in the fellowship of his sufferings and Resurrection, Phil. 3. 10. Now then enquire; is there vertue gone from Christ to make thy dark mind seeing, thy stubborn judgement yielding, thy proud heart humbling, thy filthy heart cleansing, thy hard heart relenting and mourning, thy carnal affections to be heavenly, thy sinful soul to be holy? Read and well consider that in 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. 2. Where there is true Faith, it will cause the par∣ty to make a curious, narrow, impartial, diligent search into his own heart and soul, to see what hu∣mility, what self-denyal, what sin abhorrency, what love to Christ, what delight to the Ordinances, what zeal for Gods glory, what contempt of the world, what desires after the society of the Saints, what sympathizing with them in their afflictions? and if upon this search thou findest any impressions of grace, any spiritual work, any savouring, savory di∣stinguishing operations upon thy heart, then the Spi∣rit hath been there, and begun to work the grace of Faith in thy heart. 3. True Faith doth make the heart humble and lowly; Have we pardon of sin? why saith Faith, the cause of this is Gods love: Have we righteous∣ness? why saith Faith, the cause of this is Christs merits: Have we any gift? why saith Faith, the cause of this is Christs love. So that the soul sits down, and often saith, O Lord, O Lord, in my self
I am nothing, nay of my self worse then nothing. But what I am, I am by grace, all that I have is thine, my bread, my health, my life, my body, my soul, all is thine. If any love, if any mercy, if any Christ, if any grace, if any comfort, if any strength, if any stedfastness, if any performances, if any good work, if any good word, if any good affection, if any good thought, why, all is thine. I have nothing but what I have received, thou only art the cause, I am less then the least of thy mercies, and what is thy ser∣vant that thou shouldst look on such an one as I am? thou madest me, and thou boughtest me, and thou calledst me, and thou justifiest me, and thou savest me. 4. True Faith doth desire and endeavour after an increase; Help my unbelief, said the weak believing Father. O Lord encrease our Faith, said the Dis∣ciples; there are yet many degrees wanting to faith; either thou canst not be perswaded, or not fully per∣swaded, or not constantly perswaded; but if the Faith be true and living, it will bend after a rising. 5. True Faith in Christ, and a mournful heart for sin alwaies go together, Zach. 10 12. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and mourn, &c. there are two things that Faith will fetch up in the soul, the one is love to Christ, another is sorrow for sin. 6. True Faith is fruitful, James 2. 18. See Titus 3. 18. Although works do not cause Faith, or Justi∣fication, yet they do clearly manifest to others, whe∣ther we have Faith yea or no. To close up this point, let me acquaint the Reader,
that there are spiritual and inward characters of Faith, which serve as evidences to him that hath it, many of those I have hinted at under this fore-going head. Secondly there are outward or more external signs of Faith, and they consist in walking, so in the sight of men, that they may in charity judge of our Faith by our works: then there are characters of a strong Faith, and also signs of a weak Faith: First of a strong Faith, Rom. 4. 20. he staggered not at the promise through unbelief. Mat. 8. 6, 7, 8. I have not found so great Faith in Israel. Mat. 5. 22. O woman, great is thy faith, &c. So there are cha∣racters of a weak Faith; One is, he will be hasty to be answered, and be ready to suspect Gods favour, and Christs love, if he be not presently answered. Another is, he will be faint if delayed. And so much for the charactes or signs of Faith. The benefits of living by Faith: a Believers comfort, hope, joy and confidence should be in God, the same at all times. THE Lord hath various dispensations of provi∣dence as well relating to the outward, as to the inward man. Sometimes his way is in the whirl∣wind, and sometimes he is in the small still voice, and sometimes his foot-steps are in the deep waters, and so his way is not known. Nah. 1. 3. & 1 Kings 19. 12. & Psalm 77. 19. His dispensations are ma∣ny times contrary the one to the other; to day per∣haps thou enjoyest peace, strength, riches and honor, with health, prosperity and many friends, and to¦morrow
all these may be blasted; to day God un∣bosoms himself unto thee, and shines forth upon thee, but in a moment he withdraws himself. As blessed Job, David, and divers others experienced. Now the reason why we should believe, hope and rejoyce in God at all times, are as followeth. 1. Because a Believers happiness depends not up∣on his own doing, but upon Christ, who is of God made unto him righteousness, sanctification, &c. who hath saved us, and called us, not according to our works, but according to his purpose and grace, &c. 1 Cor. 1. 3. 2 Tim 1. 9 2. Because the state of a Believer in Christ, as considered in him, is a state of perfection, he is clean from all sin by the blood of Christ, they be removed from us; thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back; as far as the East is from the West, so far hath he re∣moved our transgressions from us: seventy weeks are determined upon the people, to finish the trans∣gression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation, and to bring in everlasting righteous∣ness. Col. 1. 28. John 17. 23. Heb. 10. 14. 1 John 1. 7. Isaiah 35. 8. & 38. 17. Psalm 103. 12. Dan. 9. 24. Ezek. 16. 14. Hereupon the soul begins to rejoyce in God, for he hath cloathed me with the garment of salvation, and covered me with the robe of righteousness. Our sins are laid upon Christ, and his righteousness is ours: hereupon saith God, thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee. 3. Reason: Why a Believers comfort, hope, joy and confidence should be the same at all times, be∣cause that God who hath loved an ever∣lasting
love, loves thee in his Son: thou art not be∣loved for thy own sake, or for any thing in thee, but upon the account of the Lord Jesus, in whom God is well pleased: Believers are never the more just before God for their own integrity, nor the less just for their iniquity. God doth say of himself, I am the Lord, and change not: his love is as himself, ever the same: and Christ in whom thou art beloved, the same yesterday, to day, and the same for ever: and hereupon should we live by Faith, and rejoyce ever∣more with joy unspeakable and full of glory, Heb. 13. 8. 1 Thes. 5. 16. Psal. 32. 11. 4. Because whatsoever thoughts we have of God, he is unchangeable; if he doth withdraw himself, and lead thee into the wilderness, it is that he may speak comfortably to thee. Hos. 2. 14, 15. and all this while thou hast his promise with thee, and his faithfulness is engaged unto thee. Isaiah 54. 7, 8. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I gather thee: in a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlast∣ing kindness will have mercy upon thee. Jer. 51. 5. Neh. 9. 16, 17. Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them to the end, Iohn 13. 1. 5. God doth ever look upon his as they are in his Son, and not simply as they are in themselves: they dwell in Christ, and he in them, they live in Christ, and their life is hid with Christ in God; and when Christ who is their life shall appear, then shall they also appear with him in glory, and be found in him, not having their own righteousness, &c. These Scriptures do fully prove all the fore-going reasons, why a Christians hope, joy and comfort
should be the same in God at all times, and so live by faith, and not by sight, Hos. 2. 19, 20. Jer. 3. 14. Jer. 33. 8. Isa. 62. 5. Heb. 8. 10, 12. Ezek. 16. 62, 63. Heb. 3. 6. Jer. 33. 20, 21. Hosea 14. 5. Isa. 61. 10. Isa. 54. 5. Jer. 31. 9. Heb. 3. 17, 18. Heb. 6. 17, 18. Rom. 3. 3. 2 Tim. 2. 13. Rom. 8. 28, 33, 35, 38, 39. Isa. 41. 10 Isa. 57. 18, 19. Isa. 54. 7, 8. Heb. 10. 19, 20, 22. Psalm 46. 1, 2, 3, 4. Rom. 8. 1, 2. John 13. 1. Isa. 63. 16. Psal. 89. 30, 31, 33. Several waies for a believer to hold fast his con∣fidence in God, at all times. To live by Faith in infirmities, is to live upon Christ and his promises, viz. If under temptations, 1. Cor. 10. 13. there is a promise of supportation and deliverance. In deadness of heart, Isa. 35. 5, 6. there is a pro∣mise of relief and quickning. If fallen by transgression, Jam. 5. 17. yet there is others of the Lords own in the same case. If thou seest thy duty, and want strength to do it, here is help and strength for thee, Job 17. 9. Psalm 84. 7. Isa. 45. 24. and 40. 29, 30. Jer. 17. 8. Psal. 1. 2, 3. Psal. 92. 13, 14. Isa. 61. 9. In Christ thou hast perfectly obeyed the Law, perfectly suffered and satisfied for all thy sins to the justice of God; so that in Christ, thou art perfectly just and righteous, and thereupon it is said, Col. 3. 3. Ephes. 2. 6. that our life is hid with Christ in God, and we are raised up with Christ, and made
to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; though in thy self there is a body of lust, and corrup∣tion, and sin, and there is a law revealing sin, accu∣sing and condemning, but if we live by faith in Christ, and in the apprehension of his love, believing in the life, righteousness, obedience, satisfaction, and glory of him whom the Spirit cals ours. Christ is ours, we are Christs, and Christ is Gods: he then lives out of the power of all condemnation, Christ being the end of the Law for righteousness; and thus a believer is blessed only in a righteousness without, not within, and all his assurance, confidence and comforts to flow into him through a channel of faith, and not of works, believing himself happy for what another, even Christ hath done for him, not for what he hath done, nor can do for himself: for when we are at the best, we are but vanity, Psal. 39. 5. and unprofitable servants, Luke 17. 10. Now this believing in God is attended with these five blessed things. 1. It is the highest piece of obedience to God, Rom. 16. 26. It is called the obedience of Faith. 2. It doth put a new engagement upon God to make good his promise, upon which faith is ground∣ed, Psal. 119. 49. Remember the word unto thy servant upon which thou hast caused me to hope, 1 Chron. 5. 20. 3. Consider also another priviledge is this, the greatest mercies that ever came into a soul, comes in a way of believing, Rom. 15. 13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, Rom. 5. 1. being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. &c. 4. By it we give the greatest honour to God, John 3. 33. He hath set to his seal that God is true,
but he that believeth not hath made him a lyar, 1 John 5. 10. 5. This is the way to have God take pleasure in us, Psal. 147. 11 The Lord taketh pleasure in those that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy, Psal. 33. 18. The eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy. The joy of a believer would be alwaies unspeakable, did he al∣waies apprehend his happiness in and by Christ Jesus. Faith in Christ supplies all wants, it honours God, as Heb. 11. the whole Chapter: and God honours those most that live by it: by it, saith the Scripture, the Elders obtained a good report; by faith we may live a life to God, of joy in him our righteousness, as if we had never sinned; by faith we live above sin, in∣firmities, temptations, desertions, sense, reason, fears and doubts: Faith sweetens the sweetest mercy, and the bitterest miseries, it renders great afflictions as none, it is the bulwark of the souls strength and comfort: by Faith we cheerfully, rea∣dily, and universally, and constantly obey God. In a measure it makes the the yoak of Christ easie and sweet, it states the soul in the possession of heaven, whilst the body remains on earth, as John 3. 36. By faith we view the glory of heaven, and know our selves to be happy, even then when to a carnal eye we seem most miserable. By faith we can cheerfully part with, and suffer deprivation of the sweetest outward com∣forts and enjoyments, and welcome them, know∣ing that we do but exchange the worst things, and place for a better; those that live up by faith, live upon God, and are refreshed in his house, which is
plentifully stored with all desirable dainties, having this welcome, eat O friends and drink abundantly: It is O believer thy portion, duty, and priviledge thus to do: O then, O then let us at once believe that God will be to us according to his gracious pro∣mise and Covenant, notwithstanding our daily omis∣sions and commissions, excuses and defects, according to that portion of Scripture, Psal. 89. from 30. to 37. If my children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgements; If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their trans∣gressions with the Rod, and their iniquities with stripes: Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from them, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, my Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips, &c. He that lives by Faith in infirmities, may be thus characterized. 1. He will hear Christ and not the voice of a stran∣ger, John 10. 27. 5. 2. He is not offended at whatsoever Christ re∣quires, Mat. 11. 6. 3. The revealed will of God in the Scriptures is his Rule, and not the light within, nor the traditi∣ons of men; he walketh more by rule then example. 4. He will trust God, and relye upon his word, he eyeth the promise, and saith, surely in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, Isa. 45. 24. Jude 3. Act. 20. 31, &c. 5. He will hold fast to, and earnestly contend for the truth, and Faith once delivered to the Saints. 6. His sin doth not sink him into despair; though he may have many doubtings, he will say in the mid  of
all his imperfections, I have as much of the love of God, acceptation in Christ as the best Saint ever had; though I come short in the manifestation, my state is as happy as any of theirs, Heb. 3. 17. Although the Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine, &c. Yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation, &c. What shall I say more? my body shall be raised. 1 Thes. 4. 16. And I shall have a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. 43, 44. I shall have a glorified body, Phil. 3. 21. The Sun in the firma∣ment is not so glorious as my body shall be, because the Sun is but a natural body: I shall have fulness of know∣ledge, Ephes. 3. 18. and fulness of joy and pleasure, Psal. 16. 11. No misery, hunger, cold or nakedness, pain, grief nor weariness shall attend me, but I shall rest without labour, 2 Thes. 1. 7. And I shall have in rest tranquility, and in tranquility contentment, in con∣tentment joy, in joy variety, in variety security, in se∣curity a glorious eternity, then shall I be like him, and see him as he is, 1 John 3. 1, 2. compared with 1 Cor. 13. 12. To close up all that I shall speak of this grace of Faith, which is of so great concernment, give me leave to answer two considerable questions that do arise in the hearts of many. 1. What conditions or qualifications must or ought I to find in my felf before I believe or lay hold on a promise? 2. If to believe in God is of so great concernment, both to being, and well being, why do so few men and womens sons and daughters believe? 1. Quere is: What conditions and qualifications must, or ought a man to find in himself, before he
believeth or lay hold of the precious promises in the Scriptures of Truth. Answ. I know no qualifications or conditions re∣quired of us, before we come, unless these be con∣ditions and qualifications; tob uy milk and wine with∣out mony and without price, and to take of the water of life freely, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. Rev. 22. 17. Isa. 43. 25. Isa. 45. 22. And this I say there will be found in all that do believe, without which they will not come to Christ: I do not say without which they should not come. 1. A sense of his lost condition, and great need of a Saviour; the whole need not a Physitian, saith our Lord Christ. 2. There will be poverty of Spirit, which doth spring or arise from these two things. First, that a soul hath a sense, that it hath nothing that good is in it self. Secondly that he can do nothing to procure good to himself. 3. There will be an inquiring after a remedy, &c. Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? Lord what wilt thou have me to do? 4. There will be a willingness to part with any thing for Christ, that stood in opposition to him, that so he may enjoy him. 5. There will be a resolution and purpose of heart to lead a new life, more holily, spiritually and hea∣venly, for time to come. 6. A resolution to wait upon God in his wayes, and to lie at the Pool of Bethesda. Now these and the like things are not required, as that without which we should not come to Christ, but these things
will be in him that doth come, without which he cometh not. 2. Quere: What is the reason why so few do believe in God, seeing the way is so opened, and cleared, and the stumbling blocks removed? Answ. 1. Ground or reason, why believing on the Son of God is so hard, is because every thing in man doth fight against it: hence it doth come to pass, that believing doth require the greatest piece of self-denyal in them: for a man to break the Law, and yet to be freed from the curse of the Law, this reason cannot comprehend. 2. Ground why so few believe, is, either because they think they do believe already, and yet do not; or else they would believe, but say they cannot: First they think they do believe, and yet do not, and these are of three sorts; First, ignorant persons: now ignorance and unbelief, they alwayes go toge∣gether; we read of Paul that did things before he was converted, in ignorance and unbelief. Jer. 4. 22. My people are foolish, they know not me, to do good they have no knowledge. Secondly, those that boast and glory in their own righteousness, these have no faith in Jesus Christ and his righteousness. The third sort of people that do think they do believe and do not, are prophane persons, and these be of two sorts, men of prophane spirits, and men of prophane lives, pro∣phane practices. 3. Ground or reason why so few believe, is, because it is the great design of Satan either to hin∣der or overthrow our Faith; because believing doth give the greatest glory to God, and brings in the greatest good to us. First, it doth give the greatest
glory to God of any work in the world, it doth give glory to his truth and faithfulness, and power, and mindfulness. So it doth give glory to Jesus Christ, to his name, power and God-head, Of∣fices and attributes; by doubting we dishonour him, frustrate the grace of God, make the death of Christ of none effect. 4. Reason why believing is so hard a work, is, be∣cause of the multitude of false Doctrines that there are in the world, that a man scarce knows who to hear, or whom to believe, &c. Of Repentance unto life. REpentance and faith are two inseparable com∣panions; where the one doth dwell the other will lodge, in the Covenant of grace there is place for repentance, and mercy for the penitent. Let us first enquire what true repentance is, viz. Some say repentance is a grieving for sin, both original and actual, arising from an apprehension of displeas∣ing so loving a God, 2. Cor. 7. 11. For behold this self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort: what carefulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves? yea what indignation? yea what fear? yea what vehement desire? yea what zeal? yea what revenge in all things? &c. Repentance is not only a turning from evil to good, but a hating the evil we turn from, and a loving the good we turn to. True repentance is a general universal change of the whole man in every part; though it be but in part, it doth change both heart and life, word and work, it makes darkness light, and bitter sweet▪
and a Leaper an Angel, Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make ye clean: there is the change of the heart: put away the evil of your doings, there is the change of the life. See Ezek. 18. 30, 31, 32. Or repentance is a uni∣versal change in the whole man, the understanding is turned from darkness to light: the will from sinfulser∣vitude to an holy liberty: the affections from disor∣der into order, the heart from hardness into softness: so the eye of wantoness into an eye of chastity: the uncircumcised ear into an obedient ear: the hands of bribery into the hands of liberty: and the feet of vanity into the waies of purity. Repentance for sin is nothing, without repentance from sin. He that hath repented indeed, doth still desire to have his sin purged, as well as pardoned: repen∣tance is a work that must be timely done, or we be utterly undone: he that hath truly repented, doth now strike most at those sins that he was most prone to before: the Jaylor, Act. 16. Washed those wounds that his own hands had made but a little be∣fore: he acts in waies of mercy, quite contrary to his former cruelty: So did Zacheus, Luke 19. So did Paul, Acts 9. So did Manasses, 2 Chron. 33. 6. True repentance hath these choice companions at∣tending it. The first is Faith, Mar. 1. 14. Repent ye therefore and believe the Gospel. Secondly, love to Christ doth alwaies accompany repentance, as we may see in Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. Thirdly, fear of offending God, and an holy care to honour him, these and the like companions do alwaies ac∣company true repentance, they were born together, and they will live together, till the soul doth change earth for heaven. Conviction goes alwaies with con∣version,
and repentance and forgiveness of sins goes alwaies together, so doth sanctification and justi∣fication: this repentance is a flower that grows not in natures garden, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spot? &c. Men are not born with repentance in their hearts, as they are with tongues in their mouths. The Nature of sin. The Springs or Rise of sin. The ready way to mortifie sin. FIrst of the Nature of sin. Although sin hath but one nature, yet it hath several names; in every sin we take from God, and add to another thing. Sin is the transgression of the Law, and not believing and obeying the Gospel: sin defiles a man totally, it begins at the understand∣ing, and so to the will and affections: sin robs a man of the Image of God, of the presence of God. Sin was the first founder of hell, and laid the first stone thereof. And yet, most of this is but the effects of sin: the essence must needs be much more abomina∣ble. Hence sin is called poyson, and sinners Ser∣pents. Sin is called vanity, and sinners dogs. Sin is called mire, and sinners swine: the least sin virtu∣ally more or less, contains in it the nature of all sin; no sooner did one sin set upon Adams heart, but he had all sin in him; every sin doth put God upon complaining, Christ upon bleeding, and the Spirit upon grieving, and the soul a mourning: many sin by omission and commission, at one and the same time, and yet know of neither: the more there is
of the will in the acting of sin, the greater the sin is. Some sins of omission may exceed some of commissi∣on; the more deliberation, and the weaker tempta∣tions any hath, and yet sinneth, the greater the sin is. Many a man is full of sinful corruption, but shew it not for want of occasion. No sooner did one sin seize upon Adams heart, but he had all sin in him. How sin creeps up, and gets head in us. SAtan first tempts us to be strange one to another, and then to divide, and then to be bitter and jealous, and then to bite and devour one another: again, hasty and froward words begets anger; an∣ger being kindled, begets wrath; wrath seeketh gree∣dily after revenge. See Prov. 17. 14. Sin is of an in∣croaching nature, it creeps on the soul by degrees, step by step: David gave way to his wandring eye, and so fell into the sins of murder and adultery: again, Satan will first draw a soul to be unclean in his thoughts, then in his looks, then in his words, and then in deeds; he will first draw a soul to look on the golden wedge, and then to love the golden wedge, and then to handle the golden wedge, and then to gain the golden wedge. Again, he will draw a soul, first to have low thoughts of Scripture and Ordinances, and then to sleight Scripture and Ordinances, and then with the Ranters and Quakers to cast off Scrip∣ture and Ordinances: Again, if we give way to sin∣ful motion it will be great, vain thoughts, and vain thoughts will beget idle words, and idle words will beget petty oaths. Sins of omission do also open
the door, and make way for sins of commission: and again, fearfulness and timerousness doth arise from weakness and feebleness, and weakness and feebleness doth arise from unbelief or incredulity; the beginning of sin is oft by the Devils suggesting evil thoughts: evil thoughts cause delight, delight consent, consent engendereth action, action causeth custom; so one sin draweth on another: grant a little and a great deal will follow. Sin is ill in the eye, worse in the tongue, worser in the heart, but worst of all in the life: there are three waies how Satan comes into the Soul to cheat it. First as a subtile Ser∣pent in evil thoughts. Secondly, as an Angel of light, in lying Prophets and evil spirits. Thirdly, as a roar∣ing Lyon, in Persecutors. Of the great danger of small sins. OUR Father Adam for eating an Apple: one would account it a small matter to eat an Apple: Yet what misery did that bring? It did slay our Father, and deceive our Mother, cheated and almost undone all our Brethren, defiled our Sisters, wounded our children, and plundred all our kindred to the skin, and left them as poor as Job. The sin of Angels was but a small sin, only one sin, and but a sin in thought too, not in action; yet for this they were cast out of heaven. One would think it but a small sin for David to number the people, yet how many thousands did God take away by the plague for that small sin? It is true, in one sense there is no little sin, because
there is no little God to sin against. One would think it was but a small thing for Ʋzza to put his hand to uphold the falling Ark; yet for this the Lord smote him that he dyed. For one small sin of Moses, for neglecting to cir∣cumcise the child, for the bare omission of that, the Lord met him, and would have killed him, Exodus 4. 24. The same Moses for one unadvised speech must die in the wilderness, and not go into Canaan, Num. 20. 10. Palm 106. 33. Now there is great danger in samll sins, for these four reasons. 1. Because they be committed with more com∣placency and less reluctancy. 2. A man is apt to commit small sins with more security and less penitency. 3. People are apt to run into small sins with more frequency. 4. One stab at the heart with a pen-knife will kill a man. One little leak in a ship may sink it. And one little sin unrepented of will damn a soul, &c.
Of the mischief brought upon many for one sin. ONE sin cast Adam out of Paradise, and the Angels out of heaven: Annanias and Saphira for one lye were stricken dead; so was Ʋzza for once touching the Ark: One sin brought misery up∣on Esau for selling his birth-right, and David for Numbering the people; the sin of Saul, his sin be∣ing but one, and that of omission too, in not killing Agag the King of the Amalekites, he was utterly cast off by the Lord for the same, though he was his annointed and chosen servant before. I have lately read in a Book of Mr. Thomas Brooks, of the mis∣chief brought upon many precious men for one only sin, viz. One sin tript up the heels of Noah, the most righteous man then in the world: One sin cast down Abraham, the greatest Believer in the world: One sin threw down David, the best King in the world: One sin cast down Paul, the greatest Apostle in the world: One sin threw down Sampson, the strongest man in the world: Another cast down Solomon, the wisest man in the world; And another Moses, the meekest man in the world: And another sin cast down Job, the patientest man▪ in the world.
What hurt sin doth a Saint. IT is not falling into the water that drowns, but lying in it; so falling into sin sinks not thy soul, but living in it: we can stay no more from sinning, without the restraining grace, then the Heart from panting, and the pulse from beating: Sin may break a Christians Communion, but not his Union with God. God had one son without corruption, but no son without correction; he had one son without sin, but no son without sorrow: Sin will cost a Christian more grief, sorrow, heart-bleeding, and soul-break∣ing, before conscience will be satisfied, and comfort restored, and evidences cleared, and pard on in the Court of conscience sealed: For God is as severe in punishing, as he is gracious in pardoning, his house of correction is his School of instruction; Sin doth make God look severely, and chide bitterly, and strike heavily, even where and when he loves dearly. Isaiah 59. 2. Your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. Psalm 89. 32. Then will I visit their sins with a rod. Ver. 33. Nevertheless my loving kind∣ness will I not take from them, nor suffer my faithful∣ness to fail. Many would fain be rid of their sufferings, that would not at all be rid of their sins; Sin and shame are inseparable companions, and sin and punish∣ment are linked together; if thou wilt be sinful, thou must be miserable. One little miscariage doth in the eye of the world over-shadow all a Christians gra∣ces,
as one little cloud doth overshadow the whole body of the Sun. The ready way to mortifie sin. 1. SHun the occasions of sin, for that man shall be a slave to sin that will not flie the occasi∣ons of sin; it is impossible for that man to get the victory over sin, that sports and plaies with the oc∣casions of sin. I have read of five men that were studying what was the best way to mortifie sin. The First said, to meditate of Death; the Second said, to meditate of Judgement; the Third said, to medi∣tate on the Joyes of Heaven: the Fourth said, to meditate on the Torments of Hell: the Fifth said, to meditate on the blood and sufferings of Jesus Christ: and certainly the last is the strongest motive of all to mortifie sin; that soul that doth this, Isa. 62. 4, 5. shall no more be called forsaken, for the Lord will rejoyce over him, and be a well-spring of life unto him, and make his abode with him, and turn his sighing into singing, and his trembling into rejoycing, and his prison into a Paradise; then the soul will break forth, and say in these or the like words, O blessed be God for Jesus Christ, blessed be his name for that precious blood that hath justifi∣ed our persons, and quieted our consciences, and scattered our fears, and answered our doubts, and given us the triumph over sin, hell and death; who is he that condemneth? it is Christ that died: this made Paul, Rom. 8. 33. to the 38. cry out, victory, victory; he lookt upon all the enemies, and
sings it sweetly out, saying, Over all these we are more then Conquerors: in a word, from Christ alone we have strength to perform any duty, to exercise any grace, to subdue any lust, to resist any temptation, to bear any affliction. John 15. 5. Without me ye can do nothing; nay Paul goes further, 2 Cor. 3. 5. We of our selves are not sufficient to think a good thought, but all our sufficiency is from God. Isa. 45. 24. Christ is made unto a Believer righteousness and strength: now if we want Faith in Christ, we want righteousness by way of acceptation, and we want strength by way of assistance: Surely the mercy of God is the most powerful argument to perswade a soul from sin. Psalm 26. 3, 4. For thy loving kind∣ness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth. So Joseph, Gen. 39. 9. How can I do this great wicked∣ness, and sin against God? his soul being taken with mercy, was not moved with his mistresses impu∣dency. 1 Iohn 3. 3. He that hath this hope in him doth purifie himself as he is pure. Mich. 7. 19. He will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the depth of the Sea. Rom. 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit do mortifie the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, through the eternal Spirit, purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God? Surely, surely, if the bowels of mercy do not melt, win and draw us, Justice will be a swift witness against us: all divine power and strength against sin, flows from the souls union and communion with Christ; it is only Faith in Christ that binds the strong man hand and foot; it is only Faith in Christ that makes a man triumph over sin, Satan, hell and the world: And that stops the issue
of blood, that makes a man strong in resisting, and happy in conquering, so that sin alwayes dies most, where faith lives most; so that we must get up Gos∣pel principles, if we would keep up Gospel practices: Quere. We read in the Bible of many over head and ears in sin, and yet at last became great Saints. I pray how came those to mortifie their sin? Answ. We read of their misery, and also of their recovery, in many Scriptures: I will instance in one that speaks the sum of all the rest, as to the way how to mortifie sin; Tit. 3. 4, 5. For we our selves sometimes were foolish, disobedient, deceived, and serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another (there is the mysterie) but after that the kindness and love of God appeared not by works, of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, (there is the remedy,) in a word, the considerati∣on of the love and grace of God the Father, and the love of God the Son, the promises of God, and the pre∣sence of Christ: the example of the Saints, and the re∣compence of reward held forth to us in the Gospel makes a sound Christian to hold on, and to hold out, resolving to conquer, or to dye conquering. As a Christian grows up in the assurance of Gods love, so he will better heal his strong lusts: an heart softned and reconciled to God, willingly clos∣eth with the commandment, so that the best way to mortifie sin, and to amend our lives, is to lay hold on the love of God by faith in Christ, and so first to get assurance of forgiveness, which softens the heart, and enlightens the eyes to see that it is only the blood of Christ that purgeth from dead works. A
man by his own strength cannot prevail against a lust, that is to be done only by the blood of Christ, into which we are baptized, Rom. 6. 3. He that hath the strongest faith, hath ever the holiest heart and life; sanctification ariseth from justification: the Scrip∣ture saith, Every man that hath this hope in him, pu∣rifieth himself as he is pure: in this evidence of self∣purifying, note these three things. First, the act performed purifieth. Secondly, the object, about which this act is to be exercised, themselves, that is, their whole man, soul and body, from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. Thirdly, the rule or Pattern of this act, he purifieth himself as God is pure: this is not a word of equality, but of resemblance. Fourth∣ly, the ground or motive inciting to this purify∣ing, viz. hope of glory: every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure, 1 John 3. 2, 3. Hope in Christ excites to purity, because it conducts us straight to Christ the perfect pattern of all purity. Surely it is the appearance of Gods grace to us, which works a hope of glory in us, and this hope of glory doth purifie these several en∣suing waies. 1. It puts us upon, and helps us in a frequent wash∣ing our selves in the fountain opened for sin and un∣cleaness, viz. in the purifying blood of Christ by Faith and hope, as instruments applying Christ cru∣cified, Zach. 13. 1. Heb 9. 14. Psal. 51. 7. Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, &c. Rom. 3. 25. 2. This works us up to true endeavours in the use of all means to purifie both soul and body, person and conversation, from all corruption universally,
both in kind and degree, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Now hypocrites wash the outside of the platter or cup, but inwardly they are full of extortion and excess, Mat. 23. 25, 26. 3. This grace of God, and hope of glory, puts the soul upon maintaining a constant spiritual com∣bate by faith and hope, and other graces of the Spi∣rit against the flesh, Rom. 8. 13. And so by the Spi∣rit mortifies the deeds of the flesh, daily crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts, Galat. 5. 17, 24, 25. and this grace of hope as an inward princi∣ple works out pollution and corruption, as being re∣pugnant thereunto. 4. This hope of glory leads the soul to a diligent improvement of the word of God for self-purify∣ing, the word hath in it a purifying Faculty, John 15. 3. Ye are clean through the word that I have spoken unto you: the word purifies these waies. 1. As a lamp, discovering the spot, Rom. 7. 7. 2. As a star, conducting to Christ, the fountain of purifying, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Zach. 13. 1. 3. As a rule, according to which we are heedfully to order our conversation, Psal. 119. 9. 4. As a motive to self-purifying, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 5. As an antidote against sin. Psal. 119. 11. thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin a∣gainst thee.
Sin in the best Saint, and most times in the best actions of Saints. 1. THE fairest day hath his clouds, and the finest linneng hath its spots, the richest jewels their flaws, and the sweetest fruit their worms; so hath the most precious. Christians their failings, Da∣vids heart was more often out of tune then his harp. 2. Consider what complaints and cryings out there were amongst the most precious Saints, being sensible of their sins, Rom. 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, said Paul, Jer▪ 3. 25. We lie down in our shame, for we have sinned against the Lord our God, both we and our fathers from our youth, Gen. 6. 5. God saw that the wickedness of mans heart was great, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And for the Saints themselves here, in all duties, there is imperfection, something polluted, and something defective; our most spiritual duties are not wound up to command; they are all tainted with disproportion to rule, and not only so▪ but our choicest▪ services are be Leopar∣ded with many spots. We, whilst in this body can stay no more from sinning, then the heart from panting, and the pulse from beating: The Angels are impure in his sight, how much more the best of our actions? in many things we offend all: either offend and fail in the matter, or in the ground, or in the form, or in the end: Now our not acting from a pure prin∣ciple, by a pure rule, to a pure end, or our com∣ming
short in any of these, may mar the whole acti∣on: no action is said to be done according to rule, in a Gospel administration, unless it be attended with these five things. 1. All righteous acts must, and ought to be done spiritually and heartily, with heart and spirit, Prov. 23. 26. John 4. 24. 1 Cor. 6. 20. 2. Sincerely, as in the sight of God, Gen. 17. 1. Psalm 18. 22. and 66. 18. John 21. 15, 16, 17. 3. Obediently, because God commands it, as in Noah, Gen. 17. 7. Abraham, Heb. 11. 8, 17. Psal. 40. 8. 4. Universally, without reservation or excepta∣tion, Psal. 119. 6. 5. Constantly, perseverance in well doing doth crown the action, Psal. 1. 2, 3. Psal. 119. 20. Psal. 92. 14, &c. And moreor less every man comes short in these five things. So that a Saints comfort cannot lye in the duty performed: but a Saints comfort lyeth in this, viz. Although we carry our selves in our choicest perfor∣mances very weakly, yet the Lord doth carry to∣wards us very sweetly, and doth accept of that which we do very kindly, although done in much infirmity: in a word, he doth accept of our per∣formances, although accompanied with many infir∣mities: but to close up this head, that there is sin in the best Saint, consider these Scriptures, 1 King. 8. 46. For there is no man that sinneth not, Eccles. 7. 20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that doth good and sinneth not, &c. Jam. 3. 2. For in many things we offend all, &c. 1 John 1. 8. If we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, Prov. 20. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? 1 John 1. 10. If we say that we have no sin, we make him a lyar, and his word is not in us. There needs no more proof to prove sin to be in the best Saint, and in the best acti∣ons of Saints. Let us make out after a more per∣fect righteousness, or we perish for ever. The uni∣versal experience of the best of Gods people in all ages, doth evidence that none of them have been without sin in this life, not Abraham, Gen. 12. 13, 19. not Isaac, Gen. 26. 7, 8. not Jacob, Gen. 27. 19, 20. not Moses and Aaron, Psalm 106. 33. Deut. 32. 50, 51. Exod. 32. 2, 21. not David, Psalm 51. 1. to the tenth verse, and 38. 3, 4. not Peter, Mat. 26. 33, 34, 35, 70. to the end, Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13. not Paul himself, Rom. 7. 18, 20, 23, 24, 25, &c. The difference between the sinning of the Rege∣nerate, and the unregenerate. COnsider, that both the children of God, and the children of the Devil sin, yet there is a vast difference between the sinning of the one, and of the other, whereby we may according to Scrip∣ture distinguish betwixt the regenerate and unre∣generate. 1. He that is regenerated and born again, com∣mitteth not sin, nor can sin with a whole will, but as it were with a half will, an unwilling willing∣ness, and a dissenting consent, Rom. 7. 15. For
that which I do I allow not, verse 19. But the evil which I would not, that I do. Now the unregene∣rate sins with a full will, and with a full consent. 2. Sin in a Christian differs from sin in a wicked man, thus; it is the same for the matter, but not for the manner. 3. Although there be sin in a godly man, as well as in a wicked man, yet with this difference; the Christian doth constantly maintain war against his sin, the other is at peace with it. 4. They that are regenerate sin not against Gos∣pel remedy, the other doth. Now Jesus Christ is the Gospel remedy: and their not coming to him, looking upon him, receiving him, and accepting of him for salvation, John 1. 11, 12, 13. Act. 4. 12. John 3. 18, 36 and 16. 9, &c. This is to sin against Gospel remedy. 5. A regenerate man, though he have sin and cor∣ruption in him, yet he doth in some good measure avoid the occasions that should draw this out. Job made a Covenant with his eyes, that he might not sin against God: but the other runs into all actions, as the horse into the battle: To close up this head, a regenerate man, although he sin as well as an un∣regenerate, he is not under the raign of sin, neither doth he sin habitually, neither with the allowance of any bosom sin, not only as carnal men do, nothing but sin. For, first he doth stand in the way of sin∣ners, and intice others to sin, he doth study how he might commit sin, and makes a trade of sin, sins willingly, and pleaseth himself in sin, and pleads for sin: he is troubled and cannot sleep except he hath done mischief, and caused some to fall, Prov. 4. 16,
&c. The very thoughts of sin is pleasant and delight∣full to him, he will boast at his wickedness, and hates the man that doth reprove him for it; but this spot is not the spot of Gods people, Deut. 32. 5. How many waies the Lord is said to forgive sin; Or the various names and expressions of forgiveness. 1. FIrst Aaron by a special command from God, Lev. 16. 21. Was to lay his haad upon the head of the goat, and confess over him all the iniqui∣ties of the children of Israel. and all their transgresti∣ons, puting them upon the head of the goat, and the goat did bare away all their iniquities, into the land not inhabited, verse 22. 2. The Lord tels us he hath cast all our sins be∣hind his back, Isa. 38 17. Thou hast cast all my sins, saith he, behind thy back, &c. 3. We read that our sins are cast into the bottom of the sea, Micah 7. 17. 4. The Lord tels us in his word, that our sins are blotted out, Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he that blot∣teth out thy transgressions for my own sake, Isa. 44. 22. 5. The Lord tels us our sins are covered, Psal. 32. 1. Blessed is the man whose sins are covered, and transgressions for given. 6. The Lord tels us he will remember our sins no more, Jer. 31. 34. For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sins no more. 7. The Lord saith he will not impute sin to us,
Rom. 4. 8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin; he will not impute sin, that is, he will not set sin on our score, he will not put sin to our account; though sin be in us, yet it is not imputed to us. 8. The Lord tells us, that so far at the East is from the West, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us, Psal. 103. 12. What shall I say more, who is a God like unto him, that pardoneth iniquity, trans∣gression and sin, which comprehends all sin of what nature, kind and degree whatsoever, unless the un∣perdonable sin (iniquity is that which is done against another man) Sin is that which is done against a mans felf, and transgression that which is done im∣mediatly against God, but all these are pardoned for his own sake, Isa. 43. 25. Whether sins before conversion ought to be called to mind after conversion. SINS before conversion ought to be called to mind, but not with complacency of Spirit, or stupidity of heart, or despondency of mind. 1. Not with complacency of Spirit, but with bitterness of Spirit, and grief and sorrow of heart. Isaiah 6. 5. I am a man of unclean lips, saith that humble soul; so humble Job cries out of the iniqui∣ty of his youth, Job 13. 26, &c. so humble David sighs it out, Psalm 51. 3. My sin is ever before me: so those many converts, Titus 3. 3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, ser∣ving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful and hating one another, but after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour towards man appeared. 2. Though they are to be called to mind; it must not be with stupidity of heart, but with a broken, and bleeding, and a contrite heart; in the day of our prosperity we are not to forget our former poverty, but to consider, that we are not worthy of that cal∣ling, of that Gospel, and of that grace tendred to us in the word. 3. It must not be done with despondency of mind neither, the truth lyeth between two extreams; we must not call them so to mind as to discourage us, and make us unwilling to come to Christ, &c. 1. The first Reason why that people in a convert∣ed state should often call to mind the sin and misery they were in before conversion; because by so doing we shall be provoked to magnifie and admire the riches of Gods grace; none in the world do more admire Gods grace and mercy, then those that are most sensible of their own sin and misery. See 1 Tim. 1. 13. 2. Reason: because this will kindle a great deal of pitty and compassion in our souls towards those that remain yet unconverted. Titus 3. 2, 3. I Paul, and thou Titus, were sinful as well as they, and did serve divers lusts as well as they, let us pitty them, and help them out of this state of sin and death. Reason 3. Because this will make us more watch∣ful and careful. Eph. 5. 8. You were sometimes dark∣ness (saith he) but now are you light in the Lord, walk therefore as children of the light. 2 Sam. 7. 18. Who am 10 Lord God, said King David, and what is
my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? And Saint Paul, 1 Tim. 1. 13. remembers himself, and leaves it written for others to read, that he had been a blas∣phemer, a persecutor, and injurious: a low meditati∣on for an high Apostle, yet profitable to himself and others. Whether the Dominion of sin may not be taken away, where yet the life of sin remains. SIN may live where it doth not reign, and dwell where it is not welcom; it is true, the Scripture doth say, they that are Christs, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts; but here the Scripture doth not speak of a total subduing of sin, as if every lust and corruption should be quite sub∣dued, but only this far, to give a deadly blow to sin, that sin shall not reign nor bear sway in thy soul as it hath done formerly; the dominion of sin is taken away, but the life and being of it is continued for a little time. As Hagar would dwell with Sarah till she beat her out of doors: so will sin dwell with grace, till death beat it out of doors: there shall be some remainders of sin still in the best of Gods servants, but sin shall not reign in their mortal bo∣dies; sin may live in a Saint, and yet the Saint not live in sin. Let us now examine in what cases, and with what limitations strength of corruption may consist with strength of grace? the resolving of this question is of very much use. 1. Though sin be strong, yet grace may be strong
too in thy soul; though thy sin be great, if thy sorrow be great too, it evidenceth thy grace is so al∣so, 1 Chro. 23. 12. 2. If you find a strong opposition against your corruptions, though you cannot fully subdue sin, yet do you strongly oppose it: then there is strength of grace in the soul, though there be strong corruptions in the body. 3. There is strength of grace, where there is strong cries to God against thy sins, this argues grace, and the strength of grace, Deut. 22. 25, 26, 27. 4. There is strength of grace in that man or wo∣man that is resolved in the strength of Christ, to con∣quer his strong sins, or die conquering of them; our Lord Christ when two things were set before him, either to sin or die, he chose death, rather then sin, and by degrees he works his Spouse to the same mind. 5. That strength of grace may be consistent with strength of corruptions, I might instance in many precious Saints, I will mention one for all the rest, and that is in Peter; who had not only truth and re∣ality, but eminency and strength of grace: For though temptations and corruptions did sometimes prevail, yet he had strong affections towards Christ, he did out-strip many of the Disciples. 1. He was the man that of all the Disciples wept most bitterly for his sins, Mat. 26. 75. 2. Peter was the first that ran to the Sepulchre to see what was become of Jesus, John 20. 5. 3. He was the man who hearing that Christ was risen, leapt into the Sea for joy, John 21. 7. 4. He was the first man that made the first Ser∣mon,
and first preached the Gospel after the Ascensi∣on of Christ, Acts 1. 15. 5. He had that love to Christ as strong as death, for he suffered death afterwards for Christ; but now although in the cases before mentioned, strength of grace may be consistent with strength of corruption, yet there are other cases wherein they are altogether inconsistent; though there may be strong grace, and strong corruption in the soul, yet the reign of any one corruption in the soul, yet the reign of any one corruption is utterly inconsistent with grace, and the strength of it. See Rom. 6. 12. & 7. 23. And when I say there is a consistency between grace and corruption, I would be understood of spiritual and inward corruption, viz. of hardness of heart, Spiritual pride, deadness in duties, &c. For into gross external open acts of sin, strong Christians do seldom fall. How far a true Christian may be tainted with errour in Judgement, and yet at last be re∣stored. Sometimes even Gods own children, are even overcome with erroneous opinions; One whom the Lord had received into favour, might erroneous∣ly hold himself bound in conscience to the Legal dif∣ference of daies and meats under the Gospel, Rom. 14. 1. to the 7. The Apostles themselves erroneous∣ly deemed Christ should be a worldly King, Mark 10. 37. to 41. And this errour was not cured in them, though they were eye witnesses of his passion and resurrection, Acts 1. 6. And the Church of Ga∣latia
erred grosly in the point of Justification, mingling Moses with Christ, the works of the Law with Faith in Justification, Gal. 3. 4, 5, &c. by which it doth appear that regenerate persons may for a time be insnared in some errours that are gross and dangerous, and that against fundamentals of Faith; Christ and his Offices, those are fundamentals, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Eph. 2. 20. yet the Apostles as we said before, till the sending of the Holy Ghost upon them, were in an errour about Christs Kingly Office, taking it to be temporal rather then spiritual: Justifi∣cation by Faith alone is a Fundamental, Rom. 3. 28. Gal. 4. 5, 6. yet for a season, as before the Galati∣ans lay under that gross errour of that necessity of Legal works with Faith. But it is a dangerous thing for any of the Lords people to fall into such gross errours, hereby their minds are darkened, Eph. 4. 18. and corrupted, 2 Cor. 11. 3. bewitched, Gal. 3. 1. Now consider how grievous it is to have a mans mind corrupted; if the mind be darkness, how great is that darkness? &c. Oh here is the love of God in restoring his people again into the truth; and yet for all this he calls them the children of truth, 1 Joh. 3. 19. they can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 2 Cor. 13. 8. their loins are girt about with truth. Eph. 6. 14. whereas carnal men remain in er∣rour; and are men, 1. Of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, 2 Tim. 3. 8. and turning away their ears from the truth, 2 Tim. 4. 4. 2. Or they hold the truth in unrighteousness, Rom. 1. 18. 3. Or they are not able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Tim. 3. 7.
4. They have no love to the truth, 2 Thes. 2. 9, 10. and no wonder if such persons be unstable, and led away with the errour of the wicked, &c. Of Knowledge, first of God, secondly of our selves: the properties of it, and means of attaining it, and the benefits we have by it. Of Knowledge. TO lack knowledge is a very evil thing, to scorn to learn is worse, and to hate knowledge is worst of all. Hos. 6. 6. I desired the Knowledge of God, more then burnt offerings. Hos. 4. 1. The Lord hath a controversie with the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no knowledge of God in the Land. 1 Cor. 15. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame. Hos. 4. 6. My people perish for want of knowledge. Prov. 1. 22. How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and fools hate knowledge? Prov. 2. 16. When wisdom entereth into thy heart, and know∣ledge is pleasant to thy soul, discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee. Eph. 2. 17. There∣fore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is. What shall I say more, knowledge is that understanding which we have both of God and his Word and Will, and of our own selves; it is a store-house of all wisdom, and the beginning of salvation; it is a spiritual vertue to speak little and well; words are the shadow of works, and works the substance of words; much talking and little pra∣ctising, is like to an empty vessel, that doth give a
greater sound then they that be full; much knowledge & little practise is like a great tree that makes a large shew, but bears no fruit. To close up this, first of know∣ledge in general, let me tell the Reader, that a man without knowledge, is as a workman without hands, or as a painter without eyes, or as a traveller without legs, or as a ship without sails, or as a bird without wings, or as a body without a soul: there is a threefold knowledge or illumination: First, general and na∣tural, the light of Reason. Secondly, spiritual and supernatural. Thirdly, there is a knowledge of middle illumination betwixt these two, more then meerly natural, but less then truly superna∣tural. Of the knowledge of God. SOme have not the knowledge of God, saith the Lord by his servant Paul, I speak this to your shame, 1 Cor. 15, &c. Again another Scripture saith, This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent, John 17. 3. Again, it is death to be ignorant of him, for he will come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance on them that know him not, 2 Thes. 1. 8. So that all regenerate persons have true know∣ledge, though it be an imperfect knowledge: they do truly, though weakly know God, as doth ap∣pear in these Scriptures, Jer. 31. 34. John 6. 45. 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12. 1 John 5. 20. In a word, to know him, is to know all things,
for they have their being from him; to be igno∣rant of him, is to be ignorant of all things: So that such an one doth know nothing as he ought to know. Let the reader turn to the first page of this book, where I have laid down as much as I understand in this mysterie. Of the knowledge of our selves. IT is a most excellent thing for a Christian to know himself, and then at the best, he would see himself to be but vanity, and an unpofitable ser∣vant to God, and so begin to cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils. Oh what are the best of men! they have no better lodging for his noble soul, then a cottage of clay, and that so frail and cra∣sie, as were it not once or twice a day dawbed over, it would fall about his ears: and wheresoever he goes he is forced to carry this clog, this clay. Whereas Angels free from these shakels of flesh can move from heaven to earth, even as swiftly as can our ve∣ry thoughts. Nay, take the best piece in man, his soul, search and see, his understanding is full of dark∣ness, blindness and vanity, Psal. 94. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 24. Unteachableness and incredulity. See 2 Cor. 4. 4. Secondly, the will of man is wholly depraved, as being contrary to God, his will, word and spirit in all things: it will not depend nor wait on God, it is unconstant in good resolutions, it is very apt to diso∣bey the will of God, as we may see in Father Adam. Thirdly, as for the memory, that is also full of cor∣ruption, that it will forget the things that it should remember, and remember the things it should for∣get;
it will hold fast trifles, and let go matters of moment. Fourthly, The Conscience that is whol∣ly corrupted, that is without feeling, whereas it should excuse or accuse: It doth abuse and pervert the light it hath, by making great sins small, and small sins great. Fifthly, Our affections, they are also corrupted, they come as a tempest, and carry us away; either to make us over-love, or over∣grieve, or over-joy; and so we hate our brother, whom we should love, and love our lusts whom we should hate. What shall I say? our understand∣ing is darkened, our will depraved, our affections dis∣ordered, our memory misimployed, and conscience benummed, &c. We were conceived in sin, brought forth in iniquity, we have lived in vanity, and without the riches of Gods grace we shall dye in misery. The Charecters or Properties of true know∣ledge. 1. THE knowledge that is from God, subjects the soul to God: but the knowledge that is in the brain is notional, and neither subdues sin nor Satan. 2. Spiritual, experimental knowledge is a free gift of God, 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give in the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. This Divine light doth reach the heart as well as the head. 3. True knowledge is a transforming knowledge,
2 Cor. 3. 18. Like as the child receiveth from the parents, member for member, limb for limb, or as the paper from the press, receiveth letter for letter, or as the face in a glass, answereth to the face, so the beams of Divine knowledge, shining into the soul, stamps the lively Image of Christ upon the soul, and makes him put on the Lord Jesus, and resem∣ble him. God will own no knowledge at last, but that which leaves the stamp of Christ, the print of Christ, and the Image of Christ upon the heart. 4. True saving knowledge doth spring from a spiri∣tual sense and taste of holy and heavenly things; this is that experimental knowledge, that will turn to ac∣count at last; the other litteral knowledge will only encrease our guilt and torment, as it did the Scribes and Pharisees. 5. True knowledge circumciseth the heart, and dissolveth the dominion of sin, Ephes. 4. 22. The root of lust is error; when Christ takes away the foundation, the lust dyes, and the Devils work is dissolved. First, the lust of the eye: Christ informs the soul that there is no such excellency in riches; but that they are dross and dung, and therefore why should the eye or heart be set upon them: So this lust is dissolved, there is an end of it. 6. True knowledge doth indear Christ and the things of Christ to the soul, Cant. 2. 5. I am sick of love, I cannot live in my self: I can live only in Christ who is my life, Galatians 6. 14. God forbid that I should glory in any thing but Christ. 7. True knowledge is soul-humbling, soul-abasing knowledge: John said, I am not worthy to loose his
shoo. Peter said, depart from me, I am a sinful man. Abraham said, he was but dust and ashes. Gen. 18. 27. Jacob said, he was less then the least of all his mercies, Gen. 32. 10. David said, he was a worm and no man, Psalm 22. 2. Job abhorred himself in dust and ashes, Job 42. 1, 2, &c. 8. True knowledge is alwaies attended with holy endeavours, and heavenly desires after a fur∣ther knowledge of God, Prov. 18. 15. This knowledge of God goes before trusting in God, Psalm 9. 10. They that know thy name will put their trust in thee. There may be know∣ledge without grace, but not grace without know∣ledge. How one Believer differs from another in know∣ledge. AS saving knowledge is a free gift of God, so he gives to some more, and to others less, ac∣cording to the measure of the gift of Christ; and though it be freely given, yet the Lord doth hand it to us, and work it in us, in the use of means; age, and time, and communion, and study, and use of means, and experience do raise the apprehension and knowledge to far more degrees and strength then at the first; whereas before they saw dimly, at length they rise by degrees to a more perfect light of the same truths, and to a more full aad enlarged appre∣hension of other truths, which he was ignorant of before, even in this doth one believer differ from another.
Faith is the eye of the soul, and knowledge the ground of Faith, for believing is not rooted in igno∣rance, but in light: now every believer hath not so full and distinct a knowledge as another: there are several promises, and in them several parts and de∣grees Now all Christians have not been so long ac∣quainted with the word, as to know all the good which doth concern them. Of what a large and vast measure of knowledge a man may attain unto, and yet be without this saving knowledge. HE may speak with the tongue of men and An∣gels, and yet be as sounding brass, or a tinck∣ling Symbal, as in 1 Cor. 13. 1. Again, he may attain to the natural knowledge of all natural things, and speak eloquently and distinctly, and in many things truly; he may be well skilled in Logick, Re∣thorick, Phylosophy, and have the letter of the Scripture at his fingers ends, and yet be an ignorant man in the knowledge of God, and in the account of Christ, viz. 1. A man may have a common knowledge of Christ, and yet be without a spiritual knowledge of Christ; he may gather together a great deal of notional know∣ledge of Christ, and have much natural knowledge, by the works of God, by hearing, reading, confer∣ring, or the like, and yet be ignorant of the Tri∣nity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity. 2. He may attain to vast and great measures of notional, and yet be without an experimental know∣ledge
of Christ: how abundantly is this proved in our dayes in all places, &c. 3. An unregenerate man may attain to a con∣templative, or speculative knowledge of Christ, and yet want and be altogether without a spiritual expe∣mental knowledge; he may know Christ as a man knows his neighbour; but now a believer knows Christ, as a wife knows her husband: a natural mans knowledge is like the Moon, it hath light, but no heat: but a spiritual mans knowledge is like the Sun, that hath heat as well as light. 4. A natural man may have much knowledge, but he is a stranger to an appropriating knowledge of Christ—he doth not know Christ to be his Christ; now in this sense, a man may be a great knowing man, and yet not know Jesus Christ. 5. He is without a practical knowledge of Jesus Christ, he may know much, but do but little, Tit. 1. 16. in their words they profess to know him, but in their works they deny him: though they know God, yet they glorifie not him as God. Now put all these together, and they speak out with open mouth, that a man may attain to a great measure of knowledge, and yet be in the account of God, in the account of Christ, in the account of Christians, an ignorant man, he is without spiritual and experimen∣tal knowledge, without an affective, and apprehen∣sive knowledge, and without an appropriating, and practical knowledge. I shall close up this head with a few cautions and considerations. 1. Take this for a truth, that in a Scripture ac∣count, to complain of ignorance, is a good degree of knowledge, Prov. 30. 2. And I have not the knowledge of a man, &c.
2. Take this also for a truth, that in Gods ac∣count, he knows most that doth most, Psal. 111. 10. A good understanding have all they that do his commandments: God doth not measure our know∣ledge by our questions and disputes, but by our practices, as in Jer. 22. 16. He judgeth the cause of the poor and needy; was not this to know me, saith the Lord? 3. Take this also, that it is not the wanting of some measures or degrees of knowledge, that doth make a man ignorant in the sight of God, but the want∣ing of true knowledge of the Father, Son, Spirit, and Scriptures. Object. I am surely ignorant of God, saith many weak Christians: I do not know him, he will come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on me. Answ. 1. Suppose thou art ignorant of God, yet if thou art not consentingly ignorant, if thou art not a self-conceited man or woman, that thinkest thou knowest much, when thou knowest little, thou art well enough, if thou art not like those, in Hos. 8. 2. Israel shall say unto me, my God we know thee, and yet there is no fear nor knowledge of God in the Land. 2. If thou dost not sit down contentedly in thy ig∣norance, but dost labour and endeavour after more knowledge, then thy condition is good enough; but if thou sayest unto God in thy heart, as in Job 21. 14. Depart from me, for I desire not the knowledge of thy wayes; then thy condition is extream bad. 3. If thou art not obstinately ignorant, like those spoken of in Psalm 82. 5. They know not, neither will they understand, but they walk on in darkness: When
men be ignorant, and will be ignorant, this is an evi∣dence they have no saving work of God upon them, 2 Pet. 3. 5. saith the Apostle, these things they are willingly ignorant of. Now if thy ignorance be accompanied with these three circumstances, that you are conceitedly, and contentedly and obstinately ignorant, the Lord be merciful to thee, thou art in a state of death and damnation; but on the other hand, although thou hast abundance of ignorance in thee, yet if thou dost bewail it, and labour and desire after more knowledge, if you follow on to know the Lord, and are not obstinately ignorant, thy condition is good. Of Obedience. TRue obedience or keeping of Gods command∣ments, flows Originally from the true knowledge of God, to which we have been speak∣ing, so that here obedience fals in its centre and place; there is a three-fold obedience, viz. 1. There is an obedience both true and per∣fect, this was performed by Christ on earth, and by Saints and Angels in Heaven, Phil. 2. 8. Mat. 6. 10. 2. There is another kind of obedience, that is neither true nor perfect, done by all natural men; they fail in the ground from which, the rule by which, and the end to which, Rom. 8. 8. 3. There is a true and sincere, but an im∣perfect obedience, which is performed by Saints on earth: in all their obedience there is some imper∣fection,
something polluted, and something de∣fective; yea the most spiritual obedience is not wound up to command, they are all tainted with disproportion to rule; and not only so, but our choicest services are be Leoparded with many spots, yet the bent and main disposition of their hearts are upright and unfeigned, notwithstanding there be some gradual infirmities and imperfections in all their actions: concerning obedience, what it is, the ground and springs of it, I have before in this book at large laid down under the head of justification, and also more larger under the head of sanctification, and therefore I shall speak no fur∣ther to it here, but to proceed the next point that comes in order. Of Experience. IT is the duty, and it should be the practice of all sober Christians, to treasure up experien∣ces of Gods goodness, Psalm 77. 5. Thou hast been my helper, Psalm 63. 7. I was brought low, and he helped me, 2 Tim. 4. 17, 18. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, Psalm 89. 49. Lord where are thy former loving kindnesses? and so in another Psalm, return to thy rest O my soul, the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver us, in whom we trust, he will yet deliver us, Psalm 116. 2. Because he hath enclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. It is good to hear, better to understand, better to enjoy, and best of all to have experi∣ence
of what we hear, understood, and enjoyed: Laban could say to Jacob, I have learned by ex∣perience, that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake, Gen. 30. 27. So a man that hath had experience, can tell us, that sin is the greatest evil in the world, and that Christ is the only thing necessary; the fa∣vour of God is better then life: that the wounded spirit is such a burthen that none can bare; that a broken heart is an acceptable sacrifice to God, for he hath found it; so that the promises are precious promises, for he hath found it so: That the smiles of God will make up the want of any outward mercy, for he hath found it so, Psalm 63. 3. Because thy loving kindness is better then life, my lips shall praise thee. Of Enjoyment. IT is one thing to have a portion, and another thing to enjoy it; to possess a thing, and to enjoy a thing is the portion of a true Christian, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Who giveth us richly all things to enjoy, and hence it is that many a poor man lives more comfortably then the rich; the rich man hath much, and doth possess, the poor man hath little, and that little he doth enjoy. The rich man, saith Solo∣mon, roasteth not that which he caught in hunting; he hath hunted to and fro, and gotten a great deal together, and now hath the sight of it, but not the taste of it: this is one of the sore evils that Solomon saw, Eccles. 5. 13. There is, saith he, a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun; riches kept for the
owners thereof to their hurt. Eccles. 6. 2. there is an evil that I have seen, a man to whom God hath given riches and honour; so that he wanteth no∣thing of all that he desireth, yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof; this is vanity, and a sore evil, Prov. 12. 27. but the substance of a diligent man is precious, he doth eat and drink, and is satisfied, and doth praise the name of the Lord. If it be but a dinner of herbs, it is bet∣ter to him then a stalled Oxe to the other: What shall I say more to this head, the enjoyment of Christ without honour will satisfie the soul; the enjoyment of Christ without riches, will satisfie the soul; the enjoyment of Christ without re∣lations; the enjoyment of Christ without plea∣sure and smiles of the creature will satisfie the soul: Nay, though honour is not, and health is not, and friends are not; It is enough that Christ is mine and I am his.
Of love, the nature of it, several sorts and kinds of it: How its wrought in the heart, tryals of it, and properties of it: means of attaining it, and impediments of it, and in∣ducements to it. OF the nature of this love. Although Christians do somewhat differ in their defining it, what it is, yet in the essence or body of it they agree; but before I can orderly come to speak of the several definitions that Christians give of it, I must acquaint the Reader of the several sorts of love, viz. there is a love natural, &c. and a love sinful, &c. and there is a love spiritual. 1. There is love of pitty, as in a Father to a sick and vitious son, or one friend to another in misery: or if you please there is, 2. A natural love planted in the heart of man to love himself, his children, wealth and acquaintance: Now the spiritual love that we shall speak of by and by, doth set banks to the stream of natural love, that it run not over, either to over-love, or over∣grieve. 3. There is a love of complacency: So the Fa∣ther is well pleased with an obedient son, the husband with a vertuous wife, the School-master with a to∣wardly Scholar. 4. There is a love of friendship, when a man doth both honour and respect such and such good people, and is so beloved of them again.
5. There is a love of dependance, when we love one upon whom all dependeth, namely God; whom also we love, with a love of complacency and friend∣ship, being a full object, free from all mixture of evil, and altogether supernatural; this supernatural love is that I intend to speak to, and first of the nature of this love; in which I shall take notice of the various judgements of many precious Christians, in the de∣finition of it, although in the main they all agree. 1. One saith, it is an holy disposition of the heart arising from faith, whereby we cleave to the Lord, with a purpose of heart to serve him, and to please him in all things. 2. Another saith love is a grace wrought in the heart by the Spirit of God, in perswading the party of Gods love to it; and so the soul comes to love God, because he did first love him, 1 John 4. 19. 3. Others say, it is a supernatural grace flowing from Faith, instilled by God himself, whereby through the mercy of God we see the great excel∣lency of him, and thereby are drawn to love and yield obedience to him. 4. Others say it is an holy affection, or act of the will, or disposition of the heart, whereby it cleaves or makes forward to some good, that is agreeable to it self. 5. Others say, it is a spark of heavenly fire, that puts all the affections into an holy flame. Cant. 1. 7. Tell me O thou whom my soul loveth. Isa. 26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. He that planted the affecti∣ons of love in our hearts, may well call for his own,
and expect to gather the grapes of his own Vine∣yard. Several sorts or kinds of Love. BEsides what hath been spoken in the foregoing head, there are several sorts and kinds of love; as, First there is a fleshly and carnal love, which is altogether sinful. Secondly, there is a naturall ove, as in a Parent to a child, and one relation to ano∣ther. Thirdly, there is a civil love, such as one neighbour and friend hath to another. Fourthly, there is a religious love, and that is twofold, the one is subordinate to the other, viz. First there is our love to God. Secondly to his people, as they bear his image. First to God himself, who is the very essence of love, he is nothing else but love, God is love, neither should there be any thing beloved by us, but as it either conveys love to us from him, or else deaws up our affections to him; there is also a love to our enemies required of us, which we ought to be found in the practise of, in obedience to the command of God, and in love and pitty to their poor souls, Mat. 5. 44. But that love that I shall treat of is, that love spoken to in Scripture, which is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, Rom. 5. 5.
Of the springs of Love, how it is begotten and encreased in us. THE Lord tells us by Paul, Rom. 5. 5. That the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost: he shews us that he loveth us that were of no worth, and whilest we were in our sins, that he dyed for us, and then he doth shed the sense and feeling thereof abroad in our hearts, whereby we come to taste and see how good and gracious the Lord is, Psalm 34. 8. 1. Spring of love is this, the Lord doth unveil himself a little to the soul, whereby it sees his excel∣lency, viz. wisdom, power, riches, beauty, glory, faithfulness and amiableness. 2. Spring of love is this, the soul having seen something of his excellency, and so loves him, not only because of that, although he be most worthy of love, but also because he hath cast his love upon us: and so in the second place, the soul comes to love Christ, because he first loved us, 1 John 4. 10, 19. as fire begets fire, so doth love beget love. 3. Spring of love is this, after the soul hath seen the worth of Christ, and the love of Christ, it comes in the next place to see that the love of all relations doth meet in the love of Christ: and this doth raise up a Christian to love Christ with a supream love: Love is as a Load-stone, drawing the affections to love Christ, as to one that is aimable and lovely, fa∣mous and glorious, spotless and matchless, in his name, in his nature, in his offices, in his graces, in his
gifts, in his discoveries, in his appearances; in his Or∣dinances, he is full of gravity, majesty, and mercy, and glory, he is the chiefest among ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10. So the soul loves Christ for that incom∣parable goodness and natural sweetness that there is in him. But others that see it not, reject those gra∣cious invitations, reject the Kings Supper, and think it strange that thou runnest not with him to the same excess of riot. 4. Spring of love is this, the Lord presents be∣fore the soul, First his love in giving Christ. Se∣condly, the love of Christ in giving himself, and this many times takes with a soul, and makes it break forth in these or the like expressions; O the love of God to sinners, to give his son, and not a servant, his own son and not another, his only son and not a se∣cond, his only begotten son, and not an adopted son, that he should send and give him, when he was not sought by us, but freely given by him to us, not friends but enemies! &c. In the next place consider, the love of Christ in giving himself; O how won∣derful was his love to us, it was not a love to the fallen Angels, but to fallen man! Oh what hath he undergone for us! O that he that was equal with God should come in the form of a servant! That he that the heaven of heavens could not contain, should be cradled in a Manger, and from his cradle to his Cross, his whole life was a life of sorrows! Oh that the Judge of all flesh should be condemned, the Lord of Life put to death, that he that was crowned with honour and glory, should be crowned with thorns! That that face that was white and ruddy, should be spit upon by the beastly Jews! and that
tongue that spake as never man spake, should be ac∣cused of blasphemy! That those hands that swayed the Scepter, and feet that were as fine brass, should be nailed to the Cross! He was tempted by the De∣vil, reviled by the High Priests, branded for a Babler, Wine-bibber, and Sabbath-breaker, and Blasphemer! all this he suffered for us out of love to us, shall we not love him? his true love to us will be satisfied with nothing but love again—This is another Spring of love. Of the Tryals of Love, how it may be known. WE read, 2 Cor. 2. 8. And to prove the sinceri∣ty of your love; if the Lord will, this shall be my work in few words, to lay down those spiri∣tual experimental signs of this sincere, unfeigned, fer∣vent love. 1. The first character of this grace of love is this; true love will be satisfied with nothing but love again; what doth all avail, as long as we may not see the Kings face. 2. Those whom we love we often think upon, our thoughts fasten on them. Psalm 139. 17, 18. How precious are the thoughts of thee unto me O God, how great is the sum of them? when I awake I am still with thee. So that sleeping or waking, his mind runs up∣on him: try thy love of God by this; if thou think not often of God, thou lovest him not; but if thou canst not satisfie thy self with profits, pleasures, friends and other worldly objects, but thou must turn other businesses aside, that thou mayest
daily think of God: then thou lovest him. 3. Those whom we love, we will not willingly offend; no bars are so strong as love; Sooner will the servant offend his master, the son his father, the wife her husband, the subject his Protector, then him whom he spiritually loves. Friendship binds faster then any authority; Jonathan will offend his natural Father, rather then his spiritual brother, David: Joseph will offend his mistress, rather then his God, &c. 4. Those whom we love, we acquaint with our grievances, and lay open our miseries to their bo∣soms; their counsel we ask, and from them we look for help. 2 Chron. 20. 12. Jehoshaphat being opposed by his enemies, to whom comes he to complain? to none but to God whom he loved: to whom comes Hezekiah, 2 Kings 19. 14, 15. to complain against Rabshakeh and Sennacherib? to none but to God: to whom went David to complain of the bitter words of Cush the Benjamite? to none but unto God whom he loves. Psalm 7. 1. O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute me, &c. 5. Those we love, we take any small token kind∣ly from them; a pin from a friend is more esteemed then a pound from an enemy. 6. Those whom we love, we are willing to suffer or endure any thing for. Iacob, Gen. 29. 20. en∣dured a tedious service for Rachel, and it seemed but a few daies to him, because he loved her: so Pauls love to Christ made him not care for the passionate speeches, nor affectionate tears of his friends, he loved Christ more then either of them,
Acts 21. 13. compared with Iohn 21. 15. 7. Those whom we love, we can bear any thing that comes from them; we can endure their reproofs and their corrections; the child can be contented to be struck by the Father, that would not not take a blow of another. Psalm 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth because thou didst it. 8. That love that we bear to the people of God, is a sure token of our love to God, the image of God is graven in them, and they that love God, love those images of him that himself hath stamped; and the more like they are to God, the more they love them: But not to love them, is delivered as a note of the children of the Devil. 1 John 3. 10. He that loveth not his brother, is not of God. 1 Iohn 4. 7. He that lo∣veth not his Brother abideth in death. See 1 Iohn 4. 20. 9. Those that we love, we shall be often speaking of, and praising them. Psalm 47. 6. As he abound∣ed in love to God, so he abounded in praising him, Sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises to our King: and see ver. 7. What shall I say more, doth thy heart stir after Christ? art thou sick of love, grieved if he be ab∣sent, glad if present? art thou very diligent to ob∣tain the thing beloved? love cannot abide delaies, but would presently enjoy the thing loved: love de∣sires no wages but love again; true love will con∣strain you to please him, and put such necessity upon you to obey him, that you cannot chuse but do it in some good measure, 2 Cor. 5. 14. 10. And lastly, with the love of God is alwaies joyned the hatred of sin. Revelat. 2. 6. Thou
hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. The love of God, and the love of sin cannot dwell intensively at the same time in the same heart; for the love of the one will prove the hatred of the other, Mat. 6. 24. Jam. 4. 4. So love to God casts out servile fear, 1 Iohn 4. 18, 19. there is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth out fear, because fear hath torment: he that feareth is not de perfect in love: love casteth out a sinful, servile, slavish fear, whereby we slavishly fear either God or the crea∣ture, Rom. 8. 15. Mat. 10. 28. this is the fear that true love casts out. 1. Is this love of God shed abroad in thine heart by the Holy Ghost? hast thou an experimental taste of Gods love? Rom. 5. 5. 2. Hath this love of God effectually regenerat∣ed and renewed thee by the Spirit? Titus 3. 4, 5, 6. 3. Hath this love of God adopted thee, that thou art numbered amongst the sons of God? 1 Iohn 3. 1, 2. 4. Hath this love of Christ satisfied thee, and made thee holy? Col. 3. 12. 5. Hath this love of Christ brought thee to live the life of Faith? Gal. 2. 20. 6. Doth this love of God and Christ sweetly con∣strain, and even compell thee to be cheaully service∣able to him in thy place and calling? 2 Cor. 5. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Of the Properties of this true Love. 1. WHere there is love to God, and faith in Christ, it makes the soul long for, and earnestly desire the appearing of Christ, 2 Tim. 4. 8. There is a Crown of righteousness laid up for all them that love his appearing: as when we love any, we love their presence. It is true, sometimes good men are afraid to die, but it is because they would be better fitted for their Bridegrooms coming: besides the best have flesh as well as Spirit, &c. 2. Another property of love is this: Love de∣lighteth to speak well of the party beloved. David abounded in love to God, and therefore could never satisfie himself in speaking of, and praising him, Psalm 105. 3. Love is bountiful and seeks not its own, as doth abundantly appear in this blessed portion of Scri∣pture, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. 4. Another property of love is this, it will put the whole man to work for the party beloved: Me∣mory, Will, Affections, Tongue and Hand, and all will fall to work, when others stand frozen and be∣nummed: surely the heart that loves Christ is still drawing nearer and nearer to him, aspiring towards heaven, and thriving in the work of grace. 5. And lastly, love commandeth the affections, of anger and fear, it moderates the one, and regu∣lates the other. What shall I say more of the properties of this love? he that hath this love of God shed abroad in
his heart, doth look upon Christ as the chiefest among ten thousand, and so speaks good of his name, Psal. 34. 8. O taste and see that the Lord is good, &c. In a word, a soul comes to love him for himself, because he is the object of love. And so this man grieves when he is either dishonoured or slighted. Of the motives or inducements to perswade us to get into, and grow up in this Love. THE motives to perswade us to make out after this love, may be drawn from, either the bene∣fits that we shall get by it; or from the hurt or dan∣ger in neglecting it. To begin then with the last first, 2 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Iesus Christ, let him be cursed with a double curse, &c. 1 Iohn 4. 8. He that loveth not, knoweth not God, for God is love: and if we know him not. 2 Thes. 1. 8. he will come in flaming fire taking vonge∣ance on them that know him not. Iohn 5. 42. These people have not the love of God in them. Ioh. 8. 42. Iesus said to them, if God were your father, ye would love me, &c. 1 Iohn 3. 10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil; whosoever doth not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his Brorher: in a word, there is nothing that we say or do that will be ac∣cepted of the Lord without this love, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. Though I speak with the tongue of men and An∣gels, and though I have the gift of prophecy, and un∣derstand all mysteries, and though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and give my body to be burned, and have not this love, I am nothing, &c. In the next place let us consider the excellency of
it, and the benefits we shall get thereby. First, it is most like to God, 1 John 4. 16. God is love, and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God. Again, it is called by David, a joyful, blessed and pleasant thing: Again, it is recorded in Scripture as one of our evidences for heaven, 1 John 3. 14. By this we know we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren: and our love to our brethren is a sign of our love to God, 1 John 4. 20. Lastly, love will stand when all other graces will fail, 1 Cor. 13. 8. Love never faileth, ver. 13. now abideth Faith, Hope, Charity, these three, but the greatest of these is Charity. Of our love to the children of God, the nature of it, the tryals of it, the means of attaining it, and impediments that hinder it. 1. OF the nature of it: Christ is nothing else but love, and there should not any thing be beloved by us, but as it either conveys love from him▪ or else draws up our affections unto him; and our loving of his body the Church, will effect both these. The nature then of this love, may be com∣prehended under these ensuing heads. When we love them, as such in whom we see the Image of Christ, for their spiritual brother-hood, 1 Pet. 2. 17. The godly for godliness sake, for God in them: Christians for Christianity, for Christ in them; the Saints for their Saint-ship, for their Sanctity of per∣son and conversation; The spiritual children begot∣ten, for their Heavenly Fathers sake: when grace is
the principal load-stone of our affection; when for this we love them, more then for beauty, sweetness of disposition, birth, breeding, learning, wi, gifts, wealth, honour, &c. And so love all such as we apprehend to be the children of God; for he that truly loves one child of God, as a child of God, loves every child of God, whether noble or ignoble, rich or poor, bond or free, male or female; for the same God, the same Christ, the same grace, is as truly amiable in one, as in another. See Col. 1. 4. Hence we also come to love them most, that are most gracious, for where grace allures the affecti∣on, the more grace there is in any person, there is the stronger motive and allurement to love more. Jesus loved all his Disciples, John 13. 1. But John he loved eminently above all the rest, John 21. 20. And so as grace grows in the same person, true love towards him will grow proportionably. Of the Tryals of our love to the brethren. THere is a two-fold tryal or evidence of our love to the Lords people, the one more in∣ternal, the other extrnal. st, of the first, of the inward evidences. We ad  Jhn 3. 14. By this we know we have passed from death to life, be∣cause we love the Brethrn. Now r unfeign∣ed love to them will appear by these ensuing things. 1. If I would know whether I love the Brethren▪ Let me exam what my thoughts are of them, love thinketh no evil, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. Now I can
certainly tell what I do think of another, although I cannot tell what he doth think of me. So, though I cannot certainly, and infallibly tell whether ano∣ther loves me, yet I can certainly tell whether I love him or no; his love to me is in his heart, which I know not; my love to him is in my heart, which I know, and no creature else. 2. If I would indeed know if I love the brethren, let me examine how I do stand affected to them, in sympathizing with them when they be in misery, Heb. 13. 3. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body. 3. When we are at distance from them, what de∣sires have we after them, Phil. 1. 8. God is my re∣cord, how greatly I long after y all, in the bowels of Jesus Christ. Now why doth Paul call God to record? to prove the truth of his love to these Saints, but because this love in his heart, was known to none but to God and himself. 4. What delight do we take in their company; we are often in the company of those that we take no delight in: Now do we indeed delight in the society of the Saints: then we love them, Psalm 16. 3, &c. In a word, such things as we love, we keep with care, possess with joy, and loose with grief: so much of the inward tryals of our love to the Saints. Next of the external tryals of this love, by which we may know, that others do love us, and by which they may know that we love them. But these evidences are not so infallible as the
other, we read John 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to a∣nother: and how doth our love unto another appear, but in these or the like things, viz. 1. He that doth love his brother, will be apt to reprove him when he doth ill, and praise him when he doth well; a friend can bear a sharp reproof from a friend, &c. 2. Another evidence of love is this, we acquaint those whom we love with our miseries, lay open our griefs, and account it some ease to discharge some of our sorrows into their bosoms; their advice we ask, and from them we look for assistance, 2 Cor. 8. 3. 3. Where love is in the heart, it will appear in the tongue, 1 Cor. 13. Love is kind, but there is a great deal of verbal and complementary love with men, forbidden in the Scriptures of truth, saying, love not in word and tongue, but in deed and in truth. 4. Another Character of love is this, when thou hast some injuries offered thee, thou wilt not soon be angry, 1 Cor. 13. 4. love suffereth long. 5. Where there is love unto another, there will be endeavours to do good unto another; not only to the body, but also to the soul; they will be apt to say, as the woman of Samaria did to her neighbours, when she had found Christ her self, she cals them to him, John 4. 29. Come see a man which told me all things that ever I did, is not this the Christ? Or as David, Psal. 66. 16. I will tell you what God hath done for my soul.
Of the means of attaining a true love to the brethren. 1. COnsider the Lord loves them, and ath re∣ceived them; then say to thy self, shall I hate and reject those that he loves and receives, how unlike shall be to God? 2. Consider that the Lord commands thee to love them, and it is thy duty so to do; and wilt thou re∣bel against God, in not doing thy duty, but the quite contrary? 3. Consider they be members of the same body, children of the same Father, heirs of the same pro∣mises as thou art. Consider I say, thy relation to them, 1 Cor. 12. 27. For relation is the ground of affection. 4. Labour daily to have a higher esteem of all the Saints, and a lower esteem of thy self, so by de∣grees shalt thou come to love them indeed, Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through strife and vain glory, but in lowliness of mind: let each esteem other better then themselves. 5. Eye the work of God in them, the Image of Christ in them, and the gifts and graces of his Spi∣rit adorning them, and then thou wilt quickly love them, and that with a pure heart fervently, 1 Pet. 1. 22.
Of the impediments, and hinderances of love. 1. THe first impediment that doth hinder love, which we should do well to beware of, is this, beware of persecuting them either with tongue, hand or pen, Acts 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Zach. 2. 8. He that toucheth them, toucheth the Apple of mine eye, saith the Lord. 2. Beware of pride, Prov. 13. 10. Only by pride cometh contention. 3. Beware of offending them, Mat. 18. 6. 4. Beware of giving credit to evil reports, for many times it is a lye; also take heed of evil surmis∣ings, and groundless jealousies, and all other things that makes head against love, Ehes. 4. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking be put away from you, with all malice. Of the grace of hope, the nature of it, and the properties of it, and encouragements to it, and Characters of it. IF any ask why I write of hope after love? I an∣swer, because I find it so set down in the Scrip∣tures written for our learning, 1 Thes. 5. 8. But let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breast∣plate of Faith and love, and for an helmet, the hope of salvation. Now, first the nature of this hope may be thus. That hope of the Gospel is a grace of God,
whereby we expect good to come, patiently wait∣ing till it come, Rom. 8. 25. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. Look what the brest is to the child, and the oyl to the lamp, such is hope to the soul; it lives upon the promises, and every degree of hope, brings a degree of joy into the soul, Heb. 6. 18. It is built upon the truth and faithfulness of God, 2 Tim. 2. 13. Or▪ the hope of a Christian is built upon the love of Christ, the blood of Christ, the righteousness of Christ, the satisfaction of Christ, and the intercession of Christ, and the free grace of God, 1 Peter 1. 13. And upon the infinite power of God, Rom. 4. 21. In a word, true hope doth consist in Gods love in adoption, and the truth of his promises, and the power of performance, 2 Tim. 1. 12. I know in whom I have believed, and I am perswaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, &c. Or, hope is that vertue, whereby we expect all good things from God, and so patiently attend in the use of his appointed means, for all things that we need, Psal. 22. 4, 5. and 37. 7. and that not only when we have the means, but also when we want all apparent means, as the Israelites did in the De∣sart, &c. Or, true hope is a well grounded and patient ex∣pectation of the accomplishment of all those spiritu∣all and eternal good things, which God hath pro∣mised through Jesus Christ, to all that believe and expect them.
Of the Properties of this hope. 1. FIrst, this hope as an inward principle, works out pollution, and corruption, as being re∣pugnant thereunto, 1 John 3. 3. And every one that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, as he is pure. 2. Hope is alwaies more or less exercised about heavenly things, viz. Sometimes it is exercised about the righteousness of Christ, sometimes it is ex∣ercised about the love of God the Father in giving Christ: sometimes hope is exercised about the word and promises, Psal. 119. 49, 81, 114. and Psa. 130. 5. In thy word do I hope. Hope in the promises will keep the head from aking, and the heart from sinking: in a word, the promises are the ladder by which hope gets up to heaven, and so hope in the promises will support a distressed soul, and reduce a wandring soul: hope in the promises will confirm staggering souls, and some undone souls: The promises are the Anchor of hope, as hope is the Anchor of the soul, See Rom. 8. 24. Gal. 5. 5. Tit. 1. 2. 3. Hope hath much in reversion, though little in possession; hope can see a glimpse of heaven through the thickest cloud; hope can see light through darkness, life through death, smiles through frowns, and glory through misery; hope holds life and soul the together; it holds the soul and the promises toge∣it holds the soul and heaven together. 4. Hope never takes off, but puts the soul upon
doing and obeying, 1 Pet. 1. 3. it gives life and strength to all our duties, 1 Cor. 9. 10. 5. Hope will enter into that within the vail, Heb. 6. 19. Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, which entreth into that within the vail. 6. Another property of hope is this, it will help a soul to wait patiently upon God, for any thing it doth stand in need of, Rom. 8. 25. For if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. Of the encouragements, to encourage us to hope in God. 1. FIrst, this is the way for a Christian to enjoy himfelf, and to have God take pleasure in him also, Psal. 147. 11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy, Psal. 33. 18. Behold the eye of the Lordis upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy, to deli∣ver their souls from death, &c. 2. A believers comfort, hope, joy, and confi∣dence should be the same at all times, and that for these five unanswerable reasons. 1. Because God is unchangeable, John 13. 1. 2. Because God ever looks upon his, as they are in Christ, Gal. 5. 17. Psal 103. 14. 3. Because the hope and comfort of a believer de∣pends not upon his own doings, but upon Christs ho∣liness and righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30▪ 2 Tim. 1. 9. Heb. 13. 8.
4. Because Christ and all true believers in a sense are one, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Ephes. 5. 30. Heb. 2. 11. 5. Because we are not beloved for our own sakes, but for Christs sake, Mat. 3. 17. compared with Isa. 43. 25. Mich. 7. 18, 19, 20. 6 I might speak of many more encouragements, viz. As God doth command us to hope in him, and commends us for so doing, and blames and threat∣ens us for not hoping in his mercy. But if I should speak of every thing distinctly, I perceive my book would swell to a greater volumn then I intended. Of the distinguishing Characters between a well grounded, and a presumptuous hope. 1. FIrst, the hopes of a regenerate man, it is gotten by, and grounded upon the word of God, and therefore it is called the hope of the Gos∣pel, Col. 1. 23. Rom. 15. 4. But now the hopes of wicked men, as they are gotten they know not how, so neither do they know upon what they are ground∣ed, &c. 2. True hope is bottomed upon the mercies of God, and the merits of Christ: and hence it is that Christ is called our hope, 1 Tim. 1. 1. Because he is the foundation, upon which believers do build all their hopes. But now the false and presumptuous hopes of the wicked, are built upon their own du∣ties, what they have done for themselves, Mich. 3. 11.
3. True hope doth as well act for heaven, as hope for heaven, Psal. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord and do good; here is trusting and doing put together; true hope doth act for heaven, as well as hope for heaven. But a presumptuous hope, that hopes for heaven, as its end, but never acts holiness, as its way to heaven: in a word, false hope doth hope much and act little. Wicked men will hope for salvation, but not work out their salvation, &c. 4. He that hath true hope, doth make conscience to keep his heart pure and free, both from the love of sin, and the dominion of sin, 1 John 3. 3. He that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, as he is pure: that is, he doth endeavour so to do at least. But now a false hope will hope for heaven, though he walk on after the imaginations of his own heart, as in Isaiah 51. 10. Thou hast walked in the great∣ness of thy wicked waies, yet sayest thou not, there is no hope: though they had great sins, yet they had great hopes for heaven, but this hope is only a pre∣sumptuous hope. 5. True hope flows from a long, and well ground∣ed experience in the waies of God, and from an ex∣perience of the grace, and beauty, and love of God to him, and from experience of the goodness and mercy, and promises of God, and also from an ex∣perience from his own heart, which in some measure is enabled by Christ to withstand temptations, sub∣due corruptions. Such experiences as these are inlets to a well grounded hope. But now, the hopes of wicked men and women, are only the results of
ignorance, deluding and presumptuous hopes, with∣out any former experience of the ways of God, sure∣ly such hopes are vain and empty hopes, that will end in miserv, Prov. 11. 7. The hope of the wicked shall be cut off, and when he dies his expectation shall pe∣rish. See Job 8. 14. Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spiders Web. See Job 11. 20. Their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost, there∣fore let us take heed that we do not fancie to our selves false hopes of heaven on the one hand, and have as much care on the other hand; that you do not cast off grounded hopes, and say, there is no hope, and have as much care that you do not harbour in your hearts, common and ordinary conceits of this grace of hope: for there is the same certainty, the same excellency, and the same efficacy in this grace of hope, as there is in Faith and love. First, there is the same certainty in it, Heb. 6. 11. It is called the full assurance of hope. Secondly, there is the same excellency in it. Tit. 2. 13. It is called a blessed hope, and there is also the same efficacy in it: for as faith is said to purifie the heart, Act. 15. 9. So likewise doth hope, 1 John 3. 3. Every man that hath this hope in him, doth purifie himself, as he is pure. Again, there is the same difficulty in getting hope, as there is in getting Faith; for as it is gotten by the word preached, so is hope too, Col. 1. 23. And if Faith be wrought in us by the power of God, as Heb. 12. 2. So is hope likewise wrought in us by the power of the Holy Ghost, Rom. 15. 13. That ye may abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost, let our faith and hope then e in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. and let us not be moved away from the hope of the Gospel. Col. 1. 23.
The great Pillar of Marble that must bear up our hope, is the promises of God in Christ; he that builds his hopes for heaven only upon his own per∣formances and good duties, his hope is in vain; for this is not the pillar and ground of our hope, for when we have done all that we can, we must lie down at the feet of Christ, and conclude, that our best righteousness is but silthy rags; and when we have done all that we can, we are but unprofitable ser∣vants, Isa 64. 6. Luke 17. 10. Of Perseverance, what it is. It is the end that crowns the action: it is not enough to begin well, unless we end well; Man∣nasseh and Paul began ill, ended well; Judas and Demas began well, but ended ill; Double damnati∣on doth attend those that begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh; Persevering Saints must work hard in the wilderness, before they sit down in Paradice; they must make a constant progressin holiness, before they enter into happiness. 1. That perseverance that is true, is, a perseve∣rance in holy and spiritual principles, it is an abiding in love, John 15. 9, 10. Col. 1. 23. If ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not removed away from the hope of the Gospel: See 1 Tim. 2. 15. Heb. 13. 1. 1 Cor. 13. 13. A persevering Christian doth hold on, and hold out to the end, Mat. 10. 22. Mat. 24. 12, 13. Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto the Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life.
2. It is a perseverance in believing, in repenting▪ in mourning, in hoping, in loving, in fear, in humi∣lity, and in patience, and self-denyal; it is perseve∣rance in grace that doth crown every grace, and eve∣ry gracious soul with the crown of glory at the last, Rev. 2. 10. 3. In a word, that which the Holy-Ghost calls perseverance, hath this ingredient in it, it is an abiding in the Word and Doctrine of Christ. Iohn 15. 7. 1 Iohn 2. 24. Iohn 8. 31. If ye continue in my Word, then are you my Disciples indeed: A true Christian doth constantly maintain war, and usually obtain victoy; he is resolved to conquer, or die con∣quering. We read Acts 8. 43. that Paul and Barnabas per∣swaded the Christians to continue in the grace of God: for if we continue not, we shall be cut off, Rom. 11. 22. Of the gifts of the Spirit, and what those best gifts are that Christ gives to his best beloved ones. HAving written before of the graces of the Spi∣rit, it now follows in order to write something of the gifts of the Spirit, for there are many gifts and vertues of the Spirit: for every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, another after that, Jam. 1. 17. Rom. 12. 6. having then gifts differing, &c. 1 Cor. 12. 8. there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit; To one is given a word of
wisdom, to another a word of knowledge, by the same Spirit, to another Faith, by the same Spirit, to another the gift of healing, to another the working of miracles, to another prophecying, to another discern∣ing of Spirits, to another divers kind of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues; hence it comes to pass that every man is eminent in his gift above others, viz. Abraham exceeded Moses in faith; Moses exceeded Abraham in meekness; and Job exceeded both in patience: and Joshua exceeded all three in valour; So the Church of the Romans exceeded the Church of the Thessalonians in wisdom and knowledge; and the Church of the Thessaloni∣ans exceeded the Church of the Romans in Faith and Patience. So again, Paul he had the gift of utter∣ance, and freedom of speech, he was accouned the chief Speaker, he was a most eloquent man. Now Barnabas did exceed Paul in another gift, viz. in comforting those who were in trouble, Acts 11. 23, 24. and Peter did excell both Paul and Barna∣bas in another gift, viz. in feeding the Lambs, Iohn 21. 15, 16. Again it is said of Iames and Iohn, that they were sons of thunder, as having a more power∣ful gift from God to terrifie and awaken sinners. So then every good and perfect gift is from above, as we find Iames 1. 17. And as every man hath recei∣ved the gift, so he is to administer the same, 1 Pet. 4. 10. For to that end every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, another after that, as we read 1 Cor. 7. 7. And no man is to neglect the gift that is in him, 1 Tim. 4. 14. But it is the duty of all to stir up the gift that is in them▪ 2 Tim. 1. 6. Every man hath a gift given him accord∣ing
to the measure of the gift of Christ, Eph. 4. 7. and so having gifts differing according to the mea∣sure that is given to us: whether prophesie, let us prophesie according to the proportion of Faith, Rom. 12. 6, &c. Again we read in 1 Cor. 12. 1, 4, 8, 9, 28. concerning spiritual gifts, I would not have you igno∣rant, for there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit; for to one is given by the same Spirit the Word of wisdom, to another the Word of knowledge, to ano∣ther faith, to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit, to another prophesie, to another discerning of spirits, to another divers kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues, and all this worketh that one and the self-same spirit: Dividing to every man severly as he will. Eph. 4. 11, 12. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evange∣lists, and some Pastors and Teachers, Elders and Dea∣cons, ver. 12. for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.
More particularly, let us enquire into this, what those best gifts are that Christ gives unto his best beloved ones. THere are common gifts that all in common have, one as well as another; but▪ under this head I shall speak only of those most choice special gifts that he bestows upon his sons and daughters. 1. He giveth light to his beloved ones, yea he giveth spiritual light, which is a mercy of mercies, Eph. 5. 14. He gives that light whereby his people, not only awake and rise from the dead, but he en∣ables them to see sin to be the greatest evil; he gives that light that melts the soul, that humbles the heart, that warms and quickens the soul, and quiets the soul, and glads the soul. A man is not born with heavenly light in his heart, as he is born with a tongue in his mouth, for till Christ comes and sets up a light in the soul, the soul liveth in darkness, and lies in darkness, yea is darkness in the very abstract. Eph. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. 2. He gives repentance, which is a flower that grows not in natures garden. Jer. 13. 23. The Ethi∣opian cannot change his skin, nor the Leopard his spots; and that he doth give repentance as a gift to his, doth appear by these Scriptures, Acts 5. 31. 2 Tim. 2. 25. 3. He gives his Spirit, Rom. 5. 5. 1. John 3. See Iohn 14. 26. & 4. 13. 4. He gives a soul skill to lay hold upon, and
sweetly to apply the precious promises to him∣self. 5. He gives peace. Iohn 14. 27. My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. 6. He doth give pardon of sins, and that pardon of sins is a gift, will appear Acts 5. 31. Acts 26. 18. compared with Psal. 32. 1, 2. 7. He doth give grace. Iohn 1. 16. of his fulness we shall receive grace for grace. 8. And lastly, He gives himself. Rom. 8. 32. he that hath given us his son, how shall he not with him also give us all things? In a word, the Lord doth give his people spiritual and heavenly gifts, pure gifts, wine without water, light without darkness, gold without dross. See Rev. 22. 1. James 3. 17. He gives soul-satisfying gifts, most permanent and lasting, and most useful gifts. I had intended to have written something of the dif∣ference between Common and Special gifts, and of the vast difference between the gifts that Christ gives, and those the world gives; But my Book I see would then swell too big, &c. I shall to this add but this word, Christ doth vo∣luntarily and freely give these gifts and graces; never did a mother more willingly give her child suck, then Jesus Christ bestows grace upon his people. Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 17. So much of the graces, gifts and vertues of the Spirit; we shall now come to speak of the Ordinan∣ces of the Gospel, in which these gifts and graces must and ought to be exercised. I shall speak of ten or eleven of them which are standing Ordinances re∣maining to this day in full force and vertue.
Of the several Ordinances of the Gospel. 1. OF the Assembling of our selves toge∣ther. 2. Of preaching, and prophecying, and attentive hearing. 3. Of joynt prayer and supplication. 4. Of singing and praising God together. 5. Of the Ordinance of Baptism. 6. Of the Lords Supper, or breaking of bread. 7. Of Collections for the poor. 8. Of Reading the Scriptures. 9. Of Admonition, private and publick. 10. Of Suspention. 11. Of Excommunication. First of the Ordinance of Assembling our selves together. THE Church of God is in Scripture resembled to a natural body, wherein are many mem∣bers united to each other, and to one head, by one Spirit: now in order to this union, we are to assem∣ble our selves together in obedience to that great command. Heb. 10. 25. Not for saking the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is. Psal. 122. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go unto the house of the Lord. Those Saints that are as∣sembled together according to a Gospel institution, are a communion of Saints, arising from a clea ap∣prehension
of their union with Christ and his mem∣bers. 1 Cor. 12. 13, 14. For by one Spirit we ae all Baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit, for the body is not one member, but many mem∣bers. Ver. 20. For now are they many members, but one body: Now when a man comes to see that every one in whom the Lord Jesus appeareth is a member together with him in the same body, whereof Christ is the head; then his heart longeth to joyn himself in fellowship with such, who have fellowship with the Father and the Son. 1 John 1. 3. And so goes out by the foot-steps of the flock, and propounds him∣self to the Church, and puts himself upon the tryal of the truth of that work of grace in his heart: So that a Church is at first gathered by the word preached and faith received of them that hear it, Mat. 28. 19, 20. but to come to particulars, I shall according to my measure speak or write of the Ordi∣nance of assembling under these two heads. 1. As it relates▪ to those that are converted, but never as yet joyned to any Church of Christ. 2. As it relates to those that are converted, and joyned to the Church of Christ. 1. As it relates to those that are converted, but never as yet joyned to any Church of Christ in or∣der: let them consider, that it is their duty to pro∣pound themselves to, and endeavour to joyn with the Church. For first the Lord in his Word doth command it. And secondly the example of the pri∣mitive Saints, whose foot-steps we are to follow, doth call for it; and therefore you no sooner read
of a people converted, but the next news, they were baptized and added to the Churches: and good rea∣son why: because God commands us not to forsake the assembling of our selves together. And secondly, although our being depends not upon our joyning with a Church of Saints, yet our well-being doth much depend upon it: If any ask how or by what means is a Church at first gathered? I would say to them again. What is written? how readest thou? you are to observe no other Rule, means or way, then what is either exprest, implyed, or included in the holy Scriptures of truth, where we may find out the right Ordinanes, Ministry and Go∣vernment. The right Constitution of a Church of Christ, or the way at first to gather a Church. 1. LET seven, eight, nine or ten, or more of those men that are most sound in the Faith, and most unblamable in their lives and conversation, appoint one day to fast and pray to∣gether, and earnestly seek unto God for his directi∣on herein, and toward the end of the day, let them one by one give an account of the work of grace upon their hearts, and of the hope that is in them, and then give your selves up to the Lord, and one to another by the will of God, with no other Co∣venant then this, to endeavour as God shall en∣lighten, and enable you to walk together in the ap∣pointments, Ordinances, and institutions of Christ, the head of the Church, exprest, implyed, and con∣tained
in the Scriptures of truth, which you take to be your rule, &c. 2. In the end of this meeting appoint your next meeting, both time and place, expecting the pre∣sence of Christ with you to assist and teach you, according to his promise, Mat. 18. 20. See the as∣semblies Annotations on this verse. 3. You having proceeded thus far, you may look upon your selves as a Church of Christ in its infancy, and when other Christians by the word preached, and Faith received, desire to joyn with you in this or the next meeting, let their names be propounded, which being done, let the brethren appoint a meet∣ing to confer with them about the time when, the place where, the manner how the Lord did first appear to them in a powerful conviction, con∣version, and regeneration, or something equivolent thereunto: and if they give such an account of the work of grace upon their hearts, as doth satisfie the brethren, that the Lord hath begun a work in this creature, that he hath promised to finish, as in Phil. 1. 6. Then you are to proceed to a second questi∣on, being as before satisfied in the first; that the par∣ty is a hewed and squared stone, and a living stone, fit for the spiritual building: in the next place en∣quire of the said party that desires to joyn with you; what is his or her grounds and ends in desiring fellowship with you, and if you find that their grounds be in obedience to the command of God, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Rev. 18. 4. and their ends be, that they might enjoy God in all his ordinances, and have a fellowship with those that have fellowship with the Father and the Son, as in 1 John 1. 3. that
is, being united by Faith to Christ and his members, he may pertake of his grace, and spiritual life from him, and by him be united to God the Father, and have communion with him, Joh. 17. 21. compared with Heb. 2. 11. All that are admitted, must put themselves upon the rest, and be received by consent, for the Church is Christs kingdom; now the matter or subjects of Christs kingdom, they are believers gathered out of the world, by the preaching of the Gospel, and the powerful Ministry of the Spirit, Mark 1. 15. and Mar. 16. 15, 16. Act. 2. 44. hence it is that the Church in Scripture are frequently called Saints, and holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, the house of God, and Temple of the holy Ghost, the houshold of Faith, born from above, of the Spirit, that they might worship God in Spirit and in truth; they were darkness, but now are light, Ephes. 5. 8. They were lost, but now found; were dead, but now are alive; they before had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy: were not a people, but now are a people of the living God; the Father disdains not to count them his sons and daughters; the Son is not ashamed to call them brethren; the Holy Ghost is pleased to make them his temple to dwell in; all which discovers and confirms that the Church of Christ are and ought to be a spiri∣ritual building, made up of spiritual stones, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Now if any professor hang back, and seek not to joyn with the Church of Christ, only because he will not be examined before the Church, in the par∣ticulars before mentioned, then let me ask that man
or woman, child or servant, how it is that you are unwilling to venture your estate in this world, with∣out first advising with a Lawyer; and thou wilt ad∣vise with Physitians about thy bodily health, but will adventure their souls upon their own judgement and tryal, without taking the advice of the Church of Christ: is thy soul less precious to thee then thy body or thy estate? if thou hast truth of grace, why wilt thou not bring it to the touchstone, and come to examination? if no grace, why wilt thou refuse the way and means to get it? surely thou dost neg∣lect this way either, 1. Our of ignorance and pride, because thou wilt not have thy ignorance discovered. 2. Or else it is from a prophane spirit of opposi∣tion against all the wayes of Christ, held forth in the Gospel. See thy doom, Luk. 19. 14, 27. 4. The Church being thus planted, and the num∣ber thereof increased. If you find some qualified, you ought to proceed to elect your Officers, the Church being a most free Corporation under Christ the Lord, Ephes. 2. 19. She is in all reason and equity to chuse her Officers and Ministers, 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28, &c. Unto whom also she is to give assistance, obedience, and maintainance, 1 Tim. 5. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 9. 7, 9. compared with Heb. 5. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 4. 5. Now that these Officers of the Church appoint∣ed by Christ, are to have their outward calling from the Church, whereof they are members, for the present, and unto whom they are to ad∣minster, will fully appear by these few reasons. 1. Because the Apostles, who taught only
Christs commandments, so directed the Churches, Act. 1. 23. Act. 6. 1, 2, 3, 5. Act. 14. 23. 2. Because the people amongst whom they have been conversant, can best judge of their fitness both in respect of their gifts and graces. 3. Because it furthereth much the diligence and faithfulness of the Minister, that they whose Mini∣ster he is, have freely chosen him, as unto whom under Christ, they commit the most precious trea∣sure of their soul, Heb. 13. 17. Also, it binds the people to greater love, and obedience to him or them, whom themselves have made choice of. But if any of the officers so elected by the Church be found un∣faithful in his place, he is by the Church to be warn∣ed to take heed to his Ministry he hath received, Col. 4. 17. to fulfil it; which if he neglect to do, by the same power which set him up, he is to be put down and deposed. Now if any ask how many are the officers or of∣fices in the Church? I answer, there are five, be∣sides the extraordinary offices of Apostles, Pro∣phets, and Evangelists, for the first planting of the Churches, which are ceased with their extraordinary gifts, &c. 1. First, there is, or ought to be the Pastor, to whom is given the gift of wisdom, for exhortation, Ephes. 4. 11. 2. The teacher, to whom is given the gift of knowledge, for Doctrine, Rom. 12. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 8. 3. The governing Elder, who is to Rule with di∣ligence, Rom. 12. 8. 1 Tim. 5. 17. 4. The Deacon, who is to receive and distribute
the holy treasure, with simplicity and sincerity, 1 Tim. 3. 10. Act. 6. 1, 3. 5. The widdow or Deaconess, who is to attend the sick, and impotent with compassion and chearfulness, 1 Tim. 5. 3, 9, 10. Rom. 16. 1. All these are useful and necessary, and these alone sufficient for the Church, as being the most perfect society, and body of Christ, which neither faileth in that which is necessary, nor ex∣ceedeth in any thing superfluous; so they are uni∣ted and compacted together by that one Spirit, to the Lord, and each to other to the edifying of its self in love, Ephesians 4. 3, 4. and 16. In the want or in the absence of any of these servants of the Church; the Church hath power to appoint any one or more of her members for the present ne∣cessity to supply the room or absence of her officer or officers. 2. But then in the next place for those that are united to a Church of Christ, let them be∣ware that they forsake not the assembling of them∣selves together, as the manner of some is, Hebrews 10. 25. And again, consider the danger of draw∣ing back, Hebrews 10. 38. Now if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him: Again, Luke 9. 62. And Jesus said unto him, no man having put his hand to the plough, and look∣ing back, is fit for the kingdom of God. Surely those that fall off from a true Church of Christ, and persevere therein to the end, shall hear Christ say to them, as in Luke 19. 27. But those mine ene∣mies which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me.
How dreadful is this sin of falling off! First, it is sharply threatned of God, Proverbs 14. 14. Heb. 10. 38, 39. Secondly, this sin is severely plagued, Matthew 12. 43, 44, 45. compared with 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22. Again, See 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us: These were once in the Church, but never truly of the Church; for then they would have persevered; their apostacy there∣fore doth evidence their hypocrisie; false rot∣ten professors, will, and in all ages hath thus apostatized. The wind blows not away the wheat, but the chaff, &c. And so much of the first Ordinance of assembling our selves together.
Of the Ordinance of preaching, who they are that ought to preach: the manner how, the time when, the place where, the persons to whom, how this gift of preaching may be ob∣tained: and whether the Minister may receive mony for preaching: how to remember, and a rule to try all doctrines by. 1. Of the Ordinance of preaching. THat preaching and prophesying is a standing Ordinance of God, will at large appear, if we consider these and the like Scriptures, 2 Tim. 4. 2. Preach the word, be instant in season and out of sea∣son, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and Doctrine, Mat. 28. 19, 20. compared with Mark 16. 15. And he said unto them, go into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved. The business of preaching is to make new creatures, and to turn Lions into Lambs; the Preacher is but an in∣strument in the hand of God, to make an unbeliever to believe he is Gods workmanship, Ephes. 2. 10. An ax makes no Artificial thing, but by influence from the Artificer; neither doth a pen write, but by his help that handles it. So Preachers and preaching, is but instrumental in the hand of the Spirit, to make you Christs, 2 Cor. 3. 2. They may be only called Ministers, by whom the people believe, God was mighty by Peter and Paul, Gal. 2. 8. Ministers are
but the Rams horns, but God throws down the wals of Jericho: Mens hearts are as the everlasting doors, but God opens them, as he did Lydia's, or else all the preaching will be in vain. Who they are that ought to preach the Gospel. THose to whom the Lord hath given the Word, Psalm 68. 11. The Lord gave the Word, and great was the company of those that published it. But principally those are to preach, open and ap∣ply the Scriptures that are set apart by the Church or Churches to that work of the Pastor and Teach∣er, who by the Word of life are to feed the Flock, over which they are the over-seers, Acts 20. 28. Titus 1. 5. But in the exercise of prophesie, such as are not in office in the Church, may exercise their gifts to speak unto edification, exhortation and comfort, af∣ter the publick ministry by the Teachers, and under their direction and moderation, whose duty it is, if any thing be obscure, to open it; if doubtful, to clear it; if unfound, to refute it; if imperfect, o sup∣ply what is wanting. See 1 Cor. 14. 3, 29, 30, 31. If any say farther, how is that exercise proved in the Scripture? I answer. 1. By the example in the Jewish Church, where men, though in no office either in Temple or Syna∣gogue, had liberty publickly to exercise their gifts, as doth clearly appear by the Scriptures, Luke 2. 42, 46, 47. Luke 4. 16, 17, 18. Acts 8. 4. & 11.
19, 20, 21. & chap. 13. 14, 15, 16. chap. 18. 24, 25, 26. 2. It will yet farther appear by this commandment of Christ and his Apoles, Luke 9. 10. Luke 10. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 14. 1, 5▪ 30, 31. 3. It will further appear by the prohibiting of wo∣men to teach in the Church, hereby liberty being given unto men, their husbands, or others, 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. 4. This will yet more fully appear by those most excellent ends, which by these means are to be ob∣tained, as, 1. The glory of God in the manifestation of his manifold graces. See 1 Pet 4. 10, 11. 2. That the gifts of the Spirit in men be not quenched, 1 Thes. 5. 19, 20. Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying, that is, stop not the motions of the spirit in your selves, nor restrain the gifts thereof in others. 3. For the fitting, and tryal of men for the Mi∣nistry. 4. For the preserving pure the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is more indangered, if some one or two alone may only be heard, and speak, Act. 2. 42. 5. For the debating and satisfying of doubts if any do arise, Act. 13. 15. 6. For the edifying of the Church, and conversion of others; always provided, 1. That he speak not as one that hath any au∣thority over them, but as a fellow member. 2. That he have the gift of prophesie, to speak as an Oracle of God, to edification, exhortation and comfort, 1 Cor. 14. 3.
3. That he speak not in opposition to, nor in any way undervaluing of those that are set apart by the Church, as Officers over them, for they are cal∣led to the greatest and weightiest employment in the world: Yea such an employment, that would cer∣tainly break the backs, not only of the best, and strongest men, but even of the very Angels, should not God put under his everlasting arms. No la∣bour to that of the mind, no travel to that of the soul; those that are faithful in the Lords vineyard no doubt find it so: and so with Paul, often say, who is suffici∣ent for these things? I have read of Luther, that he would often say, that if he were again to chuse his calling, he would dig, or do any thing, rather then take upon him the office of a Mi∣nister. Of the manner how the Preacher is to preach. 2 Cor. FOR we are not as many which corrupt 2. 17. the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 4. And my speech, and my preaching, was not with enticing words of mans wisdom, but in demon∣stration of the Spirit, and of power: Their work is to make dark things plain, not plain things dark and obscure. It is most observable concerning God the Father, who is the great Master-piece of speech; when he spake from heaven, he makes use of three several texts of Scripture in one breath, Mat. 17. 5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. First, this is my beloved Son, that Scrip∣ture
we have in Psalm 2. 7. In whom I am well pleas∣ed, this we have in Isa. 42. 1. hear him, this we have in Deut. 18. 15. All which may be a pattern to Preachers to keep close to the Scriptures. Oh how unlike to God are such Preachers, that spend much time in wisdom of words, and vanity, and novelty, and sophistry, and so darken counsel, by words with∣out knowledge. A Minister of the Gospel is duly to divide and distribute the word according to every ones spiritu∣all estate and condition; they must speak comfort, to whom comfort belongs, and counsel to whom counsel belongs, and reproof to whom reproof be∣longs, and terror to whom terror belongs, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to shew thy self approved un∣to God; a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth: or rightly cut∣ting into parts the word of truth; and that they may so do, they ought to study the conditi∣on of the people, as well as the parts of the text, and so before they preach, to consider who they are to preach to, whether to the ignorant or know∣ing; whether enemies to Religion, or professors of it. Whether they are meerly formal, or truly spiritual: Whether they are more cheerful and zealous, or more cold and sluggish; that so he may give to every one his portion, and rightly divide the word of truth, like a wise Physitian, to apply cordials where the condition of the party doth require it, as well as corrosives and purges; this is to have the tongue of the Learned, to know how to speak a word in due season: we may see, Isa. 50. 4. The phrase must be plain and full, wholsom
and effectual; the greatest learning is to be seen in the greatest plainness. Saint Paul doth often glory in this, that his preaching was not in wisdom of words, or in excellency of speech, not with enticing words of mans wisdom, not as pleasing men but God, who tryeth the heart, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and the second chap. 1 Thes. 2. 4. Those that are the true Prophets of Christ, must with Micaiah speak the truth to Ahab, although with him they be beheaded for it, 1 King. 22. 8. they must with Nathan tell David, thou art the man, 2 Sam▪ 12. 7. and with Nehemiah, tell the Princes and Rulers to their faces, that they oppress the peo∣ple with sore taxes, Nehem. 5. 6. also the Lord com∣mandeth Jeremiah, that he should speak the mind of the Lord to the faces of the people, Jer. 1. 17. the true and faithful Prophets of the Lord must with Amos, preach the death of Jeroboam, and captivity of Israel at Bethel in the Kings Chappel, Amos 7. 12, 13. Yea they must with the Prophet Zachariah tell the Rulers and people of Israel to their faces, that because they had forsaken the Lord, the Lord had forsaken them, 2 Chron. 24. 20, 21. In a word, to add no more, they ought with John Baptist, to tell He∣rod to his face, that it is not lawful for him to have his brothers wife, although with him they be be∣headed for it, Mark 6. 18. to 28.
Of the time when, the place where, the persons to whom the Gospel is to be preached. 1. FIrst of the first, the time when the Gospel is to be preached, 2 Tim. 4. 2. Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrine, Acts 20. 7. Paul continued his speech until mid∣night. Surely the Lord in his word doth give us to understand that there is no time unseasonable, either to receive or do good, only some times may be more seasonable then other. 2. The place where the Gospel is to be preached; the Lord in his word doth give us to understand▪ that as the Gospel is to be preached to all Nations; so it is to be preached in all places, in the Synagogue, in the house, in the field, by the seaside, in the ship; the most convenients place is, where the people may most conveniently meet together in the name of Christ▪ See Acts 5. 42. And daily in the Temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. 3. The persons to whom the Gospel is to be preached, and that is to every creature; go saith Christ in his commission, into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature; he that be∣lieveth and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16. 15. God doth ender the Covenant of grace or the Gos∣pel to all Nations, and to every creature in all Na∣tions, and it is the mind of God that every messen∣ger and Minister of his should declare and publish
this Covenant to all, without respect of persons, as by these Scriptures doth fully appear, Act. 20, 24, 25. Mat. 28. 19. Tit 2. 11. Mat. 24. 14. The Lord doth make this general tender of grace and mercy, that so none might object and say, they were not called, nor invited, and to leave them without excuse: withall, we are to consider, that man hath neither will nor power of himself, unless it be given him from above, to receive, believe, or imbrace such tenders, John 3. 27. John 6. 65. Jer. 10. 23. Jer. 17. 9. Job 21. 14. John 5. 40. Acts 13. 48. For all men by nature are desperately wil∣full, absolutely weak, and altogether wicked, ha∣ving neither spiritual desire nor strength, neither spi∣rituall feet to carry them to this grace, nor spiritu∣all hands to receive this grace, when it is brought and tendred unto them; yet it must be tendred to all, for a witness against all that embrace it not, and for the bringing in of those that are ordain∣ed to eternal life, for there be some of the Lords flock amongst all Nations, kindreds and tongues, upon the face of the earth; therefore no man is to shut out himself, but to endeavour to get strength from the Father to draw him to Christ, John 6. 44. Acts 13. 28.
What a Minister is to preach. IT is undoubtedly the duty of all Ministers to preach Jesus Christ unto the people, 2 Cor. 4. 5. We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for his sake. We no sooner read that Paul was converted, but the next news of him is, Acts 9. 20. And straight way he reached Christ in the Synagogues: Christ is to be preached, because the preaching up of Christ, is the only way to preach down Anti∣christ, or whatsoever makes against Christ, 2 Thes. 2. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10. Again, Christ is to be preached, because this is the only way to save and win souls to Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 10, 11, 12. compared with John 17. 3. Acts 2. 14 to 42. If any ask further what a Minister is to preach? Then I answer, he is to preach the Gospel, and he is to preach the Law, for so did Christ and his Apostles: but the Gospel is to be preached chief∣ly, and mainly, but the Law accidentally and oc∣casionally, as will more fully appear in the follow∣ing discourse.
Which is first to be preached, the Law or the Gospel. THis is the Commission and message of Christ, Mark 16. 15. Go and preach the Gospel. And it was the practice both of Christ and his Apo∣stles to preach the Gospel in the first place. First, we find it to be the practice of Christ, as for exam∣ple, our Saviour Mat. 5. 3. to the 12. he pro∣nounced nine blessings of the Gospel in his Sermon on the mount, before he spake one word of the Law. So Mat. 4. 23. We read that Jesus went about al Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and preach∣ing the Gospel of the Kingdom, &c. So likewise it was the practice of the Apostles, viz. we read of Paul, 1 Cor. 2 2. That he determined to know or make known nothing amongst the Corinthians save Jesus Christ, and him crucified: Hence Ministers are called the Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. And in another place they are called the Ministers of Christ, and of righteousness, be∣cause they did preach the Gospel in the first place. So again, Paul when he came to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 3. He delivered unto them, first of all that which he also received: how that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures, which was plain and pure Gospel. So again, Paul and Sylus, upon the first question propounded unto them by the keeper of the prison, Acts 16. 31. They exhort and teach him to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; and good reason, because believing was to
be taught before doing, Heb. 11. 6. Tit. 3. 8. with∣out faith it is impossible to please God: and those that had believed in Christ, should be carefull to maintain good works. So again, Peter in Act. 2. before he spake of the Jews crucifying of Christ, he did preach the free and blessed Gospel to them. Object. 1. But I have heard some of our brethren of the Presbyterian Congregations object against this truth, and say, how can men come to see the want and need of Christ, if the Law be not first preached? Answ. It is supposed that all men do look upon themselves as sinners, and acknowledge themselves to be sinners, although they have not such a parti∣cular and sensible conviction theeof, and so the work of the Minister is not so much to shew men the need of Christ first, but rather the love of God in giving Christ, John 3. 16. and to shew and set forth the riches of Christs grace to sinners in ge∣neral, Romans 5. 8. Object. 2. But is it not the first work of the Spirit to convince men of sin? John 16. 8. Answ. By sin in that place is meant the sin of unbelief. Of sin, saith he, because they believe not on me, ver. 9. and this sin is not convicted by the Law; For that which doth not command Faith, cannot discover the sin of unbelief; or else consider, the Gospel was preached to these people before, and they would not believe nor embrace that Gospel, but continue under the Law, and so the Law is to be preached to them. Object. 3. If the Law be not to be preached first, when and to whom is the Law to be preached?
Answ. 1. The Law is to be preached after the Gospel, unto such as do not imbrace the Gospel, and yet justifie themselves, as the Jews did, and that think by their misunderstanding the Law, that they keep the Law; thus Christ did preach the Law, Mat. 5. from 21. to the end. 2. The Law is to be preached to those that would make it void, and null, and of no effect. 3. The Law is to be preached, and taught unto men after they do believe, so far as it doth teach Be∣lievers their duty towards God and Christ, and their neighbour; but the duties and commands of the Law are not o be urged to Christians upon any other ground, thn upon that ground which Christ himself did urge them. John 14. 15. If ye love me, keep my commandment▪ Titus 3. 8. These things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they that have believed in Christ, be careful to maintain good works. Much more might be said to prove this point. How the Gift of preaching may be obtained. SUrely it is the Lords work to furnish and enable a soul to this great work, 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6. not that we are sufficient of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, who hath made us able ministers of the New Testament; So again, Eph. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ by the will of God. Gal. 1. 11, 12. But I certifie you Brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me is not after man, for I nei∣ther received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Now the Lord doth
hand forth this gift to his servants many times in use of means. First prayer. Secondly reading the Scri∣ptures. 2 Tim. 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto every good work. Thirdly meditation, 1 Tim. 4. 15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. The fourth and last means to be used to attain this gift, is studying, 2 Tim. 2. 15. Study to shew thy self ap∣proved unto God, a work-man that needeth not to be ashamed; but be sure that thou dost study more Scri∣pture mysteries then humane Histories. 1. In each text consider the coherence, occasion, circumstance, and order of the words. 2. Consider the denomination of the text, as whether it be a Precept, Exhortation, Threatning, Promise, Petition, Deprecation, Similitude, Parable, &c. and that to be insisted upon only, which is most agreeable to the principal immediate scope of the holy Ghost in that text, then you are to consider of the method, that so you may teach clearly, convict strongly, and perswade powerfully, and that you may so do, consider the chief parts of a Sermon are these three. 1. Explication. 2. Confirmation. 3. Application. Each of these may be further branched and subdivi∣ded: Then come to the dividing of the Text, and there be not too curious (for it must not be divided) needless or obscure. From the division of the words, come to the Doctrines which must be deduced from it, clearing their inferences, shewing their latitude
according to their several branches and degrees; then come to the confirmation by positive proofs from Scripture; the text being divided, and the doctrines raised, then you come to the reasons, which should be such as may tend to convince the judgement; the particular heads from whence the reasons are de∣duceable, are these. 1. The Necessity 2. The Equity Which are capable of many subordinate branches. Then come to application, which is either, 1. Doctrinal, for our information: or, 2. Practical, for examination, by marks or signs, which are either Effects, or Properties. Doctrinal application is for our information, be∣ing a use of information, and here those Logical di∣rections may be useful concerning the collect∣ing, 1. Of a general from a special, Rom. 4. 3, 4. 2. Of the less from the greater, as John 10. 25. Rom. 8. 32. 3. The greater from the less, as 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10. 4. The effect from the cause, as Heb 2. 8. 5. The cause from the effect, John 6. 45. 2. Practical application doth consist in correcting of manners, commonly stiled a use of reproof, ter∣ror or dehortation, to disswade men from any sin∣ful course; but herein you must endeavour to di∣stinguish between sins of infirmity, and sins of wil∣fulness, and accordingly proportion the severity of your reproofs; in all which you must express, rather your love then your anger, and strive rather to con∣vince,
then to exasperate, so that it be the zeal of a displeased friend, rather then the bitterness of a pro∣voked enemy, that it might appear that it proceeds from your love and care of their welfare, and that there is a necessity of insisting upon it, both from your duty and their danger; the proper heads for amplification of this use are two-fold. 1. Disswasive. 2. Directive. 1. Disswasive, may have these three heads. 1. The aggravation of the sin. 2. The threats denounced against it. 3. The judgements executed upon it. All which are further capable of many other subor∣dinate branches of Amplification. 2. The directive part doth either consist in the removing the impediments that do hinder, or in the use, or means, and helps, whereby we may be di∣rected to the remedy. Then also there is a use of confutation, and that is for the refuting of erroneous positions, and Solution of such doubts and queries as are most obvious, and material; and here you must be careful that you ma∣nage this with, 1. Solid pressing arguments, making your answers as clear as the objection, lest you confirm the error by darkning counsel with words without knowledge. 2. This must be done with much meekness and Lenity in differences not fundamental, 2 Tim. 2. 25. Soft words and hard Arguments are the most ef∣fectual way to convince. Then there is a use of consolation, and that is to apply the comforts that do arise from any Do∣ctrine
to the receivers, and embracers and retain∣ners, and practicers thereof; now consolation doth arise from either promises, experiences, or from the removing of scruples, by which the thoughts of the hearers are raised from sense to Faith, from pre∣sent things to future. Then there is also a use of exhortation; this also may be amplified by motives, to intcie the affections from either, The profit or danger in obeying or not obeying. If any desire further direction herein, let them se∣riously consider these particulars. 1. The Preface. 2. The Method. 3. The Matter. 4. The Expression. 1. The Preface; in which it is the duty of all Gospel Ministers, to perswade the hearers it is the word of God that you speak to them, which con∣cerns their everlasting happiness, and is able to save their souls, and that you the speakers do but stand in Christs stead as his Ambassadors and mouth to you; and that the peoples despising them is no less then the despising Christ, Jam. 1. 21. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Luke 10. 16. 1 Tim. 4. 8. which being believed, it will make the hearers, 1. Favourable. 2. Teachable. 3. Attentive. 2. The next thing to be considered, is the Method; now Method is an art or gift, in contriving the discourse in such a regular frame, wherein every
part may have its due place and dependance, which will be a great advantage both to the preacher and hearers, viz. A man may more easily retain them, when they are linked together, and not scattered; Method being as a chain, in which if a man should let slip any one part, he may easily recover it again, by that relation and dependance which it hath with the whole; the Method which many do think is most useful, is that of Doctrine and Use, and Ex∣plication, and Application; Allegorical interpreta∣tions may lawfully be used, observing these three qualifications. 1. Use them sparingly and soberly. 2. They must be short and pertinent, not forced and far fetcht. 3. Use them rather for illustration then proof. But here you must be careful that you do not let Hagar the hand maid, out-brave her Mistress Sa∣rah, and that you do not prefer blear-eyed Leah be∣fore beautiful Rachel, and so stuff a Sermon with cy∣tations of Authors, and the witty sayings of others; but this is to make a feast of Vinegar and Pepper, which is useful, as sawces, but must needs be im∣proper and offensive, to be fed upon as dyet. 3. The next thing to be considered, and that is the matter, in which there is two things to be considered. 1. The seasonableness of it, to the time and people. 2. The pertinency of it, to the text. 1. The seasonableness of it to the time and peo∣ple, and for your help herein consider, 1. Who you are to speak to, whether to the igno∣rant or knowing.
2. Whether enemies to Religion, or professors of it. 3. Whether they be meerly formal, or truly spiritual. 4. Whether more cheerful and zealous, or more cold and sluggish. That so you may rightly divide the word of truth, and give to every one his portion, and prophesie according to the analogy of Faith, Rom. 12. 6. And keep to the form of sound words, 2 Tim. 1. 13. And that you do this according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, Peter tels you, 2 Pet. 1. 20. That you must not make the Scripture speak in a private sense, that is, you must not analize, and inter∣pret them so, as if the prophesies thereof did relate only to the particular occasion and circumstances of times, of places, and of persons in, by, and to whom they were at first spoken, so much to the Preface, Method and Matter: the last help unto preaching is the Expression, in which there be two things con∣siderable. 1. The Phrase. 2. The Elocution. 1. The Phrase should be plain, full, wholsom, and effectual, and natural to the text; the greatest learning is to be seen in the greatest plainness. Saint Paul doth often glory in this, that his preaching was not in wisdom of words, and excellency of speech, not with inticing words of mans wisdom, not as pleasing men but God, who tryeth the heart: what shall I say more? 1. He must speak according to the mind of God in Scriptures, Isa. 8. 20.
2. He must speak to exhortation, edification and comfort, 1 Cor. 14. 3. 3. He must speak nothing but that which he hath been taught of God, Rom. 15. 18. 4. He must speak as an Oracle of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. 2. In the Elocution there are two extremities to be avoided. 1. Too much boldness. 2. Too much fear. 1. Too much boldness: as a remedy against this, consider the special presence of God and Angels; the solemn dignity of these sacred Mysteries, the weighty business of saving souls, and who is suffici∣ent for these things, 2 Cor. 2. 16. 2. Against too much fear; consider it doth be∣come the business you are about, for you should speak the word with boldness, Acts 4. 29. God hath promised his assistance, that his strength shall appear in your weakness: Again, consider tim erousness in the speaker will much hinder the efficacy and power of the word on the hearers, so that the most proper manner of Elocution is with Modesty and Gravity. I have dwelt longer up∣on this point then I intended, I proceed to the next.
Whether the Minister may receive money or wages for preaching, yea or no. AS the ministry of the Gospel is an ordinance of God: So hath the same God ordained that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Go∣spel, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Again we read Gal. 6. 6. that it is the duty of the people so to do, Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things, Luke 10. 7. for the labourer is worthy of his hire. 2 Cor. 11. 8. I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them to do you service; 1 Cor. 9. 9. For it is written in the Law of Moses, thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox, that treadeth out the Corn: doth God take care for oxen, ver. 10. Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is written, ver. 11. if we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? I shall answer some objections, and present a few cautions, and so close up this point. Object. But we read of the Apostles, or at least some of them, that they did preach the Gospel of Christ freely, as appears, 1 Thes. 2. 9. & 2. Cor. 11. 7. Answ. Let the reader consider these two things in answer to this objection. 1. That the Apostle doth reckon it an abusing of his power: 2 Cor. 11. 7. 2. He put his labouring with his own hands among his afflictions, 1 Cor. 4. 12. 3. He did not want a power to command them to maintain him, 2 Thes. 3. 8, 9▪
For there was a commission from the Lord, as well to live of the Gospel, as to preach the Gospel: which no man can deny, unless he deny the Scripture to be his Rule, or else remain ignorant in that rule. But withall take these cautions? a Gospel mainte∣nance by the Lord appointed, is for none but a Gospel Ministry, plants of his own planting, the other plants are to be pluckt up: then also this maintenance must be collected in a Gospel way, not by Tythes, and commencing suits at Law, and taking away their goods by violence, &c. There are some of our national ministers, that have need to be better taught, before they be better: fed if any make hire or wages, the end of their work, they are hirelings, not Gospel ministers. Of Attentive Hearing. VVE have heard what is the duty of the preachers; now let us see what is the du∣ty of the hearers: the same God that Commands his Ministers to speak as an oracle of God unto edifi∣tation▪ exhortation and comfort: commands us that are hearers to hearken to his voice in them, and to at∣tend upon the same without distraction: whiles the Minister is speaking, let us be searching the Scriptures, to see if those things be so, yea or no. 1. We are to endeavour to understand what we hear. 2. To believe what we understand. 3. To treasure up and keep in memory that we do believe.
4. To practise what we keep in memory. 5. To communicate to others, what God hath taught us. It is not enough that the word be rightly preached and dispensed, unless it be rightly heard and received; some there be that are all ear, all for hearing, no thing for practising; others there be that are all tongue, all for speaking; others are all eye, all for searching and enquiring; others are all hand, all for receiving, nothing for communicating, and no marvil then that we hear so many Sermons to so little pur∣pose: let us seriously consider these three Scriptrues, Prov. 1. 24, 28. Because I have called, and ye refused, ye shall ball upon me and I will not answer you, Mich. 3. 4. As you have behaved your selves to me so will I to you, you shall cry unto me but I will not hear you, Zach. 7. 13. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cryed, and they would not hear, so they cried and I would not hear them, saith the Lord of Hosts. What shall I say more; by attentive hearing our Judgements come to be informed, and the corrupti∣ons of our hearts discovered, James 1. 23, 24. Nay that precious grace of Faith cometh by hearing, Rom. 10. 17. Acts 13. 48. Eh. 1. 13. 1. Then let us take heed how we do hear. Luke 8. 18. 2. Take heed what we do hear, Mark 4. 24. 3. Let us take heed whom we do hear, Jer. 27. 9. Compared with John 10. 27.
How to remember what is preached. 1. BE well acquainted with the principles of religion, and of the Scriptures, by frequent Reading of them. 2. Be much in conferring with experienced Chri∣stians about the ordinances of God, and duties of Chri∣stians. 3. Be well acquainted with the method of preach∣ing; and for that there is three Rules. 1. Hear several men. 2. Hear frequently. 3. Read now and then some Sermon books. 4. Eat sparingly, and drink moderately, and so fame thy mind to these ensuing things. 1. Consider the text with its parts. 2. The doctrines with its proofs. 3. The reasons and grounds, for demonstration and confirmation. 4. The uses and applicacion: these things being considered, there are six thing to be practised. 1. In hearing, Sit or stand all the time without moving as little as you can. 2. Keep your eye from staring about, look intent∣ly either upon the Minister, or some other thing. 3. Keep your ear all the time very attentive to what is delivered, as if thou wert to hear for thy life, for so thou art. 4. Call home thy wandring mind, and keep it close to what you hear. 5. Repeat the first principal heads to your self
twice or thrice, and the rest successively. 6. Sermon being ended, repeat to your self at large, and beware of charging your memory with worldly businesses, and daily exercise your memory to retain some things, for custom is a second nature, and use makes masterdome. A Rule to try all Doctrines by. THE Scripture is the standard by which we are to try all Doctrines by, it is the touchstone or test, therefore we should maintain no opinion stifly, till we have tried it throughly. 1. Whatsoever doctrine doth advance the will of God as well as the grace of God; which doth teach us what we should do for him, as well as what he hath done for us, that Doctrine is true. 2. That doctrine that doth advance all the Attri∣butes of God, the justice of God as well as the mer∣cy of God, the holiness of God, as well as the grace of God; which doth teach us piety towards God, and Charity towards men, according to Scripture rule, that doctrine is true. 3. That doctrine that doth teach us to bottom upon Christ alone for Salvation, and not upon our own works or qualifications, that must needs be true. 4. That doctrine that tendeth to the informing of the judgement, and reforming the heart, and conform the life to the whole will of God, that doctrine is true and good. 5. That doctrine that doth lead out by the foot∣steps of the Flock to teach us to have respect to all the
ordinancesto seek for, and to keep all the commands of God, that doctrine is true, 1 Chron. 28. 8. Of Prayer and Supplication, another standing or∣dinance of the Gospel. 1. OF the nature of it, what it is. 2. Whom we must pray to. 3. For whom we are to pray. 4. What extraordinary prayer is. 5. The necessity of Prayer. 6. The posture to be used in Prayer. 7. The place where we are to pray. 8. The time in which we are to pray. 9. Motives to encourage us to pray. 10. Means to be used to obtain the Gift of Prayer. 11. Hinderances of Prayer. 12. Several sorts of prayer, never answered. 13. How many wayes doth the Lord answer Prayers. 1. Of the nature of it, what Prayer is. Prayer is a speaking to God face to face, wherein we speak to him in Faith, Humility, Sincerity and Fervencie of Spirit; it is Jacobs Ladder, by which a soul climbs up to Heaven, and it is Noahs dove that goeth forth and returns not till it brings an answer of peace. Or prayer is a calling upon God alone in the name of Christ by the help of the Holy Ghost, or it is the earnest request of an humble and sanctified Heart, together with thanksgiving, in behalf of our selves and others, with assurance to be heard in what
we pray for, according to the will of God, Phil. 4. 6. Rom. 8. 26. Psal. 50. 15. Eph. 6. 18. 1 John 5. 14. James 1. 6. Or Prayer is a Familiar speech with God in the name of Christ, 1 John 5. 14. Opening the de∣sires of our hearts unto him, and a pouring out of the heart before him for the things we need, Psal. 50. 15. Jer. 33. 3. Lam. 2. 19. Or prayer is a spiritual gift and grace of the holy Ghost, teaching us both what to pray for, and how to pray, enabling us to pour out our souls unto the Lord with sighs that cannot be uttered, Psal. 62. 8. Rom. 8. 26. Psalm 145. 18. the Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him in truth: Heart and tongue must go together, word and work, lip and life, prayer and practice must eccho one to the other: it is not the greatness of the voice, nor the multitude of words, nor the sweetness of the tone, nor the studied notions, nor the Eloquent expressions, but truth in the in∣ward parts, that is prevalent with God: now the pro∣perties of effectual prayer are these. 1. That we pray understandingly, 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with Understanding, 2. That we pray earnestly and importunately, James 5. 16. compared with Luke 11. 8. 3. That we pray constantly, Luke 18. 1. Men ought alwaies to pray and not to faint, See Luke 21. 36. Watch ye therefore and pray alwayes. 4. We should pray in Faith without wavering, James 16. 5. In truth without faining, Psal. 145. 18. & Psal. 17. 1. 6. We should pray in humility, without swelling, Luke 18. 13.
7. We should pray in zeal without cooling, Jam. 5. 16. 8. We should pray with resolution to use all good means for the obtaining the things we pray for, &c. The Heart may pray without the tongue, with fruit and feeling, 1 Sam. 1. 10. But the tongue without the heart is nothing but vain babling. Whom we are to pray unto. SUrely we are to pray to God alone, and to none other, for he alone as the great Searcher of all hearts, heareth the voice, and knoweth the meaning of the Spirit of Prayer, Psalm 25. 2. Rom. 8. 27. Jehosaphat oppressed by his enemies, to whom goes he to complain? to none but unto God, 2 Chron. 20. 12. To whom went David to complain of the bitter words of Cush the Benjamite? to none but unto God, Psalm 7. 1. O Lord my God in thee do I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me, He alone is able to grant whatsoever we demand; Eph. 3. 20. Wherefore seeing he alone hears all pray∣ers, heals all Sinners, knows all Suiters, Jer. 31. 18. 2 Chron. 7. 14. 1 Chron. 28. 9. Psal. 44. 21. He alone hath love enough to pity all, and power enough to relieve all our wants and necessities; to him alone we are to pray, and to none other, Mat. 11. 28. Thus we must pray only to God, in the only name, and for the only sake of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the alone Mediator between God and man, 1 Tim. 2. 5.
For whom we are to pray. FIrst, for all men, 1 Tim. 2. 1. even our enemies, Mat. 5. 44. because they bare the common Image of God, Jam. 3. 9. So that we are to pray for all sorts and degrees of men, especially publike persons, as rulers and such as are in Authority, 1 Tim. 2. 2. and for Mini∣sters that watch over our souls, Ephes. 6. 19. Col. 4. 3. So also we are to pray for our selves, us and ours, for all things that we want, either for soul or body, that doth concern our being, or well being. And if we be not answered at the present, or in the same kind that we desire, 2 Cor. 12. 9. yet soo∣ner or latter we are sure to receive, even above that we are able either to ask or think, if we conti∣nue with constancy, patience, and importunity, to seek unto him according to his will, Luke 11. 5. and 18. 1. 1 John 5. 14. And that we ought to pray for others, will yet further appear by this, viz. A∣braham prayed for Abimelech, Gen. 20. 17. Jacob for his sons, Gen. 49. Paul for the people, and they for him, 1 Thes. 1. 2. this kind of prayer is called in∣tercession.
What extraordinary prayer is. EXtraordinary prayer is that which is made up∣on some special occasion, or extraordinary ac∣cident falling out, felt or feared, upon a whole Na∣tion, City, Family, or Person; by reason whereof our prayers are both longer, and ferventer then at other times, Psalm 119. 62. Acts 12. 5. Joel 2. 15. Ionah 3. 6. See Ezra 9. Dan. 9. and Nehem. 9. In these times of Fasting, or extraordinary praying, or both, we are most earnestly and fer∣vently to call upon God either for the obtaining of some singular benefit, or special favour that we stand in great need of, or for the avoiding of some spe∣cial punishment, or notable judgement hanging over our heads, or already fallen upon us, Acts 16. 30, 31, 32. and 14. 23. 2. Chron 20. Ioel 1. 2, 12. 16. There are three things to be considered about this extraordinary prayer. 1. There is something to be considered before we enter upon it. 2. There is something to be considered in this prayer. 3. There is something to be considered after this prayer. 1. Something to be considered before this extra∣ordinary prayer. 1. What our wants are, either for soul or body, our selves or others. 2. What promises we have from God, that he will give us such things. 3. That we agree together, to pray for these
things, with one tongue and one heart, Mat. 18. 19. 4. Let us also for the keeping up our Faith, con∣sider what wonderful things prayer hath done; it hath healed the sick, and raised the dead, unloosed chains, and unlocked prisons, and set the Saints free, Act. 12. 5, 7, 11. 2. There are some things to be considered in prayer, and they are four. 1. That we call upon God in truth of heart, Psal. 145. 18. Psal. 17. 1. 2. Beware of drilling out too much time in pray∣ing; long prayers oftentimes deaden others affecti∣ons: it is good to pray brief and often, as Christ did, Matthew 26. 39, 42, 44. compared with Mat. 6. 7. 3. When we pray to one in the Trinity, let us mind all three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and sever them not. 4. Let us be very importunate, and earnest, and servent; and that we may do so, consider the excel∣lency of the things we ask, and the necessity of them, Rom. 15. 30. Psal. 143. 6. Consider, how did Daniel pray in the Lions den, the three children in the fiery furnace, Jonah in the Whales belly, and Jeremiah in the dungeon, and our Saviour Christ, when he prayed, and sweat drops of blood? let us endeavour to pray so, that he may turn our darkness into light, our deadness into life, our bondage into li∣berty, and our weakness into strength. 3. And lastly, there be four things to be considered after prayer. 1. Press after what we have prayed for, in the use
of all the means for the accomplishing or obtaining of those things, Prov. 1. 2, 4, 5. 2. Hearken and listen what the Lord doth say, as a man that doth knock at a great mans door, he listneth to hear if any body be coming, if not, he knocks again and again, &c. 3. Expect and wait patiently for a full answer, Psal. 40. 1. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he in∣clined unto me, and heard my cry. 4. Learn wisely to distinguish between delayes and denials, and not take a delay for a denial, Mat. 15. 21. to 29. Christ did delay the woman pray∣ing to him, but not deny her, and at last did give her more then she had asked. Surely, as prayer is the cry of our hearts, to open all our necessities un∣to God, Lam. 2. 19. So it is also the key of the Lords treasury, and to obtain the mercies from him that we need; so we pray in the name of the Son, by the help of the Spirit according to his will, with under∣standing, reverence, humility and fervency, faith, love, and perseverance. Of the necessity of praying. SOme men are very apt to say, it is of no use to pray unto God, seeing he both knoweth what we need, either for his glory, or our good, and hath determined what to bestow upon us: but let me tell them that say so, that as God hath fore∣appointed all necessaries to be given us, so hath he also appointed the means whereby they should be brought to pass, whereof prayer is a chief means,
as appears, Ezekiel 36. 37. compared with Mat. 7. 7. Prayer is a means to recover our peace, and to nourish our communion with our God, Dan. 9. Phil. 4. 6, 7. John 17. Surely, such as have least care, and make least conscience of calling upon God, have least acquaintance and acceptance with him, Psal. 14. 4. Prayer is a Key to open the storehouses of all Gods treasury unto us; as by knocking we en∣ter into the place we desire to go unto; so by prayer we obtain those things we need: prayer is as a hook to reach those things that are above our reach, and to put by those things that stand in our way; in a word, it is so necessary, as without it, the use and the enjoyment of the things we have is unlawful, 1 Tim. 4. 5. For as if we take any thing that is our neighbours, without asking him leave, we are accounted thieves. So to take any thing of Gods (whose all things are) without asking them at his hand, is felony, Ier. 10. 25. He will pour out his fury upon the families that call not on his Name: that is, upon those that do not acknowledge the Soveraignty of God, by seek∣ing unto him in prayer, See Psal. 79▪ 6.
The Posture or Gesture to be used in prayer. VVE should use such holy behaviours, and comely gestures of body, as are beseeming the Majesty of God, with whom we are to deal, and in whose presence we are, and as becometh so holy an exercise which we have in hand; name∣ly, such gestures as may best express and increase our reverence, humility, and fervency, as the bowing of the knees, Ephes. 3. 41. Lifting up of our hands and eyes to heaven, Lam. 3. 41. Iohn 17. 1, &c. Which yet are not alwayes or absolutely ne∣cessary, Luke 18. 13. The Publican stood afar off and prayed: the main thing is to have the heart lifted up to God, Psalm 25. 1. and 143. 8. and the knees of our hearts bowed before the Lord, Phil. 2. 10. In a word, it is said that Christ looked up to heaven and prayed, Paul kneeled down; the gesture should be such as doth express the reverence of the heart, and that gesture to be used in prayer which doth most quicken and help the duty. Some gestures bring dulness, and indiposition, others makes the body more fit for prayer; use that which doth most quicken.
Of the place where we are to pray. Quest. WHere must we pray? Answ. Generally in all places, 1 Tim. 2. 8. I will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hans without wrath and doubting, for Christ is every where present before us, Mat. 18. 10 The publike place sometimes is most convenient, some∣times the private, Mat. 6. 6. And sometimes there is the sudden lifting up of the heart unto God, as oc∣casion is, without gesture in any place or company, Nehem. 2. 4. So then prayer may be either publike or pri∣vate, and in both places, either ordinary or extra∣ordinary, Acts 6. 4. 1 Tim. 2. 12. Acts 10. 4. Ionah 3. 6. Of the time in which we are to pray. THe time in which a Christian is to pray, is laid before us, 1 Thes. 5. 17. pray continually: So Luke 21. 36. Watch therefore, and pray alwayes, Luk. 18. 1. This parable spake he unto them, that men ought alwaies to pray and not to faint, either su∣ing for mercies, or waiting for answers, or rendring praise for mercies received, Psal. 5. 3. Luk. 2. 37.
The motives to encourage us to pray. PRayer is a jewel of grace bequeathed by Christ unto us, Luke 11. 2. Again, it is the hand of Faith, the Key of Gods treasury, the souls So∣licitor, the hearts armour-bearer, the minds in∣terpreter, Mat. 7. 7. Ephes. 6. 18. It procureth all blessings, preventeth all curses, 2 Chron. 7. 14. Further, it sanctifieth all creatures that they may do us good, 1 Tim. 4. 5. seasoneth all crosses, that they can do us no hurt, 2 Cor. 12. 18. Lastly, it keepeth the heart in humility, the life in sobriety; strengthneth all graces, overcometh all corruptions, subdueth all temptations, maketh our duties accep∣table to God, our lives profitable unto men, and both life and death comfortable to our selves, Act. 9. 11. Ephes. 6. 18. Iude 20. Acts 4. 24. What shall I say more for our encouragement to pray unto God but only this? consider, and that seriously, the Lord is never worse, but many times better then his word. Solomon did only ask in prayer for wis∣dom. 1 King. 3. 11, 12. And the Lord gave him more wisdom then he did ask and riches and honour to boot. Again, we read, 1 Sam. 1. Hannah prayed but for a son, and the Lord gave her a son, and a Prophet too for her son. Samuel was a great Pro∣phet. So again, for our encouragement to pray, we read, Gen. 17. That Abraham prayed, saying, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee, ver. 19. And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed,
and thou shalt call his name Isaac, and as for Ishmael, I will answer thy prayer, and make of him a great Nation, ver. 20. Again, we read that Jacob prayed, Gen. 28. 19. and said, O Lord, if thou wilt give me raiment to put on, and bread to eat, thou shalt be my God; and the Lord gave him all that he desired, and much more, Gen. 32. 10. For with my staff, said he, came I over this Jordan, but now I am so exceedingly encreased in goods, that I am become two bands. See Gen. 33. 4, 5, 6. Again, we read, Mat. 18. 24, 26. Of one that was in debt ten thousand talents; and the mony be∣ing demanded, the debtor desired but dayes of pai∣ment, and the Lord forgave him the whole debt, ver. 27. Shall I crave leave to instance only in one more, then consider that place, Acts 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. A cer∣tain man lame from his mothers womb, asked an alms of Peter and Iohn, and they gave him a mer∣cy above, and beyond what he asked, yea a mer∣cy to him worth more then the whole world; they healed him of his lameness, insomuch that he leaped, and rejoyced, and praised God, ver. 8. The means to be used to obtain the gift of prayer. FIrst labour to get some true feeling of thy misery, for sense of misery breeds desires of mercies, Mat. 15. 22. when the soul panteth most, the heart pray∣eth best; and increase in knowledge, that the head
may guide the heart, 1 Cor. 14. 15. For what we know is worth the having, we will not lose for want of asking. Pray for the Spirit of Prayer, which helpeth and healeth our infirmities, and teacheth us both for manner, measure, and matter to lay open all our ne∣cessities, Rom. 8. 26. Luke 11. 13. Of the Lets and hinderances of prayer. THe sensuality of the men and women living in pleasure, drowning all their desires in de∣lights, and their prayers in pleasures, 2 Tim. 3. 4. These men are lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God, and therefore pray not to him. Another hinderance is, that state of stupidity of worldlings, that think they have no need of pray∣ing, but of carking and caring, toyling and moyl∣ing in the world, Luke 12. 17, 18. Phil. 3. 19. Who mind only earthly things. Again, roving imaginations, inordinate affecti∣ons, dulness of spirit, weakness of Faith, coldness in feeling, faintness in asking, weariness in waiting, too much passion in our own matters, and too little compassion in other mens miseries, Mar. 9. 24. Isa. 38. 13, 14.
Several sorts of Prayer never answered. 1. HE that prayeth and yet regardeth iniquity in his heart, the Lord will not hear his prayer, Psal. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer. 2. He that prayeth, and yet hateth to be reformed, drawing neer with the lips, but having his heart far from him, Isa. 29. 13. 3. Those that pray and yet turn their ars from his precepts: he turneth away his ears from their prayers, Prov. 28. 9. 4 Those that pray and yet continue in unbelief, their prayers shall not be answered, Jam. 1. 7. letnot that man so much as think he shall receive any thing from the Lord. 5. Those that pray and yet continue in senseless impiety; so that the cry of our sins unrepented of drowns the voice of their prayers, Zech. 7. 13. 6. Those that would neither hear nor answer God when he called and cried unto them, see Prov. 1. 24. 28. Mich. 3. 4. 7. When we either cause or suffer the afflicted to cry without hearing; the Lord hearing us cry in our afflictions, without helping. Gen. 42. 22.
How many wayes doth the Lord answer the Pray∣ers of his people. 1. HE doth answer many times in giving the very thing we ask, So Solomon did ask wisdom, and the Lord gave it. So Hanna prayed for a Son, and the Lord gave her a Son: So also Acts 10. 30, 31. Dan. 9. 19, 20, 21. Acts 12. 13, 14. 2. The Lord doth answer the prayers of his people in giving them faith to believe, and patience to wait the Lords leasure, till he doth give the mer∣cy prayed for, So Heb. 5. 7. 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 3. The Lord doth many times answer our pray∣ers, although he doth not give us the very thing we ask, but a better in the room of it, Gen. 17. 18, 19. Psalm 35. 13. 4. He doth answer our prayers many times in giving as full Satisfaction to the soul, in the absence of the mercy prayed for, as if it had received it: Hab. 2. 3.
Another stanning Ordinance of the Gospel is thanksfiving or Singing of Psalms and Spi∣ritual Songs making melody to the Lord in our Hearts. PRaise or thanksgiving is a reverent acknow∣ledgement of his mercies, the heart being cheared with some taste of his goodness, acknow∣ledgeth all to come from his mercies, goodness, wis∣dom and power, which makes the Soul as in Psal. 32. 11. to rejoice in the Lord, and to shout for joy, Psal. 107. 8, 15, 21, 31. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men! This is to be done with the Spirit and with understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 15. As prayer and petition ariseth from the feeling of our miseries, so doth praise from feeling of Gods mer∣cy; petition beggeth what we want, and praise ac∣knowledgeth what and wheuce we have it: Rev. 15. 3. 1 Chron. 29. 12. 1. This puts the Soul upon speaking good of his name to others, Psal. 40. 9, 10. 2. It puts the Soul upon resolving to bestow all for his honour and service, 1 Chron. 29. 2, 3. This praising of God must be with a single, not with a double heart, Psal. 145. 18. This must be done in the best manner, suting his se∣veral properties, with their due Praises, according to the nature of the present blessing, Exodus 15. 2, 3. Psalm 144. 1, 2. This praise must be continually, as long as we live, as long as his mercy endureth, and our lifelasteth, Psal. 146. 2. 1 Thes. 5. 18.
It is a good, comely, and pleasant thing to praise the Lord, Psal. 147. 1. It is his will thus to be honored, 1 Thes. 5. 18. It is a duty of Saints and Angels both here and hereafter, Luke 2. 13, 14. It fits the heart for other graces, and provokes the Lord to fresh mercies. That we may set about this work in good earnest, dwell much upon these things following. 1. Seriously consider what great things God hath done for us, 1 Sam 12. 24. 2. Rest content with thy allowance and estate wherein he hath set thee, Phil. 4. 11. 3. Often compare thy estate with others of Gods Saints who want many things that we enjoy, and feel many Sorrows which we fear not, Psal. 147. 20. 4. Be faithful in all talents, and fruitfull in all graces, and this will be a great means to make us praise God for all his mercies: Mat. 25. 13. Phil. 1. 11. That Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs is a Gospel-command, which ought to be performed unto the Lord, and practised in and by the Church of Christ, and by every particular be∣liever as occasion requires: by singing I under∣stand a lifting up of the voice with joy: see 1 Chron. 15. 16. Isa. 51. 3. & 52. 8, 9. and by singing of Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, a praising of God, by lifting up of the voice, Psal. 51. 14. Psal. 8P. 1. Psal. 105. 2, 3. By Psalms I understand the Psalms of Da∣vid, or such as are contained in the book of Psalms: By Hymns I▪ understand Songs of praise unto God, Mat. 26. 30. Mark 14. 26. Col. 3. 16. By spiritual Songs I understand such songs, the matter whereof is
divine, and Spiritual, and heavenly, Rev. 15. 3. these spiritual Songs are mentioned also in Eph. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. and were framed at first by the immediate mo∣tion and inspiration of the Spirit of God, upon some special and extraordinary occasion; that singing is a Gospel-command, or one principal part of Evangeli∣cal Gospel worship, is proved from Pauls injunction thereof unto the Churches, Eph. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. James▪ likewise doth urge the practise of it, by way of command, Jam. 5. 13. and we have the example also of our blessed Saviour and his Apostles, Mat. 26. 30. Mar. 14. 26. and of the Apostles Paul and Silas, Acts 16. 25. That it ought to be practised in the Church, I mean the Assembly of the Saints, is evident from that Eph. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. Where the Apo∣stle exhorts the Church of Ephesus, to speak to them∣selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; and the Church at Coloss, that they teach and admonish one another in Psalms, Himns and spiritual Songs, sing∣ing with grace in their hearts unto the Lord; which were altogether impossible to be done, if this ordi∣nance or command of the Lord Jesus was not to be practised in the Church: and I find the Prophet Da∣vid exciting and stirring up the Saints to the practise of this so heavenly an exercise, Psal. 30. 4. Sing unto the Lord O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the re∣membrance of his holiness; and Psalm 145. 5. Let the Saints be joyful in glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds; and withall I find several Gospel prophecies which seem to point out the mutual and joint per∣formance of this duty, as sa. 52. 8. thy watch▪men shall lift up the voice, with the voice together shall they sing; and Psal. 132. 16. I will also cloath her priests with
Salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy: and it was prophecied of our Saviour Christ, saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church will I sing praise unto thee, Heb. 2. 12. Isa 35. 10. Jer. 31. 12. therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Sion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, &c. That it ought to be practised by every believer, as occasion requires, and as the Spirit is drawn forth thereunto, is very evident from Jam. 5. 13. 1 Cor. 14. 15. That the Psalms of David ought to be sung, will appear by these reasons. 1. Because I find no other Psalms mentioned in the Scriptures, then the Psalms of David, and such as are contained in that book of Psalms. 2. Because where there is mention of Psalms in the new Testament, either by Christ or his Apostles, I find that they refer or relate to the Psalms of David, or that book of Psalms, as may be collected from these (among other) Scriptures, Luke 20. 42. Luke 24. 44. Acts 1. 20. Acts 13. 33, 35. 3. Because I find contained in the Book of Psalms variety of excellent, spiritual and heavenly matter, which upon all occasions may draw forth the souls of the Saints in this way of a holy rejoycing before the Lord. That our Singing ought to be performed with a cheerfull heart, and that they only ought to sing whose hearts the Lord hath made glad, the Scriptures do evidently declare: Its said in 2 Chron 29. 30. That the Levites sang praises with gladness, Jer. 31. 7. Sing with gladness for Jacob, Isa. 65. 14. Behold my
Servants shall sing for joy of heart, And it is the express rule of the Apostle James; Is any merry, let him sing Psalms; How shall we sing the Lords Song in a strange Land, said the captive Jews, who were required to sing when they were weeping by the rivers of Babylon, and their Spirits overwhelmed with grief? Psal. 137. 1, 2, 3, 4. That our singing ought to be with grace in the heart, is evident from Col. 3. 16. that is I conceive either with a heart full of the sense of Gods pardon∣ing and justifying grace, or as it is regenerated, re∣newed and Sanctified by the spirit of grace; this is the root of all true Spiritual and heavenly rejoycing, and this hath made the Saints to sing aloud for joy, Psal. 71. 23. my lips shall greatly rejoyce, when I sing unto thee, Psal. 145. 7. Isa. 12. 2. 35. 2. And lastly, that our singing ought to be performed with the spirit and understanding, is very clear from 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with under∣standing also; our singing (as all other religious acti∣ons and services) will be very unpleasing and unac∣ceptable unto God, if they be not carried on in the strength of the Spirit, that is, if they be not purely, believingly, and affectionately, and understandingly performed. Some objections I have met with, as to the man∣ner of the performance of this duty. Obj. 1. But if it be granted that Psalms, &c. are to be sung, what warrant have we to sing them in meet∣er? and if you have no warrant in the word for such a practise, then is it a meer tradition and invention of men: nothing ought to be practised in the worship of God, but what is warranted by the word of God.
Answ. I answer, First, that if the Psalms as they are pen'd and recorded in the book of Psalms can be sung so as the Church may be edified, and confusion avoid∣ed, I should judge it an exercise very suitable to the mind of God, wherein my spirit would very freely concur, provided that such Psalms be sung, which con∣tain matter of praise unto God: I have been hitherto of opinion that the Church ought to sing Psalms in such a way as they can be sung by them, which hi∣therto hath been found to be in the way of meeter, provided that the putting of them into meeter, doth answer, but not obscure and destroy the Sense and mind of the Holy-Ghost as they are left upon record unto us. Now lest the pleasantness of the voice or tune should more affect the ear, then the Spirituality and soundness of the matter the heart, the Apostle doth caution them, that they so sing, as that they make melody in their hearts unto the Lord, that their hearts be affected and ravished as it were with that which their tongues do utter before the Lord; this is that singing with grace in our hearts, Col. 3. 16. If we are offended with meeter, because there will be some variation, or change of words from what they are in the Psalms, upon record, though they agree never so much with the sense of the Spirit of God in them, then may we also be offended with our Bibles, and lay them aside, because one Bible differs from another very much in the translation, as we may find if we compare one reading with another; and yet du∣ly weighed and considered, the sense is the same, and the mind of the Holy-Ghost may be understood in either. Ob. But singing of Psalms and Hymns, must be by
an immediate gift of the Spirit, as may be gather∣ed from, 1 Cor. 14. 26, &c. to sing a Psalm or hymn, already penned, savoureth too much of formality, and customariness, which ought to be avoided in the Church of God. Answ. That in 1 Cor. 14. is a reprehension of some disorders amongst them in the worship of God, and proves nothing at all, that the singing of a Psalm or hymn must be by an immediate gift of the Spirit, extemporary and without forethought or premeditation at all. How is it then brethren, when you come together, every one of you hath a Psalm, hath a Doctrine? &c. One having made choice of a Psalm he would sing, another he would declare a Doctrine, and that at the same time, in much confusion and disorder, to the distur∣bance of the Churches peace, therefore he repre∣hends them for so doing, and cautions them also, that all things be done to edifying; but we must be sure the Psalm or Hymn, for the matter, is su∣table to the state and condition of the Church, and that there be a sutableness in our spirits to utter it be∣fore the Lord, &c.
Of the Ordinance of Baptism, another standing Ordinance of the Gospel. THat Baptism with water is an Ordinance still in force, is so plain and clearly held forth in the Scriptures, that I hear none deny it, unless it be the erroneous Quaker, and the voluptuous Ran∣ter, together with a few new upstart wantons, that cast Gods Ordinances behind their backs. I shall reduce all I have to say to this Ordinance of God, to these two heads. 1. We shall speak something to the essence of this Ordinance. 2. To the exercise of it. 1. To the essence of it; the Ordinances of the Gospel, whereof this of Baptism is one, doth not differ from the Ordinances of the Old Testament, in respect of the Author, which is the same God, the substance Christ, the receivers the people of God, which are in both the same, but of continuance, evi∣dence, and easie performance and efficacy; in all these the Ordinances of the New Testament have the greater preheminence, 2 Cor. 3. 9. This Ordinance of Baptism was brought into the Church at the command of God, Iohn 1. 33. by the Ministry of Iohn, therefore called his Baptist, Mat. 3. 1. afterwards this Ordinance was sanctified and confirmed by our Saviour Christ himself, being Baptized by John, Mat. 3. 13. and after all this, he gave commission to his Apostles and Ministers to continue the same in his Church unto the end,
Mat. 28. 18. Mark 16. 15, 16. That the washing of the body by water is essential to this Ordinance, will appear Ephes. 5. 26. and that the party be Baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy-Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. 2. The exercise of Baptism is abundantly held forth to us in the Scriptures of truth, where we have example one upon another. As there is first our birth in Christ, and second∣ly our nourishment after we are born; so the Lord hath appointed two seals, or two confirming Or∣dinances; the one sealing our regeneration, en∣trance, and ingrafting into Christ, the other sealing our perseverance and growth in Christ; as in the bo∣dily life we see that we need no more but to be born, and then to have this life preserved: the Ordinance of Baptism sealeth the first, and the Lords Supper the second; so then Baptism is an Ordinance of the New Testament, by the washing of water, Ephes. 5. 26 representing the powerful washing of the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Heb. 10. 22. and so sealing our regeneration, or new birth, and entrance into the Covenant of grace, and our ingrafting into Christ, and into the body of his Church, John 3. 5. Tit. 3. 5. Act. 8. 27. Here let the Reader take notice of the similitudes between the sign, and thing signified. 1. Water is a necessary element, the natural life of man cannot be without it, and the blood of Christ is as necessary to the spiritual life of the soul. 2. Water is a comfortable element, the thirst of the body cannot be quenched but by water. So the
thirst of the soul cannot be quenched but by the blood of Christ, Joh. 4. 13. 3. As water is necessary and useful, so it is a free element, a cheap element, easie to come by with∣out cost, so is the blood of Christ, Isa. 55. 1. O he that thirsteth, come and drink freely. 4. As it is necessary, useful, and comfortable, and free, so it is a common element▪ none are barred from it, any may go to the river and drink. So the blood of Christ is offered to all, rich and poor, high and low, none can say I am shut out or except∣ed against. 5. Water is copious and plentiful, there is no less in the river for thy drinking, there is enough for all men. So is the blood of Christ, it can never be drawn dry of his fulness. we may all receive, yet he never the more empty, John 1. 16. 6. Water is a cleansing and purifying element, and it resembles the blood of Christ fitly in that, 1 Iohn 1. 7. The blood of Christ cleanseth from us all sin. The inward thing signified, is many times really exhibited, and coveyed and sealed in the use of the outward: hence are those expressions in Scripture, of being born again of water, and of the Holy Ghost, Iohn 3. 5. of cleansing by the washing of water, Ephes. 5. 29. So again, arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, Acts 22. 16. so Rom. 6. 3. we are buried with Christ by Baptism Surely the Ordinance of Bap∣tism, being rightly administred, and rightly re∣ceived, doth effect that which it doth repre∣sent. We should know that confirming Ordinances, Sa∣craments
or seals, properly do not give us any right unto God and his Christ, and promises, but only seal up and confirm that right and interest which al∣ready we have in Gods Covenant of Grace: God promised to Father Adam life, and then he gave him the tree of life, to be a pledge of his promise: now it was not the tree of life, that gave Adam life, but God according to his promise. Adam might have lived upon God in the promise without the tree, for the tree could do him no good without the pro∣mise. Thus God promised Christ, and his benefits to the believing generation, and then he gave Bap∣tism to seal these promises. So then it is not Bap∣tism that saves us, but the promises; it is not water that purgeth our sins, but the blood of the Cove∣nant; what shall I say more? where God is pleased to dispense his seals they are great comforts, and pledges of his love, and where he denieth means and oportunity of enjoying the signs, the things sig∣nified are never the further off, or less effectual: Davids child died the seventh day, a day before the time appointed for circumcision: and yet both his words and his carriage gives us to understand that he doubted not of the salvation of it. So the thief upon the cross, believing in Christ, was received with Christ into Paradise, though he were never baptiz∣ed; but he had the inward grace of baptism, the washing of the blood of Christ, though not the out∣ward sign; some have the outward sign, and not the inward grace, some have the inward grace, and not the outward sign: when God affordeth means, we must wait upon him for a blessing in them, and by them, as his pipes of convey∣ance:
and when he doth not afford means, we should not tye the working of his grace to them. These things seriously considered, may make any man admire why there should be so great contention, jarring, and wrangling about the time when, and the persons to whom, and the manner how this Or∣dinance is to be administred: are not the Scriptures as clear in laying down this, as they are in confirm∣ing the Ordinance it self? now the Scripture being the rule, we are to look for a precept for what we do, otherwise the Lord will say, who hath requi∣red these things at your hands? and in the want of a precept, we are to walk by example, so saith the Apostle, ye ought so to walk as ye have us for an example: in the want of a precept and example, ne∣cessary directions, inferences and consequences may be made use of, as I might prove at large; but be∣ware of drawing any of these against a plain pre∣cept and example. Now give me leave to present a few of those precepts and examples, recorded in the Scripture, for the baptizing of a believer, and when the reader hath answered these few, I shall give him so many more for ought I know. 1. For precept, consider these three Scriptures, Acts 2. 38. Then Peter said unto them, repent and be baptized every one of you, &c. Acts 10. 48. And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Acts 22. 16. And now why tarriest thou, arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. Now here being three precepts for the baptizing of believers, can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Acts 10. 47.
2. For example, consider these three examples, Mat. 3. 13, 14, 15. Then cometh Jesus to John to be baptized, ver. 16. and Jesus when he was baptized, went up straight way out of the water, and loe the hea∣vens were opened unto him, &c. Acts 2. 41. Then they that gladly received the word, were baptized, &c. Acts 8. 12. They were baptized both men and wo∣men, &c. Behold, here is both precept and example for bap∣tizing of believers, and that in the mouth of two or three witnesses (and yet shall not every word be established?) Shew me the like for baptizing of children, and I will write a book of recantati∣on, and acknowledge my error both to God and man: But I am sure thou canst not do it, with∣out thou wilt make a new Scripture, or grosly per∣vert this. Let the Reader beware at last, that he be not found amongst the number of those spoken of, Luk. 7. 30. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not bapeized. That Baptism is an Ordinance of the Gospel, and that only believers hath right unto it, hath been pro∣ved: now I shall lay down a few reasons why chil∣dren ought not to be baptized. 1. Because we find no command nor example in the word of God, that any Infants were baptized, and we are forbidden to presume above what is writ∣ten; and further, if we should admit of any one thing in the worship of God, which we find no warrant for in the word of God, we should be forced by the same reason to admit of many, yea of any inventi∣ons of men.
2. As an nfant is uncapable of examining him∣self, and of discerning the Lords body, and there∣fore not admitted to that Ordinance, so also he is uncapable of believing and discerning the use and end of this Ordinance, for there are many things about which Faith is to be exercised by him that is baptized. I will instance in five. 1. To exercise Faith in the blood of Christ for the washing away of sins, See Acts 2. 38. compa∣red with Acts 22. 16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord 2. Special things held forth in this Ordinance, that a child is not capable of discerning, is the My∣stical mortification of sin, Rom. 6. 3. Know you not that so many of us that were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death, ver. 6. knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, &c. 3. Another thing held forth to us in this Ordi∣nance, is the rising again unto newness of life, Romans 6 4. Therefore we are buried with him by Eaptism, verse 5. For if we have been plant∣ed together in the likeness of his death, we shall be raised in the likeness of his resurrection. 4. Another thing held forth in this Ordinance, is the Baptism of the Spirit, Act. 2. 38. compared with Act. 11. 16. 5. Another thing held forth in this blessed Ordi∣nance, is the resurrection of the body, See Col. 7. 12. Rom. 6. 5, 8. I suppose the Reader will grant that a child is not capable of apprehending, believing and applying
these and the like things held forth in this Ordinance, and that God requires that such as are baptized, should first believe, Mat. 28. 19. Act. 8. 12, 13, 36, 37, 38. Mat. 3. 6. Act. 10. 47, 48. But because this controversie is handled at large in other treatises, such as desire further satisfaction may have recourse to them. Now, what art thou doing O man that callest me and others Anabaptists? for our obedience to God in this blessed Ordinance, whilest thou art rejecting his counsel? if thou say, was not I baptized hereto∣fore? I answer, if I were baptized with God-fathers and God-mothers, Common prayer book, Cross and Surpliss, and by a Minister made by the Bishops, all which are voted down, as Antichristian, and the manner of that Baptism was also by sprinkling water upon my face, concerning which the Scrip∣ture is silent, how may I be assured God will own such a Baptism for his Ordinance? Blame me not then if I endeavour to follow Christ herein, who was baptized when he came to years, and com∣mands me so to walk, as I have him for an example, 1 John 2. 6. compared with Mat. 3. 15, 16. I shall close up all that I have to say at this time to this Ordinance with two words of advice, the one to those that own Baptism according to the Scrip∣ture Rule, when people are capable of it; the other to those that rail, mock, and deride the peo∣ple that are baptized, calling them Anabaptists. 1. You that have taken up this Ordinance, be∣ware of laying a greater stress upon it, then ever God appointed you, viz. it was never appointed to break love, and Communion, and to quench the Spirit,
and to justle out some other Ordinances, nor to shut out the weak in the Faith, nor to put them upon doubtful disputations; my brethren, let me tell you, I have rather chosen to weep it out before the Lord in my closset, then to publish to the world▪ what I have heard and seen amongst you; what? know you not that all Christians are one in Christ, and partakers of one Spirit, promises, graces, and have right to all Pri∣viledges? what? know you not that all Saints are fellow-members, fellow-souldiers, fellow-travellers, co-heirs, fellow-sufferers, and fellow-Citizens, ha∣ving the same father, being cloathed with the same robe, ruled by the same word, inclined to the same work? will you shut out those that God hath received, and stop the mouth that God hath opened, and re∣fuse communion with those that have fellowship with the Father, and the Son, and that are faithful to what they know? are all blind that doth not see by your eyes? 2. You that so exceedingly cry up Baptism of In∣fants, and cry down all baptizing of believers. Let me tell you, that through prejudice, weakness and blindness, you cry up that which you have neither precept nor example for in all the book of God, and cry down that which there is precept upon precept for, and example upon example: I even tremble to think what a sad account you will give to God for this one day: if you say you can prove the bap∣tism of Infants by necessary Deductions from Scrip∣ture, and Inferences, and Consequences, then let me ask you how you durst to make use of any of these to cross plain precepts and examples.
Of the Lords Supper, or breaking of bread: ano∣ther standing Ordinance of the Gospel. 1. OF the Lords Supper, what it is. 2. Wherein Baptism doth differ from it. 3. Preparations to the Lords table required. 4. The actions of the Administrator of this Or∣dinance. 5. The actions of the receiver, and duty in re∣ceiving. 6. Who they are that may partake of this Ordi∣nance. 7. The ends and uses of the Lords Supper. 8. The duties to be performed after receiving. First, of the Lords Supper, what it is. IT is a sealing or confirming Ordinance of the Gospel, wherein by the outward elements of bread and wine, sanctified by the word and prayer, and ex∣hibited by the Minister, and rightly received by the communicant, assurance is given to those that are in∣grafted into Christ, of their continuance in him, and relation to him, receiving nourishment by him unto eternal life: or it is a second confirming Ordinance of the New Testament, wherein God, by the signs of bread and wine, signifieth, sealeth and offereth to every faithful receiver, the body and blood of Christ for his spiritual nourishment and growth in Christ; and so confirmeth him in the Covenant of grace.
The matter of the Lords Supper is partly out∣ward, as bread and wine, and partly inward, as the body and blood of Christ: those outward elements signifying Christ, and him crucified, with all the be∣nefits of his death, passion, even whole Christ, with all the fruits of his mediation, Mat. 26. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25. Wherein doth Baptism differ from the Lords Supper, seeing they are both confirming Or∣dinances. IN regard of the thing signified, Baptism, as hath been said, is a seal of our entrance into the Church of God: the Supper of the Lord is a seal of our con∣tinuance in the same; the one of our new birth, the other of our spiritual growth; the former is ordain∣ed to this end, that being out of Christ by nature, we being born again, might now be ingrafted into his body, Tit. 3. 5. Joh. 3. 5. the latter, that being in Christ by grace, we might continue and encrease in him, 1 Cor. 10. 16. and 11. 23. 1 Pet. 3. 21. The Supper of the Lord is to be received as often as he shall give occasion: Baptism but once, for there is but one entrance into Christ, but many degrees of growth up in him.
Of the Preparation to the Lords table. THere ought to be a careful preparation before the action, and great heed in the whole action, and a joyfull and thankful close and shutting up of it; all which ought to be performed as well by the mi∣nister as the people. 1. Let there be a due search and tryal of our own souls, whether we can find in our selves the things which God doth require in worthy communicants, viz. 1. by examining our wisdom and knowledge, both of Gods will in general, and of the nature and use of this holy ordinance in particular; whether we can give a reason of the representation of Christ in the bread and wine, and see our need of it, and what we may benefit by it: So also we should examine our Faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 Tim. 1. 15. and repentance, Heb. 10. 22. James 4. 8. and see whether this to us be attended with the love of God, Zach. 12. 10. and of our Brethren, 1 Cor. 16. 4. and a fervent praying for a blessing upon this ordinance of God, Mat. 26. 26. In thy preparation look much upon thy unwor∣thiness, as first the wickedness of thy nature, ready to all evil, and backward to all that is good. Second∣ly, consider thy blindness of mind, sleepiness of me∣mory, hard heart, and stubborn will, unholy affe∣ctions. Consider if thou wast cursed in the womb, born a child of wrath, what art thou now having lived so long in Sin, but the child of hell far more then thou
wast before, Psal. 58. 3. Job 20. 11. If for one sin al the curses of the Law do lie upon thee: as Gal. 3. 10. James 2. 10. What is due to thee for all thy sins? if single sins deserve death, what do thy double and treble sins deserve? consider thy rebellious backsliding sins against knowledge, conscience, covenants, pur∣poses, promises, protestations; do not all these deserve double and deeper damnation? not knowing of God, he will not have mercy upon thee, Isa. 27. 11. not repenting thou shalt perish, Luke 13. 3. not fearing him, he will make thy plagues wonderful, not believing in him thou shalt be damned, John 3. 18. not lo∣ving him thou art and shalt be cursed, 1 Cor. 16. 22. not being zealous he will spew thee out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 16. not being meek thou art an abominati∣on to the Lord, Prov. 3. 32. not being mercifull, thou shalt have judgement without mercy, not eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the Son of God, thou hast no life in thee, John 6. 53. And eat his flesh and drink his blood thou canst not, unless thou dost examine thy self, and by Faith discern the Lords body. Of the actions of the administrator of this blessed Ordinance. FIrst the minister is to take the bread and wine, and to separate it from ordinary bread and wine, which doth signifie Gods separating Christ from other men to be our alone mediator; and that he was by the father set a part to that office, and so separated from sinners, Exod. 12. 5. Heb. 7. 26.
Then he comes to bless and consecrate the bread and wine, by the word and prayer, which doth signi∣fie Gods sanctifying and furnishing him with all gifts needful for a mediator. Then he cometh to break the bread and pour out the wine, which doth signifie the passion of Christ, with all the torments which he endured for our sins, viz. to accomplish our salvation: see what he endured, consider that he that was equal with God, should come in the form of a Servant; that he that the hea∣ven of heavens could not contain, should be cradled in a manger, that the Judge of all flesh should be con∣demned; that the Lord of life should be put to death; that he that was his fathers joy should cry out, my God, my God why hast thou forsaken me? that that head that was crowned with honour should be crowned with thorns; that those eyes that were as a flame of fire should be closed up by the darkness of death; that that tongue that spake as never man spake, should be ac∣cused of blasphemie; that those hands that swayed the Scepter, and feet that were as fine brass, should be nailed to the cross, and himself hanged on a tree between two thieves, and then they pierced his side with a spear, his precious blood shed, and his righte∣ous soul poured forth unto Death, Isa. 53. 5, 10, 12. Heb. 9. 14. Surely as the bread nourisheth not if it remain whole and unbroken, so there is no life for us in Christ, but in as much as he died for us. Then the Minister gives the bread and wine to the receivers, which doth signifie that God gave Christ, and Christ gave himself to us, and in this is Christ Jesus with all his merits offered to all sorts of receivers, and that God hath given him unto the faithful re∣ceivers
to feed their souls unto eternal life, John 3. 14, 15. & 6. 50, 51. Of the actions of the receiver, or duty in reciev∣ing. FIrst he is to take the bread and wine presented to him, which doth signifie the recieving of Christ into our souls, with all his benefits, by Faith, and that they and only they have benefit by Christ, which thus apply Christ to themselves by a true and live∣ly Faith: John 1. 12. To as many as did receive him, to-them he gave power to become the Sons of God. Secondly, the communicants are to eat the bread and drink the wine, receiving them into their bodies, and digesting them, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Which doth sig∣nifie our uniting to Christ and enjoying of him, and so with delight apply him and his mercies to all the necessities of our Souls, Spiritually feeding upon him, and growing up by him; and as God doth bless these elements to preserve and strengthen the body of the receiver, so Christ apprehended and received by faith doth nourish our Souls, and preserve both body and soul unto eternall life, John 6. 50, 51. 1 Cor. 10. 3, 11, 19, 17. As the bread passeth through many alterations be∣fore it is fit to be eaten, as cutting down, threshing, grinding, and the parching heat in baking, so the blessed body of Christ was pittifully bruised and rent with drops of blood, scourges, nayles, thorns, and with a spear, before it could be a fit sacrifice for sin; and as bread feeds the body, so doth Christ the soul; and as bread drives away natural hunger, so doth Christ
spiritual hunger; and as bread is given to the hungry and poor, so Christ effectually to the broken in heart, and to the contrite Spirit, and to the hungry soul: if any ask what it is to receive Christ, then I answer, to accept of him to be thy Priest, and Jesus, to save thee by his blood; and to be thy Prophet, and Christ, to teach thee by his word: and to be thy Prince and Lord, to reign in and over thee by his Spirit, making thee to learn and live by his Laws; now if thou hast thus re∣ceived Christ, thou wilt part with any thing in the world rather then him, and so it will make thee to take heed of that which may cause Christ to depart from thee. 1. By committing any of thy old sins, 2 Pet. 1. 9. 2. By neglecting any of his Services, 2 Pet. 1. 10. 3. By not loving all his commandments; John 15. 14. 4. By not waiting for his second coming in power and great glory. Who they are that may partake of this Ordi∣nance. ALL who are of years and sound judgement to discern the Lords body, and to examine them∣selves, and are received by consent into the body of the Church of Christ, these are to repair to this ordi∣nance, for none partake of it worthily, but those who profess the true Faith, and have duly examined and prepared themselves, Isa. 66. 23. 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28. whereby all not of age and sound judgements are debarred of this ordinance, and may not be admitted
by the Church to the Supper of the Lord, but such only as have these things in them, which God re∣quireth at their hands, the other is to be kept back by the Discipline of the Church, and those also of the Church that are under admonition or suspension, till the Church receive full satisfa∣ction. The ends and uses of the Lords Supper. HAving spoken to the matter and form of the Lords Supper, it now fals in order to speak of the ends and uses thereof. 1. To receive Christ more firmly, and to be knit faster unto him. 2. To renew our Covenant with God. 3. To shew forth his death, 1 Cor. 11. 26. or to call to mind and renew the mercy and vertue of Christs death, 1 Cor. 11. 24. 4. To encrease our Faith, begotten by the word preached: and to confirm unto us our nourish∣ment therein by the means of Christs death. 5. To encrease our love to Christ, and his body the Church. 6. To quicken our hearts to all holy duties. 7. To encrease our joy in the Holy Ghost, our peace of conscience, our hope of eternal life, and all other graces of God in us. 8. To stir us up with greater boldness to profess Christ and his Ordinances, then heretofore we have done. 9. To make a difference between our selves and
the enemies of Christ, who casting the converting Ordinances behind their backs, they are debarred of the confirming Ordinances of Baptism and the Lords Supper. Of our duty after receiving. VVE should endeavour to obtain, and retain a greater measure of Faith in Christ, love to God and all his servants, power to subdue sin, and practice obedience with all other sanctifying and saving graces, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. and 11. 21. Col. 2. 6, 7. 2 Pet. 3. 18. For a true receiver shall feel in himself an increase of Faith, and sanctificati∣on, and a greater measure of dying unto sin, a fur∣ther strengthning of the new man, and so a greater care to live in newness of life, and to walk the more comfortably and steddily in the wayes of God, for strength to perform any duty, to exercise any grace, to subdue any lust, to resist any temptation, to bare any affliction, is derived only from Christ, and many times conveyed to the soul in this pipe of conveyance, to wit the Lords Supper.
Of Collection for the poor, another standing Or∣dinance of the Gospel. WE read 1 Cor. 16. 2. Ʋpon the first day of the week▪ let every one of you lay by in store as God hath prospered him, 2 Cor. 8. 7. There∣fore as you abound in every thing, in Faith, and utte∣rance, and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to us, see that ye abound in this duty also, 1 Tim. 6. 17, 18. Charge them that are rich, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, Rom. 12. 13. Di∣stributing to the necessity of the Saints, given to Hos∣pitality. 1 John 3. 17. But who so hath this worlds goods, and seeth his brother hath need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? Heb. 13. 19. Therefore to do good and to communicate, forget not, for with such sa∣crifice God is well pleased, Prov. 19. 17. He that hath pitty upon the poor, lendeth to the Lord, and that which he hath given, will he pay him again: but more particularly consider, 1. What it is to give alms. 2. Who they are that should give to the poor. 3. How much must they give. 4. To whom are we to give. 5. What order is to be observed in giving. 6. With what affection must we give. 7. How many wayes are we to give. 8. What fruits may we expect of this duty. 1. Of the first, what it is to give alms.
Answ. It is a duty of Christian love, whereby such as have this worlds goods, do freely impart to such as are in want, in obedience to the command of God, 1 Joh. 3. 17. 1 Tim. 6. 8. Mat. 25. 35, 42. 2 Cor. 9. 7. Who they are that should give alms. WHosoever hath this worlds good, 1 John 3. 17. that is, such a portion out of which something may be spared, though it be but two mites; not only rich men are to give, 1 Tim. 6. 17. but all such as labour with their hands, Ephes. 4. 28. out of their earnings, servants out of their wages, children out of their parents allowance, wives out of any portion they have of their own, or by allow∣ance of their husbands; lastly, those that live upon liberal alms, must spare something to those that have little or no supply, 2 Cor. 8. 2, 14. Nay in some cases those may give that are ac∣countable to others, as appeareth in the wise and com∣mendable example of Abigal, 1 Sam. 25. 3. And in some other cases of necessity, for extream necessity dispenseth with the ordinary course of du∣to both to God and man, See Mat. 12. 7. But of goods evil gotten, or wrongfully detain∣ed, not alms, but restitution must be made, Luk. 19. 8.
How much must we give. VVE must sow liberally, that we may reap li∣berally, 2 Cor. 9. 6. Gal. 6. 7. Prov. 11. 25. Notwithstanding in the quantity respect must be had. 1. To the ability of the giver. 2. To the condition of the receiver. 1. To the ability of the giver, Luke 3. 11. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Who is not so bound to give, as to impove∣rish himself, 2 Cor. 8. 13. And at last to make him∣self of a giver a receiver: yea, it is unlawful so to give unto some one good use, as to disable our selves for the service of the Common-wealth, or for the relief of our families or kindred in special, 1 Tim. 5. 8. 2. Respect must be had to the condition of the re∣ceiver, that his necessity may be supplyed, 2 Cor. 9. 12. Jam. 2. 15, 16: not so as to make him of a receiver a giver, for this is to give a patrimony, not an alms. To whom must we give. TO such only as are in want, yea to all such, but especially to them who are of the hous∣hold of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. We are to give to Or∣phans, aged, sick, blind, lame, and the trembling hand, Levit. 25. 35. But such as turn begging into an occupation, they are to be compelled to work,
if able, which if they will not, they are not to eat, 2 Thes. 3. 10, 11, 12. What orders is to be observed in giving. VVE must begin with such as are nearest to us in point of relation, 1 Tim. 5. 8. for our own families, Deut. 15. 7. Thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother, and so according as the Laws of Nature, Nations and Religion shall direct us, and so proceed to such as are afar off, according as our ability can ex∣tend; it must he given seasonably, whilst the poor have need, and thou hast it to give; thou hast some∣thing to day, it may be none tomorrow. With what affection must we give. 1. WIth tender pitty and compassion, as we would have others do to us if we were in their case, Psalm 112. 4. compared with Mat. 7. 12. 2. With humility and secresie, not seeking praise from men, but approving our hearts to God, Mat. 6. 1. 3. With cheerfulness, because God loveth loveth a cheer∣ful giver, Rom. 12. 8. 2 Cor. 9. 7. 4. With simplicity, not respecting our selves, but the glory of God, and the good of our fellow-mem∣bers, 2 Cor. 8. 4, 5.
How many waies may one be said to give. 1. BY giving freely and cheerfully, as we have proved before. 2. By lending to such as are not able to lend to us again, Luke 6. 34. Psalm 37. 26. pro∣vided we take nothing for the loan, Exod. 22. 25. 3. By selling, and abating something of the price, in pitty and love to them. 4. By forbearing whatsoevor is our right, in case of their great necessity, Nehem. 5. 8. 5. By considering the poor, in begging something of others for them, Psalm 41. 1. Blessed is the man that considereth the poor: the Lord will deli∣ver him in the time of trouble. What fruits may we expect of this duty. 1. BY this we make God our debtor, Prov. 19. 17. He that hath pitty upon the poor, lendeth to the Lord, and that which he hath given, he will pay again, See Mat. 10. 42. and 25. 35. 2 Tim. 1. 18. 2. By this we seal the truth of our Religion, Jam. 1. 27. This is pure Religion and undefiled before God. 3. By this we sanctifie our store, and bring a blessing on our labours, yea and upon our posterity af∣ter us, Luke 11. 41. Deut. 15. 10. Psalm 112. 2. 37. 26.
4. God forgetteth not, but will surely reward the least, even accept of cold water, given in Faith, and for his sake, Mat. 10. 42. Of reading the Scriptures, another standing Or∣dinance of the Gospel. 1. COnsider that the Scriptures are the word of God. 2. That no History is comparable to the Scri∣pture. 3. Who they are that ought to read the Scri∣ptures. 4. Why must we read the Scriptures. 5. How we ought to read the Scriptures. 1. Let us consider that the Scriptures contained in the Old and New Testaments are the word of God, as will appear by these ensuing particu∣lars. 1. By the consent and testimony of▪ godly men in all ages, from them that first knew the pen-men, until our time. See Psal. 119. 125. 2. The simplicity, integrity, and sincerity of these Writers, doing nothing by partiality, 1 Tim. 5. 21. 3. The sweet concord and harmony between these writings, and all things contained in them, notwithstanding the diversity of persons by whom, places where, times when, and matters whereof they have written, See Luke 24. 44. 4. The prophesies thereof prove them to be the word of God, fore-telling things to come so long
before-hand, with their circumstances, thus was the Messiah promised to Adam four hundred years before he was born, Gen. 3. 15. and to Abraham one thousand nine hundred and seventeen years be∣fore the accomplishment, Gen. 12. 3. 5. The admirable power and force that is in them to convert and alter mens minds, and to incline their hearts from vice to vertue, Psal. 19. 7, 8. Psal. 119. 111. Heb. 4. 12 Act. 13. 12. What shall I say more, the Scriptures of truth are perfectly holy in themselves, and by themselves, whereas all other writings are imperfect, Christ is the eternal word, John 1. 1. Rev. 19. 13. Iohn 1. 14. 1 John 5. 7. The Scriptures are the written word, Mar. 7. 13. Jer. 30. 1, 2, 4. Ier 34. 1. Exod. 20. 1. and 34. 27. Job 42. 7. John 10. 35. Luke 8. 21. and 11. 28. Jer. 37. 2. Jer. 36. 1, 4, 6, 8, 11, 16, 18. That no History is comparable to the History of the Scriptures. THe books of the Old and New Testament are so sufficient for the knowledge of Christian Religion, that they do most plentifully contain all Doctrine necessary to salvation, they being per∣fectly profitable to instruct to salvation in them∣selves; whence it followeth, that we need no tradi∣tions or inventions of men, no Cannon of Coun∣cils, no sententes of Fathers, no orders of Parliaments, or decrees of Popes for to supply and supposed de∣cts of the written word, or for to give us perfect
directions in the worship of God, and the way of life, then is already expressed in the Scriptures, Mat 23. 8. John 5. 39. Mat. 15. 9. Lastly, the holy Scriptures are the rule of life and ground of Faith, the rule, the line, the square, and light whereby to examine and try all Doctrines by, Joh. 12. 4. Gal. 1. 9. all traditions, revelations, decrees of councils, opinions of Doctors, &c. are to be proved out of the Divine Scriptures, no word like this word for antiquity, rarity, brevity, harmony. Who they are that ought to read the Scriptures. THe Scriptures of truth are carefully and profita∣bly to be read and heard of all sorts and de∣grees of men and women, both privately and openly, so as they may receive profit by them, Deut. 31. 11, 12. Moses commanded the book of the Law to be read to all the children of Israel, men women and children, that they might thereby learn to fear the Lord their God, Josh▪ 8. 34. There was not a word of all which Moses commanded, that Joshua read not before all the congregation, John 5. 39. Christ commandeth all men to search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they testifie of me, Rev. 1. 3. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophesie, Rom. 15. 4. Whatso∣ever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, Act. 17. 11. The hearers are commended for searching the Scriptures.
Why must we read the Scriptures DAvid testifieth that the Law of the LordPsalm 19. 8. is perfect▪ converting the soul; the Testimonies of the Lord are true, giving wisdom to the simple, Psal. 119▪ 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths, Prov. 1▪ 4. It giveth subtilty to the simple, and to the young man knowledge and discretion. Paul saith, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3. The Scriptures are our fathers letters to us, and his last will, to shew us what inheritance he hath left us; women and children have read the Scriptures, 2 Tim. 3. 15. Saint Paul affirmeth that Timothy was nourished up in the Scriptures from his Infan∣cy, &c. Again, by reading the Scriptures, we gain know∣ledge, therefore we should read them, Prov. 2. 16. When wisdom entreth into thy heart, and knowledge is pleasant to thy soul, discretion shall preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, Hos. 6. 6. I desire know∣ledge of God, more then burnt offerings, Hos. 4. 1. The Lord hath a controversie with the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no knowledge of God in the Land, 1 Cor. 15. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame, Hos. 4. 6. My peo∣ple are destroyed for want of knowledge, Prov. 1. 22. How long ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity; and fools hate knowledge? Ephes. . 17. Therefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is, 2 Tim 3. 15, 16. And that from a child thu hast
known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, ver. 16. For all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, ver. 17. That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works. How must we read the Scriptures. 1. FIrst, endeavour to see the excellency of the Scriptures, set a high price upon them, and then thou wilt take more delight in them, Jer. 6. 10. The word of the Lord is to them a reproach, they have no deht in them: whereas David that did delight in the Lord, he did meditate in them day and nihgt, Psal. 1. 2. 2. Let us endeavour to get the Scriptures written in our hearts, as well as in our minds, and to that end we should pray constantly, and wait diligently for the Spirit of revelation, to open the seals of that book. 3. Observe these eight rules, and read the Scri∣ptures. 1. Read them diligently and carefully. 2. Read them frequently. 3. Read them believingly, with an expectation to gain something by reading▪ 4. Compare Scripture with Scripture when you read them, compare spiritual things with spiri∣tual. 5. Pray, meditate and study to find out the spiri∣tual meaning of those Scriptures that be dark and hard.
6. Take heed of allowing thy self in any secret sin, against, or contrary to the Scriptures; he that doth so, may read long enough, and understand no∣thing. 7. Be much in the practice of what thou hast al∣ready learned, he that is faithfull in a little shall have much more. 8. Pray frequently, and fervently to the Lord. 1. To help thee to understand what thou readest, Mat. 24. 15. and Mat. 13. 5. 2. Believe what thou understandest. 3. To apply what thou dost believe. 4. To affect and hide in thy heart, what thou dost apply. 5. To keep and retain in memory what thou dost affect. 6. To communicate as opportunity is offered what you keep: surely he that thinks himself too good to read and to be ruled by the word, will at last be found too bad to be owned by God, &c. Of Admonition, private and publike. PRivate admonition is betwixt brother and bro∣ther, Levit. 19. 17. Mat. 18. 15, 16. The other publike, by the messengers of the Churches or Officers, when the private will not prevail, Mat. 18. 17. 1 Tim. 5. 20. The degrees of private admonition are two, the former is most private, done by one; the other is private also, but more publike then the first, and
it is done by two or three at the most, whereof he that first admonisheth must be one, Matthew 18. 15, 16. Now publike admonition is that which is done by the whole Church, or the Minister assisted by the Congregation, 1 Tim. 5. 20.▪ For if the se∣cond warning serve not, our Saviour would have the offendor presented to the Church as to the highest court, Mat. 18. 17. Who therefore hear∣ing their admonition, is to be received, notwithstand∣ing his former obstinacy. I shall say no more to this in this place, because I shall speak more fully to it when I come to speak of the Ordinance of excom∣munication. Of Suspention. SUspention is a certain separation of him that will not amend by admonition from some things that are holy in the Church, as the use of the Lords Supper, or from officiating in any office in the Church, till he repent, and when he doth, he is not by and by to be admitted to all priviledges of the Church, but to re∣main suspended for a time, till the fruits of repen∣tance may better appear; for if some in the Law, Num. 9. 6. for a certain pollution in a lawful du∣ty, for burying the dead, were suspended from the Passover, much more in the Gospel for such obstina∣cy; it is agreeable to the Gospel to execute the sen∣sure of suspention after two admonitions upon a known offence.
Of Excommunication. THE Church of Christ is in Scripture resembled to a natural body, wherein are many members united to each other, and all to one head by one spi∣rit, growing up in unity: now as in the natural bo∣dy there may be many infirmities, so also it is in this mystical body, sometimes it may be Subject to di∣stempers by the drinking in of untruths, sometimes windy humorus of pride, high-mindedness, &c. and so distemper it, sometimes a Palsie humor of deadness and benummedness seise upon it, sometimes feave∣rish fits of violent headiness may inflame it; but God whose temples it is, hath provided for it against such distempers, whereof this of excommunication is is one. Now if any ask what it is, then I answer. Answ. It is the casting of a stubborn sinner out of the Church, and a delivering him unto Satan, who be∣ing thus disfranchized of all the liberties, and depriv∣ed of all the benefits and common society of the Church, is separated as it were from that protection it once had. This ordinance is to be administred to such as are desperately wicked, that have nothing profited by the former censures, but still continuedin their former wickedness of obstinate and malicious resisting all means graciously used to reclaim them. Now the end of this casting out is twofold, either respecting the good of the person excommunicated, or the rest of the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Tim. 1 20. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are ga∣thered
together, to deliver such an one unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. This must be done in wisdom, tenderness, courage and faithfulness, to this end, to gain our offending member a gain, and to obey God in this command also, praying to God for his blessing upon his own ordinance, and that he would keep us from those sins that we deal with others for. Of assurance of Salvation. 1. THE nature of it. 2. Whether it be attainable in this life. 3. Of the several sorts and degrees of assurance. 4. Of the trials of assurance, how it may be known. 5. To labour and endeavour for it is our duty. 6. Of the benefits of it, and arguments to perswade us to endeavour to gain it, which are five. 1. The want of it doth hinder thankfulness. 2. Assurance will settle a soul upon Christ. 3. Assurance doth sweeten all other blessings to us. 4. Assurance doth put us upon our duty, be it what it will. 5. Assurance doth ease us of the world, and mounts the Soul above it. 7. Of the Springs of Assurance. 8. Of the impediments of assurance. 9. Of the evil of doubting or want of Assurance. 10. Many think they have Assurance and have it not.
11. Many reasons wherefore the Lord doth not give Assurance speedily. 12. Very hard to recover assurance if once lost. Of the nature of Assurance, what it is. ASSurance is a certain sweet motion of the soul steadily resting upon the mercy of God, through the merits of Christ, with an unshaken expectation of all that is promised; this assurance in Scripture hath several denominations, which I shall speak to under the next head. Or assurance is a victorious conclusion against the strength of doubting, whereby the mind of a believer is certained and perswaded, and upon good grounds setled concerning his personal interest in Christ and all his benefits. Assurance conquers our doubtings, answers our arguments, clears our evidences unto the soul, against the many suspitions which did arise, that Christ doth indeed own it, that he is the Saviour thereof, &c. This assurance is called sometimes full assurance of understanding, Col. 2. 2. Sometimes called full assurance of hope, Heb. 6. 11, 12, 19. Sometimes full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 22▪ So that faith and hope do contribute their influ∣ence to the making up of full assurance, sometimes this is called boldness, Heb. 4. 16. Importing an undant∣ed, yet humble and dutifull looking God in the face; sometimes full assurance when faith acts strongly without staggering through unbelief.
Whether Assurance be attainable in this life. 1 John 5. 13. THese things have I written unto you, that ye way know that ye have eternal life, Heb. 6. 18. God hath given us his Oath, his word, his seal, that our consolation may be strong, and that our salvation may be sure. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. Solomons Song. 2. 16. My beloved is mine and I am his, I am his by purchase, and I am his by conquest, I am his by donation, and I am his by election, and I am his by Covenant, and I am his by marriage: Isa. 63. 16. doubtless thou art our Father, though Abra∣ham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, thou O Lord art our Father and our redeemer, Rom. 8. 38. Paul saith that nothing could separate him from the love os Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure: there∣fore we see it is attainable, and our duty to make it sure, &c.
Of the several sorts of Assurance. THere are degrees of assurance, some more weak, some more strong; there is an assurance, and a full assurance. God in his word doth exhort Christians to strive after assurance, yea full assurance, yea the riches of full assurance; and no doubt, that not only Paul but many a good Christian can say sometime or other, I am verily perswaded that Christ loved me, and gave himself for me. Assurance hath many denominations in the Scrip∣tures, according to its degrees; sometimes it is called a perswasion, Rom. 8. 38. Sometimes boldness, Eph. 3. 12. In whom we have boldness, which doth import an undanted (yet humble and dutiful) looking God in the face. Sometimes it is called full assurance, Rom. 4. 2. That is, when faith doth act strongly, without staggering through unbelief. This is called sometimes full assurance of under∣standing, Col. 2. 2. Sometimes full assurance of hope, Heb. 6. 11, 18, 19. And sometimes full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 22. For Knowledge, Faith and Hope do all contribute their influence to the making up of full assurance, ma∣ny Christians have some degree of assurance, who think they have not, and many have no assurance at all, who yet pretend thereto most of all.
Of the trials of assurance. AS Surance may be brought to the test, and tried by, 1. The qualification of the Subject assu∣red. 2. Or by the grounds or cases of assurance. 3. Or by the fruits and effects of it; we are not to let the reall interest of Christ to hang hovering and in dispute, but to determine them by particular and per∣sonal evidence. 1. True assurance doth support and comfort the heart in deepest tribulation, as we may see in Job and Paul. 2. True assurance doth make a man of a Godlike disposition, easie to be intreated, ready to forgive, abundant in goodness; it makes a man study the good of others, wherein he may strengthen the feeble, and comfort the dejected, and inrich the impoverished, and recover the seduced, and inlarge the streightned, and build up the wasted. 3. True assurance puts the soul a work upon self∣purifying, 1 John 3. 2, 3. 4. True assurance doth make the soul incomparably to prize communion with God and Jesus Christ Can▪ 2. 6, 7, 16, 17. Compared with Cant. 3. 1. to the 6. 5. True assurance doth engage those that have it to serve and honour God, Josh. 1. 15. God assured Joshua that he would neverleave him, nor forsake him: Joshua upon this resolves that he and his house would serve the Lord, &c.
To make out after, and endeavour for assurance, is our duty. WE are bound to draw near unto God in the full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 22. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather brethren give dili∣gence to make your calling and election sure: but so foolish are we, that whilst with much care and labour we go about to make those things certain which are most uncertain, we make those things uncertain, which might be made certain, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine you selves, whether ye be in the faith, prove your selves, &c. Consider farther, that although the enjoyment of assurance makes most for our consolation, yet the living upon Christ purely in the want of as∣surance, makes most for his exaltation; he is happy with Thomas that believeth upon seeing and handling, but thrice happy are those that believe when they do nor see, John 20. 29. Faith can make a soul submit in a cross, but it is assurance which makes the soul to rejoyce and tri∣umph.
Of the benefits of assurance, and many arguments to perswde us to make out after it. 1. THE want of it doth hinder thankfulness; 2. Assurance will settle a soul upon Christ. 3. Assurance will sweeten all other blessings to us. 4. Assurance will put us upon all kind of duty. 5. Assurance will ease a man of the world, and mount the soul above it. 1. The want of it doth hinder thankfulness. We cannot give God hearty thanks, whilst we are doubtfull of our particular interest in Christ; this man cannot thank the Lord from his own Soul, for giving his Son Jesus Christ, seeing he doth doubt of his interest in him; he cannot thank God for par∣don of sin, seeing he doth doubt whether they be par∣doned or no, see Psal. 103. 1, 2, 3. 2. Assurance will settle a soul upon Christ, and cause him to lie down and sleep in safety; there be two ef∣fects of this blessed assurance, one is joy, the other is peace; it glads the heart, and it pacifies the heart. 3. Assurance will sweeten all other blessings to us: we shall see them handed forth to us in love, here is saith the soul plenty of food and ayment, and friends, and God is my God too: my sins are pardoned too, but the want of this may check all our mercies. 4. Assurance will put us upon all kind of duty, viz. What shall I render to the Lord for all his mer∣cies? I will either do, or suffer, or any thing for him that hath done so much for me.
5. Assurance will mount the soul above the world, and make the soul to live out of its self, in the Spirit, upon Christ, unto God, above the world, under Or∣dinances, looking to election behind, and perfecti∣on before. O the blessed favour of God, the eviden∣ces of our Union with Christ: this is like the light of the Sun, which puts out the light of ten thousand candles; those that have so much as to make up assu∣rance for heaven, will never complain of too lit∣tle on the earth: these things considered, doth lay be∣fore us two things. 1. The benefits of assurance. Secondly, it doth bespeak the reader, if he have it not, to labour for it. Of the springs of assurance, or means by which it is attained. THE work we have to do is two-fold. First, get title to Gods love. Secondly, get assu∣rance that thou hast a title; the first is done by action, the second is done by examination. He that would get assurance, must not cut off any of the pipes of conveyance, neither make use of them sluggishly. A sluggish spirit, is alwayes a la∣zy spirit: he that will find rich minerals, must dig deep: he that will be rich, must be diligent and sweat for it: he that will taste the kernel, must crack the shell: he that will have the marrow, must break the bone: he that will wear the garland, must run the race: He that will ride in triumph, must get the victory; a lazy Christian shall alwaies want four things: comfort and content, confidence and
assurance, Heb. 6. 11. and we desire that every one would shew the same diligence to the full assurance of Faith. O how can we look so many sweet pro∣mises in the face, and harbour so many misgivings in our hearts? First, take one promise, and charge that upon the heart, and if the heart be stubborn and will not yield, then take another, if that will not do, then take another, and lay that home upon the heart, and never leave or cease this work, till thou hast made thy calling and election sure; and make as much conscience of these commands that requires thee to get assurance, as you do of those commands that requires thee to pray, read and hear; assurance is heavenly wages that God gives not no loyterers: though no man doth merit assurance by obedience, yet God usually crowns obedience with assurance, Joh. 14. 21, 22, 23. 1. Diligently improve those notable assuring Or∣dinances, the Word, Lords Supper, and Praye r, to help on all the former directions. 1. The word was therefore written, 1 John 5. 13. That believers might know they have eternal life, let it therefore dwell in you richly, Col. 3. 16. 2. The Lords Supper seals up remission of sins, therefore be at the Lords table frequently, but be sure to partake of it worthily. 3. Prayer, that not only spreads open a mans heart, but pierceth the heavens, creeps into the bo∣som of God, and sometimes furnisheth the doubting spirit with assurance in the very exercise of it. 2. Spring of assurance cherisheth and improveth all your graces but especially assuring graces, knowledge, Faith, and hope; by knowledge we
discern our selves, by Faith we appropriate to our selves, and by hope we patiently wait for full en∣joyment. 3. Quench not, grieve not the Spirit of God, for that spirit is sent to assure us, most convincingly, clearly and satisfactorily. 4. Go on from faith to faith, add one grace to ano∣ther, so shall an entrance be administred to thee abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. See and well con∣sider this portion of Scripture, 2 Pet. 1. from ver. 5. to ver. 12. Of the impediments of assurance. 1. THE first impediment of assurance that I shall name, is this, our measuring of the merey and bowels of God, by the narrow scantling of our dark understanding. 2. Another is our making sense, reason and feeling the sole judge of our spiritual condi∣tion. 3. Another impediment of assurance is, our re∣taining so many despairing thoughts, not considering that despair is one of the worst sins, viz. It is a dis∣henour to God, and a reproach to Christ, a resisting of the Spirit of Grace, and a murderer of the soul, a belying of God, a denying of Christ, and a crown∣ing of Satan, and a proclaiming the Devil conqueror; Jdas did sin more by despairing then by betraying of Christ. 4. Another impediment of assurance is, our not
reading and believing these and the like precious pro∣mises, Num. 14. 19, 20. Exod. 34. 6, 7. Mich. 7. 18, 19. Isa. 30. 18, 19. Psalm. 38. 34. to the 40. Psal. 103. to the 13. Jer. 3. 1. to 12. Luk. 15. 20. to 24. 1 Tim. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. 5. Another impediment of assurance is our living in the neglect of some of Gods Ordinances, when we wait on God in some of his wayes, but not in all, viz. Some will wait upon God, in hearing the word of life, and yet neglecting the breaking the bread of life: sometimes God will give assurance in one Ordinance, and deny it in another, that we may seek his face in all, 1 Cor. 28. 8. 6. Our dallying with sin; he that doth lye down in sin must live in fear, there is no assurance for us, unless we offer up our Isaac, and part with our Ben∣jamin, pull out our right eye, and cut off our right hand, &c. The evil of doubting, or want of assurance. WE cannot in any one thing more gratifie Satan, and wrong our own souls, then to live in a state of doubting; we wrong our selves in point of comfort and content, and in point of peace, and in point of boldness; a man that lives without assu∣rance, leaves his soul open to many blows and knocks, frowns and wounds, from God, from the world, from carnal friends, and from Satan: besides, if we live and dye in unbelief, John 3. 18. He that believeth not, is condemned already: by the Law, and the Gospel, and by your own conscience; all
these have passed the sentence of condemnation up∣on that state already: the sin of unbelief is a great sin, and it is our sin to give way to it. We nourish a snake in our bosom, that will sting us to death; to doubt and to despair of mercy, is to make the God of truth a lyar, 1 John 5. 10. Doubting makes the countenance sad, and the hands to hang down, and the knees feeble, and the heart full of fears and trembling; besides, the time of doubting is a bar∣ren time, there is no praying nor praising, nor growing, nor any vigorous acting. Surely, this state comes not from God, he bids us make our cal∣ling and election sure; neither doth it come from Christ, he speaks and gives peace to his flock, they come not from the holy Spirit of God, for he is the great and most sweet comforter, revealing and ap∣plying the love of God unto the soul; consider these Scriptures, Mat. 14. 31. O thou of little faith, where∣fore didst thou doubt? Luk. 12. 29. Neither be ye of doubtful minds, 1 Thes. 2. 8. I will that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands without wrath, and doubting. But whilst we live in the want of assurance, we live in a state of doubt∣ing.
Many think they have assurance, and have not. LET us consider, that there is a great deal of counterfeit knowledge, and counterfeit faith, and counterfeit love, and counterfeit repentance: so there is a great deal of counterfeit assurance in the world; many there be that talk high, and look big, and bear it out bravely, whereas when their assurance comes to be weighed in the ballance, and brought to the test, it will be found too light; when it cometh to withstand temptation, it is found too weak, and when it should put the soul upon Divine action, it is found to be but a lazy presumption; so we are apt to think our sins to be no sins, when in∣deed they be many, and that they are but smal, when indeed they are great, and that we have grace, when we have none, and that our grace is true, when it is counterfeit, and that our condition is not so bad as others, when it is worse: so we are apt to lay claim to God, to Christ, and the promises, and priviledges, and all the glory of another world, when we are in the sight of God, poor, and blind, and miserable, and naked, being Christless, and grace∣less, and truthless, and so think our selves to be some∣thing, when we are nothing according to this Scri∣pture, Gal. 6. 3. Assurance is not all kind of perswasion, there are two kinds of assurance or perswasion of the mind touching a mans personal interest in Christ, one is imaginary and deluding, for as the heart of a man
may deceive it self, about the habit of Faith, or any other grace, so it may delude a man about the acts and degrees of the same; doth the true believer believe in Christ? so thinks the hypocrite that he doth too: hath a true believer a perswasion of his in∣terest in Christ? so hath the hypocrite to a most exal∣ted confidence, an Iron faith that will never doubt nor bow; it is just with him as with a poor man in a dream, what the rich man hath by propriety, that same thing may the poorest man have in a dream, fancy or imagination. Many reasons wherefore the Lord doth not give assurance speedily. 1. BEcause assurance is meat for strong men, babes are not able to bear it, and di∣gest it. 2. He doth not give it speedily, because we are apt to seek it more for our selves, then we do for his honour; as the Sun doth, as it were, put out the light of the Moon, stars, fire and candle. So the glory of God must put out all other ends; the ser∣vant that minds his wages more then his work, must not wonder if his master be slack in paying him; and sure it is, that he that is most mindfull of Gods honour, God will be most mindfull of his com∣fort. 3. Another reason why he doth not speedily give in assurance is, that when they have it they may the more highly prize it, and the more carefully keep it, and the more wisely improve it, and the more
affectionately and effectually bless God for it; none sets such a prize upon light, as he that hath lain a long time in darkness. 4. That we might live purely upon Christ, we are apt to rest upon every thing below Christ, viz. to rest upon creatures, to rest upon gifts or graces, duties and Divine manifestations, or celestial conso∣lations, and to rest upon gracious evidences: now the Lord to cure his people of these distempers, ma∣ny times leaves his children of light to walk in dark∣ness; but let us consider, that although the enjoy∣ment of assurance doth make most for our comfort, as we have said before: yet the living purely upon Christ in the want of assurance, doth make most for his glory; no Christian to him that in the want of visibles, can live upon an invisible God. 5. The Lord most times will have his people make a constant progress in holiness before he gives them this happiness of assurance, for assurance in a sense is the daughter of holiness. Very hard to recover assurance, if one lost. LET us consider the wonderful difficulty of re∣covering assurance if once lost. Oh the sighs, the groans, the complaints, the tears, the heart∣rentings, the soul-bleeding▪ the gaining of assurance at first cost very dear, but the regaining of it will put us to more pains and charge. Of the two it is casier to keep assurance when we have it, then to recover it when we have lost it: as it is easier to keep the house in reparations, then to raise it up when it
is fallen; a man may easier make a seeing eye blind, then a blind eye to see; a man may easily put an In∣strument out of tune, but not so soon put it in again: a man is easily born down the stream, but cannot so easily swim up the stream. It is better to be kept from the losing of assurance, then to be cured; as it is better to be kept from a disease, then to be cured of a disease. Oh what is the state of a poor Christi∣an that hath lost his assurance! it will cost him more grief, sorrow, heart-breaking, and soul-bleeding, be∣fore conscience will be▪ quieted, divine justice satis∣fied, and comfort, and joy restored, evidences clear∣ed, and pardon in the court of conscience seal∣ed. David found this to be very hard, which made him cry out, O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, create a clean heart, renew a right spi∣rit, restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, Psal. 51. 7. to 12. We lose our assurance by backsliding, unbelief, luke-warmness, formality, &c. and yet cannot be recovered until we remember from whence we are fallen; and repent we cannot, until we look upon him whom we have peirced, and see Gods delightful affections, and tender mercies before set us, in sweet working, and soul-ravishing, and heart-melting ex∣pressions: a relapse in diseases is more dangerous then the first sickness was, Job 5. 14. 2▪ Pet. 2. 22. Mat. 12 43.
Of the difference between the Law and the Gos∣pel; and of the several sorts of Laws. AS the Law requireth obedience, so the Gospel directeth us how to perform it, 1 Tim. 1. 9, 10, 11. The Law commands us to worship God as our Creator, the Gospel commandeth us to wor∣ship him in Christ, as our Saviour; the Law like Pharaoh requires brick, but allows no straw, the Gospel both allows strength and supplies, Rom. 10. 5, 6, 8. But yet as the Law saveth us not without the Gospel, so the Gospel saveth us not without the Law, which directeth us in our duty both to God and man, Deut. 5. 32. At the giving of the Law the mountain burned, the trumpet sounded, the people fled, and Moses trembled, and all this to teach us that we should be very careful to perform obedience to the same. Object. What was the Ceremonial Law? Answ. It was that which did prescribe orders for direction in rites of outward worship, only sha∣dowing the grace of the Gospel. Heb. 10. 1. But the substance of this▪ Law being come, those shadows are utterly abolished, by the death of Christ, and therefore the use of them now would be a kind of denyal of his death. Quest. What was the Judicial Law? Answ. That wherein God appointed a form of civil government of the Common-wealth. Now this Law is not utterly revoked and abolished by
Christ, for he came not to over-turn any good government. Quest. What is the Moral Law? Answ. That which commandeth perfection of godliness and righteousness, and directeth us in our duties both to God and man, Deut. 5. 32, 12. 32. Quest. Are not we delivered from this Law by the means of Christ? Answ. From the burden of the Law, exacting in our own persons perfect obedience, and from the curse of the Law, due unto disobedience, we are de∣livered by Christ, Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13. but from the commandment as a rule of life, we are not freed, Jam. 2. 8. For the Law doth lay a charge upon all the powers of the soul, viz. First, it doth charge the under∣standing to know every duty, even all the will of God; it chargeth the judgement to discern between good and evil; it chargeth the memory to retain it; it chargeth the will to chuse the better, and to leave the worse; it chargeth the affections to love those things that are lovely, and to hate things that are un∣comely.
Of the ten Commandments. THe ten Commandments are divided into two tables, Deut. 4. 13. and 10. 1, 4. Which Chirst called the two great Commandments, Mat. 22. The four first do contain our duty to God, and the six latter, our duty to man. The first commandment is, Thou shalt have no other Gods before me. This commandment directs us to the choice of the true God, and the entertaining him in all our thoughts, in which there are nine things enjoyn∣ed, and three things prohibited or forbidden. 1. Knowledge, Joh. 17. 3. 2. Remembrance, Eccles. 12. 1. 3. Love, Deut. 6. 5. 4. Trust, Prov. 3. 5. 5. Hope, Psal. 146. 5. 6. Fear, Isa. 51. 12, 13. 7. Humility, Mich. 6. 8. 8. Patience, Lam. 3. 39. 9. Obedience, 1 John 5. 3. Things prohibited or forbidden in this first com∣mandment. 1. Atheism, Heb. 11. 6. 2. Heresie, Tit. 3. 10, 11. 3. Apostacy, Heb. 10. 26.
The second Commandment. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth, thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them, Exod. 20. 4, 5. This second commandment layes before us the so∣lemn worship that is to be performed unto God, without images and ceremonies. This second commandment doth prohibit seven things, and enjoyn six things; four ordinary, two extraordinary. The things prohibited or forbidden are these seven. 1. Idolatry, Psal. 97. 7. 2. Will-worship, Col. 2. 23. 3. Superstition, Act. 17. 22▪ 4. Traditions, Col. 2. 8. 5. Schism, 1 Cor. 11. 18. 6. Witch-craft, Exod. 22. 18. 7. Confusion, 1 Cor. 11. 21. Things commanded and enjoyned in this second commandment, are, first ordinary, secondly extra∣ordinary. First ordinary, Extraordinary 1. Prayer, 1 Thes. 5. 17. 2. Preaching, Mal. 2. 7. 3. Seals or Sacraments. 4. Discipline, Mat. 18. 17. 5. Fasting, Lev. 23. 19. 6. Feasting and thanksgiving. Ester. 9. 22. The third Commandment is this. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that
taketh his name in vain, Exodus 20. 7. This third commandment doth inform us, how we should glorifie God aright, in the actions of our common life, without swearing or blasphe∣ming. This third commandment doth prohibit four things, and enjoyn five things. The things forbidden, or prohibited are, 1. Oaths, Jer. 4. 2. 2. Vows, Numb. 30. 2▪ 3. Lots, Prov. 16. 33. 4. All unreverent and unholy use of his name, and prophaning of his titles, properties, actions, and Ordinances, either by mouth or acti∣on, Lev. 21. 32. Mal. 1. 6, 12. Things commanded or enjoyned in the third com∣mandment, in the sanctifying of God. 1. His names, Deut▪ 28. 15. 2. Attributes, 1 Pet. 3. 15. 3. Word, Psal. 50. 16, 17. 4. Works, Psal. 58. 10, 11. 5. Religion, Ephes. 4. 1. The fourth Commandment is this. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, Exod. 20. 8, 9▪ 10, 11. This fourth commandment doth inform us of a certain day set apart for Gods service, as the Sabbath or Lords day. This fourth commandment doth prohibit certain things, and enjoyn many other things. Things prohibited. 1. The making of it a common day▪ Neh. 13. 15▪
2. Vain speech about wordly things. Isa. 581. 3. 3. Idleness, feasting, pastimes, Exod. 32. 6. 4. The doing that on the Lords day, which is no day lawful, Mar. 3. 4. Ezek. 23. 37, 38. 5. The imploying others in worldly busi∣ness. Things commanded or enjoyned to be done on that day. 1. Hearing and reading the word, Luk. 4. 16, 22. Act. 13. 14▪ 15. 2. Prayer and singing of Psalms. 3. Visiting and relieving the sick. 4. Examining our selves, and those that be∣long to us. 5. Catechising our families. The fifth Commandment runs thus. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy dayes may be lng in the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee▪ Exod. 20. 12. This commandment layes before us the duties we owe one to another in regard of our particular relation, unto such as are our superiors, inferiors and equals. In a word, the fifth commandment presents us with the duty of, 1. Magistrates, 1 Tim. 2. 2. 2. Ministers, 1 Pet. 5. 2. 3. Parents, Ephs. 6. 4. 4. Masters▪ Col. 4. 1. 5. Husbands, Ephes. 5. 25. 6. Noble and rich, 1 Tim. 6. 17. 7. Aged, Tit. 2. 2, 4.
8. Subjects, Rom. 13. 1. 9. People, Heb. 13 17. 10. Children, Ephes. 6. 1. 11. Servants, 1 Pet. 2. 18. 12. Wife, Ephes. 5. 24, 33. 13. Poor, 1 Sam. 25. 8. 14. Young, Lev. 19. 32. The sixth Commandment runs thus. Thou shalt not murder, Exod▪ 20. 13. This commandment layes before us our duty in the preservation of mens persons, and living in peace and meekness. In this commandment there are five things forbid∣den, and four things enjoyned. The things forbidden are these and such like, 1. Unjust anger, Mat. 5. 22. 2. Hatred, 1 Joh. 3. 15. 3. Inward desire of revenge, Rom. 12. 19. 4. Reviling and back-biting, Psal. 15. 3. 5. Immoderate worldly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Things enjoyned or commanded. 1. Friendship, Prov▪ 27. 9. 2. Mercy and good works, Gal 6. 10. 3. Meekness, Ephes. 4. 32. 4. Overcoming evil with good, Rom. 12. 21. The seventh Commandment is this. Thou shalt not commit adultery▪ Exod. 20. 14. This commandment presents us with the preserva∣tion of chastity▪ temperance, and marriage.
In this commandment there are eight things for∣bidden, and seven things enjoyned. The things forbidden are these and such like. 1. Wanton gestures or behaviour, Prov. 6. 13. and 7. 10. 2. Wanton looks, Job 31. 1. 3. Wanton speeches, Ephes. 4. 29. and 5. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 15. 33. 4. Uncleaness 1 Cor. 6. 9. 5. Fornication 1 Cor. 6. 9. 6. Adultery, Heb. 13. 4. 7. Intemperance, 1 Pet. 4. 3. 8. Bad company, 1 Cor. 5. 9. Things enjoyned in this commandment. 1. Marriage, 1 Cor. 7. 2, 9. 2. Care to keep a good conscience, Eccles. 7. 28. 3. Labour in our vocation. 4. Watchfulness over our own hearts, Mal. 2. 16. 5. A Covenant with our eyes, Job 31. 1. 6. Prayer, Psal. 119. 37. 7. Holy meditation, &c. The eighth Commandment is this. Thou shalt not steal, Exod. 20. 15. This commandment enjoyns us to have a care, and endeavour the preservation of our own, and our neigbours good, and therein of the maintain∣ing of justice in our dealing one with another. In this eighth commandment there are seven things prohibited, and five things enjoyned. The things forbidden follow.
1. Theft, Lev. 19. 13. 2. Oppression, Prov 14. 31. 3. Deceit, 1 Thes. 4. 6. 4. Sacriledge, Prov. 20. 25. 5. Usury, Deut. 23. 20. 6. Bribery, Prov. 29. 4. 7. Prodigality, Luk. 15. 13. Things enjoyned in this commandment. 1. Just dealing, Lev. 25. 14. 2. Diligence in our calling, Ephes. 4. 28. 3. Liberality, Prov. 11. 25. 4. Hospitality, 1 Pet. 4. 9. 5. Restitution, Exod. 22. 5. Lev. 6. 4, 5. The ninth Commandment is as followeth. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neigh∣bour, Exod. 20 16. This commandment enjoyns us with the preserva∣tion of our own and our neighbours good name, and the maintaining of truth in our testimony. This ninth commandment doth prohibit seven things, and enjoyn five things. Things prohibited in this commandment. 1. Slandering, Prov. 15. 24. 2. Credulity, Psal. 15. 3. 3. Hearing tale-bearers, Prov. 25. 23. 4. Censuring, Mat. 7. 1. 5. Sinister suspitions, 1 Cor. 13. 5. 6. Flattery, Prov. 27. 14. 7. Silence in defending, 2 Tim. 4. 16. Things enjoyned in this commandment. 1. A care of our own names, Phil. 4. 8. 2. A care of the names of others, Mat. 1. 19.
3. A care of our speeches, that they be to Gods glory, Ephes. 5. 4. 4. That they be profitable to the good of others, Col. 4. 6. 5. And lastly, that our speeches be both true and charitable, for these two must inseparably go together, for charity rejoyceth in truth, 1 Cor. 13. 6. And the truth must be spoken in love, Ephes. 4. 15. For truth without love savoureth of malice, and cha∣rity without truth is false, vain and foolish, because God is true, and the Author of truth, and the De∣vil a lyar, and the father of lyes; and as truth makes us like unto God, so lyes make us like unt the Devil. The tenth Commandment is as follow eh. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbours wife, Exod. 20. 17. This tenth and last commandment, doth pro∣hibit, 1. Covetousness, Heb. 13. 5. 2. Self-love, 2 Tim. 3. 2. 1 Cor. 10. 24. 3. Evil thoughts, Prov. 24. 9. 4. Envy, Prov. 23. 4. This commandment doth enjoyn, 1. A pure heart, 1 Tim. 1. 5. 2. Watchfulness over our thoughts, Prov. 4. 23. 3. Contentedness, Phil. 4. 11. 4. Coveting after spiritual things, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Now in the strictest sense it is impossible that any man should keep these commandments in thought,
word and deed, from such a principle and to such an end as it ought to be kept; but this may serve, First to humble us in the sight and sense of our sins, which have made us subject to the wrath of God, and the curse of the Law, that so we may be driven out of our selves, and with hast flie unto the mercies of God, in the satisfaction of Jesus Christ. Of the Lords prayer and the several petitions therein contained. THere are in the Lords prayer six petitions, the three first do concern Gods glory, and the three latter do concern our necessity; divided as it were into two tables; whereof three do concern God, as doth the first table of the Law; and three do concern our selves, and our neighbours, as doth the Second table; so that by the very order of the petitions we may learn this, that we ought to think upon Gods glory before any thing that belongs to us, John 12. 27, 28. The six petitions are as followeth. 1. Hallowed be thy name, Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 12. 2. Thy kingdom come, Mat. 6. 0. Luke 11. 2. 3. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, Mat. 6. 10. Luke 11. 2. 4. Give us this day our daily bread, Mat. 6. 11. Luke 11. 3. 5. Forgive us our debts, as we forgive them that are debtors to us, Mat. 6. 12. Luke 11. 4. 6. And leads us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, Mat. 6. 13. Luke 11. 4.
1. Of the first, Hallowed be thy name. 1. By the name of God, we are to understand God himself, 1 Kings 5. 5. Isa. 26. 8. His titles, as Jehovah, Eloim, the Lord of Host, and such like; and then his attributes, and properties, as wisdom, power, love, goodness, justice, mercy, truth, Exod. 33. 18, 19. & 34. 5, 6. We are said to hallow his name, when we acknow∣ledge it, and honour it, Psal. 96. 7, 8. Thereby as it were setting the crown of holiness and honour upon the head of God. 2. In the next petition, Thy kingdom come. In this petition we pray that God may reign in our hearts, that the kingdom of sin and Satan being more and more abolished, Act. 26. 18. Col. 1. 3 Christ may now reign in our hearts by grace, Col. 3. 15, 16. and we with him for ever in glory, 2 Tim. 2. 5. 12. 3. In the next petition, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Hereby we exclude all wills opposed to the will of God, as our own will, and all wills of evil men, or wicked Angels may be dissappointed; and so we desire grace, that we may obey his will, and not the lust of the flesh and the will of man. 4. In the next petition, we pray, Give us this day our daily bread. In this petition, we beg that God would provide for us competent maintenance, or such a proportion of outward means, as he shall see meet for us, Prov. 30. 8. and that he would give us grace to rely upon his providence, for all the means of this temporal life, and to rest contented with that allowance which he shall think fit for us, Psal. 4. 11, 12.
Yea in this petition we beg health, wealth, food, sleep, rayment, house, &c: together with all the helps and means to attain them, and that he would give us care and conscience, to get those needfull things by lawfull means, that labouring with our hands the thing that is good, we may eat our bread, Eph. 4. 28. 2 Thes. 3. 12. 5. The fifth petition, And forgive us our debts, as even we forgive them that are debtors to us. In this petition there is a frank and humble con∣fession that we have sinned, and stand guilty of ori∣ginal and actual transgressions, and that there is no power in us to make satisfaction sor our sins; for by the Law, as by an obligation, every man standeth bound to keep it holy, and continually, Deut. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. James 2. 10. So that the breach thereof even once, and in the least point, maketh us debtors presently (as having forfeited our obligati∣on) So that no man can make amends unto God for it, considering that whatsoever he doth after the breach, is both imperfectly done, and if it were per∣fect, yet it is due by obligation of the Law, and therefore cannot go for payment, no more then a man can pay one debt with another. 6. The sixt and last petition: And lead us not in∣to temptation but delievers from evil. In this petition we pray, that not only our sin may be pardoned, but also that it may be mortified, Rom. 6. 1, 2. and that we may be either kept from temptation, or preserved by his grace from being hurt thereby, 1 Cor. 10. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 9. The effect of temptation, with∣out the special grace of God, is extreamly evil,
to wit sin and damnation, 1 Tim. 6. 9. Now seeing we cannot be tempted without the will of God, Job 1. 10. nor resist without his power, 2 Cor. 12. 9. If it be his blessed will, that he would not let us fall into the one, unless he preserve us in the other, and that he would tie up Satan, and restrain his malice and power, or else make us wise to know and avoid his stratagems. Of the World, Flesh and Devil, the three great enemies of man. First of the World. TAke the world in all its beauty, bravery, and glory, and you shall find sorrow attend world∣ly joy: danger attend worldly safety, and loss at∣tend worldly joy labours, and tears attend worldly prosperity. Where one thousand are destroyed by the worlds frowns, ten thousand are destroyed by the worlds smiles, it sings to us and sinks us, it kisseth us and be∣trayeth us: Let heaven be a mans object, and the world will soon be a mans subject; the fashion of this world passeth away, why should we set our eyes upon that which is not; heaven hath a foundation, the earth hath none; again, worldly light is mixt with darkness, Joy with sorrows, pleasure with pain, ho∣nour with dishonour, riches with want, wine with water, honey with gall, and our Sugar with worm∣wood, and roses with prickles, in a word, worldly
comforts entertained with great delight, are sel∣dom lost without exceeding great Sorrow and grief. Of the Riches of this world. THE good things of this world are not so abso∣lutely given us, but that God retains still a right to it, and an interest in it, and may demand it, how and when he please, And usually the worst of men have most of these outward things, and the best of men have least of earth, and most of heaven. A man may be great and graceless with Pharaoh, honourable and damnable with Saul, rich and mise∣rable with Dives: A man may have enough of the world to sink him, but he can never have enough of the world to save him: A man may as soon fill a bag with wisdom, and a chest with vertue, or a circle with a tryangle, as the heart of man with any thing here below, therefore it is better to be gracious then great, inwardly holy, then outwardly happy; the riches of this world, although well gotten, are but like the manna, those that gathered less had no lack, and those that gathered more, had little or none to spare; the consideration of this raysed up the spirits of those Saints, Heb. 11. to triumph upon all the beauty, bra∣very, and glory of the world, they having acquaint∣ance with, and an interest in a better and more dura∣ble riches; these are uncertain riches. For one storm at Sea, one coal of fire, one false friend, or one una∣vised word may make a rich man a beggar, and a pri∣soner altogether: Oh how do riches hinder the actings of Faith upon God, how do they interrupt our sweet
communion with God, how doth it abate our love to the people of God, and cool our love to the things of God? oh the deadness, dulness and the barrenness that attend men having large possessions in this world, and when they fall sick, a crown of Gold cannot cure the head ach, nor a velvet slipper the gout, nor a chain of gold about the neck, cannot take away the pain of the teeth. Many times he that we account the richest man, is the poorest man in the world. VVE account him a poor man that doth want meat for his belly, cloaths for his back, and money in his purse, and a house to put his head in; and in this respect every man that is out of Christ, although the most richest and honourablest man in the worlds account, is but a poor man. 1. He is a poor and beggarly man that hath no mo∣ney in his purse; now if your bags be full of gold and silver, and your hearts empty of grace, you are poor and beggarly in a Scripture account, yea you are poor, and blind, and miserable, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. 2. He is a poor man that hath no meat to put in his belly; but every man that is out of Christ, doth not, nor cannot feed upon that true manna, the bread of life, nor drink of that water of life, John 6. 55. 3. He is a beggarly man that hath not an house to put his head in; this is the case of all those that have no interest in Christ, when death cometh they know not what to do, nor where to go, unless it be into a dun∣geon
of darkness, full of devils and damned Spirits, Mat. 25. 41. 4. He is a poor man that hath no clothes to put on his back; thus every man out of Christ, is not only poor, but naked too, Rev. 3. 17. surely he is the poorest man in the world, for he wanteth an interest in God, Christ, the Spirit and promises, he wanteth peace with God, and peace in conscience, he wanteth acceptation and reconciliation, he wanteth righteousness, Justifica∣tion and adoption, and redemption, he wanteth the pardon of sin, and power against sin, and freedom from the reign of sin, he wanteth those riches that pe∣rish not, that glory that fadeth not, that kingdom that shaketh not. 5. We do account that man a poor man that is in debt over head and ears, and hath little or nothing where withall to pay; even this is the case of most of those men that have feathered their nests by raking and scraping together the muck of this world: they are in debt to men, let every bird have his feather and they will have little enough: and they are in debt to God, ten thousand times more then they are worth, and having no surety, they must lie in prison perpetu∣ally; and as for the honours of the world, what are they? the best mans honour is▪ as glass britt and brittle, and ever more in danger of breaking; as a bird hoppeth from tree to tree, so do the honours and riches of this world from man to man: and so much of the world.
Of the Flesh. NOw the works of the flesh are mani∣fest,Galat. 5. 19. which are these, adultery, for∣nication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, therefore great need of this exhortation, 1 Pet. 2. 11. dearly beloved I beseech you as strangers abstain from fleshly lusts, Rom. 7. 18. in my flesh dwelleth no good thing, for to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not, for all flesh is grace, and all the goodliness thereof as the flower of the Field, the grass withereth, and the flower fadeth, Isa. 40. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 24. Psal. 37. 2. Psal. 90. 5, 6. & 92. 7. & 103. 15. Isa. 37. 27. What shall I say more? all mankind are un∣der the wrath and curse of God, being full of blindness of mind, having a reprobate sense, liable to strong delusions, hardness of heart, horror of consci∣ence, and vile affections, having the curse of God up∣on the whole creation for mans sake; and besides all this, man is subject to all manner of evil, in body, name and estate, and relations, and imployment, to∣gether with an utter undisposed mind to all that is good, and wholly inclined to all that is evil, and that continually.
What man is by nature. NOT only born in sin, but left in a condition not able to help himself, Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an uncelan? not one, Job 25. 4. How can he be clean that is born of a woman? Psal. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, Mich. 7. 2. there is none upright amongst men, there is none righteous, no not one, Rom. 3. 12. We go astray as soon as we are born, Psal. 58. 3. Every imagination of the thoughts of our hearts is only evil, and that continually, Gen. 5. 6. Nay all the Saints themselves before conviction, conversion, and regene∣ration, were guilty of originall and actual transgres∣sion, and so were by nature the children of wrath as well as others, Eph. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Tit. 3. 3. 1 Tim. 1. 13. Eccles. 7. 20. What shall I say more, the under∣standing is full of vanity, Psal. 94. 11. Nay its full of blindness, 1 Cor. 2. 24. unteachableness and incredulity, 2 Cor. 4. 4. The will of man is wholly depraved, being contrary to God, his word and spirit in all things; as for the memory, that also is full of corruption, it will forget the things that it should remember, and re∣member the things that it should forget, it will retein trifles, and let go matters of moment; and as for the conscience, that also is wholly corrupted, it is without feeling, whereas it should excuse or accuse, it doth abuse and pervert the light it hath, by making great sins small, and small sins no sins; and as for our affections, they are also corrupted, they come as a tempest and carry us away, either to make us over∣love, or over-great, and to hate our brother we should love, and love our lusts we should hate.
Of mans own righteousness. BUt we are all as an unclean thing, andIsaiah 64. 6. all our righteousness is as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, Jer. 2. 22. For though thou wash thee with Niter, and take much Soap, yet thine iniquities are marked before me, saith the Lord God, Job 9. 30, 31. If I wash my self in Snow-water, yet mine own cloaths shall abhor me, Hosea 6. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as the morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away, Isa. 28. 20. The bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it, and the covering is narrow∣er then that a man can wrap himself in it, Isa. 50. 11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, walk in the light of your fire, and in the Sparks that ye have kindled, this shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie down in Sorrow, Job 35. 7. If thou be righte∣ous, what givest thou to him, or what receiveth he of thine hand? verse 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the Sons of men, &c. See Job 22. 2, 3. Titus 3. 8. Psalm 16. 2.
Of the Devil. THE Devil sinned from the beginning of the world, compare John 8. 44. with Jude 6. and you shall see he was the first sinner in the world, and the sole cause of all other sinners; he drew his apostate Angels with him, hence came that phrase, Mat. 25. 41. The Devil and his Angels; he deceived our first parents in the Serpent, and so brought sin upon all the world, Gen. 3. And still he as a roaring Lyon walketh about seekinng whom he may devour; sometimes in Scripture he is cal∣led Satan, because he doth mortally hate mankind; sometimes Devil, because he doth slanderously ac∣cuse men to God and man, Job 1. 11. & 2. 5. Rev. 12. 8, 9. 10. Sometimes he is called the old Serpent, for his subtile temptations; sometimes the great dragon, for his destroying of many, Rev. 12. 8, 9. But here lies much of a Saints comfort, the Devil must have a double leave, before he can do any thing against him; he must first have leave from God, as we find in the example of Job. 1. 11, 12. & 2. 3, 5. though the Devil had malice enough to destroy him, yet he had not so much as power to touch him, till God gave him commission: so Luke 8. 32. they could not so much as enter into the swine without leave from Christ; so Satan could never have over∣thrown Ahab and Saul, but by a commission from God, 1 Kings 22 And as Satan must have a leave
from God, so he must have leave from us; when he tempts we must consent, when he commands we must obey, or else all his temptations will be frustrate, Act. 5. 3. Why hath Satan filled thy heart, to lie to the Holy-Ghost? why hast thou given him an advantage to fill thy heart with infidelity, hypocrisie and ob∣stinacie to lie to the Holy Ghost? when a temptation comes, and the soul cries out, & saith, O help, help Lord for thine honour sake, for thy Sons sake, for thy pro∣mise sake, for thy mercies sake, then the evill that he tempts us to, shall be put down only to his account: what shall I say more? those that be the objects of Gods dearest love, are many times the subjects of the Devils deepest rage: Satan watcheth all opportu∣nities to break our peace, to wound our consciences, to lessen our comfort, to impair our graces, and to slur our evidences; it is as easie to compass the heavens with a span, and to contein the sea in a nut-shell, as to relate fully Christs goodness, and Satans devices, for he aims principally to make us walk sinfully, that so we might live uncomfortably, and die miserably, and be tormented with him eternally.
Of afflictions, why God doth afflict his own peo∣ple, and how to know what Sin God aims at in affliction; and when a man may be said to suffer for wel-doing, and when for evil doing. VVE read in Scripture that man is born to trou∣ble as the sparks flie upward, and although his dayes be few, yet they are full of trouble; nay we may find in the Scriptures of truth, that the Lords own dearest ones have been exceedingly exercised this way, Job 6. 4. Job the justest man alive, was fought against by the terrors of the Lord; and David a man after Gods own heart had no rest in his bones, because of his sin, and was so wasted with the grief of his heart, that his moisture was turned inth the drought of summer, Ps. 32. 3, 4. and Hezekiah who walked in the truth and with a perfect heart, had the anger of the Almighty to break his bones like a lyon, Isa. 28. 13. Was not Abel murthered by his brother? Noah mocked by his Son? Job scoffed by his wife? Jacob threatned by his bro∣ther? banished from his Father? abused by his uncle? in the day consumed with heat, in the night with frost? Gen. 31. 4. Did not the son of God himself lie bleeding upon the cross, and cry out in the bitterness of his spirit, my God my God why hast thou forsaken me? Isa 53. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, and brui∣sed for our iniquities, persecuted in his child hood by Herod, Mat. 2. 16. tempted by the Devil, reviled by the High-priests, branded for a babler, wine-bibber, blasphemer, mocked by the Jews, stript of his garments,
crowned with thorns, the first fruits of the curse, he was hanged between two thieves, and nailed his hands to the cross, and pierced his side with a spear, &c. Some reasons why the Lord doth afflict his own people. 1 Cor. 11. 32. VVE are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be con∣demned with the world: sometimes he doth afflict a few, that the rest might beware, Luke 13. 5. And sometimes he doth afflict his people for the tryal of the truth, and strength of their graces, Job 1. 21. Again, sometimes he brings his own dear ones in∣to misery, that he might magnifie the attributes of his mercy in healing them; so it was with him that was born blind: and sometimes he doth af∣flict them, to keep them humble and low in their own eyes, and to put them upon the use of means, whereby sin may be subdued. Sometimes the Lord doth afflict, for the prevention of sin for time to come; he doth punish those that serve him, and lets the world go free, this was Davids temp∣tation, Psalm 73. 13. Affliction is a seal of adop∣tion, no sign of reprobation▪ for the purest corn is cleanest fanned, the finet gold oftest tryed, and the sweetest grape hardest pressed, and the truest Chri∣stian heaviest crossed; affliction doth many times make a bad man good, but it doth alwayes make a good man better; nay God can look sowrly and chide bitterly, and strike heavily, even where, and when he loves dearly: it is a common thing for all
men to be afflicted, but it is an extraordinary thing to be bettered by it: in all afflictions consider three things. 1. The fountain from whence it comes, and that is from Gods love, Eccles. 7. 14. 2. The end whither it ayms, (our good) It was good for me that I was afflicted, Psalm 119. 3. Consider, our punishment is less then our de∣sert; the consideration of this made Aaron to hold his peace, Lev. 10. 3. and Hezekiah to wait for de∣liverance, Isa. 38. 13, 14. This made David to be dumb, Psal. 39. 9. This made Ely to say, it is the Lord, let him do as seemeth him good, 1 Sam. 13. 18. yea, this made Job to say, blessed be the name of the Lord. The Lord doth try the truth and strength of his own people to the highest, and yet layeth no more upon the weakest, then he doth enable him to bear. IF Job do exceed all others in patience, as he did, Job 5. 11. then the truth and strength of this patience shall be tryed to the utter∣most. 1. The Sabeans take away his Oxen and his Asses, Job 1. 15. 2. A fire from heaven came down and burnt up his sheep, Job 1. 16. 3. The Chaldeans came and stole away all his cam∣mels, Job 1. 17.
4. His servants that were plowing and keeping the sheep, were all slain by the edge of the sword, fire from heaven. 5. His sons and daughters were all at once slain by the fall of an house, Job 1. 18, 19. 6. Then his body was smote, and became full of boyls from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, Job 2. 7. 7. Then his wife that lay in his bosom, tempts him to curse God and dye, Job 2. 9. 8. His three near and dear friends came to him, and stayed with him seven dayes and seven nights, and spake not one word of comfort to him, Job 2. 13. 9. The presence and favour of God was hid from his soul, Job 19. 8. and all this to try the truth and strength of Jobs patience. If Peter will boast of a greater love to Christ, then the rest, saying, though I should dye with thee, I will never deny thee, Mat. 26. 35. And when this love came to the tryal, instead of dying, he came to de∣nying of Christ. So again, although Peters love made him to go out of the ship to meet Christ upon the sea. I say, although his love was strong, yet his faith was weak, and he began to sink: here his truth and strength was tryed to the highest: If Mo∣ses will exceed all the men upon the face of the earth in meekness, Num. 12. 3. the truth and strength of that meekness must be tryed, first in his absence, the people make a calf and worshipped it, Exod. 32. 19. After this the people speak against Moses, Numb. 21. 5. A little after this, when they wanted water the people chide with Moses, saying, would
God we had dyed in the wilderness, Numb. 20. 3, 4. So he was continually vexed with a perverse and crooked generation, Deut. 32. 5. And at last so pro∣voked by them, that he spake unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm 106. 33. and so his meekness was tryed to the highest: Again, to instance one more for all, if Paul have a greater revelation then the other Apo∣stles, he must have a thorn in the flesh, even the messenger of Satan to buffet him: so the woman, Mat. 15. 22. to the 28. She had a strong faith that Christ was able to help her daughter, and the mercy she desired was but external, to wit crums; now Christ did try the truth, and strength of this faith, in a threefold seeming denyal; but in all tryals the Lord doth proportion them according to the strength of those that he doth afflict, See 1 Cor. 10. 13. The Lords people have divers corruptions, and so do need divers corrections. How to know what sin God aims at in af∣fliction. THE Lord saith in his word, hear the voice of the rod, Micah 6. 9. which if we did heed∣fully observe, we might find out the sin that God ayms at in the affliction. 1. When we find in Scripture that such and such a punishment is denounced against such and such a sin, we may find by the effect the proper cause; pride with dejection and contempt; whoredom with barrenness; idleness with poverty; worldly sorrow with death.
2. Consider, if thou wouldst find out the sin God afflicts thee for, consider God doth punish thee by way of retaliation, like for like; as when we have dis∣honored God, he doth cast dishonour upon us, and having wronged our inferiours, our superiors wrong us, or if we lavish our tongues against others, we are paid home with the scourge of tongues, thus David was justly dealt with, 2 Sam. 12▪ 10, 11. 3. When we are taken in the very act of sinning, so Jon. 1. 12. flying, was followed with a tempest, and the I sraelites murmuring for flesh, were punished by God, whilst it was between their teeth, Numb. 11. 33. 4. When our sin in its own nature bringeth forth such a punishment, so a lazy Christian doth always want four things, comfort and content, confidence and assurance. Idleness in natural things, brings forth beggery and want, drunkenness begets dropsies and surreits: so the sin of uncleanness brings forth weak∣ness and filthy diseases, so immoderate carking, is attended with consumptions. 5. If thou wouldst know the sin that brought these afflictions on thee, observe what thy conscience doth most check thee for. Josephs brethren in their trou∣bles calls to mind their cruelty to their trou∣bles calls to mind their cruelty to their brother Jo∣seph, which was indeed the cause of their cross, Gen. 42. 21.
When a man may be said to suffer for well-dong, and when for evil doing. FIrst, for well-doing. 1. That man that doth suffer for well-do∣ing, in the account of God, according to his word, his person must be holy, he or she must be in the main godly. 2. The cause that they suffer for must be good, it must be for righteousness sake, viz. either for his believing in Christ, pleading for him, or practizing of his commandments, and so his affliction will be better then the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm 37. 15. They shall have more comfort in scantness, ob∣scurity, then wicked men have in plenty, credit and great felicity, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. 3. He that doth suffer for well-doing, he must suffer in a right manner; first humbly: secondly pa∣tiently and meekly: thirdly cheerfully: fourthly, he that doth suffer for Christ, must have good ends, &c. 1. He must suffer humbly: we read of Christ, whose footsteps we ought to follow, that he was led as a lamb to the slaughter, he opened not his mouth. 2. As he did suffer humbly, so he did suffer pati∣ently.
3. He did suffer cheerfully. 4. He did not revile again, when he was revi∣led; when he was threatned, he did not threaten again. 4. He that doth suffer for Christ, must have good ends in his suffering, viz. 1. To bare witness to some truth of Christ, con∣tained in the Scriptures. 2. To bare witness for the name and glory of God, 1 Pet. 4. 13. But when a man doth that which is evil, and doth suffer for it, this is not thank-worthy with God: See these Scriptures, 1 Pet. 2. 20. 1 Pet. 4. 15, 19. Many men that suffer and glory therein, suffer only for their faults, and are in no wise acceptable to God. The Lord is many times better then his word, never worse. THE Lord promised to Israel, only the Land of Canaan, but besides that, he gave them two better Kingdoms, Numb. 32. 33. Solomon did only pray for wisdom, and the Lord gave him more wisdom then he asked, and riches and honour to boot, 1 King. 3. 11, 12. Jacob told the Lord, that if he would give him raiment to put on, and bread to eat, God should be his God; and the Lord gave him that, and ten times more, Gon 28. 19. com∣pared with, Gen. 32. 10 For with my staff I passed ver this Jordan, and now I am become two bands,
Gen. 33. 4, 5, 6. So again, 1 Sam. 1. Hannah begged a son, and the Lord gave her a Son, and a Prophet too; she desired a single mercy, and the Lord gave her a double mercy, Gen. 17. Abraham and said, O that Ishmael might live before thee, the Lord granted that, and gave him an Isaac to boot, ver. 19. Mat. 15. 22. to the 28. The woman of Cana∣an did only beg of Christ the life of her daughter, and Christ gave her that, and said, moreover be it unto thee even as thou wilt Again, we read Ephes. 3. 20. That he is able to do exceedingly above all that we can ask or think: these words are so full, that they can hardly be exprest. So again, sometimes we on∣ly ask temporal mercies, and he gives us both tem∣poral and spiritual mercies. Sometimes a soul doth beg only support under temptations, and the Lord doth give that and more, (to wit) a deliverance out of temptation. So again, we find Mat. 18. 23. to the 27. That the Lord gave him more then he de∣sired; he desired but dayes of paiment, and the Lord forgave him the whole debt. So again, Act. 3. 2, 3. The cripple did only ask of Peter and John an alms, and they gave him a mercy more worth to him then the whole world; they cured him of his lameness.
Mercies and deliverances are many times near∣est to us, when we think they be furthest off. WE read Act. 27. 20. When all hopes of being saved was taken away, then Paul stood up and told them from the Lord, that there should not be so much as the loss of any mans life amongst them. So Luk 24. 15. When two of the Disciples were walking together, and were sad about the death of Christ, Christ risen from the dead talked with them, and they knew it not, Gen. 21. 16. to the 19. we read that Hagar was weeping for her son, who was dying for want of water, and there was a well of water by her, and she did not know it, till the Lord opened her eyes, Joh. 20. 11. Mary stood at the sepulcher weeping for the absence of Christ, and Christ stood by her, and talked to her, before she knew it. Again, we read Gen. 44. 45. chap. that Josephs brethren were taken prisoners, and they rent their cloaths, saying, how shall we clear our selves? and Joseph their brother stood by them, and they knew it not, even then when they were trembling, and terrifi∣ed at his presence: in a word, the Lord doth many times bring about a swifter, a fuller, and more univer∣sal help and deliverance, then heart could imagine. See Zach. 14. 6, 7. But at Even tide it shall be light. So that we may all conclude with David, Psal. 77. 19. Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the deep waters, and thy footsteps are not known.
The Lord doth many times hand forth his mer∣cies to us by the rule of contraries. GOD promised to Abraham a son, and that his seed should be as the stars of heaven, and the Lord made good this by the rule of contraries; there was fourteen years between Gods making the pro∣mise, and giving him a son, and he was about one hundred years old before he had a son, and Sa∣rahs womb was barren; and after this son was born, God calleth upon Abraham to offer him up, yet not∣withstanding all this, the Lord made good his pro∣mise, and Abraham staggered not at the promise of God, Rom. 4. 20, 21. Again, we find Exod. 14. when the children of Israel were in the greatest streight, and at the furthest distance from all humane helps, not knowing what to do, then, even then the Lord delivered them, Luke 21. 28. When ye see these things come to pass, then lift up your heads, for your redemption draweth nigh: one would have thought ruin was nigh, to see such things come to pass, John 9. 15. Christ put clay upon the blind mans eyes; one would think clay should have made him more blind, Hest. 3. 12, 13. All the Jews were designed for death, Hest. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. This de∣sign, contrary to all expectation, was discovered and revoked, and the Jews preserved by the rule of contraries: so Joseph had a promise by way of vision to be made a great man, but contrary to this, he was sold into Egypt, and there cast into prison, yet at last he got the mercy: we might instance in
Job and many others, but this may suffice to prove this truth, that God doth oft times hand forth his mercies to us by the rule of contraries, &c. This would be of great use to Christians, if more con∣sidered. The Lord doth not despise the day of small things. WE read Zach. 4. 10. That the Lord doth not despise the day of small things: and it was but a day of small things for Nicodemus, to come to Christ by night, and yet he was received and embra∣ced: one would have thought that if Christ would have dispised any, he would have despised him, who was so weak, as being either afraid or ashamed, or both, to own Christ in the day, and so he cometh to him by night; one would have thought Christ would have said to him, Nicodemus, is thy desire after me so weak and faint, that thou dost fear to come to me in the day? or am I so unworthy, as not to be owned but out of sight? hast thou either so low an esteem of me, or bearest thou so little love to me? go, return as thou camest, I will not accept thee in the dark, who wouldst not acknowledge me in the light; no no, Christ hath not one sillable of this, but he en∣tertains him, imbraces him, and instructs him, &c. It was but a day of small things with that woman, Mat. 9. 21. That had spent all, and grew worse and worse, and knew not whither to go: then she re∣solves to go to Christ: It was but a day of small things with that man that came to Christ, Mar. 9. 22.
saying, if thou canst do any thing, help us: he doubted whether Christ could help, yea or no: It was but a day of small things with the Prodigal, Luke 15. to say, when he knew not whither to go, I will arise and go to my father; yet he was recei∣ved, embraced, welcomed, and honoured; well may we say, as in Mat. 12. 20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoaking flax shall he not quench. So again, it was but a day of small things with Da∣vid, to have thoughts to build an house unto the Lord, yet that was accepted, as fully as if it had been done. Again, we read Isa. 40. 11. He will gather his lambs with his arms, and he will carry them, and that in his bosom. It is true, he doth carry our sins on his back, and hath received all the lashes due to us for them: ask blind Bartimeus, and he will tell you that Christ doth not despise the day of small things; he did but ask for mercy, and presently re∣ceived the mercy, Mar. 10. 46, 47, 48. So it is but a day of small things with us in respect of our faith, love, knowledge, and power over our corruptions, hope, patience, and self-denyal, yet who hath despi∣sed the day of small things? Zach. 4. 10.
The order of causes, how God comes downward, from the causes to, the effects; and how we must go upward, from the effects to the causes. IT will make much for our information, and con∣solation, to consider what order and method the Lord doth take to unvail his love to man, and what order and method man should take to apprehend and enjoy this love, viz. God goes downward from the causes to the effects, and we must go upward, from the effects to the causes: the web that God hath weaved we must unweave; he goes from electi∣on downward, we must go from regeneration up∣ward, thus shall God and we meet in the middle way; we must prove our selves to be called, and he will acknowledge us to be elected: consider and weigh these ensuing things. 1. The cause of salvation is Gods love. 2. The way is Jesus Christ. 3. The guide is the Holy-Ghost. 4. The rule for our footsteps is the Scrip∣tures. 5. Faith is the evidence. 6. Hope is the Anchor of the soul, and Baptism and the Lords Supper are the seals. 1. Gods love to sinners, was the cause of send∣ing his son to dye for them, Job. 3. 16. Rom. 5. 6, 8. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Tit. 3. 4, 5. 2. Christs dying for our sins, and rising again for our justification, is the cause of the Gospels being preach∣ed
to sinners, Mat. 28. 18, 19. Mar. 16. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 15. 13. 3. The Gospel being preached to sinners, is the cause of their believing, Rom. 10. 14, 15, 17. Ephes. 1. 13. Act. 13. 48. 4. Mans believing is the cause of his justification from sin, Act. 13. 38, 39. Rom. 3. 26, 28. 5. Our knowing our selves to be justified from our sins, by faith in the blood of Christ, is the cause of our love to Christ, 1 Joh. 4. 10, 19. 6. Our love to Christ, is the cause of our obeying of Christ, 1 Joh. 5. 3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: so again, Joh. 14. 15. If ye love me, keep my commandments, See the 21. and 23. ver. 7. In our obedience to him, he doth manifest these things to us, that we have right to the tree of life, Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his com∣mandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates, into the City: that is, in the obedience, he shall have the manifesta∣tion of that, 2 Pet. 1. 11. For so an entrance shall be administred unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. And so he is manifested to be the Author of salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. Behold obedience to God is the way of convey∣ance to us, so it is a lively evidence to others that we are the Lords, Joh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples: because our faith, which is the evidence of things not seen to us, is pro∣ved to others to be true by its works, Jam. 2. 18. Behold here is the Lords going downward, from
the causes to the effects; now we must go upward, from the effects to the causes. 1. God shews us what is our duty, and puts us up∣on doing it, and for the doing of it, those that be∣hold it, and hear of us, judge us to be true Chri∣stians. 2. In the doing of it, God manifests himself more and more to our souls; in the keeping of his appoint∣ments there is great reward, for so an entrance is administred to us abundantly, 2 Pet. 1. 11. 3. The cause of our obedience is our love to God, If ye love me, keep my commandments. 4. The cause of our love, was our seeing that God did love us first, 1 Joh. 4. 10, 19. 5. The cause of our faith in Christ, is the preach∣ing of the Gospel, Rom. 10. 17. 6. The cause of the preaching the Gospel to us, was Christs dying for us. 7. The cause of Christs dying for us, was Gods great love of pitty to us-wards, even when we were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephes. 2. 4. So then Gods love was the cause of sending his son o deye for our sins, Christs dying and rising again is the cause of the Gospes being preached. The preach∣ing of the Gospel is the cause of our believing: Our believing is the cause of our justification from sin; the knowing of our selves free from sin by the blood of Christ, is the cause of our love to Christ; our love to Christ is the cause of our obeying of him; and in onr obedience is the manifestation more and more conveyed to us. So by our obedience, others have some evidence of our faith in Christ.
Mans life is, or should be guided by these vertues. 1. FAith whereby we believe in, and lay hold on God for something promised. 2. Hope, and that is either for pardoning mercy, or for glory. 3. Charity, whereby we love God as the only good, and his people, and our enemies in obedience to his command. 4. Prudence. 1. In our hearts to guide our thoughts. 2. In our mouths, to order our speeches. 3. It should be in our words to grace or adorn our actions. 4. In the intelligence, to understand things present. 5. Prudence, to guess at things to come. 6. Prudence, to recal matters past. 5. Temperance, which moderates our desires, and brings the Appetite under a rule of reason, that it may not exceed the rule of moderation. 6. Perseverance, which continueth in doing and suffering valiantly. 7. Justice, which giveth every man his due, without self-love, fear or ranckor; it binds us to give due to God, to our parents, and kindred: ve∣rity and equity in all that we do, in order to our du∣ty herein. 1. Sense perceiveth. 2. Imagination representeth.
3. Understanding formeth. 4. Wit deviseth. 5. Reason judgeth. 6. Memory preserveth. 7. Intelligence apprehendeth. 8. Contemplation in the prosecution, per∣fecteth. Several Divine Sentences. First of Christ. HE that was the Son of of God, became the son of man, that we who were the sons of men, might become the sons of God. He was made sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the rightousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. The more vile Christ made himself for us, the more dear he ought to be unto us; therefore let us beware of Christ-dishonouring, and soul-undoing opinions. All good things are in Christ, eminently, perfect∣ly, and eternally. Faith in the blood of Christ, the witness of the Spirit of Christ, a sense of feeling and the love of Christ, and the hope of reigning with Christ, are the only things to be desired. Christ is as well the foun∣tain of common gifts, as of saving grace. A true Christian cannot find fulness in the crea∣ture, nor sweetness in sin, nor life in any Or∣dinance without Christ; he will weep over other
mens weaknesses, and rejoyce at their graces. We must lean more upon Christ, and less upon our own strength; lest with Peter we rest upon some old strength, and fall before a new temp∣tation. Christ can heal a soul speedily, perfectly, freely, and eternally. Oh that Christ should shed his blood for those sins that we never shed one tear for! A true Christian doth labour for unity in the Church, as well as purity; he loves to see Christs coat without rent, as well as without spot, Phil. 3. 15. Christ did admit his spouse into the garden sweetly, though she kept him out of her house sluggishly. What a poor soul doth for Christ sincerely, that our precious Saviour takes sweetly; though it be done ill, he doth accept it well. Nay, though we carry our selves in our choicest performances, very weakly, yet he doth carry him∣self towards us very sweetly, and doth accept of that which we do kindly, although done in much in∣firmity: let us enter into his service, and we shall soon experience his sweetness. Christ doth weigh the heart of the giver, more then the value of the gift, and delights to see his people give cheerfully, though they cannot give bountifully. Let us give over measuring his mercy by the nar∣row scantling of our dark understandings though difficulties may arise, and Christians hearts may fail, yet the work of Christ shall go on, &c.
Of affliction for sin, in Sentences. GOD is as severe in punishing as he is gracious in pardoning; his house of correction is his School of instruction; God had one Son without corruption, but no Son without correction; he had one Son without Sin, but no Son without Sorrow. A Soul may be dearly beloved, although soarly affli∣cted; sin and punishment are linked together; if thou wilt be sinful, thou must be miserable: Oh what is the state of a man that hath sinned! it will cost him more grief, sorrow, heart-breaking and soul-bleeding, be∣fore conscience will be satisfied, comfort restored, evi∣dences cleared, and pardon in the court of conscience sealed: for God can look sowrly, and chide bitterly, and strike heavily, even where and when he loves dearly; a soul may be full of holy affection, when it is empty of divine consolation; there may be true grace where there is not one drop of comfort, nor one dram of joy. Of Sin, in Sentences. MOst men are fallen into sin, as if there were no God to punish them, no justice to condemn them, no hell to torment them. That man shall be a slave to sin, that will not avoid the occasions of sin. It is impossible for that man to get the conquest of sin, that plaies and sports with the occasions of sin.
It is better to be kept from sin, then to be cured of sin; as it is better to be kept from a disease, then to be cured of that disease; the greatest sinners shall be the greatest sufferers. Sin shall never be our bane, if it be our burden; sin doth intice us to that which is against Gods holiness, as well as against our happiness, There is no sin little, because there is no little God to sin against. There is many a one full of sinful corruption, that shews it not for want of occasion; but the more grace thrives in the Soul, the more sin dies in the soul: Sin may break our Communion, but not our Union with God. Every sin doth put God upon complaining, Christ upon bleeding, and the spirit upon grieving, and so men go on from folly to folly, till they be ripe for eternal misery. Of doing or practising, in Sentences. WE should spend our and time pains about that which will make us live happily, die comforta∣bly, and raign eternally. It is not knowing man, nor the talking man, nor the reading man, but the doing man, that at last will be found the happiest man. Therefore no danger or difficulty should hinder a Christian from his duty; for if our knowledge be not turned into practise, the more knowledge we have, the more miserable shall we be. We should be thankfull under mercies, faithfull in our places, humble under divine appearances, and fruitfull under pretious odinances.
For he that thinks himself too good to be ruled by Gods word, will be found too bad to be owned by God. To reward good for evil, is divine; to reward good for good, is humane; to reward evil for evil, is brutish; but to reward evil for good, is devilish; we are apt to have two eyes to behold our dignity and priviledges, and not so much as one eye to see our duty and services. Of the Riches, Honour and Glory of the world, in Sentences. A Man may be great and graceless with Pharaoh, honourable and damnable with Saul, rich and miserable with Dives. A man may have enough of this world to sink him, but he can never have enough to save him; though good Christians have here but little in possession, yet they have a glorious kingdom in reversion. It is better to be gracious then great, inwardly ho∣ly then out wardly happy, for the best mans honour is as glass, bright and brittle, and evermore in danger of breaking: the things of this life are not so absolutely given us, but that God retains still a right to it, and an interest in it, and may demand it when and how he please.
Of the Devil and his temptation, in Sentences. THE Devil aims principally to make us walk sinfully, that so we might live uncomfortably. If Satan be alwaies roaring, we should be alwaies watching, for though Satan cannot rob a Christian of his crown, yet he will endeavour to spoil him of his comfort: It is not Satans tempting, but our consenting, not his inticing, but our yielding, that makes tempta∣tion sinful. Therefore let us not yield to Satans temptations, who hath the worst name, and the worst nature of all created creatures: our carnal security is his oppor∣tunity; and he that would not be taken with Satans devises, let him make present resistance against Sa∣tans first motions. Of assurance of Salvation, in Sentences. A Ssurance is a salve for every sore, and a remedy for every malady; a Christians anchor at sea, and his shield at land, a staff to support him, a sword to defend him, and a pavilion to hide him. Assurance makes heavy afflictions light, and long afflictions short, and bitter afflictions sweet; God hath made an everlasting separation between sin and peace, sin and joy, sin and assurance; if sin and our souls be one, God and our souls must needs be two. He that will get assurance, must mind his work more then his wages, for assurance is heavenlywages,
that God gives not to loiterers, but to the ingenious labourers. Though no man merits assurance by his obedience, yet God usually crowns obedience with assurance. That soul will never attain to any settled assurance of Salvation, that builds his hopes upon a sandy foun∣dation; We cannot distrust our selves too much, nor trust Christ too much. It is one thing for God to love a soul, and another thing for God to assure that soul of his love. A man may be truly holy, and yet not have assu∣rance that he shall be eternally happy. God writes many a mans name in the book of life, and yet not let him have assurance of it till the hour of death; assurance is a mercy too good for most mens hearts, a crown too weighty for most mens heads. It is the best and greatest mercy, and therefore God will only give it to his nearest and dearest friends. As faith is often attended with unbelief, and sincerity with hypocrisie, and humility with vain glory, so is assurance with fears and doubts.
Divers knotty questions answered, and seeming contradictions in the Scripture, reconciled, and many Scruples of conscience removed. VVE read 1 John 3. 16. we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. Quest. In what cases may we hazard or lay down our lives for the brethren? Answ. 1. A private Christian may adventure his life for publike persons, Rom. 16. 3, 4. Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helers in Christ, who have for my life laid down their own necks, unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the Chruches of the Gentiles. 2. A man may warrantably adventure his life, if need require, for a multitude, that they may be pre∣served from destruction, so Moses, Exod. 32. 31, 32. so Paul, Rom. 9. 3. compared with Phil. 2. 17, 18. 3. One publike officer may hazzard his life for another of more concernment in the Church, as Epaphroditus a Pastor of the Philippians, for Paul an Apostle, Phil. 2. 30, &c. We read in many places of Scripture, that it is the duty of every man to believe, and we find in other Scriptures, that God is the Author of Faith, and with∣out him we cannot believe, John 5. 40, 44. Q. Why doth God promise eternal life to those that do believe, and threaten eternal death to those that do not, seeing it is not in their power by nature? Answ. 1. That he might by means of those promises
and threats work us unto that which by nature we are averse unto, 2 Cor. 5. 11, 20. 2. That we might appear more inexcusable, when neither promises nor threatnings will move us to im∣brace free mercy, Acts 13. 46, 51. Acts 18. 6. 3. That the grace of God might as well appear in giving us power to believe, as in giving Christ, and in him forgiveness of sins to be believed, Rom. 9. 16. & Rom. 11. 5, 6. 4. That we might apply our selves unto God in the use of those means that he hath appointed for the working of Faith in us, John 6. 27. Isa. 55. 3. 5. That we might wholly deny our selves, and search, and by searching find in the Covenant of grace, matter of free conveyance of power to believe whatsoever is required to be believed, Rom. 10. 17. John 5. 39. Rom. 4. 16, &c. We read John 3. 3. except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God, and we find that he that is born of God 1 John 3. 9. doth not commit Sin. Q. How or in what sense he that is born of God is said not to commit sin? Answ. 1. He sins not, that is, he doth not make it his trade as others do; he sins not out of malice, nor alloweth himself in a course of sin; if sin dwelleth in him, it doth not reign in him, Rom. 6. 12, 14. 2. If he do through some strong temptation fall into any sin, he sins with an unwilling willingness, and with a dissenting consent, Rom. 7. 15, 19. So that they that are born of God, do not commit sin, as they do who are unregenerated. 3. They that are born of God do not commit Sin, That is, they do not sin against Gospel remedy, as
others do; Jesus Christ is the Gospel-remedy, Acts 4. 12. the going on in a state of unbelief and impeniten∣cy, not accepting of Christ by Faith and repentance as a Saviour and Mediator, is sinning against this Gospel-remedy, Acts 16. 31. Compared with John 1. 11, 12. 4. He that is born of God doth not sin pre∣sumptuously, and with wilfull obstinacy; they sin ra∣ther out of infirmity then of insolency, out of weakness rather then willfulness, they do not so much overtake faults, as faults overtake them, Gal. 6. 1. In this sense he that is born of God doth not sin, or that that is born of God doth not sin; but for all this in another sense the best of men do sin, and have in them sin Original, and too often fall into actual: who can understand his errours? Psal. 19. 12. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prov. 20. 9. there is no man that sinneth not, 1 Kings 8. 46. 2 Chron. 6. 36. But before I proceed further, I will give you a Catalogue of those places of Scripture that speak of man as free from sin, and then another Catalogue of those places of Scripture that affirm we have sin in us: and lastly do what I can to reconcile them together.
Of spotless Saints. THou art all fair my love, there is no spot inCant. 4. 7. thee, that is, no such spot as the wicked man hath, Deut. 32. 5. Ephes. 5. 27. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, 2 Pet. 3. 14. That you may be found in him without spot or wrinkle, Rev. 14. 5. For they are without fault before the throne of God, Col. 1. 22. You who were enemies in your minds, now hath he re∣conciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblamable, and unreprovable in his sight. ver. 28. that we might present every man perfect in Christ, Col. 2. 10. You are compleat in him, Ezek. 16. 14. Thou art comely through my comeliness, saith the Lord, that I have put upon thee, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He was made sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, Psalm 55. 13. The Kings daughter is said to be all glorious within. Whatsoever grace there is in Christ, there is some∣thing of the same stamped upon every true Christian, viz. Is Jesus Christ called the beloved of God? so are the Saints too: is he called the Son of God? the Saints are also called the Sons of God: Is Christ cal∣led heir? the Saints are said to be heirs, co-heirs with Christ: Is he said to be elect and precious? so are the Saints, 1 Pet. 1. 2. He is called the light of the world; they are also called light in the Lord, Ephes. 5. 8. Is he said to be full of grace and truth? so are the Saints too, some of them, as Stephen, full
of grace, Acts 7. 55. and Mary full of grace, &c. They were once blind, but now they see; once slaves, but now sons; once dead, but now alive; once drakness, but now light; once an heir of Hell, but now an heir of Heaven; once Satans bond men, but now Gods free men; once under the Spirit of bon∣dage, but now under the Spirit of Adoption, that seals up the remission of sins, the Justificati∣on of their persons, and the salvation of their souls, &c. Of the spots in the best Saints. THe most holy and best of Christians in this life▪ have in them sin original, and thence too often fall into sin actual: who can understand his er∣rors? Psalm. 19. 12. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prov. 20. 9. There is no man that sinneth not, 1 Kin. 8. 46. and 2 Chron. 6. 36. In many things we sin all, Jam. 3. 2. There is not a Just man upon earth, that doth good, and sin∣eth not, Eccles. 7. 20. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; and if we say we have not sinned, we make God a lyer, for he hath said in his word, that we all have sinned, 1 John 1. 8, 10. see also Rom. 7. 5, 23, 24. Again the Testimony of the best of Saints in all ages doth testi∣fie that none of them all have been without sin in this life: no not Abraham the Father of the faithfull, Gen. 12. 13, 19. & 20, 2, 5. not Isaac, Gen. 26. 7, 8, 9. not Jacob, Gen. 27. 19, 20, 24. not Moses and Aaron,
Psalm 106. 33. Deut. 32. 50, 51. Exod. 32. 2, 12. not David, Psalm. 51. 1. to 10. & 38. 3, 4. not Peter, Mat. 26. 33, 34, 35, 70. not Paul himself, Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13. Rom. 7. 18, 20. How to reconcile these Scriptures together, see∣ing the one saith, they have Spots, the other saith, they have none. 1. WE are to put a difference between Spot and Spot, as the Lord doth: Deut. 32. 5. Their Spot saith he, is not the Spot of my people; so his people had not Spots, and yet they had Spots, but not such Spots as wicked men. 2. Whereas it is said they had no spot or wrin∣kle in them, it was as they were made come∣ly by the comeliness that he had put upon them, Ezek. 16. 14. And as they were covered with the robe of his own Righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. And so their Holiness and Righteousness was of the Lord, Isa. 57. 17. Hence he is in Jer. 23. 6. Called the Lord our Righteousness: the nature of Grace and Sanctification in this life, is but imperfect, and grow∣ing unto perfection, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. Phil. 3. 12, 13. Some Canaanites are still in the Land; although we are entered into Canaan, there is a Remnant of flesh, as well as a Principle of the Spirit. Gal. 5. 17. In this sense the Church is not actually purged, but in purging from all defilements, and at last there shall be no spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing, Ephes. 5. 26, 27. So that compleat purity from sin, and perfection, is to be desired on earth, yet re∣served
for heaven, Rom. 6. 7. Ephes. 5. 27. Heb. 12. 23. Rev. 21. 27. I have dwelt longer then I intended up∣on this question, I must get it up again in being brief in the next. We read Mat. 12. 31, 32. The Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come. Quest. What that sin against the Holy Ghost is? Answ. The sin against the Holy Ghost doth com∣prehend, and take in three things, Knowledge in the mind, Malice in the heart, persecuting some known Truths, and persevering therein: for the proof of this, let me instance in three Scriptures, first, Paul was filled with malice in his heart; but although a scholar, he had no knowledge in his mind, as the text saith, he had mercy on me because I did it ignorantly; now Peter he had much know∣ledge in his mind, but no malice in his heart, and so although he sinned out of knowledge, yet he sin∣ed not this sin, but upon the crowing of the cock, and Christs looking on him, he repenteth; now take the knowledge that was in Peter, and joyn it with the malice that was in Paul, and in both these persecute the truth, and persevere therein, this is that grand sin, for that grand sin hath these three properties, 1. Knowledge. 2. Malice. 3. Perseverance in a way of wickedness, for finalness, maliciousness, and universalness must be taken joyntly together, not severally one from another, if by them we would describe the sin against the Holy Ghost; for a man may fall knowingly and maliciously, yet unless he fall finally, and so make a defection from the truth, not through fear or infirmity, but out
of hatred, blasphemy, and persecution; if he come not up to this, he hath not committed this sin, for we find all the former sins to be pardonable. It is reported of Julian that committed this sin, that he was from his child-hood trained up in piety, and attained to great knowledge, and when he came to the Empire, he carryed himself with much clemen∣cy, but after this, he came to deny Christ in France, and turned a most bloody butcher, and barbarous persecutor to poor Christians; after this being either wounded in a battle, or a blow from heaven, he took a handfull of his blood, and flung it up into the air, and burst out into a most wicked experssi∣on against Christ, and said, thou man of Galilee, thou hast overcome me, and so miserably dyed. Quest. Is not Election the cause of salvation, and Reprobation the cause of damnation? Answ. Election and Reprobation are not in any sense the causes of salvation and damnation, but Christ is the proper and meritorious cause of salvati∣on; and sin the proper and meritorious cause of dam∣nation: Election and Reprobation they are but pre∣cedent and precurrent acts or decrees, and the causes of salvation and damnation, they come in between the decrees and the execution thereof. Quest. How could Christ, being but one, make sa∣tisfaction for the sins of so many? Answ. How could father Adam, being but one, infect so many with original sin? I hope you will grant that the second Adam was as well able to san∣ctifie, as the first was to putrifie; for though Christ was but one, yet he was such a one as was greater and better then all, and so able, and sufficient to sa∣tisfie
for all, and to redeem all as well as he made all; and the blood of such a one as Christ, the son of God, was of such an infinite value and price, that it did surmount and surpass in dignity and worth, all the souls in the world; and his sufferings and merits were a sufficient satisfaction, if intended and applyed to that end for to save so many worlds of men, as there is men in the world. Quest. Did Christ fulfil the moral Law, or ten com∣mandments by his death? Answ. He did satisfie and perform for his people what the Law could require and exact from them, and so became the end of the Law, for righteous¦ness or Justification, to every one that believeth, Rom. 10. 4. And so redeemed and freed them from the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. By be∣ing made a Curse for them, &c. but it still re∣mains in full force and vertue, as a Rule of life, as it is opened by Christ, Mat. 5. There is some difference in the administration of it, since Christs coming, from the administration of it before his coming. Quest. Hath not Christ dyed for all men, and tasted death for every man? 2 Cor. 5. 15. 1 Tim. 2. 6. Answ. The word All, is not to be alwaies ta∣ken for every one; for the word All hath many restrictions; for this word All is very often taken in Scripture for all kinds, as Paul exhorteth, that supplication be made for all men, that is, some of all sorts and degrees, as well Rulers as others, 1 Tim. 2. 1. So it is said, that Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Aegyptians, that is, in all
kind of wisdom; so we read, that Christ healed all diseases, that is, all manner of diseases; All is sometimes restrained in Scripture to Gods peculi∣ar people; Christ saith, I will draw all men to me, John 12. 32. That is, all men that the Father gave him, John 6. 4, 5. See Isa. 54. 13. Again we read, they shall be all taught of God, not all the world sure, but all Gods people: Again, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, Acts 2. 7. These cannot be meant of all the wicked: Again we read, 1 Thess. 2. 15. They please not God, and are contrary to all men, that is, all good men: Again we read, Mat. 10. 22. Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake, that is, of all wicked men; by which we may see how the word All is taken vari∣ously, and therefore it is to be limited, and deter∣mined to persons and things, according as the text will bear, and no otherwise; and when as it is said, he tasted death for every man, it is to be taken for many, for instance, Cant. 3. 8. Every man had his sword on his thigh. Mic. 4. 4. Every man shall sit under his Vine. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Every man shall have praise of God: Now consider, every man in the world had not a sword to wear, nor a Vine to sit under, neither shall every man have praise of God; so every man is not to be taken, for eve∣ry man in the world particularly: but if it were granted that Christ tasted death for every man par∣ticularly, and that all have some Benefit by the death of Christ, viz. Their natural lives, and the possession of the creatures, yet it doth not follow, if he tasted death for every man, that therefore he suffered the wrath of God for every man, and
the punishment due to all for their sins, Mat. 27. 34. He tasted the vinegar mingled with gall, but he would not drink it: and may there not be some mysterie held out thereby to the point in hand? you that are spiritual, Judge. Quest. Doth not God give to every man some Talent or Talents, which if a man did improve, should be increased? Answ. Yea, and there is no man that doth avoid so much evil, and do so much good as he ought and might: consider that to some the Lord doth give natural Talents, as Wisdom, Wealth, Art, &c. And to other spiritual Talents or Gifts, as to Pray, Prophesie, Interpret; and God may very justly damn men for not improving what he gves them; therefore we read, that the very Heathen, that had but the very Light of Naure, and walked not up to that, will be inexcusable at the day of judgement: but withall consider this, that to sin against the Law of Nature only, is enough to damn men, yet the improvement of the Law of Nature is not sufficient to save men, for there is a Knowledge of Christ, Faith in him, and Obe∣dience to him required as absolutely necessary to salvation, John 17. 3. John 3. 36. Luke 19. 27. Compared with Rom 1. 20, 21. Rom. 2. 15. These Scriptures compared together will prove the whole answer to this question. Quest. How came the Sabbath day to be changed from the seventh day to the first, and from a Sabbath day to the Lords day. Answ. By divine authority, as may appear by the practice of our Saviour Christ and his Apostles,
John 20. 19. compared with Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. This is the day they preached, prayed, brake bread, and collected for the poor. And so it came to be called the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10▪ Because the special dedication thereof was to the Lords service. So then this day was changed from the seventh to the first, and from a Sabbath to a first or Lords day, because it might serve for a thankful memorial of Christs resurrection: for as God rested from his Labour on the last day of the week, so Christ ceased from his labour and afflictions on this day, Matthew 28▪ 1. compared with Gen. 2. 1▪ 2. As the one there∣fore was specially sanctified, in regard of the Cre∣ation of the world, so was the other in respect of the restauration and redemption of the world, which of the two is a greater work then the Creation. So then the sourth Commandment doth not re∣quire a seventh day from the Creation, but a seventh day in general: so then it doth not hence follow that we should rest the same day the Lrod rested, but that we should rest from our works one day in seven, as he rested from his; which day under the Law he appointed to be the last day of the week; so nothing hindereth but by his special appointment under the Gospel, it may be the first day, and yet the substance of the Commandment nothing al∣tered: if any reply and say, why doth not the new Testament mention this change? I answer, because we read of no question moved about the same in the Apostles time: so then a Sabbath day, the Lords day, or the first day of the week, which is all
one, is constantly and perpetually to be observed, and never to cease till it be perfectly consummated in the heavenly Sabbath, Heb. 4. 9, 10. The Jews were to work six daies, and rest the se∣venth day; first work, then rest: but now we are to rest the first day, and work the following dayes; first enter into rest, and then work, as an effect of that rest. We read John 10. 27. And Christ said, my sheep hear my voice. Quest. How are believing man and women said to be his sheep? Answ. First, we are said to be his by donation, God gave us to Christ. 2. We are said to be his by purchase, he bought us with a dear price. 3. We are said to be his by Covenant. 4. We are said to be his by Covenant. 5. We are said to be his by Marriage. 6. We are his by birth, we are born from above. Quest. Whether a godly man ought to pray, when he hath not the fresh gales of the spirit drawing him forth thereunto? Answ. Then is the principal time to pray, but not the only time; for he is to pray also at other times; first, we are commanded to pray at all times, Luke 18. 1. Luke 21. 36. Secondly, we have ex∣ample as well as precept to prove this truth, Psalm 119. 25, 154. David in the midst of deadness fals to prayer for quickening, saying, quicken me accord∣ing to thy word. Quest. Whether it be the duty of a wicked
man to pray, seeing we read Prov. 15. 8. That, the Sacrifices of the wicked is an Abomination to the Lord? Answ. It is undoubtedly the duty of a wicked man to pray, and the Priviledge of a Christian that he can do it, though they that have no faith, cannot seek Christ as they ought; yet it is their duty to pray and to seek after Christ, Psal. 79. 6. Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that have not known thee, and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy name: So again, Jer. 10. 25. If the not calling up∣on the name of God be a sin, then to call upon the name of God is a duty: Hence Peter calls upon Si∣mon Magus, Acts 8. 22. Though an unbeliever, to pray. The Pharisee and the Publican both went to the Temple to pray, Luke 18. 10. So again Ephraim, Jer. 31. 18. Yet not converted, prays unto the Lord to turn him. Again, we may see 1 Kin. 21. 27. Ahab humbled himself, and rent his cloaths, and put sack-cloath upon his flesh, and fasted, ver. 29. I will not saith the Lord bring the evil in his daies, but in his sons daies I will bring the evil upon his house. So then it doth plainly appear, that it is the duty of all men to pray, only it is the pri∣viledge of the regenerate, they can pray in the spirit, and with understanding too: a Christians seeking of God, is the effects of Gods seeking of him; and a mans praying before faith, is the effect of the common work of the spirit; our seeking after faith, is the effect of the saving work of the Spi∣rit; external Actions shall have externall an∣swers; spiritual actions shall have spirituall an∣swers, &c.
We read in four Scriptures, of Iniquity, Trans∣gression and Sin, Exod. 34. 7. Mic. 7. 18. Levit. 16. 21. Iob 13. 23. Quest. What difference is there between Ini∣quity, Transgression, and Sin? are not these three one? Answ. Iniquity is that which is done against another man; Sin, that which is done against a mans self; and Transgression, that which is done immedi∣ately against God, 1 Sam. 2. 25. But the Scriptures in some places make them all one; but where we find these three words, Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, laid down together; we are to understand that the Lord doth speak of our sin, with all its aggra∣vations, with all its haynous circumstances, sin with all its malignity. Quest. Whether God may forgive a man his sin, and yet the man himself not know it? Answ. A mans sins may be forgiven him, and he not know it, Lam. 3. 42. We have transgressed, and have rebelled, and thou hast not pardoned, &c. yet God had pardoned, and God had for∣given them, and yet they lay under suspence of pardon; and this is the case of many souls at this day. Quest. If God pardons sin, whether or no doth he afflict and punish men for it afterward? Answ. God in his despensation of Justice, doth punish no man but where sin is: Sin entered into the world and death by sin: it is true, sometimes the Lord doth afflict for tryall, and not for sin, so was Jobs affliction.
Now that God doth punish his people for sin, though their sins be pardoned, will appear from these two Scriptures, 2 Sam. 12. 14. How be it, be∣cause by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child shall surely die: I will punish thee in thy child, I will pardon thy sin, yet I will punish thy sin. So likewise in 2 Sam. 7. 14, 15. I will be his father, and he shall be my son: if he commit Iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, but my mercy shall not depart away from him, this was a promise to Solomon; so the Psalmist quoting this expression, Psalm 89. 31, 32. If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then I will visit their transgressions with a rod, Amos 3. 2. You have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your Iniqui∣ties. Object. Did not Christ fuffer for our sins, and must we suffer too? how can this hang toge∣ther? Answ. When we say we are punished for sin, we are to take notice, that there is a great deal of difference between our sufferings for sin, and Christs; our punishment for sin is not by way of satisfaction to divine Justice, for so Christ was punished, Isa. 53. The chastisement of our Peace is laid upon him. Quest. Whether pardon of sin goes before faith and repentance, or follows after? Answ. Doubtless in the court of heaven, accord∣ing to election, Christ being a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, our sins are forgiven and done away; but as to our apprehension and ma∣nifestation,
God doth pardon sin after a man repents and believes, Act. 3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, see Acts 26. 18. Ephes. 2. 3, 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being Aliens from the common∣wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. Quest. Whether it be consistent with the state of pardon, to fall into the same sin again, and again, over and over? Answ. Pardoned men have fallen often into the same sin, Gen. 42. 15. It was a gross sin for Joseph to swear an heathenish oath, by the life of Pharoah ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither; send one of you for him, and you shall be kept in prison, or else, by the life of Pharoah, surely you are spies; so that Joseph swore twice by the life Pharoah: so we read of Jehosaphat, he fell twice into the same sin, 2 Chron. 20. 35, 36, 37. Besides consider, that although grace doth free us from the dominion of sin, and from the damning power of sin, and from the love of sin, yet grace doth not free any man from the seeds of any one sin, and therefore it is possible for a soul to fall again and again: as for instance, Lot was twice overcome with wine, John twice worshipped the Angel, Abraham out of fear often dissembled, and laid his wife open to adultery to save his life, see Gen 20. 13. and Gen. 12. David was resolved to kill Nabal, and all his innocent family, and a little after he fell into the foul murther of Ʋriah. Jacob twice told a lie for compassing the blessing, Gen. 27. 19, 21. Lot was
twice made drunken, and committed Incest with both his daughters, Gen. 19. Peter thrice denies his Master, and every time worse then another, Mat. 26, &c. These things are written to caution us that stand, that we fall not; and to comfort them that are fallen, that they despair not. Quest. How should a Christian come to see the greatness and vileness of his sin? or how shall I aggravate my sin, that I may see it as it is in its colours? Answ. 1. Consider first how osten thou hast sinned against the motions of Gods Spirit, and so grieving the spirit by withstanding Divine moti∣ons. 2. So sinning against the frequent manifestati∣ons of Gods Love to thy soul, this doth grealy aggravate sin: this did aggravate Solomons sin, 1 Kin. 11. 3. Consider how thou hast sinned against the rebukes and checks of thine own conscience, Jam. 4. 17. To him that knoweth to do good, and doth it not, to him it is sin. 4. To sin against Gods warnings or Judgements, either against others or our selves, this doth heigh∣ten our sin, see Dan. 5. 22, 23. compared with 2 Chron. 28. 22. 5. To sin against mercies, is an aggravation of sin, 2 Sam. 12. I delivered thee out of Sauls hand, I gave thee thy Masters house, if all this had been too little for thee, I would have given thee such▪ and such things, wherefore hast thou dispised, &c. 6. There is a resisting of the Spirit, Acts 7. 51. And there is a vexing the Spirit, Isa. 63. 10. But they re∣belled,
and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and fought against them. 7. Sin is aggravated, when a man doth frequent∣ly fall into the same sin. 8. Sin is aggravated, when it is done in a way of complacencie, when we love and delight in it. 9. Sin is aggravated, when it is done by one that lives under much means of Grace; this made a woe to be pronounced against Chorazin and Beth∣saida. 10. This also doth aggravate sin, when it is done against vows, purposes, promises, prayers and resolutions. This doth add perjury to our Ini∣quity. Quest. Who are those that are nearest related one to another in this life, amongst the sons of men? Answ. The members of Christ, whether strong or weak, high or low: Religion puts men into the nearest Union, and the most endeared Relations; they who are united together in the blood of Christ, are knit together in the strongest bands. Quest. Whether sin may be dying, when in our own apprehnesion, and in the apprehension of others it is rather increasing? Answ. Corruption may be then most enfeebled, when in our own apprehension it is most enraged, viz. A coal of fire glows most, a little before it goes out: and a candle burning into the socket, gives a blaze, even as it is going out: a long dark night, sometimes is most darkest, a little before break of
day, the devil rageth most, when he is nearest chaining up: many a Fowl fluttereth most, when his neck is broken, or his head cut off. Quest. Seeing all men under heaven, are either in the state of Nature, or in the state of Grace, how may we know who is in the state of Nature, and who is in the state of Grace? or what are the di∣stinguishing Characters of the one, and also of the other? 1. A man in the state of Nature is one that doth live, and walk in an open or secret course of sin, contrary to the Scriptures, and the light of Na∣ture. 2. He is one that doth live quietly, and secure∣ly, and contentedly, in a secret state of igno∣rance. 3. He is one that doth rest upon, and glory in a form without a power. 4. He doth in his judgement prefer, and in his will deliberately chuse the things of this world, before the things of Christ. 5. He is one that doth contemptuously turn his back upon the Ordinances of God, and tenders of Jesus Christ. 6. He is one that is apt to persecute with his hand, and revile with his tongue the people of God, Phil. 1. 28. 7. He is one that will cloud and colour wick∣ed practices with specious pretences, devour wid∣dows houses, and for a pretence make long prayers. 8. He is apt to be a great exactor of holiness upon others, but he will do but little himself; bind heavy▪
burdens, and lay them upon others, &c. 9. He is apt to be carefull in small matters, and negligent in great things. 10. And lastly, a man may seem to make a great progress in Religion, and yet be but in a state of con∣demnation, viz. It is said of Simon Magus, that he believed, Act. 8. 13. It is said of Judas, that he repented: others did hear the word with joy, and some partake of the heavenly gift and powers of the world to come, and were sanctified, Numb. 24. 2, Balaam is said to have the Spirit of God, and to have his eyes opened, and to have heard the word of God, and to have seen the visions of the Almighty, so that he prophesied of the Kingdom of Christ, ver. 19. So Jam. 1. 26. If a man amongst you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, this mans reli∣gion is vain. Quest. What are the Characters of a true Chri∣stian, by which I may be able to discern between him and a man in the state of nature? Answ. There are many external discernable Cha∣racters of a true Christian, and there be also many internal evidences. First, there are many external Characters. 1. He that doth see his interest in the promises, he will let us know it, by cleansing himself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 2. He that is a servant unto God, will let us know it by his obedience to him, Rom. 6. 16. 3. If you say that you are Christs sheep, let it ap∣pear by your hearing his voice, Joh. 10. 27. 4. If you say that you do abide in him, let us know it by your endeavouring to walk as he walked 1 Joh. 2. 6.
5. If Christ hath dyed for you, let us see it by your living unto him, 2 Cor. 5. 15. 6. If you do know him, so as to have an interest in him, let it appear by keeping his commandments, 1 Joh. 2. 4. 7. If you have received a Kingdom that cannot be moved, let us see it by your serving him with reve∣rence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28. 8. If you be the spouse of Christ, let us know it by your enquiring after him, Cant. 5. 6. 9. 9. If you be his Disciples, let us know it by your love one to another, Joh. 13. 35. 10. If you say you live in the spirit, let us know it by your walking in the spirit, Gal. 5. 25. 11. If you do abide in the true Vine, let us know it by your fruitfulness, Joh. 15. 5. 12. If you say that you are indeed Christs, let us know it by your crucifying the flesh, with the affecti∣ons and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. 13. If you are indeed planted in his house, let us know it by your flourishing in his Courts, Psal. 92. 13. 14. If Christ hath chosen you to salvation, let us know it by your sanctification of the spirit, and the belief of the truth, Ephes. 1. 4. 15. If you say that you do live in his will, let us know it by your doing his will. 16. If you say that you have faith in Christ, let us see it so appear by its works, Jam. 2. 18. 17. Who is a wise man amongst you all, and en∣dued with knowledge? let him shew out of his good conversation, his works with meekness and wisdom, Jam. 3. 13.
Quest. But are there not some things in a Christi∣an that cannot be in an hypocrite; if so, pray let me know what they are? Answ. There are some flowers that grow not in natures garden, and some pearls that are not to be found in the worlds field, and some precious things in a true Christian, that were never found in a cast∣away, viz. 1. A true Christian indeed will mourn in secret, confess to God, and judge himself for those sins that no man can spot him for; his greatest and hot∣test conflicts are against inward pollution, obvious only to the eye of God and our selves. 2. A true Christian indeed doth as earnestly desire to have his sin purged as pardoned, and himself fitted to do or suffer for the name of Christ. 3. He doth loath, hate, and abhor, and refrain sin, from a right principle to a right end, and so in his heart saith with Joseph, how shall I do this evil, and sin against God? 4. He is willing to be searched be any Christian in any thing; and many times he entreats the Lord to search him, Psal. 139 23, 24. 5. He labours in all duties and services to approve his heart to God. 6. In respect of the general bent, and srame of his heart, subjects to Christ. 1. Freely and sweetly. 2. Universally, in one thing as well as ano∣ther, without any exception, or reser∣vation. 3. This he doth constantly and unwearyedly, at least in desire.
4. He mourns in secret, when God is disho∣noured. These are such flowers of Paradise that were never seen to grow in natures garden, until the new man was put on, and the party renewed in the Spirit of his mind let us then make the word and spirit the judge of our condition, for if we make sense and reason the judge of our condition, we must resolve to lve in fear, and lie down in sorrow. Quest. Whether man hath a free will, yea or no? Answ. Mans will is free to all that is evil; so said the Apostle, to do evil, is present with me, but how to do that which is good, I find not. So man hath free will to do evil, but no will to do good, because the one is natural, the other is supe natural, Rom. 9. 16. So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy: poor man would be like the spider, spinning out a thred of his own, and so think to climb up to heaven by a thred spun out of his own bowels, Jb 8. 14. This thred will be cut off, there is an emptiness and insufficiency in our nature to any thing that is spiritually good, we are not suffi∣cient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of God: we have no grace but what we receive from Christ, and grace is no grace, unless it be every wav free; therefore we have little reason to boast of the freedom of our will, to any thing that is spiritually good, because our will is not free, till it be by grace made free; we have no power to become the Sons of God, till it be given us to believe in his name.
Quest. Whether a man may fall from grace, yea or no? Answ. A true Christian can never totally and fi∣nally fall away from grace; it is true there is a kind of seeming holiness, which may be lost, and a form of godliness, which may vanish and come to nought, Heb. 6. 4, 6. and 10. 29. It is true also that Gods own people called and chosen, may nuch damp and quench the grace of God which is in them, and may shew much infirmity in particular fals, the sense of it may be much lessened, power of it weakned, the degree of it abated, but the habit cannot be ut∣terly lost, the life of it never goes out; con∣sult with these Scriptures, and they will prove this truth, Jer. 31. 3. I have loved thee with an everlast∣ing love, 2 Tim. 2. 19 Nevertheless, the founda∣tion of God standeth sure, Heb. 7 25. He ever liveth to make intercession for them, John 10. 28. And I give unto them eternal life, and no man shall pluck them out of my hand, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept by the power of God, through faith, to salvation. Now if any say a man may fall away from grace, let me ask him. 1. Is the surety of the New Testament grown so uncertain? Heb. 7 22. 2. Is the promise now come to be so mu∣table? 3. Is the power of God grown so weak? 1 Pet. 1. 5. 4. Is the will of God become mutable? 2 Tim. 2. 19. 5. Is the free, eternal and everlasting love of God become changable? John 13. 1. Isa. 54. 10 The
mountains shall depart, and the hils be removed, but the kindness of the Lord shall not depart: men and Divels shall as soon dethrone God, pluck the Sun out of the firmament, and Christ out of the bosom of the Father, as they shall pluck a believer out of the arms of Christ, or rob him of his interest in the precious promises: what shall I say more? A Chri∣stian is but a weak subject to fall, but he hath a strong God, a strong Saviour, and strong promises: he hath a foundation: first, a sure foundation: second∣ly, it is a foundation of God that cannot shake, but standeth firm, &c. Quest. How should a godly man or woman fol∣low their particular calling with comfort, pleasure, ease and delight, that so they might live sweet∣ly till they go hence, and at last dye comfor∣tably? Answ. The Scripture shews that men must have a calling, and teacheth them how to beliave them∣selves in it. Tht first Adam and the second, the two only innocent persons that ever lived upon the earth, had both of them a calling. Adam drest the garden, and Christ was a Minister of the circumcision, Gen. 2. 15. Rom. 15. 8. 1. How a man may and ought to follow his cal∣ling providently, Proverbs 27. 23. and 2 King. 2. 23. 2. Diligently, Eccles. 9. 10. with Genesis 31. 6. 40. 3. Faithfully, not trusting to our own toyling, without building upon Gods blessing, Deut. 8. 18. Prov. 10. 22. 4. Moderately, not hindring our selves in the
exercise of Religion, Luk. 10. 39, 40. &c. not wearing away our bodies with excessive toyl, Exod. 18. 18, &c. avoiding excessive care, which di∣sturbs and annoies the heart, Psal. 108. 1. 1 Tim. 2. 8. not with a will to be rich, but to be imployed for Gods glory, 1 Tim. 6. 9. 2 Cor. 12. 14. Ephes. 4. 28. Observe a few rules in buying, and a few rules in selling. First in buying. (1.) Do not say the com∣modity is naught, when you know it is good, Prov. 20. 14. (2.) Do not give counterfeit mony, Gen. 23. 16. (3.) Do not long defer the paying, when you have bought, Prov. 3. 27, 28. (4.) Do not buy those commodities that are not fit to be sold, as stollen good, Monuments, as Crosses, Beads and Images, Amos 2. 16. then in selling, 1. Do not multiply words in selling, in a multi∣tude of words there is sin, saith Solmon. 2. Do not sell thy commodities by false weights, Amos 8. 5. Micah 6. 10. 3. Do not work upon the ignorance or simplicity of him that comes to buy, 1 Thes. 4. 6. 4. Do not imbase a commodity from its prima∣tive worth, and yet sell it at the full price, Amos 8. 6. Isa. 1. 22. In a word, in all our endeavours and pains, let us be without care, 1 Pet. 5. 7. casting all your care upon him, for he careth for you, Psal. 37. 3, 4, 5. Trust in the Lord and do good, so shalt thou dwel in the Land, and verily thou shalt be fed; delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desire of thine heart; commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shll bring it to pass, Prov. 16. 3. Commit thy way
to the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established, Psal. 55. 22. cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee, remember the world was made of no∣thing, Heb. 11. 3. and Job tels us that it doth hang upon nothing, Job 26. 7. therefore to depend upon it, is to depend upon nothing, Prov. 24. 5. Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? surely the fashion of this world passeth away, and here we have no continuing City, our bodies are cottages of clay, which shortly will beblown down by the wind of death, yea their falling began with their building. Quest. Whether a godly man may buy and sell, eat and drink, travel and discourse with an ungodly man or men? Answ. We find in the Scriptures that a good man is to love his enemies, and to do good unto all, Gal. 6. 10. The Lord doth cause the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall upon them, therefore beware of judging and condemning them: are they proud? who can tell but God may humble them: are they unclean? who can tell but God may cleanse them: we ought to be courteous in our behaviour towards them, Gen. 23. 7, 12. Abraham bowed himself to the people of the Land, Christ was tender hearted to∣wards them, he wept over them that were to shed his blood: and we are to own and commend what there is of God in them: so it is said, Christ did love the young man in the Gospel, for those natu∣ral parts that there were in him. God is the fountain of common gifts, as well as of saving grace. The Lord doth make use of them, to bring out of their loyns many precious men: and sometimes he doth
make use of them, to help the woman, and sometimes to awaken his people, and put them upon their guard: but in all our conversings with wicked men, take heed to these things. (1.) Walk warily and cir∣cumspectly before them, Phil. 2. 15. For you are in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, 1 Pet. 2. 12. Having therefore your conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, ver. 15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing, we put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. (2) Beware of envying at their prosperity, because God hath prohibited that, Psalm 37. 1. Consider, they have their reward here in this life, Prov. 24. 19. There is no reward to a wicked man in another life. (3.) Beware of cracking a good con∣science to procure their favour, as Judas did: con∣sider their favour is fickle, and it is a madness to lose the favour of God, to gain the favour of his enemies. (4.) Beware of omitting those duties that God requires of you for fear of them: this is to life up man more then God. Consider, omission may damn a man, as well as commissions, and hereby we shall gratifie carnal men, by omitting of good du∣ties, for fear of them: and by this we shall stag∣ger those that were coming on in the wayes of God. (5.) Beware of too deep a familiarity with them, and that for these reasons. First, because they have no communion nor fellowship with God, Ephes. 2. 12. They are without Christ in the world, and have communion with Satan, 1 John 5. 19. The whole world lyeth in wickedness. Again, deep com∣munion with them is very dangerous to your souls. Joseph by this began to swear, by the life of Pharaoh; and Peter being a little in bad com∣pany
how soon could he swear and lye, both one af∣ter another. Quest. Whether recreation be lawful, and if so, what recreation and when to be used, and how long, and how oft? Answ. Recreation in some pleasant and harmless exercise is lawful, as might appear by the testimony and practices of many good people, sometimes mak∣ing use of their liberty therein; observing these and the like rules. 1. In, and by things lawful, not vain, as filthy or slanderous songs, 1 Cor. 15. 33. Psal. 69. 12. 2. Not foolish talking, and unsaintlike jesting, Ephes. 5. 3, 4 3. Not dicing, carding, stage-playing, and fidling. 4. We are not to use recreation as we do meat and drink, but as wine, seldom, and little at a time, 1 Tim. 5. 23. Then there are times in which no recreation is either lawful or expedient. 1. On the Sabbath or Lords day it is altogether forbidden, Isa. 58. 13. 2. In the time of mourning, for it becomes no bo∣dy to be jolly, when God is angry, Isa. 22. 12, 13. Mat. 9. 55. 3. It must be done in a fit time, as our occasions will bare; that we may redeem time, and not set spurs to a running horse, as it were a benefit to be rid of time, that is neither for our profit here, Proverbs 21. 17. nor our safety hereafter, Mat. 25. 30. 4. It must be made use of, in a fit man∣ner,
for no more then we are willing to lose. 5. It must be carried on soberly, not over earnest∣ly; it is dangerous for a man to give up himself too much to pleasurable things, 1 Cor. 7. 31. for wis∣dom must be the moderator of our mirth and con∣tent, Eccles. 2. 3. 6. This also must be done in good company, not with men of evil manners, lest we bring our selves to be in danger to be partaker of their sins. Quest. In as few words as may be answer me to these eight things. 1. Election, what it is? 2. The causes of it. 3. The ends of it. 4. The effects of it. 5. The Subjects of it. 7. The properties of it. 8. The signs of it. Answ. I have spoken to Election before in its place, but seeing here are more particulars, then there I have spoken unto, I shall answer each briefly. 1. As to election what it is? consider that it is a special decree of God, touching the conferring of eternal salvation, by Christ the Redeemer, to certain men of meer mercy and good will. 2. As to the causes of election, it is the love of the Trinity, God Almighty, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. The manner of working peculiarly to each of them: the Scripture expresly sheweth that the Father and the Son did elect us, Ephes. 1. 4. John 15. 16. In which we may not exclude the Holy Ghost, who
hath one common God-head with them, 1 Joh. 5. 7. So that the cause which moved God to elect, was his meer good will, and nothing else, as appears by these ensuing undeniable reasons. 1. By the word of God, he hath predestinated us, according to the good pleasure of his will, Ephes. 1. 5. Rom. 11. 5. So then we are not elected for foreseen faith, for every cause is before the effect, now faith is after election, Act. 13. 48. So in the next place we are not elected for any foreseen works, for the Apostle doth exculde all works from being either causes of election or repro∣bation, Rom▪ 9. 11, 12. 3. The ends of election may be reduced to these three heads. 1. The glory of God, and the celebration, and declaration of his mercy, Romans 9. 23. Ephes. 1. 6. 2. The second end is, that we should be ho. ly, Ephes. 1. 4. He did not chuse us because we were then holy, but that we might be holy. 3. The third end is the salvation and glory of the elect, therefore they are said to be ordained to eternal life, and prepared unto glory, and cho∣sen unto salvation, Acts 13. 48. Rom. 9. 23. 2 Thes. 2. 13. 4. The effects of election, are the mediation of Christ, adoption, vocation, saving faith, justifica∣tion, glorification, in a word, Gods election is the root of all gifts of God in us, and the foundation of all sa∣ving benefits bestowed upon us.
5. The Subject of election is double, the first is him in who we are elected, and that is Christ, he hath chosen us in him, saith Paul, Ephes. 1. 4. The other Subject is the persons that are elected, and these are not all the sons of Adam without ex∣ception, for he that taketh all, and refuseth none, cannot properly be said to chuse; the elect consider∣ed comparatively, are a little flock, a remnant, a garden inclosed, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed, they be as one of a City, two of a tribe, they be but a handful to a house full, a drop to the Ocean. Yet if we consider them simply in themselves, they are an innumerable number, that cannot be numbred, Ephes. 5. 23. Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God, Rom. 5. 19. By the obedience of Christ, many shall be made righteous, Rev. 7. 9. John saith he saw an in∣numerable multitude of all Nations and tongues which stood before the lamb, cloathed with long white robes, and palms in their hands, so that the number of Gods elect, considered by themselves alone, is great. 6. The Prerogatives of the Elect, which no re∣probate can partake of, are as followeth. 1. God knows them, loves them, and approves of them, 2 Tim. 2. 19. 2. True faith is wrought in them, and them only, Tit. 1. 1. Act. 13. 48. 3. Effectuall vocation and conversion belongs to them only, Rom. 8. 30. 4. They only are adorned with the graces of the Spirit, Col. 3. 12. 5. Salvation belongs to none but to them. Rom. 11. 7.
6. None of the Elect shall be wholly seduced, Mat. 24. 24. John 10. 28. Jer 32. 40. 7. God doth cause his Angels to protect them, Psal. 34. 7. 8. God shall send his Angels to gather together his elect, Mat. 24. 31. 9. The Elect shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. 10. If any wrong them, here God will a venge them, Luke 18. 7, 8. Zech. 2. 8. 11. He will shorten the evil dayes for his elects sake, Mat. 24. 22. 12. The elect need not fear death and damnation, who shall lay any thing to their charge? Rom. 8. 33. 7. The properties and signs of election are as fol∣loweth. 1. It is most free, without all obligation, compulsion, external instigation, or provision of future prepara∣tions, merits, &c. hath not the potter power over the clay, to make of the same lump, one vessel to honour, and another to dishonour? 2. The decree of election is from all eternity, before we did believe, and before we were born, see Rom. 9. 11. 3. The election of God is constant, perpetual, immutable and inviolable, my Counsel saith God shall stand, Isa. 46. 10. and the foundation of God remain∣eth sure, 2 Tim. 2. 19. 8. What are the signs of election, but the dy∣ing unto sin, poverty of spirit, a hungring after the righteousness that there is in Christ, and prizing of it above all earthly things? a resignation of our selves into Gods hands, with an acknowledgement
of our ffences, with a true purpose to leave them, forgiving our enemies, and a delight in Gods Saints? &c. So then put all together, and we may see it is Gods favour, not mans faith, his mercy, not mans merit, that is the foundation and fountain of mans election and felicity. Q. What is vocation or effectual calling? Answ. Vocation is an action of God, translating from the kingdom of darkness to his own kingdom; it is two-fold extraordinary or ordinary, extraordi∣nary vocation is an immediate work of the spirit, whereby without outward means, he inwardly speak∣eth to the soul, and so doth make the heart to answer his call: Vocation which is ordinary, is that where∣by God calleth out of darkness into his marvellous light, from the power of Satan, unto God, by the preaching of the Gospel. Q. What is Justification? Answ. Justification is a gracious work of God, whereby he judgeth the elect to be just by faith in Christ, through the imputation of his justice, and that unto the praise of his glorious grace, given us in Christ before the world began. Q. What is Sanctification? Answ Sanctification is a benefit bestowed upon us by God, whereby our corrupt nature is renewed to the Image God, or a total inward change of a man justified, whereby the Image of God is restored in him. Q. Wherein doth justification and sanctification agree, and wherein do they disagree? Answ. 1. First they agree in their cause, for God is the Author of them both, through the merits of Christ.
2. They have both one instrumental cause, which is Faith; of the former by receiving of it, and of the latter by effecting it. 3. They agree in their scope and end, for they both tend to one end; but justification as the cause, and sanctification as the way. Now as they do accord in some things, so they dif∣fer in other things, viz. 1. In that justification is out of man, Sanctificati∣on is within him. 2. Justification absolveth a sinner, whereby he seeth he standeth righteous at the bar of Gods justice; sanctification, makes us stand righteous in the ac∣count of men. 3. Justification brings peace of conscience, so doth not sanctification but puts us upon following that peace. 4. Justification consists in the imputation of righ∣teousness to us; Sanctification in the infusion of right principles, that we might walk holily to right ends. 5. Justification is acted at once, sanctification is done by degrees: the former is in this life perfect, the latter is imperfect. 6. They differ in respect of the manner in which they are wrought, for justification is wrought by the right of donation, but sanctification is by the way of practical alteration. Q. What necessity is there of Magistracy or Civil powers in the world? Answ. As a City without wals, a sea without banks, a vineyard without a hedge or pale, so is a com∣mon-wealth without a Magistrate; or a kingdom
without a Magistrate, is as a ship without a pilot, or a world without a Sun. Q. What men are fit for officers in Church and State? Answ. When the Lord directed Moses what offi∣cers to chuse for publike imployment, Exod. 18. 21. He said, chuse out of all the people, able men, such as fear God, men of truth, &c. not favour, money, seniority, &c. But grace, wisdom and courage must advance men unto rule: Officers in Church and State are not for sight, but for service; we judge not of a pillar by its beauty, but by its strength: It is better to be under a zealous faithfull John Baptist, though his rayment be hair and leather, then under a silken Diotrephes, who is all for preheminence, no∣thing for performance. The shortness of mans life, and the misery that doth attend every age and condition of all men that live and delight in sin, and lie down in Sorrow. MAns whole life is but a progress of death, all the time we live we die invisibly, and when we die indeed, it is but a compleating of what we have been doing all our life; the best mens lives are as glass, bright and brittle, and evermore in danger of breaking, Jer. 22. 29. Oh earth, earth, earth, hear the voice of the Lord! And why doth he mention earth three times? 1. Because we came from the earth. 2. Because at the best we are but earth. 3. Because we shall speedily return to the earth, as appears
by these Scriptures, Job 7. 9. the length of our dayes is compared to the vanishing of a cloud, and some∣times to the swiftness of aPost, Job 9. 25. sometimes to a flower that springs in the morning, and withereth before night, Job 14. 2 Sometimes to a Weavers shut∣tle, Job 7. 6. What is swifter then a shuttle? it flies to and again, forward and backward: so nights and dayes pass this shuttle of our life, forward and back∣ward, to and fro; the night doth cast this shuttle to the day, and the day casts it to the night, and the night to the day, and so from one to the other, forward and backward, to and again; So that between these two, time quickly weaves off the thread of our life, the piece comes to be woven, and so to be cut off; and just so is our life, Isaiah 38. 12. I have cut off like a Weaver. What shall I say more? All the Prophets and Apostles that have written, have more or less written of the fewness of our dayes, and uncertainty of our lives; Abraham said he was but dust and ashes, Gen. 18. 27. All our dayes on the earth is as a shadow, and there is no abiding, 2 Chro. 29. 15. When a few years are come, then shall I go the way whence I shall not return, Job 16. 22. We spend our dayes like a tale that is told, Psal. 70. 9. All flesh is grass, and the goodliness there∣of as the flower of the field, Isa. 4. 6, 7. We do all fade as a leaf, and our iniquities as wind have taken us away, Isa. 64. 6. For what is our life? it is even as a vapour that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away: such is the swiftness of mans dayes, and short∣ness of his life, and frailty of his nature, that the swiftest, shortest, and frailest things that we read of in Scripture, are not swift, short, and frail enough
to compare mans life unto. Here I cannot but acquaint the Reader with some things that the Lord made of great use to me many years since in reading some part of the practise of Piety, and auo∣ther book called Sincere the Convert, and another lit∣tle book called Good news from heaven, &c. toge∣ther with what I have learned from the Scriptures and Christians, &c. and so I shall trace man from his birth to his death, and begin, First with chose that live and die in a state of nature; Secondly we shall lay down, and that in few lines, the blessed state of those that in their life prepare for death, for death hath something to say to every man, and would fain be heard, but men are not at leisure to heark∣en to him, till he throws them upon their sick beds. Of the Condition of man in his birth and in¦fancy. By the pangs, groans, and struglings, and the vio∣lent travell of his mother, the child is produced to the light, many miscarrying at their birth by di∣vers accidents, the mother and the child perish to∣gether, but sometimes by Gods providence after the child hath been imprisoned nine moneths in an ob∣scure prison, it springs into the world, and so as it were cast naked upon the earth all embrued into the blood of filthiness, so that the mother is asha∣med to let the child know the manner thereof. Oh miserable man, where shall I begin to describe thine endless misery, who art condemned as soon as con∣ceived,
and adjudged to eternal death, before thou wast born to a temporal life; a beginning indeed we may find, but no end of thy misery, and so thou art subject in this life, to all kind of slavery, and in the life to come to overlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: from which there is no escaping, un∣less thou art born again of water and of the spirit, John 3. 3, 5. Of mankind in the state of childhood. THE two first years of it is nothing but impo∣tency and weak imbecility to himself, and charge, trouble and vexation to his parents; other creatures by the benefit of nature can stand upon their Legs, and seek after their food, but thou must be swadled in clouts, and not able to help thy self; the yound chickens as soon as they are hatched, can run after their dam, to seek for food, the lambs, calves, and yound colts, stand suddenly upon their legs to seek their dams teats: but man would perish if his mother did not bring the nipple of her brest to his mouth, and rock him upon her knees, and for the three or four years of his infancy, he must be carefully tended for fear he should take hurt, left horses, carts, or coaches run over him, &c.
Of mankind in the state of youth. THE greatest part of this time is spent under the restraint of their tutors or masters, for youth is as an untamed beast, all whose affections are rash, and rude, not capable of good counsel when it is given, delighting in nothing but toyes and babies, and vanity, and therefore must be kept under the rod and fear of parents and masters, as if thou hadst been born to live in slavery, rather then at the dis∣position of thy own will; no tired horses were ever more willing to be rid of their burdens, then thou art to get out of this state of bondage, &c. never minding thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, Eccles. 12. 1. Except the Lord hedge up thy way thou art running with all speed headlong to Hell. Of the state of manhood. THE maturiry of mans age begins at thirty, and continues till forty five; in this state the flesh provokes thee to lust, the world allures thee to plea∣sure, and the Devil tempts thee to all kind of sins, fears of enemies affright thee, suits in Law do vex thee, wrongs of ill neighbours do oppress thee, cares for wife and children do consume thee, sin stings thee within, Satan layes snares before thee, sins past, dogs behind thee; in this miserable estate, whither wilt thou go for rest and comfort? the house is full of cares, the Field of toyl, the Sea of Pirats, the Land of
Robbers, who can reckon up besides all this, the losses, crosses, griefs, disgraces, sicknesses, and calami∣ties that do attend us, the death of near and dear friends and relations; one while adversity on the left∣hand frets thee, another while prosperity on the right-hand flatters thee, over thy head Gods judge∣ments due to thy sins are ready to fall upon thee, and under thy feet, hels mouth is ready to swallow thee up, therefore take heed Oh man what thou dost, &c. Of the declining state of man. THis age of man is subject to envy and cove∣tousness, as the former age was to ambition and carking cares, whereby it appears that mens passions and sins, do rather change then forsake them, for car∣nal delights to which young men are most addicted, do change in their delcining age, unto envy and covetousness, and sometimes their avarice doth change to ambition; a godly man at this age is fitter for counsel then for action, because their passions are commonly more moderate, their experiences great∣ter, their Judgement more solid, and their counsels safer, Job 12. 12. With the ancient is wisdom, and in length of years understanding, but this declining age of man is not free from vanity, it being subject to envy at another mans prosperity, &c.
Of the Decrepit, or old age of man. THE decrepit age of man begins a little after sixty, and ends when death strikes them with his dart, Rom. 6. 23. the wages of sin is death, the old age of man, except it be endued with free-grace, and sanctified by the Spirit of God, it is the vanity of vanities, and the misery of all miseries, for the in∣numerous infirmities incident to it, viz. bald-head∣ed, stooping under dotage, wrinkled face, rotten teeth, stinking breath, testy with choler, withered with driness, dimmed with blindness, filled with di∣seases, overwhelmed with sickness, and bowed toge∣ther with weakness, having little use of any sense, but of the sence of pain: what shall I say more? trace man from his mothers womb to the grave, & you shall find him nothing but a piece of vanity in his best estate, Ps. 39. 5. First in his very conception, they may be ex∣tinguished by ill scents and vapours, bruises or fals; then in their infancy, by the quinsie, convulsions, mea∣sels or the small pox; then in their youth by the sword, plurisie, and burning feavers; then in the next age, apoplexies, bloody fluxes and consumptions; then in their declining age by the stone and the gout, drop∣sies, palsies, &c. And in old age, aches, cough, stone, and divers other casualties; so that I may conclude with Solomon, that the lives of natural men are meer vanity and vexation of Spirit.
Of the Pollution and Misery of the soul in this life. THE understanding is full of vanity, Psal. 94. 11. 2 Cor. 4. 4. The will of man is wholly depraved, it is contrary to God, his word and Spirit in all things, it will not depend nor wait on God; as for the memory that also is full of corruption, that will forget the things that is commanded to remem∣ber, and remember the things that we should for∣get; and as for the conscience, that also is wholly cor∣rupted, it is neither clear to see things that are amiss, nor sensible of sins committed; and whereas it should excuse or accuse, it doth abuse and pervert the light it hath by making great sins small, &c. And as for our affections, they come as a tempest, either to make us over-joy or over-grieve; what shall I say more? the wretched soul is so deformed with sin, defiled with lust, polluted with filthiness, outraged with passions, pined with envy, overcharged with gluttony, boyling with revenge, transported with rage, so that the glorious Image of God is transfor∣med into the ugly shape of the Devil; our understand∣ing is darknned our will depraved, our affections disordered, our memory misimployed, our consci∣ence benummed.
Of the Miseries attending both body and soul in the hour of death, if they see not their in∣terest in Christ. DEath in the Scripture is called the King of ter∣rors, and the fear of death makes many sub∣ject to bondage all their life, for death is a messen∣ger that hath something to say to every man, and he often speaks to all, that would fain be heard, but most men are not at leisure to hear what he hath to say, no, not till old age, nor then neither; well, after all the forementioned troubles, in comes death, and looks the old man grim and black in the face, and neither pittieth his age, nor regardeth his long en∣dured Dolours, but battereth all the principal parts of his body, and arresteth him to appear before the great judge of Heaven and Earth, at the bar of his Justice; then the old man fals into a cold sweat over all his body, and a trembling in all his members; the head aketh, the face waxeth pale, the nose black, the eye-strings break, the tongue faltereth, the throat rotleth: whilst he is thus summoned to appear at the great assize of Gods court, behold a quar∣ter Sessions, and goal Delivery is held within him; where reason sits as Judge, and his conscience being now awakened, puts in a bill of Inditement; where∣in is alleadged, all the evil deeds that ever thou hast committed, and the good deeds that ever thou hast omitted, and all the curses, and Judgements that are due to every sin: Never such a bill put up against the greatest Traitor in any court of men; thou must
hold up thy hand at the bar, for all the sins that ever thou didst commit in the whole course of thy life; the bill of Indictment it self runs thus. 1. Thou art accused for many sins of omission, in leaving undone many good things, that God in his word required of thee. 2. For spoiling all the good things that ever thou didstin thy life, by mixing the poyson of thy own cor∣ruption with them. 3. For sinning in secret, as if God had not seen it, because men do not; and hereby denying, as it were, Gods Omnipotency. 4. For presuming sometimes to sin openly to the Dishonouring of the God of Glory, before all the world. 5. For sinning against all sorts of men, against thy Parents in thy youth, thine equals in thy manly age, thine inferiours in thy old Age. 6. For sinning against God himself immediately, by abusing his Name and Ordinances. 7. For sinning against mens Souls, Lives, Goods, Chastity, good Name, and all that was near and dear to them. 8. For sinning against thy own soul, and all the good things God hath given thee, by intemperance, and otherwise. 9. For sinning against Gods holy Ordinances, in neglecting or abusing them. 10. For sinning against Gods Mercies, abu∣sing Health, Wealth, and Liberty, and Parts, and Gifts. 11. For sinning against Gods Judgements, as if thou
caredst not for his pleasure, nor fearedst his displea∣sure. 12. For sinning against the checks of thy own con∣science, that often forbad thee to sin, but could not be heard. 13. For sinning against the motions of Gods spi∣rit, and so putting the Lord upon complaning, and Christ upon bleeding, and the Spirit upon griev∣ing. 14. For drawing others to sin, by thy bad exam∣ples and counsels. 15. For incouraging them in their sins, by ap∣proving of them. 16. For not reproving them for sin, as if thou wast afraid to speak for God, against those that dis∣honour him. 17. For not punishing sin, where thou hadst pow∣er and authority, and wast required to do it. 18. For a world of precious time, that thou hast mispent in the world. 19. For a multitude of unknown sins, that thou hadst totally forgotten, committed in the child-hood, youth and man-hood; all thy omissions and com∣missions will then come into thy mind, and if thou wouldest, thou canst not put them out; I know of two precious Christians, being a long time weak, and like to dye, that did witness to this truth; all the sins of their youth that they had forgotten, came in remembrance as fresh as if but now commit∣ted. 20. And lastly, there comes in a long bill, that thou never dreamedst of, much less, couldest repent of; ig∣norance will be no plea in this court, God will say,
thou oughtest and mightest have known al these things to be sinful, out of the holy Scripture; and there∣fore art utterly unexcusable. Oh consider, if ever any bill were like to this, and bring it home to your own consciences, for it is your own case; it is true, that in all courts of Justice, exception against witnesses is al∣lowed, but thou canst except against none of these, except it be the Devil, who bears malice to thee; yet malice is a good informer, though a bad Judge; but to cashier his testimony, what canst thou say against thy partners in sin? do not they know all thy waies? what canst thou say against good men, that with grief beheld thy sinfull courses? what against good Angels, that will not belie thee? what canst thou say against thy own conscience? what canst thou say against the most true and knowing God, that cannot lie? And whilst thy soul is thus within, out of peace and order; thy wife, children and friends trou∣ble thee as fast, to have thee put thy goods in order, some crying, some craving, some pittying, some chearing well; In this extremity, the soul looks eve∣ry way for help, and she finds her self every way helpless: I shall here acquaint the Reader, of a pas∣sage that I read at least twenty years ago; which God made of great use to me, viz. The soul be∣ing in this misery, desires to hear the least word of Comfort; she directs this or the like speech to the Eyes: Oh Eyes, who in times past were so quick sighted, can you spie no comfort? not any way how I might escape this dreadful danger? Alas, the eye∣strings are broken, they cannot see the candle that burneth, nor discern whether it be day or night.
The soul finding no comfort in the eyes, speaks to the ears; Oh Ears, who were willing and wont to recreate me with hearing new pleasant discourses, and musick, can ye hear the tidings of the least com∣fort for me? but the ears are either so deaf, that they cannot hear at all; of the sense of hearing is grown so weak, that it cannot endure to hear his dearest friends to speak; So the ear cannot mi∣nister any comfort: Then she intimates her grief un∣to her Tongue; Oh Tongue, who was wont to bring it out with the bravest, where are now thy big and daring words, now in my greatest need? canit thou speak nothing in my defence? canst thou neither daunt these enemies with threatning words, nor in∣treat them with fair speeches? But alas, the tongue cannot in his greatest extremity, so much as call for a little drink, or desire a friend to take away with his finger the flegm that is ready to choak him. Find∣ing here no hope of help, she speaks to the feet, where are ye oh feet, which sometimes were so nimble, in running and carrying of me from place to place; can ye carry me now no where, out of this dange∣rous place? But alas, the Feet are as it were dead already; if they be not stirred, they cannot stir. Then she directs her speech unto her hands; Oh hands, who have been so often approved for Man∣hood, in Peace and War, wherewith I have so often defended my self, and offended my Foes; never had I more need then now; Help now, or I perish for ever: But alas, the Hands are so weak, and do so trem∣ble, that they cannot reach to the mouth a spoonfull of supping to relieve languishing Na∣ture.
Whilst The poor man lyeth in this misery, in comes all his wealth to give her master a visit; and in effect saith this to him: Thus far have I gone with thee, but farther I will not, I have nothing to do in another world: Now therefore master shift for your self; I will go seek me a new Master: Nay, saith his Master, I hope thou wilt not serve me so, now I have most need of thee; many a nights rest have I broken for thee. Wealth. The more fool thou Master, who bid thee do so, not God I am sure, but the Prince of the air, the God of this world. And there∣fore now to him thou must go or whither thou dost go I know not, nor care not; but farther to go with thee, I will not; for I will seek me a new Master. Master. Nay Wealth I pray thee say not so, that goeth to my very heart, go answer for me, or at least speak a good word for me. Wealth. Not I; nay, I am sure you shall answer for me and your self too; and to tell you the truth, I doubt the place is too hot for me where thou art go∣ing; Look, Look, here comes death; quivering in your lips, quaking in your joynts, staring in your eyes; I cannot endure the sight of him: oh draw the curtain, shift fot thy self Master, and I will shift for one. Master. Oh base vagrant, have I thus entertain∣ed thee like a Prince for this? Oh all ye people of the world, be warned by me, a dying man: Lay up Treasure in Heaven, improve thy Talent, redeem thy Time, and give Diligence to make thy Calling and Election sure: Oh how suddenly hath death stol∣len upon me, like the Sun, which the eye perceives not
to move, though it be most swift of motion. The God of Mercy hath utterly forsaken me, and the Devil who knows no mercy waites for me; my joyes in this life were gone before I could scarce enjoy them; my miseries are eternal, and never shall know end: Oh that I had spent the hours that I consumed in carding, dicing and other exercises, in reading the Scriptures, in hearing Sermons, and meditating thereon; in conferring with the Lords people, in weeping for my sins, in fasting, watching and praying, and beliveing; that I might have now departed in the assured hope of everlasting salvati∣on: Oh that I were now to begin my life again, how religious and purely would I lead my life! But now my glass is out, the Sun is set, the golden Scepter is taken in, once I had a reconcileable God, bowels of Mercy were not totally restrained, but Repentance might have enlarged them: The treasury door of Mercy and Grace was not lockt up, but Faith could have opened it, and the hour of Grace might have procured the oyl of Gladness; and there was still a blank in the leaf, for the sinners name to be put in upon coversion, but now every door of hope is shut and lockt up, and now is my case more miserable then the beast that perisheth in the ditch; for I must go to answer before the Judgement seat of the Righ∣teous judge of heaven and earth, where I shall have none to speak for me, and I cannot excuse my self; my own heart already condemns me, I must needs therefore be condemned before his Judgement seat: me thinks I hear that doleful sentence, Mat. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels: If I
should say Lord, If I must depart from thy blessed presence, then bles me before I go; Then he will answer me as in the text, Depart ye cursed; Lord if I must depart, and depart without a blessing, and with a curse; let me go into some good place: no saith the Lord in the same text, Depart ye cursed in∣to Hell fire; but Lord if I must depart, and depart curs∣ed, and be cast into Hell fire; Let me stay but a little while there: then the Lord will answer as in the same text, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire: But Lord saith the damned soul, if I must depart, and depart cursed into everlasting fire: Let me have good company there; no saith the Lord, Depart into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his An∣gels, These shall be thy companions: Oh horror to to think! Oh grief to consider! Oh cursed be the day wherein I was born, cursed be the man that shewed my Father, saying, a child is born unto thee. Cursed be the man, because he shew me not Oh that my mother might have been my grave: How is it that I came forth of the womb, to endure these hellish Sorrows, and that my daies should thus end with eternal shame! And thus he who made earth his Paradise; his bel∣ly his God; his lust, his Law; and so sowed vanity, now he reapeth misery: in his prosperity he neglect∣ed to serve God, in his adversity God refuseth to save him: and the Devil whom he served now, at at last pays him his wages; thus far of the miseries of the soul and body in Death, which is but cursed∣ness in part.
Of the sad Condition and Misery of all out of Christ after death. ANd here I shall not say much, but only give the Reader a tast of that state, and then speak at large to this thing, towards the close of this book, when we speak of the last Judgment and end of all things. Now the misery of the soul after death, is either particular or general: particular is that which liteth upon the soul immediately, as soon as she is separated from the body, she is said to stand before the throne of God, and so forthwith she is carried by the evil Angels with violence in∣to hell, where she is kept as in a prison, in everlasting pains and chains, under darkness unto the Judgement of the great day: but not in that extremity of Tor∣ments which she shal receive at the last day; there thy lascivious eyes shall be afflicted with sights of ghost∣ly spirits: Thy curious ears shall be affrighted with hi∣nous noyse of howling Devils, and the gnashing teeth of damned Reprobates: thy dainty nose shall be cloyed with noysom stench, thy delicate taste shall be pined with intolerable hunger, and thy drunken throat shall be parched with nnquenchable thirst, thy mind shall be tormented to think how foolishly thou hast lost heaven, and gotten hellish pains for mo∣mentary riches; thou hast lost the eternal treasure, and changed heavens felicity for hells fury; where thou shalt have punishment without pitty, misery without mercy, sorrow without succour, crying without comfort, mischief without measure, tor∣ment without ease, where the worm dyeth not,
and the fire is never quenched, where the wrath of God shall fall upon the soul and body, as the flame of fire doth on the Lump of pitch or brimstone, in which flame thou shalt ever be burning, and never consumed: ever dying, and never dead; ever roar∣ing in the pangs of death, and never rid of those pangs: this is the second death, which every damn∣ed Reprobate must suffer, so long as God and his Saints shall enjoy bliss and felicity in Heaven for evermore. Hitherto of the misery of man in the state of corruption: now followeth the means that eve∣ry one should use to escape this sad condition; that they may not go out as the snuff of a candle, but lay down their lives in peace; in assurance, or at least some hope of their salvation. A Preparation for death, that it may not come upon us before we are ready to dye. DEath having something to say to every man, in every state and condition: it is but reason that all should hearken to the message. Now he that desires to live sweetly, and die comfortably; let him observe these and the like Rules: First, there are six things to be considered: Secondly, there are seven things to be practised. First of the first, there are six things to be consi∣dered, viz. 1. The fewness of our years, moneths, weeks, and dayes. 2. The frailty of our Nature. 3. The Many dangers we every day pass through.
4. That death is no respecter of persons. 5. That death to the godly, is but a change of place, not of company. 6. Consider, that death to a Christian, is but a house, a bed, a sleep, a rest, &c. 1. The fewness of our years, moneths, weeks and dayes, here in this life, is swifter then a weavers shut∣tle, Job 7. 6. It is a shrub, a leaf, a reed, a rush, a grass, a smoak, a cloud, a wind, a water, a bub∣ble, a vapour, a shadow, a nothing, and so at our best estate altogether vanity, Psalm 39. 5. Isa. 64. 6. Psalm 102. 3. 2 Sam. 14. 14. Jam. 4. 14. 1 Chron. 29. 15. 2. Consider the frailty of our nature, Psal. 39. 4. Lord make me to know my end, and the measure of my dayes, what it is, that I may know how frail I am: such is the swiftness of mans dayes, and shortness of mans life, and frailty of his nature, that the swift∣est, shortest, and frailest things for the most part, that we read of, are not swift, frail and short enough to compare mans life unto; mans body is but a ma∣gazine, and hospital of diseases, and diseases are but the messengers or forerunners of death; when diseases are in the house, then death is at the thres∣hold; when sickness is in the chamber, death is at the window: our body is but a cottage of clay, and that so frail and crasie, as were it not once or twice every day daubed over, it would fall about our ears: wheresoever we go we are fain to drag this clod, this clay; whereas Angels, free from the shakles of flesh, can move from earth to heaven, and from heaven to earth, even as swift as can our thoughts. Oh that we were as low in heart as condition!
3. Consider the many dangers we every day pass through, 2 Cor. 11. 26. In perils of waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils amongst our friends and foes, in perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness, en∣ticed by Satan, allured by the world, deceived and cheated by our own heart. Oh how wilt thou do to lanch out into the Ocean! dost thou know what will become of thee in another world? is thy peace made with God? is thy person justified? art thou in a state of grace? art thou born again? art thou con∣verted, and become as a little child? hast thou re∣pented? doth thy righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees? if so, it is well; if not, thou shalt never enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3. 5. Matthew 18. 3. Luke 13. 5. Mat. 5. 20. 4. Let us consider, that death hath something to say to every one of us, he is no respecter of persons; sometimes he snatcheth away the babe newly born, sometimes the child, sometimes the young man, sometimes the middle age, and alwayes the old aged; he respects no mans person, be he rich or poor, high or low, strong or weak, beloved or hated, godly or ungodly, wherefore call thy self to account every evening, examine what evil hast thou hated this day? what vice hast thou stood against this day? in what part thou art bettered now then thou wast in the morning? Seneca reports of a heathen man that would every night ask himself these questions. I have heard of a heathen after his conversion, that was tempted to some sin, he thrust his finger into the fire, saying, sin soul if thou canst burn, and so over∣came the temptation.
5. Let us consider, that death to a godly man is but a change of place, not of company; we shall have the company of the same Father, Son and Spirit, and Saints, and all the spirits of just men made per∣fect: a believer in this world is not in his own place, therefore oh Christians, weigh anchor, hoise sail, and be gone: death to a Christian will put an end to all unprofitable things here we change joy for sorrow, health for sickness, strength for weakness, honour for dishonour, plenty for poverty, beauty for de∣formity, friends for foes, silver for brass, gold for copper, &c. now death puts an end to all these, Rev. 21. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death nor sorrow, nei∣ther shall there be any more pain, Rev. 14. 13. there∣fore blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: death also doth put a change to our employment, our em∣ployment in this world doth lye much in praying, groaning, sighing, mourning, wrestling, and fighting against the world, flesh and Devil, Ephes. 6. 10. But in the world to come, our employment will lye in praising and magnifying the Lord: Again, our enjoyment shall be changed, as well as our employ∣ment, we shall change our unconstant enjoyment for a more constant, 1 Thes. 4. 17, 18. We shall change our dark and obscure enjoyment, for a more bright enjoyment, 1 Cor. 13. 12. For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; here we receive grace for grace, there we shall receive glory for glory. 6. Consider unto what familiar things death is compared and presented, to one that is in Christ; sometimes it is termed a house, Job said, I know that
thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house of all living, Job 30. 23. Sometimes it is represented as going to bed, Isa. 57. 2. Sometimes death is stiled a sleep, Dan. 12. 2. What shall I say more, death to a wicked man is the king of terrors; but Christ came to deliver his flock from the fear of death, and the grave is embalmed by Jesus Christ, he lay there three dayes, &c. 2. As in our preparation for death, there are the foregoing things to be considered▪ so in the next place, there are some things to be practiced, and the work we have is two-fold. 1. Get a title to Gods love. 2. Get assurance that thou hast a title, which is, or may be done by improving these five things. 3. Improve the present opportunity, and put not off to the last minute as most do. 4. Store up a stock of faith, store up a stock of promises, and store up a stock of prayers against that day. 5. Endeavour so to live every day, as if it were thy last day. 6. Gather up all thy evidences and spiritual ex∣periences, and keep them in mind and heart. 7. Make thy will in time of health, and leave all things clear upon thy book, both in shop and conscience. 1. In all thy gettings, be sure to get a title to Gods love, and then get assurance that thou hast a title; the first is done by action, the second is done by examination.
The action or actions are these. 1. GIve diligence to make thy calling and electi∣on sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and that a man may so do, shorten worldly business, and be mode∣rate in the use of worldly pleasures: so foolish are we, that whilst with much care and labour, we go about to make those things certain, which are most uncertain: we make those things uncertain which might be made most certain: he that hath two Irons in the fire at once, spoyls one whilst he at∣tends the other. See what care most have to make good their titles, to settle their inheritances upon their heirs: shall we not be as careful to settle our in∣terest to eternal glory? if we be quiet now, yet the Devil will find a time to try thy evidences for hea∣ven, and call our title into question; sickness and death are times of weakness to us, wherin he like a subtile enemy, displayes all his art. O consider the misery of doubting persons at their death, think upon the anguish that their souls endure, they ap∣prehend God angry with them, the Devil accusing them, earth leaving them, heaven refusing them, hell claiming them, soul and body parting, friends weeping, and themselves hopeless, going they know not whither. O then, O then let us make our cal∣ling and election sure before hand: as worldly men get riches in health to cherish them in sickness, and as the Bees get hony in summer, to feed on in the win∣ter; even so should we in time of health get good grounds of assurance, that so we might live, enjoy,
and dye in peace, and rise in perfection, and raign in happiness. 2. Get assurance that thou hast a title, viz. make a curious, narrow, impartial, diligent search into thy own soul, and see what humility, what self∣denial, what sin-abhorrency, what love to Christ, what delight in his Ordinances, what zeal to Gods glory, what contempt of the world, what desires af∣ter the society of the Saints, what sympathizing with them in their afflictions▪ and if thou findest any im∣pressions of grace, any spiritual work, any saving savoury distinguishing operations upon thy heart, &c. canst thou mourn in secret for open and secret sins? dost thou deire to have sin purged, as well as pardoned? dost thou leave sin from a right principle to a right end, and so through the Spirit mortifie the deeds of the flesh? art thou willing to be searched by any Christian in any thing? dost thou approve thy heart to God in all thy duties and services? dost thou do what thou dost for God, at least in desire and endeavour to obey him freely, universally and constantly? then thou hast a title: for these are flowers of Paradise, that grow not in natures gar∣den: when thou comest to dye, God doth but take a flower out of the wilderness, and plant it in Para∣dise; or takes a rose out of the field, and puts it in his bosom: surely death to a Christian is but an un∣loading him of all his burdens, and freeing him from all his troubles, Rev. 21. 4. Rev. 14. 13. 3. If we would dye comfortably, let us improve the present opportunity; for we have a great deal of work to do, and but a little time to do it in; this work deferred will be still greater, the time
to do it in will be shorter, the strength to do it by will be less, our understanding will be more dark, our hearts more hard, our wils more crooked, our affections more disordered, our conscience more benummed: the work we have to do is as follow∣eth, viz. We have a God to honour, a Christ to rest on, a race to run, a crown to win, a hell to escape, a heaven to obtain: we have weak graces to strengthen, and strong corruptions to weaken, we have many temptations to withstand, and affli∣ctions to bare, we have many mercies to improve, and many services to perform. If Hester had not improved the present op∣portunity, she and her fathers house had been de∣stroyed. If Abigal had not improved the present op∣portunity, many a mans life had been cut off, 1 Sam. 25. 34. There was an opportunity that the children of Israel had to enter in the Land of Canaan, upon the return of the spies, but they not improv∣ing of it, were fain to stay longer in the wil∣derness. Jerusalem had an opportunity to be gathered to∣gether, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but for want of improving it, it was de∣stroyed. Let us now redeem the time, lest our candle∣stick be removed, Rev. 2. 5. Lest as Paul and Bar∣nabas said to the Jews, to you is the word of this sal∣vation sent, but seeing ye put it from you, lo we turn to the Gentiles, Act. 13. 46, &c. Yet the dayes of plenty are amongst us, let us with Joseph lay up in
store, lest we dye in the famine: yet the weather is calm, and the season fair, let us with Noah build up an Ark, lest with the rest we perish in the flood, Gen 7. 21. Yet the Angel▪ tarryeth at the gates of Sodom, let us with Lot depart thence, lest we be destroyed, Gen. 19. 24. Yet the bridegroom tar∣ryeth and waiteth, let us hast to enter in with him, lest with the foolish Virgins we be repelled, Mat. 25. 12. Yet wisdom cryeth in our streets, Oh then, now let us harken to her. Yet the Lord set∣teth open his storehouse of mercy, let us now turn to him for a blessing, lest coming too late with Esau, we find none, Heb. 12. 17. Yet the Lord knocketh at the door of our hearts, let us now open to him, lest he say to us as he did to Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42. Now it is hid from thee: yet the Lord waiteth for our return from Babylon, oh then let us now return whilst we have time, lest hereafter he say to us as the Angel sware, there shall be no more time, Rev. 10. 6. Yet the Lord is saying to us as in Prov. 1. 23. Turn ye at my reproof, behold I will pour out my spirit upon you, lest he say to us as in ver. 24. Because I called, and you refused, you shall call, and I will not hear you; yet the Lord is saying to us as to Nineveh, Jonah 3. 4, 5. yet forty dayes, and you shall be destroyed, let us repent as they did, lest we be destroyed indeed. 4. The next thing to be practiced of all that would live sweetly, and dye comfortably, is, first, store up a stock of faith. Secondly, store up a stock of promises. Thirdly, store up a stock of prayers, and thou shalt attain the art of dying well. 1. Store up a stock of faith, and that will shew
us that Christs death is a death concerning death, 1 Cor. 15. 56, 57, &c. Christ in his death put death to death. Again, faith will assure the dying party, that the Lord will be with him in the hour of death, Psalm 23. 4. Though I walk in the valley of death, I will fear none ill, &c. Again, faith will make a Christian willing to dye, Luke 2. 28, 29. Now let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. 2. Store up a stock of promises against that day; I will be with thee in the fire and in the water, saith the Lord in one promise, and in another promise he saith, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; the labour of the Olive may fail, our nearest and dearest friends may fail, our eyes may fail, our tongue may fail, our strength may fail, our flesh and heart may fail, our spirits may fail; yet saith the Lord, I will be with thee, I will not fail thee; see these precious Scriptures, Josh. 1. 5. Josh. 21. 45. and 23. 14. 1 King. 8. 56. 3. Store up a stock of prayers; amongst all thy requests to God, in all thy addresses to him, intreat him not to forsake thee at that time. 5. The fifth thing to be practiced, is to endeavour to live every day as thy last day, Psalm 90. The Pro∣phet speaks of death, ver. 10. see what follows, ver. 12. So teach me to number my dayes, that I may apply my heart to wisdom: a natural man considers of death notionally, their senses tell them that all must dye, but as for preparation for it, that they put off till the last year, and when that is come, to the last moneth, and when that is come, to the last week of that moneth, and when that is come, to the last
day of that week, and when that is come, to the last hour of that day, and when that is come, to the last minute of that hour, and so knock when the gate is shut, Mat. 25. 12. the gate of grace is shut, and the gate of mercy, and the gate of indulgence, and the gate of repentance, and the gate of hope, and the gate of comfort, &c. But let a Christian live every day as his last day, and make sure his interest in God, whilst God is reconcilable, and whilst his bowels of mercy are not totally restrained, and whilst the treasury door of mercy and grace is open, and whilst there is a blank in the leaf for the sinners name to be put in, before the glass is out, and the Sun set, and the golden scep∣ter taken in. 6. Gather up all thy evidences and spiritual expe∣riences, and keep them in thy heart and memory, and stand on thy guard, having put on all the ar∣mour of Christ; as a valiant souldier, constantly maintain war, and thou shalt usually obtain victory; resolve in the strength of Christ, either to conquer, or dye conquering; for let no man think to dance and dine with the Devil, and afterwards to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven. Let us therefore live in Christ, and not in our selves, for in our selves there is a body of lust, cor∣ruption and sin, and a Law accusing and condemn∣ing; but if we live by faith in Christ, and in the apprehension of his love, laying hold on the life, righteousness, obedience, satisfaction of him whom the pirit cals ours, saying, Christ is ours and we are Christs, and Christ is Gods; and thus a believer
is blessed only in a righteousness without, not with in; and all our assurance, confidence, and com∣forts are to flow in unto him, through a channel of faith, and not of works: by faith we ought to live above sin, infirmities, temptations, deserti∣ons, sense, reason, fears, doubts; it makes the yoke of Christ easie and sweet; it states the soul in the possession of heaven, whilst the body remains on earth: by faith we can cheefully part with, and suffer deprivation of the sweetest outward comforts and enjoyments, and welcome death, knowing that we do but exchange the worst place and things for better, the Lord Jesus having spoken peace to the soul, that he hath paid all▪ his debts for it, and that his sins shall be remembred no more; now the soul knows it is happy, and enjoys the comfort of it. 7. Make thy will in time of health, and leave all things clear upon both books, of shop and consci∣ence, that thou mayst have nothing to do but to dye, and to meditate upon, and to have faith in the pre∣cious promises, which speak of rest, joy, peace, and perfect happiness, which is provided for us in hea∣ven, firmly believing that God will after this life give us all those things with himself which he hath promised, as certainly as thou hast in thy will gi∣ven to thy relations such and such things for them to enjoy; and so exercise faith in the resurrection of thy body, 1 Thes. 4. 16. to have a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. 43, 44. to have a glorified body, Phil. 3. 21. to have fulness of knowledge, Ephes. 3. 18, 19. to have fulness of joy and pleasure, Psal. 16. 11. sch as shall be internal, pure, full, spiritual and
eternal, where no misery, hunger, cold, naked∣ness, pain, grief nor weariness, but rest without labour; in rest tranquility, in tranquility content, in contentment joy, in joy variety, in variety secu∣rity, in security eternity, &c. thus shalt thou that hast prepared for death aforehand, dye sweetly, whilst others that put off preparation to the last, O what a hurry be they in! Oh the anguish that their souls endure! they apprehending God angry with them, the Devil accusing them, earth leaving them, heaven refusing them, hell claiming them, soul and body par∣ting, friends weeping, and themselves hopeless, going they know not whither. But to a godly man, death is neither strange nor fearful unto him; not strange, because he dyed day∣ly; not fearful, because whilst he lived he was dead, and his life was hid with Christ in God; to dye then is nothing else, but to rest from our labours, and to go home to our fathers house, unto the Ci∣ty of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general assembly and Church of the first born, to God the Judge of all, and unto the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Te∣stament; whilst his body is sick, his mind is sound, for God maketh all his bed in his sickness, Psal 41. 3. and as his outward man decayeth, the inward man renewed day by day, when the speech of his tongue saltereth, the sighs of his heart speaks lowder unto God; when the sight of the eyes faileth, the Holy Ghost illuminates him inwardly, with abundance of spiritual light: sometimes he is saying with Paul, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23.
and with David, Psalm 42. 2. As the heart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee O God, when shall come and appear before him? come Lord Jesus, come quickly. So when the appointed time of his dissolution is come, knowing that he go∣eth to his father and redeemer in the peace of a good conscience, he saith, Lord now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, &c. and so surrenders up his soul, as it were with his own hands, into the hands of his hea∣venly Father, saying with David, Into thy hands, O Father I commend my soul, for thou hast redeemed me O Lord, thou God of truth; and so saying with Stephen, Act. 7. 59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Thus far of the preparation for death, with a taste of the sad condition of one dying out of Christ, and the sweet condition of a Christian dying, that is a member of Christ, that did prepare for death before it came. I had once intended here to have spoken to the sad condition of the ungodly after death, resur∣rection and last judgement, and also of the blessed condition of all that dye in the faith, after death, re∣surrection and last judgement, but that will not fallin order here; but towards the end of this book, when we come to speak of the resurrection of the body and last judgement, when Christ shall deliver up his Kingdom to his Father, and God shall be all in all. I shall proceed now to speak of the second coming of Christ in power and great glory, &c.
The great and terrible day of the Lord is near dawning, and the glory of all flesh staining, the Kingdom of Christ appearing, and the restitution of all things approaching; this great Mysterie opened, the grounds thereof examined, the truth cleared, and the ig∣norance of many in this Mysterie disco∣vered. THat very self-same Jesus which was born in Bethlem, and suffered at Calvary, even he shall come again, the same Jesus, not another, Act. 1. 11. shall so come again, as he was taken up, viz. Visibly, substantially, apparently to all; yea in the same manner: yea it is added, as you have seen him; that we might not allegorize the matter, we are kept to the very manner: now for the probation of this truth, we have 1. The testimony of all the Prophets. 2. We have the testimony of all the Apostles. 3. We have the testimony of Angels, all bearing witness to this truth. 1. We have the testimony of the Prophets, see Acts 3. 21. Whom the heavens must receive untill the time of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the the world began, but especially the Prophets since Samuel, ver. 24. yea, and all the Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these dayes.
I will instance in a few for all: First David, Psal. 62. 7. there he speaks of the continuance of Christs king∣dom, as long as the Sun and Moon endureth; then he speaks of the extent of this Kingdom, vers. 8. and that is from sea to sea; then he speaks who shall be the subjects of this kingdom, vers. 11. and that is some of all Nations; Isaiah likewise hath not only spoken of the incarnation, birth, life and doctrine, and death, resurrection and ascension of Christ, but also he hath prophesied of his second coming in pow∣er, to gather his spiritual kingdom, and of the extent, injoyment, glory and duration of that kingdom: See one place for all Isaiah 2. 2, 3, 4. Jeremiah also bares witness to the same truth, Jer. 30. 31, 32, 33. Eze∣kiel also hath spoken of this kingdom and reign of Christ, Ezek. 34. 11. Daniel hath spoken of this kingdom and raign of Christ, Daniel 2. 44, 45. Hosea bares witness to the same truth, Hos. 1. 10, 11. & 3. 4, 5. Amos also hath foretold of these things, Chap. 9. 11. to the end. Obadiah also speaks to the same truth, ver. 21. Micah speaks to the same, Chap. 4. 6, 7. Malachy speaks of his coming and kingdom, Chap. 3. 2. 2. We have the testimony of all the Apostles, speaking frequently of Christs second coming, in all the four Evangelists, and in almost all the Epistles to the several Churches, see Mat. 24. from 29. to the end; and Mark 13. from 24. to the end; and Luke 12. from 31. to the end; and Luke 21. from 25. to the end; and Joh. 14. 3. compared with Joh. 17. 24.
So in the Epistles it is called the appearing of the glory of the great God, Titus 2. 13. and it is set out with Angelical attendance, 2 Thes. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. See a farther testimony of this truth, 1 Thes. 1. 10. & Phil. 3. 20. 3. We have the testimony of Angels, Act. 1. 10, 11. and whilest that they looked stedfastly towards hea∣ven, as he went up, behold two Angels stood by them in white apparrell, which said, ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven; behold, if the testimony of the Prophets, yea all the Prophets, and the testimony of the Apostles be not enough, then here is the testimony of Angels, which is accounted stedfast, Heb. 2. 2. In a word, the second coming of Christ might be farther proved by the immutability of Gods decree, and infallibility of his promises, and impartiality of his justice, &c. but I meet with no sort of people denying this truth, except a few of those spoken of in the Gospel, saying, where is the promise of his coming? these people have renounced their reason, and made nonsense the mother of their devotion, & therefore their arguments are not worth the answering: but the great difficulty lieth amongst those men that do believe a second coming of Christ in power and great glory, and thesemen fall into these three ranks; the first saith that Christ shall come and reign personally on the earth a thousand years before the last judgement; a second sort stands up, and saith, he shall not reign personally, but spiritually a thou∣sand years in his Saints; a third sort steps in, and con∣tradicts the two former, saying there is neither per∣sonal
reign, nor spiritual reign to be looked for at Christs next coming, for he comes to judge the world, and so to put an end to all things here below, &c. let the reader consider, that it is with us now, a little before the second coming of Christ, as it was with the Jews and others, a little before the first coming of Christ; for it is apparent they were in three divisi∣ons, as we now are, as appears by their darkness in these three portions of Scripture that speaks of Christs first coming. One Scripture said Mich. 5. 2. thou Bethleem, out of thee shall come one to rule Israel. Another Scripture said Isaiah 9. 2, 6. the land of Zebulon and Nepthaly, the people which were in darkness have seen a great light, ver. 6. for unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, &c. A third Scripture, Hos. 11. 1. we read these words, out of Egypt have I called my Son, now in these three Scriptures the Prophets did seem to vary in their pro∣phecies, and the people after, about the coming of Christ in flesh, differing as to the place where, or in which of these three Christ should be born; this dif∣ference of theirs begat this great question in Court, Mat. 2. 4. Herod gathered together all the chief Priests and Scribes, and demanded of them where Christ should be born, and they said unto him, in Bethleem, &c. Now the thing that I would have the reader to take special notice of, is this, that these three Scriptures were fulfilled at the coming of Christ, one after another, for he was born in Bethleem, called out of Egypt, and came to the land of Zebulon, and there preached, and the people that sate in darkness saw a great light, &c. and why may
not all these three things fall in together, at the se∣cond coming of Christ in power, (to wit) a perso∣sonal coming, a spiritual reign, and all the time of the reign, a judging of the world: let not us make those things inconsistent, which may be consistent, in a sense, warily understood; this I am sure, whilst we are contending what Christ shall do when he comes, that we let slip our precious time, and not so prepare as we ought for his coming. Oh what a state are things in, here every one tug∣ing for his interest! (O Lord put in for thine too) do thou gain, and let all sit down with loss, whose gain lies not in thine; cozen all creatures by bring∣ing about a swifter, a fuller, a more universal happi∣ness, by the appearance of our Lord Christ, then ever heart could imagine. Let the reader consider these eleven things. 1. There shall be a coming of Christ in power and great glory. 2. That day is very near. 3. The manner of his coming. 4. The signs of his coming. 5. He shall come visibly. 6. The posture a Christian should be in at his coming. 7. It is the duty of all to wait for his coming. 8. The benefits that a Christian shall have at his coming. 9. The consideration of his coming should cause us to live here above our contents and discon∣tents. 10. The sad condition of all out of Christ at his coming. 11. He shall come terribly.
1. There shall be a coming of Christ in power and great glory, which we have proved before by the testimony of all the Prophets and Apostles, and some of the Angels; we have proved this truth further by the immutablity of Gods decree, and by the infal∣libility of his promises, and by the impartiality of his justice, &c. by all which it doth appear most certain that Christ will come, Psalm 50. 3. Luke 21. 27. Mat. 25. 31. Mat. 24. 30. Jude 14, 15. 2 Cor 5. 10. 2 Pet. 3. 2. That day is very near, although no man knows the time of Christs coming exactly, in respect of the day and hour: yet there are signs set down by Christ and his Apostles, shewing that that day is not far off; and further, it doth plainly appear it is near, yea very near, by these demonstrations. 1. By the fulfilling of prophesies. 2. By the appearances of providences. 1. By the fulfilling of prophesies, viz. We have seen the Father against the son, and the son against the father, and the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother, wars, and rumors of wars, and a great falling away, and perillous times, as earth-quakes, many false prophets and Doctrine▪ of Devils, and some coming in the name of Christ, saying, I am he, the unbelief that is in most, and that state of security, and falling from the truth once professed, and the revealing of the man of sin, 2 Thess. 2. 1, 2. These and the like are clear testimonies that the day of the Lord is at hand. 2. This day is near, as appears by the appea∣rance of providences, as it was in the dayes of Noah,
and as it fell out in the dayes Lot, &c. 1 Thes. 5. 3. When they shall say peace and safety, then suddain de∣struction cometh upon them, 2 Tim. 3. 1, 5. This know, that in the last dayes, perillous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boa∣sters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, un∣thankful, unholy, without natural affection, truth∣breakers, false accusers, fierce, despisers of those that are good, &c. Surely these things do now abound, by which we know the day is near; the Lord hath promised to avenge his people speedily, Luk. 18. 5. Zeph. 1. 14. The great day of the Lord is near, is near, Isa. 13. 6. Howl ye, for the great day of the Lord is at hand, Joel 1. 15. For the day of the Lord is at hand, Joel 2. 1. For the day of the Lord is come, for it is nigh at hand, Heb. 10. 37. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Object. But that day and hour knoweth no man. Answ. Men may guess at the time, and not miss much for all that; for instance, did not Moses through faith see the redemption of the first captivity? Da∣niel of the second, and Abraham the day of Christ, and the spouse her beloved coming skiping upon the mountains, and a few in Israel were found waiting for their redemption: doth not the foot-steps of Christs coming begin to appear?
The manner of his coming. THe Lord Jesus will certainly and surely, like a Soveraign, like a King in Majesty, triumph∣ing in much glory, attended with the Arch-Angel, and all the host of heaven, the trumpet will be sounding, the world burning, the earth shaking, mens hearts failing, Psal. 46. 6. And then the Lord will roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and earth shall shake, Joel 3. 16. A fire stream came forth from before him, thousands mini∣stred unto him. Dan. 7. 10. And ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: this day of the Lord is great and terrible, who can abide it? the sight of Christs presence shall be doubtless an incredible brightness and majesty, in which he shall appear, for he shall come in the clouds of heaven, Mat. 26. 64. with incredible glory, Mat. 25. 31. accompanied with the whole Army of his Angels, as before, and with a great shout and voice of the Arch-Angel, 1 Thes. 4. 16. And by reason of his brightness, the Sun and the Moon shall be darkned, as lesser lights by the grea∣ter, and stars shall fall from heaven, that is, they shall seem as it were, to fall, and the powers of hea∣ven shall be shaken, Mat. 24. 29. Mat. 13. 24. Yea at his sight heaven and earth shall fly away, Rev. 20. 11. There shall not be a destruction of the nature of the Sun, Moon and Stars, as some say, for the Scrip∣ture doth speak of a new heaven, and new earth; old renewed: and so at Christs second coming he shall
renew all things. See Ezek. 32. 6, 7. Act. 3. Rom. 8. he shall come in the glory of his Father, Mat. 16. 27. with power and great glory, Mat. 24. 30. the glory of a thousand Suns made into one, will be but as sackcloth to that wherein Christ shall appear in mans nature; the wicked shall be punished with everlasting destruction from his presence, and the glory of his power, 2 Thes. 1. 9. and when his glory shall be revealed, the Saints shall be glad with exceed∣ing joy, 1 Pet. 4. 13. The signs of Christs coming. ALthough no man knows the time of Christs com∣ing exactly in respect of the day and hour, yet there are signs set down by Christ and his Apo∣stles, shewing that that day is not far off: what ex∣tream security and impiety, false prophesie, false Christs, pestilence, famine, earth-quakes, treache∣ries, want of faith and charity, have not these things already abounded? Mat. 24. 32, 33. When ye see these things, the end is near, 1 Thes. 5. 1, 2, Concern∣ing the times and seasons, brethren, it is not needfull that I write unto you, for you your selves know well that that day of the Lord will come as a thief in th night: therefore learn a parable of the fig-tree, when its branch is yet tender and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh, so likewise ye when ye shall see all these things come to pass, know that it is near, evn at the door.
Christ shall come visibly. VVE read Mat. 24. 64. hereafter shall you see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven with power, and great glory, Rev. 1. 7. Behold he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him; the damned shall see him to their amazement, and the godly shall him to their joy and consolation, Rev. 22. 4. They shall see his face, and his name shall be in their forheads, Acts 1. 11. This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven, that is, Christ go∣ing up into heaven was visible; so Christs com∣ing out of heaven, shall be visible, Matthew 26. 64. The posture a Christian should be in at his com∣ing. BE ye also ready, for in such an hour as you think not the Son of man cometh, hold out faith and patience but a little, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Mat. 24. 44. Luke 12. 35 Let your loyns be girt about, and your lamps burning, and you your selves looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 13. Be ye there∣fore ready, for the son of man cometh in an hour when ye think not, Luke 12. 40. Mark 13. 35, 36. there∣fore let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch
and be sober, then shall ye break forth and say, when ye see him coming, as in Isa. 25. 9. This is our God, we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoyce in his salvation, Heb. 10. 35. Let us not forsake the assembling of our selves together, as the man∣ner of some is, but exhort one another, and so much the rather, as we see the day approach∣ing. It is the duty of all to watch and pray for his coming. Luke 21. 36. WAtch ye therefore and pray al∣wayes, that ye may be account∣ed worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Wherefore gird up the loyns of your minds, be sober and hope to the end, for the grace that shall be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ, Luk. 12 37, 38 Blessed are those servants, when the Lord cometh shall find so doing, 2 Thes. 3. 5. Now the Lord direct our hearts into the love of God, and into the pa∣tient waiting for Christ, Rev. 22. 20. He that testi∣fieth these things, saith, surely I come quickly. Let us all say, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.
Of some of the benefits a Christian shall have at his coming. THE day is at hand, O perplexed soul, when thou shalt have smiles without frowns, light without darkness▪ day without night, wine without water, sweet without bitter, and joy without sorrow; thou now sowest in tears, thou shalt then reap in joy, yea everlasting joy shall be upon thy head, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away; the blessings to be enjoyed at this great day, are truly great, we should love the appearance of Christ, and look for, and haste to the coming of the day of God. O why is his Chariot so long in coming! Oh that the day should be so great, and our desires so small! Shall the Marriner desire his Port? the Apprentice his freedom? the imprisoned his liberty? the sick his health? the Spouse the day of her marriage? a malefactor his pardon? a labourer his rest? an heir his inheritance? and shall not a Christian long for that day which removes every sorrow, supplies every want, and makes us like him? viz. 1. From being a weak body, we shall be made strong, 1 Cor. 15. 44. 2. From being a mortal body, it shall be made spi∣ritual, 1 Cor. 15. 53. 3. It shall be free from all pain, and suffering, and sorrow, and sighing, Rev. 21. 4. 4. Our lumpish body shall be like the An∣gels, even like Christs body, Mat. 22. 30. 5. This blessed change will put an end to all un∣profitable changes; here we change joy for sorrow,
health for sickness, credit for disgrace, but here it will end, Rev. 21. 4. 6. Christ will put a change to our employment; our work at present is praying, groaning, sighing, mourning, wrestling, and fighting, Ephesians 6. 10. But then our work will be rejoycing and praysing. 7. Christ will change our enjoyment as well as our employment, viz. he will change our more inconstant enjoyment for a more constant, and he will change our more dark and obscure enjoyment, for a more clear enjoyment, and so turn our sighing into singing, and our trembling into re∣joycing, and our prison into a Paradise, and so qui∣et our conscience, and scatter our fears. 8. He will make his people the head and not the tail, as doth at large appear by these Scriptures, Isa. 62. 8, 9. Joel 2. 23, 24. Mich. 4. 4. Amos 9. 13, 14. Zach. 8. 12. Isa. 41. 18, 19. Jer. 31. 12. Isa. 30. 23. Isa. 55. 13. & 66. 6, 7. & 65. 21, 22. & 61. 4. & 60. 10. when he shall appear, we shall receive a crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. and if that be too little, we shall receive a crown of righteousness, 2 Tim. 4. 8. when he shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3. 4. when he shall appear, we shall be like him, 1 John 3. 2.
The consideration of his coming should cause us to live upon him. PAul a servant of Jesus Christ, commands us by vertue of a commission received from God, to follow him, as he followed Christ, viz. He did often speak of his departure, and of his preparation thereunto, and so whilst he was here, he lived out of himself, upon Christ, in the Spirit, unto God, above the world; yet under Ordinan∣ces, looking unto election behind, and perfecti∣on before; so that when death comes to summon him to appear before the Lord, by laying down his body in the grave, he was ready, and there∣fore brake forth and said, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me, at that day, and not to me only, but unto them also that love his ap∣pearing.
Of the sad condition of all out of Christ at his coming. 1. IN what a sad condition will all be that are not born again? Joh. 3. 3, 5. 2. In what a sad condition will all be that want faith? Joh. 3. 36. 3. In what a sad condition will those be that want humility? God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. 4. In what a sad condition will those be in that want holiness? Heb. 12. 14. 5. In what a sad condition be all those that want meekness? with the froward he will shew himself fro∣ward, &c. 6. In what a sad condition will all those be that do not know the Lord? 2 Thes. 1. 8. 7. In what a sad condition will all those be that want the wedding garment? Matthew 22. 11, 12, 13. 8. In what a sad condition will all those be that have no oyl in their lamps? Mat. 25. 3. 9. In what a sad condition will all those be that have the form and not the power? 2 Tim. 3. 5. 10. In what a sad condition will those be that have built upon the sand? Mat. 7. 26, 27. 11. In what a sad condition will all be that are pro∣fessors, and not possessors? Joh. 5. 38. 12. In what a sad condition be all those that would not have Christ to reign over them? Luke 19. 27.
In a word, Christ will save no ignorant person, no rebellious person, no hypocrite, no scoffer, no persecutor, no man that hath built upon the sand, no man that hath leves without fruit, no man that doth seek salvation by any other way then by Christ, 1 Cor 6. 9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighte∣ous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not de∣ceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adul∣terers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the King∣dom of God, &c. All the secret sins that now lye hid, shall then be made known, Luke 18. 17. and 12. 2. there is no∣thing covered that shall not then be revealed, 1 Cor. 4. 5. He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, Matthew 24. 30. Then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and mens hearts fail for fear, and for looking after those things that are coming on the earth, Joel 3. 16. the Lord also shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from Jeru∣salem, and the heavens and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his people.
Christ shall come terribly, and yet season∣ably. THe day of the Lord is great and terrible, who can abide it? Joel 2. 11. There hath not been ever the like, neither shall there be, Joel 2. 2. there shall be a time of trouble, such as ne∣ver was since the creation, Dan. 12. 1. Then shall be great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning to this day, Matthew 24. 21, 22. A fire stream shall come forth before him, and ten thousands shall be ministring unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand shall stand before him, and the judge∣ment shall be set, and the books opened, See Dan. 7. 10. Jude 14. Yet this coming will be seasonable to all that have an interest in him, and did look for him, and hasten to his coming, and love his appearing, for now they shall be like him, 1 John 3. 2. Isa. 25. 9. and Isa. 2. 3, 4. Rev. 21. 4.
There be four things that Christ hath already done for his flock, and five things he is now doing, and six things more he will finish when he comes. THere are four things that he hath already done, viz. 1. He hath taken our nature upon him, Heb. 2. 16. 2. He hath taken our sins upon him, Isaiah 53. 6. 3. He hath taken the curse due to us, upon himsef, Gal. 3. 13. 4. He hath fully satisfied Divine justice for us, Isa. 53. 11. Then there are five things that he is now doing for us, viz. 1. He is at the right hand of the Father, making interceslion for us, Heb. 7. 25. 2. He is teaching us as a Prophet, and preserving us as a King, and healing us as a Physitian, and feeding us as a Shepheard, &c. 3. He is preparing for the destroying of Anti∣christ, 2 Thes. 2. 8. 4. He is making good his promise, in pouring out his Spirit. 5. He is turning our disunion into union, Zeph. 3. 9. Then there be six things more that he will do for us when he comes.
1. He will unvail himself, and every eye shall see him, Rev. 1. 7. 2. He will gather his spiritual Kingdom, Psal. 50. 5. 3. He will establish his Kingdom on the top of all kingdoms, Isa. 2. 2. 4. He will restore our judges as at the first, and counsellors as at the beginning, Isa. 1. 26 5. He will make his enemies his footstool, Psalm 110. 1. 6. He will make his people the head and not the tail, Deut. 28. 13. Dan. 7. 27. Many more things hath Christ done for us, many more he is doing, and many more will he do when he comes. Let the reader take notice these that I have named are but a taste. Of the resurrection of the dead, at the second com∣ing of Christ. THough the resurrection of the dead is above nature, and mans corrupt reason, yet it is nei∣ther against nature, noragainst right reason; the Scrip∣ture proves the resurrection of the dead by many testimonies, examples, types and reasons, &c. 1. The resurrection is proved by testimonies, Job 19. 25, 26. Dan. 12. 2. Hos. 13. 14. Mat. 22. 31. and 27. 52. John 5. 28, 29. Phil. 3. 21. 1 Thes. 4. 2. By example of those that were raised, 1 King. 17. 22. 2 King. 4. 34. 2 King. 13. 21. Matthew 9. 25. and 27. 52, 53. Luke 7. 14.
John 11. 11. Acts. 9. 40. and 20. 10. 3. By types, as Aarons rod budding, Numb. 17. Of the Jews returning from Babylon, Ezek. 37. but chiefly of Enoch and Elias, Gen. 5. and 2. Kin. 2. 4. This resurrection is also proved by reasons, drawn first from the Covenant of God, which is not broken by death, Mat. 22. 30. But the chief reason is drawn from Christ, who is not only the type and example of our resurrection, but the beginning also thereof: For the Life of the body (the Church) is from the head. There is a first and a second Resurrection. 1. THe first Resurrection, as most do affirm, is a Resurrection from the death of sin, to the Life of Righteousness: this is a Revocation from a state of death to a state of Life. 2. There is a resurrection of the same body that man had in this life, Iob 19. 26. The form of this resurrection consisteth in the re-union of body and soul, and restoring of the ded to Life, and in the suddain change of those that remain upon the earth at his coming, &c. This resurrection is either of the godly or of the wicked. There is a Resurrection to Life, and another to condemnation, John 5. 29. 1. Of the godly, they shall be first raised, and then freed; not only from corruption, and bodily defects, but shall be crowned also with Glory, 1 Thess. 4. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Arch-Angel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ
shall rise first: Agreeable to this Text is that in Rev. 20. 4, 5. I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, which had not worshipped the beast nor his Image, nei∣ther had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and raigned with Christ a thousand years. Ver. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not again, untill the thousand years were finished, this is the first resurrection, blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection, on such the second Death hath no power: the Apostle Paul speaks to the same thing: 1 Cor. 15. 23. But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterwards they that are Christs at his Coming. 1 Thess. 4. 14. For if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. It is sown in corruption, it is raysed in incorruption; it is sown in dishonour, it is rais∣ed in Glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in pow∣er; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; ver. 49. As we have born the Image of the earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the Heaven∣ly Adam. The bodies of the Elect being thus first raised, they shall have most excellent and superna∣tural qualities. I will instance in four. 1. As before they shall be raised in power, whereby they shall be freed from all wants and weakness, and enabled to continue without the use of meat and drink, sleep and other former helps. 2. They shall be raised as before in incorruption, whereby they shall never be subject to any manner of imperfection, blemish, sickness, or death. 3. In Glory, whereby their bodies shall shine as
bright as the Sun in the firmament: Three glimpses of which Glory were seen; first, in Moses face: secondly in the transfiguration: thirdly in Stephens countenance. Three instances and assurances of the Glorificati∣on of our bodies at that glorious day, see Exod. 34. 27. Mat. 17. 2, 3, 4. Acts 6. 15. 4. In agility, whereby our bodies shall be like Angels, free from these shakles of clay, and so move from heaven to earth, and from earth to hea∣ven, even as swiftly as can our very thoughts: they shall, saith the Prophet, renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Aeagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shal walk and not faint. Now if any ask how long it shall be after this first resurre∣ction, before the rest of the dead shall rise? then I ans∣wer, we find it recorded Rev. 20. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not untill the thousand years were finish∣ed: I dare not expound this text for want of Light. Now as we read of a first and second resurrection, so we read of a first and last Judgement, or of a par∣ticular and general Judgement. Viz. Every man in particular appears before the Judgement af∣ter the hour of his death, Heb. 9▪ 27. But fully and generally upon all men after the second coming of Christ, Act. 17. 31. The death of every one several∣ly goeth immediately before the particular Judge∣ment; so the general resurrection of all goeth be∣fore the final judgement which shall be at the last day, but there shall be a great distance of time be∣tween the resurrection of the Elect and the repro∣bate. So there shall be a great difference between the resurrection of the one and of the other, &c. Viz.
1. The Elect shall be raised as members of the body of Christ, by vertue derived from his resurre∣ction; the reprobate as malefactors, shall be brought forth of the prison of the grave, by vertue of the Justice of God. 2. The Elect shall come forth to everlasting life, which is called the resurrection of life: The reprobate to shame and perpetual contempt, called the resur∣rection of Condemnation. 3. The bodies of the Elect shall be spiritual, that is, glorious, powerful, nimble, Phil. 3. 21. But the bodies of the Reprobates shall be full of un∣comeliness and horror, and lyable to extream torment. Of the Reign of Christ, or kidgdom of Christ in this world, though not of this world. AS to this point I cannot write as to the former, but under correction, and with submission to better Judgements; (I crave leave to present mine) and then let me tell the Reader, I have seriously read once, and again over and over all that I have heard of and met with both for the personal Reign, and also against the personal Reign of Christ, and searched the Scriptures, and debated and reasoned with Christians many times for many moneths, and I cannot, yea, I dare not positively affirm any such thing; nor totally in any sense (warily understood) deny it. For the Scriptures seem to point at such a thing, although I do not find it so fully confirmed, as many people of note pretend it doth; so then al∣though
I dare not say the Kingdom of Christ is of this world; yet I dare not deny but his Kingdom in a sense may be in this world: Though I cannot af∣firm that he shall Reign personally on earth a thou∣sand years, yet I have some ground to affirm, that he shall Reign spiritually, ad have a spiritual King∣dom for a season; or else what means that Scripture? Rev. 11. 15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying the King∣doms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign. Doth not this Scripture point to the same thing? Dan. 7. 27. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the great∣ness of the Kingdom under the whole Heavens shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high, and all Nations shall serve and obey them. Doth not the Prophet Isaiah speak to the same thing? Isal. 2. 2, 3. And it shall come to pass in the last daies, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hils; and all Nations shall flow unto it, for out of Si∣on shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isai. 1. 26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counsellors as at the be∣ginning. Jer. 3. 15. And I will give you Pastors ac∣cording to mine heart, which shall feed you with know∣ledge and understanding: Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the Light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be seven-fold, Isai. 11. 6. Then shall the Wolf dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, &c. Vers. 7. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed their young, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. ver. 9. They shall not hurt nor
destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Jer. 32. 39. And I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, Zech. 14. 9. Then the Lord shall be one, and his name one. Zeph. 3. 9. For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the Lord to serve him with one consent. Act. 3. 19. Is not this the times of re∣freshing that shall from the presence of the Lord? Acts 3. 21. Is not this the time of restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world began? Compare this with Acts 19. 21. and Rom. 8. 19, 20, 21, 22. Shall not the Jews be converted and imbrace the Gospel, and the fulness of the Gentiles come in? Rom. 11. 12. Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles: How much more their fulness? ver. 15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world: What shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? ver. 26. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, there shall come out of Sion the Deliverer▪ and he shall turn away ungod∣liness from Jacob, Isa. 35. 6, 7. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing, for in the wilderness shall waters break forth, and streams in the desart, and the parched ground shall be∣come a pool and the thirsty land springs of water, Deut. 28. 13. Dan. 7. 27. Then the Lord shall make his people the head and not the tail. Zeph. 3. 19, 20. Be∣hold at that time, I will undo all that afflict thee, and will save her that halteth, and will get them a praise and a fame in every land, where they have been put to
shame, for I will make you a name and a praise unto all people of the earth, when I turn back your captivi∣ty before your eyes, saith the Lord. Hold out faith and patience but a little, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, but bring his Reward with him; and so bring about a swifter, a fuller, and a more universal happiness then any could imagine. Before Sion travelled she brought forth: and at even-tide it shall be Light, Zach. 14. 6. Oh who would but Love the appearing of Christ in spirit, and look for, and hasten to the coming of this day of Restitution! Let our note become: O why are his chariots so long in coming? the sweeter the enjoyment, the stronger should be the desires: Oh that the day should be so great, and our desires so small! the spouse doth desire the day of her mar∣riage, the prisoner his liberty, the malefactor his pardon, the Labourer his rest, and Heir his inheri∣tance, an Apprentice his freedom, the Marriner his port, and shall not we live in a continual expecta∣tion of that day, which removes every sorrow, and supplies with every comfort? In a word, this day will be a clearing from all undue imputations. Now a Christian is sometimes called Dissembler, Anabap∣tist, Separate, Hyppocrite, and what not? But he may say when Christ doth appear, his Innocency shall appear too; all slanders and defamations shall fall off from the Saints, and their very enemies shall be fain to confess, that these people whom they have hated, are those whom the Lord hath bles∣sed, &c. The blessedness of this state doth con∣sist in these and the like things. 1. A clear Apprehension of God reconciled
to us in Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 19. Col. 1. 20, 21. 2. A clear apprehension of our selves, cloath∣ed with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 28. 3. A clear apprehension that all sin is forgiven, Isai. 53. 6 1 Pet. 2. 24. 4. A clear apprehension of our Consciences being purged in the blood of Christ, Hebrews 9. 14. 5. A clear apprehension of the Law, perfectly by Christ fulfilled for us, Rom. 10. 4. 6. A clear apprehension of that real, close, spi∣ritual, glorious and inseparable Union that there is between Christ and our souls. 7. A clear apprehension of that saving testimony of the Spirit of God, ratifying and testifying all this in the soul. We find that the Apostles themselves, and also Churches with whom they walked, made use of these benefits and priviledges that they should have at Christs next coming, to bear up their spirits un∣der their sufferings here, viz. 1 Pet. 1. 13. Where∣fore gird up the loyns of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end, for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. James 5. 8. Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. Heb. 9. 28. Ʋnto them that look for him, he shall appear the second time without sin unto sal∣vation, 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, Now we are the Sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, Rev. 22. 20. He which testifieth these things, saith surely I come quickly. (Let us all say with the Church) Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. The divers expressions in Scripture concerning the coming of Christ, which set him forth as com∣ing in various Dresses, Viz. Sometimes as a Bridegroom, sometimes in Fire, sometimes as a Warriour, sometimes as a Judge; are not to be understood of divers Comings, but one and the same coming in divers Respects; as to his people, he comes as a Bridgroom, when in respect of the wicked, he comes in fire, and as a Judge. I shall close up this point with two Scrip∣tures, Isaiah 61. 5, 6. And strangers shall stand and feed your Flocks, and the sons of the Ali∣an shall be your Plough men, and your Vine∣dressers. But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord, men shall call you the Ministers of our God. Chap. 14. 2. They shall take them captive, whose cap∣tives they were, and they shall rule over their oppres∣sors, &c.
Of the last judgement, the signs that go before it, what is meant by it, the place where, the person who, the time how long the judgement shall last, out of what we shall be judged, this day shall be a great Day. 1. Of the Signs that go before the last judge∣ment. THE signs foretokening the last judgement are certain nottable changes in the world, in Church and State, some farther off, some nearer unto the coming of the great judge. 1. The publishing and the sound of the Gospel throughout the whole world. 2. The Apostacy of many professors, losing their first love, and drawing back, &c. 3. The revealing of Antichrist, that man of sin and child of perdition, 2 Thes. 2. 8. 4. Common corruptions in manners, joyned with security, as in the dayes of Noah and Lot. 5. Wars, commotions and troubles both in the world, and in the Church of Christ. 6. False Christs attended with false Prophets, and armed with false miracles. 7. The calling of the Jews into the faith of the Gospel. 8. Signs in heaven, earth and all the elements, 2 Pet. 3. 7. Mat. 24. 30.
What is meant by judgement. BY Judgement is meant the pronouncing and ex∣ecuting of the irrevocable sentence of absolution or condemnation, in which the Godly shall be judged one way, and the wicked another way; for the first shall be Judged, but not condemned; the lat∣ter shall be judged and condemned. Of the place where the Lord will judge the world. THE place where the Lord Christ shall sit in Judgement, is verily thought to be in the air, over the Vally of Jehosaphat, by mount Olive, near to Jerusalem, Eastward from the temple, 1 Thes. 4. 17. this might be confirmed by these reasons. 1. Because we find some ground in the word of God for this, Joel 3. 2. and ver. 11. compared with Zech. 14, 4, 5. 2▪ Because as Christ was there abouts crucified and put to open shame, so over that place his glori∣ous throne shall be erected, when he shall appear in judgement to judge the world in righteousness, where he himself was unjustly judged and con∣demned. 3. Because that the Angels shall be sent to gather together the elect from the four winds, from one end of the earth to the other; it is most probable that the place where they shall be gathered together shall be near Jerusalem, which is the center of the earth as may be proved.
4. Because the Angels told the disciples, that as they saw Christ ascend from Mount Olivet, which is by the valley of Jehosaphat, so shall he in like manner come down from heaven: but I think it not safe, rashly to define where the place of the last judgement shall be. Of the Person who it is that shall judge the world. THE chief power of judicature shall be in Christ, for to him all power is given, and from whom no appeal can be made to any superiour. This judge shall be visible to all, both in respect of brightness and majesty in which he shall appear, but so that his sight shall be terrible to the wicked, but joyfull to the Godly, Acts 17. 31. He hath appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained, whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead; and both reprobate and elect shall hear the sentence of the judge, to the one it shall be full of horror, to the other full of comfort, Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed, vers. 41. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, now where as many texts of Scripture say, the Saints shall judge the world, that is to be understood, that they shall approve of Christs sentence, and praise the wisdom and justice of God therein.
Of the time how long the Judgement shall last. VVE read in the Scripture that the time is a day; but there are three opinions among Christians about this word day. 1. Some take the day here spoken of precisely and properly, as if the day of the last judgement should not exceed that space and proportion of time. 2. Some conceive that by the day is meant a thou∣sand years, because some are said to sit on thrones, and have judgement given unto them, that is power of Judging, and to live and reign with Christ a thou∣sand years, Rev. 20. 4. but I conceive that this judge∣ment and reign of a thousand years cannot be under∣stood of the last Judgement, because death the last enemy shall in the resurrection be destroyed; now after the end of the thousand years mentio∣ned by Saint John, Satan shall be loosed out of the prison, and the nations deceived by him, shall compass the camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City; and fire shall come down from God out of heaven and devour them all. 3. Others seem more safely to apprehend that the day here mentioned is to be taken improperly, for time indefinitely, it being in Scripture very ordinary to put a day for time: in an acceptable time have I heard thee, in a day of Salvation have I helped thee, Isa. 49. 8. If thou hadst known in this thy day, Luke 19. 42. Your Father Abraham rejoyced to see my day, John 8. 56, &c. there must be a day wherein that great work of judgement must begin, but the durati∣on thereof is to be measured by the nature of the
thing and the counsel of God; so I can determine no∣thing peremptorily concerning the continuance of the last judgement. By what, or out of what we shall be judged. AND the books were opened, and theRevel. 20. 12. dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books according to their works, &c. by those books are meant partly Gods omniscience, and partly mans conscience; God to whom all things are naked and open, needs no books to help his memory as man doth; yet we read, that he hath two books, the one is called the book of life, the other of knowledge of the first there; are four kinds: the first is of predestination to life eternall, and in this book some are so written, that they cannot be blotted out; others are written, but in appearance and hope: many hope their names are recorded in heaven, but when they fall from this hope, then they may be said to be blotted out of this book, this is the book of life eternal. Secondly, there is a book of life temporary, which is; nothing else but the condition and state of this life; out of this book did Moses, David, and Paul wish themselves to be blotted out: The third book of life is the Scripture, as containing those precepts and means by which we may obtain life eternal: The fourth book of life is our conscience, informing us of all the good and bad actions of our life. This book is opened sometimes in this life, but shall be laid open to us in the last day: The other book we read of, is of knowledge, which is threesold, viz.
1. The book of Gods general knowledge, whereby he takes notice of all men, whether they be good or bad; of this every man may say with Da∣vid, Psal. 139. 16. in thy book are all my members written, &c. 2. The book of Gods particular knowledge, of this see Psalm 1. the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, and 2 Tim. 2. the Lord knoweth who are his; this is the knowledge of approbation: in this book they are not written, to whom Christ will say at the last day, depart from me, &c. of this Da∣vid speaketh, Psalm 69. 28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous. 3. The third book of knowledge is that wherein the actions of wicked men are recorded, and which shall be laid open to them, Deut. 7. 10. Judgement was set, and the books where opened, &c. The day of judgement shall be a great Day. THIS day shall be a great day; first in respect of the judge, attended with a great number of Saints and Angels, even all his Servants waiting upon him, 1 Thes. 1. 13. Secondly this day shall be great in respect of the judged, as they fall under a four-fold consideration. 1. In respect of the greatness of their company and number. 2. In respect of the greatness of their ranks and dergees. 3. The greatness of their faults and offences. 4. In respect of the greatness of their rewards and recompences.
1. In respect of the greatness of their number, Matthew 25. 32. and 2 Thes. 2. 1. We must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body. 2. The day shall be great in respect of the great∣ness of their ranks and degrees; the high and migh∣ty Emperors, as well as the poorest out-casts; the tallest Cedar, as well as the stoutest heart, must bend and break at that day, Psalm 110. 5. there will be no other crowns worn at that day, but the crowns of righteousness: no other robes, but those washed in the blood of Christ. 3. The day of judgement will be great in respect of their faults and offences▪ the least sin will appear exceeding great, the smallest offence unpardoned, is against a God infinite; the least sin will then be looked upon, as that which put God upon complaining, Christ upon bleeding, and the Spirit upon grieving. Oh how will the scarlet, crimson transgressions, at which natural conscience is affrighted, appear at that day? those blasphemies, murthers, open oppressions, unnatural uncleanness, &c. 4. This day shall be great in respect of the great∣ness of their rewards, and recompences; there will be the loss of Gods presence to the one, and the freedom of all misery to the other, and the stamp of eternity put upon both; it shall be a righteous sentence, every cause shall be judged rightly; Christ is called a righ∣teous Judge, 1 Tim. 4. 8. in righteousness doth he judge, Rev. 19. 11. The Scepter of his Kingdom is a rigteous Scepter, he loves righteousness, Psal. 45. 6, 7. The day of judgement is a day of the revelation
of the righteous judgement of God; righteousness shall be the girdle of his loyns, this Judge cannot be byassed by favour, there is no respect of persons with God: he regardeth not the persons of men. To draw towards a close, let the reader consi∣der, that in this great day of judgement, God will bring in every secret thing, whether it be good or bad, Eccles. 12. 14. For we must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. For he hath appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness, Act. 17. 31. Oh did we meditate sometimes on this day, and think of the preparations to it, and the acting of it, and the execution of the sentence, we should trem∣ble at his word; surely at this day our consciences shall be so enlightned, that all shall perfectly remem∣ber what ever good or evil they did in the time of their life, the secrets of all hearts being then reveal∣ed; and some shall be judged according to the Law of God, which hath been revealed unto men, whether it be the Law of nature only, which is written in the hearts of all, to leave them without excuse, or that written word of God. First, the Old Testament, and after also of the New, as the ground of faith, and the rule of life, Romans 2. 12. and so by the evidence of every mans conscience, bringing all his works to remembrance, bearing witness with him, or against him, together by the testimony of such, who by Doctrine or example have approved or condemn∣ed him. What shall I say more, this will be a great day in this respect also, viz. as Christ doth come to judge
things that are not judged; so also he doth come to judge over again things that are judged amiss, Eccles. 3. 16, 17. Moreover I saw under the Sun the place of judgement, that wickedness was there, and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there: Then I said in my heart, God shall judge the world in righteousness, yea he shall judge both the righteous and the wicked, Mark 13. 32. But of that day, and that hour knoweth no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. See Mat. 24. 36, &c. God is a knowing Judge, a righteous Judge, a powerful Judge. I shall now proceed in order to speak of the state of both the damned and saved, after the judgement is over, and the sentence given, and so close up all with a few words of advice; and so of the end of the world. Of the sad condition of a man out of Christ af∣ter his death, judgement and sentence passed, viz. Go ye cursed. VVE find it written Mat. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepa∣red for the Devil and his angels: consider five things in these words. 1. Depart from me: there is a separation from all joy and happiness. 2. Ye cursed: there is a dreadful excommunica∣tion 3. Into fire: there is unexpressible pain. 4. Everlasting: there is the duration of pu∣nishment.
5. Prepared for the Devil and all his angels: ere are the tormented and tormenting companons: the isery of this dleful state may be reduced to these three heads 1. The unexpressible pains that they shall en∣dure. 2. The companions, wicked men, evil angels or devils. 3. The duration of this miserable estate. 1. The unexpressible pains that they shall endure: the devil and his angels, who being tormented them∣selves, shall have no other ease, but to wrack their fury in tormenting thee, where shall be punishment without pitty, misery without mercy, sorrow with∣out succour, crying without comfort, mischief with∣out measure, torment without ease, where the worm dyeth not, and the fire is never quenched, in which flame thou shalt ever be burning and never consu∣med, ever dying, and never dead, &c. 2. Thy companions shall be wicked men, evil angels or devils: from the judgement seat thou must be thrust (by Angels) together with all the damned de∣vils, and reprobates, into the bottomless lake of ut∣ter darkness, that perpetually burns with fire and brimstone, where thou shalt ever lament, and none shall pitty thee; thou shalt alwayes cry for the pain of fire, and yet gnash thy teeth for the extremity of cold▪ thou shalt weep to think that thy miseries are past remedy. 3. The duration of this miserable estate doth multiply and aggravate thy misery: this eternal con∣dition admits of no change or alteration, decay or consumption: mans eternal condition admits of no
future hopes, or expectation, waste or diminution: mans eternal condition admits of no mixture or moderation: mans eternal condition admits of no events or issues of providence: mans eternal condi∣tion admits of no comparison, or revocation, there is no sounding a retreat, after we are lanched into the Ocean: mans eternal condition admits of no con∣clusion: mans eternal condition admits of no con∣ception. Millions of ages pass away, and yet not one minute wasted so that after thou hast endu ed them so many thousand years, as there are grass on the earth, or sands on the sea shore, thou art no nearer to have an end of thy torments, then thou wast the first day that thou wast cast into them, yea so far are they from ending, that they are ever be∣ginning: but if after a thousand times so many thou∣sand years, thy damned soul could but conceive a hope, that these her torments might have an end, this would be some comfort, to think that at length an end will come; but as oft as the mind thinketh of this word never: it is as another hell, in the midst of hell. This is the second death, the general perfect fulness of all cursedness: the damned shall remain for ever in unspeakable torment of body, and anguish of mind, being cast out from the favourable presence of God, and Christ, and his Saints, into utter dark∣ness, blackness of darkness, weeping and gnashing ofteeth, the worm that never dyeth, the fire that never goeth out, &c.
Of the happy and blessed estate of the Elect in Heaven. THey shall be unspeakably and everlastingly bles∣sed and glorious in boy and soul, being freed from all imperfections and infirmities, and endowd with perfect wisdom and holiness, possessed with all the pleasures that are at the right hand of God, seated as Princes in thrones of Majesly, crowned with crowns of Glory, possessing the third Heaven, wherein dwelleth Righteousness, beholding and being filled with the fruition of the glorious presence of God, and of the Lamb Jesus Christ, in the company of innumerabl Angels, and Saints, 1 Cor 13. 10. Psal. 16. 11. Rev. 3. 21. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Psal. 17. 15. 1 Tim. 4. 17. Heb. 12. 22. O what variety of joyes may be considered in the glorification of man, in the delights of heavenly man∣sions, and in the blessed society of the Saints, but chiefly in the beholding of God: the body glorified, the soul shall be far more prefect then it was in the state of innocency, for in it shall be understanding without error, light without darkness, wisdom with∣out ignorance, reason without obscurity: the Lord shall in the sight and hearing of all world pro∣nounce unto his servants, Matthew 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom pre∣pared for you from the foundation of the world. 1. Come ye, here is our union and communion with the Trinity.
2. Blessed, here is our absolution, from all sins, and our endowments with all happiness. 3. Of my father, here is the Author from whom proceeds our felicity. 4. Inherit, here is faith ending in fruition, and the promises in possession. 5. The Kingdom, behold our birth right accord∣ing to grace, 2 Tim. 1. 9. 6. Prepared, See Gods fatherly care for his cho∣sen, John 14. 2. 7. From the foundation of the world, O the free and eternal love of God in Christ! having made this introduction, let me crave leave of thee rea∣der to speak more particularly of the most glorious state of a Christian in heaven after the sentence of ab∣solution at the last day of judgement, and to this point I shall rather lisp, then speak, being not able to conceive, much less to describe that most excellent bliss, and eternal wait of glory; but we may take a scantling thereof thus, the Lord in his word doth set forth to our capacity the glory of our eternal life after death, in eight things. 1. Their bodies shall shine as the brightness of the Sun. 2. The soul shall be far more perfect then it was in the state of innocency. 3. Consider the place where we shall be, and that is in the third heaven. 4. Consider whose presence we shall enjoy, Fa∣ther, Son, and and holy Spirit, Saints and An∣gels, &c. 5. In this sate we shall know one another. 6. In this state we shall speak one to another.
7. Consider the variety of joy that there shall be in heaven. 8. Consider the duration and continuance of this blessed state. 1. Their bodies shall shine as the brightness of the Sun in the firmament, like the glorious body of Christ. The Glory of a thousand Suns made into one, will be but as sack-cloath to that wherein Christ shall appear in mans nature, he being in the Glory of his Father, Mat 16. 27. And we shall be like him. 1 John 3. 2. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their father, as appears in this Scripture, Mat. 13. 43. 2. The soul shall be far more perfect then it was in the state of innocency; sor in it shall be understand∣ing without errour, Light without darkness, wisdom without Ignorance, reason without obscurity, memo∣ry without oblivion, the Will also shall be without perversness, joy without sorrow, pleasure without pain. In the slate of innocency, there was in man a possibility not to Sin, but in the state of Glory there shall be no possibility to sin. In a word, both body and soul in heaven, shall be in such a blessed state, that neither our tongue can express it, nor our mind con∣ceive it. The soul shall be more happy in being present with Jesus Christ in heaven, then if it had been present with Adam in the state of innocency. Adam was instated only in an earthly paradise; but now thou be∣ing with Christ, art instated in an everlasting King∣dom; Again, Adam though pleased in a state of inno∣cency, yet he was liable to lose that blessed slate, and did lose it, though he were a perfect creature; but
by Christ we are instated in a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, or lost. Again, When Adam was made by God in innocen∣cy, he enjoyed only the society of beasts on the earth, and birds of the air; but when Christ brings a soul to heaven, God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, An∣gels and Saints shall be his companions. 3. Consider the place where the Saints shall be after the Judgement, and that is in the third heaven: we read of Saints departed, that they see the face of God. They that are in the third heaven, are in the pre∣sence of God, the Saints departed are in the third heaven, they are in paradise, Luke 23. 43. which is the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. The place of the blessed is usually known by the name of the third heaven: the third heaven is a shining body, created immediately of God, the throne of his special pre∣sence, and of the gracious manifestation of his per∣fections, and the habitation of the blessed, both Angels and men. The whole Region of the air, unto the Moon, is in Scripture called the first heaven, from the Moon to the highest stars inclusively, the second heavn. That which is above these (the place of happiness) is the thid heaven▪ 2 Cor. 12. 2. This third hea∣ven is called a house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5▪ A City whose makr and builder is God, Heb. 11. 10. The City of the living God. Hb. 12. 22. This is Chists fathers house. John 14. 2. Paradise. Luke 23▪ 43. Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens. 1 Kin. 8. 27. The wold  this is the great City of the geat King, he measured with the reed twelve thousand urlogs; the length, and the bredth,
and the height of it are equal, Rev. 21. 16. It is the Court of God and Christ, wherein are habi∣tations for in numerable company of Saints and Angels, John 14. 2. Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. This heaven of heavens hath twelve foundations, Rev. 21. 14. The matter of the building of the wall of it was of Jasper, and the City was pure gold, like unto clear glass, Rev. 21. 18. the form four square, ver. 16. Twelve thousand furlongs, that is, fifteen hun∣dred English miles square; the gates are in number twelve, made of twelve pearls; every several gate was of one pearl, ver. 21. Situate, East, West, North, and South; three looking every way, ver. 13. Hav∣ing ingraven upon them the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, and twelve Angels for the keepers of them; the streets are of pure gold, ver. 21. Its Temple is God, and the Lamb, its Light, the glory of God, and the Lamb; its Inhabitants are the Lords people, ver. 24. Its water a pure river of Life, Chap. 22. 1. Its fruits are the fruits of the tree of Life. ver. 2. In a word, there is no place so glorious by cre∣ation, so beautiful with delectation, so rich in pos∣session, so comfortable for habitation: for there the King is Christ, the Law is Love, the honour verity, the peace felicity, the Life eternity; there is Light without drakness, mirth without sadness, health without sickness, wealth without want, credit without disgrace, beauty without blemish, ease with∣out labour, riches without rust, blessedness without misery. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God, Psalm 87. 3.
4. Let us yet consider whose presence we shall en∣joy; and that is, the prsence of Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Angels and Saints, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. The whole man shall enjoy fellowship with God, fellowship with the Lamb, and fellowship with the Angels: A happy society and sweet communi∣on, all holiness, all happiness, all joys shall be en∣joyed. All that God bestowed upon Moses could not satisfie his mind, unless he might see the face of God. When Paul had once seen this blessed sight, he ever after counted all the riches and Glory of the world to be but dung; and all his Life after was but sighing out, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: Father I will, saith Christ▪ that they which thou hast given me, be even where I am, that they may behold my Glory. 5. The next thing to be considered is, that in this blessed state we shall all know one another, and have Communion one with another, and sweet content flowing from that Communion: we shall know the power of the Father, and the wisdom of the Son▪ the grace of the holy Ghost, and the invisible na∣ture of the blessed Trinity, and in him we shall know all our friends who died in the faith, and all the faith∣ful that ever were or shall be, Luke 13. 28. Christ tels the Jews, that they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob▪ and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, therefore we shall know them: Adam knew Eve▪ whom he had never seen before, muchmore then shall we know those we have known here. David imply∣eth that he shall know his child when he comforted himself, that he should go to it, 2 Sam. 12, 23. The
Apostles knew Christ after his resurrection, Peter, James, and John knew Moses and Elias in the trans∣figuration; how much more shall we know one ano∣ther, when we shall be all glorified? Mat. 17. 4 Luke 9. 33. The rich man knew Abraham and Lazarus, Luke 16. Surely then Abraham and Lazarus shall know one another. 1 Cor. 13. 12. Sint Paul saith, at that day we shall know as we are known of God. Love never faileth, therefore knowledge, the ground thereof, remains in another life. Our knowledge in another life shall as far exceed the knowledge of this life, as the Light of the Sun doth exceed the Light of a candle. They who thirst for knowledge, Let them long be studients of this University: for all the Light by which we know any thing in this world, is nothing but the very shadow of God. Dives in Hell, knew Lazarus in heaven, and why shall not the godly know one another there? We read Mat. 13. That Peter, James and John, knew Moses in the transfiguration, as before, &c. Boulton here thinks it should detract much from the happiness of every Saint in heaven, if every Saint should not know one another there. 6. Another priviledge is▪ we shall not only know one another, and have communion together, but we shall speak one to another: Our communion and conference one with another may be gathered from the like in the Angels, who doubtless speak one to another, though not vocally as we now do, yet in their manner, viz. Angelically, and spiritually, which is thought to be nothing else but a spiritual insinuati∣on, instillation or communication of their minds, no∣tions & meanings one to another: to think that the
Angles and Spirits of the just made perfect, do not speak in their heavenly and spiritual manner, commu∣nicating their minds one to anotheras they see cause, is against reason, and inconsisting with the state of blessedness; and to think they speak in this manner, is not against Scripture or reason, though the full resolution to this thing, viz. with what tongues the Angels and souls departed, speak, seems to be reserved till we come to heaven; some conceive we shall then all speak in the Hebrew tongue. 7. Let us consider the variety of joyes in hea∣ven, and those admirable good things which God hath prepared, and which Christ hath purchased for his servants; it is not for any wit of man to con∣ceive, or any tongue to relate, or any pen to set down: nevertheless let us set down a taste of them as we find them revealed in Scriptures; in that life there shall be no earthly or sinfull misery, there shall be no sin at all, no sickness, no sorrows, no diseases nor malady, no cross nor curse, no vexation nor cala∣mity, no defect nor deformity, no tumults not troubles, no pain nor penury, all tears shall be done away, all evils removed, all sin abolished, all wants supplyed, Rev. 22. 3. Rev. 21. 4. There shall be a perpetual possession of all good things, even of God himself, who is goodness it self; there shall be perfection of knowledge, no defect in love, certain security, conistant amity, and secure tranquility; the end why all this shall be given to us, is, that God may manifest his exceeding love to us, and that we might enjoy the full fruit of Christs death and passion; and lastly, that we might acknow∣ledge
the wonderful mercies of God unto us, and ce∣lebrate his name for ever; then shall we be in a state of exemption from sin, and from the causes of sin, and from the punishment of sin. The morall Philosophers say, that hail, storm and tempest are ingendred in the middle region, but above the middle region there is no wind, no storm or tempest, but whilst we are here below, set us expect storms, winds, and blu∣stering temptations: but when God takes us above this middle region, there is no storm nor tempest to trouble us: then the Angels that rejoyced at our conversion, will much rejoyce together with us at our entrance into heaven 8. Let us consider the duration and continuance of this blessed state, this life is an everlasting life, Mat. 25. 45. It shall continue world without end: life eternal is the highest degree of blessedness, in which we shall be made partakers of Christs glory, enjoying the sight of God, and heavenly joyes for ever and ever, therefore it is termed everlasting life, John 16. 22. and Christ faith that our joy shall no man take from us. Oh who can bear this and not admire it! Who can meditate on it, and not be amazed at it? as soon as any Saint in this life felt but a true taste of these everlasting joys, they present∣ly accounted all the riches and pleasures of this life to be but loss and dung in respect of that, and there∣fore with fervent prayers, fastings, tears, faith, and good life, they gave all diligence, and laboured to ascertain themselves of this eternal life, and for the love thereof, they willingly parted with much of their earthly goods and possessions, to lay up trea∣sure in heaven.
Abraham and Sarah left their own country and possessions to look for a City, whose maker and builder is God, Heb. 11. 10, 15, 16. David prefer∣reth one day in this place, before a thousand else∣where, Psal. 84. 10. Elias earnestly besought the Lord to receive his soul into his Kingdom, and went willingly, though in a fiery Chariot, King. 19. 4. Saint Paul having once seen heaven, continually desieth to be dissolved, that he might be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. Saint Peter having espyed but a glimpse of eternal glory in the mount, wished that he might dwel there all the dayes of his life, Mat. 17. 4. saying, Master it is good for us to be here, &c. Christ a little before his death, prayeth his Father to receive him into that excellent glory, Joh. 17. 5. And the Apostle witnesseth, Heb. 11. 2. that for the joy which was set before them, they endured the cross, and despised the shame, 1 Pet. 5. 4. and when the chief Shepheard shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory, that fadeth not away, &c. this eternal condition admits of no change or alteration, decay or consumption, waste or diminution; mans eternal condition admits of no comparison, revoca∣tion or conclusion, &c.
What use we may make of all these precious things. 1. EXcellent arguments may be drawn to pres-Christians to a holy life, 2 Pet. 3. 11. see ing then that all these things must be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, and ver. 14. Wherefore seeing ye look for such things, give diligence that ye may be found in him in peace; It is our duty to live in a continual expectation of the coming of the Lord Jesus, with our loins girt, and our lamps burning; for blessed is that servant, whom his master when he cometh shall find so doing. 2. Consider that here is a fountain opened for Christian comfort, and ground for patience in all troubles, that there shall be an end: a Christi∣ans hope shall not be cut off: if in this life only we had hope, we were of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. But here lyes the comfort and patience of true Christians; theywait for another world, and they know it is a just thing with God to give them rest after their labours, 2 Thes. 1. 9. and a crown after their combate, 2 Tim. 4. 8. and after their long Pilgrimage, an everlasting habitation, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Be patient, saith the Apostle, and settle your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh, James 5. 8. 2 Pet. 2. 9. When they that have sown in tear shall reap in joy, Psal 126. 5. 3. Consider, that assurance of that blessed state may be attained in this life: we know, faith Paul,
2 Cor. 5. 1. That if our earthly house of this taber∣nacle be destroyed, we have a building, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: these things, saith John, I have written unto you, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, 1 John 5. 13. I am sure, saith Job 19. 25, 26, 27. that my Redeemer liveth, and he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold: when I awake, saith David, I shall be satisfied with thy Image, Psal. 17. 15. 4. The consideration of this should provoke us to be such as may be made meet for this inheritance of the Saints in light, and to endeavour to attain, and retain the earnest of the Spirit, whence we may be alwaies able to say we are confident and willing, rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8. and to fill the soul with strong consolation against the sufferings of life, and the fear of death, and to work an answerable con∣versation, that whether absent or present, we may so walk, as we may be accepted of him. 5. The consideration of this should put us upon a patient waiting for, and a longing expectation of our change, which draweth on a pace, and not to put that off as most do to the last year, and when that is come, to the last moneth of that year, and then to the last week of that moneth, and then to the last day of that week, and then to the last hour of that day, and then to the last minute of that hour, and so time shall be no more, and we shall not find repentance, although we seek it with tears.
6. Consider that the cause of our salvation, and so of our glorious condition, is Gods meer love and favour, without any merit of ours, Luke 12. 32. It is our Fathers good pleasure to give us a Kingdom, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, Ephes. 2. 8. By grace we are saved through faith, and not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Rom. 6. 23. everlasting life is the gift of God; and though eternal life be called a reward, yet it is not of merit, but of mercy; let this be grounded in our hearts, that the Kingdom of heaven is not a stipend of servants, but an inheritance of Sons, which they only obtain, that lay hold on his mercy, Romans 5. 8. compared with 1 Tim. 6. 12. and 19. 2. Now as hath been said, as the love of God is the cause of our salvation, fo Jesus Christ is the way, Joh. 10. 9. Joh 14. 6. 3, The holy Spirit is the guide in that way, as in Joh. 16. 13. 4. The Scriptures of truth is the rule, Gal. 6. 16. Isa. 8. 20. 5. The evidence of this salvation is faith, Heb. 11. 1. It is true, the instrumental cause, offering and proclaiming salvation is the Gospel; but the instru∣mental receiving and applying it is faith, and the cause sealing it inwardly to our souls, is the Spi∣rit of God; the external and instrumental seals thereof are the two confirming Ordinances, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. 6. The anchor of this salvation is hope, Heb. 6. 19.
7. The effects of this salvation is love to God, be∣cause he loved us first; and a holy conversation; if ye love me saith Christ, keep my commandments; and they that have believed in Christ, must be care∣ful to maintain good works, which are found and re∣quired in the way to the Kingdom, but they are not the cause of reigning. Of the end of the world. THE consequents of the last judgement is life eternal in heaven or hell, and the end of the world: having finished the former, let me point to the latter, and I have finished what I intended: we read Mat. 24. 3. that Peter, James, John and Andrew, Mark. 13. 3. came to Christ and desired him to satisfie them in these three questions. 1. Concerning the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple. 2. Concerning Christs second coming, and the signs thereof. 3. Concerning the end of the world, &c. The answer to the first question is from ver. 4. to ver. 23. The answer to the second is from ver. 24. to ver. 36. The answer to the third question is from ver. 36. to the end of that Chapter. In which Christ tels them that the very day and hour no man knoweth; that day is hidden from us, that we might not be secure, but alwayes prepa∣red, expecting the day of his coming, and hope
for it, and have a special care, that that certain uncertain hour come not upon us unawares, Luke 12. 40. The end of the world is the destruction of this vi∣sible universe: as the wicked are thrust into hell, and the godly entred into heaven: this is called the con∣summation of the world, it shall be destroyed by fire, 2 Pet. 3. 6, 7, 10, 12, &c. but what kind of fire this is, he only knows, who is himself a consuming fire. Some understand that this world shall be destroyed only in its quality, others in its substance; they who think it shall be destroyed only in qualities, mean a purging, and restauration of it to its primitive insti∣tution. But the reader may do well to take notice, that it is one thing to be restored and changed into a better state, and another thing to wax old like a garment, and to vanish like smoak, to be dissolved, to melt, to be burned, to pass away, to be no more, as these Scriptures affirm, 1 Cor. 7. 31. Psal. 102. 26, 27. and Heb. 1. 11. Isa. 51. 6. Mat. 24. 35. 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10, 12. Rev. 21. 1. FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table of the prin∣cipal matters contained in this Book. A OF assembling our selves together. Pag. 199. Of admonition, publike and private. p. 282. Of assurance of salvation. p. 285. 1. The nature of it. p. 286. 2. Whether assurance may be attained in this life, yea or nay. p. 287. 3. The sorts or degrees of it. p. 288. 4. Of the trials of assurance. p. 289. 5. It is our duty to labour for it. p. 290. 6. Of the benefits of it. p. 291. 7. Of the springs of assurance. p. 292. 8. Of the impediments of it. p. 294. 9. Of our sad condition without it. p. 295.
10. Many have it not that think they have it. p. 297. 11. Of the reasons wherefore the Lord doth not give it speedily. p. 298. 12. It is very hard to recover it, if once lost. p. 299. Of afflictions. p. 323. Why the Lord doth afflict his own people. p. 324. He doth try their truth and strength by it. p. 325. How to know what sin God aims at in affliction. p. 327. Of Angels. p. 9. How a man should act. p. 88. B. OF the Ordinance of Baptism. p. 254. 1. Of the essence of it. ibid. 2. Of the exercise of it. p. 255. Of the condition of man in his birth. p. 385. Of the bill of inditement of twenty Articles brought against man upon his sick bed. p. 392. C OF the Creation. p. 8. Of the Covenant of Grace. p. 20. 1. What is the sum or substance of it. ibid. 2. With whom this Covenant was first made. p. 25. 3. When this Covenant was made. p. 28. 4. Whether there be any conditions of it; and if so, what
they are. p. 30. 5. Whether it be one and the same Covenant of grace that was in force before the Law, and under the Law, and now under the Gospel. p. 35. 6. Whether this Covenant may not be broken as was the Covenant of works. p. 38. 7. What means one should use to get into this Covenant. p. 41. 8. When one may be said to be in this Covenant. p. 44. 9. Wherein the Covenant of grace and the Covenant of works do differ. p. 47. 10. What is Gods order and method in bringing a peo∣ple into Covenant. p. 50. 11. What are the blessings and benefits of this Cove∣nant. p. 53. 12. Whether most men and women in the world are not under a ovenant of works. p. 56. Of the ten Commandments, and what each of them doth prohibit and enjoyn. The first Commandment doth enjoin nine things, and forbid three things, p. 303. The second Commandment doth prohibit seven things, and enjoyn six things. p. 304. The third Commandment doth prohibit four things, and enioin five things. p. 305. The fourth Commandment doth prohibit five things, and enjoin five things. ibid. The fifth Commandment doth enjoin fourteen things. p. 306. The sixth Commandment doth prohibit five things, and enjoin fourthings. p. 307. The seventh Commandment doth prohibit eight things,
and enjoin seven things.p. 308. The eighth Commandment doth prohibit seven things, and enjoin five things. p. 308. The ninth Commandment doth prohibit seven things, and enjoin five things. p. 309. The tenth Commandment doth prohibit four things, and enjoyn four things. p. 310. The order of causes, how the Lord comes down from the causes to the effects. p. 336. 1. Of the coming of Christ. p. 414. 2. The time of his coming is near, p. 418. 3. Of the manner of his coming. p. 421. 4. Of the signs of his coming. p. 422. 5. Christ shall come visibly. p. 423. 6. The posture that a Christian should be in at his com∣ing. p. 423. 7. It is the duty of all to wait for his coming. p. 424. 8. Of the benefits that a Christian shall have at Christs coming. p. 425. 9. What should the consideration of his coming put us upon? p. 427. 10. The sad condition of all out of Christ at his com∣ing. p. 428. 11. He shall come terribly. p. 430. The right constitution of a Church of Christ, or the way at first to gather a Church. p. 201. There are four things that Christ hath already done, five things he is now doing, and six things more he will do when he cometh▪ p. 431.
D. A Rule to try Doctrines by. p. 231. The Lord doth not despise the day of small things. p. 334. Several Divine sentences. p. 340. The miseries attending both body and soul at the hour of death. p. 391. Of the sad condition of all out of Christ after death. p. 399. In order to our preparation for death, consider. p. 400. 1. The fewness of our dayes. ibid. 2. The many dangers we every day pass through. ibid. Death to a Christian is but a change of place, not of company. p. 401. Death is no respecter of persons. ibid. Death to a Christian is but a house, a bed, a sleep. ibid. Of the duration of the miserable estate of the damned in hell. p. 452. Of the Devil. p. 321.
E. OF Election. p. 6. Of Experience. p. 167. Of Excommunication. p. 284. How far a true Christian may be tainted with error in judgement, and yet be restored. p. 155. Of enjoyment. p. 168. Of the end of the world. p. 466. F. OF the faith of Gods Elect. p. 108. 1. Of the nature of it. ibid. 2. The Object of this faith. p. 109. 3. The Subject of it. ibid. 4. The seat of faith. p. 110. 5. The ground of faith. p. 111. 6. The springs of Faith. p. 112. 7. Of the hinderances and lets of faith. p. 114. 8. Motives to believe. p. 116. 9. Of the evil of unbelief. p. 118. 10. Characters of true faith. p. 120. 11. The benefits of living by faith. p. 123. 12. How we should keep up faith at all times. p. 126. Of the flesh. p. 318.
G. OF God the Father. p. 1. Of God the Son. p. 2. Of God the Holy-Ghost. p. 4. Of Gods decrees. p. 5. It is mans duty to get a title to Gods love, and to get as∣surance that he hath a title. p. 404. Of the time when, the place where, the persons to whom the Gospel is to be preached. p. 214. Of the gifts and graces of the Spirit. p. 194. H. OF the Holy-Ghost. p. 4. Of the grace of hope. p. 186. 1. Of its nature, what it is. p. 187. 2. Of the properties of this hope. p. 188. 3. Of the encouragements to hope. p. 189. 4. Of the difference between a well grounded and a presumptuous hope. p. 190. Of attentive hearing. p. 228. Several strong reasons why we should walk holily. p. 85.
I. OF justification by grace. p. 58. 1. This Doctrine is the foundation and basis of all Christian Religion. p. 60. 2. This Doctrine is the inlet to all true peace and com∣fort. p. 61. 3. This is the root and spring of all Gospel obedience. p. 65. 4. This Doctrine is the great stop and bar to keep out all floods of error. p. 67. 5. This Doctrine is the main support of a soul under all tryals. p. 70. 6. This is the great Doctrine by which Satans king∣dom is overthrown. p. 72. 7. This is the great Doctrine that Satan doth most war against, either to pervert or corrupt. p. 74. 8. This Doctrine is the hardest piece to be learned, it being supernatural. p. 76. 9. This Doctrine doth speak forth with open mouth, the exceeding riches, and freeness of Gods grace. p. 81. 10. And as this grace is free, so it is sure and cer∣tain, it will not fail those that rest upon it. p. 83. Of the last judgement. p. 440. 1. The signs that go before it. ibid. 2. What is meant by it. p. 441. 3. Of the place where the Lord will judge the world. ibid.
The person, who it is that shall judge the world. p. 442. Of the time how long the judgement shall last. p. 443. Out of what the people shall be judged. p. 444. The day of judgement will be a great day. p. 445. Of the blessed condition of the godly after judgement. p. 453. Of the sad condition of the wicked after judgement. p. 450. Of the place where the Godly shall be after judgement, p. 454. Of justification and sanctification, how they differ, and wherein they agree. p. 101. Of the variety of joyes that there shall be in heaven. p. 459. What use to make of it. p. 463. K. OF Knowledge. p. 157. 1. Of the Knowledge of God. p. 158. 2. Of the knowledge of our selves. p. 159. 3. The properties of true knowledge. p. 460. 4. How one believer differs from another in knowledge. p. 162. 5. What great measures of knowledge a man may at∣tain unto, and yet be without saving knowledge. p. 163.
L. OF the grace of love to God. p. 170. 1. Of the nature of it. ibid. 2. Of the kinds or degrees of it. p. 172. 3. Of the springs of this love. p. 173. 4. Of the trials of it, how it may be known. p. 175. 5. Of the properties of this love. p. 179. 6. Of the motives to perswade us to get into, and grow up in this love. p. 180. Of our love to the children of God. 281. 1. The nature of it, what it is. ibid. 2. Of the trials of our love. p. 182. 3. Of the means of attaining this love. p. 185. 4. Of the impediments and hinderances of it. p. 186. The difference between the Law and the Gospel. p. 301. Mans life is or should be guided by these seven vertues. p. 339. M. OF man. p. 11. Of mans fall. p. 13. Of mans recovery. p. 16. What man is by nature. p. 319. Of mans own righteousness. p. 320. Mercies and deliverances are many times nearest to us, when we ink they are farthest off. p. 332.
O. OF the standing Ordinances of the Gospel. p. 199. Of obedience. p. 166. How to approve the present opportunity. p. 04. P. OF providence. p. 14. Of the Ordinance of preaching. 1. What preaching is. p. 208. 2. Who they are that ought to preach. p. 209. 3. The manner how the Preacher is to preach. p. 211. 4. Of the time when, the place where, the persons to whom the Gospel is to be preached. p. 214. 5. What a Minister is to preach. p. 216. 6. Which is first to be preached, the Law or the Gos∣pel. p. 217. 7. How the gift of preaching may be attained. p. 219. 8. Whether the Minister may receive mony, or wages, yea or no. p. 227. 9. Of attentive hearing of what is preached. p. 228. 10. How to remember what is preached. p. 230. 11. How to try all, and hold fast that which is good. p. 231. Of prayer and supplication. p. 332. 1. The nature of it, what it is. ibid. 2. Whom we are to pray unto. p. 345.
3. For whom we are to pray. p. 235. 4. What extraordinary prayer is. p. 236. 5. Of the necessity of prayer. p. 238. 6. The posture to be used in prayer. p. 240. 7. Of the place where we are to pray. p. 241. 8. Of the time in which we are to pray. ibid. 9. Motives to encourage us to pray. p. 242. 10. Means to be used to obtain the gift of prayer. p. 243. 11. Of the hinderances of prayer. p. 344. 12. Several sorts of prayer never answered. p. 245. 13. How many wayes the Lord doth answer prayer. p. 246. Of collection for the poor, another standing Ordinance of the Gospel. p. 272. 1. What it is to give to the poor. ibid. 2. Who they are that ought to give. p. 273. 3. How much they are to give. p. 274. 4. To whom we should give. ibid. 5. What order to be observed in giving to the poor. p. 275. 6. With what affection we must give. ibid. 7. How many waies a man is said to give. p. 276. 8. What fruit to expect of these duties. ibid. Of the Lords Prayer, and the several petitions therein contained. p. 311. Of the pollution and misery of the soul in this life. p. 390. How to improve the present opportunity. p. 404. 1. Store up a stock of faith. p. 408. 2. Store up a stock of promises. p. 409. 3. Store up a stock of prayers. ibid. 4. Gather up all thy evidences and spiritual experien∣ces, and keep them in thy mind and heart. p. 410.
5. Live every day as thy last day. p. 409. 6. Make thy will in time of health. p. 411. Whether there be any such thing as the personal reign of Christ upon earth; and if so, what it is. p. 434. Of perseverance, p. 193. Q Divers hard questions answered, and seeming contra∣dictions reconciled, and many scruples of conscience re∣moved. p. 347. R OF repentance unto life. p. 133. Of reading the Scriptures. p. 277. How to read the Scriptures. p. 281. Who they are that ought to read the Scriptures. p. 279. Why we ought to read the Scriptures. p. 280. Of the resurrection of the dead at Christs second coming. p. 432. Of the first and second resurrection. p. 431. The manner how the Godly shall be raised, and how the wicked. p. 433. Of reprobation. p. 8.
S OF sanctification or a holy conversation p. 88 to p. 101. 1▪ Of the nature of sin. p. 135. 2. How sin creeps up, and gets head in man. p. 136. 3. Of the great danger of small sins. p. 137. 4. Of the mischief brought upon man for one sin p. 139. What hurt sin doth a Saint. p. 140. 5. The best way to mortifie sin p. 141. 6. in in the best Saints, and most times in the best acti∣ons done by them. p. 146. 7. Of the vast difference between the sinning of the rege∣nerate, and unregenerate. p. 148. 8. How many wayes the Lord is said to forgive sin. p. 150. 9. Whether sins before conversion, ought to be called to mind after Conversion. p. 151. 10. Whether the dominion of sin, may be taken away when the life of sin remains. p. 153. Of singing and praising God in Psalms, Hymns, and spi∣tual Songs. p. 247. Of Suspention. p 283. Of the Lords Supper, another standing ordinance of the Gospel. p 263. 1. What it is. ibid. 2. Wherein it doth differ from batism. p. 264. 3. Of the preparation to the Lords Supper. p. 265. 4. f the actions of the administrator. p. 266. 5. The actions and duty of the receiver. p. 268.
6. Who they are that may pertake of this Ordinance. p. 269. 7. Of the ends ands uses of the Lords Supper. p. 270. 8. The duty of all after receiving. p. 271. Of the shotness of mans life, and misery that doth attend every age thereof. p. 383. 1. Of the Condition of man in his birth. p. 385. 2. Of the state of child-hood. p. 386. 3. Of the stte of youth. p. 387. 4. Of the state of manhood. ibid. 5. Of the declining state of man. p. 388. 6. Of the decrepit state or old age. p. 389. Of the soul of man p. . The soul shall be far more perfect, and excellent was in the state of innocency. p. 454. The Saints after death shall be in the presence of Father, Son, and Holy-Ghost, Angels and Saints. p. 458. 1. In this state we shall know one another. p. 459. 2. In this state we shall speak one to another. ibid. 3. Of the duration of this blessed estate. p. 460. When a man may be said to suffer for well doing, and when for evil doing. p. 329. T THE great and terrible day of he Lord is near, proved p. 414. 1. By the testimony of the Prophets. ibid. 2. By the testimony of the Apostles p. 415. 3. By the testimony of the Angels. p. 416. 4. By the immutabilty of Gods dec ree ibid. 5. By the infallibility of his promises. ibid.
6. By the impartiality of his justice. p. 416 V OF Vocation. p. 17. W OF the world flesh and devil p. 314. Of the riches of the world. p. 315. He that men account the richest man in the world, is many times the poorest man. p. 316. FINIS.
Some Books printed and sold by Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles neer the West end of Pauls. AN Epitome of all the Common and Statute Laws of England, in Fol. The Faithful Counsellour, or the Marrow of the Law in English, in 4. to. The Priviledges of the People vindicated in 4. to. All three by William Sheppard, Esquire. The Retired mans Meditation, or the Mysterie and Power of godliness: By H. Vane Knight. Vindiciae Justificationis Gratuitae, Justification with∣out Condition, or the free Justification of a sinner Explained, Confirmed and Vindicated: By W. Eyre Minister of the Gospel at New-Sarum. Mr. Baxter's Aphorisms of Justification, Examined and Answered: By J. Crandon, in 4. to. An Exposition of the whole Book of Canticles, wherein the Text is Explained, and useful observa∣tions raised thereupon; by J. Robotham, in 4. to. Gospel Holiness, or a saving sight of God and the glorious Priviledge of the Saints: By Waltr Crad∣dock, Preacher of the Gospel, in 4. to. A description of Jerusalem, with a Map, By H. Jesse, in 4. to.
A Store-house of Provision for further Resolution in several Cases of Conscience, viz. of living above Or∣dinances, of walking in Fellowship with the unbaptiz∣ed, of Laying on of hands, &c. Also a small Catechism for babes and little ones: all three by H. Jsse. The Right Constitution of a Common-wealth, with some Errors of Government, and Rules of Policy, in 8. vo. A Brief History containing most of those notable Occurrences and Revolutions that happened in those late contests between King and Parliament▪ being a short mention of things from 1637, to 1648. by T. May Esquire. Milk for Babes in Christ, or Meditations, Obser∣vations, and Expeiences, with divers cases of Consci∣ence resolved; the glorious Priviledges of them that are Christs, with the way to know whether we are of that are Christs, with the way to know whether we are of that blessed number: Also Election before the foun∣dation of the World asserted, and the faith of Gods elect what it is: By Martin Finch Preacher of the Gospel in Lincoln-shire in 8. An Anti-Diatribe, or the Apologie of some Mini∣sters and godly people, asserting the Lawfulness of their administring the Lords Supper in a select com∣pany; proving also the necessity of Examination, in order to a more holy Church-fellowship, being an an∣swer to Mr. Humphreys's general Admission: By H. Saunders Minister of Hollesworth in Devon. The Bible in Welsh with several other Wlsh Books. Lazarus and his Sisters discourse of Paradise, or a conference about the excellent things of the other world. A Discoverer of some plots of Lucifer, against the Children of men.
The Yearning of Christs Bowels towards his lan¦guishing friends: By S. Moore Miniser of the Gos∣pel The Gate of Tongues unlocked and opened, or a Seed-time of all Tongues and Sciences, being a Short way of teaching and thoroughly learning the Latine, English French, &c. Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus his Divine Pi∣mander in 17 Books, together with his second book, called Asclepius, containing 15 Chapters, with a Com∣mentary, done into English, By Dr. Everard. Some Sermons preached on several occaons, By P. Sterry. Christian experiences from Scripture-evidences un∣der these several heads, viz. 1▪ omfort for Believers against their fears and dis∣mayings. 2. Comfort for Believers from their spiritual incomes. 3. Mans fruitlesness without saving faith. 4. Counsel unto Saints as sojourners and strangers. 5. Mns folly in determining by present Events or State of things: By R. Coler preacher of the Gospel in Wiltshire. These written by T. Collier, viz. The Right Constitution of a Visible Church of Christ, with its order and Ordinances. The Day Dauning, relating to the calling of the Jews and Christs second coming. The Confession of Faith of several Churches of Christ in the Wet, signed by several officers of the said Curches. A Catechism for the instruction of youth. A Dialogue between a Minister of the Gospel, and
an enquiring Christian about the Authority of the Scriptures and the principles of the Quakers. The personal appearing and Reign of Christs Kingdom on the Earth stated. An Antidote against the Infections of the times, or a faithful Watch-word from Mount-Sion, to prevent the ruine of souls, whereby some special considerati∣ons are presented to sinners, Admonition to Saints, and Invitation to backsliders: Published for the good of all, by the Elders and Messengers of several Chur∣ches in Wales. A Warning Piece for the Slumbring Virgins, or an Alarm to the friends of the Bridegroom being some a∣wakning Meditations upon Christs own Watch-word, Mat. 26. 41. By Ge. Scortreth Preacher of the Gospel in Lincoln. Recommended to the Reader by Joseph Caryl, William Grenhill, Geo. Griffiths. Books against the Quakers. A Faithful Discovery of a treacherous Design of Mystical Antichrist, displaying Christ's Banners, but attempting to lay waste Scriptures, Churches, Christ, faith, hope, &c. and establish Paganism in England, being an Examination of the▪ Doctrines of the people called Quakers: By Joseph Kellet, John Pomroy, Paul Glisson. A Confutation of the Quakers, being an Answer to nineteen Queries propounded by them; and Answer∣ed by S. Eaton Minister of the Gospel in Cheshire. A Testimony to the true Jesus and the faith of him, wherein the way of the people called Quakers is exa∣mined and weighed, being an Answer to James Nai∣lor's Book called, Love to the Lost: by T. Higgenson. A Looking-glass for the Quakers: By T. Collier.
