R1276 E1013_17 R203418 99863379 168765
A SEASONABLE Exhortation OF SUNDRY MINISTERS IN LONDON TO THE PEOPLE Of their respective Congregations. LONDON, Printed by E. M. for Samuel Gellibrand at the golden Ball in Pauls Church-yard; and Robert Gibbs the golden Ball in Chancery lane. 1660.
TO THE Reader. THE Reader is desired to take notice, that as the late sad Con∣fusions did awaken us to set up∣on this Exhortation; so it should have been published many weeks since in the midst of them, had not divers Interrup∣tions occasioned the delay. If the Lord be at this time (in answer to the pray∣ers of his servants) opening a doore of hope, (which we earnestly desire) as we shall bless his Name for so seasonable a
mercy; so we hope it will not be at all improper, or unacceptable to any serious and sober Chistians, as yet to awaken the People of this City to lay to heart the dangers which threaten them, and to set about the duties which may keep the Lord still amongst them.
A Seasonable EXHORTATION of Sundry MINISTERS in LON∣DON, to the People of their Respective CONGREGATIONS. THough we are not ignorant of the Prejudices and Prepossessions where∣with the carnal World are leavened against our Calling, Office, and Do∣ctrine; and what clamours and fiery conten∣tions abide for them everywhere that plead Christs cause in the Gates; and that publick Testimonies against Errors are usually miscon∣strued, as the fruits of an inordinate and mis∣guided zeal, and thought to proceed from an itch of medling, and the impulsion of private aims, rather than any good conscie yet be∣ing plac'd by the Lord in this Publick Watch-Tower, and having had experience of notable success (thorow his blessing) on former en∣deavours
in this kind, notwithstanding the re∣proaches and censures of evil minded men, we could not at least in such a time as this is, when the interesses of Christ Jesus our Lord, and his Churches upon earth are so nearly con∣cerned, (that we say not exposed to apparent hazard and ruine) but blow our Trumpet,Isa. 58 1. and in all plainness of heart give warning to those committed to our charge of the approaching dangers. Which course (we hope) can be justly of∣fensive to none that fear God in the Land, and have the concernments of Religion upon their hearts, especially when they shall consider how strictly, and with what severity of Commination all are enjoined to contend forJude 3. the faith once delivered to the Saints, and peculiarly Mini∣sters, who arePhil. 1.17. set for the defence of the Go∣spel, and invested with the title ofEzek. 33. from ver. 1. to ver. 10. Watch∣men, who are to give notice to the City of the Enemies approach, lest the blood of the slain be required at their hands; and ofActs 20.29, 33, 31. & Joh. 10.12. Pastors or Sheph, whom it concerneth in tender∣ness to the Flock, to warn every one with tears, when they see grievous Wolves ready to enter
in among them; however, if we must displease, we had rather displease men by a faithful dis∣charge of our duty, than our God by an impious and injurious silence in his cause, hoping that he will teach us to approve our selves2 Cor. 6.8. as his Ministers by honour and dishonour, by evil re∣port and good report, as deceivers, and yet true. We therefore Ministers of the Gospel in the City of London, do with all affectionate ear∣nestness Exhort the People of this City to awake, as out of sleep, and to lay to heart the great dangers that threaten us, which we may represent under a three-fold Consideration. First, The fears of the return of Popery. Secondly, The distracted estate of Religion among us. Thirdly, Other Symptomes of Gods wrath hanging over our heads. As to the first, We had verily thought that Popery had rendered it self justly odious by its own Abominations in Doctrine and Worship, as also by its bloody Tyranny lately revived in the slaughters of Ireland; and since that of Pied∣mont and Poland; and that in these days of light
and knowledge, to imagine the possibility of a return of a second Deluge of Antichristianisme over the Protestant Churches, (which yet hath been the opinion of divers, Eminent for learn∣ing and godliness amongst us) was a groundless supposition, and to fear where no fear was; but alas, that to which for some years past we could hardly allow in our thoughts the room of re∣mote possibility, is now grown into a near and an apparent probability, or a mischief at hand ready to break in upon us, if God in mercy pre∣vent not. That the Popish Faction hath often attempt∣ed a re-entry into these Nations, and what vi∣gorous endeavours have been used to carry on the Design, is not unknown to those that have been acquainted with the Times, and course of Affairs, since the Reformation in Queen Eliza∣beths days, and may easily be made evident to any that shll consider the many traiterous At∣tempts against that Queen, the Invasion in 88. the Powder-Treason, the endeavour of putting a Popish sense on the Articles of the Church of England, openly avowed by Franciscus de San∣cto Clara, and secretly abetted by others, but
never had the Adversary greater hopes of effect∣ing it than now; which that it may not seem a groundless suggestion, we desire you to con∣sider 1. The Ʋnion of Forraign, Popish Powers, which how soon the Court of Rome (being ever vigilant to improve such occasions for the Propagation of its own greatness) may make use of for the extirpation of the Protestant Religion, we need not divine; the frequent and confident expressions of our Adversaries, the Papists at home and abroad intimating such an intention, with hopes of success therein, especially here in England; and the breaches among the Protestants, turning their Arms upon one another, giving but too fair an occasion to them to carry on their purpose; A Kingdome divided against it self, cannot stand. 2. The Ʋast Numbers of Popish Emissaries, Priests and Jesuits, that swarme amongst us; English Colledges (as we are certified by cre∣dible reports) being much emptied, by reason of the multitudes that are sent hither. Now if you consider their Nearness to Great Ones, their Indefatigable Industry, compassing Sea and Land
to make Proyselites to their Superstition; the vast treasures to support them; their strong in∣fluence and efficacy upon all sorts of persons; their acting under the disguise of Sectaries, and subtilly insinuating many of their Doctrines, tending to the disparagement of the Authority of Scriptures, and teaching Justification by in∣herent righteousness, Perfection, or absolute ful∣filling the Law; unlawfulness to joyne in our Ordinances, nullity of our Ministry, &c. you will see cause with us to fear that these Locusts of the bottomless pit are now let loose, by a righ∣teous Judgement (as from God) to deceive these Nations. 3 The Printing and Ʋending so many thousands of Popish books every year in the English Tongue, which considering the Apostacy of some, and the Indifferency of many others of Quality, taking offence at the unhappy di∣visions and distractions which have been, and do yet continue amongst us, cannot speak less to us than too great an inclination to a revolt to Popery. 4. The whole body almost of Popery pub∣lished by Sectaries, especially Quakers, in whom
(though seemingly the opposite extream) we cannot but observe a ready coincidency with Papists in their opinions, as darkness and dark∣ness will sooner agree than light and darkness; yea, all Errors issuing themselves into Anti∣christianisme, the great Apostacy from the Christian Faith, as into one common sinck; here∣by the spirits of men are more prepared for the reception of Popish infusions. 5. Jesuitical Designs and Models of redu∣cing England to Romes obedience, exactly fol∣lowed, and promoted by many deluded Prote∣stants, it being most apparent from the Politi∣cal Treatises and Continual Practices of that Party, that nothing can more conduce to their ends, than the pulling down the Protestant Ʋniversities, (by which they have received their deadly wounds) and the impoverishing, disgracing, and overthrowing a Godly, Learned Ministry, an sowing jealousies and dissentions between them and their people. 6. The toleration of Popery publickly plead∣ed for in Print, and by some of Power and In∣terest endeavoured, contrary to so many re∣newed Declarations of State, together with a
varnish put upon the foulest Errors of that way by others of a prostituted conscience in their scandalous Pamphlets, which by the liberty of these times are permitted to come forth to the seducing of the people. Secondly, The present distracted estate of Re∣ligion is sufficiently evident from 1. Our divisions both in civil and spiritual things, heightened by the various changes that have happened amongst us, which have begot∣ten jealousies and animosities against one ano∣ther, so that the wonted love and communion in holy duties is interrupted, strangeness and distan∣ces fomented, censures and hard opinions of each other entertained; and whil'st each Party are Promoting the Private Interests of their own Faction, the Publick Concernments of the Gospel suffer an irreparable loss and de∣cay. 2. The many horrid and hideous Errors which for some years past have abounded a∣mongst us, against the Authority of Scriptures, the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost, Trinity of Persons, the Immortality of the Soul, Doctrines of Repentance, Humiliation, Sanctification, Resur∣rection
from the dead, the eternal recompences of heaven and hell; the decrying and abasing of Ordinances as so many empty forms, and the Ministry as an useless thing; yea, divers Sects of Libertines encreasing every day in numbers, power and malice; and under the various forms and names of Quakers, Seekers, Ranters, Fami∣lists, Behemists, &c. oppugning the received doctrine and unquestionable interests of Christ Jesus among us. 3. The odious scandals of those that profess themselves the people of God, as their self-seek∣ing under the pretence of publick good, their unparallel'd breaches of all civil and sacred Oaths and Covenants, both to God and Man, which however palliated by the cunning crafti∣ness of men, (which makes the sin the greater) yet are known to God, and visible to the World, whereby the mouth of iniquity is open∣ed, the reverence of Religion abated; and 'tis to be fear'd thousands upon this occasion look upon communion and close walking with God but as an empty notion, and meer imposture; so that to us there appeareth no visible way of re∣pairing the credit of strict profession, but by a
severe punishment of Professors from the Lords righteous Judgements ready to break out up∣on us. 4. The immense and boundless liberty per∣mitted, assumed, and freely practised by many to write, print, publish and maintain all manner of blasphemies, and horrid opinions, without danger and controule, to subvert mens faith, and to devoure the souls of our Wives, Chil∣dren, Friends, Servants, and to bury the truths of Christianity under the heap and rubbish of all sorts of Errors, the sad and woful effects whereof appear in many, by their Atheism, and Contempt of all Religion; in others, by their Scepticisme and Irresolution in any; in some, by their Apostacy from the truth, which they find so much despised, and back-sliding to Popery, as the only Religion wherein, in their opinion, uni∣on and order is retain'd; in most indifferency and lukewarmness, and much decay of the power of godliness. Lastly, some (as we are credibly informed) grown to that height of wicked∣ness, as to worship the Divel himself. 5. Sabbath-Profanation, both as to opinion and practice, grown to a greater heighth than
ever formerly; the Jewish Sabbath being cry∣ed up instead of the Christian, and Shops opened upon the Lords day, and Wares publickly put to Sale; yea, some working the works of their ordinary Callings, in Knitting, and Sewing of garments in our publick Assemblies: yea, in the very Pulpit, in the time of Gods publick Worship, to the great affront and contempt thereof. 6. The pouring out by men of all Sects, with a full month all manner of obloquie and contempt upon Ministry, and Ministers of the Gospel, openly interrupting them in the very Exercise of their Ministerial duty, whereby they are discouraged and obstructed in their work, while they are represented to the world under the notions of Baal's Priests, insatiable Hirelings, Gehazi's, Cheaters, Pulpited Divines, Distributers of Sundays Doles, Simonious decima∣ting Clergy, Common Incendiaries, and cloathed with the livery of other such revilings and all this to render whatever they shall say for the vindicating of truth, and reforming of manners, useless and ineffectual. Thirdly, Other Causes and Symptomes of
Gods wrath hanging over our heads; as First, The frequent disappointments from time to time of all hopes of coming to any consisten∣cy and settlement of Government in the Nati∣on, occasioned by our strange Confusions and Changes, pulling down and setting up, setting up and pulling down, which is a clear evidence that God hath in displeasure darkened our eyes, and hid counsel from us, Isa 9.19. Psal. 35.6. Isa. 19.13. Secondly, The sad Presages of Ʋn-churching the Nation, or the departing of the glory of God from us, evidenced 1. By his calling home to himself, and laying aside many Eminent Workmen in Church and State, as if he had no more work to be done a∣mong us, and would now leave all open to ru∣ine and devastation, Isa. 57.2. Isa. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. & 5. 2. By suffering those that remain, to be exercised with continual reproaches, and the de∣faming of many, which whatever is thought of it, is given in Scripture as a token of remediless ruine, 2 Chron. 36.16. 3. By our leaving our first love and former
zeal for the truths and worship of God, for which our fore-fathers so earnestly contended, even with the loss of liberty, life, and all things dear to them, striving against sin; but the pre∣sent coldness and indifferency in the things of God, together with our barrenness and unan∣swerable walking to the Gospel of Christ, seem∣eth to speak no less to us than the removing of our Candlestick, or some great Eclipse of Re∣ligion among us, Rev. 2.4, 5. 4. By the enmity and opposition which is everywhere manifested against the truths that are according to godliness, and malignity aginst the Professors thereof; a sin for which God threatned the Jewish Nation to take away the Kingdome of God from them, and to give it to a Nation, bringing forth the fruits thereof, Mat. 2 L. 43. 5. By the prevalency of Atheisme, Madness, and doating upon all manner of Error, (fomen∣ted by the intrusion of unskilful guides) endless separations, common ignorance, unbelief, profaness, and prejudice aginst wholsome Doctrine, and all Order and Discipline in the Church, and the ma∣ny other Confusions and spiritual judgements
which are upon us, all which we cannot but sad∣ly look upon as dreadful preparations towards a Bill of Divorce which God is about to put into the hands of these Nations. Now these things being so, we (whom the Lord hath placed in the Ministry, though un∣worthy) do promise for our selves. 1. To use all holy endeavours in our places and stations, to keep God and his truth amongst us, and to that end shall take all occasions to mourn before the Lord, and be more frequent in fasting and prayer, crying mightily to our God to return to the Tribes of his Inheritance, confes∣sing our own sins, and the sins of the people, that (if it be possible) these dreadful effects of his wrath may be turned away, and he may re∣vive his work in the midst of the years, and yet continue to be with us. 2. To be more diligent in watching over our several Flocks, feeding them with knowledge and understanding, and dispencing the Word and Sacraments with more tenderness and faith∣fulness, as also to use more care in Catechising and Seasoning youth with the fundamental prin∣ciples of the Christian Faith, and to be more
frequent in Family Inspection, both our own and yours, as the Lord shall give opportunity, and vouchsafe strength. 3. That we shall, as occasion is offered, en∣deavour your establishment in the present truths, 2 Pet. 1.12. especially against Popish de∣lusions. And we do in the bowels of Christ earnestly beseech and exhort you, out of a sense of the forementioned dangers, to prepare to meer the Lord, coming against us in Judgement, by hum∣bling your selves under his mighty hand, and re∣moving the evil of your ways, and seeking his face in Christ Jesus our Lord, that ye may be hidden in the day of his fierce anger, and in wrestling, may prevail with God to spare his people, that his heritage may not be given to reproach, and the Adversaries of his truth, say among themselves, Where is their God? More especially we exhort you; 1. To take heed of false Teachers, Mat. 16.6. trying the spirits, 1 John 4.1. and holding fast that which is good, 1 Thes. 5.21. especially to beware of Popish Insinuations, under what pre∣tence soever disguised, lest unawares you be led
away by the Error of the wicked, which we do the rather suggest, out of a fear lest many may be too well conceited of that corrupt Religion, having never smarted under Antichristian Tyranny, as our fore-fathers did, and forgetting the blood and sufferings of the Holy Martyrs, and finding Rome justified by Englands Confusions, as Sodom was by Israels sins, Ezek. 16.51. But we hope (Brethren and Beloved in the Lord) that you will think no abhorrency great enough for that Faction and sort of men, who forbid you the reading of the Scripture in your own vulgar tongue, (as if the Word of God were a dange∣rous and infectious book) who take a way from the people of God the Communion of the Cup, so expresly established by Christs Institution; who require you to attend upon prayers in a lan∣guage that you understand not; who daily of∣fer up in their Mass, a proper and propitiatory scrifice (as they call it) for quick and dead, though the Scripture assures us, that by one ob∣lation once offered, Christ hath perfected for ever those that are sanctfied, who set up Images for Worship, contrary to the second Command∣ment; who teach you the Invocation of Saints
and Angels, to the prejudice of Christ Jesus our Lord, the only Mediator between God & men; who preach up the merit of works, yea, works of Supererogation, and Popes pardons, and Purgatory for faults already forgiven, as if Christ had not fully satisfied for them; who by the words of Consecration pronounced by a Priest, profess to transubstntiate bread in to the body of Christ, and then fall down to it, and worship it; who adde traditions of men to the Word of God, as of equal Authority therewith; who dispense with Oaths, and Incestuous Marriages, resolve their faith in∣to Papal Infallibility; forbid the Marriage of Ministers, and yet tolerate Stews; who, to pro∣pagate the Roman Religion, and promote the in∣terests of the Papal Sea, take upon them to dispose of Kingdoms, and in ordine ad spiritualia to invade the temporalities of Princes, and im∣broyle their Nations in blood and confusion, and many such other Monstrous Tenents, and withall introduce a ridiculous mass of Ceremonies, and humane Inventions, not only besides the Word, but against it: We say we hope we need not many words to awaken you, that have so long enjoyed the purer light of Christianity, into a
just indignation and hatred of these abomina∣ble Superstitions, Heresies and Idolatries 2. To manifest your sincerity, not only by an hatred of Error, but a love of the Truth, hoping you do sufficiently understand the difference between opposition to a false way, and yielding up your selves to the power of the Truth; and that there is little certainty of the stedfastness of those who side with the Right Party, rather out of Faction, Custome, Education, and Publick Countenance, than any sound evidence of, or af∣fection to that good way which they do profess, 2 Thes. 2.10, 11. 3. To keep your selves unspotted from the prevailing corruptions of these back-sliding times, lest being partakers in other mens sins, you be involved in their judgments, it being the Lords way to punish the Accessories that abett and as∣sist evil things, by conniving at and consenting to them, as well as the Principal and Chief Actors; therefore we desire you to mourn in se∣cret for the abominations of the Land, with purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord and his Truth, and to disclaim all such wicked practices and opinions as have rendered this Age where∣in
we live, the wonder and astonishment of sober and religious Christians. 4. To endeavour in your places, an healing of those sad breaches and divisions which have been amongst us, that so we may be mutually strongthened in the defence of the Gospel, and in the promoting of the common faith and salva∣tion. And in as much as our knowledge here, and all other graces are imperfect, and the Lord hath so tempered the body, that the noblest member cannot say unto the meanest, I have no need of thee; let therefore the strong learn to bear the infirmities of the weak, and the weak to forbear the censuring of the strong; let not any either despise or judge, but all mutually receive and serve one another in love, that no prints of unkind distances and unbrotherly estrangements may be found amongst us; but that all who fear the Lord, may endeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, not speaking hardly against, or wounding the names and reputations of one another, but speaking often together, unto the mutual reforming and building up each other in our most holy faith. 5. To be diligent in the spiritual and con∣scientious
performance of Family duties, as those good old Exercises of Prayer both Morning and Evening, Reading the Word, Singing of Psalms, Re∣peating of Sermons, and Catechising your children and servants, (duties too much in these loose and licentious days neglected, as matters of meer formality, but zealously and constantly observed by godly men in former and better times) that so the succession of Churches be not cut off, and the taint of these corruptions may not be trans∣mitted to the next Ages by the ill education of youth, who are the seed plot of future woe or weal, and who in these loose and ungoverned times, are observed to have little favour of that Doctrine which is according to godliness, Ephes. 6.4. 6. That you would cause your children and servants to submit to publick Catechisings, and train them up in the reverence of a godly Mini∣stry, lest they get a spirit of scorning betimes; for we have just cause to fear that many young ones, instead of being taught to cry Hosanna to Christ, Mat. 21.15. do rather learn to cry Bald∣pate to his Messengers, 2 King. 2.23. by the licen∣tious defamings and reproaches of the present Age.
And now having discharged that trust which was incumbent upon us, as those that watch for your souls, and having in simplicity and since∣rity, not in fleshly wisdom, but in the fear of God, set before you the diseases and dangers where∣unto we lie exposed, with the remedies and du∣ties which in such a day of trouble and rebuke the Lord calleth for: We earnestly beseech you in the bowels of the Lord Jesus, as you va∣lue the presence of God amongst you, and ex∣pect that he should return to the many thou∣sands of this our Israel; as you prize the enjoyment of the reformed Religion, and therewithall the prosperity and tranquillity of this once flourishing City, and these now dilacerated Nations, to lay them sadly to heart; and since the Lord hath not utterly forsaken us, but there is yet hope in Isra∣el, with holy Jacob, to hold him fast, and not to let him go untill he bless us, and return with mercy unto us, making this our Jerusalem a praise in the earth: To his effectual blessing we most humbly commend this poor service of ours, and this great City to his gracious gui∣dance, and almighty protection, beseeching him to let his Eye and his Heart be perpetually
upon it, to cover it all the day long under the Wing of his Providence, and with the hi∣ding of his Power, to be a Wall of fire round about it, and still the glory in the midst of it. EDward Reynolds, Minister of Lawrence Jury. Arthur Jackson, Minister of Faiths under Pauls. Charles Offspring, Minister of Antholins. Edmund Calamy, Minister of Aldermanbury. Simeon Ashe, Minister of Austins, London. Thomas Case, Minister of Giles in the Fields. Thomas Whitfeld, Minister of Peters in Broad-street. Thomas Manton, Minister of Covent-garden. Roger Drake, Minister of Peters Cheap. James Nalton Minister of Leonards Foster-lane. John Sheffield, Minister of Swithins. William Jenkins, Minister of Christ Church. Gabriel Sangar, Minister of Martins in the Fields. William Wickins, Minister of Georges Southwark. Matthew Haviland, Minister of Trinity Parish. William Blackmore, Minister of Peters Cornhil. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook. Arthur Barham, Minister of Hellens. William Whitaker, Minister at Magdalens Bermondsey. Thomas Wadsworth, Minister of Newington Butts. Benjamin Needler, Minister of Margaret Moses.
Zachariah Crofton, Minister of Botolphs Algato. John Wells, Minister of Olaves Jewry. William Bates, Minister of Dunstans in the West. John Meriton, Minister of Nicholas Acons. Samuel Smith, Minister at Bennets Grace Church. Richard Adams, Minister of Mildreds Bread-street. Daniel Batchelor, Minister of Anne Aldersgate. Thomas Parson, Minister of Michael Woodstreet. John Kitchin, Minister of Mary Abchurch. Giles Hinton, Minister of Maudlins Old-fish-street. Thomas Meriton, Minister of Michael Coleabby. John Gibbon, Minister of Blackfryars. John Rumney, Minister of Thomas Apostles. Matthew Pool, Minister of Michael Quern at London. John Crodacott, Minister of Saviours Southwark. John Hering, Minister of Brides London. Robert Tatnol, Minister of John Evangelist. Thomas Jacomb, Minister of Martins Ludgate. George Fawler, Minister of Bride-well, precinct London. Thomas Dawks, Minister of Michael Queen-hithe. Thomas Willes, Minister of Botolph Billingsgate. Thomas Doelittle, Minister of Alphage. John Jackson, Minister of Bennets Pauls Wharfe. Thomas Clendon, Minister of All-hallows Barking. Ralph Strettel, Minister of Johns Zachary. Thomas Gouge, Minister of Sepulchres. William Cooper, Minister of Olaves Southwark. Thomas Lye, Minister of All-hallows Lumbard-street. Peter Witham, Minister of John Baptist-Walbrook. Thomas White, Minister of Mary Hill. Samuel Clark, Minister of Bennet Fink. George Smalwood, Minister of Mildreds in the Poultry.
William Spurstow, D. D. Minister of Hackney. William Taylor, Minister of the Gospel in Coleman-street. Peter Ʋinke, Minister of Michael Corn-hil. Samuel Annesley, Minister of Giles Cripplegate. John Seabrook, Minister of Andrew Le Wardrobe. Has. Bridges, Minister of Albans Woodstreet. Leonard Cook, Minister at Islington. Elijah Pledger, Minister of the Gospel at Christ-Church. Morgan Hopton, Minister of Andrews Holborn. Stephen Watkins, Minister of Southwark. FINIS.
