R299 M2893 E31_11 99868684 121037
A Most Grave, and Modest Confutation of the Errors of the Sect, commonly Called BROWNISTS, OR: SEPERATISTS. Agreed upon long since by the joynt consent of sundry, godly, and Learned Ministers of this Kingdome, then standing out and suffering in the cause of inconformity; and now published in a time of need, for the good of Gods Church, and the better set∣ling of mens unstable mindes in the truth against, the subtile insinuations, and plau∣sible pretences of that pernicious evill. Published by W. Rathband, Minister of the GOSPELL. LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster, and George Badger, and are to be sold at the Bible, on Fleet-Bridge, and in Saint Dunstanes Church-Yard. 1644.
The Publisher to the READER. CHristian Reader, touching this insuing treatise, bee pleased to understand that it was compiled, (so as now thou hast it, without any adition, or alteration) many yeares since by sundry Re∣verend and Godly Ministers of this Kingdome, who in their times stood out and suffered in the cause of Inconformitie to the Ceremonies, and laboured the Reformation of things then, and still in part remaining amisse in our Church: therein both for opinion, and practise, endeavouring to keepe close to the Rules of Scripture, and what in them lay to eschew all er∣rors and exorbitances, both of separation on the right hand, and of superstition on the left. Who the men were by name, is neither now necessary to be published, nor, in respect of them all, certainely known. But what sort of men they were that made it, and of what piety,
charitie, modestie, and abilitie for this controversie they were, the treatise it selfe by its owne light will sufficiently discover to the unpartiall, and unprejudicate Reader. It is now presented to publike view (after so long detein∣ment) the rather because; First, The Presse is now more free and open (then in for∣mer times) to books of this nature, which doe so oppose the Schisme of the Brownists, as not at all to allow of the tyran∣nie and corruptions of the Bishops. Secondly, It seemeth now more needfull then formerly, through the late lamentable increase of opinions and practises of separation, and the dangerous rents alreadie made, and likely to bee made thereby, even to the utter ruine of this Church, if by the mercie of our God, and the wisdome of our King, and Parliament, some timely, and effectuall remedy be not provided. Thirdly, Hereby (good Reader) thou maist see that the opinions, and practises of those that way addicted, now so much extolled, wondred at, and greedily embraced by many, under the notion of new truths, and a new and further light (as if some new created Star bad now appeared to the world, never seene before) are indeed no other, for substance, but the old errors and dotages of Barrow, and Greenwood, long since by them published, and by the godlie, sober, and judicious in those times opposed, and exploded. Save that now, like rustie weapons, they are newly furbished, and being but the same mettalls, and materialls, are only cast into a new mould, with addition of some things more, of the same sort, then they
expresly held; mitigation of others, by them more sharp∣lie and rigorously delivered; and interlasing of others, more pleasing and plausible to make the rest rellish and vent the better. Fourthly, Hereby also thou maist perceive, and take up the true judgment of the true ancient and present Non-con∣formists of this Kingdome, in these points, as from their own mouth, and pen. Whereof (by the help of God) thou maist make these, and the like uses. First, Thou maist cleare them in thy thoughts from the misrepresentations, and imputations both of the Episcopall, and Schismaticall partie. Both of which would make the world believe that the Non-conformists have laid the foun∣dation of Brownisme, by their principles of Inconformity, and that if this bee lawfull, the other must needs bee necessary: The former sort thus suggesting, to lay the greater ha∣tred upon them and the cause of Reformation, which they promoted; The latter sort to procure the greater credit to their owne irregular, and unwarrantable courses thereby. (And would to God that some other brethren (though of a farre better sort, and such as have long groaned under their Conformitie, had not beene, or yet were not too credu∣lous to such unlikely, and unreasonable suggestions against their brethren.) 2. Thou maist see that the cause of separation may be con∣futed without relinquishing in one part, the grounds of Incon∣formitie, or leaning at all unto Episcopacie. As the cause of Inconformitie, may bee fully maintained without fetching
weapons from or betaking our selves unto the Campe of Se∣paration, which thing I could wish with all my heart, bad beene well observed by some (otherwise godly and judicious brethren) in these dayes, who no sooner begin to distast and cast off, their old burden of superstitious conformitie, (of late augmented, and made utterly unprofitable by sundry other in∣novations) but withall they begin to dislike all set formes of prayer especially, in our Lyturgie, as unlawfull, to question their owne present standing in the ministerie as Antichristi∣an, and to abstaine from our worship, especially our Sacra∣ments, as Idolatrous, with other like unreasonable opinions, and practises. As if it were not possible for men to leape out of the Surplice, unlesse also they leapt out of the Church, and as if there were no middle betweene separation from the Church and true worship thereof, and subscription unto or practise or approbation of all the corruptions in the same. An error, in some sort, formerly excusable when oppression (as Salomon saith, Eccles. 7.7.) and persecution made even wise men themselves madde, and sometimes in hast, be∣tweene feare, griefe and anger, in avoyding one extreame, to fall upon another. But now, since that by the miraculous mer∣cie of God) the stings of those great Bees, are pulled out, and their hornes sawed off, whereby they have so long afflicted, and willingly destroyed this poore Church, I say now, mee thinkes wise men should looke before they leape, and so warily eschew one errour as that they doe not unwarily run into ano∣ther, perhaps a worse. Lastly thou mayest be somewhat stayed, from hastie ad∣hering,
or inclining to their courses of separation, not onely by the Treatise it selfe, but also by the consideration of the Treatisers. For though no mans person whatsoever can be a sufficient bottome whereon to settle any opinion or pra∣ctise in Religion, but the Word of God, and right reason alone, yet is not these mens example, or testimonie to be altoge∣ther slighted, especially in this controversie, wherein wee are sometimes almost deaffed with the praises of some of the sepe∣rators eminent learning, pietie, sinceritie, zeale, &c. In which case I hope it need not bee offensive to any, perhaps it may be profitable to some (according to the Apostles example in a case not altogether unlike, 2 Cor. 11.22. to oppose these mens learning, pietie, sinceritie, zeale, &c. against the others; Who as in all other things they were examples of holinesse, so in this, that they have ever, not only for borne but stedfastly opposed to their great reproach, dammage, and danger many wayes, the corruptions in our Church-go∣vernment, worship and Leiturgie, and have beene lights and leaders to these latter times therein, yet alwayes in a peaceable and regular way, as not on the one side to subject themselves to suspitious inventions, so on the other, not sinfully to separate from the Communion and true worship of Churches; account∣ing it more agreeable to all rules of pietie, charitie, and Chri∣stian prudence to tolerate for the time, what they could not mend, rather than to rent and teare all in peeces, to an utter ruine. To conclude, though perhaps some few particulars in this treatise may seeme more questionable, yet for the maine I
doubt not but the Authors have held close to the truth, both in their owne positions, and in opposing their adversaries. By which therefore (good Reader) thou maiest reape much be∣nefit, for thy better settling in these unsettled times, if thou be capable thereof, and if the Lord shall please to adde his blessing thereunto. Which hee shall never cease to pray for, who is, (all that he is) truly thine in Him, W R.
THE PREFACE of the AUTHORS of the Treatise, ensuing to the READER. THE holy Apostle Saint Paul writing unto the Galathians these words, Brethren, If any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, you which are spirituall, restore such a one with the spirit of meek∣nesse, considering thy selfe, lest thou also be tempt∣ed: both sheweth the danger of falling, where∣unto they are subject, who stand in the Church of God, and prescribeth the dutie of recovering those that are fallen unto such as are spirituall, That is to say, as are furnished with gifts thereunto, with the manner how all that ought to be perform∣ed: two necessary points in our judgements to be considered, and much tending to the preservation of the good and happy estate of the Church of God: for how cometh it to passe, that Sathan so farre prevaileth against it; but for that weake men consider not the danger of falling, untill they be downe, and almost past recovering; those that are fallen, either not at all, or not untill they be well neere without remedy. It is there∣fore one especiall part of holy wisedome, for men who think they stand, to take heed lest they fall, and therefore to seeke to kneow the depth of Sathans pollicies and subtilties, and then the effectuall means for the preventing of them, Into which if
they carefully enquire they shall finde, that though hee seeke to draw even those that have shined as starres in the Church, from heaven unto the earth; yet that he much more earnestly laboureth to make them wandring starres, forsaking the place wherein they seemed to be fixed, to give shine and direction to others, that is, though hee laboureth and endeavoureth to bring men from their first love and zeale, unto a lukewarm∣nesse, or key coldnesse in the Church, yet he rather desireth to lead them into a fierie spirit, and indiscreet zeale from the Church and societie of Saints, which no doubt he doth, as for many other causes; so for these two. 1. That he might by their departure, who have seemed zealous and godly pro∣fessors, shake the faith of others, and cause them to doubt, that they are not in the true Church; where they may finde di∣rections toward the kingdome of heaven: and at last to flie from it, as from Babylon. And 2. that he might deprive those men themselves of the happy meanes of the recovery which they might have had easily applyed, had they beene in the Church, and remained in the fellowship thereof: Hence it is, that in the Church of God, those who breaking the holy bands of love and faith, have like unkinde children forsaken her their naturall mother, and oft pleaded with her as a strum∣pet, which never was done in more convenient manner then of late, by certain of our brethren, who having been brought forth of the wombe, and brought up in the bosome of the Church of England, have not onely renounced, as a stepmo∣ther: but condemned her, as one of the daughters, yea the el∣dest daughter of the very whore of Babylon, railing on her, as if she living in continuall spirituall fornications, brought forth sonnes and daughters, not unto Christ; but unto Anti∣christ his adversary: By which their faults and fallings, as they have deprived themselves of those gracious blessings which they did long, and might have still enjoyed amongst us to their soules health, and made the meanes of their reco∣very more hard and difficult; so have they troubled and dis∣quieted many remaining in the body of our Church, and of
strong men in the truth, brought them to be children again in understanding, easie to bee carried about with every blast of diverse and strange doctrines, how contrary soever to the truth according unto godlinesse, either taught or received by them. The case thus standing, we take it to be our duties, being mem∣bers and Ministers of this Church, having by Gods grace re∣ceived some, though a small measure of gifts fit thereunto, as to maintaine the credit of the Church, wherein we live. And to justifie the practise of our ministerie therein, so farre forth as truth will permit; so chiefely to seeke, and endeavour both the recoverie of those that are strayed from the sheepfold of Christ amongst us, and also the stay of those that are ready to runne after them, together with the better grounding, and confirming of them who remaine in the flocke, with comfort under their shepheards, which duty we have endeavoured to performe heretofore by publike preaching, and private con∣ferences as occasions hath beene offered, and now have be∣stowed our labours in writing this treatise following, to the same end wherein after wee have proved by certaine reasons, that our Assemblies, are the true Church of God, we take up∣on us to shew. First, The foure chiefest exceptions, they take against our Church for warranting Schisme, and separation from us are vaine and frivelous. Secondly, That the maine grounds they stand upon for the erecting their new Church, are weake and slender. Thirdly, that the best arguments that they use for condem∣ning us, and justifying themselves, are loose and unsufficient: which points as we have gathered out of their printed books and written papers (where they were before scattered) and brought into one forme and body, so have we more plainely, and nakedly, both proposed, and dealt in, passing by all im∣pertinent, and offensive matters; And their flouting declama∣tions, petitions, exclamations, and bitter reviling speeches a∣gainst our Churches, Ministers, and people, all their reproch∣full slanderous profane scornings, fearefull blasphemies a∣gainst
the Word preached, and Sacraments administred, pray∣ers, and holy exercises of Religion, used in our Assemblies, wherewith their writings, and printings swell to some bignes, as Bladders puffed up with winde. All these (though wee have given the Reader some taste of their spirit in them) yet have wee not in our Treatise stood upon them, for that wee judge them not worthy the answer. This worke of ours, we commend, first unto our brethren departed from us, desiring them to read it, without partialitie, selfe love, prejudice or other sinister affections, and with meekenesse, indifferencie, and love of the Truth, desire to be informed, and readinesse to be reformed, where they erre and goe astray: It may be that God will give a blessing to it, nay sure wee are, that he is faithfull that hath promised, to give unto those that aske, to open to those that knocke, and to cause them to find that seeke, the truth in sincerity of their hearts, especially if to the reading thereof, they adjoyne: First, a review of the books which have beene written by the Ring-leaders of their sepa∣rations. Secondly, a view of the persons of whom their Assemblies consist. And Thirdly, a consideration of the estate wherein their Church now standeth. In the review of the bookes which have been written, we exhort them with single hearts, to examine the spirits where with the authors of them were led in their writing, and they shall finde it not to be the good spirit of God, which filleth mens hearts with meekenesse, humilitie compassion, softnesse, holinesse, and o∣ther sanctified affections, but that evill spirit of Satan, which under colour of zeale of Gods glory, hatred of sinne, desire of serving God in sincerity, thrusteth men whom it hath de∣ceived into pride, selfe love, rashnesse, unnaturall affections, uncharitable surmises, and most unchristian judgment of their brethren. Secondly, to weigh wisely what end they proposed to themselves in their writings, which will evidently appeare to be not so much the cleering of themselves, from the crime of Schisme, as the drawing of others to joyne with them, and
the defacing of our Church, which they compare with the most Idolatrous, and heathenish Nations, that ever were, yea with Sodom and Babylon it selfe, and the disgracing the Mini∣sters thereof, especially those whom heretofore they have most reverenced, whom they sort with most wretched Mis∣creants, Iudas, Cain, Balaam, and many other, upon whom the spirit of God hath set a fearefull brand of eternall condem∣nation. Thirdly, to try carefully the allegations of Scripture, wherewith they have fully painted the Margents, and with the multitude, whereof they have astonished the simple, or credulous Readers, perswading them, that their cause stand∣eth upon the same ground of Gods holy Word, and they shall plainely perceive, that the places by them alleadged, do for the most part prove that, which we denie not: And if they be brought to confirme the matter in controversie, they are either unconscionably, or ignorantly wrested against, or besides the meaning of the Holy Ghost. A second thing which we intreat them to do is, to view the persons of whom their Assemblies consist, and let them tell us how many of them there bee, whom they have brought from grosse igno∣rance, unto true knowledge, from infidelitie, to holy Faith, from profanesse of life, to a conscionable walking with God; if there bee scarce any amongst them, which have not bin of some note in our Churches, for holy and sincere professi∣on; and if they had no good thing in them, which they have not received by the ministerie of those men, and in the bo∣some of those Churches, which now they condemne, and flie from, why then take they the Seale of our ministerie, and Church, and set it unto their blanke? Thirdly we exhort all of them to a survey of their estate, wherein they stand, which is (if that be true, which by some of their own hath been re∣ported) full of disorder and confusion; And indeed how can it otherwise bee, whereas they teach that every member of their Church may, and ought to stand up against their Mini∣sters and Elders, to gainesay them in delivering of doctrine,
and withstand the other in execution of discipline; If he be perswaded, the one erreth from the truth, and the other faileth in justice, is not this to make every member an eye, an eare, an head? And must not men be of Angelicall perfection to pre∣serve unitie, where such large libertie is granted unto them? A second sort to whom we commend this labour of ours, be our brethren also who by the writings, doings, and suffer∣ings of these deceived men, are in danger likewise to bee de∣ceived, being brought to halt betweene two opinions. These also we pray to read it with an holy purpose, to be fully re∣solved, and setled in the truth. We hope their labour shall not be in vaine, if they will accept from us these few adver∣tisments. First, That they make not the example of any man seem he never so godly, religious, and zealous, but the Word of God only, the rule of their beliefe, and life; Paul himselfe must be followed no further, when the holy precepts of the Word, and the examples of the godly joyn together, we have the one to teach us, the other to incite us to doe our duties. Secondly, That they carry an humble and lowly conceit of themselves, and their gifts. That they remember,1 Cor. 8.2. Galath. 6.3. that if any man thinke hee knoweth any thing, hee knoweth nothing as he ought to know; And that if any man seeme to himselfe, that he is somewhat, when he is nothing, he deceaveth himselfe in his imaginations. That to this purpose, they occupie themselves in conside∣ration of their owne wants, and sinnes, which cleave so fast unto them, rather than in the marking the blemishes, & note∣ing the faults that are in others, following the counsell of the Apostle.Galath. 6.4. Let every one prove his owne worke, and then shall he have rejoycing in himselfe only, and not in another. Thirdly, that they have a reverend opinion of those men by whose ministerie they have beene begotten unto God, or nourished in the truth, by whose labours they have beene in∣structed, confirmed and comforted, in whose mouthes the Word of God hath beene unto them, as a two edged sword,
entring through them unto the deviding a sunder the soule and spirit, the joynts and the marrow, that they suffer not a sinfull thought to enter into their heads, of their vnlawfull vo∣cations, who have their hearts and soules, as Seales of their ministery, and may say to them as Paul to the Corinthians,1. Cor. 9.1. are yee not my worke in the Lord, if I be not an Apostle unto others, yet doubtlesse I am unto you, for you are the Seale of mine Apostle∣ship in the Lord; whereof they should therefore be the more carefull, for that it hath bin an ancient and ordinary policie of Satan, that hee might cause men to refuse the word brought unto them in the mouthes of the Prophets, Apostles and o∣ther men of God, yea of Christ Himselfe to perswade them that they had no warrant of their vocarions, and calling from God. Fourthly, That if notwithstanding, all that is said for their instruction, and reformation in this behalfe, they keepe a liking of that draught of a Church, which our deceived Bre∣thren have framed and commended in their writings, and de∣sire to joyne themselves unto their societie. They yet remember it is a part of wisdome, to stay the full establishing of their Church, and practise of the Ordinances thereof, for a time that they may see what blessings of God bee upon it, for the ratifying and approving of their doings: for if it bee of God, it will stand as an house founded upon a a sure Rocke, if it bee of men, it will come to naught. A third sort to whom we commend this worke of ours are our stronger brethren which continue with comfort in the societie of their Church, them wee intreat that if they finde any confirmation or strengthening unto their consciences by the pursuing hereof, any increase of knowledge and ability to maintaine the truth of our Church, Sacraments and word, to defend the lawfulnesse of our ministerie, and practise of Gods externall worship amongst us. That first they praise God whose gift it is, that any thing is spoken, or written for their edification, instruction and con∣solation, and then bestow the same as occasion shall be offered,
to the reclaiming of those that are straied, and holding them that are ready to wander. Wee lastly commend this simple travell of ours to the Church of God, whereof we are unworthy Ministers, be∣seeching her to accept our poore endeavours, the rather, for that wee are not ignorant that the labours which we have ta∣ken in this cause, will be diversly judged of, according to the manner and affection of those men to whom this worke shall come. Some, as namely, our deceived Brethren against whom we deale, will hold it damnable and execrable, as being bestow∣ed against the Church of Christ, against the Saints and chil∣dren of God, against the holy Truth taught in the Testament of Christ; yea, and that contrary to the light of our own con∣sciences, and knowledge of our owne hearts. To the first part of this their charge and accusation, we an∣swer; That whether they or wee be the true Church of God: whether they or wee have the Truth taught in the Testament of Christ, is the matter in controversie betwixt us. If wee be the Church of God and have the Truth of Christ, as we hope shall appeare by this Treatise, then have they written and spo∣ken against the Church of God, and that in most shamefull and fearefull manner. If they be the true Church of God, and have his Truth (which we assure our selves they shall be never able to prove) then have wee spent our labours against the Church of God: But have we done it wittingly and wil∣lingly against the light of our hearts; This is indeed the se∣cond part of their charge: but who made them the searchers of our hearts, and judges of our consciences, that they should accuse us, to Im other and quench the light of Truth, which hath shined into our soules, especially when they heare our protestations to the contrary, where is that Charitie that thinketh none evill, which hopeth all things; we say therefore unto the second part of their accusation with the Apostle, We say the Truth in Christ, our consciences bearing us witnesses in the holy Ghost, that we can say nothing against the Truth; but for the
Truth, wittingly and willingly. And in the Testamonie thereof we pray God that our tongues may cleave to the roofe of our mouthes when we endeavour to speake, and that our pennes may sticke to the ends of our fingers, when wee attempt to write any thing against the Church, Children, or Truth of God. Some others, Fathers, and Brethren, Ministers, and Mem∣bers with us of this Church, finding by our manner of write∣ing of what judgemeut wee are, will hold our paines requisite and necessarie, to stay the course of these waters which wee have given passage unto, and to make up the breaches wee have opened, by speaking against the government established in this Church, the Ceremonies used therein; and other our unadvised dealings in the execution of our Ministrie. To these men wee say first, that as we have beene, and are perswaded of the Truth of these things which we have deli∣vered, touching the defects and wants, the blemishes and de∣formities of this Church. So have we in the sincerity and up∣rightnesse of our hearts, dealt for the redresse and Reformati∣on thereof: Wherein, though we know nothing by our selves before men, more then Truth will permit, if they should have taken occasion by our doctrine (which we perswade our selves to be the doctrine of the Truth) to make this Schisme; Yet were this no reason to reprove us, unlesse those men which have set downe true positions be to be blamed, as Authors of the false Collections and Conclusions which are inferred and gathered thereupon. Secondly wee answer, That our deceived Brethren do no lesse condemne those Churches of God, as the Synagogues of Sathan, where the doctrine which wee have taught touching the government of the Church, and matters of Ceremonies is maintained, and where all things which wee hold offensive in our Church are abolished, then they doe the Church of England, insomuch that they have written of the Church of Geneva (which is holden to be the best pattern of a Reformed Church) that it became a miserable president and pernicious
example even unto all Europe: whereby it is evident that they have beene brought unto this Scisme by some other induce∣ments then the dealing of those men in-the execution of their Ministrie, who are charged to be the occasions, if not the Au∣thors thereof. Thirdly, there is such difference and plaine contradiction betweene them and us in judgement, yea in the matter of dis∣cipline and Church government, besides many other materi∣all points of doctrine, as we marvell any men should esteeme us causes of their defections from this Church, much more that any man should write, That between the Brownists and others (he meaneth them and us) there is no controversie as touching the framing of a Church by the word of God. A third sort of our loving Brethren, approving our care of Gods Church, and desire to reclaime poore deceived soules, will yet happily esteeme our labour altogether needlesse and superfluous, as spent and bestowed both against a cause that hath so little shew of truth and semblance of probabilitie; nay so evident appearance of falshood and vanity, as it is rather to be despised then confuted, and also upon men, whose zeale and rashnesse so far prevailes over sound judgement, and dis∣cretion, that we shall rather sharpen and increase their hu∣mour, (by thinking them worthy answering) to a further contradiction, then either informe their understanding by sound reason, or alter their affection by efficacie of any per∣swasion. These Brethren wee desire to give us leave to dissent from them, who judge far otherwise of this cause, wee handle and hope much better of the persons against whom we deale: for the cause it selfe we say, that though it did appeare, as it is in∣deed full of falshood and and vanitie unto these that have the gift to discerne betweene those things that differ, and withall to temper their affections (which is the reason it prevaileth not with any such to their seduction) yet unto men of weak judgements and strong affections, or of more heat then know∣ledge, it seemeth far otherwise, who are not in our judgements
to bee contemned and suffered to be so headlongly carried in so violent a course, but rather with compassion to be reclai∣med, and with meeknesse to be restored by such as are spiritu∣all; If it please the Lord to give a blessing to their labour so spent and imployed. Secondly, seeing this Heresie of theirs doth not only seeke to untile the House of God built amongst us, nor to breake downe the walls only, but even to overthrow the whole fram thereof, taking away the Pillars whereon it standeth, the preaching of the Word and administration of the Sacraments: Yea digging up the very foundation thereof, and taking Christ from us whom (as they say) wee preach not, but denie in all his offices, were the false-hood and blasphemie thereof never so apparant, yet were not the labour needlesse, and superflu∣ous, that is spent in confuting thereof. Thirdly, Seeing this cause hath been thought to be of such weight and regard, that it hath brought the High Court of Parliament to make a sharp Law for the preventing of the mischiefes thereof, shall it bee thought a matter unnecessary and fruitlesse for Ministers to deale withall, especially where Lawes politicke can but draw the outward man to conformi∣tie which is but Hipocrisie unlesse the Law of God be annex∣ed thereunto for the converting of the soule, and bringing the inward man, to doe that inwardly, and sincerely which out∣wardly it performeth. Lastly, Wee have the examples of diverse Learned and godly brethren to warrant our doings, and to perswade us of the necessitie of this labour, who either by commandement from authoritie, or of their own motions by occasions offered unto them, have dealt not only by disputation and conference, but also by writing and printing for the suppression of this Schisme and reclaiming these men. For the persons against whom wee write, though we hold them all to be in a dange∣rous estate (wee are loath to say in a damnable estate) as long as they continue in this Schisme, and have cause to feare that Sathans subtilties abusing the gifts that are in them, and draw∣ing
them to pride, and conceit of themselves hath hardened some of them so in their Schisme, that they will hardly be re∣claimed, yet hope we, that as many of them have been brought backe againe to the Church, who straied away with them, so the rest may in time be brought to a sight of their owne error by good meanes effectuall thereunto, such as God hath san∣ctified to that end, and promised to accompany with the gra∣cious assistance of his holy spirit: This labour therefore of ours, we trust shall not be in vaine, but have that work in them for their recovery by the blessing of God. If God vouchsafe us not this favour to be happy instruments of their good, yet doubt we not, but he that is witnesse unto our Consciences, how we long after their salvation, yea even from our hearts roots; will be our strength, and our judgment and worke shall be with him; though they bee not gathered. But if it be remembred that our labours have beene bestow∣ed,Esay 49.4, 5. not only to raise them that are fallen already; but also to stay them that stagger, and strengthen them that stand up∣right: though it should be utterly unprofitable unto the for∣mer sort; yet being likely to prevaile with others, to their be∣nefit, it cannot but be acceptable unto God, and comfortable unto our selves, and so neither superfluous nor unnecessary. This now only remaineth (Christian reader) that before we commend this treatise to Gods blessing, we advertise thee of two things needfull for thee to know: First, whereas to many rash and hot spirited men it may seeme, that wee have dealt in this cause too remisly, so that wee have justified the corruptions of our Church, as hath beene objected against others heretofore; We answer, that our dealing may well in∣deed seem too remisse, whilst the reader shall compare it with over bitter, untrue, yea, and slanderous biting and invectives of our Brethren: but being compared with it selfe, and with our Church, as in it selfe it standeth, we hope it will appeare (sure wee are that our knowledge) wee have not justified the least thing therein worthy to be condemned.
Secondly, whereas the worke is somewhat long, and there∣fore somewhat wearisome to the Reader: Know that we de∣sired to be much more briefe therein then wee are, both for that, not the reading so much as the writing of it out by them, that after the reading of it may desire it, must needs be tedious; as also; for that fewer words and reasons might have as well satisfied the learned sort: but whereas our desire is to satisfie the simple, as having more need; by framing divers an∣swers unto the arguments and proofes which we confute, and to make them plaine to their capacity and understanding, wee could not vse more brevitie without more obscuritie. And thus we commend thee to God, and to his blessing upon the reading hereof, that it may be a meanes to teach thee to dis∣cerne the things that differ, and to keepe thee from thy being overmuch just, lest thou become too wicked. Amen.
A Collection of the chiefe Heads, of this book. I. Certaine exceptions they take, and faults they find withus; viz. With our, I. Church in gene∣rall and the whole frame of Our As∣semblies wch they affirme to bee false and Antichristian, because; 1. They were not rightly gathered, pag. 8. 2. They communicate together in an outward wor∣ship of God that is polluted with the writings and inventions of men, pag. 12. 3. They want the true discipline of Christ, page 17. 4. They submit themselves to false, and Antichri∣stian discipline, page. 19. 5. They obstinately continue in the aforesaid wants and corruptions, having beene convinced, page 21. II. Ministers whom they affirme to bee false and Antichri∣stian. 1. The Office whereunto we are called, is not that wch Christ hath ordained, but that which Anti∣christ calleth his Priests unto. page 28. 2. Their entrance is not according to Christs Ordi∣nance, but also Antichristian. p. 34. 3. Their administration and exercise of their office, is not according to Christs Ordinance, but An∣tichristian formes of prayer. p. 39. 4. Their maintenance is Iewish, and Antichristian, viz. by tythes, &c. pag. 42. III. People and the private members of our Assemblies, whom they say to be such as no true Church, can consist of. 1. Because they are not a separated peo∣ple from the world. pag. 50. 2. They are not Saints faithfull. pag. 51. 3. They tollerate the openly prophan p. 52 Two certaine con∣clusions, wch they inferre upon the foresaid exceptions viz. 1. Therefore the Assemblies wee separate from are such, as the Scriptures doe warrant us to sepa∣rate from. pag. 57. 2. Therefore the Assemblies we joyne unto, are such as the Scriptures doe warrant us to joyne unto. p. 62.
THE Church of Engl. is a true Church OF CHRIST. I. EXCEPTION. THe first Exception is against the whole body of our Assemblies and our Church in Generall, which they tearme Babylonish Synagogues and a whorish Idolatrous Church, Henry Barrow in his discovery of the false Church, Page 24. ANSVVER. THat the Church of England is a true Church of Christ,Our Congre∣gations are true Churches For, Arg. 1. We have and oyne together in the use of the preaching of the Gospell and admini∣st ration of the Sacraments. and such an one, as from wch whosoever wittingly and willingly separateth himselfe, cutteth himselfe from Christ, wee doubt not but the indifferent Reader may be perswaded by these reasons following. First, Wee enjoy and joyne together in the use of those outward meanes which God in his Word hath or∣dained for the gathering of a visible Church: for proofe whereof wee alleadge, that the meanes which we use and enjoy, have been effectuall to the unfained conversion of many, as may appeare, both by the other fruits
of faith, and by the Martyrdome which sundry have endured that were Members of our Church, and had no other meanes of conversion then such as we have: Yea even those men, who judge so hardly of us now are able to witnesse with us in this case. That if their be any true faith and sanctification in them (though it bee much increased, as they think, since they left us) yet it was begun and bred in our Assemblies. Secondly, If these places of holy Scripture, Marth. 28.20. Eph. s. 4.11, 14. bee well examined, it will bee found that the means, which Christ ordained for the gathering of a visible Church, are the very same which we enjoy, even the preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments. That which Henry Barrow saith against us, in this point pag. 160. of his discovery (viz.) that there is not any one thing amongst us either in order, or administration according to Christs Testament, shall bee hereafter disproved, when we shall come to justifie our Ministery of the Word and Sacraments against their arguments or Objection what∣soever. Now that this is an infallible and good argument of a true Church, appeareth:Which is an in fallible note of a true Church. because; First, There cannot any people be named, that, having these meanes, may yet by the word be evicted not to have beene the true Church. The Papists indeed bragge of these means, but without cause, for the doctrine of faith is not preached amongst them, but oppugned, and consequently they cannot have the true Sacraments which are Seales of righteousnesse,Rom. 3.12. & 9, 4. which is by faith. Secondly, the Scripture every where speaketh of the preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacra∣ments, as of priviledges peculiar to the Church of God.psalm. 147.19.20. So while the Jenes only were the Church, these priviledges were re∣strained to them,Matth. 10 56. and never made common to the Gentiles till the partition wall being broken downe,Acts 11.19. & 23. they also were incorporated to the Church of God. So the Prophet saith,Arg. 2. that this should be the reason, why the Gentiles were moved to joyne themselves unto the true Church, because there and no where else the Ministerie of the Word was to be found. Secondly, Our whole Church maketh profession of the true faith: The confession of our Church, together with the Apologie thereof, and those Articles of Religion which were agreed upon in the Convocation House, in the Yeare of the Lord 1562. (whereunto every Minister of the Land is bound by Law to subscribe, so farre forth as they concerne the con∣fession of faith, and the doctrine of the Sacraments) doe prove this evi∣dently; for how shall wee better judge of the faith which our Church professeth, than by such evidence. Many Papists and Atheists, are in our Land. wee grant, and many ignorant and wicked men besides, who make not so cleere and so holy profession of the true faith, as they should: but
that our Church accounteth any one to be her Child, or member, who ei∣ther denieth Christ, or professeth any other way to salvation, then faith which worketh by love, or who doth not professe this faith an some mea∣sure, we confidently deny. Now this reason also hath force sufficient to prove us the true Church; for as true faith in Christ is that which giveth the life and being to such as are effectually called, and so become Mem∣bers of the Invisible, and Elect Church; so the profession of true saith, is that which giveth life and being to a visible Church: Upon this profes∣sion wee finde many that have beene incorporated into the visible Church, and admitted to the priviledges thereof, even by the Apostles themselves:Act: 8.37, 38. & 16.31.32. & 12. Yea and Simon Magus, though he had neither faith, nor the spirit of God, yet because he made profession of faith, was judged a member of the visi∣ble Church, and baptized. So the Church of Pergamus,Act. 8 13. Revel. 2.12, 15. though it did to∣letate grosse corruptions in it; it kept the faith of Christ, and denied not his faith, and was still called the Church of God. The description of a Church, which they give in the page 67.See our further answer to this in the defence we make for our people a∣gainst the se∣cond Article of their third exception. of their collection of Letters and conferences (viz.) That it is a company of faithfull people that truly worship Christ, and readily obey him; is utterly untrue, it it be understood (as needs it must) of the visible Church; for it every one that the Church may account a visible member, be truly faithfull, how is our Saviour to bee understood, when he compareth the Church or Ministery to a draw-net, which being east into the Sea, gathereth as well that which must be cast away, as good Fish:Matth. 13.47, 48. And to a field, where the Devill doth as busily sow tares, as the Sonne of Man doth good Wheate?Matth. 13.37 39. or how shall that difference stand, which the Scripture maketh betwixt the Lords judgment, and the judgment of men, if men may not account any members of the Church by their outward appearance, and profession;1 Sam. 1617. Acts 13.28. unlesse they know them to have true faith? which thing the Lords eye is only able to discerne. Thirdly, We hold, and teach, and maintaine, against all Heretickes,Arg. 3. and adversaries, every part and Article of Gods holy truth, which is fundamen∣tall, and such, as without the knowledge, and believing whereof, there is no salvation. Our confessions, Catechismes. Articles of Religion, publi∣shed, and approved of our Church, may perswade all indifferent men of this: Yet was not Henry Barrow ashamed to write in the 10th. page of his discovery. That all the Lares of God, both of the first, and second Table are here broken, and forsaken, both of the Ecclesiasticall, and Civill estate, and of every particular person in both, all things being innovated in both, accord∣ing to the Iusts and pleasures of men, the Law, and Word of God being quite rejected and cast aside. And in the 212. page of their refutation of Master Gifford, They
have these words; We hold that you have poysoned all the fountaines of sin∣cere doctrine, and perverted the whole Testament, and turned away the practise thereof by your damnable false expositions: Yea, that you teach not one point sincerely. And in the 162. page of this discovery. They are made socon∣trary one to another, as it is an impossible thing, to finde two of them in one minde; yea, or any one of them constant in that he affirmeth, they know not the Doctrine even of the beginning of Christ. Adde hereto Henry Barrowes words, 12 and 23. pages of their collections of Letters, and conference. We will not give any answer to these speeches, but onely desire the Chri∣stian Reader to consider, whether ever Gods Spirit taught any to write so slanderously; not onely against a whole Nation, (the conversion whereof they pretend to seeke) but against the blessed Truth of God; And how unlikely it is that they should bee in the right way, whose chiefe leaders were guided by such a spirit: That they should be the Lords building, whose first founders and Master builders, had either so small skill, or so bad a Conscience: Doe we not hold all the same books of Canonicall Scrip∣tures which they themselves doe? Doe wee not reject out of the Canon all which themselves account Apochryphall? Have they any translation of holy Scripture besides ours? Doe they themselves beleeve, or teach otherwise in the Articles of the holy Trinity, of justification, of prede∣stination then wee doe? Hath every member of their Assemblies recove∣red that spirit of truth, whereby they are led into all truth; as Henry Barrow, page 107. of his discovery affirmeth? And is there not any one amongst us that hath not quite rejected the whole Word of God? Not any one that knoweth the doctrine even of the beginning of Christ? We know no better way to convince them in this, then by appealing unto their Consciences, which we are sure will take our parts against them. Now this reason also is strong to prove us a true Church, for although the bare letter of the Scripture may be found amongst the Jewes and Pa∣pists, and other Heretickes.Which none ran doe but the true Church. Yet was there never any people, that held and maintained the true sence of the Scripture, in all points fundamentall, but only the Church of God, whereunto onely this title belongeth to bee the pillar and ground of truth:1 Tun. 3.15. A people may bee a true Church though they hnow not nor hold every truth contained in the Scriptures. wherein wee desire the Reader to consider that a people may be the true Church, though they know not, nor hold not every truth contained in the holy Scriptures, but contrarily hold many er∣rours repugnant to the Scriptures. Yet hath Henry Barrow affirmed in the 167. page of his discovery: That to the people of God, and every one of them, God hath given his holy sanctifying spirit, to open unto them, and leade them unto all truth, Whereby it is most evident, that he would have none to be accounted the people and Church of God, who either know not, or practise not every truth contained in the holy Scriptures. In which opini∣on, see, I pray you how grosse and dangerous errors are contained.
First, That to every inseriour member in the Church, there is as much reveiled as to the Pastors, and chiefe members, whereas the Apostle affir∣meth,Romans 12.3. Ephes 4 16. eol. 2.19. that the Holy Ghost is given to every member of the body of Christ, not equally, but proportionably, as the place, which it occupieth in the bo∣die doth require. Secondly, That the promise mentioned, Iohn 16.13. Should be made to every member of the Church: which in the last words of the verse ap∣peareth plainely to be particular to the Apostles. Thirdly, That the Church cannot erre: and so neither were the Co∣rinthians rightly called the Church of God, when they judged corruptly of fornication, and of the Resurrection; Neither they of Pergamus when the Doctrine of Balaam was maintained among them; Neither were Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, true Members of the Church, who (though in the exercises of their Apostolicall function, they could not erre) yet knew but in part and in many things were subject to er∣ror.1 Cor. 13 9. Another strange opinion is amongst them maintained in the 156,157. of the discovery (viz.) That every truth contained in the Scripture is fun∣damentall: For (although we affirme not (as he thereslandereth us) That some part of Scripture is more holy, more authenticall, or more true then other.Note. Yet doubt we not to say, that some parts are of more use, and more neces∣sary for men to know then, othersome. Else, why doth the Holy Ghost oft give speciall commendation to some parts, more than to other;1 Tim 4.11. Titus 3.8. Make 4.3. why doth he (as it were make Proclamation, and solemne oyesses before some, and not before other? Why doth hee use a speciall art in some parts, rather than in other? And although wee doe not hold (as they falsly charge us in the forenamed page of their discovery) That some parts of holy Scrip∣ture are of small moment, superficiall, needlesse, and of no necessitie: such as may be altered and violated without any prejudice, or danger at all to the soule, and much lesse that a man that hath obstinately continued in the transgression of some parts, and openly taught the same unto others, may be undoubtedly saved, though he die without Repentance: but on the contrary wee beleeve, and teach that there is no part of holy Scripture, which every Christian is not necessarily bound to seeke, and desire the knowledge of, so farre forth as in him lieth: yet dare wee not call every truth fundamentall, that is, such as if it be not obeyed and known, the whole Religion, and faith of the Church must needs fall to the ground. For we doe make no question, but that the thiefe that was crucified, and the Eu∣nuch even then when he was baptized by Philip, were in the state of sal∣vation, though they could not choose but bee ignorant of many truths in Religion. The only fundamentall truth in Religion, is this, That Jesus Christ
the Sonne of God, who tooke our nature of the Virgin Mary, is our on∣ly and all-sufficient Saviour. For first, they that receive this truth are the people of God, and in the state of salvation, they that receive it not, cannot possibly bee saved.Mat. 16.17 104.2. Col. 3.17. Iohn 20.31. Ephos. 2.20. Secondly, There is no other point of Christian Religion necessary, otherwise then as it tendeth necess rily to the bringing us unto, or confirming us in the assurance of this one truthHeb. 13.8. 1 Cor. 2.2. Eph. s. 2.19, 22. and there∣fore when the Apostle saith that the Church is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, his meaning is not to call every thing contai∣ned in their writings, the foundation of the Church. But that this foun∣dation wee have spoken of, is there to be found, and hath witnesses from thence, and that all the writings, and doctrines of the Apostles and Pro∣phets doe bend unto, stay and rest upon this one truth, as the walls in the building, upon the chiefe corner stone. Lastly,Arg. 4. All reformed Churches give the Testimony to us. All the knowne Churches in the world acknowledge our Church for their Sister, and give unto us the right hand of fellow-ship. This Henry Barrow, and Iohn Greene-wood denie in their 14. page of their refutation; but they name not any one Church that maketh question of us, whether wee were the true Church or no: never yet was there any refor∣med Church made that question. They are well acquainted with our Church, by the report of them that have travelled from bence and sundry other wayes, with our doctrine and Lyturgie, our wants and corruptions every one. Neither doe they only forbeare to shew their dislike to us, or are content to preserve society with us, which happily through humane in∣firmitie, they might doe upon sinister respects (though they approved not of us in judgment, but they doe also hold and teach, that what people so∣ever hath so much as we, is the true Church, though the wants and corrup∣tions are as great as ours are. Now when we alledge for our selves the testimonies of the Churches,Which strong∣ly argueth that we are the true Church. we doe not thereby (as these men fondly conclude in the 14. page of their refutation) make the word of men, the foundation of our Church; Nor doe we use these as our only and chiefe defence; whereby we seeke to ap∣prove our selves either unto the Lord, or to the Consciences of his people; but such an argument wee take this to bee, as in his due place, hath much force in it; and as God Himselfe hath sanctified for a principall help in de∣ciding of controversies in this kinde, the Apostles use to alleadge it as a matter of comfort to them whom they write unto, that the Churches of Christ salute themRom. 16.16. 1 Pet. 5 13. that they were famous and had the good report of the ChurchesRom. 16.19. 2 Cor. 8 18, 19, 23.24. Galah. 1.2. Saint Paul though hee received not his calling either from men, or by men (c) nor was any whit inferior to the chiefe Apo∣stles2 Cor. 12.11. yet doth he alleadge for the credit of his ministery, that the chie∣fest Apostles approved him, and gave to him the right hand of fellow∣ship;Gal. 2.9. Yea,Gal. 2.2. he sought also their approbation, and feared, that without it,
he should have runne in vaine. And which is yet more, he seeketh to win commendation and credit, even to those which he by his Apostolicall au∣thoritie, might have established by the example and judgment of other churches: If those Churches, which were planted by the Apostles them∣seltes, might take comfort in the good opinion that other Churches had of them: May not we much more? If the Ministery of Paul, and orders he prescribed to the Church, received further credit by the approbation of the Churches: Then their approbations give some credit to the ministerie and orders of the Church now. The doctrine and word of God (though to speake properly it recei∣ved authoritie onely from it selfe, and the Spirit of God) yet hath it ever beene the rather received by men, for the testimony the Church hath given unto it. So our Saviour Christ saith, That Wisdome is justified of her Chil∣dren,Matth. 11.19. Iohn 5.34. and although he affirmeth, that he received not the record of men; Yet in respect of the salvation and good it men, he judgeth it necessary,John 1.7, 8, & 5, 33, 34. that Iohn Baptist should give Testimony unto him. Now if this one thing furthered the damnation of the unbelieving Iewes, that they would not heare nor receive Christ, though testimony were given of him by one whom they knew to be sent of God: shall not this further the condemna∣tion of these men, that they refuse to heare, and receive us, though we be commended unto them by the testimony of so many Churches of God? Some cases there bee wherein wee are commanded to seeke for the judg∣ment of the Churches, and to account it the judgment of God, else why did the Church at Antioch in a question that could not be debated at home, seeke to the Church at Jerusalem, for helpe especially, seeing they had two such excellent men with them as Paul and Barnabas, whose judgments they might safely have trusted unto:Acts 15.2. saith our Saviour, that whatsoever they binde on earth, shall be bound also in heaven,Matth. 18 18. and saith he not al∣so to Churches of other Nations? Shall he be accounted as an heathen, or a Publican, that will not regard the judgment and censure of the particular Congregation, whereof hee is a memberMatth 18.17. and shall they not be much more accounted so, that despise the judgment of all the Churches? Must the spirits of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets, amongst whom we live1 Cor. 14.32. and must not both people and Prophets be subject to all the Pro∣phets and Churches in the world? The abilitie to trie and discerne the spi∣rits and doctrines of such teachers as arise in the Church is such a gift as the true Church never wanted1 Ioh. 4.1. Revel. 2.2. neither could it bee the pillar and ground of truth1 Tim 3.15. if it should be ignorant of a truth, so necessary to the salvation of men as this is, (viz.) What people is accounted to be the true Church of God: if God hath given his Church power to judge and pro∣nounce a particular man, that he is in the state of salvation, and that so in∣fallibly, that he hath promised to ratifie in heaven, the judgment which the
Church shall in this case give upon earthMatth. 18 18. may it not bee said that hee hath much more made the Church able to discerne and pronounce of a Congregation or people, that is a true visible Church, which is a matter of no such difficultie as the other? So that to conclude, though those men make so light of the judgment and testimony of other Churches,1 Cor. 14 36. as if the Word of God had come out from them onely, or, as if themselves were able to judge of us better than all the godly learned besides; Yet doe wee take much comfort and assurance from hence, that we are the true Church of God. Now it remaines that we answer such reasons, as are objected a∣gainst our Church bythem. Objections answered. THe first thing that they object against our Church,Object. I. The objection against the whole body of our Church, is that it was not rightly gathe∣red. and our parish as∣semblies, is this: That it was not rightly gathered by such meanes as God in his Word hath ordained and sanctified for the gathering of his Church. For saith Henry Barrow, in the 10th page of his discovery. All the peo∣ple were in one day, with the blast of Queene Elizabeths Trumpet, of igno∣rant persons, and grosse Idolaters made faithfull Christians, and true Pro∣phets. And in the third page of that Epistle to the Reader, which they have presixed to their refutation of Master Gifford, they have these words. Where such prophane multitudes were immediately changed from publike Idolaters and on an instant received, or rather compelled to be members of this Church, in some parish or other, without any due calling to the saith, by the preaching of the Gospell going before, or orderly joyning together in the faith, there being no voluntary, or particular confession of thein owne faith and du∣ties, made nor required of any, who can say, that those Churches were ever rightly gathered, or built according to the Rule of CHRISTS Testa∣ment? ANSWER, I. To all that they thus object against our first gathering this answer, we give. First, That we might bee counted a true Church, though it could not appeare that we were at the first rightly gathered, for even as the Disciples might be well assured of Christs bodily presence, when they saw and felt him, though they could not perceive which way, or how he could possibly come in, so may we esteeme them a true Church, of whose present pro∣fession
and faith, wee are well assured though wee cannot see by what meanes they were first gathered; Else wee may still doubt, whether Melchisedech and the families of Iob, were true Churches and mem∣bers of the Church, because how they were first gathered, and made a Church, or of whom, we know not; and yet we are now certainely per∣swaded that they are a Church. Nay, wee finde good warrant in the word to the contrary, for we reade of many, (who having by that they heard, and saw) perceived evidently, that a people were the Church of God, did joyne themselves willingly unto them, without enquiring how they were gathered or converted, as Abraham to Melchise∣dech, Rahab to Israel, the Eunuch to Philip, the Gaoler to Paul and Silas. Secondly, Wee might be rightly gathered to the societie,Secondlie, We might be ga∣thered to an outward pro∣fession, and to the societie of the visible Church by some other meanes, then by preaching of the Word Confutation of Mr. Gifford page 152. and in the collecti∣on of slande∣rous Articles, page 44, 45. and fel∣lowship of the visible Church, by other meanes then by the preaching of the Gospell: for proofe whereof, we alleage their owne judgment and opinion, (which howsoever it be, yet hath force enough to stop their mouthes) namely, that men may bee won to the true faith of Christ, not extraordinarily, but even ordinarily, also by other meanes than the publicke and ministeriall preaching of the Word. For if se∣verall Members may bee converted without this meanes, may not they much rather without it bee gathered together, and made an as∣sembly? Secondly, Admit there were no other means, whereby a man could be soundly converted, but only preaching: Yet it is evident, that by some other meanes, men may bee lawfully brought to an outward pro∣fession, and so made a visible Church. Many in the dayes of Christ were prepared to heare and believe, and did also follow him, and pro∣fesse themselves his Disciples, that no man could, without sinne, have de∣nied them to bee members of the visible Church, who yet were not all drawne by his word. But some by his Miracles,Iohn 2.23, 24. some by the re∣port they heard of himIohn 4.39. some by desireIohn 6.24, 26. they had to be fed by him. Some Kings became nursing Fathers, and Queenes nursing Mo∣thers to the Church, their Lawes have beene meanes to bring men to outward societie of the Church. And the practise of Iosiah proveth, that men may bee compelled by the Magistrate, to serve the Lord.Chron. 34.32, 33. Now as many heareing of the fame of Iohn Baptist, and of Christ came unto them, and so were converted by their preaching:Thirdlie, Our Churches were first con∣verted, and ga∣thered by teaching of the Word. so many that for feare of the Law, were first brought to the Church and out∣ward profession of the truth have beene and are effectually converted by the ministery of the Word. Thirdly, Our Church was gathered by the preaching of the Word.
For, the first conversion of the faithfull of our Land, was by the preach∣ing of the Gospell, as is manifested by the testimonies of the best appro∣ved Histories; Since that time, many have beene from age to age, cal∣led by the same means, as by the ministerie of Master Wickliffe, and such like, for proofe whereof this may serve that in most of the Kings dayes there have beene some, which have endured Martyrdome for the truth. These secret ones did gather others secretly, so long as persecution con∣tinued, and shewed themselves openly, when libertie was granted; In the dayes of King Edward, great numbers were by preaching, so effectu∣ally called, that in Queene Maries Reigne, many simple men and wo∣men, were able to maintaine the truth, against the learnedst Papists, and to seale it with their bloud. Besides them, there were many secret Congregations in many parts of the Land, all the daies of Queene Ma∣rie, which gladly received, and openly professed the Gospell offered unto them, by publicke authoritie, at her Majesties entrance to the Crowne. If it bee said, that they ceased to bee the true Churches of Christ because they joyned themselves, and became one body, with such as were newly come from Idolatry, (and that not of conscience, but for feare onely:) we answer; that they rather, that were fallen from the Gospell in Queene Maries daies, were moved by Queene Eli∣zabeths Proclamation, to joyne themselves unto them, that had stood faithfull all that while: Neither is it truly said of them, that in one day, by the blast of Her Majesties Trumpet, at the beginning of her Reigne, all sorts of men were drawne to a profession of the Gospell, without any further meanes used, for before any were compelled to the profes∣sion of the Gospell; which was not till Midsomer, after her Majestie came to the Crowne, there were not onely many Commissioners sent unto all the parts of the Land, that they might deface all the monuments of Idolatry, but sundry Preachers also, which in the dayes of Queene Mary, had received approbation, and exercised their ministrie in some of the best reformed Churches beyond the Seas, did by their doctrine both keepe them, whom they found converted) in the profession of the truth, and called many others, of which number we may reckon, Master Knox, Leave, Gilbie, Sampson, Whitingham, Goodman; and sundry others. And there were daily added to the Church, by no other meanes, then by the ministerie of the Word preached. So that if this were a good reason against other particular members, or whole fami∣lies, yet it cannot justifie a separation from all, seeing wee have manie that by the preaching of the word of God, were converted and gathered.
Fourthly, This being proved that there was a true Church in the Land before Her Majesties Reigne,Fourthly though the meanes used for the gather∣ing our Church had not beene sufficient for the first calling a people to the faith, yet were the sufficient for the recall∣ing of the peo∣ple that had fallen from the faith which formerly they had professed. the question must not be whether the meanes she used, were the right meanes for the calling, and conver∣ting a people to the faith, but whether she tooke a lawfull course for re∣calling, and reuniting of Her Subjects unto those true professours whose fellowship they had forsaken; this was the course which Jeho∣saphat tooke,2 Chro. 17.8. who (to gather the Church which was divided) sent preachers into sundry parts of his Kingdome, and appointed Noble men to accompany and assist them by countenancing their ministery, and compelling the people to heare them. This course also did Iosiah take, who having abolished Idolatry com∣pelled all his subjects to the service of the true God;2 Chr. 34.33. 2 Chro. 14 4. 2 Chro. 15.13. Thus did Asa use his authority, in commanding Iuda to seeke the Lord, and to doe according to the Law, and Commandement, and threatning them with death, that should resuse: So did Hezekiah by his Proclamation bring divers of Israel to Ierusalem, who were before separated from the Church of God.Chro. 30, 12. Fifthly, Whereas they say, that at the beginning of her Majesties Reigne, the people should have beene required with solemne oath and covenant to renounce Idolatry, and to professe faith, and true obedience to the Gospell, after the example of Asas reformation; Wee an∣swer. First, If it had beene absolutely necessary to the being of a Church that there should be such a solemne covenant by oath, to renounce Ido∣latrie; this course should be taken in that reformation which Ichosaphat and Iosiah made, as well as that which Asa made. Secondly, even where this oath was taken, it was Gods true Church before the time of that oath and covenant made by Asa, wee reade it was made and taken in the 15. yeere of his Reigne, when yet his sub∣jects were the true Church long before. Secondly, There be diverse congregations in our Land, which in the beginning of her Majesties dayes, and since, have publikely professed their repentance, for their former Idolatry, and promised to imbrace and obey the truth, as it is profently established; as in Coventry, North-hampton, and some other places. Yea, we doubt not to affirme, that the whole Land; in the Parliament, holden in the first yeare of her Maje∣sties Reigne, did enter into a solemne covenant with the Lord, for the renouncing of Popery and reciaving the Gospell.
OBJECT. II. The second thing they object against the whole body of our As∣semblies is this:Object. The second Objection a∣gainst the whole body of our Church is, that it useth a worship of God which is pollu∣ted with the writings of men, as, read, stinted prayers. Answ. That they communicate together in a false and Idola∣trous worship of God, which is polluted with the writings of men, (viz.) With read stinted prayers, Homilies, Catechismes, and such like; which in the 24. page of their refutation, they call the smoake of the bot∣tomlesse pit. To this Objection we give this answer. First, That it is evident by the Word, that the Church hath used, and might use lawfully in Gods worship, and prayer, a stinted form of words: for we find a form of bles∣sing the people prescribed to the Priests,Numb. 6.23, 24 a forme of confession to be used at the bringing of the first fruits to the Temple prescribed to the people,Deut. 26.13, 15. A psalme appointed for the Priests, and Levites, to use every Morning.Psalme 22.1. Another to be used every Sabbath day:Psalme 92. So in the thanks∣giving used at the bringing home of the Arke, unto the place prepared for it by David, the Church tyed themselves to the very words of 105. and 96. Psalmes;1 Chro. 16.8, 36. and as one Evangelist reporteth, that our Saviour appointed that prayer which he gave to His Disciples to be a patterne to frame all other prayers by.Matth. 6 9. Luke 11.2. Object. So the other Evangelist reporteth, that he had them when they prayed, say, Our Father, &c. Which he would never have done, if it had not beene lawfull for us in making those pe∣titions to God, to use those very words which are there prescribed. Now to that, they object against this, that we never read, the Apostles did use this prescript forme of words in prayer. We answer,Answ. That it is absurd negatively to prove from examples of men, against that which God in His Word so expresly, either comman∣ded, or permitted; for we may as well reason thus: That we doe not reade that the Apostles, or the Church in their time, did baptize Infants. Ergo, They were not then baptized: or thus, We doe not read, that the Apostles did pray, either before, or after they preached, Ergo, They did not: Or thus, Saint Paul did not marry, nor take maintenance from the Corinthians, Ergo he might not lawfully have done it. The most Psalmes, that David made, as they were committed to the Church Mu∣sitians; That in singing them, were tied to the very words that David set downe; so they were not sung as Meditations and doctrines for the instruction of the Church, but as prayers unto God. This is evident not onely by the manifold petitions and thankesgivings unto God, that are to bee found in them, but by this especially, that they are said to bee sung unto the Lord.
And as by that which hath beene said, it may appeare that set and prescript formes are lawfull in those prayers and thanksgivings that are used upon ordinary occasions;Secondly, A stinted and set forme of words is lawfull, even to the extraordi∣nary prayers. So it is also evident, that they may bee lawfully used even in those prayers, and thanksgivings, that (being ta∣ken up) on extraordinary occasions, doe require an extraordinary, and speciall fervency of the spirit, for which we have the example of our Saviour Christ Himselfe,Mat. 26.42, 44. who used the very same words three times se∣verally b even in that prayer, which hee made with all holy excesse of fervent affection. And this may lawfully be done, not only in those formes which we frame and devise our selves,Thirdly, It is lawfull to tie our selves (in prayer) even to that forme of words which have been devi∣sed and used by others. 2 Chro. 6.41, 42. Psalm. 132.8.10. 2 Chron. 5.13. Psalm. 136.1. Psalme 136.1. 2 Chron. 20.21. 2 Chron. 29.30. 4. A prescript forme of words bath beene some times comman∣ded to be used in extraordinary occasions. Hosca 14.3 Ioel 2.13. but in them also which we finde to have bin used by the good servants of God in former times, upon the like occasi∣ons to those that befall us now So Salomon useth, in the Dedication of the Temple, that very Psalme which David vowed to use at the bringing of the Arke to his house; and in the bringing of the Taber∣nacle and holy Vessells into the House of God, he useth the same words of another Psalme. So Jehosaphat useth the same words of the same Psalme, in that excellent thankesgiving which he maketh to God. He∣zekiah caused thanks to be given, in the same words unto God, as Da∣vid, and Asaph had used before. Yea, this manner of praying, and praising in set and prescript formes of words, even upon extraordina∣rie occasions, we finde directly commanded fundry times. So the Pro∣phets expresly set forth what words should bee used among the people. And which is yet more, we finde a set, and prescript form of words to be used in extraordinary occasions, appointed long before that those occasions fell out. So we reade of a forme of thanksgiving,Fourthly, it hath sometimes beene prescribed long before the occa∣sions fell out. Esa 12.3, 4. 1 King. 8.47. Daniel 9.5. Ier. 33.11. Ezra 3.11. appoint∣ed to be used by the Church at Christs comming, and Salomon, prescri∣beth a form of confession, to be used by the Church in captivitie, which forme Daniel in the name of the Church used. So Ieremie appointeth the 136. Psalme to be used by the people, for a forme of thanksgiving, after their returne from captivitie, which was also used accordingly by then: whereupon this will follow, that unlesse they can take excepti∣on, to the matter of our prayers (which shall afterwards be considered of) they may not blame us for the stinted and prescript forme of pray∣ers we use, and that if we want fervencie of spirit, in our prayers,That also which they object against our Ca∣techismes is of no force, for first, it is lawfull to collect out of the word, and to teach in order the principles of Religion. the fault is to be imputed to the corruption of our owne hearts, and not to the prescript formes we use. Concerning the Catechismes used in our Church, we answer; first, It is evident by the Scripture, that the Church hath for the instruction of the people, not only taught, and deliverd the holy Scriptures them∣selves,
and tied themselves in their teaching, to the very words, and frame thereof) but hath also ever had, and used to teach abridgments, summes of their principles of Religion, collected out of the Scriptures, and this wee thinke will be evident to such as in the feare of God and desire to know the truth, shall well weigh and consider these places.Rom. 2, 20. & 6, 17. 2 Tim. 1.13. Heb. 5.12.13, 14, & 6, 1, 2, Secondly, it is also lawfull to require of the hearers an ac∣count which is also thus taught. And as the Scripture proveth this warrantable, so reason it selfe, and common experience teacheth, that it is a great help in all knowledge, to have short summes of that we would learne, in our view, and prospect represented to us, and to have that in order taught, that we would bee instructed in. So is the Saylor holpen by his Card, the Traveller by his Map, and the most cunning workman, by his patterne he draweth be∣fore be beginneth his worke.Luke 2.46.47. Mat. 13.36, 51 Mark. 9.28.30, 31. So he that teacheth children, beginneth with the Letters; and hee that buildeth an house, with the foun∣dation. Secondly,Thirdly the hearer may lawfully give account of the doctrine in the selfe same words wherin it was taught. Fourth'y he may lawfully have copies of these prin∣ciples in writ∣ing or print. That wch they object against our forms (viz) that we con∣ceive them not our selves, but they are devi∣sed & imposed by others, is al∣so of no mo∣ment, for it is lawfull to use these formes not only that are in the word, but such as men have devised, Ref. pag. 204. It is also evident, that in teaching these principles (as well as in the other kinde of instructions) Christ and his Holy Apostles have beene wont to require of their hearers, that they should resound, and give account of the principles of Religion, thus taught in order, as appeareth by the notation of the Greeke word, , which is used in all these places, Luke 14. Acts 18.25. 1 Cor. 14.19. Galath 6.6. as also by the practise of the Jewish Church, which our Saviour by his presence approved and by his owne practifie also, and which, (follow∣ing his example) some of the Apostles did. Thirdly, If Ministers may (as wee have proved) in regard of the particular state of their people, collect such abridgments, and require the people to resound them; then it cannot be unlawfull, for the people to resound the doctrine in the selfe same words, wherein it was taught. Fourthly, This being so, it cannot but be lawfull, and profitable for the people to have the Catechismes, and sums delivered them in writ∣ing, or in print, that they may the better read, and learne them. Seeing we may have formes, both of prayers and Catechismes, we see not how this can condemne the formes which wee use, viz. That in compiling, and collecting them, the invention, and such other gifts of men are used, seeing there is a liberty left to the Church to doe many things, that tend onely to the setting forth of Gods Ordinances, (as themselves confesse) and in the preaching of the Word, and in those prayers which they call conceived praiesr, the wit, memory, judgment, and such other humane gifts, are lawfully, and necessarily used, especial∣ly considering that the peoples understanding, and memory, may bee the better helped, by that they are well acquainted with them by the other.
If (we may use lawfully (as we see we may) even such formes as were collected by men,Secondlie, It is lawfull for Mi∣nisters to use such formes as have beene de∣vised by men of better gifts then them∣selves. and that these formes doe not any way staine or prejudice the fevencie of the spirit, then doubt we not, but these forms that have beene set downe by men of better gifts, may as lawfully bee used of them, who throughly conceive the meaning, and truth of them, as those which the Minister deviseth himselfe. If formes thus devised by men be found to be lawfull and profitable, what sinne can it bee, for the Governours of the Church, to command that such formes bee used;Thirdlie, It is lawfull to use such good formes as are imposed by au∣thoritie. or for us that are perswaded of the lawful∣nesse of them being imposed, unlesse they will say, that therefore it is unlawfull for us to heare the word, receive the Sacraments, beleeve the Trinitie, and all other Articles of the faith; because wee are comman∣ded by the Magistrates so to doe: whereas indeed we ought the rather to doe good things that are agreeable unto the Word, when wee know them to be also commanded by the Christian Magistrate. Though we are perswaded by the former reason,Yet we doe grant that in some cases conceived prayers, are more fit then other. to think that stinted formes, are so farre from being simply unlawfull, as in that, in the ordi∣nary and generall occasions of the whole Church, they are many times, more fit, then those, that are called conceived prayers. Yet it is well knowne that our Law alloweth, and our preachers, also doe use prayers conceived, which we in some cases, doe judge more fit to stirre up, and expresse the groanes, and sighes of the spirit, then those prayers doe wherein we tie our selves to prescript words. But why doe wee seeke to justifie our prescript Lyturgie, before these men, who speake as scornefully, and profanely of our conceived prayers, as they can possibly doe of those which wee read? For when Henry Barrow had derided and flouted those that use onely read pray∣ers; hee breaketh out into these speeches, in the 37. page of his disco∣very, that other smooth hypocrites: yet as grosse Idolaters, use this, (viz.) the Lords prayer, as a clause, or supply, to their long, and prolix prayers conceived before, whereby it should seeme, that their hatred to us, (rather then to our corruptions) is so great, as that, whatsoever wee doe will displease them. Concerning Homilies, this answer wee give;The reasons they bring a∣gainst us for Homilies is of no force. That though wee thinke it is not simply unlawfull, to reade in our Assemblies such Homi∣lies, as are for the matter sound and good: yet in regard of the dange∣rous inconveniences, that may come, by using them by so many Mini∣sters and Congregations in the Land, doe utterly dislike all publike use of them: as that we wonder that these men are not ashamed to use this as a reason of their separation from the whole Church.
But what if all this were granted, that the use of our stinted pray∣ers,If to have a Drescript form of Lyturgie were Idola∣trous yet might we be the true Church for all that. Catechismes, and Homilies were Idolatrous, which yet wee have proved to be otherwise; will it from thence follow, that we are not that true Church? Is this a greater corruption in the worship of God, then the retaining of hie places, against which there is so expresse a com∣mandement,Deut. 12.2. 1 King 11.8, 9 1 King. 15.14. 2 King. 15.4. 2 King. 18.4, 2 King. 13.6. or then the burning Incense to the Brazen Serpent? b and yet it is evident, that the one of these was retained in the dayes of Asa and Azariah Kings of Iudah, and the other, even till Hezekiahs Reigne: in which time notwithstanding, it is manifest there was a true Church in Judah. The testimony of Scripture, which they quote in the page 68. of the collection of Letters and Conferences: and in the 144. page of their resutations against our prescript Lyturgie, are such as either tend generally to the condemning of Idolatrie,Deut. 5.8, 9. 1 Chro. 28.10. Revel. 22, 19. Prov. 30.5, 6. Deut. 4.32. Revel. 22.18, 19 Matth. 15.9. Col. 2.20, 23. or such as forbid us to add any thing to the Word of God. To the first sort, we answer; that they have not yet proved our Ly∣turgie Idolatrie. Secondly, if they had, yet cannot they by these te∣stimonies conclude, that therefore they that use it are not the true Church. To the other sort of Testimonies, this we say; that we adde not our Lyturgie unto the Word of God, nor make it of equall authoritie with it: neither doe we use it to the same ends, and purposes, that we doe the Scripture. Secondly, Wee doe wonder, with what judgment, or Conscience, they can blame us for adding to the word by our Lyturgie, who will at no hand allow us to use, as prayers, any of the formes that are set down in the Scripture. The reasons also against all formes of Lyturgie,The reasons against all formes of Ly∣turgie are weake and set downe in the 43. page of the collection of slanderous Ar∣ticles. are fond and weake, though they seeme to collect them from the Scriptures, for wee have a∣bove proved, that God may be worshipped spiritually, and fervently, even in that prayer, wherein a set and prescript forme of words are used. Secondly, That this is no good reason, the Apostles are not read, to have used any set forme of prayer themselves; or to have prescribed any to the Churches, Ergo, they did not use, or prescribe any, or Ergo, the Church might not. Thirdly,Iohn 4.23. Rom. 8.26. 1 Iohn 2.17. 1 Cor. 3.11, 12 We see not why they may not as strongly reason, the spi∣rit helpeth our infirmities, and wee have received that anointing, and therefore we need not, nor may not use any outward helps, for our con∣solation and instruction, or for the subduing of our corruptions; as this, the spirit helps our infirmities, &c. and we have received that anointing,
Ergo, we need not, nor may not use any prescript formes of words, as helps in our prayers. OBJECT. III. The third thing they object against the whole bodie of the Church,Object. The third Ob∣jection against the whole bo∣dy of our Church, is, that we want Christs Disci∣pline. is this: That we want that discipline, and order, which Christ in his Te∣stament hath appointed for the government of the Church: for neither have we (say they) the power to binde or to loose; nor those officers by whom the censures of Christ should be exercised; Yea saith, Henry Barrow, in the 160. page of his discoverie; You have not any one thing, order, or administration, according to his Testament. And in the 188. page, such places of Scripture as make expresse mention of Christs dis∣cipline, as Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 15. and 12. 2 Cor. 2 Ephes. 4. 2 Thes. 3. and 1 Tim. 5.1. are not saith he, suffered so much, as to be read in the Church; much lesse to be sincerely expounded: from these premises, see what a conclusion, he in the 27. page of his discovery, inferreth, without the power (saith hee) and practise of the diligent watch of every Mem∣ber: but especially of the Elders, the Word of God is made an Idoll, the Sacraments sacriledge unto us, and all things we do, odious and abominable unto the Lord. To this third Objection, this answer we give.Answ. The first part of Christs Dis∣cipline which is most subst in∣tiall we have 1. For the works and du∣ties which hee would have performed in the governmēt of his Church, are all one in our assemblies. Discipline not exercised rightly. First, whereas the discipline of Christ, consisteth in two things, (viz.) what works and duties, Christ would have performed, for the ordering and government of his Church, and by what persons and Officers hee would have these duties exercised: We affirme, that for as much as all these workes, (viz.) preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments, the censures of admonition, suspension, excommunica∣tion, and provision for the necessitie of the poore, are in many of our Assemblies performed, and by Law ought to be in all, that there ore we cannot justlie be said to be without the discipline of Christ, but rather that we having the discipline of Christ, which is most substantiall, doe want the other, and so exercile it not rightlie, that is to say, not by those Officers, which Christ ath appointed. Secondly, It is well knowne, that the chiefe works and discipline;Secondly, The chiefe workes of Christs Dis∣cipline are ex∣ercised with us even by those Officers that he appointed. namely the preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacra∣ments, and consequentlie, the principiall part of that power, to binde and loose, which Christ gave to his Church, is not only exercised in ma∣nie o our Assemblies; but exercised also, by those very Officers which Christ hath appointed for us: the Lawes of our land doe authorize the Minister to staie from the Lords Table, all such as are uncatechised,
and out of charitie, or any otherwise publike offenders, (as appeareth in the Rubrick before the Communion, and in that which is after con∣firmation) And from whence else commeth the trouble of many of our Ministers, but from the exercising of this authoritie, even from the suspending of the ungodly from the Sacrament, and stinging their consciences by the preaching of the word? Thirdly,Thirdly, though the pine were not exercised at all with us, it could not therefore fol∣low that we have it not. Fourthly, Though even through igno∣rance or feare∣fulnesse, wee were kept frō it, yet might wee have right and authoritie to use it. Though none of our Assemblies did use this power, it followeth not from therce, that we have it not: No more than it doth follow, that the rich churle hath no monie, because he useth none, and that a man therefore hath no authoritie, because hee doth not exer∣cise any. Fourthly, Admit we were not able (through want of knowledge and courage) to use this power. Yet followeth it not, that therefore wee want the right, and authoritie to use it: For if those Churches which the Prophet reproveth,Ezek. 22.26. for putting no difference between the holy and prophane or that which the Apostle blameth, for not putting the incestuous person from among them: had they wanted authoritie, to use this power, how could they justlie have beene reproved, for neg∣lecting the exercising thereof? Lastly, Though it were granted, that we wanted both the exercise of the Churches censures, and some of those Officers, which our Savi∣our hath appointed to exercise them by: Yet might wee bee a true visible Church notwithstanding: there was a true Church in Iudah, all the daies of Asa,b 1 Cor 5.1, 2. and Iehosaphat,2 Chro. 15.9.10. & 17, 5, 9 yet was not the discipline refor∣med there, till the latter daies of Iehosaphats Reigne.2 Chro. 19, 8 11. Ezek 22.26. That also was a true Church, even then when the Apostles found this fault with them,1 Cor. 5.1, 2. the Congregation at Samariah is called a Church before the discipline was established there. And even in Jerusalem there was a famous visi∣ble Church of Christ long before sundry parts of the discipline (for want whereof they condemne us) were established there, yea it is evi∣dent, that by the Apostles themselves diverse Churches were gathered, some good space of time,g Acts 13.43. 14 11, 21, 23. Tit, 5.5. before the discipline was setled, or exercised,Acts 8.12.19 31. Acts 2.41, 42. by all which is manifest; that how necessary soever those parts of the discipline (which we want) be to the beautie, and well being, or pre∣servation of the Church. Yet are they not necessary to the being ther∣of, but that a true Church may be without them. And as we may well call him a man, that wanteth not only sundry parts of his body, as an Arme, or a Legge. or Eye, but is also distempered much even in the Braine, and Liver, and heart, and the rest of the viall parts; so may wee rightly call that a Church, which not only wanteth sundry of those Of∣ficers which Christ hath ordained, but hath also even in the ministerie
of the word, and the profession of the true faith (which are as it were the braine and heart of a true Church) much maimednesse and dis∣temper. The places of Scripture which they alleadge to disprove this which wee have said, are unskilfully applyed;In the collecti∣on of Letters and conferen∣ces, page 69. Ephes. 4.11, 12. Rom. 12.8. for the one of them mentio eth no other ordinary officers out Pastors, and Teachers, which our Church professeth, the other though it proveth there should bee other Officers besides them there named; yet doth it not affirme, that with∣out them there can be no true Church. OBJECT. IIII. The fourth thing which they object against the whole body of our Assemblies is this:Object. The fourth Objection a∣gainst the whole body of our Assem∣blies is, that we stand un∣der the Popish Church go∣vernment w reason also is insufficient to warrant their separation. That we stand under (us they say) a false and An∣tichristian government, for that wee are directed by; and subject to Ca∣nons, Courts, and authoritie of the Bishops which they do not content them∣selves in the 68.69. page of their collection of Letters, and conferen∣ces to call Popish, and Antichristian, and Aegyptian, and Babylonish Tokes, but in regard thereof they say our Assemblies Cast our Sathan by the power of Sathan. To this fourth objection we make this answer: First, Seeing it hath beene already shewed that the discipline which our Church exerciseth, is in substance the same with that which Christ instituted, they cannot with any colour of truth say, that all our Church government is Popish, and Antichristian, but only that it is po∣pishly and corruptly administred.Answ. 1. The sub∣stance of our discipline is Christ, and not Antichrists 2 Thes 10.11. 2 Tim. 4.1.3. 1 Iohn 2.22. 1 Iohn 4 3. Iohn 7. Revel. 13.5, 16. Secondly, Though it were confessed, that in the callings, and au∣thoritie of the Bishops, there bee diverse things Antichristian; Yet see we not how our Bishops could truly be called Antichrists, or Antichri∣stians; because, first the word when it describeth Antichrist, and teach∣eth us how to know him, useth to marke him out by his false doctrine. Neither can we find in holy Scripture, any such accounted an Antichrist or Antichristian, who holding the truth of doctrine, and professing all the fundamentall Articles of the faith, doth swerve either in judgment or practise from that rule which Christ hath given for the discipline of his Church. Now it is evident, that our Bishops both doe, and by the Lawes of our Land ought to hold and teach all doctrines and truths that are fundamentall: Yea some of them have learnedly, and soundly main∣tained the truth against Heretickes; that have gaiaid it, some have not only by their doctrine and ministerie converted many to the truth, but have suffered persecution also for the Gospell, and though Henry Bar∣row
in the eleventh page of his discoverie call them Pseudo-Martyrs, and run-away professors, yet can hee not prove that they all since their accepting their rooms, renounced, and are fallen from that truth which they then suffered for. Secondly, Their Hierarchie, and other their corruptions that are charged upon the calling of our Bishops, were rather to bee esteemed as the staires, and way to Antichristianitie, then Antichristianitie it selfe, which is evident by this, that they were in the Church before the Pope (who is the Antichrist, and the chiefe head-linke of all Antichristiani∣tie) was revealed. Thirdly, The Antichristian Bishops hold their preheminence, as from GODS Law, which is unchangeable; Whereas our Bishops since her Majesties Reigne untill this day (for the most part) held their superioritie by no other right, then by the positive Law, which is varia∣ble; Yea it appeareth, both by the institution of the Courts of deli∣gates, and by the continuance thereof to this day, that they doe and ought by Law to hold their jurisdiction, not as from God, but as from he Prince. Thirdly,Thirdly, if they were, yet might we be the true Church. Admit that both our Bishops, and the government by them exercised were Antichristian, yet might wee that stand in that sort, as we doe, be subject unto them that are the true Church of Christ; it is evident, that to speake properly, the Yoke of Antichrist is only inward and spirituall where the faith and Conscience are enjoyned upon paine of damnation to receive other Lawes and worship, then that which God in his word prescribeth, and even to this Yoke, the true Church hath beene often subject, or else the Church of the Jewes even in the dayes of Christ was no true Church that held themselves bound in con∣science to observe sundry traditions of the Elders: In a more large sense those Prelates are called Antichristian, that joyne civill jurisdiction, with Ecclesiasticall, or usurpe more than they ought in externall govern∣ment, or tyrannously abuse the power committed to their hands; and this Antichristian Yoke also, the true Church hath borne many a time: in the dayes of the Macchabees, there was a true Church among the Jewes, yet did the Priests exercise civill jurisdiction. There was a true Church,Ier 5.31. & 20.1. both in Jeremies, and Ezekiels dayes, which yet did beare this Antichristian Yoke: the authoritie which our Bishops are said to usurpe over the Ministers,Ezek. 34.4. Which had not-needed if the Church could have suppres∣sed, or with∣stood them. and Church, is not worse than that, which Ditrephes usurped; for besides that hee sought for an Antichristian preheminence, it is evident that the Church was unable to resist him, and therefore the Apostle purposed himselfe to come and re∣buke him. Their own termes they use in this, [viz. Aegyptian, and
Babylonish Yoke,] shall teach them thus much; for seeing that the Ieues remained still the Church of God, even in that bondage that they stood under in Aegypt, and Babylon; why may not wee also remaine God Church still, notwithstanding the Yoke which wee beare, being nothing so heavie as that was? OBJECT. V. The last thing they object against the whole body of our Assem∣blies,The fifth Ob∣jection against the whole bo∣dy of our Church is that we obstinately continue in the aforesaid wants and cor∣ruptions though we have bin duly convinced. 1. Objection is false and in∣sufficient to warrant their separation for some of our assemblies have mourned for that which is amisse and by all due meanes sought reformation. Secondly, some maintaine cor∣ruptions and oppugne the discipline be∣cause they are not yet in their consciences perswaded of the things. Tit. 3.11. is this: That wee obtinately continue in the aforesaid wants, and corruptions, though we have beene convinced concerning this point, they have these words, in the 23. page of their refutation; Wee hold withall that no true Church, or Christian will maintaine any sinne, or error, when it is evidently shewed and convinced to them by the Word of God; much lesse persecute such as reprove and admonish them, as you do. In the 164. pag. they charge us with wilfull obstinacie, open rejecting, and resisting the truth, &c. To this reason, we also give this answer. That neither doe our Assemblies continue in the aforesaid wants and corruptions, neither if they did, should they therefore cease to be a true Church; for, First, It is evident, that many Ministers and Congreations, have both by prayer unto God, and all meanes (that have been in their powers to use) testified unto men their earnest desire to have these corruptions re∣moved, and the true discipline established. Secondly, The most of them that maintaine the evills that are a∣mongst us, and repugne the reformation which the rest have sought, can∣not bee justly charged with wilfull obstinacie, or committing those things wherein their own consciences doe condemne them; for, seeing they professe, and pretend that they are not yet in their judgment per∣swaded of these things, and the whole conversation of many of them: is, such as gives us just cause to believe them, who dare be so presumptu∣ous as to judge thus of their hearts, and consciences, though hee were sure they have wanted no meanes whereby they might have beene con∣vinced. Considering that it is one thing, to have had the meanes of convin∣cing another thing to be convinced: the former whereof may bee per∣formed to us by men, the other by the Lord only; and that a people, in whom some right meanes of convincing have not been effectuall, may as well be the true Church of God, as they that have received and profi∣ted by all right meanes, that have beene used for their instruction, and re∣formation of life.
Thirdly, We have not yet had the right meanes used to convince us in sundry of those matters,Thirdly, Wee have not had so much as the right meanes used to con∣vince us in these things which are in controversie between them and us. that are in controversie betweene us and them; for proofe whereof, we referre our selves to the answer, which we will hereafter make unto their articles in their conclusion. Fourthly, Though not only the right meanes had been used to con∣vict us, but they had also so farre prevailed with us, that in judgment we saw the truth (which they say is not practised amongst us) and in heart did affect it; yet would this sufficiently cleere us from the crime of wilfull obstinacie, that wee have not power without the consent and permission of Christian Magistrates (under whom we live, by whose meanes we enjoy so many great benefits,Fourthly, Al∣though wee were all throughly convinced, yet have wee not power and warrant from God to redresse publike disor∣ders, and erect the discipline without the consent of the Christian Ma∣gistrates. and whom if wee should thus farre provoke (we should evidently hazzard the losse of those things wherein the very life and being of a visible Church consisteth,) either to remove the corruptions that remaine amongst us, or to establish those Church orders which wee want; for although we doubt not but the whole truth of Christs doctrine, may be lawfully taught (though all the Magistrates in the world gaine-say it) and practised also so farre forth by every Christian, as the bounds of his particular calling permits, and that it is the Magistrates principall honour, in the sight of God, and man, to yeeld and submit himselfe to the instructions, reproofes, and censures of the Church, so far forth, as they are agreeable to the Word of God, who is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: Yet cannot we not see good rea∣son to perswade us, that the Church ought, or may either pull downe, corrupt Church government, or erect the right discipline, not onely without, but contrary to the likeing of Christian Magistrates. Thus much we finde in the Word of God.Godly Princes First, That in those publicke reformations of the Church, which the word commendeth, the Christian and godly Princes were ever the principall actors. Secondly, That for the want of publicke Reformation, the Magi∣strate is every where blamed, and no where the Church, for ought we can find: oft are the Priests, and people blamed for erecting and practis∣ing Idolatry, but never for that they plucked it not downe, when their Princes had set them up: Neither can wee finde whether ever the Church under a Christian Magistrate, was by any Prophet, either com∣manded to deale (otherwise then by perswasion) in publike Reforma∣tion, when the Magistrate neglected it; or reproved for the con∣trarie. To that which they were wont to say; then the Apostles were much to blame, who in erecting the Church government, never waited for, nor sought the Magistrates leave, and good likeing? Wee answer,
that though without the Magistrates leave they did it. Yet not contra∣rie to his liking, or when he opposed his authoritie directly, and inhibi∣ted it, the never erected the discipline, when there was so direct an op∣position made against it by the civill Magistantes. Secondly, If it could bee proved that the Apostles did so then, yet would it not follow, that we also may doe so now; for neither was the Heathen Magistrate altogether so much to bee respected by the Church as the Christian Magistrate is; neither have our Ministers, and people, now so full and absolute a power, to pull downe, and set up orders in the Church, as the Apostles (those wise Master builders) had. Lastly, though this were all proved,Fisthly, though we did volun∣tarily continue in those knowne wants & corruptions having power to redresse them: yet might we be the true Church notwithstand∣ing. that our Assemblies are through∣ly convinced in these points, and that we having power to reforme that which is amisse, doe yet voluntarily continue in those wants, and cor∣ruptions, yet might we be the true Churches of Christ, notwithstand∣ing; for as true faith in Christ, not morall obedience, is that which gi∣veth life, and being to every true member of the Church, so the profes∣sion of true faith in Christ, rather than obedience, is that which giveth the life, and being to a visible Assembly. So wee reade that many upon their profession of faith were bapti∣zed and incorporated into the Church.Acts 8.12, 13 & 16, 31, 32. So that which made the Ro∣muns a true Church in the judgment of Paul, was, that their faith was published throughout the world.Rom. 1.8. And generally, that which made the Gentiles (to whom hee preached) a true Church, was that they gave obedience of faith, neither doe wee see what difference they will make betwixt the covenant of workes, and the covenant of grace,Rom. 1.5. if they hold obedience to the Commandements of God, necessary to the life and first being of a true Christian Church. And as a wife ceaseth not to be a wife, though in many things shee cease to be wilfully disobedient to her husband, unlesse she sin, either by desertion, or whoredom, and be divorced. So neither the Church cea∣seth to be the Church, and Spouse of Christ, till she be both sufficiently convinced of Atheisme, or Idolatry, and be divorced also, the Lord tak∣ing from her His Word, and Sacraments, and all other his spirituall Jewells, and Ornaments; In the third Chapter of Ieremy, both Israel, and Iudah, were charged with Idolatry, and yet must we needs confesse, that they still continued the true Church of God, unlesse wee will say, there was at that time, no true visible Church in the world, which was most absurd to affirme. So the Corinthians being in the first Epistle, convinced of the sinne of Idolatry,1 Cor. 10.14. and other sinnes,2 Cor. 6.14. & 12, 21, 13, 2 the Church re∣maining in them, as appeareth in the second Epistle,2 Cor. 1.1. did yet continue to be the true Church of God, notwithstanding, and so are called in the
same Epistle; That which Henry Barrow in the 94. page of their refu∣tation excuseth this Church by, (viz.) that it was orderly gathered, and established, may as well bee alleadged for our Assemblies, as for the Church of Cor. as, we hope, may appeare by that which hath been above said in our Answer to the first Objection they make against the whole body of our Church; He that was once a brother, though he persist in his sinnes, he hath beene convinced of, not by one brother only, but by two or three, yea though he commit some presumptuous sinnes, ceaseth not to bee a brother notwithstanding;Matth. 18.15, 16. how much lesse, shall a Church cease to be a true Church,Psalme 19. because it hath been convinced of some grosse corruptions, by one, or some few? The high places were continued in Israel, and Iudab, and that un∣der the Reigne of sundry good Kings; notwithstanding the reproofe of many Prophets. Yet were they of Israel, and Iudah, accounted the Church still; neither did the Prophets cease, to communicate with them.2 Kings 1.3. & 15.3. Neither would those that remained in Babylon after the Pro∣clamation of Cyrus (which was also the Commandement of God)2 Chro. 36.22 Ezra. 2.2. to returne, thrust out of the account of the Church, as appeareth by the communion of them, with the Church of Ierusalem, and the bookes of Ezra, and Nehemiah, notwithstanding, partly in feare of the danger, partly in a love of the commoditie, which they setled themselves in, during the captivitie, they did not build the Temple in person, but only sent mony for the building. Lastly, the Apostle setteth downe a Rule, which is directly contrary to this fourth Article of their first exception in these words; Let us therefore as many as are perfect, bee thus mind d, and if in any thing, ye be otherwise mind d,Philip. 3.15. God shall reveale the same unto you; Neverthelesse, Whereto we have already attained, let us walke by the same rule, that we may mind the same thing, whereby it appeareth, that with those who hold the foundation, wee both may, and ought to hold and joyne our selves in the things, wherein we are agreed, notwithstanding our diffe∣rences in those things that are not fundamentall. By all which it is ma∣nifest how false, and dangerous a doctrine, that is, which Henry Barrow in the 28. page of his discovery affirmeth, that presumptuous sinne, with obstinacie joyned thereunto, breaketh the covenant with God; if he had said, it giveth the Lord just cause to cast us off, and to make void that co∣venant whereby hee had bound himselfe unto us, wee would have con∣sented. But that the everlasting covenant of God, is utterly broken by a presumptuous sinne committed with obstinacie, if wee should grant, wee should condemne the generation of the just, and darken much the glory of Gods Mercie, who is constant in love towards those, whom he
hath receaved into covenant, even though they bee many times uncon∣stant and unfaithfull unto him. And even as an Husband, or wife, ceaseth not presently to bee an Husband, or wife, when they have committed adulterie, till by just divorce they bee separated, so it is in this case as wee have above said. Wee have a true Ministerie IN ENGLAND. II. EXCEPTION. THe second general exception is against the Ministery of our Church, which they affirme to be false, and Antichristi∣an. Concerning which, they have these words, in the page 146. and 147. of their refutation, wee have perused all this rable of the ministerie, of the Church of England, and have not found any one of them right, or almost, in any point, according to the right Rules of Christs Testament, they are all strangers there, they be∣long
us to Christs body. His Church neither are they  is members to the Head. And in the 147. page of the same back, they  they say, that our Minister is such as can have  God, alleadging moreover, that the wayes if the  Church,  are the wayes of death, and have no promise of salves and in the 147. page, they have these words; Out of the smoake of the Bottomlesse pit all their Ministers come, whe that fallen strre, An christ ha the Key thereof given him; to his Kingdome the false Church, they have alwayes belonged, alwayes served him in his sever  shapes, they have bin alwayes kit to him, as members to the head; from him, and not from Christ, wee all see with our bodily eyes, that the Church of England hath received them. And in the 158. page of the same book, they conclude thus. The keep∣ing of these offices, cannot now belong unto, or serve in Christs Kingdom: His Church neither, be knit unto Christ as the Head. But as the Holy Chost witnesseth of them, they have a King over them, the Angell of the bottomlesse pit, whose name is in Hebrew, Abaddon; and in Greeke, Ap∣pollion as in all languages, and places, they discover. ANSWER. THat wee have a true Ministerie in this Land,But it appea∣reth that our Ministery is holy and law∣full, because the true Church hath received and approved our doctrine. Iohn 10.3, 5. Ephes. 4.11, 12 2 Iohn 4.6. 2. Many have bin effectually called by our Ministerie. And this rea∣son taken from the force of our Ministery, and hath force to prove the lawfulnesse of it. it may evidently ap∣peare by these reasons. A true Church (such as we have proved ours to be in our answer, to their first exception) could neither have received our doctrine at the first, nor proved it so long, nor have beene continued, nourished, and built up by it: had not wee beene the true faithfull Ministers of Christ. Secondly, It is evident, that many have beene brought (by our Mi∣nistery) to saving knowledge, faith, and reformation of life. For proofe whereof, wee appeale, first, to their owne consciences, out of which wee desire them to answer us, as in the presence of Almightie God. Secondly, By the manifest differences, that may bee noted betwixt those that have beene taught by a learned Ministerie, and those that have bad none; who yet should bee in judgement, and affection, as good or better than the other, if the Ministerie, under which the other lived, were not true and lawfull. That this reason taken from the fruit of our labours, is sufficient to prove wee are the true Ministers of God; As appeareth in this.
1. That the Lord in his most holy Word, maketh this the most proper note of such ministerie, as is according to his owne heart.Ier. 3.15 & 23, 31. Iohn 10.25. Secondly, In that the ministerie is oft justified, and proved to be of God, by this reason; So that our Saviour Christ proveth Himselfe, to be the true Messiah, by doing the workes of the Messiah;Eph 4 11, 12 Rom. 10.14, 15. so may wee prove our selves true Ministers, by doing the workes of God, His Mi∣nisters. To that which they object against this reason,2 Cor. 9.1, 2. Rom. 13.17, 18. 1 Thes 1.1, 9. Mat. 12.5, 6. Iohn 5.36. Notwithstand∣ing that it is objected of o∣ther meanes. (viz.) that there∣by the Popish Church and Ministerie may be justified, as well as ours, seeing that many have beene converted by private conference, and rea∣ding, and by domesticall preaching, and exhortations, without a pub∣licke Church alling? We answer, that though the Lord hath beene often wont, hereto∣fore, and is able still to convert soules by private meanes, and such as are extraordinary. Yet cannot it be proved, that any have beene converted usually, or that publike Congregations have been gathered, and builded up by any private interpretations, and application of the Scriptures, but by such only as hath been use by a lawful ministerie. And whereas Henry Barrow excepteth further, p. 152. and 153 and of his refutation, that this argueth only true doctrine, and not a true Ministerie; we an∣swer, First, That thereby he justifieth our doctrine, which elsewhere, he generally condemneth. Secondly, That he affirmeth only, that true doctrine without a true ministerie, doth ordinarily convert men: but proveth it not, nor indeed was able to prove it: as shall hereafter appeare, in the answer wee make to the second Article of their consequence. But our Ministers have no promise of blessing in their teaching (say they) and therefore, neither may they lawfully teach, nor the people heare them? To this we answer, First,Ezech. 3.2, 7. That Gods Ministers have lawfully taught when they have not only wanted the promise, that their labour should doe that people good, whom they did teach, but received assurance of the contrary. Secondly, That the people have lawfully heard,Ionah 3.4, . and hearkened to teachers, that have come unto them, when they (as being utterly igno∣rant and unaconainted with Gods promises) had no assurance to their consciences, that God had promised a blessing to their hearing;
Objection first. THe first thing they object against our Ministers,Their first ob∣jection against our ministers is, that the of∣fice whereunto our Ministers were called is Antichristian, which is false & slanderous: for the office and duties whereunto we are called, are the very same which the word prescri∣beth, not those that popish Priests are cal∣led unto. Is, that the Of∣fice whereunto our ministerie is called, is not that which Christ hath Ordained, but that which Antichrist calleth his Priests unto: Concern∣ing these points, these are their words, in the 158. page of their refuta∣tion: They have served in, and belonged unto Antichrist, even the Popes Kingd me and Throne, the false Church, with all the abominable Jdola∣trie therein? ANSWER. I. To which their Objection, we give this answer. The preaching of the whole truth of Gods Word, and nothing but it; the administration of the Sacraments, and of publicke prayer, as they are all the parts of the Ministers Office prescribed in the word, so are they all appointed to our Ministers by the Law. And for so much, as there is no Priest-hood in the Popish Church, that is not ordained to offer that Idolatrous sacrifice of the Masse, or that was ever called unto, and necessarily enjoyned those duties of ministery that are required of us. Wee see not with what truth our brethren can say that our Office is the same, which Antichrist calleth his Priests unto. And if our Office bee the same which Antichrist hath ordained, how falleth it out, that the Papists give a new ordination, to such as having had that which our Church giveth, doe in Apostacie shrinke un∣to them. And if it be objected,Though some popish Priests are allowed to exercise the Ministerie without any new Ordinati∣on. that our Church admitteth such as were ordai∣ned by Antichrist without any new ordination, whereby appeareth, that our office and theirs is all one? we answer. First, That though they have no other ordination, yet in more essen∣tiall parts of their outward calling unto the Ministery, there are so ma∣ny differences to be observed, in the practise of our Church, that no in∣different man can thinke, we judge the calling, that any man hath had in popery, to be sufficient for exercise of their Ministerie in our Church. Secondly, The receaving of some into the Ministerie, that have bin
popish Priests, without new ordination, as we take it to be a grievous corruption, and such as wee will by no meanes seeke to justifie, so wee thinke it cannot by any shew of good reason, be alledged to prove that the calling which all our Ministers have, is the very same which the Po∣pish Priests exercise; but onely to shew either the outward calling, which some of our Ministers exercise is, the very same with that of the popish Priests, or (at the most) that some chiefe Governours in the Church doe in their judgement, hold that there is no new Ordination,The first rea∣son against our office is, that we all receive one. Antichri∣stian Deacon∣ship, which hath not force to condemne our office, see∣ing under the nme of Priest and Deacon, many receive at one time, the full power of ministerie. Philip. 1.1. 1 Tim. 3.8. . Ephes. 3.7. Col. 1.7, 23. 1 Tim. 4.6. . Acts 1.17, 25, & 6.4. & 12.25. & 20, 24. Rom. 12.13, 1. Cor. 12.5. Thirdly, Al∣though he that is called to be a Deacon be restrained from some worke that be∣longs to a Mi∣nister, yet is he not called to doe ought that is unlawfull. to bee required in such a case, both which if wee should grant, yet had they granted nothing at all in the question, that is betwixt us. The first reason whereby they would prove that office, whereunto our Ministers are called, is not that which Christ hath ordained, but that whereunto Antichrist hath called his Priests is, That we are called unto such a Deaconship as is not according unto Christs Testament, but Po∣pish and Antichristian? Whereunto we answer. 1. That if the Deaconship and Priest-hood (as they terme it) bee taken by us both at once, as usually they are, then we are enabled to doe whatsoever a Minister of the Gospell may doe of himselfe, without the assistance of the Eldership, and so the errour that is committed resteth in the forme and ceremony only, not in the matter it selfe. Secondly, though it were indeed to be wished, that every office in the Church were called by the proper name which the Scripture giveth it; Yet if the Church give a wrong name to a right and lawfull office, the office is not therefore to bee refused, much lesse, is the power to preach the word, and to administer the one of the Sacraments, there∣fore to bee refused, because it is given by the name of the Deacons Of∣fice, considering that although in the strict, and most proper sence, the Scripture calleth them Deacons, to whom, the Office of caring for the poore is committed; yet sometimes also all that labour in the word are comprehended under this name, and the ministery of the word, is called a Deaconship. Thirdly, If it be objected, that our Deaconship, is neither approved nor mentioned in the Scripture, because it restraineth us from dealing with the one Sacrament, and so separateth those things, which God hath coupled? Wee answer, That this can bee no reason against our Ministers, be∣cause when they are made Deacons, they are not called to do any thing that is unlawfull, but only cut short for a time and restrained from some thing, which they may or ought to doe, much lesse can it bee alleadged against all our Ministers, because many of us (as it is above said) were made both Deacons, and Priests, (as they speake fondly) in one day, and
so tooke the full power and authoritie of ministery without any such separation, or many as is here objected.The second reason against our office (viz) this we be cal∣led by such names as are popish, is fond & insufficient. For the name Priest though not simply un∣lawfull, yet in our Churches iudged unfit to be given unto the Ministers of the Gospell. Bishop Horne against Fek∣man, fol. 95. & fol. 111. Thirdly, If all were called by popish names, yet might wee be true Mini∣sters. Their second reason, against our office and function is; That ee are not knowne by the right names that in the Word an given to the Ministers of Christ, but by such names as have been devised nd given by the Pa∣pists as Priest, Pri-son, Vicar and Curate, &c. To which we answer, first, Concerning the name Priest, although we thinke, that at the first, it was well enough applyed to the Preach∣ers of the Word because it was derived from the Greeke Word, , that signifies an Elder. Yet because it is used now by the pro∣phane, as a terme of scorne, and hath a long time, both by Papists, and others, been by common custome abused, and appropriated to such as do sacrifice, therfore not only the most of our poople refuse to call us by that name but even some, who have been chiefe Governours of our Church, have judged it unfit to be given unto the Ministers of the Gospell. Secondly, It is well knowne, not only that many of our Ministers are usually called by such names, as the Scripture giveth but also that the Law of the Land (in the book of conlecration) giveth us the name of Pastors, Teachers and Rectors. Thirdly, Though the names objected against us, have beene used by the Papists, and therefore are very unfit to bee given to the Ministers of the Gospell. Yet see we not, that either by their originall, or use, they have any such contagion in them, as should poy son and infect all the of∣fices, and duties whereunto they are applyed. Fourthly,Fourthly, Espe∣cially seeing they are impo∣sed upon us, & we delight not in them. Gen. 41.45. or. 1.7, 8. Though there names were of themselve, of Antichristian original and use. Yet if they be imposed upon any such as take no plea∣sure in them, we see not how they can any wait  pollute them and their offices, then Ioseph, and Daniel, were polluted by  and Idolatrous names that were given them, or than private Christians, are made the worse by the odious termes of Precisians, Purity , is Mar∣tinists, or then our brethren themselves, are by the names of Brownists, and Barrowists; which they so usually are called by, and so much dislike. Fifthly,Fifthly Our Doctrines may bee good though wee were all called by, and did de∣light in those names. Matth. 23.2. Their third reason that we are called to read stinted & imposed prayers. if neither the Law, nor the people, did give us any other names then such as are popish, and we also did glory in them our selves. Yet makes this nothing to the condemnation of our office, and doctrine, seeing, that though the name of Pharisie were not of divine institution, Yet Christ Himselfe giveth approbation, to the office of preaching, which they exercised. Their third reason against our office and function, is. That we are called to reade stinted prayers, that are devised, and imposed by men: Con∣cerning which, they say, page 62. of their discovery, to the Booke of
common prayers, all the Priests of the Land are swonn to use it in manner and forme prescribed, and in the booke s in  the whole form and sub∣stance of their ministre, and in  3.)  book of common prayer is the very ground worke of their faith  and Ministerie, and in place  them, of the Word of God. And in the 64 page, the Word of God may not be taught, but when th booke hath first eenread, and hath had the preheminence. To all which was give this answer;Is also insuffi∣cient for a prescript form of prayer is lawfull. Secondly, even though it be imposed. First that a see and prescript forme of prayer, may lawfully be used, as we have proved already in our answer to their second objection against out Church. Secondly, If to have a prescript forme of prayer is lawfull in it selfe, we see not how this should make it unlawfull, that it is prescribed by the Church, authorized by the Christian Magistrate, for which we al∣so referre our selves to that answer, wee have already given to then se∣cond Objection against our Church. Thirdly, though that by statute, the Ministers bee commanded to read prayer, Yet doe we denie that is enjoyned, as any eentiall part of our office, seeing that in the fie of ordination, appointed by Law, there is no such thing  of us,  are there only charged with the preaching of the Word, prayer, and  of the Sacra∣ments, and discipline of Christ. And that statute which ratifieth the Communion booke, respecteth of the substance of our Office, but or∣der onely and uniformiti Neither doth any Law of our Land deny him, to be a true and lawfully Minister, which preacheth the word aright though he never reade prayers according to that booke. Whereof the practise of our Church is a sufficient proofe, wherein there are many Ministers allowed, that never medled with that booke, and many both Schoole-Masters and others, by the Bishops are permitted to reade it publikely, though they be not in the account of Ministers; And which is more, private men may ( Statute) reable it in their private houses:Their fourth reason (viz.) that wee are called to read ungodly pray∣ers is also in∣sufficient, for 1. We have Ministers that read none of those prayers that for mat∣ter or forme can be proved ungodly. All which proveth evidently the reading of the Booke of Common Prayer, is not taken to be of the substance of our ministerie, nor abso∣lutly necessary, to the being of a Minister in our Church. And therefore we cannot but wonder to read those accusations (which are so notori∣ously known to be false and slanderons) in their writings who pretend such love to sinceritie, and are so sharpe censurers, even of the secret faults of other men. Their fourth reason against the office we exercise, is, That wee are called to reade ungodly prayers? whereunto we answer. First, It is most cleare that many Ministers in our Church, use not to reade any of those prayers, which you account, for the matter ungodly,
and that therefore this can bee no good reason, against all our Ministers. Secondly,Secondly, none are in the or∣dination called and enjoyned to read such. 2 Kings 16.11. If all did use to read them; Yet are they not in their Or∣dination called to reade them (as hath beene above proved) so that if they reade them, the fault is in them, and not in the office they exercise. Thirdly, If they were enjoyned to read ungodly prayers, and did accordingly read them, this cannot make their Ministerie voyd, or Anti∣christian, for then Ʋriah should have beene no Priest, for that he made an Alter at Jerusalem, like that in all points, which was at Damascus: whereas it is evident, that he continued the Priest of the Lord still: Not∣withstanding that great fault which was beyond all comparison greater than this, that is in question. Their fift reason against our office is, That we are called to read, Ho∣milies, and Injuctions, and whereunto we answer. First, That neither do the most of our Ministers read Homilies; Nei∣ther doth any law of the Land require, that Preachers should read them. Secondly, If Law did enjoyne them to all, and all did read them; yet are they not enjoyned in our ordination, nor accounted by Law as substantiall parts of our office, neither is their any doubt made in our Land (no not by them that doe presse the precise observation of Law in this point) whether he be a lawfull Minister, who doth not read, either Homilies, or Injunctions. Their sixth reason against our office is, That we are called to marry, burie, and Church women. To which also we answer. First, That it is no part of our office (whereunto in ordination we are called) to doe these things. Secondly, as the Ministers use to blesse the Marriages, that are made in our Land, so make we no doubt, but that it is lawfull and fit (as a mat∣ter not of substance, but of good order) that they should not doe it, for as it is necessary that this ordinance of God should be sanctified, by the Word, and prayer, so it cannot bee inconvenient, that the Word and prayer, whereby it is sanctified, should be administred by him, who in a speciall sort is appointed of God to be the steward, and disposer of all his mysteries, and to whom in his ministeriall actions, greater promises are made than to any other man: though hee doe the very same thing. And seeing that in these dayes it preventeth many dangerous inconveni∣ences, to have marriages blest in the publike congregations, who can be thought so fit to speake in the congregation, and to bee the month, ei∣ther of the Lord to the people, or of the people unto God, as is the Mi∣nister? That which Henry Barrow objecteth in the 123. page of his disco∣very; That he ever tooke Marriage for an Ordinance, and an action of the
second table, and seeth not why we may not as well set up the tables, of the money changers, or bring in any other civill matters or chaffaire, as this in∣to our Church; is easily answered; for though marriages be a civill action, yet is not the blessing of it, by the word, and prayer civill: And as the Magistrates may have a hand in those actions, that are Ecclesiasticall and belonging to the first Table, (even by Henry Barrowes owne confession, in the 85. page of the same booke) so may the Minister have a hand in those actions that are civill, and belonging to the second Table. And though Marriages receive life and being, from the contract that is made by mutuall consent of parties, and Parents privately (which is the cause why we doe thereupon according to the Scriptures, account them man and wife, before they have lyen together) yet doth this adde much to the seemlinesse and beautie of that holy ordinance, when it is thus made knowne, and rightly ratified in the congregation. Concerning Courching of women, we answer: That many of our Ministers doe upon a just dislike of the forme prescribed in the booke, and upon feare of nurishing the great superstition (that the people for the most part have put in that custome) forbeare to use any particular, and personall forme of thankesgiving, at that time and occasion: And yet wee see not how it should simply, be unlawfull, (though very un∣convenient) to use some form of thankesgiving, at that time even with speciall mention of that occasion, or how our ministerie should be made void, and Antichristian by doing so besides that, the booke it selfe tieth no Minister to the forme preseribed, but leaveth it to his discretion to use it, or any other, as that case or occasion requireth. Concerning burialls, we answer. First, That many of our Ministers are knowne to refuse the forme of buriall prescribed in the booke. Secondly, That a Christian Minister may (for the honour and seem∣linesse of Christian buriall) accompany, as a Christian, with the rest of the Neighbours, the body of Christians departed unto the grave. Thirdly, if the minister use some few words of comfort and exhor∣tation at that time; Yea even in that forme, that the booke prescribeth, though it may prove inconvenient, and offensive; Yet is there no such impietie in that action, that should make his ministerie void, or Antichristian. Their seventh reason against our office is, That we are called to use Antichristian Geremonies? whereunto we make this answer. That the Ceremonies wherein opinion of Holinesse is, or hath beene put, many of our Ministers have cast off, so that this reason maketh nothing to ju∣stifie separation from all our Church Assemblies.
Secondly, Many that use sundry of these Ceremonies doe it, because either they judge them things indifferent and such, as whereunto the Law of Christian charitie,b Rom. 7.15. 2 Chron. 20 33. 1 King. 2.5.3. Though we all used the most un∣lawfull Cere∣monies that are in our Church; Yet might we bee true Ministers. Galath. 4 9. 2 Kings 14.4. Fourthly, Spe∣ciallie seeing we are not bound by office to use them. Their second Objection a∣gainst our mi∣nisterie is, that the entrance in to our Office is Antichristian; which insuffi∣cient to war∣rant their separation, for First, the peo∣ple are not bound to en∣quire or see how their Mi∣nisters entred Secondly, Our entrance may be lawfull though it be not in al points agreeable to the rules of Christs Testa∣ment. esua. p. 127. and the tender regard to the weakenesse of the people doth (as they thinke) binde them, following therein, the direction of the Word, or else they tollerate them as burdens, which it lieth not in them to remove, being laid upon them by the determination of the Magistrate, and custome of the Church: And seeing that they doe in judgement, and affection, unfainedly dislike that which either through humane infirmitie, or in Christian wisdome, and to prevent more dangerous inconveniences) they are inforced to beare with Wee see not, why they may not bee accounted the true Ministers of Christ, notwithstanding they use these inconyenient Ceremonies, as well as Paul might be judged to be a good Christian, though he sometimes did that evill, which he hated and Iehosphat a good King, though hee in∣dured the high places to continue in Iudah all the time of his govern∣ment, because hee was not able to abolish them. And David though he suffered Ioab to live many dayes, after he had committed most unna∣turall murder because hee was notable without manifest danger to his state to cut him off. Thirdly, the use of the most unlawfull ceremonies that are amongst us, is not of force to make our Ministerie void, and Antichristian, or our Church for the Galathians were still a true Church, though they had received even those impotent, and beggerly rudiments, which they had once cast off, much more wee, which cannot bee said to have resumed them, as being never yet freed from the bondage of them, so was there still a true Church in Iudah when the hill alters, and high places were continued there, which yet was a greater corruption in the worship of God, then the ceremonies whereof question is made, can possibly be ac∣counted. Fourthly, It is no part of our office whereunto we are in ordination called, to use any ceremonies as hath beene shewed before. The second thing they object against our Ministerie is, That the manner of our entrance into the aforesaid office and calling is Antichristi∣an, and not according to Gods Ordinance? Whereunto wee answer: First, that the people may lawfully accept us to bee true Ministers, whom the Church so esteemeth, though they cannot see how we first entred. And that by no commandement or ex∣ample in the Word, they are bound to enquire there-into. For further proofe whereof, we referre out selves unto the answer which wee have made to their first Objection, against the whole body of our Church. Secondly, Though none of those Rules which Christ his Testament
hath set downe for the calling, and ordaining of our Ministerie, can be wanting without a blemish, and maime to the calling: And conse∣quently they should all of them be carefully sought for, both by Mini∣ster and people, yet may some of them be wanting, without losse of the life, and being of the calling: Neither is that true which they af∣firme; That whatsoever Minister hath not a true, and right calling, in all points, though the office whereunto hee be called, be a true office, is no true Minister, but an usurper, an intruder, a thiefe, and a murtherer. For first, whatsoever is of the being, and substance of the calling to the mi∣nisterie, hath beene common to all true and lawfull Ministers, that ever were in the Church, as well as the substance of the Sacraments, and dis∣cipline, and whole Religion, hath ever beene one, and the same, in all places, and at all times; whereas it is cleere, that some of the rules prescribed for the outward calling in the New Testament, have not bin alwayes in use, and practise throughout Gods Church, no not in such ministries as the Word hath given testimonie to; for proofe whereof may be alleadged the calling, that those Levites, and Preachers exercised, whereof there is mention made, 2 Chron. 17.7, 9. For as in diverse other parts of Gods service, the omitting, and swerving from sundry of Gods holy Ordinances prescribed in the word, maketh not the acti∣on it selfe void and unlawfull (as is evident by that one example, 2 Chro. 30.26, 17, 18, 19) so the want and swerving from some rules prescri∣bed, for the outward calling of the Ministers, cannot be of force suffici∣ent to make their calling void, and unlawfull. Thirdly,Thirdly, Our entrance might be law∣full though in some points it were according to some Can∣nons of Anti∣christ. Their first rea∣son whereby thy condemne our entrance, (viz.) that we were not elect by the people, not approved by the Elder∣ship, is of no force. Though our entrance were according to some of Anti∣christs Canons, yet would not that prove that our ministerie is Antichri∣stian; for further proofe whereof, wee referre our selves to that an∣swer wee have made to the fourth Objection against the whole body of our Church. Their first reason against our entrance is; That wee are not chosen, by that people, over whom wee are set, or approved by an Eldership? Whereunto we give this answer. First, that their be sundry of our Ministers in our Church, that have beene in times past chosen by a faith∣full people, and ordained by a true Eldership, to the worke of the mi∣nisterie, at Antwerp. Geneva, Midlebarough, Flushing; Stoade, Gernsey Against who if this be objected. That they were not thus called, to any of our Parish Assemblies? Wee desire to know by what warrant they can ee accounted to be  Ministers now, that have given no just cause of deprivation, since the time they were so sufficiently called to the ministery.
Secondly, the most of such Preachers, as have stood for the cause of Reformation have the very same outward election,Secondly, ma∣nie of the same election and ordination in substance which the word requireth and ordination in substance which the word prescribeth; for first, their are be ore their entrance, sufficient meanes used to know and finde what gifts are in them by disputations and other exercises in divinitie. Secondly, their gifts are approved by the judgement of sundry lear∣ned men of the Colledges, and places wherein, and whereabout they have beene trained up Thirdly, the faithfull that are in those Congregations, where they are placed doe either desire them, or gladly receive them, or at the least by not taking exception to them, do even by their silence, consent to their entrance, or by submitting themselves willingly to their godly di∣rections in all things, and profitting in knowledge and Reformation of life by their labours, doe manifestly approve of them, and set a seale un∣to their ministerie, whereof this may serve for an evident proofe, that many Assemblies have both made an earnest fuite for sundry Ministers before their first comming to them; And when they have beene mole∣sted afterwards. And seeing the right that Patrons now have, was given them at first by the peoples free consent (though ignorantly, and unlawfully as wee are perswaded) we see not why the choise that the Patron maketh, may not be accounted the choice of the people, as well as the acts done by the Knights, and Burgesses of the Parliament, are deemed the acts of the whole commons, by whom they were deputed; It is evident that by the Law mentioned, Numb. 30.8. that the silence of the husband, or parent that testified not his dislike to the vow which hee understood was made by his wife, or child, made the said vow of as much force, as if his consent had beene requited and given, so it is judged in this case of the peoples silence, in accepting of their Ministers. Thirdly, the Law it selfe requireth that wee should have the same election and ordination in substance which the Word of God prescrib∣eth, for by the Law; First, none should be made Minister, but at the same time also be should be appointed to some certaine charge. Secondly, That when any Ministers are to be made, there should be knowledge given thereof, and that in so publike place and manner, that even the people, over whom any Minister is to be set, may know it, and be admitted, to take any just exception, they can either to his doctrine, or life. Thirdly, There may be some entrance into the Ministerie in substance sufficient, where the people at first have not made election, nor their consent been required at all: as in case where the people have not know∣ledge
of their right, or having known it have not been suffered to use it: But yet have afterwards yeelded themselves subject thereunto, as also in the case aforesaid, Numbers 30.8, for further proofe whereof, we re∣fer our selves to the answer we have given, unto that which they object in generall against our entrance. Fourthly, Concerning ordination by Eldership, this wee answer in particular: First, that unlesse the eldership be held so essentiall a thing, that there can be no true Church without it (which we are well assured of that our brethren themselves, and all that have any knowledge will denie) ordination by the eldership cannot be absolutely necessary, albeit in the setled government of a Church, we hold it of the essence of the calling of a Minister, that we have the substance of the ordination ap∣pointed in the Word. Fiftly, That as in times past; so now also there may be in some places such an estate of the Church, as wherein no manner of ordination and investing of Ministers, hath been, or could be used in the giving of an entrance into the Ministerie: And though where it may be conveni∣ently had, we hold it fit that the weaknesse of the peoples judgement in their choise of their Minister, should be supported by the discreet knowledge of the Ministers and Elders that are about them; Yet where it cannot be conveniently had (as in places where the Gospel is newly planted, and far removed from other Churches already established) there that (amongst other considerations) the course of the Gospel should not be stayed, till ordination be fetched from farre countreys; the Lord him∣selfe oftentimes supplieth the places of the Ministers and Elders, and layeth on his hands: such evidence of gifts and graces proper for the Ministry, as not onely the Church doth willingly acknowledge; but the enemies also will they nill they, are in their consciences convinced to be divine and excellent. And seeing it is evident that neither the Prophets under the law, nor many worthy Ministers that God hath raised up since the time of the Gospel, had ever before their entrance into the Ministry, their gifts so∣lemnly approved or been ordained. Our Brethren must needs grant that this kinde of ordination is not simply or absolutely necessary to the being of a Minister. To which also this may be added, that our Saviour in giving notice whereby the true Pastor should be discerned from the false, nameth only these, viz. that he enter himselfe, and lead the people in and out by that dore.
Secondly, that the people of God agree with him and consent to his Ministrie. Thirdly, that the Porter (the holy Ghost) open the hearts of the hear∣ers to him and his doctrine (a) which 3. notes doubtlesse our Saviour would not have rested in, if there could have been no true Minister with∣out the ordination which our Brethren speak of, and urge that as a matter of absolute necessitie:Their second reason (viz.) that we reccive our Ordinatiō from Antichristian Bishops, i∣also insufficient for, first, Our Bishops can∣not trulie be called Anti∣christian. So that to conclude this point, wee say that the ordinary course of entring into the Ministrie is not kept; but a great imperfection and want is to be acknowledged where this electi∣on and ordination is not used; Yet is not the want such, as taketh away the very life, and being of a true ministerie. Their second reason against our entrance is; That our ordination is received from Antichristian Prelates, and such as being persecutors of the godly, cannot bee well accounted brethren, or members of the Church, much lesse can they give a calling to a Minister of the Church? whereun∣to we answer. First,Secondly, see∣ing our Bishops are such as can judge of the sufficiencie of gifts, and are also Ministers It cannot be unlawfull for him that is to bee a Ministers to receive ap∣probation and authoritie from them. That the Bishops of England cannot truly be called Antichri∣stian Prelates, for proofe whereof, wee referre our selves unto that an∣swer we have given unto their fourth Objection, against the whole bo∣die of our Church. Secondly. seeing it cannot bee denied, that the Bishops are able to judge of such gifts as are required for the sufficiencie of Ministers; yea that many of them have beene such Ministers themselves, as to whose labours, the Lord hath set to his Seale, and who have also suffered perse∣cution for the truth; we are perswaded, that (though it were not ne∣cessary, yet) it cannot be unlawful, for him that entreth into the ministery to be approved, and authorized even by them. And if our ordination be in this behalfe faultie, how will out Bre∣thren justifie the calling of their own Ministers,Thirdly, the gifts & power to ordaine which God hath commited to his Church, we may law∣fully seeke the benefit of it, even at worse mensch ns then our Bi∣shops are if we cannot otherwise come by it. that have received or∣dination ever from the people, who neither by commandement, not ex∣ample, can be found to have any such authoritie, nor are in any degree to capable of it, as the Bishops. Thirdly, the ordination we seeke for, from the Bishops, is not theirs but committed, to the Church by Christ Himselfe: And seeing wee have already proved, that there was in England a true Church even then when this authoritie was first given by Parliament, to the Bishops, and that the true Church (which without a ministerie, cannot possibly bee continued) is never without power to ordaine Ministers: Wee may lawfully reverence, and seeke for the benefit of this power, and pri∣ledge, which God hath given to his Church, though it were conveied unto us by men, lesse capable of this authoritie, then our Bishops are.
And he that thinketh Christs ordination, the better for the man, that be∣stoweth it, iucurreth (as we thinke) the danger of the curse,Fourthly. We may lawfullie seeke the Bi∣shops approba∣tion, because from his hands only we can receive the civill Magi∣strates allow∣ance to exer∣cise our Ministrie. denounced against him, that putteth his trust in man, and maketh flesh his arme, and nith draeth his heart from the Lord. Ier. 17.5. Fifthly, If our Bishops were not at all capable of this power to give Ecclesiasticall Ordination, yet seeing the Christian Magistrates ap∣probation, is not to be refused by him that exerciseth a ministerie in the Church, and that cannot be had in our Church, but by the hands of the Bishops we thinke that he who is fitted of God to the ministerie, and hath also testimonie of his fitnesse from such godly learned Brethren as have made tryall of his gifts, and can judge of them, may lawfully ac∣cept and seeke for this kinde of approbation, if all other conditions bee equall. Sixthly, Admit the Bishops from whom we receive our ordination,6. Though the Ordination received from the Bishops were as corrupt as baptismal received from popish Priests, Yee may he be a lawfull Mini∣ster that hath no other Ordi∣nation then from the Bishops Their third Objection agaiust our Ministerie is, that our admi∣nistration and exercise of that office where∣unto we are thus called, is also Antichri∣stian. were indeed Antichristian, or Heretickes (as we judge them not to be) yet why should wee bee bound to seeke for any other ordination, more than another baptisme, then that which we have received from Popish Priests in the time of ignorance; And seeing that Barrow and Groen∣wood, in the 54. page of their refutation, doe not onely account many to be true Christians, that never had other outward Baptisme, then that which they had from Popish Priests, but plainely affirme, that such nei∣ther need, nor ought to be baptized againe; we wonder why they dare not account us true Ministers, because of this ordination received from the Bishops. Shall ordination bee thought more necessary to the being of a Mini∣ster, than baptisme is to the being of a Christian; or shall an error in or∣dination, have more force to prove one no Minister, than an error in Baptisme hath to prove one no Christian; or are our Bishops worse than the Popish. Priests, or the corruption in the forme of our ordination, greater than those that are used in popish Baptisme. The third thing they object against our Ministerie, Is, that the admi∣stration, and exercise of our function, is not agreeable to the Word, but Antichristian because (say they) as at our entrance, we sweare Canno∣nicall Obedience to the Bishops;Fifthly, Which is insufficient to warrant their separatiō, for it is not ut∣terly unlawfull for us to yeeld some kinde of obedience to, Bishops. so doe we performe it in our whole admini∣stration, by going to their Courts, by standing, and falling at their com∣mandement? Whereunto we answer. First, that so long as the Christian Magistrate requireth we should yield obedience to the Bishops (and that with this limitation, (viz.) only in things lawfull and honest) wee thinke it not unlawfull for us to give obedience to them, in those things they doe by civill authoritie,
though neither themselves, nor the Magistrate might well require us to doe, for even our Saviour Himselfe yeelded obedience to Cesar, in such a thing wherein Caesar could not lawfully exact obedience of him; as for the excommunication and suspentions,Mat. 17.24, 27 and such other censures as are meerely Ecclesiasticall? We answer. As the true Church of God, which from the Lord Iesus hath received these keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven, did though unadvisedly, and unlawfully deliver them over into the hands of the Bishops: And the Bishops being Preachers of the Word, though they should not have this power wholly committed unto them, yet are they capable of it. We see not how it should be ut∣terly unlawfull to reverence and yeeld to the censures of Christs Church, being exercised, and administred even by them, unlesse wee will say, that the Church presently looseth her right and power, to censure Offenders, when she committeth it unto any such men, as unto whom of right, ei∣ther not at all, or not of right, only it belongeth. Secondly,Secondly, Not bind our selves thereto by oath, so far as we doe. Now as wee may lawfully yeeld some obedience to the Bishops in these things, so wee may lawfully binde our selves by oath to doe it: if our oathes be required or us by the Christian Magistrates an∣thoririe, especially seeing we doe by oath binde our selves, to obey in re∣gard of the civill authoritie, which is committed to them, by the Chri∣stian Magistrate. Thirdly, For our going to their Courts, this we answer. That see∣ing we doe testifie in our callings, our dislike to the vile, and odious cor∣ruptions of their Courts; And doe also utterly refuse to yeeld obedience to any o their unlawfull decrees, we cannot justly bee condemned for appearing intheir Courts, or any other place whereunto we are by His Majesties authoritie summoned. And whereas the persons before whom wee appeare are judged usually corrupt, and enemies to that Re∣formation which wee desire, and some of them also, such as (being no ministers themselves) do by all meanes seeke the disgrace of our calling, and the utter discoutagement of such Christians, as in whom they per∣ceive any sparkes of true zeale) wee account this our appeating at their Courts, not onely for an abridgment of our libertie, but also for such a burthen, as wee have just cause to groane under, and to pray, that God would in His good time, move His Majesties heart, to eate us of it. And yet as the Apostle being free was content, for the Churches sake, not onely to become bound, in serving it with the labour of his hands, but also, by subjecting himselse to those Ceremonies, which in Christ were abolished, so may, and ought we for the Churches sake, to beare this burden, rather than to forsake, or refuse the ministerie, when the Lord hath called, and fitted us unto it.
For our yeelding to the suspentions, and deprivations, wee answer. That so long as the Bishops suspend, and deprive according to the Law of the Land, wee account of the action herein,Fourthly, To cease from the execution of our ministerie when they sus∣pend or de∣prive us. as of the act of the Church, which wee may and ought to reverence, and yeeld un∣to, if they doe otherwise, wee have liberty given us by the Law, to appeale from them, if it bee said, that the Church is not to bee obeyed when it suspends, and deprives us, for such causes as wee in our Consci∣ences know to be insufficient? We answer. That it lyeth in them to de∣pose, that may ordaine; and they may shut, that may open. And that as he may with a good conscience, execute a ministerie, by the ordina∣tion, and calling of the Church, who is privie to himselfe of some un∣fitnesse (if the Church will presse him to it) so may he who is privie to himselfe, of no fault that deserveth deprivation, cease from the executi∣on of his ministery, when he is pressed thereunto by the Church. And if a guiltlesse person put out of his charge by the Churches authoritie, may yet continue in it, what proceedings can there bee against guiltie persons, who in their owne conceit, are alwaies guiltlesse, or will at least pretend so to be; Seeing they also will bee readie alwayes to object a∣gainst the Churches judgment, that they are called of God, and may not therefore give over the execution of their ministerie at the will of man. And yet admitting it were meerely unlawfull,Fourthly, If this obedience wee yeeld to them were ut∣terly unlawfull yet may we be true Ministers of Christ not∣withstanding. upon any respect to yeeld any new obedience at all, to the censures of the Bishops; yet how will it follow, that this our unlawfull yeelding, hath force suffici∣ent to make us (ipso fasto) no true Ministers, unlesse you will say, that the High Priests, who were in Christs time, that took and left their offices, at the will of tyrants, and heathen Princes, Were therefore not to be accounted Priests, for further answer, hereunto we referre the Reader, to that which wee have above said to the fourth thing which they object against the whole body of our Assemblies; And to that also which wee have already answered unto the fourth reason, which they bring against our office. The speech of the Apostls,The speech of the Apostles. Acts 4.19, 20, 15. most un∣skilfully allea∣ged against us. 1 Tim. 6.2. which they are wont to object against us in this case, may easily appeare how unskilfully, it is alleadged to them that will consider these three differences betweene their case and ours. First, they that inhibited the Apostles, were knowne, and professed enemies to the Gospell. Secondly, the Apostles were charged not to teach in the name of Christ, nor to publish any part of the Doctrine of the Gospell, which commandement might more hardly bee yeelded unto, then this of our Bishops, who though they cannot indure them, which teach that part of the truth that concerneth the good government, and reformation of
the Church, yet are they not only content that the Gospell should bee preached, but are also preachers of it themselves. Thirdly, The Apostles received not their calling, and authority from menGalath. 2.1. nor by the hands of men, but immediately from God Him∣selfe, and therefore also might not bee restrained, or deposed by men; whereas wee, though we exercise a function, whereof God is the Au∣thor, and we are also called of God to it, yet are we called and ordeined by the hand, and ministerie of men, and may therefore by men, be also deposed and restrained from the exercise of our ministerie. The fourth Objection against our ministrie is,There fourth Objection against our Ministerie is that our maintenance is not accord∣ing to Christs directions, but Iewish and Antichristian, which is not of force to con∣demne our ministerie, Be∣cause wee may be the true Ministers of Christ although we receave maintenance from all sorts of men. That we are not main∣tained a cording to the direction Christ bath given in his Testament, but our maintenance is lewish, and Antichristian: That this is a principall matter objected against our ministerie, appeareth in the fourth page of their Collection of letters, and conferences, and sundry other parts of their writings, And least they should seeme to say it only, they bring sundry reasons, to prove that our maintenance is such, as no Minister of Christ, can ac∣cept, or live by, for say yee, our Ministers receive maintenance from all sorts of men in their parish without difference. This is alleadged in their collection of liberties and page 18. and called in the 145. page of the refutation. An execrable sacriledge, and covetous making marchan∣dize of the holy things of God, a letting out of our selves to hire to the pro∣phan, for filthy Lucre. To this first reason they bring against our min∣tenance, this answer we give. First, That the Christian Magistrate is bound to use his authoritie for the furtherance of the subjects in all things that concerne godlines, and honestic, and so see that the morall Law bee kept by them, whereas therefore the Christian Magistrate (in conscience of his dutie) hath provided by the Law, that all his Subjects should (of the increase God giveth them) contribute somewhat towards the maintenance of their Minister; we may truly be said to receave our maintenance, rather from the Magistrate then from the people. Secondly, the Magistrate may lawfully appoint so much of the Sub∣jects goods (as by Law is given to the Ministers maintenance) to bee imployed to this or any other good use, as is evident by that, which the Apostle saith, Rom. 13.7. Thirdly, the Magistrate may without any shew of wrong compell the subjects to pay this part of their goods, which they give to their Minister, because in Parliament it was voluntarily bestowed, even by the people themselves: whose free act that is, to be accounted, which is enacted and done in Parliament.
Fourthly, It is evident by the Word, that the offerings which hea∣thens voluntarily brought, and gave to the building, and beautifiing of the Temple were accepted of, as appeareth in the stories.Ezra. 1.4, 6 Fifthly, Seeing the Apostle calleth it our owne bread,Mehem 2.8. 2 Thes. 3.12. wee get by our honest labours,Eph. 4.28 and our Saviour saith in this case, that the la∣bourer is worthy of his hire,Luke 10.7 we may with comfort, and good conscience, take maintenance of the wicked that live in our parishes, for whose sake, both publikely and privately, we take paines, and to whom the benefit of our labour is offered; seeing that the Apostle a∣voucheth1 Cor. 9.11. that such as sow spirituall things amongst people (though God blesse not their feed) may lawfully, and honestly, reape their car∣nall things. Sixthly, As for the testimonie of the holy Scriptures, which our bre∣thren alleadge in this point, wee give this answer unto them. To the place, Levit. 22.25. we answer. First, that the meaning is, that a stranger being a Proselite, might no more lawfully offer any of these uncleane, and imperfect sacrifices spoken of in the verses going before, then a Jew might. Secondly, If the unbelieving stranger were meant here, yet is there nothing spoken here of the maintenance, which should come to the Priests, for the intent of the Law, in this place is to shew what manner of sacrifices should bee offered to the Lord, and not what maintenance Priests should have, which is evident, both for that the sacrifice is here called, the bread of their God, and also for that elsewhere the Priests might receave maintenance, which might have blemish, as in the first fruits, and first borne. To that place, Pro. 15.8. and all such like, we answer. First, that thought the action their spoken of (for the substance thereof) bee good and lawfull; yet as it commeth from them whose hearts are not purged by faith, it is indeed abominable in Gods sight, as all other the actions of the wicked are. Secondly, That they abuse this place, for it is there meant of the spirituall services of God, and not of corporall maintenance, and last∣ly, if it were to be understood of the maintenance of the Minister, yet should not the Minister sinne, in taking it, because they sinne in giving it; Because by the Law, it was provided, that all Iewes cleane, or un∣cleane, good or bad should pay tythes without exception. To the place Phil 4 18. We answer. First, That he speaketh not there of maintenance due to the mini∣sterie, but of the contribution, made to the afflicted Saints, and to him∣selfe in particular, that had a principall portion, in the sufferings of the Saints.
Secondly, if they urge that the maintenance of the Minister is also an odour that smelleth sweet, and a sacrifice acceptable to God, which no∣thing that proceedeth from the wicked can be: wee referre our selves herein to the answer wee have made to the Prov. 15.8. cited by them to the same purpose. Their second reason against our maintenance is,Secondly, al∣though onr main'enance be fixed and certaine. That it is fixed and certaine. This is alledged in the 61. page of their Discovery, and in sun∣dry other parts of their writings, Concerning which we answer. First, that this can be no good reason against all our Ministers, seeing that we have some preach ordinarily and painfully, who yet either live wholly of themselves, or take nothing of the people, but that which they give voluntarily. Secondly, if it be a great fault to live upon a set stipend, yet seemeth it strange unto us, that they should account it so great to make a nulli∣tie of our Ministrie. Thirdly, wee can see no reason why it should be thought either un∣lawfull or unconvenient to set stipends to be given unto, and receaved by the Minister: for first, under Moses law,Deut. 14.22 Numb. 35.2.9. Iosh. 21.18. &c. 2 Chron. 6.64. a certaine and set course was prescribed for the Ministers maintenance, and the people appoint∣ed what they should give. Now if it be said of the manner of the Le∣viticall maintenance, that it was Ceremoniall, yet would we fain know what Ceremony or shadow there can be in the certainty thereof: Shall we say that together with the Ceremonie it selfe, all the equitie also and morall reason is abrogated. Secondly, as Ezekiel describing the pattern of the new Sanctuarie that should be under the Gospel, alludeth unto a certaine and set main∣tenance that should be given to the ministrie:Ezr. 45.1.5 so there be fundry Phraises and Comparisons in the new Testament used by Christ and the Apostles, from which the same may be very probably gathered to be lawfull and fit, as when the Ministers maintenance is compared to the wages and hire of a servant,Luke 10.17 2 Tim. 5.18. and when it is compared to the souldiers pay,1 Cor. 9.7. which both things are certaine and set. Thirdly, it standeth with sound reason that the Ministers mainte∣nance should be certaine: For first, seeing it is already proved that a suf∣ficient maintenance must necessarily be given to the Minister of the peo∣ple, how can it be unlawfull, either for the people by their owne pro∣mise, or for the Magistrate by law to binde them unto that which they should voluntarily do of themselves? Secondly, by this kinde of main∣tenance, sundry of the peoples infirmities (as their grudging to give ought when it is in their power to give or not to give, their base estima∣tion likewise of the Minister, and looking for civill dutie at his hand,
and many other such like) are best prevented: Yea, we deny that ever any Church was so well informed, wherein the most part of the people had not need to have such infirmities restrained in them, by the wisedom and authority of the Christian Magistrate. Touching the places of Scripture1 Thess. 2.5. 1 Tim. 6.8. Iude 11.13. in this point alleadged, by them we give this answer. First, that they condemne onely the covetousnesse of men, and not the set maintenance of Ministers, which may be recea∣ved without covetousnesse. Secondly, if they will enforce these places against set payments to the Minister, they may as well enforce them against all set payments to the Prince, to the servant, to the labourer, or any other. Thirdly if not, then seeing the Apostles ruleTim. 5.8. doth concern even the Ministers as well as others, why should it be thought covetous∣nesse in him to provide a certaine and set maintenance for himselfe and his family, more then the same care is in any other Christian? To the place Mat. 10. we say that the Commandment which our Saviour Christ gave there to his disciples was temporary, and concern∣ed that especiall voyage onely wherein (for their incouragement to the Ministry) our Saviour assureth them, that they should not need to feare the want of maintenance; for he would supply that extraordinarily as it were, by his especiall providence, in inclining the hearts of men to maintaine them: And that this is so, may appeare by these reasons.Verse 7.8. First, if it be a perpetuall rule we may thence gather, 1. that the Mini∣ster ought now to have no abiding place, neither two coates, two paire of shooes, nor a staffe; neither that they may possesse any thing of their owne. Secondly, they then received their gifts of preaching and working of miracles freely without cost, and therefore were bound from cove∣nanting for stipend, to dispence those gifts, receaving no more then for their present necessitie of food and raiment, which cannot be so said of those, whose bringing up in learning is costly, and whose study is pain∣full. Thirdly, by the commandement which our Saviour Christ givethLuke 22.35 36. 1 Cor. 96, 7. Matth. 20. for provision for themselves; And that which Paul challengeth, it is evi∣dent, that the restraint given, Mat. 10. was but temporarie, yea ad mit it might be proved from hence, that no set maintenance were given to the Ministers during the Apostles time (which cannot be) yet follow∣eth not that there should be none: Now seeing that the Church was then without those nourishing fathers which the Lord promised by the Prophet,Esay 49 23,  without whose authoritie wee see not how that order for forced maintenance could be taken. Neither doubt we to acknowledge even this for a speciall fruit of that blessing promised to come to the
Church by Christian Magistrates, whereas they said, that whatsoever is given to the maintenance of Gods Service, should be free, and volunta∣rie, and alleadge for that, these places, Exodus 15.2. 2 Cor. 8.12. 2 Cor. 9.5, 7. we answer. That the bond of the peoples promise, and Magistrates Law is no hinderance, to the freedom and voluntarines, see∣ing the service, and obedience of David was free and voluntary; Not∣withstanding the vow and oath hee bound himselfe with.Psal. 119.106. Nbem. 10.38. So was that also which is mentioned in Nehemiah, for if Covenanting, should take away the voluntarinesse of the act, then should it not bee lawfull to co∣venant with servants and labourers or any other; Yea the Lord our God doth binde Himselfe by Covenant, to give that reward to the faith, and obedience of his servants, which yet he giveth most freely and volunta∣rilie. The third reason they alleadge against our maintenance,Thirdly. Al∣though we bee maintained by Tythes. Is this; That we are maintained by Iewish tythes, and concerning which, they have these words, In the 60. page of their discoverie; It is evident, who are thus maintained by those Iewish Tythes, and offerings, are not the ministers of Christ, and a little after, these Priests, and people still retaine the Le∣viticall decimations, in the same forme, to the same ends. And page 16. I could never see any difference betweene the Iewes and them, save that the Swine-heards, tythe-Pïgges and Geese, &c. To all which, wee thus answer: First, It is evident, that the tythes are not held amongst us, by vertue of the Leviticall Law, but only by the positive Law of our Land, for proofe whereof, these reasons following may be sufficient. First, If this kinde of maintenance were given to the Minister, for conscience and obedience to that Law; why should not the first fruits also, offerings and diverse other things, which by a plaine commande∣ment, were due to the Leviticall Priest-hood bee given us as well as tythes? Secondly, The manner of tything (which in diverse parts of our Land is diversly used, and which through custome also, is many wayes altered) proveth that paying of tythes amongst us, is not according to the Leviticall Law, nor in religeous obedience thereunto. Thirdly, The Law (by consent of the states in the Parliament) hav∣ing alenated, the tythes in many places, from the Minister, unto the Prince, and other men; doth thereby declare, that it appointeth not the paying of the tythes, by vertue of the Law of God. Fourthly, Sundry of our Ministers are (and that even in the judge∣ment of our whole Church) lawfully by other meanes maintained, then by tythes, which is also a plaine demonstration, that both the Leuiticall
Law is not held to be in force with us; and if it were, wee might yet have some true Ministers in our Land notwithstanding. Secondly, As the Prince (without any shew of Jewish superstition) may require of the Ministers first fruits, and tenths, and of all the rest of the subjects fifteenes, and subsidies for the maintenance of the wars, and other civill purposes, so doubt we not, but he may as well especially by act of Parliament (which is also the act of the people) require tenths of his people to the maintenance of the ministerie, of which (as wee have said before) he is bound to have a more speciall care, and regard then of the maintenance of the warres, or any other civill estate. Their fourth reason against our maintenance is,Fourthly, Al∣though we bee maintained by offerings and mortuary. That it ariseth from popish offerings and mortuaries: Concerning which, wee answer, as fol∣loweth. First, Their be sundry of our Ministers that receive none at all, against whose Congregations, and Ministers, this reason cannot hold, and many even of them to whom the Law alloweth offerings, have refused them that were accustomed to bee given at the Churchings, and burialls, and such other, as the receiving whereof, they see would bee likely to nou∣rish superstition in the people. Secondly, If all did receive and live by offerings, we see not what pollution can come to their ministerie thereby, for why may not that creature of God, which was first given to profane, and superstitious uses, bee now lawfully translated to the maintenance of Gods service, seeing that even under the Law, translation was lawfull, when (for a Ceremony, to shadow what detestation the people of God should beare to the manners of the heathen, and how they should be separated from them:) Many things were made uncleane to the Iewes, that are not so to us; So also the Iron, and Brasse, Silver, and Gold of Jericho,a Iosua 6.24. was put into the treasure of Gods house, as appeareth in the story of Joshuab: And David dedicated unto the Lord, the brasse, and silver, and gold, of all the Nations, that he subdued; as may also appeare by Samuel.2 Sam. 8.11. Now if those goods that were not onely put a part to an Idolatrous use, by a civill institution, but also actually abused to Idolatrie, might yet lawfully bereceaved for the maintenance of the true service of God, how much more may the mony wee receave for offerings, &c. be lawfully taken and enjoyed by us, seeing whatsoever originall the money, and institu∣tion had, yet was it never applyed to any Idolatrous use. Thirdly, If those offerings were polluted things, yet are they too accidentall to overthrow the very being, and nature of our ministerie.
Our People may beaccounted Members of a true visible CHURCH. III. EXCEPTION. THeir third generall exception, is against our people, and the private Members of our Assemblies, Whom they affirme to be such, as no true Church of God can consist of. ANSWER. THe reasons amongst us to account of people,Our people (say they) are such as cannot be members of a true Church. But we have good reasons to account our people holy & true Members of the visible Church. for the members of the true Church are these. First, We know many in whom (we thinke) we doe discerne infallible notes, of an unfained conver∣sion. Secondly, That all that are (by many of our Mini∣sters) admitted to the Sacrament, and other the pri∣viledges of the Church are such as can give account (in some true mea∣sure) of their faith, and doe not only generally professe obedience; but when they are convinced of any particular sin, they are also willing to
professe parricular sorrow and purpose of amendment. Thirdly, many of those who are wicked and ignorant, wee cannot see just cause to account them wilfully ignorant, nor obstinately rebel∣lious, and therefore we may lawfully esteeme them brethren,2 Ths 3, 14,  notwith∣standing their ignorance, and sin, and this we thinke the Apostles owne words will warrant us to doe. Fourthly, our people in generall professe the true faith, and obedi∣ence of Christ, which makes them members of the ole Church, as wee have already proved, and if an being dealt with according to the rule that Christ prescribeth, shall bee found wilfull and obstinate in his ignorance and sin,. 18.15, 17 then as he ceaseth to professe the true faith, and obe∣dience of Christ: So may wee by the Lawes of our Land, cease to ac∣count him a member of our Church. The first thing they object against our people is this,Their first rea¦son against our people, is that thr can no separation, bee discerned a∣mongst them but the consist of all os. Which reason s flse and in∣sufficient. That the igno∣rant and prphane multiu le, as they are confusedly, by our Baptisme mae member of our Church, and admitted to all other th priviledges thereof, so is there no separation (say they) to be observed amongst them in their ordinary conversation: concerning wch matter these are their own words in the ninth page of their discovery: All the prophane and wick∣ed of the Land, Atheists, Papists, Anabaptists, Heretickes of all sorts, gluttons, riotous, blasphemous, &c. and who not, that dwelleth in this land, or is within the Kings-dominions, all without exception, are recei∣ved into, and nourished in the bosome of this Church, with the Word and Sacraments: none are here refused, none are here kept out? Wher∣unto we answer. First, 2. 1, 2 53.  14.4, & 17, 4, 5. That even by the preaching of the Word, that separation which the Scripture so much commendeth, is wrought and evidently to be discovered amongst the people of our Land, and very many of our people there be, that doe carefully shunne the private familiaritie of all notorious offendors. Secondly, As all our Ministers may by Law, so many of them doe keepe from the Lords Table every ignorant person, and notorious of∣fend or. Thirdly, Many of our Ministers doe refuse to receive such into the Church by Baptisme, whose Parents will not make a confession, of true faith and obedience to Christ. Neither doth publike authoritie of Law enforce us to receive any mans Child, against whom it may be manifest∣ly proved, that he professeth not the true faith. Fourthly, children may lawfully bee admitted to baptisme, though both their Parents bee profane, if those who are in the stead of Parents to them, doe require baptisme for them, and give their promise to the
Church for their religious education, seeing they may bee lawfully ac∣counted within Gods covenant, if any of their ancesters, in any Gene∣rations were faithfull.Exod. 20.5. Their second Objection a∣gainst our peo∣ple is that none of them be accounted holy faithfull, because they obey not Christ nor practise his ordinances. Which is also false and insuf∣ficient, for first themselves know many of our people to be such as have religiously re∣formed their owne persons and families, and carefully sought the reformation of the Church. The second thing they object against our people is, That the best of them are without true faith, because they live not in obedience of Christ, set up among them, nor practise his Ordinances? Whereunto wee an∣swer. First, It is a most rash and presumptuous judgement to denie them a∣mongst us to bee a faithfull people, of whom these our brethren them∣selves doe know that they have by the hearing of the Word, beene brought to such a faith, as bath beene effectuall in the Reformation of their lives, because (partly for that they knew it not, and partly for that they are hindred by authoritie) they practise not the whole discipline of Christ; And this rash judgment which they give of our people, is so much the more blame-worthy, because they cannot be ignorant, with what care our people have sought by all good, and dutifull meanes the Reformation of the Church: And how much they have be wailed and mourned for the want thereof, for which matter also, wee referre the Reader to the answer, we have above given to their fourth and fifth ob∣jections against the whole body of our Assemblies. Secondly, Our people deserve not to be blamed, for that they erect not the discipline; for, First, They esteeme both our Prince to be a most lawfull and a Chri∣stian Magistrate, and our Ministers to bee true Ministers of Christ, by whose meanes, seeing they have received from God, and do still enjoy, not those blessings only, that belong to the comfort of this life, but the meanes of eternall happinesse, and the effectuall assurance of it also; they are justlie afraid, that by enterprising a publike Reformation, not only without, but contrary to the direction, and liking of them, who by Gods Word ought to have, if not the only, yet the principall hand, in that worke, they should highly offend God. 2. They cannot finde any warrant in holy Scripture for them that are private Members of the Church, to erect the discipline, no not though the Magistrate and Ministers, who should deale in this worke were al∣together profane and ungodlie, in deviding the Land of Canaan, which was a type of Heaven, and of the Church under the Gospell, and in all the Church causes, that were dealt in under the government of Iosua, which was a type of, Christs government, neither private persons, nor the whole multitude, had the managing of matters,Iosh. 19.51. & 21, 1. & 22, 14 but the people did all by the Elders, and chiefe Fathers, a which also was commanded:Numb. 34.16.28. So in publike Church causes under the Gospell, the Lord hath ordai∣ned
certaine speciall men chosen out from among the people, by their consent to rule and governe the rest.1 Tim. 5.17. & 4.14 And where God hath sanctified and separated a speciall sort of men to any office, or the administration thereunto belonging, there hath hee restrained all others that are not of the same sort, from doing the actions properly belonging to that office, as may well appeare by comparing these places of holy Scripture together.Numbr. 4.15. with the first, Chron 13.7, 10 Num. 4.20. with 1 Sam. 6.19. Num. 16.40. & 3.10. Heb. 5.4. with 2 Chron. 26.16, 19. Acts 14.23. Therefore also wee see the faithfull, at Listra, conium, and Antio∣chiah, l ad no Elders, till the Apostles by their consent, ordained them: No more had they at Creta till Tius, was sent to that purpose. To the places of holy Scripture, which they alleadge for this their second Objection against our people? we answer. First, That some of them,Ier. 31.34. Ezech. 44.8, 9. Cant. 4.7. 1 Pet. 2.9. Acts 15.9. concerne the invisible Church, and ther∣fore are ignorantly applyed to the description of them that are mem∣bers of the Church visible. As if no measure of faith, and holinesse, were to be allowed by men in the judging of the members of the Church visible, but that onely which the Lord Himselfe alloweth of in juding of the elect Members of the visible Church: Whereas it is evident, that to the making of the Members of the visible Church, an outward obedience and profession of faith is sufficient, though there be no inward grace, nor truth in the heart. Secondly, That some of them require indeed, that every Christian should seeke the Kingdome of God, and the place where God is wor∣shipped, according to his Word, submit themselves to the Yoke of Christ, and to obey him in all his Ordinances: but that the people with∣out either the Magistrate, or Ministers helpe, or consent, should reform the Church, and erect the discipline, they are so farre from command∣ing, that if they be well compared, with that wee have above said, they will be found to command the contrarie. The third thing they object against our people, Is, That though some of them had once beene faithfull, yet by tollerating in their Assemblies, the open prophane, by wanting power to cast them out, and communicateing with them in their worship of God, they are now become not ue Church of Christ? Whereunto we answer. First, that the godly which are in our Assemblies, do not at all tollerate the wicked profane, but doe as much (as in them lieth) shew their dis∣like to them, mourning also for their profanenesse, and for the want of Christian discipline, whereby they might be separated: Yea the very Lawes of our Church (as hath beene above said) doe separate from our Assemblies the open prophane.
Secondly, admit they did not at all shut out the prophanie (either be∣cause they know not their right, or for that they are hindred and restrain∣ed to doe it, or that they sin in not using their right in this case) or if it were granted that the people, even the private members of the assem∣blies had full authoritie given them by Christ, without the Ministers or Magistrates consent to cast out and excommunicate the open profane (the contrary whereof hath been before sufficiently proved) yet might they as lawfully for want of power, or for such inconveniences tollerate the prophanie amongst them, and so forbeare the execution of their au∣thoritie in this case, as either David did spare Joab,2 Sam 3 39. 2. Kings 14 5. or Amaziah those rebels that slew his father because they were not strong enough doe justice upon them. Thirdly, the communicating in Gods service with these open sin∣ners,Thirdly, they may be true members of the Church, though they doe communi∣cate in Gods, worship with the open pro∣fane, as may appeare by the example of the godly that li∣ved under the law. whom the godly in some of our assemblies are enforced to com∣municate with, or to want the benefit of Gods publike worship is not sufficient, either to make him profane, or pollute unto them the holy things of God; for proofe whereof we alleadge, First, the examples of the godly that lived under the Ceremoniall law. The Prophets either served not God at all in the Temple, or else they joyned in Gods service with many that were notoriously stained with grosse sinnes: for who are they whose sinnes the Prophets so mightily cry out upon,Esay 1.10. Jer. 5.1.9. and 7 8.11. Ezek. 16.4.52. and 22, 25.26. but such as were admitted to the publike worship of God. If the Babylonians and the Caldeans should violently have included themselves into the Church assemblies of Gods people in the time of their captivitie; should the godly Jewes by such presence of the wicked which they wanted power to hinder, either have beene perswaded to cease from publike worship of God, or have been poluted by it. Was Annah and Simeon, or the blessed Virgin and Ioseph polluted by com∣municatingLuke 2.22.27.36. with the Jewes in their time, when not only the peo∣ple, but also the Priests with whom they communicated, were both in doctrine and life so much corrupted: Or did this staine all that Justice for which Zacharias is so commended for that hee kept his course, and so served in the Temple even in that corrupt age. But what need fur∣ther examples be brought for the practise of the godly that lived under the law, seeing it is evident that our Saviour himselfe was by Circum∣cision made a member of that corrupt church of Iury,Luke 2.21.22. and presented in that temple when hee was an infant, and when hee came to yeares of discretion he communicated with them in the publike service of God; for he went with his Parents to the Passeover,Luke 2.41. he went to the feast of the Tabernacles,Iohn 7 10. his cnstome was to frequent the Synagogues on the Sabboth day, even before he entred into the Ministrie,Luke 4 16. yea he
commandeth the people so far to hearken unto, and to sollow the di∣rections of those wicke Scribes and Pharisees, as they kept themselves within t e chaire of Moses, and taught his doctrineM. 23, 1, 2, .: But this rea∣son taken from the examples of the godly that lived under the law, Henry Barrow in the 39. and 40 pages of his Discovery seeketh to shift off after this manner, viz That nothing then dfiled the godly, if the Priest and People with whom they communicated were not Legally and Ceremo∣nially polluted: for the Priests and Ecclesiasticall State then were not to med ile with the faults of manners, nor to separat any from the Congrega∣tions for morall sinnes: but it is now under the Gospel far other wise where all things are become new and spirituall, and where all manner of knowne sinnes obst nately held and maintained, have as great force to defile men in the judgement of the Church, and to deserve seperation as legall pollutions, leprosies, running issues and other diseases had then. To which his reply we answere that morall transgressions did defile men, and make them worthy to be separated from Gods publique wor∣ship then, as well as they doe now; for it is evident by the law that they who had morally offended, were kept from the Congregation till they had professed their repentance, and till attonement had beene made for them. For to what purpose can wee imagine that publike confession bring∣ing a sin offering,evit 4 13.14.22 27, and 5.1.  6.27. Nn 15.22.25 and seeking of attonement to be made by the Priest should be enjoyned him that had committed a morall transgression, if without the doing of these things, he might be still partaker of the pub∣lique worship, and if these things do not import a restraint from the publique worship, them will it follow, that the morall transgressour was left free from all censure and Ecclesiasticall punishment, notwithstand∣ing this his open and manifest contempt of Gods ordinances: for there is no other censure appointed in the whole law for the punishment of this contempt, and consequently the whole worship of God did lie open to most notorious profanation and confusion, Secondly, the man that did morally offend is as well called uncleane by the holy Ghost, as he that had transgressed the Ceremoniall law, and the very same word (Tame) that is put for Ceremoniall uncleannesse in one place,Le. 5.2.3. is put for morall uncleannesse in another, 8 23.24.29. and conse∣quently where it it is said in the book of Chronicles, that by Jehoiadab his appointment,2 Cn. 23.29. porters were set by the gates of the house of the Lord, that none that was uncleane in any thing should enter in, it may and ought to be understood of the restraining of them that were morally, as well as those that were Ceremonially uncleane. Thirdlie, the Priest was commanded to deale with him, that in some
things sinned of ignorance against the Morrall Law, even in the same sort as he was to deale with him that was legallie polluted through ig∣norance.Lvit 5 1. Levit. 6. 7. Fourthlie, Hee that was privie to himselfe of Morall transgression, was bound in Conscience to abstaine from the facrifices and Sacraments though he were not ceremonially polluted:Esay 1.10, 14.  7 9.11.  5 23, 24. And were not the Church Governours, then bound to separate such, when they also, and the Con∣gregation were made privie to such transgressions? But why spend we so many words in confuting this most absurd as∣sertion, seeing themselves in the 89. and 90. pages of their refutation, affirme, and lbour to prove, by many testimonies, that under the Law ma∣ny were to bee separated from the Congregation for morall transgres∣sios. A second reason to prove that the godlie are not polluted,Secondly, Of the godly that lived under the Gospell. by com∣municating in the true worship of God, with knowne and open sinners, may bee taken from the example of the godlie that have lived in the Churches under the Gospell. The godly that were in the Church of Cor. remained Saints, and faithfull still,1 Cor. 1.2. though they had communicated in Gods worship, with the incestuous person, with such as accounted fornication no sinne, as came profanely to the Sacrament, as denied the Resurrection. The faithfull in Pergamus receive no pollution, from them that li∣ved amongst them, and joyned with them in Gods worship, and yet maintanied the doctrine of Balaam, and of the Nicolaitames, nor they of Thyatira from Jesbell, who was tollerated amongst them to teach and deceive, and cause many to commit fornication amongst them,Revel. 2.14, 15. Revel. 2.20, and to eate meate sacrificed to Idoles. And (to let passe all other examples) we would gladly know this of our brethren themselves, whether if it should so fall out in their Assem∣blies (as it may in the most perfect Church, that is upon the earth) that some one wicked man should remaine uncast out, either through the ignorance, or partiallity, or feare of the Church governours, they should for that one mans sake, deprive themselves of all the comfort they finde in their meetings; if they would not, why give they not the like liberty to the godly amongst us, who have, and doe still looke for as much com∣fort in our Assemblies, as they doe in theirs: If they would then who is so blinde, as not to see that their Congregation is a very Babell, and place full of miserable confusion, or so mad, as either to jovne himselfe unto it, or being joyned, to remaine in it, any longer? If they alleadge that the former examples are all unfitly applyed unto our people, for that they were all true Churches, whereunto the godly above named, did
joyne themselves, and therefore were not easily to be forsaken, and the worship wherein they communicated with the wicked, was the true worship of God (whereas neither our Assemblies are true Churches, nor our worship the true worship of God,) or they continued not in this their fault, with that obstinancie, that we and our people doe? We answer, That they begge that, which is in question between us, for neither doe our people doubt whether it be the true Church, and worship of God, wherein they communicate, nor doe they see how they have beene convinced of sinne in this action. And we have alrea∣die proved at large, both that our Church, is a true Church, and our worship the true worship of God, and that we cannot justlie bee char∣ged with obstinate continuance, in those wants and corruptions, that are now amongst us. To the places of Scripture which they bring against our people in this point in the 68. page of their Collection of Letters, and conferen∣ces? We answer, that they are all most unskilfullie applied, for although someLevit. 20.24. Iohn 15.16. of them doe prove, that Gods people should bee separated from the rest of the world: SomeEsay 65 11. Ezech. 16.25. of them that they may not offer sacrifice unto a multitude of Gods, nor joyne with Idolators, neither in the false worship of God, nor in voluntary leagues, and familiaritie;2 Cor. 6.14 17 other some that the Minister must deale sincerely, in the delivery of Gods Message to his people, not mixing any vile opinion, or assertion of his owne, with the precious Word of God, nor applying the Word to their humours and likeing, but cause them rather to frame, and apply themselves unto it,Ir. 15.19. yet doe no one of these prove either, that the communicating in the true worship of God, with some that are prophane, is of force, to cut off a people from the Church, and covenant of God; or that the godly should rather abstaine from the exercise of Gods true worship, than use them in the company of some others that are ungodly. Or that it is the sinne of the people, that such are not separated from amongst them; And surely wee cannot but wonder that our brethren doe thus deale with the sacred Word of God; they use to fill the Mar∣gents of their bookes with such store of places of Scripture, that the simple might thinke that they have even a cloud of witnesses against us; when themselves could not but know, that the Scripture is by them dragged as it were by violence, to beare witnesse in a matter, for which they have not one word to speake.
The Conclusion. FRom these three Exceptions that have beene above answered, they inferre this conclusion, that therefore they may lawfully, and ought to separate themselves from us in such sort, as they doe. In this conclu∣sion, there are two Articles, whereunto we will answer severally. The first Article in their conclusion is this: The Assemblies which we goe from, are such, as the Word of God doth warrant us to goe from? Whereunto we answer; That wee may much more strongly con∣clude upon that which we have above written, that because we have a true Church, consisting of a lawfull ministerie, and a faithfull people, therefore they cannot separate themselves from us, but they must needs incurre the most shamefull and odious reproach of manifest Schisme. The places of holy Scripture which they alledge to warrant their se∣paration by; we affirme to be of no force, to conclude that which they are brought for, which shall more plainely appeare when they are consi∣dered of a part, and sorted so, as the varietie of their nature requireth. The first sort of their testimonies concerne only that private,1 Cor. 5.9, 13 Ephe. 5.7, 10, 11 2 Thes. 3.6, 14.15. and vo∣luntary familiaritie, which Christ hath forbidden to have with the wick∣ed that live in the Church, this shall appeare to bee the true meaning of the Apostle, even of that place of 1 Cor. 5. which in the 218. page of their refutation, and in sundrie other places of their writings, they urge so, as it may seeme they judge it to be of more force, for this pur∣pose, then all the rest. First the word , used by the Apostle, both in this place and the 2 Thes. 3. doth with a double composition with two such pre∣positions, note a most familiar acquaintance and conversation. Secondly, It cannot be shewed in all the Scripture, where this phrase to (eate) being barely and generally set downe, without any adition is taken for the eating of the Sacrament. Thirdly, If the Apostle had meant a separation in the Church As∣semblies, he would have commanded the Church rather to cut off, and to put from them, these wicked men then to separate themselves from the wicked. Fourthly, It appeareth by the tenth and eleventh verses, being com∣pared
together, that the Apostle wrote the second time to cleare his meaning in that which hee had wrote before; And therefore in this place bee requireth no more separation from brethren, that are fornica∣tors, and then the Corinthians did think he had (in a former letter) from such fornicators were out of the Church; Now the Corinthians could never imagine, that when the Apostle forbad them to eate with Hea∣thens and Infidels that were fornicators, and his meaning should bee to forbid them the communicating with such in the service of God: for they never had accustomed to communicate so; And therefore the sepa∣ration he requireth, must needs be meant only of private, and voluntary familiarity. If they object that the Apostle in requiring separation from the wicked in private conversation, doth much more forbid all societie with them in the worship of God, seeing that thereby we joyne our selves much nearer together then by any civill fellowship (as they affirme in the 218. page of their refutation) Wee answer, that the reason followeth not; for, First, It is in a private mans power to keepe from his first Table any wicked man, in whose hand, yet it lyeth not to shut any from the Lords Table. Secondly, Each Christian as he is bound, by the commandement of God to the exercises of Religion, especially in such as are publike, so is he to forbeare the private farmiliaritie of the wicked. Thirdly, Even as a Christian may eate privately with a wicked man, or with an excommunicate person, in some cases, when his company cannot be eschewed, as being in an Armie, or Prison, or shippe upon the Sea, amongst a companie of vile wicked men, being by the Prince, or any other that hath power enforced either to doe so, or utterly to want all food, so much more is it lawfull for a Christian to eate with the wick∣ed man at the Lords Table, wherein he is enforced either to doe so, or utterly to want all the great benefits and comfort that God offereth him in the Sacrament. The second sort of their Testimonies,Matth. 7.15. Rom. 16.17. 2 Tim. 3.5. Titus 2.6. whereby they labour to warrant their separation, concerne only the avoyding and taking heede of false Prophets, blinde guides, hypocriticall, and prophane deceivers, and therefor they can with no peace to their consciences, ground their separation upon them, till they have sufficiently proved, that not some of our Ministers, but all are not only faultie in their practise, but teach also unsound, and corrupt doctrine, which they will never bee able to prove. The third sort of their Testimonies,2 Cor. 6.14.18 evel. 18.4 doe indeed partly concerne that separation, which Christians should make from Idolatours in the service of God, yet doe they no wayes serve, to justifie this their separation
from us unlesse they could prove (which they are not able to doe) that those Assemblies which these Scriptures command a separation from, were in the profession of truth equall to us, or that the corruptions which are amongst us, are equall unto such as were in those Assemblies. Besides these test imonies, they seeke by two reasons, to prove the neces∣sitie of their separation from us, whereof the first is taken from the burt that may come to the true Christian by communicating with the wick∣ed; The other from the hurt he may doe to the wicked, with whom he doth communicate. Concerning the first, they have these words; in the 97. page of their refutation. A little Leaven, leaveneth the whole lumpe, so one openly unworthy received to the Lords Supper, maketh all the Communicants guil∣tie. And in the 34. page of their discoverie; The knowne, and suffe∣red sinne of any one member is contagious to all such as communicate in Prayers, and Sacraments, with such an obstinate offender, and maketh them as guiltie in Gods sight, as he himselfe is? Whereunto we answer. First, That we have already proved by many examples (in the answer wee have above given unto the last thing they object against the people, and private members of our Church) that the godly receive no contagi∣on from the wicked, with whom they are inforced to communicate in the true worship of God. Secondly, That their assertion may by reason, appeare evidently to be most absurd, for if the presence of the wicked should of its own nature make the action of the Sacrament, and prayer voyd, and of none effect to the faithfull, that communicate with him, then should we never with∣out great doubting, and wavering communicate in those holy exercises in such a Congregation, where all that we joyne with, are not well knowne unto us, for feare their should bee in the company, some open offendors whom our selves know not of. If our knowledge, and privity to his sin, be the thing that maks his presence contagious to us, especially when we haye admonished him,Ezec. 18.20. and by all meanes testified our dislike to his sinne, so farre as in us lyeth. Then how is the Prophet to bee under∣stood, when he saith; the wickednesse of the wicked shall be upon his owne head, but admit this was granted that the presence of the wicked in prayer, and Sacrament, did infect the godly, how will they excuse their refusall to heare the Word preached in our Assemblies, seeing it is so cleere by the Apostles speech,Cor. 14.24, 25. that the preaching of the Word, might be of force, to doe them good, though some that joyned with them in the hearing of it were Infidels. To their second reason, wherein they pretend a charitable regard of us, who by their joyning with us in Gods worship, may be hardened in the like∣ing
of our corruptions, and by their separation, may happily be brought to Repentance. We answer, that the godly man who hath reproved the open offen∣der, shunned his private familiarity, and hath gone so farre in testilying his dislike to his sinne, as the bounds of his calling will permit, is no way accessary to his sinne, nor hath any fellowship with the unsruitfull workes of darknesse,Ephes. 5.11. and if that any wicked man will imagine, that the godly doe not much dislike him, because they will not for his sake, shun the publike worship of God; it is an offence taken and not given, and therefore such as wherewith the conscience of a godly man need not to be troubled. Thus have we answered, that which they pretend for the warrant, and necessitie of their separation from our Assemblies. And now least any should be justly offended by thinking that in this apologie, we make for our Church, wee doe any way plead for Baal. or seeke to daube up the breaches of our Church with untempered morter, and so runne our selves into the danger or that curse, which the Lord denounceth against them, that cal darknesse light, and speake good of evill. We therefore freely confesse, that there are (indeed) in our Church great corruptions, and that is the great sinne of our Ministers, that they doe not with so much zeale, and courage reveale and shew their distike of them, and of our people, that they mourne not, nor seeke by all hom∣ble and earnest meanes to God, and the Magistrate for Reformation of them, as they ought to doe. And yet (though many in this Land, doe both know, and mourne, and make knowne also in their callings their great dislike unto those corruptions that are amongst us, as much as any of these brethren with truth can doe, we dare considently affirme, that the corruptions of our Church, are not such, as for which an. Christian may make separation from us, and that we are hereby induced to avouch, because wee finde that in the Old, and New Testament, as hath beene above said, as many, and as hainous corruptions to have beene in such Assemblies, as from which no separation was ever taught or practised. Secondly, Though we did grant that (upon warrant of some places, that they bring) there might lawfully (upon due regard of some cir∣cumstances) a separation be made even from our Assemblies, yet do we affirme, that for as much as they have failed in sundry of those circum∣stances, that therefore their seperation, is utterly unjustifiable, for wher∣as they could not with any just warrant to their consciences, seperate themselves from us, till they bad found us obstinate in our corruptions, and temptuous scorners of all good meanes used for reforming us, (as is evident by the example of such separations as are commended in the
Word)Acts 13.45.46. and 19.8, 9. we affirme that they have departed from us before they could (with any charitie or good conscience) be so perswaded of us. And this we doubt not to prove to their owne consciences, and to all that know them well, by these reasons following. First, they separated themselves from us before that either by wri∣ting or any competent meanes, they had soundly convicted us, or mani∣fested unto our judgement the dangerous errors we held, wherein they have manifestly transgressed the rule of the word:Act. 19.3.9. 2 Tim. 4.2. T. 1.10, 11. and 3.10. we grant indeed the truth and necessitie of the government of Christ prescribed in the word, which hath beene sufficiently manifested to the Church, and that our Church hath beene sufficiently convinced of many grosse corrupti∣ons; but that for the want of some parts of discipline, our Church should be no Church, or that for the corruptions amongst us, our Ministers should be no true Ministers, or our people no faithfull people (which are the very fundamentall principles of their Schisme, and almost the very matter of difference betwixt them and us.) In these points wee deny that either to this day they have sufficiently convinced us, or that before the first time of their separation) they had in any measure used meanes to convince us. Secondly, after they had convicted us in Judgement, they should have (by brotherly admonition and exhortation, sought to perswade us unto the love and practise of the truth revealed, and to the hatred and for∣saking of the manifested corruptions2 Thes. 3.14.15. Tit. 3.10. Heb. 10.15. which is evident they did not before their separation. Thirdly, the Scripture forbiddeth the Church to eject a private member, till in all patience and long suffering, his repentance hath been waited for, and the fruit of the aforesaid meanes expected2 Thes. 3.14.15. 2 Tim. 2.24, 25 and 2 Tim. 4.2. which evidently reproveth their hastie and sudden departure from us, either be∣fore, or suddenly after they had used the meanes abovesaid, especially seeing that in all reason more long-sufferance should be vsed by such private members as they were toward a whole Church, than by a whole Church towards private members. Fourthly, whereas they should have used all the meanes abovesaid in meeknesse, humilitie and love, mourning also for the hardnesse of our hearts, whereby the meanes became frustrate unto us.Ephes. 4.15. 2 Tim. 2.25. Tit. 3.2. Heb. 10.24.25. It is evident that their zeale in dealing against us, hath beene like the rash and undis∣creet zeale spoken of, and reproved in the sons of Zebedeus.Mar. 3.5. Luke 9.55. And hath favoured altogether of uncharitablenesse and not of love: for as all they that once have declined to that Schisme, are found to be exceeding∣ly proud and disdainfull to wards all that are contrary minded; yea even such as (before they were infected with that leaven) were patternes
of all love, modesty and humility unto others; so will they not acknow∣ledge nor reverence any of the most excellent graces that God hath gi∣ven unto any of his servants amongst us, nor so much respect them, as the very Papists will doe; no they professe greater detestation and despite to the most godly and most sincere men amongst us, then they doe to such as are most notorious in profannesse, and malice to the truth. To which purpose also wee desire that the spirit whereby Henry Barrow was directed in writing his last bookes may be well examined. Fiftly, whereas by the equitie of the rule which our Saviour himselfe giveth, and according to the practise of the Apostolike Church, wee should have had our corruptions made knowne to some other Reformed Churches, and by them we should have beene convinced and admonish∣ed before these our brethren could rightly judge us as heathens and pub∣licanes, we affirme that they (as if the Word of God had come out from them, or had come unto them onely) have by their disorderly separation, not onely despised and robbed us of our right; but all other christian Churches in the world besides. Sixtly, they have not so much as protested the cause of their separa∣tion from us to the particular Congregations, whereof before their de∣parture they were accounted by others, and did also acknowledge them∣selves to be members. Seaventhly, those of them which once exercised the places of the Ministrie amongst us, and received for the same the reward due which they call Balaams wages, have not before, or since their departure, made actuall restitution of that which was (if their opinions be true) most un∣justly received, nor yet shewed themselves willing so to doe, to their abilitie which norwithhstanding by the law of God they are most strict∣ly bound to doe. The scond Article in their conclusion is this, That the Assemblies which they goe and joyne themselves unto, are such as the Word of God commandeth them to goe unto: whereunto we give this answere. That if they had followed the direction of Gods Word when they had left us for our coruptions and wants as they charge us with, they should have joyned themselves to some other Reformed Churches which are pure from our corruptions, and amongst whom the discipline of Christ is rightly established: as we finde the faithfull Levites and people did in the dayes of Iiroboam and every wise hearted Christian, will hold it to be a reason of great force against them that they have made separation, not from us onely; but from all other Reformed Churches in the world: For there by they appeare to have beene of this judgement, that till they
arose, there was not a true cōstituted visible Church in the whole world knowne unto them: unto which they might have joyned themselves. Secondly, the Assemblies which they erected, and joyned themselves unto, if they be looked into with a Christian and indifferent eye, shall well appeare to be much more deformed than many of those are, which they have for saken, for proofe whereof, we desire the Readers, to weigh well with the weights of the Sanctuary, and to try by the touchstone of the Word certaine points of doctrine, which they have both brewed, and broached to the world in their printed Books. Then secondly their practise and dispositions. All their Paradoxes, and absurd opinions, we will not set downe, but in some few, we will give the Readers a taste of the rest. In the 138. page of their discovery they affirme, That such an Idola∣trous shape cleaveth to every stone of our Materiall Charches, as by no meanes can be severed from them, while there is a stone left standing upon a stone, so that neither they can be used to the worship of God, nor we have any use of them, seeing that they are execrable, and devoted to de∣struction. In the 167. page of the same booke they teach: That to every Christian God hath given his boly sanctifying spirit, to open unto them, and to lade them in to all truth. Much like unto this, is that which they wright in the 161. page of their refutation: That it is an execra∣ble position, to say that the Church, and every member thereof is in some spirituall bondage to sinne. Touching the Magistrates authority, besides that by the whole te∣nour of their writings, it appeareth, that they hold the people may take in hand the publike Reformation of the Church, and erect the whole discipline not only without, but contrary to the Christian Magistrates liking and consent; they doe also directly affirme, page 218 and 219. of their discovery: That God hath in the holy Scripture made most per∣fect, and necessary Lawes, both for the Church, and Common-wealth, and that he requireth of the King, and Magistrase, to see their Lawes exe∣cuted, and not to make new. Neither doe they judge ever a whit more dutifully of the Churches of God, for of them they use to speake, as if their had beene no true Church in the world, till they sprung up. Nor were at this time any right constituted Church Assembly in the world, but their owne: for in the Epistie to the Reader which they prefixed before their discovery and in the first page thereof, they have these words. The whole land (I say not the whole World) hath lyen so long, and is so deepe set in the defction, &c. And in the second page: Although the truth hath long layn hid, and buried, and be now impugned of all men. But why should
wee wonder that they iudge so erroniously of men, seeing the sacred Worship of God, they hold, that it may receive pollution from men that deale in it, for in the 30. page of their discovery, They teach that the open sinne of the Minister, defileth the Sacrament, and Prayer, admi∣nisted by them. Yea in the 34. page they goe somewhat further, and say: That the knowne, and suffered sinne of any one member, is coniagious to all such as communicate with him, in that estate, and make th them all as guiltie in Gods sight, as he himselfe is. Touching the Articles of our faith, which by all the godly, in all ages have beene called the Apostles creed; Thus they speake, in the 76. page of their discoverie: Their forged patchry, commonly called the Apostls Creede. The Article of Christs descending into Hell what sence soever it be taken in, they call in the 48. page of their refutation; That Blasphemous Article of our Faith. Besides these grosse absurdities they hold against other points of wholsome doctrine, let the Reader guesse at the judgment they have in the manner of Church government (wherein they would appeare to be better seene, then all the godly learn∣ed in the world besides) by these few things. which we will offer to his consideration. First, whereas they have in their writings, disclaimed the discipline which wee desire, and other reformed Churches have re∣ceived, they have never yet clearely set downe, what discipline it is wch themselves stand so much for. In the 27. page of their discoverie, when they have scoffed at the discipline we seeke, they offer words to this ef∣fect. That without the power, and practise of the diligent watch of every member, but chiefly of the Rulers, and Elders, the Word of God is made as Idoll, the Sacrament sacriledge unto us, and all things we doe, odious and abominable to the Lord: Whereby it appeareth, they are of opinion, that there can be no true Religion there, where either, there is no Elder∣ship established, or where the Elders faile in the execution of their of∣fice, or where any one private member of the Church shall faile in doing the Office of a Watchman, and censurer to the rest, much like to this, is that which they write in the 37. page of their refutation, Hath the grea∣ter Minister in the Church, any more power to retaine, and loose the sinne of the least member, then the same member, hath to binde, or loose his sinne. In the 119. page of their discoverie, speaking of the Church govern∣ment. which hath beene sought for amongst us, and received by other reformed Churches, they have these words. The thing it selfe they cor∣rupt, in that they adde new devises of their owne, as their Pastorall sus∣pensi  from their Sacraments, their set continued Syeds, their select classes of Ministers, their settled supreame Councell, whereby they have well expressed what they meane, in the 29. and 249. pages of their re∣futation
when they affirme, that the Church hath no power, to make any Loves of indifferent things. And page 193. of their discovery; That the people, without any Minister, may give ordination, and full calling in∣to the ministery. Secondly, As their judgment is erronious, so is the practise of their discipline in their Assemblies most disorderly; For, first none can gather Churches from Infidelitie, nor may goe about it, but only such as are ap∣pointed to it, by our Saviour Christ, and he hath appointed none for that worke but Ministers, which also themselves in the fourth page of the preface, prefixed to the refutation, doe confesse, we would gladly know by what ministrie, their Assemblies were first gathered; by what pres∣byterie were the Ministers, that first gathered their Assemblies examin∣ed, and ordained with imposition of hands: Secondly, when the first were gathered, what foundation had they to ground their faith, and doctrine upon (especially in these point of controversie) when they nei∣ther had any other translation of the Scripture then that which they re∣ceived from us, whom they judged no better than Heretickes, and Infi∣dels, nor any one among them, who by the knowledge in the tongues, was able to examine our translation, by the originall Scriptures. Thirdly, How great a disorder it is, that in their Assemblies, private persons are allowed to interpret the Scriptures publikely; and that they hold faith may even ordinarily be wrought by privatemen. Where God hath separated, and sanctified a speciall sort of men, to any office, and the administration thereunto belonging; there he hath restrained others, that are not of that sort, from, ordinarie doing of the actions properly be∣longing unto that office, as may appeare by many Testimonies, and ex∣amples; Now it is evidant that in the Old, and in the New Testament, the Lord did seperate the Priests, and Levites, Apostles, Prophets, Evan∣gelifts, Pastors, and Teachers, to the publicke Administration of the Word, and Prayer of the Sacrifices, and Sacraments of the Church, how then shall any other presumo to meddle there with? The Priests and Levites, who had ever by inheritance, some right to all the services of the Tabernacle might not lawfully exercise the mean∣est service, till they were specially called, and consecrated thereunto,Exod. 28. & 29. Levit. 8.34. how much lesse then, might any other deale in the publike service of God without a publike calling thereunto? Wee are not ignorant that they are wont to alleadge many testimonies of Scripture, to warrant this disorder by, but alas they doe it very ignorantlie; For many of them whose examples they cite, were by speciall calling separated to the Of∣fice of preaching. The seventie Disciples are said to have beene sent by CHRIST,
Luke 10. Paul and Barnabas, when they preached at Antioch, of Pisidia,Acts 13. were not onely lawfull Ministers, but (for ought that can appeare by this place to the contrary) they were so reputed also by the Ruler of the Synagogue, to whom their publike, and famous preaching in so many Assemblies before, with the approbation of the Jewes, could not bee unknowne; The faithfull men that the Apostles writes of to Timothy,2 Tim. 2.2. who should teach others also, were such only, as shold be both instruct∣ed by Timothy, and receive authoritie from him to do it. Of some other mentioned in their quotations, it is very probable, that they were not private men, but had a speciall calling to the Office of preaching. The Disciples, that being scattered through persecutions went about preach∣ing, may very well be thought to have beene Ministers, rather than pri∣vate men, unlesse we shall imagine there were no Ministers in Iernfalem before the Church was scattered, but the Apostles only, and Philip who is also called an Evangelist, is the only man of name amongst all these scattered Disciples, that preached; The Prophets mentioned in the 1 Cor. 14. is very likely, were either such as whose extraordinarie gifts did suficientlie prove to the Church, that they were extraordinarie stir∣red up, and called of God, or else such as being separated to the work of the ministerie, were by that exercise of their gifts to bee fitted to the full execution of that office, as those children of the Prophets were, for the like purpose trained up in these Schooles of the Prophets mentioned in the Old Testament. And as they cannot conclude out of these places, that those Prophets were meere private men, so shall they not ftle the name of a Prophet given in any place of holy Scripture to a meere private man. The preaching mentioned, Luke 8.39. the expounding of the way of God, Acts 18 26. the exhorting spoken of, 1 Thes. 5.11. was not Eccleiasticall, or Church preaching but only private, and do mesticall in∣struction. Some other places which they alleadge,Phil. 2.15, 16 Peter 3.12. concerne neither publike preaching, nor private instruction, but onely the constant profession of the truth, and holy conversation which God requireth of every Chri∣stian. Thirdlie the grosse disorders that are to be found in their Assemblie we have mentioned, to which the strange chose of their Ministers may be added: For by what Testimonic of holy Scripture can they warrant the admitting or choosing in to the ministerie, such a one, as within some six, or eight weekes before was tramplanted from so Antichristi∣an a Church and ministerie as they reckon ours to be. As not onely Master Francis Johnson, but sundrie other of their Ministers have beene.
Sure wee are that herein they have done directly contrary to the rule of the holy Apostle, and for smaller faults then this they are ready to say against us in the 127. page of their refutation, That he that hath not a true and right calling unto his Office, is no true Minister; but an Ʋsurper, an Intruder, a Thiefe, a Murderer, &c. But what shall we need to reckon up any more of the disorders that may be noted in their Church govern∣ment, seeing it is not possible but that those Assemblies should be full of confusion and disorder, where no Church censure can passe without the consent of every private man, and wherein every member is made equall in power and authoritie with the Ministers and Elders of the Church. These things being so, what is there to be seene amongst them, whereby so many simple Christians are deceived and moved to forsake us, and joyne to them? Save onely that shew of sinceritie and zeale, and holy conversation wherein they are thought to go far beyond any of us. Concerning which wee say, that although the coversation of many of our people and Ministers also be very scandalous, and the lives of the best of us, far short of that perfection we dayly strive unto: Yet it shall well appeare to him that will rightly consider these few lines following, That the power of true godlinesse is much more wanting amongst them then 'tis with us, whom they have forsaken; for it we may judge of the schollers by their teachers and of the miserable seduced mul∣titude by their chief Leaders, and if men do not use to speak, much lesse to write: but from the abundance of their harts, then have they as smal cause certainlie to bost of their holines, & to say they are not as other men, nor as we are, whom they have forsaken, as the Pharisee in the Gospel said:Luke 18 9.11.14. This wee dare boldly say, that there was never any man of note in our Church, that in his writings hath bewrayed so irreligeous and unsanctified a spirit, as their chiefe Leaders have done: For proofe whereof wee desire the Christian Reader to consider first the shamefull lies which wittingly, and against the light of their owne hearts, they have published, and whereby they have in a manner borne false witnesse against us. In the ninth page of their Discovery they say, That all the Atheists, Papists, and Anabaptists, and Heretiques of all sorts, Whores, Theeves, Witches, Conjurers, and who not, that dwelleth in this Island, or is within the Queenes dominions, are received and nourished within the bo∣some of this Church, with the Word and Sacraments; none are refused, none kept out. In the 60. page of their Discovery they say, These Priests and people retaine the Leviticall Decimations in the same forme, to the same end. In the 63. and 64. pages they affirme, That the service book is the very ground worke of our Faith, Church, and Ministry, from
whence we fetch all our directions for all things, That we are sworne to, and by this booke. That the Word of God may not be taught, but where this bath been read. In the 28. page, They say we all adore the words of Sa∣lutation which the Angel Gabriel used to the Ʋirgin Mary, That we wor∣ship either the Purification, or the person of our Lady: So they malicious∣ly say we torme the blessed Virgin) And that we powre out unto her our drinke Offerings, and burne incense to the Queen of heaven; Where∣as, through divers pages they charge us with keeping Fasts and Feasts to honour of Saints. In the 100. page they say, Their Priest Baptiseth the childe, In the Name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, and of the holy Crosse. In the 148. page, They say, it is vtterly denyed in the Church of England, that the Magistrate should be Excommunicated. In the 183. page, They say, that it is im∣possible to finde two of ou Ministers in one minde and judgement, yea, in any two Churches of the Land, to have the same doctrine taught. In the 188. page they say, That no one place of Scripture which maketh ex∣presse mention of the government of Christ, As Rom. 12.1. Cor. 12. and 15. and is suffered to be so much as read in our Churches. In the 175. page they say, These new Glasses take upon them to make Ministirs. A second note whereby we may try the spirits of their chief Leaders, is their spitefull railing, wherein they are so rich and plentifull, as wee know not how to finde amongst all the rabble of profane and ungodly men, any one that goeth beyond them in it, our Ministers they call Balamites, Cananites, Babylonish Divines, Egyptian Enckanters, limmes of the Divell, as bitter enemies as Turkish Ianizaries, marked souldiers of the Beast, such as know not the Doctrines of the beginning of Christ, such as were nusled even from the mothers breast in profane Heathenisme, vaine. Philosophie, ungodly Arts, trained up in Idolatrie, Superstition, and most filthy Abhomination, Perjurie, Blasphemie, &c. These men by precisenes and outward shew of Holinesse, Hypocrisie, Ʋain∣glory and Covetousnesse, resemble, or rather exceed the Pharisees. And the 38. page of their Discovery, Such a Priest as this is a Blasing star, a Paragon of a Countrie, one of the new found Martin Saints, and such People are Puritans, or Martinists, Preficians, &c. And in the 193. page, they name the Ministers of Geneva and their Churches Classes, (I dare not say the secret Classes in England) doe make Ministers for us in England. And these Ministers when they are come over, are received and esteemed as Angels in hell, and shine as bright stars in this smokie Egyptian furnaces. And in the 12. page of their Collection of Letters, speaking of two very worthy Preachers, they have these words. I suppose more corrupt Teachers then these cannot
be found is any age, they teaching nothing almost truely, much lesse sincereli. To this we may refer the unreverent and malicious speech, against the most godly learned, that have lived in the Reformed Churches be∣yond the Seas, as in the 23. page of their Discovery, they call us the croo∣ked Disciples of Master Calvin. And in the 18. page Master Calvin hath no doubt unsufferably perverted and wrested these and other places of Scripture, and drawne very foule and corrupt doctrines thence, touching the state and order of a planted Church, and more dangerous and damnable con∣clusions from the same. And in the 33. page. This and such like dtesta∣ble stuffe hath Master Calvin in his ignorance, partly to confute the Anabaptists, partly to defend his own rash and disorderly proceedings of Ge∣ueva, whereby this their Church became a just reproach to all men, yea, that which is worse, and more to be lamented, it became a miserable precident and pernicious example to all Europe. The last note which we will observe for the triall of their spirit, is their scurrilous and ruffanlike profanesse, wherein they seeme to us to have expelled all that in a show of zeale and sinceritie, have written or dealt in the holy things of God. In the 52. page of their Discoverie, speaking of Ordination they have these words. He solemnly sitteth in his chaire, and layeth his Symoniacall hands upon him, delivereth the Bible into his hands, breatheth upon him, and giveth, or rather selleth him his un∣hy Ghost, as he shall know by the price of his box. In the 73. page ha∣ving spoken against red stinted prayers, and being come to speak against the prayers which godly Preachers doe conceive, according to the pre∣sent occasions of the Church. Thus they scoffe at them; Other more smooth Hpocrites, yet as grosse Idolaters, use the Lords Pray∣er as a close or supply (forsooth) to their long Prelix Prayers conceived before. In the 86. page of their refutation. He most sacrilegiously selleth them his pretended Sacrament for their second shot or offering. In the 97. and 98. page of their Discoverie, speaking of our publique Fasts; thus they write. Here the learned Priests and Preachers lay their heads together, choose out three or soure, from among them to preach: some of them must play Sinne, another the Judgements of God, the third Repentance, the fourth, the Gospel, the people are solemnly bidden from all quarters to this Stage Play: who as the first invention of it flocked in thick and threefold to behold this novelty: He that playeth Sinne amongst some other faults, will reprove such as do not diligently enough countenance the preaching Priests (I should say) frequent not their Sermons; for the want of the Dise pline, all that mourne in the chine, and sigh in secres for it, (though neither Priest
nor people know what it meaneth, yet) they must now fast and then the fault is not in them, but in God Almightie, that they have it not. If you come now to the second Table, they are severe men, they will make Consci∣ence to tremble, If there bee ever an Usurer, or a Drunkard, or an Whoremaster, they will so back-bite him, that hee will not love a Ser∣mon a good while againe. These men must beare with them, if in the Pulpit, when they are ravished with the zeale of the Lord, they have now and then a gird at them, to ease their so makes, especially now for fashion sake. And in the 99. page when the P. P. have ended, then are the peo∣ple dismissed (where I trow for that night, is no talke either by the way as they goe home, or at their supper. but how excellently such a man, and such a man did.) The Priest themselves that tooke this paines, are be∣stowed at some good hosts, or some good Danes Houses where at night they recompence their fasting and mourning with good cheare, and case; And in the 180. page. They had a presoript place, like a Tubbe, called their Pulpit, and the Preacher for the most part disputes to the Houre-Glasse, which being run his Sermpcin action must be at an end. And a little after, here would not be fergotten, the sweet Palmodicall harmo∣nie of the Vultures, Crowes, Gleades, Owles, Geefe, of the Leopards, Beares, Wolves, Dogges, Foxes, Swine, Goats: All these with one accord, Sympathy, and Harmony, sing some pleasant ballad, or else un∣to Davids Melodious Harpe some Psalme in time, to stirre up the spirits of their worthie Priest, or Preacher, who being thus wrupt and ravished with this Harmonie, goes to his Geare in forme above said, where his mouth distills, and his lipps drop downe old Parables, &c. And in the 191. p. Master Parson takes to him his Pastorall staffe, or wooden dag∣ger of superstition, where with hee keepes such a flourishing as the flie can have no rest, yea by your leave if any poore man in the parish of∣fends him, he may peradventure goe without his Bread and Wine for that day: and in the 192. page, speaking of the Bishops, and dumbe Ministers: Indeed their Cake is Dough, it this geare, this sweeping new Reformation come in; In the 128. page, speaking of Churching of wo∣men they have these words, she having offered her accustomed offering, to him for his labour; God speed her well, she is a woman on foote a∣gaine. And in the 244. page of their refutation, they call our prescript prayers; The smoake of the bottomlesse pit. But what need wee any further evidence or demonstration of their spirit; Sure we are that by this which is alreadie set downe, it will well appeare to the wise and Christian Reader, that Gods Spirit never taught
men to write as those men (who are knowne to have beene the chiefe perswaders and seducers of these our deceaved brethren) have done. To conclude, if wee did grant that the Assemblies which these men have gathered and joyned themselves unto, were not equall onely, but much better reformed then ours, yet by joyning to them with disclay∣ming, and condemning utterlie all other reformed Churches in the world, wee see not why they may not thereby be said to divide Christ; As well as they of Corinth, should have done if they joyned unto, and fellowed Paul, so as withall they forsaked, and despised Apollos, or Ce∣phas. FINIS.
