S4036 E824_4 99866725 119009
GODS UNCHANGEABLENESS: OR GODS Continued Providence, in preserving, governing, ordering and disposing of all Creatures, Men, Actions, Counsels and Things, as at the beginning of the world, so to the end of the world, for ever, according to the counsel of his own will. FROM WHENCE Is gathered six necessary Inferences very applicable to the Changes, Alterations and vicissitude of these our present times. WHEREIN Is clearly demonstrated and proved, That OLIVER CROMWELL is by the Providence of GOD, Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, &c. to whom the People owe obedience, as to him whom GOD hath set over them. Ʋnto which is added, The Causes of Discontent, Repining and Murmurings of Men: Also, Some serious Advertisements, and seasonable Admonitions to the Discontent∣ed, and Reprehensions to all Impetuous, Arrogant Murmurers. Together with Answers to some chief Objections made against the Lord Protector and his present Government, endeavouring (if possible) satisfaction to all men. Therefore written and published for publike good, By GEORGE SMITH Gent. JER. 10. 23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walketh, to direct his steps. PSAL. 75. 6, 7. For promotion cometh neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South. But God is the Judge: he putteth down one, ad setteth up another. 1 PET. 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, Or unto Governours, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, for so is the will of God, &c. LONDON. Printed for Tho. Underhill at the Ancor and Bible in Pauls Churchyard, and Lawrence Chapman next to the Fountain Tavern in the Strand. 1655.
TO ALL FREE-BORN PEOPLE of England, that are lovers of Peace and Truth, Grace be unto you and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord JESUS CHRIST, &c. CHRISTIAN READER, THere is not any Doctrine more usefull to the life of man, or more necessary to be known to the comfort of the Saints, then the Doctrine of Providence; for not to know and beleeve, that God the Creator doth by his secret and wise providence govern all things, is injurious to God, and hurtfull to our selves, and as much as to deny the Soveraignty and high prerogative of the Lord Jehovah over the worlds; which is indeed the exercise of his Kingly dominion, in ordering the whole universe, which in the following Discourse I offer unto your serious consideration: But because these times are pestered with many pestilent opinions, and seditious practises, all truths cannot please all men, every man believeth or denieth whatsoever may most advance their own particular judgments and interests; so that I well know this dis∣course will be very unpleasant to many of this age: Therefore (good Readers and my friends) let me beg your patience, not only in the matter of my discourse, thwarting the desires and self-designes of men, it being against the common stream of the now raigning opinions; but in the manner also, in my applica∣tions to the present Changes and alterations, designs and in∣terests, so strongly strugled for by the most of men; to all which this my discourse runs in flat opposition; the same thing being
flatly denied which I affirm and do defend. I think I am the first that in this way and manner hath published any thing in defence of the present Government under his Highness the Lord Prote∣ctor: I have not read nor seen any thing written of this nature, but what hath been to the contrary; by which I received so lit∣tle satisfaction, or am so farre from being satisfied by what I have read, that my spirit burned within me to make opposition there∣unto, which caused me to put my pen to paper on this subject. Give me also leave to give my Judgment in the matter; I am one of the free-born of the Nation, and claim my vote as well as any other, having a proportionable right to all priviledges, and must proportionably share in any affliction that God shall please to inflict upon the Nation; Therefore it concerns me to speak as well as to hear others speak; if I speak not their sense, let me be born with, as I bear with them that speak not my sense: if any my friends be offended at what I write, I cannot help their pas∣sion, nor will I be angry at them: I know not any mans aym nor end in what they do, so well as I know my own: I know my own; I know my aym is publike good, and my end Gods glory, nor do I seek to please men but to please God, I seek not victory but verity; if God accept of my endeavour, I have my end; if men reject it, or me for it; I pass not: yet I would so speak and write, that I may not give any offence, neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God: but if offence be taken without cause, why therefore should I lose my liberty in which Christ hath made me free? But though I be free from all men (as the Apostle speaketh) yet would I be servant to all (in the sense the Apostle speaketh) that I might gain the more to God: There is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence; If ever there were a time to speak for God, and the Cause of the Saints on earth, the despised ones, it is now no time to be silent, but to contend earnestly for the truth, and for the faith that was once delivered to the Saints: It was but once delivered, I dare not say it shall be delivered a second time, to them that have had it once delivered, if they lose it, whether it be to a Nation or to a man only. We in England have had it delivered to us, We, beyond Caper∣naum, have been exalted unto Heaven &c. the mysteries of the Gospel have been unfolded unto us above all other Nations, and
God hath long owned us to be his people; the Word hath been operative, working in power, piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, joynts and marrow; a discerner of the thoughts and intentions of the heart: It hath been a converting Word, else whence had those rebellious children their conversion boasted of, that cast off their Mother that bare them, and brought them forth? an Antichristian Church brings not forth a Christian brood: It is thus farre true, that we have had much chaff mixt with the pure wheat, many weeds have grown in this vineyard of Gods planting: Was there ever wheat without chaff? Was there ever a garden without weeds? but never so many as at this day: some have been alwayes, and some will be to the end of the world: there shall be, there must be tares among the good corn: the evil one will cast tares where God casts good seed; and that evil one hath been busie in this age above all ages; the field of Gods Kingdom seemeth now to be covered all over with tares, but God can gather in his good corn, and weed out those tares, at the day of his harvest: he will manifest the blasphemers, and re∣prove the horrid blasphemies, strange self-opinions, false christs, false apostles and teachers, seducers of mens souls, evil angels in shape of Angels of light, that under the notion of truth broach damnable heresies, doctrines of devils: All od herefles, abomi∣nated by the primitive Church, are all at this day revived at once, and in disguised new dresses, come like wolves in sheeps cloathing: these are such as trouble the Church of God, which the Apostle in his time wished to have been cut off, Gal. 5. 12. And it is the duty of the Christian Magistrate to suppress them; he is as Christs vicegerent and Lievetenant on earth, not only to command ob∣servance of the first Table, but also of the second: If he that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three wit∣nesses; how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Sonne of God. &c. and done despight to the spirit of grace? Heb. 10. 28, 29. And the sword is not put into the Magistrates hand in vain We read in Deut. 17. from vers. 2 to vers. 7. if any had broken the covenant with God, and worshipped false gods, he was to be stoned to death: yet I say not, that every heresie under the Gospel should be punished by death: but I say, it is the duty of the supreme Magistrate, to suppress all heresie and blasphemy by a Law: Nor do I say, that
an erring Conscience is to be punished by the Law of the Magi∣strate, if he keep his erring opinion within his own walls; but if he seduce others, and thereby stirre up sedition, alienating mens judgments from due obedience, I say such a one is liable to the wrath of the Civil Magistrate; and those Magistrates, that tolerate or connive at such things, will be found to do the work of the Lord negligently: those things I only hint at by the way, and leave to the consideration of the judicious. What I have said as to the matter of my following discourse, which is Providence, ordering all things; it is the truth of God held forth in sacred Scripture, from which I cannot retrograde: what I have said as to the matter applicatory, I only give my judg∣ment, and leave the even to that Providence which governs all things. As to my vindication of the Lord Protector, whom Pro∣vidence hath exalted, Providence will yet further order him, and all his counsels and actions, after the counsel of Gods will: God hath a great work for him to do, and it shall be done, whether to be a nursing father to the Church of Christ, and a skilfull Escula∣pius, to heal the distempers of three sick and wounded Nations, or whether for a contrary work, I cannot assert, God only knowes it, to whom all secrets belong: what is revealed belongs to us, and it is our duty as we are men, to own the Powers that be; and as we are Christian men to pray for them; therefore for him; that God will make him a glorious instrument in his own hand for his glory and the peoples good. We hope well, but prayer is better then our hopes, and is the means to accomplish our hope: and God is alwayes better to his praying people then their prayers: let us not sinne by withholding our prayers, which thing hath sometimes caused blessings to be turned into curses: Let us not limit the holy one of Israel, nor give rules to Providence; nor let us spend our time in devising and plotting, nor as the Athenians, make it our work to hear and to tell News; but pray and endea∣vour for peace and truth; and beleeve, that God is a rewarder to them that diligently seek him. There is yet balm in Gilead, a dore of hope is opened to us; The seed is yet in the barn; as yet the Vine and the Figg-tree, the Pomegranate and the Olive tree, hath not brought forth (saith the Prophet,) from this day I will blesse you▪ Hag. 2. 19. It is God that prepareth the seed and the ground, and gives the increase by his blessing, Psal. 65. 9, 10. Therefore
let us pray unto God for our Governours, for his Highness, and for his Parliament; for as God doth instruct the husbandman to discretion, to break the clods of his ground, and to cast in his seed in the appointed place and time, as the Prophet speaketh; so doth he instruct Princes, and teacheth them discretion to rule and govern as he pleaseth; for by him Princes raign and rule; The husbandman waiteth for the fruit of the earth (saith James) and hath long patience for it, untill he receive the early and the later rain; and shall not we follow the footsteps of providence, and patiently wait Gods time and means, for giving us the blessings promised? Let us cast off our own wayes, wills and designs, and be obedient to Provi∣dence, and see what the Lord our God will do for us. Courteous Reader, read me with patience, not with any prejudice: try all truths, oppose nothing that is truth; good counsell is not to be slighted, nor seasonable reproof to be scorned, though it come from one of whom you could say as Achab said of Michaiah, that you hate him, and that he doth not speak good concerning you but evil: I have written what God hath instructed me, do you read, and read all; then judge (as God shall put into your heart) of him who is your servant in the Lord Jesus Christ, that desires increase of grace to you and all the Israel of God. George Smith.
The principall things touched upon in the following Discourse. GOD the Creator doth govern all things by his secret Providence. Page 1. The want of the true knowledge of Providence, is cause of murmurings. p. 2, & 12. Providence set forth by the Ladder that Jacob saw in his vision, and by the Piller of cloud that guid∣ed Israel in the wilderness. p. 2. Nothing comes to pass by chance or devisings of men, or meerly by nature, but by Providence. ibid. Providence what it is? ibid. & p. 12. It is the eye of God. p. 3. It ordereth all the actions of men. ibid. The dayes and life of man. p. 4. It ordereth the dispositions of men. ib. It ordereth the wicked actions of wicked men. ib. It ordereth the secrets of the heart, and the an∣swer of the tongue. p. 5. It ordereth the least of things, which men falsly say come by chance or fortune. ib. All creatures animate and inanimate wait on God, and obey and exe∣cute his command. p. 6. Providence changeth the order that nature hath put into things. ib. All the works of Providence are known and certain to God from e∣ternity. ib. But they are all contingent to men. p. 7. The times of Families and Kingdoms are appointed by God, their rise and their period is certainly set, and the means thereto conducing. p. 7, & 8. Why Jehu was punished like Achab. p. 8. Admonition to those that God hath made punishers of others sins. ib. Providence ordereth all actions and things, to advance men and Nations as pleaseth him, p. 9, 10. Providence ordered Oliver Cromwell to be Lord Protector. p. 11. Every mercy and every judgment is from God, not from men, but as
instrumeuts in Gods hand. p. 11, 12. Inferences drawn from the Doctrine of Providence. p. 13. All mercies to men or Nations are of Gods free grace and love. ib. Particular mercies instanced. p. 14, 15. All Judgments are from God as recompence for sinne. p. 16. Particular sinnes instanced, and at ripeness in England. ib. How Priviledges of Parliament were lost. p. 17. A Memento of the Covenant. ib. The wicked are taken in their own craftiness, and fall by their own designs. p. 18. Observations of some Actions and Designs of King James, and of the late King. p. 18, 19. Six peeces of Providence very observable to the late King. p. 20. Considerable Providences to the long Parliament. p. 21. Six considerable Quaeries propounded. p. 22. God hath set a time when he will give in mercies, and when he will in∣stict Judgements. p. 22, 23. And upon whom. ib. And how much it shall be. p. 24. But all those times and purposes in God, are unknown to men. p. 24, 25. Mens boldness to foretell Gods times and purposes. ib. Revelations and visions in these times, but vain fancies. p. 26. These are trying and shaking times. p. 26, 27. God shaketh Nations severall wayes. ib. The word of God like fire shall consume all opposers. p. 28. The greatest Reformation, hath ever met with greatest opposition. ib. Three things have long threatned Judgment to England. ib. Men not able to bring any enterprise to pass by all their contrivings. p. 29. The Lord Protector set up by Providence, made successfull by Saints prayers. ib. Although God hath set the time for every purpose, which cannot be altred, yet men are to be diligent in the use of all lawfull means, p. 30, 31. How God is said to repent, or to be changed. p. 32. No means must be used but lawfull means. p. 33. We must not trust in means, nor be too solicitous in the use of means without a particular Promise. ib. Nor to use unwarrantable means to obtain lawfull things. ib. Christs Kingdom is spiritual. 34 He accepts not the use of the sword in the Saints hand, to set up his Kingdom. ib. Reasons why? p. 35.
The pressings in mens spirits, not alwaies agreeable to the Spirit of God. p. 35, 36. The Spirit of God leadeth but to one truth. ib. The right means to ob∣tain Mercies, and to avoid Judgments. 36, 37. What the Doctrine of Paul and Peter is, concerning the civil Ma∣gistrate. ib. The civil Magistrate hath authority to command the worship of God, and to punish the contemners of it. p. 38. When God hath manifested his will by the work of Providence, we are to submit and not to murmur. p. 39. Murmurers reproved. ib. The effects of murmuring. ib. The causes of mens murmurings. p. 40. Severall sorts of murmurers noted. p. 41, 42. Order in discipline required by Christ in his Church. ib. Men ascribers, are God prescribers. p. 43. The murmuring of Corah was against the Offices of Magistracy and Ministry. p. 43, 44. Advice to the people. p. 44, 45. Men are building new Babels. ib. Kings, nursing fathers to the Church under the Gospel. ib. Christs enemies shall be slain miraculously, by the sword that goeth out of his mouth. p. 46. It was Israels sinne in asking a King before God gave him, And it is a sinne in any people to reject a King when God gives him. p. 47. Seditious persons like Sheba the sonne of Bichri. ib. The bitterness of warre, instanced in Abner and Joab. ib. Five principall Objections made against the Lord Protestor, An∣swered. p. 48. The cause of our late warre, what. p. 49. The Lord Protector vindicated, as to former promises. p. 50. In his trust to the Parliament and Nation. ib. In breach of Priviledges of Parliament. p 51. That this is a free Parliament. ib. Concerning the Militia. p. 52. Concerning his Negative voice. p. 53. Concerning Religion. p. 54. Concerning making Laws, and raising of Money. p. 55. That he is no favourer of Cavaliers, but as in justice he ought. ib.
Gods Ʋnchangeablenesse, OR, Gods continued Providence in preser∣ving, guiding, ordering and disposing of all Creatures, Men, Actions, Counsels and Things, as at the beginning of the world, so to the end of the world, for ever; According to the counsell of his own Will. THat there is a God that hath created the world and all things, we all acknowledge; the Heathen con∣fesse the same, but know not the true God in his essence and being, God hath hid himself from them, farther then what is revealed to them by the works of creation, therefore they frame gods to themselves according to their fancies, and so make many gods: We Christians do acknowledge one God, and but one God, distinguished by three per∣sons, Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost; And that there is three Persons or three Hypostases, and but one God, is revealed to us by the Word of God, contained in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, where only this mystery of the Godhead is to be known; there∣fore the wisest and most prudent of the Heathen cannot know this, because they have not the sacred Scriptures made known to them; But this we all pro∣fsse to know and to beleeve, therefore it wee in vain and lost labour to use Arguments to prove it. But that this one God the God of Israel doth govern, order, and dispose all Ceatures, Actions, Things, Men and Counsels, according to the purpose of his own will, is not so clearly acknowledged nor beleeved, but contrary, it is denied by some though by name they are Christians, yet they go not in their practise in this particular beyond the old Sect of Stoick Philosophers, who though heathen acknowledge a Deity, yet leave the guidance and ordering of things to nature, and so tye God to second causes; Therefore it will not be unnecessary to prove, that there is a secret and special providence of God that governeth and ordereth all things; for indeed the want of the knowledge and
practice of this is the cause of great complainings, discontents, and murmu∣rings against God and against men; We look at instrumental causes but see not the efficient cause, the cause of all causes: Jaco did not only look to the foot of the ladder which he see in his vision, but he  at him who sate at the top of the LadderGen. 28. 13.; This Ladder doth literally set forth Gods Provi∣dence governing all things; The steps or gradations of the Ladder are the divers means which God useth; The Angels ascending and descending are the ministring spirits which God sendeth forth to execute his will, as the A∣postle tels us, they are all ministring spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation: And theHeb. 1. 14 Psalmist exhorting us to the praise of God saith, Who is like the Lord our God, that hath his dwelling on high, and yet abaseth himself to behold the things in the heaven and in the earth? Psa. 113. 5, 6. He so be∣holdeth all things as to order all things, and all actions, not only Men and An∣gels, but the unreasonable creatures, yea, inanimate things by a providence: As the Israelites were led through the wildernesse by a pillar of a cloud by day, and by a pillar of fire by night, So all creatures are guided by providence: You know that when the cloud was taken up from the Tabernacle, the Israe∣lites journeyed and went forward so long as the pillar went before them, but when the pillar staid they staid, in that place where the cloud abode there they pitched their tents, as is said, Num. 9. 17. Again, when the cloud was ta∣ken up whether by day or by night, they journeyed, and so long as it rested they remained in their Tents; whether it was for a day or for daies, for moneths, or for years:Numb. 9. 22. Ex. 40. 36. God is the same to us that he was to Israel, his pro∣vidence is the same, though altered in the dispensations, &c. God is eternal, and he is unchangeable in all his waies, he made himself known in times past by his wondrous works and special Revelations, but now he maketh himself known by his word as well as by his works. The visible things created which are but part of the works of God, do set forth to the whole world his power and wisedom, Psa. 19. and as the Psalmist saith, The Lord is known by the judgements which he executeth, Psa. 9. 16. But especially by his word he hath made himself known to his people, his word is contained in the sacred Scri∣ptures of the Old and New Testament, there he hath revealed himself in his Attributes, Names, Titles, eternal essence and being; and by his word we come to know what his works are, they are revealed in Scripture to be De∣cree, Creation and Providence; Decree was the purpose of God before all time what should be in time, and till time shall be no more; Creation was the making of the worlds and all things in them of nothing, and that was in the beginning of time; Providence is the governing and disposing of all things, by which God the Creator doth exercise his Kingly power for ever, according to the decree and secret counsel of God, effecting every purpose, in the time, place, and by the means pre-ordained by God. Now that there is such a ruling providence that ordereth all things, and every thing in the world, is necessary to be known and beleeved by all; There∣fore I shall endeavour to prove it by Scripture and experience, and that nothing comes to passe by chance or meerly by nature, nor can be effected and done by any devisings, contrivings, wisedom, or power of men, without the dispo∣sing of providence: For if there be a God that made all things, it must needs be that the same God governs all things and their Actions, according to his will: But God made all things, that's confessed, why did God make the crea∣ture?
not for themselves, nor to leave them to act and do as they list▪ But God made all for himself, for his own gloy,Pr. 16. 4. Isa. 43. 21. yea, he made the wicked for the day of wrath: It was indeed a glorious work to make the worlds and all creatures, but it is a more glorious work to govern the worlds and every creature by his most wise providence: This providence he calleth the eyes of his gloryIsa. 3. 8., by it his glory is manifested in every thing, and this glory he will not give unto any otherIsa. 42. 8.: Providence is the absolute Soveraign power of God over the creatures, exercising his eternal Decrees and secret counsell, ordering things and actions according to his good pleasure, after the counsell of his own willEph. 1. 11; Thus saith the Lord (speaking of things done from the beginning of the world, and things to be done) my Counsell shall stand, and I will do all my pleasureIsa. 46. 10 Psa. 33. 11; Seek ye out of the Book of the Lord (saith the Prophet) and reade, not one of these things shall fail, nor ssiall misse one of anotherIsa. 34. 16: All things shall come to passe, and be so ordered and fitted unto another as the sword to the Scabbard or knife to the sheath: I will speak the word, and the word that I speak shall be doneEz. 12. 25; The Lord of Hosts purposeth, and who shall dis∣anull itIsa. 14. 27? he spake and it was done (saith the Psalmist) he commanded and it stood fastPs. 33. 9. There was a sore Famine in Samaria, and the Prophet telleth them that the next day there should be great plenty, but this seemed a thing impossible, and was not beleeved, the Assyrians being then with a mighty Army besieging Samaria2 Kings 6. 24.: Now the Lord made the host of the Assyrians to hear a noyse of horses aad chariots, and of a mighty host, and for fear they all fled from their Tents, and left their Tents and Camp, even as it was with all provisions, and fled for their lives2 Kin. 2.: Now there were four lepers that were in distresse and ventured themselves to go to the Camp of the Assyrians, where they found abundance of food and treasure, and all the host was fled; these bring tidings to Samaria; And as the Lord had said by his Prophet so it came to passeVer. 16.: Here was no contrivance, nor wisedom, nor power of men in all this, but the work of providence; So you shall see that when two men go into the field to hew wood, the head of the Axe sticth from the helve at unawares, and kil∣leth one of these menDeut. 19. 4.: This is the work of providence, and in such a case God himself saith, I have delivered such a man to the slayers handEx. 21. 13: If God take care of a Sparrow, he much more taketh care of a man, But a Sparrow falleth not to the ground without the providence of God, and a mani, of more value then many SparrowsMat. 10. 31.: Two men travell on the way, the one is robbed of his purse, the other is never assaulted, this is providence in the one and in the other. You know Ahab would needs go up to Ramoth-Gilead, he was very confi∣dent of victory, he takes much advice and counsell about it, strengthens him∣self by the assistance of King Jehosapha, and is encouraged by no lesse then four hundred false Prophets; all say to him Go and prosper1 King. 22. 6.; Only Miciah the Prophet of the Lord tels him from the mouth of God, that he should not return in peace; Ahab scorns the Prophets words, and imprisons him, and goes on with confidence of his design; Now what crossed him in his design, contrivements, and power, &c. the Text tels you, a certain man drew a bow at a venture, nd shot an arrow; He knew not Ahab, nor could any know him, for he had disguised himself; Ahab wanted not for any contrivance, policy, counsell, nor strength to preserve himself, yet maugre all policy, the arrow
thus shot at a venture findes out Ahab, and although Ahab was armed it is by providence guided to the joynts of his armour, where it enters, and hits Ahab so that he died1 King. 22. 34.; Here providence executeth the decree of God upon Ahab; You know the King of Assyria sent a mighty and invincible Army against Hezechiah King of Judah, confident of successe: Hezechiah unable to make opposition by any equality of strength, yet this invincible host is destroyed, not by any art, wisedome, counsell, or strength of men, all was wanting; But an Angell of the Lord went out and smote the Camp of the Assyrians in one nigh One hundred fourscore and five thousand2 King. 19. 35., This is also the work of Pro∣vidence. As the Actions of men so their daies and life are ordered and appointed by God, therefore saith holy Job, the daies of every man are appointed by God, and all those daies are ordered by providence, though men know them not, nor how they are secretly ordered and every hour preserved till the appointed time be come, for saith Job, Thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot passeIob 14. 5, therefore saith he, I will wait till my change comeIob 7. 1.; So the Propher David, My times (saith he) are in thy handsPs. 31. 15. And as Providence ordereth the Actions and Lives of men, so it doth reach to the orderings of the disposition and naturall affections of men, ei∣ther to love or hatred, to kindnesse, or to churishnesse, what else changed the disposition and affection of Esau, from bloudy wrath to loving kindenesse, when he came out against Jacob with hatred, and when he meeteth him he embraceth him with loving-kindenesse and brotherly affectionGen. 33. 4; So you shall see Laban pursuing Jacob in great anger, and when he is on the way his dis∣position and anger is changedGen. 31. 29.; You may see the Midianites that came out against Israel all in love one with the other, and hatred against Israel, fall one upon another, and destroy one another, providence ordereth that every one set his sword against his fellowIud. 7. 22; The like you may see in the Army of the Philistims1 Sam. 4. 20.. Yea more, It is evident from sacred Scriptures, That all the wicked Acti∣ons of wicked men are ordered by providence, God ruleth them, and orders them for the accomplishment of his secret counsel, and by the ordering of those Actions God hath glory: I say, they are ordered by providence, not as wicked men intend or act them, they intend and act out of a wicked prin∣ciple, to a wicked end, but God orders them otherwise, to effect something of his own decree, and turns it to good in the doing his will; The action, and the sin in the action is their own, but the ordering of the action is of God: All wicked actions of wicked obdurated Pharaoh, providence ordered to the glory of God. St Paul hath this expression, For the Scripture saith of Pharaoh, even for this cause have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my Name might be declared throughout all the earth,Ex. 9. 16. Rom. 9. 17. His cruelty in destroying all the male-children of the Hebrews; Moses being cast into the River, the repulse that Pharaoh gave to Moses message from God, his encrease of the burthens and labours on the Hebrews, and his oft refusing to let the people go, &c. Providence ordered all these things to the advance∣ment of Gods glory: So it is said of Sihon King of Heshbon, that God harden∣ed his heart, and why? that Sihon King of Heshbon out of the bitternesse and envy of his own heart against Israel, should refuse to suffer them to passe peaceably through his Countrey, to the end that Israel might have a just
cause to engage warre with them and destroy themDeut. 2. 30.. Was there ever so great an Act of wickednesse acted in the world, or in∣vented, as that horrid conspiracy of Herod, Pontius Pilate, Judas, the Gen∣tiles, and the people of the Jews against the Lord Christ? yet providence ordered all this, and brought the greatest good out of that most horrid act; The Scripture saith plainly, that all this was no more but what was before-determi∣ned should be doneAct. 2. 23. & Act. 4. 27, 28.: St John speaking of the unbelieving Jews from that place Isa. 6. 10. sairh, God hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heartsJoh. 12. 40.: and Esay saith, the Lord hath powred upon them the spirit of deep sleep, and hath cho∣sed their eyes, The Prophets, Rulers, and Seers hath he coveredIsa. 29. 10; God is not only a bare permitter of evil actions in men, but he is a powerful agent, ordering of those evil Actions by his wise and secret providence, to serve to the pur∣pose of his own will; the sinne is their own but the guidance of the Action is Gods, ordered to his own glory; Job tels us, that the deceiver and the decei∣ved are both hisIoh 12. 16., he ordereth both; If a Prophet be deceived when he hath spo∣ken a thing, I the Lord have deceived himEze. 14. 9, that is, such Prophets as Ahabs four hundred Prophets were, whom Satan could not deceive till he was bid to go and prevail: All the actions of the devil are ordered by providence, and there is not, nor cannot be any action of the devil but what is extreamly wicked: Remarkable is that place of St John, Rev. 17. 13. speaking of that foul aposta∣cy of Papacy, he saith, They shall give their power and strength to the beast, He saith not they will give, but they shall give, as a thing that God had pre-or∣dained to be, much more may be said, this I hope may suffice to prove this Truth. Yet furrhermore you shall see, that as God orders by his providence all Men, and all Actions, of all sorts, their times, their dispositions, &c. so he ordereth the very secrets of the heart, and the answer of the tongue; The Wiseman tels us, The Kings heart is in the hand of God, be turns it as the Rivers of waters whithersoever he willPr. 21. 1.: And the answer of the tongue is from the LordPr. 16. 1, to this effect is that saying of Christ to his Disciples, take no thought what you shall speak, for it shall be given to you what to speak at the same hourMat. 10. 1.: The man thar shall consult within himself, and debate in his own thoughts, and come to a full resolurion what he will answer or speak to this or that thing, so as that he thinks nothing shall alter him, yet that man when he comes to put his resolves into action, shall speak or do as providence shall order and direct, it may be quite contrary to what he resolved, something will come in between the preparation and the action; Caiaphas the High Priest doubtlesse spake not those words of himself when he said, It was expedient that one man should die for the people, but Providence ordered him to use those those words, That as he was High-Priest that year, he prophefied, that Christ should die for the NationIoh. 11. 51.: So the Wiseman tels us, Many seek the favour of the Ruler, but every mans judgement is from the Lord; As we know men usu∣ally seek the favour of a Judge before whom they have a matter to come, but they consider not that the verdict shall be as providence shall order it. Yea, Providence extendeth to the least and smallest of things as well as to the greatest, for God worketh all things after the counsell of his own will, even those things that men corruptly call Chance or Fortune; The very hairs of a mans head they are numbredMat. 10. 30., a Sparrow is one of the meanest of birds, yet a Sparrow falleth not to the ground but by ProvidenceMat. 10. 29.; The grasse, the
corn, the Trees, the Plants, and the Flowers of the Field grow and flourish by providenceMat. 6. 28, 30,, yea, the lot that is cast or drawn as we say by chance, is or∣dered and disposed by providence; Providence ordereth all and every thing. And as God by Providence governs and orders all creatures and their A∣ctions, so all creatures readily obey his command, they are all at his call, at his beck they come, and at his beck they go, whatsoever he commandeth that they do; Every creature in their kinde own him for their Creator and Preserver; The eyes of all (saith the Psalmist) wait upon thee, and thou gi∣vest them their meat in due seasonPsalm 145. 15.; God is the great master of the whole Uni∣verse, the great Family of the world, he sets every one in their station, ap∣points every one their work, and pays them all their wages; Thy judgements (saith the Prophet) are a great deep, thou preservest man and beastPsa. 36. 6.; The young Lions seek their meat of GodPsa. 104 21.; and God prepareth for the young Ravens their foodJob 38. 41.; The Creatures are the Hosts and Armies of God, at what time soever he is pleased to muster them together; The contemptible grashoppers if God please to whistle them shall be a destroying ArmyJoel 2. 25; Poor despised Flies shall come in swarms to plague a whole Nation if God command them, yea, at Gods command, Frogs and Lice shall be irresistible Armies; And who can stand before them? The Hail, the Ice, the Snow, the Fire, the Water, the Windes, all and every thing are at his command; All things in heaven, on the earth, in the Seas, and in hell, are at his beck; Angels, Men, Beasts, Birds, Fishes, yea devils themselves are commanded by God, and are his In∣struments to punish, overturn, lay desolate, and destroy the mightiest Mo∣narchs, Kingdoms, or people as pleaseth him. Yet further, That order that nature hath set in the creatures or things, when God pleaseth to command, shall be altred and changed in extraordina∣ry manner; The Red Sea must part in sunder and stand as a wall on this side and on that side; The proud streams of the River Jordan shall be altred and turned back, even in the time of her highest pride and overflowingsJosh. 3. 16. Ps. 104. 3.; The Sun which as the Bridegroom cometh out of his chamber, and as a Giant rejoyceth to run his racePs. 19. 5. must at Gods command, for execution of his Decree stand still upon Mount GibeonJosh. 10. 12, 13.: Again when God pleaseth it shall neither stand still nor go forward, but it must go backward ten degreesIsa. 38. 8.; Let Jouah be cast into the Sea, if God command the waters shall not drownJon. 1. 15; if Da∣niel must be cast into the Den of cruell, hungring, ravening Lions; they shall not be able one of them against Gods command, to open a mouth to hurt himDan. 6. 22, If the three Children must be cast into a double-heated, fiery Furnace, the fire shall not burn, nor so much as scorch one hair of their headDan. 3. 21, 22.; When God will have Israel come out of Egypt in quiet, not so much as a dog in all Egypt shall move his tongue at man or beastEx. 11. 7.; And when God commands the very dogs of Jezabels own house shall tear and devour Jeza∣bel2 King. 9. 10, 36., all things act or forbear to act as God pleaseth to command them, they readily execute all his pleasure. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the worldAct. 15. 17., that is, nothing is new unto God in all the works of providence; he knows all and every thing from all eternity, what shall be for ever; There is no contingency in the Decrees of God, they are certain and unchangeable, nothing shall fail of all that he hath purposed, but providence shall surely effect and accomplish
every work in its appointed time and season, and by the means appointed, ac∣cording to the pleasure of God, but unto men the works and Decrees of God are unknown, they are contingent both in respect of Actions and Events: And hence it cometh to passe that great works and strange events that provi∣dence bringeth to passe in the world are wondred at, because they are strange to us, we never see such a thing, such a change, such an overturn, &c. nor looked not for any such thing; As the Prophet speaks, When thou didst terri∣ble things which we looked not for, when thou camest down the mountains flowed down me thy presenceIsa. 64. 3, that is, when God appeareth in the world, in acting any new and great work, which we have not seen nor looked for, whether it be in the delivering of the Church out of some great affliction, or bringing calami∣ties upon his Church for their sins; Or whether it be in visiting the Nati∣ons Inhabitants of the earth for their long-born with iniquities, their abomi∣nable murthers, cruelties, and oppression, their contempt of God and perse∣cution of his servants the Ministers, &c. When God I say shall come, and unexpected by us, unlooked for, overturn, overturn, throw down the mighty, lay waste and make desolate strong Cities, fortified Nations, and the greatest Monarchies; Then the mountains shall melt, or flow down as water at Gods presence, all obstructions shall be cast out of the way, the great men and most crafty counsellors, that stood like mountains a little before, seeming impossible to be removed, these shall vanish and come to nothing; Who art thou O great Mountain before Zerubbabel? thou shalt become a plainZech. 4. 7.; God will throw off Kings, and corrupt, irreligious, oppressing Parliaments, let them make their mountains never so strong they shall be cast down: This is the absolute Soveraignty of God, the exercise of his Kingly power, his everlast∣ing dominion: Who is (as the Apostle expresseth) the blessed God and only Potentate1 Tim. 6. 15., He who hath on his vesture and on his thigh a Name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS, Rev. 19. 16. He changeth times and seasons, removeth Kings and setteth up Kings, &c. He is a just and righteous God, and hath no respect of persons, keepeth Co∣venant and promises to his people, will not fail, nor can be hindred; He is infinite in power, and he is unchangeable in all his waies and works; He is the King of SaintsRev. 15. 3, He goes forth conquering and to conquerRev. 6. 2. all Kings and Na∣tions that are his enemies, and shall break them with a rod of Iron, and dash them in peeces like a potters vessellPsa. 2. 9., for he is also King of NationsIer. 10. 7, And for the seed of Jacobs sake he will break in peeces the Shepherd and his flock, the Captain and the RulersIer. 31. 23.; Out of his mouth goeth a sharp Sword, that with it he should smite the NationsRev. 19. 15., And he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, for the Lord is high above Na∣tions, and his glory above the HeavensPs. 113. 4; To him the Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and the small dust of the ballance, All Nations are before him as nothing, and are counted to him lesse then nothing, and vanityIsa. 40. 15, 17.; He hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and measured the Heavens with a span, comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scaics, and the hils in ballancesIsa. 40. 12.: Such is the greatnesse of Gods power; The daies of men, the years of families, and the ages of Kingdoms are all by him numbred and de∣termined, the time of their beginning, the time that they shall continue, the times and means of their encrease, and of their diminution, and the instru∣ments to accomplish all Gods will in every particular; All is known and ap∣pointed by God,Da. 5. 26. till which time they shall stand, and longer they cannot
stand;Luk. 19. 42, 43. their period is certain, determinated by God who is unchangeable; But unto men they are altogether unknown, therefore uncertain; Secret things belong unto God, yet these secrets God will reveal to his Saints in the time ap∣pointed, when the time of the accomplishment is come and not before, as we shall shew afterward in the proper place. You know that Gideon was a good man, and God stirred him up to be a de∣liverer of his people from the bondage of the Midianites, the people would have made him their King, and his posterty to rule after him, which he re∣fused; Yet Gideon that he might leave a memorial of his acts and name, ask∣ed of the people their earrings, and their chains of gold, which they had taken as their prey from the conquered enemy, One thousand seven hundred shekels of gold, besides other ornaments, &c. which they willingly gave him, of which he made an Ephod, and put it in his City, And all Israel went a whoring after it, that is, they superstitiously worshiped it, which thing became a snare to Gideon and to his houseIud. 8. 27; This was the means to bring a period to Gideons Family, for as soon as Gideon was dead, Abimelech the Son of Gideon, which he had by his Concubine a Shechemite, together with the men of Shechem, conspired a∣gainst the Sons of Gideon, which were threescore and ten, and slew them all save Jotham who escaped; Thus God made Abimelech the instrument to pu∣nish the sin of Gideon, and Abimelech was made King, and reigned 3. years; Here was ambition, treachery, and murther in Abimelech, and in the men of Shechem, this puts a period to the life of Abimelech, to the people of Shechem, and to Abimelechs Kingdom, for the Text saith, God sent an evil spirit be∣tween Abimelech and the men of ShechemIud. 9. 23; So that Abimelech is the instru∣ment to destroy the men of Schechem that joyned with him in his conspiracy and murther of his Brethren, and set him up over them; And when he had done that, providence makes a silly woman the Instrument to destroy AbimelechIudg. 9. 40, 53.. So you know Ahab sinned, he sold himself to do wickedly, and God by the Prophet foretelleth the destruction of him, of his Family, and of his Kingdom1 King. 21. 21.; Providence brings Jehu to be the Instrument to accomplish this work, Iehu did it to the full, and with great zeal, seeming to the Lord of Hosts, but Iehu's heart was not upright before God1 King. 10. 30, 31., Therefore the Prophet Hosea from the mouth of God denounceth judgement against the House of Iehu for the bloud of Ahabs houseHos. 1. 4.; Iehu did all that God had threatned a∣gainst Ahabs house, and he did but what was the will of God should be done, yet Iehu must be no lesse punished then he had punished Ahab; Calvin gives a good reason of this, It was not (saith he) for any act done ro Iezabel, or upon the children of Ahab, for in all that the Lord himself testifieth he did well2 King. 10. 30., but because Iehu's hearr was not upright to God in that that he did, and because Iehu did not depart from the sins of AhabVers. 31., Iehu sinning like Ahab must be punished like Ahab, and it was made good accordingly at the time appointed2 King. 15. 10. 12.: The Apostle tels us that these things are written for our ad∣usonition1 Cor. 10. 11., &c. This is an admonition to them of our time whom God hath made Instru∣ments to punish the sins and oppressions of others, that they take heed that they be not guilty of the sinnes and oppression that they have punished in o∣thers; It were a happinesse to this Nation if some were not as faulty as those that they have punished; It is good that sin be punished, but it will prove
very ill to the punishers that walk in the practise of the same sinnes. It was well done of Henry the eight in putting down the Popes Supremacy, and de∣molishing Monasteries, Nunneries, Priories, &c. Let his end be what it will, or what it was, or the cause of doing it; but it was very ill in Henry the 8. that he continued in the practise of the same superstition and persecution of Gods people: It was a good act to cut off Tyranny, but it is extream evil that the same hands should act high oppression; God will stir up other hands to cut off them and their Families, he hath already shewed his anger, and will perfect it to their ruine, if their repentance prevent it not, for God is unchangeable in all his judgements and his dealings with men, wherein a man sinneth therein he shall be punished, as it was with Adonibezek, if men notwith∣standing all warnings, admonitions, and examples, will go on in sin, it is a sign that their period is nigh: Thus it was with the Sons of Ely, they were wicked, and they were oppressive, they caused the Sacrifices of God to be ab∣horred1 Sam. 2. 17., and they were admonished by good old Ely, but they would not hearken to his voice, to be reformed, and why? because saith the Text The Lord would slay them1 Sam. 2. 24., and providence ordereth the Philistins to be in∣strumental to accomplish it; This was also the occasion of casting off Flies Family for ever: By this we see how providence orders things, Actions, and Instruments to overturn and cut off Men and Families, yea, whole King∣doms, as we see in the mighty of Chaldea, at the period of time the hand∣writing upon the wall shewed Belshazzar that God had numbred his Kingdom and finished itDan. 5. 26, the set time was come, and the same night was Belshazzar slain, and the Monarchy transferred to the Medes and Persians, when he lit∣tle expected such a change, as appeareth by his jolity, feasting, and drinking wine, with a thousand of his Lords, and causing the vessels of silver and gold to be brought to carouse in, which his Father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple in Hierusalem; God defers long, but when he smites he doth it suddenly, when men least look for it, and that irresistibly. Now as providence ordereth things, Actions and Instruments, to cut off and to destroy, as it pleaseth him, so providence ordereth things, Actions and Instruments, secondary causes, to advance men, families, and kingdoms, when he pleaseth; Of which I shall offer two or three Instances; We see when God for the bringing his own purpose to passe in accomplishment of his Decree and promise made to Abraham, and would to that end advance Ioseph above his brethren, that he might be the Instrument to preserve his Fathers house, which was then the only visible Church on earth, Providence orders every thing to concurre: And herein observe these nine particular peeces of provi∣dence: 1. Iacobs love to Ioseph procures his brethrens hatredGen. 37. 2, 3, 4. & v. 10. 11. 2 His Bre∣threns hatred procure consultations and conspiracies against the life of Ioseph. 3. Providence suffereth them not to agree in their counsels to kill him, and so his life was preserved. 4. They sell him to the Midianitish Merchants, these Merchants carry him into Egypt, and there they sell him to Potiphar a chief Officer to King Pharaoh, where God blesseth Ioseph and prospered all that he put his hand untoGen. 39. 2, 3, 4.. 5. Ioseph is cast into prison by the false accusation of Potiphars wife: In the prison he findeth favour of the Keeper of the prison, and is trusted by himVer. 21.. 6. Two of Pharaohs servants, his chief Butler and his chief Baker are by Pharaoh cast into the same prison where Ioseph wasGen. 4. 2, 3, and are put under Iosephs charge. 6. This Butler and this Baker dream each
of them one dream in one and the same night; Ioseph came to the knowledge of their dreams, and shews them the interpretation of it. 7. This occasioneth Iosephs skill and knowledge in the Interpretation of dreams to be knownGen. 41. 12. 8. Pharaoh also dreameth a dream which none could interpret, which occasi∣oneth Ioseph to be sent for out of the prison, who telleth unto Pharah the Interpretation of his dream; Upon which Ioseph is made Ruler over Pharaohs House, and over the whole Kingdom, next to Pharaoh himselfVer. 40. 9. God brings a famine on all the earth, except in Egypt, for there he had given plen∣ty; Therefore Iacob sends his Sons into Egypt to buy foodGen. 42. 2, 3. there they bow to Ioseph their brother and do homage to him, as was foretold by his dream, and for which they so much the more hated himGen. 37. 7, 9.: Thus you see how pro∣vidence ordered every thing to concurre to effect Gods purpose: And Ioseph himself els his brethren as much, saying, It was not you but God that sent me before to preserve you a postcrity on earth, and to save your livesGen. 45. 7, &c. a means to accomplish what was promised long beforeGen. 15. 13. Act. 7. 6.. The like instance we have in the advancement of Hster and Mordecai: Very observable in ten other particular peeces of providence: 1. That at so great and publike Feast as the King Ahashuerus made to his princes and people, it should come into the Kings minde to send for his Queen Vastai, a thing unusuall at such meetings. 2. That the Queen should give so peremptory a denial: And that the King for that one offence, should be so greatly in∣censed against his Queen, whom he loved (and in whose beauty he gloried) as to call for advice to revenge himself upon herEst. 1. 11. 3. That the Princes, No∣bles and wise men, should thereupon suddenly advise to put away Vastai from being Queen. 4. That when the fairest of the Persian Virgins were to be cal∣led to the King to chuse him another Queen, that Ester should be brought amongst them, who was of a strange Countrey and a Captive, without any friend or means in Court to preferre her, nor was her kindred nor family known, yet providence gives her favour in the eyes of Hegai the keeper of the womenEst. 2. 9., and of all that looked on her, and specially in the eyes of the King, so as she was taken into the house Royall, and afterward became Queen in Vastai's steadve. 16, 17.. 5. That Mordcai a captive Jew should be in the hearing of the Treason plotted by two of the Kings Servants to take away the Kings life, and that by his discovery the Treason was preventedver. 21.. 6. That this discovery of Morde at should be recorded, and Mordecai named for the dis∣coverer. 7. That Haman the Agagite having gotten an irrevocable decree to de∣stroy Mordecai and all the Jews, the whole Church of GodEsth. 3. 8, 13., yet swelling in rage against Mordecai, prepared a gallows of fifty cubits high to hang Mordecai thereonEst. 5. 14.. 8. That the same night before the intended execution of Mor∣decai, Sleep should go from the King, which caused him to call for the Chronicles to be brought and read before him, and that the act of Mordecais discovery and saving the Kings life, should be then among thousand other things pitched pon, and read to the King, which then occasioned the King to think of giving honour to Mordecai, which he never thought of beforeEst. 6. 1, 2. 9. That at that very instant Haman should come to the King with intention to speak that Mordecai might be hanged on the Gallows prepared, of which he was not only disappointed, but to his shame and grief was made the instru∣ment to honour Mordcai, and being taken in his own snare was himself hanged on the gallows he made to hang MordecaiEst. 7. 10. 10. That Esther by her
Intercession to the King in the behalf of her self and her people, obtained her request, and they the people that were designed to death became the destroy∣ers of their enemies, so that the Church of God was not only preserved from the cruelty of their enemies, but was greatly advanced to their great joy, rejoycing, and thanks-giving, to the praise and glory of God; All which is left to the memory of all ages upon sacred record; Such is the power and wisedom of God so ordering every thing by his providence to his own glory and his peoples good. Take into your consideration the many providences for preservation to David▪ whom God purposed to advance to the hrone of Israel: what straits and difficulties he was often brought into by by designs of secret enemies, treacheries, revolting of friends, and the malice of Saul and his flatterers, daily pursuing his life, with a great and resolute army, all made frustrate by pro∣vidence, that the Decree of God prophesied by Iacob, might in him be accom∣plished, That a Scepter should not depart from Iudah, nor a Law-giver from be∣tween his seet until Shiloh comeGen. 49. 10., which was spoken of David and in him full∣filledIsa. 11. 1., the particulars would be too long to instance them; it may be I shall touch some of them in another place afterward, and leave the whole story to the Reader to contemplate. Something I might say of many particulars and clear providence, observa∣ble of late daies in ordering things, Actions, and Instruments, leading Oliver our present Lord Protector to the place, office, and dignity in which he now ruleth, with the Honourable High Court of Parliament, for whom I pray, and of whom I intend to say something more in the proper place afterward, in the mean time we have I hope said enough to prove that God and God a∣lone pulleth down Kings and setteth up Kings; That so we may acknowledge that every mercy and every judgement is from God, ordered by him, and is not from men, whatsoever their designs are, or whatsoever they intend or aim at as their end, for all men good and bad are but Instruments in Gods hand, secondary causes, and can do nothing but what God by Providence leads them to do, or permits to be done to effect his own purpose and secret decre, ordering all and every Action thereunto. It is true, that a merciful man doth good, and a good man sheweth mercy, but a good mans goodnesse is not his own, he hath received it from God who is the fountain of all good, nor can a good man distribute good to another but as he is guided by God, he is but the Instrument in Gods hand, Every good and perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of LightsIam. 1. 17.: A man may be able to do good to this or that man, yet he may sometimes want will to do it, if he have a will it is from God, where, how, or to whom he shall do that good; or if a good man have a will and intention to do good to this or that man, his intentions may be crossed that he cannot do it, or if he be not crossed in his intentions, yet the good he doth may turn to the hur of him that receives it, except God blesse and prosper it, so that all good and every mercy to any man, let the Instrument be what it will it is from God: God gave Ioseph favour with the Keeper of the prisonGen. 39, 21. and God ex∣tended mercy to his people in the sight of the Kings of PersiaEzr. 9. 9., all is from God; Men are but Gods Instruments, therefore Iacob praieth to God that God would give his Sons favour with the men they had to do withGen. 43. 14. And as it is in mercies, so it is in judgements and afflictions, all is from
God, men are his Instruments, secondary causes; It is true that wicked men devise and imagine mischief continually, and plot against the righteous, to afflict and to molest them, although the wickednesse which they plot is their own; And they think they have power to act accordingly, they never want∣ing will to do it, yet they are crossed by providence in acting what they in∣tend: And often yea alwaies (to the Elect of God) the evil they think to do turns to the good of them against whom it is done; as the bufferings from Satan did to Paul, it was advantage to him, for if wicked men could act answerable to their wils and intentions, neither righteousnesse nor holinesse should be amongst men▪ not the man on earth that should practise either, but they are in Gods hand, his Instruments, to do his pleasure, and no more, neither wicked men nor Saan himself cannot do, as shall be shewed afterward. The want of due and serious consideration of this truth and submission to it, causeth much discontent and murmuring among men, for in our afflcti∣ons we are ready to fly in the face of men, meer instruments, secondary cau∣ses, and as the Prophet complains, We turn not to God that smiteth us, nor seek to the Lord of hostsIsa. 9. 14.; We are like the dog that bites the stone that is cast at him, but looks not at the hand that cast it; We are sensible of the rod that whips us, but take no notice of the hand that holds it; We complain of men and things, Accidents and Causes, and it is likely not without cause, but God the cause of all causes (except sin) we consider not, who saith of him∣self, I the Lord do all things, I create the light and make darknesse, I make peace and create evilIsa. 45. 7.: God mingleth a perverse spirit in the midst of counsellIsa. 19. 14, he leadeth away Counsellors spoiled, and maketh Judges foolsIob 12. 17; God stirred up Hadad and Rezon to be adversaries to Solomon1 King. 11. 14, 23., and they did much mischief in Israel all Solomons daies? Shall there be evil in the City (saith the Lord) and I the Lord have not done itAm. 3. 6.? that is, evil of affliction, punishment, not the evil of sin, for that is the procuring cause of all punishment, as we shall shew in the pro∣per place; All that I now drive at, is but to prove, that all secondary causes, men or things, can do nothing of themselves either to misery or to happiness; But that all mercies and all judgements, are of God, from him, and by him, he disappointeth the devises of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise. This I say is the Soveraignty of God the Creator over all things, go∣verning the world by his wise and secret providence; And it doth above all things declare the glory, omnipotency, and incomprehensible wisedom of God, working in and by all things, after the counsell of his own will; That all things though in motion and use, never so contrary one to another, and in their nature and ends destructive one to another, yet all and every thing in most harmonious union, work together in one consent to effect and accom∣plish whatever God hath in his secret counsel determined, yea, by the worst of Instruments, to do glorious things, bringing good out of their evil, and work deliverance to his Church by the, Enemies Actions, and destroy his Enemies by their own counsels, causing the wisedom of the wise to perish, and to hide uuderstanding from the prudentIsa. 29. 14., When he giveth quietnesse who can make trou∣ble? and when he hideth his face who can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation or against a man onlyJob 34. 29.. Thus much shall serve for foundation or groundwork of our intended dis∣course, from whence we may gather some inferences, and therein take a view
of some late and remarkable Providences in these our daies, ordering Coun∣sels Actions and Things contrary to mens designs and endeavours, and work∣ing all things after the counsell of his own will, pulling down and setting up whom he pleaseth for the accomplishment of his own secret purpose, first one, and then others, changing times and seasons, men and counsels, governments and things: From whence I inferre, First, That all mercies are from God, and are given in to a Nation or peo∣ple of Gods free love, not of any desert, merit, or by any procurement of men. Secondly, That all judgements and afflictions are from God only, and are the just recompence for sin, procured by our selves, men or things afflicting, being but secondary causes, instruments in Gods hand. That the evil designs of men, their wicked counsels, aims and ends, are all ordered by providence, and turned to their own ruine. Fourthly, That God in his secret counsel hath set a time when he will give in mercies to a Nation, and when he will inflict judgements, and hath also appointed the means, and upon whom it shall be, what it shall be, and how much it shall be, and that those times altogether unknown to men Fifthly, Although God have set the time for the one and for the other, which shall certainly be accomplished in its time, according to Gods good pleasure, yet men are to be diligent in the use of all lawful means for the ob∣taining of the one, and for the avoiding of the other. Sixthly, That when God hath effected and done his will in any thing vi∣sibly made known to us by the work of his providence; We are not to mur∣mure nor repine though it be in any thing contrary to our expectation or de∣sire, or though it be to our great affliction, but to submit to it willingly, only by praier to seek unto God, and patiently wait his time and means for deli∣verance. For the first, That all mercies are from God, and are given in to a people or nation, of Gods free love, not of any desert, merit, or by any procurement of men; This inference is very clear, and warranted by sacred Scriptures, whether spiritual mercies or temporal mercies. First, All spiritual mercies are of Gods free love, we neither deserve, nor can by any means of our own procure the least spirituall mercy; We are all by Adams fall alienated from God, and are become his enemiesCol. 1. 21. Rom. 5. , We are born heirs of wrathEph. 2. 3, and there is nothing in us that can reconcile us to God, nor any way appease his wrath against us, therefore whatever the mercy be that we enjoy it is of Gods free-love; Any punishment lesse then hell fire is a mer∣cy from God which we cannot deserve: God indeed made man righteous and upright, but men have sought out many inventionsEcc. 7. 29.; Men can pervert their own waies, and make themselves miserable, but no way help themselves out of misery; But God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, &c. Joh. 3. 19. So loved, that is, he loved beyond what can be expressed, He gave his only begotten Son, it was a free gift, free love, in the full dimensions, uncon∣ceivable and incomprehensible, He sent his Son made of a woman and made un∣der the Law to redeem us, that we might receive the Adoption of SonsGal. 4. 4, 5., yea, Christ gave himself to redeem us from our iniquityTit. 2. 14. Gal. 3. 13.; We are not redeemed by corruptible things, but with the precious bloud of Christ1 Pet. 1. , if all the Angels in heaven should give themselves to die for the sin of one man, it could not
redeem him; All Angels and Men joyned together cannot procure the expi∣ation of one sin, therefore all is of Gods free love; but that God should give his Son Jesus Christ into the world to take our nature, our flesh, and for us to undergo reproach and shame, and sorrow of soul, and at the last lay down his life for us, that we by his death might have life; This is a love not to be expressed. Secondly, All temporal mercies are of Gods free-love, No man hath by right nor desert the least claim to any good thing, but as it is the free-gift of God, every mercy to a Nation, to a Family, or to a particular man is the free-gift of God: It is Gods free love and mercy that the heavens are not made Iron and the Earth brasse, and that our fruitful Land is not turned into a barren wildernesse, that the fruits of the earth are not parched away by droughts, nor destroied by Inundations, nor an Enemy let in upon us to devour and consume all our labours; It is Gods free mercy to man to give wine to chear the heart, and bread to strengthen him: And that he giveth us rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and glad∣nesse, a mercy that we of Gods free mercy enjoy at this day beyond imagina∣tion; And it is free mercy that God doth not suddenly smite us for our un∣thankfulnesse under such enjoyments, and for the murmurings of men for such a blessing; It was Gods free-love to his Church to put into the heart of Henry the 8. to cast off the Popes Supremacy, let the cause or end be what it will; It was from God the earnest of future deliverance from the bon∣dage of spirituall Babylon: It was Gods free-love to preserve Q. Elizabeth from the rage and bloudy plots of an Antichristian brood, that she might be instrumental to a Gospel-Reformation, carried on by her with much pie∣ty, although not perfected: It was Gods free-love to this Nation to scatter the Spanish Armado in 88. And to defeat the Papists bloudy design in their hellish plot of the Powder-Treason in 1604. And it was free mercy from God to withhold the destroying plague of pestilence from this City of Lon∣don, amidst the many great distractions wherewith he had afflicted us; this sinfull City which deserves nothing from God but wrath and judgements, yet God hath long spared it, when the plague hath been sore in other coun∣treys, and in divers places of this Nation; It was doubtlesse free-mercy from God that God gave us a Parliament in 1640. and the fault was in men that it was not for happinesse to posterity: It was free mercy from God that we were victorious over the power of a late Royall Army, and that we were not given as a prey into their hands, and it was no lesse free mercy to Eng∣land, that we had victory over he insulting people of the Netherlands; as also to order things by his wise providence, to compose things so as new to settle a peace between the two Common-wealths, which I pray may be lasting to Gods glory: It was the Lord that was on our side when men rose up against us, else they would have swallowed us up quick: The snare is broken and we are es∣caped. And truly (whatsoever some men think) it was a great and free mercy from God that our everlasting Parliament was dissolved, who had a price put in their hand, but they neglected it though they sate full twelve years: Self-seeking, covetousnesse, and private interest blasted the good fruit we ex∣pected; at the first we made them demy-gods, but God hath shewed us they were but men: They indeed took off an oppressor, but they gave life to op∣pression,
and brought a free people into hard bondage: The house of Israel was Gods Vineyard, and the men of Judah his pleasant plants, Whence God looked for judgement but behold oppression, for righteousnesse but behold a cryIsa. 5. 7.; Religion and policy were with many but one and the same thing, We fasted for strife and debate, and smote with the hand of wickednesse, but did not loose the bands of wickednesse, to undoe the heavy burthens and let the oppressed go freeIsa. 58. 4, 6: Providence dissolved that Parliament not yet that I know lamented by any: And truly I conceive it was no lesse mercy from God that the suc∣ceeding Parliament was dissolved too, Many members therein having a de∣sign to destroy our Laws and Religion, to cut off the head of the two great Ordinances of God, Magistracy and Ministery, at one blow, and so set open a floud-gate for loose licentious liberty to break in upon us to our confusion, where then should we have found the true liberty and priviledge of the peo∣ple so much talked of, while we were under the oppression of an arbitrary power? blessed be that providence that hath prevented those designs, and freed us from that yoke, giving us comfort in hopes of a setled peace and holy Re∣formation, with the restoring us again to our Laws and true priviledges, By that Illustrions and Noble Champion OLIVER Lord Protector of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, &e. whom Providence hath made instrumental to hinder destruction to the Nation, and provide that our Teachers are not dri∣ven into corners, as the Lord hath promised they shall not beIsa. 30. 20.. Let no man mistake me to think that I am an enemy to Parliaments, I am not God knows it, but I am a lover and honourer of Parliaments, and shall ever, as my own life, and the publike safety, But I hate the sins of Parlia∣ments, covetousnesse, self-seeking, oppression, schisms, divisions, factions and private interest, these God hates, and I cannot nor will love what God abhors though I be hated for it: I do with much thankfulnesse acknowledge it as a free mercy from God that we have this present Parliament, My Praier is, that God will make them blessings to lasting posterities; And surely it is free-love and mercy from God in setting up that authority and single person which hath called this Parliament; And as great a mercy that Providence discovered that Plot and murtherous design hatched in France and to be ex∣ecuted upon his Person in England: The same mercy and free-love was ex∣tended to this Nation for his Highnesse late escape from the danger of his pre∣sumptuous attempt in a recreation not becoming his dignity, I pray it may be a monition to him not again to go out of his place and rank: Providence having called him to the care of the greatest affairs conerning the Church of God in general, and the welfare of the people of these three Nations, A heavy burthen! and requires the whole strength of body and minde; And above all these mercies we must not forget to acknowledge it a mercy from God that we at this day do enjoy the Ordinances of God, notwithstanding the mighty oppositions both on the left hand and on the right hand, Super∣stition on one side and imprudent zeal on the other, we have the word of Truth held out to us, and may enjoy every Ordinance in its purity if we will, or if we were not wanton; for men may be as holy as they will or can be, there is no restraint in that, nor persecution for it: I wish we did not too much counive at grosse apparent heresie and blasphemy, For though the truth should be free heresie should have a bar, God blames the Church of Perga∣mus and the Church of Thyatira, for suffering them them that held the do∣ctrine
of Balaam: and for suffering her that called her self a Prophetesse, to teach and seduceRev. 2. 14. 20, &c. Dead flies (saith Solomon) cause the Ointment of the Apothecary, to send forth a stinking savourEcc. 10. 1, and corrupt doctrines suffered are dishonour to the Truth. We come to the second Inference, and that is, That all Judgements and Afflictions are from God only, and are the just recompence for sinne, procu∣red by our selves, men or things afflicting, being but secondary causes, instru∣ments in Gods hand: This is very fully proved in the whole Book of God, That all Iudgements and Afflictions are from God; is sufficiently proved in our foregoing discourse; And that they are the just recompence of sinne is as clear, for God never punished but for sin, and if there had been no sin there should never have been any punishments, The Soul that sinneth shall dieEzek. 18. 12.: The old world was destroyed by a deluge, and why? for Sinne, God saw that the wickednesse of man was great upon the earthGen. 6. 5. &c. And for sinne Sodom and Go∣morrha was destroied by fire from heaven: Nadah and Abihu for their sinne were devoured by fire, and that (for ought we know) for a sinne of Igno∣ranceLev. 10. 1, 2: The wages of sinne is deathRo. 6. 23.; What else is warre, pestilence and fa∣mine but the recompence of sin? and so procured by by our selves: All af∣flictions on the body, in the minde, on the estate, or in our respective rela∣tions are just recompence for our sinnes from the hand of GodLev. 26. Deut. 28.; There hath been no alteration, no overturnings, iudgements and misery but for sin, and is all procured by our selves: We may say of England as Daniel said of Israel when they were under the captivity of Chaldea, To us belongeth confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, to our Fathers, and to all the people because of our transgressionsDan. 9. 8: And as Ezra, That God hath punished us lesse then our deser∣vingsEzr. 9. 13: And as Jeremy, It is of the Lords mercy we are not consumedLam. 3. 22: Our elder Sister is Samaria, and our younger Sister is Sodom, we have justifiedour Sisters in all the abominations which we have doneEze. 16. 46, 51,: What shall we say to the pride of Eng∣land even in the day of her calamity? Oh the pride of apparel, the pride of place, of gifts, of blessings received, yea of graces and of our supposed or flattered humility! What shall we say to the idlenesse and fulnesse of bread? the drunkennesse, swearing, forswearing, and the abominable blasphemies, that England is guilty of? And what shall we say of the murders, adulteries, mighty oppressions, self-love, and wicked Sorcery that is in England? the dishonouring of the Lords day, contempt of Gods worship and generall neg∣lect of all duties of the first and second Table? what lukewarmnesse is there in Religion? more then ever was in Laodicea, What hot contentions about fancies and ceremonies, and coldnesse to the power of holinesse? What un∣thankfulnesse under the enjoyment of multitude of mercies? What security and self-promising of happy condition? as if no evil could befall them, like the men of Laish that dwelt carelesly, and there was no Magistrate in the Land that might put them shame in any thingJud. 18. 7: Although our professed and common Enemy is vigilant, watching and seeking all advantages against us, if God should (as they hope) give us into their hand, were it not just with God? And were it not by our own procurements, may not God say to us as to Israel, Thou hast destroyed thy self, but in me is thy helpHos. 13. 9. Give me leave ye people of England, my Brethren, to put you in remem∣brance of one sin more; And it is not a little one of which I fear many thousands are guilty more or lesse; You made a Solemn Covenant, with your
hands lift up to the most High God, in the time of your distresse, for Re∣formation and defence of Religion, as should be agreeable to the Word of God (not the established Discipline in Scotland nor England, but) for the setling one Discipline in the three Nations, and that is no lesse then the com∣mand of God, Ye shall have one Ordinance both for the stranger and for him that is born in the LandLev. 9. 14; I fear we are so far short of performing what we covenant∣ed in this particular, that we (or very many) have purposely acted the quite contrary: We covenanted against Popery and Prelacy, which is (God be blessed) in a great measure cast off; But heresie, schism, blasphemy and pro∣phanesse are encreased, which we also covenanted to extirpate; We covenan∣ted to preserve Priviledges of Parliament and liberty of the people, but where are they? if lost, who lost them? the power of the Enemy could not take them from us; but lost they are, or in great measure lost: I will not dispute whether a Parliament or an Army lost them, or took them from us, for it was neither; It was self-seeking that lost all, Now hopeful by providence to be again restored by his Highnesse, stirred up by Providence (I hope with confi∣dence) to be Englands deliverer: As to that part of the Covenant that con∣cerned the late King, And that which concerned the Union of the three Na∣tions, I conceive them to be lesse substantiall and more conditional; condi∣tions and circumstances not well observed, makes the forfeiture on that side; Providence I trust will put us into a better Union then we intended or could then think of, God worketh all things after the counsell of his own will; I charge no particular person, nor blame any more then my self, I know my own heart is deceitful to my self, I cannot say so much of any other mans. All my aim and desire is, as to my self so to all others, to stir them up to considerate remembrance, that we are yet under such a Covenant, and that I and every one may examine whether we have done our duty or not, and what we finde to be wanting in us let us in the strength of the Almighty endeavour to make up by humbling our souls before God whom we have of∣fended; For the Covenant was lawfull or it was unlawfull; if lawfull, we have provoked the high God by our sleighting of it; if unlawfull, we have dishonoured God in swearing before him to that which he would not own; so there is great cause and good ground why we should be deeply humbled in the presence of God: Every particular person covenanted to reform himself, and to endeavour Reformation in others, and each one to endeavour to go before another in example of real Reformation: if we have done what we were able in this particular, we have done well: if not, sinne lieth at our door, and judgement will surely enter into our houses; for as God is true and just, he will avenge the quarrell of his CovenantLev. 26. 25.; Let no man great or small pro∣mise to himself safety, nor think it is fogotten by God, though it be cast off by men; Joshua and the Princes of Israel made a Covenant with the Gibeo∣nites, with whom they might not make Covenants, but had commission to slay them, yet Saul four hundred years after brake that Covenant, And for the breach of that Covenant God brought a famine three years year after year in the time of David, until execution was done upon Sauls house2 Sam. 21. 1.; God takes notice of all our doings, but especially of our keeping or breaking of Covenants; Because God is as it were called from his place to come to wit∣nesse our sincerity and uprightnesse, the breach whereof God calleth the pol∣lution of his NameIer. 34. 16., and for it threatneth Israel to destroy them by the
sword of an enemy,See vers. 17. 20. and by the pestilence, And to remove them into all Kingdoms captives, which in the time appointed was made good; Gods for∣bearance is no acquittance, though men foolishly imagine it so. Because sentence is not speedily executed against an evil work, therefore the hearts of the Sons of men is set in them to do evilEcc. 8. 11: Though God suffers for a time, yet all that time Providence ordereth Actions and Things, for safety to some, and for destruction to others, And this brings us to the third Inference. The third Inference is, That the evil designs of men, their wicked coun∣sels, their aims and ends are all ordered by providence, and turned contrary to their designs to be their own ruine; This truth is obvious, it is proved by Scripture and by common and daily experience. The Lord (saith the Psalmist) is known by his judgements which he executeth, the wicked is snared by the work of his own handPs. 6. 16.: This is one of Gods Judgements upon wicked men and wicked counsels, they shall be snared by their own works: He taketh the wicked in their own craftinesse, and the counsell of the froward is carried ead∣longIo 5. 13, yea, his own counsel shall cast him downIo 18. 7.: Thus Haman the Agagite was snared in his own wicked devises, and Ahitophels own counsell became his ruine: You know how it fared with Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, and with Jeroboam the Son of Nebat: Rehoboam forsook the counsell of the old men that were counsellors to his Father, and followed the counsell of young men like himself; The people come unto him for ease of their heavy burthens which Solomon his Father had laid upon them; He by his counsell gives them a very rough Answer, and tels them his father chastised them with whips, but he would chastise them with scorpions, He would adde more to their burthens, heavy oppression, and his finger should be thicker then his Fathers loins1 Kin. 12 10, 11., but God turned his own aim and all his counsell to his losse; Ten Tribes revolted from him, and from his Family for ever, and made Jeroboam their King. Jeroboam he fearing lest the people of Israel should return again to Reho∣boam, if they should go up to Jerusalem to offer Sacrifice, therefore to esta∣blish himself in the Kingdom he took counsel, and made two Altars and two Calves of gold, pretending it was too far a journey for the people to go up to Jerusalem,1 King. 12. 28, 29. and he set one in Bethel and the other in Dan, and he made of the lowest and basest of the people, to be Priests in the high places: Now this wicked design by which he thought to establish himself, became his ruine1 Kin. 13 34. and 1 King. 14 10, 11.: See the like by the experiences of our time; King James Fa∣ther to our late King, not thankful for Gods mercies to him, bringing him from a mean Kingdom to a rich and plentifull Nation flowing with milk and honey, grew wanton, and like Jeshurn kicked, he came to strong Cities, a fat Land, houses filled with goods, Wells digged, Vineyards, Olive-yards, Fruits, &c as is expressed by Nehemiah, Ch. 9. 25. but he like Israel rebelled against his God, and cast his Law behinde his back, and persecuted the Prophets and Mi∣nisters that testified against him, exalting himself and prerogative to make his Son and Family like Nimrod; What strange wickednesse did he act in his private chamber? and openly gave away the lawful wives of men to o∣thers, viz. the Lady Rich to the Lord Mount-joy, the Countesse of Essex to Carre, &c. Did he not design to bring the people of this Nation under, by laying heavy burdens upon their shoulders? What else was Loan-money, il∣legal Fines for Buildings, and his fooling of Parliaments? endeavouring
to make them uselesse and himself a great Monarch, preparing for a greater work which his Son was to act; which design our late King endeavoured to exalt, and in pursuance thereof followed the footsteps of his Father (not in personal sins, but) in publike grievances: Like Rehoboam to make one of his fingers heavier then his Fathers loins; And like Jeroboam to set up Calves in Bethel, and in Dan, to ensnare the people, to advance prerogative: Did not he endeavour by his Prelats, or his Prelats by him, to bring in a compli∣ance or neer Union between England and Rome? and to effect their design they endeavoured to weaken the Nations of able religious men, and of Arms, why else was Rochel betraied under pretence of releeving it, and many able and godly men slaughtered? Why else was that mock-voyage to Cadis? why else were our honourable Parliaments disgraced? called only of necessity for money sake, but not suffered to reform any evil, nor to put them to any shame which were the Actors of abominable wickednesse, but honourable members of Parliamennt for such things were imprisoned, where many died, others were banisht their houses into remote Countreys Prisoners and Exiles▪ &c. And for the advance of prerogative, new waies were invented to get money without Parliaments or Law; Loan-money, Knighthood-money, Ship-mo∣ney, Compositions for Cottages, Compositions for New Buildings, Moneys for Forrest Lands, Woods, Timber, &c. Monopolies upon all our necessary commodities, Taxes upon Customs, and gun-powder ingrossed and kept from the Subject, their Arms seized, Companies of Souldiers were billeted in most Market-Towns of the Nation, and lest that should be too little to effect the Tyrannical design, the Duke and his plotrers had provided to have 600 Flanders Horse brought into England, with Swisser Riders; No man is so silly I think as to ask why all this was done, for the reason is plain to every reasonable man. Nor was this all, for all zealous and godly Ministers were weeded out of every Town and Countrey; Bishop Wren can easily name you some scores if not hundreds that he drove from their Livings and Habitations; besides them he procured to be imprisoned and banisht. Arminianism was advan∣ced and they were made Bishops that defended it; Lectures were put down, Afternoon Sermons on the Lords Day were forbidden, Books were published to give way to prophane the Lords Day by sports and pastimes; these Books were commanded to be read in all Churches to ingratiate the multitude, and such Ministers as refused to reade these Books were suspended, the morality of the Sabbath was denied, preached against, Sunday called no Sabbath, the name Minister was changed to Priest, the Table to an Altar, on which Basons and Tapers were set, there was very little wanting to plain Popery but the name; Thus far the design was carried on smoothly. Scotland only stood in the way as some rub that must be removed, and to that end a Liturgy was sent down to them which they would not swallow; Therefore they must be forced, an Army to that purpose was prepared; The Scots make opposition, money grew wanting to manage that design to leavy more forces; A Parliament was called to raise money, which refusing to give were quickly dissolved: The Scots grew enraged, had encouragements, make invasion, which caused another Parliament to be called, That Parliament would give no money except they might be established to sit till they had re∣formed abuses and things; They were established by an Act to sit until
both Houses consented to dissolve, and also two Acts of grace was passed, viz. to take away the High-Commission and Star-Chamber; All this to please the people that they might assist in their further design of war, as short∣ly after appeared, wherein providence ordered their designs, counsels, aims, and ends to Gods glory and to their own ruine. Here take speciall notice of six severall peeces of providence; 1. That the great pressures, innovations, and the designs apparent of bringing on greater oppression even to a perpetual slavery, caused great fears in the people, which could not be secured but by an established Parliament. 2. That providence infatuated the late King and his counsell in passing an Act of unlimited time for establishment of that Parliament, which was the giving away of one chief part of prerogative, by which he might else have dissolved that Parliament after some years, and saved his head; Esau sold his birthright but he design∣ed to have the blessing, Providence had infatuated him that he considered not that the blessing was annexed to the birthright: Our late King sold that part of his exercised prerogative, with design to get it double, not only to be King still but Tyrant too, How Providence hath ordered those designs we know. Thirdly, That after the signing of the Act aforesaid the Soveraign Authority was in the Parliament, which the late King by a wicked Councel and lying Clergy was seduced to take Arms against, as Ahab was by his Councell and 400. lying Prophets, to go up to Ramoth-Gilead to his own ruine, and the ruine of his Family. Fourthly, That his heart was hardened and the hearts of his Councel, and would not hearken to any offer of peace or reconciliation, though many addresses were made to him from time to time by the whole house unanimously, but his heart like Pharaohs was hard, and the time of his peace was hid from him, until it was too late, when he desired it and might not have it. Fifthly, That Providence should make use of the Earl of Essex to be the Instrument to drive the late Kings wife from him, whose Wife the late Kings Father gave to another man. Sixthly, That the late King by his refusal of all offers of reconciliation, and his delaies, en∣treaties, providence over-ordering all things against his designs, became his irrecoverable ruine; of whom we may say as Sir Walter Rawleigh saith of Darius, He was infatuated in all his Counsels and undertakings against Alexander, ever following the worst counsell, and using the unsafest means to preserve himself, which sheweth plainly that God had purposed his de∣struction and the losse of his Kingdoms; And that the disappointing him and his Counsell in all their Designs, and overthrowing their bloudy and cru∣ell Armies was the immediate work of providence for the accomplishing of the secret purpose of God; If we continue not to imitate and act the same sins of oppression and innovation, or the like, as Jehu did: If so we do, Iehu's reward will be given, for our God is an unchangeable God; What he hath done to others before us, he will as surely do still, and for ever where the like sins are acted; God sometimes gives a King in is anger, and takes him away in his wrath, Hos. 13. 11. They, whether King, Parliament, or people, that reject the Word of the Lord, the Lord will reject them, 1 Sam. 15. 23. Thus God did by Saul, and thus he did by Rehoboam; for in that the ten Tribes revolted, God himself testifieth and saith, This thing is done by me, 1 Kin. 12. 24. Who is he (saith the Prephet in the name of the Church) that saith it cometh to passe when God commandeth it not, Lam. 3. 37.
Many other observable providences have offered the due consideration of them to us; which I may not passe by with silence among many that have attended our late Parliaments both in their sitting and in their dissolution; I shall minde you of these few, the first shall be this, That when things were not likely to succeed according to the Parliaments design, or a great part in Parliament, They devised to publish an Ordinance called the Self-denying Ordinance, thereby calling all the members of both Houses from all offices and military affairs, here was a specious pretence, but by them that made it it was not intended to be observed; for who left any place of profit to serve the publike? It is true, so far as the present design reached it took and made a great and a good change in the Army, but providence ordered that Ordinance and that change, pulling down and setting up, to frustrate the future design of them that made it: Providence by that Ordinance took off the Right Honourable his Excellency the Earl of Essex from being General, when he had gone with courage and fidelity as far in that work as his principles could carry him, pro∣vidence made him instrumental to lay the foundation of that work, Provi∣dence also by that Ordinance and that change Ordered, That the Right Ho∣nourable and Noble Sir Thomas Fairfax should be set up in his room, to raise the structure of that work and building upon the fonndation Essex had laid, as fitter to effect Gods further purpose, who built as far as his principle could carry him, when providence had used Essex as far as God had purpose to use him in that work: Providence also in Sir Thomas Fairfax his time put a per∣verse spirit amidst the Members of Parliament, so as the contest was very great, grew into factions and interests, some designing the life of him whom others designed to die, so as the power of the Sword was called to end the controversie, and all to the accomplishment of Gods will, his Excellency the Lord Fairfax having a farre larger Commission then ever the Parliament gave before, having in his hand power, the use of the whole Militia, Castles, Forts, Towns, &c, Providence ordered upon some scruple in his Excellency that he voluntarily and resolvedly laid down his Commission, when earnestly sollicited both by Parliament and by the then Leutenant General Cromwell to hold it up; And providence still ordering things to effect the purpose of God, Ordered that the then Lieutenant Generall should have the same Com∣mission, or larger, without limit, to be Captain Generall of all Forces by Sea and Land, Castles, Forts, &c. consequently of all the whole Militia; This was providence, That he might lay on the topstone of the structure and finish the work so farre: And as Providence had stirred him up as a valiant Champion, so next as a faithful Patriot to his Countrey to dissolve a sit still Parliament, to whom God had given all opportunities to do their Nation good, but they would not, nor could give themselves to consider what was their duty to act for their private Interests, some levelling the Earth for their own design, others building of Castles in the Air for a Fifth Monarchy, an unsafe practice and very unsound doctrine, unwarrantable to be maintained in bloud, If these be not clear providences what shall we call Providence? These things we have seen gradually acted and ordered by a secret and wise providence, turning the design of the Parliament in their Self-denying Ordi∣nance, and the Powers and Commissins thereupon granted, to their dissolu∣tion, which they aimed should have been the means to have perpetuated their sitting.
These things premised, I shall modesty offer six Queries to any impartiall man upright and unbyast in this case. First, Whether it was not of providence that the Parliament gave to his Excellency the Lord Cromwell that unlimited power for the safety of the Nation, as it was of providence that the Late King and his Councel past an Act of unlimited time for the Parliament to sit, to his own ruine and casting off his posterity? 1. Whether his Excellency were not bound in conscience for publike safety, being a publike person in trust, to make use of the one, as well as the Parliament made use of the other; and by that authority to dissolve an undoing Parliament, as well as to sup∣presse a destroying Enemy, both conducing to publike safety? Thirdly, whe∣ther the dissolving of that Parliament were any greater breach of priviledge then the taking out of one half of the members by force, of which he had before of late a President in the time of the Lord Fairfax, and well approved of by the dissolved Parliament. Fourthly, whether as Providence served our necessity by the late Kings Act for the Parliaments sitting for a long time, It did not (after severall admonitions) as much serve our neces∣sity, after their too long fitting, to dissolve that Parliament by the power of their own Commission? Fifthly, whether it were not evidently a provi∣dence, That the succeeding Parliament (not appointed by his Excellency, but) chosen by the Souldiery, Many of them promoting (except in giving away the publike treasure) the like destructive waies, to the taking away our Fundamental Laws, and bringing in (as it were) another Gospel, pul∣ling down and overthrowing all, but set up nothing except a floudgate to confusion, should of themselves, that is, the major part, to prevent those (almost executed) designs, dissolve that Parliament, and resign their autho∣rity into his Excellencies hand? Sixthly, whether providence did not won∣derfully order things in that time of distraction, discontent, and division among the people at home, and a bloudy warre abroad: That his Excellen∣cy calling of a Councel, seeking God by praier and fasting, All his Councel and all other persons of quality whom it concerned to be acquainted with the thing, should most harmoniously agree, and resolve to meet one way as to the government of the three Nations; And with one consent publikely to entitle him (then his Excellency) to be Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and of all the dominions and territories thereunto belonging? Let me say again with the Prophet, Who is he that saith it cometh to passe when the Lord commandeth it not? Lam. 3. 37. These things sufficiently prove the Inference, That the evil designs of men are ordered by Providence to their own pre∣judice. The next and fourth Inference is, That God in his secret counsell hath set a time when he will give in mercies to a Nation, and when he will inflict judgements, and hath also appointed the means; And upon whom it shall be, what it shall be, and how much it shall be; And these times are altoge∣ther unknown unto men. That this is a truth, that God hath appointed a set time for mercies and for judgements, the holy Ghost witnesseth, Eccl. 3. 1. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven: If there be a time to every pur∣pose then nothing is contingent, if to every purpose then it must needs be appointed by God, none but God knows all times and purposes, therefore none but God can appoint times and seasons; This is one part of Gods So∣veraignty,
as he is Governour of the world; Men sometimes may appoint times and never intend to keep them, and they may sometimes appoint times to some purpose which they are not able to perform, or sometimes they may appoint times, and their minde changeth, they are altered from what they intended; But God is just and intendeth to do all that he saies and ap∣points; And he is infinite, can do whatsoever he will, nothing can disable him; And he is unchangeable, In him is no shadow of change, whatever he hath appointed shall surely be done in its time: Is there not (saith Job) au appointed time to man on the Earth? Job 7. 1. as much as to say, there is an ap∣pointed time. You know God promised to give Abraham a Son, of whose seed the Savi∣our of the world should comeGen. 17. 19.: And God set a time when that mercy should be given, And at the set time Sarah conceived and bare IsaacGen. 21. 2: so God promised to give unto Abrahams seed the whole Land of Canaan; and he set the time when it should be made good, and that was from the time of the promise four hundred and thirty years, which was made good to a day, for saith the Prophet Moses, at the cud of 430 years,Act. 7. 17 even the self same day all the hosts of the Lord went out of EgyptExod. 12, 42.; The Prophet Isaiah prophesying of the encrease and glory of the Church, saith, The Lord shall hasten it in his timeIs 60. 22 God had set the time when it should be, the Psalmist speaking of the time of Gods shew∣ing mercy to Zion saith, The set time to favour her is comePsa. 102. 13.: Daniel spake of the appointed time when the Saints should possesse the KingdomDan. 7. 22: The very time was set for the coming of Christ in the flesh, When the fulnesse of time was come God sent forth his Son made of a woman,Gal. 4. 4. &c. And there is a time set and certain when he shall come the second time in gloryLuke 13. 33., but these times are altogether unknown to men. So for Judgements, God hath appointed and set the time when he will inflict them, whether on Nations, Families or persons: God himself witnesseth this Truth when he tels Abraham, The sins of the Amorites were not yet fullGen. 15. 16.: the time and measure of their iniquities was set, Israel had sinned against God a long season, in oppression, and in Sabbath-breaking, &c. but when the time was come and the measure of their iniquity made up, that they came to de∣spise his word, and to misuse his Prophets; there was no remedy, then God gives them into captivity2 Chr. 36. 16, 21.: Destruction was threatned to Palestine, and the time setIs. 14 31.; So for Babylons Judgements, the time was setIer. 51. 33; The devils have a time set, and they know it is set, but know not when it shall beMat. 8. 29.; Jehu had a set time for his Family to last, four generations, and it was fulfilled2 King. 10. 30. Hos. 1. 4. at that time. As there is a set time for mercies and for judgements known and appointed by God, so he hath appointed upon whom it shall be; He in his secret coun∣sell spareth one and punisheth another, as pleaseth him; He hath set his mark upon his as he did upon the house of the Israelites, that the destroying Angel might passe overEx. 12. 23, the destroier shall not touch one that hath the mark, Old, Young, Maids, Children and Women, that are markedEze. 9. 6.; but those that have not Gods mark of protection, them he separates every one to evilDeut. 29. 21.; So he hath appointed what it shall be, whether sword, famine, or pe∣stilence, or any other affliction, according to their sins; Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty men in the warsa 3. 25, this was a particular judgement threat∣ned for the pride of the women; Again, I will number to the sword, and ye shall
bow down to the slaughterIs. 65. 12, this was threatned for the hypocrisie of the people, and in more particular it was against Assyria, They shall waste Assyria by the swordMic. 7. 6.; So in particular the Lord called for a famine2 Kin. 8. 2., so the Lord by the Pro∣phet saith, I have sent among you the pestilence after the manner of EgyptAmos 4. 10.: this was a judgement among others for oppression and irreligious worship, also the grashopper and the palmerworm, to devour the fruit of the Land, He will likewise send harmfull beasts to destroy, as is threatned to the people, walk∣ing stubbornly against GodLev. 20. 22., he also threatneth to smite them with Consum∣pions, with burning Agues and Feavers, with blindenesse and with astonishment and other particular plaguesDeut. 28. 25, &c., and all these are appointed by God, this for one and that for another, as pleaseth him; This the Prophet Jeremy maketh clear and saith, Thus saith the Lord, Such as are for death to death, Such as are for the sword to the sword, Suchas are for famine to the famine, and such as are for the captivity to the captivityIer. 15. 2. & Ier. 44. 11., as God hath appointed to every one, so he commandeth to be done, and providence effecteth all. God hath also appointed how much it shall be, how long every judgement and affliction shall last, not oppressing men, Nimrods of the earth, nor Satan himself can punish or afflict, till God will have them afflict, nor can conti∣nue the affliction either to a Nation or to a man, a day longer then the time God hath set; You know David complained that the Plowers ploughed on his back, they made long furrows, but how long? till the time appointed by God, then the rigbteous Lord cuts the cords asunderPsa. 129. 3. 4; It is a metaphor taken from the Plowman, he holds the Plow, the Horses draw by cords or traces, and the Plow breaketh and teareth the ground, but when the cords are cut the horses may go, but the Plow stands still, it makes no more surrows; there would be no end of afflicting if the devils and wicked men were not limited; God saith to them as to the proud waves, Thus far you shall go and not a foot fur∣ther; God tels Abraham that his seed must be afflicted, and be strangers in a Land (or lands) that was not theirs; and God sets the time how long it should be; four hundred years is the set timeGen. 15. 13., this time of affliction began presently after the birth of Isaac, and was thirty years after the Promise made to Abraham before-mentioned, which Moses counting from the time of the first Promise, maketh four hundred and thirty years, Exod. 12. 41. The Captivity in Babylon was appointed, and the time set how long it should be threescore and ten yearsIe. 25. 12 2 Chro. 26. 21.; Satan was limited in all his temptations and afflictions upon Iob, he could not go one jot further then Gods appointmentsIob 1. 12.; The holy Ghost foretelleth the afflictions of the Church, but withall tels them, the time is set how long and what it shall be; Satan shall cast some of you into prison, how long? You shall have tribulation ten daiesRev. 2. 10, God had set the time, and when that time is out, neither devils nor men can afflict any longer, Pharaoh may pursue Israel with a mighty Army to his own destruction, but cannot hurt one of the people of Israel, when his Commission is outExo. 14. 8; So long as God would have Israel to be afflicted, every taskmaster in Egypt could make their lives miserable, but when the time appointed was expired, Pharaoh with all his host cannot continue it one day, not so much as a dog in all Egypt shall move his tongue at man nor beastEx. 21. 7.. But although God have set times to all purposes, and all are known to him, yet these are unknown to men; Israel although the time of their affliction and servitude was foretold,knew not the time of their deliverance till it came,
for they knew not from what time to begin their account of the four hundred years: so although Ieremy had foretold that Israel should be in captivity seven∣ty years, yet they knew not when those years were expired, because they were not sure whether they took the beginning at the first captivity, which was in the time of Iehojaki; or in the second, which was in the time of Jeconiah; or in the third, which was in the time of Zedekiah, when the Temple was burnt and wholly broken down; It is true, Daniel saith He understood by Books (that was by Jeremies Prophecy) that God would accomplish seventy years in the desolation of JerusalemDa. 9. 2., by which he knew the time was near, but though he was a Prophet of God, God had not revealed to him that it was expired, nor could he ascertain the time; Neither could Nehemiah nor Ezra till the very time was come; Nor could they say or imagine by what means their deliverance should come: but God who only is wise and faithfull in all his promises, keeps his time, and by providence ordereth the means to effect the thing promised, so it was in bringing back his people from theit captivity, which what done when they looked not for it, before they were aware; Hence it was that the Church in celebrating her praise for that deliverance, saith, When the Lord returned again the Captivity of Zion, we were like them in a dreamPs. 126. 1, the suddennesse of their deliverance was amazement to them, as if they had but dreamed it; The time of Christs coming in the flesh was foretold by Da∣niel and others of the Prophets; It was shewed to Daniel by the seventy weeksDan. 9. 24, 25., yet until the very time came none could tell or say that was the time; So the time of Christs second coming it is foretold, and signs given us of the time, yet no man, no, nor the Angels in heaven can tell the time when it shall be: not what day nor what ageMat. 24. 36.: We are therefr: commanded to watch, for saith our Saviour Christ, Ye know not when he will come, neither doth any man know who shall be smitten, and who shall escape in the time of any calamity, though it be certainly known and appointed by God; Christ telleth his Disciples, It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father hath put in his own pow∣erAct. 1. 6.; God hath set the time for the fall of Babylon, and he hath set the time for the conversion of the Jews, but the time nor means we cannot know till the accomplishment be: Hence I conceive Daniel is commanded to shut up the words, and to seal the Book even to the endDa. 12. 3, that is, shut or seal this Prophecy, for it is obscure, and long to the end, before it shall be accomplish∣ed: It is the saying of Irenius, That every Prophecy before it be accomplisht is as a riddle, but being once accomplished it is plainly understood; And though by faith we look upon all Prophecies to come as that which is truth, and that there is a certainty in them as if we now saw them fulfilled, yet at the time of their accomplishment they shall be much more glorious, and it is true that as Knowledge encreaseth, so men will be more studious in them, and in observing the several providences of God working and ordering secondary cau∣ses, as the means to accomplish them in the time appointed, but it cannot be known unto us as is proved. Then surely it must needs be unwarrantable boldnesse in any to take upon them to tell what God will do, and when he will do it, and will prescribe the means how it shall be done, as many do in these daies, who spare not to affirm, that Christ shall come to reign on the earth a thousand years, and the time when he shall come, and by what means that fifth Monarch shall be set up, and what Governours and Government shall be in the world till then, they
will tell us when the Jews shall be converted, and how; When Babylon shall fall, and by whom, and what means; But these things are secrets of Gods counsell, as I have shewed, things which he keeps to himself in his own pow∣er, and till the time of the accomplishment no man can know the certainty of them; To tell us of Revelations, Visions, Dreams, and new Lights, is nothing, but even as much as if they should say they dreamed, they were in a dream, for they are meer fantasies; I can say of these men no other then the Prophet Jeremy saith of the false Prophets of his time, which prophesied lies, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamedIer. 23. 25., God himself testifieth of such Pro∣phets, that He had not st them yet they ran, nor spoken to them yet they prophe∣fiedVer. 21.. It is good, that good men should search into all Truths, it is their duty, and compare Providences with Scipture, to finde out all truths: but good men (for so I judge of many of them, though seduced by a false spirit) to be too confident in things altogether doubtful is unwarrantable boldnesse, they should consider that there are many lying spirits gone out into the world, therefore Saint Iohn exhorts, that we beleeve not every spirit1 Ioh. 4. 1, And we are fore∣told, that in these latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to se∣ducing spirits and doctrins of devils1 Tim. 5. 1; And we know that Satan can transform him∣self into an Angel of light2 Cor. 11. 14.; Christ himself hath foretold us, that there shall arise false Christs and false Prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders, that if it were possible they should deceive the very ElectMat. 24. 24. vtr. 23., but he commands that we be∣leeve them notRev. 20. 7, and gives a memorandum with an Ecce, Behold, I have told you before; And we know, that these are the times wherein the devil is let loose to deceive the Nations because we see the Nations are deceived, and he hath great wrath becse he knoweth that he hath but a short timeRev. 12. 12.: The Apostle Peter writing to beleevers saith, there were false Prophets among the people, and tels them, there shall be False Teachers among them, who shall privily bring in damnable heresies, and shall bring upon themselves swift damnation1 Pet. 2. 1. These are those times foretold, but we will not see it, we will not know them, we presume to tell of times that shall be, but will not take notice of the times that be; This is the time of great triall, and yet in these times men will be most confident and secure, and take not notice that Satan hath deceived them, to be the fulfillers of the Prophecies of Christ, and of his Apostles, in their heresies and seducements, &c. There is a time to every purpose, but because men knowing it not, but misseth their time, their misery is great; They are snared with an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon ihem, as fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as birds that are caught in a snareEc 9. 12. These times, the times of this generation are not only trying times, but they are shaking times, God is now shaking the Nations and Kingdomes of the world, according to that Prophecy of Haggai, It is a little while and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the Sea, and the dry-land, and I will shake all NationsHag. 2. 6, 7.: God may be said to shake the Nations several waies, He shakes by his voiceIer. 25. 30. Psa. 68. 8., in thunder and lightning, as when the Law was given on Mount Sinai; And he shakes by his fearful and terrible judgements upon his enemies, casting down and overturning Monarchs and Kingdoms; And he shaketh by the power of the Gospel, as at Christs Birth a new Star appeared, and led to him, and at his death the earth shock, the graves opened, the Sun was darkened; And at the preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, Men,
Nations, and Kingdoms were shaken, turned and changed upside down. God hath of late shaken this Nation (as many other) by the sword; He is still shaking Nations, yea, all Nations by the sword of his indignation, rending, tearing, scattering, and overturning this or that Nation, this or that power; These are doubtlesse Gods refining times; Preparations for accom∣plishment of the glorious things to be done for his Church, which are pro∣mised; The downfal of Antichrist, Gog and Magog, and making the Ene∣mies of Christ to become his foostool. The calling of the scattered Jews, and bringing in the fulnesse of the Gentiles, when it shall be said, who are that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to their windowsIsa 60. 8.? And the gathering to∣gether of his people, that there shall be one Shepherd and one flockIoh. 10. 16., and that Satan shall be oden under our feetRom. 16. 20., all which in the times appointed shall be assuredly made good; Not by the shaking of the Nations by the sword, though God may use the Nations as instrumentally to break one ano∣ther in peeces, as a preparative thereunto, so far as pleaseth him: But the ac∣complishment thereof must be by the shaking of the Nations by the Word of God; which I conceive is meant by the Apostle, where he saith, yet once more will I shake, not the earth only, but also heavenHeb. 12. 26., signifying a spirituall sha∣king by the powerful preaching of the Gospel and work of Gods Spirit, to bring gathering the Church into one, subduing our lusts and carnality, mor∣tifying sin, and making us a reformed people, conformable to Christ, and that the Kingdom of Christ may be set up in our hearts, for which we are taught to pray; He that sate upon a white horseRev. 19. 11 and made warre, and on his head had many Crowns, and clothed in a vesture dipt in bloud, His Name is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. the Armies that followed him were in heaven, therefore spirituall, and the sword, with which he smiteth the Na∣tions, goeth out of his mouth; This is no materiall sword, but it is the word of God, the Sword of the Spirit: When he threatned the Church of Perga∣mus for suffering false doctrines among them, he tels them he will come and fight against them by the word of his mouhRev. 2. 16: That word of the Gospel which the wicked would have slieghed and called foolishnesse, shall with won∣drous power shake the Nations, destoy, and conquer the world of the wicked, as is expressed in other Scriptures2 Th. 2. 8, which agrees with that of the Prophet, Not by might, nor by power, ut by my Spirit saith the Lord of HostsZec. 4. 6., but I will not go further in this point, because I would not too much digresse from the In∣ference to which I am speaking, I only hint at these things by the way, to the end that men may be stirred to search dilgently after truth as they would search for silverPro. 2. 4., and bring every mans judgement to the touchstone as they do gold, that they may not be deceived▪ by dreams or specious shews, and so depart from the truth and lose their future happinesse. This is a time of shakings, God is now shaking the Nations, Gods judge∣ments are abroad in the earth, that the Inhabitants of the world may learn righteous∣nesseIsa. 26. 9.: The shakings of this Nation have been great, not only in temporals but in spirituals, Thrones, Dignities, and Governments, have been shaken and shaken, cast down, overturned and changed again and again, Religion a∣dulterated, annihilated, and made a matter of policy, the very foundation of that pillar and ground of truth, hath been stricken at, undermined, and sorely assaulted, and is at this day, but we have a sure promise, that the gates of hell shall never prevail against itMat. 16. 18., and we have seen Gods provident care
thereof, that they that have been the heads of this assault have been broken in peeces and their asstiations, the Word of God is as fire and it shall consume stubble; All the enemies of truth shall be like straws, though numerous, which conspire against a burning coal, and encompasse it by heaps to put it out, that when they think they have done it, and have eclipsed the light for a little while, it shall kindle, burn, and consume them all, these straws though mighty for a time shall come to nothing; This is their time of attempts, and this is the time that God will purge his Church, This is the time of Refor∣mation, and of great judgements; For whenever God hath been doing any great work tending to Reformation, the devil and Satan, that great old Ene∣my and subtle Serpent hath alwaies made the greatest opposition, the greater the work is that God is doing the stronger the oppositions will be, as we see in Rev. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. considered and compared: That God is doing a great work in these daies is manifest, clear as the light of the Sun, But what God will do he only know, To us it is unknown, whether he will at this time give in to England the mercies promised, or whether he will yet afflict us with more and greater Judgements we know not: The former shall be made good assu∣redly to his Church, the latter seems rather to be our present portion, the effects of all the alterations and changes in our times, is hid from our eyes, only it is Gods good pleasure, and he is doing a great work. There are three things, evils, that have long threatned the great judgements and changes which we of England have lately felt and seen in this Nation. 1. The encrease and growth of all kinde of sin, especially corruption in ReligionIudg. 5. 8, and a general crying oppression, these do still remain as high as ever.y Zep. 3. 1. Eze. 25. 7. Jer. 5. 1. 2. The appearance and encrease of secondary causes thereunto conducing, principally Jealousies, Divisions, Emulations, Hypocrisie, Sedition and Trea∣cheryJudg 9. 23.: These things are effects of Gods angerIs. 19. 14, and forerunners of great changes, but these do encrease in England. 3. The straits and necessities of the Church, when good men especially holy, godly Ministers are scorned, contemned, and misused2 Chron. 36. 16., then God is exceeding angry, and brings wrath without remedy; For the Churches ne∣cessity is Gods opportunity to deliver his Church and to avenge himself of their enemies, and that is alwaies by great changes: God hath made change after change in England, once, twice, thrice, and again, but the evils are not changed, therefore more changes are threatned: The Prophet denonncing Judgement against the King and Kingdome of Israel saith thus, Thou profane wicked Prince of Israel whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end, thu saith the Lord God, Remove the Diadem and take off the Crown, this shall not be the man; Exlt him that is low, and abase him that is high, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more until he come, whose right it is and I will give it himEzek. 21. 25, 26, 27.; This Prophecy was concerning Zedekiah, and Israels carrying captive into Babylon, and the government of Christ, to whom all Kingdoms and Na∣tions are given, and are his right, whom he is pleased to set up as vicegerent under him, to rule in righteousnesse and judgement, shall be established, God will abase him that is highest, and exalt him that is low, and will overturn, and overturn again and again until he come, for his right it is to whom Jesus Christ shall give it. So it is evident that all turnings, overturnings and changes that have been
in this Nation, or whatsoever shall be are not by accident, nor by the subtle contrivement of counsel or men, but as all is ordered by Providence to effect Gods will, for man is not able of himself to bring any enterprise to passe, he is not able (saith Doctor Preston) to see all the wheels that tend to make up an enterprise, nor if he were able to see them all, he is not able to turn them, nor to fit every one so together as to make up an enterprise. God by providence after several changes and several attempts of new enter∣prises, which the attempters (though skilful to deceive and powerful to com∣pell) could not enterprise, hath given us a Supream Magistrate to judge the people of these Nations; And by providence hath intitled him OLIVER Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and of the Dominions thereunto belonging; This is the man whom God by his secret providence hath made the instrument of our deliverance, from the designs of an Anti-christian brood, and from the powers of Royall and Hierarchical enemies, and rescued our Laws and Religion out of usurpers hands, therein compara∣ble to Gideon; It is true he accepted of what Gideon refusedIud. 8. 22, but he covet∣ed not what Gideon askedver. 24., nor indented beforehand, as Iephthah didIud. 11. 9, He might have sate in Parliament at ease, and with profit as others did, but pro∣vidence ordered him to another work, And he freely and voluntarily exposed himself to all hardships, to endure the parching Sun by day, and the nipping frost by night, as a zealous Patriot of his Nation, his sleep departed from his eyes, His bed the open field, and the Heavens his Curtains, He was not backward to jeopard his life in the high places of the field for the safety of his Countrey, not shifting to secure himself in the greatest danger, nor de∣clined any Engagement with the Enemy, let the disadvantages be what they could,  three, four, or five to one of the Enemies party, yet not once that I can remember was he put to the worst, or caused to fly from, or turn his back from the Enemy, from the beginning of the war to the end thereof; He is of an ancient Family, He hath been well educated in Learning and in Religion (except only some youthful tricks) hath been a professor of holi∣nesse and practiser of justice, the man of the Saints praiers, whom God pro∣spered, and made successeful in all his undertakings, and providence hath kept in all dangers, ordering all along by gradations to what he now is, as is observed in our third Inference: Why God hath done all this we cannot give any reason, but that it is his secret will to effect his own purpose; But whe∣ther it shall be at this time as an income of mercies, or encrease of afflictions, I leave to the all-knowing God who will manifest his pleasure in his own time; It may be a mercy from God and so I esteem of it, but we may by our divisions turn it to a judgement; as indeed our seditious practises do threa∣ten: Sure I am (whatever may be) that since providence laid this burthen upon him, he hath managed it with much wisedom and justice, the fruits whereof we have had some taste, To the honour of God I speak it, And do apprehend that his purposes tend thereunto; As also to the honour, safety, and benefit of the Common-wealth, manifested by his ordering affairs a∣broad, in making honourable peace, thereby stopping more and greater effu∣sion of bloud, and exhausting of treasure; As also his Highnesses care for proving Ministers, to eject those that are scandalous and unsound, in which I yet hope his Highnesse and present Parliament will make better and further progresse, that known Heresies, apparent Blasphemies, and open prophanesse
may be extirpate and ast out of these three Nations, which that they may do shall be my constant praier, And that as God hath added to his Highness encrease of worldly hononr; he will also double and redouble to him spiritual humility, wisedom, holinesse, with all other graces; And let this be the prai∣er of Zions Saints, that Peace and Truth may be established, Jesus Christ set up in ou hearts, and sincerely worshiped in his own Ordinances, that the purity of Ordinances may stand like the Ark of God, before which all here∣sies, seducements, and doctrines of devils may fall like Dagon to the earth; so that if it be possible Eugland may be the Beloved Nation, and the praise of the whole Earth, for the which let us all pray and endeavour, and this brings us to our fifth Inference. The fifth Inference is, that although God have set a time for the giving in of mercies, and for inflicting of Judgements, which shall certainly be a∣complished in their time, yet men are to be diligent in the use of all lawful means for the enjoying of the one and the avoyding of the other: This was ever the practice of holy men in all ages, the Prophet Daniel notwithstand∣ing he was well assured of the performance of Gods promise for the delive∣rance of his people, after the set time of seventy years was expired, yet he praieth with his face toward IerusalemDan. 9. 10, yea, when he knew the time was at hand, he yet praieth for the accomplishment of it, and confessed his own sins and the sins of the peopleDan. 9. 3, 4. 5., nor did he think it sufficient to pray for a spurt, but he praied from the morning until the time of the evening SacrificeVe. 20, 21: Thus Zion her self complaineth unto God and praieth for deliveranceLam. 5. 21, 22., and Nehemiab when the time was come, mourned, fasted and praied, and used all lawful endeavoursNeh. 1. 4., He looked sad in the presence of the King, siging the sorrow of his heart, for the ruines of Ierusalem, and this was ans by which he obtained favour to make his Rquest to the King, yea, lest his tongue was speaking to the King, his heart praied to the God of havenNeh. 2. 3, 4▪ and God gave him his desires, not only to build the Temple at Ierusalem, but to have all materials necessary for the wok▪ The reason why all lawful means must be used, is, Because whatsoever God in his secret counsel hath determi∣ned to be done▪ he hath also determined and appointed the means how it shall be done: As he hath decreed the end, he also hath decreed the means condu∣cing to that end; So it was in the things of rebulding the City and Temple: God had determined it should be built again promised it by his Prophets: And he had also determined and appointed that yrus should be the means or secondary cause of it, Therefore he cals Cyrus his Shepherd He that shall per∣form all his pleasure, even saying to Ierusalem, Thou shalt be built, and to the Tem∣ple, by foundation shall be laidIsa. 44. 28., and he shall let go my captivess. 45. 13. 13.: And this was at the time appointed made good as you may see Ezr. 1. 1. and herein Gods purpose and secondary causes work together: God worketh by such men and endeavours as he hath appointed, and such means men are to use. You know God promised to Israel many blessings, both temporall and spi∣ritual, he promiseth the downfal of their enemies, and great encrease of all things, multiplicity of blessings in all outward comfortsEze. 36, so he promiseth to them, and in them to us Christrans, all spirituall blessings▪ freely given for his own Name sake, he promiseth to sprinkle clean water on us, to clense us from all our filthinesse and from our Idols; He will give us a new heart and put his Spirit into us, and cause us to walk in his Statutesve. 25, 26, signifying thereby the
merits and bloud of Jesus Christ, which cleanseth us from all iniquity, &c. yet saith the Lord (notwihstanding he will surely give all these blessings free∣ly) I will be sought unto, I will be enquired of by the house of Israel to doe it for themEzek. 36. 37., so you shall see God sends the Prophet to Hezekiah, to tel him, he should suely die of the disease, of which he was sick; Hezekiah notwith∣standing makes his addresses by praier unto God unto God, to spare his life, and obtains his desire, God addes fifteen years2 Kiu. 20 1, 5, 6., praier obtains the mercy desired, that's one means, yet there must be another means added; Hezekiah must take a bunch of figs and apply to the mortall sore, and he shall recoverIs. 38. 21, when God alloweth, nay, requireth that we shall use all lawful means; for us to neglect to use the means or obstinately reject the means, we are self-ene∣mies, and it is just with God to withhold the mercy we desire, or to bring the judgements upon us, we would avoid; to neglect, slieght or contomn any lawfull means, is a tempting of God, that man that shall cast off all means, and say he will rest upon providence, neither beleeves there is indeed an over∣ruling providence, nor can rest upon providence upon any Scripture ground; He that will rest upon providence must follow the dictate and waies of provi∣dence, else he deceives himself; The Physician in cases of any necessity▪ is the means for health, the Chirurgion is a means for cure of a fretting wound, ulcer, or gangrene: The Lawyer to clear a questioned Title, or to pleade a doubtful cause before the Judge▪ he that shall in such or the like cases, neg∣lect or reject such means, providence offering it to him, shall be justly con∣demned of folly by any wise man, so it is in all things between God and us, to obtain mercies or to avoid judgements, we are to search out and to use all lawfull means. But in the use of any means though never so lawfull, we must take heed that we trust not to the means, for that is sinful, and the way to deprive our selves of what we do expect or most desire, and to involve our selves in these troubles and miseries we would avoid and most fear: This was the si of that good King Asa, in his disease, he sought not to the Lord but to the Physicians2 Chron. 16. 12.: We must be diligent in means, but trust in God as much as if we had no means to use; You shall see that when Moses was to leade the people of Israel through a vast and barren wildernesse, God gave him a pillar of a cloud by day, and of fire by night to go before them; and the Ark of the Lord went before to finde out a resting-placeNumb. 10. 33., for where the Ark rested they staied, and as long as the Cloud rested upon the Ark they rested in their TentsNùmb. 9. 18.; This was providence guiding the people to convenent places for water and rest, yet Moses the Servant of God is very inquisitive with his Father in Law, whom Providence had brought to him, and who was acquainted with the waies of the wildernesse and places where was Springs of water, to instruct him in the way, and be a guide unto himNumb. 10. 31., he would not be wanting in the use of any lawful means: When the Prophet Nathan, sent from God, tels David that his childe should surely die; David notwithstanding sets himself to the use of means to preserve the childes life2 Sam. 12. 16., yet David did not therein oppose himself against Gods will, for David knew that the use of lawful means was no way crossing of Gods purpose; He well knew that Gods comminations are some∣times conditional and sometimes absolute, as indeed they are, and so are the promises of mercies: Gods threatning of judgement against Nineveh was conditional, Yet forty daies and Ninevth shall be destroied, that is, if Nineveh
do not repent; but Nieveh repented and was sparedJon. 3. 10; The Text saith, God saw they turned from their evil waies, and repented of the evil he said he would do to them; Not that God indeed repented or can repent, or be changed: the word repent we finde several times in Scripture, 1 Sam. 15. 35. The Lord repent∣ed that he made Saul King, and Gen. 6. 6. It repented the Lord that he had made man, So in Ioel 2. 13. God is slow to anger and of great kindenesse; and repent∣eth of the evil, and in ver. 14. who knoweth if he will repent and leave a blessing behinde him? These and other the like Scriptures are by some objected against the abso∣lute decrees and purpose of God, as if God did not absolutely determine what he would do, but as if there were a contingency in God, and that he upon oc∣casion changeth his decree and purpose; To this I answer, That the word repent or repentings is but an expression which the holy Ghost useth after the manner of the speech of men, whereby the pity and compassion of God is set forth unto us, and how unwilling he is to punish his creatures, as in Lam. 3. 33. He doth not afflict willingly, that is, he delighteth not to punish, to af∣flict, or to grieve the hildren of men, but as he is provoked by their sins which he hateth, and he hateth nothing but sin, or for sin, but God is said to delight in mercy, Mic. 7. 18. We are not to search into the secret decrees of God, which is absolute nor which is conditional, but we know God is unchangeable in all his purposes and varieth not, The strength of Israel (saith the Prophet) will not lie, nor repent, for he is not a man that he should repent1 Sam. 15. 29., Therefore re∣pentance in God is nothing else but his unchangeable ordering and disposing of changeable things: God is not changed in any thing but things change and alter, Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the worldAct. 15. 18., and what he hath purposed shall be done, nothing can alter it, as is shewed in our former discourse: God is immutable, he changeth not, In him i no variable∣nesse nor shadow of turningJam. 1. 17, But God is said to change when they whom God loveth and taketh care of are changed, then God changeth the course of things so as it is for their good: God unchangeably forgiveth them that repent as he did Nineveh, and unchangeably punisheth them that go on in their wicked waies, as he did Saul: All comminations of God are means to repentance and to reformation, and repentance with reformation is the means to pre∣vent the judgements threatned, except where the Decree is absolute, as in the case of Esau, Heb. 12. 17. and with Cain or Iudas, &c. and in case of re∣sisting the means and motions of repentance, as the stiff-necked Israelites, Heb. 3. 11. to whom there is no place for repentings; But this is the secret counsell of God, and belongs not to us to search into farther then it is revealed in Scripture, and the Revealed will of God is our rule, we are to look no fur∣ther, but practise according to what it holds forth to us, whether the threat∣ning of judgements be absolute or conditionall, it is not for us to enquire into it, but we are to use all lawful means to prevent it, as to obtain any mercy promised; For all comminations of God are either for our repentance that we may prevent the evil, or to our obduration that we may be without all excuse, therefore God saith, At what instant he shall speak concerning a Na∣tion, or concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down, and to destroy it; If that Nation turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil I thought to do unto them: and at what instant he shall speak concerning a Nation or Kingdom, to build and to plant it, if it do evil in his sight, he will repent of the good where∣with
he said he would benefit themJer. 18, 7, 10, God is pleased to give encouragement to all, and the Covenants which God hath made between himself and mankinde are conditional: The Covenant with Adam was upon exact obedience on mans part, Do this and live; The Covenant in Christ is not of works but of grace, established upon better promises, as the Apostle reachethHeb. 8. 6., given by the hand of a Mediator, ties us by the condition to beleeve and repent: he fist Covenant under the Law sheweth what we should do, but cannot; The se∣cond Covenant under the Gospel teacheth us how all is done for us, if we beleeve and repent: The promises of the Law are to the exact workers and doers of the LawRo 10. 5.: The promises of the Gospel are to him that worketh not, but beleeveth in him that justifieth the ungodlyRom. 4. 5. &c. Now if we break the condition on our part, God is no way bound to us, for if we beleeve not, we shall be condemnedJoh. 3. 18., if we repent not we shall perishLuk. 13. .: Thus it was to the Nation of the Jews, wrath came on them to the utmost, because of their Impenitency and Unbelief, how much more shall it be so to all other Nations and so it is to England! Great blessings are promised, and destroy∣ing udgements ae threatned, But God will surely withhold our mercies, will pluck up what he planted, and will hasten destroying judgements if we do not beleeve and repent; Therefore it is Englands duty to be diligent in the use of all lawfull means, to obtain mercies and to avoid Judgements. Here let me give caution in two things: 1. That we use no means but such as is lawful, warrantable in Scripture: 2. That we must not be solici∣tous in the use of any means for things for which we have not a promise: To use unlawful means for the obtaining of lawful things, or to seek unlawfull things by any means, are both equally evil: As for instance, Sarah did well to endeavour and expect the blessing to Jacob, because she had a promise; but Sarah did ill in using unlawfull means for a lawful thing: Jeroboam had no promise of the Kingdom, but he had a leading providence which was equi∣valent, therefore he did not ill in using means to obtain it: But it was his great sin in using unlawful means to establish himself in his Kingdom: so Saul, in the time of his distresse it was lawfull for him and duty to use means, and endeavour to avoid the danger threatned, but it was his sinne to use un∣lawful means, to go to the Witch of Eudor1 Sam. 28. 7., conrary to this you see when good Hezechiah was in distresse he useh such means as is warrantable, first he eneavoureth to preserve himself and kingdom against a potent Enemy by agreement and pacification2 King. 18. 14.: what they could not do it, though warranta∣ble, as appears of the saying of ChristLuk. 14. 32., Then he flies to the rock of strength, he opens the whole truth of his case unto God, and trusts in him, and was thereby delivered2 Kin. 19. 4. 15.. We know David had an absolute promise of the Kingdom from God, and found great oppsition, Saul persecuted him to the death, yet David would not use nawful means to obtain the promise, nor to preserve himself, he only useth such warantable means as providence offered to him, and trusts in God! It is true, he eat of the Shew-bread which was be∣longing only to the Priests, but this is justified by the Lord Christ in case of necessityMat. 12. 3, 4. Hos. 6. 5., Mercy is to be preferred before Sacrifice, so he fled to Achas king of Gath, and he changed his bhaviaur and feigned himself madq 1 Sam. 21. 13., this in case of necessity to save life is not unlawfull, he did not distemble with his tongue to say he was mad: it may be lawful for a man to dissemble in his behaviour or discretion, when it is unlawful to do it in words, Nor did he do it as distrust∣ing
in God, as is apparent Psa. 34. 6. he trusted in God and was delivered at that time when he changed his behaviour, as is evident by the Title of that Psalm: It is granted that in matters of Religion to change behaviour is sin, as to bow to an Idol, or to be hypocritical in shews of Religion, a it is to be feared very many are at this day, and have been for honour or profit, as Simon Magus did, Nor did he dissemble his behaviour, to the end he might murther as Cain did, and as Joah did, but David intended damage to none, only his own safety: We have a kinde of resemblance to this in the Lord Christ, to try his Disciples, Luk. 24. 28. The Text saith, He made as if he would have gone farther: And whereas it may be objected he lyed o Achsh when he said that he had been against the South of Judah, and against the South of the Ke∣nites 1 Sam. 27. 10., &c. He did not lie unto him, he spake doubtfully to the Question asked, so as Achaz might take it in a double sense, either that he had been against the people of the South of Judah, and of the Kenites, or against the people of the Philistims that dwelt in the adjacent Villages of the South of Judah, and so indeed it was; So that David lyed not, nor used any unlawful means to obtain the promised Kingdom, nay, when opportunity was in his hand he would not hurt Saul, though he then hunted after Davids life as after a Partridge on the mountains, declaring his trust in God and innocency to∣ward Saul; When he had him at all advantage in the Cave▪ and at another in his Trenches, David would do no act to crosse Gods providence though a∣nimated to it by his chief Friends. Contrary to Davids practice is the practice of men at this day who with∣out any warrant from Gods Word, contrary to humanity, plot and contrive means to betray and subvert men and governments, that are not suable to their own desires, and contrary to clear providence, and that by abominable evil means; And also in a sollicitous use of good means for the obtaining of things not promised, nor any leading providence or probabilities to the things endeavoured for, but will and fancy, or the instigations of false deceiving spirits, what else are the many and frequent fastings one contrary to another, and appeals to God in things which tend to strife and debate, and to set up the Kingdom of Christ by bloud, who saith, his Kingdom is not of this world, or if it were he needs not the material sword to exalt him: for all pow∣er is given unto him both in heaven and in earthMat. 28. 18.; He is King for ever in a spr∣tual sense, but They that take the Sword shall perish by the SwordMat. 26. 52, He can pre∣sently have more then ten thousand Angels to cut down all his enemies at once if he please, and when he pleaseMat. 26. 53; And he no where in all the Scripture commandeth nor exciteth any of the Saints to carry on his cause in bloud, nor to use endeavours by the sword to set up a fifth Monarchy, neither to make war against Nations, to destroy Kings as Kings the sword of Christ is the sword that goeth out of his mouth, Rev. 19. 15. with this sword he will smite the Nations, and by this sword were the remant slain, Rev. 19. 21. God refused to accept of Davids desire to build the material Temple for Gods worship, be∣cause he had been a man of war, and had shd much bloud1 Chro. 28. 3.: And again, 1 King. 22. 8. Thou shalt not build a house to my Name, because tho hast shed much bloud upon the earth in my sight: The Temple was a Figure of Christ, and was for external worship: If that which was but a Figure and materiall might not be built with bloudy hands, then doubtlesse the thing typified which was the glory of Christ, the spiritual Temple and spiritual worship of the New and
Heavenly Jerusalem, shall not be built by the sword of the Saints on earth, a strange and unwarrantable opinion, and a worse practice; The holy Ghost is pleased to intimate to us that while the Temple was in building there was not heard neither Axe nor Hammer, nor any too of Iron, all the time of the build∣ing 1 King. 6. 8; From whence I infer, The holy and spirituall worship of Christ, shall not be set up by any Instruments of war, but as in the building of the Temple the stones were hewed and the materials made ready before they were brought to the building, and were hewed by the men of Tyre and other Nations who did not belong to the services of that Temple; So God will use the sword of the heathen and wicked men of the world to prepare for the work of the spiritual Temple, they shall be his drudges to do that bloudy work, to hew the Nations and Kingdoms as pleaseth him; they shall be his Instruments to cut down, dig up, and hew one another, and cast down the migty Mountains till they be made Plains, they shall doe it in wrath and revenge one to another, but God will work by them after the coun∣sell of his own will: And then as in the Reformation in the dies of Heze∣chiah▪ God will prepare the hearts of his own people, and the thing shall be done suddenly2 Chro. 29. 36.; they shall be a willing people in the day of his power, this it consonant to holy Scriptures, and hath been the manner of Gods doings, Not by might nor by power, but by the Spirit of the Lord of HostsZec. 4. 6.. Besides, David in his Reign was a Type of the Churches troubles and war, es Solomon was a Type of the Churches peace and flourishing condition; Bus I finde not that David nor Solomon ever made an offensive war against any Nation, but it was ever defensive, except by command from God, or a pro∣vidence leading to it, as in the case of the Ammonits, when they had abused Davids Embastadors and his friendly courtesie, and disgraced them that were his Messengers: And the Assyrians who joyned with them2 Sam. 10; but for them to attempt things for which they have neither command nor any leading providence, but upon their own wils, fancies, or as some say by the direction and guidance of the spirit, to these men, not I but the Lord Christ saith un∣to them as to James and John when they would have had him to command fire to come down from heaven upon the Samaitans: Ye know not what man∣ner of spirit of spirit ye are ofLuk. 9. 55.; The Son of man is not come to destroy mens lives but to save them; These men have spirits of infirmies, crooed spirits, like that woman whom the Lord Christ healedLuk. 13. 11, the Lord in mercy cure thew: We are commanded not to beleeve every spirit1 Joh, 4. 1 in Rev. 16. 13. there were three unclean spirits went out of the Dragon and out of the mouth of the Beast, and cut of the mouth of the false Prophet; What were these spirits? these were the spirits of devils, working miracles, and what else, they go to the Kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of the great day of God Almighty, ver. 14. The Spirit of God saith expresly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the saith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils1 Tim. 4. 1; Hence is that precept of the Apostle, to try the spirits whether they are of God because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, 1 Joh. 4. 1. I know many good men are seduced and do seduce at this day, And it is grievous to them and unsuffera∣ble to them to bear it to be told they are seduced, because they have a zeal to God and to holinesse; Surely so had Paul when he was in a great errour, and so was David full of holy and right zeal to God, yet his spirit erred; his spi∣rit was prest to build God an house, so as he vowed to do it, Psa. 132▪ 2. And
he consulted with the Prophet Nathan about it, and Nathans spirit closed with his spirit, and said, Go do all that is in thine heart, for the Lord is with thee2 Sam. 7. 3: But the spirit of holy David and the Spirit of the Prophet Nathan, were both conrary to Gods spirit in that work, for the word of the Lord to Nathan for∣bad it afterward. Give me leve I beseech you in the mercies of God to say unto you that are Fifth Monarch men, as St James saith to the whole Church and Sans, Do not rre my beloved BrethrenIam. 1. 16, it is most true that violent ungrouded affections are violent tempations, and will bring violent and certain afflctions upon men and Nations; Obedience is better then Sacrifice, blinde Sacrifices nor un∣commanded service by God were never accepe; Who hath required this at your hand? Let us therefore walk humbly wih God, eny our selves, our own spirits, our own righteousnesse, and et up the Lord Christ in our hearts, that he may spiritually rule over us and in us by mortifying our corruptions, sub∣duing our carnall reason and our unbridled lusts; this is i the Lord Jehovah hath promised, and this is it we are taught to pray for, Thy Kingdom come; And for this as for all other mercies thereon attending, let us be ever diligent in the use of all lawful means, in behalf of our selves or Nation, and the whole Church of God, with submission to Gods will; And truly he that will im∣partially and strictly examine his own heart (and be sure it deceive him not) shall finde that all his endeavours will be too little, to bring his will to the will of God in every thing, but the heart is deceitfull above all thing, and despe∣rately wicked, who can know itJer. 17. 9? and from the deceit of our own heas toge∣ther Satans instigations, we labour to bring Gods will to our will, and hence ariseth great evils and distractions even among Christians, at this day; All boast of the Spirit and yet walk contrary to the pirit, for the Spirit is one and is not divided, the Spirit leads into the way of one truth not many truths; give me leave to put the question which Paul in the like case, Are ye not car∣nal 1 Cor. 3. 4? yet these Corinthaus to whom Paul speaks were beleevers, Sains in the Apostles esteem, for he gives them the right hand of brotherhood, though in this respect carnall in their divisions concerning spirituall things, and those things if not prevented will bring sore judgements, and prevent the mercies by us expcted and t the Church promised. The lawfull means to prevent the one and to possesse the other, are of two sorts, spiritual and civil, which for brevity I shall but name, for I intend not polixity in this discouse; The first and chief means is praier, Pray continually,Col. 4. 2., that's the rule givenT. 5. 14, and pray earnestlyIam. 5. 17, and ferventlyVer. 16.; But we must come to pray with humble hearts, else God will not hear our pray∣ers, He giveth grace to the humbleJam 4 6, bu he resisteth the proud; God heareth the desire of the humble, and will prepare their heart, and incline his heart to hearPs. 10. 17, he dwelleth with the humble and will revive the spirit of the hum∣ble and contrite ones, Isa 57. 15. and we must pray for such things as are ac∣cording to Gods will, such things as are according to Gods will, such things as we have pomise for, not according to our own wils, You ask and receive not, and why? because ye ask asseJam. 4. 3.: This is the considence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will hheareth us1 Joh. 5. 14., but if we ask according to our own will he will not hear him, that is, he wil not give him what he asketh; And we must also ask in faith without wavering, Jam. 1. 6. but how can we have faith in asking any thing for which we have not a promise? for
faith is grounded upon the promise; Abraham beleeved the promise, Rom. 4. 3. he staggered not at it, he was fully perswaded that what God had pro∣mised he was able to perform, and would do itRom. 4. 20, 21; And without faith it is im∣possible to please God,Heb. 11. 6 what is not of faith is sin, without faith God accepts no praierMat. 21. 22.; and in the last place we must ask all that we pray for in the Name of Iesus Christ, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name he will give it youIoh. 16. 23.; See Joh. 14. 13. And in extraordinary cases we must adde spiri∣tual sting to our praier, for there is a kinde of devil that goeth not out but by praier and fastingMat. 17. 21., humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up, Jam. 4. 10. we must come with humbled hearts, willing, and de∣sirous to bring our wils to Gods will, but take beed of fasting and praying, and making appeals to God,Heb. 12. 29. to bring Gods will to your will, it is not safe to tempt God, For our God is a consuming fire. The next means is to get the love of God kindled in our hearts, let us get burning zeal to the truth, and receive the truth in the love of it, contend for verity not for victory; Advance the Gospel in the Ministry of it, love the bro∣therhood, honour all men, fear God, and honour the Supream Magistrate1 Pet. 2. 17, whe∣ther King or Lord Protector, this is Apostolical doctrine, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of GodRo. 13. 1.; This is the Apostle Pauls doctrine, and this is the A∣postle Peters doctrine, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Losds sake1 Pett. 2. 13., for so is the will of GodVer. 15.; This is no new devised doctrine, nor is it in the least Antichristian, but the doctrine of the Law and the doctrine of the Gospel, If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine (that is, that denieth this doctrine) receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed2 Ioh. 10) to deny this truth of the Gospel, and teach for Gospel another thing, is to bring in another Gospel: But I am commanded by the Gospel, that though men or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel then what the Apo∣stles have preached, not to beleeve itGal. 1. 8.; The Gospel establisheth a standing Magistracy and a standing Ministry, by them Liberty and Religion is main∣tained and preserved if well regulated. Therefore it highly concerns Parliaments, of which by Gods mercy and love to his people, we are not wholly deprived, nor by one for ever oppressed; It is Gods mercy and his honour (the Lord Protector I mean) whom God hath made instrumental to call this Honourable Assembly in Parliament together, I say it concerns them to consider whence we are fallen, and whether we are going, and by their authority to put bars against licenticusnesse and loose liberty, and to be a wall of protection unto the truth, that those Foxes may be taken that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender grapesCan. 2. 15; Honourable Parliament, if my Scribling Sheets ever come to your view, take notice from them that God hath by his good providence called you together to make up the breach that finne hath made (or rather God for sin) upon us; We have been perfidious to God, and God hath removed justice and equity from us; You must be both Phinchas and Aaron; Phinchas to rise up with courage and zeal, not only to do justice but to give life to the just Laws of the Nation, that justice may be done by a Law against the transgressors of Gods LawNumb. 25. 7, and Aaron to stand between the dead and the living, that Gods anger may be appeased:Numb. 16. 48.: You in behalf of the good people of these three Nations, are to settle by Gods assistance these unsetled Nations, what is possible for the
present, and with all possible care to look to the future, the God Almighty be your strength and your Counsellor, in the great work under your hands, that you may be instruments in  hand to establish a just and setled Magi∣stracy and a holy religious Ministry, That the glory of the Lord Jehovah may be advanced, and the people of these Nations may again enjoy their Rights and Proprieties, our sins cry to God for geate judgements, and the people cry under great pressures; And God hath called you that are the great men of these Nations to prove and to try what you will do for him, Jer. 5. 5. You have known the way of the Lord and the judgement of your God, turn you not aside as others have done; God seeks now as he did in Jerusalem, to finde a man, if there be any that executeth judgement and secketh the truth, that he may spare poor England, Jer. 5. 1. And let not the poor of these Na∣tions be forgotten by you, provide houses and stock to set them to work in all Cities, Countreys, and Towns, that there may not be a beggar in our Is∣rael Deu. 15. 4; Debts ought to be paid, but Publike Faith debts not paid is most dis∣honourable to the Nation, I know as things have been managed it is no easie thing to pay them; But to purge the University and Nurseries of Learning from their open pollutions and vicious practices, and Schools of Learning to be purged of vitious Schoolmasters, the poyson of youth and the bane of age and ages, is a work acceptable to God, a means to obtain blessings to poste∣rities, and it will cost no money to do it. These and the like means diligently used, really prosecuted, freed from self∣interest, vain-glory, or hypocrisie, will assuredly multiply mercies on the Na∣tions, and prevent the judgements threatned, and cause England to be the praise of the whole earth: I pray give me leave to say what the Lord by the Prophet said in another case (concerning Tythes then due by a Law of God, leviticall, only belonging to the Jews; now due by no such right, but they were unjustly withheld) Therefore saith the Lord, Prove me now there∣with, if I will not open to you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessingMal. 3. 10 &c. So I say, Use such means as before I have briefly mentioned, and prove the Lord if he will not double and redouble all sorts of blessings on this Com∣mon-wealth. I blesse God that there hath been a beginning of a Reformation of some things by his Highnesse more then in some years past by others, though much was promised; And I blesse God that put into his Highnesses heart and this present Parliament to call for a general and publike day of Humiliation, for emergent causes named, which God will doubtlesse accept of, as of late he did by a signet of his favour, when we by his Highnesse order sought God for Rain in our great necessity; Although some who stile themselves Saints not only refused to joyn in our Petitions, but used unchristian speeches to Gods dishonour and contempt of the duty: And truly it was sad to observe the ge∣neral neglect of our late Solemn Fast, that only Shops should be shut, and places for recreation full (as I was informed) but Churches shut or empty, in respect of the numbers of Inhabitants, many omitting the duty out of carnal respects, and many out of will, because it was commanded, and be∣cause the end crossed their self-interests; I do affirm that it is no lesse a duty in the Christian Magistrate to command the duties and performance of du∣ties for the true worship of God, then it was duty to the Magistrate under the Law, but the Magistrate under the Law did command such duties, as Asa,
Jehosaphat, Jehojada, Hezckiah, and others: We know that Asa did not only com∣mand Reformation of Gods worship, bur annexed to his command a great pu∣nishment 2 Chron. 15. 13.; And Ezra did the likeEzr. 7. 26; And the Apostle Paul diminisheth nothing of the Magistrates Authority under the Gospel, nor is there any Scripture that offers the least doubt of that their authority, but rather makes it great∣er, Heb. 10. 28. therefore I say that the neglect or rather contempt of such duties, and the suffering of it uncontrolled by the Magistrate, will in stead of a blessing bring a curse, as is threatned by the Prophet, Jer 48. 10. but the due observance of the holy and spiritual worship of God held forth by the Magistrate, and practised by the Minister and People, is the chief means to divert the judgements we fear and procure the blessings we want. I come now to the sixth and last Inference, and that is, That when God hath effected and done his will in any thing visibly made known to us by the work of providenee, we are not to murmure nor repine, though it be in any thing contrary to our expectation or desire, or though it be to our great af∣fliction, but to submit to it willingly, only by praier to seek unto God, and patiently wait his time and means for deliverance. This hath been the practice of the godly in all ages;2 Sam. 12. 22, 23. Thus holy David did, while his childe was yet alive he used all lawful means for the life of it: But when God had done his will, and the childe was dead, he left off to mourn, and murmured not, but patiently bear the affliction; Thus did just and righteous Job, he feared his Sons might sinne, and procure Gods displeasure, he therefore used the right means to prevent itIo 3. 25 Job 1. 5., but when Pro∣vidence had brought that to passe which he feared, and God had visibly mani∣fested his pleasure, Job was patient, he murmured not, neither against pro∣vidence nor instruments, but blessed the Name of the LordIob 1. 11, 22.: The Church under her great affliction murmured not, they acknowledged Gods hand, and complained of their sins the cause of allLam. 3. 37, 29., and waited patiently for their deli∣verance: It is good (saith the Prophet) that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the LordLam. 3. 26.; Surely (saith Job) it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any moreIob 6. 12; And the Apostle ex∣horts, that we be followers of them that by faith and patience inherit the promiseHeb. 6. 12: But to murmure against providence is wickednesse, and the effects of mur∣muring and discontents is very dangerous; Dangerous to a mans self, and bringeth others into dangers too: You know what became of the murmu∣ring Israelites in the wildernesse, from time to time, as is recorded in the Books of Exodus and Numbers; Consider the case of murmuring Korah and all his murmuring company, the earth opened and swallowed them upNum. 16. 32, 33.; This was the immediate hand of God, not Moses nor Aaron, yet such was the rebellious hearts of the people, that the next day they all fall to murmuring against Mo∣ses and against Aaron, and accused them that they had killed tho Lords peo∣ple Num. 16. 41.▪ And for this there died presently of them, fourteen thousand and seven hundred by a sudden plagueVer. 49.; You know that for this sin of murmuring all the people that came out of Egypt from twenty years old and upward, were excluded from the promise, except Caleb and IoshuaNumb. 14. 29.: Hence the Apostle exhorts us Christians, not to tempt God as they tempted him, nor to mur∣mure as they murmured and were destroied; for saith he, All these things hap∣pened unto them for our examples1 Cor. 10. 10, 11.; God is the same to us that he was to them, only he hath divers dispensations of his judgements; he is an unchangeable
God for evert If we sin like them that went before us, we shall be as greatly punished as they were, yea, greater; Though God do not so usually strike men suddenly for sin as formerly, yet there is greater wrath to come. Let us a little consider the cause of mens murmuring, and see if it do not arise from a carnal heart, a carnal man propounds ends to himself, as the Merchants St Iames speaks of, that say they will go to such a City, or such a Countrey, and buy, and sell, and get gain, but say not, if God will: so it is with men that seek their own ends in any thing, they propound this or that, but God is not in their thoughts, they say no, if God will; but we will do this or that thing, or would have this or that done, &c. It may be, nay, it is common with these men, that they will have the Name of God in their mouths, but (as the Psalmist speaks) God is not in all their thoughts; And therefore when their wils and designs are crossed, they are angry, and repine against God and men; Thus the people of Israel did in the wildernesse, they met with crosse providences which they looked not for, and they could not bear it, but cry out against Moses, saying, because there were no graves in Egypt; Hast thou brought us to die in the wildernesseExo. 14. 1.? and again, wherefore hast thou brought us out of Egypt to kill us in the wildernesse, our children and our cattelEx. 17. 3. Exo. 16. 8.. Thus at this day we have seen many strange Providences such as we looked not for, and men have had many and diverse designs, aims and ends, but meet with crosse Providences, which they cannot bear, nay, resolve they will not bear, they complain and cry out against this and that thing, but specially they murmure against God and own not his providence in governing the world; Therefore they also murmure at the thing done, and against the In∣struments doing it, this is I say against God himself, for he alone orders every thing and every Action, as is proved in the beginning of this ourdiscourse, which may satisfie humble men; But saith the wisest of men, The foolish man perverteth his way,Pr. 19. 3. and his heart fretteth against the Lord: This is a carnal heart, for a spiritual man sees God in all and bears all things with patience, and waits by praier for guidance by providence, but never praies against a mani∣fest providence, except to be delivered from the evil that may in some cases be feared, for providences lead the people of God into straights and afflicti∣ons for sin, as well as it delivereth them from afflictions when they are hum∣bled, and this the Church was well acquainted with; therefore say, It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the LordLa. 3. 16, then by the rule of contrary it must needs be evil to repine and murmure. It is very observable that Moses mentioneth a mixed multitude that came with Israel out of Egypt, Exo. 12. 38. these were of other Nations, probably Servants, that kept their cattle, &c, And they seeing the mighty wonders that God did for his people in Egypt joyned with them, and would go out with them; As the multitude that followed Christ for the loavesJoh. 9. 26., but being crossed in their expectation they grow discontent and murmure, lusting af∣ter the fleshpots of EgyptNu. 11. 4, and bred a generall discontent among the people, such a mixed multitude was among the people of Israel after they were deli∣vered from their seventy years captivity, which good Nebemiah separated from IsraelNeh. 13. 3. Such a mixed multitude are at this day in England, some of other Nati∣ons, some of contrary Religions, Priests and Jesuites, and others that have
by all subtle waies insinuated themselves, and these have set the people into discontents and murmurings, and are enemies to the advance of the Gospel, and to the building of the spirituall Temple, no lesse then those adversaries of Iudah and Benjamin that would have insinuated themselves under pretence of helping to build the Temple, saying, they sought the God of Israel as the Israelites did, and did sacrifice to himEzr. 4. 2., when indeed they were enemies, and endeavour to hinder their work; but Zerubbabel and the chief of the Fathers cast them off, then they send to have conference with Nehemiah to betray him, but he would not own their messageNeh. 6. 2, 4., and the work in his hand prospered. But our Fathers of England have hearkened to these our mixt multitude, and Gods work hath been hindred, and themselves lost their honour; The mixed multitude among us are grown numerous and incorrigible, they do not only murmure but they (some of them) threaten, and resolve not to be satisfied, for if one sort have what he desires another will dislike it, and that which is accepted this year shall be cried down next year (nay sometimes next day) for they that seek they know not what, cannot tell when to be pleased at every thing that is done: some cry out against it, and against the Instruments do∣ing it, without regard to Providence or publike interest, and these cause murmurings among the people who would not murmure but for them; These are those that have tasted of the heavenly mauna, but grew wanton, lusting after other food, many of these came into our hosts because they saw the great thing the Lord did for us, but they came not in with the first, nor did they bear the brunt of the day, and being enticed by their own lusts they mur∣mure and grow impatient at every providence that crosseth their desires: They murmured against our first Parliament called Anno Dom: 1640. and rejoyced when it was dissolved, endeavouring to carry on their designs by the next Parliament, but providence crossed them, and they were dissolved too: And Providence hath ordered all actions, counsels and things, to set up another way of government, which for private interest was cried down: Now Oli∣ver by the Providence of God is set up and made Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, &c. the great and general murmuring is against him, He is a man of honour and integrity, the instrument in Gods hand to do great and mighty things for us, And as I have said before he is the man of the Saints prayers, and by their praiers God hath made him prosperous and successeful in all his undertakings, we (yea many of the chief murmu∣rers) have acknowledged it, and owned him as our Ioshua: What hath he done to the prejudice of the people or Nation, that we now mur∣mure against him? why, he hath by Gods providence frustrate the designs and aims of the mixed multitude, therefore they all murmure; The Anti∣christian and prelatical parties and all the Hierarchy are angry and seek his life, the Levelling party and the men of the Fifth Monarchy they are angry, and combine together by plotting against him, and as the Prophet saith of himself so I may say of his Highnesse, They watch for his halting, saying, perad∣venture he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and take our revenge upon himJer. 20. 10.: Besides these there is another sort of this mixed multitude that murmure, and they are pecuniaries, either oppressors or mercenaries: Because it is conceived his Highnesse will look after the publike treasuries, and manage the publike treasure to publike advantage; These were afraid of a day of ac∣count in this life that were not afraid of a judgement day in the life to come,
therefore they are angry; There is another sort that are ambitious to have the honour and command that Providence hath cast upon his Highnesse, there∣fore they are angry, for ambitious men cannot endure any superiour; Good men without holy watchfulnesse may fall into the evil of ambition: We finde that Aaron and his Sister Miriam a Prophetesse grew ambitious against Moses, they quarrell with him about the Ethiopian woman which he had mar∣ried, that's their pretence, but then they plainly tell Moses that God had not only spoken by him but by them also; You know how God took it at their hands, if good men sin God will not spare them but more severely punish them: some other there be that murmure against his Highnesse, as Ioab did against good David in the case of Abner, because he made peace with him, and with the house of Saul2 Sam. 3. 21, 24.: Others murmure, because they conceive more ho∣nour, greater esteem, and better reward is given to some then to themselves, like those that were hired into the VineyardMat. 20. 11., you know what answer Christ gives to such; This kinde of evil began to enter into the hearts of the Dis∣ciples, but Christ taught them a better lessonLuke 9. 46, 47., of some of these sorts, are all the great murmurers of which the Apostle Iude saith plainly, these are they that walk after their lusts, and their mouth speaketh swelling wordsJud. 16.; These strive for masteries, they would all command but they cannot endure to o∣bey, and would perswade the people that all their oppressions, injustice, and cruelty is righteousnesse, and that the justice distributed to every man through one man, is oppression; Every mans waies are right in his own eyesPro. 16. 2, as the holy Ghost is pleased to express; And they would do as when there was no King in Israel but every one did what was right in his own eyesIud. 17. 6, to adulterate Religion, abuse the Ministers of the Gospel, teach for doctrines the precepts of men, commit adultery, blasphemy, and kill, or what not, as in the time of vacancy of Judges in Israel, that there was no publike Magistrate in the Land to put them to shame in any thingIud. 18. 7: Was not England almost brought to this condition? And is it not the thing so much laboured for at this day? and that under the specious pretence of a Reformation, such a Reformation as ascendeth out of the smoak that came out of the pitRev. 9. 2, 3: blessed be our Jehovah that hath thus far holpen us against such designs, that they have been pre∣vented by his good providence; And let the Instrument be blessed by Ieho∣vah who hath been used by his hand to disappoint their purposes, of whom I hope and expect much better things then from those Reformers, or then we have seen in our Age for due administration of justice and establishment of Religion and Laws, that Religion may be advanced, held forth to the people by a holy discipline, according to the Word of God, which is the will of Christ, not the fancies of men, for God is a God of order and not of con∣fusion, He is not the Authour of confusion but of peace in all the Churches of the Saints1 Cor. 14. 33; And it was the Apostles joy in beholding their order and stedfast∣nesse of faith in ChristCol. 2. 5.; And for this cause as himself saith, he left Titus at Crete, that he should set things in order that was wanting and ordain El∣ders in every CityTit. 1. 5.; Order by a discipline of worship in the purity of Or∣dinances is the way to that Reformation the Lord Jehovah looketh for; and the establishment and due execution of good and just Laws, that every man may enjoy his own propriety, and that justice may be distributed to every man without favour or revenge impartially, and that oppressors may be punished severely, according to their offence; This is the thing God looks for at the
hand and by the place to which he hath called the Lord Protector; And this I beleeve he intendeth and will do, if murmurers will have but patience, If he do it not, he dissembleth with God, and God will judge him, who on∣ly knows the secrets of all hearts; For Judgement belongs unto God alone, he hath not given that unto men, but he hath commanded us not to judge (but our selves;) Judge not that ye be not judgedMat. 7. 1, for the Lord is a God of Judgement, blessed are they that wait upon himIs. 30. 18: The Prophet Malachy sharply reproveth the Jews in a case like ours at this day; Ye have wearied the Lord with your words, yet ye say, wherein have we wearied him? when ye say, every one that doth evil is good in the sight of the LordMal. 2. 17; that is, you make acclamations against God and blasphemous clamours, because you have not forthwith what ye desire, and in their own way, as if he were a favourer of evil doers, there∣fore ye cry out Where is the God of judgement? as a violent affirmative that there was no such just God, thus murmurers weary God, Shall not God search out this, for he knoweth the secrets of the heartPs. 44. 21. Why then do we judge and condemn the man that hath done us good and no harm? and why do we murmure against God and repine at providence? The Lord in mercy open the eyes of all his people, and bring their hearts suitable to himself, that they may willingly submit their wils to the will of God: You know we had a long time of peace and knew not the bitternesse of war, and we had a happy beginning of Reformation in the daies of Q. Elizabeth, but in stead of going forward we went backward, and fell into the hands of oppressors and persecutors of Gospel-Truths, which was the pro∣curement of war, (a sore punishment) we expected relief from men, but were more oppressed, they neither cared to ease us, nor pitied out condition, our Religion grew to be mixed with multitudes of new devi∣ces, and all old heresies (cried down by the primitive Church;) Under these calamities we groaned and cried to God, yea, many of Gods people sought him by praier and fasting, private and publike for deliverance, And that God would give us Judges as at the first, and Counsellors as at the begin∣ning Isa. 1. 26, that we might be called the righteous and faithfull Nation, yet we will not give God leave to do it for us, though we see Providence working it, we will not be satisfied except God bring his will to our will, nay to our wils, except God will give us the thing we ask in our own way, and by the means we our selves prescribe and set down, we will not own it any other way; We ascribe too much to our selves, therefore we prescribe unto God things, times, men and means. God by providence hath given us again a free Parliament, freely chosen by the people, or it is their own fault, if some of the Members that the peo∣ple have chosen be discontented, and are of any of those sorts of murmurers before spoken of, so as they refuse to act for the good of the Commonwealth, it is their fault, and I fear their sin, It is not his Highnesses fault, nor the peo∣ples, but it will be some grief to the refusers when they shall see the work done without them, or that it should miscarry by their neglect, they know∣ing that at this day the pillar and ground of truth is shaken; And the two great and standing Ordinances of God strongly assaulted by many of that kinde of temper that Korah and his company was; That rose up against the office of Moses and the office of Aaron, who would have no Magistrate but themselves, nor no Ministry, but of themselves; The office of Magistracy
was in Moses, the office of the Ministry wa in Aaron; They are two di∣stinct Offices, and not promiscuously to be mixed, nor to be severed from a Christian Commonwealth, Gods word is the rule to both, Moses and Aaron were Brethren, and of one Tribe, signifying a propinquity in their Offices, they go together, and are defence and instruction one to the other; Now a∣gainst these Offices Korah and 250 Princes of the people, men of renown, rise up and say, Moses and Aaron, wherefore lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord, you take too much upon you seeing all the Congregation is holy, even eve∣ry of themNu. 16. 3.; Moses in this case makes his appeal to God, the murmurers did the like (as some among us too presumptuously have done) God decides the controversie between them, and saith, he will cause their murmurings to cease, God gave a signal testimony on the side of Moses and Aaron, shewing who was the man that God did chuse, by causing the rod of the Tribe of Levi to budd, blossom, and to bear Almons in the Tabernacle of witnesseNum. 17. 6, 7, 8.; We are not to expect such miraculous signs in our time, yet it cannot be denied our ene∣mies themselves being witness, but that God hath done wonderfull things by his Highnesse for us and against our enemies, of which we have (and may have a lasting) benefit; if we provoke not the Almighty by our murmurings, and cause him to turn our blessings into a curse; Faith makes not haste, but staies Gods time, and waits upon Providence; But it appears we live more by sense then by faith; We trust God so far as we see reason for it, and no farther; We say as the murmurers in the Wildernesse did to Moses, Thou hast not brought us into a Land that floweth with milk and honey, or given us inheritance of fields and Vineyards; Wilt thou deceive us, and make thy self a Prince over us, and put ont the eyes of his peopleNum. 16. 13, 14.? Dost thou think they do not see thy fals∣hood toward them? These murmurings kept the people from the Land they looked for, and brought a curse upon them which they looked not for, and thus it may befall us, if God be not more merciful to us; Who is then the sinner, and who shall posterity have cause to curse? I beseech you My Brethren of England, be not impatient, take heed that you fight not against God, murmure not at any Providence, beleeve that God ruleth in the earth, and governs all things, and that all the turnings and over∣turnings, and the changes which we have lately seen is of God; And all these, yea, all things shall work together for good to them that love GolRo. 8. 28.: Let us trust God who is faithful in all that he hath said, and will make good what∣soever he hath promised, and that to us in our times, if we provoke him not: Let us therefore be followers of them that by faith and patience inherit the promiseHeb. 6. 12: Consider what our condition was before our last change, and whe∣ther men were leading of us, if Providence had not disappointed their design; were we not hasting into that (or worse) condition that Israel was in, at the beginning of Asa's government? when they were without the true worship of God, Without a Teaching Priest, and without a Law? and there was no peace to him that went out or to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countreys2 Chron. 15. 3, 5.? If it were so with us then let us imitate those good people, and do as they then did, they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord their God, and sought him, and he was found of him, 2 Chro. 15. 4. And at that time God stirred up the heart of Asa, and he reformed all the evils, and they were delivered; God, as I have said, by strange providences, evident to us, hath stirred up his Highnesse, and given him the honour to be Lord Prote∣ctor
of his people, who knoweth what the Lord our God will do for us by him? Let us seek God for him, and daily pray that God will give him wis∣dome as to Solomon, and courage as to Phinehas, and zeal for the Lord of Hosts, and for the religion of his God, as to good Asa, Hezechiah, and o∣thers, that God made instrnmentall for the glory of his Name, and for the good of his people; Such I hope his Highnesse will be to us, not only in these three Nations, but to the Church militant through the whole world: take the Apostles rule and practise it, Put up your praiers, supplications, in∣tercessions and thanks-giving for all men, but especially for all that are in autho∣rity, and why? that we may leade a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and holinesse1 Tim. 2. 1, 2; But if we will disobey such precepts as this, and provoke such Providences as have led us thereunto, and be obstinate in our own waies and wils, as if we would build new Babels to our own fancies, and say as those Builders said, Let us make us a Name lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the earthGen. 11. 4; God will surely bring the evil upon us that we seek to prevent, and we shall be scattered in our work: Have we not (some of us) begun to lay the foundation of such a work? why else are we thus confounded that we cannot understand one another? One cals for mortar, and another brings a mattock; one cries out for brick and stone, another brings a hammer and an axe; One is building and another is breaking down; One saies Christ Jesus is setting up Kings and chief Magistrates according to his own heart, to be his Vicegerents on earth, such as shall own the Lord Christ, and acknow∣ledge that they reign by him and for him, according to that Prophesie of the Evangelicall Prophet, Isa. 49. 23. Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers and Queens shall be thy Nursing Mothers, they shall bow down to thee with their face to the earth, and lick up the dust at thy feet, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord, &c. that is, as the Nurse feeds the childe, and defends it from harm, so Kings and Queens under the Gospel shall tender the Church of Christ, to provide for it by providing holy Ministers and honourable maintenance for them, that they may not serve Tables, but wholly attend to the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and be a wall of protection to keep them from harm, and that corrupt doctrines break not into the Church, and they shall bow down to thee with their faces to the earth, that is, they shall acknowledge the Lord Christ to be their head, before whom they shall cast down their Crowns, and acknowledge they are but his Vicegerents, by him appointed to feed, cherish, and defend his faithful ones, and to reverence the word of Christ, &c, according to that of the Psalmist, All Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve himPs. 72. 11; Others say, that Christ is Staining the pride of all glory, and bringing into contempt all the honourable of the earth, pulling down all Kings and kingly powers, Isa. 23. 9. Others say, that Christ is only pul∣ling down all wicked Kings, Tyrants, and Persecutors, and will stain the pride of all humane glory, such as Babylon and Tyre, against whom the Pro∣phet Isaiah in the 23. Chapter before-mentioned denounceth judgement but not against all Kings, yet deny not that the Lord Christ who is said to ride upon a white horse, going forth conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6. 2. shall conquer all Kings and Kingdoms that are his enemies, all shall stoop before him; Others say, Christ only shall reign and shall be King of the Saints, and shall be set up in his glory and Kingdom on earth by the Sword of his Saints, in bloud, alluding to that in Rev. 19. 13. He was cloathed in a vesure dipt in bloud,
And as in Psa. 58. 10. The Saints shall wash their feet in the bloud of the wicked, and in Psa. 68. 23. That thy foot may be dipped in the bloud of thine enemies, &c. The meaning of these places is plain to be no more but the suddain destru∣ction which the Lord Jehovah should bring upon the wicked, such as are e∣nemies to the Church, as in the words going before in Psa. 58. 8, 9. As a Snail that melteth they shall passe away, and before the pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as with a whirlwinde: He shall, who is that he? It is God Jehovah he shall do it, not the Saints; the Lord Christ to whom all pow∣er and dominion is given, and was given to him from the time of his Incar∣nation, as he himself witnesseth, Mat. 28. 18. All power is given to me, &c. he doth not say, It shall be given me, but in the present tense It is given unto me; Hence is that of Isa. 63. 3. I have trd the wiepresse alone, and of the people (our Saints) there was none with me, for I will tread them in mine an∣ger, and trample them in my fury, See Rev 14. 20. and Rev. 19 17, 18. by which it is evident that the destruction of Christs Enemies shall not be by the sword in the hand of the Saints, but by some miraculous way from heaven, like that expressed in Rev. 20. 9. Fire came down from God out of heaven and devoured them; It is doubtlesse true that Satan is let loose out of prison, and God useth him instrumentally to deceive the Nations, we see it, and the Lord Jehovah doth cause them by Satans deceits to destroy and con∣sume one another, but the great destruction must come by some great and miraculous way from the hand of God, and thus Christ is said to be King of Nations, and he is King of Saints in a peculiar manner, he is the pro∣tector and safe preserver of the Saints on earth, and he ruleth in them spiritu∣ally, notwithstanding M. Spittlehouse be of an erring opinion, as he expresseth in a late Paper published in print: I shall esteem and strive to imitate him in any vertue, but I must dissent from his errours: Of this I have spoken in our fifth Inference, to which I referre the Reader for further satisfaction; We that make Scripture our rule, say, and shall ever aver, that the Kingdom of Christ is set up by praier, and that is the power of the Spirit of God within us, he shall rule in the hearts of the Saints, and by his Kingly power shall and will subdue our lusts or fantasies and self-waies; mortifie the flesh and the affections thereof, that we may be fit Temples for him to dwell in, that he alone may rule and reign there1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.; Others there be that will have none to rule over them but Caesar, Caesar must be their King, they will neither have Christ, nor his vicegerent to be their King, but they say stoutly as the un∣beleeving Jews, Away with him, away with him, we have no King but CaesarJoh. 19. 15.; Such are the great Disciples of M. Evans, who hath a notable Art to abuse Texts of Scripture; Many other such Babel practices we have to work con∣fusion in a poor shattered Common-wealth, but God in his appointed time will prove our buildings and what they are, whether we have built upon the sands or upon the rockMat. 7.: I shall at this time omit to numerate mens self∣waies, and shall with the Apostle Paul give this caution to all, he saith of himself (according to the grace of God which was given to him as a wise Master Builder) he had laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon, but let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon, for the fire shall try every mans building what it is, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 13. Let not any that professe to be Chri∣stians contend for victory but seek verity, for strife and division are fleshly and carnal, as the Apostle expresseth in the Chapter last mentioned; The
Lord Christ exhorts us to peace, the Apostles all exhort to peace, love, and concord, and Saint Paul tels us, If we bite and devour one another, we shall be consumed one of anotherGal. 5. 15; And the Lord Christ by a convincing Argument saith, that If a Nation be divided against it self it cannot standMar. 3. 24, Consider how great things God hath done for you1 Sam. 12. 14., therefore serve the Lord with all your heart; But if you will murmure against God; and do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your King, these are the words of Samuel to the people when they bad sinned in asking a King, not simply in asking a King, but violently de∣siring it before Gods time came, that he would give them a King, for David was from the beginning ordained to be their King, although they had not asked a King, as is evident Gen. 49. 10. and Kings are Gods Lieutenants on earth: It is no lesse sinful to refuse a King when God gives him, then it was sinful to ask a King before Gods time was come, wherein he would give them a King, Let not this be Englands sin, it will not be unpunished, we have seen the work of Providence all along, in setting up our Lord Protector, all the plottings and devices, and counsels of men, could never have effected such a thing, in such a way, it is evident that God hath done it, we have seen the working of the wheels, and the living creatures by the wheels, spoken of by the Prophet Ezechiel, in Chap. 1. 15, 16, 17. &c. and in Chap. 10. 13. &c. And a wheel in the middle of a wheelEz. 1. 16., It is hard to kick against pricks, and it is a dangerous thing to provoke providence. I have seen a seditious Paper sent abroad by some that stile themselves sober Christians, intitled, Some Memento's to the Army; I hope they are as they stile themselves; But I am sure Christians have neither precept nor example of such practice, to stir up rebellion: There was one Sheba the son of Bichri a very seditious man, upon Scripture record, a Son of Belial, of whom it is said, He blew a Trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, every man to his Tent O Israel2 Sam. 20 1.▪ Bichri prepared as he intended for a new war against David; What his reward was from the hand of a just God, you shall see 2 Sam. 20. 22. he lost his head by the hands and consent of his associats; Scatter thou the people (saith the Psalmist) that delight in warPs. 68. 30; You may know that warre is every where in Scripture threatned as one of Gods sorest judgements, and peace is promised as a singular mercy to a Nation, it was so to the Nation of the Jews, and is especially promised to the Church under the Reign of Christ▪ Kingdom, when they shall beat their swords into plow shares and their spears into pruning booksIsa. 2. 4. Mic. 4. 3., there is a time of warre and there is a time of peaceEccl. 3. 8.; We had our time of war, and tasted of the bitternesse of it, God now in great mercy offereth us our time of peace, if we will not accept of it but provoke God by our murmuting we may fear the event. Christians and Englishmen, I pray consider that saying of Ahner to Joab, Shall the sword devour for ever? will it not be bitternesse in the latter end x ? You know how it proved, bitter both to Abuer and to Joab; Discontents, Ambi∣and false Interest procured the sword to eat the flesh of them by the just hand of God; As Abuer had shed the bloud of many in Israel in an evil cause, his bloud was shed by Joab wickedly2 Sam. 3. 27., And Joab because beshed the bloud of war in the time of peace1 Ki. 1. 5., he was slain by the sword at the horns of th :1 Ki. 2. 34 God hath manifested his will to us by clear providences, Let us as men tha fea God and own his providence submit unto it, and not murmure nor repine, but with patience wait to see what God will yet do for us; He hath multi∣tudes
of blessings to the obedient, and as many curses and scourges to the murmurers; If it he (as the Psalmist saith) a good and pleasant thing for brethren to dwell together in unityPs. 133. 1; Then it must needs be an evil and unplea∣sant thing for Brethren to dwell together in discord, dissention, strife and va∣riance, all disunited and disjointed in affections. Consider what I have said, and the Lord give every one a good and right understanding in all things; If that I have said being well weighed be not found to be truth, beleeve it not, But if it be the truth, follow it, practise it: or this that I say shall one day be a witnesse against him that readeth and slieghteth it, and give me leave to adde this to the rest, and tell you, that those that are contemners and murmurers against the government of a Com∣mon-wealth in the Infancy of it; they are he greatest enemies to that Com∣mon-wealth, not hurtful only to themselves but to the whole Nation, the evil example of one murmurer draws more to the imitation of that sin, then the perswasion and good counsell of many can divert, and so all or multitudes oft perish together; As we see in the men that were sent to spy out the Land of Canaan, they murmured and brought an evil report of that good Land, which caused all the people to weep and murmure and cry out against Moses, and AaronNu. 14. 2, for which their murmuring they were excluded from that good Land and promise; And not only so, but they even those men that brought up the evil report, were destroied before the Lord by a plagueNumb. 14. 27.; Consider what God hath done he will do still; For God is unchangeable, It is one of his Attributes which he takes only to himself, I am the Lord, I change notMal. 3. 6.; In him is no variablenesse neither shadow of changeIam. 1. 17; Therefore it must of necessity follow from Gods unchangeablenesse, that whatsoever he hath done in for∣mer times he will do the same, for he is the same; what judgements he hath inflicted for any sin, or that he hath threatned to inflict he will still do the same; therefore the Apostle tels (even us Christians) that whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our LearningRo. 15. 4. &c. I confesse (my Brerhren) when I took my pen in hand to write upon this subject Discourse, I intended not above three sheets of paper, but the mat∣ter is encreased before me, and I could not expresse my self with more bre∣vity, I would yet for further satisfaction modestly give Answers to some Ob∣jections made by some sorts of men against his Highnesse the Lord Prote∣ctor, which I will do in as few lines as I can possibly. It is Objected,That the cause of our war which hath cost so much bloud and treasure, was, To defend our Rights and Freedoms against the Tyranny of Kings, to be governed under a Parliament as free People by just Laws, &c. But the Lord Pro∣tector assumes to himself the Authority of a King by exercising a greater Tyranny over the people then the King did, to give Laws, &c. I answer the cause of our warre (as instrumental) was, To defend the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament, the Freedom and liberty of the Peo∣ple, and the defence of the true Religion against incroaching Tyranny, and innovations subtlely insinuated by the late King and his evil Counsel; But that our Warre intentionally was against the lawful Authority of Kings, or against the Person of the Late King as he was King, or against his just pre∣rogative, I deny; Only against his evil Councel the War was raised, that the Priviledges of Parliament, the Liberty of the People, and the truth of
Religion might be defended and established, This will appear by severall Parliament Declarations, Protestations, and solemn Covenant; wherein the Parliament do declare, protest, and covenant (as their own priviledge, free∣dom and liberty, &c.) to defend and preserve the Kings person, his just Rights and Prerogatives, so far as it might stand with the preservation of Religion and the peoples Rights; But the late King standing in strong op∣position to the Parliament and Liberty of the people, and his Rights and Prerogatives coming in competition with or against the preservation of Re∣ligion and Priviledges of Parliament and the peoples Right; He defending and taking upon himself all the evil Actions and wicked devices of his evil Councell, miscarried (for so providence had ordered it should be:) And the people (as providence led them) submitted to a Parliament to govern them as a free People, they expected much ease and great Reformation, but enjoyed—. Now I would ask the Objectors these two short Questions. 1. If a Parlia∣ment should become more tyrannicall then a King, and lay heavy burthens upon them, reaching to their persons, lives, and estates, by an unknown Law or arbitrary power, and suffer Innovations to come in on every side, to the contempt of Religion and adulterating every truth, turning Religion into eve∣ry shape to metamorphise truth; whether in this case, if such should be, the people might not as justly cry out and take up Arms against such a Parliament as against a King? 2. If all these evils could be found and sensibly felt by the people, whether it were justice to themselves, acceptable to God, or benefit to their posterity, to cast off, and to abandon for ever the authority and use of Parliaments? I think they would give their negative, except such as would live without all order or command, which is to be worse then devils; Nor is the office nor just power of a King to be for ever rejected because there have been Tyrannical, oppressing, superstitious, or idolatrous Kings, for the office of a King is the Ordinance of Jehovah, and cannot be made null by man: To this office though not by the Name or Title of a King, God by his providence hath exalted the Lord Protector; And he that resists his just Authority and Government resists the Ordinance of God: It is evident he hath not assumed to himself that authority: he that objects that, I beleeve speaks against the di∣ctates of his own conscience (except his conscience be cauterized) and that he hath exercised any Tyranny or oppression over the people, it is false, and malicious calumniation, or that he will ever do any such thing is but envies suspicion, therein measuring his Corn by their own Bushell; He hath been the instrument in Gods hand to withhold greater oppressions from the people, and what at this day lies upon their shoulders, were laid on by others, not by him, from which he is endeavouring to free us; Let us not therefore whilest he is easing of us cry out against him, and say he hurts us, like the dogge that bites him that saves him from the tree; And for Laws he hath given none of himself, for he refers that to the Honourable Parliament now sitting, and suc∣cessors: That which he did by advice of his Councel in the regulating of the Chancery, and ejecting scandalous Ministers, and bringing all treasuries into one, &c. were (I think) very acceptable things and beneficial to the Nation, such as were long looked for from—but they came not. Obj. I, but he hath protested, engaged, and promised before God and men against the government to be by one person, and that the government should be by succeeding Parliaments, &c.
I answer, not contesting whether he made any such particular engagement and promise or not: but grant he did, such a thing I hope the Objector will grant, for it cannot be denied that in every promise or engagement there is some condition, the condition not kept the promise or engagement is void; Whether it were between man and man in private contract, or whether it were between a publike person of trust and a Nation, or to other persons of publike concernment, if in any thing of private contract, doubtlesse although the promiser were a looser by it he is in strictnesse of conscience tyed to per∣form what he promised; But if to publike concernment, the conditions fail∣ing in the least, he is not bound to perform what he promised and intended, for that were the highest breach of trust, possibly his Highness might by per∣swasion and conditions promised, engage against the government by Kings, and to be governed by Parliaments, beleeving (such or such conditions being performed) it might be most for the Peoples Freedom and Liberty, but when he found the conditions waved, and that the Freedom and Rights of the peo∣ple was monopolized, and their liberty turned into licentiousness, he might change his minde and purpose: A good Father that promiseth to his childe such or such an Inherinance, and really intends to do it, yet if he be fully and experimentally convinced that his childe will abuse that donation, he revokes his promise, alters his intention, and gives it to any other, and that justly: I am unwilling to speak all the truth in this case, because I would not cast dirt, &c. But the question is whether his Highness was not bound rather to wave such a promise to preserve posterity, then to keep it to enslave a Nation, he being a chief and principal man in trust? For as I said just now, in every promise there is some condition, as when it was imposed by supream authori∣ty on all the people of the Nation to engage to be true and faithful to that go∣vernment then without King or House of Lords; The condition was implied that the people must have honest and just protection under that government; And the end of all promises and engagements ought to be to Gods glory and publike good: Now if after such promise or engagement made by his High∣nesse, if either the condition or the end did not concurre or answer the inten∣tion (as we know it did not) his Highness is absolutely freed from his promise or engagement, and no way tied unto such a promise. It is further objected, That he was the Commenwealths Servant, trusted by Par∣liament to maintain the Priviledges of Parliament, and was paid for what he did: But for him to dissolve Parliaments, break their Priviledges, and set up himself to rule and govern as he please, is not just. Let it be granted he was the Common-wealths servant, he ever acknowled∣ged it, so was the Parliament too, but became Lords over the people at their own will, and although he were trusted by the Parliament, yet he was not a ser∣vant to the Parliament farther then the Parliament was Servant to the Com∣monwealth, for publike benefit, he himself as a member had equal voice in Parliament, and had greater trust imposed on him then all, even by the autho∣rity of Parliament, for their lives and liberty, and the well-being of the three Nations lay in his trust and faithfulnesse, who never failed in the least of any performance, in which by the blessing of God upon his industry providence made him instrumental of heir preservation and of the nations; He was as a Souldier well contented with his pay, he repined not, nor sought for more, only endeavoured that the fruits of Gods blessing given in by God to the Na∣tions
by his industry and faithfulnesse might be distributed to the people in all justice, which was not done, but the contraty; Therefore I say he being established the chief person in trust, was bound to discharge that trust in all things for publike good, especially providence leading him by gradations, step by step, to what he did, which if he had neglected or shall hereafter neg∣lect, God will raise up some other, but if he had been unfaithful in this, then what should he do (as Job speaketh) when God shall arise up? and when God vi∣siteth what should be answer him? Nor did he break the priviledge of Parlia∣ment though he dissolved that Parliament, for the priviledges of Parliament were broken (but not by him) long before their dissolution, by whom and upon what design the whole people of the Nation knew, and I willingly omit to repeat: If the attempting to take out five Members was a breach (as surely it was) then the taking out or driving away of more then half five hundred, was a greater breach and as much as a whole dissolution, which priviledge could not well be restored without a dissolution; for if that Parliament (as was in design by some) had been perpetuated; or if (as was by some others designed) there had been another force upon the house, or (as they called it) another purge, where had been the priviledges of the people? What would have become of the fundamental Laws of the Nation? and amongst how many heresies and corrupt new formed Religions must we have searcht to finde truth? and who should have known his right or enjoyed his propriety in any thing? Nor did his Highnesse set up himself, for God set him up, who puls down and sets up whom he pleaseth, providence leading him to that he is, nor doth he seek to rule and govern according to his own will, but according to the fundamen∣tall Laws of the Nation, and agreeable to the will of God, else he would have asked much more for himself and his posterity then he hath done, nor intend∣ing to rule by any arbitrary power, for then he would nor have bounded him∣self by Laws and Articles, as you see he hath in the Government published by himself, &c. And taking care for the future by trinnial Parliaments, and calling this present Parliament freely elected by the people as a means to re∣store lost Priviledges: In all which is no injustice but faithfulnesse in the dis∣charge of his trust, as a Servant to the Commonwealth for publike good. Fourthly, The great Objection framed against his Highnesse, is, 1. That he called this Parliament upon design, as he did other former things, for his own ends, not for publike benefit. 2. That it is not a free Parliament, not free in the El∣ction, nor free whn assembled to proceed as a free Parliament, restraint was put up∣on them, many members sent away, because they would not engage to his design, to confirm on him the supream power of the Nation, give him the Militia, negative to all Parliament Resolves, power to make Laws, and to raise money, so that not only all the strength and treasure of the Nation should be in his power, but Religion too, which is more then ever the King had, and the things for which we engaged in a war against him as a Tyrant, &c. To this I answer, as we say in our Proverb, and that truly, Ill will never speaks well, The men of the world, designing men, have ever envied vertue and honour, which I verily beleeve are compactible in his Highness, and therefore envyed, not by the righteous, but by the men of the world, whose designs and interests are crossed: 1. That he called this Parliament for any other end then for publike benefit, circumstances do demonstrate; If things be compared with things which I willingly forbear to particularize; And for all preceding things which the Objectors call designs, Providence hath
clearly led him to, as is proved in our foregoing discourse. 2. That this is a free Parliament, both in the Election and in the proceedings, is evident to them that are not blinded by some prejudication; For the restrictions made in re∣spect of qualification in persons to be Elected and Electors, was so far from infringing the peoples liberty, or being any barre to their freedom, that it was indeed their greatest freedom and security of their safety, and was at this time (considering out present condition) of absolute necessity; Many designs be∣ing on foot to corrupt and ensnare counsels, the judgements of men being much unsetled by subtle insinuations of seducers; Nor was there any restraint upon Parliament proceedings when assembled, as is objected, but what tended to publike good, and the end why this Parliament was summoned, viz. to put things that are out of order into order, by the Legal way of Parliament pro∣ceedings, not to encrease factions, nor to maintain parties and private Inte∣rests, but to establish Religion, peace, and just Laws, the main basis and foundation to the well-being of a Commonwealth, wherein the Parliament is free, And I hope by their wisedom, through the assistance and direction of Jehovah, this Parliament will be instrumentall in the laying of such a foun∣dation, that God may own us for his people, dwell in our Land, remove his afflicting hand from us, and leave a blessing to posterity. I say further, that this present Parliament was summoned by the Authority of the Lord Protector, which authority is from God, to which providence hath led him all along, And we are commanded to be subject to the higher powers, not some but all; Let every soul be subject, why? for there is no power but of God, The Apostle tels you that the powers that be are ordained of God, Rom. 13. 1. By this power he summoned this Parliament, And before the sum∣mons he by the advice of his counsell declared to all the people the condition that the Commonwealth was in, and what was now necessary to be done for a happy settlement, I need not repeat any particular thing declared, nor verbal∣ly spoken by his Highnesse at the Parliaments first assembling, because it is publike to all, The people in all obedience to his Highnesse authority accord∣ing to his summons, made their respective Elections; The Knights and Bur∣gesses elected (or the most of them) accepted of their Elections, and appear∣ed at the day and place; Why any one should after all this oppose that autho∣rity which called them, and the end why they came together, I will not judge. That his Highnesse sent any away, as is objected, I deny, They were at their own liberty to sit in the house or to depart, it was at their free choice, That which they were to subscribe was no other then was plainly held forth to all men in the government as to one man, This was no barre to the free debates in Parliament, for their debates to establish justice and righteousnesse, or offering any thing that might conduce to the benefit of the Common∣wealth, It is only a bar against Oligarchy, the worst of governments ready to break in upon us: It is true it doth confirm his Highnesse Lord Protector, for his life and no more, which if he did not for publike benefit he might have asked it for his posterity, and carried it by his power, if he had made himself his design, as is objected; To that part of the Objection concerning the Militia, he was trusted with it by the Parliament, and it was at his dispose, for the good of the publike, and so he ever used it with all faithfulnesse, and God by it made him instrnmental to bring us out of Egypt (I may say) by great wonders; We are still in the Wildernesse scarce come so far as to Mount
Nebo: And we have many thousands among us that still look back unto Egypt, and we have the Children of Anak, Giants and Cananites that stand in the way and hinder out entrance into the possession of our Evangelicall hap∣pinesse promised, These must be subdued and kept under, therefore the Militia is still as useful in his hand as before, to secure the people from those lusting murmurers, and to subdue the Cananites; He claims not the Militia to him∣self, but desires it may be in Parliaments and himself, Providence hath put it into his hand, and he knows his own heart, that he intends to use it no way but for the benefit of the Common-wealth by advice of Parliament, But he cannot know any others heart, nor can he say of any other that they would so use it, No, not for the people, if it were in their hands at this time, for the people are of as many mindes as men, if all might elect whom they would to serve in Parliament, or all that would by designs get to be elected should be Members, it is more then probable the Enemy might in short time be Ma∣sters of the Militia, and by it not only give away our Freedoms so much talked of, and the liberty of the people, but take away our lives also, and which is more then all take from us the priviledge of the Gospel, and what else hath been purchased with so much bloud and treasure, and turn our pleasant Eden into an Acheldama; The good people of this Nation with his Highness may say at this time, as David once said, The Sons of Zervia he too hard for me, which caused David to omit the doing that justice he willed to be done; And truly my judgement tels me, if his Highness should for his time (whatever he may for publike good grant for future) part wholly with the Militia from his hand, he should provoke providence and betray his trust to the Commonwealth (which consists not of a few men that appropriate singularity to themselves for private interests, but all the people) and give his life as a prey to his ene∣mies, and with himself the three Nations, which till some settlement be esta∣blished, depend upon his welfare; As also the interest that all true Christi∣an people in the world have in the welfare of this Nation; There must be a trust somewhere, but every man may not be trusted, though every free born subject have right in it; Nor can it be trusted in the hands of the multitude, for they rule by voice, not by Law, nor to some of them, because others have equal right: Nor can it be safe under the hand of a government Democratical (the thing mightily aimed at by the opposites to his Highness, under specious shews, to please and to deceive the people) which is, as experience tels us, next cosen to the highest Tyranny; why then not rather in him? of whose trust and fidelity the people of this Nation have good experience and great delive∣rance, from a first and second thraldom, till he by Gods blessing with his Par∣liaments advice can settle it in safety for the future. And whereas it is objected, That he seeks a negative voice to the Parlia∣ments resolves, is a scandal, He asks it not but only in those things that funda∣mentally concern the government, and that is (if men could see) for publike benefit, that neither Oligarchy nor Domocracy may start up to enthrall and en∣slave the people, by governing them according to will and fancy, by promises without known Laws, where then would be the freedom and liberty of the people now so much talked of by the Objectors? These things he only ex∣cepts against, in all other things whatsoever of Parliament Resolves being drawn into Bils, and offered unto his Highness, if he consent not unto them within twenty daies, they are to passe into, and to become Laws, although he
shall not give his consent, as is exprest in Art. 24. And for his seeking to have power to make Laws, and to raise money, it is meer calumniation, he seeks it not, nor claims it not, but leaves it to the wisedom of Parliament, as appears in Art. 6. except (as is there excepted) for and in cases of safety and of necessi∣ty, till the time that this presant Parliament were assembled, and that to be done by him with the advice of his counsel, as in Art. 30. so then he seeks not the strength nor treasure of the Nation to himself, nor to have it in his own power, as is objected: And for Religion he seeks nor to have it in his power, but leaves it also to the Parliament to debate, consult, and resolve, that he by them and they by him might receive all light possible in so great a business, for In the multitude of counsel there is safety; It is indeed a great work, beyond the wisedom of man to appoint, without divine assistance and spiritual wisedom; His Highness well knows the evil of the rigid prelatical Persecution, in Ty∣rannizing over the consciences of men in that rigid stictness; And he as well knows the evil of unbridled liberty, that it is abused and made a Cloak of mali∣ciousness, and as servants to corruption, occasions to the flesh, and to licentiousness, blasphemies, heresies, and doctrines of devils, the original of all discord, dis∣sentins, quarrels, seditions, and confusion, which seldom ends, if tolerated, but with destruction to the best and most flourishing Commonwealths: These are Rocks that will split the Ship of the best fortified Commonwealth, there∣fore carefully to be avoided by the best advice and skill of the most experien∣ced Pilot, in which his Highness doth not refuse the counsel of this Parlia∣ment, nor doth he refuse to pass the Bill they shall agree on, except in his wise∣dom he see (as our chief Pilot) something in it be dangerous to the well-being of the Nation, and give them satisfaction therein, for he is more in this case then any one man in Parliament, possibly a vote may be carried by one man, which in such a case he may justly deny, because the utility, peace, and hap∣piness of a Commonwealth depends upon the right Discipline in Religion, and the justice of Execution of just Laws, for regulating between two ex∣treams; Religion in the power of it, in all godlinesse, is a Law in it self, and needs no Law to command it, for Religion is truly the very nursing Mother to all vertues, graces, peace, and unity among men; And I must tell the Objector, that the late Kings have not really endeavoured this, but he or they had power to have done it, the neglect was his ruine, and a chief cause of Eng∣lands misery. Nor did we engage against this power or authority of the late King, but against his misusing of that power, casting off those just Laws which by his authority he should have observed and commanded to be executed for the good of his people; He seeking to rule by his own will, by absolute power in himself, to cast off all just Laws and adulterate Religion at his pleasure; this was the Original of our war, and this is that which the Ancients in all times have called Tyranny; But his Highness assumes not to himself so much Au∣thority as the late and former Kings claimed and exercised, That which he claims is such a power as may enable him to establish Religion in its purity, and that he with his Parliament might enact and give life to all just Laws, under which the people may live in all peaceableness, and be governed in all sobriety and godlinesse, with tranquillity and utility, for present and future, that the people may dwell safely every man sitting under his own Vine and under his Figree, as in the daies of Solomon, 1 King. 4. 15.
Besides, we ought to consider, that for severall years past we have travelled in a wilderness in untroden and uneven waies, and are digressed much from the right way of good discipline, almost in that condition as Israel was when with∣out a known Law, and without a teaching Priest, 2 Chr. 15. 3. And it is nor possible that in an instant at the first step we should recover our lost way, and atain to such a Reformation as all good people desire, but we must expect as we have been led in crooked waies, and leaped over all bounds to lose our selvs, we must meet with some unevenness and cragged steps before there can be an establishment in all truth and justice; The work is very great and the great∣est works are done with the greatest difficulty, because they ever meet with the greatest opposition, it was so in Ezra's time, and it is so now; yet let none that truly fear God be discouraged, for God is our God, If we seek him he will be found of us, but if we forsake him not he will cast us off for ever. 1 Cor. 28. 9. ult. These are the words of David to Solomon, when he was to build the materiall Temple, and in ver. 10. he tels him for his greater encouragement God had chosen him to build it, and exhorts him to take heed and be strong to doe it; There is a spiritual Temple to be erected, of which that was the Type, we know not by express words who God hath chosen and appointed to do it, But it shall be done at the time appointed, and by the man and means appointed; What was promised concerning the Temple at Jerusalem in a spiritual sense, belongs to us under the Gospel, as that promise which God made to Joshua, Ch. 1. 5. belongs to all Christians, and is to them applied by the Apostle Heb. 13. 5. for he hath said he will never fail you nor forsake you: God is now working by his providence for us, though we will not see it; But let us take heed we do not provoke Providence whatever men object or pretend, let us follow the footsteps of providence, not our own wils, and be careful not to envy men that God will honour, but imitate them who through faith and patience inherit the promise. It is again objected by some, That his Highness is a favourer of them that are known Cavaliers, so as they have equal priviledges with them that have ventured all for publike good, &c. Ans. Why then do others object against him for exempting all cavaliers, from being elected or Electors of members to serve in Parliament; If an enemy shall submit shall not he receive him into favour, and shall anothers eye be evil because he is good? and because we have been in a War shall we never be reconciled? God forbid. Besides the Parliament upon good and Christian considerations hath past an Act of Pardon to such Delinquents as had com∣pounded, or were not sequestred, if any compositions were not made or any were unsequestred, it was not nor is his Highness fault; By this let any judi∣cious man, unbiast in the case, judge whether these Objections be not more of envy or out of rashnesse then of truth or justice. Other Objections I might answer, but these I have named are the chief, and those that seem to carry the greatest weight in them; Therefore I shall omit to say any more, having been already longer upon this Discourse then I intended. POSTSCRIPT. SOme small things have been mistaken by the Printer and by my self, not any thing much▪ material that have observed that needs an Errata, what you finde I pray amend by you Pen, and let your Christian love and patience bear with the rest, Farewell. FINIS.
