S5114 38875598 152394
A Copy of two Letters which Richard Stafford had intended to have delivered unto the King and Queen, but not being admitted by the Yeomen of the Guard, he left them on the Rails of the back-Stairs at White-Hall, on January 26. 1689/96. In each of which was inclosed a Printed Paper, Entituled, A Supplemental Tract of Government, referred to the Conside∣ration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, January 4. in the Year aforementioned. To his Excellent Majesty, King William. May it please your Majesty; THe inclosed Paper doth contain a Manifestation and Application of Things out of the Word of God, which is true, and will be fulfilled. When it is suggested in a common matter, that by keeping unto a lesser good one is in danger to be deprived of a greater, here is no Hatred or Indignation, but thanks for the Admonition. The Kingdom of Heaven doth as much exceed all the Kingdoms of this World, as the Son doth the Light of a Spark, which only ascends a little height and expires into nothing: So whatever is most Great, Beautiful and Enduring here (if for some years) is not so much in comparison to Eternal Glory and Happiness. Every thing is to be laid aside, which may forfit our Title to that; the Principles of Re∣stitution and Justice are to be observed, if a man would have the favour of God, and be a partaker of his Crown and Reward: But he that doth wrong, shall receive for the wrong he hath done, and there is no respect of Persons. To her Excellent Majesty, Queen Mary. Madam; THe inclosed Paper doth shew that God is dishonoured by the breach of his Law; a right sence of, and zeal for his Glory may justifie any one in taking notice of it. Also it is Charity and Kindness to exhort and admonish one another to cease from Sin and Transgression, to prevent his Indignation here, and Punishment in the World to come. My earnest Prayer and Desire is that all People may use the right means to obtain Salvation; and that your Self would (above all things) make sure of the real and enduring Happiness. The first Letter was again carried to the Court at Kensington on Fe∣ruary 22. (and being sent to a Lord of the Bed-Chamber in order to be presented unto the King, it was by the Officer thrown into the Fire and  burnt. Such is the Policy of Satan and his Instruments to hinder Men See 56. 23, 24. om coming to the Knowledge of the Truth that they might be saved.
The CASE of Richard Stafford humbly offered to the Consideration of both Houses of Parliament. WHereas Richard Stafford hath been, and stands yet indicted at Common Law, and hath suffered a Weeks Imprisonment in Newgate for certain Papers, entituled, A Supplemental Tract of Government, &c. which he delivered in to the late Parliament on January 4. 1689. to which he made an Appearance at the last Sessions at the Old-Bayley, and had Oyer of his Indictment, which did run in these words, viz. That the said Richard Stafford did intend to raise difference and discord between the King and Queen, and their Peers and Great Men, and the Commons of this Kingdom of England in Parliament lately assembled, &c. He the said Richard Stafford did offer to this by way of Answer and Plea, That what he did was in full Parliament, and that he was introduced according to Form and Order into the House of Lords, the House then sitting; and the Substance and Matter of the said Paper, was referred to the Consideration of the Lords and Commons; And if it did tend to breed difference and discord between the King and Queen and Them, Themselves were the more proper Judges of what lay in their own breast, and whereof a Jury of 12 inferiour Men were not so fit to judge and deter∣mine. And further it was alledged, That this Case did come within the reason of Stat. 1o. Gulielmi & Mariae, for declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and setling the Succession of the Crown; wherein amongst the several instances of mal-administration of the late Reign there recited, one was, By Prosecutions in the Court of the Kings-Bench for Matters and Causes cognizable only in Parliament: And it was a like Error there to proceed in a more inferiour Court for what belongs to their Conusance. Though this Clause was inserted in as to the Case of Mr. Williams, who was illegally proceeded against in the Kings-Bench, for what he did as Speaker in the House of Commons; yet no publick Statute expressed in general words, is made to reach only one single and particular Case, but it takes in all others of the like Nature and Reason. It is agreeable both to the Statute and Common Laws of this Kingdom, and to right Practice and Usage, That things should be heard where they are done: And that great and weighty matters (whereof the present, according to the Indictment, is the greatest that can be, and may be stiled a Case of many Generations) should be determined in the highest Courts of Judicatory. The reason why some things of this nature have been tryed at Common Law, is because sometimes of the long interval and space of time between Parliaments, (and with this, if I mistake not, they did palliate the proceedings against Mr. Williams) and so the Offender might escape Justice in the mean while, which would be a great inconvenience: Or if he lie only under suspicion and doubt, his Tryal would be defer∣red; or if he be falsly accused and charged, he is delayed from clearing and vindicating his own innocence in the mean while, which is a very great prejudice & trouble to himself. But here by a strange Art and most wicked Corruption, of calling evil good, and good evil; of justifying the wicked for reward, and taking away the righteousness of the righteous from him, Isa. 5. 20. 23. by turning of things upside down, Isa. 29. 16. the aforesaid Richard Stafford is charged to do a thing unlawfully, unjustly, and wickedly, when he doth only lay the Laws of God before Men; He doth endeavour (according to his Duty and the Grace committed unto him) to turn them from Iniquity unto Righteousness. He doth say and affirm, That all the Words mentioned in the aforesaid Papers are True, Signi∣ficative, and will be certainly fulfilled. He doth come in the Name of Almighty God, and will make evident his Commission, that he is really sent, and hath more words to speak out in Person viva voce, unto the Honourable Houses of Parliament; Hoping that they will not be like their Forefathers, a Rebellious and Stubborn Generation, which refuse to hear the Law of their God. It is Gods constant Method to speak unto the World by those of the same likeness with our selves; and he doth commonly raise up mean Persons to convey forth his Truth unto Men, That the excellency should be of God, and not of us. I dare not abuse nor trifle with his Name, but am ready to explain the nature and meaning thereof, if I may be heard out throughly without any interruption. And so likewise, ye ought to take heed how ye reject it, for you will admit of things of lesser moment. If another should come from an Earthly Prince, or discover some new thing, or in a matter of Peace and War, of Rights or Priviledges, him will ye hear: But ye are apt to refuse or disregard, what hath relation to the immediate Government of him who is the Great King over all the Earth, and in subordination to that, is not only for the real Peace and Security of this whole Nation, but of the King∣doms round about. If I speak falshood or folly, as I should then be liable unto the Wrath and Judgment of the great God for taking his Name in vain, and making vile his Majesty; so in the mean while, I contentedly submit to be made an Example of your utmost Severity and Punishment, for disturbing and interrupting your Counsels. But if I speak Wisdom and Truth, I ought to be hearkened unto.
