T2602 E246_7 R5026 99872774 158375
The true CHARACTER Of such as are MALIGNANTS in the Kingdome of SCOTLAND. By way of Information and Direction to the Ministery of that Kingdome. ALSO The Indiction of a publike FAST the third Sunday of February next, and the Thursday following. By the Commissioners of the generall Assembly of the Church of SCOTLAND. Wherein is shewed their zeale to the glory of God, and the fellow-feeling they have of their Brethren, the Members of Christs Body. LASTLY, Lamenting the present Distraction of the Church, and Kingdome of ENGLAND. LONDON, Printed for HENRY OVERTON, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-head-Alley. 1643.
Directions to Ministers anent Malignants: By the Commissioners of the generall Assembly of the Kirke of SCOTLAND. COncerning a sort of Enemies, the Malignants, whether they be such as from the begining oppose the worke of Reformation of Reli∣gion in this Land, or such as shew themselves upon whatsoever pretence, backward and disaffected to the Reformation of Religion of England, so much indeavoured by this Kirke from our zeale to the glory of Christ, our desire of the happinesse of our Neighbour Kingdomes, our feares of apparant danger to the Religion here, if they be not made one with us in unity of Religion and uniformity of Church government: And our hopes by the blessing of God, to have a patterne from the Word set up in this Island, for the example of other Kirkes abroad. Because Enemies of this kinde may prove most dangerous if they be not discovered and avoyded, it is at this time our duty to make such Malignants known to the people that they be not deceived and drawn away from their own stedfastnesse, and from the love of Christ and of their Bre∣thren: But in doing this duty we have great need of wisdome, and the Spirit of discerning, that we neither take our friends to be our enemies, and by that mistake discourage the well affected and multiply enemies against our selves, nor such as are indeed enemies to be our friends, and thereby wrong the cause of God and weaken our selves in seeking after Reformation: and ther∣fore they must not be taken for enemies who hope the best of the Kings Majesty, and profes that they love his honour (which is the calumnie of the Malignant, against the seekers of Refor∣mation) nor such as in the begining through want of perswasion were not so forward for Reformation, nor such as in debate
of matters do possibly differ in their judgements from others, about some Circumstances, and midses which may leade to the desired end of unity in Religion, provided their conversa∣tion be such as beseemeth the Gospell of Christ; and for the substance and reallity of their Speeches and actions in private and publique, they be known to contribute their best endea∣vours for Reformation. Upon the other part, such as be enemies indeed may be known, first, by their malicious Censuring and calumniating of the civill and ecclesiasticall meetings of this Kirke and Kingdom which are held for conserving of peace betwixt the Kingdomes, and for endeavouring by all good meanes the unity of Religion, as if they tended to the diminition of the King his greatnesse and Authority in England. 2. By their dispising or misregard∣ing of the publique resolutions agreed upon for so good ends. 3. By their notable injuring the Kings Majesty in his honour, in attributeing to his Majesty whatsoever is plotted by bad Counsellors, or acted by the Popish and Praelaticall party, as if there were not a difference betwixt the King and them, or be∣twixt the King and his Authority, and the pretence and abuse thereof. 4. By slandering and traducing all such as labours to promote the reformation, in England, not spareing them who are in places of Government, and whom God hath honoured to be worthy instruments in our own reformation, as if they were enemies to the Kings honor, and were serving their own privat ends, without respect to the publique. 5. By their going about & endeavoring to make the hearts & hands of others to faint in the worke of reformation, and if it were possible to make them as Malignant & disaffected as themselves. 6. By laboring to bring the Parliament of England in suspition, as if they intended to st the yoke of royall Authority, or intended not the refor∣mation of religion, and unitie with this Kirke. 7. By their in∣solncy an boasting when they heare of the successe of the Popish and Praaticall party, and their readinesse to assist them according to their power, whereby they bewray their feare of reformation of religion, and their hope to see the day when they shall be avenged upon such as they maligne at home. When they are knowne by these and the like practises, we sought to warne the people to beware of their Company, Coun∣sells
and seducements; and because such Malignants shrow under the false pretence of Loyalty to the Kings Majesty, with∣out respect to religion or the good of religion, we ought in all our Speeches and Praiers to testifie our faithfullnesse and high respects to the Kings Majesty, and also to presse and pray for the unity of religion, and for the prospering all the good waies that may conduce for so blessed a worke, as serving for the honour of God, and for the King his greatnesse, and the true peace of his Kingdoms, declaring all such as oppose the unity of Religion to be enemies to God, to the King, and to the peace and prosperity of the Kingdoms. Now since it is incumbent to us by our calling, and commit∣ted to us by the generall Assembly according to our calling, to use all lawfull and Ecclesiastick waies for furtherance of refor∣mation and unity of Religion, for continuance of our own peace at home, and of the common peace betwixt the King∣doms, a necessity is laid upon us. First, to give warning to the people of the danger of the Protestant religion, through the Popish Armies in England and Jreland, pretending that they are better and more dutifull Sub∣jects then the Protestants, but intending no lesse then the ruine of the reformed Religion, and the planting of their Herisie, Idolatry, and Tyrannie in a more compendious way then could have bin, don by the late Service-booke, and Booke of Cannons in which course if they shall by their power prevaile, it shall be impossible for the Kings Majesty to suppresse Popery, and main∣taine the true religion, conforme to the many promises con∣teined in his Majesties Declarations; They will soone cast off their professed Allegiance and subjection, and it will be no easie matter for this Church and Kingdome, whence they con∣ceive all their troubles and disappointments to have issued to resist that violence, especially considering what a disaffected and discontented party we have at home in our own bosom. Secondly, since unity in the truth hath bin our strength since the begining, we ought by all good meanes in publick and pri∣vate, to prevent and remove all divisive motions which by ma∣licious and crafty sichophants are endeavoured by spreading of Calumnies and Islanders against the present Government, and putting aspersions on such, whether of the Nobillity & Gentry,
Burroughs and Ministry; as the Lord hath honoured to be faith∣full and happy Instruments in his worke, from the begining having endured the heat of the day, and resolved to be constant unto the end. Thirdly, that since by the providence of God the two King∣domes are so strongly united, and there be hopes of a more strong union by unity of religion. It is our duty to labour to remove and prevent all occasions of jealousies and suspitions betwixt the two Kingdomes, and to do or say nothing that may breed misunderstandings, breake off correspondence, weaken the confidence or infringe the Union and Peace betwixt the two Kingdomes, so happily established in his Majesties presence and with his royall consent in both Parliaments. Fourthly, because when we speake for the Kings honour and for obedience to civill Authority in all things lawfull, our speeches are wrested by perverse men to their corrupt ends, as if we loved not the reformation of religion in England and Ire∣land; and when we speake of reformation, we are traduced as enemies to the King and to royall Authority, which may make a great mistaking and worke dangerous effects amongst the peo∣ple, who love both reformation of religion and the Kings ho∣nour: Therefore in this difficulty we ought to shew in our Do∣ctrine, that there is no repugnancy, betwixt the Kings Autho∣rity, and the reformation of religion, that nothing can serve so much for his Majesties glory and the greatnesse of his King∣domes, as doth the reformation of religion in all his dominions, and that such as are opposite to the reformation, are greatest enemies to the Kings honour, whatsoever they professe or sweare to the contrary, and also to explaine the difference be∣twixt the Kings power and just authority, and the pretending and abusing thereof by such men for their own private ends; and to shew that oppoisiition to such men and their waies, is a true testimony of faithfullnesse and loyalty to the King. That the Presbiteries be carefull to discern and try these Malignants and to reclaime or censure them according to the Acts of the Assem∣bly, and to make report of their dilligence to the next Assembly. In end, because much every way doth depend upon us of the Ministry, we have need to stir up our selves and the people in truth and unity, which by the blessing of God will be a powre∣full
meane to preserve our Religion, and to propagate the fame to other Churches groaning under thier severall burdens and panting for such a reformation as the Lord in mercy hath gran∣ted unto us. Indiction of a Publike FAST, by the Commissioners of the Generall Assembly of the Kirke of SCOTLAND. WHereas by the late generall assembly, power is committed unto us, to consider and performe what we find necessary by all lawfull and Ecclesiastique wayes, for furtherance of the union in Religion and unity in Kirke government, for continu∣ance of our owne peace at home, and of the common peace in, and betwixt the two Kingdomes. We find it necessary that there shall be a solemn fast and humiliation kept in all the Kirkes of this Kingdom upon the third Sunday of February next, and the Thursday following, for the causes add motives following. 1. Although within these few Yeares wee renewed the Covenant and Vowed solemnely to stand to the former reformation of Religi∣on, and to reforme our selves and our Families We have notwitstan∣ding fallen from the zeale and fervency of our affection at that time, many persons of all ranks and callings are growne luke-warm and are content with a meer formality and shew of godlines, without inward power yea sins and vices abound as in the time of corruption, Family worship, mutual edification & stirring up on of another by information admonition, consolation rebuke much neglected & Ministers negligent in urging the same all which are so much the more heynous because of our unthankefullnes after so great mercies & breach of Covenant. 2. The danger of this Church and Kingdome arising partly from within; by the insolency of Papists in these troublesome times, and divisive motions of the Malignant Party, and creeping in if errors; and partly without, from the Popish Armies and Praelaticall party in England and Ireland, which aim undoubtedly at the disturbance of our peace, and overthrow of the wish of Reformation: The conside∣ration whereof should move us to pray to God to dir ct us in all law∣full meanes which may serve for unity amongst our selves, that wee may be the more strengthened against the common enemy. 3. In respect of the fellow feeling which we ought to have with the
Members of Christs body farre and neere, wee have cause to lament the long casting troubles of the Churches abroad in Germany, and else where, and especially the combustions in England, and almost utter desolation in Irelad. 4. That the Lord may blesse all lawfull meanes to be used for pre∣serving the union and peace betwixt the two Kingdomes, and procu∣ring the unity of Religion, and uniformitie of worship and Church Government within his Majesties Dominions especially that God would grant a good successe to the Treaty and travells of the Com∣missioners both of the Parliament and generall assembly. 5. Because the unhappy division; betwixt the King and Parliament of England is a great impediment to the wish of Reformation, and the setling of a firm peace in his Majesties Dominions: It is our duty to recommend earnestly to the Lord, that the differences may be com∣posed in such a way as may most conduce to the glory of God, and advance the so much wished for unity of Religion and uniformity of Church Government. 6. Finally, that the Lord would discover and disappoint all the conspiracies plots and machinations, which tend to the execution of the bloody decrees of the councel of Trent; the fountain from whence hath issued all the troubles and persecutions to the reformed Churches; and quickly destroy that Man of sin. Amen. FINIS.
