W648 E303_6 99861097 113225
Alter Britanniae Heros: OR THE LIFE OF THE MOST HONOVRABLE KNIGHT, Sir HENRY GAGE, Late Governour of OXFORD, Epitomiz'd. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the Ʋniversitie. 1645.
Alter Britanniae Heros: OR, THE LIFE AND DEATH OF The most Honourable Noble Knight, Sir HENRY GAGE, &c. TILL I began seriously to consider the perfecti∣ons of man in such excellent Persons as are men indeed, I took that saying of the great Aqui∣nas to tast more of Passion, then Divinity; Wherein he averrs, That were not those well instructed by Faith, who duly weigh man, what gifts and gra∣ces God hath endow'd him withall, what Wonders he hath done to make him great and happy, what Beauties he hath in∣still'd both into Soule and Body, and what supereminent de∣light he takes to be doing good to this Noble Creature; They would conclude, That Man were the God of God himselfe. But now though Faith be to me a precious allay to that ex∣treame Conclusion, yet I confesse the sentence to be a certain truth. This I was compell'd to acknowledge, when I did sur∣vey exactly the Excellencies of a Smith, or Gage, to recount examples to my selfe familiar, and such as I may speak of safely under the Character of a gratefull vertue; Censure her selfe granting it a Solecisme to flatter the dead. Pardon my generous ambition of two such Noble Mottoes as Fidelity and Gratitude afford: whereto that I want not some pretence, I call you to witnesse, O great and happy Geniees of the two forementioned Heroes. To peerlesse Smith, I have
already for both those Titles done that homage, which now I am about to pay unto admired Gage. Wherein may affection supply what the want of leasure, instructions, and the times abridge. This gallant Gentleman was borne at London, about the yeare 1597. of worthy and exemplar Parents, both of gene∣rous and noble Families, his Father being a principall Branch of the Gages of Sussex: a house for Antiquity and merit, no∣thing lesse then obscure; They were both intent to breed him, with the rest of their Children, as Gentilely and Civilly, as the Exigence of their Estate, Consumed, and Exhausted, by the severity of that difficult time would permit. And to this end at ten yeares old, sent him with his Bro∣ther into Flanders, to receive Education, where Mr Henry Gage, with singular satisfaction, past through the severall Schooles of Humanity. Which accomplisht, he was sent by his Father through France into Italy, where under that famous Scholar Picolhomini, Vncle to this great Generall, the Duke of Amalfi, he heard his Philosophy, and with great applause did publiquely defend it. Thus having laid stately Ground∣workes for such Magnificent Structures, as after he raised upon them, and being ready to write Man, he begins to consider in what Channell of the Ocean of this World he had best steer his Course towards the Land of Promise. At length the divine directions work upon those Noble faculties of his Soule; in∣nate Fortitude, and desire of Honour: insomuch that between them a firme resolution is begotten to Sayle towards Heaven over the most turbulent part of the Sea, in a Man of Warre. He designes himselfe for a Souldier; and considering that Tra∣vaile did much conduce to that end; To Flanders, France, and Italy, which he had already view'd, he adde Germany, and returnes that way to the Netherlands. But least you may judge that of his Travayles he made onely a present delight, and fed his Curiosity, I must assure you his observation was so strong, and punctuall, that all men did admire the exact account he was able to render of all things deserving serious memory. Mars had now read many bloudy Lectures to the Belgians,
and that Country of all others in Europe, was held his proper Academy. Where immediately upon his arrivall at 22 yeares of Age; The Gages glory, enters himselfe a Souldier in Ant∣werp Castle; There for a Twelve-months space he trayl'd a Pike, where his Noble, discreet, and gallant Carriage, brought him such endearments with the Governour and Garrison, as was very singular, and seldome gain'd by strangers in so high a manner from the Spanish Nation. Here his reputation shines with such a splendor, that the Earle of Argyle being about to raise a Regiment, seeks to win him to him: and offers him a Company. His Governour to Congratulate his advancement, Feasts him in a Princely man∣ner, and well presaging what he would arrive to; publiquely glories to have been Tutor to so brave a Souldier. Bergen ap Some, is the first place where he enters into Acti∣on, at which Siege being divers times Commanded to assault the Enemies Trenches, he gallantly performed it, till at length he was by one of their Mines blowne up towards those im∣mortall Regions whither his Noble Soule aspired. But it pleased God strangely to preserve him, so that his hurt was not so dangerous, but that admitted of a short recovery. The next yeare, the Famous Marquesse Spinola laies siege to Breda▪ in all which long and tedious action, our youthfull Captain comports himselfe, with so much Valour, and such Resolution, that he merited speciall notice from that Renowned Generall. This Siege compleated, the English Regiments were both refor∣med, so that for two or three yeares he remained without fur∣ther Charge, and betook himselfe, if it were possible, to a more excellent imployment, The Theory of Warre; for his judge∣ment told him, practice without Contemplation, was an acci∣dent without a substance. Sometimes for recreation he cast an eye upon Heraldry, and soon therein became a great Profici∣ent. Sometimes he bestow'd himselfe in translating Bookes, which he exceeding well perform'd, witnesse the Siege of Breda, written by the elegant Hermannus Hugo; and Vincents Heraldry, the first whereof he translated out of Latine into English. The latter out of English into French.
In this Vacation he began to cast about to find a Consort, on whom to place his noblest affections, and at length he dis∣covers one Mistris Mary Daniell, a Gentlewoman, whose worth and beauty made her a deserved object for the Love of so excellent a Person. It seemes nature had long before de∣sign'd her for him, as we may almost conclude, by a memorable accident happening, when with her Mother shee long before came over to see London, the Epitome of this Kingdome. Amongst other places in the City, which their Curiosity sur∣veid was St Jamese's, where in a Gallery adorn'd with divers Pictures, they saw one of Sir John Gage's Knight of the Garter, and great Grandfather to the Gentleman that now I write of; who in Queene Maries dayes had been Lord Chamberlaine of the Houshold. Of this Picture, the young Gentlewoman took speciall notice, as that which onely pleased her, and severall times reviewed it; presaging as it were that from that strange sympathy and liking would come some strange result, as after proov'd by her Match with one descended of his Loynes. However then it made so firme an Impresse on her tender fancy, being then scarce twelve yeares old, that after being married, and her Noble Husband passionately complaining, that he could not after curious search and labour, find the Pi∣cture of this Sir John Gage, which he had sought for with great desire: shee presently repeats the former Story, and so directs him thither, where since he did procure it. By this Gentlewoman he had a gallant Fortune, and was blest in the processe of those nineteene yeares they liv'd toge∣ther with a dozen Children, whereof sixe are still living, two Sonnes and foure Daughters. The firmnesse of their love, and happinesse was such, that those who liv'd for most part with them, and exactly noted what past between them, never could observe from either the least glance of anger ordistast: but still discover their endlesse affection in the highest Meridian. As he was a most tender Husband, so there never was a more in∣dulgent Father, which Indulgence he mannag'd with such an high discretion, that he preserv'd in them so great a reverence, that a beck or cast of his eye, was a sufficient command or check
unto them. But he taught them this filiall piety, not onely by precept, but example also, as appeares by a memorable act of his about this time, for his Father through his great misfor∣tune, was brought unto the hard condition of Confiscation of his whole Estate, and long imprisonment, having onely his life left him, and that onely upon curtesie, by the Kings reprieve after Condemnation. In this case he had not onely outliv'd his owne remainder of subsistance; but also the severall an∣nuities his Noble Allies and Kindred had bestowed upon him, some for 20, some for 30 yeares, in pure Compassion to see his endlesse Sufferings. But his Durance hath survived all, and no reliefe is left him, but the generous piety of his Worthiest Sonne, who to relieve his Fathers Exigence, voluntarily demises the reversion of a faire Estate at Croyden, called Haling-house, waving all respect of wrong to himselfe, or prejudice to his Wife and Children: so farre did the force of his unequall'd piety to his Parents, transport his Noble nature. Having past now two or three yeares▪ without any active or publick imployment, and furnish't his Contemplation with the best Maximes of Warre, he thinkes fit to fall againe to pra∣ctise those choycer Meditations wherewith he had enricht his mind. In the yeare 1630, Sir Edward Parham raising a new Regiment of English, makes Sir William Thresham Ser∣geant Major, and Mr Gage Captaine Commendant, in which condition he remained, ill by Parham's death, Tresham came to succeed as Colonell, and Captaine Gage as Sergeant Major, in which imployment he was, when the States besiedged Mastricht; where the Marquesse de Sanct Cruce won, with the gallantry, and prudence of the Commanders, in these des∣perate times did so reye upon that Regiment, that he gave them the guard of his owne Person. The next yeare he was in the Field, with the Marquesse de Aitona, in that which they called the running Leaguer, by rea∣son of the States and their continuall motion. Where the fore∣mentioned Marquesse, with the Duke de Lrm, took such ciall notice of him, that they perswaded him to raise a Re∣giment
of his owne: and to that end gave him a Commission. But by reason of some difficulties in England, it could not be throughly effected, till a little before Sir William Threshams death. When he having raised above 900 effective men, the others death intervening, had his Regiment compleated by addition of the old unto it; which his Highnesse the Prince Cardinall bestowed upon him. But these favours and endeare∣ments amongst Strangers he obtained not by any sinister meanes, but meerly with the eminence of his Vertue, for he could not be won to doe any thing ungratefull to his naturall Soveraigne: or inconsistent with the interest and honour of his Nation. Witnesse his fidelity exprest by his speedy repaire to England out of Flanders, (where he was in actuall Service by license of his Soveraigne) as soon as our King had broken Peace with Spaine, and called his Subjects home. This I am confident you may find once or twice attested upon record, by such Ministers of State as then were resident in Flanders. A good testimony of his Loyalty and obedience, who upon the first Summons of his King did not dispute the matter, but readi∣ly left his whole Fortunes behind him, yea his Wife and Chil∣dren as well as his Command there, which was alwayes honourable. What I hence inferre, was confirmed by another president, which I shall wrong his memory to omit. For when the En∣glish Regiment in Flanders, was Commanded into Germany; the prudent and gallant Colonell sensible of his Countries In∣terest, stoutly refused that imployment; alledging it to be un∣seasonable for English Subjects to maintaine a Warre in the Palatinate, against the Nephewes of their owne Soveraigne. And this asseveration he fortified with such evincing reasons, that he prevailed to have that Command repeal'd: an Argu∣ment that nothing was more deare unto him, then his duty to his Prince and Country. Whil'st he was Colonell, his Regiment was every Summer in the Field, and put upon the most important Actions; As for the Siege of St Omers, his memory in those that make relation of it, must needs be very eminent; since it is held Confest,
that his Trudence and Valour, did not onely make good the Townes so long resistance, but also was the load▪ starre, which guided Piolhomini to that prosperous successe in their reliefe. Three Summers successively, was he imployed to succour Gueldres, before which the States Army lay, whence still he returned with prosperous and deserved successe. After the Spaniards had lost the Bartaile of Re Croyx, he was sent with his Regiment and 1400 other Horse and Foot to secure Guel∣derland, against the Hollander, who was thought likely to take the advantage of that defeat, and endeavour to effect something there. But they having notice who was designed to attend them, wav'd their designe, and returned back with their Army into Flanders: which was likewise done by this prudent Com∣mander, who returned with such unexpected celerity, that he came happily to joyne with Don Francisco de Melos Army, before the Enemy was able to effect any thing. Afterwards, Don Andreas Cantelmo took him▪ and two other Mrs De Cam∣po, and marcht out of Flanders with them, to the Skirts of Holland, where after they had every where given strong A∣larmes, in their returne home Cantelmo sent him to take in a Castle possessed by the States. Which he did, forcing the de∣fendants to render upon discretion; notwithstanding which he used them with so much generosity, that during their Capti∣vity, he entertained the Officers every day at his owne Table, and procured moreover for them and the Common Souldiers, who were above 100▪ in number a daly allowance▪ from the Country, which noble Curtesie of his, moved the Prince of Orange, to use divers principall Officers Spaniards, tal at the latter end of that yeares field, with like Civility. Whilst thus he was growing every day in esteeme and re∣putation, amongst the most judicious and eminent of those that knew him, and being now looked upon by all such as he con∣verst with as a most accomplisht Gentleman, and compleat Souldier. This horrid and unnaturall Rebellion breakes forth at home, which from the beginning he did so much resent, that with all possible industry he imployed his utmost power and abilities in Flanders, to further and advance the quarrell of his
distressed Soveraigne; and to supplant the Rebells. As he con∣vinc't by his many painfull and costly endeavours, which at sundry times deprived the Rebells of neare 30000 Armes, and afforded His Majesty 8000 of those that were intended to be borne against him; nay had been doubtlesse had not Noble Colonell Gage diverted the intention, seized them to a better use, and made the action an eternall Argument of his Loyalty and Prudence. But this was not the onely instance he gave of his affection to his King, whose service he tendered so much, that although his Regiment was then much weakned, and he deprived of hopes to recruit it, never any Souldier of his, who could give him any probable hopes of attaining His Majesties Army, but he chearfully gave him his passe, and encouragement to depart. Whence I dare safely affirme, that since these Ciyill Warres, that Regiment hath afforded His Majesty at least 200 Officers of severall degrees. Notwithstanding all this, he did not conceive he had done his part as he ought, unlesse he came in Person to serve his So∣veraigne also▪ which consideration he so deeply apprehended, that neither his present imployment, assurance of future pre∣ferment, a reputation so eminent, a revenue so sure and n∣stant, nay nor his Wi and Children could detae him: but he take leave of the Netherlands and repaires to England, re∣solving to contribute all that Magazine of  abilities wherewith his breast was stored to the reoring of his Coun∣tries happinesse. he comes not empy handed, Armes, and divers Soul∣diers of quality gave some addition to the welcome of that most worthy and endearing Person of his. He was received with joy at the Court, and (every one presaging he should shortly doe his Nation some eminent Service) intertined here with a welcome Omen. Where his prudent, civill, and gallant Conversation, added such a Ltre unto his other Ver∣tues, and seated him so much above the region of envy, that malice her selfe durst not barefact choose but fawne upon him. Soone had he fortified himselfe in the judgement of the King
and the ablest men about him, as also wedded the Peoples opi∣nion. And now every ones impatient, till by some gallant action; he hath paid tribute for the great esteem, and reputa∣tion they had fixt upon him. Whilst every one is casting about for some imployment worthy of him, His Majesty considering the exigence of his owne present Condition, and the importance of Oxford, his Principall Garrison, is necessitated to engage the Colonell joyntly with the Governour Sir Arthur Ashton, in the defence and preservation of it. In the Interim of which imployment, what great and memorable things he did, in the subsequent dis∣course I will relate. No one is ignorant, that knew any thing, what excellent things he did propose for the Fortifying, Clean∣sing, Storing, and preserving the City. How many grievan∣ces he publickly remov'd in the Officers, and endeavour'd to reforme: and what worthy endeavours he did use to regulate▪ and moderate the reciprocall abuses, and excesses that were so obviously committed. Whil'st we are thus busied within our walls, the industrious Rebells seek to environ us on all sides, and so by Famine force us to surrender. Wherefore to this end they clap a Garrison into Brstall house, within sixe miles of us on that side whence most of our Provisions came. Besides this, whilst His Majesty was absent in the field, they fortify Abington, besiege Banbury, and straiten s every way, so that we are compell'd for our necessary subsistance to endeavour their repulse on some side. After Consultation, Brstall is thought the fittest to be attemp∣ted, and Colonell Gage must be entrusted with the manage of that businesse. They allow him a Competence of men, and other necessa∣ries, and the 10th of June he sets forward, where after his ar∣rivall with his owne Personall Valour, he put such Courage into his Followers; and with his prudent ordering of all things so amated the conscious Enemy: that he soone brought them to a Parly. His Carriage in the businesse deserving a more ex∣act relation, I will take leave to discend to partioulars. The 11th day in the morning, he sate downe before the House,
immediatly sending word to the Lady, that shee and others of her Sexe might depart thence with leave and safety: promi∣sing to see her safely convoyed to any place shee had a mind to. His excelling curtesie was such, that though this Lady did no∣thing lesse then merit such an offer, he could not dispence with the goodnesse of his owne nature, to deprive her of this civi∣lity. Assoone as he had notice that the Ladies were gone, the House was presently inviron'd by his Command, and the Soul∣diers fell on with such a well-govern'd fury, that they soon possessed the Church and other out buildings, which the ne∣my endeavoured to defend: but thence repelled, and seeing the House attempted with hot assault, Conducted by so much discretion, and exemplary Courage of the Commander; they demand a Parly, and offer to give up the House, with the Vi∣ctuall, Ammunition, and Ordnance, so that they might march away with their Armes and Horses. Which though it might by some that waigh not the severall circumstances be esteemed too specious adeparture for them, yet this prudent Gentle∣man considering the House was strong, that it had cost some men already, and that he could not force it, but at dearer rates, chose rather to yeeld to their demands, then hazard the lives of any more; which were more precious to him then the Armes of the Rebells. Vpon their surrender, he so punctu∣ally observ'd his Conditions, and convoy'd them with such civility, that themselves confest they had fallen into the hands of an honourable and gallant Enemy. His successe here procured him fresh imployments, he is sent to disturbe their new garrison at Abingdn, to effect which he marcht out in the night, and presuming of the intelligence of those who had imployed him concerning the Forces of the Enemy, He falls upon them gallantly in the morning, and charges up to their turnepikes and ascends their workes, but finding the enemy powre upon him in such unexpected num∣bers, he begins to think of a retreat, and give immediat order for it: As being the only thing they could hope for, if that; considering as well the enemies strength and readinesse as the thinnenesse of their own numbers, their distance from hom,
their amazement and repulse: but such was his valour dexteri∣ty and discretion, that notwithstanding the enemy pursued him like a torrent, he made an honourable and safe Retreat. This added much to his esteem in the judgement of every knowing and discreet man. So that what imployment of exi∣gence and necessity this Summer afforded here, was almost all imposed upon him; Basing Castle, the dwelling house of the Honourable and Loyall Marquesse of Winchester, had now en∣dured a second Siege for two and twenty weekes: and was now brought to that necessity for Provisions, that unlesse it were supplied by a speedy reliefe, it must be forced to surren∣der. This once certified to the Commissioners at Oxford added much trouble to the exigence of their present condition. For they saw no suddain assistance could be expected from His Ma∣jesty, they considered the importance of the place; the quality and gallant behaviour of the defendants, together with their owne inabilities to assist them; which concurrence of diffi∣culties made them very anxious, till consulting with the fa∣mous Gage, they find him beyond expectation proffer him∣selfe voluntarily to run the hazard of all obstructions, and un∣dertake the businesse. Though here they considered that A∣bingdo, Ailysbury, Reading, and the Leaguer it selfe, did se∣verally afford greater numbers then they could send with him, though they waighed the length of the March, and difficulty of the passes; yet such was their opinion in him▪ and confi∣dence in his Courage, and experience, that they resigned all to his discretion. The action was so eminent and so deserving memory, so Souldier like and fortunately attempted, and per∣formed, that I cannot pretend to honour his Noble Genius, should I omit a punctuall relation of it. Vpon Monday the ninth of September, that at ten a clock at night, he Marcht out of Oxford towards Basing. with 400 Foot, 250 Horse. 12 barrells of Powder, 1200 waight of Match, passes by Wallingford, where he received an addition of 80 Horse, with as many Foot, on Tuesday Morning they rested and refreshed, and then he dispatched an expresse to the Governour of Winchester Sir William Ogle, dsirine him,
according to his former promise to Sir Edward Nicholas to draw out with his Forces, and to fall into Basing Parke, in the reare of the Rebells Quarters, betwixt foure and five a clock the next Morning, being Wednesday the 11th of September: whilest he with the Oxford Troopes assaulted them on the o∣ther side, and the Lord Marquesse from the House, plyed them with a fierce Sally. Having finisht this dispatch, he Marcht forward, with as much speed as the Foot Souldiers could make, towards Aldermerston, where he intended to repose againe. They past through the Country for Parliamenteers, with O∣range tawney Scarfes and ribands, till a Wallingford Captaine (who was sent before with his Troope, together with the Quarter-masters of each Regiment to discover, and have pro∣visions in a readinesse against the Souldiers arrived) found in the Towne, some of the enemies Scoutes, and forgetting his disguise fell fowle upon them, took some Prisoners and so dis∣cover'd themselves. This evening the Foot were extreamly wearied (having had scarce 3 houres rest since they went out of Oxford) which the prudent Colonell perceiving▪ alighted himselfe from his Horse, by whose example and intreaty, the other Officers, and Troopers did the like, and walkt three miles, whilest the tired Foot refresht themselves in their Saddles; By which meanes, he came to Aldermerston about eight in the evening; seven miles from Basing, and rested till eleven, when againe he set forward and Marcht all night, though the Foot were faint and much dejected. So that being come within two miles of the place, they began to lye downe as not able to advance farther, whereupon he caused all his Horse-men every man to take one of them up behind him, himselfe giving the first example, which uwoed  so took them, that they wholly forgot their former gue, and with hopes of Pillage, and promise of Mny when they re∣turned to Oxford, were so encouraged, that they desired no∣thing more then to attaque the Rebell. In the interim, arrives a Lieeant from Wichester, who ares them, the Governour by reason of the Enemies Horse, which lay betwixt him and Basing,  not draw t to assist
them. Whereupon the Colonell was compell'd to enter into new Counsells; wherefore seeing himselfe deprived of that assistance, and presuming the Enemy having notice of his com∣ming, would draw to a head, he resolves contrary to his first resolutions, with united Forces to fall strongly upon them in one place. In order to which he Commands the men to be put in readinesse, riding up to every Squadron, gave the word, which was Saint George, chearing them with what possible encouragements he could, and Commanding every of them to tye a handkerchiefe on their right armes above their elblow, for a distinction to be knowne as well to one another, as to the Lord Marquesse his men, if they should chance to make a Sally, and for want of such a signall fall foule upon one another. After this preparation, they marched on, the gallant Colo∣nell alighting from his Horse, arm'd only with his Sword, led up the Foot, and being come as he conceived, within hearing of the House, he Command his Drummes and Trumpets to cheare the besieged with the newes of his long wisht arrivall. The Rebells having notice the day before of his comming, and of the place he was like to fall on, had drawne forth all their best men, all fresh and pamper'd in number farre excee∣ding his, with these they possest the Passes, with some crosse hedges of advantage, lining them with Musketiers. Here stood the rest of the Horse and Foot in Batagli ready for him, and answer'd his Drummes and Trumpets with their owne, which he perceived were very neare, though clouded under the wing of an obscure mist. Our Forces had advanced not many paces further, before they discovered a Body of the Enemies Horse, consisting of sixe Troopes, standing in very good order ready to receive our charge. Which though we hastened to accst them with, before we came at them, we were first saluted from the hedges by a smart Volley of Musket shot, though accompanied with more Terror then Execution: for notwithstanding this, the right wing of our Horse, com∣manded by gallant Colonell Webb: Charg'd the Enemy so home, that   they all turn'd head and ran away. The left wing   after the followed the Chase▪ till the
Rebells were got into a place of safety. In this pursuit, we took a Cornet of theirs, which since is knowne to be Morleyes. Vpon the Rout of the Horse, Colonell Gage advanced with the Foot towards the hedges, where after two houres dispute, he beat them from hedge to hedge, till at last he brought them to abandon all their holdes on that side, and give him free en∣trance to the House. Where after he had delivered the Mu∣nition he brought with him, and paid my Lord Marquesse the respects due to a Person of his quality, leaving 100 Souldiers of his owne with him, he marcht with the rest of the Horse and Foot to Basingstoke; a good halfe mile distant thence, and with small resistance possest himselfe of it; whence all that day he continued sending to the Garrison, as much Wheat, Malt, Salt, Oates, Bacon, Cheese, Butter, and other Provision, as he could get Carts or Horses to transport it. There he found a little Magazine of 13 Barrells of Powder, with some Muskets, which also he sent in: together with 80 head of Cattle, and 100 sheep. Whil'st these things were doing at Basingstoke, according to his directions, they in the House Sallyed into Ba∣sing Town, beat thence the Enemy, killing 50, and taking two of their Captaines, and 33 Souldiers Prisoners in the Church. By this time the day was neare spent, and the Enemy ha∣ving received some fresh supplies of Horse, appeared much more numerous, and gay then in the morning, and made shew of a desire to fight with ours againe. Advancing to that end over a large Champaine, almost within Musket shot of our Horse, standing in a field without Basingstoke, betwixt two large Hedges, which were lined with Foot. There they stood facing each other an houre or two, till the Colonell perceived his Squadrons of Horse to grow thin, many of them slincking away by reason of the extreame fatigue and fasting, wherewith most of them both Horse and Men were opprest. Whereupon he gave order they should retire by degrees, and passe through the Towne towards Basing house, whilst he with the Foot made good the Avenues and Passages, on that side the Tow. When he understood the Troopes had past the Towne, and were put againe into order on the other side towards the house.
He likewise with most part of the Foot, retired likewise, lea∣ving a Captaine with 70 Musketeers to make good the Ave∣nue; who also when he saw the Colonell retired up to the Horse, drew off also, leaving only a Sergeant with 20, to dis∣pute the Passage, till the rest were retired into the House. Whither they also had order immediately to draw off, which they did, the Enemy not once attempting to enter the Towne: but retreating soon after, they perceived our Horse to give back. The reason why this provident Commander refused to lodge in the Towne, was the consideration of the many Ave∣nues to be defended, against the Enemy now recruited with new additions of strength; which could not without difficulty have been done, in regard our Horse and Men were so farre spent, and our Souldiers so apt to hide and disperse in severall houses, there to fall to drinking and disorders. The next day early he sent out a Lievtenant Colonell to the Towne with all the Horse and Foot, as well to refresh them∣selves as to be sending Provisions all that day into the Garri∣son. In the meane while this accomplisht Souldier spent that Thursday in contriveing his retreat to Oxford, and sending out severall Spies to observe the motions of another Enemy, who was drawing to a head from Abington, Newbury, and Reading, to hinder his retreat homewards. And he found by the unani∣mous relation of his severall Spies, that they of Abington were lodged at Aldermarston, they of Newbury at Thatcham, and they of Reading at Padsworth, Townes lying upon severall passes of the River Kennet, over which He was necessitated to goe; in his retreat Norton with his Horse and Foot which lay in Basing Parke, was to follow him in the Reare, whensoever he began to move, which they conceived he could not doe, but they should have notice of it. The Colonell resolved there∣fore in his owne breast, without acquainting any man whatsoe∣ver with it, to make his retreat that very night, having in that little time he had been there slaine sixescore, taken 100 Priso∣ners, with 150 Armes, and out of the adjacent Townes, put in a Monthes Provision into the House. As also drawne in two peeces of the Enemies Artillery; The one, a goodly Demi-Cannon,
which had been formerly engaged, and neither Party had adventured to fetch them off. But now the better to amuse the Enemy, and give them cause to thinke that He thought of nothing lesse then of so sud∣daine a retreat, he sent out Warrants to Sherborne and Sher∣field, (presuming they would come to the Enemies know∣ledge) to bring in suddainly a certaine quantity of Corne to the Garrison upon pain, if they refused, of sending 1000 Horse and Dragoones before the next day noone to set their Townes on fire. Having thus disposed of all things within himselfe, and judging that he was not able with longer stay to doe my Lord Marquesse any further service: though by delaying his returne, he might have endangered the losse of those Forces committed to his Charge. A little before night, he sent Or∣ders to Basingstoke, for his men to retire, as they had done the night before, and to march to the House, but not to enter, till they had further Order from him: whither when they were arrived, he told my Lord Marquesse of his resolution to de∣part that night, and the necessity of it; begging of him two or three good Guides, and so takes leave of his Lordship, mar∣ching away quietly without sound of Drum or Trumpet about eleven of the clock that Thursday night. He gives Orders to all his Scouts both in the Van and Reare, that if they met with any of the Enemy, they should likewise give themselves out to be Parliamenteers, marching from the Campe before Ba∣sing, to the River Kennet, to lye in wait for the Oxford Forces that were to retire that way; Thus as you see his judgement and prudence was excelling, so his Successe was equall. For finding the Rebels had pull'd downe Burfield-Bridge, he found a way to foard the River, every Trooper taking up a Musketier behind him. So having happily past the Kennet, and having certaine no∣tice they had pulled up both Henly and Reading Bridges; about eight a clock on Friday morning, he did againe foard the Thames at Pangborne, and so marcht to Wallingford, where he rested and refresht that night, arriving safe the next day at Oxford, with the losse onely of eleven men. Where he was
received with extraordinary applause, and acclamations▪ though he show'd as much discretion and modesty upon that occasion, as he had done Valour and Prudence in the Action that procur'd it. For when upon notice of his approach, most of the people ran out into the fields to meet him, and all Per∣sons of quality almost with their Coaches went to honour his returne, he steales away by them, and after he is enter'd the Towne, rides up a private way to his lodging, as if he had been nothing concerned in these expressions of joy; and as if this triumph had had no relation to him. Which the people refle∣cting upon, when as the Souldiers entred the Towne, they saw him absent whom they stood gazing to behold; I meane the wise Conductor of this great & fortunate enterprize, who privately had withdrawne himselfe. Which turned their ap∣plause to wonder, and hence they doubly magnified so admi∣rable a Person. But whether this great Action were undertaken with grea∣ter magnanimity, performed with more Courage, Prudence, & Skill, or finished with more modesty, I dare not presume to resolve. Yet I dare affirme, that if you consider all circumstan∣ces and difficulties, this Expert Gallant Commander past through in the performing of it: as for example his fighting with a strength so farre superiour to his, at so great a distance, from friends and home, upon their owne ground, and notwith∣standing all treacherous endeavours to the contrary, to mannage and performe it with such secrecy and Successe: nay, after all though way laid in sundry places, with such vast numbers, who had broke the Bridges, and possest the Passes, to make such a Gallant and safe Retreat. This weig'd, I say you needs must grant the whole Action to have been for wise Conduct, gal∣lant and skilfull manage, the most Souldier-like piece these Warres have ever yet afforded. Few weeks are past after this, before Banbury also is brought into the like exigent condition, and must needs be releived by such a time or else surrendred. Wherefore to him again they have recourse, as to the only person that could effect it. He to convince the world, that his zeale and love to his Majesty was
the cheife motive of his undertaking, and to evince them who attributed his cheerfull undergoing the last action, only to his respect and affection to that most noble and loyall Lord, the Marquesse of Winchester. Embraces this imployment also though he esteemed it a peice of greater difficulty then the for∣mer, as then he told the Lords Commissioners, by reason now it was with the same number to encounter an Enemy doubly equall to the other; notwithstanding which, their confidence and opinion of him is such that he must needs attempt it, and and to engage hm further, they assure him the King will send the Earle of Northampton with 400 Horse to his assistance, and that punctually at such a time and place they should come and meet him. He wisely consider'd that the force of Oxford joyn'd with them, were not considerable to fall upon an Enemy triple their number, if either skil or resolution did attend them. Wherefore he concludes by some stratageme or other to a∣mate them, and lay a foundation whereupon he might proba∣bly raise the desired successe; to this end he counterfaits the hand of Browne Commander of the Rebels at Abingdon, and directs a letter to Fines at Banbury, assuring him the King was come with a formidable Army to Newbury, and that he was sending the Earle of Northampton with 3000 Horse and Dragoones which were to passe by Abingdon, and to joyne with Gage, and the Oxford Forces in raising that Seidge. Wherefore he Counsells him to depart, and draw off in time, for by reason of the neernesse of the Kings Army, he could not afford him any assistance. This letter was by his contrivall handsomly delivered, and so amuzed Fines, that he called a Councell of War upon it, which sate some houres. The hand perswaded them that Browne had sent it, only one of them creates a doubt in the smoothnesse of the stile, and insists upon that, which causes them before they resolve any thing, to send a Post to Abingdon to know if any such letter were sent thence, where all was disavow'd, Browne protesting nothing came from him. This answer made them again secure, but so that they kept strict watch upon all quarters to discover any moti∣on of ours. Not many houres after the Earle of Northampton
cames with about the first mentioned number, and noble Co∣lonell Gage according to their pact goes out with some Foot, two Drakes and what Horse the Towne afforded to meet him; upon this the Enemies Scouts at their approach run in, and assures them that the Earle and Colonell were now comming indeed; immediatly they apprehend themselves betraid, and conclude, that the number and other circumstances in the sup∣posititious Letter, were all true. Whereupon they draw off their Cannon, and possest with a panick feare, send them away in the night: staying themselves till morning, for the honour to be so soundly beaten, that they could not lay claime to the credit of a Cowardly retreat. But flying give way to them, whom they might have devoured▪ had they stoutly stood and closed boldly with them, but the Successe next after Almighty God is due to the discreet contrivall, and manage of this hand∣some device of his. Shortly after his returne from Banbury, His Majesty re∣paires to Oxford, and as an earnest of His Princely gratitude for these gallant Actions makes him a Knight, and treats him with very endearing respects, assuring him, that He would never forget his merit and singular Service: but study to advance him to such honourable imployments as He might thence per∣ceive how much He did value and esteeme him. Which He shortly after perform'd, by making him Governour of Oxford; Sir Arthur Aston, by reason of his unfortunate mischance be∣ing become unable for such an active and toilsome Charge. It is incredible what a generall Contentment all men took in his Promotion, and how few repined at his advancement. And 'tis no lesse difficult in those that did not see it, to conceive how admirably well he manag'd that place, for those few dayes he liv'd to possesse it. What noble and wise Designes he laid, with what admirable dexterity he endear'd himselfe to all Courtiers, Scholars, Townesmen, Souldiers, all affording him honour and affection. 'Tis really a wonder, how insensibly he fortified himselfe in every ones opinion. He wins the States∣man by his Prudence, the Courtier with Civility, the Scholar by his Respect to Arts, and Eminence therein, the Townes∣men
by Crtesie, as also by falling halfe his owne Pay, and ea∣sing them of many unnecessary Taxes. Lastly his Care, Coun∣tenance and Gallantry endear'd him wholly to the Souldiers. He was no sooner confirmed in his place, but he began to let the World perceive, that he meant to governe the Towne indeed, he takes an exact survey of the Fortifications, Maga∣zine, together with the number and discipline of the Souldi∣ers, and determines to see them all supplied, representing them seriously to His Majesties Councell, he does not onely expose the necessities and defects, but also proposes the meanes how to supply and correct them. He demands Horse to Command the Country, secure the Markets, and to fetch Provisions to his Garrison, and propounds the manner how to raise them, and doe all this. He takes order for store against a Siedge, thence descends to the accommodation of the Souldier, and the re∣paire and preservation of their Armes. Diversly contrives the Townesmens ease, and yet performes it with content to the Souldier, and meanes of their better subsistance. Having done this at home, he begins to cast his eyes abroad, and thinkes how to secure the Country, as much as was within the reach of pos∣sibility, whil'st the Enemy holds Abington: to the end, that they might be better able to Contribute and afford Provisions to Oxford. Wherefore he resolves to break all the Bridges upon the Tame, and the other Rivers neare, and to make redoubts upon the Fords and Passes, so to preserve all the East and North side of the City entire from annoyance, and in other places to make Garrisons in places convenient; These, and an hundred other excellent Designes he had, which if God had granted him Life, he would have accomplisht. All which, as all his other businesse, he had chalk'd out for execution, in a gallant discreet method, which did the businesse home, and yet left him in all without anger or aspersion from any. Which in a moment, got him such an excesse of love and authority toge∣ther, that all concluded, never Towne could be more happy then this was like ere long to be. But scarce had we possest this admirable Man three weeks, and solac'd our selves in such a treasure. When the Heavens envious of our felicity, or
angry at our desertlesse happinesse, in love with those beauties and excellencies of his, were pleas'd to deprive us of him; making use of this occasion. He seeing the exigence of secu∣ring the East side of this City, to urge the demolishing of Columb Bridge neare Abington, over which the Enemy made daily incursions into the Country to Plunder, gather Contri∣butions, and spoyle our Markets: Resolv'd upon the enter∣prize and gives instruction to his Lievtenant Governour for the execution of it, he determining himselfe to attend his Government at home. But it was the will of God to bereave us of him, his Autumne was come, and he must dye in the Bed of Honour. In order to which decree, those transcendent gallant Spirits, who went in that Action out of their extraor∣dinary esteeme of him by power and entreaties, wooe him con∣trary to his owne principles to leave his domestique charge, and expose himselfe in that fatall attempt. Wherefore he drawes out of Oxford, with 600 Horse and Foot, accompanied with the two Princely Brothers, P. Rupert, and P. Maurice, together with sundry other gallant Spirits, who upon Saturday the 11th of March, came thither about seven in the morning, where this worthy Commander lea∣ding the men himselfe, possest the Bridge. Making it good a long time against the hot assaults of the enraged Enemy, who endeavoured to preserve the freedome of so important a Passe; which conduced so much to their subsistance, and our annoy∣ance. The dispute was so sharp on both sides, that the place was won and lost no lesse then twice on each side; the noble Colonell seeing the difficulty, had drawne himselfe to a place convenient to survey and consider in such manner the situa∣tion, and accesses of advantage, that he might the better thereby attaine his end. Where whil'st he was designing how to pursue with successe, what he had with such difficulty be∣gun, a wandring Bullet hits him on the side, and transpierces his Body: with which mortall wound be immediatly falls to the ground, and together with him the whole enterprize, which was presently deserted. Shortly after this shoishment of this mortall Summons
was past over, he comes to himselfe, and being taken up to be conveyed away, recollects his powers, to prepare himselfe for his approaching end. Which with great piety and pru∣dence he performed, with no little edification to such as ob∣serv'd him. At this instant he gave an ample testimony of the sincerity and resolution wherewith he came to serve His Ma∣jesty, and his Country in this just Quarrell. For being deman∣ded what he would have done concerning his temporall Estate, he replied; I thank God, that, to my comfort is already setled, onely Commend me to my deare Wife, and put her in mind, that if it can be, shee see my Sonnes brought up according as shee and I had agreed, so many yeares at Schoole, where they are, and after send them to LA FLESH in FRANCE, to heare some part of their Philosophy, and to learne those other necessary and becomming qualities of Gentlemen. Tell my Children, that their dying Father sends them his Blessing. Except these few wordes in all the time of at least two houres, which he lived in perfect sence and memory after that unfortunate wound: he was not heard to open his mouth to any other end, then to breath forth Heroike acts of Devotion, attending wholly to reconcile himselfe to his Lord and Saviour, into whose divine hands with unspeakable resignation and repose he yeelded his happy Soule. The newes of this sad disaster comming before, prepared Oxford to entertaine his Body with such a face of sorrow, as I am deceiv'd, if ever formerly had been seen such a generall dejection, and lamentations so universall in that City, amongst all degrees of Persons. And it was well observ'd, that the most generous and noble Spirits did most passionately expresse their affection, and resent the losse of this renowned Gentleman. But this appeared most abundantly in the Confluxe at his Fu∣nerall on the 13th of January, where the Court, the Camp, the Vniversity, the City, did even contend who should ex∣presse the greatest affection, and yeeld him the greatest honour. The Court honour'd him with Prince Rupert, the Duke of Richmond, the Lord Treasurer, the Lords Chamberlaines Secretaries, Comptroller, the Lords of the Privy Councell; and
most of the Nobility and Gentry besides. The Camp sends Deputies of her affection, most of the great Commanders in the Kingdome. The Ʋniversity and City, afford both their repre∣sentative Bodies in the Vice-Chancellor and Mayor, with their severall Traines of followers. Somerset and Chester Heralds were sent by His Majesty to attend, and order the solemnity, which was indeed worthily perform'd. The Souldiers did guard the passage from the thronging multitude, whil'st foure Trumpets in mourning went before, beating the aire with the dolefull Ecchoes, you may imagine this sad occasion did afford, which they continued, till they had brought to Christ-Church (to use the Heralds words) The most Honourable Sir Henry Gage Governour of Oxford, who in the North Angle in the Body of the Church, was at length deposited, his Grave being honour'd with the Teares and Sighes of our whole Nation Epitomiz'd in this City. Amongst which my affection doth perforce oblige me to preserve the memory of my affliction for this irreparable disaster, in the following Elegy. An ELEGY. AS flowers, whose lovely tinctures most invite Our eyes, and feed them with the chast delight Of naked beauties, which our senses chaine With choicest odors nature doth containe: Charming our sight more strongly to behold, The Bodies that these rarities enfold; Intice us nearer, which doth also woo Ʋs both to handle, and to cull them too: Neglecting others which were these away, Were worth our notice, and a like survay. So men whose faire perfections best proclaime; The fountaine whence those excellencies came With life and vigour; insomuch thereby That Atheists urg'd confesse a Deity:
Such whose Heroike mindes and nobler soules The worlds great axe-tree out of both the poles Would cast, in contestation to inthrone Justice and vertue, though they lost their owne. Men in whose bosomes shines immortall light, Enricht with all that is not infinite. No sooner these doth lustfull Heaven spye, But fixes on them an inamour'd eye: And eager lovesicke. This disease to cure, Purloynes them from us, ere they be mature. Thus thus alas Great GAGE, from earth was cull'd, Long time before the hand of nature pull'd. Blest Genius, if thou be not quite dissolv'd, Into that endlesse essence which involv'd All essences, or if thou still descry Within the mirrour of the Deity, Our wordes and actions: if thou take delight To live preserved from Cymmeran night In humane bosomes. Hearkn to the vow, Ʋnto thy happy Ghost I offer now, By all the love I bore thy precious breath, By all the teares wherein I mourn'd thy death, By all the honours that thy vertues Crown'd, By all the joyes wherein thou dost abound, By all that blisse thou doest possesse and see, By all those glories that invelope thee, I here protest, thy name shall never dye, Whilst any thing is mortall, that is I. Nay my immortall part, shall ever pay Homage to thee in that Eternall day Of endlesse time, in which thou shalt descry My love as fresh as immortality. Ed: Walsingham. I have hitherto insisted upon what this noble Gentleman did his Life and Actions; give me leave now in briefe to tell you what he was, and give you a scantling both of his inward
and outward man. Sir Henry Gage, was of a faire and goodly Stature, in Body as in mind, above the ordinary pitch of other men; To this height he had in all parts a beautifull propor∣tion. He was of a faire Complexion, very Comely, his Com∣portment was Courteous, Gentile, and his Presence full of Reverence: His Speech discreet and civill, his Conversa∣tion pleasant, very modest, and accommodated happily to places, times, and Persons. In fine his gratious outside, did every where proclaime what a rich and noble Soule was lodg'd within. Those that were pleas'd to take notice of what he said and did, continually discovered new proportions of Vertue in him, and the stricter their observation was, so much the more did they admire his Vertues and Abilities, of some whereof at least, I have engag'd my selfe to give a short account. What was most singular in him was his perpetuall industry, and that even when he was not in actuall Service in the field, by ex∣ercising his Souldiers in the use of their Armes, cutting out Townes and Forts in Turfe, and teaching his men even by way of recreation how to become expert; how to Approach, to Scale, Retreat, how to gaine a Towne by Assault, or by a famishing Siedge, how to make their Trenches, and secure themselves, with a Thousand such Souldier-like imploy∣ments. He had an excellent Pen, and that strangely enricht by the variety of the best Languages whereof he was Master; Latine, English, French, Italian, Spanish, were familiar unto him; he was not ignorant in Greek, and though he was in Dutch not elegant, yet he had enough to treat with the Peasants there, and such as understood no other language, all which is an ex∣treame argument of a strong memory. His ability in this kind made him imcomparable gratefull to all, for being in a Coun∣try where all Languages were spoken, he was able to enter∣taine every one for the most part in his owne Tongue. Which made him eminent in a high degree, as appeared at the Siedge of St Omers, at which time by reason of a Puesto he had Charge of there, he having frequent occasions to send sundry Orders
and dispatches in severall Languages, Prince Thomas of Savoy; took speciall notice thereof, and perceiving they came alwaies in the same hand, enquired who was his Secretary. Answer being made, that he used none, he admired it so farre, that to be further assured, he sent a Walloon Cavalier, called Monseiur Lanoy, with some pretended businesse to stay with him; though the true end was to take notice whether or no he was his owne Secretary, being that his Stile and Language was still so excel∣lent good. The truth is, there are not many that are able in so severall Languages, without affectation to write such natu∣rally elegant and gentile Letters, with so much facility and dispatch. How patient he was of labour, and how carefull of his Charge, I need goe no further for an instance then his last im∣ployments, the Government of Oxford; which appear'd remarkable to all the Inhabitants; for after he had so great a trust committed by His Majesty unto him, there was no night in which he slept foure houres in his Bed, for being busied all day he took the dead of the night to write and contrive his Affaires. Which those prudent and Souldier-like instructions he left behind him worthily demonstrate. Yet all this serious attention to warlike affaires did not so much possesse him, but they left him enough of himselfe to attend to Conversation, which was so affable and Courtly, that those who were stran∣gers to him, dream'd often of nothing lesse then that he was a Commander of so much Courage, Experience, and Repute. As none in the Summer was more active in the field in the times of his imployment then he; so none in another kind more industrious in his Winter Garrisons. For then he was at Court perpetually soliciting in behalfe of his Souldiers, for their Pay, accommodations in Garrisons, recruits, and the like. You might see him also frequent in the Courts of Iustice, soliciting his right in Law in behalfe of his Wife and Chil∣dren; wherein he was so knowing, that all his Lawyers for the most part ingenuously still confest, that he needed no better Councell then himselfe had given unto them, by way of information in his Case. And however many able men
hold it action enough to follow any Suit in Law, yet he was more industrious then to wast his whole day in this, or his Regiments affaires, and would steale besides three, foure, or five close houres to his Book and Pen, bestowing himselfe now in reading History or Philosophy, then in translating some profitable Bookes, and sometimes in writing something of his owne; which as they highly deserve, may chance ere long to be expos'd in publique, and communicated to the World. But his chiefe Study was to make himselfe Master of the Theo∣ry of Warre, wherein though his practice was already emi∣nent, yet I may well affirme that none desirous of Philosophy ever studied Aristotle more intensely then he did Fortifi∣cations, Siedges, Mannaging of Battailes, and in generall the whole Stratagetick part of Warre. Nor was he yet so narrow, as with all this action to be Commensurated, he found time enough, besides twice or thrice a day to Comply with the obligations of a devout Chri∣stian, and most houres of the day with a great dexterity of his ready Pen to dispatch Military orders, and correspond con∣stantly with divers Friends as well remote as neare unto him. Insomuch that some wise men stick'd not to affirme him a man made for as much Action, as was necessary to mannage the affaires of a great Empire. Which may be confirm'd by the greatnesse of his mind, and strange liberality, which even since his comming hither he hath sometimes practiced. Once he was knowne when he had but three and forty shillings in all, and knew not how at present to compasse more, he stick∣ed not to give forty of it to a decayed Gentleman, that beg∣ged of him, whereupon being advised to husband better his money, till his imployments would afford him more plenty, he smiling answered, When I begin to love money, I shall desist to be any more a Souldier, for he that loves money loves his life, and by consequence fearing danger, is unfit to be imploy'd in any gallant Action. But this was not the onely generous way he spent his meanes, for he laid out very much in Correspondence, having
excellent good weekly from most parts of Christendome, which although it was chargeable to him, yet he was wont to say; What others spent in Cards, Dice, and other vaine exercises, be might well allow himselfe in this, which was so usefull to him, and of so great contentment. The Honour of his Nation he had still an eye upon, when he was abroad as well as his owne, and although his Revenue was not great, yet no Italian, Spaniard, or other Cavalier appeared more neat and gallant both in Field and Garrison then he, who kept alwayes a constant Table, fit at any time to receive the grea∣test Commander. Which was alwayes grac'd with extreame Courtesie and freedome. These discreet gallantries, gave a lustre to his greater merits and esteeme, and that not onely here at home, as the World saw with His Majesty, the No∣bility, and all sorts of People, but also in the Court of Brux∣ells, and the whole Country. Where by reason of his Affa∣bility, Prudence, Valour, and other great endowments, he was reputed the flower of all our English that had appeared in those parts. Though his worth and Person were admir'd and gratefull to all, yet to none more then those three Fa∣mous Generalls, Prince Thomas of Savoy, the Duke of Ler∣ma, and Count Fountaine, all which held with him an extra∣ordinary familiarity and dearnesse, won by that chearfull calmnesse and composure in him, which invited all men to admire his constant smoothnesse so great, that the highest incitements would hardly adde a wrinkle to the severity of his mind, to make his passion legible to such as studied him with most attention. Thus I have given you a briefe survay of the Famous Gage, though I confesse, I have afforded you but a glimpse of his inward man, and have willingly conceal'd the greatest per∣fections and excellencies of his richest Soule. I have done nothing in saying, all men knew him an expert Souldier, a great Commander, and that his Friends knew him a perfect Linguist, an excellent Humanist, a sound Philosopher; and competently seen in diviner Studies: in summe a compleat
Scholar, insomuch that it may well be doubted, whether he was abler at his Pike or Pen. I have added little by affir∣ming him an exact Courtier, nay a prudent Statesman; as some able judgements have not sticked freely to acknow∣ledge: unlesse I did treat of his more inward Vertues, and disclose his singular Piety. But seeing my selfe unfit, unable for to speak him further, I here conclude; and offer this im∣perfect Votive of my affection to his happy memory, glory∣ing that by this, Posterity shall know me so, as at least to ranke me amongst the admirers of this excellent Man. FINIS.
