Y17 47683585 173040
map of Dunkirk 1. The Town of Dunkirk is very well fortified, full of Souldiers, and furnished with all Warlike Habiliments. 2. The great Sandy Hills near Dunkirk are taken into a very large and Strong Citadel, well furnished with all manner of Artillery, and other Necessaries. 3. The French King hath Cut a New Trench thorow the Splin∣ter Sands, one Mile in length, for a Harbour for his Men of War, and hath by Art, and Vast Expence, so far Advanc'd the Work, that it will at present, upon the Head of the Tyde, Receive a Hundred Men of War, of Forty Five Guns apeece, and when finished, 150 Ships of Seventy Guns apeece, may enter at the Top of Tyde, and be safely se∣cured from Storms, and all Enemies whatsoever. 4. The French King is Raising a Castle in the Sea, at the Mouth of the New Harbour, on which will be Planted 200 Peeces of Cannon, when finished, to secure his Men of War in this New Mole. 5. This Great and Prodigious Work hath been Four Years in Action, and in One Year more it may be finished; and at present there may be Employed in and about the Work, and preparing Ma∣terials 14000 Persons. 6. The Town of Dunkirk is at present a Free Port, and much Land is laying out to build upon, to Enlarge the Town. 7. When the Harbour and Castle in the Sea is finished, the Mole will be secure from Sands choaking it, the West-wind driving the Sands, and lodging it against the West-side of the Harbour; and the Flashes of Water drawn out of the Rivers above the Town, forceth out all Sands that come in at the Mouth of the Harbour. Query 1. If the Harbour at Dunkirk be finished, Whether the Strength of England and Holland by Sea can destroy it? Q. 2. If the Harbour of Dunkirk were finished, Whether Hol∣land will not be forced upon necessity to joyn with the French? Q. 3. If the Harbour of Dunkirk were finished, Whether their Men of War from Dunkirk will not be in half Sea in Four Hours, in the Downs in Ten Hours, in the Mouth of the Thames in Six∣teen Hours? Q. 4. If the Harbour of Dunkirk were finished, Whether Eng∣land can be without Two Hundred Men of War to justifie the Ho∣nour of the Crown and Trade? Q. 5. If the Harbour of Dunkirk were finished, Whether Dun∣kirk in few years may not become London, and London Dunkirk, as Amsterdam is now become Antwerp, and Antwerp Dam, and all by the Command of the Lilo Fort, fixt upon the River Skeld, which hath so hindred Trade from Advancing to Antwerp, that at present Grass grows in four of five parts of that Exchange? Q. 6. If it be not convenient for all Merchants Trading to Dun∣kirk, to Order all Masters of their Vessels to observe from time to time how this great Work Advances; and to take the depth of the New Harbour from one end to the other, and deliver it in Writing to ir Owners? Q. 7. Whether it be not the Interest of those in Authority, seri∣ously to consider of this great Affair, and to use all means that may conduce to the Obviating of this great Work, before it be too late? Q. 8. Whether the Harbour of Dunkirk may be destroyed, and rendred useless before it be finished? When Lilo Fort upon the Skeld was made With speed from Antwerp then departed Trade, And Holland now that Fort doth still maintain, Which hath to Amsterdam increast much gain. Beware now London, ere it be too late, For fear lest thou dost tast of Antwerp's Fate. But use all means, with might and main, To keep the Seas for Merchants gain. The Town and Citadel of Dunkirk, with the New Harbour for Ships and Castle in the Sea, was Surveyed the 23d of May Anno 1681. By ANDREW YARRANTON, Author of the First and Second Part of England's▪ Improvement by Sea and Land.
