8 45534383 171803
At the Court at White-Hall the 24th. of July 1677. By the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of His Majesties Most Honourable Privy Council. UPon the Humble Petition of George Carew Esq Admini∣strator of the Goods and Chattels of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pindar, Sir Thomas Meres Kt. Executor of Sir Erasmus de le Fountain, Thomas Coppin, Gilbert Crowch, and William Hinton Esq Valentina Bazilla Lloyd, Executrix of Sir Peter Vanloar, and Elizabeth Bartlet Windows, Mark Fletcher, and Thomas Carter Merchants, on the behalf of themselves, and many Hundreds of His Majesties Subjects of England herein concerned, setting forth the Sinister Practices used by Peter Boudaen of Middleburgh Merchant: Nephew and sole Executor of Sir Peter Courten, in Possessing himself of the Estate, Real and Personal of the said Sir Peter; avoiding to come to any Ac∣compt for the same, and obstructing the ordinary Course of Iustice during his life, as his Sons, and Heirs have since done; whereby the due Administration of Iustice hath been often denyed, and the Iudicial Acts and Decrees of the Prero∣gative Court, and High Court of Chancery in this Kingdom, nighted and con∣temn'd in the ordinary Courts of Iudicature in Holland, and Zealand; Where by Order from the States in the year 1676. Iustice was positively denyed the Petiti∣oners to the great Oppression of them, and of many Orphans and Widows, claim∣ing the Effects of Sir William Courten's Estate and his Sons, as also of Mr. John Moncy's, and Sir Paul Pindars, gotten into the hands of the said Boudaen, Pergens, and others Inhabitants of Amsterdam, and Middleburgh, to the value of two hun∣dred and fifty thousand pounds. And therefore praying that speedy satisfaction may he required from the Embassadour Extraordinary of the States General, or that Commissioners on either side may be forthwith named to inspect the Accompts, between both Parties, and determine the same according to Right. His Majesty was pleased to appoint Wednesday the 10th. of October next, for hearing the Petitioners at the Board, concerning this business; at which time the Parties concerned, are to give their attendance, and bring their Council Learned, if they please. John Nicholas.
