16533 52633327 174756
A short forme of Thankesgiuing to GOD, for staying the contagious sickenes of the Plague: To be vsed in Common Prayer, on Sundayes, Wednesdayes, and Fridayes. ¶ Set forth by Authoritie. Jmprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO 1604. elaborate decorative border containing the royal Anglo-Irish blazon or coat of arms, personifications of Fidelity and Humility, and the attributes of the Gospel writers: St Matthew's angel, St John's eagle, St Mark's lion, and St Luke's bull FIDES HVMILITAS
royal Anglo-Irish blazon or coat of arms
¶ Read the ordinary Seruice till you come to the Psalmes. And in stead of those which are appointed of course, read some of these: Viz. 34. 95. 103. 116. 107. 118. 145. 146. 147. ¶ After the second Lesson, read this Psalme following. Psal. 85.LOrd, thou art be∣come gratious vnto thy Land, thou hast turned away the afflictions of thy seruants. Thou hast taken a∣way all thy displea∣sure, and turned thy selfe from thy wrathfull indignation. Psal. 94.For if thou Lord hadst not helped vs, it had not failed, but our soules had bene put to silence.
But when we said our feete haue slipped, thy mercie, O Lord, helped vs vp. In the multitude of the sorrowes that we had in our hearts, thy comforts haue refreshed our soules. Psal. 62.63Our soules waited still vpon the Lord, our soules hanged vpon his helpe, our hope was alwayes in him. In the Lords word did we reioyce, in Gods word did we comfort our selues. Psal. 50.For the Lord said: Call vpon mee in the time of trouble, and I wil heare thee, and thou shalt praise me. Psal. 40.69So when wee were poore, needy, sick∣ly, and in heauinesse, the Lord cared for vs: hee was our helpe and our Sauiour according to his word. Psal. 27.In our aduersitie and distresse hee hath lift vp our heads, and saued vs from vtter destru∣ction. Psal. 33.91Hee hath deliuered our soules from death, hee hath fedde vs in the time of dearth, hee hath saued vs from the noy∣some Pestilence. Psal. 27.Therefore will we offer in his holy Tem∣ple, the oblation of Thankesgiuing with
great gladnesse: we will sing and speake prai∣ses vnto the Lord our Sauiour. Psal. 106.We will giue thankes vnto the Lord, for hee is gratious, and his mercy endu∣reth for euer. Psal. 86.103.The Lord is full of compassion and mer∣cie, long suffering, plenteous in goodnesse and pitie. Psal. 57.108.His mercy is greater then the heauens, and his gratious goodnesse reacheth vn∣to the cloudes. Psal. 103.Like as a father pitieth his owne children: euen so is the Lord mercifull vnto them that feare him. Psal. 71.Therefore will we praise thee and thy mercies, O God, vnto thee will wee sing, O thou Holy one of Israel. Psal. 98.Wee will sing a New song vnto thee, O God, we will praise the Lord with Psalmes of Thankesgiuing. Psal. 47.O sing praises, sing praises vnto our God: O sing praises, sing praises vnto our King. For God is the King of the earth, sing prai∣ses with vnderstanding. Psal. 145.Wee will magnifie thee, O God our
King, wee will praise thy Name for euer and euer. Euery day will we giue thankes vnto thee, and praise thy Name for euer and euer. Our mouth shall speake the praises of the Lord, and let all flesh giue thanks to his holy Name for euer and euer. Psal. 21.72Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for euer: and blessed bee the Name of his Maiestie world without end. AMEN. AMEN.
In stead of the other Prayers vsed in the time of the Sickenesse, Read some of these following. WEe will magnifie thee, O God our King, and we will praise thy name for euer and euer: be∣cause in the midst of thine anger, thin∣king vpon mercie, thou hast deliuered our soules from death, and preserued vs from that noysome pestilence, which not long since, raged in this Citie, sweeping away the rich with the poore, the aged with the young, leauing whole houses de∣solate, and filling all places with dead bo∣dies: So that in mans iudgement there was no hope remayning, but that this yeere would haue thereby prooued yet more dreadful and infectious then the for∣mer.
But because thou wilt haue it knowen, that thou onely woundest and canst heale againe, that thou killest and reuiuest, bringest euen to hell and backe againe: thou hast vouchsafed, contrarie to all humane expectation (such is thy power and goodnesse) to command thine Angell to stay his hande, and spare this Citie, and hast turned thine anger and the fiercenesse therof vpon many other Cities and Townes within this Realme. Wee therfore at this time offer vp vnto thee a double sacrifice, at once, of hearty Thankes∣giuing for this our strange deliuerance, and of humble and earnest Prayers, for those dolefull places, thus grieuously afflicted: beseeching thee for thy Sonne Iesus Christ his sake, to be gracious vnto them also, that both they and we in ioynt affec∣tion, may acknowledge thy iustice in thy punishments, and recorde thine infinite mercies in sparing vs miserable sinners, through Iesus Christ thy Sonne, and our Sauiour, to whom, &c.
O Most gracious God, see∣ing it hath pleased thee in the multitude of those sorrowes which we had in our hearts, by reason of that grieuous conta∣gion which thou lately didst send amongst vs (besides the feare and expectation of the like, or a more vio∣lent infection this present yeere) to sende thy comfortes for the refreshing of our soules, and to remooue that fearefull pe∣stilence frō vs, not for any desert of ours, who are most wretched sinners; nor by any meanes of mans deuise, but onely of thine owne fauour, and for thy mercies sake: we yeeld vnto thy diuine Maiestie all thankes and praise, for this thine espe∣ciall goodnesse; trusting that we shal take warning, by this last dreadful iudgment, for euer prouoking thee to such a wrath∣full indignation againe. And hauing felt the weight of thy heauie hand vpon our selues, tenderly compassionating the wo∣full case of those Cities and Townes in this Realme, which are nowe stricken
with the same; we most humbly beseech thee, most mercifull Father, to extend the like mercie to them, that thou hast done to vs. Good Lord spare them, and heare their praiers, now crying vnto thee in the vexation of their spirits, and the anguish of their soules, and vs for them, that so this whole land may ioyfully prayse thy Name, and say; Lord thou art become graci∣ous vnto thy land, thou hast turned away all thy displeasure. Graunt this O Lord, for thine onely Sonnes sake, Iesus Christ our Lord and onely Sauiour, Amen. ALmightie and eternall God, which strikest and healest, bringest downe to death and quicknest a∣gaine, who in thy iust iudgement for our sinnes diddest lately sore plague vs in our chiefe Citie and round about, with great sickenesse and mortalitie: yet remembring thy mercie hast turned thy selfe most graciously vnto vs, and comfor∣ted vs againe, by ceasing the plague ther∣in, euen then when as by all likelihoode
both of the time and place, and concourse of people, and our litle amendment of life, we could not but iustly feare & expect the continuance and encreasing of the same: wee most humbly acknowledge with all due thankefulnesse from the bottome of our hearts, this thine exceeding gracious goodnesse and vndeserued mercie, euer∣more praysing thy great & glorious name, for so wonderfull grace and clemencie to∣wards vs most vile and wretched sinners so freely and mercifully extended: most humbly beseeching thee of thy fatherly goodnesse, not onely to continue this gra∣cious course of thy louing fauour, in miti∣gating and lessening more and more this noysome Pestilence, till it be cleane remo∣ued from vs: But also to powre thy hea∣uenly Grace into our hearts, that we ne∣uer forgetting how grieuously and iustly wee haue bene chastened for our sinnes, and yet in Mercy not consumed, but rai∣sed vp againe and comforted, may learne thereby, both to feare thy dreadful iudge∣ments against sinne, and so by true Re∣pentance to turne vnto thee from our
wicked wayes, least a worse Plague fall vpon vs; And also to put our whole trust in thy Mercy, and approch with confi∣dence vnto thy Throne of Grace, for help and succour in all our troubles and aduer∣sities, Euermore thanking & praysing thy glorious Maiestie for this thy most merci∣full and marueilous deliuerance, through Iesus Christ our Lord and Sauiour. O God the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, the God of all Mercie and Comfort, which art Lord of life and death, and rulest all things in heauen and earth by the word of thy Power: Looke downe mer∣cifully from thy Holy place, vpon the peo∣ple of this Land yet grieuously afflicted in many places, with great sicknesse and mortalitie. And as by thy great Mercy, the Plague which lately raged in our chiefe City, threatning vtter consumption and desolation to the same, is now slaked and asswaged to our great comfort, for
which we praise and magnifie thy glori∣ous Name: So likewise we most hum∣bly beseech thee, in the tender bowels of thy endlesse Compassion, to be gratious and mercifull to the other parts of this land, now fearefully affrighted and af∣flicted with this grieuous Plague & pesti∣lence. Send them good Lord, speedy help and succour from thy Holy habitation; And as thou diddest sometimes turne a∣way thy fierce wrath from the Niniuites, being iustly threatened out against them, and euen hanging ouer their heads, by giuing them Repentance through thy Grace: So now visite the hearts of thy people in this Land with thine heauenly Grace, and holy Spirit, that they may speedily and soundly returne vnto thee from all their wicked wayes, in true Re∣pentance, and a liuing Faith in Iesus Christ: That so wee may bee deliuered from this heauy wrath & Plague, which our sinnes haue pulled downe and scat∣tered amongst vs; And learne by thy fearefull Iudgements to walke hereaf∣ter before thee, in continuall reuerence
and obedience, And for thy gratious mer∣cie to giue thee Euerlasting praise and glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. O Almightie God, which art the Resurrection of the dead, and the Life of them which liue, who in thy dis∣pleasure cariest vs downe in a moment to the gates of death, and in thy mercie recallest our Soules backe to dwell in the land of the liuing: Wee giue thee humble thankes, that it hath pleased thee to restore vs when wee were almost past hope, to strengthen vs in the extremitie of our weakenesse, to deliuer vs thy people of this Citie from the Contagion, when in the eye of mans reason it was most like∣ly to haue encreased. This we acknow∣ledge to be thy doing, O Lord, and it is wonderful in our eyes, which haue seene these thy great mercies surpassing the strength of our hope: and wee beseech thee to continue thy gracious goodnesse towards vs still, whereby all the world may see and knowe, that thou art our
mercifull Father, and wonderfull Deli∣uerer, to the glory of thy holy Name, and to the comfort of vs thy children, through Iesus Christ our Lord. O Heauenly Father, which art the Fountaine of Life, and the GOD of our health, in whome alone wee liue, and mooue, and haue our being: we beseech thee, that as thou hast beene gracious vnto this Citie, and the parts about it, in remoouing from hence that fearefull Plague, which for our sins thou haddest most iustly sent among vs: So it would please thee to heare these our in∣tercessions for our brethren, which in other places of this Realme do yet grone vnder thy punishing hand. O Lord, be gracious also vnto them, and command thine Angel to sheath his Sword, that a remnant may be saued. So shall wee all ioyntly magnifie thy Mercies, and com∣passe about thine Altars with songs of deliuerance, to our vnspeakeable com∣fort, and to thy euerlasting Glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
