D777b R174635 49521463 174116
A DECLARATION Of the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax, AND The Knights and Gentry in the North of England, With the Raising of Forces in the North, West, and Eastern Ridings of Yokshire; And the Ren∣devouzing of fifteen hundred Horse at Maulton Moor, and another great Body near the City of YORK. Also, the securing of Cliffords Tower, Carlisle, Leeds, Hallifax, Skipton, and divers other placs: And the Lord Lamberts Resolution, at a General Council of Officers. With Orders and Instru∣ctions to several Regiments. London, Printed for G. HORTON, 1659. Jaunuar:
The Resolution of the Lord Lam∣bert; And the Rising of the Lord Fairfax in the North. UPon the arrive of Col. Salmon with the Lord Lambert in the North, and representing the great Turn of Affairs in the South, a Council of Offi∣cers was immediatly called, where (by some) it was resolved, to deter all further motion towards Gen. Monck, and to acquiesce in the Parliament, and to yield obedience to their authority; but col. Lilburn is the onely man that hath heightned Lambert, notwithstanding the Revolt of above six hundred horse, besides the Irish Brigade, who have de∣clared for the Parliament, and returned to their former Duty & Obedience: insomuch, that col. Lambert, Major Creed, and some others, are in no small consternation, being resolved to consult their own Interest; and to that end are preparing Overtures for a submmission, and 'tis believed they will accept of the Parlia∣ments gracious Tender and Act of Indempnity. For the di∣visions of his Army are such, as give him no great encourage∣ment to engage with them especially now they hear of the Par∣liaments sitting, as also upon receipt of the Orders dispatcht by Lieutenant colonel Pepper from the Parliament, to require
them to return to their Obedience. Col. Redman is ordered the command of the Irish Brigade of Horse, and Lieu. colonel Bret (at present) hath the conduct of the Foot. The said Brigade hath subscribed an Engagement, and sent it inclosed in a Letter to Sir Arthur Hasilrgg. Which Letter beng read in Parlia∣ment i was resolved, That all the Officrs who ve signed this Engagement, and all the non commissionated Officers and pri∣vate Souldiers of the said Irish Brigade; shall be, and are hereby indempnified. On Friday last, being the 30 of December, the Lord Fairfax, and most of the Gentry in the County of York, rendezvouzed near the Ciy, and appeared with many hundreds in Arms, be∣sides three Troops of the standing Army all declaring for the Parliament; as manifestly appars by the following Declara∣tion, viz. WHereas we cannot without much grief of heart, and conster∣nation of spirit, consider and bewail the destructive confusi∣sions, that have plunged into Church and State, and the inevitable Ruine threatning the good people of this Nation, unless speedily and timely prevented, in this day of publique calamity; We therefore having earnestly besought the Lord to direct us in this great and weighty Affair, wherein the Liberty and peace of these Nations, and the Interest of the Godly and Faithful therein is so nearly con∣cerned, do find it our duty to Declare, That we shall, through the strength of God, assert and maintain the Freedom and Priviledges of the present Parliament, the supream Authority of these Na∣tions, and not suffer the Members thereof to be illegally interrupted or molested in the discharge of their Duties; And we do solemnly avow to all the World, that our onely intention in doing this, is to pre∣serve the Rights of our Country, and to protect and encourage all the Godly and Faithful therein; and likewise to establish the peace of these Nations, and the Government of a Free-State or Common∣wealth. The Lord Fairfax is marched to Leeds, having a great Body of Horse, and most of the Gentry in the West-Riding of York∣shire have also appeared at a Rendezvouz with him, gallantly
mounted, and well arm'd. Sir Henry Cholmley hath also raised a considerable Body in the North Riding, and Sir Hugh Bethyl, and Sir Francis Boynton, have done the like in the Eat-Riding, who on Thursday last Rendezvouzed fifteen hundred Horse, well armed, at Maulton Moor; all in generall declaring for the Parliament; and ineed such a great and voluntary Rising as this hath hardly ever been seen in Egland. Divers other Counties have declared for the Parliament, amongst whom, the Counties of Leicester and Warwick have bin highly instrumental: from whence we hear, that the City of Co∣ventry have declared wholly for the Parliament, and that the parts adjacent flocked into Colonel Hacker in such multitudes, that he might in a very short time, if occasion were, have formed a considerable Army, ready to assert the Parliaments Interest. Upon his entring the City, be rode to the Market-place with Sir John Norris, having about five hundred Horse, and there decla∣red for the Parliament. Since which time, They have been proclaimed at several other places, more especially at Lyn in Norfolk, where the Mayor and Burgesses of the said Town did not onely raise Forces for the Parliament but also disarmed such that were rai ed against the Authority thereof, taking away all their arms and ammunition: For which good and faithful ser∣vice a Lter of Thanks was ordered to be sent to the said Mayor and Burgesses. This great and providential Change, doth not onely appear obvious in most parts of England; but from Ireland also it is af∣firmed, That Major Wilson hath secured the city of Limrick for the Parliament. Lieu. col. Nelson is fled, being not Parliament-proof. Waterford, London Derry, and the City of Cork have also declared their concurrence. Besides, Colonel Privy, Gover∣nour of Carlow, hath submitted. Munster, & Limbrick is Surprised, Clanmel and Rosse have Declared this Way▪ Kilkenny and the Casle likewise: the Souldiers threatning to throw their Governour over the VValls, if He stood Out. In fine, there is a coninual Intercourse between the Scottish and Irish Souldiery.
The Parliament have Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee of Inspections to examine what moneys have bin raised and taken up in the several Counties of this Common∣wealth, and by whom, and what is become of the same, with power to send for persons, papers, writings, &c. Resolved by the Parliament, That all Officers who were in Commission on the 11th of October, 1659. and all other Offi∣cers and Souldiers in the late Defection and Rebellion, who have already submitted, and such as shall hereafter submit them∣selves, and have returned, or shall return to their Duty and Obe∣dience to the Parliament, before the Ninth of this instant Janu∣ary, shall be, and are hereby pardoned and indempnified for Life and Estate, provided that this Vote doth not extend unto the pardoning of wilful Murther: and it is Ordered, That all such of the said Officers and Souldiers, who shall so return to their Duty and Obedience to the Parliament, shall be disposed of by the Council of State, Commissioners for the management of the Army, or General Monck. Resolved, That John Lambert Esquire, shall be included in this Vote. Ordered, That the Council of State do see that this Vote be put in execution. The Committee appointed to treat with the City, reported, That it was the desire of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mon Council, to acquisce in the Parliament, under whom God had blessed them with peace, when there was War throughout the whole Nation, and to yield Obedience to their Authority. Since the Raising and Rendevousing of the Yorkshire Horse by the Lord Fairfax, and the Gentry, the Design of colonel Lil∣burn is diverted, and the Tower of York secured for he Parlia∣ment; so that the Gentleman was forced to wheel about, and retreat with his two Troops to the Lord Lambert, who we hear hath commanded his Forces from the confines of Northumber∣land, Westmerland, and Cumberland, conceiving that through the remoteness of their Quarters, many interposed for a diversion; and that whole Troops, as well as Foot Companies, fall off
The Town and Castle of Carlisle 'tis said, hath declared their concurrence with the Yorkshire Forces, who are ready for a conjunction, as occasion shall invite. Skipton upon Craven hath assuredly declared for the Parliament, as also the castles of Scar∣brough, Helmsley, and divers other places; but what the intent and design of the Lambertarians are, in gathering to a Body; there is no certainty: yet 'tis probable, though many conjecture other∣wise, that it may be in order to a Return from his late Defecti∣on and Disobedience to the Parliament. FINIS.
