P3761A R182197 52528876 178858
PROPOSALS Humbly offered to the Parliament, For the Supplying of the King with Present Money without Interest, (whereby he will be better inabled to carry on a Vigorous War against France): For the great Ease of the Subject: For the Advance and Encouragement of Trade: And, For the Raising of the Price of Land. IT is humbly proposed, That a certain Fund be settled, by Act of Parliament, by way of Land-Tax, payable by equal Proportions, for four Years, (as suppose three Millions of Money to be raised after the Rate of seven hundred and fifty thousand Pounds per annum:) That there be an Office erected, called, the King's Bank (or by what other Name or Title soever the Parliament shall think fit to settle the same) in the City of London: That Commissioners be appointed by Act of Par∣liament, and their Salary likewise settled, that shall have Power to grant out Bills numbred (that cannot be counterfeited) to such a Value and Number as shall not ex∣ceed the said Fund to be raised: That such Bills shall always be accounted paid, and taken as present Money: That if any question the Bills as shall come to hand, they may have Recourse to the said Office, where they shall be satisfied, paying no Fees. That a fourth Part of these Bills shall be paid off every Year, either by Indorsment, or by taking out new Bills for a fourth Part less, which shall be thought best: So that the whole will be paid off in four Years. The Reasonableness of the Proposal appears in the Particulars following: 1. Hereby the King is immediately supplied with so much present Money as the Fund amounts to, without paying Interest, which will be a vast Ease to the Subject. 2. The Ease of the Subjects is very evident, in that they will have four Years time to pay that in, which otherwise must be paid in one. 3. By this Means Trade will be advanced, by making Money more plenty, and consequently the Interest lower. 4. The lowring the Interest of Money advances the Price of Land: as suppose Money at 6 l. per Cent. per annum, Land at twenty Years Purchase, lowring Interest to 5, makes Land proportionably to be at 25 Years Purchase: and if at 4 l. per Cent. per annum, to be at 30 Years Purchase. And whereas it is said by some that these Proposals come too late, for that four Shil∣lings in the Pound is already voted upon Land for this present Year, whereof seven hundred thousand Pounds are already borrowed, or voted to be borrowed upon the Credit of the said Fund: It is humbly proposed, That instead of a borrowing Clause the said Office may be erected and impowered to grant out Bills as aforesaid; by which Means Their Maje∣sties will be immediately supplied with the Remainder of the said 4 s. per l. which beside the Charge of the said Office, cannot be less than 200000 l. Advantage to the Nation. And if Ways and Means may not be speedily found out for the Supplying Their Majesties with the Money already Voted as Absolutely Necessary for this Present Year 94; It is further Proposed, That 1 s. per l. per Annum more be granted to Their Majesties upon Land, to continue for 4 Years; and that a 5th Part of the Whole for this Present Year 94, be charg'd upon the Tenant. For that no Persons inhabiting in any City, Borough or Town Corporate, nor any Tenants Renting Land under 50 l. per Annum, but what are infinitely more indebted to the Goodness of Their Present Majesties, in so generously parting with their Reve∣nue of Hearth-Money, only proposed by them for the ease of the Subject. And as for those that rent Land above 50 l. per Annum, they are generally Men of Stocks. So that this Charge of 1 s. per l. per Annum for one Year, (considering the great Advantage and Profit they have made for these 2 Years) can be no great Burden. By this Means their Majesties will be immediately supplyed with 4 Millions of present Money for this present Year without Interest, except what is already borrow∣ed upon the said Fund of the 4 s. per l. per Annum. And if there should be occasion for extraordinary Supplies for the Service of the Year 95; If 1 s. 6 d. per Ann. for 4 Years be laid upon Land, it will raise 3 Millions more of present Money without Interest; which will then make 2 s. 6 d. in the Pound per Annum upon Land. And if there should be occasion for the like Supplies for the Service of the Year 96; If 1 s. 6 d. in the Pound per Ann. for 4 Years more be laid upon Land, it will raise 3 Millions more of present Money without Interest, as above; which in the Whole, will make but 4 s. in the Pound per Annum upon Land. By which time the Anticipation that is upon the Excise and Customs, will be off; and they will provide the like Sums for the Year 97 and 98. So that in the Year 98, Land will pay but 3 s. in the Pound per Annum; and in the Year 99, but 1 s. 6 d. So that the Continuing 3 s. per l. per Annum upon Land, together with the Funds of Excise and Customs, will raise 3 Millions per Annum present Money, ad Infinitum.
Offered to the PARLIAMENT For supplying the King with present Money without In∣terest. By issuing out Bills and making a Kings Bank
