S1704 R183415 51784659 175063
A PROCLAMATION, Appointing Skippers to give up Lists of their Passengers: WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our She∣riffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially consti∣tute Greeting: Whereas we are informed that several disaffected Persons who did go into, or remain in the Kingdom of France, during the late War, contrary to the late Act of Parliament made thereanent, are resolving to re∣turn privatly into this Our Kingdom; Therefore, and for preventing any Inconveniency that may arise thereupon, We have thought fit with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, to Command and Appoint, likeas, We hereby Command and Appoint, all Masters of Ships who shall bring home any Passengers from any Forraign Countrey after the date hereof, that they do detain them, and take Security of them for the effect after specified, until they be presented unto, and brought before one of the Members of Our said Privy Council, or before the Sheriff, Stewart, Lord of Regality, or Baillie of the Bounds within the which the said Ship shall happen to arive, or their Deputs, or before the Magistrats of the Burghs or Ports at which the saids Ships may arrive as said is, , that the saids Passengers may be by them examined, and if the saids Sheriffs and other Officers of the Law, and their Deputs, or the foresaid Magistrats shall find the saids Passengers, or any of them to be dis∣affected to Us and Our Government, or to have gone to, or remained in France contrary to Law during the said late War, or to have been banished Intercomuned, or Forefaulted, or that they cannot give a good Account of themselves, that then and in that case, the saids Sheriffs and other Officers of the Law and Magistrats foresaids, make and keep the saids Passengers Prison∣ers, until they acquaint the saids Lords of Our Privy Council, and receive from them such Orders as they shall think fit to give in this matter; Certifying all Masters of Ships, and also all the saids Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords of Rega∣lity, Ballies and their Deputs, and Magistrats of the Burghs and Ports fore∣saids, who shall not observe, or who shall contraveen the Premisses, that they shall be proceeded against before the Lords of Our Privy Council, and by them punished with all rigour. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and we charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation hereof that none pretend Ignorance; And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the tenth day of May, and of Our Reign the Tenth Year. 1698. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the King, Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom 1698.
