D171A W17421 [ocm]64551152 184509
A FUNERAL ELEGY Humbly Dedicated to the Renowned Memory of the HONORABLE, Thomas Danforth Esq. Of Cambridge, Sometimes Deputy GOVERNOUR in the Colony of the Massachusetts-Bay, and President of the Province of Main; and One of His Majesties Honourble COUNCIL, Judge of the Superiour Court in the Province of the Massachusetts-Bay in New England; Who (after He had long Served His Generation by the Will of GOD in several High Stations) Did to our Inconceivable Loss, but His Unparallel'd Gain, Rest from all His Labours, on the Sacred Day of Rest, the Memorable 5th. of November: Anno Domini. 1699. Aetatis Suae, 77. Hoos, Onus: Mors, Pax. JUDGE of the Quick and Dead I am not, Yet HIM and my self should very much forget If that I should decline the Bench to take Nor give my sence and sentence of this Fate. Pardon me, Sir; 'Twere better first to Die Than prove Disloyal to your Memorie 'Tis Conscience gives Commission not t' be Mute Justice and Gratitude shall Execute. The Isle which (Alfred sings) no Help desires, Yet all the World supply from Her requires Able to Glut King Solomon with Pleasures And Surfeit Great Augustus with Her Treasures: Whence the First Christian Emperour did spring And since that, Many an Heroe, Many a King Rich in all Merchandize: More Rich in Men: (Scarce such an Isnd in the World agen:) And whence New England sprang It did produce Him, to this Land who was of Glorious Use. He, Nature drew from Him whom Grace Divine, Rather than Worldly Grandieur, made to Shine. Who urg'd to Knight Him, Him, He follow'd not Follow'd a Greater King, to Desart Lot; Like Marsacus, when He saw Saints to Goe Would fain be Knight of their Wing'd Order too. Such was His Father: And poor Framingham Lost a Choice Lecture when He hither came By Prophets Preach'd; But He procur'd the same. After His Father's Death This Son was bless'd, Rudeness and Lewdness much He did Detest; Fear'd God from's Youth, like good Prince Obadiah An Early Convert, like Renown'd Josiah. Glowing His Love: most Veh'ment His Desire Like Coals of Juniper and Flames of Fire, To Jacobs Portion: Angels, Powers, Life, Death Heights, Depths, could not put either out of breath Harnass'd and Rigg'd with th' Christian Panoplie; Well under girt with sound Sincerity: In every State, undelug'd, could Sail Right; His Anchor held, on something out of Sight. Left not his Sweets, when He Promotion wan His Wine still Cheer'd the Heart of God and Man His Speech well Season'd both for Time and Grace For in His Soul, most Sav'ry Salt had Place. He had an Art, He practis'd to the last, What e'r was Talk'd, in Spiritual mould to Cast. God's Suel He; 'Mongst those that on Him call 'Mongst Thundring Hosts, an Expert General: Nobly Seraphick, and most Rapturous, In Prayer; A Secon'd Theodosius. What's Parent came Three Thousand Miles, to Win That, to neglect, He dare'd not Count no Sin. God's Temple had Him, a Professor Press'd Gods Table found Him Young, a Worthy Guest. 'Twas Time, a Vine Grew up on His House side: Withington's Halls afford this Saint a Bride Precious as Gold Their Faith, yet as Behov'd 'Twas by both Fining Pot and Furnace Prov'd; Them Ten Rare Pledges, arly fledg'd, forsook And the Directest way to Heaven Took: 'Mongst whom count Chief the Famous Samuel Whose Excellencies Englands both can Tell. During that Wondrous Term of Seven times Seven, Co heirs They Lived, of the Grace of Heaven. Just in the Fiftieth year of Jubilee His Aged Virtuous Consort vent out free, Yet not so Free, as He o Follow was, And to o're take Her, meds His Heavenly Pace. 'Twas His High Care when first He saw that Comet Of Earthly Wealth arise o  off from it. I'ts Dreadful Fiety Tail; th' Intailment even Of Difficulty in the way to Heaven; That Sin bred Fate, can't course of Law out-root A Gospel Course, He found might greatly doe 't. Saw on His Hand that Viper Venimous: To Alms it temper'd, Made a Treacle thus Honours to seek or shun H' was never buisy. His Head could bear Great Height & not be Dizzy. Bless'd by Bless'd Wilson first on Bench when sat Regal'd with th' Anagram, Handsom for that. Edicts, Examples, and Sharp Punishment States, warping from their Standard ought prevent. Sagacious He betimes to Meet and Mate Ill Humours, threatning to subvert the State. Flat fell They who would 'said New-England flat; Thank GOD & th' MAN with Little Band, for That. Him, and His Country, who would Wast, in Hast He made Repent, Their Rents came in so fast. Iv'e someimes heard Him say that He had ever As lieve dy by the Ax as by the Feaver; In a Good cause, and with a Conscience Good; For Church & State, so Truth's Great Champion stood. Like Samuel Rode the Circuit Judg'd each Tribe, And like Brave Smuel,  ook a Bribe. So Good, Great, Wise, Just, Steady Trusty, Free; We'l ne're want Men, while we have Such as Thee. His Thoughts Pure Spirits were, He therefore us'd Physician like, to give them, well infus'd In some sweet proper Vehicle of Wit, Some Proverb, Story, Simile, most fit. When Men of Sense addres'd Him, 'twas His fashion Reasons to shew, and leave the Application: And when some nimble Case out ran His Vicit, Still Gave forth Sentence, in a Nihil Dicit. Dangers, as soon as meant, He oft Suspected Forgers, He oft Sagaciously Detected: At Helm in Tempests, yet His Courage Stout 'Though Dangers were Extream, would ne'vr give out. Of Them, like Nicodemus He was One, And stood like Him, stout Protestant alone 'Gainst a Committee, whose blind Indignation Condemn'd the Best Men of that Generation. I know not where to stop; His Course was thus To make New Englands Journal Glorious: Hath stood our Churches Pillar ever since, Not wihout Envy, for His Recompence. Harvard! For Honourable, Thou must goe; Who was thy Steward, Treasurer, was soe: Charg'd and Discharged were thy Quarter Bills, Drain'd not thy Stock, but with large Hundreds fills A Bounteous Patron unto many a Plant In thy fair Nursery, whose Means were scant. Resolves so to continue, 'Spite of Death, By Lands and Rents, His last Will witnesseth. Bring Tribute to thy Benefactors Dust To be Ungrateful is to be Unjust. Church Messengers Christs Glory are, so He (In that Relation,) oft was seen to be; Nor was 't a Shame for a Profess'd Divine, To be beholden to His Golden Mine. So well-read in all Points, Men of best fashion, Unto His Judgment pay'd a Veneration. When Church Disturbances requir'd His Best He signally with great Success was Bless'd. In's Family as exact Order's seen, As if that it a Soveraign State had been: Reading, Instruction, Prayer, and Repetition So constant were, You'd envy their Condition. From Families would Spring New Englands Bliss Might all be taught and Govern'd as was His. Great is the Loss of such a Man as This! Full of Good Works, not therefore void of Fears; No Works so Good but call for Fasts and Tears; Justification through His Saviours Blood, And Righteousness, (His Aged Souls last Food, His Readings, Meditations, there, were spent So Views His Title, and Receives Content. Like Solomon, All Gainful Arts He trys To Dye in Christ, Best Gain He finds; so Dies. His Arms: On Gold, the single opened Eye, (Man's Noble Part) imports Sincerity, And Wisdom too: That Gemm the Di'mond dwells Invulnerate, 'though it cutts all things else. He left with's Children Dear a Num'rous Race, Lord! Give 'em Portions of their Grandsire's Grace Thousands up springing so, in His rich Heap Shall Love Thy Name, & Thy Commandments keep. Amen. Iohn Danforth.
