E141A R174844 [ocn]124064168 192255
An EPISTLE By Way of Encouragement to Friends, To be frequent at Week-Day Meetings. Dear and tender Friends, WE having been often refresht, in the living presence of the Lord, in Meetings; and those that have truly Hungred after Righteousness, have there felt the Bread that comes from Heaven, plentifully Distribu∣ted; and many being thereby Nouri∣shed up in the Eternal Life, it hath encouraged them to be frequent in Meetings; not only on first Days, but also on Week days, to wait upon the Lord in his Divine Gift, to be re∣fresh't again: For as the Sence of Gods Goodness is abode in, the Hun∣ger will remain after the Childrens Bread, and an earnestness of mind will be to get to the Table of the Lord, where our Souls have been Refresht before; that we may enjoy the re∣newings of the Heavenly Life, and in∣crease in it; wherein, as we are pre∣served, we shall abide in the favour of God, and have a share of his Blessings which he is bestowing among the Sons of Men, whose Hearts are prepared and stand open, and expecting to re∣ceive from him. Therefore, Friends, let a Watch∣fulness be in the mind of every one, that this Worlds Cares and Concerns do not become as Briars and Thorns unto any, hindring their Growth in the Truth: For, Friends, these out∣ward Goods the Lord hath bestowed, ought rather to cause in our minds Thankfulness unto the Giver, and to walk in true fear, and lowliness of mind before him, and unto those that so do, outward Riches, or any outward Blessing or Mercy that he bestows, will not be an Occasion, to neglect our Christian Duty of Assem∣bling our selves together, but so much the more as we have received from him, so much the more to be engaged to serve him, and draw near unto him, and wait upon him. And thus your good Example in frequenting Meetings, may be an In∣ducement to others to frequent Friends Meetings also; whereas, if any looking into our Meetings, should  a thinness and slackness in Frier  may they not think? that our ∣ings
are no more profitable than their own, and so not be drawn by our Example to be fervent in seeking after the Lord; let therefore the zeal and diligence of Friends in frequenting Meetings, shew forth the Benefit of our Meetings, and the re∣freshment that may there be had; and it may prove a means to stir up them to consider, that surely we do enjoy more in our Meetings, then they do in theirs, because of our fre∣quenting them so diligently. And Friends, if any are in streights and difficulties inwardly, whom have we to go unto? in comparison of our God therefore not only in private, but also in the assembly of the Lords People, spread your spiritual necessities before him, and wait upon him for a supply; and let the minds of none Wander, out (when you are so met) be staid upon the Lord in his Heavenly Gift, to receive from him, and if any are not yet come to a stay to their minds, let such be turned to the meas;ure of the Spirit they have received, and (in faith) therein diligently resist the enemy that would keep you unsetled, and as you abide faithfully Warring against him, in due time you'l know a Victory; and this will be of more advantage to your immortal Souls, then increase of outward Wealth, or indeed, then a bare formal sitting in Meetings, only to hear the Experi∣ences of others. For hereby you'l come to know Bread in your own Houses, and Water in your Cis∣terns, that you'l not need to say to others, give us of your Store. For through the Heavenly Gift that you have received will you be abundantly supplyed, and your Souls in the re∣ceiving, will have a Sacrifice of thanks∣giving and Praise to Offer to our God, who is worthy thereof, for ever and evermore. And you that are Masters and Mi∣stresses of Families, and Parents of Children, had need be Exemplary in your Practice and care over those of your Families, That they seeing your zeal and earnestness, in Assembling your selves together, to wait upon the Lord, may be drawn by your Example also to be diligent in wait∣ing upon him, and so come to re∣ceive for themselves of his Blessings and Mercies, and then, that they to∣gether with you, may live Worthy of his Mercies, is the fervent Travail and Prayer of Your Friend, Theodor Eccleston. London, 13. 10. Month. 1693. Remember the time Appointed for Meetings to begin. nted by T. Sowle at the Crooked Billet in Holy-well-Lane, Shoreditch. 1693
