R2259ba R182881 [ocm]64551718 184785
THE Rules of the Schools AT THE JESUITS in FANCHURCH-STREET. I. THe Invention of Opening these Schools is, to Teach Youth Vertue and Learning: They shall be Taught Gratis; nor shall they be at any farther Charges or Expences than the buying of their own Pens Ink, Paper and Books. II. These Schools are common to all, of what condition soever, and none shall be excluded, when they shall be thought fit to begin to learn Latin and Write sufficiently well: And in these Schools shall he taught Greek and Latin, as also Poetry and Rhetoric, as they shall rise to higher Schools. III. And altho' Youths of different Professions, whether Catholicks or Protestants, come to these Schools; yet in Teaching all, there shall be no distinction made, but all shall be Taught with equal Diligence and Care, and every one shall be promo∣ted according to his Deserts. IV. There shall not be, either by Masters or Scholars, any tampering or medling to persuade any one from the Profession of his own Religion; but there shall be all freedom for every one to practise what Religion he shall please, and none shall be less esteem'd or favored for being of a different Religion from others. V. None shall upbraid or reproach any one on the account of Religion; and when any Exercise of Religion shall be practised, as hearing Mass, Catechising, or Preach∣ing, or any other; it shall be lawful for any Protestant, without any molestation or trouble, to absent himself from such Exercise, if he please. VI. All shall be Taught to keep God's Commandments, and therefore none shall be permitted to Lye, Swear, or Curse, or talk uncivil Discourse; Nor shall fight or quarrel with one another; and he who shall be observed to fail in these Duties, shall be punished according to his demerit: And when any one, for these, or other Faults, shall be adjudged to any Chastisement, if he shall refuse to receive such Chastisement quietly, or be stubborn, he shall be Expell'd the Schools, and not be re-admitted again, until he shall have given satisfaction for such his Fault. VII. All shall be in their respective Schools by a quarter before Eight in the Morning, and shall there stay until Ten and a half: Again at a quarter before Two, until half an hour after Four. And all Parents are earnestly desired to send their Children timely to School, and not easily to stay them at home; for the neglect of some Days may hinder the Profit of many Weeks and Months: And they are to send them decently Clad. VIII. The other hours of the day they shall Study at their own Homes, and pre∣pare those Exercises, which the Masters in the Schools appoint to be brought, at their next coming to the Schools. And therefore all Parents are desired to allow their respective Scholars such conveniency for their Studies at their own Houses, that they may comply with those Duties which are appointed them. IX. All are required to be exact and diligent, in daily frequenting the Schools, and being there, none are to go out without leave of their Master; and when any one shall be absent from School, he shall the next day he comes bring from his Pa∣rents a Ticket of the lawfulness of such his absence: Yet they shall have every Week two Afternoons of Recreation, in which they come not to School; unless a Holy∣day happen that Week, which shall then be their Recreation-day. X. Such as come from the Writing-School, and have no Entrance in Latin, are to be received but three times in the Year, viz. at the beginning of the New Year, at Easter, and about our Lady-day in September. London, Printed for F. W. and are to be sold by the Cushion-Man at the Chappel in Lime-street.
