1963.7 S113180 99848419 176934
A STAFFE OF COMFORT TO STAY THE weake from falling, very needfull for the afflicted. By RICHARD BERNARD, Preacher of Gods Word, at Batcombe in So∣merset-shire. Art thou any way tempted, or trou∣bled? reade, beleeue, and reioyce. LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston, for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop, at the South doore of St. Pauls Church. 1616.
TO THE WOR∣SHIPFVLL HIS Christian good friends, Mr. Iames Bisse, and Mr. Ed¦ward Bisse, Esquires: with his very kinde wel∣wisher, Mr. Ro∣bert Groue. TO HIS LOVING and assured friends, Master Iohn Bernard, and Mr. Ed∣ward Bernard, both of Downe∣side, louing brethren, constant in vnitie. All sauing graces, all spirituall comforts for soules safety: all corporall welfare, and outward prosperitie, for encouragement to all duties of godlinesse. Euen so, Amen. WOrshipfull, and Gentlemen (my good friends) Cō∣forts, I well know, might
seeme to be vnseasonably of∣fered in a world of securi∣ty; but that also I am not ignorant, that in a secure world, many sleepe not in the cradle of security. There is a righteous No∣ah, in a world of the vn∣godly, & a iust Lot among the Sodomites, vexed in heart with their vncleane conuersation. Where many (as one of the Prophets spea∣keth) eate the Lambs of the flocke, and Calues of the stalls, faring, as it is said of Diues, deliciously euery day; there may bee some (like poore Lazarus) lying at their gates begging food,
for preseruation of life. While some, perhaps, may bee chaunting the song, to the sound of the violl, and be singing merrily the tune of worldly contentment: O∣thers, peraduenture, may be sad in heart, and set downe heauily mourning for their miseries. What if a Gallio relish not religion, nor doth care any thing at al, though Paul be smitten wrongful∣ly; yet must we think, there be such as do not forget, but truely take to heart the af∣fliction of Ioseph? While some are whole, not needing the Physician, as in their owne conceits they foolishly
imagine; some other neuer∣thelesse may feele their spi∣rituall maladies, yea and groane vnder their burthē, desiring to be eased. Albeit full stomackes tread vnder∣foot the hony combe: yet the hungry soule is glad of the crummes which fall from the Lords Table. Indeede, the carnall libertine, if he may enioy worldly wealth, & earthly rest, he feeleth no want of spirituall comforts, nor taketh any notice of his spiritual bondage; but a ho∣ly Paul, a true conuert to God, though hee haue out∣ward contentments, yea & inward peace; yet because
he cannot doe the good hee would, but often the euill, which he would not, he cri∣eth out; O miserable mā that I am, who shall deliuer mee from the body of this death! Therefore to those that stand in need of cōfort, and desire the words of heauen∣ly refreshment; to those that are troubled in mind, in spi∣rit wounded and in their conscience afflicted: to those that are assaulted by Satan, vexed by ill men, disquieted in their outward estates, crossed in the honest course of their callings, or any waies tempted; to all those, and for their sakes haue I
laboured in this worke of Comforts, that they may find (if God please) some so∣lace hereby to their poor af∣flicted spirits. I send it not to gybing Ismaels, mock∣ing at the children of the promise, but to obedient and faithfull Isaacs; not to prophane Esaus, but to religious Iacobs: to Io∣seph in prison and bonds, not to his brethren at liber∣tie at home, and vnhum∣bled: to the oppressed Is∣raelites, and not to op∣pressing Egyptians. I of∣fer it not to proud and hau∣tie Hamans; but to hum∣ble and mournful Morde∣cayes
clothed in sackcloth: to Ieremy and Amos the true dealing Prophets, and not to Amaziah and Pa∣shur the flattering Priests: to Abedmelech a godlie Courtier, and not to Zibah the sycophant and cousiner: to a constant Ruth, not to a backe-sliding Orpha: to an Hannah, a womā trou∣bled in spirit, pouring out her soule before the Lord, & not to a Peninah, a vex∣ing and vpbrayding aduer∣sary: not to a Michol moc∣king her Lord and hus∣band; but to a contemned and despised Leah. In a word, it is to the heauie loa∣den
that I wish refresh∣ment, and to the sorrowfull glad tidings, health to the sicke, rest to the troubled; soundnes of comfort, to the broken in heart, strength to the weak and feeble soule, and full supply of whatsoe∣uer is wanting for true ioy to euery one of the Lords e∣lected people. Oh (my worshipfull, and worthy good friends) I wish the spirit of the Lord God vpon me, to publish power∣fully good tidings to the meeke, to binde vp the bro∣ken hearted, to proclaime liberty to the captiues, the o¦pening of the prison to them
that are bound, to declare the acceptable yeere of the Lord, & to comfort all that mourne: this is my desire, this is the true intendment of this my labour. If God so blesse it, how ioyful & glad shall I be? and that it may be, I intreat the Lord, to ap∣point and giue vnto them that mourne in Sion, beauty for ashes; the ioy of oyle, for mourning; the garment of praise, for the spirit of hea∣uines, that they may bee cal∣led the trees of righteousnes the planting of the Lord, that hee may bee glorified. This mercy I craue also of God for you, and doe desire
that this my worke (which here I present to you) may bee both friendly accepted of, as I offer it for a testimo∣ny of my true and hearty af∣fection, and also so diligent∣ly perused, as you may reape the ioyfull fruit thereof, & speake from experience the praises of God; and thus in my best well-wishes, not doubting of a kind accep∣tance, and your continu∣ance of loue, I heartily be∣take you to the protection and louing mercies of our heauenly Father. Batcombe Decem. 29. Yours in all Christian duties, and seruices of my calling, RIC. BERNARD.
HEAVENLY COMFORTS, AND holy contentments; set out by Obiections, and Answeres. Of Religion. Obiection. There is much tal∣king & strife a∣bout that, which men call Religi∣on: but to this day I could neuer know certainly, what it should be. Answ. It is that,What that is, which we call Re∣ligion. which is prescribed in the holy
Scriptures, called, the way of the Lord. Act. 18.25. the old way, and good way. Ier. 6.16. the path of life, Psal. 16.11. the perfect way, Psa. 101.2. the way of wisdome, Prou. 4.11. the right way, 2. Pet. 2.15. the way of vn∣derstanding, Prou. 9.6. the way of life, Ierem. 21.8. the way of God, Matth. 22.16. Act. 18.26. the way of saluation, Act. 16.17. the way of truth, 2. Pet. 1.2. and the way of righteousnesse, 2. Pet. 2.21. This Religion, pure and vndefiled before God, and the Father, is also to visit the fatherlesse and the widowes in their affli∣ction, & to keepe our selues vnspotted of the world, Iam. 1.27.
Obiect. It may seeme by this, that Religion is but one way: and yet there are many religions, that I know not which way to turne me. Answ.There is but one true Re∣ligion. Indeed there is but one true religion, as there is but one true God and Father of all, one Lord, one Spirit, one body, one faith, one hope of our voca∣tion, and one Baptisme, E∣phes. 4.5. Therefore turne neither to the right hand, nor to the left, Prou. 4.27. For know, that hee which wandreth out of the way of vnderstanding, shall remain in the congregation of the dead, Prou. 21.16. but they that walk in the good way, shall finde rest vnto their soules. Ier. 6.16.
Obiect. But so many, though they be of diuers and differing opinions, doe chal∣lenge to themselues this one Religion, and do so condemne one another, as I, (an igno∣rant man) cannot tell what to doe, or how to know the truth. Meanes to know the truth.Answ. Dearely belo∣ued (saith Saint Iohn) be∣leeue not euery spirit, but trie the spirits, whether they are of God, 1. Ioh. 4.1. despise not prophecying; trie all things, and hold that which is good, 1. Thessal. 5.20.21. and then if any man will doe the will of God, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God. Ioh. 7.17. Obiect. Among the pro∣fessors
of that Religion, which some take to bee the best, there are not wanting, errors, sects, and schismes. Answ. There must bee heresies, that they which are approued may be made manifest, 1. Cor. 11.19. for from without shall arise grieuous Wolues, & enter into Gods Church, not spa∣ring the flocke: and from within shall arise vp men, speaking peruerse things, to draw Disciples after them, Act. 20.29.30. Let not therefore this offend thee; for it must needs be, that of∣fences shall come, Matth. 18.7. Obiect. Me thinkes Re∣ligion is but a phansie, or a policie; because the most, of
what Religion soeuer, do liue, not answerable to their pro∣fession, but cleane contrary. Answ. Doe not for this, condemne Religion it self: but consider, that many are called, but few are chosen, Mat. 20.16. That wide also is the gate, and the way broad, that leadeth to de∣struction, and many there be that goe in thereat: be∣cause the gate is strait, and the way narrow that lea∣deth vnto life, and few there be that finde it, Mat. 7.13. Christianity is no grie∣uous yoke.Obiect. Nay, the bon∣dage, and burthensomenesse of Religion may seeme to bee the cause hereof, which is too heauie for any man to beare. Answ. The law of Christ is a perfect law of liberty,
Iam. 1.25. by which hee hath made vs free, Gal. 5.1. who exhorteth vs to take his yoke on vs, and we shall finde rest vnto our soules; for his yoke is easie, and burthen light, Mat. 11.29.30. and his Commande∣ments are not grieuous, 1. Ioh. 5.3. Obiect. I was (I may tell you) of that Romane faith, spoken of through the world, as Saint Paul speaketh, Rom. 1.8. and 16.19. but now am of this, called the reformed Religion; I feare me, that I haue done much amisse, in forsaking that, which the A∣postle hath so commended. Answ.He is happie that forsa∣keth Pope∣rie. Thou hast not forsaken that true and an∣cient Catholicke faith,
taught by Saint Paul, but now dost professe the very same, then taught by the A∣postles, as that Same Epistle of Saint Paul, and the rest of the Scripture teach. But this present Romish religi∣on thou hast done well to forsake, therein obeying Christs commandement, shewing thy selfe thereby one of Gods people. Reuel. 18.4. and sauing thy selfe from that fearefull ven∣geance, and those horrible plagues, which are to bee powred out vpon that An∣tichristian state. Reuel. 14.9.10. Obiect. This our Reli∣gion hath not so many goodly Ceremonies; nor holy Church ordinances, to keepe the peo∣ple
in deuont exercises for the seruice of God, as that hath. Answ.Poperie is onely mens precepts. In vaine they worship mee (saith Iesus Christ) teaching for do∣ctrines mens precepts. Mat. 15.9. They worship they know not what:2. Cor. 3.17. Heb. 9.14. we know what we worship: the true worshippers worship the Father in spirit, and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him. God is a spirit, and they that wor∣ship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth, Ioh. 4.22.23.24. Ob. But yet this refor∣med Religion is euery where spoken against of many: and this I can say, that men very wise in the world, men of
great place, and very lear∣ned too, like that Religion, & cannot away with this, but for the present state. Why wise men of the world can∣not away with the true spiritual worship of God.Answ. Christianity in the Apostles time, was euery where spoken against, Act. 28.22. was it therfore not ye Truth? And as for these wise men of the world, li∣king that, and disliking this spirituall worship of God, maruell not at it. For not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, nor many noble are called. 1. Cor. 1.26. And the naturall man receiueth not the things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishnesse vn∣to him: neither can he know them, because they be spiri∣tually discerned. 1. Cor. 2.14
Obiect. Many among vs now adaies fall to that Reli∣gion. Answ. They are gone out from vs,Who they be, that fall to Poperie from vs, and the reasons why. because they were not of vs: for if they had been of vs, they would (no doubt) haue continued with vs: but they are gone out, that they might bee made manifest; that they were not at all of vs, 1. Ioh. 2.19. And this is come to passe, because they profes∣sing the truth with vs, yet receiued not the loue of the truth, that they might be sa∣ued. Wherefore God hath sent them strong delusions, that they should beleeue a lie, 1. Thessal. 2.10.11. And for this cause also, when with vs they knew God,
they did not glorifie him, neither were thankful, they became vaine in their ima∣ginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, and by professing themselues wise, they are now becom fools, Rom. 1.21.22. Obiect. But that Religi∣on hath been spread mightily abroad, many Monarches of the earth haue with one mind giuen their power and au∣thoritie to that See; and kin∣dreds, tongues, and nations, haue worshipped the same. That where∣of the Pa∣pists doe boast, is a marke of the Beast.Answ. This is the power of the beast, Reuelat. 13.7. and of the whore sitting vp∣on the waters; that is, peo∣ple, multitudes, nations, and tongues, Reuel. 17.15. wor∣shipping that beast: whose
names are not written in the booke of life, of that lambe, which was slaine from the beginning of the world, Reuel. 13.8. Obiect. If this were so, men of wisedome and lear∣ning on that side would see it, without all doubt. Answ. I may say with the Prophet:Why it is, that Idola∣ters cannot see their ve∣ry damnable and grosse Idolatrie. Stay and won∣der; the Lord hath couered them with a spirit of slum∣ber, and shut vp their eyes: the Prophets and the chiefe Seers hath he couered, the vision of them al is become as the words of a book that is sealed vp,Esa. 29.9. which cannot bee read, Esa. 29.9.10.11. They know not, they vn∣derstand not,Deut. 29.4. because hee hath shut their eyes that
they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot vn∣derstand nor consider, Esa. 44.18. and for that Satan worketh with all deceiue∣ablenesse of vnrighteousnes in thē that perish, that they might be damned,Many see and know the truth, which yet they will not imbrace; but with Scribes and Pharisies wilfully re∣sist it. who be∣leeue not the truth, but take pleasure in vnrighteousnes, 2. Thessal. 2.10.12. Yea, they seeing, will indeed not see; and hearing, will not vnderstand, because their hearts are hardened. Obiect. Those of that Religion hope to aduance a∣gaine that supreme head (as they call him), and some with vs feare that he wil preuaile, and get dominion ouer vs. Answ. Feare it not, their hope is vaine; he is that man
of sinne now in a consump∣tion.That Anti∣christ of Rome shall no more preuaile to rule ouer vs. 2. Thessal. 2. his fall is certainly determined. Reu. 14.8. and 18.2. The Angell hath sworne by him that li∣ueth for euer & euer. There shall be now no more time for him to encrease his strength, and to rise vp a∣gaine. The little booke is eaten, the witnesses haue prophecied, Reuel. 10.5.6.10.11. and 11.3. The se∣uenth Angell hath sounded his trumpet, & so the king∣domes become the Lords, by little and little, Reue. 11.15. The viols haue also a good space since, begun to bee poured out, which are the last plagues of Gods wrath. The Angels that poure them out, come out
of the Temple, & so are for ye Church, & against the ene∣mies thereof, whose power now they feele, & shal so do now for euer, Reu. 15. & 16. The Lord hath giuen them blood to drink, for they are worthy, Reu. 16.6. Of the ten horns, some haue begun to hate that whore: & in the time appointed, they shall make her desolate & naked, & shall eat her flesh, & burn her with fire, Reu. 17.16. Obiect. But in the meane space they murther many of Gods Saints.The Saints sufferings comfor∣table. Answ. Great is yet the Saints comforts: for who∣soeuer will loose his life for Christs sake, shall saue it, Luk. 9.24. Mat. 10.39. and 16.15. Mar. 8.35. yea bles∣sed
are such, for they die in the Lord, and their workes follow them, Reuel. 14.13.Reu. 16.18. Mat. 24. Obiect. These bee good comforts; yet I reade, that before the great ouerthrow of this romish state, & before Christs cōming, there shall be terrible daies; in which mens hearts shal faile them with feare, which may make vs greatly to bee dismayed. Answ. Oh,The flocke of Christ haue no cause to feare. yet feare not little flocke (saith our Saui∣our) it is your Fathers plea∣sure to giue you a king∣dome, Luk. 12.32. In pati∣ence possesse your soules; for there shall not an haire of your head perish, Luk. 21.18. Looke vp therefore and lift vp your heads: for euen when these things be∣gin
to come to passe, the day of your redemption draweth neare, Luk. 21.28. Obiect. Many thinke it an idle thing, to contend and striue about Religion, and to bee so zealous for good things, as some hote spirits be. It is meete to be zea∣lous for Re∣ligion.Answ. Striue to enter in at the strait gate, for many will seeke to enter, and shal not bee able, Luk. 13.24. I follow hard, or presse to∣wards the marke (saith the Apostle) Philip. 3.14. who exhorteth to bee feruent in spirit, seruing the Lord, Rom. 12.11. And Christ Ie∣sus gaue himselfe for vs, that hee might redeeme vs from all iniquity, and purge vs, to bee a peculiar people
to himself, zealous of good workes: and Saint Iude doth exhort vs also to contend earnestly for the faith, which was once deliuered vnto the Saints, vers. 3. Obiect. There is for all this, small profit in keeping Gods Commandements. Answ. In keeping of them there is great reward,Religion wants not a reward. Prou. 2.10-12.16.20. and 3.2.4.22.23.24. and 4.22. Psalm. 19.11. And godlines is great gaine, 1. Tim. 6.6. It is profitable to all things, which hath the promise of this life, & the life to come, 1. Tim. 4.8. Obiect. I haue had now and then a mind, to haue be∣come á diligent reader of the Scriptures, but that againe I thought thus: What profit is there in it?
It is good to studie the Scriptures.Answ. The whole Scrip∣ture is giuen by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to conuince, to cor∣rect, and to instruct in righ∣teousnesse, 2. Tim. 3.16. It conuerteth the soule, ma∣keth wise the simple, reioy∣ceth the heart, enlighteneth the eyes, Psal. 19.7.8. It is a lanterne vnto our feete, a light vnto our pathes, Psal. 119.105. Making absolute and perfect the man of God vnto all good workes, 2. Tim. 3.17. Obiect. These meere Bi∣ble-Clerkes, that haue no∣thing but Scripture, & such as addict themselues there∣unto, making it their chiefest studie, are held men vnlear∣ned, of weake apprehensions,
without vnderstanding and iudgement. Answ. Dauid,Psal. 19.7. & 119.130. Prou. 1.4. The word of God ma∣keth men wise. the King of Israel, a man of warre, va∣liant, and wise, saith: Oh how I loue thy Law! it is my meditation all the day, Psa. 119.97. through which hee did get vnderstanding, vers. 104. and became wiser then his enemies; and got thereby more vnderstan∣ding then his teachers, and the ancient, vers. 98.99.110. a good vnderstanding haue they, that do thereafter, Psa. 111.10. It is the wisedome and vnderstanding of Gods people; and for their know∣ledge & obedience to this, they are accounted an vn∣derstanding and wise nati∣on, Deut. 4.6.
Obiect. But the studie of this maketh men to erre, to become Schismatickes, and Heretickes, and vnquiet per∣sons in the State. Ignorance of the Scrip∣ture causeth errour.Answ. It is a sure word, to which while wee attend, wee doe well, 2. Pet. 1.19. and men erre, not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. Psal. 95.10. Obiect. Many yet that reade the Scriptures, doe run into by-paths. Who they be, that run into by-paths, and why.Answ. The vnlearned, and vnstable, doe wrest the Scriptures to their own de∣struction, 2. Pet. 3.16. be∣cause to some it is giuen to know ye secrets of the king∣dome of heauen, and not to other some, Mat. 13.11. to whom God giueth not eyes
to see, nor hearts to per∣ceiue, Deut. 29.4. for he re∣sisteth the proud, and gi∣ueth grace vnto the hum∣ble. 1. Pet. 5.5. Obiect. If religion were so good, so comfortable a thing as men say: then many that haue seemed most for∣ward, and zealous, would not forsake their such godli∣nesse, zeale, and sincerity, for earthly pleasures, which they once condemned; for profits, which they once neglected, and for honours, which see∣med to bee greatly despised, and which they formerly haue inueighed against. This is to mee a great stumbling blocke, and maketh me veri∣ly to thinke, that men, which speake so much of the com∣forts,
and ioy in Religion, doe but counterfeit, and talke of more then either they feele, or Religion indeed can af∣foord them. The godly feele com∣fort in Re∣ligion.Answ. The kingdome of God is righteousnes, peace, and ioy in the holy Ghost, Rom. 14.Psal. 119.72.103.127. and 19.9. Dauid felt Gods word sweeter then honey, and the honey combe; and saith, they are more to bee desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, Psal. 19.10. Hee reioyced in the way of Gods testimonies, as much as in all riches, Psalm. 119.14. and such ioy and com∣fort found he in the exerci∣ses of Religion, that hee wi∣shed to dwell in the house of the Lord,Psal. 84.1.2.3.4.10. and 122.1. all the daies of his life, Psal. 27.4. Now hee
being a man after Gods owne heart, did not coun∣terfeit; and therefore Reli∣gion giueth singular com∣fort to the truly godly. As for the backsliding of some from their godlinesse, zeale, and sincerity;Religion it selfe not to be the worse esteemed of, because men fall from it. it ought not to make vs to bee offended with Religion it selfe, to thinke it affoordes no com∣fort: for there be that heare and receiue the word with ioy, & yet for want of root, endure but a season, Matth. 13.20.21. Demas for profit forsooke his profession, 2. Tim. 4.10. and zealous Ie∣hu, for honour, left the true seruice of God, and wor∣shipped Idols, 2. King. 10.31. Salomon the wise, that loued the Lord in the be∣ginning,
1. King. 3.3. after∣wards through fleshly plea∣sures, had his heart in his old age turned to vanity, 1. King. 11.4. Obiect. These sorts of men, thus declining from goodnesse, do often prosper in this world: they get prefer∣ment in the Church, and in the Common-wealth:Matth. 12.43 Luk. 11.24.46. and are not the least aduersaries to that their own former shew of goodnesse; and therefore it may seeme, that God is not of∣ffended with them, neither is it any great matter, whether we be religious or prophane so be it, that we walke wisely after the world. Ier. 15.6.Answ. It had been bet∣ter for these persons, not to haue knowne the way of
righteousnesse,Backsliders are in a most fearfull con∣dition. then after they haue knowne it, to turne from the holy com∣mandement deliuered vnto them. For it is happened vnto them, according to the true prouerbe: The dog is turned to his owne vomit againe, and the sow that was washed, to her wallow∣ing in the mire, 2. Pet. 2.21.22. Howsoeuer they enioy the world, as Iehu did, yet God taketh no pleasure in them, Hebr. 10.38. and vn∣lesse they doe repent with Peter, and returne, confusi∣on shall light vpon them, Ier. 17.13. Psalm. 125.5. for the righteous shall not liue for his former righteous∣nesse, in the day of his trans∣gression, Ezech. 33.12. If
he be turned away from his righteousnes, & doth com∣mit iniquitie, according to the abominations that the wicked man doth, his righ∣teousnesse that hee hath done, shall not bee mentio∣ned; but in his transgressi∣on that he hath committed, and in his sinne that he hath sinned, in them shall he die, hee shall die euen for the same, hee shall euen die for his iniquitie that hee hath done, Ezech. 18.24.26. Obiect. Seeing this is so, that a man may enter into the profession of Religion, and afterwards slide backe, and bee plagued of God for the same, it maketh me fearefull to begin to enter into that strait way, lest being wearie
of well doing, I fall away, and my last state bee worse then the first,Luk. 11.26. as Christ himselfe tels vs. Answ. The foundation of God remaineth sure,The elect cannot vt∣terly perish. and hath his seale, the Lord knoweth who are his, 2. Tim. 2.19. they heare his voice, and follow him, Ioh. 10.27. for all that the Fa∣ther giueth him, shall come to him: and him that com∣meth, will he in no wife cast out: because he came down from heauen, not to doe his owne will, but the will of him that sent him: and this is the Fathers will that sent him; that of all which hee hath giuen him, hee should lose nothing, Ioh. 6.37.38.39. for he giueth to them e∣ternall
life, and they shall not perish, neither shall any pluck thē out of his hands; his father which gaue them to him, is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of his Fathers hands. Ioh. 10.28.29. Ther∣fore feare not to come to him; for if thou bee the Lords, thou shalt also euer remaine with him. Of religious Persons. Ob. GOd maketh no more reckoning of those persons that are cal∣led religious, then hee doth of others, for any thing I know. Answ. If heerein the Lord himselfe by his word
may be beleeued:The religi∣ous are in high esteem with God. Psal. 73.1. & 119.165. Prou. 12.2. and 13.22. and 3.33. and 15.9. Eccles. 2.26. and 9.12. Esa. 3.10. Psal. 84.4.5.11. and 85.8. and 91.1-16. and 92.12.13.14. Psal. 34.9. with 91.10. Esa. 65.13.14 then ve∣rily the Lord doth most highly esteeme of them, & most blessed are they. Bles∣sed is the natiō, whose God is the Lord, and the people whom hee hath chosen for his owne inheritance, Psal. 33.12. his eyes are vpon them, vers. 18. with mercy he compasseth them, Psalm. 32.10. the Angell of the Lord campeth about them, Psalm. 34.7. to them there is no want, vers. 9. of that which is good, vers. 10. his eyes are vpon them; his eares are open to their cry, vers. 15. and deliuereth thē out of all their troubles, ver. 17. Psal. 22.24. from death, from famine, Psalm. 33.19. he vpholdeth them, Psalm.
37.17. and preserueth them for euer, vers. 28. for hee delighteth in them to doe them good, Ier. 32.41. Pro. 11.20. and hee that touch∣eth them must know, that hee toucheth the apple of Gods eye, Zach. 2.8. Obiect. If the Lord so delighted in them, and loued them, surely the world would not so hate them, as it doth. The world hateth the godly, and why.Answ. Yes, because the Lord loueth them, and hath chosen them out of the world; therefore the world hateth them, Ioh. 15.19. Christ our Sauiour, is the e∣uer beloued of God; yet the world hated him, vers. 18. Ioh. 7.7. so doth it al Christs true Disciples, for that hee
hath giuen them his word, and because they are not of the world, Ioh. 17.14. Obiect. They bee of the meanest sort of people, for the most part, that either are, or else do carrie the shew of hearty affection to Religi∣on, which in reason, me think, should not be Gods choyce. Answ.The meaner sort haue of∣ten greater measure of grace in this world, then the great ones, Luk. 10.21. I thank thee (saith our Sauiour) O Father, Lord of heauen and earth, be∣cause thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast reuealed them vnto babes; euen so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. 11.25. God calleth not many (though some) noble, migh∣ty, and wise men after the flesh; but hee chuseth the
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; the weake things to confound the mighty; & base things, and things that are despised hath God chosen; yea and things that are not, to bring to nought things that are; that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1. Corinth. 1.26-29. Obiect. They are despi∣sed, as of no value with men. What the godly bee with God.Answ. But with God they are a chosen generati∣on, a peculiar people, 1. Pet. 2.9. and his chiefe treasury, Exod. 19.5. Psalm. 135.4. And take heed saith our Sa∣uiour, that yee despise not one of these little ones: for I say vnto you, that in hea∣uen their Angels doe al∣waies
behold the face of my Father, which is in heauen, Mat. 18.10. Obiect. They bee all ac∣counted as base and vile, and are not of men beloued. Answ. But they be pre∣tious in Gods sight, honou∣rable and beloued, who wil giue men for them,Ioh. 14.21. & peo∣ple for their life, Esa. 43.4. Obiect. None delight in their companie. Answ. But the Lord de∣lighteth in them,God deligh∣teth in them. Prou. 11.20. and a Dauid, a man af∣ter the Lords heart, hath his eyes vpon the faithfull:Luk. 6.22.23 hee delighteth in the Saints that are in the earth, and in them that excell in vertue, Psalm. 16.3. Obiect. The best sort a∣uoideth
their companie, and cannot endure them. God will dwell with the godly. Esa. 57.15.Answ. But God the Fa∣ther, and Christ his sonne, will come vnto them, and make their abode with thē, Ioh. 14.23. and a Dauid wil haue such to dwell with him, Psal. 101.6. Obiect. These men are not so well esteemed of, as ma∣ny others be, which are not of their stampe. Answ. But (saith Salo∣mon) the righteous is more excellent then his neigh∣bour, Prou. 12.26. Obiect. They be hated of not a few. Answ. They that hate the righteous, shall be deso∣late. Psal. 34.21. Obiect. They bee moc∣ked,
derided, and laughed to scorne. Answ. So was Dauid,Psa. 44.13.14 Psa. 22.7. other godly men, Psalm. 123.3.4. and Iesus Christ himselfe, as that Psalme sheweth; and the E∣uangelist, in Matth. 27.39. the seruants may not looke to be better then their Ma∣ster. Obiect. I think they car∣rie a hell in their hearts, they are neuer merrie like other men. Answ. Salomon saith the contrary,The godly are of a mer∣rie and glad heart. Psal. 118.15. that God giueth to a man, that is good in his sight, wisdome, and know∣ledge, and ioy, Eccles. 2.26. and againe hee saith, the righteous sing and reioyce, Prou. 29.6. but in the Lord,
Phil. 4.4. Psalm. 64.10. and in goodnesse, 2. Chro. 6.41. and this their ioy shall not bee taken from them, Ioh. 16.22. folly is ioy to him that is destitute of vnder∣standing, Prou. 15.21. but the godly cannot (as the foole doth) make a sport of sinne, Prou. 10.23. and 14.9. and reioyce in doing euill, as the wicked do, Pro. 2.14. Obiect. I cannot perceiue for all this, that they thinke they may be merrie. They may be merrie.Answ. They are exhor∣ted to bee merrie, and to re∣ioyce, Psal. 33.1. and hearti∣ly, Psal. 95.1. and continu∣ally, Phil. 4.4.1. Thess. 5.16. Obiect. Yea, but I meane in honest mirth, in things
indifferent. Answ. Yes verily,They may vse honest recreations. they know that zealous Dauid might play on a harpe, and sing as he did, 1. Chron. 13.8. Holy Iob might take pleasure in his harp and or∣gan, cap. 30.31. and that the people of God may make good cheare, eate, & drink, and bee merrie, Nehem. 8.1. King. 4.20. But heerein they reioyce, as if they did not reioyce, as the Apostle exhorteth them, 1. Cor. 7.30. Obiect. If this bee so, I could almost be one of these, but that the wicked are so o∣uer them, and will so bee, I thinke for euer, though they suppose the contrary. Answ. The prosperity
of the wicked is but slippe∣rie,The wicked shall not e∣uer rule o∣uer the- godly. Pro. 14.19. Psal. 73.18.19. who one day shall burne as an ouen, and be as stubble, and haue neither roote nor branch; when vnto them that feare the Lord, the sonne of righ∣teousnesse shall arise, who shall tread downe the wic∣ked, euen as ashes, vnder the soales of their feet, Mal. 4.1.2.3. yea the Saints shall iudge the world, 1. Cor. 6. and others shall be made to come and worship before their feet, Reuel. 3.9. So as then shall men easily dis∣cerne betweene the righte∣ous and the wicked; be∣tweene them that fear God, and them that feare him not, Mal. 3.18.
Of Gods Church. Ob. GOds people and Church heere is tossed too and fro, as if God did altogether neglect vs. Answ. We are here but pilgrims and strangers, 1. Pet. 2.12. and not of the world,The Church is not neg∣lected of the Lord. Ioh. 15. yet God hath an eye vnto vs, 1. Pet. 3.12. hee counteth all our wandrings, Psalm. 56.8. he followeth vs, whither soe∣uer wee goe, Iosh. 1.9. and causeth his Angels to take charge of vs, Psal. 91.11. and 34.7. who alwaies attend before God for our safety, Matth. 18.10. Hebr. 1.14.
Ob. Yet I am not a little troubled, to see the godly on the one hand so brought vn∣der, vexed, and persecuted; and the proud aduersaries on the other hand so lifted vp, liuing at ease, in all outward peace, and worldly content∣ments. No cause is there, to grieue at the prosperity of the wic∣ked.Answ. Fret not thy selfe because of the prosperity of the wicked neither enuie at them, Prou. 23.17. and 24. 1. Psal. 37.1. for they shall soone bee cut downe like grasse, and wither as the greene herbe, Psal. 37.2. yet a little while and the wic∣ked shall not bee: yea thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall not be, vers. 10. their armes shall be broken, vers. 17. they shall
perish and become as the fat of lambs, they shall con∣sume, into smoake they shal consume away, vers. 20. The righteous shall reioice when hee seeth the ven∣geance,Psalm. 37.35.36. hee shall wash his feete in the blood of the wicked: so that a man shall say; verily there is reward for the righteous; verily, he is a God, that iudgeth in the earth, Psal. 58.10.11. Obiect. Yea,Psalm. 37.12.32. but in the meane season they plot a∣gainst the iust. Answ. The Lord shall laugh at them; for he seeth that their day is comming, Psal. 37.13. Obiect.Psal. 37.14. But they watch the righteous and seeke to slay him: they haue drawne
out the sword to slay such as be of an vpright conuersati∣on. Answ. Feare them not, the sword shall enter into their owne heart, Psal. 37.15. Obiect. But they haue gotten him into their hands, and condemned him. Answ. The Lord will not leaue him in their hands, nor condemne him when he is iudged, Psal. 37.33. Obiect. Oh, the enemie rageth, and seeketh to ouer∣flow vs as a flood: what is to be done? Answ. Stand still, feare not, behold the saluation of the Lord, Exod. 14.2. Chro. 20. for safety is of him, Pro.
21.31. who sitteth vpon the flouds, and is King for euer, Psal. 29.10. and 96.10. to deliuer his Saints out of the hands of the wicked, Psalm. 97.10. Obiect. We are in present danger. Answ. God is our re∣fuge and strength, a very present helpe in trouble. Psal. 46.1.5. Obiect. We want strength. Answ. The Lord will giue strength vnto his peo∣ple, Psal. 29.11. Obiect. Our enemies are vnreconcileable, so as they will most cruelly torture and torment vs, if they get vs in∣to their hands. Answ. If our waies please the Lord, hee will
make our enemies be at peace with vs, Prou. 16.7. and will shew mercies vnto vs, yt they may haue mercy vpon vs, Ier. 42.12. & 15.11. Obiect. Ah, but we haue by our sinnes so prouoked him vnto wrath, that wee may iustly feare he will indeed vt∣terly cast vs off.God will not vtterly cast his off. Lam. 3.31.32. Ier. 51.5. 1. Sam. 12.22. Answ. The Lord will not cast off his people, nei∣ther will he forsake his in∣heritance, Psalm. 94.14. If wee repent, hee will, also re∣pent of the euill, which hee hath thought against vs, Ie∣rem. 18.8. for he retaineth not his anger for euer, Mic. 7.18. it endureth but a mo∣ment, Psalm. 30.5. because he delighteth in mercy, Mich. 7.18.
Obiect. I wonder at this, that the Lord letteth many of them, that most sincerely serue him, to bee persecuted, & murthered of the enemies.
Answ. Maruell not;The godly must suffer, and why. for it is giuen to them in the behalfe of Christ, not onely to beleeue on him, but also to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.29. whose death is pretious in Gods sight, Psal. 116.15. whose suffering is also vnto them an euident token of saluation; but vnto their e∣nemies, a manifest token of damnation, Phil. 1.28. for, it is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribu∣lation to them that trouble the godly; but to these, rest with God, when the Lord Iesus shall be reuealed from heauen, 2. Thessal. 1.6.7. Obiect. The Lords wrath hath been long vpon his peo∣ple, euen to consume them, and cruell tyrants haue ex∣ercised their malice vpon them, no small space of time. Why the wicked are suffered to tyrannize ouer the godly.Answ. The Lord will not leaue his altogether vnpu∣nished; yet will he correct in measure, and not make a full end of them, Ier. 30.11. for it hath pleased him to make them his people. 1. Sam. 12.22. onely hee tur∣neth his hand vpon them, to purge purely away their drosse, and to take away all their tinne: afterwards they shall bee accounted a righ∣teous and faithfull people, Esa. 1.25.26. for the tyran∣nie of the enemies know,
that they be but the rod of the Lords anger, their po∣wer, his staffe of indignati∣tion, Esa. 10.5. the axe which he heweth with, ver. 15. to accomplish what he himselfe hath determined vpon his people, and the ve∣ry time is set downe, Ier. 29.10. Gen. 15.13. which be∣ing expired, he will certain∣ly set his people at liberty, Gen. 15.14.16. Ier. 29.10.11. Esa. 10.25.27. and de∣stroy the aduersaries, Gen. 15.14. Esa. 10.12.16.17.18.25.26. and 14.25. Ier. 30.16. and 50.18. and 51.24. therefore (saith he) reioyce O ye nations with his peo∣ple: for he will auenge the blood of his seruants, and will render vengeance to
his aduersaries, and will bee mercifull vnto his people, Deut. 32.43. Obiect. But they may be perhaps forgotten, and so bee as a forsaken people. God neuer doth forget his.Answ. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that shee should not haue compassion of the sonne of her wombe? Yea, they may forget; yet will not I forget thee (saith the Lord): be∣hold I haue grauen thee vp∣on the palmes of my hands, Esa. 49.15.16. I haue for a moment forsaken thee: but with great mercy will I ga∣ther thee: In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment: but with euer∣lasting kindnesse will I haue
mercy on thee, & my kind∣nesse shall not depart from thee, neither shall my coue∣nant of peace bee remoued, saith the Lord thy Redee∣mer, that hath mercy on thee, Esa. 54.7-10. Obiect. The Pope, and his power, make great prepa∣ration against vs, of the re∣formed religion, to root vs out, and to destroy vtterly our names from vnder hea∣uen. Answ. Feare not,Esa. 8.9.-13. & 41.10.-16. let vs not bee faint hearted, for these smoaking firebrands, their counsell is wicked, & it shall not stand, neither shall it come to passe. Esay 7.4.7. Obiect. These our ene∣mies haue their Diuiners,
and their Wise men, they giue credit to their Machiauilian Iesuites, and their coniuring Priests, mocking at the Prea∣chers of Gods word among vs. Answ. The Lord doth frustrate the tokens of the liars, and maketh the diui∣ners mad, and turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish; but confirmeth the words of his seruants, and perfor∣meth the words of his Mes∣sengers, Esa. 44.25.26. Obiect. The Church is robbed of these seruants and messengers, the true Pastors, by Antichrist; the vision thus failing, the people pe∣rish. Answ. Returne (saith
the Lord) for I am merciful, I will not keepe anger for euer, but if you so do, I will giue you Pastors according to my hart,People that seeke to please God, shall haue faithfull Pa∣stours. which shall feed you with knowledge and vnderstanding, vers. 15. so will I saue my flocke, and they shall no more bee a prey, Ier. 3.12.15. Ezech. 34.21. Obiect. The shepheards feede themselues,Ezech. 34.4. & not their flockes, they eate the fat, and cloathe themselues with the wooll, but suffer the Lords flocke to be scattered, and to become a prey vnto the beasts of the field. Few care to strengthen the diseased, to heale the sick to bind vp that which is broken, to bring backe that which was driuen
away, and to seeke vp that which is lost, but with force and cruelty to rule them. Ill Shep∣heards shall not alwayes fleece the flocke. Ier. 23.1.2.Answ. Behold, (saith the Lord) I am against these Shepheards, and wil require my flocke at their hand, and cause them to cease for fee∣ding the flock, neither shall these Shepheards feed thē∣selues any more.Esa. 40.11. I will de∣liuer my flocke from their mouth, that they may not be meate for them. I will my selfe feede them in a good pasture, they shall lye in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed. I wil seeke that which was lost, and bring again that which was driuen away. I will binde vp that which was broken: and wil strengthen
that which was sicke.Ier. 23.4.5. And I will set one shepheard ouer them, that shall feed them; and he shall be their Shep∣heard. I the Lord will bee their God, and my seruant a Prince among them: I the Lord haue spoken it. Yea I will cause the euill beasts to cease, and wil breake the bands of their yoake, and deliuer them out of the hands of those, that serue themselues of them. Ezec. 34.10.14.16.23.24.
Of a godly mans ten∣tations, and of one called vnto the state of grace. Ob. WHen I was baptised, I made a straight couenant then to become a true and faithfull seruant to Christ; but yet, alas, I did sinne and offend my God, through my wretched nature, contrary to my promise. The best are offenders.Answ. There is not a iust man vpon earth, that doth good and sinneth not. Eccles. 7.20. Who can say, I haue made my hart clean, and am pure from my sin? Prou. 20.9. If wee say wee
haue no sinne, wee deceiue our selues, and the truth is not in vs, 1. Iohn 1.8. For there is no man that sinneth not, 2. Chron. 6.36. What is man that hee should bee cleane, and he that is borne of a woman, that he should be righteous? Iob 15.14. In many things wee sinne all, Iames 3.2. Obiect. Oh but I am much grieued, that I cannot yet ouer-master wholly my corruptions so, as I would; I daily pray against them, and yet am not set free. Answ.Grace is suf∣ficient. My grace (saith God to Saint Paul in the the like case) is sufficient for thee, either to preuent thy sinning, or to pardon the offence, 2. Cor. 12.9.
And know for thy comfort, that thus striuing, it is no more thou, but sin in thee, Rom. 7.19. From which bo∣dy of death, thorow Christ Iesus thou shalt be deliue∣red, Rom. 7.24.25. Obiect. But besides my nature prone to ill, I haue since I entred into a more conscionable profession of my Christianity, contrary to pro∣mise, and a very bold prote∣station before diuers, that if euer trouble should come for my religion, I would stand out to the faces of the aduer∣saries; and though other should fal away of a dastard∣ly feare, yet I would stand out to the death. Neuerthe∣lesse, alas, at my first exami∣nation by base persons; be∣fore
I was brought to any of authority, I, like a cowardly wretch, denied my profession; euen my Lord and Sauiour, with swearing and cursing. Answ.The godly of weakenes sometime fal fearefully in time of ten∣tation. This fearefully befell the Apostle Peter, e∣uery way, and in euery de∣gree, as thou speakest of thy selfe, Matth. 26.33.35.70.72.74. Luke 22.33. But hee remembring the words of Iesus, being hear∣tily sorry, and bitterly wee∣ping for his sinnes, vers. 75. the Lord was reconciled to him, affording him his fa∣uour with the rest, to bee still one of his blessed Apo∣stles; by whom hee after∣wards wrought mightily in word and deed; neuer men∣tioning to him his so feare∣ful
a denyal of him: So albe∣it that thou hast fallen with him, yet if thou doest also in sort repent with him, be assured the Lord will re∣ceiue thee to mercy, for hee is one and the same for e∣uer. Obiect. Ah, but such is my exceeding weakenesse (the Lord be mercifull vnto mee) that I fall this way and that way, by this and that occasi∣on so often, though not wil∣fully, yet for want of strength to resist & bridle my sudden passions, as I feare vtterly to be cast off at the length. Though the godly fall, they shall not be cast off.Answ. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delighteth in his way. Though he fall, he shall not bee vtterly cast
downe; for the Lord vp holdeth him with his hand, Psalm. 37.23.24. & 145.14. For hee that commeth vnto Christ, in no wise hee will cast out; because it is his fathers will, that of all which hee hath giuen him, he should lose nothing, but should raise him vp at the last day, Ioh, 6.37.39. Obiect. Yea, but when I so sinne, I infinitely displease God, I cannot then, but looke for damnation, though I bee sorry from my very soule, when I doe amisse in the very least measure, that may bee. Answ.Gods mercy doth preuent damnation. Consider that the Lord pardoneth iniquitie, & passeth by transgression, in his infinite mercy, and re∣taineth not his anger for e∣uer,
because hee delighteth in mercy, Mich. 7.18. Obiect. I cannot thinke, though I turne, that hee will turne towards me, and shew me mercy, wil he (think you)? Answ. Surely hee will turne againe, hee will haue compassion, Mich. 7.19. Obiect. But my iniqui∣ties haue subdued mee, and my sinnes are gone ouer my head. Answ. The Lord will subdue them, and cast them all in the depths of the sea, Mich. 7.19. Obiect. Yea, it may be so, if I had not beene a backe∣slider, since I receiued a loue of the truth. The backe∣slider is not made hope∣lesse of mer∣cy, if he re∣turne.Answ. Go and proclaime these words (saith the Lord)
Returne thou backesliding Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to fall vpon thee; for I am mercifull (saith the Lord) and will not keepe anger for euer: onely acknowledge thine iniquitie, that thou hast transgressed against the Lord thy God, Ier. 3.12.13. and I will heale your backesliding, and will loue you freely, for mine anger is turned away, Osea. 14.4. Obiect. This and such like promises, are made to the posterity and children of the Patriarke Abraham: What is this to mee, who am of the Gentiles, and not of the Iewes? except I were one of Abrahams children, I can take no cōfort by this promise
or any other made to the god∣ly among the Iewes. The promi∣ses of salua∣tion made to Abra∣hams poste∣rity, belong to vs belee∣uing Chri∣stians.Ans. Knowest thou not, that hee is not a Iew that is one outward; but hee is a Iew that is one within, ha∣uing the circumcision of the heart in the spirit. Rom. 2.28.29. and also this know, that hee that belee∣ueth in Christ, is the sonne of Abraham, Luke 19.9. Gal. 3.7.29. And the pro∣mise dooth belong also to the Gentiles, as many of them, as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2.39. And in euery Nation, hee that feareth God, and wor∣keth righteousnes is accep∣ted with him, Act. 10.35. The word of saluation is sent to euery one that fea∣reth
God, Act. 13.26. Euen vnto the Gentiles, Act. 28.28. The righteousnesse of God, is now by the faith of Christ vnto all, and vpon all that beleeue, for there is no difference, Rom. 3.22. The partition wall being now broken, Ephes. 2.14. So as those, which in times past, were not a people, are now the people of God, which had not obtained mercy; but now haue ob∣tained mercy, 1. Pet. 2.10. Ephes. 2.12. Obiect. I am glad to heare this, yet there be so ma∣ny crooked by-paths, & such turnings to the right hand and to the left, as I feare for want of wisedome and know∣ledge, and one to instruct me
in the right way, to bee mis∣led. The Lord is the guide of the godly.Answ. God giueth to a man, that is good in his sight, wisedome, and know∣ledge, and ioy, Eccles. 2.26. Hee will instruct him and teach him the way hee shall choose, Psalm. 25.12. And in the way that he shal goe, he will guide him with his eye, Psal. 32.8. Yea hee shall heare a word behinde him, saying: This is the way, walke thou in it, when he is turning to the right hand, and when hee is turning to the left, Esa. 30.21. Obiect. I feele my selfe heauily loaden with the bur∣den of my sinnes, and am full of anguish of heart desiring to be deliuered.
Ans. Come vnto me (saith Christ) all ye that labour & are heauy laden,Christ can supply all our necessi∣ties. and I will giue you rest, Mat. 11.28. Obiect. I am naked with∣out rayment, poore and desti∣tute of the graces of God. Answ. Christ hath a robe of righteousnesse for thee, Reuel. 19.8. and hee will make thee rich, Reue. 3.18. and decke thee with orna∣ments, Ezech. 16.11. Obiect. I am filthy with sinne. Answ. Hee will wash thee, and spread his skirts ouer thee, and couer thy filthynesse, Ezech. 16.8. Obiect. I am blacke, foule, and vncomly.The foule are made faire in Christ. Answ. The Lord will make thee beautifull, and
perfect it through his com∣lines which he will put vp∣on thee, Eze. 16.14. And though thou hast lien a∣mong the pots; yet shalt thou bee as the wings of a Doue couered with siluer, and her feathers with yel∣low gold, Psal. 68.13. Obiect. I am of a troubled spirit, ah, deepe are my wounds: the Lord hath slaine me, and the arrowes of God sticke in me. Christ Iesus is the cure of the soule.Answ. Christ Iesus is the Physician of the soule, Mat. 9, 12. The Lord killeth and maketh aliue, Deut. 32.34. Hee healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth vp their wounds, Psal. 147.3. Hee maketh soare and bindeth vp, hee woundeth, and his
hands make whole, Iob. 5.18. Come (saith the Prophet Osea) let vs returne vnto the Lord, for he hath torne and he will heale, hee hath smitten, and hee will binde vs vp, Chap. 6.1. For hee is the father of mercies, and the GOD of comfort, 2. Cor. 1.3. Obiect. But it may bee long, ere the Lord thus in mercy looke vpon me. Answ. After two dayes will hee reuiue thee, and in the third day hee will raise thee vp, and thou shalt liue in his sight, Osea 6.2. Obiect. I thirst after his mercies, and hunger after righteousnes: Oh I shall not be satisfied. Answ. Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, for they shal bee satisfied,The hungry and thirsty shall be sa∣tisfied. Matth. 5.6. I will (saith the Lord) poure water vpon him that is thir∣sty, and floods vpon the dry ground, Esay 44.2. They shal be abundantly satisfied with the fatnesse of Gods house (saith the Prophet) and he will make them that trust in him, drinke of the riuers of his pleasures; for with the Lord is the foun∣taine of life, Psal. 38.8.9. And of the water of Life, Christ Iesus giueth to all that will aske of him, Iohn 4.10. And whosoeuer drin∣keth thereof, shal neuer bee made athirst, but it shall bee in him a well of water springing vp to eternall life, Ver. 14.
Obiect. I cannot pray, but in great weakenesse. Ans.The godly haue a help in prayer. Though we know not, what we should pray for, as we ought; yet the spi∣rit helpeth our infirmities, and maketh intercession for vs, with groanes that can∣not be expressed, Ro. 8.26. Obiect. There is no assu∣rance to be heard, though we doe pray. Answ.The faithfull haue assu∣rance to be heard of God. Prou. 10.24. 1. Iohn 5.14. Matth. 7.7. If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall aske what you will (saith our Sauiour) and it shall bee done vnto you, Iohn 15.7. & 14.13. What∣soeuer ye shall aske the Fa∣ther in my name, hee will giue it you, Iohn 16.23. Therefore (saith he againe) whatsoeuer yee desire when
yee pray, beleeue that yee shall receiue, and yee shall haue them, Mark. 11.24. Obiect. But my faith is exceeding weake in Prayer. A weake faith (if true) preuaileth with God. Mark. 11.23.Answ. If yee haue faith, as a graine of mustard seed, yee shall say to this moun∣taine; remooue hence to yonder place, and it shall remooue; or to this Syca∣mine tree, bee thou pluckt vp by the root, and be thou planted in the sea, and it shal obey you; and nothing shall bee impossible vnto you, Mat. 17.20. Luke 17.6. Therefore pray with the Apostles, saying, Lord in∣crease our faith, Luke 17.5. And cry, as the childs fa∣ther in the Gospell, Lord I beleeue, helpe my vnbelief,
and the Lord will heare thee, as he did him, Marke 9.24. Obiect. Satan sore as∣saulteth my faith, I feare it will faile me. Answ. But Christ pray∣eth, that this faith faile not, Luke 22.32. Obiect. This was Christs speech to Peter, and the A∣postle; but I doubt whether he will pray for mee also, as well as for them. Answ. I pray not (saith our Sauior) for these alone, but for them also that shall beleeue in me through their word, Iohn 17.20. Obiect. I am very igno∣rant, and doe want this hea∣uenly wisedome and know∣ledge, which I see and ad∣mire
in many, very silly and simple men to see too. Wisdome is of God. Prou. 2.1.-5. Iob 38.36. Eccles. 2.26. Dan. 1.17. & 2.21.Ans. If any of you lacke wisedome (saith St. Iames) let him aske of God, that giueth to all men liberally and vpbraideth not, and it shall be giuen him. For the Lord giueth wisedome, out of his mouth commeth knowledge and vnderstan∣ding, Pro. 2.6. It is true that there is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the al∣mighty giueth them vnder∣standing, Iob 32.8. Obiect. I finde such cor∣ruptions in me, and heereby iudge my selfe so cursed a creature, as I often dare not bee bold to draw neere into Gods presence. Answ. We haue a great
high Priest that is passed into the heauens,Through Christ we may boldly goe to God. Iesus the son of God, who is touched with the feeling of our infir∣mities, we may therfore go boldly vnto the throne of grace, Heb. 4.14.15.16. Obiect. I am fearfully tempted by Sathan, some∣time to presume, sometime to despaire, and sometime to cast off religion, and to be∣come a worldling, now to one thing, now to another, he scarce lets me rest. Surely, if I were Gods childe; I should not bee so tempted of that hellish spirit.Sathans dai∣ly tempting, a signe of our deliue∣rance from him. Matth. 3.17. Marke 1.11. Answ. Thou dost not conclude well, for this is a sure signe, that hee hath not possession of thee: for where the strong man is, all
is in peace, Luk. 11.21. Also Christ Iesus, the euer dear∣ly beloued and only Sonne of the Father, was tempted by the diuell, Matth. 4. who, though at Christs cōmand he departed from him, Ver. 10.11. Yet did hee then leaue him, but for a little season, Luk. 4.13. Obiect. There is no way to driue him away. Answ. Yes, resist the diuell (saith Saint Iames) and hee will flee from you, Chap. 4.7. Obiect. His power is migh∣ty to doe what he will, and go∣eth vp and downe, seeking like a roaring Lion whom to deuoure. Answ. His power is li∣mitted, Iob. 1.12. & 2.6. and
without leaue can hee not enter into an heard of filthy swine, Mat. 8.31.Satan can do no more but what God will. Obiect. There bee many inchanters, witches, practi∣sers of sorceries, diuiners, and lot-casters, to doe vs mischiefe: these bee strong and powerfull limbes of the diuell, and doe much hurt, their cursed doings are not to be auoided. Answ.Witches cā∣not worke their wills vpon the godly. Haman and his consorts cast lots and took counsell at his wise-men, to bring a mischiefe vpō good Mordecay and the other Iewes, but preuailed not, Ester, 3. & 7.10. Balac hi∣red the witch Balaam, to curse Gods people, but hee could not doe it, Numb. 23.13. For surely there is no
inchantment against Iacob, neither is there any diuina∣tion against Israel, Vers. 23. Obiect. I finde plaine contraries within mee, moo∣ning to good, and moouing to that which is euill, and this continually: for if I decline neuer so little awry to the world, or pleasures, then their commeth som one place of Scripture or other, to my minde, which causeth my conscience to checke me, and maketh me to feare; and if I bee earnestly deuoted to the best things, as to the reading of Gods holy word, meditatiō of heauenly things, Fasting & Prayer; then il motions a∣rise vp in my hart, & my sen∣ses carry me away, and so in∣terrupt this godly course, as
I am much grieued herewith, and know not what to thinke or iudge of this my estate. Answ.The striuing of flesh and spirit, a note of our happy state. This is the flesh lusting against the spirit, & the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that thou canst not do the things that thou wouldest, Gal. 5.17. Also this remembring of some Scripture when thou art amisse, to reclaime thee, is a token that the Lord hath put his Law into thy inward parts, and writ∣ten it in thy heart, Ier. 31.33. To make thee feare him, that thou maiest not depart from him, Ier. 32.40. As also that God keep∣eth his promise made, Esa. 30.21. To giue thee a word
of direction, when thou art going wrong; thy state therefore is most blessed. Obiect. I haue (God be blessed) a competent meanes to liue vpon, and somewhat to spare now and then: yet when the poore craueth any thing of me, I am not so rea∣dy to giue, because I thinke it but cast away vpon them. Mercy to the poore, is very accep∣table vnto God. Pro. 14.21. & 11.17.Answ. Oh no, hee that hath pittie vpon the poore, lendeth vnto the Lord; and that which hee hath giuen, wil he pay him againe, Pro. 19.17. Blessed is hee that considereth the poore, the Lord will deliuer him in time of trouble, the Lord wil preserue him, and keepe him aliue, and hee shall bee blessed vpon the earth, Psal. 41.1.2.
Obiect. I doe feare to want my selfe. Answ. Hee that giueth vnto the poore, shall not lacke, Prou. 28.27. Obiect. But a man may be too liberall. Answ.Psal. 112.9. 2. Cor. 9.9. Pro. 11.17. & 21.26. Hee that hath a bountifull eye, shal be bles∣sed, for hee giueth of his bread to the poore, Pro. 22.9. Giue and it shall bee gi∣uen vnto you, euen a good measure, and pressed down, shaken together and run∣ning ouer, shall men giue into your bosome, Luke, 6.38. There is that scattereth and yet increaseth; for the liberall soule shall be made fat, and hee that watereth, shall be watered also him∣selfe, Pro. 11.17.24.25.
Obiect. The poore are very vnthankefull. Answ. Cast thy bread vpon the waters, for thou shalt finde it after many dayes, Eccles. 11.1. Obiect. Men doe not praise nor esteeme of him, that is merciful: he that ga∣thereth riches and storeth vp treasure, though he care not for the poore, hee is made much off. Answ. Oh, giue not thy almes to be praised of men, but let it bee in secret; and thy father that seeth in se∣cret, will reward thee o∣penly, Matth. 6.2.4. As for such as spare more than is meete, surely it tendeth to pouerty, Prou. 11.24. Obiect. I dwell amongst
shamelesse sinners, woe is me,Esa. 3.8.9. surely their deserued plagues are comming, and I shall not escape free from the same. Answ. Surely a woe is vnto them; it shall bee ill with the wicked: But (saith the Lord) say yee to the righteous,The godly shall escape, when venge∣ance com∣meth vpon the wicked. it shall bee well with them, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings, Esa. 3.10.11. And so care∣full is the Lord for the safe∣ty of his people, as hee will haue all Israel on the shore, safe, before the wrath re∣turne to drown the Egypt∣tians, Exod. 14. and Lot out of Sodome before he burne it with fire, Gen. 19.2. Pet. 2.5.6.7. and Noah in the Arke before the flood came, Gen. 6. & 7. Yea before de∣struction,
he sends his An∣gell to marke those in the forehead, that sigh and cry for all the abominati∣ons, giuing a charge to the instruments of his wrath, not to come neere to any of these, Ezech. 9.4.6. Obiect. It greeueth mee to be as one alone, among so many mockers of religion, I cannot go to any neighbour that I haue, for spirituall comfort. The godly are often left alone.Answ. Noah was with his family alone, in his ge∣neration, Gen. 6. Lot a∣lone in Sodome, whose righteous heart was euery day vexed, with the vn∣cleane conuersation of the people, 2. Pet. 2.7. Eliah was, as it were alone in Is∣rael:
so as this is no other∣wise with thee, then it was with these holy and righte∣ous persons. But know, that a godly man is neuer alone, and that more are with him than against him, 2. King. 6.16. 2. Chron. 32.7. Obiect. I dwell far from the Church, and without a∣ny nigh neighbours louing me, but rather hating me for my profession: and yet I car∣ry my family (all that can vnderstand) with me, leauing my house without any de∣fence (in a manner), which makes me feare often a mis∣chiefe to bee done mee, be∣fore I can returne againe. Answ. The Angell of the Lord pitcheth round a∣bout them that feare him,
and deliuereth them,Gods prote∣ction is ouer such as seeke to serue him. Psa. 91.10.11 Zach. 2.5. Psalm. 34.7. The Lord maketh an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on euery side, Iob. 1.10. Neither shall any (saith the Lord to Israel, and so now to the Israel of God) desire thy land, when thou shalt goe vp to appeare be∣fore the Lord thy God, Exod. 34.24. Of trouble for Reli∣gion. Ob. I Am in great heaui∣nesse through the ma∣nifold tentations, troubles, and vexations that come vp∣on me, for my Christian pro∣fession.
Answ. Sure it is, that tri∣bulation is not ioyous for the present, but grieuous; neuerthelesse afterwards it yeeldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousnesse, vnto them that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. Also consider, that vnto vs it is giuen for Christ (saith the Apostle), that not onely we should beleeue in him, but also suffer for his sake, Phi∣lippians 1.29. And being partakers of the sufferings,Rom. 8.17. so shall wee bee also of the consolations, 2. Cor. 1.7. Knowing that this is but the tryall of our faith, being much more precious than gold that perisheth (though it be tryed with fire), that it might bee found vnto our
praise, and honour, and glo∣ry, at the appearing of Iesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.7. Obiect. I am loaden a∣boue measure with reproa∣ches: the wicked enemies and vngodly vaine persons doe hate mee, and speake all manner of euill against mee, that they can imagine, sepe∣rating me from their compa∣ny, and doe cast mee out, as a man of an euill name, from a∣mong them. The godly are to re∣ioyce greatly in afflictions, for righte∣ousnes sake.Ans. Thus haue the wic∣ked done heeretofore vnto the godly, Lu. 6.23. Psa. 35.15.16. & 57.4. & 31.18. But (saith our Sauiour) blessed are you, when men shall hate you, seperating you from ther company, re∣uile you, and say all manner
of euill against you falsely, casting out your name (as e∣uill) for mee, the Sonne of mans sake: Reioyce yee in that day, be exceeding glad, and leape for ioy; for be∣hold, great is your reward in heauen, Matth. 5.11.12. Luke 6.22.23. And be∣cause also the spirit of glory resteth on you, which on their part is ill spoken of, 1. Pet. 4.14. Therfore feare not the reproach of men, neither bee afraide of their reuilings; for the moth shal eat them like a garment, and the worme shall eat them like wooll, Esay 51.7.8. Obiect. Oh, but in the meane space I feare, by such vnsufferable euills, such de∣spitefull
tauntings, odious re∣proches, hatefull slanders, & cruell persecutions, to be sha∣ken off from my profession, & drawne from my stedfastnesse to the wayes of the wicked. Answ. We stand not of our selues,A man stands not constant in suffering, but by Gods assisting power, and grace onely. but wee are kept (as Saint Peter saith) by the power of God vnto salua∣tion through faith, 1. Pet. 1.5. Hee worketh all our workes in vs, Esay 26.12. Trust therefore in the Lord for euer, for in the Lord Ie∣houah is euerlasting strength Vers. 4. Cast thy burthen vpon the Lord; hee will beare thee vp, hee will ne∣uer suffer the righteous to be moued, Psal. 55.22. & 16.8. Also God is faithfull, who will not suffer vs to be
tempted aboue that wee are able; but will with the tentation also make away to escape, that wee may be able to beare it, 1. Cor. 10.13. Obiect. My outward man is ready to perish, and I am in danger of my life euery day, and for the maintenance of the truth. Answ. Though our out∣ward man perish;A good man by suffering gaineth much. yet the inward man is renewed dai∣ly; and our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for vs a farre more exceeding and eternall weight of glory, 2. Cor, 4.17. So that the sufferings of this present life, are not worthy to bee compared with the glory, that shall be
reuealed in vs, Rom. 8.18. Therfore faint not to death, knowing what Christ saith: that whosoeuer shall hate his life in this world, and shall lose it for his sake, shal keepe it vnto eternall life and finde it, Matth. 10.39. & 16.25. Iohn 12.25. Obiect. I want strength, and feele my selfe to faint, vnder the burthen of my heauy crosses. God wil giue strength, that we faint not in trouble.Answ. Hast thou not knowen (saith the Prophet) hast thou not heard, that the euerlasting God, the Lord, the Creatour of the ends of the earth fainteth not, neither is weary? he gi∣ueth power to them that faint, and to them that haue no might, hee increaseth
strength, Esa. 40.28.29. They that wait vpon the Lord shall renue their strength, they shall mount vp with wings as Eagles, they shall runne and not be weary, they shall walke and not faint, Ver. 31. Obiect. My tryalls and troubles are as waters, ready to drowne mee, and as fire to consume, the flame whereof is almost kindled vpon me. Answ. Feare not (saith the Lord to his people) when thou passest thorow the waters,God is in our compa∣ny in all af∣flictions. I will bee with thee; and thorow the riuers they shall not ouerflow thee: when thou walkest thorow the fire, thou shalt not bee burnt, neither shall the flame kindle vpon thee, Esa. 43.1.2.
Obiect. The world is full of seducers, and I am of so meane a capacity, of so shal∣low a iudgement, and so weak hearted, that (I feare) being set vpon I shall turne aside, either to the right, or to the left. How, and by whom, to es∣cape sedu∣cers.Answ. To escape these, be humble, and God will teach thee the way thou shalt choose, Psal. 25. Glo∣rifie God according to thy present knowledge, and haue a loue to the truth, and pray, so God will not giue thee ouer to thy selfe, and to beleeue lyes, Rom. 1. 2. Thes. 2. And this vnder∣stand, that to deceiue the elect it is vnpossible, Matth. 24.24. Mark. 13.22. Obiect. I am to bee cal∣led
before authority, to an∣swere for my religion, which I am willing to doe: but in∣deed, I feare I am not able to defend the truth, against their subtle sophistry. Answ. Bee not afraide,God will as∣sist his, in answering for the truth, against their aduersaries. neither bee troubled, but sanctifie the Lord God in your hearts (saith Saint Pe∣ter), and bee ready alwayes to giue an answere to euery man, that asketh you a rea∣son of the hope that is in you, with meekenesse and reuerence, hauing a good conscience, 1. Pet. 3.14.15.16. Not being carefull, nei∣ther taking thought how or what thing yee shall an∣swere, or what ye shall say; for the holy Ghost shall teach you in the same
houre, what yee ought to say, Luke 12.11.12. And Christ will giue you a mouth, & wisedome; which all your aduersaries shal not be able to gainesay, nor re∣sist, Luk. 21.15. Obiect. Ah, the false∣heartednesse of this world! when I was in prosperity and in peace, I had many that would say well of mee; looke vpon mee cheerefully, not holding it any disgrace to be in my company; and if any did oppose me, they were rea∣dy to answere in my behalfe: but now as soone as authori∣ty called mee in question, they are shrunke backe; yea my neerest acquaintance haue forsaken me, and doe auoide my company for feare, though
my cause be the truth, which they also professe. Answ. Saint Paul saith,In peace they accom∣pany vs, who in aduersity and dangers may forsake vs. that at his first answering no man stood with him; but all men forfooke him, 2. Tim. 4.16. Notwithstan∣ding the Lord stood with him, and strengthened him, and hee was deliuered out of the mouth of the Lion, Vers. 17. Let this be there∣fore thy comfort, that God doeth stand by thee; and consider also how Iesus Christ was thus dealt with. His Disciples (whom hee calls friends) Ioh. 15.14.15. forsooke him and fled, and such as at other times ap∣plauded his doctrine, reue∣renced his person, admired his workes, and wondered
at his gracious words; did when he was taken of his e∣nemies, leaue him; and in¦stead of their former cry∣ing Hosannah, now with the mighty they tooke part & cryed, away with him, let him be crucified, Mat. 27. Ob. I can haue no rest, nor peace with the nighest of my bloud, but they also are against me, onely for my pro∣fession, and doe seeke my bloud; yea I am not safe in mine owne house, but there∣in haue I aduersaries. I thought I should haue beene more peaceable, but I finde it cleane contrary. Religion here on the earth, affords little out∣ward rest to vs, but rather occasions of trouble frō the wicked. Luk. 12.35.Answ. Doth not our Sauiour say: I came not to send peace, but rather a sword and diuision, Matth.
10.34. Luk. 12.51. I am come to send fire, Vers. 49. And to set a man at vari∣ance against his father, and the daughter against the mother, and the daughter in law, against hir mother in law, Matth. 10.35. There shall bee fiue in one house diuided, three against two, and two against three, Luk. 12.52. A mans foes shall be they of his owne house, Matth. 10.36. The brother shall deliuer vp the brother to death, and the father the childe: and the children shall rise vp against their parents, and cause them to be put to death, Matth. 10.21. Yea, yee shall (saith Christ) be betrayed by pa∣rents, and brethren, and
kinsfolkes, and friends; be∣ing hated of all men for my names sake, Luk. 21.16.17. But there shall not a haire of your head perish: in your patience possesse your soules, Vers. 18.19. For he that indureth to the end shall bee saued, Matthew 10.22. Obiect. I haue lost ma∣ny friends by rebuking sinne, though I did it very respec∣tiuely, in true loue to the par∣ties, in compassion to their soules, and in regard of Gods glory, and discharge of my Christian duty; because men are so full of selfe-loue, and for that the world affoordeth so many flatterers, to whom men easily giue an eare; that they cannot with patience
heare a louing, wise, and Christian reprehension. Answ.Faithfull dealing findes, a better bles∣sing in the end, then flattery shall.He that rebuketh a man shal finde afterwards (though not perhaps at the first) more fauour, than hee that flattereth with his tongue, Prou. 28.23. Hee that saith vnto the wicked, thou art righteous; him shal the people curse, nations shall abhorre him; but to him that rebuketh him shall be delight, and a good bles∣sing shall come vpon him, Prou. 24.24. When as hee that speaketh flattery to his friends, euen the eyes of his children shall faile, Iob 17.5. Obiect. The wicked doe curse mee for crossing their lewd courses, and because I
am an enemy to their Idola∣try, superstitions, and wicked vanities. A causlesse curse, is not to be feared.Answ. The curse that is causlesse shall not happen vnto thee. Prou. 26.2. And where God doth blesse, the wicked cannot curse. Num. 23.8. So as with Dauid, thou maist say; it may bee the Lord will look vpon my affliction, and that the Lord will requite good for the cursing, 2. Sam. 16.12. Obiect. I haue lost very much for my conscience, and more than euer I looke to get againe. God rewards all losses for righteousnes sake.Answ. Verily, there is no man (saith our Sauiour Christ) that hath forsaken house, or brethren, or si∣sters, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and the Gospels, but hee shall re∣ceiue an hundreth fold: now in this time house and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come, shall inherit euerlasting life, Marke 10.29.30. Mat. 19.29. Obiect. I am almost (for all this) made weary of my profession, by so many ten∣tations and trialls at home and abroade. Answ. Be not weary of well doing, Gal. 6.9. But rather account it exceeding ioy (saith Saint Iames) when you fall into diuers tenta∣tions, knowing that the
triall of your faith worketh patience, Iam. 1.2.3. Pa∣tience experience, and ex∣perience hope, and hope maketh not ashamed, Rom. 5.4.5. For in due time we shall reape, if we faint not, Gal. 6.9. And blessed is the man, that indureth ten∣tation; for when hee is tri∣ed, hee shall receiue the crowne of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that loue him, Iames 1.12. Obiect. I haue entertai∣ned such as haue come with the truth of Christ, onely for my spirituall comfort, and for the same haue I beene molested and troubled. Answ. Howsoeuer men deale with thee, God will
reward thee: for wee read,To entertain the faithfull, is a worke that shal not want the re∣ward. that hee which receiueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shal receiue a Pro∣phets reward: and hee that receiueth a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, shall receiue a righte∣ous mans reward, Mat. 10.41.42. And for thy farther comfort, know who then were thy guests; euen God the Father, and Christ his Sonne. For (saith he) hee that receiueth whom I send, receiueth me; and hee that receiueth me, receiueth him that sent me, Ioh. 13.20. Obiect. Neuer man hath beene so afflicted, and suffe∣red the sufferings, which I haue indured of my malici∣ous enemies, for the truth.
Christs pati∣ent suffering, and other following his steps before vs, helpe greatly to comfort our fainting spi∣rits.Answ. For thy comfort, least thou shouldest bee wearied and faint in minde, Heb. 12.3. Consider the Lord Iesus (thy master) who endured the speaking a∣gainst of sinners, endured the crosse, and despised the shame, Vers. 2.3. Behold, thy fellow seruants, and ho∣ly men, and Saints of God recorded in Scripture, their like and farre greater af∣flictions. Obiect. I haue beene cast (as a malefactour) into the common goale, and straight∣ly kept. Answ. So were the A∣postles, Act. 5.18. &. 12.4. Obiect. I haue beene brought before authority, & before examination I haue
beene commanded to be bea∣ten, whipped, set in the stocks and imprisoned. Answ. Thus were Paul and Silas dealt with, being grieuously whipped vnto bloud, and then were thrust into an inner prison, Act. 16.22.23.24. Ieremy was smitten, and put into the stockes, Ier. 20.2. Obiect. Yea, but I ha∣uing beene examined and found not guilty, but inno∣cent in the Iudges owne con∣science; yet most vniustly, for feare and fauour haue I been commanded to be whip∣ped, and deliuered to the se∣cular power to bee put to death, and had died, but that God strangely deliuered mee.
Answ. Thus dealt Pi∣late, that fearefull flattering and vniust Iudge,Mark. 15.15. with our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, Matth. 26.18.24.26. Who was not onely in dan∣ger of death; but was put to death indeede, in his cru∣cifying was very despight∣fully abused, Vers. 29.34.39.48. Marke 15.19.20.23.29.31. Obiect. The prison I lay in was filthy and stinking. Answ. The dungeon which Ieremy was cast into was full of mire; so as the poore soule stucke fast ther∣in, and had there dyed, be∣ing allowed no food at all to eat: but that one Abed∣melech the Morian, went to the King himselfe, to get
him deliuered from thence, Ier. 38.6.9-13. Obiect. I haue indured manifold persecutions, be∣sides these now mentioned. Answ.Act. 14.22. By many tribula∣tions haue many of the most holy Saints of God, entred into the kingdome of God: they haue beene tried by mockings, scour∣gings, bonds and imprison∣ment, Heb. 11.36. They haue beene made gazing∣stockes, by reproches and afflictions,Many and sundry tor∣ments haue the Saints suffered, for righteousnes sake. and spoiled of their goods, Heb. 10.33.34. Some haue beene cast into a burning ouen, Dan. 3. Others into the denne of Lions, Dan. 6. Some haue beene stoned, some slaine with the sword, some hew∣en
in sunder; others wan∣dred in Wildernesses, and Mountaines, and Dennes, and Caues of the earth vp and downe, clad in sheepe skinnes, and goates skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, Hebr. 11.37.38. And wanting re∣liefe of men, haue eaten no other food, then that the foules of the heauen, (by Gods admirable and most wonderfull prouidence) did bring them, 1. Kin. 17.6. Obiect. Men haue lien in wait to take mee, and di∣uers haue banded themselues sometimes together, swea∣ring to kill mee, and cursing me; though I neuer had any thing to doe with them, nor euer gaue them iust occasion
of offence, farther then they tooke offence, by my profes∣sing and defending the truth. Answ.Ier. 15.10. It is the good graces in Gods chil∣dren (which the wicked hate them for), as Cain did his bro∣ther Abell. Ieremy did not meddle with worldly busi∣nesses among the people, neither giuing nor taking to vsury, yet the people cursed him. The Iewes lay in wait by the gates of the City, for Paul, (day and night) to kil him, Act. 9.24. being aboue fortie men did sweare his death, and neuer to eat or drinke till they had done it, Act. 23.12.13.21. Though he was to them all a harmelesse person, nei∣ther had hee giuen any iust occasion to them (in any worldly respect) so to doe. But God in mercy, proui∣ded meanes to deliuer him∣selfe
safely from them, Acts 9.25. & 23.30.31. Obiect. These things are able to separate a man from Christ. Afflictions shall not faint the hart of the faith∣full, to make them fall frō the truth.Answ. Verily no: the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Saints of God; haue for the Lords sake beene killed all the day long, and beene accounted as sheepe to the slaughter, Rom. 8.36. 2. Cor. 4.11. Shall then tribu∣lation, or distresse, or perse∣cution, or famine, or naked∣nesse, or perill, or sword se∣parate vs from the loue of Christ? Nay in all these things, wee are more then conquerours, through him that loued vs. And the A∣postle is perswaded not on∣ly for himselfe; but also for
those that bee truely the Lords; that neither death, nor life, nor Angells, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall bee able to separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Ie∣sus our Lord, Rom. 8.37.38.39. Of one (as it were) wholly cast downe with the sight of sin, & refusing comforts. Ob. I Am none of Christs: offer me no comfort. Answ. Thou art bapti∣sed, and as many as haue
beene baptised into Christ, haue put on Christ, Galat. 3.27. Obiect. I am in sin, and brought forth in iniquity. Answ. So was zealous Dauid, Psal. 51. Yet a man after the Lords owne heart, 1. Sam. 13.14. So as his na∣turall corruption, did not hinder the worke of grace. Obiect. I am wrapped in Adams transgression, which I may mourne for, but not wipe away by repentance. Answ. As by the of∣fence of one, iudgement came vpon all to condem∣nation; euen so by the righ∣teousnesse of one, the free gift came vpon all men, vn∣to iustification of life, Rom. 5.18. For as by one mans
disobedience,As by the first Adam we are con∣demned: so by the se∣cond Adam we are saued many were made sinners: so by the o∣bedience of one, many shall bee made righteous, Vers. 19. As in Adam all dye, euen so in Christ shall all be made aliue, 1. Cor. 15.22. Therefore as thou doest looke vpon the first Adam, a liuing soule, the man by whō came death: so behold (with comfort) the second Adam, the quickning spi∣rit, the man by whom com∣meth the resurrection of the dead, Vers. 20.45. Obiect. I haue giuen my selfe to the diuell. Answ. But yee are not your owne (saith the Apo∣stle) yee are bought with a price. 1. Corinth. 6.19.20. Therefore canst thou not
giue thy selfe vnto him, be∣ing none of thine owne to giue. Obiect. I neede not giue my selfe to him, for I am his already by nature. Answ. But by faith in Christ wee are all the chil∣dren of God, Gal. 3.26. For as many as doe receiue him, to them he giueth power to become the sonnes of God, euen to them that beleeue on his name, Ioh. 1.12. Obiect. Though I should beleeue in Christ, and doe his will, I cannot thinke either my estate, or any other mans, to be any whit better, or our selues to be in any more hap∣py case, then men are (or may be perhaps) by wit, educati∣on, learning, or otherwise.
Answ. Verily,Without new birth, no saluation. except a man be borne from aboue, of water and of the spirit, he cannot see the kingdome of God, nor enter thereinto. Ioh. 3.3.5. But Christ Iesus hath made vs Saints by cal∣ling, 1. Cor. 2. Kings and Priests vnto God his father, Reuel. 1.6. Yea, if we doe what hee commandeth vs, hee will call vs his friends, and we shall bee accounted as his brethren and sisters, Mark. 3.34.35. And shall be fellow-heires with him in the life to come, Rom. 8.17. Gal. 4.7. Obiect. I cannot get out of the hands of Satan, hee is the strong man, able to keepe possession, who ruleth in all that are his, (as a Prince)
and are taken captiue by him at his will.Ephes. 2.1. 2. Tim. 2.26. Satā can not hold such, as be the Lord Christs.Answ. Christ Iesus is a∣ble to cast him out, he is the stronger, Luke 11.22. Who came to destroy his works, Heb. 2.14. And to assure vs hereof, God hath couenan∣ted and sworne by an oath, to deliuer his out of the hands of their enemies, to serue him without feare, in holinesse and righteousnes, all the dayes of their life, Luk. 1.73.74.75. Obiect. I finde in my selfe no power to doe, nay, not to will any thing that is good. Answ. It is God that worketh both to will, and to doe, Phil. 2.13. Obiect. But I am not worthy, that GOD should
worke any good desire, or any grace of godly practise in me: I cannot therefore see, vpon what ground I may ex∣pect it, or looke to become one of his. Answ.God doth vs good of his owne good pleasure. Deut. 7.7.8. & 9.5. Psal. 44.3. Ezech. 36.32 God worketh in vs the will and deed, of his owne good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. It hath pleased him to make vs his people, 1. Sam. 12.22. In Christ hath hee chosen vs, before the foundation of the world, hauing predestinated vs vn∣to the adoption of chil∣dren, by Christ Iesus vnto himselfe, according to the good pleasure of his will, Ephes. 1.4.5.9. Obiect. Oh, I am a sin∣ner. Answ. Christ Iesus hath
power to forgiue sins,Christ Iesus is he that sa∣ueth sinners. Luk. 5.24. Hee came to call sin∣ners, Vers. 32. and to saue sinners, 1. Tim. 1.15. And shall saue his people from their sinnes, Matth. 1.21. Obiect. But God is angry with vs for our sinnes. God is well pleased in Christ. Psal. 103.9.Answ. But yet in Christ is he well pleased, Matth. 3.17. And who is like our God, who pardoneth ini∣quity, and passeth by the transgression of his people? Hee retaineth not his anger for euer; because he deligh∣teth in mercy, hee will haue compassion, Mich. 7.18.19. Obiect. God is of an e∣uerlasting remembrance; & therefore hee cannot forget my sins, neither will hee blot them out.
Answ.God blot∣teth out of his remem∣brance the sinnes of his people. I haue (saith the Lord) blotted out, as a thicke cloud, thy transgres∣sions, and as a cloud thy sinnes, for I haue redeemed thee, Esa. 44.22. Hee will put them out of his re∣membrance, Ezech. 33.16. Cast them into the depths of the sea, Mich. 7.19. And remember them no more, Hebrewes, 8.12. & 10.17. Yea, though thy iniquities should bee many, and thy sinne sought for, they shall not bee found, because hee hath pardoned them, Ierem. 50.20. Obiect. God is a iust and terrible God. Answ. But hee is also full of compassion,God as he is iust, so mer∣cifull. and gra∣cious, the Lord is good
and ready to forgiue, Psal. 86.5.15. Obiect. But hee is not so to euery one. God as he is iust, so mer∣cifull.Answ. He is plenteous in mercy, and good to all that call vpon him, Psal. 86.5. & 145.9.18. Obiect. I haue liued, and so long continued a lewd and bad course, that it is in vaine to looke for mercy. When wee doe repent, God will forgiue. Esa. 57.15.16.Answ. Let the wicked (saith the Prophet) forsake his way, and the vnrighte∣ous man his thoughts, and let him returne to the Lord, and he will haue mercy vp∣on him; and to our God, for he will abundantly par∣don, Esa. 55.7. And spare them as a man spareth his owne sonne, Mal. 3.17. As
I liue (saith the Lord), I haue no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that he turne from his way and liue; and if hee turne, he shall not fall by his wic∣kednesse, in the day that he turneth, he shall surely liue, and not die, Ezech. 33.11.12.15. & 18.21. For hee doth not afflict willingly, nor grieue the children of men. Lam. 3.33. Obiect. Though God be mercifull, yet must also his iustice bee satisfied; which neither I, nor any other man can doe: there is none there∣fore to worke my peace with him.It is Christ Iesus, that maketh peace be∣tweene God and vs. Answ. If any man sin, we haue an aduocate with the father, Iesus Christ the
righteous,It is Christ Iesus that makes peace be∣tweene God and vs. and hee is the propitiation for our sinnes, 1. Ioh. 2.1. Through whom wee haue peace with God by faith, Rom. 5.1. By whose death we are recon∣ciled vnto God, and haue receiued the attonement, Vers. 10.11. Yea I, euen I am he (saith the Lord) that blotteth out thy transgres∣sions for my owne sake, and wil not remember thy sins, Esa. 43.25. Obiect. I am vnder the Law. Christ re∣deemeth vs from vnder the Law.Answ. God hath sent forth his Sonne, made of a woman; made vnder the Law: to redeeme them that were vnder the Law, that we might receiue the adop∣tion of sonnes, Gal. 4.4.5.
Obiect. But the Law is of force to condemne, and ac∣curseth all that obey it not, and doe not obserue and keep all things therein contained, which I can not do, and ther∣fore my sinne and iudgement remaineth, and I am accur∣sed. Answ.Christ deli∣uereth vs from the curse of the Law. Christ hath re∣deemed vs from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for vs, Gal. 3.13. an offering for sinne, Esa. 53.10. Vpon whom the Lord layed the iniquity of vs all, Vers. 6. Hee was wounded for our transgressions, hee was bruised for our iniqui∣ties, the chastisement of our peace was vpon him, and with his stripes were wee healed, Vers. 5. Therefore
to such as are in Christ Ie∣sus,Rom. 8.1. there is no condemna∣tion: for hee doth iustifie, who then can condemne? Verse. 33.34. Obiect. Oh, but all sin∣ners are not alike, nor all sinnes: mine are as scarlet, and red as crimson. Answ. Though your sinnes bee as scarlet (saith the Lord), they shall bee as white as snow: though they be red (like crimson), they shall be as wooll, Esa. 1.18. Obiect. Ah, but I haue sinned horribly, in damnable idolatry, in filthy forni∣cation, beastly adultery, in effeminatenesse, Sodomitry, theft, couetousnes, and drun∣kennes; I haue beene a railer, and an extortioner, yea what not?
Answ. Such were some of the Corinthians,No sin dam∣nable to the truly repen∣tant person. yet be∣ing truly penitent and cal∣led, they were washed, san∣ctified, and iustified, in the name of the Lord Iesus, & by the spirit of our God. 1. Cor. 6.11. Yea, the bloud of Christ clenseth vs of all our sinnes, 1. Ioh. 1.7.8. Obiect. Yea, it might thus fall out well to them, be∣ing onely offenders, (as igno∣rant heathen) against the morall Law, and Law of nature: but I was trained vp in the Church of God; yet most wickedly, haue I volun∣tarily beene a diuellish infor∣mer against the godly, get∣ting authority to imprison them, and to put them to death, and so haue I indeed
done, and therefore am I a bloudy and damned perse∣cutor. Bloudy per∣secutors, are not without hope of mer∣cy, if they re∣pent and be∣leeue,Answ. Manasses was religiously brought vp, yet he fell to wickednesse, and did much euill in the sight of the Lord, and shed much innocent bloud in Ierusa∣lem, 2. King. 21.16. Yet when hee besought the Lord, and humbled him∣self greatly before him, and prayed vnto him, hee was intreated of him, and hee heard his supplication, 2. Chron. 33.12.13. Saint Paul was also a blasphemer, a persecutor, and an oppres∣sour of the Saints, 1. Tim. 1.13. Breathing out (as a mad man) threatnings and slaughter, Act. 9.1. Volun∣tarily
seeking & getting au∣thority of the high Priest, Vers. 2. To binde all that called vpon the name of Christ, Verse 14. Hee cast many of them into prison; and when they were put to death, he gaue his sentence, yea hee compelled them to blaspheme, Chap. 26.10.11. Yet was he receiued to mercy, and Christ Iesus counted him faithfull after∣wards, and put him in ser∣uice, 1. Tim. 2.12.13. Obiect. Though Saint Paul was pardoned, yet I can not be pardoned; for hee sin∣ned in zeale, of ignorance, through vnbeliefe, and was otherwise strict of life in his profession: but I professed Christ, and yet haue done as
much as euer Saint Paul did, and liued most filthily, which hee neuer did; therefore my sinne is impardonable, which I haue done against Christ, & he wil neuer forgiue it me. Answ. Whosoeuer spea∣keth a word against the Sonne of man,Christ ex∣cludeth none from hope of mercy, that doe repent & beleeue, but such as sinne against the holy Ghost. it shall bee forgiuen him, Matt. 12.32. Yea all sinnes shall bee for∣giuen to the sonnes of men, and blasphemies wherewith soeuer they shal blaspheme, Mark. 3.28. For no sinne is impardonable to the truely penitent, Ezech. 18.21.22. And the Lord excludeth none from mercy, but such as sinne against the holy Ghost, Matth. 12.31. Obiect. Alas, alas, woe is me, I am then damned: for
I feare that I haue sinned a∣gainst the holy Ghost. Answ.They that feare and are sorry for sinne, haue not sinned against the holy Ghost. That thou doest feare and grieue, through feare that thou hast com∣mitted it, is an infallible argument, that thou hast not committed it: for such as once sinne this sin, haue no feare nor contrition of heart for sinning, for they cannot possibly repent. A∣gaine, it is not enough to make thee guilty of this; because thou hast been, and art yet one professing Christ, and hast persecuted others also professing him: But there must bee the illu∣mination of the spirit, and thou must haue tasted of the good gift of God,Heb. 6.5.6. & 10.29. Matth. 12.31 which many professing him, (only
by a formall education) ne∣uer come to, and fall to persecute maliciously that knowne truth, despiting the spirit of grace, making a mocke of Christ. Now thou holdest a profession of Christ, and desirest to be re∣conciled vnto God; art sor∣ry also that thou hast beene so wicked, and lamentest they case, fearing to bee guilty of this sin: all which (most certainely) may as∣sure thee, that thou hast not sinned this sinne, against the holy Ghost. Obiect. Mine is a legall repentance, like that in Iu∣das, Matth. 27. Not that godly sorrow which the A∣postle speaketh of, 2. Cor. 7.10. Which I haue not, nor
can not yet attaine vnto. Answ. Behold,Repentance is Gods gift, and is pro∣mised to all that be his. GOD hath exalted Iesus Christ with his right hand, both to giue repentance to Israel, and also forgiuenesse of sinnes, Acts 5.31. Yea the Lord hath promised to worke repentance, and the grace of conuersion in all his, Ezech, 36.25.26.27. Therfore pray with Dauid, Create in me a cleane heart, O God, and renue a right spirit within mee, Psalme 51.10. Obiect. But I want the Spirit of God, to helpe mee to pray. Answ.God will giue his ho∣ly spirit vnto his people. The Father will giue the holy Ghost to them that desire him, Luke 11.13. And Christ hath pro∣mised
also to send him from the Father, Iohn 15.26. And it is a part of the couenant made with his people, to put his spirit into them, Ezech. 36.27. Obiect. It is too great a request to aske this (of my selfe) at Gods hands; if Christ would doe it for mee, then should I haue hope, o∣therwise I thinke my prayer but vaine. Answ. Heare then for thy comfort: I will (saith our Sauiour) pray the Father, and hee will giue you the Comforter, that hee may a∣bide with you for euer, Ioh. 14.16. Obiect. Ah, for all this, I am afraide to goe to God, because of my sinnes, for hee
saith: the foolish shall not stand in his sight, hee hateth all them that worke iniquity, and telleth them that hee will not heare them, that their sinnes haue made a separati∣on betweene him and them. Answ.Not the pre∣sumptuous sinners, but the truely penitent, are inuited to come vnto Christ. The Lord spea∣keth to such as are not re∣pentant, but liue in their sinnes, and yet presumptu∣ously come vnto him, and thinke to be heard. But to other that be sorry for their sinnes, and feele the heauie burthen of them, hee most louingly inuiteth to come vnto him, saying; Come vn-mee all yee, that are wearie and heauie laden, and I will ease you, Matth. 11.28. Be∣leeue in Christ, and thou hast peace with God, Rom.
5.1. And hast receiued by him the attonement, Rom. 5.11. Who is our high Priest making intercession, Rom. 8.34. Feeling our in∣firmities; and therfore mai∣est thou, and euen all of vs, goe boldly to the throne of grace, that wee may receiue mercy, and finde grace to helpe in time of neede, Heb. 4.15.16. Obiect. Christ is man, and so may inuite vs; but God doth not will me, or any such sinfull wretches to come vnto him. Answ. Yea God doth beseech vs, that wee would bee reconciled vnto him, 2. Cor. 5.20. Obiect. But God is a most righteous God, hating
wickednesse: I a lewde and sinfull caitiffe, voide of all righteousnesse: there can ve∣rily then bee no reconciliati∣on, except there were a medi∣atour betweene vs. Answ.Christ Iesus is mediatour betweene God and vs. There is one God, and one mediatour betweene God and man, which is the man Iesus Christ, 1. Tim. 2.5. Who is made sinne for vs, which knew no sinne, that wee might bee made the righte∣ousnesse of God in him. 2. Cor. 5.21. He is our righ∣teousnesse, Ier. 23.6. Our wisedome, holinesse, and redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. And hee hath by his bloud clensed vs of all our sinnes, 1. Ioh. 1.7. Obiect. This were no
smal comfort and incourage∣ment to goe to God, if Christ be indeede a sufficient Saui∣our, and able to saue vs. Christ Iesus is perfectly able to saue vs.Answ. For this, heare what the Apostle saith, hee is able to saue them (to the vttermost), that come vnto God by him, seeing hee e∣uer liueth to make interces∣sion for them: For he is the high Priest for vs; holy, harmelesse, vndefiled, sepa∣ted from sinners, and made higher than the heauens, He. 7.25.26. And is set on the right hand of the throne, of the maiesty of God, Heb. 8.1. Rom. 8.34. Hauing obtai∣ned eternall redemption for vs, Heb. 9.12. Obiect. The Apostle was a Iew, and writeth here
thus vnto the Hebrewes (a separated nation from all the world), I being no Hebrew, may haue no benefit by Christs death. Answ. Iesus was to die,Christ Iesus was to dye for Gentiles, as well as Iewes. not for that nation onely, but also that he should ga∣ther together in one, the children of God that were scattered abroade, Iohn 11.52. Obiect. Alas, that I knew not this before now, it is too late: death is seazing vpon mee: and I feare the time too short to call to God for mercy, and to repent. Answ.No time too late to re∣pent heere: if it be (in∣deed) vnfai∣ned repen∣tance. The good theefe vpon the Crosse, had but a little time: yet when hee confessed his sinnes, con∣demned himselfe for the
same, acknowledged his in∣flicted punishment iustly deserued, reprouing his fel∣low-cōpanion in euill, pro∣fessing his faith in Christ, and crauing mercie at his hands, had presently a bles∣sed promise of life, that hee should (euen that day) bee with the Lord Iesus Christ in Paradise, Luk. 23.42.43. Obiect. Yet one thing troubles mee very much, I see many that say, Christ is their Sauiour, and that God is mercifull, and hath forgi∣uen them their sinnes, and yet haue had the heauie rodde of God vpon them for all that: therefore in such a case it is but a conceit to thinke we are pardoned. Answ. Though the
Lord doe afflict them,The godly may be par∣doned, and yet chastised. yet it is not a conceit to bee per∣swaded of the pardon of their sinnes: for the Psal∣mist saith, Thou wast a God that forgauest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inuentions, Psal. 99.8. And Nathan plainely tells Dauid, that his sinne was pardoned, and yet because by his deede, hee had caused the enemies of God to blas∣pheme, his childe did die, and afterwards in a diuers manner was he himselfe af∣flicted, 2. Samuel 12.11.13.14. Obiect. But God per∣haps, when he hath forgiuen, may call backe his mercy, and not shew constantly his mer∣cy according to his Word.
The saluati∣on of the e∣lect, is an euerlasting saluation.Answ. With the father of lights there is no varia∣blenesse, nor shadow of tur∣ning, Iam. 1.17. The Lord is good, his mercy is euerla∣sting, and his truth endu∣reth to all generations, Psa. 100.5. & 118.1.29. Israel shall bee saued in the Lord, with an euerlasting saluati∣on: Yee shall not (saith the Prophet) bee ashamed nor confounded, world with∣out end, Esa. 45.17. The heauens shall vanish away like smoake (saith the Lord), and the earth shall waxe old, like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner: but my saluation shall bee for euer, and my righteous∣nesse shal not be abolished,
Esa. 51.6.8. Matth. 24.35. For the outward crosses of this life. Ob. THough I feare God, I am in no better state then others, that make no conscience of their wayes. Answ. Touching these out ward things, all things come alike to all, and one condition to all, Eccles. 9.2.3. & 8.14. & 2.14. Obiect. I haue many bodily infirmities. Answ. Isaac was blind, Gen. 27.1. Holy Zachary dumbe for a time, Luk. 1. Iacob halted, Gen. 32.31. Hezechias was sicke and
and had the plague, Esa. 38.1.21. Dauid decayed in strength and wanted bodi∣ly heat, 1. Kings 1.1. Iob was full of sores, botches, and boyles, Chap. 1.7. Eli∣sha had his bodily infirmi∣tie, 2. Kings 13.14. Asa was extreamely diseased in his feet, 2. Chron. 16.12. Pe∣ters mother in Law, was ta∣ken with a great feauer, Luk. 4.38. And Mary Magdalen was possessed once with seuen deuills. Obiect. I was rich, but my state is decayed. Answ. It was Iobs case, a iust and holy man, Chap. 1. 15-18. & 2.7. & 16.12. But consider the end that hee made, Iam. 5.11. Iob Chap. 42.
Ob. Oh, yet I can not but grieue, when I consider my former estate and compare this with it. Answ.Afflictions bitter to the flesh, but the soules safe∣ty, and me∣dicinable to the whole man. No chastisement for the present seemeth to be ioyous, but grieuous, neuerthelesse afterwards it yeeldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousnes, vnto them that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. And consider with thy selfe, if any iniqui∣tie bee in thine hand, put it farre away, and let not wic∣kednesse dwell in thy taber∣nacle, Iob, 11.14. For then shalt thou lift vp thy face without spot, yea thou shalt bee stedfast and not feare, thou shalt forget thy mi∣serie, and remember it as waters that passeth awaie,
Verse 15.16. Obiect. I haue very lit∣tle to begin the world againe with. Answ. Seeke vnto God betimes, and make thy sup∣plication to the almightie: though thy beginning bee small, yet thy latter end shal greatly increase, Iob, 8, 5.7. Obiect. Oh, my pouertie remaineth vpon mee, and I haue nothing to liue vpon. Pouertie is not to presse downe any mans heart.Answ. Christ Iesus was borne in a poore state, so liued, and so died poore. Remēber that thou brough∣test nothing into the world, neither shall any man carry any thing out of the world Naked we came, and naked shall we returne, Iob, 1.21
Eccles. 5.14. 1. Tim. 6.7. So as thou canst not bee poo∣rer, than thou camest hither, neither shall any other bee better then thy selfe, in the end of their daies. Obiect. But yet these worldly wants (for the pre∣sent) doe much trouble mee, and the cares thereof doe so much disquiet me, as I know not which way to turne mee, for none taketh care for me. Answ. Be nothing care∣full, Phil. 4.6.No cause to bee troubled with worldly cares. Cast all care on the Lord, for hee careth for thee, 1. Pet. 5.7. Our heauenly father knoweth that we haue neede of all these things, Mat. 6.32. Cast therefore thy burthen vpon the Lord, and hee shall su∣staine thee, Psal. 55.22.
Obiect. I liue onely from hand to mouth, and cannot get before hand, I haue only food and rayment. Supply of present ne∣cessary wāts should cause vs to be con∣tented.Answ. Be not couetous, content thy selfe with that thou hast, Heb. 13.5. If thou hast food and rayment, bee therewith content. 1. Tim. 6.8. As Iacob was, Gen. 28.20. For the Lord hath said, hee will neither faile thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.6. Obiect. This hauing but onely for the present, maketh me too carefull and doubting for the time to come. Not to care for to mor∣row.Ans. Take no thought for to morrow, Matth. 6.34. Luk. 12.22. But say with Abraham, God will pro∣uide, Gen. 22.8. Consider the Rauens, for they neither
sowe nor reape, which nei∣ther haue store-house nor barne, & yet God feedeth them. How much more are ye (saith our Sauiour) better than fowles? Luke 12.24-30. Psal. 104.27. & 145.15. Leuit. 26.4. Matth. 6.25-31. Obiect. But the world is now a hard world, and I feare famishing. Answ.The godly neede not feare famish∣ment. Prou. 10.4. & 13.4. The Lord will not famish the soule of the righteous, Prou. 10.3. Loue not thou sleepe, least thou come to pouertie, Prou. 20.13. The idle soule shall suf∣fer hunger, Prou. 19.15. And he that followeth vain persons, shall haue pouerty enough, Prou. 28.19. But open thine eyes, and thou
shalt bee satisfied with bread, for the diligent hand and the blessing of the Lord maketh rich, Prou. 10.4.22. And his soule shall be made fat, Prouerb. 13.4. Obiect. But the poore (e∣specially being religious) are not beloued of worldlings, which doe possesse the things of the earth, and are hard hearted, vnwilling altoge∣ther to relieue their wants, and therefore may wee pe∣rish. God can re∣lieue his childrens wāts, though the world be neuer so hard.Answ. The Lord can giue his people fauour in the sight of the Egyptians, so as they shall lend them, such things as they require, Exod. 12.36. And if man be mercilesse, hee can make
Rauens feed his seruants, 1. King. 17.4. And send food from heauen, Exod. 16.35. So as they shall not bee a∣shamed in the euill time: and in the dayes of famine, they shall be satisfied, Psal. 37.19. Obiect. Alas, my charge is great, my labour and meanes very weake, to beare vp daily such a heauy bur∣then. Answ. Walke before God, and be vpright,Small means may (by Gods bles∣sing) suffice to maintaine many. he is all sufficient, Gen. 17. Hee can blesse very smal means, euen a cruise of oyle, and a little meale to nourish a whole family, 1. King. 17. Hee can feed a thousand with a loafe of bread, as he did fiue thousand with fiue
loaues and two fishes, be∣sides women and children, and cause to bee taken vp twelue baskets full of bro∣ken meat, Matth. 14.20. Know this, that man liueth not by bread only, but by e∣uery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.Matth. 4.4. Obiect. But corne is so scarce, and at such an ex∣cessiue rate, that wee poore may thinke no otherwise, but to perish by famine, before the price will abate. Answ. Knowest thou not, that ouernight in Samaria,God can turne scarci∣ty into great plenty, and that in a short space. that women eat their chil∣dren for hunger, 2, Kings 6.28.29, and that an Asses head was at eightie peeces of siluer, Verse 25; and yet the next day (according to
the word of the Lord), a measure of fine flower was sold for a sheckle, & 2. mea∣sures of barly for a sheckle, in the gate of Samaria, 2. Ki. 7.1.16. For with God no∣thing is impossible. Obiect. Yea, these had Gods word to comfort them, to expect such mercy: but we haue no such word for vs. Ans.We haue promises frō God to pro∣uide for vs, Psal. 132.15. Whatsoeuer things are written afore time, are written for our learning, that wee through patience and comfort of the Scrip∣tures might haue hope, Ro. 15.4. Also the Lord hath promised, not to famish the soule of the righteous, Pro. 10.3. Hee giueth meate to them that feare him, and is euer mindfull of his pro∣mise,
Psal. 111.5. The Ly∣ons roare and suffer hun∣ger: but such as feare the Lord shall want nothing that is good, Psal. 34.9. In dearth he will redeeme thee from death, so as thou shalt laugh at destruction and fa∣mine, Iob, 5.20.22. Obiect. I am not worthy that God should so prouide for mee. Answ. God regardeth not thy worthinesse: for of his goodnesse he prouideth for the poore. Obiect. My pouertie ma∣keth mee to bee despised of them that haue wealth. The godly poore are better then the wicked rich.Answ. As for contempt, learne to contemne it, for the Lord regards thee, Psal. 40.17, and know that a lit∣tle
which a righteous man hath, is better than the ri∣ches of many wicked, Psal. 37.16. And that better is the poore, that walketh in his vprightnesse, than hee that is peruerse in his waies, though hee bee rich, Prou. 28.6. & 19.1. Obiect. My pouertie hin∣dereth me, that I cannot doe the good I would, to such as suffer and are in bands for righteousnesse sake, which doth not a little grieue mee: though I giue my myte, yet it is nothing. Answ.A willing minde to do well after our ability, is acceptable vnto God. God doth ac∣cept the will for the deed; for if there be first a willing minde, it is accepted accor∣ding to that a man hath, and not according to that hee
hath not, 2. Cor. 8.12. A cup of cold water shall not lose the reward, Matth. 10.42. And the poore wid∣dowes myte is more accep∣table to God, than the su∣perfluitie of the wealthy, Mar. 12.43.44. Of commom crosses, vexations, and out∣ward molestations. Ob. I Am crossed one way or other: the Lord is euer correcting me and try∣ing mee. Answ. Happy is the man whom the Lord cor∣recteth,Ps. 94.11.13. Iob, 5.17. Psalm. 94.12. For whom the Lord loueth, hee chastiseth, and
scourgeth euery son whom he receiueth; for if wee be without chastisemēt, wher∣of all are partakers, then are we bastards and no sonnes, Heb. 12.6.7. Also blessed is he that indureth tentations, Iam. 1.12. For God doth thus proue his children, that he might doe them good in the latter end, Deut. 8.16. Obiect. I am iniured vn∣iustly, and it vexeth mee to be wronged of them, that I do no wrong vnto. Answ. Dauid was perse∣cuted without cause, Psal. 119.161. So was Iesus him∣selfe; let not this therefore vex thee, knowing that it is thanke-worthy to indure griefe, suffering wrongful∣ly: and it is acceptable to
God to take it patiently, 1. Pet. 2.19.20. Obiect. But such, as both by reason and religion are bound to mee, haue yet abu∣sed me. Answ. Dauid was abu∣sed of his familiar friend, Psal. 41.9. With whom he had taken sweet counsell, and walked into the house of God in company, Psal. 55.14. And Iesus Christ be∣trayed by Iudas, one of his twelue chosen house-hold seruants, and that with a token of loue, and vnder a friendly salutation, Matth. 26. This is therefore no strange tryall, but such as befell the best beloued of God. Obiect. I haue many ad∣uersaries,
and am now at this present in great danger of them. Answ. Dread them not, the Lord hath a hooke to put in their nostrils, 2. Kings 19.28. He can con∣found their wisedome, as he did Achitophels, 2. Sam. 17.14, or strike them blind, as hee did the Sodomites, Gen. 19, and the armie of the Aramites, 2. King. 6.18, or hide thee from their wrath, as he did Eliah from the furie of Iezabell, 1. Kin. 18.12. & 19. And Ieremy with Baruch, from the hands of the Princes, Ier. 36.26, or command them not to hurt thee, as hee did Laban pursuing Iacob, Gen. 31.24.29, or turne their
harts, as he did Esaus toward Iacob, Ge. 33. Making them to bee at peace with thee, Prou. 16.7, or raise vp for them enemies to keep them busied, that thou maiest es∣cape, 1. Sam. 23.27.28, or else make their hearts melt, taking knowledge of thine innocency, and cause their owne mouthes to iustifie thee, and condemne them∣selues as Saul did, when hee vniustly pursued after Da∣uid, 1. Sam. 24.16.17.18. & 26.21. Obiect. My aduersaries are full of trickes and deui∣ses, to bring their matters a∣bout. Answ. The Lord disap∣pointeth the deuises of the craftie, that their hands
can not performe their en∣terprizes, Iob, 5.12.Psal. 21.11. & 33.10. Esa. 33.11. Nehe. 4.15. Yea he taketh the wise in their owne craftinesse, Verse 15, and their owne counsel shal cast them downe, Iob. 8.7. Obiect. They are migh∣tie and rich, and I am of a meane and poore estate. Answ.Pro. 22.22.23. But the Lord sa∣ueth the poore from the sword, from their mouth,Psal. 140.12. and from the hand of the mighty, so as the poore hath hope, Iob, 5.15.16. For the Lord will maine∣taine the cause of the affli∣cted, and the right of the poore. Obiect. They speake lies, and are false witnesses a∣gainst me. Answ. The mouth of
them that speake lies shall be stopped,Prou. 12.19.22. & 19.5.9. & 21.28. Psalm. 63.11. And they shall bee destroy∣ed, Psal. 5.6. Dauids ene∣mies did belye him. Psalm. 35.11. So did Naboths, 1. King. 21. The Iewes aduer∣sarie Haman, Ester, 3.8, and others, Esdr. 4.12. And the enemies of the Lord Iesus did wickedly belye him; so as the malice of thine ene∣mies heerein, is no other than was Christs, and all these before named. But hearken what is said, The almightie will witnesse for thee, though thine aduersa∣ries should write a booke against thee, Iob, 31.35. Obiect. They trauel with mischiefe, they haue digged a pit, and spread a net, and
haue set trappes in the way for me. Answ.Reade the whole 64. Psalme, no∣ting the ma∣lice of the wicked, their policy and combination against the true hear∣ted, and their ouer∣throwe. Let them trauell with mischiefe, they shall bring forth a lye, Psalm. 7.14, and fall into the ditch which they haue digged, Vers. 15, and in the net which they haue hid, shall their owne feet bee taken, Psal. 9.15. Obiect. In my aduersitie my friends forsake mee, and for verie feare of mine ene∣mies, my deerest and nighest of bloud haue left mee, and I am so destitute of succour. Answ. Of such friends Iob complaineth,Friends faile in aduersity. Psal. 142.4. & 69.8. & 38.11. Chap. 19.19, and Dauid, Psalm. 31.11. & 38.11: but what though man leaue vs, the Lord will stand by vs, 2.
Tim. 4.16. And when fa∣ther and mother doe for∣sake vs, the Lord will take vs vp, Psal. 27.10. For the Lord will regard the pray∣er of the destitute, and not despise their prayer, Psalm. 102.17, and will deliuer them out of the hand of the wicked, Psal. 97.10, stan∣ding at the right hand of the poore, to saue him from those that condemne his soule, Psal. 109.31. Obiect. I am in danger of imprisonment, and the crueltie of mine enemies is such, if they once throwe me into prison, I shall neuer get out. His proui∣dent care is ouer poore prisoners.Answ. The Lord look∣eth downe from the height of his sanctuarie, from hea∣uen
doth the Lord behold the earth, to heare the groa∣ning of the prisoner, to lose those that are appoin∣ted to death, Psal. 102.19.20. Ieremy was in a dunge∣on, Iehoiaehim, 2. King. 25.27. Paul and Sylas in pri∣son, yet GOD deliuered them; yea and Manasses in chaines, and that for his wickednesse, yet then truely repenting and praying for mercie, the Lord set him al∣so at libertie, 2. Chron. 33.11.12.13. Ob. But I know the pri∣son that I shall go to, is kept by a sturdy and hard hear∣ted goaler, without any re∣ligion, therefore may I perish while I am there. Answ. Ioseph was cast
into prison vnder a hea∣then, but the Lord being with him, and shewing him mercy, gaue him fauour in the sight of the keeper of the prison, Gen. 39.21: & S. Paul and Sylas being at the first cruelly dealt with by a Goaler, vnder whom they were imprisoned, yet soone got speciall fauour at his hands, the Lord hauing conuerted him to the faith of Christ, Acts, 16.24 33.34. Obiect. Ah, I am cast downe, my wicked aduer∣saries haue preuailed, I al∣most faint in this my trou∣ble. Answ. Be of good cou∣rage the Lord wil strength¦en thine heart, Psal. 31.24
& 27.14. Waite on the Lord, and he will saue thee, Esa. 25.9. He will raise vp all those that bee bowed downe, Psalm. 146.14. & 146.8. Hee lifteth vp the meeke, and casteth the wic∣ked downe to the ground, Psal. 147. Obiect. It grieueth mee to see how they now triumph, and reioyce ouer mee, as one vtterly forsaken, left desti∣tute, and forgotten of God. Answ.Psal. 22.24. The Lord thinkes vp∣on the af∣flicted, to deliuer them. The Lord forget∣teth not the cry of the af∣flicted, Psal. 9.12, hee re∣gardeth the prayer of the deftitute, Psal. 102.17, hee is a refuge in times of trou∣ble to the oppressed, Psalm. 9.9. & 14.6; yea, for the oppression of the poore, for
the sighing of the needy, now will I rise (saith the Lord) I wil set him in safe∣tie, from him that puffeth at him, Psa. 12.5. Obiect. But seeing I am not deliuered, I feare God hath forsaken mee, and the rather, for that I haue v∣sed good and lawfull meanes for deliueraunce, and yet since that time I haue beene worse dealt with then be∣fore. Meanes at first may seeme to be weake, which after may pre∣uaile.Answ. So were the Is∣raelites (for a while) worse dealt with by Pharaoh and the Egyptians, because Mo∣ses and Aaron were means for their deliuerance, but at the length they were set free, Exod. 5.23. & 12.41. Waite therefore on the
Lord, and he wil saue thee, Prou. 20.22. For the Lord forsaketh not them that seeke him,Psal. 18.30.. Psal. 9.10. & 37.28. Hee saueth by his right hand them that put their trust in him, from those that rise vp against them, Psalm. 17.7. Remember I pray thee, who euer peri∣shed being innocent, or where were the righteous cut off? Iob, 4.7. Obiect. I hope I should doe well, but that I feare one man, that is high minded and mightie, who beareth the most sway, and is a great friend to my aduersaries, and so my enemy, beleeuing lyes also and false reports against mee. Answ. Blessed is the
man,Man is not to be feared. that maketh the Lord his trust, and respec∣teth not the proud, nor such as turne aside vnto lies, Psal. 40.4. Why shouldest thou bee afraide of a man that shall dye, and euen in a moment? Iob, 5.20. or of the Sonne of man, which shall be made as grasse? E∣say, 51.12. If God be with vs (saith the Apostle) who can be against vs? Rom. 8.31. Therefore say with Da∣uid, my defence is in God, Psal. 7.10. The Lord is on my side, I will not feare what man can doe vnto me, Psal. 118.6. Obiect. Yea, but if I had some such great helpes to stand for mee, as they haue for them, it were the better,
and I should hope so the soo∣ner to preuaile. Answ. It is better to trust in the Lord,Though it be not a∣misse to haue fauour of man, yet it is best to trust onely in God. then to put any confidence in man: it is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confi∣dence in Princes, Psal. 118.8.9; In whom there is no help, Psal. 146.3. For mans breath goeth forth, hee turneth to his earth, in that very day his thoughts pe∣rish, Vers. 4. Happy there∣fore is he, that hath the God of Iacob for his helpe, whose hope is in the Lord his God, who keepeth truth for euer, and executeth udgement for the oppres∣sed, Vers. 5.6.7. Turning the way of the wicked vp∣side downe, Vers. 9.
Obiect. I know it is best to trust in God, who is able to deliuer, but what meanes to vse, that God may deliuer me, I know not. Prayer a meanes to be vsed for deliuerance in trouble.Ans. Euen humble and feruent praier, for (saith the Lord) Call vpon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me, Psal. 50.15. For the Lord is nigh vnto all them that call vpon him: to all that call vpon him in truth, Psal. 145.18. Obiect. I haue often cal∣led, and (blessed be his name) he hath often heard mee, but I may not yet thinke, that he will doe so still. Answ. The Lord will deliuer thee in six troubles,God is not weary of well doing. yea in seuen, there shall no
euill touch thee, Iob. 5.19. Many times did hee deliuer the Israelites, Psal. 106.43. For the goodnesse of God indureth continually, Psal. 52.1. And he delighteth to doe good to his people, Ier. 32.41. Obiect. I am constrai∣ned to make my sute vnto the King, and I feare to thinke of it (though my cause bee most iust), because of the ma∣iesty of that his place and person. Answ. Pray vnto the King of Kings, for the Kings heart is in the hands of the Lord, as the riuers of wa∣ter, hee turneth it whether soeuer he will, Prou. 21.1. Obiect. I feare that some haue falsly informed against
mee, and so the truth of my cause shall not bee vnder∣stood. Answ. What if they haue? it is the honour of a King to search out a matter, Prou. 25.2. And the eyes of the Lord preserue know∣ledge, and he ouerthroweth the words of the transgres∣sour, Prou. 22.12. Obiect. But a wicked Zibah, in his treacherous courses by flatterie, and his si∣nister practises mis-led Da∣uid (a wise Prince) in mat∣ter of iudgement. Answ. A King that sit∣teth in the throne of iudge∣ment, scattereth away all euill with his eyes, Prou. 20.8. And a wise King scat∣tereth the wicked, & bring∣eth
the wheele ouer them, Vers. 26. For by taking a∣way the wicked from be∣fore him, his throne is esta∣blished in righteousnesse, Prou. 25.5. In his lippes is a diuine fentence, and his mouth transgresseth not in iudgement, Prou. 16.10. Ob. A Dauid, though he bee both a wise and a good King, yet is hee but a man, and so may do amisse against me, a poore distressed Me∣phibosheth, made contemp∣tible by my enemies. Answ. Mercy and truth doe preserue the King, and his throne is vpholden with mercy, Prou. 20.28. To Kings it is an abomination to commit wickednes, Pro. 16.12. And the King that
faithfully iudgeth the poor, his throne shall bee establi∣shed for euer, Prou. 29.14. Obiect. I should haue good hope to speede, but that my aduersaries can make friends, and haue many de∣uises to hinder my suite. Ans. There are many de∣uises in a mans heart;Prou. 21.30. Ier. 9.23. neuer∣thelesse the counsell of the Lord, that shall stand, Prou. 19.21. Many seeke and will intreate the fauour of the Prince, Vers. 6. But euerie mans iudgement commeth from the Lord, Prouerbs, 29.26.
Of euils in a Common∣wealth. Ob. I Thinke there was ne∣uer a worse age, one can not trust an other; such deceit, lying, flattering, swea∣ring, forswearing, mischiefe, and crueltie, yea and all ini∣quitie: but truth and good∣nesse few like and allow of. Answ.Formertimes worse: yet the present time com∣monly com∣plained off. Mans heart pos∣sessed with griefe of present euills, which he onely con∣sidereth off, maketh him forget what hath been. But behold thou now the for∣mer time, and weigh the complaints of the Pro∣phets. Osea saith, there was
in his daies, no mercy, truth, nor knowledge of God in the Land; but swearing, ly∣ing, killing, stealing, and whooring, and bloud tou∣ching bloud, Chap. 4.1.2. They set trappes and laide nets to catch men, many by deceit became great, and waxed rich, Chap. 5.26.27. Brothers would supplant one another, and neigh∣bours would walke vp and downe with slanders, and one deceiue another, they would speake peaceably with the mouth, but in hart would lay waite, Chap. 9.4.5.8. They were shamelesse in adulteries, and abomina∣ble whooredomes, like fed horses, neighing after their neighbours wiues, Chap. 5.
8. Couetousnesse and false∣hood raigned in Prophets, and Priests, soothing and flattering vp the people, and that without shame, Chap. 6.13.14.15. Being in Esaus dayes as greedy dogges, ne∣uer satisfied, Chap. 56.11. But neither they, nor the people were valiant for the truth. Ier. 9.3. None called for iustice, none pleaded for truth, Esa. 59.4. The cause of the fatherlesse, and right of the needy they iudged not, Ier. 5.28. Their Princes were rebellious, and companions of theeues, they loued gifts, and fol∣lowed after rewards, Esa. 1.23. They altogether brake the yoke, and did burst the bands of their obedience
towards God, Ier. 5.5. And the house of God in those wicked times by stealing, murther, adultery, and o∣ther sinnes was made a den of theeues, Ierem. 7.9-11. And therfore now no grea∣ter cause to complaine of this age than formerly hath beene, the consideration may worke patience and prayer: yet not without griefe of heart, as the euills did cause the godly men in those dayes to mourne. Eccles. 4.4.Obiect. I can not but maruell to see the oppression of the poore, and violent per∣uerting of iudgement and iustice. Answ. Maruell not at the matter: for hee that is higher than the highest re∣gardeth,
and there is grea∣ter then they, Eccles. 5.8. Obiect. It may seeme that there is no prouidence, that God regardeth not, and that hee doth not behold, what is done here vpon earth. Answ.2. Chro. 16.9 Gods eyes are euery where, and knowes all and euery particular mans doing. Ier. 32.19. The Lord from the place of his habitati∣on, looketh vpon all the in∣habitants of the earth, hee fashioneth their hearts, hee considereth al their works, and beholdeth all the sons of men, Psal. 33.13.14.15. Yea he looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth vn∣der the whole heauen, Iob, 28.24. Psal. 113.6. Obiect. This may bee so in generall in a confused manner: but hee doth not take notice of euery particu∣lar
mans doing. Answ. There is not any creature, that is not mani∣fest in his sight: but all things are naked and open to his eyes, with whom wee haue to doe, Heb. 4.13. The wayes of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, and hee pondereth all his do∣ings, Prou. 5.21. Hee seeth a mans waies, and counteth all his steppes, Chap. 31.4. His eyes are in euery place, beholding the euill and the good,1. Chro. 28.9 Psal. 7.10. & 20.12. & 94.11. Prou. 15.3. Hee try∣eth the raynes and the hart, Ier. 11.20. 1. Sam. 16.7. Though it bee deceitfull a∣boue all things, Ier. 17.9.10. And considereth our thoughts long before. Obiect. Be it that God
seeth thus, as is saied;All things are possible with God. yet it may be, he is not able to rule and gouerne them. Answ. God is greater than man, Iob, 33.12. And doth what he will in heauen and in earth, for there is no∣thing too hard for him, Ier. 32.17. Psal. 135.6. Obiect. Then it may seeme, that hee is respectiue of persons: if hee can take order with them, and will not. Answ.God is no accepter of persons. Deut. 10.17. 2. Chro. 9.7. Act. 10.34. Rom. 2.11. Hee doth not accept the person of Prin∣ces, nor regardeth the rich more then the poore, for they are all the work of his hands, Iob, 34.19. Obiect. Well, for all this, seeing that God forbids sin, and hateth iniquitie, and yet
men commit sinne and ini∣quity: it seemeth not reaso∣nable, that hee should suffer them to liue vpon the earth. God suffe∣reth the wic∣ked to re∣maine vpon the earth.Answ. God giueth not account of any of his mat∣ters, Iob, 33.13. But what if God, willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power knowne, doth in∣dure (with much long suffe∣ring) the vassals of wrath made vp to destruction, Rom. 9.22. Otherwise they should soone be cut down, and the Lord would raine vpon them snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this should bee their portion to drinke, Psa. 11.5.6. Obiect. Mee thinke yet, they should not be suffered to
doe what they list, as wee see they doe daily. Answ. They doe not what they list,The wicked do not what they list. though wee thinke so, and that they themselues also bee so per∣swaded. It is the Lord that doth onely whatsoeuer hee pleaseth, Psalm. 115.3. Iob, 23.13. But they doe not what they will, for they can not speake but as hee will, Prou. 16.1. Nor goe, but by his direction, Vers. 9. Ierem. 10.23. Prou. 20.24. Their power, counsell and consent doe that, which Gods hand and his counsell determined before to bee done, Act. 4.28. Therefore in all these things which come to passe, wee may say with Ely: It is the Lord, let
him doe what seemeth him good,2. Sam. 16.10.11. 1. Sam. 3.18. Obiect. But it may not seeme credible, that the Lord doth heare and see all their wayes, & the iniquitie which they doe commit; for it is so horrible, & the villany ther∣of in many so outragious, that man can not indure it. Can God heare and see, and let them alone? God be∣holds the wicked, and seeth what they doe.Answ. Mine eyes (saith the Lord) are vpon all their waies, they are not hid from my face, neither is their ini∣quitie hid from mine eyes, Ier. 16.17. For he that plan∣ted the eare, shall hee not heare? hee that formed the eye, shall not hee see? and hee that teacheth man knowledge, shall not hee
know? Psal. 94.1.10. Obiect. Belike then, the Lord is not angrie with them, and therefore may they continue and proceede on, without feare of punish∣ment. Answ.Esa. 42.14. God is an∣gry with the wicked, though hee forbeare to reuenge himselfe for a season. Though the Lord keepe silence a long time, when men do these things: yet one day will he reproue them, and set their sinnes in order before them, Psalm. 50.21. In the meane sea∣son, hee is angry with the wicked euery day, Psalm. 7.11. And hee seeth and be∣holdeth mischiefe and spite, to requite it with his hand, Psa. 10.14. For the wicked, and him that loueth vio∣lence, doth his soule hate, Psal. 11.5. Yea hee hateth
all the workers of iniquity, abhorring the bloudie and deceitfull man, Psalme 5.5.6. Obiect. The mighty sit in iudgement to iudge o∣thers: but none taketh no∣tice of their proceedings. Answ. Yes verily, God standeth in the congregati∣on of the mightie. Hee iudgeth among the Gods, Psalm. 82.1. And sitteth in the throne iudging right, Psal. 9.4. For the righteous Lord loueth righteousnes, his countenance doth be∣hold the vpright, Psal. 11.7. Obiect. The poore com∣plaine, the oppressed are not releeued, the fatherlesse and widowes are neglected, their cause cōmeth not before thē.
Answ.The poore afflicted, haue God for their iudge, hee pleadeth for them. The Lord exe∣cuteth righteousnesse and iudgement, for all that are oppressed, Psal. 103.6. Hee heareth the cry of the affli∣cted, Iob, 34.28. Hee hea∣reth the poore, Psal. 69, 33. He deliuereth the poore in his affliction, Iob, 36.15. The Lord will maintaine the cause of the afflicted, & the right of the poore, Psal. 40.12. He is a father of the fatherlesse, and a iudge of the widdow in his holy ha∣bitation, Psalm. 68.5. Hee wil deliuer the needy when hee cryeth, the poore also, & him that hath no helper, Psal. 72.14. Obiect. But these want an aduocate and Lawyer to plead for them, and there∣fore
are they spoyled, of those that seeke their ouerthrow. Esa. 3.13.14.Answ. The Lord will plead the cause of the poore and afflicted, and wil spoyle the soule of those that spoyle them, Prou. 22.23. For their Redeemer is mightie, Prou. 23.11. Obiect. Though a man may haue his cause pleaded, iustly defended, and sentence on his side pronounced, yet it may want execution. Answ. The Lord also executeth righteousnes and iudgement, for all that are oppressed, 103.6. He esta∣blisheth equitie, Psal. 99.4. For righteousnes & iudge∣ment, are the habitation of his throne, Psal. 97.2.
Of Warres. Ob. THere is a pressing of souldiers euery where, we must into the wars: but how we shall preuaile I can not see. Answ. Through God we shall doe valiantly, for he it is that shall tread downe our enemies, Psal. 60.12. Obiect. We want strength and skill. Answ.Psal. 68.35. & 144.1. God girdeth his with strength vnto the bat∣tell, & teacheth their hands to warre, and with their armes to breake euen bowes of steele, Psa. 18.32.34.39.
Obiect. Wee are very shortly to ioine in battel with a great hoast, which bee the enemies of our faith and true religion. Not to feare to fight a∣gainst the e∣nemies of the Church.Answ. Feare them not (saith the Lord) for I am with you: be not dismaied I will strengthen you, yea I will helpe you, yea I will vphold you with the right hand of my righteousnesse, Esa. 41.10. For the battell is not yours, but the Lords: goe out therefore against them; for the Lord will be with you, 2. Chron. 20.15.18. Obiect. But we Captaines feare, that many newly pres∣sed are faint hearted and will not fight. Answ. They shall be as
mighty men, which treade downe their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battell, and they shall fight because the Lord is with them, Zach. 10.5. Obiect. The enemies serue vnder a mightie po∣tentate, and are a great mul∣titude. Answ. Bee strong and couragious,There are moe with the godly, than with the wicked. 2. King. 6.16. bee not afraide nor dismaied for that King, nor for all the multitude that is with him, for there be more with vs, than with him. With him is an arme of flesh: but with vs is the Lord our God to helpe vs, and to fight our battels, 2. Chron. 32.7.8. There is no king saued by the multi∣tude of an hoast, a mightie
man is not deliuered by much strength, Psal. 33.16. Obiect. But besides his owne strength and puissance, hee hath many Princes his confederates, who haue ioy∣ned their powers to his, and we are but an handful: ther∣fore doe they boast and make themselues sure of the vi∣ctorie. A smal com∣pany may preuaile a∣gainst a huge hoast.Answ. Let not him that girdeth on his harnesse boast himself, as he that put∣teth it off, 1. Kin. 20.11. As did Benhadad, who came a∣gainst Ahab with Horses and Chariots, and thirtie two Kings also with him, Verse 1. Yet seuen thou∣sand two hundred thirtie & two of Israel ouerthrew his hoast, and made him flye
out of the field, Vers. 15.20. Zerah the Ethiopian came against Asa with a huge hoast, of a million of men, with many Chariots and horse-men, yet because Asa did rely vpon the Lord, that innumerable multi∣tude was ouerthrowne, 2. Chron. 16.8. & 14.9.13. For it is nothing with the Lord to helpe, whether with many, or with them that haue no power, V. 11. Obiect. But besides the multitude (being two to one) the enemy hath by a strata∣gem of warre, gotten vs into the very midst of them, they haue laied an ambushment, so as the battell is before and behinde. Answ. It is not policie
that can preuaile against the Lord.Policy can∣not preuaile, where God will giue the victory. Ieroboam that Idola∣ter came into the field with a chosen army of eight hun∣dred thousand mighty men of valour, 2. Chron. 13.3. And Abiiah a true wor∣shipper of God, but with halfe so many, being also compassed round with Ieroboams hoast, yet cry∣ing vnto the Lord, hee deliuered them into the hand of Abiiah, who slew of them fiue hundred thou∣sand chosen men, Verse 14-17. Because Iudah relied vpon the Lord God of their fathers, Vers. 18. Obiect. They are well furnished with weapons. Answ. No weapon that is framed against thee shall
prosper, Esa. 54.17. Obiect. They haue got∣ten the places of aduantage, the Hils and Mountaines from vs. Answ. Truely in vaine is safetie hoped for,The aduan∣tage of the place, pre∣serues not against Gods power. from the hils, and from the mul∣titude of mountaines: true∣ly in the Lord our God is the saluation of Israel, Iere. 3.23. Who is God in the valleys, as well as on the hils, to giue his people vic∣torie, 1. King. 20.28. Obiect. They bee strong in horse-men. Answ. A horse is a vaine thing for safety,Esa. 31.3. neither shal he deliuer any by his great strength, Psal. 33.17. The riders on horses shall be confounded, Zach. 10.5.
Obiect. They haue many Chariots. Esa. 31.1. Prou. 21.31. 2. King. 6.7.Answ. Indeed some put their trust in Chariots, some in Horses, but let vs remem∣ber the name of the Lord our God, whose Chariots are twentie thousand, euen thousands of Angels, Psal. 68.17. Obiect. Well, they bee gathered together to bid vs battell. Answ. Behold they shall surely gather together, but not by me. Whosoeuer shal gather together against thee (saith the Lord) shall fall for thy sake, Esa. 54.15. Ob. But it seemeth to me im∣possible to escape in the bat∣tel, frō the shot of the Artil∣lery, it flieth so thicke vpō vs.
Ans. Trust in God, and hee shall couer thy head in the day of battell (Psalm. 140.7) vnder his wings; his truth shall be thy shield, and buckler, thou shalt not need to feare the terrour of the night, nor for the arrow that flyeth by day, nor for the destruction that wast∣eth at noone. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee, Psal. 91.4-7. Obiect. Wee want a wise and valiant man of warre to be our Leader. Answ. The Lord mighty in battell (Psal. 24.8.) shall goe forth as a mightie man, like a man of warre, he shall cry, yea roare; hee shall be∣haue
himselfe mightily, and preuaile against his ene∣mies, Esa. 42.13. Obiect. Wee want the company and countenance of mighty Princes, to helpe vs. Earthly Princes power, is not to be trusted vnto, but we are to beleeue in the Lord.Answ. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the sonne of a man, in whom their is no helpe, Psal. 146.3. For he goeth forth, he returneth to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish, Vers. 4. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any con∣fidence in man. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in Prin∣ces, Psal. 118.8.9. For the eyes of the Lord runne too and fro, throughout the whole earth, to shew him∣selfe strong in the behalfe
of them, whose heart is perfect towards him, 2. Chron. 16.9. Obiect. They haue strong helpers: but we haue few, or none to take part with vs. Answ. Feare not,If God be with vs, none can stand a∣gainst vs. Ier. 17.5. 2. Kin. 6.16. Though men doe not aide vs, yet God being for vs, who can bee against vs, Rom. 8.31. For with them is onely an arme of flesh: but with vs, is the Lord our God to helpe vs, and to fight our battels, 2. Chron. 32.8. So as they that bee with vs, are moe then they that be with them, 2. King. 6.16. 2. Chron. 32.7. Ob. Yet peraduenture the enemy may force vs to retire, and wee are neere no Castle, shelter, or place of refuge.
Answ. The Lord is a shelter, a strong tower, Psa. 61.3. A rocke of saluation, Psal. 62.2. And our refuge, Psalm. 46.7. & 48.3. Yea, the name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runneth into it, and is safe, Prou. 18.10. Of particular callings and courses of life, and first concerning Parents.Parents. Ob. I Am a careful father, and yet am I vexed with a lewd and rebellious child,, which doth not a lit∣tle afflict me.Godly pa∣rents may haue vngod∣ly children. Answ. Faithfull Abra∣ham (the friend of God)
had a mocking Ismaell; good Isaac, a prophane E∣sau; and zealous Dauid, his most wicked and vnnaturall sonne Absolom. Obiect. I haue instructed him, but he is not the better, I will therefore leaue him to himselfe. Answ. A childe left to himselfe,Correction good for children. bringeth his Pa∣rents to shame, Pro. 29.15. But correct thy sonne, and hee shall giue thee rest, yea hee shall giue delight vnto thy soule, Verse, 17. Obiect. I am not in want my selfe, nor euer was desti∣tute of competent meanes to liue (I thanke God), yet am I very much troubled about my childrens welfare, how they should doe after me, be∣cause
I haue little or no∣thing to leaue them. Answ. The Lord is a strong confidence to him that feareth him,The childrē of the righ∣teous are blessed. Psal. 103.17. & 115.14. Prou. 13.22. and his children shall haue a place of refuge, Prou. 14.26. The iust man walketh in his in∣tegrity, and his children are blessed after him, Prou. 20.7. For the generation of the vpright shall bee bles∣sed, Psal. 112.2. Of which Dauid speaketh from his experience, saying, I haue beene young, and now am old, yet haue I not seene the righteous forsaken, nor his seede begging bread, Psal. 37.25. Obiect. I am desirous to haue my children well brought vp, and could be con∣tent
to be at cost (to the vt∣most of my power) for the same, but that I can not see how possibly they may come to preferment; for not mens deserts, but (for the most part) fauour, friends, money, outward grace, and counte∣nance of the world, fraude and flattery get men their places and preferments. Answ. Behold,Preferment is onely of God, and the earth dispo∣sed at his pleasure. Ier. 27.5. God exalteth by his power, Iob, 36.22. Preferment (what∣soeuer man thinketh, or whatsoeuer meanes hee v∣seth to obtaine it) commeth neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South: but God is the iudge, hee putteth downe one, and setteth vp another, Psalm. 75.6.7. Both riches
and honor come from him. He raigneth ouer all. In his hand is power and might. In his hand it is to make great,Psal. 107.41. and to giue strength vnto all, 1. Chron. 29.12. He raiseth the poore out of the dust, and lifteth the needy and beggar out of the mire from the dung-hil, that hee may set him with Princes, euen with the Princes of his people, Psal. 113.7. And to make him inherit the throne of glory, 1. Sam. 2.8. Children. Ob. I Am a child, (I speake it with harts griefe,) of ill disposed Parents, I
feare that God will visit vp∣on mee their sinnes and ini∣quities. Answ.A good child shall not fare the worse, for his fathers wickednes. Behold (saith the Lord) all soules are mine, as the soule of the fa∣ther, so the soule of the sonne is mine. The soule that sinneth, it shall die, the father in his owne iniquity, Ezech. 18.4.18. But loe, if hee beget a sonne that seeth all his fathers sinnes, which he hath done and conside∣reth, and doth not such like, he shall not die for the ini∣quity of his father, hee shall surely liue, Verses, 18.14.17. Obiect. Wee bee father∣lesse children, wee haue none to flye vnto for succour, to haue remedy for the wrongs we doe sustaine.
God is the guardian to father∣lesse chil∣dren.Answ. The Lord is the helper, and a father of the fatherlesse, Psalm. 10.14. & 68.5. Hee is their mightie redeemer, hee will plead their cause with the oppres∣sor, Prou. 23.11. Hee will iudge the fatherlesse and oppressed, that the man of earth may no more op∣presse, Psal. 10.18. Obiect. I haue very vn∣kind and vnnaturall bre∣thren, without cause on my part. Answ Not more vn∣kind and vnnaturally cruel, than Cain was to innocent Abell, or Esau to Iacob, and Iacobs ten sonnes to their brother Ioseph, whom they did intend mercilesly to murther, euen of meere en∣uie,
for the graces of God in him. Married persons. Ob. I Am vnequally yoked. Answ. God so dis∣poseth by his prouident hand in his wisedome, that a religious Dauid, shall match with a mocking Mi∣chol; and a wise Abigail with a foolish and churlish Nabal. Obiect. We are of so crosse natures, as we shall neuer be brought to accord. Answ. Pray vnto the Lord, for hee maketh them of the house to bee of one minde. Psal. 68.6. Obiect. Wee haue too
many children. Children are the blessing of God.Answ. Say not so, be∣hold, children are an heri∣tage of the Lord, and the fruit of the wombe is his reward, Psal. 127.31. Bles∣sed is the man that hath fil∣led his quiuer, his house full of them, Ver. 5. It is a bles∣sing promised to him that feareth God, that his wife shall bee as a fruitfull vine by the sides of his house, and his children as Oliue branches round about his Table, Psal. 128.31. Obiect. But I am growne old, and haue the charge, not onely of mine owne chil∣dren, but of my childrens children. Answ. There is no cause of discontentment, but of
glory and reioysing, for childrens children are the crowne of old men, Prou. 17.6. Obiect. See how very vnthankefull some are for Gods blessing, in giuing them children! but I that desire them can not haue them, and remaine hopelesse. Ans.God can make the barren to beare chil∣dren. Hannah remained long childlesse, yet at the length God made her fruit∣full, 1. Sam. 1.20. & 2.21. For the Lord setteth the so∣litarie in families, Psal. 68.6. And maketh the barren woman to keepe house, and to bee a ioyfull mother of children, Psal. 113.9, when it pleaseth him. If thou dost remaine childlesse, be con∣tent to bee without a cer∣taine
care, for an vncertaine comfort. For as a wise child maketh a glad father, and causeth the mother to re∣ioyce, Prou. 15.20. & 23.24.25. So a foolish sonne is a griefe to his father, and bitternesse to her that bare him, Prou. 17.25. Vnmarried. A good wife is Gods gift.Ob. I Haue a mind to mar∣ry: but I feare to bee ill sped. Answ. Goe vnto God for his furtherance & bles∣sing; for house and riches are inheritance from Pa∣rents, but a prudent wife commeth of the Lord, Pro. 19.14. By his fauour thou
shalt finde her, Pro. 28.22. And hee will send his An∣gel with thee to guide thee in the way, Gen. 24.7. Obiect. I haue beene married, but haue now lost a comfortable yoke-fellow, and a most obedient louing wife: the remembrance of her is such, as though I hard∣ly can containe, yet am I ve∣ry loth to marry againe. Answ. Abraham had his beloued Sarah, for beautie hardly comparable, admi∣rable in graces, matchlesse for her loue to her husband, and held worthy to bee re∣corded by the Apostle, as a patterne to all wiues,1. Pet. 3.6. for her reuerence and obedi∣ence in word and deede vn∣to her Lord and husband,
yet at the Lords call shee went before him,Gen. 23.2. who mourned and wept greatly for her: but yet hee being very old,Chap. 25.1. afterwards marri∣ed Keturah. But for the younger sort in yeeres, that can not containe, let them euer consider what the Apostle saith: It is better to marry then to burne, 1. Cor. 7.9. Obiect. I am a poore wi∣dow that haue lost a good husband, a man fearing God, yet hath he left me in a great debt, and with a charge of children, and now the credi∣tors come vpon me to take all away, and to leaue me no∣thing, neuer poore woman was in such a case. Alas, I know not what to doe.
Answ.God proui∣deth for poore wi∣dowes, and fatherlesse children. Bee patient and waite on God: thou maiest read of a good mans wife, one that feared God, to haue beene left in the verie selfe same case, 2. King. 4.1. Yet did the Lord (as an hus∣band to her), and a merci∣full father to her children, miraculously prouide for them, both for their main∣tenance and paiment of the debt, Verse 3-7. For the Lord is a father of the fa∣therlesse, and a iudge of the widow, Psal. 68.5. He also relieueth the fatherlesse and widow, Psal. 146.9. And e∣uer hath had speciall care of them, both for their reliefe, Deut. 24.19.21, the pre∣seruation of their state, Prouerbs, 15.25, and pre∣uenting
of wrongs offered vnto them, Exo. 22.22.24. Masters and Seruants. Ob. I Am a master of a fa∣mily, but a world of griefe it is to see the deceit and falshood of seruants, I am almost vndone by them, I thinke neuer master was thus dealt with. A good ser∣uant serueth the Lord.Answ. Had not most ho∣nest, most true hearted Me∣phibosheth, a notable decei∣uer to his seruant, that wic∣ked villaine Zibah? 2. Sam. 16. Had not religious Phi∣lemon, his pilfering Onesi∣mus? Doest thou not know that Iesus Christ himselfe had a traitour to his ser∣uant,
who for gaine sold his life into the hands of his bloudy enemies? Consider and learne patience. Obiect. I am a poore ser∣uant, I labour faithfully, but my reward is small. Answ.A good ser∣uant serueth the Lord. In so doing thou seruest the Lord Christ, of whom thou shalt receiue thy reward, Col. 3.24. For if with a good will thou doest seruice to thy master, as vnto Christ, with feare and trembling in singlenes of heart, not with eye-ser∣uice, as a man-pleaser, but as a seruant to Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, for the good thing thou doest, thou shalt bee recompensed of the Lord, Ephes. 6.5-8.
Obiect. My master is a very worldling, and dealeth not honestly with mee in my wages, according to coue∣nant. If it were not for com∣mon shame, or that he knowes by law I may recouer my dew, he would send me away empty-handed: it can not but grieue a man to doe faithfull seruice to such a man. The masters wickednes, should not make the seruant faithlesse. Gen. 30.26.33. & 31.6.37.38.39.40.Answ. Thou maist not yet cease to be faithfull, loo∣king for a reward at God hand, Iacob was a mos faithfull and painefull ser¦uant to Laban, yet did thi his vncle and master wron him, and changed his wa¦ges tenne times, Gen. 31.  41. And except the God o Abraham, and the feare o his father Isaac, had been
with him, surely his master Laban had sent him away emptie, Gen. 31.42.Gen. 31.9.12.42. But God saw the faithfulnes of Iacob, and all that Laban did vnto him, and the affli∣ction of his seruant, and the labour of his hands, and therefore did he graciously reward him, & God is one and the same to all faithfull seruants, Ephes. 6.8. Obiect. I am constrained to be at command to such, as be enemies to true religion, idolaters, and persecutors, and can not get away, which maketh me to thinke my selfe left of God, and not to bee reckoned among such as feare him. Ans. Ioseph a godly man, liued in Pharaohs Court,
Gen. 41.40.A good man may serue a bad master sometime. Iacob was a seruant to idolatrous La∣ban, Gen. 31. Daniel was with Nebuchadnezzar and Darius, Dan. 2.48. & 6.3. Abedmelech was one in Ze∣dechias Court, Ierem. 38.7. And Obediah, one fearing God was in Achabs house, 1. King. 18.3. Yet were they not left of God, but such as did serue and feare him. For though they were seruants to men: yet were they (be∣ing good) euen the Lords freemen, 1. Cor. 7.22. Men in publike autho∣ritie. Ob. I Am a magistrate, but much discouraged in the execution of my magi∣stracy,
for matters are so packt vp of others, lewde persons so borne with all, and my selfe for iust proceeding so little regarded of my bet∣ters, so opposed by my equals, and so despised hereby of in∣feriours, as in deede, I must either giue ouer my place, or cease to be vpright. Answ.We may not cease to doe well, though we be cros∣sed in our callings. For all this take heed what thou doest: thou iudgest not for man, but for the Lord, who is with thee in the iudgement, 2. Chro. 19.6. Blessed are they that keepe iudgement, and he that doth righteousnesse at all times, Psal. 106.3. Let therefore the feare of the Lord bee with thee, take heed and do it, 2. Chr. 19.7. Obiect. I am a iudge, and
one sitting in the place of iu∣stice: but indeed a very per∣uerter of iustice and truth: for I haue more often pre∣tended law, than followed it; and if I had law, (then for my owne aduantage and profit, or to reuenge mee on my ad∣uersaries, or to pleasure my friends, or for hope of a bribe, or to haue (in the like occa∣sion) an other to doe as much for me, or my friend, or for feare somtime) I would make the best of that law; & where it would serue the turn, there would I stretch it vpon the ten making the sinewes thereof cracke againe; and where it might make for the aduerse party, that braunch I would falsly interpret, or make it to bee of no force.
Thus vniustly haue I sit in iudgement. Woe is me: I can not hope of mercy. Ans.Luk. 19.8.9. An vniust Iudge may finde mercy, if he repent and make restitution. Saluation is come to Zacheus house, if he be∣leeue in Christ, shew mer∣cy freely and bountifully to the poore, and shall restore backe againe, what he hath gotten by forged cauillati∣on. For the Lord looketh vpon men in his mercy. And if any say I haue sinned, and peruerted that which was right, and it profited mee not, hee will deliuer that mans soule for going into the pit, and his life  the light, Iob, 33.2 Pastors and Teachers. Ob. I Am a Pastour ouer a flocke, but haue a re∣bellious
people, who cause me to feare to discharge faith∣fully my dutie, they are so wickedly bent against me. Ezech. 3.9.Answ. Be not afraide of their faces, for though they doe fight against thee, they shall not preuaile: for I am with thee, to deliuer thee (saith the Lord,) Ier. 1.18.19. And I will deliuer thee out of the hand of the wic∣ked, Ier. 15.20.21. Obiect. I haue preached painfully, yet I finde no fruit of my labours, my diligence is but lost vpon them. A painefull Pastour shall not lose the reward of his labour.Answ. The word (saith God) that goeth out of my mouth, shal not returne vn∣to mee void, but it shall ac∣cōplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the
thing, wherto I send it, Esa. 55.11. Howsoeuer it doth preuaile with them, yet art thou in thy ministery, a sweet sauour of Christ vnto God, both in them that are saued, and in them that pe∣rish, 2. Corinth. 2.15. Thy iudgement is with the Lord, and thy worke with thy God, Esa. 44.4. And though the people bee not gathered, yet shalt thou bee glorious in the Lords eyes, and he shal be thy strength, Verse, 5. Ob. But if they amend not, I feare to become guiltie of their bloud. Ans. If thou dost warne the wicked, and hee turne not from his wickednesse, nor from his wicked way,
he shall die in his iniquitie, but thou hast deliuered thy soule, Eze. 3.19. And art free from his bloud, Act. 20.26. Ob. Truely, I am weary of my calling, and ready to giue ouer my ministery, I am so discouraged both at home and abroad, of the laietie I am reproached, and of the clergie (in authority) I am not assisted, but rather base∣ly esteemed and neglected as a contemptible person. I haue suffered of all sorts such wrong, onely for my faith∣fulnesse in my ministery, as I am not able to indure it. Christ is to vs his mini∣sters, a pat∣terne of patience.Answ. That thou maiest not be wearied and faint in minde, consider the Lord Iesus, who indured such contradiction of sinners a∣gainst
him, and for the ioy that was set before him, in∣dured the crosse, despised the shame, and is now set at the right hand of the throne of God, Heb. 12.2.3. Saint Paul fought a good fight, kept the faith, and so finished his course, & there∣fore was a crowne of righ∣teousnesse layed vp for him, 2. Tim. 4.7.8. For he that in∣dureth tentation, when hee is tried, shall receiue the crowne of life, Iam. 1.12. Obiect. I am complained off to the highest authority, as an vnsufferable man. Ans. So was Amos the Prophet, by Amaziah to Ieroboam, Amos, 7.10. Obiect. They hold me a mad fellow, an enemy to the
State, & some preach against the truth which I teach, and yet must I be silent, if I com∣plaine, I am not heard, I haue so many, and those great enemies against me. Ieremies mi∣series.Answ. Ieremy that most sincere, zealous, and faith∣full Prophet of God, was held a mad fellow, one that taught without authoritie, to be worthy stocking, and imprisonment, Cha. 29.26.27. The Priests and false teachers spoke against him, and brought him before au∣thoritie, as an enemy to the Sate, Chap. 26.8.10.11. & 28.1—& 38.4. They deuised mischiefes against him, a∣busing him with their tongue, Chap. 18.18. They had him and his ministery
in derision, mocking & re∣proaching him, Ch. 20.7.8. His familiars watched to catch aduantage against him, Chap. 20.10. His very life was sought, Cha. 18.20.23. Pashur smote him, and put him in the stockes, Cha. 20.2. His writings were burnt, Chap. 36.21.23. And hee cast into a most loath∣some, filthie and stinking prison, Chap. 38. Verse, 6. Thus was Ieremy dealt with. What shall I speake of other Prophets? Micha∣iah, 1. Kings 22.27. Vriiah. Ier. 26.23. Eliah, and the rest also of the Apostles, Bi∣shops, and Pastors, faithfull Martyrs of Iesus Christ af∣ter them? Thou hast not with these resisted vnto
bloud striuing against sin, Heb. 12.4. Marchants. Ob. WE dwell by the sea side, and the seas doe so often swell, and rage in a storme, as wee may feare they will at length ouerflow the earth. The sea can∣not passe the bounds.Answ. The Lord hath placed the sand for the bound of the sea, by a per∣petuall decree, that it can∣not passe it; and though the waues thereof tosse them∣selues, yet can not they preuaile, though they roare, yet can they not passe ouer it, Ierem. 5.22, to turne a∣gaine to couer the earth, Psal. 104.9. For the Lord
hath set barres and doores, saying, hitherto shall you come, but no further, and heere shall the proud waues bee staied, Iob, 38.10.11. Ob. I am a Marchant, and am often to trade vpon this vnstable element, and doe feare casting away, for the waues are mightie, and rage horribly, when the stor∣my winde lifteth them vp, so as we in the shippes mount vp to heauen, and downe againe to the depth, reeling and stag∣gering to and fro (like drun∣ken men), and sometime are almost brought vnto our wits end. Answ.There is safety vpon the seas. There is yet safety vpon the seas, for the Lord ruleth the raging of the sea,
when the waues thereof a∣rise he stilleth them, Psalm. 89.9. Hee is mightier than they, Psal. 93.4. For when men doe cry vnto him in their troubles, he deliuereth them out of their distresse: hee makes the storme to cease, and the waues to bee still, and bringeth them to their desired harbour, Psal. 107.28.30. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and his wonderful works to the children of men! Psal. 31. Trades-men. Ob. I Am a trades-man, & desire to liue honest∣ly: but if I so doe, I see I shal not thriue.
Answ. The vpright shall haue good things in posses∣sion, Prou. 28.10. Ob. But by my honest dea∣ling, I get but little, when o∣thers possesse great riches. Ans. Better is a little in the feare of God, then great riches without equitie and right, Prou. 16.8. And a lit∣tle that a righteous man hath, is better thā the riches of many wicked. Ps. 37.16. Ob. But thus shal I leaue little to my children, when o∣thers make theirs gentlemē. Ans. The iust man that walketh in his integrity, his children are blessed after him, Prou. 20.7. As for the heritage hastily gotten, it shall not bee blessed in the end, Prouerbs, 20.21. For
wealth gottē by vanity, shal be diminished, Pro. 13.11. Ob. I could gaine, if I might but vse the common shifts, and speake vntruely now and then, which are vsu∣all euery where betweene the buyer and the seller. Yea, those that are held the most honest market-men, and ap∣proued chap-men, are not free from some shifts, and vn∣true speaking without which they can not liue, by buying and selling and gaine therby. Goods ill gotten shall not prosper. Prou. 12.3. & 28.8. & 13. & 11.22. Iob, 27.17. & 21.5.6.7. Ier. 22.13.17Ans. The getting of trea∣sures by a lying tongue, is a vanitie tossed too and fro, of them that seek death, Pr. 21.6. Also lying lippes, are abomination to the Lord: but they that deale truly are his delight, Prou. 12.22.
Husband-men. Ob. MY calling is very litle esteemed off, and doth want wherewith to commend it. Answ. It is not so,Husbandry a calling not to be despi∣sed. for this calling of the husband-man is of very great anti∣quitie. The first man of the first world was an husband-man, euen Adam,Gen. 3. who also brought vp his children therein, Gen. 4. And the first man of the latter world, was an husband-man, euen righteous Noah, Gen. 9. It is also of very great necessity, for the profit of the earth is for all. The King himselfe is serued by the field, Ecc. 5.9. Ob. But none of account
had euer esteeme thereof, for now men of any ciuill bring∣ing vp, scorne to be imployed about this calling of hus∣bandry, though they doe not put their hands to the labor. Most hono∣rable per∣sons, haue honoured husbandry.Ans. The first Monarch euen God himselfe planted a garden, Gen. 2.8. The two next vnder him, the sole Monarches of the earth, A∣dam and Noah were hus∣band-men. Also Vzziah a valiant King, 2. Chron. 26. Whose name, for his noble acts and victorious battells spread farre, Vers. 8. Yet lo∣ued husbandry, Vers. 10. If therefore most honourable persons, may make a calling honourable: then is this calling of husbandry most honourable.
Ob. It may be God doth not respect so much a man in this calling, as he doth in an∣other, and then there is small comfort in it, how honoura∣ble, ancient, and necessary so∣euer it be. Answ. How much God respects the husband-man,God re∣spects the husband-man. appeareth in these things: that God is his God, and in∣structeth him to discretion, & teacheth him, Esa. 28.26. He promiseth also blessing vpon his labour, if he be di∣ligent, Pro. 27.23.27. & 28.19. & 12.11. Ob. But sometime it fal∣leth out, that doe what wee can, one crop will not bring in an other, though wee hus∣band it neuer so well. Ans. If you will walke in
my statutes (saith the Lord) your threshing shall reach to the vintage,Mens sinnes marre their husbandry. and the vin∣tage shall reach to the sow∣ing time, and yee shall eat your bread to the ful, Leuit. 26.5. Ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old be∣cause of the new, Vers. 10. Ob. Wee oftentimes want raine, and many times haue it vnseasonably. God promi∣seth seasona∣ble weather, to such as serue him. Leuit. 26.4. Deut. 28.12. Ioel, 2.23.26Ans. If you will hearken diligently vnto my cōman∣dements (saith the Lord) which I command you, to loue the Lord your God, & to serue him with all your heart, and with all your soule, then I will giue you the raine of your Land in his due season, the first raine and the latter raine, that
thou maiest gather in thy fruits, Deut. 11.13.14, haue grasse also in the field for thy cattell, that so thou maiest eat and be full, Vers. 50. And praise the name of the Lord your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you, Ioel, 2.26. Ob. I thinke the raine falleth according onely to the course of nature, and is carried (as wee common people thinke) by Planets, and not by any such a proui∣dent hand of God; for I haue knowne it to raine in one place, and not in another, & the same not far asunder. Ans.Raine is by Gods ap∣pointment. It is the Lord God that calleth for the waters of the sea, & poureth them out vpon the face of the
earth, Amos, 5.8. And sen∣deth waters vpon the field, Iob, 5.10. Yea it is hee that watereth the ridges of the earth abundantly, making it soft with showers, and blesseth the springing ther∣of, Psal. 65.9.10. Hee doth also withhold the raine be∣fore the haruest, and causeth it to raine vpon one Citie, and causeth it not to raine vpon another, Amos, 4.7— And he only it is that reser∣ueth vnto vs, the appointed weekes of the haruest, Ier. 5.24. Praised be his name. Of Death. Ob. I Am but young, very healthful and strong, and yet neuerthelesse I feare
sudden death, or vntimely taking away. Answ.The houre of death is certainely determined of God. If it be good for thee, & God so please thou shalt goe to the graue in a full age, and as a ricke of corne commeth in due sea∣son to the barne, Iob, 5.26. Howsoeuer know this, that there is an appointed time to man vpon earth, Iob, 7.1. His time is in Gods hand, Psal. 31.15. His daies and moneths are numbred, and his appointed bounds hee cannot passe, Iob, 14.5. Ob. I feele an vnwilling∣nesse in me to dye. Answ.We should not be vn∣willing to die. Consider that it is the way of all flesh, Iosh. 23.14. 1. King. 2.2. And that it is appointed vnto men once to die, Heb. 9.27.
And though the wicked die without hope,Iob, 21.33. Eccles. 7.2. Prou. 11.7. Yet the righteous in death hath hope, Prou. 14.23. For wee doe know that if this earthly house of this taber∣nacle were dissolued, wee haue a building of God, an house not made with hand, eternall in the heauens, 2. Cor. 5.1. And shall for e∣uer blessedly rest from our labours, Reuel. 14.13. & 21.4. Ob. Oh, but (I feare me) we are swallowed vp of death, and so there is no more re∣membrance of vs. The dead as well as the liuing, are in remembrāce before God.Answ. God is not God onely of the liuing here on earth, but also of them that be departed this life, Matth. 22.32. Who will giue vs
victory ouer death, through our Lord Iesus Christ, 1. Cor. 15.57. Who will raise vs vp at the last day, Ioh. 6.44. For all that beleeue in him shall not perish, but haue life euerlasting, Iohn, 11.25.26. & 8.51. Obiect. But the elect of God are scattered all the earth ouer: Yea, and milli∣ons of men are dead and con∣sumed to dust in the graue; it is not like that these can be brought together, to meete the Lord at his appearing. Ans. Yes verily;All shall be raised vp at the last day. for the Lord will send his Angels with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall ga∣ther together his elect from the foure windes, from one end of heauen to the other,
Matth. 24.31. The trumpet shall sound, and the dead also shall rise, 1. Cor. 15.52. For I know (saith Iob) that my Redeemer liueth, and that hee shall stand at the latter day vpon the earth, and though after my skin, wormes destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I my selfe shall see, and mine eyes shall be∣hold, and none other for me, Iob, 19.25.26.27. Ob. Yet those that are in the graue, dead and rotten when Christ commeth, can not as soone appeare and be∣hold his presence, as those that be then aliue; the consi∣deration thereof may make vs desire still to liue. Ans. They that are aliue,
and remaine vnto the com∣ming of the Lord,The dead in graue shall not be pre∣uented, by the liuing at Christs com∣ming. shall not preuent them that are a∣sleepe, for the Lord himselfe shall descend from heauen with a shout, with the voice of the Arch-angel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise: first thē, we which are aliue and remaine, shall together with them be caught vp in∣to the clouds, 1. Thess. 4.15.18. Ob. This is comfortable, but, alas, one thing much troubleth my minde often, when I think vpon my death: for my corruptions are so great, my faith so weake, Sa∣tans suggestions so strong, & my owne conscience so for∣cibly accusing many times,
that I feare my end will bee fearefull. The issues of death are in the hand of God.Answ. The Lord doth know (though we doe not) how to deliuer the godly out of tentations, 2. Peter, 2.9. For he is our God, e∣uen the God of saluation, to whom belong the issues of death, Psalm. 68.20. By whose power (and not by our owne) wee are kept through faith vnto saluati∣on, 1. Pet. 1.5. Who also is faithfull, and will not suffer his to bee tempted aboue that they are able, but will with the tentation also make a way to escape, that they may bee able to beare it, 1. Cor. 10.13. So as thou mai∣est say (with Saint Paul) that the Lord will deliuer
thee from euery euill work, and will preserue thee to his heauenly kingdome, 2. Tim. 4.18. Ob. Well, though I es∣cape a fearefull end before men: yet may I be damned at the last day. Answ.No condem∣nation to those that are in Christ. Rom. 8.1. He that heareth my words (saith our Lord Iesus) and beleeueth in him that sent mee, hath euerla∣sting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but hath passed from death to life, Ioh. 5.24. Ob. But when we are in heauen, wee may perhaps bee cast out thence againe, as the Angels were, and so be sepa∣rated from Christ againe.The Elect at the last day shall be euer with Christ. Ans. No, we shall at the last day be like him, 1. Iohn,
3.2. And appeare with him in glory, Col. 3.4. And so shall wee be euer with the Lord, 1. Thes. 4.17. There∣fore let vs comfort one an∣other with these wordes, Vers. 18. Ob. That shall be a happy day to the godly: but mee thinke, hee is slacke in com∣ming, the day is long too. Christ is not slack in com∣ming, but staieth for our good.Answ. Be not ignorant of this one thing, that with the Lord a thousand yeeres, is but as one day: neither is the Lord slacke concerning his promise (as some men count slacknesse) but is long suf∣fering to vs-ward, not wil∣ling that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2. Pet. 3.8.9. For the long suffering of
the Lord, we must account to be saluation, Ver. 15. To all that gladly expect his comming. Ob. I haue heard happily of many & sundry comforts, which might make glad the heart of the most pensiue spi∣rit, if there bee no doubt of the truth thereof. Answ.Gods word is most infal∣libly true. Psa. 119.142. The words of the Lord are pure words, as sil∣uer tried in a furnace of earth purified seuen times, Psa. 12.7. Pro. 30.5. The te∣stimony of the Lord is sure, Ps. 19.7. His word is truth, Ioh. 17.17. It is true from the beginning, Psa. 119.160. It indureth for euer, 1. Pet. 1.25 Blessed be God, & his mer∣cies bee magnified for euer and euer, Euen so Amen. FINIS.
