E1186 816.m.3[51] R29995 99889636 188672
THE ADDRESS OF THE LORDS SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL, AND COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, TO THE KING's MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. Presented by the Right Honourable The LORD MARQUESS of HALLIFAX, Lord Privy Seal, and Speaker to the House of Lords. In the Banqueting-House at White-hall, the Eighth of March, 168 WITH His Majesty's Most GRATIOUS ANSWER thereunto. LONDON, Printed by James Partridge, Matthew Gillyflower, and Samuel Heyrick, Printers to the House of Lords. 1688/9.
THE ADDRESS OF THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament, to the King's most Excellent Majesty. Die Martis, 5 Martii, 1688/9. WE Your Majesty's most faith∣full and dutifull Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral, and Commons assembled in Parliament, being highly sensible of our late great and signal Deliverance from Popery and Arbitra∣ry Power, whereof it hath pleased Almighty God to make Your Majesty the glorious Instru∣ment, and desiring to the utmost of our abilities to express our Gratitude to Your Majesty for so great and generous an Ʋndertaking, no less necessary for the Support of the Protestant
Interest in Europe, than for the recovering and maintaining the Civil Rights and Li∣berties of these Nations, so notoriously inva∣ded and undermined by Popish Counsels and Counsellours, and being likewise fully con∣vinced of the restless Spirits, and the con∣tinued Endeavours of Your Majesty's and and the Nation's Enemies, for the Extirpa∣tion of the Protestant Religion, and the Sub∣version of our Laws and Liberties, do u∣nanimously declare, That we will stand by and assist Your Majesty with our Lives and Fortunes in supporting Your Alliances abroad, in reducing of Ireland, and in defence of the Protestant Religion and of the Kingdom.
HIS MAJESTY's MOST GRACIOUS ANSWER TO THE ADDRESS Of Both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT. My Lords and Gentlemen, IF any thing could add to the E∣steem and Affection I have for Parliaments, and particularly for this, they would be much en∣creased by the Kindness you shew to me, and the Zeal you express for the Publick Good, in the Address you have made, which in the Manner, as well as the Matter, hath eve∣ry
thing in it that ought to recommend it to Me. I will assure you that I will never abuse the Confidence you shall put in me, being fully per∣suaded, that there is no sure Foundation of a good Agreement between a King and his Peo∣ple, but a mutual Trust; when that is once bro∣ken, a Government is half dissolved; it shall therefore be my chief Care never to give any Parliament cause to distrust me: And the best Method I can use for that purpose, is never to expect any thing from them but that which shall be their own Interest to grant. I came hither for the Good of the Kingdom, and since it is at your desire that I am in this Station, I shall still pursue the same ends that brought me. God hath been pleased to make me instru∣mental to redeem you from the Ills you feared, and it is still my Desire, as well as my Duty, to endeavour to preserve your Religion, Laws, and Liberties, which were the onely Induce∣ments that brought me into England, and to those I ascribe the Blessings that have attended this Undertaking. When I spoke last to you, I told you of the necessity of Assisting our Allies, and more espe∣cially the States of Holland, whose readiness to relieve you, at their so great Hazard and Ex∣pence,
from the Extremities you lay under, needs no other Arguments to move you to the consi∣deration of it. As I was then a Witness of their Zeal and Af∣fection to promote the Expedition, and to second my Endeavours even with a Neglect of their own Safety, so I am now sensible of the inevitable ruine they have drawn upon Themselves, by giving you this assistence, if you should not return it to them. They really exhausted themselves to such a Degree, both as to Men and Money, that it is not easily to be imagined, and I am confident your Generosity will have as little bounds to∣wards them, as theirs had towards you; and that you will not only enable Me to make good the Treaty with them, and repay what they have actually laid out upon this occa∣sion, of which our Account shall be given to you, but that you will farther support them, to the utmost of your Ability, against the Power of their Enemies, who must be yours too, by their Interest, and by their Religion; and do certainly design the Ruine of Holland to be a step to your destruction. I need not take pains to tell you the deplora∣ble condition of Ireland, which by the Zeal and Violence of the Popish Party there, and by the assistence and encouragements they have from France, is brought to that pass, that it is not
adviseable to attempt the Reducing it, other∣wise than by a very considerable Force, which I think ought not to be less than Twenty Thou∣sand Horse and Foot; which by the Blessing of God, will make the Work shorter, and in con∣sequence, the Charge easier, though the first Ex∣pence must of necessity be very great. You are to consider that towards the more speedy and effectual success in relation to Ireland, as well as with a regard to France, there must be such a Fleet as may, in Conjunction with the States, make us so entirely Masters of the Sea, that nothing can be sent from France, either to Ireland, or any where else, that may give di∣sturbance to us, or our Allies. I must also recommend the Consideration of the Revenue to you, that it may be so Set∣led, as that it my be Collected without di∣spute. My Lords and Gentlemen, These things will amount to a great Summ, and must of consequence be a present weight upon the People; but considering that nei∣ther your Religion, nor your Safety, can pro∣bably be secured without these means, I conclude you will think nothing can be too great a price for their preservation. And I will engage my Solemn Word to You, That whatever you
shall give in order to these publick ends, shall be strictly applyed to them; and that as you so freely offer to hazard all that is dear to you, so I shall as freely expose my Life for the sup∣port of the Protestant Religion, and the Safety and Honour of the Nation. THE END.
Die Veneris 8 Martii 1688/9. ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the Address of both Houses Presented to His Majesty this day, and His Majesty's most Gracious Answer thereunto be forthwith Printed and Published, Jo. Browne, Cleric. Parliamentor.
