E961 816.m.13[82] R225201 99885929 186282
AN ABSTRACT OF THE BILL Now depending for Regulation and better Government of the COMPANY of Painter-Stainer  LONDON: Together with some REASONS of the Principal Branches of it. Preamble, fol. 1. eclared so by Stat. 1 Jac. 20.REcites it to be an ancient Company and incorporated with Power to Oversee, Rule, and Govern, all the Fellowes of the same Society, and all others using th same Art, and all material Works and Merchandize concerning the same. Grievance.That Aliens and others not free of the Company, for the most part unskilful, use the Art and and take Apprentices. 1st. To the prejudice of the Com¦pany. 2dly. To the detriment of the People. 3dly. The disgrace of the Nation. And 4thly. The contempt of the Lawes. Enacted.at. 5. Eliz. c. 4. forbids using y Trade, not being bred pprentice to it, in London,  elsewhre.That none use the Trade in London or  miles distance, unlesse bound by Indenture to one of the Company for seven years upo pain of  for every offence. Proviso, That this Act shall not prejudice those that have already served seven years to any Free-man, and are not as yet free, so that they up their freedoms befo the 24th. of December 1664. anted by the Charter.Proviso,That Persons, which for their skill in Painting are now admitted, or hereafter shall be admitted into the Company, shall not be Sued or troubled for working  a Painter within the said  miles of London, and that they shall not use the said Art within the City of London, or the Liberties thereof. ecital Star. 1. Jac. cap. 20. Grievance.Recites the Act 1o. Jac. cap. 20. That forbids Plaisterers to use the Painters Trade: and the Proviso in it, that Plaisterers might use Whiting, Blacking, Red-Lead Red-Oaker, Yellow-Oaker, and Russet mingled with size only and not with oyle, by pretence whereof the Plaisterers use the Painters Trade. Enacted. ccording to the Letters Pa∣ents of the Company, 19 July 3 Eliz. And the Stat. 1 Jac. ap. 20. ENACTED, That the Plaisterers lay these Colours flat and plain, in size only and not in Oyle, and that in mixing the Colours none shall Glaze them with varni upon pain of  for every offence. Gives Power to the Master and Wardens, or any one of them, with some of the Company, not exceeding four in all, at convenient times to search any Places whe Painting is sold, to see if it be well wrought; and if not, to seize it, and to carry it away, and deface and destroy them. Stat. 1 Rich. 3. c. 9. No stran∣er shall exercise a Handicrafts ade, except they first serve Native.The Master, Wardens, Assistants, and Livery, have Power every year to choose twelve of the Company, being skilful Artists, and they or any seven may License N¦tives or Strangers, not free of the Company, being Artists, to use the Trade, not taking above  pounds for the same, and the Persons licensed paying as others of th Company. Granted by their Charter.That the Master, Wardens, Assistants, and Livery have Power to make Reasonable By-Lawes, for Restriction of the number of Apprentices and Journe¦men, and for other Honourable things, for the better Government of the Company. tat. 1. Rich. 3. cap. 9.That all Aliens, not licenced as aforesaid, shall depart the Realm or work as Journey-men, to a Free-man of the Company, and his name and his Masters to be entred  the Hall Book gratis, upon pain of The Offences shall be inquired of in the Kings Courts of Westminster or the Courts of Record, within the Jurisdiction, whereof the Offences shall so be committed the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Goale delivery or of the Peace; and one moiety of the penalties to his Majesties use, and the other moiety with reasonable cost of  Suit to the Plaintiff or Informer. THE REASONS. Rich. 3. c. 9. 14. 15. Hen. 8. . 9. 32 H. 6. c. 16. 5 Eliz. a. 4. FIrst, There have been several Acts of Parliament formerly made, which will extend to the Principal Branches of this Act, but are ancient and defective in for things, and do not so well regulate and impower the Company to admit those that are skilful in the Art in this manner, but they are all far more severe agai them, then this. Stat. 5 Eliz. an ill remedy.Secondly, It is certain that the Stat. 5. Eliz. cap. 4. Provides, that none shall exercise a Trade, but that penalty being but Forty shillings, which is so little and ha to be proved, that it will be in a manner, no remedy to reduce and discover those that work privately, and have not served Seven years; in regard it cannot be do without much charge and diligence, and no costs of Suit recovered in that Action. Thirdly, Those that have served Seven years, it is most probable, are more skilful then those that have not served, any time; and besides, their Service and Freedo are lyable to all Duties of their Company and Taxes. And therefore, if those not free should have a greater Priviledge, it would not onely discourage the Industry the Freemen, but ruine them and the Government of the Society, and make a failer in this Art. Fourthly, The Freemen for the most part are House-keepers, and beat all Publick charges; but on the contrary, the others are many of them inconsiderable pe¦sons, and are very numerous, in and about this City, and have no certain place of Habitation: But if this Act pass, it will bring them under the Government of Company, and make them liable to Taxes for His Majesty. Fifthly, If those that are Freemen of the Company of Painter-Stainers, cannot bring in the strangers, which have any equal advantage with the Members of tGranted by the Charter to call others to their assistance, and dmit them. Company, and to bear and equal burthen with them, which is in a manner granted them by their Charter; the Company cannot be supported, but must inevitably fall, a be destroyed, by the encroachment upon them. If it shall be Objected, That any that shall be famous for Painting, and comes from beyond the Seas, he shall not be admitted to use that Art. The former Acts that have passed, provide for that, and do altogether restrain them: And by the Statute Rich. 3. if they use this Art, they shall firsit their Person Estate. In relation to the Proviso in the Stat. 1. Jac. cap. 4. which gives power to the Plaisterers to lay Whiting, Blacking, Red Lead, Read Oaker, Yellow Oaker, a Russet, mingled with Size onely. Answ.  First, The very Title of that Act is, A Plaisterer shall not use the Occupaiton of a Painter; and the whole Body of that Act is against the Plaisterers, to forb them to use the Art of Painting: The intent of which Proviso, was to give them liberty to use it, to lay those Colours plain, as necessary for their Profession about t Seiling of Rooms, and such like. Secondly, In the same Act, immediately after that Proviso, there is a Proviso which limits the ways of a Painter, for laying those or other Colours in Size, which a high measure shews the intent of the Act to be as is above set forth. Thirdly, The Plaisterers under pretence of this Act, stretching it to their own advantage, incroach very much upon the Painters trade, in regard most peices of goo Painting may be done by these Colours, with the mixture of them each with the other; whereby the Plaisters being altogether unskilful in that Art, pretend to do sev¦ral Paintings, which are done so ill, as that they cannot deserve the name of Painting, although done at far greater rates then what the Painters usually have for Pain¦ings of that nature. Fourthly, It tends to the scandal and disgrace of the Art of Painting within our English Nation. Fifthly, It hath been upon several Debates by the Painters against the Plaisterers, declared by Law, to be on the Painters side; but to avoid these Strifes and Debat the Explanation of the aforesaid Proviso, is humbly offered. The Charter, which creates the Company of Plaisterers, gives them the name of Dawbers; neither is there any Charter, wherein Colours are mentioned, but th use of Lath, Loam, and Lime, is onely granted them.
