E1423 [ocm]12272608 197437
A DECLARATION Of the Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the raising of all power, and force, as well Trained Bands as others, in severall Counties of this Kingdom, to lead against all Traytors, and their adherents, and them to arrest and imprison, and to fight with, kill, and slay all such as shall oppose any of His Majesties loving Subjects that shall be imployed in this service, by either or both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Ordered that this Declaration be forthwith Printed, Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. August 9. London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and Iohn Franck. 1642.
A Declaration of both Houses of PARLIAMENT. WHereas certain Informati∣on is given from severall parts of the Kingdom, That divers Troops of Horse are imployed in sundry Counties of the Kingdom; and that o∣thers have Commission to raise both Horse and Foot, to compell His Majesties Sub∣jects to submit to the illegall Commission of Array, out of a Trayterous intent, to sub∣vert the liberty of the Subject, and the Law of the Kingdom; And for the better strengthning themselves in this wicked at∣tempt, Do joyn with the Popish and Jesui∣ticall faction, to put the Kingdom into a
combustion and civill warre, by levying forces against the Parliament, and by those forces to alter the Religion, and the anci∣ent Government, and lawfull liberty of the Kingdom, and to introduce Popery and Idolatry, together with an Arbitrary form of Government: And in persuance thereof, have traiterously and rebelliously, levyed warre against the King, and by force, robbed, spoiled, and slain, divers of His Majesties good Subjects, travelling about their lawfull and necessary occa∣sions in the Kings protection according to Law, and namely that for the end and purpose aforesaid, That Earle of North∣ampton, the Lord Dunsmore, Lord Willughby of risby son to the Earle of Lindsey, Henry Hastings Esq; and divers other unknowne persons in the Counties of Lincolne, Notting∣ham, Leicester, Warwick, Oxfordshire, and other places, and the Marquesse of Hertford, the Lord Pawlet, Lord Seymore, Sir John Staell, Sir Ralph Hopton, John Digby Esq; & other their Accomplices have gotten toge∣ther great forces in the County of Somerset.
The Lords and Commons duely con∣sidering the great dangers which may ensue upon such their wicked and Traiterous de∣signes; And if by this meanes the power of the Sword should come into the hands of Papists and their Adherents, nothing can be expected but the miserable ruine and deso∣lation of the Kingdome, and the bloody Massacre of the Protestants. They doe Declare and Ordaine, That it is and shall be lawfull for all His Majesties loving Subjects, by force of Armes, to resist the said severall Parties & their accomplices, and all other that shall raise or conduct any other Forces for the ends aforesaid. And that the Earle of Essex, Lord Generall, with all his Forces raised by the authority of Par∣liament, As likewise the Lord Say Lievte∣nant of Oxfordshire, Earle of Peterborough Lievtenant of Northamptonshire, Lord Wharton Lievtenant of Buckinghamshiere, Earle of Stamford Lievtenant of Leicester∣shiere, Earle of Pembrooke Lievtenant of iltsshire and Hampshire, Earle of Bedford Lievtenant of Somersetshire and Devon,
Lord Brook Lievtenant of Warwickshiere, the Lord Cranborne Lievtenant of Dorset∣shiere, the Lord Willoughby of Parham Liev∣tenant of Lincolnshire, and their Deputy Lievtenants respectively, and all those who are, or shall be appointed by Ordi∣nance of both Houses, to perform the place of Deputie Lievtenants; Densill Hollis Esquire, Lievtenant of the City and County of Bristoll, and the Majors and Cheriffs of the City, and Deputy-Lievte∣nants there, and all other Lievtenants of Counties, Sheriffs, Majors, Deputy-Lievte∣nants shall raise all the power and forces of their severall Counties, aswell Trayned Bands as others, And shall have power to Conduct and leade the said Forces of the said Counties, against the said Traytors and their Adherents, and with them to fight, kill, and slay all such as by force shall op∣pose them; and the persons of the said Traitors and their Adherents and Accom∣plices to arrest and imprison, and them to bring up to the Parliament, to answer this their Traiterous and Rebellious attempts
according to Law, and the same, or any o∣ther Forces, to transport and conduct from one County to another in aide and assi∣stance one of another, and of all others that shall joyne with the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament for the defence of the Religion of Almighty GOD, and of the Li∣berties and peace of the Kingdome, and in pursuit of those wicked and Rebellious Traitors, their Conspirators, Aydes and Abettors and Adherents: Requiring all Lievtenants of Counties, Sheriffs, Majors, Justices of Peace and others His Majesties Officers and loving Subjects to be ayding and assisting to one another, in the executi∣on hereof, and for their so doing all the the parties above mentioned; and all others that shall joyn with them, shall be justified, desended, and secured by the power and authority of Parliament.
Die Lunae, Aug. 8. 1642. Ordered that this Declaration be forth∣with Printed and Published. Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl D. Com. FINIS.
