E1591 [ocm]13047470 197924
INSTRVCTIONS Agreed upon by the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For Sir William Brereton Bronet, one of the Members of the House of Commons, and for Sir GEORGE BOOTH, Knight and Barronet: and the rest of the Deputie Lieutenants of the Citie and Countie of CHESTER. Die Lunae Januarii. 9. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that these Instructions shall be forth∣with printed and published. IOHN BROWNE Cleric. Parliament. decorative woodcut LONDON, Printed for Iohn Wright, and are to be sold at his Shop in the Old-Baily. Ian. 11. 1642.
Instructions agreed upon by the Lords and Commons in Par∣liament, for the Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Chester. WHereas it doth appeare, to the Lords and Com∣mons now assembled in Parliament; that the King seduced by wicked Councell, hath raised War against the Parliament, and other his good Subjects, and hath drawn together great store of Papists, and ill affected persons, and sent out Commissions, for the levying of others, to the great hazard of Religion, and the publique peace of the Kingdome. 1. You the said Deputy Lieutenants, shall take speciall care there∣fore that the Ordinance concerning the Militia, from time to time, be put in execution▪ through the said Countie, as you shall see cause: And for that purpose, you or any two or more of you shall have power and authority, to Arme, Traine, and put in readinesse, all and every the Inhabitants of that County, fit for the War, as well Trained band, as other Voluntiers, both Horse and Foote, and them, under the Com∣mand of such Collonels Lieutenant Collonells, Serjeant Majors, Cap∣taines, and other Officers, as the Lieutenant of the said Countie, or you or any three or more of you shall in his absence nominate and ap∣point, to leade and conduct, aswell against all Forraigne Forces, that shall in hostile manner invade the said Countie, as for resisting, and op∣posing of all other forces, which shall be either within the said County, or elsewhere, raised to the disturbance of the peace of that Countie, or which shall stand in opposition to the Orders, Commands, and Ordi∣nances of both Houses of Parliament; and the Sheriffes and all other Officers and Subjects of the said County, are hereby injoyned, to assist you and every of you therein; and if any person whatsoever shall lea∣vy or endeavour to leavy or billet▪ any Souldiers or to raise, draw or keepe together, the Trained Bands or other Armed Forces of the said Countie or any other Forces, by colour or pretence of any Commis∣sion or Warrant from his Majesty, under the great Seale or otherwise without Order or consens of both Houses of Parliament: You are to make knowne to the Trained Bands or other Inhabitants of the said County; that those who shall appeare upon any such Warrant▪ or obey any such Commission, shall be held disturbers of, and enemies to the publique peace: and those who shall not appeare upon any such Warrant and Commission, nor do any thing in execution thereof, but shall conforme and submit to the Ordinance of the Militia, shall be protectd by both Houses of Parliament. And you the said Deputy Lieutenants or any two or more of you, shall in the name▪ and by the authority of both Houses of Parliament, require and command all persons, to forbeare the execution of such Commission or Warrant and to cause the same to be delivered up to
you, or any of you, to be sent to the Parliament. And you the said Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or more of you, are hereby required, to draw together, such of the Trained Bands, and other forces of the said County, as shall be expedient for the suppressing of all such As∣semblies, and for the apprehending and imprioning of all or any such person or persons, as shall after admonition and command, by you or any of you made unto them, to forbeare the execution of any such Commission or Warrant, or the calling or gathering or keeping toge∣ther of any such Forces or Assemblies, still perfix in doing the same; and likewise such as shall beare Armes, by colour of any Warrant or Commission from his Majesty, under the great Seale or otherwise, without order or consent of both Houses of Parliament. And also such disaffected persons, as shall be found raising any parties or factions against the Parliament; or casting any reproaches or aspertions against them or their proceedings, to be sent up to the Parliament, to answer such their offences, as to Law and justice shall appertaine. 2. You the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any one or moe of you, shall stay, search and examine, or cause to be stayed sear∣ched and examined all suspitious persons, and caryages, and shall search or cause to be searched, all suspitious places, and to seize upon all Horses, Armes and Amunition, Money, Plate or other provisions whatsoever which you or any one or more of you shall have just cause to suspect is▪ or are raised, or provided for the fomenting or maintain∣ing Warre gainst the Parliament and the Kingdome. 3. You the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants or any one or more of you shall oppose and suppresse all Rebelion and commotion whatsoever within the said Countie of Chester or in any other Coun∣ties in association with the said Countie of Chester. 4 You the Deputy Lieutenants or any one or more of you, shall conduct and leade all such forces of Horse and Foote▪ as shall be raised within the said Countie of Chester, by Authority of both Houses of Parliament for the service of the Parliament and Kingdome. And you the said Deputy Lieuenants and Inhabitants and every of you, shall fight with kill and slay all such as shall by force oppose you, or any of you in the execution of this or an other Order or Ordi∣nance of both ouses of Parliament and all other their assistants, ayd∣ers and abettors: and you or any one or more of you shall leavy such other forces of Horse and foot as (his Excellency) the Earle of Essex shall by his Commission give you power to leavie under such Collo∣nels Commaners and other Officers as shall be by him appointed or directed: And you shall pursue he said Traitors and Rebells and their adherents, in the said County of , or in any other places or Counties of the Kingdom into which they shall retire themselves. And you shall defend and protect his Maesties good Subjects from vio∣lence and opression, by the illegall Commission of Array▪ or other∣wise: And you shall hinder and forbid, the execution of that illegall Commission; and in all places, to the utmost of your power and en∣deavour▪
to restore and preserve the peace of the Kingdom. 5. You the said Deputie Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any one or more of you shall take from the said Rebells and Traytors, and their adherents, all such Armes, Ordinance, and Amunition and goods as they have taken from any of his Majesties Subjects, and restore the same to the Owners: And if any of those Armes▪ Ordinance, Amuni∣tion or other goods so taken, be wasted spent consumed or so concea∣led from you that you cannot come to the same, then you or any one of you, shall in leiw thereof cause due recompence to be made to the parties grieved, out of and with the offendors goods. 6. You the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants or any one or more of you, shall take care▪ that such Resolutions and Orders of both Houses, as have bin or shall be made and delivered or sent down to your▪ or any of you be put in execution, and shall require the Sheriffes and Justices of the Peace, and all other his Majesties Officers and Subject of the said County, to be ayding and assisting unto you, and every of you, for that purpose: And if any of them shall refuse, or forbeare to be ayding and assisting to you therein, you or any one or more of you, shall them apprehend and imprison, and send up to the Parliament, or otherwise dispose of them, for further punishment, as to justice shall appertaine. 7. You the said Deputy Lieutenants; shall likewise declare unto all men, That it hath ever been▪ and still shall be the care and endeavours of the Parliament, to provide for his Majesties safety; and that they do not nor never did know, of any evill intended toward his Majesties Person, which might more him to require any Army, or extraordina∣ry guard: That his greatest safety is in the affection and fidelities of his Subjects, and in the advice and councell of his Parliament; and his greatest danger in withdrawing himselfe from them and joyning him∣selfe to such disaffected and malignant persons; obnoxious to Justice for their great enormities, who under colour of doing him service, have raised forces which they labour to increase, to the hazard of ruining Religion and the whole Kingdom. 8. And you the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any or more of you shall in the name of the Lords and Commons, publish, or cause to be published throughout the said County, the Declarations already commanded or hereafter to be commanded to be published by both Houses of Parliament, and you and every of you shall endeavour to cleare the proceedings of the Parliament, from imputations and aspersions and shall from time to time certifie the Speaker of the House of Commons, of all things which you conceive necessary for the present service; and that a speedy accompt thereof may be made, and that the directions of the Lords and Commons to you, aswell as your Advertisements to them, may have a cleare and speedy passage, you and every of you, shall lay a strict charge upon all Host-masters, Messengers and others, that they do not suffer any Letters or other dis∣patches to, or from the Parliament, or any other imployed in their
service, to be intercepted or stayed: And if any shall presume to make stay of such dispatches, you, and every of you, shall direct the Post∣masters to repaire to the Justices of Peace, Constables, and other Of∣ficers for their ayd and assistance, who are hereby required, to take speciall care, that there be no such Interruption. 9. You the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any two or more of you, are hereby Authorized and required, forthwith to dis∣arme all Popish Recusants, and other dangerous and ill affected per∣sons aswell Cleargy men as others, as have testified, or shall testifie their ill dispositions to the peace of the Kingdome and proceedings of Parliament: and all such Armes, and all other Armes formerly taken from Popish Recusants▪ shall be imployed by you for the defence of the said Countie, and shall be put into the hands of such as you or any two or more of you, shall conceive to be persons well affected in Reli∣gion and to the peace of the Kingdom, and the proceedings of Par∣liament. 10. You the said Dequty Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any one, or more of you shall take care that none of the Recusants Armes▪ or o∣ther Ammunition of the said Countie; shall be taken or carried out of the same upon any pretence or command whatsoever, without warrant from both Houses of Parliament, or authority derived from them: And you or any one, or more of you shall apprehend and imprison, in such places as you shall thinke meete▪ all such Popish Recusants in the said County, as doe not confine to themselves to their dwelling places, according to he statute in that case provided. 11. You the Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any one or more of you shall seize: and take into your custody the publique Maga∣zines of the said County, and the same shall be disposed, and imployed for the defence of the County▪ in such manner, as shall bee thought fit, by the said Sir William Brereton one of the Members of the House of Commons or in his default or neglect▪ then by any two or more of the said Inhabitants, and any three or more of the said Deputy Lieutenants. 12. And you the said Dputy Lievtenants or any two or more of you are likewise to give charge from both Houses of Parliament, to all Co∣lonells Captaines, Lievtenants, and all other Officers for the M that they shall bee observant to such directions, as they shall from time to time receive from the Lord Lievtenant of the said County, or his Deputies, or any of them, for the due performance of any the com∣mands, of the said Houses. 13. You the Deputy Lievtenant and Inhabitants, or any one, or more of you shall resist and repell, and are hereby authorized, to resist and repell, by the power of the said County, and all other wayes▪ and means, all such force and violence as shall be raised, or brought by any person or persons to the hinderance or disturbance of this present ser∣vice or for the arresting or seizing the persons of you, or any of you, or any other which shall bee imployed in performance of the Ordinance, Instructions and Commands of both Houses of Parliament, for any
thing done in execution thereof: And the Sheriffes and Justices of peace, of the said Countie, and all other Officers and subjects, are here∣by required to be ayding and assisting to you, and every of you, for the better and more speedy execution of the premises. 14. You the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any two or or more of you, shall with the consent, of any two of the said Deputie Lievtenants have power and authority, to fortifie the City, Towne of of Chester, or any other place of the said County, in such a manner and sort as you, or any two or more of you with the consent of any two of the said Deputy Lievtenants, shall thinke fit for the safety of the said County; and for the more security of the same, shall set such severall guards and forces, in all places and Townes of the said Countie, as you or any two or more of you, with the consent of any two, of the said Deputy Lieutenants, shall thinke fit and requisite, and to cause the Bea∣cons, within the said County, to be watched guarded and fired, as occa∣sion shall require. 15. You the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any one or more of you and every other person or persons, to be thereunto nomi∣nated and appointed, by you, or any one or more of you, shall or may call together the Inhabitants of the said County, at such times and pla∣ces, as you, or they shall thinke fit and propound to them, what horse, men and Armes▪ they will find▪ and maintaine, and what money; plate horse, or Victualls for horse and man, they will give, lend or advance; for the defence of the said County of Chester, and the Kingdome of Eng∣land, and to take their answers and subscriptions, and to appoint Trea∣surers for those moneys, plate and Victualls and Commissioners for the valuing of the horse, Arms and Victuals the receiving and listing & enrolling therof; which tresurers and Commissioners are hereby requi∣red, to receive, issue forth▪ and imploy all the said money, plate, horses armes and victualls respectively in such manner as by warrant from you or any two or more of you▪ shall be appointed for providing of ammu∣nition for warre, and for payment officers or souldiers or for any other things necessary for the defence of the said County or Kingdome: And whosoever within the said County, shall bring in any money, Plate, horse▪ Armes or Vctualls, or shall furnish or maintaine▪ any men horse, or armes for the service of the said County or Kingdome, shall have their money repaied with interest; according to eight pounds per centum; and the full value of their plate with consideration▪ for the fashion, not exceeding one shilling per ounce, and shall have full recompence for all their charge, in finding furnishing and maintaining of men▪ horse and armes: And for this both houses of Parliament, doe engage the pub∣lique faith▪ and a signification of the said Tresurers or any two of them for the receipt of the said moneyes and plate for the purposes aforesaid, shall be a sufficient ground for the parties so lending, money or plate to demaund the same againe with interest and consideration for the fashi∣on of the plate; and a signification under the hands of the said Com∣missioners, for the valueing of the said horses, Armes and Victuals or a∣ny
two of them, of the values of the horse, arms and victuals; and of the time when they were first brought in; shall bee a warrant to demand sa∣tisfaction, according to those values; and they shall keepe an accompt of the time from the first enrolement; of any such horse and horsmen, that such as find and maintaine them may be repayed, according to the rate of two shillings six-pence per diem, for so long time as they have mainai∣ned them in this service. 16. And you the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any one or more of you, are hereby authorized, and required, to apprehend, and send up to the Parliament all such persons in the said County of Chester, as by both or either Houses of Parliament, are or shall bee Vo∣ted Delinquents. 17. You the said Deputy Lieutenants, or any three or more of you, whereof the aforesaid Member of the House of Commons, to be one, shall or may in the absence of the Lieutenant of the said County, make and appoint such Colonells, Captaines and other Officers as shall be re∣quisite for the service and defence of that County, and to remove them out of their places, and to make others, from time to time, as you shall thinke fit for that purpose. 18. You the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any one or more of you shall or may cause and require, strong watches and wards to bee set by the Constables or such other persons as you shall thinke meet; in all convenient places in that County, for the peace and safety thereof. 19. You the said Deputy Lievtenants or the greater part of you where∣of the aforesaid member of the House of Commons to bee one, may joyne in assosiation, with the adjacent Counties, for the mutuall de∣fence of each other County: And for that purpose you or any of you, shall have power to conduct and lead, or to cause to bee conducted and led; any force out of the said County of Chester, into any other Coun∣tie or Counties whatsoever, as shall be expedient for the service, and to require and receive, into the said County of Chester, out of and from, any other Counties or place, the ayd and assistance of any persons or forces whatsoever. 20. You the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any one or more of you, shall or may apprehend and imprison, all such persons, as shall oppose you or refuse to obey you in the premises respectively▪ and to send him or them in safe custody up to the Parliament or any Com∣mittee of Parliament to be proceeded with according to Justice. 21. You the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, and every of you shall observe and execute all such further directions, and instructi∣ons, as you shall from time to time receive from both Houses of Parli∣ament: And whatsoever you shall doe therein, or any other person in ayde or assistance of you, it shall bee accepted of as good and acceptable service to the Kingdome: And for their and your so doing, they and you shall be defended and protected by the authority of Parliament and the resolution of the Lords and Commons to protect those that shall
obey and further their commands you shall publish and eclare upon all oc∣ons for the better encouragement of the Subjects of this Kingdome in that be halfe. 22. You the Deputy Lieutenants or any two or more of you shall publish and declare, that if any who have assisted the Commissioners of Array and their Adhe∣rents in execution of any thing contrary to any Ordinance or Order of both Hou∣ses of Parliament; shall willingly within ten dayes after publication made; by you or any of you returne to their duty not doing any hostile act, with i the ime limi∣ted▪ and bring in their Armes to you, or any one or more of you and joyne them∣selves with the parliament in defence of Religion, his Majestes Person; the liberties and Laws of the Kingdome, and Priviledges of Parliament with their persons and Estates: That the Lords and Commons will bee ready upon their submission, to re∣ceive such persons, in such manner as they shal have cause to acknowledge that they have been used with clemencie and favour; provided that this shall not extend to admit any man into either House of Parliament who stands suspended, without gi∣ving satisfaction to the House whereof hee shall bee a Member: And except all per∣sons who stand impeached, or particularly Voted in either House of Parliament, for any Delinquency whatsoever; excepting likewise such Adherents, of those who stand impeached in Parliament, of Treason as have beene eminent persons and chiefe actors in those Treasons: and except the Earle of Bristol: the Earle of Cumberland, the Earle of Newcastle, the Earle Rivers, Secretary Nicholas, Mr. Endy∣mn Porter, Mr. Edward Hide, the Duke of Richmond, the Earle of Carnarvan, the Lord V. Newarke, the Lord V. alkland. 23. You the said Dep. Lieut. and Inhabitants, or any one, or more of you, shall take and seize all such Rents▪ Goods and Chattells as shall belong to any that are in Armes against the Parliament: And shall put the same into such hands as shall be answerable and accomptable for the same and thereof shall send a perfect Schedule to the Speaker of the House of Commons 24. You the said Deputy Lieutenants or Inhabitants, and any one or more of you, shal take away the Armes and Horses of such as shall refuse to contribute Moneys, Plate or Horse, Men or Armes upon the Propositions: And you shall force all Papists and persons disaffected to the Parliament, to contribute to the main∣tenance of the Army. 25. You the said Deputy Lietenants and every of you shall take care that the Armies under your or any of your Conducts or Commands be governed accor∣ding to the Lawes and Ordinances published by his Excellency the Earle of Essex, and to pay them out of such moneys as shall be paid upon the subscriptions or o∣therwise upon the Contributions▪ and upon the Estates of such as are in actuall Service against the Parliament; or have contributed any Supplies for the mainte∣nance of it. 26. You the said Deputy Lieutenants or any three of you, shall have power to take into your protection of the Parliament such as shall bring in their Armes, and forsake the Party of the Commissioners of Array, and their Adherents against the Parliament so as they be not Papists or Delinquents declared by both Houses of Parliament, or by either of them. 27. And lastly, all such Victuals Money, Plate, Armes, Ammunition and provision for Warre, as shall be raised or brought in by vertue, meanes or occa∣sion of this Ordinance, or any thing therein contained; or as shall be sent downe unto you the said Deputy Lieutenants and Inhabitants, or any of you by direction or appointment of both or either the Houses of Parliament: or of any Committee of both or either Houses of Parliament; shall be imployed and bestowed in such manner as shall be agreed, directed and appointed by the said Sir William Brere∣ton one of the Members of the House of Commons, or in default or neglect, then by three or more of the said Deputy Lieutenants, by Warrant under their hands in writing. FINIS.
