E2993A Lutt.III[111] R226352 99886675 186987
ENGLANDS MEMORIAL, OR A THANKFUL REMEMBRANCE Upon the present Never to be Forgotten Deliverance of Both KING AND NATION FROM THE Bloody Popish PLOT▪ Shewing, That the Papists by their Principles are Real Enemies to our KING and Countrey. By a Well-Wisher to the Protestant Religion. BLEST be our God, that gloriously did save Both King and People, from that dreadful Grave, Which Anti-christ had dig'd both long and deep, To bury our Nation in a dismal sleep. O that this Day might never be forgot; No, nor the Papists who did lay the Plot. Blest be that God who looked down from high, And set us free, who were Condemn'd to dye. Well, let this mercy never be forgotten, But live in minds when we are dead and rotten? That future Ages may this thing record, And give the Praise unto the highest Lord; Who only did this great Salvation bring To all the Nation, and unto our King. Blest be our God, who did deliver us free, And caught themselves in that they lay'd for we. For Englands God who knew their Curst design, Did wisely work, even by a Countermine. Oh! what dark times hath England often seen; en not long since in th'dayes of Mary Queen? How did she then the Blood of Saints most dear, Smith field spill, and England every where. that all those who would not fall before, Worship Idols and the beastly Whore; ey would not by their delusions turn, e next News was, they should for certain burn. that in Smith-field many a one did burn, ecause they would not unto Popery turn. ut yet after those black and gloomy dayes, od did shew forth his glorious Beams and Rays. other Queen, Elizabeth by Name, ho did uphold and Protestants maintain. nd then the Gospel got some Breath, which was efore Extirpate, and his Glory has i'd forth full bright▪ to many in this Land, ho have accepted it with Heart and Hand. often have they tri'd again to rise, nd many a time by Plots they did devise ow they the Gospel might again devour, nd in Christs stead, set up th' Ant'christian whore. h! that the day might never be forgot, n which Hells Agents layd the Powder Plot; Vhich had not Mercy stopt their Cruel hands, hey fairly bid for all the three whole Lands. ow often has their Plots been deeply layd; ut Heavens bright Eye hath often them betrayd. nd now of late what Mercy have we seen, nk the like hath hardly ever been. at God should in the very Nick of time, ke known and shew their desperate design. ho will not wonder, if they have their Eyes t on that Light that darkness still descries? that its true, as it hath often been, hat on this Mount our God was fairly seen. ut surely were't not for our bloody Crimes, hey ne're should prosper in such Curst designs? t its our sins which opens wide the Gap Righteous Judgments to come in thereat. did indeed from Israel o Old, Sometimes depart, and with his Enemies hold. VVhen by their sins they did from God depart, He them forsook, and took their Enemies part. But 'twas not so, when they their God did keep, A handful then did beat a mighty heap. Two little Kids of Israelites di sly n hundred thousand Syrians in one day. that if ever we mean to save our Land, Ve must have God upon our side to stand. herefore, O England, keep close to thy God; nd then fear not the Popish Scourging Rod. But if we do by wicked works depart, Then God will give us up, and make us smart, Into their hands which will our Butchers be, And us destroy with all their Cruelty. But if we would the mighty Lord sure keep, Then we must pray, watch, mourn, and often weep: So he'll arise, and fully plead our Cause Against Hell, Pope and all their Cursed Laws. Oh! how much Blood hath Babel drunk before, So that she's fitly call'd the drunken Whore? Who have drunk of th'Blood of th'Saints full deep, And thousands have layd in a dead fast sleep. Much Blood has been shed by her oft before In England, Ireland, and in Paris more. Two hundred thousand innocent souls and more, Was slain in Ireland by the Scarlet VVhore. And now again she doth attempt this thing, To Murder Subjects, and to kill our King. O Cursed Monsters! is this religious Reason, For to slay Princes, and say its no Treason. Yet this is she that would be counted Heir, Because she saith she sits in Peters Chair. But prethee Rome tell us the truth, and bring The time and place where Peter taught this thing▪ Yea, this is she that Mother Church would be, Yet teach for truth such Immorality. For worst of Hathens do Condemn this Spirit, VVhich yet the Papists say thereby they Merit. So by this Rule you'll easily guels this thing, What Enemies such must needs be to our King. What, Rome! did'st think to take us in this plight, Before your Works of darkness came to light. Or did you think Heavens bright Eye could not see, Nor yet would judge for this your Villanie: No Rome, believe it; God that sits above VVill judge thy Tyranny, and will remove Thee from that Seat where thou sit'st as a Queen, In brave Attire, and hath no sorrow seen. But stay a while, thy Plagues shall come one day, VVhen Christ will all his dear Saints blood repay Upon thy Head, and give thee blood to drink Because thou'rt worthy he doth surely think. O Friends, see how the Antichrstian VVhore, Doth by her wiles, her policy and power Endavor once more Christs subjects t' enthrall, And bring them down before that Beast to fall. O monstrous Head with thy long tripple Crown, VVhat did'st thou think tht England would fall dow To VVorship thee and Idols dumb adore, No sure, there's some, those thughts do much abhor, Though some there are, yet other some there be, VVho never will fall down, nor give the Knee To such a monstrous Head and VVhore as thee. VVell, let Hell plot, and all Rome's Brats conspire Against Christ, and his Interest to expire. VVe'll never fear, if we but keep our God, That ever Rome shall be's afflicting Rod. Lord, let not darkness Cover again our Land, Nor us give up into the Papists hand? The worst of Heathens us to kill and slay: Say, Is enough, Dear Lord, and thy Hand stay. But now if we the Lords just Hand would stay, VVe must make Conscience then to fast and pray, Yea, we our ways must likewise well reform, Or else we shal see yet a greater storm. But if this Land would throughly do this thing, Then we should save both Nation and our King. And then ere long there would be shouts and cries, That Babylon's fallen, 's fallen, and never more shall rise. FINIS. ONDON Printed in the YEAR 1678.
