E3917A 816.m.12[125] T11158 99893223 190276
The Extraordinary CASE, OF several Persons who did Advance, and Pay into the Receipt of His Majesties Exchequer, the Sum of 564,700 l. upon the Faith and Credit of an Act of Parliament, made in the Sixth and Seventh Years of His Majesties Reign, for Granting to His Majesty certain Rates and Duties on Stone, Glass, and Earthen Wares, Coals and Culm, for the Term of Five Years, for Carrying on the War against France; Impowering His Majesty to Borrow the said Summe at the Interest of 7 l. per Cent. with a Clause in the said Act, That what should fall short, or be Deficient for Repayment of Principal and Interest in the Time limit∣ed, should be Transferred to, and made good out of the first Aids to be Granted to His Majesty by Parliament. The very next Sessions of Parliament, the Duties on Stone, Glass, and Earthen Wares, was Appropriated for Establishing, A National Land-Bank; and the Duties on Coals and Culm were quite Taken away without the Consent of the Persons, who so Frankly Lent the said Summe; whereby they were totally Deprived of their Security, on which they depended when they parted with their Moneys on a Fund which undoubt∣edly would have fully Discharged the Principal and Interest in the Time granted, and were left destitute of any Interest for a Considerable Time. The Sessions of Parliament following, the aforesaid Matter was in an Humble Petition set forth to the Honourable House of Commons, wherein the Petitioners prayed to be Restored to their Security on which they Lent their Moneys; or else that some other Equivalent Security might be Granted instead thereof: Which Petition was referred to a Committee to Examine, and make their Report of the Matter Specially to the House. The said Committee did accordingly Examine it, and made their Report Specially, that all the Alligations therein were True. After which there were several Resolutions of the House, that Effectual Provision should be made for Dis∣charging the said Debt and Interest. And it is Humbly Conceived the said Just Debt had been Secured out of several Funds, which at that Time were Ingrafted in the Bank of England till 1706, for Satisfying several Deficiencies; (and the rather) because a very short Time longer than 1706 (it's supposed) would fully and Honourably Discharge all. But the Honourable House of Commons being Resolved to make Effectual Provision in Room of the Coals, &c. and they being Informed that a Duty on Leather would produce a very Considerable Summe Yearly, these Tallies were Transferred to the Duty on Leather; whereby the Proprietors had not the good Fortune to be THEN made Ingraftable into the Bank: The Preamble of which Leather Act doth Express, That the Disappointment and Failure hath been very Injurious to the Lenders, and Prejudicial to the Publick Credit; with a Clause, That so much as shall fall short or Deficient for Repayment of the said Debt and Interest in the Time limited, shall be Transferred to, and Paid and Satisfied to the Lenders out of any of the next Aids or Supplies to be Granted to His Majesty by Parliament. The next Sessions of Parliament, which was in the Ninth and Tenth Years of His Majesties Reign, a Duty was Laid on Coals and Culm again, to Advance 500,000 l. more, which now Carries 8 l. per Cent. Interest, at which Time the Persons who first Lent their Moneys on the said Duties, did offer their Humble Petition, setting forth the Insufficiency of the Duty on Leather, and praying to be Restored to part of their first Fund, the Coals and Culm again. But the Petition would not be Received. The Duty on Leather is so very Inconsiderable, that it has not Paid off any Principal Moneys for about Fourteen Months past, and will Expire the 20th of April next: Whereby the Persons who Lent their Moneys (in the most Difficult Times for the Best of Purposes) will be Destitute of any Security for their so Great and Just Debt. By all which Means the Petitioners have been very great Sufferers, and are still like to continue so, unless the Present Honourable House of Commons will either Restore them to their First Security, (part of which is Now a very Valuable Fund) or otherways will Please to make such Effectual Provision for the Repay∣ment of the said Great and Just Debt, and growing Interest, as in their GREAT WISDOM and JUSTICE they shall think REASONABLE.
THE EXTRAORDINARY CASE.
