R285 816.m.7[128] R226296 99886629 187557
The new Invention FOR THE SHEATHING of SHIPS WITH Lead and Lacker, Without the use of Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Brimstone, or any other Graving, HAth been Experimented upon several of the King's Ships, with such Success and Approbation, that His Majesty, and the Lords of the Admiralty, have given express Order to the Commissioners and Principal Officers of the Navy, That all their Ships for the future shall be Sheathed no other∣wise, but by the way of this New Invention. The Phoenix was the first, which was done March 10. 1670. and after several Voyages was lately ordered into the Dock at Woolwich, supposing her Sheathing might want some Repair, but upon view of the Master-Builder and others, it was found to be in as good condition as at first doing: Where∣upon she was turned out of the Dock the next day; and the Captain, Master, and other Officers averred, she was so tight during the whole Time, that they were forced to heave in water to keep her sweet. The Dreadnought, done in June, 1671. the Henrietta, Lion, and Mary, done in October, 1672. which being lately laid on ground at Sheerness and Ports∣mouth have all their Sheathings found to be in as good condition as at first, as the Master-Builder and Assistant at Portsmouth, &c. have certified. Others have been also done, no doubt, with as good success; but not being yet viewed, are not here mentioned. The Bread-Rooms also of some of these, and many more of His Majefty's Ships have been lined within, almost in the same manner the Sheathing is without, which has proved of great preservation to the Bread, as several of the Pursers and Officers of the said Ships have certifi'd, and must needs, by reason of its duration, be much cheaper and better then Tynn, which is so liable to rust. The Lead also is made so close pressed, smooth, and equal in all parts, and of what thick∣ness or thinness desired, that great use may be made thereof, in many other things relating to Shipping, &c. All Merchants and others, who desire to have their Ships accommodated with this way of Sheathing, if they please to repair to the Persons employed by the Parties concerned in the management of this, viz. to Mr. Thomas Rastel, at the Jerkers Office in the Custome-house, or to the said Mr. Rastel or Mr. Francis Dracot, at Mr. Garraway's Coffee-house, every Tuesday and Thursday, from 11 to 12 a clock, and afterwards in the West-India Walk upon the Exchange; they may receive satisfaction, that this way of Sheathing is as cheap as the other, much more durable, and in many respects more beneficial to the Owners, both in point of Charge, and advantage in Sailing.
