R487 816.m.16[24] R225194 99885922 188525
REASONS for chusing Sir Robert Atkins and Sir John Knight, Parliament-Men for the City of Bristol. THAT Sir Robert Atkins and Sir John Knight have had great experience in Parliamen∣tary Affairs, and thereby are much more fit to serve this City in that capacity, than Sir Richard Hart and Mr. Earle who were never there. That the King's Life, as well as the Nation, is very much in danger by a Popish Plot, of which is Majesty his very sensible in his last Speech; and by his Writ does direct his Subjects to chuse the wisest and most Judicious Men to advise with in Parliament what to be done. That with the Parliament we trust our Lives, Liberties, Estates, and Religion, and what∣soever is near and dear unto us, in their hands; so that 'tis against all Reason to put out Men, of whose Loyalty, Wisdom and Integrity we have had large experience, and to venture our All with those who were never tried. That the Cities of London and Westminster, and Borough of Southwark, and almost all the places in the Kingdom, have elected their old and knowing Members, thanking them for the pains they have taken: And shall Bristol be said to be unkind to Sir John Knight their honest old Member, and Sir Robert Atkins their worthy Recorder? That Sir John Knight is a very knowing Merchant, and Sir Robert Atkins a great Lawyer; and can do much more Service for this City, in getting an Act for Merchandizing to the East-Indies and Turkie, by their Interest and knowledg in the Parliament-House, than either Sir Ri∣chard Hart, or Mr. Earle, who have no such Interest with the Lords and Commons as they have. That every Inhabitant of this City may easily see the difference betwixt Sir Robert Atkins and Sir John Knight on the one side, and Sir Richard Hart and Mr. Earl on the other, by the great numbers lately admitted to the Freedom of this City, of which every Lover of the City is desired to take notice, That Sir Robert Atkins and Sir John Knight have not made one free on their account, nor would have any of their Friends so do; as highly valuing the Priviledg and Freedom of this great City: and would rather not be Parliament-men than do the City so much wrong, as to make any person free that has no right. That several hundreds have been lately made free, and they no way concerned in it, to the very great detriment of most of the Freemen of this City, who will more and more find it prove prejudical to all the Carpenters, Coopers, Taylors, Shoomakers, Smiths, Joyners, and other Tradesmen, Journymen and Apprentices. That by these hundreds of Freedoms you may easily perceive what Pride and Ambition will do; and if, to be Parliament-men, your Freedoms shall at first be so poorly valued; what may such Men do in Parliament for more Honour? Remember that they also may give away your ALL. That the Mayor and some others have ordered the Town-Clerk and Chamberlain, that Sir Robert Atkins and Sir John Knight shall have no Copy of the many hundreds that are lately made free, tho they are Justices of the Peace, and have power to know. By which every one may perceive their design; as also that several hundreds of Copies are kept by some in this City, when-as the persons they belong to ought to have the keeping thereof themselves; of which an accompt will be taken when time shall serve. That Sir Robert Atkins and Sir John Knight were always known to be of the Church of England; and as loyal to their King as Sir Richard Hart or Mr. Earl can possibly pretend to; tho some unworthy persons (who dare not tell them so to their faces) asperse them other∣wise. That in so great a Concern you are not to chuse for favour nor affection, but such Men that can best serve the Nation in general, which we ought to prefer above private Esteem or Friendship: Otherwise, should any ill come by chusing new Men, and putting by good old ones, we may fear the fate of Rehoboam, who by advising with New Counsellors, and refusing the Advice of the old ones, the Kingdom was rent assunder: which God grant may never be this Nation's nor this Citie's Case. Amen.
