R1180 816.m.14[35] R224761 99885639 185488
❧ The Retayling Vintners their Ansvver, TO A PETITION, Lately Printed, and falsely and unjustly suggested by Projectors, against the said Retaylors. R. Kilvert. depiction of Richard Kilvert Abel in this th' art like to cursed Caine. Th'ast wrong'd thy Brethren and thy Chaine. I've rackt my Wines to 'thfull extent, Not dreaning of a Parliament. depiction of letters patent Patent depiction of Alderman Abell Office of Tickets. A B THough Guido Vaux walked for a long space with his darke lanthorne undiscovered, yet in the end, time faire and faithfull hand-maide brought to light his Treasons and Hypocrisies. And although projectors Snaile-like creepe into their shell of obscurity, yet the Justice of these times will shew them in their owne net they have danced in, and cause them to carry upon their projecting backs their crimes and faults that they unjustly endeavour to father upon others. It was most apparant to the world, that Alderman Abell had long since a designe to raise an Imposition of 40. shillings per Tonne upon all Wines that should be imported into this Kingdome to be sold; and to get the said Imposition granted unto him at a Farme of 30000. pounds per annum, not having any regard to the great burthen it would bring upon the Common wealth, but ayming at his owne particular profit and gaine, and to bring his owne end to passe, and the better to effect and ac∣complish his project, he combined with one Richard Kilvert; and to enable him for his purpose, the said Alderman Abell being at that time Master of the Company of Vintners, admitted the said Richard Kilvert to be a brother of that mystery and society. That thereupon the said Alderman Abell, and the said Master Kilvert did in a private Taverne conceive and frame a Pe∣tition to his Majestie in the name of the Retayling Vintners of London, and preferred the said Petition; whereas in truth, the Retaylors were not at all privy to the drawing or preferring of the same. That thereupon Alderman Abell, and Master Kilvert procured the Imposition to be layd, and the same was granted to Alderman Abell (and to such as he pleased to take in) at 30000. pounds per Annum, whereas if the Imposition were re∣ceived, it would amount to a farre greater summe. That for the support and maintenance of the designe, Richard Kilvert had a gratuity of 1000. pounds, and 500. pou per annum out of the Farme, and Alderman Abell 500. pounds per annum out of the increase, besides his share in the profit of the Farme. That the said Alderman Abell for the better obtaining of his owne ends, procured divers of the retayling Vintners to be imprisoned, and their goods to be seised for the raising and advancing of his unlawfull Wine project. That divers of the retayling Vintners did preferre a Petition to the Parliament against the said Alderman Abell and Richard Kilvert, discovering their deceits to his Majesty, their exactions upon the Subject, and their oppressing of the said Petitioners. That thereupon the said deceits, exactions and oppressions were proved, and Alderman Abell and Richard Kilvert voted for the projectors of the said Wine project, both in the creation and execution thereof by the Honourable Assembly of the Commons in the House of Parliament. That now to cast an aspersion upon those that discovered and detected their deceits and oppressions, they have printed a Petition which they framed for their owne ends, and preferred to his Majesty in the name of the Retayling Vintners, with∣out the direction, consent, or privity of the generality of Retayling Vintners. That the Alderman and his partners gained by their Wine project in one yeare, all Charges and Expences discharged, and cleared, the summe of 25146. pounds, eighteene shillings, and nine pence. This as appeareth by his owne Leidger-Booke, Fol 295. Anno Dom. 1638. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
