R1657D S113210 99848447 178298
Robin Hood and the Butcher. To The Tune of, Robin Hood and the Begger. COme all you brave gallants & listen a while, with hey down down an a down, that are in the Bowers within, For of Robin Hood that Archer good, a song I intend for to sing. Vpon a time it chanced so, with hey, &c. hold Robin in Forrest did spy, A jolly Butcher, with a bonny fine Mare, with his flesh to the Market did hye. Good morrow good fellow, said jolly Robin, with hey, &c. what food hast, tell unto me, And thy Trade to me tell, and where thou dost dwell, for I like well thy company. The Butcher he answered jolly Robin, with a hey, &. no matter where I dwell, For a Butcher I am, and to Notingham, I am going my flesh to sell. What is price of thy flesh said jolly Robin? with hey, &c. come tell it soon unto me, And the price of thy Mare, be she never so dear, for a Butcher fain would I be. The price of my flesh the Butcher repli'd, with hey, &c. I soon will tell unto thée, With my bonny Mate, and they are not dear, four mark thou must give unto me, Four mark I will give thée, saith jolly Robin, with hey, &c. four mark it shall be thy fée, Thy mony come count, and let me mount, for a Butcher I fain would be. Now Robin he is to Notingham gone, with hey, &c. his Butchers trade for to begin With good intent to the Sheriff he went, and there he took up his Inn. When other Butchers they opened their meat, with hey, &c. hold Robin he then begun But how for to sell he knew not well, for a Butcher he was but young. When other Butchers no meat could sell, with hey, &c. Robin got both gold and fée, For he told more meat for one peny than others could do for thrée. But when he sold his meat so fast, with hey, &c. no Butcher by him could thrive, For he sold more meat for one peny, than others could do for five. Which made the Butchers of Notingham, with hey, &c. to study as they did stand, Saying surely he was some Prodigal, that hath sold his Fathers Land. The Butchers they stepped to jolly Robin, with hey, &c. acquainted with him for to be, Come brother one said, we be all of one Trade, come will you go dine with me. Accurst of his heart, said jolly Robin, with hey, &c. that a Butcher doth deny, I will go with you my brethren true, and as fast as I can hie.
BVt when to the Sheriffs house they came, with hey down, down, an a down to dinner they hied apace, And Robin he, the man must be, before them all to say Grace. Pray God bless us all said jolly Robin, with hey, &c. and our meat within this place, A Cup of Sack so good, will nourish our blood, and so I do end my Grace. Come fill us more wine, said jolly Robin, with hey, &c. let us merry be while we do stay, For wine and good chéer, be it never so dear, I bow I the reckning will pay. Come brother be merry said jolly Robin, with hey, &c. let us drink and never give ore, For the shot I will pay, ere I go my way, if it cost me five pounds and more, This is a mad blade, the Butchers then said, with hey, &c. saies the Sheriff he is some Prodigal, That some Land has sold for silver and gold, and now he doth mean to spend all. Hast thou any horn beasts, the Sheriff repli'd, with hey, &c. good fellow to sell unto me? Yes that I have good Master Sheriff, I have hundreds two or thrée. And a hundred aker of good frée Land with hey, &c. if you please it to sée, And Ile make you as good assurance of it, as ever my Father made me. The Sheriff he saddled a good palfrey with hey, &c. with thrée hundred pound in gold, And away he went with hold Robin Hood, his horned beasts to behold. Away then the Sheriff and Robin did ride, with hey, &c. to the Forrest of merry Sherwood. Then the Sheriff did say, God bless us this day from a man they call Robin Hood. But when that a little further they came, with hey, &c. hold Robin he chanced to spy A hundred head of good red Déer come tripping the Sheriff full nigh. How like you my horn'd beasts good Master Sheriff, with hey, &c. they be fat and fair for to sée I tell thée good fellow, I would I were gone, for I like not thy company. Then Robin be set his horn to his mouth, with hey &c. and blew but blasts thrée, Then quickly anon there came little John, and all his company. What is your will, then said little John, with hey, &c. good Master come tell it to me, I have brought hither the Sheriff of Notingham this day to dine with thée. He is welcome to me then said little John, with hey, &c. I hope he will honestly pay, I know he has gold, if it be but well told, will serve us to drink a whole day, Then Robin took his mntle from his back, with hey, &c. and laid it upon the ground, And out of the Sheriffs Portmantle he told thrée hundred pound. Then Robin he brought him thorow the wood, with hey, &c. and set hm on his dapple gray, O have me commended to your wife at home, so Robin went laughing away. T. R Finis. London, Printed for F. Grove on Snow Hill. Entered according to Order.
