R2165 816.m.14[98] R224887 99885726 185551
Reasons shewing that the desires of the Cloathiers, and VVoollen Manufacturers of ENGLAND expressed long since in their Petition presented to the Parliament (against Ingrossing and Transporting of Wooll and Fullers-Earth, and that none might use it, but those that make it into Manufactures) will not be prejudiciall to the Grower; but greatly beneficiall to the generall Trade of the whole Nation. 1.Witnesse Spanish and Irish Wooll, imployed in this Nation. TO begin with the Growers, Whereas the Wooll of the growth of England, is not sufficient to maintain the severall Manufacturers that are imployed about Wooll in England, as Cloathiers, Bay-makers, Saymakers, Serge-makers, Cottons, Freezes, Penistones, Purpetuanaes, Stuffes of Norwich of all sorts, &c. Therefore seeing all must be used by them, the Grower may sell all unlimited to price or time. 2. The Cloathiers aforesaid, are constrained to buy the greatest part of their Wooll, at or about shear time, when the poor Growers (if any there be) want mony. And that by reason of the Summer time, to get their Wooll home, to dye it, and dry it, for the Winter imployment, for the poor which they imploy about it. To which end (when they sell for time) they so order it, as to have their mony due at shear time; which debts when they cannot receive, they procure mony upon their credit, or their goods by pawn. 3. If the Cloathiers aforesaid must use all the Wooll, then the Ingrosers would not by Wooll, except to sell to the Cloathiers for great profit, or to transport it. 4. The Ingrossers or forestallers do hinder the Cloathiers from going to the Grower, by reason they go before the Market, and prevent the Cloathiers comming there. 5. The more the Wooll is imployed into severall Manufactures, the greater price will be to the Grower; but if the Wooll be forstalled, or ingrossed, it wil hinder greatly the trade of all the Manufacturers, and so the losse redownds to the Grower. 6. From experience, when for sixty years and above, the Cloathiers only had the sole buying of Wooll, they gave as good a price to the Grower, if not better, then since the Stapler, or Jobber had liberty to buy, till these distracted times. 7. We hope the Growers, though many and great, do not so desire their own profits, as thereby to prejudice the generall trade of this Nation; for so much Wooll as costs the Cloathiers 12 l. of the Growers, will cost them 16 l. more at least, to make it into a Manufacture fit to be sold in the Market. Lastly, As for the fear of a Monopoly by the Cloathiers, it is impossible, by reason of their multitude, and great distance one from another, through the whole Nation. They never were, or ever can be, in a society or corporation as the Staplers are; and therefore can never agree to ingrosse Wooll, or hinder the Grower of his price. The reason is, if one will not buy, another will. That the Woollen Manufacturers having the sole buying of Wooll, tends exceedingly much to the Nations good. 1. THis is, and must be taken for granted, as the foundation of the work, That all the wooll that growes in England, and more, witnesse, Spanish, and Irish, and Cotton Woolls, is and might be spent, or used in severall Wool∣len Manufactures in this Nation; as Cloth, Bayes, Sayes, Serges, Purpetua∣naes, Stuffes of severall sorts, Freezes, Cottons, Caps, Garters, Gloves, Stock∣ings, &c. 2. The vending of the aforesaid Manufactures beyond the Seas, is it that causeth so much and so many of the Manufactures, to be made in this Nation, which were heretofore made in other Countries. 3. The cheapnesse or reasonablenesse, of the prizes; and goodnesse of the Commodity at the Market: is that which causeth so many of our woollen Commodities, to sell beyond Seas, before other Countries. 4. The many hundred Thousands of people that are imployed in making the aforesaid Commodities, doth cause such great quantities of goods, that are brought home in return of our English Commodity; to be spent in Eng∣land. And doth furnish Merchants, with all manner of goods, to trade with all Nations abroad. As (for one particular) the Silk that comes in return of Cloth, doth imploy many Thousands, in making all manner of silken Com∣modities, as Velvets, Plushes, Sattens, Grograms, Lace, &c. which by reason of Trade, are used much in this Nation. Likewise all sorts of Spices, Fruits, Furres. Sugers, Wines, dying stuffe of all kinds, Hemp, Flax, Pitch, Tarre, Pot∣ashes, Cordage, with many other things; nay, we may say, even gold and silver, all which are used in this Nation, by reason of the Woollen Trade. 5. The poor of the Nation, will, or may be governed, and kept from stealing if they have work. But if they want work, their necessities and idle∣nesse, doth often occasion Rebellion and theft, with many other evills, as day∣ly experience proveth. 6. It is the great and chief cause of so much shipping in this Nation. And so many thousands of Marriners to be imployed about it. And likewise of so much Customs to be paid in this Nation, to defray all the charge of them. All which are the walles and strength of England. But that which chiefely, and especially, doth prejudice and destroy, that rich and precious life of Trade in this Nation, is Ingrossing and Transporting of Wooll and Fullers Earth. 1. FOr the Ingrossers, Jobbers, and Broggers, doe goe between the bark and the Tree; between the Growers and the Manufacturers,; and ingross the greatest part of the Wooll, and makes it so deare to the Clothiers, that they cannot live upon their Trades, and maintaine the poore with work, nor bring their goods to the Market at reasonable rates, so that the Merchants may carry them Cheap to their Markets beyond Seas, because other Countries can afford cheaper then we, which is the maine hinderance to the trade of England, 2. The Ingrossers doe usually abuse and corrupt the Wooll, when they have it in their hands, and mix severall Countries Woolls together, which deceives the Clothiers; causeth much false and bad Cloth to be made in England, and consequently bringeth our English Commodity and Nation to be out of Cre∣dit and esteeme in other Countries, which destroies the Trade of England. Their corrupting and abusing of Wooll, hath been fully proved before a Committee of Parliament. 3. When the Ingrossers cannot have unreasonable prizes for their Wooll, of the Clothiers, or the Manufacturers; they will, and doe Transport it beyond Seas, and there its made into Manufactures, and causeth many Workmen to goe from hence, to be imployed there; which doth, nay, hath already, al∣most lost the Trade of this once flourishing Nation. 4. It occasions much Fullers Earth to be Transported to other Parts; both which heretofore were restrained by Law, and judged destructive to the Nation; but now frequently practised and connived at, by many Covetous Wretches and Enemies to their Countrey. It was a Principle that ruled in the mindes and hearts of Parliament men, in Edward the sixth dayes, that the plenty of Wooll in England, should and ought to cause the cheapness of Com∣modities made of it; and thereupon did forbid any to buy, but those that made it into Manufactures. They would not feed the greedy covetous mindes of some men; but pre∣ferred the common good before all. But if it be objected to savour of a Monopoly. 1. Something hath been said to it, in the close of our reasons for the Wooll-Grower: yet more particularly in Answer to this Objection; by dis∣covering the nature and being of a Monopoly; which is, when one, or some few men, Doe ingrosse into their owne hands a generall Commodity of the Nation, to the prejudice of all the rest of the Common wealth, which are concerned in it; as in Sope and Salt of late; and so of any other generall Commodity whatsoever. 2. But the Woollen Manufacturers are not a few men; but a very great con∣siderable part of the Nation; and they buy the Wooll to worke it into seve∣rall Manufactures. Which first and last sets the whole Nation on worke, in severall imployments, in which the profit of the Wooll, is divided amongst all Tradesmen and Merchants. 3. But if any one man, may buy Wooll, and sell it againe unwrought; then any, or all men may do the like; and then the Wooll will be Ingrossed into a few mens hands, to the great damage of the puplique good of all Tradesmen of this Nation, which is the true and proper nature of a Monopoly: as is in great part already begun amongst us, and will be more practised by men that have money, and given to selfe-interest, against the Nations good. Secondly, Yet some may thinke it is against free Trade. 1. If by free Trade, be meant absolute free Trade, without any limitati∣on, or qualification at all, but every man doe what he list. Then we may as well transport Corne, Wooll, and Fullers Earth, out of the Nation, as any other Commodity. And the Rich men may Ingrosse all the Corne, (and other things of livelyhood) into their owne hands; and no man say, why doe yee so. But its hoped, no man will desire to have, or use such a freedom. 2. Then we humbly conceive, Free Trade must have its Interpretation, or limitation and bounds, which is the Nations good. Such freedome we plead for; and have already made it appeare, that our desires tend to it; and a∣gainst those that hinder it with all their might. What hinderance is is to free Trade (for Tradesmen to have Freedome) to buy their Commodity at first and best hand; and thereby enabled to set on worke, so many poore of the Nation, and make good Commodities of it, which the Law binds them to doe: and also be able to bring it at reasonable prizes to the Market, and Mer∣chants. And what but destruction to Free Trade is it, to suffer Ingrossers and Ingrossing of the chiefe Materialls of Trade. Much might be added by more knowing experienced men; but these are for a taste. And are presented to the view and consideration of all that love and preferre the Nations good, before their own private Interest, and in speci∣all to the faithfull Patriots of this Nation; in whose hands it is to redresse this grand evill, and from whom we expect it, and pray for it; so that in fine, the Ingrosser and Transporter of Wooll, is the cause of all the bad and deare Cloth made in this Nation. By Edmond Rozer in the behalfe of the Clothiers of England. February the first. 1648.
