816.m.22[39] R222963 T2056 99885380 201313
The Travels of the Patriarchs. The TRAVELS of ABRAHAM. 1. ABraham went out of his own Country of Ʋr in Chaldea to the City of Ha∣ran in Mesopotamia, which is three hundred seventy six miles. 2. From Ha∣ran, at the Command of God he went to Sichem, which is four hundred miles. 3. From Sichem he went to the Plain and Wood of Mamre to the Hill between Bethel and Hay, which is twenty eight Miles. 4. From thence he went into Aegypt, Travelling Southward two hundred forty Miles. 5. Out of Aegypt he went again into Canaan, to the Hill that lieth between Bethel and Hay, which is two hundred and forty Miles. 6. From thence he went to the Plain of Mamre near Hebron, thirty two Miles. 7. From the Plain of Mamre he went to Dan, which is an hundred twenty four Miles, and there overthrew the four Kings which had taken Lot Prisoner. Gen. 14.8. He pursued the Enemy for the space of Eighty Miles, to Hebam in Phae∣nicia, which lyeth on the left side of Damasco, Gen. 14.9. From Phaenicia, he went to Sodom, where Melchisedech met him, which is one hundred sixty Miles. Gen. 14.10. From Sodom he went back again to the Plain of Mamre, which are forty Miles. 11. From the Plain of Mamre he went to Gerar, which is six miles, where his Son Isaac was born, Gen. 20.21.12. From Gerar, he went to Beersheba, which is twelve Miles, where he took an Oath of King Abimelech. 13. From Beersheba, he went to Moont Moriah which is forty Miles, where he would have Offered his Son Isaac, Gen. 22.14. From Mount Mori∣ah he returned again to Beersheba, which is forty Miles. 15. From Beersheba, he and his Wife went to the Plain of Mamre by Hebron, which is sixteen miles, and there they dyed and were buried. Gen. 23. and 25. So that all the Travels of Faithful Abraham the Patriarch, were one thousand seven hundred ninety four Miles. The TRAVELS of LOT. 1. LOT Travelled with Abraham from Ʋr in Chaldea to Haran in Mesopotamia, which is three hundred thirty six Miles. Gen. 12. 2. From Haran they Travelled to Sichem, in the Land of Canaan, which are four hundred Miles. 3. From Sichem, they Tra∣velled through Moriah, to the Hill lying between Bethel and Hay, which is twenty four Miles. 4. From the Hill between Bethel and Hay, they went into Aegypt, which is two hundred forty Miles. Gen. 13. 5. From Aegypt they went into the Land of Canaan, to the Hill lying between Bethel and Hay, where Abraham had formerly dwelt, two hundred and forty Miles. Gen. 13. 6. From the Hill between Bethel and Hay, Lot separated himself from Abraham, and went to the Town of Sodom Eastward, which is Twenty Eight Miles. Gen. 13. 7. In Sodom, Lot was taken Prisoner, He and all his Houshold, and led away to the Town of Pan, which is thirty two Miles. Gen. 14. 8. And when Abraham had delivered him out of the hands of his Enemies, and pursued them, he returned with him from Dan to Hobam in Phaenicia, lying on the left side of Damascus, which is Eighty Miles. 9. From Phaenicia, Abraham came again with Lot unto Sodom, which is one hundred and sixty Miles. 10. Lastly, When the Lord had determined to Rain Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom, Lot, according to God's Command, went thence to Zoar, &c. Luther saith, that Abraham took Lot to Hebron with him to comfort him, and there he died. Hebron is thirty six Miles from Sodom. So that all the Travels of Righteous Lot were one thousand six hundred fifty and two miles. The TRAVELS of ISAAC. 1. I Sare being young, went with his Father Abraham from Beersheba, to Mount Moriah, where his Father would have offered him unto God, as the Lord Commanded him, which is forty Miles. 2. From thence, with his Father, he returned to Beersheba, which is forty Miles. 3. From Beersheba, he travelled with his Father to Hebron, by the Plain of Mamre, which is sixteen Miles. 4. From the Plain of Mamre, Isaac travelled Southward to the Fountain of Life, which is sixteen Miles, and there he dwelt, Gen. 24. 5. From thence he returned back again to his Fathers Burial, who was laid in that double Cave in Mamre, which was sixteen Miles. 6. From thence he returned back again to the Well of Life, where he dwelt, sixteen Miles. 7. From the Fountain of Life, he went to the Well of Gerar, which is eight Miles; where Abimelech, seeing the beauty of his Wife Rebeccah, would have Ravish'd her, and for fear, he told him she was his Sister, Gen. 26. 8. From Gerar, Isaac went Westward to the Valley of Gerar, which is Eight Miles, and there he caused the Well to be digged up again, which the Inhabitants had stopt up. 9. From thence he went to Beersheba, which is four Miles; where the same Night the Lord appeared unto him, Gen. 26. 10. From Beersheba he returned again to Hebron by the Plain of Mamre, which is Sixteen Miles: Here Abraham, Sarah, and Rebeccah died, and were buried, Gen. 35. So all the Travels of the Patriarch Isaac, were one hundred forty Eight Miles. The TRAVELS of JACOB. 1. FRom Beersheba Jacob went to Bethel, which is Forty Eight Miles, and there he saw a Ladder that reached down from Heaven, whereby the Angels Ascended and De∣scended, Gen. 28. 2. From Bethel he went to Haran in Mesopotamia, which is Four Hundred Thirty Two Miles; where he married Leah and Rachel, Gen. 28. 3. From Ha∣ran in Mesopotamia, he went to Mount Gilead, which is Three Hundred Eighty Miles; and when Laban pursued him (at the Command of God) he made a League with him, Gen. 31. 4 From Mount Gilead he went to Mahanaim, which is Sixteen Miles; and there he met with the Angels of God, Gen. 31. 5. From Mahanaim he passed the water, and went to Penuel, which is Four Miles, and there he Wrestled with the Angel of God, Gen. 32. 6. From Penuel he went to Succoth, where he pitched his Tents, Two Miles, Gen. 33. 7. From Succoth he passed the River of Jordan, and went to Sichem, not far from Salem (about Eight Miles) where his Daughter Dinah was Ravished, Gen. 33. 8. From thence he went to Bethel, which is Eight and Twenty Miles, Gen. 33. 9. From Bethel, he went to Bethlehem Euphrata, which is Twelve Miles; in which way Rachel dyed, and was buried not far from Bethlehem: Then Jacob went forward, and set up his Tents near to the Tower of Eder, a Mile from Bethlehem towards the South, Gen. 35. 10. From Bethlchem Eu∣phrata and the Tower of Eder he returned again to the valley of Mamre near Hebron to his Father Isaac, which is Twenty Miles, Gen. 35. 11. From Hebron he went to Beersheba, which is Sixteen Miles, Gen. 38. 12. From Beersheba, he went to the Town of Ony, a little off Ae∣gypt in the Land of Goshen, which is One Hundred Sixty Eight Miles. where Joseph his Son gave him Honourable Entertainment, Gen. 4.8 13. From Ony he went to the City Zoan, which is also called Tanis, Twenty Eight Miles, where he was presented to King Pharaoh, Gen. 4. 14. From Tanis he returned to Ony, which is Twenty Eight Miles, and there he dwelt and died in the Land of Goshen. The TRAVELS of the Patriarch JUDAH. 1. JƲdah Travelled from Sichem, where Jacob dwelt, to the Town of Odulla, Forty and Four Miles, where he married Schuah, the Daughter of Chananei. 2. From thence he went to Timnah to shear his Sheep, Six Miles, &c. 3. Afterward he went twice with his Brethren into Aegypt to buy Corn at Zoan, where Joseph at that time was; for the Famine was very great round about. So that reckoning his Journey twice to and again, it amounted to Eight Hundred Twenty and Two Miles. Lastly, he returned again with his Father and his Bro∣ther into Aegypt, Two Hundred and Eighty Miles. The TRAVELS of the Patriarch JOSEPH. 1. WHen Joseph was sent from Hebron by his Father Jacob, be went to Sechem to seek his Brothers, Sixty Miles. 2. From thence he went to Dothan, Four Miles, where by his Brothers he was thrown into a Pit, and after sold to the Ishmaelites, Gew 37. 3. From Dothan he was carried to Tanis in Aegypt, and there sold to Potiphar, Tharaoh's Chief Steward, Two Hundred Seventy Miles. 4. From Tanis he went to meet his Father in the Land of Goshen, which is Twenty Eight Miles. Gen. 46. 5. From thence he turned back again to Ta∣nis, and presented his Father and Brethren to Pharaoh, which is Twenty Eight Miles. 6. From thence he went back to Ony, to see his Father, who was now Sick unto Death, there he received his blessing, and closed his Eyes, this was Twenty Eight Miles. 7. From thence he returned back again to Tanis, Twenty Eight Miles. 8. From Tanis he went back to Ony, with a great Company of Horses and Chariots, preparing an Honourable Funeral for his Father, this being Twenty Eight Miles. 9. From Ony he went to Atad, which lies upon the further side of Jor∣dan, towards the East, which is Two Hundred Forty Miles; where he made a great Lamentation for his Father seven days, Gen. 50. 10. From Atad he went to Hebron the Metropolis of the Tribe of Judah, near to which stood the double Cave in the Valley of Mamre, where Ja∣cob was buried, which was Forty Miles. 11. From thence to Heliopolis, 2 City of the Aegy∣ptians, where Joseph set up a stately Academy for all Aegypt, which was Two Hundred Miles. 12. From thence he went to Tanis or Zoan, which was the Chief Defence and Metropolitan City of all Aegypt, accounted Six Miles. So all the Travels of Joseph was One Thousand Nine Hun∣dred Sixty Two Miles. The TRAVELS of MOSES. 1. AT Forty Years Old he fled out of Aegypt into the Land of Midian, One Hundred and Eighty Miles, Exod. 3. 2. From thence he went to Mount Sinai or Horeb, Sixty Four Miles, Exod. 3. 3. From Mount Horeb he returned to Midian, sixty five miles; Exod. 4. 4. From Midian he went to Tanis in Aegypt, one hundred eighty miles, Exod. 12. 5. From thence to Ramases, forty eight miles, Ex. 12. 6. From thence to Succoth, eight miles, Exod. 13. Num. 33. 7. From thence to Eltham, eight miles. 8. From thence to Ha∣hiroth, sixteen miles, Num. 33. 9. From thence through the Red Sea, and three days through the Wilderness to Marah, forty miles, Exod. 15. 10. From Marah to Elim, eight miles, Exod. 16. 11. From Elim towards the South by the Red Sea, six miles, Num. 33. 12. From the Red Sea to the Wilderness of Zin, sixteen miles. 13. From thence to Daphea, twelve miles, Num. 33. 14. From thence to Alus, twelve miles. 15. From thence to Raphi∣dim, eight miles, Exod. 27. 16. From thence to Mount Sinai which is eight miles, Exod. 19. 17. Thence to the Graves of Lust, where Israel murmured, eight miles, Num 11. 18. Thence to Hazaroth, which is eight miles, Numb. 12. 19. Thence to Rithma, eight miles, Num. 33. 20. Thence to Remon Parets, six miles, Num. 33. 21. Thence to Libanen, six miles. 22. Thence to Risa, six miles. 23. Thence to Rehelatha, six miles. 24. Thence to the Hill of Sephar, four miles. 25. Thence to Harida, four miles and a half Num. 33. 26. Thence to Maccheloth, four miles, Num. 33. 27. Thence to Thahath, four miles. 28. Thence to Thara, four miles. 29. Thence to Mithka, four miles. 30. Thence to Casmona, eight miles. 31. Thence to Miscroth, thirty two miles, Num. 33. 32. Thence to Bneiaccon, twenty four miles. 33. Thence to the Mount Gidgad, twenty miles. 34. Thence to Jot∣batha, twenty four miles. 35. Thence to Ebrona, twenty miles, Num. 33. 36. Thence to Eziongaber, twenty eight miles. 37. Thence to the Wilderness of Zin-Kades, forty eight miles. 38. Thence to Mount Hor, forty eight miles. 39. Thence to Salmona twenty eight miles. 40. Thence to Phunon, twenty miles. 41. Thence to Oboth, twenty four miles. 42. Thence to Igim upon the Hill Abarim, sixteen miles. 43. Thence to Dibon Gad, six∣teen miles. 44. Thence to Almon Diblathaim, sixteen miles. 45. Thence to the Hill Abarim, sixteen miles. 46. Thence over the River of Arnon to Jackri, sixteen miles. Numb. 21. 47. Thence to Heshbon, four miles. 48. Thence to Jaezer, eight miles. 49. Thence to Edrei, twelve miles. 50. Thence to Mount Libanus, fifty six miles. 51. Thence back forty miles to the field of the Moabites, Deut. 34. So all the Travels of Moses were one thousand four hundred twenty four miles. The Prophet BALAAM'S TRAVELS. THis Prophet travelled from Pithora or Phatura in Mesopotamia, to Abel, or the Plain of Vines, where his Ass spake, Numb. 22. which is four hundred miles. From thence he went to the Land of Moabites, forty miles, where in the Mount of Peor he blessed the Children of Israel. So all the Travels of this Prophet was four hundred forty miles. The TRAVELS of JOSHUA. 1. JOshua travelled with Moses from Ramases, out of Aegypt through the Red Sea, and came to Cades-Barnea, two hundred sixty eight miles. 2. From thence Joshua was sent forth with other Spies, to view the Land of Canaan, Numb. 13. And went out of the Wil∣derness of Zin and Param to Rechob in Galile, one hundred and forty miles. 3. From thence to Hamath in Syria, one hundred and eighty miles. 4. From thence to Hebron, three hundred and four miles. 5. From thence they returned back to Cades-Barnea, twenty miles. 6. Thence to Ezean-Gaber, and thence to Jahza, four hundred sixty four miles 7. From thence through two Kingdoms to Mount Libanus, eighty miles. 8. From thence they returned to the Land of Sittim, that lay by the Hill Pisgah, in the Field of the Moabites, eighty miles. 9. From thence through the River Jordan to Gilgal, six miles, Num. 21. Josh. 4.5. 10. Thence to Jericho, two miles: This Town he assailed and took, Josh. 6. 11. Thence to Ai, which he took and burnt, Josh. 7.8. 12. Thence to Gilgal, four miles, upon the Hill of Ebal he built an Altar, Josh. 8. 13. Thence to Gibcon, twelve miles, there the Sun stood still during the Battel against the three Kings, Josh. 10. 14. Thence to Asalon two miles; there the Moon stood still, Josh. 10. 15. Thence to Aseka, four miles; where it hailed upon Israel's Enemies, Josh. 10. 16. Thence returned unto the Camp at Gilgal, twenty miles; Josh. 10. 17. Thence to Makeda; there he hanged the five Kings, Josh. 10. 18. Thence to Libna, two miles, and took it, Josh. 10. 19. Thence to Lachish, eight miles. 20. Thence to Eglon, eight miles, Josh. 10. 21. Thence to Hebron, sixteen miles, Josh. 10. 22. Thence to Debir, a mile. 23. After that Joshua Conquered all Judaea towards the South, bordering Eastward upon the Red Sea, Southward upon Cades-Burnea, Westward upon Asdod and Gaza, and Northward upon Gibeon and Gilgal, which Circuit containing one hundred fifty and six miles. 24. From Gilgal, Joshua went out with his Army two and twenty miles to the River Merom, where he slew the rest of the Kings of the Canaanites, Josh. 11. 25. Thence Joshua chased his Enemies to Sidon, which was six hundred and twelve miles, Josh. 11. 26. Thence to Hazor thirty miles, which Town he burnt, Josh. 11. 27. After that Joshua won all the Towns in the Holy Land, Northward, in Samaria, Galilea, from Gibcon to Mount Libanus, and from the River Jordan to the Great Sea, which in circuit contains two hundred eighty miles. 28. Thence returned to Gilgal, threescore and twelve miles, Josh. 14.15. 29. Thence to Shiloh, twelve miles, Josh. 18. 30. Thence to Timnah Sera, eight miles, Josh. 19. 31. Thence to Sichem, forty miles, Josh. 24. 32. Thence to Timnah Sera again, forty miles, where he died and was buried, Josh. 24. So all the Travels of Prince Joshua were two thousand three hundred fourscore and twelve miles. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's Church-Yard, near the little North-Door, 1680. At which Place you may be furnished with most sorts of bound or stitched Books, as Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Speeches, Declarations, Letters, Orders, Commissions, Articles: As also Books of Divinity, Church-Government, Sermons, and most sorts of Histories, Poetry, Plays, and such like.
