P2487 [ocn]489263235 208670
The Jovial Marriner; OR, The Sea-mans Renown. Sail forth bold Sea-men, plough the Liquid Main, Fear neither storms nor Pirats, strive for gain. Whilst others sleep at home in a whole skin, Your brave adventures shall great honour win. To the Tune of, I am a Jovial Batchelor, &c. J.P. woodcut of sailing ships I am a Jovial Marriner our calling is well known. We trade with many a Forreigner to purchase high renown, We serve our Country faithfully and bring home store of Gol; We do our business manfully, for we are frée and bold: A Sea-man hath a valiant heart and bears a noble minde: He scorneth once to shrink or start, for any stormy wind. 'Tis known what hardship we indure abroad upon the Seas: Whilst others sléep at home secure, nd spend their time in ease, We seldome dare lie down so rest lest danger should ensue: Our beads with care is sore opprest, beleeve me this is true, A Sea-man hath a valiant heart, &c. A Cowardly spirit must not think to prove a Sea-man bold; For to be sure he may not shrink in dangers manifold: When Sea-fights happen on the Main, and dreadful Canons rore. Then an men fight or else be slain for we have no back door. A Sea-man hath, &c. 'Tis Sea-men stout that doth desere both honour and renown, In perils great we may not swerve though Neptune séem to frown: If once his curled front we spy drencht in the foamy brine; Then each man doth his busiess ply there's none that doth repine. A Sea-man hath, &c. When angry Billows brash the Skye, most hideous to behold, Then up our Ships are tost on hye, and with the waves are roull'd; When tempests fierce our sails doth tear and rends the Masts a sunder, O! then we have reat cause to fear or else it were a wonder. A Sea-man hath, &c. Great Rocks which lye amongst the waves doth threten us with deah And many Sea-men finde their Graves in Sands which are bent, To sée the Masts of Ships appear, which hath been cast away, Would make a Land-man dye for fear, 'tis best at home to stay. A Sea-man hth a valiant heart and bears a noble mnde: He scorneth once to shrink or start, for any stormy wind. The Second Part, To the same Tune. stock woodcut of couple on bed BRave England hath been much inricht by Art of Navigation: Great store of wealth we home have fetcht tor to adorn our Nation: Our Merchants sti we do supply with Traffick that is rare, Then Sea-men cast your caps on high we are without compare, A Sea-man hath a valiant heart, and bears a noble minde▪ He scorneth once to slinch o start for any stormy wind. Who should the Ladies pallats pleale with Spices of the best? If Sea-men all should take their ease and stay at home to rest: Our Gallants they would finde a want of sils to make them fine And tearing boyes no more would rant if once they wanted wine, A Sea-man hath, &c. Our Land it would in vaded be if Sea-men were not stout; We let our friends come in you see and keep our foes without; Our priviledge upon the Seas we bravely do maintain, And can enlarge it when we please in Royal Charles his Reign. A Sea-man hath, &c. Such Countries as do lie remote doth tremble at our fame: For we hve taught them all to note tis England bears the Name: In  parts where ere we come o cur is well known, What ere they he they dare not mumm if we say all's our own, A Sea man hath, &c. When us our Ships with Merchandize are safely come to shore, No men like as under the Skies to drink, to sing, and rore▪ Good wine and beer we freely toye, until the ground look blew: We value neither Turk nor Pope, we are a jovial crew, A Sea-man hath, &c. We kiss our wives when we return, who long for us did wit: And he that  ngle needs not mourn, he cannot want a mate. Young women still are wondrous kinde to Sea-men in their need; And sure if shews a courteous minde, to do a friendly deed, A Sa man hath &c. With pretty curious dainty knacks, we please the females we: We know what longing women lacks, most surely we can tell A Sea-man is a Cock oth' Game, Young Maidens finde it true: We never are so much to blame, to let them want their due. A Sea-man hath, &c. Thus Gallant Sea-men I have spread abroad your high renown: Which shall survive when you are dead, and gain a lasting Crown; Your praise so future ages shall most gloriously appear, Then courage Noble Sea-men all 'tis you I love most dear. A Sea-man hath a valiant heart and bears a noble minde: He sorneth once to shrink or start, for any stormy wind. Finis. London, Printed for T. Passenger, on London-Bridge. With priviledge.
