10755 99837630 1966
Deo Amicis{que} Amor Innocentia Prudentia Resolues Diuine, Morall Politicall by Owin Felltham Hor. ser. lib. jo. His ego Comodius, quam tu praeclare Senator millibus at{que} alijs Ʋiuo. London Printed for Henry Seile LEX EVAN FIDES
TO THE MOST VERTVOVS, DISCREET, AND Noble; the Lady DORO∣THY CRANE, daughter to the right Honorable, and Religious, the Lord HOBART. MADAME, IF euer Reso∣lutions were needfull, I thinke they
be in this Age of loose∣nesse; wherein, 'twere some vnhappinesse to bee good, did not the Consciousnesse of her owne worth, set vertue firme, against all dis∣heartnings. This makes her of so specious a glo∣rie, that though shee need not the applause of any, to adde to her happinesse; yet she at∣tracts the hearts of all that know her, to Loue, Seruice, Admira∣ration.
That I haue sa∣cred this offertory of my thoughts to your Ladyship, this is reason inough; if not, your Loue to my dearest friend, may second it. To apparell any more in these paper vest∣ments, I should multi∣ply impertinents; and perhaps displease. For I haue euer found face∣commendation to dye Wisedomes cheeke of a blush-colour. Discreet
Nature is alway mo∣dest, and deseruing best, loues least to heare on't. This onely I will truely adde: that I know not the thing of that value, should make me shrine vp a worke of this na∣ture, to any, in whom I could obserue, the pos∣sibility of a faile in Ver∣tue. Such a Dedication were to put Vertue to a Stepdame, that would not nurse, but stifle her. With your Goodnesse, I
am sure, shee shall finde the tendernesse of a ma∣ternall loue. And if in these weake extracti∣ons, your Iudicious eye light you to ought, in∣creasing that affection (all by-respects put a∣way) my next Petition will bee: that it may please you to command Your immutable seruant, OW. FELTHAM.
TO THE PERVSER. TO beginne with Apologies, and intreate a kinde Gensure, were to dispa∣rage the Worke, and begge partialitie: e∣quall with Ostentation I ranke them both. If thou
bee'st wise, pleasing words cannot blinde thy iudge∣ment from discerning er∣rors, wheresoeuer they ap∣peare. If thou bee'st foo∣lish, they can neither blāch thy folly, nor make thee thinke better, than thy in∣discretion leades thee to. Requests from others, may sway our words, or a∣ctions; but our mindes will haue their owne free thoughts, as they appre∣hend the thing. Internall iudgement is not easily
peruerted. In what thou shalt heere meete with, vse the freedome of thy natiue opinion: Et Lectorem, et Correctorem liberum volui. I shall euer pro∣fesse my selfe his debtor, that greets me with repre∣hensions of Loue. The noblest part of a friend, is an honest boldnesse in the noting of errors. He that tells me a fault, ayming at my good; I must thinke him wise and faithfull: wise, in spying that which
I see not: faithfull, in a plaine admonishment, not tainted with flattery. That I haue made it publique, I pleade not the importuni∣tie of friends: that were to play at Hazzard for folly, if it prooue not. I writ it without incourage∣ment from another; and as I writ it, I send it a∣broade. Rare, I know it is not: Honest, I am sure it is: Though thou findest not to admire, thou maist to like. What I aime at in
it, I confesse, hath most re∣spect to my selfe; That I might out of my owne Schoole take a lesson, should serue mee for my whole Pilgrimage: and if I should wander from these rests, that my owne Items might set me in hea∣uens direct way againe. We doe not so readily run into crimes, that from our owne mouth haue had sen∣tence of Condemnation. Yet, as no Phisician can be so abstemious, as to follow
strictly all his owne pre∣scriptions: So I thinke there is no Christian so much his minds master, as to keepe precisely all his resolutions. They may bet∣ter shewe what hee would be, then what he is. Na∣ture hath too slow afoote, to follow Religion close at the heele. Who can ex∣pect, our dull flesh should wing it with the flights of the soule? He is not a good man that liues perfect; but hee that liues as well as he
can, and as humane fraileties will let him. He that thus farre striues not, neuer began to bee vertuous; nor knowes he those transcending ioyes, that continually feast in the noble-minded man. All the externall pleasures that mortality is capable of, can neuer enkindle a flame, that shall so brauely warme the soule, as the loue of vertue, & the cer∣taine knowledge of the rule we haue ouer our own
wild passions. That I might curbe those, I haue writ these: and if in them, thou find'st a line may mend thee; I shall thinke I haue diuulg'd it to pur∣pose. Reade all, and vse thy mindes libertie; how thy suffrage falls, I weigh not: For it was not writ so much to please others, as to profit my selfe. Farewell.
Ad Librum: —Quid miser egi? Quid volui? Dices.
RESOLVES: DIVINE, MORALL, PO∣LITICALL. I. IDLE bookes are nothing else, but cor∣rupted tales in Inke and Paper: or indeed Vice sent abroad with a Licence: which makes him that
reades them, conscious of a double iniurie: they be∣ing in effect, like that besti∣all sinne of brutish Adulte∣rie. For if one reades, two are catched: hee that an∣gles in these waters, is sure to strike the Torpedo, that in stead of beeing his food, confounds him. Besides the time il spent in them, a two-fold reason shall make me refraine: both in regard of my loue to my owne soule, & pitie vnto his that made them. For if I be corrupted by them, the Comprisor of them is mediately a cause of my ill: and at the day of Reckoning (though now
dead) must giue an accoūt for't, because I am corrup∣ted by his bad example which hee leaues behinde him; So I become guilty by receiuing, and hee by thus conuaying this lewd∣nesse vnto me: Hee is the thiefe, I the recieuer; and what difference makes our Law betwixt them? If one be cut off, the other dyes; both I am sure perish alike. I will write none, lest I hurt them that come after me. I will reade none, lest I aug∣ment his mulct that is gone before me: neither write, nor read, lest I proue a foe to my selfe. A lame hand
is better then a lewde pen: while I liue, I sinne too much; let me not continue longer in wickednesse, then life. If I write ought, it shall be both on a good subiect, and from a deliberated pen: for a foolish sentence drop't vpon paper, sets folly on a Hill, and is a monu∣ment, to make infamie eter∣nall. II. The humble man is the surest Peace-maker: of all morall vertues, Humility is the most beautifull; shee both shunnes Honor, and is the way to it: she rockes
Debate asleepe, and keepes peace waking, nay, doth foster, doth cherrish her: which is well expressed in a pretty story of two goats, that met at once, on a very narrow Bridge, vnder which there glided a deepe, and violent streame: being both met, the straitnesse gaue deniall to their Iour∣ney; get backe they could not, the planke was too nar∣row, for their returning turne: stand still they might, but that could nei∣ther bee continuall, nor to purpose: and to fight for the way in so perillous a place, was either to put a
wilfull period to their liues, or extremely hazard them. That they may therefore both passe in safety, the one lyes down, & th' other goes ouer him: so while their passage is quiet, their liues are secure, from death, from danger. I haue euer thought it idle to continue in strife; if I get the victory, it satis∣fies my minde, but then, shal I haue his malice too, which may endamage me more: so my gaine will bee lesse then my hindrance: If I be ouercome vnwillingly, thē is the disgrace mine, and the losse: and though I haue not his malice, yet
shall I not want his scorne. I will (in things not weigh∣ty) submit freely: The pu∣rest gold is most ductible: tis commonly a good blade that bends well. If I expect disaduantage, or misdoubt the Conquest, I thinke it good wisedome, to giue in soonest; so shall it be more honor to doe that willing∣ly, which with stiffenesse I cannot but hazard vpon compulsion. I had rather be accounted too much humble, then esteemed a little proud: the Reede is better that bends, and is whole; then the strong Oake, that not bending,
breakes: If I must haue one, giue me an inconuenience, not a mischiefe: the light∣est burthen, is the easiest borne. III. To make a perfect man, there is requisite both Re∣ligion & Nature. Nature a∣lone we know too loose: re∣ligion alone will seeme too hard; some for Religion haue I knowne formall, strict; yet haue so wanted the pleasing parts of a good nature, as they haue beene feared, but not loued: for being of a fiery spirit, euen slender occasions haue
made way to the divulging of their own imperfections: either by too seuere a re∣prehension, or else by too soone sodaine Contempt: both which make much for the harbouring of hate a∣gainst themselues, by ma∣king them esteemed either rash Censurers, or angry proud ones: and wee all know, that as Iudgement is neuer shot suddenly but from a fooles bow; so blind Choller broke into expres∣sion, is the true marke of an intemperate minde; others there yet rest, whom it tic∣kles much to chatter of their own merits, and they
cannot lay an egge, but they must cackle, or like the boasting PHARISEE, trumpet out the report of their owne praises: if not out of an affected singulari∣ty, and an ouerweening o∣pinion of their owne excel∣lence; yet for lacke of an humble and discret nature, that should cause their ob∣seruation bee busied at home. And this is that makes the world disdaine, contemne them: selfe com∣mendation is an arrow with too many feathers: which, we leuelling at the marke, is taken with the wind, and carryed quite
from it. Some againe for nature, I haue found rarely qualified: ennobled with such a mild affability, such a generous spirit, and such sweetnesse of disposition, and demeanour, that their humble & courteous carri∣age haue preuailed much in the affection of those with whom they haue had com∣merce: yet because they haue wanted Religion (that like a good subiect should make an elaborate worke rare) they haue, onely in a superficiall applause, wonne the approbation of the vn∣steady multitude: who loue them more for suffering
their rudenesse, then for a∣ny noble worth, that's obui∣ous to their vndiscerning Iudgements. But in all this they haue got no reue∣rence, no respect at all. Thus Religion without Nature (in men meerely naturall) begets a certaine forme of awfull regard: but to them 'tis like a tyrannical Prince, whom the people obey more for feare of an austere rebuke, then for any true affection, they beare to his person. Now Nature with∣out Religion oft wins loue: and this is like a Master too familiar with his seruant: that in the beginning gains
loue, but shall in the end find contempt: and his to∣leration will be made an al∣lowance of ill. Both toge∣ther are rare for qualificati∣on. Nature hath in her selfe treasure enough to please a man; Religion a Christian: the last begets feare, the o∣ther loue, together admi∣ration, reuerence. I will like, I will loue them sin∣gle; but conioyn'd, I will affect and honour. IIII. I finde, to him that the tale is told, beliefe onely makes the difference be∣twixt a truth, and lyes: for
a lye beleeued, is true: and truth vncredited, a lye; vn∣lesse he can carry his pro∣bation in's pocket, or more readily at his tongues end: for as he that tels a smooth lye, is iudged to speake truth, till some step forth to contradict his vtterance: so hee that tels an vnlikely truth, is thought to broch a lye, vnlesse he can produce conuincing reason to proue it; onely the guilt, or iustice of the thing rests in the knowing conscience of the Relator. In the hearer I can∣not count it a fault: 'tis ea∣sie to bee deceiued in mira∣cles, in probabilities: al∣beit
the iudgement that passeth on them, bee both honest, wise, apprehensiue, and cleere. In the teller iustly; if it bee a lye, there needs no text to confute it; if it seeme so, and he can∣not purge it, discretiō were better silent. I will tell no lies, lest I bee false to my selfe: no improbable truths, lest I seeme so to others; If I heare any man report won∣ders, what I know, I may haply speake; what I but think, shal rest with my self; I may aswell be too suspici∣ous, as ouer credulous.
V. Three things are there which aggrauate a miserie, and make an euill feeme greater then indeede it is. Inexpectation, Vnacquain∣tance, want of Preparation. Inexpectation, when a mis-hap comes suddenly, and vnlooked for: it distracteth the minde, and scares both the faculties and affections from their due consultation of remedy: whereas an e∣uill foreseene is halfe cured, because it giueth warning to prouide for danger. Thus the falling of a house is more perillous, than the ri∣sing
of a floud: for, while of the former, the hurt is more vnauoydable, by rea∣son both of the violence, and precipitation: The lat∣ter, through the remissenes of comming, is lesse dange∣rous, lesse preiudiciall; there being time, either to auoyd the place, or to counter∣mure. If this suffice not, think but how odious trea∣son would shew in a deare friend, from whom we only expected the sweet embra∣ces of loue: the conceit onely is able to kill, like a madde Dogg's biting, that not onely wounds the bo∣dy, but insaniates the soule.
Secondly, Vnacquaintāce. Familiaritie takes away feare, when matters not v∣suall, proue inductions to terror. The first time the Fox saw the Lyon, hee fea∣red him as death: the se∣cond, hee feared him, but not so much: the third time hee grew more bold, and passed by him without qua∣king. The Imbellicke pea∣sant, when hee comes first to the field, shakes at the report of a Musket: but af∣ter he hath rang'd thorow the furie of two or three Battels, he then can feare∣lesse stand a breach; and dares, vndaūted, gaze death
in the face. Thirdly, want of preparation. When the enemie besiegeth a Citie, not prepared for Warre, there is small hope of euasi∣on, none at all to conquer, none to ouercome. How much more hard is the win∣ter to the Grashopper, then the Pismire, who before, ha∣uing stor'd her Garner, is now able to withstand a fa∣mine? Lest then, I make my death seem more terrible to me, then indeed it is; I will first daily expect it: that when it comes, I may not be to seeke to entertaine it: if not with ioy, as beeing but flesh: yet without sor∣row,
as hauing a soule. Se∣condly, I will labour to be acquainted with it, often before it come, thinking it may come: so whē I know it better, I shal better sustaine it: with lesse feare, without terror. Thirdly, I will pre∣pare for it, by casting vp my accounts with God, that all things euen and streight betwixt vs, when∣soeuer he shall please to call for me, I may as willingly lay down my life, as leaue a prison. Thus shall I make my death lesse dreadfull, and finish my life before I dye. He that dyes dayly, seldome dyes dijectedly.
VI. A good beginning haue I oftē seen cōclude ill. Sin in the bud is faire, sweet, plea∣sing: but the fruit is death, horror, hell. Something will I respect in my way, most in my Conclusion: in the one, to preuent all wilfull errors; in the other, to insure a Crowne. For as Iudgement hath relation to the manner of dying; so hath death dependance on the course of liuing. Yet the good end hath no bad beginning; it once had. A good consequence makes the premises so esteemed of, and a sweete rellish at the
leauing off, makes the draught delightfull, that at the first did taste vnplea∣sant. That is well that ends well: and better is a bad beginning that concludes well, then a prosperous on∣set that ends in complaint. What if my beginning hath been ill? sorrowes ouer∣blowne, are pleasant; that which hath beene hard to suffer, is sweet to remēber. I will not much care what my beginning be, so my end be happy. If my Sunne set in the new Ierusalem, I haue liu'd well, how-euer afflictions haue sometimes clouded my course.
VII. Extreme longings in a Christian, I seldome see succeed well: surely God meanes so to temper his, as hee would not haue their affections violent, in the search of a temporall bles∣sing: or else hee knowes our frailety such, as wee would be more taken with the fruition of a benefit, then the Author. Prosperi∣ties are strong pleaders for sinne: Troubles be the su∣rest Tutors of goodnesse. How many would haue dy∣ed ill, if they had liu'd mer∣rily? GOD hath seuerall
wayes to reduce his to his own orders, among which, I am perswaded none is more powerfull, then re∣straint of our wils. It sends the soule to meditation, wherby she sees the worlds follies in such true colours of vanitie, that no sound discretion can thinke them worth the doting on: and though our discontent∣ments so transport vs, as we see not the good we reape by a Depriuation: yet sure wee are happier by this want: for wee are all like women with Child, if wee had the things we long for; how soone should we eate
and surfet? When nature findes her ardent desires fulfilled, shee is rauenous, and greedy; yea then shee hath so little moderation, as 'tis not safe to satisfie her. If I can, I will neuer ex∣tremely couet: so though I meet with a Crosse, it shal neither distemper, nor di∣stract mee: but if my de∣sires out-strip my intenti∣on, I will comfort my selfe with this, that the enioy∣ment might haue added to my content, and endange∣red my soule: but the want shall in the end be a meanes to embetter them both. Gods Saints shall with ioy
subscribe to his wil: though heere for a time it may seeme to thwart them. VIII. A worthy Act hath hee done, that hath learned to refraine his tongue: and surely much euill hath hee preuented, if hee knowes when to be well silent. Vn∣kindnesses breed not so ma∣ny Iarres, as the multiply∣ing of words that follow them. How soone would these coales dye, if the tongue did not enkindle them? Repentance often followes speaking; silence either seldome, or neuer:
for while our words are many, sinne is in some, in most. Goe to the Crane, thou Babbler, reade her sto∣rie, and let her inform thee: who flying out of Sicily, puts little stones in her mouth, lest by her owne garrulitie, she bewray her selfe as a prey to the Eagles of the mountaine Taurus: which with this policy, she flyes ouer in safety: euen si∣lence euery where is a safe safeguard: if by it, I offend, I am sure I offend without a witnesse: while an vnruly tongue may procure my ru∣ine, and prooue as a sword to cut the thrid of my life
in two: 'tis good alwayes to speake well, & in season: and is it not as safe some∣times to say nothing? hee that speakes little, may mend it soone: and though hee speakes most faults, yet hee exceedes not, for his words were few. To speake too much, bewrayes folly; too little, an vnperceiuing stupiditie: I will so speake, as I may be free from bab∣bling Garrulitie: so bee si∣lent, as my Spectators may not account me blockishly dull. Silence and speech are both as they are vsed, either tokens of Indiscretion, or badges of Wisedome.
IX. 'Tis a hard thing among men of inferiour ranke, to speak to an earthly Prince: no King keepes a Court so open, as to giue admittance to all commers: and though they haue, they are not sure to speede; albeit there bee nothing that should make their petitiōs not grantable. Oh how happy, how pri∣uiledged is then a Christi∣an? who though he often liues heere in a slight e∣steeme, yet can hee freely conferre with the King of Heauen, who not onely heares his intreaties, but de∣lights
in his requests, inuites him to come, and promi∣seth a happy welcome; which he shewes in fulfil∣ling his desires, or better, fitter for him. In respect of whō, the greatest Monarch is more base, then the ba∣sest vassaile in regard of the most mighty and puissant Emperour. Man cannot so much exceede a beast, as God doth him: what if I be not known to the Nim∣rods of the world, and the Peeres of the earth? I can speake to their better, to their Master; and by pray∣er bee familiar with him: importunity does not an∣ger
him; neither cāanything but our sins make vs goe a∣way empty; while the game is playing, there is much differēce between the King and the Pawne: that once ended, they are both shuf∣fled into the bag together: akd who can say whether was most happy, saue onely the King had many checks, while the little Pawne was free, and secure? My com∣fort is, my accesse to heauen is as free as the Princes; my departure from earth not so grieuous: for while the world smiles on him, I am sure I haue lesse reason to loue it then hee. Gods fa∣uour
I will chiefly seeke for; mans, but as it fals in the way to it: when it proues a hindrance, I hate to be loued. X. The vertuous man is a true wonder: for it is not from himselfe, that hee is so. But that I see so many wicked, I meruaile not. 'Tis easier running downe the hill, then climing it. They that are this way giuen, haue much the aduantage of them, that follow good∣nesse. Besides those incli∣nations that sway the soule to vice, the way is broader,
and more ready: hee that walkes through a large field, hath onely a narrow path, to guide him right in the way: but on either side, what a wide roome he hath to wander in? Euery ver∣tue hath two vices, that close her vp in curious li∣mits: and if shee swerues, though but a little, she sud∣denly steps into errour. Fortitude hath Feare, and Rashnesse: Liberalitie, Auarice, and Prodigalitie: Iustice hath Rigor, and Par∣tialitie. Thus euery good mistresse, hath two bad ser∣uants: which hath made some to define vertue, to
bee nothing, but a meane betweene two vices, wher∣of one leads to excesse, the other to defect: making her like the roofe of a Church, on whose top, wee scarce find roome to turne a foote in: but on either side, a broad road to ruine: in which, if we once be fal∣ling, our stay is rare, our re∣couery a miracle. The man that is rare in vice, I will ne∣uer admire: if he goes but as hee is driuen, hee may soone be witty in euill: but the good man, I will wor∣thily magnifie: he it is can saile against the wind, make the thorny way pleasant,
and vnintangle the incum∣cumbrances of the world. XI. What sinne is there, that we may account or little, or veniall, vnlesse compara∣tiuely? seeing there is none so small, but that (without repentance) is able to sinke the soule in eternall Dam∣nation? Who will thinke that a slight wound, which giues a sodaine Inlet to Death? But should wee grant this errour, yet these of all other, I obserue the most dangerous, both for their frequency, and secre∣cie; the one increasing
them to a large heape, the other so couering them, as we see not how they wrōg vs: The raine that fals in smallest drops, moistens the earth, makes it mire, slimy, and durte: whereas a hard showre, that descēds violēt∣ly, washeth away, but soakes not in. Euen the smallest letters are more hurtfull to the sight, then those that are written with a text pen. Great sinnes, and publicke, I will auoide for their scan∣dal & wonder: lesser & pri∣uate, for their danger, and multitude: both, because my God hates them. I cannot, if I loue him, but
abhorre, what hee loathes. XII. Memory and forgetful∣nesse, are both in friendship necessary. Let me remem∣ber those kindnesses my friend hath done to mee, that I may see his loue, and learne gratitude. Let mee forget those benefits I haue performed to him, lest they shuffle out the effect of my loue, and tell mee hee is re∣quited. Thus may we to∣gether increase our friend∣ship, and comforts: other∣wise, a man may haue ma∣ny acquaintances, but no friends; though vnthanke∣fulnes
banisheth loue, Gra∣titude obtaines a repeale∣ment. XIII. I obserue, besides the in∣ward Contents of a peace∣able cōscience, two things, wherein a Christian excels all other men. In true Va∣lour: In Fidelitie. In true Valour; that is, in a iust quarrell: for if his cause bee naught, there is none more timerous then hee; and indeed to shew much Courage, in a bad matter, is rather a token of despe∣rate folly, then any badge of a magnanimous minde; but in a iust cause, he is bold
as a Lyon. Nothing can daunt his euer vndaunted minde. Not Infamy, for he knowes in this, his share is not worse then his Masters; & while it is for his names sake; he knowes he is in it, blessed. If there bee any Nectar in this life, 'tis in sorrowes wee indure for goodnesse. Besides, hee weighes not how he fals to the world, and men; so he may stand firme, to his hea∣uenly Father. That God we fight for, is able enough to vindicate al our wrongs. Not afflictions; how many did Iob, and the Apostles wade through with Cou∣rage,
with Content? These he knowes are heere but for a time, transient, and mo∣mentany; neither shall the Israelites liue alwayes, vn∣der the tyranny of Pharaoh, or the trauels of the Wil∣dernes: He knowes also, the more abundant in sorrowes heere, the more abundant in ioyes hereafter; His teares shall returne in smiles, his weepings in a streame of pleasures. God doth not re∣compence with a niggard∣ly hand; hee shall finde his ioyes as an ouer-flowing Sea; and his glory beyond thought, exuberant. Not Death; for he knowes, that
wil be his happiest day; and his bridge, from woe, to glory. Though it bee the wicked mans shipwracke, 'tis the good mans putting into harbour: where stri∣king sayles, and casting Anchor, he returnes his la∣ding with aduantage, to the owner; that is, his soule to God; leauing the bulke still mored in the Hauen; who is vnrigg'd, but onely to be new built againe, and fitted for an eternall voyage. Had not Christians had this so∣lace; how should the Mar∣tyrs haue dyed so merrily, leaping for ioy, that they were so neere their home,
and their heauen? dying of∣ten like Samson among his enemies, more victory at∣tending their end, then pro∣ceedings. Ah peerelesse Va∣liance! vnconquerable For∣titude! Secondly, in Fide∣litie. There is no friendship like the friendship of Faith. Nature, Educatiō, Benefits, cannot all together, tye so strong as this. Christianitie knits more sure, more in∣dissoluble. This makes a knot, that Alexander cannot cut. For as grace in her selfe, is farre aboue nature; so likewise is she, in her ef∣fects: and therefore vnites, in a far more durable bond.
And a Christian, though he would resolue with him∣selfe, to deale double; yet if he be sincere, in spight of his resolution, his consci∣ence will rate him, checke him, and deny him to doe it; nay, though he would, he cannot resolue. He that is borne of God, sinnes not; and the Spirit of sanctifica∣tion will not let him re∣solue vpon ill. This is that Fidelity that wee finde, and admire in many, that haue chosen rather to embrace the flame, & dye in silence, then to reueale their Com∣panions, and Brethren in Christ. Tyrants shal sooner
want inuention for tor∣ments, then they with tor∣tures be made treacherous. The League that heauen hath made, hell wants power to breake. Who can separate the coniunctions of the Deitie? Againe, as well in reproofe, as in kind∣nesse, doth his loue ap∣peare. For howsoeuer hee conceales his friends faults, from the eye of the world; yet hee affectionately tels him of them, in priuate: not without some sorrow on his owne part, for his brothers fall. He scornes to be so base as to flatter: and he hates to bee so currish as
to bite. In his reprehensi∣ons, he mingles Oyle and Vineger: hee is in them, plaine, and louing. Inuio∣lable amitie! Inualuable loue! Heere is met Cou∣rage and Constancy; one to withstand an Enemie, an other to entertaine a friend. Giue me any foe, rather thē a resolued Christian: no friend, vnlesse a man truely honest. A father is a ready treasurie; a brother an in∣fallible comfort; but a friend is both. XIIII. I will in all losses, looke both to what I haue lost,
and to what I haue left. To what I haue lost: that if it may be, and be good, I may recouer it: if not, that I may know what I haue for∣gone. To what I haue left: that if it be much, I may be thankefull, that I lost no more, hauing so much, that I might haue been depriued of: if little, that I may not repine; because I haue yet something: if nothing but my life, that I may then be glad: because that will bee the next thing I shall lose. Which whensoeuer it hap∣pens will with double Ioy recompence all the rest. Gods presence is aboun∣dant
plenty: hauing that, I know nor want, nor losse, nor admission of ill. XV. A man that would esta∣blish a troubled gouern∣ment, must first vanquish all his foes. Factious heads, must bee higher by a Pole then their bodies. For how will the Folds bee quiet, while yet among them, there bee some Wolues? Hee that would rule ouer many, must fight with ma∣ny, and conquer: and be fure, either to cut off those that raise vp tumults: or by a Maiesticke awe, to
keepe them in a strict sub∣iection. Slacknesse, and conniuence, are the ruines of vnsettled Kingdomes. My passions, and affections are the chiefe disturbers of my Ciuill State: What peace can I expect within mee, while these Rebels rest vnouercome? If they get a head, my Kingdome is diuided, so it cannot stand. Separations are the wounds of a Crowne; whereby (neglected) it will bleed to death. Them will I striue to subdue. If I cut them not off, I will yet re∣straine them. 'Tis no cruel∣ty, to deny a Traytor li∣bertie.
I will haue them be my Subiects, not my Prince: they shall serue mee, and I will sway them. If it cannot bee without much striuing; I am con∣tent with a hard combate, that I may haue a happie raigne. 'Tis better I endure a short skirmish, then a long siege: hauing once wonne the field, I will hope to keepe it. XVI. Death to a righteous man, whether it commeth soone, or late, is the begin∣ning of ioy, and the end of sorrow. I will not much
care, whether my life bee long, or short. If short; the fewer my dayes bee, the lesse shall bee my misery, the sooner shall I be happy. But if my yeeres be many, that my head waxe gray, euen the long expectation of my happinesse, shall make my ioy more wel∣come. XVII. 'Twas anciently said, that whatsoeuer good worke a man doth with labour, the labour vanisheth, but the good remaines with him that wrought it. And what∣soeuer euill thing hee doth
with pleasure, the pleasure flyes, but the euill still rest∣eth with the Actor of it: goodnesse making labour sweet; euill turning plea∣sure to a burthen. I wil not care how laborious, but how honest; not how plea∣surable, but how good my actions be. If it could bee, let mee bee good with∣out pleasure; rather then lewd, with much ioy. For though my good bee at first tedious; I am sure in time it will yeeld me con∣tent: whereas the euill that now is delightfull, cannot but prooue a woe to my soule. The sweetest liquor,
is not alwayes the most wholesome. The Limon is more tart, yet excelleth the Orenge, that delighteth the taste: poison may a while seeme pleasant, and a weake stomacke thinke a Cordiall fulsome. XVIII. What if I were the worlds chiefe Fauourite? endowed with the choy∣cest ornaments her Trea∣sury could affoord mee, a∣dorn'd with beauty, im∣bellisht with a faire propor∣tion, in policie subtill, in alliance great, in reuenue large, in knowledge rich,
famed with honor, and ho∣nored with attendants; and to all these, had adioyned the prolonged yeeres of Methusalah, yet if I wan∣ted grace to vse these gra∣ces right, they would all turne to my greater dis∣grace and confusion. Good parts imployed ill, are wea∣pons, that being meant for our owne defence, we mad∣ly turne their edges, and wound our selues: they might make mee faire in show, but in substance more polluted: they would bee but as a saddle of gold to the backe of a gall'd horse; adorne mee, they might,
better mee they could not. Grace onely can make a man truely happy: what shee affordeth, can content sufficiently; and with ease furnish the vast roomes of the mind: without her, all are nothing; with her, euen the smallest is true sufficien∣cie: how fully can she bee rich, in the penury of these outward royalties? some∣thing indeed they adde to her ornament, but 'tis from her, that they assume their goodnesse. For though heauen hath made them so in their owne nature, yet is it from her that they proue so to me. Doe we not oft∣ner
finde them, lights to blind vs, then to direct vs? I will neuer thinke my selfe neerer heauen, for hauing so much of earth. A weake house with a heauie roofe is most in danger. He that gets heauen, hath plenty e∣nough; though the earth scornes to allow him any thing: he that failes of that, is truely miserable; though shee giue him all shee hath. Heauē without earth is per∣fect. Earth without Heauen, is but a little more cheer∣ly hell. Who haue beene more splendent in these ex∣ternall florishes, then Hea∣then? but in the other, 'tis
the Christian onely can challenge a felicity. Hauing these, I might winne ap∣plause with men; but the other wanting, I shall neuer gaine approbation vvith God. And what wil all their allowance auaile, when the Earths Creator shall Iudge and Condemn? 'tis a poore reliefe in misery, to be one∣ly thought well of, by those that cannot helpe me. XIX. Is not man born to trou∣ble, as the sparkes flye vp∣ward? is not his time short, and miserable, his dayes few, and euill? What mad∣nesse
then were it in me, to hope for a freedome from sorrowes, or to thinke my selfe exempt from the com∣mon appointment of the most High? It hath beene censured as phrensie, to vndertake to expell nature; what shall I thinke it, to hope to frustrate the de∣signement of the Lord of Nature? Humanitie, and misery, are alwayes para∣lels: sometimes indiuidu∣als: and therefore when wee vvould put sorrow in an Embleme, we paint him a man. If I haue but few Crosses, I vvill truely then account my selfe fauoured:
if I haue many, and be som∣times free, Ile thinke I e∣scape well, beeing so vnto∣ward. If I haue nothing but troubles; yet may I not complaine: because my sinne hath deseru'd more, then heere I can bee able to suffer. Had I but a being, though full of woe, yet vvere I beholding to God for it. His very least, and meanest gift, exceedeth much, euen all, my best de∣sert. I doe infinitely want, how to merit a permission to liue. XX. To haue euery man speak
vvell of me, is impossible: because howsoeuer I carry my selfe, some Cynick will barke at my course. Who can scape the lash of Cen∣sure? If I should be vitious, and profuse, I should bee loued of some; but not the best, not the good. If I should Camelion-like, change my selfe to euery obiect, if I were not extra∣ordinarily vvarie, I might soon counterfet some mans humour false, and that would bane my drift. For both to Vertue, and to Vice, is Flatterie a false glasse, making the one seeme greater, the other
lesse then it is: and if it lights on a noble discreti∣on, it is euer so vnhappy, as to beget the ruine of it selfe. But I imagine I could doe it with such exactnesse, that euen the eye of Lyncaeus could not espy it: yet when one should commend mee for one thing, and another for the contrary; vvhat vvould the vvorld thinke of mee, that could thus in one, bee hot, and cold? should I not be censured as a Tymorist? Yes surely, and that iustly: neither could it but be iust with God, at last to vnmaske my Flatte∣rie, and vnrip my folly, in
the view of the multitude. Priuate sinnes are punisht with a publike shame. A supposed honest man found lewd, is hated as a growne Monster, discouered by the blabbe of Time. Sinne is a concealed fire, that euen in darknesse will so worke, as to bewray it selfe. If I liue vertuously, and with piety, the world will hate me, as a Separatist: and my Repu∣tation will be traduced, by the Ignominious aspersion of maleuolent tongues. To be good, is now thought too neere a way to con∣tempt: That which the Ancients admired, wee
laugh at. A good honest man is a foole. What then? shall I, to please a man, dis∣please a Christian? I had rather liue hated for good∣nesse, then bee loued for Vice. Hee does better that pleaseth one good man, then hee that contents a thousand bad ones. I would, if it could be, please all: yet I would winne their loues vvith honesty: otherwise, let their hate wound mee, rather then their loue im∣brace. What care I for his friendship, that affected not vertue? hauing his hate, he may hurt mee outwardly: but inioying his loue, I will
iustly suspect my soule of some ill. For if his affection be toward me, 'tis sure be∣cause hee sees somthing in mee, that pleaseth himselfe: but while hee sees euery thing vnlike him; how is't possible I should bee belo∣ued of him? since diuersi∣ties breed nothing but dis∣vnion: and sweet Congru∣itie is the mother of Loue. XXI. Who admires not the Wisedome of Demosthe∣nes, in the answere hee re∣turned to Corinthian Lais? [Poenitere tanti non emo.] Certainely, had hee not
knowne it from a selfe ex∣perience, 'tis not possible a Heathē should haue spake so diuinely. All our disho∣nest actions, are but ear∣nests laid downe for griefe. Vice is an infallible fore-runner of wretchednesse. Let the Worldling tell me, if he findes it not true, that all his warrantable aberra∣tions, wherein he hath di∣latedly tumbled himselfe, end at last, either in anguish, or confusion; Sinne on the best condition, brings repentance: but for sinne without repentance, is pro∣uided hell. 'Tis not folly, but madnes, euen the high∣est,
that makes a man buy his vexation. I wil force my selfe to want that willing∣ly, which I cannot enioy without future distaste. Though the Waspe falles into the hony, that after drownes her: yet the Bee chuseth rather, to goe to rhe Flowre in the field, where shee may lade her highes securely, and with leisure; then to come to the shop of the Apotheca∣rie, where shee gets more, but makes her life hazarda∣ble.
XXII. Workes without faith, are like a Salamander with∣out fire, or a fish without water: In which, though there may seeme to be some quicke actions of life, and symptomes of agilitie: yet they are indeede, but fore-runners of their end, and the very presages of death. Faith againe with∣out Workes, is like a bird without wings: who, though she may hop with her companions here vpon earth; yet if she liues til the world ends, shee'l neuer fly to heauen. But when both
are ioyn'd together, then doth the soule mount vp to the Hill of eternall Rest: these can brauely raise her to her first height: yea carry her beyond it; taking away both the will, that did be∣tray her: and the possibili∣ty that might. The former without the latter, is selfe∣coozenage: the last with∣out the former, is meere hypocrisie: together, the excellencie of Religion. Faith is the Rocke, while euery good action is as a stone laid; one the Founda∣tion; the other the structure. The Foundation without the walls, is of slender va∣lue:
the building without a Basis, cannot stand. They are so inseparable, as their coniunction makes them good. Chiefely will I la∣bour for a sure Foundation, Sauing Faith: and equally will I seeke for strong wals, Good Workes. For as man iudgeth the house by the edifice, more than by the Foundation: so, not according to his Faith, but according to his Workes, shall God iudge man. XXIII. 'Tis a rare thing to see a rich man religious; we are told, that his way is difficult:
and not many mighty are chosen. For while the earth allowes them such ioyes, 'tis their heauen; and they looke for no other: Their pleasures are sufficient vnto them, both for honour, so∣lace, and wealth: who wonders to see them care∣lesse of the better, when they dote vpon the worse? neither the minde, nor affe∣ction, can bee seriously di∣uided at once. Againe, e∣uen low Commons whom they thinke meanely of, are higher often in vertues of the minde; are dearer vn∣to God then they: & shall sit in heauen aboue them.
Are there not many ser∣uants, that in life haue born the burthen now crowned with vnending Ioyes, while their masters are either in a lower degree glorious, or excluded that coele∣stiall societie? I dare make it a part of my faith; yet a∣uouch my selfe no Here∣ticke. Euen in meanest things GOD shewes his mighty power: Impossibi∣lities are the best aduancers of his Glory. For what we least beleeue can be done, wee most admire beeing done. Yet in this obserue the mercy of God, that though the Worldling hath
not pietie in his thoughts, yet God giues him all these good things that hee hath no right to: albeit by his owne ill, he, like enuy, ex∣tracts euill out of good; so they proue in the end, no∣thing but paper pillars and painted fruite. Let all men blesse God for what they enioy: they that haue wealth, for their riches: I will praise him, that he hath kept them from me. I haue now what is good for me: and when my time comes, my ioy shall abound.
XXIIII. A vertuous man shining in the puritie of a righteous life, is a Lighthouse set by the Sea-side, whereby the Mariners both saile aright, and auoyd danger: But he that liues in noted sinnes, is a false lanthorne, which shipwrackes those that trust him. The vertuous man by his good carriage winnes more to godlines, and is the occasion of much good, yea it may bee, so long as the Moone renewes: For his righteousnes dyes not with him: those good examples which he liued in, and those
pyous workes which hee leaues behind him, are imi∣tated and followed of o∣thers, both remayning and succeeding. So they are cō∣ueyed from one generati∣on to another: and he, next God, is a primary cause of a great deale of the good they atchieue. So wee can∣not but grant, that while here his memory weares out, his glory in a better world augments daily: ei∣ther by his good presi∣dents, his pious institutions, his charitable deeds, or his godly works; each of which with Gods blessing, are a∣ble to kindle some heat in
the cold zeale of posteritie. Examples are the best and most lasting lectures; vertue the best example. Happie man that hath done these things in sincerity; Time shall not outliue his worth: He liues truely after death, whose pious actions are his pillars of remembrāce: though his flesh moulders to drosse in the graue, yet is his happinesse in a perpe∣tuall growth: no day but addes some graines to his heape of glory. Good workes are seedes, that af∣ter sowing returne vs a con∣tinuall haruest. A man liues more renowned by some
glorious deedes, then euer did that Carian, by his Mausolean monument. On the contrary, what a wofull course hath he runne, that hath liued lewdly, and dyes without repentance? his example infects others, and they spread it abroad to more; like a man that dyes on the plague, he leaues the infection to a whole Citie: So that euen the sinnes of thousands, hee must giue an account for. What can we thinke of such as haue been the inuentors of vnlawfull games, and callings that are now in vse? sure they haue much to answere for, that
thus haue occasioned so much ill: yea better had it beene, they had not beene at all, then being, to be loa∣den with the sinnes of so many. Miserable man! that when thy owne burthen is insupportable, thou yet causest others to adde to thy weight; as if thou would'st be sure desperate∣ly to make thy rising irreco∣uerable: are the waters of thy own sinnes so low, that thou must haue streames from euery place, to runne into thy Ocean? Who can without a showre of teares, thinke on thy deplorable state, or without mourning,
meditate thy sad conditi∣on? Oh! Let me so liue, as my life may be beneficiall, not hurtfull to other. Let my glory increase, when my life is done: I am sure, satietie in heauen, is not capable of either com∣plaint, or discontent: but as for spoyling others, by my owne confusion, sinne: I should think death a faire preuention. I loue not that life which makes death e∣ternall. I haue sin enough of my owne, to sigh, and sorrow, and mourne for: I need not make others mine by my owne bad actions. A little of this is too too
much; yea, he hath enough, that hath none; hee hath too much, that hath any at all. XXV. Hee deserues not com∣mendation, that for beeing commēded growes proud: euery good thing, a good man speakes of mee, shall, like the blast of a trumpet in warre, incite and incourage me, to a closer pursuit of more nobler vertue: not like Bucephalus trappings, blow mee vp in a higher conceit of ouerprizing my owne weaknes: So while some speake well, let my
deeds exceed their tougue. I had rather men should see more thē they expect, then looke for more then they shall find. XXVI. When a man hath the proiect of a course in his mind, 'tis good wisedome to resolue of secrecy, till the time his intent bee ful∣filled: neither can hee but be foolish, that brags much, either of what he will doe, or of what hee shall haue: For if what hee speakes of, falls not out accordingly, then will the world mocke him with derision and
scorne: and oftentimes his liberall tongue, may be oc∣casion of some ones sodain intercepting his aime: di∣vulged intentions seldome proceed well: multitudes make a iarre in businesses; their opinions, or Councels either distract Iudgement, or diuert resolution: But howsoeuer, if what wee boasted of commeth to passe, yet shall we be repu∣ted vain-glorious, boasters, vnwise. Bragges lift vp ex∣pectation so high, that shee ouerthinkes the birth: and many times, the childe which indeed is faire, wee thinke not so, because wee
were possest with hopes of finding it rare. Secrecy is a necessary part of policie: things vntold, are yet vn∣done: then to say nothing, there is not a lesse labour. I obserue, the Fig-tree whose fruit is most pleasant, bloomes not at all: where∣as the Sallow that hath glo∣rious palmes, is continual∣ly found Barren. I would first be so wise, as to bee my owne Councellor: next, so secret, as to bee my owne Councell-keeper. XXVII. Some men read Authors as our Gentlemen vse flo∣wers,
onely for delight and smell; to please their fancy, and refine their tongue. Others like the Bee, extract onely the hony, the whole∣some precepts, and this a∣lone they beare away, lea∣uing the rest, as little worth, of small value. In reading I will care for both; though for the last, most: the one serues to instruct the mind; the other fits her to tell what she hath learned: pit∣ty it is, they should be deui∣ded: he that hath worth in him, and cannot expresse it, is a chest keeping a rich Iewell, and the key lost. Concealing goodnesse, is
vice; vertue is better by be∣ing cōmunicated. A good stile, with wholesome mat∣ter, is a faire woman with a vertuous soule, which at∣tracts the eyes of all; The good man thinkes chastly, and loues her beauty, for her vertue; which hee still thinks more faire, for dwel∣ling in so faire an outside. The vicious man hath lust∣full thoughts; and he would for her beauty, faine de∣stroy her vertue: but com∣ming to sollicite his pur∣pose, findes such diuine le∣ctures, from her Angels tongue, and those deliuer'd with so sweet a pleasing
modesty, that he thinks ver∣tue is dissecting her soule to him, to rauish man with a beauty which he dream'd not of. So hee could now curse himselfe, for desiring that lewdly, which he hath learn'd since, onely to ad∣mire, and reuerence: Thus he goes away better, that came with an intent to bee worse. Quaint phrases on a good subiect, are baits to make an ill man vertuous: how many vile men seeking these, haue found them∣selues Conuertites? I may refine my speech without harme: but I will ende∣uour more to reforme my
life. 'Tis a good grace both of Oratory, or the Pen, to speake, or write proper: but that is the best work, where the Graces, and the Muses meet. XXVIII. Wee see in the Moone a threefold condition, her Wane, her Increase, her Full: all which, I liuely see resembled in a Christian, three causes working them: Sinne, Repentance, Faith. Sinne; vvhich after the act, vvhen he once considers, it makes him like the Moone in her Wane, or state of Decrement, obscuring, and
diminishing that glorious light of the spirit, vvhich vvhilome shined so bright∣ly in him: nay, sometimes as the Moone in her latest state of Diminution, hee seemes quite gone, resting for a time like a man in a trance, like a tree in Win∣ter, or as fire buried in con∣cealing Embers, vvithout either sence, or shew, of ei∣ther light, or heat. But then comes Repentance, and casts water in his face, be∣dewes him vvith teares, rubbes vp his benummed soule; that there is to bee seene some tokens, both of life, and Recouery: This
makes him spring, causes him to begin to bud againe, vnburies his lost light, and by little and little, recol∣lects his decayed strength of the apprehension of Gods Spirit: so sets him in the way to ioy, and renued courses. But lastly, Faith ap∣peares, and perfects vvhat Repentance beganne, and could not finish: she cheeres vp his drooping hopes, brings him againe to his wonted solace, spreads out his leaues, blowes vp his fainting fire to a bright flame: makes him like the Moone in her full glory, indues him with a plente∣ous
fruition of the presence of the Almighty, and ne∣uer leaues him, till he be re∣settled in his full ioy, con∣tentment, happinesse. Thus while he sinnes, he is a De∣cressant; when he repents, a Cressant; when his faith shines cleere, at full. Yet in all these, while hee liues heere, hee is subiect to change: sometime like a Beacon on a Hill, he is seen a farre off, and to all: some∣time like a Candle in a house, neerer hand, and only to his familiars: some∣times like a Lampe vnder a bushel, he is obscur'd to all; yet in all he burnes: though
in some, insensibly: and is neuer without one sound consolation, in the worst of all these: for as the Moone when shee is least visible, is a Moone as well, as when wee see her in her full pro∣portion; onely the Sunne lookes not on her vvith so full an aspect, and shee re∣flects no more, then she re∣ceiues from him: So a Christian in his lowest ebb of sorrow, is the Childe of God, as well, as when hee is in his greatest flow of comfort, onely the Sunne of Righteousnesse darts not the beames of his loue so plentifully, and hee shewes
no more, then God giues him. When God hides his face, man must languish: his with-drawings, are our mi∣series: his presence, our vn∣failing Ioy. Sinne may cast mee in a trance, it cannot slay mee: it may bury my heat, for a time, it cannot extinguish it: it may make me in the wane, it cannot change my beeing: it may accuse, it shal not condemn: Though GOD depriue mee of his presence for a time, hee will one day re-inlighten mee, pollish mee, and crowne mee for euer: where the Moone of my inconstant ioy shall
change to a Sunne, and that Sunne shall neuer set, be∣clouded, or eclypsed. XXIX. In expences I would bee neither pinching, nor pro∣digall: yet if my meanes al∣low it not, rather thought too sparing, then a little profuse: 'tis no disgrace to make my ability my Com∣passe of saile, and line to walke by. I see what I may doe; others but what I doe: they looke to what I spend, as they thinke mee able; I must looke to what my e∣state will beare: nor can it be safe, to straine it at all:
'tis fit I should respect my owne abilitie, before their forward expectation. Hee that when hee should not, spends too much, shal when he would not, haue too lit∣tle to spend. 'Twas a witty reason of Diogenes, why he asked a halfe-penny of the thrifty man, and a pound of the prodigall; the first, hee said, might giue him often, but the other e're long, would haue none to giue. Yet say I had to dispend freely; as to bee too neere hauing enough, I esteeme sordid: so to spend super∣fluously, though I haue a∣bundance, I account one of
follies deepest ouer-sights. There is better vse to bee made of our talents, then to cast them away in waste: God gaue vs them, not to spend vainely, but to im∣ploy, for profit, for gaine. XXX. As the Needle in a Dyall remoued from his point, neuer leaues his quiuering motion, till it settles it selfe in the iust place it alway stands in: So fares it with a Christian in this world; no∣thing can so charme him, but hee will still minde his Sauiour: all that put him out of the quest of Heauen,
are but disturbāces. Though the pleasures, profits, and honours of this life, may sometime shuffle him out of his vsuall course; yet he wauers vp and downe in trouble, runnes to and fro like Quick-siluer, and is ne∣uer quiet within, till hee re∣turnes to his wonted life, and inward happinesse: there he sets down his rest, in a sweet, vnperceiued, in∣ward content: vvhich though vnseene to others, hee esteemes more, then all that the world cals by the name of felicity: they are to him, as May-games to a Prince; fitter for children,
then the Royaltie of a Crowne. It shall not more grieue me, to liue in a con∣tinued sorrow, then it shall ioy mee, to finde a secret perturbation in the worlds choycest solaces. If I finde my ioy in them, without vnquietnesse, that vvill proue a burdensome mirth: For finding my affections settle to them without re∣sistance, I cannot but di∣strust my selfe, of trusting them too much. A full de∣light in earthly things, ar∣gues a neglect of heauenly. I can hardly think him ho∣nest, that loues a Harlot for her brauery, more then his
Wife, for her vertues. But while an inward distaste shewes mee these Cates vn∣sauourie, if my ioy bee vn∣compleat in these terrene felicities, my inward vn∣settlednesse in them, shall make my content both suf∣ficient, and full. XXXI. Strange is the inchant∣ment that the world works on vs, when she smiles, and lookes merrily: 'tis iustly matter of amazement, for a man to grow rich, and re∣taine a minde vn-altered: yet are not all men changed alike, though all in some∣thing
admit variation. The Spider kills the man, that cures the Ape. Fortunes ef∣fects are variable, as the na∣tures she works vpon: some, while their baskets grow more full, their mindes are higher, and rise: they now know not those friends, that were lately their com∣panions: but as a Tyrant among his Subiects, growes haughty, and proud: so they, among their familiars scorne, and contemne: spur∣ning those with arrogant disdaine, which but of late, they thought as worthy as themselues, or better: high fortunes are the way to
high mindes: pride is vsual∣ly the child of riches. Con∣tempt. too often sits in the seat vvith Honour. Who haue we knowne so impe∣rious in Offices, as the man that was borne to beggery? As these rise, so some fall: and that which should sa∣tiate their desire, increaseth it: which is euer accompa∣nied with this vnhappines, that it will neuer bee satis∣fied: this makes them ba∣ser, by beeing wealthier: profit (though with drud∣gerie) they hugge with close armes. All vices de∣base man, but this makes a Master a slaue to his seruant,
a drudge to his slaue; and him that GOD set ouer all, this puts vnder all. Pittifull! that man when good things are present, should search for ill: that he should so care for riches, as if they were his owne: yet so vse them, as if they were anothers: that when hee might bee happy, in spending them, will bee miserable in keeping them: and had rather dying, leaue wealth to his enemies, then beeing aliue, relieue his friends. Thus as one a∣spires, the other descends: both extremes, and iustly blameable. If my estate
rise not, I hope my minde will bee what it is, not Ambitious, nor Auarici∣ous. But if euer the Di∣uine prouidence shall, be∣yond either my desert, or expectation, blesse mee, I will thinke, to grow proud, is but to rise, to fall: and to proue couetous, onely to possesse wealth, that the nobler mindes may hate, and scorne mee. For what is there they esteeme more sordid, then for a mans minde to bee his mo∣neyes Mercenary?
XXXII. A weake Christians life, is almost nothing but a Vi∣cissitude of sinne, and sor∣row. First, hee sinnes, and then he laments his folly: like a negligent schoole∣boy, he displeaseth his ma∣ster; and then beseecheth his remission with teares. Our owne coruptions are diseases incurable: while we liue, they will break out vpon vs; wee may correct them, wee cannot destroy them: they are like the feathers in a fowle, cut thē they will come againe: break them, they will come againe: plucke them out, yet
they will come again: only kill the bird, and they grow no more. While bloud is in our veines, sinne is in our nature; since I cannot a∣uoide it, I will learne to la∣ment it: And if through my offences, my ioy bee made obscure, and vanish: that sorrow shall new beget my ioy; not because I haue beene sinfull, but because, for sinne, I finde my selfe sorrowfull. All other sor∣rowes are either foolish, fruitlesse, or beget more: onely this darke entry, leades the way to the faire Court of happines. God is more mercifull in giuing re∣pentāce
to the Delinquent, then in granting remission to the Repentant: He hath promised pardon to the Pe∣nitent, no Repentance to the Peccant. XXXIII. In chusing friends there be two sorts of men, that I would for euer auoyde: For besides the learning of their vices, I dare not trust them with a secret. There is the Angry man, and the Drunkard: The first in his fit is meerely mad, hee speakes not a word by rea∣son, but by brutish passion: not vpon premeditated
termes, but whatsoeuer his memory on the sudden catches, his violent passion driueth out, bee it knowne, or hidden: so oft in a braule he blabbes out that, which being cooled, hee much re∣pents to haue named: com∣mitting that in his sparkling fury, which his appeased soule will tremble to think of. Anger is the feuer of the soule, which makes the tongue talke idle: it puts a man into a tumult, that he cannot heare what Counsell speakes: tis a ra∣ging Sea, a troubled water, that cannot be wholesome for the vse of any: and if it
be true which Hippocrates tels, that those diseases are the most dangerous, that al∣ter the habit of the patients countenance: this must needs bee most perillous, that voyce, colour, counte∣nance, pace, so changeth, as if fury dispossessing reason, had set a new Garrison in the Citadell of man. This he knew that gaue vs that precept, Make not friend∣ship with an angry man. The other hath no memo∣ry at all: For the aboun∣dāce of wine, hath drown'd vp that noble Recorder: and while Bacchus is his chiefe god, Apollo neuer
keepes him company: Friends and foes, familiars, and strangers are then all of equall esteeme: so he for∣getfully speakes of that in his cups, which if he were sober, should bee buried in silence. First he speakes he knowes not what, nor after, can he remember what that was he spake. Hee speakes that he should forget, and forgets that, which hee did speake. Drunkennesse is the funerall of all intelligi∣ble man, whom onely time and abstinence can resusci∣tate. A Drunkards minde and stomach are alike; nei∣ther can retaine, what they
receiue. I would bee loth to admit of a familiar so in∣fectious as either; more vn∣willing to reueale my selfe to any so open. What friēd soeuer I make choise of, I will bee sure hee shall haue these two properties, Mild∣nesse, Temperance: other∣wise tis better to want companions, then to be an∣noyed with either a mad∣man, or foole. Clitus was slaine by a Drunken Ma∣ster: The Thessalonians massacred by an angry Em∣perour: and the deaths of of either, lamented by the Agents.
XXXIIII. I see, liberty makes licen∣tious, and where the reines are giuen too loosely, the affections run wildely on, without a guide, to ruine: For mans will without dis∣cretion, that should adde li∣mits, is like a blind horse, without a bridle, that should guide him aright: he may goe fast, but runnes to his own ouerthrow, and while hee mends his pace, he hastens to his owne mis∣chiefe. Nothing makes vs more wretched, then our owne vncontrolled wils. A loose will fulfilled, is the
way to worke out a woe. For besides this folly in be∣ginning wrong, the greatest danger is in continuance: when like a Bowle running down a hill, he is euer most violent, when hee growes neerest his Cēter & period of his aime. These follies are prettily shaddowed in the sports of Acteon, that while he suffer'd his eye to roue at pleasure, and be∣yond the pale of expediēce, his Houndes, euen his own affections, ceaze him, teare him, proue his decay. Let it be my vigilance to curbe my beginning desires, that they may not wander be∣yond
moderation; if my owne will be a blind con∣ductor, good precepts to an ingenious nature, are bitts that restraine, but hurt not. I know, to follow a soo∣thing fancy, cannot be but ridiculously ill: and this in∣conuenience besides haue I seene; That hee which may doe more then is fit, will in time doe more then is lawfull. He that now ex∣ceedes the measure, will ere long exceed the manner. Vice is a Peripatetick, al∣wayes in Progression.
XXXV. Euen between two faith∣full friends, I thinke it not conuenient that all secrets should be imparted: nei∣ther is it the part of a friend, to fish out that, which were better concealed. yet I obserue some, of such in∣sinuating dispositions, that there is nothing in their friends heart, that they would not thēselues know with him; and this, if I may speake freely, I count as a fault. For many times by too farre vrging, they wring bloud, from whence onely milke should flowe:
knowing that by their im∣portunitie, which not only breedes a dislike in them to heare, but also when their conference is ended, begetes a repenting sorrow in him that told it: and makes him wish, hee had lock't vp his lips in silence, rather then haue powred out his heart with such in∣discretion. How many haue bewailed the vntimely dis∣closures of their tongue? how many haue screw'd out secrets, that would haue giuen thousands to haue return'd them vnknowne? If I haue a friend that I care not to lose, I will neuer in∣gage
my selfe so much, as to be beholding to him to know all. If I haue one that is faithfull, I wil not wrong him so much, as to wrest that from him, should cause him be sorrowfull. If hee reueales ought vn-vrged, my aduice is faithfull, and free: otherwise, to presse out a secret that may proue preiudiciall, I esteeme as the beginning of the breach of Amity, and the primary breeder of a secret dislike. XXXVI. We know 'tis sometimes better to sound a retrait, & so retire, then 'tis to stay in
the field, and conquer: be∣cause it may so fall out, that the prize we win, cannot counteruaile the losse, that by this Warre we shall su∣staine: so like the foolish Mariner, that seeing a Fish in the Sea, leapes into wa∣ter to catch that, which to∣gether with his life hee lo∣seth. Wee often lose an e∣ternall Kingdome, for the gaine of toyes, and vanities. Who is there that hazzards not his soule, for the plea∣sures, or the profits of sin? which when they haue, what haue they got, but shaddowes, or vexations? The wealthy man is like a
powder-master, who hath prouision against an ene∣mie, but is euer in danger of being blowne vp. As for pleasure, 'tis at best but a hilded vessel; which though it please the palate for a cup or two; yet the Lees are at hand, and they marre it: a little disturbance turnes it into distaste. What a foole were I to cast away my soule on such transitorie trifles? which when I haue, I am neither sure to enioy, nor to find commodious: what I cannot keep without dan∣ger, I will neuer earnestly seeke: to lose a Crowne of gold, for a counterfet, is
more then a childish fond∣nesse. I had better sit still, and be quiet in peace, then rise to conquer a petty Vil∣lage, when my losse is a large Citie. XXXVII. Christ healed diseases three manner of wayes; with meanes, as the Leper in the eighth of Mathew: without meanes, as the ten Lepers in the seuenteenth of Luke: against meanes, as the man borne blind, in the ninth of Iohn. I will looke to meanes as beeing more ordinarie, more reuealed: but if my blind eye sees not
that present succour, my feare is not more, nor my griefe. 'Tis as easie to God to worke without meanes, as with them: and against them, as by either: 'Tis all one to him, Bee cleane, or Go wash. Yea, though eue∣ry argument concludes danger, let not my hopes faile mee yet, his omnipo∣tency is beyond that feeble stay of the soule: nor yet will I so depend on his will hidden, as I neglect to pra∣ctice his will reuealed. For as to dis-regard his appoin∣ted meanes, is a supreme contempt: so to depend too much on things vnsearch∣able,
is rather a badge of rash presuming, then any notable courage of faith. I must looke to my way, and let him alone in his. XXXVIII. 'Tis a Capitall misery for a man to bee at once both old, and Ignorant. If hee were onely old, and had some knowledge, he might abate the tediousnesse of decrepit age, by the diuine raptures of Contemplati∣on. If he were yong, though he knew nothing, yet his yeeres would serue him, to labour, and learne: where∣by in the Winter of his
time, hee might beguile the wearinesse of his pillow and chayre. But now his body beeing withered by the stealing length of his dayes, and his limbes whol∣ly disabled, for either moti∣on, or exercise: these toge∣ther with a minde vnfur∣nished of those contenting speculations of admired Science, cannot but de∣lineate the pourtraicture of a man wretched. A gray head with a wise minde, is a treasurie of graue Pre∣cepts, experience, & iudge∣ment. But foolish old age, is a barren Vine in Au∣tumne: or an Vniuersitie to
study folly in: euery action is a patterne of infirmitie: while his body sits still, hee knowes not how to finde his minde action: and tell mee if there bee any life, more irkesome then idle∣nesse. I haue numbred yet but a few dayes; and those I know, I haue neglected. I am not sure they shall bee more, nor can I promise my head, it shall haue a snowy haire. What then? Knowledge is not hurtfull, but helpes a good minde: any thing that is laudable, I desire to learne. If I dye to¦morrow, my life to day shal bee somewhat the sweeter
for knowledge: and if my day proue a Summer one, it shall not be amisse, to haue prouided something, that in the euening of my Age, may make my minde my Companion. Notable was the answere that Antist∣henes gaue, when hee was asked what fruit he had rea∣ped of all his studies? By them, saith hee, I haue lear∣ned, both to liue, and to talke with my selfe. XXXIX. There is a two-fold way to honour: Direct, when God cals: Indirect, when man seekes it, without the Lords warrant. Dauid went
the first, and his Crowne departed not frō his head, till nature had payed her debt, and his life dissolued: And when hee is gone, his Issue succeedes him. Ab∣solon went the other, but his sinnes pulled him down with vengeance; and onely a dumbe pillar speakes his memory. God cannot in∣dure the aspiring spirit, that would clime the hill of pre∣ferment, without his leaue. Theeues of honour, seldom finde ioy in their purcha∣ses, stability, neuer. Besides, I obserue the man that is fit for a place of note, neuer seekes it so much, as hee is
sought for, for it: whereas euer the Bramble, that is low, and worthlesse, cryes out aloud, Make me a King: 'tis incident to a weake minde, to ouer-value it selfe. How many would be Magistrates, that know not how to bee men? Moses obiects much, when God himself imposeth a charge: For a man of vnderstand∣ing knowes, that 'tis better to liue in the Valley, where the times tempests blow o∣uer him: then to haue his seat on the Mountains top, where euery blast threatens both his ruine, and fall: howsoeuer others measure
him, hee knowes his owne height; and will not exceed it. Yet beeing placed by an Almighty hand, hee that set him there, can keep him se∣cure. But hee must then be∣ware, that he makes not that his King, that should he his Subiect: that he giues not the reines, where he should vselthe checke: and that he playes not the Ape too much, either by too idle i∣mitation, or by doting too fondly, on his darling Ho∣nour. Thus cautelous, may he liue safe: When he that reacheth promotion with∣out Gods calling him, may flourish awhile, but not
thriue. In ascents, those are the safest, that are broadest, and least sudden, and where the light is open: how soon is a fall caught in those staires that are darke, nar∣row, & quickly rising? I wil as well look to the way, as the thing: There is no path to happy preferment, but that which vertue treades: which was well noted by the Heathen, when they built the Temple of ho∣nour so, that none could enter it, but they must first passe through that of ver∣tue. I had rather liue honest∣ly, though meanely: then by vnlawful practices vsurp a Crow ne.
XL. Nothing more dis∣worthes a man, then Co∣wardice, and a base feare of danger: the smooth way it makes difficult, the difficult inaccessible. The Coward is an vnfinisht man; or else one which nature made lesse then others: If euer he did any thing well, for∣tune was his guide, not wisedome. His feare in him begets delay, and delay breedes that he feares, dan∣ger: the souldier that dares not fight, affoords the Ene∣mie too much aduantage for his preparement; both
for directing his souldiers, plotting his Stratagems, strengthening his files, or∣dering his Campe, or do∣ing any thing may turne disaduantage vpon his foe: when as the valorous war∣riour giues most discomfi∣ture, in his sodainest onset, where hee takes away the time for fortification. If it bee by speech a man is to act his part, feare puts an ague in his tongue, and of∣ten leaues him, either in an amazed distractiō, or quite elingued. For the too se∣rious apprehension of a pos∣sible shame, makes him for∣get that, should helpe him
a gainst it: I meane a plaine boldnesse, bequeathing a dilated freedome to all his faculties, and senses: which now with a cold feare, are frozen and congealed. If not this, out of an vnmea∣sured care to doe well, it driues a man into affectati∣on: and that like misshapen apparell, spoiles the beauty of a well limb'd body: For nature will not endure the racke; when you set her too high, she proues vntune∣able, and in stead of a sweet cloze, yeeldes a cracke: she euer goes best in her owne free pace: I will neither stay her solong, as to meet
delay: nor runne her so far, as to doe ought affectedly. I had rather be confidently bold, then foolishly timo∣rous; he that in euery thing feares to doe well, will at length doe ill in all. XLI. Many haue much lamen∣ted the losse of trifles, when they might haue gained by such damages, had they not with them, lost themselues: I meane, their quiet minds, and patience. Vnwise so to debarre themselues of rest, when their vexation cannot yeeld them profit; if teares could either reco∣uer
a losse, or recall time, then to weepe, were but to purpose; but things past, though with prudence they may be corrected, yet with greatest griefe, they cannot bee recalled: make them better wee may, but for to make them not to be at all, requires more then a hu∣mane strength, or a finite power. Actions once done, admit a correction, not a nullity. Although I will endeuour to amend what is gone by amisse, yet will I labour, neuer to grieue for any thing past, but sinne: and for that alwayes. A small losse shall neuer trou∣ble
mee: neither shall the greatest hindrance, make my heart not mine owne. He spake well that said, He which hath himselfe, hath lost nothing. XLII. Some men are of so no∣ble, and free a disposition, that you cannot beeing a friend, aske ought, to re∣ceiue a deniall: it being one part of their happines, to pleasure the man they loue. Yet these in the end, and these times, are the on∣ly vnhappy men. For being exhausted by the necessities of others, and their base
working on a free nature; an vnwelcom want, at once vndoes them, and the good∣nesse of their disposition. pitty such willing courtesies should be cast away in such vngratefull ground; that like an vnbottomed Gulfe, swallowes, but returnes not: or that a mans firme loue should make him doe that, should kill himselfe in future. Contrarie to these, you haue another sort are fast, and holding: and though sometimes they might pleasure a friend, without a selfe preiudice: yet their inbred crabbed∣nesse reserues all, with a
close hand. And while the other ruins with a faire af∣fection; hee thriues with a vulgar hate, and curses; such as the first, are best to others: such as the last, to themselues. I will so serue others, as I iniure not my selfe: so my selfe, as I may helpe other. XLIII. As there is no feate of Actiuity so difficult, but being once done, a man ventures on it more freely the second time: so there is no sinne at first so hate∣full, but being once com∣mitted willingly, a man is
made more prone for a rei∣teration. For there is more desire of a knowne plea∣sure, then of that which onely our eares haue heard report of. The horse that hath fed on prouender, will looke and long for it: but the iade that hath only had hey, expects no more then his racke. So farre is igno∣rance good, that in a calme, it keepes the minde from distraction; and know∣ledge, as it breedes desire in all things, so in sinne. Bootlesse therefore shall e∣uer be that cunning fetch of Satan, when hee would in∣duce me once to make a tri∣all
of sinne, that I might thereby know more, and be able to fill vp my mouth with discourse, my minde with fruition; bearing mee in hand, I may at my plea∣sure giue it the hand of par∣ting, and a finall farewell. Too often (alas) haue I bin deceiued with this begui∣ling perswasion, of a power to leaue, and a will to re∣turne at my will. Hence∣forth shall my care bee to refraine from once. If I grant that, stronger perswa∣sions will plead for a se∣cond action: 'tis easier to deny a guest at first, then to turne him out, hauing stay∣ed
a while. Thou knowest not, sencelesse man, what ioyes thou losest, when thou fondly lashest into new offences. The world cannot repurchase thee, thy pristine integrity: thou hast hereby lost such hold of grace, as thou wilt neuer againe be able to recouer. A mind not conscious of a∣ny foule enormities, is a fair temple in a durty street: at whose dore, Sinne, like a throng of rude plebeians, knockes incessantly: while the doore is shut, 'tis easi to keep it so, and them out▪ open that, but to let in one, thousands will rush in after
him, and their tramplings will for euer soyle that vn∣stained floore, while thy conscience is vnspotted, thou hast that can make the smile vpon the racke, and flames; 'tis like Ho∣mers Nepenthe, that can ba∣nish the sadnesse of the minde. But when thou woundest that, thou buriest thy ioyes at once: and throwest a Iewell from thee is richer then the wealth of worlds. Foole that thou art, that wandring in a darke wildernesse, dost wilfully put out thy candle; and thinkest cold water can slake thy thirst, in the bur∣ning
fit of an Ague; when it onely breeds in thee a de∣sire to powre in more. Hee that neuer tasted the plea∣sures of sinne, longs lesse, af∣ter those banefull discon∣tenting contents. What sweets of sinne I know not, I desire still to bee vnexpe∣rienc't in. I had rather not know, then by knowledge be miserable. This Igno∣rance will teach me Know∣ledge, of an vnknowne peace. Let mee rather be outwardly maimed, and want discourse: then bee furnisht of that, and possesse a wound, that bleedeth within.
XLIV. 'Tis foolish, and sauors not of common policie, to purchase friends by large gifts: because hauing once vsed them to rewards, they will still expect more: and custome that pleaseth, is seldome omitted, without either discontent, or dan∣ger. If then our loues to∣kens shall seem to diminish, friendship likewise will de∣crease: and if not quite con∣sume, yet easily be drawne to allow harbour to base dis-respect: which what a thorne it is to an affectio∣nate minde, I desire rather
to know by iudicious ob∣seruation, then by reall ex∣perience: but sure I am, it no way can bee small: yet most true must it needs be, that friendship wonne by large gifts, resembles but the straw fire; that hauing matter to feed vpon, burnes brightly: but let new fuell be neglected; it dyes, con∣sumes, and quite goes out. Nor further can this amity be euer approued, or sure, or sincere. For hee that loues me for my gifts sake, loues my gifts, aboue my selfe: and if I should hap∣pen to light on aduersitie; I should not finde him then
to appeare: there being no hope of a gainefull requi∣tall. If I giue any thing, it shall be because hee is my friend: not because I would haue him so: not so much that I may haue his loue; but that already, hee hath mine. I will vse them sometimes to continue friendship, neuer to begin it. I doe not hold him wor∣thy thankes, that professeth me a kindnesse for his own ends. XLV. Nothing more saddens the soule of a good man, then the serious apprehen∣sion
of a iust shame. If it were false, his own cleere∣nesse would bee a shield strong enough, to repell the darts of slander. For man is neuer miserable, till Con∣science turnes his enemy. If it were but the losse of ri∣ches, there were a possibili∣tie of a recouerie: if of friends, hee might finde more, or content himselfe with the knowledge of their happinesse, in that glorious Mansion of the Saints: if of corporall an∣guish, a quiet minde might mitigate his paines, or in∣dustry with time, take a truce with sorrowes: but
this misery is immedicable. Credit once lost, is like wa∣ter so diffusiuely spilt, that 'tis not in humanitie to re∣collect it. If it bee, it hath lost the purity, and will for euer after, be full of soile: and by how much his ho∣nesty was more noted; by so much will his shame bee more, and his griefe. For see what a horrour he hath be∣fore him; all will bee now ready to brand him with the odious, and stigmati∣call name of an Hypocrite. His Reputation (which though it bee not dearer then his soule, yet he pri∣zeth aboue his life) will be
blacked with an eternall staine: which nor absence, time, endeuour, nor Death can wash away. If he liues, and could in himselfe for∣get it: yet the enuious world will keepe it vpon record: and when hee mindes it not, rub it on his galled soule. If he could fly from his Countrey, that would like a Bloud-hound follow him: if he dyes, that will suruiue him, and make his very graue contempti∣ble: nay, so farre will it spread, as somewhat to in∣fect his friends: and though haply in himselfe hee may bee bettered, by so rash a
fall: yet the cruell, and vn∣charitable world will euer thinke him worse. In this I dare not follow it: in do∣ing that may cause this, I hope I shall not. I will first striue to be void of the act might bring shame, next, not to cast it in the dish of the penitent. If my suffe∣rings bee vniust, I am sure in the end I shall find them comfortable. If God hath pleas'd to remit offences, why should I commemo∣rate them? A good life is a fortresse against shame: and a good man's shame, is his benefit: the one keepes it away; the other when it
comes, makes it proue pro∣fitable. XLVI. The will for the deed, is oft with God accepted: and he that is a thankefull Deb∣tor, restores a benefit. Ma∣ny benefits, nay, all I pos∣sesse, O Lord, from thee I know I haue receiued: re∣quite them I cannot, re∣turne them I may not, and to rest ingratefull, were a sin inexcusable. Since then I cannot retaliate thy loue, or retribute thy fauours: yet Lord will I owe them, with a desire to pay.
XLVII. There is not any thing eates out friendship, sooner then concealed grudges. Though reason at first pro∣duceth opinion, yet opini∣on after, seduceth Reason. Conceits of vnkindnesse harboured and beleeued, will worke euen a steady loue, to hatred. And there∣fore, reserued dispositions, as they are the best keepers of secrets: so they are the worst increasers of loue. Betweene friends it cannot be, but discourtesies wil ap∣peare: though not inten∣ded, by a willing act, yet so
taken by a wrong suspect: which smothered in si∣lence, increase dayly, to a greater distaste: but reuea∣led once, in a friendly man∣ner, oft meet with that sa∣tisfaction, which doth in the disclosure banish them. Sometimes ill tongues, by false tales, sow Discord be∣tweene two louers. Some∣times mistakes, set the mind in a false beliefe. Some∣times iealousies, that flow from loue, imprint suspiti∣on in the thoughts. All which may find ease in the vttering: so their discoue∣rie be in mildnesse; other∣wise, choller casts a mist be∣fore
the eyes of the minde, and when it might see cleerely, will not let it. If betweene my friend, and my selfe, a priuate thought of vnkindnesse arise; I will presently tell it, and bee re∣conciled: if he be cleere, I shall like him the better when I see his integritie: if faulty, confession gaines my pardon, and binds mee to loue him: and though we should in the discussion iarre a little, yet will I bee sure to part friendly. Fire almost quench't, and laid abroad, dyes presently: put together, it will burne the better. Euery such breach
as this, will vnite affection faster: a little shaking pre∣fers the growth of the tree. XLVIII. I haue sometimes wish't my selfe in some high seate of honor: with what folly, I haue after seene, and been displeased, with my selfe, with my desires: so vnbe∣fitting vvisedome, so disso∣nant from Christianity. For what can a high place con∣ferre vnto mee, that can make my life more truely happy? if it addes to my ioyes, it increaseth my fear; if it augments my pleasure, my care is more, and my
trouble. But perhaps I shal haue reuerence, weare rich apparell, and fare delicious∣ly: alas! cold flames, wet raymēt. Haue I not known some inioying all, and ne∣uer found other fruit, but enuie, beggery, and disease? so haue in the end, wished to change, for lower Ho∣nors, for meaner dignities, accounting themselues as the flag, on the top of a ship∣mast, as more high, and more visible; so more, and euer open, to the wind, and stormes: being as a worthy Iudge once answered one, that gaue him his title of Honor: True, Honorable
seruants: to post through the toyles of a circuit, and thinke on any mans busines but their owne. Ah Tissue couer, to a straw Cushion! But I shal haue more means, so shal I do the more good: I grant; but may I not doe as much good, with lesse meanes? 'Tis a question who shall haue more re∣ward, of him that does most in quantity, or most accor∣ding to the proportion of his meanes; If Christ may be admitted as arbitrator, the poore Widdow gaue more, then al the rich ones. I feare, if I had more, I should spend more in waste:
sure I am, I should haue more to answere for. Be∣sides, who knowes what a change wealth might work in me? what a snare hath it proued to many, that like the Sunne, haue in the mor∣ning of their time, moun∣ted themselues to the high∣est pitch of perspicuity, and brightnesse? which when they haue once attained, they decline, fall, vanish, & are gone; leauing nothing behind thē, but darke night, blacke reputation. If not this, what can I tell, but that I might gather like a spunge, to bee squeezed out againe, by some grinding
oppressor? So bee more vexed with an vnexpected losse, then pleased with my short inioyment. The thiefe that meets with a full purse, takes away it, and re∣turnes a stabbe; while the empty pocket makes the life secure: then perhaps we could wish to be poore, but cannot: that so vvee might lessen our griefe, by the sorrow for our losse. Tell me then, O my soule! vvhat should make thee wish to change? I liue in a ranke, though not of the highest, yet affoording as much happinesse, more freedome: as beeing ex∣empt
from those suspitious cares, that pricke the bo∣some of the wealthy man: 'tis such as might content my better, and such as hea∣uen smiles on, with a graci∣ous promise of blessing, if my carriage be fair and ho∣nest; and without these who is well? I haue necessaries, and what is decent; and when I desire it, something for pleasure. Who hath more that is needfull? If I be not so rich, as to sowe almes by sackfulls, euen my Mite, is beyond the super∣fluity of wealth: and my pen, my tongue, and my life, shal (I hope) helpe some
to better treasure, then the earth affoords them. I haue food conuenient for mee: and I sometimes find exer∣cise to keepe my body healthfull: when I doe, I make it my recreation, not my toyle. My rayment is not worst, but good; and then that, let mee neuer haue better. I can bee as warme in a good Kersey, as a Prince in a Skarlet robe. I liue where is much means of true saluation: my liber∣tie is mine owne, I can both frequent them, and desire to profit by them. I haue a mind can bee pleased vvith the present; and if time
turnes the wheele, can in∣dure a change, without de∣siring it. I vvant nothing but abundance; and this I neede not, because want herein, I account much bet∣ter then reall possession: if it had beene fit for mee, I know, my God would haue bestowed it on me. He ne∣uer was so careles of a child of his, as to let him misse that, he knew might make for his good. Seeing then, hee sees it inconuenient, it shall bee my ioy to liue without it; and hence∣forth, will I not long any more to change. He is not a compleat Christian, that
cannot be contented vvith that he inioyes. I will ra∣ther settle my minde to a quiet rest, in that I finde: then let her wander, in a wearied sollicitude, after vngotten plenty. That e∣state that God guies mee, e∣uer vvill I esteeme best: though I could not thinke it so, I am sure it is so: and to think against knowledge, is a foolish suspition. XLIX. 'Tis a precept from a per∣fidious mind, that bids vs thinke all knaues vve deale vvith: so by distrusting, to hinder deceit. I dare not
giue my mind that liberty, lest I iniure charity, and run into error. I will thinke all honest, if strangers: for so I'me sure they should bee; only let me remember, they are but men: so may vpon temptation, fall with the time; otherwise, though they want religion, Nature hath implanted a morall iustice, which vnperuerted, will deale square. Christs precept was found in the mouthes of Heathen. Doe not to another, what thou wouldst not haue done to thy selfe.
L. Though the bodies ex∣cretions grow but insensi∣bly, yet vnlesse they bee dayly taken away, wee see, they make men monstrous: as Nabuchadnezzars haires were like Eagles feathers, and his nayles like birds clawes, in his seuen yeeres bestialitie. So that those things which nature with due ordering, hath made for vse and ornament: with a carelesse neglect, grow to mischiefe, and deformitie. In the soule I finde it yet worse: and no Vice so soon steales on vs, as the abuse of
things in themselues law∣full: For Nature euer since her first deprauation, with∣out a corrigible hand to re∣straine her, runs into wide extremities. I know, 'tis good the Vine should flou∣rish, but let it alone, and it ruines it selfe, in superflu∣ous branches. Our pleasures wee see, are sometimes the enliuenings of a drooping soule: yet how easily doe they steale away our minds, and make vs with a mad af∣fection, dote vpon them? none suspecting in so faire a semblance, a Sinon, that should gull vs, with such di∣lusiue postures: but because
we know them lawfull, we boldly, and heedlessely vse them: and as Prouidence is the mother of happinesse: so negligence is the Parent of misery. I will euer bee most circumspect, in things veiled with either good∣nesse, or sweetnesse. No∣thing steales more soules frō God, then lewd courses that are outwardly glori∣ous. Reason hath not so dull an eye, but shee may see those things, that are ap∣parantly ill: but those that are so, onely by their acci∣dent, haue power to blind her sight: so require more care, more vigilancy. I'le
only vse them, to make me better: whē they leaue that, I'le leaue them: and deale with'vm in a wise discreti∣on, as the Emperour Com∣modus did with his ser∣uants, in a wicked iest, ba∣nish them: not for the ill they haue done mee; but for the harme they may doe. Since all my goodnes cannot make one sin good: why should an accidentall sinne spoile that, which is good in it selfe? L I. There is no man that liues well, but shall be sus∣pected for selfe-conceited,
vnlesse hee can liue like a Hermite, in a Cell: or like some Satyre, in an vnfre∣quented Desart. He cannot for his life so carry him∣selfe, but he shall sometimes light on lewd company: such as hee neither loues, nor cares for. If hee conti∣nues society with them, he endangers his soule: either by participating of their bad actions, or else by con∣niuing at those offences, he sees they delight in: ei∣ther of which, not onely cast a present guilt on the soule, but euen worke it to such a temper, as makes it apt to receiue the impressi∣on
of any ill; So secretly insinuating, till it come frō toleration, to alowance, Action, Custome, Delight. Bad Companions are like Traitors, with whom if we act, or conceale, wee are guilty: this Pitch will de∣file a man. If he shall out of an honest care of his soules welfare, and his loue to Re∣ligion, labour to auoid such bad associates: or beeing vnhappily fallen among them, seeke for a present e∣scape: Then pride, and a high conceit of himselfe, is guessed the onely motiue of his bodies departure: when indeed 'tis onely
goodnesse, that importunes his absence. But tell mee now, is't not better I leaue them, & be thought proud wrongfully: then stay with them, and be knowne bad certainly? He's a foole that will sell his soule, for a few good words, from a bad mans tongue. What is't to me, how others thinke me, when I know, my intent is good, and my wayes war∣rantable? A good consci∣ence cares for no witnesse: that is alone, as a thousand. Neither can the worlds Calumnies, worke a change in a minde resolued. How∣soeuer heere my Reputati∣on
should be soiled vnwor∣thily, yet the time is not farre off, when a freedome from sinne will bee more worth, then a perpetuated fame from Adam, till Doomes day. While hea∣uen and my Conscience see mee Innocent, the worlds suppositions cannot make mee culpable. Hee that is good, and ill spoken of, shall reioyce, for the wrong is done him by others. Hee that is bad, and well repor∣ted, shall grieue for the in∣iury hee does himselfe. In the one, they would make mee what I am not: in the other, I make my selfe what
I should not. Let mee ra∣ther heare ill, and doe well: then doe ill, and bee flat∣tered. LII. For iniuries, my opinion is with Socrates: 'Tis bet∣ter to suffer, then to offer them. He may be good that beares them: he must be ill that proffers them. Saul would slay Dauid, when himselfe only is vitious, and ill. Vice, is accompanied with iniustice; Patience, is an attendant on Vertue.
LIII. In all nations, two things are causes of a common prosperity: Good Gouern∣ment: and good Obedi∣ence: A good Magistrate, ouer a peruerse people, is a sound head, on a surfetted body. A good Communal∣tie, and a bad Ruler, is a healthfull body, with a head aching: either are oc∣casions of ruine: both soūd, preseruatiues. A good Go∣uernour is a skilfull Ship∣master, that takes the shor∣test, and the safest course: and continually so steeres, as the Rockes, and Shelues
which might shipwracke the state, be auoided: and the voyage euer made, with the soonest speed, best pro∣fit, most ease. But a wicked Magistrate is a Wolfe made leader of the fold: that both satiates his crueltie, and betrayes them to dan∣ger. To whom if you adde but ignorance, you may vpon certain grounds, pro∣phesie destruction. The Iudges insufficiencie, is the Innocents calamitie. But if the Common-wealth be o∣bedient, & the Ruler wor∣thy: how durable is their felicitie, and ioy? Solon might well say, That Citie
was safe, whose Citizens were obedient to the Ma∣gistrates, and Magistrates to the Lawes. What made the Maior Scipio so victorious, but his wisedome in direct∣ing, and his Souldiers wil∣lingnesse, in obeying, when he could show his troopes, and say, You see not a man among al these, but will, if I command him, from a Tur∣ret throw himselfe into the Sea? The inconuenience of stubbornnesse, that Consull knew, who meeting vvith an obstinate Youth, sold both him, and his goods, saying, Hee had no need of that Cittizen, that vvould
not obey. As it is in the larger, and more spacious vvorld; so is it in the little world of Man. None if they serue their true Prince, but haue a Gouernour com∣pletely perfect. Criticisme it selfe, cannot find in God to cauill at. He is both iust, and mercifull, in the Con∣crete, and the Abstract, he is both of them. Who can taxe him with either cruel∣tie, or partialitie? though my obedience cannot an∣swere his perfection; yet will I endeuour it. If Christ bee not my King to go∣uerne, he wil neither be my Prophet to forewarne, nor
my Priest to expiate. If I cannot come neere it, in ef∣fect, as being impossible: I will in desire, as being con∣uenient: so though lesse, yet if sincere, I know, he wil accept it: not as meritori∣ous, but respecting his pro∣mise. LIIII. 'Tis an Aphorisme in Physicke, that they which in the beginning of sicknes eate much, and mend not, fall at last to a generall loathing of food. The Mo∣rall is true in Diuinity. He that hath a sick conscience, and liues a hearer vnder a
fruitfull Ministery, if hee growes not sound, he will learne to despise the word. Contemned blessings leaue roome for curses. Hee that neglects the good hee may haue, shall find the euill he would not haue. Iustly hee sits in darknesse, that would not light his Candle when the fire burned cleerely. He that needs counsell, and will not heare it, destines him∣selfe to miserie, and is the willing Author of his own woe. Continue at a stay he cannot long: if he could, not to proceede, is back∣ward. And this is as dan∣gerous to the soule, as the
other to the body. Pittifull is his estate, that hates the thing should helpe him: if euer you see a drowning man refuse helpe, conclude him a wilfull murtherer. When God affoords mee plentifull meanes, woe bee to mee if they proue not profitable: I had better haue a deafe eare, then hear to neglect, or hate: to the burying of such treasures there belongs a curse, to their misspending, Iudge∣ments. LV. God giues three kinds of gifts, Temporall, Spirituall,
and Eternall; Temporall, as Wealth, Pleasure, Ho∣nour, and such like. Spiri∣tuall, as Sauing Faith, Peace of Conscience, and assu∣rance of Saluation. Eter∣nall, as Glory and happines in heauen for euer. The first is common to the wic∣ked, as well as the godly, and they mostly florish in these terrene beauties. For who so great in fauour with the world as they? They liue, become old, and are mighty in power, as Iob speakes in his 21. yet all these sweetes passe away like a vapour, and though they reuell out their dayes
in mirth, yet in a moment they goe downe to the graue. The two other God bestowes onely vpon his Elect: all that heere hee of∣ten giues them, is onely one of these: some spirituall fa∣uours hee bestowes vpon them, the other he reserues for them, when Earth can∣not cal them her Children. One he giues them not, till they be gone from hence; the other when they haue it, the world sees it not. What differēce can a blind man perceiue, betweene a sparkling Diamond, and a worthlesse peble? Or what can a naturall man spie, in
an humble Christian, that euer hee thinkes may make him be happie? Afflictions heere are the Lot of the righteous, and they dimme those splendid beauties, that speak them faire in the eye of the Almighty: they are sports of the priuie Chamber, that these Kings ioy in: the vnciuill vulgar see not the pleasures of their Crown: Whereas the wic∣ked, and God∣forsaken man spreads out his plumes, and seemes euen to checke the Sunne in his glory. Vice loues to seeme glorious, yea more to seeme, then to bee. What a Lustre these Glow∣wormes
cast in darknesse, which yet but touched, are extinct? a poore reckoning alas in the end! when all these counterfet Iewels shal be snatched from him, and he answere for all strictly, at the vnauoidable barre of the last Iudgement. They had neede haue some plea∣sure here, that can haue no∣thing but woe heereafter. Flesh, rebellious flesh, would sometime set me to murmur at their prosperity; but when my minde in her Closet reuolues their fickle estate, and findes all their good in presēt, & outward, I see nothing may be a mid∣wife
to the least repining enuie. When my soule sola∣ceth her selfe in those raui∣shing delights that exhila∣rate a Christians mind, how poorely can I thinke of those lamentable ioyes? the spirituall man lookes on the flourishes of this life with pitty, not desire. If God giues the wicked one, and me two, why should I com∣plaine? but when the least of mine, is infinitely better then his all, let mee neuer grudge him, so poore, and so short a heauen. If God affoords mee his childrens fauours, (though oppressed with pouerty) I am richer,
then all their gawdy Adu∣lations can make me: be∣cause I haue already the earnest of a World of Ioy, which the wicked shall ne∣uer obtaine. LVI. I wonder what spirit they are indued withall, that can basely libell at a man that is falne! If they were heauenly, then would they with him condole his disasters, and drop some teares in pitty of his folly, and wretchednesse: If but humane, yet nature neuer gaue them a mind so cruell, as to adde weight to an o∣uercharged
beame. When I heare of any that fall into publike disgrace, I haue a mind to commiserate his mis-hap, not to make him more disconsolate. To in∣uenome a name by libells, that already is openly taint∣ed, is to adde stripes with an Iron rod, to one that is flayed with whipping: and is sure in a mind well-tem∣per'd, thought inhumane, diabolicall. LVII. Our yeeres at full are fourescore and ten: much time compared to a day; but not a minute in respect
of eternity: yet how few liue to tell so large a succes∣sion of time? One dyes in the bud, another in the bloome, some in the fruite, few like the sheafe, that come to the barne in a full age; and though a man liues to inioy all, see but how lit∣tle he may call as his owne. He is first Puer, then Iuue∣nis, next Vir, and after Se∣nex; the first hee rattles a∣way in toyes and fooleries, ere hee knowes where he is, spends a great part of his precious time: hee playes as if there were no sorrow, and sleeps as if there would neuer bee ioy. The next,
pleasures and luxurie shor∣ten and hasten away: vn∣checked heat makes his nim¦ble spirits boile; hee dares then doe that, which af∣ter he dares not thinke of: he does not then liue, but reuell; & cares not so much for life, as for that which steales it away, Pleasure. Hee hath then a soule that thinkes not of it selfe, but studies onely to content the body: which with her best indulgence, is but a piece of actiue earth: when she leaues it, a lumpe of na∣stinesse. The third, Cares of the world, and posterity, debarre of a sollid content:
and now when he mounted to the height of his way, he finds more misery, then the beginning told him of. What iarres, what toyles, what cares, what discon∣tentments, and what vnex∣pected distractions, shall he light vpon? if poore, hee's miserable, and ridiculous: if rich, fearefull & solicitous: this being all the difference betweene them, the first la∣bours how to liue, the o∣ther studies how to conti∣nue liuing. In the last, na∣ture growes weake and irk∣some to her selfe, venting her distaste with Salomon, and mournes that now shee
finds her dayes, that be vn∣pleasing. He that liues long hath onely the happinesse, to take a larger taste of mi∣sery: what before hee thought hurled about with more then a sphericall swiftnesse, hee now thinks more tedious, then a tyred Hackney in foule wayes: Time, that before hee hath wooed to stay for him, now he could on his knee sue to, to haste him away. But if (that honey of all humani∣ty) Learning, hath taught him a way to coozē his sor∣rowes, he could then with old Themistocles, find in his heart to weep, that he must
then leaue life, when he be∣gins to learne wit. Thus all mans ages are so ful of trou∣bles, that they filch away his time of liuing. The first is full of folly: the second of sinne: the third of labour: the last of griefe. In all, he is in the Court of this world, as a ball bandyed be∣tween 2. rackets, Ioy, & sor∣row: If either of thē strike him ouer, he may then rest: otherwise, his time is no∣thing, but a constant motion in calamitie. I haue onely yet runne through the first, and passed my Puerilia; whether my life, or my youth shall be ended first, I
neither know, nor care. I shall neuer bee sorrowfull, for leauing too soone, the tempests of this tumbling Sea. But if I see my Sum∣mer past, I hope in Autumn God will ripen me for him∣selfe, and gather me; if my Maker, and master saw it fit, I could bee content neither to see it, nor winter, I mean the winter of age: but if he shall appoint mee so large a time, I shall willingly pray as my Sauiour hath taught mee, His will bee done: though I wish not the full fruition of all, yet doe I de∣sire to borrow a letter from each: So in stead of Puer,
Iuuenis, Vir, & Senex; giue mee the foure first letters, which will make mee PIVS. LVIII. Two things in my appa∣rell, I will onely aime at; Commodiousnes, Decen∣cie: beyond these I know not, how ought may bee commendable; yet I hate an effeminate sprucenesse, as much as a phantasticke disorder. A neglectiue com∣linesse is a man's best be∣comming ornament. Sarda∣napalus was as base in his Feminine vestures, as Helio∣gabalus was mad, when hee
wore Shooes of Gold, and Rings of Leather: the one shew'd much pride, the o∣ther more wantonnesse: let mee haue both these exclu∣ded, and I am pleas'd in my Garments. LIX. Though an enemy bee not a thing necessarie; yet is there much good vse to be made of him: yea, some∣times he doth a man a grea∣ter pleasure, then a dearer friend. For wheras a friend, out of a feare to displease, and a kinde of conniuing partialitie, speaks only Pla∣centia, & such as he thinkes,
may not giue a distaste, an enemy vtters his opinion boldly, and if any act, mis∣beseeming vertue, spring from a man, he will be sure to finde it, and blowe it a∣broad. So that if a man can∣not know by his friends, wherein he offends; his e∣nemie will bee so much his friend, as to shew him his folly, and how hee fayles. 'Twas a good speech of Diogenes, Wee haue need of faithfull friends, or sharpe enemies. Euery man hath vse of a monitor: yet I see in all, such a naturall and wilfull blindnesse through selfe-loue, that euery man
is angry when his enemy reuiles him, though iustly: and all pleased, when a friend commends, though his Encomion be false, and desertlesse. I will entertaine both with an equall vvel∣come: neither, without some meditation, and good vse. If one praise me for the thing I haue not, my first following endeuour shall bee to get what hee com∣mends mee for; lest vvhen the time comes that I should shew it, hee reape disgrace, by reporting vntruths, and I lose my credit, by want∣ing that, I am suppos'd to possesse. If for that I haue:
I will striue to attaine it, in a measure more large: so shall his words be truth, and my deeds prooue them. If my enemy vpbraids me, let mee see if it bee iustly. It was an argument of much worth, in that renowned Macedonian, which made him (when he was told Ni∣canor rayled on him) say, I beleeue he is honest, and feare I haue deseru'd it. If it bee so, I will labour to shake off that corruption, and be glad I haue so discouer'd it. But if iniuriously hee reports foule, it shall bee my ioy to beare contentedly, the vn∣iust aspersions of malicious
Censure: who euer was, that was not slandered? Though hee should be be∣leeu'd awhile: yet at last, my actions would out-weigh his words, and the disgrace rest, with the intender of the ill. So that webbe of scandall, they would iniect vpon me, my life shal make a garment, for themselues to weare. That stone that iniury casts, euer in the end, lights on her selfe. LX. Two things a man ought to respect while hee liues heere; his inward integri∣tie, and his outward vp∣rightnesse:
his piety toward God, and his reputation a∣mong men. The one is by performance of religious duties; the other by obedi∣ence to the lawes publike; the one makes his life fa∣mous; the other, his death happy: so both together, bring credit to the name, and felicitie to the soule. I wil so be alone, as I may be with God: so with compa∣ny, as I may please the god∣ly; that, report from good men, may speake me vertu∣ous. Thus whensoeuer my breath shall bee made but aire, they shall beleeue, and I know, my selfe to bee
blessed. The death of a good man, is like the put∣ting out of a wax perfumed Candle; hee recompences the losse of light, with the sweet odour hee leaues be∣hinde him. LXI. As it fareth between two friends, that haue been an∣cient familiars, yet dwel∣ling asunder, the one out of a carelesse neglect, forgets and omits his vsuall duty of visitation; and that so long, that at last he forbeares to goe at all: so their loues de∣cay, and diminish: not pro∣ceeding from any Iarre, but
onely out of a stealing neg∣lect, of renuing their loues: Euen so it fals out between God, & the carelesse Chri∣stian: who when hee hath long omitted the duty of Prayer, and perhaps hath some small motiues of a happy returne; the Diuell askes him with what face hee can now repaire vnto him, hauing been so long a stranger, both to him, and that holy duty. Dis-respect is the way to lose a friend: Hee that would not conti∣nue a friend, may neglect him, and haue his aime. Ex∣perience hath taught mee how dangerous neglience
hath beene, how preiudici∣all: how soone it breeds custome; how easily, and in∣sensibly, custome creepes into Nature; which much labour, and long endeuour cannot alter, or extirpate. In this cause there is no re∣medy but violence, and the seasonable acceptance of opportunitie: The vigilant Mariner sailes with the first winde, and though the gale blow somewhat aduersely, yet once lanched forth, hee may either finde the blast, to wombe out his sailes more fully, or else helpe himselfe, by the aduantage of Sea-roome: whereas he,
that rides still anchor'd in the Riuer, and will sayle with none, but a wind faire, may either lye till hee lose his voyage, or else rot his Barke in the Harbour. If a supine neglect run me on these sands, a violent blast must set me afloat againe. In things that must bee, 'tis good to be resolute. I know not whether I shall haue a second call, or vvhether my first motion shall die Issue∣lesse. I am sure I must re∣turne, or perish: and there∣fore necessitie shall adde a foot to my weake desires; yet I will striue more to preuent this, by frequent
familiaritie; then beeing an estranged friend, to renue old loues: not that after er∣rour, I would not returne; but that I would not stray at all. LXII. The good man hath ma∣ny sorrowes, that the wic∣ked man neuer knowes of: his Offences, the sinnes of the Time, the dishonour of God, the dayly increasing of Satans kingdome, and the present misery of his fathers children: So that many times, when the pro∣phane man is belching out his blasphemies, hee in∣wardly
drops a teare in his soule, and is then petition∣ing heauen for his pardon. But to strengthen him vn∣der the burthen of all these, he hath one ioy (that were all his sorrowes doubled) could make him lightly beare them: and this is the truth of Gods promises. If I haue more troubles then another, I care not; so I haue more ioyes. God is no tyrant, to giue mee more then my load. I am well in the midd'st of all, while I haue that, which can vp∣hold me in all. Who de∣serues most honour of the sluggard that hath kept his
bed warme, or the man that hath combated a monster, and master'd him? Iob was not so miserable in his af∣flictions, as hee was happy in his patience. LXIII. The enuious man is a squint-ey'd foole; and must needs want, both wit and honesty: for as the wise man hath alwayes his mind fixed most on his owne af∣faires: so on the contrary, hee obserues other mens; while those that are prop∣per and pertaining to him∣selfe, inioy the least of his counsell and care. He sees
others, & is blind at home; he lookes vpon others as if they were his, and neglects his own as if they were an∣others. Againe, that which he intends for mischiefe, & a secret disgrace; euer addes some splendour to the brightnesse of his worth, he doth so vniustly maligne: as if wishing him infamous, he would labour to make him famous: or desiring to kill him, would prescribe him a Cordiall. Enuie, like the worme, neuer runs but to the fairest and the ripest fruit: as a cunning Bloud-hound, it singles out the fattest Deere of the Herd:
'tis a pitchy smoake, which wheresoeuer we finde, wee may be sure there is a fire of vertue. Abrahams riches were the Philistims enuie. Iacobs blessing bred Esaus hate. He's a man of a strāge constitution, whose sicknes is bred by anothers health; as if nature had made him an Antipathite to vertue; If hee were good, or meri∣torious, hee would neuer grieue to haue a compani∣on: but being bad, and shal∣low himselfe, hee would damme vp the streame, that is sweete and silent: so by enuying another, for his radiant lustre, he giues the
world notice, how dark and obscure hee is in himselfe. Yet to all these blurres, if it were a vice, that could adde but a dramme of content, there might something bee spoken in way of Apology; But whereas all other vices are retained, either for plea∣sure or profit; this only like a barren field, brings forth nothing, but bryars, and thornes: nothing but a meager leanenesse to the pined corps, accompanied with griefe, vexation, mad∣nesse. If another excell me in goodnesse, I'le make him my example to imitate: not my blocke to stumble on.
If in wealth, I shall with him blesse God for his plen∣ty, neuer grudge at those faire fauors of heauen, God hath enough, both for mee, and him: but if he deserues better, let mee applaud the diuine Iustice, not taxe it. If the vice it selfe shall not cause me to shunne it; yet the folly of it shall awe mee so much, as not to shake hands with a Serpent so foule: 'tis only the weake∣sighted, that cannot endure the light. A strong eye can vnhurt gaze the Sunne.
LXIIII. The Councell the Phi∣losopher gaue the young men of Athens, may with much profit, be appli'd by a Christian: viz. That they should often view them∣selues in a glasse, that if they were faire, and well featured, they should doe such things, as should bee beseeming their amiable shape: but if foule, and ill fauored, that then they should labour to salue the bo∣dies blemishes, by the beauties of a mind, accoutred with the ornaments of vertue, & good literature. The Law is the Christians looking glasse;
which will shew all, with∣out either flattery, or parti∣ality. 'Tis a globe hung in the midd'st of the roome, vvhich will shew thee euery durty corner of thy soule. If thou hast wandered in a darke way, this will tell thee thy aberrations: and put thee againe into true path. In it vvill I often be∣hold my selfe: that if I bee free from the outward, actuall violation of it, any thing faire, or haue some beauties, I may study day∣ly, how to maintaine them, how to increase them. But if I find my selfe like a Leo∣pard in his spots, or an Ethi∣opian
in his hiew naturall, blacke and deformed (as I cannot be otherwise in my selfe) it shall yet make mee see my defects, and striue to mend them. Knowne de∣formities incite vs to search for remedy: The know∣ledge of the disease, is halfe the cure. LXV. There is no man so bad∣ly inclin'd, but would glad∣ly bee thought good: no man so good already, but would be accounted some∣what better: Which hath oft made me sit down with vvonder, at the choise ex∣cellēcy
of religious vertue; that euen those which in heart contemne this Prin∣cesse; yet cannot but think it an honour, to be counted as attendants to her. Such a diuine, and amazing Ma∣iestie there is in Goodnes, that all desire to weare her Liuery, though few care to performe her seruice: Like proud Courtiers, they would faine bee Fauorites, but scorne to attend. If then they cannot but affect her, that are her enemies; how should they loue her that ioy to be friends? If I bee bad, let my care bee to bee good indeed, not thought
so. If any good parts alrea∣dy shine in me; I had rather in silence know my selfe better, then haue the vncon∣stant world deeme me, ei∣ther rare or excellent. LXVI. It was well said of Dauid, The vvicked man shall not liue out halfe his dayes: for by his intemperancy, hee puls on himselfe either dis∣eases, or iudgements; which cut him downe, before hee bee fully growne. And though his dayes bee mul∣tiplyed, he makes thē seeme much shorter, then indeed they are. For besides the
beeing taken away by vn∣timely accidents, there bee two things that seeme to contract time, in a more compendious scope. Either excessiue and secure ioy: or else a sure expectation of ill. One of these in euery wic∣ked man hath residence: The former is too ordina∣rie: the latter not so com∣mon, nor fully so dange∣rous. The first hath his con∣science so cast in a sleepe, that it feeles not those priuy and perillous wounds, that sinne impaires it withal. All is frolicke, iocund, merry: and he swimmes in the ful∣lest delights inuention can
procure him: his eye's in∣chanted with lasciuious ob∣iects; his eare charmed with scurrilous talke; his taste glutted with luxurious ryots; his smell filled with artificiall perfumes; and his armes heated with the wan∣ton imbraces of lust: euery sence hath his seuerall sub∣iect of solace: and while in all these, his affections are wholly taken vp in the pre∣sent apprehension of plea∣sure; how can hee count of the precipitate pace of time, that like an Arrow, from a strong bent Bow, sings with the speed of his course? If his delights
would giue him leisure, to meditate a little on this, he might be so much himself, as to know how his time posteth: But letting it passe, as a thing vnthought of, his end steales on him, vnlook't for, vnwelcome, vnawares: and all those voluptuous merriments, wherein in his life-time, he imbathed him∣selfe: now seeme as a day that is past, whose Sunne declin'd at noone. But if otherwise, this sensualitie blinds him not, or that his conscience be awake alrea∣die: then alas! how time∣rous and terrifi'd he is, with the expectation of his
doome, and finall confusi∣on? wishing that hee were either some senslesse stone, that the bitter throes and pangs of despaire might not feelingly pierce him; or else that he had such wings, as could procure his escape from death, and marrow∣searching Iudgement. So like a condemned man, that knowes the date of his dayes, hee lyes telling the clocke, and counting the houre; which he spends, in wishing euery day a yeere, euery houre a day, euery minute an houre, that still he might awhile inioy the sweet possession of his deare
and beloued life. Thus ei∣ther while his soule cleaues to the midd'st of his mirth, his way beguiles him: or else while he quiuers with the consideration of the shame that attends him, he sailes with such feare, that he mindes not his voyage; so is suck't into Gulfe, e're euer hee be aware. A full swinge in pleasure, is the way to make man sense∣lesse: A confident perswa∣sion of vnauoidable misery is a ready path to despaire. These potions that are good but tasted, are mortal ingurgitated. Pleasure taken as Physick, is like a cordiall
to a weakened body: and an expedient thought of our dissolution, may bee as a corrosiue plaister to eate away the deadnesse of the flesh. Both are commenda∣bly vsefull. I will neither be so Iouiall, as to forget the end; nor so sad, as not to remember the beginning of life, God. XLVII. Though Prayer should bee the key of the day, and the locke of the night: yet I hold it more needfull in the morning, then when our bodies do take their re∣pose. For howsoeuer sleepe
be the Image, or shadow of death, & when the shadow is so neere, the substance cannot be farre: yet a man at rest in his chamber, is like a sheepe impenn'd in the fold; subiect onely to the vnauoidable, and more immediate hand of GOD: whereas in the day, when hee roues abroad in the o∣pen and wide pastures, he is then exposed to many more vnthought of acci∣dents, that contingently and casually occurre in the way: Retirednesse is more safe then businesse: who beleeues not a ship securer in the Bay, then in the mid∣dest
of the boyling Ocean? Besides, the morning to the day, is as youth to the life of a man: if that be begun well, commonly his age is vertuous: otherwise, God accepts not the latter ser∣uice, when his enemy ioyes in the first dish. Hee that loues chastity, will neuer marry her, that hath liued a Harlot in youth. Why should God take thy dry bones, when the diuell hath suck't the marrow out? LXVIII. GOD hath left three books to the world, in each of which hee may easily be
found: The Booke of the Creatures, the book of Con∣science, & his written Word. The first shewes his omni∣potency. The second his Iustice: the third his mercy, and goodnesse. So though there bee none of them so barren of the rudiments of knowledge, but is sufficient to leaue all without excuse, apologies: yet in them all, I find all the good, that euer either the Heathen, or the Christian hath publisht a∣broad. In the first, is all Na∣turall Philosophy: in the second, all Morall Philoso∣phy: in the third, all true Diuinitie. To those admi∣rable
Pillars of all humane learning, (the Philosophers) God shew'd himselfe in his omnipotency and iustice, but seemed as it wete to conceale his mercy: to vs Christians he shines in that which out-shines all his workes, his Mercy: Oh! how should we regratulate his fauours for so immense a benefit, wherin secluding himselfe from others, hee hath wholly imparted him∣selfe to vs? In the first of these I will admire his workes, by a serious medi∣tation of the wonders in the Creatures. In the se∣cond, I will reuerence his
iustice, by the secret and in∣most checks of the consci∣ence. In the third imbrace his loue, by laying hold on those promises, wherein he hath not onely left mee meanes to know him, but to loue him, rest in him, & inioy him for euer. LXIX. If the fault be not in the misapplication, then is it true that Diogenes spake of Learning; That, It makes yong men sober, old men hap∣pie, poore men rich, and rich men honorable. Yet in any, without grace, it proues a double mischiefe; there is
nothing more pestilent, thē a ripe wit applyed to lewd∣nesse. Because hee that knowes himselfe to bee quicke and acute, relyes on his own braine, for euasion from all his villanies; and is drawne to the practice of much vice, by the too much presuming on his own dex∣teritie. Ability & a wicked will, is fuell to burne the world with; wit and wan∣tonnesse are able to intice a chaste one. Resolution and policy can cast broyles in Christendome, and put ci∣uill men into ciuill warres; if you beleeue not this, exa∣mine the Iesuite. On the
contrary, where grace guides knowledge, and Re∣ligion hath the reines of Art: there, though on earth, the man is made heauenly; and his life is truely Ange∣licall, He does good by the instinct of Grace, and that good hee doth well, by the skilfull direction of Lear∣ning. Religion is as Gram∣mar, that shewes him the word, and the ground: while knowledge, like Rhe∣toricke, doth pollish it with beseeming ornaments. He that giues almes, do's good, but he that giues willingly to the needy, and in season does better. I vvill set my
selfe to attaine both: for as he can neuer be a good O∣rator, that wants either Grammar, or Rhetoricke: So there is no man can bee a compleat Christian, with∣out Grace, and some know∣ledge. Vzzah intended vvell, but did not know so; & want of goodnes spoil'd Achitophels Councell. How can wee either desire or loue him that wee doe nor know? since affectus mo∣tus est Cordis, à notitia & cognitione obiecti, excita∣tus.
LXX. The couetous man can∣not bee a true or faithfull friend to any: for while he loues his money better thē his friend, what expectati∣on can there bee of the ex∣tent of his liberality? In aduersity, and the time of tempest, when he should be a hauen to rest in, and an Alter Idem; he will either like the Crocodile ceaze on him in the fall, and take the aduantage of his necessi∣ties: or else out of a loth∣nesse to lose any thing by his disbursement, rather see him macerated by a consu∣ming
want, then any way send him a salue for di∣stresse. Words from a dead man, and deeds of charity from a man couetous, are both alike rare, and hard to come by. 'Tis a miracle if he speakes at all; but if hee doth breake silence, 'tis not without terrour & amaze∣ment to the hearers. A co∣uetous mans kindnesse, is like the fowlers shrap wher∣in he casts meat, not out of charity, to relieue them; but trecherie to insnare thē. He reaches thee bread in one hand and shewes it; but keepes a stone in the other and hides it. If yet his courtesies were
without danger, I would rather indure some extre∣mitie, then bee beholding to the almes of Auarice. He that ouer-values his benefit, neuer thinkes hee hath thanks sufficient. I had bet∣ter shift hardly, then owe to an insatiable Creditor. LXXI. I haue seene some high minded roysters, scornfully contemne the lowly poore of Christ; as if they were out of the reach of the shat∣tering wind of Iudgement, or thought it an impossibi∣lity, euer to stand in need of the helpe of such humble
shrubbes. Fooles so to con∣temne those, whose ayde they may after vvant: 'tis no badge of Nobility to despise an inferiour. Mag∣nanimity and humility are Cohabitants: Courtesie is one of the fairest Iems in a Crowne; 'twas Caesars glo∣ry, to saue his Countrey∣men, which liues stil in that speech, vvhich sayes, he par∣doned more, then hee ouer∣came: True Honour is like the Sunne, that shines as well to the Peasant in the field, as the Monarch in his throne: he that withholds his clemency, because the subiect is base, denies a re∣medy
to his wounded foot; because 'tis an inferior part so he may iustly after com∣plaine and want it: when the Lyon was catched in a snare, 'twas not the spati∣ous Elephant, but the little Mouse, that restor'd him his wonted liberty: though the head guides the hand, the hand defends the head. LXXII. As sudden passions are most violent; so sudden oc∣casions of sinne are most dangerous: for while the sences are set vpon by vn∣thought of obiects, reason wants time to call a Coun∣sell
to determine how to resist the assault: 'tis a faire booty makes many a thiefe, that if he had missed of this accident, would perhaps haue liu'd honestly. Oppor∣tunity is a wooer, that none but heauen can conquer. Humanity is too weake a spell for so powerfull a charme: shee casts a fury into the bloud, that will teare out a way, though the soule bee lost by it. The racke is easier then her im∣portunity; flames are snow∣bals to it: sure if the Diuell would change his proper∣ties, he would put himselfe into this subtill thing: she
puls vs with a thousand chaines; at euery nerue she hangs a poize, to draw vs to her sorcery: and many times in our gaine, wee are lost for euer. What, tortures cannot force vs to, she will smoothly perswade: shee breakes all bonds, lawes, re∣solutions, oathes. Wise was the abstinence of Alexan∣der, from the sight of Darius his daughters; lest their beauty should incite him to folly: shee runnes vs into forbidden errors, & makes vs so desperate, as to dare a∣ny thing: If shee offer mee her seruice to ill, Ile either kicke her as a bawd to vice,
or else vvinke, vvhen shee shewes mee her painting. Occasion is a witch, and I'le be as heedfull in auoyding her; as I vvill bee vvary to eschew a sinne. But if I bee constrained to heare the Syren sing, Vlisses was wise, when hee ty'd himselfe to the mast. LXXIII. My hatred to my ene∣my shall be but in part, my loue to my friend, whole and intire: for howsoeuer I may hate my enemies vi∣ces, and his ill conditions; yet will I loue his person, both as he is a man, and my
brother. His detestation is too deepe, that will burne his linnen, because 'tis foule; they may both re∣turne to their former puri∣ty, and then to hate, is sin∣full. But as for my friend, I will loue both his person, and his qualities: his qua∣lities first, and for them his person. Yet in neither will I so hate, as to bee a foe to goodnesse; nor so loue, as to foster Iniquity: 'Tis a question which is the worst of the two, to bee vi∣ces friend, or vertues ene∣mie.
LXXIV. Next God, the good man is the onely friend; for when all other slinke out of the way, hee onely is a secure harbour for a ship∣wrackt soule to ride in; If he be vpright that be falne in distresse, he then relieues him, as a brother, as a mem∣ber: If lewd, yet necessity induceth a commiseration, and seeing the glorious Impresse of the Almighties image in him, hee can not, but for his Fathers sake, af∣fect him. If hee be poore, of God's making, by the
vnauoidable designement of a supreme prouidence, nature incites a reliefe: For he knowes not how soone, a like lot may fall in his owne ground. The same sunne saw Iob both rich, and poore to a Prouerbe. If his owne ill courses haue brought his decay; hee is not so obdurate, and flinty, but that hee can afford him a hand of compassion, to strengthen him a little, in the midd'st of disasters: ho∣ping that his charitie may either worke his returne, or stay him from speedy ru∣ine. If he be ill, he is a Ma∣gistrate, to correct and re∣claime
him: if good, he is a father, to vphold, and loue him: if rich, he reades him a lecture of moderation, and discreet disposure; tels him, not possession, but vse, diuitiates a man more true∣ly: if poore, he sets him to Schoole with Paul there to learne, Content is plenty; tel's how that Pagan Cynick could laugh at riches, when he call'd them nothing but fortunes vomit; if wise, hee is his delight, and solace; euen the Granar, where he leaues his load, and lockes his store: if ignorant, hee instructs him with the Ora∣cles of God, dictitates sen∣tences
vnto him, & speakes all, tanquam ex tripode. Eue∣ry way I finde him so bene∣ficiall, that the pious vvill not liue, but with him: and the badde man cannot liue without him. Who had salu'd the offending Israe∣lites, had not Moses stood vp for to intercede? it shall more ioy mee to liue with Christians, then men. LXXV. The hard-hearted man hath misery almost in per∣fection: and there is none more wretched, then a man with a conscience feared. Other sinners march in the
high-way to ruine; but hee as hee goes, builds a wall at his backe, that hee cannot retire to the tent. Neither Mercies, nor Iudgements, winne him at all. Not mer∣cies: those his pride makes him thinke but his due, and while they are but com∣mon ones, they passe away with his cōmon thoughts. Benefits seldome sinke deepe in obdurate minds: 'tis the soft nature that is soonest taken with a cour∣tesie. Not Iudgements; for either he reuerberates them back, before they pierce, as a wal of steele doth a blunt∣headed arrow: or if they
doe perhaps find entrance, like the Elephant, with the convulsion of his nerues, & his bodies contraction; hee casts out the shaft that sticks within him: so still he rests vnmollified, for all this raine, and haile. Warnings to peruerse dispositions, are the meanes to make them worse: Those plagues, and wonders that would haue melted a milder soule, only reduced Pharaoh's to a more hard, and desperate temper. Strange! that hee should locke out of his own good, with so strong a key, so sure a Ward; when euery vice that defiles the minde,
findes both ready and free welcome. If I liue in sinne, God's first call is mercy; I had better goe willingly, then be led by constraint: 'tis fit hee should know the smart of torture, that no∣thing will cause to confesse but the Racke: if I finde God whips mee with any sensible stroke, I will search the cause, then seeke the cure: such blowes are the physicke of a bleeding soule: but neglected, my sinne will be more, and my punishment: 'tis in vaine to bee stubborne with God: hee that can crush vs to no∣thing, can turne vs to any
thing: let mee rather re∣turne speedily, and preuent Iudgements, then stay ob∣stinately and pull downe more: as 'tis a happy feare, which preuents the offence, and the rod: so that is a mi∣serable valour; which is bold to dare the Almighty. LXXVI. Some mens Censures are like the blasts of Rammes Hornes, before the walles of Iericho: all the strength of a mans vertue they lay leuell at one vtterance: when all their ground is onely a conceited fancie, without any certaine basis
to build on. What religi∣ous minde will not vvith amazement shudder, at the peremptorie conclusi∣ons, where they haue set their period? Wondring, Man that knowes so little, should yet so speake, as if he were priuy to all. I confesse, a man may roue by the out∣ward lineaments, what common inclinations rule within: yet that Philoso∣pher did more wisely, that seeing a faire face, with a tongue silent, bade him speake that he might see him. For the cheeke may be dim∣pled with a pleasing smile, while the heart throbs with
vndiscerned dolors: and as a cleere face shewes not alwayes a sound body: no more is an ingenuous look, alwayes the ensigne of a minde vertuous I wil onely walke in Christ's path, and learne by their fruits to know them: where I want expe∣rience, charitie bids mee thinke the best, and leaue what I know not, to the Searcher of heart's. Mis∣takes, Suspect, and Enuie, often iniure a cleere fame, there is least danger in a charitable construction; In part hees guilty of the wrong that's done, Which doth beleeue those false reports, that runne.
I will neither beleeue all I heare, nor speake all I beleeue; A mans good name is like a milke-white ball, that will infinitely ga∣ther soyle in tossing. The act of Alexander in this cause, merits an eternall memory: that hauing read a Letter with his Fauorite Hephaestion, wherein his mo¦ther calumniated Antipa∣ter, tooke his Signet from his finger, and appressed his lips with it: Coniuring as it were, the strict silence of anothers disgrace: Oh A∣lexander! this very action was enough to make thee famous, who should not in
this admire, and imitate thee? A desire to disgrace another, cannot spring from a good roote: Malice and basenesse euer dwell with calumnie. I will iudge well of euery man, whom his owne bad life speakes not ill of: if he be bad, I'le hope well; what know I show his end may prosper? I had better labour to amend him to himselfe, then by pub∣lishing his vices, make him odious to others. If hee be good, and belongs to God, how can I chuse but offend much, when I speake ill of a child that is indeared to such a fathers affection?
God loues his owne ten∣derly; and whosoeuer offers a disgrace to them, shall be sure to pay for't, ei∣ther by teares, or torment. LXXVII. There are three things e∣specially that a Christian should know: His owne Misery: Gods Loue: his owne thankefull Obedi∣ence. His misery, how iust; Gods loue, how free, how vndeserued; his own thank∣fulnesse, how due, how ne∣cessary. Consideration of one, successiuely begets the apprehension of all: Our misery shewes vs his Loue:
his Loue cals for our ac∣knowledgement. Want makes a bounty weightier: if wee thinke on our needs, wee cannot but admire his mercies: how dull were we, if wee should not value the reliefe of our necessi∣ties? he cannot but esteeme the benefit, that vnexpect∣edly helpes him in his dee∣pest distresse: That Loue is most to be prized, whose onely motiue is goodnesse. The thought of this, will forme a disposition grate∣full: who can meditate so vnbottomed a loue, and not study for a thankefull de∣meanour? His minde is
crosse to Nature, that re∣quites not affection with gratitude. All fauours haue this successe, if they light on good ground, they bring forth thankes. Let mee first thinke my misery, without my Sauiours mercy: next, his mercy, without my me∣rits: and from the meditati∣on of these two, my since∣rer thankes will spring. Though I cannot conceiue of the former as they are; Infinite, and beyond my thought: yet will I so pon∣der them, as they may en∣kindle the fire of my vnfai∣ned, and zealous thanksgi∣uing. That time is vvell
spent, wherein wee studie thankefulnesse. LXXVIII. Though the fooles of the world think outward beau∣ty the only Iewell that de∣serueth wearing; yet the wise man counts it but an accident; that can neither adde, nor diminish, to the worth of vertue, as she is in her selfe: so as hee neuer e∣steemes her more, or lesse, but as he findes her accom∣plisht with discretion, ho∣nesty, and good parts. If my friend be vertuous, and nobly-minded, my soule shall loue him, howsoeuer
his body be framed: and if beauty make him amiable, I needs must like him much the better: the Sunne is more glorious in a cleere sky, then when the Hori∣zon is clouded. Beauty is the wit of Nature put into the frontispice. If there be any humane thing may teach faith reason, this is it: in other things, we imagine more then wee see: in this we see more then wee can imagine. I haue seene (and yet not with a partiall eye) such features, & such mix∣tures, as I haue thought im∣possible for either Nature to frame, or Art to coun∣terfet;
yet in the same face, I haue seene that, which hath out-gone them both, the Countenance. Oh! if such glory can dwell with corruption, what celestiall excellencies are in the Saints aboue? who would not gaze himselfe into ad∣miration, when he shall see so rich a treasure, in so pure a Cabinet, vnmatched ver∣tue, in matchlesse beauty? But if my friends body hath more comelinesse, then his soule goodnesse; I like him the worse, for beeing but outwardly faire. Wicked∣nesse in beauty, is a traytor of the Bed-chamber; poi∣son
in sweet meates. A vi∣tious soule, in a beautifull body, I account as a Iesuite in the Roabes of a Courtier; or somewhat more fitly, a Papist, that will goe to Church. LXXIX. As I thinke there are ma∣ny, worse then they seeme; so I suppose there are some, better then they shew: and these are like the growing Chesnut, that keepes a sweet, & nutrimentall ker∣nell, included in a rough, and prickely huske. The o∣ther, as the Peach, hold a rugged and craggy stone,
vnder the couer of a Vel∣uet Coat. I would not de∣ceiue a good man either way: both offer a wrong to vertue: The one shewes her worse then she is; dulling her beauty with dimme co∣lours, and presenting her, with a harder fauour then her owne: The other doth varnish ouer the rottennesse of Vice, and makes good∣nesse but the vizor for hy∣pocrisie. Either are con∣demnable: painting the face, is not much worse, then wilfull soiling it. He is as well a murtherer, that accuseth himselfe falsely, as he that did the act, and de∣nies
it. One would obscure goodnesse, with Vice; the other would palliate Vice, with goodnesse. Fraud is in both: and I am sure no Plea can make deceit allowable. I will therefore striue to a∣uoid both; and with Chry∣sostom either seeme as I am, or bee as I seeme. But if I should erre on one side, I had rather resemble a plaine Country-man, that goes in russet, and is rich in reue∣nues; then a riotous Cour∣tier, that weares glorious apparell, without mony in's purse.
LXXX. A Christians voyage to heauen, is a sentence of three stops; Comma, Colon, Periodus. He that repents, is come to the Comma, and begins to speake sweetly, the language of saluation; but if he leaues there, God vnderstands not such abrupt speeches: sorrow alone, cannot expiate a Pyrats robberies; hee must both leaue his theft, and serue his Country, ere his Prince wil receiue him to fauour. 'Tis he that confesseth & forsakes his sinne, that shal find mercy: 'tis his leauing his wicked∣nesse,
that is as his Colon, and carries him halfe way to heauen. Yet heere also is the Clause vnperfect, vnles he goes on to the practice of righteousnesse, which as a Period knits vp all, and makes the sentence full. Re∣turne, and penitence is not sufficient for him, that hath fled from his Soueraignes banner; hee must first doe some valiant act, before by the law of Armes, hee can bee restored to his former bearing. I will not content my selfe with a Comma; Re∣pentance helps not, when sinne is renued; nor dare I make my stay at a Colon; not
to doe good, is to commit euill, at least by omission of what I ought to doe: before I come to a Period, the con∣stant practice of piety, I am sure, I cannot bee sure of complete glory. If I did all strictly, I were yet vnprofi∣table; and if God had not appointed my faith to per∣fect mee, miserable. If hee were not full of mercies, how vnhappy a creature were man? LXXXI. Euen from naturall rea∣son, is the wicked man prou'd to bee sonne vnto Satan, and heire of hell, and
torments. For not to speake of heauen, (where the bles∣sed are happy, and al things beyond apprehension ex∣cellent,) euen in the Firma∣ment, we see how all things are preserued by a glorions order: the Sun hath his ap∣pointed circuit, the Moone her constant change, and euery Planet & Starre their proper course and place. For as they are called fixed Starres, not because they moue not at all, but because their motion is insensible, and their distances euer the same, by reason of the slow motiō of the eighth sphere, in which they are: So they
are not called wandring Pla∣nets, for that they moue in an vncertaine irregularitie; but because those seuen in∣feriour Orbes, wherin they are set, are diuersly carried about; which makes them appeare sometimes in one place, somtimes in another, yet euer in the settled place of their owne Orbe, whose Reuolutions also, are in most strict, and euer certain times▪ The earth likewise hath her vnstirred Station; the Sea is confin'd in limits; and in his ebbings, & flow∣ings, dances as it were after the influence, and aspect of the Moone; whereby it is
both kept from putrifacti∣on, and by struggling with it selfe, from ouer-flowing the land. In this world, Or∣der is the life of Kingdoms, Honours, Arts: and by the excellency of it, all things flourish, and thriue. Onely in hell is confusion, hor∣rour, and amazing disorder. From whence the wicked man shewes himself sprung, for there is nothing that like him, liues so irregular, and out of compasse. Dis∣order is a bird of the Di∣uels hatching: I feare lest those that rent the Church for Ceremonie, haue some affinitie with that prince of
mis-rule: wee oft finde the parents disposition, though not propagated to the child, yet followed by him. I do not censure, but doubt. We haue seldome knowne him good, that refuseth to obey good orders. Who can expect a fruitfull crop, when the field is somtimes blasted with Lightning, sometime drenched with invndations, but neuer che∣rished with a kindly Sunne? things vncapable of a true forme, are euer mending: yet euer vnperfect: when the rankes are broken, the victory is in hazzard. One bad voice, can put twenty
good ones out of tune. I will first order my minde by good resolution; then keepe it so, by a strong con∣stancie. Those Souldiers dyed brauely, that where they stood to fight, they fell to death. LXXXII. In euery man there bee three things that encoun∣ter our Consideration; The Mind, the Behauiour, the Person. A grosse ble∣mish in any of which, sticke some disgrace on the vn∣happy owner. If the Mind be vitious, though the car∣riage bee faire, and Person comely; Honesty esteemes
not outward parts, where inward Grace is wanting. If his mind be good, & car∣riage clownish, his outward bad demeanour makes his inward worth ridiculous: and admit he hath both de∣seruing applause; yet a sur∣feited and diseased body, makes al disregarded; while the approch of his presence may proue preiudiciall, in∣fectious, noisome. To reme∣dy the defects of all these, I finde three noble Sciences: Diuinity, Philosophy, Phisick: Diuinity, for the Soule; to preserue that vnstain'd, and; holy; as also to indue it with vnderstanding; for
God with his Graces, instils Knowledge: it was the keeping of his Law, made Dauid wiser then those that taught him. Diuine know∣ledge is not without hu∣mane; when God giues the first, in some measure hee giues both: and therefore we seldome finde the igno∣rant man honest; if hee bee mentally, yet hee failes ex∣pressiuely. Philosophie, for his manners and demea∣nour, in the many contin∣gent things of this life; to fit him both with decent Complements, and suffici∣cient stayednes: neither sa∣uouring of Curiosity, nor
rusticity: nor was euer Re∣ligion found a foe to good manners; For shee shines brightest in a braue behaui∣our, so it bee still free from affectation, flattery. Phi∣losophy is the salt of life; that can dry vp the crude humors of a nouice, & cor∣rect those pestilent qualities wherewith nature hath in∣fested vs: which was in∣genuously confest by Socra∣tes, when Zopyrus by his Phisiognomy, pronounced him fouly vicious. Phy∣sicke, to know the state of the body; both to auoyde distempers in health, and to recouer health, in wearying
diseases; 'tis the restitution of decaying nature: when she is falling, this giues her a hand of sustenance: it puts away our blemishes, restores our strength, and rids vs of that, which would rid vs of our liues. In all these though a man bee not so learned, as to teach them to others; yet in all I would know so much, as might serue to direct mee, in mine owne occasions. 'Tis commendable to know any thing that may beare the title of Good; but for these so pleasing Sciences, I will rather study with some paines, then want experi∣ence
in things so necessary. Thus shall I fit my mind for God, my body to my mind, my behauiour to both, and my friends. LXXXIII. The distempers of these times, would make a wise man both merry, and mad: merry, to see how vice flourishes but a while, and being at last frustrate of all her faire hopes, dyes in a deiected scorne; which meetes with nothing in the end, but beggery, basenesse, and contempt. To see how the world is mistaken in o∣pinion, to suppose those
best, that are wealthiest. To see how the world thinkes to appall the minde of no∣blenesse with misery; while true resolution laughs at their poore impotency, and slights euen the vtmost spight of tyranny. To see how men buy Offices at high rates, which when they haue, prooue gins to catch their soules in, and snare their estates, and re∣putations. To see how foo∣lishly men coozen them∣selues of their soules, while they thinke they gaine, by their cunning defrauding another. To see how the proiectors of the world,
like the spoke of the Wheele of SESOSTRIS Chariot, are tumbled vp and downe, from beggery, to worship; from worship, to honour; from honour, to basenesse againe. To see what idle complements are currant among some that affect the Phantasticke garbe: as if friendship were nothing but an apish salute, glossed ouer with the var∣nish of a smooth tongue. To see a strutting prodigall ouer-looke a region, with his wauing plume; as if he could as easily shake that, as his feather; yet in priuate creep like a crouching Spa∣niell,
to his base muddy prostitute. To see how pot-valour thunders in a Tauerne, and appoints a Düell, but goes away, and giues mony to haue the quarrell taken vp vnder∣hand. Mad on the other side, to see how Vice goes trapperd with rich furni∣ture, while poore Vertue hath nothing but a bridle and saddle, which onely serue to increase her bon∣dage. To see Machiauel's tenents held as Oracles; ho∣nesty reputed shallownesse; Iustice bought and sold; as if the world went about to disprooue Zorobabel, and
would make him confesse, mony to bee stronger then Truth. To see how flatterie creepes into fauour vvith Greatnesse, while plaine dealing is thought the ene∣mie of state, and honour. To see how the Papists (for promotion of their owne Religion) inuent lyes, and print them; that they may not onely cozen the pre∣sent age, but gull posterity, with forged actions. To see how well-meaning sim∣plicitie is foot-ball'd. To see how Religion is made a Polititians vizor; which hauing help't him to his purpose, hee casts by, like
Sunday apparell, not thought on all the weeke after. And which vvould mad a man more then all, to know all this, yet not know how to helpe it. These would almost di∣stract a man in himselfe. But since I finde they are incu∣rable; I'le often pray for their amendment in pri∣uate, neuer declaime, but when I am call'd to't. Hee loseth much of his com∣fort, that without a iust deputation, thrusts himselfe into danger. Let mee haue that once, and it shall neuer grieue mee, to die in a war∣rantable Warre.
LXXXIV. To reuenge a wrong, is both easie, and vsuall; and as the world thinkes, sa∣uours of some noblenesse: but Religion sayes the con∣trarie, and tels vs 'tis better to neglect it, then requite it. If any man shall willing∣ly offer me an iniury, hee shall know, I can see it; but withall, he shall see, I scorne it: vnlesse it be such, as the bearing is an offence. What need I doe that, which his owne minde will doe for me? If he hath done ill, my reuenge is within him: if not, I am too blame in see∣seeking
it. If vnwillingly he wrongs me, I am as rea∣die to forgiue, as hee to submit: for I know, a good minde will bee more sor∣rowfull, then I shall be of∣fended: With his own hand hee rebateth his honour, that kills a prisoner humbly yeel∣ding: Who but a Deuill, or a Pope, could trample on a prostrate Emperour? LXXXV. I obserue none more ly∣able to the world's false censure, then the vpright nature, that is honest, and free. For many times, while he thinkes no ill, hee
cares not though the world sees the worst of his acti∣ons; supposing he shall not be iudged worse, then hee knowes himselfe: but the world beeing bad it selfe, guesses at others by his owne: so concludes bad, of those that are not. Some haue I knowne thus iniur'd; that out of a minde not ac∣quainted with ill, haue by a free demeanor, had infinite scandals cast vpon them; when I know, the ignorant and ill world is much mis∣taken, and coniectures false. I will neuer censure till I see grounds apparant: hee that thinks ill without this,
I dare pawne my soule, is either bad, or would be so, if opportunitie but seru'd him. In things vncertaine, a badde construction must needs flow from a badde minde: who could ima∣gine priuate vice which they doe not see, by a harmelesse carriage, which they doe see, vnlesse either their own ill practice, or de∣sires, had prompted them? Vice as it is the Diuels issue; so in part it retaines his qualities; and desiring others bad, beleeues them so. But vertue had a more heauenly breeding: shee is wary, lest shee censure rash∣ly:
and had rather straine to saue, then erre to con∣demne. If my life bee free from villany, and base de∣signes, I know, the good will speake no worse then they see: as for those that are lewd, their blacke tongues can neuer spot the faire of vertue: onely I could sometimes grieue, to see how they wrong them∣selues, by wronging o∣thers. LXXXVI. Euery man either is rich, or may bee so; though not all in one and the same
wealth. Some haue abun∣dance, and reioyce in't: Some a competency, and are content: some hauing nothing, haue a minde de∣siring nothing. Hee that hath most, wants some∣thing: hee that hath least, is in something suppli'd; wherein the minde, which maketh rich, may well pos∣sesse him with the thought of store. Who whistles out more content, then the low-fortun'd Plow-man, or sings more merrily, then the abiect Coblar, that sits vnder the stall? Content dwels with those, that are out of the eye of the
world, whom she hath ne∣uer train'd with her gawds, her toyes, her lures. Wealth is like learning, wherein our greater knowledge, is onely a larger sight of our wants. Desires fulfilled, teach vs to desire more: so wee that at first were pleased, by remouing from that, are now growne in∣satiable. Wishes haue nei∣ther end; nor End. So in the midd'st of affluencie, wee complaine of penurie; which not finding, wee make. For to possesse the whole world with a grum∣bling minde, is but a little more specious pouerty. If I
be not outwardly rich, I will labour to bee poore in crauing desires; but in the vertues of the minde, (the best riches) I would not haue a man exceed me. He that hath a minde conten∣tedly good, inioyeth in it boundlesse possessions. If I be pleas'd in my selfe, who can adde to my happinesse? as no man liues so happy, but to some his life would be burdensome: so we shall finde none so miserable, but wee shall heare of an∣other, that would change calamities.
LXXXVII. To haue beene happie, is wretched; to bee happie, momentany; to may bee happy, doubtfull. All that the world yeelds, is ei∣ther vncertainely good, or certainely ill. Euen his best cordials, haue some bitter ingredients in them; lest foolish sensuality should catch them with too gree∣die a hand. Wee should surfet with their hony, if there were not gall inter∣mingled. The reason of de∣fect I finde in the obiect, which beeing earthly, must
be brittle, fading, vaine, imperfect: so though it may please, it cannot sa∣tisfie. Earth can giue vs but a taste of pleasure, not fill vs. What shee affoords, let me lawfully vse; trust to, neuer. He onely, that hath beene, is, and shall bee for euer, can make my past happinesse present, my fu∣ture certaine, and my pre∣sent continue, if not as 'tis, better, and then for euer. LXXXVIII. A good name is among all externals, both the best, and most brittle blessing.
If it be true, that Difficilia quae pulchra, this is a faire beatitude. 'Tis the hardest both to get, and keepe: like a glasse of most curi∣ous workemanship, long a making, and broke in a moment. That which is not gained but by a con∣tinued habit of many ver∣tues, is by one short viti∣ous action, lost for euer. Nay, if it could onely va∣nish in this sort, it would then by many be kept vn∣tainted: If it could not be lost but vpon certainties; If it were in our owne kee∣ping; or if not in our own, in the hands of the wise
and honest; how possible were it to preserue it pure? But alas! this is the mi∣serie, that it rests vpon pro∣babilities, which as they are hard to disproue, so they are readie to per∣swade: That it is in the hands of others, not our selues: in the custodie not of the discreet, and good onely; but also of Fooles, Knaues, Villaines: Who though they cannot make vs worse to ourselues; yet how vile may they render vs to others? To vindi∣cate it from the tongues of these, there is no remedie but a constant carefull dis∣cretion.
I must not onely be good, but not seeme ill: Appearance alone, which in good is too little, is in euill too much. He is a wil∣full murtherer of his owne fame, that willingly ap∣peares, in the ill action hee did not. 'Tis not enough to bee well liu'd, but well reported. When we know good fame a blessing, wee may easily in the contrary, discerne a curse: where∣of wee are iustly seized, while wee labour not to auoid it. I will care as well to bee thought honest, as to be so: my friends know mee by the actions they
see, strangers, by the things they heare: the agreement of both, is the confirming my goodnesse. The one is a good complexion; the other a good countenance: I deny not but they may bee seuerall; but they are then most gracefull, when both are seated together. It had beene well spoken of Caesar, if hee had not put her away, when after tryall, and the crime clee∣red, hee said, Caesars wife should not onely bee free from sinne, but from suspition. An ill name may bee free from dishonestie, but not from some folly. Though
slanders rise from others, we our selues oft giue the occasion. The first best way to a good name, is a good life: the next, is a good be∣hauiour. LXXXIX. All earthly delights I finde sweeter in the expec∣tation, then the inioyment: All spirituall pleasures, more in fruition, then ex∣pectation. Those carnall contentments that heere wee ioy in, the Diuell shewes vs through a pro∣spectiue glasse; vvhich makes them seeme both
greater, and neerer hand: when hee tooke Christ to the Mountaine, he shewed him all the Kingdomes, and the glory of them; but ne∣uer mentions the troubles, dangers, cares, feares, vi∣gilancies, which are as it were the thornes, where∣with a Crowne is lined. Oh! what mountaines of ioy doe wee cast vp, while wee thinke on our earthly Canaan? whatsoeuer tem∣porall felicitie wee appre∣hend, we cull out the plea∣sures, and ouerprize them; the perils and molestations wee either not see, or not thinke of: like the foolish
man, that at a deare rate buyes a Monopoly, where∣in hee counts the gaines, and ouer-casts them; but neuer weighs the charges, nor the casualtie, in ma∣king of him lyable both to the hatefull curse of the people; and the seuere cen∣sure of a Parliament. Here∣in wee are all fooles, that seeing these Bladders, wee will blow them beyond their compasse. 'Tis Sa∣tans craft, to shew vs the inticing spots of this Pan∣ther, concealing the torui∣tie of her countenance. But when againe wee looke at heauenly things, like a cun∣ning
Iuggler, he turnes the glasse; so detracts from those faire proportions, the chiefe of their beauty, and worth: those, we beleeue both lesse, and more re∣mote; as if hee would car∣rie vs in Winter, to see the pleasures of a Garden. Thus the heart informed by abused sences, is con∣tent to sayle as they steere; so either tombes her selfe in the bosome of the waues; or cuts through the way to her enemies Coun∣try; where shee is quickly taken, ransack't, and rifl'd of all. If this were not, how could wee be so heartlesse
in pursuite of celestiall pri∣zes, or what could breed so soone a loathing of that, which most we haue coue∣ted, and sweat to obtaine? If my mind grow enamou∣red on any sublunarie hap∣pinesse, I will coole it with this knowledge: and with∣all tell her, shee is happier in apprehending the taste, without the Lees; then in drinking the Wine, that is yet vnfined. That feli∣citie which experience findes lame, and halting, Thought and supposition giue a perfect shape. But if the motions of my soule wheele toward any diuine
sweet, my strongest argu∣ments shall perswade a pro∣ceeding. Heere imaginati∣ons dark eye is too dimme, to fix vpon this Sunne. When I come to it, I am sure I shall finde it trans∣cending my thoughts: Till then, my faith shall bee aboue my reason, and per∣swade mee to more then I know. Though fruition ex∣cludes faith, yet beliefe makes blessed. So I will beleeue, what yet I cannot inioy.
XC. Euery mans actions are according to his mind, te∣dious or delightfull. For be it neuer so laborious and painefull, if the minde en∣tertaines it with delight, the body gladly vndergoes the trouble, and is so farre at the mindes seruice, as not to complaine of the burthen. And though it be neuer so ful of pleasure, that might smooth the sences; yet if the mind distastes it, the content turnes to vexa∣tion, toyle. Desire is a ind that against the tyde can
carry vs merrily; with it, make vs fly. How pleasant would our life be, if we had not crosse gales to thwart vs, various tydes to checke vs? With these, how full of distresse? yet in them, we often increase our sorrows, by vainely striuing against vnconquerable fate; when if we could but perswade our minde, wee might much ease both it, and our body. That which is bad, though neuer so pleasureable, I'le striue to make my minde dislike; that my body also may bee willing to forgoe that, which my mind hates. That which is good, and
should be done, I'le learne to affect, and loue; howsoe∣uer my body refuse. As my mind is better then it; so my care shall bee more to con∣tent it: but most to make it cōtent with goodnes, other∣wise I had better crosse it, then let it settle to vnlaw∣full solaces. I prefer this vn∣quietnesse, before the other peace. That which is easie, Ile easily doe; that which is not, my mind shall make so. My life as it is full e∣nough of trauaile; why should I by my mindes loa∣thing, make it seeme more difficult?
XCI. I cannot know God as he is; if I could, I were vnhap∣py, and he not God. For then must that eternall om∣nipotencie of his be finite, and comprehensible; else, how could the fleet dimen∣sions of the minde of man containe it? I admire the definition of Empedocles, who said, God was a Sphere, whose Center was euery where, and Circumference no where. Though his full light bee inaccessible, yet from this ignorance springs all my happinesse, and strongest
comfort. When I am so ingulfed in misery, as I know no way to escape; God, that is so infinite a∣boue mee, can send a deli∣uerance, when I can neither see, nor hope it. He needes neuer despaire, that knowes he hath a friend, which at all assayes, can helpe him. XCII. If I were so punisht as to liue here perpetually, I would wish to haue alwaies such a mind, as I find after the conquest of a strong temptation: then haue I as much happinesse, as can be
found in this lifes mouea∣bles. The tryall first be∣wrayes the danger, then the escape vshers in succee∣ding ioy: and all know, the Sun appeares more lustrous to a prisoner that comes out of a Dungeon, then to him that dayly beholds his brightnesse. When is wine so pleasant as after a long thirst? Besides, the soule withdrawne from GOD, returnes in the end with comfort, and againe sweet∣ly closeth with her Maker; whose goodnes she knowes it is, to make her so braue∣ly victorious. We are ne∣uer so glad of our friends
company, as when he re∣turnes after tedious ab∣sence. All the pleasures that wee haue, rellish bet∣ter when wee come from miseries; then, what a glo∣ry is it to a noble spirit, to haue endur'd and con∣quer'd? there being more sweetnesse in a hard victo∣rie, where wee come off faire; then in the neglected pleasures of a continuall peace. Those Fowles taste best, that we kill our selues in birding: what bread eates so well, as that which wee earne vvith labour? And indeed 'tis the way to make vs perfect; for as he can ne∣uer
bee a good Souldier, that hath not felt the toyle of a battell: so he can neuer be a sound Christian, that hath not felt temptations buffets. Euery fire refines this gold. If I did finde none, I should feare I were vices too much: or else that God saw me so weake, as I could not hold out the encounter: but seeing I do, the pleasantnesse of the fruit, shall furnish me with patience, to abide the pre∣cedent bitternesse; This gone, I shall find it a felicity to say, I haue beene wret∣ched.
XCIII. Earth hath not any thing more glorious then ancient Nobility, when tis found vvith vertue. What bar∣barous mind will not reue∣rence that bloud, which hath vntainted run through so large a succession of ge∣nerations? Besides, ver∣tue addes a new splendor, vvhich together vvith the honor of his house, chal∣lengeth a respect from all. But bad greatnesse, is no∣thing but the vigor of vice; hauing both minde and meanes to bee vncontrolla∣bly
lewd. A debauched sonne of a Noble Familie, is one of the intollerable burthens of the earth, & as hatefull a thing as hell: for all know, he hath had both example, and precept, flo∣wing in his education; both which, are powerfull enough to obliterate a na∣tiue illnesse: yet these in him, are but auxiliaries to his shame, that vvith the brightnesse of his Ance∣stors, make his owne dark∣nesse more palpable. Vice in the Sonne of an Ancient Family, is like a clownish Actor in a stately Play, hee is not onely ridiculous in
himselfe; but disgraces both the plot, and the Poet: vvhereas vertue in a man of obscure Parents, is like an vnpollish't Diamond, lying in the way among pebbles; which howsoe∣uer it bee neglected of the vnciuill vulgar; yet the wise Lapidary takes it vp, as a Iewell vnvaluable; it being so much the more glorious, by how much the other were baser. He that is good and great, I would sell my life to serue him no∣bly; otherwise, being good, I loue him better, whose fa∣ther expir'd a Clowne; then he that being vitious,
is in a lineall descent from him, that was knighted with Tubal-Cain's fauchion which he made before the Floud. XCIIII. I find some men extreme∣ly passionate: and these, as they are more taken with a ioy; so, they taste a disaster more heauily. Others are free from beeing affected; and as they neuer ioy ex∣cessiuely; so they neuer sorrow immoderately: but haue together, lesse mirth, and lesse mourning: like patient gamesters, winning, and losing, are one. The
latter I will most labour for. I shall not lose more contentment in apprehen∣ding ioyes, then I shall griefe in finding troubles. For we are more sensible of paine, then delight; the one contracting the spirits, the other dilating thē. Though it were not so, liuing heere, vexations are more ordina∣ry: Ioy is a thing for here∣after. Heauen cannot bee found vpon earth. Many great ioyes are not so plea∣sant, as one torment proues tedious. The father sighes more at the death of one sonne, then he smiles at the birth of many.
XCV. In weighty affaires, wee can neuer doe well, vnlesse we know both our selues, and the thing wee intend. Truth falls into hazard, when it finds either a weak Defender, or one that knowes not her worth. How can hee guide a busi∣nesse, that needeth a guide for himselfe? Haue we not knowne many, taking their abilities at too high a pitch, rush vpon matters that haue proou'd their ouerthrow? Rash presumption is a lad∣der that will breake our
necks. If wee thinke too well of our selues, we ouer∣shoot the marke; If not well enough, wee are short of it. And though wee know our selues, yet if ig∣norant in the thing, wee ex∣pose our selues to the same mischiefe. Who is so vn∣wise as to wade through the riuer he hath not soun∣ded, vnlesse hee can either swimme wel, or haue helpe at hand? Hee that takes vpon him what hee cannot doe, rides a horse which he cannot rule; he can neither sit in safety, nor alight when he would. In whatsoeuer I vndertake, I vvill first stu∣dy
my selfe; next the thing that I goe about: being to seeke in the former, I can∣not proceede well; vnder∣standing that, I shall know the other the better; if not the particulars, I may cast it in the general; something vnseene, we must leaue to a sodaine discretion, either to order, or auoyde. 'Tis not for man to see the e∣uents, further then nature and probabilities of reason lead him. Though wee know not what will bee, 'tis good wee prepare for that which may be: we shall brooke a checke the easier, while wee thought on't,
though wee did not expect it. But if knowing both aright, I find my selfe vna∣ble to performe it; I vvill rather desist from begin∣nings, then run vpon shame in the sequell. I had better keepe my selfe and ship at home; then carry her to sea, and not know how to guide her. XCVI. What an elated Meteor would man grow to, did prosperitie alwayes cast sweetening dewes in his face? Sure he would once more with Ouids Gyants,
fling Mountaines on heaps, to pull downe God from his throne of Maiesty; for∣getting all felicity, but that aiery happinesse hee is blinded with. Nothing feedes pride so much, as a prosperous aboundance: 'tis a wonder to see a Fauo∣rite study for ought, but additions to his greatnesse: If I could bee so vncharita∣ble, as to wish an enemies soule lost, this were the onely way: Let him liue in the height of the worlds blandishments. For how can hee loue a second Mi∣stresse, that neuer saw but one beauty, and still con∣tinues
deepely enamoured on it? Euery man hath his desires intending to some peculiar thing: GOD should bee the end we aime at; yet we often see, nothing carries vs so farre from him, as those fauours hee hath imparted vs: tis dange∣rous to be outwardly bles∣sed. If plenty and prospe∣ritie were not hazardous, what a short cut should some haue to heauen, ouer others? 'Tis the misery of the poore, to be neglected of men: 'tis the misery of the rich, to neglect their God. 'Tis no small abate∣ment to the bitternesse of
aduersities, that they teach vs the way to heauen. Though I would not inha∣bite Hell, if I could, I would sometimes see it; not out of an itching desire to behold wonders; but by viewing such horrors, I might value heauen more dearely. Hee that hath experienc't the Seas tumultuous perils, will euer after, commend the Lands security. Let mee swimme a riuer of boyling Brimstone, to liue eternally happy; rather then dwell in a Paradise, to bee damn'd after death.
XCVII. Euery Vice makes the owner odious; but Pride and Cruelty more then any beside. Pride hath no friend: His thoughts set his worth aboue himselfe, all others vnder it. Hee thinks nothing so disgrace∣full, as want of reuerence, and familiaritie. There is a kinde of disdaining scorne writ in his brow, and ge∣sture; wherein all may reade, I am too good for thy company. So 'tis iust all should despise him, be∣cause hee contemneth all. Hee that hath first ouer∣prized
himselfe, shall after be vnder-valued by others; which his arrogancie thin∣king vniust, shall swell him to anger, so make him more hatefull. Pride is euer dis∣contentiue: It both occa∣sions more then any, and makes more, then it doth occasion. As Humilitie is the way to get loue and quietnesse: so is Pride the cause both of Hatred, and Warre. Hee hath angred others, and others will vex him. No man shall heare more ill of himselfe, then he that thinkes he deserues most good. It was a iust quip of that wise King, to
that proud Physician, who writing thus, Menecrates Iu∣piter, Regi Agesilao salutem; was answered thus, Rex A∣gesilaus, Menecrati sanitatem indeed he might well wish his wits to him, that was so vnwise as to thinke him∣selfe God. Aristotle, when hee saw a youth proudly surueying himselfe, did iustly wish to be as he thought himselfe; but to haue his enemies such, as hee was. I dare boldly say, neuer proud person was well be∣loued. For as nothing v∣nites more, then a reci∣procall exchange of affecti∣on: so there is nothing
hinders the knot of friend∣ship more, then apparant neglect of courtesies. Cru∣elty is a Curre of the same litter. 'Tis natures good care of her selfe, that warnes vs from the denne of this Monster. Who will euer conuerse with him, that he hath seene deuoure another before him? A Tyrant may rule while hee hath power to compell; but when he hath lost that, the hatred hee hath got, shall slay him. Who won∣ders to heare yong Cato aske his Schoolemaster, how Silla liu'd so long, when hee was so hated for
his crueltie? it was a diuel∣lish speech, that Caligula borrowed of the Poet, Ode∣rint dum metuant: I am content if they feare mee, that they should hate me. And sure if any man tooke the course for't, hee did; when hee bade his execu∣tioners so strike, as they might feele that they were a dying. Hee that makes cru∣eltie his delight, shall bee sure to haue hate his best recompence. Detestation waites vpon vnmerciful∣nesse: who would not helpe to kill the Beast, that sucks the bloud of the Fould? What hath made some
Nations so odious as these two; Pride, and Cruelty? The proud man will haue no friend; and the cruell man shall haue none. Who are more miserable then they that want company? I pitie their estate, but loue it not. Were I Lord of the whole Globe, and must liue alone, I had vnhappi∣nesse enough to make my cōmands my trouble. The one turn'd Angels out of Heauen; the other, Monarks from their thrones: both, I am sure, are able to turne vs to hell: it is better being a beast, then a dying man, with either vnpardoned.
XCVIII. I know not vvhether is more true, That, likenesse is the cause of Loue: or, Loue the cause of likenesse. In agreeing dispositions, the first is certaine; in those that are not, the latter is euident. The first is the easier loue; the other the more worthy. The one hath a lure to draw it; the other without respect, is voluntarie. Men loue vs for the similitude we haue with themselues; GOD, meerely from his good∣nesse, when yet wee are
contrary to him. Since he hath lou'd mee, when I was not like him, I vvill striue to bee like him, be∣cause hee hath lou'd mee. I would bee like him being my friend, that lou'd mee, when I was his enemie. Then onely is loue power∣full, when it frames vs to the will of the loued. Lord, though I cannot serue thee as I ought, let me loue thee as I ought. Grant this, and I know, I shall serue thee the better.
XCIX. What wee either desire, or feare, wee are easily drawne to beleeue. Tell the prodigal, his Kinsman's dead should leaue him an estate to swagger with, hee'le quickly giue credit to 't. The mother of a sicke infant, if shee but heares death whisper'd, she is confident her childe is gone: either of them trans∣port the minde beyond her selfe, and leaue her open to inconueniencies. How many haue shortened their dayes, by sudden false ap∣prehensions,
that haue been help'd forward, by one of these two; or else so disco∣uered their mindes, as they haue made way for them∣selues, to bee wrought vp∣on by flatterie, by seduce∣ment? In the one, Nature is couetous for her owne good; so dilates her selfe, & as it were stretcheth out the armes of her soule, to embrace that, which shee hath an opinion may plea∣sure her: and this is in all sensitiue creatures; though I know the desire of onely rationall, and intelligible things, is peculiar to Man: who by vertue of his in∣tellectuall
soule, is made desirous of things incorpo∣reall, and immortall. Thus hee that would bee vvell spoken of, beleeues him, that falsely tels him so. In the other, Nature is proui∣dent for her owne safety; so all the spirits shrinke in to guard the heart, as the most noble part: whereby the exteriour parts, beeing left without moisture, the haire is sometimes sud∣denly turned gray: the heart thus contracted, and wrought vpon, by it selfe; more easily then, admits a∣ny thing, that is brought her by the outward senses.
Thus if the miserable Man heares a fire hath beene in the towne where his house is, he cryes vndone, though his owne were neuer in danger. In either of these, how might perswasion worke, and betray vs? What nature hath infused, I cannot cast out; correct I may. If I must desire, and feare, I will doe it so moderately, as my iudge∣ment, and reason may bee still cleere. If vnawares I be ouertaken, I will yet be carefull to conceale my selfe: so though my owne passions bee ouer-strong; others shall not see them,
to take mee at aduantages. As many haue been spoiled by being soothed, in their plausible desires: so haue many beene abused, by be∣ing malleated, in their troublesome feare. C. Resolutions may often change; sometimes for the better; and the last euer stands firmest. But vowes well made; should know no variance: For the first should bee sure, without al∣teration. Hee that violates their performance, failes in his duty: and euery breach
is a wound to the soule. I will resolue oft, before I vow once; neuer resolue to vow, but what I may keep; neuer vow, but what I both can, and will keepe. FINIS.
When thou view'st this, mend faults, that heere are showne; And when thou view'st thy selfe, then mend thine owne. In the 12. line of the third page to the Reader, for noting, reade, notify∣ing: in line 13. for tels me a fault, read, tels me of a fault, pag. 60. line 5. for I imagine, read, imagine: pag. 294. lin. 16. for mind, reade wind.
