11029.5 23060509 26159
Newes from Flanders and Ostend. A TRVE DECLARA∣tion how that the Lords States of the vnited Prouinces, vnder the conduct of his Excellencie, haue set forth a princelike Nauie of ships from Zeland, the 15. day of April 1604: Which went to the Island of Casant, where the foresayd Lords States haue taken in the Sconce of Coxie, S. Catherine, S. Phi∣lip, and Isendiick with other small sconces and holds. Translated out of Dutch into English. LONDON Printed by Arnold Hatfield for Iohn Bill.
To the Reader. GEntle Reader, Notwithstan∣ding the long (almost this three yeres) besieging of the Towne of Ostend; the Lords States of the vnited Prouinces, haue thought it good, to land an Armie in Flanders, hoping by that meanes to withdraw the siege from Ostend: and perceiuing that the Enemie for all that leaues not the siege, but daily gets neere vn∣to the same, hoping likewise to get it in, and so perswading himselfe, that nothing shall be able to withstand his might, but all to be vn∣der his power; to that ende they of Flanders haue employed all their forces to bring vn∣der the said Towne of Ostende, thinking by that meanes to haue all that Countrey so sure vnto them, that none were able to set any more footing in that land, to winne any thing from them; not thinking so much on the Lords strong hand (the other meanes) as of late he hath shewed, and is like to come to
passe; when alwayes the Enemie thought (if Ostend were won) not so much as a win∣dow would be left open thorow which any man might by any meanes preiudice them. God notwithstanding hath opened a doore to his Excellencie, to let him in; as we may see in reading of this briefe and true declarati∣on, for which we are highly to praise God, and to praie moreouer that his Excellencie (vnder the Lords protection) may haue a good proceeding in his godly purpose; and that it would please God to open the eies of the inhabitants of the land of Flanders, and others, which are vnder the Spaniards yoke, that we all may liue together in one true beliefe peace & loue, to Gods glorie and our soules saluation. Amen.
A true declaration how that the Lords States of the vnited Prouinces, vnder the conduct of his Excellencie, hath set forth a Prince∣like nauie of ships from Zeland, the 15. of April 1604. which went to the Island of Casant, where the foresaid Lords States, haue taken in the Sconce of Coxie, S. Katherine, S. Philippe, and Isendiicke, with other Sconces and holds. BY the wise gouernment of the Lords States in gene∣rall of the vntied Prouin∣ces in Netherland, and his Princelike Excellencie Maurice of Nassaw, there were staied and taken vp al about in the foresaid vnt∣ted Prouinces, a very great number of ships: and so furnished with all maner of warlike mu∣nition, to set forward towards the Enemies countrey; and hauing shipped all their horse and foote, they came the 13. of Aprill 1604. before Zeland. The 14. his Excellencie and the Lords States came before the Castle of Ramekins, where the foresaid Nauie gathered them∣selues together: Yet none of the Lordes States, nor his Excellencie, nor any other Lord, or principall man landed there, but re∣mained all a shipboord; onely certaine Souldi∣ers went a shore to Middleborrow, and other
places in the Island to bay such things as they had néed of: which had warning in the euening towards eight of the clocke by the sound of the drumme, that all Souldiers vpon paine of death, should come a shipboord, and for that purpose were two of the gates of the said citie all night left open to let them passe out. As the Souldiers were come aboord, you might heare about twelue of the clocke at night, thrée great péeces of Ordinances to be shot of, when the ships set saile together, with faire weather, and a southeast winde, so that the foresaid shippes and Souldiers came by breake of day before Swarte-gate and Kerken-gate, in the Island of Casant, and there landed their men the 15. of the moneth aforesaid without the losse of anie one man. They that laie about and in the Sconce cal∣led Swarte-gate, with other little holdes there∣abouts, ran al away: whereupon his Excellen∣cie marched forward toward the forte of Hofsteede, the which he also tooke in, and went forward to the Sconce Lippenen, so named of the Captaine that held the same, whom his Ex∣cellencie commanded to deliuer vp the saide Sconce; whose ansu ere was, that first he must sée his Canon: whereupon his Excellencie sent him word, that if he should but shoote one shot thereat, he would take none of them to mercy, and foorthwith he placed two péeces, whereup∣on they within presently deliuered it vp, going
out thereof with their weapons. The enemie hearing of his Excellencies ap∣proch, drew out foorthwith some part of their armie that lay before Ostend, and came the 15. day of the saide April on the west side of Sluis hauen. The 16. day the Enemy there began to en∣trench himselfe with a halfe-moone, to stop the comming ouer of his Excellencie, who the 17. and the 18. of the same moneth stirred not, till he had fortified himselfe in the Iland of Casant, as the Enemy did on the West side thereof: yet notwithstanding his Excellencie brought one of his Batteries vnder the Castle of Sluis, where he caused certaine shot to be made on the Gal∣lies there, whereupon the Enemy caused them presently to be brought vp higher to the Towne of Sluis. They of Sluis shot but little: His Excellen∣cie would loose no time, but thought good to finde out another way to make his entrance in∣to the maine-land of Flanders, and is therefore in the night, the 18. of Aprill aforesaid, gone by land, but the next day returned to his Quarter. The night following, his Excellencie with a greater power goes forward, and takes in the Sconce of Coxie, and remained there the 20. day. Then his horse and foote make towards S. Catherines, and S. Phillip, where his Excel∣lencie brought all his power, and vpon their May day, stilo nouo (being Philip and Iacobs day)
made more than an hundred great shot at the Sconce of S. Philip and S. Catherine, before eight of the clocke in the Euening, and the whole Leaguer the whole night so bestirred themselues, that they within fearing some ge∣nerall storme, ran all away, and so his Excel∣lencie tooke in both the Sconces, to his great ioy and all his companie. Hauing now set firme footing in Flanders, he goes presently to the Sconce of Isendijcke, a∣bout which he entrencheth himselfe, & lodgeth his Armie so about it, shutting them so vp, that no man might either come foorth or goe in vnto them. The Enemie lyeth on the West side of Sluis hauen, and causeth great stoore of Shallops from Bridges and Sluis to be brought, with two thousand men in them, meaning to take in Ca∣sant againe. Our men suffered the Enemie to land to the number of some thousand, and so fell on them, and draue them to flight, which were the greatest part of them Spaniards and Italians, crying out, A la barea, A la barca. Fiue of their shallops runne a ground and were drowned, with the men in them, the rest slaine, ex∣cept seuentéene that were taken, whereof thrée were brought to his Excellencie. Besides, our men got eight of the enemies Shallops. His Excellencie goes forward with Isendijke, and in the night tooke one that salied out of the Sconce, who being examined, gaue to vnder∣stand,
That there was want of all things, except shot and fresh water. His Exceliencie the 29. of Aprill, sent his Trumpet called Hans, to summon them to yéeld vp the Sconce; who at the second sound of the Trumpet, was shot in the head, of which he falles dead in the place. His, Excellencie hereat being very angry, sent forthwith a drum to demand him that had shot his Trumpet, to be deliuered out vnto him, otherwise he would receiue none of them to mercy: wherupon they sent out two Captaines, making excuse that they by no meanes could learne who had done the same: yet notwithstanding his Excellencie instantly demands that hee be deliuered before he will giue them any hearing, whereupon they returned to their Sconce; and in the Euening came to his Excellencie to parle about the deli∣uery vp of the said Scance, which giueth them no hearing. At last they come againe bringing with them him that had shot his Trumpetter, (which was an Italian) Then his Excellencie giues them the hearing, and are agréed on such conditions as follow. The Conditions. FIrst, that they shall goe out of the saide Sconce, with their armes, without founde of drumme, and without their matches light. Secondly, that they shall leaue in the saide Sconce all their great Ordmance & Munition.
Thirdly, that in 4. moneths next following, they shall not beare Armes against his Excel∣lencie in Flanders. Fourthly, that his Excellencie will lende them shipping to carrie their sicke and hurt men with their baggage to Sas, and for that shall two Captaines remaine in hostage with his Excellencie, till the foresaid shippes come a∣gaine. After this agréement, the Souldiers went out of the Sconce, the last of April, 1604. a∣bout fiue of the clocke in the afternoone, being in number 600. men. Since, it is crediblie reported by sundrie pas∣sengers, that the 2. of May, and the 3. his Princely Excellencie marched vp toward the ruinated walled townes, Ardenborgh and Mid∣dleborgh, and tooke them, and so marched vp to∣ward the Towne of Dam, distant a league from Bridges. Other Passengers comming frō Flushing the 4. of May, say, that there were ar∣riued more Souldiers out of Frieseland: like∣wise Switsers to be sent to his Princely Ex∣cellencie in Flanders. Also that the Countie or Earle Lodowicke of Nassow, with other Captaines, with some 14. Corronets of Horsemen, accompanied with the mutined Souldiers, called the Esquadron, (strong 1500. horsemen, and 800. footemen Muskettiers) conducted by their Eletto, and di∣rected by Captaine Du Boys, for the States,
are entred Brabant, with some Ordinance, and past vp by Brussel, to Mons in Henault, and as is reported, as farre as Buist, spotling all that they finde, saccaging all Abbeies, Townes, and Villages, Gentlemens houses, that had no money to raunsome them, Wouere, Flerus and other townes burnt, séeking to bring al vn∣der their contributions: but it is thought, they pretend to take and fortifie some Towne or place vpon the Moose, to stop all passage from Germanie and Italy. Passengers comming from Flushing the fourth day of May, and others comming by the sea-coast of Flanders and Ostend, heard and saw on Saturday the fifth of this present Mo∣neth, great shouting on all sides at Ostend, for the space of seuen houres vpon the Seas, per∣aduenture to force them, before Prince Mau∣rice campe came néerer. Great accusations be∣ing made by Marques Spinola, the Generall before Ostend, vnto the Archduke at Gant, of the Spanish Souldiers vntowardnesse in fight, enuying the honour of the Italians and Walons, being maintained as is thought of Don Loys de Valasco, and they vse these words; Que non quieren mourir por vn Marques Spinola, mas ben por en Rey: which is, that they will not die for Marques Spinola, but will for their king: en∣uying him the honor. It is like that they of the Countrey of Flan∣ders, hauing contributed hetherto some ninetie
thousand Guldens monthly, which is 9000. pounds sterling, for the maintenance of this siege, will now not be able to continue, being spoiled, and charged with thrée campes, the besieging campe, and the Archdukes campe, and the Prince Maurice campe. Hitherto is all related what is past: besée ching God to send a deliuerie to those Prouinces, of Spa∣nish & forreine gouernment, where∣by all Christendome might come to a good peace, which God grant. Amen: FINIS.
