11056 99838082 2440
OF THE RVSSE Common Wealth. OR MANER OF GO∣uernement by the Russe Emperour, (commonly called the Emperour of Moskouia) with the manners, and fashions of the people of that Countrey. ∵ The Contents are noted in the Ta∣ble, set downe before the be∣ginning of the Booke. AT LONDON Printed by T. D. for Thomas Charde. 1591▪
To the Queenes most ex∣cellent Maiestie. MOst gracious Soueraigne, beeyng em∣ployed in your Maie∣sties seruice to the Em∣perour of Russia, I obserued the State, and manners of that Coun∣trey. And hauing reduced the same into some order, by the way as I returned, I haue presu∣med to offer it in this smal Booke to your most excellent Maiestie. My meaning was to note thinges for mine owne experience, of more importaunce then delight, and rather true then strange. In
their maner of gouernment, your Highnesse may see both: A true and strange face of a Tyrannical state, (most vnlike to your own) with∣out true knowledge of GOD, without written Lawe, without common iustice: saue that which proceedeth from their Speaking Lawe, to wit, the Magistrate who hath most neede of a Lawe, to re∣straine his owne iniustice. The practise hereof as it is heauy, and grieuous to the poore oppressed people, that liue within those Countreyes: so it may giue iust cause to my selfe, and other your Maiesties faithfull subiects, to ac∣knowledge our happines on this behalfe, and to giue God thankes for your Maiesties most Prince∣like, and gracious gouernment: as
also to your Highnesse more ioy, and contentment in your royall estate, in that you are a Prince of subiectes, not of slaues, that are kept within duetie by loue, not by feare. The Almightie stil blesse your Highnes with a most long, and happy reigne in this life, and with Christ Iesus in the life to come. Your Maiesties most humble subiect, and seruant G. Fletcher.
The sum of this dis∣course contei∣ning the 1. Cosmogra∣phie of the Countrie. 1. The breadth and length of the Countrie, with the names of the Shires. 2. The Soyle and Clymate. 3. The natiue commodities of the Countrie. 4. The chiefe cities of Russia. 2. Pol∣licy. 1. The or∣dering of their State. 5. The house or stocke of the Russe Emperour. 6. The maner of inauguration of the Russe Em∣perours. 7. The forme or manner of their publique go∣uernment. 8. Their Parliamentes and manner of holding them. 9. The Russe Nobilitie, and meanes whereby it is kept in an vnder proportion agreeable to that State. 10. The manner of gouerning their Prouinces, or Shires. 11. The Emperours priuie Counsell. 12. The Emperours Customes and other Reue∣nues, & what they amount vnto, with the So∣phismus practised for the encrease of them. 13. The Russe communaltie & their condition. 2. Their iudicial procec∣ding 14. Their publique Iustice and manner of pro∣ceeding therein. 3. Their warlike prouisi∣ons. 15. The Emperours forces for his warres, with the officers and their Salaries. 16. Their manner of mustering, armour, pro∣uision for vittaile, encamping, &c. 17. Their order in marching, charging, and their martiall discipline. 18. Their colonies and pollicie in mainteyning their purchases by conquest. 19. Their borderers, with whom they haue 20. most to doo in warre and peace. 4. Their Eccle∣siastical State. 21. Their Church offices, and degrees. 22. Their Leiturgie or forme of Church ser∣uice, with their manner of administring the Sacraments. 23. The doctrine of the Russe Church. 24. Their manner of solemnizing marriages. 25. The other Ceremonies of the Russe Church. 3. Oeconomie or priuat be∣hauiour. 26. The Emperours domestique or priuate be∣hauiour. 27. The Emperours houshold, and offices of his house. 28. The priuate behauiour, and manners of the Russe people.
The description of the Countrie of Rusia, with the breadth, length, and names of the Shires. The I. Chapter. THe countrie of Russia was sometimes cal∣led Sarmatia. It chaunged the name (as some do suppose) for that it was par∣ted into diuerse small, and yet absolute gouernments, not depending, nor being subiect the one to the other. For Russe in that tongue doth sig∣nifie asmuch as to parte, or diuide. The Russe reporteth that foure brethren, Tru∣bor, Rurico, Sinees, and Variuus, diuided among them the North parts of the coun∣trie. Likewise that the Southpartes were possessed by foure other, Kio, Scieko, Cho∣ranus, and their sister Libeda: each calling
his territorie after his owne name. Of this partition it was called Russia, about the yeare from Christ 860. As for the conie∣cture which I find in some Cosmographers, that the Russe nation borrowed the name of the people called Roxellani, and were the ve∣ry same nation with them, it is without all good probabilitie: both in respect of the ety∣mologie of the word (which is very far fet) and especially for the seat and dwelling of that people,Strabo in his 7. booke of ogr. which was betwixt the two ri∣uers of Tanais and Boristhenes, (as Strabo re∣porteth) quite an other way from the coun∣trey of Russia. When it bare the name of Sarmatia, it was diuided into two chiefe parts: the White, and the Blacke. The White Sarmatia was all that part that lieth towardes the North, and on the side of Liestand: as the Prouinces now called Duyna, Vagha, Vstick, Vologda, Carga∣polia, Nouogradia, &c: whereof Nouograd ve∣lica was the Metropolite, or chiefe cittie. Blacke Sarmatia was all that countrey that lieth Southward, towards the Euxin, or Black Sea: as the dukedome of Volodemer of Mos∣ko, Rezan, &c. Some haue thought that the name of Sarmatia was first taken,Gen. 10. Ioseph. l. 1. cap. 14. from one Sarmates, whom Moses and Iosephus call A∣sarmathes, sonne to Ioktan, and nephew to Heber, of the posteritie of Sem. But this see∣meth
to be nothing but a coniecture taken out of the likenes of the name Asarmathes. For the dwelling of all Ioktans posteritie is described by Moses, to haue beene betwixt Mescha or Masius (an hill of the Amonites) and Sephace, neare to the riuer Euphrates. Which maketh it very vnlikely, that Asar∣mathes should plant any colonies so far off in the North and Northwest countries.The bor∣ders of Russia. It is bounded Northward by the Lappes and the North Ocean. On the Southside by the Tar∣tars, called Chrimes. Eastward they haue the Nagaian Tartar, that possesseth all the coun∣trie on the East side of Volgha, towards the Caspian sea. On the West and Southwest bor∣der lie Lituania, Liuonia and Polonia. The whole country being now reduced vn∣der the gouernment of one,The shires of Russia. cōteyneth these chief Prouinces or Shires. Volodemer, (which beareth the first place in the Emperours stile, because their house came of the Dukes of that countrey) Mosko, Nisnouogrod, Plesko, Smolensko, Nouogrod velica (or Nouogrod of the low countrey) Rostoue, Yaruslaue, Bealo∣zera, Bezan, Duyna, Cargapolia, Meschora, Va∣gha, Vstuga, Ghaletsa. These are the naturall shires preteyning to Russia. but far greater & larger then the shires of England, though not so well peopled. The other countries or prouinces which the Russe Emperours haue
gotten perforce added of late to their other dominion,The Pro∣uinces or countries got by con∣quest. are these which follow Twerra, Youghoria, Permia, Vadska, Boulghoria, Cher∣nigo, Oudoria, Obdoria, Condora, with a great part of Siberia: where the people though they be not natural Russes, yet obey the Em∣perour of Russia, and are ruled by the lawes of his countrie, paying customes and taxes, as his owne people doe. Besides these hee hath vnder him the kingdomes of Cazan and A∣stracan, gotten by conquest not long since. As for all his possession in Lituania (to the number of 30. great townes and more,) with Narue and Drop in Liuonia, they are quite gone, beyng surprised of late yeares by the kinges of Poland and Sweden. These Shires and Prouinces are reduced all into foure Iu∣risdictions, which they call Chetfyrds (that is) Tetrarchies, or Fourthparts. Wherof we are to speake in the title or chapter, concerning the Prouinces, and their manner of gouern∣ment. The whole countrie is of great length and breadth.The bredth and length of the coun∣trie. From the North to the South (if you measure from Cola to Astracan which ben∣deth somewhat Eastwarde) it reacheth in length about 4260. verst, or miles. Notwith∣standing the Emperour of Russia hath more territorie Northward, far beyond Cola vnto the riuer of Tromschua, that runneth a 1000.
verst, welnie beyōd Pechinga, neare to Ward∣bouse, but not intire nor clearly limited, by reason of the kings of Sweden and Denmark, that haue diuers townes there, aswell as the Russe, plotted togither the one with the o∣ther: euery one of them claiming the whole of those North parts as his owne right. The breadth (if you go from that part of his terri∣torie that lieth farthest Westwarde on the Narue side, to the parts of Siberia eastward, where the Emperour hath his garrisons) is 4400. verst or thereabouts. A verst (by their reckoning) is a 1000. pases, yet lesse by one quarter then an English mile. If the whole dominion of the Russe Emperour were all habitable, and peopled in all places, as it is in some, hee would either hardly hold it all within one regiment, or be ouer mightie for all his neighbour Princes. Of the Soyle and Climate. The 2. Chapter. THe soyle of the countrie for the most part is of a sleight sandie moulde, yet very much different one place from another, for the yeeld of such thinges as grow out
of the earth. The countrie Northwards to∣wards the partes of S. Nicolas and Cola, and Northeast towards Siberia, is all very barren, and full of desert woods by reason of the clymat, and extremitie of the colde in win∣ter time. So likewise along the riuer Volgha betwixt the countries of Cazan, and Astra∣can: where (notwithstanding the soyle is very fruitefull) it is all vnhabited, sauing that vpon the riuer Volgha on the west side, the Emperour hath some fewe castels with garrisons in them. This hapneth by means of the Chrim Tartar, that will neyther him∣selfe plant townes to dwell there, (liuing a wilde and vagrant life) nor suffer the Russe (that is farre off with the strength of his countrie) to people those partes. From Vo∣logda (which lieth almost 1700. verst from the porte of S. Nicholas) downe towardes Mosko, and so towardes the south parte that bordereth vpon the Chrim, (which contei∣neth the like space of 1700. verst or there a∣bouts) is a very fruitfull and pleasant coun∣trie, yeelding pasture, and corne, with woods & waters in very great plentie. The like is be∣twixt Rezan (that lieth southeast frō Mosko) to Nouograd and Vobsko, that reach farthest towards the northwest. So betwixt Mosko, and Smolensko (that lieth southwest towards Lituania) is a very fruitful and pleasant soile.
The whole countrie differeth very much from it selfe, by reason of the yeare: so that a man would meruaile to see the great alte∣ration and difference betwixte the winter, and the sommer Russia. The whole coun∣trie in the winter lyeth vnder snow, which falleth continually, and is sometime of a yarde or two thicke, but greater towardes the north. The riuers and other waters are all frosen vp a varde or more thicke, how swifte or broade so euer they bee. And this continueth commonly fiue moneths, vz, from the beginning of Nouember till to∣wardes the ende of March, what time the snow beginneth to melte. So that it would breede a frost in a man to looke abroad at that time, and see the winter face of that countrie.The cold of Russia. The sharpenesse of the ayre you may iudge of by this: for that water drop∣ped downe or cast vp into the ayre, congea∣leth into Ise before it come to the ground. In the extremitie of winter, if you holde a pewter dishe or pot in your hand, or a∣ny other mettall (except in some chamber where their warme stoaues bee) your fingers will friese faste vnto it, and drawe of the skinne at the parting. When you passe out of a warme roome into a colde, you shall sen∣sibly feele your breath to waxe starke, and euen stifeling with the colde, as you draw it
in and out▪ Diuers not onely that trauell abroad, but in the very markets, and streats of their townes, are mortally pinched and killed withall: so that you shall see many drop downe in the streates, many trauel∣lers brought into the townes sitting dead and stiffe in their sleddes. Diuers lose their noses, the tippes of their eares, and the bals of their cheekes, their toes, feete, &c. Ma∣ny times when (the winter is very harde and extreame) the beares and woolfes issue by troupes out of the woodes driuen by hunger, and enter the villages, tearing and rauening all they can finde: so that the inha∣bitants are faine to flie for safegard of their liues. And yet in the Sommer time you shall see such a new hew and face of a countrie, the woods (for the most part which are all of fir and birch) so fresh and so sweet, the pastures and medowes so greene and well growen, (& that vpō the sudden) such varietie of flowers, such noyse of birdes (especially of Nightin∣gales, that seeme to be more lowde and of a more variable note then in other countries) that a man shall not lightly trauell in a more pleasant countrie. And this fresh and speedy grouth of the spring there, seemeth to proceede from the benefite of the snow: which all the winter time being spred ouer the whole countrie as
a white robe, & keeping it warme from the rigour of the frost, in the spring time (when the sunne waxeth warme, and dissolueth it into water) doth so throughly drench and soake the ground, that is somewhat of a sleight and sandy mould, & then shineth so hotely vpon it againe, that it draweth the hearbes and plants forth in great plenty and varietie, in a very short time. As the winter exceedeth in colde, so the sommer inclineth to ouer much heat, specially in the moneths of Iune, Iuly, and August, being much war∣mer then the sommer ayre in England. The countrie throughout is very well wa∣tred with springs, riuers, & ozeraes, or lakes. Wherein the prouidence of God is to bee noted, for that much of the countrie beyng so farre inland, as that some parte lieth a 1000. miles and more euery way from any sea, yet it is serued with faire riuers, and that in very great number, that emptiyng them∣selues one into an other, runne all into the sea. Their lakes are many and large, some of 60. 80. 100. and 200. miles long, with breadth proportionate. The chief riuers are these 1. Volgha,The chief riuers of Russia. that hath his head or spring at the roote of an Aldertree, about 200. verst aboue Yaruslaue, & groweth so big by the encrease of other riuers by that time it commeth thither, that
it is broad an English mile and more, and so runneth into the Caspian sea, about 2800. verst or miles of length. The next is Boristhenes (now called Ne∣per) that diuideth the countrie from Litua∣nia, and falleth into the Euxin sea. The third Tanais or Don, (the auncient bounder betwixt Europe and Asia) that ta∣keth his head out of Rezan Ozera, and so running through the countrie of the Chrim Tartar, falleth into the great sea lake, or meare, (called Maeotis) by the Citie of Azou. By this riuer (as the Russe reporteth) you may passe from their citie Mosko to Constanti∣nople, and so into all those partes of the world by water, drawing your boate (as their manner is) ouer a little Isthmus or narrow slippe of lande, a fewe versts ouerthwart. Which was proued not long since by an Am∣bassadour sent to Constantinople, who passed the riuer of Moskua and so into an other cal∣led Ocka, whence he drew his boate ouer in∣to Tanais, and thence passed the whole way by water. The fourth is called Duyna, many hun∣dred miles long, that falleth Northward in∣to the Baye of Saint Nicholas, and hath great Alabaster rockes on the bankes towards the sea side. The fifth Duna, that emptieth into the
Baltick sea by the towne Riga. The sixt Onega, that falleth into the Bay at Solouetsko 90. verst from the port of Saint Nicholas. This riuer below the towne Car∣gapolia meeteth with the riuer Volock, that falleth into the Finland sea by the towne Yama. So that from the port of S. Nicholas into the Finland sea, and so into the Sound, you may passe all by water, as hath bene tri∣ed by the Russe. The seuenth Suchana, that floweth into Duyna, and so into the North sea. The eight Ocka, that fetcheth his head from the borders of the Chrim, & streameth into Volgha. The ninth Moskua, that runneth thorough the citie Mosko, and giueth it the name. There is Wichida also a very large and long riuer that riseth out of Permia, and fal∣leth into Volgha. All these are riuers of very large streames, the least to be compared to the Thames in bignesse, and in length farre more, besides diuers other. The Pole at Mos∣ko is 55. degrees 10. minutes. At the porte of S. Nicholas towards the North 63. degrees and 50 minutes.
The natiue commodities of the Countrie. The 3. Chapter. FOr kindes of fruites,The fruites and graine of Russia. they haue Appels, Peares, plummes, cheries, redde and blacke, (but the blacke wild) a deene like a muske, millian, but more sweete & pleasant, cucumbers & goords (which they call Arbouse) rasps, strawberies, and hurtil∣beries, with many other bearies in great quantitie in euery wood and hedge. Their kindes of graine are wheat, rie, barley, oates, pease, buckway, psnytha, that in taste is somewhat like to rice. Of all these graynes the countrie yeeldeth very sufficient with an ouerplus quantitie, so that wheate is solde sometime for two alteens or ten pence star∣ling the Chetfird, which maketh almost three English bushels. Their rye is sowed before the winter, all their other graine in the spring time, & for the most parte in May. The Permians and some other that dwell far north, and in de∣sert
places, are serued from the partes that lye more Southward, and are forced to make bread sometimes of a kinde of roote (called Vaghnoy) and of the middle rine of the firre tree. If there be any dearth (as they accoun∣ted this last yeare, An. 1588. wheat and rye beyng at 13. alteens, or 5. shillings 5. pence starling the Chetfird) the fault is rather in the practise of their Nobilitie that vse to en∣grosse it, then in the countrie it selfe. The natiue commodities of the coun∣trie (wherewith they serue both their owne turnes,The chiefe commodi∣ties of the countrie. and sende much abroad to the great enriching of the Emperour, and his people) are many and substantiall.1. Furres. First, furres of all sortes. Wherein the prouidence of God is to be noted, that prouideth a naturall re∣medie for them, to helpe the naturall incon∣uenience of their countrie by the colde of the Clymat. Their chiefe furres are these, Blacke fox, Sables, Lusernes, Dunne fox, Mar∣trones, Gurnestalles or Armins, Lasets or Mi∣niuer, Beuer, Wuluerins, the skin of a great wa∣ter Ratte that smelleth naturally like muske, Ca∣laber or Gray squirrell, red squirrell, red, & white Foxe. Besides the great quantitie spent within the countrie (the people beyng clad all in furres the whole winter) there are transported out of the countrie some yeares by the marchants of Turkie, Persia, Bougharia,
Georgia, Armenia, and some other of Chri∣stendome to the value of foure or fiue hun∣dred thousand rubbels, as I haue heard of the Marchants. The best Sable furre grow∣eth in the countrie of Pechora, Momgosors∣koy and Obdorskoy, the worser sort in Sibe∣ria, Perm, and other places. The blacke fox and redde come out of Siberia, white & dun from Pechora, whence also come the white wolfe, and white Beare skin. The best Wul∣uerin also thence and from Perm. The best Martrons are from Syberia, Cadam, Morum, Perm, and Cazan. Lyserns, Mineuer, and Ar∣mins the best ar out of Gallets, and Ouglites, many from Nouogrod, and Perm. The Beauer of the best sort breedeth in Murmonskey by Cola. Other cōmon furres, and most of these kindes grow in many, and some in all partes of the countrie. The second cōmoditie is of Wax,2. Waxe. where∣of hath bene shipped into forraine coun∣tries (as I haue heard it reported by those that best know it) the summe of 50000. pood yearlie, euery pood conteyning 40. pound, but now about 10000. pood a yeare. The third is their Hony,3. Hony. whereof besides an exceeding great quantitie spent in their ordinary drinks (which is mead of al sorts) & their other vses, some good quantitie is car∣ried out of the countrie. The chiefe encrease
of honie is in Mordua & Cadam neare to the Cheremissen Tartar: much out of Seuerskoy, Rezan, Morum, Cazan, Dorogobose, & Vasma. Fourthly,4. Tallow. of Tallow they afoord a great waight for transportation: not only for that their countrie hath very much good ground apt for pasturage of cattaile, but also by rea∣son of their many Lents and other fastes: and partly because their greater menne vse much waxe for their lightes, the poorer and meaner sorte birch dried in their stoaues, and cut into long shiuers, which they call Luchineos. Of tallow there hath bene ship∣ped out of the realme a fewe yeares since a∣bout a 100000. pood yearely, now not past 30000. or thereabonts. The best yeeld of tal∣low is in the parts & territories of Smolensko, Yaruslaue, Ouglits, Nouogrod, and Vologda, Ot∣fer, and Gorodetskey. An other principall commoditie is their Losh and Cowe hide.5. Hide. Their Losh or Buffe hide is very faire and large. Their bull and cowe hide (for oxen they make none, ney∣ther yet weather) is of a small sise. There hath bene transported by Marchants stran∣gers some yeares, a 100000. hydes. Now it is decreased to a 30000. or thereabouts. Be∣sides great store of goates skinnes, whereof great numbers are shipped out of the coun∣trie. The largest kind of Losh or Buffe bree∣deth
about Rostoue, Wichida, Nouogrod, Mo∣rum, and Perm. The lesser sorte within the kingdome of Cazan. An other very great and principall com∣moditie is their Trane oyle,6. Trane oyle. drawen out of the seal fish.The man∣ner of hun∣ting the Seal fish. Where it will not bee impertinent to shewe the manner of their hunting the seal, which they make this oyle of: which is in this sort. Towardes the ende of sommer (before the frost begin) they go downe with their boates into the Bay of S. Nicholas, to a cape called Cusconesse or Foxnose, where they leaue their boates till the next spring tide. When the sunne waxeth warme towarde the spring, and yet the yse not melted with∣in the Bay, they returne thither againe. Then drawing their boates ouer the sea yse, they vse them for houses to rest and lodge in. There are commonly about 17. or 18. fleete of them, of great large boates, which diuide themselues into diuers companies, fiue or six boates in a consort. They that first finde the haunt, fire a bea∣con, which they carry with them for the nonce. Which being espied by the other cō∣panies, by such among them as are appoyn∣ted of purpose, they come altogither and compasse the seales round about in a ring, that lye sunning themselues togither vpon the yse, cōmonly foure or fiue thousand in a
shoale, and so they inuade them euery man with his clubbe in his hand. If they hit them on the nose, they are soone killed. If on the sides or backe they beare out the blow, and many times so catche and holde downe the club with their teeth by main force, that the party is forced to cal for help to his fellowes. The manner of the Seals is, when they see themselues beset, to gather all close together in a throng or plumpe, to sway downe the yse, and to break it (if they can) which so ben∣deth the yse that many times it taketh the sea water vpon it, and maketh the hunters to wade a foot or more deepe. After the slaugh∣ter, when they haue killed what they can they fall to sharing euery boate his part in equall portions: and so they flay them taking from the body the skin, and the lard or fat withall that cleaueth to the skin. This they take with them, leauing the bodies behind, and so goe to shore. Where they digge pits in the groūd of a fadome and an halfe deepe, or there a∣bout, and so taking the fat or larde off from the skinne they throw it into the pit, and cast in among it hoat burning stones to melt it withall. The vppermost and purest is solde & vsed to oyle wooll for cloth, the grosser (that is of a red colour) they sell to make sope. Likewise of Ickary or Cauery, a great quan∣titie is made vpon the riuer of Volgha out of
the fish called Bellougina,Ickary. 9, the Sturgeon, the Se∣ueriga & the Sterledey. Wherof the most part is shipped by French and Netherlandish mar∣chants for Italy and Spaine, some by English marchants. The next is of Flaxe and Hempe,8. Hempe and flaxe. whereof there hath bin shipped (as I haue heard mar∣chants say) at the port of Narue a great part of a 100. ships smal & great yerely. Now, not past fiue. The reason of this abating and de∣crease of this & other cōmodities, that were wont to be transported in a greater quanti∣tie, is the shutting vp of the port of the Nar∣ue towards the Finland sea, which now is in the hands & possession of the Sweaden. Like∣wise the stopping of the passage ouerland by the way of Smolensko, and Plotsko, by reasō of their warres with the Polonian, which cau∣seth the people to be lesse prouidēt in main∣teining and gathering these & like commo∣dities, for that they lack sales. Partly also for that the marchāts & Mousicks (for so they cal the cōmon sort of people) are very much dis∣couraged by many heauy & intollerable ex∣actions, that of late time haue bin imposed v∣pon them: no man accounting that which he hath to be sure his own. And therfore regard not to lay vp any thing, or to haue it before hand, for that it causeth thē many times to be fleesed & spoiled not only of their goods,
but also of their liues. For the grouth of flaxe the prouince of Vobsko and the countrey a∣bout is the chiefe and only place. For hemp Smolensko, Dorogobose and Vasma. The countrey besides maketh great store of salt.9. Salt. Their best salt is made at Stararouse in ve∣ry great quātity, where they haue great store of salt wels, about 250. verst frō the sea. At A∣stracan salt is made naturally by the sea wa∣ter, that casteth it vp into great hils, and so it is digged down, and caried away by the mar∣chants & other that wil fetch it from thence. They pay to the Emperor for acknowledge∣ment or custome 3. d. Russe vpon euery hun∣dred weight. Besides these two, they make salt in many other places of the Realme, as in Perm, Wichida, Totma, Kenitsma, Solouetske, O∣cona, Bōbasey, & Nonocks, al out of salt pits, saue at Solouetskey, which lieth neere to the sea. Likewise of tarre they make a great quā∣tity out of their firre trees in the countrie of Duyna & Smolensko,10. Tarre. whereof much is sent a∣broad.11. Ribazu∣ba. Besides these (which are all good and substantial commodities) they haue diuers o∣ther of smaller account, that are natural and proper to that countrey: as the fishe tooth (which they cal Ribazuba which is vsed both among thēselues & the Persians & Boughariās that fetcht it from thence for beads, kniues, & sword hafts of Noblemen, & gentlemē, &
for diuers other vses. Some vse the powder of it against poyson, as the Vnicornes horne. The fish that weareth it is called a Morse, & is caught about Pechora. These fishe teeth some of them, are almost two foote of length, and weigh eleuen or twelue pound apiece. In the prouince of Corelia,12. Slude. and about the ri∣uer Duyna towardes the North sea, there groweth a soft rocke which they call Slude. This they cut into pieces, and so teare it into thin flakes, which naturally it is apt for and so vse it for glasse-lanthorns and such like. It giueth both inwards and outwards a clearer light then glasse, and for this respect is bet∣ter then either glasse or horne: for that it nei∣ther breaketh like glasse,13. Saltpee∣r & brim∣stone. nor yet will burne like the lanthorne. Saltpeter they make in many places, as at Ouglites, Yaruslaue and V∣stug, and some small store of brimstone vpon the riuer Volgha, but want skill to refine it. Their iron is somewhat brittle,4. Iron. but a great weight of it is made in Corelia, Cargapolia, and Vstug Thelesna. Other myne they haue none growing within the Realme. Their beasts of strange kinds are the Losh,The strāge sts, fish, fole, &c. that breed in Russia. the Ollen, the wilde Horse, the Beare, the Woluering, or wood dogge, the Lyserne, the Beauer, the Sable, the Martron, the blacke and dunne Foxe, the white Beare towardes the Sea coast of Pechora, the Gurnstale, the La∣set
or Mineuer. They haue a kinde of Squir∣rel that hath growing on the pinion of the shoulder bone, a long tuft of haire, much like vnto feathers, with a farre broader tayle then haue any other squirrels, which they moue & shake as they leape from tree to tree, much like vnto a wing. They skise a large space, and seeme for to flie withall, and therefore they call them Letach Vechshe, that is, the flying squirrels. Their hares and squirrels in Som∣mer are of the same colour with ours, in win∣ter the Hare changeth her coate into milke white, the squirrell into gray, whereof com∣meth the Calaber. They haue fallow Deere, the roe Bucke, and goates very great store. Their horses are but small, but very swift and harde, they tra∣uell them vnshod both winter and Sommer, without all regard of pace. Their sheepe are but small and beare coorse, and harsh wooll. Of foule, they haue diuers of the principall kindes: First, great store of Hawkes, the Ea∣gle, the Gerfaulcon, the Slightfaulcon, the Goshawke, the Tassel, the Sparhawk, &c. But the principall hawke that breedeth in the countrey, is counted the Gerfaulcon. Of other foules their principall kinds are the swanne tame and wilde, (where of they haue great store) the Storke, the Crane, the Tedder, of the colour of a Feasant, but farre
bigger and liueth in the firre woods. Of Feasant and Partridge they haue very great plentie. An owle there is of a very great big∣nesse, more vglie to beholde then the owles of this countrey, with a broade face, & eares much like vnto a man. For fresh water fish besides the common sorts (as Carpe Pikes Pearch, Tench, Roach, &c.) they haue diuers kinds very good & de∣licate: as the Bellouga, or Bellougina of 4. or 5. elnes long, the Ositrina or Sturgeō, the Seueri∣ga, & Sterledy somewhat in fashion and taste like to the Sturgeon, but not so thicke nor long. These 4. kinds of fish breed in the vol∣gha, & are catched in great plenty, & serued thence into the whole Realme for a great food. Of the Roes of these foure kinds they make very great store of Icary or Caueary as was said before. They haue besides these that breed in the volgha a fish called the Riba bela, or white sal∣mon which they account more delicate thē they do the redde salmon wherof also they haue exceeding great plentie in the riuers northward, as in Duyna the riuer of Cola, &c. In the Ozera or lake neere a towne called Perislaue, not far frō the Mosko, they haue a smal fish which they call the fresh herring, of the fashion, and somewhat of the taste of a Sea-hearing. Their chiefe townes for
fish are, Yaruslaue, Bealozera, Nouogrod, A∣stracan, and Cazan: which all yeeld a large custome to the Emperour euery yeere for their trades of fishing, which they practise in Sommer, but send it frozen in the Winter time into all partes of the Realme. The chiefe Cities of Russia. The 4. Chapter. THE chiefe Ci∣ties of Russia are, Mosko, Nouo∣grad, Rostoue, Vo∣lodomer, Plesko, Smolensko, Iarus∣laue, Perislaue, Nisnouograd, vo∣logda, Vstiuck, Golmigroe, Ca∣zan, Astracan, Cargapolia, Columna. The citie of Mosko is supposed to be of great antiquitie,Mosko. though the first founder be vnknowen to the Russe. It seemeth to haue takē the name from the riuer that runeth on the one side of the town. Berosus the Chaldean in his 5. book telleth that Nimrod (whom o∣ther prophane stories cal Saturn) sēt Assyrius, Medus, Moscus, & Magog into Asia to plant
Colonies there, and that Moscus planted both in Asia and Europe. Which may make some probability, that the city, or rather the riuer whereon it is built, tooke the denomi∣nation from this Moscus: the rather bicause of the climate or situation, which is in the ve∣ry farthest part and list of Europe, bordering vpon Asia. The citie was much enlarged by one Euan or Iohn, sonne to Daniel, that first changed his title of Duke into King: though that honour continued not to his posterity: the rather because he was inuested into it by the Popes Legate, who at that time was In∣nocentius the fourth about the yeere 1246. which was very much misliked by the Russe people, being then a part of the Easterne or Greeke Church, Since that time the name of this citie hath growen more famous, and bet∣ter knowen to the worlde: insomuch that not onely the prouince, but the whole coun∣trey of Russia is tearmed by some by the name of Moscouia the Metropolite citie. The forme of this citie is in manner round with three strong walles, circuling the one within the other, and streets lying betweene, wher∣of the inmost wall, and the buildings closed within it (lying safest as the heart within the bodie, fenced and watred with the riuer Mo∣skua, that runneth close by it) is all accoun∣ted the Emperours castle. The number of
houses (as I haue heard) through the whole citie (being reckoned by the Emperour a little before it was fired by the Chrim) was 41500, in all. Since the Tartar besieged and fired the town (which was in the yeare 1571.) there lieth waste of it a great breadth of ground, which before was well set and plan∣ted with buildings, specially that part on the south side of Moskua, built not long before by Basilius the Emperour for his garrison of souldiours, to whom he gaue priuiledge to drinke Mead, & Beer at the drye or prohi∣bited times, when other Russes may drinke nothing but water, and for that cause called this newe citie by the name of Naloi, that is, skinck or poure in. So that now the Citie of Mosko is not much bigger then then the citie of London.Nouograde. The next in greatnes, and in a man∣ner as large, is the citie Nouograde: where was committed (as the Russe saith) the memora∣ble warre so much spoke of in stories of the Scythian seruants, that tooke armes against their maisters: which they report in this sort: vz. That the Boiarens or Gentlemen of Nouograde and the territorie about (which onely are souldiers after the discipline of those countries) had warre with the Tartars. Which being well perfourmed and ended by thē, they returned homewards. Where they vnderstood by the way that their Cholopey
or bondslaues whome they left at home, had in their absence possessed their townes, lands, houses, wiues, and all. At which newes be∣ing somewhat amased, and yet disdayning the villanie of their seruants, they made the more speed home: and so not farre from No∣uograd met them in warlike manner march∣ing against them. Whereupon aduising what was best to bee done, they agreed all to set vpon them with no other shewe of weapon but with their horse whips (which as their manner is euery man rideth withall) to put them in remembrance of their seruile condi∣tion, thereby to terrifie them, & abate their courage. And so marching on & lashing alto∣gither with their whips in their hands they gaue the onset. Which seemed so terrible in the eares of their villaines, and stroke such a sense into them of the smart of the whip which they had felt before, that they fled al∣together like sheepe before the driuers. In memory of this victory the Nouogradiās euer since haue stāped their coine (which they cal a dingoe Nouogrodskoy currāt through al Rus∣sia) with the figure of a horseman shaking a whip a loft in his hand. These two cities ex∣ceed the rest in greatnes. For strength their chief townes are Vobsko, Smolensko, Cazan & Astracan, as liyng vpon the borders. But for situation Iaruslaue. farre exceedeth the rest.Iaruslaue.
For besides the commodities that the soyle yeeldeth of pasture & corne, it lieth vpon the famous river Volgha, & looketh ouer it frō a high banke very faire & stately to behold: wherof the towne taketh the name. For Ia∣ruslaue in that tongue signifieth as much as a faire or famous bāke. In this towne (as may be ghessed by the name) dwelt the Russe king vlademir sirnamed Iaruslaue, that married the daughter of Harald king of England, by me∣diation of Sueno the Dane, as is noted in the Danish storie about the yeare 1067. The other townes haue nothing that is greatly memorable, saue many ruines within their walles. Which sheweth the decrease of the Russe people, vnder this gouernment. The streates of their cities and townes in steed of pauing, are planked with firre trees, plained and layed euen close the one to the other.The man∣ner of Russe buylding. Their houses are of wood without any lime or stone, built very close and warm with sirre trees plained and piled one vpon an other. They are fastened together with dentes or notches at euery corner, and so clasped fast together. Betwixt the trees or timber they thrust in mosse (whereof they gather plentie in their woods) to keepe out the ayre. Euery house hath a paire of staiers that lead vp into the chambers out of the yarde or streat after the Scottish manner.
This building seemeth farre better for their countrie, then that of stone and bricke: as being colder and more dampish then their woodden houses, specially of firre, that is a dry and warme wood. Whereof the proui∣dence of God hath giuen them such store, as that you may build a faire house for twentie or thirtie rubbels or little more, where wood is most scant. The greatest inconuenience of their woodden building is the aptnes for fi∣ring, which happeneth very oft and in very fearful sort, by reason of the drinesse and fat∣nesse of the firre, that being once fired, bur∣neth like a torch, and is hardly quenched till all be burnt vp. Of the house or stocke of the Russe Emperours. The 5. Chapter. THe syrname of the imperiall house of Russia, is called Bea∣la. It tooke the originall (as is supposed) from the Kinges of Hungarie. Which may seeme the more probable for that the Hungarian Kings many yeares agoe haue borne that name: as appeareth by Bonfinius
and other stories written of that countrie. For about the yeare 1059 mention is made of one Beaela that succeeded his brother An∣dreas, who reduced the Hungarians to the Christian faith from whence they were fallen by atheisme and Turkish perswasion before. The second of that name was called Beala the blinde, after whom succeeded diuers of the same name. That their auncestrie came not of the Russe nation,The house Beala not naturall Russe. Iuan vasilowich father to this Empe∣rour would many times boast, disdaining (as should seeme) to haue his progenie deriued from the Russe bloud. As namely to an Eng∣lishman his goldsmith, that had receiued bul∣lion of him to make certain plate: whom the Emperour commaunded to looke well to his waight. For my Russes (sayd he) are theeues all. Whereat the workeman looking vpon the Emperour, began to smile. The Empe∣rour being of quicke conceipt, charged him to tell him what he smiled at. If your Ma∣iestie will pardon me (quoth the goldsmith) I will tell you. Your highnesse said that the Russes were all theeues, and forgot in the meane while that your selfe was a Russe. I thought so (quoth the Emperour) but thou art deceiued. For I am no Russe, my auncestors were Germanes (for so they account of the Hungarians to be part of the Germane natiō
though in deed they come of the Hunnes. That inuaded those countries and rested in those parts of Pannonia, now called Hungary. How they aspired to the Dukedome of Volodemer (which was their first degree, and ingrafting into Russia) and whether it were by cōquest, or by marriage, or by what other meanes, I could not learne any certentie a∣mong them.The ad∣uoncement of the house of Beala. That from these beginnings of a small Dukedome (that bare notwithstan∣ding an absolute gouernment with it, as at that time did also the other Shires or Pro∣uinces of Russia) this house of Beala spred it selfe foorth, and aspired by degrees to the monarchie of the whole countrie, is a thing well knowen, and of very late memorie. The chiefe of that house that aduaunced the stocke, and enlarged their dominions, were the three last that raigned before this Em∣perour, to wit. Iuan Basileus, & Iuan father to the other that raigneth at this time. Wherof the first that tooke vnto him the name and title of Emperour, was Basileus father to Iuan, & grandfather to this man. For before that time they were contented to be called great Dukes of Mosko. What hath bene done by either of these three, and how much they haue added to their first estate by conquest or otherwise, may bee seene in the chapter of their colonies, or purchases perforce. For
the cōtinuance of the race, this house of Bea∣la at this present is in like case as are many of the greatest houses of Christendome vz. the whole stocke and race concluded in one, two or some fewe of the bloud. For besides the Emperour that now is, who hath no childe (neither is like euer to haue for ought that may be coniectured by the constitution of his body, and the barennesse of his wife af∣ter so many yeares marriage) there is but one more vz. a child of sixe or seuen yeares old, in whom resteth all the hope of the succes∣sion, and the posteritie of that house. As for the other brother that was eldest of the three, and of the best towardnesse, he died of a blowe giuen him by his father vpon the head in his furie with his walking staffe, or (as some say) of a thrust with the prong of it driuen deepe into his head. That he meant him no such mortall harme when hee gaue him the blow, may appeare by his mourning and passion after his sonnes death, which ne∣uer left him till it brought him to the graue. Wherein may be marked the iustice of God, that punished his delight in shedding of bloud with this murder of his sonne by his owne hand, and so ended his dayes and ty∣rannie together, with the murdering of him∣selfe by extreame griefe, for this his vnhap∣pie and vnnaturall fact.
The Emperours yonger brother of sixe or seuen years old (as was said before) is kept in a remote place from the Mosko, vnder the tuition of his mother and hir kinred of the house of the Nagaies: yet not safe (as I haue heard) from attempts of making away by pra∣ctise of some that aspire to the succession, if this Emperour die without any issue. The nurse that tasted before him of certaine meat (as I haue heard) died presently. That hee is naturall sonne to Ioan Vasilowich, the Russe people warrant it, by the Fathers qualitie that beginneth to appeare already in his tender yeares. He is delighted (they say) to see sheepe and other cattel killed, and to looke on their throtes while they are bleeding (which com∣monly children are afraid to beholde) and to beate geese and hennes with a staffe till he see them lie dead. Besides these of the male kind, there is a widdow, that hath right in the succession, sister to the old Emperour, and aunt to this man, somtime wife to Mag∣nus Duke of Holst, brother to the king of Denmarke, by whom shee had one daughter. This woman since the death of hir husband hath bene allured again into Russia by some that loue the succession better then hir selfe, which appeareth by the sequele. For hir selfe with hir daughter so soone as they were re∣turned into Russia were thrust into a Nunne∣rie,
where hir daughter died this last yeare while I was in the countrie, of no naturall disease as was supposed. The mother remai∣neth still in the Nunnerie, where (as I haue heard) shee bewayleth hir selfe, and curseth the time when she returned into Russia, en∣tised with the hope of marriage, and other fayre promises in the Emperours name▪ Thus it standeth with the imperiall stock of Russia of the house of Beala, which is like to determine in those that now are, & to make a conuersion of the Russe estate. If it be into a gouernment of some better temper, and milder constitution, it will be happy for the poore people that are now oppressed with intollerable seruitude. Of the manner of crowning or inaugu∣ration of the Russe Emperours. The 6. Chapter. THe solemnities vsed at the Russe Emperours coronatiō, are on this manner. In the great Church of Precheste (or our Lady) within the Empe∣rours castle is erected a stage,
whereon standeth a scrine that beareth vpon it the Imperiall cappe and robe of very riche stuffe. When the day of the Inauguration is come, there resorte thither, first the Patri∣arch with the Metropolitanes, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, all richly clad in their Pontisicalibus. Then enter the Dea∣cons with the quier of singers. Who so soone as the Emperour setteth foote into the Church, beginne to sing: Many yeares may liue noble Theodore Iuanowich &c: Whereun∣to the Patriarch and Metropolite with the rest of the Cleargie, answere with a certaine Hymne, informe of a prayer, singing it all together with a greatnoyse. The hymne be∣yng ended, the Patriarch with the Empe∣rour mount vp the stage, where standeth a seat ready for the Emperour. Whereupon the Patriarch willeth him to sit downe, and then placing himselfe by him vpon an other seate prouided for that purpose, boweth downe his head towardes the ground, and sayeth this prayer: Oh Lord God King of Kinges, Lord of Lordes, which by thy prophet Samuel diddest choose thy seruant Dauid, and annoint him for King ouer thy people Israell, heare now our prayers, and looke from thy sanctuarie vp∣on this thy seruant Theodore, whome thou hast chosen and exalted for King ouer these thy ho∣ly Nations, annoint him with the oyle of glad∣nesse,
protect him by thy power, put vpon his head a crowne of golde and pretious stones, giue him length of dayes, place him in the seate of Iustice, strengthen his arme, make subiect vn∣to him all the barbarous nations. Lette thy feare bee in his whole heart, turne him from an euill faith, and from all errour, and shewe him the saluation of thy holy and vniuersall Church, that hee may iudge thy people with Iustice, and protect the children of the poore, and finally at∣teyne euerlasting lyfe. This prayer hee spea∣keth with a lowe voyce, and then pronoun∣ceth a lowde: All prayse and power to God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost. The prayer beyng ended, hee commaundeth cer∣taine Abbots to reach the imperiall roabe and cappe: whiche is done verie decently, and with great solemnitie, the Patriarch with∣all pronouncing alowde: Peace be vnto all. And so he beginneth an other praier to this effect: Bowe your selues together with vs, and pray to him that reigneth ouer all. Preserue him (oh Lord) vnder thy holy protection, keepe him that hee may doo good and holy things, let iustice shine foorth in his dayes, that wee may liue quietly without strife and malice. This is pronounced somewhat softly by the Patri∣arch, whereto hee addeth againe alowd: Thou art the King of the whole worlde, and the sauiour of our soules, to thee the Father,
Sonne and Holy ghost, be all prayse for euer, and euer, Amen. Then putting on the roabe and the cappe, he blesseth the Emperour with the signe of the crosse: saying withall, in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy ghost. The like is done by the Metropolites, Arch∣bishops, and Bishops: who all in their order come to the chaire, and one after an other blesse the Emperour with their two fore∣fingers. Then is sayed by the Patriarch an other prayer, that beginneth: O most holy virgin mother of God, &c. After which a Dea∣con pronounceth with an high lowde voice: Many yeares to Noble Theodore, good, honou∣rable, beloued of God, great Duke of Volode∣mer of Mosko, Emperour, and Monarch of all Russia, &c. Whereto the other Priestes and Deacons that stand somewhat farre of by the altar or table, answeare singing: Ma∣ny yeares, many yeares, to the noble Theodore. The same not is taken vp by the Priestes and Deacons, that are placed at the right and left side of the Church, and then all to∣gether, they chaunt and thunder out, sing∣ing: Many yeares to the noble Theodore, good, honaurable, beloued of God, great Duke of Vo∣lodemer, Mosko, Emperour of all Russia, &c. These solemnities beyng ended, first com∣meth the Patriarch with the Metropolites. Archbishops, and Bishops, then the Nobi∣litie,
and the whole companie in their order, to doo homage to the Emperour, bending downe their heads and knocking them at his feete to the very ground. The stile wherewith he is in∣uested at his Coronation, runneth after this manner. THeodore Iuanowich, by the grace of God great Lord and Emperour of all Russia, great Duke of Volodemer, Mosko, and Nouo∣grad, King of Cazan, King of Astracan, Lord of Plesko, and great duke of Smolensko, of Twer∣ria, Ioughoria, Permia, Vadska, Bulghoria, and others, Lord and great duke of Nouograd of the Low countrie, of Chernigo, Rezan, Po∣lotskoy, Rostoue, Yaruflaueley, Bealozera, Lief∣land, Oudoria, Obdoria, and Condensa, Com∣maunder of all Siberia, and of the North partes, and Lord of many other Countries, &c. This stile conteyneth in it all the Em∣perours Prouinces, and setteth foorth his greatnesse. And therefore they haue a great delight and pride in it, forcing not onely there owne people but also straungers (that haue any matter to deliuer to the Empe∣rour by speach or writing) to repeate the whole forme from the beginning to the end, Which breedeth much cauill, and some∣times
quarrell betwixt them and the Tartar, and Poland Ambassadours: who refuse to call him Czar, that is Emperour, and to re∣peat the other partes of his long stile. My selfe when I had audience of the Emperour, thought good to salute him onely with thus much vz. Emperour of all Russia, great Duke of Volodemer, Mosko and Nouograd, King of Cazan, King of Astracan. The rest I o∣mitted of purpose, because I knew they glo∣ried, to haue their stile appeare to bee of a larger volume then the Queenes of Eng∣land. But this was taken in so ill part, that the Chauncellor (who then attended the Em∣perour, with the rest of the Nobilitie) with a lowde chafing voice called still vpon mee to say out the rest. Whereto I answered, that the Emperours stile was very long, and could not so well be remembred by straungers, that I had repeated so much of it, as might shewe that I gaue honour to the rest &c: But all would not serue till I com∣maunded my Interpreter to say it all out.
The State or forme of their Gouernment. The 7. Chapter. THe manner of their gouern∣ment is much after the Tur∣kish fashiō: which they seeme to imitate as neare as the coū∣trie, and reach of their capa∣cities in pollitique affayres will giue them leaue to doo. The State and forme of their gouernment is plaine tyrannicall,The Russe gouern∣ment ty∣rannicall. as applying all to the behoofe of the Prince, and that after a most open and barbarous manner: as may ap∣peare by the Sophismata or secretes of their gouernment afterwards set downe, aswell for the keeping of the Nobilitie and Com∣mons in an vnder proportion, & far vneuen ballance in their seuerall degrees, as also in their impositions and exactions, where∣in they exceede all iust measure without any regard of Nobilitie or people: farther then it giueth the Nobilitie a kinde of iniust and vnmeasured libertie, to commaund and ex∣act vpon the commons and baser sort of peo∣ple in all partes of the realme where soeuer they come, specially in the place where their
landes lye, or where they are appoynted by the Emperonr to gouerne vnder him. Also to the Commons some small content∣ment, in that they passe ouer their landes by discent of inheritance to whither sonne they will: which commonly they doo after our Gauillkinde, and dispose of their goods by gifte or Testament without any control∣ment. Wherein notwithstanding both No∣bilitie and Commons are but stoarers for the Prince, all running in the ende into the Emperours coffers: as may appeare by the practise of enriching his treasurie, and the manner of exactions set downe in the title of his customes, and reuenues. Concerning the principall pointes and matters of State, wherein the Soueraintie consisteth (as the making and annulling of pu∣blike Lawes, the making of Magistrates, power to make warre or league with any forraine State, to execute or to pardon life, with the right of appeale in all matters, both ciuill and criminall) they doo so wholy and absolutely pertaine to the Emperour, and his Counsell vnder him, as that hee may be saide to be both the Soueraine commaunder, and the exe∣cutioner of all these. For as touching any Lawe or publique order of the Realme, it is euer determined of before any publique assemblie or Parliament bee summoned.
Where besides his Councell, hee hath none other to consult with him of such matters as are concluded before hand, but onely a fewe Bishops, Abbots, and Friers: to no other end then to make aduantage of the peoples superstitions, euen against themselues, which thinke all to bee holy and iust, that passeth with consent of their Bishops and Cleargie men, whatsoeuer it be. For which purpose the Emperours are content to make much of the corrupt state of the Church, as now it is among them, and to nourish the same by extraordinarie fauours, and immunities to the Bishops seas, Abbeies and Frieries: as knowing superstition and false religion best to agree with a tyrannicall state, and to be a speciall meanes to vphold and mainteyne the same. Secondly, as touching the publike offices and magistracies of the realme, there is none hereditarie, neither any so great nor so litle in that countrie, but the bestowing of it is done immediatly by the Emperour himself. Insomuch that the very Diacks or clearkes in euery head towne, are for the most part assigned by himselfe. Notwithstanding, the Emperour that now is (the better to entend his deuotions) referreth al such matters per∣teyning to the State, wholly to the ordering of his wiues brother, the L. Borris Federo∣wich
Godonoe. Thirdly, the like is to be said of the iu∣risdiction concerning matters iudiciall, spe∣cially such as concerne life and death. Wherein there is none that hath anie au∣thoritie or publike iurisdiction that goeth by discent, or is held by charter, but all at the appoyntment and pleasure of the Empe∣rour, and the same practised by the iudges with such awe and restraint, as that they dare not determine vpon anie speciall mat∣ter, but must referre the same wholly, vp to the Mosko to the Emperours Coun∣cell. To shewe his Soueraintie ouer the liues of his subiects, the late Emperour Iuan Vasi∣lowich in his walkes or progresses, if hee had misliked the face or person of any man whō hee met by the way, or that looked vpon him, would command his head to be strook off. Which was presently done, and the head cast before him. Fourthly, for the soueraigne appeale, and giuing of pardons in criminall matters to such as are conuicted, it is wholly at the pleasure and grace of the Emperour. Wher∣in also the Empresse that nowe is, being a woman of great clemencie, and withall de∣lighting to deale in publike affaires of the Realme, (the rather to supply the defect of her husband) doeth behaue her selfe after an
absolute manner, giuing out pardon (spe∣cially on hir byrth, day and other solemne times) in her owne name, by open procla∣mation, without any mention at all of the Emperour. Some there haue beene of late of the auncient Nobilitie, that haue held diuers prouinces by right of inheritaunce, with an absolute authoritie and iurisdiction ouer them, to order and determine all mat∣ters within their owne precinct without all appeale, or controlment of the Emperour. But this was all annulled and wrung cleane from them by Iuan Vasilowich father to this Emperour. The manner of holding their Par∣liaments. The 8. Chapter. THeir highest Court of pub∣like consultation for matter of State,The States of Parlia∣ment. is called the Zabore, that is, the Publike Assembly. The states & degrees of per∣sons that are present at their Parliaments, are these in order. 1. The Em∣perour himselfe. 2. Some of his Nobilitie a∣bout the number of twentie being all of his Councel. 3. Certain of the cleargy men, &c.
about the same number. As for Burghers or other to represent the cōmunaltie, they haue no place there: the people being of no better account with them then as seruants or bond slaues that are to obey, not to make lawes, nor to knowe any thing of publike matters before they are concluded. The Court of Parliament (called Zabore) is held in this manner.The order of the sum∣mons or as∣sembling. The Emperour cau∣seth to be summoned such of his Nobilitie as himselfe thinketh meete, being (as was said) all of his Councell: together with the Patri∣arch, who calleth his Cleargie, to wit, the two Metropolites, the two Archbishops, with such Bishops, Abbots, and Friers as are of best account and reputation among thē. When they are all assembled at the Empe∣rours court, the day is intimated when the session shal begin. Which commonly is vpon some friday, for the religion of that day. When the day is come, the cleargie men assemble before at the time & place appoin∣ted, which is called the Stollie. And when the Emperour commeth attended by his Nobi∣litie, they arise all, and meete him in an out roome, following their Patriarch, who bles∣seth the Emperor with his two forefingers, laying them on his forehead, and the sides of his face, and then kisseth him on the right side of his brest. So they passe on into their
Parliament house, where they sit in this or∣der. The Emperor is enthronized on the one side of the chamber. In the next place not far from him at a smal square table (that giueth roome to twelue persons or thereabouts) sitteth the Patriarche with the Metropo∣lites and Bishops, and certeine of the prin∣cipall Nobilitie of the Emperours Councel, together with two Diacks or Secretaries (cal∣led Dumnoy dyakey) that enact that which passeth. The rest place themselues on ben∣ches round about the roome, euery man in his ranck after his degree. Then is there pro∣pounded by one of the Secretaries (who re∣presenteth the speaker) the cause of their as∣semblie, and the principall matters that they are to consider of. For to propund bils what euery man thinketh good for the publike be∣nefite (as the maner is in England) the Russe Parliament alloweth no such custome, nor libertie to subiects. The poynts being opened,Their dis∣course at Parliamēt. the Patriarch with his Cleargie men haue the prerogatiue to be first asked their vote, or opinion, what they thinke of the poyntes propounded by the Secretarie. Whereto they answere in or∣der, according to their degrees, but al in one forme without any discourse: as hauing lear∣ned their lesson before, that serueth their turnes at all Parliaments alike, whatsoeuer is
propounded. Commonly it is to this effect. That the Emperour and his Councell are of great wisedome, and experience, touching the pollicies and publike affaires of the Realme, and farre bet∣ter able to iudge what is profitable for the com∣mon wealth, then they are, which attend vpon the seruice of God onlie, and matters of religion. And therefore it may please them to proceede. That insteede of their aduise, they will aide them with their prayers, as their dueties and vocations doe require, &c. To this or like effect hauing made their answeres euery man in his course, vp standeth some Abbot or Frier more bold then the rest (yet appointed before hand as a matter of forme) and desireth the Empe∣rour it would please his Maiestie, to com∣maund to be deliuered vnto them what his Maiesties owne iudgement, and determinate pleasure is, as touching those matters pro∣pounded by his Deiake. Whereto is replied by the saide Secreta∣rie in the Emperours name. That his High∣nesse with those of his noble Councell, vpon good and sound aduise haue found the matters propo∣sed to be verie good and necessarie for the com∣mon wealth of his Realme. Notwithstanding, for asmuch as they as religious men, & know what is right, his Maiestie requireth their godiie o∣pinions, yea and their censures too, for the appro∣uing or correcting of the saide propositions. And
therefore desireth them againe to speake their mindes freely. And if they shal like to giue their consents, that then the matters may passe to a full conclusion. Hereunto when the Cleargie men haue giuen their consents (which they vse to do without any great pausing) they take their leaues with blessing of the Emperour: who bringeth the Patriarch on his way so farre as the next roome, and so returneth to his seat, till all be made readie for his returne home∣ward. The actes that thus are passed by the Zabore or Parliament, the Deiakeis or Secre∣taries draw into a forme of proclamation, which they send abroad into euery Prouince, and head towne of the Realme, to be publi∣shed there by the Dukes and Diakeis, or Se∣cretaries of those places. The session of Parliament being fully ended, the Empe∣rour inuiteth the Cleargie men to a solemne dinner. And so they de∣part euery man to his home.
Of the Nobilitie, and by what meanes it is kept in an vnder proportion agreea∣ble to to that State. The 9. Chapter. THe degrees of persons or estates of Russia,The Vdel∣ney Knazey chiefe of the Nobili∣tie, besides the soueraigne State or Emperour himselfe) are these in their order. 1. The Nobilitie which is of foure sortes. Whereof the chiefe for birth, authoritie, and reuenue are called the Vdelney Knazey, that is, the exempt or priuiledged Dukes. These held sometime a seueral iurisdiction, and absolute authorite within their precincts, much like vnto the States or Nobles of Germany. But afterwards (reseruing their rights vpon composition) they yeelded themselues to this house of Be∣ala, when it began to waxe mightie, and to enlarge it self by ouermatching their neigh∣bours. Onely they were bound to serue the Emperour in his warres with a certain num∣ber of horse. But the late Emperour Iuan Va∣silowich father to this prince, being a man of high spirit, and subtill in his kind meaning to reduce his gouernmēt into a more strickt
forme beganne by degrees to clip of their greatnes, & to bring it downe to a lesser pro∣portion: till in the end he made them not onely his vassals, but his Kolophey, that is, his very villains or bōdslaues. For so they terme and write themselues in anie publike in∣strument or priuate petition which they make to the Emperour. So that now they holde their authorities, landes, liues and all at the Emperours pleasure, as the rest doe. The meanes and practise whereby hee wrought this to effect against those, & other of the Nobility (so well as I could note out of the report of his doings) were these, and such like. First, he cast priuate emulations among them about preroragatiue of their titles, and dignities. Wherein hee vsed to set on the inferiours, to preferre or equall themselues to those that were accounted to bee of the nobler houses. Where he made his aduanntage of their malice and con∣tentions, the one against the other, by re∣ceiuing deuised matter, and accusations of secrete practise and conspiracies to be in∣tended against his person, and state. And so hauing singled out the greatest of them, and cut them off with the good liking of the rest, hee fell at last to open practise, by forcing of the other to yeeld their rights
vnto him. 2 Hee deuided his subiectes into two partes or factions by a general schisme.The factiō of Oppressini & Zempskey deuised by the Empe∣rour. The one part hee called the Oppressini or Select men. These were such of the Nobilitie and Gentrie as he tooke to his owne part to pro∣tect and mainteyne them as his faithful sub∣iects. The other hee called Zemskey, or the Commons. The Zemskey conteyned the base and vulgar sort, with such Noblemen and Gentlemen as he meant to cut off, as suspe∣cted to mislike his gouernment, and to haue a meaning to practise against him. Wherein he prouided that the Oppressini for number and qualitie of valure, money, armour, &c: farre exceeded the other of the Zempskey side, whom he put (as it were) from vnder his protection: so that if any of them were spoi∣led or killed by those of the Oppressini (which hee accounted of his owne part) there was no amendes to bee sought for by way of publike iustice, or by complaint to the Em∣perour. The whole number of both partes was orderly registred and kept in a booke: so that euery man knewe who was a Zempskey man, and who of the Oppressini. And this li∣bertie of the one part to spoyle and kill the other without anie helpe of Magistrate, or lawe (that continued seuen yeeres) enriched
that side, and the Emperours treasurie, and wrought that withall which hee intended by this practise, viz. to take out of the way such of the Nobilitie, as himself misliked: whereof were slayne within one weeke to the number of three hundred within the citie of Mosko. This tyrannicall practise of making a generall Schisme, and pub∣like diuision among the subiects of his whole Realme, proceeded (as should seeme) from an extreame doubt, and desperate feare, which hee had conceiued of most of his No∣bilitie, and Gentlemen of his Realme, in his warres with the Polonian and Chrim Tar∣tar. What time hee grewe into a vehement suspition (conceiued of the ill successe of his affayres) that they practised treason with the Polonian and Chrim. Whereupon he exe∣cuted some, and deuised this way to be ridde of the rest. And this wicked pollicy & tyrannous pra∣ctise (though now it be ceassed) hath so trou∣bled that countrey, and filled it so full of grudge & mortall hatred euer since, that it wil not be quenched (as it seemeth now) till it burne againe into a ciuill flame. 3 Hauing thus pulled them and sea∣sed all their inheritaunce, landes, priuiled∣ges, &c. saue some verie small part which he left to their name, hee gaue them other
landes of the tenour of Pomestnay (as they call it) that are helde at the Emperours pleasure, lying farre of in an other coun∣trey, and so remoued them into other of his Prouinces, where they might haue neyther fauour, nor authoritie, not being natiue nor well knowen there. So that now these of the chiefe Nobilitie (called Vdel∣ney Knazey) are equalled with the rest: saue that in the opinion and fauour of the people they are of more account, and keepe stil the prerogatiue of their place in al their publike meetings. Their practise to keepe downe these houses from rising againe and recouering their dignities are these, and such like. First, many of their heires are kept vnmaried per∣force that the stocke may die with thē Some are sent into Siberia, Cazan and Astracan, vnder pretence of seruice, and there either made away, or else fast clapped vp. Some are put into Abbeyes, and shire themselues Fri∣ers by pretence of a vowe to be made volun∣tary, and of their owne accord, but indeede forced vnto it by feare, vpon some pretensed crime obiected against them. Where they are so garded by some of special trust, and the Couent it selfe (vpon whose head it standeth that they make no escape) as that they haue no hope but to ende their liues there.
Of this kinde there are manie of verie great Nobilitie. These and such like wayes begunne by the Emperour Iuan Vasilo∣wich are still practised by the Godonoes, who beyng aduaunced by the mariage of the Empresse their kinsewoman, rule both the Emperour, and his Realme, (specially Bor∣ris Federowich Godonoe, brother to the Em∣presse) and endeuour by all meanes to cut of, or keepe downe all of the best and aunci∣entest Nobilitie. Whereof diuers alreadie they haue taken away, whom they thought likeliest to make head against them and to hinder their purpose, as Knez Andreas Gu∣raken Bulgatkoue, a man of great byrth and authoritie in the Countrey. The like they haue done with Peeter Gollanni (whom they put into a dungeon where he ended his life) with Knez Vasilie Vrywich Golloohen, with Andrieu luanowich Suskoy accoun∣ted among them for a man of a great wise∣dome. So this last yeere was killed in a Mo∣nasterie, (whither they had thrust him) on Knez Iuan Petrowich Suskoy a man of great valure, and seruice in that Countrey: who about fiue or sixe yeeres since, bare out the siege of the Citie Vobsko made by Ste∣pan Batore King of Polonia, with a 100000. men, and repulsed him verie valiantly, with great honour to himselfe, and his countrey,
and disgrace to the Polonian. Also Mitheta Romanowich vnckle to the Emperour by the mothers side, was supposed to haue dyed of poyson, or some like practise. The names of these families of greatest Nobility are these in their order.Names of the grea∣test houses of the Russe Nobilitie. The first is of Knez Volodemer, which resteth at this time in one daughter a widow, and without chil∣dren (mentioned before) sometime wife to Hartock Magnus brother to the king of Den∣mark, now closed within a trūnery. The 2. knez Metheloskey thrust into a Friery, and his only sonne kept frō mariage, to decay the house. The 3. Glimskoy. But one left of his house, & he without children saue one daughter. The 4. Suskoy, wherof there are 4. brethren yong men, & vnmaried al. The 5. Hubetskoy. Of this house are 4. liuing. The 6. Bulgaloy now called Guletchey house, whereof are fiue liuing, but youths al. The 7. Vorallinskoy. Two left of that stock. The 8. Odgoskey. Two. The 9. Telletskoy. One. The 10. Taytoue, three. These are the names of the chiefe families called Vdelney Knazey: that in effect haue lost all now, saue the very name it selfe, and fauour of the peo∣ple, which is like one day to restore them a∣gaine, if any be left. The 2. degree of Nobility is of the Boiarens.The 2. de∣gree of No∣bilitie. These are such as the Emperour honoureth (besides their nobility) with the title of coun∣sellers.
The reuenue of these 2. sorts of their Nobles that riseth out of their lands assigned thē by the Emperour, & held at his pleasure (for of their owne inheritaunce there is little left them as was said before) is about a thou∣sand marks a yeere: besides pension which they receiue of the Emperour for their ser∣uice in his warres, to the summe of 700. rub∣bels a yeere, and none aboue that summe. But in this number the lorde Borris Fe∣derowich Godenoe is not to be reckoned, that is like a Transendent, and in no such predica∣ment with the rest, being the Emperors bro∣ther in law, his protectour for direction, for commaund and authority Emperour of Rus∣sia. His yerely reuenue in land & pension, a∣mounteth to the summe of 93700. rubbels and more, as appeareth by the particulars. He hath of inheritance (which himselfe hath augmentēted in Vasma Dorogobose sixe thou∣sand rubbels a yeere. For his office of Con∣nick, or Master of the Horse 12000. rub∣bels, or markes, raised out of the Conaslue Sloboday, or the liberties pertayning to that Office, which are certeyne Landes and Townes neere about the Mosko. Besides, all the meddowe and pasture grounde on both sides the banke of the riuer Mosko, thirtie verst vp the streame, aod fourtie verst downwards. For his pension of the Empe∣rour
(besides the other for his office) 15000. rubbels. Out of the Prouince or Shire of Vagha, there is giuen him for a peculiar ex∣empted out of the Chetfird of Posolskoy 32000. rubbels, besides a tent of furres. Out of Rezan and Seuer, (an other peculi∣ar) 30000. rubbels. Out of Otfer and Tu∣riock an other exempt place 8000. rubbels. For rent of Bathstoaues and Bathing hou∣ses without the walles of Mosko 1500. rub∣bels. Besides his pomest, or lands which hee holdeth at the Emperours pleasure, which farre exceedeth the proportion of land allot∣ted to the rest of the Nobility. One other there is of the house of Glinskoy that dispendeth in land and pension about 40000. rubbels yeerely. Which hee is suffered to enioy because hee hath married Borris his wiues sister, being himselfe verie simple, and almost a naturall. The ordering of him & his landes are committed to Borris. In the third rank are the Voyauodey or such Nobles as are,The 3. sort of Nobili∣tie. or haue bin generals in the Em∣perours warres. Which deliuer the honour of their title to their posterities also: who take their place aboue the other Dukes and Nobles that are not of the two former sort, vz. of the Vdelney knazey, nor of the Bo∣iarens. These three degrees of their Nobilitie (to
wit) the Vdelney knazey, the Boiarens, and the Voiaudey haue the addition of vich, put vnto their sirname as Borris Federowich, &c: which is a note of honour that the rest may not vsurpe. And in case it be not added in the naming of them, they may sue the Best∣chest or penaltie of dishonour vpon them, that otherwise shall terme them. The fourth and lowest degree of Nobili∣tie with them, is of such as beare the name of Knazey or Dukes, but come of the yonger brothers of those chiefe houses, through ma∣ny discents, and haue no inheritance of their owne, saue the bare name or title of Duke onely. For their order is to deliuer their names and titles of their dignities ouer to all their children alike, what soeuer else they leaue them. So that the sonnes of a Voiauodey or Generall in the field, are called Voiauodey though they neuer saw the field, and the sons of a Knez or Duke are called Knazey though they haue not one groat of inheritance or liuelyhood to mainteine themselues withall. Of this sort there are so many that the plen∣tie maketh them cheap: so that you shall see Dukes glad to serue a meane man for fiue or six rubbels or marks a yeare, & yet they will stand highly vpon their Bestchest or reputa∣tion of their Honours. And these are their seuerall degrees of Nobilitie.
The second degree of persons is of their Sina Boiarskey,The second degree of persons. or the sonnes of Gentlemen: which all are preferred, & hold that name by their seruice in the Emperours warres, being souldiers by their very stocke and birth. To which order are referred their Dyacks or Secretaries, that serue the Emperour in euery head towne, being ioyned in Commission with the Dukes of that place The last are their Commons,The third degree. whom they call Mousicks. In which number they reckon their Marchants, & their common artificers. The very lowest and basest sort of this kind (which are held in no degree) are their coū∣trie people whom they call Christianeis. Of the Sina boiarskey (which are all souldiers) we are to see in the description of their forces, & military prouisions. Concerning their Mou∣sicks, what their condition & behauiour is, in the title or chapter Of the common people. Of the gouernment of their Pro∣uinces and Shires. The 10. Chapter. THe whole countrie of Russia (as was said before) is diuided into foure parts, which they call Chet∣firds, or Tetrarchies. Euery Chetfird
cōteineth diuers shires, & is annexed to a se∣uerall office, whereof it takes the name. The first Chetfird or Tetrarchie beareth the name of Pososkoy Chetfird,The foure Chetfirds. or the Iurisdiction of the office of Ambassages, and at this time is vnder the chiefe Secretarie and officer of the Am∣bassages called Andreas Shalcaloue. The stā∣ding fee or stipend that he receiueth yearely of the Emperour for this seruice, is 100. rub∣bels or markes. The second is called the Roseradney Chet∣fird, because it is proper to the Roserade or high Constable. At this time it perteineth by vertue of office to Basilie Shalcaloue, brother to the Chancellor, but it is executed by one Zapon Abramoue. His pension is an hundred rubbels yearely. The third is the Chetfird of Pomestnoy, as perteining to that office. This keepeth a Re∣gister of all lands giuen by the Emperour for seruice to his Noblemē, Gentlemē, & others, giueth out & taketh in all assurances for thē. The officer at this time is called Eleazar wel∣lusgine. His stipend is 500. rubbels a yeare. The fourth is called Cassanskoy dworets, as being appropriat to the office that hath the iurisdiction of the kingdomes of Cazan and Astracan, with the other townes lying vpon the Volgha, now ordered by one Druzhine Penteleoue, a man of very speciall account
among them, for his wisdome, and prompt∣nes in matters of pollicie. His pension is 150. rubbels a yeare. From these Chetfirds or Tetarchies is ex∣empted the Emperors inheritance or Vochin (as they cal it) for that it perteined from aun∣cient time to the house of Beala, which is the sirname of the imperiall bloud. This stā∣deth of 36. townes with their bounds or ter∣ritories. Besides diuers peculiar iurisdicti∣ons, which at likewise deducted out of those Chetfirds, as the Shire of Vagha (belonging to the Lord Borrise Federowich Godonoe) and such like. These are the chiefe gouernours or offi∣cers of the Prouinces, not resident at their charge abroad, but attending the Emperour whether soeuer he goeth, and carrying their offices about with them, which for the most part they hold at Mosko, as the Emperours chiefe seat. The parts and practise of these foure of∣fices, is to receiue all complaints and actions what soeuer, that are brought out of their seuerall Chetfirds, and quarters, & to informe them to the Emperours counsell. Likewise to send direction again to those that are vn∣der them in their said Prouinces, for all mat∣ters giuen in charge by the Emperour and his Counsell, to be done or put in execution
within their precincts. For the ordering of euery particular Prouince of these foure Chetfirds, there is ap∣pointed one of these Dukes, which were rec∣koned before in the lowest degree of their Nobilitie, which are resident in the head townes of the said Prouinces. Whereof eue∣ry one hath ioyned with him in Commission a Dyack or Secretarie to assist him, or rather to direct him. For in the executing of their commission, the Dyack doth all. The parts of their Commission are these in effect.The Com∣mission of the Dukes or Presi∣dents of Shires. First to heare and determine in all ciuil matters within their precinct To which purpose they haue vnder them certeine offi∣cers, as Gubnoy Starets or Coroners, who be∣sides the triall of selfe murders, are to attach fellons: and the Souldiae or vnder Iustices, who themselues also may heare and determine in all matters of the same nature, among the countrie people of their owne wardes or bayliwicks: but so that in case either partie dissent, they may appeale, and goe farther to the Duke and Dyack that reside within the head towne. From whom also they may re∣moue the matter to the higher court at Mos∣ko of the Emperours Counsell, where lie all appeales. They haue vnder them also Sots∣koy Starets, that is Aldermen, or Baliues of the hundreds.
Secondly in all criminall matters, as theft, murder, treason, &c. they haue authoritie to apprehend, to examine and to emprison the malefactor, and so hauing receiued perfect e∣uidence & information of the cause, they are to send it ready drawen and orderly digested vp to the Mosko, to the officer of the Chet∣fird, whereunto that Prouince is annexed: by whom it is referred and propounded to the Emperours Counsell. But to determine in a∣ny matter criminall, or to doo executiō vpon the partie offending, is more then their com∣mission will allow them to doo. Thirdly, if there be any publike seruice to be done within that Prouince, (as the pub∣lishing of any Law, or common order, by way of proclamation, collecting of taxes and im∣positions for the Emperour, moistering of Souldiers, and sending them forth at the day and to the place assigned by the Emperour or his Counsell) all these and such like per∣teyne to their charge. These Dukes & Dyacks are appointed to their place by the Emperour himselfe & are chaunged ordinarily at euery yeares end, ex∣cept vpō some special liking or suit, the time be proroged for a yeare or two more. They are men of themselues of no credite, nor fa∣uour with the people, where they gouerne, being neither borne, nor brought vp among
them, not yet hauing inheritance of their owne there, or els where. Onely of the Em∣perour they haue for that seruice an 100. markes a yeare, he that hath most, some fif∣tie, some but thirtie. Which maketh them more suspected & odious to the people, be∣cause being so bare, and comming fresh and hungrie vpon them lightly euery yeare, they rack & spoile them without all regard of iu∣stice, or conscience. Which is easily tollerated by the chiefe officers of the Chetfirds, to the end they may rob them againe & haue a bet∣ter bootie when they call them to account: which cōmonly they doo at the end of their seruice, making an aduātage of their iniustice & oppression ouer the poore people. There are few of them but they come to the Pudkey or whip when their time is ended, which themselues for the most parte doo make ac∣count of. And therefore they furnish them∣selues with all the spoile they can for the time of their gouernment, that they may haue for both turnes, aswel for the Emperour, and Lord of the Chetfird, as to reserue some good part for themselues. They that are appointed to gouerne a∣broad, are men of this qualitie: saue that in the foure border townes that are of greatest importance, are set men of more speciall valure and trust two in euery towne. Wher∣of
one is euer of the Emperours priuie coun∣sell. These foure border townes are Smolens∣ko, Vobsko, Nouogrod, & Cazan, whereof three lie towards the Polonian & Sweden, one bor∣dereth far of vpon the Chrim Tartar. These haue larger cōmission then the other Dukes of the Prouinces that I spake of before, and may doo execution in criminall matters. Which is thought behoofull for the Com∣monwelth: for incident occasions that may happen vpon the borders▪ that are far of, & may not stay for direction, about euery oc∣current and particular matter from the Em∣perour and his Counsell. They are chaunged euery yeare (except as before) and haue for their stipend 700. rubbels a yeare hee that hath most: some haue but 400▪ Many of these places that are of greatest importance, & al∣most the whole countrie is managed at this time, by the Godonoes and their clients. The citie of Mosko (that is the Emperours seat) is gouerned altogether by the Empe∣rours Counsell. All matters there both ciuill and criminall, are heard and determined in the seuerall courtes, held by some of the said Counsell, that reside there all the yeare long. Onely for their ordinary matters (as buil∣dings,The Go∣uernment of Mosko. reparations, keeping of their streates decent and cleane, collections, leuying of taxes, impositions and such like) are appoin∣ted,
two Gentlemen, & two Dyacks or Secre∣taries, who hold a court together for the or∣dering of such matters. This is called the Zempskey house. If any townes man sus∣pect his seruant of theft or like matter, hi∣ther he may bring him to haue him exami∣ned vpon the Pudkey, or other torture. Be∣sides these two Gentlemen, and Secretaries that order the whole Citie, there are Sta∣rusts or Aldermen for euerie seuerall com∣panie. The Alderman hath his Sotskey or Constable, and the Constable hath certeine Decetskeis or Decurions vnder him, which haue the ouersight of ten housholds a peece, whereby euerie disorder is sooner spide, and the common seruice hath the quicker dis∣pach. The whole number of Citizens poore and rich are reduced into companies. The chiefe officers (as the Dyacks and Gentle∣men) are appointed by the Emperour him∣selfe, the Starust by the Gentlemen and Dy∣acks, the Sotskoy by the Starust or Alderman, and the Decetskoies by the Constables. This manner of gouernment of their Pro∣uinces and townes, if it were aswell set for the giuing of iustice indifferently to al sorts, as it is to preuent innouations, by keeping of the Nobilitie within order, and the com∣mons in subiection, it might seeme in that kinde to bee no bad nor vnpollitique way,
for the conteyning of so large a Common-wealth, of that breadth and length as is the kingdome of Russia. But the oppression and slauerie is so open, and so great, that a man would maruell how the Nobilitie and people shoulde suffer themselues to bee brought vnder it, while they had any means to auoid and repulse it or being so strength∣ned as it is at this present, how the Empe∣rours themselues can be content to practise the same, with so open iniustice and oppres∣sion of their subiects, being themselues of a Christian profession. By this it appeareth how harde a mat∣ter it were to alter the state of the Russe go∣uernment,An harde matter to alter the State of Russia. as now it standeth. First, because they haue none of the Nobilitie able to make head. As for the Lords of the foure Chetfirds or Tetrarchies they are men of no Nobilitie, but Dyacks aduanced by the Em∣perour, depending on his fauour, and atten∣ding onely about his owne person. And for the Dukes that are appointed to gouern vn∣der them, they are but men of a titular dig∣nitie (as was saied before) of no power, au∣thoritie, nor credit, saue that which they haue out of the office, for the time they enioy it. Which doth purchase thē no fauour, but ra∣ther hatred of the people, for asmuch as they see that they are set ouer thē, not so much for
any care to doo them right and iustice as to keepe them vnder in a miserable subiection, and to take the fliece from them, not once in the yeare (as the owner from his sheepe) but to poule and clip them all the yeare long. Be∣sides the authority & rule which they beare, is rent and diuided into many small pieces, being diuers of them in euery great Shire, li∣mited besides with a very short time: which giueth them no scope to make any strength, nor to contriue such an enterprise, if happily they intended any matter of innouation. As for the common people (as may better ap∣peare in the description of their state & qua∣litie afterwardes set downe) besides their want of armour & practise of warre (which they are kept from of purpose) they are rob∣bed continually both of their harts & mony, (besides other means) somtimes by pretence of some seruice to be done for the common defence, sometimes without any shewe at all of any necessitie of Common-wealth or Prince. So that there is no meanes either for Nobilitie, or people to attempt any inno∣uation, so long as the militarie forces of the Emperour which are the number of 8000. at the least in continuall pay) hold themselues fast and sure vnto him, and to the present state. Which needes they must doo beyng of the qualitie of Souldiours, and enioying
withal that free libertie of wronging & spoi∣ling of the commons at their pleasure, which is permitted them of purpose, to make them haue a liking of the present state. As for the agreement of the Souldiers and commons, it is a thing not to be feared, beyng of so opposite and contrarie practise much one to the other. This desperate state of things at home, maketh the people for the most part to wishe for some forreine inuasion, which they suppose to bee the onely meanes, to rid them of the heauy yoke of this tyrannous gouernment. Of the Emperours Counsell. The 11. Chapter. THE Emperours of Russia giue the name of coū∣sellour to diuers of their chiefe Nobilitie, rather for honors sake, then for any vse they make of thē about their matters of state. These are called Boiarens
without any addition, and may bee called Counsellors at large. For they are seldome or neuer called to any publique consulta∣tion. They which are of his speciall and pri∣uie Counsell indeed (whom hee vseth daily and ordinarily for all publique matters per∣teining to the State) haue the addition of Dumnoy, and are named Dumnoy boiaren, or Lords of the Counsell, their office or sitting Boarstua dumna. Their names at this present are these in their order.The nūber and names of the Coū∣sellours of State. First, Knez Feoder Ioanowich Methisloskey. 2. Knez Iuan Michailowich Glinskoy. 3. Knez Vasilie Iuanowich Suskoy Scopin. (These three are accounted to bee of greater birth then wisedome taken in (as may seeme) for that ende, rather to furnish the place with their honours and presence, then with their aduise or counsell.) 4. Knez Vasilie Iuanowich Suskoy, thought to be more wise then the other of his name. 5. Knez Feoder Michailowich. 6. Knez Micheta Romanowich Trowbetskoy. 7. Knez Timophey Romanowich Trowbetskoy. 8. Knez Andriew Gregoriwich Curakine. 9. Knez Demetrie Iuanowich Forestine. 10. Knez Feoder Iuano∣wich Forestine. 11. Bodan Iuanowich Sabaroue. 12. Knez Iuan Vasilowich. 13. Knez Feoder Demetriwich Shestinoue. 14. Knez Feoder Michailowich Troyconioue. 15. Iuan Buter∣lyney.
16. Demetrie Iuanowich Godonoe. 17. Borrise Federowich Godonoe, brother to the Empresse. 18. Stephan Vasilowich Godonoe. 19. Gregorie Vasilowich Godonoe. 20. Iuan Vasilowich Godonoe. 21. Feoder Sheremitoue. 22. Andriew Petrowich Cleshenina. 23. Ig∣natie Petrowich Tatisloue. 24. Romain Mi∣chailowich Peua. 25. Demenshoy Iuanowich Cheremissen. 26. Romain Vasilowich Al∣ferioue. 27. Andriew Shalcaloue. 28. Va∣silie Shalcaloue. 29. Eleazar Wellusgin. 30. Drezheen Penteleoue. 31. Zapon Abra∣moue. The foure last of these are called Dum∣noy deiakey or Lord Secretaries.Foure Se∣cretaries. These are all of the Emperours priuie counsell though but fewe of them are called to any consul∣tation, for that all matters are aduised and determined vpon by Borris Federowich Go∣donoe brother to the Empresse, with some fiue or sixe more whom it pleaseth him to call. If they come, they are rather to heare, then to giue counsel, & doo so demeane thē∣selues. The matters occurrent which are of state done within the Realme, are infourmed them at their sittings by the Lordes of the foure Chetfirds, or Tetrarchies. Whereof men∣tion is made in the Chapter concerning the Gouernment of their Prouinces. Who bring in all such letters as they receyue from the
Dukes, Dyacks, Captaines, and other offi∣cers of the Cities, and Castels, perteyning to their seuerall quarter or Chetfird, with other aduertisements, and informe the Counsell of them. The like is done by the chiefe officer of euery seuerall office of Record: who may come into the Counsell chamber, and in∣forme them, as occasion incident to his of∣fice doth require. Besides matters of State, they consider of many priuate causes, infor∣med by way of supplication in very great numbers. Whereof some they intertaine and determine, as the cause or meanes can pro∣cure fauour. Some they send to the offices whereto they perteyne by common course of Lawe. Their ordinarie dayes for their sit∣ting, are mondaies, wensdaies, and fridayes. Their time of meeting is commonly seuen a clock in the morning. If there be any extra∣ordinary occasion that requireth consulta∣tion on some other day, they haue warning by the Clarke of the counsell called Dorofcy Bushew, who receiueth order from the Roserad or high Constable of the realme, to call them together at the time appointed.
The Emperours customes Of the Emperours customes and other Reuenues. The 12. Chapter. FOR the receyuing of cu∣stomes,The offices of receipt. and other rentes belonging to the Crowne, there are appoynted di∣uers vnder officers, which deliuer ouer the same in∣to the head treasurie. The first is the office of Dwoertsoua or Steward of the housholde. The second is the office of the Chetfirds: which I comprehend vn∣der one, though it bee diuided into foure se∣uerall partes, as was sayd before. The third is called Bulsha prechode, or the great In∣come. As touching the first,The Ste∣ward recei∣uer of the crowne lād rentes. which is the of∣fice of the Steward, it receyueth all the rents of the Emperours inheritance, or Crowne lande, whiche they call Vochin. The Vo∣chin or Crowne lande conteyneth in it 36. townes with the territories or hundreds belonging vnto them. Whereof the chiefe that yeeld the greatest rents are these: A∣lexandrisca, Corelska, Otfer, Sloboder, Daniels∣ka, Moisalskoy, Chara, Sametska, Strararouse,
ransoue, &c. The inhabitants or tenants of these and the other townes, pay some rent money, some other rent dueties (called O∣brokey) as certeine Chetfirds, or measures of graine, wheate, rye, barley, oates, &c. or of other victuall, as Oxen, Sheepe, Swannes, Geese, Hares, Hennes, wild fowle, Fish, Hay, Wood, Honie, &c. Some are bound to sowe for the Emperours prouision certaine Akers of ground, and to make the corne ready for his vse: hauing for it an allowance of cer∣taine akers of ground for their owne proper vse. This prouision for the houshold, specially of graine serued in by the Tenants, is a great deale more then is spent in his house, or in other allowance serued out in liuerie, or for the Emperours honour, called Schalouaney: for which vse there is bestowed very much both in graine, and other victuall. This sur∣plus of prouision is sold by the Steward to the best hand, and runneth into the Empe∣rours treasurie. In the time of Iuan Vasilowich, father to this Emperour (who kept a more Princely & bountiful house then the Emperour now doth) this ouerplus of graine, and other in∣comes into the Stewardes office, yeelded to his treasurie not past 60. thousand rubbels yeerely, but riseth now by good husbanding
of the Steward Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe, to 230. thousand rubbels a yere. And this by the meanes of the Empresse, and her kinred, specially (Borris Fedorowich Godonoe) that ac∣count it al their owne that runneth into the Emperors treasure. Much of this surplusage that riseth out of the rent prouision, is em∣ploied to the paimēt of the wages of his hou∣shold officers, which are very many atten∣ding at home, and purueying abroad. The second office of receipt called the Chetfirds,The office of Chetfird. (being deuided into foure seuerall partes, as before was sayde) hath foure head officers: which besides the ordering and gouernment of the shires conteyned with∣in their seuerall Chedfirds, haue this also as a part of their office,Tagla and Podat. to receiue the Tag∣la and Podat belonging to the Emperour, that riseth out of the foure Chetfirds or Quarters. The Tagla is a yeerely rent or imposition raysed vpon euery Wite or mea∣sure of graine, that groweth within the land, gathered by sworne men, and brought into the office. The Wite conteyneth sixtie Chet∣firds. Euery Chetfird is three bushelles En∣glish, or little lesse. The Podat is an or∣dinarie rent of money imposed vpon eue∣rie soake, or Hundred within the whole Realme. This Tagla and Podat bring in yeerely
to the Offices of the Chetfirdes a greate summe of money: as may appeare by the particulars heere set downe. The towne and Prouince of Vobsko, pay yeerely for Tagla & Podat about 18000. rubbels. Nouo∣grod 35000. rubbels. Torshocke & Otfer 8000. rubbels. Razan 30000. rubbels. Morum 12000. rubbels. Colmigroe and Duyna 8000. rubbels. Vologda 12000. rubbels. Cazan 18000 rubb. Vstiug 30000. rubbels. Rostoue 50000. The citie of Mosko 40000. rubbels. Sibier∣skoy 20000. rubbels. Castrome 12000. rub∣bels. The totall amounteth to 400000. rubbels, or markr a yeere, which is brought in yeerely the first day of September, that is reckoned by them the first day of the yeere. The thirde (that is called the Bulsha Pre∣chod,The office of Bulcha Prechod or great in∣come. or great Income) receyueth all the customes that are gathered out of all the priucipall townes and Cities within the whole Realme. Besides, the fees and o∣ther dueties which rise out of diuers smal∣ler Offices, which are all brought into this office of Bulsha Prechod. The townes of moste trade that doe yeelde greatest cu∣stome, are these heere sette downe. Mo∣sko, Smolensko, Vobsko, Nouogrod Velica, Strararouse, Torshocke, Otfer, Yaruslaue, Ca∣strome, Nesna Nouogrod, Cazan, Vologda. This
custome out of the great townes is therefore more certaine, and easie to be reckoned, be∣cause it is set and rated precisely what they shal pay for the custome of the yeere Which needes must bee paide into the saide office, though they receiue not so much. If it fal out to be more, it runneth al into the Emperours aduantage. The custome at Mosko for euerie yeere,The Empe∣rours cu∣stome. is 12000. rubbels. The custome of Smolensko, 8000. Vobsko 12000. rubbels. Nouogrod velica 6000. rubbels. Stararouse by salt and other commodities 18000. rubbels. Torshock 800. rubbels. Otfer 700. rubbels. Yarusslaue 1200 rubbels. Castrome 1800. rubbels. Nesna No∣uogrod 7000. rubbels. Cazan 11000. rub∣bels. Vologda 2000. rubbels. The custome of the rest that are townes of trade, is some∣times more, sometimes lesse as their traffike, and dealings with commodities too and fro, falleth out for the yeere. This may bee saide for certaine,The whole receipt of the Bulsha Prechod or great in∣come. that the three tables of receipts belonging to this of∣fice of Bulsha Prechod, when they receiue lest, account for thus much, vz. The first table 160000. rubbels. The second table 90000. rubbels. The third 70000. rubbels. So that there commeth into the office of Bulsha Pre∣chod, at the least reckoning (as appeareth by their bookes of customs) out of these and o∣ther
townes, and maketh the summe of 340000. rubbles a yeere. Besides this cu∣stome out of the townes of trade, there is receiued by this office of Bulsha Prechod, the yeerely rent of the common Bathstoaues, & Cabacks or drinking houses, which pertein to the Emperour, Which (though it be vn∣certaine for the iust summe, yet because it is certaine and an ordinary matter, that the Russe wil bath himselfe aswel within as with∣out) yeeldeth a large rent to the Emperours treasurie. There is besides,Rents out of the iudi∣cial offices. a certeine mulct or pe∣naltie that groweth to the Emperour out of euery iudgement, or sentence that passeth in any of his courts of Record in all ciuill mat∣ters. This penaltie, or mulct is 20. Dingoes or pence vpon euery rubble or marke, and so ten in the hundred. Which is paide by the partie that is conuict by lawe. Hee hath be∣sides for euery name conteyned in the writs that passe out of these courts, fiue Alteens. An Alteen is fiue pence sterling, or there a∣bouts. This is made good out of the office, whence the writ is taken foorth. Thence it goeth to the office that keepeth the lesser seale, where it payeth as much more to the Emperours vse. This riseth commonly to 3000. rubbels a yeere, or thereabouts. Far∣ther also out of the office of Roisbonia, where
all fellonies are tried, is receiued for the Em∣perour the halfe part of fellons goodes the other halfe goeth the one part to the infor∣mer, the other to the officers. All this is brought into the office of Bul∣sha Prechod, or great income. Besides the o∣uerplus or remainder that is saued out of the land rents, allotted to diuers other offices: as namely to the office called Roserade, which hath landes and rentes assigned vnto it to pay the yeerely salaries of the souldiers, or horsemen, that are kept still in pay. Which in time of peace when they rest at home not employed in anie seruice, is commonly cut off and payde them by halfes, some∣times not the halfe: so that the remain∣der out of the Roserade Office that is layde into the Emperours treasurie, commeth for the most part euerie yeere to 250000. rub∣bels. In like sort (though not so much) is brought in the surplus out of the Strellets∣koy offices which hath proper lands for the payment of the Strelsey men or gunners, as∣well those at Mosko, that are of the Empe∣rors gard (12000. in ordinary) as on the bor∣ders, and other garrison townes and castels. Likewise out of the office of Prechase, Shisi∣uoy Nemshoy which hath set allowance of landes to mainteine the forreyne mercena∣rie
souldiers, as Poles, Sweadens, Doutches, Scots, &c. So out of the office of Pusharskoy, (which hath lands and rents allowed for the prouision of munition, great Ordinance, pow∣der, Shot, Salpeeper, Brimstone, Ledde, and such like) there is left somewhat at the yeres ende, that runneth into the treasurie. All these bring into the office of Bulsha Pre∣chod that which remaineth in their hand at the yeeres end. Whence it is deliuered into the Emperours treasurie. So that the whole summe that groweth to this office of Bul∣sha Prechod, or the great income (as appea∣reth by the bookes of the said office) amoun∣teth to 800000. rubbels a yeere, or therea∣bouts. All these offices,The Empe∣rours trea∣sure house within his castle of Mosko. to wit, the office of the Steward, the foure Chetfirds, and the Bul∣sha Prechod deliuer in their receiptes to the head treasurie, that lyeth within the Empe∣rours house or castle at the Mosko. Where lye all his moneyes, iewels, crownes, scep∣ters, plate, and such like, the chests, hutches, and bagges beyng signed by the Emperonrs themselues with their owne seale. Though at this time the L• Borris Federowich Godonoe his seale and ouersight supplieth for the Em∣peror, as in al other things. The vnder officer at this time is one Stepan Vasilowich Godo∣noe, Coosin germane to the sayde Borris,
who hath two Clearkes allowed to serue vn∣der him in the office. The sūme that gro∣weth to the Em∣peroures treasurie in money onely, for euerie yeere. 1 Out of the Stew∣ards office aboue the expense of his house 23000. rubbels.The summe of the Em∣perours rēt money. 2 Out of the foure Chetfirds for soake & head money 400000 rubbels. 3 Out of the Bulsha Precod Office, or great incoome, for custome and other rents. 800000 rub¦bels. Summe 1430000 rub¦bles cleere, besides all charges for his house, & ordinary sa∣leries of his souldiers o∣therwise dis∣charged. But besides this reuenue that is paid all in money to the Emperours treasurie he recei∣ueth yeerely in furres, and other dueties to a great value out of Siberia, Pechora, Permia, and other places, which are solde or bartred away for other forreine commodities to the Turkish Persian, Armenian, Georgian and Bou∣gharian Marchants that trade within his coū∣tries, besides others of Christendome. What it maketh in the whole (though the value can not be set downe precisely, as being a thing casual as the commodity may be got) it may
be gessed by that which was gathered the last yeere out of Siberia for the Emperours custome, vz. 466. timber of Sables, fiue tim∣ber of Martrones, 180. blacke Foxes, besides other commodities. To these may bee added their seazures, and confiscations vpon such as are in dis∣pleasure, which riseth to a great summe Be∣sides other their extraordinary impositions, and exactions done vpon their officers, Mo∣nasteries, &c. not for any apparant necessity or vse of the Prince, or common wealth, but of will and custome: yet with some pretence of a Scythian, that is, grosse and barbarous pollicie (as may appeare) by these fewe So∣phismata, or counterfeit pollicies, put in pra∣ctise by the Emperours of Russia, all tending to this end to robbe their people, and to in∣rich their treasurie. To this purpose this by∣word was vsed by the late Emperour Iuan Vasilowich: That his people were like to his beard. The oftner shauen, the thicker it would grow. Or like sheepe, that must needes be shorne once a yeere at the leasst: to keepe them from being ouer laden with their wooll.
Meanes vsed to draw the wealth of the land into the Emperours Treasurie. TO preuent no extortions exacti∣ons, or briberies whatsoeuer, done vpon the cōmons by their Dukes, Diacks, or other officers in their Prouinces: but to suffer them to go on till their time bee expired, and to sucke themselues ful. Then to cal them to the Pra∣ueush (or whippe) for their behauiour, and to beat out of them all, or the most part of the bootie, (as the honie from the Bee) which they haue wrung from the commons, and to turne it into the Emperours treasurie, but neuer any thing backe againe to the right owners, how great or euident soeuer the in∣iurie be. To this end the needy Dukes, & Di∣acks, that are sent into their prouinces, serue the turne very well, being chaunged so of∣ten (to wit) once a yeere: where in respect of their owne, and the qualitie of the people (as before was said) they might be continued for some longer time, without all feare of in∣nouation. For comming still fresh vpon the commons, they sucke more egerly: like Ti∣berius the Emperours flies, that came newe still vpon all olde sore. To whome hee was
wont to compare his Praetors, and other pro∣uinciall officers. 2 TO make of these officers (that haue rob∣bed their people) sometimes a publike example, if any be more notorious then the rest: that the Emperour may seem to mislike the oppressions done to his people, & trans∣ferre the fault to his ill officers. As among diuers other, was done by the late Emperour Iuan Vasilowich to a Diack in one of his Prouinces: that (besides many o∣ther extortions, and briberies) had taken a goose ready drest full of money. The man was brought to the market place in Mos∣ko. The Emperour himselfe present made an Oration. These good people are they that would eate you vp like bread, &c. Then as∣ked hee his Polachies or executioners, who could cut vp a goose, and commaunded one of them first to cut off his legges about the middes of the shinne then his armes aboue his elbowes (asking him still if goose fleshe were good meate) in the ende to choppe off his head: that he might haue the right fashi∣on of a goose readie dressed. This might seeme to haue beene a tollerable piece of iu∣stice (as iustice goeth in Russia) except his subtill end to couer his owne oppressions.
3 TO make an open shew of want, when a∣nie great taxe, or imposition is towards. As was done by this Emperour Theodore Iu∣anowich, by the aduise of some about him at the beginning of his reigne: when be∣ing left very rich (as was thought) by his fa∣ther, he sold most of his plate, and stamped some into coyne: that hee might seeme to want money. Whereupon presently out came a taxation. 4 TO suffer their subiects to giue freely to the Monasteries (which for their super∣stition very many doe, specially in their last wils) & to lay vp their money and substance in them, to keepe it more safe. Which all is permitted thē without any restraint or pro∣uiso, as was & is in some countries of christē∣dome. Whereby their Monasteries grow to exceeding great wealth. This they do to haue the money of the Realme better stored toge∣ther, and more ready for their hand, when they list to take it. Which manie times is done without anie noyse: the Fryers beeyng content rather to part from somewhat (as the encrease groweth) then to loose all at once. Which they were made to doubt of in the other Emperours dayes. To this end Iuan Vasilowich late Emperour
vsed a very strange practise,A strange practise to get money. that few Princes would haue done in their greatest extremi∣ties. He resigned his kingdome to one Velica Knez Simeon, the Emperours sonne of Ga∣zan: as though hee meant to draw himselfe from al publike doings to aquiet priuat life. Towards the end of the yeere, hee caused this newe King to call in all Charters graun∣ted to Bishoprickes and Monasteries, which they had enioyed manie hundred yeeres before. Which were all cancelled. This done (as in dislike of the fact and of the misgouernment of the newe King) hee re∣sumed his scepter, and so was content as in fauour to the Church and religious men) that they should renew their charters, & take them of himselfe: reseruing and annexing to the Crowne so much of their lands, as him∣selfe thought good. By this practise hee wrung from the Bi∣shoprickes, and Monasteries (besides the landes which he annexed to the Crowne) an huge masse of money. From some 40, from some 50, from some an hundred thousande rubbels. And this aswell for the increase of his treasurie, as to abate the ill opini∣on of his harde gouernment, by a shewe of woorse in an other man. Wherein his strange spirite is to bee noted: that beyng hated of his subiectes, (as himselfe knew wel
inough) yet would venture such a practise, to set an other in his saddle, that might haue ridde away with his horse, while himselfe walked by on foote. 5 TO sende their messengers into the Pro∣uinces, or shires where the special com∣modities of their countrey grow, as furres, waxe, hony, &c. There to forestall & ingrosse somtime one whole commodity, sometime two, or more, taking thē at smal prices what thēselues list, & selling them againe at an ex∣cessiue rate to their own marchants, and to marchants strangers. If they refuse to buy them, then to force them vnto it. The like is done when any commoditie eyther natiue or forreine (as cloth of golde, broade cloth, &c▪) thus engrossed by the Em∣perour, and receiued into his treasurie, hap∣peneth to decay, or marre by long lying, or some other casualtie. Which is forced vpon the Marchants to be bought by them at the Emperours price, whether they will or no. This last yeere of 1589. was engrossed all the waxe of the countrey: so that none might deale with that commoditie, but the Empe∣rour onely. 6 TO take vp & engrosse in like sort some∣time forreine commodities (as silkes,
cloth, ledde, pearle, &c. brought into his realm by Turkish marchants, Armenians, Bou∣gharians, Poles, English, and other. And then to force his marchants to buy them of his of∣ficers at his owne price. 7 TO make a Monopoly for the time of such cōmodities as are paid him for rēt, or cu∣stom, & to inhanse the price of thē, as furres, corn, wood, &c. What time none must sell of the same kind of cōmodity, til the Emperors be all sold. By this means hee maketh of his rent, corn, & other prouisiō of victual (as be∣fore was said) about 200000. rubb. or marks a yeere. Of his rent wood, hay, &c. 30000. rubbels, or thereabouts. 8 IN euery great towne of his Realme he hath a Caback or drinking house, where is sold a∣quavitae (which they cal Russe wine) mead, beere, &c. Out of these hee receiueth rent that a∣mounteth to a great summe of money. Some yeeld 800, some 900, some a 1000 some 2000 or 3000. rubbels a yere. Wherein besides the base, and dishonourable meanes to encrease his treasurie, many foule faultes are com∣mitted. The poore labouring man, and artificer, manie times spendeth all from his wife, and children. Some vse to lay in twen∣tie, thirtie, fourtie rubbels, or more into the
Caback, and vowe themselues to the pot, till all that be spent. And this (as he will say) for the honour of Hospodare, or the Emperour. You shall haue manie there that haue drunk all away to the verie skinne, and so walk na∣ked (whom they call Naga.) While they are in the Caback, none may call them foorth whatsoeuer cause there be, because he hinde∣reth the Emperours reuenue. 9 TO cause some of his Boiarens, or Nobles of his court, (whom he vseth vpon trust) that haue houses in the Mosko, to faine them selues robbed. Then to send for the Zemsk men, or Aldermen of the citie, and to com∣maund them to finde out the robberie. In default of not finding it, to praue or seasse the citie for their misgouernment in 8000. 9000. or 10000. rubbels at a time. This is many times practised. 10 IN these exactions to shew their soueraign∣tie, sometime they vse very plaine, and yet strange cauillations. As was that of Iuan Va∣silowich, father to this Emperour, after this sort. He sent into Permia fot certaine loads of Cedar wood, whereof hee knew that none grew in that Countrey. The inhabitants re∣turned answere they could find none there. Whereupon hee seassed their Countrey in
12000. rubbels, as if they cōcealed the com∣moditie of purpose. Againe he sent to the citie of Mosko to prouide for him a Colpack, or measure full of liue fleas for a medicine. They returned answere that the thing was impossible. And if they could get them, yet they could not measure them, for leaping out. Whereupon he praued, or beat out of their shinnes 7000. rubbels for amulct. By like cauillation hee extorted from his Nobilitie 30000. rubbels, because he missed of his game, when he went a hunting for the Hare: as if their hunting and murdering of hares had bin the cause of it. Which the No∣bilitie (as the manner is) praued presently againe vpon the Mousicks, or common peo∣ple of the Countrie. This may seeme a straunge kinde of extortion, by such plea∣sant cauils to fliese his poore subiectes in good sadnesse: but that it agreeth with the qualitie of those Emperours, and the mise∣rable subiection of that poore Countrie. These, and such like meanes are practi∣sed by the Emperours of Russia, to encrease their Trea∣surie.
Of the state of the Communaltie, or vulgar sorte of people in the coun∣trie of Russia. The 13. Chapter. THE condition of the com∣mons, and vulgar sort of peo∣ple may partly be vnderstood by that which already hath bin said concerning the mā∣ner of their gouernment, & the state of the Nobilitie, with the ordering of their Prouinces, and chiefe townes of the land.The seruile and misera∣ble estate of the Russe people. And first touching their libertie how it standeth with them, it may appeare by this: that they are reckoned in no degree at all, nor haue any suffrage nor place in their Zabore, or high court of Parliament, where their lawes and publique orders are conclu∣ded vpon. Which commonly tend to the op∣pression of the commons. For the other two degrees vz: of the Nobilitie, and Clear∣gie, whiche haue a vote in the Parliaments (though farre from that libertie that ought to bee in common consultations for the pu∣blique benefite, according to the measure and proportion of their degrees) are well contented that the whole burden shall light vpon the commons, so they may ease their
owne shoulders by laying all vpon them. A∣gaine into what seruile condition their liber∣tie is brought, not onely to the Prince, but to the Nobles, and Gentlemen of the Countrie (who themselues also are but seruile, special∣ly of late yeares) it may farther appeare by their owne acknowledgments in their sup∣plications, and other writings to any of the Nobles or chiefe officers of the Emperours. Wherein they name and subscribe them∣selues Kolophey, that is, their villaines, or bondslaues: as they of the Nobilitie doo vn∣to the Emperour. This may truely be saide of them, that there is no seruant nor bond∣slaue more awed by his Maister, nor kept downe in a more seruile subiection, then the poore people are, & that vniuersally, not only by the Emperour, but by his Nobilitie, chief officers, and souldiers. So that when a poore Mousick meeteth with any of them vpon the high way, he must turne himselfe about, as not daring to looke him on the face, and fall down with knocking of his head to the very ground, as he doth vnto his Idoll. Secondly concerning the landes, goods, and other possessions of the commons they answere the name and lie common indeed without any fense against the rapine, and spoile, not onely of the highest, but of his Nobilitie, officers, and souldiers. Besides
the taxes, customes, seazures, and other pu∣blique exactions done vpon them by the Emperour, they are so racked and pulled by the Nobles, officers, and messengers sent a∣broad by the Emperour in his publique af∣faires, specially in the Yammes (as they call them) and thorough faire townes, that you shall haue many villages and townes of halfe a mile, and a mile long, stande all vnhabited the people being fled all into other places by reason of the extreame vsage and exacti∣ons done vpon them. So that in the way to∣wards Mosko, betwixt Vologda and Yarusla∣ueley (which is two nineties after their recko∣ning, litle more then an hundreth miles En∣glish) there are in sigt fiftie Darieunes or vil∣lages at the least, some halfe a mile, some a mile long (that stand vacant) & desolate with out any inhabitant. The like is in all other places of the realme (as is said by those that haue better trauelled the countrie then my selfe had time, or occasion to doo. The great oppression ouer the poore Commons, maketh thē to haue no courage in following their trades: for that the more they haue, the more daunger they are in, not onely of their goods, but of their liues also. And if they haue any thing, they conceale it all they can, somtimes conueying it into Mo∣nasteries, sometimes hiding it vnder the
ground, and in woods, as men are woont to doo where they are in feare of forreine inua∣sion. In so much that many times you shall see them afraid to be knowen to any Boiuren or Gentleman of such commodities as they haue to sell. I haue seene them sometimes when they haue sayed open their commodi∣ties for a liking (as their principall furres & such like) to looke still behind them, and to∣wards euery doore: as men in some feare, that looked to be set vpon, & surprised by some enimie. Whereof asking the cause, I found it to be this that they haue doubted least some Noblemā or Sinaboiarskey of the Emperour had bene in cōpanie, & so layed a traine for thē to pray vpon their cōmodities perforce. This maketh the people (though other∣wise hardened to beare any toile) to giue themselues much to idlenes and drinking▪ as passing for no more, then from hand to mouth. And hereof it commeth that the cō∣modities of Russia (as was said before) as wax, tallow, hydes, flaxe, hempe, &c.) grow and goe abroad in farre lesse plentie then they were woont to doo: because the people being op∣pressed and spoiled of their gettings, are dis∣couraged from their laboures. Yet this one thing is much to be noted, that in all this op∣pression there were three brethren Mar∣chants of late that traded together with one
stocke in common, that were found to bee woorth 300000. rubbels in money, besides landes, cattels, and other commodities. Which may partly be imputed to their dwel∣lings far of from the eye of the Court, vz. in Wichida, a 1000. miles from Mosko, & more. The same are said by those that knew them to haue set on worke all the yeare long ten thousand men in making of salt, carriages by cart, & boat, hewing of wood, and such like: besides 5000 bondslaues at the least, to in∣habite and till their land. They had also their physitions, surgeons, apothecaries, and all manner of artificers of Doutches and others, belonging vnto them. They are said to haue paied to the Emperour for custome to the sum of 23000. rubbles a yeare (for which cause they were suffered to enioy their trade) besides the mainteining of certeine garrisons on the borders of Si∣beria, which were neare vnto thē. Wherin the Emperour was content to vse their purse, till such time as they had got ground in Siberia, and made it habitable, by burning, and cut∣ting downe woods from Wichida to Perm, aboue a 1000. verse and then tooke it all a∣way from them perforce. But this in the end beyng enuied, and disdained, as a matter not standing with their pollicie to haue any so great, speci∣ally
a Mousick, the Emperour began first to to pull frō them by pieces, sometimes 20000 rubbels at a time, sometime more: till in the end their sonnes that now are, are well ea∣sed of their stocke, and haue but small parte of their fathers substance: the rest being drawen all into the Emperours treasurie. Their names were Iacoue, Gregorie, & Simon the sonnes of Onyka. For the qualitie of their people other∣wise,The tyran∣ny and op∣pression o∣uer their very minds and wits. though there seemeth to be in them some aptnesse to receyue any art (as appea∣reth by the naturall wittes in the men, and very children) yet they excell in no kinde of common arte, much lesse in any learning, or litterall kinde of knowledge: which they are kept from of purpose, as they are also from all militarie practise: that they may be fitter for the seruile condition, wherein now they are, and haue neyther reason, nor va∣lure to attempt innouation. For this pur∣pose also they are kept from traueling, that they may learne nothing, nor see the fa∣shions of other Countries abroad. You shall seldome see a Russe a traueller, ex∣cept he be with some Ambassadour, or that he make a scape out of his Countrie. Which hardly he can doo, by reason of the borders that are watched so narrowly, and the pu∣nishment for any such attempt, which is
death if he be taken, and all his goods con∣fiscate. Onely they learne to write, and to read, and that very few of them. Neither doo they suffer any straunger willingly to come into their realme out of any ciuill Countrie, for the same cause, farther then necessitie of vttering their commodities, and taking in of forreine doth enforce them to doo. And therefore this yeare 1589. they con∣sulted about the remouing of all Marchants straungers to the border townes,The ielou∣sie of the Emperour concerning his state. to abide and haue their residencie there, and to bee more wary in admitting other straungers hereafter into the Inland parts of the realm, for feare of infection with better manners and qualities, then they haue of their owne. For the same purpose also they are kept within the boundes of their degree by the lawes of their countrie: so that the sonne of a Mousick, artificer, or husbandman, is euer a Mousick artificer, &c: and hath no means to aspire any higher: except hauing learned to write and read, he attaine to the prefer∣ment of a Priest, or Dyack. Their language is all one with the Slauonian, which is thought to haue bene deriued from the Russe tongue, rather then the Russe from the Slauonian. For the people called Sclaui, are knowen to haue had their beginning out of Sarmatia, and to haue termed themselues of their conquest
Sclauos, (that is) famous or glorious, of the word Sclaua, which in the Russe & Slauonian tongue, signifieth as much as Glory, or Fame. Though afterwards being subdued and trod vpon by diuers nations, the Italians their neighbours haue turned the worde to a con∣trary signification, and terme euery seruant or peasant by the name of Sclaue, as did the Romanes by the Getes & Syrians, for the same reason. The Russe character or letter is no other then the Greeke, somewhat distorted. Concerning their trades, diet, apparell, and such like, it is to be noted in a seuerall chapter of their priuate behauiour. This or∣der that bindeth euery man to keepe his rancke, and seuerall degree, wherin his fore∣fathers liued before him, is more meet to keepe the subiects in a seruile subiection▪ and so apt for this and like Common-wealths, then to aduaunce any vertue, or to breed a∣ny rare or excellent qualitie in Nobilitie or Commons: as hauing no farther rewarde nor preferment, whereunto they may bend their endeuours, and imploy themselues to aduaunce their estate but rather procu∣ring more danger to themselues, the more they excell in any noble or principall qualitie.
Of their publique Iustice, and manner of proceeding in ciuill, and cri∣minall matters. The 14. Chapter. THeir courts of ciuiliustice for matters of con∣tract,Courts of ciuill iustice three. & other of like sort, are of three kinds, the one beyng sub∣iect vnto the o∣ther by way of appeale. The lowest Court (that seemeth to be appointed for some ease to the subiects) is the office of the Gubnoy Starust, that signi∣fieth an Alderman, & of the Sotskoy Starust, or Bailief of the soake or hundred, wherof I spake before in the ordering of the Prouin∣ces. These may ende matters among their neighbours within their soke, or seuerall hū∣dred, where they are appointed vnder the Dukes & Diacks of the Prouinces, to whom the parties may remoue their matter, if they cannot be agreed by the said abnoy, or Sots∣koy Starust. The second is kept in the head townes of euery Prouince or Shire,The Dukes and Diacks Court. by the said Dukes and Diacks, that are deputies to the foure
Lords of the Chetfirds (as before was sayd) From these courts they may appeale,The high Court of Mosko. and re∣moue their suites to the chiefe Court, that is kept at the Mosko, where are resident the of∣ficers of the foure Chetfirds. These are the chiefe Iustices or Iudges, euery of them in all ciuill matters that grow within their seuerall Chetfird or quarter, and may be either com∣menced originally before them, or prosequu∣ted out of the inferiour Courts of the Shires by way of appeale. Their commencing,Their mā∣ner of pro∣cedeing in Ciuill mat∣ters. and proceeding in ciuill actions is on this manner. First, the plaintife putteth vp his supplication, where∣in hee declareth the effect of his cause, or wrong done vnto him. Whereupon is gran∣ted vnto him a Wepis, or warrant, which hee deliuereth to the Praestaue, or Sergeant, to doo the arrest vpon the partie whom hee meaneth to implead. Who vpon the ar∣rest, is to put in sureties to answere the day appointed, or els standeth at the Sergeants deuotion, to be kept safe by such meanes as he thinketh good. The Sergeants are many, and excell for their hard and cruell dealing towards their prysoners, commonly they clappe irons vpon them, as many as they can beare, to wring out of them some larger fees. Though it bee but for sixe pence, you shall see them
goe with chaynes on their legges, armes, and necke. When they come before the Iudge, the plaintife beginneth to declare his matter after the content of his suppli∣cation. As for Attourneis Counsellours, Pro∣curatours & Aduocates to plead their cause for them, they haue no such order, but euery man is to tell his owne tale, and plead for himselfe, so well as he can. If they haue any witnesse, or other eui∣dence,Ending of controuer∣sies by kis∣sing the Crosse. they produce it before the Iudge. If they haue none, or if the truth of the cause cannot so well bee decerned by the plea, or euidence on both partes: then the Iudge asketh eyther partie (which hee thinketh good plaintife or defendant) whether hee will kisse the Crosse, vpon that which he auou∣cheth, or denieth. Hee that taketh the Crosse (being so offered by the Iudge) is ac∣counted cleare, and carrieth away the mat∣ter. This ceremonie is not done within the Court or office, but the partie is carried to the Church by an officer, and there the ce∣remonie is done: the mony in the meane while hanging vpon a naile, or els lying at the idols feete, ready to be deliuered to the partie, as soone as he hath kissed the Crosse before the said Idoll. This kissing of the Crosse (called Creu∣stina chelouania) is as their corporall oath.
and accounted with them a very holy thing,Iudgement by lotte. which no man will dare to violate, or pro∣phane with a false allegation. If both par∣ties offer to kisse the Crosse in a contradi∣ctorie matter, then they drawe lottes. The better lotte is supposed to haue the right, and beareth away the matter. So the partie conuicted is adiudged to pay the debt or penaltie whatsoeuer, and withall to pay the Emperours fees, which is twentie pence vpon euery marke, as before hath bene no∣ted. When the matter is thus ended, the par∣tie conuicted is deliuered to the Sergeant, who hath a writte for his warrant out of the office, to carry him to the Praueush or Righ∣ter of Iustice, if presently hee pay not the monie, or content not the partie. This Praueush or Righter, is a place neare to the office: where such as haue sentence passed against them, and refuse to pay that which is adiudged, are beaten with great cudgels on the shinnes, and calues of their legges. Euery forenoone from eight to eleuen, they are set on the Praueush, and beate in this sort till the monie be payd. The afternoone and night time, they are kepte in chaines by the Sergeant: except they put in sufficient suerties for their apparance at the Praueush at the hower appointed. You shall see for∣tie
or fiftie stand together on the Praueush all on a rowe, and their shinnes thus becud∣gelled, and bebasted euery morning with a piteous crie. If after a yeares standing on the Praueush, the partie will not, or lacke wherewithall to satisfie his creditour, it is lawfull for him to fell his wife, and children, eyther out right, or for a certaine terme of yeares. And if the price of them doo not a∣mount to the full payment, the creditour may take them to bee his bondslaues, for yeares or for euer, according as the value of the debt requireth. Such kinde of suites as lacke direct eui∣dence, or stande vpon coniectures and cir∣cumstances to bee waighed by the Iudge, drawe of great length, and yeeld great ad∣uantage to the Iudge▪ and officers. If the suite be vpon a bond, or bill, they haue for the moste parte good and speedy iustice. Their bonds, or billes are drawen in a ve∣ry plaine sorte,The forme of Russe bils or bonds. after this tenour. I Iuan Va∣sileo haue borrowed of Alphonasse Dementio, the summe of one hundred rubbles of going mo∣ney of Mosko. from the Kreshenea (or hal∣lowing of the water) vntill the Saburney vos∣creshenea (or Counsell Sunday) without inte∣rest. And if this money rest vnpayed after that day, then hee shall giue interest vpon the sayd money, after the common rate, as it goeth among
the people, vz. for euerie fiue the sixt rubbell. Vpon this there are witnesses, Micheta Sydro∣ueskoy, &c: Subscribed. This bill haue I written Gabriell I acouelesni, in the yeare 7096. The witnesses, and debter (if he can write) en∣dorse their names on the backe side of the bill. Other signing, or sealing haue they none. When any is taken for a matter of crime (as treason,Proceeding in criminall matters. murder, thefte, and such like) hee is first brought to the Duke, and Diack, that are for the Prouince where the partie is attached, by whom hee is examined. The manner of examination in such cases, is all by torture, as scourging with whips made of sinowes, or whitleather (called the Pud∣key) as bigge as a mans finger, which gi∣ueth a sore lash, and entreth into the flesh, or by tying to a spit and rosting at the fire, sometimes by breaking and wresting one of their ribbes with a pavre of hote tongues, or cutting their flesh vnder the nayles, and such like. The examination thus taken withall the proofes, and euidences that can bee allead∣ged against the partie, it is sent vp to the Mosko to the Lord of the Chetfird or Fourth∣parte, vnder whom the Prouince is, and by him is presented to the Counsell table, to bee read and sentenced there, where onely
iudgement is giuen in matter of life & death, and that by euidence vpon information, though they neuer sawe nor heard the par∣tie, who is kept still in pryson where the fact was committed, and neuer sent vp to the place where he is tried. If they find the par∣tie guiltie, they giue sentence of death accor∣ding to the qualitie of the fact: which is sent downe by the Lord of the Chetfird, to the Duke and Diack to bee put in execution. The prisoner is carried to the place of exe∣cution with his handes bounde, and a waxe candle burning helde betwixt his fingers▪ Their capitall punishmentes are hang∣ing, hedding, knocking on the head, drow∣ning, putting vnder the yse, setting on a stake, and such like. But for the most part the prisoners that are condemned in Som∣mer, are kept for the winter, to be knockt in the head, and put vnder the yse. This is to bee vnderstood of common persons. For theft, and murder, if they be committed vp∣on a poore Mousick by one of Nobilitie are not lightly punished, nor yet is hee cal∣led to any account for it. Their reason is, because they are accounted their Kolophey, or bondslaues. If by some Sinaboiarskey, or Gentleman souldier, a murder or theft bee committed, peraduenture he shal be im∣prisoned at the Emperours pleasure. If the
manner of the fact be verie notorious, he is whipped perchance, and this is commonly all the punishment that is inflicted vpon them. If a man kill his owne seruant little, or no∣thing is said vnto him, for the same reason: because hee is accounted to be his Kolophey, or bondslaue, and so to haue right ouer his verie head. The most is some small mulct to the Emperour, if the partie be rich: & so the quarell is made rather against the purse, then against the iniustice. They haue no written law, saue onely a smal booke that conteineth the time, and manner of their sitting, order in proceeding▪ and such other iudicial forms and circumstances, but nothing to direct thē to giue sentence vpon right or wrong. Their onely lawe is their Speaking Law, that is, the pleasure of the Prince, and of his Magistrates and officers. Which sheweth the miserable condition of this poore people, that are for∣ced to haue them for their law, and direction of iustice, against whose iniustice, and ex∣treame oppression, they had neede to be armed with many good, and strong lawes.
Their forces for the warres, with the chief officers and their salaries. The 15. Chapter. THe souldiers of Russia are cal∣led Sinaboiarskey, or the sons of Gentlemen: because they are all of that degree, by ver∣tue of their millitary professi∣on. For euery souldier in Rus∣sia is a gentleman, and none are gentlemen, but only the souldiers, that take it by discent from their ancestors: so that the sonne of a gentleman (which is borne a souldier) is euer a gentlemā,Souldiers by birth & inheritāce. & a souldier withal▪ & professeth nothing els but militarie matters. Whē they are of yeeres able to beare armes, they come to the office of Roserade, or great Consta∣ble, and there present themselues: who en∣treth their names, and allotteth them cer∣teine lands to maintein their charges, for the most part the same that their fathers enioy∣ed For the lands assigned to mainteine the army, are euer certein, annexed to this office without improuing, or detracting one foot. But that if the Emperour haue sufficient in wages, the roomes being full so farre as the lande doeth extend already, they are manie
times deferred, and haue nothing allowed them, except some one portiō of the land be deuided into two. Which is a cause of great disorder within that countrie: when a souldi∣er that hath many children, shal haue some∣times but one intertained in the Emperours pay. So that the rest hauing nothing, are for∣ced to liue by vniust and wicked shiftes, that tend to the hurt & oppression of the Mou∣sick, or common sort of people. This incon∣uenience groweth by mainteining his forces in a continual succession. The whole num∣ber of his souldiers in continual pay, is this. First, he hath of his Dworaney, that is, Pensio∣ners, or Gard of his person, to the number of 15000. horsemen, with their captaines, and other officers, that are alwaies in a readines. Of these 15000. horsemen,Degrees of horsemen. there are three sorts or degrees, which differ aswell in esti∣mation, as in wages, one degree from ano∣ther.1. Praetoriae∣nior such as attend the Emperours person, 15000. The first sort of them is, called Dwora∣ney Bulshey, or the company of head Pensio∣ners, that haue, some an hundred, some four∣score rubbels a yeere, and none vnder 70. The second sort are called Seredney Dwora∣ney, or the middle ranke of Pensioners. These haue sixty, or fiftie rubbels by the yere, none vnder fourtie. The third and lowest sort are the Dyta Boiarskey, that is, the lowe Pensio∣ners. Their salarie is thirty rubbels a yere for
him that hath most, some haue but fiue and twentie, some twentie, none vnder twelue. Whereof the halfe part is paid them at the Mosko, the other halfe in the field by the ge∣nerall, when they haue anie warres, and are imployed in seruice. When they receiue their whole pay, it amounteth to 55000. rubbels by the yeere. And this is their wages, besides lands al∣lotted to euery one of them, both to the greater and the lesse, according to their de∣grees. Whereof he that hath least, hath to yeeld him twentie rubbels, or marks by the yeere. Besides these 15000. horsemen▪ that are of better choyce (as being the Emperors own gard when himself goeth to the warres, not vnlike the Romane souldiers called Prae∣toriani) are a 110. men of special account for their Nobilitie, and trust, which are chosen by the Emperour, and haue their names re∣gistred,Two other troupes to the number of 65000. that find among them for the Empe∣rours warres, to the number of 65000. hors∣men, with all necessaries meet for the warres after the Russe manner. To this end they haue yeerely allowance made by the Emperour for themselues, and their companies, to the summe of 40000. rubbels. And these 65000 are to repaire to the field euery yeere on the borders towards the Chrim Tartar, (except they bee appoyn∣ted
for some other seruice) whether there be warres with the Tartars, or not. This might seeme peraduenture somwhat dangerous for some state, to haue so great forces vnder the command of Noblemen to assemble euerie yeere to one certeine place. But the matter is so vsed, as that no danger can grow to the Emperour, or his state by this meanes. 1. Be∣cause these noblemen are manie, to wit, an 110. in all, and changed by the Emperor so oft as he thinketh good. 2. Because they haue their liuings of the Emperour, being other∣wise but of very small reuenue, and receiue this yeerely pay of 40000. rubbels, when it is presently to be paide foorth againe to the souldiers that are vnder them. 3. Because for the most part they are about the Emperours person, being of his Councel either speciall, or at large. 4. They are rather as payma∣sters, then Captaines to their companies, themselues not going forth ordinarily to the warres, saue when some of them are appoin∣ted by speciall order from the Emperour himselfe.Horsemen in cōtinuall pay 80000. So the whole number of horsemen that are euer in a readinesse, and in continu∣all pay, are 80000, a few more or lesse. If hee haue neede of a greater number (which seldome falleth out) then he inter∣teineth of those Sinaboiarskey, that are out of pay, so many as hee needeth: and if yet hee
want of his number, he giueth charge to his Noblemen, that hold lands of him, to bring into the fielde euery man a proportiona∣ble number of his seruaunts (called Kolo∣phey, such as till his lands) with their furni∣ture, according to the iust number that he intendeth to make. Which the seruice be∣ing done, presently lay in their weapons, and returne to their seruile occupations a∣gaine. Of footmen that are in continuall pay,Footmen in continu∣all pay 12000. he hath to the number of 12000. all Gunners, called Strelsey. Whereof 5000. are to attend about the Citie of Mosko, or any other place where the Emperour shall abide, and 2000. (which are called Stremaney, Stresley, or Gunners at the stirrop) about his owne person at the verie Court or house where himselfe lodgeth. The rest are placed in his garrison Townes, till there be occasion to haue them in the fielde, and receiue for their salarie or stipend euery man seuen rubbels a yeere, besides twelue measures, a piece of Rye, and Oates. Of mercena∣rie Souldiers, that are strangers (whom they call Nimschoy) they haue at this time 4300.Strangers mercena∣ries in pay 4300. of Polonians: of Chirchasses (that are vn∣der the Polonians) about 4. thousand, where∣of 3500. are abroad in his garrisons: of Dout∣ches and Scots about 150: of Greekes, Turks,
Danes and Sweadens, all in one band, an 100. or thereabouts. But these they vse onely vp∣on the Tartar side, and against the Siberi∣ans: as they doe the Tartar souldiers (whom they hire sometimes, but onely for the pre∣sent) on the other side against the Polonian and Sweaden: thinking it best pollicie so to vse their seruice vpon the contrary bor∣der. The chiefe Captaines or leaders of these forces,The chiefe captaines or leaders. according to their names, and de∣grees,1. The Voi∣auod or Ge∣nerall. are these which follow. First the Voy∣auodey Bulshaia, that is, the Great Captaine, or Lieftenant generall vnder the Emperour. This commonly is one of the foure hou∣ses of the chiefe Nobilitie of the lande: but so chosen otherwise, as that hee is of small valure, or practise in martiall mat∣ters, beeyng thought to serue that turne so much the better, if hee bring no other partes with him saue the countenance of his Nobilitie, to bee liked of by the souldiers for that, and nothing els. For in this poynt they are very warie that these two (to wit) no∣bilitie, and power meet not both in one, spe∣cially if they see wisedome with all, or apt∣nesse for pollicie. Their great Voiauod or Generall at this present in their warres, is commonly one of these foure: Knez Feodor Iuanowich Methis∣soskey
Knez Iuan Michailowich Glinskoy, Che∣rechaskoy, and Trowbetskoy, all of great Nobi∣litie, but of very simple qualitie otherwise: though in Glinskoy (as they say) there is somewhat more then in the rest. To make vp this defect in the Voiauod or Generall,2. Liefete∣nant gene∣rall. there is some other ioyned with him as Lief∣tenant Generall, of farre lesse nobilitie, but of more valure and experience in the warres then he, who ordereth all things that the o∣ther countenanceth. At this time their prin∣cipall man, and most vsed in their warres, is one Knez Demetrie Iuanowich Forestine, an auncient and expert captaine, and one that hath done great seruice (as they say) against the Tartar,3. Marshals of the field foure. and Polonian. Next vnder the Voi∣auod and his Lieftenant generall are foure o∣ther that haue the marshalling of the whole army deuided among them, and may be cal∣led the marshals of the field. Euery man hath his quarter, or fourth part vnder him. Whereof the first is called the Praua Polskoy, or right wing. The second is the Leuoy Polskoy, or left wing. The third is Rusnoy Polskoy, or the broken bād▪ because out of this there are chosen to send abroade vpon any sodaine exploit, or to make a re∣scue▪Foure mar∣shals depu∣ties 8. or supply, as occasion doth require. The fourth Storeshouoy Polskoy, or the warding bande, Euery one of these foure Marshals
haue two other vnder them (eight in all) that twise euery weeke at the least must muster and traine their seueral wings or bands, and hold and giue iustice for all faultes, and dis∣orders committed in the campe. And these eight are commonly chosen out of the 110. (which I spake of before) that receiue and deliuer the pay to the souldiers. Vnder these eight are diuers other Captains,Fiue Coto∣nels vnder Captaines. as the Gul auoy, Captaines of thousands fiue hundreds and 100. The Petyde Setskoy or Captaines of fifties, and the Decetskies or Captaines of tennes. Besides the Voiauoda or Generall of the Armie (spoken of before) they haue two other that beare the name of Voiauoda: whereof one is the Master of the great Ordi∣nance (called Naradna voiauoda) who hath di∣uers vnder Officers,Sixe Ma∣sters of the Artillerie. necessarie for that ser∣uice. The other is called the Voiauoda gula∣uoy, or the walking Captaine,The wa∣king Cap∣taine. that hath a∣lowed him 1000. good horsemen of princi∣pall choyse, to range and spie abroad, and hath the charge of the running Castle, which we are to speake of in the Chapter folow∣ing. All these Captaines, and men of charge must once euery day resort to the Bulsha voiauoda or Generall of the Armie, to know his pleasure, & to informe him, if there be any requisite matter perteining to their office.
Of their mustering, and leuying of for∣ces, manner of armour, and prouision of victuall for the warres. The 16. Chapter. WHen warres are towards (which they fayle not of lightly euery yeere with the Tartar, and ma∣nie times with the Polonian and Sweden (the foure Lordes of the Chetfirds sende foorth their summons in the Emperours name,Their order for muste∣ring. to all the Dukes and Dy∣acks of the Prouinces, to bee proclaymed in the head Townes of euery Shire: that all the Sinaboiarskey, or sonnes of gentlemen make their repaire to such a border where the seruice is to be done, at such a place, and by such a day, and there present them selues to such, and such Captaines. When they come to the place assigned them in
the summons or proclamation, their names are taken by certaine Officers that haue Cōmission for that pourpose from the Rose∣rade, or high Constable, as Clarkes of the Bandes. If any make default and faile at the day, hee is mulcted, and punished very seuerely. As for the Generall and other chiefe Cap∣taines, they are sent thither from the Em∣perours owne hande, with such Commissi∣on and charge as hee thinketh behoofull for the present seruice. When the souldi∣ers are assembled, they are reduced into their Bands, and companies, vnder their se∣uerall Captaines of tennes, fifties, hundreds, thousands, &c. and these Bands into foure Polskeis, or Legions (but of farre greater numbers then the Romaine Legions were) vnder their foure great Leaders, which also haue the authoritie of Marshals of the fielde (as was sayd before.) Concerning their armour they are but slightly appointed.The horse¦mans fur∣niture. The common horseman hath nothing els but his bow in his case vn∣der his right arme, and his quiuer & sword hanging on the left side: except some fewe that beare a case of dagges, or a Iauelin, or short staffe along their horse side. The vnder captains wil haue cōmonly some piece of ar∣mour besides, as a shirt of male, or such like.
The Generall with the other chiefe Cap∣taines and men of Nobilitie, will haue their horse very richly furnished, their Saddles of cloth of golde their Bridles faire bossed and tasselled with golde, and silke frindge, be∣studded with Pearle and precious stones, themselues in very faire armour, which they call Bullatnoy, made of faire shining steele, yet couered commonly with cloth of golde, and edged rounde with armin furre, his steele helmet on his head of a very great price, his sword bow and arrowes at his side, his speare in his hande, with an other faire helmet, and his Shestapera, or horsemans scepter carried before him. Their swordes, bowes, and arrowes are of the Turkish fashi∣on. They practise like the Tartar to shoote forwards and backwards, as they flie and retire. The Strelsey or footeman hath nothing but his piece in his hande,The foote∣mans fur∣niture. his striking hat∣chet at his backe, and his sworde by his side. The stocke of his piece is not made calie∣uer wise, but with a plaine and straite stocke (somewhat like a fowling piece) the barrel is rudely and vnartificially made, very hea∣uie, yet shooteth but a very small bullet. As for their prouision of victuall,Prouision of victuall. the Empe∣rour alloweth none, either for Captaine, or souldiour, neither prouideth any for
them except peraduenture some corne for their money. Euery man is to bring suf∣ficient for him selfe, to serue his turne for foure moneths, and if neede require to giue order for more to bee brought vnto him to the Campe from his tenant that tilleth his land, or some other place. One great helpe they haue, that for lodging and diet euery Russe is prepared to bee a soul∣diour beforehand. Though the chiefe Cap∣taines and other of account carry tents with them after the fashion of ours, with some better prouision of victuall then the rest. They bring with them commonly into the Campe for victuall a kinde of dryed bread, (which they call Sucharie) with some store of meale, which they temper with water, and so make it into a ball, or small lumpe of dowe, called Tollockno. And this they eate raw in steade of bread. Their meate is bacon, or some other flesh or fish dryed, after the Dutch manner. If the Russe souldier were as hardy to execute an enterprise, as he is hard to beare out toyle and trauaile, or were o∣therwise as apt & wel trained for the warres, as he is indifferent for his lodging and dy∣et, hee would farre exceede the souldiours of our partes. Whereas now he is farre mea∣ner of courage and execution in any war∣like seruice. Which commeth partly of his
seruile condition, that will not suffer any great courage or valure to growe in him. Partly for lacke of due honour and reward, which he hath no great hope of, whatsoeuer seruice or execution he doe. Of their marching, charging, and other Martiall discipline. The 17. Chapter. THE Russe tru∣steth rather to his number, thē to the valure of his souldiers, or good ordering of his forces. Their marching or leading is without all or∣der, saue that the foure Polskey or Legions, (whereinto their armie is deuided) keepe themselues seueral vnder their ensignes, and so thrust all on together in a hurrey, as they are directed by their Generall. Their Ensigne is the image of Saint George. The Bulsha Dworaney or chiefe horsemen, haue euery man a small drumme of brasse at his saddle bowe,Horsemens drummes. which hee striketh when hee giueth
the charge, or onset. They haue drummes besides of a huge bignesse,The horse∣mans man∣ner of char∣ging. which they carry with them vpon a board layde on foure horses, that are spar∣red together with chaines, euery drumme hauing eight strikers, or drummers, besides trumpets and shawmes, which they sounde after a wilde manner, much different from ours. When they giue any charge, or make any inuasion, they make a great hallowe or shoute altogether as loude as they can, which with the sound of their trumpets, shawmes, and drummes, maketh a confused and hor∣rible noyse. So they set on first discharging their arrowes, then dealing with their swordes, which they vse in a brauerie to shake, and brandish ouer their heads, before they come to strokes. Their footemen (because otherwise they want order in leading) are commonly placed in some ambush or place of aduantage,The foote∣mans charge. where they may most annoy the enemie, with least hurt to themselues. If it bee a set battell, or if any great inuasion be made vp∣on the Russe borders by the Tartar, they are set within the running or mouing Castle (cal∣led Beza,The wal∣king Castle or Gulay gorod) which is caried a∣bout with them by the Voiauoda gulauoy (or the walking General) whom I spake of before. This walking or moouing Castle is so fra∣med,
that it may bee set vp in length (as occasion doeth require) the space of one, two, three, foure, fiue, sixe, or seuen miles: for so long it will reach. It is nothing els but a double wall of wood to defende them on both sides behinde and before, with a space of three yardes or thereabouts betwixt the two sides: so that they may stande within it, and haue roome ynough to charge and dis∣charge their pieces, and to vse their other weapons. It is closed at both endes, and made with loope holes on either side, to lay out the nose of their piece, or to push foorth any other weapon. It is carried with the Armie wheresoeuer it goeth, being ta∣ken into pieces, and so layed on cartes spar∣red together, and drawen by horse that are not seene, by reason that they are couered with their carriage as with a shelfe or pent∣house. When it is brought to the place where it is to be vsed (which is deuised & chosen out before by the walking voiauod) it is planted so much as the present vse requireth, some∣time a mile long, sometimes two, sometimes three, or more: Which is soone done without the helpe of any Carpenter, or instrument: because the timber is so framed to claspe together one piece within an other: as is ea∣sily vnderstood by those that know the ma∣ner of the Russe building.
In this Castle standeth their shotte well fenced for aduantage, specially against the Tartar, that bringeth no ordinance, nor o∣ther weapon into the field with him, saue his swoord, and bow and arrowes. They haue also within it diuers field pieces, which they vse as occasion doth require. Of pieces for the field they carry no great store, when they warre against the Tartar: but when they deale with the Polonian (of whose forces they make more account) they goe better furni∣shed with al kind of munition, and other ne∣cessarie prouisions. It is thought that no Prince of Christendome hath better stoare of munition, then the Russe Emperour. And it may partly appeare by the Artillerie house at Mosko, where are of all sortes of great ordinance, all brasse pieces, very faire, to an exceeding great number. The Russe souldier is thought to be bet∣ter at his defence within some castle, or town, then hee is abroad at a set pitched field. Which is euer noted in the practise of his warres, and namely at the siege of Vobsko, a∣bout eight yeares since: where hee repulsed the Polonian king Stepan Batore, with his whole armie of 100000. men, and forced him in the ende to giue ouer his siege, with the losse of many of his best Captaines and souldiers. But in a set field the Russe is noted
to haue euer the worse of the Polonian, Sweden. If any behaue himselfe more valiantly then the rest, or doo any speciall piece of seruice, the Emperour sendeth him a piece of golde, stamped with the Image of Saint George on horsebacke.Reward for valure. Which they hang on their sleeues, and set in their caps. And this is accounted the greatest honour they can receiue, for any seruice they doo. Of their Colonies, and mainteyning of their conquests, or purcha∣ses by force. The 18. Chapter. THE Russe Empe∣rours of late yeres haue verie muche enlarged their do∣minions, and ter∣ritories. Their first conquest after the Dukedom of Mos∣ko (for before that time they were but Dukes of Volodomer, as before was sayd)
was the Citie, and Dukedome of Nouograd on the West, and Northwest side: which was no small enlargement of their dominion, & strengthning to them for the winning of the rest. This was done by Iuan great grandfa∣ther to Theodore now Emperour, about the yeare 1480. The same began likewise to en∣croach vpon the countries of Lituania, and Liuonia, but the conquest onely intended, & attempted by him vpon some parte of those countries, was pursued and performed by his sonne Basileus, who first wan the citie and dukedome of Plesko, afterwards the citie & dukedome of Smolensko, & many other faire towns, with a large territorie belonging vn∣to thē about the yeare 1514. These victories against the Lettoes or Lituanians in the time of Alexander their Duke, he atchiued rather by aduantage of ciuill dissentions, and trea∣sons among themselues, then by any great policie, or force of his owne. But all this was lost againe by his sonne Iuan Vasilowich, a∣bout eight or nine yeares past, vpon com∣positiō with the Polonian king Stepan Batore: whereunto hee was forced by the aduanta∣ges which the Pole had then of him, by rea∣son of the foile he had giuen him before, and the disquietnes of his owne state at home. Onely the Russe Emperour, at this time hath left him on that side his countrie, the cities of
Smolensko, Vitobsko, Cheringo and Beala gorod in Lituania. In Liuonia, not a towne, nor one foote of ground. When Basileus first conquered those coun∣tries,Lituania. he suffered the natiues to keepe their possessions, and to inhabite all their townes, onely paying him a tribute, vnder the go∣uernment of his Russe Captaines. But by their conspiracies and attempts not long after, he was taught to deale more surely with them. And so comming vpon them the second time, hee killed and carried away with him, three partes of foure, which hee gaue or solde to the Tartars that serued him in those warres, and in steede of them placed there his Russes, so many as might ouer∣match the rest, with certaine garrisons of strength besides. Wherein notwithstanding this ouersight was committed, for that (ta∣king away with him the vpland, or countrie people (that should haue tilled the ground, and might easily haue bene kept in order without any daunger, by other good polli∣cies) he was driuen afterwards many yeares together, to vittaile the countrie (specially the great townes) out of his owne countrie of Russia, the soile lying there in the meane while wast, and vntilled. The like fell out at the port of Narue in Liefland,Narue. where his sonne Iuan Vasilowich de∣uised
to build a towne, and a castle on the o∣ther side the riuer, (called Iuangorod) to keepe the towne, and countrie in subiection. The Castle he caused to be so built, and fortified, that it was thought to be inuincible. And when it was finished, for reward to the Ar∣chitect (that was a Polonian) he put out both his eyes, to make him vnable to build the like againe. But hauing left the natiues all within their owne countrie, without abating their number or strength, the towne and ca∣stle not long after was betrayed, and surren∣dred againe to the king of Sweden. On the Southest side, they haue got the kingdomes of Cazan, and Astracan. These were wonne from the Tartar, by the late Emperour Iuan Vasilowich, father to the Emperour that now is: the one about 35, the other about 33. yeares agoe. Northward out of the countrie of Siberia, he hath layed vnto his realme, a great breadth and length of ground, from Wichida to the riuer of Ob∣ba, about a 1000. miles space: so that hee is bold to write himselfe now, The great Com∣maunder of Siberia. The countries likewise of Permia,Permia and Pechora. and Pe∣chora▪ are a diuers people and language from the Russe, ouercome not long since, and that rather by threatning, and shaking of the sword, then by any actuall force: as being a
weake and naked people, without meanes to resist. That which the Russe hath in his pre∣sent possession,Meanes of holding his chiefe townes. hee keepeth on this sorte. In his foure chiefe border townes of Vobs∣ko, Smolensko, Astracan, and Cazan, he hath certeine of his Counsell not of greatest no∣bilitie, but of greatest trust, which haue more authoritie within their precincts (for the countenauncing and strengthning of their gouernment there) then the other Dukes that are set to gouerne in other places, as was no∣ted before, in the manner of ordering their Prouinces. These hee chaungeth sometime euery yeare, sometime euery second or third yeare, but exceedeth not that time, except vp∣on very speciall trust, and good liking of the partie, and his seruice: least by enlarging of their time, they might grow into some fami∣liaritie with the enimie (as some haue done) being so farre out of sight. The townes besides are very strongly fenced with trenches, castels, and store of mu∣nition, and haue garrisons within them, to the nūber of two or three thousand a piece. They are stoared with vittaile if any siege should come vpon them, for the space of two or three yeares before hande. The foure Ca∣stels of Smolensko, Vobsko, Cazan and Astra∣can, he hath made very strong to beare out
any siege: so that it is thought that those townes are impregnable. As for the countries of Pechora and Per∣mia,Meanes of holding the coun∣tries of Pe∣chora, Per∣mia, and Si∣beria. and that part of Siberia, which he hath now vnder him, they are kept by as easie meanes, as they were first got. vz. rather by shewing, then by vsing of armes. First, hee hath stoared the Countrie with as manie Russes as there are natiues, and hath there some fewe souldiers in garrison, inough to to keepe them vnder. Secondly, his officers and Magistrates there, are of his owne Russe people, and hee chaungeth them very of∣ten, vz. euery yeare twise or thrise: notwith∣standing there bee no great feare of any in∣nouation. Thirdly, he deuideth them into many small gouernments, like a staffe broke in many small pieces: so that they haue no strength beyng seuered, which was but li∣tle neyther when they were all in one. Fourthly, hee prouideth that the people of the Countrie haue neither armour, nor mo∣nie, beyng taxed and pilled so often as hee thinketh good: without any means to shake of that yoke, or to relieue themselues. In Siberia (where he goeth on in pursu∣ing his conquest) he hath diuers castles and garrisons, to the nūber of six thousand soul∣diers of Russes, and Polonians, and sendeth many new supplies thither, to plant and to
inhabite, as he winneth ground. At this time besides he hath gotten the kings brother of Siberia, allured by certeine of his Captaines, to leaue his owne countrie by offers of great intertainement, and pleasanter life with the Russe Emperour, then he had in Siberia. He was brought in this laste yeare, and is now with the Emperour at Mosko well intertey∣ned. This may be sayd of the Russe practize, wheresoeuer he ruleth, either by right of in∣heritance, or by conquest. First, he berie∣ueth the countrie of armour & other means of defence, which he permitteth to none, but to his Botarskies onely. Secondly, he robbeth them continually of their monie, and com∣modities, and leaueth them bare with no∣thing but their bodies, and liues, within cer∣teine yeares compasse. Thirdly, he renteth and deuideth his territories into many small pieces by seuerall gouernments: so that none hath much vnder him to make any strength, though he had other oportunities. Fourth∣ly, he gouerneth his Countries by men of small reputation, & no power of themselues, and straungers in those places where their gouernment lieth. Fiftly, he chaungeth his gouernours once a yeare ordinarily, that there grow no great liking nor intiernesse betwixt the people and them, nor acquain∣tance
with the enemy if they lie towards the borders. Sixtly, he appointeth in one and the same place aduersarie gouernours, the one to bee as Controller of the other, as the Dukes and Diacks: where (by meanes of their enuies and emulations) there is lesse hurt to bee feared by their agreement, and himselfe is better infourmed what is done amisse. Seuenthly, he sendeth many times into euery Prouince secrete messen∣gers of speciall trust about him as intelligen∣ces, to prie and harken out what is doing, and what is a misse there. And this is ordi∣nary, though it be sodaine, and vnknowen what time they will come. Of the Tartars, and other borderers to the Countrie of Russia, with whome they haue most to doo in warre, and peace. The 19. Chapter. THeir neighbours with whom they haue greatest dealings & intercourse, both in peace & warre, are first the Tartar: Secondly the Polonian whom the Russe calleth Laches,The Poloni∣ans called Laches by the Russe. no∣ting the first author or founder of the Na∣tion,
who was called Laches or Leches, wher∣vnto is added Po, which signifieth People, & so is made Polaches, that is, the People or poste∣ritie of Laches: which the Latines after their manner of writing call Polanos. The third are the Swedens. The Polonians and Swedens are better knowen to these partes of Europe then are the Tartars, that are farther of from vs (as being of Asia) and diuided in∣to many tribes, different both in name, and gouernment one from another. The greatest and mightiest of them is the Chrim Tartar,The Chrim Tartar. (whom some call the Great Cham) that lieth South, and Southeastward from Russia, and doth most annoy the Countrie by often in∣uasions, commonly once euery yeare, some∣times entring very farre within the inland parts. In the yeare 1571. he came as farre as the citie of Mosko, with an armie of 200000. men, without any battaile, or resistance at all, for that the Russe Emperour (then Iuan Vasilowich) leading foorth his armie to en∣counter with him, marched a wrong way: but as it was thought of very purpose, as not daring to aduenture the fielde, by reason that hee doubted his nobilitie, and chiefe Captaines, of a meaning to betray him to the Tartar. The citie he tooke not, but fired the Sub∣burbs, which by reason of the buildinges
(which is all of wood without any stone,The firing of Mosko by the Chrim Tartar, in the yeare 1571. brick, or lime, saue certein out roomes) kind∣led so quickly, and went on with such rage as that it cōsumed the greatest part of the citie almost within the space of foure houres, be∣ing of 30. miles or more of compasse. Then might you haue seene a lamētable spectacle: besides the huge & mighty flame of the citie all on light fire, the people burning in their houses and streates, but most of all of such as laboured to passe out of the gates far∣thest from the enemie, where meeting toge∣ther in a mightie throng, and so pressing e∣uery man to preuent another, wedged them∣selues so fast within the gate, and streates neare vnto it, as that three ranks walked one vpon the others head, the vppermost trea∣ding downe those that were lower: so that there perished at that time (as was sayd) by the fire & the presse, the number of 800000 people, or more. The Chrim thus hauing fired the Citie, and fedde his eyes with the sight of it all on a light flame, returned with his armie, and sent to the Russe Emperour a knife (as was sayd) to sticke himselfe withall: obbraiding this losse, & his desperate case, as not daring either to meet his enimy in the fielde, nor to trust his friends, or subiects at home. The principall cause of this continual quarell be∣twixt
the Russe and the Chrim, is for the right of certeine border parts claimed by the Tar∣tar, but possessed by the Russe. The Tartar al∣leageth that besides Astracan, & Cazan (that are the ancient posessiō of the East Tartar) the whole countrie from his bounds North and Westward, so farre as the citie of Mosko, and Mosko it selfe, perteineth to his right. Which seemeth to haue bene true by the re∣port of the Russes thēselues,Homage done by the Russe to the Chrim Tartar. that tell of a cer∣teine homage that was done by the Russe Em∣perour euery yeare, to the Great Chrim or Cham, the Russe Emperour standing on foote & feeding the Chrims horse, (himselfe sitting on his back) with oates out of his owne cap, in stead of a boule or maunger, & that within the castle of Mosko. And this homage (they say) was done til the time of Basileus grandfa∣ther to this man. Who surprising the Chrim Emperor by a stratagem, done by one of his Nobilitie (called Iuan Demetrowich Belschey) was content with this raunsome, vz: with the chaunging of this homage into a tribute of furres: which afterwards also was denied to be paied, by this Emperours father. Hereupon they continue the quarrell, the Russe defending his countrie, and that which he hath wonne, the Chrim Tartar in∣uading him once or twise euery yeare, some∣time about Whitsontide, but oftener in Har∣uest.
What time if the great Cham or Chrim come in his owne person, he bringeth with him a great armie of 100000. or 200000. men. Otherwise they make shorte, and sud∣den roads into the countrie with lesser num∣bers, running about the list of the border as wild geese flie, inuading and retiring where they see aduantage. Their common practise (being very popu∣lous) is to make diuers armies,The man∣ner of the Tartars fight, and armour. & so drawing the Russe to one, or two places of the fron∣tiers, to inuade at some other place, that is left without defence. Their manner of fight, or ordering of their forces, is much after the Russe manner (spoken of before) saue that they are all horsemen, and carrie nothing els but a bow, a sheafe of arrowes, and a falcon sword after the Turkish fashion. They are very expert horsmē, & vse to shoot as readily back∣ward, as forward. Some wil haue a horsmans staffe like to a bore speare, besides their o∣ther weapons. The cōmon souldier hath no other armour then his ordinary apparel, vz: a blacke sheeps skin with the wooll side out∣ward in the day time, & inward in the night time, with a cap of the same. But their Morseys or Noblemen imitate the Turke both in ap∣parel, & armour. When they are to passe ouer a riuer with their armie, they tie three or foure horses together, & taking long poles
or pieces of wood, bind them fast to the tails of their horse: so sitting on the poles they driue their horse ouer. At handie strokes (when they come to ioyne battaile) they are accounted farre better men then the Russe people, fearse by nature, but more hardie & blouddy by continuall practise of warre: as men knowing no artes of peace, nor any ci∣uill practise. Yet their subtiltie is more then may seeme to agree with their barbarous con∣dition.The subtil∣tie of the Tartar. By reason they are practised to in∣uade continually, and to robbe their neigh∣bours that border about them, they are very pregnant, and ready witted to deuise strata∣geams vpō the suddaine for their better ad∣uantage. As in their warre against Beala the fourth king of Hungarie, whome they inua∣ded with 500000. men, & obteined against him a great victorie. Where among other, hauing slaine his Chauncellor, called Nicho∣las Schinick, they founde about him the Kings priuie seale. Whereupon they deui∣sed presently to counterfait letters in the Kings name, to the cities and townes next a∣bout the place, where the field was foughtt with charge that in no case they should conuey themselues, and their goods out of their dwellings, where they might abide safely without all feare of daunger, and not
leaue the coūtrie desolate to the possession of so vile & barbarous an enimie, as was the Tartar nation, terming themselues in all re∣prochfull manner. For notwithstanding he had lost his carriages, with some fewe strag∣lers that had marched disorderly, yet hee doubted not but to recouer that losse, with the accesse of a notable victorie, if the sa∣uage Tartar durst abide him in the fielde. To this purpose hauing written their letters in the Polish character, by certaine young men whom they tooke in the field, & signed them with the Kings seale, they dispatched them foorth to all the quarters of Hunga∣rie, that lay neare about the place. Where∣upon the Vngarians, that were now flying a∣way with their goods, wiues, & children vpō the rumour of the Kings ouerthrow, taking comfort of these counterfait letters, stayed at home. And so were made a pray, being surprised on the suddaine by this huge num∣ber of these Tartars, that had cōpassed them about before they were aware. When they besiege a towne or fort, they offer much parle, and sende many flattering messages to perswade a surrendry: promi∣sing all things that the inhabitants will re∣quire: but beyng once possessed of the place, they vse all manner of hostilitie, and eru∣eltie. This they doo vppon a rule they
haue, vz: that Iustice is to be practised but towardes their owne. They encounter not lightly, but they haue some ambush, where∣vnto (hauing once shewed themselues, and made some short cōflict, they retire as repul∣fed for feare, and so draw the enimie into it if they can. But the Russe being wel acquain∣ted with their practise, is more warie of them. When they come a rouing with some small number, they set on horsebacke counterfait shapes of men, that their number may seeme greater. When they make any onset, their man∣ner is to make a great shoote, crying all out together Olla Billa, Olla Billa, God helpe vs, God helpe vs. They contemne death so much, as that they chuse rather to die, then to yeeld to their enimie, and are seene when they are slaine to bite the very weapon, when they are past striking, or helping of themselues. Wherein appeareth how different the Tar∣tar is in his desperate courage from the Russe, and Turke. For the Russe Souldier if he begin once to retire putteth all his safety in his speedie flight. And if once he be taken by his enemie, he neyther defendeth him∣selfe, nor intreateth for his life, as recko∣ning straight to die. The Turke commonly when he is past hope of escaping, falleth to intreatie, and casteth awaie his weapon,
offereth both his handes, and holdeth them vp, as it were to be tyed: hoping to saue his life, by offering himselfe bondslaue. The chiefe bootie the Tartars seeke for in all their warres, is to get store of captiues, specially yong boyes, and girls, whom they sell to the Turkes, or other their neighbors. To this purpose they take with them great baskets made like bakers panniers to carrie them tenderly, and if any of them happen to tyer, or to be sicke on the way, they dash him against the ground, or some tree, and so leaue him dead: The souldiers are not troubled with keeping the captiues, and the other bootie, for hindering the execution of their warres, but they haue certein bands that intend nothing els, appointed of pur∣pose to receiue, and keepe the captiues and the other praye. The Russe borders (being vsed to their in∣uasions lightly euery yeere in the sommer) keepe fewe other cattel on the border parts,The Tartar religion. saue swine onely, which the Tartar will not touch, nor driue away with him: for that he is of the Turkish religion, and will eate no swines flesh. Of Christ our Sauiour they con∣fesse asmuch as doeth the Turke in his Alka∣ron, vz. that hee came of the Angell Gabriel, and the Virgin Marie, that hee was a great Prophet, and shalbe the Iudge of the world
at the last day. In other matters likewise, they are much ordered after the manner and di∣rection of the Turke: hauing felt the Tur∣kish forces when hee wonne from them A∣zou, & Caffa, with some other townes about the Euxine, or Blacke sea, that were before tributaries to the Chrim Tartar. So that now the Emperour of the Chrims for the most part is chosen some one of the Nobilitie whom the Turke doeth commend: whereby it is brought nowe to that passe, that the Chrim Tartar giueth to the Turke the tenth part of the spoyle, which hee getteth in his warres against the Christians. Herein they differ from the Turkish reli∣gion, for that they haue certeine idole pup∣pets made of silke, or like stuffe, of the fashi∣on of a man, which they fasten to the doore of their walking houses, to be as Ianusses or keepers of their house. And these idols are made not by all, but by certeine religious women, which they haue among them for that, & like vses. They haue besides the image of their King or great Cham, of an huge big∣nes which they erect at euery stage: when the army marcheth: & this euery one must bend and bowe vnto as hee passeth by it, bee he Tartar, or stranger. They are much giuen to witchcraft, & ominous coniectures, vpon euery accident which they heare, or see.
In making of mariages they haue no regard of alliance or consanguinitie. Onely with his mother, sister, and daughter a man may not marrie, and though hee take the woman into his house, and accompany with her, yet hee accounteth her not for his wife, till he haue a childe by her. Then he begin∣neth to take a dowrie of her friendes of horse, sheepe, kyne, &c. If she be barren after a certeine time, he turneth her home againe. Vnder the Emperour they haue certeine Dukes,The Tartar Nobilitie. whome they call Morseis or Diuoy∣morseis: that rule ouer a certeine number of 10000. 20000. or 40000. a piece, which they call hoords. When the Emperour hath any vse of them to serue in his warres, they are bound to come, & to bring with them their souldiers to a certeine nomber, euery man with his two horse at the least, the one to ride on, the other to kill, when it commeth to his turne to haue his his horse eate. For their chiefe vittaile is horse flesh,The Tartar dyet. which they eate without bread, or any other thing with it. So that if a Tartar be taken by a Russe, he shall be sure lightly to finde a horse legge, or some other part of him at his saddle bow. This last yeere when I was at the Mosko, came in one Kiriach Morsey, nephewe to the Emperour of the Chrims that now is (whose father was Emperour before) accompanied
with 300. Tartars, and his two wiues, where∣of one was his brothers widdow. Where be∣ing intertained in very good sort after the Russe manner; hee had sent vnto his lodging for his welcome, to bee made ready for his supper and his companies, two very large and fatte horses, ready flawed in a sledde. They preferre it before other flesh, be∣cause the meate is stronger (as they say) then beefe, mutton, and such like. And yet (which is marueile) though they serue all as horsemen in the warres, and eate all of horse flesh, there are brought yeerely to the Mosko to be exchanged for other cōmodi∣ties 30. or 40. thousand Tartar horse, which they call Cones. They keepe also great heards of kine, and flockes of blacke sheepe, rather for the skins and milke (which they carry with them in great bottels) then for the vse of the flesh, though sometimes they eate of it. Some vse they haue of ryse figs, and other fruites. They drinke milke or warme blood, and for the most part carde them both to∣gether. They vse sometimes as they traueile by the way, to let their horse blood in a vain, and to drinke it warme, as it commeth from his body. Townes they plant none,The Tar∣tars dwel∣ling. nor other stan∣ding buildings, but haue walking houses which the Latines call Veij, built vpon
wheeles like a shepheards cottage. These they drawe with them whithersoeur they goe, driuing their cattaile with them. And when they come to their stage, or stan∣ding place, they plant their cart houses very orderly in a ranke: and so make the forme of streetes, and of a large towne. And this is the manner of the Emperour himselfe, who hath no other seat of his Empire but an Agora, or towne of wood, that moueth with him whi∣thersoeuer hee goeth. As for the fixed and standing building vsed in other countreys, they say they are vnwholsome and vn∣pleasant. They beginne to mooue their houses and cattaile in the spring time from the South part of their Countrey towards the North parts. And so driuing on til they haue grased all vp to the farthest part Northwarde, they returne backe againe towardes their South countrey (where they continue all the win∣ter) by ten or twelue miles a stage: in the meane while the grasse being sprung vp a∣gaine, to serue for their cattaile as they re∣turne. From the border of the Shalcan to∣wards the Caspian sea, to the Russe frontiers, they haue a goodly Countrey, specially on the South and Southeast partes, but lost for lacke of tillage. Of money they haue no vse at all, and
therefore preferre brasse and steele before other mettals, specially bullate, which they vse for swords, kniues, and other necessaries. As for golde and siluer they neglect it of ve∣ry purpose, (as they doe all tillage of their ground) to be more free for their wandring kinde of life, and to keepe their Countrey lesse subiect to inuasiōs. Which giueth them great aduantage against all their neighbors, euer inuading, & neuer being inuaded. Such as haue taken vpon them to inuade their Countrey (as of olde time Cyrus and Darius Hystaspis, on the East and Southeast side) haue done it with very ill successe: as we find in the stories written of those times. For their manner is when any will inuade them, to allure and drawe them on by flying and reculing (as if they were afraide) till they haue drawen them some good way within their countrey. Then when they beginne to want vittaile and other necessaries (as needs they must where nothing is to bee had) to stoppe vp the passages, and inclose them with multitudes. By which stratagem (as we reade in Laonicus Chalcacondylas in his Tur∣kish storie) they had welnigh surprised the great aud huge armie of Tamerlan, but that hee retyred with all speede hee coulde, to∣wardes the riuer Tanais, or Don, not with∣out great losse of his men, and carriages.
In the storie of Pachymerius the Greeke (which he wrote of the Emperours of Con∣stantinople from the beginning of the reigne of Michael Palaeologus to the time of Andro∣nicus the elder) I remember hee telleth to the same pourpose of one Nogas a Tartari∣an captaine vnder Cazan the Emperour of the East Tartars (of whome the Citie and kingdome of Cazan may seeme to haue ta∣ken the denomination) who refused a pre∣sent of Pearle and other iewels sent vnto him from Michael Palaeologus: asking with∣all, for what vse they serued, and whither they were good to keepe away sicknesse, death, or other misfortunes of this life, or no. So that it seemeth they haue, euer or long time bene of that minde to value things no further, then by the vse, and necessitie for which they serue. For person and complexion they haue broad and flatte visages, of a tanned colour into yellowe and blacke, fearse and cruell lookes, thin haired vpon the vpper lippe, and pitte of the chinne, light and nimble bodied, with short legges, as if they were made naturally for horsemen: whereto they practise themselues from their childehood, seldome going afoote about any businesse. Their speach is very suddaine and loude, speaking as it were out of a deepe hollowe
throate. When they sing you woulde thinke a kowe lowed, or some great bandogge howled. Their greatest exercise is shooting, wherein they traine vp their children from their very infancie, not suffering them to eate, til they haue shot neere the marke with∣in a certein scātling. They are the very same that sometimes were called Scythae Noma∣des, or the Scythian Shepheards, by the Greeks and Latines. Some thinke that the Turkes tooke their beginning from the nation of the Chrim Tartars. Of which opinion is Lao∣nicus Chalcocondylas the Greeke Historio∣grapher, in his first booke of his Tur∣kish storie. Wherein hee followeth diuers very probable coniectures: The first ta∣ken from the very name it selfe, for that the worde Turke signifieth a shepheard, or one that foloweth a vagrant and wilde kinde of life By which name these Scythian Tartars haue euer bene noted, being called by the Greekes , or the Scythian shep∣heards. His second reason, because the Turks (in his time) that dwelt in Asia the lesse, to wit, in Lydia, Coria, Phrygia, and Cappadocia, spake the very same language that these Tar∣tars did, that dwelt betwixt the riuer Tanais or Don. and the countrey of Sarmatia, which (as is well knowen) are these Tartars called Chrims. At this time also the whole nation
of the Turkes differ not much in their com∣mon speach from the Tartar lāguage, Third∣ly because the Turke and the Chrim Tartar agree so well together, aswell in religion, as in matter of traffique neuer inuading, or iniurying one another: saue that the Turke (since Laonicus his time) hath encroached vp∣on some Townes vpon the Euxin sea, that before perteined to the Chrim Tartar. Fourthly, because Ortogules sonne to Ogu∣zalpes, & (father to Otoman the first of name of the Turkish nation) made his first roads out of those partes of Asia, vpon the next borderers, till he came towardes the coun∣treys about the hill Taurus, where hee ouer∣came the Greeks that inhabited there: and so enlarged the name and territorie of the Turkish nation, til he came to Eubaa and At∣tica, and other partes of Greece. This is the opinion of Laonicus, who liued among the Turks in the time of Amurat the sixt Turkish Emperour, about the yeere 1400. when the memorie of their originall was more fresh: and therefore the likelier hee was to hit the trueth. There are diuers other Tartars that bor∣der vpon Russia, as the Nagaies, the Chere∣missens, the Mordwites, the Chircasses, and the Shalcans, which all differ in name more then in regiment, or other condition, from
the Chrim Tartar except the Chircasses that border Southwest,The Nagay Tartar the cruellest. towardes Lituania, and are farre more ciuil then the rest of the Tar∣tars,The Chir∣casce the ci∣uilest Tar∣tar. of a comely person, and of a stately be∣hauiour, as applying themselues to the fashion of the Polonian. Some of them haue subiected themselues to the kings of Poland, & professe Christianitie. The Nagay lyeth Eastwarde, and is reckoned for the best man of warre among all the Tartars, but verie sa∣uage,The Chere∣missen Tar∣tar. and cruell aboue all the rest. The Che∣remifrn Tartar, that lieth betwixt the Russe & the Nagay, are of two sorts, the Lugauoy (that is of the valley) and the Nagornay, or of the hillie countrey. These haue much troubled the Emperours of Russia. And therfore they are content now to buy peace of thē, vnder pretence of giuing a yeerely pension of Russe commodities, to their Morseis, or Diuoymor∣seis, that are chiefe of their tribes For which also they are boūd to serue thē in their wars, vnder certeine conditions. They are saide to be iust & true in their dealings: and for that cause they hate the Russe people, whom they account to be double, & false in all their dea∣ling. And therfore the common sort are very vnwilling to keep agreement with them, but that they are kept in by their Morseis, or Dukes for their pensions sake. The most rude & barbarous is coūted the
Mordwit Tartar,The Mord∣wite Tartar the most barbarous of the rest. that hath many self fashiōs, & strange kinds of behauiour, differing frō the rest. For his religiō, thogh he acknowlege one god, yet his maner is to worship for god, that liuing thing, that he first meeteth in the morning & to sweare by it al that whole day whether it be horse, dogge, catte, or whatso∣euer els it be. When his friend dieth, he kil∣leth his best horse, and hauing flayed off the skin he carrieth it on high vpon a long pole, before the corpes to the place of buriall. This hee doeth (as the Russe sayeth) that his friend may haue a good horse to carie him to heauen: but it is likelier to declare his loue towardes his dead friende, in that hee will haue to die with him the best thing that hee hath. Next to the kingdome of Asiracan, that is the farthest part Southeastward of the Russe dominion, lyeth the Shalcan, and the countrey of Midia: whither the Russe mar∣chants trade for raw silks, syndon, saphion, skins, and other commodities. The chiefe townes of Media where the Russe tradeth, are, Derbent (built by Alexander the great, as the inhabitauntes saye) and Zamachie where the staple is kept for rawe silkes. Their manner is in the Spring time to re∣uiue the silke-wormes (that lye dead all the Winter) by laying them in the warme
sunne, and (to hasten their quickening that they may sooner goe to worke) to put them into bags, and so to hang them vnder their childrens armes. As for the worme called Chrinisin (as we call it chrymson) that maketh coloured silke, it is bred not in Media, but in Assyria. This trade to Derbent and Sama∣chie for rawe silkes, and other commodi∣ties, of that countrey, as also into Persia, and Bougharia, downe the riuer Volgha, and through the Caspian sea, is permitted aswell to the English, as to the Russe marchants, by the Emperours last Graunt at my being there. Which hee accounteth for a very spe∣ciall fauour, and might prooue in deede ve∣ry beneficiall to our English marchants, if the trade were wel, and orderly vsed. The whole nation of the Tartars are vt∣terly voyde of all learning, and without written Lawe. Yet certeine rules they haue which they holde by tradition, common to all the Hoords for the practise of their life. Which are of this sort. First, To obey their Emperour and other Magistrates, whatsoeuer they commaunde about the publique seruice. 2. Except for the publique behoofe, euery man to be free and out of controlement. 3. No pri∣uate man to possesse any lands, but the whole countrey to be as a common. 4. To neglect all daintinesse and varietie of meates, and to content
themselues with that which commeth next to hand, for more hardnesse, and readinesse in the executing of their affaires. 5. To weare any base attire, and to patch their clothes, whether there bee anie neede or not: that when there is neede, it bee no shame to weare a patcht coate. 6 To take, or steale from anie stranger whatsoe∣uer they can gette, as beeyng enemies to all men, saue to such as will subiect themselues to them. 7. Towardes their owne hoorde and na∣tion to be true in word, and deede. 8. To suffer no stranger to come within the Realme, If any doe, the same to bee bondslaue to him that first taketh him, ex∣cept such marchants and other as haue the Tar∣tar Bull, or past∣port about them.
Of the Permians, Samoites, Of the Permians, Samoites, and Lappes. The 20. Chapter. THe Permians & Samoits that lye frō Russia, north & Northeast, are thought like∣wise to haue ta∣kē their begin∣ning from the Tartar kind. And it may partly be gessed by the fashion of their countenance, as hauing all broade, & flat faces, as the Tar∣tars haue,The Per∣mans. except the Chirchasses. The Permi∣ans are accounted for a very ancient people. They are now subiect to the Russe. They liue by hunting, and trading with their furres, as doth also the Samoyt, that dwelleth more to∣wardes the North sea.The Sa∣moites. The Samoyt hath his name (as the Russe saith) of eating himselfe: as if in times past, they liued as the Canni∣bals, eating one another. Which they make more probable, because at this time they eat all kind of raw flesh, whatsoeuer it bee, euen the very carion that lieth in the ditch. But
as the Samoits themselues wil say, they were called Samoie, that is of themselues, as though they were Indigenae, or people bredde vpon that very soyle, that neuer changed their seat from one place to another, as most nations haue done. They are subiect at this time to the Emperour of Russia, I talked with certeine of them, and finde that they acknowledge one God:The Sa∣moites reli∣gion. but repre∣sent him by such things as they haue most vse and good by. And therfore they worship the Sun, the Ollen, the Losh, and such like. As for the storie of Slata Baba,Slata Baba or the gol∣den Hag. or the Golden hagge. (which I haue read in some mappes, and de∣scriptions of these countries, to bee an idole after the forme of an olde woman) that be∣ing demaunded by the Priest, giueth them certeyne Oracles, concerning the successe, and euent of thinges, I haue founde it to bee but a verye fable. Onelie in the Pro∣uince of Obdoria vpon the Sea side, neare to the mouth of the great riuer Obba, there is a rocke, which naturally (beeing some∣what helped by imagination) may seeme to beare the shape of a ragged woman, with a child in her armes (as the rock by the North cape the shape of a Frier) where the Ob∣dorian Samoites vse much to resort, by rea∣son of the commoditie of the place for fishing: and there sometime (as their man∣ner
is) conceiue, and practise their sorceries, and ominous coniecturings about the good, or bad speed of their iourneies, fishings, hun∣tings, and such like, They are clad in Seale skins,The Samoits habite and behauiour. with the hea∣rie side outwards downe as low as the knees, with their breeches and netherstocks of the same, both men and women. They are all blacke haired, naturally beardlesse. And therefore the men are hardly discerned from the women by their looks: saue that the wo∣men weare a lock of haire down along both their eares. They liue in a maner a wilde and a sauage life, rouing stil from one place of the countrey to another, without anie proper∣tie of house or land more to one then to an other. Their leader or directer in euery com∣panie, is their Papa or Priest. On the North side of Russia next to Core∣lia,The Lappes. lieth the countrey of Lappia, which rea∣cheth in length from the farthest poynt Northward, (towardes the Northcape) to the farthest part Southeast (which the Russe calleth Sweetnesse or Holie nose, the English men Capegrace) about 345. verst or miles. Frō Sweetnesse to Candelox by the way of Versega (which measureth the breadth of that coun∣trey) is 90. miles or there abouts. The whole countrey in a manner is eyther lakes, or mountaines, which towardes the Sea side
are called Tondro, because they are all of hard and craggy rocke, but the inland partes are well furnished with woods, that growe on the hilles sides, the lakes lying betweene. Their diet is very bare & simple. Bread they haue none, but feed onely vpon fish & fowle. They are subiect to the Emperour of Russia, and the two Kings of Sweden, and Denmark: which all exact tribute and custome of them (as was said before) but the Emperour of Russia beareth the greatest hand ouer them, and exact of them farre more then the rest. The opinion is that they were first termed Lappes of their briefe and short speach. The Russe deuideth the whole natiō of the Lappes into two sorts. The one they call Nowremans∣koy Lapary, that is, the Noruegian Lappes: be∣cause they be of the Danish religion. For the Danes and Noruegians they account for one people. The other that haue no religion at all, but liue as brute and Heathenish people, without God in the world, they call Dikoy Lopary, or the wild Lappes. The whole nation is vtterly vnlearned, hauing not so much as the vse of any Alpha∣bet, or letter among them. For practise of witchcraft and sorcery, they passe all nations in the world. Though for the enchaunting of shippes that saile along their coast (as I haue heard it reported) and their giuing of winds
good to their friends, and contrary to other, whom they meane to hurt by tying of certein knots vpon a rope (somewhat like to the tale of Aeolus his windbag) is a very fable, deui∣sed (as may seeme) by themselues, to terrifie sailers for comming neare their coast. Their weapons are the long bow, and handgunne, wherein they excell, aswell for quicknes to charge and discharge, as for nearnesse at the marke, by reason of their cōntinuall practise (wherto they are forced) of shooting at wild fowle. Their manner is in Sommer time to come downe in great companies to the sea side, to Wardhuyse, Cola, Kegor, and the bay of Vedagoba, & there to fish for Codd, Salmon, & But-fish, which they sell to the Russes, Danes, & Noruegians, and now of late to the English mē that trade thither with cloth, which they exchaunge with the Lappes and Corelians for their fish, oile, and furres, whereof also they haue some store. They hold their mart at Co∣la on S. Peters day: what time the Captain of Wardhuyse (that is resiant there for the king of Denmarke) must be present, or at least send his deputie to set prices vpon their stockfish, traine oile, furres, and other commodities: as also the Russe Emperours customer, or tri∣bute taker, to receiue his custome, which is euer payed before any thing can be bought, or sold, When their fishing is done, their mā∣ner
is to drawe their carbasses, or boates on shoare, & there to leaue them with the keele turned vpwardes, till the next spring tide. Their trauaile too & fro is vpon sleds, draw∣en by the Olen deer: which they vse to turne a grasing all the Sommer time, in an iland cal∣led Kilden (of a very good soile compared with other partes of that countrie) and to∣wards the winter time, when the snow be∣ginneth to fall, they fetch them home again, for the vse of their sledde. Of their Ecclesiasticall state, with their Church offices. The 21. Chapter. COncerning the gouernement of their Churche, it is framed altoge∣ther after the mā∣ner of the Greek: as being a part of that Church, and neuer acknowled∣ging the iurisdi∣ction of the Latine Church, vsurped by the Pope. That I may keepe a better measure in
describing their ceremonies, thē they in the vsing them (wherein they are infinite) I will note briefly: First, what Ecclesiasticall de∣grees, or offices they haue with the iurisdi∣ction, and practise of them. Secondly, what doctrine they holde in matter of religion. Thirdly, what leiturgie, or forme of seruice they vse in their Churches, with the manner of their administring the Sacramēts. Fourth∣ly, what other straunge ceremonies, and su∣perstitious deuotions are vsed among them. Their offices,The church officers. or degrees of Churchmen, are as many in number, and the same in a manner both in name and degree, that were in the Westerne churches. First they haue their Patriarch, then their Metropolites, their Archbishops, their Vladikey or Bishops, their Protopapes or Archpriests, their Papes or Priests, their Deacons, Friers, Monkes, Nunnes, and Eremites. Their Patriarch,The Patri∣arch. or chiefe directer in mat∣ter of religion vntill this last yeare, was of the citie of Constantinople (whom they called the Patriarch of Sio) because being driuen by the Turke out of Constantinople (the seate of his Empire) he remoued to the Ile Sio, some∣times called Chio, and there placed his Patri∣archiall sea. So that the Emperours, and cler∣gie of Russia, were wont yearely to send gifts thither, and to acknowledge a spirituall kind of homage, and subiection due to him,
and to that Church. Which custome they haue held (as it seemeth) euer since they pro∣fessed the Christian religiō. Which how long it hath bene I could not well learne, for that they haue no storie, or monument of anti∣quitie (that I could heare of) to shewe what hath bene done in times past within their countrie concerning either Church, or com∣mon wealth matters. Onely I heare a report among them, that about three hundred yeares since, there was a marriage betwixt the Emperour of Constantinople, & the kings daughter of that countrie: who at the first denied to ioyne his daughter in marriage with the Greeke Emperour, because he was of the Christian religion. Which agreeth well with that I finde in the storie of Laonicus Chalcacondylas concerning Turkish affaires in his fourth booke: where hee speaketh of such a marriage betwixt Iohn the Greeke Emperour, and the Kings daughter of Sar∣matia. And this argueth out of their owne report, that at that time they had not recey∣ued the Christian religion: as also that they were conuerted to the faith, and withall per∣uerted at the very same time, receyuing the doctrine of the gospell, corrupted with super∣stitions euen at the first when they tooke it from the Greeke Church, which it selfe then was degenerate, and corrupted with many
superstitions, and fowle errours, both in do∣ctrine and discipline: as may appeare by the story of Nicephorus Gregoras, in his 8. and 9. bookes. But as touching the time of their conuersion to the christiā faith, I suppose ra∣ther that it is mistaken by the Russe, for that which I find in the Polonian storie, the secōd booke the third chapter: where is said that a∣bout the yeare 990. Vlodomirus Duke of Rus∣sia, married one Anne sister to Basilius, and Constantinus brothers, & Emperours of Con∣stantinople. Wherupon the Russe receiued the faith & profession of Christ. Which though it be somewhat more auncient then the time noted before out of the Russe report, yet it falleth out al to one reckoning, touching this point, vz: in what truth and sinceritie of do∣ctrine the Russe receiued the first stampe of religion: for asmuch as the Greeke church at that time also was many waies infected with errour, and superstition. At my being there,The trans∣lation of the Patri∣archicall sea from Constantino∣ple or Sio, to Mosko. the yere 1588 came vn∣to the Mosko the Patriarch of Constātinople, or Sio) called Hieronomo being banished as some said) by the Turke, as some other reported by the Greeke clergie depriued. The Emp. being giuen altogether to superstitious deuotions, gaue him great intertainment. Before his cō∣ming to Mosko, he had bene in Italy with the Pope, as was reported ther by some of his cō∣pany.
His arrād was to cōsult with the Emp. concerning these points. First about a league to passe betwixt him & the king of Spaine, as the meetest Prince to ioyne with him in op∣position against the Turke. To which purpose also Ambassages had passed betwixt the Russe & the Persian. Likewise from the Geor∣gians to the Emperour of Russia, to ioyne league together, for the inuading of the Turke on all sides of his dominion: taking the aduantage of the simple qualitie of the Turke that now is. This treatie was helped forward by the Emperours Ambassadour of Almaine, sent at the same time to solicite an inuasion vpon the parts of Polonia, that lie towards Rusland, and to borrow mony of the Russe Emperour, to pursue the warre for his brother Maximilian, against the Swedens son now king of Poland. But this consultation concerning a league betwixt the Russe & the Spaniard, (which was in some forwardnes at my comming to Mosko, and already one ap∣pointed for Ambassage into Spaine) was mar∣red by means of the ouerthrow giuen to the Spanish king by her Maiestie, the Queene of England, this last yeare. Which made the Russe Emperour and his Counsell, to giue a sadder countenance to the English Ambassa∣dour at that time: for that they were disap∣pointed of so good a policie, as was this con∣iunction
supposed to bee betwixt them and the Spanish. His second purpose (whereto the first serued as an introduction) was in reuenge of the Turke and the Greeke cleargie, that had thrust him from his seat, to treate with them about the reducing of the Russe church vnder the Pope of Rome. Wherein it may seeme that comming lately from Rome, he was set on by the Pope, who hath attemp∣ted the same many times before, though all in vaine: and namely in the time of the late Emperour Iuan Vasilowich, by one Anthony his Legate. But thought this belike a farre better meane to obteine his purpose by trea∣tie and mediation of their owne Patriarch. But this not succeeding, the Patriarch fell to a third point of treatie, concerning the re∣signation of his Patriarchship, & translation of the Sea from Constantinople, or Sio, to the citie of Mosko. Which was so well liked, and intertained by the Emperour (as a matter of high religion, & pollicie) that no other trea∣tie (specially of forrein Ambassages) could be heard, or regarded, till that matter was concluded. The reason wherewith the Patriarch per∣swaded the translating of his Sea to the citie of Mosko, were these in effect. First, for that the Sea of the Patriarch was vnder the Turk
that is enemie to the faith. And therefore to bee remoued into some other countrie of Christian profession. Secondly, because the Russe church was the only naturall daughter of the Greeke at this time, and holdeth the same doctrine & ceremonies with it the rest being all subiect to the Turke, and fallen a∣way from the right profession. Wherein the subtill Greeke to make the better market of his broken ware, aduaunced the honour that would growe to the Emperour, and his countrie: to haue the Patriarches seat, tran∣slated into the chief citie, and seat of his Em∣pire. As for the right of translating the sea, and appointing his successour, hee made no doubt of it, but that it perteyned wholy to himselfe. So the Emperour, & his Counsell,The Patri∣archship of Constantino∣ple transla∣ted to Mos∣ko. with the principall of his cleargie being assembled at the Mosko, it was determined that the Me∣tropolite of Mosko, should become Patriarch of the whole Greeke Church, and haue the samefull authoritie, & iurisdiction that per∣teined before to the Patriarch of Constantino∣ple, or Sio. And that it might bee done with more order, & solemnitie, the 25. of Ianuary, 1588. the Greeke Patriarch accōpanied with the Russe Cleargie, went to the great Church of Precheste, or our Ladie, within the Empe∣rours castle (hauing first wandred thorough
the whole citie in manner of a procession, and blessing the people with his two fingers) where hee made an Oration, and deliuered his resignation in an instrument of writing, and so laied downe his Patriarchicall staffe. Which was presently receiued by the Metro∣polite of Mosko, and diuers other ceremo∣nies vsed about the inauguration of this new Patriarch. The day was holden very solemne by the people of the citie, who were cōmaunded to forbeare their workes, and to attend this so∣lemnitie. The great Patriarch that day was honoured with rich presents sent him from the Emperour and Empresse, of plate, cloth of gold, furres, &c: carried with great pompe thorough the streats of Mosko and at his de∣parting receiued many giftes more, both from the Emperour, Nobilitie, and Clear∣gie. Thus the Patriarchship of Constantino∣ple, or Sio, (which hath continued since the Counsell of Nice) is now translated to Mos∣ko, or they made beleeue that they haue a Patriarch with the same right and authoritie that the other had. Wherin the subtil Greeke hath made good aduantage of their super∣stition, and is now gone away with a rich bootie into Poland, whither their Patriarch∣ship be currant or not. The matter is not vnlike to make some
schisme betwixt the Greeke & Russe Church, if the Russe holde this Patriarchship that he hath so well payed for, and the Greekes e∣lect an other withall, as likely they will, whi∣ther this man were banished by the Turke, or depriued by order of his owne Cleargie. Which might happen to giue aduantage to the Pope, & to bring ouer the Russe Church to the sea of Rome (to which end peraduen∣ture he deuised this stratageam, and cast in this matter of schisme among them) but that the Emperours of Russia know well enough, by the exāple of other christian Princes, what inconuenience would grow to their state & coūtrie, by subiecting themselues to the Ro∣mish sea. To which ende the late Emperour Iuan Vasilowich was very inquisitiue of the Popes authority ouer the Princes of christen∣dome, & sent one of very purpose to Rome, to behold the order, & behauior of his court. With this Patriarch Hieronimo was driuen out at the same time by the great Turke, one Demetrio Archbishop of Larissa: who is now in England, & pretendeth the same cause of their banishment by the Turke (to wit) their not admitting of the Popes new Kalender, for the alteration of the yeare. Which how vnlikely it is, may appeare by these circum∣stances. First, because there is no such affe∣ction, nor friendlie respect betwixt the
Pope & the Turke, as that he should banish a subiect for not obeying the Popes ordināce, specially in a matter of some sequele for the alteration of times within his owne coun∣tries. Secondly, for that he maketh no such scruple in deducting of times, and keeping of a iust and precise account from the incar∣natiō of Christ: whom he doth not acknow∣ledge otherwise then I noted before Third∣ly, for that the said Patriarch is now at Na∣ples in Italy, where it may be ghessed he would not haue gone within the Popes reach, and so neare to his nose, if he had bene banished for opposing himselfe against the Popes de∣cree. This office of Patriarchship now transla∣ted to Mosko,The Patri∣arches iu∣risdiction. beareth a superiour authoritie ouer all the Churches, not onely of Russia, & other the Emperours dominions, but tho∣rough out all the churches of Christendome that were before vnder the Patriarch of Cō∣stantinople, or Sio: or at least the Russe Pa∣triarch imagineth himselfe to haue the same authoritie. Hee hath vnder him as his pro∣per diocesse the Prouince of Mosko, be∣sides other peculiars. His court, or office is kept at the Mosko. Before the creatiō of this new Patriarch,The Me∣tropolites. they had but one Metropolite, that was cal∣led the Metropolite of Mosko. Now for more
state to their Church, and newe Patriarch, they haue two Metropolites, the one of No∣uogrod velica, the other of Rostoue. Their office is to receiue of the Patriarch such Ec∣clesiasticall orders, as he thinketh good, and to deliuer the charge of them ouer to the Archbishops: besides the ordering of their owne diocesse. Their Archbishops are foure: of Smolens∣ko,Archbi∣shops. Cazon, Vobsko, and Vologda. The partes of their office is all one with the Metropolits: saue that they haue an vnder iurisdiction, as Suffraganes to the Metropolites, and su∣periours to the Bishops. The next are the Vladikeis,Bishops. or Bishops, that are but sixe in all: of Crutitska, of Rezan, of Otfer and Torshock, of Collomenska, of Volodemer, of Susdalla. These haue euery one a very large diocesse: as diuiding the rest of the whole countrie among them. The matters perteyning to the Ecclesi∣asticall iurisdiction,Ecclesiasti∣call iurisdi∣ction. of the Metropolites, Archbishops, and Bishops are the same in a manner that are vsed by the Cleargie in o∣ther partes of Christendome. For besides their authoritie ouer the Cleargie, and or∣dering such matters as are meare Ecclesi∣asticall, their iurisdiction extendeth to all te∣stamentarie causes, matters of marriage, and diuorcementes, some pleas of iniu∣ries,
&c. To which purpose also they haue their Officials, or Commissaries (which they call Boiaren Vladitskey) that are Lay∣men of the degree of Dukes,Their Gen∣tlemen cō∣missaries. or Gentle∣men, that keepe their Courtes and execute their iurisdiction. Which besides their o∣ther oppressions ouer the common peo∣ple, raigne ouer the Priestes: as the Dukes & Diacks doo ouer the poore people, with∣in their precincts. As for the Archbishop or Bishop himselfe, he beareth no sway in de∣ciding those causes, that are brought into his Court. But if hee would moderate any matter, hee must doo it by intreatie with his Gentleman officiall. The reason is, be∣cause these Boiarskey, or Gentlemen offici∣als, are not appointed by the Bishops, but by the Emperour himselfe, or his Counsell, and are to giue account of their doings to none but to them. If the Bishoppe can in∣treat at his admission to haue the choice of his owne officiall, it is accounted for a spe∣ciall great fauour. But to speake it as it is, the Cleargie of Russia, aswell concerning their landes and reuenues, as their authori∣tie and iurisdiction, are altogether ordered and ouer ruled by the Emperour, and his Counsell, and haue so much, and no more of both as their pleasure doth permit thē. They haue also their assistants or seuerall Coun∣sels
(as they call them) of certeine Priests that are of their diocesse, residing within their cathedrall cities, to the number of foure and twentie a piece. These aduise with them a∣bout the speciall and necessarie matters be∣longing to their charge. Concerning their rentes and reuenues to mainteyne their dignities,The church reuenues. it is somewhat large. The Patriarches yearely rents out of his landes (besides other fees) is about 3000. rubbels, or markes. The Metropolites and Archbishops about 2500. The Bishops some a 1000. some 800. some 500, &c. They haue had some of them (as I haue heard say) ten or twelue thousand rubbels a yeare: as had the Metropolite of Nouograde. Their habite or apparell (when they shewe themselues in their Pontificalibus af∣ter their solemnest manner) is a miter on their heades,The habite of their clergy men. after the popish fashion, sette with pearle and pretious stone, a cope on their backes, commonly of cloth of golde, embrodered with pearle, and a Crosiers staffe in their handes, layed ouer all with plate of siluer double guilt, with a crosse or sheepheardes crooke at the vpper ende of it. Their ordinarie habite othewise when they ride or goe abroad, is a hood on their heads of blacke colour, that hangeth downe their backes, and standeth out like a
bongrace before. Their vpper garment (which they call Reis) is a gowne or man∣tell of blacke Damaske, with many listes or gardes of white Sattin layed vpon it, eue∣rie garde about two fingers broad, and their Crosiers staffe carried before them. Them∣selues followe after, blessing the people with their two forefingers, with a maruei∣lous grace. The election,The electiō of Bishops. and appointing of the Bi∣shops and the rest, perteyneth wholy to the Emperour himselfe. They are chosen euer out of the Monasteries: so that there is no Bishop, Archbishop, nor Metropolite, but hath bene a Monke, or Frier before. And by that reason they are, and must all bee vn∣maried men, for their vow of chastitie when they were first shorne. When the Emperour hath appointed whom hee thinketh good, he is inuested in the Cathedrall church of his dioces, with many ceremonies, much af∣ter the manner of the Popish inauguration. They haue also their Deanes, & their Arch∣deacons. As for preaching the worde of God,The lear∣ning & ex∣ercise of the Russe Clergie. or any teaching, or exhorting such as are vnder them, they neyther vse it, nor haue a∣ny skill of it: the whole Cleargie beyng vtterlie vnlearned bothe for other know∣ledge, and in the word of God. Onely their
manner is twise euery yeere, vz. the first of September (which is the first day of their yere) and on S. Iohn Baptists day, to make an ordinarie speach to the people, euery Me∣tropolite, Archbishop, and Bishop in his Ca∣thedrall Church, to this or like effect: That if anie be in malice towardes his neighbour, hee shall leaue off his malice: if any haue thought of treason or rebellion against his Prince, he beware of such practise: if he haue not kept his fasts, and vowes, nor done his other dueties to the holie Church, he shal a∣mend that fault, &c. And this is a matter of forme with them, vttered in as many words, and no more, in a manner, then I haue heere set downe. Yet the matter is done with that grace and solemnitie, in a pulpit of purpose set vp for this one Acte, as if he were to dis∣course at large of the whole substance of di∣uinitie. At the Mosko the Emperour him∣selfe is euer present at this solemne exhorta∣tion. As themselues are voyde of all maner of learning, so are they warie to keepe out all meanes that might bring any in: as fearing to haue their ignorance, and vngodlinesse discouered. To that purpose they haue per∣swaded the Emperours, that it would breed innouation, and so danger to their state, to haue anie noueltie of learning come within
the Realme. Wherein they say but trueth, for that a man of spirit and vnderstāding, helped by learning and liberal education, can hard∣ly indure a tyrannicall gouernment. Some yeres past in the other Emperors time, there came a Presse and Letters out of Polonia, to the citie of Mosko, where a printing house was set vp, with great liking & allowance of the Emperour himselfe. But not long after, the house was set on fire in the night time, and the presse and letters quite burnt vp, as was thought by the procurement of the Cleargy men. Their Priestes (whom they call Papaes are made by the Bishops,Priests. without any great tri∣all for worthinesse of giftes, before they ad∣mit them, or ceremonies in their admission: saue that their heades are shorne (not shauen for that they like not) about an hand bredth or more in the crowne, and that place an∣noynted with oyle by the Bishop: who in his admission putteth vpon the priest, first his surplesse, and then setteth a white crosse on his brest of silke, or some other matter, which he is to weare eight dayes, and no more: and so giueth him authoritie to say and sing in the Church, and to administer the Sacraments. They are men vtterly vnlearned, which is no marueile, forasmuch as their makers, the
Bishops themselues (as before was saide) are cleere of that qualitie, and make no farther vse at al of any kind of learning, no not of the scriptures themselues, saue to reade and to sing them. Their ordinary charge & functiō is to say the Leiturgie, to administer the Sa∣craments after their maner, to keepe & deck their idoles, and to doe the other ceremo∣nies vsuall in their Churches. Their number is great because their townes are parted in∣to many smal parishes, without any descreti∣on for deuiding them into competent num∣bers of housholds, and people for a iust con∣gregation: as the manner in all places where the meanes is neglected, for increasing of knowledge, and instruction towardes God. Which cannot well be had, where by means of an vnequall partition of the people, and parishes, there followeth a want and vn∣equalitie of stipend for a sufficient mini∣sterie. For their priests,The Russe Priests can marry but once. it is lawful to marrie for the first time. But if the first wife dye, a se∣cond hee cannot take, but hee must loose his Priesthood, and his liuing withall. The reason they make out of that place of Saint Paul to Timothie 1. 3. 2. not well vnder∣stood thinking that to bee spoken of diuers wiues successiuely, that the Apostle speaketh of at one and the same time. If he will needs
marry againe after his first wife is dead, hee is no longer called Papa, but Rospapa, or Priest quondam. This maketh the Priestes to make much of their wiues, who are accoun∣ted as the matrones, and of best reputation among the women of the parish. For the stipend of the Priest, their man∣ner is not to pay him any tenthes of corne, or ought els: but he must stand at the deuo∣tion of the people of his parish, and make vp the incommes towards his maintenance, so wel as he can, by offerings, shriftes, marria∣ges, burials, dirges, and prayers for the dead and the liuing. (which they call Molitua) Forbesides their publike seruice within their Churches, their manner is for euery priuate man to haue a prayer saide for him by the Priest, vpon any occasion of businesse what∣soeuer, whether he ride, goe, saile, plough, or whatsoeuer els he doeth. Which is not framed according to the occasion of his bu∣sinesse, but at randome, being some of their ordinarie and vsuall Church-prayers. And this is thought to be more holy, and effectu∣all, if it be repeated by the Priests mouth, ra∣ther then by his owne. They haue a custome besides to solemnize the Saints day, that is patrone to their Church once euery yeere. What time al their neighbours of their coū∣trey, and parishes about, come in to haue
prayers saide to that Saint for themselues, and their friendes: and so make an offering to the Priest for his paines. This offering may yeeld them some ten poundes a yeere, more or lesse, as the patrone, or Saint of that Church is of credite, and estimation a∣mong them. The manner is on this day (which they keep anniuersarie) for the priest, to hire diuers of his neighbour priestes to helpe him: as hauing more dishes to dresse for the Saint, then he can wel turne his hand vnto. They vse besides to visite their parishi∣oners houses, with holy water, and perfume, commonly once a quarter: and so hauing sprinckled, and besensed the goodman and his wife with the rest of their houshold, and houshold-stuffe, they receiue some deuoti∣on more or lesse,The priests mainte∣nance. as the man is of abilitie. This and the rest laid altogether, may make vp for the priest towardes his maintenaunce, a∣bout thirtie or fourtie rubbels a yere: wher∣of he payeth the tenth part to the Bishop of the Dioces. The Papa or Priest is knowen by his long tufts of haire,The priests attire. hanging downe by his eares, his gowne with a broad cape, and a walking staffe in his hand. For the rest of his habite, he is apparelled like the common sort. When he saith the Leiturgie or seruice, within the Church, he hath on him his surplesse, and
sometimes his coape, if the day be more so∣lemne. They haue besides their Papaes or Priestes, their Churnapapaes (as they call them) that is; Blacke Priestes: that may keepe their Benefices, though they bee ad∣mitted Friers withall within some Mona∣sterie. They seeme to bee the verie same that were called Regular Priestes in the Po∣pish Church. Vnder the Priest, is a Deacon in euery Church, that doeth nothing but the office of a parish Clearke. As for their Pro∣topapaes, or Archepriestes, and their Arch∣deacons (that are next in election to be their Protopopas) they serue onely in the cathedral Churches. Of Friers they haue an infinit rabble farre greater thē in any other countrey,Friers. where po∣pery is professed. Euery city, & good part of the countrey, swarmeth ful of them. For they haue wrought (as the popish Friers did by their superstition and hypocrisie) that if any part of the Realme bee better and sweeter then other, there standeth a Friery, or a mo∣nastery dedicated to some Saint. The number of them is somuch the grea∣ter, not onely for that it is augmented by the superstition of the countrey, but be∣cause the Fryers life is the safest from the oppressions, and exactions, that fall vpon the Commons. Which causeth many to
put on the Fryers weede, as the best ar∣mour to beare off such blowes. Besides such as are voluntarie, there are diuers that are forced to shire themselues Fryers, vpon some displeasure. These are for the most part of the chiefe Nobility. Diuers take the Mo∣nasteries as a place of Sanctuary, and there become Friers, to auoyde some punishment, that they had deserued by the lawes of the Realme. For if hee gette a Monastery ouer his head, and there put on a coole before hee be attached, it is a protection to him for euer against any law, for what crime soe∣uer: except it be for treason. But this Prouiso goeth withal, that no man commeth there, (except such as are commanded by the Em∣perour to be receiued) but hee giueth them lands, or bringeth his stock with him, & put∣teth it into the common Treasurie. Some bring a 1000 rubbels, & some more. None is admitted vnder 3. or 4. hundred. The manner of their admission is after this sort.Their ma∣ner of shi∣ring Friers. First, the Abbot strippeth him of all his secular or ordinarie apparell. Then hee putteth vpon him next to his skinne, a white flannel shirt, with a long garment o∣uer it down to the ground, girded vnto him with a broade leather belt. His vppermost garment is a weede of Garras, or Say, for co∣lour and fashion, much like to the vpper
weed of a Chimney-sweeper. Then is his crown shorne a hand breadth, or more close to the very skinne, and these, or like wordes pronounced by the Abbot, whiles hee clip∣peth his haire: As these haires are clipped of, & taken from thy head: so now we take thee, and se∣parate thee cleane from the worlde, and worldly thinges, &c. This done, hee annoynteth his crowne with oyle, and putteth on his coole: and so taketh him in among the Fraternitie. They vowe perpetuall chastitie, and absti∣nence from flesh. Besides their landes, (that are verie great) they are the greatest marchants in the whole countrey, and deale for all manner of com∣modities. Some of their monasteries dispēd in landes, one thousande, or two thousande rubbels a yeere. There is one Abbey called Troits, that hath in lands & fees, the summe of 100000. rubbels, or marks a yeere. It is built in maner of a Castle, walled rounde a∣bout, with great ordinance planted on the wall, and conteineth within it a large bredth of grounde, and great varietie of building. There are of Friers within it, (besides their officers, and other seruants) about 700. The Empresse that now is, hath many vowes to Saint Sergius, that is patrone there: to intreat him to make her fruitful, as hauing no chil∣dren by the Emperour her husband. Lightly
euery yeere she goeth on pilgrimage to him from the Mosko, on foote, about 80 English miles, with fiue or sixe thousand women at∣tending vpon her, all in blewe liueries, and foure thousand souldiers for her garde. But Saint Sergius hath not yet heard her prayers, though (they say) he hath a speciall gift and facultie that way. What learning there is among their Fry∣ers,The Friers learning. may be knowen by their Bishops, that are the choyce men out of all their monaste∣ries. I talked with one of them at the Citie of Vologda, where (to trie his skill) I offe∣red him a Russe Testament, and turned him to the first Chapter of Saint Mathewes Go∣spel. Where hee beganne to reade in verie good order. I asked him first what part of scripture it was, that hee had read? hee an∣swered, that hee coulde not well tell. Howe manie Euangelistes there were in the newe Testament? Hee sayde he knew not. Howe manie Apostles there were? Hee thought there were twelue. Howe he shoulde be sa∣ued? Whereunto he answeared mee with a piece of Russe doctrine, that hee knew not whether he shoulde bee saued, or no: but if God woulde Poshallouate him, or gratifie him so much, as to saue him, so it was, hee would be glad of it: if not, what remedie. I asked him, why he shoare himselfe a Fryer?
He answered, because he would eat his bread with peace. This is the learning of the Fri∣ers of Russia, which though it be not to bee measured by one, yet partly it may bee ges∣sed by the ignorance of this man, what is in the rest. They haue also many Nunneries,Nunneries. where∣of some may admitte none but Noblemens widowes, and daughters, when the Empe∣rour meaneth to keepe them vnmarried, from continuing the blood or stocke, which he would haue extinguished. To speak of the life of their Friers, and Nunnes, it needes not, to those that know the hypocrisie, and vn∣cleannesse of that Cloyster-broode. The Russe himselfe (though otherwise addicted to all superstition) speaketh so fowlly of it, that it must needes gaine silence of any mo∣dest man. Besides these,Eremites. they haue certeyne Ere∣mites, (whome they call Holy men) that are like to those Gymnosophists, for their life and behauiour: though farre vnlike for their knowledge, & learning. They vse to go starke naked, saue a clout about their middle, with their haire hanging long, and wildely about their shoulders, and many of them with an iron coller, or chaine about their neckes, or middes, euen in the very extremity of win∣ter. These they take as Prophets, and men of
great holines, giuing them a liberty to speak what they list, without any cōtroulmēt, thogh it be of thee very highest himselfe. So that if he reproue any openly, in what sort soeuer, they answere nothing, but that it is Po gra∣cum, that is, for their sinnes. And if anie of them take some piece of sale ware from anie mans shop, as he passeth by, to giue where he list, hee thinketh himselfe much beloued of God, and much beholding to the holy man, for taking it in that sort. Of this kinde there are not many, be∣cause it is a very harde and colde profession, to goe naked in Russia, specially in Winter. Among other at this time, they haue one at Mosko, that walketh naked about the streetes, and inueyeth commonly against the state, and gouernment, especially against the Godonoes, that are thought at this time to bee great oppressours of that Common wealth. An other there was, that dyed not many yeeres agoe (whome they called Basi∣leo) that would take vpon him to reprooue the olde Emperour,Basileo the Eremite▪ for all his crueltie, and oppressions, done towards his people. His body they haue trāslated of late into a sump∣tuous Church, neere the Emperours house in Mosko, and haue canonized him for a Saint. Many miracles he doth there (for so the Fri∣ers make the people to beleeue) and manie
offrings are made vnto him, not only by the people, but by the chiefe Nobilitie, and the Emperour, and Empresse themselues, which visite that Church with great deuotion. But this last yeere, at my beeing at Mosko, this Saint had ill lucke, in working his miracles. For a lame man that had his limmes resto∣red (as it was pretended by him) was char∣ged by a woman that was familiar with him (being then fallen out) that hee halted but in the day time, and coulde leape merily when he came home at night. And that hee had intended this matter sixe yeeres be∣fore. Nowe he is put into a Monastery, and there rayleth vpon the Fryers, that hyred him to haue this counterfaite miracle, pra∣ctised vpon him. Besides this disgrace, a li∣tle before my comming from thence, there were eyght slaine within his Church by fire in a thunder. Which caused his belles (that were tingling before all day and night long as in triumph of the miracles wrought by Basileo their Saint) to ring somewhat softli∣er, and hath wrought no little discredite to this Miracle-worker. There was another of great account at Plesko,Nicôla the Eremite. (called Nichôla of Plesko) that did much good, when this Em∣perours father came to sack the towne, vpon suspition of their reuolting and rebellion a∣gainst him. The Emperour, after hee had sa∣luted
the Eremite, at his lodging, sent him a reward. And the Holy man to requite the Emperour, sent him a piece of rawe fleshe, beyng then their Lent time. Which the Em∣perour seeing, bid one to tell him, that hee marueiled that the Holy man woulde offer him flesh to eat in the Lent, when it was for∣bidden, by order of holie Church. And doth Euasko, (which is as much to saye, as Iacke) thinke (quoth Nicôla) that it is vnlawfull to eate a piece of beasts flesh in Lent, and not to eate vp so much mans flesh, as hee hath done already. So threatning the Emperour with a prophecy of some hard aduenture to come vpon him, except hee left murdering of his people, and departed the towne: he saued a great many mens liues at that time. This maketh the people to like very well of them, because they are as Pasquils, to note their great mens faults, that no man els dare speake of. Yet it falleth out sometime, that for this rude libertie, which they take vpon them, after a counterfeite maner, by imita∣tion of Prophets, they are made away in se∣cret: as was one or two of them, in the last Emperours time, for beyng o∣uer bolde in speaking against his gouernment.
Of their Leiturgie, or forme of Church-seruice, and their manner of administring the Sacraments. The 22. Chapter. THeir morning seruice they call Zautrana,Their mor∣ning Ser∣uice. that is, mat∣tins. It is done in this order. The Priest entereth into the Church, with his Deacon fol∣lowing him. And when hee is come to the middle of the Church, he be∣ginneth to say with a loude voyce: Blassla∣uey Vladika (that is) Blesse vs heauenly Pa∣stor: meaning of Christ. Then he addeth, In the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, one very God in Trinitie: and As∣pody Pomeluy, or, Lorde haue mercy vpon vs, Lorde haue mercie vpon vs, Lorde haue mercie vpon vs: repeated three times. This done, hee marcheth on towardes the Chauncell, or Sanctum Sanctorum, (as they vse to call it) and so entreth into the Scharsuey Dwere, or the heauenly doore: which no man may en∣ter into, but the Priest only. Where standing at the altar, or table (set neere to the vpper wall of the chauncell) hee sayeth the Lordes prayer, and then againe Aspody Pomeluy,
or Lord haue mercie vpon vs, Lorde haue mer∣cie vpon vs, &c: pronounced twelue times. Then praysed be the Trinitie, the Father, the Sonne and holie Ghost, for euer and euer. Wher∣to the Deacons, and people say, Amen. Next after, the Priest addeth the Psalmes for that day, and beginneth with O come let vs wor∣shippe, and fall downe before the Lorde, &c. and therewithall himselfe, with the Deacons, & people, all turne themselues towardes their Idoles, or Images, that hang on the wall and crossing themselues, bowe downe three times, knocking their heades to the verie ground After this, he readeth the ten com∣mandements, and Athanasius Creed, out of the Seruice booke. This being done, the Deacon that stan∣deth without the heauenly doore, or chaun∣cel, readeth a piece of a Legēd, out of a writ∣ten booke, (for they haue it not in print) of some Saints life, miracles, &c. This is diuided into manie partes, for euerie day in the yeere, and is read by them with a playne singing note, not vnlike to the Popish tune, when they soung their Gospels. After all this (which reacheth to an houre, and an halfe, or two houres of length) hee addeth certeyne sette Collectes, or prayers vpon that which hee hath read out of the Le∣gend before: and so endeth his Seruice.
All this while stand burning before their I∣doles, a great many of waxe candles, (wher∣of some are of the bignesse of a mans wast) vowed, or enioyned by penance, vpon the people of the parish. About 9. of the clock in the morning, they haue an other seruice, called Obeidna, (or Compline) much after the order of the Po∣pish Seruice, that bare that name. If it bee some high, or Festiuall day, they furnish their Seruice beside, with Blessed bee the Lorde God of Israel, &c. and We prayse thee O God, &c: Sung with a more solemne, and cu∣rious note. Their Euening seruice,Their Eue∣ning ser∣uice. is called Vecherna, where the Priest beginneth with Blaslauey Vladika, as hee did in the morning, and with the Psalmes appointed for the Vecher∣na. Which beyng read, hee singeth, My soule doeth magnifie the Lorde, &c. And then the Priest, Deacons, and people, all with one voice, sing, Aspody pomelui, or Lord haue mer∣cie vpon vs, thirty times together. Whereun∣to the boyes that are in the Church, answere all with one voyce, rowling it vp so fast, as their lippes can goe: Verij, Verij, Verij, Verij, or, Prayse, Prayse, Prayse, &c. thirty times to∣gether, with a very straunge noyse. Then is read by the priest, & vpō the holidaies sung, the first Psalme: Blessed is the man, &c. And in
the end of it, is added Alleluia repeated ten times. The next in order is some part of the gospell read by the Priest, which hee endeth with Alleluia repeated three times. And so hauing said a collect in remembrance of the Saint of that day, he endeth his euening ser∣uice. All this while the Priest standeth aboue at the altar or high table, within the Chancel, or Sanctum Sanctorum, whence he neuer mo∣ueth al the seruice time. The Deacon, or Dea∣cons (which are many in their cathedrall Churches) stand without the chancell by the Scharsuey dwere, or heauenly doore: for with∣in they may not be seene all the seruice time, though otherwise their office is to sweepe, and keepe it, and to set vp the waxe candels before their Idols. The people stand toge∣ther the whole seruice time in the body of the Church, and some in the church porch▪ for piew, or seate they haue none within their churches. The Sacrament of baptisme they admini∣ster after this manner.The man∣ner of the Russe bap∣tisme. The child is brought vnto the Church (& this is done within eight daies after it is borne) if it bee the childe of some Nobleman, it is brought with great pomp in a rich sled or wagō, with chaires & cushiōs of cloth of gold, & such like sumptu∣ous shew of their best furniture. When they are come to the Church, the Priest standeth
ready to receiue the child within the church porch, with his tub of water by him. And thē beginneth to declare vnto them, that they haue brought a little Infidell to be made a Christian, &c. This ended, he teacheth the witnesses (that are two or three) in a cer∣teine set forme out of his booke, what their dutie is in bringing vp the childe after hee is baptised vz. That he must be taught to know God, and Christ the Sauiour. And because God is of great maiestie, and wee must not presume to come vnto him without media∣tours (as the manner is when wee make any suit to an Emperour, or great Prince) there∣fore they must teach him what Saints are the best, & chiefe mediatours, &c. This done, he cōmandeth the diuell in the name of God after a coniuring manner, to come out of the water: & so after certeine praiers he plungeth the childe thrise ouer head, & eares. For this they holde to be a point necessary, that no part of the childe be vndipped in the water. The words that beare with thē the forme of baptisme vttered by the Priest, when he dippeth in the childe, are the very same that are prescribed in the gospell, & vsed by vs, vz: In the name of the Father, & of the Sonne, & of the Ghost. For that they should altar the forme of the words, and say by the holy Ghost, (as I haue heard that they did (folowing cer∣tein
heretikes of the Greeke church, I found to be vntrue, aswell by report of them that haue bin often at their baptismes, as by their booke of Leiturgie it selfe, wherein the order of baptisme is precisely set downe. When the childe is baptiszed, the Priest laieth oile and salt tempred together vpon the forehead, and both sides of his face, and then vppon his mouth, drawing it along with his finger ouer the childes lippes (as did the Popish priestes) saying withall cer∣teine prayers to this effect: that God will make him a good Christian, &c: all this is done in the Church porch. Then is the childe (as being now made a Christian, and meet to be receiued within the church dore) carried into the church, the Priest going be∣fore, and there he is presented to the chiefe Idoll of the Church, being layd on a cushion before the feete of the image, by it (as by the mediatour) to bee commended vnto God. If the child be fick, or weake (specially in the winter) they vse to make the water luke warme. After baptisme the manner is to cut of the haire from the childes head, and ha∣uing wrapped it within a piece of wax to lay it vp, as a relique, or monument in a secret place of the church. This is the māner of their baptisme, which they accoūt to be the best & perfectest form.
As they doo all other parts of their religion, receiued (as they say) by tradition from the best church▪ meaning the Greeke. And ther∣fore they will take great paynes to make a proselite, or cōuert, either of an infidell, or of a forrein Christian, by rebaptizing him after the Russe manner. When they take any Tar∣tar prisoner, commonly they will offer him life, with condition to be baptized. And yet they perswade very few of them to redeeme their life so: because of the naturall hatred the Tartar beareth to the Russe, and the opi∣nion he hath of his falshood, and iniustice. The yere after Mosko was fired by the Chrim Tartar, there was taken a Diuoymorsey, one of the chiefe in that exploit with 300. Tar∣tars more: who had all their liues offered thē, if they would be baptized after the Russe manner. Which they refused all to doo, with many reproches against those that perswa∣ded them. And so beyng carried to the riuer Mosko (that runneth through the citie) they were all baptized after a violent manner: be∣ing thrust downe with a knock on the head into the water, through an hole made in the yse for that purpose.Rebapti∣zing. Of Lieflanders that are captiues, there are many that take on thē this secōd Russe, baptisme to get more libertie, & somwhat besides towards their liuing, which the Emperour ordinarily vseth to giue them.
Of Englishmen since they frequented the countrie there was neuer any found, that so much forgot God, his faith, and countrie, as that he would bee content to be baptized Russe, for any respect of feare, preferment, or other meanes whatsoeuer: saue onely Ri∣chard Relph, that following before an vngod∣ly trade, by keeping a Caback (against the or∣der of the countrie) and being put of from that trade, & spoiled by the Emperours offi∣cers of that which he had, entred himself this last yeare into the Russe profession: & so was rebaptised, liuing now asmuch an idolater, as before he was a rioter, and vnthrifty person. Such as thus receiue the Russe baptisme, are first carried into some Monasterie to be instructed there in the doctrine and ceremo∣nies of the church. Where they vse these cere∣monies. First, they put him into a new and fresh suite of apparell, made after the Russe fashion, and set a coronet or (in Sommer) a garland vpon his head. Then they annoint his head with oile, & put a waxe candle light into his hand: and so pray ouer him foure times a day, the space of seuen daies. All this while he is to abstaine from flesh and white meats. The seuen daies being ended, he is pu∣rified and washed in a bathstoue, and so the eight day hee is brought into the church, where he is taught by the Friers how to be∣haue
himselfe in presence of their idols, by ducking downe, knocking of the head, cros∣sing himself, and such like gestures, which are the greatest part of the Russe religion. The sacrament of the Lordes supper they receiue but once a yeare,The admi∣nistring of the Lords supper. in their great Lent time, a litle before Easter. Three at the most are admitted at one time, and neuer aboue. The manner of their cōmunicating, is thus. First they cōfesse themselues of all their sins to the Priest (whō they call their ghostly fa∣ther. Then they come to the Church, & are called vp to the Cōmunion table, that stan∣deth like an altar, a little remoued frō the vp∣per end of the Church, after the Doutch ma∣ner. Here first they are asked of the Priest whither they be cleane or no, that is, whi∣ther they haue neuer a sinne behind that they left vnconfessed. If they answere, No, they are taken to the table. Where the Priest beginneth with certeine vsuall prayers, the communicants standing in the meane while with their armes foulded one within an o∣ther, like penitentiaries, or mourners. When these prayers are ended, the Priest taketh a spoone, and filleth it full of claret wine Then he putteth into it a small piece of bread, and tempereth them both together: and so deli∣uereth them in the spoone to the Commu∣nicants, that stande in order, speaking the
vsuall wordes of the Sacrament. Eat this &c. Drinke this &c. both at one time without a∣ny pause. After that he deliuereth them againe bread by it self, and then wine carded toge∣ther with a little warme water, to represent bloud more rightly (as they thinke) and the water withall, that flowed out of the side of Christ. Whiles this is in doing the commu∣nicants vnfold their armes. And then foul∣ding them againe, follow the Priest thrise round about the communion table, and so returne to their places againe. Where ha∣uing said certeine other prayers, he dismis∣seth the communicants, with charge to bee meary, and to cheere vp themselues for the seuen daies next following. Which being en∣ded, he enioyneth them to fast for it as long time after. Which they vse to obserue with very great deuotion, eating nothing els but bread and salt, except a little cabbage, and some other hearbe or roote, with water or quasse mead for their drinke. This is their manner of administring the Sacraments. Wherein what they differ from the institution of Christ, and what ceremo∣nies they haue added of their owne, or ra∣ther borrowed of the Greekes, may easily be noted.
Of the doctrine of the Russe church, and what errours it holdeth. The 23. Chapter. THeir chiefest errours in mat∣ter of faith I find to be these.The Russe errours. First,1. Their disallowing of certeine parts of the Canonicall scriptures. concerning the word of God it self, they will not read publiquely certeine bookes of the Canonicall scripture, as the bookes of Moses: specially the foure last, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri, and Deutero∣nomie, which they say are al made disauthen∣tique, and put out of vse by the comming of Christ: as not able to discerne the difference betwixt the morall, and the ceremoniall law, The bookes of the prophets they allow of, but read thē not publikely in their churches for the same reason: because they were but directers vnto Christ, & proper (as they say) to the nation of the Iewes. Onely the booke of Psalmes they haue in great estimation and sing and say them dayly in their Churches, Of the new Testament they allow, and read all except the Reuelation: which therefore they read not (though they allow it because they vnderstand it not, neither haue the like occasion, to know the fulfilling of the pro∣phecies
conteyned within it, concerning e∣specially the apostasie of the Antichristian Church, as haue the Westerne Churches. Notwithstanding they haue had their Anti∣christs of the Greeke Church, and may finde their owne falling of, and the punishments for it by the Turkish inuasion in the prophe∣cies of that Booke. Secondly (which is the fountain of the rest of al their corruptiōs,2. Traditi∣ons equall to the holy Scripture. both in doctrine & ce∣remonies) they holde with the Papistes, that their church Traditions are of equall authori∣tie with the written worde of God. Wherein they prefer thēselues before other churches: affirming that they haue the true and right traditions deliuered by the Apostles to the Greeke church, and so vnto them. 3. That the church (meaning the Greeke and specially the Patriarch and his Synod,3. The Church to haue soueraigne au∣thoritie in interpre∣ting the Scriptures. as the head of the rest) haue a soueraigne au∣thoritie to interpret the Scriptures, and that all are bound to holde that interpretation as sound, and authentique. 4. Concerning the diuine nature & the three persons,4. The ho∣ly Ghost to proceed frō the Father onely. in the one substance of God, that the holy Ghost proceedeth from the Father onely, and not from the Sonne. 5. About the office of Christ,5. Christ not sole mediator of intercessiō. they holde many fowle errours, and the same almost as doth the Popish church: namely that hee is
the sole mediatour of redemption, but not of intercession. Their chiefe reason (if they bee talked withall) for defence of this errour, is that vnapt and foolish comparison, betwixt God and a Monarch or Prince of this world, that must bee sued vnto by Mediatours a∣bout him: wherein they giue speciall prefer∣ment to some aboue others, as to the blessed Virgin whom they call Precheste, or vndefi∣led, and S. Nicôlas, whom they call Scora po∣mosnick, or the Speedy helper, and say that he hath 300. angels of the chiefest appointed by God to attend vpon him. This hath brought them to an horrible excesse of idolatry, after the grossest & prophanest māner, giuing vn∣to their images al religious worship of prai∣er, thanksgiuing, offerings, & adoration, with prostrating and knocking their heads to the ground before thē, as to God himself. Which because they doo to the picture, not to the portraiture of the Saint, they say they wor∣ship not an idol, but the Saint in his image & so offend not God: forgetting the cōmande∣ment of God, that forbiddeth to make the image or likenes of any thing, for any religi∣ous worship, or vse whatsoeuer. Their church walles are very full of them, richly hanged & set forth with pearle & stone vpō the smooth table. Though some also they haue embossed, that stick from the board almost an inch out∣wards.
They call them Chudouodites, or their miracle workers: and when they prouide them to set vp in their Churches, in no case they may say that they haue bought the i∣mage, but exchaunged monie for it. 6. For the means of iustification,6. Iustifi∣cation by workes. they a∣gree with the Papists, that it is not by faith only apprehēding Christ, but by their works also. And that Opus operatum, or the worke for the worke sake, must needes please God. And therefore they are all in their numbers of praiers, fastes, vowes, & offrings to saints, almes deeds, crossings & such like, and carrie their numbring beads about with them cō∣tinually, aswel the Emperour & his Nobilitie as the cōmon people, not only in the church, but in all other publike places, specially at a∣ny set or solemne meeting, as in their fastes, lawe courts, common consultations, inter∣tainement of Ambassadours, and such like. 7. They say with the Papists that no man can be assured of his saluation,7. Saluati∣on vncer∣teine. til the last sen∣tence be passed at the day of iudgement. 8. They vse auricular confession,8. Auricu∣lar confes∣sion. & thinke that they are purged by the very action frō so many sinnes, as they confesse by name, and in particular to the Priest. 9. They hold three sacramentes, of Bap∣tisme,9. Three Sacramēts. the Lords supper, and the last annoiling, or vnction. Yet concerning their Sacrament
of extreame vnction, they holde it not so necessarie to saluation as they do baptisme, but thinke it a great curse and punishment of God,10. All dā∣ned that die without baptisme. if any die with out it. 10. They thinke there is a necessitie of baptisme, and that all are condemned that die without it.11. Ana∣baptisme. 11. They rebaptise as many Christians (not being of the Greek church) as they con∣uert to their Russe profession: because they are diuided from the true Church, which is the Greeke,12. Diffe∣rence of meates. as they say. 12. They make a difference of meates & drinks, accounting the vse of one, to be more holy then of an other. And therefore in their set fastes they forbeare to eate fleshe, and white meats (as we call them) after the man∣ner of the Popish superstition: which they obserue so strictly, & with such blinde deuo∣tion, as that they will rather die, then eat one bit of flesh, egges, or such like, for the health of their bodies in their extreme sicknese. 13. They hold marriage to be vnlawfull for all the Clergie men,13. Marri∣age for some per∣sons vnlaw∣full. except the priests on∣ly, and for them also after the first wife, as was said before. Neither doo they well allow of it in Lay men after the second marriage. Which is a pretence now vsed against the Emperours only brother, a child of six yeres old: Who therefore is not praised for in their
churches (as their manner is otherwise for the Princes bloud) because hee was borne of the sixt marriage, and so not legitimate This charge was giuen to the priests by the Em∣perour himselfe, by procurement of the Godonoes: who make him beleeue that it is a good pollicie to turne away the liking of the people from the next successour. Many other false opinions they haue in matter of religion. But these are the chiefe, which they holde partly by meanes of their traditions (which they haue receiued from the Greeke church) but specially by igno∣rance of the holy Scriptures. Which notwith∣standing they haue in the Polonian tongue, (that is all one with theirs some few wordes excepted) yet fewe of them read them with that godly care which they ought to doo: neither haue they (if they would) bookes suf∣ficient of the old and new Testament for the common people, but of their Leiturgie one∣ly, or booke of common seruice, whereof there are great numbers. All this mischief commeth from the cler∣gie, who being ignorant and godlesse them∣selues, are very warie to keepe the people likewise in their ignorance and blindnesse, for their liuing and bellies sake: partly also frō the manner of gouernment setled among them: which the Emperours (whom it speci∣ally
behoueth) list not to haue chaunged by any innouation, but to retaine that religion that best agreeth with it. Which notwithstan∣ding it is not to be doubted, but that hauing the word of God in some sort (though with∣out the ordinarie meanes to attaine to a true sense and vnderstanding of it) God hath al∣so his number among them. As may partly appeare by that which a Russe at Mosko said in secret to one of my seruaunts, speaking a∣gainst their images and other superstitions: That God had giuen vnto England light to day, and might giue it to morrow (if he plea∣sed) to them. As for any inquisition or proceeding a∣gainst men for matter of religion, I could heare of none: saue a few yeares since against one man and his wife, who were kept in a close prison the space of 28. yeares, till they were ouer growen into a deformed fashion, for their hayre, nailes, collour of counte∣nance, and such like, and in the end were bur∣ned at Mosko, in a small house set on fire. The cause was kepte secrete, but like it was for some part of truth in matter of religion: though the people were made to beleeue by the Priests and Friers, that they held some great, and dam∣nable heresie.
Of the manner of solemnizing their Marriages. The 24. Chapter. THe manner of making & solem∣nizing their marriages is diffe∣rent frō the maner of other coun∣tries. The man (though he ne∣uer saw the woman before) is not permitted to haue any sight of hir al the time of his wo∣ing: which he doth not by himself, but by his mother or some other ancient woman of his kin, or acquaintance. When the liking is ta∣ken (aswell by the parents as by the parties thēselues, for without the knowledge & con∣sent of the parents, the cōtract is not lawful) the fathers on both sides, or such as are to thē in steede of fathers, with their other chiefe friends, haue a meeting & conference about the dowrie, which is comonly very large af∣ter the abilitie of the parents: so that you shal haue a market man (as they call them) giue a 1000. rubbels, or more with his daughter. As for the man it is neuer required of him,The man∣ner of in∣dowment for wiues. nor stādeth with their custome to make any iointer in recompence of the dowrie. But in case he haue a child by his wife, she enioieth a thirde deale after his disease. If hee haue two children by hir or more, shee is to haue
a courtesie more, at the discretion of the hus∣band. If the husband depart without issue by his wife, shee is returned home to hir friends without any thing at al, saue only hir dowrie: if the husband leaue so much behind him in goods When the agreement is made cōcerning the dowrie, they signe bonds one to the other, aswell for the paiment of the dowrie as the performing of the mariage by a certein day. If the woman were neuer mar∣ried before, hir father and friends are bound besides to assure hir a maiden. Which bree∣deth many brabbels and quarrels at Law, if the man take any conceipt concerning the behauiour, and honestie of his wife. Thus the contract being made, the parties begin to send tokēs the one to the other, the woman first, then afterwards the mā, but yet see not one an other till the marriage be so∣lemnized. On the eaue before the marriage day, the bride is carried in a Collimago, or coach, or in a sledde (if it be winter) to the bridegromes house, with hir marriage appa∣rell and bedstead with hir, which they are to lie in. For this is euer prouided by the Bride, and is commonly very faire, with much cost bestowed vpon it. Here she is accompaned all that night by hir mother, and other wo∣men: but not welcommed, nor once seene by the Bridegrome himselfe.
When the time is come to haue the mar∣riage solemnized,Ceremo∣nies in ma∣riages. the Bride hath put vpon her a kind of hood, made of fine knitworke, or lawne, that couereth her head, and all her body downe to the middle. And so accom∣panied with her friends, & the bridegroome with his, they goe to Church all on horse∣backe, though the Church bee neere hande, and themselues but of very meane degree, The wordes of contract, and other ceremo∣nies in solemnizing the marriage, are much after the order, and with the same wordes that are vsed with vs: with a ring also giuen to the Bride. Which beeing put on, and the wordes of contract pronounced: the Brides hand is deliuered into the hand of the Bride groome, which standeth al this while on the one side of the altar or table, and the Bride on the other. So the marriage knot beeing knitte by the Priest, the Bride commeth to the Bridegroome (standing at the end of the altar or table) and falleth downe at the feete, knocking her head vpon his shooe, in to∣ken of her subiection, and obedience. And the Bridegroome againe casteth the lappe of his gowne, or vpper garment, ouer the Bride, in token of his duetie to protect, and cherish her. Then the Bridegroome, and Bride, stan∣ding both together at the tables ende, com∣meth
first the father, and the other friends of the Bride, and bowe themselues downe low to the Bridegroome: and so likewise his friends bow themselues to the Bride, in tokē of affinity & loue, euer after betwixt the two kinreds. And withall, the father of the Bride∣groome offreth to the priest, a loafe of bread, who deliuereth it straight again to the father, & other friends of the Bride, with attestatiō before God and their idols, that hee deliuer the dowry wholly and truely at the day ap∣pointed, & hold loue euer after, one kinred with another. Wherupon they break the loaf into pieces, & eate of it, to testifie their true & sincere meanings, for performing of that charge, and thenceforth to become as grains of one loafe, or men of one table. These ceremonies being ended, the Bride∣groome taketh the Bride by the hand, and so they goe on together, with their friendes after them, towardes the Church porche. Where meete thē certein with pots, & cups in their handes, with meade and Russe wine. Whereof the Bridegroome taketh first a charke, or little cuppe full in his hand, and drinketh to the Bride: who opening her hood, or vale below, and putting the cup to her mouth vnderneath it (for beeing seene of the Bridegroome) pleadgeth him a∣gayne. Thus returning altogether from the
Church, the Bridegroome goeth not home to his owne, but to his fathers house, and she likewise to hers, where either intertayn their friends apart. At the entring into the house, they vse to fling corne out of the win∣dowes, vpon the Bridegroome, and Bride, in token of plentie, and fruitfulnes to bee with them euer after. When the Euening is come, the Bride is brought to the Bridegrooms fathers house, and there lodgeth that night, with her vale or couer still ouer her head. All that night she may not speak one word (for that charge she receiueth by tradition from her mother, and other matrones her friendes) that the Bridegroome must neither heare, nor see her, till the day after the marriage. Neither three dayes after, may shee bee hearde to speake, saue certeyne fewe wordes at the ta∣ble, in a set forme with great manners, and reuerence to the Bridegroome. If she behaue her selfe otherwise, it is a great preiudice to her credite, and life euer after: and will highly be disliked of the Bridegroome him∣selfe. After the third day, they depart to their owne, and make a feast to both their friends together. The marriage day, and the whole time of their festiuall, the Bridegroome hath the honour to bee called Moloday Knez,
or yong Duke, and the Bride Moloday Kne∣zay, or young Dutchesse. In liuing with their wiues, they shewe themselues to be but of a barbarous condi∣tion: vsing them as seruants, rather then wiues. Except the Noble-women, which are, or seeme to be of more estimation with their husbands, then the rest of meaner sort. They haue this fowle abuse, contrary to good or∣der, and the worde of God it selfe, that vpon dislike of his wife, or other cause whatsoe∣uer, the man may goe into a Monasterie and shire himselfe a Frier, by pretence of deuoti∣on: and so leaue his wife to shift for her selfe so well as she can. Of the other Ceremonies of the Russe Church. The 25. Chapter. THe other ceremonies of their Churche,The signe of the crosse. are ma∣nie in number: especially, the abuse about the signe of the Crosse, which they set vp in their high wayes, in the tops of their Chur∣ches, and in euery doore of their houses, sig∣ning
themselues continually with it, on their foreheads and brests, with great deuotion, as they will seeme by their outward gesture. Which were lesse offence, if they gaue not withall, that religious reuerence and woor∣ship vnto it, which is due to God onely, and vsed the dumbe shewe, and signing of it in∣steede of thanksgiuing, and of all other due∣ties which they owe vnto God. When they rise in the morning, they goe commonly in the sight of some steeple, that hath acrosse on the toppe: and so bowing themselues to∣wardes the crosse, signe themselues withal on their foreheads, and brests. And this is their thanksgiuing to God for their nightes rest, without any word speaking, except perad∣uenture they say, Aspody Pomeluy, or Lorde haue mercie vpon vs. When they sitte downe to meate, and rise againe from it, the thanks∣giuing to God, is the crossing of their fore∣heads and brests. Except it be some few that adde peraduenture, a worde or two of some ordinarie prayer, impertinent to that pur∣pose. When they are to giue an oath for the deciding of anie controuersie at Lawe, they doe it by swearing by the Crosse, and kissing the feet of it, making it as God, whose name onely is to bee vsed in such triall of iustice. When they enter into any house (where e∣uer there is an idole hanging on the wall)
they signe themselues with the crosse, & bow themselues to it. When they begin any work, bee it little, or much they arme them selues first with the signe of the crosse. And this cō∣monly is all their prayer to God, for good speede of their businesse. And thus they serue God with crosses, after a crosse and vaine maner: not vnderstanding what the crosse of Christ is, nor the power of it. And yet they thinke all strangers Christians, to be no better then Turkes, in comparison of themselues (and so they wil say) because they bow not themselues, when they meete with the crosse, nor signe themselues with it, as the Russe maner is. They haue holie water in like vse,Holywater. and e∣stimation, as the Popish Church hath. But herein they exceede them, in that they doe not onely hallow their holie water stockes, and tubbes ful of water, but all the riuers of the countrey once euery yeere.Hallowing of riuers. At Mosko it is done with great pompe, and solemnitie: the Emperour himselfe being present at it, with all his Nobility, marching through the streets towards the riuer of Moskua, in man∣ner of procession in this order as followeth. First goe two Deacons, with banners in their hands, the one of Precheste (or our Ladie) the other of S. Michael, fighting with his dragō. Then follow after, the rest of the Deacons &
the priests of Mosko, two & two in a ranke, with coaps on their backs, and their idols at their brests, carried with girdles or slinges, made fast about their necks. Next the priests come their Bishops in their pontificalibus: then the Friers, Monks, and Abbots: and af∣ter, the Patriarches, in very rich attite, with a ball, or sphere on the top of his myter, to sig∣nifie his vniuersalitie ouer that Church. Last commeth the Emperor with all his nobility. The whole traine is of a mile long, or more. When they are come to the riuer, a great hole is made in the yse, where the market is kept, of a rod and a halfe broad, with a stage round about it to keepe off the presse. Then beginneth the Patriarch to say certaine prai∣ers, and coniureth the diuel to come out of the water: and so casting in salt, and censing it with frankincense, maketh the whole riuer to become holy water. The morning before, all the people of Mosko vse to make crosses of chawlke ouer euerie doore, and window of their houses: least the Diuell beyng coniu∣red out of the water, shoulde flye into their houses. When the ceremonies are ended, you shal see the black Gard of the Emperours house, and then the rest of the Towne, with their pailes and buckets, to take off the hallowed water for drinke, and other vses. You shall
also see the women dippe in their children o∣uer head and eares, and many men and wo∣men leape into it, some naked, some with their clothes on, when some man woulde thinke his finger woulde freese off, if hee should but dippe it into the water. When the men haue done, they bring their horse to the riuer, to drinke of the sanctified wa∣ter: and so make them as holie as a horse. Their set day for this solemne action of hal∣lowing their riuers, is that we cal Twelfthday. The like is done by other Bishops, in al parts of the Realme. Their maner is also to giue it to their sick, in their greatest extremitie: thinking that it will eyther recouer them,Drinking of holy wa∣ter. or sanctifie them to God, Whereby they kill many, through their vnreasonable superstition, as did the Lord Borris his onely sonne at my beyng at the Mosko: whom he killed (as was said by the phisitions) by powring into him, colde holie water, and presenting him naked in∣to the Church, to their Saynt Basileo, in the colde of the Winter, in an extremitie of sick∣nesse. They haue an image of Christ, which they call Neruchi, (which signifieth as much as Made without hands) for so their priests, & superstition withal, perswadeth them it was. This in their processions, they carry about
with them on high vpon a pole, enclosed within a Pixe, made like a lanthorn, and doe reuerence to it, as to a great mysterie. At euery brewing, their maner is likewise,Brewing with holy water. to bring a dish of their woort to the Priest, within the Church: which beyng hallow∣ed by him, is powred into the brewing▪ and so giueth it such a vertue, as when they drink of it, they are seldome sober. The like they doe with the first fruites of their corne in Haruest. They haue an other ceremonie on Palm∣sunday,Palmsun∣day. of auncient tradition: what time the Patriarch rideth through the Mosko, the Em∣perour himself holding his horse bridel, and the people crying Hosanna, & spreding their vpper garmentes vnder his horse feete. The Emperour hath of the Patriarch for his good seruice of that day 200 rubbels of standing pension. Another pageant they haue much like to this, the weeke before the nativitie of Christ▪ When euery Bishop in his Cathe∣dral Church setteth forth a shew of the three children in the Ouen. Where the Angell is made to come flying from the roofe of the Church, with great admiration of the loo∣kers on, and many terrible slashes of fire, are made with rosen, and gun-powder, by the Chaldians (as they call them) that run about the towne all the twelue dayes, disguised in
their plaiers coats, & make much good sport for the honour of the Bishops pageant. At the Mosko, the Emperour himselfe, and the Empresse neuer faile to be at it, though it be but the same matter plaid euery yeere, with∣out any new inuention at all. Besides their fastes on Wednesdayes,Fasts. and Fridayes throughout the whole yeere, (the one because they say Christ was solde on the Wednesday, the other because he suffe∣red on the Friday) they haue foure great Fastes, or Lentes euery yeere. The first, (which they call their great Lent) is at the same time with ours. The second, about Midsommer. The third, in Haruest time. The fourth, about Hallontide: which they keepe not of pollicie, but of meere superstition. In their great Lent for the first weeke, they eate nothing but bread and salt, and drinke no∣thing but water, neither meddle with anie matter of their vocation, but intende their shriuing, and fasting only. They haue also 3. Vigils, or Wakes in their great Lent, which they cal Stoiania & the last Friday their great Vigil,Vigils. as they cal it. What time the whole pa∣rish must bee present in the Church, and watch from nine a clocke in the Euening, til sixe in the morning, all the while standing, saue when they fall downe, and knock their heads to their idoles, which must be an hun∣dred
and seuentie times, iust through the whole night. About their burials also,Burials. they haue ma∣nie superstitious and prophane ceremonies: as putting within the finger of the corpes, a letter to Saint Nicolas: whome they make their chiefe mediatour, and as it were, the porter of heauen gates, as the Papistes doe their Peter. In Winter time, when all is couered with snow, and the ground so hard frozen, as that no spade, nor pikeaxe can enter their man∣ner is not to burie their dead, but to keepe the bodies (so many as die all the Winter time) in an house, in the suburbs, or outparts of the towne, which they call Bohsedom, that is, Gods house: where the dead bodies are py∣led vp together, like billets on a woodstack, as hard with the frost as a very stone, till the Springtide come, & resolueth the frost: what time euery man taketh his dead friend, and committeth him to the ground. They haue besides their yeeres and mo∣neths mindes,Moneths mindes. for their friendes departed. What time they haue praiers saide ouer the graue by the Priest: who hath a penie ordi∣narie for his paines. When any dieth, they haue ordinary women mourners, that come to lament for the dead party: and stand how∣ling ouer the bodie, after a prophane, and
heathenish manner (sometimes in the house, somtimes bringing the bodie into the back∣side asking him what hee wanted, and what he meant to die. They bury their dead, as the party vsed to goe, with coate, hose, bootes, hat and the rest of his apparell. Many other vaine and superstitious cere∣monies they haue, which were long and te∣dious to report. By these it may appeare, how farre they are fallen from the true know∣ledge, and practise of Christian religion: ha∣uing exchanged the worde of God, for their vaine traditions, and brought al to ex∣ternal, and ridiculous ceremonies, without any regard of spirite and trueth, which God re∣quireth in his true worship.
Of the Emperours domestike, or priuate behauiour. The 26. Chapter. THe Emperours priuate behaui∣our, so much as may bee, or is meete to bee known, is after this maner. Hee riseth cōmonly about 4 a clock in the morning. After his apparrelling and washing, in com∣meth his ghostly father, or priest of his chā∣ber, which is named in their tongue, Otetz Duhouna, with his crosse in his hand, wher∣with he blesseth him, laying it first on his forehead, then vpon his cheekes, or sides of his face, and then offreth him the ende of it to kisse. This done, the Clearke of the crosse (called Chresby Deyack Profery) bringeth in∣to his chamber, a painted image, represen∣ting the Saint for that day. For euery day with them hath his seuerall Saint, as it were the patrone for that day.His priuate prayer. This he placeth a∣mong the rest of his image gods, wherewith∣all
his chamber is decked, as thicke almost as the wall can beare, with lampes and waxe candles burning before them. They are very costly and gorgeously decked with pearle, and precious stone. This image being pla∣ced before him, the Emperour beginneth to crosse himselfe after the Russe manner, first on the forehead, then on both sides of his breaste, with Aspody Pomeluy, Pome∣luy mena hospody, sacroy mena gresnick Syhode∣stua: which is as much to say, as, Helpe me O Lorde my God, Lorde comfort me, defende and keepe me a sinner from doing euill, &c. This hee directeth towardes the image, or Saynt for that day, whom hee nameth in his pray∣er, together with our Lady (whom they call Precheste) Saint Nicholas, or some other, to whome he beareth most deuotion, bowing himself prostrate vnto them, with knocking his head to the verie ground. Thus he conti∣nueth the space of a quarter of an houre, or thereabouts. Then cōmeth againe the ghostly father, or chāber priest, with a siluer bowle full of holy water, which they call in Russe, Sweta Voda, & a sprinkle of Basill (as they call it) in his hād: & so al to besprinckleth first the image gods, and then the Emperour. This holy water is brought fresh euery day from the Monaste∣ries, farre and neere, sent to the Emperour
from the Abbot or Prior, in the name of the Saint, that is patrone of that Monastery, as a speciall token of good wil from him. These deuotions being ended, he sendeth in to the Empresse, to aske whether she hath rested in health, &c. And after a little pawse goeth himselfe to salute her in a mid∣dle roome betwixt both their chambers. The Empresse lieth apart from him, and kee∣peth not one chamber, nor table with the Emperour ordinarily, saue vpon the eaue of their Lentes, or common Fastes: what time she is his ordinarie ghest at bedde and boorde. After their meeting in the mor∣ning, they goe together to their priuate Churche or Chappell, where is sayde, or soung a morning Seruice (called Zautrana) of an houre long or thereabouts.The Empe∣rour giueth presence e∣uery mor∣ning. From the Church hee returneth home, and sitteth him downe in a great chamber, to be seene and saluted by his Nobilitie, such as are in fauour about the Court. If hee haue to say to anie of them, or they to him, then is the time. And this is ordinarie, except his health, or some other occasion alter the custome. About nine in the morning, he goeth to another Church within his Castle: where is soung by Priests, and Choristers, the high Seruice (called Obeadna or Complin) which
commonly lasteth two houres: the Empe∣rour in the meane time▪ talking commonly with some of his Councell, Nobilitie, or captaines, which haue to say to him, or he to them. And the Councell likewise conferre together among themselues, as if they were in their councell house. This ended, he retur∣neth home, and recreateth himselfe vntill it be dinner time. He is serued at his table on this manner. First, euery dish (as it is deliuered at the dres∣ser) is tasted by the Cooke,The Empe∣rours ser∣uice at his Table. in the presence of the high Stewarde, or his Deputie. And so is receyued by the Gentlemen wayters (called Shilshey) and by them carried vp to the Emperours table, the high Stewarde or his Deputie going before. There it is re∣ceiued by the Sewer (called Erastnoy) who giueth a taste of euerie dishe to the Taster, and so placeth it before the Emperour. The number of his dishes for his ordinarie ser∣uice is about seuenty: dressed somwhat grose∣ly, with much garlicke, & salt, much after the Doutch manner. When hee exceedeth vpon some occasion of the day▪ or entertainment of some Ambassador, he hath many more di∣shes. The seruice is sent vp by 2. dishes at a time, or three at the most that he may eate it warme, first the baked, then the rost meats, & last the brothes. In his dyning chamber is an
other table: where sit the chiefe of his No∣bilitie that are about his Court, and his ghostly father, or Chapleine. On the one side of the chamber standeth a cubbard or table of plate, very fayre and riche, with a great cesterne of Copper by it, full of yse and snow, wherein stande the pottes that serue for that meale. The taster holdeth the cup that he drinketh in all dinner time, and deliuereth it vnto him with a say, when hee calleth for it. The manner is to make many dishes out of the seruice after it is set on the table, and to send them to such Noble∣men and officers, as the Emperour liketh best. And this is counted a great fauour, and honour. After dinner hee layeth him downe to reste, where commonly hee taketh three houres sleepe, except he employ one of the houres to bathing, or boxing. And this cu∣stome for sleeping after dinner, is an ordina∣ry matter with him, as withall the Russes. After his sleepe, he goeth to euen song (cal∣led Vechurna) and thence returning, for the most parte recreateth himself with the Em∣presse till supper time, with iesters, and dwarfes, men and women, that tumble be∣fore him, and sing many songs after the Russe manner. This is his common recreation betwixt meales, that hee moste delightes in.
On other speciall recreation is the fight with wilde Beares, which are caught in pittes, or nets, and are kepte in barred cages for that purpose, against the Emperour be disposed to see the pastime. The fight with the Beare is on this sort. The man is turned into a cir∣cle walled round about, where he is to quite himselfe so well as he can: for there is no way to flie out. When the Beare is turned loose he commeth vpon him with open mouth. If at the first pushe hee misse his aime, so that the Beare come within him, hee is in great daunger. But the wilde Beare being very fearse, hath this qualitie, that giueth aduan∣tage to the Hunter. His manner is when he assaileth a mā, to rise vp right on his two hinder legges, and so to come roaring with open mouth vpon him. And if the Hunter then can pushe right into the very brest of him betwixt his forelegges (as commonly hee will not misse) resting the other ende of their boarespeare at the side of his foote, & so keeping the pike still towards the face of the Beare, he speedeth him cōmōly at one blow. But many times these Hunters come short, and are either slaine, or miserably torne with the teeth & talents of the fierce beast. If the partie quite himselfe well in this fight with the Beare, he is carried to drinke at the Em∣perours seller doore: where he drinketh him∣selfe
drunke for the honor of Hospodare. And this is his rewarde for aduenturing his life, for the Emperours pleasure. To maintain this pastime the Emperor hath certein huntsmen that are appointed for that purpose to take the wild Beare. This is his recreation com∣monly on the holy daies. Somtimes he spen∣deth his time in looking vpō his goldsmiths, and Iewellers, tailers, embroderers, painters, & such like, & so goeth to his supper. When it draweth towaeds bed time, his priest saieth certein praiers: and then the Emperour bles∣seth and crosseth himselfe, as in the morning for a quarter of an houre or thereaboutes, and so goeth to his bedde. The Emperour that now is (called The∣odore Iuanowich) is for his person of a meane stature, somewhat lowe and grosse, of a sallowe complexion, and inclining to the dropsie, hawke nosed, vnsteady in his pase by reason of some weakenes of his lims, hea∣uie and vnactiue, yet commonly smiling al∣most to a laughter. For qualitie otherwise, simple and slowe witted, but verie gentle, and of an easie nature, quiet, mercifull, of no martiall disposition, nor greatly apt for mat∣ter of pollicie, very superstitious, and infinite that way. Besides his priuate deuotions at home, he goeth euery weeke cōmonly on pil∣grimage to some Monasterie, or other that
is nearest hand. He is of 34. yeares old, or thereaboutes, and hath reigned almost the space of sixe yeares. Of the Emperours priuate, or house∣holde Officers. The 27. Chapter. THe chiefe officers of the Emperours houshold, ar these which follow The first is the office of the Boiaren Co∣nesheua,Maister of the Horse. or maister of the Horse. Which cōteineth no more then is expressed by the name, that is▪ to be ouerseer, of the Horse, and not Magister equitum, or Master of the Horsemen. For he appointeth other for that seruice, as occasion dothe re∣quire (as before was said.) He that beareth that office at this time, is Borris Federowich Godonoe, brother to the Empresse▪ Of Horse for seruice in his warres (besides other for his ordinary vses) he hath to the number of 10000. which are kept about Mosko.
The next is the Lord Stewarde of his houshold at this time,The L. Ste∣ward. one Gregorie Vasilo∣wich Godonoe.The L. Tre∣surer. The third is his Treasurer, that keepeth all his monies, iewels, plate, &c: now called Stepan Vasilowich Godonoe. The fourth his Controller,Controller, Chamber∣laine. now Andreas Petro∣wich Clesinine. The fift his Chamberlaine. He that attendeth that office at this time, is called Estoma Bisabroza Pastelnischay.Tasters. The sixt his Tasters, now Theodore Alexandro∣wich, and Iuan Vasilowich Godonoe. The se∣uenth his Harbengers,Harbēgers. which are three No∣ble men, and diuers other Gentlemen that doo the office vnder them. These are his or∣dinarie officers, and offices of the chiefest account. Of Gentlemen beside that wait about his chamber,Gentlemen of the chā∣ber. & person (called Shilsey Strap∣sey) there are two hundred, all Noblemens sonnes.The Gard. His ordinary Garde is 2000, Hag∣butters ready with their pieces charged, and their match lighted, with other necessarie furniture▪ continually day and night: which come not within the house, but wait with∣out in the court or yard, where the Empe∣rour is abiding. In the night time there lod∣geth next to his bedchamber the chiefe Chamberlaine, with one or two more of best trust about him. A second chamber of there lodge sixe other of like account, for their
trust and faithfulnesse. In the third cham∣ber lie certeine young Gentlemen, of these two hundred, called Shilsey Strapsey, that take their turnes by forties euery night.Grooms. There are Grooms besides that watch in their course, and lie at euery gate and doore of the Court, called Estopnick. The Hagbutters or Gunners, whereof there are two thousand (as was said before) watch about the Emperours lodging, or bed chamber by course two hundred and fiftie euery night, and two hundred & fiftie more in the Court yarde, and about the Treasure house. His court or house at the Mosko is made Castle wise, walled about with great store of faire ordinance planted vpon the wall, and conteyneth a great breadth of ground within it, with many dwelling houses. Which are appointed for such as are knowen to be sure, and trustie to the Emperour.
Of the priuate behauiour, or qualitie of the Russe people. The 28. Chapter. THe priuate behaui∣our and qualitie of the Russe people,Constituti∣on of their bodies. may partly be vn∣derstood by that whiche hath beene said cōcerning the publique state and vsage of the coun∣trie. As touching the naturall habite of their bodies, they are for the most parte of a large sise, and of very fleshly bodies: accounting it a grace to bee somewhat grosse and burley, and therefore they nourish and spread their beardes, to haue them long and broad. But for the most part they are very vnweldy & vnactiue with∣all. Which may bee thought to come partly of the climate, and the numbnes which they get by the cold in winter, and partly of their diet that standeth most of rootes, onions, garlike, cabbage, and such like things that breed grosse humors, which they vse to eate alone, and with their other meates.
Their diet is rather much then curious At their meales they beginne commonly with a Chark or small cuppe of Aqua vitae,Their diet. (which they call Russe wine) and then drinke not till towardes the ende of their meales, taking it in largely, and all together, with kissing one another, at euery pledge. And therefore after dinner there is no talking with them, but euery man goeth to his bench to take his afternoones sleepe, which is as ordinary with them as their nightes reste. When they exceede, and haue varietie of dishes, the first are their baked meates (for roste meates they vse little) and then their broathes, or pottage. To drinke drunke, is an ordinary matter with them euery day in the weeke. Their common drinke is Mead, the poorer sort vse water, and a thin drinke called Quasse, which is nothing els (as wee say) but water turned out of his wittes, with a little branne meashed with it. This diet would breede in them many diseases, but that they vse bathstoues, or hote houses in steede of all phisicke, commonly twise or thrise euery weeke. All the winter time, and almost the whole Sommer, they heat there Peaches, which are made lyke the Germane bathstoaues, and their Potlads like ouens, that so warme the house, that a straun∣ger at the first shall hardly like of it. These
two extremities, specially in the winter of heat within their houses, and of extreame colde without, together with their diet, ma∣keth them of a darke, and sallow complexi∣on, their skinnes beyng tanned and par∣ched both with colde and with heate: special∣ly the women, that for the greater parte are of farre worse complexions, then the men. Whereof the cause take to bee their kee∣ping within the hote houses, and busying themselues about the heating, and vsing of their bathstoues, and peaches. The Russe because that hee is vsed to both these extremities of heat and of cold, can beare them both a great deale more patiently, then straungers can doo. You shal see them sometimes (to season their bo∣dies) come out of their bathstoues all on a froth, and fuming as hote almost as a pigge at a spitte, and presently to leape into the riuer starke naked, or to powre colde wa∣ter all ouer their bodies, and that in the coldest of all the winter time. The women to mende the bad hue of their skinnes, vse to paint their faces with white and redde co∣lours, so visibly, that euery man may per∣ceyue it. Which is made no matter, be∣cause it is common, and liked well by their husbandes: who make their wiues and daughters anordinarie allowance to buy them colours to paint their faces withall,
and delight themselues much to see them of fowle women to become such faire ima∣ges. This parcheth the skinne and helpeth to deforme them when their painting is of. They apparell themselues after the Greeke manner.The Noble mans at∣tire. The Noblemans attire is on this fashion. First a Taffia or little night cappe on his head, that couereth little more then his crowne, commonlie verie riche wrought of silke and gold thread, & set with pearle & pretious stone. His head he keepeth shauen close to the very skin, except he be in some displeasure with the Emperour. Then hee suffereth his haire to growe and hang downe vpon his shoulders, couering his face as vgly and deformedly as he can, Ouer the Taffia he weareth a wide cap of black Foxe (which they account for the best furre) with a Tiara or long bonnet put within it, stan∣ding vp like a Persian or Babilonian hat. A∣bout his neck (which is seene al bare) is a col∣ler set with pearle and pretious stone, about three or foure fingers broad. Next ouer his shirt, (which is curiously wrought, because he strippeth himselfe into it in the Sommer time, while he is within the house) is a Shepon, or light garment of silke made downe to the knees, buttoned before: & then a Caftan or a close coat buttoned, and girt to him with a Persian girdle, whereat he hanges his kniues and spoone. This commonly is of cloth of
gold, and hangeth downe as low as his an∣kles, Ouer that he weareth a lose garment of some rich silke, furred and faced about with some gold lace, called a Ferris. An other ouer that of chamlet, or like stuffe called an Al∣kaben, sleeued & hanging low, and the cape commonly brooched▪ and set all with pearle. When hee goeth abroad, he casteth ouer all these (which are but sleight (though they seeme to be many) an other garment called an Honoratkey, like to the Alkaben, saue that it is made without a coller for the neck. And this is commonly of fine cloth, or Camels haire. His bus kins (which he weareth in stead of hose, with linnen folles vnder them in steed of boot hose) are made of a Persian lea∣ther called Saphian, embrodered with pearle. His vpper stockes commonly are of cloth of gold. When he goeth abroad, he mounteth on horsebacke, though it be but to the next doore: which is the manner also of the Boi∣arskey, or Gentlemen. The Boiarskey or Gentlemans attire is of the same fashion,The Gen∣tlemans apparell. but differeth in stuffe: and yet he will haue his Caftan or vndercoat sometimes of cloth of gold, the rest of cloth, or silke. The Noble woman (called Chyna Boi∣arshena) weareth on hir head,The Noble womans at∣tire. first a caull of some soft silke (which is commonly redde) and ouer it a fruntlet, called Obrosa of white
colour. Ouer that hir cap (made after the coife fashion of cloth of gold) called Shapka Zempska, edged with some riche furre, and set with pearle and stone. Though they haue of late begonne to disdaine embrodering with pearle about their cappes, because the Diacks, and some Marchants wiues haue ta∣ken vp the fashion. In their eares they weare earerings (which they call Sargee) of two inches or more compasse, the matter of gold set with Rubies, or Saphires, or some like pretious stone. In Sommer they goe often with kerchieffes of fine white lawne, or Cam∣bricke, fastned vnder the chinne, with two long tassels pendent. The kerchiefe spotted and set thicke with rich pearle. When they ride or goe abroad in raynie weather, they weare white hattes with coloured bands (cal∣led Stapa Zemskoy). About their necks they were collers of three or foure fingers broad, set with riche pearle and pretious stone. Their vpper garment is a loose gowne cal∣led Oposhen commonly of skarlet, with wide loose sleeues, hanging downe to the ground buttened before with great gold buttons, or at least siluer and guilt night as bigge as a wal∣nut. Which hath hanging ouer it fastned vnder the cappe, a large broad cape of some riche furre, that hangeth downe almost to the middes of their backes. Next vnder the Oposken or vpper garment, they weare an∣other
called a Leitnick that is made close be∣fore with great wide sleeues, the cuffe or half sleeue vp to the elbowes, commonly of cloth of golde: and vnder that a Ferris Zemskoy, which hangeth loose buttoned throughout to the very foote. On the hand wrests they weare very faire braselets, about two fingers broad of pearle and pretious stone. They go all in buskins of white, yellow, blew, or some other coloured leather, embrode∣red with pearle. This is the attire of the No∣blewoman of Russia, when shee maketh the best shew of hir selfe. The Gentlewomans apparell may differ in the stuffe, but is all one for the making or fashion. As for the poore Mousick and his wife they go poorely cladde.The Mou∣sicks or cō∣mon mans attire. The man with his Odnoratkey, or loose gowne to the small of the legge, tyed together with a lace before, of course white or blew cloth, with some Shube or long wastcoat of furre, or of sheepskinne vnder it, and his furred cappe, and buskins. The poorer sort of them haue their Odnorat∣key, or vpper garment, made of Kowes haire. This is their winter habite. In the sommer time, commonly they weare nothing but their shirts on their backes, and buskins on their legges. The woman goeth in a redde or blew gowne, when she maketh the best shew, and with some warme Shube of furre vnder it in the winter time. But in the Sommer, no∣thing
but her two shirts (for so they call thē) one ouer the other, whether they be within doores, or without. On their heades, they weare caps of some coloured stuffe, many of veluet, or of cloth of golde: but for the most part kerchiefes. Without earings of siluer or some other mettall, and her crosse about her necke, you shal see no Russe woman, be shee wife, or maide. As touching their behauiour,Their wits and capaci∣ties. and quality otherwise, they are of reasonable capacities, if they had those means that some other na∣tions haue to traine vp their wittes in good nurture, and learning. Which they might borrowe of the Polonians; and other their neighbours, but that they refuse it of a very self pride, as accounting their owne fashions to be far the best. Partly also (as I said before) for that their manner of bringing vp (voide of all good learning, and ciuill behauiour) is thought by their gouernours most agreable to that State, and their manner of gouern∣ment. Which the people would hardely beare, if they were once ciuilled, & brought to more vnderstanding of God, and good policie. This causeth the Emperours to keep out al meanes of making it better, and to be very warie for excluding of all peregrinitie, that might alter their fashions. Which were lesse to bee disliked, if it set not a print into the very mindes of his people. For as them∣selues
are verie hardlie and cruellie dealte withall by their chiefe Magistrates, and o∣ther superiours, so are they as cruell one a∣gainst an other, specially ouer their inferi∣ours, and such as are vnder them. So that the basest & wretchedest Christianoe (as they call him) that stoupeth and croucheth like a dogge to the Gentleman, and licketh vp the dust that lieth at his feete, is an intollerable tyrant,Crueltie of the Russe people. where he hath the aduantage. By this meanes the whole Countrie is filled with rapine, and murder. They make no account of the life of a man. You shall haue a man robbed sometime in the very streats of their townes, if hee goe late in the euening: and yet no man to come forth out of his doores to rescue him, though hee heare him crie out. I will not speake of the straungenesse of the murders, and other cruelties com∣mitted among them, that would scarsly bee beleeued to bee done among men, special∣ly such as professe themselues Christians. The number of their vagrant and beg∣ging poore is almost infinite: that are so pinched with famine and extreame neede, as that they begge after a violent and des∣perate manner, with giue mee and cut mee, giue mee and kill mee, and such like phrases. Whereby it may bee gheassed, what they are towardes straungers, that are so vnnaturall and cruell towardes their owne. And yet it
may bee doubted whither is the greater, the crueltie or intemperancie that is vsed in that countrie.Intempe∣rancie. I will not speake of it, because it is so soule and not to bee named. The whole countrie ouerfloweth with all sinne of that kinde. And no marueile, as hauing no lawe to restraine whoredomes, adulteries, and like vncleannesse of life. As for the truth of his word, the Russe for the most part maketh small regard of it, so he may gaine by a lie, and breache of his promise. And it may be saide truely (as they know best that haue traded most with them) that from the great to the small (except some fewe that will scarcely be founde) the Russe neither beleeueth any thing that an other man speaketh, nor speaketh any thing him∣selfe worthie to be beleeued. These quali∣ties make thē very odious to all their neigh∣bours, specially to the Tartars, that account themselues to be honest and iust, in compa∣rision of the Russe. It is supposed by some that doe well consider of the state of both countries, that the offence they take at the Russe gouernment, and their maner of be∣hauiour, hath beene a great cause to keepe the Tartar still Heathenish, and to mis∣like (as he doeth) of the Chri∣stian profession. FINIS.
