11229 S102503 99838285 2659
AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE BOOKE OF ACTS AND MONVMENTES OF THE CHVRCH: Written by that Reuerend Father, Mai∣ster Iohn Fox: and now abridged by Timothe Bright, Doctour of Phisicke, for such as either through want of leysure, or abilitie haue not the vse of so necessary an history. All day long are we counted as Sheepe for the slaughter. Psal. 44. depiction of a group of monstrous roman catholic figures cutting the throat of a sheep or lamb, with more sheep in the foreground and a female figure knelt in prayer in the background How long Lord, holy and true? Apocal. Cap. 6. verse 10. Imprinted at London by I. Windet, at the assignment of Master Tim Bright, and are to be sold at Pauls wharf, at the signe of the Crosse-keyes. 1589. Cum gratia, & Privilegio Regia Maiestatis.
To the Christian Reader. COnsidering the great vse and profite of that wor∣thie worke of Actes and Monumentes, written by Master Iohn Fox, of blessed memorie: and by reason of the largenes of the volume, and great price, how the most were bereaued of the benefite of so necessarie an Historie: J often wished, some man would take the paines to draw the same into an Abridgement: that, both those that are busied in affaires, or not able to reach to the price of so great a booke, might also haue vse of the historie with them that neither want leisure, nor hability suf∣ficient. But, seeing hetherto nothing done that way, nor hearing of any that had it in purpose, J vētured vpon the labor my self, & thus haue per∣formed it for thy vse: wherein, J haue omitted no∣thing to my remembrance, and as my iudgement serued me, that is materiall to the historie, so farre as the nature of an Abridgement would permitte. As for Treatises, Disputations, Epistles, and such like, J leaue them to be read all together in the large Booke: which I doe exhort thee (gentle Rea∣der)
the rather for my Abridgements sake, to buy, and vse. For, as the copiousnes of that notable worke, hath hid the riche treasures of the same, through charge of price, and mens affaires: So this my labour may geue thee an assay, and ap∣petite, to know further, whereof thou maist here take (as it were) the taste. J assure thee, in mine o∣pinion, there is not a booke, vnder the Scriptures, more necessarie for a Christian to be conuersant in. There is no Burgesse of a Citie, that hath care of his corporation, but would be glad to know, how in times past, the world went with his Corporatiō, that therby he may vnderstād the better how to be haue himselfe therein, as occasion shall serue: and, not onely woulde desire to knowe the lawes of the same, but also, what examples haue any way beene geuen, touching the same. Euen so, it becommeth much more Christians, that are Citizens of the church of Christ, and haue a communitie in that bodie, to know, not onely the lawes of this Citie, (which is the word of God) but also, what hath be∣fallen, either good, or bad, and euerye accident: whereupon, experience may arise by example, and wisdome thereof, to be put in vse accordingly. We may read what hath befallen the worthiest Com∣monwealths in this world, and what stormes they
haue endured, and all sunke, vnder them. This Common-wealth of the Church standeth for euer, though the stormes that haue blowen vpon it, haue beene more boysterous than any other state hath endured. And by reason of cōtinuāce, geueth great varietie of examples: of Gods prouidence, of his mercie, of his fatherly chastizements, and correcti∣on, and of that holy faith, which hath ministred in∣uincible strength of constancie, & patience to this heauenly state of Christes Church, in the middest of all stormes of tryall. And here mayst thou reade, not onely what hath beene suffered of the olde Fa∣thers of the church, who haue with their bloud pur∣chased vnto vs this freedome of the Gospell: but of late times, what thy father, thy mother, thy bro∣her, and thy friēd haue suffered for like testimonie, wherby the sincerity of the Gospel standeth at this day. When (I say) in this Abridgement, thou maist reade these things, J mean much more in the large volume, where all such matters lie open at the full: and whereto (I pray thee) let this my labour be (as it were) an introduction. And if thy hability serue thee, or any other disposition thereto, J pray thee let not this booke withdraw thee. For, Abridge∣ments, in all kinde of learning, haue byn vsed, for such respects as J haue before mentioned: besides,
the memorie embraceth them more readily: and not to hinder great volumes. Neither doo they of their own nature, work such effect. If slouth of some per∣sons neglect them, so are they punished therfore in wanting that belongeth vnto them to know: & yet through Abridgementes, haue some furniture of that profitable instruction, whereof otherwise they would be vtterly ignorant. It is said, Iu∣stines Abridgement lost Trogus Pompeius: Trogus peraduenture is lost, but whether through Iustines Abridgement, that hardly can be proued: and had it not beene for Iustine, we had lost with Trogus, the history too. The case is far otherwise since printing was knowen: for, who would lose a leafe of Liuie, for any Abridgement. Before, it may be, charge of written Copies might be some cause, why the large volumes were not so vniuer∣sall. And I pray thee, if the Author him self (the fittest of all men, being an History so meet, euen for the meanest Christian, especially in these times, and conteyning recordes of such things, as are els no where to be had) had takē it in hand: had it not byn thanks-woorthy? Yet so had beene greater danger in decaying the booke at large in regard of the more sufficient performance of the worke, than by this of mine. I trust the matter needeth no
An Abridgement of the first volume of the Ecclesiasticall history of Acts, and Monuments of Martyrs. The History is deuided into fiue partes. 1 The first is of the suffering time of the Church 300. yeere after Christ. 2 The growyng and florishing time of the same, other 300. yeeres. 3 The declining time, other 300. vntill the losing of Sathan: about the thousand yeere after Christ. 4 The time of Antichrist: which cōtinued in full swinge 400. yeeres. 5 The time of reformation these later 288. yeeres. IN the 17. of the raigne of Ti∣berius Nero,Tiberius Nero. Christ. Christ suffered the 34. yéere of his age. Tibe∣rius raysed no further perse∣cutiō, yet liued he seuen yéeres after the death of Christ, and raigned in all 23. yéeres. Him succéeded C. Caligula:C. Caligula. hée commaunded his Image to be set vp in the temple at Ierusalem, and to be wor∣shipped. And after him succéeded C. Nero,C. Nero. & D. Nero.D. Nero. Clau∣dius raigned 13. yéeres. Domitius 14. In the latter end of whose raigne, Peter & PaulePeter and Paule. were put to death, for the faith of Christ. Anno 69.
About this time, an. 73.  and 40. yéeres after the passiō of Christ, & the 3. yéere after the suffering of Peter and Paule, the Iewes were destroied,Titus. Vespasian. Iewes de∣stroyed. by Titus, and Vespasian his father: (who succéeded Nero) to the number of eleuen hun∣dred thousand, besides a great number Vespasian slue in subduing Galile, & seuentéene thousands mo that were sold for slaues. Stephen.Stephen the Deacon was the first martyr, put to death at Ierusalem, and stoned by the Iewes. After Stephen, suffered IamesIames. the brother of Iohn, whom HerodHerod. slew with the sword: and with him the partie that was cause of his persecution: who beyng moued in consci∣ence, as Iames went to execution, confessed himselfe to be a Christian also, and were both beheaded together. The same day that Stephen suffered, NicanorNicanor. one of ye 7. deacons, with 2000.2000. other christians, suffered for the faith. SimonSimon. one of the deacons, and afterward bishop of Bos∣rum in Arabia, was there burned: and ParmenasParmenas. also an o∣ther of the Deacons, suffered for the faith. Thomas,Thomas. who preached to the Parthians, Medes, Persi∣ans, Germans, Heraconies, Bactries, and Magies, suffered in Calamina, a citie in Iudea, beyng slaine with a dart. Simon ZelotesSimon Zelotes (who preached in Mauritania, and in the countrie of Aphrike, and in Britaine) was crucified. Iudas.Iudas brother of Iames, called Thaddeus and Lebeus, who preached to the Edissens, and to al Mesopotamia, was slaine vnder AugarusAugarus. king of the Edissens in Berito. Simon.Simon, brother to Iude, and Iames the yoonger, (which were sonnes of Mary Cleopha, and of Alpheus) called Ca∣naneus, bishop of Ierusalem after Iames, (as Dorotheus recordeth) was crucified in a citie of Egipt, in the time of TraianusTraianus. Emperour: but as Abdias writeth, he was slaine with his brother Iude, by a tumult of the people of Suanir, a citie of Persidis. Marke the Euangelist, & first B. of Alexandria, preached
the Gospel in Egypt: and there being drawn with ropes to the fire, was burned: and afterward buried in a place called there, Bucolus: vnder the reigne of Traianus the Emperor. BartholomeusBartholomeus is said to haue preached to the Indians, and to haue conuerted the Gospel of S. Mathew into their tongue, where he continued a great space: doing many mi∣racles. At last in Albania a citie of great Armenia, after di∣uers persecutions, he was beaten downe with staues, then crucified, and after being excoriate, hee was at length be∣headed. Iohan. de monte regali. AndrewAndrew, the Apostle, and brother of Peter, was crucified at Patris, a citie in Achaia, (by the Gouernour EgeasEgeas.) em∣bracing the crosse, and ioying therein, the day before the Ka∣lends of December. Matthew,Matthew. otherwise called Leui, first a publicane, then an Apostle, after that he had conuerted to the faith Ethiopia, and all Egypt, HircanusHircanus. their king sent one to runne him through with a speare. Iohan. de monte regali. MatthiasMatthias. also, after that he had preached to the Iewes, was stoned, and beheaded by them. Philip the Apostle,Philip and his daughters. after he had much laboured among the barbarous nations, was crucified, and stoned to death in Hierapolis, a citie of Phrygia, where he was buried, and his daughters with him. Isodor. IamesIames. being required of the Iewes to disswade the peo∣ple from the faith of Christ,Other. and that he should stand & speak from the battlements of the temple, that he might more con∣ueniently be heard;The Iewes. he (contrary to their expectation) prea∣ching Christ, was throwne downe from the battlementes headlong, and stoned: and one being present, tooke a Fullers instrument, wherewith they beate cloth, and smote him on the head, whereof he died, and was buried in that place. At which time also, other were put to death among the Iewes for the testimony of Christ.
The first Persecution. THe first was stirred vp by Nero Domitius,Nero Domit. the 6. Empe∣rour: about the yere 67.  Whose cruelty was such against Christians, that he had neither regarde of sexe, condition of life, or age: so that open stréetes were spread with the dead carkases of Christians. He caused persecution throughout al the prouinces of the Romaine empire: and endeuoured vt∣terly to abolish the name of Christians. In that persecution, PeterPeter. was crucified, his head down∣ward: himselfe requiring it should be so, as vnworthy to be in all manner executed like Christ Iesus. The cause was thought to be the reuenge of the death of Simon Magus:Simon Magus. who pretending to the people of Rome, to flée from ye mount Ca∣pitolinus vp into heauē, by the praier of Peter, was brought headlong downe: wherwith his legges & ioynts being bro∣ken, he died. At that time also, Peters wifePeters wife. suffered, béeing much encouraged by the words of her husband Peter, whiles he hanged vpon the crosse. Vnder the same Nero, PaulPaul. was beheaded in the 14. yéere of Nero, the same day that Peter was crucified, and was buried in the way of Ostia. But o∣thers (as Prudentius in his Peristephano) writeth that they were put to death in one day: but Paule a yeere after Peter. The second Persecution. THe Church hauing had some rest vnder Vespasian, Do∣mitianDomitian. (brother to Titus) moued, (not long after) the 2. persecution. He put to death al ye nephews of Iuda,Nephewes of Iuda. called the Lords brother, and caused to be sought out and slain, al that could be found of the stock of Dauid: as Vespasian also did be∣fore him: least yet he were to come of the stocke of Dauid,
that should enioy the kingdome. In the time of this tirant, Simeon,Simeon. Bishop of Ierusalem, after other torments, was crucified to death: whom IustusIustus. afterward succéeded in that bishoprick. This Tyrant exiled IohnIohn. the Apostle and Euāgelist, in∣to Pathmos, an. 97.  And vnder Pertinax he was released, and came to Ephesus, anno 100.  where he continued vntill the time of Traianus, and there gouerned the Church in A∣sia: where also he wrote his gospel. And so liued til the yere 68. which was the yere of his age 99. Euseb. Flauia,Flauia. daughter to Flauius Clemens, one of the Roman Consuls, suffered for the name of the Lord Iesus: and was (with many other banished out of Rome, into the Ile Pon∣tia. Euseb. lib. 3 A remnant of the flock of Dauid as yet remayned: who being brought to Domitian to be slaine, and hee percyuing them to be poore, and vnderstanding from them, that the kingdome of Christ should not be a worldly, but an heauen∣uenlie kingdome, let them goe, and staied the persecution. They (being dismissed) had afterwarde the gouernment of Churches: and so continued in peace till the time of Traia∣nus. Egesip. & Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 20. In these persecutions no kind of torment was omitted, that could be deuised against the Christians:The 2. perse∣cution. and no kinde of slaunder kept back, that might empaire their credite, their bodies (after death) not being suffered to be buried: and yet the Church did dayly more, and more, encrease. EuaristusEuaristus. Bishop of Rome next to Clement, succéeded in the third yere of Traianus, and suffered the xij. yere of his Raigne. Alexander,Alexander. who succéeded Euaristus, conuerted a great part of the Senators of Rome to the faith. Among whom, one Hermes,Hermes. a great man in Rome, whose sonne being dead, he raised to life, and restored sight to his maide being blinde. Which Adrianus, the Emperor hearing of, sent word to Au∣relianus
Gouernor of Rome, to apprehend Alexander, with Euentus,Euentus. and Theodulus,Theodulus. otherwise called Theodorus, his two Deacons, and Hermes,Hermes. to committe them to Warde, with Quirinus the Tribune, whose daughter named Albi∣na,Albina. he cured: which mooued Quirinus,Quirinus. with all his house to be baptized, and suffred also for the faith of Christ. In the second yere of Hadrian, Aurelianus tooke Alexan∣der, with Hermes, his wife, children, and whole housholde, 1250. and threw them into prison, and not long after, burnt them all in a Furnace. Whose crueltie being rebuked by Theodulus, another Deacon of Alexander, caused also vnto himselfe the same martirdome. Quirinus the same time (as saith Antoninus) hauing first his tongue cut out, then his handes and féete, afterwarde was beheaded, and cast to the dogges. The thirde Persecution. The third persecution.BEtwixt the second persecution and the third, was but one yere, vnder the Emperor Nerua.Nerua. After whom succéeded Traianus,Traianus. who raysed the thirde persecution: which was so grieuous, that Plinius SecundusPlinius Secundus. (moued with compassion) being himselfe an Infidel, wrote to the Emperour, and cer∣tified him that so many thousandes were put to death with∣out cause: sauing that they vsed to gather themselues toge∣ther before day, to sing hymnes to a certaine God, whom they worshipped, called Christ. Whereupon the persecuti∣ons were greatly alaied. The summe of Plinies letters to the Emperor. Plinies letter for mitigation of the perse∣cution.THe summe of the Epistle was, that the Emperour would resolue how long to inflicte the punishment with respecte of Age, Sexe, or Degrée. Whether any Pardon might be graunted vnto such as would denie the faith; or whether that offēce alone should so grieuously be punished; or if other offences did aggrauate the fault: who (their Reli∣gion
and excepted, their worshipping of Christ) els cōmitted they nothing against the lawes: as euē such that had renoū∣ced their faith confessed, & as he had made proofe by laying 2. christian maids on ye racke, to proue if they could haue extor∣ted confession of further crime. And that for asmuch as some (although many of them encreased) gaue their names to doo sacrifice with incēse vnto the image of the Emperor, and sa∣crifices were more then before brought to be sold: if space were granted, they might be amended, which else by great multitudes might run into daunger of condemnation. To whom the Emperor made answere:The Empe∣rours answere. yt he would not haue the christiās sought for, but if any were brought & cōuicted, such should suffer executiō: & such as vnfainedly denied the faith, & would do sacrifice in opē place, should be receiued to mercy. Certaine Sectaries there were of the Iewes that ac∣cused SimeonSimeon. then B. of Ierusalem, & sonne of Cleophas, to come of the stocke of Dauid, and that he was a Christian. Wherevpon he was scourged by AttalusAttalus. commaundement then Proconsull, during the space of many daies together, being of the age of 120. and with great admiration giuen of his constancie, he ended his course vpon the crosse. Vnder this Traiane which next followed Nerua, amōg o∣thers, PhocasPhocas. B. of Pōtus suffered, whō Traianus, because he refused to do sacrifice to Neptune, cast into a hot furnace, and after into a scalding bath. Anton. Eginl. fascic. temporum. In the same persecutiō suffered also SulpitiusSulpitius. & Seruilia∣nusSeruilianus. two Romanes, whose wiues are said to be EmphrosinaEmphrosina. & Theodora:Theodora. whom SalmaSalma. did conuert to the faith, and after∣ward were also martyred. This Salma was beheaded of C. Lepidus, the gouernour, in the mount Auentine, in the daies of Hadrian: vnder whom also suffered SeraphiaSeraphia. a virgin of Antioch. Moreouer in this time of Traiane suffered NereusNereus. and AchilleusAchilleus. at Rome: about which time also one SagarisSagaris. suffered martyrdome in Asia, Seruius Paulus beyng then Proconsull in that prouince.
In this time suffered Ignatius.Ignatius. Some say that he being sent from Syria to Rome, was giuē to wild beasts to be de∣uoured: passing through Asia he confirmed the churches, and cōming to Smirna where PolycarpusPolycarpus. was, he wrot diuerse epistles, one to Ephesus, an other to MagnesiaMagnesia. being at Me∣ander, another to Trallis. He now being iudged to ye beasts, & hearing the Lions roare: I am the wheat or graine (said he) of Christ, I shall be ground with the téeth of wild beasts, that I may be found pure bread. He suffered the 11. yéere of the raigne of Traianus. Euseb. & Hieronimus. About this time many thousands died for the faith: among them one PubliusPublius. bishop of Athens. Next to Traianus succéeded Hadrian,Hadrian. vnder whom suffe∣red Alexander bishop of Rome, with his two Deacons E∣uentiusEuentius. and Theodorus,Theodorus. also HermesHermes. and QuirinusQuirinus. with their families. In this time of Hadrian, Zenon,Zenon. a noble man of Rome with 10023 were slaine for Christ. Henricus de Erfodia & Bergomensis lib. 8. make mention of 10000. in the daies of this Hadrian, to be crucified in the mount Ararat, crowned with crownes of thorne, & thrust into the sides with sharpe darts, after the example of the Lords passiō: whose captains were Achaicus,Achaicus. &c. Heliades, Theodorus, and Carcerius, &c. Vnder Hadrian suffered also Eustachius,Eustachius. a captaine whō Traianus had sent in times past against the Barbarians, & hauing now subdued them, was honorably met in his iorney of Hadrian the Emperor himselfe: who first by ye way would do sacrifice to Apollo for the victory, willing Eustachius to do also. Which he refusing (not withstanding all meanes to draw him to it) was brought to Rome: where with his wife & children he suffered martyrdome vnder the same Hadrian. Faustinus.Faustinus & IobitaIobita. citizens of the citie of Brixia, suffered martyrdome with gréeuous torments. At the sight whereof one CaeloceriusCaelocerius. seing their so great patiēce in such tormēts, cried out with these words, Verè magnus Deus christianorum.
Verily, great is the God of the Christians. Wherevpon he was presently apprehended, and suffred with them. Ex Ant. Equi. One Anthia a godly woman (who committed her sonne Eleutherius to Anicetus Bishop of Rome, to be brought vp in the faith,) who was afterward B. of Apulia, was there beheaded with her sonne Eleutherius Nicephorus. Vnder this Hadrian suffered also Iustus,Iustus. and Pa∣stor,Pastor, twoo brethren in a Citie of Spaine called Complu∣tum. Likewise Symphronissa the wife of Getulus the martyr, with her seuen children,Symphronissa and her seuen children. is said about the same time to suf∣fer: who first was much and often beaten and scourged, & af∣terward hanged vp by the haire of the head. At last, hauing an huge stone fastned about her necke, was cast into the ri∣uer. And after that her seuen children, with sundrye and diuers kindes of punishments, were martyred by the Ty∣rants. Getulus or Getulius was a minister or teacher in the Citie of Tibur, who with Cerdelis, Amantius, and Pri∣mitiuus, by the commaundement of Adrian, were condem∣ned to the fire. The names of the seuen sonnes of Symphro∣nissa were, Crescens, Iulianus Nemesius, Primitiuus, Iusti∣nus, Stateus, and Eugenius: who by the commaundement of Adrian, were tied to seuen stakes, and so racked with a pulley: and last of all, thrust through, Crescens in the neck, Iulianus in the breast, Nemesius in the heart, Primitiuus about the nauell, Iustinus cut in euery ioynt of his body, Stateus runne through with speares, Eugenius cut asunder from the brest to the lower partes, and then cast into a déepe pit, hauing the name by their idolatrous Priests, entituled Ad septem Biothanatos. After the death of whom Symphro∣nissa the mother did likewise suffer.
Getulus The chil∣dren of Sympho∣rosa.Crescens. Iulianus. Nemesius. Primitiuus. Iustinus. Stateas. Eugenius. Cerdelis Amantius Primitiuus Sophia and her two children.Sophia with her two children Serapia and Salma did suf∣fer vnder some tyrant about the the yéere 130. While Hadrian the Emperour was at Athens, he pur∣posed to visite the citie of Elewsina: which he did, where he sacrificing to the Gentiles gods, gaue frée libertie to kill the Christians whosoeuer would. Wherevpon QuadratusQuadratus. Bishoppe of Athens, and AristidesAristides. a philosopher of Athens, and another Serenus Gramus,Serenus. a man of great nobilitie, wrote Apologies for the Christians vnto the Emperour, with such eloquence and learning, laying out their innocen∣cie, that he directed his letters to Minutius Fundanus Pro∣consul of Asia,Persecution asswaged in Asia. willing him from hencefoorth to exercise no more crueltie vpon the Christians, nor to condemne them for that cause. Thus the Christians had some quiet for a time. After Hadrian, succéeded Antoninus Pius,Anton. Pius. who although he moued no persecution against the Christians, yet the tu∣multuous rage of the heathen did not ceasse to disquiet the people of God. The Emperours affection might appeare by a letter or edict of his to the Commons of Asia, to stay their rage against Christians, except they had committed anie thing against the lawes of the Empire, willing them to consider the Christians patience in their tormentes, and boldnesse in times of Earthquakes,Persecution ceasseth. and tempestes, when as other tremble and quake for feare. This edict was pro∣claimed at Ephesus in the publike assemblie of all Asia. So by this meanes the tempest of persecution in those
dayes began to be appeased. After Antoninus Pius, M. Antoninus VerusM. Antoninus verus. succéeded with his brother Lucius,Lucius. about the yéere 162.  These were sharp and fierse against the Christians, and after Nero, mo∣ued the fourth persecution. The fourth Persecution. IN Antoninus Verus time, suffered many Christians with diuerse kinds of torments: namely at Smyrna, some of thē were whipped, that the inward arteries & veines appea∣red, euen their very intrailes and bowels were séene, & after that were set vpon sharpe shels, taken out of the sea, edged & sharp, and certain nailes & thorns laid for the martirs to go vpō sharpned & pointed, called obelisci. And lastly were they thrown to beasts to be deuoured. Among whō one Germa∣nicusGermanicus. very cōstantly suffred, to the admiration of ye enimies. But most famous aboue ye rest, was the martirdom of Poly∣carpus,Polycarpus, disciple to the Apostles and 86. yéeres of age, & who had serued in the ministery about the space of 70. yéeres, and was placed of S. Iohn in Smirna, whose disciple he was. He suffered about the yéere of our Lord 170.  and in the 7. yéere of Antoninus Verus. The manner of his death and martyrdome was thus. These persecutions being begun in Smyrna, Polycarpus was perswaded by certaine yt were about him, to conuey himselfe away, and to hide him in a Village not farre from the Citie, which hee did, and there abiding with a fewe more of his companie, was night and day in supplication, for the peace of the Congregation. Three daies before his apprehension, hee sawe in a vision by night, the bed set on fire vnder him, and sodainly to be consumed, And when he waked, he interpreted it, that he should suffer martirdome by fire. At the last (being found by the pursuers, & vnderstanding yt they were armed) he came frō the chamber where he was, & entertained thē wt chéerful
countenaunce, and made them dine, and required that hée might haue one houres respite to make his prayers: which being grāted him, he did it in such sort, as they which heard him were astonied. His prayers being ended, they brought him to the citie vpon an Asse on a solemne feast day, there met him Irenarchus,Irenarchus. Herodes,Herodes. and his father Nicetes:Nicetes. which causing him to come vp into the chariot where they sat, per∣swaded him to do sacrifice. Which when he refused, wt rough wordes they molested him, and thrust him, going downe the chariot, that he might hurt or breake his legs: but he went merily on to the place appointed. To whome there came a voice from heauen that comforted him, & bad him be of good chéere, as he was going to the place of iudgement. Whither when hee came, the Proconsul disswaded him from the faith, and willed him to say with him and the rest, Destroy these naughty men. Then Polycarpus beholding with con∣stant countenance the whole multitude, and giuing a great sigh, looked vp to heauen and said: Thou thou it is that wilt destroy these wicked men, meaning the Lord. Then the pro∣consul thus being earnest with him said vnto him, take thine oath, and I will discharge thée: Deste Christ Polycarpus an∣swered, 86. yéeres haue I béen his seruant, yet in all this time hath he not so much as once hurt me, how then may I speake euil of my soueraign Lord and king, which hath thus preserued me. Then the Proconsul vsed al maner of threat∣nings against him: which when they could not preuaile, Po∣licarpus still denying with great constancie, Philip the Go∣uernor of Asia, was commaunded to let lose the Lion to Po∣licarpus: who made answere, that he might not so doe, be∣cause he had his pray alredy. Then the people required wt one voice, that he would burn Policarpus aliue. Which was perfourmed. And hauing made himselfe readie to the stake, they would haue nayled him thereto with Iron hoopes, but he said: let me alone as I am, for hee that hath geuen mee strength to suffer and abide the fire, shall also geue power,
that wtout this prouisiō I shal abide, and not stir in this fire. Which when they heard, they only bound him: who hauing geuen thankes vnto God, and testified his faith, the tormen∣tors put fire vnto him, which seemed to those that were be∣holders, to compasse the bodie like a vaile, which in ye mid∣dest thereof séemed like golde and siluer, tried in the fire, and yelded a pleasant smell Thus the fire not consuming his bo∣die, one of the Tormentors thrust him in with a Sworde. Whereafter, so great a quantitie of bloud issued out of his bodie, that the fire was quenched therewith. The bodie af∣terwarde was taken and burned, as their manner was to doe. And this was the ende of that worthie man. At that same time suffered also at Smirna twelue other, that came from Philadelphia, with diuers other: as, Metro∣dorus,Metrodorus. a minister, and another worthy man named Pionius,Pionius. who (after gréeuous torments) were burned. After these, suffered Carpus,Carpus. Papylus,Papylus. and Agathonica,Agathonica. a woman, who were put to death at Pergamopolis in Asia, Euseb. l. 4. c. 7. In Rome suffered Felicitas wt her seuen children:Felicitas with her 7. children. whose names were, Ianuarius, Felix, Philip, Siluanus, Alexander, Vitalis and Martialis. Of which companie, Ianuarius (after he was whipped with roddes) was prest to death with lea∣den waightes. Felix and Philip had their braines beaten out with maules. Siluanus was cast downe headlong, and had his neck broken. Alexander, Vitalis, and Martialis, were be∣headed. Last of all, the mother was slaine with the sworde. Ex Suppl. Vnder this M. Antoninus suffred also the worthy man, and learned Philosopher Iustinus,Iustinus. born at Neapolis in Pa∣lestina. His father was Priscus Baicus. He wrote Apolo∣gies: First to the Senate of Rome, after to Antonius Pius, the Emperor. He wrote also to Vrbinus, Lieftenant of the Citie. He preuayled so with Antonius Pius, that hee stayed the persecution in Asia. This man was accused by Cres∣cens
a Cynike philosopher, whom he had vanquished in dis∣putation: in reuenge whereof he procured his death, in the yere 154.  in the xiij. yere of the Reigne of Antoninus the Emperor. Vnder the same Antoninus, suffered also Ptolomeus, & Lucius,Lucius. for confessing Christ, in a Citie of Egypt, called A∣lexandria. Ptolomeus was accused by a Centurion, subor∣nne thereunto by a vicious Infidel, whose wife had béene also lewde, but conuerted by Ptolomeus, and thereupon de∣parting from her vicious husband, hee reuengeth himselfe vpon her Instructor: who being brought before Vrbinus the Iudge, and condemned to suffer death, Lucius a Christi∣an, blaming the Iudge, and iustifying the innocencie of Pto∣lomeus, was with him also (without further examination) martired. In the raigne of this Tirant, suffered also one Concor∣dus,Concordus. a Minister in the Citie of Spoletum, because he would not do sacrifice to Iupiter, but spit in his face: wherefore (af∣ter many and sundrie torments) he was beheaded. It is reported that diuers other Martirs suffered vnder this Antoninus Verus: as, Symmetrius,Symmetrius, &c. Florellus, Pontia∣nus, Alexāder, Caius, Epipodus, Victor. Corona, Marcellus, and Valerianus. Who (because they would not doe sacrifice to Idols) ended their liues by the sword. Vnder this Tyrant suffered diuers Martirs at Vienna, and Lions, two Cities in France. Among whom, Vetius,Vetius. Zacharias, Sanctus, Maturus, Attalus, Blandina, Alexander, and Alcibiades, are chiefly renoumed. Vetius Epagathus, for reproouing the cruell sentence of the Iudge, geuen against the Christians, and making an Apologie for them, was martyred. He was called by the faithfull (being but a young man) the Aduocate of the Christians. Sanctus.Sanctus was Deacon of the Congregation at Vienna: MaturusMaturus. was but a little before baptized: AttalusAttalus. was
borne at Pergama, who was the foundation and piller of that congregatiō. BlandinaBlandina. weried the tormentors with hir patient suffering. Likewise did Sanctus, who in his tormen∣ting beyng asked his name, his citie, his kinred, he answe∣red to all questions, I am a Christian. With these suffered one BibledesBibledes. a woman, who had denied Christ, & being tor∣mented to the end she might vtter some wickednes of the Christians, shée confessed Christ againe, continued constant, and was martyred with the rest. At that time PhotinusPhotinus. deacon to the B. of Lions, about 90. yéeres old, beyng first sore beaten, was cast into prison, and there died within two daies after. Maturus and Sanctus were brought againe to torment, and with them Blandina and Attalus, yet, notwithstanding ex∣quisite and strange deuised torments, they continued con∣stant in the faith. Blandina was fastened vpon a stake, & cast to beasts to be deuoured, but no beast woulde touch her: wherevpon they tooke her downe, and put her in prison till another time. Attalus was brought foorth againe, with one Alex∣anderAlexander. a Phrygian, and a Phisition: who because he encoura∣ged the Christians standing before the Iudge, was appre∣hended, and suffered most grieuous torments most patient∣ly, without change of countenaunce, and died, broyled in an Iron chaire. After this (being the last day of the spectacle) Blandina a∣gaine, and one Ponticus,Ponticus. a childe of fiftéen yeres olde, was brought foorth. The childe died constant, with extremitie of torment. Blandina (after diuers most exquisite tormentes, as whips, gridiron, and wilde beastes) was at the last, cast into a net, & throwen to a wilde Bull, and so was gored to death. Neither did their rage cease against the dead bodies: which they would not suffer to be buried, but caused them to be watched, least they should be put in graue. The causes why these persecutions were the more sharpe, was because
some of the Ethnicks being seruants to the christians, were compelled by threatnings to fayne against them, that they kept the feasts of Thiestes and incest of Oedipus, with o∣ther most hainous crimes. To these Emperours did MelitoMelito. bishop of Sardis exhi∣bite Apologies for the Christians, learned and eloquent. So did Claudius ApollinarisCl. Apollinaris bishop of Hierapolis, like as Qua∣dratusQuadratus. and AristidesAristides. did before to the Emperour Hadrian. So that whether it were by that means, or through the wri∣ting of AthenagorasAthenagoras. a philosopher, & a Legate of ye Christi∣ans, it is certaine yt the persecutiō the same time was staied.Persecuton stayed. Others thinke it came by a miracle wrought in the Empe∣rours campe. For what time the two brethren Emperours ioyned together, and warred against the Quades, Vandals, Sarmates, and Germaines, when their souldiers wanting water fiue daies together,Miracle. and by meanes thereof were like to perish: in this distresse, a legion of the Christian souldi∣diers withdrew themselues, and praied, whereby they ob∣tained showers and swéete raine, and the enimies were ter∣rified with lightnings and haile, and so discomfited and put to flight. Wherevpon the Emperour wrote to diuers of his Gouernours, that they should giue thankes to the Christi∣ans, and giue them peace: of whom came the victorie and preseruation to him and all his people. In the yere 175.  succéeded the former Lucius, Antoni∣nus Commodus,Commodus. sonne to Verus, who raigned xiij. yeares. In whose time (as some thinke) by the fauour of Martia,Martia. the Emperors Concubine, who fauoured the Christians, perse∣cution slaked. By which meanes, many noble personages of Rome, embraced the Gospel. Among whō was one Apol∣lonius,Apollonius. who being maliciously accused by Seuerus his ser∣uant, (notwithstanding the false accusation of his Accuser) being detected, and he for that crime hauing his legs broken, was neuerthelesse, driuen to make confession of his faith, and for the same also beheaded by an auncient Law, that no
Christian ought to be released without recantation. This Emperor on his birth day, with the people of Rome assembled together, made sacrifice to Hercules and Iupiter, causing it to be cried through out ye citie, that Hercules was the patrone of the citie. At which time there were in the ci∣tie Vincentius,Vincentius. Eusebius,Eusebius, &c. Peregrinus, Potentianus, learned men, and instructors of the people: who conuerting the Gen∣tils in diuerse places, and hearing hereof, preached and per∣swaded against the same, and conuerted one IuliusIulius. a Sena∣tor, with others to the faith. Whereof Commodus hearing caused them all to be first tormented, & then to be pressed to death with leaden waights, sauing that Iulius was beaten to death with cuggels, at the commandement of Vitellus the Maister of the Souldiers. PeregrinusPeregrinus. had béene sent before of Xistus B. of Rome into the parts of Fraunce, to supply the roome of a teacher, where the horrible persecutiōs had made wast. Who hauing there established the Churches, returned home againe to Rome, and finished his daies with martyrdome. XistusXistus. or Sixtus was the sixt bishop of Rome after Peter, and gouerned that ministery ten yéeres. To Sixtus succéeded Telesphorus,Telesphorus. and was bishop there eleuen yéeres, and died in the first yéere of Antoninus Pius, beyng martyred the yéere 138.  After him succéeded Hygi∣nus,Hyginus. and died a martyr anno 142.  After him followed Pius.Pius, &c. After him succéeded Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, about the yéere 180. About this time of Commodus, among others were mar∣tyred SerapionSerapion. B. of Antioch, EgesippusEgesippus. a writer of the ec∣clesiasticall History from Christes passion to his time. Also Miltiades,Miltiades. who wrote his Apologie for Christian religion, as did Melito, Aristides and Quadratus before. About the same time wrote Heraclitus,Heraclitus. who first began to write Annotations and Enarrations vpon the New Te∣stament, and Epistles of the Apostles. Also TheophilusTheophilus.
bishop of Cesarea, DionisiusDionisius. bishop of Corinth, a man fa∣mously learned, who wrote diuerse Epistles to diuerse churches: and among other exhorteth PenitusPenitus. a bishop that he would lay no yoke of chastitie on any necessitie vpon his brethren, but that he would consider the infirmitie of other, and beare with it. About the daies of Cōmodus, wrote also Clemens Alex∣andrinusClemens A∣lexandrinus. a man of singular learning. In that time liued also Pantenus, who was the first in Alexandria that professed to reade in open schoole, of whom is thought first to rise the or∣der of Vniuersities in christendome. He was sent to preach to the Indians by Demetrius bishop of Alexandria. Now in this tranquillitie of the Church grew contention among themselues for Easter day,Contention a∣mong the chri∣stians for Easter day. which had bin stirred be∣fore of Polycarpus & Anicetus. For they of the West church pretending the tradition of Paule and Peter, but in déede be∣ing of Hermes and Pius, kept the Sunday after the 14. day of the first moneth. The Church of Asia following the ordi∣nance of Iohn the Apostle, obserued an other. The fifth Persecution. AFter the death of Commodus raigned PertinaxPertinax. but few moneths: after whō succéeded Seuerus,Seuerus. vnder whom was raised the fifth persecution. He raigned 18. yéeres, and in the first ten was very fauourable, afterward through false accu∣sations and suggestions, he caused to be proclaimed, that no Christian should be suffered: wherevpon an infinite num∣ber were slaine, this was about the yéere 205.  the crimes obiected, were rebellion against the Emperour, Sacrilege, murthering of Infants, incestuous pollutions, eating raw flesh, libidinous cōmixture, worshipping the head of an asse: which is thought to haue béene raised by the Iewes, also for worshipping of the Sunne: which rose because eyther they vsed dayly to sing vnto the Lord, or bycause they vsed
to pray toward the East. But the speciall matter agaynst them was, that they would not woorshippe Idoles. The Presidents and chiefe vnder the Emperour of this perse∣cution were, Hilarius,Hillarius &c. Vigellius, Claudius, Hermianus, ruler of Cappadocia. Celicius, Capella, Vespronius, De∣metrius mentioned of Cyprian, and Aquila Iudge of Alexan∣dria. The places where these persecutions raged were A∣frica, Alexandria, Cappadocia, and Carthage. The number infinite: of which the first was Leonides,Leonides. the father of Ori∣gen, who although he were but of the age of seuentéen yéers, greatly desired to haue suffered with his father, had not his mother priuily in the night stollen away his garments and his shirt, and so for shame he was constrained to tarrie at home: yet he wrote to his father, Take héede to your selfe that you turne not your thought and purpose for our sakes OrigenOrigen. was so toward in knowledge of the scriptures, and all kinde of vertue, that his father would diuers times vncouer his brest being asléepe, and kisse it, giuing thankes to God that had made him so happie a Father of so happie a sonne. After the death of his father, all the goodes béeyng con∣fiscate to the Emperour, hée susteined himselfe, his mother, and sixe brethren, by kéeping a schoole, till at length he ap∣plied himselfe altogether to the scripture, and profited in the tongues, Hebrew & Gréeke, which he conferred with other translations, as that of the 70. & found out also other tran∣slations which we call the common translations of Aquila, of Symmachus and Theodocian, with which he ioyned also foure other. He wrote to the number of vij. thousand bookes,O rgens book the copies whereof he vsed to sell for three pence a peece and a little more to sustaine his liuing. He had diuers Schollers, as Plutarchus,Plutarchus. SerenusSerenus, &c. his Brother which dyed both martyrs: Serenus was burned, Heraclitus and Heron were beheadded. Also another Serenus
which was beheaded, Rhais; and Potamiena, who was tor∣mented with pitch powred vppon her, and martyred with her mother Marcella, and died in the fire. Shée was put to death by one Basilides,Basilides. a Captaine of the armie, who shewed her some kindnesse in repressing the rage of the multitude: wherefore she thanked him and saide, she would pray for him. Now this Basilides being required a while after to giue an oath in a matter by the Idols, and the Em∣perour (as the manner of the oath was) refused so to doe, confessing himselfe to bée a Christian, and was beheaded for the faith. At that time, there was one Alexander,Alexand. who after great tormentes, escaped aliue, and was afterwarde Bi∣shoppe of Hierusalem, together with Narcissus,Narcissus. who being thréescore and thrée yéeres olde, was vnweldy to gouerne alone. He continued Bishop in Hierusalem 40. yéeres, till the persecution of Decius, and there erected a famous libra∣ry, where Eusebius had his chiefest helpe in writing his ec∣clesiastical history. He wrote also diuers Epistles, and licen∣sed Origen to teach openly in his Church. At length being very aged was brought to Cesarea vnder Decius, where after his constant confession the second time, he died in pri∣son. Vnder Seuerus, suffered also Andoclus,Andoclus. whome Po∣lycarpus had sent before into Fraunce: who was apprehen∣ded of Seuerus, and first being beaten with bats, was after∣ward beheaded. In that time AsclepiadesAsclepiad. confessed also, and suffred much, and was after ordeined Bishop of Antioch, and continued there 7. yéeres. About the fourth or fift yéere IreneusIreneus. with a great mul∣titude beside, were martired. Hée was the scholler of Poly∣carpus. He was appointed Bishop of Lyons: and there con∣tinued 23. yéeres. In his time, the question of keeping of Easter was renued betwéene VictorVictor. Bishoppe of Rome,
and the churches of Asia: and when Victor would haue ex∣communicated them as Schismatikes, Ireneus, with other brethren of the French Church, wrote vnto Victor, to staye his purpose therein, and not to procéede thereto, for such a matter. Not long after Ireneus followed Tertullian,Tertullian. about the time of this Seuerus and Antoninus Caracalla, who writte very learned Apologies for the Christians, and confuted all the slaunders obiected against them. He writte also diuers bookes: whereof part remaine at this day. Victor succéeded Eleutherius in the bishoprick of Rome, and died a Martir (as some say) after he had sitten ten or xij. yeres. This Victor was earnest in the matter of Easter, the yere of our Lord 260.  and would haue excommunicated all of the contrarie minde, had not Ireneus disswaded him. With Victor stoode Theophilus,Theophil. &c Bishop of Cesarea: Nar∣cissus, of Ierusalem: Ireneus, of Lyons: Palmas, of Pontus: Panthillus, of Corinth: the Bishop of Ostrena, and other more: who agréed to haue Easter vpon the sunday, because they would differ from the Iewes in all things: and partly, because the resurrection of the Lorde fell on that day. On the other side were diuers Bishops of Asia. Among whom, the chiefe was Policrates,Policrat. &c. Bishop of Ephesus, alledging the example of Philippe the Apostle, with his iij. daughters at Hierapolis: of Iohn the Apostle and Euangelist, at Ephe∣sus: Polycarpus, at Smirna: Thraseas, at Eumenia, Bi∣shop and Martir. Likewise the example of Sagaris at Lao∣dicea, Bishop and Martir: holy Papirius, & Melito, at Sar∣dis: beside diuers others. Notwithstanding, Victor procée∣ded to excommunication, yet by the wise handling of Irene∣us & other, the matter was staied: who shewed, that variāce and difference of Ceremonies, was no strange thing in the Church of God, not only in the day of Easter, but also of fa∣sting, and diuers other vsages among the Christians, and yet kept the vnitie of faith and concord among themselues:
and brought forth examples of Telesphorus, Pius, Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, and such other. After Victor, succéeded in the Sea of Rome zephyrinus,Zephyrinus. in the dayes of Seuerus, about the yere 203.  Eusebius saith, he died in the raign of Caracalla, and sate xvij. yeres. Platina saith that he died vnder Seuerus, and sate viij. yeres. And so, Nauclerus. Damasus saith, that he sate xvi. yeres, and ij. Moneths. Vnder this Seuerus suffered also Perpetua,Perp. &c. Felicitas, and Rouocatus her brother. Also, Saturninus and Satyrus, bre∣thren, & Secundulus, which were throwen to wild beastes, and of them deuoured, in Carthage, and in Africa: sauing that Saturninus (being brought againe from the beasts) was beheaded, and Secundulus died in prison, about the yere 202  Seuerus raigned xviij. yeres, and was slaine at Yorke by the Northerne men and Scots, the yere 214.  Leauing behinde him two sonnes, Bassianus, and Geta. Which Bassianus,Bassianus. surnamed Carocalla, after he had slain his brother here in Britain, gouerned the Empire alone the space of sixe yeres. After whose death he also (being slaine of his seruantes) succéeded Marianus, with his sonne Diadu∣menus, who after they had raigned one yere, were both slain by their own people. After them succéeded Varius HeliogabVarius Helio∣gabalus. who (after he had raigned very vitiously ij. yeres, viij. moneths) was slain by ye souldiers, drawne through the citie, & throwne into Tyber. He (hauing no issue) adopted his heire Aurelius Alexander Seuerus, the sonne of Mammea. He entered his raigne the yere 224.  and continued xiij. yeres, wel commended for ver∣tue, and fauoured the Christians. Mammea,Mammea. the mother of this Emperor, whō Ierom cal∣leth a deuout, & religious womā, hearing of ye fame of Origē, sēt for him to Antioch: to whō Origē resorted, and (staying a while wt the Emperor and his mother) returned again to Alexandria. Thus (hauing raigned xiij. yeres) at a cōmotion
in Germany, with his mother Mammea he was slaine. After him succéeded Maximinus,Maximinus. & although the church in the time of Alexander had no open persecution, yet vnder Iudges there were many martyred, because there was no edict to the contrary. As vnder Almachus, CalixtusCalixtus. B. of Rome, who succéeded Zephyrus aboue mentioned: and after him Vrbanus, who suffered vnder Alexander Seuerus. Vin∣centius saith Calixtus was tied to a great stone, and so out of a window was throwne into a ditch. Eusebius saith he sat 5. yéeres, Platina 6. Sabellicus 7. and so Damasus. After Calixtus followed Vrbanus,Vrbanus. about the yéere 227.  he died a martyr (as Marianus, Scotus, Sabellicus, Naucle∣rus doo hold) in the dayes of Seuerus after he had gouerned there, as Damasus & Platina say, foure yéeres: as Marianus, eight yéeres. Damasus and Platina witnesse of him, that hée conuerted diuerse Ethnicks, among whome were Ti∣burtiusTiburtius. and ValerianusValerianus. the husband of Cecilia, which be∣ing both noble men of Rome, remayned constant vnto mar∣tyrdome. Vnder the same Alexander suffered also one AgapitusAgapitus. of the age of fiftéene yéeres, who beyng condemned at Prene∣ste in Italie, because he would not doo sacrifice, after other torments, was beheaded. The executor of these punishmēts was one Antiochus, who while the torments were execu∣ting, fell suddenly from his Iudiciall seat: crying out that all his inward bowels burned within him, & died. Vnder him also suffered CalepodiusCalepodius. a minister of Rome, who was drawen through the citie, & cast into Tiber: after him suffe∣red PammachusPammachus. a Senator of Rome, with his wife & chil∣dren, and other men and women, to the number of 42. and with them also another noble Senator named Simplicius:Simplicius. all which together in one day had their heads smitten of, & their hands hanged vp in diuerse gates of the citie. Vnder him also suffered QuiritiusQuiritius. a noble man of Rome with his mother Iulia,Iulia. with a great number besides: also
TiberiusTiberius. and ValerianusValerianus. citizens of Rome and brethren, suffered the same time, being first beaten with bats, and af∣ter beheaded. Also one MartinaMartina. a virgin suffered at the same time: but these martyrs are rather to be thought to suffer vnder Maximinus or Decius. The sixt Persecution. Maximinus.MAximinus succéeded Alexander, as is aforesaid the yéere of our Lord 237.  Who for the hatred he had to Alexan∣der, raised the sixth persecution, especially against the teach∣ers of the Church: he raigned but thrée yéeres. In the time of this persecution Origen wrote his booke De Martyrio. After him succéeded Gordian,Gordian. who was milde towards the Christians, raigned six yéeres, and was slaine of PhillipPhillip. who succéeded him. In the dayes of these Emperours aboue recited, was PontianusPontianus. bishop of Rome, who succéeded next after Vrba∣nus about the yéere 236.  in the twelfth yéere of Alexander, according to Eusebius declaring him to sit six yéeres. Da∣masus and Platius write that hée was Bishop nine yéeres and a halfe, and with Phillip his priest was banished into Sardinia, and there died. But it séemeth he was rather ba∣nished vnder Maximinus, and died in the beginning of the raigne of Gordianus. In these times notable men were raised vp to the church, as PhiletusPhiletus. Bishop of Antioch, who succéeded Asclepiades aboue mentioned anno 220.  and after him ZebenusZebenus. bishop of the same place anno 231.  To these may be added Ammo∣niusAmmonius. the Scholemaster of Origen and kinsman of Porphiry the enemy of Christ. In the same times was also Iulius A∣phricanusIulius Aphri∣canus. the scholer of Origen. To these may be ioined Natalius,Natalius. who had suffered for the truth, and was seduced by Asclepiodotus and Theodotus (who were ye disciples of Theodorus) to take vpon him to be
the Bishop of their sect, promising him euery moneth 150. pieces of siluer, wherto he yéelded. But the Lord in a vision admonished him, whereto he taking no héed, was in a night scourged with Angels, and so confessed his fault, and decla∣red that which had happened vnto him, to Zephirinus the Bishop, who with the rest of the congregation admitted him againe. After Pontianus succéeded Anterius.Anterius. Cōcerning his time writers doe greatly vary. Eusebius and Marianus Scotus affirm, that he was Bishop but a moneth, Damasus twelue yeeres and one moneth, Volateranus Bergomensis & Hen∣ricus Erford thrée yéeres & one moneth, Nauclerus one yere and one moneth. Next to this Bishop, was Fabianus. HippolitusHippolitus. was a martyr: and as Gelasius saith, was bi∣shop of an head Citie in Arabia, Nicephorus, that he was Bishop of Ostia, a port towne néere to Rome. He was a great writer, and was about the yéere 230.  Prudentius in his Peristephanon, maketh mention of great heapes of martyrs buried by thréescore together: and saith, that Hip∣politus was drawne with wild horses through fields, dales, and bushes. After Gordianus, succéeded Philippus, who with Philip his sonne, gouerned about the space of sixe yéeres ann. 246. These Emperours with their families were christened and conuerted by Fabianus and Origen. He with his sonne was slaine of Decius, one of the Captaines, by hatred, as it is thought, because the Emperours had committed their trea∣sures vnto Fabianus then Bishop of Rome. The seuenth Persecution. DEcius hauing slayn the former Emperours inuaded the crowne the yéere 250.  by whom through enuie & hatred as is aboue said, was moued a terrible persecution against
the Christians. Fabian.Fabian aboue mentioned, was made Bishoppe of Rome after Anterius, by the flying and lighting of a Doue vpon his head in the congregation, which was minded to elect some noble personage of Rome. He sate 13. yeres, or as other say 14. & was put to death by Decius, who also caused to bée proclaimed in al quarters the destruction of Christians. To this Decius Origen wrote of the rightnesse of his faith: he continued two and fifty yéeres in great labours of teaching, and writing, and sustained diuers gieuous per∣secutions, but especially vnder Decius: vnder whom hauing suffred bands, torments, rackings, with bars of yron, dunge∣ons, besides terrible threats of death, and burning, at length was brought to an altar, where a foule filthy Ethiope was appointed to be, and there this choise was offered him, whe∣ther he would sacrifice to the Idoll, or haue his body pol∣luted with that foule and ougly Ethyope. Origen made choyse rather to doe sacrifice:Origen sacrifi∣ceth. for the which impietie, hée was after excommunicated by the Church. Epiphanius writeth, that he being vrged to sacrifice to Idols, and taking the bones in his hand, wherewith the heathen were wont to honour their goddes, called vpon the Christians to car∣rie them in honour of Christ: which fact the Churche of Alexandria misliking, remooued him from their commu∣nion.Origen excom∣municated. Wherevpon Origen driuen away with shame, went into Iurie, where being in Hierusalem among the con∣gregation, and there requested of the ministers to make some exhortation in the Church, refused a great while so to doe: but at length through importunitie, he turned the booke as though hée woulde haue expounded some place of Scripture, and read the verse of the 49. Psalme. But God saide to the sinner, why doest thou preach my iustifica∣tions? and why doest thou take my testament in thy mouth? &c. Which verse hauing read, hée shut the booke, and sate downe, wéeping and wayling, the whole congrega∣tion
also wéeping and lamenting with him.Origen re∣penteth. Suidas saith, Origen was buried at Tirus. Eusebius saith he died vnder ye Emperor Gallus, about the yéere two hundred fiftie and fiue,  and the thrée score and ten yeares of his age, in great miserie and pouertie. In the time of An∣toninus Carocalla, Origen had a notable man HeracleasHeracleas. his vsher in the schoole of Alexandria, who after in the tenth yeare of Alexander, Origen departing vnto Cesaria, suc∣céeded him in the gouernment of the schoole of Alexandria. This Heracleas also succéeded after the death of Deme∣trius to be Bishop of Alexandria, in the tyme of the Em∣perour Gordianus: in which function he continued sixtéene yéeres. After Heracleas, succéeded Dyonisius Alexandrinus. Heracleas was no martyr, but died thrée yéeres before De∣cius, anno 250.  vnder whom Dionysius AlexandrinusDionysius. Alexandrinus. suf∣fered much. The persecutions vnder Decius were so cruel, yt Niceph. faith, it were as possible to number the sand of the sea, as to recite their names yt suffred.Cruel persecu∣tion. Of the which persecution vnder the Emperor, the chief doers were, Optimus the vndercon∣sul, Secundianus, Verianus, Marcellinus, &c. In the time of Decius, AlexanderAlexander. was B. of Hierusa∣lem, where he continued a very aged man about the terme of xl. yeres, till the 1. yere of Decius. At what time (being brought from Ierusalem to Cesarea) he died in prison. After whom succéeded Mezananes,Mezananes. the xxxvj. Bishop of that citie, after Iames the Apostle. Vnder this Decius, Babylas, B. of Antioch, who succée∣ded zebinus, died in prison, which followed after Philetus, an. 232. and sate xij. yeres. Which Philetus succéeded Ascle∣piades, after Serapion, an. 214 and sate vij. yeres. Babilas, because he resisted a certaine Emperour, who had most cruelly slaine (against his promis) a kinges sonne, whom he receiued in Hostage, and woulde not suffer him
to enter the tēple of the christians, was by him put to death. In the raigne of Constantinus, afterward Gallus then made ouerseer of the East parts, caused the body of Babylas to be translated into the suburbes of Antioch called Daph∣nes: where was an oracle of Apollo, which after the bring∣ing in of the body of Babylas, ceassed to giue answere, alle∣ging his body to be the cause: and so it continued til the time of Iulianus, who therefore caused it to be remoued away by the Christians: which was no sooner departed the temple, but the temple was consumed with fire. This Babylas is mentioned of Chrysostom who is like to be another, diuerse from him that died. In Decius time Nicephorus in his fifth booke, maketh mention of an other Babylas besides this that was Bishoppe of Nicomedia, and suffered vnder De∣cius. In these times in the Citie of Antioch suffered fourtie Virginsxl. Virgins. in the daies of Decius. In Phrigia suffered one PeterPeter. in the Towne of Lampsur, vnder Optimus the Pro∣consul. In Troada also other martyrs suffered, whose names were, Andrew,Andrew, Paul,Paul. Nichomachus,Nichomach. and DionisiaDionysia. a Virgin. Also in Babylonia, diuers Christian Confessors were founde by Decius, and were ledde away into Spaine, there to be executed. In the Countrie of Cappadocia at the citie of Cesarea, Germanus,Germanus. Theophilus,Theophilus. Cesarius,Cesarius. & Vitalis,Vitalis. suffered martir∣dome, Likewise PolichroniusPolychronius. Bishop of Babylon, and Ne∣stor,Nestor. in Pāphilia, Bishop of the same place. At Persida, in ye Towne of Cardala suffered OlimpiadesOlympiades. and Maximus.Maximus. In Tyrus, Anatolia,Anatolia. a Virgin, and Audax,Audax, gaue their liues for the faith. In these times, diuers suffered diuersly in Alexandria, a whole yeare before any Proclamation, by reason of a Sooth∣sayer,Soothsayers. which stirred vp the people. Who first flying vpon a Priest, called Metra,Metra. apprehended him, and layde vpon him with staues and clubbes, and with sharpe réedes pricked his
face, and eyes, and afterwarde in the Suburbes stoned him to death. Then tooke they Quinta, a faithfull woman, and bound her féete, and drew her through the stréetes, vpon the harde stones. And so (dashing her against the milstones) and scourging her with whips, slue her in the Suburbes of the Citie. This done, they spoyled all the Christians, who auoi∣ded the City, and tooke the losse patiently. Among other that were taken there was one Apollonia,Apollonia. an auncient Virgin, whom they brought forth, and dashing al her téeth out of her iawes, made a great fire before the Citie, threatning to cast her into the same, except she would denie Christ. Whereat she staying a while, as one that would take a pause, sodain∣ly leapt into the middest of the fire, and so was burned. They also tooke one Serapion,Serapion. in his owne house, whō hauing broken almost all the ioyntes of his bodie, they cast him downe from an vpper lofte, and so he died. Thus (raging against the Christians) at last they fell at debate a∣mong themselues, and so for a time the furie staied: which was so great, that no place could hide the Christians from the rage of the heathen. Shortly after this, came the Edict of the Emperour against the Christians, whereupon the persecution grew in all places more grieuous thā before. In so much, that some reuolted voluntarilie,Reuolt. & some by impri∣sonment & tormēt: Other continued constant to the death: of whom one was Iulianus,Iulianus. a man diseased with the gout, & not able to go, but was caried by two men: of whom, the one quickly denied the other. Cronion,Cronion. surnamed Eunus,Eunus. with Iulianus the olde man, were laide vpon Camels, and there scourged, at length cast into the fire for the testimonie of Iesus. When ye aforesaide were going to martirdom, there was a souldierA souldier. tooke parte with them, and so was presentlie apprehended, & beheaded. Likewise was one Macer,Macer. a Lybian, burned aliue, for his confessing of Christ. After these, suffered Epymachus,Epimachus. and Alexander,Alexander. which hauing suffered bonds & torments,
with rasors and scourges, were burned wt iiij. other womē. Likewise Ammonarion,Ammonarion. a holy virgin, and an aged ma∣trone, named Mercuria,Mercuria. with another called DyonisiaDionysia. (being a mother of many faire children) after many tormēts, were slaine by the sword. Ammonarion suffered before the rest, after, Heron,Heron. and Isidorus,Isodorus. Egyptians, and with them Di∣oscorus,Dioscorus. of the age of xv. yeres, With whom the Iudge first began, and could not preuaile, either by perswasions, or tor∣ments. The rest (after grieuous torments) he caused to bée burned, and respited Dioscorus for his tender age, being a∣stonied at his graue answeres, and constancie. NemesianNemesian. also, an Egyptian, was first accused to be a cōpa∣niō of theues: but being purged thereof before the Cēturion, was thē accused of christianity. Wherfore (being more grée∣uously scourged thā ye other théeues) he was burned wt them. There were standing before the Tribunall seat, certaine warriors, or knights, whose names were, Ammon,Ammon. Zenon,Zenon. Ptolomeus,Ptolomeus. Ingenius,Ingenius. and wt them a certaine aged man cal∣led Theophilus:Theophilus. who séeing a certain Christian fainting, and fearful to confesse his faith, emboldned him by signes, & gaue him courage. Which being noted, & the stāders by readie to lay hands on them, they preased vp of their own accord, pro∣fessing themselues to be Christians. Wherat the Iudge and his assistants were greatly amazed, and the Christians em∣boldened to suffer. So they departed, glad for the testimo∣nie they had geuen of their faith. Also one Ischrion,Ischrion. being oftentimes moued by his master to do sacrifice, and he refusing, was of him run through with a pike, and slaine. In these times, infinite numbers wādred in wildernesses, suffering hunger, colde, danger of wilde beastes: in the number of whom was Cheremon,Cheremon. Bishop of a towne called Nilus, an aged man: who with his wife, flying to the mountain of Arabia, could neuer (although they were sought for) be heard of. And many other taken of the barbarous Arabiās, could scarcely be ransomed for money.
At the same time Dionisius AlexandrinusDionisius. Alexandrinus. (out of whose Epistle to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, Eusebius recordeth these persecutions) suffered much afflicton, and had straunge deliuerance. Once the messenger was stroken blind, and could not find his house, beyng a Farmer of Sabinus: at length after thrée dayes he was commaunded of God to fly, and so did: but afterward comming to Ierusalem, he was taken and brought by soldiours to Taposixis, where Timo∣theusTimotheus. being from home and returning, & finding Dionisius and others taken, and all the rest fled, he fled away also, and méeting a neighbour of his, and asked whether he went, de∣clared all the matter simply. Which doone, the man went on as he was purposed to a marriage, and tolde the company what was done, which they hearing, burst out of the house in the night season (as the manner of marriages was in that time) making toward the prisoners with great showting: whereat they that apprehended the prisoners being afraid, left them, & ran away. Then the cōpany willed them to de∣part, which they did, & tooke Dionysius by the hands & féet, & caried him out, & led him away. There followed him Gaius,Gaius. Faustus,Faustus. Petrus,Petrus. Paulus,Paulus. who brought him out of the city, and setting him vpon a bare Asse, conueyed him away. Vnder Decius suffered one Christophorus,Christophorus. a Chanaa∣nite, being 12. cubits hie. Vnder him, also suffered MeniatusMeniatus. a Florentine, & Agatha,Agatha. an holy virgin in Sicily, who suffe∣red imprisonment, with beatings, racking, famine, rayling vpon, sharpe shelles, and hote coales. Hauing (moreouer) her brestes cut from her bodie, by the crueltie of Quintinia∣nus the Proconsul. About the same time suffered also amōg others, xl. virgins by diuers kindes of death. Vnder this ty∣rant also suffered by the sword (after diuers torments) Try∣phon,Tryphon. a man of great holines and constancie in the Citie of Nice, by Aquilius. At what time Decius had erected a tēple in ye midst of Ephesus, cōpelling al in the citie to do sacrifice, there were found vij. souldiers yt refused: their names were,
Maximianus, Malchus, Martialis, Dionisius, Iohannes, Serapion and Constantinus. Who when respite was giuen them to consider of the matter, till the Emperours returne from the warre, hid themselues in mount Celius in caues: which the Emperour at his returne caused to be rammed vp with stones, and so they were martyred. There was, as Hieronymus writeth in the life of Pau∣lus the Heremite, a godly souldier, who could by no meanes be brought from his faith by the Pretor, and was brought into a pleasant garden, and laid on a soft bedde, and an har∣lot sent to allure him: who when she offered to kisse, he bit of hir tongue, and spit it in the harlots face. The like is re∣ported of Ambrose de virginibus, of Theodora,Theodora. who was commanded to the stewes: which a young man a Christi∣an vnderstanding, pressed in, as though he had béene one of the lewde wantons, and tolde Theodora what he was, and councelled her to chaunge garments, and to conuey her self away. Which she did, he offering himselfe to their violence: and being found a man, confessed himself a Christian, & was presently condemned to suffer. Which Theodora vnderstan∣ding of, offered her selfe to the Iudge, as the party guiltie, and required the other might be discharged. But the cruell iudge commanded them to be both beheaded, and after cast into the fire. At what time this befel, it doth not appeare. Agathon.Agathon, a man of Termes, in the citie of Alexādria, for rebuking those that derided the dead bodies of the Christi∣ans, was condemned to lose his head. The Proconsull of Troada, gaue PaulusPaulus. and AndreasAndreas. (being first scourged, and after drawen through the Citie) to be troden to death vnder the féete of the people. In this time also of Decius, suffered one Iustinus,Iustinus. a priest of Rome, and Nicostratus, a Deacon, also Portius,Portius. a priest of Rome, who is reported to haue conuerted the Emperour Philip a∣boue mentioned. In that time there was also one Secundianus,Secundianus. who was
accused to Valerian a captaine of Decius to be a Christian: who as he was led by the souldiers to the gaile, VerianusVerianus. & MarcellinusMarcellinus. cried to the souldiers, and asked whether they led the innocent. Wherevpon they were also brought to a place named Contumcellas, and there after torments & bea∣tings with wasters, they were hanged on a gibbet with fire put to their sides: but the tormentors some fell suddenly dead, other were taken with euill spirites, and the martyrs at length were beheaded with the sword. Besides an infinite number that suffered vnder Decius,Sore persecu∣tion. these are registred, Hippolitus and Concordia, Hiereneus & Abundus, Victoria a virgin, beyng noble personages of Antioch: Bellias bishop of the citie of Apollonia, Leacus, Tyrsus and Galmetus Nazanzo, Triphon in the citie of E∣gipt, called Tanais. Phildas bishop of Philocomus, with ma∣ny other in Perside, Philochronius bishop of Babilon, The∣siphon bishop of Pamphilia, Nestor bishop in Corduba: Parmenius a priest with diuerse other. In the prouince cal∣led Colonia, Circensis Marianus and Iacobus. In Africa Nemesianus, Felix, Rogatianus priest, Felicissimus: at Rome Iouinius, Basilius, Ruffina, Secunda virgins, Ter∣tullianus, Valerianus, Nemesius, Sempromanus, & Olym∣pius in Spaine: Teragone at Verone, Zeno bishop at Ce∣sarea: Marinus and Archenius in the towne of Milaine: Priuatus bishop, Theodorus surnamed Gregorius bishop of Pontus. Haec Beda. Also in the same persecution suffered certaine children,Children per∣secuteth. in a citie of Tuscia called Aretum: their names are thought to be PergentiusPergentius. and Laurentius.Laurentius. The heat of this persecution was so sore, that some re∣uolted,Reuolt. as Serapion an aged mā, Nichomachus in the midst of his torments, in the citie of Troada: Euaristus bishop in Africa, Nicostratus a Deacon, whereof diuerse were puni∣shed by the hand of God, some with euill spirites, some with straunge diseases.
In this time rose vp the quarrell and Heresie of Noua∣tus,Nouatus. who disturbed CyprianCyprian. bishop of Carthage, afterward disturbed CorneliusCornelius. Bishop of Rome, and beyng assisted with Maximus, Vrbanus, Sydonius, and Celerinus, al∣lured vnto him thrée simple Bishoppes in the coastes of Italie, by whose laying on of hands (making them drunke before (he made himselfe Bishop of Rome with Cornelius, whom he went about by all meanes to defeat, and caused the people that came to receiue the Eucharist at his hands, to sweare they would stand with him. But Maximus, Vr∣banus, Sydonius, and Celerinus, perceiuing themselues ab∣used, forsooke him afterward. Cornelius remained B. of Rome after the death of De∣cius to the time of Gallus, but other affirme (as Damasus) that he was exiled vnder Decius, and by him martyred in the way of Appius, first beyng beaten with plumbats. Eu∣sebius saith he sat two yéeres: in another place he saith thrée yéeres. Damasus giueth him onely two yéeres. Vnder this tyrant suffered, as Cyprian reporteth, two yoong men, the one AureliusAurelius. who was twise tormented, the other Mappalicus,Mappalicus. who in the middest of his torments, sayd to the Proconsull; to morrow you shall sée the running for a wager: meaning his martyrdome, which he constant∣ly did suffer. Decius death.This Decius raigned but two yéeres, and with his sonne was slaine of the Barbarians. Pomponius affirming that he warring against the Gothians, to auoid their hands, ran into an whyrlepit where hée was drowned, and his body neuer found. Immediatly after the death of Decius, God sent a plague tenne yéeres together,A plague of ten yeeres. which made diuerse places of the world desolate; especially where the persecution most ra∣ged. Where might appeare great difference betwéene the Christians and Gentils, one comforting and ministring to the necessities of their brethren, the other forsaking their
neighbours, and friends, left them destitute,Cyprian de mortalitate. and voyd of suc∣cour. Vpon this plague, Cypr. wrote his book de mortalitate. After ye death of Decius, succeded VibiasVibias. GallusGallus. & Volusian.Volusianus. his son, both by treasō, about ye yéere 255. & cōtinued 2. yéers. Gallus at the first was quiet,The teachers of Christianity banished. but anon after published e∣dicts against ye Christians, which was chiefly of banishmēt of the guides of the church. In whose time Cyprian B. of Car∣thage was banished. Other were condemned to ye mynes, as Nemesianus,Nemesianus. Felix,Felix. Lucius,Lucius. with their bish, priests, & deacons: to whom Cyprian wrote cōsolatory epistles. He wrote also consolatory Epistles to SeagriusSeagrius. & Rogatianus,Rogatianus. being then in bonds for the trueth. In the time of this Gallus, was Lu∣cius B. of Rome sent into banishment, (who next succéeded Cornelius in ye yéere 256.) wherin he continued but a while, and returned to his Church. Lucius sate but 8. moneths, as saith Eusebius, Damasus, Marianus, Scotus, and Nauclerus say he sate 3. yéeres, and was beheaded the second yéere of Valerian, and Galienus. After Lucius, came Stephanus,Stephanus. & sate 7. yéers 5. months, & di¦ed a martir, as saith Damasus. Platina, Sabellicus, Eusebius, & Volateranus, giue him (which is more likely) but 2. yeres. Betwixt this Stephanus, and Cyprian, fell a contentionContention. about rebaptising of heretikes. Next to the former Emperors succéeded Emilianus,Emilianus. who slue the former, and succéeded himself. After that he had reig∣ned but thrée moneths, he also was slaine. Next, Valerianus, and Galienus,Valerianus & Galienus. his sonne, were aduaun∣ced to the Empire, and succéeded Emilianus. Valerianus thrée or foure yéeres was so curteous, and gen∣tle to the Christians, as no Emperour before him, no not such as professed Christ: so that his Court was full of Chri∣stians. But being seduced by an Egyptian magician,Valerianus seduced. who was hindred by the Christians, from practising his charms, he fell to idols, and sacrificed young infantes, and raised the eight persecution.
The eight Persecution. THe chief ministers of this persecution were, Emilianus, President of Egypt, Paternus and Galerius maximus Proconsuls in Africa, Paternus Vicegerent in Rome, Pe∣rennius, Nicetus and Claudius Presidents. Disordered life of Christians.The cause of this persecution, besides the Egyptian a∣boue mentioned, was the dissention and disordered life of Christians, euen of those that had béen confessors, as Cypri∣an in his fourth booke, and fourth Epistle doeth declare: to whom it was shewed in a vision of the Lord before it came. There was a certaine aged man sitting,A Vision. at whose right hande sate a young man very sadde and pensiue, as one with an indignation sorowfull, holding his hande vppon his breast, his countenance heauie, and vnchéerefull. On the left hand sate another person, hauing in his hand a nette which hee threatned to lay to catche the people that stoode about, and saide vnto him: the young man whom thou séest sad & sorowful, is for that his precepts bee not obserued: but he on the left hand daunceth and is merrie, for that occa∣sion is giuen him to haue power of the aged father, to afflict men. Cyprians Apo∣logie for Chri∣stians.Cyprian doth defend the Christians, and confute the false accusations laid against them (as among the rest to be ye cau∣ses of all calamities that happened of warre or plague whatsoeuer) writing contra Demetrium, as Tertullian had before, writing contra Capulam. Cyprian was an African, borne in Carthage, and first was an idolater,Cyprian once a Magician. altogether giuen to the practise of magical artes, and a worthie Rhetorician. He was conuerted to the saith by Cecil. a priest (whose name after hee bare) through occasion of hearing the history of ye Prophet Ionas.Cecilius con∣uerteth Cypr. And im∣mediatly vpon his conuersion, he distributed all his sub∣stance to the poore, and being ordayned a Priest, was
not long after made Bishop of Carthage. But whether hée succéeded Agrippinus,Agrippinus. which was the first author of rebap∣tization, it is vncertaine. Such were his giftes and vertues, that he had the gouernment of the whole East Church, and Church of Spaine: and was called the Bishop of Christian men. He was much geuen to reade Tertullian, and called him his master. In the time of Decius and Gallus, he was first banished,Cyprian ba∣nished. and after (returning againe out of exile, in the time of Vale∣rianus) he was also the second time banished by Paternus, the Proconsull of Africke, into the Citie of Thurbin, or into a Citie called Furabilitana, or Curabilitana. But when Paternus the Proconsul was dead, Galienus Maximus suc∣céeded him: who finding Cyprian in a Garden, caused him to be apprehended, and (after many raging words) his head to be stricken of, Xistus being then Bishop of Rome,Cyprian be∣headed. in the yere 259. It is to be noted, that there were more Cyprians:Diuers Cy∣prians. one of whom, Nazianzen writeth to be a Citizen of Antioch, and afterward Bishop of that Citie, and martired vnder Dio∣clesian. There was also a third Cyprian, in the time of Iu∣lianus Apostata, long after both the former. About this time, vnder the same Valerianus, suffered Xis∣tus, or Sixtus, the second of that name, Bishop of Rome: who with vi. of his Deacons,Sixtus with six of his deacons. (Nemesius being one) was behea∣ded. At which time also, one Laurence a Deacon, séeing the Bishop led to execution, cried out vnto him, saying, O deare father, whither goest thou without the companie of thy deare sonne? meaning himselfe. To whom he answe∣red with a fatherly discourse: that within thrée dayes, hee should suffer after a more painfull manner: which in déede followed according as he had said: for Laurence hauing di∣stributed of the goods of the poore, by the charge of the Bi∣shop, it came to the Emperors eare: who (gréedie of praye) commanded him to render the treasure vnto him. But he in¦steade
thereof, presented vnto him after thrée dayes respite, a sort of poore Christians, as the treasure of the Church. Wherewith, taking himselfe deluded, he commanded Lau∣rence to be broyled on an Iron Gridiron.L. broyled on a gridiron. Whereon, after he had suffered a great space, he pronoūced these words vn∣to the Tyrant: This side is now rosted inough, turne vp O Tyrant: assay whether rosted, or raw, thou think to be bet∣ter meate. By the constant confession of this Laurence, a certayne Souldier of Rome being pricked, and therewith conuerted to ye faith, desired forthwith to be baptized of him: for which, (being called for by the Iudge) he was scourged, and after beheaded. Vnder the same suffered also Dionisius (B. of Alexādria)Dionisius B. of Alexandria. much affliction and banishment: who with Faustus, Maxi∣mus, and Cheremon, were banished into a town of Libia, called Cephrobie. Emilianus the President, at the Empe∣rors commandement, not geuing Dionisius (then sick) one daies respit: in ye place he was once scourged, & afterwarde remoued frō thence to another place called Mariota, a more straight & sharpe place of Libia. Who after he came thither, was assigned thence to go to Colluthion. There were also afflicted with him at yt time, Caius, Petrus, and Paulus. But (notwithstanding all their crueltie) certaine visited the bre∣thren:The brethren visited. as Maximus, Dioscorus, Demetrius, and Lucius. At yt time also EusebiusEusebius. suffred afflictiō for the truth, who was afterward made B. of Laodicea, in Siria. Maximus had the ministerie of the church of Alexandria after Dionisius. Faustus.Faustus long after, being a very olde man, was in the la∣ter persecution beheaded. Dionisius himselfe suruiued all these troubles, and continued vnto the xij. yere of the reigne of Galienus, about the yere 268. and so in great age depar∣ted in peace, after he had gouerned the church of Alexandria xvij. yeres, and taught Schoole in the same xvi. yeres. After whom succéeded Maximus.
In Cesaria Palestine suffered ye same time Priscus,Priscus. Mar∣cusMarcus. and Alexander:Alexander. who stepping to the iudge, and declaring thēselues to be Christians, were giuen to wild beasts, with a woman that had béene before of the sect of Marcion. Also in Carthage were 300. martyred300. martyred. in a lime kill, for refusing to doo sacrifice to Iupiter. Also in the citie of Tuburba, Maxima, Donatilla, and Secunda, thrée virginsThree virgins were after diuerse cruell torments giuen to beasts, which refusing to touch thē they were be∣headed with the sword. In Symela a citie vnder the Alpes one PontiusPontius. beyng apprehended by Claudius the president, after diuerse torments, was giuen to beastes, who refusing to touch him, was committed to the fire, of which also beyng not touched, he was beheaded by a riuers side, and his body cast into the same.Gods iudge∣ments. At which instant Claudius with Anabius his assistant were taken with wicked spirits, and bit of their owne tongues, and so died. In the same time also ZenoZeno. Bishop of Verona was martyred. The later Histories write of one Philippus, who beyng promoted to the Presidentship of Alexandria, came downe with his wife Claudia, and his two sonnes Auitus and Sergius, and his daughter named Eugenia. Among whom this EugeniaEugenia. was brought to Christianitie, with two other her companions Eunuches Prothus, and Hyacin∣thus: with whome shée councelling, tooke the apparell of a man, partly to auoid trouble, and to heare more boldly the readings of HelenusHelenus. an aged Bishop, and called her name Eugenius. Now a matrone named Melancia, of Alexandria, fell in loue with this Eugenius: which she refusing, and Me∣lācia seing by no means she could obtaine her suit, she made an outcry against Eugenius, declaring yt he went about to defloure her, & presented her accusatiō to Philippus: Wher∣vpon Eugenius was constrained to manifest her selfe vnto Philippus her father, who had now long time missed her, & whom with other of her parents she did afterward win to
the faith, for the same was after martyred. Eugenia after the martyrdome of her Father, is sayd to haue returned to Rome with Prothus, and Hyacinthus, and conuerted Ba∣silla to the faith, who should haue béene married to a Pa∣gan husband, and was then beheaded after sundry, and di∣uerse torments. In the sixt yéere of Valerianus, VictorVictor. and Victorinus,Victorinus. with ClaudianusClaudianus. and BossaBossa. his wife, after thrée yéeres im∣prisonment, and diuerse torments, were put to death. Vnder these tyraunts, suffered FructuosusFructuosus. Bishop of Taraconia in Spaine, with his two Deacons Augurius and Eulogius, condēnsd by Emilianus. There hands bound behind them, presently were vnloosed, and the fire flew from them, till they had praied, that it might accomplish the worke, and so they died constantly. At which time a certaine souldier of the house of Emilianus,A vision. did sée the heauen open and the martyrs enter in: which sight he did shew vnto the daughter of Emilianus the president. This Valerian after he had raigned with his sonne Ga∣lienus six or seuen yéeres, and about two yéeres had afflic∣ted the Christians, fell into the handes of SaporesSapores. king of Persians, beyng of thrée score and ten yéeres of age: who made him alwaies his footestoole to get vppon his horse, to which purpose he serued till his death: albeit Eusebius saith hée was slayne at the commaundement of Sapores, and powdered with salt. Claudius his president was possessed of a Diuell,Gods iudge∣ments. and biting of his owne tounge, by many small péeces, ended his life. At the same time in the Romane Monarchie there hap∣pened thirtie earthquakes together:Earthquakes. by the meanes where∣of Galienus could not succour his Father, whome it is thought they did so terrifie, that hée caused therevpon the persecution to bée moderated,Persecution moderated. notwithstanding there were some that suffered: among whom was one Marinus,Marinus. who being a noble man, and a warriour of Cesarea, and standing
for a dignitie that belonged vnto him, was accused of him yt should succéed him, to be a Christian, wherevpon being cal∣led before Achaius, then iudge, had giuen him foure houres to deliberat: who standing in deliberation, Theotechnus o∣therwise called TheodistusTheodistus. Bishop of Cesarea brought him into the Church of Christians, layde before him a booke of the new testament, and a sword, willing him to choose: who forthwith chose the booke, and so encouraged by the Bishop, presented himselfe to the iudge, by whose sentence hée was beheaded. After the martirdom of Xistus, the gouernment of ye church of Rome was committed to one Dionysius,Dionysius. about the yéere 266.  who continued therein the space of 9. yéeres, according to Eusebius, but as Damasus saith, 6. yéeres and 2. moneths. After him succéeded Felix,Felix, in the first yéere of Probus the Emperour, about the yéere 280.  who gouerned that Church 5. yéeres and died (as Platina saith) a martyr. After him fol∣lowed Entuchianus,Entuchianus. and then Gaius,Gaius. both martyrs, as the histories of some doe record. About the time of these Bishoppes, Theodorus Bishop of Neocesarea liued, otherwise called Gregorius magnus,Gregor. magn. whom Nicephorus calleth the worker of miracles. After the captiuity of Valerian with whom he reigned 7. yéeres, he ruled the monarchy alone about 9. yéeres with some peace to the Church. After Galienus succéeded Claudius,Claudius. a quiet Emperour: although Vincentius saith, he moued persecution: vnder whō he maketh mention of 262, martirs,262. martyrs. that should suffer. This Claudius raigned but 2. yéers, after whom came Quintilia∣nusQuintilianus. his brother, a quiet Prince: who continued but seuētéen dayes, and had his successor Aurelianus:Aurelianus. vnder whom was moued the ninth Persecution.
The ninth Persecution. The tyrant terrified.THis Aurelianus rather intended, then mooued persecu∣tion, for as the edict was a subscribing with his hande, hée was terrified with lightening, and not long after about the fifth or sixth yeere of his reigne hee was slaine, be∣twixt Bizans and Heraclea, Anno 278.  Vincentius and Orosius notwithstanding reckon vp a great Catalogue of martirs, which shoulde suffer vnder him in France, and Italie. Amnis.Next vnto Aurelianus succeeded Publius Annius Ta∣citus,Tacitus. who reigned but sixe moneths: after him succéeded his brother Florianus,Florianus. who reigned but thréescore daies. And after him succéeded M. Aurelius,Aurel. Probus. surnamed Probus, vn∣der whom was moued no persecution: and after he had reig∣ned sixe yéeres, & foure moneth, (by reason he kept his souldi∣ers occupied, where no occasion of war was offred) he was slaine. Anno 284. Next him succéeded CarusCarus. with his two sonnes, Carinus,Carinus. and Numerianus,Numerianus. who continued but 3. yeres. Of these, Nu∣merianus killed Cerillus,Cerillus mar∣tyred. because hee would not suffer him to enter into the congregation of the Christians hee beeing their bishop. This Numerianus was slaine of his father in law Aper. After these, succéeded Dioclesian,Dioclesian. in whose time till the 19.19. yeeres qui∣et in the church yéere of his reign, ye Church was quiet, & the whole time of the quietnes of the Church might séeme to continue about 44.44. yeres quiet. The Church groweth. yéeres. In which time, the Church grew mightily, and the chiefe of them were in fauour with the Emperour, as Dorotheus, and Gorgoneus, and diuers mo. Church disso∣lute.The Church hauing now obtained peace outwardly, be∣ganne to be deuided with controuersies, and to waxe wantō with their peace,Large temples builded. which was so great, & multituds so increa∣sed, that then they began to builde large churches for their
congregatiōs:The x. perse∣tion. but their dissolutenes brought on them the 10 persecution, which although it passed through the hands of diuerse tyrants, yet it beareth the name of Dioclesian. The tenth Persecution. THis Dioclesian flue Aper, who flue Numerianus, and in the first beginning of his raigne, chose for his Colleague MaximianusMaximianus. surnamed Herculeus, father to Maxentius, which two also chose two other to them, Galerius, and Con∣stantius, whom they called Cesars.Cesars. Dioclesian all the while he abstained from persecuting, obtained diuerse victories, wherewith beyng puffed vp, he would néeds after a solemne triumph be woorshipped as a God: saying he was brother to the sunne, and moone,Dioclesian would be wor∣shipped as a God. Churches bur∣ned. Scriptures destroyed. and would néeds inioyn yt people to kisse his féete: and in the 19. yere of his raigne hee mooued persecution. In the moneth of March, when the feast of Easter was nigh at hande, hée commaunded all the Churches of the Christians to bee de∣stroied, and the scriptures to be burned, and put of from ma∣gistracie all such as were Christians, and constrained all with torments, to offer to Idols. At the first comming of the cruel edicts into Nicomedia, after the Proclamation made was set vp, there ran a Chri∣stian, a noble man borne, & openly rent, and tare it in pieces, notwithstanding, two of the Emperors were then in the ci∣tie: for which act he was put to most bitter death. These Tyrants parted the execution of their crueltie a∣mong them. Dioclesian in the East, Maximianus in ye west. Dioclesian began first in his owne Campe with the Chri∣stian Souldiers: willing such as would not agrée to him, to lay away their weapōs, and geue ouer their charges: which they did willingly. At Tyre in Phenicia,Miracle. there were certaine Christians (geuen to the beares, & most cruel wilde beastes) preserued miraculously from hurt: although they were kept hungrie
for the purpose, and raged against those that brought the christians, and those they could catch they deuoured: but the Christians were beheaded with the sword, & after throwne into the sea. At that time was martyred the B. of Sidon. But Sil∣uanusSiluanus. the bishop of Gazensis, with 39. other were slaine in the mettall mines of Phenicia. Then also was PamphiliusPamphilus. an elder of Casarea, the glo∣ry of that congregation martyred, of whom Eusebius hath written in a seuerall booke. In Syria all the teachers, bishops, Elders, and Deacons were committed to pryson, TirannionTyrannion, was made meat for the fishes of the sea, and ArnobiusArnobius. a very good phisition, was slaine with brickbats. Some to auoyd sacrificing to idols drowned, themselues, as two maides in Antioch,Two maides of Antioch. of a worshipful parentage. SiluanusSiluanus. the Bishop of Emissa, together with certaine o∣thers, was throwne to wilde beasts. In Mesopotamia the Christians were hanged by the féete, and choaked with a smoake of small fire, with diuers other torments. In Cappadocia the martyrs had their legs broken. There were also martyrs in Tarsus of Cilicia, Thara∣tus,Tharatus. Probus,Probus. and Andronicus.Andronicus. But the martyrs of Pontus suffered most grieuous torments: and so outragious was the beginning of the persecution in Nichodemia, & Bithi∣nia, that he refrayned not from the slaughter of Emperors children, nor the chéefest Princes of his Court, whom not long before he had estéemed as his owne children, Among whom was Peter, of the household,Peter of the Houshold. who (after diuers cruell torments, as, whipping to the bones, and powdering with salt & vinager) was rosted with a soft fire: which DorotheusDorotheus. and GorgoniusGorgonius. séeing, reprooued the Emperour, and con∣fessed themselues to be Christians. Wherefore (notwtstan∣ding they were in great authoritie vnder him) they were
almost tormented as Peter was and after strangled. Afterward, AnthoniusAnthonius. Bishoppe of Nicomedia, and a great companie of Martirs with him, were beheaded. And so was LucianusLucianus. (the Elder of the Congregation at Anti∣och) after hee had made his Apologie before the Empe∣rour. Hermannus caused Serena the wife of Dioclesian,Serena, the wife of the em∣peror martired to bée martired. There were also other Martirs in Nicomedia, as, Eulampia, Agapen, Irenea, Chronia, and Anastachia: who vnder Illyricus chiefe Officer, were burned. Maximinus burned 2000.Two thousand together in a Temple, bur∣ned. Christians together in one Temple, men, women, and children. In Arabia many Martirs were slaine with axes. In Phrygia there was a whole Citie of Christians compassed, set on fire, and burned.A whole citie of Christians burned. In Melitina, a Region of Armenia, the Bishops and El∣ders were cast into prison. In Arabrate, a Region nigh Armenia, Eustachius, that Countreyman borne, and Sheriffe vnder the Emperor at Lycia, in the East, hauing there done execution on the chri∣stians, was conuerted, and confessed himselfe a Christian: & after diuers strange tormentes, was carried to Sebastia, with the rest of his companions, and there burned, At that time also suffered Eugenius, Auxentius,Eustachius. Marde∣rius. And in no lesse manner raged this persecution in E∣gypt, where Peleus, and Nilus,Peleus and Nilus. Bishops, were martyred. But especially in Alexandria the rage was great, where Peter the Bishop of Alexandria suffered, with the Elders of the same church, Faustus, Didius, Ammonius, Phildas,The B. with the Elders, martired. A legion of Christians martired. He∣sichius, Pachiminus, and Theodorus, beside many other. The whole legion of Christian Souldiers, which (to the number of 6660. lay at Thebes in Egypt, vnder the Chri∣stian Captaine Mauritius) refusing to worshippe Images, were tithed to death once, and then againe: and last, through ye exhortation of Mauritius,Mauritius. died al together constant in faith
Likewise at Anteno diuers Christian Martirs suffered death together. Among whom were, Ascla, Philemon, and Apollonius. And in other parts of Africa, and Mauritania, was great persecution. Also in Samnium, & Scilia, where 79.79. martired. were put to death. Now in Europe, at Nicopolis in Thracia, the Martirs were miserably handled by Lysia. In Chalcedon suffered Euphenia, vnder Priscus the Proconsul Great persecu∣tion in Italy.At Rome, Iohannes, and Crispus, being Priestes had the execution of Martirs. At Bohemia, Agricola, & Vitalis: and at Aquileia, the Emperor commanded euery man to kil the Christians. Among those, Felices, and Fortunatus are recorded. In other places also of Italie, the persecutiō was great: as, at Florentia, Pergamus, Naples, Cāpania, Be∣neuentus, at Venusa in Apulia, in Thussia, and at Ve∣rona. In Fraunce. Rectorianus was a cruell persecutor. At Mediolanum suffered Victor.Victor. At Massilia, Maximianus setteth out his decrée, that all ye refused to doe sacrifice, should with diuers tormentes be slaine. In Beluacus suffered Lucian.Lucian. In Spayne likewise was great persecution, as at Eme∣rita, where suffered Eulalia, and Adula: where also suffered Vincentia, Sabina, and Christiana. 18. martired.At Toletum suffered Leucadia the virgin. At Cesarea, Augusta: Where were put to death xviij. beside a great nū∣ber of Martirs which suffered vnder Decianus the Go∣uernor, who afflicted with persecutiō, all ye coasts of Spain. And the foresaide Rectorianus made such Persecution at Treuers,Persecution in Spaine. néere the riuer of Mosella, that the bloud of chri∣stian men that were slaine,Riuers died with bloud of Christians. ran like a litle brooke, and colou∣red many riuers. And round about all quarters he commā∣ded horsemen to ride, and charge the people to kill the Chri∣stians, as they found them. Moreouer, at Colonia was great persecutiō, where Agrip∣pina
and Augusta were martyred: as also in the prouince of Rhetia.In Britanny great perse∣tion. And in Brytannie all the Christians were de∣stroyed. The deaths that this tyrant vsed were diuerse, and the torments so gréeuous as no tongue can vtter: as the hanging vp of them by one hand,Straunge torments. that they might féele the waight of the rest of their bodies, the scorching and broy∣lyng them with coales not vnto death, but euery day new: with which kind of death the martyrs of Antioch were af∣flicted, as more at large it appeareth by a letter of Phil∣das, to the congregation of Thunitans, where hée was Bi∣shop before hée receiued the sentence of death, beyng yet in handes. In Thebaid, Eusebius saith, that he himselfe beheld the persecution, which was so great,The persecu∣tors wearied with slaughter. that the very swords of the hangmen and persecutors, being blunt with the great and often slaughter, they themselues for wearinesse sate down to rest them, and other were faine to take their places. But the martyrs nothing dismayed, bare all with patience, for his sake. In this persecution one Miletus gaue backe, and the Bi∣shoppe of Lycus a citie in litle Egypt,Reuolt. whom Peter the Bi∣shop of Alexandria did therfore excommunicate. So did Mar∣cellinus Bishop of Rome, being perswaded thereto by Dio∣clesian, wherefore he was excommunicated, but afterward repented, and was also martired. So cruel was the persecution, that there were slaine of Martirs in xxx. dayes, xvij. thousand,17000. slain in 30. dayes. 300. at Alex∣andria. 300. at Colen. besides another great multitude that were condemned to the mettall mines, and Quarries. At Alexandria, with Peter their B. were slaine 300. with axes. Geriō was beheaded at Colonia, & Agrip∣pina, with 300 of his felowes. Victor in the citie of Troye, now called Xanthus, with his felowes, 360. Reginus reci∣teth many other martirs, to the number of 120. Mauritius came out of Syria into France, and Italy, be∣ing Captain of the bande of the Theban souldiers, in nūber
6660.Theban soul∣diers 6660. sent for of Maximinianus to go against the rebellious Bangandes. These Thebans were at Rome confirmed by Marcellus the bishop in the faith. Now at Ottodon Maximi∣nianus offered sacrifice to the Diuels, and commaunded all his army so to doo, which Mauritius and his company re∣fused, wherefore they were all tythed to death once: and persisting constantly, were tythed againe, and at the last by the commaundement of Maximinianus his whole army set vpon them, and slue them all, making no resistance. Victor at that time was not of that bande, but beyng dismissed for his age, came suddenly to sée what had béene doone, and fin∣ding them making mery and banketting, hauing knowne the cause, detested their fact. Whervpon, confessing also him selfe to be a Christian, he was slaine. This persecution endured till the seuenth yéere of Con∣stantinus, as Beda saith, but as Eusebius, till the tenth yere: which at the length ceassed from slaughter, the tyrants being out of hope to extinguish them: yet slew they many, and put out the eies of diuers, and condemned other to the mettall mines. When Dioclesianus and Maximinianus had reigned to∣gether one and twentie, or two and twentie yéers, they gaue ouer their empire, and liued a priuate life, Dioclesian at Sa∣lona, the other at Mediolanum, Ann. 309.  after Christ, so that the Emperiall dignitie remayned now with Constan∣tius & Galerius Maximinus. Maximinus gouerning the east, and Constantius the West partes. But Constantius (con∣tented only with the title) satisfied himselfe with Fraunce, Spaine, and Britanie. Wherefore, Galerius chose to him his two sonnes, Maximinus and Seuerus. Likewise, Con∣stantius tooke Constantinus vnder him. Constantinus.In the meane time, while Maximinus with his two Ce∣sars were in Asia, the Romā souldiers set vp for their Em∣peror Maxentius, the sonne of Maximinian, who had depo∣sed himself: against whom Seuerus being sent by his father,
was slaine of Maxentius: in whose place Maximinus tooke Licinius, and these Emperours prosecuted the persecution seuen or eight yéeres, which was till the yéere 318.  Sauing that Constantius and his son Constantinus rather fauoured the Christians:Constantius trieth his court, who were Chri∣stians. and minding to trie at a certaine time what good Christians hée had in his court, fayned as though hée would doo sacrifice to Diuels, and commaunded all his hous∣hold so to doo, to the end he might discerne the one from the other: which hauing doone, and finding a number to remaine constant, cherished them and refused the backsliders, admit∣ting the other to the chiefe places about him. Maximinus in the East churches vsed great crueltie, and had executioners of the same, Pentius, Quintianus & Theo∣technus, besides other: but his rage was stayed by the hand of God, who sent him such a botch,Gods iudge∣ment vpon Maximinus. that it putrified and eate his entrailes, from whence swarmed an innumerable mul∣titude of lyce: wherevpon he caused persecution to cease, and required the Christians to pray for him, and published e∣dicts of peace vnto them throughout all his Empyre. Wher∣at one Maxentius was not pleased to haue such edicts publi∣shed, where he had to doo, in Asia, & other prouinces. But Sa∣binus, who had among them the chief office, wrote the Em∣perours pleasure to the substitutes of euery country, wher∣vpon grew a maruellous sudden alteration in the Church. But scarse suffered Maximinus the tyrant the same six mo∣neths vnuiolated, but set out contrary edicts, & caused them to be engraued in brasse, and hanged in euery citie. So that persecution rose againe as great as before. At Emysa in Phenicia they condemned thrée christians, with whom Syl∣uanusSyluanus. the bishop, a very old man, being 40. yéeres in ecclesi∣asticall function, was condemned to death. In Nicomedia Lucianus the Elder of Antioch, after he had giuen his Apo∣logie to the Emperour, was put to death. In Amasia a citie of Cappadocia, Bringes the lieftenant of Maximinus, had the executing of that persecution.
At Alexandria, PetrusPetrus. a most worthy bishop, was behea∣ded with many other Egyptian bishops. QuirinusQuirinus. the Bi∣shop of Scescanius was throwne into the flood, hauing an handmill hanged about his necke, and drowned. At Rome died Marcellus,Marcellus. and TimotheusTimotheus. the elder, with many other Bishops and priests: and in many other places diuerse were martyred, as Victorianus, Symphorianus, Ca∣storius with his wife, Castulus, Cesarius, Mennas, Nobi∣lis, Dorotheus, Gorgamus, Petrus, and other innumerable martyrs more, Iuliana, Cosmus, Damanus, Basilenus, with 7. other. Dorothea, Theophilus, Theodosia, Vitalis, Agri∣cola, Acha, Philemon, Hireneus, Ianuarius, Festus, Deside∣rius, Gregorius, Spolitanus, Agapes, Chronia, Hirenea, Theodora,270. martyred. and 270. other: Florianus, Primus, and Feli∣cianus, Vitus, and Modestus, Crescentia, Albinus, Rogatia∣nus, Donatianus, Pancratius, Catharina, Margareta, Lucia, the virgin, and Antheus the king with 37000. martyrs,Antheus a king, with 37000. mar∣tyrs. Simplicius, Faustinus, Beatrix, Panthaleon, Gregorius, Iustus, Leocandia, Anthonia, with an infinite number more. Also Felix Victor with his parents, Lucia the wid∣dow:79. martyrs. Germinianus with 79. others: Sabinus, Anastacia, Chrisogonus, Felix, and Audactus, Adrianus, Nathalia, Eugenia, Agnes of thirtéene yeares old. The kind of cru∣elties were straunge, and the persecution more gréeuous vnder Maximinus the tyrant, then vnder Maximinianus the Prince. Now the Emperour in his edict, had declared what plen∣tie they enioyed, what times their Idols were adored: but immediatly vpon this renewing of persecution, fell out most miserable famine and pestilence,Famine and pestilence. in the which the chri∣stians shewed their kindnes vnto the Gentils, reléeuing to their power such as they thought to stand in néed. Herevpon grew againe some peace. Maximinian vnderstanding that the Pretorian souldiers had chosen his sonne Emperour at Rome, intended to take
vnto him againe his empire, and perswaded Dioclesian so to do, but was repulsed, and prouided to fly to Constantinus in Frāce for aide; but indéed purposed to kil him: which was detected by Fausta the daughter of Maximinian, whō Con∣stantinus had married. So that taking no place, he retired, & in the way was apprehended, and put to death. Certaine companions of Maxentius, solliciting a Christi∣an Gentlewoman of Rome, whose husband first they had killed, to satisfie the filthie desire of the Emperour, rather then she would so doe, killed her selfe. In the beginning of his reigne, he fained himself a Chri∣stian, to the end he might serue his wicked purpose, but after∣ward shewed himself both towards them, and in al other be∣hauiour most abhominable, giuing himselfe to magicke, and pollution of his body, with all kinde of cruelty against his owne citizens, and nobles. He banished a certain noblewoman of Rome, because she gaue her goods to the Church. The people of Rome being wearied with ye villany of Ma∣xentius,The villany of Maxentius. required ayd of Constantin. who first admonished him by letters, which nothing preuailing, he gathered an ar∣mie in Fraunce, and Britanny, to represse the rage of the of the tyrant. To whō he approched: and fearing his charms wherewith hée had vanquished Seuerus, sent by Galerius, stoode in doubt: and whilest he was in doubting, and casting vp his eies manie times to heauen, on the South part, a∣bout the going downe of the sunne, he saw a brightnesse in heauen, appearing in the similitude of a crosse,A vision of the crosse. with certain starres of equall bignesse, giuing this inscription like latine letters, In hoc vince, that is, in this ouercome. Eusebius Pam∣philus made report that he heard Constantinus himselfe of∣ten report the same. Now he being astonied hereat, and con∣sulting vpon the meaning thereof, in the night in his sléepe, Christ appeared vnto him with the signe of the same crosse, which he had séene before, bidding him to make the figuratiō
thereof, and to carrie it in his warres before him, and so should he haue victorie. Wherevpon he marched towards Maxentius, (hauing done as the vision commanded) who be∣ing constrained to issue out of the citie to méete him, com∣manded Pons Milonius to be beaten down, & a false bridge to be made, thinking thereby to take Constantinus. But hée himselfe being not able to sustaine Constantinus force,Maxentius drowned. The last perse∣cution ended. and retiring, in hope to get the Citie, was ouerthrowen of his horse into the flood, and drowned, and so ended the last Per∣secution. The first attempt of Constantinus against Maxentius, was Ann. 318.  So that thrée hundred yeres was the ful time of the persecution from Christ. Constantinus for this victo∣rie had his image set vp, holding in his right hand the signe of the crosse, with this inscription: with this wholesom sign, the true token of fortitude, I haue rescued and deliuered our citie from the yoke of the tyraunt. After this, Constantinus with Lycinius,Liberty to the Christians. gaue liberty by proclamation to Christians, to professe their religion. Diocle. dieth.Dioclesian being at Salona, and hearing of the procee∣dings of Constantine, and this his edict, either for sorow di∣ed, or as some say, poysoned himselfe. Now remained onely Maximinus in the West, who although he raged against the Christians, yet was hee appaled at the edict before mentio∣ned, and caused Sabinus to publish a certaine releasement to Christians, and yet wrote another countermaund: how∣beit shortly after, he making warres, and fighting with Ly∣cinius, lost the victory. Wherevppon, he caused his char∣mers to be killed,Maxim. glorifi∣eth the God of the Christians. that perswaded him to the warres: and shortly after, being oppressed with a certaine kind of disease, glorified the God of the Christians, and made a most abso∣lute law for their safety. This was Ann. 319. Now yet remained Licinius, who was also a persecutor: notwithstāding, at ye first he dissembled the matter, and ioy∣ned with Constantine. He was a man euerie way vitions:
he named Learning the poyson of the common Wealth,Learning na∣med by Licini∣us the poyson of the common weale. Licinius a great persecu∣tor. and counted learning in a prince to be a great vice. The know∣ledge of the lawes he did most abhorre: For he himself was vnlearned. He became a Persecutor, pretending against the Christi∣ans, that they prayed for Constantinus onely, and not for him. First, he began to persecute in his court: then he stret∣ched vnto his prouinces, with as great crueltie as any that went before him: and hated Constantine, who gaue him his sister Constantia to wife,Churches ra∣ced to ye groūd. and had bestowed many bene∣fites vpon him. About Amasia, and other Cities of Pontus, he rased the churches euen to the ground. Among those that suffered, Nicephorus first speaketh of Theodorus:Theodorus. who (being hanged vpon a crosse,) had nayles thrust into his armepits, and after that, his head striken of. Also, of one Theodorus B. of Tyre, & a man of Pergamus. Likewise, BasiliusBasilius. B. of Amasenus, Nicholaus,Nicholaus. B. of Mi∣rocus, Gregorius, of Armenia the great. After that, PaulPaul. of Neocesarea, who by Licinius him selfe, had both his hāds cut off with a searing Iron. Besides these aforesaid, were in the citie of Sebastia, xl. Christian Souldiers,Fourty chri∣stian souldi∣ers. in the vehement colde time of winter, drowned in a horseponde: when Lycias as yet, & Agricolaus executing the sherifes office vnder Licinius, were in the east part, of great reputation,Inuenters of torments. for inuenting of new and strange torments against the Christians. The wiues of those 40. were caried to Heraclea, a citie in Thracia, and there with a certaine deacon, whose name was Ammones, were (after innumerable torments) slaine with the sword. Diuers battels were fought betwéene Licinius & Con∣stātinus. First in Hungarie,Licinius vanquished. where Licinius was ouerthro∣wen. Then againe in Macedonia, whither he fled, and re∣payred his armie. And finally, being vanquished both by sea and lande, at Nicomedia he yelded himselfe to Constan∣tine, and was commanded to liue a priuate life in Thessa∣lia,
where he was slaine by the souldiers. He was killed an. 324.  Licinius slaine Constantius, the father of Constantine, being a good and godly Emperor, died, the iij. yere of the persecution, an. 310. and was buried at Yorke. Constantius dieth & is bu∣ried at Yorke Alban the first martir in En∣gland.Now, among an infinite number of speciall men of name that suffered, were these that follow in this 10, persecution, At what time Dioclesian and Maximinian, had directed out their Letters for the persecuting of Christians, Alban (the first that suffered martirdome in England for Christ) recei∣ued into his house a persecuted Clarke, named Amphibalus,Amphibalus. by whose continuall praying day and night, and godly life, he became a Christian. It was infourmed the Prince, that he lodged the Clarke. Whereupon, (search being made by the Princes commandement) Alban, by and by putting on the apparell of the Clark, his master offered himself in stead of the other, to the souldiers, who brought him to the Iudge, that was euen then sacrificing vnto deuils at the Altar. Which Alban refusing to doe, at the commandement of the Iudge, after he had béene gréeuously scourged, was behea∣ded. The Clarke flying into Wales, was fet also againe to the same Towne of Verlancaster, where he was martired, hauing his bellie opened, and made to runne about a stake, while all his bowels were drawen out, then thrust in with swords and daggers, and at last stoned to death. With Alban suffered Aaron, & Iulius,Aaron, and Iulius. ij. citizens of Verlā∣caster, beside a great nūber mo. Albans martirdome might séem to be about the ij. or iij. yere of the x. persecutiō, vnder ye tirāny of Dioclesiā and Maximinianus, Herculeus thē bea∣ring rule in England, about an. 301.  before Constantinus came to his gouernmēt.England only touched with ye tenth persecu∣tion. It is to be noted yt Englād was not touched wt any of the ix. persecutions, but only wt this tenth, in which almost al christianitie was in ye Ilād extinguished. Pitiles Galerius, wt his grand captain Asclepiades, inua∣ded Antioch, threatning ye christiās: whom one Romanus, a noble man, confirmed, & encouraged to be constāt. Wherfore
he suffered many strange torments wt great constancy: and reasoning wt the tirant of the truth, required a child to be pre¦sented vnto him: which was doone, of whō he asked, whether it were more reasonable to worship one God, rather thē in∣numerable, considering God could be but one. To whom the child answered before the tyrant, according as his Christian parents had instructed him, yt one god was to be worshipped.A child tor∣mented. Wherefore the child was grieuously scourged, & the skin of his head pulled of hayre and all, the mother standing by, & exhorting the child to patience and constancie; he was put to death with Romanus, the child was beheaded,A myracle. and Ro∣manus cast into ye fire. Which whē it would not burne him, he was brought from the same, and strangled in prison. GordiusGordius. was a citizen of Cesaria, a Centurion, who gaue ouer his charge, & liued in the desert a long time: but vpon a certaine day when a solemne feast of Mars was celebrated with games, in the Theator of Cesaria, he came thether, & gat vp to the highest place of the Theator: and vttered him∣selfe a Christian in the hearing of all the people: whereupon after he had endured many & gréeuous torments, the shiriffe assayed by flattery: which when it would not preuayle, hée caused him to be had out of the Citie to be burned, which was accomplished, and suffered of him with patience. Like∣wise suffered Menas an Egyptian souldier after that in like sort with Gordius, hée had declared himselfe to be a Chri∣stian in the citie of Cotis, where after diuerse torments, by the commaundement of Pirrhus the President, he suffered the losse of his head. Basilius mentioneth of 40. martyrs40 martyrs. in a Sermon, which were gentlemen, & yoong all, that professed themselues chri∣stians, and went boldly vnto the Marshall, & declared vnto him their names: wherat he was first astonied, & not preuai∣ling with flattering words & faire promises: deuised a new torment, and caused them to stand all night (in the winter) in a great pond which was in the midst of the citie, and lay
full vpon the cold Northwind. In the morning they were found starke and stiffe, yet hauing breath, were brought to the fire to be burned. Now one of them more liuely then the rest was pitied of the tormentors, who said to his mother standing by, that they would saue him aliue: but shée with her owne handes brought him to the pile of wood where the rest lay,A notable mo∣ther. admonishing him to accomplish the blessed iourney he had taken in hand? The like story reporteth Nicephorus of fortie martyrsFortie mar∣tyrs. that were maried men, which were killed in a ponde at Se∣bestia a towne of Armenia. In this persecution suffered also CyrusCyrus. a Physition, borne in Alexandria, who flying into Egipt in the persecu∣tion of Dioclesianus and Maximinianus, led a solitary life in Arabia: vnto him resorted one IoannesIoannes. borne in the ci∣tie of Edessa beyond Euphrates, leauing his souldiers life which before time he had exercised. Now these twaine hea∣ring of the inprisonment of Athanasia with her thrée daugh∣ters, Theoctiste, Theodota and Eudoxa, at the persecution of Canope a citie in Egipt, came to confirme them: at which time Sirianus was the chiefe Captaine and Lieftenant of Egipt (who was very cruell especially against women and maydens) whereof they being accused and in no sort yéel∣ding to doo sacrifice, were put to death by the sword, with Athanasia and her thrée daughters.Athanasia and her three daughters. SebastianSebastian. beyng borne in that part of France which is called Gallia Narbonensis, was Lieftenant generall of the vauward of Dioclesian the Emperour, and encouraged many martyrs of Christ by his exhortations: whereof be∣yng accused to the Emperour, was commaunded to bée brought into ye opē field, where of his owne souldiers he was shot through with innumerable arrowes, and after his body was throwne into a Iakes. With him suffered others, as Nicostratus with Zoe his wife, Tranquillinus with Martia his wife, Traglianus, Claudius, Castor, Tiburtius, Castullus,
Marcus and Marcellinus, with other moe. BarlanBarlan. a noble man, mentioned in a sermon of Basilius, hauing abode all torments, was laid vpon the altar, where they vsed to offer vp sacrifice, and fire and frankincense put into his right hand, (wherin he had yet some strength,) thin∣king he would haue scattered the incense vpon the altar, and haue sacrificed, but the flame eate round about his hand, and the the same endured as though it had bin couered with hot embers, he saying the Psalme: Blessed is the Lord my God who teacheth my hands to fight, &c. Vnder Dioclesian, & Maximinian, suffered Agricola,Agricola. and Vitalis his seruant. VitalisVitalis. died in extremity of torments, A∣gricola was fastned to the crosse, and so died. But most lamentable was the martyrdome of Vincen∣tius a Spaniard,Vincentius lamentable martyrdome. who suffered martirdom at Valence vnder Darianus the President: of whom he was so racked, that all the ioynts of his body cracked: then was his body indented with many deadly wounds: and thirdly, his flesh was torne with yron combes sharply fyled, and that the tormentors should be the more egar, they were also scourged.Tormentors scourged. This done they laid his body vpon a grate of yron, and hauing opened it with hookes, they seared it with fiery plates, sprinckling the same with hotte salt. And last of all, they drew him into a dungeon sprinckled with sharpshelles, and locked his feet in the stockes. At Alexandria, Philoromus, hauing great possessions, forsooke all for Christ, and was beaded, and could not be mo∣ued with respect of friends, wife or children. Also Procopi∣usProcopius. in Palestine, after his conuersion, brake his siluer images and gaue them to the poore, and after most grieuous tor∣ments, had his head smitten off, hauing first his body dis∣membred, both of hands and feete. In like manner suffered Gregorius, a young man of Cappadocia, besides a number of others, as Sergius and Bac∣chius, &c.
PanthaleonPanthaleon. a Phisition in Nicomedia, Theodorus in the citie of Amasia, in Hellespontus, Gerion with 318. fellow martirs,318. martyrs. which suffered about Colon. Hermogenes Presi∣dent of Athens, being conuerted by the constancie and pati∣ence of one Menas, and Eugraphus. Item Samonas, Gurias and Abilus, Hieron also with certaine his confessors vnder Maximinus, Indes and Dominas at Nicomedia, with 2000. martyrs:2000. martirs. Enelasius and Maximinius, whom Fausta the virgin conuerted in her torments. Also Thirsus, Lucius, Callinicus, Apollonius, Philemon, Asilas, Leonides, with Arrianus president of Thebaide. Cyprian Bishop of Antioch (before his profession being a filthy magician,) suffred with Iustina a virgin. Item Glice∣rius at Nicomedia, Felix a minister, Fortunatus, Achilleus deacons in the citie of Valent, Arthemius of Rome, Ciria∣cus deacon to Marcellus the Bishop, Caryophorus Priest at Thuscia, with Abundus his deacon. Item Claudius, Cy∣rinus, Antonius, which suffered with the Bishop Marcelli∣nus, Cucusatus in the citie Barcimona, Felix Bishop of A∣pulia, with Audactus and Ianuarius his priests, Fortunatus and Septimus his readers, who suffered in the citie Venu∣sia vnder Dioclesian: CassianusCassianus. was stabbed in of his schol∣lers with bodkins, or yron pennes, wherewith they did vse to write. Now the constancie of the womēConstancy of women. was also marueilous, & especially of a virgin, named Eulalia,Eulalia. of the towne of Eme∣rita in Portugal, who (beeing shut vp of her Christian Pa∣rents, that for desire of martirdome, feared least shée should be cause of her own death) brake out in the night, & came be∣fore the Gouernor of the town of Emerita, being distant frō the village where she was kept, & confessed her selfe to be a Christiā, & reproued the cruelty of the iudge, & the vanity of Maximinius, ye worshipped Idols, throwed the idols down, which shée was brought to worship, & scattered the incense. Wherfore, after many vain perswasiōs. she had one ioynt of
her body pulled from an other, and her flesh and sides scrat∣ched with talents of wilde beastes to the bones (shée in the meane time reioysing and praysing God) They seared her brests with torches, which when they had caught her hayre which hanged downe to her féete & couered her shame, shée swallowed the flame, opening her mouth, and so died. Like was the constancy of Agnes of Rome, of honorable parentage, and not mariageable, when she professed Christ, wherefore being brought before the iudge, she was threat∣ned torments which she contemned, then was she threatned to be cōmitted to the common stewes, & yoonkers appointed to assaile her, whom when she refused, cōmandement was giuen that shee should bee tied at a corner of a stréete, naked where cōmon strumpets vsed to resort. At this ye multitude being greatly ashamed, went away sauing one, who behol∣ding ye virgin with vnchast eies, was stricken wt lightning,A miracle. & his eies dasht out of his head: whom Agnes praied for, & re∣stored. In the end she was beheaded, and greatly reioyced to sée the executioner, preferring him before all the amorous companie. There are many miracles reported of her. CatharineKatherine. openly resisted the Emperour Maxentius to his face, rebuking him for his crueltie, wherefore after shee had felt the racke, and the foure sharpe cutting wheeles, she was beheaded, about the yeere of the Lord 310. There was also one Iulitta,Iulitta. who was dispossessed wrōg∣fullie of her goods by the Emperors Deputie: for which shée complayned to the Emperor: but the couetous, and false de∣putie, accused her of Christianitie, wherefore she could haue no redresse. Whereupon being commaunde to doe sacrifice with Incense, she refused it, and confirmed, and encouraged others. She was burnt in the fire, & so slept in the Lord. Also Barbara, a noble womā in Thuscia, after she had suf∣fered most cruel torments as, cordes, & burning of her sides, was at the last beheaded. Also FaustaFausta. the virgin, who suffered vnder Maximinus: by
whom Euelasius a ruler in the Emperors palace, and Maxi∣minius the president, were both conuerted, & suffered mar∣tyrdome. Also Iuliana of Nicomedia, vnder Maximinus. Item Anisia a mayd of Thessalonica, vnder the same Maxi∣minus. Iustina, which suffered with Cyprianus bishop of Antioch. Also Lucia, Agatha and Tecla, who rather suffered vnder Nero as most doo agrée: which all holy virgins, suf∣fered in the tenth persecution of Dioclesian. Succession of Bishops of Rome.Now during the time of this persecution, these Bishops succéeded one the other: Caius, who succéeded next after Xi∣stus, Marcellinus, Marcellus, Eusebius, and then Miltiades: all which died martyrs in the time of this persecution. Mar∣cellinus hauing giuen place to Dioclesian, and sacrificed, was excommunicated, but repented, and was martyred, with Claudius, Cyrinnus, and Antonius. Marcellus also re∣fusing to doe sacrifice, was beaten with wasters, and expel∣led the citie, and entred into the house of LucinaLucina. a widow: & assembled the congregation. Which the tyrant hearing of, turned the house of Lucina into a stable, and made Marcel∣lus a kéeper of beasts: and so with stinch thereof, and mise∣rable handling, he died. Eusebius sate Bishop of Rome two moneths: some say eight, some sixe moneths. Miltiades (by the testimonie of Platina) sate thrée yéeres & seuen moneths, & suffered vnder Maximinus. Which séemeth not to be true, because he died before Miltiades. He was the last of the bi∣shops of Rome, that were in danger to suffer. Yet persecutiō in Asia.Now in the East partes, in all Asia as yet for the space of iiij. yerers persecutiō did not cease, by the meanes of wic∣ked Licinius: vnder whom suffered diuers: as, Hermylus, a Deacon, and Stratonicides, a kéeper of the prison. Which both, (after punishments sustayned) were strangled in the floud Ister. Now also vnder Sapores,Vnder Sapo∣res. king of Persia, suffered Acyn∣dinus, Pegasius, Anempodistus. and Epidephorus: also, Si∣meon, Archbishoppe of Selentia, with Ctesiphon, another
Bishop in Persia, with other ministers, and religious men,128. martirs. to the number of 128. The Magicians of Persia accused Simeon, and Ctesiphō to Sapores, that they fauoured the Romane Empire, and re∣uealed to the Emperor such things,The magiciās raise persecu∣tion. as were done in Per∣sia. Whereupon he called for Simeon, the chief Bishop, and endeuoured to perswade him to doe sacrifice: which he refu∣sing, was committed to prison: and in the way going to the Gaole, there was sitting at the kings gate a certaine Eu∣nuche, an olde Schoolemaster and Tutor of the kinges, na∣med Vsthazares,Vsthazares. who had fallen from Christianitie to Ido∣latrie, who séeing the. B. passing by, led to prison, rose vp, & did reuerence vnto him. SimeonSimeon. againe with sharpe words rebuked him, and cried out against him. Whereat the Eu∣nuche burst out into teares, and (laying away his Courtly attire) put vpon him a mourning wéede, and sate before the Court gates wéeping, and saying within himselfe, woe is me, with what hope shall I hereafter looke for my God, whē Simeon my familiar acquaintance so much disdayneth me? Which being made known vnto the king,A notable historie. and he confessing himselfe a christian, after many perswasible words in vain, he was by the kings commandement led away to be behea∣ded. Going vnto execution, hée desired that the king woulde graunt him, for the old and faithfull seruice he had done him, that it might be proclaimed by a Crier, that Vsthazares was not beheaded for any offence against the king, or Realm; but onlie because he was a christiā. Which he required, because his shrinking from the faith, gaue great offence to many Christians that heard thereof. And so it was granted vnto him. Simeon being in prison, and hearing thereof, was very glad: and the next day suffered also, with an hundred more.An hundred suffer. All which were put to death before Simeon, who confirmed them: and at last, with two other ministers of his Church, Abedecalaus, and Ananias, he was also put to death. At which time, one Pusices, séeing Ananias, an old father,
to shrinke at the sight of those that suffered: said vnto him, O father, a litle moment shut thine eyes, and be strong, and shortly thou shalt sée the sight of God. Which being reported to the king, he caused an hole to be made in his neck, & there: out pulled his tongue, and so was he put to death, who was the kings seruant, and ouerséer of his Artificers. At which time also, the daughter of Pusices, a godly virgin, was put to death for the testimonie of Iesus. The next yere following, on the day of the Lords passi∣on,A cruel edict. the king set foorth an Edict, for the vtter extinguishing of all the Christians that were in his Dominions. So that an infinite number were slaine in Towne and Citie, (by the procurement of the Magicians,Magicians.) and diuers in the kings Court suffered martirdome: among whom was Azades,Azades. whom he did most entirely loue. Of whose death when hée heard,The teachers onely put to death. he tooke it so heauelie, that he commaunded after that time, no Christians should be put to death, but onely those that were teachers. In the same time the Quéene fell into a certaine disease: vpon occasion whereof, the cruel Iewes, & Magicians falsly accused Trabula,Trabula. the sister of Simon the Martir, a godly vir∣gin, with another Sister of hers, that they had wrought the Quéene hurt by Charmes: for which, they were both cut in sunder with Sawes, and their quarters hanged vp∣on stakes, the Quéene going betwéene them, thinking thereby to be healed. This Trabula (being beautiful) was promised deliuerance by one of the Magicians, if she would yelde to his pleasure Which she constantly refused, and suf∣fered patiently. Now vpon the Proclamation against the teachers, great persecution rose against them by the malice of the Magici∣ans: especially in the Countrey of Diabener, which was most Christened: where Acepsimas (there B.) with a great number dismissed, and onely depriued of liuing, was taken and whipped of the Magicians. To whom one IacolusIacolus.
a minister of the Church, ioyned himselfe to serue the ne∣cessitie of the aged Bishop. At the same time also Atha∣las a minister: Aradanes, and Abdiesus Decius, were imprisoned, and miserably scouraged for the testimony of Christ: and afterward were more tormented of the Arch∣magician,The Archma∣gician. to whom the King had giuen liberty to vse his pleasure on them, vnlesse they would worship the Sunne: which when they refused to doo, they were put to most bitter torments, in which Acepsimas died: the other yet remay∣ning maruelously aliue, were turned againe into pry∣son. Of whom AthalasAthalas. in time of his whipping, was so rac∣ked with pullings, that both his armes were pulled out of ioynt, and hung downe, that he had no vse of them. Innumerable were the slaughters of bishops, ministers,Innumerable slaine. and deacons, in this persecution vnder Sapores. The names of certaine thus recited of Zozomen, and Nicephorus: Bar∣basines, Paulus, Gaddiabus, Sabinus, Mareas, Marcus, Io∣hannes, Hormisdas, Papa, Iacobus, Romas, Maares, Agas, Bothres, Aldas, Abiesus, Ioannes Abrianus, Agdelas, Sapo∣res, Isaac, Dausus, Bitor,250. martyrs. xv. thousand martyred a∣mong the Per∣sians. also with Mameanda his fellowe Bishop, and the rest of his Churches vnder him, to the num∣ber of 250. persons. In summe, the number of those that the Persians themselues were able to recite, commeth to fifteen thousand men and women. Now these troubles comming to Constantines eares, mooued him to consider how to re∣dresse the Persecution, and there being at Rome Embas∣sadors of Sapores, with requestes to the Emperour, hee graunted them all: thinking thereby,Constantine to Sapores, for mitigation of the persecution to moue him to be fauourable to the Christians: And wrote also vnto him a letter, requiring him to take compassion vpon those Inno∣cents, and shewed how the hand of God had béen against ti∣rants of the Church, as Valerianus, &c. What successe his letter had, it is vncertaine: But likely it is, that it did somewhat mitigate the heate thereof. Of o∣ther troubles, it is recorded to haue béene in Persia, vnder
Isdigerdes the king in the time of the Emperour Theodo∣sius, at which time suffered AndasAndas. the bishop, and HomisdaHomisda. a great noble mans sonne of great reputation among the Persians: whom the king condēned to kéepe his Elephants naked, and seing him a distance of time after, tanned with the Sunne, promised him if he would deny Christ a shirt to couer himselfe withall: which whē he refused, he was bani∣shed the country. There was also one SuenesSuenes. that had vn∣der him an hundred men: and because he would not denie Christ, the vilest of his seruaunts was appointed ouer him and the rest, and coupled with his Maisters wife. BeniaminBeniamin. also, the deacon after two yéeres imprisonmēt, was let loose at the request of the Romaine Embassadour: but afterward preaching contrary to the kings commande∣ment, was thrust vnder the nailes with xx sharpe prickes. Wherat when the martyr laughed, a sharpe réede was put vp into his yard, and a long thornie stalke thrust vp into his bodie, and so he died. These persecutions were about the yéere 425. Likewise vnder IulianusIulianus, the Apostata, certaine suffered martirdome by Idolaters, as Emilianus,Emilianus. who was burned in Thracia, and Domitius, who was slaine in his caue. The∣odorus also for singing a Psalme at the remouing of the bo∣die of Babylas, was tormented from morning till night, and hardly escaped with life:The martirs comforted. and being asked how hee coulde a∣bide the torments, said, at the first he felt some paine, but af∣terwarde, there stoode by him a yong man, who (as he was sweating) refreshed him in such sorte, that being let downe from the Engine it gréeued him more than before. Artemi∣as also the Captaine of the Egyptian Souldiers, lost his head for Christ. Also, Eusebius, and Nestabus, two Bre∣thren, with Nestor also, were murthered by the people of Gaza. Euspicius, a noble man in the Countrey, died among thē of Cesarea, whereof, some were banished, some slaine, for
pulling downe the temple of Fortune. But speciall was the crueltie of the ArethusiansArethusians. a people of Syria, against a company of Christian virgins, whome they first set out na∣ked to be scorned of the multitude, then shaued them: then couered them with swill and draffe, and caused them to be deuoured of Swine. It is thought their crueltie was the greater, because Constantine restrained them of the expo∣sing their virgins to filthy lust, and destroyed the temple of Venus in Heliopolis. Among the rest,The temple of Venus de∣stroied. Marcus ArethususMarcus Are∣thusus. their Bishop was most cruelly handled, because at the commaundement of Constantine, hée pulled downe a temple of Idols, and buil∣ded a Church for Christians in the place. Now they consi∣dering how he was not fauoured of Iulianus, accused him of treason: who first fled, then hearing there were taken o∣ther for him, hée returned againe, & offered himselfe: whom when they had gotten, they first stripped naked, and beate him gréeuously, then they put him into a filthy sinke, from whence againe they tooke him, and caused boyes to trust him in with sharpe sticks. Lastly, they put him into a basket & annointed him with hony and broth, and hong him before the sunne, as meat for waspes & flies to féed on. All this they did vnto him, that he might be brought either to build again the temple, or giue mony to the building: which he refused. But at the last (taking him to be a poore man) they required but a small summe, which he also would not yéeld vnto: an∣swering yt it were as great impietie to confer one halfepeny to a matter of impietie, as a great summe: thus they being not able to preuaile against him, let him downe. And thus much of the persecution in ye primitiue church,The persecutiō of the prima∣tiue Church endeth. A moneth for a saboth of yeeres. which agréeth with the time of the Apocalips, taking euery moneth for a saboth of yéeres: 42. Monethas, that make vp iust the time frō Christes death, to the last yéere of persecutiō by Maxen∣tius, which were 294. & six yéeres vnder Licinius in Asia: in all 300. yéeres, reckoning from the death of Iohn Baptist, to
the end of Maxentius and Licinius: all which time Sathan from the time of Licinius till Iohn Wickliffe was bound vp.Sathan bound vp, til Wicliffe. Constantine deferred baptisme till his old age, because he determined a iourney into Persia, and thought in Iordan to haue béene baptized. He entered into the Empire, Anno 311. and raigned 30. yéeres, as Letus saith 32. lacking two moneths.Constantine borne in Eng∣land. Helena daugh∣ter of king Coilus, Con∣stantines mo∣ther. He was borne in Brytaine. His mothers name was Helena daughter of king Coilus. He greatly trauelled for the peace of Christians, and before hée had conquered Licinius, wrote to his subiects inhabiting the East, in their fauour. He set also peace among the Bishops in the Church, who were at dissention, and made prouision for ministers and teachers of the people, and caused all to be restored vnto the Christians that had béene taken from them in the perse∣cutions:Constantine, a father of the Church. writing to Syluius his chiefe Captaine, to that end, and commaunded him that in Affrica where he had to doo, and where Cecilianus was bishop, that Clarkes and mini∣sters should be freed from all manner publike duties & bur∣thens. He was greatly studious in taking vp causes among the bishops, and wrote to that end to diuers: as to Miltiades bishop of Rome, to Crescēs bishop of Siracusa, to Cecilianus bishop of Carthage: also to Eusebius for the edifying of new Churches. And after he had gathered the Nicene CouncellNicene coun∣cell. for the vnitie of the Church, he writeth to Alexander, and Arrius to the same entent. He prescribed a certaine prayer for euery one of his soul∣diers in stead of a brief Catechisme, & caused them to learne the same,Constantine teacheth his souldiers a prayer. which is this: Wée acknowledge thée onely to be our God, we confesse thée onely to be our king, we call vp∣on thée our onely helper: by thée we obtaine our victories, by thée we vanquish our enemies, to thée we attribute whatso∣euer commodities we presently enioy, and by thée we hope for good things to come: vnto thée we direct all our suits, and peticions, most humbly beséeching thée to kéepe Constantine our Emperour and his noble children, to continew in long
life, and to giue them victory ouer all their enimies through Christ our Lord. Amen. He graunted great immunities to the ministers, that they might appeale from the ciuil iudge to their bishop,Appeale gran∣ted by Con∣stantine. whose sē∣tence was of as great value in such cases, as if the Empe∣rour himselfe had pronounced it. He prouided also maintenance for liberall artes and sci∣ences, for the professors,Prouision for learning. their wiues and children and gaue thē great immunities. He wrote also to Eusebius the B. of Nicomedia, to procure 50. volumes of parchment, wel boūd, and cause to be written out of the scripture therein in a lege∣able hand,The scriptures written for the vse of ye church. such things as were profitable for the instruction of the Church: and allowed him two ministers for the busi∣nesse. Finally, he was a father to the Church, and enforced himselfe euery way to set forth the Gospel, and euery good thing, and endeuoured to suppresse the contrary.Constantine baptised a lit∣tle before his death. He was baptised at Nicomedia, of Eusebius Bishoppe of Nicomedia, in the 31. yéere of his raigne, a little before his death. The end of the ten persecutions.
The rest of this history concerneth chiefly the affaires of the Church of England and Scotland. The rest of this history concer∣neth chiefly England and Scotland. England re∣ceiued the Go∣spel in Tyberi∣us time.GIldas affirmeth, that Britain receiued the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the Emperor, vnder whom Christ suffred, and that Ioseph of Arimathea, after ye dispersiō of the Iews, was sent of Phi∣lip ye apostle out of France into Britain ann. 63.  And here remained al his time, and laid the foundation of the Gospel.Easter kept in England after the maner of ye East church. The Gospel came into En∣land from the Cast and not from Rome. In the time of Bede almost a thousand yeeres after Christ, as he testifieth, Ea∣ster was kept after the manner of the East Church, in the full moone, what day of the wéeke soeuer it fell, and not on the sunday as we doe now, Wherby it may appeare that the preaching of the Gospell came into this land from the East and not from Rome. About the yéere 180.  King Lucius, sonne of Coilus, king of Britains, which now are called English men, hearing of the miracles done by Christians in diuers places,K. Lucius the first Christian K. of England, Fugatius and Damianus. at that time wrote to Eleutherius B. of Rome, to receiue of him the Christian faith: who sent him therevpon certain preachers, Fugatius, or by some Faganus, and Damianus, or Dimia∣nus, which conuerted first the king and the people of Bri∣tain, and baptized them, and subuerted the temples, and mo∣numents of idolatrie. And the 28, Flamines they turned to bishops, and thrée Achflamines to thrée Archbishops, hauing their seates in thrée head cities, London, Yorke, and Gla∣morgantia, by Wales. This king also sent to him for the Romane lawes, to frame his people therafter: who answered, that the lawes of God was to be his direction for lawes, and not the Ro∣manes, that might be reproued, the other being without ex∣ception, Thus was the Christian faith confirmed in this lande,
by the meanes of Eleutherius,Eleutherius. and therein it continued two hundred and sixtéene yeres,  till the comming of the Pagane Saxons. King Lucius raigned 77. yeres, and died without issue, the yere of our Lord, 201. the xiiij. yere after his baptisme, (some say the iiij. and some the tenth,) and was buried at Glocester. By reason that the king died without issue, the Lande was spoyled, and the Romanes inuaded, and became some∣times masters. When they raigned, Gentilisme was aduaunced: and when the Britaines, the Gospell. Albeit no persecution touched the Britaines, that is read of,Almost all Christianitie destroyed in England. before the last persecution of Dioclesian and Maximinianus Hercule∣us. At which time, all Christianitie was almost in ye whole land destroyed. Now the Britanes being greatly distressed, and brought to miserie, the Archbishop of London, called Gnetelinus, procured helpe out of lesse Britanie, and brought ouer Con∣stantinus the kings brother, by whose meanes, the state of Religion, and Common-wealth was in some quiet, all the time of Constantine, and the Archbishop, till Vortiger cru∣ellie caused his Prince to be slaine, and inuaded the Crown.Gnetelinus Archb. of London. And fearing the other two brethren of Constantine his Prince Aurelius, and Vter in litle Britaine he caused aide to be sent for to the Saxons (being then Infidels) and mar∣ried him selfe also with Rowen, an Infidel, the daughter of Hengist. Which Hengist depriued him and his people, and droue the Britaines out of their Countrey: after that the Saxons had slaine of their Nobles two hundred, thrée score, and eleuen: some say foure hundred and thréescore,271. of the No∣bilitie of Eng∣land slaine by the Saxons. Which miserie fell vpon them, for couetousnes, and oppression in their Princes: wickednes in the Iudges: slouthfulnes of the Bishops, in neglecting their dueties of preaching: and ryot and wantonnes of the people, as saith Gildas in his chroni∣cle. This fell out in anno 469.
The Captaines of the Saxons were, Hengistus, and Horsus. Now, the first persecution in this Lande began vnder Dioclesian, an, 210. The first per∣secution in England by Dioclesian. The second by Gnauius and Melga.The second was by the inuading of Gnauius, & Melga, whereof, the first was Captaine of the Hunnes: and the o∣ther of the Pictes. Which two Tyrants (after the slaughter of Vrsula,Vrsula, and 11000. noble Virgins11000. Vir∣gins.) made their rode into Britaine. At what time, they made a miserable murther of Christians, spoyling and rasing Churches, without regarde either of women or children. The third by Hengist,The third by Hengest. and the Saxons, who destroyed (like raging wolues) the silie shéepe: till Aurelius Ambro∣sius came,Aurelius Am∣brosius resto∣reth the chur∣ches. and restored againe the Churches destroyed. The fourth was by Gurmundus,Gurmundus, a pagā, king of the Af∣fricans, who ioyning with the Saxons, wrought much mis∣chiefe against the Christians. In so much, that Theonus B. of London,  and Thaodiceus, of Yorke, with the rest of the people, did pack away, some into Cornewall, some into the mountaines of Wales, an. 550. and remayned till the time of EthelbertEthelbert. king of Kent,  an. 589. In whose reigne, ye faith was first receiued of the Englishmen,Gospell recei∣ued of the En∣glishmen. Austen sent in∣to England by Gregory, B. of Rome. by meanes of Grego∣rie, bishop of Rome, who in the yere 598. sent Austen into England, and with him about xl. Preachers, to instruct and conuert the people. The occasion was offered by séeing cer∣tain children of the land to be sold at Rome: where conside∣ring their beautie, he had compassion on them: & thereupon, when the Bishorick of Rome fell vnto him, next after Pela∣gius, he sent Austen, with the other Preachers. Who pas∣sing on their iourney, were greatly afraid, and discouraged, considering the barbarousnes of the people. But being com∣forted by Gregorie, and perswaded, they went on their ior∣ney, and came to the Ile of Tenet,Ile of Tenet. on the Eastside of Kent. Néere vnto which lāding place was the Palace of the K. not farre from Sandwich, which the Inhabitants of the Ile thē called Richburgh: whereof some part of the ruinous walles
is yet to sée. The king that raigned at that time was Ethel∣bert the fifth king of that prouince, who at that time had married a Frenchwoman Christened, whose name was Berda,Berda. whom hée had of that condition, that shée should with her bishop LebardusLebardus. inioy the faith. By meanes whereof he was the more flexible to embrace the preachyng of the faith of Christ. Now the king hearing of Austines arriuall, within few dayes after, and hauing receaued message from Austine, of the cause of his comming, commeth to the place where hée was, to speake with him. To whom Austine preached the word of God. The king at the first was not perswaded: yet for so much as he came for his benefit, he both ministred vnto him necessaries, and gaue him libertie to preach, and conuert his people (which hée did in Canterbury where the king gaue him a mansion place) and baptized people on the Eastside of the cittie in the old Church of Saint Martine, where the Quéene was woont to resort, till time that the king himselfe was conuerted to the faith, which he was at length by the godly conuersation of Christians, & myraclesGodly conuer∣sation, and mi∣racles. that were wrought. He was conuerted an. 586.  and the 36. yéere of his raigne: who beyng conuerted, the number grew innumerable, whom he specially embraced,None compel∣led to beleeue. The Abbey of S. Peter and S. Paule in Canterbury. but compelled none. Then he gaue to Austin a place for his bishops sea at Christ church in Canterbury, and builded the Abbey of S. Peter and Paule in the Eastside of the citie, where after Au∣stin and all the kings of Kent were buried, and that place is now called S. Austin. In this while Austin sailed into Fraunce to the bishop of Arelatensis called Ethereus, by him to be consecrated archbishop, by the commandement of Gregory, and so was. He sent moreouer to Rome one of his company Laurentius, to shew Gregory how they had sped, and also to be resolued concerning nine or ten questions. The first how the B. should vse himselfe towards his
clarke,Questions re∣solued from Rome. and of oblations, what diuidens were to be made. For the first Gregory referreth him to the Epistle of Paule to Timothie: touching the second he telleth him, the order of the church of Rome is to make foure parts:Bishops li∣uings how to be bestowed. the one for the B. hospitalitie in receauing commers in: the other to the Clergie: the third to the poore: the fourth to repairing of churches. And because (he saith) Austine could not liue from his clarkes, he would haue in their societie all common. The second, whether Clarkes that can not containe may marry, and then marrying, whether they are to returne to their secular estate againe or no?Clarkes may marrie. to whom hée answereth, they might marry and also obtaine their stipends. The third, seing the faith is but one, how commeth it to passe,Diuerse ce∣remonies. that the ceremonies and customes be so diuerse, as one manner of Masse at Rome, and an other in France? To which he answered, that without respect of place he should chose out of many churches, the best orders. The fourth, what punishment should be laid on him that pilfereth out of the church? This he referreth to his discretiō, consideration being had of the necessitie of the stealer, & the abilitie to make recompence, without any gaine. Whether two brethren may marry two sisters, being far of from any part of kindred? To this he answereth affirma∣tiuely, to what degrée of kindred matrimony may extend: and whether it is lawfull to marry with the stepmother,Degrees for marriage. & her kinsfolkes. The answere he referreth to the law of God, and denieth the lawfulnesse of such marriages, or with the kinsfolke, but in the third degrée. Whether such as be coupled in such vnlawfull mariage, ought to be separated, and denied the Communion? to which he answereth: that such as haue béene so maried in time of their ignorance, should not therefore be separated from the Communion, but admonished to do so no more: and such as professe the faith, and so couple themselues, he willeth they should be denied the Lords body.
After what manner he should deale with the Bishops of France, and Britain? To these he answereth, that the Bish. in Fraunce are not to submit to him, but onely his iurisdicti∣on should extend ouer them of Britaine. The ninth containeth diuers points: whether a woman with child ought to be baptized? & after she hath had a childe, whether she ought to enter the Churche, &c? To which all, Gregorie maketh answere with resolution. Nowe Gregory, after he had sent these resolutions, sen∣deth mo coadiutors, and helpers, as Mellitus, Iustus, Pau∣linus, and Ruffianus, with bookes and such other things, as he thought necessary for the Church. He sendeth also to Au∣sten a Pall with letters,A Pall from Rome. containing an order betwéen ye two Metropolitane seates of London, and Yorke. Notwithstā∣ding, he graunteth to Austen during his life, to be the onely chiefe Archbishop in all the lande, and after his time that to returne againe to London and Yorke. Hee sendeth also another letter to Mellitus, willing him to let the Idolatrous temple stand, and alter the vse. He admonisheth Austen also not to be puffed vp with pride, for his working of miracles. Moreouer, he wrote to king Ethelbert, willing him to con∣tinue constant, and sendeth him presents. Now Austen of a monke, being made an Archbishop, after he had baptized a great part of Kent, made two Archbishops by the comman∣dement of Gregorie, MellitusMellitus, was specially sent to the East Saxons, in ye pro∣uince of Essex, where afterward he was made B. of London vnder Sigebert K. of Essex: which Sigebert, together with his vncle Ethelbert, first built the Church of S. Paul in Lon∣don, and appointed it to Mellitus for his Bishops seat. Austen associate with this Mellitus and Iustus, through ye helpe of Ethelbert, assembled the Doct. of Britain in a place, which taking the name of Austen, is called Austens oake.Austens oake, In which assembly, he charged the Bishops to preach with him to the English men, the word of God, & to baptise after ye ma∣ner
of Rome,Brittains and Scots refuse the Easter of Rome. & kéep Easter after the same maner, which the Britains & Scots refused to doe. Then he gathered another synode, to ye which came 7. bish. of Britons, with the wisest men of that famous abbey of Bangor:Abbey of Ban∣gor. who first taking coun∣sel of an holy wise mā, were aduised yt if he were humble, thē to agrée vnto him,Austens pride offendeth the Britains. as ye seruant of God. The B. thus counsel∣led, entred into ye counsel, & Austen after ye Romane manner kepeth his chaire of pride: wherat (after some heat of words) ye Brittains disdaining, departed. To whō thē Austen spake, and said, that if they woulde not take peace with their bre∣thren, they should receiue warres of their enimie, &c. 1100. monks of Bangor slaine.Which not long after fell out according as he had said, for Ethelfride being yet a pagane, slue 1100. monks of the Ab∣bey of Bangor (which consisted of 2100. monkes that liued with the sweat of their brows) that came to Chester, & prai∣ed and fasted thrée daies, for the good successe of Brockmayl against the Saxons. Whereat Ethelfride being offēded, slue 1100, only 50. fled away. They came to their chiefe Gouer∣nour, one named Dinoe.Dinoe. This Ethelfride was afterwarde slaine of the christian king Edwin, (who succéeded him) as he had slaine the Christians before, which was 610. Austen, after that he had baptised a thousand Christians of Saxons, in one day, in the West riuer, that is called Swold beside Yorke: on Christmas day, hee perceyuing his ende to drawe neere,Gregorie dieth ordained LaurentiusLaurentius. to rule after him, the Archb. Sea of Canterbury. In the meane season, a∣bout this time died Gregorie: of whom it is said, yt of all the Bish. that were afore him, he was ye basest, & of al that came after him ye best. About which time, died also in Wales, Da∣uid, Archb. of Kaerleion, who then translated the sea frō thēce to Meuenia, & therfore is called Dauid of Wales. Not long after this, also died Austen,Austen dieth. after he had set 15. or 16. yéeres. This Gregory denied any B. to be lawfully called vni∣uersal bish. declaring, that he that shold take that vpon him, is ye forerunner of Antichrist. For this matter hee had much
adoo with the Emperour, and Patriarch of Constantinople, who was extolled by Mauricius to the Patriarchie of Alex∣andria, and would be called vniuersallPatriarke of Alexandria would be vni∣uersall. Patriarch,Strife about Primacy. requiring the Emperour that hée would obtaine Gregories consent herein: but Gregory refused so to doo, wherevpon grewe greate troubles to Gregory, that purchased thereby the displeasure of the Emperour. This Gregory brought in the title among the Romaine bishops, to be called Seruus seruorum Dei.The title, Seruus seruo∣rum Dei. Sabinianus first vniuersall Bishop. After Gregory succéeded Sabinianus, a malitious detra∣ctor of Gregory and his workes. He continued scarse two yéeres: after whome succéeded Bonifacius the third, who raigned but one yere, yet did much hurt: he obtained of Pho∣cas the wicked Emperour, that he and his succcessos,Phocas giueth first title of v∣niuersal bishop should be called vniuersal Bishops, and head of the rest. This Pho∣cas, to obtaine the empire, killed his maister Mauritius, and his children: but he was rewarded thereafter. For, hauing his hands and féete cut of by Heraclius, that succeded him, he was cast into the sea. King Ethelbert did many Christian actes,Ethelb. dieth. and died when he had raigned 56. yéeres, ann. 616.  whom stories say to be slaine in a fight betwéene him and Ethelfride the king of the North Saxons, who also after he had raigned foure and twentie yéeres, was slaine in the field of Edwin, that suc∣ded in Northumberland after him. This Edwin the sonne of Alba, was conuerted by Pauli∣nus, and was the first christian K. of Northumberland, al∣though his wife were a Christian woman, & K. Ethelbertes daughter. Who, although he was much laboured with by his wife, yet was he hard to be woon to the faith, till a cer∣taine trouble fell vpon him, which was the cause of his cal∣ling: for his death being conspired by the K. of Westsaxons, Quincelinus, wt Kinegilsus his brother, he was woūded by one yt was suborned to kill him. About whitsontide after, the K. assēbled his host, & entended to make war against them, &
vowed to Christ if he would giue him victory that he would be christened, and in token therof caused his daughter borne of Edelburgh, the same Easterday when he was wounded, named Eufled to be baptized, with twelue other of his fami∣lie, by Paulinus. So he obtained the victory, and yet with much adoo, forsooke his Mahometrie at the preaching of Pau∣linus, and denied to be christened till a time after. This Edwin before he maried the daughter of Ethelbert fell into some displeasure with him, and fled to Redwald king of the East Angles, which Redwald being corrupted intended to betray him, wherefore being pensiue and not hauing whe∣ther to fly, there appeared suddenly to him a straunger, who said vnto him with other spéeches: wilt thou doe after his counsell that shall deliuer thée, and follow him if hee shewe thée a better way of life? to whom he promised faithfully so he would. Then he laying his hand vppon his head: when (saith hée) this token happeneth vnto thée,A vision. then remember this time of thy tribulation, and the promise which thou hast made, and sodainly he vanished out of sight. Now Paulinus séeing the king to hard to beléeue, praied for him, and God reuealed vnto him the vision aboue mentioned. Wherevp∣pon Paulinus comming vnto the king vpon a time, and lay∣ing his hand vpon the Kings head, asked him if hee knew that token: the king hearing this, and remembring the to∣ken, was readie to fall downe at his féete. But Paulinus would not suffer that, and declared vnto him, the victories he obtained by Christ, and put him in minde of his former promise. Whereupon, the king (conferring with his Nobles) was by him baptized in Yorke, with many of his Subiects. In so much, that Coysi, the chiefe of the Idolatrous prelates, with others of that kinde,Edwine bap∣tized. destroyed the Idoles, with their Tem∣ples, which was at Godmunham, not farre from York. And this was the eleuenth yere of his Reigne. This Edwine, after he had first brought in the Faith into
the North partes, continued after his baptisme, vi. yeres. At length he was slaine in battaile by Ced walla, king of the Britaines, and by wicked Penda, king of the Mercians, with his sonne, and Offricus, in the field called Hatfield. This Paulinus, was the first Archbishoppe of Yorke, and ordeyned by Iustus Archbishoppe of Canterburie. After whose decease, he ordeyned Honorius Archbishop of Can∣terburie. Paulinus, after the death of Edwin, fled from the vnmer∣cifull Cedwalla, and the wicked, and Idolatrous Penda, (who had neither regarde of Sexe, nor age) by water, into Kent, with Edelberge the Quéene, and Eufled her daughter. Where he remayned Bishop of Rochester, the space of xix. yeres. And so the Church of Northumberland lacked a Bi∣shop the space of xxx. yeres. Notwithstanding, he left one Iames, a Deacon, in those quarters,Paulinus, the first archbishop of York. who continued there preaching, til peace was recouered, and the Church brought againe to a stay. By the meanes of this Edwine, Erpwaldus king of the East-angles, sonne to Redwaldus aboue menti∣ned, was brought to the faith. After Edwin and his sonne, reigned Osricus, and Eaufri∣dus (the one in Deira) who were first christened in Scotlād, but after they were kings, reuolted to Idolatrie, and in the yeres following, were slaine one after another, by Cedwal∣la, and wicked Penda. After whom succéeded in Northum∣berland, the second sonne of Ethelfrede, named Oswaldus, hauing rule ouer both the prouinces, as wel Deira, as Ber∣nicia. He (by prayer made vnto God) ouercame Cedwalla, or Cadwallo, the Britaine king, which sent Penda with an armie against him, that was ouerthrowen, after hee had reigned ouer the Britaines 22. yeres, leauing after him a sonne, wohm Gaufridus called Cadwalladius,Oswald a nota∣ble king. the last K. of Britans. This Oswald was very religiously disposed, and sent for a certain bishop out of Scotland, named Aidanus, to preach to his people. And as he preached in Scottish, so ye K.
did interprete it, hauing learned the Scottish tongue in his banishment there. By the meanes of Oswald, Kinigilsus, K. of the Westsaxons, was conuerted to Christs faith, espe∣cially through the godly labor of Berinus, who was sent by P. Honorius, to preach in England, & then made Bishop of Dorcester.Kinigilsus conuerted. To whom Quincelinus, brother to the foresaid Kinigilsus, (after he had receiued baptisme of BerinusBernius.) gaue to him the said citie, therein to make his Sea: and gaue after to the B. of Winchester,The Sea of Winchester. 7. miles compasse of land, to buyld there the bishops Sea, which was accomplished, & finished by Kenwalcus his sonne. This Bernius was driuen by the weather to the Coast of the West-saxons, where Kinigilsus, and his brother Quin∣celinus did raigne, and were baptized with their people. It so fell out, that Oswaldus, King of Northumberlande, was there present: and ye same day married Kinigilsus his daugh∣ter, and was also Godfather to the king. Oswald (after he had raigned ix. yeres) was at the length slaine in the field, called Maxfield, by wicked Penda, king of Mercians. Which Penda likewise, was ouercome, & slaine by Oswy, brother to Oswald, the next king of Northum∣berland after Oswald, not withstanding hee had himselfe as many people as Oswy had. Penda had iij. sonnes, Wolferus, Weda, and Egfridus. The second sonne Weda, Oswy had before time maried his daughter,Weda con∣uerted. by consent of Penda his father. Who also by the helpe of Oswy, was made king of Southmercia, and promi∣sed when he married his daughter, he would become a chri∣stian: which thing he perfourmed after the death of Penda. And within thrée yeres following, by reason of his wife, he was slaine.Wolferus conuerted. After him, the kingdome fell to Wolferus, the o∣ther brother, who being wedded to Armenilda, daughter to Ercombert, K. of Kent, was afterward christened: so that he is accounted the first christian king of Mercia. This Wolferus conquered Kenwalcus K. of Kent, and
gat the Ile of Wight, which after he gaue to Sigbert king of the East-angels, vpon condition he would be christened,Sigbert bap∣tized. And thus the East-angles which before had expulsed Melli∣tus their B, recouered againe the christian faith vnder Sig∣bert their king, who was baptized by FinanusFinanus. the bishop. Now to Oswy was ioyned Oswinus his cosin, ouer the prouince of Deira, & there raigned with Oswy seuen yéere, a Prince gentill, liberall, and deuout, but not long after Os∣wy the king of Bernicia disdaining at him, caused him trai∣terously to be slaine: and so Oswy with his sonne Egfride raigned in Northumberland alone. In that time and also in the house of Oswy and his sonne Egfride, was Butolphus the abbot, who builded in the East part of Lincoln an abbey. Also Aidanus, Finianus, and Col∣mannus, with 3. scottish Bishops of Northumberland, holy men, that held with the Brittains against the Romish order for kéeping of Easter. Moreouer, Cuthbertus, Iarmuannus, Cedda and Wilfridus liued at the same time. About this time, or not much before,  vnder the raigne of Oswy and Oswine, the question of Easter,The questions of Easter. and hauing of o∣ther ceremonies, was debated in the Abbey called Sterne∣halt: Of which, HildaHilda. a deuout woman, was abbesse: to the which place came both the kings, the father and the sonne, Bishop Colman, with his Cleargy of Scotland, Aigelbert with Agathon, and Wilfride, Priestes. Iames, and Roman were on their sides: Hilda the Abbesse, was on the Scottish part, with her companie. And the reuerend Bishop, CeddaCedda. was appointed Prolocutor for both partes in that parlemēt. Now, there was much debating of ye matter on both partes: one standing to the custome of Iohn the Euangeliste, to be kept according to the Law: the other, the tradition of Peter and Paul, of Rome, with other reasons. Wilfride, spake for Aigelbert, because he could vtter his mind more plainlie in the English tongue. Now, when Wilfride had shewed, that Peter was the chiefe of the Apostles, and that the
Lord had said to him I will giue thée the keies of the king∣dome of heauen &c. The King said to Colman, is it true that the Lord spake these things to S. Peter? and Colman answered yea. Then said the King can you declare any thing that the Lord said to Columba? (who was a reuerend Father, whom Colman alledged to follow) Colman answe∣red, No. Then quoth the King doo you both agrée on this matter? They both answered, yea. Then concluded the king: for asmuch as S. Peter is dore kéeper of heauen, I will not gainesay him, but in that I am able I will obey his or∣der in euery point, least when I come to the gates of hea∣uen, he shut them against me. Vpon this simple and rude reason of the king,A rude reason of the king. the multitude consented, and with them, Cedda was contented to giue ouer, onely Colmannus the Scot, being then Archb of Yorke, departed into Scotland, carrying with him the bones of Aidanus.The bones of Aidanus. After the decease of Oswin, Egfride his sonne was king after him in Northumberland, fiftéene yéeres. By this Eg∣fride, Cuthbert was promoted to the Bishopricke of the yle of Farne, and Wilfride, which before had béene Archbishop of Yorke was displaced, through the meanes of Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury and Cedda, possessed that Sea. Wilfride, when he was put out, went to Agathon Bishop of Rome, and complained to him, and was well allowed in some things. But the king, and Theodorus, had there such Proctors, and friendes, that he returned without spéeding of his cause. Wherefore hee returned vnto the Southsaxons, and buylded an Abbey in Silisey, and preached vnto the Southsaxons xv. yeres. The king of the Southsaxons was then Ethelwolde: to whom Wolferus, king of the Mercians, gaue the Ile of Wight,Southsex con∣uerted. vpon condition, yt he should be a Christian. Where∣fore, Wilfride being now licenced by Ethelwolde the king, preached vnto his Nobles, and people of Southsex, and con∣uerted them to Christ.
In the time of whose baptizing the raine that lacked before, thrée yéeres, was giuen them plentifully, whereby their countrie was made fruitfull, and their famine stayed,Great famine. which was such, that ye people (penured with famine) would go 40. togither and throw themselues into the Sea. Moreo∣uer the same Wilfride taught them first the art of fishing,The art of fish∣ing taught. whereof they were ignorant before. After Egfrid, who was slaine in the straights of Scotland, succéeded Alfride his brother, and bastard sonne to Oswin, & raigned 18. or 19. yéeres in Northumberland.Wilfride re∣stored. This Alfride restored againe the foresaid Wilfride to the sea of Yorke, whom his brother had before expelled, & put in Cedda. Not withstanding the same king within 5.Wilfride ex∣pulsed againe. yéeres after expulsed Wilfride again, & so he went to Rome. But at lēgth by Os∣wrick his successor, he was restored againe; & Cedda was or∣dained by Theodorus archbishop of Cāterbury, who by the authority of ye Sinod holdē at Hatfield, did after deuide Mer∣cia into fiue bishoprikes, one to Chester, the 2. to Worcester, the third to Lichfield, the fourth to Caderna in Lindsey, the fifth to Dorcester, which was after translated to Lincolne. Néere vnto this time in the yéere 666. began the dete∣stable set of Mahomet, which wel agreeth with the number of the beast signified in the Apocalips χξς that is 666.  Of him came the kingdome of Agarens, whom he after named Saracens, to whom he gaue sundry lawes,Mahomet beginneth. patched of many sectes and religions together. He taught them to pray euer to the South, & to kéepe the Friday as we doo the Sunday. He permitted thē to haue as many wiues as they were able to maintaine, & to haue as many concubines as they listed: to abstaine from the vse of wine, except vpon certaine solemne daies in ye yéere: to worship onely one God omnipotent: say∣ing that Moyses, and the Prophetes were great men; but Christ was greater, and greatest of all the Prophets, as be∣ing borne of the virgin Mary by the power of God without mans séede, and at last was taken vp into heauen; but was
not slain,Turkes con∣quered the Saracenes. but another in his likenes, &c. At length this king∣dome of the Saracens was conquered by the Turkes. In this meane season TheodorusTheodorus. was sent from Italie into England by Vitellianus the Pope, to be Archbishop of Canterbury, and with him diuerse other monkes of Italie, to set vp here in England Latine seruice,Latine seruice, and masse first brought into England. The archbi∣shop plaieth Rex. Masses, Ceremo∣nies, Letanies, wt such other Romish ware: & being archbi∣shop he began to play Rex, placing and displacing bishops at his pleasure: he thrust out Cedda, & Wilfride archbishop of Yorke, pretending they were not lawfully cōsecrated. Wil∣fride went vp to Rome, but could haue no redresse. An. 680.In the time of this Theodorus, & by the meanes of him a prouinciall Synod was holden at Thetford:A prouinciall Synode at Thetford. the principall points were these: 1. That Easter should be vniformly kept on the full moone in the moneth of March. 2. That no B. should intermeddle with the dioces of an other. 3. That mo∣nasteries should be exempt from the authoritie of Bishops. 4. That monks should not stray frō one monastery to an o∣ther without licence of his Abbot. 5. That no clergy man should forsake his B. & be receiued in another place without letters commendatorie of his owne B. 6. That forren bi∣shops & clergy men should be contented onely with such hos∣pitalitie, as should be offered thē, without any further inter∣medling wtout licence. 7. That prouinciall synodes should be kept within the realme, at least once a yéere. 8. That no B. should prefer himselfe before an other, but obserue ye time & order of his consecration. 9. That the number of bishops should be augmented as the people increased. 10. That no marriage should be admitted but such as was lawfull, and no man put away his wife,The sixt gene∣rall councell at Constance. Marriage for∣bidden. The first Latin masse at Con∣stantinople. but for fornication. The next yéere following was the sixt generall coun∣cell kept at Constance, where Theodore was also present vnder Pope Agathe: where marriage was permitted to the Gréeke Priestes, and forbidden to the Latine. In this coun∣cell the Latine masse was first openly said by Iohn Portēsis
the Popes Legate, before the patriarch, and princes of Con∣stantinople, in the temple of S. Sopry, After the decease of Alfride, king of Northumberland, succéeded his sonne Oscadus, & raigned 11. yéers, after whō raigned Kenredus, 2. yéeres, and next after him, Osricus, 11. yéeres. In the time and raigne of these 4. king of Northum∣berland, king Iua raigned in West saxe, who succéeding Cad∣wallader, the last king of the Britains, begā his raign ann. 689.  and raigned with great valiantnes ouer the West Sa∣xons, the terme of 37. yéeres. About ye 16. yere of the raign of this Iua, or Iue, Etheldred king of Mercia, after he had raig∣ned there 30. yéeres, was made a monke, & after an abbot of Bardney. About the 18. yéere of the raigne of Iua,King Iua made a monke, and after an abbot. died the learned & worthy bish. Aldelmus,Aldelmus. first abbot of Malmesbu∣rie, afterward B of Schirburne. He was next vnto Bede, in learning and vertue: he wrote diuers Epistles, and Po∣ems. The sea of Schirburn was afterward vnited to the sea of Winton. Moreouer, about the 25. yéere of Iua,  died S. Iohn of Be∣uerley, then Bishop of Yorke,Iohn of Beuer∣ley. and was buried at the porche of the minster of Beuerley, In the time of this foresaide Iua,The right ob∣seruing of Ea∣ster, now first receiued of Picts and Brittaines. beganne the right obseruing of Easter day, to be kept of the Picts and Brit∣tains: in the obseruing of which day, thrée things are chiefly necessarie. 1. The full moone of the moneth of March. 2. The Dominicall letter. 3. The equinoctial daies. It tooke place, through ye busie trauel of Theodorus, Cuthlacus, but name∣ly of Egbert, whom they termed the holie monke, and of Colefride abbot of Serwin in Northumberland, who wrote to Narranus, or Naivnus, the king of the Pictes, about the same: who also wrote amōg other things, of ye shauē crownsShauen crownes. of priests, saying, it was as necessarie for their vowe, for restraint of their lustes, as it is for anye Christian man to blesse him against spirites, when they come vp∣pon him. The letter is very ridiculous, notwithstanding
being read before king Naiton, he rose from among his no∣ble men, and gaue thanks to God for the aduise of shauing, knéeling on the ground,The K. than∣keth God for the priests sha∣uen crownes. and caused it to bee obserued among his people, defacing the errors that had bin vsed the space of 404. yéeres. Now when king Iua had ruled the West Saxōs 37. yéers, he was perswaded by Ethelburga his wife, to go to Rome, & there to be made a mōk. Which hauing lōg time before per∣suaded, & not preuailing, she caused ye faire palace of the king, where they had bin the day before,The deuise of Ethelburga the Queene. to be filled full of dung, & hogges, & vile beasts to be laid in the chiefe chambers, & in their own chamber, a sow to be laid with her yong pigges, and bringing the king thither againe, within a while, there∣vpon declared vnto him the vanity of this life, and perswa∣ded him to be a monke. Wherevpon, shortly after, he resig∣ned his kingdome to Ethelardus his nephewe, and in great deuotion went to Rome, after he had raigned seuen & thirty yeres: after whose departing, Ethelburga his wife went vn∣to Barking,The Q becom∣meth an Ab∣besse. seuen miles from London, where, in the Nunry of Barking, before founded of Erkenwald, she continued, & ended the rest of her life, when shee had continued Abbas of the place a certaine time. This Iua, was the first king that graunted a penny for euery fire house through his dominion, to be paid vnto the Court of Rome, which after was called Rome scotte, or Pe∣ter pence, and long after was paid in manie places of Eng∣land. Peter-pence.Iua was the first of Saxon kings, that set foorth lawes to his countrie, to the number of 80. and odde. Next vnto Osoricus king of Northumberland, followed Celulfus,Celulfus a lear¦ned king. Diuers lear∣ned men flou∣rish. Bedaes Anglo∣rum historia. whō he had adopted brother to Kenred. This Ce∣lulfus, as hée was learned, so in his time diuers learned men flourished in England: among whom was Beda, who vnto the same king Celulfus, offered his historie, intituled, Anglorum historia, not onely to be ratified, but also to bee a∣mended
by his learning and knowledge. BedaBeda. was an Englishman, a Priest, and of the Monaste∣rie of Peter and Paul, at Wire, and was borne in the same Territorie. About the xix. yere of his age he was made a Deacon, and the xxx. a Priest. From which time, til the age of lix. he occupied himselfe in wryting Treatises, and inter∣preting of Scriptures, which rose to the number of xxxvij. Volumes, which he digested into xxviij. Bookes. This Beda, for the same of his learning, was sent for by Pope Sergius, who wrote vnto Chelfride, the Abbot of Wire, to send him vnto him. He liued in trauel of studie till the age of lxij. yeres. At length (drawing to his ende) being sick vij. wéekes together, besides other occupyinges of his minde, and studies, which he did not intermitte,Beda transla∣ted the gospel of Iohn into English. he transla∣ted the Gospel of Saint Iohn into English. So he died, (pronouncing very many comfortable wordes to those that stoode round about him,) vpon Ascension day, in the same yere that Nothelinus was restored to the Archbishoprick of Canterburie. This Celulfus, king of Northumberlande, before menti∣oned, after he had reigned viij. yeres, was made a Monke in the Abbey of Farne, otherwise called Lincolne, or holy I∣land. Where, by his meanes, licence was geuen vnto the monks of that house only to drink wine or ale, which before,The K. made a Monke. by ye institution of Aidanus, before mētioned, drank nothing but milke, and water. After whom succeeded Egbert his co∣sin, brother to Egbert, the same time Bishop of York, which brought againe thether, the Pall, that his Predecessors had forgone, since the time of Paulinus, who left that Sea, and fled to Rochester. The said Egbert also erected a noble Librarie in Yorke: whose example I would other Bishops now would follow,A noble Libra∣rie in Yorke by a Bishop. About the beginning of Egberts reigne, was Cutbert, Archb. of Canterburie, who conuented a great Synode of Bishops and Prelates, in the yere of our Lorde 747. in the
moneth of September néere to the place called Clonesho: in the which Synode assembled, these articles were enacted. First, that Bishops should be more diligent in looking to their office, & admonishing the people of their faults. 2. That they should liue in a peaceable mind one wt another. 3. That euerie Bishop once in a yere, should goe about all the Pari∣shes of his Dioces. 4. That the Bishops should admonish their Abbots and Monkes, to liue regularly: and that Pre∣lates should not oppresse their inferiors, but loue them. 5. That they should teach the Monasteries which the Se∣cular men had inuaded, and could not be taken from them, to liue regularlie. 6. That none should be admitted to orders, before his life were examined. 7. That in Monasteries, the reading of holy Scriptures should be more frequented. 8. That Priestes should be no disposers of secular busines. 9. That they should take no money for baptizing of infants 10.The L praier and Creed, in the English tongue. That they should both learn, & teach, the Lords prayer, and the Créede, in the English tongue. 11. That al should ioyne together after one vniforme order, in their Ministe∣rie. 12. That with a modest voyce, they should sing in the Church. 13. That all Holidayes should be celebrated at one time. 14. That the Sabboth day be reuerently obser∣ued. 15. That the seuen houres Canonicall, be euery day obserued. 16. That the Rogation dayes, both greater and lesser, should not be omitted. 17. That the feast of Saint Gregorie, and Saint Augustine our Patron, should be ob∣serued. 18. That the Feast of the foure times shoulde be kept. 19. That Monks and Nunnes, should goe regular∣lie apparrelled. 20. That Bishops should sée these De∣crées not to be neglected. 21. That the Churchmen should not geue themselues to drunkennes. 22. That the com∣munion shoulde not be neglected of the Churchmen. 23. That the same also should be obserued of the Lay men, as time required. 24. That Lay men shoulde first be wel tried, before they enter into Monkerie. 25. That almes
be not neglected. 26 That Bishops should sée these decrées notified to the people. 27 They disputed also of the pro∣fite of almesse. 28 Of the profite of singing Psalmes. 29 That the congregation should be constitute after the habilitie of their goods. 30 That Monkes should not dwell among lay men. 31 That the publike prayer should be made for Kings and Princes. These decrées among them concluded, CutbertCutbert. the Archbishop sendeth the copie thereof to Boniface,Boniface the Pope, an En∣glishman. otherwise called Winfride an English man, that was then Archbishop of Mentz. This Boniface wrote a letter to Ethelbald, who was present at ye former Synod,Boniface a great maintai∣ner of nunnes. admonishing him of his vicious life, & of his Nobles wantonnes euen with the Nunnes, of which order this Boniface was a great setter vp & maintai∣ner afterward. This Ethelbald, after the departing of K. Celulph to his monkery, spoiled the country of Northum∣berland, and exercised mortall warre a great while against Cudred of some called Cutbert K. of West-saxons, who en∣countering with Ethelbald that had the greater power, by means of a certaine warriour, a Consull called Edellim o∣uerthrew him. Notwithstanding the next yéere he renewed battell, & was slaine of one Beornered after he had raigned 41. yéeres in Mercia, where Beornered raigned after in that dition but a small time. For Offa nephew to the said E∣thelbald expulsed Beornered, and succéeded king in that prouince of Mercia, after he had raigned 39. yéeres. Boniface before mētioned,Religious fa∣thers permit∣ted to carry Nunnes about with them a preaching. permitted religious fathers to carry about nunnes with them a preaching, & founded ma∣ny monasteries, & canonized many Saints. Among other he founded the great monastery of Fulde in Germany of En∣glish monkes, into the which no women might enter, but Libda & TeclaLibda & Tecla. two English nunnes. He deposed Childeri∣cus king of Fraunce by authoritie from Pope Zacharie,Childerike de∣posed by the Pope. and Pipinus the betrayer of his Maister was confirmed. From this Boniface procéeded that detestable doctrine that
although the Pope led with him innumerable soules into Hell,A detestable doctrine of Boniface. yet ought no man to rebuke him. In the time of this Archbishop, Pope Gregory the se∣cond,Great maiste∣ries wrought against the Greeke Emp. by Popes. Philippicus the Emp. lost both his eyes and Empyre. also Gregory the third, and pope Zacharie: and before these, Pope Constantine the first, wrought great maiste∣ries against the Gréeke Emperours, Philippicus, and Leo, and others, for the maintayning of Images to be set vp in the Churches, of whom Philippicus lost both his eies and his Empire. Leo for the same cause was excommunicated of Gregory the third. This Gregory the third, is like to be he which wrote the 4. bookes of Dialogs in Gréeke, falsly bearing the name of Gregory the first: which bookes after∣ward Zacharie his successor translated into Latine. Also this Gregory the third brought into the Masse Canon,The clause for reliques, the memoriall, and offerings for the dead. the clause for Reliques, beginning Quorum solemnitates hodie in conspectu &c. Item he brought into the same the memori∣all, the offering and sacrifice for the dead: Like as Zacharie brought in the Priests vesture and ornaments. And Con∣stantinus the first,The Priests vesture. was he that gaue his féete to be kissed of the Emperour. Constantinus the first, gaue his feete to be kissed of the Emperour.In the time of Egbert king of Northumberland, Sigi∣bert or Sigbert, raigned in the West Saxonie, and was for his cruelty deposed, and wandering in a wood alone without comfort, was slaine by the Swineherd of the earle Combranus; whome hée before had slaine, for giuing him counsell to gouerne his people, and himselfe after a better sort. This Sigebert beyng slaine, in his place succéeded Ke∣nulphus Anno 748.  who with the agréement of the West-saxons, was one of the chéefe doers against Sigebert his ma∣ster. Kenulphus reigned 31. yéeres, till hée resorted to a par∣amour of his, whō he kept at Merton, where he was beset, and slaine by a kinsman of Sigebert, named Clito or Cli∣ton. Moreouer in the raigne of the foresaid Egbert king of Northumberland, and the eight yéere of Kenulphus king
of West Saxons, Offa, after he had slaine the tyrant Beorn∣redus. (who before had slaine Ethelwald king of Mercia, & vncle to this foresaid Offa) reigned king of that prouince. Offa had such displeasure against the citizens of Canter∣burie, that he remoued the Arthbishops sea, and the lands of Lambrith Archbish. of Canterbury (by the agréement of Pope Adrian) vnto Lichfield.Lambrith to Lichfield. About the later time of the raigne of Offa king of Mer∣cia, Ethelbert king of Eastangels, came to sue to mar∣rye with Offas daughter, but the Quéene suspecting worse matter (without cause) caused him to be beheaded, ha∣uing trained him into a conuenient place, by one Gnim∣bertus, the yeere 793. but the Quéene liued not thrée mo∣neths after: and at her death, was so tormented, that shée bit, and rent her tongue asunder, with her téeth.The K. giueth the tenth of his goods to the Church. And Offa vnderstanding of the innocencie of this king, gaue the tenth part of his owne good to holye Churche, and to the Church of Hereford (in remembrance of this Ethelbert) he bestow∣ed great lands. Moreouer, hee builded the abbey of Saint Albones, &c: and went after to Rome to doe penance, where he gaue to the Church of Saint Peter, a peny through euery house in his dominion, which was commonly called Rome∣scot or Peter-pence,Romescot or Peter-pence. and there at length was transformed from a King to a Monke, Anno 794.  with Kenredus king of Northumberland, although some denie that hée was a Monke. After Offa, when he had reigned 39. yéeres, succéeded Eg∣fretus his sonne, who raigned but foure monethes: next Egfret, succéeded Kenulphus in the kingdom of Mercia, who made warre against the Cantuarites, and tooke Egbert their king called Wren: whom he bound, and led prisoner to Mer∣cia: but vpon the dedication of a Church, which hee builded, he released him out of prison. Next to Pope Zacharie, followed Pope Stephen the se∣cond: to whom Pipinus the French king, to gratifie the
Pope gaue to the sea of Rome, the princedome of Rauenna, the kingdome of the Lombards, and manie other great pos∣sessions of Italie,The donation of Pipine the traitor and murtherer. Inuention of Organs. with all the cities thereto, adioyning vn∣to the borders of Venice: and this is like to the donation which (they say) was giuen of Constantine. To this Pipinus, was sent into France the inuention of Organs out of Gréece, by Costantine Emperour of Con∣stantinople. Anno 757. Next to Stephen the second, succéeded Paul the first, in the Papacie, who thundered against Constantine the emperor of Constantinople, for abrogating of images, but hee conti∣nued constant in his purpose, notwithstanding, to the end of his life. These came to bee Popes, Constantinus the seconde, a Laie man,Pope deposed, & his eies out. and brother to Desiderius the king of Lom∣bardie, for the which cause, hée was shortly deposed and thrust into a Monasterie, hauing his eyes put out. In whose steade, succeeded Stephen the third, who con∣demned the seuenth Councell of Constantinople for hereti∣call, because in that Councell, the woorshipping of Images was condemned,Pope striueth for images. and contrarily caused them to be worship∣ped and incensed. At this time, Charles the great beganne to raigne, by whom the Pope caused Desiderius, the Lombard king, to bee depriued. Next vnto Stephen succeeded Hadrianus the first, who gaue more veneration to images, then any before him writing a booke in commendation, and vtilitie of their adoration,Images, laie mens kalender. commaunding them to be taken for lay mens ka∣lenders, holding a synode at Rome against Felix, and al o∣ther that spake against images: and as Paul the first be∣fore him, had made much of the body of Petronella, S. Pe∣ters daughter. So this Hadrian, clothed the body of S. Pe∣ter all in siluer,Cost vpon Images. and couered the altar of S. Paul with a pall of gold. This Hadrian did confirme the order of Saint Grego∣ries
Masse, before the order of S. Ambrose: for vnto the time 800.Strife for Gregories masse. the Liturge of S. Ambrose was more vsed in the Italian Churches, but this Bishop burnt the bookes of Ambrose seruice into ashes, and threwe into prison many priests that would not consent vnto him. Now Eugenius cō∣ming 3. daies after the councell ended, perswaded the pope to call the councell againe, & agréed that both the bookes of Gregory and Ambrose should be laied vpon the altar of Pe∣ter and Paule, and the Church dores shut and sealed, they should all the night giue themselues to prayer, that God might giue a token whether were more to be allowed. Now, on the morning,A miracle falsly inter∣preted. they found Gregories masse booke plucked one péece from another, and scattered ouer all the Church, and onely Ambroses booke open vpon the altar, where they had laide it. This miracle, Pope Adrian did interprete on his owne side side, that as the leaues were scattered ouer the Church, so should Gregories booke bée vsed through the worlde, and Ambrose his book should onely be kept at his owne Church, at Mediolanum, where hee sometime was Bishop. Carolus magnus did confirme his fathers gift and de∣uotion to the Pope, adding moreouer, therevnto the Citie and dominion of Venice, Histria, the Dukedome of Fo∣roiuliense, the Dukedome Spoletanū, and Beneuentanum, and other possessions mo, to the patrimonie of saint Peter: and the Pope, to requite him, made him Patricium Roma∣num, and ordeined him onely to be taken for Emperour of Rome. Carolus being proclaymed Emperour, the Empire was translated from the Grecians to the Frenchmen, an. 801.The Empire translated to the French. A B C Mo∣nasteries. and continued so 102. yeres, or thereabout, till the comming of Conradus, and his Neuew Otho, which were Germās. This Charles builded so many Monasteries as there bée letters in the A.B.C. He helde a Councell at Franckforde, wherein was condemned, the Councell of Nice, and Irene,
for setting vp, and worshipping of Images. Anno 784.  Irene Empresse of the Gréekes, through the meanes of Pope Hadrian, tooke vp the body of Constantine Emperour of Constantinople,Irene the Greeke Em∣presse a main∣tainer of I∣mages. her owne husbandes father, and when she had burned the same, she caused the ashes to be cast into the Sea, because he disanulled Images. After∣ward she raigned with her sonne Constantine the sixt, sonne to Leo the fourth:The cruell Irene. who was also excommunicated for taking away Images, and being at dissention with him, she caused him to be taken, and laid in prison: and afterward (through power of fréends being restored) was at the last againe cast into prison,The Emp. eies pulled out by his mother. and had his eyes pulled out so cruelly, that with∣in short space he died. After this, the Empresse by the coun∣sel of Therasius, Bishop of Constantinople, held a Counsell at Nicea, wherin it was decreed, that Images again should be restored to the Church: which Charles afterward repea∣led at Frankford. At length shée was deposed by Nice∣phorus, who succeeded her, and ended her life in much pe∣nurie. Monasteries erected and founded in England.In the space of 200, yéeres, these monasteries following, began to be founded in the land. Paules Churche at London was founded by Ethelbert King of Kent, and Sigebert king of Essex, about the yéere 604. The first Crosse, & Altar, was set vp in the North parts, in Heuenfield, vpon occasion of Oswalde, King of Northū∣berlandes fighting against Cadwall: where he in the same place set vp the signe of the Crosse, knéeling & praying there for victorie, an. 635. The Church of Winchester was first begun, and foun∣ded by Kinigilsus, king of Mercia, hauing nine myles a∣bout it. And afterwarde finished by his Sonne Kewalcus, where Owen, of Englishmen, was the first Bishop. Anno 636. The Church of Lincolne, was first founded by Paulinus
Bishop, an. 629. The Church of Westminster began first by a certaine ci∣tizen of London, through the instigation of Ethelbert, king of Kent, which before was an Ile full of Thornes, anno 614. The common Schooles were first erected at Cambridge,Common schooles at Cambridge. by Sigebert, king of East-angles, an. 636. The Abbey of Knonisburie buylded by Furceus the Ere∣mite, an. 637 The Monasterie of Malmsburie, by one Meldulsus, a Scot, an. 640. And after enlarged by Agilbert, Bishop of Winchester. The Abbey of Glocester first buylded by Offricus, king of Mercia, as Cestrensis saith. But as William Malms∣burie wryteth, by Vlferus, and Etheldred, brethren to Ki∣neburga, Abbesse of the same house, in the yere of our Lord 679 The Monasterie of Maylerose, by the riuer of Twide, by Aydanus, a Scottish Bishop. The Nunnerie of Theorduton, by Heuy, who was ye first Nun in Northumberland. The Monasterie of Hetesey,The first Nun in Northum∣berland. by Oswy king of Northum∣berland, who also, with his daughter Elfred, gaue possessiōs for xij. Monasteries, from the partes of Northumberlande, anno 650 The Monasterie of Saint Martin in Douer, by White∣red, king of Kent The Abbey of Lestingeye, by Ceadda, whom they call Saint Cedde, through the graunt of Oswald, sonne to saint Oswald, king of Northumberland, an. 651 The Monasterie of Whitbie, otherwise called Strenhalt, by Hilda, daughter to the Nephue of Edwin, king of Nor∣thumberland, an. 657. Also, another Monasterie called Ha∣canus, not farre from the same place, builded by the same Hilda, the same yere.
The Abbey of Abingtō buylded by Cissa, king of South∣sex, an. 666 Also, an Abbey in the East side of Lincolne, called Ioan∣no, by S. Botolph, an. 654 The Monasterie of Ely, buylded by Etheldred, or Edel∣drida, daughter of Anna, king of East-angles, and the wife of Elfride, king of Northumberland, in the yere six hundred seuentie foure. The Monasterie of Chertsey, in Southerie, by Erkēwald B. of London, an. 674. throwen down by the Danes, & ree∣dified by king Edgar. The Nunnerie of Barking, edified by the same Erken∣waldus, B. of London, about the same time. The Abbey of Peterborough, otherwise called Made∣hamsted, founded by king Ethelwald, king of Mercia, anno 675 Badney Abbey, by Etheldredus, king of Mercia, an. 700 Glastenburie, by Iua, K. of the West-saxons, and after re∣paired, and enriched by king Edgar, an. 701 Ramsey, in the time of king Edgar, by one Alwinus, a no∣ble man, an. 673 K. Edg. builded 40. Abbeies.K. Edgar buylded in his time xl. Monasteries. He raig∣ned an. 601 The Nunnerie of Winburne, by Cuthburga, sister to In∣sus, K. Iuaes brother, an. 717 The Monasterie of Sealesey, néere to the Ile of Wight, by Wilfridus, B. of Yorke, an. 678 The Monasterie of Wincombe, by Kenulphus, king of Mercia, an. 737 S. Albons, buylded by Offa, K. of Mercia, an. 755 The Abbey of Euesam, by Egwinus, an. 691 Ripon in the North, by Wilfridus, B. an. 709 The Abbey of Echelinghey, by K. Aluredus, an. 691 The Nunnerie of Shaftesburie, by the same Aluredus, the same yere.
King Ethelbald freed the churches monasteries,The Church freed from tributes. &c. from all manner tributes, and granted them great liberties. Di∣uerse of the Saxon kings became mōkes: as Knigilsus king of West-saxons: Iue king of West-sex.Diuerse Saxō kings become monkes. Celulfus king of Northūberland, Eadbertus king of Northumb. Ethelredus of Mercia, Kemedus of Mercia, Offa of East-saxons, Selly of East-saxons, Sigebertus king of East-angles. There became also Quéenes & kings daughters,Queenes be∣came nunnes. with o∣ther noble women Nuns: as Hilda daughter to the nephew of Edwin king of Northumberland, Abbesse of the house of Ely. Erchengoda with her sister Ermenilda, daughter of Erkembertus K. of Kent, which Erchengoda was professed in Brigets order in Fraunce. Also Edelberga, wife and Quéene to king Edwin of Northumberland, and daughter of king Anna, who was also in the same house made a Nunne. Etheldreda, whom they tearme Saint Eldred, wife to king Egfred of Northumberland, was professed Nunne at Helinges, Werburga, daughter of Vlferus, king of Mercians, was made Nunne at Ely, Kinreda, Sister of king Vlferus, and Kinswida her sister, were both pro∣fessed Nunnes. Sexburga daughter of king Anna King of Mercia, and wife of Ercombert, king of Kent, was Ab∣besse at Ely,, Elfrida daughter of Oswe, King of Nor∣thumberlande, was Abbesse at Whitney. Mildreda, Wil∣burga, and Milginda, all thrée daughters of Merwaldus, K. of West-mercians, became Nunnes: Bridburga, the wife of of Alfride, K. of Northumberland, and sister to Ofricus, K. of Mercia, and daughter of king Penda, was professed Ab∣besse in the Monasterie of Glocester: Elfleda, daughter of K. Oswy, & wife of king Penda his sonne, became also a Nun: Likewise Alfritha, wife to king Edgar, and Editha, daugh∣ter to the same king Edgar, with Wolfrith her mother, and so forth. As in the Britans time,Vnder the Bri¦tons, the Me∣tropolitane sea at London, and by the Saxons after the com∣ming of Austin translated to Canterbury. the Metropolitan Sea was at London, so in the time of the Saxons, after the comming
of Austin, it was remoued to Canterbury: ye names & yéeres of which Metropolitanes till Egbert from Austin are these: Augustinus 16. Laurentius 5. Mellitus 5. Iustus 3. Hono∣rius 25. Deus dedit 10. Theodorus 22. all these were I∣talians. Bertnaldus English 37. in whose time the mona∣sterie of S. Martin was builded in Doroberne by Witre∣dus and his brother kings of Kent. Tacunius 3. Notheli∣nus 5.Cutbert for∣biddeth fune∣rals to be made for him. Cuthbertus 17. He after his death forbad all fune∣rals, exequies, or funerall lamentations to be made. Lam∣brithus or Lambertus 27. In whose time king Offa trans∣lated the Metropolitane sea from Canterburie to Lichfield, by the graunt of Pope Adrian, being ouercome with aposto∣licall arguments, as saith Flores historiarum, that is, with money.In the time of 17. Archb. 34 Popes. Ethelardus 13. who by his Epistles to Pope Leo, obtained the Metrapolitan sea againe to Canterburie. Vl∣fredus 28, Fegeldus 3, Celnocus 41. During the time of these seuentéene Archbishops, there were 34. Popes of Rome. Anno 826.  Egbert, notwithstanding he had sixe, or eight against one of his men, ouerthrew Bernulphus K. of Mer∣cia,The lande brought into one monarchy, and called An∣glia. with other kings, & subdued the rest of the land into one monarchy, and hauing called a counsel of his Lords at Win∣chester, was by their aduises crowned king ouer all the land, and caused the inhabitants to be called Angles, and the Land Anglia. This king (when he had ruled the West-saxons, and ouer the more part of England, xxxvij. yeres) died, and was buri∣ed at Winchester: leauing his kingdome to Ethelwolfe, which first was Bishop of Winchester,  and after, vpon ne∣cessitie, made king, through the dispensation of Gregorie the fourth.A B made king of Eng∣land. He gaue to the Church, and Religious orders, the tithes of al his goods and lands in West-saxons,Lands geuen to ye Church. with libertie, and fréedome from all seruage,  and ciuill charges. Much like the donation of Ethelbaldus, king of Mercia. The ground of al
their good workes and donations was remission of sinnes, which they thought thereby to procure) This doone, taking his iourney to Rome with Alured his yoongest sonne, com∣mitted him to the bringing vp of pope Leo ye fourth. Where he also reedified the English schoole at Rome: which being founded by king Offa or rather Iue King of Mercia, was in the tyme of King Egbert his Father consumed with fire. Besides,Peterpence throughout all England. he granted to Rome of euery fire house a penny to bée payd throughout the land, as king Iue in his domi∣nion had doone before. Also he gaue and graunted to be paid to Rome yéerely thrée hundred markes: that is, to the main∣tayning of the light of Saint Peter one hundreth markes: to the light of Saint Paule an other hundreth; to the vse of the Pope an other hundreth. This doone he returned by France into England, and married with the daughter of Carolus Caluus, whose name was Iudith. Hée had to his chiefe councellors two Bishops, Adelstanus B. of Schire∣borne, more skilfull in ciuill matters then in diuinitie: and the other Swithinus bishop of Winchester, beyng of a con∣trarie disposition. Gregory the fourth aboue mentioned, was the third Pope that succéeded after Pope Paschalis the first: beyng but foure yéeres betwixt them: who succéeded after Ste∣phen the fourth which followed Leo the third, next Pope vnto Hadrian, in the time of Charles the great. From the time of that Hadrian the first, vnto Pope Hadrian the third, the Emperours had some stroke in the election (at least in the confirmation of the Romane Pope) notwithstanding there were diuerse practises to the contrary. Wherefore by the commaundement of Ludouicus the Emperour in the time of Gregory the fourth,Generall coun∣sels called by the Emperour. a generall Synode was comenced at Aquisgraue, where it was decreed by Gre∣gory and his assistants, that euery Church should haue sufficient of his proper landes and reuenewes to find the
Priests therof. That none of the Clergy, of what degrée so∣euer he were, should vse any vesture or any pretious, or a∣ny Scarlet colour,Against the ex∣cesse of apparel in the Clergy. neyther should weare ringes on their fingers, except it be when Prelates be at Masse, or giue their consecrations. Item, that prelates should not kéepe too great portes or families, nor kéepe great horses, vse dice, or kéepe har∣lots: and the Monkes should not excéede measure in glut∣tony or riot.Against the di∣cing & whoring of the Popes Clergie. Item, that none of the Clergy beyng eyther annoynted or shauen, should vse eyther golde or siluer, ey∣ther in their shooes, slippers, or girdles, like to Heliogaba∣lus.They should were no siluer in their shooes, nor gold. Moreouer, by him (at the commaundement of Ludo∣uicus the Emperour) the feast of Alsaints was first brought into the Church. Feast of Al∣saints first e∣rected.After this pope came Sergius the second, who first brought in the altering of the Popes names, because hée was named before Os porci, that is, Swines snout: which also ordai∣ned the Agnus thrise to be song at the Masse,Alteration of Popes names. Swines snout. and the host to be deuided into thrée partes. After him was Pope Leo the fourth: to whom this king Ethelwolfus did commit the tui∣tion of his sonne Alured. By this Pope Leo, it was first enacted by a Councell of his, that no Bishop should bée condemned, vnder thrée score and twelue witnesses, also (contrary to the lawe of Gregory the fourth his predecessor) he commaunded and or∣dained the crosse, all to beset with gold and pretious stones, and to be carried before him. After this Leo succéeded a woman Pope, named Gilber∣ta,Gilberta a wo∣man Pope. and was called Ioan the eight. She was a dutchwoman of Magunce, who went with an English monke out of the Abbey of Fulda to Athens, in mans apparell: where shée prooued excellently learned: and obtained the Popedome, and sat two yéeres and six moneths:The Pope tra∣uaileth with childe. and at last openly in the face of a generall procession, fell in labour and trauell of childe, and so died. By reason whereof the Cardinals at this
day doo auoid to come néere that stréete where that shame was taken. By Benedictus the 3. that succéeded next in the whorish sea, was first enacted (as most writers record) the Dirge to be said for the dead:The dirge for the dead. albeit Gregory the third, had doone in that matter worthely for his part already. After him sat Pope Nicholas the first, who enlarged the Popes decrées with many constitutions, equalling the authoritie of them with the wrytings of the Apostles.Popes decrees equall with the Apostles wri∣ting. He ordained that no secular Prince, nor the Emperour him∣selfe, should be present at their Councels, vnlesse in mat∣ters concerning the faith. Also that no Lay man should sit in Iudgement vpon the Clergy men, or reason vppon the Popes power. Item, that no Christian magistrate should haue any power ouer any prelate: alledging that a prelate is called God.A prelat called God. Also that all Church seruice should be in Latine, ex∣cept the Polonians and Sclauonians;Polonians & Sclauonians exempt from Latine seruice. to whom he permit∣ted the vse of their owne tounge. Sequences in the Masse, were by him first allowed. By this Pope priestes began first to be debarred marriage:Against priests marriages. Huldrich of Auspourgh. whereof Huldrich Bishop of Auspourgh sendeth a letter to the Pope, reclaiming and confuting his procéedings in the matter, grauely and learnedly: shewing the decrée to be an impious tyrannie, contrary to the lawes of God, and Na∣ture. The epistle séemeth rather to belong to the time of Ni∣cholas the second, or third. After this pope Nicholas, succéeded Hadrianus the second, Ioannes 9. Martinus 2. After these came Hadrian the third, and Stephen the fifth: By this Hadrian it was decréed, that no Emperour after that time should intermeddle in the ele∣ction of the Pope: and thus began the Emperour first to de∣cay, and the Pope to swell.The Emp. be∣ginneth to de∣cay, and Pope to swell. Ethelwolfe after hée had doone valiantly agaynst the Danes (that greatly inuaded and molested the land) died,
and left behind him foure sonnes, which raigned euery one in his order (after the decease of their father:) whose names were, Ethelbaldus, Ethelbrightus, Ethelredus, and Alu∣redus. About the latter time of the raigne of Ethelred, Anno 870.  the Danes hauing to their Captains Inguar & Hubbar, landed in Norfolke, and forced Edm. the vnder king of that Prouince, to flée to Franingham castle, and commaunded him to submit himselfe vnto them, and to raigne vnder Ing∣uar, Prince of the Danes. Whervpon, by perswasion of one of his Bishops, being his secretary, he paused; and made an∣swere, that Edmund, a Christian king, for loue of temporal life, will not submit himselfe to a Pagan Duke,K. Edm. slaine of the Danes. vnlesse hée would before be a Christian. Wherefore, hauing apprehen∣ded him at S. Edmondesbury, he bound him vnto a trée, and caused him to be shot to death, for that he woulde not denie Christ, and his lawes. Lastly, they caused his head to bee smitten off, and cast it into the thicke bushes, which was by his friends at the same time taken vp, and solemnly buried at S. Edmondesbury: whose brother named Edwol∣dus, (notwithstanding of right the kingdome fel to him) set∣ting apart the worlde, became an Hermite, at the abbey of Cerum, in the county of Dorset. King Ethebald hauing had great conflicts with ye Danes, and perplexed with the miserable state of his countrey, af∣ter he had raigned fiue or eight yéeres, deceassed. During which time, of his raigne (notwithstanding many troubles) he builded the colledge of Canons at Exeter, and was bu∣ried at the Abbey of Winburne, or Woburne. After whose decease, for lacke of issue, the land fell to his brother Alured or Alfred, ann. 872. who first of the English kings,Alfred of the English K. ta∣keth his vnctiō from the Pope, tooke his, crowne, and vnction of Pope Leo at Rome. Hee after great alteration, and diuers troubles forced the Danes to séeke for peace: which was concluded vpon certaine coue∣nants: wherof one, and the principall was that Gutrum
their K. should be christened. The other, that such as would not be christened, should depart the Realme. Vpon these co∣uenants, Gutrum comming to Winchester,The king of the Danes christened. was there chri∣stened, with xx. of his great Nobles. To the which Gutrū K. Alured being his Godfather at the baptisme, named him Athelstane, and gaue him diuers Countreys: as, of East-an∣glia: conteyning Norfolke and Suffolke, and part of Cam∣bridgeshire: and graunted to the Danes that were christe∣ned, the Countrey of Northumberland: the rest voyding the land. Athelstane raigned xi. or xij. yeres. Alfred buylded diuers houses of Religion: as, the house of Nunnes at Shaftesburie, and the religious houses at E∣theling. Also, another at Winchester, named the new Mo∣nasterie, and endued richly the Church of Saint Cutbert, at Durham. Hee sent also into India, to pay, and performe his vowes to saint Thomas of India, which he promised in the time of his distresse, against the Danes. After hee had reigned nine and twentie yeres, and sixe monethes: he chan∣ged this mortall life, and deuided his goods into two equall partes, the one to vses secular, the other to vses Ecclesiasti∣call: Of the which, the first he deuided into thrée portions: the first, for behoofe of his familie: the second, vpon his buil∣dings: the third vpon strangers. The other second into foure partes: the one to the reliefe of the poore,Alfred a no∣table king. an other to mona∣steries, the third to the Schooles of Oxford, for the mainte∣ning of good letters, the fourth he sent to forraine Churches without the Realme. He deuided the day and the night into thrée partes. Eight houres (if he were not let by warres,A notable spē∣ding of ye time by the king. and other affaires) hée spent in studie and learning. Other eight in praier & almes déedes. And the other eight in natural rest, sustenance of his bodie, and néedes of the Realme. He especially prouided against robbing, and théeues, by seuere execution. In such sorte, that he caused to be set vp through his Dominion, gilded brooches, and none so har∣die,
neither by day nor night, to take them downe. His ver∣tues were many: he was learned; wise; religious; and vale∣aunt: especiallie about the West part of the land he erected Schooles, and mainteyned Students, although among the Britaines, in the towne of Chester, in Southwales, long before that, in the time of King Arthure, as Galfridus wryteth) both Grāmer, and Philosophie, with the tongues, were taught. In the time of Egbert, king of Kent, some writers af∣firme, yt this land began to flourish with Philosophie. About which time, also, some thinke that the Vniuersity of Grant∣chester, néere to that which is now called Cambridge, began to be founded by Beda,Grantchester founded by Beda. following this coniecture therein, for that Alcuinus, who went to Rome, and from thence into Fraunce, in the time of Charles the great (where he first be∣gan the Vniuersitie of Paris) was first traded vp in ye same Schoole of Grantchester.Paris began from Grant∣chester. Bed. lib. 3. cap. 18. writing also of Sigebert, king of the East-angles, declared how Sigebert returning out of Frāce into Englād, (according to the examples which he did there sée) ordered, and disposed Schooles of learning, through the meanes of Felix, then Bishoppe: and placed in them Tea∣chers, after the manner of the Cantuarites. And yet before these times, it is thought there were two Schooles, or Vni∣uersities within the Realme: the one for Gréek, at the town of Greglade, which was after called Kirklade: the other for Latine, which was then called Latinlade, afterward Lethe∣lade, néere to Oxford. Alfrede very learned.This King Alfrede was eleuen yeres of age before hee began to learne Letters, hauing to his Master Pleimun∣dus, (afterwarde made Bishoppe of Canterburie,) and grew so in knowledge, that he trāslated diuers latin works: as, Orosius, Pastorale Gregorij, the histories of Bede, Boe∣tius de Consolat. philosophiae: also, an Enchiridion of his owne making.
He compiled also an Historie in the Saxon tongue called the historie of Alfred. He suffered no man to aspire to any dignitie in his Court, except he were learned, and caused all his Nobles to set their children to learning: if they had no sonnes, then their seruaunts. He began also to translate the Psalter into English,The Psalter translated by king Alfred. and had almost finished the same, had not death preuented him. These endeuours he tooke in hand, that the English nation might be furnished with knowledge, which was decayed before, by the innumerable volumes burned by the Danes.The king care∣full to furnish the land with knowledge. He vsed chiefly the wise counsell of Neotus,Neotus. who was counted then an holy man, and was Abbot of a certaine monastery of Cornewall: by whose aduise hée sent for Grimbaldus a learned monke out of Fraunce, and for Asserion an other learned man out of Wales, whome hée made Bishop of Schireborne: also out of Mercia hée sent for Werefrithus Bishop of Wor∣cester, to whom hée put the Dialogues of Gregory to be trā∣slated. By the aduisement of Neotus he ordained certaine schooles of diuerse artes, first at Oxford: and fraunchised the same with many great Libraries. Moreouer, besides other learned men which were a∣bout Alfred, histories make mention of Iohannes Scotus,Iohannes Sco∣tus. a godly deuine, and a learned Philosopher, but not that Sco∣tus whō we call Duns, (who came after this many yéeres.) This Iohannes Scotus at the request of Carolus Caluus, the French king, translated the booke of Dyonisius, inti∣tuled De Hierarchia, out of Gréeke into Latine, word by word. Hée wrote also a booke, De corpore & sanguine Do∣mni: which was after condemned by the Pope,Scotus booke De Corpore condemned. In conci∣lio Vercellensi. He wrote also a booke De naturae diuisione, wherein he accorded not with the Romish religion: whervpon the Pope writing to Charles of this Scotus, complained of him: so he was constrained to remoue out of France, and came into Engl. to Alured (as some say) by ye letters of Alfred, of whō
he had great intertainment till he went to Malmesburie, where he was slaine of his owne schollers (whō he taught) with their penkniues.Scotus slaine of his scholers. King Alfred had by his wife two sonnes, Edward, and E∣thelward, and thrée daughters Elflena, Ethelgora, & Ethel∣ginda, which all he caused to be instructed in learning. Ed∣ward succéeded in the kingdome; Ethelward died before his father; Ethelgora was made a Nunne; the other two were maried the one in Merceland, the other to ye Earle of Flaun∣ders. He raigned 29. yéeres, & six moneths: he departed this life, v. Kal. Nouemb. & lieth buried at Winchester, an. 901.  Wheresoeuer he was, or whether soeuer he went, he bare in his bosome or pocket a litle booke, cōtaining the Psalmes of Dauid,Dauids psalms alwaies with the king. and certaine other prayers of his owne collecting, wherevpon he was continually either reading, or praying, whensoeuer he had leasure therevnto. Pleymundus schoolemaister to Alfred, succéeded Ethere∣dus in the Bishopricke of Canterburie, and gouerned that sea 34. yéeres. After him succéeded Athelmus and sat 12. yéeres: after him came Vlfelmus, and sat 13. yéeres: him followed Odo a Dane borne, and gouerned 20. yéeres. After the death of Pope Stephen the fifth, was much broyle in the election of the Bishops of Rome, one conten∣ding against another: in so much that in the space of nine yéeres, there were nine Popes: of the which, first was For∣mosus, who succéeded Stephen, being made pope against the minde of certaine in Rome, that would rather Sergius, then Deacon of the Church of Rome, should bée Pope: not with∣standing Mars and mony preuayled on Formosus part, by the aid of king Arnulphus, who came to Rome and behea∣ded Formosus aduersaries, whom the Pope in recompence blessed & crowned Emp. This Formosus had once sworne neuer to reiterate or take to him againe ecclesiasticall order, but was absolued againe of Pope Martin, who sat foure or fiue yéeres: after whom in 9. yéeres, there were nine Popes.In nine yeeres nine Popes.
After him succeded Boniface the 6, who continued 25. daies, then came Stephen the 6. who abrogated all the decrées of Formosus. and taking vp his body after it was buried,Pope Stephen rageth against the dead bodie of Formosus. cut two fingers of his right hand, and commaunded them to bée cast into Tiber, and then buried the bodie in a Laye mans sepulchre. He raigned one yéere, and him succéeded Rhema∣nus, & sate 3. months, repealing the decrées of his predeces∣sor against Formosus, next whom came Theodorus the 2. who like wise taking part with Formosus, raigned but 20. daies, then sate Pope Iohn, who fought against ye Romans, and (to confirme the cause of Formosus more surely) did hold a synode at Rauenna of 72. Bishops, with the French king Endo, and his Archbishops, present at the same: where all the decrées of Formosus, were confirmed, and those of Ste∣phen the 6. burned. This Pope liued not Pope full twoo yéeres: after whom succéeded Benedictus the fourth, who kept the chaire thrée yéeres: after whom Leo the fift was Pope, who within 40. daies of his papacie, was with strong hand taken and cast in prison by one Christopher, his owne housholde Chap∣laine, whom he had long time nourished in his house: which Christopher, being Pope about the space of seuen moneths, was also horsed from his seate by Sergius, as hée had done to the other before, who after hée had thrown downe Christopher, shore him monke into a monasterie, and occupied the sea seuen yéeres. This Sergius, a rude man,Sergius baeba∣rous cruelty a∣gainst Formo∣sus, now dead and buried. and vnlearned, very proude and cruell, had before time beene put backe from the Popedome by Formosus aboue mentioned: by reason whereof to reuenge himselfe of For∣mosus againe, (béeing nowe in his papacie) caused his bo∣die to bée taken vp, and afterward setting it in the Papall sea (as in his Pontificalibus) first disgraded him, then commaunded his head to bée smitten off, with the other thrée fingers which were left: which done he caused his body to be throwne into Tiber, deposing also all such as had béene
inuested by Formosus. By this Pope Sergius, first came vp the bearing of can∣dles on Candlemas day,Candles on Candlemas day. for the purifying of the blessed vir∣gin. After Sergius entred Pope Anastasius: who after he had sate 2. yéers, folowed pope Lando, the father (as some think) of pope Iohn: which Iohn is said to haue beene Paramour of Theodora, a famous harlot of Rome,A pope set vp of Theodora, a famous har∣lot. & set vp by the same harlot, either against Lando, or after Lando his father, to succéede in his roome. There is a story writer called Liuthprandus, who wri∣ting de imperatoribus, lib. 2. cap. 13. maketh mention of this Theodora, and Iohn the eleuenth: and saith, that this Theo∣dora had a daughter named Marozia, which had by Pope Sergius aboue mentioned, a sonne who afterwarde was pope Iohn the 12. The same Marozia, afterward married with the marques Guido of Tuscia, through whose means and his friends at Rome, she brought to passe that this pope Iohn the eleuenth was smothered with a pillow laid to his mouth,Pope smothe∣red. after he had raigned 13. yéeres, and so Iohn the 12. her sonne raigned in his stéed: but because the cleargie, and people of Rome did not agree to the election, therefore was Pope Leo the 6. set vp in his roome. Thus pope Iohn the sonne of Sergius, and Marozia, being reiected, raigned pope Leo, 7. moneths: after him pope Ste∣phen 2. yéeres: who being poisoned,Pope poisoned then was pope Iohn the 12. aboue rehearsed, set vp againe, where hee raigned néere the space of 5. yeeres. After Iohn the twelfth, followed pope Stephen, thrée yeeres. Leo thrée yéeres and foure moneths: Stephen the eight, thrée yéeres, foure moneths: Martine 3. yéers, 6. mo∣neths: After him, Agapetus, eight yéeres and sixe moneths: about whose time, or a little before, beganne the order of monks called, Ordo Cluniacensis.The Monkes Cluniacenses. It may appeare, in those times, that the authoritye of
bestowing bishoprikes in England, and also in prescribing lawes to Churchmen was in the hands of the kings of the land, and not onely in the handes of the Pope: as it is manifest by King Alfredus lawes: If any one lie with an other mans wife, &c. If any that hath taken orders, steale, &c. After Alfred succéeded his sonne Edward called the elder, giuing also testimonie of the same. Who with Pleymun∣dus archbishop of Canterbury, and with other Bishops in a Synod assembled, elected seuen Bishops, in seuen Metro∣politane churches, whose names were 1. Freidstane, 2. A∣delstane, 3. Werstane, 4. Addlelin, 5. Edulphus, 6. Derne∣gus, 7. Kenulphus. In which election, the kings authority a∣lone séemed then sufficient.The kings au∣thority in elec∣ting of bishops sufficient. This Edward raigned 24. yéers:  his daughters he set to spinning,The K. daugh∣ters set to spin∣ning. and to the néedle: his sonnes he set to the studie of learning: to the end that they being Philosophers first, might bee made more expert to gouerne the common wealth.The king ma∣keth his sonnes first Philoso∣phers, and then Gouernours. Ethelstane succéeded his father in the kingdome, and be∣ing base born of Egwin, before the king was married to her, and fearing his next brother Edwine, being rightly borne, caused him to be put in an old rotten boate in the broad sea, onely with one Esquier with him: who being perplexed with the rage of the Sea, and wearie of his life, threw him selfe into the Sea. This act Ethelstane lamented vij. yeres, and buylded the two Monasteries, of Middleton, and of Mi∣chelendes, for his brothers sake, or (as the Stories say) for his soule. About this time, the Empire began to be translated from Fraunce (where it had continued about an hundred yeres,) into Germanie,The Empire translated out of France into Germanie. where it hath euer since remayned. This king gaue his thirde Sister to Henricus Duke of main, for his sonne Otho, the first Emperour of the Ger-Almanes.
This king set foorth diuerse lawes for the gouernment of the clergy: he prescribed also constitutions touching tithes geuing. And among his lawes, to the number of 35. diuerse things are comprehended, pertaining as well to the spiritu∣altie, as to the temporaltie. Out of the lawes of this king first sprong vp ye attachment of théeues, yt such as stole aboue 12. d.Attaching of theeues. Stealing a∣boue twelue pence. and were aboue twelue yéeres old, should not be spa∣red. He raigned about the space of 16. yéeres, and died with∣out issue. Anno 940. After him succéeded his brother Edmund sonne of Ed∣ward the elder, by his third wife, being of the age of twentie yéeres. About this time Mōkery came into England.Monkery com∣meth into En∣gland. There was at that time, and before a monasterie in France, called Floriake, after the order of Benedict: from the which mona∣stery did spring the greatest part of our English monkes, who being there professed, and after returning into Eng∣land, did gather men daily to their profession: & so at length grew in fauour with kings and princes, who founded them houses, mainteined their rules, and enlarged them with possessions. Among the Monkes that came from Floriake, especially was one Oswaldus, first a monke of Floriake, then Bishop of Worcester, and Yorke: a great patrone, and setter vp of monkery.Oswaldus a monke, a great Patrone of monkery. This king builded and furnished the abbey of Glasten∣burie, and made Dunstan abbot thereof. He was slaine of a felon with a knife. He ordeyned lawes also for the Spiritualtie, touching tithes, against deflouring of Nunnes, touching reparation of Churches, &c. In the time of this Edmund, was Odo, Archbishoppe of Caun∣terburie, who was the first from the comming of the Sax∣ons, till this time, that was Archb. being no Monke, for all before him were Monkes: of whom, a great part had béen Italians, vnto Berctualdus. Notwtstanding, after he sayled into France, and receiued that order at Flo-riake. Vlstan bishop of York, at the same time is noted to differ in habite
from other Bishops. Odo continued Bishop the space of twentie yeres: after whom, Elsinus was elected, and ordeyned by the king, to succéede through fauour and money: but going to Rome for the Popes pall, in his iourney through the Alpes, he died for colde: after whom succéeded Dunstan. This Edmund gaue to saint Edmund the Martir, aboue mentioned, the towne of Bredrichcepworth, now called S. Edmondsburie,Saint Ed∣mondsburie. with great reuenues, and landes belonging to the same. He was buried at Glassenburie by Dunstane. He left two sonnes behinde him; Edwine, and Edgar, by his wife Elgina: But the children beeing vnder age, Edred brother to the king, was made Protector in the mean time, who faithfully behaued him selfe towardes the young chil∣dren. In his time Dunstane was promoted by the meanes of Odo, from Abbot of Glassenbure, to be Bishop of Worce∣ster, and after of London. By this Dunstan, Edred was much ruled. So that he is reported in stories, too much to submitte himselfe to fonde penance layde vpon him by Dun∣stane. After his Vncle Edred, Edwin the eldest sonne of King Edmund beganne his raigne, anno 955.  being crowned at Kingston by Odo, Archbishop of Canterburie. He is repor∣ted the first day of his Coronation, to haue departed from ye company of his Lords, into a secret chamber, to the disorder∣ly companie of a woman, whose husband he had slain. Now, Dunstan (being yet but Abbot of Glassenburie) followed the king into the chamber, and brought him out by the hand, and accused him to Odo the Archb. and caused him to be separa∣ted from the said woman, and to be suspēded out of ye church by the same Odo. Whereupon, the king being offended wt Dunstane,D. causeth the king to be sus∣pended for adulterie. banished him, and forced him for a season to flie into Flaunders, where he was in the Monasterie of Saint Amandus.
About the same season, the Monasticall order of S. Be∣nedict, or (as they call them) blacke monkes, began to in∣crease in England: in so much, that other Priestes & Cha∣nons were displaced, and they set in their roomes. But king Edwine (for displeasure he bare to Dunstan) did vexe al that order of Monkes, so that in Malmsburie, Glassenburie, & o∣ther places, he thrust out the Monkes, & set Secular priests in their roomes. In the end, being hated for his euill demeanor, hee was deposed from the Crowne,The K depo∣sed. and his brother Edgar receiued in his roome, so that the riuer of Thames deuided both their kingdomes. Edwine (when he had raigned foure yeres) de∣parted, leauing no issue of his bodie. Wherefore; the rule of the land fell vnto Edgar his younger brother, in the yere of the Lorde, nine hundred fiftie and nine;  he (being about the age of sixtéene yeres, but hee was not crowned till fourtéene yeares after. In the beginning of his reigne he called home Dunstane whom Edwine before had exiled. Then was Dunstane, (before Abbot of Glassenbury) made B. of Worcester, and after of London. Not long after this, Odo, the Archbishop of Canterbu∣rie deceased, after he had gouerned the Church xxxiiij. yeres. After whom, Brithelinus Bishoppe of Winchester, was first elected: but because he was thought vnsufficient, Dun∣stan was chosen, and the other sent home againe to his own Church. So Dunstan being made Archbishoppe by the K. went to Rome for his Pall, to Pope Iohn the thirtéenth: which was about the beginning of the Kinges raigne. Dū∣stan hauing obteined his Pall, returned and obteined of the king, that Oswaldus, who was made a Monke at Floriake, was created B. of Worcester: and not long after, through the meanes of Dunstan Ethelwoldus, first Monke of Glas∣senburie, then Abbot of Abbindon, was made Bishoppe of Winchester.
These thrée bishops were great vpholders of Monks: by whose councell king Edgar is recorded in histories to haue builded either new out of the groūd, or caused to be reedified monasteries decaied by the Danes, more then fortie. More∣ouer thorough the instigation of them, the king in diuerse Cathedrall Churches, where Prebendaries and Priestes were before, displaced them, and sette in Monkes and Nunnes.Priests displa∣ced, and monks placed. After that the kings minde was thus perswaded to ad∣uance Monkery, Oswaldus bishop of Worcester, also made Archbishop of Yorke, after the death of Oskitellus, hauing his sea in the Cathedrall Church there of S. Peter; after he had first assaied the Canons and priests by faire meanes to become monkes, and not preuailing, néere to the same Church of S. Peter in the Churchyard, he builded another Church of our Lady, which when he had replenished with monks, there he continually frequented: and so the people left the other Church naked. Wherevpon the priests did ey∣ther become monks, or depart from the place. So did Ethel∣wold driue out the Canons and priests from the new mona∣sterie in Winchester, afterward called Hida, and placed his monks. The cause was pretēded for that they were thought slacke, and negligent in their Church seruice, and set in Vi∣cars in their stéed. Then the K. gaue to the same Vicars, the land which belonged before to the Prebendaries: who also, not long after shewed them selues as negligent as the o∣ther. Wherefore, king Edgar (by the consent of Pope Iohn) voyded cléerelie the Priestes: and ordeyned there Monkes. Which Monkes, did greatly differ, and doe at this day disa∣grée with the auncient Monkes of olde time, that were Lay men onely,The new mōks differ from the olde, who were lay men. and were forbidden by the Councell of Chalce∣don, in any sorte to deale with matters of the Church: and were such, as by the Tyranny of Persecution, were ei∣ther constrained to hide themselues in solitarie places, or els of their owne voluntarie deuotion, withdrewe themselues
from company, hauing nothing proper of their owne, or all things common with other. Afterward Bonifacius the fourth made a decrée, Anno 606.  that Monkes might vse the office of preachyng, of baptizing, and hearing confession, and assoiling them of their sinnes: and in processe of time they so incroched vpon the of∣fice of ministers, that at length priestes were discharged out of their cathedrall Churches, and Monkes placed in their roomes. King Edgar a mainteiner of learning.King Edgar was a great mainteiner of religion, and learning. To auoid excessiue drinking by the example, of the Danes, which dwelt in diuerse places of the realme, he or∣dained certaine cups with pinnes or nailes, set in them, ad∣ding thereto a law, yt what person did drinke past that mark, at one draught, should forfeite a certaine pennie: the halfe part whereof should fall to the accuser, the other to the ru∣ler of the towne, where the offence was done. He was a noble Prince, wise, and victorious, but fauoured the mon∣kish superstition ouermuch, and is reported by some to haue builded so many monasteries for them, as there are Sun∣daies in the yéere, or as Edmer reporteth 48.48. monasteries builded by K. Edgar. Notwithstan∣ding he was much giuen to adulterie, and fornication, and v∣sed among others, Egelfleda or Elfleda, called the white daughter of Duke Odorere: of whom he begate Edward in bastardie: for the which he was enioyned by Dunstan, seuen yeres penance, and kept back from his Coronation so long, till the one and thirtie yere of his age, anno 974 although he began his Raigne at sixtéene. His penance appoynted by Dunstane,The K. enioy∣ned penance by Dunstan. was, that he should weare on his head no crowne,  for the space of seuen yeares: that he should fast twise in the wéeke; that he should distri∣bute the tribute left him by his ancesters, liberally vnto the poore; that he should build a Monasterie of Nuns at Shafts∣burie: Moreouer, he should expell Clarkes of euill life (mea∣ning such Priestes as had wiues and children) out of Chur∣ches
and places, couents of Monkes, &c. He raigned sixtéene yeeres, & was crowned onely thrée yeeres. He adopted to suc∣céede him, Edward that was borne of the harlot. Among other lawes of this king, he ordained that the Sunday should be solemnized from Saturday at nine of the clocke, till Munday morning.The Saboth to be solemni∣sed from Sa∣turday nine of the clocke, till Munday mor∣ning. By reason of the displacing of the Priestes before, there arose a great contention after Edgars death, one part stan∣ding with them, so that they called also the crowne in que∣stion: another part fauouring Edward,Great strife betwixt priests and monkes. the other Egfride the lawfull sonne: in which sturre Dunstan Archbishop of Canterburie, and Oswald of Yorke, with diuerse other Bi∣shops, Dukes, and Lordes assembled a Councell: where Dunstan comming with his crosse in his hand, and bringing Edward with him, so perswaded the Lordes, that Edward was receiued king, whom Dunstan hoped would become a patron of Monkery, and aduaunce that estate; but it fell out contrary to his expectation. For shortly after the corona∣tion, Duke Alferus of Mercia droue out the Monkes from the Cathedrall Churches, and restored the Priestes with their wiues. In the end, vpon this controuersie was hol∣den a Councell of Bishops, and other of the Clergie: first at Winchester, where the greater part of nobles & commons iudged the Priests to haue great wrong, and sought by all meanes to redresse it, anno 977.  Yet notwithstanding the strife ceased not: in so much that a new assembly of clergy men, & other was appointed afterward, in a place called the stréete of Calue, where the Councell was kept on an vpper loft, where diuerse cōplaints were made against Dunstan; but he preuailed notwithstanding. Not long after, about the fourth yéere he was slaine with a dagger, drinking on horsebacke, by the procurement of the mother of Egelred, (whom he came to visite,) & his bro∣ther her sonne Egelred. He was buried not beyng knowne who he was, at the towne of Warham: & thrée yéeres after
was taken vp by Duke Alfere, and with honor was remoo∣ued to the Minster of Shaftsbury, & there bestowed in the place called Edwardstow. This Edward they hold for a martyr, and say that the Quéene in repentance of her fact builded after two nunneries, one at Amesbury by Salisbu∣ry: the other at Werewell, where she kept her selfe in con∣tinuall repentance, all the dayes of her life. Him succéeded Egelredus his brother. Pope Iohn the thirtinth (of whom Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury receiued his pall) is noted to be monstrously vitious:A monsterous vitious pope. he was an whoremaster, adulterous, incestuous, li∣bidinous: a gamester, an extorcioner, periured, a fighter, a murtherer, cruell, and tyrannous: of his Cardinals some he put out their eies, from some he cut out their tounges, some their fingers, some their noses, &c. In a generall councell be∣fore Otho the first Emperour of the Germanes, these obie∣ctions were articulate against him: first, that he neuer said his seruice: that in saying his Masse he did not communicate: that he ordained Deacons in a stable: that hée committed incest with two of his sisters: that playing at dice, he called for the Diuell to help: that for mony he made boies bishops: that he defloured virgins and straungers: that of the palace of Laterane he made a stewes: & that he lay with Stephana his fathers concubine: likewise with Ramera, and with An∣na, and her néece: that he put out the eies of bishop Benedict: that he caused houses to be set on fire: that he broke open houses: that he dranke to the Diuell: that hée neuer crossed himselfe, &c. For the which causes he was deposed by the consent of the Emperour, and the Prelates: and Pope Leo placed in his roome. But after, thorough the harlots of Rome,Pope restored by harlots. and their great promises, hée was restored againe, and Leo put out. At length, about the tenth yéere of this Pope, he being found without the citie with another mans wife, was so wounded of her husband, that within eight dayes after he died.Pope killed in adultery.
After him, the Romans elected Pope Benedictus the fift, without the consent of the emperor: whervppon Otho besie∣ged Rome, and set vp Pope Leo againe, the eight of that name. Which Leo, to gratifie him again, crowned Otho for Emperor, and entituled him Augustus: also the power which Carolus magnus gaue to the Cleargy and people of Rome touching the election of the B. of Rome, this Leo by a syno∣dall decrée gaue to the Emperour and his successors.The election of the Pope gi∣uen to the Em∣perour by the Pope. The Emperour againe restored to the Sea of Rome al such pos∣sessions, which Carolus magnus tooke from the Lombards, and gaue to them. After Pope Leo had raigned a yéere, and thrée moneths, succéeded Pope Iohn the 14. Against whom, for holding with the Emperor, Petrus the head captain of the citie, with two Consuls, and twelue Aldermen, & diuers other nobles, gathering their power together, laid handes vppon him in the Church of Laterane, and clapt the pope in prison eleuen moneths.The Pope put in prison. Whereof the Emperour hearing, sped him to Rome, and did execution vpon the offenders, and commit∣ted Petrus to the Popes arbitrement:The cruell re∣uenge of the Pope. whom he caused first to be stript naked, then his beard being shauen, to be hanged by the haire a whole day together, after that, to be set vpon an Asse, his face turned backward, and his handes bounde vnder the Asses tayle, to be led through the Citie: that done, to be scourged with roddes, and so banished the citie. And thus the holy father loued his enemy according to the rule of the Gospel. From this Pope, procéeded first the christening of bels,The christning of belles. 971.  After him, followed Pope Benedictus the 6, who was in like maner apprehended by Cinthius, a captain of Rome, and cast in prison, where he was strangled,The Pope strangled. or as some say, famished for lacke of meat. Then came Pope Donus the 2, after whom, Bonifacius the 7. was pope, who was constrai∣ned to hide himselfe, for feare of the Citizens conspiracie, & séeing no place for his safety, tooke the treasure of Saint
Peters Church, & so priuily stole to Constantinople: in whose stéed the people set vp Pope Iohn the fiftéenth. Not long af∣ter, Boniface returning againe from Constantinople, by his money procured a garrison to take his part, by whose meanes Pope Iohn was taken, his eies put out, and so throwen in prison,The popes eies put out, & he fa∣mished in prisō. where he was as (some say) famished, some say he was slaine by Feruchus. Neither did Boniface liue many daies after, but sodainly died: whose carkas after his death, was drawne by the féete through the stréetes of Rome,The dead body of the Pope drawn through the streets. the people shriking, and exclaiming against him, An. 276. Next Pope after him was Benedictus the seuenth, by the consent of the Emperour Otho the second: and raigned 19.  yéeres. In the time of this Pope, Hugh Cappet, the French king tooke Charles the right heire to the crowne, by treason of the Bishop of Laon, and when he had imprisoned him, hée also imprisoned Arnoldus, Archbishoppe of Rames, and placed in his roome Gilbertus, a Necromancer, who was Schoole∣maister to D. Robert the kings sonne; but Pope Benedictus calling a councel at Rhemes, restored Arnoldus againe, and displaced Gilbertus, After Benedictus, succéeded in ye sea of Rome, Pope Iohn the 16. and died the 8. moneth of his papacie, next to whom came Iohn the seuentéenth, and after him Gregory the fift, ann, 995.  This Gregory called before Bruno, was a Ger∣maine borne, and therefore more maliced the Cleargie, and people of Rome. Whervpon, Crescentius with the people and cleargy, agréeing against the same Gregory, set vp pope Iohn the 18. wherevpon Gregory went to Otho the third, who vpon his complaint, came to Rome, & tooke in the city of Rome both Crescentius the consul, & Iohn the pope. Which Iohn hauing his eies put out,The popes eies put out. was after depriued of his life. Crescentius the Consul was set vppon a wilde horse, ha∣uing his nose and eares cut of,Crueltie and so was ledde through the Cittie, his face turned to the horse tayle: and after
hauing his Members cutte off, was hanged vpon a Gib∣bet. Pope Gregorie being thus restored to his former state, raigned foure yeres in his Papacie, although some say, but two yeares. During which time, he assembled a Councell at Rome,A Councell at Rome. wherein (to establish the Empire in his owne coū∣trey, by the consent, and councell of Otho,) he ordeyned se∣uen Princes of Germanie, to be Electors of the Emperor:The seuen E∣lectors of the Empire. thrée Bishoppes, and thrée Princes: the Palatine; the Duke of Saxony; and the Marques Brandenbourge: vnto whome was added the king of Boheme, to geue a casting voice, if néede so required. The Bishoppes were, of Ma∣gunce; of Treuers; and of Colone. This constitution be∣ing first begun in the yere of our Lord, nine hundred ninetie seuen,  was afterward established in Germanie, by Otho the Emperor, an. 1002. Now, concerning king Egelred, or Elred, the sonne of Al∣frith. He raigned 38. yeres. Our English Cronicles report his raigne to be vngracious in the beginning;A strāge reign of a king. wretched in the middle; and hatefull in the end. There fell a variance betwixt this king, and the Bishop of Rochester, so that he made warre against him, & besieged the Citie till the Bishop offered him an C.l. of golde, which he receiued, and so departed. The Danes, in the time of this king, did much molest the Lande: in so much, that the King was gladde to graunt vnto them great summes of money, for peace.Peace bought for money of the Danes. For the assurance of which peace, Analeffe, the Captaine of the Danes, became a Christian, and so departed the Coun∣trey. About the xi. or as some say, the ix. yere of this kings reign, died Dunstan: after whome succeeded Ethelgarus, or, as Iornalensis saith, Stilgarus. After him Elfricus, as sayeth Guilielmus, lib. 1. de Pontif. But as Polidorus saith, Siri∣fius. After him, Elfricus came, but after the minde of Williā,
lib. 1. Siricius. But Polidorus saith, Aluritius, then Elphe∣gus, &c. About the same time, Anno 995.  Aldwinus, Bishoppe, translated the bodie of Saint Cutbert from Chester (which first was in a Northerne Iland, then at Rochester,) to Du∣relind,The Sea of Durham be∣gan. or Durelin, whereupon the Bishoppes Sea of Du∣resine first began. This king was greatly vexed with the Danes, and was faine to redéeme peace with great summes of money, yere∣lie, which was called Dane-gelt,Danegelt. from x. thousand, to xl. thou∣sand a yere. An. 1000. In the xxi. of his reigne, he married with Emma,  daughter to Richard D. of Normandie, which caused the king to haue great confidence in himselfe: and by presumption thereof, sent secrete, and straight Commissi∣ons, to the Rulers of euerie towne in the lande, that vpon Saint Brices day, at a certaine houre appointed, the Danes should be sodenly slaine,Danes slaine. which was in like manner perfor∣med. But the Danes, and their king, hearing thereof, en∣tered againe, and made great waste. In so much, that the king was fayne to take peace with them: and gaue to King Swanus, thirtie thousand poundes: whereupon he returned. But the peace lasted not long, for the next yeare, one named Turkillus,Turkillus, a Dane. Great vexati∣on of ye Danes. a Prince of the Danes, inuaded againe, and was fayne to be pleased with giftes. So the inuasion of the Danes, and the molesting of Englishmen by them, neuer ceased: wherewith the Countrey was brought to great miserie. After this, Swanus, the king of Danes, who had made a couenant of peace before with the K. brake it: and hearing of the increase of his people in the land, came, and landed in Northumberlande, and there proclaymed himselfe king of the Land. After much destruction in other places, at length he came to Canterburie, which he besieged, and was resisted twenty dayes: but at last, by treason of a Deacon,Treason of a Deacon. called Almaricus,
(whom the Bishop had preserued from death before) wan it, and tooke the goods of the people, and set the towne on fire: and tithed the Monkes of Saint Augustines abbey:Monkes tithed by the Danes. killing nine by cruell torment, and kéeping the tenth aliue, for slaues. So they slue there of religious men, to the num∣ber of nine hundred: of other men, women, and children, they slue aboue eight thousand. And finally, when they had kept the Bishop Elphegus in straight pryson, the space of eight moneths: (because he would not agrée to giue them thrée thousand poundes) after many villanies doone vnto him, at Gréenewich they stoned him to death.Elphegus sto∣ned by the Danes. The K. Egelred in the meane time fearing the end of this persecution, sent his wife Emma, with his two sonnes Alphred, and Edward, to the Duke of Normandie, with whom also he sent the bishop of London, whether also him∣selfe went: after he had spent a great parte of the Winter in the Ile of Wight, whether hée was chased of the Danes.The king cha∣sed of the Danes. Whereof Swanus hearing, and inflamed with pride, reared great exactions vppon the people: and among other, hée re∣quired a great summe of monie of Saint Edmunds landes: which the people there clayming to bee frée from kings tri∣butes, denied to pay. For this, Swanus entred the territory of S. Edmund, & wasted the country, and despised the holy martyr: menacing also the place of his sepulcher: wherefore the men of ye coun∣try, fell to fasting & prayer.Fasting and prayer. Shortly after, Swanus died sud∣dainly, crying, and yelling, among his knights. In feare whereof Canutus his sonne, that ruled after him, graunted them the fréedome of al their libertie: and moreouer, ditched their land with a déepe ditch, and granted to the inhabitants thereof great fréedome; quitting them from all tributes; and after builded a Church ouer the place of his Sepulture: ordained there an house of monks: and endewed them with rich possessions. And after that time, it was vsed, that kings of Englād when they were crowned, sent their crownes for
an offering to S. Edmunds shrine,The crowne of England offe∣red to S. Ed∣munds shrine. and redéemed the same afterward with a condigne price. King Egelred hearing of the death of Swanus, made prouision, and returned into England: for whose suddaine comming Canutus being vnprouided, fled to Sandwich, and there cutting of the noses, and the handes of the pledges which his father left with him, sailed into Denmarke: and the next yeare returned againe with a great nauie: and lan∣ded in the South countrie, and entered the countrie of West-saxon, forcing the people to bée sworne to him, and to giue pledges. In this season king Egelred beyng at London, was taken with sickenesse, and there died: and was buried in the Northside of Paules Church behind the quire, after that he had raigned vnprosperously six & thirtie yéeres, leauing behind him his eldest sonne Edmund Iron∣side, and Alphred and Edward, which were in Normandy. This king with his councell gaue foorth wholesome lawes and precepts for iudges: and it is recorded, that he deposed or depriued from all possessions, a certaine iudge or iustice named Walgeatus,A false iudge deposed, whom the king loued. Edmund slain. the sonne of one Leonet, for false iudge∣ment, and other prowde doings: whom notwithstanding he loued aboue all other. After the death of Egelred, variance fell betwixt the En∣glishmen for the election of the king: the one part stan∣ding for Edwin the eldest sonne of Egelred; the other for Canutus, the sonne of Swanus the Dane. By means wher∣of there were diuerse battels fought betwéene them, and in the end the Princes thēselues tried the matter hand to hand: and when they had assaied each other a while; by the motion of Canutus, hastely, they were agréed, and kissed each other to the comfort of both hostes: and shortly after agreed vpon partition of the land, and loued as brethren. Soone after, a sonne of wicked Edericus, by the means of his father, espying Edmund at the draught, thrust him into the fundament with a speare and slue him, after that he had
raigned two yéeres. He left behind him two sons, Edmund, and Edward: whom Edrick the wicked Duke, after ye death of their father, tooke from their mother, not knowing yet of the death of her husband, and presented them to King Canu∣tus, and saluted him, haile king alone. Canutus being King alone, sent the sonnes of Edmund to his brother Swanus, king of Sweueland, to be slaine: who abhorring that déede, sent them to Salomon, king of Hungary, where Edmund being married to the K. daughter, died. Edward was marri∣ed to Agatha, daughter of his brother Henrie the 4. Empe∣ror. Canutus being established King,A promise well performed. & hauing promised the false Duke to make him higher then all the Lordes of the land, caused his head to be stricken of: and to be set vppon London bridge, and his body to be cast into the town ditch: other say, he caused him to be bound, and throwen into the Thames.The reward of Traitors. Likewise Canutus did disdaine all those whom he knewe to haue dealt falsely against Edmund, and his heires. In the meane time Swanus king of Denmarke, brother to Canutus died, wherefore that land fell to Canutus; who anon after sailed thither, and tooke the possession, and re∣turned into England, & married Emma, late wife of Egel∣red, and by her had a sonne called Herdeknight, or Hardi∣knoutus: He assembled a parlement at Oxford, wherin was agréed that English men, and Danes, should hold the lawes made by king Edgar,King Edgars lawes. as most good, & reasonable. Thus, the Danes being in England, beganne by little and litle to bée christened, and Canutus went to Rome, and so returning againe to England, gouerned the land 20. yéers, leauing be∣hind him two sonnes, Harold, & Hardiknoutus, which Har∣diknoutus was made K of Denmarke in his fathers time: Harold for his swiftnes, called Harefoot, (son to Canutus by Eligna his first wife) began his raign ouer Englād, an. 1039  He banished his stepmother Emma, & took her goods, & iew∣els from her. He raigned but 4. yéeres, & the kingdome fell to
Hardeknoutus king of Denmarke his brother: who when he had raigned 2. yéeres,Hardeknoutus dieth. being merry at Lambith, sodainly was stricken dumme, and fel down to the ground, and with∣in 8. daies after died without issue of his body, and was the last that raigned of the blood of the Danes.The last K. of the Danes. For the Earles and Barons agréed, that none of that blood should after bée king, for the despite and hurt the Danes had done to ye Eng∣lish nation, and sent into Normandy for the 2. brethren, Al∣fred & Edward, sonnes of king Egelred, entending to make Alfred king of England: but Earle Godwin a Westsaxon, who had married the daughter of Hardeknoutus, thought to slay the two brethren comming into England, & to make Harold his sonne king: which sonne, he had by the daugh∣ter of Hardeknoutus, ye Dane King. The messengers that went for the brethren, founde but Alfred the elder: for Ed∣ward the younger was gone into Hungary, to speake with his cousin the outlaw, which was Edward Ironsides sonne. So the traitor Godwin met with Alfride, & the Normans attending vpon him, and when they came to Guilde doune, he commanded his men to slea all that were of Alfrides com∣pany, and after that, to take Alfred, and to leade him to the yle of Ely, where they should put out both his eies: which they did,Alfred cruelly murthered, & that done, they opened his body, and tooke out his bowels, set a stake into the ground, and fastned an end of his bowels thereto, and with néedles of yron they pricked his tender body, thereby causing him to go about the stake till al his bowels were drawne out. After this treason the wic∣bed Duke fled into Denmark, and lost al his lands in Eng∣land, and kept him there 4. yéeres, and more. The stories record, that this Canutus folowing much the superstition of Achelnotus, Archb. of Canterbury, went on Pilgrimage to Rome, and there founded an Hospitall for English Pilgrims: hée gaue the Pope pretious giftes, and burdened the land with a yéerely tribute, called Rome∣shotte.Romeshot. He shrined the body of Bernius, and gaue greate
landes to the Cathedrall Church of Winchester: he buil∣ded Saints Benets in Northfolke, which was before an heremitage. Also S. Edmundsburie,S. Edmunds∣burie turned from priestes to monkes. which king Ethelstane ordeined before for a colledge of priests, he turned to an ab∣bey of Monkes of S. Benets order. This king Canutus beyng prouoked to go to Winche∣ster by Egelnothus Archbishop of Canterburie, resigned his regall crowne to the rood,A Rood crow∣ned king of England. and made the roode king ouer the land. He ordained lawes of his owne, touching matters ec∣clesiasticall (although at the beginning hée vsed Edgars lawes) as touching paying for opening the earth at fune∣rals: he forbad also all faires and markets vpon Sundayes: and all secular actions, but vpon vrgent necessitie.A good law a∣gainst adultery He or∣dained to receaue the communion thrise a yéere. That mar∣ried woman that had committed adultery, should haue her eares and nose cut off. Also that no widow should marrie within xij. moneths after the death of her husband, else to lose her ioynture, &c. Thus ended the Danish kings: which Danes had vexed and wasted the land, the time of 255. yéeres.The land vex∣ed by ye Danes 255. yeeres. Next vnto Canutus the second, or Hardiknoute, succée∣ded Edward, the younger sonne of Egelred, and Emma, who was long banished in Normandy. He came ouer with a few Normans, and was crowned at Winchester, anno 943. by Edesius, thē Archbishop of Canterburie: and not long after, he married Goditha, or Editha, daughter of Earle Godwin: with whom he neither dealt fleshly, nor yet put her from his bed. He gouerned the land with great wisdome & peace xxiiij yeres. In the time of this K. came William, Duke of Norman∣die, with a goodly companie, to sée K. Edward: to whom (it is said) Edw. promised (if he died without issue) to leaue the Crowne. In this K. reigne liued Marianus Scotus,M. Scotus. the sto∣rie wryter.
About the 13. yéere of this kings raigne, he sent Aldred bishop of Worceter, to the Emperour Henricus the fourth, praying him that he would send to the king of Hungarie, that his coosin Edward, sonne of Edmund Ironside, might come into England, for so much as he entended to make him king after him (who was called Edward outlaw). This was fulfilled, and he came into England with his wife A∣gatha, and with his children Edgar Adeling, Margaret, and Christina: but the yéere after his returne he died at Lon∣don, & was buried at Westminster, or as Iornalensis saith, at Paules church in London. After whose decease the king receiued Edgar Adeling his sonne as his owne child, thin∣king to make him his heire; but fearing the mutabilitie of the Englishmen, and the pride, and malice of Harold the sonne of Godwin, directed Embassadours to William, Duke of Normandy,William Duke of Normandy appointed heire of the crowne. his kinseman, assigning him to bée lawfull heire after him. After the death of Godwin, his son Harold grew in great fauour with the king. He sayled into Flaunders, and in the course of his sayling, he was driuen by force of weather into the prouince of Pomilitie, where he was taken prisoner, and sent to William, Duke of Nor∣mandie: to whom he was made to sweare, that he in time following, should marry his daughter, and that after the death of King Edward,Harold swea∣reth to Duke William. he should kéepe the land of England to his behoofe, according to the minde and will of Edward: (after some Writers) and so to liue in honor next to him, in the Realme. Thus he returned home, and shewed to the king what he had done. Wherewith he was very wel con∣tented. Leofricuss Earle of Chester, and of Mercia, who was al∣so very faithfull to king Edward, with his wife Godina, builded the Abbey of Couentrée,The Abbey of Couentrie. and endued the same with great lands and riches. King Edward (after hee had reigned thrée and twentie yeares, and seuen monethes) died;K. Edw. dieth. and was buried in the
Monasterie of Westminster, which he had greatly augmen∣ted, and repayred. Diuers lawes were before in diuers Countryes of this land vsed: as, the Law first of Danwallo, Molunicius, with the lawes of Mercia, called Mercinelega, then the lawes of West-saxon kings: as, of Iue, Offa, Alfrede, &c. which was called Westsaxonilega. The thirde were the lawes of Ca∣nutus, and of Danes, called Danelega. Of al these lawes, K. Edward compiled one vniuersal, and common law,K. Edwarde be∣ginneth the cō∣mon law. for all ye people through his land, which were called King Edwards Lawes, so iust, and seruing the publike weale of all E∣states, that the people did long after rebell against their heads, to haue the same lawes againe, being takē frō them, but could not obteine them. For though Duke William did sweare to the maintenance of them, yet he forsware him∣selfe: and abrogating them, brought in much worse, & more obscure: yet was he compelled (through the clamor of the people) to take some of Edwards Lawes,The law at this day. Duke W. con∣trarie to his oath, ouerthro∣weth ye lawes. but omitted ye most part, contrarie to his oath at his coronation, placing ye most of his own lawes, in his owne Language, to serue his pur∣pose: and so they remaine to this day. Harold, the second sonne of Earle Godwin, tooke on him (through force and might) to succéede Edward: notwithstan∣ding his oath to Duke William of Normandie, an. 1066.  wherof he hearing, sent Embassadors, admonishing him of couenants, which Harold refused to performe. Whereupō, D. William prepared to inuade: and sent to Rome, to Pope Alexāder, touching his title, and voiage into England. The Pope confirmeth the same: and sent vnto him a Banner; willing him to beare it in the shippe, wherein hee him selfe should sayle. So he tooke shipping at the hauen of saint Va∣leria, and landed at Hastings in Sussex. From whence he sent a monke to Harold, and offered him thrée conditions.Conditions of peace offered by D. Wil. to Harold. 1 Either to render vnto him possession of the land, and so to take it againe of him vnder tribute, raigning vnder him.
2 Or els to stand to the Popes arbitrement betwéen them. 3 Or els to defend his quarrell in his owne person, against the Duke, without any further bloudshed. All which conditions he refused, and ioyning battayll wt the Normans, was shotte into the left eye with an arrowe, and died, after he had reigned ix. moneths: and so was he the last that reigned of the Saxons. Which (reckoning from Hengistus first reigne in Kent) was the space of 591. yeres. And if it be reckoned from the yeres of the West-saxons,Saxons ende after 591. or 560. yeres. then it endured the space of 565. yeres. Now, after Elfegus, whom the Danes stoned at Gréen∣wich, Liningus succéeded in the Sea of Canterburie:Archb of Canterburie. and af∣ter him Egelnothus: then Robertus, a Norman: after whō, Stigandus (as they say) inuaded the Sea by Simonie, being both Archbishop of Canterburie, bishop of Winchester, and Abbotte of another place. Where hee continued a long space, till Duke William cast him into prison, & there kept him, placing in his roome Lanfrancus, a Lombard borne. About the yere of our Lord one thousand, lacking one or two, Siluester the second succéeded after Gregorie the fift, in the Sea of Rome. This Siluester was a Sorcerer, and com∣pacted with the deuill to be made Pope. He sate four yeres, one moneth, and eight dayes. Siiuester coue∣nanteth with the deuil for the popedome.He vpon a certaine time demaunded of the deuill an an∣swere, how long he should enioy the Popedome: to whō hée answered againe: vntill thou say masse at Ierusalem, thou shalt liue. At length, the fourth yere of his Popedome, say∣ing Masse in the Lent time, at the temple of the holy crosse, being then called Ierusalem, there he knew the time was come that he must die: whereupon (being stroken with re∣pentance) he confessed his fault before the people: desiring them to cut his bodie in péeces (which he before had vowed to the deuil:Siluester is deceiued by the deuil.) and so being hewē in péeces, they would lay it on a cart, and burie it there, where the horses would stay of their owne accord. So the horses stayed at the church of La∣teran,
& there he was buried, wheras commonly by the rat∣ling of his bones within the tombe,The ratling of Syluesters bones. is portended the death of Popes, as the common report goeth. Iohannes Stellas. After Siluester succéeded Iohannes 19. by whom was brought in the feast of Alsoules,The feast of Alsoules. as Volaterane saith, Anno 1004.  Through the meanes of one Odilo abbot of Clu∣niake, to be celebrated next to the feast of Alsaints. Not long after came Iohannes 20. and Sergius the 4. after whom succéeded Benedictus the eight, then Iohn 21. who (beyng promoted by arte Magicke, through Theophi∣lact his Nephew, Gratianus, Brazutus, and other sorcerors) brought in first the fast of the éeuen of S. Iohn Baptist, and and S. Laurence: after him Benedictus the 9. by magick al∣so, who resisting the Emperour, Henricus the 3. son to Con∣radus,The Popedom solde. and placing in his roome Petrus the king of Hunga∣ry, with this verse: Petra dedit Romam.Petra dedit, &c Petro tibi Papa coro∣nam, after for feare of Henricus, preuailing in battell, hee was faine to sel his seate to his successour Gratianus, called Gregorius 6. for 1500. pounds. At which time, were thrée Popes together in Rome, one raging against another. Be∣nedictus 9. Siluester 3. Gregorius 6.Three Popes together. For the which cause Henricus, surnamed Niger the Emperour, comming to Rome, displaced these 3. monsters at one time, placing for them Clemens the 2. and therevpon enacted, that no Pope thencefoorth, should be chosen without confirmation of the Emperour.No P. with∣out the Em∣peror. The Romans also made an oath to the Empe∣ror, that they would not intermeddle in the election of the Bishoppes, further then the Emperors assent should agree withall. But within ix. moneths after, they forgat their oth, and poysoned the B. Which fact some impute to Steuen his successor, called Damasus the second: some to Brazutus, who (as histories record) wtin xiij. yeres, poisoned 6. popes:One poysoneth sixe popes. Cle∣mēs ye secōd; Damasus 2; Leo 9; Victor 2; Steph. 9; Nicola{us} 2. Damasus entred, neither by consent of the people, nor elec∣tion of the Emperor, but by plain inuasiō: and wtin 23. daies
being poisoned An. 1049.  much contention was at Rome about the papall sea: so that the Romanes by consent of the Cardinals, desired the Emperour to giue them a Bishop: which he did, one named Bruno an Almaigne, and Bishop of Collen, afterward named Leo the ninth, who comming from the Emperour to Rome in his Pontificalibus, was met of the Abbot of Cluniake, and Hildebrande a monke, that al to rated him, because he would take his authoritie of the Emperour rather then of the Clergie; and councelled him to lay downe that apparell, and to enter in with his owne habite, till he had his election by them: which he did, confessing his fault, and was called Leo the ninth. By him HildebrandHildebrand. was made a Cardinal, and put in great autho∣ritie. Vnder this Pope, were twoo councels, one kept at Ver∣cellis,A councell at Vercellis. A councell at Laterane. where the doctrine of Berengarius, touching the real presence, was first condemned, although Berengarius as yet recanted not; but afterward, in ye councel of Laterane, vnder Nicholas 2. Anno 1060.  The other was kept at Maguntia, where was enacted, that Priests should be excluded vtter∣ly from marriage:Priests may not marrie. and that no lay man shoulde giue bene∣fice or any spirituall promotion. This Leo being at Wormes with the Emperour on Christmas day, did excommunicate the subdeacon, because in reading the Epistle he did it not in the Roman tune, hee being there present. The Archbishop moued therewith, de∣parted from the Altar (being at masse) saying,The pope, and Archb. fal out at masse. he would not procéed in his seruice, vnlesse his Subdeacon were restored. Whereupon, the Pope commanded him to be released, and so they went forward in their seruice. Brazutus the poysoner.After the death of Leo (whom Brazutus poysoned the first yere of his Popedome) Theophilactus did striue to be pope, But Hildebrande (to defeate him) went to the Emperor, that assigned another, a German, Victor 2. Who hauing a Councell at Florence, depriued many bishops for Simony,
and fornication: that is for being maried. In the second yéere of his popedome, he was also poysoned by Brazutus, tho∣rough the procurement of Hildebrand and his Maister. After him succéeded Stephen the 9. by the election of the Clergie of Rome, contrary to their othe made to the Em∣perour. By this Stephen the Church of Millain was first brought vnder the subiection of the Romish Church: and shamed not to accuse the Emperour of heresie, for minish∣ing the authoritie of the Romane sea: and at that time it was counted simonie, to enioy any spirituall liuing at a temporall mans hand. Which Stephen hearing to raigne in diuerse churches, especially of Burgundie and Italy, sent foorth the Cardinall Hildebrand to reforme the matter, hée himselfe also earnest therein. In the meane while Ste∣phanus tasting of Brazutus cup, fell sicke: whereof Hilde∣brand hearing, hasted to Rome, & assembling the orders of the Clergie together, made them sweare, that they should admit none bishop, but such as should be by the consent of all. This doone, Hildebrand taketh his iourney to Florence, be∣like to fetch the B. of Florence to enstall him: the clergy ha∣uing sworne vnto him, that none should be chosen B. before his returne: but the people in his absence, elected one of their owne citie called Benedictus the 10. Whereof Hildebrand hearing, was greatly offended, & returning without Gerar∣dus B. of Florence, caused the clergy to procéed to a new e∣lection: whervpon (they being afraid to doo it at Rome) went to Sene, and there elected Gerardus bishop of Florence, na∣med Nicolaus 2. who holding a councell at Sutriū, through the helpe of duke Godfride and Gilbert, and other bishops in Italie, deposed the other Pope. Benedictus vnderstan∣ding himselfe to be set against by Hildebrād, vnpoped him∣selfe, and went and dwelt at Velitras. Nicholas being thus set vp against the mind of the Em∣perour, or consent of the people of Rome, after his fellow Pope was driuen away, brake vp the Synod of Sutrium,
and came to Rome, where he assembled another Councell called Lateranum: in which first was sette forth the terrible sentence of Excommunication,The terrible sentence of ex∣cōmunication. mentioned in the decrées, and beginning In nomine Domini nostri, &c. The effecte of the Councell was, that a few Cardinals, and certaine Catholike persons might choose the Pope without the Emperour.The Pope to be elected only by ye cardinall. Se∣condly, against these that créepe into the seate of Peter by si∣monie, without consent of the Cardinals. In the same Coun∣cell also Berengarius Andeuangensis,Berengarius recanteth. an Archdeacon, was driuen to recant his doctrine agaynst the reall presence. In the same Councell was also hatched the new found tearme of transubstantiation.Transubstan∣tiatiō hatched. This Pope made Robert Guichard (displacing the right heire) Duke of Apulia, Calabria, Sycilia, and Captaine ge∣nerall of Saint Peters landes: that through his force hee might subdue those that rebelled against him. At length hee met with Brazutus cup, after hee had set thrée yéeres and an halfe, Anno 1062. At the beginning of this Nicholas, or somewhat before, An. 1057. was Henricus 4. made Emperour, after Henri∣cus the third, and raigned fiftie yéeres. In the raigne of this Nicholas, An. 1060.  Alredus bi∣shop of Worcester, after the decease of Knisius his prede∣cessor should be made archbishop of Yorke: who comming to Rome with Toctius Earle of Northumberland, for his pall, was depriued: till the Pope beyng threatned by To∣ctiusThe Pope threatned by Toctius. with the losse of S. Peters tribute, was cōtent to send home Aldredus with his pall. After the death of Nicholas, the Lombards being oppres∣sed before of him, desired to haue a Bishop of their com∣pany, and so elected the bishop Parmen called Cadolus, to be Pope with the Emp. licence, to whom they sent concerning the same. Hildebrādus hearing this setteth vp another, An∣selmus, afterward called Alexander the 2. so that the two popes met, & fought together,Two Popes fight. Alexander getting the vpper
hand. The Emp. hearing of this, sēt his Embassador, Otho Archb. of Collen to Rome: who did chide the pope, for taking so vpon him without the emperors leaue. Against whō, Hil∣brand on the other side, very stoutly behaued himselfe in the maintenance of the cleargy: so that Otho was content to be perswaded: onely requiring in the Emperors name, a coun∣sel to be had to decide the matter, whereat the Emperour should bee present himselfe, and so hee was. In which Councel, kept at Mantua, Alexander was declared Pope, and the other had his pardon granted him. In this Councel, it was concluded, that priests should haue no wiues, & such as had Concubines, to say no masse: priests children not to be secluded from holy orders: no benefices to be sold for money; Alleluia to be suspended out of the Church in time of Lent, &c. It was also decréed, that no spiritual man should enter into any Church by a secular man, and that the pope should be elected onely by the Cardinals. Benno Cardinalis wri∣teth, that Alexander being at masse, (hauing perceiued the fraudes of Hildebrand as he was preaching) told him hée would not sit in that seat without the licence of the Empe∣rour. Wherevpon after masse, Hildebrand by force had him into a chamber, and pummelled the pope with his fistes:The pope pum∣meled by Hil∣debrand. ra∣ting him, for that he would séeke fauour of the Emperour. Thus he was kept in custody, and stinted at xx. d. a day:The P. stinted at xx. pence a day. Hil∣debrand in the meane time encroching to himselfe the trea∣sure of the Church.Hildebrand en∣crocheth the Church trea∣sure.
The names and order of the Archbishops of Can∣terburie, from the time of king Egbert, to Wil∣liam the Conquerour. 18 ETheredus 18. 19. Pleimundus 29.20. Athelmus 12. 21. Vlfelmus 13.22. Odo 20. 23. Elfius or El∣finus. 1. 24. Dunstane. 20. Polydorus maketh Dunstane the 23.25, Ethelgarus, 1.26. Elfricus, 11.27. Siricius 5.28. Elphe∣gus, 6. 29. Liuingus, 7. 30. Egelnodus 17.31. Edsius, 11. 32. Robertus 2.33, Stigandus 17.34. Lanfrancus 19. The Printer to the Reader. NOte gentle Reade, that whereas (by means our writ∣ten copie had not obserued the same) we vnawares haue omitted certaine distinctions, that wee purposed to haue made betweene each of the 3. parts, or bookes of this former volume abridged, according as in the first volume of acts & monuments, at large is distinguished: thou shalt vnderstand, that the first of those former bookes contey∣neth the 300. yeres next after Christ, vntil Lucius his daies. The 2. booke beginneth pag. 68. and conteineth the next 300. yeeres; viz. from Lucius to king Egbert. The 3. must be reckoned from pag. 85. containing the next 300. yeeres, viz. to the time of William the Conqueror: which here fol∣loweth.
The fourth booke. ANno 1067.  William Conqueror was crowned king,W. Conqueror by the handes of Ald∣redus, Bishop of Yorke, for so much as Stigandus, Archbishop of Canter∣burie was thē absent) on Christmas day. William exercised great crueltieCrueltie of the Conqueror. vpon the English Nation, and abro∣gated Edwards lawes, and established his own, for his pro∣fite. He placed his people in all offices, Spirituall and Tē∣porall. And such was the reproch of English men,An Englishmā a name of re∣proch. that it was a name of shame. And thus now the fift time, the land was by diuers Nations afflicted. First, by the Romans, in ye time of Iulius Cesar. Then, by Scots, and Pictes. After,England. fiue times ouerrun. by Saxons, and then by Danes, which continued from ye reign of Ethelwolfe, 230. yeres, till K. Edward. And fiftly, by the Normans. In the fourth yere of K. William, betwéene Easter and Whitsontide, was helde a Councell at Winchester, of the Cleargie of England: In which were present, two Cardi∣nals, sent from pope Alexander the second, Peter and Iohn. In that Councell, (the king being present) were deposed many Prelates of the English Nation, without any euidēt cause, that the kings Normans might be placed.Normans placed. Srigandus Archbishop deposed. Among whom, Stigandus the Archbishop was put downe for thrée causes. The first. for that he had wrongfullie holden the bi∣shoprick, while Robert the Archbishop was liuing. The se∣cond, for that he receiued the Pall of Benedict, who was de∣posed. The third, for that he occupied the Pall without law∣full authoritie of the Court of Rome. So Stigandus was deposed, and kept in Winchester, as
a prisoner during his life. At the same time was preferred to the Archbishoprick of York, Thomas, a Norman, and Chanon of Bayon: at which time also, Lanfrancus Abbot of Cadomonencie, a Lombard, and Italian borne, was sent for, and made Archbishoppe of Canterburie.Lanfrāk, arch∣bishop of Can∣terburie. Contention of primacie. Betwixt him and the Archb. of Yorke there grew great contention for the oath of obedience. But in the end, through the king, Thomas was contented to subscribe obedience to the other. After, the Archb. went to Rome for their Palles, with Remigius B. of Dorcester: wtout which no Archb. nor B. could be confirmed. And to Lanf. Alexāder (for ye estimatiō of his learning) gaue ij. palles:2. palles geuen to Lanfrank. one of honor, the other of loue, he obteined also for the other ij. their cōfir∣mation. Now againe began the controuersie of Primacie to be renued before the P. who sent thē home to end ye matter, & to haue it determined. So returned they to Englād an. 1070  and ye 6. yere of this W. the matter was brought befor the K. & clergie at Windsor: where (after much debating on both sides) Th. gaue ouer: condiscending, that the first of his pro∣uince should beginne at Humber. Whereupon it was de∣créed, that Yorke for that time should be subiect to Cant.York subiect to Cant. in matters appertaining to the Church. So that wheresoeuer within England, Canterburie would hold his Councel, the Bishops of Yorke should resort thether, with their bishops, and be obedient to his decrées Canonicall. Prouided moreo∣uer, yt when the Archb. of Canterburie should decease, Yorke should depart to Douer, there to consecrate (with other) the B. that should be elect: and if Yorke should decease, his suc∣cessor should resort to Canterburie, or els where the Bishop of Cant. should appoint, there to receiue his cōsecratiō, ma∣king his profession there, wt an oath of canonical obedience. In the daies of this Lanfrancus, Archb. of Canterburie, anno 1076.  diuers bishops seates were altered from town∣ships, to great cities:Bishops seates altered from from townes to great cities. as, of Sealesey, to Chichester: out of Cornwall, to Exceter: from Welles, to Bath: from Shire∣burne
to Salisburie, from Dorcester to Lincolne, frō Lich∣field to Chester. Which bishoprike of Chester, Robert then B. reduced from Chester to Couentrie. Likely it is also, that the sea of the archbishop was translated from Douer to Canterbury, or that Canterbury in old time had the name of Dorobernia: as doth by diuerse testimonies appéere. In the 9. yéere of this kings raigne, by ye procurement of Lanfrancus, was a councel holden at London: where among other things it was first enacted,Ecclesiasticall decrees. yt the Archb. of Yorke shold sit on the right hand, & the B. of Lōdon on the left, or in ye ab∣sence of Yorke, London on the right hand, & Winchester on the left hand of the archbishop in councell. 2. That bishops should translate their seas from villages to cities. 3. That monkes should haue nothing in proper, and if they had died vncōfessed, they should not be buried in churchyard. 4. That no Clarke or Monke of another Dioces should be admitted to orders, or retained without letters cōmendatorie. 5. That none should speake in the Councell except Bishops, & Ab∣bots, without the leaue of the Archmetropolitane. 6. That none should marie within ye seuenth degree with anie of his owne kindred, or of his wiues departed. 8. That no sorcerie should be vsed in the Church. 9. That none of ye clergy should be present at the iudgement of anie mans death, or dismem∣bring: neither should be anie fautor of the said iudicants. In the daies of this Lanfrancus, Waltelmus B. of Wintō, had placed about fortie Canons in sted of Monks, so that the part of Priests was taken againe against Monkes.Priests yet a∣gainst Monks. But it held not: Lanfrancus opposing himselfe against the same. He wrote a booke against Berengarius called Opus scintillarū. His owne church of Canterburie he pulled down, & builded a new. He sate ninetéene yéeres, and being not so fauoured of William Rufus, he died for sorrow.Lanfranke di∣eth for sorow. After Pope Alexander followed Pope Hildebrand, surna∣med Gregorie the 7. an. 1074.  He was a sorcerer,Pope Hilde∣brand a sor∣cerer. & first be∣gan to spurne against the Emperours, who before time
confirmed the Popes and called Councels: but this Pope trusting vpon the Normans, that then ruffled in Apulia, Calabria, and Campania, trusting also vpon the power of Machtilda a stout woman there about Rome, and partly bearing himselfe bold for the discord that then was among the Germanes:Hildebrand contemneth the Emperour. Both the swordes. Pope can not erre. first contemned the authoritie of the Emp. & vanted he had both swords committed vnto him of Christ. Wherevpon he chalenged the dominion both of the East & West churches, & boasted he could not erre: and that he had receiued of Christ & Peter, power to bind & loose: he decréed against married priestes, whose wiues in these daies were called Presbiteresse:Presbiteresse. forbidding men to salute them, to talke with them, or to kéepe cōpany with them: and to this end a∣mong others he wrote letters to Otho B. of Constance cō∣cerning this matter, who resisted ye pope herein. The coūcell of Hildebrand against maried priests was holdē at Rome.Councell a∣gainst mar∣riage of priests The clergy of Fraunce also withstood it, alledging that de∣crée to be against Gods lawes,The decree a∣gainst marri∣age resisted. and the law of nature. The Germain ministers did also mightily withstand the same, so yt the archb. of Mentz in a councell vrging ye matter with the popes legate called Curiensis, hardly escaped with their liues, & so the councell brake vp. By this schisme,A schisme. it fo∣lowed yt the churches after yt, in choosing their priests, would not send them to the bishops to be confirmed; but did elect thē within themselues, & so put them in their office without all knowledge of ye bishops: who were determined to admit no priests, but such as were to take an oth of perpetuall single∣nes, and so first came vp the profession of single priesthood. Hildebrand a villanous pope.This Hildebrand was a most wicked, & reprobate mon∣ster; a sorcerer, a necromancer, an old cōpanion of Siluester, Theophilactus, & Laurentius coniurers, Benno cardinall of Rome setteth out many of his villanous acts. Assoone as pope Alexāder was dead, who died somewhat before night, the same day (contrary to the canons) he was chosen pope of the Laymen; but the Cardinals subscribed not to his electiō.
For by the Canons, vnder paine of cursing, none should bée chosen vnder 3. daies after ye burial of his predecess.None chosen Pope vnder 3. daies after his predecessors buriall. He also put the Cardinals from his councel, and society; so that none could beare witnes of his life, faith, and doctrine: wheras the Canons command, that in euery place where the Pope is, should be with him 3. Cardinals, being priests, and 2. dea∣cons, because of his ecclesiastical testimony. He excommuni∣cated the Emperor,The Pope ex∣cōmunicateth the Emperour. being in no synode solemnly accused be∣fore: whereto none of the cardinals would subscribe. Assoon as he had rose out of his papal seate, to excommunicate the Emperor, it (being made a little before with bigge timber) sodainly rent and shiuered in pieces. He appointed one to lay great stones ouer the Church roofe of S. Maries in ye mount Auentine, whether the Emperor was wont to go to prayer: to the end, by throwing thē downe the vault, he might slay ye Emperour at his praiers.The pope prac∣tiseth to kill the Emperour while he pray∣eth. Which while the hireling was doing, by remouing a stone, it broke the plank wheron it lay, and the hireling standing thereon, both fell downe together: and so he was with the same stone dashed in pieces. Also enquiring of the Sacrament of the altar an answere, (as an oracle against ye Emperor:) because it wold giue no answer,Hildebrand as∣keth counsell of the host, and casteth it in the fire, because it would not an∣swere. he threw it into the fire, and burned it, contrarie to the per∣swasion of the Cardinals. His villanies were infinite: in so much that diuers of the colledges of the Church of Rome re∣fused to communicate with him. He perswaded the Empe∣rour to depose those Bishoppes that came in by Simony: which he did without delay, & after Hildebrand restored the same againe, to procure their friendships vnto himselfe, and to make the Emperour odious vnto them: and after much vexing of him, caused him by force and violence to accuse himselfe at Canusium, in his presence, who had ex∣communicated him. The Emperour comming on his bare féete,The Emperor barefoot to the Pope. clothed in thinne garments in the sharpe Winter, was there thrée daies made a spectacle to the world, and a iest to Hildebrand. Too long it were to declare all the detestable
acts of this Hildebrand. About what time Hildebrand was made Pope, Henri∣cus 4. the Emperor, was encombred with warres in Ger∣many, by Otho duke of Saxons. Now vpon ye point hereof, Hildebr. cursed al those, that being lay mē, gaue any spiritu∣al promotiōs, or receiued any at their hands: her by thinking to wring al authority frō temporal men, and to take it to the spiritualty: and sent for the Emperor, now busie in warres to appeare at the Councel of Laterane in Rome. Where the emperor could not (being busie in his warres) appeare. The Pope threatneth he would excommunicate him,A popish inter∣pretation of sy∣mony. & except he would abiure simonie, as they called it, & do penance, (he cal∣led symonie, giuing & taking spiritual liuings at lay mens hāds) he would also depose him from his regal dignity. The Emp. being moued with the arrogancy of the Pope, called a councel at Wormes, in which al the Bish. of the whole em∣pire of Germany cōcluded vpon the deposing of Hildebrād:A terrible pope and sent Roulandus, a priest of Parmen with the sentence, who there denounced the same. Hildebrand tickled with the sentence, first condemneth it in his Councell of Laterane, with excommunication. Secondly, depriueth Sigfridus arch∣bishop of Mentz, of all his dignities: with all the prelates & priests, that tooke the Emperours part. Thirdly, he accuseth Henricus the Emperor himselfe, depriuing him of his king∣dome, and regall possession, and releaseth his subiectes of their oath made vnto him.The Emp. fain to yeeld to the Pope. The Princes of Germany tooke this occasion to rebell againe, and concluded to elect another Emperour, and to fall from Henrie, vnlesse the Pope would come into Germany, & he there content to submit himselfe, & so obtain his pardon. Wherto the Emp. seing no other way, with an oath agréed: whervpon, the Bishop of Triers was sent Ambassadour to intreate the Pope to come into Ger∣many, whereto he yéelded: and in his way when he came to Vercellos, the bishop of that citie, bearing a grudge to the Emperor, perswaded the pope, that he was cōming against
him with a mighty power: willing him to prouide for him∣selfe, wherevpon the pope beyng afraid returned to Canu∣sium or Canusus, a citie subiect to Matilda a Countesse in Italie. Whereof the Emperour vnderstanding, incontinent comming out of Spires with his wife & his yoong sonne, in the déepe and sharpe winter, resorted to Canusus without any company, for they were al afraid of the popes curse: and laying apart his regall ornaments, came barefooted, with his wife and child to the gate of Canusus:The Emperor brought vnder the Popes foote. where he from morning to night all the day fasting, most humbly desired absolution, crauing to be let in to the speach of the Pope: which could not be graunted of thrée daies. At last it was aunswered, that the Pope had no leasure to speake with him: yet notwithstanding, through his importunate sute, and intreatie of Matilda, the Popes paramour, and of A∣leranus Earle of Sebaudia, and the Abbot of Cluniacke: it was graunted, that hée should be admitted to the Popes spéech. On the fourth day, being let in, for token of true re∣pentance, he yéelded to the Popes handes, his crowne, and all his imperiall ornaments,The Emp. yel∣deth his crown to the Pope. and confessed himselfe vnwor∣thy of the empire, if euer he doe so againe against the Pope: and humbly required absolution. The pope answered, hée would not release him, but vpon conditions: First, that hée shalbe content to stand to his arbitremēt in the Couecel, & to take such penance as he should appoint him: & that he should be readie to appeare in such place, and time, as the P. should appoint him. Moreouer, being content to take the P. as Iudge, should answere in the said Councel, to all accusations laide against him: & that he should neuer seeke any reuēge hereafter. Also, though he were quit, & cléered therein, should stād to the P. minde, whether to haue his kingdome restored, or to lose it.Hard condi∣tions. Finally, that before the triall of his cause, he should vse no ornamēts of his crown or empire: nor to gouerne, or exact any oath of his subiects. These things being promised of the
Emperour by oth. He onely released him of excommunica∣tion, & afterward, fearing least the Emperor should hereaf∣ter,Henricus 4. deposed. when he had obtained peace among his people make re∣uenge, they concluded to deriue the Empire to Rodolphus a great state of Germanie: and sent into France to declare the Emperour to be rightly excommunicated, and to require the consents of the French men, to elect Rodolphus: to whom the pope sent a crowne with this sentence, The Rock gaue this crowne to Peter,Petra dedit Petro. & Peter giueth it to Rodolph: and gaue in commaundement to the archbishop of Mentz, and Collen, to elect this Rodolphus for Emperour. Which newes being brought to Henricus the Emperour, he muste∣reth his men to defend his right: and trusting vpō the league betwéene him and the Pope, sendeth to Rome, requiring him to procéed with his sentence against Rodolphus, for the rebellious inuasion of his empire. The pope refused to de∣nounce Rodolphus:Rodolph. chosē emperor. and after they had tried twise with the sword, & much bloodshed, he sendeth downe a commission by Otho Archbishop of Treuers, Bernardus deacon, and Ber∣nardus Abbot of Massilia, to whom he gaue charge to call a Councell in Germanie, and there to define whether should be Emperour, promising that he would ratifie him whome they should choose: but the Emperour would not permit the Legates to holde any councel in Germany, except they wold first depriue Rodolphus of his kingdome. Whereupon, the Legates returned againe without their purpose: which mo∣ued the Pope once againe to thunder out his excommuni∣cation against him: thinking thereby, to further Rodol∣phus. Also, he enditeth, and deposeth Gimbertus, Archb. of Ra∣uenna, for taking the Emp. part: and sendeth to Rauenna an other Archb. with ful authority. Vpon this, they fought againe: where Rodolphus,Rod. wounded to death. (hauing his deaths wound,) was carried to Hyperbolis, where he commaunded the Bishops and chiefe doers of his conspiracie to be brought vnto him:
who (when they came) he lifted vp his right hand, in which he had taken his deadly woūd, and said: this is the hand that gaue the oath, and Sacrament to Henricus my Prince, and which (through your instigation) hath so oft fought against him in vaine. Now go, and performe your first oath to your K. for I must goe to my fathers: and so died. After this, the Emperor hauing subdued his enemie, cal∣led a Councell of diuers Bishops: of Italie, Lombardie, and Germanie, at Bryxia, an. 1083.  Where hee purged him∣selfe, and accused the Pope of diuers crimes:Crimes a∣gainst the P. as, to be an v∣surper; periured; a Negromancer; a sorcerer; and sower of discord; &c. When, notwithstāding he swore with others, in the the time of his father, Henricus the third, that during his time, and his sonnes, they would suffer none to aspire, (nor they themselues) to the seate of Papacie, without the consent of the Emperours. Wherefore, that Councell con∣demned this Gregorie, to be deposed: and sent the tenor to Rome, and elected Gimbertus, Archbishop of Rauen∣na, named Clemens the thirde, whom the Emperor by force of armes placed in that Sea. Not long after this, Hilde∣brand died in exile,Hildebrand deposed, dieth in banishment. and as Antoninus wryteth, lying on his death bed, he bewayled his faults, and sent a Cardinall to ye Emp. desiring forgeuenes, absoluing also him & his part-ta∣kers, quicke, & dead, from the sentence of excommunication. About the death of Pope Hildebrand, or not long after, followed the death of K. William Conqueror,W. Conque∣ror dieth. anno 1090.  after that he had reigned xxvij. yeres & x. moneths, who set∣ting on fire the Citie of Meaux in Fraunce, and being busie thereabout, ouer heat himselfe, fell sick, and died. He was so hard to Englishmen, that, as there was no English Bishop remayning, but onely Wolstane of Worcester, who being commanded of the K. and Lanfrank, to resigne vp his staffe, partly for inhabilitie, partly for lack of the French tongue: refused otherwise to resigne it, but only to him that gaue it: and so went to the tombe of K. Edw. where he thought to re∣signe
it, but was permitted to enioy it stil: so likewise, there was almost no Englishmā, that bare office of honor or rule. In so much, that it was halfe a shame at that time, to be cal∣led an Englishman. Yet was he somewhat fauorable to the Citie of London, and graunted them the first charter that e∣uer they had, written in the Saxon tongue, and sealed with gréene waxe. He was much geuen to maintain peace in his land:The conqueror geuen to make peace in his land. so that a mayden loded with gold, might haue traueled safely through the same. He builded two monasteries, one, at Batel in Sussex, where he wan the field against Harold: and another at Barmonseie, in the Countrey of Normandy. There were slaine on ye side of Harold,Great slaugh∣ter of Eng∣lishmen. 66634. Englishmē. Of the cōquerors side, 6013. in the battel fought betwixt thē. The first B. of SalisburieThe first B. of Salisburie. was Hermann{us}, a Normand, who first began the new church, & minster there. After whō succéeded Osmund{us}, who finished the work, and replenished the house with great liuing, & much good singing. This Os∣mundus began the ordinary first, which was called secundū vsum Sarū,Secundum vsum Sarum. an. 1076.  The occasion whereof, was a great cō∣tention ye chanced at Glassenbury, betwéene Thurstanus the Abbot, & his Couent, in the daies of W. Conqueror, whō he had brought with him out of Normandy, from the Abbey of Cadonius & placed him Abbot of Glassēb. The cause of this contention was, for ye Thurst. the abbot, & his couent, contē∣ning their quire seruice, then called the vse of S. Gregorie, cōpelled his monks to the vse of one W. a monk of Fiscā, in Normādy:The vse of Gregorie. The Ab killeth his monkes. so it grew from worde to blowes & from blowes to armour: so yt the abbot slew ij. monks at the steppes of the altar, &c. This matter being brought before the K. the Ab∣bot was sent again to Cadonius, & the monks by cōmande∣ment of the K. scattered in farre countreis. Thus by occasion hereof, Osmund. B. of Salis. deuised ye ordinarie, that was called the vse of Sarū, and afterward was receiued in a ma∣ner, throughout England, Ireland, and Wales. W. left after his death by his wife Mawd, 3. sonnes, Robert
Courtesey, to whom he gaue the duchie of Normandie, Wil∣liam Rufus his 2. son, to whom he gaue ye kingdome of En∣gland, & Henry the 3. sonne, to whom he gaue his treasure. About this time there was a certain B. dwelling betwixt Collen & Mētz, who hauing store in time of famine, & would not reléeue the poore, was eatē with mise,A bishop eaten with mise. Rats tower. though he builded in ye mids of Rhine a tower to kéepe himselfe in against thē, It is called at this day of the duchmen Rats tower. An. 1088.  W. Rufus the second sonne began his raigne, & raigned 13. yéeres, being crowned at Westm. by Lanfrācus. Robert Courtsey hearing how Rufus had taken vppon him the kingdome,Williā Rufus. made preparation of warre against his brother, but was by him appeased without fight. This vari∣ance betwixt the two brethren, caused dissention among the Normā B. & Lords, both in England & Normandy, so that almost al ye Normā B. rebelled against their K. except Lan∣francus and Wolstan B. of Worcester an English man. In the 3. yere of Rufus, died Lancfrancus,Lancfranke dieth. the Archb. af∣ter whose decease, the Sea stood empty 4. yéeres. Remigius bishop of Dorceter, remoued his sea from thēce to Lincolne, and builded the minster there. By him also was founded the monastery of Staue. Herbert Losinga, at this time remoouing his sea from Thetford to Norwich, there erected ye cathedral church, with the Cloister: where he furnished the Monkes with sufficiēt rents, and liuings of his owne charge besides his Bishops lāds.Nothing from the king, but for money. He bought his bishoprick of ye K. for monie (as nothing came from him but for money,) whereupon, repenting him of simonie, he went to Rome, and resigned it to the Popes handes, of whom he receiued it presently again. This Her∣bert was the sonne of an Abbot, called Robert. After Pope Hildebrand succéeded Victor 3. set vp by Matilda, and the Duke of Normandie.Victor 3. pope. With the faction of Hild. This Victor also shewed himself stout against the em∣peror: and so all his Successors, according to the example of
Hildebrand:Victor poiso∣ned in his chalice. he sat but one yéere and an halfe; as they say, being poisoned in his chalice. In the time of Victor began the order of the Monkes of the Charterhouse, by meanes of one Hugo B. of Grationople,Charterhouse monkes. and of Bruno bishop of Collen Next to Victor sat Vrbanus 2.Vrbanus pope. by whom the acts of Hil∣debrand were confirmed, and new decrées enacted against In Henricus the Emperour. this time were two Popes at Rome:Two popes at once. Vrbanus, and Clemens the third, whom the Emperour set vp. Vnder Pope Vrbane, came in the white monkes of Ci∣stercian order,White mōks. by one Stephen Harding a monke of Schir∣borne an Englishman: by whom this order had beginning in the wildernes of Cistery, within the Prouince of Bur∣gonie, ann. 1098.  It was brought into England, by one cal∣led Especke, that builded an Abbey of the same order, cal-Merinale. In this order, the Monkes did liue by the labour of their hands: they paid no tithes, nor offerings: they ware no furr, nor liuing: they ware red shoes, their cowles white, and coate blacke: all shorne saue a litle circle: they eate no flesh, but onely in their iourney. This Vrbanus had diuers councels: one at Rome, where he excommunicated al such lay persons as gaue inuesture of any ecclesiastical benefice: & al such of the cleargy, as abiected themselues to be vnderlings, to Lay persons for benefices. Another Councell he helde at Claremount in Fraunce: In which, was agréed the voyage against the Saracens, for recouerie of the holy Lande: where thirtie thousande men being perswaded by the Popes Oration, and taking vpon them the signe of the Crosse for their cognisance, made pre∣paration for the voyage: whose Captaines were, Godwine Duke of Lorraine, with his two Brethren, Eustace, and Baldwine,Voyage a∣gainst the Sa∣racens. the Bishop of Padue, Bohemund, the D. of Pu∣ell: and his neuew Tancredus, Raymund Earle of Saint Egidius, Robert Earle of Flaunders, and Hugh Le grand brother to Philip the French king. To whom also was
ioined Robert Corthoise duke of Normandie, and diuerse mo, with one Peter an Heremite,Peter the He∣remite. who complaining of the misery that the Christians sustayned there, was the chiefe cause of that voyage, an. 1096.  Which cōpany was trap∣ped, and slain in great number among the Bulgars, néere to the towne called Ciuitus: the rest passed on,Ierusalē won from the Sa∣racens. and besieged Ierusalem, and wan it of the Infidels in the 39. day of the siege: and Godfry captaine of the Christian army, was pro∣claimed first king of Ierusalem. About this time the K. of England fauoured not much the church of Rome,  Prohibition of going to Rome because of their insatiable & impudent exac∣tiōs: nether wold he suffer any of his subiects to go to Rome. By this Vrbanus, the 7. Canonicall houresCanonicall howers. were first in∣stituted in the church. Item, that no B. should be made but vnder the title of some speciall place. Item, that Mattins and houres of the day, should euery day be said: also euery Saturday to be said the Masse of our Lady: & all the Iewes sabboth to be turned into the seruice of our Lady. Item, all such of ye clergie as had wiues, should be depriued of orders. Item,Lawfull for subiects to breake their oth of alle∣giance. that it might be lawfull for al subiects to breake their oth of allegiance with such, as ye pope had excōmunicated, &c. The K. after he had deteined the archbishoprike of Can∣terbury in his owne hands thrée yéeres, gaue it to Anselmus abbot of Beck in Normandy: which he was so vnwilling to take, that the King had much adoo to thrust it vpon him,The citie of Canterbury giuen to the Archbishop. and was so desirous he should haue it that he gaue vnto him wholly the citie of Canterburie, about the yéere 1093.  But afterward there fell such dissention betwixt them, that the king sought all meanes to put him out againe: for that he required of Anselmus in gentle manner, that such landes of the Church of Canterburie, as the king had giuen to his friendes, since the death of Lanfranke might so remaine: & whereto Anselme refusing to agrée,Anselme the Archb. against the king. moued the King with displeasure against him: and therevpon he did a great while stop his consecration.
By reason of the contention at Rome betwixt the two Popes, Vrbanus, and Clemens 3. there grew diuision: some holding with one, & some with the other. England tooke part with Clemens 3. but Anselme against the K. & the rest stuck to Vrbanus,Vrbane, and Clemēt popes at strife. and required of the king leaue to fetch his pall of Vrbanus: which when he could not at the first obtaine, he appealeth to the pope; contrary (as the K. said) to his fealty. Betwixt thē there was much reasoning, & debate about the matter: but in conclusion none of his fellow Bishops durst take his part, but were all against him: especially William B. of Duresme. In the meane season the king had sent two messengers to Vrbane for ye pall, to bestow where he would: who returned and brought with them Gualtar B. of Albane the Popes Legate, with the pall to be giuen to Anselme. Which Legate so perswaded the king, that Vrbane was re∣ceiued Pope through the whole land: and after the king had receiued the pall, there went vnto Anselme certaine, decla∣ring the paines and charges the king was at, in procuring the pall,The king faine to relent to the Archbishop. & willed him somewhat to relent vnto him; which he notwithstanding in no case would yéeld vnto: so the king was compelled to yeeld vnto him the full right of the sea. But afterward grewe great displeasure betwixt them, so so that Anselme went to appeale to Rome, where he remai∣ned in exile, notwithstanding Vrbane wrote in his behalfe to the King, that set light by the Popes letters and suite therein.A Councell. Wherevpon the pope promised at the next Coun∣cell at Baron to take order for the matter, where Anselme beyng present was called for: and first sitting in an vtter∣side of the Bishops, afterward was placed at the right foote of the Pope, with these wordes: Includamus hunc in or∣be nostro,The Archb. of Canterburie called the pope of England. tanquam alterius orbis Papam. Whervpon that same seat was appointed afterward to the sea of Canterburie in euery generall Councell. In this Councell great stur was against the Grecians, about the procéeding of the holy ghost. Which gréeke church
differed from the Latine in 20. or 29. articles. First,29. articles of controuersy be∣twixt ye church of Rome and the Greeke Church The Latines holdē for excō∣municates. that they are not vnder the sea of Rome. 2. That the sea of Rome hath not greater power, then the 4. patriarkes, and whatsoe∣uer the pope doth beside their knowledge, or without their approbation, is of no value. 3. That whatsoeuer hath béen cōcluded since in the second general councel is of no authori∣ty sufficient: because from that time, they recount the La∣tines to be excluded out of the Church. 4. They deny ye reall presence, & consecrate in leuened bread. 5. Also at the words of baptism, they say: Let this creature be baptized, in ye name of the father, sonne, & holy Ghost, &c. 6. They deny purga∣tory, & account the suffrages of the dead of no value. 7 That the soules after death, haue neither their perfect paine, nor glorie, but are reserued in a certaine place, till the day of iudgement. 8. They condemne the Church of Rome, for mixing colde water in their Sacrifice. 9. They con∣demne the Church of Rome, saying: they admit aswell wo∣men, as men in baptisme to annoint children, on both shoul∣ders. 10. Also they call our bread, Panagia. 11. They blame the Romish church, for celebrating masse on any other daies saue sundaies, and certaine other feast daies. 12. The Gréek hath neither creame, nor oile, nor sacrament of confirmati∣on. 13. Neither do they vse extreme vnction: expounding ye place of S. Iames, of spiritual infirmity. 14. They enioyne no satisfaction for penaunce. 15. They consecrate for the sicke onely, on maundy Thurseday, keeping it for the whole yéere after: neither doe they fast any Saturday through the yéere, but onely on Easter euen. 16. They giue onely but fiue orders: as Clearkes, Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests, and Bishops: the Romans giuing nine. 17. They make no vow of chastity. 18. Euery yéere the Grecians vse vpon certaine daies, to excommunicat the Church of Rome,The Romans euery yeere so∣lemnly excom∣municated of the Greekes. and all Latines, as heretikes. 19 They excommunicat him, that striketh a Priest: neither doe they liue vnmarried. 20. Their Emperour disposeth of ecclesiasticall matters
of gouernment according to his owne pleasure. 21. They eate flesh, egges & chéese on Friday 22. They hold against the Latines, for celebrating without the consecrated church: for fasting on the Sabboth day: for permitting menstruous women to enter into the church, before their purifying: for suffering dogges and other beasts to enter into the church. 23. The Grecians vse not to knéele in al their deuotions, not to the Eucharist, sauing one day in the yéere. 24. They per∣mit not the Latines to celebrate vpon their altars: which if they doe, they by and by wash the altar: and when they ce∣lebrate, they say but one Lyturgy, or masse vpon one altar that day. 25. They dissent in the maner of the procéeding of the holy Ghost, &c. Now in the counsel aforesaid, among other pointes, ye pro∣céeding of the holy ghost, & celebrating with leauened bread, was debated: concerning the which, Anselme did behaue himself greatly to the mind of ye pope: & after lōg reasoning of matters betwixt the churches, the pope thundereth out ex∣communication against the Gréekes,The Pope ex∣communicated the Greekes. and their adherents: & was ready also to procéed to the sentence of excommunicati∣on against the king of England for Anselmus sake, had not Anselme himselfe knéeling down, obtained for him longer time of further trial. Whervpon the counsel brake vp, & the Pope directeth his letters to the K. of England, and commā∣deth him to reuest Anselme:The Pope cō∣mandeth the K. of England. which the K. woulde not obey, but sent message and letters contrary, to the great discon∣tentment of the pope, threatning him again with excommu∣nication: but the messenger so handled the matter, that whē the councel came, which was then holdē at S. Peters church in Rome, the K. tooke no harme; onely the sentence of ex∣communication was pronounced against Lay persons that gaue inuesture of Churches, and them that were so inue∣sted: and against such as giue themselues in subiection to Lay men for Ecclesiasticall thinges. The Counsel being finished, Anselme went to Lyons, and stayed there till
the death, both of Pope Vrban, and also of the king: who in hunting (by chance) was wounded to death by an arrowe,The K. slaine. shot of a knight named Walter Tyrrell, and was buried at Westminster. Vrbanus ruled the Church of Rome xij. yeres, & excom∣municated the Emperor Henricus, who had bin also before excommunicate by Hild. & Victor, and after by Paschalis. After the time of this K. William,K. of Wales cease. the name of kings cea∣sed in the Countrey of Wales, among the Britaines, since King Rice, who in the raign of this K. an. 1093.  was slaine in Wales. Anno 1100. Henrie the first succéeded Rufus, for wante of issue, who was the 3. sonne of the Conqueror. Hee for his knowledge in liberall artes, was called Beauclarke.  Hée reformed the state of the Cleargie, & released the grieuous payments: and reduced againe K. Edwards lawes,K. Beauclarke. K. Edwards lawes resto∣red. with cor∣rection thereof. He reformed Country measures, and made a measure after the length of his owne arme, &c, Soone after he was K. he married Mawde, daughter of Malcolin king of Scots, and of Margaret his wife, daughter of Edward the Outlaw, being a professed Nunne in Win∣chester. Whom, notwithstanding, without dispensation of the Pope, he married, by the consent of Anselme. By which Mawd he had two sonnes, William, and Richard: and two daughters, Mawd, and Marie. About the third yeare of this kings reigne,Little S. Bar∣tholmewes founded by meanes of a minstrell. Priestes se∣questred from their wiues. the hospital of S. Bartholmew by Smithfield was founded, by meanes of a Minstrell belonging to the K. named Raier, and was after finished by Richard Whitting∣ton, Alderman, and Mayor of London. In his time, by meanes of Anselmus, Priestes were first in England sequestred from their wiues. Also it was de∣créed, that Monkes, and Priestes, should beare no rule ouer lay persons, &c. This king called home againe Anselme,Anselme restored. that was at the Councell of the king at Westminster, where the K. in the
presence of the Lords, as wel temporall, as spirituall, inue∣sted ij. bishops, Roger B. of Salisburie, and Roger B. of Herford. During which Councel, Anselmus in his Conuo∣cation, deposed diuers Abbots, and other Prelates. At this Councel, and the other before set forth by Ansel∣mus, Herbert, B. of Norwich had much trouble with the Priestes of his Dioces: for they would neither forsake their wiues,Priests would not forsake their wiues. nor leaue their Benefices. And requiring Anselmus councell therein, was willed by him to account them as re∣bels, and to perswade the people to driue them foorth of their Countrey, and to place monkes in their roomes. Like busi∣nes also had Gerard, Archb. of York: which (notwithstan∣ding his excommunications) he could hardly bring to passe. Anno 1103.  about the end of the iij. yere of the K. reigne, a debate fel betwéene Anselme and the K. for those Bishops whom the K. had consecrated: whom Anselmus disdayned, and otherwise behaued himselfe very insolently against the king.Anselm in∣solent against the king. And Messengers being sent to Paschalis the pope, for allowance of the kings inuesting, he would in no case yéelde to the same, but held himselfe fast in the steppes of Vrbane: in so much, that the Embassadors of the King, hauing said, that he would not lose the authoritie of inuesting Pre∣lates, for the crowne of his Realme: the P. answered, be∣fore God (with an oath) nor I, for the price of his head,For the price of his head. A proud P. will lose the geuing of spirituall promotions in England. Yet at that same time it was brought to passe, that cer∣tain customes in such matters were released vnto the king: and that the K. onely, who had inuested them, being excep∣ted, they that were inuested, should be excommunicated: the absolution, and satisfaction of whom should be lefte to Anselm. Thus Anselm was dismissed (whether he went to com∣plaine) from Rome: and in his returne, was charged by the Ambassador of the K. either to consent vnto him, or els to be∣ware how he presumed to enter into the land againe.
Wherevpon he remained at Lions a yéere and a halfe, writing diuerse letters vnto the king: and séeing no way to preuaile with him, he went about to reuenge himselfe by ex∣communication: wherof the king hearing, desired Anselmus to come vnto him into Normandie,The king re∣conciled to Anselme. where reconcilement was made, & Anselmus restored againe, yet deferred he his comming into England, because he would not communicate with those whom the king had inuested: and made his abode at the abbey of Beck. The king yet sent againe Embassa∣dors to Rome: where it was agreed, that he should take ho∣mage of the Bishops elect, but should not deale with inue∣sting them by staffe, and ring, &c. Now in the absence of Anselme, Priestes,Priestes pay mony for their wiues to the king. and Chanons tooke them to their wiues againe, paying a certaine mony to the king for the same: whereat Anselmus beyng very angrie, writeth to the king and rebuketh him for the same, and afterward méeting with him at the abbey of Becke,Anselme yeel∣ded to in all points. agreed vnto him in all pointes he desired. First, that all Churches which were made tri∣butary to the king before, should be made frée. Item, that he should require nothing of the said Chur∣ches, the seates beyng vacant. Item, that those married Priestes that had giuen mo∣ny to the king, should surcease from ecclesiasticall function thrée yéeres: and that the king should take no more after that manner: and that all the goods that had béene taken a∣way from the Archbishoprike should be restored at his re∣turne into England. Anno 1106.  The sixt yéere of the Kings raigne, An∣selme by the permission of the King, assembled a great coun∣cell at Westminster, of the prelates and Clergie: where (by the Popes authoritie) he so wrought with the king, that it was enacted, yt no temporal man after that day, should make inuesture with crosse, or with ring, or with pastorall hooke: besides many other decrées against priests mariages, & sodo∣mitry. But the decrée & curse against that was called backe
againe by the suite of certaine, who perswaded Anselmus that the opening of that vice did giue more occasion of com∣mitting the same, and so it was taken away: but the decrée against marriage remained still. Pope PaschalisPope Pas∣chalis. entered his papacie the same yéere that king Henry began his reigne, an. 1100.  and being brought into Laterane vpon a white palfray, a scepter was brought him,The Popes ornaments. and a girdle put about him, hauing seuen keies, with seuen seales hanging therevpon, in token of his seuenfold power,Popes seuen∣fold power. according to the seuenfold grace of the holy Ghost, of binding, loosing, shutting, opening, sealing, resigning, and iudging, &c. This Pope did depose all those Prelates that the Emperour set vp: also banished Albertus, Theo∣doricus, & Maginulphus (they striued the same time for the papacie) and made an army against Guybert whom the Emperour had made Pope: who being put to flight not long after died. About the same time Anno 1101.  the Bishop of Flo∣rence began to preach & to teach, Antichrist then to be borne and to be manifest,That Anti∣christ was borne. Married priests condē∣ned for Nico∣laitans. as Sabellicus testifieth: wherevpon Pas∣chalis assembling a councel, put to silence the said bishop, and condemned his bookes. In this Councell at Trecas, mar∣ried priests were condemned for Nicolaitans. This Paschalis renewed the excommunication of Hilde∣brand against the Emperour; and set vp his sonne, Empe∣rour against him, & caused the archbishop of Mentz, of Col∣len, and of Wormes, at Hilgeshen, to depriue the Empe∣rour:The Emp. de∣posed by the Pope. and to take from him all the ornaments of his Em∣pyre, wherevpon the Emperour beyng left desolate, he pro∣nounced, Let God see and iudge.Let God see and iudge. Thus they left him, and went, and confirmed his sonne, and caused him to driue out his Father, who then beyng chased of his owne sonne (ha∣uing but nine persons about him) did flie by the Dukedome of Lymbrough. Where the Duke beyng then a hunting, and hearing
of him, followed after him. The Emperour looking for no∣thing but present death, (for he had displaced the same Duke before out of his dukedome) submitted himselfe, and craued pardon: the Duke pitying his case, receiued him to fauour, and into his castle. And gathering together his men of war, brought him to Collen, where he was well receiued. His sonne hearing of this, besieged the citie, but the father by night escaping fled to Leodium where he assembled a pow∣er, and pitched a field: desiring his friends,The pope set∣teth the Empe∣rors sonne a∣gainst him. that if he got the victory, they would spare his sonne. In fine, the Father had the victory, and the sonne was put to flight: but shortly af∣ter, they renewed battel againe, and the sonne got the field, and the father taken: who being vtterly dispossessed of his kingdom, was brought to that state, that comming to Spire, he was faine to craue of the Bishop there (to whom he had done much good before) to haue a prebend in the Church:The Emperor craueth to be aprehend of a Church, but could not ob∣taine it. and for that he had some skil of his book, he desired to serue in our Ladies quire, yet hée could not obtain so much at his hands: who sware by our lady, he should haue none there. Thus he came to Leodiū, & there for sorow died, after yt he had raig∣ned 50. yéeres: whose body Paschalis after his funerall,  cau∣sed to be taken vp again, and to be brought to Shires,The Emp di∣eth for sorow. where it remained fiue yéeres, vnburied. After the decease of Henricus the 4,  his sonne Henricus the 5. raigned 20. yéeres, who comming to Rome to be crow∣ned of the Pope, could not obtaine it,No Emperour to haue to doe with the elect. of the Pope. The Emp. had been slaine at Rome. before it were by him fully ratified, that no Emperor should haue any thing to doe with the election of ye B of Rome, or with other bishopricks: and such a stirre there was at Rome, that the Emperor, if he had not defended himselfe with his owne handes, he had béene slayne: yet gotte hée the victorie, and tooke the Pope, and leadeth him out of the Citie: where he inden∣teth with him vppon diuers conditions,The pope faine to agree to the Emperour. both of his coronati∣on, and recouering againe his title in election of the Pope, and other Bishops. Wherevnto the Pope assented and a∣gréed
to all: so the Emperour being crowned of Paschalis, returned againe to Rome. The pope brea∣keth couenant.But so soone as the Emperour was returned into Ger∣many, ye Pope forthwith calling a synod, reuoked al that hée had granted to before, & excomunicated Henricus the Em∣perour: whereof he hearing, being in France, and there ha∣uing married Mathild, daughter to K. Henry, returned with a power, and putteth the pope to flight, and placeth another in his stéede.The Germans rebell. In the which time, the States of Germany rebelled, in so much that it grew to a foughten field, ann. 1115.  Wherfore, the Emp. séeing no end of troubles, was faine in the end to giue ouer all his right in Churchmatters. The Emp. gi∣ueth ouer to the Pope.In the time of this Paschalis, liued Bernardus, called Ab∣bas Clarauallensis, ann. 1118.  of whom sprang the Bernar∣dine monkes.Bernardine monkes. After the death of Paschalis, succéeded Gelasius,Gelasius chosen by the Cardinall? without the consent of the Emperour: wher∣vpon grew great great variance in Rome: and at length an∣other pope was set vp by the Emperor, called Gregorie the 8:Gregorie 8. and Gelasius driuen away into Fraunce, and there died. After whom came CalixtusCalixtus. the 2, chosen by a fewe Cardi∣nals, without the consent of the Emperour: who comming vp to Rome to inioy his seat, first did excommunicat the Em∣perour: Hee then hauing diuers conflicts with his fellow, pope Gregorius, at length draue him out of Rome. At which time, by this occasion, great cōtrouersie was betwixt the em∣perors, & the popes court, for the preeminence: but in cōclu∣sion,The Emp. fain to yeeld. the Emp. was faine to condiscend to the vnreasonable conditions of the pope: first to ratifie his election, notwith∣standing the other pope was aliue, whom the Emperour set vp: and that in matters of the popes election, and inuesture of the Bishops, hee should resigne his right. Which being graunted,A shamefull v∣sage of a pope. the Pope maketh out after his fellow pope, and taketh him at Sutrium, and set him vppon a Camell, his face towardes the Camels tayle, and the tayle held in his
hand in stéede of a bridle, and so brought him to Rome tho∣rough the stréetes, and afterward hauing shorne him, thrust him into a monastery. This Pope did first establish the papall decrées against the Emperour: he brought in the foure quarter fastes, cal∣called Imber daies,Imber daies. and brought in the order of monks, cal∣led Premonstratensis,Premonstra∣tensis. & also was hot against priests wiues. After the death of Anselme, who deceased An. 1109.  Af∣ter he had béene in the sea. 16. yéeres; the church of Canterbu∣rie stood void 5. yéeres:Canterbury 5. yeeres void to the kings vse. and the goods of the church was spent to the kings vse, the king pretending to take deliberation to choose one answerable to those that went before. The same yéere, after his death,Ely made a bi∣shopricke. the king conuerted the abbey of Ely, to a bishoprick, which was before vnder the bi∣shopricke of Lincolne: placing there, Henrie, B. of Bangor, the first Bishop of that sea. Ann. 1115.  Rodolphus, B. of Rochester, an English mā, was promoted to be Archb. of Canterbury, and Thurstinus the kings Chaplaine, was elected Archb. of Yorke: who, be∣cause he refused to professe obedience to the same Sea, was depriued by the king: and therevpon went to complaine to Pope Paschalis, who wrote, that he would haue the order of Gregorie stand therein. But Thurstine stood stiffely in the matter, & renounced his Archbishoprick, promising he wold neuer, either make claime to it, or molest those that should enioy it. Now afterward, when Calixtus had called a Coū∣cell at Rheims, in Fraunce, Thurstine wrought so, that hée was in that Councell consecrated, and had his pal, notwith∣standing the Pope had promised the king faithfully to the contrarie. For which deede, the K. was sore discontented wt Thurstine, and warned him the entrie of his land. In the Councel of Rheims, were gathered 434. Prelates,A Councel of 434. Prelates. The pointes there concluded, were, for establishing their owne authoritie, in dispensing of Ecclesiasticall Offices, & in pro∣hibiting Priestes marriages, and sequestring thē from their
wiues. Which articles were sent to ye Emperor, to trie his mind before the Councell should breake vp: who was con∣tented with all, sauing that he could not away to haue the inuesting of ecclesiasticall function taken from him:The Pope ex∣cōmunicateth the Emperor. where∣vpon the pope procéedeth against him to excommunication. It was not long after, but the Pope came to Gisortium, where Henry king of England resorted to him, desiring that he would send no more Legates into the land, except he himselfe desired, because they spoiled the realme of great treasures:The king of England sueth to the Pope. and also that he would graunt him to vse all the customes vsed before of his auncestors in England, and in Normandie. To these petitions the Pope graunted, and re∣quired againe of the king, that he would license Thurstin the Archbishop aboue mentioned, to returne with fauour in∣to the land: but the king vtterly denied that, except he would submit to Canterbury.Submit to Canterbury. Anno 1120  the yéere following, Pope Calixtus directeth his letters to the king for Thurstinus, and to Rodulph Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, in which he doth interdict the Chur∣ches of Canterbury, and Yorke, and threatneth the King with excommunication, except within a moneth after the the same Thurstine were receyued into the Sea of Yorke.The Pope Thurstine. Wherevppon Thurstine (for feare) was imme∣diately sent for, and receaued: and was placed in the Sea. Anno 1122.  Within two yeares after, Rodolfe Arch∣bishoppe of Canterburie died, whom Gulielmus de Turbin succéeded. About which time, in the xxvij. yere of the kings reigne, the Gray friers,The Graye friers. by procurement of the king, came first into Englande: and had their house first at Canterburie. Anno 1125. the king called a Councell at London, where the spi∣ritualtie of England (not knowing whereabout it was re∣quired) graunted the king to haue the punishment of maried Priestes.The Priests pay to the K. for their wiues. Whereupon the Priestes (paying to the K. a cer∣tain summe) were suffered to retaine their wiues stil, to the
great gaine of the king. This king Henrie buylded the Abbey of Reading, for ioy of Saint Iames hand, which his daughter Mawde (who had maried with the Emperor Henrie the fift) brought vnto him after the decease of her husband. She was after maried to Geffrey Plantagenet, Earle of Aniou: of whome came Henrie the second. About this time was founded the Priorie of Norton, in the Prouince of Chester, by one William, the sonne of Ni∣chelle. This K. an. 1131.Danegelt re∣leased by the king.  released vnto the land the Dane¦gelt, which his father and brother renued. Hee erected also a new Bishoprick at Carlill. After Calixtus succéeded Honorius 2. Notwithstanding that the Cardinals had elected another,Honorius B yet he (by yt meanes of certaine Citizens) obteyned it. An. 1125.  Vnto this time liued Henricus v. after that hee had reigned xx yeres, & died out issue. Next after Henricus, the Empire fell to Lotharius, D of Saxon, an. 1127.  In the time of P. Honorius 2. there was one ArnulphusArnulphus. (some say) Archbishop of Lugdune. (Trithe∣mi{us} saith, he was a Priest) that for sharpe rebuking of the Cleargie of Rome, was layde waite for, and priuily drow∣ned. He preached very boldly against their abuses. Sabelli∣cus, and Platina say, they hanged him. About the time of this Arnulphus (if it were not his own worke) there was writ∣ten a booke, called Opus tripartitum,Opus tripar∣titum. that cōplayneth of ma∣ny abuses and enormities of the Church: as first,Abuses of the church prea∣ched against. of ye num∣ber of holy dayes: also, of curious singing in the Church: of the multitude of begging Friers, and professed womē: with diuers other points of abuse. About the yere of our Lord 1128.  Knights of the Rhodes and Templars. the order of Knights of the Rhodes (called Ioannites) and the order of Templars, rose vp. After HonoriusHonorius. succéeded Innocentius the second,  in the yere of our Lord, one thousande, one hundred, and thirtie.
but after hee was chosen, the Romanes elected Anacletus, Betwixt which Popes great strife and contention rose,Contention betwixt the popes. till Lotharius the Emperor began to assist, and take part with Innocentius. This P. decréed, that whosoeuer did strike a PriestStrike a Priest sha∣uen, should be excommunicate, and not be absolued, but only of the pope himselfe. An. 1135.  King H. dieth in Normandie, after that he had reigned in England, thirtie fiue yeares and odde monethes, leauing for his heires, Matilde the Empresse, his daughter, with her young sonne Henrie, to succéede. But the Prelates and Nobilitie (contrarie to their oath) made Steuen, Earle of Boloign, king: sisters sonne to Henrie. Hee entered his reigne, an, 1136. But the empresse, about the 6. yere of his reign, came in∣to England, and tooke him, & sent him to Bristow to be kept prisoner. Whēce he escaped out, and pursued the empresse, & her parte, and caused her to flie the Realme, the sixt yere of his reigne. But after that, Henrie, Duke of Normandie, inuaded in the quarrell of his Mother: and so preuayled, that Steeuen was contented to holde the kingdome but for his life time, and that Henrie in the meane time, should be proclaymed Heire apparant. The same yere, about Octo∣ber, Steeuen ended his life, after he had reigned xix. yeres, periuredly. As Theobald succéeded after William, Archb. of Cant. so in York; after Thurstane, followed William, who was cal∣led S. William of York. Hée was poysoned in his chalis,Archb. poyso∣ned in his chalice. by his Chaplains. In the xvi. yere of the reigne of this king, Theobaldus Archbishoppe of Canterburie, and Legate to the Pope, held a Councell at London, wherein was concluded appellati∣ons from Councels to the Pope, found out by Henry, Bi∣shop of Winchester. In the time of King Steeuen, died Gracianus, a Monke
of Bononia, who compiled the booke called, The Popes de∣crées, also his brother Petrus LombardusPetrus Lom∣bardus. Bishop of Paris, Maister of Sentences, wrote his foure bookes of Senten∣ces. These two were the greatest doers, in finding out that the similitude onely of bread and wine remained in the sa∣cramentes. Some write that Petrus ComestorPetrus Co∣mestor. the writer of the Scholasticall history, was the third brother. In this time also liued Hildegard the Nunne and prophetisseHildegard the nunne and pro∣phetisse. in Al∣maigne. By this K. was builded the abbey of Feuersham, where his sonne and he were buried. He builded the monasterie of Finerneys and of Fomitance. Much about the same time, came vp the order of the Gil∣bertines,Gilbertines. by one Gilbert, sonne to Iacoline, a knight of Lin∣colnshire. Theobald,Priests no ru∣lers in worldly matters. ye Archb. of Canterb. among other matters de∣créed, yt priests should not be rulers of worldly matters: and that they should teach the Lords praier, & Créed, in english. Mattheus Parisiensis, writeth, how Stephen K. of England, reserued to himselfe, the bestowing of spiritual liuings, and inuesting of prelats, ann. 1133.  At which time also Lothari∣us the Emperour began to doe the like, had not Bernardus giuen him contrary councel. Then came into ye Church, the manner of cursing with booke, bell, and candle,Booke bel, and candle. deuised in the Councell at London, holden by William, B. of Winchester, vnder P. Celestinus, who succéeded after Innocentius, an. 1142.  Also, Lotharius who succéeded after Innocentius, an. 1142. Also, Lotharius succéeded in the Empire, Conradus, the nenew of Henricus 5. an. 1138. Who onely (among the Emperors) is founde not to haue receaued the Crowne at the popes hand. In the dayes of this Emperour, who reigned fiftéene yeares, were diuers Popes: as, Celestinus, 2. Lucius, 2. Eu∣genius, 3. Betwixt P. LuciusLucius. and the Romanes was great strife: for, the Romanes would haue recouered their auncient
libertie in choosing their consuls: and Pope Lucius in the fight was well beaten, and liued not long after. Pope EugeniusEugenius. after, him followed the same course, An. 1145.  and compelled them to abolish their consuls, and to take such Senators as he should assigne. Then followed AnastasiusAnastasius. the 4. And after him Adrianus the 4. an English∣man,Adrianus pope an Englishmā. by his name called Breake speare, belonging once to S. Albons. He likewise kept great stur, & preuailed against the Romanes for the former causes, and thundered against Fredericus the Emperour. Hildegardis a Nunne, and as many iudged (euen the pa∣pistes themselues) a Prophetisse, liued, anno 1146.  and prophecied against the whole rowte of Romish prelats, and of the fal of that Church, especially against ye senior Friers, and such other bellies of the same. In a certain place she hath these wordes: And now is the law neglected among the spi∣rituall people,Hildegard prophecieth a∣gainst ye king∣dome of the Pope. which neglect to teach, and to doe good things. The maister likewise, and the Prelates doe sleepe, despising iustice, and laying it aside, &c. And in another place: Then shall the crowne of Apostolicall honour be deuided, because there shalbe no religion among the Apostolicall order: and for that cause shall they despise the dignitie of that name: & shall set ouer them other men, and other Archbishops. In so much, that the Apostolike sea of that time, by the diminuti∣on of his honor, shall haue scarce Rome, and a fewe other Countreyes thereabout, vnder his dominion. And these things shall come to passe, partly by incursiō of warres, and partly by a common Councell,Iustice flou∣rish when the Pope is ouer∣throwen. and consent of the Spirituall and Secular persons. Then shall Iustice flourish: so that in those dayes, men shall honestly applie themselues to the an∣cient customes, and discipline of auncient men, and shal ob∣serue them as men in times past haue done, &c. Shee prophecied also of the Friers. In those dayes shall rise a senselesse people, proud; gréedie; without faith; and sub∣till: which shall eate the sinnes of ye people, holding a certain
order of foolish deuotion, vnder the fained cloke of begge∣ry, &c. But this order shall be accursed of all wise men and faithfull Christians: they shall cease from all labour and giue themselues ouer to idlenesse, choosing rather to liue by flattery and begging, hauing familiaritie with women, teaching them how to deceiue their husbandes, by their flat∣tery and deceitfull wordes, and to robbe for them: for they will take all these stolen euill gotten goods, and say, giue it vnto vs, & we will pray for you: so that they beyng curious to hide other mens faults, do vtterly forget their owne. And alas they will receiue all things of rouers, pickers, spoilers, théeues, sacrilegious persons, vsurers, adulterers, heretikes, schismatikes, apostataes, whores, and bawdes, of noblemen periurers, merchants, false iudges, souldiers, tyrants, prin∣ces, of such as liue contrary to the law, and of many per∣uerse and wicked men, following the perswasion of the Di∣uell, the swéetnesse of sinne, a delicate and transitorie life, and fulnes, euen vnto eternall damnation, &c. Henry the 2. sonne of Ieffrey Plantagenet, and of Mawd the Empresse, and daughter of king Henry the first, raigned after Stephen, and continued 35. yéeres. Within a yéere or twaine after the entry of his raigne, he made Thomas BecketThomas Becket. Lord Chauncellor of England. About the yéere of our Lord, 1158.  Gerhardus, and Dulcinus Nauarrensis, did earnestly preach agaynst the Church of Rome; mainteyning,Gerhardus a∣gainst ye church of Rome. that prayer is not more ho∣lie in one place then in another: that the Pope is Anti∣christ:Pope Anti∣christ. that the Clergie, and Prelates of Rome were reiect, and the very whore of BabilonWhore of Ba∣bilon. prefigured in the Apoca∣lips, &c. These two Anno one thousand, one hundred, and fiftie eight, brought with them thirtie into England; who by the king and prelates were burned in the forehead, and so sent out of the realme. And after, as Illyricus writeth, were put to death by the Pope.Put to death by the Pope. The Emperour Fredericus successor to Conradus, mar∣ched
vp to Italy, to subdue there certaine rebels. The Pope hearing thereof, came to méet him with his Cardinals, at Sutrium: the Emperour seing the Bishop, alighted of his horse to receyue him,The Emp. hol∣deth the popes stirrop on the wrong side. holding the stirrop on the left side: whereat the Pope shewed himselfe somewhat agréeued, but the next day with holding the right stirrop hée made him amends: and when they were come together, Hadrian would not crowne him (for the Popes at that time had brought the Emperours to that passe) except hée would of his owne charges, helpe to the recouery of Apulia, out of the handes of the Duke William: whereto the Emperour a∣gréed, and so the next day was crowned. In the meane time the Pope excommunicateth the Duke, and incenseth Immanuell the Emperour of Con∣stantinople against him: but the Duke putteth Immanuell to flight, and placed his siege agaynst Bonauenture (where the Pope with his Cardinals were looking for victory) and forced the Pope to entreat for peace: which hée graunted on condition, that hée should make him King of both Sycils. The Pope returning to Rome, and there finding that hée could not preuaile against the consuls of Rome, remooued to Arciminum. In this meane time, the Emperour requireth homage of the Bishops of Germanie,Popes Legats forbidden in Germanie. forbidding the Popes Legates to be receiued in Germanie, except hée sent for them. Be∣sides hée prefixed his owne name in his letters before the Popes name, wherevpon passed letters of displeasure be∣twixt them: and Hadrianus not content with the Empe∣rours answere, directeth a bull of excommunication, and stirreth vp William duke of Apulia, and the clergie against him. The Emperour purgeth himselfe, by letters sent tho∣rough his Empire, very pithie, and sharpe. The Pope on the other side accuseth the Emperour to the bishops of Ger∣manie,The Germans excuse the Emperour. and incenseth them against him: but they would not so far yéeld vnto the Pope, but excused the Emperour.
This Pope, onely continued foure yéeres,The Pope cho∣ked with a flie. and odde mo∣neths: and walking with his Cardinals to a place called A∣nagnuia, or Arignam,  he was choked with a flie that got in∣to his throat. About this time, rose vp the order of the HermitesThe order of the Hermites. by one William, once Duke of Aquitania, and afterward a Frier. After Hadrian, succéeded Alexander 3:Alexander 3. Pope. and at the same time the emperor, with 9. Cardinals, set vp Victor 4. so that there fell much debate about the matter, til at the last, Alex∣ander, by the help of Philip the French king, obtained ye sea, against whom, the Emperor made his power: and comming to Rome, forced the Pope to saile to Venice: whither he sent Otho his sonne after. Who attempting rashly against his fathers commandement, was ouercome, and taken. Wher∣vpon the Emperour (to redéeme his sonne) was faine to séek peace: and comming to Venice at S. Markes Church,The Emperor faine to seeke peace with the Pope. The Pope sets his feete vpon the Emperors necke. where he should take his absolution, he was bid to knéele at ye popes féet: and the pope setting his féet vpon the Emperors necke, pronounced the verse of the Psalme: Thou shalt walke vp∣pon the Adder and the Basilisk: and shalt tread downe the Lion, and the Dragon. To whom the Emperor answered: not to thée, but to Peter. The pope againe both to me, & to Pe∣ter. In fine, the Emperour was absolued, on condition, hée would receiue Alexander for true Pope: and restore againe to the Church all that he had taken away. This Pope (who raigned 27. yéers) kept sundry councels,Against marri∣age of priestd. both at Turo, and at Lateran: wherein he concluded against marriage of priests At this time, liued Thomas Becket: whose first prefer∣ment was to the Church of Branfield, which he had by the gift of Saint Albons. After that he entred into the seruice of the Archbishoppe of Canterburie, and was put of Theobald the Archbishop to king Henrie, to bridle the yong king, that he should not be too fierce against the Cleargie: of whom hée was made Lord Chauncellour, and afterward in the 44.
yéere of his age, was made priest, and the next day made bi∣shop: afterward there fell great variance betwixt the king and him for ouerlightly punishing the Clearkes that offen∣ded his lawes:Variance be∣twixt the King and Becket. and standing with the king therein. Besides, he resisted diuers ancient lawes of the land, and would not submit himselfe or his Cleargie therevnto: moreouer, there were other lawes also made at Claredoune,Executed for a Traitor that brought curse from Rome. in Normandy, whereto Becket would giue no allowance: as if any person should be found to bring from the Pope, or from the Archb. of Canterbury, anie writing, containing a curse or indict of the land,Peterpence denied. he should bée executed for a traytour, &c. That Peterpence should no more be paide. yet at the length hée answered, he would agrée to the Kinges ordinances saluo or∣dine suo.Saluo ordine suo. Which clause, the king greatly misliked: but not∣withstanding great intreate by the Bishoppe of Norwich, and Salisbury, and the teares of two of the chiefe of the Templars, called Richard de Hast, and Constans de He∣nerio, hée would not relent, til the king signified by expresse message,Becket relen∣teth to the K. that hée should look what to trust to, if he yelded not at his request: so at length hee relented. And the king cal∣led a Councell of States, where he requiring the Archb. to set to his seale to instruments drawn, cōcerning the matter, but he refused so to do, til farther deliberation, which also the king was contented with: & yet after Thomas repented him of that he had done, by the motion of his crossebearer, who put him in mind how preiudicial it was to the Church, that he had yéelded vnto. Wherevpon he required absolution of the Pope for his fact, who graunted the same, and gaue him courage to bee constant in his quarrell begun,Becket stout to the king. and therevp∣pon he waxed stoute, and would haue departed the lande, to flee to the sea of Rome: but hee was staied. The quarell ceassed not, for Becket being Legatus a latere, greatly staied the kings purposes. Wherevpon the king sent to the Pope, requiring that the same authority might be bestowed vppon some other after his appointment: which was the Archb. of
York, but the P. would not: notwithstanding, at the request of the Kinges Clergie, he was content yt the K. should be Le¦gate himselfe: whereat hee tooke great indignation:The K. Toulde be the Popes Legate. which moued the Pope (at the length) to yelde to the request of the bestowing of the Legacie vpon the Archbishop of Yorke: yet so, that he would Thomas should take no harme thereby. The king hauing this, straight began with the Inferiors of the Church, that had broken his lawes: as Felons;Robbers, fe∣lons murthe∣rers, among the Clergie. Rob∣bers; Quarrellers; Breakers of the peace; and Murtherers: whereof, more then an hundred, were prooued at that time vpon the Cleargie. This, Thomas could not abide, as derogating from the li∣bertie of holy Church. The king on the contrarie part, was greatly incensed, and caused him to be cited to appeare on a certaine day, at the Town of Northhampton: where Tho- appeared not, but sente another. This the king tooke in great displeasure, and laid diuers actions against him, of re∣conings, &c. The other Bishops endeuoured to perswade Thomas, to consider what he did, and not to stande so stiflie against the king: others encouraged him: and at last they agréed with common consent, to cite him vp to Rome vpon periurie, and appointed him his daye of appearance. Which when the Archbishop heard, he also sent to Rome: to whom the Pope directeth againe his letters of comfort, that made Becket still to hold himselfe stout against the King, who was so in∣censed against him, that if he had not fledde the Court, he had béene laid in prison,Becket flieth, and turneth his name to Derman. for not answering to certaine accompts the king had to charge him withall. But he sped him away, changing his name, and calling himselfe Derman: and ta∣king shippe at Sandwich, fled into Flanders, & from thence to Ludouicus the French king: who (notwithstanding Let∣ters, and request to the contrarie) gaue him entertainment, and wrote to the Pope in his behalfe: and (although the K. had sent vnto him Ambassadors, Robert, Archbishoppe of
Yorke, with other Bishoppes, and Nobles, requiring him to deale otherwise,) thorow the French Kings letters, did wholy encline to Becket. But, forasmuch as he could not be placed as yet in England, the Pope sendeth him in a monks habite to the Abbey of Pontiniake, in Fraunce: where hée remayned two yeares. And from thence he remoued to Se∣non,B. in exile seuen yeres. where he abode fiue yeres. So his exile continued in all, seuen yeres. Now the king vnderstanding of the Popes fauor toward Becket, sayling out of England into Normandie, directeth ouer certaine Iniunctions against the Pope, and the Archbi∣shop of Canterburie. Besides, an. 1166.  it was set foorth by the kings Proclamation, that all manner of persons, both men & women of Beckets kinred,Beckets kinred banished. should be banished: with∣out carrying away any penyworth of their goods. Hee sent also to Guarrin, the Abbot of Pontiniakes, threatning him, that if he would not put away Tho. hee would driue out of his Realme, all the Monkes of his order. Whereupon, Becket was faine to depart to Lewes the French king, who placed him at Senon, and there found him the space of fiue yeares. In which time of his absence, he wrought all hee might against the king, and those that he knew did not fauour him: & diuers letters passed to, and from Becket, to the Pope, & the king: very seditious, & rebellious. Frō which dealing, a very pithie letter, written by the Suffraganes of ye Church of Canterburie, could nothing perswade him, but prouoked him, very sharply to replie against them. He reiected also, the letters of the Empresse, that endeuored to perswade him. After these letters sent to and fro, anno 1169.  the King fearing least the Archbishoppe should procéede against his owne person by excommunication) made his appeale to the Pope:The K. feareth Becket. whereupon, he sent two Cardinals, Guilielmus, and Otho, o take vp the matter, at Grisorsium in Fraunce: but it came to no conclusion. Where, William requiring Becket
(for the peace of the Church which hée pretended) to resigne his Bishoprike, so that the King would giue ouer his cu∣stomes: answered that the proportion was not like, saying: that hée (sauing the honour of his Church and person could not so doo) but the king,Because the Pope had cō∣demned them. it stood on his soules health to re∣nounce those ordinances and customes, because the Pope had condemned them. After the Cardinals were returned, the French king also thought to haue preuayled with Thomas, and laboured to perswade him, but could not. Thomas alwaies adding his obedience, Saluo honore Dei, very captiously, that he might thereby make escape if néede were, wherewith the King was greatly displeased. After this there fell other displeasure betwixt them. An∣no 1170.  And the sixtéenth yere of the Kings raigne, at which time hée kept his Parlement at Westminster, hée caused his sonne Henry to be crowned King, with consent of Lordes Spirituall and Temporall: which Coronation was doone by the handes of Robert Archbishop of Yorke, with assistance of other Bishopses: whereat Becket tooke great displeasure, because hée was not called for, and com∣playned thereof to the Pope: at whose instaunce the Pope sent downe sentence of excommunication against the Arch∣bishop, and London, Salisbury, Duresme, and Rochester, that were doers with him in the Coronation: and sendeth also two Legates, the Archb. of Rhothomage, and the Archb. of Nauerne with full commission, either to driue the King to reconciliation, or to interdict him, by the Popes censure out of the Church: wherevpon the king at last (through the mediation of the French king, and diuerse prelates, & great Princes) was content to yéeld to reconciliation, but would not graunt him his possessions, and landes of his church, be∣fore he repaired into England,The king yeel∣deth to Becket. and should shew how peace∣ably he would agrée with the kings subiects. This peace being thus cōcluded. Thomas after 6. yéers of
his banishment returned, and was commanded of the yoong king to kéepe his house. The Bishops before excommuni∣cated, required absolution of him, but hée would not graunt therevnto simply without cauteles: so they cōplained to the king, who tooke it heauenly, & lamented oft & sundry times, that none would reuenge him of his enemy: which certaine to ye number of 4. hearing, prepared themselues, & came into England out of Normandie, about Christmasse time, & re∣paired to Thomas, & commanded him in the kings name to come to the yoong K. & to doo his duty to him, & to restore the bishops whom he had excōmunicated, for ye kings coronatiō: which Thomas would not grant vnto, touching ye absolutiō, referring it to the pope who had excōmunicated thē. In the end so disorderly Thomas behaued himselfe, that they said he had spoken against his owne head, and rushed out of the dores, cōmaunding the monks to kéepe him forth comming. What quoth Thomas, thinke you I will fly away? nay nei∣ther for the K. nor for any man, will I stir one foote frō you: and so cried after them,Foure armed men kill Tho∣mas Becket. here, here shall you find me, laying his hand vpon his crowne. The 4. whose names were Rey∣nold Bereson, Hugh Morteuill, Wil. Thracy, & Richard Bri∣to, went to harnesse themselues, & returned the same day, & slue Becket, méeting him about euēsong time with his crosse in his hand, euery one striking him with his sword into the head: they after fled into the North, & at length with much adoo,The murthe∣rers do penāce. hauing obtained their pardon of the pope, went to Ie∣rusalem in linnen clothes, barefoote, fasting, and praying, whereof in few yéeres after, they died. Anno 1220.  There was a question as saith Cesarius the monke, at Paris, whe∣ther Becket were saued or damned. Roger a Normand holding against him:Whether Bec∣ket were saued or damned. and Peter Cantor a Parisian, for him, grounding himselfe vpon myracles, which hée was repor∣ted to haue doone after his death,270. myracles done by Bec∣ket. and his quarrell for the Churches sake: his miracles are reported to haue béene 270. Of this Thomas the papistes sing this blasphemous
Antheme, or Collect in English thus:A blasphemous Antheme. For the blood of Tho∣mas, which he for thée did spend, Graunt vs Christ to climbe where Thomas did ascend. But as it appeareth by the testimony of Robert Crick∣ladensis, the Péeres and nobles of this land, néere about the king, gaue out in straight charge, vpon paine of death,None shoulde hold Becket a martyr or preach his mi∣racle. The kings pe∣nance. & con∣fiscation of all their goods, that no man should be so hardy, as to name Thomas a martir, or to preach of his miracles The king for this fact, was vpon his oath inioyned this penance: First, that he should send so much to the holy land, as should find 200. knights, for the defence of the land: also, that from Christmas day next following, he should in his owne person fight for the holy land (except he were otherwise dispensed with) 3. yéeres. Also, that he should fight against the Sara∣cens in Spaine. Item, that he should not hinder any appel∣lations made to the Pope of Rome. Also, that neither he nor his sonne, should euer depart from the pope & his successors. Itē, yt the possessions of the church of Canterbury, should bée fully restored, & that the outlawes for Beckets cause, should be restored, Also, that his decrées stablished against ye church, should be void: besides other fastings and alms, &c. It is mē∣tioned also in stories of the said king, that returning out of Normandy into England, he came first to Canterbury, and so soon as he had séene Beckets Church, lighting of his horse, & putting off his shoes, he went barefoote to his tombe:Sharpe penāce whose steps were found bloody through the roughnes of the stones: and not onely that, but also receiued farther penance of eue∣ry monke in the cloyster, certaine discipline of a rodde, Ann. 1174.  In which yere, the minster of Canterbury was clean burnt, and almost all the citie.Canterbury burnt. The yéere 1175  was in the Conuocation at Westmin∣ster the contention renewed about the obedience of York to Cant. Also about Lincolne, Chichester, Worcester, & Here∣ford, whether those churches were vnder the sea of York,Contention betwixt Yorke, and Canterb. or not. About those matters grew such contention betwixt the
seas. that appeale was made to the sea of Rome, on the one partie, and a Cardinall was sent downe to make peace be∣twixt them for 5. yeres, til they should haue full determina∣tion of their cause: and that the Archb. should abstaine from the claime to the church of S. Oswald at Glocester, and mo∣lest the sea of Yorke no more therein. In the yéere 1176.  Richard, Archb. of Canterbury, made 3. archdeacons in his dioces, where there was wont to bée but one. About which time also, it was graunted by the king to the popes legate, that a Clearke shold not be called before a temporall iudge, except for offence in the forrest, or for his lay fée which he holdeth. Item, that no Archb. or Bishoprick should remaine in the kings hands,No bishoprick remain longer then one yeere in the K. hand. aboue one yéere, without great cause. The same yéere, there was one at Canterbury, to be elect abbot in the house of S. Austen, named Albert: who required the Archbishop to cōsecrate him in his owne Church: which the Archb. refused, requiring him to come to him rather. The matter grew hot betwixt thē, so that appellation was made to Alexander the pope, who through pence tooke the Abbots part, and inioyned the Archb. to satisfie Alberts request: who picked out a time, when the Abbot was about his houshold affaires, absent from home, & not finding him, departed, pre∣tēding the fault of ye abbot, in great disdain. So the abbot dis∣appointed, filled his purse, and went to Rome, and had his consecration of the Pope himselfe.Contention a∣gaine betwixt the Archbi∣shops. This yéere began again the contention betwixt the Archbishops, for superiority, at a councel at Westminster, where Yorke took the right hand of the Cardinal, the popes legate: where about grew such a cō∣tention, that words begate blowes, and the Archb. of Can∣terburies part pulled York from his seat to the ground: and al to teare his casule, chimer, and Rochet from his backe; and put the legate in such feare,From wordes to blowes. that he ranne away. The next day after, Yorke appealeth to Rome. This king, though his dominions were greater then e∣uer
before him, yet neuer put taske on his subiects, nor vpon the spiritualtie any first fruits, or appropriations of benefi∣ces, & yet his treasure after his death amounted to 900000.No taske, nor first fruites. pounds, besides Iewels and furniture. Anno 1181.  The archbishop died, and his goods came to the king, which extended to 11000. pounds, beside plate. This king died, after he had liued with estimatiō of great valure and wisedome in the gouernment 35. yéeres.The king died. Pope Alexander sat 21. yéeres, or as Grisburgensis wri∣teth 23. yéeres, This pope among many other his acts, had certaine Councels, some in France, and some at Rome in Laterane: by whom it was decréed that no Archb. should re∣ceiue his pall, except he should first sweare. The forme of the words wherby the pope is wont to giue his pal, are these: To the honor of almighty God,The forme of words in gi∣uing the pall. & of blessed Mary the virgin, and of blessed S. Peter and Paul, and of our Lord, pope N. and of the holy church of Rome, and also of the Church of N. committed to our charge, we giue to you ye pall taken from from the body of S. Peter, as a fulnes of the of∣fice pontificiall, which you may weare within your owne church vpon certaine daies, that bee expressed in ye priuile∣ges of the same church granted by the sea Apostolike. The pope might weare the pall at all times,Order of the pall. and in all places at his pleasure. It must be asked within 3. moneths: without the which, any might be displaced. Also, it must be buryed with him to whom it belonged. The bishops make this oath to the Pope. I M, B. of N. from this houre hencefoorth, will be faithfull,The B. oath to the Pope. and obedient to blessed S. Peter, & to the holy apostolike church of Rome: and to my Lord N. the Pope. I shall be in no Councell, nor helpe, either with any consent, or déede, where by either of them, or any of them, may be empaired: or whereby they may be taken with any euill taking. The Councell which they shal commit to me, either by themselues, messengers, or by letters, wittingly, or willingly, I shall vtter to none: to
their hinderance, and damage. To the mainteining of the papacy of Rome, and the regalities of S. Peter, I shall be an ayder (so mine order be saued) against all persons. The Le∣gate of the apostolike sea, both in going, and comming, I shall honorably intreat, and helpe him in all necessities. Be∣ing called to a Synode, I shall be ready to come: vnlesse I be let by some Canonicall empeachment. The palace of the Apostles euery third yéere I shall visit: eyther by my selfe, or by my messenger: except otherwise I be licensed by the sea apostolike. All such possessions as belong to the Dioces of my Bishoprike, I shall neither sell, nor giue, nor lay to morgage, or lease out, or remooue away, by any manner of meanes (without the consent and knowledge of the Bi∣shoppe of Rome) so God helpe mée, and the holy Gospell of God. Also among other decrées, in a Councel at Rome of 300. Bishoppes, Chastitie was obtruded vpon Priestes, and Thomas Beckette: and Bernarde were canonized for Saintes.T. Becket, and Bernard, cano∣nized for Saints. Anno 1184.  The French king came on Pilgrimage to Becket, the K. of England méeting him by the way. After the death of Richard, Archbishoppe of Canterbu∣rie, who followed after Becket, succéeded Baldwinus,Baldwinus. a Ci∣stercian Monke. Anno 1178.  In the Citie of Tholouse, was a great mul∣titude of men, and women, whome the Popes Commissio∣ners did condemn for heretikes: of whom, some were scour∣ged naked, some chased away, and other some compelled to abiure. They held against the reall presence. In the time of this Alexander the Pope, sproong vp the doctrine, and name of them, which were called then, Paupe∣res de Lugduno,Pauperes de Lugduno. which of one Waldus, a chiefe Senator in Lions, were named Waldenses.Waldenses. They were also called Le∣onisti, & Insabbattati About the yere 1119. or, according to Laziardus, 1170.  About this time, or not long before, rose
vp Franciscus,Franciscus. and Dominicus,Dominicus. mainteners of blinde hy∣pocrisie. The originall of Waldenses came vpon this occasion:  a∣bout the yere 1160. it fell out as the chiefe heads of the citie of Lions were walking, and talking according to their ma∣ner, of diuers affaires, one among them fell downe dead: wherat WaldusWaldus. being present was so terrified, that he was stroken with repentance, and indeuour to refourme his life: insomuch that, first he began to minister large almes of his goods to such as needed. Secondly, to instruct himselfe, and his familie, with the true knowledge of Gods word. Thirdly, to admonish all them, which resorted vnto him vpon any occasion, to repentance, and vertuous amendment of life: whereby he drew much people vnto him: to whome he gaue certaine rudiments, translated out of the scripture, into the French tongue. The Prelates threatned him with excommunication, whereat hee was nothing abashed; but persisted constant, vntill with sworde, imprisonment, and banishment, they draue Waldus, with all his fauourers, out of the Citie: who therefore, were called Pauperes de Lug∣duno, because they were driuen from their Countrey, and dispossessed of their goods. Their articles were these. 1 Onely the Scriptures are to bee beléeued in matters concerning faith.The doctrine of the Wal∣denses. 2 All things necessarie to saluation, to be conteyned in the Scriptures. 3 That there is one onely Mediator, and no Saints, to be inuocated. 4 No Purgatorie. 5 Masses to be wicked. 6 Mens traditions to be reiected in matters of saluati∣on: against holy dayes, superfluous chaunting, fixed fastes, the degrées, and orders of Priestes, Nunnes, &c. Against vowes, and peregrinations.
7 Against the supremacie of the Pope. 8 Against receiuing in one kinde. 9 The Pope is Antichrist, and Rome Babylon. 10 Against indulgences, and pardons. 11 Against vowes of chastitie. 12 That such as heare the word, and haue a right faith, are the Church of Christ: and the keyes to be the preaching of the word, and ministring the Sacraments. These Waldenses, at length exiled, were dispersed into sundrie, and diuers places: of whom many remayned long time in Bohemia, who writing to their king Vladislaus, to purge themselues of the slaunderous accusations of one D. Augustin, gaue vp their confession, with an Apologie, which was no other doctrine than that which is taught at this day:The zeale of ye Waldenses. as appeareth by the report of Aeneas Siluius. They were deuout in praier, and diligent in reading the Scriptures. In so much, that Reinerius, a diligent Inquisitor against them, reporteth, that he did heare, and sée, a man of the Countrey, vnlettered,The Testamēt by heart. which could rehearse the whole booke of Iob, worde for worde without the booke: and diuers other which had the new Testament by heart: and they were so paine∣full to instruct others, that he saith, he did heare (of one that knew the parties) that one of them did swimme ouer the ri∣uer Ibis, to conuert one from the Romish religion, and to geue him instructions. In the reigne of this K. Henrie, was gathered thorowe England and Fraunce, ij. d. of euerie pound, for the succour of the East christians against the Turkes: for such was the affliction, that Pope Vrban 3. died for sorow, & Gregorie 8. the next Pope after him, liued not two moneths. Then in the dayes of P. Clement 3: king Henrie of Eng∣land, and Philip the French king, the Duke of Burgundie, the Earle of Flaunders, the Earle of Cāpania, with diuers other christiā princes, wt a general consent, vpō S. Georges day, took the mark of the crosse vpon thē: promising together
to take their voiage to the holy land: at which time the king of England receiued first the Red crosse,The markes of the crosse to go to fight for the holy land. the French king the White crosse, the Earle of Flanders the Gréene crosse, and so other Princes other colours. But king Henry after the thrée yéeres were expired, in which he promised to per∣forme his voiage, sent to ye pope for farther delay of his pro∣misse, offering for the same to erect 3. monasteries: which hee thus performed. In the Church of Waltham hee thrust out the secular priests, & placed monkes in their roome, and repaired againe, & brought in the nunnes of Amesbury, that were before excluded for their incontinent life. An. 1173.Incontinent life of nunnes. About the fiue and twentith yéere of the raigne of this king Ludouicus the French king, by the vision of Thomas Beckets appearing to him in his dreame, and promising him the recouery of his sonne,K Lewes of France maketh pilgrimage to Becket. if he would resort to him to Can∣terbury, made his iourney into England, to visit S. Thomas at Canterbury, with Philip, Earle of Flanders: where hée offered a rich cup of gold, with other precious iewels, & 100. vessels of wine yéerely, to the couent of the Church of Can∣terbury. Anno 1178.  AlbingensesAlbingenses about Tholouse deni∣ed the reall presence, and denied also matrimony to be a sa∣crament. The monkes of the Charterhouse,Monks of the Charterhouse. first entred into this Realme, an. 1180. Anno 1187.  Baldwinus, Archbishop of Canterburie, be∣gan to buyld his new house, and church at Lambeth, but by letters of Pope Clement the third, he was forbidden to pro∣céede any further. It is written also, that Henrie 2. gaue to the Church of Rome, for the death of Becket, 40000. markes of siluer, and 5000. markes of gold, an. 1187. In the fiue and thirty yeare of his reigne, the king died at the Castle of Whiuen, in Normandie: at whose death, they that were present, were so greedie of the spoile, that
they left the body of the king naked, and not so much could be found as a cloth to couer it: till a Page comming in, and seing the king lie so ignominiously, threw his cloke vpon his neither partes. Anno 1189.  Richard the eldest sonne of Henry the 2. succéeded his Father: at which time Pope ClementPope Clement sat at Rome, succéeding Gregory, that died a little before for sor∣row. Iewes de∣stroyed.In the time of the Coronation of the king, the Iewes were destroied, almost all the land ouer. The king in part of satisfaction for his trespasse against his father, agreed with Phillip the French king, to take vpō them the recouery of the holy lande: and for the same, solde and let out much, and gathered diuers waies, great trea∣sures for the iourney. Besides, by the commaundement of Pope Clement the third, a tenth was exacted of the whole Realme: in such sort, as the Christians should make to the King 70000.A Bish. Chan∣cellour. A Bish. chiefe iustice of Eng∣land. pound, and the Iewes sixe thousand. For the gouernment of his Realme in his absence, the King set ouer principall in his absence, the Bishop of Ely his Chauncel∣lour, and the the Bishop of Durham: whom he ordained to be chiefe Iustice of England, the one to haue the custody of the Tower, with the ouersight of all other partes of the land on this side of Humber. The other, which was the bi∣shoppe of Durham, to haue charge ouer all other his domi∣nions beyond Humber: sending moreouer to Pope Cle∣ment, in the behalfe of William, Bishoppe of Ely, to bée made the Popes Legate through all England, and Scot∣lande: which also was obtained. These thinges thus or∣dered,The iourney for the holie land. the K. about the time of Easter, sayled into France, & there deferred their iourney til after Midsommer. They confirmed their agréemēt of the enterprise by oath, the forme of which oath was this. That either of thē should mainteine the honor of the other,The forme of the oath for the holy land. and beare true fidelitie of life, members, and worldly honor: and that neither of them
should faile one the other in their affaires, &c. But these co∣uenants were not performed on the French kings part: for at Messana, hée suffered the kings part to be abused,The French breaketh his oth. by the inhabitants of the citie, and picked quarrels against the En∣glishmen, and wrought treason against the king, by sending letters to the king of Cicill Tancredus, by the duke of Bur∣gundy: the contents whereof were, that the king of Englād was a false traitour, and would neuer keepe the peace that was betwixt them: and if the said Tancredus would warre against him, or secréetly by night would inuade him, hée with all his power would assist him, and ioine with him to the destruction of him, and all his armie: which letters Tan∣credus shewed vnto king Richard at Cathmensium a citie, where the king found Tancredus: who gaue him very good intertainment thrée daies & thrée nights: and at his depar∣ting gaue him foure great ships, and 15. gallies, and fur∣thermore he himselfe would néeds accompany him the space of two daies iourney, to a place called Tauernium. After the king of England had vnderstood so much by Tancredus, and had also receiued of him the very letters, he would shewe the French king from thenceforth no louing countenance as before. King Richard hauing won Cipres, departed with the French king toward the siege of Achon, & the 6. of Iune crossing the seas, he met with a great barke fraught with men of warre being Saracens, and furnished with wild fire and vnknowen serpents, to the defence of A∣chon, whom he vanquished, and the 7. of Iune came to A∣chon: which in short space after was rendered vnto the chri∣stians, the 12. of Iuly, and the captaines of the Pagans vp∣on agréement, resorted vnto the tents of the Templars to common with the king, touching peace, & giuing vp of their citie The sum of which peace was this, that ye kings should haue the citie of Achon, fréely & fully deliuered vnto them, with all that was therein, and 500. Captaines of the Chri∣stians should bée restored, which were in Achon: also
the holy crosse should be rendered vnto thē, & 1000. christian captains, with 200. horsemen, whom soeuer they thēselues would choose out of al them that were in the power of Sala∣dine. Moreouer they should giue to the kings 200000. by∣sants, so that they themselues would remaine as pledges in the K. hands for performāce hereof: that if within 40. daies these couenaunts were not accomplished,Achon wonne by the Chri∣stians. they would abide the kings mercy touching life and lims. These couenaunts beyng agréed vpon, the kings sent their souldiers and ser∣uants to the citie, to take an 100. of the richest and best in the citie, to close them vp in towers vnder strong kéeping. The 13. day the two kings deuided the spoile of the citie betwixt them: whereat the souldiers grudged, and with somewhat adoo were appeased. The 20. of Iuly K. Richard desired the French king, that they with their armies would bind themselues by oth, to re∣maine there still in the land of Ierusalē 3. yéeres, for the re∣couering of those coūtries: but he would sweare (he said) no such oth, & about the beginning of August the French K. de∣parted from Achon to Tirus, leauing his halfe part of ye citie of Achon to Cōradus the Marques. After whose departure, the Pagans refused to kéepe their couenants made, and nei∣ther would restore the holy crosse, nor the monie, nor the captiues: sending word that if king Richard did behead the pledges left with him at Achon, they would chop of the heads of such christian captiues as they had in their hands. Shortly after this the Saladine sending great gifts to king Richard, requested the time limited for the beheading of the captiues to bée proroged, but the King refused to take his giftes, or to graunt his request. Wherevpon the Sa∣ladine caused all the Christian captiues within his possessi∣on forthwith to be beheaded: which was the 18. of August. And albeit the king vnderstood it, yet he would not preuent the time limitted for the execution of his prysoners, beyng the twentith day of August: vppon which day hée caused
them openly; in the sight of the Saladines army to bee be∣headed, to the number of 2500. sauing hée reserued cer∣taine of the principall for purposes, especially to make ex∣change for the holie crosse, and certaine other of the christi∣an captiues. After this, King Richard purposed to besiege the City of Ioppe, where, by the way betwéene Ioppe, and Achon, néere to a towne called Ashur,Saladine put to flight. Saladin encountring the king was put to flight, and the chase followed thrée miles by the chri∣stians: so that he had not such a losse in 40. yeres before: and but one Christian captaine, called Iames Auernus in that conflict was ouerthrown. From thence king Richard went to Ioppe, & then to Ascalon, where he foūd Ioppe forsaken, & Ascalon thrown to the ground, and the whole land of Sy∣ria forsaken: throughout all which countrey, the king had frée passage without resistance. In the meane space of the kings absence, William,B. William ruffleth in the kings absence. the B. of Ely ruffled, and began to suspend the Canons, Clearks, & vicars of the church, as of S. Peter in Yorke, because they re∣ceiued him not with procession. Vnder which interdiction, he held them, til they were fain at last to to fal down at his feet, causing al their bels to be let down out of ye stéeple.1500. horse the Bishops traine He com∣monly neuer rode vnder 1500. horses, of chaplens, priests, & other seruing men waiting vpon him. He was couetous, gi∣uen to wantonnes, and intollerable pride: and so long as it lasted, held all vnder him; but it lasted not long. King Richard, at his setting out toward Hierusalem, left order that Earle Iohn, and Gefferey his brethren, shoulde not enter into England, the space of 3. yéeres, but Iohn was released afterward of that bond. Also the K. being at Mes∣sana in Sicily, sent his mother Alinor to ye Pope for his bro∣ther Geffery, elected before to the sea of Yorke, to be cōsecra∣ted Archb. but as she was trauelling to Rome,Clement dieth pope Clemēt died the 6. day of April:Celestine Pope. in whose roome succéeded Celesti∣nus the third, who the next day after his consecration came
from Laterane to S. Peters Church. Where standing vpon the staires before the churchdoore of S. Peter, he receiued an oath of Henricus king of the Almanes, that he should defend the Church of God, and al the liberties thereof, & mainteine iustice: also to restore againe the patrimony of S. Peter, ful and whole. And finally, surrender againe to the Church of Rome, the city of Tusculanum, &c. Vpon this graunt, the pope tooke him to the Church, and annointed him for Emperour, and his wife for Empresse: who there sitting in his chaire pontificiall held the crowne of gold betwéene his féete:The pope set∣teth the crown vppon the Em∣perors head with his feete, and dasheth it off againe & so the Emperour bowing down his head to the popes féete, receaued the Crowne: and the Empresse likewise. The crowne béeing thus sette vppon his head, the Pope eftsoones with his foote stroke it off againe, declaring thereby, that hée had power to depose him, (if hée deserued it.) Then the Cardinals taking vp the crowne set it on his head againe. Now Geffery being cōsecrated, through licence of the pope Celestine, by the Archb. of Turon, came into England. Af∣ter his consecration, the Bishoppe of Ely hearing thereof, charged him not to enter,, and to remember his oath made to the king, at his setting forward toward Hierusalem: moreouer, he threatned to apprehend him. The Archbishop notwithstanding, arriued at Douer in the moneth of Sep∣tember: where the Chauncellors men stood ready to appre∣hend him, from whom he escaped, and came to the monkes house of Douer. Which house, the Chancellors men beset, so that he could not escape: and on a day when he had sayde masse, as hee was standing at the Altar with his gar∣ments yet about him, they rushed in, and layde handes vppon him, bounde him, and drewe him through the dyrt,The Archbish. rudely handled and so committed him to Mathewe Clarke theyr Constable to bee kept. These thinges beeyng brought to his Brothers eare, the Earle Iohn, hee the twelfth of October, and the Archbishoppe of Roan, with all
the Bishops, Earles, and Barons, and Citizens of London, assembled together in Paules-churche: where,Ruffeling W. deposed. for his great enormities, they agreed to depose William, the ruffe∣ling Chauncellour, and to place in his roome the Archbishop of Roan. The third day after this, the Chancellor came to Douer, where he remained a few dayes, and (contrarie to his pro∣mise) purposed to take shipping, to passe ouer the Seas: and disguised himselfe in the apparel of a woman, hauing in his hand a meat-wand, and on his arme a péece of linnen cloth. And thus, as he was sitting vpon a rocke, wayting for his ship, a certaine Fisherman espying him,W. is taken disguised like a woman. and supposing him to be an harlot, came to him, and so with striuing with him found him to be a man, whereat hee wondred, and began to make an outcrie against him. Whereupon, came great mul∣titudes, wondring at him, haling, and drawing him by the collar, and sléeues, through stones, and rockes: and at length laid him in a darke celler, in steade of a prison. Now, Earle Iohn hearing of this, within viij. dayes after, sent word that they should deliuer him, and let him goe.W. goeth ouer Sea. So he went ouer Sea, and directed letters to the Pope of the iniuries done vn¦to him, and also into Siria, vnto king Richard. Vpō which complaint, Pope Celestine wrote a thundering letter vnto the prelates of England, that they should with book, bell, and candle procéed against earle Iohn, and other his adherents, with no lesse seueritie, then if the iniuries had béene done vnto his owne person, &c. But none could be got to execute the commandement of the Pope: And the other part wrote likewise to king Richard, complayning of the abuses of the Chancellor. This Bishop of Elie wrote vnto him, that the French king set vp Iohn, his brother, to possesse his kingdome, being councelled thereunto by the Templars. Whereupon, the K. séeing the Duke of Burgundie,The K taketh truce with the Saracens. & the Frenchmen shrinke from him, toke truce, offered by the Saracens, vpon the con∣dition,
that if the king would restore vnto him againe Sila∣uonia, in as good state, as it was when he tooke it, he would graunt to him, and to all Christians in the lande of Ierusa∣lem, truce for thrée yeres. Not long after, an. 1193.  the next Spring, hee returned: and in his iourney (by the tempestes of weather) about the partes of Histria,The K taken in his returne from the Sa∣racens warre, and sold to the Emperour Chalices cros∣ses, and shrines sold to redeem the king. in a Towne called Sinaca, was there ta∣ken by Lympold, Duke of the same Countrey, and so solde to the Emperor for 60000. markes: and was kept by him in custodie, a yere and thrée monethes: and at length relea∣sed for 14000. Poundes: which Summe of money was here gathered and made in England, of Chalices, Crosses, Shrines and other Church plate: and this was about the 5. yere of his reigne, and then it was obteyned of the P. that Priests might celebrate with Chalices of latin,  and tinne:Chalices of lattin & tinne. which continued long after. In the time of the kinges captiuitie, Philip the French K. incensed Iohn, the brother of king Richard, to take on him the kingdome of his brother. For which fact, Ioh. at his brothers returne, submitted himselfe vnto him, and craued pardon: which the king graunted. About this time, there was one FulcoFulco. (some say hée was Archb. of Roan called Gualter) who came vnto the king, and tolde him,The kings three daugh∣ters bestowed. he had three daughters to bestow, willing him to bestow them in time: that is, pride, couetousnes, and luxuri∣ousnes. Which words the king tooke in good part, & calling his Lords, declared vnto them what Fulco had councelled him: and said, I geue my daughter swelling pride to be wife to the proude Templars: My greedy daughter auarice to the couetous order of ye Cistercian mōks: And last of al my filthy daughter Lururie to the riotous prelates of the Church. The king laying siege to a castle called Galuz, belong∣ing to the Lord Bemonice in little Brittaine, thinking there to haue obtained great substaunce of treasure, was shot into the arme by a souldier named Beytādus Cordomi:K Richard slaine.
wherevpon the yron remaining and festering in the wound, the king within nine daies after died, hauing first forgiuen the souldier before his death. After the death of king Richard,King Iohn. raigned his brother Iohn Earle of Morton. An. 1200.  Diuorce was made betwixt king Iohn and his wife, because they were in the 3. degrée of kinred. An. 1205.  Hubert archb. of Canterbury deceased Before his body was yet committed to the earth, the yoonger sort of the monks elected Reignold their superiour: and placed him in the Metropolitane sea without the Kings licence and knowledge. Who being sent vnto by the elder sort of mōks, requiring his gratious license to choose their Archb. consen∣ted therevnto: requiring them also instantly at his request they would shew fauour to Iohn Gray bishop of Norwich, which they also did, electing him into that sea. And for the full establishing, the king sent of his owne charges, to haue the matter ratified by the Pope. The two Suffraganes of Canterbury not beyng made acquainted with the matter, sent spéedily to Rome,  to haue both the elections stopped, wherevpon grew great tumult: for the Pope condemning both their elections, created Ste∣phen Langton with his owne hand, in the high Church of Viterby: vpon which occasion the king conceiued an excée∣ding displeasure against the Clergy, and Monks of Canter∣bury, and banished 64. of them out of the land: and doth also sharply expostulate by letters with the Pope, for that he had chosen Stephen Langton, a man brought vp amongst his e∣nimies a long time, in the kingdome of France: besides the derogation to the liberties of his crowne threatning except he would fauour the kings liking of the B. of Norwich,The king threatneth the Pope. hée would cut of the trade to Rome, and the profites that came thether from the land. The Pope writeth in the behalfe of R. Langton a fro∣ward and arrogant letter, and not long after sendeth a com∣mandement
and charge into England to certaine bishops, that if the king would not yéeld, they should interdict him through his realme. For the executiō whereof foure bishops were appointed: William B. of London, Eustace bishop of Ely, Walter bishop of Winchester, and Giles bishop of He∣reford. Which foure bishops went to him, shewing their cō∣mission,The king in∣terdicted. & willing him to consent: which the king refusing, they went and pronounced the generall interdiction through out the realme, and so the Church dores were shut vp, with keies, walles, and other fastnings, &c. Which with other demeanour so incensed the king, that hée tooke all the posses∣sions of the foure Bishops into his handes, appointing cer∣taine men to kéepe the liuing of the Clergie throughout the realme, and that they should inioy no part thereof: he also proclaimed, that all those that had Church liuing, and went ouer the sea, should returne at a certaine day, or else lose their liuings for euer: and charged all Sheriffes to inquire if any churchman receiued any commaundement that came from the Pope,The king a∣gainst the Clergie. and that they should take their bodies and bring them before him, and also that they should take into their hands for the kings vse, all the church lands that were giuen to any man by the Archbishop Stephen, or by the pri∣ors of Canterburie, from the time of the election of the Arch∣bishop: and further charged, that all the woods that were the Archbishops, should be cut downe, and sold. Which things the pope hearing of, sendeth two Legates Pandulph and Durance,Pandulph and Durance Le∣gates. to charge the king to make restitu∣tion, and cease from those wrongs doone to the church: which when he refused to doo, he procéeded to excommunicate him, & to assoile all his subiects from their oth of obedience,Subiects as∣soiled of their oth of obediēce. assoi∣ling also all those of their sins, that would rise against the K. And a while after vpon the Legats returne the Pope sum∣moned all bishops,The king ac∣cursed of the Pope. abbots, & clarkes to repaire to Rome, to cōsult what was to be doone therin, where he accursed the K. and sent vnto the French king vpon remissiō of all his sins,
and of all that went with him, that he should take with him all the power that he might, and so inuade the Realme of England, to destroy king Iohn. Moreouer, he gaue sentēce, that the K. should be deposed, & another put in his place: ap∣pointing the deposing to ye french K Philip:The pope gi∣ueth England to the French king. promising to giue him remission of al his sins, and the cléere possession of all the Realme of England, to him, & his heires, if he did either kill him, or expel him. Whervpō, the next yere 1212.  the Frēch K. begā to inuade: but the Englishmen took 300. of his ships, wel ladē with al prouision, & burnt another hundred within the hauen: and tooke the spoile: yet the K. considering the conspiracies of the pope, and the sharpe inuasion of ye French K. with the treasons at home, by reason of the popes dispen∣sation with the oath of obediēce, in the 13. yéere of his raign sent Embassadors to the pope, requiring peace:The king sub∣mitteth to the Pope. promising to satisfie him in al things with due satisfaction: whervpon the pope sent Pandulph again into Englād, with other Embas∣sadors. To whō, in the behalfe of ye court of Rome, the K. sub∣mitted himself, & resigning, gaue vp his dominiōs of Eng∣land, & Ireland frō him & his heires, that should come of him for euermore: with this condition, that he shold take these 2. dominions of the pope again to farm,The Realme of England and Ireland far∣med of ye Pope. paying yéerly therfore to the court of Rome, 1000. marks of siluer. Thē took the K. the crown from his head, knéeling vpon his knées, in ye pre∣sence of al his lords, & Barons, & gaue it to Pandulph, the le∣gate, saying on this wise: Here I resign vp the crown of the Realme of England into the popes hands, Inocent the 3: & put me wholly in his mercy, & ordinance.The king re∣signeth ye crown to the Popes Legate. Then took Pādulph the crowne of K. Iohn, and kept it 5. daies, as a possession, & seisin taking of the 2. Realmes England, and Ireland: which also the king confirmed by a chart obligatory. Wher∣vpon, he was the 2. of Iuly, discharged from the interdiction. wherein he had continued 6. yéeres & 3. moneths. Moreo∣uer, those that did stick to the K, of the meaner sort, they wer also fain to resort to the legate for absolutiō: the other being
faine to séeke to the pope. Nowe notwithstanding this sub∣mission of the K yet did the Cleargy pretend farther against him, and incensed his Barons: insomuch that diuers of them desired of Philip, the French king, that he would giue them Lodouike, his eldest sonne whom they would make their K. so that the king was faine to vse the popes aide, against di∣uers conspiracies,The Duke of Milaine. and attempts against him: till at the last, the Barons vnderstanding by the vicount of Millain, who lay on his death bed at London, how Lodouike had sworne, most cruelly to vse the English nation if he preuailed: they sought for ye kings fauor, & recōciliation: which they obtained. Ann. 1215.  Innocent 3. held a synode at Rome, called the councel of Lateran, wherin he established by publike decree yt the pope shold haue frō thēceforth the correction of al chri∣stian princes,Strange de∣crees of the Pope. & that no emperor shold be admitted except he were sworn before, & also crowned of him: he ordeined more¦uer, that whosoeuer he were, that spake euil of the pope, hée should be punished in hell with eternall damnation. He then ordained a pixe for to couer the host, and a Bell when he goeth abroad,Transubstan∣tiation. Pope dieth. and made the masse equal with Chri∣stes Gospel. In this councell was also brought in transub∣stantiation: he continued also the act of abiuring the wiues of priestes. Anno 1216.  died Pope Innocent 3. the 17 day of Iuly, and was buried at Perusium in Italy. After, him succeeded one Cintucus, otherwise called Ho∣noriusHonorius. 3. a man of very great age: yet liued he ten yéers, and a halfe in the papacie, and more. The same yéere also, king Iohn was poisoned (as most writers testify) at Swinsted abbey,K. Ioh. poisoned by a mōke of that abbey, of the order of the Cistercians, or S Bernards brethrē, cal∣led Simon of Swinsted. The monk did first consult with his abbot,The propesie of Caiphas. & shewed him what he minded to do, alleaging for him self, the porphecy of Caiphas, 11. of Iohn, saying: It is better that one man should die, then the whole people perish.
I am well contented (saith he) to loose my life, & so become a martyr, that I may vtterly destroy this tyrant: with that ye Abbot did wéepe for gladnes, & much cōmended his feruent zeale. The Monke then being absolued of his Abbot for do∣ing this fact, went secretly into the garden on the backside, & finding there a most venemous toad, did so pricke him, and presse him with his pēknife, that he made him vomit all the poison yt was within him: this doone he conueyed it into a cup of wine, & with a flattering & smiling countenance, he said to the K. If it shall please your princely maiestie, here is such a cup of wine, as you neuer dranke better in your life time: I trust this wassall shall make all Englād glad, & with that he dranke a great draught thereof: the King pledged him. The monk anon went to the priuie, and there died:The monke dieth. (his guts gu∣shing out of his belly) and had cōtinually from thenceforth 3 monks to sing masse for him, cōfirmed by their general chap∣ter. The K. within a short space after, feeling great griefe in his body, asked for Simon the monk: answere was made, he was dead: thē God haue mercy on me said ye K. so went he to Newark vpō Trēt, & there died: & was buried in ye cathedral church at Worcester, betwixt S. Oswald & S. Wolstane,K. Iohn dieth. an. 1216. the 19. of October, after that he had béene much vexed with the cleargy 18. yeeres, sixe moneths, and odde daies. In the raigne of this king, the Citizens of London first obteined of the K. to choose yerely a Mayor. Next vnto King Iohn, succéeded his sonne. Hen. 3.Mayor in London. being ix. yeres of age, and was crowned, an. 1216. at Glocester, (which was thē coūted the safest place in the land) by Swal∣low the Popes Legate. Yet notwithstanding, Lewes the French kings sonne, greatly molested him,  with certayne Lords and B. who hated his father K. Iohn. til 1219 Lewes lost ye field, & was driuen to séek peace. & so receued, and absol∣ued by the Cardinal, who before had cursed him, and all that took part wt him: and had geuen him 1000. l. in siluer for his charges, & so departed. After the departure of Lewes, Swal the
Legate looketh to his haruest: and maketh inquisition for all those Bishops that had taken against Henry the third, and held with Lewes, and caused them to fine for their fault and recouery of their seates: Hugo of Lincolne 1000. markes, and an 100. to Swalo the Legate. Americus a∣gainst images. Priuat tithes. Receiuing at Easter. The bell and candle before the Sacramēt. The Masse as from the pope.Pope Innocent the third, condemned Americus a lear∣ned bishop, for an heretike, for teaching against Images. Al∣so he brought into the Church the paying of priuate tithes, and receiuing once a yéere at Easter: he ordeined the reser∣uation of the Sacrament, and the going with the bell and light before the Sacrament: he ordeined also in the Coun∣cell of Laterane, that the Canon of the Masse should be re∣ceiued with equal authority, as if it procéeded from the Apo∣stles themselues: he brought in transubstantiation. Also hee ordeined that none should marry within the third de∣grée. The Pope stir∣reth vp dissen∣tion in ye worldHe stirred vp Otho against the Emp. Philip, because Philip was made Emperor against his will: and afterward against the said Otho, (whom he made Emperour) he ray∣sed vp Fredericke king of Cecil, and deposed Otho, because he said, he held certaine cities belonging vnto him. Correction of Princes belō∣geth to ye pope.He ordained also, if any prince offended one another, the correction should appertaine vnto the Pope. In the history of Hermannus Mutius, it is recorded, that an. 1212.  in this Popes time, diuers noble men, and other in the Countrey of Alsatia,100. Alsatians burned in one day by the P. did holde that euery day was frée for eating of flesh, so it be done soberly. Also, that they did wickedly, which restrayned Ministers from their lawfull wiues: For which cause, this Pope and his Bishops, caused an hundred of them to be burned in one day. Nauclerus re∣porteth, that at the same time, many were in the Citie of Millan, of the said doctrine, which vsed to sende Collects vn∣to the foresaid Saints of Alsatia.
The Rablement of Religious Orders in the Popish Church. AVstinians. Ambrosians. two sortes, 490 Antonians heremites, 324 Austines heremites, 498 Austines obseruants, 490 Armenians sect. Ammonites, and Moabites. Basilius order, 384 Benets order, 324 Bernardes order, 1120 Barefooted friers, 1222 Brigets order, 1370 Beghart, or white Spirites, 1399 Brethren of Ierusalem, 1103 Brethren of S. Iohn, de ciuitate, black friers, 1220 Brethren of wilful pouertie, Cluniacensis order, 913 Canons of S. Augustine, 7080 Charterhouse order, 1086 Cistercian order, 1098 Crossebearers, or Crossed friers, 1216 Carmelites, or white friers, 1212 Clares order, 1225 Celestines order, 1297 Camaldulensis order, 950 Crostarred brethren, Constantino politanish order Crosse-bearers, Chapter monkes. Duch order, 1216 Dominick black friers, 1220 Franciscans, 1224 Grandmontensis order, 1076 Gregorian order, 594 Georges order 1407 Guilhelmites, 1246 Gerundinesis order. Galileans, Heremites. Helenes brethren, Humiliati, 1166 Hospitall brethren. Holy Ghost order. Ieroms order, two sorts. 1412 Iohns heremites. Iustines order, 1432 Iohannites, or knights of the Rhodes, 380 Iniesuati, 1308 Ieromes heremites, 1365 Iosephs order, 490 Iacobites sect. Iames brethrens order. Iames brethren with the sword.
Indians order. Katherin of Senes order, 1455 Keyed mōks, K. of the Rhodes. Lazarites, or Marimagdalins, or our Ladies brethren. 1034 Lords of Vngarie. Minorires, which be deuided into Conuentuales. Obseruants. Reformate. Collectane. De Capucio. De Euangelio. Amedes. Clarini, &c. Minorites 1224 Maries seruants, 1304 Monks of mount Oliuet, 1046 Marouinies sect Monorites sect. Monache, & Monachi. Morbonei, & Merestei. Menalaish, & Iasonish sect. New chanons of S. Austin, 1430 Nestorini. Nalhart brethren. New order of our Ladie. Nazarei. Paules heremites. 345 Premonstratensis order, 1119 Preachers order, or black friers, Peter the Apostles order, 1009 Purgatorie brethren Rechabites. Sarrabites. Sambanites, 1199 Scourgers, the first sect, 1266 Souldiers of Iesus Christ, 1323 Scopenites, or saint Saluators order, 1367 Specularii, or Glasse order. Sepulchres order. Shere order. Swerds order. Starrid monkes. Starrid friers. Sclauonie order. Scourgers, the second secte, called Niniuites. Stoole brethren. Scotland brethren order. Sicarii. S. Sophis order. Templars order, 1110 Templar knights 1120 The vale of Iosaphats order Vallis Vmbrosae, 1400 Waldensis sect. Wentzelaus order. Wilhelmes order. White monkes of mount Oliuet. 1406 Zelotes order.
IN the daies of pope Innocent the 3. began the two sects of Friers, one called the Preachers order,Dominicks. Minorits friers. or blacke friers of S. Dominicks, the other called the Minorits of S. Francis. The Preachers order began of one Dominicke a Spani∣ard, about the partes of Tholouse, who after he had labou∣red 10. yéeres, in preaching against the Albingenses, after∣ward comming vp to the Councell with Fulco B. of Tho∣louse, desired the pope to haue his order of preaching cōfir∣med: which the pope a great while refused, till at length tho∣rough a dreame he dreamed, he perswadeth the Pope. His dreame was, that Laterane Church was ready to fall, & he with his shoulders was faine to hold it: wherevpon Domi∣nick had his petitition granted. The rule which they folow, séemeth to be taken out of S. August. Their profession stādeth vpō 3. special point. 1. Hauing charity. 2 Holding humility. 3. Possessing wilful pouerty: their habit, & clothing is blacke. The minorities descend from one Francis, an Italian, of the citie of Assissium, who hearing that Christ sent forth his disciples to preach, thought to imitate the same in himselfe, & his disciples: and so left of shoes, had but one coate,The perfection of the Gospel. and that of a coorse cloth, in stéed of a latchet to his shoe, and a girdle, tooke a Hempen cord, and apparrelled his disciples, teaching them (as he said) the perfection of the Gospel, to apprehend pouerty, and to walke in the way of holy simplicity. He left in wryting to his Disciples, and followers, his rule, which he called the Rule of the Gospell. He was very seuere in outward chastising of him selfe, so that in Winter, he coue∣red his bodie with ise, and snowe. He called pouertie, his Ladie. He kept nothing ouer night. So desirous he was of martirdome, that he went into Siria, to the Souldan, who receiued him honorablie: for he tolde him not the trueth, as Iohn Baptist did to Herod.Many sectes of Franciscans The Franciscans be deuided into many Sectes: some goe in tréene shooes, or pattins, some barefooted, some regular Frāciscās, or obseruāts, some minors, some minimi, other of ye gospel, other de caputio.
About the same time sprang vp the Crooched friers,Crooched friers. ta∣king their originall of Innocent the 3. who raised vp an ar∣my signed with the crosse on their brest, to fight against the Albingenses, whom the Pope and his sect accompted for he∣retiks, about the part of Tholouse. The Albingenses denied the Popes authoritie and his traditions: they were against Images, pardons, purgatorie: and chiefly they were abhor∣red of the Pope, because they set vp a contrary pope against him in the coastes of Burgarorum. Of these Albingenses were slaine at times, and burned a great multitude, by the meanes of the Pope and Simon de monte forti, with other more. About this season, or not not much before, died Pope In∣nocent the third, in the 19. yéere of his Popedome: to whose custody, Fredericus the nephew of Fredericke Barbarossa, being yong, was committed by the empresse his mother. Af∣ter this Innocent, succéeded Honorius 3. and after Honori∣us, when he had gouerned ten yéeres, followed Gregorius 9. which popes were in the raigne of Henry 3. About the yéere 1218.  Becket 50. yeeres after his death, was taken vp, and shrined for a new Saint, made of an olde rebel:Becket shrined after his death to whose shrining came such resort of people of Eng∣land and France, that the countrey of Kent was not suffici∣ent to sustaine them. About the yeare 1220.  the young king was the seconde time crowned againe at Westminster. About which time, was begun the new building of our Lady Church at West∣minster. By reason the Realme (through king Iohn) was made tributarie to the Pope, the exactions vpon all estates, from the Sea of Rome (especiallie vpon beneficed men,Incredible exactions from Rome. and such as held any thing of the church) were incredible: so that cer∣taine of the Nobles assented with the king, to make a re∣straint of such rents, and exactions. The Pope required by Cardinall Otho, of all ye churches,
two prebends, one for the bishops part, one for the chapter: & also of the monasteries, where be diuerse portions,The Popes request in En∣gland. one for ye Abbot, another for the couent: of ye couēt so much as apper∣teineth to one monke, ye portion of the goods being portiona∣bly deuided: of the Abbot likewise as much. This request was denied, so that not long after the said Otho came again, Cum autentico plenariae potestatis and assembled a Councell a∣gaine at London, for the former purpose: so that diuerse for feare, & many to obtaine further dignities, bestowed diuers pretious rewards on him, in palfreis, in rich plate, and iew∣els, in costly and sumptuous garmēts, richly furred, in come, in vittels, &c.Gifts to the popes Legate. In so much that onely the B. of Winchester hearing that he would winter at London, sent him fiftie fat oxen, and a 100. coome of pure wheat, and eight tunnes of chosen wine towards his house kéeping: and other like∣wise according to their abilitie. Now the time of the Coun∣cell drawing néere, and the Bishops assembled,Contentiō be∣twixt Canter∣bury & Yorke for dignitie. there fell great variance and discord betwixt the Archbishops of Can∣terbury and Yorke, for sitting at the right hand, and the left hand of the cardinall. The Cardinall to pacifie thē, brought foorth a certaine Bull of the Pope, in the middest whereof was pictured the figure of the Crosse, with the Image of Paule on the right side, and Peter on the left, and vpon that shewed no derogation to arise for the place or seats. Wher∣vpon from that time foorth Canterbury enioyed the right hand, and Yorke the left. This strife thus ended,The strife en∣ded. the Car∣dinall preacheth vnto them, and maketh such vnreasona∣ble demaundes, for the filling of his bagges, that the king dreading the displeasure of his commons, for the dooings of the Legate, willed him to repayre home againe to Rome: yet could hée not be so rid of him, but that hée gleaned foure markes of euery procuration, besides, the rable of Friers sturred men to go to warre agaynst the Turkes, whom when they had once bound with a vowe, and signed them with the Crosse, then send they Bulles to release them for
mony. Besides the Pope shamed not to aske the fifth part of euery ecclesiasticall mans liuing, and also pope Gregory agréed with the citizens of Rome, that if they would ioyne with him in vāquishing Fredericke the Emperor: he would graunt vnto them, that all the benefices of England that were and should be vacant, namely pertaining to religious houses, should be bestowed at their owne will & commande∣ment, to their children, & kinsfolke: whervpon within a few daies after, the pope sendeth commandement to the archb. of Cāterbury, and foure other bishops, that prouision should be made for 300. Romans, in the chiefest, and best benefices in all England300. Romanes to be placed in benefices of England. at the next voidance, so that the archb. and those bishops should be suspēded from all gifts of benefices, vntill the 300. were prouided for. Wherevpon the archb. seing the vnreasonable oppression of the land, went into Fraunce and left the realme, and the rest of the Prelates comming themselues to the king, desired a councell, & that talke might be had in the matter: which being graunted, they made cer∣taine exceptions to the Popes request,The Pope de∣sireth to be strong to sup∣presse the Em∣perour Frede∣ricke. not daring directly to denie the contribution. Now the occasion both of this collection of the mony, and this fauour of the Romans, was to the end the Pope might be sufficiently strong to suppresse the Emperour Fredericke. Not long after this, followed at Lions a generall Coun∣cell,A Councell at Lions. called by Innocent the 4. In which Councell the En∣glish nation did exhibite certaine Articles of their griefes, touching the Popes great exactions, and placing Italians in their benefices: but their suite preuayled not, for the Pope not long after that,New exactiōs in England. sent for new exactions to be ga∣thered: which when the King heard of, hée commaunded the Bishops not to yéeld to any such matter, till the returne of his Ambassadours, which hée sent to the Pope touching that matter. About the latter end of December, the Em∣bassadours returne, and signifie the Popes high displeasure against the King: whereat hée being greatly mooued, caused
to be proclaimed through al his realme, that none héereafter should consent to any taxe of money, frō the court of Rome:No taxe of mo∣ney out of Eng¦land to Rome. which comming to the popes eare, he directeth his letters to ye prelats of England, vpon payn of his curse & suspence, that they should make collection of the summe of money, against the feast of the assumptiō: the charge of the curse being com∣mitted to ye B. of Worcester to execute.The K. relen∣teth to ye pope. The 3. part of churchgoods, & the yeerly fruit of vacant bene∣fices to ye pope. This so terrified the king, that, what with the perswasion of the bishops, & other prelats, he relented: which made the Pope at length (so past shame) that he he demaunded vpon the censure of his curse, the third part of the churchgoods, and the yéerely fruits of al vacant benefices. So that such hath béene the insatiable de∣sire of the Romanists, that in the dayes of Sudburie, Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, Anno 1360. the pope by his proc∣tors gate from the Cleargy, in lesse then one yéere, more thē 60000. Florins of méere contributions,60000. florins in one yeere to Rome be∣sides, &c. besides his other a∣uailes, and common reuenues, out of benefices, prebenda∣ries, first fruits, tributes, peterpence, collations, reseruati∣ons, relaxations, and such merchandise. About this time, ann. 1220.The Albingen∣ses assailed by the pope. the pope stirred vp Lodouike the yong French king, through the instance of Philip his fa∣ther, to lay siege against the Albingenses, of the city of Tho∣louse, & vtterly to extinguish them: but God preserued thē, and cast such a pestilence among the Frenchmen, beside fa∣mine & want, that they were constrained to depart: & Simon de monte forti general of the army, to whom the land of the Earle of Tholouse was giuen by the pope, was slaine with a stone before the gate of the citie. Ann. 1221.  first entred ye Frier minorites, or gray Friers into the land, and had their first house at Canterbury,Frier minorits in England. & had their first patrone, Franciscus, which died ann. 1227.  and his order was cōfirmed by P. Honorius 3. an. 1224. About their comming in, many english men came into their order:Iohannes de sancto Egidio. Alexander de Hales. amōg whō, was Iohan. de sācto Egidio, a famous phisitiō, & astro∣nomer, & Alexander de Hales. Not long after by Williā de
longa Spata, which was the bastard sonne of king Henry 2. and Earle of Salisbury, the house of CarthusianCarthusians. mōks, was first founded at Heitrop, anno 1222. whose wife Ela, after his death founded the house of Nunnes at Lacocks, & there continued her selfe Abbesse of the place. Not long after, began the new building of the minster of Salisbury,Minster of Salisbury. whereat Pandulphus the Popes legate, laide the 5. first stones: one for the pope, the 2. for the yong K. Henrie, the 3. for the good Earle of Salisbury, she 4 for ye Countesse, the fift for the B. of Salisbury. About the yeere 1221. fell a contention betwixt Eustace B. of London, and the chapter of Pauls on ye one side, & the abbot of Westminster with his couent on the other side, about spiritual iurisdictiō, & subiecti∣on: whether ye monastery of Westminster were exēpted frō the subiectiō & iurisdiction of the B. of London, or not: which controuersy at last, cōming to compromise, was committed to ye arbitrimēt of Stephē,Contention a∣bout spirituall iurisdiction. Archb. of Cant. Philip, B of Win∣chester. Thomas of Merton, & Richard, prior of Dunstable: & at length it was agréed, that the monastery of Westminster should be vtterly exempted from the iurisdiction of the B. of london: & that Stanes with the appurtenāces therunto belō∣ging,Westminster exempt from the B. of Lon∣don. shold appertain to the monast of Westminster. Also ye the manor of Sunnebury, should be due & proper to ye church of S. Paul, & also the church of S. Margaret: with al the lād be∣longing to the same, to be exempted frō al other iurisdiction, but only ye B. of Rome, & so was this matter ended, an. 1222. Anno 1224.  the Lordes and Barons of the land, graun∣ted to the king, the wardship and marriage of their heyres: which was then called, Initium malorum. Wardship ini∣tium malorum.An. 1226  died pope Honorius, a great aduersary to Frede∣rik the Emp. after whō succeded Gregory 9. more grieuous then his predecessor. In the which yere also died Lodouike ye periured french K. at the siege of Auinion,Honorius the Emperors eni∣mie dieth. whom the pope now the second, or third time, had set vp to fight against Rai∣mund, the good Earle of Tholouse, and the Albingenses of
that Countrey, at which time also, he sent his Legate, M. Roman{us}, into France, to require of euery Cathedral church two Prebendships: one for the Bishop, another for the chap∣ter. And in Monasteries also, where the Abbot and Couent had diuers portions, to require two Churches: one for the Abbot, the other for the Couent, kéeping this proportion: that how much should suffice for the liuing of one Monke, so much the whole Couent should finde for their part,The Popes vnreasonable request denied in France. and as much the Abbot for his. Which request of the Legate was denied: with further discourse, that if such exactions were not restrayned, it were to be doubted, least an vniuersal depar∣ting might follow from the church of Rome. Which words so moued the Legate, that he gaue the matter ouer. Now while the Legate was in hand for the popes purse, certaine preaching friers were directed by the Legate Ro∣manus, into all France, to stirre vp the Frenchmen, to take the crosse vpon them, and to warre against the Earle of To∣louse, and the people thereof, whom they accounted heretiks:Warre against the good Earle of Tolouse. which many did gladly yelde vnto, rather for feare of the Frenchking, then for the Legates motion. Against the Ascention daye then next following, they prepared themselues, with horse, and harnesse, to sette vpon the Tholousians, with strength of 50000. men, besides vit∣lers, and wagoners.The Earle of Tolouse of ex∣communicated The Legate (by the way) did openlie excommunicate the Earle of Tolouse, and all that tooke his part, and interdicted his lād. The first Citie of the Tholou∣sians, was Auinion: at the siege whereof, the king sustained great losse, both through the valour of the Citizens, and also by the hand of God, with pestilence and famine:The French king dieth. so that the king (to auoyd the infection) went into an Abbey, not far of, and shortly after died. Whose death the Popes Legate cau∣sed to be concealed, and endeuoured by pollicie, and treache∣rie, to get the Citie. For, when he saw that no other meanes would preuaile, he requested, and frendly desired them, that he, and his Prelates that were about him, might come
into their Citie, to examine what faith they were of, and that he neither sought, nor meant any other thing thereby, but their own safeties, as wel of body, as of soule: (which he faithfully sware vnto them) that he might returne true cer∣tificate thereof. Which being granted, and the Inhabitants nothing mistrusting, the Souldiers of that Campe that were there agréed before, made them readie, and rushed in at the entrance of the Prelates, and slue the Porter, & war∣ders,Auinson ouer∣run by treason of the Popes Legate. and at length wan the Citie, and destroyed the same. There be accompted more than two and twentie thousand French Souldiers, that perished one way or other, at the siege. Anno 1228.  About this time, Pope Gregorie the ninth, who succéeded Honorius,The P. chased out of Rome. fell at variance with the people of Rome, in so much, that about ye feast of Easter, they thrust the Pope out of the Citie, pursuing him vnto his Castle of Viterbium: where also they inuaded him so valeantly, that they chased him to Perusium. Ex Matth. Parisiensi, Pag. 69. In this yeare also rose a controuersie betwixt the King, and the Prior and Couent of Durham, for choosing of their Bishop: the King taking part with Lucas, a Chaplen of his, whom he offered to their election: the Monkes preferring a Clarke of theirs, called William, Archdeacon of Worce∣ster: whom also they presented to the King; but he had no liking vnto him. Whereupon, both the parties sent vp to Rome: where the matter being trauersed with great alter∣cation on both sides, it was at length concluded betwéene them both, that neither M. William, nor yet Lucas, should be taken, but that Richard, B. of Sarum, should be translated to Durham, and be Bishop there. Contention for superioritieThe like stirre happened also, both the same yere, and a∣bout the same matter, betwéene the Monkes of Couentrie, and the Chanons of Lichfield, for choosing of their B. which of them should haue the superior voice in the electiō of their
Prelate: and that matter beyng had vp to Rome, it was concluded that the Monkes of Couentrie, and the Church of Lichfield should choose their Bishop by course, each part kée∣ping turne the one after the other. Prouided, notwithstan∣ding, that the Prior of Couentrie, should alwaies haue the first voice in euery election, whereas the old custome was, that the Couent with the Prior of Couentrie was woont to haue the whole election of the bishop, without the Canons. ex Math. Paris. pag. 68. In this yéere 1228.  died Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury,The chapters of the bible di∣stinct by Ste∣phen Lāgton. by whom (as N. Triuet recordeth) the chap∣ters of the Bible, in that order & number as we now vse thē were first distinct. The said Langton also made Postils vpō the whole Bible: moreouer he builded the New hall in the palace of Canterbury. After the death of Langton, fell strife betwixt the King, and the Monks of Canterburie, for the election of their Arch∣bishop: the Monkes choose one of their owne societie named Walter Heuesham: the King preferred Richard Chauncel∣lour of Lincolne, and articulated against the other, that hée was the sonne of a Felon, conuicted, and hanged: also that hée had lyen with a Nunne, and had children by her, &c. The matter beyng presented before the Pope, and like to go hard on the Kings part, the Kings proctors promised and graunted in his name,The tenth of al the goods of England and Scotland, to be geuen to the Pope. to be giuen to the Pope the tenth part of all the goods of the Realme of England, and Scot∣land moueable, to sustaine his warres agaynst the Empe∣rour, so that hée would encline fauourably to the Kings suit, whereat the Pope boyling (as saith Parisiensis) with vn∣measurable desire of subduing his enemy the Emperour, and cherished with so great promises, graunted vnto them. This was doone, An. 1229. These things thus finished at Rome, the Pope sendeth his owne chaplain Stephen, legate into England, to require the tithes of all moueable goods of England, Ireland, and
Wales, which were promised vnto him. Wherevpon the king called a Councell at Westminster to common of the matter, where in fine, notwithstāding the dislike of the most part, yet for feare of curse and of interdiction the summe was gathered: so that the Prelates hauing no other reme∣dy,The prelates driuen to sell there chalices and copes. were driuen to sell their chalices, cruets, copes, iewels, and other Church plate, and some to lay to morgage such things as they had, some also to borrow vpon vsury, to make the mony which was required. Moreouer the said Stephen (as saith Parisiensis) brought with him into England for the same purpose,Vsurers brought into England by the Popes Legate. bankers and vsurers, who lending out their monie vpon great interest, did vnreasonably pinch the English people: which Merchant vsurers were then called Caursini, and such exactions were then vpon the poore En∣glishmen, that not only their present goods were valued, and taxed,The corne growing a∣gainst the next haruest, tithes to pay ye Pope. but also the corne yet growing against the next har∣uest, was tithed, &c. Onely the Earle of Chester named Ra∣dulphus, stood stoutly against the pope, suffering none with∣in his dominion, either lay men, or clarks, to yéeld any tēths to the Popes proctors. Parisiensis, pag. 74. This yéere 1229. was finished the New church of Co∣uentrie by Alexander bishop of the same citie, and partly by the helpe of the king: which Church Richard his predeces∣sor bishop of Couentry had begon. The French men againe about this time assayled Ray∣mundus Earle of Tholouse,The, Earle of Tholouse as∣sailed againe. but preuailed not, the Earle hauing in the conflict taken 500. and many slaine of their seruitours: to the number of two thousand, were taken with their armour. Yet thrise the same Summer did they assault the godly Earle, and were put to flight and discomfited. Parisiensis, pag. 96. Richard Archb. of Canterbury beyng now confirmed in his seat, came to the king complaining of Hubert lord chiefe Iustice, for withholding the Castle and towne of Tum∣bridge from him, with the appertenance thereto belōging, &
other lands of ye Earle of Clare, lately deceassed: which lands pertained to the right of that sea, and to the Church of Can∣terbury: for the which the said Earle & his auncestors, were bound to doe homage to him and his predecessors: and there∣fore required the kéeping of the foresaid castle, with the de∣meanes to be restored vnto him. The king misliking the de∣mand, answered not to the appetite of the Archb. wherby he was so moued, that he brast forth into excommunication of al such as held those possessions, or tooke their part, the K. one∣ly excepted: which done, he prosecuteth his matter before the Pope. The K. hearing thereof, sendeth vp M. Roger Con∣telu, with certain other against ye Archb. The Archb. among other the articles, complaineth to the Pope, of certaine Bi∣shops his suffragans: who, neglecting their pastoral functiō, did sitte on checker matters, belonging to the king, and exer∣cised sessions and iudgements of blood:Bishops set on checker mat∣ters exercised sessions and iudgements. The pope neg∣lecteth the K. and satisfieth the Archb. he complained also of beneficed parsons, and Clearks, within orders: for hauing many benefices ioyned with the cure of soules, and that they also taking example of Bishops, did intermeddle in secular matters, and in iudgements of Lay men. The Pope negle∣cteth the kings allegations, & fauoureth altogether the Arch∣bishop, and sent him away satisfied in his requests, who in his returning homward, within 3. daies of his setting forth, died, in the house of the gray Friers at Saint Gemmes. Pa∣risiensis. After the death of Richard, the monkes did choose Ran∣dulph Neuell,Randulph Neuell. Bishop of Chester, and the Kings Chauncel∣lour, a man faithful, vpright, and constant. The King appro∣ued of the election, and onely the Popes confirmation was wanting. Wherevpon, the monks addressed thē to Rome, to haue the popes liking: and first requiring help for the expen∣ces of the iourney of the new Archbish, hee denied the same, he should séeme in any sort, ambitiously to séeke after it,A good bishop. and holding vp his handes to heauen, thus prayed: O Lorde God, if I shall be thought woorthy to bée called (although
indéed vnworthy) to the seat, and office of this Church: so be it as thou hast disposed. But if otherwise in this troublesom office of Chauncery, and this my inferiour ministery, wher∣vnto I haue béene assigned, I shall séeme more necessary for this thy kingdom & people, I refuse not my labour, thy will be done. The monkes notwithstanding, procéeded on their iourney, & shewed the matter to the pope: the popes holinesse inquired of the qualities of the man, of Simon Langthon, brother of Stephen Langthon Archbish. before mentioned: who did so depraue Radulph Neuell to the Pope, that hée charged the monkes to procéed to a new election: who agréed vpon Iohn their prior to be Metropolitane: but he (no other fault being found, notwithstanding he had bin examined in 3. daies together of the Cardinals) was repulsed for that he was too aged: though he were able to take a iourney to Rome and home againe. Anno 1231.  the exactions of the pope were so grieuous in the land, that it was deuised of some of the nobles, that cer∣taine letters vnder the pretensed colour of the kings autho∣rity, should be sent abroad, commanding that such corne and graine, & other reuenewes as were taken vp for the Pope, should be staied, & forth cōming by a certain day in ye said let∣ters appointed. These letters wer thought to procéed chiefly from Hubert, L. chief iusticeHubert. Lord chiefe Iustice. of England: who then next vn∣der the K, ruled ye most affaires of ye realme. This done, they sent these letters by certaine souldiers thereto appointed: who did execute ye contents accordingly: so that the Italians throughout the land, were spoiled, & their corne & fruites be∣stowed on ye poor commons of the land.Italians spoy∣led throughout the land. This comming to the knowledge of Roger, B. of London: he with the assistance of other bishops, procéedeth to excommunication against them, and such as had forged the kings letters. Yet for al that, the same yéere, about Easter next following, all the Barnes in Englande, that were in the handes of any Romane, or Italian, were likewise wasted: who for feare were fayne
to hide themselues in monasteries and celles. The Authors and workers of this feat were foure score armed souldiers, of whom the principall Captaine was one naming himselfe William WithersWilliam Wi∣thers. surnamed Twynge. The Pope hearing of this, sendeth his letters to the king vpon the same, threatning him with excommunication, to search out the doers of the fact, & to punish them according∣ly: likewise he sent the same charge to Peter bishop of Win∣chester, and to the Abbot of Saint Edmunds, to inquire in the South partes: to the bishop of Durham, and the Archb. of Yorke, and to Master Iohn Chanon of Yorke a Romane, to inquire in the North partes for the said malefactors. So that earnest inquisition, being made, diuers were found fa∣uourers, and diuers euen of ye cleargy: but the chiefe author was supposed to be Hugo de Burge, L. chiefe iustice, who both with the kings letters, & his own, fortified ye doers ther∣of, that no man durst interrupt them. Moreouer, in the same society, was R. Twinge, who of his owne voluntary accord came to the king, and protested himselfe to be the Author of the fact, because that by the sentence of the B. of Rome, and fraudulent circumuention of the Italians, he was bereaued of the patronage of his benefices, hauing no more to giue but that one. Then the king, and other executors of the Popes commandement, counselled him to offer himselfe to the pope to be absolued, and there to make declaration of his cause. The king also wrote letters in the behalfe of his Souldiers, requiring fauourable audience. At the request whereof, P. Gregorie, both released him of the sentēce, and restored him to his Patronage. But the grudge against Hubert did not so ende, for the Bishops conspired against him: and first com∣meth Peter, B. of Winchester, to the K. with gréeuous com∣plaints: and so preuayled with him, that he caused the Lord Hubert to be put from his office, and procured Steeuen Se∣graue to be placed in his roome. And afterward, the K. was more & more kindled against him, and called him to account
for old matters whereof he had the hand of the king to shew for his discharge, which notwithstanding was not accepted: the bishop of Winchester replying, that the charter of king Iohn had no force after his death, but that ye may now (said hée (be called to reckoning of this king for the same. The iniuries also, & damages wrought against the clarks of Rome, and the Italians, and the Popes Legates, were obiected against him, with diuerse other crimes concerning the estate &c. Wherevnto he was required to answere by order of law. Hubert then seing himselfe in such a straight, refused to answere presently, but required respite, because the matters were waighty which the king obiected vnto him: which was graunted til the 14. day of September: but in the meane time,L. Hubert de∣stitute on eue∣ry side. fearing the king, he fled from London to the priory of Merton, and was destitute on euery side: sauing onely that Lucas Archb. of Dublin, with instant praiers, & teares, laboured to the king for him. When the day was come, that Hubert must appeare, kéeping amōgst the monks of Merton, he durst not shewe himselfe: whereat the King being offended, directed his letters in all hast to the mayor of London: commaunding him to muster, and take vp all that could beare harnesse in London, and by force of armes, to bring him Hubert either quicke, or dead, out of Merton: which was accomplished.The Londo∣ners hate Hu∣bert. And on the next morow, the Lon∣diners (who hated Hubert) issued out with twenty thousand men, and set forward toward the Abbey of Merton, where Hubert was prostrate before the Altar, commending him∣selfe to God. In the meane season, while the Citizens were on their iournie, it was suggested to the king by Radolph, Bishop of Chichester, and Lord Chancellour, that it was dangerous to raise vp the rude multitude for feare of sedition. Moreouer, what shalbe said (quoth he) among the Frenchmen, & other Nations, but thus (iestingly, and in mockerie) see what a kinde birde is this young king of England, that séeketh to
deuoure his olde Nurse, vnder whose winges he hath béene brought vp in his youth? With which words the king be∣ing moued, sent in all hast after the armie, willing them to retire. One of the Messengers (for he sent two) made great spéede, and shewed the kings pleasure in good time: the other (desiring the destruction of Hubert) lingred in his way, and notwithstanding he rode but a soft pace, fel of his horse, that by chance stumbled, and brake his neck. After this, the Archb. of Dublin, with great suite intrea∣ted, and obteyned of the K. to graunt Hubert respite till the xij. of Ianuary, to prouide him of his answere. Whereupon, Hubert taking some confidence, and (as it were) comming to himselfe) tooke his iourney to S. Edmondsburie, where his wife was: and passing through Essex, inned at a certayne Towne, belonging to the B. of Norwich. Whereof, when the king was certified, (fearing least he should make some commotion in the Realme) sendeth in hastie anger after him, Sir Godfrey Crancombe, knight with 300. men, com∣manding them vnder paine of hanging, that they shoulde bring him to the Tower of London. Which commandemēt was accomplished in hast. Hubert hauing intelligence of their comming, (rose out of his bed, naked as he was) & ran to the Chappell néere to the Inne where he was, and there with one hand holdeth the crosse, and with the other the sa∣crament of the Lordes bodie. Godfrey entering the Chappell with his armed Souldiers, and taking the Crosse and Sacrament out of his hands,L. Hubert brought to Tower. bound him fast with Fet∣ters and Giues, vnder the horse bellie, and brought him to the Tower. Whereat the king (hauing tarryed vp, watch∣ing for him) greatly reioyced, and went merrilye to his bed. The next morrow following, Roger, Bishoppe of Lon∣don, had knowledge after what sort he was taken out of the Chappel. He commeth to the King, blaming him boldly for violating the peace of holy Church: and protested, that vn∣lesse
the partie were losed againe, and sent to the Chappell, from whence he was taken, he would enter into sentence of Excommunication against the déede doers.L. Hubert sent back a∣gaine. Whereupon, the king sendeth him back againe to the Chappel, by ye same Souldiers that brought him out before: and geueth charge vnder paine of hanging, to the Sheriffes of Hartford, and Essex, that in their owne persons, with the strength of both Shires, they should watch, and compasse about the Chap∣pell, and sée that Hubert in no wise should escape. In the meane time,Lucas Archb of Dublin, true frend to the L. Hub. he continued in praier, night, and day: and Lu∣cas Archb. of Dublin, his true, and almost onely friend, cea∣sed not to pray, and wéepe to the King for him, desiring him at the least to participate vnto him, what he purposed to doe with Hubert Whereupon, the King answering, said, of thrée things he should choose whether he would. First, ei∣ther to forsweare the Realme of England for euer: or to be condēned to perpetuall imprisonment: or els to confesse him selfe openly to be a traytor.Hard choice offered to L. Hubert. But hereunto Hubert made an∣swere, that he would choose none of these, as, who was nei∣ther guiltie, nor worthie of any such confusion. But to sa∣tisfie somewhat the minde of the King, he would be content to depart the Realm for a season: but to abiure the realm, he would not so doe. In this meane time, Radulphus, Earle of Chester, and Lincolne, which was one of the greatest enemies he had, died. Hubert yet continued enclosed in the Chappell, vn∣till his two seruaunts (which ministred vnto him) were taken from him by the kings commandement. Then Hubert (séeing no other remedie, but there to be starued with hunger) offered him selfe of his owne accorde vnto the Sheriffes: who by the K. commandement, brought him againe to the Tower. Not long after the K. hearing that Hubert had committed his treasure to ye Templars in Lōdon, sent to thē to deliuer it into his hands who refusing so to do, the king cōmaunded
Hubert to cause the treasure to be deliuered: which he did most willingly, and yéelded both himselfe, his treasures, & all that euer he had vnto the kings wil, and pleasure. The e∣nemies of Hubert herevpon cried out against him, saying: that he was a théefe, & had stolen the treasure from the king, had deserued to be hanged: and thus cried the accusers daily in the kings eares: but the king now somewhat appeased & satisfied, answered that there was no néed so straitly to deale with him, who frō the time of his youth first serued his vn∣cle K. Richard, then his father K. Iohn: in whose seruice (as he heard say) he was driuen to eate his horse, &c. and that he had rather be counted a king, foolish & simple, then to he iud∣ged a tyrant toward such as haue serued him, and his ance∣stors in so many dangers, faithfully waying more the fewe euils (which yet be not proued) then so many good desertes of his euident, and manifest seruice, done both to him,The K. some∣what appeased towards Lord Hubert. and the whole realme. And thus the king somwhat relented to poore Hubert his old seruant, and graunted to him such lands as he had giuen by king Iohn his father: and whatsoeuer he had els by his owne purchase. Thus Hubert had some chéering,Hubert some∣what cheered. and with the fauour of the king, the nobles began to bée satisfied: and foure Earles, namely, Richard the kinges brother, William, Earle of Warren, Richarde, Earle Marshall, and William, Earle of Ferries, became Sureties for him vnto the King. Vp∣on which Sureties, he was translated to the Castle of Di∣uisis. Whereupon, the Bishoppe of Winchester commeth craftely to the King, and desireth the custodie of that Castle,Craft of a Bishop. making no mention of Hubert, to the intent, that by the kéeping thereof, he might the sooner dispatch him. Hubert hearing thereof, openeth the matter vnto two of his ser∣uāts, who cōueyed him by night vpon their backs (fettered as he was, his kéepers being a sléep) into ye parish church of ye town, & there remained wt him. The kéepers (after search)
found him in the Church, and with violence drew him into the castle againe, whereof the Bishop of Sarum vnderstan∣ding, came to the castle where Hubert was, and requireth that he might be brought to the church againe, from whence he was taken: which when the kéepers denied to doo, the bi∣shop gaue sentence of excommunication against them: and that doone, with the bishop of London, and other bishops, go∣eth and complaineth to the king of the iniurie doone to Hu∣bert, and contumely against the church: neyther would they leaue the king,Great reuerēce of the church. before they had obtained that he should bée brought againe into the Church, and so he was: but not long after the king commaunded to kéepe him with watch,The king hard to L. Hubert againe. till either he came forth, or perished by famine. In the meane season, great dissention arose betweene the King, and his Nobles: by meanes whereof, Hubert was taken by Richard, Earle marshall into Wales, and there remained til the King at length was reconciled with his nobles,L. Hubert re∣ceiued into the kings fauour. and so receiued with the rest Hubert againe into his fauour. As Hubert was vexed for emptying the Popes barnes, so likewise Roger, Bishop of London, being suspected for the same, was inforced to trauell to Rome, there to purge himselfe before the Pope. Caursini, Ita∣lian vsurers.This Roger, after his returne from Rome, laboured to expell out of his Dioces, the Italian Vsurers, called Caursi∣ni and (they withstanding him) procéedeth to the sentence of excommunication against them. But they so wrought with the Pope, that they caused the Bishoppe of London (being both aged, and sicklie) to be cited beyonde the Seas, there to make answere vnto such obiections as were infer∣red against him. And so the bishop was compelled to let the cause fall. The Popes visitation ge∣nerall.The same yere, the Pope (to recouer his losses) proclay∣med a generall visitation thorough all religious houses, ex∣empt, and not exempt, vniuersallie pertayning to his iuris∣diction,
where, by the cruell dealing of the visitors, many were compelled to trauell, & appeale to Rome, to the great expenses of their mony, and filling of the popes coffers. And (as Parisiensis saith) the visitatiō tended not to any reforma∣tion, so much as to the deformation of the vniuersall order: while all they which before through all parts of the world folowed onely the rule of Benedict,A deformation no reformation Benedict or∣der. now through new deui∣sed constitutions, are found so deuided, & diuers, that of al the monasteries, and other churches of religion, scarse may two be found, which do agrée in one rule, and institution of life. In the time that Hubert was secluded frō the king.  none bare sway vnder him but Peter B. of Winchester:Peter bishop of Winchester. by whose counsell the naturall seruitours of the king were remooued, and straungers placed in greatest offices. To him were ioy∣ned Peter de Riuallis his coosin, who had cōmitted to him all the great holds & munitions of the realme. Stephen Segraue who succéeded Hubert, & Robert Passelew, who had the kée∣ping of the treasure vnder Peter Riuall: so that by these, all the affaires of the realme were ordered: & wherof the nobles cōplaining, through the bishops means could haue no audi∣ence. So that they sent word to the K. that vnlesse he would without al delay seclude from him Peter B of Winchester, and other Alians of Pictauia, they would with the cōmon cōsent of the realme, displace him of his kingdome.They would displace the king. At which message the king was much perplexed: but Winchester wrought so with him, that the king warred vpon the Mar∣shall, with other of the Nobles néere two yéeres. The same yéere the king builded a monastery of cōuertsA monastery of conuerts. at London, for the redemption of his soule, and the soule of king Iohn his father, and the soules of all his ancestors, &c. Ex Math. Paris. pag. 86. After the election of Iohn Prior of Cāterbury was disanulled, one Iohn Blund was elected: who trauelling vp to Rome, An 1233.  to be confirmed of the pope, was vnchosen againe, for that he had receiued of Peter B. of Winchester 1000. marks, and had another 1000. pro∣mised
him of the said Winchester: thinking by his mony to make him of his side, & also wrote to the Emperour to helpe forward his promotion in the court of Rome: but all was in vaine. After whom by the commandement of the Pope, one Edmund, Chanon of Salisbury, was ordained Archb. and had his pal sent him from the pope: which Edmund,Edmund. after, for his vertues was canonized for a Saint:Robert Gro∣sted. about which time also Robert Grosted was made bishop of Lincolne. This Edmund with other bishops, An. 1234.  declared boldly in the name of the Lords (the king being in counsell at Westminster) that the counsell which then he followed was daungerous,A bad counsell followed of the king. both to him and the realme. Adding more∣ouer except he would in short time reforme himselfe, they would procéed by censure of the Church against him: these wordes of the Bishops beyng spoken, the king required a little time of respite to aduise him, saying: that he could not of a sudden remoue his councell from him, before he had en∣tred his accompt with them of his treasures cōmitted vnto them, and so the assembly brake vp. Not long after this Edmund the archb. was inuested in ye church of Canterbury: who shortly after his consecration, about the moneth of Aprill cōming with his Suffragans to the place of counsaile, where the King with his Barons and Earles was assēbled, put him in mind of his promise, touch∣ing the reforming of matters: denouncing, that except hée would spéedily so doo,Reformation. they would procéede to the sentence of excōmunication against him, & those that should shew them∣selues enemies: wherevpon the king within few daies after commaunded Winchester to leaue the court, and to go to his Bishopricke: moreouer hée commaunded Riuall the Bi∣shops coosin (some stories say his sonne) to render vnto him his castels, and to giue accompt of all his treasures, and so to voyd the realme:The kings courage. swearing moreouer vnto him, that if he were not beneficed, and within orders of the Church, hée would haue caused both his eies to be pulled out of his head.
He expelled also the Pictauians, & sent Edmund,Pictauians expelled. the Arch∣bishop, with Chester, and Rochester, to intreate of peace with Leolin and Richard, Earle marshall and others. But in the meane time, while these things were doing in Eng∣land, Richard, Earle marshal, by the falshood of the Bish. of Winchester, and Peter Riuall, forging the kinges letters to the Irishmen against him: and partly by the conspiracie of Gilbert de Morisco, was circumuented by the Irishmen in warre: and there taken, and wounded, and by them (through the meanes of his Surgion) slaine. About this time great slaughter was of thē which are cal∣led Catini, about the parts of Almaine:Catini in As∣maine slaine. they were estéemed of pope Gregorie, and the papistes, for heretikes: but what their opinions were, it is not certaine. Parisi. In like sort,Albingenses slaine. the Albingenses in great number were slain by pope Gregory in a certaine plain in Spaine. Paris. fo. 87 The king hearing of the death of the Earle marshal, made great lamentation for him. At Glocester, the Archb. with the bishops, declared to the K, the conditions of peace: & desired yt he would be reconciled to the Nobles, & those hée had banished the Realme. Wher∣vpon, the King directed his letters, and gaue safeconduct to all the exiles, that they shoulde repaire to him about the beginning of Iune at Glocester. Wherevppon first com∣meth to the King, Hubert,Hubert com∣meth to the K, offering himselfe to the kinges goodwill, and fauour: whom the king with chéerefull coun∣tenance, embraced: restoring vnto him, all that hée had taken from him, of liuing, and possessions: and after him, came o∣thers that were imbraced of the king, and receiued into fa∣uour againe,Reconciliation and those that were before high in the Kinges fauor, reproued and reiected, and among other matters, for the death of the Earle marshal. The same yéere the peace grew in England,Dissention be∣twixt the pope, & the Romans. dissentiō fel at Rome, betwixt the Pope and the Romanes: for that the Citizens claimed by olde custome, that it was not lawfull
for the pope to excommunicat any citizen,The Pope greater then any man. nor suspend the ci∣tie with any interdiction for any maner excesse. The Pope answered, that he is lesse thā God, but greater than any mā, therefore greater then any Citizen: yea greater then King or Emperor: and forsomuch as he is their spiritual father, he ought, and lawfully may chastise his children. For this, and other controuersies, such dissention arose, that the pope with his cardinals, remoued to Perusium: but the Romans ouer∣threw diuers of his houses in the citie. Wherefore he did ex∣communicate them. The Romanes then flying to the Em∣peror, desired his aide: but he gathered an army, and to plea∣sure the Pope, went against them, and ioyned with the Popes army: whose Captains were, the Earle of Tholouse (to purchase the popes fauour) and Peter the foresaid B. of Winchest, who ioyning together with the emperour, vexed the citizens greatly, who with the nūber of a hundred thou∣sand without order, issuing out with purpose to destroy Vi∣terbium the popes cities, were destroied thēselues (in great number) of their enimies. On both partes were slaine 30.Romans slayn. thousand But the most part were of the Citizens. This dissention continued long after. In the time of this Gregory 9. ann. 1230.  the schisme of the Church brake out into a plaine diuision,Schisme of the East Chhrch from the West. vtterly disse∣uering the East Church from the West, vppon this occa∣sion. There was a certaine Archbishop, elected to a Bishop∣ricke among the Grecians: who comming to Rome to bée confirmed, could not be admitted without a great summe of money: which when he refused to pay, and detested the exe∣crable simony of the Court of Rome, hee made his repaire home againe to his countrie, vnconfirmed: declaring to the whole nobilitie of that land, how the case stood. Wherevpon all the Church of the Grecians hearing this, at the same time departed vtterly from the Church of Rome. Insomuch that the Archbish. of Constantinople comming afterward
to the Councel of Lions, declared there openly, that, where∣as he had before time aboue thirtie Bishoprickes, and Suf∣fraganes, now he had not thrée. Adding moreouer, that all the Grecians, and certaine other, with Antioch, & the whole Empire of Romania, euen to the gates (almost) of Constan∣tinople, were gone from the obediēce of the church of Rome. Paris. f. 112. & f. 186. By occasion of which separation, in the yere 1237. Ger∣manus.1237 Germanus. Archb. and Patriarke of Constantinople, wrote vn∣to Gregorie the ninth, desiring him to study, & séeke meanes of vnitie, and that he would not refuse to méete him in the midwaye, to debate of the matter, that vnitie might bee recouered. But the Pope refused, and shortlye after, sent foorth his preaching Friers, to moue all Christians to take the signe of the Crosse, and to fight against the Grecians,The signe of the crosse to fight against the Grecians. euen as it were against the Turkes, and Sara∣cens. In so much, that in the Ile of Ciprus, many good men, and martyrs, were slaine for the same, as by letters of the said Germanus doeth appeare: who wrote to the Pope, and Cardinals, to reforme themselues: which was so taken of the Pope, that shortly after he prepared to send men of war, signed with the crosse, to fight against the Grecians. Whereupon, the Archb. of Antioch, with the foresaid Ger∣manus, solemnlie excommunicated the Pope.The pope ex∣communicated Intollerable exactions of the pope. The exactions of the Pope were so intollerable in the land, that king Henrie the third wrote to Pope Innocent the fourth, for releasement, in most humble, and gentle mā∣ner, anno 1244.  the 28. yere of the kings reigne: Yet it boo∣ted not, for the Pope was not ashamed to take of Dauid, Prince of North-wales, fiue hundred markes a yeare, to set him against the King of England, and exempted him from all his fealtie, and obedience, which he had sworne. In the yeare one thousande, two hundred fourtie fiue,Prince of Wales set a∣gainst the king of England. the whole Nobility of the Realm, by generall consent, with the kings knowledge, caused all partes of the Sea side to be
layde, that no Messenger with the Popes letters, & Bulles from Rome, should be permitted to enter the realm. Wher∣upon,No messenger permitted to, or fro Rome. some were taken at Douer, & there stayed. Notwith∣standing, when complaint thereof was brought to the king, by Martinus the Popes Legate, there was no remedie, but the K. must néedes cause the letters to be restored againe, and executed to the full effect. Then the king (vpon aduise) caused a view to be taken through euerie Shire in Englād, to what summe the whole reuenewes of the Romans, and Italians, amounted to, which by the popes authoritie went went out of England. The whole summe whereof, was foūd yerely to be 60000.60000. marks yerely to Rome. markes. To which summe, the whole reuenewes of the crowne did not amount. The Nobles then vnderstanding the miserable oppres∣sion of the Realme, being assembled together at Dunstable for certaine causes, sent one Fulco, in the name of the whole Nobilitie, vnto Martinus, that he should with spéede departe the land,The P. Legate departeth En∣gland. except he would be cut all to péeres. Which mes∣sage the Legat shewed to the king, and demaunded if his consent were thereto: and finding small comfort, tooke his leaue, and departed, an. 1245. After this, followed immediatly a generall Councell at Lions:Councel at Lions. to the which, the estate, and Lords of the Realme, with consent of the Communaltie, sent two billes: the one containing a generall Supplication to the Pope and Coun∣cell: the other, with the articles of such gréeuances as they desired to haue redressed. The Supplication was sent by Sir Roger Bigotte, knight, and William de Powick, Es∣quire, and Henrie de la Mare, with other knights, and Gen∣tlemen. After yt it was there opened, & read, P. Innocent first kéeping silence, differred to answere thereto, making hast to procéed to his detestable sentence of excommunicatiō & curse,Emp. Fred. cursed by the Pope. against the good Emperor Fred. Which curse being done, the Pope tolde them flatly, they should not haue their requestes fulfilled: and incontinent during ye same councell,
he caused euery B. of England to put to his hand and seale, to the obligation made by the king Iohn for the Popes tri∣bute: threatning moreouer, that if hée had once brought downe the Emperour Fredericke, he would bridle the inso∣lent pride of England well enough. In the beginning of the next yéere following, An. 1246.  Pope Innocent came to Cluniake:Pope perswa∣deth warre a∣gainst Eng∣land. where he perswaded the French king Lewes, to make warre against the king of En∣gland: whereto the French king would not agrée: but short∣ly after concluded with him longer truce. Ouer and beside all other exactions, the Pope sending downe his letters from the sea Apostolike, charged the pre∣lates to find him some ten, some fiue, some fiftéene able men, well furnished with horse and harneis, for one whole yéere to fight in the Popes warres:The Popes warres. and least the king should haue knowledge hereof, it was enioined them vnder paine of ex∣communication, that they should reueale it to none, but to kéepe it secrete onely to themselues. Pope Innocent now intending to subdue the Gréeke church, sent the prouinciall of the Grayfriers, with other as∣sociates of the same order into England, with his precepts authenticall, that all goods gotten by vsury, should be at∣tached for his warre against the Gréekes:Warre against the Greekes. and that all those should be absolued from all their sinnes, that would take on them the crosse to fight against the Grecians, &c. with other articles tending to the Popes profite. The same yéere 1246.  The Pope commaunded the Prelates of England, that all beneficed men in the realme of England, which were resident vpō their benefices should yéeld the third part of their goods: and they which were not resident should giue the one halfe of their goods, for the space of thrée yéeres together: which summe beyng estéemed toge∣ther, was found to amount to 60000. l.60000. pounds exacted by the Pope. The executiō of this commission, was cōmitted to the B. of London: but as con∣sultation was had about the matter at Paules, the King
sendeth straight charge, that they should not consent there∣to. Parisiensis, fol. 207. And afterward, An. 1247.  about February, the king cal∣led a parlement, and directeth Embassadours with letters, and also to make manifest the grieuances of the land vnto the court of Rome:The grieuāces of England. whereto the Pope maketh a slender, and an impertinent answere. In the yéere 1244.  Iewes the French king, sonne to quéene Blāch fell very sicke, lying in a swound or trance, for certaine daies, that some said, he was dead: his mother, a∣mongst the company superstitiously giuen, went & brought a péece of the holy crosse, with the crowne, and speare: which péece of the holy crosse, Baldwinus Emp. of Constantinople (whom the Grecians had deposed a litle before, for holding with the B. of Rome) had sold to the Frēch king, for a great summe of mony, and blessed him with the same: also laid the crowne and speare to his body: making a vowe withall, in the person of her sonne: that if the Lord would visit him with health, and release him of that infirmitie, hée should be marked with the crosse to visit his sepulcher. Thus as shée with the Bishop of Paris, and other, was praying: the King with a sigh began to plucke to his armes, and legs: and so stretching himselfe, began to speake, giuing thankes to God that had deliuered him from death. And assone as he was well recouered,The French King receiueth the signe of the crosse. receiued the signe of the crosse, vow∣ing for a fréewill sacrifice, that he would in his owne person visit the holy land. After that, great preparation was made thorough out Fraunce, for the iourney. The most part of the Nobles crossing themselues, after the example of the king. The Frenchmens example, moued William longa Spata, with the Bishop of Worcester,The voyage of the holy land. and certaine Gentlemen to the same iourney. Anno 1248.  the feast of Iohn Baptist drew nigh, which was the time appointed for the setting foorth, and nothing
wanted thereto, sauing the variance betwixt Frederike the Emperour, and the Pope: which he thought good to séeke to appease, that he might haue both safer passage through the Emperours countrey, and lesse ieopardy might be at home.The Pope re∣fuseth al agree∣ment with the Pope. But the Pope would not in any sort come to agréement, al∣though the Emperour offered him whatsoeuer amendes hée woulde require: and if the Pope could not abide his tarry∣ing in his owne dominions and empire: he said he woulde go fight against the Saracens, and Turkes, neuer to return into Europe againe, there to recouer lands and kingdomes, whatsoeuer did at any time belong vnto Christendome, so that the Pope would be onely contented, that Henrie his sonne should be Emperour after him. Neither could this be admitted. Then he offered for truth of his promise, to put in the French king, and the king of England for his sure∣ties, or els for triall of his cause, to stande to their arbitre∣ment. Neyther woulde that bée graunted. At last, hée desi∣red that hée might come himselfe, and answere before the Councell: which the Pope also refused, Paris. fol. 187. An∣no 1225. The French king finding no fauour at the Popes hand,Damiata won from ye Turks for the Emperour, taketh his leaue of him at Lions, with heauinesse, and proceeded in his iourney: and hauing nowe taken Damiata, the Soldan sent vnto the king, by cer∣taine that were about him: offering to the Christians, the quiet, and ful possession of the holy land, and all the king∣dome of Hierusalem: and besides, other infinite treasure of gold and siluer: or what els soeuer might pleasure them. Onely vppon condition, that they woulde restore againe Damiata, with the captiues there: and so woulde ioyne together in mutuall peace, and amitie, &c. It was also firm∣ly spoken, that the Soldan, with most of his nobles, were intended to leaue the law of Mahomet, and imbrace the faith of Christ: so that they might quietly enioy their landes, and possessions. But they had commaundement
from the Pope by his legate,The pope hin∣dreth the peace that if any such offers shoulde be made, they should not in any case accept of them. Paris. fol. 233. But afterward the Soldan growing to bee more confi∣dent, refused that which before he had offered: and in con∣clusion, the army of the Christians, was wholly destroyedThe armie of Christians wholy destroi∣ed. by the Saracens: and the French king with his two bre∣thren taken prisoners: the King was raunsomed at sixtie thousand marks, and Damiata deliuered againe, vpon con∣dition that the Soldan shoulde sée him safely conducted to Achon.80000. Chri∣stians perisheth in the warres against the Turkes. The number of Christians that perished in that iourney, were 80000. persons. Paris. fol. 237, 238. After this ouerthrow of the French king, and his army, the Christians of Antioch, and of other Christian regions, gaue ouer their holdes, and cities. In the raigne of Henrie the third, was the good Empe∣rour Federike the second vexed of the Popes: first, of Inno∣centius the third: to whom, with his dominions, hée was in his minoritie committed by his mothers testament, thin∣king thereby to haue safely prouided for him. But this Pope, so soone as hée had protection of the young Emperour and his seigniories, became a false Traytour against him: and stirred vp Sibill, the late wife of Tancredus, whome Henrie put from the kingdome of Sicilie, to recouer the same againe, & procured the ayd of the French K. therunto. At which time, the worthy protector Innocent 3. sent his le∣gats with letters of excōmunication against such, that wold not admit one Walterus, (who had married with the eldest daughter of Tancredus) for their king: and also absolued the Princes electors, and other Nobles, from their oath which they had made to Henricus, touching the establishing of his son in the empire: and wrote his Epistle to the Duke Bar∣thold of Zaringia, to be Emperour: which he refusing, hée went about to procure, that Otho the sonne of Henrie Leo should be made Emperour. But Frederick now growing to
mans estate, gathered his powre and pursued Otho:Fredericke crowned Em∣perour by pope Honorius. who anon after died, and so he was crowned Emperour of Ho∣norius the Pope, that succéeded Innocentius, and was of him consecrated, and called Augustus. After his consecration, he gaue many great giftes,Gifts to the Church of Rome. & as∣sured by his charter, to the church of Rome, the dukedome of Fundanum: hée gaue moreouer, and remitted what con∣stitutions the Pope would desire: whereby what soeuer he were, which for the diminution of the liberties of the church were excommunicated, and so continued a yéeres space, that then he should be within daunger of proscription, and not be released without satisfactiō made, and that he were admitted by the Pope to the Church againe. A while after Frederike departing from Rome, certain conspirators, both bishops, & others, against the emperor, fled to Honorius for succour. Which when Frederik vnderstood, he began to expostulate with the B. considering the vnséem∣linesse of that his fact: the pope on the other side,Honorius cur∣seth the Emp. Frederike. thundered out his curses, and excommunications against him. Nicholaus Cisnerus affirmeth, that whilest Frederike the Emperor was in Sicilia, his wife Constantia died at Catrana, or Catana. In the meane time, the Christiās with a great many, sailed into Egypt, & took the Citie Heliopolis, commonly called Damatia, & long ago named Pelusinū: be∣ing in good hope to haue driuē Sultanus ye Soldan, out of E∣gypt,) had a great, and marueylous ouerthrow, by the con∣ueying of the water of Nylus (which then ouerflowed) into their Campe, and were faine to accorde an vnprofitable truce with the Soldan, for certaine yeres, and to deliuer the Citie againe. Whereupon, king Iohn, surnamed Brennius King of Ierusalem, arriued in Italie, and desired helpe of Emperor against his enemies. And from thence he went to Rome, to the Pope, de∣claring vnto him their calamitie, and present perill, de∣siring ayde therein. By whose meanes, the Emperour
(as saith Cisnerus) was reconciled with the Pope and made friends.The Emp. re∣conciled with the pope. To whom also king Iohn gaue Ioell his daughter in mariage, which came of the daughter of Conradus king of Ierusalem, as right heyre therevnto by her mother: by whom also he obtained the kingdomes of Naples, and Si∣cill, and promised he would in his owne person with all spéede, assay to recouer the kingdome of Ierusalem. Hono∣rius that lately was reconciled vnto him,Honorius dieth. purposed to haue made against him some great and secret attempt: but was by death preuented. After whom succéeded Gregory the 9. as great an enimy to Fredericke as Honorius:Pope Grego∣ry the 9. which Gre∣gory came of the race of him whom the Emperour had con∣demned of treason,The Pope threatneth the Emperour. wrought against himselfe. This Gre∣gorie was scarcely setled in his papacie, when that hee threatned him with excommunication, vnlesse he would pre∣pare himselfe into Asia (according to his promise) vnto king Iohn: which was onely (the Emperour being absent) that he might bring some purposes against him to passe. Fazellus a Sicilian writer, saith: that the chiefest cause of the Em∣perors stay, was for the oath of truce and peace, during cer∣taine yeres: which was made betwixt the Saracens, & chri∣stians, that yet was not expired When K. Iohns daughter of Hierusalem, was brought to Rome, and the Emperor and the Pope reconciled together, to celebrate the marriage:The Pope of∣fended with the Emp. for not kissing his foot but his knee. Gregorie (as the manner was) offered his right foote to the Emperor to kisse, who stouped not so low, but scarce kissed the vpper part of his knée, and would not kisse his foote: whereat the Pope was greatly of∣fended, and purposed to reuenge it, as occasion shoulde serue. Afterwarde, the Emperor prepared himselfe to the iour∣ney against the Saracens, and recouerie of Ierusalem, but was stayed by sicknes, all other things being in a readines. Who, after he had recouered himselfe, procéeded in his iour∣ney: and when hee came to the straights of Peloponesus,
and Creta. His disease grew vpon him againe, and sodainlie he fell sicke: whereof the Pope hearing, thundered against him excommunications, and curses, laying most foule, & false crimes to his charge. In so much, that the Emperour was fayne to purge himselfe by his letters, vnto the Christian Princes: especially, of Germanie, and the Nobles of ye Em∣pire, his Ambassadors not being suffered to approach the P. presence. But now, being recouered of his sicknes, he prouided all things necessarie for the warre: and came to Ioppa, and so vsed the matter, that the Saracens graunted his demaunds right profitable for the Christian Common-wealth, and a peace was concluded for tenne yeares, and confirmed by so∣lemne oath on both sides:The iourny a∣gainst the Sara. the forme and condition of which peace, was thus. First, that Frederick should bee crowned K. of Ierusalem Secondly, that all the landes and possessi∣ons which were situate betwixt Ierusalem,The P. false accusation of the Emperor. and Ptolema∣ida, and the greatest part of Palestina, the Cities of Tirus and Sidon, which were in Siria, and all other territories, which Baldwinus the fourth at any time had, and occupied there, should be deliuered vnto him: onely, certaine Castles reserued. Thirdly, that he might fortifie, and builde, what Fortresses, and Castles he thought good, Cities and townes in all Siria, and Palestina. Fourthly, that all Prisoners in Saracens hands, should be fréelie set at libertie: and againe, that the Saracens might haue leaue (without armour) to come into the Temple, where the Sepulchre of the Lorde is, to pray, and that they should keepe still Cratum, and the kings mount. These things obteined, Frederick desireth the Pope,The Emperor craueth the P. fauour. that for as much as he had now accomplished his promise, nei∣ther was there any cause, why he should now be offended with him, that he might be reconciled, and obteyne his fa∣uour. In the meane season, the Emperor, with all his ar∣mie, marcheth to Ierusalem: where, vpon Easter day, anno
1259.  hee was crowned king. Onely, the Patriarch of Cypres, and Oliue, the Master, or Captaine of the temple, repining thereat.The Emperor crowned K. of Ierusalem. The P prac∣tiseth against the Emperor whiles he war∣reth with the Saracens. In the time of the Emperors being in A∣sia, the Pope practiseth against him at home. And first, cau∣sed the Souldiers which the Emperor sent for out of Ger∣manie, to the mainteyning of the holye warres, to bée stayed, passing through Italie, and caused them to be spoiled of all such prouision as they had: and sent letters into Asia, to the Patriarch of Ierusalem, and Souldiers, that kept the Temple, and Hospitall, inciting them to rebell against the Emperour. And furthermore, disswaded the Princes of the Saracens, that they should make no league with Frederike, neither deliuer vp vnto him the Crowne,The P prac∣tiseth with the Saracens. and Kingdome of Ierusalem: Which letters fell into the hands of the Empe∣rour. Besides these practises, he also excited his father in law, Iohn Brennius; and the French king, to inuade his Domi∣nions: which ioyntly they did. Thus, while the Pope practised in the dominions of Fre∣derike, he receiued the letters of his good successe in Asia: which greatly vexed his holines, so farre of was he from re∣ioysing therat. Wherby it may appeare, that his desire was, to haue the Emperor take that dangerous iourney, there to miscarie, and perishe. But the Pope (that hee might haue some pretence) blamed the Emperour, for that he had suffe∣red the Saracens (although without armour and weapon) to enter vnto the Sepulchre of Christ,A quarrel to the Emperor. and had left for them a lodging, néere vnto the place. The Pope also caused a rumor to be spread, of the death of the Emperor, to the end he might allure vnto him, the fi∣delitie of those cities in the kingdome of Naples (which yet kept their alleagance vnto Frederike) of whom they shoulde now hope for no longer refuge. The Emp. re∣turneth and winneth towns from the pope in Italy.The Emperour now vnderstanding what stirre the P. kept in his Dominions, returned wt such power, & successe,
that he winneth in Italie as many townes, as the Pope had, euen almost to Rome, and after that Vmbria and Pi∣cena: yet for Christian and publicke tranquillitie sake, hée sendeth vnto him his Legates to entreate a peace, decla∣ring that hée would (if no other conceyued grudge were then pretended) make to him an accompt voluntarily of all things that hée had doone in his life:The Emp. of¦fereth to giue accompt of his things to the Pope. and that hée would and was contented to submit himselfe vnto the Church: and that for this cause hée willingly offered vnto him both dutie and obseruancie, and sent him Princes and Dukes of the Empyre to entreate for this peace: yet was the popes insolencie such, that hée would not that yéere be brought to any agréement, but the next yéere after with much adoe,Peace betwixt the Emp. and the pope. a peace was made and concluded betwixt them by the helpe and industrie of Leopaldus of Austria, and Hermannus Captaine of the Duitch souldiers, and the President of Messana. The Pope then absoluing the Emperour of his excommunication, tooke therefore of him an hundred and twentie thousand ounces of golde,120000. ounces of gold to the Pope for the Emperours absolution. and promised him the ti∣tles both of the empire, and also of his kingdomes: yet kept he not promise with him, for besides other breaches, he nei∣ther restored the customs in the land of Sicil, neither yet the city Castellana. Yet notwithstanding, Frederike for peace sake, bare the iniury, and studied by liberall giftes to make the Pope his trustie frend. But no meanes would serue: so that he moued Henrie, the Emperors sonne in his absence, to rebell against his father:The P. mo∣ueth the Emp. sonne to rebel against his father. besides other conspiracies pro∣cured against the Emperor: who returning into Italie, to punish those that had rebelled with his sonne. The P. ad∣monished those that were faultie, to ioyne themselues toge∣ther, and to furnish their Townes, and Cities, with gari∣sons, & to send for ayde to their frendes, and to prouide wea∣pons méete for war. And furthermore, sendeth his Ambas∣sador to ye Emp. to whō (vnder pretence of peace) he sendeth out commandemēt, to interdict him and his land, so soone as
he came within the borders of Italie, yet the Emperour marcheth forth into Italie, notwithstanding the Popes for∣bidding, and brought vnder the cities that rebelled, as Man∣tua,The Emp. pre∣uaileth for all the Popes curse. Verona, Ternisium, Patauium, and others, & ouerthrew the Popes confederates, whereat the pope being somewhat dismaid, began to feare the Emperor, and now goeth about to depriue him: which hée vnderstanding, sendeth foure Le∣gates vnto him, that might answere, and refute the crimes layd against him. With which Embassadours the Pope re∣fuseth to speake, and at a day appointed pronounceth the sentence of proscription against the Emperour:The pope pro∣nounceth the sentence of pro∣scription a∣gainst the Em∣perour. depriuing him of all his dignities, honours, titles, prerogatiues, king∣domes, and the whole empire, and and sollicited against him Tewepolus the Venetian, who yet stood fast and faithfull to the Emperour. Yet certaine princes of Germanie, by the Popes meanes, reuolted from the Emperour, as Otho the Gouernour of Rhemes, and Duke Boiora, who also cau∣sed thrée other Princes and Dukes,Reuolt from the Emperour to the Pope. to reuolt from the Em∣perour to the Pope: as Vuenceslaus, and Belus, Princes of che Hungarians, and Henrie, Duke of Polonia: to whom al∣so came Fredericus Austriacus his sonne. These gathe∣ring a Councell, (when they had thought to haue translated the empire vnto the kings sonne of Denmarke) desired to haue the Popes Legates to be sent from him to the effect of that election. These newes being brought to the Emperor, at Pata∣uium: hee purgeth himselfe of the crimes, to the Christian Princes, and denounceth a solemne Councell of all ye prin∣ces, and other Nobilitie of the Empire, at Aegera: to whom resorted diuers States,The Church spoiled to main¦taine the popes warres. and Nobles. The pope, on the other side, soliciting against the Emperor all that hee might: so that some had tithes geuen them to fight against the Empe∣ror: other, Glebe-lands, and benefices: other, the spoyle of such Colledges, and Monasteries, as tooke not part with the Pope: And to some other were geuen Colledges, and Mo∣nasteries
themselues: yea there were certaine of the popes owne birdes that had their ecclesiasticall tithes taken from them, and other some had the rentes and reuenewes of their Colleges pluckt away by force,The Emp. pre∣uaileth. to the maintenaunce of the popes quarrell against the Emperour. But the Emperour preuayled and came to Viterbium, which draue the Pope into a feare, least he would also come to Rome: wherefore he caused a supplicatiō to be drawne, pourtraying about the same the heads of Peter and Paule,Euerlasting life promised to such as wold fight against the Emperor. and with a sharpe and cō∣tumelious Oration, he much defaced the Emperour, promi∣sing them euerlasting life, and giuing the badge of the crosse to as many as would arme themselues and fight against the Emperour, as against the most wicked enemy of God and his church, yet the Emperour by Gods blessing preuai∣led and subdued the popes confederates. Now while this stir was betwixt the Emperour and the pope, Ochodarius the Emperour of the Tartarians sonne, with a great power inuaded ye borders next adioyning vnto him, & there wan Ropolanum, Rodolium, Mūdanum, with diuerse other cities & townes, killing man, woman, & child, and destroyed all Hungarie, & made great spoile in both the Pannonias, Mesiarum, Bulgaria, & Seruia. When Belus the king of Hungarie had gotten to Pola, a citie of Histria: vnto Otho duke of Dalmatia, hée sent his Legates to Fre∣dericke the Emperour, promising, if that he would send him aid to expell the Tartars, Hungarie should euer after bée vnder the iurisdiction of the Empire. The Emperour was in respect of the common cause of Christians,The pope hin∣dereth the de∣fence of chri∣stendome. very willing to satisfie his request, but the pope with his confederats hinde∣red the same, as he signified to the king of Hungarie by his letters. Notwithstanding he sent Conradus Caesar king of Bohemia, and other Princes more of Germanie, to with∣stand the enemy, as much as lay in them to doo. But ye great armie and number of souldiers that ware the crosse, by the Popes assignement, differed their iourney agaynst the
Tartarians, and had commaundement giuen them by Al∣bertus the Popes procurator, to abide at home, till they should be called for in battle to fight against the Emperour: and notwithstanding this spoile and hauocke of Polonia, Bohemia, and Hungaria, by the Tartarians, it was deter∣mined that at Libussa the Princes confederate should be as∣sembled, about the deposing of the Emperour, and creating an other: & the league with him and the French king by the popes means,The Emp. wa∣steth about Rome. either was vtterly infringed or else in varia∣ble suspence. Wherefore Fredericke now seing no other re∣medie, prosecuteth his warre to the vttermost, and wasteth all the countrie about Rome,The pope di∣eth for anger. wherewith the Pope was so dismaide, that beyng in dispaire to obtaine his purpose, hée died for very anger and thought. This Gregory brought into the Church much horrible impietie, blasphemy, & wickednes, & among others brought in that most detestable Canticle,Salue Regina brought into the Church. Salue Regina: in which hée attributeth the honour and worshippe onely due to Iesus Christ, vnto the virgin his mother. This is hée, in whose name the booke of the DecretalsThe decretals. was set out, a sinke of folly and impietie. Pope Cele∣stine. Pope dieth.After this Gregory was placed Celestine, borne in Me∣diolanum, among the Castellians: who (as Blondus decla∣red) by fained promises, offered a league with Fredericke, and the 18. day after he was created, he died. Now Fredericke thinking himselfe void of feare, lenieth an army against the Tartarians,An army a∣gainst the Tar∣tarians. for the reliefe of the Chri∣stians, who hearing of the comming of the Emperour, re∣turned another way, by the riuer Danubius to Tanricia, and so through the fennes of Meotida, and by the riuer Ta∣naum into Sarmatia Asiatica. After Celestine, the cardinals made choyse of Simbaldus a Genouais for pope, whom they called Innocentius the 4.Innocentius 4. which election Fredericke was well pleased with: as hée signified by letters and Legates gratulatorie to the pope.
The legats of Frederick, with the furtherance of Baldro∣nius Emperour of Constantinople, laboured very diligent∣ly for conclusion of promised peace: but all in vaine, for while the Emperours legats attended for answer of peace, Ramerus the Cardinall went secretly and tooke Viterbium which was on the Emperours part. The Emperour (not∣withstanding there séemed no hope of peace) doubted not but if he might himselfe speake with the Pope, he vpon rea∣sonable conditions should well inough accord with him: wherefore he desired him by his legats to appoint a place where the Emperour might speake with him.The Empe∣rour seeketh peace. The Pope will none. The Pope séemed to be content therewith, but on a sudden went to Lyons, and called a councell, and with a lowd voice som∣moneth Frederick, and appointing him a day commaunded him there personally to appeare to pleade his cause. The Emperour agréed, but required conuenient time to trauaile thether. The pope would not so much as graunt 3. dayes, but being both iudge and accuser,Pope iudge accuser. condemneth him before he could come thether without proofe of any crime, or his cause suffered to be pleaded. But Gods iudgement failed him not: for the writers of the annals accord, that when Frede∣rick the Emperour, and Conradus his sonne were dead and the pope gaping for the inheritance of Naples and Sicil, and thinking by force to subdue the same, coming to Naples wt a great armie of men, there was heard manifestly in the Popes court a voice, pronouncing these wordes. Thou wretch, come to receiue thy iudgemēt.A voice heard. Thou wretch, come and re∣ceiue thy iudgement. And the next day the pope was found dead all blacke and blew, as though he had bin beaten with battes. When the Emperour had vnderstanding of this cruell sentence, he signified the iniurie to all Christian Prin∣ces by his letters, and prouided euery way to withstand the P. and his confederats: and after diuers aduenturs & varia∣blenes of thinges,The Emp. dieth. hee came into a certaine castle of his in Apulia, called Florentinum, where hee fell sicke of
an ague, and died. Hauing had purpose, as Pandolphus Co∣lonuthius writeth, of some maruellous exploite, & great at∣tempt. Frederike died willingly, and gladly, in the yéere 1240.  the 13. day of December, the 57. yéere of his age, and 37. of his raigne, and was buried at Panorium. The pope counted him an enemie of the Church: and so both Innocen∣tius the fourth pronounced him, and the same sentence haue other Popes registred in their 6. Booke of decretals, and e∣stablished the same for a law, that he ought to bee taken for no lesse. In the Countrey of Sueuia, about the time of Frederike the second, anno 1240.  or néere about the same, were manie preachers,Preachers bold against Pope. which preached fréely against the Pope, & prea∣ched that he was an heretike, and that his bishops & Prelats were Simoniakes, and heretikes, and that the inferiour priestes had no authoritie to binde and loose, but were sedu∣cers: and that such cities and countries as were then vnder the popes curse, might notwithstanding lawfully resort to the receiuing of the sacrament, as wel as before. Item, that Friers, Dominick & Franciscan did subuert the church with their preaching, &c. And not long after these, rose vp Arnol∣dus de noua villa,Arnoldus de noua villa was condemned. a Spaniard, a man famously learned, & a great writer, ann. 1250.  whom ye pope condemned amōg he∣retikes, for holding, and writing against the corrupt errors of the popish church. His teaching was, that christiā people are led by the pope into hel. Item, that cloisterers are voyd of charitie, and denyed that masses are not to be celebrated, & that they ought not to do sacrifice for the dead, &c. And as this Arnoldus was condemned, so likewise the same time, Io∣hannes Seneca,Iohannes Se∣neca appealeth from the pope to a Councell. the glosewriter of the popes decrées, and pro∣uost of Halberster, was excommunicated, and depriued of of his prouostship, for resisting Pope Clement the fourth, gathering certaine exactions in Germanie, and there∣fore hée appealed from the Pope to a generall Councell; and had manie great fauourers on his side: till at last,
both the Pope and he died. After this, folowed Guilielmus de sancto amore,G. de sancto amore against the Pope. a Ma∣ster of Paris, and a chiefe Ruler then of that Vniuersitie. Al testimonies of Scripture, that make against Antichrist, he applyeth them against the cleargie of Prelates, and against the popes spiritualtie. The same Guilielmus is thought to be the author of the Booke which is attributed to the Schoole of Paris, and inti∣tuled, De periculis ecclesiae,De periculis Ecclesiae. where he proueth by thirtie and nine arguments, that friers be false Apostles.39. arguments that Friers be false Apo∣stles. Hee was by Antichrist, and his rablement, condemned for an heretike, exiled, and his bookes burned. In the dayes of this Guilielmus, there was a most dete∣stable, and blasphemous booke, set foorth by the Friers, mē∣tioned also in Matthias Parisiensis, which they called Euan∣gelium aeternum Spiritus sancti,Euangelium aeternum spi∣ritus sancti. the euerlasting Gospell, or the Gospell of the holie Ghost. In which booke, many abho∣minable errors of the Papistes were conteyned, so that the Gospel of Iesus Christ was vtterly defaced. Which sayde booke, was not to be compared to this euerlasting Gospel, no more then the shell was to be compared to the kernel,The shell to the kernell. or the darkenesse to light, &c. Moreouer, that the Gospell of Christ should be preached no more but fiftie yeares, and then this euerlasting Gospell should rule the Church, &c. Item, that whatsoeuer was in the whole Bible,A blasphemous gospel of the Friers. was in the same Gospell conteyned. At the length, this Friers gos∣pell was accused to the Pope: and so sixe persons chosen of the whole Vniuersitie, to peruse, and iudge of this booke: as, Christianus, Canonicus, Beluacensis, Ododoaco, Nichola∣us de Baro, Iohannes de sicca vella, Anglus, Iohannes Be∣lim, Gallus. Among whom, this Guilielmus also was one, who mightely impugned this pestiferous, & deuillish booke. These sixe (after the perusing of this booke) were sent to Rome. The friers also sent their messengers withal: where
they were refuted, and the errors of the booke condemned: but so, that the pope, with the Cardinals commanded ye said booke to be abolished, and condemned, not publikely (tende∣ring the estimatiō of the religious orders) but ye they should be burned secretly, and the bookes of the foresaid Guilielm{us} to be burned withall. Among other besides of ye age-which withstood the B. of Rome, and his antichristian errors, was one Laurence,Laurence. an Englishman, and master of Paris: ano∣ther was Petrus Ioannes,P. Iohannes. P antichrist Rome Ba∣bylon. Dead bones burned. a Minorite. Laurence was about the yere 1290.  who proued the Pope to be Antichrist, & the Sinagogue of Rome great Babylon. The Pope, after his death caused his bones to be taken vp, and burned. To these is to be added, Robertus Gallus, an. 1290. who being born of right noble Parentage, for deuotion sake, was made a do∣minike Frier.R. Gallus. He had diuers visions against the Pope,Visions against the pope. and Sea of Rome. Hee called the Pope an Idoll. He forewar∣ned (as is in a certaine Chronicle declared) how God would punish the simonie, and auarice of the Cleargie, with such a plague, that riuers should run with bloud. It is saide, there is remayning a great volume of his visions. To these fathers is to be ioyned Rob. Grosted, B. of Lin∣colne,R. Grosted, B. of Lincolne. a man famouslie learned in the iij. tongues, & in philo∣sophie. He wrote diuers bookes, and one speciall Sermon, he exhibited in foure sundrie scrowles to the Pope, and other foure Cardinals: beginning, Dominus noster Iesus Christ{us}, &c. He wrote diuers Inuectiues against the Pope.Inuectiues against the Pope. The Pope (amongst his other intollerable exactions) had a certain neuew (so the popes are wont to cal their sonnes) named Frederike, being yet vnder age, whome Innocent would néedes preferre to be a Chanon, or Prebende, in the Church of Lincolne: and directed downe his letters, to cer∣taine his factors here in England, for execution of the same. Wherewith Grosted was greatly offended, and maketh a quick, and sharpe answere to the Pope: whereat he fretting and fuming, answered with a proud looke, and fierce mind,
what old doting franticke wretch is this, so boldly and rash∣ly to iudge of my doings? By swéete S. Peter and S. Paule, were it not but vpon our owne clemencie and good nature we are constrained, we would hurle him downe to such con∣fusion, that we would make him a fable, a gasing stocke, an example and wonderment to all the world:K. of England the popes man∣ciple, vassall page. for is not the king of England our vassall, and to say more, our manciple and page, which may at our pleasure and becke imprison him, and put him to vtter shame. This when the Pope had in rage vttered, scarse were his Cardinals able to appease him with gentle and milde wordes, declaring vnto him the inconuenience, if he should so procéede, besides giuing great commēdation of Grosteds learning and godlinesse. These wordes spake Lord Giles a Spanish Cardinall to the pope, and this Councell gaue the rest vnto him, that hée should winke at these things,Manifest and knowne that once should come a defec∣tion from Rome. least some tumult might arise thereof, especially seing this is ma∣nifest and knowne to all men, that once must come a defecti∣on and parting from the church of Rome. Not long after, this Robert Grosted died at Budgen. In time of his sicknesse, he called vnto him a Preaching frier, one Iohn Giles, and did greatly complaine of the disorders of the Friers, and of the Romane clergie, prouing the Pope to be an Hereticke:The pope an hereticke. declaring and reprouing manifold ab∣uses of the church of Rome, and said that this old verse may truly be verified vpon it. Eius auaritiae totus vix sufficit orbis. Eius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit vna.Romane ver∣tues. that is: The whole world doth scarse satisfie his couetousnesse, neither doth one harlot suffise for his leacherie: and in the end prophesied:R. Grosted prophesieth a∣gainst Rome, and dieth. Neither (saith hée) shall the Church be de∣liuered from the seruitude of Egypt, but by violence and force, and by the blouddy sword. So scarse able to vtter his words, with sighing, sobbing, & wéeping, his tongue & breath failed, and so finished his daies. He departed, An. 1253.  Of
his decease: thus writeth Math. Paris. pag. 278. Out of the prison and banishment of this world which he neuer loued, was taken the holy bishop of Lincolne, Robert, at his Man∣nor of Buckdune on the éeuen of S. Dionise:The vertues of R. Grosted. who was an open reproouer of the pope, and of the king: a rebuker, of the Prelates: instructer of the clarks: fauourer of scholers: prea∣cher to the people: persecutor to the incontinent: a diligent searcher of the Scriptures: a maule to the Romans,A maule of the Romans. and a contemner to their dooings, &c. This Robert Grosted caused to be viewed, and conside∣red diligently of his clerkes, what the reuenew of forren∣ners and straungers set in by the pope came to by the yéere, and it was found,Pope Innocēt the 4. a great impouerisher of christendome. and euidently tried, that pope Innocent the fourth, did impouerish the vniuersall Church of Chri∣stendome, more then all his predecessors from the time the pope first began: so that the reuenewes of forreners & clerks placed by him here in England,70000. markes reuenewes of forreners pla∣ced in the land by the Pope. mounted to the summe of 70. thousand markes and aboue: whereas the méere reue∣newes of the crowne came not to 30. thousand. Mathias Parisiensis reporteth, that pope Innocentius, an. 1254. being maruellous angry with Grosted, contrary to the mind of his Cardinals, would haue his bones to be cast out of the church: and purposed to bring him into such spite, that he should be counted an Ethnicke, a rebell, & disobedi∣ent person throughout the world: and therevpon caused his letters to be sent to the king of England, knowing that the king would gladly serue his turne therein, to haue the spoile of the bishop and his Church. But the night following Grosted appéered vnto him comming in his Pontificalibus,Grosted ap∣peereth in a vi∣siō to the pope. and with a seuere countenaunce, and terrible voice spea∣keth vnto him beyng in his rest, and smiteth him on the side vehemently with his crossestaffe, saying: O thou scurffie lazie, old, bald, lowsie, wretched, doting Pope, hast thou pur∣posed to cast my bones out of the Church, to the slaunder and shame of mée, how came this rashe wilfulnesse into
thy head? it were more méete for thée to make much of the zealous seruantes of God, although departed:Grosted stri∣keth the Pope. with other wordes of reproofe, and so departed from him, leauing him stroken, and halfe dead: so that hée neuer enioyed anie pro∣sperous day, or could haue anie quiet night til the morning, vnto his death: which happened shortly after, hee being at Naples, ann. 1255.  or as N. Treuet recordeth, 1254. After Innocent the 4. succéeded in the Popedome,Innocent di∣eth. Alex∣ander the 3.Alexander 3. After this, about the yéere 1260.  fell debate betwixt the King and his Nobles: but so was it compounded, that the King and the Lords did sweare at Oxford, that what lawes and decrées in the same assembly, shoulde bée proui∣ded to the profit of the King and the Realme, the same vni∣uersally shoulde be kept and obserued, to the honour of God, and peace of the Realme Besides the king and the Lordes, there were also 9. Bishops, which swearing to the same end, excommunicated all such as should gainstand the said proui∣sions there made. Wherevppon, diuers wholesome lawesWholesome lawes. were enacted, which misliked the King, in such sort, that he required of the Pope for himselfe, and his sonne Edward, to be dispensed with of their othes, Anno 1261.  Which being easily obtained,The Pope dis∣penseth with othes. Pope dieth. the king steps back from all that was before concluded. The same yéere died pope Alexander: after whom succée∣ded Vrban the 4. who also reuiued and renewed the release∣ment of the kings oath aforesaid: wherevpon grew war be∣twixt the king and the Barons.P. Vrban 4 War betwixt the king and the Barons. Anno 1264.  died Pope Vrban, and after him succéeded Clement 4.Clement 4. who, (as Nicholas Riuet affirmeth) was first a married man, & had wife and children, and was the sollicitor and Counseller to the French K. then after the death of his wife, was Bishop, intituled: Padiensis. after that,Vrban dieth. Archb. of Narbourn, and at last, made Cardinall: who being sent of Pope Vrban in legacie for reformation of peace, in his ab∣sence,
was elected Pope by the Cardinalles. Thomas of Aquine Bona∣uenture.About this time florished Thomas of Aquine Reader at Paris among the Dominick Fryers: and Bonauenture a∣mong the Franciscan Friers, ex Nichol. Riuet. Anno 1265  the pope graunted that the Church of Eng∣land should pay tenthes of all reuenewes, as well tempo∣rall as spiritual, to the King, to continue thrée yeares space: & the yeare after,Tenthes to the Kinge. the popes Legate, Octobonus, caused to be proclaimed a new graunt of pope Clement to the King and Quéene of all the tenthes for 7 yeares to come. Anno 1267  peace was concluded betwéene the King & the Barons, and Octobonus departed the land. This Oc∣tobonus enrolled to perpetuall memorie,Peace betwixt the K. and the Barons. the valuation of all the Churches in the realme of England, so narrowly as by any meanes he might enquire the certainty thereof. Cathedrall churches popes pensions.The same was he that made al the Cathedral & conuen∣tuall churches to pay pensions: so that those churches that gaue not the vacancie of their benefices to their Clerkes and straungers, should pay vnto them a certaine yearly pension during the vacancie of the benefices they should haue. Clement 4. diethThe same yeare dyed pope Clement the 4. after whose death the church of Rome was vacant 2. yeares: and then was chosen an Archdeacon Pope, whose name was The∣ardus, as he was taking his iourney into the holy land, and called him Gregory the tenth.Gregory 10. During the raigne of King Henry the 3. Edward the Kinges sonne was one that made a generall expedition a∣gainst the SaracensAgainst the Saracens. to Ierusalem, and in the yeare 1270, in the moneth of May he set forward in his iourney. About the time when Prince Edward was preparing his iourney towardes Asia, Boniface the Archb of Canterbury ended his life in the countrie of Sebaudia, going belyke to Rome, or comming thence. In whose stead Gregory the tenth placed Robert Kilwardly, neither according to the
minde of the Monkes, who agréed vpon the Prior of their house named Adam Chelendine, nor of the king, who spake in the behalfe of Robert Burnell there Chancellor. About this time came out the great Concordances,Great Con∣cordances. by an English frier, called Derminghton. Ex Eulogio. Anno 1273.  Pope Gregory the tenth called a gene∣rall CouncellA generall Councell. at Lions, about the controuersie betwixt the Gréeke Church and the Latine, and for the vacancie of the sea apostolicall. This yéere in the moneth of Aprill, Richard King of Almaigne, died at the Castle of Barthamstéed, and was buried at the Abbey of Hailes,Abbey of Hailes. King dyeth. which hée buylded from the ground. This yeare 1273. dyed King Henry, the 16. day before the calendes of December, in the 56. yeare of his raigne,Westminster church. & was buryed at Westminster. The stéeple and church wher∣of in his life time he began to build, but did not fully finish the same before his death. After Henry the 3. succéeded his sonne Edward, and was crowned anno 1274. Anno. 1276.  began the foundation of the Black fryers by Ludgate.Blackfryers by Ludgate. And in the yeare 1285. the new worke of ye church of Westminster that began in the 3. year of Henry the third was finished: which was 66 yeares in edifying. An. 1291.  The Iewes were vtterly banished the realm: for which, the Commons gaue to the K. a Fiftéene. King Edward had sharpe warre with the Scottes,Iewes bani∣shed ye realm vtterly. and subdued them thrée times: who séeing they could not make their partie good against the King, sent priuilie to P. Boni∣face for his ayde, and councell: who immediatly sendeth downe his precept to the king, that he should herafter cease to molest the Scottes, for that they were a people exempt,The Scots pertain to the Popes chap∣pell. and properly pertayning vnto his Chappell: and therefore it coulde not otherwise bee, but that the Citie of Ierusa∣lem must néedes defende her owne Citizens: and as the
mount Sion maintaine such as trust in the Lord. Where∣vnto the king made answere with an oth, that hée would mainteine that which was his right euidently knowne to all the world. The next yéere after, which was the 29. of the kings raigne, the Pope directeth his letters to the king againe, wherein he chalengeth the kingdome of Scotland, to be pro∣per to the Church of Rome, and not subiect to the king of England, and therefore it was against God, &c. for him to hold any dominion ouer the same:Scots conuer∣ted by the re∣liques of S. Peter. Among other reasons, one was because the kingdome of Scotland was conuerted by the reliques of S. Peter to the faith of Christ, and therefore if hée woulde claime any right to the same Church, or anie part thereof, he should send vp his procurators, specially to the same appointed, with all that he could for himselfe al∣leadge vnto the sea apostolike, there to receiue, what reason and right would require. The king calling a parlement Ann. 1301.  answereth the popes letters, and so did the Lords temporall, and the whole Baronry of England. The yéere 1303.  Pope Boniface the 8. stirred vp Ed∣ward, king of England, to fight against the French king Philip, with whom the Pope had taken displeasure. After the bishopricke of Rome had béene long voyde, thorough the dissention of the cardinals, for the space of two yeares, and thrée moneths. At the length Celestinus was chosen Successor to Pope Nicholas the fourth. Which Ce∣lestinus, in his first Consistorie, began to reforme the clergie of Rome,Celestine be∣ginneth to re∣forme ye church of Rome. thinking to make the same an example to all other Churches. Whereby, he procured to himselfe such hatred of the Clergie-men, that this Boniface being called Benedic∣tus, speaking through a Réede, by his chamber wall in the night season, admonished him (as it had béene a voice from heauen) that he should geue ouer his Papacie, as a burthen greater then he could beare. Ex Mass.
Which in déede after sixe monethes he did (partly for the voice spoken before,Boniface a crafty knaue. P. thrust into prison. Bon-pope of Rome. and partly for feare) being tolde of cer∣taine, which were craftely suborned in his chamber, that if he did not resigne, he should lose his life. And, when hee had resigned, Boniface thrust him into perpetuall prison, and so he died. Wherfore, this Boniface was worthilie called the viij. Nero: of whom it was rightly saide, he came in like a Foxe; reigned like a Lion; and died like a dog. This Boniface, inuading after Celestinus, behaued him∣selfe so imperiously, that he put down Princes, excommuni∣cated Kings, such as did not take their confirmation at his hands. Diuers of his Cardinals he draue away for feare: some of them (as Schismatiks) he deposed, and spoyled them of all their substance.The pope curseth ye frēch king to the 4. generation. Philip the French king he excommu∣nicated, for not suffering his money to goe out of his realm, and therfore cursed him and his to the fourth generation. Albertus the Emperor, not once, or twise, but thrise sought at his hands to be confirmed, and yet was reiected: neither could obteine, except he would promise to driue the French king out of his Realme. The factious discord in Italie, betwixt the Gulephs, and the Gibellines, he greatly set on fire: in so much, that vpon Ashwednesday, when Porchetus, an Archbishop, came, and knéeled downe before him, to receiue ashes,The pope scoffeth &c. the Pope (looking vpon him, and perceiuing that he was one of the Gibellines part) cast a handful of ashes in his eyes: saying, Memento homo, quod Gibellinus es, &c. Remember man, that a Gi∣bellin thou art, and to ashes thou shalt goe. This P. (moreouer) ordeyned first the IubilieThe first Iu∣bilie. in Rome: in the solemnizing whereof, the first day he shewed himselfe in his Pontificalibus, and gaue frée remission of sinnes, to as many as came to Rome, out of all partes in the world. The second day, being wayted on with Emperial ensignes, he caused a naked sword to be caried before him,The power of both swords. & said with a loud voice, Ecce potestatem vtriusque gladij. Lo here the
power, and authoritie of both swordes, &c. By this P. diuers constitutions, extrauagantes of his predecessors,Extrauagant constitutions. Sextus Ni∣cholaus. Pardons and indulgences. were collected together: with many of his own lewdly added thereto, and so made the booke, called Sextus Decretals: by whom also sprang vp first, pardons, and in∣dulgences from Rome. Now, the cause of quarell betwixt the Pope, and the French king, (according to N. Riuet,) was this. Anno 1301  the Bishop of Oppanuham (being accused for a conspiracie against the French king) was brought vp to his Court,The quarrel betwixt the P. and French king. and so committed to prison. The Pope hearing of this, sendeth worde to the King by his Legat, to set him at libertie: which the king did, and withall, discharged both him, and the Le∣gat, commanding them to auoyde his Realme. Whereupon, Boniface reuoked all the priuiledges gran∣ted by him or his predecessors before to the kingdome of Fraunce, and not long after thundred out the sentence of his curse against him: citeth all the Prelates, al Deanes and Lawiers, both Ciuill and Canon to appeare personally before him at Rome, and at a certaine day, which was the first of Nouember. The king of France for∣biddeth to carrie treasure to Rome.Against this citation the king againe prouideth by straight proclamation, that no maner of person should export out of the Realme of Fraunce, either gold, siluer, or any other ma∣ner of ware or merchandize, prouiding withall the waies and passages diligētly to be kept, that none might passe vn∣searched: also, he defeated the Pope of giuing Benefices, Prebendaries, and other Ecclesiasticall liuings: for which cause, most sharpe letters passed betwixt them. Boniface beginning thus:The Popes proud stile to the French K. Boniface the seruant of Gods seruāts, &c. Feare God, and obserue his commandements: we will thee to vnderstand, that thou art subiect vnto vs, both in spiritu∣all thinges, and in temporall. The king answereth, wt this salutation: To Boniface, bearing himselfe for chiefe B. lit∣tle health, or none at all. Let thy foolishnes know, that, &c.
In the yéere 1303.  Maister William Nagareta made declaration against the Pope, with appellation made at Pa∣ris,Nagareta a∣gainst ye pope Foure articles against the pope. afore the King and his Councell in the Church at Pa∣ris. This William Nagareta propounded foure Articles against the Pope, that he was an vsurper, an Hereticke, an horrible symoniacall, and a blasphemer of the way of truth, and required of the king and prelates to call a councell, that prouision might be made for the bettering of the estate of the church: and afterward laid out in 28.28. Articles a∣gainst the pope articles more at large the villanies of this Boniface, as that he beléeued not the immortalitie of the soule: that he should say, whoredome is no sinne: that he caused his images to be made of siluer and to be set vp in churches. That he had a priuate deuill. That he was a witch. That he was a Sodomite, a murtherer, &c. Which thinges the King vnderstanding, with the Archbishops and Bishops made appellation to a councel for the matters. Thenames of the prelates were these: the archbishops of Nicosien, Remen, Senoren, Narbonen, Tu∣ronen: the Bishops of Landuiren, Belnacen, Catolacen, Antisiodoren, Meldimen, Nurmen, Carnoten, Aurelianen, Ambiauen, Mornen, Silanen, Andeganen, Abricen, Con∣stant, Ebroicen, Lexonicon, Sagien, Caloromont, Lemoni∣cen, Auicen, Mascicoren &c. With Abbots, &c. This ap∣peale was made the 9. yeare of Bonifaces popedome at Lu∣para in Paris. After these things thus in the Parlement agréed, the Prelates of the Cleargie, consulting among themselues what was best to be done in so doubtfull a matter, and drea∣ding the Popes displeasure for that which was done alredy, to cléere themseues in the matter, they contriued a letter to the Pope, partly, to certifie him what there was done, and partly to admonish him what he should doe. These things thus done, anno 1304.  about the natiuitie of the Virgin Marie, came a garison of harnessed Souldiers well appoynted, sent partly by the French king, partly by
the Cardinals, Columpna whom the Pope before had de∣posed vnto the gates of Auragum, where the Pope did hide himselfe,The pope hi∣deth himselfe. because he was borne in the towne, the captaines of which armie was one Schaira brother to the foresaid car∣dinals, and another William de Longareto, high steward to the French king, who inuading the Popes towne, and fin∣ding the gates open, gaue assault to the Popes Frontier, where hée with his Nephew or Marques, and foure other Cardinals were immured. The townesmen séeing all their strength to be bent against the pope, caused the common bell to be rong, and so assembling themselues in a common coun∣sell, ordeined AdulphusAdulphus. one of the chiefest rulers of the towne for their Captaine, who (vnknowen to them) was a great aduersary to the Pope. This Adulphus bringing with him Reginaldus de Supina,Reginaldus de Supina. a great Lorde in Campa∣nia, and the two sons of Iohn Chitan, a noble man, whose Father the Pope had then in prison: at length ioyned him with the French companie against the Pope, and so beset his palace on euery side: and first setting vppon the palla∣ces of the thrée Cardinals, which were then chiefe about the Pope,The cardinals goods rifeled. rifeled, and spoyled all their goodes: the Cardinals by a backe doore, hardly escaped their hands. But the popes palace, through munition and strength of the Marques, was something better defended. At length, the Pope perceiuing himselfe not able to make his partie good, desired truce with Schaira and his company,Pope craueth truce. which was granted him from one of the clock till nine. During which time of truce, the Pope sendeth priuily to the Townsmen of Aruagum, desiring them to saue his life: which if they would doe, he promised to enrich them, that they should all haue cause neuer to forget,The Pope reiected. or to repent the benefite bestowed. To this they made answere againe (ex∣cusing themselues) that it lay not in their power to doe him any good, for that the whole power of the Towne lay with the Captaine.
Then the pope all destitute & desolate sendeth to Schaira, beséeching him to draw out in Articles wherein hée had of∣fended him,The pope glad to make a∣mends. Conditions offered to the Pope. and he would make him amendes to the vtter∣most. Schaira maketh answere againe, that hée should not escape with life but vpon thrée conditions. First, to restore againe the two Cardinals of Columpna his brethren, whom he had before depriued, with all other of their stocke, and kinred. Secondly, that after their restitution hee should renounce his papacie. Thirdly, his body to remaine in his power and custodie. These cōditions the pope would none of:The gates of the popes pa∣face fired. so that the time of truce expired, the captaines and souldiers first fired the gates of the palace, whereby the army hauing a full en∣trance, fell to rifle, and spoile the house: at length they burst in to the pope, whom they put to choise, either presently to leaue his life, or to forgo the popedome. But that hée denied stifly to doo, rather choosing to die for it, saying:The pope ra∣ther would die then renounce his popedome. Lo here my neck, lo here my head, protesting that he would neuer while hée liued renounce his papacie. Then Schaira went about, and was ready to slay him, but by certaine that were a∣bout him hée was stayed: the Souldiers in the meane time did lade themselues with gold and treasure, that as Robert Auesb. reporteth,The pope spoi∣led of infinite treasure. all the Kinges of the earth together were not able to disburse so much out of their treasurie in a whole yéere, as then was taken and carried out of the Popes palace, and of the palaces of the thrée Cardinals, and Marques. Thus Boniface bereaued of al his goods, remained in their hands thrée daies: during the which space, they had set him on a wild and vnbroken colt,The Pope homely vsed. his face turned to the horse tayle, causing the horse to runne and course, while the Pope almost was breathlesse:The pope al∣most starued. moreouer they kept him so with∣out meat, that hée was thereby almost famished to death. After the three daies the Aruagians with 10000. souldiers
slue the kéeper,The pope deli∣uered, almost famished. & burst into prison, and deliuered Boniface almost famished, whom the people refreshed with vittaile, and receiued his blessing. From thence he tooke his iourney to Rome, beyng accompanied with a great number of har∣nessed souldiers: where shortly after, partly for feare which he was in, partly for famine, & partly for sorrow of his ine∣stimable treasure lost;Pope dieth. Benedict 9. he died. After whom succéeded Be∣nedict the 9. of whom these verses are written. A re nomen habe, Benedic, Bene fac, Benedicte. Aut rem peruerte, Maledic, Malefac, Maledicte. Boniface afore mentioned was the Author of the De∣cretals.Decretals. About this time in the daies of king Edward, Bo∣niface directed a Bull to Iohn Peckham archbishop of Can∣terburie (whom he had placed against the minde of the king and Church of Canterburie) as also vnto all other quar∣ters of the Church vniuersall: in which was decréed that no Church, nor Ecclesiasticall person, should hencefoorth yéeld to his king or temporall magistrate, eyther any giuing, or lending, or promising of tribute, subsidies, or portion, what∣soeuer of the goods and possessions vnto him belonging, but should be cléerely exempted and discharged of such subiecti∣on or tallage,Clergy exempt from subsidie. to be exacted of thē in the behoofe of the prince, and his affaires. Not long after, the King held his Parlement at Saint Edmunsburie, where was graunted vnto him of all Cities and Boroughs, an eight, and of the commons a twelfth of their goods: onely the clergy by reason of the bull stood stout, wherevpon the king likewise secludeth them from vnder his protection,The clergy out of the kings protection. and sauegard of his lawes: and because the Archbishop was more stout, and an inciter of the rest, hée seised vpon his goods, and caused an Inuentory of the same to be enrolled in the excheker. After the death of Iohn Peckham, succéeded Robert Win∣chelsy, with whom the king had like variance, as with the other Peckham: and accused him to the Pope for breaking
of peace, and taking part with them that rebelled against the king about vsages and liberties of the realme: wherefore the king being cited vp to the court of Rome, was there sus∣pended, till hee had purchased his absolution againe.The King of England trou∣bled with the sea of Canter. And as this King was troubled with Archbishops: so from Hil∣debrand, and the time of Lanfrancus, euery King in his time had somewhat to do with that sea. By Peckham before mentioned,No benefices but one. it was ordeined that no spirituall minister shoulde haue more benefices then one: which also was decreed by the constitutions of Octo and Octobonus, the Popes Legate the same time in Eng∣land. The Kinges mother was a professed Nunne in Ames∣burie. In the later yeare of this kinges raigne, Cassianus K. of the TartariansCassanus K. of the Tartariās. (of whom come these which now are Turkes, fighting against the Souldan,The Tarta∣rians christe∣ned. king of the Sara∣cens in the plaine of Damascus slue a 100000 of Sara∣cens: and againe at Babilon fighting with the said souldan, flue him in the field, & 200000. of his Saracens, & calling vpon the helpe of Christ, and thereupon became Christian. The same Cassianus his brother also afterward was christ∣ned him selfe and all his house. In the raigne of this King, Walter Merto Bishop of Rochester builded Merton Colledge in Oxford:Merton Col∣ledge in Ox∣ford. in whose raigne also liued Henricus de Gandano,Henr. de Gan∣dano. De villa noua. Scotus, Duns. Clement 5. The court of Rome to Aui∣nion. The P. reigne as Emp. sede vacante. Arnoldus de vil∣la noua. Dantes Scotus called Duns, and other mo. After pope Benedict succeeded Clement the 5. who trans∣lated the Popes court to Auinion in Fraunce. By this Clement it was ordeined, that the Emperour, al∣though he might be called K. of the Romaines before, yet he might not enioy the title of Emperor before he was by him confirmed: and that the Emperours seat being vacant, ye P. might raigne as Emperour vntil anew were created. By him the orders of the templars which (at that time were too abhominable) were put downe at the councell of Vienna:Templars put downe.
He also ordained, and confirmed the feast of Corpus Chri∣sti,Corpus Chri∣sti day. The Clemen∣tine decretals. assigning indulgences to such as heard the seruice ther∣of: and also compiled the 7. book of the decretals, called of his name the Clementines. In the time of this Pope, Henricus the sixt of that name,The Emp. poi∣soned by a mōk in the chalice. Emperour, was poysoned, receiuing the Sacra∣ment, by a false dissembling monke, called Bernard, which was thought not to bee done, without the consent of the Popes Legate. For the which fact, although he escaped, yet diuers of his order after that, with fire, and sworde, were slaine. The Emp. of Constantino∣ple excommu∣nicated.This Pope excommunicated Andronicus Paleologus, Emperor of Constantinople, anno 1327.  declaring him to be a schismatike, and heretike, because hee would not suffer the Grecians to make their appeale from the Gréek church to the Pope, neither would acknowledge him to be his su∣periour, &c: from which, the Gréek church was exempted, sauing the space of 58. yéeres, during the time of the French Emperours, al which time the French Emperors, with the Gréeke Church, were subiect to the church of Rome: but af∣terward, such was their hate against the Romanes, that be∣cause Michael Paleologus, and the Grecians, being called vp by Gregorie the tenth, to a Councell at Lyons, about the controuersie of procéeding of the holy Ghost, &c. did sub∣mit themselues to the Church of Rome: the Gréeke monks and Priestes denied him the due honour, and place of bu∣riall. P. Iohn 22.After Clement the 5. succéeded pope Iohn the 22. with whom Lodouike the Emperor had much trouble: after whō, succéeded Benedict the 12.P. Benedict. This Benedict, on a certaine time being desired to make certaine new Cardinals,This worlde made for the Cardinals. answereth againe, that he gladly would so do, if he also could make a new world. For this world (said he) is for these Cardinals, that be made already. Ex scripto Engethusensis.
An. 1307. The xxxiiij. yeare of the reigne of the king, in the beginning of Hillarie Tearme, the King kept a Parle∣ment at Carlil,Complaint against the P. for oppressing England. where great complaintes were brought in by the Nobles, and Ancientes of the lande, concerning the oppression of the Church, by the Popes Legat, William Te∣sta, otherwise called mala Tecta: who came by reason the P. (hauing translated his court to Auinion) was denyed by the princes of Rome, S. Peters patrimonie, & liued then barely: hee had of contribution, and beneuolence, within the first yeare, nine thousand, and fiue hundred markes of siluer, and all his other charges, and expences, (which he largely yt yere bestowed) cléerely borne, besides the benefite of Bulles, sent by the said Testa, and the first fruits of al churches being va∣cant, at any time, or by any man, within the realm of Eng∣land, Scotland, Wales, & Ireland. And also, the first fruites of all Abbeis, and Priories, within the said Realmes, &c. Whereupon, the king, in the same Parlement, withstood the Legate, charging him (with the consent of the Earles, & Barons) to abstaine from such exactions: and said, he would sende to the pope about the matter: which he did, and there∣upon the Pope changed his purpose touching Abbeis: and after that, the first fruites of English Churches was gran∣ted vnto the king for two yeres. In which space, he obteined the fruites of the foresaid Churches, &c. During which Parlement before specified, as mē were talking many things of the Popes oppression, sodeinly fell downe (as it were from heauen) among them,An Epistle of Cass. to the Church of England. a paper with this superscriptiō. An epistle of Cassiodorus, to the church of England, concerning the abuses of the Romish church. To the noble church of England, seruing in clay, & brick, as the Iewes did in times past, vnder the tyrannie of the E∣gyptians: Peter, the sonne of Cassiodore, a Catholick soul∣dier, and deuoute Champion of Christ, sendeth greeting, and wisheth to cast of the yoke of bondage, and to receiue the reward of libertie, &c.
What effect this letter wrought in them to whom it was directed,The P. stil reteineth his exactions. it is not in stories expressed: by the sequele it may be coniectured, that whatsoeuer was said, the P. retained stil his exactions. Anno 1329. The King of France called a parlement at Paris, about the beginning of December, to conferre of the iurisdiction of the Pope, both in Spiritual, and Temporal things. In which Parlement, a certain wise Nobleman, called Peter de Cugnerijs,P. de Cugne∣riis. being one of the kinges Councell, rose vp, and spake on the kings behalfe, taking for his Theame, Render vnto Caesar that which is his, and vnto God that which is Gods: which he prosecuted very effectuallie, and deliuered a bil of 64. articles, wherin the Spiritualty vsur∣ped vpon the temporaltie: and gaue the Prelates time to de∣liberate:64. Articles against the spiritualtie. which was, til the Friday next ensuing. On which day, the B. Edwine, and Archb. of S. Senon, elect, in the name of the whole Clergie, answered for them all before the King, and endeuoured to proue, that a person ecclesiasticall, might haue temporall iurisdiction, by the ex∣ample of Melchizedech, who was k of Salem, & Priest, &c. And in the conclusion of his replie, said, because a byl of ma∣ny articles was exhibited, parte whereof did infringe the whole Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction: to the defence wherof, wée wil stand vnto ye death (said he:) some other of them, contain onelie certayne abuses, which we beléeue none such to be: but if there be, we will sée redresse therein, to the quietnesse of the people, and praise of almightie God. The next Friday following, the Bishop of Eduen (ta∣king the Psalme 89. Lord, thou art our refuge,) extolled the kings person, sitting with his Barons and Counsellers about him, and prosecuted an answere to the Lord Peter of Cugners oration, and proued both swordes to belong vnto the Pope: and answered particularlie the Articles aboue mentioned.
The next Friday after this the Prelates assembled a∣gaine at Vicenas before the king, to heare their answere, where the Lord Peter of Cugner (beyng Prolocutor for the king) tooke for his Theame, I am peace vnto you, doo not feare: wherevpon he signified that they should haue no feare nor be troubled for any thing that there had béene spoken: for that the entent of the King was to kéepe the rites of the Church and Prelates, which they had by law, and by good and reasonable custome, but yet proued that the knowledge of ciuill causes belonged not to them,Knowledge of ciuill causes belongeth not to the clergy. which notwithstan∣ding, he said, the K. was ready to heare the informatiō of thē that would instruct him of any custome: and those customes which were good & reasonable he would obserue: which an∣swere liked not the B. Edwin, but he replied again in ye pre∣lates defence: and in cōclusion beséeched the K. that it would please him, to giue them a more comfortable answere, & that they might not depart from his presence all pensiue and sad, whereby occasion might be giuen to the Laitie, to impugne the rites and liberties of the Church. It was answered a∣gaine, that the kings intent was not to impugne the cu∣stomes of the Church. The Sunday followyng at Vicenas, they had answere and assurance from the King, that they should suffer no damage in his tyme: yea, and that hée would defend their rightes and customes, because it should not bée sayd that hée would giue examples to others to impugne the Church, and that if the Bishoppes and Prelates would sée refor∣mation of those things, that were to be amended,Reformation to be doone. where∣about he would take respite betwéene this and Christmasse next following, his grace would innouate nothing: and if in the foresayd space, they would not reforme that which was amisse, his Maiestie would appoynt such order as should be acceptable to God, and his subiects. After this, the Prelates and Cleargie had leaue of the King to depart, and went home. This Parlement of the French is to be
referred to the yéere, 1329. Anno 1307.  King Edward marching toward Scot∣land died: after whom succéeded his sonne Edward the se∣cond.The K. dieth. About the yéere 1310.  or the next following, came in first the Crooched friers,Crooched friers. and also began first the Knights of the order of Iohn Baptist, called otherwise the Knights of the Rhodes,Knights of the Rhodes. for that they by manly knighthood put ye Turks out of the Rhodes. 54. Templars burned at Pa∣ris.This yéere the French K. caused to be burned 54. Tem∣plars at Paris, with the great Maister of the order: and by his procurement Pope Clement the fifth, who succée∣ded Benedict, called a Councell at Vienna, where the whole order and sect of Templars beyng condemned, was shortly after, by the consent of all Christian kings, deposed all in one day.The Tēplars put downe v∣niuersally. The cause why those vngodly Tēplars were put downe, was so abhominable and filthy, that it is not with modestie to be named. After the deposing of the Templars, the King of France thought to make his sonne king of Ierusalem, and to con∣uert to him all the landes of the Templars: but Pope Cle∣ment would not thereto agrée, transferring all their landes to the order of the Hospitallers,The Pope sel∣leth the Tem∣plars landes. for a great summe of mony giuen for the same. In the same Councell it was also decréed by Pope Cle∣ment, that all religious orders exempted, should be subiect vnder the common lawes, as other were: but the Cister∣cian Monkes with mony and great giftes redéemed their priuiledges, and exemptions of the Pope, and so had them graunted.Cistercian monks exēpt. Rob. Auesb. But the Franciscans sped vnhappily with their suite: of which Franciscans, when certaine had offered vnto the Pope Clement foure thousand Florens of gold, beside o∣ther siluer, that the Pope would dispence with them to haue landes and possessions against their rule, the Pope asked them where that mony was, and they answered in
the marchauntes handes. The Pope absolued the mar∣chauntes of their bondes, and commaunded all that money to bée imployed to his vse: declaring vnto the Friers, that hée woulde not infringe the rule of Saint Francis,The pope con∣seneth the Frā∣ciscan Friers lately canonized, neyther ought hee to doe it for anie money. Thus the Friers lost their money, and their indulgence. Ex eodem. Sabellicus writeth, that Clement the fift excommunica∣ted the Venetians,The Venetiās cursed of the popa. for ayding and preferring of Aroda vn∣to the estate of Ferrarie: and wrote his letters through∣out all Europe, condemning them as enemies of the church, and giuing their goodes as a lawfull pray vnto all men: which caused them to sustayne great harme. So that Fan∣cis Dandulus, a noble man of Venice beeing Embassa∣dour,A monstrous tyrannie. was fayne so to humble himselfe before this proude tyrannicall Prelate, that hée suffered a chayne of yron to bee tyed about his necke, and to lye downe flat before his table, and so to catch the bones and fragmentes that fell, as if he had béene a dogge, til the Popes fury was toward them asswaged. About this time, Rob. Winchelsey Archb. of Canterbu∣ry (whom the kings father had banished before) was relea∣sed, and returned home from Rome. Great disturbance rose betwixt the king, and the nobles: who hauing their power lying about Dunstable, sent mes∣sage vnto the king at London, to haue their former acts con∣firmed: at which time came two Cardinalles from Rome, with letters sent vnto the nobles from the pope. The no∣bles answered to the message of the Cardinals, that as tou∣ching themselues, they should be at all times welcome vnto them, but as for their letters (forasmuch as they were men vnlettered, and onely brought vp in feats of warre) therfore cared they not for séeing the same: neither would they speak with the Legates concerning their busines. Yet at the last, through the mediation of the Archb and the Earle of Gloce∣ster,
the matter was taken vp betwixt the King and the Nobles. Anno 1313 Robert Winchelsey died, in whose roome Ro∣bert Cobham was elected by the King and Church of Can∣terbury: but the Pope did frustrate that election, and placed Walter RenaldWalter Re∣nald. Bishop of Worcester. About this time died Pope Clement the 5.Clement 5. di∣eth. who kéeping in Fraunce, neuer came to the sea of Rome: after whose death the Papacie stood voide two yeares. Papacie voide two yeares.After Clement succéeded pope Iohn the 22. who sent two Legates from Rome vnder pretence to set agréement be∣twixt the king of Englād and the Scots: they for their char∣ges and expēces required of euery spiritual person iiii d. in euery mark:Iohn 22. Pope maketh profite of the variance of princes. but all in vaine. For the legates as they were in the North partes about Derlington with their whole fa∣milie and traine, were robbed & spoiled of their horses, trea∣sure, apparel, and whatsoeuer else they had: and so with an euil fauoured handling, retired backe againe to Duresme: where they staied a while waiting for an answere from the Scots. But when neither ye popes legacie, neither his curse, would take any place with the Scots, they returned againe to London, where they first excommunicated and cursed as blacke as soote all those arrogant and presumptuous rob∣bers of Northumberland. Secondly for supplying of ye losses receiued, they exacted of the clergie to be giuen vnto them 8. pence in euery marke. But the Clergie thereunto would not agrée: séeing it was their owne couetousnes, as they said that made them venture farther then they néeded:viii d. in euery marke only they were contented to relieue them after 4. pence in the marke: further they would not graunt. And so they departed to the popes court againe. Michael house founded in Cambridge.In the time of this king the Colledge in Cambridge, cal∣led Michaell house was founded by Sir Henry Stanton knight. About the same time also was Nicholaus de Ly∣ra,Nicholaus de lyra. which wrote the ordinarie glosse of the Bible: also
Guilielmus OcchamGuilielmus Occham. a worthie deuine, of a right sincere iudgement, as the times then would eyther giue or suffer. Among others which the King did trouble, and take re∣uenge of, for the rebellion of the Barons, was one AdamAdam. Bishoppe of Hereford, who beyng appeached of treason, with other more, was at length arrested in the Parlement, to appeare, and answere to that should be layd against him. To which the Bishop answered: I, an humble minister and member of the Church of God, and Bishop consecrate (albeit vnworthy) can not, neyther ought to answere, to these so high matters, without the authoritie of the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury my direct iudge, and next vnder the high Bishoppe of Rome, whose suffragane also I am, and the consent likewise of other my fellow Bishops. After which woordes, the Archbishop and other Bishops made humble sute for him to the King. But when the King would not be woon, nor turned with any supplication: the Bishops together with the Arch∣bishops and Clergie, comming with their crosses, tooke him away, chalenging him for the church without any fur∣ther answere making: charging moreouer vnder the cen∣sures of the church, and excommunication, none to presume to lay any further handes vpon him. The king commanded, notwithstanding, to procéede in iudgement, and the iurie of twelue men to goe vpon the in∣quisition of his cause: who finding, and pronouncing the bi∣shop to be guiltie, the king caused immediatlie, all his goods and possessions to be confiscate to himselfe. Moreouer, made his plate, and all his houshold stuffe, to be throwen out of his house, into the streete. But yet he remayned still vnder the protection of the Archbishop. This Archb. was called W. Winchelsey,  after whom succéeded S. Mepham, Anno, one thousand, thrée hundred,Simon M. and twentie seuen. R. Auesb. After P. Clement v. (by whose decease the Romane Sea
stood vacant two yéeres and thrée moneths. Next was elected pope Iohn 22.Clement 5. a Cistercian Monke, who sat in the papacie 18. yéeres, a man so stout, inflexible, and giuen much to hea∣ping vp of riches,A great he∣resie. that he proclaimed them Heretikes, that taught that Christ, & his Apostles, had no possessions of their owne in the world. At this time was Emperour Ludouicus BauarusLudouicus Bauarus Em∣perour. a wor∣thy man: who with this Pope and other that followed him, had no lesse contention then had Fredericus before:Contention betwixt the pope & Emp. 24. yeeres. in so∣much that this contention continued 24. yéeres. The cause thereof rose of the constitution of Clement 5. predecessor to this Pope: by whom it was ordeined that Emperours elec∣ted by the Germanine princes, might be called kings of the Romanes: but might not enioy the title and right of the em∣pire, without their confirmation, giuen by the pope. Wher∣fore, this Emperour, because he vsed the imperiall dignitie in Italie: (before he was authorized by the P) he excommu∣nicated him: and notwithstāding, the Emperour did often∣times offer vp himself to make intreatie of peace,Pope hath full power to cre∣ate and depose Emperors at his pleasure. yet the in∣flexible pope would not bend, mainteining that he had full power to create, and depose kings and Emperours at his pleasure. In the same time were diuers learned men, who did greatly disallow the B. of Romes doings: among whō was Guilielmus Occham, whose Tractations were afterwarde condemned by the Pope, for writing against the Temporal iurisdiction of their Sea: and another named Marsilin{us} Pa∣tauinus,Marsilius Pa∣tauinus. who wrote the booke, called Defensor pacis,Defensor pacis. giuen vp to the handes of the Emperor: wherein, the controuersie of the Popes vsurped iurisdiction, in thinges Temporall, is largely disputed, & the vsurping authoritie of the same sea, set foorth to the vttermost. At length, when the Emperor (after much suite at Aui∣nion) could not obteine his Coronation. Cōming to Rome, he was there receaued with great honor, where he, with his
wife, were both crowned, by the ful consent of all the Lords and Cardinals there, and another Pope there set vp, called Nicholas the fifte. After which things,Pope Nicho∣las v. the Pope (not long after) died at Aui∣nion in France: whome succéeded Benedictus the twelft,Benedict xii. a Monke of Benedictus order, and reigned vij. yeres. Who by the councell of Philip, the French king, confirmed, and pro∣secuted the censures that Iohn his predecessor had published against Lewes the Emperor: and depriued him, both of his Emperiall Crowne, & Dukedome of Bauaria:Emperor de∣priued. that he stode excommunicate, till time that variance fell betwixt this P. Benedict, and the French K. Wherfore, to haue some friēds to flie to, he began to pretend fauor and absolution. And not long after, died. After whom folowed Clement vi. a man most furious, and cruell.Variance be∣twixt the P. and french K. This Clement vi. renuing againe the former excommu∣nications of his predecessors) caused his letters to be set vp on Church dores: wherein he threatened, and denounced, most terrible thunderboltes against the Emperor, except within thrée dayes he would renounce the Emperiall pos∣session of the crowne: and (resigning vp his Empire into his handes) would submitte himselfe, his children, and all his goods, to the will and pleasure of the B. with promise, that he would not receaue any part thereof, but vpon his good grace, as his will should be to referre it ouer. And besides, the Pope sendeth to the Emperor, a cer∣tain forme of a bill, conteyned in writing,The Emp. must resigne all to the P. with certain con∣ditions, that hee commaunded to be geuen to the handes of the Emperor. Which he gently receiued, and, not onelie with his seale confirmed it,The frinthar∣ted pope. but also sweareth to obserue all the conditions thereof. Which the Pope hearing, greatly marueyled at it, but was nothing mollified. The Princes, and Electors séeing the bill, with the arti∣cles, and conditions, desired the Emperor that hee woulde stande to the defence of the Emperiall Dignitie, as hee had
begun, promising their assistance, and ayde, And thereupon, were letters sent to the Pope, desiring him to abstaine from such manner of articles against the State, and Maiestie of the Empire. Vpon this, the Pope, vpon Maundie Thursday, bluste∣reth out most black curses against him,Black curses against the Emperor. and also, reneweth all the former Processes: as, both against an Heretike, and a Schismatike. Commandinge (moreouer,) all the Princes Elec∣tors, to procéede in chusing a newe Emperour. Which the Archbishop of Mentz refused to doe,Archbishop of Mentz de∣priued. and therefore was by the Pope, depriued of all his dignities. The Archbishop of Colen took eight thousand markes and the Duke of Saxonie two thousand, and were corrup∣ted by Iohn, King of Bohem, and elected Charles his sonne to be Emperour, whom Pope Clement in his Consistorie, did approoue: but hee was repulsed at Aquisgraue, where they were wont to be crowned. This Charles, with the French King, and the King of Boheme,Warre with the king of England. by the setting on of the Pope, made warre a∣gainst the King of England; but were all by him put to flight. The Emperor geueth ouer to the P.Lodowicke (notwithstanding the States of Germa∣nie assembled at Spires, promised to stick vnto him) re∣membring his oath made before to the Popes Bull, wil∣lingly gaue ouer his Emperiall dignitie, and went to Bul∣garia.The Em. poysoned. Where shortly after, through the practise of Cle∣ment (as Hieronimus Martius doeth wryte) he was poy∣soned. The Princes then hearing of his death, assem∣bled themselues to make a newe election: who refusing Charles,Gunterus de monte nigro chosen Emp. elected for Emperour, Gunterus de Monte ni∣gro: who shortlie afterwarde falling sicke at Frankford, by one of his Phisitions Seruauntes, was also poysoned, whom Charles had hired to worke that feat, and not dying
thereof, for auoiding bloudshed, thorough councell of the Germans, hée gaue ouer his Empire to Charles: who to haue his sonne set vp after him,Charles cho∣sen Emperour. graunted to the Princes e∣lectors of Germany, all the publicke taxes and tributes of the Empire. This pope Clement first reduced the yéere of Iubile to euery fiftie yéere,The Iubile e∣uery 50. yeere. From Auinion to Rome. which first was kept but euery hundreth yéere: and so he beyng absent at Auinion, which hée purcha∣sed with his mony to the sea of Rome, caused it to be cele∣brated at Rome. Anno 1350.  In the which yéere were numbred of Peregrines going in and comming out, to the number of 50000. Praemostr.50000. Pil∣grims. The Bull of Pope Clement geuen out for this present yeare of Iubile, procéedeth in these woordes as followeth. What person or persons soeuer for deuotion sake shall take their peregrination to the holy Cittie:The forme of the Bull of Iu∣bile. the same day when he setteth forth out of his howse, he may choose vnto him selfe what confessor or confessors, either in the way, or where else he lusteth: vnto the which confessors wee graunt by our authority full power to absolue all cases pa∣pall, as fully, as if we were in our proper person there pre∣sent. Item wee graunt, that whosoeuer being truly con∣fessed, shall chaunce by the way to dye,The pope commandeth the angels. he shall be quite and and absolued of all his sinnes. Moreouer, we commande the Angels of Paradise to take his soule out of his bodie (being absolued) and to carrie it into Paradise, &c. And in another Bull: we will (saith he) that no paine of hell shal touch him: graunting (moreouer) to all and singular person, and per∣sons, which are signed with the holy-Crosse, power, and authoritie, to deliuer, and release thrée or foure Soules, (whom they list them selues) out of the paines of Purgato∣rie, &c. This Clement (as saith Auesb.) tooke vpon him so pro∣digallie in his popedome, that he gaue vnto the Cardinals
of Rome, bishoprickes, and benefices, which then were va∣cant in England, and began to geue them new titles for the same liuings, which he gaue them in Englād: wherwith the K. was offended, & vndid all the prouisions of the pope with∣in his realme: commaunding vnder paine of imprisonment and life,Against proui∣sions from Rome. no man to be so hardy as to bring in any such pro∣uisions of the Pope, and vnder the same punishment char∣ged the two Cardinals to void the realme. Anno 1343.  And in the same yéere all the tenths, as well of the Tem∣plars,Tenths to the King. as also of other spirituall men, were giuen and payd to the king through the whole realme. King Edward the second builded two houses in Oxford for good letters, Oriall Colledge, and Saynt Marie hall.Oriall colledge and S. Mary hall. Anno 1326. the townes men of Berry spoiled the Ab∣bey, of treasure inestimable, and almost burnt vp the whole house:The Abby of Bury spoyled by the townes men. and in one wéeke burnt vp 22. mannors belonging to the same, carriyng away goodes to the valure of 9220. pounds, fiue shillings and eleuen pence, besides other ine∣stimable treasure. While the Abbot all this space was at London at the Parlement. For which fact, thirtie tartes full of townes men were carried to Norwich; of whom, ninetéene were there hanged, and diuers conuict, were put in prison. The whole Towneshippe was condemned in sixe score thousand pound,The Towne of Bury fined at 120000. poūd. to be paide for damages of the house. Iohn Berton, Alderman, with two and thirtie Priestes, thirtéene women, and one hundreth, thirtie and eight others, of the same Towne, were outlawed: of whom, certaine confede∣rated, & priuilie in the night, burst to the Abbot of Cheming∣ton,The Abbat of Cheuington. and tooke him, and secretelie conueyed him ouer Sea, to Dist in Brabant, where they kept him in great penurie and miserie: till at length, being knowen where he was, hee was brought home with procession, and restored to his house againe. Nich. Trimet. & Flor. hist.
After Edward the 2. succéeded his sonne Edward 3.K. Edward 3. about the age of 15. and raigned 50. yéeres. An. 1344.  The clergy of England graunted to the king a tenth for thrée yéeres: for the which the king againe in re∣compence graunted vnto them his charter,A charter from the king to the clergy. contayning these priuiledges. That no Archbishop or Bishop should be ar∣raigned before his iustices, Siue ad sectam suam, siue partis. If the said clarke doo submit and claime his clergie, professing himselfe to be a member of the holy Church, who so doing shall not bée bound to come to his answere before the Iu∣stices, and if it shall be layd vnto them to haue married two wiues, or to haue married a widow, the Iustices shall haue no power to procéede against them, to inquire for the matter, so that the cause shall bée reserued to the spirituall court, &c. About this age (as before) God raysed vp learned men, who layd open the abuses of the Church, as Gregorius Ar∣minensis,Gregorius Arminensis. according to Trithemius, who dissented from the Papistes and Sophisters, as wée doo in doctrine of Frée∣will, counting the Papistes and Sophisters in that point worse then the Pelagians. TaulerusTaulerus. a preacher of Ger∣many in Argentine taught, anno 1350.  against mens merites, and inuocation of Saints, and was an enemy to all superstition: to whom may be added Franciscus Pe∣trarchaFranciscus Pe∣trarcha. of the same age, who calleth Rome the whore of Babilon, the mother of errour, the Temple of Heresie, &c. and higher, in the yéere one thousand, thrée hundred, and for∣tie, Iohannes de rupe Scissa,Iohannes de rupe Scissa. was cast in pryson for rebu∣king the Spiritualtie of their great enormities: hée cal∣led the Church of Rome the whore of Babylon,Rome the whore of Babilon. and the Pope the minister of Antichrist, and the Cardinals false Prophetes: beyng in pryson hée wrote a booke of prophe∣stes, touching the affliction that honge ouer the heades of the Spiritualtie, calling his Booke, Vade mecum in tri∣bulatione.Vade mecum in tribula∣tione.
About the yéere 1340. in the citie of Herbipone, was one named Maister Conradus Hager,M. Conradus Hager. who is recorded to haue maintained and taught the space of foure and twentie yéeres, the Masse to be no manner of Sacrifice: for which his doctrine hée was taken, and inclosed in pryson. Not long after this, about the yéere 1350. Gerhardus Rhiddor,Gerhardus Rhiddor. wrot against the Monkes and Friers, a booke intituled Lachri∣ma Ecclesiae.Lachryma Ec∣clesiae. About the yéere 1322. liued Michaell Cesenas,Michael Ce∣fenas. prin∣cipall of the Grayfriers, and Petrus de Corbana; of whom writeth Antonius in quarta parte summae, and saith they were condemned in the extrauagant of Pope Iohn, with one Iohannes de Poliaco.Iohannes de Poliaco. Their opinions were, that Peter was no more the head of the Church, then the other Apo∣stles, that the Pope hath no authoritie to depose Empe∣rours: that Priests are equall in authoritie. Michaell wrote against the pryde, tyrannie, and primacie of the Pope, ac∣cusing him to be Antichrist, and the Church of Rome the whore of Babylon, drunken with the bloud of Saints,Rome Baby∣lon drunken with the blood of the Saints. &c. For this cause hée was depriued of his dignitie, and con∣demned of the Pope: hée left behind him many followers, of whom a great parte were slayne by the pope, some were burned: as Iohannes de Castilion,Iohannes de Castilion. and Franciscus de Al∣catara.Franciscus de Alcatara. In extrauag. Iohannis 23. With the foresaid Mi∣chaell was also condemned, Iohannes de Poliaco, (whose assertions were that euery Pastor in his owne Church ought to suffice to heare confession: that pastors and bishops had their authoritie immediatly from Christ and his Apo∣stles, and not from the Pope, &c. After Simon Mepham Archbishop of Canterburie (who liued not long,) succéeded Iohn Stretford: after whome came Iohn Offord, and liued but ten moneths, in whose roome succéeded Thomas, and raigned but one yéere, Anno 1350.  and after him succéeded Simō IselipSimon Iselip. which was made by Pope Clement 6. who sat seuentéene yéeres, and builded
Canterbury Colledge in Oxforde:Canterbury Colledge in Oxford. which Simon Iselip suc∣céeded the Bishoppe of Ely, named Simon Langham, who within two yéeres, was made Cardinall. In whose steade, Pope Vrban the 5. ordeyned William Witlesey, Bishop of Worcester, to be archbishop of Canterbury, ann. 1366. In which yéere, William, Bishoppe of Winchester,The new Col∣ledge in Ox∣ford. founded the new Colledge in Oxford. In the order of Popes, next vnto Clement the sixt, ann. 1353.  succéeded pope Innocent the sixt. In the first yéere of which Pope, two Friers Minors, or Franciscans,P. Innocent 6. were put to death at Auinion, for certaine opinions, that séemed to the Pope and his Cardinals erroneous: whose names were one, Iohannes Rochetailada, or Hayabalus, who béeyng a Frier minorite, beganne first in time of Pope Clement the sixt, Anno 1345. to preach, that the Church of Rome was the whore of Babylon,Rome the whore of Ba∣bylon. and the Pope with his Car∣dinalles to be very Antichrist, &c. In the meane time of his accusation, it happened, that a certaine priest com∣ming before the Pope, cast the Popes bull downe before his féete, saying: Loe heere take the Bull vnto you, for it doeth me no good at all. I haue laboured nowe these thrée yéeres with it, and yet cannot get my right. The pope hearing this, caused the poore Priest to bée scour∣ged, and imprisoned with the Frier. Of Fryer Rachetai∣lada, Froyssard maketh mention in his first volume, chap. 211. and sayth, that Pope Innocent the sixt helde him in prison in the Castle of Baignour, for shewing that ma∣nie thinges shoulde fall on the Prelates of the Churche for greate superfluitie and pride then vsed amongest them. About the same time, happened a contention be∣twéene the Frenche Prelates and the Friers of Paris,Contention betwixt the French pre∣lates and the Friers. because they preached, and hearde Confessions: and after much adoo, in fine, the matter comming vnto open dispu∣tation, it was concluded by maister Giles, one of the
Augustine Friers, that after his iudgement, the Prelates were more on the truthes side, &c. Ex Godfrido de Fonta∣nis. About this time, anno 1354.  the Townes men of Ox∣ford spoyled the schollers,The townes men of Oxford spoile the schol∣lers. and brake vp twentie of the doores of their halles, and wounded many of them, and slew and threw into priuies, and cutte their bookes and billes into pieces, and carried away much of their goodes: this was done the twelfth of February: wherefore the whole Towne was interdicted by the Bishoppe of Lincolne. At which time also was graunted to the Vicechauncelour, or Commissarie, to haue the assise of Bread, Ale, Wine, and all other victualles: the Mayor of the towne béeing exclu∣ded. Also it was decréed, that the Commons of the towne shoulde giue vnto the Studentes, 251. poundes star∣ling, in part of satisfaction: reseruing notwithstanding to euerie one of the Students his seuerall action against a∣ny seuerall person of the Towne, &c. The cause of the broyle, was, for that a Student powred the wine on his hostes head: and broke his head with the pot in a certayne brawle. Simon Islip archbishop of Canterbury, mentioned be∣fore with his letters patent, directed to all parsons, and Vi∣cars within his prouince, straightly charged them and their parishioners, vpon payne of excommunication, not to ab∣staine from bodily labour vppon certaine Saintes dayes:Idle holidaies which were woont before to bée hallowed and consecrated to vnthriftie idlenesse.A priests wa∣ger. Item, that no Priest should haue gi∣uen vnto him more than three 3. pounds, sixe shillings eight pence, for his yéerly stipend, which made diuers of them to robbe and steale. Anno 1362. After Simon Islip, succéeded in the sea of Canterbury Si∣mon Langham, then William Wittlesey: after whom suc∣céeded Simon Sudbury. About the yéere 1360. the Nunnes of Saint Brigets
order beganne:S. Bridgets Nunnes. Queenes col∣ledge in Ox∣ford. about which time also was buylded the Quéenes Colledge in Oxford, by Quéen Philip of England, wife to K. Edward the the third. Also, in the time of this Pope Innocent, Frier Iohn, Bishop of Elie, moued with certain iniuries (as he thought) done vnto him by the Ladie Blanche, made his complaint to the Pope: who sending downe his curse to the Bishop of Lincolne, and other Prelates, to be executed vpon the ad∣uersaries of the Bishop of Elie, commaunded them, that if they did know any of the said aduersaries dead and buried, yet they shoulde cause the same to be taken vp: which also they perfourmed accordingly. Of whom, some had béene of the kings Councell. Wherewithall the king being sore displeased, did molest againe the said Prelates: which comming to the popes hea∣ring, certaine were directed downe from the court of Rome, in the behalfe of the Bishop of Elie: who méeting with the Bishop of Rochester, the Kings Treasourer, deliuered vn∣to him Letters from the Pope, the tenure whereof was not knowen. Which done, they incontinently auoyded away. But certaine of the kinges Seruantes pursued after, and did ouertake them: of whom, some they imprisoned, and o∣ther some they brought to Iustices, and so were condem∣ned to be burned. This Pope Innocent ordeyned the feast of holy speare,Holy speare. and holy nayles.Holy nayles. The names of the Bishops of Canterburie, from Lan∣francus, and their continuance, was this.The order of the Bishops of Cant. 34 Lanfrancus, ninetéene yeares. 35 Anselmus, twen∣tie. 36 Radulphus, eight. 37 Guilielmus Curboyle, thirtéen. 38 Theobaldus, twenty foure. 39 Becket, nine, 40 Richardus, tenne. 41 Baldwinus, seuen. 42 Huber∣tus, fourteene. 43 Stephanus Lancthon, two and twentie. 44 Richardus, foure. 45 Edmond of Abenden, seuen.
46 Bonifacius, fiue and twentie. 47 Kilwarbie, Frier, sixe. 48 Pecham, Frier, thirtéene. 49 Winchelsey, ninetéen. 50 Reinold,The order of the bishops of Cant. fiftéene. 51 Stratforde, twentie nine. 52 Offord, tenne moneths. 53 Bradwarden, one. 54 Islep, fourtie seuen, About this time beginneth the losing of Sathan, who had béene shutte vp now 1000. yeares. The ende of the fift Booke.
The fifth Booke. THe first persecution of the primitiue Church, beginning at the 30. yéeres of Christ, was prophecied to conti∣new two and fortie moneths, that is 294. yéeres. The ceasing of the last persecuti∣on of the primitiue Church, by the death of Licinius the last persecu∣tor began, Anno 324. begun from the Natiuitie of Christ, which was from the 30. yéere of his age 299. The binding vp of Sathan after peace giuen to the Church, counting from the thirtie yéere of Christ, began an∣no 294. And lasted a 1000. yéeres, that is counting from the 30. yéeres of Christ, to the yéere 1294. About which yéere pope Boniface sat in the sea of Rome, and made the sixt booke of the Decretals, confirmed the or∣der of Friers, and priuiledged them with great fréedomes, Anno 1294. Vnto the which count of yéeres doth not much disagrée, that which Maister Fox saith,A prophecie. hée found in a certaine old Chronicle prophecied, and written in the latter end of a booke: which booke was written as it séemeth by a Monke of Douer, and remayneth yet in the custody of William Cary, citizen of London, alledging the Prophecie of one Hayn∣chardusHaynchardus. a Grayfrier, grounded vpon the authoritie of Io∣achim the Abbot, prophecying that Antichrist should bée borne, the yéere from the Natiuitie of Christ 1260. which is coūting after the Lords passion, the very same yéere when the orders of Friers both Dominickes and Franciscans be∣gan first to be set vp by Honorius the third, and Gregorius the 9. which was the yéere of our Lord counting from his
passion, one thousand, two hundred, and twentie six: and counting after the Natiuitie of the Lord, one thousand, two hundred, and thrée score, whereof the verses in the author are written, anno 1283. A prophecie of Antichrist.Cum fuerint anni completi mille ducenti, Et Decies seni post partum virginis almae: Tunc Antichristus nascetur Daemone plenus. As diuerse other before times opposed themselues a∣gainst the Pope, so now about the yéere one thousand, thrée hundred, thrée score, agaynst the Pope and his Clergie was set out a Prayer,A complaint of the Ploughmā against the clergy. & complaint of the Ploughman, faithful∣ly set foorth by William Tindall, against auricular confessi∣on, shrift, penaunce, long praier, masse, singlenesse of priests, Images, &c. Not much before this Iohannes de Rupe Scissa, vtte∣red a propheticall parable against the clergie of Rome, com∣plaining it to be a byrde decked with the feathers of other foules,The church Rome a bird decked with o∣ther birds fe∣thers. whereof because she was prowd, and did not ac∣knowledge the benefit, nor from whom she had it, the foules pulled euery one their fethers, and left her naked: and so (said he) it will befall to the church of Rome. About the same time, also God raysed vp Armachanus agaynst Antichrist, which Armachanus was Primate and Archbishop of Ireland,Armachanus Archb. of Ire∣land. who in the time that hée liued had no man that excéeded him eyther in life or learning: his name was Richard Fitzrafe:Richard Fitz∣rafe. he was brought vp in the vni∣uersitie of Oxford vnder Iohn Badenthorp,Iohn Baden∣thorp. who was a great enemy to begging Friers: whose steps also the scholer following, began to doo the like: and being called vp to Lon∣don, made seuen or eight Sermons, wherein hée propoun∣ded nine Conclusions against the Friers,9. Conclusions against the Friers. for the which hée was by the Friers cited vp before Pope Innocent the sixt: before whom he valiantly defended himselfe, and continued constant therein vntill his dying day: his sufferings and de∣liuerances were maruellous great.
The controuersie for the Friers helde very long in the church, & they had of popes, some mainteiners,A long contro∣uersie of the Friers. Their fauou∣rers. & some aduer∣saries, Mainteiners, Honorius 3. Gregory 9, Alexander 4. Clemens 4. Boniface 8. Clemens 5. Against them, Innocē∣tius 3. Innocentius 4. Martinus 4, Benedictus 11. The learned men that disputed against the Friers,Their assi∣stants. were these, which either were condemned by the Popes or caused to recant: Guilielmus de sancto amore, Bernar∣dus super capitulum, Omnis vtriusque sexus. Godfridus de fontibus, Henricus de Gandauo, Guilielmus de Lan∣duno, Iohannes Monachus Cardini, Iohannes de Po∣liaco, who was caused by the Pope to recant at Paris. Armachanus, who wrote a Booke Defensorium Curato∣torum,Defensorium Curatorum. and for his defense of Curates against the Fry∣ers, hée was banished, besides other vexations, seuen or eight yéeres, and died in the same, banished at Auinion: of whose death, a certaine Cardinall hearing, openly prote∣sted, that the same day a mighty piller of Christes Church was fallen. Against this Armachanus,Armachanus a mighty pillar of Gods church wrote diuers Fri∣ers, After the death of Pope Innocent, was Pope Vrban 5. who by the fathers side, was an Englishman: he maintey∣ned and kindled greate warres in Italie, sending Egidius his Cardinall, and Legate: and after him, Ardiminus a Burgundian, his Legate and Abbot, with a great puisance, and much money against sundry cities in Italie: by whose meanes, Cities and townes, which before had broken from the pope, were oppressed. Also Bernabes & Galeaceus prin∣ces of Millaine vanquished, by whose example others bée∣ing feared, submitted themselues to the church of Rome,How Rome commeth by her patrimony. and thus came that wicked Church by her great possessions, which her patrones would néedes father vpon Constantine the godly Emperour, In the time of this Pope, and in the second yéere of his raigne, about the beginning of the yéere, 1364.  vppon the
euen of the natiuitie of the Lord, the fourth Sunday of Ad∣uent, one Nicholaus OremNicholaus Orem. preached a Sermon before the Pope and his Cardinalles: in which he rebuked the Pre∣lats & priestes of his time: and threatneth their destruction not to be far off, by certain signes taken from their corrupt life, &c. His Text was out of the sixe and fifty of Esaie: My sauing health is neere at hand to come, and my righteous∣nes to be reuealed. Iesuits begin.In the fift yéere of Pope Vrban, began first the order of Iesuites. Vnto this time, which was about the yeare 1367.  the of∣fices here in England, as the L. Chancelour, L. Treasurer, and of the priuy seale, were wont to be in the handes of the Cleargy:Offices remo∣ued from the Cleargie to the Laity. but about this yéere, through the motion of the Lordes in the Parlement, and partly, for hatred of the Cleargie: all those offices were remooued to the Lords tem∣porall. The P. remo∣ueth from France to Rome againe.After the death of Vrban succéeded Gregorie the eleuēth: who among his other actes, first reduced agayne the pa∣pacie out of Fraunce vnto Rome, which had nowe beene from thence, the space of seuentie yeres: being ther∣to mooued (as Sabellicus recordeth) by a Bishoppe, who being blamed by the Pope, for long absence from his charge, answered: and why are you so long absent from the place where your Church doth lye? Wherevpon the pope sought all meanes after that, to remoue his Court out of Fraunce into Rome. This Pope Gregorie 9, in a certaine Bull of his sent to the Archb. of Prage, maketh mention of one named Me∣litzing, a Bohemian,Melitzing a Bohemian. and saith in the same, that he should teach, Anno 1366.  that Antichrist was alreadie come, and that the same Melitzing had certayne congregations follo∣wing him: and in the same congregations, certaine harlots, who being conuerted frō their wickednes, were brought to a godly life: which harlots hee vsed to prefer before al ye holie
religious virgins, wherefore he commaunded the Archb. to excommunicate and persecute the said Melitzing: which hée did, and also imprisoned him. King Edward the third holding a Parlement in the third yéere of this Pope, sent his Embassadours to him: desi∣ring him that hée from thencefoorth would abstaine from his reseruations of benefices vsed in the court of England: and that spirituall men within this Realme promoted vn∣to Bishoprickes, might fréely enioy their elections within the Realme, and be confirmed by their Metropolitane, ac∣cording to the auncient custome of the land: whereto the Pope sent an answere (but when) it is not recorded) sauing that the yeare following, Anno 1374.  there was a trac∣tation at Bruges vppon certaine of the said articles be∣twixt the King and the Pope, which did hang two yéeres in suspence: so at the length it was thus agréed betwixt them, that the Pope should no more vse these reseruati∣ons of Benefices in Englande:The P. should no more vse re∣seruations of benefices in England. and likewise the King shoulde no more giue Benefices vppon the Writte Qua∣re impedit, &c. But nothing was touched concerning the fréedomes of elections confirmed by the Metropoli∣tanes. As touching these reseruations, prouisions and collati∣ons, with the elections of Archbishops, Bishops, beneficed men, &c. wherewith the Pope vexed the lande, the king in the fiue and twentie yere of his reigne, enacted (according to the Statute made in the thirtie yeare of the reigne of his Grandfather king Edward the first) against the like pillage and rauening, (but not put in practise) reuiued it, and inlar∣ged the same: adding (moreouer) thereunto, other straight and sharpe penalties, against such as offended in any parte of the same. And in the Parlements holden the 27. and 28. yeares of his reigne, it was decreed, that whosoeuer (for any cause of controuersie in law) either Spirituall or Temporall, whe∣ther
they were personall or reall,Premunire to make appeale to Rome for any cause. should appeale or consent to any appeale to be made to the sea of Rome, should incur the daunger of a Premunire. About this time, beyng the yéere of our Lord, 1370.  liued holy Brigit, whom the Church of Rome hath not onely ca∣nonized for a Saint,Holy Brigit a great rebuker of the popish clergy. but also for a prophetesse: yet in her bookes of Reuelations, she was a great rebuker of the pope, and of his filthie clergie, calling him a murtherer of soules, a spiller,The Pope compared. and a piler of the flocke of Christ, more abhomina∣ble then the Iewes, more cruell then Iudas, more vniust then Pilate, worse then Lucifer himselfe: she prophecieth that the sea of Rome shall be throwne downe into the déepe like a milstone, &c. And that the Cleargy haue turned the ten commandements into two words. Da pecuniam:The x commā∣demēts turned into 2. words. da pecuniam. that is, giue money. About the same time also, 1379.  liued Catherina Senen∣sis,Katherina Se∣nensis. which hauing the spirite of prophecie much cōplained of the church of Rome, & prophecied before of the great schisme which then followed in the Church of Rome, and endured al the councel of Constance, the space of 39, of yeres, and decla∣red also before of the reformation of religion, that nowe is. Mathias Pari∣siensis of Anti∣christ.Also, about the yéere 1370. liued Mathias Parisiensis a Bohemian, who wrote a large booke of Antichrist, and prooueth him alreadie come, and noteth the Pope to be the same: besides other abuses in the Romish Church, against which he doeth inueigh. Shortly after, anno 1384.  liued Iohannes Mountziger,I. Mountziger. Rector of the Vniuersitie of Vlme, who preached against the worshipping of the Sacrament, and was resisted by the Friers, till the Senate, and Councel of the Citie was faine to take vp the matter betwixt them. About this time liued Nilus, Archbishop of Thessaloni∣ca,Nilus Archb. of Thess. and wrote a large worke against the Roman Church, and layeth the fault of the Schisme betwixt the East and
West Church vpon the Pope: and very copiouslie reproo∣ueth manie pointes of Poperie: as, his Supremacie, &c. About the yere 1371. liued Henricus de Iota,H de Iota. whome Gerson doth much commend, and also his companion Hen∣ricus de Hassia,H. de Hassia. who in a certaine Epistle which he writeth to the Bishoppe of Normacia, Iacobus Cartusiensis, doth greatly accuse the Spirituall men of euery order: yea and the most holiest of all, the Pope himselfe, of many and great vices. He citeth also out of the prophecie of Hildegardis,The deuils bellie full of the Popes voluptuousnes these wordes. Therefore doeth the deuill himselfe speake vnto you, Priestes: daintie bankets, and feastes, wherein is all voluptuousnesse, doe I finde among these men. In so much, that mine Eyes, mine Eares, my bellie, and my veynes, are euen filled with the froath of them, and so foorth. About the yere 1390.  there were buried at Bringa 36. Citizens of Maguntia, for the doctrine of Waldenses, as Brushius affirmeth, and Masseus recordeth of diuers,36. burned for the trueth. 140. suffered for refusing the decretals. to the number of an hundred and fourtie, which in the Prouince of Narbone, chose rather to suffer whatsoeuer gréeuous pu∣nishment by fire, then to receue the decretals of the Romish Church, contrarie to the vpright trueth of the Gospell. Also foure and twentie suffered at Paris,24 suffer at Paris. in the yere of our Lord, 1210. And in the same author is testified, that in the yere, there were 400. vnder the name of heretikes, and fourescore beheaded, Prince Armericus hanged, and the la∣die of Castile stoned to death. In the seuentéene yere of Edw. the third, the Commons found great fault at prouisiōs comming from Rome, wher∣by Strangers were dishabled within this land, to enioy ec∣clesiasticall dignities: and shewed how the Pope had graun∣ted in most couert wise, to two new Cardinals (and name∣ly to Cardinall Peragoth,) aboue one thousande markes of yearelie taxes.
They (therefore) required the king, and Nobles, to finde some remedie, for that they neuer coulde, nor woulde, leaue those oppressions, &c. or els, to helpe them to expel the popes authoritie by force. Whereupon, the king, Lords, and commons, sent for the acte made at Carlil, an. 35. of the reigne of king Edward the first, vpon like complaint, thereby forbidding, that any thing should be attempted, or brought into the realme, that should tend to the blemishing of the kinges prerogatiue, or preiu∣dice of the Lords,The Act of prouision made or Commons. And so at this time, the sta∣tute, called The act of Prouision, was made, by common cō∣sent: which generally forbiddeth the bringing in of bulles, or any such trinkets from the Court of Rome: or vsing, allow∣ing, or enioying, of any such bill, processe, instrument, &c. The penaltie of which statute, was, as folowed in ye next Parlement, anno regni, 18.) the transgressors thereof, to lie in perpetuall prison, or to be forbidden the land: and that all Iustices of Assise, Gaole deliuerie, or Oier and determiner, may determine the same: required withall, that the same act and prouision, should continue for euer. And notwithstan∣ding the bishops were neither named, nor expressed with the other Lords of the Parlement, yet it stood in full force, not∣withstanding. In which Parlement were also diuers points enacted, touching presentments of Ecclesiasticall dignities,An act to con∣tinue for euer Decrees a∣gainst the op∣pression of the Pope. and Be∣nefices. Also, in the Parlements, the 20. 25. 38. 40. 50. & 51. of the kings reigne, were enacted decrées against the oppres∣sion of the Pope, and his filthie, and rauenous Cleargie: be∣sides diuers other against them. Moreouer, in the booke of the actes and rolles of the king, it appeareth, that he sent Iohn VVickliffe, (Reader at that time of the Diuinitie Lecture in Oxforde) with certaine o∣ther Lordes, and Ambassadors, to treate a marriage be∣twéene his Daughter, and Leonell, Sonne vnto king Ed∣ward: whereby is to be noted, the good will which the King
bare to Wickliffe, and what small regard he had of the sea of Rome. This Wickliffe liued in the raigne of King Edward the third, in the yéere of our Lord, one thousand, thrée hundred,  thée score and eleuen: and then withstood greatly the popes procéedings, and the Popish clergy. Hée was a man very well learned, as testifieth of him Walden his most bitter and cruell enemy: who in a certaine Epistle written to Pope Martin the fifth, saith that hée was wonderfully asto∣nished at this his most strong arguments, with the places of authoritie that hée had gathered, and the vehemencie and force of his reasons, &c. In Wickliffes time,In VVickliffes time ye worlde was in worst case. was the worlde in most desperate state, and in greatest blindnesse, and ignoraunce, both of the power of the Gospell, and all other good learning: and the Churche of Rome most cruell, and voyde of all good gift and grace of GOD: and religion turned to superstiti∣on. Wickliffe first (of matters of religion) began with the Idolatrie, committed in the Sacrament:VVickliffe a∣gainst images. which he did not so soone attempt, but the whole glut of monkes, and begging Friers made against him: and after them Simon Sudburie, Archbishop of Canterbury, tooke the matter in hand, and for the same cause depriued Wickliffe of his benefice at Oxford: notwithstanding, he well supported,Iohn of Gaunt Lord H. Percie fauourers of VVic. and friended of the King, and other: as, Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and the Lord Henrie Percie, by whom he bare out the ma∣lice of the friers, till the yere of our Lord, one thousand,  thrée hundred, seuentie seuen. The opinions for which he was depriued in Oxforde,The opinions of VVic. were these: That the Pope had no more power to excom∣municate any man, than an other: and that to absolue, is as much in any Priestes power, as in his. That when Eccle∣siasticall persons doe sinne habitualiter, continuing in the same still, the Temporall powers may, and likewise ought
to take away from them that which hath béene before be∣stowed vpon them, &c. He touched also the matter of the sa∣crament, prouing, that in the same the accidents did not re∣maine without the substaunce, both by the Scriptures and ancient Doctours. About the yéere 1376.  the Bishops still vrging and stir∣ring vp their Archbishop Simon Sudbury (which before had depriued him, and afterward prohibited him not to stirre any more in those kind of matters) had obtained by processe and order of citation, to haue him brought before them, wherevpon both place and time for him to appeare, after their vsuall forme was to him assigned. The Duke hauing intelligence, that Wickliffe his Client should come before the bishops, fearing that he being but one, should be too weak against such a multitude, calleth vnto him out of the orders of Friers, foure Batchelers of diuinity, out of euery order one, to ioyne them with Wickliffe, for the more surety. Whē the day was come for Wickliffe to appeare, which was Thursday, the 19. of February, Iohn Wickliffe accompa∣nied with the Friers,Wickliffe brought before the Bishops. and with them also the Duke of Lan∣caster, and Lord Henry Piercey, Lord marshall of England: the said Lord Piercey going before him to make roome and way where Wickliffe shoulde come: such was the throng of the multitude in Paules Church (which was the place ap∣pointed) that the Lordes, for all the puissaunce of the high Marshall, scarce could with great difficultie gette way tho∣rough. In so much, that the Bishop of London, Wil. Court∣ney, sonne to the Earle of Deuonshire, séeing the stirre that the Lord Marshall kept in the Church, among the people, speaking to the Lorde Piercie, said, that if hee had knowen what masteries he would haue kept in the church, he would haue stopped him for comming in there. Whereupon grewe words. At last, after much wrastling, they preased thorow, and came to our Ladies Chappell, where the Duke, and ba∣rons were sitting together, with the Archbishops, and other
Bishops, before whom stood Iohn Wickliffe to know what should be laid against him. To whom first spake the Lord Percie, bidding him sit downe, saying:Wickliffe bid sit downe. hée had many things to answere vnto, and therefore had need of some soft seate. But the Bishop of Lincolne cast into a fumish heat, sayd he should not sit there, neither (said he) was it according to law, &c. wherevpon grewe great heat of speach among them. The Duke also taking part with the Lord Percie,From braule to threates. rebuked the Bishop, who went so farre beyond the Duke in rayling, that the Duke (as the Author saith) was asha∣med because hée could not ouerpasse the Bishop in braw∣ling, and therefore fell to plaine threatning: wherevpon the contention grew so great, that the councell broken vp with scolding and brauling for that day, was dissolued before nine of the clocke. About this time a proude bishop of Norwich was woun∣ded and sore hurt,A prowde B. wounded. with his traine dispersed at the towne of Lennam, for that he presumed to take vpon him to cōmaund a mace, or tipstaffe, belonging to the chiefe gouernour of the towne, to be carried before him. Anno 1377.  In the moneth of Iune 21. day, died Ed∣ward 3. that after he had raigned 51. yéeres, who of all the kings of the realme vnto king Henry the 8.K. Edward di∣eth, the grea∣test brideler of the pope. was the greatest brideler of the Popes vsurped power, whereby Iohn Wic∣kliffe was maintained with ayd sufficient. Richard the second succéeded his father, beyng but eleuen yéeres of age: and in the same yéere of his Fathers decease, was crowned at Westminster, anno 1371. Wickliffe, notwithstanding he were forbidden by the bi∣shops, continued yet with his fellowes, going barefoot, and in long friers gownes,Wickliffe go∣eth barefoote preaching. Articles out of Wickliffes preachings. (as their manner was) preaching dili∣gently to the people: out of whose Sermons, chiefly these ar∣ticles were collected: That ye Eucharist is the body of Christ, but figurately. That Rome is not the head of churches: and that Peter had no more giuen vnto him then other apostles.
That the pope had no more the keies, then any other within the order of priesthood: that the Lords temporall may take a∣way the temporalities of the clergy, offending habitualiter, & are bound vnder paine of damnation, to take them away frō any Church so offending: That the gospell is the onely sufficient rule of life. That neither the Pope nor any other prelate of the church, ought to haue prisons, wherein to pu∣nish transgressors, &c. Which were collected with diuerse more by the Bishops, and sent to Pope Gregory at Rome, where the Articles beyng perused and read,Wickliffes ar∣ticles condēned for hereticall. were condem∣ned by 23. Cardinals, to be hereticall. An. 1378.  pope Gregory sendeth his Bull by the hands of one M. Edmund Stafford directed vnto the vniuersitie of Oxford rebuking them sharply, imperiously, & like a pope, for suffering so long the doctrine of Wickleffe to take roote: which Bull when it came to be exhibited to their hands,The Popes bull against Wickliffe. the Proctors and Maisters of the vniuersitie, ioyning together in consultation, stood long in doubt, deliberating with them∣selues whether to receiue the Popes Bull with honour, or to reiect it with shame. Beside this Bull sent to the Vniuersitie of Oxford, pope Gregory directed moreouer his letters the same time to the Archbishop of Canterbury Simon Sudbury, and to the Bi∣shop of London William Courtney, with the conclusions of Iohn Wickliffe therein enclosed: commaunding them by vertue of those his letters apostolicall, and straightly in∣ioyning them, to cause the sayd Iohn Wickliffe to be appre∣hended and cast into prison: and that the King and the No∣bles should be admonished,The Pope di∣ligent against Wickliffe. not to geue any credit to the do∣ctrine of Wickliffe, &c. Besides this Bull to the Archbishop of Canterburie, and the Bishop of London, he wrote two o∣ther letters concerning the same matter, to the same Bi∣shops, dearing the same date of day, and yéere, in the seuēth yéere of his papacie. 11. Kalend. Iunij. Moreouer besides all these buls, & letters, he directeth an
other Epistle bearing the same date vnto king Richard the 2. touching the same matter. The articles included in the Popes letters,18. hereticall o∣pinions against Wickliffe. that were held for erroneous, were about 18. as first, none hath pow∣er but Christ to ordaine, that Peter, and all his ofspring, should politikely rule ouer the world for euer. 2. God cannot giue to any man for him and his heires any ciuill dominion for euer. All writings of men as touching perpetuall in∣heritance, are impossible. 4. Euery man being in grace, iustifying, hath right ouer all the good thinges of God. 5. A man cannot but onely ministratoriously, giue any temporall or continuall gift either to his naturall sonne, or to his sonne by adoption. 6. The temporall Lordes may lawfully take away the riches from the church when they do offend habi∣tualiter. 7. The Pope cannot any way make able, or disa∣ble any man. 8. A man cannot take hurt by excommunica∣tion, except he be principally excommunicate by him selfe. 6 No man ought but in Gods cause, to procéed to any ecclesi∣astical censure. 10. An excommunication doth onely binde, when it is against the aduersary of Gods law. 11. Ther is no power giuen to excommunicate any subiect for denying any temporalites. 12. The Disciples of Christ haue no po∣wer to exact by any ciuill authoritie, temporalities by cen∣sures. 13. It is not possible by reason of the absolute power of God, that any can bind or lose the people, or whatsoeuer christian he be. 14. The vicar of Christ doth onely binde and loose, when he worketh conformably by the ordinaunce of Christ. 15. any priest duly ordained, hath power to mi∣nister the sacramentes, and consequently absolue any man confessing his faultes being penitent for the same. 16. A∣gréeth with the 6. 17. Whosoeuer haue endued any church with temporalities, it is lawful for them to take them away by way of medicine, for to auoide sinne: notwithstanding any excommunication &c. For as much as they are not giuen but vnder a condition 18. The Bishoppe of
Rome, or any Ecclesiasticall minister may lawfully bée re∣buked of his subiects, and for the profite of the Church, bée accused eyther of the Cleargy, or of the Laitie. These let∣ters made the Bishops maruellous bolde, and bragge: but God by a small occasion, did lightly ouerthrow their deui∣ses, for the day of examination being come, a certaine per∣sonage of the Princes Court of no great noble byrth, named Lewis Clifford, entring in among the Bishoppes, comman∣ded them that they should not procéede in any definitiue sen∣tence against Iohn Wickliffe. By which wordes, they were amazed, and durst not procéede: and thus escaped Wickliffe the second time:Wickliffe esca∣peth the second time. and was by them cléerely dismissed with a certaine declaration made of his articles, and protestati∣on, that hée woulde, while hée liued, mainteyne the lawe of Christ: and if through ignoraunce, &c. Iohn Wick∣liffe was greately supported by the Londoners:Wickliffe great¦ly supported by the Londoners. by whose meanes hée escaped the handes of the Bishoppes the second time: and procéeded, publishing, and preaching the trueth: whom also it greatly helped, because in the same yéere, or the next following, Gregorie the Pope dy∣ed.Pope Gregory dieth. After whom ensued such schisme betwixt two Popes, that it continued in the Church nine and thirty yéeres, till the time of the councell of Constance:A schisme be∣twixt 2. Popes 39. yeere. the occasion of which schisme, was through the pride of Vrban the sixt. From whome (about the same cause) of his Cardinalles, the most part, and other Princes shronke, and set vp ano∣ther French Pope against him, named Clement,Clement. who raigned eleuen yéeres: and after him, Benedictus 13.Benedict. 13 that raigned sixe and twentie yéeres. Again, of the contrary side, after Vrbanus 6. succéeded Boniface 9. Innocentius 8. Gre∣gorius 12.Boniface 9. Innocent 8. Gregory 12. Alexander 5. Iohn 13. in this order: Vrban 6. eleuen yéeres, and eight moneths. Boniface 9.14. yéeres & 9. moneths.Popes and Antipopes. Antipopes, Clement 11. yéers. Benedictus the 13. 26. yéeres. Pope, Innocentius the 8. two yéeres. Gregori∣us the 12. two yéeres, 7. moneths. Alexander 5. 11. moneths.
Iohannes, 13. fiue yeres, tenne moneths. In which miserable schisme fell out many horrible tra∣gedies: as, sheding of bloud; imprisonment of priests;Crueltie a∣mong the cler∣gie during the Schisme. mur∣thering of Otho, Duke of Brunswike, Prince of Tarentū; Ioan, Quéene of Ierusalem, and Sicilia, his wife, strang∣led in prison; racking of Cardinals on gibets to death; the be∣heading of fiue Cardinals together, after long torments; the slaughter of fiftie thousand, slaine in battaile on both sides: with a number of other cruelties, practised among them, which Theodorick Niem, who was present at P. Vrbanus death, doeth most largely discourse. About thrée yeres after, there fell a dissention betwéene the nobilitie and commons of the land: in which tumult, the rude people tooke, and beheaded Simon Sudburie,S. Sudburie beheaded by the rude peo∣ple. Archb. of Canterburie. In whose place succéeded William Court∣ney, who was very diligent in rooting out Heretikes: not∣withstanding, in the meane season, Wickliffes parte increa∣sed priuilie, and dayly grew to great force, vntill the time that William Barton, Vicechancellor of the Vniuersitie of Oxford, about the yere, 1380.  had the whole rule of that V∣niuersitie: who calling together eight Monastical Doctors, with foure other, and the rest of his affinitie,W. Barton. Vicechanceler of Oxford, ene∣mie to Wickliff putting the common seale of the Vniuersitie, to a certaine writing, set foorth an Edict, declaring vnto euery man, and threatning them vnder gréeuous penalty, that no man should be so har∣die hereafter, as to associate themselues with any of Wick∣liffes sauourers: and vnto Wickliffe himselfe he threateneth the greatest excommunication, and further imprisonment, and to all his fautors, vnlesse that they (after thrée dayes canonicall admonition) did repent, and amend. Which thing when Wickliffe vnderstoode, forsaking the Pope, and all his Cleargie, he thought to appeale vnto the Kinges Maie∣stie. But the Duke of Lancaster forbad him that, and coun∣selled him to submitte himself to the censure, and iudgement of his Ordinarie: whereto he granted, and made such quali∣fying
of his assertions, that he did mitigate the rigour of his enemies.Wickliffe mit∣tigateth his e∣nemies. The next yeare after 1382.  by the commaundement of William Archb. of Canterbury there was a cōuocation hol∣den at London, where Iohn Wickliffe was commaunded to be present: but whether he appeared personally or not, it is not in stories certainly recorded. In which councell Wick∣liffes articles were some of them condemned for heretical, and other for erronious. The articles condemned for here∣ticall are these. Articles of Wickl. con∣demned.1 There is no transubstantiation after the wordes of con∣consecration. 2. The accidentes remaine not without the substaunce after the wordes. 3. Christ is not corporally pre∣sent in the Sacrament. 4. If a B. or Priest be in deadly sinne, he can not order, consecrate or baptize: (which arti∣cle seemeth to be falsly taken.) 5 A man truly penitent nee∣deth not outwardly to be confessed. 6. Christ did not ordeine the Masse. 7. If the Pope be an euil man, hee hath no po∣wer ouer faithfull Christians, except it be giuen him from the Emperour. 8 Since the time of Vrban 6. there is none to be receiued for Pope, but to liue after the manner of the Greeks. 9. That church goods may be taken from the Cler∣gie, if they so deserue. The erronius opinions were these. 10 That no prelate ought to excōmunicate any man except he knew him first to be excmōunicated of God. 11 That he which doth so excommunicate, is therby himself excommu∣nicated, or an heretick. 12 That any person excōmunicating him that hath appealed to the king, or counsel, is thereby himselfe a traitor. 13 That they that for feare leaue the hea∣ring or preaching of the word of God, are therefore al∣ready excommunicated: and in the day of iudgement shall be counted as traitors to God. 14 That it is lawfull for any Deacon or Prieste to Preache without licence of the, Pope, or Popishe Clergie.
15. That so long as a man is in deadly sinne, he is neither Bishop or prelate in the church of God: (which article sée∣meth to be hardly gathered of them.) 16. That all the tem∣porall Lordes may take away temporall goods from the churchmen if they so deserue. 17. That tenths are pure almesse.Tenths are pure almesse. 18. That all speciall prayers applied to any pri∣uate or particular person, by any religious man or Prelate, doth no more profite the same person, then generall or vni∣uersall prayers doo profite others, which be in like state with them. 19. That whosoeuer entereth into any pri∣uate religion, is thereby made the more vnapt to kéepe the commaundements of God. 20. That holy men which haue instituted priuate religions, haue grieuously offen∣ded. 21. That religious men in their pryuate religions are not of the Christian religion. 22. That Friers ought to liue by their labour. 23. That whosoeuer giueth al∣messe fo Friers, is in daunger of cursse. Now when the Archbishop, Suffraganes, and Prelates, &c. were assembled at the Grayfriers in London, vpon saint Dunstons day after dinner, about two of the clocke, and should go about their busines, a terrible earthquakeA terrible earthquake. fell thorough all England. The Archbishop endeuored by all means to abolish Wic∣kliffe and his doctrine, and to that effect wrote both to the Bishop of London, to the commissary of Oxford, and also sollicited the king against the same. Vpon Wickliffes conclusions were examined, Nicholas Herford, Phillip Repington, and Iohn Ashton bachelers of diuinitie, who at length with somwhat adoo, confessed Wic∣kliffes articles to be heretical or erronious, after a sort some of them being taken, & in some sense construed: which kind of answere, because it pleased not the prelats, they were ap∣pointed to be examined againe of certaine speciall points, where their answere was not direct and full before. In the examination of Iohn Ashton the archb. required,
that he would answere in the Latine tongue, because of the Lay people that stood about him, but Ashton refused so to do: and answered in his mother tongue: and so behaued himselfe that the Archbishop called him hereticke and erronious:Persecution. and at the same time the archbishop being desirous (as he pretē∣ded) to be informed by Thomas Hilman bacheler of diuinitie (there being present & somewhat fauouring Iohn Ashton) what his iudgement was touching the said conclusions, as∣signed vnto him also a deliberation, to appeare with Nicho∣las Herford, & Phillip Repingdon: at which time Thomas appeared, and pronounced the articles all hereticall or erro∣nious: Nicholas, and Phillip, for not appéering were ex∣communicated for contumacie. Against which excommuni∣cation ye parties excōmunicated, exhibited an appeale vnto ye B. of Rome, which appeale the archb. vtterly reiected, & sent a letter to M. Rigge cōmissary of Oxford, to make diligent search for Nicholas Herford, & Phillip Repington, to appre∣hend them, & to send them vp personally to appéere at a cer∣taine day prescribed for the same: and sollicited the King to ioyne his sword to assist him, whereto he also yéelded, and directeth his letters to that effect, both to the Archb. and to the Vicechancellor of Oxford, which was anno 1382. The vicechancellor the same time was Robert Rigges, the proctors Iohn Huntman, and Walter Dish, who then (as far as they durst) fauoured ye cause of Iohn Wickliffe, & that side: in so much that the same time & yéere 1382. when cer∣taine sermons publike should be customably appointed, at the feast of the Ascension, and of Corpus Christi, to be prea∣ched in ye cloister of S. Frisewide, now called Christ church, before the people, by the Vicechancellor, & the Proctors: the doing thereof was committed to Phillip Repington,The fauourers of Wickliffe appointed to preach. & Ni∣cholas Herford, so that Nicholas should preach on the Ascē∣sion day, & Repington on the Corpus Christi day. In which sermon on Corpus Christi day, Phillip preached, (among o∣ther matters) that the Pope and Bishops ought not to be
recommended aboue temporall Lords, and that in all moral matters, he would defende Wickliffe, as a true Catholike Doctor. And finally, his sermon concluded, hee dismissed the people with this sentence, saying: I will in the specula∣tiue doctrine, as pertaining to the matter of the Sacrament of the altar, kéepe silence till such time as GOD other∣wise shall instruct and illuminate the heartes of the Clear∣gy. Against this Philip, Peter Stokes a Carmelite,Stokes an eni∣my to Wickliff. was a great aduersarie. And a while after, the Vicechauncelor and Brightwell went vp to London, to purge themselues, and their adherentes of the accusations of this Frier, and bée∣ing examined vppon the articles of Iohn Wickliffe, they did consent, that they were woorthely condemned: and so were with somewhat adoe, discharged, and commaun∣ded séeke out the fauourers of Iohn Wickliffe: whereof Ni∣cholas Herford and Philip Repington, hauing priuy war∣ning by the Vicechauncellour, conueyed themselues away, and fledde to the Duke of Lancaster,Duke of Lan∣caster forsaked the scholers of Wickliffe. who yet forsooke them for feare, or somewhat else, not expressed. So soone as they were fledde, the Archbishoppe directeth letters to the Vice∣chancellour, and to the Bishop of London, named Robert Braisbrocke, to excommunicate them, and to lay for them both in Oxford, and in London, that they might bée ap∣prehended. This was the fourtéenth of Iuly, Anno 1382 after which Repington in the same yéere, the thrée and twē∣tieth of October, was reconciled to the Archb. and so was Iohn Ashton. About the 23. of September the same yéere,Repington re∣conciled, and so Aishton. the king cal∣led a parlement for a subsidy: and the Archbishops and Pre∣lats a Conuocation, in the monastery of Saint Friswide in Oxford, where in the third day of the assembly, in the pre∣sence of the prelates, Philip RepingtonRepington abiureth. (otherwise called of the brethren afterward Rampington) abiured his former conclusions, and the doctrine of Wickliffe: & immediatly af∣ter was brought in Iohn Aishton, who refused to answere,
and afterward, was cited and condemned by Thomas A∣rundell Archbishop of Canterbury; but what became after∣ward of him, it is not certaine. It is plaine by the Chroni∣cle of S. Albons, that the Londoners did hinder the Archb. himselfe sitting in the citie of London, when he would haue made processe against Iohn Aishton,The Londo∣ners fauorers of trueth. anno 1382. Nicho∣las Herford, during the time of this Conuocation did not appeare: and therefore had the sentence of excommunica∣tion against him: against which he put in his appeale to the King, and his Councell: the Archbishoppe woulde not ad∣mitte it, but caused him to bee apprehended, and inclosed in prison: yet hee escaped, and returned to his for∣mer preaching in secrete manner. Wherevpon the Arch∣bishop thundered out excommunication against him, and wrote letters to the king, requiring his sword to chop of his necke. In this meane time, it is not certainly knowne, what became of Wickliffe but as it may bee gathered out of Wal∣den,Wickliffe ba∣nished. it appeareth that he was banished: but whersoeuer he were, at that time hée wrote a letter to Pope Vrban the sixt, purging himselfe therein: and also in the same declareth a briefe confession of his faith. But this Pope Vrban otherwise called Turban, was so hotte in his warres against Clement the French Pope, his aduersarie; that he had neither leysure, nor list to attend vppon Wickliffes matters,By reason of the schisme Wickliffe is more quiet. by reason of which schisme, Wickliffe was in more quiet. Anno 1383.  Pope Vrban employed Henry Spencer B. of Norwich (who was hardly intreated at Lennam, for striuing for the mayors mace) in suppressing of the An∣tipope, at Auinion in Fraunce: and sent Bulles to the same Henry about this time to Croysser, whosoeuer would go wt him into France, to destroy the Antipope, that named himself Clement, & to make wars with al those ye tooke his part: which was takē in hād accordingly, & to ye end was giuē
to the Bishop the fiftinth, which was graunted to the king the Parlement before, and about the moneth of Maie, be∣ing come to Canterbury, & there tarying for a wind, in the Monastery of S. Augustine, receiued a writ from the king that he should returne to him, and know further his plea∣sure. The B. fearing he should be staied: notwithstāding the writ, entred the seas, and arriued at Calis, and afterward besieged Grauendie, that held with the Antipope, and tooke it, and there slue man, woman, and child.A cruell Bi∣shop. Ex Chron. Mon. D. Albons. And after that he had slaine at Dunkirke in the chase, twelue thousand of the Frēch, (of his men only seuen missing,) and had in vaine besieged Ipres, and could not kéepe Graueling, returned againe into England. In this meane time Iohn Wickliffe, eyther béeyng banished, or kept in some secrete place,Lutterworth VVickliffes pa∣rish Church. returned agayne within short space: and repayred to his parishe Churche at Lutterworth, whereof hée was parson:  and there dy∣ed, in the beginning of the yeere one thousand, thrée hun∣dred, eightie and foure, vpon Siluesters day, and died olde: of whom Thomas Walden his aduersary testifieth,VVickliffes constancie. that the same pleased him in his olde age, which pleased him beyng young. This Wickliffe had written diuers and sundry workes, which, anno 1410.  were burnt at Oxforde, the Abbot of Shrewesburie being the Commissarie, and sent to ouersée that matter: and not onely in England, but in Boheme also, the bookes of Wickliffe were set on fire, by one Subincus, Archbishop of Prage. The number of the volumes which he is said to haue burned, being most excellently written,W. bookes burned. & richlie adorned with bosses of gold, and rich couerings, (as Aeneas Siluius writeth) were aboue 200. Iohannes Cocleus in his Hist. Hus. recordeth, that there was a certaine Bishop in England, which wrote vnto him, that he had yet remaining in his custody, two mighty vo∣lumes of Wickliffes workes, which for the quantitie, might
séeme to be equall to the workes of S. Augustine. He wrote also certaine answers to king Richard the second, touching the Title of the King and the Pope: and whether the king may for his defence in time of necessitie withhold his trea∣sure from the Pope. In which he declareth the Popes vsur∣pation, and that Lordly dignitie which by the institution of the Apostles is forbidden him, &c. Wickliffe had many fauourers, euen of the Nobilitie, as well as of the lower sort. His speciall fauourers were these: Iohn Clenbone,Wickliffes fa∣uourers. Lewes Clifford, Richard Sturmes, Tho∣mas Latimer, William Neuell, Iohn Mountague, which plucked downe all the Images in his Church. Beside all these, was the Earle of Salisbury, who for contempt in him noted toward the Sacrament, in carrying it home to his house, was enioyned by Badulph Ergon, Bishop of Sa∣lisbury,Penance. to make in Salisbury a crosse of stone: in the which all the story of the matter should be written: and hee eue- Fridaye, during his life, to come to the Crosse bare∣foote, and bareheaded in his shirt: and there knéeling on his knées, to doe penance for his fact. Ex Chro. Mon. de albon. In vita Rich. 2 The Londoners at this time, trusting in the mayors authoritie (the cleargy & spirituall men being choked with bribes,The Londo∣ners take vpon them, &c. and winking at vice) tooke vppon them the office of the B. in punishing vices belonging to the ciuil law: as, for∣nication, adulterie, &c. Ex eod. Wickliffe had diuers testimonies of his great learning, and godlinesse: as, of the Vniuersitie of Oxford, sealed with the Vniuersitie Seale. But so farre did his doctrine take place, that the Councell of Constance, (to destroy it,) did de∣crée, that fourty fiue of his articles were hereticall, and 41. yeres after his death,VVic. bones burned after his death. Persecution. commanded his bones to be taken vp, and burned Thomas Walden, in his booke de sacramentis, & sacra∣mentalibus, saith, that after Wickliffe, many suffered most
cruell death, and many also did forsake the Realme. In the number of whom was William Swinderbie, Walter Brut, Iohn Puruey, Richard White, VVilliam Thorpe, Raynolde Peacock, Bishop of Asaph, and afterwardes of Chichester: Iohn Scotte, and Philip Norris, which being excommuni∣cate by Pope Eugenius the fourth, anno 1446. appealed to a general, or oecumenical Councel. Peter Paine, who flying from Oxford into Boheme, did stoutly withstande the So∣phisters, as touching both kindes in the Sacrament of the supper: and afterward, (among the rest of the Orators) was one of the fourtéene that were sent to the Councell at Basil: where, by the space of thrée dayes, he disputed vpon the arti∣cle touching the ciuill dominion of the Cleargie: in the yere 1438. Also, the Lord Cobham fauoured, and followed VVic∣kliffes doctrine, as did the Bohemians, who (by the meanes of a Bohemian, Student in Oxford, of a noble stocke, that carried with him into Bohemia certaine of VVickliffs booke De realibus vniuersalibus, de ciuili iure & diuino, de Ec∣clesia, de quaestionibus variis contra Clerū, &c.) had know∣ledge of the doctrine of VVickliffe. A certaine noble man in the Vniuersity of Boheme, had founded, and buylded a great Church of S. Matthias, & Ma∣theus: which Church was called Bethelem, geuing vnto it great lands, and finding in it two preachers, euery day to preach (both holy day, and working day) to the people. Of the which Preachers, Iohn HusseI. Husse. was one: who hauing fa∣miliaritie with the young noble man, that had béene student in Oxford, tooke such pleasure in reading the bookes of Wic∣kliffe, and such profite, that hee began to defende the author, both in Schooles, and Sermons. Anno 1389. VVilliam Swinderbie,VV. Swinderb. 1389 Priest, was accused of certaine false poyntes, vntruely obiected against him. The denouncers were, Frier Frisbie, obseruant, Fryer Hinclie, Augustine, and Thomas Baxton, Dominican.
Now, although he neuer preached, or mainteyned the articles obiected against him: yet the Friers, with their witnesses, standing forth, declared him to be conuicte, brin∣ging also drie wood with them to the towne, to burne him: and would not leaue him, before he had made them promise, and sworne vnto them, (for feare) neuer to holde them: and that he should goe to certaine Churches and reuoke the opi∣nions which he neuer affirmed: as, that men may aske their debtes by charitie, but it is not lawfull to imprison any mā for the same. That a childe is not truely baptized, if ye priest ye baptizeth him, or his Godfather or godmother, be in dead∣lie sinne, &c. Which penance he did, according to their iniun∣ctions. After this was done in the dioces of Lincolne, W. Swin∣derbie remoued into Hertfordshire,Articles a∣gainst S. where hee was much more vexed by the Friers, and by Iohn Tresuant, Bishop of Hereford. The articles which before were obiected, anno 1391. at the church of Bodenham, in the same Dioces, were these. 1 There is no Transubstantiation. 2 That the accidents cannot be without the subiect: and that there re∣mayneth materiall bread. 3 That all Priestes are of like power in all things. 4 That auricular confession is super∣fluous. 5 That inferiour priestes haue power of binding, and losing, onely, and immediatly from Christ. 6 That the Pope cannot graunt yerelie pardons, &c. Whereof, diuers were falslie laide to his charge, as he in his answere did de∣clare. In which answere he denied those that were absurd: and the other he protested he would mainteine, till such time as he were by the word of God other wise infourmed. This answere he should séeme to haue sent in writing, himself not daring to appeare, being cited foure sundrie times. Where upon, he was condemned for an heretike, and his articles, & answeres for heretical. From which sentence, he appealed to the K and his Councel, alleadging reasons for the same.
Bycause the Kings court is aboue the Bishops, because the matter is of death and the Bishoppes (sayd hée) will say, Nobis non licet interficere quemquam. It is not lawfull for vs to kill any man, &c. what after became of him it can not certainely bée affirmed, whether hée escaped their handes or died in pryson, or was burned: but it remaineth out of doubt, that during the time of king Richard 2. no hurt was doone him, which was in the yeere 1401.  At what time the king being wrōgfully deposed, Henry the 4. inuaded the kingdome. In the beginning of whose raigne was holden a parlement at London, wherein Wickliffes bookes, doctrine, & maintainers were condemned, & his fauourers iudged to be apprehended, and except they recanted, to bee deliuered to the secular power:Henry the 4. the first perse∣cuting king in England. whervpon a certaine priest is said to haue bin burned in Smithfield for the testimonie of the trueth, which might be William Swinderby aforesaid. Next vnto William Swinderby, his companion Walter BruteWalter Brute. was apprehended for the testimony of the trueth. Hée was a Laye man, and a Graduate of Oxforde: the chiefe cause that stirred vp the zeale of this man, seemeth to haue bin the impudent pardons & indulgences of P. Vr∣ban graunted to Henry Spencer B. of Norwich to fight a∣gainst pope Clement: and the wrongfull condemnation of the articles and conclusions of W. Swinderby. The articles laide out against him, were, yt he had taught against the reall presence of the Sacrament. That he in∣ueighed against the croysing, to fight against Clement, and yt he aduouched the P. to be antichrist, & a seducer of the peo∣ple. That he aduouched VV. Swinderbies articles,Articles a∣gainst Brute. and an∣sweres to be good. Which articles also, they ministred, and laid to his charge, in the chamber of the Bishop of Hereford, at his Mannour of Whitborne, then being present, M. Rai∣nold, of wolstan, chanon of Hertford, sir Philip Dilester, per∣son of the church of Blanniorim, &c. To the obiections, and articles Brute did cause an answere to be deliuered to the
Bishop, which because it séemed to him too obscure, & short, required him to write vpon the same matters againe more at large: wherevpon M. Walter declareth his minde more amply of the same matters: and confuteth the Popes vsur∣pation,Pope Anti∣christ. and proueth him very copiously to be Antichrist. Disputeth against the necessitie of tithes: against auricular confession, and the Popes absolution and pardons, against iustification by workes, and the reall presence: that Christes body is not left for a sacrifice, but a Sacrament: against ex∣ercising of Priests selling of prayers, holy water, purgato∣rie, selling of pardons, of orders, of hallowings, discipline, and fraternitie, &c. that the citie of Rome was Babilon: & against Images. Against all these things, he most pithily, & learnedly treated: and in the ende of his declaration, he pro∣phecieth that the temporalties shold be taken from the clear∣gie,The temporal∣ty taken from the Cleargy. for the multitude of their sinnes. After that this declaration was exhibited by Walter Brute vnto the Bishoppe of Hereford, he further appointed him the third day of October, at Hereford, with the continu∣aunce of the daies following, to heare his opinion. Which third day, being Friday, anno 1393.  Walter Brute appea∣reth before him, sitting in commission in the Cathedrall Church of Hereford at sixe of the clocke, or thereabouts ha∣uing assistance in the same place, diuers Prelates, abbots, &c. Among whom was N. Herford. In which assemblie VValter submitted himselfe vnto them, after they had continued Friday, Saterday, and Sun∣day, in their informations, and examinations, against him: so as for that time it is like he escaped: what afterwards be∣fel vnto him, it is not certaine. Out of the declarations, and writings of VV. Brute, the B. with the monkes, and doctors, did draw out certaine ar∣ticles, to the number of seuen and thirtie: which they sent to the Vniuersity of Cambridge, to be confuted, vnto two lear∣ned men, Master Colwel, and Master Newton, bachelers of
diuinitie, which they to their skill did take in hand. Certaine writings are found in the same register, adioi∣ned to the history of Walter Brute, & one,A turnecote persecutor. a letter which hath no name, written to M. Nicholas Herford, who beyng at the first a great folower of Wickliffe, was now in the num∣ber of those that sat vpō Walter Brute. The effect of ye letter was to warne him, & put him in mind of his fal: & beside that epistle, there is found annexed with the same,A letter of Lu∣cifer prince of darkenes to the clergy. a certaine o∣ther letter counterfayted, vnder the name of Lucifer Prince of darknesse, to the persecuting Church of the popish clergy. Which letter séemeth to some to be ascribed to Occham a∣boue mentioned, wherein Popish Church is noted to be Antichristian, and the abuses of the same laid open, Ex Re∣gistro Herfordiensi: and diuerse other writings of like argu∣ment, both before and since haue béene deuised: as, one bea∣ring the Title Luciferi ad malos principes ecclesiasticos, imprin∣ted first at Paris in Latine, and vnder the writing thereof bearing this date, Anno à palatij nostri fractione, consortiumque nostrorum subtractione 1351.  Which if yée count from the passion of Christ, reacheth to the time of Wickliffe 1385. that was aboue six yéeres afore the examination of this Walter Brute. There is also another epistle of Lucifer ad Praelatos, mentioned in the Epistle of the schoole of Prage, to the Vniuersitie of Oxford, set foorth by Huldricus Hutte∣nus, Anno 1370. Also Vincentius in his Speculo historiae, lib. 25. cap. 89. ma∣keth mention of a letter of the féends of hell to the clergy, as in a vision represented before 400. yéeres.The feends glad of want of preaching. In which the féends giue thanks to the clergy, in that by their not preach∣ing, they sent infinite number of soules to hel, &c. Also Iaco∣bus Cartusiensis writing to ye B. of Wormace declareth the enormities of the church: besides an. 1228. at Paris, in a si∣node of the clergy,The Diuell teacheth what should be preached. there was one appointed to make a Ser∣mon, & beyng carefull what to say to the people, the Diuell appéered to him, and bid him preach, and say to them, the
princes of Hell salute you, yée Princes of the Church, be∣cause thorough your negligence all soules go downe to hell, adding moreouer that hée was enforced by the commaunde∣ment of God to declare the same: yea and that a certaine token was also giuen the Clergie, whereby the Synod might euidently sée, that hée did not lie. Ex catalog. Illyric. fol. 546. King Richard the second, was by Boniface the 9. stirred vp against the professors of the truth: which Boniface direc∣ted his Bull, both to the Bishop of Hereford agaynst the professors, and also another vnto the King, the sixt yéere of his dignitie Episcopall: wherevppon the King gaue out straight commission against them that helde of the side of Wickliffe, and specially agaynst Walter Brute hée wrote a letter the two and twentith day of September, the seuen∣tenth yéere of his raigne. Albeit during the life of the King none are expresly found by name that suffered burning: not∣withstanding some there were which by the Archb. Wil∣liam Courtney, and other Bishops had béene condemned, and diuers also abiured,Abiurers. and did penaunce, chiefly about the towne of Leycester: the names of which persons detected are these:Well affected about Leyce∣ster. Roger Dexter,Roger Dexter. Nicholas Taylor,Nich. Taylor. Nicholas Wag∣staffe, Michaell Scriuener, William Smith, Iohn Henry, William Parchmenar, and Roger Goldsmith, inhabitants of the towne of Leycester, who for holding against the Re∣all presence, against worshipping of Images, and worship∣ping of the Crosse, against the chaunting of Masse, and mat∣tins, against pardons, Friers, oblations for the dead, auri∣cular confession to the priest, &c. were of the Romane church condemned for Heretikes: and because Roger and Nicho∣las appéered not, being cited, on Alhallow day, being the first of Nouember, the archb. celebrating high masse, cursed thē & their adherents,The towne of Leycester in∣terdicted. with hell, booke, & candell, and did interdict the whole towne of Leicester, and all the Churches in the same, so long as any of the foresayd excommunicate persons
should be there, and till all the Lollards of the towne should turne from their heresie, obtaining at the Archb. hande, the benefite of absolution: at length it was declared, that there was a certaine Anchores,An Anchores of Wickliffes doctrine. within the Churchyard of S. Pe∣ters of Leicester, infected with Wickliffes heresie, na∣med Matild, which MatildMatild. being examined by him, & he not finding her answere directly, assigned her a day peremp∣tory, to appeare before him at the monastery of S. Iames at Northamptō, there more fully to answere vnto the articles of that heresie, which was the 6. day of the same moneth of Nouember: which Matild was so straitly examined,Recant. that she recanted, and did 40. daies penance. About that time, there was one Margaret Cailie a Nunne,Margaret Cai∣lie a Nun, for∣saketh her or∣der. which forsaking her order, was against her will inforced by the Archb. to enter into the same againe. Moreouer, of the number of the 8. persons before mentioned, 2. recanted, Wil∣liam Smith, Roger Dexter, & Alice his wife, and had inioy∣ned penance, to heare masse, & go on procession 3. times be∣fore the crosse in their shirts, with Tapers and crucifixes in their hands, and in the open market to do likewise: William singing the antheme, with the Collect, Sancta Katherina,Penance. & Roger and Alice a Pater noster, and an Aue Marie: and so also should againe stand the Sunday next, as before in the Church, &c. 1389. About this time, one Peter PateshullPeter Pateshul an Austen frier, ob∣taining by the Popes priuiledge, (through the meanes of Walter Dys, Confessor to the Duke of Lancaster) liberty to chaunge his coate and religion, and hearing of the doctrine of Iohn Wickliffe, and other of that sort, began at length to detect the vices of his order, in such manner, as all men woondred to heare the horrible reciting thereof. which be∣ing brought to the eares of his order, twelue of them, while hee was preaching at the Churche of Saint Christo∣pher in London, stoode vp openly in his preaching: and one of them contraried that which he saide: which, when the
Londoners did sée, they thrust him with his brethren out of the Churche, and wounded them, sore beate them, and followed them home: purposing to destroy their mansion with fire also, had not the Sheriffe of London, with two Friers of good report,The Londo∣ners zealous. of the same house with gen∣tle and mylde woordes mittigated their rage. This Peter Patshull was afterwarde desired to put in writing, that he did know, touching their wickednesse: which hée did, accusing them of murder, naming time, place, and per∣sons: sodomitrie, treasons to king and realme, &c. Which writing, the Londoners caused to bée set vp on Paules Church doore at London: and was read, and copied out of many.  This was Anno 1387. the tenth yeere of the raigne of King Richarde the second. Ex Chron. Monast. Albon. At the same time, Anne the kings wife, had the Gospels in English,The K. wife hath the Gospel in English. with the foure Doctors vpon the same. She was a Bohemian borne, Sister of Vincelaus, king of Boheme: which care of knowledge in her, Thomas Arundell Arch∣bishoppe of Yorke, preaching at her funerall, the 18. yéere of the Kinges raigne, greatly commended: and praised for hauing them in the mother tongue, and blamed sharply the negligence of the Cleargy. Notwithstanding this Tho. Arū∣del,Tho. Arundell. after this sermon, became ye most cruell eniury that could be against English bookes, and the authors therof: for short∣ly after the death of the Quéene, he with the B. of London, Robert Braybrock, crossed the seas into Ireland, & there de∣sired the kings aide against the heresie of Wickliffe. Anno 1393.  at Westminster was called a Parlement, by the Kinges commaundement, to that purpose: in which parlement, certaine articles were put out in the behalfe of the gospel, to the number of twelue; & were fastned vpon the Churchdoore of Paules at London,Articles in the be halfe of the Gospel. and also at Westmin∣ster. 1. The first was against the appropriations, and pride of the Cleargie. 2. Against Papisticall priesthoode.
3 Against singlenes of Priestes. 4 Against Transubstan∣tiation. Against exorcismes, and blessings of priests. 6 A∣gainst ciuill iurisdiction of Ecclesiasticall persons, 7 Against masses for the dead, 8 Against pilgrimages, and oblations. 9 Against auricular confession. 10 Against the purchasing of indulgences, and pardons a poena, & culpa, by Lords, vnto such as doe helpe their armies to kil Christians in forraine Countreyes, for temporall gaine. 11 Against Nunnes, and widowes which vow a single life. 12 Against multi∣tude of artes not necessarie,Multitude of artes not ne∣cessarie. vsed in the Church. To these articles were adioyned reasons in reproofe of the practise of the Church of Rome therein. And vnto the ar∣ticles these verses were thus adioyned. The English Nation doth lament of Sodomites their sinne: Which Paul doeth plainly signifie, by Idols to begin. But Gersitis full ingrate, from sinfull Simon sprong: This to defend, (though priestes in name) make Bulwarkes great and strong.Rime against popish priests. After these articles were thus set foorth, the King, not long after returned out of Ireland: and at his returne called certaine Nobles vnto him, Richard Sturie, Lewes Clifford,Fauourers of the gospel. Thomas Latimer, Iohn Montacute, &c. Whō he did sharp∣lie rebuke, and terriblie threaten, for that he heard them to be fauourers of that side: and tooke an oath of Richard Stur∣rie, that he should neuer fauour any such opinions: swearing that he should die a shamefull death if he brake his oath, Ex Chron. D. Alb. Now Pope Vrban was dead sixe yeares before:P. Boniface 9. whom succéeded Boniface the ninth, that laboured by all meanes a∣gainst the Gospell, and had written sundrie times to King
Richard, as wel for the repealing of actes of Parlement, a∣gainst his prouisions, Quare impedit, and premunire faci∣as, as for the persecuting of the professors of the truth: which letter he wrote to the king, anno 1396. which was the yere before the death of William Courtney, Archbishop of Can∣terburie, after whom succéeded Th. Arundel, brother to the Earle of Arundel first B. of Elie, then archb. of Yorke, and Lord Chancellor of England, and lastly, archb. of Canterb. about the yere 1397. Anno 1398. the ninth yere of the Pope, K. Richard 2. wrote a certaine letter to the Pope, full of vertuous instruc∣tion, to the quieting of the schisme: and a godlie admonition, very pithilie,The K. writeth a christian ad∣monition to the P. and copiouslie: in the ende whereof (the rest be∣ing of like sort) he beséecheth him to receiue his councel effe∣ctuallie, that in doing thus, the waters may returne to the places from whēce they came: and so the waters may begin to be made sweete with salt, least the axe swimme on that water, and the wood sinke, and least the fruitfull Oliue de∣gender into a wilde Oliue, and the leprosie of Naaman, the Nobleman, cleaue continuallie to the house of Gehezie, and least the Pope, and the Pharisies crucifie Christ againe. Christ, the spouse of the Church, which was wont to bring the chiefe bishop into the holiest place, increase your Holi∣nesse, or rather, restore it, being lost, &c. Ex lib. cuiusdam Dunelmen. But the Popes being little moued with good councell, neither of them would geue ouer, to the quiet of the Church, but prosecuted their titles to the vttermost. Notes of certaine Parlementes holden in the reigne of K. Richard 2. making against the Pope. Parlements holden against the P.IN the first yere, at Westminster, that first fruites be no more paid to the P. Item, that no prouision be made from Rome, to procure any Benefice. That none farme any Ec∣clesiasticall liuing of a stranger.
In which bill it was rehearsed that Frenchmen had six thousand pound a yéere, that way in England. Against the Popes reseruations of dignities electiue: in the second, yéere agaynst Aliens, who had the greatest part of Church dignities in their hands. Item, that the benefices of rebels to Pope Vrbane should be seised into the kings hands. That Vrbane was true pope and who soeuer fought for any prouision but from Vrbane, should be out of the Kings protection. In the third yéere the Prelates and Clergie, made a pro∣testation against a certaine new graunt, to wit, their ex∣tortion. But the King (notwithstanding their protestation) would not stay to graunt to his Iustices in all cases as was vsed to be doone in times past, &c. In the 4. yéere against the popes collectors, that all priors aliens might be remoo∣ued and Englishmen placed in their roomes. In the ninth yéere, that redresse might be had against such religious per∣sons, as vnder licence to purchase 10. pound a yéere, doo pur∣chase 80. or an 100. That clerkes should pay to the king first fruites as they doo to the Pope. The 11. yéere against impo∣sitions gathered of the popes Buls of Volumus & Imponi∣mus, and that they might be bestowed vpon the kings wars against the Schismatikes of Scotland, & that such as bring into the realme such, may be reputed for traitors. In the 13. yéere, that the Popes collector should be com∣manded to auoid the land within 40. daies, or else to be ta∣ken for the kings enemy: and that euery such collector from henceforth should be an Englishman, and sworne to execute the statutes made in this parlement, &c. and in the 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 25. Decrées, were made agaynst some one point, or other of the Popes authoritie and power in England, and abuses of the Clergie. In the fiue and twentith yéere, Thomas Arundell archb. of Canterburie in the parlement was proued a traitor,Tho. Arundell proued a tray∣tor. in that he procured the Earles of A∣rundell, & Warwicke, and the Duke of Glocester, to en∣croch
themselues royall power, and to iudge to death Sy∣mon Burley, and sir Iohn Barnes, without the Kings con∣sent: wherevpon it was decréed that hée should be banished, his temporalties seised, & his lands, and goods forfaited. The King further prescribed that he should take his passing on Friday, within six wéekes of Michelmas at Douer, toward the partes of Fraunce. King deposed.Anno 1399.  K. Richard was deposed from his crowne by common consent: after whom succéeded Henry the 4. who returned out of France, with Thomas Arundell the Arch∣bishop before exiled, and by him was led to the seat royall. This was anno 1399. The next after an. 1400.  followed a parlement holden at Westminster, in which parlement one William SawtreeWilliā Sawtre. priest, desiring to be heard for the commoditie of the whole realme, and the matter beyng smelt before of the Bishops, they obteined that the matter should be referred to the con∣uocation house: which it was, and the conuocation beyng differred till Saturday next the twelfth of February, so was his audience also: where, at the day appoynted hée ap∣péering, the Archbishop Thomas Arundell obiected that hée had fallen into certaine hereticall Articles abiured before the Bishop of Norwich, and caused certaine Articles vnab∣iured to be read, and obiected against him by Robert Hall Chancellour to the B. thus: sir William Charles, otherwise called Sawtree,Obiections a∣gainst Sawtree parish priest of the Church of Saint Sith the virgin in London, publickly and priuely, doth hold these conclusions vnder written. 1. That hée will not wor∣ship the crosse. 2. That hée would sooner worship a tem∣porall King. 3. That he would sooner worship the bodies of Saints. 4. That he would rather worship a man truly contrite. 5. That he is bound rather to worship a man pre∣destinate, then an Angell of God. 6. That a man is not bound to his vow of visiting the monuments of Saints; but that he may distribute the expences of his vow to the poore.
7. That euery Priest, or Deacon, is more bounde to preach then to say the Canonicall houres. 8. That after the wordes of consecration, the substaunce of bread remaineth still. To which articles, he in the Charterhouse before the bi∣shoppe, and his Councell, exhibited a scroll of answeares, mainteyning the same: after which answeares publikely read by maister Robert Hal, the Archbishop inquired of the saide William, whether he had abiured these heresies before the Bishop of Norwich, or not, as was alledged against him: whereto he answered no. Then he specially examined him of the sacrament of the altar: who answered, that after the words of consecration, there remained bread: wherevppon the Archbishop gaue, sentence of heresie against him. The same prouincial Councel being continued vntill the 24. day of the same moneth of February, the Bishop of Norwich presented a certain processe vnto William Sawtre, wherein he had abiured the articles laide against him: which béeyng declared, it was demanded of William Sawtre, otherwise cal∣led Chatris, why he might not be pronounced a man fallen into heresie, and to be disgraded. Whereunto he answered nothing: then the Archbishoppe, and the whole Councell gaue sentence, he should be taken for a relaps,Relaps. and disgra∣ded, & so committed to the secular power. His proceeding in his degradation, after that he had put on the apparel, was in this sort as followeth. In nomine patris, filii, & spiritus sancti,The maner of disgrading. Amen. We Thomas, by Gods permission Archbish. of Cā∣terbury, primate of all England, and Legate of the Aposto∣like Sea, doe denounce thée William Sawtry, otherwise cal∣led Chawtris, Chaplaine fained, in the habite and apparell of a Priest, as an heretike, and as one refallen into heresie, by this our sentence definitiue, by counsell, consent, & au∣toritie to be condemned, and by conclusion also of all our fellow brethren, fellow Bishops, Prelates, Councell pro∣uinciall, and of the whole Cleargie, doe degrade and de∣priue
thée of all thy priestly orders, and in signe of degrada∣tion, and actuall deposition from thy priestly dignitie, for thine incorrigibility, and want of amendement, wee take from thée the Patent and Chalice, and doe depriue thée of all power of celebrating masse, and also wée pull of thy backe, the casule, and take from thée the vestiment, and depriue thée of all priestly honour, and so procéeded they in taking away the vestiment, and stoole of a Deacon, and and the albe of a subdeacon, and maniple, and candlesticke, taper and cruet of an Acolouth, the holy water bucket of an exorcist, the Legend booke of a Reader in the Church, the Surplise of a Sexton,The surplesse of a Sexton. the crowne of Ecclesiasticall dignity to bée shauen, and the Priestes cappe taken away, and a Lay mans cappe put on, that they might fauourably receiue the saide William thus vnto them committed. This done, by their solliciting, the king directed a terrible decrée against him for his spéedy execution to the Mayor and she∣riffes of London: which was perfourmed accordingly. Anno 1400. The time of Henry the 4.The time of Henrie 4. was full of trouble, blood, & mi∣sery. He was the first of the kings of England, that put out his hand to the shedding of the blood of Saints, since the con∣quest. After the burning of this godly man, the rest of the com∣panie beganne to holde themselues more close, for feare of the King, who was altogether bent to hold with the Popes prelacie. Anno 1405.  by the Archbish. of Yorke, named Richard Scroop, with the L. Mowbery, marshall of England (which both conspired against the king) ten articles were set vpon Churchdoores, against the king: wherein he was charged to be a traitor, periured, a murderer, a breaker of the orders of the church, a tyrant, a miss-gouernor of the commonwealth, an oppressor, &c. But they with their adherents were ap∣prehended, and put to death.
Anno 1409. Thomas Badby1409 Thomas Bad∣by martyr. a taylor and lay man, was by Thomas Arundell archbishop of Canterbury brought to condemnation for the testimony of the truth. His Articles were: 1. That the sacrament of the Altar is not the reall bo∣dy of Christ, and that after consecration it remaineth bread still. 2. That it was vnpossible, that any priest could make the body of Christ. 3. That he said, Iacke Baker of Bristow had as much power to make the like body of Christ, as any priest had. He was pronounced an Hereticke, first by the B. of Worcester in the chappell Caluary of S. Thomas martyr, nigh the cathedrall Church of Worcester, which was afterward approued by the archbishop of Canterbury, Archb. of York, London, Winchester, Chichester, Norwich, (the prince Edmund, Duke of York being also by) &c. and he condemned in Paules Church in London,Crocodiles teares. and so was deli∣uered to the secular power to be burned: which when they had done, (like false hypocrits) they desired ye tēporall Lords present, very instantly, that they would not put the saide Iohn Badby to death, &c. But this being done in the fore∣noone (the 15. day of March) on the afternoone, ye kings writ was not farre off: hée was brought into Smithfield, and there being put in an emptye barrell, was bounde with y∣ron barres fast to a stake, and dry wood put to him, and so burned. At which time, Courtney Chauncellour of Ox∣ford, preached and informed him of the faith of holy church. the Prince, the K. eldest sonne being also present. When the tunne was put ouer his head, and fire put to, he cried mercy, (belike vpon the Lord,) whereat the Prince commanded to take away the tunne, and to quench the fire, promising him pardon (if he would recant) and a yerely stipende out of the kings treasurie. Which when he denied, and refused to recant, hee com∣manded the tunne to be put ouer him againe, and fire put to, and so was he consumed. The Cleargie still persecuted the faithfull, and moued
the king at the parlement (which yet continued) to enact the Statute Ex officio,The Statute Ex officio. which hée yéelded vnto: and to forti∣fie the same, the Archbishop made also a constitution against the professors of the truth: and such was the straitnesse in those times, that although many did constantly abide, yet some did shrincke backe: among whom was one Iohn Pur∣uey that recāted at Paules crosse,Diuers shrinke backe. Iohn Edward priest, who reuoked at the Gréene yard at Norwich, Richard Herbert, and Emmot Willy of London, also Iohn Becke at London, Iohn Seynons of Lincolnshire, who was caused to reuoke at Canterbury. The articles which commonly they did hold were these: First, that ye office of the holy crosse did conteine méere idolatry,Articles. and that the crosse woorshippers are méere Idolaters: that there is not the bodily presence in the sa∣crament. That the Eucharist was instituted for a memo∣riall onely. That the same Sacrament is a figure of his bo∣die. That euery Priest ought to preach without license of his ordinary. That it is sinne to giue any thing to the prea∣ching Friers. That we ought not to offer at the burials of the dead. That confession of sins to the priest is vnnecessary. That the infant, although he die vnbaptized, is saued. That neither the Pope, nor any whosoeuer, can compell any man to sweare by any creature of God, or by the Bible. That no man is bound to giue any bodily reuerēce to any prelats, &c. Anno 1407. was William ThorpeW. Thorpe. examined of articles before the Archbishop, Thomas Arundell: which William, set foorth his examination, written with his owne hand. He was called, and examined the Sunday next after Lammas, hauing béene before imprisoned in the Castle of Saltwood: He was burthened to haue preached in Shrewesburie, in Saint Chads Church. 1 That the Sacrament of the Altar was materiall bread.Articles. 2 That Images are in no wise to be worshipped, 3 that men should not goe on Pilgrima∣ges. 4 That Priestes haue no title to tithes. 5 That it is not lawfull to sweare in any wise.
Which articles he denied that euer he taught, yet being examined of them particularly, he (first declaring that euery Priest hath power to preach, and ought so to doe,) answered to the first, that Transubstantiation was inuented by Fry∣er Thomas Aquinas,Transubstan∣tiation inuen∣ted by Tho. Aquinas. since the deuill was let loose. To the second, that, as in the Church of the Iewes, it was not law∣full, nor put in practise, to make the image of the Trinitie, or of any of the Saints, or Prophets: so neither, in the time of the Gospell. And so to the rest, hee holdeth, and aduou∣cheth against the Romish Church: sauing, concerning the matter of swearing. He saide, he preached that it was not lawfull to sweare by creatures, and so not by a booke: and alledged Chrisostome for that purpose, who blameth them greatly, that bringe forth a booke to sweare by.Against swea∣ring on a booke. Besides these articles, it was also obiected to him, what he thought of auricular confession: which he auswered to bée vnnecessarie, but onely a contrite, and penitent heart vnto God. And if any man féele the burthē of his sinnes gréeuous, and his conscience disquieted, then were it not amisse, to re∣sort to a good priest: and if he fayled, that a man might law∣fullie take councell, and comfort at a Lay mans hand. The discourse was long betwixt the archb. and him, and very ex∣cellently, and couragiously did Thorp maintaine the trueth, against the archbishop. Who, among many arguments of no waight, alledged the examples of P. Rampington (who now persecuted the brethren, although he had before professed the truth,) the B. of Hereford, and Puruey, &c. that had relapsed from the trueth which they once mainteyned: but nothing could discourage, or alter the constant hart of the godly mā. Which the Archb. perceiuing, after many threatnings,A constant confessor of the trueth. and contumelious words, he called a Clearke, and rounded him in the eare, who went forth, and straightway fette the Con∣stable of Saltwood Castle, whom the Archb. commanded to carrie William away: who led him into a foule and filthie prison: where notwithstanding, he felt the exceding comfort
of Gods spirit most plentifullie. Besides his examination written wt his own hand, there is also extant a treatise, vn∣der the title of his wil, conteining a complaint against viti∣ous priests: their pride; plesure of this life; neglecting of their dueties; &c. What became of him is not in stories specified: but it is most likely (being committed to most straight pri∣son) he was closely made away, or died by sicknes. T. Walden writeth thus of I. Puruey before mentioned, in his secōd tome. I. Puruey (saith he) was the librarie of the lollards,I. Puruey, the librarie of the Lollards. and glosser vpon Wic. He said that the worshipping of Abraham was but a salutatiō. And tom. 3. he saith: This I. Puruey, with Herford, a doctor of diuinity, were gréeuous∣lie tormented, and punished, in the castle of Saltwood: and at last recanted at Paules crosse in London, T. Arundel then being Archb. of Cant. Afterward againe he was imprisoned vnder H. Chicheslie. archb. of Cāt. 1421.  The works of this man which he wrote, were gathered by R. Lauingam, his aduersarie. First, as touching the sacrament of the last sup∣per, the sacrament of penance, the sacrament of orders, the power of the keyes, the preaching of the gospell, of marria∣ges, of vowes, of possessions, of correcting of the Clergie, of the decrées of the church, of the state of the P. and Cleargie: of all these generallie, he left diuers monuments, grauelie, and exactly written. Articles te∣canted.The articles which he taught, and afterward was forced to recant at Paules crosse, were these. 1 No transubstanti∣ation. 2 No auricular confession. 3 Euery godly Lay man, is a priest vnto God. 4 That the wicked prelats haue not the keyes, and that the cursing of the Pope should doe good, and no hurt: for that they which are so cursed, are dismissed, and fréed from his cursed lawes. 5 Against vowes of perpetual chastitie. 6 That priests ought to preach the Gospell fréelie. 7 That Innocentius 3. with 600. bishops, and 1000. other prelats, which set down in a councel, transub. and reall pre∣sence, were fooles, blockheads, heretikes, &c. in so doing: and
therefore no man ought to obey their constitutions, except they be grounded vpon the Scriptures, or vpon some reason which can not be impugned. Besides these, Richard Lauingam collected other arti∣cles, out of ye bookes of Puruey, as against the chapter of pe∣naunce, and committing of sinnes, Omnis vtriusque sexus. Item that Innocētius the third was the head of Antichrist: against the Sacrament of Orders. And if there were no Pope, yet all the bishops might gouerne the Church by com∣mon consent, as once they did before,Once they did before, &c. such worldly pride crept in among the Bishops, &c. As touching the authoritie of the keyes no man ought to estéeme Sathan (whom men call the Pope) and his vniust censures, more then the hissing of a serpent, or the blast of Lucifer. Concerning the Sacra∣ment of matrimony, that gossipry ought to be no let.The P. curse the blast of Lu∣cifer. That no vow ought to be made, but in such things as a man may and ought lawfully to performe. Touching the possessions of the Church, he declareth that the king, and the Lords, and commons, may without any charge at all, kéepe 15. garrisons, & find 15000. souldiers, ha∣uing sufficient lands and reuenues to liue vppon) out of the temporalties, gotten into the hands of the Cleargy,How the tem∣poralties of the cleargy shoulde be bestowed. & fayned religious men, which neither do that which belongeth to the office of Curats to do, nor yet to secular lords. And moreo∣uer, the king may haue 20000 pound, to come fréely euerie yere to his cofers, and aboue: also, may finde, and sustaine, fiftéen Colledges more, and 15000. Priestes and Clarkes, with sufficient liuing, and an hundred hospitals for the sick, and euery house to haue one hundred markes in landes: and all this to be taken out of the tēporalties of the clergy, wtout any charge to the realme, &c. That the law of Siluester the P. which is declared in 2. q. 5. ca. praesul. & cap. Nullam, is contrarie to the law of Christ, and either Testament. And yt those decretals of accusations, cap. quando, & qual. which do prohibit any clarks to be brought before a secular iudge,
to receiue iudgement, doo containe blasphemy, heresie, and error, and brings great gaines to Antichrists cofers. That punishment of adultery belongeth to secular persons: and furthermore hée maketh an exhortation to the Princes, to iudge the Church of Rome, which hée calleth the great and cursed strumpet, of whom S. Iohn writeth Apocalips. 17. Touching the lawes, & determinations of the popes church, the Christians ought to repeale such of them as are against the word of God: and that the Canon lawes are full of he∣resies. This was written of him, anno 1396.  which sée∣meth to be before his recanttatiō at Saltwood, before Tho∣mas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury. Nowe all this time, the schisme continued betwixt the popes: and so endured, til the Councell of Constance, which was in whole, the space of 29. yéeres: the original whereof, began at Vrbanus the fift, who dying ann. 1389.  next folow∣ed Boniface 9.Boniface 9. im∣pudent in sel∣ling of pardōo. who sate 14. yéeres: he in selling his pardons, was so impudent, that hee brought the keies of S. Peter (as saith Platina) in contempt. After him succéeded Innocentius 7, and sate two yéeres: who béeing dead, the Cardinals consulted together, and sée∣ing the inconuenience that grew of the schisme, minded to prouide some remedie for the same: and tooke order, being assembled in their conclaue, for the election of a new Pope: and promised among themselues, with a solemn vow made to God, Marie the blessed virgin, to Peter, and Paul, and all the companie of holy Saints, that if any of them within the Colledge, or without the same, should be called to that high place of the Apostolicall preheminence, he should effectuallie renounce the iurisdiction, and title of his Popedome, if, or whensoeuer,Order against the schisme. the contrarie Pope for the time being, woulde in like manner renounce his place, and title: and his Cardi∣nals in like manner condiscended to the cardinals of Rome. So that these two Colledges of Cardinals agréeing toge∣ther, that one chiefe B. might be chosen, and taken out of thē
both, to be made ye true pope: Prouided moreouer, that none should séeke absolution or releasement from the said vow and bond once passed among them. Vnto all which things e∣uery one subscribed with his hand, and so they procéeded and chose Gregory 12. who in the same day of his election,Pope Gregory the 12. in the presence of all the Cardinals, confirmed the vow, subscri∣bing the same with his hand, in forme as followeth: And I Gregory this day being the last of Nouember, anno 1407.  chosen and elected Bishop of Rome, doo vow, promise, and confirme all the premises, &c. This being doone, shortly after he was crowned, being of the age of 80. yéeres:Pope Gregory 12. periured. but the holy Father periured himselfe, and therefore diuerse did forsake him, and sent to Kings and Princes of other lands for their assistance, to appease the Schisme: and amongst the rest, Cardinall Bituriensis was sent to the King of England, who publishing diuers conclusions (which remaine in the registers of Thomas Arundel) disputeth that the pope ought to be subiect to the Lawes and Counsels: by whose motion the King directeth his letters vnto Gregory the Pope, An∣no 1409.  perswading him to performe his oth, and to giue ouer, for the quiet of the Church, and the quieting of the Schisme: vnder pretence whereof hée shewed that 200000.200000. Chri∣stians slaine in a popish quar∣rell. Christians had béene slaine, and that of late thirtie thou∣sand thorough the dissention about the Bishopricke of Leo∣dium, betwéene two set vp: the one by the authoritie of the one Pope, and the other by the authoritie of the other, and further moued him to giue ouer, as the naturall mother did her sonne before Salomon,The king wri∣teth to the Pope. rather then it should be parted & deuided, according as ye harlot would it should be. He wrote also to the colledge of Cardinals, requiring them that if ac∣cording to their desire and request, Gregory would at the Councell of Pise giue ouer his Popedome, they would take order for the state of the Church This being done, an. 1409. the yéere next folowing 1410.  The Cardinals of both popes, Gregorius, and Benedictus,
by common aduise assembled at Pise, and chose a new pope Alexander the 5.Pope Alexan∣der 5. Three popes together. But to this election neither Pope Gre∣gorius nor Benedictus did agrée: whereby there were thrée Popes together in the Romish Church. This Pope scarce∣sly had warmed his triple crowne, but hée giueth full re∣mission of all manner of sinnes, whatsoeuer to all them that would bestow any thing to the Monastery of S. Bar∣tholmew by Smithfield, resorting to the said Church any of these daies following: On maundy thursday, goodfriday, the feast of the Annunciation, from the first ensuing to the latter. But within the same yéere hée died: and after him succéeded Iohn 23.Pope Iohn 23. In the time of Alexander, great trouble grew in Bohe∣mia, by reason of the bookes of Iohn Wickliffe, which were embraced of diuerse, but specially of Iohn Husse,Iohn Husse. by whose means the people began to grow to great knowledge: wher∣of complaint was made to Alexander 5. that caused by & by Iohn Husse to be cited vp to Rome: & when he came not, di∣rected his letters to ye archb. Swinco, charging him to forbid that way, & condemne such as he should apprehend, for here∣tikes, except they would recant. Against which Bull, Husse obiected many things, & shewed how it stood against ye word of God:An appeale to the same better aduised. and therefore (saith he) from this mandate of pope Alexander, I doo appeale to the said Alexander being better aduised. And so as he was prosecuting his appeale, immedi∣atly Alexander died. Then Swinco, when he saw that Iohn Husse contemned the bull, and had no hope in Vinceslaus the king, of redresse: he wēt to complaine to Sigismund king of Hungary, and brother to Vinceslaus, with whom after hée had spoken, immediatly he died for sorrow. By reason of whose death the Gospell tooke roote among the Bohemians,Pope Iohn 23. bendeth all his power against the Bohemiās. which held not long, for Iohn the 23. bent all his might a∣gainst the Bohemians. About the yéere 1412.  Thomas Arūdell brought into En∣gland the tolling of Auies in honor of our lady: with certaine
Auies to bee saide,The tolling o Auies. and daies of pardon to bee giuen for the same: and for the ratifying hereof, he directeth his mandate to the B. of London. He graunted to euery one that shoulde say the Lords praier, and salutation of the Angel, fiue times at the morning peale, with a deuout mind totiens quotiens,40. daies of pardon for say∣ing Auies. (how oft soeuer) 40. daies of pardon. This Archb. was so proud, that because the bels of Lon∣don did not ring at his comming to the citie:Bels, steeple, & organs, suspen∣ded by a proud Bishop. he suspended both belles, stéeple, and organs, til the ministers of such chur∣ches might attaine to the benefite of grace and mercie. For this cause of ringing belles, debate also fel betwéene the B. of Worcester, and Pryor of the towne, insomuch that the Archb. was saine to take vp the matter betwixt them: such was the pompe and pride of Prelates in those daies. Not vnlike was the dealing of William Courtney, Predecessour to Arundell: who, because certaine poore men did not bring litter for his horse in cartes, but in sackes; did call and cite them before him, sitting in his tribunal seate Pro littera,A contention pro littera, for litter. that is, for litter, after his owne Latine: and after their sub∣mission, enioyned them penance, that they going leisurely, before procession,Penance for bringing litter in sacks, & not in Carts. euery one of them should carry openly his sacke, or bagge stuffed with hay, and straw: so that the hay and straw might appeare, hanging out of the mouths of the sacks being open: the names of the poore men were, Hugh Pennie, Iohn Forestall, Iohn Boy, Iohn Wanderton, Wil∣liam Hayward, and Iohn White, tenaunts to the Lorde of Wingham. In this kings time, diuers actes were established against the authoritie of the Pope, and excesse of his Cleargy. In the first yéere, it was obiected against Richard 2. that he procured letters Apostolicall from the Pope, to confirme certaine statutes of his, which seemed to the Parlement to tend to the disgrace of the crowne and dignity, and against the liberties of the land. In the 2. yéere, it was required in the Parlement, that
all such persons as should be arrested by force of the statute, made against the Lollards in the 2. yeere of king Henry the the fourth may bée bayled, and fréely make their purgation. In the eight yéere it was propounded, that none shoulde sue to the Church of Rome for anie Benefice, collation, or pre∣sentation of the same, vnder paine of the statute of Proui∣soes, made in the 13. yéere of Richard the 2. whereunto the king graunted, Item, in the same parlement, it was put vp in petition, that the King might enioy halfe of the profites of anye Parsons benefice, not resident thereon: wherevnto the king answered, that Ordinaries shoulde doe their dueties therein, or els he woulde prouide further remedy, or staye their pluralities. The 9. yéere of the kings raigne, the commons requi∣red the king, that none presented be receiued by any ordi∣narie, to haue any benefice, of any incumbent, for any cause of priuation, or inhabitation, wherof the processe is not foū∣ded vpon Citation, made within the realme: and also that such incumbents may remaine in all their benefices, vntil it be proued by due inquest in the court of the K, that the cita∣tions whervpon such priuations, & inhabitations are gran∣ted, were made within the realme, & if such ordinaries do, or haue presented, or others doe present to the contrary: that thē they and their procurators &c. incurre the pain conteined in the statute made against prouisoes, ann. 13. Richard. 2. Also, that no Popes collectour shoulde from thenceforth leuie any money within the realme, for first fruits of any ec∣clesiastical dignitie, vnder paine of incurring the statute of prouisoes. A bill in Par∣lement to take the temporal∣ties from the Cleargy.Besides, in the same parlement, the commons of the land put vp a bill vnto the king, to take the temporalties out of ye spiritual mens hand. The effect of the bill, was that the tem∣poralties disorderly wasted by men of the Church, might suffice to finde the king fiftéene Earles, fiftéene hundred
knights, sixe thousand two hundred Squires, and an hun∣dred houses of almes, more then were in those dayes in the land. And ouer all these charges, the K. might put yerelie in his Cofers, 20000. l. Prouided, that euery Earle should haue of yerelie rent, 3000. markes, euery knight 100 markes, and foure Plow land, euery Squire 40. markes by the yere, with two plow land, and euery almes house, with ouersight of two true Se∣culars to euerie house: and also with prouision, that euerie Township should kéepe al poore people, Towne-dwellers, which might not labor for their liuing: with condition, that if mo fell in a towne, than it was able to mainteine, the said almes houses to reléeue such townes. And to beare these charges, they alledged by their bill, that the Temporalties being in the possession of Spiritual men, amounted to thrée hundred and two and twentie thousande markes by the yere: whereof, they affirmed to be in the sea of Canterburie, with the Abbey of Christes-church, of saint Augustines, Shrewesburie, Coggeshall, and Saint Osiris, 20000. markes by the yere. In the Sea of Durham, and o∣ther abbeyes there, 20000. markes. In the Sea of Yorke, and other abbeyes there, as much. In the Sea of Winche∣ster, and abbeyes there as much. In the Sea of London, and abbeyes there, and other houses, as much. In the Sea of Lincolne, with the abbeies of Peterborow, Ramsey, and o∣ther, as much. In the Sea of Norwich, and abbey of Burie, & other, as much. In the Sea of Elie, & Spalding, as much. In the sea of Bath, with the abbey of Okinburn & other, as much. In the sea of Worcester, with the abbey of Euesam, Abingdon, and others, as much. In the sea of Chester, wt the precinct of the same, and the seas of S Dauid, Salisburie, & Exceter, with their precincts, as much: with many other ab∣beyes, bishopricks, &c. Moreouer, they alledged, that diuers in Englād possessed so many temporalties, as might suffice to find yerely 15000. priestes & clarkes, euery priest to be al∣lowed
vij. markes by the yere. To this bil no answere was made, but yt the K. would take some aduisemēt, & deliberatiō. Anno 1413  Henrie the 4. died in a chamber at Westmin∣ster, called Ierusalem, and was buried at Canterburie, by the tombe of Thomas Becket. After him succéeded his sonne Henrie the fift, and not long after his coronation a Parle∣ment was holden after Easter, at Westminster, an. 1413. At which time, Tho. Arundel, Archbishop of Canterburie, collected in Paules church at London, an vniuersal Sinode of al the bishops, and clergie in England. In which Sinode, among other matters, it was determi∣ned, that the day of S. George, and of saint Dunstan, shoulde be double feast. Now, the Popish feastes are thus deuided: either they be double feastes, or simple. The double feast is subdiuided into principall double;The kindes of popish feastes. greater double; lesser dou∣ble; and inferior, or lower double. To the principall double feast belonged eight dayes in the yere: so the greater double had geuen vnto him in this Conuocation, the day of Saint George, and of S. Dunstan. And albeit it was so decréed, yet by custom it was not so vsed.Notes of prin∣cipall soules feast. The principal double, and the greater double, were knowen from al other by 4. notes. By seruice in the kitchen; by seruice in ye church, both the which were double; by ringing in the stéeple, with double peale; by copes in the quire, and censing of the altar. For in these two great and principall double feastes, the vij. the viij and ix. les∣sons must be read with silken copes: and at the saide feasts, in the time of the Lessons, the altars must be censed: & like∣wise, the lesser double, and inferior double, had their peculiar seruice to them belonging. And thus much of their double feasts. The simple is also deuided into ether triple inuitorie or double inuitorie, or else single. Of the which moreouer some haue thrée lessons, some haue 9. &c. And thus much of popish feastes. The chiefe cause of the Synode was to oppresse the Gos∣pel (as recordeth the chronicle of S. Albōs.) And to withstād
the Noble and worthy Lord Cobham,The noble and worthy Lord Cobham. who principally mainteyned and receiued the preachers, and set them vp to preach, whom the Bishop had not licensed: which was a∣gainst a constitution principall of theirs. In the meane time as they were talking and conspiring against the Lord Cobham, there resorted vnto them 12. Inquisitors for he∣resie, whom they appoynted at Oxford the yéere before, to search out for Heretikes, with all Wickliffes bookes: who brought 246. conclusions, which they had collected as here∣sies out of the said bookes. The names of the Inquisitors were these: Iohn Witnā,Inquisitors for heresie. a maister in new colledge, Iohn Langdom monke of Christ church in Canterb. William Vfford regent of ye Carmelits, Thomas Clayton regēt of the Dominicks, Robert Gilbert, Richard Enthisdale, Iohn Luck, Richard Sindishame, Ri∣chard Fleming, Thomas Rotborn, Robert Rowberry, Ri∣chard Grafdale: who all cōcluded that the chiefe fauourers were first to be dealt against: & there present, ye noble knight sir Iohn Oldcastle, L. Cobham, was complained of by the generall proctors, to be the chiefe, principall, and a mighty mainteiner of suspected preachers, in the dioces of London, Rochester, and Hereford, cōtrary to the mind of the ordina∣ries: and to haue assisted them by force of armes. And last of all, they accused him to be far otherwise in be∣liefe of the sacrament of the altar, of penance, of pilgrimage, of image worshipping, and of the ecclesiasticall power, then the holy Church of Rome had taught many yéeres before. Vpon this it was concluded among them, that without any further delay, processe should be awarded out agaynst him,Processes a∣gainst the Lord Cobham. as against a most pernitious heretike, and because they con∣sidered his great birth, and the fauour he was in with the K. counsell was giuen, & they were aduised, first to know his pleasure who thē remained at Keningstone: which they did. Who although he too much yéelded to them, yet required thē in respect of his Noble stocke, and Knighthood, that they
would (if it were possible) without rigour reduce him again to the vnitie of the Church, and promised them also, that in case they were not contented to take some deliberation, him∣selfe would seriously common the matter with him, which he anon after accordingly did, and sent for the L. Cobham, & whē he was come, he called him secretly, admonishing him betwixt him & himself, to submit himselfe to his mother the holy church, & as an obedient child to acknowledge himselfe culpable:The answere of L. Cobham to the king. vnto whom the Christiā knight made this answer. You most, worthy prince (saith he) I am alwaies prompt & ready to obey, for asmuch as I know you a christian prince, & the minister of God, bearing the sword to the punishment of euill doers, & safegard of them that are vertuous: vnto you next vnto my eternall God, owe I most reuerēce, & submit therevnto (as I haue doone euer) all yt I haue either of for∣tune or nature, ready at all times to fulfil whatsoeuer you in that Lord cōmaund me, But as touching the pope & his spi∣ritualtie, I owe them neither suit nor seruice, for somuch as I know him by the scriptures to be the great Antichrist,The Pope knowne by the scriptures to be the great Antichrist. the sonne of perdition, the open aduersary of God, and the abho∣mination standing in the holy place. When the King had heard this, with such like sentences more, hée would talke no longer with him, but left him vtterly, and the archbishop resorting againe vnto him,The L. Cob∣ham forsaken of the king. he gaue him full authority to cite him, examine him, & punish him, according to their diuelish decrées: wherevpon after a priuate citatiō by one Iohn But∣ler, & the archbishops somner, at the castle of Cowling, about the wednesday before the Natiuitie of our lady in Septem∣ber, he commaunded letters citatory to be set vpon the great gates of the Cathedrall Church of Rochester, but thrée miles from thence, charging him to appéere personally be∣fore him at Ledes the eleuenth day of the same moneth and yéere, all hinderances set aside: & these beyng pulled downe, new letters were set vp, on the Natiuitie day of our Lady, which also were rent downe and consumed.
Then forasmuch as he did not appeare at the day appoin∣ted, at Ledes, where he sate in his consistory, as cruell as e∣uer was Caiaphas, with his court of hypocrites about him: he iudged him, denounced him, and condemned him of most deep contumacy. And afterward it being reported vnto him, yt he laughed and scorned his censure, without iust proof ther∣of, he excommunicated him, and commaunded him to be cited afresh, to appeare before him the saturday before the feast of Mathew, threatning that if hee did not then appeare before him, he would more extremely handle him: & compelled the lay power by most terrible curses to assist him against that seditious apostata, schismatike, heretike, the troubler of the publike peace, that enimy of the realme and great aduersary of the holy Church: for all these hatefull names did he giue him. The Lord Oldcastell hearing this,The L. Cob∣hā maketh a draught of the confession of his faith. and perceiuing in what danger he stood, tooke pen and paper in hand, and made a draught of the confession of his faith, and sealed it with his owne hand: which confession was nothing els but the Apo∣stles Creede, with a briefe declaration vppon the same. In which he answered the 4. chiefest articles, that the Archb. laide against him: and that done, he tooke the copy with him, and went therwith to the king, trusting to find mercy with him, and offered it to him, who woulde in no case receiue it, but cōmanded it to be deliuered vnto those that should be his iudges. Then he desired in the K. presence, that an hun∣dred knights & esquiers might be suffered to come, as vpon his purgation, which he knew wold cléere him of al heresies. Moreouer, he offered himselfe, after the law of armes to fight for life or death, with any man liuing, Christian, or heathen, in the quarel of his faith, the kings maiesty, and the Lordes of his Councel, excepted: and furthermore protested, that he would obey al maner of lawes agréeable to ye word of God. Yet notwithstanding all this, the K. suffered him to be summoned personally in his own priuy chamber. Then said the Lord Cobham to the king, that hée had appealed from
the Archb. to the Pope of Rome, and therefore he ought in no case (said he) to be my iudge: & hauing his appeale there, readie written, he shewed it with all reuerence to the king: whereat the king was much more displeased, and saide vnto him,The L. Cobhā arrested at the kings commā∣dement. that he should not pursue his appeale: and so was hée there arrested at the kings commandement, and ledde forth to the tower of London, to kéepe his day (as was then said) which the Archbishop had appointed him before, in the kings chamber. Now the day of examination being come, which was the 23. of September, the saterday before the feast of S. Mathew, Tho. Arundell the Archb. sitting in Caiphas roome, in the Chapter house of Paules, with Richard Clifford, Bish. of London, and Henry Bullinbrook Bishop of Winchester: Sir Robert Morley knight, and Lieutenant of the tower, brought personally before him, the said L. Cobhā, and there left him for the time: vnto whom the Archb. (after that hée had exhibited vnto them the confession of his faith, which they did not altogether mislike) required his beliefe on the Sacrament of the Altar: & whether there bée a tran∣substantiating or not? Whether (as concerning the Sacra∣ment of penance) euery man be necessarily bound to con∣fesse himselfe to a Priest ordained by the Churche? but he would answere no otherwise then he had exhibited in his bill,The L. Cob∣ham answe∣reth. which was, that he beléeued al the Sacraments that e∣uer God ordained in his Church: he beléeued the blessed Sa∣crament of the altar to bée Christs bodie in forme of bread: That it is necessarie for euery man to do penance for sinne, with true confession & due satisfactiō, as Gods law teacheth: That who so doth ye worship to dead images, yt is due to god, he doth therin commit ye sin of Mahumetry. That euery mā is a pilgrime in this world, & he that knoweth the holy com∣mandements of God, & kéepeth them shalbe saued, althogh he neuer in his life go on pilgrimage, as men doe to Rome, to Canterbury, &c. None other answere could they get of him:
which troubled them greatly, and the archb. bad him take deliberation till the Munday next following, which was the 25. of September, and then iustly to answere: especially whether there remained materiall bread in the Sacrament of the Altar, after the words of consecration or not? and pro∣mised to send him the matters cléerely determined: which the next day he did, euen a blasphemous and foolish writing, made by him and his vnlearned clergie. Now, when the 25. of September was come, which was the Munday before Michaelmas Anno 1413.  The archb. commanded his iudiciall seat to be remoued from the chap∣terhouse of Paules, to ye Dominicke friers within Ludgate in London, with diuers Bish. Doct. Friers, monks, priests, chanons, parish clearks, belringers, & pardoners: which rab∣ble al disdained the L. Cobham,, with innumerable mocks, and scornes. reckoning him to be an horrible heretike,The L. Cob∣ham mocked of knaues. and a man accursed afore God: and after the day spending in rea∣soning to, & fro; of ye sacrament of the altar, of shriuing, of the authoritie of the Pope, of pilgrimages, and worshipping of Images, because hée did not beléeue in these pointes as the holy Romish Church did teach; the Archbishop stood vp,The L Cob∣ham condēned. and read a byll of condemnation against him: after which bill read, the L. Cobham said with a most chéerful countenance. Though you iudge my body, which is but a wretched thing, yet am I certaine, and sure, that ye can doe no harme to my soule, no more than Satan could doe to the soule of Iob. And as concerning these articles, I wil stand to them to the very death, by ye grace of my eternal god. And after a short instru∣ctiō to the people, he fell there vpon his knées, holding vp his hands, and eyes to heauen, & praied for his enemies: O lord God eternal, I beséech thée for thy great mercies,A worthie martir. to forgeue my pursuers, if it be thy blessed wil. And then he was deli∣uered to sir R. Morley, and so led againe to the tower. This being done, the B. and priestes fayned an abiuration in the name of the L. Cob. to ye end to bleare ye eies of ye vnlearned
multitude for a time; neither did it euer come to the hands of the L. Cobham. The L. Cobham, after he had a certaine space remained in the Towre (sentence of death being giuen vpon him) hée escaped (it is not knowne by what meanes) and fled into Wales:The L. Cob∣ham fleeth and escapeth. where he continued by the space of foure yéeres. Anno 1413.  After the common computation of our En∣glish counting the yéere from the Annuntiation: but after the Latine writers from Christes Natiuitie, 1414. in the moneth of Ianuary, sir Roger Acton knight, Master Iohn Browne, and Iohn Beuerley the preacher suffered martyr∣dome (as some say) in the field of S. Giles, with other more to the number of 36.36. martyrs. (if the stories be true) they suffered be∣fore the Lord Cobham thrée yéeres. They were hanged and burnt. Some say, Sir Roger Acton was hanged naked at Tyborne, sauing that certaine partes of him were couered, and after certaine daies, a Trumpetter of the kings called Thomas Cliffe gate graunt of the King, to take him downe, and to bury him. After the decease and martirdome of these aboue menti∣oned, in the next moneth following, in the same yéere the 20. day of February, God tooke away the great enimie of his worde,Thomas Arun∣dell dieth. and rebell to the king, Thomas Arundell Arch∣bishop of Canterburie, who was so stricken in his tongue, that he could neither swalow, nor speake for a certain space before his death. He continued Archb. eightéene yeres. After him succéeded H. Chichesley, an. 1414. and sate 25. yeres, a great enemie to the gospel. About the same yere, the king began the foundation of ij. Monasteries: one, of the Friers obseruants on the one side of Thames:H. Chichesley. and theother on the other side of the same riuer, called Shene:  and Sion, dedicated vnto the Charterhouse Monkes: with certaine Brigette Nunnes, or Recluses, to the number of 60. dwelling within the same precinct. So that the whole number of these, with priestes, monks, dea∣cons,
and nunnes, should equall the number of 13. apostles, and 72. disciples. The order of these was according to the description of the Apostle, Coloss. 1. Eate not, taste not, touche not, &c.Eate not, taste not, touch not. To eate no flesh, to touch no money, to weare no linnen, and so forth. About Michaelmas the same yere, the king began his par∣lement at Leicester: in which, the Commons put vp their bill againe, which they had put vp before, anno 11. Hen. 4. that the Temporalties wasted so disorderly by the Clergie, might be conuerted to the vse of the king, and of his Earles, and knights, &c. In feare of which bill, least the king should geue therun∣to his comfortable audience, (as testifyeth Robert Fabian, and others,) certaine of the Prelates, and other of the head Churchmen, put the king in minde, to clayme his right in France. Wherupon, Hen. Chichesley made a long,Craft of the Cleargie. and so∣lemne Oration to the king, to perswade him thereunto: offe∣ring to him (in behalfe of the Cleargie) great, and notable summes: by reason whereof, the bill was againe put of. Now, about this time, Io. Husse, preaching at his church of Bethlehem, was accused therefore by some,Husse accused. to P. Iohn the xxiij. for an heretike. The Pope committed the whole matter to Cardinall Columna, who hauing heard the accu∣sation, appointed a day for Iohn Husse to appeare in ye court of Rome. But the king Vinceslaus sent his Ambassadors to Rome, to desire the bishop to quitte, and cléere deliuer Iohn Husse from that sentence, and iudgement. In the meane season, Iohn Husse also sent before the day appointed, his lawfull procurations to the Court of Rome: who with strong reasons did proue his innocencie, till Co∣lumna woulde accept no reasons: and so his Procurators appealed vnto the high Bishop.H. excommuni∣cated for an heretike. But the appeale preuayled not, but that he would excommunicate Iohn Husse, as an obstinate heretike, because he came not at his day appoin∣ted,
to Rome: notwithstanding, by reason of the appeale, they had other Iudges appointed vnto them: as, Cardinall Aquildianus, and Cardinall Venetus, &c. Which Iudges, after they had deferred the matter a yere and a halfe, they confirmed the sentence of Cardinall Columna: and because his Procurators (being commanded) would not yeld to giue ouer their suite, certaine of them were cast into prison, and gréeuouslie punished: the other (leauing their businesse vn∣done) returned againe into Boheme. The Bohemians (notwithstanding) little cared for this: but increased more and more in knowledge, and lesse regar∣ded the Pope. Now, after the death of Swinco, the pope placed one Cō∣radus chiefe generall: who with the doctors, and diuines of the Vniuersitie of Prage, greatly conspired, and laboured against the trueth; and drewe out articles, whereunto they would haue Iohn Husse to consent. Whereof when I. Husse, and his adherents had word, they also drewe out articles in his purgation. Now, in the meane time of this altercation betwéene them: Pope Iohn raysed warre against Ladislaus, king of Naples, (who had besieged the Popes townes, and territo∣ries) and gaue full remission of sinnes to all that would war on his side, to defend the church. Which Bul, when it came into Boheme, the king (that fauoured the Pope) gaue com∣mandement, that none should attempte any thing against those Indulgences. But certaine of the faithfull could not abstaine, but called the Pope Antichrist, and spake against him. Wherefore, they were taken, and beheaded. Their names were,Persecution in Boheme. Iohn, Martin, and Stascon. The people (after their death) tooke their bodies, and with great solemnitie, brought them vnto the Church of Bethlehem: at whose fu∣neralls, diuers priestes (fauouring that side) song on this wise: These be the saints, which for the testament of God gaue their bodies, &c. And so they were sumptuously buried
in the church of Bethlehem. I. Husse preaching at the fune∣rals, and much commending them for their constancie. Thus the citie of Prage was deuided:Prage deui∣ded. the Prelates with the greatest part of the clergie, & most of the Barons which had any thing to loose, helde with the Pope, especially Ste∣phen Paletz, being the chiefe doer of that side: on the contra∣ry part the commons with part of the clergie, and students of the vniuersitie, went with Iohn Husse. Vinceslaus the K. fearing the matter would grow to a tumult, caused I. Husse to be remoued out of the citie: and assented to the Popish Clergy, in the 18. articles against Iohn Husse for the main∣tenance of the sea of Rome. I. Husse now departing out of the citie, went to his countrey, where beeing protected by the Lord of the soyle, he cōtinued preaching: neither yet was he so expelled Prage, but that somtimes he resorted to ye church of Bethlehem, and there also preached to the people. Moreouer, against the decrée of the Doctors, Iohn Husse, with his fellowes, replied againe: answering their articles, with contrary articles, and obiections: wherto the Catholike Doctors answered againe with a long and tedious pro∣cesse: the scope whereof principally tended to the defence of the principality of the pope. Thus then, maister Ioh. Husse being driuē out of Prage, and moreouer, being excommunicated, that no masse might be said, where he was present: the people began mightely to grudge, and crie out against the Prelates: laying great, and horrible vices to their charges. The K. seing the inclination of the people,The people against the Prelates. being also not ignorant of the vices of the cleargie; began to require great exactions of such as were knowen to be wicked liuers. Whereupon, such as fauoured Iohn Husse, begā to accuse many. In so much, that by this meanes,None contro∣leth Husse. Husse began to take vnto him more libertie, and to preach in his church at Beth∣lehem, and none to controll him. Now, Steuen Paletz, and Andreas de Broda, chiefe doers
against Husse, wrote vnto him sharpe and cruell letters The Pope also writeth letters to Vinceslaus the King, for suppressing of Iohn Husse and his doctrine: which was in the last yéere of his Popedome, An. 1414. This yéere Sigismund the Emperour and Pope Iohn 23.Councell of Constance. To pacifie the Schisme of three Popes. called a sinod for the pacifying of the Schisme at Con∣stance, which was betwéene the thrée popes. The first wher∣of was Iohn, whom the Italians set vp: the second Grego∣ry, whom the Frenchmen set vp: the third Benedict, whom the Spaniards placed. This councell endured foure yéeres, and had in it 45.A Councell that lasteth foure yeeres, and had 45. Sessions. Sessions. In this councell all the matters were decided, chiefly by foure nations, English, Germaine, French and Italian: out of which foure nations were ap∣pointed and chosen foure presidents, to iudge and determine all matters of the Councelles: the names of which foure, were these: Iohn the patriarch of Antioch, for France, An∣thonie, Archb, of Rygen, for Italy, Nicholas, Archb. of Ge∣nesuensis, for Germany, and Nicholas, Bishop of Bath, for England. In this Councel nothing was decréed worthy of memo∣rie, but this onely, that the Popes authority is vnder the Councell,The Councell ought to iudge the Pope. and that the councel ought to iudge the Pope, and as touching the Communion in both kindes, although the Councell did not denie it, yet by the same Counsell it was decréed to the contrarie. In this Councell Iohn did resigne his Papacie, for the quiet of the schisme: and the Emperor (geuing him thanks) kissed his féete. Afterward, the same Iohn, repenting him yt he had so done sought meanes to flie: whereunto, Frederike Duke of Austrich, did assist him: and when hee was nowe comming to Schafezonse,P. repenteth of wel doing. to goe into Italie, the Emperour pursuing, tooke him and proclaymed Frederike traytor, and for that cause tooke away Cities from him, but was at last reconciled againe. The Pope being thus deposed, was committed vnto the
County Palantine, and by him caried to the castle of Man∣heim, where hée was kept prisoner by the space of 3. yéeres, and afterward he was againe by Pope Martin admitted to the number of the Cardinals. This pope Iohn was deposed by the decrée of the councel: more then 40. most grieuous crimes proued against him,40. articles a∣gainst Pope Iohn. as that he had hired Marsilius Parmensis a physicion, to poison Alexander his predecessor: that he was an heretike, a simo∣niake, a lier, an hipocrite, a murtherer, an inchanter, a dice-player, an adulterer, a sodomite: & finally, what crime was it wherewith he was not infected, &c. In the 14. Session came in ye resignatiō of P. Gregory 12. The 37. Session did publish definitiue sentence against the 3. pope Benedict: & in the 39. they procéeded to elect a new pope, & on S. Martins éeuen they chose one,Pope Martin. & therfore named him Martin: who according to the custome was honorably brought by the Councell, and the Emper. into the church of Constance, vnto the monastery of S. Austine, to be crowned:The Emperor leadeth the popes horse. the Emp. on foot, leading his horse by the bridle on the right hand: the marques of Brandēburgh prince elector, also lea∣ding his horse on the left hand: the P. himselfe riding in the midst on his palfrey. The Councell being dissolued, a cardi∣nall was sent by the P. named Anthony, to declare his In∣dulgēce vnto them: who granted to euery point in that coū∣cel, ful absolution once in their life, so that euery one within 2. moneths after the hearing of this Indulgence should pro∣cure the same in forme of writing. Also an other Indulgēce was graunted of full remission at the houre of death: & that was aswel vnderstood of the houshold, as the Maisters thē∣selues; but vnder this condition that from the time of notifi∣cation of the same,The popes In∣dulgence. they should fast euery Friday for the space of one whole yéere, for absolutiō in their life time. And for absolution in the howre of death, that they should fast an other yéere in like sort, except some lawfull impediment: so that after the second yéere, they should fast out their liues
end, or els do some other good worke. This beyng proclai∣med, the Synode brake vp, and euery man departed. 3940. Prelats at the Coun∣cell.The nūber of prelates at this councell, was 3940. wherof the number of B. & Archb. was 346. Abbots & doctors 564. Secular mē, princes, dukes, erles, knights, esquires 16000. Common women belonging to the councell,Common wo∣men belonging to the councell 450. 450. Barbers, 600. Minstrels, cookes, & iesters, 329. So that ye whole mul∣titude which were viewed to be in the towne of Constance, betwéene Easter & Whitsontide, where nūbred to be 60500. Now although this councell was thought principally to be called to appease the schisme, yet a great part of the cause was the Bohemians, and especially for Iohn Husse. For be∣fore the Councell began, the Emperour Sigismund sent cer∣taine gentlemen Bohemians, which were of his owne hous∣hold, giuing them in charge to bring Iohn Husse bacheler of Diuinitie to the Councell, and that vnder his safeconduct, to the entent he should purge himselfe of that which they had to lay against him. Iohn Husse trusting vpon the Empe∣rours safecōduct, sent word to the Emperour that he would come to the Councell, and with all, caused certaine bils to be written in Latine, Bohemian, and Almaine language, that if any one had to obiect ought against him, hée should come to the councell, and there he would answere him. The same time also Iohn Husse sent his Procurators to the lord Bishop of Nazareth, ordained by the Apostolicke sea, inqui∣sitour of heresie in the cities and dioces of Prage, requiring that if he found any errour in him, he would declare it open∣ly.The Bishop giueth good testimony of Husse. But the Bishop gaue good testimonie of Iohn Husse, and signified the same by his letters. Iohn Husse also requi∣red of the Archbishop of Prage, that if he knew any errour by him, he would signifie the same vnto him: who cléered him before all the Barons of Boheme, that were assembled in the Abbey of S. Iames, for the affaires of the land. Of which testimony the Barons made report by their letters to the Emperour Sigismund, in the towne of Constance.
Moreouer, Iohn Husse required for his further purgatiō be∣fore he went to the Councel, that he might make profession of his faith before the Archb. and cleargy of Prage, which might not be graunted him, but by excuse was put of. About the Ides of October, ann. 1414.Wencelat de Duba. Iohn de Clum. Iohn Husse being accompanied with 2. noble gentlemen, Wencelat de Duba, & Iohn de Clum, parted from Prage toward Constance, and in euery market towne, as he passed, he set vp writings: in which he required, that if any could lay heresie to his charge, they should prepare to méet at the Councell: there he would be ready, to satisfie thē. When he was passed out of Boheme into Almaigne, he was greatly intertained of the Citizens, and Burgesses, and of the people, and founde much fauour, especially at Norimberge. In this mean time, the greatest aduersary that Ioh. Husse had, Stephen Palletz a Bohemian, was come to the councel: but his companiō, Stanislaus znoma was not yet passed the borders of Boheme, when he was stricken with an Impo∣stume, whereof he died. Assoone as Palletz was come to Cō∣stāce, he did associate vnto him, one Michael de Causis, who was sometime Curate of Prage, and (hauing cousened the King Vinceslaus of a great summe of money, to renew the mines of gold in Gilorroy, fled from thence to Rome) he and Palletz sometime of Husses acquaintance. These 2. promised the aduersaries of Husse to deale against him: which they did, & drew articles against him, especially out of his book de Ec∣clesia, & offred them vnto the cardinals, monks, &c. and did so incense them, that they determined to cause Iohn Husse to be laide handes on. The 26. day, after Iohn Husse was come to Constance,Iohn Husse come to Con∣tance. the Cardinalles, through the instigation of Palletz and de Causis, sent the Bishop of August, and the Bishoppe of Trident, and with them the Archborough of Constance, and a certaine knight to Iohn Husses lodging, which should make report, that the Pope and Cardinalles willed him
to come and make account of his doctrine before them, as he had oft times desyred: and that they were ready to heare him. Iohn Husse vnderstanding of their minde, went out to the Popes court, and being come before them, they re∣quired him to declare vnto them the pointes which were reported of him to bee taught erronious, and against the Church, which Iohn Husse was willing to doe, and protes∣ted that he neuer (by Gods assistance) would mainteine or teach any doctrine that were not sound. The Cardinalles said, they liked that answere wel, and so went their way and left him, and maister Iohn Clum, vnder the custody of armed men, till four of the clocke at after noone: at which time the Cardinalles assembled againe in the Popes court to take coūsell what they might do with Iohn Husse. And a litle before night, they sent the prouost of the Romaine court, to shew maister Iohn de Clum, that hee might returne to his lodging, for as for Iohn Husse they had other wise prouided for him. And after this, Iohn Husse was led by the officers of the Chapter house of the great Church of Constance, where he was kept prisoner by the space of eight dayes. From thence he was caryed to the Iacobins, hard by the Rhine, and was shut vp in the prison of the abbey, which was hard by the Bogardes;Iohn Husse kept in prison. Husse falleth sicke. where he fell sore sicke of an a∣gue, by reason of the stench of the place: where he became so weake that they dispayred of his life: and for feare he should die in prison, the Pope sent his phisitions to cure him. In the time of his sicknes, his accusers made importunate sute to the principals of the Councell, that he might be condem∣ned: and presented vnto the Pope articles. 1. That hee held against transubstantiation. That Priestes can not consecrate being in deadly sinne.Articles a∣gainst Husse. That he doth not allow that the church signifyeth, Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, &c. That he sayth, all Priestes haue like power. That the Church being in sinne hath no power of keies. That he fea∣reth not excommunication. That he kepeth not the inues∣stures
and institutions of the church. That he holdeth, if a man be once ordeined a Priest or Deacon, he can not bee holden or kept backe from the office of Preaching, &c. With diuers other matters which they maliciously obiected a∣gainst him. Vpon this occasion they appointed thrée Iud∣ges: The Patriarch of Constantinople: the B. of Castel: and the B. of Libusse, who recited the accusation vnto Iohn Husse, at which time his ague was feruent and extremely vpon him: and required hee might haue an aduocate to an∣swere for him:An aduocate denied to H. but that was plainly and vtterly denyed him, because the matter was of heresy, for which he was called in question. Afterward, when Iohn Husse had gathered a litle strēgth, there were (by the commaundement of the thrée commissio∣ners) certaine articles gathered, some by Palletz, and some by them selues. Thus, Iohn Husse remained in ye prison of the couent of Franciscans, vntill the Wednesday before Palmesonday, and certaine appointed to kéepe him. The same day, Iohn the 23 chaūged his apparel, and con∣ueied himselfe secretely out of the towne of Constance. Whereupon Iohn Husse (because the Popes men, who kept him, deliuered vp their charge,Husse cruellie handled in prison. and followed their maister) was put into the handes of the B. of Constance, who sent him to the castle on the other syde of the riuer of Rhine, not farre from Constance, whereas he was shut vp in a tower with fetters on his legges, that hee could not walke in the day time: and in the night time he was fastened vp to a rack on a wall hard by his bed syde. In the meane time certaine noblemen of Pole and Boheme put vp a supplication to the fower nations, Almaine, Italy, Fraunce and England, for the deliuerie of Iohn Husse. 14. of Maye 1415.  to which supplication the B. of Luthoms did answere, with further accusation against Iohn Husse. Which answere of his the nobles of Boheme confuted againe. And when they by long
time could receiue no answere of this Supplication, which they had alredy put vp, they determined the last day of May following, (by another Supplication, put vp to the Princi∣pals of the Councel) to intreat that I. Husse might be deliue∣red out of prison, and defend his owne cause openly, They also put vp the testimoniall of the B. of Nazareth, touching I. Husse: to which Supplication they answered, that although there might be a thousand sureties put in, yet they were not to be taken in this mans case, vnto whome, there is no faith, nor credite to bee geuen. How be it, this they wil, vpon the fift day of Iune next, Iohn Husse shal be brought againe to Constance, and there haue frée libertie to speake his minde fréely before the Councell, and that they would louingly heare him: but in the end, the matter fel out farre contrarie to this promise. The same day, the barons, & Lords, presented a supplication to the Emp. requiring him to further the supplication put vp to the councel: to which, what answere the Emp. made, it is not certain: but likely it was, by processe of the matter, that the Emp. was fayne to breake his promise,The Emperor breaketh pro∣mise with H. touching the safeconduct which he pro∣mised Husse: by reason (as they pretended) that no defence of safeconduct might be geuen vnto him, that was suspected, or iudged to be an heretike. The fift day of Iune, the Cardinals, &c. in the Couent of the Franciscans in Constance, purposed, in the absence of I. Husse, to haue condemned him in those articles which they had drawen against him, but for a Notarie, named I. Mea∣doniewitz, who loued Iohn Husse, and went to M. Vence∣lat de Duba, and Iohn de Clum, and told them the matter: who went and made report thereof to the Emperor. The Emp. vnderstanding their intēt, sent Lewes, ye coun∣tie Palatine of Heydelberge, and the L. Frederike, Bur∣graue of Noremberg, to signifie vnto them which ruled the coūcel, that nothing should be done in ye cause of I. H. before it were hard wt equity: & yt they would sēd him al such articles
as were laid against the sayd Husse, which were either false or Hereticall, and he would do so much that the said Articles should be examined, by good and learned men. Then accor∣ding to the Emperours will, the iudgement of the princi∣pals of the councell was suspended, vnto such time as the said Husse himselfe were present. Now Iohn Husse beyng brought forth, & beginning to answere,Husse begin∣neth to answer for himselfe. scarse had he opened his mouth, but they all began to cry out against him, yt he had not leasure to speake one word: besides some did outrage in words against him, & other some spitefully mocked him: so yt he seing himselfe ouerwhelmed, with this rude & barbarous noise, & that it profited nothing to speake, he determined fi∣nally to hold his peace & kéepe silence. After that time, they cried, he is dumbe, he is dumbe (thinking they had won the field) this is a signe he consenteth to these his errours. But some more moderate then the rest, misliking the dealing, de∣parted from the councell for that present, and appointed to méete there againe the morrow, to procéed in iudgement. The next day, which was the 7. of Iune (in which the Sunne was almost wholy eclipsed) somewhat after about 7. of the clocke, the same flocke assembled againe in the cloi∣ster of the Friers minorites, and by their appointmēt Iohn Husse was brought before them,Husse appee∣reth againe. accompanied with a great number of armed men: thether went also the Emp. whom M. De Duba, and Clum, and the notarie named Peter, did follow, to sée what the end might be. When they were come thether, they heard the accusation of Michaell de Causis, who first obiected against him, the matter of reall presence, that hée should mainteine, after the wordes of consecration, there remayned materiall bread: which article Iohn Husse denied that euer hée mainteyned. Vpon that matter there grew dispute among them. Then was there read an article, wherin was obiected yt he mainteined Wicklifs errors, which he also denied. Besides, diuerse false accusations were brought against him: which
doone, and Palletz hauing endeuoured asmuch against him as malice would serue: Iohn Husse was committed to the custody of the Bishop of Rigen, vnder whom Ierom of Prage was also prisoner: but before hée was led away, the Cardinall of Cambray exhorted him to submit himselfe vn∣to the Councell; and so did also the Emperour: which if hée refused to doo, he said, he would sooner make the fire with his owne hands to burne him, then he would suffer him to hold such opinions, &c. And so hauing thanked the Emperour for the safeconduit,Husse not suf∣fered to pro∣ceede in his answere. and procéeding farther to make answere, he was cut of, and led away with the sergeants. The morrow after, which was the 8. of Iune, the same company assembled againe at the Franciscans: & in this as∣sembly was Iohn Husse, De Duba, & De Clum, and Peter the, notary his friends. In which assembly there were read against Husse 39.39. articles a∣gainst Husse. articles, the which they said were drawen out of his bookes. Husse acknowledged all those that were faithfully collected (of which sort there were but a fewe) as, That their is but one vniuersall Church, the company of the predestinate. That Paule, nor Peter were euer mēbers of the Diuell, although some their acts did resemble the ma∣lignant Church. That no true member of the Church doth at any time fall away from the body. That the Predesti∣nate is alwaies a member of the Church, although not in present iustice. That there is no sensible signe that cā make a man the member of the Vniuersall Church. That a reprobate man neuer is a member of the Vniuersall church. That Iudas was neuer a true Disciple. That the congre∣gation of the Predestinate, whether they bée in the state of grace, or not according, vnto present Iustice, is the holy v∣niuersall Church. That Peter neuer was, neyther is the head of the vniuersall church. That if he that is called the vicar of Christ, doo not walke according to Christ, he is the messenger of Antichrist. That all those that vse simonie doo not know the duties of the keies and censures of the church.
That the papall dignitie is sprong from the Emperours au∣thority. That no man would reasonably affirme, that any man is the head of any particular Church. That it ought not to be beléeued, that the Pope may be the head of anie particular Church, vnlesse he be predestinate or ordained of God. That the Popes power of Vicarship, is but vaine,Articles auow∣ed of Husse. if he do not conform his life according to Iesus Christ. That the Pope is most holy, onely if he doe follow Christ in hu∣mility, gentlenes, patience, &c. That the Cardinals are not the true successors of the apostles of Christ, except they fashi∣on themselues to ye kéeping of Christs cōmandements. That ecclesiasticall censure ought not to procéede to execution of death. That the nobles of the world ought to compel the mi∣nisters of the church, to kéepe the law of Iesus Christ. That the Cleargies ecclesiastical obedience is inuented without warrant of the scriptures. That he appealed from the Pope to Christ, and did not estéeme the Popes curses. That a vi∣tious man liueth vitioustly, and a godly man godlily. That if a minister be wrongfully forbidden to preach, he ought not to obey, for any commandement of power to the contra∣rie, because it is a worke not of indifferency, but of expresse commandement. The next article was almost one with this. That the ecclesiasticall censures are antichristiā: which Husse denied to be vttred in that form. That there ought no interditement, or curse to be appointed vnto the people. And these were the articles both alleadged out of his booke of the Church, and by himselfe auouched before them. Besides these, there were other articles brought against him: among which were 19. yt brought him into prison. That Paul accor∣ding to present iustice, was a blasphemer, but the childe of God by predestination. That Christ more loueth a predesti∣nate man, being sinful, then a reprobate, in what grace soe∣uer he be for the time. That al sinful, according to presēt iu∣stice, are not faithful. That ye words of Christ touching bin∣ding and losing, except they bee well vnderstood, bring much
feare, or much presumption That the binding and loosing by God is simply and plainly the principall. That priests doe onely heap vp those things out of the scriptures, which serue for their bellies. That the Popes power, when he doth wic∣kedly, is not to be feared. That an euil Pope is not the suc∣cessor of Peter, but of Iudas. That the Pope is the beast spo∣ken of in the Apocalipse. This he denied to haue béen vttered by him. That it is lawfull to preach, notwithstanding the Popes inhibition. That the Popes commandement béeing not agréeable to the Gospel, is not to be obeyed. That the Cleargy and Laitie may iudge of the works of prelats. That God himselfe doth suspend euery wicked priest from his mi∣nistery. That the Cleargie supplanteth the Laye people, &c. To these Articles aboue mentioned, were other also an∣nexed, which the Parisiens had set downe against him, to the number of 19. The chiefe author wherof, was one Ger∣son Chancellour of the Vniuersitie of Paris, wherevnto hée had no time to answere. Now when the foresaid articles were read, with their te∣stimonies, the cardinal of Cambray, with the rest, exhorted Ioh. Husse to submit himself to the councel, & to suffer pati∣ently yt they would determine, which was, that he shold con∣fesse himselfe to haue erred in the articles, & promise by oath, neither to teach nor mainteine them: & moreouer, openly re∣cant all of them. To this, the Emp. moued him also with the rest to whom he answered, that whatsoeuer were repugnāt to the scriptures, being so proued vnto him: he would recāt & renounce, otherwise durst he not do against his conscience, & after much debating,Husse will not recant. & many false accusations, Iohn Husse was caried to prison again, Ioh. de Clum following & cōfor∣ting him, who after he was carried away, the Emp. migh∣tily inueyed against him,The Emperor against Husse. & incited the Councel against him, and his scholer, Hierom of Prage, to all seuerity, as also against his friends and fauourers: and so they departed out
of the cloister, and brake vp the assembly for that time. The day before his condemnation, which was the sixt of Iuly, the Emperour Sigismund sent vnto him foure Bi∣shops, with M. Vincelat de Duba, and Iohn de Clum, to vnderstand of him what he would doo, and when he was brought out to them, and his minde demaunded, he deliue∣red his resolution, that he was ready to be reformed if it could be prooued by the scriptures, that he had erred. Which the Bishops counted an arrogant answere, and commaun∣ded him to be carried to prison againe. The next day the Emperour with all the spirituall and temporall Lords, held a generall Session in the head church of the city of Constance: in which Iohn Husse was disgra∣ded, condemned, & deliuered to the ciuil power.Husse disgra∣ded, condem∣ned, and deli∣uered to the seculars. When Ioh. Husse was brought thither, he fell downe vpon his knees, & prayed a long time. In the meane while, the B. of Lundy went vp and made a sermon: when his sermon was ended, the Procurer of the Councell rising vp, named Henricus de Pyro, required that the processe of the cause of Iohn Husse, might be continued, & so procéed vnto the definitiue sentence: then they alleadged other articles against him. And last of all, that he should say, there should be a fourth person in the diuinitie: whereto Iohn Husse saide, O miserable and wretched man, which am forced, and compelled to feare such blasphemie, & slander. Afterward the article was read, how he appealed to Christ, and that by name was called hereticall. Whereunto Iohn Husse answered: O Lord Iesu Christ, whose word is openly condemned in this Councell, vnto thée againe I make my appeale: who,H. appealeth to Christ. when yu wast euill intreated of thine enemies, diddest make thine appeale vnto God thy father, committing thy cause to a most iust Iudge: that by thy example, we also (being oppressed wt ma∣nifold wrōgs, & iniuries) should flie vnto thée. Last of al, was read ye article touching the contempt of his excommunicatiō: wherto (after he had yelded a reasonable & lawful answere)
one of the iudges read the definitiue sentence against him. When the sentence and iudgement against him was en∣ded,Husse prayeth for his enemies & is derided. knéeling downe vpon his knées, he said: O Lord Iesu Christ forgiue mine enemies, by whom thou knowest that I am falsly accused, and that they haue vsed false witnesse and slanders against mée, forgiue them, I say, for thy great mercies sake. This his praier, the greater part, especially of the Priests derided. At the last the 7. bishops disgraded him, euery one taking a péece from him, & when they came to the rasing of his sha∣uen crowne, before the Bishops would go in hand with it, there fell a great contentiō among them, with what instru∣ment it should be done, with a razor, or a paire of shieres. The courage of Husse.In the meane season, Iohn Husse turning toward ye Em∣perour, said, I maruel much that they being all of like cruell mind,Cruelty of the bishops against Husse. and stomake, yet they cannot agrée of their kind of cru∣eltie. Notwithstanding at the last, they agreed to cut of the skin of his head, with a paire of shieres: which being done, they caused to be made a certaine crowne of paper, almost a cubite high: in the which were painted 3. ougly diuels of a wonderfull ougly shape, and this title set ouer their heads. Heresiarcha. The which when he saw, he saide, My Lord Iesu Christ for my sake did weare a crown of thorns, why should not I then for his sake againe, weare this light crowne, be it ne∣uer so ignominious? Truely I will doe it, and that willing∣ly. When it was set vpon his head, the Bishops said, now we committe thy soule to the deuill. But I (said Ioh. Husse, lifting his eyes toward the heauens) doe committe my spi∣rite vnto thy handes, O Lord Iesu Christ: to thée I commēd my soule, which thou hast redéemed. So (after hee was committed to the Secular power,) the Emperor comman∣ded Ludouicus Duke of Bauaria, that he should take Husse of the Bishops hands, and deliuer him to those that shoulde doe the execution.
The place appointed for his execution, was before the gate Gothebian betwéene the gardens, and gates of the sub∣urbes. When Iohn Husse was come thether, knéeling vpon his knées, and lifting his eyes vp to heauen, he prayed, and said certaine Psalmes, and specially the 51. and 31. psalmes: and they which stoode by, heard him oftentimes in his pray∣er, with a merie countenance, repeate this verse: Vnto thy handes O Lord, I commend my spirite, &c. Which thing when the Lay people behelde, which stoode next vnto him, they said: what he hath done before we know not, but now we sée, and heare, that hee prayeth very deuoutly, and godly. When as by the commandement of the tormentors hée was risen vp from the place of his prayer, with a loud voice he said: Lord Iesu Christ, assist and helpe me, that with a constant and patient minde, by thy most gratious helpe, I may beare and suffer this cruell and ignominious death, whereunto I am condemned, for the preaching of thy most precious word, and holy Gospel. So he was tied to a stake, toward the West, because (said they) he was not worthie to looke towarde the East:The behauiour of Husse at his death. and strawe, and fagots being put to him, Ludouicus Duke of Bauaria (before fire was put vnto the wood, with another with him, the sonne of Clement) came, and exhorted him, that he would yet be mindfull of his safetie, and renounce his errors. To whom he said, what errors should I renoūce, when as I know my selfe guiltie of none. This was the principall ende, and purpose of my doctrine, that I might teach all men penance, and remission of sinnes, according to the veritie of the gospell of Christ, and the exposition of holie Doctors. Wherefore, with a cherefull mind and courage, I am here redy to suffer death. When he had spoken these words, they left him, and ha∣uing shaken hands, they departed. Then was the fire kind∣led, and Iohn Husse began to sing with a loude voice: Iesu
Christ, the sonne of the liuing God, haue mercie vpon me: and when he began to say the same the third time, the wind droue the flame so vpon his face, that it choaked him: yet notwithstanding, he moued a while after, by the space that a man might say almost thrée times, the Lordes prayer. The bodie being burned to ashes, with great diligence they gathered them together, and cast them into the riuer of Rhine,They cast the ashes of Husse into ye Rhine. that not so much as any memorie, or remnant of him might be left. Cocleus in his second booke contra Hussitas, thinketh, that the author that writte this historie of I. Husse, was called Iohannes Prizibram, a Bohemian, who after succéeding in the place of Iohn Husse, at Prage, at last is thought to haue relented vnto the Papistes. And thus much concerning the death of I. Husse, who was burned at Constance, an. 1415. about the moneth of Iulie. Being in prison,Treatises of H. in prison. he wrote diuers treatises: of the comman∣demēts of the Lord, of prayer, of mortal sinne, of matrimo∣nie, of the knowledge and loue of God, of thrée enemies of mankind, the flesh, the world, and the deuill, of repentance, of the sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ, of the suffi∣ciencie of the law of God to rule the church, &c. He had also many prophetical visions. An. 1415.  April iiij. M. Ierom of Prage, gréeuously sorow∣ing for the slanderous reproach, and defamation of his coū∣trey of Boheme: & also, hearing tell of the manifest iniuries done vnto ye man of worthie memorie: I. Husse, fréely, and of his own accord, came to Constance,Ier. of Prage commeth to Constance. & there perceiuing that I. Husse was denied to be heard: and yt watch and ward was laide for him on euerie side, hee departed to Iberlinge, a Citie of the Empire, vntil the next day, which Citie was a mile from Constance. From thence hee wrote his Let∣ters to Sigismund king of Hungarie, and his barons, requy∣ring him of safeconduct: which being denied him, ye next day he wrote certain intimations, which he sent to Constāce, to be set vpon the gates of the citie, & of the churches, & mona∣steries,
and houses of Cardinals, and other Nobles, and pre∣lates, requiring that if any had ought to charge him with of Heresie, they would repaire thether, where he should be ready to satisfie them, requiring also in the same, safeconduct and frée accesse: which when it would not be graunted, the Nobles, Lords, Knights, &c. especially of Boheme present in Constance, gaue vnto Maister Ierome their letters pa∣tentes, confirmed with their seales, for a witnesse and testi∣monie of the premisses: wherewith Ierome returning a∣gaine into Boheme,Treason a∣gainst Ierome of Prage. was by treason of his enemies taken in Hirssaw, by the officers of Duke Iohn, and was brought backe againe to the presence of the Duke. In the meane time, Palletz and de Causis, & such as were enemies to Iohn Husse, required that Hierome might be ci∣ted before the Councel, which was accordingly performed, & maister Hierome cited, by reason of his intimation: and the Duke brought him bound vnto Constance, with a great and long chaine: to whom, after they had obiected certaine friuo∣lous matters, they deliuered him (being bound) vnto the of∣ficers of the citie of Constance, to be caried to prison, for that night: where he was comforted of Peter the Notary, and one Vitus.Hierome car∣ried to prison. Peter the No∣tary, & Vitus. Which being knowne, when it drew towardes eue∣ning, ye Archb. of Rygen sent certaine of his seruants, which ledde away Hierome, being strongly bounde with chaines, both by the handes, and by the neck: and kept him so for cer∣taine houres. When night drew on, they caried him vnto a certaine tower of the citie, in S. Paules Churchyard, where they (tying him fast vnto a great block, and his féete in the stockes, his hands also being made fast vpon them) left him. The block was so high, that he could by no meanes sit there upon, but that his head must hang downward: where he lay, (none of his friendes knowing of his conueyāce away) two daies, & ij. nights, reléeued only with bread & water: wherof M. Peter hauing knowledge by one of his kéepers, desired yt he might haue leaue to prouide him meat: which was gran∣ted.
Within 11. daies after so hanging by the héeles, he vsed so smal repast,Ierom falleth sicke. that he fell sore sicke euen vnto death: wher∣vpon he desired to haue a confessor, which was hardly and with great importunitie graunted him. Now he had béene in prison one yéere lacking but seuen daies. After they had put Iohn Husse to death, about the feast of the Natiuitie of Mary the virgin, they brought foorth M. Ierom (whom they had kept so long in chaines) vnto the church of S. Paule, and wrought so with feare of death with him,Ierom abiu∣reth. that he abiured in the cathedrall Church in open Ses∣sion, and gaue assent that Iohn Husse was iustly condem∣ned and put to death: after which they caused him to be car∣ried againe to the same prison, but not so straightly chained as he was before. Now Palletz and de Causis hearing of this and vnderstanding that he made this abiuration, onely to e∣scape their hands, together with certaine Friers of Prage, put vp new accusations against maister Hierom:New accusati∣ons against M. Hierome. whose ma∣lice did appeare so much against him, that the Cardinall of Cambray, and the Cardinall de Vrscons, the Cardinall of Aquilegia and of Florence, with his iudges also: considering the great iniurie done vnto him, laboured before the whole Councel for his deliuerie. Which when they were about, his enimies, & among them, one Doctor Naso greatly vrged the matter against M. Hierome,Doct. Naso a great enemy of Hierome. insomuch that he said vnto thē, I greatly feare, least that you haue receiued some rewardes either of the K. of Boheme, or of these heretikes. The Cardinals thus rebuked, gaue ouer Master Ieroms cause, and his enemies obteined to haue other Iudges ap∣pointed: as, the Patriarch of Constantinople, who had con∣demned M. Iohn Husse, and was a great enemie to M. Hie∣rome, and another Germane Doctor. But Ierome refused those priuate Iudges, and required open audience: which in hope hee would confirme his recantation before them, was graunted vnto them. Anno 1416.  May 25. M. Ierome was brought into open
audience in the cathedrall church of Constance, where the commissioners, in the behalfe of his aduersaries, obiected a∣gainst him 107. new articles: and because the time would not suffer to answere,New articles against M. Ierome. they appointed him the third day af∣ter: the residew of the articles, he answered most learned∣ly, and eloquently, and put to silence his aduersaries. At length came in false witnesses that testified against him: whom he againe most pithily, and eloquently confuted. All this while the popes councell did wait whē he should make recantation, and craue pardon. But he persisting still in his constant Oration, did acknowledge no error, neither gaue any signification of recantation. And at last entred into the praise of M. I. Husse, and finally concluded, that all such articles, as I. Wickliffe, & I. Husse, had written, and set foorth against the enormities, pompe, & disorder of the prelates,Ierome con∣stant. he would firmely and constantly defend vnto the death: greatly condemning his fact, in that he did consent vnto the condem∣nation of M. I. Husse, & Wickliffe. The coūcell whispered to∣gether, & said: by these his words, it appéereth, he is at a point with himself. Then was he caried again into prison (hauing bin in prison before 340. daies) & grieuously fettered,Ierome grie∣uouslie fette∣red. by the hands, armes, & féete, with great chaines, & fetters, of yron. The saturday next before the Ascention day, early in the morning, he was brought with armed men into ye church to haue iudgement: where they perswaded him to reuoke the testimony, and praise he gaue of I. Husse, & Wickliffe: which he would not in any sort doo: then a certaine B. named the B. of Landy, made a certaine sermon exhortatory, against Maister Hierome, perswading to his condemnation. After the Sermon ended, M. Ierome againe said vnto them, you will condemne me wickedly, & vniustly: but I af∣ter my death, will leaue a remorse in your conscience, and a naile in your harts. Et cito vos omnes, vt respondeatis mihi,M. Ierome prophecieth. coram altissimo & iustissimo Iudice, post centum annos. That is: Here I cite you all, to answere vnto me before the most high
and iust Iudge, within an hundreth yeeres. Finally, when no persuasions would moue him to recant, they gaue sentence of condemnation against him:Ierome con∣demned. which sen∣tence being giuē, a great miter of paper was brought, pain∣ted about with red Diuels: the which when he beheld and saw (throwing his hood vpon the ground) he tooke the miter, and put it on his head: saying, my Lord Iesu Christ, when he suffered for me most wretched sinner, did weare a crown of thorne vpon his head, and I for his sake, in stéede of that crowne, will were this miter & crowne. And afterward he was laid hold on by the secular power: and when he was led out of the church, with a chéerefull countenance and lowde voice,M. Ierome singeth after his condem∣nation. lifting vp his eies to heauen, he began to sing, Credo in vnum Deum: as it is accustomed to be song in the church: af∣ter that, other certaine Canticles of the Church. At length comming to the place of execution, where as M. Iohn Husse before had suffered death innocently, knée∣ling downe by the picture of Master Iohn Husse, which was there prepared to burne him, hée made a certaine deuout prayer. Whiles hée was a praying, they tooke him vp, and stripped him, and bound him to the Image: and when they begun to lay wood about him,M. Ierome singeth at the stake. he began to sing: Salue festa dies: and the Hymne beyng ended, he song againe with a lowde voice, Credo in vnum Deum, vnto the end: that beyng doone, hée said vnto the people, in the Germane tongue, to this effect: Déerely beloued brethren, euen as I haue now song, so doo I béeleue, and no otherwise, and this Créede is my whole faith: notwithstanding now I die for this cause, for that I would not consent and agrée to the Councell, and with them affirme & hold, that M. Iohn Husse was by them iustly condemned: for I doo know well that he was a true preacher of the gospell of Christ. When the wood was begunne to bée set on fire, hée song, In manus tuas Domine, commendo spiritum meum. When that was ended, and he beganne vehemently to burne: hée
said in the Bohemian tongue: O Lord God, father almighty, haue mercy vpon me, and be mercifull to mine offences, for thou knowest, how that sincerly I haue loued thy truth. He was by reason of the stoutnes of his nature, long in burning. After he was dead, they brought his bedding, books, hood, &c. & burned them all to ashes in the same fire: which after they did diligently gather, & cast into the riuer of Rhine. Thus much, touching Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prage: whose historie was written by a Bohemian, who was present, and a beholder of the action. In the meane time, while Hierome was in trouble, and brought before the councel, the nobles of Boheme,Letters of the nobles of Bo∣heme to the Councell. and Mo∣rania, (greeued with their dealings) directed letters vnto this barbarous Councell of popishe murderers, greatly bla∣ming them for their fact, and defending both maister Iohn Husse, and maister Hierom, ending their letters in this sort: the premisses notwithstanding, we (setting apart al feare & mens ordinances prouided to the contrary,) wil mainteyn & defend the law of our Lord Iesu Christ, and the deuout, hū∣ble, and constant preachers thereof, euen to the shedding of our blood: dated at Sternberg, ann. 1415.  &c. Round about the same letters, were 54 seales hāging, and the names of them, whose seales they were,54. seales to the letter. subscribed. An. 1414.  by Henry Chichley Archb. of Cāterbury, much was the affliction and trouble of good men here in England: which cruelty, Iohn ClaydonIohn Claydon. currier of London, & Richard TurmingRich. Turming first tasted of. The 17. day of August, an. 1415. Iohn Claydon did perso∣nally appeare, arrested by the mayor of London, for suspiti∣on of heresie, before Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canter∣bury, in Paules Church: who being demaunded,Constancy. denied it not, but frankly confessed that for 20. yéeres space, he had bin suspected therof: for which also he had suffered 2. yéeres im∣prisonment at Conuey, & thrée yéeres in the Fléete: out of which prison, he (in the raigne of king Henrie the fourth,
was brought before L. Iohn Scarle, then Chancelour to the king, and there did abiure all heresie, and errour. And be∣ing demanded of the Archbishop, confessed that since his ab∣iuration, he had in his house written English bookes of re∣ligion, and had frequented the company of diuers godly mē. Which confession being made, the Archb. did command the bookes to be deliuered to maister Robert Gilbert Doctor of diuinity, William Lindwood, Doct. of both lawes, and other Clearkes to bee examined. And in the meane time, Dauid Beare, Alexander Phillip, and Balthasar Mero, were taken for witnesses against him: and were committed to bee exa∣mined to maister Iohn Escourt, general examiner of Cāter∣bury. This done. the Archb. continued his session til munday next in the same place, which was the 20. day of the same moneth, and maister Escourt publikely exhibited the wit∣nesses: which being read, there were after that read diuers tractations, found in his house: out of which, especially out of a booke called, the Lantern of light,The Lanterne of light. (that Claidon at his owne costs, caused to be written by one, called Ioh. Grime) being examined, diuers points were gathered, and noted for heresie.Articles. First, that the Pope was Antichrist, and the enimy that sowed tares among the lawes of Christ. That ye Arch∣bishops and Bishops, speaking indifferently, are the seats of the Beast Antichrist. That the Bishoppes license, for a man to preach the worde of God, is the Character of the Beast. That the Court of Rome, is the head of Anti∣christ, and the Bishoppes the bodie. That no reprobate is a member of the Church. That Christ did neuer plant priuate religions. That the materiall Churche shoulde not bée decked with golde.The causes of persecution. That Priestes vnlawfully kéeping temporall goodes, and vnsatiable begging of Fri∣ers, were the twoo chiefe causes of the persecution of Christians. That almes were to be giuen to the honour of GOD, onely of goodes iustly gotten, to bée giuen to one that is in charitie, and to those that haue néede. That
often singing in the Church, is not founded on the scripture. That bread and wine remaine in the Sacrament. That all Ecclesiasticall suffrages doe profite all godly persons indif∣ferently. That the Popes Indulgences bee vnprofitable. That the Laytie is not bound to obey the prelates, in what so euer they command except the prelates doe watch, to geue God a iust accompt of their soules. That Images are not to bée sought to by pilgrimages. For these articles, the archb. with the rest, did condemne and burne I. Claydons bookes, and procéeded to a definitiue sentence of condemnation against him: and shortly after, hée was had to Smithfield, where méekly he was made a burnt offering vnto the Lord, an. 1415. R. Fabian addeth, that Richard Turning, Baker, was the same time also burned in Smithfield. The next yere, 1416. the archb. of Canterburie in his Conuocation holden at London, maketh sharper constituti∣tions then were before,Sharper con∣stitutions then before. against the Lollards. During the time of which Conuocation, two priestes, noted for Here∣tikes, were brought before the Bishops: the one, Iohn Bar∣ton, and the other, Robert Chappel.Iohn Barton. Robert Chap∣pell. Barton, because he had béene excommunicated, and so stoode 6. or 7. yeres before, vp∣on articles of religion, & yet sought no reconciliation: which being proued against him, he was committed to Philip, B. of Lincoln, to be kept in prison, til otherwise it were deter∣mined. R. Chappel, otherwise Holbech, sometime chaplen to the L. Cobham, because he (being vnder excōmunication 3. or 4. yeres) did yet in contēpt of the keyes, continue saying masse, & preaching, & sought no reconciliation. So the session brake vp for ye time, which was about ye end of May, 1416. The 12. of Iulie next following,Chappel sub∣mitteth. Chappel appeared a∣gaine, and (submitting himselfe) with much a doe, receiued pardon: and was (in stead of penance) enioyned certayne articles to publish at Paules Crosse. As,Articles enioy∣ned Chappel. that Prelates might lawfullie holde Temporall Lawes. That it were
vniust, and vnlawfull for temporall men, vpon any occasion to take away the Prelates temporalties, notwithstanding the abuses of them. That peregrinations are auaileable to the remission of sinnes. That, to worship Images, doth pro∣fite Christians. That auricular confession is necessarie. That, though a priest be in mortall sinne, yet may he make the body of Christ. That Priestes ought not to preach, without the Bishoppes licence. That priuate religions are profitable to the vniuersall Church. That hee woulde promise, and sweare, neuer to holde any thing against the premisses. Diuers caused to abiure.After the setting out of the constitutions of H. Chichesly, Archb. of Canterburie, diuers godly men were sore vexed, and caused outwardly to abiure: as, Iohn Tayler, of the pa∣rish of S. Maries at Querne, William Iames, Master of art, and Phisitian, who had long time remayned in prison: also, Iohn Duerfer, Iohn Gourdeley, of Lincolnshire, wel com∣mended for his learning, Katherin Dertford, a Spinster. the Parson of Hyggley, in Lincolnshire, named M. Robert: William Henrie of Tenderden, Iohn Gall, a Priest of Lon∣don, Richard Monke, Vicar of Chesham, in Lincolnshire, with other mo. Collection for the P. to war against the Bohemians.During the time of the Conuocation prouinciall, Pope Martin had sent down to the cleargie of England, for a sub∣sidie, to be gathered of the Church, to mainteine the Popes warre, against the Lollards of Bohemia. Also, another sub∣sidie was demanded, to persecute William Clarke, master of arte in Oxford, who sayling out of England, was at ye coun∣cell of Basill, disputing on the Bohemians side: and thirdly, another subsidie was also required,W. Clarke. W. Russel. to persecute William Russel, which was Wardē of the Gray Friers in London, who the same time was fledde, and there escaped out of prison. Among the rest which were at this time troubled for their faith, was, Radulph Mungin,R Mungin. priest: against whom, it was
articulated at the Bishops conuocation. First,Articles. that it should not be lawfull for any Christian to fight against the Here∣tickes of Bohemia. That hée should kéepe companie with Maister Clarke aforesaid. That hée should disperse certaine bookes of Wicklifs, as Trialogus, &c. That he spake against the Popes Indulgences: which points he refused to abiure, and therefore by the Archbishop was condemned to perpe∣tuall prison: after whose condemnation the Sunday next fo∣lowing the recantation of Thomas Granter,Recantation. and Richard Monke, priestes aboue mentioned was read openly at Paules church: after which Granter was put to seuen yéeres imprisonment, vnder the custody and charge of the Bishop of London. Edmund Frith also recanted, who was the but∣ler of Sir Iohn Oldcastell. Besides these, many other, who likewise for religion were greatly vexed, especially in the Dioces of Kent, in the townes of Rumney, Tenterden, Woodchurch,Kent well af∣fected. Cran∣brooke, Staplehurst, Beninden, Halden, Roylnenden, and others: where as whole housholdes, both man and wife, were driuen to forsake their houses, and townes, for daun∣ger of persecution. Among whom in the certificate of Bur∣both the Archbishoppes officiall: these are named, Wil∣liam White priest, Thomas Grensted priest, Bartholmew Chronemonger, Iohn Waddon, Ioan his wife, Thomas E∣uerden, William Euerden, Steuen Robin, William Chine∣ling, Iohn Tame, Iohn Facolin, William Somer, Marian his wife, Iohn Abrahā, Robert Munden, Laurence Cooke: which persons because they would not appéere, were excō∣municated by the Archbishop, and what hapned after vnto them, it doth not appéere, but like it is, they were at length forced to submit themselues. About the yéere 1417.  the L. Cobham hauing now béene in Wales the space of foure yéeres (the King proclaiming a great summe of mony to him that could take sir Iohn Old∣castle either quicke or dead) the L. Powes brought him vp to
London,The L. Powes taketh the lord Oldcastle in Wales. about the moneth of Decēber: At which time there was a Parlement assembled at London, for the reléefe of mony to be sent to the K. whom the bishops had set to worke to fight in France: the records of which parlement doo thus say: that on tuesday the 14. of December, and the 20 of the parlement, sir Iohn Oldcastell of Cowling, being outlawed in the Kings bench, and excommunicated before the Archb. of Canterburie for heresie, was brought before the Lords, and hauing heard his said conuictions, answered not thereto in his excuse: vpon which record and processe, it was adiud∣ged that he should be taken as a traytor to the king, and ca∣ried to the Tower of London,The lord Cob∣ham condēned. and from thence drawne tho∣rough the citie vnto the new gallowes in S. Giles without temple barre, and there hanged, and burned hanging. After the martirdome of sir I. Oldcastle, motiō was made in the parlement, that the L. Powes might be thāked, & wor∣thily rewarded for his great labour in apprehending him. All mischiefe imputed to the Lollards.In this time all horrible mischiefs and facts, if any were doone, were imputed to the poore Lollardes. The nobles of Boheme, which before wrote vnto the councell of Constance,Bohemians cited to the councell of Constance. were therfore cited vp to the councel. The letter of Sigismund answereth in ye name of the whole councell: excusing himselfe of Husses death. Secondly, he re∣quireth them to be quiet, and to cōforme themselues peace∣ably vnto the orders of the Romish church. Also the Councell hearing, and fearing some stir to arise among the Bohemians, did make lawes to bridle them, to the number of 24.24. lawes to bridle the Bo∣hemians. As that the king of Bohemia should bée sworne to giue obedience, and defend the liberties of the church of Rome. That all Masters, Doctors, & Priests, shall be sworne to abiure the doctrine of Wickliffe, and Husse, in that councell condemned: the rest being of like sorte. The Bohemians, notwithstanding these cruell articles, contemning the vaine deuises of the Prelates & Fathers of the councell, ceased not to procéede in their league & purpose
begun, ioyning themselues more strongly together. This yere, after the deposing of Pope Iohn,The Popes goods. 75000. li. & spoiling of his goods, which came to 75. thousand pounds of golde, and siluer, Pope Martin was elected. Now the Pope comming vppon his palfry, trapped with scarlet down to the ground, and the Emperour on the right side, and the Prince Ele∣ctor on the left, playing the footmen, and holding the horses bridle, vnto the market place: there the Iewes accor∣ding to the manner, offered vnto him their lawes, and ce∣remonies: which the Pope receiuing cast them behind him,The Iewes offer their ce∣remonies to the Pope. saying: Recedant vetera, noua sunt omnia: that is, Let olde things passe, euery thing is new. Ex histor. Alba. Ex Para∣lip. Vrsperg. The Pope now confirmed, threateneth very grieuously the Bohemians, both with apostolicall, and secular arme:Pope thret∣neth the Bo∣hemians. A solemne yearly memo∣riall of the death of Husse and Ierome. Monasteries suppressed. Captaine Ni∣cholas. but the Bohemians nothing moued therewith, assembled together, and first agréed to celebrate a solemne memoriall of the death of Iohn Husse, and Hierome: decréeing the same to be celebrated yéerely: and afterward obtained certayne Churches of the king, where they might fréely preach & mi∣nister the sacraments vnto the congregatiō. This done, they suppressed diuers monasteries, beginning first with the great monastery of the blacke friers 7. miles distant from Prage, driuing the vitious priests and monkes out of them: and so their number encreased vnder their Captaine, called Nicholas. Their number encreasing now more and more, they went vnto their K, requiring to haue more ample churches: the king séemed willingly to giue eare vnto Nicholas, in∣treating for the people and commanded them to come again the next day. The people being departed, the king turned himselfe to Nicholas, remayning stil behind, & said:The King thretneth Ni∣cholas. Thou hast begun a web to put me out of my kingdome: but I will make a rope of it to hang thée. Whervppon, the K. present∣ly departed into the Castle of Visegarde, and within a
while after, entred into a new castle, which he himselfe had builded, 5. stones cast from thence, sending Embassadors to his brother to require ayde. These protestants being assēbled in the town of Prage, holding their conuentions, the king sent forth his chamber∣lain with thrée hundred horsemen, to run vpon them: but he hauing respect vnto himself, fled Whē ye news was brought vnto the king, his cupbearer (standing by) said, I knew these things would thus come to passe: for which words, the king would haue slaine him with his dagger, had not they which stood by disswaded him, with much adoe. Immediatly the K. being taken with a palsey, fell sicke, and within 18. daies daies after, hauing marked the names of them, whom hée woulde haue put to death,The kings cru¦el determinati∣on disappoin∣ted by his own departed his life, before the Princes, vnto whome hee had sent, were come, ha∣uing raigned 55. yéeres, and béeing of the age of seuen and fiftie yéeres. Immediatly after the death of Wenceslaus, there was a noble mā, named Zisca,Zisca. borne at Trosnonia, who gathering together a number of men of warre, spoiled the Abbeies and monasteries, and his number increasing to 4000. tooke the Castles of Vicegrade, and Pelzina, wan the bridge, and the nether part of the lesser Prage, which vpon conditions hée rendred againe. About Christmas, Sigismund the Emp came down, and by reason of execution done at Vratoslania, the head citie of Slesia, was had in such iealousie, that they stopped him from entring into the cities of Bohemia, and counted him an eni∣mie vnto the kingdome. In the meane time, Zisca tooke Ausca, a Towne situated vpon the riuer of Lusintius, and rased it: and forasmuch as he had no fenced towne to inhabite, chose a playne, fenced by nature,Tabor builded by Zisca. about eight myles from Ausca, and compassed the same with walles, and there builded houses, & called the same Tabor. Afterwarde, hée surprised Nicholas, maister
of the Emperours Minte, whom the Emperour had sent with 1000. horse into Boheme to set things in order. In this meane time the Emperour gathering together the nobles of Slesia, entered into Boheme, and allured one Chenco with large promises (who had before reuolted once to the Protestantes) to render vp againe the castle of Prage vnto him, and there placed himselfe to annoy the towne: Which doone the citizens sent for Zisca, who went with his Taborites, and receiued the citie vnder his gouernement: which the Emperour did besiege,Zisca putteth the Emperour to flight. but was compelled to raise it: and to be short, Zisca put the Emperour to flight, subuerts the abbey of Pelsina, and as he layed siege to Raby, hauing but one eye before to sée,Zisca loseth his other eye. hée lost the same beeing stricken with an arrow: which yet notwithstanding, he woulde not forsake his army, but after that, tooke diuers townes, caused the Saxons his enimies to retire, and againe puts the Em∣perour to flight, and tooke Broda. At these troubles, the consuls of Prage, being grieued,Iohan. Premō∣stratensis and his, compani∣ons put to death. cal∣led for Iohannes Premonstratensis, and nine other of his adherents, whom they supposed to bee the principalles of of this faction, into the Councel house, as though they wold conferre with them of the common wealth: and when they were come, they slue them, and departed home, euery man to his owne house, thinking they had made the citie quiet. But their seruantes, not circumspect inough, washing the houses, did wash down with all the bloud of those that were slaine, into the sinkes, and chanels. The which being once séene, the people knew what was done. By and by, there was a great tumult, the Councell house was straight way ouerthrowen, and eleuen of the principall Citizens, which were thought to be the authors thereof, were slaine, and di∣uers houses spoyled. Zisca in the meane while, very vali∣antly behaued himselfe. But, betwixt him and the Citie of Prage, at the length fell great dissention. In so much, that they prepared an armie against him, and caused him
to flie: who at last finding opportunitie of place, caused his standard to stand still,Dissention be∣twixt Prage and Zisca. and sought with them of Prage, and slue 3000. of them, and put the rest to flight, and went to be∣siege Prage, but by the wisedome of one named Iohannes de Rochezana, reconciliation was made betwixt Zisca and them of Prage:Reconciliatiō. Which when the Emperour vnderstood, & perceiued all things fell out according to the mind of Zisca, and that vpon him alone the whole state of Boheme did de∣pend: he sought priuy meanes to reconcile, and get Zisca in∣to his fauour, promising him the guiding of all his army, the gouernante of the whole kingdome, and great yéerely reue∣newes, if he would proclaime him king, and cause the cities to be sworn vnto him: vpon which conditions, when as Zis∣ca, for the performance of the couenants, went vnto the em∣peror, in his iourney at the castle of Prisconia, he was stric∣ken with sicknes,Zisca dieth. and there died. It is written, that beyng demaunded in the time of his sicknes, where he would his body should be buried: he com∣maunded his skinne to be plucked off, his dead carkase, and the flesh to be cast vnto the foules and beastes, and a drum to be made of his skinne, which they shoulde vse in their warres: affirming, that when the enimies shoulde heare the sound of the drumme, they woulde not abide, but take their flight. The Taborites despising all other images, yet set vp the picture of Zisca ouer the gates of their Cities. The Epitaph of Iohn Zisca, the valiant Captaine of the Bohemians. I Iohn Zisca, not inferior to any Emperor, or Captaine, in warlike policie:The epitaph of Zisca. a seuere punisher of the pride, and aua∣rice of the Clergie, and a defender of my Countrey, do lie here. The same which Ap. Claudius in geuing good coun∣cell, and M. Furius Camillus did for the Romans, in vali∣antnesse, the same I (being blinde) haue done for my Bo∣hemians.
I neuer slacked oportunitie of battaile, neither did fortune at any time faile me. I being blinde, did fore∣see all oportunitie of well ordering my businesse. Eleuen times, in ioyning battell, I went victor out of the fielde. I seemed worthilie to haue defended the cause of the mise∣rable, and hungrie, against the delicate, fatte, and glutto∣nous priestes: and for that cause, to haue receiued helpe at the handes of God. If their enuie had not let it, without doubt I had deserued to be numbred amongest the most famous men. Nōtwithstanding, my bones lie here in this halowed place, in despite of the Pope.In despite of the P. Iohn Zisca, a Bohe∣mian, enemie to all wicked, and couetous priests, but with a godlie zeale. Ex Aen. Sil. All this while the Emperor, with the whole power of the Germanes, were not so busie on the one side, but Mar∣tin the Pope was as much occupied on the other: who, a∣bout the same time, directed out a most terrible Bull against all those that tooke part with Wickliffe, Husse, or Ierome:A Bull. and set foorth certaine articles, whereof examination was to be had: with a certaine manner also, how they were to be dealt withall, set downe. Not long after Ziscas death, certain Bohemians set forth another contrarie writing, against the pestiferous Sea of Rome: bearing the names of Procopius, & Conradus,Procopius. Conradus. Cap∣tains of the Bohemians. Now, after ye Zisca was dead, immediatlie followed di∣uision in the hoste: the one parte choosing Procopius, surna∣med Magnus, to be their Captaine: the other part saying, there was none worthie to succéede Zisca. Whereupon, they, choosing out certaine to serue the warres, named them¦selues Orphanes.Orphans. And albeit there was oftentimes dissen∣tion among them, yet they ioyned, and defended themselues against forraine power. These two armies obteined great victories, in so much,
that Sigismund the Emperor sent for the Nobles of Bohe∣mia, vnto Posonium, a towne of Hungarie, in the borders of Austria: but they would not enter into the town, but remai∣ned in their tents without the towne: whether the Empe∣ror going to them, and promising them kindenesse, they ob∣iected againe, the falsifying of his safeconduct to Iohn Husse, &c. So nothing being finally concluded, the Emperor retur∣ned home. Pope Martin, perceiuing the Gospell to increase more and more, sent the Cardinall of Winchester, an English∣man, borne of a noble house, into Germanie, to moue them to warre against the Bohemians: whereunto the Emperor also did assist him. 3. Armies.There were iij. armies prouided: in the first were the Dukes of Saxonie, and the lower cities. The second armie was gathered of the Francomans, and was vnder the con∣duct of the Marques of Brandenburgh. The thirde was led by Otho, the archbishop of Treuerse, whom the Rhenenses the Bauarians, and the Emperiall Cities of Sweuia, fol∣lowed. The 3. armies flee before they see their ene∣mies.These armies ioyned together, and pitched before Mis∣na, & vnderstanding that the Protestants drewe néere, they fled before they saw their enemies. Then (all lettes set a∣side) they vanquished Thraconia, and hauing obteined great store of warlike Engines, they destroyed Misna: and when they would haue returned home by Franconia, they had great summes of money sent them, that they would not de∣stroye the Countreyes of Bramberge, and Noremberge, whereby the Hoste of the Bohemians was greatlie enri∣ched. Sigismund the Emperor hauing newes of these thinges, went straight vnto Noremberge, and there gathered newe aide. Also, Pope Martin sent Iulian, the Cardinall of Saint Angell, into Germanie, with ambassage, to make warre vpon the Bohemians, who went straightway to Norem∣berge
to the Emperour, where many nobles of Germanie were assembled, and a decrée made of a new expedition a∣gainst the Bohemians, against the 8. of the Calends of Iu∣ly. It is said, the company of the aid of Sweuians, which they called the company of S. George, and the Magistrates of the Imperiall cities, the Bishops of Mentz, Treuers, and Colen, and the Chieftaines of their Prouinces were aboue fortie thousand horse,40000. horse against the Protestants. but their footemen not fully so many. After this, the Cardinall entered into Bohemia with a large army, and on the borders of Boheme destroied many of the Protestāts townes, and spared neither man, woman, nor child. But the Bohemians making toward them, there fell such a feare among the popish armie,The popish ar∣my fleeth, be∣fore they see their enimies. that they fled be∣fore any enemie appeared: whom the protestants pursuing, had a great pray, and spoyle of them: notwithstāding Alber∣tus prince of Austrich, who was appointed to bring his ar∣my through Morania, hearing tell that the Cardinall was entred into Bohemia, with all spéede, came out of Aust∣rich, with his army, and besieged the towne of Prezorabia, but when he vnderstood how the cardinal was fled, he left of his purpose, and returned through Morania, which was not yet subiect vnto him: and destroied aboue 50.50. townes de∣stroyed. townes with fire and sword, and so afflicted them that they promised him subiection, on condition, that he would be bound to doe that, which the Councel of Basil should determine. Then was there an Ambassage sent out of Boheme, vn∣to Basil, where Sigismund held the Councell: who during the time of the wars, held himself at Noremberge, & wrote vnto the Bohemians, what law he had of them, and exhor∣ted them to repaire vnto the Councel of Basil,Councell at Basil. where their gréefes should be heard, and remedie prouided. The Coun∣cell of Basil also wrote their letters to the Bohemians, that they should send their Ambassadors, which should shew a reason of their faith, promising them safeconduct to go and
come, and frée libertie to speake what they would. The Bo∣hemians stood in doubt, considering how Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prage had béen handled by them at Constance: But the Nobilitie followed the mind of Maynardus, prince of the New house, who perswaded them to go. And after his councell an Ambassade of 300.An Embassage of the Bohemi∣ans to Basill. horse was sent to Basill: the chiefe whereof was William Cosca a valiant knight, and Procopius surnamed Magnus, a man of worthy fame for his manifold victories, Iohn Rochezana preacher of Prage, Nicholas Galerus minister of the Thaborites, and one Pe∣ter an Englishman,Peter an En∣glishman. of excellent, prompt, and pregnant wit. These Bohemian Embassadors were gently receiued. The next day after, the Cardinall Iulianus sending for them vnto the Councell house, made a gentle, long, and elo∣quent Oration vnto them, exhorting them to peace, and vni∣tye: saying, that the Church was the spouse of Christ, &c. This Oration the Bohemians answered, clearing them∣selues of crimes laid to their charges, and required open au∣dience, wheras the laity might also be present, to manifest their innocencie: which request was granted vnto them, and so they propounded foure points,4. points wher∣in the Bohe∣mians dissent from ye church of Rome. wherin they dissented from the Church of Rome. First, that all that would bee saued, ought of necessity to receiue the Communion vnder both kindes. Secondly, all ciuill rule and dominion to be forbid∣den vnto the Clergie, by the law of God. Thirdly, that the preaching of the word of God, is frée for all men, and in all places. The fourth was, as touching open offences: which are in no wise to be suffered, for the auoiding of grea∣ter euill. These were the pointes, obiected in the name of ye whole Realme. The Bohemians chose out foure Diuines, that should declare their Articles to be taken out of the worde of God. Likewise, on the contrarie parte, there were foure appointed by the Councell. This disputation continued fif∣tie dayes.The disputa∣tion continued fiftie daies.
In the time, while the Bohemians were thus in long conflicts with Sigismund the Emperour,K. Henry the 5. the Prince of priests. King Henry the fifth likewise fighting in France died: who was so deuout to the Pope, and Prelates, that hée was called the Prince of Priestes. ¶ The names of the Archbishops of Canterbury. 54. Symon Iselip seuentéene yéeres. 56.The names of the archb. of Canterbury. Symon Lang∣ham two. 57. William Witlesey fiue. Symon Sudbury six. 59. William Courtney fiftéene. 60. Thomas Arundell eigh∣téene. 61. Henry Chichesly nine and twentie. The ende of the fift Booke.
The sixt Booke. HEnry the sixt succéeded his Father, Anno 1422.  In the first yéere of his raigne,The sixt part of the Section. W. Taylor. was burned a constant witnesse of Christes truth, William Taylor a Priest, vnder Henry Chi∣chesly Archbishop of Canterburie. Hée was first apprehended in the dayes of Thomas Arundell, and ab∣iured afterward in the daies of Henry Chichesly, Anno 1421. which was the yéere before his burning. The said William Taylor appéered againe in the conuocation before the Archbishop, being brought by the Bishop of Worcester, hauing béene complayned of, to haue taught at Bristow these articles following. Articles.That whosoeuer hangeth any Scripture about his neck dishonoreth God, and giueth it to the Diuell. That God onely is to be adored. That Saints are not to be worship∣ped nor inuocated. These Articles hée denied that hée preached of, but one∣ly communed of the same: especially vppon the second and third, onely in way of reasoning, and so brought out of his bosome a Paper, conteyning certaine Articles, with testi∣monies of the Doctors alledged, and exhibited the same vnto the Archbishop: who deliuered it vnto Maister Iohn Castell, and Rikinghale, the two Vicechancellours of Ox∣ford and Cambridge, and to Iohn Langdon Moonke of Canterburie, who the Munday following, presented the said articles to the Archbishop and Prelates as erronious: Wherevpon William Taylor beyng called,Recant. in conclusion was content to reuoke the same, and for his penaunce was condemned to perpetuall pryson: whereof notwith∣standing, through fauour, hée was also released, putting in
sufficient sureties in the Kings Chauncery, and swearing that he would neuer hold, or fauour any such opinions after that. And so he being absolued, and taking his oath, hée was committed to the B. of Worcester, to be released vpon con∣ditions aforesaid: yet so, that hee should appeare at the next Conuocation, whensoeuer it should be before the Archb. In the mean time, while William Taylor was in the cu∣stody of Worcester, there passed certaine writings betwéen him, & one Tho. Smith, priest of Bristow: in the which wri∣tings, William Tailor replying against the said Thomas, cō∣cerning the questions of worshipping of Saints: which be∣ing brought to the hands of the B. of Worcester, William Taylor began anew to be troubled ann. 1422. the xj. of Fe∣bruary, & being brought before the cōuocation, his writings were brought before him, which he would not denie. The Archb. caused it to bee deliuered to the 4. orders of friers in Londō, to be examined: who found out these 4. here∣ticall points in them.Foure hereti∣call points. 1. Euery prayer, which is a petition of some supernaturall gift, or frée gift, is to be directed onely to God. 2. That praier is to be directed to God alone. 3. To pray to any creature, is to commit idolatry. 4. Much like the rest, but to fill the number of their orders, they made a fourth. When the Saterday was come, which was the 20 day of March, the orders of Friers hauing declared their censure in the Chapter house of Paules, touching Taylors articles: hée was vpon the same, forthwith condemned as a relapse:Taylor condē∣ned & burned. first to bée disgraded, and after burned: who being had to Smithfield, the first day of March, did finish his martirdom, Anno 1422. Anno 1424. Iohn FlorenceIoh. Florence. a Turner, appeared before William Bernam, Chancellour to William, B. of Norwich, for these articles. 1. That the Pope, & Cardinals,Articles. haue no power to constitute lawes. 2. That onely the Sunday is to bee kept holie. 3. That men ought onely to fast
the quatuor temporum. 4. That Images are not to be wor∣shipped. 5. That Curats ought not to exact tithes. 6. That al they that sweare by their life and power, shalbe damned, except they repent.Submission. But béeing threatned, he submitted him∣selfe,Penance. and abiured, and was enioyned this penance.: three Sundaies in a solemne procession in the cathedrall Church of Norwich he shoulde be displaied before all the people, The like also shoulde bée done about his parish Churche, of Shelton, thrée other seuerall Sundayes, he béeing bare∣headed, barefoote, and barenecked, after the manner of a publike penitentiarie, his bodie béeing couered with a can∣uase shirt, and bréeches, carrying in his hand a taper of a pound weight. Ann. 1424. Richard BelwardRich. Belward. 1424 of Erisam, abiured these articles before the B. of Norwich, the 24. of Iuly, & purged himselfe by his neighbours, and sware that he would nei∣ther teache, nor assist any against the church of Rome. His articles were these.Articles. 1. That ecclesiastical ministers haue no power to excommunicate. 2. That he held the opinions of sir Ioh. Oldcastle. 3. That mē ought not to go on pilgrimage. 4. That the Curats sel God on Easter day, when they receiue offerings. 5. That he gaue counsel against offerings for the dead, & for women that were purified. 6. That saints ought not to be praied vnto, &c. He denied these Articles, and pur∣ged himselfe by thrée of his neighbours: yet because the bi∣shop greatly suspected him of Lollardy, he sware him, that he should neuer teach any thing against the Romish Church, and so dismissed him. In like manner, was Iohn God de Sel,Iohn God de Sell. of Dichin∣gham, Parchment maker, for the same articles, faine to purge himself, and sweare, and so was set at liberty, til ann. 1428. Sir Hugh Pie,Sir Hugh Pie. also Chaplaine of Ludney, in the dio∣ces of Norwich, was accused before the Bishop, ann. 1424. for holding these points: first against pilgrimages: Itē, that almes is only to be giuen to the néedy beggers at their doors.
That no Image is to be worshipped. And that he cast the crosse of Bromehold into the fire. These articles he denied, purged himselfe by witnesse of 3. Lay men, and 3. Priestes: was sworne, and so dismissed. Anno 1428.  King Henrie the sixt sent downe most cruel letters of Commission vnto Iohn Exetor, and Iacolet Ger∣main, kéeper of the castle of Colchester, for the apprehending of sir William White, Priest,W. White, Priest. and others, suspected of heresie. By vertue of which commission, it is found in olde Monu∣ments, that within short space after, Iohn Exetor, who was appointed one of the Commissioners, attached sixe persons, in the towne of Bongay, in the Dioces of Norwich, & com∣mitted them to William Day, and William Row, constables of Bongay, to be sent within tenne dayes following, vnder safeconduct, to the castle of Norwich: where by reason of the antiquitie of the record, these names remaine only to be read: Iohn Wadden of Tenderden, in the Countie of Kent, Bartholmew Monke of Ersham, in the Countie of Norfolk, Cornleader, a married man, William Skuttes. These thrée were in the custodie of the Duke of Norfolke, in his Castle of Fremingham. Besides these, there are found in old monuments, in the dioces of Norfolk and Suffolke, especiallie in the townes of Beckles, Ersham, and Ludney, a great number, both of men and women, to haue béene caste into prison, and after their abiuration, brought to open shame, in Churches, and Markets, by the Bishop of Norwich, named William, and his Chanceller, William Bernham, Iohn Exetor being Re∣gister: So that within the space of thrée or foure yeres,Great vexa∣tion for the trueth of Christ. that is, from the yere 1428. vnto 1431. about ye number of 120. men and women, were examined, and suffered great vexa∣tion for the profession of Christian faith. Of whome, some were taken onely vpon suspition for eating of meates for∣bidden, vpon Vigill dayes: Who, (after their purgation made) escaped more easilie away. Whose names followe
here subscribed. Robert Skirring of Harlestone, William Skirring, Iohn Terry of Ersham, Iohn Aibre of Ersham, Iohn Middle∣ton of Haluergate, Iohn Warde of Ersham, Richard Clark of Sething, Thomas VVhite of Bedingham, Master Robert Beert of Berrie, and Richard Page of Clepslie. The other were more cruellie handled, and some of them burned: among whome speciall mention is made of these 3. Father Abraham,Father Abra∣ham, William White priest, I. Wad priest, burned. of Colchester, VVilliam VVhite, Priest, and Iohn VVaddon, Priest: The residue abiured, and suf∣fered penance: as, Iohn Beuerley, I. VVardon, Io. Middle∣ton, Iohn Baker, I. Knight, Margerie Baxter, Iohn Skillie, Iohn Godhold, Tomas Albeck, Iohn Pierce, Nicholas Ca∣non, of Ey. Thomas Pie, Iohn Mendham, Io. Middleton, Thomas Chatris, Thomas VVade, VVilliam Taylour, Iohn Capper, Vicar of Tunstall, with thrée score and two o∣ther. The articles which they held, were these. Against auri∣cular confession. That there remayneth bread and wine af∣ter the wordes of consecration, and that no priest can make the bodie of Christ. That euery true Christian is a Priest to God.Articles. That no man is bound to Lent, or any dayes prohi∣bited by the Church of Rome. That the pope is Antichrist. That (necessitie vrging) it is lawfull to doe bodilie labour on holie-daies, That Priestes may marrie. That Ecclesi∣asticall censures of the Prelates, are not to be regarded. A∣gainst swearing in priuate causes. Against Pilgrimage. A∣gainst honouring of Images. Against holy water. That the death of Becket was neither holy, nor meritorious. That Relikes ought not to be worshipped. That prayers in all places are acceptable vnto God. That no Saint is to bée prayed vnto. That Bel-ringing was ordeyned to fill Priestes purses. That it is no sinne, to withstand the Ec∣clesiasticall processes. That the Catholike Church is only the congregation of Gods elect.
In these articles they all agréed, and it séemeth,Williā White scholler to Wickliffe. they had the doctrine from William White, who was scholer and fol∣lower of Iohn Wickliffe. This William White gaue ouer his priesthood & benefice,  and tooke vnto him a godly woman to his wife, named Ione: yet ceassed not he from his dutie of teaching, but preached continually, wrote, and instructed the people at Canterbury. Before time, he had recanted these points: That men should séeke for the forgiuenes of sinnes onely at Gods hands. That the wicked liuing of the pope and his holy ones is a diuelish and heauy yooke of Antichrist. That men ought not to wor∣ship images, nor holy men after they be dead. That the Ro∣mish church is the fig trée which Christ accursed. That such as weare coules, or be annointed, or shorne, are the launce∣knights of Lucifer, &c. Which articles he abiured An. 1424. before Henry Chichesly at Canterb. but now being stron∣ger in the truth, endured to the end, & was condemned of 30.White burned in Norwich. articles, & was burned at Norwich, in the moneth of Sep∣tember 1428. hauing labored diligently before in teaching the people of Norfolke. He was a man very godly, & deuout, in somuch that all the people had him in great reuerence: & were woont to desire him to pray for them. When he was come vnto the stake, thinking to open his mouth to speake vnto the people, to exhort and cōfirme them in the truth, one of the Bishops seruāts stroke him on the mouth,Crueltie. thereby to force him to kéepe silence: and so there patiently he ended his course, being made a witnes of Christ Iesus. His wife Ione followed her husbands footesteps, and confirmed many in the truth: and therefore suffered much trouble, & punishment at the Bishops handes, the same yéere. About the same time also, suffered by burning father A∣braham of Colchester, and Iohn Waddon priest, for the like articles. Iohn Beuerly, alias Batild was enioyned that the Fri∣day and Saturday, next after his dismission he should fast
bread, and water, and vppon the Saturday to be whipped from the Palace of Norwich, goyng round about by the Tomlands, and by S. Michaels Church, by Cottell Row, and about the market, hauing in his hand a waxe candle of two pence, to offer to the Image of the Trinitie, after hée had doone his penance, &c. and this doone, hée should depart out of the Dioces, and neuer come there any more. Besides, the same yéere diuerse did penaunce and abiured: and the yéere following, 1429.  diuerse did the like penance, to the number of 16. or 17. An. 1430.  R. HouedonRich. Houedō. a woolwinder & citizen of Lōdon, was burnt at the Towrehill, for the doctrine of Wickliffe. Anno 1431.  Thomas BagleyThom. Bagley. a Priest, vicar of Mo∣nenden beside Malden, beyng a valiant disciple of Wic∣kliffe, was condemned of Heresie by the Bishops at Lon∣don, about the midst of Lent: was disgraded and burned in Smithfield. The same yéere also Paule CrawPaule Crawe. a Bohemian, was takē at S. Andrewes, by the Bishop Henry, & deliuered ouer to the secular power to be burnt, for holding against the faith of Rome, touching the sacrament of the Lords supper, wor∣shipping of Saints, auricular confession, with other of Wic∣kliffes opinions. Tho. Rhedon at Rome.An. 1436.  Th. Rhedon a Frenchman, and a Carmelite frier, was burned at Rome for these articles, which notwith∣standing they gathered falsly against him. That the church lacketh reformation, and that it shall be punished and refor∣med.Articles. That Infidels, Iewes, Turkes, and Mores, shall be cōuerted vnto Christ in the later daies. That abominations are vsed at Rome. That the vniust excommunication of the Pope is not to be feared. Eugenius at this time was Pope,Eugenius Pope. and succéeded Pope Martin a litle before. After sundry tor∣ments he was condemned for an heretike and was burned. He was accused by William of Roan cardinall of S. Mar∣tins in the mount, vicechancellor of the court of Rome.
About the same time,Persecution a∣bout Germany diuers other suffered in the places about Germany, as Henry Grunfelder, priest of Ratispone, ann. 1420. Henry Rodgeber, priest in the same citie, anno 1423. Ioh. Draendorf a priest, & of noble birth, at Wormes ann. 1424. Peter Thraw, at Spire. ann. 1426.  Mathew Ha∣ger also suffered at Berline, in Germany, not long after. Ex Basilei Centur. sept. After the death of pope Martine, who reigned 14. yéeres: succéeded Eugenius the fourth. about the yeere 1431.  He be∣gan first to celebrate the Councel at Basill:Eugenius be∣ginneth the Councel at Basill. which Councel Martine had before intended. In the 39. session of the councel of Constance, it was de∣créed, & prouided,Order for the times of gene∣ral councels. concerning the orders and times of such ge∣neral councels, as shold after folow, The first that shold next ensue, to be kept the 5. yere after ye councel of Cōstance. The 2. 7. yeres after that, & so orderly al other to folow successiue∣ly frō x. yere, to x. yere. Wherfore, according to this decrée, fol∣lowed a general councel 5. yeres after the Councell of Con∣stāce holden at Sene, vnder pope Martin, an. 1424.  but that soon brake vp. 7 yeres after another Councel was holden at Basill, ann. 1431. which was the most troublesome Coun∣cell, that euer was: and continued 17. yéers.The trouble∣some Councell at Basill conti∣nued 17. yeres. Wherin it was concluded (as before at Constance) that the general councels were aboue the Pope. When pope Martin the 5. had appointed Iulian, Cardinall of S. Angell, to hold a general councel at Basill, for rooting out of Heresies, he died: and Eugenius 4. succéeded: who confirmed the same authoritie to the Cardinal Iulian. Vnto this Councell, came the Emperour Sigismund, and during his life, protected the same. After his death, Pope Eugenius altering his mind & pur∣pose, would transport the Councel vnto Bonony: & thereby hindred the successe of the councel of Basill: and first he held a contrary Councell, at Ferraria, and afterward at Flo∣rence. Eugenius the Pope pretended that the Gréeks, who
should come to ye councel, wold not passe the Alpes: & that he himself could not go so long a iourney, & that ye Germanes in their own countrey,Contention betwixt the P. and the fathers of the Coūcell. would be so vntractable, that nothing could there be attēpted for their reformation. Whervpon he cited the fathers of the councel vp to Bonony, vpō great pe∣rill. They againe cited the pope, that either he should come himselfe, or send his ambassadors, vnder great penaltie. For the appeasing of this dissention, the Ambassadors of Albert, king of the Romans, & of the other princes of Ger∣many, assembled together; first, at Norimberg, where they could determine nothing; and againe at Frankford, to ap∣pease the dissention betwéen the Councel and the Pope. In the meane time, the Emperours Ambassadors, and the Am∣bassadors of the electors, went to Basil, and conferring with the Ambassadours of other Princes, there they earnestly de∣sired the fathers of the Councell, that they would transport the councel to another place (the which only thing pope Eu∣genius séemed alwaies to séeke and desire) that either hée might therby deuide the fathers of the Councel, or take a∣way their liberties. Notwithstanding, the Synode thought good, neither to deny the princes request, neither graunt that which Pope Eugenius desired. During this doubt, the Em∣perours Embassadors, and the B. of Patauia, and Augusta, (being much required therevnto) appointed a noble Baron, named Conrade Weinsperg, by the K. commādement, to be the protector of the Councel, & the fathers: but by means of a great pestilence, which beganne to grow, the assembly that should haue béen holden at Frankford, was transported vn∣to Mentz. The Ambassadors of the Princes thought good also to go thither, if by any meanes they might finde vnity. The assēbly was very famous: for there were present, the Archb. of Mentz, Collen, and Treuers, electors of the sacred empire: and al the Embassadors of the other Electors. Not∣withstanding, the Archb. of Collen was the chiefe fauou∣rer of the Councel in this assembly. The sacred Synode
also thought good to send thether their Embassadour the pa∣triarch of Aquileia, the Bishoppe of Venice, and the Bi∣shop of Argen, diuines: Iohn Segonius, and Thomas de Corcellis, with diuerse others. There was no mā there pre∣sent that would name himselfe the Embassadour of Euge∣nius. But the chiefe Hercules of the Eugenians was Ni∣colaus Casnanus,Nicholaus Casnanus. a man singularly well learned, and of great experience. After diuerse consulatations had, the electors of the Em∣pire, and the Embassadours of the other Princes of Germa∣nie thought good, to giue forth commaundement through out their whole countrie and natiō, that the decrées of the coun∣cell of Basill should receiued and obserued. While these thinges were thus debated at Mentz, there rose vp a doubtful question among the diuines, which remai¦ned at Basil, whether Eugenius might be called an heritike, who so rebelliously contemned the commaundement of the Church. Among these diuines, the chiefest both in learning, and authoritie, was the Bishop of Ebrium, Ambassadour to the king of Castile, and a certaine Scottish abbot: to whose reasons, the rest did consent or giue place: and so Eugenius was pronounced both an heretike, and a relapse.Eugenius pro∣nounced an he∣retike & relapse Eyght conclusions were there determined, and allowed amongst them, which they called verities: the copie wherof they did diuulgate thorough al Christendome. The verities were these. That the Councell hath autho∣ritie aboue the Pope. That the Pope cannot transport, nor proroge the general Councell, lawfully assembled,8. Verities. without the consent of the whole. That he that resisteth those veri∣ties, is to be counted an heretike. That Eugenius the fourth had resisted those verities. That Eugenius, being admoni∣shed by the sacred Councel, did recant the errors repugnant to those verities. That the dissolution, or translation of the Councell, attempted the second time by Eugenius, is a∣gainst the foresaide verities. That Eugenius, in going
about to dissolue and transport the councell againe, is fallen into his first reuoked errours. That Eugenius beyng war∣ned by the councell to giue ouer, and notwithstanding per∣seuering and erecting a councell at Ferraria, shewed him∣selfe thereby obstinate. When the Embassadors of the councell were returned from Mentz, and that certaine report was made of the al∣lowing of their decrées, the Fathers of the councell thought good to discusse the conclusions and verities of the diuines more at large: wherevpon by commaundement of the de∣puties, all the Maisters and Doctors of the clergie, with the residue of the Prelates, were called together into the chap∣terhouse of the great Church, there openly to dispute and dis∣cusse the heresie of Eugenius. A disputation of 6. daies a∣gainst Pope Eugenius. Panormitane a defender of Eugenius.This disputation continued 6. daies, both forenoone, and after noone. Among whom, Cardinall Ludouicus Archb. A∣relatensis was the iudge of the whole disputation. They cō∣cluded according to the former verities, and all in a maner allowed them, except Panormitane, Archbishop, who much disputed against them. Likewise did the bishop of Burgen, the king of Aragons Almoner: yet did they not gainsay the 3. first conclusions, but only those wherein Pope Eugenius was touched. Panormitane greatly contending with the B. of Argens, Iohn Segonius, and Francis de Felix, Diuines that Eugenius was not relapsed, wrought so, that the worde Relapse, was taken out of the Conclusions, and in steade thereof, the word Prolapse put in. Neither durst Pa∣normitane himselfe altogether excuse Eugenius of heresie, but defended more the first resolution, than the second: yet departed he not without answere, for Iohn Segonius,I. Segonius. an expert Diuine, fullie answered him, and scarse could finish his oration without interruption: for, Panormitane often∣times interrupting him, went about (disorderly) to confute, now this, and now that reason. Whereupon, the B. of Argen interrupted Panormitan,
in his arguments, and put him from his purpose. Yet they passed so farre, that that they did not abstain from opprobri∣ous taunts: & when ye B. of Argen said, that the pope ought to be the minister of the Church, Panormitan could not suf∣fer that, but so farre forgat himselfe, that he saide, the Pope was Lord ouer the Church. Segonius, on the contrary part,Panormitane wil haue the P. Lord of the Church. Seruant of seruants, the P. honorablest title. answered, yt it was ye most honorable title the P. had, to bée called the seruant of the seruants of God: and alleaged why they ought not to séeke after forraine Lordshippe, because Christ himselfe came not to be ministred vnto, but to mini∣ster, &c. With whose answeres, he being somewhat disquie∣ted, the Councel brake vp, and departed. The next day after dinner, they returned all againe, where the Archb. of Lions, the Kings Orator, requested to speake his minde. After he had by diuers reasons prooued Eugenius to be an Heretike, he bitterly complayned, dete∣testing the negligence, and slouthfulnesse of those, which had preferred such a man to the Papacie: and so moued all their hearts that were present, that they al with him,The Councel aboue the P. did bewaile the calamitie of the vniuersal church. The Bishop of Bruxels, Ambassador for the King of Spaine, did excellently proue, that the Councell was aboue the Pope: yet doubted hee whether they were verities of faith. The K. of Arragons Almosiner (being a craftie, and subtile man) did not directly dispute vpon the conclusions, but picking out here and there, certaine arguments, sought to hinder the Councell: against whom, an Abbot of Scot∣land and Tho. de Corcellis, did largely dispute in defence of the Conclusions. When the Disputation was ended, and a finall conclu∣sion of those matters euen at hand, the Archbishops of Mil∣laine, and Panormitane, armed themselues to let the mat∣ter, and exhorted all men of their faction, to withstande it. And first of all, as soone as the congregation was assembled, the Bishop of Burgen exhorted them to deferre the conclu∣sion,
and to tarie for the Ambassadors of other Princes, who would shortly returne from Mentz. After him Panormitane spake also to the same end, and so did Ludouicus the Prothonotarie of Rome. But Ludo∣uicus, the Cardinall Arelatensis,Ludouicus. Cardinal A∣relatensis. made an eloquent, and pi∣thie Oration; and perswaded them to constancie, and to the maintenance of the conclusions. And when he had made an end of his Oration there was a great noise, crying out, and brauling euery where. Which when Ludouicus the Patriarche of Aquileia perceiued, hee saide vnto Panormitane, and vnto Ludouicus Prothono∣tarie: doe not thinke the matter shall so passe, you knowe not yet the manners of the Germanes: for if you goe foorth on this fashion, it will not be lawfull for you to departe out of this countrey with whole heads. But Iohn, Earle of Diersten, (who then supplyed the Protectors place) and the Citizens of Basill, gaue assurance of safetie, and the Earle willed them to bee of good cheare: who, neuer discouraged at the Patriarches wordes, and by an Interpretor declared, that his minde was not to threa∣ten, but to nourish the Fathers: they should foresée, that they should not depart from the councel, nothing being done, and furthermore, desired pardon, if his wordes had offended the Councel, Panormitane, or any man. Yet for al this the noy∣ses and cries, could not be stayed: for, as often as men∣tion was made of reading the Concordatum, great noyse, and rumors were still made to stoppe the same: so that Ami∣deus Archbishop of Lyons, and Primate of all Fraunce, a man of great reuerence and authority, was moued to speake in the behalfe of the Conclusions, and to admonish them, not to geue eare vnto the disturbers of concord. In the end, the Concordatum of the xij. men, concerning the articles, were required to bee read by the Cardinall Arelatensis, many whispering him in the eare, that he should goe forward, and not alter his purpose.
Then Panormitane, assoone as the concordatum began to be read, rising vp with his companions, & the Aragons, cried out with a lowde voice, saying: you Fathers do contemne our requests, & despise prelates: you would conclude, but it is not your part to conclude: we are the greater part of the prelates: we make the councell, and it is our part to con∣clude. And I in the name of the rest do cōclude, that this is to be deferred and delayed. With this word there sprang such a noise and rumour in the councell,Great dissentiō in the councell. as is accustomed to be in battle when two armies ioyne: some cursing that which Panormitane went about: other some allowing the same. Then Nicholas Amici,Nicholas A∣mici. a diuine of Paris, according vnto his office, said: Panormitane, I appeale from this your con∣clusion, to the iudgement of the Councel here present, nei∣ther doe I affirme any thing ratified, which you haue done, as I am redy to proue, if it shall séem good. The cōtrary part séemed now in better place, for they had already concluded. The other part, neither had concluded, neither was it séene how they could conclude among so great cries and vprores. Notwithstanding, amongst all these troublous noyses, Ioh. Sigonius, a singular diuine, of the Vniuersitie of Salamen∣tine, had audience, and reproued Panormitane, in that hée had concluded, without deciding of the Deputies, and with∣out examination of twelue men, or any rite, or order: and so procéeded to exhort them to constancie, & not to depart with∣out finall conclusion. In the meane time,Panormitan is obstinate. many graue men exhorted Panormi∣tane, to geue ouer his conclusion: but neither was he min∣ded so to doe, nor the Fathers determined to depart without a conclusion. All things were disturbed, neither did the pre∣lates sit in their seates: but as affection led them, some went to the Cardinall Arelatensis, some to Panormitane. Then Arelatensis séeing the matter to be in danger, and that there was no readie way to make a conclusion, thought to vse some policie to appease the multitude: and tolde them all,
he had newes to declare them,A policie of Arelatensis. wherewith they were mar∣uellous attentiue, and kept great silence. Eugenius messen∣gers (saith he) hath filled all Fraunce, preaching a new doc∣trine, extolling the authoritie of the Bishop of Rome aboue the sacred councell, and therefore the Councell must of ne∣cessitie prouide remedy: and to conclude, at the least vppon the three first verities, which the Fathers had doone, euen as I also (saith he) doo here conclude, in the name of the Fa∣ther, Sonne, and Holy ghost. And when he had finished his oration,Arelatensis concludeth. with a chéerefull and mery countenance, rising vp he departed: some of thē kissed him, some of them kissed the skirtes of his garments, and commended his wisedome. It is reported, that Panormitane, when he came to his lodging, and was gone to his chamber, complained with teares, that hee had both wittingly and willingly impug∣ned the trueth. After this, there was a great consultation among the Eugenians, what was best to doe in this matter. Some thought to leaue the Councel, other some to tarry, & to resist, that nothing should farther be done against Eugenius: and this opinion remained among them. The next day after, being the 25. of Aprill, the Archb. of Lyons, and the Bishoppe of Burgen calling together the Prelates into the Chapter house of the great Church, began many things as touching peace. The Bishop of Burgen perswaded, that there should be deputations appointed that day, vnto whom, the Archbishop of Lions should geue po∣wer to make an agréement. Vnto whom it was said, there could be no agréemēt, before the aduersaries confessed their fault, and desired pardon therefore. Anon after, the Fathers of the Councel had drawen out a forme of a decrée vpon the former conclusions, and had approued the same in the sacred deputations. By this time the Princes Orators were re∣turned from the assemblie at Mentz: and holding a Councel among them selues, they had determined to let the decrée.
The 9. day of May, there was a generall conuocation holden, wherevnto all men resorted. The princes Embassa∣dors were called by the B. of Lubecke, & Conrade de Win∣sperg the proctor, into the quire, and there kept: where they tarried so long, that (the forme of the decree beyng appoin∣ted to be concluded that day) the Cardinall perceiuing the cōgregation to be full, and that the twelue men had agréed, and that there was great expectation with silence, thought good not to delay it for feare of tumult, but commaunded by and by the publike Concordances to be read. Wherein this was also contained, that the Cardinall Arelatensis might appoint a Session, whensoeuer he would: which ha∣uing read, and beyng desired by the promoters, concluded as the manner and custome is. Whereof when the Princes Embassadors which were in the quire vnderstood, they brake of their talke, and beyng much vexed, they imputed all to the B. of Lubecke,The Bishop of Lubecke. which of purpose had kept them in the quire, and protracted the time. Wherevpon they entring into the congregation, filled the house full of cōplaints, & greatly blamed Arelatensis: which diuerse others did also, especially the bishop of Millane, rai∣ling vpon him, calling him another Catiline, vnto whom all desperate and naughty persons had refuge. To whom after Arelatensis had made answere, he com∣maunded the forme of the decree to be read. Then Panor∣mitane and those that were of his part, would needes haue a certaine protestation first to be read. There was great con∣tention on euery side: notwithstanding, at the last, Arela∣tensis preuailed, and the forme of the decrée was read vnto this word Decernimus, that is, we decrée. Then Panor∣mitane rising vp, would not suffer it to be read any further, and the Bishop of Patauia said, that it was vncomely, that Arelatensis with a few Bishops by name, should conclude the matter: the like did also all they that fauoured Panor∣mitane. The Cardinall of Terraconia also did grieuously
rebuke his partakers, that they did not reade the protesta∣tion: and commaunded one of his familiars to read it. But the fathers of the Councell would not giue place to the rea∣ding of the protestation. Which when Albinganēsis did con∣sider, hée commaunded the writing to be giuen vnto him, and as he began to speake, suddēly Arelatensis rose vp, with a great number of the Fathers to depart: but by the means of George the Prothonotary of Bardaxina, the multitude which were departing, were called backe againe, and the Cardinall and the Patriarch were required to sit downe a∣gaine, and that they should not leaue the church void & quiet for the aduersaries: wherevpon suddenly all the whole mul∣titude sat downe, and the gates were shut againe. In the meane time Matthaeus Albinganensis a B. read the protestation, to none else but to himselfe alone, for it could not be heard for noise: which being ended, the Lum∣bards and Cathelans confirmed the protestation: and after∣ward by reason the Cardinall of Terraconia said, he agréed to that dissention, because the Embassadors of his king dis∣sented from them, with him almost all the Arragons, Lom∣bards, & Cathelans departed: all the other taried still. So A∣relatensis seing the cōgregation quiet, willed the cōclusions & forme of the decrée to be read againe (There remained in the congregation the Embassadours of the Empyre, and of France, talking together of their affaires) Notwithstanding the B. of Turnon heard mention made of the conclusions, & turning himselfe to the B. of Lubecke, said: Lo the matters of faith are now in hand againe, let vs go hence I pray you, that we be not offence to others, or that we be not said to dissent from the Embassadors: the B. of Lubecke answered tary father,The Bishop of Lubecke fauo∣reth the truth. tary here: are not the conclusions most true? why, are you afraid to be here for the truth? Arelatensis after all things were read, which he thought necessarie, at the request of the deputies concluded: and so making an end, dismissed the congregation.
After this, it was determined betwéene the Lombards, & Arragons, to abstaine from the deputations for a certayne time. Which they did not long obserue: notwithstanding the deputations were holden very quietly for a certaine space, neither was there any thing done worthy of remembrance, vntill the 15. day of May. During which time, al means pos∣sible was sought to set a concord betwixt the fathers, but it would not be. Then Nicholas Amici required Arelatensis, to appoint a Session against the morrow after: which he did according to his motion. The B. of Lubecke made protesta∣tion in his owne name, and in the name of his protector, that he would not consent, that there should be any session, if it should in any part derogate frō the agréement had at Mentz. George Miles also, his fellow Ambassador, consented to this protestation: but the protector of the Councell would in no case consent vnto the protestation of the B. of Lubecke, and saide, that hee did not know any thing of their doinges at Mentz. After the other, the Bishop of Concense made his prote∣station, and after him followed Panormitane, who reproued the promoter of the faith, because he required the prelates to haue a session, and instantly required, there might be no ses∣sson as yet holden. Vnto whom, Arelatensis answered: that the promoter of the faith,The promoter of the faith. ought by his office to call the prelates to deter∣mine a matter of faith; especially, for so much as the depu∣tation of the faith and the whole Councell had so giuen him in commaundement: and further, confuted Panormitane, and required him to consider, in this standing for Eugenius, whether he spake according to his conscience, or not: for (saith he) ye conclusiōs which now shalbe decréed, are most general, neither is there any mētion in them of the pope, & moreouer, the veritie of faith is contained in them, against the which, if Eugenius did contend, it were more méete, that the pope should be corrected, then the veritie omitted. And thus hée
making an end, all were warned to come the next day to the Session. When the 16. day of May was come, all they whom the Session pleased, assembled at the houre: the Ambassadors al∣so of the princes were come together into the Church quire, to attempt further what they could doe: and sending the Bi∣shops of Lubeck, and Concense, and the Deane of Turnon, an excellent learned learned man, they offered themselues to be present at the Session, if the deposition of Eugenius might be deferred yet 4. moneths: who when they had recei∣ued a gētle answere of Arelatensis, and the other principals, returning againe, the Ambassadours would haue onely the first conclusion decréed: and therevpon sent againe vnto A∣relatensis, vnto whom answere was made, that the chiefe force did consist in the two other conclusions,, and that the Councell would specially determine vpon them: with which answere they departed, and the Session began to be cele∣brated, and Arelatensis caused prayers and lamentations to be made,Praiers with teares. with lamentations and teares, that God would di∣rect them. Although there were not many Bishops, yet all the seates were filled, with Bishops, Proctors, Archdeacōs, Presidents, Priors, &c. to the number of 400. or more, all in great peace, exhorting one another to the profession of the faith. The B. of Massilia, a Noble man, read the decrée, which was attentiuely hearkened vnto, and not one worde interrupted: when it was ended, Te Deum laudamus was song, with great ioy and gladnes: and so the session dissol∣ued, which was the 33. Session; and amongst all the rest, most quiet and peaceable.The 33. session most quiet. The day following béeing the 22. of May, the Princes Ambassadours,The Princes Ambassadours yeelded. without al mens expectatiōs (it was thought béeing touched with remorse of conscience, euen now to de∣test, and abhorre that which they had done before) came vn∣to the generall congregation, and excused themselues of their absence: namely, the Bishoppe of Lubecke, and
the Bishop of Turnon: who, after he had made an end, Car∣dinall Arelatensis gaue thankes to God, that had so defen∣ded his Church, &c.Eugenius deposed. Hauing declared the necessitie of the de∣crée, he rose vp, and the Congregation was dissolued. Now, after that Gabriel Condulmarius, called Eugeni∣us the fourth, was deposed from the Bishopricke of Rome, by the aduise of Iohn Segonius, they stayed two monethes, before they procéeded to elect another Pope. In the meane time, Letters were sent to the Princes, to declare the depo∣sing of Eugenius, by the Sinode: & to publish it abroade. During this time, many died of the pestilence,Death of the pestilence at the Councel. at the coū∣cell: as, Ludouicus, the Prothonotarie, Ludouicus, the Pa∣triarch of Aquileia, the Abbot of Doxa. About the same time, died also the K. of Arragons Almo∣siner, in Switzerland, the Abbot of Virgilia, at Spire, and Iohn, the B. of Lubeck, betwéene Vienna and Buda. Yet, Arelatensis would not depart, but kept constant, and helde out the Councel. And after that the time of the decrée was passed, and Gabriel deposed, the Fathers procéeded to the e∣lection of another P. And first of all, they nominated those that (together with the Cardinals) should elect the Pope. The first, and principall of the Electors, was Cardinal A∣relatensis: the rest of the Electors were chosen out of the I∣talian, French, Germaine, and Spanish Nations. The next day after there was a Session holden, where∣in Marcus, a famous Diuine, made an Oration, and recko∣ned vp the manifolde vices of Gabriel, and described what kinde of man he ought to be that should succéede: euen one quite contrarie vnto him in all respects. The Electors re∣ceaued the Communion together, and afterwarde tooke their oath,Thoe ath that the Electors of the Pope take. and the Cardinall Arelatensis (opening the booke of Decrées) read the forme of the oath in the audience of all men, and first of all tooke the oath himselfe: which was, that hee woulde onely haue respect to the saluation of Christes people, and profite of the vniuersal church: and after him, in
like manner, all the other Electors did take their oath: then they went with great solemnitie vnto their conclaue, where they remayned seuen dayes. The manner of their election was on this sort. Before the Cardinals seate was set a deske, wherein there stoode a Bason of siluer.The manner of electing the pope. Into the which Bason, all the Electors did cast their Schedules: which the Cardinall receiuing, read one by one, and foure other of the Electors wrote as he did reade them. The tenure of the Schedule was in this manner. I George, Bishoppe of Vienna, doe choose such a one, or such a one, for Bishoppe of Rome, and peraduenture na∣med two. Euery one of the Electors subscribed his name vnto the Schedule, that he might thereby know his owne, and say nay, if it were contrarie to that which was spoken: whereby all deceit was vtterly excluded. The first scrutinie thus ended, 17. of diuers nations were nominated: notwithstanding, Amideus, D. of Sauoy (who had béene married, a man of singular vertue) surmounted them all: for in the first scrutinie he had the voice of 16. E∣lectors. In the next scrutinie, which was holden in ye nones of Nouember, he had 21. voices, and so likewise in the 3. and 4. scrutinies. And forasmuch as there was none in all the scrutinie, found to haue two partes, all the other Schedules were burnt. And, because there lacked but one voice to the election of the high B. they fell to prayer, desiring God, that he would direct their mindes to the vnitie of the Church. Amideus, duke of Sauoy.The next scrutinie the matter was ended, and when the scrutiny was opened, it was found, that Amideus, the most deuout Duke of Sauoy, was chosen Pope. Then the Cardinall Arelatensis published vnto them the name of the elect Bishop. After this, they gaue thanks in the great Church, and declared the election again to the people, and hauing song an himne, departed. Amideus thus being elected about Nouember, was called
Felix v. and was crowned in the citie of Basil, the moneth of Iuly. And thus much hetherto touching the councell of Basill, which endured 17. yéeres. About the 6. yéere of the councell, Sigismund the Emp. died:Emp. Sigis∣mund dieth. after him succéeded his son in law, Albert second duke of Austrich, a sore aduersary of the Bohemiās: he was made Emp. an. 1438.  and raigned Emperour but 2. yéeres. After whom succéeded his brother Frederick 3. duke of Austrich. Now to returne to the Embassadors of the Bohemians, who came to the councell of Basill, the ninth of Ianuary, to whom when cardinall Iulian had made an vnpleasant ora∣tion, Rochezanus one of the Bohemians made also an ora∣tion, and required to haue a day appoynted to be heard, which was appointed the sixtenth day of the same moneth, Vpon which day Iohn RochezanusRochezanus. hauing made his Pre∣face, began to propound the first Article, touching the Com∣munion to be ministred in both kindes,Disputation vpon the Bo∣hemians ar∣ticles. and disputed vppon the same thrée daies, alwaies afore noone. Then VincelausVincelaus. the Thaborite, disputed vpon the second article, touching the correction and punishment of sinne, by the space of two daies. After whom VldericusVldericus. Priest of the Orphanes disputed vppon the third Article two dayes, touching the frée preaching of the word of God. Last of all Peter PainPeter Paine. disputed thrée daies, touching the ciuill dominion of the clergy, which was the 4. article. And afterward gaue copies of their disputations vnto the Councell in writing, with hartie thanks, that they were heard. The thrée last did somewhat inueigh against the councell, cōmending I. Husse, and I. Wickliffe for their doctrine.Rhagusius. The Bohemi∣ans offended. Wherto Iohn Rhagusius a Dalmatian, & a diuine, did so reply, that the Bohemians would néeds depart from Basill, & could scarsly be appeased. Certaine of ye Bohemiās would not heare Rhagusius finish his disputation, which endured vpon the first article 8.Popish dispu∣ters, against the Bohemiās. daies in the forenoone. After him Egidius Carlerius answered vn∣to the second article by the space of foure daies.
To the third article answered one Henricus, surnamed Frigidum Ferrum, thrée daies together. Last of all, one Io∣hannes Pollomarius, master of the requestes of the Palace, answered vnto the fourth article thrée daies together: so that the long time, which they vsed in their disputations, séemed tedious to the Bohemians. Notwithstanding this answere, the Bohemians still de∣fended their articles, and especially the first: in so much that Iohn Rochezanus did strōgly impugne Ragusinus answere by the space of 6. daies. But for so much as one disputation bred another, & it was not perceiued, how that means could make concord, the protector of the councell, William duke of Bauaria, attēpted to bring the matter to a friēdly debating: but agréement could there be none, for the Embassadors of ye Bohemians said: they came to propoūd those foure articles in the name of the whole kingdome of Boheme, & to speake no more. Wherevpon William the protector of the councell, found means that the councell decréed, to send a famous am∣bassade with the Embassadours of Boheme vnto Prage, whereas the people should assemble vpon the Sunday. And vpō 14.Embassadors from the coun∣cell to Prage. day of April, there were 10. chosen out of the coun∣cell, to go with the Bohemian Embassadors vnto Prage. After the cōming of these Embassadors much contention began to rise betwixt the parties. The Bohemians standing to their 4. articles, & refusing to yéeld, except they were first accepted of, or iustly reproued: which when ye Embassadors saw, they desired to haue these articles deliuered vnto them in a certaine forme, which they sent vnto the councell by 3. Bohemian Embassadors. Afterward the councell sent a de∣claration into Boheme, to publish vnto ye people in the com∣mon assemblies of the kingdome, by the embassadors which were commaunded to report vnto the Bohemians in the name of the councell, that if they would receiue the declara∣tion of those thrée articles, and the vnitie of the church, there should be a meane found, whereby the matter touching the
fourth article, of the communion vnder both kindes, should be passed with peace and quietnes. After the Bohemians had taken deliberation vpon these declarations, they said, they would giue no answere vnto the premisses, before they vnderstood what should be offred them touching the communion: wherto the councel: declared that licence should be giuen vnto the Bohemians, to cōmunicate vnto the people vnder both kinds,Licence to the Bohemians to cōmunicat vn∣der both kinds to such as bee of lawfull yéers, & discretion: this alwaies obserued, that the ministers shal say vnto those that communicate, that they ought firmly to beleue, not the flesh only to be conteined vnder the forme of bread, & the blood onely vnder the forme of wine, but vnder ech kind, the whole & perfect Christ. Moreouer, other doubts were so answered by the councel, that after much communi∣cation had to and fro, at last a concord was concluded, & con∣firmed by sentence of their handes. The Bohemians promi∣sed to receiue the peace, & vnitie of the church, and the decla∣ration of the 3. articles. This was done, ann. 1438.  about the feast of S. Martin. It was afterward agréed both by the Ambassadors of the Councel, and of the Bohemes, that whatsoeuer remained, should be determined, first at Ratispona, afterward, at Bru∣gain, in the dioces of Olymintus, then at Alba in Hungarie, before the Emp. Sigismund:Concord be∣twixt the Bo∣hemians and the Councel. but the matter coulde bee en∣ded in no place. At last, ye concord was concluded by writing, with their seales at Inglania, a citie of Morania: the 5. day of Iuly in the presence of the Emperour. Anno 1438. in the moneth of Nouember, the Bohemi∣ans put vp certain petitions to the Councel that it might be frée for al in Boheme, and the marquesdom of Morania, to communicate vnder both kinds. That they might haue good pastors. That the Gospels & Epistles, and Creed, might bée song in the vulgar tongue. That the Vniuersity of Prage might be increased by Prebends,The Vniuersi∣ty to be increa∣sed with Pre∣bends, &c. and certaine Benefices of cathedrall churches. That they would prouide for the refor∣mation
of the Churches of Boheme. To these demaundes, answeres were made ready by the Councell, but were kept backe, it was not knowne wherefore. At this Councel of Basil the 36. session holden the 17. day of September, ann. 1439.  the feast of the conception of our Lady, was ordained to bee holden, and celebrated yeerely. Likewise, in the 44.The feast of the conception of the virgin. Session of the same Councell, holden the first of Iuly, ann. 1441.  was ordained the feast of the visi∣tation of our Lady, to be celebrated yeerely in the moneth of Iulie. The feast of the visitation. Good lawes ordained in the councel of Ba∣sill.This Councel did ordaine diuers wholesome lawes for the Church, as, that méet ministers might be appointed in e∣uery church to shine in vertue & knowledge: wherto expecta∣tiue graces of benefices were an hinderance: and so tooke thē away, that no actions of controuersie should be brought to Rome, beyond 4. daies iourney from thence, & that no friuo∣lous appeales should be made to the Pope. That the Cardi∣nalles should not be of kinne to the pope, and not excéed the number of 24.24. Cardinals. Iewes to be conuerted. Stipend for the tongues. That the first fruites should no more be paid to the Pope. That meanes should be prouided for ye conuer∣sion of the Iewes. That the Hebrue, Gréeke & Latin tōgues might be mainteined, & stipends prouided for the teachers of them. Against priests kéeping of Concubines. During the life of Sigismund the Emperour, no man resisted this Councell, also during the time of Charles the seuenth, the Frenche King, the Councell of Basill was fully and wholly receiued through all Fraunce. After the death of Sigismund, when Eugenius was deposed, and Felix Duke of Sauoy elected Pope, greate discordes arose, and much practise was wrought, but espe∣cially, on Eugenius part: who béeyng nowe excommuni∣cate, by the Councell of Basill, to make his part more strong,18. new Car∣dinals. made eightéen newe Cardinalles. Then hée sent his Oratours vnto the Germanes, labouring by all meanes to dissolue the Councell of Basill.
The Germans were at that time so deuided, that some of them did hold with Felix, & the coūcell of Basill, others with Eugenius & the councell of Ferraria, & some were neuters. After this the French K. being dead, which was Charles the 7. about the yéere 1444. the Pope began to stirre vp the Dolphin of Fraunce by force of armes, to dissipate that councell collected against him. Who leading an armie of fiftéene thousand men into Alsatia,The Dolphin of France a∣gainst the coū∣cell of Basill is vanquished. did cruelly wast & spoile the countrie: after that laid siege vnto Basill, to expell and driue out the Prelates of the Councell. But the Heluetians with a small power did vanquish the Frenchmen, and put them to flight. Although Basill by the valiātnes of the Hel∣uetians was thus defended: yet the Councel could not con∣tinue, by reason of the Princes Ambassadors, which shronke away, & would not tarie: so that at length Eugenius brought to passe, partly through the helpe of Fredericke, labouring for the empire, and partly by his Orators (in the number of whom, was Eneas Siluius) among the Germanes, that they were content to giue ouer both the Councel of Basill, and their neutralitie. This Frederick of Austrich, being toward the Empire, brought also to passe, that Felix, which was chosen of the councel of Basil to be Pope, was contented to renounce, and resigne his papacy to Pope Nicholas, the 5.Pope Nicho∣las the 5. successor to Eu∣genius. Of the which Nicholaus, Frederike was confirmed at Rome to be Emperor, and there crowned, an. 1451. As these things were doing in Basil, in the mean season Eugenius brought to passe in his Conuocation at Florence, that the Emperour, and Patriarch of Constantinople, with the rest of the Grecians then present, were perswaded to receiue the sentence of the church of Rome,The Greekes abhorre the Romanes. concerning the procéeding of the holy Ghost. Also, to receaue the communi∣on in vnleauened bread, to admitte Purgatorie, and to yeld themselues to the authorttie of the Romish Church. Wher∣unto (notwtstāding) ye other churches of Grecia would in no
wise consent at their comming home. In so much that with a publike execration they did condemne afterward all those Legates that had consented to those articles, that none of them should be buried in Christian buriall: which was Anno 1439. Ex Gas. Pencer. 11. battels wonne by the Protestants against the Papists.Thus much concerning the councell of Constance, Ba∣sill, and the Bohemians, who in the quarrell of Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prage, fighting vnder Zisca their captaine, had eleuen battels with the popes side, and euer went away victors, Ex paral. Abb. Vrsp. in Epitap. Ioh. Zisc. Moreouer in the history of Pencer, it is testified that Pope Martin the 5. sending for the Bishop of Winchester the Cardinal, had leuied thrée maine armies, intending to ouercome all the Bohemians: one armie of th Saxons, vn∣der the Prince elector. The second of the Francons, vnder the Marques of Brandenburg. The third, of Renates, Ba∣uarians, and Swechers, vnder Otto Archbishop of Tre∣uers. With these, Sigismund also the Emperour, and Car∣dinall Iulian, the Popes Legate (who at last was slaine in warre: and béeyng spoyled of all his attire, was left naked in the fielde) ioyned all their force, who ioy∣ning together fiue times (sayth the storie) with fiue sun∣drie battailes, inuaded the Bohemians. At euery which battel 5. times, the said aduersaries (daunted with a sodain feare) ran away out of the field, before any stroke was geuē.Fiue times the papists ran away before any stroke was geuen. Gasp. Peucer. lib. 5. And so they continued inuincible during the life of Zisca, and Procopius: after whose death, Maynardus, a captaine, and a traytor to the Bohemians, found meanes, by a Pro∣clamation, made as though hee would warre against other Countreys of their enemies, bordering about them, craftely to traine all them which were disposed to take wages,Crueltie, and treason against the Bohemi∣ans. into certaine barnes, and houels, prepared for the same purpose: and so shutting the dores vpon them, set fire to them, and
burnt of them diuers thousandes, and so brought the rest by that meanes, vnder the subiection of the Emperor, during his life time: which lasted not long. Ex Aen. Sil. About the yere 1439.  the eightéene yere of the reigne of Henrie the sixt, one Richard Wiche,R. Wich. Priest, was burned at Tower hill. It is testified of him, that he, before his death, prophecied that the Posterne of the Tower shoulde sinke: which afterwarde came to passe. In so much, that the peo∣ple counted him for an holie man, and made their prayers to him after he was dead, and reared a great heap of stones, and set vp a crosse there by night: so that a great clamor ran vpon those that put him to death. For appeasing of which rumor, the king gaue commandement to punish all such as went thether on Pilgrimage. And by that meanes, the con∣course of people was stayed. He was burnt about the Mo∣neth of Iune. In the same yere about Nouember, Henrie, archbishop of Canterburie, called a Conuocation: wherein, the Pre∣lates tooke aduisement to make a Supplication to the king, for abolishing the law of Premunire facias. To which supplication the king made answer, he would pause vpon the matter, and in the meane time, hee woulde send to all his Officers, and Ministers in the Realm, that no such brief of Premunire should passe against any of them, til the next Parlement, an. 1439. About the yere 1440.  Eleanor Cobham, Dutchesse of Glocester, and Roger Only, Priest, were condemned: the one to perpetuall Prison,Duches of Glocest. con∣demned to perpetuall pri∣son. R. Only bur∣ned. Articles of D. Humfrey a∣gainst the Cardinall. (which was the Duchesse) for the profession of the trueth: and the other vnto death, (although treason were pretended against thē, of practising the kings death, which was not likelie: but rather, their profession, and the malice which the Cardinal of Winchester bare vn∣to the good Duke Humfrey, Duke of Glocester, who com∣playned of the Cardinal to the K. in 23. articles, as also, of the archb. of Yorke. That Winchester presumed to be Car∣dinall
against the mind of K. Henrie the fift. That he was in danger of Premunire, for bringing a Bul from Rome, to hold his Bishoprike though he were a Cardinal. That he enten∣ded himself to be the Kings gouernor. That hee defrauded ye King of his iewels, &c. The hearing of which accusations the K. committed vn∣to his Councel, whereof the most part were spirituall per∣sons,The destructiō of D. Hūfrey. so that nothing was said thereto. But vpon the necke of this, ensued the condemnation of the Duchesse, and with∣in six yeres after, the destruction of the Duke himselfe. Anno 1445.  H. Chichesly, Archb. of Canterbury, died, by whom the Ladie Eleanor the Duchesse, was condemned in S. Steuens Chappel at Westminster,Pennance. for penāce, to beare a taper through Chepesyde thrée sundry times, and after∣ward outlawed to the Ile of Man, vnder the custodie of Sir Iohn Standley knight. This Henrie Chichelesley builded in his time 2. Colled∣ges in Oxford the one called Alsoln colledge,Alsoln, and Bernard Col∣ledge of Ox∣ford. and the other called Bernard colledge. About the yeare 1447.  Henry Bewford Cardinall, and William de la poole duke of Suf∣folke with the Quéen, conspired duke Humfreyes death, & deuised how to trappe him: and for the more speedy furthe∣rance thereof a parliament was sommoned to be kept at Berry, far from the citizens of London: whither resorted all the Péeres of the Realme, and amongest them the Duke of Glocester, who on the second day of the Session was by the Lord Beumond high constable of England being accompa∣nied with the duke of Buckingham, and others arested, ap∣prehended,Duke Humf. imprisoned. and put in prison, and vpon the same, all his ser∣uauntes put from him: of whom 32 of the principall being also vnder the arrest were dispersed into diuers prisons. Af∣ter this arrest thus done, and the duke put into ward: the night after (saith Hall) sixe nightes (saith Fabian and Polychronicon) he was found dead in his bedde the twen∣ty fourth of February,D. Humfrey found dead in prison. and his Bodie shewed vnto the
Lordes and commons, as though hée had béene taken natu∣rally with some suddaine disease. This was the end of the good Duke, after he had politikely by the space of 25.Good Duke Humfrey. yéeres gouerned this realme. The next day after, the Cardinall died, an. 1448.  in great impatiencie, saying, fie, will not death be hyred, nor will mony doo nothing? &c.The desperate Cardinall. Mary Magda∣lens colledge in Oxford. After the Cardinall succéeded William Wainfleet, in the Bishopricke of Winchester, who founded the colledge of Mary Magdalene in Oxford. Anno 1450. William de la Poole, beyng accused of treason to the land, and indeuouring to flie into Fraunce, was encountred with a ship of warre, belonging to the tow∣er: whereby hée was taken, and was brought into Douer rode, and there on the side of a shipboat, one strake off his head: and this ende had the other of the good Dukes eni∣mies. The yéere 1450.  printing was first inuented, by one Ioh. Faustus, a goldsmith, dwelling first at Argentine, afterward a Citizen of Mentz:Printing in∣uented. who perceiuing the inuention to come wel to passe, made one Iohn Guttemberg, & Peter Scafford of his counsell: binding them by oath to kéepe silence for a while. After fiue yéeres, Iohn Guttemberg Copartner with Faustus, beganne then first to broch the matter at Strasborough, Vlricus Han, in Latin called Gallus, first brought it to Rome. This printing was after the inuention of gunnes, which were inuented in Germanie, an. 1380. 130. yeres.Printing later then gunnes 130. yeres. Anno 1453.  Constantinus Paleologus being Emperour of Constantinople, the great Citie of Constantinople was taken by the Turke Mahumet, after the siege of 54. dayes: which siege began in the beginning of Aprill. Within the citie (beside the Citizens) were but onely 6000.Constantino∣ple taken by the Turkes. rescuers of the Gréekes, and 3000 of the Venetians, & Genowayes. A∣gainst these, Mahumet broght an army of 400000. collected
out of the Countries and places adioyning néere about: as out of Grecia, Illyrica, Wallachia, Dardanis, Triballis, Bulgaris, out of Bithinia, Galatia, Lidia, Cicilia, and such other: which places had yet the names of Christians: thus one neyghbour for luker sake helped to destroy another.One neighbor destroyeth an other for gayne The Emperour Palaeologus séeing no way but to flée, ma∣king toward the gate, either was slayne or troden downe with multitude. The citie beyng thus got, the Turkes sac∣king and ranging about the streetes houses, and corners, did put to the sword most vnmercifully whosoeuer they found,Cruelty of the Turkes. both aged, and yoong, matrons, virgins, children, and infants, sparing none: the Noble matrons & virgins, were horribly rauished, the goods of the citie, and treasures in hou∣ses, the ornaments in Churches, were all sacked and spoy∣led, the pictures of Christ opprobriously handled, in despite of Christ. The spoile and hauocke of the citie lasted thrée dais together. These things thus being done, and the tumult ceassed, after thrée daies, Mahumetes the Turke entereth into the Citie, and first calling for the heads and ancients of the Citie, such as he found to be left aliue, he cōmanded to be mangled and cut in pieces. It is also saide (as the authour reporteth) that in the feasts of the Turkes, honest matrones and virgins, and such as were of the kings stocke, after o∣ther contumelies, were hewen and cutte in pieces for their disport. This end had the noble Citie Constantinople, which con∣tinued before flourishing equallie with Rome, 1120. yeres. Ex. Hist. Wittenberg. Peucer. After the death of Henrie Chichesley, next succéeded Ioh. Stafford, an. 1445.  who continued 8. yeres. After him came Iohn Kemp, anno 1453.  who sate but thrée yeres. Then succéeded Thomas Bursther. In the time of which archbishop, Raynolde Peacock, bi∣shop of Chichesley, was afflicted by the Popes Prelates, for his faith, and profession of the Gospel: and being cited vp to
Lambeth was caused to recant these points. That we are not bound by necessitie of Faith, to beléeue that our Lord Iesus Christ after his death descended into hell. That it is not necessarie to saluation, to beléeue in the catholike church. That it is not necessarie to saluation, to beléeue the com∣munion of Saints. That it is not necessary to saluation, to affirme the body materially in the Sacrament. That the vniuersall Church may erre in matters which pertaine to faith. That it is not necessary for the Church, to hold that which euery generall councell shall ordaine. With this Pe∣cocke, were diuerse mo condemned for heretikes: and not∣withstanding his recantation, he was deteyned still in pry∣son, where some say, he was priuily made away by death. Pope Nicholas 5. made Felix, who renounced his Pope∣dome vnto him, a cardinall: & crowned Fredericke for wor∣king the feat, and confirmed him to be full Emperour:The Emp. not Emp. but king of the Romans before the pope confirmed him. for before they be confirmed by the Popes, they are not Empe∣rours, but are called kings of the Romanes. This Pope for to get great summes of mony, appointed a IubileA Iubile. in the yéere 1450.  Also in his time one Math. Palmerius wrote a booke De Angelis, in defending whereof hée was condemned by the Pope, and burned at Crona, An∣no 1448.  Ex Tritemio. After him succéeded Calixtus 3.P. Calixtus. who amongst diuers other things, ordained both at noone & at euening the bel to toll the Auies, as it was vsed in ye popish time, to helpe the souldiers that fought against the Turkes:Auies doth helpe thē that fought against the Turkes. for which cause he ordained the feast of the transfiguration of the Lord,The feast of transfiguratiō. solēnising it with like pardons and Indulgences as was Corpus Christi day. Also, this pope procéeding contrary to the councels of Con∣stance and Basil, decréed that no man should appeale from the Pope to any Councell: by whom also S. Edmund of Canterbury, with diuers others were made Saints.S. Edmund of Canterbury made Saint. Next vnto Calixtus, succéeded Pius Secundus,Pius Secūdus Pope. otherwise called Aeneas Siluius, who wrote the 2. bookes of cōmenta∣ries,
vpō the councell of Basill, This Aeneas at the writing of these his bookes, séemed to be a man of indifferent & tolle∣rable iudgement and doctrine, from the which afterward being Pope, he séemed to decline and swarue, séeking by all meanes possible, to abolish the bookes which before he had written: & wheras before he preferred generall councels be∣fore the P. now being P. he did decrée,Pope Pius al∣tered his for∣mer iudgemēt. that no mā should ap∣peale from the B. of Rome to any councels: & likewise for priests mariages, whereas before he thought it best to haue their wiues restored, yet afterward he altered his mind o∣therwise. There was great discord betwixt this P. & Do∣rotheus archb. of Mentz: & vpō the same betwene Frederike the Palatine, & the duke of Wittenberg, with others: by oc∣casion wherof,Mentz looseth his freedome. besides ye slaughter of many, the citie of Mentz which was before frée, lost the fréedome & became seruile. The causes of the discord betwixt Pius and Dorotheus,Discord be∣twixt P. Pius & Dorotheus. were these: 1. Because that Dorotheus would not consent vnto him in the impositiō of certaine tallages & taxes with∣in his countrie. 2. For that Dorotheus would not be bound vnto him, requiring that the said Dorotheus being prince elector, should not call the electors together without his li∣cense. 3. Because hée would not permit vnto the Popes legates, to conuocate his Clergie together after his owne lust. This Pius began, Anno 1458. After Pius 2. succéeded Paulus Secundus, a pope wholy set vpon his belly,Paulus Secun∣dus Pope. and ambition, and a hater of all learned men. This Paulus had a daughter begotten in fornication, whom because he saw her to be therefore hated, began (as the stories report) to repent him of the lawe of the single life of Priestes,The pope for mariages of Priestes. Pope Sixtus 4. Stewes at Rome. The yeere of Iubile altered once againe. and went about to reforme the same. Ex Stanisl. Rutheo. After this Paulus, came Sixtus the 4. which builded vp in Rome a stewes for both kinds, getting thereby no smal rēts & reuenewes. This pope among other his acts, reduced the yéere of Iubile, from the 50. to the 25. He also instituted
the feast of the conception, and of the presentation of Marie, and Anna her mother, and Ioseph: also he canonized Bona∣uenture and S. Francis, for Saints. By this pope also were brought in beades,Beades & La∣dies Psalter. and he insti∣tuted to make our ladies psalter, through the occasion of one Alanus, and his order: who were wont (by putting beades vpon a string to number their praiers. This pope made 32. Cardinals in his time: of whom Pe∣trus Renerius was the first: who,A prodigall Cardinall. for the time he was Car∣dinal (which was but 2. yéers) spēt in luxurious riot 200000 Florens, and was left 4000. in debt. Weselius Groningensis, in a certaine treatise of his, de in∣dulgentijs Papalibus, writeth of this pope Sixtus: that at the request of this Peter Cardinal, and of Hierom his brother, he graunted vnto the whole family of the Cardinal S. Lucy, in the 3. hot moneths, Iune, Iuly, & August,Liberty for Sodomitry. frée liberty to vse Sodomitry: with this clause, Fiat vt petitur. That is, Be it as it is asked. Next after this Sixtus, came Innocentius the eight,Innocentius 8. Pope. a man verie rude, and farre from all learning. Amongest the noble actes of this Pope, this was one, that in the towne of Paulus Equicolus, hée caused 8. men, and 6. women, with the Lord of the place, to be apprehended, and iudged for he∣retikes, because they said that none of them were the Vicars of Christ, which came after Peter, but onely they which fol∣lowed the pouerty of Christ. Also he condemned of heresie, George, the K. of Boheme,King of Bo∣heme condem∣ned of the P. and depriued him of his kingdome, and procured his whole stocke, to be vtterly reiected: giuing his kingdom to Matthi∣as king of Pannonia. Anno 1461.  king Henry the 6. was deposed by Edward the 4. after he had raigned 38. yéeres and an halfe. Henry the 6. founded the colledge of Eaton,Colledge of Eaton. and another house, hauing then the title of S. Nicholas in Cambridge, and now called the kings Colledge. Ex scala mundi.
This king Henrie reiected the popes buls; which graun∣ted to Lewes, Archb. of Roane, the profites of the Bishop∣ricke of Ely, after the death of the Bishop, by the name of the administration of the said bishopricke. Anno 1461. (Henry the 6. being deposed) Edward the 4. was crowned king. An. 1471.  Vpon the assentiō eue, K. Henry being prisoner in the tower, departed this life, & was brought by Thames, in a bote to the abbey of Chertsey, & there buried. Polydor after he had described the vertues of this king, recordeth that king Henry the 7. did afterward translate the corpes of him from Chertsey, to Windsore: and addeth moreouer, that by him certaine miracles were wrought:Henry the 6. to be canonized a Saint, for suc∣cessiue change. for the which cause, Henry the 7. laboured with pope Iulius, to haue him canoni∣zed for a Saint: but the death of the king was the let. Ed∣ward Hall writing of this matter, declareth, that the cause of the let, was the excessiue fées, which were so great, of ca∣nonizing a king aboue any prelat, that the king thought best to kéepe his money in his chest. About the yéere, 1465.  There was here in England, a Frier Carmelite, who preached in Michalemas terme at Paules crosse, in London: that our Lord Iesus Christ was in pouertie, and did begge in the world. Which question was so stirred here, that it came to the Popes eares, Paulus 2. the next yere following: who eftsoons sent downe his bul, signifying to the Prelates, that this heresie, that pestiferous∣ly doth affirme,An heresie to hold ye Christ was a begger. that Christ did openly begge, was condem∣ned of old time by the Bishop of Rome, and his Councels: and that the same ought to be declared in al places for a dan∣gerous doctrine, and worthy to be troden downe vnder all mens féete. Anno 1473.  in August, one Iohn Goose, or Husse was condemned, and burned for the trueth, at Tower hil: so that, since the time of Richard the 2.Iohn Goose martyr. there was no king hitherto, in whose raigne, some godly man or other had not suffered
the paines of fire, for the testimonie of Christ. This godlie man being entertained in the Sherifes house, before he wēt to execution, desired some meate: and (eating) he said to those about him: I eat now a good and competent dinner, for I shall passe a little sharpe shower, before I go to supper. And hauing dined, he gaue thanks, and requested that he might shortly be led to the place where he should yelde his spirit to God. Ex Polychro. Anno 1437.  died Sigismund the Emperor, in Morania, after whom succéeded Albert, D. of Austrich, who in the se∣cond yere of his reigne died. After whom succéeded Frederi∣cus 3. Duke of Austria, an. 1440. After Fred. (vnto whome the Germanes complayned in vain of ye oppressions of ye P.) succéeded his sonne Maximiliā. An. 1476. the B, of Herbipolis, condemned, and burned for an heretike, one Iohn, a neat-heard,I. a neat-heard. because he held yt the life of the clergie was abhominable before God. Ex Munst. An. 1479.  one Ioh. de Wesalia, was forced to reuoke these articles, being greatly hated by the Thomistes.I. de Wesalia recanteth. That men he saued fréelie thorough méere grace, by faith in Christ. That frée will is nothing. That only the word of God is to be beléeued, and not the glosse of any man, or fathers. That the word of God is to be expounded, by comparing, & wey∣ing one place with another. That Prelates haue no power geuen them to expound Scriptures by any peculiar right, more than another. That mens traditions, as, fastings, par∣dons, feasts, &c. are to be reiected. That extreme vnctiō, & cō∣firmatiō, are to be reiected. That confessiō with satisfaction is to be reprehended. That the primacie of ye P. is vaine, &c. He was complained of by the Thomistes (who were re∣als, and greatly hated the nominals) vnto Diethrus,Nominais, Reals. archb. of Mentz. His articles being examined by the Diuines of Heydelberge, and Colen, were condemned, and he compel∣led to recant, Ex Ost. Grat. An. 1484. died P. Sixtus the fourth,  a very monster of na∣ture:
of whom writeth Platina, that vniustlie he vexed all I∣talie with warre and dissention. Agrippa wryting of him, saith, that among all the Baudes of these other later dayes, which were buylders of Brothelhouses, this Sixtus 4. sur∣mounted all other: who at Rome erected Stewes of double abhomination, not only of women, but also &c. Whereupon, no small gaine redounded to his cofers, for euery such common harlotte in Rome, paid to him a Iulie péece,Reuenes of the Pope from the stewes of Rome. the sum wherof grew in the yere somewhile to 20000 at length to 40000. duckets. He was a man rather borne to war, then to religion, as saith Carion, for he warred against Vitelius Tiphernates, against the Florentines, & Venetiās, whom he excommunicated, and absolued not till he died. Al∣so, against Colonienses, against Ferdinandus, K. of Apulia, and Duke of Calabria: also, against other nations and prin∣ces. Ex Ioh. Laziardo. This Sixtus was a speciall Patrone of begging Friers,Begging fri∣ers. granting them to enioy reuenewes in this world, and in the world to come euerlasting life. Among which Friers, there was one named Alanus de Rupe,Alanus de Rupe. a black frier, which made the Rosarie of our Ladies Psalter,The Rosarie of our Ladies Psalter. and erected a new frater∣nitie vpon the same, called Fraternitas Coronariorum,Fraternitas coronariorum per∣tayning to the order of the Dominikes: of which order, Ia∣cobus Sprenger, one of the condemners of Iohannes de We∣salia, was a great aduauncer: and especially this Sixtus the fourth, who gaue vnto the saide Fraternitie large Priui∣ledges. Concerning the institution of this Rosarie, there was a booke set forth, about the yere 1480.  In ye beginning where∣of it is declared,The institu∣tion of the Rosarie. that the blessed virgin entered into the Cell of Alanus, and was so familiar with him, that she did there espouse him for her husbande, and kissed him with her hea∣uenly mouth: opened vnto him her Pappes, and poured great plentie of her owne milke into his mouth. For the confirmation whereof, the saide Alanus did sweare déepelie,
cursing himselfe, if it were not, thus as he had made re∣lation. This booke being in Latine, & printed, beareth this title: Rosareae Augustissimae Christiferae Mariae Corona. And in the front it sheweth the name of Iodocus Bisselenis, a noble man of Aquine. After yt this pope Sixtus had vnderstanding, that Hercules Estensis duke of Ferraria, had ioined peace with Vene∣tians against his will, he was so gréeued thereat,Sixtus dieth for anger. Platina a shamefull flat∣terer of the Popes. that for rancor of mind, within fiue daies after he died. About which time also died Platina, a shameful flatterer, and bearer with the wicked liues of the Popes. Anno 1483. Edward 4. died, after he had raigned two and twentie yéeres, whom succéeded Edward 5. who with his brother Richard was slaine, by one Iames Tyrell. Iohn Dighton and Miles Forest,Richard 3. the vsurper. by the suborning of Richard the third, vsurper, who proclaimed himselfe King, Anno 1483.  in the moneth of Iune, & the sixt of Iuly was crow∣ned. Richard raigned but two yéeres and two moneths, be∣ing ouerthrowne of Henry 7. who succéeded him, an. 1485.Henry 7. king.  and raigned 23. yéeres and eight moneths. Anno 1494.  died Frederike, who had raigned 53. yéeres, after whom succéeded Maximilian his sonne, who raigned seuen yéeres wit his father Frederike. This Maximilian set vp the vniuersitie of Wittemberg,Maximilian the founder of the vniuersitie of Wittēberg. and was excellently well learned himselfe, & was the cause why diuerse gaue themselues to learning, namely to search∣ing out of Histories, whereto the Emperor was giuen him∣selfe, & wrote diligently in the Latine toonge his owne acts, as did Iulius Caesar. The men who florished by his meanes, were: Cuspinianus, Nauclerus, Cōradus, Pentingerus,Learned men flourished in Maximilianus time. Mā∣tius, & others. In that age also excelled Baptista mantuanus, Angel. Politianus, Hermolaus Barbarus, Picus Mirandula, and Franciscus his cosin: Rodulphus Agricola, Pontanus Philippus, Beroaldus, Marsilius Ficinus, Volaterranus, Georgius Valla, with infinite other.
Amongst whom also is to be numbred Veselus Gronin∣gensis, otherwise named Basilius, who was not long after Iohn de Wesalia: both much about one time, and both great fréends together. This Veselus died, anno 1490.  he was so notable and so worthy a man, that of the people he was cal∣led Lux mundi,Veselus a lear∣ned man called Lux Mundi the light of the world: he did disallow the popish doctrine, of confession and satisfaction, in the matter of repentance: likewise he did disproue both at Rome, and at Paris, purgatorie, supererogation of workes, and pardons, and Popes Indulgences: hée disalowed Masses and pray∣ing for the dead, and supremacie of the Pope: hée held that the Pope might erre: hée disalowed the great riches of the Clergie: that the Popes keyes doo not open, but shut heauen gates, &c. Not long after the death of this Weselus an. 1494.  and the 9. yéere of Henry the 7. the 28. of Aprill, was burned a very old woman,Ione Boughtō martyr. named Ione Boughton widdow, and mo∣ther to the Lady Young: which Lady was also suspected to be of the same opinion that her mother was. Her mother was foure score yéeres of age, and held eight of Wickliffes opinions, for the which she was burned in Smithfield. The night following that she was burnt, the most of her ashes were had away, of such as had loue vnto the doctrine for the which she suffered. An. 1497:  the 17. of Ianuary beyng Sunday, two men one called Richard Milderall, and the other Iames Sturdy, bare faggots before the procession of Paules,Fagots borne. and after stood before the preacher in the time of his Sermon. And the Sunday following stood other 2. men at Paules crosse, all the sermon time, one garnished with painted, and written papers, the other hauing a faggot on his necke. After that in Lent season, vppon Passion Sunday, one Hugh Glouer bare a faggot before the processiō of Paules, and after-with the faggot stood before the preacher all the Sermon while.
And on the next sunday following, foure men stood, & did their open penance at Pauls, and many of their books were burnt before them at the crosse. Anno 1498. in the beginning of May,  the king béeing then at Canterburie, there was a Priest burnt,A priest burnt. which was so strong in his opinion, that all the Clearks, and Do∣ctours, béeing there present, could not remoue him from his faith: whereof the King béeing informed, caused the priest to be brought before his presence: who, by his perswasions, coulde not cause him to reuoke, and so he was burnt imme∣diatly. Anno 1499.  a certaine godly man, and constant martir of Christ, named Babram,Babram mar∣tyr. was burnt in Norfolke, in the mo∣neth of Iuly, as Fabian reporteth: yet the printed Fabian re∣porteth it to be the yéere, 1500.  In the yéere next folow∣ing, the 20. day of Iuly, was an olde man, burnt in Smith∣field,An old man burnt. Sauanorola burnt. This yéere, Hieronimus Sauanorola, a monke in Italy, with two other Friers, named Dominicke and Siluester, which fauoured Sauanorolas learning, were condemned to death at Florence: the articles wherefore they suffred, were these. 1. Frée iustification by faith. 2.Articles. The communion vnder both kinds. 3. Indulgences & pardons of the pope, are of no effect. 4. For preaching against the filthie life of the cleargy. 5. For denying the Popes supremacie. 6.The Pope Antichrist. The keies were not giuen to Peter alone, but vnto the vniuersall Church. 7. That the Pope was Antichrist, because he did attribute more to his own indulgences, and pardons, then to Christs merites. 8. That the Popes excommunication is not to be feared. 9. That auricular confession is not necessary. 10. That he had moued the citie to vprore. 11. That he contēned the Popes citation. 12. That he had slandered the Pope. 13 That he said, Italy must be cleansed with Gods scourge, for the manifold wickednes of the Princes and Cleargy. They were first hanged vp openly in the market place, and after
burnt to ashes, and the ashes cast into the riuer of Arum, the 25. day of May, Ex Catalogo, testium Illirici. Spirit of pro∣phecy in Saua∣norola.This Ierome Sauanorola had the spirit of prophecie, and foreshewed many things to come, which fel out accordingly. He suffered vnder pope Alexander 6. About this time, was one Philip Norice,Philip Norice. an Irishman, professor at Oxford, long vexed and troubled for his profes∣sion of the trueth. The Germanes had twise before sued to Fredericke the Emperour,Suite of the Germans to ye Emperour a∣gainst ye church of Rome. to be a meanes to ease them of their manifolde grieuances, from the Church of Rome, and were repulsed: & now againe, made the same suite to Maximilian his sonne: vnto whom they deliuered x. grieuances,Ten grieuan∣ces. whereby ye Ger∣manes had béen long oppressed: shewing also remedies a∣gainst the same, with certaine aduisements, how the Emp. might auoide the popes subtleties. The grieuances were these: 1. That the Bishops of Rome, do at the request of e∣uery vile person, withstand the couenants of their predeces∣sors buls, priuiledges, &c. 2. That elections of Prelates are oftentimes put backe. 3. That election of Presidentships are withstood, notwithstanding the graunts haue béene pur∣chased before, to the Chapter houses. 4. That greatest eccle∣siastical dignities, are reserued for Cardinals, and head No∣taries. 5. That expectatiue graces, called Vowsons, are graunted without number. 6. That yéerely reuenewes are exacted without delay, or mercy: and oftentimes more extor∣ted then ought to be. 7. That rule of Churches is giuen at Rome, to such as are more fitte to kéepe mules, then to go∣uerne and instruct men. 8 That new pardons, with reuoca∣tion of the olde, are granted to scrape money. 9. That tēths are exacted, vnder pretence of making warre against the Turkes, when as no expedition doeth followe therevp∣pon. 10. That causes, which might be determined in Ger∣manie, are indistinctly carried to the Court of Rome. After these grieuances propounded, they subscribed the
remedies, and aduertisementes to the Emperour, where∣vppon the Emperour set foorth an Edict against certaine abuses of the Clergie.Edicts of the Emperour a∣gainst certaine abuses of the Clergy. That none should haue two Canon∣ships, &c. Against the couetousnesse of the Clergie: concer∣ning which reformation the Emperour required (as it sée∣meth) aduise of Iacobus Selestadiensis,Iacobus Sele∣stadiensis. who wrote vnto him concerning the matter. After Innocetius 8. succéeded Alexander 6.Pope Alex∣ander 6. which A∣lexander among other horrible things, when he was cōpel∣led to send Gemes or Demes, brother to Baiazetes the great Turke, to Lewes 11. the French king for a pledge, because the Frēch king should not procure the great Turkes fauour by sending his brother Gemes to him to be slaine,Pope hyred by the Turke to poison his bro∣ther. The P. procu∣red the Turke to fight against the French K. he béeing hired by the Turke, caused the same Gemes to be poisoned: who in his iourney, going toward the French king, died at Terracina, Ex Hieronymo Marcis. And the same Alexander the 6. taking displeasure with Lewes the French king, about the winning of Naples, sent to Baiazetes the Turk, to fight against Lewes. Ex eodem. Moreouer, this pope caused Antonius Mancinellus hāds, and tongue to be cut off, because he wrote an eloquent ora∣tion against his horrible life. At length, as he was sitting at Rome with his Cardinalles, and other rich Senatours, of Rome,The P. and his Cardinals poisoned. his seruaunts at vnwares brought to him a wrong bottle, whereby both he was poysoned, and his car∣dinals about him. After this Pope succéeded next Pius 3.P. Pius 3. Pope casteth away Peters keyes. about the yere 1503. After whom came next Iulius 2. a man more abho∣minable then all his felowes: who on a time when he wēt to warre, cast the keies of S. Peter into Tibris, saying, that for as much as the keyes of Saint Peter woulde not serue him to his purpose, he would take to himselfe the sworde of S. Paul. Of this Pope Iulius it is certainly reported, that, part∣lie with his warres, and partlie with his cursinges, within
the space of seuen yéeres,200000. Chri∣stians slaine by the Popes meanes. as good as 200000. Christians were destroyed: first he besieged Rauenna against the Ve∣netians, then Seruia, Imola, Fauentia, Foroliuinum, Bo∣nonia, and other cities, which he gat out of princes handes, not without great bloudshed. This Iulius tooke an oth when he was made Pope (as Iohn Sleidan maketh men∣tion) that he would haue a coūcell within two yéeres: which because he did not performe, nine of his Cardinals departed from him, and came to Millan, and there appointed a coun∣cell at Poyse:A councell at Poyse. among whom the chiefe were Bernardinus Crucenis, Guilielmus Prenestinus, Franciscus Constanti∣nus, with diuerse others: among them also were the pro∣curators of the Emperour Maximilian, and of Lodouike the French king. So the Councell was appointed, anno 1511.  to begin in the kalēds of September. They called this coun∣cel to accuse the Pope for certain crimes, and to depose him: whereof Iulius hearing, giuetn out contrary commandemēt, vnder great paine, no man to obey them: and calleth himself another councel against the next yéere, to bee begun the 19. day of Aprill. The French king vnderstanding, Pope Iulius to ioyne with the Venetians, and so to take their part against him, conuented a Councell at Thurim, in the moneth of Septē∣ber. In which Councell, these questions were propounded. 1 Whether it were lawfull for the Pope to moue warre a∣gainst any Prince without a cause.Questions a∣gainst the P. 2. Whether any prince (in defending himself) might inuade his aduersarie, and de∣nie his obedience. To which questions it was answered, both to be lawfull, and that the pragmatical functionPragamatical function. was to be obserued throughout all France. After this, the king sent vnto Iulius the answere of this Councell, requiring him, either to agrée to peace, or to ap∣poynt a generall Councell, where this matter might bee more fullie decided. Pope curseth the french K.Iulius would neither of these, but forthwith accursed Lu∣douike
the french king: and after much bloudshed,P. dieth. and mor∣tall warre, the pope died, an. 1513.  Februarie 21. A note touching the miserable persecution, slaugh∣ter, and captiuitie of the Christians, vn∣der the Turkes. THe beastly tirannie of the Turkes,Persecution vnder ye Turke aboue al the rest in∣comparablie, surmounteth all the afflictions, and cruell slaughters that euer were in any age, or read in any histo∣rie: especiallie by ye space of these latter 300. yeres. Whose crueltie hath béene such, that there is no place almost where they vanquished, that they did not, either slay all the inhabi∣tants thereof, or leade away the most part into such captiui∣tie, that they continued not long aliue: or els so liued, that death had béene vnto them more tollerable. And as in the time of the first pesecutions of the Roman Emperours, the saying was, that no man could steppe with his foote in Rome, but should treade vpon a Martyr: so it may be said, that almost there is not a Towne, Citie, or vil∣lage, in all Asia, Grecia, and also in a great part of Europa, and Affrica, whose stréetes haue not flowed with bloud of the Christians, whom the cruell Turkes haue murthered. Of whom are to be séene in histories, heapes of Souldiers slaine: of men and women, cut in péeces: of children, sticked vpon poles, and stakes: whom these detestable Turkes most spitefullie (and that in the sight of their parents) vse to gore to death. Some they drag at horse tailes, & famish to death: some they teare in péeces, tying their armes and legges to foure horses: other some they make markes to shoote at: vp∣on some they trie their swordes, how déepe they can cut and flash: the aged, and féeble they tread vnder their horses: wo∣men with childe, they rip their bodies, and cast the infantes into the fire, or otherwise destroy them. In their promises there is no trueth.
After the Citizens of Croya had yeelded, and were pro∣mised their liues, yet were they destroyed, & that horrible. In Mosia, after thee king had geuen himselfe to the Turkes hand, hauing promise of life, Mahumet slue him with his owne handes. The Princes of Rasia had both their eyes put out, with basins redde hote set before them. Theodosia, otherwise called Caphum, hauing had promise of safetie, be∣ing surrendred, was likewise destroyed. At the yelding of Lesbos, a number of young men and children, were put vp∣on sharpe stakes, and poles. At the winning of Hidruntum, a Citie in Apulia, the olde were troden vnder horses, ma∣trones, and virgins rauished, women with childe, cutte, and rent in péeces. The Archbishop of that Citie, an aged man, was cut in sunder with a woodden saw, &c. At the taking of Nigropontus otherwise called Calcides, anno 1471. the Turke (contrarie to his promise) most cru∣ellie caused all the youth of Italie to be pricked vpon sharpe stakes, some to bee dashed vpon harde stones, and other some to be cutte in sunder in the middest, and other mo, with other kindes of death to be consumed. In so much, that all the stréetes of Chalcides did flowe with the bloud of them that were slaine. At the winning of Constantinople, the Turke neuer rose from dinner, but he caused euery (day for his disport) thrée hundred Christian Captiues of the nobles of that Citie, to be slain before his face. So in Methone (af∣ter his Captaine Omardo had sent vnto him at Constanti∣nople, 500. prisoners of the Christians) he commanded them all to be cut, and deuided in the middle, and so being slayn, to be throwen out into the fieldes: Omares hauing likewise slaine all the Townesmen. In Seruia, the Prince of the Countrey being sent for, vnder faire pretence of wordes, and promises, to come and speake with the Turke, after he was come of his owne gen∣tlenesse, was apprehended, and had his skinne fleane off, and so was put to death. His Brother and Sister brought
to Constantinople in a triumph, and all the Nobles of his Country (as Faber addeth) had their eyes put out: and this was the manner of their cruelties towarde those they put to death. Other some he carieth into miserable captiuitie, for the Turke neuer cōmeth into Europe, to war against the chri∣stiās, but there followeth after his army a great number of brokers and merchants, such as buy men, and children, and sell them againe, bringing with them long chaines, in the them againe, bringing with them long chaines, in the which they linke them, by fiftie or thrée score together, such as remaine vnderstroied by the sword: whome they buy of them that spoile and robbe the christian countries, which is lawfull for any of the Turkes army to do: so that the tenth of the spoyle be reserued for the great Turke. Of such as remaine for tithe, if they bee aged, (of whom very few be kept aliue, because little profit comes of them) they be solde to the vse of husbandry, and kéeping of beastes. If they be young men or women, they be sent to certayne places there to be instructed in their languages, and artes, as shalbe most profitable for their aduantage, and such are called in their tongue Saris.Saris. And the first care of the Turks is this, to make them deny Christ, and to bee circumcised: and after that they are set, and appointed, euery man as he séemeth most apt, either to the learning of their lawes, or the feates of warre. Some are brought vp to be placed in the number of the Ianizaries,Ianizaries. who are the Turkes Cham∣pions. And if any of the young men, or children, shall ap∣peare to excell in beautie, him they so cutte, that no parte of that which Nature geueth, or man, remayneth to be séene in all his bodie, whereby (during the freshnes of his age) he is compelled to serue their abhomination: and when age cō∣meth, then they serue in stead of Eunuches to wayte vpon Matrones, or to kéepe horses and mules, or els to be sculliās and drudges in their kitchens. Such as be young maydens, and beutifull, are deputed for
concubines: they whiche bée of meane beautie, serue for to doo their drudgery worke in their houses, and cham∣bers: or els to spinne, or such other labours: but so as it is not lawfull for them either to professe Christians religion, or euer to haue any libertie: and thus are they vsed which fall to the Turke by tithe. The other which are bought and sold among priuate sub∣iects, first are allured with faire wordes, & promises, to take circumcision: which if they will doo, they are more fauoura∣bly intreated, but all hope is taken away from them, of re∣turning into their country: which if they but attempt, the paine thereof is burning. And if such come at length to li∣bertie, & will marrie, they may: but then their children re∣maine bond to the Lord, for him to sel at his pleasure: & ther∣fore few marry, of such as are wise, among them. They ye re∣fuse to be circumcised, are miserably handled amont them. Such captiues as be expert in any manuall art, or occupati∣on, can better shift for themselues: but they which haue no handicraft to liue vpon, are in worse case: and therfore such as haue béene brought vp in learning, or be noble men, and such other, whose tender education can abide no hardnes, are the least reputed of by him which hath the sale and kéeping of them: and no cost is bestowed vpon them, but they are ca∣ried about barehead, and barefooted, both sommer, and Win∣ter, in frost and snow: and if any be faint, or sick in the way, there is no resting for him in any Inne, but first he is driuē forward with whippes: and if that will not serue, he is sette peraduenture vpon some horse: and if his weaknes be such, that he cannot sitte, then is hee laide ouerthwart the horse∣backe, on his bellie like a calfe: and if he chaunce to die, they take of his garments, such as he hath and throw him into a ditch. Beside, in the way, they are all manicled by the hands, least they shoulde harme their leaders. For many times x. persons haue the leading of fiftie captiues: and when ye night
commeth, their féet also are fettered, so that they lodge in no house, but lie vpon the ground all night. The yoong women haue a little more gentlenesse shewed them, beyng carried in paniards on the day time: but when the night commeth, pittie it is, so heare the miserable cry∣ing out, by reason of the filthy iniuries they suffer by their carriers, in so much that the yoong tender age of six or seuen yéeres, as well of the one sex as of the other, can not saue them from the filthy villanie of the beastly Turkes. When the morning commeth, they are brought foorth to the mar∣ket to sale: where the byer (if he be disposed) plucking of their garments, veweth all the bones and ioyntes in their bodies. And if hée like them, he giueth his price, and car∣rieth them away into miserable seruitude; in so much that some Christian captiues haue béene yooked like Oxen to draw the plough. The mayde seruaunts likewise are kept in perpetuall toyle, in close places, where neyther they come in sight of any man, neither be they permitted to haue any talke with their fellowes seruaunts. Such as are com∣mitted to kéepe beastes, lie abroad both day and night in the wild fieldes, and at spare houres are employed also in han∣dy laboures. Out of these miseries there is no way for them to flée, e∣specially they that are carried into Asia beyond the seas:How the chri∣stian captiues vse to flee from their maisters. or if any doo attempt so to doo, hée taketh his time chiefly about haruest, when he may hide himselfe all day in the corne, or in the woods, or marishes, and find food: and n the night one∣ly hée fleeth, and had rather bée deuoured of Wolues, then to returne againe to his Maister. In their flying they vse to take with them an hatchet, and cordes: that when they come to the sea side, they may cut downe trées, and bind to∣gether the endes of them, and so where the sea Hellespon∣tus is narrowest, about Sestos and Abidos they take the Sea, sitting vppon trées: where if the winde and tyde doo serue luckely, they may cut ouer in foure or fiue houres,
but the most part eyther prish in the floudes, or are dri∣uen backe againe vpon the coast of Asia, or else be deuoured with wild beastes in the woods, or perish with hunger and famine. If any escape ouer the Seas into Europe, by the way they enter into no towne, but wander vpon the mountains, following onely the North starre for their guide. As touching such townes and prouinces, as are wonne by the Turkes, & wherein Christians are suffred to liue vn∣der tribute: First of all nobilities there they kill, & make away the churchmen and clergy: hardly they spare the chur∣ches;How ye Turke vseth the chur∣ches of christi∣ans vnder his subiection. but bels and all the furniture thereof, either they cast downe, or els turne to their blasphemous religion, leauing to ye christians certaine blind old chappels, which when they decay, it is permitted to repaire them again, for great sums of mony giuē to the Turke: neither be they permitted to vse any open preaching, or ministration, but onely in silence, & by stealth to frequēt together. Neither is it lawfull for any christian to beare office within the citie or country, nor to beare weapon, nor to weare any garment like the Turkes: and whatsoeuer blasphemy be spoken against Christ, it must be borne with silence: or if one speake a word against the Turkes religion, he shall be forced to be circumcised, and then if he speake one word against Mahomet, he shall be burned. And if a Christian being on horsebacke, doo méete or passe by a Masselman, that is a turkish Priest, he must light from his horse, and with a lowly looke doo reuerence to him: or if he doo not, he is beaten downe from his horse with clubbes and staues. Tribute payed of Christians to the Turke.For their tribute they pay the fourth part of their sub∣stance & gaine to the Turke, beside the ordinarie tribute of the christians, which is to pay for euery head within his fa∣milie a ducket vnto the Turke: which if the parents cā not do, they are cōpelled to sell their childrē into bondage: others not able to pay, go chayned in fetters from dore to dore
begging, to make vp their paiment, els must they lie in per∣petuall prison: and yet notwithstanding, when the Christi∣ans haue paide all dueties, it remaineth frée for the Turkes to take vp, among the Christians children, whom they best like, and them to circumcise, and to carry them away, being yong, from the sight of their parents, into farre places, to be brought vp in the popes warres: so that they may not re∣turne to them againe, but first are taught to forget Christ, & then their parents. And albeit, the same children doe after∣ward greatly degenerate from the faith of Christ, yet many of them haue priuily about them, the gospel of S. Iohn writ∣ten: In principio erat verbum, &c. in Gréeke and Arabicke, for a remembrance. And thus much touching the misery vnder the Turkes, and their cruelties. In the yéere 1499.  in the time of one Perseuell, manie were taken for heretikes in Kent,Fagots borne. and at Paules Crosse they bare fagottes, and were abiured: and shortly after the same yéere, there went thirtéene Lollardes afore the procession in Paules, and there were of them eight wo∣men, and a young ladde, and the laddes mother was one of the eight; and all the thirtéene bare fagots on their necks be∣fore the procession. Ann. 1506,  in the dioces of Lincolne, in Buckinghāshire, William Smith being B. of the same dioces) one William Tilseley was burned at Amersham, in a close,William Tilse∣ley a martyr. called Stane∣ly: at which time, one Ioan Clark, a married woman, which was the onely daughter of the said Tilseley,Cruelty a∣gainst nature. & a faithful wo∣man, was compelled with her owne hands to set fire to her father. And at the same time, her husband Ioh. Clarke, did penance at her fathers burning, and bare a fagot, as did also 20. mo: which afterward were compelled to weare certain badges, & went abrode to do penance,Penance. as to Buckinghā,William Page burned in the cheeke. Ay∣lesbury, & other townes nigh: and also diuers of these men were afterward burned in the chéeke: as William Page, &c. Some report, that sixtie were put to beare fagots for
their penance: of whom diuers were inioyned to beare, and to weare fagots at Lincolne, 7. yéeres together, &c. In which number, was also, one Robert Bartlet, a rich man: who for his profession sake, was put from his Farme and goods, and was condemned to bee kept in the monastery of Ashrige, where he ware on his right sléeue, a square péece of cloth, 7. yeeres together. About the same time, of the burning of William Tilseley, (as the Amersham men doe say, or the next day after, was one father Roberts burnedFather Ro∣berts burnt. at Buckingham. He was a mil∣ler, and dwelled at Missenden: and at his burning, there was aboue twenty persons,Fagots borne. that were cōpelled to beare fa∣gots, and to do such penāce, as the wicked pharisées did com∣pell them. After that, by the space of two or thrée yéeres, was bur∣ned at Amersham, Thomas Barnard,Thomas Bar∣nard. a husbandmā, & Iames Morden,Iames Morden a labourer: they two were burned at one fire. And there was William Littlepage, burned in the right chéeks, & Father Rogers, and Father Reuer, aliâs Reiue, which after was burned. Also, there were 30. mo, that were burned in their chéekes, and bare fagots at the same time. Father Ro∣gers was in the Bishoppes prison, fourtéene wéekes toge∣ther, night and day: and was so cruelly handled with colde, hunger, & yron, that after his comming out of prison, he was so lame in his backe, that he could neuer go vpright, as long as he liued. Anno 1506.  Thomas ChastTho. Chast. of Amersham, was (after o∣ther great afflictions) strangled in the Bishoppes prison, in Wooburn, vnder W. Smith, B. of Lincolne, and was bu∣ried of the wicked wretches, in ye wood, called Norland wood, in the high way betwixt Wooburn and litle Marlow: to the intent he should not be taken vp to be séene. Tho. Norice martyr.Anno 1507.  one Thomas Norice was burnt, for the te∣stimonie of the trueth, at Norwich, being condemned by the B. the last day of March.
Anno 1508.  Elizabeth Samson, of the Parish of Alder∣manburie, was compelled to abiure, before Master Willi∣am Horsey, Chaunceller to the Bishop of London. Shee spake against pilgrimages, worshipping of Images, and the Reall presence. About this time was burned Laurence Glest,L. Glest. mar∣tir. at Salis∣burie, after they had kepte him in prison two yeres, for the matter of the Sacrament. At whose burning, William Rus∣sell was burned in the chéeke. After this, there was a godly woman burnt at Chipping Sudburie, by the Chaunceller Doctor Whittington: who,A woman burnt. after she was burned, and the people returning homeward, a Bull brake loose from a Butcher, that was in hande to haue slaine him, singled out Doctor Whittington from all the people, and (hurting neither olde nor young) tooke him alone, gored him thorough and thorough, carrying his guts,Gods iudge∣ment. and trayning them with his hornes all the stréetes ouer, to the great admiration of all the people. This is testified by diuers credible witnesses. An. 1485.  The ix. of March, amongest other good men in Couentrie, these nine hereunder named, were examined, be∣fore Iohn, bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield, in S. Michaels church, and recanted. Iohn Blumston, for holding against purgatorie, & images. Robert Crowther, for the matter of the Sacrament, the authoritie of the keyes, and Images. Iohn Smith, for the Lords prayer, & Créed in English. Robert Brown, for images, flesh-eating in Lent, purga∣torie, auricular confession, and satisfaction. Thomas Butler, for purgatorie, and merites. Iohn Falkes, for images, and that he did eate Cowmilke the first sunday in Lent, &c. Richard Hilman, for the scripture in English; for the mat∣ter of the sacrament, &c. In the yere of our Lord 1488.  the thirde of April, Mar∣gerie
Goit, wife of Iames Goit, was constrayned by Iohn, B. of Couentrie and Lichfield, to recant concerning the re∣all presence. In the raigne of K. Henrie 7. liued Iohannes Picus, earle of Mirandula. He comming to Rome, booted and spurred, set vp 90.Picus Mirand. to dispute in the same with any in Christendome, whosoeuer would come against him. Of the which, diuers were touching the matter of the Sacrament: against whom, none in all Europe was found to dispute. But the Prelates (appointed by the Pope) consulted to en∣quire vpon his Conclusions.90. Conclusiōs to be disputed on by Picus. Whereupon they did articu∣late against him, for suspition of heresie. He died, being of the age of 32. of great learning. In his sicknes Charles the eight French king, (moued with the fame of his learning,) came to visit him.The furniture of Mirandulas Studie. The furniture of his bokes cost him 7000 Florens. A little before his death he was minded to geue al away, and to take a Coule, to goe about and preach. With two Popes, that is, with Pope Innocent, and Alexander 6. he had much vexation. The names of the Archbishops of Canterbury, in this sixt booke continuing. 62 Iohn Stratford, eight yeres. 63 Iohn Kemp, thrée. 64 Thomas Burchier, thirty thrée. 65 Iohn Morton, four∣téene. 66 Thomas Langton ws elected Archbishop, and died before he was confirmed. 67 Henrie Dene, two. 68. William Warrham, twenty eight. A briefe note of Ecclesiastical Lawes, ordeyned by cer∣taine auncient kings of this land, for gouernment of the church, before the Conquest. Lawes of K. Iuas, or Iua. That Ministers should frame their conuersation accor∣ding to the forme in lawes prescribed.
That Infants should be baptised within thirtie dayes. That no man should labour on the Sunday. Also hée esta∣blished immunitie of Churches and Sancturarie, and tooke order for the true payment of Church duties, and of the first fruites of all that was sowen, to be paid at the day of S. Martin. Anno 712. Lawes of king Alured or Alfred. He enlarged the priuilege of Sanctuarie: hée laid dou∣ble paine vppon such as committed offences in the solem∣nities of certaine feastes: also against them that commit∣ted Sacriledge: hée made a law against Priestes commit∣ting murder: also he made a law against whoredome, ad∣ultery, and fornication:he appointed daies of fasting, and ceasing from labour. Item, he set order for making and kée∣ping of vowes. Ecclesiasticall lawes of king Edward the Elder, and Githine the Dane king. They agréed vpon the sanctuary: they forbad paganisme: they laid punishment vpon the Clergie, committing theft, periurie, or murder, fornication, or any capitall crimee: they made a law against all buying selling, and labour vpon the Saboth. Item, that no execution be doone on the Sunday: also against witches, and sorcerers. Lawes of king Ethelstane. Anno 924. He commaunded that euery village of his owne, should giue a mōthly Corrody to a poore person. That 50. psalmes should be soong daily for the king, &c. He also ordained pu∣nishment for witches, and sorcerers, &c. Lawes of king Edmund. Anno 94. He prouided lawes against ye vnchast liuing of churchmē:
He made lawes cōcerning tithes, first fruites of euery mans crop, and almesse mony duely to be paid: that Bishops of their owne charges should repayre churches, and admonish kings for furnishing of the same. For periurie also, and figh∣ting within the Church. Lawes of King Edgar. Anno 959. He ordained that Sunday should be kept holy, from Sa∣terday at noone till Munday morning: also concerning frée∣dome and liberties of the Church tithes, first fruits of corne, and paying of Peter pence. For holydaies and fastingdaies. That Synodes should be kept twise euery yéere, whereat as well the Bishop of the Dioces, as the ciuill magistrate should be present. King Canutus. 1016. That ecclesiasticall persons beyng accused of fighting, murder, or any other offence, should answere to their pur∣gation therein. That Priestes should be disgraded for per∣iurie, and put in sureties of good behauiour: hée limited the degrées of marriage: he commaunded touching the Sab∣bath day, that which Edgar did before: he commaunded eue∣ry christian to come to the housell thrise euery yéere at least. That they inquire and search after Gods lawe and com∣maundementes. That euerie Christian vnderstand the points of his faith: at least that he learne perfectly the Lords prayer, and Créede, els to be excluded from the Eucharist, and vndertaking for others at Baptisme. That Bishops and Priestes should doo their duties. That at the court of euery shire the Bishop of the Dioces shall be present with the Sheriffe, and that the one shall teach them Gods lawe, and the other mans.
King Henry 7. finished his course of life, 1509.  after whō succéeded his sonne, Henry 8.Henry 8. and shortly after married La∣dy Katherine, the daughter of Ferdinandus,K. Henrie 7. dieth. his late brother Prince Arthurs wife, by the dispensation of pope Iulius, and the requests of Ferdinandus her father. At this time was renewed the old strife betwixt the Do∣minicke fryers, & the Franciscans,Old strife be∣twixt the Do∣minicks and Franciscans. about the conception of ye the virgin Mary: the Franciscans held, that the virgin was without original sinne, the Dominicks were of the contra¦ry mind. Ann. 1476. Pope Sixtus 4. ioyned with the Franchiscans,The feast of the virgin Maries conception. & ordayned a solemnization of the feast of the virgins conception, offering all men & women, which would heare masse, & seruice, from the first euensong of the same feast, to the Octaues of ye same, as many daies pardon, as Pope Vrban 4, and Martin 5 did graunt for hearing seruice of Corpus Christi day. He made also an addition to the Aue Marie,An addition to the Aue Mary. graunting pardon of sins to all that would with the same addition, pray vnto the Vir∣gin. The addition is: and blessed is Anna thy mother, of whom thy virgins flesh hath procéeded without blotte of ori∣ginal sinne. This did pope Sixtus afterward, that the Domi∣nicks might conforme themselues thereto, confirme with a bull: dated 1483. whereby the Dominicks were compelled to giue to the virgin euery night an Antheme in praise of her conceptiō, and to subscribe to the Franciscane doctrine.The virgin Mary concei∣ued without sinne. Although the greatest number of the schoole Doctors, were of the contrary faction, Petrus Lombard, Thomas Aquinas, Bernardus, Bonauenture, &c. After the renewing of this dissention, ann. 1509.  certaine of the Dominicks deuised a certain image of the virgin, that they might make to stirre, to make gestures, to complain,Sleight of Friers. to wéep, to grone: & by their deuises, to make answere to them, that asked: for which déede, the false friers were taken & bur∣ned at Bernes the same yéere: Peucer, Munster, Carion, &c. Their names were, Iohannes Vetter, Franciscus Vliscus,
Stephanus Balisthorst, and Henricus Steinegger. Pope Iulius was condemned, an. 1510.  in the councel of Turon in France, an. 1512.  being vanquished of Lewes the French K. about Rauenna: & on Easter day the next yere di∣ed:Pope Leo. after whom succéeded Leo the 10. It appeareth by the registers of Richard Fitziames, in the dioces of London, that betwixt the yéere 1509. & 1527. de∣uers persons were compeleld to abiure, for denying to wor∣ship ye Crucifix, for transubstantiation, holy daies, pilgrima∣ges,Abiuration. adoration of images, speaking against the immoderate riches of Churchmen, the reading of English bookes: for de∣nying, a priest to haue two benefices, &c. Ann. 1511.  the 18. of October, William Sweeting & Iohn Banister, who before had recanted: receiuing farther strēgth from God,William Swee∣ting, and Iohn Banister, mar∣tyrs. were burned in Smithfield, for the testimony of the trueth: which was concerning the reall presence. Ann. 1517.  one Ioh. Brown, who had born a fagot before, in the daies of K. Henry 7. was burned at Ashford, for ye pro∣fession of the truth,Iohn Browne martyr. condemned by Archb. Warrham, first ha∣uing had his féet burned to the bones by Warrham & Fisher, bishops, to compell him to deny the trueth. Ann. 1514.  one Richard Hunn, merchant tailor in the city of London, was priuily made away, and hanged in the Lol∣lards tower,Rich. Hunn. for the trueth: and after his death, to make him more odious, they picked certaine articles against him, out of the preface of his English Bible. This was done by one Doct. Hedd. The 20. of Decemb. the dead corps of Richard Hunn was burned in Smithfield: first hauing condēned it of heresy, (after they had hanged him in prison secretly) is bodie was burned, 16. daies after his murdering. But the matter hauing bin fully examined by the councel, & iudges, and iustices of the realme: it was found by good proofe, and sufficient euidence, that D. Horsey the Chancelor,D. Horsey the Chancelor. Charles Ioseph the Summer, and Iohn Spalding the hel-ringer, had committed the murther But by the suited of the Bishop of
London vnto the Carinall Woolsey, at the gaole deliuery, the next Sessions, the kings attourney pronoūced the iudge∣ment against Horsey to be fales, and him not to be guilty of the murther. An. 1518. the 24. of September,  Iohn Stilman who had before recanted 11. yéeres past, was apprehended & brought before Richard Fitz-Iames B. of London, and the 25.Iohn Stilman burned. of Oc∣tober was condemned for a relapse, and burned in Smith∣field, Doctor Hedd vicar generall reading the sentence. It was obiected yt he spake against pilgrimages: that he vsed to read bookes of Wickliffe, at his wicket, &c. That he cal∣led the Pope Antichrist, &c. and that the inferiour were the synagogue of Sathan, &c. The same yéere the 29. of March,Thomas Man martyr, Tho. Man was burned in Smithfield: who had before abiured, ann, 1511. the 14. of August: against auricular confessiō, the sacramē of extreme vnction: against worshipping of images, that ye popish church was not ye church of God, &c. Doct. Hedd pronoūced likewise sentence against him, & deliuered him to the sheriffe of Lon∣don, to be presently burned:Pilate washeth his hands. with this protestatiō made be∣fore, that he might not consent to the death of any: & therfore he desired the sheriffe not to punish him with rigour. This yere was the great abiuration at Amersham,The great ab∣iuration at A∣mecsham. 700. conuerted by T. Man, Knowne men, Iustfast men. Tho-Man confessed of himself, as it appeareth by the regi∣ster, that he had conuerted 700. from popery to the trueth. In those dayes, those that were professors of the trueth, were called knowne men, and Iustfast men. After T. Man, was Robert Cosin also condemned, and burned at Buckin∣gham, for holding against pilgrimages, confession to priests, and worshipping of Images, &c. Anno 1511.  William Sweeting, alias Clerke, was con∣demned, and burned for a relapse. He was taken at Chel∣sith, where he kept the Towne beasts, and was their Net∣heard. His articles were, against Pilgrimages, reall pre∣sence, worshipping of Images. He had dwelt 16. yeres and
more with the prior of Saint Osich, named George Lawne; where hée so turned the Prior, that hée was afterward com∣pelled abiure: which also William himselfe through frial∣tie had doone before. Hée beyng asked, what cause hée had why he should not be iudged as relapse, said: he had nothing else, but onely that hée committed himselfe to the mercie of God. With William Sweeting was also condemned the same time,Iames Brew∣ster. of the parish of Saint Nicholas in Colchester, Anno 1505. He had béene abiured by Wil∣liam Warham Archbishop of Canterbury. They were bur∣ned togither in Smithfield at one fire, the 18. of October, his Articles were against images, pilgrimages, worshipping of Images, the sacrament of the altar, &c. Anno 1518.  Christopher ShoomakerChristopher Shoomaker. was burned at Newbery, for like articles afore. For then the Churche of Rome was chiefely withstoode, for Pilgrimages, ado∣ration of Saintes, the Scripture in English, and real pre∣sence. William Smith, Bishop of Lincolne, died, an. 1515.  who builded the Colledge of Brasen-nose, in Oxford:Colledge of Brasen-nose in Oxford. after whō succéeded Iohn Longland a Frier, and cruell vexer of poore Christians: who propounded such captions interrogatories, that he forced one brother to detect another;One brother detecteth ano∣ther, the hus∣band the wife, &c. the husband, the wife; the brother, the sister; the son, the father. Yet notwith∣standing all crueltie, the number did so encrease, that the B. séeing the matter almost paste his power was faine to re∣quire ayde of the king for the suppressing of them. Whereto the king graunted, and sent downe his letters to the She∣riffes, Baylifes, Officers, &c. to ayde the Bishop in that be∣halfe. Whereupon, a great number abiured, anno 1521.  in the Dioces of Lincolne, and did sharpe panaunce. Among which there were certain,A great num∣ber abiure. who because they had abiured vn∣der Bishop Smith, were now condemned for relapse, and were burned:T. Bernard burned. whose names are these: Thomas Bernarde, Iames Morden, Robert Raw, Iohn Scriuener, Ione Nor∣man,
and Thomas Holmes, which had detected many of the brethren, yet escaped hee not the relapese. Iohn Scriueners, owne children were compelled to set fire to their Father,Vnnaturall crueltie. as Ione Clarke was before compelled to doe to her Father William Tilsworth. About this time D. ColletD. Collet. was troubled of B. Fitziames, Bricot, and Standish, but found fauor with the king.Paules schole builded. He ere∣cted the Schoole of Paules. The firste Schoolemaster of his Schoole was W. Lilius. This Collet was very lerned. He died anno 1519. After Pope Iulius 2. succéeded Leo 10. who (vnder pretēce of warring against the Turkes) sent a Iubile, with his par∣dons, through all Christian Regions, & Dominions, where∣by he gathered innumerable riches, and treasures. The ga∣therers whereof perswaded the people, yt whosoeuer would geue x. s̄ should at his pleasure deliuer one soule out of pur∣gatorie: but if it were one iotte then then shillings, Pardonous sold. they preached that it would profit them nothing. Ex Christ. Mess. li. 20. Chro. This filthie marchandise was brought into Germanie by a Dominike Frier, called Tecellius: whereupon,Tecellius Frier, Luther a Frier Augustine, then abhorring this shamelesse practise, anno 1517.  vp openly the Temple ioyning to the castle of Wittemberge, the morrow after the feast of all Saintes, certaine propositions concerning Indulgenes.Luther. an au∣gustine fier. Whereupon, the Frier Tecellius inueighed against Lu∣ther in his sermons, calling him heretike, and worthie to be persecuted with fire: and burned Luthers Propositions opē∣lie, and a Sermon which he wrote of Indulgences. This rage of the Frier caused Luther to intreate more amplie of the matter:Luther accu∣sed to the B. of Rome. wherefore he was accused to the Bi∣shop of Rome, and (minding as yet no further) indeuoured to get the popes fauour, writing vnto him for the same, with all submission, in these wordes. Most holie Father,Luther wri∣teth to the P. I offer my selfe prostrate vnder
the feete of your holinesse, with all that I am, and that I haue. Saue me, kill me, call me, recall me, approue me, re∣proue mee, as you shall please: your voice (the voice of Christ in you speaking) I will acknowledge. If I haue de∣serued death, I shall be contented to die, &c. This was in the yéere of our Lord,  one thousand, fiue hundred, and eightéene. Dialogues a∣gainst Luther. Eckius against Luther.Not long after the impudent dealing of Frier Tecelli∣us, steppeth out one Siluester de Priero, a Dominike Fri∣er, which published rayling dialogues against Luther. Vnto whom Luther made answere againe. Next after this Siluester, stepped vp Eckius, and impug∣ned the conclusions of Luther. With whome encountred D. Andreas Bedensteme, Archdeacon of Wittemberge, ma∣king his apologie in the defence of Luther. Afterwarde, Martin Luther was cited vp the 7. day of August, by one Hieronimus Bishop of Ascalon, to appeare at Rome. The Vniuersitie of Wittemberg hearing therof, directed vp their letters, with their publike seale, to the P. in Luthers behalfe. Duke Frederike also by his letters, sued to Cardinall Caietanus, (who was then at Augusta,) that the cause of Luther might be fréed from Rome, and remoued to Augusta to the hearing of the Cardinall. The Cardinal (at the Dukes suite) wrote to the Pope, and receiued answere, that hee shoulde call Luther before him at Augusta: and if he foūd him obstinate, that he should interdict him, with al his adherents, and mainteiners who∣soeuer, the Emperors person only excepted. The Pope also directeth other letters at the same time to Duke Fred. complayning with many gréeuous words a∣gainst Luther.P. cōplaineth against Lut. About the beginning of October, M. Luther came to Au∣gusta, at the charges of the prince Elector, and hauing obtei∣ned safeconduct from the Emperor Maximilian, presented
himself to the cardinal: who propounded vnto him 3. things. 1. That hée should reuoke his errours. 2. That he should promise from that time forward to abstaine from the same. 3. That hée should abstayne from any thing that might trouble the Church, whereunto hée answered: that he was perswaded it was sound and Catholike which hée had said: and that he was ready to answere, to that should be obiected against the same: and that concerning the matters, he would heare the iudgement of the vniuersities of the Empyre, Ba∣sill, Friburg, and Louane. After this, Luther prepareth an answere by and by to Caietanus, teaching that the merites of Christ are not com∣mitted to men: that the Pope may erre: that hée ought to bee reprehended: that authoritie of Scriptures ought to leade in matters of faith: that the extrauagant containeth vntrueths, &c. The Cardinall woulde heare no Scripture, but com∣maunded Luther to come no more in his presence, except hée woulde recant: yet Luther abode there still, and depar∣ted not. The Cardinall sent for Iohannes Stupitius, Vicar of the Augustines, and mooued him earnestly to bring Luther to recant of his owne accord. Luther tarried two daies after, and nothing was saide vnto him:Luther sub∣mitteth him∣selfe. the third day hée deliue∣red his minde in writing, submitting himselfe, and promi∣sing, that he would haue more moderation, and that (tou∣ching the matter of pardons) hee would procéede no fur∣ther. Onely he saide, he could not retract his sentence be∣fore defended, for so much, as he had said nothing, but with a good conscience, and that was agréeable to the testimony of the Scriptures. This wryting the Cardinall lightly regarded. Which when Luther sawe, and tarrying yet two dayes longer: vn∣derstanding that the Cardinall had saide, that he had com∣maundement to imprison Iohn Stupitius, and Luther, after
he had made, and set vp his appeale, he departed from the Cardinall. After Luthers departure, the Cardinall writeth a sharp letter vnto duke Fredericke, declaring the dangerous doc∣trine of Luther, and exhorteth the Duke to tender his owne honour and safetie, and to expell Luther out of his domini∣ons. Whereto the Duke answereth, both purging himselfe, and Luther: desiring the Cardinall to be a meanes to the Pope, that innocencie and truth be not oppressed, before the errour be lawfully conuicted. This doone, the Duke sendeth the letter of the Cardinall to Luther: Luther writeth again to the duke, and declareth how he was dealt with at Augu∣sta, what he offered, and how he attended, offering also him selfe to banishment, to auoyde the malice of his enimies: & no doubt, both the Duke and Luther were brought into a streight. In which meane time, the Vniuersity of Witten∣berg wrote their letters in defence of Luther, which caused the Duke now seriously to hearken to his cause. This was, ann, 1518.  about the beginning of December. In the mean time, in the moneth of Nouember, the pope sendeth forth new indulgences into Germany,New pardons. and into all quarters, with a new edict: wherein he declareth, that the bishop of Rome hath power to release dispense, and to grant indulgences auaileable, aswell for the liuing, as the dead: lying in the paynes of purgatorie. Luther in the meane time, hearing how they minded to procéede against him at Rome, appealeth from the Pope to a generall Councell: which the Pope vnderstanding, prac∣tiseth with the Duke, by flatterie, and by secrete letters, to Noblemen of the Dukes Councel, that they might remoue the Dukes minde from Luther. But before Melitus his am∣bassador approached Germanie, MaximilianMaximilian. died, an. 1519.  in the moneth of Ianuarie: and through the meanes of Fre∣derike, Prince Elector, the Empire fel to Carolus v. surna∣med Prudens, about the end of August.
In the moneth of Iune before, there was a publike dis∣putation ordained at Lypsia, a citie in Misma,A disputation of Lipsia. vnder the do∣miniō of George duke of Saxonie, vncle to duke Frederick. At that disputation Eckius and Carolostadius disputed of frée will: and thether came Luther, and Phillip Melancthon, to heare what was doone. Luther not minding, nor purpo∣sing to dispute: but there beyng prouoked he disputed with Eckius, of the Popes supremacie, of Purgatorie, of Indul∣gences, and of Penance. This was in the moneth of Iuly, an. 1519. About the beginning of which yéere ZuingliusZuinglius. came first to Zurich, and taught: who at Zurick withstood Sampson a Frier, that came thither with the Popes par∣dons. Anno 1530.  the Doctors and Friers of Louane, and Colen, condemned the bookes of Luther as hereticall: a∣gainst whom also Luther effectually defendeth himselfe, and sheweth to the nobilitie of Germanie in another booke,The yeerely mony that wēt out of Germa∣ny to Rome. that the mony that goeth yéerely out of Germanie to Rome, a∣mounteth to 3000000. Florens. Now a while after the coronation of the Emperour, the Pope sendeth againe to Duke Fredericke, requiring him to cause Luthers bookes to be burned, and that hée would eyther sée Luther executed himselfe, or send him fast bound to Rome. To the Embassadours the Duke answered, that before the matter were disputed, and the cause made ma∣nifest, hée might not with any equitie or honour procéede in such sort. Two Cardinals (notwithstanding) tooke and burned Lu∣thers bookes: whereof he hearing,Luther bur∣neth the popes Decrees. burned also as many of the Popes Decrées as he could get, and the late Bull also set out against him, openly, and solemnly, with a great number of people following him. This was doone the 10. of Decem∣ber. On Maunday thursday the Pope curseth Luther:Pope curseth Luther. and shortly after he hauing the Emperours pasport,Luther ap∣peereth at Wormes. and beyng sent for also by him, appéereth at an assembly at Wormes,
Anno one thousand,  fiue hundred, and one and twentie, a∣bout seuentéene dayes after Easter, his friendes greatly dissuaded him, to whom he answered: as touching him∣self, since he was sent for, he was resolued to enter Worms, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, although he knew that there were as many Diuels,Luthers cou∣rage. as there are tiles to couer the houses at Wormes. The fourth day after his repaire to Wormes, at foure of the clocke in the afternoone, he appéered before the imperiall maiestie, Princes, Dukes, &c. where Eckius aboue mentio∣ned, who was then B. of Triers, generall officiall, with a loud voice propounded vnto him, in the name of the assem∣bly two questions.Eckius questi∣ons to Luther. 1. Whether the bookes that went a∣broad in his name were his. 2. Whether hée would re∣cant them if they were his. To the demaundes Luther answered: that the bookes whose titles they had read vn∣to him, hée did acknowledge: and as for the second poynt hée craued respite of deliberation, that hée might without preiudice of the woord of God, and perill of his owne soule, answere the interrogatorie: which was graunted vnto him, till the next day the same houre: and then his o∣pinion should not be in writing, but pronounced by word of mouth. Luthers books of three sortes.The next day hée appéered, and answered, his Bookes were of thrée sortes: The first, in whiche hée sim∣ply declared the religion of Christian faith and good works, which the popes Bull it self iustifieth, and is not to be reuo∣ked. The second sort, wherein he had inueighed against the papacie, the crueltie & exhortiō of the same, which if he should reuoke it should adde more force to their tyrannie, and open wide gates to their impietie. The third sort, which he had written, was against priuate persons, which laboured to mainteine the Romane tyranny, and to withstand the true doctrine which hée had professed. In which hée confessed hée might haue dealt, not with such vehemencie of spirit, yet that
he could cal nothing of the same backe, without preiudice of the cause. Albeit, he offred himself, both to be shewed wher∣in he erred, and to hearken to those that could giue reason, and out of the scriptures, to the contrary: &c. These wordes thus pronounced, Eckius the Emperours prolocutor, with a sterne countenance, refused his answere, as not direct, and plaine. Then Luther, considering (saith hée) your soueraigne maiestie, and your Honours require a plaine answere: this I say, and professe as resolutely as I may, without doubting, or sophistication, that if I bee not conuicted by testimonie of the Scriptures, and by probable reasons, (for I beléeue not the Pope, nor gene∣rall Councels, which haue erred many times, and haue béen contrary to themselues) my conscience is so bound and captiued in these Scriptures, and worde of God, which I haue alleadged, that I may not, Luthern answe∣reth directly. nor will not reuoke anie manner of thing; considering it is not lawfull, nor godlie, to doe any thing against conscience. Herevppon I stand, and rest: I haue not what els to answere, God haue mercie vpon me. To this answere, Eckius replied againe, as insufficient, and indirect, and fled to the councels: but Luther replied, and declared, how they haue erred, and were not méete to determine matters of faith. The officiall againe answered, that could not be prooued, that the councels haue erred: but Luther promised to proue it: and now night approching, the Lordes arose, and departed. Vpon Friday following, the Emperour signified to the States of Germany, by his let∣ters, that he minded to extirpate Martine Luther, and his doctrine. The munday following before supper,The Emperor purposeth to roote out the Gospell. the Archb. of Tri∣ers aduiseth Luther, that on Wednesday next, he shoulde appeare before him at nine of the cloake, before dinner, and assigned him the place. Luther appeares, where, in the presence of the Archbishop, Marques of Brandēburg
Duke of Saxonie, and other States, Doct. Vocus the mar∣ques of Bades chaplaine, exhorted Luther with a rhetori∣cal oration to recant: and spake in defence of the Councels. To whom Luther replied, that he spake not against al coun∣cels: but that they might erre it appeared by the councell of Constance, which condemned this article of Wickliffe, the Church is the communion of the predestinate, with other words more: which being finished, he was bid to stand aside: and in the mean while, the princes conferred, & sent for him againe, and exhorted him. To whom he answered: except he were ouerthrown by the scriptures, he might not yéeld with a safe conscience. Afterward, the Archbishop himselfe, with gentle and courteous wordes, exhorted Luther to submitte: which would not be. So that within a while after, ye Archb. officiall, declared vnto Luther, from the Emperour, that hée should within 20. daies return home, vnder his safeconduct, from whence he came. And the sixe & twentith of April, hee returned:Luther retur∣neth. the Emperors Herald, Gasper Sturm safely con∣ducting him. Afte this, the Doctours, and Schoole-men of Paris, wrote against Luther, and condemned his bookes, and not long after,The Emp. out∣laweth Luther, &c. Charles the Emp. directeth a writte of outlawrie against Luther, and all them that tooke his part: comman∣ding, wheresoeuer he might bée gotten, to apprehend him, and his bookes to bee burned. Vppon this, Duke Frede∣ricke conueyeth Luther away secretly, by certaine faithfull Noble men: in which time, hee wrote, among other Bookes, one intituled, De abroganda Missa,De abroganda Missa. dedicated to his companie of Augustine Friers: who vppon that, beganne to laye downe their priuate Masses. This do∣ctrine,Wittemberg fauoureth Lu∣ther. the Vniuersitie of Wittemberg (their Councel bée∣ing asked by the Duke) did confirme: and councelled the Duke, to put downe the vse of the masse in his domini∣ons. About the same time, king Henrie the 8. bare the name
of a certaine booke written against Luther:Booke against Luther. Defender of the Christian faith in which he de∣fendeth the Popes pardons, his authoritie, and the matter of the sacrament. For which, the pope added to his stile and title, Defender of the Christian faith. Within the compasse of the same yere, P. Leo died, reioy∣sing of 3. blessings that God had bestowed vpon him. First, that hee, being banished out of his Countrey, was restored againe with glorie. 2 That he deserued to be called Apo∣stolike. 3 That he had driuen the Frenchmen out of Italy. After that he had spoken these words, he was striken with a sodaine feuer, and shortly after died, being of the age of 47 yeres, albeit some suspected he died of poyson. After him succéeded Hadrian, 6. In whose time the Turkes wanne Rhodes,Pope Hadri∣an 6. A meeting at Noremberge. He liued not much aboue one yere and a half in his Papacie. In the time of this Hadr. the councell of Wormes brake vp, and another meting appointed by the Emp. and States at Noremberge, an. 1522. To which méeting the Pope sent his letters, and beside, gaue his Legate Cheregalius instructions against Luther. To whom the princes answered again, geuing reason, why (as yet) the Emperors Edict was not executed against Lu∣ther, and requiring also, that his holinesse, with the consent of the Emperor would summon a generall Councell, with as much spéed as might be: wherein matters might be frée∣lie debated for the benefite of the Church, and reformation of the same: and that the assembling of that Councel, might not be deferred longer then one yere. In ye meane time, they promised to take reasonable order, &c. At the same time also, at Noremberg,100. greeuan∣ces of Germa∣nie against the pope. the states propoū∣ded an hundred gréeuances of the Germans, which they did sustaine from the Sea of Rome: as, forbidding of marriage in degrées not forbidden by the law of God: forbidding of meates, not forbidden by God: restraint of marriage at cer∣taine times: selling remission of sinnes for money: innumi∣ties
of clergy men: excommunication abused: number of ho∣lie dayes ouer burthenous: suspending, & halowing of church¦yardes: against Officials, and ecclesiasticall Iudges: that ec∣clesiasticall Iudges annex lay matters vnto their iurisdicti∣on, &c. These greeuances they deliuered to the popes legat, an. 1523.1523 P. Hadrian dieth. P. Clement 7. and so the assemblie of Noremberge brake vp, and was proroged to the next yere following. In the mean time Hadrian died: after whom succéeded Clement 7. who, ye next yere after, sent his Legat, Cardinal Campeius, vnto the as∣semblie at Noremberg, with many faire petitions, & sharpe complaints against Luther, &c. but not a word of the gréeuā∣ces, or of any reformation. While Luther was absent from Wittemberg,Carolostadius. And. Carolostadius stirred vp the people, to throw downe images in the temples, besides other thinges mo, which Luther (returning to Wittemberg) misliked, be∣cause it was not done orderly, & by the magistrate, to whom it did belong. Ex Ioh. Sleid. lib. 3. 1546 L. dieth. Luthers praier at his death.An 1546. in the 63. yere of his age, L died, after he had continued writing and preaching 29. yeares. Before his death he prayed thus: My heauenly Father, eternall & mer∣cifull God, thou hast manifested vnto me, thy deare Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ. I haue taught him, I haue loued him as my health, my life, and my redemption: whom the wic∣ked haue persecuted, maligned, and with iniurie afflicted. Draw my soule vnto thee. After he had thus prayed, he said as insueth, thrise: I cōmend my spirit into thy hands, thou hast redemed me O god of truth. God so loued the world, that he gaue his only sonne, that all that beleeued in him, might haue life euerlasting. Frederike prince Elector, died before Luther, an. 1525.1525 L. fulfilled Ie∣rome of prages prophecie. Thus Luther fulfilled the prophecie of Ierom of Prage, I cite you al to answere before the most high and iust Iudge, after 100. yeres. Ierom was burnt 1416. and Luther began to write anno 1516. An. 1524. At the diet of Noremb. was much reasoning cō∣cerning
the mariage of priests: which cardinall Cāpeius im∣pugned: and concerning the liberties of the citie of Straus∣burgh, which the B. would haue infringed, taking into his hands, ye cause of maried priests from the magistrate of the towne, against ancient custome & agréement betwixt them. After the councell of Noremberg, immediatly followed another sitting at Ratisbone,A councell at Ratesbone. where were present Ferdi∣nandus Campeius Cardinall of Salisburgh, the two dukes of Bauarie, the Bishops of Trent, and Ratisbone, &c. and made many popish Decrées and actes against Luther:Actes against Luther. which Campeius laboured to haue enacted in a full councell, and with the consents of all the Empyre: but the mindes of di∣uerse were gone from the Pope: and he was faine to get the same ratified in this particular conuenticle. An. 1519. Vldricus Zuinglius,1519 Zuinglius. first abiding at Glocro∣na in a place called our Lords hermitage, remoued to Zu∣ricke, and there began to teach, dwelling in the Minster a∣mong the Canons or Monks, of that close, & vsing the same rites with them, the space of two or thrée yéeres: & because Leo the same yéere had renewed his pardons againe, he cō∣tinued by the space of two yéeres & more, detecting of the ab∣uses of the same, till Hugo B. of Constance, to whose iuris∣diction Zurick did then belong, wrote letters to the senat of Zuricke, cōplaining greatly of Zuinglius: to whom certain of the citie made answere, desiring the B. yt he would do no∣thing preiudiciall to the libertie of the gospell; Zuinglius ha∣uing referred his cause to the Senate. This was An. 1522.  Zuinglius also wrote a letter to the whole natiō of the Hel∣uetians, monishing them not to hinder the course of the go∣spell, and not to molest priestes that were married: and ex∣horted them to withdraw the libertie of concubines. Thus, Zuinglius continued certaine yéeres,Dominicks a∣gainst Zuin∣glius. & at the last the Dominicke friers opposed themselues, wherevpon the Senate of Zuricke sent forth their commaundement to all Priests & Ministers to repaire to Zurick, against the 29. of
Ianuarie next ensuing,  Anno 1523. That matters tou∣ching religion might be fréely disputed of; directing of their letters to the B. of Constance, that hée would either repaire thether himself, or send his deputie. At the day, came Iohā∣nes FaberIohannes Fa∣ber against Zuinglius. the Bishops Vicegerent. (Zuinglius had before contriued his doctrine into thrée score and seuen Articles, and published thē abroad, that they that minded to dispute, might be better prepared.) Faber he denieth to dispute the matter, and said, it was méeter for a generall Councell, (which (said he) was néere at hand) then in that assembly to be handled: notwithstanding Zuinglius vrged, that if he, or any, had ought to say against his doctrine, they would then declare it: but when no man would appéere to dispute, the assembly was discharged. Wherevpon the Senate of Zu∣ricke caused to be proclaimed thorough their dominion, that the traditions of men should be abandoned,Traditions of men abādoned in Zuricke. 1523 Decree at Lu∣cerna. and the Go∣spell of Christ purely taught, out of the old and new Testa∣ment. Anno 1523. Sleid. lib. 3. The next yéere after, there was an other decrée made at Lucerna, of the contrarie part, to the maintenaunce of Popish religion, and against Luthers doctrine. After this cōclusiō at Lucerna, the Cantons of Heluetia directed their letters to the men of Zuricke, lamenting their estate, and blaming the new doctrine of Zuinglius, and Leo Iuda,Leo Iuda. Cantons deui∣ded. and shewing to them the daunger that might follow. Where∣vnto the Tigurins and men of Zuricke made their an∣swere againe, the same yéere, the one & twentith of March, purging themselues, and iustifying the doctrine of the Go∣spell preached by Luther, Zuinglius, &c. and offered them∣selues to be reformed (if they were in errour) by the Scrip∣tures, and that they would attend therefore till toward the end of May next ensuing, as also from the Bishop of Con∣stance, and vniuersitie of Basill. The moneth of May being come, the B. of Constance, an∣swereth to ye mē of Zuricke in a booke, wherin he defendeth
images, and popish masse. This booke they answered: & pro∣ued his doctrine, by the scriptures, to be false: & (before they sent their answere) pulled downe all the images in their do∣minion, about the 13. of Iune. And a few moneths after,Images pulled downe. an order was taken in the citie of Zuricke, betweene the Ca∣nons of the church, and citie, for disposing the lands, and pos∣sessions of the Colledge. This profession of the Tigurins, of the 13. pages,The Cantons that misliked Zuinglius. sixe did chiefly mislike: to witte, Lucernates, Vrani, Suicenses, Vn∣terualdii, Tugiani, Fiburgenses. These in no case would bee reconciled, but layde diuers slaunderous matters to their charge: whereof the Tigurins diligently purged them∣selues. Anno 1525. in the moneth of Aprill, next following: the citie of Zuricke banished the masse in all their domi∣nion,Masse bani∣shed. and placed in stéede thereof the supper of the Lorde, the reading of the Scriptures, praying. Also, a Law was made against whoredome, & adulterie: and Iudges ordai∣ned to heare ye causes of matrimony, an, 1525. Sleid. lib. 4. The other seuen pages appointed among themselues, cō∣cerning a méeting, & disputation to be had at Baden: where were present among other Diuines, Iohannes Faber, Ec∣kius, and Murnerus. The Bishops also of Lucerna, Basill, Suriake, and Lawsanna, sent thither their Legats: the con∣clusions propounded, were: that the body and blood of Christ are present in the Sacrament. That the masse is a sacrifice for quicke & dead, That the blessed virgin, and other saintes are to be inuocated, as mediators & intercessors. That ima∣ges ought not to be abolished. That there is a Purgatorie. Which conclusions, Eckius took vpon him stoutly to defend. Against him reasoned Oecolāpadius, (who was then chiefe preacher at Basill) with other mo. Zwinglius was not per∣mitted of the Senate to be heard. The conclusion of the dis∣putation was, that al should remaine as it was. This was done in the moneth of Iune.
1527 A disputation at Berne.Anno 1527. in the moneth of December, the people of Bern appointed a disputation at Bern, and sending forth writings thereof, called all the Bishops about them thither, as of Constance: Seduno Lansanna warning them both to come themselues, and to bring their Diuines with them, or els to loose such possessions as they had lying within the precinct of their territorie. After this, they appointed ec∣clesiasticall persons of their owne iurisdiction to dispute,Scriptures only to decide controuersies. de∣termining the whole disputation to be decided onely by the authoritie of the olde and new Testament. And to the in∣tent, men might come thither better prepared, they propoū∣ded in writing ten conclusions,Ten conclusi∣ons. to bée defended of their mi∣nisters, by the scriptures: which ministers, were, Franciscus Colbus, and Berthaldus Hallerus. The themes were these. 1. The true church heareth on∣ly ye word of God. 2 It maketh no laws without it. 3. That traditions ordained by the Church onely, bind, as they agrée with the word of God. 4. That Christ only hath made satisfa¦ction for our sins. 5. That Christes body is not really in the sacrament. 6. That the sacrifice of the masse is cōtumelious to Christ his sacrifice. 7. That Christ is only to be inuocated as mediator. 8. That there is no purgatory. 9. Against ima∣ges. 10. Against single life of priests. To these letters, & articles, the Lucernats, Vranites, Scin∣thians, Vnterualdians, Tugians, Glareans, & Soliturni∣ans, & they of Freiburg answered again by cōtrary letters, exhorting them of Bern to desist from their purpose; conclu∣ding, that they would neither send, nor suffer any learned man to come thither, nor graunt safeconduct for any to passe through their countrey. The Bishops refuse disputa∣tion.Al this notwithstanding, the Lords of Bern, the 7. of Ia∣nuary, procéeded in their disputatiō. Of the bishops before as∣signed nor one came, neuertheles the city of Basil, Zuricke, and Schafuse, and Abbecelle, Sangallium, Mallusia, with ye neighbours of Rhetia, also, they of Strasborough, Vlmes,
Ausburgh, Lyndane, Constance, and Isne, sent thether their Embassadours. The Doctors of Berne began their di∣sputation: there were present Zuinglius, Oecolampa∣dius, Bucerus, Capito Blaurerus, with other mo, which de∣fended the affirmatiue. On the contrary part, the chiefe was Conradus Tregerius a frier Augustine: who shifting from the Scriptures, to the Doctors, not being permitted so to doo by the moderators of the disputatiō, would dispute no more. This disputation endured 19. daies,The dispute lasted 19. daies and in the end it was agréed, that the conclusions were agréeable to the word of God, and should be ratified not only in Berne, but also in certaine other cities néere adioyning. Furthermore that masses, altars, and images should be in al places abolished. At the city of Constance, certain things begā to be altred before: in which citie, the preacher, Ambrosius Blanreus was a notable man, & had bin a monke before, in the mona∣stery of Alperspacke, in the Duchy of Wittemberg. After this disputation thus concluded at Berne,Berne refor∣med. the I∣mages, and altars, with ceremonies, and masses, were a∣bolished at Constance:Geneua refor∣med. they likewise of Geneua followed the example of Bern, by reason whereof, the Bishops and Cleargy departed the citie. The Bernates after they had redressed with them the state of religion,The Bernates refuse ye league of the french K they renounced the league made before with the French king, refusing the warly stipend, folowing the example of the Tigurins, which before had done ye like, and were contented onely with their yerely pension, which the K. payeth to euery page of the Heluetians, to kéep peace. The day and yere when this reformation began with them, they caused to be engrauen in a piller, with letters of golde,A monument of their refor∣mation. 1528 for a perpetuall memorie to all posteritie to come. This was an. 1528. By these examples, the ministers of Strausburgh began also to affirme, and teach, that the masse was naught. The P. clergie laboured on the contrary part. The Senat would
haue brought it to a disputation, but the Priests would agrée to no reasoning: wherevpon the magistrates commaunded them silence. The Bishop desired the Senate to perseuer in their old religiō: but not preuailing, they did sollicite the as∣sembly of the Empire at Spires, who sent a solemne Em∣bassade to Strausborough, requiring them to alter nothing, but to refer all things to a generall Councell. In like man∣ner the Bishop of Heldessem, hauing béene with them a litle before, exhorted them in the name of the Emperour. But the Senate of Strawsborough, seing the matter did now hange in controuersie two yéeres, the preachers dayly calling vpō them for reformatiō, & also suite being made by other Citizens, assembled their great Citizens, to the num∣ber of 300. in which, the most voyces went against the masse. Wherevpon, immediatly the twentith of February, ann. 1529.1529 Masse put downe in Strawsbo∣rough. Basill refor∣med. a decrée was made, that the masse should be laid downe, til the contrary part could proue it to bee lawfull by the scriptures. Anon after, at Basill also, the masse was excluded, and twelue Senatours fauouring popery, displaced by the commons, and the images throwne out of the churches, and a decrée made, that the masse and images should bee aboli∣shed, through their whole iurisdiction: in this citie, taught Oecolampadius.A memorial of their refor∣mation. The day of burning their images (which was Ashwednesday) they doe with mirth and pastime so∣lemnise at this day. Anno 1529. Ferdinando the Emperors brother, and his Deputie in Germanie, decréed against the Protestantes at Spires, and refused to admitte the Ambassadors of Straus∣burgh, because they had reiected ye masse. The other princes which were receiued, as, the Duke of Saxonie, George, of Brandenburgh, Ernesus, and Franciscus, Earles of Lue∣burgh, & Lantgraue Anhaldius did withstād the decrée, and shewed their cause in a long protestation written: which done, all such Cities as subscribed, and consented to ye Pro∣testation
of the Princes, ioyned themselues in a common league with them, whereupon, they were called protestāts. The names of the Cities were these: Strausburgh,The name of Protestants. No∣rembergh, Vlmes, Constance, Ruteling, Winsenium, Mē∣ning, Lindania, Campodinum, Hailburnim, Isua, Wesse∣burgum, Norling, and Sangallum. The other Pages on the contrarie side, made like confe∣deracie, which were especially fiue: Lucernates, Vrani,A diuision of the Pages for religion. Sui∣cences, Vnterualdij, and Tugiani, purposing to ouerrun the religion of Christ: who also, despitefully hanged vp ye armes of the Cities, Zurich and Berne, vpon the gallowes. In so much, that Berne and Zurich raysed a power against the Suitzers aforesaid. But as they were both readie to en∣counter, through the meanes of the Citie of Strausburgh, and other Intercessors, they were parted at that time, and so returned. Which peace continued two yeares betwéene them, till by reason of contumelies against the reformed ci∣ties, the Tigurins, and Bernates, stopping al passage, suffe∣red no corn, nor vitle to passe one to the other this was 1531. The French king, with the Glarians, Friburnians, and Soliturnians, endeuored to make peace betwixt them, vpō certaine conditions, which the other fiue Pages refused, and armed themselues, and approching néere Surich, ouermat∣ched them of Zurich with multitude, and discomfited the ar∣mie: among whom, at that time Zuinglius was slaine,Zuinglius slaine. al∣so, the Abbot of Capella, and Commendator Cunacensis, with 13. other learned men, as it is thought, being falsly be∣trayed, and brought into the hands of the enemie. The ma∣ner of the Suitzers is, when they goe to warre, the chiefe Minister of their Church goeth with them, which was the cause why he was present at the warre.The minister goeth with the armie. After he was slaine they burnt his bodie, being dead. Ex Sleid. li. 8. Zuinglius was 44. yeres of age when hee died. They tooke the Abbot Capellensis being slaine, and put out both his eyes, and cloathed him in a Monks coule, and so set him
in a pulpit to preach, rayling on him in most despitefull ma∣ner. This battle was the xi. of October. The Bernats hea∣ring of this ouerthrow, armed themselues to make reuēge, and attempting to take Tugie, were ouermatched of the Page-men. At the last (through mediation) a league was made betwéene them,A league be∣twixt the Ca∣nons. D. of Saxon dieth. 1532 that the Tigurins, Bernats, and Ba∣silians, should forsake the league made with Strausburgh, and the Lantgraue: and likewise the v. pagemē their league with Ferdinandus. And hereof were obligations sealed the last of Nouember. Oecolampadius hearing of the death of Zuinglius, de∣parted this life also the last of Nouember, being of the age of 49. The next following, in the yere of our Lord, 1532. in the moneth of August, died Iohn Frederike Duke of Saxo∣nie, a great mainteiner of the trueth. After whom succéeded Iohn Frederike his sonne. 1533 H. Voes, I. Ech, burned.Anno 1527. Two young men were burned at Bruxels, one named Henrie Voes, of the age 24. The other Ioh. Ech, which were before of the order of Augustine Friers: they were persecuted by Egmondanus the Popes Inquisitor, & the diuines of Louane. The examiners were, Lochestratus and others. The cause was, that they denied, it was deadlie sinne to transgresse the decrées of the fathers, and of the B. of Rome. They were burned the first of Iuly, marueylously ioying at their death, in so much, that one of them séeing fire kindled vnder his féete, said: me think you strowe roses vn∣der my féete.The courage of the martir. After their death, their Monasterie was dissol∣ued; the President thereof (called Iacobus Lutherianus,) after diuers afflictions, was forced to recant at Bruxels: but afterward being deliuered, departed, and fled to Luther. An. 1524.  About the citie of Diethmar, was H. Sutphen monk burned, wtout al order of iudgement, or iust condēna∣tion. He was preacher at Breame, & greatly wtstoode by the chanons and prelates, but mainteined by the senat & people:
in so much that being sent for to the Archbishop, and to a prouinciall councell at Burstade, they refused to send him thether, foreseing the malice of the councell. But when the time came, that the Lord would haue him witnes his truth, an. 1524. he was set vpon on a sudden at Meldorph in Di∣ethmar (whether he went to preach) by the rude multitude, through the instigatiō of ye Frāciscane friers, associated with certaine presidēts of the country, who to the intent the hus∣bandmen of the country should be more couragious, gaue them 3. barrels of Hambrough béere to drinke. About mid∣night they came in armour to Meldorph: the Iacobins and Monkes prepared torches for them, least Henry should slip away in the dark. So with great violence, they brake into the house of the parish priest, where Henry was; who sent for him also to preache, and hauing rifeled the house, and shamefully abused the priest, they ran with furie vpon Hen∣rie, and pulled him naked out of his bed, and drew him na∣ked to Heyda, and brought him to a mans house, called Cal∣den, and bound him there in the stocks, with chaines, in the frost & snow: which, when the good man of the house (taking compassion on him) would not suffer, they caried him away to Hamburgh, and shut him vp in a cupbord. The common people, all the night continued drinking, and swilling. In the morning, about 8. of the clocke, the rude people, (boyling with drinke) cried out: burne him, burn him. This rude people the Franciscans greatly encouraged. So they bound Henrie, hands, necke, and féete, and with great noyse brought him foorth to be burned. When he came to the fire, for very weakenes he sate down on the ground. By and by, there was present one May, a president, corrupted with mo∣ney, that condemned him, and pronounced sentence. Which done, one stroke him behinde on the head with a sharp dag∣ger, Iohn Holmes of the new Church, stroke him with a mace. Other thrust him into the backe, and armes: and that so often as he began to speake. One named Master Gunter
criyng out, and encouraging them, and saying: go too good fellowes boldly, truly God is with vs present. After this, he brought a Franciscane Frier vnto Henry, that he should be confessed, to whom he said: because he ne∣uer offended him, he could not forgiue him, and so refused to be confessed. The fire as often as it was kindled, would not burne, notwithstanding they satisfied their mindes vpō him, striking, and pricking him, with all kinde of weapons. Hen∣ry in the meane time standing in his shirt before the rude multitude, at the last hauing gotten a great ladder, they bound him fast thereto,Crueltie. and cast him into the fire, and when he began to pray, one strake him on the face with his fist, saying: thou shalt first be burnt, and after pray, and prate as much as thou wilt. Then another treading vppon his brest, bound his necke fast to a steppe of the ladder, that the blood gushed out of his mouth, and nose: at last, after long tormenting, they cast him, ladder and all into the fire: & one Iohn Holmeus ranne vnto him, and strake him with a mace vpon the brest, till he died. Afterward, they rosted him vpon the coales, for the wood would not burne out: an. 1524  Ex Epist. Luth. About the same time, many other godly persons were throwne into the riuer of Rhine, & into other riuers, whose bodies were after found, and taken vp. Also, in the said towne of Diethmar, one IohnIohn M. suffered martirdome like Henrie. At the towne of Hala, a Preacher named M. George,M. George. was murthered by the rude multitude, incensed thereunto by the Monkes, and Friers, for ministring in both kindes. Ex Crisp. & Pantal. At Prage also in Bohemia, another changing his Mon∣kerie into Matrimonie, did suffer in like manner. Ex Lud. Rab. Anno 1524. Iohn Clerke was martired at Metz in Lo∣rain, for breaking downe the Images, which they were (at
certaine times woont to worship in the suburbes of ye citie: for which fact he was cōdemned, & first his right hand stroke of, then his nose with violence pulled from his face with pin∣sers, after ye both his armes & his paps,Great crueltie, and great pa∣tience. were likewise pluc∣ked & drawen with the same instrument: the martyr in the meane time singing the verse: Their images are but siluer and gold, the worke of mens hands, &c. The residue of his life they consumed with fire. This man before, an. 1523. had béene whipped, & marked in the forehead, at Melden 10 miles from Paris, for setting vp a bill against the Popes pardons, lately sent thether: in which bill he named the Pope Antichrist. Ex Crisp. & Plant. Anno 1525. The 12. of Ianuarie M. Iohn Castellane1525 I. Castellane. doctor of Diuinitie, was burned in the towne of Wiken, for preaching the truth in Mentz, beyng apprehended by the seruants of the Cardinall of Loraine, and carried away to the castle of Nomenie, where he was most cruelly handled, from the fourth of May, to the twelft of Ianuary, and from thence to the towne of Wiken: where he was condemned by the Bishop of Nicopolis, sitting in his Pontificalibus, beyng suffragane of Mentz, with the Clergie, Nobles, and people about him. He suffered with such constancie,Constancie. that a great number were drawne to the knowledge of God thereby, and many confirmed. The same yéere, a godly minister after diuerse torments most terrible, as well by the priuie members, as otherwise, was drowned at Eushisheim, because he married a wife se∣cretly in his owne house, with a few witnesses: after he was throwne downe he striued a while, so that the riuer was red with his bloud. Ex Oecolampadio. About this time, by reason of a rebellion of the commons against the rulers of Germanie, diuerse protestants were fasly accused and put to death:Crueltie. among whom one after most gréeuous torments diuerse times of the Strapado, which he sustained six houres together, that the sweat which drop∣ped
from his body, for paine & anguish, was almost bloud, had his head stroke of. Ex Oecolampadio. Wolgangus Schuchus hauing conuerted a towne in Lo∣tharing, belonging to duke Anthony prince of Lorrain, bea∣ring the name of S. Hippolitus, the Duke hearing thereof, & being misinformed by the aduersary, threatned the towne destruction with fire and sword. Wolgangus hearing therof wrote a letter to the Duke, purging the towne of the crime of sedition, & rebellion laid against it, and likewise declaring the truth of religion. But the Duke nothing pacified there∣with, Wolgangus of his owne accord wēt to Nancie, which is the head towne of Lorrain, there to render a confession of his doctrine, and to deliuer the towne of Hippolitus, who was not so soone come thether, but hands were laid on him, and he cast in a stinking prison, where he was sharply hand∣led. After a while he was had to a house of Grayfriers, to make profession there of his faith, where he confuted lear∣nedly all those that stood against him: one Bonauenture a frier, monstrous in body, & conditions of mind, was modera∣tour of the disputation, who hauing béen long confessor to the Duke, & of great authoritie in Lorrain, was euer perswa∣ding the duke, to banish all learned men out of Lorrain, and that it was sufficient to saluatiō, only to know the Pater no∣ster, & Auie. This man beyng iudge of the disputation, Wol∣gangus mainteined the truth against the rable of the Cler∣gie: who being not able otherwise to make their partie good against him, tooke his Bible with the notes in the Margine, and burned it. At the last disputation Duke Anthony him∣selfe was sayd to be there disguised, who although hee vn∣derstood not the speach of Wolgangus, beyng in Latine, yet perceyuing him to be bold and constant,Courage and constancie. departing from the disputation, pronounced, he should be burned, because he denied the Church, and sacrifice of the Masse: Wolgangus hearing the sentence of his condemnation, began to sing the 122. Psalme: I reioyced when they said vnto me, we will
go into the house of the Lord: and at the execution, sang the 51. Psalme, till the smoke, and flame, tooke from him his voyce, and life. Shortly after his death, the Commendator of Saint An∣thonie of Vienna, who sate as spiritual iudge ouer him, and gaue sentence of his condemnation, fell sodainly downe and died. Also, his felow which was abbot of Clarilocus,Gods venge∣ance. and suf∣fragane of the Bishop of Mentz, sodainly at the comming in of the Duches of Denmarke, into the citie of Nancie, stric∣ken with a feare at the cracke of guns, fell downe, and died. Ex Lud. Rab. & Pant, Ann. 1526. Ioh. Huglein,1526 Ioh. Huglein. priest, was burned at Mespurgh, by the Bish. of Constance, for that he did not hold with the B. of Rome his doctrine in all points. This yéere, the Ladie Katherine, the olde Emperours yong sister, was promised in marriage, with Iohn Frede∣ricke, sonne and heire to the Prince electour of Saxonie: but thorough the alteration of religion, they swarued from their couenants: and Hawnart,No promise to be kept with heretikes. the Emperours Ambassadour in Germany, said plainly, that there was no promise to be kept with heretikes. Anno 1527. George Carpenter1527 George Car∣penter. of Emering, was bur∣ned in the towne of Munchen, in Bauaria. 1. Because hée did not beléeue, that a priest could forgiue sins. 2. He beleued not, a man could call God out of heauen. 3. He beleued not, that God was in the bread. 4. He beléeued not, that the ele∣ment in Baptisme giueth grace. The same yere, Leonard Keyser,Leonard Keysar. of the countrey of Baua∣ria, was put to death, for the testimonie of the truth: he was of the town of Raw, 4. miles frō Passaw, of a famous house. He being at his study in Wittēberg, was sent for by his bre¦thrē: who certified him, that if he wold sée his father aliue, he shold come wt speed: he was scarse come thither, whē as by ye cōmandmēt of ye B. of Passaw, he was takē by his mother, & brethrē.The mother & brethren a∣gainst children and brethren. The articles wt he was accused of, were, ye faith only
iustifieth. 2. Works are the fruites of faith. 3. The masse is no sacrifice, nor oblation: also hée denied confession, satis∣faction, vowe of single life, Purgatorie, difference of dayes, inuocation of Saintes, and for holding onelie two Sacraments, &c. They that sate in iudgement of him, were, the Bishop of Passaw, the suffraganes of Ratisbone, and Passaw: and with them Eckius, béeyng garded with ar∣med men. He suffered the 16. of August, Ex 6. tomo operum Lutheri. Wendelimuta.Anno 1527. a vertuous widowe, named Wendelmu∣ta, was first strangled, and after burned at Hage in Holland the twentieth of Nouember, for the profession of the trueth. ex Pantal. Anno 1529. Peter Filsteden and Adolph Clareback,1529 Peter Filste∣den & Adolph Clarebacke. Germanes, by the commaundement of the Archb. and Se∣nate of Collen, were burned there for the trueth, especially of the supper of the Lord after that they had endured impri∣sonment a yéere and a halfe. At that time, certaine popish Preachers perswaded the people, that the putting to death of certaine wicked persons, (meaning the Gospellers) shoulde pacifie the wrath of God, who then plagued Germany with the sweating sick∣nes. Sleid. Nicholas.Ann. 1524. one Nicholas of Antwerp, was apprehended, (preaching without the towne) by two butchers seruantes, and put into a sack, and drowned by the Craue at Antwerp: Persecutor, Charles the Emperour. Iohan. Pictor.At the same time, Iohannes Pictorius, a learned man of Holland,A couragious martyr. and partly of kin to Erasmus Roterodamus, was first strangled, and then burned, pronouncing at his death: O death, where is thy victory? The Persecutors, Margaret, aughter of Maximilian, princesse of Holland, M. Montane, M. Rosemund Inquisitors, M. Iodocus Louering, Vicar of Mechling. He was condemned for speaking against masse, and pardons, and subtile abuses of priests.
Anno 1525. Mathias Weibel,1525 M. Weibell. Schoolemaster, was han∣ged by Campadonium in Sweuia, for saying somewhat a∣goinst the Abbots first Masse, and against carrying about of relikes. The persecutor was Sebastian Baitesteni. The same yere, a good priest being cōmanded to geue good councell to 16. Countreymen that should be beheaded,A Priest mar∣tir. was afterward himselfe bidden knéele downe, and had his head cut off, onely for méere hatred against the Gospel. The per∣secutors were certaine noble men, after the commotion of Countreymen in Germanie. Ex Gastia. Anno 1528. G. Sherrer,1528 G. Sherrer. a Preacher, was put to death at Rastat, frō Saltzburgh x. miles. He was condemned to bée burned aliue, but meanes was made that he was first be∣headed. Going towards his death; he saide: That you may know I die a Christian, I will geue you a signe, and so hée did: for when the head was stricken from his shoulders, the bodie falling vpon the bellie,A signe. so continued the space that one might well eate an egge: after that, it softly turned it selfe vpon the backe, and crossed the right foote, and likewise, the right hand ouer the left. At the fight whereof, the Magi∣strates would not burne his bodie, but buried it with other Christian mens bodies, Mat. Flat. Illiric. An. 1522. At Dornick Henrie Flemming1522 H. Fleming. was burned, by Balthasar, Officiall. He was sometimes a Frier, and be∣ing offered life by Balthasar, if he would confesse his wife to be an harlot, denyed so to doe, and was thereupon burned at Dornicke. Anno 1539.  A good priest, dwelling not farre from Ba∣sill, was slaine of his guest, another wicked drunken priest: for the which fact, the wicked priest was both dismissed of his B. and had also a greater benefice geuē him for his wor∣thie at. Ex Ioh. Gast. & Pantal. Anno 1543.  At Louaine 28. men and women were ta∣ken, that professed the trueth, and tormented seuerally. A∣mong whom, there was one Paulus, a Priest, of sixtie yeres,
who (staggering in his confession for feare of death) was had out of Louan, and condemned to perpetuall prison, which was a stinking dungeon: where he was suffered neither to reade, nor write, and was fedde onely with bread and wa∣ter. Other two there were, who (beecause they had reuo∣ked before) were burned, which they endured cherefullie. There was also an old man, and two aged women, brought foorth: of which, the one was called Antonia,Antonia. of an auncient stock in that Citie. The man was condemned to be beheaded: the women to be burned quicke. The other which abiured not, were condemned to be burned. Ex Fran. Eucenate. Anno 1544. At Louan was Master Perceuall,1544 M. Perseuall. of ye same Vniuersitie, adiudged to perpetuall prison, for reprehending certaine popish superstitions: and there fed with bread and water. At last, some iudge that either he was famished, or secretly drowned, Ex Eucenate. The same yeare, was Iustice Imsberge,Iustice Ims. a Skinner of Louan, beheaded, his burning being pardoned, at the suite made to the Quéene: for speaking against the P. supremacy, masse, purgatorie, and the real presence, Ex Euc. The same yere, one GilesGiles. of Bruxels, a Gutler, was bur∣ned for the testimonie of Iesus. He was detected by the par∣son of Bruxels. After they had kept him prisoner 8. months in Louan, they sent him to Bruxels to be iudged: where he comforted diuers that were there in prison: among whome also was Franciscus Eucenas.F. Eucenas. He was in prayer so ardent, (knéeling by himselfe in some secrete place) that he séemed to forget himselfe: being called to meate, he neither saw, nor heard them that stoode by him many times, till he was takē vp by the armes. At sundrie times he might haue escaped, (the doores being left open) but he would not, for bringing the kéeper in danger. At the length, about the moneth of Ianuarie, he was as∣sayed with torments, to confesse the truth (as they called it)
which was, purgatorie, and to vtter mo of his fellowes, but it would not preuaile: then they secretely condemned him, for feare of the people. Standing before the hangman to be strangled first, hée would not, saying: hée should not néed to mitigate his payne, for I feare not (saith hée) the fire, doo therefore as thou art commaunded. After this the bles∣sed martyr gaue testimonie to the truth in the fire. Francis. Eucenas. An. 1543. and 1544. at Gaunt was very sharpe perse∣cution,1543 Sharpe perse∣cution. as also in all Flanders, but specially at Gaunt, there were many headmen burned for the truth. And afterward the Emperour cōming to Bruxels, there was terrible slaughter and persecution, especially in Bra∣bant, Hennegow, and Artoise. In so much that at one time as good as 200.200. martyrs. men and women together, were brought out of the country about to the citie of whom some were drowned, some burned, some priuily made away, others sent to perpetuall prison. Ex Eucenate. An. 1545. Martin Heurblot1545 Martin Heur∣blot. a fishmonger, before he was conuerted to the Gospell, a man of euill life, but afterward a sincere professor of the truth, was first tormēted, to declare and to bewray other of his profession, which he would not doo: after, he was brought before the councell of Flanders, & was condemned the ninth of May, to be burnt at Gaunt in Verle place, for denying Purgatorie, the reall presence, and praying for the dead. His persecutors were the Franciscane friers of Gaunt. Ex Pantal. The next day Nicholas Vanpole, and Iohn de Bruck,Nicholas Van∣pole, Iohn de Brucke. & his wife were burned at Gaunt for the same causes: the councell of Flaunders beyng persecutors. The same yéere at Delden a towne in the low country, Vrsula & Mary,Vrsula and Mary. of noble parentage were cōmitted to the fire, for professing of ye truth. First, Mary being the yoonger was put to the fire, where she praied ardently for her enemies. Then the Iudges exhorted Vrsula to turne: if shée would
not, at the least shée should require to be beheaded: but shée refused so to doo, and as touching the kind of death, she said shée feared not the fire, but rather would follow the ex∣ample of her déere sister that went before. The executio∣ners could not consume their bodies, but left them whole lying vppon the ground white: which certaine godly Chri∣stians priuily tooke vp, and buried in the night. Ex Lud. Rab. Pantal. &c. Two brethren and the mo∣ther.The same yéere Franciscus and Nicholas brethren, with their mother Catherina, were condemned at Mech∣lin, for denying the Church of Rome, to be the Church of Christ: for the Sacrament in both kindes: for denying con∣fession, inuocation of Saints, and Purgatory. The mother was condemned to perpetuall prison: the brethren after tor∣ments, were condemned to be burned: and least they should exhort the people, they had gagges, or bals of wood thrust in∣to their mouths: which they thorough vehemencie of speach thrust out againe: and sang with a lowd voice, I beléeue in one God. The one féeling the flame come to his beard, said: ah what a small paine is this, in cōparison of the glory that is to come. There were besides another yoonger brother, and a sister with them in prison, who being as yet not setled neither in doctrine nor yéeres, somwhat relented, and were deliuered. Ex Phil. Melanc. The persecutors were the parson of S. Katherins, Do∣ctor Tapertons, William Cericken ruler of Mechlin. The same yéere, were apprehēded one Adrian & Marian his wife. The cause of their trouble was the edict of the Em∣perour against Lutherans, in the councell of Wormes. A∣drian (for feare) gaue backe, and was onely beheaded: shée was burned quicke, beyng enclosed in an iron grate, as the manner of that country is. Ex Pant. lib. 4. The same yéere M. Peter BrulyPeter Bruly. preacher, after hée had endured foure moneths imprisonment, was iudged by the Emperours commissioners to be burned to ashes, and his
ashes to be throwne into the riuer. The Priestes caused a small fire to be made, to increase his paine: but he endured chéerfully, and constantly. He being searched for by the ma∣gistrates of Dornick, where he preached, was hidden, and at length, let downe in a basket, ouer the citie wall, where he that let him down leaning ouer the wall to bid him farewel, caused vnawares, a stone to fall of the wall: which lighting vpon him, brake his leg: and so he was token by the watch. Ex Lud. Rab. lib. 6. The same yere, suffred Peter MiociusPeter Miocius a silkweauer, before his conuersion, a very wicked man: but after, maruellously reformed by Peter Bruly afore mentioned: they first impri∣soned him in a filthy dungeon, among frogges, toades, and filthy vermin. Shortly after, the Senate sent for him: and when hee woulde haue answered vnto their examinations, frō point to point: they interrupting him, bad him say, yea, or nay. Then said he, if you will not suffer me to answereA round an∣swere. for my selfe in matters of such importaunce, then send me to prison againe, among my toades, and frogs, which will not interrupt me, whē I talk with my Lord my God. So being condemned, with gunpowder put to his brest, he was put to death, and endured the fire. The Friers hearing the crack of the powder on his brest, told the people yt the diuel came out of him, and carried away his soule. There was at the same time, one BergebanBergeban. in prison: whom, when the iudges sent for, as one suspected, being then out of the way, he concei∣ued thereof such sorow in his mind, that he went of his own accord, and presented himself vnto the iudges: wherevpon, (they being sory for his voluntary appearaunce) they com∣mitted him to prison, and after, the commissioners threat∣ning him with cruel torments, & the Friers flattering him, to haue his punishment changed, & to be beheaded: he yelded vnto them. The persecutors were, the Senate of Dornick, and Doctor Hasurdus, a gray Frier. Ex Rabo, &c. Anno 1546. Iohan. Diazius, a Spaniard, was martired,
and killed of his owne brother, at Norberg in Germanie: where DiaziusIohan, Diazius killed by his brother. was busie in printing of Bucers Booke. His brothers name, was Alphonsus, who brought with him frō Rome, a cut throate, and a ruffian, to kill his brother. To whom, he comming, & perswading him to reuoke the truth, & the other refusing so to do, he fained himselfe to depart, & took his leaue of his brother: and by the way, buying an hatchet of a carpenter, sent his man disguised, with letters to his brother, himselfe following after: as Iohn Diazius in the morning was rising out of his bed, to read the letters: the wretched hangman, with the hatchet, claue his head insun∣der to the braines, leauing the hatchet in his head: and so he, with Alphonsus, tooke them to their héeles. They of Nor∣berg hearing of the fact, made after them, and one of the cō∣pany ouertooke them, and caused them to be put in prison at Genipont: but the Papists handeled the matter so, that the Emperour tooke it into his owne hearing, and no iudgement was giuen. Ex Claudio Senarclero. Ann. 1546. Charles the Emp. held an armed Councell at Augusta,1546 An armed coū∣cel at Augusta. The interim. after his victory gotten of the Germains: where, Iulius Vfling, Michael Sidonius, and Iohn Islebius, going about to concord together the Gospel of Christ with popish traditions, drewe out a newe religion, called an Interim, which the Emp. endeuoured with the sword to mainteine: and vnderstanding, that among other, the citizens of Con∣stantia refused his Interim, purposed to surprise them: but the Spaniards were driuen backe, and their captaine Al∣phonsus slaine. Ex Sleid. lib. 21. At the same time, many godly ministers of the churches in Germany, were in great danger, specially, such as refu∣sed the Interim: of whom, some were cast in prison, as Mar∣tine Frectius, superintendent of Vlms, with foure other preachers mo. Also, his brother George, for comming to his house, but to comfort him: for which cause Musculus the same time,
with other preachers mo, went from Auspurgh, Brentius from Hala, Blanrerus from Constance, Bucer from Straus∣burgh. In Hungary a certaine godly priest,A priest in Hungary. because he preached that eating of flesh was not forbidden in the Scriptures, the Bishop caused his body to be tied round about with hares, géese, and hennes,A straunge crueltie. and so caused dogges to be set vpon him, which cruelly tare and rent his body to death. Within few dayes after, the vile Bishop fell sicke and died madde. Ex tomo 2. Conwal. serm. Anno 1547. the Duke of Saxonie,The Duke of Saxonie Iohn Fredericke beyng taken prisoner of the Emperour at Albis, the 24. of April, because he would not forsake the trueth, was 5. yeres detained from his wife and children, and carried about with the Emperor. At the last, 1552.1552 Lantgraue of Hesse. he was set at libertie, and continued in his religion, till the houre of his death. Sleid. lib. 19. Such also was the case of Philip, the Lantgraue of Hesse: who was sixe daies after the Duke of Saxonie, fréed out of long captiuity. Lib. 9. & 24. Anno 1547. Hermannus, Archbishop of Colen,1547 Hermannus Archb. of Colē. was de∣posed by the Emperour: because he had reformed his church of certaine Papisticall superstitions, vsing therein the ad∣uise of Martin Bucer. In his roome was placed Adolphus Earle of Scauenburgh. Sleid. 18. An. 1549.1549 Martirdome for the trueth. Nicholas, a Frenchman, and Barbara his wife, with one Marion, the wife of Augustinus, a Barber, a godly man, suffered: who fled, and trauelling towards Englande, passing by Dornick, were there detected to ye Lieutenant of Dornick and so carried to Bergis, and there put into a dun∣geon. And afterward, NicholasNicholas. Marion. was condemned to be bur∣ned, Marion, wife of Austin, to be buried quick. Nicholas (going to the place of execution) was commanded to speake nothing to the people: Yet (forgetting his silence vnto ye peo∣ple) hée cryed with a loud voice: Charles, Charles, how long
shall thy hart be hardened?A worthy mar∣tyr. wherevpon one of the souldi∣ers gaue him a blow, and the Friers cried, he hath a Diuell. To whom he spake the verse of the psalme: Depart from me all ye wicked, for the Lord hath hard the voice of my weeping. Ex Lud. Rab. & alijs. Augustine.A while after, Augustine the husband of Marian was taken at Bellemount in Hennegow, & was caried to Ber∣gis, where he was burned, hartily calling vpon the Lord. Ex Crisp. & alijs. 1551 Two virgins.Anno 1551. at Bamberg two virgins were burned for the testimonie of the truth: they had garlandes of straw put vpon their heads: wherevpon one comforted another, saying: Christ bare a Crowne of thornes, and why shoulde not wée weare a crowne of strawe? &c. Ex Phil. Melancth. The same time, the citie of Magdeburg,Magdeburg. for refusing the Emperors Interim, had béen distressed the space of a whole yéere: but by reason of warre, which fell that time betwixt the Emperour, and the French king, they were receiued in∣to fauour, and suffered to enioy their former religion quiet∣ly. Sleid. lib. 23. Anno 1555. one Hostius,1555 Hostius. otherwise called George, for reprouing a Frier that preached false doctrine, touching the Sacrament of the Lordes body: after his Sermon in the Church, was apprehended by Hesselius, the Chamberlayne, and first being strangled, was afterward consumed with fire. Ex Lud. Rab, Anno 1554. Iohannes Frisius1554 Ioh, Frisius. Abbot of Newstate in Bauaria, was deposed, for mayntayning the trueth. The 25. of Iune. Anno 1555. Bertrand le Blasse,1555 Ber. le Blas. a Silke-weauer, wente vpon Christmas day, to the high Church of Dornick, where (the Priest being at masse) he tooke the cake out of his hāds, as he would haue lifted it ouer his head, and stamped it vn∣der his féete. For which fact, he was first drawen to the ca∣stle
of Dornick, to the market place (being before thrise tor∣mented on the pinebanke.) Then he was set vpon a Stage, where his right hand (wherewith hee tooke the hoste) was crushed, and pressed betwixt two hote Irons, till the forme and fashion of his hand was mishapen. In like maner, they vsed his right foote, which he thrust out of his owne accord,A wonderfull constancie. to be vsed as his hand was before. This done, they tooke the ball of Iron out of his mouth, and cut out his tongue: who (notwithstanding) with continuall crying, ceased not to call vpon God. Whereupon, the Tormentors put the Iron bal into his mouth againe. From thence they brought him downe into the lower Stage: he going to the same as quietly, and cherefullie, as if no part of his bodie had béene hurt. There, his hands and legges were bound behind him with an Iron chaine, and so he was let vp and down into the fire flatte, so long, till his whole bodie was consumed to ashes, which were (by the Gouernors commaundement) cast into the riuer. This done, the Chappel where the crustie godThe crustie Ood. receiued the shame, was locked vp, and the boorde wherupon ye priest stoode, burnte: the marble stone, on which the god brake his neck, was broken to péeces. And forasmuch, as Bertrād had receaued his doctrine at Wesell, commandement was geuen, that no person of that Countrey, should goe to We∣sel, vnder incurring the danger of the Emperors plackard. Ex Crisp. Plant. & alijs. The same yere 200. ministers, and preachers of the Gos∣pell, were banished out of Bohemia,200 preachers banished Bo∣heme. Ministers of Lorrain ba∣shed. for preaching against the superstition of the B. of Rome. Sleid. l. 25. At the same time also, the ministers of Lorrain were banished by the v. popish Pages, whom the Tigurins did receiue. Panc. An. 1562. Frances Warbut, and Alexander Daiken,1562 F. Warlut, A. Daiken. were beheaded at Dornick for the profession of the trueth, and yet their bodies committed to sepulture: they singing Psalmes when they went to execution, Ex Eud. Rab.
Gillotus Viuer,Gil. Viuer. Iames Fabers father in law, Michaell Faber, sonne to Iames Faber; Anna, wife to Gillotus, and daughter of Iames, were burned at Valence, for the testimo∣nie of the trueth. Persecutors Earle Lalaine. Anno 1550. At Valence, was Michella,1550 Michella, wife to Iames Clerke, who suffered before, burned also wt Gillotus. Crisp. An. 1552. Godfrey Hamel1552 G. Hamell. a tayler, was burned at Dor∣nick, or Turney: and when (to diminish his paine) the hang∣man would first haue strangled him, he refused it, saying, he would abide the Iudges sentence. Ex eod. Beside these martirs, a number suffered in the higher, and lower Germanie: some secretely made away, some burned, and some drowned. Anno Domini 1555. At Bergis, suffered Iohn Malo,1555 Iohn Malo Damian Wittrock, Weldrew Calier, Iohn Porceaw, burned quick. An. 1541. Suffered one Iulian, & Adrian Lopphen, 1555 At Bruxels, 1559. was one Baldwine beheaded: another also called Gillekin Tilman burnt. An. 1541. William Swole, burnt at Mechlin. An. 1529. Nicholas Paul beheaded at Gaunt. Robert Orginer, and Iane his wife, with Bandicon, and Martin Orginer, their children, suffered at Lisle, in the yere 1556.Parents and children mar∣tired together, 1556 Master Nicholas, and Iames Fosdaw, burnte at Mous, Cornelius Volcart, at Brugis, anno 1553. Habert the prin∣ter, and Philip Iopner, at Bruges, anno 1553. A woman buried with thornes vnder her. Peter le Ronp at Bruges, anno 1552. At Mechline suffered Frances, and Nicholas Thijs, two brethren, anno 1555. At Antwerpe were burned Adrian a painter, and Henrie, a Tayler, an. 1555. Also Cor∣nelius Halewine, Locksmith, and Herman Iohnson, ye same yere. M. Iohn Champ, Scholemaster, anno 1557. With a number mo, which are to be séene in a dutch boke of Adrian. Anno 1525. A certaine Monke, because he forsooke his
abominable order, & married, was burnt at Prage. A godly preacher was poisoned by ye priests at Erford. Ex Pantal. Thus farre the Duch martyrs. These which follow are French martyrs. ANno 1524. Iames Pauan1524 Iames Pauan. schoolemaister was persecu∣ted by D. Martiall of Paris, and there burned: he had once before béene compelled to recant. Ex Crisp. Anno 1528. Dionisius Rieux.1528 Dionisius Ri∣eux. was burnt with a slow fire at Melda, and did abide much torment: hée much medi∣tated vpon the saying of Christ: He that denieth me before men. &c. Ex Crisp. Ann. 1533. Iohan. de Caduceo1533 Iohan. Cadu∣ceo. Fiue burned at Paris. batcheler of the ciuil law, was burned at Limosin. The same yéere, these 5. were burned at Paris, for ca∣sting abroad certain bils, which sounded against the masse. Bartholomew Mylen, a lame créeple, Ioh. Burges, merchāt, the receiuer of Nantz, Henry Poole of Courbellin, Cantel∣la a Schoolemistres, Stephen de la Forge, merchant. Henry Poylle had his tongue boared thorough, and with a wyre ti∣ed to one of his chéekes: they were atached by the Promo∣ters of Paris. Crisp. Anno 1534. Alexander Canus1534 Alexander Canus. Priest, otherwise cal∣led Laurentius Crucenc, was burned at Paris with slowe fire, Pantal. Anno 1533. Iohn Pointer,1533 I, Pointer. a Surgeon, was first condem∣ned to be strangled, and then burned: but afterward (because he would not do homage to an Idoll at the commandement of a Frier who came to confesse him) his sentence was al∣tered, to haue his tongue cut out, and so to be burned. The persecutors were the Graye Friers of Paris, and the Gar∣bonish doctors, Crisp. The same yere, Peter Gandet,P. Gandet. sometime knight of the Rhodes, was trayned out of Geneua by his vncle, and after long torments, was burned, Crisp.
Anno 1534. Quoquillard1534 Quoquillard. was burned at Bezanson. Crispin. The same yéere Nicholas a scriuener, Iohn de Phoyx, Stephen Burlet, were burned at Arcas. Also Mary Becan∣della, for reprouing false doctrine preached by a Frier, was accused by a Grayfrier at Rochell, and burned at Founta∣nis. Crisp. Anno 1535. Iohn Coruon1535 Iohn Coruon. of Moscon, was burned for the testimonie of the truth: a man vnlettered, yet to whom God had giuen such wisedome, that the Iudges were ama∣sed. Crisp. Anno 1526. Martin Gouin1526 Martin Gouin. beyng taken with letters of maister Farell, and Peter Viret, and forced by the In∣quisitour, to make confession of his faith, was drowned. Crisp. Anno 1540. Claudius Painter,1540 Claud. Painter. a goldsmith, was accused by his kinsfolks, whom he attempted to cōuert, & was com∣mitted to Morinus, a chief captaine: who condemned him to be burned: but the high Court of Parlement of Paris, gaue iudgement, that his tongue shoulde bée first cutte out. Crisp. The same yéere, Stephen BruneSteph. Brune. a husbandman, was persecuted by Gasper Angerius, the Bishoppes renter, and Donucellus, a Franciscane, and Inquisitour: he was iud∣ged to be burned. At the place of his burning, called Plan∣uoll, the winde blewe the flame of the fire so from him, that he stoode exhorting the people that continued there, about the space of an houre, scarce harmed, or touched with any flame. So that all the wood being wasted, they were fayne to begin a new fire againe: yet stoode he constant, neither could he yet be burned. Then the Hangman tooke a stake and let fly at his head: to whom the blessed man (being yet aliue) said, when I am iudged to the fire to be burnt, doe you beat me with stones, like a dogge? With that the hangman, with a pike thruste
him through the belly and guts, and so burned him to ashes, scattering his ashes afterward with the wind. Ex Crisp. Anno 1542. Constantinus1542 Constantinus. a citizen of Roan, with thrée other, were burned for the testimony of the truth. Crisp. The next yéere Iohn du BeckIohn du Beck. priest, abode the torment of the fire for the truth, in the chiefe citie of Champaine. The same yéere Aymond de lay voyAymond de lay voy. a preacher, beyng accused by the parish priest of S. Faith in Angeow, & other priests, was taken (when he might haue fled, and was also by his friends exhorted therevnto) & hauing béene tormen∣ted thrée houres, that he sounded therewith, beyng a man of a weake nature, he was condemned to be burned at Bour∣deaux. After sentence giuen he conuerted a Carmelite frier, who was his cōfessor. He was burned for denying purgato∣rie, with other points of popish superstition: when hée was brought to the place of execution, he sang the psalme, When Israell came out of Egypt, &c. and as he was oft repeting, O Lord my God I cōmend my soule, the hangman haled him vpon the steps, in such sort that he strangled him, & after his body was consumed with fire. Before his death,A notable saying. my flesh (saith he) striueth maruelously against the spirit, but short∣ly I shall cast it off. Anno 1544. Frauncis Bribard1544 Francis Bri∣bard. Wil. Russen. the chiefe secretarie to the Cardinall of Bellay, his tongue first cut out, was after consumed with fire. The same yéere W. Russen an Apothecarie, was burned at Roan, for scattring bookes against popery. First, because he would not doo reuerence to the Image of our Lady, his tongue was cut out. The māner of the execution was, he had his hands & féet bound behind his backe, & with a pully was lifted vp into the aire, & when the fire was kindled, he was let downe into the flame, where the blessed martyr with a smiling & chéerefull countenance looked vp to heauen, neuer moouing nor stirring till he gaue vp his spirit: some said, he had a diuel, others said nay, for then he would haue fallē into
dispaire. The Carmelite, who moued him, going to executiō, to doo homage to the idol, was called De Lauda:De Lauda. he was af∣terward conuerted, and preached the gospell. Crisp. lib. 2. Anno 1545. Iames Cobard1545 Iames Cobard. a schoolemaister, was bur∣ned in the citie of S. Michaell, in the dukedome of Barens in Lorraine, for disputing with thrée popish Priestes, and mainteyning that the Sacraments doo not auaile without faith: and for other his confessiōs, which he sent of his owne accord to the iudges, by his mother. Crispinus. An. 1546. Peter Clerke,Peter Clerke. brother to Iohn Clerke, burnt before: Stephanus Mangius, Iames Bomplack, Iohn Brise∣bar, Henry Hutmotes, Thomas Honorate, Iohn Bardoni∣nus, Iohn Flesch, Iohn Pitquer, Iohn Mattheston, Phillip Little, Michaell Chailow, Frauncis Clerke, Couberon a weauer, were burned at Melda or Meaux, 10. miles from Paris, were William BriconetusW. Briconetus. B. of the place did much good, and reformed the Church, but being straitly examined, relented, and there enterteined a priuate congregation in Mangius house, & chose Peter Clerke to their minister. The congregation grew shortly to 400. and complaint beyng made thereof to the Senate of Paris, thrée score & two, men & women, were brought bound to Paris, singing Psalmes by the way,14 Christian martyrs. especially the 79. psalme: of these 62. fourtéene were stedfast & constant, & endured first racking, to bewray other of their brethren, but vttered none: ye rest were scour∣ged and banished, the other persisting still in the profession of the truth, were sent in a cart from Paris to Melda, to be executed. In the way thrée miles from Paris, a certaine weauer méeting them, cried alowde: bidding them to be of good chéere, and to cleaue fast to the Lord, who also was ta∣ken and tied fast to the cart. Comming to the place of execu∣tion, which was before Mangius house, it was told them that they which would be cōfessed should saue their tōgues: so 7. (to obtaine to speake) were confessed the other 7. would not As they were in burning the people song psalmes. The
priests also séeing that, song, O Salutaris hostia, and Salue Re∣gina, while the sacrifice of these holy martirs was finished.The priestes sing at ye death of martyrs. Their wiues being compelled to sée their husbands in tor∣ments, were after put in prison, from whēce they being pro∣mised to be let go, if they wold say, their husbands were dā∣ned, they refused to say so. The accusers wer, Frācisc. friers. Anno 1546. Peter Chapet1546 Peter Chapet. was first strangled, and then burnt at Paris, for scattering bookes of religion, and farther confession of his faith. His accuser was Iohn Andre, promo∣ter to Liset the President. Going to execution, he praied, O L. Iesu, son of Dauid haue mercy vpon me. Then said D. Malliard, who was one yt disputed with him before, & was appointed to be present at executiō: say Iesus Maria, or els (saith he) thou shalt be burned quick: which he refused to do, and afterward being strugled withal, to vtter ye same, did let scape out of his mouth, Iesus Maria vnawares: but he by & by, repressing himself: O God (saith he) what haue I done, pardon me O Lord, to the truth I haue sinned. Then was he strangled, yet so, that somewhat he felt the paines of the fire. After this, Malliard full of anger, went to the iudge∣ment house, and much blamed the iudges, for suffering the heretikes to haue their tongues: wherevppon, a decrée was made, that all that went to be burned, vnles they would re∣cant at the fire, shold haue their tongues cut out:Their tongues cut out. which law was afterward diligently obserued. Crisp. lib. 6. Anno 1546. SauitinusSauitinus. Niuet a lame créeple of the towne of Meaux, as they were examining him of certain points of religion, asked him, whether he would stand to that hée had said or no? to whom he answered againe: & I aske you Lord Iudges, dare you be so bold, to deny that which is so playn, and manifest by the open words of the scripture. At last, he suffred death, with cruel tormēts, through ye means of Peter Liset, a great persecutor. Henric. Pantal. & Gallic. hist. The same yéere, Stephen PolliotSteph. Polliot. was apprehended at Fera, & burned at Paris, hauing his bookes hanged about
his necke:Pantal. after hee had a long space béene kept in a foule and darke dungeon. Anno 1547. Iohn English1547 Ioh. English. was condemned by the high Court of Paris, for the profession of the trueth. Crisp. & Adrian. The same yéere Michael MichelotMichael Mi∣chelot. was burned at Wē∣den by Turney: who being asked, whether he would recant, and be beheaded, or persist, & be burned. He answered: that hée trusted, he which gaue him grace not to deny the trueth, would also giue him patience to abide the fire. The same yéere, Leonardus de PratoLeonardus de Prato. going to Bar, a towne in Burgondie, from Dyion, with two false bre∣thren: with whom, he talked of religion, was bewraied of them, and burned. Ioh. Taffing∣non.Also, the same yéere, Iohn Taffingnon, Ioane his wife, Simon Mareschall, Ioan his wife, William Michliot, Iames Bonleraw, and Iames Bretany, of the citie of Langeres, wer committed to the fire, and suffered with great constancie: e∣specially, Ioan, Simons wife, reserued to the last place, be∣cause she was the yonger, confirmed her husband, and al the rest: declaring that they should the same day be married to the Lord Iesus Pantal. Crisp. & alii. Michael Ma∣reschal, &c.The same yéere, about the same time, were Michael Ma∣reschall, Iohn Cam, great Iohn Camus, and Iohn Seraphin condemned by the Senate of Paris, and there burned. Ex eisdem. Anno 1548. Octauian Blonds,1548 Octauiā Blōds a marchant of precious stones, was first apprehended at Lions, and there after a while, confessing, and standing to the maintenance of the trueth, at length through importunitie of his parentes, and friends, gaue ouer his confession: notwithstanding, Gabri∣el of Sacconer, presentener, his persecutor, not leauing him so, appealed him vp to the high court of Paris, where, being asked touching his faith, which of the two confessions hée would stand to, (he beeing admonished before of his fall and
offence geuen) said, he would liue and die in his first confes∣sion: and so was he condemned to be burned, Crisp. l. 6. Anno 1549. Hubert Cherrer,1549 H. Cherrer. Taylor, a young man, of 19 yeres, constantly suffred at Dyion, for the testimony of the trueth: notwithstanding all threatnings of persecutors, or allurements of parents. The same yere. M. Florence Venot,F. Venot. after he had endured 4. yeres imprisonmēt at Paris, where he suffered greeuous torments: and (among other) had béen put in a brake, like an Hipocras bagge, that hee could neither stande nor lie seuen weekes together. At length, when there was a great shewe in Paris, the king comming to the citie, and diuers other martirs in sundrie partes of the Citie put to death, he (with his tongue cut out) was brought to the execution of thē all. And last of all, in the place of Maulbert, was burned, the 9. of Iuly in the afternoone. Crisp. The same yeare also, Anne Andebert,A. Andebert. an Apothecaries wife and a widow, was burned at Orleance, and condem∣ned by the councel of Paris. When the rope was put about her, she called it her wedding girdle, wherewith she should be maried to Christ:Notable con∣stancie and courage in a woman. and being appointed to be burned vpō a Saterday, she said: On a Saterday was I first maried, and on a saterday shal I be maried againe, Ex Crisp. The same yere, when diuers were burned at Paris, for a spectacle, not long after the coronation of Henrie 2, among them was a poore taylor, dwelling not farre of the kinge pa∣lace, in S. Anthonies streete,A poore tai∣lor. who (for that he wrought vpon an holie day) was clapt in prison: and the matter béeing brought to the Court, the poore taylor was presented euen before the king, into the Palace: where hee so couragiouslie behaued himselfe against Petrus Castellanus, B. of Mascō, whom the king willed to talke with this poore Taylor in his presence, that the king seemed to muse with himselfe (as one amazed) so yt (least his behauiour should be any meanes to worke in the kings mind) he was commaunded againe to
the hands of the Officer, and within few daies condemned by the high steward of the kings house, to be burned aliue. And so his execution was sharpe and cruell, before ye church of Saint Marie, the king himselfe being present: where it pleased God to geue such strength to his seruant, in suffe∣ring, that the beholding thereof did more astonish the king, then all the other did before. Io. Crisp. Pantal. li. 7. The same yere was one ClaudiusClaudius. burned at Orleance, (comming from Geneua to his Countrey,) for the Gospel. Crisp. The same yere the Councell of Paris condemned Leo∣nard Galimard,L. Galimard. to be burned, the same time that Leonard Venate suffered at Paris. Also, at Troys suffered Macaeus MorreowM. Morreow. for the testimonie of the trueth. Ex eod. An. 1550. Ione Godean,1550 I. Godean. and Gabriel Berardinus, were burned: being apprehended for rebuking a priest of swea∣ring. Gabriel began to shrinke for feare of torment: yet be∣ing confirmed by the constant death of Ione, recouered a∣gaine: & (hauing first his tongue cut out) was burned, Eod. An. 1551. Thomas Spaāulinus,1551 T. Sanpauli∣nus a notable martir. of 18. yeres of age, for re∣buking one that did sweare, at Paris, was suspected of Lu∣theranisme, and so miserably racked in prison, yt he shoulde either forsake his opinion, or confesse other of his religion: through the setting on of one Mallard, & other Sorbonists, that the sight thereof, made Aubertus, one of the Councell, to turne his back, and wéepe. The young man (when hee had made the Tormentors wearie with racking, and yet would confesse none) at laste was had to Maulbers place in Paris, to be burned: where he (being in the fire) was plucked vp againe vpon the gibet, and asked whether he would turne:Marueilous constancie. To whom he said, that he was in the way toward God, and desired them to let him goe. And so he ended his life. Ibid. Anno 1551. Mauricius Secenate was burned in Pro∣uence, for the testimonie of the trueth: who first answered in
such sort that they had no great aduantage against him: for which hée was so troubled in conscience, that beyng after∣ward called before the iudge, answered so directly that hée burned for the same. Ex eodem. The same yéere was Iohannes Put or de Puteo,Iohannes Put. surna∣med Medicus, burned at Vzez in Prouence, for the Sa∣crament of the Lords body. Ibidem. The same yéere, at Lions was Claudius Mouerius,Claudius Mouerius. af∣ter much dangerous afflictions & prisonments, burned for the profession of the truth. He was noted to be of so mild cō∣ditions, & so constant, and learned withall, that certaine of the iudges could not forbeare wéeping at his death. Anno 1552, Renat Poyet,1552 Renat Poyet. the sonne of William Poyet, which was chauncellor of Fraunce, for the constant witnes∣sing of the truth, was burned at Salmure. The same yéere, Iohn LoyerIohn Loyer. and his seruaunt a yoong man, comming from Geneua, were taken by the way, and had to Tholouse, where they were both condemned. When they were brought to the stake, the yoong man first going vp, began to wéepe, the Maister fearing least hée should giue ouer, ranne and comforted him: so they began to sing as they were in the fire: the Maister standing vpright to the stake, shifted the fire from himselfe to his seruaunt,Piety & chri∣stian charity. beyng more carefull of him then of himselfe: and when he saw him dead, he bowed himselfe downe into the fire, into the flame, and so died. Crispin. & alij. The same yéere, Hugonius GrauierHugonius Grauier. minister of Cortil∣lon, was taken at Mascon, where he went to visit his wiues friends, and was burned at Burg. Crisp. Anno 1533.1533 Fiue students burned. Martial Alba, Petrus Scriba, Bernard Se∣gonie, Charles Faber, Peter Nauihew, comming from Ge∣neua, and going to Lions, where they sitting at the table of one that met them by the way, and bad them home to his house, were apprehēded and led to pryson: where after they had continued a yéere, and disputed with the Friers, & had
exhibited a learned confession of their faith, afterward were burned at Lions. They were examined sunderly of the sa∣crament of the Lords body, of purgatory, of confession, inuo∣cation, free will, and of the supremacie. &c. Beyng set on the cart, they began to sing Psalmes: at the place of execution Martial Alba beyng the eldest,Christian cha∣ritie. was the last that went to the stake, who desired he might go about his fellowes tied at the stake and kisse them, which beyng graunted, he went and kissed euery one of them, saying: farewell my bro∣ther, likewise each one bad farewell my brother. The hang∣man thought first to haue strangled them, but their faces be∣ing smeared with fat and brimstone, the rope was burnt before they were strangled: so the blessed martyrs in the middest of the fire, spake one to another to be of good chéere, and so departed Crisp. Pantal. Shortly, after the fiue students before mentioned, Pe∣trus BergeriusPetrus Ber∣gerius. made the like confession, and was burned at Lions: he conuerted in the dungeon a certaine theefe, who for payne and torment in the pryson cried out of God, and cursed his parents that begat him, beyng almost eaten with life, miserably handled, and fedde with such bread, as dogges, and horses had refused: he by the prayers and teaching of this Bergerius was conuerted: his name was Iohn Chanbone.Iohn Chan∣bone. Touching his conuersion he wrote a swéet letter to those fiue students, wherein he praysed God for them. Crisp. & Pantal. Anno 1553. Dionisius Pelloquine,1553 Dionisius Pel∣loquine. a moonke some∣time, was burned at Ville Franch, sir miles from Lions, after long imprisonment, his articles were the Masse, the Sacrament, auricular confession, Purgatorie, the virgin Marie, the Popes supremacie: He died the 11. of Sep∣tember. Stephanus Peloquinus his brother was taken with Anne Andebert aboue mentioned, and martyred at the same time, at a small fire. Crisp. The same yéere Ludouicus Marsacus, who had bin of the
order of the Dimilaunces, that had serued the king: Micha∣el Gerard his cousin, Stephen Granot carpenter, were bur∣ned at Lyons, by sentence of the kings Lieutenant. As they should be brought out to to the stake, by the hangman, he ti∣tied the rope about the necke of the other two, Marsacke see∣ing himselfe to be spared, for his order and degrees sake, cal∣led by the way to the Lieutenant,A worthy chā∣pion of Christ. that hee might haue also one of the precious chaines tied about his necke, in ho∣nour of his Lord: the which being graunted vnto, they were so led to the fire Crisp. Pantal. The same yéere, Mathaeus Dymonetus a marchaunt,Matheus Dy∣monetus. who before his conuersion, had led a vitious life: was bur∣ned at Lions, by the Lieutenant, Primacius, and Bnatheri∣us officiall, and Orus inquisitour. Hee suffered the 15. of Iuly. Crisp. The same yéere, William Neele,Williā Neele. an Augustine Fri∣er, was burned at Eureux in France, for rebuking the vitious life of Priestes, and the Deane named Legoux Pan∣tal. lib. 6. The same yéere also, Simon LaloeSimon Laloe comming from Gene∣ua, was taken: and after much racking, and torments, was burned at Dyion: the 21. of Nouember. The executioner named Iames Siluester,Iames Siluest. séeing the constancy of the martyr, was so touched in conscience, that he fell into such a dis∣paire, that hée could hardly receiue anie comfort of all the promises of the Gospel: at length he was strengthned, and conuerted: and so with all his familie remooued to Gene∣ua. Crisp. Also the same yéere at Paris, Nicholas NayleNichol. Nayle. shoe-ma∣ker, comming thither, with certaine fardels of bookes, was apprehended: and after diuers torments, so that his bodie was almost dissolued one ioynt from another (to vtter his fellowes) was last of all burned Crisp. The same yéere also, Peter SerrePeter Serre. about Tholouse, (who first was a priest, and then went to Geneua: where hée
learned the shoomakers craft, and so liued) was burned, be∣ing bewraied by his brothers wife: to whom he came of kindnes from Geneua, to do his brother good. The iudge as∣king him what trade he was, said, of late he had béen a shoo∣maker:The name of a priest, a name of shame to a Christian. the Iudge asking what trade hee had before vsed, said: he was ashamed to rehearse, or to remember, it béeyng the vilest, and wickedest estate in the world. The Iudge and the people hearing him say so, thought he had béen some théefe, or cutpurse, and were desirous to heare the same of him: but he very loth, and with shame refused to vtter the same: neuerthelesse, at length, through importunity, was constrained to declare the trueth: and saide, he was a priest. His tongue béeing cutte out, and so put to the fire, hée stoode so quiet, looking vp to heauen all the time of his burning, as though hee had felt nothing: bringing such admiration to the people, that one of the Parlement sayde: that way was not the safest, and best, which they vsed in bringing the Lutherans to the fire: for it would doe more hurt than good. Crisp. The same yéere Stephen King,Steph King, &c and Petrus Denocheus, one King a Notary, and Petrus his Clearke, were after long imprisonment, burned at Chartris. Anno 1554. Anthonius Magneus1554 Antonius Magneus. being taken at Bur∣ges, by certaine priestes, was sent to Paris, where, after great rebukes, and tormentes, he was iudged to haue his tongue cut out, & to be burned at ye place, of Maulbert in Pa∣ris. He was sent from the 5. students at Lyons, & other in captiuitie at Paris, vnto Geneua, to commend thē to their praiers vnto God: from whence hauing returned; within 3. houres after he was taken at Bruges. Crisp. The same yéere, William AlenconWilliam Alen∣con. book-binder, was bur∣ned at Mount-pelliers, ye 7. of Ianuary. There was ye same time at Mount pelliers, a certain clothworker, who for fear reuolted: to whom it was inioyned by the iudges, to make recantation publikely, and to bee present at the burning
of Alencon: at the beholding of whose constancie he gathe∣red such boldnesse, that he desired the iudges, either that he might burne with Alencon, or else to be caried backe again to prison, saying: that he would make no other recantation:Repentance. wherefore within thrée daies after was burned. Crispin. The same yéere, at Dola was beheaded a godly lawier, named Paris Pamer,Paris Pamer. for the gospell of Christ. Pantal. The same yéere, Peter du Val shoomaker,Peter du Val. after most grée∣uous torments, was burned at Nismes. Crispin. Also the same yéere, Iohannes Filiolus carpenter,Iohn Filiose. & Iulia∣nus le Ville pointmaker, were burned at Sansare: they were apprehended by Gilles le Pers. After sentence of fire being giuen, they appealed to ye court of Paris, where they being presēted, Gilles le pers was sodainly stricken mad, & so died. After this, the officer tormented thē from after din∣ner, til 3. of the clocke, to make them recant: which, whē they constantly endured, they were brought to the place of exe∣cution, where the officer put into their hands, being bound, a wodden crosse, which they tooke with their téeth, and cast a∣way. Wherfore, their tōgues were cut out: which not with∣standing, they spake at their death, saying: We bid sinne, the worlde, and the Diuell, farewell for euer,Notable con∣stancie. with whom wée shall neuer haue to doe hereafter. At last, when the tormē∣tor came to smeare them with brimstone, and gunpowder, goe to (said Filiolus) salte the stinking flesh, salt it. Finally, as the flame burst vp to their faces, they constantly finished their martirdome, Pantal. The same yere also, Dionisius Vair was burned at Roan,D. Vair. his iudgement being geuen, thrise to be taken vp with the engine, and so to be let downe againe. He was first a popish priest: left that, and became a bookebinder at Geneua. After∣ward, in the time of king Edward, was minister at Gersey till Quéene Marie came in. He was apprehended at Roan, with I. Langoise, his brother: by one William, who stayd his bokes, & him yt had ye custody of thē: wherof Denis hearing, to
redeeme the kéeper of his bookes, offered himselfe, and so af∣ter many terrible tormentes, he was executed with fire, where the flame went so high, that the hangman being not able to come néere him, cried to the people standing by to helpe, but neuer a man would stir. So hee finished his course and martyrdome. Pantal. lib. 10. There was a rich man in Paris, that sayd in iest to the Friers of S. Frauncis order, you weare a rope about your bodies, because S. Frauncis should once haue béene hanged, but the Pope redéemed him, vpon condition that euer after he should weare a rope. Vpon this the Franciscans caused him to be apprehended, and so iudgement passed he should be hanged, but he contented to recant, thought thereby to saue his life. The Friers hearing of his recantation, com∣mended him, saying: if hee continued so, he should bee sa∣ued: and so called on the Officers, that hee might be han∣ged, while he was in a good way: and so, notwithstanding his recantation,Cruelty of the Friers. he was hanged for iesting against the friers. Pantal. Anno 1554. Tho. Galbergne1554 Th. Galbergne a Couerlet-maker, was burned at Turney, chéerefully singing psalmes, at the time of his execution. Crisp. lib, 4. About which time also, Nicholas PaulNicholas Paul. was beheaded at Gaunt. Anno 1551. Richard Feurus,1551 R. Feurus. a Goldsmith, was condē∣ned at Lions, he appealing to the high Court of Paris: In the way as he was led to Paris, he was mette by certaine whom he knew not, and by them taken from his kéepers, and set at libertie. And anno 1554. finding fault in an Inne in Daulphin, with grace said in latine, he was detected, and taken by the vnder Marshall, and brought to Lions, where he was condemned, first to haue his tongue cut out, & then to be burned, (Dignatius being Iudge:) which he receaued willingly, the 7. of Iulie, Crisp. & alijs. The same yere, Nicholas de Chesne, as he went from
Bezamon, to the Towne of Grie, did not homage to a cer∣taine crosse. Whereupon, he was detected by a Monke, and condemned by the Iudge to be burned. Being caried to the place of martirdome, by the way he was promised, that if he would knéele downe and heare a masse, he should be let goe as a passenger. Which Nicholas refusing to doe, tooke his death patiently, Crisp. lib. 6. Anno 1556. Iohn Bertrand,1556 I Bertrand. a kéeper of the Forrest of March Noyce, was burned at Bloys, for the testimonie of the trueth, being condemned by Denis Barles, Counceller of Bloys: As he was tied to the poste he sang the 25. Psalme. Of age he was young, and of countenance, amiable. Séeing the place where he should suffer, O happie iorney (saith he) and faire place, that is prepared for me. O Lorde (saith he) geue thy hand to thy seruant, I commend my soul vnto thée, and so yelded vp his spirit. Crisp. li. 6. The same yere, Peter Ronsean,P. Ronsean. whilest he required his inheritance of his brother in law, was betrayed by him. He was put to the racke 3. times, which he suffered constantlie with great torments. Afterward he had his tongue cut out, and a ball of Iron put into his mouth. He was drawen on a hurdle, all broken and maymed, to the fire: where hee was drawen vp into the ayre, and let down 3. times: and when he was halfe burned, the ball of Iron fell out of his mouth, and he with a loud voice cryed out: saying, Iesus Christ as∣sist me, and so gaue vp the ghost, Crisp. The same yere suffered also at Burdeaux, Arnold Mo∣uier,A. Mouier. & Iohn de Cases, who went to comfort Arnold. After many examinations, sentence was geuē they should be bur∣ned, by Anthony Lescure, the kings Atturney. They were drawen thorow the durt vpon hurdles; to the place of execu∣tion, with a number of billes, glaiues, and gunnes, & trum∣petters. The Magistrates commanded also the gates to be shutte, and garded with kéepers. Mouier was first strangled. Cases was set on fire before
the hangman came, who chaunced to fall from the top of the post, to the pauement, and so brake his head, that the bloud followed in great quantitie. When these two milde Mar∣tyrs were almost consumed to ashes, sodainly there fel such a feare among them, without any cause, notwithstanding their gates were garded, their furniture of gunnes, & other weapons, that they all fledde, and ranne ouer one another. The Prior of S. Anthonies fell downe, so that a great nū∣ber went ouer him. The Iudge Pontake, on his Mule, with his red robe, flying as other did, was ouerthrowen in the prease, in the stréete called Peterni, in such sort, that he was faine to be caried to a widowes house, and there cried with∣in: hide me, saue me, I am dead, my friends: hide my Mule, that no man sée her, &c. But no man knew any cause of all this feare, Crisp. li. 6. The same yere, Bartholmew Hector,B. Hector. a Bookeseller of Geneua, as he came into the vale of Angrogn in Piedmont, was arrested by a gentleman called Perrere, & sent to Thu∣rin, and was burned. At the stake he was offered his par∣don, if he would recant, which he refused. At his death many wept, saying, why doeth this man die, that speaketh of no∣thing but of God? Crisp. lib. 6. He was condemned by Bal∣thelmew Emie, President. Anno 1557. Philip Ceur,1557 P. Ceur. Apothecarie of Geneua, and Iames his felow, were burned at Dyion, the most parte of the people wept bitterly, saying, be of good cheare, brethren, &c. whereat the aduersaries were greatly offended, saying to the Magistrates, doe you not sée, how almost halfe parte of the people is on their side, and comforts them, Crisp. li∣bro. 6. The same yere, Archambant Seraphoni,Archambant. and M. Nicho∣las de Russeaw, constantly suffered at Dyion. The same Ar∣chambant had béene condemned 3. yeares before, at Tule, and as he was led to Burdeaux, escaped. Ibid. The same yere, Philbert Hambis, sometimes a Prieste,
then a painter, afterward the minister of Albenart in San∣tong, was apprehended at Saintes Ville, and with him his host, a priest whom hée had conuerted to the Gospell, and so caried to Burdeaux before the president. As hée was in pryson, on a Sunday a Priest came in with all his furni∣ture, to say Masse, whom Philbert seing inuested, came and plucked his garments from him, with such zeale, that the masse-garments, with chalice, and candlestickes fell downe and were broken, saying vnto him: is it not enough for you to blaspheme God in Churches, but you must pollute also the pryson with your Idolatrie? The gaoler hauing first beaten him, vppon this laid him in a low pit, laden with yrons, that his legs were swollen withall, and there conti∣nued 8. daies. A little before, perceiuing the priest his host to haue fallen, and to haue flatly renounted his profession, after certaine instruction, and warning to repent, hee tolde him, his life should be neuer the longer, for he should die be∣fore him, and not for Gods cause: and that he should be an ensample to all apostataes: he had no sooner ended his talk,Gods ven∣geance. but the priest going out of prison, was slaine by two gentle∣men which had a quarrell to him. At the place of his execu∣tion, the trumpets blew to hinder the people from hearing his exhortation: so first being strangled, hee was consumed with fire. Crisp. lib. 6. The same yere, Nicholas StartoriusN. Startorius. was attached by Ri∣pet, a Secretarie, and burned at Ost, by Piedmount: being first tried with the rack. He was afterward burned: being of the age of 26. He was apprehended for blaming a frier that preached false doctrine, Crisp. li. 6. An. 1558. George Tardife1558 G. Tardil. was burned at Senes. Ano∣ther at Tours, a broiderer of that place. Nic. a shomaker, at Ienuile. Nicholas was yong: who, when he was condēned, and set in the Cart, his father (comming wt a staffe) woulde haue beaten him:The father a∣gainst ye sonne. but ye officers (not suffering yt) would haue stroken the old mā. The sonne seeing that, cryed out, saying,
he had authoritie ouer him, and therfore desired them to suf∣fer him: finally hauing a ball of iron put in his mouth, hée was consumed with fire. Crisp. lib. 6. An assembly of three or foure hundred of the faithfull at Paris.Anno 1558. the fourth of September, a company of the faithfull to the number of three or foure hundred were assembled at Paris in a certaine house, hauing before it the colledge of Plessis, in the stréete of S. Iames, and behind it the colledge of Sorbone, who there assembled in the begin∣ning of the night, to communicate the Lordes supper, were discouered by the Priests of Plessis, who made outcry vpon them, that the whole citie almost was in armour. The go∣uernours of the congregation exhorted the people to con∣stancy, and fell to praier. That done, (through the councel of some, which knew the cowardly hearts of the multitude) order was taken, that the men which had weapons, shoulde venture through the presse, onely the women and children, remained in the house, & a few men with them, which were lesse bolde, to the number of sixe or seuen score: where ap∣peared the wonderful work of God, in thē yt went out with weapons: which (notwithstanding, that the lanes and passa∣ges were stopped,A maruellous deliuerance. and fires made) did all escape, saue onely one, who was beaten downe with stones, and so destroied. Certaine that remained in the house, afterward lept into gardens: where they were staied till the magistrates came. The women, who were all of great wealth, only sixe or se∣uen excepted, perceyuing the furie of the people, wente vp to the windowes, crying mercie, shewing their innocent in∣tent required iustice ordinarie. Thus as they were inclosed six or seuen houres, came Martin, the kings Atturney, with force of Commissaries, and Sergeants, who entring the house, and viewing of the furniture, the women and children, for pitie coulde not re∣fraine from teares. Notwithstanding, procéeding in his of∣fice, he had them all to prison, in the litle Castle. In the meane time, all manner of slaunderous reports were raised
of them, as incest, conspiracie, killing of children, &c. which rumour the Cardinall of LorrainThe cardinall of Lorraine a slanderer of the faithfull. did greatly confirme. The brethren which escaped, hearing this, consulted, first to humble themselues with praier before God in their priuate families. Secondly, to stop the brutes running of their as∣semblies, to write Apologies, one to the king,An Apologie to the king. another to the people. The Apologie to the king nothing preuailed: who was perswaded that all was but pretenced excuses. The other to the people did great good, in satisfying the rumours and defending the good cause of the Gospell: against which Apologies, and persons, diuerse Sorbonists began to write, one called Doctor Demochares, the other Cualis Bishop of Auranches: besides these, yet a third Sorbonist. And finally the 17. of September, diuerse of the poore afflicted Christi∣ans were brought forth to their martyrdome, a great part of them being deliuered by the intercessiō of the Germans, who were then in a certaine colloquie at Wormes, albeit certaine of the company were executed before the com∣ming of the Germane Embassadors, whose names doo here ensue: Nicholas ClynetNicholas Cly∣net and other martyrs. one of the Elders of the congre∣gation at Paris, before schoolemaister at Santong where hée was borne, was there pursued, and had his image bur∣ned: hée did so ouerthrowe Maillardone one of the chéefe Sorbonistes, and a notorious Sodomite, the Lieutenant, that he confessed, he neuer heard a man better learned, and of more intelligēce. With him suffered also Taurin Grauell an elder also of the same congregation, first a student of the law in Tholouse, then an aduocate in the court of Paris: the third a gentlewoman of thrée and twenty yéeres of age, named Phillip de Luns, widow of the Lord of Graueron: they had al their toongues first cut out, and then suffered the fire with great constancie, specially Grauell, and the wid∣dow, who euer before since the death of her husband vsed to go in mourning apparell:A notable widdow. but the same day going to bur∣ning, she put on her French hood, and decked her selfe in her
best apparell, as going to a new marriage. Grauell & Clinet were burned aliue: Philip was strangled after she had a lit∣tle tasted the flame with her féet, and visage. At the time of execution, she neither changed colour nor countenaunce, be∣ing of an excellent beautie. Crisp. lib. 6. Of the same company were Nicholas Cene a Physi∣cian, brother to Phillip Cene aboue mentioned, and Peter Gabart a sollicitour of processes, about the age of thirtie yéeres: the time of execution beyng come, they had their tongues cut out, and were drawen to the Suburbes of Saint Germane, where they endured great torment: for they were holden long in the ayre ouer a smal fire, and their lower parts burnt of, before their higher parts were much burned, notwithstanding they endured constant to the end.Bibles and te∣stamēts burnt. At the same time many Bibles, and Testamentes, were burnt. Of the same number also Fredericke Danuile, and Frauncis RebiziesFredericke Danuile, and Frauncis Re∣bizies. scholers, and neyther of them past twentie yéeres of age, were burned at Paris, the same yéere of our Lord, 1558.  They were examined thrée times of diuerse points of Poperie: of the Church, of the Sacra∣ment, of Purgatorie, power of the Keies, &c. by the Sor∣bone doctors, and Friers. About the two and twentie day of October, they were brought vp to a chamber in the castle to be racked, that they might vtter the rest of the congregation. Rebizies beyng drawne and stretched in the ayre, cried: come Lord and shew thy strength, that man doo not preuaile, &c. After him they racked also his companion, and then burnt them both, at the place Maulbert in Paris, one of them comfor∣ting another,Worthy mar∣tyrs. saying: be strong my brother, be strong. Sa∣than away from vs. Of the same cōpany were also Rene Seaw,Rene Seaw. & Iohn Alme∣ricke,I. Almericke. who were almost racked to death, that Almericke could not go when he was called to the court to be iudged:
both of them died in prison, constantly standing to the truth, Ibidem. About this time 1558. VillegaignonVillegaignon. Lieutenant for the french K. after yt he had a while professed the truth, reuolted: and in the land of Bresil (where he had taken an Iland) hée murdered and drowned in the Sea Iohn Bordell,Iohn Bordel. and Ma∣thew Vermeille, and Peter Hurdon for the profession of the truth. There was a fourth Andrew de Feaw, whō by allure∣ments, and threatninges, he drew from the truth. The same yeare Geffrey VaragleGeffrey vara∣gle. (who before had said masse 17. yeres and was afterward a preacher in the valley of Angrogn) was first strangled, and then burned at Thu∣ris in Piedmont by the kinges lieftenant. He was questio∣ned with about workes of supererogation, iustification, frée∣will, predestination, confession, satisfaction, indulgences, images, purgatorie, the Pope, &c. It is said that at the time of his burning a Doue was séene (as is credibly reported of many) flying and fluttering diuers times about the fire. Crisp. lib. 6. The same yeere also Benet RomaneBenet Ro∣mane. a mercer, first being pitifully racked, was hanged in the Aire, and so burned at Draguinian in Prouence. The fame of his constancy being known in the town, Iudge Barbose a man blind & ignorāt, and no lesse deformed, came to sée him, & asked, what do they beleeue (saith hee) in any God at Geneua? Romane loking vpon him said, what art thou, that so wretchedly dost blas∣pheme? I am (sayd he) the ordinarie iudge of this place. And who hath put thée (said Romane) so grosse & deformed a person in such an office? Thinkest thou we be infidels: and no Christians? And if the Deuils themselues do con∣fesse a God, suppose you that they of Geneua do deny their God? no, no, we beléeue in God, we inuocate his name, and put all our trust in him. Whereof Barbose tooke such indignation, that he pur∣sued him to the death.
There was great disputation after his death: some said, if good men had béene about him, it had gone better with him: and that those priestes and monkes, which were about him, were whoremaisters, and infamous. Other went a∣way, maruelling and disputing of his death, and doctrine, &c. Crispine. Anno 1558. Frauncis ViuaxFrancis Viuax. was strangled and bur∣ned at Dyion, beyng betraied by a Priest, whose Sermon he reprehended, and who pretēding friendship, required far∣ther conference: which being appointed in the couent of the Iacobins, there was he apprehended, & witnessed the truth by martirdome. Anno 1559. Peter Arondeaw1559 Peter Aron∣deaw. being taken by the priestes at Rochel, was conueyed to Paris, and the 15 day of Nouē∣ber, was there burned quicke at the place, called S. Iohn in Greue. His chiefe accuser, was one Monroy, who was not long after stryken with an Apoplexie, and died. The Lieu∣tenant also, for causes of extortion, was deposed within a while after. Crisp. lib. 6. The same yéere was Thomas Montard,Tho. Montard. being conuerted from a vitious life, burned quick for the testimony of Iesus, at Valencius: because he said the God of the host was abho∣minable, Crisp. lib, 6. The residue of the French martyrs. Ann du Burg.ANn du Burg Councellour of Paris, Andrew Coiffyer, Iohn Isabew, Iohn Iudet, martyrs of Paris: Gefferey Guerneis, Iohn Morell, Iohn Berbeuill, Peter Cheuet, Ma∣rin Marie, Margaret Riche, Adrian Daniffe, Giles de court, Phillip Parmentier, Marin Rosseaw, Peter Milot, Iohn Berfoy, besides the tumult of Amboise,The tumult of Amboise. Marlorate. the persecuti∣on of Vassay, Austen Marlorat, maister Mutonis.
The residue of Dutch Martyrs. IAmes de Lo, of the Ile of Flaunders, Iohn de Binsons, at Antwerp, Peter Pettit, Iohn Denis, Simon Guilmyn, Si∣meon Herme, of the Ile of Flanders, Iohn de Lannoy, at Tourney, Alexander Dayken, of Brainchastell, William Cornu at Henalt, Anthonie Carou, of Cambray, Renan∣dine de Franckvile. Certaine suffered at Tourney, Michel Robibert of Arras, Nichaif de la Tombe, at Tourney. Roger du Mont. A note of Spanish Martirs. Anno 1540. Frances Sauromanus,1540 F. Sauromanus a Spanishe Mar∣chant, so profited in one moneth by hearing of M. Iacobus, sometime Prior of the Augustine Friers in Antwerp, and afterward Preacher at Breame, that hee exhorted diuers of his friendes at Antwerpe by letters, bewayling their ig∣norance. He wrote also to Charles the Emperor, requiring him, that he would reforme the miserable corruption of religion in Spaine. And besides this, he wrote a Catechisme, and di∣uers other Treatises in the Spanish tongue. This Frances comming to Antwerp, and purposing there to conferre of matters of religion, and to instruct his Coun∣treymen: was by them betrayed, and boldly confessed his faith, and religion: and reasoned with the Friers, with such zeale, that the Spaniards (thinking he had not béene wel in his wittes,) conueied him into a Tower sixe miles from Antwerpe: where he was deteyned in a déepe Dungeon, with much miserie, the space of 8. moneths. But afterward, the Spaniards thinking him better come to himselfe, dis∣charged him out of prison. Which was about the time yt the Emperor was at the Councell of Ratisbon, 1541: whether
Frances went, and there hauing time & oportunitie to speak vnto the Emperor, he stepped boldly vnto him: beseeching him to deliuer his Countrey, and Subiects of Spaine, from false religion,The Emperor three times ad∣monished by Sanromanus. and to restore againe the sinceritie of Christes doctrine. This did he thrée times, the Emperor geuing gen∣tle audience. But attempting the fourth time, hee was re∣pulsed by certaine Spaniards about the Emperor: who in∣continently would haue throwen him into the riuer Danu∣bius, had not the Emperor staied them, and willed he should be iudged according to the lawes of the Empire. By which commandement, he was deteined with other malefactors in bands, till the Emperour tooke his voyage into Aphrike, & when the Emperour came into Spaine, he was there de∣liuered to the Inquisitors, by whom he was laid in a darke prison vnder the ground, and at length after many exami∣natiōs and much afflictiō, they perceiuing him not to be re∣claimed, procéeded to his condemnation, and pronounced sentence of burning against him. His articles were, that we are saued onely by the frée mercy of God in Christ: that the Masse is an horrible blasphemy: that auricular confession, satisfaction, purgatory, inuocation of Saints, Image wor∣shipping, be méere blasphemies against God, &c. As hée was layd on the heape of wood, and the fire kind∣led about him, hée beganne a little at the féeling of the fire, to lifte vp his head towardes Heauen: which the Inquisitours perceiuing, thinking hée would haue recan∣ted, caused him to be taken of the fire: but when they per∣ceyued him constant, they threw him in againe, and so was he immediatly dispatched. Francisc. Encenas. Anno 1545. Rochus1545 Rochus. was burned at Saint Lucas in Spaine. Hée was an Image maker, and assoone as hée had receyued the light of the Gospell, hée gaue it ouer. and li∣ued by making of seales, sauing onely hée kept the Image of the virgin Mary artificially grauen, for a signe of his oc∣cupation.
It fell so that an Inquisitor passing by, asked Rochus the price of the Image, which when Rochus did set (belike not minding to sell the Image) the Inquisitour bad him scarse halfe the mony: which when hée heard, hée sayd, hée would rather breake it, then to sell it otherwise then hée might affoord it: yea (sayd the Inquisitour) breake it? let me sée thée: with that Rochus tooke vp a chéesill and dash∣ed it on the face of the Image, wherewith some part of the face was blemished: the Inquisitour séeing that, crying out as hée were madde, commaunded him to pryson, and within thrée daies after he was burned, for blemishing his owne worke. Pantal. lib. 5. The execrable Inquisition of Spaine. IT first began by Ferdinandus and Elizabeth his wife,Of the execra∣ble Inquisitiō of Spaine. and was instituted against the Iewes, which after their Baptisme, professed their owne ceremonies: but now it is practised against the professors of the Gospell. The Spa∣niardes, especially the great diuines, doo hold, that the ho∣ly Inquisition can not erre: and that the Fathers of the Inquisition can not bée deceiued. By the order of the In∣quisition, the party called in question, if any thing be sus∣pected or pretended, is incontinent commaunded to a hor∣rible pryson, and there they find out crimes against him at leasure. In the meane time no man liuing so hardy (not the father for the child) as to speake for him: for if he do, he is also taken, and cast into prison: neither is it permitted for any one to enter into the prison, but there he endureth alone, where he can not sée so much as the ground, and where he su∣staineth moreouer whippings, rackings, irons, tortures, &c. Sometimes they are brought foorth, and shewed in some high place, for an open spectacle of rebuke and shame: and thus are some of them deteined many yéeres, & murthered by long tormentes whole daies together:Torments whole dayes together. during all the time what is doone in the prison no mā knoweth, but only ye holy
Fathers and the tormentors: all is doone in secrete: the ac∣cuser secrete, the crime secrete, the witnesse secrete, ney∣ther is the poore prisoner euer aduertised of any thing: if hée can gesse who accused him, wherefore and whereof, hée may bée pardoned peraduenture of his life, but this is ve∣ry seldome, and yet is he not set at libertie, before hée hath endured long time infinit torments: and this is called their Penitence: and so he is let go, yet not but that hée must weare a garment with yellow coulours, for a note of pub∣like infamie to him and his whole race. And if he can not gesse right, shewing to the iudge by whom he was accused, and whereof, incontinent the horrible sentence of condem∣nation is pronounced against him, to be burned for an obsti∣nate heretike: yet so the sentence is not executed till he hath endured imprisonment, in some hainous prison. Thrée sortes of men, most principally bée in daunger of these Inquisitours.Three sortes of men in danger of the Inquisi∣tion. 1. They that bée greatly rich, for the spoyle of their goods. 2. They that bée learned, be∣cause they will not haue their secrete abuses espied. 3. They that begin to increase in honour, and dignitie, least beyng in honour they should worke them some shame. This Inquisition the King & Princes are bound by oth to main∣teine with all their power. 1559 28. martyrs in the towne of Validoly.Anno one thousand, fiue hundred, and fiftie and nine. The 25. day of May, in the towne of Validoly, where com∣monly the councell of the Inquisition is wont to be kept, there were eight and twentie godly Christians (sauing one Iew) that did suffer for the testimonie of the truth, whereof 14. were burned, and the rest had their goods confiscate, and a note of dishonour layd vpon them, for the name of Iesus. They which were burnt, and their goods confiscate, were D. Cacalla,Cacalla M. somtime an Augustine frier, priest of the towne of Validoly, and sometime preacher to Charles the fifth, a man of great learning,A Christian stocke. Iohn de Biuero priest of Validoly, and brother to Cacalla, Dame Blaunch, sister vnto them,
Frauncis de Biuero, brother vnto the Dame, Constance de Biuero, an other Sister, Dame Leoner de Biuero, her cou∣sin: being already dead long before at Validoly, ye mother to the fiue aforesaide, aboue her coffine, was her picture laide, which was condemned with her dead corpes, to be burned for an heritike. Moreouer, her goodes being confiscate, her house, was adiudged vtterly to be rased, and cast downe to the grounde: and for memoriall thereof, a marble stone to be set vp in the place: wherein the cause of her burning should be engraued. After these, were condemned M. Alfonz Perez, priest of Valence, Christoph. Del citizen of Samora, Christopher de Padilla, Anthony de Huizuelo, Katherine Roman, Frauncis Erreni, Katherin Ortega, Isabel Strada, Iane Valesques, and a certaine Smith. They were all first strangled, sauing Anthony Huizuelo: who was burned a∣liue, because he did with more vehemency, detest the Pope, then the rest. They which had their goodes confiscate, were these: Don Petro Sarmiento, knight of the order of Alcanta∣ra, dwelling at Valence, & sonne of the marques de Poza, was iudged to beare a SanbenitaSanbenita. all his life, and cōdemned to perpetuall prison, with losse of his order, & all his goods: to whō it was moreouer enioyned, neuer to weare any more gold, siluer, precious stones, &c. Dame Mencia his wife was adiudged to the same punishment. Don Louis de Ropas, sonne and heire of the the marques of Poza, through great suit made for him, was condemned only to weare a Sanbe∣nita vnto the town-house, and his goods to be confiscat. The same iudgement was also giuen of dame Anne Henriques, daughter of the marques Alcauses, & mother to ye marques de Peza, and wife to Lorde Alphonsus de Fonseca. Dame Iane de Silua, wife to Iohn de Biuero, brother to Doctor Cacalla, was enioyned to beare a mantle all her life, for penance: & her goods confiscate. The like did Leonard de Lisuers, wife to Huizuelo, Doct. of diuinity suffer. Item, Marina de Saiauera, wife of Cisneras de Sareglio. Itē, Da∣niel
Quadra, born at Pedrosa: al which 3. were condemned to perpetual prison wt their mantels, & cōfiscation of al their goods: dame Mary de Roias was iudged to beare her mantel to the town house, and her goods confiscate. Anthony Domi∣nicke de Pedrosa was condemned to thrée yeares imprison∣ment, clothed with a Sanbenita, and his goods cōfiscate. An∣thony Basor an Englishman, was enioyned to beare his mantell to the Towne house, and was thrust into a cloy∣ster for one yeare, there to be instructed. There was a Iew likewise burned at that time for reuolting from his christē∣dome to Iudaisme. It is reported, besydes these aforesaid 37. other prisoners yet remained at Validolie, reserued to another tragedy of that bloudy Inquisition. Besides Spaine, Naples also, and Cicill are subiect to to this barbarous Inquisition: in which kingdome of Ci∣cill, it is credibly reported, that euery thirde yeare a cer∣taine number are brought out to martirdome: Sometime twelue, sometime sixe, sometime more or lesse: among whō an. 1559.  One comming from Geneua to Cicill. vpon zeale to doe good, was condemned to the fire: and as hee should take his death, was offered by the hangman to bee first strangled, but hee refused the same, saying he woulde féele the fire, and so endured singing with all his might vnto the Lorde, till he lost both life, and voice, by force of the fire. A note of Italian Martirs. Anno 1546. N. Encenas,1546 N. Encenas. otherwise Dryander a Spa∣niard, brother to Franciscus Encenas, a man of great learning; he was also instructour to Diazius the Godly Martir aboue mentioned: this man was first offred the Sanbenita made in forme of a mantell before and behind him, with signes of ye red crosse: which when he refused, hee was adiudged to be burnt: & so was, at Rome, in sight of the
Cardinals, and face of the Apostolicall sea. Pantal. lib. 6. Crispin. &c. Franciscus EncenasFranciscus Encenas. brother to this Nicholas, beyng in the Emperours court at Bruxels, offered vnto Charles the fifth the New testament translated into Spanish: for the which cause hée was cast into prison, where hée indured so∣rowfull captiuitie and calamitie, the space of 15. moneths, looking for no other but death. At last, thorough the maruel∣lous prouidence of almighty God, the first day of February, Anno 1545.  at eight of the clocke after supper, hée found the dores of the pryson open, and so tooke the occasion, and es∣caped, and went into Germany. Anno 1550. Fauinus1550 Fauinus. borne in Fauentia, was burned at Ferraria: by the earnest perswasions of his wife, & friends, he did first relent: wherof he conceiued such sorow of mind, yt he could not bée quiet, till hée had fixed his minde to ven∣ture his life for the testimonie of the trueth: wherevpon, he went about all the countrey of Romaigna, publikely prea∣ching the doctrine of Christ. So anno 1547.  hée was apprehended againe in a place called Bagnacauallo: where also hée was condemned to bée burned: but hée sayd, his houre was not yet come, and the same to bée but the be∣ginning of his doctrine, and so it was: for shortly after, hée was remooued to Ferraria, where hée was deteyned two yeres. At last, the Popes Inquisitors condemned him to death, an. 1549.  And yet his time being not come, he re∣mayned after that, till the moneth of September, an. 1550.  At length, being brought to a prison, where diuers Lordes, and Captains were, that stirred vp factions. They first scor∣ned him, and tooke him to be of a melancholike braine: but after, he so wrought with them, that their merrie cheare was altered into a newe kinde of countenance: hauing him now in admiration, whom before they had in derision. When the imprisonment of this Fauinus was knowen to his parents & kinsfolk, his wife and friends came to him wt
wéeping perswasions: to whom he answered, that it was enough for them that he had once for their sake fallen into that cowardlinesse they knew,A constant martyr. wherefore he desired them to depart in peace, and solicite him no more therein. About the same time died Pope Paulus the 3. and after him succéeded Iulius the 3.Pope Paulus the 3. died. Pope Iulius 3. which then sent letters that Fa∣uinus should be executed: the newes wherof beyng brought him, he gaue the messenger thankes. So early in the mor∣ning, after he had praied most earnestly vnto God, he was strangled thrée houres before day in the citie of Ferraria, to the intent the people should not sée him, nor heare him speake. Afterward about dinner time, his body in the same place was burned: at the burning whereof came such a fra∣grant smel to all them there present. and so stroke their sen∣ses, that they were therewith maruellously refreshed. Pant. lib, 7. & Crisp. Anno 1550. Dominicus de Basuna,1550 Dominicus de Basuna. was hanged at Placentia, after certayne monethes imprisonment, for preaching of true confession, against Purgatorie, Par∣dons, &c. Hee was offered pardon, if hée woulde recant: but he refused so to doe, and receiued martyrdome. Pantal. lib. 7. Anno 1551. Galeazius Trecius,1551 Galeazius. a Gentleman of good calling, was burned at Laus Pompeia in Italie. A litle be∣fore he should be burned, there was a controuersie betwixte the mayor of the citie, and the Bishops Clergie, for the ex∣pences of wood which should goe to his burning. He hearing thereof, sent worde to both parties to agrée, for he himselfe of his owne goods, would sée the cost of that matter dischar∣ged. But at the suite of his friendes, and by perswasions, (after thrée seuerall examinations, and testimonies geuen to the trueth) he relented. Whereupon, he fell into such gréefe of minde, that he could not be quiet, till he had occasi∣on offered to recouer himselfe: which afterward he did, de∣nying to the Iudges agayn that which before he had yelded
vnto them. This Galleazius was firste instructed in the truth by an Augustine Frier, named Maniardus, and after∣wards more throughly confirmed by Celius Secundus, Ex Celio. Anno 1538. Did one Iohannes Mollins,1558 I. Mollins. a Gray Frier, secretely expound the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, to a few. Which being knowen, his auditors increased, so that he was compelled to read openly in the Temple. At the same time was one Cornelius at Bononie, a vaine babler: him did Cardinall Campeius require to interprete the same Epistle also, to disgrace Mollins. But Mollins ex∣celled him, and drew to him his auditors. Which when Cor∣nelius perceiued, hee perswaded the Cardinall to dispatch Mollins. So, a disputation was appointed betwixt them, which indured till thrée of the clock after midnight. From which disputation Iohannes departing, was taken, com∣ming downe at the lowest steppes, and caried to prison. In the meane season, Laurentius Spatha,L. Spatha. generall of his order, in most spéedie wise posted vp to Rome, and so preuayled in Mollins behalfe, that the P. wrote downe his letters to Cā∣peius, that Iohannes should be deliuered out of prison: so yt within 3. monethes after, he shoulde personally appeare at Rome. Thus, the 30. day of his imprisonment, he was deli∣uered: who, but for the comming of the Popes letters, had béene burned within 3. dayes after. Whē he came to Rome, he was not permitted (as he desired) to dispute openly, but enioined to write his mind in articles, & to bring his proofes: which he diligently performed, intreating of original sinne, iustification by faith, frée will, purgatorie, &c. Vpon this, cer∣taine Cardinals and Bishoppes were assigned to haue the cause in hearing: who disputed with him. 3. dayes, and could not refell that which he had proued: At ye last, answere was made him, that it was trueth which he affirmed, neuerthe∣lesse, the same was not méete for this present time: for that it could not be taught nor published, without the detriment
of the Apostolike sea: wherfore he should abstaine hereafter from the epistles of S. Paul, and so again return safe to Bo∣nonie, and there professe philosophie. Thus being returned home, he declareth all the matter in the pulpit: wherewith Campeius more offended then before, obteyned of the pope, that the generall of the order, shoulde remoue Molins from Bononia, and place him elswhere. So, from thence he was sent to Naples, and there was appointed preacher in ye Mo∣nasterie of S. Laurence. But Petrus the viceroy there, could not abide his doctrine, and so néerely sought his life, that hee departed, and went wandring into Italie from place to place, preaching Christ. Not long after this, Campeius being dead, he returned again to Bononia, being called thether by a good Abbot, named de Crassis, an. 1543.De Crassis. 1543 where he renued againe the reading of Paules Epistles, after a secrete forte: but that could not long be vndiscouered. Whereupon, by meanes of Cardinal de Capo, and by Bonauentora the Ge∣nerall he was apprehended the second time, and brought to Fauentia, and there layd in a filthie stinking prison: where he continued 4. yeres, no man hauing leaue once to come to him. During which time, he wrote a Commentarie vpon ye bookes of Moses: which labor was suppressed by the aduersa∣ries. At length, through the intercession of the Earle Petili∣anus, and the good Abbot de Cassis, he was againe deliue∣red, and sent to Rauenna, where he made his abode a while wt the Abbot, after at Vitalem: and there againe taught the gospel of Christ, as before. And whensoeuer he spake of the name of Iesu, his eyes dropt teares, he was so fraught with a mightie feruentnes of Gods spirite. In proces of time, whē ye abbot was dead,The zeale of Molins. his sureties begā to be weary of their bond, and so was he againe the third time imprisoned by the Popes Legats. There were then 4. men of great authority, who bayled him out of prison againe: of whom, one took him home to instruct his childrē: at whose fame, such a concourse came to sée him, that the aduersaries consulted wt themselues
to kill him: wherevpon commaundement was sent to the Popes Legates, to lay hands vpon him, and to send him vp fast bound to Rome, where againe the fourth time he was imprisoned in the castle of Nouie, and there continued eigh∣téene moneths, and at last the 5. of September, anno 1553. there sat vpon him 6. Cardinals, beside the iudge, and con∣demned him with a weauer of Perusium, in the temple of S. Mary, called De Minerua: first to be hanged & then bur∣ned: which sentence beyng pronounced against him, he cited them vp to the tribunall seat of Christ: and so they were both had to the place of execution, and suffered méekely for the testimony of the truth. Pantal. lib. 19. Anno 1554  two monkes of S Austine in Rome, were found in their selles, with their tongues & heads cut off, only for rebuking the outragious excesse of the Cardinals. Man∣lius in dictis P. Melanct. The same yéere, Franciscus GanibaFranciscus Ganiba. was first strangled, and then burned at the city of Canum, in the dioces of Mil∣lain, for the testimony of the trueth: hauing his tongue first boared, that he might not speake. Pantal. lib. 10. Anno 1555. Pomponius Algerius1555 Pomponius Algerius. was burned aliue at Rome, after he had bin long deteined in prison at Venice: where being in prison, he wrote a notable Epistle to the af∣flicted Saints, full of consolation. An. 1559. Iohannes Aloisius1559 I. Aloisius. suffered at Rome. And the same yere Iacobus BouellusI. Bouellus. at Messina. They were both sent downe from Geneua, to the parties of Calabria, there to minister, Ex Epist. Sim. Flo. After Pope Iulius 3.1560 Iulius 3. came Marcellus 2.Marcellus 2. After him Pau∣lus 4.Paulus 4. After whom, Pius 4. Who raysed such sharpe persecu∣tion in the kingdome of Naples, that many Noble men, with their wiues, & others, were reported there to be slaine. Pantal. lib. 11. The same yere, 1560. 88.88. Martirs together. persons put together into one house, both young & old, one after another, were taken out of
the house: and so being laid vpon the butchers stall, with one blouddy knife were all killed in order in Calabria. Pan∣tal. lib. 11. The Pope pro∣miseth.It is to be noted, that the Pope did promise Marques Buccianus gouernour of the prouince of Calabria, to make his sonne a Cardinall of Rome, if all the Lutheranes of that prouince were rooted out: which might be the cause of this butcherly crueltie. The persecution of Merindole and Cabriers. ABout 200. yéeres ago, this people is said to come out of the coūtry of Piedmount, to inhabit in Prouence, in cer∣taine villages destroyed by warres, and other desert places, wherein they vsed such labour, and diligence, that they had aboundance of corne, wine, oyle, almondes, with o∣ther fruits. They had of long time refused the Bishoppe of Romes authoritie, and obserued euer a more perfect kind of doctrine, then others, (deliuered vnto them from the Fa∣ther to the sonne) euer since the yéere 1200. In the yéere 1530.  vnderstanding that the Gospel was preached in cer∣taine townes of Germany, and Switzerland, they sent thi∣ther two learned men, that is, Georgius Maurellus,Georgius Maurellus. borne in Delph, and Petrus Latomus,P. Latomus. a Burgundian, to conferre with the learned ministers in the doctrine of the Gospell. Which done, as they returned through Burgundie, Petrus Latomus was taken at Dyion, and cast into prison: Maurel∣lus escaped, and returned to Merindoll, with bookes and let∣ters, which he brought with him from the churches of Ger∣manie: Whereby they being instructed, sent for the moste auncient brethren, and chéefest in knowledge in all Cala∣bria, and Apulia, to consult with them, touching the refor∣mation of the Church. Whereby the Bishops were so moo∣ued, that they raged greatly against them. Among other, there was one Iohn de Roma, a Monk, who was most cru∣ell:A cruel monk. and among other his cruelties, he vsed to examine them
thus: he filled bootes with boyling greace, and put the bootes vpon their legges, tying them backeward to a forme, with their legges hanging downe ouer a small fire, and so exa∣mined them: thus he tormented very many, and in the end most cruelly put them to death. The first whom hée thus tormented, were Michellotus Serra,Michellotus Serra. and William Melius,Wil. Melius. The vengeance of God. with a number mo. But Gods vengeance fell heauily vp∣on him, for first he was condemned for this crueltie, by the high court of parlement of Prouence: and auoiding that sen∣tence by flying to Auinion, he was stroken with such a hor∣rible disease, that no man durst come nigh him, aliue or dead. He did so horribly stinke whē he was dead, there was none would come néere him to burie him, but a yoong no∣uice newly come to his order, caught hold with an hooke vp∣on his stinking carrion, and drew him into a hole, which was made for him harde by. While he was in tormēts and anguish, he cried out oftentimes in great rage, oh,Despaire. who will deliuer me? who will kill me, and rid me out of these intolle∣rable paines, which I know I suffer for the euils & oppres∣sions I haue doone to the poore men? &c. After the death of this monster, the B. of Aix, by his offi∣ciall Perionet continued the persecution by the hands of the ordinary iudge called Meiranus a cruell tyrant: who with∣out forme of law, such as the iudge had pronoūced to be he∣retikes, he put to death with most cruell torments. In the time of Bartholmew Cassanus presidēt of the par∣lement of Aix, a most cruell tyrant: they of Merindoll in the person of 10. were cited personally to appéere before ye kings atturney. But they hearing that the court had determined to burne them, without order of law; durst not appéere at the day appointed,A cruell sen∣tence against the people of Merindoll. for which cause the court awarded a most cruell sentence against Merindoll, & condemned all the in∣habitants to be burnt, both men and women, sparing none, no not the little children, and infants: the towne to be ra∣sed, and their houses beaten downe to the ground: also the
trées to be cut downe, as well Oliue, as other, and nothing to be left, to the end it should neuer be inhabited, but re∣maine as a wildernesse. This sentence against the Merin∣dolians,The harlot of the B. of Aix, laboureth a∣gainst Merin∣doll. the concubine of the Bishop of Aix, laboured great∣ly to haue executed, especially because (as the Bishop of Aix told her) they held, that all Bishops, pastors and, priests, ought eyther to be married or gelded: for which she said, she hated them to the very death, and would employ goods, and fréends, to worke their destruction. The Archbishop of Arles, the Bishop of Aix, & diuers Ab∣bots, and Priors, consulted how to execute the arrest with all spéede, and by the aduice of the Bishop of Aix they went to Auinion, there with other Prelates to intreat of the mat∣ter: in which assembly they made a generall composition, confirmed with an oth, that euery mā should endeuor him∣selfe, that the arrest of Merindoll should be executed with al expedition, euery man offering to furnish out men of warre according to his ability, the charge wherof was giuen to the B. of Aix. After this councell holden, the next day they ban∣ketted at the house of the Bishop of Rieux: to which banket all the fairest women of Auinion were called, to solace these good Prelates: after they had dined, they fell to dauncing, dicing, and such other pastimes: which béeyng ended, they walked abroade to solace themselues till supper: as they passed the stréete, euery one leading his minion vppon his arme, they saw a man which sold bawdy pictures, and bal∣lades, all which the Bishops bought vp, being as many as a mule could well carrie: and if any sentence were obscure in the rime, the Bishops did expound it, with great delight and laughter. In the same place walking along, they found one that sold certaine bibles in French, & Latine, which when ye prelats perceiued, they greatly raged against the man, who answered thē, is not the bible as good as these goodly pictures which you haue bought for these gētlewomen? He had scarse spokē these words, when ye B. of Aix said, I renoūce my part
of paradise, if this mā be not a Lutheran: so he was laid hold on, and on the next morow after, brought before the iudges,The martyr burned with 2. bibles about his necke. in presence of the Bishops, & condemned immediatly to bée burned, with two bibles hanging about his necke: the one before, & the other behind. This sentence was executed the same day: and thervpon, proclamatiō made against al books in the french tongue intreating of the scriptures, vnder pain of death, to all them that would not bring them in. After this, the B. of Aix goeth to the president Cassaneus, and laboureth him to put the arrest in execution: who being perswaded therto, the drum was sounded vp through out al Prouence, the captains were prepared with their ensignes displaied, and a great number of footmen, and horsmen, begā to set forward, & marched out of the towne of Aix, in order of battel, wel horsed and furnished against Merindoll, to exe∣cute the arrest. The inhabitants of Merindol hearing therof, commended themselues, and their cause to God by prayers,The manner of of Gods chil∣dren in afflicti∣on. making themselues ready to the slaughter, In this while the Lord of Alence, a man, wise and learned in the Scriptures, and in the ciuil law, altered againe the presidents mind: and so the commission was called barke, and the army retired, which was come within a mile & a half, of the town of Me∣rindol, to do the execution.God heareth their praiers. The Merindolians hearing ther∣of, gaue thankes to God, and determined to subiect thēselues vnto Gods will, and to endure whatsoeuer affliction should be layd vpon them. The fame of them, and also of the arrest, came to the king Francis eares; who gaue commandement to the noble & vertuous Lord monsieur de Langeay: at that time his Lieutenant in Thurim, a citie of Piedmount di∣ligently to enquire the trueth of the matter: who sent 2. de∣puties to enquire: the which deputies made report of ye ver∣tue, & diligence of ye poore Merindoliās, in such sort that they had by their labour fructified Merindol; yt wheras before it was taxed but at 4. crowns, before the destruction & oppres∣sion which it suffered, paid yeerly to the Lord 350. crowns,
besides other charges: they declared also the great oppres∣sion, which they had suffered. Besides they had good testimo∣nie giuen of their neighbors of Prouence, what they held al∣so: also, against the popes religion, was truly reported, and the copye of the arrest brought whereof the king was ad∣uertised by monsieur de Langeay: who vnderstanding these things,King Frauncis pardoneth the Merindoliās. sent letters to them of grace and pardon, not to those onely which were condemned for lacke of appearance, but also for all the rest of the countrey of Prouence, which were accused and suspected in like case: commanding the Parle∣ment, that they should not hereafter so procéed: but if there were any that could be proued by sufficient information to haue swerued from christian religion, that then hee shoulde haue demonstration made vnto him by the word of God, out of the old, and new testament: & so by gentlenes bée reduced to the church of God: cōmanding also, that those which were conuicted of heresie, should abiure, & that all prisoners should be set at libertie: which either were accused, or suspected of Lutheranisme. By vertue of which commandement, & let∣ters of the king, they were permitted to declare their cause, Whervpon,A confession of the Merindo∣lians faith. they made a cōfession of their faith,, which was presented first to the court of parlement, & afterward more at large, with articles therunto annexed: it was deliuered to the B. of Cabillon, and to Cardinall Sadolet. About this time, the yéere 1542. the vicelegate of Auini∣on assembled a great number of men of war, at the request of the B. of Cauailon, to destroy Cabriers:1542 Cabriers. when the army was come within a mile of Cabriers, the Cardinall Sadolet went with spéede vnto the Vicelegate, and shewed the arti∣cles of the confession of Cabriers,Sadolet helped Cabriers. and how they offered to bée informed, wherin they had erred, by the word of God: wher∣vppon, at that time, the army retired. Afterward, it was ordained by the court of Parlement, that according to the kings letters, Ioh. Durand, counseller of the court of parlement, with a secretary, and the Bish. of
Cauaillon, with a Doctor of diuinitie, should goe vnto Me∣rindoll, and there declare vnto the Inhabitants, the heresies which they knew to be cōteined in their cōfession: & to make them apparant by good and sufficient information. And ha∣uing so conuicted them by the word of god, they should make them renounce, and abiure the said heresies, &c. Whereupon, Durandus signified the day that he woulde be present at Merindol, that none of the Inhabitants might be absent. At the day appointed, the parties aboue mentio∣ned came vnto Merindoll, whereas also were present di∣uers Gentlemen, and men of vnderstanding of all sortes. There was called foorth Anthonie Mailard,Examination of the Merin∣dolians. Bailiffe of the towne of Merindoll, Ienon Romane, and Michelin May∣nard, Sindiques, Iohn Cabrie, and Iohn Palenc, Ancients of Merindoll, and Iohn Brunerol, vnder-bayliffe: who re∣quiring that they might (because they were vnlearned) an∣swere by Aduocate, were denyed either to answere by Ad∣uocate, or by wryting, but only in their owne persons: who notwithstanding, did (by Gods assistance) so answere, that the aduersaries were ashamed, and durst put in no informa∣tion of heresie against their articles. But the B. spake a lōg tale in ye Cōmissioners day, and would declare nothing: and the Doctor made a long tale in latin, and would geue no o∣therwise any information against them. Many that came thether to heare this disputation, were much touched, and moued to require copies of their confession, and answeres. Whereupon, many were conuerted to the faith: & namelie, 3. doctors, who went about to disswade the Merindolians from the trueth: whose ministerie God vsed afterwarde in the preaching of the Gospel. Of whom, one was D. Com∣band, Prior of S. Maximinie, afterwardes Preacher in the territorie of the Lords of Bern: another was D. Semanti, who was also a preacher in the Bayliwike of Touon: the other was D. Herandi, pastor, and minister in the Countie of Newcastle.
After this, the Inhabitantes of Merindoll were in quiet for a time, vntill Iohn Miniers, an excéeding bloudy tirant, began a new persecution. This Miniers, being Lord of Opedie, néere to Merindol, first began to vexe the poore Christians, by polling and ex∣tortion, getting from them what he could, to inlarge his own Lordshippe, which before was very base. For this cause, he put 5. or 6. of his owne Tenants into a Cistern vnder the ground and cloasing it vp, there kept them till they died for hunger, (pretēding that they wer Lutherans) to haue their goods and possessions. By this, and such other practises, this wretch was aduā∣ced in a short space to great wealth and dignitie: and at lēgth became the Kings Lieutenant generall in the Countrey of Prouence, in the absence of the L. Grigitane, then being at the Councell of Wormes in Germanie: this wretch, im∣pudently, and falsly, geueth the king to vnderstand, yt they of Merindoll and Snatre, about the number of twelue or fiftéene thousande, were in the field in armour, with En∣signe displayde, entending to take the towne of Marcelle, & to make it one of the Cantons of the Suitzers. By which lie he obteined the kings letters patentes, and through the helpe of the Cardinal of Tournon, commanded the sentence of the former arrest to be executed against the Merindoliās. After this, he gathered all the Kings armie, which was then in Prouence, ready to go against the Englishmen: and tooke vp all (besides) that were redy to beare armour in the chéefe townes of Prouence: and ioyned them with the army which the popes Legate had leuied for that purpose in Aui∣nion, and all the Countrey of Venice, and employed ye same to the destruction of Merindoll and Cabriers, and of other Townes and Villages, to the number of 22. geuing com∣mission to his Souldiers, to spoile, ransacke, burn, & destroy al together, and to kil man, woman, & child, without al pity, sparing none. Before he came to Merind. he rāsakt & burnt
certaine townes, namely, La Roche, S. Stephens, ville Laure Lormarin, la motte, Cabrieretter S. Martin, Pipu,The cruelty of Antichrist. and other places mo, notwithstanding the arrest onely exten∣ded to Merindole, where the most of the inhabitants were murthered, and slayne, without any resistance: women, and maidens rauished, women with child, and little infants most cruelly murdered, the paps of many women which gaue sucke to their children cut of, and the children staruing at the breasts of there dead mothers: such crueltie, as was neuer before séene. The Merindolians séeing all on a flaming fire about them, left their houses, with women and children, and other few, and with them certaine ministers of their Churches. Miniers in the meane time, had deuided his army into two parts, marching with the one partie himselfe towards Me∣rindoll: and hauing knowledge by espiall, whether the Merindolians were fledde, hée sent the other part of his armie to set vppon them on a sudden: who came and found them assembled at prayers, and spoyled them of all that they, had pulling their garmentes from their backes:Popish cru∣eltie. some they rauished, some they whipped and scourged, some they sold away like cattle, &c. The women were in number a∣bout fiue hundred. In the meane time, Miniers came to Merindoll, where hée found none but a yoong man, named Maurice Blanc,Maurice Blanc. who had yéelded himselfe to a Souldier, promising him for his raunsome 2. French crownes. Miniers would haue had him away by force, but it was answered: the souldier ought not to loose his prisoner. Miniers therefore paying the two crownes, himself tooke the yoong man, & caused him to be tied to an Oliue trée, & shot through with harquebushes, and so cruelly martired the yoong man, still calling on God: so hée razed Merindoll, and laid it euen with the ground.Merindoll ra∣zed, and layed euen with the ground. When he had so done, he laid siege to Cabriers: which whē he could not ouercome by force, he promised thē fairly, if they would
let him enter in, swearing hée would harme none of them, wherevpon the people let him in: who when he was once entered,Miniers brea∣keth his oth with Cabriers falsified his oth, and first picked out about thirtie men, caused them to be caried to a certaine medow, bound, and there to bée miserably cut and hewen in péeces of his Souldiers: hée exercised also great cruelty ouer the wo∣men, and caused fortie of them to be taken, of whom many were with childe, and put them into a barne full of hey and straw, and caused it to be set on fire at foure corners, kée∣ping them that would breake out, with pikes and hal∣berts: there was a Souldier which being moued with pit∣tie at the lamentation of the women, opened a dore to let them out, but as they were comming forth, the cruell ty∣rant caused them to be slaine, and cut in péeces, opening their bellies,Meruailous crueltie. that their children might fall out, whom they trode vnder their féete: many were fledde into the wineseller of the Castle, and many hidde themselues in caues, whereof some were caried into the medow, and there stripped naked, were slaine, other some were bound two and two together, and caried into the hall of the Castle, where they were slaine by the Captaines, reioycing in their buchery. That doone, this tyrant commaunded captain Iohn de Guy, with a band of ruffians to go into the church (wher was a great number of women, children, and yoong infants) to kill all that he found there: he although at first refusing, yet being threatned, performed the same. The number of them which were slaine,1000. slaine. was a thousand persons, men, wo∣men, and children: the infants which escaped their furie, were baptized againe of their enemies. In token of this ioly victory, the Popes officers caused a piller to be erected in the place of Cabriers, in which was engrauen the yeare and daye of sackyng the towne by Iohn Miniers Lord of Oped, and chéefe president of the Parlement of Prouence. In this meane season, they of Merindoll and Cabriers which had fled to the mountaines,
being in great necessitie of victuals, procured certaine men, which were in fauour with Miniers, to intreate him, they might depart safely, onely with their liues: although they had no more but their shirts to couer their nakednes. Wher∣vnto he answered, not one of them shal escape my hands, I will send them to dwell in hell among the diuels. After this, there was a power sent vnto Cossa,Cossa destroy∣ed. which likewise they ouerran, and committed there great slaughter. Many of the inhabitants fled away, and went into an Or∣chard, where the souldiers rauished the women, & maidens: and when they had kept them there a day and a night, they handled them so beastly, that they died shortly after. They which escaped to the woods, and went wandring by moun∣tains, were taken, and set in gallies, or els were slaine out∣right: many which hid themselues in rocks and dark caues: some were famished, some smoothered with fire & smoke put to thē. And this was the destruction of Merindol & Cabriers. This cause was afterward in the time of Henry the se∣cond, fiftie times pleaded to and fro, by one called Aubrius,Aubrius. against Minerius, and another named Robertus, the defen∣dant: but it could not be determined, and Minerius was let out of prison, and restored to his possessions, and libertie a∣gayne: vpon condition made to Charles, Cardinall of Lo∣raine, that he should expell the true professors out of al pro∣uinces: which he after his restoring, practised accordingly,Gods iudgmēt vpon Minerius & other perse∣cutors. till being stricken of God, he died of a rotting in his guts, his entrals being eaten with wormes, yelding a horrible stēch. Lewis de Vanie, brother in law to ye president, & the brother, & son in law to Peter Durand, maister Butcher of the town of Aix, flew one another, vpon a strife that fel betwixt them: and on them the same day, the judge of Aix, who accompani∣ed Minerius in the same persecution, as he returned home, going ouer the riuer of Durance, fell of his horse, and was drowned Pantal.
The histories of the persecutions and warres against the Waldenses, in the valleies of Angroigne, Lucern, S. Martin Perouse, and other in the countrie of Piedmount from the yeere 1555. till the yeere 1561. ALbeit these people had before this time, certaine to preach the word of God, & minister the sacraments vnto them priuatly: yet in the yere of our Lord 1555.  in ye moneth of August, the Gospel was openly preached in Angroign: for which cause, they built thē a church in ye mids of Angroign: wherin assemblies were made, & sermons preached. It hap∣pened at yt time, that one Ioh. Martin of Griqueras, a myle from Angroign, which vaunted euery where, that he would slitte the ministers nose of Angroign, was assaulted with a wolfe, which bit of his nose, that he thereof fel madde. The yéere 1556.  the ministers of the valley of S. Mar∣tins, preached openly. At that time, certaine Gentlemen of the valley of S. Martin, took a good mā (Bartholomew a book∣binder) prisoner, as he passed by the valley, who they sent by & by to Turim, and there, with a maruellous cōstancy, after he had made a good confession of his faith, he suffered death. And moreouer, they of the Parlement of Turim, sent one named the President of S. Iulian, associating vnto him one named de Ecclesia, and others, to hinder their enterprise, admonishing them in the Kinges name, and the Parla∣ment of Turim, to returne to the obedience of the Pope, vpon paine of losse of goods, and life, and vtter destruction of their town: & withal he recited vnto thē ye pitiful destructiō of Merindoll, and Cabriers, and other Townes néere a∣bout, in the Countrey of Prouence. To whom they answe∣red, that if it were shewed in anie point by the worde of God, wherin they erred, they were ready to be reformed, & so remained constant, notwithstanding, they receiued great vexatiōs frō ye president: insomuch, that they with one accord presented a briefe confession of their faith, with an answere
to certaine interrogations, made by the president touch∣ing the Masse, Auricular confession, Purgatory, Coun∣cels, &c. requiring that séeing it is permitted to Turkes, Saracens, and Iewes, to dwell quietly in the fairest cit∣ties of Christendome, they might be suffered to inhabite the desolate mountaines and valleis, hauing their whole re∣ligion founded vpon the true word and Gospell of Iesus Christ. These articles returned to the Kings court, where they remained a whole yéere without any answere made: during which time they of the valleys liued in great quiet∣nesse: whereby the number of the faithfull so increased, that throughout the valleies, Gods word was truely preached, and his sacraments duly administred, and no masse saide in Angroign, nor in diuers places. The yere following, the president of S. Iulian returned with his associates, to Pigneroll, & sent for thither the chief rulers of Angroign, and of the valley of Lucerne: that is, for 6. of Angroign, & for two of euery parish beside: saying vnto them, that their confession was found to be heretical: & that therfore the K. commanded them to returne to ye obedience of the church of Rome, vnder paine of losse, both of life, & goods: enioyning them moreouer, to giue him answere within 3. daies: from thence he went to the vallie of Lucern, & threat∣ned them greatly. But this notwithstanding, they persisted constant, and desired that their confession might be amēded by the word of God, if any fault were, and they would yeld thereunto. With which answere the President was not cō∣tent. Now, at the same season, the princes of Germanie, & certain of the Switzers,Suitzers sue for the valley. sent vnto the French K. desiring him to haue pitie of those churches: so that from that time, for 3. yeres after, the people were not molested by any of the K. officers: but yet they were sore vexed by ye monks of Pig∣neroll, and the gentlemen of the valley of S. Martin. At the same time, a Minister of Angroign, named Gef∣frey Variala,Geffrey Vari∣ala. was taken at Berge, going to visite those
churches, and from thence carried to Turin, and there put to death. A few daies after, a minister of the valley of Luserne was taken prisoner at Suse, and soone after sent to Turin, where he was condemned to be burnt, but the hangman at the time of the execution, fained himselfe sicke, and conueied himselfe away, and so did another serue them, wherevpon the minister was committed againe to prison, where after long and painefull endurance, seing the prison dore open, he escaped and returned to his cure. Now foure yéeres being past, Anno 1559.  there was a peace concluded, betwéene the French king and the king of Spaine: wherevpon, the countrie of Piedmount, certain towns excepted, were restored to the Duke of Sauoy: vn∣der whose regiment, the foresaid Churches, and all other faithfull people of Piedmont continued in great quietnesse: the Duke himself being contented they should vse their for∣mer religion. But the Pope and his Cardinals coulde not beare it, and the popes Legat, who followed the Court, per∣swaded the Duke by all meanes, not to suffer this people: ye people foreséeing their danger, wrote to the Duke with cō∣mon consent, shewing, that the cause why they were so ha∣ted, was their religion: which they desired to be tried by the word of God: but it is not certaine, whether this aduertise∣ment were deliuered to the Duke or not: for, in the moneth of March following, there was great persecution raysed a∣mong the poor Christians which were at Carignon: among whom, there were certaine godly persons, taken, & burnt within 4. dayes after:Persecution. that is to say, one Mathurine and his wife, and Iohn de Carquignan, dwelling in the Valley of Lucern, taken prisoner as he went to the market of Pigne∣roll. Many at that time fled away: others fearing the cru∣eltie, returned to the church of Rome. Within few dayes after, the Churches of Lelarch Me∣roun, Meane, and Suse, were woonderfully assaulted. The
minister of Suse, and Mean, among others were taken, who was put to death in the fire. Of Larch and Meroun, some were sent to the galleyes, other some yealded,Those that yelded, more cruelly handled then those that were constant. and some fled away. It is certainly knowen, that such as yelded were more cruelly handled than they that continued constant. The beginning of this horrible persecution, rose of Pro∣clamations made in al places, that none should resort to the sermons of the Lutherans, but should liue after the custome of Rome, vpon paine of the forfeyture of their goods, and to be condemned to the Gallies for euer, or to lose their liues. Thrée of the most cruell persons that could be found, were appointed to execute this commission. The first, was one Thomas Iaconel, a Sodomite, and a monster against God and nature. He was a Monke, an In∣quisitor of the Romish faith, and a false Apostata. The second was Collaterall Corbis, who (after their re∣fusals of going to masse) vsed to burne them within 3. daies. But it is certainly reported, that séeing the constancie, and hearing the confession of the poor martirs (féeling a remorse and torment in his conscience) he gaue ouer, and protested he would meddle no more. The 3. was the Prouost de la Iustice, a cruel, and crafty wretch. In that season, one named Charles de Comptes, of the Valley of Luserne, and one of the Lords of Angroigne, did write vnto the Commissioners, that they shoulde vse some lenitie towardes them of the Valley of Luserne: by reason whereof, they were a while more gently entreated then the rest: but the Monkes of Pigneroll, with certaine ruffians about them, did torment, and burne, and sent to the gallies, such as were of the churches néere vnto them. The gentlemen of the Valley of S. Martin, intreated their tenants very roughly, commaunding them to returne to the masse: and aboue the rest, two specially, Charles Tru∣chet, and Boniface his brother: who the 2. of Aprill before day, (with a number of Ruffians) spoyled a village of their
Subiects, called Reuclaret, and certaine of the retinue tooke a Minister of the same valley prisoner, which was come out of Calabria, and was going to visite the poore people of Reuclaret, and led him prisoner to the Abbey, where, not long after, he was burnt, with another of the Valley of S. Martin. The 3. night after, they of Pragella, sent about 400 to discomfite the companie of the Trouchettes, & to restore those that were fled, to their houses: which they did, putting them to flight, with the only losse of one man. This Charles Trouchet and his brother, did so incense the Duke against the poore people, with false reportes, that they perswaded the Duke to builde fortresses in the Moun∣tains, and to place garisons. The people withstood the Com∣missioners, and sent certaine to the Duke: and immediatlie after, the Commissioners sent also to the D. Court, being at Nice, to inflame his anger more against them. But God o∣therwise ordeyned: for, the Trouchets being at Nice, went to sea with diuers noble men: and immediatly were taken prisoners by the Turkes, put into the gallies, sore beaten wt ropes: & long time after (denying their nobilitie) were sent home hauing paid 400. crowns for their ransom. Some say, that the D. himself was almost taken, but sure it is, that hée fel sick soone after. In April next following, by meanes of the L. of Raconis, who was present at a sermon néer Angroign, they put vp 3 supplications, one to the D. another to the duches, the 3. to D. councel: wherin were debated the points of their religiō: they offering to reforme what was the wed by Gods word to bee amisse. After this, the persecution séemed to be staied for a litle while. In Iune next following, the L. Raconis, & the L. of Trinity, came to Angroign, to perswade the people to put away their preachers, & to receaue the masse: which if they would doe, they promised to pacifie the D. and to be a meanes to stay the persecution? but the people refused so to do. Wherupon, exclamations were made, & persecutiō began
to be more furious on euery side: amongst others the monks of Pigneroll were most cruell,Cruel Monks. who sent out a company of hired Ruffians, that spoiled all they could lay hold on, & led away men, women, and children, captiues to the Abbey, where they were most pittifully tormented. At the same time, also they sent a band of the fame Ruf∣fians by night to the ministers house of S. Germaine, in the valley of Perouse, where they tooke him, and sore wounded him, and pricked him behind with their halbards, to make him hasten his pace: at that time also many they slue, ma∣ny they hurt, and many they brought to the Abbey, and there kept them in prison, & cruelly handled them. The mi∣nister, after long imprisonment, they rosted at a small fire:The minister rosted. when half his body was burnt, he confessed, and cried on the Lord Iesus with a loude voice. Now, forasmuch as the mi∣sery was great, and these ruffians, to the number of 300. had made great spoyle, that no man coulde dwell there in safetie: it was demāded of ye ministers, whether it were law∣ful for men to defend thēselues against these ruffians, or no: the ministers answered, it was lawful: warning thē in any case, to take héed of bloodshedding. This question being once dissolued, they of the valley of Luserne, and Angroign, sent certaine men to them of S Germane to ayd them against the supports of these monkes. In the moneth of Iuly, they of Angroign being in a mor∣ning at haruest, vpon the hill side of S. Germain, perceiued a company of souldiers spoyling them of S. Germain, and doubting they would goe to Angroign, made an outcry. The people of Angroign assembled themselues vpon the hill and some ran to S. Germain, ouer the hill, & some by the valley. They yt went by the valley met the ruffians comming from S. Germ. laden wt the spoile which they had gotten: & being but 50. set vpon 20. wel appointed, & gaue thē ye ouerthrow. Then passing ouer ye bridge, being stopped, ye enemies were faine to take the riuer of Cluzon, where diuers were slaine:
many drowned, and some escaped very hardly, and such a slaughter was made of them, that the riuer was died with the bloud of them that were wounded and slaine, but none of the Angrognians were once hurt: if the riuer had béen as great as it was woont commonly to be, there had not one man escaped aliue. The next day following, the commaunder of S. Antho∣ny de Fosseaw came to Angroigne, accōpanied with diuers gentlemen, saying: he was sent by the duke, commanding them to put away their ministers: which they refused to doo. From thence he went to the abbay of Pignorell, where hée and Iaconiell caused a number of the poore inhabitants of Campillon: and of Feuill, which be of the valley of Lusern, to be takē prisoners: spoyling them of their goods; driuing a∣way their cattle, and forcing them to sweare, &c. Therevp∣pon, they wrote vnto the Lord of Ranconis, declaring vnto him the procéedings of the commander. After this, there were many commandements, & iniuncti∣ons, giuen to banish ye poore Valdois, with the doctrine of the Gospell: and in the end of October, next following, a rumor went, that an army was leuied to destroy them. And there were indéede certaine handes leuied ready to march at an houres warning, and those malefactors which heeretofore were fled, or banished for any offence were now again cal∣led home, and pardoned: so that they would take thē to their weapons, and goe to destroy the Waldois. They in ye meane time, by the councell of their Ministers, fell to fasting, and prayer, and carried all that they could, of their substance, vp to the mountaines, praysing God, and singing Psalmes vn∣to him. The first day of Nouember, Angroign (by proclamati∣ons and writings set vp in euery place) was exposed to fire and sword. The second of Nouember, the armie approched to the borders of the Valley of Lusern, and certaine horse∣mē came to a place called S. Iohn, a litle beneath Angroign:
then the people returned into the mountaines: certaine of S. Iohns perceiuing that the horsemen not onely spoyled their goods, but also caried their fellowes away prisoners, set vpon them: so they retired to Bubian, where their campe then was, and not one of them of S. Iohns slaine or hurt. It happened at the same time, that two of the foresaid horsmen, being sore amazed, galloped before ye rest towards the army, being ready to march towards Angroign, crying:The wicked fly where none persecuteth. they come, they come: at whose cry the whole army was so astonished, that euery man fled his way: & they were all so scattered, that the captaines that day were not able to bring them into order againe, and yet no creature followed them. On the saturday morning the army mustered in the me∣dow ground néere to Angroign: they of Angroigne had sent certaine to kéepe the passages, and stop the army that they should not enter, if it were possible: the number was but few, who perceiuing their enemies prepared to fight, pray∣ed first of all to God to assist them. When they perceyued their enemies comming toward them, the combat began and endured a long time in the passages of Angroigne. At length the Waldois perceyuing themselues oppressed with the multitude of their enemies, retyred to the toppe of the mountaines, where they defended themselues till night. When they had found a place where they might withstand their enemies, still pursuing them, they turned themselues and slue diuerse of them, and hurt many. When the euening came, the enemies rested, & went a∣bout to encāp thēselues, there to rest al night. Which things when the Angroigniās perceiued, they fell to praier, but the enemies flouted them: then the people deuised a policie, to send a drum into ye valleis hard by: & as they were making their praier vnto God, & the drum sounded in the valley, the Lord of Trinitie caused his souldiers, which were about to encāpe themselues, to remoue thence: which was a great re∣freshing to the poore people. Many of the enemies that day
were slaine, & many hurt, of the which very few escaped: of the Angroignians that day were but thrée slaine, & one hurt, who was after healed well againe. The L. of Trinitie, af∣ter ward, placed garisons there, & much molested ye Angroig∣mans: & after they had cōmended thēselues to god by praier, they sent vnto them of Perouse, & of S. Martin, and of Pra∣gella for aid, sent them all the helpe that they were able. The next day after, there came letters to Angroigne frō the L. of Trinitie, in which he excused the outrage that was doone: and required them to shew themselues obedient to the Duke. They againe cōplaining of their wrongs, offered thēselues wt all obedience to be reformed by ye word of God, where they had erred, beséeching him, and all the Lords of Piedmont, to be their intercessors to the duke in this behalf. Vpon Munday being 4. of Nouember, the L. of Trinitie sent his army to Villers, & Tailleret: the lesser cōpany as∣cended toward Villers: the people séeing their enemies ap∣proch, after they had with praier cōmēded thēselues to God, strongly withstood them, & slue many: many also were hurt, & some fled. The other cōpany ascended toward Tailleret, & although they of ye place were but few in nūber, & that part of ye army greater, yet making their praiers, & commending their cause to God, they likewise defended thēselues valiāt∣ly. In the meane season, they of Villers emboldned by their late victory, came to assist their neighbors, & being assembled together, couragiously pursued their enemies, & put them to flight. In this pursuit, it chaunced that this poore people by an ambush of their enimies, which came another way, were suddenly enclosed, and like to be destroied: but yet by Gods helpe they all escaped, and onely thrée hurt, which were soone cured again: on the enemies side there were so many slaine, that they lay together by cartlodes. The same day also 17. of Roccapiata put to flight a great number of the inhabi∣tants of Sanson, néere to Roccapiata, that went thether, and spoiled a rich man there, of all that he had.
After that the L of Trinity had receiued the request, and letters of the Angroignians, he sent his secretary Gastant, to moue the people, to prosecute a supplication to the Duke, promising that he would returne with his armie. In which, while they of Angroign perceiued, that a part of the armie, ascended the hil of Tailleret, and the other part had already gottē the way, which led to the medow of Tower (by which meanes, they of Angroign might easily be enclosed) they sent certain to kéep the way: who encountering with their e∣nimies, obtained the victorie, not one of them being so much as hurt that day. This trechery, the Lord of Trinity excu∣sed, putting the fault in them of Tailleret, who had slain cer∣taine of his men in the high way. The 9. of Nouember he vsed the like communication, as before, touching an agréement: sending for certaine of An∣groign, to that intent, as he pretended: whom he perswa∣ded, in token of obedience, to laye downe their armour, &c. Which when they had done, he falsified his promise, his sol∣diers in the meane time spoiling their armour. A few daies after, he sēt his secretary Gastāt, to Angroign, to make a ful resolution of ye agréement, yt the people of An∣groign shold sue for grace to ye Duke, in yt they had taken vp armour for their defence, & yt they should humbly beséech him to giue thē liberty to continue in their religion they profes∣sed, &c. Whervnto they of S. Ioh, of Roccapiata, of S. Bartho∣lomew of Perouse, wt other of the valley of Perouse, agréed. Now while they were treating of this agréement, the L. of Trinity vexed cruelly them of Tailleret, pretending the cause, for that they came not to this agréement: for which cause, his souldiers spoyled and sacked most lamentably di∣uers daies together. Al which being done, the L. of Trinity caused the chiefe of the people to assemble together, and de∣manded 20000. crowns toward the charges of the Dukes maintenāce of his army, against thē in time past. But by the means of his secretary Gastant, who was promised an 100
for a bribe, 4000. were cut of: so they graunted 16. thou∣sand, whereof the Duke released the one halfe. The poore people being required to pay the 8000. pre∣sently, were faine to sell that they had for a little to make a summe: and although the money were paide, yet the army retired not but demāded anew, & forced them to promise the payment of 8000. crownes: which the Duke released. This done, he went about to slea their ministers, but chiefly the minister of Angroign, whom, when they could not gette, they spoiled his house and burnt his bookes, and spoiled 40. houses in Angroign, broke their milles, and carried away the corn and meale, which they found there: and, to be short, the practises of cruelty shewed vpon the poore people conti∣nually, was very strange: as for example, they tooke at Tail∣leret, Odul Gemet,Odull Gemer. a man of sixtie yéers of age, and put him to a cruel death: for when they had bound him, they tooke a kind of thing, called in French Escarboth, and put them to his nauell, couering them with a dishe, which within short space pearced into his bellie, and killed him. The messengers which were sent to the Duke, after they had béene detained there 6. wéeks, and cruelly handled, not∣withstanding the miseries sustained before, brought a new commaundement, that al must go to masse: wherevppon, they sent, and declared their distresse to them of ye same pro∣fession in Daulphin: who hearing therof, ioyned themselues together in league, for maintenance of the trueth: for which cause, certaine of the ministers, and elders of the Church of Daulphin, were sent to the valley of Lusern: who arriuing there at euē, at the village of Boly, word was brought, that such as would not go to masse, shold be condēned to be burnt, or sent to ye gallies, which whē they heard, they exhorted one another, saying: let vs now make solemne protestatiō, yt wée wil vtterly forsake ye false religion of the pope, & that we wil liue and die in the constant profession of Gods holy worde, and trueth. Let vs go tomorowe to the temple to heare
the word of God: and after this, let vs cast downe all the Altars and Idols to the ground. To this euerie man agrée∣ed: and in the very same houre in which they were appoin∣ted to answere the commandement, they performed their agréement, both at Bobie, and at Villiers: whether as they went, they encountred a band of souldiers, and put them to flight, the 7. of Feb. In the meane time, the L. of Trinitie (after he had cōmitted diuers outrages) being sore beaten of the Angrognians, & diuers of his men slain, especially one of great authoritie in the D. court) blewe a retrait, & descēded to Angroign, and there (ye people being fled to the medow of Tower) burnt 1000. houses, & made great spoyle. Where, although they oftentimes assayed to set fire on the two tem∣ples, and the Ministers house, yet could they not fire them. Afterward, the Lord of Trinitie burnt Rosa,Rosa destroied and de∣stroyed it with fire and sword. But the Angroignians had afterwards such a hande of the aduersaries, that they put them to flight, with great slaughter. There was one of 18. yeres of age, and but small of stature, which alone slue the Lord of Monteil, Master of the Campe, as it was tolde to the K. Another simple man threw downe Charles Truchet, with the stroke of a stone, and a young man leapt vpon him, and slue him with his owne sword, which was four fingers broade, and claue his head in sunder. This Truchet was one of the principall authors of this warre, and their chiefe enemie. The Angroignians pursued them more thā a mile, and made great slaughter. The 18. of Februarie, the L. of Trinitie not satisfied wt burning, & destroying the greatest part of townes & cities, endeuoured to burne and spoyle all the little Villages roūd about, pertayning to the same: where his, were againe by a fewe, discomfited, through the power of God. And when the enemies at any time rested them, the Angroignians prayed to God, which feared the enemies more, then any thing els. The 18. of March, the L. of Trinitie, with an armie of
sixe or seuen thousand, assayled them again, with the gentle∣men of the countrey: but God gaue them victorie, after they had cried 3. or 4 times, help vs O Lord. The captain of this band was named Bastian, of Vergil, a man very experte in feates of warre. He, at the taking of his iorney threatned to doe great things that day: his hostes hearing that, said, Mō∣sieur, if our religion be better then theirs, we shall haue the victorie, els you shall not preuaile. Shortly after, the Cap∣tain was brought again into his Inne, so wounded, and so féeble, that he was not like to liue: then said his hostes vnto him, Monsieur, it is now wel séene that their religiō is bet∣ter than ours. After that, being assayled againe, they man∣fully defended themselues, and had almost stricken the L. of Trinitie with an harquebush, for the shot brake the wand which he bare in his hand, who séeing his Soldiers in such great numbers slaine, he wept bitterly. The next day, one of the principal captains of the armie, surrendred his charge to the L. of Trinitie, saying vnto him, that he woulde neuer fight against this people any more, and so departed. In that combat there were but 2. of the Waldois slayn, and 2. hurt. Through the whole countrey of Piedmount, e∣uery man sayd, God fighteth for them: and the Souldiers themselues confessed,God fighteth for his people. they were so astonied, that they could not strike. Moreouer, they said, that this people neuer shot, but they killed, or hurt. Some others said, that the ministers (by their prayers) coniured, or bewitched them, yt they could not fight. And in trueth, such was the successe of this people, that only 14. of them were slaine in all these conflictes. The 19. of March, there was a hot skirmish at Angroign: for 3. companies of souldiers went thither to burn al that re∣mayned: but they were manfully resisted, so yt they, séeing the losse of their men, retired. After yt, the L. of Trin. endeuored by all falshood to destroy the poor people. It fel out, yt the L. of Raconis, seming to be sory for this war, sent an honest man, named Fran. Gilles, to the medow of Tower, to take aduise
how hee might best further the agréement, who hauing consulted with the ministers & rulers, and returning home was murthered by two of Angroigne: which greatly gree∣ued the Waldois, who wrote to the Lord of Raconis, excu∣sing themselues, and declaring how it gréeued them: promi∣sing that they would execute vpon them such Iustice as was méet in such a case. The L of Raconis writ vnto them againe, requiring that the offenders might be deliuered vn∣to him: whereunto they answered: that vpon 3. conditions they should be deliuered. 1. That they should not be cōpel∣led to doo any thing against their consciences,Conditions. & as touching religion nothing should be spoken to thē, but out of ye word of God. 2. That spedy iustice should be done on thē, & therafter, this shold be no preiudice to ye liberties & priuiledges of An∣groign. 3. That the execution should be vpon the borders of Angroign, for example: this was accepted, and the offen∣ders deliuered, which did redound greatly to the commen∣dation of the Angroignians. After yt the L. of Trinity had greatly vexed them, and yet could not preuaile, the rulers of the Waldois requested earnestly the Lorde of Raconis, to present a supplication,Supplication to the Duches of Sauoy. which they had made to the Duches of Sauoy: wherein they declared ye equity of their cause, protesting al due obedi∣ence to ye Duke, their soueraign Lord: & if it might be proued by the word of god, that they had held any error, they would (wt humble submission) receiue correction, & be reformed: Hūbly beséeching her grace, to appease the displeasure that the D. had conceaued against them, by the vntrue surmises of their aduersaries: and if in any thing they had offended, they craued his most gratious pardō. About this time, the L. of Trinitie was in danger of death by sicknesse. Soon after the supplication was deliuered, the duches sent an answere to ye Valdois, by the L. of Raconis, of hard conditiōs: as, that they should banish their ministers, receiue the masse, & suffer no more preaching: & yt the D. would at his pleasure make
fortresses all the country ouer: which when they vnderstood they made request vnto her againe, that these conditions might be moderated with certaine other demaunds for their libertie: and aboue all, they beséeched her to take pittie on them, and that they might not be compelled to doo any thing against their conscience, &c. After which supplication view∣ed and read of the Duches,Libertie gran∣ted to the Waldois. she so perswaded the Duke, that answere was made according to their mind, preaching per∣mitted with frée libertie, their goods restored, and fréedoms, liberties, general and particular restored. Yet so, that Masse should be said in all the parishes of these Valleis, & no man compelled to come to the same: the captiues were also re∣stored, that were sent to the gallies, and reasonable ran∣some taken for the prisoners of the Waldois: and so, through the meanes of the Duchesse, the poore Waldois haue béene quiet vntil this day. Anno 1526.  a certaine Iew in Constantinople, was con∣uerted to the faith, which when the Turkes knew, they slue him, and cast out his dead body, not suffering it to be buried: which lay 9. or 10. daies incorrupt keping colour and fresh∣nes, as if it had not béene dead, with a pleasant & delectable sauour: which when the Turkes behelde, they buried the bodie themselues, being greatly astonied thereat. The end of the seuenth Booke.
The Abridgement of the second vo∣lume of the Ecclesiasticall historie of the Actes and monuments of Martyrs from the time of King Henrie the eight, to Queene Elizabeth, our gracious Ladie now reigning. ANno 1519. Mistresse Smith wi∣dowe, Robert Harchets shoomaker, Archer Shoomaker, Thomas Bond Shoomaker, Wrigsham a Glouer, Lansedall a hosier, were on Ashwed∣nesday taken and put in prison, and the weeke nexte before Easter were condemned for relapse, (because most of them had borne fagottes in the same Citie before) to bee burned at Couentrie:Burned at Couentrie. the principall cause of their apprehension was, that they taught their familie the Lordes praier, and tenne commaundements in English; Mistresse Smith onely was dismissed for that present, and sent away, but as Mourton the Somner was leading her home, (because it was somewhat darke in the euening) by the arme, hearing the ratling of a scrol within her sléeue, yea said he, what haue you here? and finding that it was the Lordes praier, the beléefe, and the tenne commaundements in English, Ah syrah (said he) as good nowe,Mistresse Smith. as another time, come, and so he brought her backe againe to the Bi∣shop, where she was immediatly condemned, and so burned with the sixe before mentioned, the fourth day of Aprill in
a place thereby called the little Parke. Anno 1521. Robert Sylkes1521 Robert Sylkes. who was one of the former companie, and by flight escaped, was brought to Couentrie two yeeres after, and burned the morrow after he came thi∣ther, which was about the 13. day of Ianuary These Mar∣tyrs being thus dispatched, the Shiriffes took their goods and cattle to their owne vse, their wiues and children being left destitute. Anno 1527. Patricke Hamleton1527 Patricke Hamleton. a Scotchman borne of a noble house, the first day of March was condemned for the testimonie of the trueth, and burned at Saint Andrews in Scotland, he (at the Vniuersitie of Marpurge in Germa∣nie, by conference with Franciscus Lambertus) did so grow in knowledge and zeale, that hée first there set vp conclusi∣ons to be disputed of concerning faith and workes,Patrickes articles. The ar∣ticles wherefore hee was condemned, were these: 1. Man hath no frée will. 2. Man is iustified by faith in Christ. 3. A man so long as hée liueth is not without sinne. 4. He is vnwoorthie to bée called a Christian which beléeueth not that hee is in grace. 5. Good woorkes doe not make a good man, though a good man doth good workes. 6. An euill man bringeth foorth euill workes, which being repented of, doe not make an euill man. 7. Faith, hope and charitie cannot bée seuered in one man in this life. For the condemnation and burning of this man, the diuines of Louane, by letters gaue thankes vnto the Archbishoppe of Saint Andrewes, and the Diuines of Scotland, This Patricke Hamleton cited the blacke Frier called Cambell who accused him, to appeare before God, to aun∣swere the innocencie of his death, and named a certayne daie when, before which time the Frier died without re∣morse of conscience. Patricke Hamelton wrote a Treatise of diuinitie called Patrickes places:Patrickes places. and they were tran∣slated out of Latine (wherein he wrote them) into Englishe by Iohn Frith.
A few yéeres after, the Archbishoppe of S. Andrewes burned Henrie ForrestHenry Forest. (who had taken orders of Bennet and Collet) for saying, Maister Patricke was a martyr, and his opinion good. He was betraied by Walter Long a Fryer: to whom he confessed himselfe. He suffered death at the North Church stile of S. Andrewes. Within a yéere after the martyrdome of Henry Fo∣rest, or there about, Iames Hamleton,Iames Hamle∣ton. the brother of Patrick Hamleton the martyr, was called in question for maintei∣ning the opinions of his brother: but the king, Iames the 5. gaue him counsell to depart, and not appeare: which if hee did, he could not helpe him; for the Bishops had perswaded him, that the cause of heresie did not appertaine vnto the king. So he fled and was condemned as an heretike, and all his goods confiscate. Catherine Hamleton his sister, and Aunt to the king,Recant. recanted her opinion touching iustification without respect of woorkes, béeing thereto perswaded by the king: and so e∣scaped. At the same time also an honest woman of Lieth, for cry∣ing in her trauell; Christ helpe me, when the mydwife bad her say, Our Lady helpe me, was caused to recant.Recant. About the same time Maister Norman Gurley,Norman Gurley. because he denied purgatorie, and said the Pope was Antichrist, and would not recant, was condemned by Iames Hay Bishop of Rose, & commissioner of Iames Beton Archbishop of S. An∣drewes, and burned vpon the gréenes side betwixt Lieth and Edenburgh. With him was burned Dauid Straton,Dauid Straton for say∣ing there was no purgatory, but the passion of Christ, and tribulations of this world he was also falsly accused to haue said, no tithes were to be paid, for that he casting his fishes to the Vicar of Eglisgrige, some fell into the Sea. Anno 1532. Thomas Harding,Harding. who with his wife, before had abiured, after lōg penance was burned (as a relapse, be∣ing condemned by Iohn Longland Bishoppe of Lincolne)
at the North ende of the towne of Chesham in the Dell going to Botley; when they had set fire on him, there was one that dashed out his brayns with a billet. It was suppo∣sed of them, that they might haue fourtie dayes of pardon that shoulde carrie wood to his burning, on hope whereof manie people caused their children to beare billets and fa∣gottes to the burning of Martyrs. He was burned on the e∣uen of Corpus Christi day, béeing of the age of threescore yeeres and aboue. About the same time, diuerse others suffered trouble for the doctrine of the trueth, as vnder Doctour London, Maistresse Alice Dolie béeing accused of her mayde Eliza∣beth Wighthill, for holding against Purgatorie, agaynst Images, for the articles of the Créede in English: this was about 1520. Anno 1525.  Frier Hackman for holding frée saluation by grace. Anno 1525 Also Robert West priest of S. Andrewe vnder shaft, for commending Martin Luther &c. for which he was abiured, ibid. Father, wife and si∣sters against the Christi∣ans.Anno 1530. Iohn Ribourne was accused by both his si∣sters, his owne wife, and of his owne father; (who were compelled by Iohn Longland Bishop of Lincolne, to depose against him concerning meates, Purgatorie, pilgrimage, prayer in the English tongue, &c. Iohn Eaton and Cecill his wife of the parish of Spure were detected by Richarde Ryburne, for holding downe their heades at the sacring time, and when the belles did ring at the feast of exaltation of the holie crosse, betweene Mattines and Euensong, for saying What a clampering of belles is here? Tho. LoundeThomas Lounde priest who had beene with Luther two yeeres, béeing afterwarde cast in the Fleete at Lon∣don was a great instructer of Iohn Ribourne afore men∣tioned.
At the same time vnder Iohn Longland Bishoppe of Lincolne, Iohn Simonds, was molested for denying Pur∣gatorie, for denying singlenes of priestes, it was also testifi∣ed against him, that he conuerted eight priests, & had holpen two or thrée friers out of their orders. Vnder the same Bishop about that time,Abiured. were these per∣sons following examined, excommunicated, and abiured, for being together in Iohn Taylors house of Hichenden, and there hearing Nicholas Fielde of London, to reade a par∣cell of Scripture in Englishe to them, and expounde to them many thinges against images offerings, prayer in the Latine tongue, against the Sacraments of the Altar, pur∣gatorie, &c. Their names were these: William Win∣graue, Thomas Haukes of Hichenden, Robert Hawes of West Wickam, Iohn Taylor, Iohn Hawkes, Thomas Herne of Colshill, Nicholas Fielde, Richard Deane, Thomas Clarke the yonger, William Hawkes of Che∣sham. Vnder Iohn Longland Bishop of Lincolne, Simon Wis∣dome of Burford was molested for the Gospell, the Psalter, the summe of holie Scripture in English, so Iames Alger, or Aliger, because he sayde euerie Christian man li∣uing after the lawes of God is a Priest, hee woulde no dole for his soule, and denyed Purgatorie &c. He had not of long time beene confessed, and for denying the Priestes power of absolution, with the other before was compel∣led, to seeke reconcilement in the Church and to abiure the trueth. Anno 1526.  Pope Clement the seuenth absolueth the othe made of the French king to the Emperour, and ioy∣neth together a confederacie of the Venetians and other Princes against the Emperour, whereof the Duke of Bur∣bone and other of the Emperours Captaynes hauing intel∣ligence, gathered their armies together, and after muche fighting and bloudshed about Millan, Hawde and Cre∣mona
at length they approched, and bent their siege against Rome, and after thrée sharpe assaults obtained the Cittie with the whole spoyle thereof.Rome spoiled and the Pope taken prisoner. Where he besieged the fore∣saied Pope with his Cardinals in the mount of Adrian, and tooke him prisoner. Anno 1527.  In the Castell of saint Angell, at which tyme Rome suffered more spoyle then of the Goathes and Vandalles, the Souldiours that dayly laie at the siege of the Castell made iestes of the Pope:Rimes made of the Pope. sometime they had one riding like the Pope with a whore behinde him, some∣times hée blessed, and sometime he cursed, and sometime they would with one voice call him Antechrist, &c. When the Cardinall Wolsey here in England heard how his father of Rome was taken prysoner, he laboured to the Kinge to fight against the Emperour for the deli∣uerie of the Pope, whiche the Kinge refused by his owne person or his people to doe: but yéelded to the Cardinall of his treasure, to take what himselfe thought conuenient: who therevpon made out of the Kinges treasure, twelue score thousand pounds,220000. li. out of ye kings tresure to fight against the Emperour. and caried it ouer the sea with him: whiche when he came to the kinges court at Amiens, he conuerted to the hiring of Souldiours, and furnishing out the French kinges armie, appointing also certaine En∣glishe Captaines in the king of Englands name, to goe agaynst the Emperour to restore the Pope: all whiche ar∣mie was paide with the kinge of Englandes mony. The cause why the Cardinall bare the Emperour this malice, after some wryters, appeareth to be this: At what tyme as Pope Clement was taken prysoner, the Cardinall wrote vnto the Emperour, that hée shoulde make him Pope, but when he had receiued an aunswere that plea∣sed him not, he waxed furious madde, and wrote manie me∣nacing letters vnto the Emperour, that if hee would not make him Pope, hee woulde make suche a ruffeling be∣tweene Christian princes as was not this hundred yéeres
before,Proude Pre∣lats. yea though it should cost the whole Realme of Eng∣land. Whose ambitious endeuour the king himselfe did also fauour, as it appeareth by instructions giuen of the King to his Ambassadours at Rome, to that effect that Wol∣sey might be placed in the papacie after the death of Pope Clement: to the ende, hée might compasse his cause of di∣uorce.To the end the king might compasse his cause of di∣uorce. While the Ambassadours were trauelling at Rome for the aduauncement of the Cardinall to bee Pope, if Clement were dead; hee played héere the Persecutour at home: First, hée caused Fryer Barnes an Augustine Fryer, to beare a fagotte, for certaine pointes which hée cal∣led heresie: hée caused two marchauntes of the Still yeard to beare fagottes, for eating fleshe on Friday. This was a∣bout, Anno 1526. Anno 1528.  The Cardinall caused Arthur Bilney, Gef∣fery Lound, and Garret to be abiured for speaking against the Popes authoritie and his pompous pride. Anno 1529. The Cardinall was cast in a Premu∣nire1529 The proude Cardinal cast in a Premu∣nire. and execution performed vppon him, hee forfeited all his Landes, Tenementes, goodes and cattell, and should haue beene put out of the Kinges protection:The K. graci∣ous to the Cardinall. but the king sent him a sufficient protection, and of his gentlenesse lefte to him the Bishoprickes of Yorke and Winchester, and gaue vnto him plate and stuffe conuenient for his de∣gree. Anno 1530.1530. A Parliament. In the moneth of Nouember was sum∣moned a generall parliament to be holden at Westminster, in which, Syr Thomas Moore succeedeth in the Lorde Chauncelourship vnto the Cardinal. The Commons in this Parliament propounded their griefes against the spiritual∣tie,Griefe of the communalty a∣gainst the spi∣ritualtie. which were especially sixe. First, the excessiue fynes that the Ordinaries tooke for probate of Testaments: as, a thousande markes paide for the will of Syr William Compton knight, as Syr Henrie Guilforde knight, one
of the executors, declared in open Parliament. The second  cause, the great polling which the spirituall men vsed in taking of corpes, presents or mortuaries. The thirde, that  priestes being surueyors, stewards, and officers to Bishops, Abbots &c. had and occupied farmes, graunges and grasing in euery countrey. The fourth cause was, that Abbots, Pri∣ors,  and spirituall men kept Tannehouses, and bought and solde wooll, cloth, and all manner of marchandise, as other temporall marchants did. The fift cause was their non resi∣dencie  from their flocks, and residencie in the court of Lords houses. The sixt was, that vnlearned priestes had tenne or  twelue benefices, and learned scholers in the vniuersities wanted both benefice and exhibition: all which grieuances were redressed the same parliament. During the same par∣liament, there was brought downe to the commons the booke of Articles, which the Lordes had put vp to the king against the Cardinall, the chiefe whereof were these: First, that hée without the Kinges consent had procured himselfe to bée Legate.Articles a∣gainst the Cardinall. 2. In all writinges that hee wrote to Rome, he wrote I and my King. 3. That hée slaunde∣red the Church of Englande to the Court of Rome,I and my king. which hée saide was facta in reprobum sensum. 4. Hée without the Kinges assent, carried the great seale with him into Flaun∣ders, when hee was sent Embassadour to the Emperour. 5. Without the kinges consent, hee sent commission to Iohn Gregorie de Cassalis Knight, to conclude a league betweene the king and the Duke of Ferrarie. 6. That he hauing the Frenchpockes, presumed to come and breath on the king.The Cardi∣nall had the Frēchpocks. The Cardi∣nal confes∣seth the Ar∣ticles. 7. That hee caused the Cardinals hatte to bee put on the kinges coyne. 8. That hee had sent innumera∣ble substance to Rome for the obtayning of his dignities, to the impouerishing of the Realme. These Articles were confessed all, of the Cardinall, and assigned with his hand. Anno. 1531.  Notwithstanding the kings goodnesse to∣wardes
him, the Cardinall being in his Dioces,The Cardi∣nal vnthank∣full to the king. wrote to the Court of Rome, and to diuers other Princes, letters in reproche of the king, and endeuoured to winne fauour of the people with pompe, and great gifts to the Gentlemen; which the king (although he knew his doings) dissembled all that yeare, till he saw his heart so lifte vp with pride, that hee thought it not conuenient to suffer him any longer; so he di∣rected his letters to the Earle of Northumberland,The Cardi∣nall arrested and priso∣ned. willing him with all diligence to arrest him, and to deliuer him to the Earle of Shrewsburie; which was accordingly done, and the vi. day of Nouember he was conueied from Cawood to Sheffielde Castle, and there deliuered to the Earle of Shrewesburies keeping. When the Cardinall was thus arrested, the king sent Sir William Kingstone, knight, Captaine of the Garde, and Constable of the Tower of London, to fetch the Cardinall to the Tower; when the Cardinall saw the Captain of the Garde, he was so sore astonished, that shortly after hee be∣came sicke; men said he willingly tooke such quantitie of a strong purgation, that his nature was not able to beare it, and the matter that came from him was so blacke, that the stayning thereof could not be gotten out of the Blankettes by any meanes. By easie iourneies he was brought to the Abbey of Leicester, the xxvij. day of Nouember, where (for very feeblenesse of nature,The Cardi∣nall dieth. caused by purgations and vomits) he died, the second night following, and there lyeth buried. It is testified by one yet liuing, in whose armes the Car∣dinall died, that his bodie being dead, was blacke as pitche, and was so heauie that sixe could scarce beare him: and fur∣thermore, did so stincke aboue the ground,The Cardi∣nals bodie did stinke a∣boue ground. that they were constrayned to hasten the buriall thereof in the night season, before it was day. At the which buriall, such a tempeste, with such a stinke there arose, that all the Torches went out, and so he was throwen into the Tombe.
This Cardinall founded a new Colledge in Oxford: for the furniture whereof he had gathered together all the best learned he could heare of: amongst which number were these, Clarke, Tyndall, Sommer, Frith, and Tauerner, with other mo. Which holding assemblie together in the Col∣ledge, were counted to be Heretikes, and thereupon were cast into a prison of the Colledge where was kept Saltfish, through the stinke whereof the most part of them were in∣fected, and Clarke thereof died, being young and tender, and a man of singular learning among them all. And other in o∣ther places in the Towne also, of the same infection deceas∣sed. In the time of the Cardinall, Master Humfrey,M. Humfrey. who was a right godly and sincere Alderman of London, was troubled and put in the Tower for the Gospel of Christ, and for the mainteyning of them that fauoured the same: but at length he was forced to abiure,Abiure. and after was made knight by the king, and Sheriffe of London. Anno 1530. Thomas Hitten1530. Tho. Hitten Martyr. a Preacher at Maidstone, after long torments & sundry imprisonments, by Wil. War∣ham Bishop of Caunterburie, and Fisher Bishop of Roche∣ster, was burned at Maidston for the testimonie of ye trueth. Anno 1531. Thomas Bilney1531. Tho. Bilney. of Cambridge, professour of both Lawes, conuerted Thomas Arthur, and M. Hugh La∣timer, then Crossebearer at Cambridge on procession daies, and preached against the intollerable pride of the Cleargie, and the authoritie of the Bishop of Rome, being associate with Arthur; whereof the Cardinall hearing, cast him into prison, and anno 1527. accompanied with a great number of Bishops, as Caunterburie, Cutbert of London, Iohn of Rochester, &c. came into the chapterhouse at Westminster, where Bilney & Arthur were brought before them. Where the Cardinall demaunded, whether Bilney had preached a∣ny of the opinions of Luther, contrarie to the Catholike Church Whereto Bilney answered negatiuely, & being as∣ked againe of the Cardinall, whether he had not taken an
oath not to preach, or defend any of the opinions of Luther, he graunted he had so sworne, but not lawfully. Which In∣terrogatories so ministred, and answere made, the Cardinal caused him to sweare to answere plainly to the Articles and errours, preached and set foorth by him. Who hauing béene thus sworne and examined, the Cardinal procéeded to the ex∣amination of M. Arthur there present, causing him to take the like oath. Then the Cardinall and the Bishops by their authoritie, ex officio, did call for witnesses against M. Bilney, Iohn Huggen, chéefe Prouinciall of the Fryers Preachers throughout all England, Geffrey Iulles, and Richard Iug∣woorth, Professors of diuinitie of the same order. Also W. Ierkett Gentleman, William Nelson, and Thomas Williās: and so the Cardinall (because he was otherwise occupied in the affaires of the realm) committed the matter to the hea∣ring of the Bishop of London, and two other Bishops there present, or to thrée of them. The xxvij. of Nouember, in the yéere aforesaide, the B. of Londō, with the B. of Ely & Rochester, came into the B. of Norwiches house, wheras likewise ex officio, they did swere certaine witnesses against M T. Arthur, in like sort as before against M. Bilney, & warned him on his oath, he should not reueale his examinatiōs, nor answeres, nor any part of thē. The second day of December, the B. of London with o∣ther Bishops, assembling in the place aforesaid, after that Bilney had denied vtterly to returne to the church of Rome, the B. of London did exhibite into the Notaries, in the pre∣sence of M. Bilney, v. Epistles, wt one schedule in one of the Epistles, conteining his articles & answeres, folded therein, & another epistle folded in maner of a booke with vj. leaues, which al he cōmanded to be registred, & the originals to bée deliuered vnto him againe, & bound the Notaries wt an oath for the safe kéeping of the copies. The Interrogatories were concerning Ecclesiasticall constitutions; Luthers doctrine; the church Images; a thirde place; Images; fasting dayes;
prayer to Saints, faith without woorks, prayer in an vn∣knowen tongue, &c. to the number of 34. Whereto Bilney34. Articles against Bil∣ney. made such answere as the Prelates were nothing satisfied, The iiij. day of December, the Bishop of London with other Bishops his assistants, assembled againe at the Chap∣ter house of Westminster, whither Master Bilney was also brought, who being often, and earnestly required to submit himselfe, answered diuers times, Fiat iustitia & iudicium in nomine Domini. Then the Bishoppe after deliberation, put∣ting off his cappe, said: In nomine patris, &c. And making a crosse on his forhead and on his breast, gaue sentence against M. Bilney there present, in this manner. I by the consent and counsell of my brethren here pre∣sent, doe pronounce thée Thomas Bilney,Sentence of condemnati∣on against Bilney. who hast béene ac∣cused of diuers articles, to be conuict of heresie, and for the rest of the sentence, we take deliberation till to morrow. The v. day of December, the Bishoppes assembled there againe, and exhorted Bilney diuers times to returne to their Church, and permitted him to goe into some secrete place, there to consult with his friends, till one of the clock at after noone of the same day. At after noone, the Bishop of Lon∣don againe asked him whether he would returne, and ac∣knowledge his heresies. But Bilney required to bring in witnesses to cléere him, which would not be graunted him. And when they vrged him againe, he said he would geue no other answere than he had. If they should prooue that he was sufficiently conuict, he woulde submitte himselfe, and desired againe to haue time and space to bring in his refused witnesses. After great instancie on the Bishops parte with Bilney to recant, or els the sentence must be read, he required the Bishoppe to geue him licence till the next morrow, to deli∣berate with himselfe, whether he might abiure the heresies, wherewith he was defamed, or no: Whereto the Bishop at the last graunted, and gaue him two nightes respite to deli∣berate,
that is, till Saterday at nine of the Clocke in the forenoone. The vij. day of December, in the yeare and place afore∣said, the Bishop of London, with the other Bishops, being assembled, Bilney also personally appeared, and being de∣maunded whether he would now recant,Bilney recan∣teth. he answered, he was perswaded by Master Dankaster & other of his friends so to doe, and so there openly read his abiuration, and sub∣scribed to it, and deliuered it to the Bishoppe, who then did absolue him, and enioyned him penance, that he shoulde a∣bide in prison appoynted by the Cardinall, till he were by him released. And moreouer, the next day he should goe be∣fore the Procession in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul bare headed, with a fagotte on his shoulder, and should stand before the Preacher at Paules Crosse, all the sermon time. The space of two yeres after his abiuration, that is, from the yere 1529. to the yere 1531. Bilney liued in great an∣guish of minde,Bilney in great anguish of mind for his recantation. and halfe in despaire for his gréeuous facte, and at length, by Gods grace, and good counsel, he came to some quiet of minde and conscience, and fully resolued to geue ouer his life for the confession of that trueth which hee before had renounced And thus being fully determined, he tooke his leaue at tenne of the clocke at night, of certaine of his friends, and said that he woulde go to Ierusalem, allu∣ding to the wordes of Christ, what time he was appoynted to suffer his passion. So from thence he departed into Nor∣folke, where he preached in priuate housholdes, and confir∣med an Anchres, whom he had conuerted to Christ. Then preached he openly in the fieldes, confessing his facte,Bilney repen∣teth. and preached publikely the doctrine which hee before abiured. And at Norwich he was apprehended, and carried to prison, there to remaine, til blinde Bishop Nixe sent vp for a wryt to burne him. Who after his examination and condemna∣tion before Doctor Pells, Doctor of law and Chauncellour, first was degraded by Suffragane Vnderwood, according
to their popish manner, by the assistaunce of all the Friers and Doctors of the same suite. Which doone, hée was imme∣diatly committed to the laie power, and to the two Shi∣riffes, of whome Thomas Necton was one, Bilneys especi∣all good friend. After this the Friday following at night, which was be∣fore the daie of execution, he bare himselfe very chéereful∣ly among his friendes, to their greate comfort. The Sater∣day next following, he was brought forth to execution with∣out the cittie gate, called Bishops gate, in a lowe valley, cal∣led the Lollards pit, vnder Saint Leonards hill, accompa∣nied with Doctor Warner his old acquaintaunce, parson of Winterton. Goyng to execution, he was comforted secréet∣ly by one of his acquaintaunce, that willed him to stande sure and constant: to whome he aunswered, that whatso∣euer stormes he passed in this venture, yet shortly after saied he, my ship shall be in hauen: and desired him to helpe him with his prayer. Before his going to the stake, he con∣fessed his faith, and after that, went to it, and praied: which doone, he stoode vpon the ledge of the stake made for him, to the end he might be the better séene, and the chaine was cast aboute him: and standing thereon, Doctor Warner came to him to bid him farewell: whiche spake but fewe woordes for wéeping: vpon whom Thomas Bilney did gently smile,Bilney smileth at the stake. and inclined his bodie to speake with him a fewe woordes of thankes, and the laste were these: O Maister doctor féede your flocke, Féede your flocke: that when the Lord com∣meth, he may finde you so dooing: and farewell good maister Doctor, and pray for mée. While he stood thus vpō the ledge of the stake, certaine Friers, Doctors & Priors, being pre∣sent at his examination & degradation, praied him to cleare them to the people, least they should withdraw their almes from them: which he did according to their request. Then by reason of the great wind, the fire thrise departed, and had recourse before it coulde be sharpe enough to consume him.
In the which (til he gaue vp the Ghost) he knocked his brest, sometime crying, Iesus, sometime Credo, and so gaue wit∣nes to the truth, and slept in the Lord. About Anno 1527. Simon Fish, who fled ouer the seas, as Tindall, for feare of the Cardinal, whom he had offended, in playing a parte against the Cardinal in a plaie, made the booke of the Supplication of the beggers:The Suppli∣cation of beg∣gers. and the next yéere sent it to the Lady Anne Bulleine, which booke her brother séeing in her hand, tooke and read it, and gaue it her againe, willing her to giue it to the King: which thing she so did. About Anno 1528.  The king vnderstanding who made it, and how for feare of the Cardinall he had fled ouer seas, kept it in his bosome iij. or iiij. daies: which Fishes wife vn∣derstanding, and hauing encouragement of certaine about the King, that signified tokens of the kings good liking, shée made suite to the king for the safe returne of her husbande: whereto he most gratiously graunted. Whervpon after two yéeres and an halfe of absence he returned, and was of his wife brought vnto the king, about the yéere 1530. who embraced him with most louing countenaunce: and after iij. or iiij. howers talke, as they were riding on hunting, dismis∣sed him, and gaue him his protection.The king gi∣ueth Fish his protection. About the same time also, M. Moddis the kings footman, being in talke with the king, of religion, and of new bookes that were come frō beyond seas, said: if his grace would par∣don him, & such as he would bring to his grace, he should sée such a book as was maruelous to heare of. The king deman∣ded who they were: he said ij. of your merchaunts, George Eliot, & George Robinson. The king appointed a time to speake with them, & so did: & caused one of them, G Eliot to read the book vnto him. Which being read, the king made a∣long pawse, and then said, if a man should pull downe an old stone wall, & begin at the lower part, the vpper part therof might chance to fal on his head. And then he tooke the booke and put it into his deske, and commanded them vpon their
allegiance, not to tell to any that he had séene the booke. A∣gainst the supplication of the beggers, sir Thomas Moore wrote, vnder the title of poore séely soules pewling out of purgatorie,Poore seely soules pewling out of Purga∣tory. to whiche Iohn Fryth made a pithie and effec∣tuall replie. When the Cardinall and Prelates vnderstood of the sup∣plication of beggers, and other English bookes, they gaue out a commission against reading of English bookes,A Commission against En∣glish bookes. and namely the booke of Beggers, and the new Testament of Tindals translation, which was done out of hand by Cutbert Tunstall bishop of London, and a short time after, they had procured an inhibition by the kinges proclamation, Anno 1529.  both against English, & other in the Latine tongue, which contained ought against their superstition, whervpon ensued great persecution and trouble, whereof first tasted Thomas Bilney aforesaid. Anno 1529. came foorth the New testament of Tin∣dals translation,The testament of Tindals translation. which Tunstall and Moore deuised to sup∣presse (through the counsell of Augustine PackingtonAugustine Packington. a Mercer and Tindals fréend) by buying all the copies, for which he gaue verie largely, and so furnished Tindall with monie, that he corrected them and set them foorth againe in greater plenty then before, being reléeued with the Bishops mony, wherewith the bishop being gréeued, declared vnto Packington, how they swarmed more then before, to whom said he: my Lord, you were best to buie the stampes too, and so shall you be sure: at which answere the bishop smiled, and so the matter ended. The same yéere that Bilney suffered Anno 1531. the moneth of Nouember, Richard BayfieldRichard Bay∣field. suffered for the testimonie of the truth, and was burned in Smithfield, he was sometime a moonke of Surrie, and conuerted by Doc∣tor Barnes, and two godly men of London brickmakers, Maister Maxwell and Maister Stacie Wardens of their companie. He so profited in the doctrine of Christe in twoo
yéeres, that by the Moonkes of this house; he was caste into prison, and there endured sore whipping with a gagge in his mouth, and then stocked, and so continued in the same torments thrée quarters of a yéere, before Doctor Barnes could get him out; which at length he did by the meanes of one doctor Ruffani of the same house. From thence Doctor Barnes carried him to Cambridge, where he greatly profited in good letters, and neuer returned to his Abbie, but went to London to Maxwell and Stacie, who kept him secréetly a while, and after caried him beyond the seas, (Doctor Barnes being then in the Fléete for Gods woorde) where he was be∣neficiall vnto Tindall and Fryth, and at the last returning to London to Maisters Smiths house in Bucklers burie, there was he bewrayed, & dogged to his bookebinders in Marke∣lane, where he was taken and caried to Lollards tower, and from thence to the Colehouse, by reason that one parson Patmore parson of much Haddaine in Essex, that lying in Lollards tower was confirmed by him in the doctrine of Christ, who after abiured, and was condemned to perpetual prison, but deliuered againe by the kinges pardon. But Ri∣chard Bayfield continued constant, & in the Colehouse was worse handled then before in Lollardes tower: for there he was tied bothe by necke, middle and legges, and stan∣ding vpright by the walles, diuerse times manicled, to ac∣cuse others that had bought his bookes. He was thrise in the Consistorie at Paules put to his triall whether he would abiure or no: but he standing to his triall by disputation, to the confounding of his aduersaries,Bayfield con∣demned. by Stokesly then his iudge, with the assistaunce of Winchester and other Bi∣shops, he continuing constant in the cause of Christ, was condemned the twentie daie of Nouember, Anno 1531 in the quéere of Paules and disgraded. After which the Bi∣shop tooke his Crosier staffe,Cruelty. and smoote him on the brest that he threw him downe backwardes, and brake his head that he souned. When he came to himselfe againe, he than∣ked
God that he was deliuered from the malignant church of Antechrist. Anon after he was ledde through the quire to Newgate, and there rested aboute an hower in prayer; and so went to the fire in his apparell ioyfullie; and there for lacke of a spéedy fire, was half an hower aliue: and when the left arme was in the fire and burned, he rubbed it with his right hand, and it fell from his bodie, but he continuyng in prayer without moouing. On Wednesday the xxj. of Aprill the yéere 1529. Iohn Tewksburie (who was conuerted by reading of Tindals te∣stament, & the wicked Mammon, he had also the bible writ∣ten) was brought into the cōsistorie at London, before Cut∣bert bishop of London and his assistants, Henry bishop of S. Asse, & Iohn abbot of Westminster, & was examined of diuerse errors (as they called them) in the booke of ye wicked Mammon:The booke of the wicked Mammon. Which Iohn Teuksbury iustified for truth: thrée sessions he appéered, & manfully stood to the truth: being exa∣mined of articles touching Antechrist, iustificatiō by works, saints, almes, other mens praiers for vs &c. The examina∣tion of which articles being doone, the B. of London did ex∣hort him againe to recant, and appointed him to determine with himselfe against the next session: in whiche session he submitted himselfe and abiured,Iohn Teuksbu∣ry recanteth. and was appointed penāce the eight of Maie, Anno 1529. Two yéeres after, hauing receiued more grace and strength at Gods hands, moued by the example of Bayfield that had before done the like, he returned to the cōstant pro∣fessiō of the truth:Iohn Teuksbu∣ry repenteth. & being apprehended, was brought before sir T. Moore and the B. of London, where certaine articles were obiected against him, touching faith, kéeping of for∣bidden bookes, purgatorie, sacraments of the altar &c. & con∣fessing his articles, the bishop pronounced sentence, and de∣liuered him to the Shiriffes of London, Richard Gresham, and Edward Altam,Teuksbury burnt. who burned him in Smithfield vpon S. Thomas euen, the xx. of December.
This yéere Edward Frese,Edward Frese. first apprentice to a painter in the city of York, who for his pregnancie of wit, his yers were redéemed by the Abbot of Bersie Abbey, and became a no∣uice; but after long space, not liking that trade, he ran away, and came to Colchester in Essex, where he followed his vo∣cation, married a wife, and liued honestly. After he had béen there a good time, he was hyred to paint certaine clothes for the new Inne, which is in the middle of the market place: in the border of which cloathes, he wrote certaine sentences of scripture: for which he was apprehēded in the same Inne, and brought to Fulham to the B. house where he was cru∣elly imprisoned, with one Iohnson and his wife of Colche∣ster, Wyly with his wife and sonne,Bread made of sawdust. and father Bate of Row∣shedge: they were fed with manchet, made with the grea∣ter part of sawdust, and were so straightly kept, that their wiues and friends might not come at them. After the painter had béen there a long space, by much suit he was remoued to Lollards towre: his wife in the meane time of his suit, whiles he was yet at Fulham, béeing desi∣rous to sée her husband, & pressing to come in at the gate, then big with child, the porter lift vp his foote,Crueltie and stroke her on the belly, that at length she died of the same, but the childe was destroyed immediatly. After that they were al stocked for a long time, afterward they were let loose in their prisons agayn. This paynter, be∣cause he wold alwaies be writing on the walles with chalk to their discontentment, was manacled by the wrists, til the flesh of his armes was grown higher thē his yrons: wherby he could not keame his head, that his haire was folded toge∣ther. After the death of his wife, by suit of his brethrē to the king, he was brought out into the consistorie of Paules, and as his brethren reported, they kept him iij. daies without meate, before he came to his answere: so that with imprison∣ment and hunger, the man grew out of his wittes: which when they had procured by crueltie, they sent him againe
to Bersie Abbie, but he would not tarrie among them, and so continued out of his wits till his dying day. His brother Valentine Freese and his wife,Valentine Freese and his wife. gaue their liues at one stake in Yorke, for the testimonie of the truth. Father Bate gate out of the pryson in a darke night, and was caught no more, but died shortly after. In this yéere Frier RoiceFrier Roice. was burned in Portingall for the truth. In the beginning of this yéere, the Bishops, who had burned Tindals testaments,The Bishops commaunded to make a trā∣slation of the Bible. were inioyned by the King to cause a new Translation to be made; notwithstan∣ding which commaundement they did nothing at all. But contrary in the moneth of Maie, the Bishoppe of Lon∣don caused all the translations of Tindall, and many other Bookes whiche hée had bought, to bée burned in Paules Churchyarde. Iames BaynamIames Baynā. who married the wife of Simon Fish, a Gentleman of the middle Temple, was accused to sir Tho∣mas Moore lord Chancellour, and arested of a sergeant at armes, and carried to the Chancellours house at Chelsey, where he continued in frée prison, vntill sir Thomas Moore perceyued he could doo no good of him. Then he put him in prison in his owne house, and whipped him at a trée in his garden, called the trée of Truth: and after sent him to the Tower to bée racked, and so he was; Sir Thomas beyng present himselfe, till in a manner he had lamed him, because he would not accuse the Gentlemen of the Temple of his acquaintaunce, nor shew where his bookes laie. And because his wife denied them to be in his house, she was sent to the Fléete, & their goods confiscate. After they had thus practi∣sed against him by torments, then was be brought before I. Stokesley B. of London, the xv. of December. An. 1531. in the towne of Chelsey, & there examined touching purgatorie, Intercession of Saints, Confession, vowes, concerning Lu∣thers marriage, the Sacrament of anneyling, of Baptisme, whether matrimonie were a Sacrament, for his bookes of
Scripture, and what he iudged of Tindall &c. to which arti∣cles he subscribed according to the truth. The next day following, he appeared in the same place as before,Iames Baynam submitteth. & after much persuasion he submitted himself the B. notwithstanding committed him to one of the Counters for further triall. And the yéere 1532.  In the moneth of Febru∣arie he was called for againe, and although he was yet ab∣iured, not yet séemed he to satisfie the Chancellor: so he was for that present returned to his prison againe: and the viij. day of February appeared as before, and made a full abiu∣ration, and subscribed it. Which doone the Chancellour put him to his fine, to pay twentie pound to the king: and inioy∣ned him penance, to go before the Crosse in Procession at Paules, and to stand before the Preacher at Paules crosse during the Sermon, with a fagot on his shoulder, and so to returne with the Summer againe to prison, there to abide the Bishops determination.Iames Baynā repenteth. And so the 17. of Februarie he was dismissed home, where he had scarce abode a moneth, but he bewayled his fact, and was neuer quiet in conscience, til he had asked God and the world forgeuenesse, before the congregation in those dayes, in a warehouse in Bowe lane. And immediatly the next Sunday after, he came to S. Au∣stines, with the new Testament in his hand, in English, and the obedience of a Christian man in his bosome, and stoode vp there before the people in his pewe, and there declared wc wéeping teares, that he had denied God, and prayed the peo∣ple to forgeue, and to beware of his weakenes. Besides, hée wrote certaine letters to the Bishop, to his brother, and to others: so that shortly after he was apprehended, and com∣mitted to the Tower of London, and after thrée appearan∣rances, the 19. of April, the 20. and the 26. of the same mo∣neth, before Master Iohn Foxforde. Vicar generall of the Bishoppe of London, in the presence of Mathew Grifton, Register, Nicholas Wilson, and William Phillips, &c, hée was condemned to be burned, and so was hée deliuered
to sir R. Gresham shiriffe then being present, who caused him by his officers to be carried to Newgate,Iames Baynā burned. & was burned in Smithfield the last day of Aprill at iij. of the clocke in the afternoone. After he had indured great torments, stockes and irons in prison before, as he was in the middest of the fla∣ming fire, and his armes and legges halfe consumed there∣with,The courage of a worthy martyr. he spake these wordes: Oh, ye papists behold, ye looke for myracles, here now may yée sée a myracle, for in this fire, I féele no more paine, then if I were in a bed of downe, but it is as swéete to mée as a bedde of roses. About this present time or not long before, Iohn BenetIohn Benet. a tailor, dwel∣ling in a village called Vrchuant, was burned in the towne of Deuies, within the Countie of Wiltshire, for the deny∣ing of the Sacrament of the Altar. And much about the same time was one Traxnell burned, in a towne called Brodford within the same County. The same yéere 1532.  Robert King, Nicholas Marsh, and Robert Garner men of Dedham, Robert Debnam of Estbergholt, had ouerthrowne and burned the roode of Do∣uercourt,The Idoll of Douercourt. ten miles of Dedhā, of which Idoll a brute was blowne that no man had power to shut the doore where hée stood, wherefore the doore was alwaies kept open: for which fact halfe a yéere after they were hanged in chaines, Kinge in Dedham at Burchet, Debnam at Cattawaie Cawsie, Marshe at Douercourt: Gardiner escaped and fledde. The same yéere, and yéere before, many Images were caste downe and destroyed in many places,Many images cast downe. as the Cru∣cifixe by Cogshall in the highwaie: Saint Petronell in the Church of great Horksleigh: S. Christopher by Sudbury, S. Petronell in a Chappell by Ipswich: also Iohn Seward of Dedham, ouerthrew a crosse in Stoke parke, and tooke two Images out of a chappell in the same parke, and cast them into the water. An. 1533.  Iohn Frith was first a student in Cambridge
and after, one of those whome Cardinall Wolsey gathered together, of the choise learned men, to furnish his Colledge, which he gaue the name of Saint Frideswide, nowe called Christes Colledge. He that yere, the xx. day of Iune,Christes Col∣ledge in Ox∣ford. was condemned by the Bishop of London, to be burned, and the sentence read, he was deliuered to Sir Steeuen Peacock, Mayor of London, and the Sheriffes of the same Citie, and the fourth day of Iulie was burned in Smithfield: who at the stake, chearefully embraced the Fagottes, and fire which was put vnto him, and seemed to reioyce for his fel∣lowe, that was burned with him,Iohn Frith burned. rather than to bee care∣full for himselfe, though (by reason the winde bare awaye the flame from him) hee was somewhat long in bur∣ning. After the death of certaine whom the Cardinall had be∣fore imprisoned in the caue of his Colledge, where Saltfish was vsed to be layde, Frith, with other, were dismissed, vp∣pon condition, not to passe aboue tenne miles out of Ox∣forde. But Frith, after the hearing of the examination of Dalaber, and Garret, which bare the fagottes, went o∣uer Sea, and after two yeres came againe for exhibition of the Prior of Reading, as is thought, and had the Prior ouer with him. Being at Reading, he was there taken for a vagabonde, and was set in the stockes, and through the meanes of one Leonarde Coxe, Scholemaster of the Towne, who woon∣dered at his excellent learning, was againe set at liber∣tie: but his safetie continued not long. Sir Thomas MooreSir T. Moore pursueth Frith. then Lorde Chauncellour, did so deadly pursue him, both by Lande and Sea: And at last, being traiterouslie taken, he was sent to the Tower of London. Where he had many conflictes with the Bishops, but especially in writing with Sir T. Moore. The occasion wherof, was a Treatise which he made, and communicated it with W. Holte, a Taylor of Londō, that caried it to Moore ye chācellor, who endeuoured
to confute it: The pointes of Frithes treatiseFrithes trea∣tise. were, First, that the controuersie of the Sacrament is no necessarie Ar∣ticle of fayth vnder paine of damnation. 2. That Christ is not in two places at once. 3. that Christes woordes in the institution of the Sacrament, are to bee vnderstoode accor∣ding to the phrase of speech, comparing phrase with phrase, according to the analogie of Scripture. 4. That the order and institution of Christ is to be reteined, although the order of the priestes doe neuer so much differ from it.The copie of which answere Frith got by meanes of friends, and answered. A treatise of these poyntes Frith did write, and it was carried by Holt vnto Moore, which hee answered him againe out of prison: omitting nothing, belonging to the perfect hand∣ling of the matter. Hée wrote also a Treatise of Purga∣torie, in which quarrell hee withstood the violence of the moste obstinate enemies, Rochester, Moore, and Rastall: and conuerted Rastall to his part, who was Moores sonne in lawe. After he had sufficiently contended in writing with those men, he was at last carried to Lambith, first before the Bi∣shop of Canterburie, and after vnto Croydon before Win∣chester, and last of all, before a common assembly of By∣shoppes at London, where continuing constant in his righ∣teous cause, was condemned. With FrithFrith condem∣ned. was Andrewe HewetAndrew Hewet. burned, hee was borne at Feuersham, in the Countie of Kent, of the age of foure and twentie yeeres, and was apprentice with one Maister Warren, Taylor in Watlingstréet: he was betrai∣ed by the false Iudas William Holt, and cast into prison in the Bishoppes house: from whence hauing fyled off his y∣rons, hée escaped; but was bewrayed againe by one Wi∣thers, a false hypocrite as Holt was: and with him were taken Iohn Tibauld, who was banished from his owne house by an iniunction, and had béene foure times in prison for Christes sake, and Iohn Chapman in whose house they were, who al were carried to the Bishops house: but Hewet
they sent to Lollardes Towre, and kepte Chapman and Tibauld asunder, watched with two priestes seruauntes. The next day Bishoppe Stokesley came from Fulham, and committed Chapman to the stockes, and shutte vp Ti∣bauld in a close chamber, but by Gods prouidence hee was deliuered out of prison, albeit hée coulde not enioy house nor lande, because of the Bishoppes iniunction, but was fayne to sell all that hee had in Essex. Chapman after fiue wéekes imprisonment, whereof three hée sate in the stockes, by much suite made to the L. Audley, who was then Chancel∣lour, was deliuered: but Andrew Hewet after long and cru∣ell imprisonment was condemned to the fire with Frith, af∣ter that he had giuen testimony to the trueth. Anno 1531.  The fiftéenth of Ianuarie, Thomas Be∣net a Schoolemaister of fiftie yéeres of age, borne in Cam∣bridge, was deliuered vnto Sir Thomas Dennis knight, to be burned in Exceter. He hid himselfe sixe yeres in Deuon∣shire: but kindeled with zeale, he resolued to aduenture his life for the testimonie of Iesus: and in the moneth of Octo∣ber, he did set vppon the Cathedrall church doore of Exceter scrolles, in which were written: The Pope is Antichrist, and wée ought to worshippe God onelie and no Sayntes: the Authour of which billes coulde not bée founde. At the last, the priestes fell to curse with booke, bell and candle, the Authour of the same, Bennet béeing by: who fell into a laughter within himselfe for a great space, and coulde not forbeare: Whereby some saie hee was bewrayed and ta∣ken: other, that his enemies beeing vncertaine whether it were he or not, suffered him to depart home. And, not bee∣ing able to digest the lyes which were preached, sent his boye with other scrolles, as before hee had done, who béeyng examined, confessed whose boye hee was, and so Ben∣net was knowen, and taken, and committed to warde, and béeing called to examination before the heads and can∣nons of the Citie, confessed the fact, and after muche
disputing with the Friers, especially, one Gregorie Basset, who had lien in prison at Bristow for the trueth, and reuol∣ted (béeyng threatened, hée shoulde haue his handes bur∣ned off with a panne of coales, which was brought rea∣die at his examination,Thomas Ben∣net martyr.) hée was condemned to death, and burned. At whose burning, Iohn Barnehouse Esquier bée∣ing present, tooke a fyrre bush vpon a pyke beyng sette on fire, and thrust it vnto his face, because hée woulde not saie: Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis. But he answered, Pa∣ter ignosce eis: and so fire being put to him, patiently he en∣ded his life. By reason of the rigorous proclamation aboue specified, procured by the Bishops, great persecution ensued, so that a great number were troubled, and either burned, or con∣strained to abiure. Thomas Cornwell or Austy, Anno 1530. for not kéeping his fagot vpon his shoulder after his abiuration, was con∣demned to perpetual prison in the house of S. Bartholomew: from whence he afterward fled and escaped. Anno 1530. Thomas Philips made his appeale from the B. to the king, and would no otherwise abiure, then gene∣rally all heresies: for which the B. did excommunicate him, and denounced him contumax: and what after became of him, it is vncertaine. A litle before this time, William TracieWilliam Tra∣cie. a woorshipfull Gentleman of Glocestershyre, and then dwelling at Tod∣dington; made in his will, that hée would haue no funerall pompe at his buriall, neyther passed hée vppon Masse: and saide hée trusted in GOD onelie, and hoped by him to bée saued, and not by anie Saynt. This Gentleman dy∣ed, and his sonne his executour brought the Will to the Bi∣shoppe of Canterburie to prooue, which, hée shewed to the Conuocation, and then most cruelly they iudged that he shoulde bée taken out of the ground, and bée burnt as an he∣retike. Anno 1532.  Wherof the King hearing, the Chance∣lour
was fayne to fine thrée hundreth pounds to haue his pardon of the king. Anno 1531. Henry Tomson taylor, notwithstanding he submitted himselfe to the Bishop, yet therewith sentence condemned him to perpetuall prison. His cause was the de∣nying of the host to be God. The same yéere was Thomas Patmore parson of Had∣ham in Hartfordshire, a godly man and painefull teacher, persecuted by Richard FitzIames bishop of London, who was desirous to preferre another to the good mans benefice: and so hardly was he dealt withall, that in the end he sub∣mitted himselfe and abiured, and was notwithstanding committed to perpetuall prison. Howbeit, one of his bre∣thren made such suite vnto the king (by the meanes of the Quéene) that after thrée yéeres imprisonment, hée was both released out of prison, and also of the King obtey∣ned a Commission vnto the Lord Audley, then Lord Chan∣cellour, and to Cranmer Archbishoppe of Canterbury, and to Cromwel then Secretarie, with others, to enquire of the vniust dealinges of the Bishoppe and his Chauncellour a∣gaynst Patmore: but what was the ende thereof, it is vn∣certaine. Anno 1531. Christopher a Dutch man of Antwerp was put in prison at Westminster, for selling new Testaments in English, and there died. The same yer, a boy of Colchester, or of Norfolk, for deli∣uering a buget of bookes to Richard Bayfield, was layed in the prison of Master Moore, Chauncellour, and there dyed. From the yere 1533. during the time of Quéene Anne,During the time of Queen Anne, no great persecution. no great persecution, nor abiuration was in the Church of England: sauing that x. Anabaptistes were put to death in sundrie places of the Realme. And anno 1535. tenne other repented, and were saued: whereof two were pardoned af∣ter sentence geuen, which was contrary to the popes law.
After the Cleargie had with great crueltie vexed Christs flock, anno. 1534.1534. Commons a∣gainst the Cleargie. a parlament was called by the king, about the 15. daye of Ianuarie, in which the Commons renued their old gréefes, complaining against the Prelates, and Or∣dinaries, for calling men before them ex officio. Answere to which requestes the king at that present did delay. After the Cardinal had béene cast into a premunire, anno 1530, about the yéere 1532 the king made a restraint, that nothing should be purchased from Rome;Nothing to be purchased from Rome, and procéeded fur∣ther against all the Prelates, for supporting the Cardinall: by reason whereof, they also were entangled with premu∣nire. For the releasement whereof, they offered the king 118840. poundes, which was accepted with much adoe. In this submission the king was called of the Cleargie,Supreame head. Su∣preme head. The motion of the Commons to the king, touching their gréeuances from the Cleargy, in the prorogation of the par∣lament tooke good successe. Wherein the king prouided re∣medies, and enacted in the same Parlament, that no man should be troubled for speaking any thing against the vsur∣ped power of the Bishop of Rome, or his lawes, not groun∣ded on the law of God.The vsurped power of the Pope put downe in England. In this Parlament also, the decrées and prouinciall constitutions were committed to be exami∣ned of 32. persons, chosen by the king out of the higher and lower house, and at their discretions to be abrogated, or to stande in strength. Also it was decréed, that the Cleargie of this Realme, submitting themselues to the king, should and did promise, in verbo Sacerdotij, neuer to assemble their Conuocations without the kings writte,No Conuoca∣tions without the kings writ nor to enact, or to execute such constitutions without his Royall assent. Moreouer, that no person should appeale, prouoke, or sue to the Court of Rome, vnder paine of prouisures, prouisure, or premunire. Item that no Annuales, and first fruites of Bishops, and Archbishops, should be paid to Rome, for any
Bulles, Bréeues, Palles, &c. Item that the king should no∣minate the person to be elected into any Ecclesiasticall dig∣nitie, and so the Prior and Couent, Deanrie, Chapter of those Cathedrall Churches, where the Seate was vacant, by the vertue of the kings letters missiues, shoulde within 12. dayes, choose that person nominated by the king, &c. Moreouer, it was decréed against all intollerable exacti∣ons of the Bishop of Rome, in pensions, Peterpence, procu∣rations, fruites, &c. And finally, in this Parlament it was consulted, concerning the lawfull succession of the Crowne, in ratifying it to the heires of the kings body and Q. Anne. In which Parlament also, the degrées of marriage were plainly set out, according to the word of God. Not long af∣ter, the king required an oath of the Spiritualty, to be made vnto him, & abolished that which they were woont to make to the Pope: In which only they acknowledged the king to be Supreme head. Which oath Sir Thomas Moore misli∣king, was enforced to resigne vp his Chauncellorship,The oath of the Cleargie to ye Pope aboli∣shed. Moore resignth the Chauncel∣lourship. and to deliuer vp the great Seale of England, into the K. hands. After whom succéeded Sir Th. Awdley knight, who fauou∣rably inclined to the doctrine of the Gospell. Not long after, the king procéeded to marrie the Ladie Anne Bulleine, who was a speciall fauourer of the gospell,The K. renoū∣ceth the Pope. and so was diuorced both from the Lady Dowager, and the Pope together. The Princesse Dowager, after the diuorce, procured from the Pope an interdictment of the king, and the whole Realme. Anno 1533.1533. Lady Eliza∣beth borne. Quéene Anne was crowned: and not long after her coronation, the 7 of September she was brought a bed, and deliuered of a faire Ladie, named at the Font Eliza∣beth; the Archbishop of Caunterburie being Godfather, and the olde Dutches of Norfolke, and the olde Marchionesse of Dorcet, widowes, Godmothers. After this, the Monkes and Friers, and other euill dispo∣sed persons, feigned that God had reueyled to a Nunne,
Elizabeth Barton, whom they called the holy maid of Kent:The holy maid of Kent. that if the king procéeded in that diuorce, he should not be K. of this Realme one moneth after: and in the reputation of God, not one day, nor houre. This dissimulation was found out by the diligence of the Archbishoppe of Caunterbu∣rie, the Lord Cromwell, and Master Hugh Latimer: and she condemned, and put to death, with certaine of her coun∣sell, in the moneth of Aprill, anno 1533. as, Henrie Golde, Bacheler of diuinitie; Richard Master, Parson of Alding∣ton; Edwarde Bocking, Monke of Caunterburie; Iohn Dearing, Monke of Caunterburie; Hugh Ritch, Frier, Warden of the Graye friers of Caunterburie; Richarde Risbie, attaint of treason by acte of Parlament, and so put to death. Others of the same conspiracie, as, Fisher, bishop of Rochester; Thomas Golde, Thomas Laurence, Edward Thwates, Iohn Adeson, and Thomas Abell, being conuicte and attainted of mesprision, were condemned to prison, and forfeyted their goods and possessions to the king. This yere, 1533.  one Pauier, or Pauie, Towneclarke of the Citie of London, a notorious enemy of Gods trueth, and a verie busie fellow about the burning of Rich. Bayneham, hanged himselfe:Gods iudge∣ment. he saide, rather than he woulde sée ye scrip¦ture in English, to be read of the people, he would cutte his owne throate; but hee made his choise rather of an halter. About this time also died Doctor Foxforde, Chauncel∣lour to the B. of London, a common butcher of Gods saints, who was the condemner of all those, which were put to death, troubled, or abiured, vnder Stokesley, throughout all the Dioces of London. He died sitting in his chaire, sodain∣lie, his belly being burst, & his guttes falling out before him. About the same time also died Wil. Warham, Archbishop of Canterburie, whom succeeded Th. Cranmer.Tho. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterburie. This yere, at Dunkirke in Flaunders, a writte of Ex∣communication was set vp against the king, for the di∣uorce: which beeing knowen vnto the king, hee caused
to be discharged a great sort of the princesse Dowagers ser∣uaunts, and they that remained still were sworne to serue her as a Princesse onely, and not as Quéene: and because she refused to be serued of such, she remained with a very few, liuing after this sort the space of two yéeres. An. 1534.  Vpon the iij. of February the parliament was assembled againe, wherein was made an act of succession, whereto euery person should be sworne.Preaching a∣gainst ye popes supremacie. During this parla∣ment time, euery Sunday preached at Paules crosse a bi∣shop, which declared the pope not to be head of the Church. Iohn Fisher bishop of Rochester, sir Thomas Moore, and Doctor Nicholas Wilson parson of S. Thomas Apostles in London, refused the oath to the Act of succession made then: wherfore they were sent to the Tower. In the end, the Do∣ctor was content to dissemble the matter, and so escaped: but the other two remained obstinate. The third of Nouember, this parliament was again as∣sembled, in which the Pope and Cardinals, with his par∣dons and indulgences were wholly abolished:The Popes pardons whol∣ly abolished. to the aboli∣shing whereof, and to the ratifying of the kings title of su∣preme head, Stephen Gardiner gaue his othe, so did Iohn Stokesley, B. of London, likewise Edward Lee Archbishop of Yorke, Cuthbert, B. of Duresme, and all the rest of the Bishops in like sort, to this title agréed also the sentence of the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. Also, Ed. Bonner then Archdeacon of Leicester,Gardiners booke de obe∣dientia, with Bonners notes. was of the same iudgemēt, and prefixed his preface to Steuen Win∣chesters booke, de obedientia, of the same argument. To this also agreed the whole Cleargie of the Church of Eng∣land, and subscribed with the handes of the Bishoppes, and other learned men, to the number of 46. doctors of diuinitie, and of both lawes. Anno 1535. Fisher the Bishop of Rochester,  and Sir Thomas Moore, were executed, for refusing the oath of su∣premacie, which all the other Bishoppes and Cleargie
yéelded vnto: one was executed the xxij. of Iune, the other the vj. of Iulie. The ruine of Religious houses.Shortly after the ouerthrowe of the Pope, by little and little began the ruine of the Abbeys and Religious houses: and the same yéere in the moneth of October, the king ha∣uing then Thomas Cromwell of his counsell, sent Doctor Lee to visit the Abbeies, Priories and Nunneries in all En∣gland, and to set at libertie all such religious persons as de∣sired to be frée, and all other that were vnder the age of xxiiij. yéeres: prouiding withall that such Moonkes, Chanons and Friers as were dismissed, shoulde haue giuen them by the Abbot or Prior in stéede of their habite, a secular priestes gowne, and xl shillings of money, and likewise the Nunnes to haue such apparell as secular women did then commonly vse, and suffered to goe where they woulde. At which time also, from the saide Abbeies and monasteries were taken the chiefe Iewels and and reliques.Chiefe iewels and reliques taken from the Abeies. After these things done of the king against the Pope, hée endeuoured by al meanes to entertaine the fauour & friend∣ship of other princes, as the Emperour, the king of France, the king of Scottes, to whom hee purgeth himselfe concer∣ning his diuorce and lawfulnesse of his marriage with the Ladie Anne, and declareth the manifolde iniuries which the Pope had done vnto him, and how hée deferred the cause of his diuorce and second marriage: which he did, fearing the malice of the Pope and prelates, least they shoulde stirre them vp to warre against him, which they laboured by all meanes to bring to passe, especially Cardinall Poole plaied his part therein. Anno 1536. Wil. Tindall,1536 Wil. Tindall burned. who translated the new Te∣stament in English, and the fiue bookes of Moses, with ma∣ny other godlie woorkes, was burned at the towne of Fil∣forde in Flaunders, by vertue of the Emperors decrée, made in the assembly at Auspurgh. He was first strangled, and af∣ter consumed with fire. At the stake he cried with a feruent
zeale and lowde voice: Lord open the king of Englands eies. Tindall was borne aboute the borders of Wales, and brought vp from a child in the Vniuersitie of Oxford, where he increased in knowledge of artes and tongues. From thence he went to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge, where hauing abode a while, hée departed, and resorted to one Maister Welch a knight of Glocestershire, and was there Schoolemaister to his children, where he so behaued him∣selfe boldly in disputing with Abbots, Deanes & Archdea∣cons, &c. that he was faine to depart that coūtrie. Such was the grudge of the priests against him, especially after they perceiued, by his means, that they were not so welcome to M. Welches house as in times past. From master Welche, Tindall commeth vp to London, & sought to serue Tunstall B. of London, but being refused of him, he aboad notwith∣standing in London the space almost of a yéere: & finding no place in England to translate the New testament, hauing some aid & prouision ministred vnto him of Humfrey Mon∣mouth, & certaine other godly men,Tindall takes in hand the translation of the New testa¦ment. he departed into Ger∣manie, and there tooke in hand the translation of the New testament, which he finished first Anno 1527. After he had continued a while in Germanie, as in Saxo∣nie, where he had conference with Luther and other learned men, he came downe into the Low countries, and had his moste abiding in the towne of Antwerpe, vntill the time of his apprehension: whiche was about one whole yéere; in the house of Thomas Poynes an Englishman, who kepte an house of English merchants. Aboute which time came thither one out of England, whose name was Henry Phil∣lips, his Father beyng customer of Poole. This Phillips grewe into acquaintance with Tindall, and pretended much fauour vnto him. After this, Phillips goeth from Antwerpe to the court of Bruxels: which is from thence xxiiij. English miles (the King hauing then no Ambassadour there), and
procured to bring from thence with him to Antwerpe, that procurour generall, which is the Emperours atturney, with other certaine officers. Within a while after (Poynes siting at his doore) Phillips man came vnto him, and asked whether M. Tindall were there, and said his maister would come to him, and so departed: Poines within iij. or iiij. daies being de∣parted out of the towne to Barrow xviij. miles from Ant∣werp, Phillips cōmeth again to Poines wife, & asketh for M. Tindall, and what good chéere there was in the house, & whe∣ther he would dine with him: that doone, he goeth out to pro∣uide and set the officers which he had brought from Brux∣els in the stréete, and about the doore. Then about noone he came againe, & went to M. Tindall, and said, he had lost his purse; and praied him to lend him xl. s̄, which M. Tindall did. Then saied Phillips to M. Tindall, you shall be my guest here this day. No saied M. Tindall; I go foorth this day: you shall go with me and be my guest, where you shall be wel∣come. So when it was dinner time, M. Tindall went out with Phillips, and at the going foorth of Poines house, Mai∣ster Tindall would haue put Phillips before him, but Phil∣lips would in no wise, pretending a shewe of great humani∣tie: so M. Tindall went before him. He had set officers on ei∣ther side the doore vpon seates, to whome Phillips pointed, with his finger ouer M. Tindals head that the officers might sée it was he, & so should apprehend him. Who there tooke him, & brought him to the Emperors atturney, the procuror generall; where he dined: Frō whence he was had to the ca∣stle of Filford, xviij, miles from Antwerpe, where he remai∣ned til he was put to death; Poines labouring for the release of M. Tindall, with letters directed out of England by the Lord Cromwell & other, to the court of Bruxels. Then the Lord of Barowe was also clapt in prison, & after long im∣prisonment, was faine to escape by flight. But good Mai∣ster Tindall could not escape, but was put to death for the testimonie of the trueth. Of whome the Emperours
Atturney left this testimonie, that he was a learned, good,Tindals prote∣station tou∣ching his trā∣slation. and godly man. Concerning his translation of the new testa∣ment, thus himselfe protested: I call God to record, against the day in which I shal appeare before ye Lord Iesus, to giue a reckoning of my doings, that I neuer altered one syllable of Gods word against my conscience, nor would do this day, if all that is in earth, whether it be honour, riches, or plea∣sure, might be giuen me. The same yéere that Tindall was burned, Anno 1536. In the beginning of the yéere, first, died Ladie Katherine, Princesse dowager, in the moneth of Ianuarie, after whom the same yéere, in the moneth of May next following, Quéen Anne, who had nowe béene married to the king, the space of thrée yéeres, was put to death;Queene Anne put to death. very likely by the practises of the prelates against her, who was an earnest fauourer of Gods people: and incontinent after the suffering of Quéene Anne: the king within iij. daies after, married Ladie Iane Seimer. About this time, Paule iij. Bishop of Rome appoyn∣ted a generall counsell at Mantua in Italie, requiring all kinges and princes to be there present in person, or to sende their Ambassadours: pretending to suppresse heresies, to reforme the Church, and to warre against the Turke. To this Councell the king refused either to come,The king refu∣seth the general counsel at Mantua. or to send Ambassadour: and made his protestation against the sea of Rome. A litle before the death of Quéen Anne, there was a par∣lament at Westminster, wherein was giuen to the king, by generall consent of the Abbots, all such houses of religion, as were vnder iij. hundred marks:Certaine hou∣ses of religion giuen to the king. which did prognosticate what would befall the rest. Shortly after the marriage of the king, with the Ladie Iane Seimer, in the moneth of Iune, during the conti∣nuance of the Parlament, by the consent of the Cleargie in the Conuocation house in Paules Church, a booke was set out, containing certain Articles of religion necessarie to
be taught to the people:Articles of re∣ligion to be taught the people. wherein they treated specially, but of thrée sacraments, baptisme, penance, and the Lordes sup∣per: where (also diuers things were published, concerning alteration of certaine points of religion; and certaine holie daies forbidden: & many Abbeies agréed on to be suppressed. For the which cause a Monke, named Doct. Mackrell, na∣ming himself Captain Cobler, stirred vp to rebell the num∣ber of xxvi. thousand in Lincolne shire:Rebellion sup∣pressed. which was quietly suppressed. Also, he raysed an other of xl. thousand Yorkshire men, by stirring vp of Monkes and priestes. They called their rebellion, an holy pilgrimage: which was also by the great prouidence of God quieted without bloodshed. At that time, diuers priests, which were stirrers vp of the people, were executed. Anno 1537.1537 Prince Ed∣ward borne. Queene Iane dieth. The moneth of October, was borne Prince Edward, shortly after whose birth, Quéene Iane his mother, the second day after, died in childbed, and left the king a widower: who so continued the space of two yéeres together. By reason of the kings departure from the pope, the Emperour, the French king, and Scottes beganne to ruffle against him: but hearing of the byrth of Prince Edwarde, and vnderstanding of the death of Quéene Iane, whereby the king was a widower:Ruffelings a∣gainst the K. easily calmed. and the bruite béeing that hée would matche with the Germanes, they began to be calme againe. Anno 1536 The king began with a little booke of arti∣cles,The K. articles for the instruction of the people, bearing this title: Ar∣ticles deuised by the kings highnes to stablish christian qui∣etnesse & vnitie among the people. It contained the Créede, iij. sacraments, how images might safely be worshipped, and how saints departed ought to be reuerēced: that the parsons should teach their people, that Christ is their only mediator, & how the ceremonies of holy water, holy bread, candles, &c. shoulde without superstition bée vsed. It tooke away also
the abuses which rose vpon the imagination of Purgatory, as, Masses for soules departed, pardons, &c. Not long after these Articles, certaine other Iniunctions were also geuen out, about the same yere. Whereby a number of holidayes were abrogated,A number of Holidaies ab∣rogated. and especially such as fel in haruest time. After these Iniunctions, other mo followed afterward, geuen out by the king, concerning Images, Reliques, and blinde miracles. For, abrogating of Pilgrimages, deuised by superstition, and mainteined for lucres sake.Scripture in English. Also for the Lords prayer, beléefe, and tenne commaundements, and the Bible to be had in English. Anno 1538.  yet againe other Articles were set out, whereby both the Parsons of Churches, and the Parishes together, were bound to prouide in euery Church, to buye a Bible in English. Also, for euery Parishioner to be taught by the Minister, to vnderstand, & say the Lordes prayer, and Créede, in their owne vulgar tongue, with other necessarie and most fruitfull Iniunctions. As, for the frée preaching of the word of God; against Images; pilgrimages; for a Regi∣ster booke in euery Church;A Register booke in euerie Church. against Beckets day; knelling, Auies; Suffrages of Saints, &c. This yere was Frier Forrest burned quicke, hanging in chaines, in Smithfield. He denied the kinges supremacie, and was conuict of diuers other damnable articles. He was an obseruant Frier. With this Forrest, was Daruell Ga∣theren, an abhominable Idoll of wales, burned: and it ful∣filled a blinde prophesie, that it should set a Forrest on fire. He tooke his death very vnpatiently. In the moneths of October, & Nouember, the same yere, the religious houses, by the speciall motion of the L. Crom∣well, were from the very foundations rooted vp.Religious hou∣ses from the foundation rooted vp. Immediatly after the ruine and destruction of Monaste∣ries, the same yere in the moneth of Nouember, followed the condemnation of Iohn Lambert, the faithfull seruant of Iesus Christ.
This LambertIoh. Lambert. being borne and brought vp in Norfolke, was first conuerted by Bilney, and studied in the Vniuersi∣tie of Cambridge, from whence, through the violence of the time, he departed to the partes beyonde the Seas, to Tin∣dall, and Frith, and there remayned the space of a yere and more, being Preacher to the English house at Antwerpe, till he was disturbed by Sir Thomas Moore, and through the examination of one Barlowe, was carried from Ant∣werpe to London, where he was brought to bee examined. First at Lambeth, then at the Bishops house at Oxforde, before Warham, Archbishop of Caunterbury, and other ad∣uersaries, hauing 45. Articles layde against him,45. Articles a∣gainst Lābert. concer∣ning the Sacraments, of orders; of penance; of confession; cō∣cerning vnwritten verities; purgatorie; prayer to Saintes; pilgrimage, lent fast; Images; praying for soules departed; preaching without licence of Bishops; the Popes excommu∣nication; Scripture in the mother tongue; iustification by faith onely; concerning the Councell of Constance; the num∣ber of Sacraments; the power of Peter; the power of ye pope, &c. Whereto Iohn Lambert made a large and learned an∣swere, and constantly testified the trueth of the same points agréeable to the Scriptures. He was moreouer required to bewray his fellowes, which hee refused to doe with great boldnesse. These answeres of Lambert were deliuered to Doctor Warham, Archbishop of Canterburie, about the yere 1532. at what time he was in custodie, in the Bishops house at Oxford: from whence the next yere, through the death of the Archbishoppe, he was deliuered. After Warhā, succéeded D. Crāmer, Lambert in the meane time being de∣liuered, returned to Lond. & taught childrē about ye Stocks. Anno. 1538.  It happened that Lambert was present at a Sermon in Saint Peters Church in London, preached by Doctor Taylor, who after was a Cōfessour of Iesus Christ: with whom (after the Sermon) Lambert went and talked,
and vttered his diuerse argumentes, where hée desired to be satisfied. The matter was concerning the Sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ. Tailor desired him to deferre the matter till another tyme, and to wryte his minde: whiche hée did, and at last it brake out to bée a publicke mat∣ter; so that he was sent for by the Archbishop of Canturbu∣ry, and was forced to defend his cause openly. In that dis∣putation it is said, that Lambert did appeale from the Bi∣shops to the king: and the rumour of the disputation was spred to the court. Now at this time Stephen Gardiner then bishop of Winchester,A wicked per∣suasion. was in authoritie among the kinges Counsellours, and perswaded the kinge by the burning of Lambert to quiet the people, who grudged at diuerse of his dooinges, bothe touchyng his diuorce, and pullinge downe the Popes pride, and thereby to declare how stoutly he would resist Heretikes, whereby the people might take some contentment. So by these perswasions a day was set & Lambert brought forth, where besides he had ye kings fierce countenance against him,Lambert dis∣puteth. he had x. disputers against him frō xij of the clocke, till v. at night, among which were, the arch∣bishop, Stephen Gardiner, Tunstall B. of Durham, & Sto∣kesley bishop of London. In fine, through Winchesters per∣swasion, to gratifie the people, the king himselfe condemned Lambert, and commanded Cromwell the chiefe friend of the gospellers to read the sentēce.The king con∣demneth Lam∣bert. Cromwell rea∣deth the sen∣tence against Lambert. Cromwell cra∣ueth pardon of Lambert. Vpon ye day that was appoin∣ted for this holy martyr to suffer, he was brought out of the prison, at viij. of the clocke in the morning vnto the house of the L. Cromwell, & so caried into his inner chamber, where as it is reported of many, Cromwell desired him of for∣giuenes for that he had doone: from thence he was brought into the hall, and so into Smithfield, where he suffered most terrible torments: for after his legges were burned vp to the stumps, & that the wretched tormentors had withdrawē the fire from him, so that but a small fire was left vnder him, two that stood on each side of him, with their halbards
pitched him vpon their pikes, as farre as the chaine would reach, then he lifting vp such handes as he had, and his fin∣gers euer flaming with fier, cried vnto the people in these wordes:Lambert a worthy mar∣tyr. None but Christ, none but Christ, and so beyng let downe againe from their Halbards, he fell into the fire, & yéelded vp the ghost. Lamberts trea∣tice of the Sa∣crament.During the time that he was in the Archbishops house, he wrote a treatise to the king touching the Sacrament, wherein he prooued that the bodie could be but in one place, and that the Sacrament was a mysticall matter. The same yéere 1538. Robert Packington Mercer, bro∣ther of Austen aboue mentioned, because he little fauoured the clergie, being a man of courage, and a burges of the par∣liament house for the Cittie, and was thought to haue had some conference with the king, to the disaduauntage of the clergie, at fiue of the clocke in the morning as he was woont, going from his house in Cheapside, to prayers at a church called S. Thomas of Acres, but nowe Mercers chappell, he was slaine with a gun by an Italian,Robert Pac∣kington slaine going to pray∣ers. whome D. Incent Deane of Paules had hired for lx. crownes to doo that feat, as he himselfe afterward on his death bed confessed. The same yéere was Collins a mad man and his dogge burned,Collins & his dogge burned together. because as the priest lifted his God, so Collins in the Church at the same time, lifted his dogge ouer his head: his dogge was burnt also with him. Likewise another mad man called CowbridgeCowbridge. was bur∣ned at Oxford the same yéere: who, what euer his madnesse was before, yet in the middes of the flame, he lifting vp his hand to heauen, soberly and discréetly called vpon the name of the Lord Iesus, and so departed. About the same time and yéere PutdewePutdewe. was put to death for saying merily to a priest; after he had drunke the wine, he blessed the hungrie people with the emptie Chalice. At the same time also was condēned W. LettonWilliā Letton. a moonke of Aye in the Countie of Suffolke, & was burned at Nor∣wich:
for speaking against an idoll, that was vsed to be car∣ried in procession at Aye; and for holding that the Sacra∣ment ought to bée ministred in both kindes. Somewhat before the burning of these men, Nich. PekeNicholas Peke. was burned at Ipswich: and when (the firres were set on fire) he was so scorched, that he was as blacke as pitch, Do∣ctor Reading standing there before him, with Doctor Heirre and Doctor Springwell, hauing a long white wande in his hand, did knocke him vpon the right shoulder, and sayde, Peke, recant, and beléeue in the Sacrament:The notable courage of the martyr. to whom Peke answeared: I defie thée and it also, and with greate vio∣lence, hee spatte from him blood: which came by reason the veynes brake in his bodie for extreme anguish. Which when hée saide, Doctor Reading graunted, by the autho∣ritie of the Bishoppe of Norwich fourtie dayes of pardon, to so many as should cast a sticke to burne the heretike: where∣vpon Baron Curson, Sir Iohn Audley knight, and others were moued so to do; and cutte downe boughes, and threw them into the fire. This yéere the king was againe required by the Empe∣rour, and other States to be a sender to the generall Coun∣sell at Vincence. For the Duke of Mantua woulde suffer none there,The king a∣gaine refuseth the Counsell. except the pope would with a sufficient armie gard this city. The king again refused, and sendeth his pro∣testation in way of defence for himselfe to the Emperour, and other Christian princes: which he concludeth with this farewell. Thus mighty Emperour, fare yée most heartely wel, and you Christian princes,The kings farewell to the princes. Anno Reg. the pillers and stay of Chri∣stendome, fare ye heartily wel: also you, what people soeuer you are, which doe desire, that the Gospel and glory of God may flourish, fare ye heartily well. As Thomas Cromwell fauoured the Gospel, so Stephan Gardiner, B. of Winchester, practised all he coulde against the same, and wrought so with the king, that the yéere 1539.  seuere Iniunctions were set out by the kinges authoritie,
against English scripture bookes, without examination: a∣gainst translations,Search in∣iunctions. without the authors name were put to it: against sacramentaries, that no man should dispute of the sacrament, & with the rest the canon of Becket rased &c. and in fine, so was he nusled by Winchester, that Anno 1540.1540. The king nus∣led by Win∣chester. The whippe with vi. strings The vi. Arti∣cles. He summoned a parlament to be holden at Westminster the xxviij. of Aprill: also a synode of prelates, in which the sixe articles were concluded, touching matters of religi∣on: which were commonly called the whippe with sixe strings. The first article was concerning transubstantiation. 2, A∣gainst the communicating in both kindes. 3. That priestes might not marry, after ye order of priesthood receiued. 4. that the vowes of chastity made aboue 21. yéeres of age, & of wi∣dowhood, aduisedly made, should be obserued. 5. The establi∣shing of priuate masses. 6. Auricular confession to be expedi∣ent. The punishment for breach of the first article, was bur∣ning without any abiuration, with losse of all goods & lands, as in case of treason:Treason. Felonie. the default against the other fiue arti∣cles was fellony, without any benefit of cleargy, &c. Against these articles, only D. CranmerCranmer dis∣puteth against the vi. articles. Archbishop of Canterbury, stood vp, and thrée daies disputed against them, with such strength of reason, that the king (who euer bare e∣specall fauour vnto him) well liking his zelous defence, on∣lie willed him to depart out of the parlament house, vnto the Counsell chamber for a time, (for safegarde of his conscience) till the Act shoulde passe, and bée graunted: which hée notwithstanding with humble protestation, refu∣sed to doe. After the parlament was finished, the king sent the Lord Cromwell, (who in few dayes after was apprehended) the twoo Dukes of Norfolke and Suffolke, and all the Lordes of the parlament house to dyne with the Archbishoppe at Lambith, and to comfort him: and within few daies also vp∣on the same, required, that hee woulde giue a note of all
his doings and reasons in the said parliament, which Cran∣mer eftsoones accomplished accordingly, and sent the copie thereof to the king. Besides these sixe Articles, in the same parliament was ordained, that if Priestes were taken in Adultery or For∣nication, and duely conuict, for their not Caste nor Caute, at first tyme they shoulde forfaite their goods,Against adul∣tery and for∣nication of priests. and for the se∣cond faulte, be taken and executed as fellons: this was brought in by the Lord Cromwels aduise: Who if he might haue had his will, the firste crime of these concubinarie Priestes, aswell as the second, no doubt had béene punished with death: but so Gardiner did barre that article with his shifts, that the first was losse of goodes, and the second death: and the next yéere he so prouided, that the paine of death, by Act of parlament was cleane repealed: So that by this sta∣tute it was prouided,Death for a∣dulterie re∣peated. for all such votaries as liued in whor∣dome and adultery: For the first offence, to lose his goodes, and all his spiritual promotions, except one. For the second, to forfeite all that he had to the king. For the third conuicti∣on, to sustaine continual imprisonment. Anno 1541. The eight and twentith day of Iuly, the noble lord Cromwell, the maule of the Pope and Papists in this land, and the great fauourer of the gospell was put to death at Tower hill.1541. Cromwell the maule of the P. put to death. The crimes obiected against him, were, first heresie, and that he was a supporter of Barnes, Clarke, and many other, whom by his authoritie and let∣ters, written to Sheriffes and Iustices, in diuers Shires, he had discharged out of prison. Also, that hee did disperse bookes of heresies among the kinges Subiects. Item, that he caused to be translated into English diuers bookes, that conteined matter against the Sacrament, &c. Besides all this, there were brought in certaine witnesses, which charged him with wordes that he should speake against the king in the Church of S. Peter the poore in the xxx. yere of the kings reigne.
In the moneth of Iuly during the Parliament being in the Counsell chamber, he was sodainly attainted, and carri∣ed to the Tower, the xix. of the moneth of Iulie, & the xxviij. day put to death. He was borne of a simple parentage, at Putney or there abouts, being a Smiths sonne, his mother married after to a Sherman. CromwellThe life of L. Cromwell. being ripe of yéeres was at Antwerp retained to be secretarie to the merchants there: From whence being procured by Geffery Cham∣bers with another companion, (whom the men of Boston sent to Rome for the renewing of their priuiledges,) to go to Rome and aid them in their suite, he departed and accom∣panied the Boston mens Ambassadours to Rome: where he aduised with himselfe, how he might haue best accesse vnto the pope, and best dispatch of his busines: and hauing know∣ledge how that the popes holy tooth greatly delighted in new fangled strange delicates, it came into his mind to prepare certaine fine dishes of gelly made after our countrey maner here in England, which to them of Rome was not knowen, nor séene before. This done, Cromwell obseruing his time, as the pope was newly come from hunting into his pauiliō, hée with his companions approched with his English pre∣sents, brought in with a thréemans song (as we call it) in the English tongue, and all after the English fashion. The pope sodainly marueiling at the strangenes of the song, and vnderstanding that they were Englishmen, and that they came not emptie handed: willed them to be called in. Cromwel there shewing his obedience, and offring this iolie Iunkets: such as kings & Princes onely vsed (said he) in the Realm of Englande to féede on: desired that to be ac∣cepted in good part, which he & his companions, as poore Su∣ters vnto his Holinesse, had there brought, and presented, as Nouelties méete for his recreation. Pope Iulius so liked their Iunkets, that he desired to know the making of their daynties: And vnderstanding their suites, without any more adoe, stamped both their pardons, both the greater and the
England: the king also wrote in like manner to Boner his Ambassadour, to assist the doers thereof in all their reasona∣ble suites: whereto the king of Fraunce gaue licence, & Bo∣ner shewed himselfe very diligent about the worke.The Bible in English prin∣ted at Paris. So the booke was printed euen to the last part, & then was quarrels picked to the printer, who was sent for to the inquisitors of the faith, & there charged with certaine articles of heresie. Then were sent for the Englishmen that were at the cost & charge therof, Richard Grafton and Whitchurch, & the cor∣rector Miles Couerdale, but hauing warning what would follow, the Englishmen posted away, leauing behind them their Bibles to the number of 2500. called the Bibles of the great volume, and neuer recouered any of them, sauing the Lieuetenant criminal sold foure great dryfats of them to an Haberdasher, to lap in caps, and those were brought again: but the rest were burnt at the place called Maulbert in Pa∣ris. But notwithstanding the losse, after they had recouered some part of the foresaid books, and were comforted, and in∣couraged by the L. Cromwell, the same men went agayne to Paris, and there got the presses, letters, and seruants of the foresaid printer, and brought them to London, and there they became printers themselues, (which before they neuer intended) and imprinted out the said Bible in London, and after that printed sundry impressions of them, but yet not without great trouble and losse, through the hatred of Stee∣uen Gardiner, and his fellowes.Steeuen Gar∣diner alwaies an enemie to the Gospel. In those dayes there were two sundrie Bibles in En∣glish, printed and set foorth, bearing diuers titles, and prin∣ted in diuers places. The first was called Thomas Mathewes Bible,Th. Mathewes bible. printed at Hamborough, about the yere 1532. The Corrector of which Printe was Iohn Rogers, the Printers were Richard Grafton and Whitchurch. In the translation of this Bible, the greatest doer, was William Tindall, who with the helpe of Miles Couerdale, had translated all
the bookes thereof, except onely the Apocrypha and certaine notes in the Margent, which were added after. But because William Tindall in the meane time was apprehended be∣fore his booke was fullie perfected, it was thought good to them that had the dooing thereof to chaunge the name of William Tindall, because that name was then odious, and to further it by a straunge name of Thomas Matthew (Iohn Rogers being the same time corrector to the print): who had then translated the residue of the Apocrypha, and added also certaine notes thereto in the Margent: and thereof came it to be called Thomas Matthewes bible. Which bible of Tho∣mas Matthewes, after it was imprinted and presented to the Lord Cromwell, and the Lord Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, who liked very well of it, Cromwell presen∣ted it to the king,The Bible in English pre∣sented to the king. and obtained, that it might fréely passe to be read of subiects, with his graces licēce: So that there was printed on the same booke, one line in red letters, with these wordes: Set forth with the Kinges most gracious licence. This book did greatly offend the Bishops, both for the pro∣logues, and especially, for a table, called, of the common pla∣ces of the Bible, and the scriptures, for the approbation of the same, and chiefly, about the supper of the Lord, and priests marriages, and the masse, which there was said not to bée found in the Scripture. After the restraint of this bible of Mathew, another came to be printed at Paris, anno 1540. which was called the bi∣ble of the large volume.The Bible of the large vo∣lume. The Printed that printed it, was the former, & the ouerseer was Miles Couerdale, who con∣ferred Tindalles Translation with the Hebrewe, and men∣ded diuers places there. In this Bible, although the former notes of Thomas Mathew were omitted, yet sundrie marks, and hands were annexed in the margent; which meant that in those places should be made certaine notes; wherewith also the Clergie was offfended: and Cromwel being dead, complaintes were
made to the king, of the translation of the Bible, and of the Preface of the same, and then was the sale of the Bible cō∣manded to be staied, the B. promising to amend and correct it, but neuer performed it.The Bishops promisse to a∣mend the Bi∣ble, but per∣formed it not. Then Grafton was called for, and troubled & cast in the Fléete, where hée remained sixe wéekes, and before he came out was bound in 300.l, neither to print, to sell, nor cause to be printed any mo bookes till the king and the clergie should agrée on the translation; and thus was the Bible staied from that time, during the reigne of king Henry the eight. Anno 1541. D. Cutbert Barnes,Doctor Barnes Thomas Garret, and William Hierome were burned in Smithfield for the testi∣monie of Iesus Christ, after the death of the lord Cromwell, who whiles he liued was a great defence vnto diuerse that professed the truth, but he being taken away, many godly christians in diuerse places went to wracke. Doctor Barnes after that he came from the vniuersitie of Louaine, went to Cambridge, where hée was made Prior and Maister of the house of Augustines, at which time the knowledge of good letters was very scant in the Vniuersi∣tie: which Barnes thinking to redresse, read in his house Te∣rence, Plautus, and Cicero, so that what with his labour and helpe of Thomas Parnell his scholer whom he brought from Louaine with him, reading Copia verborum & rerum, he cau∣sed the house shortly to florish with good letters, and made a great part of his house learned: as M. Cambridge, M. Field, M. Coleman, M. Burley, M. Couerdall, &c. After these foun∣dations laid, he did openly read in the house, S. Paules Epi∣stles, and put by Duns & Dorbell,Duns & Dor∣bell put out of Cambridge. and (yet though he were a questionarie himselfe) in short space made he diuerse good di∣uines, obseruing disputations of necessarie points of faith in his house,Disputations of points of faith, rare in Cābridge in those daies. & also in the schooles when he should dispute with any man. The first man, that answered Doctor Barnes in the Scriptures was M. Stafford, for his forme to be batchel∣lour of diuinitie; Which disputation was marueilous in the
sight of the great blind Doctors: notwithstanding all this, till he was conuerted by Bylney;D. Barnes con∣uerted by Byl∣ney. he remained in his super∣stition still. The first Sermon that euer he preached accor∣ding to the truth of the Gospell, was the Sunday before Christmas day at S. Edwards church belonging to Trini∣trie hall in Cambridge, by the pease market: whose theame was the Epistle of the same Sunday, Gaudete in Domino &c. For which Sermon he was immediatly accused of he∣resie by two fellows of kings hall. Then the godly mē floc∣ked, and conferred together: the house that they most com∣monly resorted vnto, was the white horse, which for dispite of them, to bring Gods word into contempt was called Ger∣many.The White∣horse in Cam∣bridge called Germany. This house was especially chosen, because they of S. Iohns, Kings and Quéenes Colledges might come on the backeside thether. Doctor Barnes was accused in the regent house, and con∣stantly continued, with much preaching of diuerse parties one against another, in trying out Gods truth, till with∣in sixe dayes before Shrouetide, then was there sent downe a Sergeant at armes called maister Gibson, dwel∣ling in Saint Thomas Apostle in London, who suddain∣ly arrested Doctor BarnesD. Barnes arrested. in the Regent house: and pri∣uely they had determined to make searche for Luthers bookes, and all the Germanes workes suddainly: but by Doctor Farmans warning of Quéenes Colledge the bookes were conueyed away: thirtie persons they had in speciall suspition. Doctor Barnes was carried to Cardinall Wol∣sey, and after hée had a while stood constant (by the perswa∣sion of Doctor Gardiner his secretarie, and Foxe) he relen∣ted and submitted himselfe:Barnes sub∣mitteth him∣selfe, and with fiue Stylliard men he bare his faggot at Paules: the bishop of Rochester there preaching against Luther, & Doctor Barnes. Notwithstan∣ding his submission the Bishop commaunded hée shoulde be had to the Fléete againe, and bée permitted to haue such libertie as other prysoners had: where Doctor Barnes
continued halfe a yéere: at length was deliuered, and com∣mitted to be frée prisoner at the Austen friers in London. Where being vndermined and complained of: it was de∣termined he shoulde be remoued to the Austine friers in Northampton, there to be burned, he himselfe knowing nothing thereof: but by the aduise of Maister Horne, who brought him vp, he made escape, came to London, and by long Seas went to Antwerpe, and so to Luther,D. Barnes es∣capeth out of prison. and there fell to studie till hée had made answere to all the by∣shoppes of the Realme, and had made a Booke entituled, Acta Romanorum Pontificum,Acta Romano∣rum pontificum. and another Booke, with a supplication to King Henrie. And such fauour God gaue him in fight of the Duke of Saxonie, and the King of Demarke, that the king of Denmarke sent him with the Lubeckes as Ambassadour to King Henrie the eyght, and was lodged with the Lubeckes Chancellour at the Stillyarde. Syr Thomas Moore the Chauncellour would faine haue entrapped him, but the king woulde not suffer him: For Cromwell was his great friend, and ere he went, the Lu∣beckes and he disputed with the Bishoppes of this Realme in defence of the trueth, and so departed with them a∣gayne without resistaunce: and afterwarde hauing set for∣ward in Germanie his woorkes in print that hée had be∣gunne: hée returned againe in the beginning of the reigne of Quéene Anne: and after that was sent Ambassadour by king Henrie the eight to the Duke of Cleue, for the mar∣riage of the Ladie Anne of Cleue, betwéene the King and her: and was well accepted therefore, vntill the time that Stephen Gardiner came out of Fraunce: after which time, neyther religion prospered, nor the Queene, nor Cromwell, nor the Preachers: for not long after, Do∣ctour Barnes with his brethren were apprehended, and carryed before the Kinges maiestie at Hampton Court, and there was examined. Where, the Kinges maiestye
séeking the meanes of his safetie: and desirous that Win∣chester and he might agrée, graunted him leaue to go home to conferre with the Bishop: but they not agréeing, through certaine complaints, Barnes and his fellowes were inioined to make thrée sermons the next Easter following, at the spit∣tle. In which, not satisfying the Prelates, they were sent for to Hampton Court again,D. Barnes sent to the tower. and from thence to the Tow∣er by Sir Iohn Gostwicke, from whence they came not out til they came to their death. And thus much concerning Doctor Barnes. About the yéere 1526. Maister Garret Curate of Honie lane in London came to Oxforde, and dispersed there certaine Bookes in Latine, not agréeable to the Romish superstition, with Tindalles Testament: and had not long béene there, but hée was searched for in Lon∣don to bée apprehended for an Heretike: and afterwarde a priuie searche was made in Oxforde: whereof Garret béeyng warned by Maister Cole of Magdalene Colledge, who after was crosse bearer to Cardinall Wolsey: he de∣parted out of Oxforde in the morning before Shrouetide, towards Dorcetshyre, where hee woulde haue for a time hidde himselfe. But altering his mynde, on the Friday night next, hée returned to Oxforde, and laye in Radlies house, where, by the priuie searche the same night hee was taken, and kept prisoner in Doctour Cotfords cham∣ber, maister of Lincolne Colledge, then being Commissary of the Vniuersitie: from whence, (when the Commissary and his company was at Euensong,) Garret putting backe the locke of his doore with his finger, escaped againe, and (chaunging his apparrell by the helpe of Anthonie De∣laber scholer of Alborne hall) departed: but afterward was againe taken by maister: Cole or his men, going West∣ward, at a place called Hincksey, a little beyonde Oxeford, and so being brought back agayn, was committed to ward: that done, hee was conuented before the Commissarie,
Doctor London, and doctor Higden Deane of Frisewides, now called Christes Colledge, into Saint Maries Church, where they compelled him to carrie a Fagot in open Pro∣cession, and Delaber with him, and after were sent to Os∣ney, there to be kept in prison, till further order was taken. Yet againe after this, M. Garret flying from place to place,Barnes, Garret and Hierom, burned toge∣ther. escaped till the time he was apprehended, and burned with Doctor Barnes: with whom also W. Hierome, sometime Vi∣car of Stepney, was likewise drawne into Smithfield, and together with them endured constantly martyrdome in the fire. This Hierome, for preaching at Paules the 4. Sundays in Lent, and saying that all that were of the Fréewoman Sara, were freely iustified; for preaching that wee are not bound to princes lawes, further than according to the word of God; and that workes are no part of our saluation; was committed to the Tower, and the xxx. of Iulie, two daies af∣ter the death of the Lorde Cromwell,An vniust proceeding. not comming to any answere, nor yet knowing any cause of their condemnation without any publike hearing, (processe being made out a∣gainst them by the kings Counsel, in the Parlament time) Barnes, Hierome, and Garret were brought together from the Tower into Smithfield, and by constant suffering the rage of the fire, they gaue testimonie to the trueth. After they had made confession of their faith, and prayed, there was one asked Doctor Barnes if the Saintes prayed for vs, he said he would referre that vnto God: and if they did, then I trust (said he) to pray for you within this halfe houre, M. Sheriffe: and asked the Sheriffe if he had any Articles a∣gainst him, for which he was condemned. The Sheriffe an∣swered, no: Then (said he) is there any man els that know∣eth wherefore I die, or yt by my preaching hath taken any errour, let them now speake, and I will make them aun∣swere. And no man answered: So praying earnestly for his persecutors, hee gaue himselfe to suffer, and required
master Sheriffe to haue him commended vnto the king, and to shew him that he required of his grace foure requestes. First,Doctor Barnes his 4. requestes to the king. that he would bestowe parte of the Abbey possessi∣ons on the reliefe of the poore. Secondly, that he woulde sée matrimone to be had in more reuerence. Thirdly, that swearers might be punished. Fourthly, that he woulde set vp Christes true religion. The same yere and day, and in the same place, were foure Papistes executed for denying the kings Suprema∣cie,Foure papists executed for denying the knigs supre∣macie. which brought the people to a marueylous admiration. Their names were Powell, Fetherstone, and Abel. All 3. drawen, hanged, and quartered. It fell out thus, by reason the kings Counsell was deuided in Religion: the one side hastening the execution of the Papistes, and the other of the Protestants. The fauourers of the trueth in king Henries dayes. The patrones of poperie in those dayes.The fauourers of the trueth were these, Caunterburie, Suffolke, Vicount Beauchampe, Vicount Lisle, Russell Treasourer, Paget, Sadler, Awdeley. The fauourers of the Papistes, Winchester, Duresme, Norfolke, Southhamp∣ton, Anthonie Browne, William Paulet, Iohn Baker, Rich, Chauncellour of the Augmentation, Winckfielde Vice-chauncellour. There suffered besides those traytors, in the time of king Henrie, for the cause of Supremacie, to the number of foure and twentie in all. Such was the furious prosecuting of the commission for the vi. Articles, that in London a great number came into question, and great trouble, to the number almost of two hundreth persons: and out of other quarters, such a num∣ber were apprehended through this Inquisition, that al the prisons in London were too little to holde them:All prisons in London too li∣tle to hold the persecuted. in so much that they were fayne to lay them in Halles. At the last, through the meanes of the Lord Awdeley, such pardon was obteyned of the king, that the Lord Awdeley, then Lorde Chauncellour, being content that one should be bound for
another, they were all discharged. Edmund BonerBoner turneth his opinion, and becōmeth a persecutor. who had before béen aduanced by Crom∣well, and preferred before another way, being now B. of London, shewed himselfe a most cruell executor of the com∣mission, in such sort that he burned Richard Mekins being but of xv. yéeres of age, for chauncing to speake against the Sacrament of the Altar, as he had heard other say; and o∣ther were caused to recant, as Towling parson of S. Antho∣nies, and Alexander Seaton a Scotish man, and a worthy preacher: this was Anno 1541. An. 1541.  Iohn Porter a yoong man, was by Boner cast into prison in Newgate, for reading the Bible in Paules: yet the king had commaunded it should be read: and Boner himselfe in the daies of Cromwell appointed that vj. bibles of the great volume should be set vp in the church of Saint Paules in London for the people to read.Six Bibles set vp in Paules to be read of the people. Wherevpon great multitudes would resort thither to heare this Porter read. Hereat Boner beyng grieued, caused him to be put in the dungeon of Newgate: where he was fettered in irons both legges and armes, with a coller of iron aboute his necke, fastened to the wall in the dungeon. From this torment, by suite of his brother and many other hée was released, to be among the other prysoners, fellons and murtherers: whose blasphemie and wickednesse hée beyng not able to beare, and therewith finding fault, and giuing them in∣structions, he was complained of and carried downe againe, and layd in the lower dungeon of all, and oppressed with boltes and irons. It is thought that he was fettered with one Ingine in the pryson, called, The Deuill in the necke,The diuell in the necke. whiche is so deuised that within thrée or foure houres, it breaketh and crusheth a mans backe or body in péeces,Iohn Porter killed in pry∣son. so that within six or eight dayes after, being heard pitifully crying and groning he was found dead. In the time of the Cardinall, Thomas Somers an ho∣nest Merchant was in pryson in the Tower for hauing of
Luthers bookes, and penaunce beyng inioyned, that hée should with thrée other Merchaunts, ride with bookes into Cheapeside hanged about their neckes, with a bason tinged on before them, and there cast their Testamentes in the fire. Now because he cast his booke ouer or through the fire, and woulde not cast it into it,Thomas So∣mers dieth in the Tower. hée was complained of and cast againe into the Tower by the Cardinall, where hée died. In the diocesse of Lincolne, vnder Iohn Longland, and Doctor Dracot his Chancellour, great persecution was a∣bout Buckingham, and Amersham for the sixe Articles, and the same time the Bishop burned two in one day: the one named Thomas Barnarde,Thomas Bar∣nard, Iames Morton mar∣tyrs. and the other Iames Morton, the one for teaching the Lordes prayer in English, and the other for kéeping the Epistle of saint Iames translated into English. In Oxford also the same time or much there about, re∣canted one maister Barber, a master of arts of that Vniuer∣sitie, a man excellently learned. His cause was the matter of the Sacrament. Not long before his recantation there was one maister Malarie, maister of arts of Cambridge of Christs Colledge, who for like opinions contrary to the Romish faith, was conuented before the Bishoppes, and in the end sent to Ox∣ford there openly to recant, and to beare his faggot, to the terrour of the studentes of that Vniuersitie, at whose recantation while Doctor Smith preached, and treated of the Sacrament, there rose a false imagination of firs that shoulde bée ouer their heades; and suche impression it tooke in Doctor Smith, that in manner hée first of all cried out in the pulpet:A popish feare. these are the traynes and subtilties of Heretikes agaynst mée. Lorde haue mercie vppon mée, Lorde haue mercie vppon mée, &c. Claymunde with o∣ther of the aged sorte, that coulde not runne and make shift for themselues, knéeled downe before the highe Altar,
committing themselues and their liues vnto the sacrament, all ful of terror. While the rest thronged & thrust to get out of the Church; among them there was a boy, that séeing the dores so stopped with presse, that he could not get out, climed vp vpon the dore, & among them gate out ouer mens heads: being vpon the doore, he saw a Monke comming towardes him, which had a great wide cowle hanging at his backe: which the boy perceiuing, leapes downe into the Monkes cowle: the Monke at the first perceiuing nothing, but after a while, féeling his cowle heauie, and hearing the voyce of the boy; thought it had béene a diuell: and began to coniure him, in the name of God and all saints; I commaund thée to declare what thou art, that art behind my backe? to whom the boy answered: I am Bartrams boy.Bartrams boy. The diuell in the Monkes cowle. But I (saide the Monke) adiure thée in the name of the vnseparable trini∣tie, that thou wicked spirite, doe tell mée who thou art, from whence thou camest, and that thou gette thée hence: I am Bartrams boy, sayde hée, good maister let mée go: and with that, his cowle beganne to cracke vpon his shoulders: the monke, when he perceiued the matter, tooke the boy out and discharged his cowle, the boy tooke his legges and ran away as fast as he could, and this was the perplexitie of the good Catholikes in that assemblie: which rose vpon the cry∣ing of fire in the stréetes, by one Hewster, who sawe a chimney on fire: and according to the custome, cried: Fire, fire, as hée passed by Saint Maries Church. Nowe as tou∣ching the Heretike, because hée had not done his sufficient penaunce there, by occasion of this hurliburly: therefore the next day hée was reclaymed into the Church of Saint Frisewide, where hée supplied the rest of his penance that lacked. An. 1541. By the sentence of ye cōuocation house, the Lady Anne of Cleue was diuorced,Lady Anne of Cleue di∣uorced. & the king permitted to mary with ye L. Katherine Hawarde, and within a while, she al∣so was put to death for incontinency with Tho. Culpeper.
The same yéere, in the moneth of August 1541 sixe were executed at Tiborne for the matter of supremacie:Sixe put to death for the supremacie. The Pri∣or of Dancaster, Giles Horne a monke of the Charterhouse of London, Thomas Epsame a monke of Westminster, who was the last in king Henries daies that ware a monks wéede: the fourth, one Philpot, the fift, one Carew, the sixt was a Frier. The king after the death of his first wife, now more and more he missed his olde Counsellour Cromwell,The king mis∣seth Cromwell. and partly smelling the waies of Winchester, beganne a little to set his foote in the cause of religion: and now the want of Crom∣well, did more mightely knit his affection to Cranmer, whō he alwaies before loued wel. And in the same yéere, the mo∣neth of October, after the execution of this Quéene: the king vnderstanding some abuses, yet to remaine vnrefor∣med, namely, about pilgrimages and idolatrie, &c. directed his letters to the Archb. of Canterburie for spéedy redresse of the same: this was Anno 1542. The yeere 1543.1543. Whitemeates permitted in Lent. in the moneth of Februarie, follo∣wed another Proclamation giuen out by the Kinges au∣thoritie, whereby whitemeates were permitted to be eaten in Lent. Anno 1544.  Anthony Parson priest, Henrie Filmer. Iohn Marbeck, were sent from London to Windsor by the Sheriffes men, the Saterday before S. Iames day: and laid fast in the towne gaole, Robert Testwood, (who had kept his bed) was brought out of his house vpon crowches and laide with them. Robert Bennet was the fourth apprehen∣ded with them, and being sicke of the pestilence, and a great sore running vpon him, he was left behind in the Bishop of Londons gaole, whereby he escaped the fire. Now these being brought to Windsor, there was a session specially procured to be holden the Thursday after, which was S. Agnes day. Against which sessions by the counsell of Doctour London and Simons a cruell Persecutour,
were all the Farmers belonging to the Colledge of Wind∣sor warned to appeare to be the iurers. The Iudges were these: Doctor Capon bishop of Salisbury, sir William Essex knight, sir Thomas Bridges knight, sir Humfrey Foster knight, Franckelen Deane of Windsore, and Fachell of Readyng: Robert Ockam occupied the clarke of pea∣ces roume: who called Anthony Parson and read his in∣dictement: whiche was, preachyng agaynst the reall pre∣sence: Thomas Testwood, whom they alleadged against, that hée mocked the Priest at the lifting &c. Next, Filmer, whome his owne brother accused, for the matter of the reall presence: there being none but his owne brother to witnes against him, whom Doctor London flattered and entertayned in his owne house to that ende. Lastly, Iohn Marbecke béeyng called, was charged to haue re∣sembled the lifting vp of the Sacrament, to the setting vp of Ieroboams calues, and for speaking agaynst the Masse: In which Articles they were founde guiltye by the Quest: one Hyde, dwelling beside Abington in a Lordeshippe belonging to the Colledge of Windsor, spake in the mouth of the rest. Then the Iudges beholding the prisoners a good while, (some with waterie eyes) made curtesie who shoulde giue iudgement: which when Fachell that was the lowest in the benche perceyued: if no man will doe it, then will I (said Fachell) and so gaue iudgement. So were they had away, who with comfor∣ting one another, prepared themselues to die the next day. All the night, till dead sléepe tooke them, they continued still calling on the name of the Lord, and praying for their per∣secutors. On the next morowe, which was Friday, as the priso∣ners were all preparing themselues to suffer, the Bishop of Sarum and others, had sent a letter by one of the She∣rifes Gentlemen, called master Frost, to the bishop of Win∣chester, (the Court being then at Oking) in the fauour
of Marbecke,Marbecke par∣doned. at the sight of which letter the Bishop straight way went to the king and obtained his pardon: which was to the end he might betray others. On the Saturday mor∣ning the other thrée were had to suffer, and all thrée beyng bound to the post, a certaine yong man of Filmers acquain∣tance brought him a pot of drinke: asking him if he would drinke? Yea quoth Filmer I thanke you, and so they encou∣raging themselues, drancke one to another. Filmer reioy∣cing in the Lord, said: be merie my brethren and lift vp your hearts to God: for after this sharpe breakefast I trust we shall haue a good dinner in the kingdome of Christ our Lord and redéemer:Filmer, Test∣wood, & Por∣son burned. at which wordes Testwood lifting vp his hands and eies to heauen, desired the Lord aboue to re∣ceiue his spirite. And Anthonie Parson pulling the strawe vnto him, laide a good deale thereof vpon the toppe of his head, saying: This is Gods hatte: nowe am I dressed like a true souldier of Christ, by whose merites only I trust this day to enter into his ioy:Notable mar∣tyrs. and so they yéelded vp their soules vnto the Lord with such patience, as it was marueilous to the beholders. The meaning of Gardiner was after this to haue dealt with great personages, had not the Lord preuented his cru∣ell practises. On the Munday after the men were burnt: it was de∣termined by the Bishoppe of Salisburie, that Robert Oc∣kam should go to the Bishop of Winchester with the whole processe done at the Sessions the thursday before. And also, had writings of those that were priuilie endicted: whereof one of the Quéenes men (named Fulke) hauing knowledge, gat to the Court before, and tolde Sir Thomas Cardine, and other of the priuie Chamber, how all the matter stoode. Whereupon, Ockam was laide for, & passing the stréetes by the Earle of Bedfordes lodging, was pulled in by ye sleeue, and kept secrete at my Lorde priuie Seales, till certaine of the priuie Counsel had perused all his writings: Among
which, they found certaine of the priuie Chamber endicted, with other the kings Officers, and their wiues. That is to say, Sir Thomas Cardine, Sir Philip Hobbie, with both their Ladies. Master Edmund Harmon, Master Th. Wel∣dowe, with Snowball and his wife. All these they had en∣dicted by the force of the vi. articles, as ayders, helpers, and mainteyners of Anthonie Parson. And besides them, they had endicted of heresie, a great number mo of the kings true and faithfull Subiectes. Whereof the kings Maiestie be∣ing certified, gaue vnto them his gratious pardon.The king pardoneth. And so had Benet a discharge withall: and being certified of the she∣riffe and Sir Humfrey Foster, of the death of the poore men at Windsor, the king turning from them, to depart, sayde, Alas poore Innocents. And after this withdrew his fauour from Winchester, caused Doctor London,Winchester cast out of fa∣uour. and Simons the Lawier, and a fierce persecutor of them, to be apprehended, and brought before the Counsell: and examined vpon their oath, of alleigeance, who for denying their wicked fact, were found periured, and were iudged as periured persons, to weare papers in Windsor, and Ockam to stande vpon the Pillorie at Newberie, where he was borne.False Iudges and accusers punished. The iudge∣ment of the thrée was, to ride about Windsor, Reading, and Newberie, with papers on their heads, and their faces tur∣ned to the horsetailes, and so to stande vpon the Pillorie in euerie of those Townes, for false accusation of the forena∣med Martyrs, and for periurie. Anno 1539.  There was commission sent to Calice, to enquire of heresie, through a complaint made of the enter∣tainement and accepting of Adam Damlip, alias George Bucker, who there for xx. dayes or more, preached euery day at vii. of the clocke. He preached very godly sermōs against Transubstantiation, and adoration of the sacrament. Dam∣lip by this Commission was cited, and appeared before the Archb. of Canterbury, Winchester, Chichester, and diuers others: before whom constantly he mainteined the trueth of
the sacrament, and being dismissed for that time, & enioyned to appeare the next day,Adam Dam∣lip. by the secret warning of the archb. of Cant. he stept aside into the West countrey, while great trouble was kindled against Gods people in Calice, name∣ly, against sir W. Smith, curate, & a zelous preacher, T. Brook R. Hare, sir I. Butler, then Commissarie, Iames Cocke, alias Coppē,Persecution in Calice. D. Lane, I, Barber, and others. Of the which persons T. Brooke, R. Hare, Coppen, D. Lane, & I. Barber, were ap∣prehended, and sent ouer, and committed to prison in West∣minster gate: and then commaunded to appeare before the Archb. Winchester, Chichester, and ten other, appointed by the kings maiestie. Sir W. Smith preacher, and I. Butler, by commandement were apprehended in Calice, and boūd by suretie, not to passe the boundes of Calice. Sir William Smith was accused to preach against our ladie, and praying to saints, good works, &c. Brooke, for spea∣king against the sacrament, Rafe, Hare for speaking against holy bread & holy water, Butler was charged to haue main∣teined Adam Damlippe: for which he was dismissed of his Commissariship. And it was determined, that sir W. Smith, Rafe Hare, Iames Cock, and Iames Barber, should be sent to Calice, and there to abiure, and do penance: where sir Williā Smith was enioyned to make the sermon, R. Hare, I. Cock, and Iames Barber, there standing with fagots vpon their shoulders: sauing because he dwelled there, Barber was en∣ioyned to beare his fagot iiij. miles of Calice, on the market day: where sir. W. Smith preached also, as before, and so or∣dered the matter in his sermon, that in effect he denied no∣thing he had taught before. His accuser was one R. Long, a man at armes in Calice, who falsly swore that he had ea∣ten flesh in Lent, at Brookes house: after which oath, he ha∣uing taken displeasure some way, ran out of his house, and in the eyes of a number of people, went & drowned himselfe. After this commission, which was executed by M. Green∣field, sir I. Butler, the K. mason, & others (through the rage of
the enimy, and complaint to the king, that the commons were in perill through dissention of opinions,) there were sent ouer new commissioners, the earle of Sussex, lord great Chamberlaine, the lord S. Iohn, sir Iohn Gage knight, sir Iohn Baker knight, M. Layton clerke of the closet, and D. Currin with speciall instructions, besides signed with the kings owne hand: so that if God had not taken compassion, there had an hundreth béene burnt or hanged shortly after: but it hapned far otherwise: for of the number of those accu∣sors, iiij. were by the cōmissioners sent ouer into England: to wit, Clement Philpot seruant to the L. Lisle, sir Edmund curate of our Ladies church, Thomas Towchet a postmai∣ster, Peter Requet:Gods iudge∣ment and de∣liuerance of his people. of the which Philpot and the Curat were drawne, hanged and quartered at London: and contrarily, of them that were accused, not one lost an haire of his head. Inquisition being made, Thomas Brooke aforementioned, was committed to ward: and so were Anthony Pickering Gent. Henry Turney gentleman, Sir George Darby priest, Iohn Shepheard, William Pellam, William Reuerdall, Iohn Whitewood, Iohn Boote, Robert Clodder, Copen de Lane, & Mathew de Lound, sent to close prison: William Stephens likewise, who was Adam Damlips host,The L. Lisle dieth in the Tower. was sent into Eng∣land and clapt in the Tower: and after him the L. Lisle de∣putie, who died in the Tower. The seconde day after Easter, Thomas Brooke was sent for, and committed to close prison in the maiors gaole: and George Brodway was suborned by the Counsel of Ca∣lice: who threatened him greatly, if he woulde not burthen Brooke with some concealementes (which he at length by straite imprisonment & threats, did, and set to his hand, that Brooke had for a long time concealed foure groates euery day, for his Clarkes wages:) for which after a while Brod∣way being gréeued in his conscience, with a knife wēt about to cut his owne throte, had not the gaoler preuēted him; who heard him grone wt the pain he felt of ye woūd: after, through
guilt of conscience and shame he fell out of his wittes.Gods iudge∣ment vpon a false accuser. Of this dealing with Brooke, his wife gaue intelligence to the lord Cromwell; wherein shée desired the lord Cromwell to be a meanes to the king that the afflicted, and their causes might be heard in England, which he with spéed did accom∣plish, and wrote to the Commissioners in the kings name, that Brooke, and xij. or xx. of his complices should be sent o∣uer into England with their accusers. Now by the time that the Commissioners had receiued these letters, they had made out precepts for viij. or ix. score honest men more to be cast in prison; but these Letters ap∣palled and staied them: notwithstanding they banished the men before named, out of the towne for an hundreth yeres: and sent them back to prison, staying them there vpon hope, that the Lord Cromwell should sooner come into captiuitie then he did: but at last they sent xiij. prisoners with Brook, who within xxiiij. houres, were at anker before the Tower wharfe: whom when the Lord Cromwell vnderstood to be come, he commanded their yrons to be smote off at the tow∣er wharfe, and the prisoners to be brought vnto him, whom hee greatly comforted. After that, they were sent to the Fleete, and whiles they were in the Fleete, and William Steuens in the tower, the xix. day of Iuly Anno 1541, the Lorde Cromwell their great fauourer was beheaded at Tower hill, so that all hope seemed to them to haue beene vtterly lost of any deliuerance: but the Lord had them in re∣membrance, and stirred vp the Lord Awdley,L. Awdley a friend to the afflicted. Lord Chaun∣cellour of England, without further examination, to deliuer them. And at length, two yeres after, he deliuered William Steeuens also, by the kings owne motion. The vniust Coū∣sellers, who charged the Towne with sedition and heresie, fell afterward into the kings displeasure, and the L. Graie, Sir George Carew, and Sir Richard Greenfield, who pur∣ged the town of the slander, although for a time they were in displeasure, yet wtin a while after, they came into greater
fauor then before; and were rewarded with xx. l. a yéere a péece at the least: Rockwood one of the fearcest persecutors fell into dispaire:Rockwood a persecutor de∣spaireth. Gods iudge∣ments. and at the last breath cried, he was vtter∣ly damned, for that he said, malitiously he sought the death of such good men. The Vndermarshall also (another persecu∣tor) suddenly fell downe in the counsell chamber and neuer spake worde: and the rest of the persecutors had the reueng∣ing hand of God following after them. Adam DamlipAdam Dam∣lip taken a∣gaine. who before escaped & lay hid in the West∣country, teaching a schoole about a yéere or two: by the mise∣rable inquisition of the six articles, was againe taken and brought vp to London, where he was by St. Gardiner com∣manded to the Marshalsea, & there lay the space of other two yéeres, where thinking he had béene forgotten; he in the La∣tine tongue wrote an epistle to the B. of Winchester, wher∣in he said he would write his obedience & submission: for said he, I had rather die then here to remaine, and not to be suf∣fered to vse my talent to Gods glorie: This he said to M. Marbecke then prisoner in the Marshalsea. This epistle he deliuered to his kéeper about Saturday in ye morning, which was about the ij. wéeke before Whitsontide, desiring him to deliuer it at the court to the B. of Winchester, which he did. The B. made such quicke dispatch, that ye kéeper came home at night very late, & brought with him a precept for the exe∣cutiō of Adam Damlip. So vpon munday early in the mor∣ning, the kéeper & other of the knight Marshals men, cōueied Adam vnto Calice vpon the Ascension euen, & there cōmit∣ted him to the Maiors prison: & because they could not bur∣then him with any thing, within a sufficient cōpasse of time, to condemne him: they laid to his charge he had receiued a French crowne of cardinall Poole at Rome; where before his first comming to Calice, he was requested to read thrée lectures a wéeke in Cardinall Pooles house: & therefore they condemned him and executed him for treason:Adam Damlip put to death. which death he most méekely and hartely tooke: Iohn Butler and sir Da∣niell
the curate before mentioned, after ix. moneths impri∣sonment were with much labour permitted to returne to Calice againe: William Steuens aboue mentioned, who had remained all this time in the Tower, was condemned also of treason with his guest Adam Damlip, & pardoned by the king. Adam Damlip had sometimes béene a great papist & chaplaine to Fisher B. of Rochester: & after the death of his maister, trauelled France, Dutchland, and Italie, and came to Rome: where he would not for the wickednes of the place abide to remaine, though cardinall Poole offered him main∣tenance to read iij. lectures a wéeke in his house; which he refused: & for receiuing onely a French crowne, he was con∣demned and executed for treason: he receiued it at the Cardi∣nals hand to drinke, and beare some charge of expence. By the preaching of Adam Damlip in Calice, among o∣thers, there was a poore mā whose name is not yet certain∣ly knowne: who was conuerted to the truth & therfore con∣demned by one Haruey there, being cōmissarie: whom this Haruey in time of his iudgement called Hereticke, and said he should die a vile death: the poore man aunswered againe, and said that he was no hereticke, but was in the faith of Christ: and whereas thou saidest, said he, that I shall die a vile death, thou thy self shalt die a viler death, and that short∣ly. And so it came to passe, for within half a yéere after Har∣uey was hanged,Gods iudge∣ment. drawne and quartered for treason in the same towne of Calice. After the burning of this poore man, there was also a cer∣taine other schooler coūted to be a dutchman named Dodde, who comming out of Germany, was there taken with cer∣taine Germane bookes about him: & being examined & stan∣ding stoutly to the doctrine of the gospell, he was burned. A little before this time, Will. Bolton, alias Crosbow∣maker, for saying the Pope wanted Charitie: if he could, and would not release soules out of Purgatorye, by Doctor Darlie parson of our Ladies Church in Calice, then Com∣missarie
for Archbishoppe Warham, was made to beare a fagotte, and lost his wages, which was vi, pence a day: who complaining thereof to the king, and declaring vnto his ma∣iestie the cause, sent him to Calice againe: and after that gaue him viij. pence a day. As for the vi. articles, many good men were put to death, so for the Popes supremacie diuerse suffered. And about this time, Larke a priest of Chelsey for the supremacie, and Germine Gardiner, néere kinseman to Stephen Gardiner, and his secretarie, for practising for the Pope against the King, were put to death. By an act of parlament holden An. 1544.1544. The rigour of vi. articles mi∣tigated. the rigour of the vi. articles was asswaged a little: & at the first time it was permitted, that they which offended against them might re∣cant: which if they refused to doe, and offended againe, they should beare a fagot, and should be admitted to abiure: if the third time they offended, then they should sustaine punish∣ment according to law. Notwithstanding this Parlament had thus mittigated the rigor, yet remained the poison: and all manner of bookes bearing the name of Williām Tindall, or what other booke soeuer contained any thing against the vi. articles, were debarred. In this Parlament also, it was permitted onely to noblemen and gentlemen,Noblemen and Gentlemē per∣mitted to reade the scripture. to reade the scriptures to their edifying: so they did it without discussing or vrging therevpon. In this Parlament also it was permitted to the party de∣tected, to trye his cause by witnesses: as many (or more) in number as the other which deposed against him, Anno 1545.1545. Sixe articles more qualified. the vi. articles were yet much more quali∣fied by Act of Parlament: whereby it was also decréed, that the king should haue full power to appoint 32. persons: to wit, sixetéene of the Cleargie, and sixetéene of the tempo∣raltie, to peruse and ouersée, & examine the Canons, consti∣tutions and ordinances of the canon law, aswell prouinciall, as synodall: and so according to their discretions to establish
an order of ecclesiastical lawes, such as should be thought by the king most conuenient. This yeere 1544. Iohn Heywood recanted the Popes supremacie, and Iohn Ath the trueth of the sacrament. About the yeere 1546.1546 Saxy hanged. one Saixe a priest, was hanged in the porters lodge of Stephen Gardiner, not without the consent of the Bishop, as it is supposed: there was also a ser∣uant in Colchester, named, Henrie, burned for the testimony of the trueth.Henry burned. This yeere 1546. One KerbyKerby. was burned in Ipswich for the testimony of the truth: and the matter of the real pre∣sence: at whose death, the Lord Wentworth (who gaue sen∣tēce against him) with others, wept bitterly: He was burnt the Saterday before Gang munday, and at the same barre also was condemned one Roper,Roper. Clearke of Mendesham: & was burned at S. Edmundsbury, the Gang munday after. He suffred great pains & tormēts in his burning, for ye wood was gréen, so that he was choked with smoke: and moreouer being set in a pitch barrell, was therewith sore payned at length one standing by, took a fagot stick, and striking at the ring about his neck, stroke him belike vpon the head, & so he sunke down and was dissolued. The other, Kerby, being dis∣swaded by maister Robert Wingfield,A notable speech of the constant ser∣uant of Christ. that declared vnto him the painfulnes of the death, said vnto him. Ah Maister Wingfield, be at my death, and you shal say: there standeth a Christian souldier in the fire. At the later end of this yéere 1545. in the moneth of No∣uember, was granted vnto the king (besides other subsidies of money,) al Colledges, Chauntries, Frée chappels, hospi∣tals, Fraternities, brotherhoods, guildes, & perpetuities of stipendarie priests, to be disposed at his pleasure. The next Lent following, D. CromeD. Crome re∣canteth. made a dilemma a∣gainst priuate masses: but the Prelates did so handle the matter that on Easter next, they made him to recant. Anno 1546. About the moneth of Iune, Anne Askewe,
Iohn Lacels, gentleman, of the Court, Iohn Adams a Tai∣lor, Nicholas Belleman a priest of Shropshire, were burned at one fire in Smithfield. Anne Askew 1545.Anne Askewe. in the moneth of March, was first examined by C. Dare, Inquisitor, at sad∣lers hall, touching the Sacrament of the Altar, Masses, con∣fession, the kings booke: and afterward committed by him to be examined of a Priest, who propounded also concer∣ning the sacrament: to whom she would make no answere, neither vnto the Inquisitor, touching that matter. He enquired also concerning priuate Masses, which shee said was idolatrous. From thence they had her to my Lord Mayor, who examined her as they had done before: to whom she made such answere as she did to the quest before, which was in some things directly, in other some, by question. A∣gaine, because she said she would not cast Pearles among swine. From thence the L. Mayor commanded her to ward without baile: so she remained in the Counter xi. daies, and no friend admitted to speak wt her, sauing a priest was sent vnto her by ye B. to examin her of his points of superstition. The xxiii. of March, her Cosen master Britaine, went to my Lord Mayor, desiring of him shee might be bayled: who said he would not do it without the consent of the Spiritual Officer. Whereupon he went to the Chauncellour: but the matter was so haynous, that he durst not do it without the B. of London were made priuie to it. So from him he went to Bonner, who said to master Britaine, that hee was well contented that she should come foorth to a communication: and appointed her to appeare the next day at iij. of the clocke at after noone: but sent for her at one of the clock, and by flat∣tering wordes endeuoured to perswade her to declare her whole minde without feare: and promised her that no vaun∣tage should be taken of any worde she should there speake: but she would declare nothing. Wherwith the bishop being offended, charged her with words she should be reported to speake against the sacrament of the altar, against the masse,
with other such like questions, some true, some false: wher∣to she made such answere as was not to the B. contentmēt: yet subtilly he drew out a circumstance, as it were a recan∣tation, & required her to subscribe to it: which she saide shée would do so far foorth as the holy scripture doth agrée vnto. Frō thence she was caried againe to prison, vntil ye next mo∣row, at which time she was cōmanded to appeare at ye guild hal: from whēce againe she was commited to prison: neither could she yet be bayled. Thē were her sureties cōmanded to come before thē the next morow in Paules church: where wt much a do they took a bond of them of recognisaunce for her foorth comming, and so she was deliuered. Anno. 1546. she was examined againe before the kings counsel at Gréen wich: to whō she answered in many things parabolically:Anne Askew answereth pa∣rabolically. & when the B. of Winchester bad her make a direct answere, she said she would not sing a new song of ye Lord in a strāge land. The next day she was again brought before the Counsel, and (as before) was questioned wt tou∣ching the Sacrament of the altar: to whom she boldly and roundly (with some checke vnto the aduersaries) made aun∣swere in such sort,A. Askew an∣swereth boldly and roundly. as they could take no direct vauntage a∣gainst her. On the sunday after she fel sore sick, & desired to speake with M. Latimer, which might not be permitted. Af∣ter that she was sent to Newgate, in her extremitie of sick∣nes,Anne Askew condemned. & from thence they brought her to the guild hall: where she was condēned for ye article of ye real presēce in ye sacramēt. After her condemnation, on Tuesday, she was sent from Newgate to the signe of the Crowne, where M. Riche, the Bishop of London, and N. Shaxton, laboured to perswade her to recant by faire words, but it would not preuaile: then M. Rich sent her to the tower, where she remained till 3. of the clock: then came M. Rich & one of the counsel, & charged her vpon her obedience, to shew vnto them, if she knew any man or woman of her Sect, and asked of the Lady of Suf∣folke, of Sussex, of Hertforde, my Lady Dennie, and my
Lady Fitzwilliams: which she would not disclose, nor any o∣ther. Then they put her on the racke,Anne Askew racked till she was nigh dead because she cōfessed no Ladies nor Gentlewomen to be of her opinion, and there∣on they kept her a long time: and because shée lay still and did not crie, my Lord Chancellour and Maister Rich tooke paines to racke hir with their owne handes, till she was nigh dead, then the Liefetenant caused her to be loosed from the racke: which doone, incontinently she souned. Then they recouered her againe: and after that, she sat two long houres reasoning with the lord Chancellour vpon the bare floore: who with flattering woordes perswaded her to leaue her o∣pinion. Then was she brought to an house, and layd vpon a bed with painefull bones: after which the lord Chancel∣lour sent her word, that if she would leaue her opinion, she should want nothing: if she would not, she should to New∣gate, and thence to the fire. To whom she sent word againe, that she would rather die, then breake her faith. The king vnderstanding by the Liefetenaunt of her cruell racking,The king dis∣pleased with the racking of Anne Askew. was greatly displeased therewith. The day of her executiō being appointed, she was brought into Smithfield in a chaire, because she could not go on her féete, by reason of her racking, and was girded by the middle with a chaine that might hold vp her bodie, and so was shée with her fellowes a witnesse of the truth, and sealer of the same with her bloud. Anne Askew hauing letters of pardon offered her at the stake by Wrisley lord Chancellour, if shée would recant, she refused so much as to looke on them. They were there also offered to the rest,The martyrs had pardon at the stake. but they by her example were confirmed, and likewise refused the same. About the same time and yéere, Doctor Ripse bishop of Norwich did incite the old duke of Northfolke against Ro∣gers in the countie of Northfolke: who was condemned, and suffered for the cause of the sixe Articles. An. 1546. Winchester practized against Q. Catherine Parre the last wife to king Henry, who was very zealous
towardes the Gospell,Winchester practiseth against the life of the Queene. and had perswaded with the king to make a perfect reformation, and so farre he preuailed with the king, persuading him of the factious disposition of the go∣spellers, and of the daungerous example of the Quéene his wife; that, before that he and the L. Chancellor, and others (who conspired together against her) departed, the king had giuen out cōmandement, with warrant to certaine of them made for that purpose, to consult together about drawing of certaine articles against the Quéene, wherein her life might be touched: which ye king by their persuasions pretended not to spare, hauing any rigor or colour of law to coūtenance the matter. With which cōmission they departed that time from the king; resolued to put their pernitious practise in executiō: & first determined to deale with those whō they knew were great about her, as the Lady Harbert, afterward the Coun∣tesse of Penbrooke, and sister to the Quéene, and chiefe of her priuie chamber: the lady Lane being of her priuie chamber, and also her cosin Germane; the lady Terwit beyng of her priuie chamber. It was deuised that these thrée should first of all haue béene accused, & brought to answere to the six ar∣ticles: and vpon their apprehension in the court, their closets and coffers should haue béen searched, that somewhat might haue béene found whereby the Quéene might be charged, which being found, she her selfe presently should haue béene taken, & likewise caried by barge in the night to the Tower. To all this the king séemed to giue his assent, and afterward opened all the matter to D. Wendy his Physicion, charging him withall vpon perill of his life, not to vtter it to any per∣son. Now the time drawing nigh when they minded to put their mischéefes in practise, the bill of articles drawne out against the Quéene, and subscribed with the Kinges owne hand, falling from the bosome of one of those wicked coun∣sellours, was found, and taken vp of some godly person, and brought immediatly to the Quéene: who séeing the same fell into a marueilous perplexitie, almost to the perill and
daunger of her life: whereof the king hearing, he sent his Phisition Wendie, and came also himselfe to comfort her: to whom she delared her griefe; but the king gaue her most comfortable wordes: and so when he had tarried an houre with her, he departed. Shée afterwardes being recouered, came to the King, and founde suche fauour with him, and had so satisfied him in those thinges,The king much altered concer∣ning their prac¦tises against the Queene. for which the Prelates conspired against her, that his minde was fully altered, and detested in his heart the bloudie conspiracie of those Tray∣tours: who yet notwithstanding the next day determined to haue carried the Quéene to the Tower: and at the houre appointed, the Lord Chauncellour, with fourtie of the garde at his héeles, commeth into the garden where the Quéene was with the King, and those thrée Ladies, in plea∣saunt communication, fully determining from thence to haue taken the Quéene and those thrée Ladies, and to haue carried them to the Tower: whom the King stearnely be∣holding, and breaking of his myrth with the Quéene, step∣ped aside and called him knaue, arrant knaue, beast and foole,The Queene deliuered from her daunger. and commaunded him presently to auoide out of his presence. So departed the Chauncellour with his train, and all his deuises brought to naught, and the subtletie of Gar∣diner discouered, who was alwayes a cruell enimie against the Gospell, and professors of the same. Gardiner not onely practised in England against reformation, but also when the King was minded to reforme in England, he being Ambassadour beyond the seas, for the agréement of a league betwéene England, Fraunce, and the Emperour: he wrote vnto the king, and perswaded him, that if he procéeded to al∣ter any whit in England in matters of religion, the league would not go forwarde: whereby the Kinges determinate purpose for that time was altered, although before he had commanded the Archb. Cranmer to cause two letters in his name to be drawne for the abolishing of Roodlofts, and rin∣ging on allhallow night.
After this, Anno 1546. The matter of reformati∣on beganne to be reuiued: and the French king, and the king of England did agrée to make a perfect reformation:The kings of England, and France, agree to make a per∣fect reformatiō of religion. and were so fully resolued therein, that they meant also to exhort the Emperour to doe the same in Flaunders, and other his countries, or else to breake off from him. And herein the king commaunded the Archbishop Cranmer to penne a forme thereof, to bée sent to the French king to con∣sider of: but by the death of these Princes, that purpose was cut off. About this time, Sir Hugh Cauerley knight, & maister Litleton, falsly accused Sir George Blage, one of the kings priuie chamber, the sunday before Anne Askew suffered, be∣fore Wriseley Lord Chauncellour:Sir George Blage condem∣ned to be bur∣ned. the next day he was car∣ried to Newgate, & from thence to the guild hall: where he was condemned the same day, and appointed to be burned the wednesday after. They laid to him, that he shold say, that if a mouse did eate the bread, they should by his consent hang vp the mouse: with other such light matters. When the King vnderstood hereof, hée was sore offended with their doinges, and sent him his pardon: and so was he set at liber∣berty. Who comming after to the kings presence, ah my pig said the king to him, (for so he was wont to call him.) Yea (said he) if your maiestie had not béene befter vnto me, then your Bishoppes were, your pigge had béene rosted ere this time. After the death of Anne Askew, the Prelates made out straight proclamation against English bookes of scripture, and whatsoeuer might giue any light to the word: and drew out a number of heresies (as they call them) out of those bookes, and condemned them. Within foure moneths after, this proclamation comming out in August, the king deceassed in the beginning of Ia∣nuarie, in the 38. yéere of his reigne, Anno 1547.1547 The king dieth. lea∣uing behinde him, king Edwarde, Queene Marie, and
Quéene Elizabeth.Persecution in Scotland. Not onely in England but also in Scotland there was great persecution for the trueth: And anno 1540. was Sir Iohn Brothwicke knight, called captaine Brothwicke cited for heresie: & not appearing, but escaping out of their hands, was condemned for the same (though hée were absent) by the sentence of Dauid Beaton Archbishop of S. Andrewes and other prelates of Scotland:Ten articles against Sir Iohn Broth∣wicke. They obiected, against him x. Articles, 1. That the Pope hath no more authoritie then another Bishop. 2. That the Popes indulgences and pardons are of no force. 3. That the Pope is an open vser of Symonie, sellyng the giftes of spiritualtie. 4. That he perswaded many to imbrace he∣resies in England. 5. That hee saide, that the Cleargy of Scotland was blinde. 6. Hée condemned the counsell of Constance. 7. Hée perswaded the king to appropriate vn∣to himselfe the goodes of the Church. 8. Hée desired that the Churche of Scotland were in the same estate, that the Churche of England. 9. That the canons were of no force. 10. He perswaded against the religion of Scotland, &c. To all which articles, he made a learned and large answere: the Papistes condemned him being absent, and openly burned his picture in token of his condemnation, without all hope of pardon. Not long after the burning of Dauid Stratton, and mai∣ster Gurley: in the dayes of Dauid Beaton, B. and Cardinal of Saint Andrewes: and George Treighton Bishoppe of Dunkelden, a Chanon of Saint Colines, and Vicar of Dolone, called Deane Thomas FerretTho. Ferret was condemned to death, without any place of recantation, for preaching euery Sundaye to his Parishioners, and with him two blacke Friers, one called Iohn Relowe, the other called Be∣uerage, a priest of Striueling, called Duncan Simons, and one Gentleman called Robert Foster, in Striueling, with other thrée or foure of the same Towne of Striueling, because they were chiefe Heretickes: and especiallye,
bycause many of them were at the Bridall and mariage of a priest, who was vicar of Twilodie beside Striueling, and did eate flesh in the Lent at the same brydall. And so they were altogether burnt vpon the Castle hill of Edenburgh, where constantly they endured to the end, one comforting another. Anno 1543. Robert Lamb, William Anderson, Iames Hunter, Iames Raueleson, Iames Founteson, and Helen Stirke his wife, were put to death for the testimonie of the truth against the romish church. William Anderson, & Ro∣bert with Iames Raueleson were accused for hanging vp the Image of S. Frauncis in a corde,S. Francis homely vsed. nayling of rammes hornes to his head, and a Cowes rumpe to his taile, and for eating of a goose on alhallow eue. Iames Hunter because he vsed the suspect company of the rest: the woman for that in her childebed shée was not accustomed to call on the Vir∣gin Marie, and that shée saide no merite of the Virgin, but Gods frée mercie, procured her the honour to be made the mother of Christ. Iames Raueleson for building an house, and setting vppon the rounde of his fourth staire, the thrée crowned diademe of Peter with the Cardinalles booke, as done in mockage of his Cardinals hat. These persons on the morow after Saint Paules day were condemned, vpon the Act against conferring, and reasoning of the Scriptures. The woman aforesaid, Helen StirkeHelen Stirke a notable martir desired to die with her husbād, and greatly encouraged him, & parting with him at the stake with a kisse, saide, this was the ioyfullest day that euer she had; and said she would not bid him good night: for (said she) we shall sodeinly méet with ioy in the kingdom of heauen: and so she was taken away, & drowned, although she had a childe sucking on her. Dauid Beaton Bishop, and Cardinal of S. Andrewes, was the chiefe doer in this per∣secution. In this yeare 1543. Iohn Chartnons, being Prouost of S. Iohnston, alias Pereth, was deposed for fauouring of the
trueth. Anno 1546. The first of March, master George Wise∣heart1533. George Wise∣heart. suffered martirdome for the faith of Iesus Christ, at Saint Andrewes in Scotland, anno 1543. He was a Stu∣dent in Cambridge in Bennet Colledge, where he was a speciall patterne of godlines and learning. Afterwarde in Scotland he was apprehended, and charged to haue prea∣ched, notwithstanding he were forbidden: and to haue spokē against the masse, and the fiue odde Sacraments, against au∣ricular confession, against the sacrament of the altar, against vnction, holiwater, against the power of the Pope, frée will, distinction of meates, against prayer to Saintes, purgatory, against vowes, and the vse of popish superstitions: to which, (as they would for furie geue him leaue) George WisehartThe meeke death of George Wise∣heart. made a sufficient and Christian answere. When he came to the place of execution, and the Executioner prayed him of pardon, he said, come hether, and kissed him: and saide, lo here a token that I forgeue thée: My heart, do thine office: and so méekely he ended, and constantly gaue testimony to ye trueth of Iesus: the people piteously mourning for his death. It was not long after, but the Cardinall was slaine by the handes of one Lech, and other Gentlemen, who sodeinly brake in vpon him, and slewe him:Gods iudge∣ment. after which he lay seuen moneths vnburied at the least: and at last, like carrion, was buried in a dunghill, After Beaton, succéeded Iohn Hambleton, Archbishop of saint Andrewes, 1549. who the next yere folowing, bur∣ned Adam Wallace, for the matter of the Sacrament. He was burned on the Castle hil of Edenburgh. Before his ex∣ecution they had taken frō him all his bookes, which might serue for his comfort; but that he had learned by heart all Dauids Psalter,Adam Wallace had learned all Dauids psalter by heart. and supplyed comfort that way. When the fire was prepared, he himself asked one of the Officers that stoode by, if the fire were making redy: who told him it was He answered, as it pleaseth God, I am ready, soone or late,
as it pleaseth him: & so brought to the stake, he ended with constancie and patience, and gaue testimonie to the trueth: first exhorting the people not to be offended at his suffering for the trueths sake. Anno 1551. After that Richard Marshall doctor of Di∣uinitie, and prior of the black Friers at Newcastle in Eng∣land, had declared in his preachings at Saint Andrewes in Scotland, that the Lords prayer, commonly called the Pater noster, should be said onely to God, and not to Saints, nei∣ther to any other creature. The Doctors of diuinitie of S. Andrewes, together with the black Friers, who had long ago taught the people to say the Pater noster to Saints, had great indignation that their olde doctrine should be impug∣ned: and stirred vp a Gray fryer, called Frier Toyttes, to teach the people to pray yet to Saints.A controuersie in Scotland whether the Lords prayer should be said to Saints, or not. Whereupon fel such a schisme, that not only the Cleargie, but also the people were deuided among themselues for the matter: in so much yt there rose a prouerbe: to whom say you your Pater noster? And the cleargie for to decide the same controuersie, & to put ye people out of doubt, assembled thēselues: yet notwithstan∣ding it so depended, yt it was thought good to call a principal coūsel to decide ye matter: which being assēbled at Edēburgh, the papists wāting reason, brast out into vnséemly spéech: as frier Toyt being asked to whom he should say his pater no∣ster,The Fryer biddeth say the pater noster to the deuil. answered: say it to the deuil, knaue. In ye end, they that were called churchmē, were deuided: for some of ye bishops and diuines consented yt it should be said to saints: but ye B. of S. Andrewes, Caitenes and Athenies, refused vtterly to subscribe to the same. Finally, it was declared vnto the peo∣ple, that it should be said vnto God, with certeine restricti∣ons: and so by little and little the bruite ceassed. Anno 1558. W, Mill1539. Walter Mill. was the last yt was burned in Scot∣land for the doctrine of the gospel, the xx. day of April, before the B. of S. Andrewes, Murray, Brechin, & a number of o∣ther prelates. He was brought to the metropolitane church,
where he was put in a pulpet before ye bishops to be accused: his weakenes partly of age & ill vsage being such, as it was thought, he should not be able to be heard speake. But when he began to speake, he made the church ring & sound againe, to the confusion of the aduersaries and comfort of the godly. And being long in his praiers sir Andrew Oliphant one of the Bishops priests called him: sir Walter Mill arise, and answeare to the Articles, for you hold my Lord here ouer long: In déede (said he) I haue béene ouer long one of the Popes knights: (for he had béene before a Papist) but I am called Walter and not Sir. When neither threates nor allurements could preuaile, they condemned him, for the ar∣ticle of Priestes marriages, the seuen Sacraments, the sa∣crament of the Altar, pilgrimage. Before sentence was pronounced, Oliphant asked him: wilt thou not recant thine erroneous opinions: and if thou wilt not, I will pronounce sentence against thée. I am accused of my life (saide hée) againe I knowe I must die once, friend therfore, (as Christ said to Iudas) doe it quickly: yée shall knowe that I will not recant the truth: for I am corne: I am no chaffe. I wil not be blown away with the wind, nor burst with the flaile, but I wil abide both.A notable speech of the martyr. Such was his maruellous boldnesse & constancie, which did so moue the hearts of many, that the B. steward of his regaltie, prouost of the towne, called Pa∣trike Learmend, refused to be his temporal Iudge: to whom it appertained. Also the Bishoppes Chamberlaine being therewith charged, would in no wise take vpon him so vn∣godly an office. Yea, the whole town was so offended with his vniust condemnation, that the bishops seruāts could not get for their money, so much as one corde to tie him to the stake, or Tarre barrell to burne him, but were constrayned to cut ye cords of their masters owne Pauilion, to serue their turne. So being tied to the stake, & hauing exhorted ye people, and praied, fire being put vnto him, he ended in the Lord, wt such chéerfulnes and constancie enduring his martyrdome,
that he was the last martyr in Scotland: this was in the time of Mary Longawale Quéene regent of Scotland, and Iohn Hamelton bishop of Saint Andrewes and primate of Scotland. Anno 1511. Vnder William Warrham Archb. of Can∣turburie, certaine martyrs that were omitted whiche suffe∣red at that time with him, because they are not to be forgot∣ten, are to be referred to that yéere. They suffered for deni∣yng the Sacrament of the Altar, &c for auricular confession, the extréeme vnction, images, pilgrimages, prayer to saints, holy bread, holy water, &c. They denie all that they had vttered any thing against those popishe pointes: yet wit∣nesses, who had partly abiured before, and others against nature, as the husband against the wife, and children a∣gainst the mother: being brought forth, they were condem∣ned, and put to death. Their names were: William Carder of Tenderden, Weauer, Agnes Grebill of the same towne of thréescore yéere old, Robert Lawson of Halden, of the age 60. Iohn Browne of Ashford, Edward Walker of Maidston, Cutler: who all notwithstanding they promised to submitte themselues, yet were they condemned. The cause why the good woman so stood (as she did) to the deniall of those arti∣cles, obiected against her was, for that she neuer thought that her husband and her owne children, (who only were priuie of her religion) would haue testified against her: which when she perceiued, she repented the time that euer she bare those children of her bodie. So, notwithstanding that she offered conformitie, she was condemned and put to death. Her hus∣bandes name was Iohn Grebill: her sonnes, Christopher and Iohn. Besides these, which were put to death, a num∣ber vnder Warren were forced to abiure the trueth against the reall presence, confession, sacrament of matrimony, vnc∣tion, pilgrimages, Images, Saintes, holie water, holie bread, &c. Also omitted before, anno 1539. Iohn a Painter, and
Giles Germaine, who were accused and condemned for he∣resie at London before the Bishop and other Iudges, where, by chaunce comming in one of the kings seruaunts named Lancelot, a very tall man, and séeming by his countenance and gesture to fauour the cause of the poore men, was also examined and condemned with them and the next day at fiue a clocke in the morning, was carried with them into Saint Giles fieldes, and there burned. Also about the latter end of Tonstals time bishop of Lon∣don, one Stile was burned in Smithfield with the Apoca∣lips (whereon he vsed to read,) about his necke.Stile burned with the Apo∣calips about his necke. Which booke when he saw fastened to the stake with him: hée lif∣ted vp his voice, and said: O blessed Apocalips, how happie am I, that I shall be burned with thée: and so with the booke was he consumed with fire. Also ouerpassed before, about the second yéere of the raigne of king Henry the eight, Iohn Browne of Ashford after xl. daies imprisonment, when the Archbishop and Do∣ctor Fisher had burned his féete with hote coles to the stumps to make him recant. On Friday before Whitsunday he was sent to Ashford where he dwelt, the next day to be burned: and a yoong maide of his house espying him in the stockes, told hir mistresse, who ranne and sat by him also all night: to whome hée gaue exhortation, and declared how hée had béene tossed to make him denie his Master, which he would not doo for all their tormentes. The cause of his death, was because he said to a Priest, bragging hée was a soule Priest: where finde you the soule when you go to Masse, and where doo you leaue it when you go from Masse? when the Priest said, he could not tell, how can you then saue the soule said he. For this hée was complayned of to William Warham Archbishop of Canturburie, and suddainely was taken in his owne house the same day when his wife was churched, as he was bringing in a messe of pottage to the borde, ser∣uing
in his guestes: and his féete bound vnder his owne horses belly was caried away to Canterbury, neither hée nor any of his friends knowing whether he went: where af∣ter he had continued in prison fortie daies, from Low-sunday till Friday before Whitsontide he was sent to Ashford, and there put to death (as hath béene declared) comfortably and chéerefully giuing testimonie to the truth. The end of the eight Booke.
The ninth Booke. AFter the death of king Henry, succéeded king EdwardKing Edward reigneth. his sonne: being of the age of 9. yeres. He began his reigne ye 28. day of Ianuary, a most happy patrone of the Gospel. In his daies Carolus the Empe∣ror made request to the king & his coun∣sel, to permit Lady Mary to haue masse in her house, without preiudice of the law. Wherto the king being required by his counsel to giue his consent, woulde in no case yéelde to it:The K. refused the Emperors suite to per∣mit Lady Mary to haue masse. notwithstanding they laide before him what danger might insue to him by breach of amity with ye Emperour: & they being more vrgent vpon him: the King séeing their importunate sute, in the ende his tender heart bursting out into bitter wéeping and sobbing, desired them to be content, and so refused to yéelde vnto the Emperours re∣quest in that behalfe. Because he was young, and of tender age, he was committed to xvi. Gouernours: amongst whom especially, the L. Edward Seimer, the Duke of Somerset his vncle was assigned vnto him protector: by whose ende∣uour the vi. articles were abolished:Sixe articles abolished. whereby the practises of Winchester began to decay. This king restored the holy Scriptures in the mother tongue, masses he abolished,Religion re∣stored. and such as were banished were receiued home: he chaunged the most part of Bishops of dio∣ces and Churches: and compelled the dumbe dogges to giue place to those that would preach. Besides, other also out of forrein countries were sent for, & entertained:Peter Martyr at Oxford. Bucer & Pau∣lus Phagius at Cambridge. as Peter Mar¦tyr, who taught at Oxford: Martin Bucer, & Paulus Phagius at Cambridge. The old Bishops who were obstinate were committed toward: Boner to the Marshalsea, Gardiner & Tonstal to the tower, where they remained thrée yéeres to∣gether. In this kings time, all persecution ceassed, and
the professors of the Gospel were in all places relieued: On∣ly one Thomas Dobbe,Tho. Dobbe. a student, & master of artes of Cam∣bridge of S. Iohns Colledge, in the beginning of this kings reign was cast in prison, for speaking against the masse: & di∣ed in the Counter in Londō, being thither committed by the Archbishop of Canterburie: whose pardon notwithstanding was obtained by the Lord protector, and should haue béene brought him, if he had continued. The king, vntill such time as by consent of the whole e∣state of parlament, hee might establish a more perfect order of religion, purposed by the aduise of his counsel of his owne authority, somewhat to prosecute his godly purpose. Wher∣vpon he chose out certaine wise and learned men to bée his commissionersCommissio∣ners. in that behalfe: and so diuiding them into se∣uerall dioces to bée visited, appointing likewise vnto euery companie, one or two godly learned preachers: who all eue∣ry session should instruct the people in the true doctrine of the Gospell. To those Commissioners were deliuered certaine Iniunctions, and Ecclesiastical lawes: the which they should both inquire of, and also command in his maiesties name or behalfe: all tending to the abolishing of popish superstition, and establishing of the trueth of the Gospel: besides which generall Iniunctions, for the estate of the whole Realme, there were also certaine others particularly appointed for the Bishops only: whereby they were inioyned to sée the o∣ther put in due execution: besides others, which did more par∣ticularly confirme them. During the time that those Com∣missioners were occupied abroad, the king desiring a farther reformation, appointed a parlament the 4. of Nouember, in the first yéere of his reigne, Ann. 1547.1547. A Parlament. which continued vn∣to the 24. day of December next following: wherein al Acts made before, that tended against the Professors of the Go∣spel, were abrogated. In the same parlament also, it was decréed: that the Sa∣crament should be ministred to all vnder both kindes: then
also were candles on Candlemas day forbidden, & ashes on Ashwednesday. About the same time also al Images were vtterly taken away: and anno 1548. one vniforme order of prayer was instituted, in the second yere of his reigne, at a Parlament holden the fourth of Nouember, that lasted till the fourtéenth of March next ensuing. At the same parlamēt was it lawfull also for priests to haue wiues. To all these at the first Bonner séemed to yelde, but at length, bewraied himselfe, by suffering dayly to be song, the Apostles masse, and our Ladies masse, &c. in diuers of his chappels in Pauls, cloking them with the names of the apostles, and our ladies communions: whereof the Counsell being enfourmed, cau∣sed him to reforme the abuse. To al these good orders, diuers priests, and popish Iusti∣ces, shewed themselues vntoward, so that the cōmon praier booke was (long after the publishing of it) either not know∣en at all, or els very vnreuerently vsed throughout ye realm: for which, the king with his Counsel prouided redresse. Bon∣ner yet séeming not to dislike openly of these godly procée∣dings, yet his minde appeared, by his negligent putting in execution of those Iniunctions, in his owne Dioces. Wher∣upon, the xj. day of August, anno 1549. he was called for be∣fore the Counsel, and rebuked according to his offence, and enioyned to preach at Paules Crosse, on the Sunday thrée wéekes ensuing. There were deliuered also vnto him Articles, whereon he should entreate, as they thought most méete, with pri∣uate Iniunctions for himselfe to obserue: as, to preach once a quarter at the Crosse, and to be present himselfe at all the Sermons made there: to celebrate himselfe the Cōmunion, and to administer the same, &c. About this time, (through the setting on of the popish Priestes) diuers quarters of the Land rebelled, as in Cornwall, and Deuonshire,Rebellion. and York∣shire, for their popish religion: which were all suppressed. The Scots also, and French king, attempted against ye land,
and were also ouerthrowen. The Scots at Muskelborough field, and the Frenchmen at the Iles of Iersey and Garne∣sey. Bishop Boner, who the first yere of the kings reigne, anno 1547. had submitted himselfe, hearing of the death of the Lord Admirall, the L. Protectors brother: and after that, the rising of the kings Subiects, began to draw backer, and to neglect his duetie. Whereupon (as hath béene sayde) he was called before the Counsell, and enioyned to preach, that such as rebell against their Prince, resist Gods ordi∣nance: and to set foorth in his Sermon, that the authoritie of the king, was no lesse in his young age, than was of any of his Predecessors, &c. Boenr, at his time appointed, prea∣ched at Paules crosse:Muskleborow field. Scots & Frēch ouerthrowen. and in steade of declaring such things, as were enioyned him, he spent his Sermon in the mainte∣nance of the papisticall Transubstantiation: and altogether left out the article touching the lawfull authoritie of the K. during his nonage. For which so doing, I. Hooper afterward B of Worcester and Glocester, and M. W. Latimer, Bache∣lour of Diuinitie, did exhibite vnto the kings highnes, vnder both their names, a bill of complaint against him. Where∣upon, the king did immediatly direct foorth his Commission vnder his broad Seale, vnto the Archb. of Canterburie, the B. of Rochester, and other Counsellors, geuing them autho∣ritie to call Boner before them, and to deale with him accor∣ding as they should finde cause. The tenth day of september, Bishoppe Boner was sum∣moned to appeare at Lambeth, before the Commissioners: before whom he behaued himselfe most vndiscréetely, and vnreuerently: defacing the authoritie of the Commissi∣oners, and shifting of the poynt hee was accused of: and in the ende pulled out a Protestation out of his bosome, readie written, and exhibited it vnto the Commissioners. Vnder which protestation, he requested to haue a copie both of the Commission, and accusation: with time to answere therūto. Which was granted him: & he assigned to appeare
againe before thē vpō friday at 8. of the clocke before noone, the next following, and then to answere. Vpon Friday the xiij. of September, Boner appeareth againe at Lambeth before the Commissioners: and because Secretarie Smith sate there who was not there the former day,Boner shifteth and caueleth. Boner ca∣uils thereat, and makes delaies of answere: and in the end tooke exceptions against his accusers, because said he, they were heretickes, and iustly excommunicated: and especial∣ly he inueighed against them for the matter of the Sacra∣ment of the Altar, and withall denied their accusations to be true: and coloured & glosed forth his maner of handling the points inioyned him, and accompted the iniunctions of the booke forged, because they were not sealed nor signed with the kings owne hand. And when he had finished reading of his answeres: Latimer deliuered vp a writing vnto the cō∣missioners, containing Articles agaynst him: whereof cer∣taine were touching his owne fact: as whether he wrote his sermon or not, to which he answered: that onely he penned certaine notes: then, what aduise and whose he had: to which he answered his owne onely with helpe of his bookes. And this he answered, an oth being ministred vnto him Ex offi∣cio mero. These wordes ended, the Commissioners assigned him Munday the xvj. of September then next, to appeare before them, and to make his full answeres to all the Arti∣cles ministred vnto him by them that day. On Mundaie the sixtenth of September hée appea∣reth againe before the Commissioners, and exhibiteth vn∣to them answeres vnto the laste Articles: but before the same were read, the Archbishop declared vnto him that his answere made against his accusers denunciation contained matter of slander against them: and so signified that they de∣sired there to purge themselues; which they both did, first Latimer and next Hooper. And after much vnséemely be∣hauiour of Boner, the Commissioners willed him to make aunswere to the articles obiected the last day against him:
which he did, reading it and answering to euery poynt ve∣rie slenderly: as to the point of the kings authoritie, that he had gathered a note out of Histories and Scriptures of di∣uerse yoong Kinges, who notwithstanding their minoritie were faithfully obeied, and reputed for very lawfull kings, all which with many other, hée had purposed to declare, if they had come vnto his memorie, which they did not: part∣ly for lacke of vse of preachyng, and partly by reason of a bill which was deliuered him from the Kinges counsell, to declare the victorie hée had agaynst the rebels, which confounded his memorie: and partely for that his booke fell (in his Sermon time) from him, wherein were di∣uerse of his notes which hée had collected for that purpose. Which answere pleased not the Commissioners, who requi∣red him to make it more direct, whether he had doone as hée was enioyned or not: whereto when he would no otherwise answere, the cōmissioners did admit presently for witnesses vpon articles against him: M. Iohn Cheeke, Henry Mark∣ham, Iohn Ioseph, Iohn Douglas, and Richard Chambers: vpon whom they laid a corporall oth, truely to answere. Bo∣ner against this, vnder his former protestation, protested of the nullitie of the receiuing and admitting, and swearing of those witnesses, with protestation also to obiect against the persons and sayings of these witnesses: demaunding a law∣full and competent time to minister interrogatories against them. Wherewith the Commissioners were contented: so that day he obiected against M. Cheeke, and the next day be∣fore noone he obiected against the rest. After this the Commissioners assigned to the Bishop to appeare againe before them vpon Wednesday the next en∣suyng, betwéene the houres of seuen and eight before noone, at Lambeth: there to shewe the cause why hee should not be declared Pro confesso vpon all the Articles: wherevnto hée had not then fully aunswered: but Boner still prote∣sting the nullitie and inualiditie of al their procéedings, they
did for that time depart. In the meane while, the Commissioners certified the K. and his counsel of the B. behauiour, and cauillations. Wher∣vpon the king the 17. of September did send vnto the Com∣missioners, a full declaration of his owne will, giuing them full authoritie to procéede at their owne discretions. The 8. of September, Boner appeareth againe, and offereth mat∣ter vnto the Commissioners, why he ought not to bée iud∣ged pro confesso, full of cauillations and vaine quiddities of their law, and inordinat contempt. In the end they mini∣stred vnto him new articles, and receiued witnesses against him: but Boner still stoode vpon the nullitie of their Com∣mission, and the whole processe, desiring a copie of the Arti∣cles: which was graunted, and time, til the next day at viij. of the clocke. Also the same time hee exhibited a cauillation a∣gainst William Latimer.Boner exhibi∣teth a cauilla∣tion against William La∣timer. So the Commissioners appointed him a new time to appeare on munday next, betwéene 6. & 9. in the morning: then to shew a finall cause why he shoulde not be iudged pro confesso. And they deliuered him a copy of the Articles. At the time appointed, the Bishop sent Robert Iohnson his register to the Commissioners, sitting at Lambith, and attending his appearaunce, to signifie to them hee was sicke, and so could not come. The twentieth of September hée appeared nowe the fift time: and hauing made a slen∣der and doubtfull answere, refused Syr Thomas Smithes iudgement, because hée sawe him sharper bent agaynst him then the rest: and made also his appeale to the King: and withall verye vnreuerently behaued himselfe tow∣ardes the Commissioners. For which cause Maister Se∣cretarie Smith commaunded the Marshalles deputie, to take Boner Prisoner, and to keepe him that no man might come vnto him, and assigned him to be brought be∣fore them againe on Mundaye nexte before noone, be∣twéene seuen and nine of the clocke. At which time hée
appeareth, and maketh a generall refusall of all the com∣missioners, and sticketh to his former prouocations, and protestations. Then the Commissioners séeyng his per∣tinacie, pronounced him Contumax, and declared him pro confesso vpon all the articles which hée had not an∣swered:Boner pronoū∣ced contumax & pro confesso. and determined to continue this case, in state as it was vntill Friday then next following, betwéen eight and nine before noone: assigning Boner to be there before them at Lambith, to heare a finall decrée of that matter. Vpon which Friday, for diuers vrgent causes, the Commissio∣ners coulde not sitte, but deferred it till Tuesday, the first of October next ensuing. Vpon which day they offered yet fauour to Boner, if hée woulde make more direct an∣swere: but hée persisting in his contumacie, with euill spéeches, the Archbishoppe, with the consent of the rest of the Commissioners, read the sentence of depriuati∣on,Boner depri∣ued. and committed him againe to his kéeper: where he re∣mained prisoner till the death of the King. Nowe béeing prisoner in the Marshallsea: he writeth vnto the Lorde Chauncellour, and to the rest of the Counsell, that through the enmity that the Duke of Somerset, and Sir Thomas Smith bare him, hée coulde not haue hearing of his suites to the King and Counsel. He directeth also a supplication to the kings maiestie, and desired his Graces letters of super∣sideas against the Commissioners: and that the matter might be heard before the Counsell. Whervpon the the K. committeth the examination of the whole processe vnto cer∣taine noble personages, and skilfull in the lawe: as the Lorde Riche, Lord Chauncellour: the Lorde Treasurer, the Lord Marques Dorset, the Bishop of Eli, the Lorde Wentworth: &c. which founde Boner in great fault of con∣tumacy: the procéedings being al iust, and the sentence right∣ly giuen. With the depriuation of Boner, fell out the trouble of the Lord Protector:L. protector. wherevpon the people thinking the ab∣rogating
of poperie was his onely dooing, bruted abroad that now they should haue their old Latine seruice againe, with other superstitious trumperie. Which caused the king & his Counsell to direct letters to all Bishops, to take away all Massals, Grailes, Processionals, Manuals, Legendes, Portuases, Iournals, &c. which might be any let to the En∣glish prayer Booke. Also the Bishops were enioyned to pu∣nish all those that refused to giue to the charge of Bread and Wine for the Communion. This was ahout the lat∣ter end of December 1549. In the next yéere following Altars were taken downeAltars taken downe. by the kings commaundement, and the Communion table placed in stéed thereof, in forme of a table, & not of an altar, as most agréeable to the institution of Christ. About this time certaine of Ladie Maries Chaplaines had saide masse contrary to the lawes: for which she be∣ing admonished of the Counsell, tooke the matter very hard∣ly, and writeth to the Counsell sharpe letters: tending to blame them, as taking too much vpon them in the kings au∣thoritie, and iustifying her owne popish causes.Lady Maries popish practi∣ses restrained. Diuers let∣ters passed to and fro, from her and the Counsel, as also from and to the king. And in fine, such order was taken: that shée was restrained of her practises of popish religion, and the offenders punished. As Bonner behaued himselfe stubbornly againg the K. procéedings, so Steeuen Gardiner B. of Winchester, was not behinde in all disobedience, and practises against the same: for which he was imprisoned before the depriuation of Boner, but was not deposed till anno 1551.  He was first for his misdemeanour cast into the Fléete, where after hée had remayned a time, in much ease, vpon promise of his cō∣formitie, he was set at libertie, and licensed to repaire to his owne Diocesse, at his pleasure. Where breaking hys promise, he againe practised against the kings procéedings: whereupon being sent for before the Counsell, he promised
againe the second time a conformation, & was left at liber∣tie in his owne house in London: where he yet againe be∣gan to ruffle against the kings godly procéedinges, and to meddle in matters, wherein he neither had commission nor authoritie, part whereof touched the kings maiestie. Wher∣of being yet once againe admonished by the king, and of the counsell, not onely promised to conforme himselfe with like of the kings procéedings, but also offered to declare vnto the world his conformation in an open sermon, on such arti∣cles as should be thought good to that end: in which sermon cleane contrary to his promisse, he did not onely neglect that that was enioyned him, but also very seditiously behaued himselfe.Gardiner be∣haueth himselfe seditiously. Wherefore he was committed to the Tower, and carried thither by sir Anthony Wingfield,Gardiner sent to the Tower. certaine doores of his house (as was thought méete) being also sealed vp. At the tower certain of the Counsel, by the kings appointment, had accesse vnto him to perswade with him: as the Duke of So∣merset, the L. Treasurer, the Lord priuie seale, the L. great Chamberlaine, and Secretary Peter. Who repairing to him the tenth day of Iune, Anno 1550. he desired to sée the kings booke of procéedings: vpon the sight whereof he would make a full answere: whereas indéede before his answers were but delaies and cauilles, séeming to be willing in al things to conforme himselfe therevnto: and promising if any thing offended his conscience, he would open it to none but to the Counsell. But Winchester hauing perused the book, saide, he could make no direct answere, vnlesse he were at liberty. In the end, the Lords seing his answeres always doubtful, it was determined that he should be directly examined, whe∣ther he would conforme himselfe to the kings procéedinges, or not: and articles drawen to that end. To the which Win∣chester in a manner subscribed, sauing the Article of sub∣mission: which he said, because he had neuer offended the K. he would not subscribe vnto. To the kinges Supremacie, his authoritie of appointing holy dayes, and fasting daies, to
his booke of procéedings, his authoritie in his tender yeres, the abrogating of the sixe articles, to his iurisdiction, and au∣thoritie in correcting of Ecclesiastical persons, he subscribed: only he would make no submission to the king. And in the ende being found peruerse and stubborne, and not able to iu∣stifie himselfe or his doings: after he had taken exceptions, and cauilled against the witnesses, he was depriued of his Bishopricke, by the authoritie of the king, and sentence ge∣uen by the Archbishop of Canterburie,Winchester depriued. among other bishops and Iudges appointed for the cause. From this sentence, Gardiner appealeth to the king, but all in vayne. As S. Gardiner was the professed enemie of the Gospell, so was Doctor RedmanDoctor Red∣man a fauou∣rer of the gos∣pell. in those dayes, for his learning fa∣mous, a fauourer of the same: and at his death, which was anno 1551. made profession thereof in the presence of M. Yong, and others. Anno 1552.  W. Gardiner, a Marchants seruant of Bri∣stow, the first day of September, in the very solemnization of a marriage betwixt the sonne of the king of Portingall, and the Spanish kings daughter, in the presence of the prin∣ces, and Cardinals, and Bishops, determined to haue step∣ped to the Cardinall at the Altar, and to haue wroong ye cha∣lice out of his hands, and to haue defaced their popish God, but that the prease of people did hinder him. So the next sun∣day, where like pompe was vsed, and no lesse Idolatry than before, W. Gardiner,W. Gardiner. in the presence of the king, and all his Nobles, and Citizens, with the one hand snatched away the cake from the priest, and trode it vnder his féete: and with ye other ouerthrew the chalice, which made them all amazed Then one drawing out his dagger, gaue him a great wound in the shoulder: and as he was about to haue stricken him a∣gaine, to haue slaine him: the king twise commaunded to haue him saued. So by that meanes they abstained from murther. After the tumult was ceased, he was brought to the K.
by whom he was demaunded of his Countrey, and how hée durst doe such a déede. To whom he declared that he was an Englishman, and that for gréefe to sée such Idolatrie, hée could not abstaine. When they heard that he was an En∣glishman, they were more earnest to know the Procurour. The Idolatrie (he answered) wherwith they prophaned the Lords Supper, only procured him. They not content there∣with, vrged him with torments, and caused a linnen cloth to be sowed round like a ball, the which they with violence put downe his throte, vnto the bottom of his stomach, tyed with a small string, which they helde in their hands, and when it was downe, they pulled it vp againe with violence, so pluc∣king it vp and downe. They cast also into prison all the rest of the Englishmen, amongst whom one Pēdegrace,Pendegrace. because he was his bedfellowe, was gréeuously tormented, and exa∣mined more then the residue, and scarcely was deliuered af∣ter two yeres imprisonment: the other were much sooner set at libertie, by the intercession of a certaine Duke. At the last, when al torments, and tormentors were we∣ried, they asked him, whether he did not repent his déede. He answered: as touching the déed, if it were to do, he should do it againe. But he was sorie it was done in the Kinges presence, to the disquiet of his minde. After they had vsed al kinde of torments, and saw there could be nothing more ga∣thered of him, and also, that through his wound, and paines, he could not long liue, they brought him thrée dayes after, to execution. And first of all, bringing him vnto the Vestrie, cut of his right hand: which he taking vp with his left hand, kissed.Execution done vpon W. Gardiner with all manner of crueltie. Then he was brought into the Market place, where his other hand was cut of: which he (knéeling downe vpon the ground) also kissed. These things thus done, his armes being bound behinde him, and his féete vnder the horse bel∣lie, he was carried to the place of execution, where there was a certaine engine, from the which, a great rope cōming downe by a Pulley, was fastened about the middle of the
Christian martyr, which first pulled him vp: then was there a great pile of wood set on fire vnderneath him, into the which he was by little and little let downe, not with his whole bodie, but so that his féete onely felt the fire: in which fire the more terribly he burned, the more feruently hée praied: At last when his féete were consumed, the tormen∣tors asked him if he did not repent, exhorting him to call vp∣on our Lady and the Saints: whereto he answered, that he had doone nothing to repent of, and that when Christ did cease to be our Aduocate, then he would pray to our Lady,The maruei∣lous constancie of William Gardiner. & said: Eternall God, father of all mercies, I beséech thée looke downe vpon thy seruant &c. And when they sought by all meanes to stop his praying, he cried out with a loud voice: rehearsing ye 34. Psalm. Iudge me O Lord, and defend my cause against the vnmercifull people: He was not come to the latter end of the Psalme, when the rope being burnt a∣sunder, he fell into the fire, and so gaue ouer. The very same night one of the kings ships was burned in the hauen, being set on fire by a sparke of Gardiners fire driuen thither with the winde: and the kings sonne, who then was married, died within halfe a yéere after the death of William Gardiner. Anno 1552.1552 Protector put to death for fellonie. the 22. of Ianuarie, in the sixt yéere of the reigne of Edward: the Duke of Somersette, Lord Prote∣ctor, was executed on Tower hill for felonie: being accused, and quitte of treason. And the next yere after deceassed the king him selfe, about the moneth of Iune, Anno 1553. A Prince of such towardnesse, as the worlde neuer had the like before: by whom the remnants of Popish Idola∣trie, and superstition, were abolished: and the church restored to her sinceritie: which di∣ed again with him, and popery re∣stored in the time of Mary, who succéeded him. The end of the ninth Booke.
The tenth Booke. WHat time King Edward began to ap∣peare more féeble and weake, during the time of his sicknesse, a marriage was concluded, and also shortly also vpon the same solemnized in the mo∣neth of Maie, betwéene the lord Gil∣ford, sonne to the duke of Northum∣berland, and the Lady Iane,L. Gilford and Lady Iane ma∣ried together. the duke of Suffolkes daughter: whose mother then being aliue, was daughter to Marie, king Henries second sister. And when no hope séemed of recouery of the King, it was brought to passe by the consent, not onely of the nobility; but also of the chiefe Lawyers of the Realme: that the King by this Te∣stament, did appoint the aforesaid Lady Iane to be Inheri∣trice to the crown of England: passing ouer his two sisters, Marie and Elizabeth. To this order, subscribed all the Kinges Counsell and chiefe of the nobilitie: the Mayor of the citie of London, & almost all the iudges and chiefe Law∣yers of this Realme, sauing onely Iustice Hales of Kent,Iustice Hales of Kent. a man who both fauoured religion, and was an vpright iudge, would in no case subscribe to the Lady Iane. When king Edwarde was dead, the xvj. yere of his age, Iane was established in the kingdome, by the Nobles con∣sent, and so published in London, and in other cities. In the meane time, while these things were a working at Londō, Marie (who had knowledge of her brothers death) wry∣teth to the Lordes of the Counsell,Queen Marie writeth to the Counsel. a letter of challenge for their doing, and claime to the Crowne. To whom ye Coun∣sell writeth againe, as to a Subiect: requiring her to holde her so contented. Wherby she perceiuing the nobles mindes bent against her, flieth into the partes of Suffolke, and kée∣peth her close for a time, within Fremingham castle: where
first of all resorted the Suffolke men for her aid, promi∣sing her aid, if that shée would not attempt the alteration of religion, which king Edward before had established.Q. Mary pro∣miseth to maintaine re∣ligion. Vnto which condition shée eftsoones agréed, promising no innoua∣tion should be made in religion. So beyng garded with the power of the Gospellers, she did vanquish the Duke and all that came against her. Ridley who before by the Coun∣sels commaundement had preached at Paules crosse a∣gainst her, after shée was proclaimed Quéene, sped him to Fremingham, to salute her Quéene: and being dispoiled of all his dignities,Ridley sent to the Tower. was sent backe againe on a lame horse to the Tower. Now being Quéene, she released Stephen Gardiner,Q. Mary brea∣keth her pro∣misse. Popish bishops restored, and the other put downe. and made him lord Chancellour of England, and B. of Win∣chester; Doctor Poynet being put out. She restored Boner to his Bishopricke, and displaced Doctor Ridley: Doctor Day to the Bishop of Chichester, Iohn Scorie beyng put out: Tunstall to Duresme: Doctor Heath to Worcester, and Iohn Hooper committed to the Fléete:Hooper com∣mitted to the Fleete. Doctor Vesey to Exceter, and Myles Couerdall put out. And moreouer summoneth a parliament against the x. day of October next ensuing, and in the meane time directeth foorth an inhibition by procla∣mation,Proclamation against the word of God. that no man should preach or read in the Churches openly the word of God, &c. About this time Boner being restored, he appointeth one Bourne a Canon in Paules to preach at the Crosse: where hée so behaued himselfe in his preaching against King Edward; that one hurled a dagger at the preacher,A dagger hur∣led at the preacher. (who it was, it could not bée knowne) and such was the stirre, that maister Bradford (at the request of the preachers brother) was faine to appease the tumult, and himselfe with M. Rogers to conduct the preacher betwixt them to the Grammer schoole dore. By reason of the tumult, it was ordained that euery hous∣holder should kéepe his seruants and children at their owne parishe Churches: and that euery Alderman in his warde
should foorthwith send for the Curates of euery Parish to warne them, both to forbeare preaching themselues, and al∣so not to suffer any other to preach, or make any solemne reading in the Church, vnlesse they were seuerally licensed by the Quéene. The next day at the sermon the Quéenes garde was pre∣sent to garde the preacher, and when men withdrew them∣selues from the sermon, order was takē by the Mayor, that the auncients of all companies should be present, least the preacher should be discouraged by his small audience. Anno 1553.  The x. of August was one William Ruther committed to the Marshalsea, for vttering certaine wordes against M. Bourne preacher, for his sermō made at Paules crosse on Sunday last before. The xvj. of August was Humfrey Pelden committed to the counter, for wordes against the said Bournes sermon at Paules crosse: and a letter was sent to the Shiriffes of Buc∣kingham and Bedford, for the apprehending of one Fisher parson of Amersham a preacher: and another was sent to the B. of Norwich, not to suffer any preacher or other to preach or expound openly the Scriptures, without speciall licence from the Quéene. The same day was M. Bradford,Bradford to the Tower. M. Vernon, and M. Beacon preachers, committed to the charge of the Lieftenant of the Tower. The same day also was M. Iohn RogersM. Iohn Ro∣gers prisoner. preacher com∣maunded to kéepe himselfe prisoner in his owne house at Paules, without hauing conference with any others, but those of his owne house. The xxij. of August there were two letters directed, one to M. Couerdall B. of Exceter, and the other to M. Hooper B. of Glocester, for their repaire to the Court, and there to attend the Counsels pleasure. The same day, Fisher parson of Amersham made his appearance before the counsell, ac∣cording to the letter the xvj. of August, and was appointed the next day to bring in a note of his Sermon.
The 24. of August, one Iohn Meluin a Scot, and a prea∣cher was sent to Newgate by the Counsel. The 26. of Aug. there was a letter sent to ye Maior of Co∣uentrie & his brethren, for the apprehension of one Simons of Worcester, and the Vicar of S. Michaels in Couentrie: with a commission to them, to punishe all such, as had (by meanes of his preaching) vsed any talke against the Quéens procéedings. The 29. of August, Maister HooperHooper appea∣reth. B. of Worcester, made his personal appearance before the Counsel, according to their letters the 22. of August. The 31. of August, M. CouerdaleCouerdale ap∣peareth. B. of Exceter, made his appearance before the Counsell, according to their let∣ters made the 22. of August. Anno 1553.  the first of September, maister Hooper and M. Couerdale appeared againe before the Counsel: whence maister Hooper was committed to the Fléete,Hooper to the Fleet. and maistsr Couerdale to attend the Lords pleasures. The 2. of Sept. Hugh Sanders, Vicar of S. Michaels in Couentry, was before the Counsel for a sermon, & comman∣ded to appeare againe vpon munday next following. The 4. of Sept. a letter was directed for maister Hugh Latimer, to appeare before them. About the fift day of Sept. the same yeere, Peter Martyr came to London from Oxford: where for a time he had béen commanded to kéepe his house, and found there the Archb. of Canterbury. Who offered to defende the doctrine of the booke of common prayer both by the scriptures and doctors, assisted by Peter Martyr and a few other. But whilest they were in hope to come to disputations, the Archb. and others were imprisoned: but Peter Martyr was suffered to return whence he came.Peter Martyr returneth home whence he came. The same day there was a letter sent to the Maior of Couentry to set Hugh Simons at libertie, if he would recant his sermon, or els to stay him: and to signifie so much to the Counsel.
The 13. of September, M. Hugh Latimer appearedLatimer ap∣peareth. be∣fore the Counsell according to their letter the 4. of Septem∣ber, and was committed to the tower, close prisoner, hauing his seruant Austine to attend vpon him. The same day the Archbishop of Canterbury appearing before the Counsell, was commaunded to appeare againe the next day at after noone in the starre chamber: where ha∣uing charged him with treason, and spreading abroade se∣ditious libels,Cranmer to the Tower. he was committed from thence to the tower, there to remaine till farther iustice, at the Quéenes plea∣sure. The 15. of September there was a letter sent to maister Horne, Deane of Durham for his appearance: and another the 7. of October for his spéedy appearance, The 16. of Septem. there were letters sent to the maiors of Douer and Rye, to suffer all French protestants to passe out of this Realme:French prote∣stants suffered to passe hence. except such whose names should be sig∣nified to them by the French Ambassadour. The first day of October, Quéene MarieMary crowned. was crowned at Westminster, and the tenth day of the same moneth be∣ganne the Parlament,A parlement. with a solemne masse of the holie Ghost, in the pallace of Westminster. To the which among other Lords, should come the Bishops which yet remained vndeposed: which were, the Archbishoppe of Yorke, Doctor Taylor of Lincolne, Iohn Harley Bishop of Hereford: of the Bishops, Doctor Taylor, and maister Harley, presenting themselues according to their duetie, and taking their place amongest the Lordes, after they sawe the masse be∣ginne, not abiding the sight thereof, withdrew themselues from the companie: for the which cause the Bishop of Lin∣colne béeing examined, and protesting his faith: was vpon the same commanded to attend. Who not long after, at An∣ker wicke by sicknesse departed: Maister Harley, because he was married, was excluded both from the Parlement, and from his Bishopricke.
This statute repealedStatutes re∣pealed. all the statutes made in the time king Henrie the viij. for Premunire, and statutes made in king Edward the vj. time, for the administration of common bread, and the Sacraments in the English tongue. In this meane while, many men were forward in erecting of Al∣tars, and Masses in Churches: and such as would sticke to the Lawes made in K. Edwards time, till other were esta∣blished, some of them were marked, and some presently ap∣prehēded. Among whom, sir Iames Hales,Sir I, Hales of kent, apprehen∣ded and impri∣soned. a knight in kent, and Iustice in the common place, was one. Who notwith∣standing he had ventured his life in Q. Maries cause, yet, for that he did at a Quarter Sessions, geue charge vpon the statutes made in king Edwards time, and Henrie the eight, for the supremacie, and religion, he was imprisoned in the Marshalsea, Counter, and Fléet, and so cruelly handled, and put in feare by talke, that he thought to ridde himselfe out of his life, by wounding him selfe with a knife: and afterward was contented to say what they willed him. Whereupon, he was discharged: but after that he neuer rested,The lamenta∣ble end of Sir Iames Hales. till he had drowned him selfe in a Riuer, halfe a mile from his house in Kent. During the time of the parlament, the Cleargie had also their Conuocation, with a disputation appointed by the Q. commaundement, at Paules, about the 18. of October. In which Conuocation, Harpsfield preached, and D. Weston, Deane of Westminster, was chosen Prolocutor. The disputation continued vj. dayesDisputation of vi. dayes. about the matter of the Sacrament: wherein D. Weston was chéefe on ye popes part. The first day D. Weston inueyeth against the Cate∣chisme, and booke of Common prayer of king Edward: and signified, that on Friday next, the xx. of October, it should be lawful for all men fréely to speake their consciences in mat∣ters of Religion. The Friday being come, in steade of disputation, the Prolocutor exhibited two seuerall Billes vnto the House:
the one, of the naturall presence of Christ in the sacrament, and the other, that the Catechisme was not set out by the houses consent: requiring all to subscribe to these Billes, as he himselfe had done. To which motion all did assent, sauing the Deane of Rochester, the Dean of Exceter, the Archdea∣con of Winchester, the Archdeacon of Hertforde, and the Archdeacon of Stow, and one other. And while the rest were subscribing, Iohn Philpot stoode vp, and declared that the Catechisme was set out by the assent of the house: and as touching the poynt of naturall presence, that it was a∣gainst reason, that men should subscribe before the matter were discussed: and withall, desired the Prolocutor, that he would be a meane to the Counsell, that some of those that were the setters out of ye same catechisme, might be brought into the house, to shew their learning that moued them to set forth the same: and that D. Ridley, & M. Rogers, with two or thrée more, might be licensed to be present at this disputa∣tion, and to be associated with them. The bishops made an∣swere, it was not for them to cal such persons vnto ye house, since some of them were prisoners: but they would be Pe∣titioners in this behalfe to the Counsell: and in case that a∣ny were absent, that ought to be of the house, they willed them to be taken in vnto them if they listed. After this, they minding to haue entered into disputation, worde was geuen, that the Lorde great Master, and the Earle of Deuonshire woulde be present at the Disputa∣tion: and therefore the Prolocutor deferred the same till the next Mundaye at one of the Clocke at after Noone. At which time, (many Nobles being assembled to heare the Disputation,) the Prolocutor sayde: that they of the house had appointed this Disputation, not to call the trueth in doubt, the which they had all subscribed, sauing fiue or sixe: but that those gainesayers might be resolued. Then hée demaunded of Master Haddon, whether hée woulde reason against the questions proposed. To whome
he answered, hée would; seing the request for those learned men to assist would not bée graunted: and so aunswered M. Elmer, and said, that little or nothing it might auaile for the trueth, since now all they were determined to the con∣trarie. After this he demaunded of Maister Cheney, who allowed of the presence, but denied the transubstantiation. Master Cheney answered, he would gladly haue his doubts resolued on that point: and so propounding his doubts, the Prolocutor assigned M. Mooreman to aunswere. By this meanes Maister Elmer was driuen to stand vp, and so M. Philpot, who reasoned against M. Mooreman and grauel∣led him. Then stood vp the deane of Rochester, M. Philpot, who disputed of the real presence: whom Weston answered, and Watson tooke his parte. Vpon whome Philpot replieth againe, and in the end the disputation grew to be confused,The disputati∣on confused. by reason many would take vpon them to answere. On Wednesday the xxv. of October, Iohn Philpot, accor∣ding to the appointment, was ready to dispute about the re∣all presence, and was ready to enter into a Latine oration, made to interpret the question: this ye Prolocutor would not suffer: and besides, contrary to their order, compelled him to make his arguments in English, which he did, & was so in∣terrupted by the Prolocutor, that he fell downe on his knées before the Earles and Lords, desiring them that he might haue libertie to prosecute his argument: but the Prolocu∣tor still interrupted.The Prolocu∣tor alwaies in∣terrupteth Philpot. Doctor Chadsey being the respondent in the end, hée hauing scarse spent one argument of a doo∣zen, in the matter of the presence in the Sacrament, was threatned of the Prolocutor to bée sent to pryson, except hée gaue ouer. So Philpot séeing himselfe and the good cause so oppressed, ended, saying thus: A sort of you here, which hitherto haue lurked in corners, and dissembled with God and the worlde, are nowe gathered together to suppresse the sincere trueth of Gods woorde, and to sette foorth eue∣rie false deuise, whiche by the Catholicke doctrine of the
Scripture you are not able to maintaine. Then stepped foorth M. ElmerM. Elmer. Chaplaine to the duke of Suffolke, whom M. Mooreman tooke vpon him to answer, and after him the prolocutor called M. Haddon Deane of Exceter, to confirme M. Elmers argument, to whome Doc∣tor Watson tooke vpon him to answere. Then stept foorth M. Perne, and in argument made declaration of his minde against Transubstantiation, and confirmed the sayinges of of M. Elmer and M. Haddon: whome the prolocutor bla∣med, because the Friday before, he had subscribed to the contrary: and so for that the night did approch, and the time was spent, the Prolocutor giuing them praises for their learning,The Romish church against reason or scrip¦ture, did yet notwithstanding conclude, that all reason set apart, the order of the holy church must be receiued, and all things must be ordered thereby. On Friday the xxvij. of October M. Haddon Deane of Exceter did enter dispute against Watson, Morgan, and Harpsfield: and when Watson was driuen to a pinch, and to denie Theodoret, for that he said, hée was a Nestorian, hée desired he might aunswere maister Chenie: and after much dispute with Watson and his fellowes, then asked the Prolocutor of maister Haddon and his fellowes, whe∣ther they would answere them other thrée daies, Haddon, Chenie, and Elmer said no: but the Archdeacon of Win∣chester,M. Philpot a hartie man. maister Philpot stood vp, and said: that although all other did refuse to answere, yet he would not, but offered to answere them all one after another. With whose proffer the Prolocutor beyng not contented, railed on him, and said hée should go to Bedlem. To whome the Archdeacon an∣swered, that hée was more worthie to be sent thither. Who vsed himselfe so ragingly in that disputation, without any indifferent equalitie. Then rose Doctor Weston vp & said: all the company hath subscribed to our Articles, sauing one∣ly these menne which you sée: wée haue aunswered them thrée daies, vppon promisse that they shoulde aunswere vs
againe as long: and if they be able to defend their doctrine, let them so doe. Then Elmer affirmed, that they neuer promised to dispute: but only to testifie their consciences, nei∣ther now (said he) doe we meane to answere, til our argu∣ments which we haue propounded, be soluted according as it was appointed: for we should profit nothing, seing the matter is already decréed vpon. On munday following béeing the thirtie of October, the Prolocutor demanded of maister Philpot, whether he would answere: who said he would so doe, if they would according to their former determination, first answere sufficiently some of his argumentes, yea euen but one, although hée had a dozen. So he was permitted to propound. His arguments was, Christ is ascended into heauen, therefore he is not present on the earth corporally. This argument Morgan,Philpots ar∣gument. Weston, Harpesfield were grauelled with. And when Phil∣pot denied that the Church was before the Scripture, and denied a friuolous reason which he brought to prooue the same: Morgan saide fye fye, hée hath no learning. With whome when Philpot compared himselfe, the Pro∣locutor commaunded him that hée shoulde come no more into the house. To whom Philpot sayde, hée might thinke himselfe happie to bée out of their companie. Then after Morgan had rounded the Prolocutor in the eare, hée sayde vnto him: wée are content, you should come into the house, so yée bée apparrelled in a long gowne and a tippet as we be, and that you shall not speake but when I com∣mand you. Then quoth Philpot, I had rather bée absent al∣together. At length the thirtéenth of December, Quéene Marie commaundeth Boner to breake vp the Conuoca∣tion.The Conuoca∣tion breaketh vp. During the time of this disputation, the twentieth day of Nouember, the Mayor of Couentry sent vp to the Lords of the Counsell, Baldwine clearke, Iohn Careles, Thomas Wilcockes, and Richarde Estlin, for their behauiour on
on alhallow day last before. Wherevpon. Careles and Wil∣cocks were committed to the gatehouse, and Clarke and Est∣line to the Marshalsea. The 3. of December, Iohn Huntington preacher: who had made a rime against D. Stokes, and the sacrament, ap∣peared before the Counsell: and vpon his submission was suffered to depart. In the moneth of December, the Parlement brake vp: in which, there was a communication of marriage be∣twixt the Emperours sonne Philippe, and the Quéene:Communica∣tion of marri∣age betwixt Q. Mary and king Philip. and in the meane while, Cardinall Poole was sent for by the Quéene. Anno 1554.1554. D. Crome to the Fleete. the 13. of Ianuary, Doctor Crome, for his preaching without licence on Christmas day, was commit∣ted to the Fléete. The 21. of Ianuary, Maister Thomas Wotton Esqui∣er was for matters of religion committed to the Fléet, close prisoner. The conclusion of the marriage betwixt the Emperours sonne Philip & Quéene Mary, stirred vp the minds of many against her. Among whom, the 3. of February, Sir Thomas WiatWiat beheaded was resisted at Temple barre, and was taken and ex∣ecuted at Tower hil. The 12. of February, the Lady Iane was beheaded: to whom two daies before her death, was sent M. Fecknam, to reduce her to the Popish religion: whom she constantly and with great power of Gods spirit resisted. With her also was beheaded her husband, the Lord Gilford.Lady Iane, and L. Gilford be∣headed. The iudgment of God vpon iudge Morgan.Iudge Morgan, who gaue sentence against the lady Iane, shortly after he had condemned her, fell mad: and in his ra∣uing, cried out continually to haue the Lady Iane taken a∣way from him, and so ended his life. Anno 1554. the 24. of February, Boner Bishop of Lon∣don sent down commissioners to al curates & pastors of his dioces, to take the names of suche as woulde not come to
auricular confession in Lent, and receiue at Easter. The moneth of March following, the fourth day of the moneth there was a letter sent from the Quéene to Boner with Articles thereto annexed, to bée put in spéedie execu∣tion. 1.Articles. That the Ecclesiasticall lawes of King Henry the viij. should be put in practise, beyng not directly against the Statutes and Lawes of the Realme. 2. That no Bishop or Prelate doo vse the clause Regia authoritate fulcitus. 3. That no sacramentarie be admitted to benefice. 4. That all Bishoppes do labour, especially in the Clergie to sup∣presse heresies. 5. Against bookes & writings. 6. Against priests mariages, and that such as would depart from their wiues should be vsed more fauourably, and admitted to the same function. But in another place, and for want of priests, that one priest should serue two places. That processions be vsed: that holy daies and fasting daies be frequented: that the ceremonies be vsed, & confirmation of children be put in pra∣ctise: and the like prescript also with articles was sent from the Quéene to the Lord Maior of London. About the same yéere and time, when Doctour Boner set foorth this prescript, there came from the Quéene a Proclamation against straungers, such as professed the Go∣spel. Vpon this Proclamation, not onely the strangers in King Edwardes time receiued into the Realme for religion, among whom, Peter Martir, Iohn Alasco, vncle to the king of Poleland: but many Englishmen fled, some into Frize∣land, some to Cleueland, some to high Germanie; wel neare to the number of 800. persons.Neare 800. persons flie be∣yond the seas. In the same moneth of March, the Lord Courtney (whō the Quéene at her first entrie deliuered out of the Tower,) and Ladie Elizabeth also, the Quéenes sister, were both in suspition to haue béene of Wiats conspiracie:Lady Eliza∣beth, and Lord Courtney, sent to the Tower. and for the same, this March were apprehended, and committed to the Tower. And, although Wiat at his death cleared them both, (as vnacquainted with the matter) yet Gardiner practised
to bring them both within the compasse of the same, and the Lord Shandoys ioyned therein with him. Not long after this, a parliament was holden at Westminster in Aprill, where the Quéene propounded concerning her marriage to king Phillip, and restoring the Popes supremacie. Her mar∣riage was agréed vppon, but the supremacie would not be obtained as then.The Popes su∣premacie wold not be obtey∣ned. The same time when this parliament was summoned, the Quéene summoned a conuocation of Bishops, writing vnto Boner, (whom she made Vicegerent in stead of Cran∣mer) being in the Tower, after the manner of a new stile leauing out supreme head: Likewise Boner giuing her cer∣tificate vpon the same, leaueth out Authoritate illustriss. & legitime suffultus, which parcels both at the length were ta∣ken away at that Parlement. In this Conuocation Boner extolling the office of priesthood, breaketh out into such an hyperbolicall prayer,Boners com∣mendation of Priesthood. that they were to be honoured before all kinges of the earth, Princes, and nobles: for, said he, a Priest is higher then a king, happier then an Angell, maker of his creatour, &c. and in some sort like to the virgin Marie: for as by speaking sixe wordes: fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum, shee did conceiue Christ, so the Priest by the wordes of Consecration, doeth chaunge the bread into the body of Christ. Anno. 1554. The x. of March, a letter was sent to the Léeftenant of the Tower, to deliuer the bodies of Master Doctor Cranmer, the Archbishop of Caunterburie, Master Ridley, and M. Latimer, to Sir I. Williams, to be conueied by them both to Oxford. The xxvj. of March, there was a letter sent to sir Henrie Doel, and one Foster, to attach the bodies of D. Taylor, par∣son of Hadley, and of Henrie Askew, and to sende them vp to the Counsell. About the tenth of Aprill, Cranmer Archbishop of Can∣terburie, Ridley Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer,
sometime B. of Worcester,Cranmer, Rid∣ley, and Lati∣mer, sent priso∣ners to Oxford were cōueied as prisoners from the Tower to Windsor, and from thence to the Vniuersitie of Oxford, there to dispute with the Diuines, and learned men of both Vniuersities, about the presence, substance and sacrifice of the Sacrament. Their names were these:Disputers at Oxford. Of Oxford, D, Weston, Prolocutor, D. Tresham, Doctor Cole, D. Oglethorpe, D. Pie, D. Harpsfielde, M. Fecknam. Of Cambridge: Doctor Yong. Vicechauncellour, D. Glinne, D. Seaton, D. Watson, D. Sedgewick, D. Atkinson. The questions whereon they should dispute,Questions to be disputed of. were these. 1. Whe∣ther the naturall bodie of Christ be really in the sacrament after the wordes of consecration be spoken by the Priest. 2. Whether any substance doe remaine after the words, sa∣uing the bodie and bloud. 3 Whether the Masse be a sa∣crifice propiciatorie. On Saterday, being the xiiij. of April, after dinner, the Commissioners and Disputers went all to Saynt Maries church in Oxford, and there (after a short consultation in a Chappel) they came all into the quire, and sate all on seats, before the Altar, to the number of 33. persons.33. Commis∣sioners. Cranmer brought before the Commis∣sioners. Vnitie with Veritie. And first they sent to the Mayor, that he should bring in D. Cranmer: whō he brought with a great number of rustie Bilmen. And be∣ing come, the Prolocutor exhorted him to vnitie. To whom the Archb. modestly answered, he would embrace it gladly, so it were ioyned with veritie. And after a discourse of the same, in fewe words, the Prolocutor caused the questions to be propounded vnto him, and required him to subscribe thereunto. Which the Archb. refusing, the Prolocutor first willed him to write his minde of them that night: and saide moreouer, he should dispute on them: and caused a copie of the Articles to be deliuered vnto him, assigning him to an∣swere thereunto on munday next, and so charged the Maior with him againe, to be had to Bocardo: where he was kept before. Then was D. RidleyRidley appea∣reth. brought, who hearing the articles
read vnto him, answered without any delay, and said, they were all false: and being asked whether he would dispute, he answered, that as long as God gaue him life, they should not onely haue his heart, but also his mouth and Penne, to defende his trueth. But hée required to haue time, and bookes. They sayde, he coulde not. And that he should dis∣pute on Thursdaye: and till that time, he shoulde haue Bookes. Then gaue they him the Articles, and bad him write his minde of them that night: and so he did. Then they commanded the maior to haue him from whence he came. M. Latimer appeareth.Last of all came in Master Latimer, who after his deni∣all of the Articles, had Wednesday appoynted for disputa∣tion. He alleadged, age; sicknesse; disease; and lack of bookes: wherefore he refused to dispute, but he sayd, he would de∣clare his minde in wryting, or by woordes: and woulde stande to all that they coulde laye vpon his back: complay∣ning, that hee was permitted neither to haue penne, nor Inke,Neither the Masse, nor maribones nor sinowes therof in the scripture. nor any Booke, sauing the new Testament in his hand: which he said he had read ouer seuen times deliberate∣lie, and yet could not finde the Masse in it, neither the mari∣bones, nor sinowes of the same. On Munday, the sixtéenth day of Aprill, they met in the Schooles, about eyght of the Clocke in the morning, and all things readie for the Disputation, Doctor Weston the Pro∣locutor, began to set the disputation a woorke, with a briefe Oration, beginning thus. Ye are assembled (speaking in the Latin tongue) hither brethren, this day, to confounde the detestable heresie of the VeritieThe detestable heresie of the Veritie. of the body of Christ in the Sacrament. At which wordes diuers of the learned men laughed. His Ora∣tion ended, D. Chadsey began first to argue, and ere he left, the Prolocutor diuers times, Doctor Tresham, Oglethorp, Marshall, Vicechauncellour, Pie, Cole, and Harpsfielde, did interrupte, and pressed him with their Argumentes:
so that euery man would say somewhat disorderly,A disorderly disputation. as the prolocutor would suffer him: so that thrée houres of the time was spent before the Vicechancellor of Cambridge began, and so the disputation continued almost till two of the clock, and all the arguments were written by foure appointed to that end, & deliuered vnto the hand of M. Day register. The prisoner was had away by the Maior, and the Doctors dined together at the vniuersitie Colledge. The next day following which was the xvij. of Aprill, was brought foorth Doctor Ridley to dispute:D. Ridley dis∣puteth. against whom was set Doctor SmithD. Smith a turner and returner. to be principall opponent: a man who diuerse times had turned and returned before: besides him Doctor Weston, Doctor Tresham, Doctor Oglethorpe, Doctor Glinne, Doctor Seaton, Doctor Cole, Master Ward, Maister Harpesfield, Doctor Watson, Maister Pie, maister Harding, maister Curtop, maister Fecknam. To al whom he answered very learnedly: he made a preface to these que∣stions, but they said it was blasphemy: and woulde not let him go forth in it. Doctor Smith could gette no aduauntage at his hand: so the other did take his arguments, & prosecu∣ted them. Doctor Glinne beginning to reason, (notwithstan∣ding maister Ridley had taken him for his olde friend) made a very contumelious preface against him. Whereof af∣terward, comming to the house where maister Ridley was kept, in the presence of Doctor Yong, and D. Oglethorpe, he asked him pardon. Weston dissoluing the Disputation, sayd these wordes against Master Ridley: Here you sée the glorious; the stubborne; the craftie; the vnconstant minde of this man. Here you sée this day,Weston trium∣pheth before the victorie. that the strength of the Trueth is without foyle. Wherefore, I beséeche you all to cry, Veritie hath the victorie: Veritie hath the victo∣rie.. After these Disputations, vpon Wednesday, M. Latimer was brought to dispute, the xviij. day of Aprill, at viij. of the clock in the morning, most in English. For master LatimerM. Latimer disputeth.
alledged that he was out of vse for the Latin. There replied vnto him M. Smith of Oriall Colledge D. Cartwright, M. Harpsfield, and diuerse other had snatches at him, & gaue him bitter taunts. Hée escaped not hissinges and scornefull laughings, no more then they which went before him. Hée was very faint, and desired that he might not long tarrie, he durst not drinke for feare of vomiting: the disputation en∣ded before xj. of the clocke: he was not suffered to read that he had, (as he said) painefully written, but it was exhibited vp, and the Prolocutor read part thereof, and so procéeded to the disputation. Towards the end of the disputatiō, the Pro∣locutor exhorted father Latimer to turne, declaring vnto him, that the Quéene was merciful. To whom Latimer an∣swered: you shall haue no hope in me to returne: I pray for the Quéene daily, euen from the bottome of my heart: that she may turne from this religion. During the while of these disputations, the Prolocutor had his tippling cuppe stan∣ding at his elbow all the time: and when maister Ridley disputed with one of the Opponents, he tooke the cup, and holding it in his hands, said to the Opponent: Vrge hoc, nam hoc facit pro nobis: vrge hoc,Weston crieth Vrge hoc. for it maketh on our side. Where∣at the assembly laughed. After the disputation of these thrée daies were ended, M. Harpesfield the next day after, which was the 19. of Aprill, disputed for his forme to be made Doctor. To which dispu∣tation, the Archbishop of Canterburie was brought foorth, and permitted among the rest, to vtter an argument or two in defence of his cause, These Disputations ended (the Friday following, which was the xx. day of Aprill) the Commissioners sate in Saint Maries Church, where Doctor Weston Prolocutor, vsed particular disswasions to euery one of the Prisoners, and would not suffer them to answere in any wise: but directly required them to say, whether they would subscribe or no. Which whē they all refused: in reading the sentence against
them, they were asked whether they would turne or no:The martyrs bid read on the sentence a∣gainst them∣selues. and they bad read on in the name of God, for they were not minded to turne: so were they condemned all thrée. Af∣ter which sentence giuen they all appealed to the iust iudge∣ment of God, for their vniust sentence: and so were they seperated the one from the other, the Archbishop to Bocar∣do, Ridley to the Shiriffes house, and Latimer to the bay∣liffes. On Saturday following, they had a Masse with a gene∣rall procession and great solemnitie. Doctor Cranmer was commaunded to behold the procession out of Bocardo: Doc∣tor Ridley out of the Shiriffes house: Latimer also beyng brought to sée it from the Bayliffes house, thought he should haue gone to burning,Father Lati∣mer would not looke toward the procession. and spake to one Augustine Cooper a catchpole to make a quicke fire: but when hée came to Carfoxe and sawe the matter, hée ranne as faste as his old bones would carrie him to one Spensers shop, and would not looke towards it. Immediatly after the sentence was giuen, Doctor Rid∣ley writeth to the Prolocutor requiring him to kéepe pro∣misse with him, touching his answeres: which the Prolo∣cutor said, he should sée how they were taken, with promisse that he should haue licence to adde vnto them, to alter them as vpon more deliberation he should thinke best &c.The Prolocu∣tor breaketh promisse with Philpot. Which promises the Prolocutor brake with him. On Munday next after these things doone, being the xxiij. day of Aprill, the Prolocutor taketh his iourney to London with the letters certificatorie to the Quéene, by whom the Archbishop directed his letters supplicatorie to the counsell: the which letters after the Prolocutor had receiued, and had carried them well neare halfe the way to London,The Prolocu∣tor openeth Cranmers letters to the Counsell. by the way he opened the same, and seing the contents thereof, sent them backe againe refusing to carrie them: Likewise Doc∣tor Ridley desireth him by letter to carrie his answeres vp to certaine Bishops in London.
Here the Author returneth to the yéere before 1553.  vpon Friday the iiij. of August, Doctor Day was deliuered out of the Fléete. The v. day Boner was deliuered out of the Marshalsea, and one M. Edward Vnderhil cōmitted to Newgate. Also ye same day at night Doctor Cockes was committed to the Marshalsea: And the same day Doctor Tonstall, and Ste∣phen Gardiner were deliuered out of the Tower, and Gar∣diner receiued to the Quéenes priuie Counsell, and made Lord Chancellor. The xvj. day of August, M. Bradford, M. Beacon, and M. Veron were committed to the Tower,Bradford, Bea∣con, and Veron to the Tower. with whom also M. Sampson should haue béene cōmitted but was not found, being diligently sought for at M. Elsenges house in Fléet-stréet, where M. Bradford was taken. Vpon the xix. of August, a letter was sent vnto sir Henry Tyrrell, Anthony Browne, and Edmund Brown Esquires, praying them to commit to warde all such as shoulde con∣temne the Quéenes order of religion, and did kéepe them∣selues from Church. Vpon Sunday the xx. of August, Doctor Watson Win∣chesters Chaplaine preached at Paules, and two hundred of the garde were there with their Halbards, least the people should make a sturre against the preacher. The xxj. of August, the Quéene set foorth a proclamation signifying that shée could not any longer hide the religion which she from her infancie had professed, inhibiting in the same proclamation, printing and preaching. Vpon Sunday the xxvij of August the B. of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Smith, and the Deane of Paules were cited to to appeare the wéeke following, before the Quéenes Com∣missioners in the Bishops consistory in Paules. In the meane time it was falsly noysed abroad, that the Archbishop, to currie fauour with the Quéene, should pro∣misse to say Dirge Masse after the old custome, for king
Edward, & that he had already said masse at Canterbury.A false rumor of the Archb. To stop these rumors, the 7. of Sept. the Archb. set forth a let∣ter, which was also printed, in purgation of himself. The 13. of September, Hugh Latimer was committed to the Tower. The next day after that the Archb. was com∣mitted to the tower. The first day of October, which was the day of her coro∣nation, the Quéene gaue general pardon: out of which were excepted all the prisoners in the Tower, and in the Fléete, and 62. more: of which number maister Whitchurch, and maister Grafton were two. Vpon the 4. of October, the Archbishop of Yorke was committed to the Tower. The fift of October, the Bishop of Lincolne, Hereford, and Westchester, were discharged from the Parlement and Conuocation. The 15. of October, Laurence Saunders, preacher at al∣hallowes in Bredstréete, in the morning declared the abho∣minablenes of the masse: about noone the same day, hée was sent for by the Bishop of London, and from thence commit∣ted to the Marshalsea. The 26. of October, the Vicechauncellour of Cambridge displaced D. Madew of the maistership of Clarehal: because he was married, and placed maister Swinborne. The 28. of October, the Papistes in the Kinges Col∣ledge in Cambridge,Kings Col∣ledge, Papists very forward. (not tarrying the making of any law) had their seruice againe in the Latine tongue, contrary to the law then in force. About the last of December, a priest at Canterbury said masse on the one day, and the next day after, he came into the pulpit, and desired the people to forgiue him: for he saide hée had betraied Christ: and there made a long Sermon against the masse. Vpon Saterday being the 13. of Ianuary, D. Crome was committed to the Fléet, and one maister Addington to
the Tower. The 20. of Ianuarie, the court of first fruits and tenths were dissolued. The 26. of Ianuary, Iustice Halles was committed to the marshalsea, and maister Rogers to Newgate. About the 24. & 25. of February, such priestes within the dioces of London, as were married, were diuorced from their liuings, and commanded to bring in their wiues with∣in a fortnight, that they might also be diuorced from them. This the Bishop did of his owne power. The 27. of February, certain Gentlemen of Kent were sent downe to be executed: among whom there were two of the Mantels: the elder of which, at his casting of the lad∣der, brake the rope. Then they would haue had him recant, and receiue the sacrament of the altar: and then they said, he should haue the Quéenes pardon: but he refused so to doe, and chose rather to die. Vpon the 18. day of March, the Lady Elizabeth the Quéenes sister was brought to the Tower. Ladie Eliza∣beth to the Tower.In the moneth of May, it was bruted that a disputation should be holden at Cambridge, betwéene M. Bradford, M. Saunders, & M, Rogers, and others of that side: and the Do∣ctors of both vniuersities on the other side: like as had béene in Oxforde before. This the godlye Preachers that were prisoners did accept, so that the disputation might bee be∣fore the Queene, or before the Counsell, or before the Parlement houses, or els if they might dispute by wri∣ting: remembring the disorder at Oxford. And they directed out of prison a declaration of their mindes by writing, the seuenth day of May, exhorting the people to sub∣mitte themselues with all patience and humilitie, &c. An∣no 1554. Their names were: Robert Menauen, aliâs Robert Fer∣rar, Rowlande Taylor, Iohn Philpot, Iohn Bradforde, Iohn Wigorne, and Gloce. Episcopus, Iohn Hooper, Ed∣ward
Crome, Iohn Rogers, Laurence Saunders, Edmunde Laurence, I. P. T. M. Miles Couerdale, agréeing also with them. The xix. of the same Moneth the Lady Elizabeth, Sister to the Quéen, was brought out of the Tower, and commit∣ted to the custodie of sir I. Williams, after Lord Williams of Thame, who gently entreated her:Lady Eliza∣beth sent to Woodstock. and afterwarde she was had to Woodstocke, and there committed to the kéeping of Sir Henrie Benefield, who excéeded in harde dealing with her. About the fifth of October, and within a fortnight follo∣wing, there were about sixtye imprisoned in London, for hauing, and selling certain bookes, which were sent ouer by Preachers that fledde beyond the Seas: among whome was M. Brown, a Goldsmith, M. Sparke, a Draper, Randall Diuer, a Stationer, M. Beston, a Marchant, wt many other. The ninth of Nouember, M. Barlowe, late B. of Bathe, and M. Cardmaker,Barlowe and Cardmaker to the Fleete. were brought before the Counsell in the Starrechamber, and after communication, commanded to the Fléete. In this moneth, or the moneth before,Against wri∣ting of Scrip∣tures on church walles. Boner directeth his precepts against al writings of scripture on church walles. About this time, in the Vniuersitie of Cambridge, and al∣so of Oxforde, many good wittes, and learned men departed the Vniuersities, because of the alteration of religion.24. places void together in S. Iohns colledge in Cambridge Of whō, some of their owne accord gaue ouer: some were thrust out of their Felowships: some were miserably handled. In so much that in Cambridge, in the Colledge of saint Iohns. there were 24. places voyde together. The xxj. of Nouember, being Wednesday,Cardinall Poole landeth. Cardinall Poole landed at Douer: and the xxviij, day he made an Ora∣tion in the Parlement house: exhorting them to returne to the Sea Apostolicke, and to abrogate such lawes as had dis∣ioyned them from the same. The next day after, the Lordes and Commons exhibited
a Supplication, wherein they desired pardon, and absoluti∣on for that which had passed against the Apostolik Sea. Vp∣on this Supplication, Cardinall Poole (in the name of Pope Iulius the third) geueth them absolution.Absolution ge∣uen to ye Lords and Commūs. Wherof the king and the Cardinall sent spéedie report to Rome, to the great ioy of the Pope, and his &c. About the second of December, a Poste was sent from the whole Parlement to the Pope, to desire him to confirme the sale of Abbey landes,Purchases of Abbey lands to be confirmed by the Pope. and Chaunterie landes: For the Lordes, and the Parlement would not graunt any thing in the Popes behalfe, before their Purchases were fully con∣firmed. The vj. day of December, all the whole Conuocation, wt Bishops and other, were sent for to Lambeth, to the Cardi∣nall, who the same day forgaue them all their periurations, schismes, heresies, and all they knéeled downe, and receiued his absolution. Vpon New yeres day at night, certaine honest men and women of the Citie, to the number of thirtie, and a minister with them, named Master Rose, were taken as they were in a house in Bowchurchyarde at the Communion: and the same night were committed to prison: and on the Thursday following, being the thirde of Ianuarie, M. RoseM. Rose sent to the Tower. was be∣fore the Bishoppe of Winchester, being Lord Chauncellor, and thence the same day he was by him committed to the Tower. The Act of the Popes Supre∣macie. Queen Marie with childe.The same day the Act of Supremacie passed in the Par∣lement house. About this time, there was a certaine opinion, that the Quéen was great with childe, & many prayers were made in diuers places for her, and for the childe, that it might be a male childe, wel fauoured, and wittie. And the xix. of Ianua∣rie, the lower House of the Parlement, with the Speaker, came to White hall to the king, and there offered vnto him the gouernement of the Realme, and of the issue, if the
in the Quéene should faile: which was confirmed by act of Parlement within ix. daies after. In this Parlement among other thinges, the Bishop of Rome was established, and all such Lawes as were made against him since the twentith yéere of King Henry the viij. were repealed, and also Cardinall Poole, Bishop Pates, Lil∣ly and other were restored to their blood. Also in this Parlement thrée statutes were reuiued for triall of Heresie. One made in the fifth yéere of Richard the second: and another in the second yéere of Henry the fourth: the thirde in the second yéere of Henry the fifth. Also the do∣ings of Maister Rose and the other that were with him was communed of in this Parlement: and vpon that occa∣sion an act was made, that certaine euill prayers should bée treason. The prayers of these men were these:Certaine euill praiers to be treason. God turne the heart of Quéene Mary from Idolatrie, or else shorten her dayes. The two and twentith of Ianuary, all the preachers that were in pryson, were called before the Bishop of Winche∣ster Lord Chancellor, and certaine other at his house in S. Mary Oueries: from whence, after they had refused to con∣forme themselues, they were committed to straighter pry∣son then before, with charge that no man should speake with them: amongst whom, one Iames George died in prison,Iames George. and was buried in the field. The eight and twentith of Ianuary, the bishop of Win∣chester by vertue of Commission from the Cardinall, in S. Mary Oueries church, called before him and certaine of the Counsell, Maister Hooper, Maister Rogers, and Maister Cardmaker: of which, CardmakerCardmaker submitteth. that day submit∣ted himselfe, the other were returned to pryson till the next day. The xxx. of Ianuarie, Doctor Taylor, Doctor Crome, M. Bradford, M. Saunders, and Doctor Farrar, sometime
bishop of S. Dauies were before Winchester, of which number Taylor, Saunders, and Bradford were excommu∣nicated, and sentence pronounced against them,Sentence pro¦nounced a∣gainst Taylor, Saunders, and Bradford. and so com∣mitted to the Shiriffes. Doctor Crome according to his de∣sire had two moneths respite, and M. Farrar was againe committed to prison, till another time. After examination and condemnation of these good men, Commissioners and Inquisitors were sent abroad into all partes of the Realme, to the afflicting of a great number of godly persones, especially in Kent, Essex, Northfolke, and Suffolke. The preachers before had put vp a supplication to the king and parlement, requiring indifferencie in their cause: but all in vaine. The end of the tenth Booke.
The eleuenth Booke. THe fourth day of February, suffered maister Iohn Rogers,M. Iohn Ro∣gers martyr, he was of the Vniuersitie of Cambridge: from whence at length hee was chosen to bee Chaplaine to the marchantes at Antwerpe, in Brabant: where hée fell in companie with maister Willi∣am Tindall, and with Miles Couer∣dale: by conference with whom, he came to great know∣ledge in the Gospel, and cast off poperie, and ioyned himself with them: as in the translating of the Bible, intituled, the translation of Thomas Mathew. After he was married, hée went to Wittenberge in Saxonie: where he so profited in knowledge, and in the Duitch tongue: that the charge of a Congregation was committed vnto him. In which mini∣sterie, he faithfully serued till the time of king Edwarde. And béeyng orderly called, he returned into Englande a∣gaine, without certayntie of any condition of liuing: where he preached diligently. Then Nicholas Ridley Bishop of London gaue him a Prebend in Paules:M. Rogers di∣uinity reader in Paules Church. and the Deane and Chapter therechose him to reade the diuinity Lecture. In which place, hée remayned till the time of Quéene Marie. After the Quéen was come to the Tower of London, he being orderly called therevnto, made a vehement sermon at Paules crosse, confirming the doctrine taught in king Ed∣wardes time, and exhorting the people to constancie. For which he was called into question: and made such answere, as for that time he was cléerly dismissed. But after the pro∣clamation, which prohibited true preaching, the Counsell quarrelled with him concerning his doctrine, and comman∣ded him as prisoner to keepe his owne house: where
he remained a long time, and might haue escaped, if hee would. At length by Boners procurement, hée was put a∣mong the théeues and murtherers in Newgate for a great space He was first examined the 22. of Ianuary by Winche∣ster,Rogers con∣demned. with the rest of the cōmissioners. Then again the 28. & 29. of the same moneth: & in the end they read the sentence of condemnation against him: mentioning there but 2. articles. First, that he affirmed ye church of Rome to be of Antichrist: Secondly, that he denied the realtie of the Sacrament. And so committed him vnto the Sheriffes handes, sen∣ding him and maister Hooper (who with maister Carde∣maker was examined at the same time) to the Clinke, there to remaine till night, and from thence then to be re∣moued to Newgate. After sentence giuen, Maister Rogers required of Gardiner, that his wife (being a strāger) might come and speake with him so long as he liued. Which Gar∣dinerCruel Gardi∣ner, would not, though she were a stranger, & had 11. chil∣dren, and one sucking on her: whom her husband woulde haue comforted and counselled, but Gardiner would not permit it. In the morning the fourth of Februarie, Anno 1555.  being munday, hée was warned sodainely by the kéepers wife, to prepare himselfe to the fire (Who beeing then sounde asléepe, scarce with much shogging coulde bee awa∣ked) & being bid to make hast: then said he, if it be so, I shal not néede to tye my poyntes. And so was he had downe: first to BonerBoner would not suffer mai∣ster Rogers to talke one word with his wife before his death. Maister Ro∣gers the first martyr of Q. Maries dayes. to be disgraded: that done, he craued of Boner, he might talke a fewe wordes with his wife before his death. This Boner would not suffer: So was he brought into Smithfield by maister Chester, and maister Woodrofe then Sheriffes of London, and chéerefully ended his mar∣tirdome in the fire: washing his handes in the flame as he was in burning. His pardō was brought him at ye stake, if he would haue recanted: but he vtterly refused it, and was the first martyr of Quéene Maries daies.
The Sunday before he suffered he drunke to Master Hoo∣per being then vnderneth him, and bad them commend him vnto him, and tell him there was neuer little fellow better would sticke to a man then he would to him; thinking they should haue burned together. In the prison he wrote a certaine prophecie of the ruine of the pope here in England,A prophecie of the ruine of the pope in Eng∣land. and restauration of the Gospell againe, which accordingly came to passe by ye blessed raigne of Quéene Elizabeth. In the moneth of February the viij. day. Anno 1555. Laurence SaundersLaurence Saunders. a Gentleman of a worshipfull house, was burned at Couentrie, after he had béen prysoner a yéere and a half in the Marshalsea. He was brought vp in Eaton, & from thence was chosen to go to Kings Colledge in Cam∣bridge: where he continued scholer in the Colledge 3. yeres, and profited much. From thence departing to his parents: by their aduise, hee minded to become a marchant, and was bounde apprentice with Syr William Chester, who af∣terward was Sheriffe of London. The same yéere Saun∣ders was burned at Couentrie, his maister considering his towardnesse in learning, and his great zeale in religion, discharged him of his seruice, as one méete for an other vse. Wherevpon he returned to Cambridge againe, where he profited greatly in the Gréeke and Hebrewe tongues: and gaue himselfe whollie to the studie of Diuinitie, and continued in the Vniuersitie till he had procéeded Master of Artes. And a long space after, in the beginning of King Edwardes time, hée was called to reade a Lecture at Fo∣thringam, in Diuinitie: where he greatlie edified many. Which being dissolued, hée was placed in the Minster at Lichfielde, to reade there. From whence hée was called to a Benefice in Leicester shire, called Church-lancton, wher∣upon he kept residence. And from thence he was called to Ashalowes in Breadstréete in London. Where behauing himselfe according to his duetie, he was accused by sir Iohn
Mordant (Counsellour to Quéene Mary) vnto Boner: and after examination, being commanded to prison by the B. of Winchester, he answered: that he did giue God thanks who had giuen him at the last a resting place, where hee might pray for the Bishops conuersion. His constancie was such, that he forbad his wife to sue for his deliuerie.Laurence Saunders con∣stancie. And when o∣ther of his friends had by suite almost obtained it, he discou∣raged them. In prison he wrote diuers comfortable letters to his wife,Sanders wrote diuers letters. to Doctor Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, pri∣soners for the like cause in Oxford: to M. Ferrar B. of S. Dauies, Taylor, Bradford, Philpot, to mistres Lucie Har∣rington, &c. After hee was excommunicated and deliue∣red to the secular power, he was brought by the Sheriffe of London to the counter, in his parish in Bredstréet: wher∣at he reioyced greatly. The fourth day of February, the Bishop of London did come to prison, where he was to disgrade him: which when he had done, Laurence Saunders said, I thanke God, I am not of your Church. The day following in the morning, he was deliuered to certaine of the Quéenes gard to bee carried to Couentrie, there to be burned. The first night he lay at S. Albones, where maister Grimoalde did speake with him, a man of greater giftes then constancie: after maister Saunders had giuen him a lesson méete for his lightnesse, he tooke a cuppe into his hands, asked him if he woulde pledge him of that cuppe of which hée woulde beginne to him vnto him: to whom Grimoald shrugging, saide: of that cuppe in your hand I will pledge you,Sweet say∣ings of Lau∣rence Saun∣ders. but of that other which you meane, I will not promise you. Well, (saide maister Saunders) my déere Lorde Iesus Christ hath begunne to mee of a more bitter cup then mine shalbe, and shall I not pledge my most swéete Sauiour? Yes I hope. After they were come to Couentrie, the same night, he was put into the common gaole among other prisoners:
where he spent all that night in prayer, and in instructing o∣thers. The next day, which was the viij. of Februarie, he was had to the place of execution, in the Parke without the Ci∣tie: where comming to the stake, he took it in his armes, and kissed it, saying: welcome the Crosse of Christ, welcome e∣uerlasting life. And being fastened to the stake, and fire put to him, full swéetly he slept in the Lord. Anno 1555. The ix. of Februarie, was B. Hooper bur∣ned at Glocester,Hooper bur∣ned at Gloster. for the testimonie of Iesus. He had béene Graduate in the Vniuersitie of Oxforde, in the time of the sixe Articles. Winchester conferred with him 4. or 5. daies together, and not preuayling with him, dismissed him to his M. sir T. Arundel, whose Steward he had béene, when hee had forsaken Oxford for feare of the sixe Articles. After the conference with Winchester, he had intelli∣gence of danger: and being counselled to prouide for himself, went ouer beyond the sea, and being at Paris, stayed not long, till he was againe layd for. So hee returned againe into England, and was retayned of M. Sentlow. After that, he departed againe beyond seas, through France into Ger∣manie, where he was wel acquainted with M. Bullinger at Zuricke: there he married a wife, a Burgonian, and then applied very studiously the hebrew tongue. In K. Edwards raigne he returned again into Englād, and taking his leaue of M. Bullinger, said vnto him: you shall sure from time to time heare from me, but the last newes of all, I shal not be able to write. For (said he) you shal heare of me to be bur∣ned to ashes: and (taking M. Bullinger by the hande) said, where I shal take most paynes: and that shall be the laste newes, which I shall not be able to write vnto you, but you shal heare it of me. Thus prophecying of the maner of his death.Hooper prea∣cheth once or twise a day. After that he had preached a while in London (for the most part twise, at the least once euery day, & neuer fay∣led) he was called to preach before the K. maiestie, and soone
after made Bishop Glocester by the kings cōmandement: In which office he continued two yeares, and after that, was made B. of Worcester: which he had not long enioyed, but the bishops quarrelled with him for the apparrell, which he refused to weare. And in the ende they so preuayled, that he agréed sometimes to shew himselfe apparrelled as the other bishops were. Afterwards (king Edward being dead, and Marie being crowned Quéene) this good Bishop was one of the first that was sent for by a Pursiuant, to be at London. He might by flight haue auoyded danger, but woulde not: saying to those that woulde haue perswaded him thereto: Once I did flie, and tooke me to my féete; but now, because I am called to this place and vocation, I am throughly per∣swaded to tarrie, and to liue and die with my shéepe. And so (hauing made his appearance) after much rating, he was cōmaunded by the Counsell to warde: it being declared vn∣to him at his departure, that the cause of his imprisonment was only for certaine summes of money, for the which he was indebted to the Quéenes maiestie, and not for Reli∣gion. The next yere, being anno 1554. the ninetéenth day of March, he was called againe to appeare before Winchester: where, what for the B. and what for the vnruly multitude, when he could not be permitted to pleade his cause, he was depriued of his Bishopricke. Hooper depri∣ued.The first of September, anno 1553. he was committed to the Fléete from Richmond, to haue libertie of the prison, and within sixe dayes after he payd for his libertie v. l. ster∣ling, to the warden for fées: who immediatly vpon ye paymēt hereof, complayned of him to Steuen Gardiner, and so was he committed to close prison one quarter of a yere in ye To∣wer chāber of the Fléet, where he was vsed very extremely. After one quarter of a yere and somewhat more, Babington the warden of the Fléete, & his wife fell out wt him about the masse: so he was put into ye wardes, where he cōtinued a lōg
time, hauing nothing appointed for his bed but a litle pad of straw and a rotten couering, and a tike with a fewe feathers therein: the chamber vile and stinking,Hooper hardly vsed in pryson. till good people sent him a bed to lie on: On the one side of which prison was the sinke and filth of the house, and on the other side the towne ditch, so that the stinch of the house had infected him with sundry diseases. During which time hée was sicke, and the doores, barres, haspes and chaynes beyng all closed and made fast vppon him, he mourned and called for help: but the Warden, when he had knowne him many times ready to die, and when the poore men of the wardes haue called to helpe him, hée hath commanded the doores to be kept fast, and charged that none of his men should come at him, saying: let him alone: it were a good riddance of him. And finally, his vsage was such, that he feared he should haue died in prison through vile intreaty, before he should come to iudgement. Againe, he was examined: Anno 1555. the 22. of Ia∣nuary, before the Bishop of Winchester, with other bishops and commissioners of Saint Mary oueries: where, whē (be∣ing exhorted by them therevnto) he refused to returne to the popish Church, he was had to prison againe, and was shif∣ted from his former chamber into another, néere to the war∣dens chamber. Where he remained 6. daies, till his cham∣ber was searched for bookes and writinges, by D. Martin and others, but none were found. The xxviij. day of Ianuarie, Hooper appeared againe be∣fore Gardiner and the Commissioners, in the afternoone, with Master Rogers. Their examinations being ended, the two sherifes of London were commaunded to carry them to the counter in Southwarke,Hooper and Rogers sent to the Counter there to remayne till the mor∣row at ix. of the clocke, to sée whether they would relent. So M. Hooper went before with one of the sherifs, and M. Ro∣gers with the other: to whom M. Hooper (looking back) said, come brother R. must we two take this matter first in hand,
and beginne to frie these faggots? Yea sir (said M. Rogers) by Gods grace. Doubt not (said M. Hooper) but God will giue strength. They were committed to the kéeper of the Counter, and appointed to seuerall chambers: not being suffered to speake one with the other, neither yet any other permitted to come at them that night. Vpon the xxix. of Ianuary, they were both brought a∣gaine by the Shiriffes of London before the commissioners: and when they could not be perswaded to forsake the truth, the Shiriffes of London were willed to carrie them to the Clincke, there to remaine til night. And when it was darke, Master Hooper was had to Newgate, there remaining six daies close prisoner. During which time; Boner, Fecknam, Chadsey, and Harpsfield, &c. resorted to him, to assay to per∣swade him to forsake the trueth: which when he would not doe, they spread false rumors of his relenting. Wherof whē maister HooperFalse rumors of Hoopers re∣lenting. heard, he directed a letter wherein he pur∣geth himself of that slaunder. Vpon munday morning, Boner came to Newgate, and there disgraded him. And the fifte of February, about foure of the clocke in the morning, he was led by the Sheriffes foorth of Newgate, to a place appoyn∣ted, not farre from S. Dunstans Church in Fléete stréete: where sixe of the Quéenes gard were appointed to cary him to Glocester, there to be burned. Whereat hee greatly re∣ioyced: being glad that he should confirm his doctrine which he had taught to his owne flock, by martyrdom before their eyes, whō he had instructed. So being brought to Glocester, he was lodged all night at Robert Ingrams house, and wat∣ched by the sheriffes there all night. His desire was, that he might go to bed betimes that night, saying that hée had many things to remember: and so did at fiue of the clock, & slept one sléep soūdly: bestowing the rest of ye night in praier. After, he gat vp in the morning, & desired that no man should be suffered to come into ye chamber: that he might be solitary til the houre of execution. At nine of the clocke he was wil∣led
to prepare himselfe, for the time was at hand. At which time, and when he came to the place of execution, hée was neuer knowne during the time of his beyng amongst them,Hooper goeth cheerefully to his death. to looke with so chéerefull a countenaunce as he did at that present. When hée came to the place where hée should die, smiling he beheld the stake, and preparation made for him, he knéelyng downe made a prayer vpon the whole Créede for the space of halfe an houre. Now after hée was some∣what entered into his prayer, a boxe was brought, and layd before him vpon a stoole, with his pardon, if he would turne:Hooper refu∣seth pardon. at the sight whereof he cried, if you loue my soule, away with it: if you loue my soule, away with it. When his prai∣ers were ended, and hée stripped to his shirte, hée went vp to the stake, and had deliuered vnto him a pound of gun-powder, whiche hée trussed close betwixt his legges, and asmuch vnder each arme hole. So réedes being set about him and cast vp, he receiued two bundels of them in his owne hands, embraced them and kissed them, and put vnder ech arme one of them, and shewed with his hande, how the rest should be bestowed. So fire being put to, he endured iij. quarters of an houre at least in the fire before hée died: it was so euill made, and the wind did so stande. In which paines he prayed so long as he could, earnestly to the Lord:Hooper a wor∣thy martyr. and the vse of tongue being taken away, hée knocked so long on his brestes with his handes, till one of his armes fell of: and then with the other, till his hand did cleaue fast to the iron vpon his brest. Anno 1555. The ix. of February Doctor Taylor,Doctor Taylor martyr. doctor of both the lawes, was burned at Hadley the towne where he was Pastor. The cause of his trouble was one Foster a petigentleman, after the sort of a Lawier, a kéeper of courts, and one Iohn Clerke of Hadley, because he resisted Iohn A∣uer parson of Aldam, who would haue said Masse in Hadley church. For this they complained of him to Stephen Gardi∣ner: who vpon complaint sent a letter to D. Taylor, com∣maunding
him within certaine daies to appeare before him. Which D. Taylor, (cōtrary to ye perswasions of his fréends) did, who so soone as D. Taylor appéered before him rayled vpon him, & when he could not preuaile any way to seduce him: he commaunded him to prison, saying: haue this fel∣low hence, and cary him to the Kings bench, and charge the kéeper he be straightly kept: so they carried him to prison, where he lay prisoner almost two yéeres. Within few daies after, diuers other learned and godly men in sundrie coun∣tries of England were layd in pryson for religion,All the prisons in England Christian schooles and Churches. so that almost all the prysons in England were become right chri∣stian schooles and churches. D. Taylor when he was come to the Kings bench, there found M. Bradford, who had great cōfort one of another. After that D. Taylor had lyen in pri∣son a while, he was cited to appeare in the arches at Bow-church, there to answere &c. & so to be depriued: who so hand∣led the matter of his mariage by scriptures, doctors, lawes, ciuill & canon, that the iudge could giue no sentēce to diuorse him: but gaue sentence of depriuation because he was mar∣ried. After a yéere & thrée quarters (in which time they had gotten old tyrannous lawes put downe in K. Henry the 8. time, & of K. Edward, to be restored againe) about the 22. of Ianuary D. Tailor appéered againe before the cōmissioners: where after perswasions and threats at Gardiners hands & the rest, he constantly holding the truth, was had to prison againe, where he endured close till the last of Ianuary. Vpon which day he with M. Bradford, and M. Saunders were again called to appéere before Winchester, Norwich, London, Salisburie, &c. where charged with Heresie and Schisme, they were required to giue determinate answere, whether they would recant or no: who shewing themselues bolde and constant in the cause of Christ, receiued the sen∣tence of condemnation, with chéerefulnesse and thankesgi∣uing to God, that they were counted worthy to suffer for his name. So Doctor TaylorTaylor, Brad∣ford, Saunders condemned. beyng condemned was
committed to the Clinke, where hee was bestowed till towards night, and then he was remoued to the Counter. Where after he had lyen a seuenight, Boner came to dis∣grade him: at which disgrading, whē Boner would haue had him put on the Antichristian attire, he would not himself do it: but it was forced vpon him by others. And when he was throughly furnished therwith, he set his hands by his side,M. Tayler is pleasant at antichr attire walking vp and downe, and saide: how say you my Lorde? Am I not a goodly foole? how say you my maisters? So the B. scraped his fingers, thombs, and crown of his head: and when he should haue giuen him a stroke on his brest with his crosier staffe, the B. Chaplen saide, my Lord strike him not, for he will sure strike againe. Yea that will I (q Doctor Taylor) the cause is Christes, and I were no  Christian, if I wold not fight in my maisters quarrel. S  Bishop being afraide, laid his curse vpon him. The fo day of February, Doctor TaylorsThey strike out D. Tailors braines at the fire. wife and his sonne sup with him in the Counter, and the next day by two of the clocke in the morning, the Sheriffe of London with his offi∣cers came to the Counter, and so brought forth D. Taylor without any light: leading him to the Wolsacke, an Inne without Algate: where he was straightway put in a cham∣ber, and kept with 4. yomen of the guard, and the Sheriffes men. Where Doctor Taylor fell downe on his knées, & gaue himselfe wholly to praier. At the Wolsacke he remained til xi. of the clocke: at which time, the Sheriffe of Essex was ready to receiue him. And so they set him on horseback with∣in the Inne, the gates being shut. At Burntwood they cau∣sed to be made for D. TaylorThey maske D. Taylor that he might not be knowen. a close hood, with two holes for his eies, and a slit for his mouth to breath at. This they did that no man should know him, nor he speake to any man: which practise they vsed with others. All the way, he was very chéerefull and merrie, to the great woondering of the companie. At Chelmesford, the Sheriffe of Suffolke mette him, and tooke him to his
charge, and perswaded him to reuolt, and dranke to him of the same condition. So did the gard, saying: on this condition, Maister Doct. we al drink to you. When they had all drunk to him, and the cup was come to him: he staied a litle, as one studying what answere he might giue: at the last he saide, maister Sheriffe, & my maisters all, I heartily thanke you for your goodwil. I haue hearkened to your words, and mar∣ked well your counsels: and to be plaine with you, I doe perceiue that I haue béene deceiued my selfe, and am like to deceiue a great many in Hadley of their expectations. With that word they all reioyced: yea, good maister Doctor (quoth  Sheriffe) Gods blessing on your heart, holde you there  it is the comfortablest worde that wée hearde you  yet: what? should you cast away your selfe in vain?  a wise mans part, and I dare warrant you, you shall  fauour. Thus they reioyced very much at the wordes and were y merry. At the last, good maister Doctor (quoth the she∣riffe) what meane you by this? that you thinke you haue ene deceiued your selfe &c. Would you know my mea∣ning plainely (quoth he) I will tell you, I haue béene decei∣ued, and (as I thinke) I shal deceiue a great manie: I am as you sée, a man that hath a very great carkas, which I thought shoulde haue béene buried in Hadley Church∣yarde, if I had died in my bed, as I well hoped I shoulde haue done. But herein I sée I was deceiued: and there are a great number of woormes in Hadley Churchyarde, which should haue had iolly féeding vpon this carrion, which they haue looked for manie a day.The wormes deceiued by D. Taylors burning. But nowe I know, wée be deceyued, I, and they: for this carkas must bée burnt to ashes, and so shall they loose their baite and fée∣ding. When the Sheriffe and his companie heard him say so: they were amazed, maruelling at his constancie. De∣parting thence, and comming within two myles of Had∣ley, hée desired to light of his Horse to make water.
which done, he leapt, and fetcht a friske or twaine,D. Taylor of a marueylous courage. as men commonly doe in daunsing. Why M. Doctor, quoth the she∣riffe, how do you now? He answered, well God be praised, good M. sheriffe, neuer better, for now I know I am almost at home. And at the last, comming to Aldam Common, the place assigned where he should suffer, and vnderstanding it was the place, he saide: Thanked be God, I am euen at home, & so lighted from his horse, and with both his handes rent the hood from his head: and profering to speake to the people, who prayed for him, and saluted him, one or other thrust a tipstaffe into his mouth, and would in no wise per∣mitte him to speake. For he was threatned, and so were o∣thers, that he should haue his tongue cutte out of his head, except he would promise to kéepe silence at his death. Whē he had praied, he kissed the stake, and set himselfe into a pitch barrell, which they had set for him to stande in. So praying,They strike out D. Tailors braines at the fire. and calling on the name of God, he endured the torment, til one Soice with an halbert strooke him on the head, that the braynes fell out, and the dead corps fell into the fire. Within viij. or ix. dayes, after S. Gardiner had geuen sen∣tence against M. Hooper, M. Rogers, M. Saunders, Doctor Taylor, and Master Bradford, being the viij. of Februarie, sixe other good men were brought before the bishoppes to be examined for their Religion: Whose names were, William Pigot Butcher, St. Knight Barber, Tho. Tomkins Weuer, Thomas Hawkes Gentleman, Iohn Lawrence Priest, and William Hunter Prentice. From which day, Steeuen GardinerGardiner put∣teth of the but∣chering of the Saints to Boner. would meddle no more in such kinde of condem∣nations, but referred the whole doing thereof to Boner Bi∣shoppe of London. Who taking the matter in hande, in the Consistorie of Paules, the Lord Mayor, and certaine Alder∣men sitting with him, the ix. day of Februarie, he read the sentence of condemnation against the sixe persons, which were not executed before the moneth of March. Vpon the xiij. day of Februarie, Master Robert Farrar
Bishop of saint Dauies, was sent towardes saint Dauies, there to be condemned and executed. The xviij. day of Februarie, Quéene Marie, after long delay, made ful answere to the king of Denmarkes letters: who had written two before to her, in the behalfe of Miles Couerdale,Miles Couer∣dale graunted to the King of Denmarke. for his deliuerance, whereunto she in the ende yelded. The xix. of Februarie, there was a certaine intimation printed in the name of Boner: where charge was geuen to euery man and woman within his Dioces, to prepare them selues against Lent to receiue reconciliation sent from pope Iulius 3. by Poole his Cardinall, and Legate de latere: and so to be absolued. Of the vj. before mentioned condemned by Boner, Tho. TomkinsThomas Tom∣kins Martyr. was the first that suffered, the xvj. of March 1555.  in Smithfield. His dwelling was in Shordich, in the Dio∣ces of Lond. He was kept in prison by Boner halfe a yere, and was of him most cruelly vsed; beaten about the face; and parte of his bearde pulled off by Boner. Wherefore he cau∣sed him to be shauen, pretending that then he woulde looke like a Catholike. After that, hauing with him M. Harps∣field, M. Pendleton, Doctor Chadsey, M. Willerton, and o∣ther standing by, the Bishoppe tooke Tomkins by the fin∣gers, and helde his hande directly ouer the flame of a Ta∣per hauing thrée or foure wéekes: supposing by the payne thereof to terrifie him, and cause him to leaue off the profes∣sion of the trueth. In the which burning he neuer mooued, till the veines shrunke,They burne Tomkins hand with a Taper. and the sinewes burst, and the wa∣ter did spirte in Master Harpsfieldes face. In so much that Harpsfield mooued with pittie, desired the Bishoppe to stay; saying, he had tryed him enough. This burning was in the Bishops Hall at Fulham. He was sundrie times examined: The first time after he had béene imprisoned about halfe a yere, the 8. of Februarie. His Articles were touching the Sacrament of the Altar.
The next day he appeared againe at eight of the clocke before noone, and againe the third tyme the same day at two of the clocke in the after noone, where remayning con∣stant in the doctrine of the Gospell: the Bishop gaue sen∣tence of death against him, and so beyng deliuered to the Shiriffe of London, was carried to Newgate, where he re∣mayned most ioyous and constant vntill the xvj. of March next after.Tomkins bur∣ned in Smith∣field. On which day in Smithfield he sealed vp his faith in the flaming fire. The same yéere the xvj. of March William Hunter of the age of ninetéene yéeres was martyred for the testimo∣nie of the truth, he being a prentise in London, in the first yéere of Quéene Marie, was commaunded at the Easter next followyng to receiue the Communion at a Masse by the Priest of the parish where he dwelt in Colman stréete in London: which because he refused, he was threatned to be brought before the B. of London. Wherfore his master one Th. Taylor a silke mā, fearing least he should come in danger for his sake, required W. Hunter to depart from him: which he did, and came to Burntwood, where his Father dwelt, with whom he remained about the space of half a quarter of a yéere, till being suspected, for reading the vj. of Iohn in the chappell of Burntwood. One Father Otwell a sumner, and one Thomas Wood vicar of Southweild, with whom also he disagréed in reasoning of points of the sacrament, he was cōplained of by the vicar to iustice Browne: but Hunter be∣ing afraid of the vicars threats, fled. Browne sent for Hūters father with the Constable, & threatned him punishment, ex∣cept he would bring vnto him his son. The father to satisfie the expectation of Browne, road ij. or iij. daies iourneis, & in the high way William met with his Father: who after he had with many teares declared what charge Browne had giuen him, the sonne said he would go home with him, to saue him harmeles whatsoeuer came of it.The father cō∣pelled against the sonne. So he was brought to iustice Browne, who after he had reasoned wt him out of the
sixt of Iohn, and could not peruert him, made a letter imme∣diatly, and sent William Hunter with a Constable to the bi∣shop of London: who not able to alter Hunters minde, nei∣ther by threates nor flatteries, commaunded his men to put him in the stockes in his gatehouse, where hée sat two dayes and nightes, onely with a crust of brownebread, and a cup of water. After two daies the B. assaied him againe, and finding him constant, sent him to the conuict prison, and commaundeth the kéeper to lay irons enough on him. So hée continued in prison thrée quarters of a yéere: in the whiche time hée had béene before the Bishop fiue times, besides the time when he was condemned the ix. day of February in the consistory of Paules with fiue other mo. After sentence of condemnation of them all, the Bishop called for William Hunter, and perswaded with him, saying: if thou wilt yet recant, I will make thée a frée man in the Citie, and giue thée fortie pounds in good mony to set vp thine occupation with∣all: or I will make thée Stewarde of my house, and I will preferre thée &c. Whereto after William had said, he coun∣ted all wordly thinges but losse and dunge, in respect of the loue of Christe; with the rest hée was ledde to Newgate, where they remayned aboute a moneth, and afterwarde were sent downe, William to Burntwood, and the other to other places in the Countrie. Now when William was come downe into the Coun∣trie to Burntwood, whiche was the Saturday before the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary that followed on the Munday after, William remained till the Tuesday, because they would not put him to death then, for the holynes of the day. In the meane time his father & mother came and com∣forted him,Hunters mo∣ther encoura∣geth him to be constant. and encouraged him, his mother saying: that shée was glad that euer shée was so happie to beare suche a sonne, who coulde finde in his heart to loose his lyfe for Christes names sake. Then William aunswered: for my little payne whiche I shall suffer, whiche is but short,
Christ hath promised me (said he) a crowne of ioy: may you not be glad of that mother? with other such words of ioy and comfort on both partes. Thus passing away saterday, Sun∣day, and munday: on Tuesday morning, when it was mor∣ning, the Sheriffe maister Brocket called on to set forward to the burning of William Hunter. Whose sonne yet did im∣brace and comfort William. At the place of his martyrdom, there was a Popish priest that endeuoured to peruert him at the stake, and saide vnto him: as thou burnest here, so shalt thou burne in hell. To whom William answered: thou lyest false prophet, away thou false prophet, away. His brother béeyng by, saide vnto him: William,Hunters bro∣ther encoura∣geth him. thinke on the passion of Christ, and bée not afrayde of death. To whom hée aunswered: I am not afrayde: then lift hée vp his handes to heauen, and saide: Lorde, Lorde, Lorde, re∣ceiue my spirite. And casting downe his head againe in∣to the smothering smoke, hée yéelded vp his life for the trueth. The eight of August, Anno 1553. William SartonWilliam Sar∣ton. wea∣uer of Bristow, was brought before Dalbie Chancellour of Bristow, and by him condemned, for holding against the sa∣crament of the altar. He was burned the 18. of Septem∣ber, Anno 1556. At Bedaile, a market towne in Yorkeshire, were two men persecuted for the trueth of the Gospell in the latter dayes of Quéene Marie, the one named Iohn Suell, and the other Richarde Suell: their imprisonment was so sore, that their toes rotted off. In the ende, the one of them at length yeelded to heare masse, and within thrée or foure dayes after his libertye, hée drowned him∣selfe in a riuer running by Richmonde, called Swaile: the other endured to the ende béeyng condemned by Do∣ctour Dakins. Who after sentence giuen against the mar∣tyr, came home to his house, and neuer ioyed after, but died.
Anno 1555. the xxvi. of March, Maister Higbed, and Maister Canston, Gentlemen of Essex, were put to death for the testimonie of the Gospel: the one at Hornden of the hill, and the other at the parish of Thundrest. Boner per∣ceiuing these two Gentlemen to bée of woorshipfull e∣state: least anie tumult shoulde thereby arise, came downe himselfe, accompanied with Fecknam, and certaine o∣ther: and laboured with faire promises and threatninges. Which when they saw would not preuaile, the B. carried them both with him to London, and with them certaine o∣ther prisoners also: which about the same time were in those quarters apprehended. Not long after this, these pri∣soners were committed to straight prison, and there attemp∣ted sundry waies by the B. and his chaplains to reuoke their opinions. At length, when no perswasion would serue, they were brought to open examination at the Consistory at Paules the 17. day of February, Anno 1555. Where being demaunded whether they would recant, and they denying so to do, were assigned the next day to appeare againe the 18. of Februarie. On which day, among many other things the Bishop read vnto them seuerall Articles, and gaue them respite till the next day to answere, and so committed them to prison againe. The articles did touch the reall presence, and that the godly martyrs who were burned, were he∣retikes: with other to this effect. These béeyng giuen them in writing, the next daie was assigned to them to giue their answere. Vpon which day, béeyng the first of Marche, they did exhibite their aunsweres contrarie to the determination of the Romish Churche: and denying to recant, they were againe dismissed and commaunded to appeare the Wednesday nexte after at twoo of the clocke at after noone, there to receyue definitiue sen∣tence. The next Friday they were called for agayne: and
no hope being had of their recantation, were againe dismis∣sed to pryson, and commaunded to appeare the nexte day in the consistorie of Paules, betwéene one and thrée in the after noone. At which houres they appearing, denied to recant, and exhibited in writing a confession of their faith: and sayde, they woulde not departe there from. Af∣ter whiche woordes the Bishop beganne to pronounce sen∣tence agaynst them. Whiche when hée beganne to doo: M. Canston complayned for that hée would not answere to their confession, but condemne them in such sort: and so ap∣pealed from him to the Cardinall. Then Doctor Smith said, he would answere it: but the Bishop not suffering him to speake, willed Harpesfield to say his minde, for the stay of the people: who tooke their confession in hande, but answered no one sentence thereof. That done, the Bishop pronounced sentence: which they chéerefully receiued, and were deliuered to the Sheriffes, and so by them sent to Newgate, where they remained in consultation fouretéen daies. Which daies expyred, the thrée and twentieth daie of Marche, they were at foure of the clocke in the mor∣ning deliuered to the Sheriffe of Essex, and so brought to their seuerall places of burning,M. Higbed & M. Canston burned. which they did most constantly endure the sixe and twentieth of the same mo∣neth. The same yere the xxviij. day of March, William Pigot, and Steeuen Knight of Maulden,Pigot & Knight Martyrs. two of the sixe that were condemned by Boner the ninth of Februarie, were both (after their appearinges) burned for the testimonie of the trueth. Pigot at Braintrie, and Knight at Maulden. Their Articles and aunsweres were like to those of Tho. Tomkins and oth Martyrs, touching the Sacrament of the Al∣tar. &c. er The next day, being the nine and twentieth day, I. Lau∣renceIohn Laurence a Priest, who was condēned with other, was brought to Colchester, and there burned sitting in a Chaire, for that
he was through euill vsage and heauie irons, not able to go. The next day after being the xxx. day of March, Robert Farrar B. of S. DauiesRobert Farrar B of S. Da∣uies burned. in Wales, was burned for the te∣stimonie of the truth: he was the next B. that suffered after M. Hooper: hée was called before the B. of Winchester with M. Hooper, M. Rogers, M. Bradford, M. Saunders, and other aforesaid, the fourth of February, on the which day he should also with them haue béene condemned: but it pleased them to deferre it till the xiiij. day of the same mo∣neth of February. After he had receiued many checkes and taunts of Win∣chester, the B. of Worcester M. Bourne &c. being found cō∣stant and resolute in the trueth, he was dimissed to prison, where he remained vncondemned, til the 14. of February: and then was sent downe into Wales, there to receiue sen∣tence of cōdemnation. Who then vpon the 26. of Februarie, in the Church of Carmarthen, being brought before Grif∣fith Leyson Esquier, Sheriffe of the Countie of Carmar∣then, was there personally presented before Henrie Bishop of Saint Dauis, and Constantine the publike Notarie: which Henrie discharged the Sheriffe, and receiueth him to his owne custody, and committed him to the kéeping of Ow∣en Iones. And therevpon exhorting him to recant, mini∣stred articles vnto him touching priestes marriage, and the Sacrament of the Altar: which he refused to answere vnto, till he saw his Commission. Which also he refused to doe at another examination, the last of Februarie. Wherefore the Bishop pronounced him contumax, and pro confesso, and com∣mitted him to his former kéeper, til Munday next, being the fourth of March, there to appeare againe betwixt one and two of the clocke. At which time appearing, he yelded an answere, and required a copie of his Articles, with respite to answere. Which was graunted: and the Thursday next assigned him betwixt one and thrée. Where, appearing at the time, he refused to subscribe. After that he had twise
more appeared, and constantlie persisted in the defence of the trueth, (notwithstanding he made his appeale from him to the Cardinall) the Bishop pronounced sentence against him, and after he had disgraded him, he committed him to the Secular power: who brought him to the place of execution in the Towne of Carmarthen. Where he in the Markette place, on the South side of the Market Crosse, the xxx. day of March, most constantly gaue testimonie to the trueth in the flaming fire. A little before Master FarrarsFarrars words to a gentleman at his death. death, one Richard Iones a Knightes sonne, comming to Master Farrar, séemed to la∣ment the painfulnes of the death he had to suffer. To whom the Bishoppe answered againe to this effect: saying, that if he sawe him once to stirre in the paynes of his burning, hée should then geue no credite to his doctrine: which also fell out, for he neuer mooued, but continued still, holding vp his stumpes burning, till the time that one Richarde Grauell, with a staffe dashed him vpon the head, and so stroke him downe. About the same moneth of March, one Rawlins WhiteRawlins Whit a Fisherman, was burned at Cardiffe, for the testimonie of Iesus. He being desirous of knowledge, (him selfe not able to reade) set his sonne to schoole, to learne to reade: and vsed to haue him reade vnto him the Scriptures, and other good bookes. Whereby he greatly profited in knowledge, and did instruct, and conuert diuers. In which good course Father Rawlins continued, til at last he was taken by the officers of the Towne, as a man suspected of heresie. Vpon which ap∣prehension, he was conuented before the Bishoppe of Lan∣daffe: by whom (after diuers combats) he was committed to prison in Chepstowe, with such libertie, as Rawlins might, (if he would) haue escaped: but that notwithstanding, hee continued still, and at the last was remoued to the Castle of Cardiff, where he remained a yere, passing ye time in praier, and exhortation to his frends, & those that came to visit him.
After a yere, the Bishop caused him to be brought vnto his owne house by Chepstowe: where (after many assayes) per∣ceyuing he could not preuaile, gaue him a day of determina∣tion: which being expired, the Bishoppe calleth for him a∣gaine; and after exhortation to recant, he procéedeth to the sentence of condemnation: sauing before he said, he woulde pray for Rawlins, that God would sende some sparke of grace vpon him. I thanke you hartely for your gentlenesse (sayth Rawlins) and if so be that your request he godly, and lawfull, and that you pray as you should pray, without all doubt God will heare you. And therefore my Lord, go to: do you pray to your God,Rawlins God & the bishops God. and I will pray to my God. I know that my God wil both heare my prayer, and perfourme my desire. After prayer the Bishop saide, Now Rawlins, how is it with thée? &c. Surely (said he) my Lord, Rawlins you lefte me, and Rawlins you finde me, and by Gods grace Rawlins I will continue. Certainly if your petitions had béene good, and lawfull, God would haue heard them: but you honour a false God, and pray not as you should pray, and therefore hath not God graunted your desire. But I am a poore sim∣ple man, as you sée, and God hath heard my complaint: and I trust he will strengthen me in his owne cause. When their prayer would not preuaile, they aduised to say a masse, to sée what that would worke. In the meane time Rawlins be tooke him to prayer in a secrete place, till such time as the Priest came to the sacring. When Rawlins heard the sa∣cring bell ring, he rose out of his place, and came to the quire dore, and standing a while, turned himselfe to the people, speaking these wordes: Good people, if there be at the least but one brother among you, the same one shall beare wit∣nesse at the day of iudgement, that I howe not to this Idoll, meaning the host that the Priest helde ouer his head. Masse being ended, and Rawlins persisting constant, the Bishoppe procéedeth to sentence, and hauing condemned him, dismis∣seth
him to be carried againe to Cardiffe, there to be put in∣to the prison of the towne, called Clockemacell, a very dark lothsome, and most vile prison: where Rawlins passed the time in singing of Psalmes. About thrée or foure wéekes after, he hauing intelligence that his tyme of death drewe néere, sendeth foorthwith to his wife, and willeth her by the messenger, that in any wise she should make readie,Rawlins wed∣ding garmēts. and send vnto him his wedding garments, meanyng a shirte, which afterwarde hée was burned in. Whiche was accomplished accordyng to his mynde. Now apparelled in his wedding garments, when ye houre was come, and he passed to his death, in the way his poore wife and children stood wéeping, and making lamentation: which so pearced his heart, that hee let fall teares from his eyes: but soone after, as though he had misliked his in∣firmitie, beganne to be angry with himselfe: insomuch that striking his brest with his hande, hée vsed these wordes: Ah flesh, stayest thou me so? wouldest thou faine preuaile?Rawlins a worthy martyr. Well, I tell thée, do what thou canst, thou shalt not by Gods grace haue the victorie. By this time hée came to the stake, and going towards it, he fell down vpon his knées and kissed the ground: and in rising againe, the earth a little sticking on his face, he saide these words: Earth vnto earth and dust vnto dust: thou art my mother, and to thée shall I returne. Then went he cherefully, and very ioy∣fully to the stake, and set his backe close thereunto: and when hée had stoode there a while, he cast his eye vpon the Reporter of this History, calling him vnto him, and sayde, I féele a great fighting betwixt the Fleshe and the Spirit: and the Fleshe woulde very fayne haue his swinge, and therefore I pray you when you séeme any thing tempted, holde your finger vp to me, and I trust I shall remember my selfe. After the Smith had made him fast to the Stake, according as hée had required him, being afrayde of his
infirmitie, and the Officers began to laie wood to him with strawe and réede,) hée himselfe as farre as hée could reach, would catcht the same, and very chéerefully disposed it a∣bout his bodie. When all thinges were readie, then stept vp a Priest, addressing himselfe to speake, and to peruert the people. Which when RawlinsRawlins. perceiued, hée beckened with his hand to the people, and said: come hither good peo∣ple, and heare not a false prophet preach. And then said vnto the preacher: oh thou naughtie hypocrite, doost thou presume to prooue thy false doctrine by Scripture? Looke in the text what followeth: did not Christ say, doo this in remembrance of mée: after which wordes the Priest beyng amazed, held his peace. Then some that stood by, cried: put too fire, put to fire: which being put to, he bathed his handes so long in the flame, till the sinewes shrunke, and the fatte dropped away: and once he did as it were wipe his face with one of them. All this while (which was somewhat long) he cried with a loud voice: O Lord receiue my soule, vntill he could not o∣pen his mouth. He was at the same time of his death, about 60. yéeres of age. About this time, Anno 1555. the 28. of March, Quéene Marie was fully resolued, and declared so much to foure of her Counsell, to restore the Abbey landes againe to the Church. And the moneth before, the 19. of Februarie, the Bishoppe of Ely, with the Lord Montague, and viij. score horse, were sent as Ambassadors from the king & Quéene, vnto Rome: very likely, for the cause of Abbey landes, as it appeareth by the sequele. For it was not long after, but the Pope did set foorth in print, a Bull of excommunication, for all manner such persons without exception, that kept a∣ny of the Church landes.The P. excom∣municateth those that hold Abbey lands. Pope Iulius the monster dyeth. And also, all such as did not put the same Bull in execution. About the latter end of this Moneth, Pope Iulius dyed, a monster of nature: who missing on a time his Porke, and answere being made that his Phisition forbad it, because of
his goute: bursting out into a rage, he vttered these wordes: bring me my porke flesh in the despight of God. An other time missing his cold Peacocke,Popes Pea∣cocke. most horribly blasphemyng God, he brake into a rage. Wherevpon when one of his cardinals sitting by, labored to pacifie him; what (said Iulius ye Pope) if God was so angry for one apple, that hée cast our first parents out of Paradice therefore:A blasphemous Pope. why may not I being his vicar, be angry then for my Peacocke, sithence a Peacocke is a greater matter then an apple? Hée confirmed the idoll of Lauretane. Vpon Shrouesunday, which was about the iij. of March, the same yéere a préest in Kent, named Nightingall, parson of Crondall besides Canturbury, reioycing at the alteration of religion, and reading to the people the popes Bull of par∣don that was sent into England, hée sayd, hée thanked God that euer hée had liued to sée that daie: adding moreouer, that hée beléeued that by the vertue of that Bull, hee was as cléere of sinne as the night that he was borne: and immedi∣atly vpon the same fell suddenly downe out of the Pulpit,Gods iudge∣ment. and neuer stirred hand nor foot, but so died. Testified by Ro∣bert Austen of Cartham, who both heard and saw the same: and it is witnessed also of the whole country round about. In the moneth of Aprill and the second day, Iohn Aw∣cocke died in pryson, and was buried in the fieldes. The first of Aprill Anno 1555. a letter was sent to the Shiriffe of Kent, to apprehend Thomas Woodgate, and William Maynard for preachyng secréetly, and to send them vp to the Counsell. The vij. day of the same moneth was sent another letter to the said Shiriffe, for the apprehension of one Hardwich, who went about with a boy with him, preaching from place to place. The fiftenth of Aprill, a letter was directed to Sir Ni∣cholas Hare, and sir Thomas Cornewallis, willing them to examine Maister Flowre alias Branch, what hée meant to were about his necke written Deum time, Vitium fuge?Deum time, Vitium fuge. and
whom else he knew to weare the like: praying them also to speake to Boner B. of London, spéedely to procéede agaynst him for his Religion, according to the Lawes, and that the Iustices of peace of Middlesex, should likewise procéede a∣gainst him for shedding of bloud in the Church, according to the Statute: so as if hée continue in his opinion hee might be executed, at the farthest by the latter end of this wéeke: and that his right hand the day before his execution, or the same day might be stricken of. The two and twentith of Aprill there was a letter sent to the Iustices of peace of Middlesex, with a writ for the ex∣ecution of the said Flower.M. Flower. The xxix. of Aprill Maister Robert Hornbye seruaunt then to the Ladie Elizabeth, was conuented before the Counsell for his religion, and constantly standing thereto, was commited to the Marshalsea. Anno 1555. the xxiiij. of Aprill George MarshGeorge Marsh suffered most constantly at Winchester for the testimonie of the truth. For a while he was Curate to Laurence Saunders: in which condition he continued for a space. But at length by detection of certaine aduersaries, hée was apprehended and kept in close pryson by George Cotes then Bishop of Che∣ster, in straight prison in Chester in the bishops house about the space of foure moneths, beyng not permitted to haue re∣léefe and comfort of his fréends. The Wednesday before Palmesunday, he voluntarily presented himselfe (being sought for) before Master Barton, who sent him the next day before the Earle of Darbie and his Counsell at Lathā. Where appearing before them, and not answering to their contentment touching the Sacra∣ment of the Altar, he was committed to ward in a cold wide stone house: where he lay two nights without any bed, sa∣uing a few canuasse tentclothes, and a paire of shéets with∣out woollen clothes: and so continued he till Palmesunday, beyng occupied in prayer and godly meditation.
On Palmsunday at after dinner, he appeared again: and comming with the Vicar of Prescot, the Vicar made report to the Earle, that the answer which he made, was sufficient for a beginner, vnto such time as he should learne farther. Wherewith the Earle was very well pleased: and so after few words, commanded he should haue a bed, with fire, and liberty to go among his seruants, so he would not hurt them with his communication. Thus he departed more troubled then before, because he had not with more boldnes confessed Christ: but in such sort as the aduersaries thought they might preuaile against him. So he praied to God for more strength. And after a day or two, confessed more plainly, and more boldly in such sort, as the Vicar was not well pleased. After which, within a day or two came to him againe M. Moore, bringing with him certaine articles, whervnto Do∣ctor Crome had subscribed in the daies of king Henrie the viij. requiring him also to subscribe: whereto he would in no sort agrée, and so he departed. Within a short space after, on shrouethurseday, the Vicar sent for him againe, saying: my Lord would be at a short point with him, if he woulde not subscribe to 4. articles: wherof thrée tended to the masse, and the fourth touching confession. These articles he denied to subscribe vnto, and was com∣mitted to the Porters ward: where he continued till Low∣sunday. On which day after dinner, his kéeper Richard Scot signified vnto him, that 2. young men came to carrie him to Lancaster. And so was he carried thither by them: and ap∣peared at the sessions among malefactors, and was thrise ar∣raigned among théeues, with yrons on his féete: and with boldnes confessed Christ. Within few daies after, Marsh was remoued from Lā∣caster, and comming to Chester, was sent for of D. Cotes, the B. to appeare before him in his hall, no body being pre∣sent but they twaine. Where the B. communed with him,
and laboured to peruert him: but all in vaine. And after he had taken his pleasure in punishing him, and reuiling him, he caused him to be brought forth into a chappel in the Ca∣thedrall church in Chester, called our Ladies Chappel, be∣fore him, at two of the clocke in the after noone: who was there placed in a chaire for that purpose, and Fulke Dutton maior of that citie D. Wall, and other priests assisting him. And after they had caused him to take an othe, they mini∣stred articles vnto him. To which he answered according to the doctrine taught in king Edwards daies: which being registred, he was returned againe to his prison. Within thrée wéekes after he appeared againe: and after many vain perswasions to recant, he receiued sentence of condemna∣tion, and was carried away, and put into a darke prison, where he had smal comfort of any creature til his death. Yet some of the citizens that feared God, would comfort him at a hole in a wall of the citie, and giue him money. When the day appointed came that he should suffer: ye she∣riffes of the city, Amry & Cooper, with their officers tooke him out of ye Northgate where he was prisoner, who came with thē most méekly with a locke on his foot, & being at the place of his death, he refused the pardon of the Quéen, which was offred him if he would recant. Which he said he would gladly accept: but forasmuch as it tended to plucke him frō God, he would not receiue it vpon such condition. So after he had praied, he put off his clothes to his shirt, & being fastned to the post, by reason the fire was vnskilfully made, he suffe∣red with great patience grieuous torment. So that when he had a long time bin tormented in the fire without mouing, hauing his flesh so broyled and puft vp, that it couered the chaine wherwith he was fastned: hee therefore was suppo∣sed to be dead. Notwithstanding sodainly he spread abroade his armes,George Marsh of great pati∣ence. saying: Father of heauen haue mercy on me: & so yelded. Vpon this ye people said, he was a martyr. And the Bish. to quiet them, shortly after made a sermon, affirming
that he was an Heretike, &c. and a firebrand in hell. Whom in recompence not long after, the hand of God did so strike, that hee dyed (as it was thought) burned of an Harlotte. This Martir did write diuers and sundrie bookes out of prison. The xxiiij. of Aprill, William Flower, sometime a Monke of Ely, and a Priest, but afterward being married, liued by teaching of children, was put to death for the testimony of the trueth, and had his hand first stricken of, for striking a Priest saying masse. Comming from Lambeth (where he dwelt) about tenne or eleuen of the clocke in the forenoone, into Saint Margarets Church at Westminster: where he finding and séeing a priest, called Iohn Cheltam, ministring the Sacrament of the Altar to the people, therewith being offended in his conscience, did strike and wounde him vpon the head, and also vpon the arme and hande with his wood∣knife:W. Flower woundeth a priest at masse. the Priest hauing the same time in his hand a Chal∣lice, with certaine consecrated hostes therein, which were sprinckled with the bloud of the same Priest. Which acte he him selfe after confessed to haue béene euil done, and there∣fore would submit himselfe to the punishment: but as con∣cerning his beléefe in the Sacrament, he would not submit himselfe to the Popish administration. Vpon this acte William Flower being first apprehended, was laid in the Gatehouse at Westminster, where he had giuen two groates before, the same day to one: saying, hée would shortly come to him with as many Irons as he could beare. Afterward he was conuented before Boner his Or∣dinarie, the xix. of April 1555. Where (after the Bishop had sworne him vpon a booke, according to his ordinarie maner) he ministred Articles vnto him, and laboured at thrée seue∣rall appearings, to reduce Flower to his superstition, from the trueth of the Gospell. To whom when Flower answe∣red: do what you will, I am at a poynt, for the heauens shall assoone fall, as I wil forsake mine opinion, &c. The Bishop
called for depositions of certaine witnesses, and pronoun∣ced sentence against him. Vpon the xxiiij. day of April he was brought to the place of Martirdome, which was in Saint Margarets Church∣yarde at Westminster, where the fact was committed. And there comming to the stake whereat he shoulde bee burned; first he maketh his praier vnto God, with a confession of the Christian faith. At the striking off of his hand he did not once shrinke, but once he stirred a little his shoulders. And thus fire was set vnto him, who burning there, cried with a loud voice thrée times: Oh Sonne of God, haue mercy vp∣on me. And when his voice fayled, he held vp his armes, till he died, being stricken downe for wante of fire sufficient, (where his nether partes were burned) yet he being in the fire, his tongue moued in his head. The iij. of May, a letter was sent to George Colt, and T. Daniel, to make search for, and to apprehend I. Bernard and I. Welch, who vsed to repaire to Sudburie: and carrying a∣bout with them the bones of Pigot that was burned, shewed them to the people, perswading them to be constant in his religion. This day St. Aps was committed to little ease in the Tower, there to remaine two or thrée dayes, vntill fur∣ther examination. The xij. day, Master T. Rosse Preacher, was by the Coū∣sels letters, deliuered from the Tower, to the Sheriffe of Norfolke, to be deliuered to the B. of Norwich, to reduce him to recant, or to procéede against him according to law. The xvj. day a letter was sent to ye L. treasorer, signifying what the Lords had done for Rosse, and that order should be geuen according to his Lordships request, for letters to the Bishops. And as for Aps (whom the Lieftenant of the To∣wer reported to be mad) his L. perceiuing the same to be true, should commit him to Bedlem, and there to remayne vntill their further order. The xxvj. a letter was sent to the L. Treasorer, to con∣fer
with the B. of London, and the Iustices of peace in that Countie where they were to be executed, that were alrea∣die condemned for religion, and vpon agréement of places, to giue order for their execution accordingly. The 28. a letter was sent to the L. Treasuror,Queene Maries ioyfull deliue∣rance of child. to cause spéedy preparation to be made of such mony, as was appoin∣ted for such persons as should carrie the ioyfull tidinges of Quéene Maries good deliuerance of childe. The 29. day was a letter directed to sir Frauncis Ingle∣field, to make search for one Iohn D. at London, and to ap∣prehend him, and send him to the Counsell, and to make search for such papers and bookes as might touch the same D. or one Benger. Vpon the 30. day of May suffered together in Smith∣field Iohn Cardmaker otherwise called Taylor, prebenda∣rie of the Church of Wels, and Iohn Warne vpholster, of the parish of Saint Iohn in Walbrooke. Cardmaker was an obseruant Frier, afterward a married minister, and in King Edwardes dayes appoynted to bée reader in Paules. Where the Papistes were so much gréeued at him for his doctrine, that in his reading they cut & mangled his gowne with their kniues. He beyng apprehended in the begin∣ning of Quéene Maries dayes, with Maister Barlow bishop of Bath was brought to London and layed in the Fléeter King Edwards lawes yet beyng in force till the Parlement ended, which deliuered the Bishops authoritie, and power ouer the professors of the Gospell. At which time these two were both brought before Winchester & other cōmissioners, who answered in such sort vnto thē, that Winchester with his fellow commissioners allowed them for catholicke, glad to haue a forged example of a shrinking brother: which also they obiected against others, commending the sobernesse of them twaine. This notwithstanding, Barnard was led a∣gaine to the Fléete. From whence he afterward beyng de∣liuered, did by exile constantly beare witnesse to the truth.
Cardmaker was conueyed to the Counter in Bredstréete, the Bishop of London procuring it to be published, that hée should shortly be deliuered, after that hée had subscribed to Transubstantiation, and certaine other Articles. To the same prison where Cardmaker was, Laurence Saunders was brought, after sentence of death was giuen against him, & they had great comfort one of another. After whose departure Cardmaker remained alone, bayted of the Papistes. Against whom Doctor Martine tooke vpon him to be a chéefe dooer by writing, whome Cardmaker did sub∣stantially confute. When the Bishop perceiued no hope to peruert these constant seruants of God, hée pronounced sen∣tence against them. And vpon the xxx. day of Maie, Iohn Cardmaker with Iohn Warne were brought by the Shi∣riffes to ye place where they should suffer. Who being come to the stake; firste the Shiriffes called Cardmaker aside, and talked with him secréetly, so long that in the meane time Warne had made his prayers, was chayned to the stake, and had réede sette aboute him, so that nothing wan∣ted but firing: but stil abode Cardmaker with the Shiriffes. The people which before had heard that Cardmaker would recant, and beholding this manner of dooing, were in a mer∣ueylous dumpe and sadnes, thinking in déede that Cardma∣ker would now recant at the burning of Warne. At length Cardmaker departed from the Shiriffes & came towards the stake, and in his garments, as hée was knéeling downe made a long prayer in silence to himselfe, yet the people con∣firmed themselues in their fantasie of his recanting, séeing him in his garmentes praying secréetly and no resemblance of any burning. His prayers being ended, hée rose vp, put of his clothes vnto his shirte, went with bolde courage to the stake and kissed it swéetely, hée tooke Warne by the hand, and comfor∣ted him hartely,Cardmaker & Warne mar∣tyrs. and so also gaue himselfe to be bound to the stake most gladly.
The people séeing this so sodainly done, contrary to their fearful expectation, as men deliuered out of great doubt: cri∣ed out for ioy (with so great a showte as hath not lightly bin heard a greater) saying, God be praised:The people en∣courage Card∣maker at his death. the Lorde streng∣then thée Cardmaker, the Lord Iesus receiue thy spirit: and this continued till the executioner put fire to them. Which being done, they both passed through the fire to their eternal rest. The twelfth day a letter was sent to the Lord Trea∣surer, to cause writtes to bee made to the Sheriffe of Sus∣sex, for the burning and executing of Dericke a Bruer at Lewes, and other two: one in Stainings, and the other at Chichester. The 23. of Iune, a letter was sent to Boner to examine a report, giuen to the Councel, of 4. parishes within the Soo∣ken of Essex, that should still vse the English seruice: and to punish the offenders, if any such were. With maister Cardmaker & Iohn Warne, vpon the same day, and in the same company, and for the same cause were also condemned Iohn Ardeley and Iohn Simson, which was the 25. of May. They were both husbandmen in the parish of Wigborow in Essex, and almost both of one age, saue that Simson was of the age of 34. and the other of 30.Valiant mar∣tyr Ioh. Ardley Iohn Ardley being vrged by the B. to recant, saide boldly vnto the B. with many other wordes of like constancie: If euery haire of my head were a man, I would suffer death in the faith that I am now in. So the 25. of May, they both receiued sentence of condemnation, and were both in one day put to death in Essex, the 10. of Iune, Iohn SimsonIohn Simson martyr. at Rotchford, and Iohn Ardley at Rayley: which they pati∣ently endured for Christes sake. About the same time, one Iohn ToolyIohn Tooly. was executed as a fellon, for rayling on a Spaniard at S. Iames. And at the gallowes hee defied the Pope and his indulgences: and saide, hée trusted onely on the merits of Christ: with other
words against the Pope. For which, after he had béene bu∣ried, the mitered prelates caused him to be taken vp out of his graue (after they had excommunicated him for want of appearance) and committed him to the Sheriffe of London to be burned the 4. of Iune. Thomas Hawks was one of the 6. men condemned in one day of Boner, the 9 of February: and put to death the tenth of Iune. Hee was borne in Essex, and by profession a Courtier, and seruant to the Earle of Oxforde, till God tooke King Edward out of this world. He had borne to him a sonne, whose baptisme he deferred to the thirde wéeke, for that hée would not haue him baptised after the Papi∣sticall manner. For which cause, the aduersaries laid hands on him, and brought him to the Earle of Oxford. The Earle sendeth him vp to London, with letters to Boner. With whom Boner after much communication, and conference of his Chaplens with maister Hawkes, hee remained at Ful∣ham: and the B. the next day departed to London, and came home againe at night. Vpon the munday morning very early, the B. called for him agayne: and there Harpesfield Archdeacon of Lon∣don, reasoned with maister Hawkes touching Baptisme, and the masse &c. But Hawkes remayned constant, & with∣stood him with mightie power of the Scriptures: as also the B. himselfe Fecknam and Chadsey, at foure sundrie times after. The first day of Iuly, the B. did call him himselfe from the Porters lodge, and commanded him to prepare himselfe to prison: and so was hee sent to bée kept close prisoner in the gate house, where he remayned thirtéene daies: and then sent Boner two men to know how he did, and whether hée were the same man. To whom he answered constantly for the trueth. After which answere, he heard no more of the bi∣shop, till the 3. of September: on which day he was pri∣uately examined againe of Boner, and woulde haue had
his hand to a bill of articles: to whom when Hawkes had said; it should neither come into his hand, hart nor minde, the bishop wrapt it vp and put it into his bosome, and in a great anger went his way, and tooke his horse and rode on visi∣tation into Essex, and Hawkes went to prison againe. After these priuate conferences, perswasions, and long de∣batings, M. Hawkes was cited to appeare in the B. consi∣storie the viij. of February: & again the ix. Where being ex∣horted by the B. with many faire wordes, to returne againe to the bosome of the mother Church: after that hée had said to the Bishop: no my Lord, that will I not, for if I had an hundreth bodies, I would suffer them all to be torne in pieces rather then I will abiure or recant: at the last, Bo∣ner readeth the sentence of death vpon him: and so was hée dismissed to prison againe, till the 10. of Iune. Then was he committed to the handes of the Lorde Riche: who being as∣sisted, had him into Essex to suffer martyrdome at Coxhall. Certain of his friendes praied him to giue thē a signe, whe∣ther the payne of burning was so great, that a man might not there kéepe his patience in the fire, which thing hee promised them to doe. That if the payne were tollerable, then hée woulde lift vp his handes aboue his head towards heauen before hée gaue vp the Ghost. Which thing hée performed vnto them. For after he had conti∣nued a long time in the fire, and when his spéech was taken away by the violence of the flame, his skinne also drawen together, and his fingers consumed with the fire; that now all men thought certainelye that hee had béene gone:Haukes geueth a signe to his friendes. then sodeinly he reached vp both his handes, (burning on a light fire) ouer his head to the liuing God, and so with great reioysing (as it séemed) did strike or clappe them thrée seue∣rall times together.Haukes writte diuers comfor∣table epistles. At which sight the people gaue a mar∣ueylous showte. And so the blessed Martyr straightway sin∣king down into the fire, gaue vp the ghost. He wrote diuers comfortable Epistles.
The xxvj. of Aprill Thomas Wattes of Byllirica in Es∣sex a linen draper was apprehended and brought before the Lord Rich and other Commissioners at Chelmesford, who after short communication had with him, sent him vp to Bo∣ner, who after foure appearances and much labouring of him to recant, in the end pronounced sentence agaynst him, and deliuered him to the Shiriffes of London: by whom he was sent to Newgate, where hée remained till the ninth of Iune: or as some record, till the xxij. of Maie. At which time he was carried to Chelmesford, and there was brought to Scots house, kéeping an In, where they were at meat with Hawkes & the rest that came downe to their burning. They praied together both before and and after their meate. Wats went and praied priuatly to himselfe,Tho. Wats martyr. and afterward came to his wife and sixe children, being there (two of which com∣pany offered to burne with him,) and comforted him: and when he had kissed them all, was carried to the fire. Where he hauing kissed the stake said vnto my Lord Rich: beware my Lord, beware, for you do against your cōscience, &c. And so patiently he ended in the Lords quarrell. In the beginning of this moneto of Iune, the time was thought to be nigh of Quéene MariesQueen Mary proued not with child. trauaile: but their ex∣pectation was deceiued, and the Prelates and their fauou∣rers confounded: so that they dealt with one Isabell Mault dwelling in Aldersgate stréete in Horne Alley, to helpe the matter. Who before witnesses made this declaration: that she being deliuered of a man childe, vpon Whitsunday in the morning, the xj of Iune, there came to her the L. North and another Lord, to her vnknowen, dwelling about Olde Fishstréete. Who demaunded of her, if she would part from her childe, and would sweare that she neuer had, nor knew any such childe. Which if she would, her sonne should (they said) be wel prouided for, and she should take no care for it. With many faire offers, if she would parte with her child. After that came other women also, of whom, one (she said)
should haue béene the Rocker:T. Mault should haue bin Queene Ma∣ries childe. but she would not part with her Sonne, who was at the writing of this History aliue, of the age of xiij. yeres and vpward, and called Timothie Mault. About this time came out a Booke called a Caueat for England,A Caueat for England. giuing warning to Englishmen of the practises of the Spaniardes, and restoring of Abbey lands. Wherupon, came foorth a straite Proclamation against any booke or writing, that should empaire the Popes dignitie: whereby great peril grew vnto diuers people. With Thomas Haukes were sent downe thrée other to be burned for the testimonie of the trueth. Nicholas Cham∣berlaineNicholas Chā∣berlaine. at Colchester, the xiiij. of Iune. Thomas SommerTh. Sommer. at Maningtrée, the xv. of Iune. William Bamforde,W. Bamford. alias Butler, at Norwich, the same xv of the Moneth of Iune. All which men patiently and constantly endured the torment for his names sake. Within iij. dayes after that Master Bradforde had saued M. Bourne, who preached a seditious Sermon at Paules Crosse, he was sent for to the Tower, where the Quéene was then, to appeare there before the Counsell. Where he was charged with the acte of sauing Bourne, which act they called seditious: and also obiected against him for preaching: and so by them he was committed, first to the Tower, and afterwardes to the Kinges Bench: and after his condemna∣tion, to the Counter. He was a man of singular pietie, and great learning, and a speciall patterne of all vertue, where he became. Bishoppe Farrar being in the kinges Bench, after much labouring with, had promised the Papistes to receiue the Sacrament of the Altar with them at Easter in one kinde. Then it happened (by Gods prouidence) on Easter euen, the day before he should do it, that M. Bradforde was brought to the kings Bench, prisoner. Where he reclaimed M. Farrar, that he did not satisfie the Papistes in receiuing, as hée had
purposed. When the Kéepers wife had brought him worde he should on the morow be had to newgate, and so to be bur∣ned, he put off his cap, and lifted vp his eyes to heauen, and sayde:Bradford re∣ioyceth at the newes of his Martirdome. I thanke God for it, for I haue looked for the same a long time, and therefore it commeth now vnto me not so∣dainely, but as a thing wayted for euery day, and euery hower: and the Lorde make me woorthie thereof. And so (thanking her) he departed vp into his Chamber, and went secretelie him selfe, and prayed a long time aboue: and spent the euening in prayer, and other good exercises with his friendes. The time they carried him to Newgate, was about xi. or xij. of the clocke in the night, for feare of the people. And the next morning at nine of the clock, he was brought into Smithfield: whither (as he went) there came to him a bro∣ther in law of his, called R. Beswicke, and tooke M. Bradford by the hand. Which when Woodrooffe (being Sheriffe) did behold, he came and brake M. Beswickes head, that the bloud ranne about his shoulders. Being come to the place of exe∣cution, hee fell flatte to the grounde, secretely making his prayers to almightie God. Then rising vp againe, and put∣ting off his clothes vnto his shirte, he went to the stake, and (holding vp his handes, and casting his countenance to hea∣uen) said thus: O Englande, Englande repent thée of thy sinnes; beware of Idolatrie; beware of false Christes; take héede they doe not deceiue you. With which words the she∣riffe was greatly offended. So (hauing comforted I. Leafe, that suffered at the same Stake with him) embracing the Réedes, he sayd thus: Straight is the way, and narrowe is the Gate that leadeth to eternall saluation, and fewe there be that finde it.M. Bradfords words at the stake. And so constantly he ended this mor∣tall life. Hee remayned in the Tower of London (before his re∣moouing to other Prisons) from the Moneth of August, in the yere of our Lorde, one thousand fiue hundred fiftie thrée,
to the 22. of Ianuary Anno 1555. vpon which day he was called out to examination before Stephen Gardiner and o∣ther commissioners: before whom he appeared thrée times, and had great reasoning touching the reall presence with him, with Boner, & Worcester: and at the last was condem∣ned by Winchester, the last of Ianuarie. Which sentence beyng pronounced, he fell downe on his knées, and hartily thanked God, that he counted him worthie to suffer for his sake. After condemnation diuerse conferred with him, as Bo∣ner, Willerton, Creswell, Harding, Harpsfielde, and o∣ther mo: as Doctor Heath archbishop of Yorke, Day Bi∣shoppe of Chichester, Alphonso the Kinges confessor, and another Spanish Frier: Doctor Weston, Doctor Pendle∣ton &c. With maister Bradford was burned one Iohn Lease,Iohn Leafe 19. yeere old, bur∣ned with Brad∣ford. an apprentice, of the age of ninetéen yéeres. Who when two billes were sent vnto him into the Counter: the one con∣tayning a recantation, and the other his confession, to know to which of them he woulde put his hand to. First hearing the byll of recantation read vnto him, (because hée coulde not reade nor write himselfe,) that hée refused: and when the other was read vnto him, which he well liked of: in∣stéede of a penne, he tooke a pinne, and so pricking his hand, sprinkled the bloud vpon the same bill: willing the Reader thereof to shew the B. that he had sealed the same with his bloud already. And so being condemned,Iohn Leafe, a notable young man, a martir. he suffe∣red patiently with M. Bradford. Within halfe a yere after, God did so strike the fore∣named sherife, Master Woodrooffe, which so cruelly hand∣led M. Bradforde,Gods iudge∣ment. that his right side being stricken with a palsey, hee so remayned till his dying day, eyght yeres to∣gether. Master Bradford wrote a whole volume of Letters,Bradfordes Letters. to sundrie persons, out of prison. And greatly strengthened,
and comforted many: to the Citie of London, to Cambridge into Lankesshire, and Chesshire, to the towne of Walden, with a nūber other to priuate persons. The next day after M. Bradford & Iohn Leafe did suffer in Smithféeld, Williā Munge préest died in pryson at Maidstone, being there in bondes for religion, & like to haue suffered if he had liued. Vpon the iij. of Iulie Anno 1555. died one Iames Tre∣uisam in the parish of S. Margaret in Lothberie, and was borne vpon a table without coffin or any thing else, into Moore-féeld and there buried. The same night the body was cast vp aboue the ground, and his sheete taken from him, and he left naked. After this, the owner of the field seeing him, buried him again.The dead body summoned to appeare to an∣swere. And a fortnight after, the sumner came to his graue, and summoned him to appeare at Paules before his ordinary, to answere such thinge as should be laide a∣gainst him. The 13. of Iuly, Iohn Bland parson of Adesham in Kent, I. Frankesh, Nicholas Sheterden, and Humfrey Middle∣ton were all foure burned together at CanterburyFoure mar∣tyrs in Can∣terbury. for one cause: whereof Frankesh and Bland were ministers and preachers. He was twise before put in prison for the Go∣spell, and by suite of friends deliuered: but because he coulde not kéepe silence in his liberty, but preach vnto the people, he was the third time imprisoned. The xiij or xiiij. of Februarie, he was sent to Canterbu∣rie gaole, where he lay x. wéekes, and then was bayled, and bound to appeare at the next Sessions at Canterburie. But the matter being exhibited to the Spirituall Court, there it was heard. So that the xviij. of May he was examined by Harpsfielde: and againe the xxi. And from them tossed to the Sessions, at Gréenewich, the xviij. and xix. of Februarie. And after much reasoning with the Commissarie, and other of the Spirituall Court, he was condemned the xxv. day of Iune, by the S. of Douer, R. Thornton, sometimes a Pro∣fessor assisted by the Commissarie, Robert Cellius, and the
archdeacon Nicholas Harpsfield. The same day were the rest afore named condemned, and suffered ioyfully together at Canturburie, the xij. of Iuly, at two stakes, al in one fire. The same moneth of Iuly, next after the suffering of the Kentishmen aboue named, Nicholas Hall bricklayer, and Christopher WadeNicholas Hall, Christopher Wade martyrs of Dartford suffered: & were condemned by Maurice B. of Rochester, about ye last day of the moneth of Iune. Nicholas Hall was burned at Rochester, about the xix. of Iuly. In which moneth of Iuly thrée other more were condēned by Maurice: whose names were Ioane Breach wi∣dow, Iohn Horpoll of Rochester, and Margerie Polley. Christopher Wade of Dartford in the Countie of Kent lynen draper, was appointed to be burned at Dartford. A∣bout x. of the clocke, the Shiriffe bringeth Wade pinioned, and by him one Margerie PolleyMargerie Pol∣ley comforteth Wade. of Tunbridge both singing a Psalme. Which Margerie, so soone as shée spied a great multitude gathered about the place where she should suffer, wayting her comming, she said vnto Wade very lowde and chéerefully: you may reioyce Wade, to sée such a company gathered to celebrate your mariage this day. Wade cōming to the stake tooke it in his armes embracing it, & kissed it: and being setled thereto, his handes and eies lift vp to heauen: He spake with a chéerefull and lowde voice, the last verse of the 86. psalme: Shew some good tokē vpon me O Lord,Wades praier. that they which hate me, may sée it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord hast helped me, & comforted me. Néere vnto the stake approched a Frier intēding some matter, while Wade was a praying. Whom when he spied, he cried earnestly to the people to beware of the doctrine of the whore of Babylon: with such vehemencie, that the Frier withdrew himselfe without speaking any word. Thē réeds being set about him he pulled & embraced them in his armes, alwaies with his hands making a hole against his face, that his voice might be heard: which they perceiuing that were his tormentors, alwaies cast faggots at ye same hole. Which he notwithstan∣ding
stil (as he could) put off, his face being hurt with ye end of a faggot cast thereat. Then fire being put to him, he cried vnto God often: Lord Iesus receiue my soule. And beyng dead and altogether rosted, his handes were held ouer his head, as though he had béene staied with a prop. The 22. of Iuly was burned at Lewes within ye countie of Sussex, one Dyrick CaruerDyrick Caruer Béerebrewer, in the parish of Bright-hamstéed in the same countie: & the next day was al∣so burned at Steining, Iohn LanderIohn Lander. late of Godstone, in the county of Surrie. Which two mē (with others) about ye end of the moneth of October were apprehended by Edw. Gage gentleman, as they were at praier in the house of Dyrick, & by him were sent vp to London to ye Counsell: who after ex∣aminatiō sent them to Newgate, there to attend the leisure of Boner. From whence they were brought the viij. of Iune next after, into the B. chāber in his house at Londō, Where being examined & earnestly perswaded with, and no hope to peruert thē: after diuerse examinations they were condēned the x of Iune, of ye B. in his cōsistorie at Paules, & afterwards were conueyed to the places afore mentioned: where they gaue their liues chéerfully and gladly for the testimonie of ye truth. Dyrick was a man blessed with tēporall riches, which notwithstanding were no clog to him during his imprison∣ment: although he was well stricken in yéeres, & as it were past ye time of learning, yet he so spent his time, that being at his first apprehensiō vtterly ignorāt of any letter of ye booke: yet could he before his death read any printed English. In his praier at the stake he vttered these words: oh Lord my God thou hast writtē: he that will not forsake wife, chil∣drē, house, and all that euer he hath, & take vp thy crosse & fol∣low thée is not worthy of thee:Dyrick Car∣uers words at the stake. but thou Lord knowest, that I haue forsaken all to come vnto thée: Lord haue mercy vpō me, for vnto thée I commend my spirit, & my soule doth re∣ioyce in thée. These wordes were the last that hée spake, till the fire was put vnto him. And after the fire came to him: he
cried: Lord haue mercy vpon me: and so died. At Chichester about the same moneth, was burned one Tho. IuesonTho. Iueson. of Godstone, in the county of Surrey Carpen∣ter: after perswasion in vaine to recant. When he had said: if there came an Angel from heauen to teach him another doc∣trine, then that which he was now in, he would not beléeue him, he was condemned, & committed to the secular power. In ye latter end of this month of Iuly, Ioh. AleworthIoh. Aleworth. died in prison at Reding, being there in bōds for ye testimony of Ie∣su. About ye end of Iuly, Iames Abbes was brought before ye B. of Norwich, D. Hopton: to whō through his threatnings in ye end Iames yelded and now whē he was dismissed, & shold go frō the B, he calling him again, gaue him a piece of mony either xx. or xl d: which whē Iames had receiued & was gone frō ye B: his conscience began to rob, & immediatly to accuse his fact. In which cōbate with himself, (being piteously vex∣ed) he went immediatly to ye B. again, & there threw him his money, & said: it repented him that euer he gaue his consent to perswasions: & that he gaue his consent in taking money. Whē no perswasions could auaile with him, he was condē∣ned to the fire: which he endured patiently for the name of Christ, the 2. of August An. 1555. in the towne of Berry. Vpon the 5. of Iuly, Ioh. DenleyIohn Denley. gent. Ioh. Newman,Ioh. Newman. and Patrick PackingāPatrick Pac∣kingam. were condēned in the consistory of Pauls to be burned for the testimony of Iesus. The two first were met on the way by Edmond Tyrrel Esquier: a most barba∣rous persecutor in those daies, comming from the burning of certain godly martirs: & vpon suspicion he sent thē to Boner: who after much trial and perswasion, were condemned for the cause of Christ, and afterward suffered for the same. M. Denley at Vxbridge the 8, of August, beeing set in the fire, with the burning flame about him, sang in it a Psalm. Which D. Story being present hearing, cōmanded one of the tormētors to hurle a fagot at him: which was done, so that ye blood rā down vpō his face: wherat he ceased singing a while,
and clapped his handes on his face: and anon, putting his hands abroad,The martyr singeth in the fire. sang againe. At the last he yéelded his soule in∣to the hands of his redéemer. Story in the meane while say∣ing, that he that floong the fagot, marred a good old song. Not long after, suffered Patrick Packingam in the same towne, About the 28. of the same moneth, Iohn Newman Pewterer dwelling at Maidstone in Kent, was burned the last of Au∣gust at Saffron Walden in Essex. About the same time, Richard HookeRich. Hooke. gaue his life for the same cause at Chichester. The same yéere 1555,  about the latter end of August suf∣fered, 6. godly martyrs together in Canterbury,Sixe godly martyrs in Canterbury. for the testi∣mony of Iesus: being condēned by the bloody Suffragā, M. Collins & Faucet. Their names were Williā Coker, Williā Hopper, Henry Laurence, Richard Collier, Rich. Wright, William Stere. Coker had giuen him respite of 6. daies, but refused them, & so was condemned. The xi. of Iuly, Hopper séemed at ye first to graunt vnto thē, but repēted: & was after∣ward cōdemned. The 16. of Iuly, Laurence being required to set to his hand to ye bil of his answeres, wrote these words: You are all of Antichrist, and him foll. And there they staied him, and would not suffer him to procéed: and wrote not fol∣low. So the second of August they read sentence against him. Collier of Ashford was condemned the 16. of August. After sentence giuen against him, he sang a psalm: ye priest crying that he was out of his wits. The same day Wright and Stere were condemned, and the day aforesaid, they con∣stantly suffered for the testimony of Christ. After the burning of these 6. aboue named, next followed the persecution of ten other seruaunts of God: Elizabeth Warne, George Tankerfield, Robert Smith, Stephen Hard∣wood, Thomas Fust, William Hall, Tho. Lewes, George King, Iohn Wade, Ioane Laishford. Elizabeth WarneEliz. Warne. in the moneth of August, was burned at Stratford-bow: she was widow, & late wife of Ioh. Warn
Vpholster and Martyr, who also was burned in the ende of the Moneth of May last past. She had béene apprehended amongst others the first day of Ianuarie, in a house in Bow Churchyarde in London, as they were gathered together in prayer: and at that present was caried to the counter, where she lay a prisoner til the xj. of Iune. At which time she was brought into Newgate, and remayned there til the ij. of Iu∣lie. Then she was sent by the Commissioners to Boner: who the vi. day of the same Moneth, caused her with diuers others to be brought before him to his Pallace. Where, af∣ter diuers vexations, and allurements to forsake Christ, af∣ter she had said to them: (threatning her) do what you will, for if Christ were in an error, thē am I in an error, shée was iudged to die. The chéefe procuror of her death was D. Sto∣rie, being (as is thought) of some alliance to her, or her late husband. G. TankerfieldGeorge Tan∣kerfield. of Lōdon Cooke, borne in the city of Yorke, about the age of xxvij. or xxviij. yeares, was in king Ed. dayes a papist, til Q. Marie came in. In whose dayes, (perceiuing the great crueltie that was vsed) he beganne to doubt, and fel to prayer, and reading of the word, which God did so blesse, that he grewe in knowledge: which so kindled him with zeale, that he became an exhorter of others. At the last he was found out, and while he went into the Temple fieldes to refresh himselfe, hauing béene sick before, Bearde commeth home to his house, and enquired for him: preten∣ding to his wife, that he came to haue him dresse a banket at the L. Pagets. She thinking no lesse, went and tolde her hus∣band: who when he heard it, said: a banket woman: indéede it is such a banket as wil not be pleasant to the flesh. But Gods will be done. And when he came home, he sawe who it was. And so Tankerfield was deliuered to the Constable, and brought to Newgate about the last of Februarie, 1555. by the said Beard, yeoman of the Gard, and S. Ponder, peute∣rer, Constable of S. Dunstans in the west. He was sent in by sir R. Cholmley knight, & D. Man, a bloudy persecuter.
And being brought before Boner, & constantly maintayning the trueth, was by him condemned: and suffered at S. Albōs the xxvi. day of August, for the testimonie of the trueth. Go∣ing down to suffer, at the signe of the crosse keyes where hée inned, he desired the hoste yt he might haue a good fire: which was made according as he required. Then he (sitting on a fourme before the fire) put off his shoes and hose, & stretched out his leg to the flame: and when it had touched his foote, he quickly withdrew it, shewing how the flesh perswaded him one way,A pretty saying of the martir. and the spirit another. After dinner ye sherife came to him, to cary him to the place of executiō. Who considering the shortnes of time, his saying was, that although the day were neuer so long, yet at the last it ringeth to euensong &c. About ij. of the clocke he was brought to the place called Romeland, a gréene néere the west end of the abbey church. After he had prayed at the stake, he said wt a chéerfull voice, that although he had a sharp dinner, yet he hoped to haue a ioyful supper in heauen. While ye reeds were set about him, a priest came to perswade him to beléeue in the sacrament. But Tankerfield cried vehemētly, I defy the whore of Ba∣bilon, fie on the abhominable idol. Whereat the maior was sore offended, and said: though he had but one lode of fagots in the world, he would geue them to the burning of him. There was a certaine knight by, that went vnto Tāker∣fielde, and tooke him by the hand, and said: good brother be strong in Christ. This he spake softly: and Tankerfield said, Oh sir, I thanke you, I am so I thank God. Fire being put to him,The patience of the martirs caused the peo∣ple to say they had the deuil. he embraced the flame, and bathed his hands therin, and so gaue vp his soule into the handes of Christ. Whose patience was such, that certaine superstitious olde women did say the deuill was in him, and in all such Heretikes, and therefore they could not almost féele any payne. Robert SmithRobert Smith. was brought to Newgate the fifth of No∣uember, in the first or second yere of the Q. by I. Mathew, yoman of the gard, & by the commandement of the Counsell.
First he was seruant to sir Th. Smith prouost of Eaton, frō whence he was preferred to a clerkship of x.l in Eaton. Hée was much confirmed in the truth, by the preachings & rea∣dings of one M. Turner of Windsor and others: Wherfore at the cōming in of Mary he was depriued of his clerkship, and not long after their examinations, wherein boldly and wisely he behaued himselfe in the cause of Christ, he was condemned in the consistorie the xij. of Iuly, and from thence was had to Newgate, with other of the brethren. He wrote diuerse letters in prison to sundry fréends. Hée suffered at Vxbridge the viij. of August. Being at ye stake he comforted the people, willing them to thinke well of his cause, and not to doubt but his body dying in that quarrell, should rise a∣gaine to life. And (said he) I doubt not but God will shewe you some tooken therof. At length he being well nigh halfe burnt and blacke with fire,The martyr giueth a signe. clustered together as in a lumpe like a blacke cole, all men thinking him for dead, suddainly rose vpright before the people, lifting vp the stumpes of his armes, and clapping the same together, and so hanging ouer the fire slept in the Lord. About this time died Stephen HarwoodStephen Har∣wood. at Stratford, & Thomas FustThomas Fust. at Ware, both for the testimonie of Iesus. Also about the end of August William HaileWilliā Haile. was bur∣ned at Barnet, and constantly suffered for the truth. George King, Thomas Lewes, and Iohn Wade sickened in Lollardes tower, died, and were cast into the fieldes, and buried in the night by the brethren. So also William An∣drew died in pryson, who was brought to Newgate, Anno 1555, by Ihon Motham Cōstable of Maulden in Essex. The principall promoter of him was the Lord Rich. The xxxj. of August suffered Robert Samuell preacher & minister at Barfold in Suffolke, his chéefe persecutor was M. Foster a iustice of Cobdock a litle from Ipswich: where he caused M. Samuell to be apprehēded & put in the goale of Ipswich: frō whence being remoued to Norwich, he fell into
the cruell hands of the bishop Doctor Hopton & Dunnings his chancellour: who first caused him to be chained bolt vp∣right to a great post: in such sort, that standing onely on tip∣toe, hée was faine to stay vp the whole waight of his bodie: besides he so pined him with hunger & thirst, his allowance being only two or thrée mouthfuls of bread, and thrée spone∣fuls of water for his dayly sustenance, that his body was so dried vp that he could not make one drop of vrine to relieue his thirst. He had diuerse visions during the time of his im∣prisonment,Samuell hath a vision. which he for modesties sake concealed. Sauing this one he declared, that after he had béene pined iij. daies, he fell in a sléepe or slumber, & one clad all in white séemed to stand before him, which ministred vnto him comfort in these wordes: Samuell, Samuell, be of good chéere, and take a good hart vnto thée, for after this day shalt thou neuer hun∣ger nor thirst. Which came so to passe accordingly. As hée came to the fire a certaine mayde came vnto him, and kissed him: her name was Rose Nottingham.Rose Not∣tingham. Next after the suffering of Robert SamuellRobert Sa∣muell. about the be∣ginning of September, was burned Williā AllenW. Allen. in Wal∣singham laboring man. At his suffering, such was his cre∣dite among the Iustices, by reason of his well tried conuer∣sation among them, that he was suffered to go vntied to his suffering: and there with patience and constancie gaue wit∣nes to the truth by shedding of his bloud. The same yéere in the moneth of Septēber, Roger CooRoger Coo. of Melford in Suffolke a sheareman, and an aged father, af∣ter sundry conflicts with his aduersaries was committed to the fire at Yexford in the countie of Suffolke. Hée was con∣demned the xij. of August by the bishop of Norwich. With the aforesaid was also condemned Thomas CobbeTho. Cobbe. of Hauerhill butcher, and was burned in the towne of Tet∣ford in the moneth of September. About the vj. of September, Robert Catmer of Hith, Ro∣bert Streater of Hith, Anthony Burward of Calete, George
Brodbridge of Bromfield, Iames Tutley of Brēchley were condemned by Thornton S. of Douer. About the mids of Septemb, Thomas Hayword,Th. Hayword. & Iohn GarewayIoh. Gareway. suffered at the towne of Lichfield, for the testimo∣nie of the trueth. About this time, there was a godly gentleman, M. Iohn GlouerM. Ioh. Glouer. in the dioces of Lichfield and Couentry, whom the B. by his letters charged the maior of Couentry to appre∣hend. But so soon as he had receiued the letters, he sent a pri∣uie watchword to Iohn to escape and shift for himselfe: who with his brother William, was not so soon departed out of his house, but that yet in ye sight of them, the Sheriffe, and other searchers came in to take him. But when Iohn could not be found, one of the officers going into an vpper chamber, foūd there Robert the other brother: a maister of art in Cābridge, lying sicke of a long disease: which was by him incontinent brought before the sheriffe, by whom he was committed to the gaole forthwith. Not being called to his answere, he was moued to enter in bonds, and so to be dismissed. But that he refused to doe, because they had nothing to lay to his charge. So he remained prisoner in Couentry the space of 10. or 11 daies: being neuer called of the maisters to answere. The 2 day after, the B. comming to Couentrie, M. War∣ren came to the guildhall, & willed the chiefe gaoler to carrie him to the B. With whom after much disputation, when he could not agrée: he was returned againe to the cōmon gaole. On the Friday morning, being the next day after, he with other brethren was carried to Lichfield, whither they came at 4 a clock: & were friendly entertained at the Sun. But the same night they were put in prison by Iephcot the Chancel∣lors man: being destitute on the sodain of al necessaries. He put him into a prison (where he continued til he was condē∣ned) a place next to ye dungeō, narrow of room, strong of buil∣ding & very colde, with smal light: where he was allowed a būdell of straw in stéed of a bed, without any thing els to ease
himself withal: & was alowed no help neither night nor day, nor company of any man, notwithstāding his great sicknes. Within 2. daies after, the Chancellour, & one Temsey a pre∣bendary, came to exhort him to conformity: to whō he gaue none eare. He was also in the mean time of his imprisonmēt assailed by tēptations of Satan: but God vpheld his seruant. At the B. first comming to Lichfield, after his imprison∣ment, he was called before him, none being present but his chaplains, and seruants, sauing an old priest: with whom he had reasoning of the church and of the sacrament, &c. and to the end he continued constant in the truth. After that, he was condemned of the B. Austen Bernher, a minister reporteth of him, that for 3. or 4. daies before his death, his heart grew lumpish, so that he feared least ye Lord shold not assist: though he had earnestly praied for the same. This his tēptation he signified to Austen his familiar friēd: who exhorted him with patience to waite the Lordes ley∣sure, and if consolation came, hee would shew some signe vn∣to him thereof:God sendeth the spirite of comfort. whereby he might also witnes the same: & so he departed. The next day when he came to ye sight of the stake, sodainly he was so mightily replenished with heauēly comfort: that he cried out, clapping his hands to Austen, and saying in these words:Robert Glo∣uer. Austen he is come, he is come, &c. In the same fire was burned with him, Cornelius Bun∣geyCornelius Bungey. a Capper of Couentry, and condemned by the B. of Co∣uentry, and so they ioyfully suffered together about the 20. of September. Iohn Glouer and William died after, and were prohibi∣ted to be buried. Iohn a twelue moneth after, being condem∣ned to be taken vp, and cast ouer the wall, as Doct. Dracot gaue sentēce. The other was prohibited to be buried by one Iohn Thirlme of Weme in Shropshire. Where hee died, and Barnard the Curate with him. In the same dioces also, M. Edward Bourton, who requi∣red of his friende, that hee might not bee buried after the
popish manner, was prohibited buriall, and was buried in his owne garden. In the same countie of Salop, Olyuer RichardineOlyuer Ri∣chardine. of the parish of Whitchurch was burned in Hartford West, Sir Iohn Yong beyng Shiriffe. Which séemeth to haue béene a∣bout the latter end of king Henry the eight. After the martyrdome of those aforesaid, followed next the condemnation of William WolseyW. Wolsey. and Robert PygotRobert Pygot. paynter, who were iudged and condemned at Ely by Iohn Fuller Chauncellour, Doctor Shaxton his Suffragan, Ro∣bert Steward Deane of Ely, Iohn Chrystopherson Deane of Norwich, &c. Anno 1555. The eleuenth of October they were burned in Wisbich. Wolsey was a Constable at Welles, and was brought to death by one Richard Euerard Gentleman, a Iustice of peace. He might haue departed if he listed: being willed so to do by D. Fuller: but he said he would be deliuered by law, and no otherwise. Pigot being called at ye sessions at Wisbich, would not ab∣sent himselfe, but appeared, & was with the other, carried to Ely to prisō: where they remained til they suffred. During which time, there came to thē one Peter Valentius a French man, who had bin a remainer there about xx. yeres, & strēg∣thened them in the faith. Shaxton had béene a professor, and became a reuolt, and laboured with them, and said: good bre∣thren remember your selues, and become new men: for I haue béene of this fond opinion, &c. To whome Wolsey an∣swered. Ah, are you become a new man? wo be to thée thou wicked new man: God shall iustly iudge thée. In the ende, sentence was geuen against them, and they committed to the stake: where they did sing the 106. psalme, clapping (as it was thought) certaine new Testaments to their breasts, which were throwen into the fire to be burned with them. The same yere, moneth, and day in the which the fore∣saide martyrs were burned at Ely, which was an 1555 the
sixtenth of October, followed also at Oxford the slaughter of M. Ridley B. of London, and M. Latimer B. sometimes of Worcester. M. RidleyM, Ridley. was sometimes maister of Pen∣brooke hall in Cambridge: afterward was made Chaplen to king Henry the eight, and promoted by him to be bishop of Rochester: and from thence in king Edwards daies trans∣lated to London. He was replenished with singular vertues and great learning. He shewed great compassion on Boners mother in K. Edwards daies: whose sonne now full vncour∣tuously requited him. He was first conuerted to the truth, by reading Bertrames booke of the Sacrament, whom also the conference with Peter Martyr & bishop Cranmer did much confirme. When Quéene Marie came in first, he was com∣mitted to the tower, & from thence with the Archb. of Can∣terbury, and Latimer, to Oxford: and there inclosed in the common gaole of Bocardo. Where at length being disseue∣red from them, he was committed to custodie in the house of one Irish:Sundry let∣ters and trac∣tations of Rid∣ley. where he remained till his martyrdom. Which was from the yéere 1554. till 1555, the xvi. of October. He wrote diuers letters and sundry tractations in time of his captiuity. Maister LatimerM. Latimer. of the Vniuersity of Cambridge, was first a zealous Papist, and a railer against those that profes∣sed the Gospel, as he did plainly declare in his Oration a∣gainst Philip Melancthon, when he procéeded Bachelour of Diuinitie.M. Latimer a zealous papist sometime, and conuerted by Bilney. But especially he could not abide Master Staf∣forde, Diuinitie Reader there. But M. Bilney had compas∣sion of his blinde zeale: and after a time came to Latimers studie, and desired him to heare him make his confession. In hearing whereof he was so touched, that thereupon he lefte his Schoole diuinitie, and grewe in further knowledge of the trueth. After he came to the knowledge of the trueth he feruent∣ly embraced the same, and suffered with patiēce many con∣flictes therefore. He had especiall enemies in Cambridge, a
black Frier, one Doctor Buckeman, Prouost of the house: and another Frier, an outlandish man, called Doctor Vene∣tus, besides all the rabble of the Heades and Doctors: as, Doctor Watson, Master of Christes Colledge, whose Scho∣ler Latimer had béene before: D. Notaries, Master of Clare Hall: Doctor Phili, Master of Michael house: D. Medcalfe, Master of S. Iohns: D. Blithe, of the kings hal: D. Bullock Master of the Quéenes Colledge: Doctor Cliffe, of Clement house: Doctor Downes, of Iesus Colledge: D. Palmes, ma∣ster of S Nicholas Hostel, &c. At the last came D. West, Bishop of Ely, who (preaching against Latimer at Barnewel Abbey) forbad him to preach any more within the churches of the Vniuersitie. Notwith∣standing, D. Barnes, Prior of the Augustine Friers, did li∣cence Master Latimer to preach in his Church of the Augu∣stine Friers: and he himselfe preached at the Church by, cal∣led Saint Edwardes: which was the first Sermon of the Gospel that D. Barnes preached, being vpon Christmasse euen, vpon a Sunday. Whereupon, Articles were gathered out against him by M. Tirrel, Felow of the Kings Hall: and presented to the Cardinall. Notwithstanding the enemies that Latimer had in Cambridge, hee continued preaching there thrée yeres, and kept conference with Master Bilney. So that the place where they vsed most to walke in ye fields, was commonly called the Heretikes hill. After he had trauelled in preaching thrée yeres in Cam∣bridge, at length he was called vp to ye Cardinall for heresie, & being contented to subscribe to such Articles as they pro∣pounded vnto him, was dismissed. After this, by the meanes of Doctor Buttes, a great fauourer of good men,D. Buttes a fa∣uourer of good men. he was a∣mong the number of those that laboured in the Kinges Su∣premacie, and went to the Court: where, after a space, hee obteined a Benefice in Wiltshire, in a towne called West∣kington. So he left the Court, & there kept residence. There he also found enemies, as in the Vniuersitie, that drew ar∣ticles
against him. As, that he should preach against our La∣die; Saintes; Auemaries; &c. His chéefe enemies (besides the Priestes of the Countrey) were Doctor Powel of Salesbu∣rie: Doctor Wilson, sometime of Cambridge: Master Hub∣berden: and Doctor Sherewood. By whose meanes he was cited vp to W. Warham, Archb. of Canterburie, and Iohn Stokeseley B of London an. 1531. the xxix. of Ianuarie: e∣uery wéeke for a space thrise. Being called before them, in the end he was dismissed: on what condition it is vncertain. At length, through the procurement of D. Buttes, & Crom∣well, he was aduaunced by the king to be B. of Worcester. Who (whē holy bread, and holy water should be ministred) caused these verses to be pronounced to the people in his dio∣ces:Verses of Lati∣mer at the gi∣uing of holy bread and holie water. Remember your promise in baptising; Christ his mer∣cie and bloudsheading: By whose most holy sprinkling; Of all your sinnes you haue full pardoning. At the geuing of holy bread, these verses following. Of Christes body this is a token; which on the crosse for our sinnes was broken. Wherefore of your sinnes you must be forsakers: If of Christes death you wil be partakers. In his Bishoprick also he suffered much trouble for wel doing, but the king greatly fauoured him. He continued in his bishoprick til the time of the vi. articles. At which time, of his own accord he resigned it. At which time also, Shaxtō B. of Salisburie, resigned his bishoprick. So they kept silēce til the time of K. Edward. And comming vp to London, for cure of a bruise, which he receiued by a fall from a Trée, hée was molested, and cast into the Tower, til the time of king Ed. In whose dayes he was set frée, and preached againe, with great fruite and edification of the people. He being 67. yeres of age, preached euery sunday twise for the most part: and both winter and summer, about ij. of the clock in ye mor∣ning he would be at his booke most diligently. He euer af∣firmed that the preaching of the Gospel would coste him his life: and perswaded himselfe that Winchester was kept in
the Tower for the same purpose: as the Euent did truly prooue. For after the death of K. Edward he was sent for by a purseuant: of whose comming he had intelligence by Iohn Careles, & prepared himself before to go with him. The pur∣seuant when he had deliuered his letters to him, departed, affirming that he had commandement not to tarrie for him, whereby it should appeare they would haue had him fledde the realme, but he cōmeth vp to London, & passing through Smithfield, (where merely hée said that Smithfield had long groaned for himSmithfield had long groa∣ned for M. La∣timer.) was brought before the Counsel. Of whom he was againe cast into the Tower, where he was hardly vsed, yet bare it cherefully, for when the Lieftenāts man vpon a time came to him: the aged father kept without fire in frosty weather, & welnigh sterued for cold, he merily had the man tel his master, that if he did not looke the better to him, perchance he would deceiue him. Which when the Lieftenant heard, fearing he should make escape,M. Latimer almost sterued for cold in the tower. chargeth him with his words. Yea M. Lieftenant, saith he, so I saide: for you look I think that I should burne, but I am like here to sterue for cold. Thus passing a long time in the tower: from thence hée was transported to Oxford with Ridley and Cranmer to di∣spute: as hath béene aforesaid. He wrote diuers and sundrie letters. Among other enemies to LatimerLatimers sun∣dry letters. at Oxford, there was one Hubberden, who riding by a Church side, where the youth of the Parishe were daunsing, came into the Church, and caused the bell to be tolled, and there made to the people a Sermon of daunsing.A Sermon of piping and daunsing. In which Sermon, hée made the Doctors of the Church to answere to his call, and to sing after his time, for the probation of the Sacrament of the Altar, against Latimer, Frith, &c, and all Heretikes. At the last, as he had made them sing, so after he maketh them daunce also. And first he calleth out Christ and his twelue Apostles: then the auncient Doctors of the church, as in a round ring, all to daunce together, with pipe vp Hubberdē.
Now daunce Christ, now daunce Peter, now Paule &c. And in conclusiō, such a dauncing kept Hubberdin, that the pul∣pet fell, and downe falleth Hubberdine and brake his leg, and died not long after. The people refused to repaire the pulpet, saying: it was not for dauncers. M. Latimer to the king for restoring of the Scriptures.M. Latimer also wrote to king Henry the viij. for the re∣storing of the frée reading of holy Scriptures, which was in∣hibited. Anno 1531. and Anno 1546. For the which Letter, hée receiued rather thankes then displeasure of the King: and not long after that, hee was aduanced to be a Bi∣shop. Amongst other memorable acts of Latimer, this was one worthy to be remembred: that being B. of Worcester, whē others gaue newyeeres gifts of golde and siluer &c. hee pre∣sented the king with a new Testament for a new yéers gift,M. Latimers newyeeres gift to the king. and a napkin hauing this poesie about it. Fonicatores & adul∣teros iudicabit Dominus. Anno 1555. In the month of October, Ridley & Latimer were both brought forth to their finall examination and ex∣ecution: the Commissioners wherof, were maister White, Bishop of Lincolne, maister Brookes Bishop of Glocester, with others. Vpon the 20. of September was sent downe a commis∣sion to Oxforde from Cardinall Poole to the parties afore∣saide, to procéede against Ridley in iudgement, and Latimer, except they would recant. So the last of September, they were cited to appeare before the Lordes in the Diuinitie Schoole at Oxford, at viij of the clocke. Where first appea∣red Master Ridley, and then Latimer. M. Ridley (while the Commission was read) standing bare before, when he heard the Popes holines named,Ridley coue∣reth his head at the name of the Pope. and the Cardinal, put on his cap: and being thrise admonished, woulde not (by putting it off) geue signe of reuerence vnto the Pope or his Legate. At the last, the Bishop of Lincolne commanded one of the Be∣dles to pluck his cap from his head. Master Ridley bowing
his head to the officer, gentlie permitted him to take away his cappe. After that Lincolne perswaded him with a long oration to recant: to which Rydley maketh answere, con∣futing the vsurped supremacie of the Pope &c. In the ende they obiected articles, whereto presently they required an∣swere: but they said such as should not be preiudiciall to that he should say to morrow. So they tooke his answeres, and appointed him againe the next morrow at eight of the clocke, willing the Maior he should haue penne, yncke, and paper, &c. So dismissing Maister Rydley, they sent for maister Latimer. To whom after exhortation to recant, and other conference, they propounded the same articles to him which they propounded to maister Rydley. Whereto he answered presently, and was assigned to appeare on the morrow againe: which maister Latimer was loth to do wil∣ling them to make spéed in that they would do. So ye Maior being charged with him, they brake vp for ye day their sessiō. The next day following, which was the first of October, maister Rydley appeared againe: and because he would not reuerence them, his cap was snatched hastely off his head. After the articles were read, & he required to answeare, maister Rydley tooke a shéet of paper out of his bosome, and began to read that which he had writtē: but ye B. of Lincolne commaunded ye Beadle to take it from him. To whom Ryd∣ley sayd, why my Lord, wil you require my answeare, and not suffer me to publish it, I beséech you, &c. so maister Ryd∣leyRidley not suf∣fered to make his answere. séeing no remedy deliuered it to an officer, that imme∣diatly deliuered it to the B. of Lincolne: who after he had se∣cretly communicated it to other two Byshops, declared the sence, but would not reade it, saying, it contained words of blasphemie. Master Rydley on the other syde would make no other answere then was contained in his writinges: which being recorded by ye register, the B. of Glocester fel to perswade master Rydley to recant. To whō maister Ridley taking in hand to answere, the B. of Glocester interrupted
him. The B. of Lincolne with his cap in his hand, desired him to returne to the vnity of their Church: which intrra∣tie, when he saw it moued not the constant seruant of God. He pocéeded to sentence of condemnation against him, which being published, M. Ridley was committed to the maior, & M. Latimer called for: who also constantly standing to the defence of the truth,Ridley and Latimer con∣demned. receiued sentence of condemnation, and was committed to the maior, and continued in durance till the 16. day of October. Vpon the fiftéenth day of October, the B. of Glocester D. Brookes, and the Vicechancelour of Oxford, D, Marshall came to maister Irishes house, then maior of Oxford, where M. RidleyRidley refu∣seth his pardō. lay, and offered him the Quéenes pardon, if hée would recant. Which he refusing to do, they procéeded to dis∣grade him, & would haue had him put on the surplice himself, but he would not: and while he spake against that Romish apparel (as he called it,) one Edridge the reader of the gréek lecture, gaue counsel he should be gagged. Nether would M. Ridley hold the chalice in his hands: but one was appointed to hold it in his hands. His degradation ended, D. Brookes called the Bailiffes, & deliuered to them maister Ridley, with charge to kéep him safe from any mans speaking with him, and that he should be brought to the place of execution, when they were commaunded. The night before he suffered, his beard was washed, and his legges. And as he sate at supper the same night at M. Irishes (who was his kéeper) he bad his hostes and the rest at the boorde to his marriage: for to morrow (said he) I must be married, and so shewed himselfe as merrie as at a∣ny time before. When they arose from the table, his brother offered all night to watch with him: but said he, no, no, that shall you not, for I minde God willing to sléepe as quietly tonight, as euer I did in my life. When euery thing was readie for their, execution in ye ditch ouer against Baily Colledge, they were brought foorth
by the maior and bayliffes. Maister Ridley had a faire black gowne, furred and faced with Foynes, such as he was wont to weare béeing B, and a tippet of Veluet furred likewise about his necke, a veluet nightcap vpon his head, and a cor∣ner cappe vpon the same, going in a paire of slippers to the stake. After him came Maister Latimer in a poore Bristow frize frocke all worne, with his buttened cappe,The behaui∣our of Ridley and Latimer at the place of execution. and a ker∣chiefe on his head, a new long shrowd hanging ouer his hose downe to the foote: which at the first sight stirred mens hearts to rue vpon them. Maister Ridley looking backe, e∣spied maister Latimer comming after, vnto whom he sayd: Oh bée you there? Yea (sayd maister Latimer) haue after as fast as I can follow. First maister Ridley entering the place, marueilous earnestly, holding vp both his hands, loked towards heauen: then shortly after espying maister Lati∣mer, with a woonderfull chéerefull looke, ranne vnto him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and as they that stoode neere reported, comforted him saying: be of good heart brother, for God will either asswage the furie of the flame, or els strengthen vs to abide it. With that, went hee to the stake, kneeled downe by it, kyssed it, and most effectually prayed: and be∣hynde hym kneeled Maister Latimer, as earnestly cal∣ling vppon GOD as hee. Doctour Smith who recan∣ted, preached a Sermon, scant in all a quarter of an houre, against them, in the meane while that they were a prepa∣ring to the fire. M. Ridley being in his shirt, stood vpon a stone at the stake, and held vp his hands and saide: Oh heauenly father, I giue vnto thée most hearty thankes, for that thou hast cal∣led me to be a professor of thée, euen to the death, &c. Then the smith tooke a chaine of yron, and brought the same both about D. Ridleyes and Latimers middles: and as hee was knocking in the staple, maister Ridley tooke the chayne in
his hand, and shaked the same, for it did gyrd in his bellie, and looking aside to the smith, saide: Good fellow, knocke it in hard, for the flesh will haue his course. Then his bro∣ther brought both him and maister Latimer gunpowder: which he said he would take as sent from God: then brought they a fagot kindeled with fire, and laide it downe at Rid∣leyes féete.Latimer pro∣phecieth at the stake. To whom maister Latimer spake in this maner: be of good comfort M. Ridley, and play the mā, we shal this day light such a candle by Gods grace in England, as (I trust) shal neuer be put out. And so the fire was giuen vnto them. When Doctor Ridley sawe the fire flaming vp to∣wardes him: he cried with a woonderfull loude voyce, In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum, Domine accipe spiritum meum. And after repeated often in English, Lorde, Lorde receiue my spirite: maister Latimer crying as vehe∣mently on the other side, Oh father of heauen receiue my my soule: who receiued the flame as it were imbracing it, and soone died M. Ridley, by reason of the euil making of the fire, had his nether partes all burnt, before the vpper parts were touched, and endured great torment with much patience: so they both slept in the Lorde, faithfull witnesses of his trueth. Diuers letters and treatises.Maister Ridley wrote diuers letters and treatises of ex∣hortation. The next moneth after the burning of RidleyM. Ridley. and Lati∣mer, which was the moneth of Nouember, died Stephen Gardiner,Stephen Gar∣diner dieth, a man of an vn∣constant mind. a man hated of God and all good men. He was (during the time of Queene Anne,) an enemie to the Pope,: but after her decease the time carried him a∣way, that hée became a Papist: till agayne in King Ed∣wardes time, hée beganne to rebate from certaine pointes of poperie. Agayne, after the decay of the Duke of Som∣merset, he quite turned to poperie, and became a cruell Persecutour. Hée hauing intelligence of the death of Rid∣ley and Latimer, deferring his dinner til thrée or foure of
the clock at after noone, commeth out (reioysing) to the olde Duke of Norfolke, who tarried for his dinner till then, at GardinersGods iudge∣ment vpon Gardiner. house, and said: Now let vs goe to dinner. And being set downe, began merely to eate: and had eaten but a fewe bittes, when the sodaine stroke of Gods terrible hande fell vpon him, so that immediatly he was taken from the ta∣ble, and brought to his bed: where he so continued xv. dayes, and then died, his tongue being blacke, and swolne in his head. When Doctor Day Bishop of Chichester came to him, and began to comfort him with words of Gods promises, & with frée iustification in the bloud of Christ our Sauiour, repeating the Scriptures vnto him: WinchesterWinchesters words at his death. hearing that, what my Lorde (saide he) will you open that gap now? then farewel all together. To me, and to such other in my case you may speake it: but open this window to the people, then farewel all together. Next after the death of Master Ridley and Master La∣timer, followed thrée other couragious Souldiers of Iesus Christ. Iohn Webbe Gentleman, George Roper, and Gregorie Parke. Iohn WebbeI Webbe, G. Roper. G. Parker, Martirs. was brought before the suf∣fragan of Douer, the sixtéenth day of September before: the other two long after. Which (beside sundrie other times) the the iij. day of October, were all thrée together brought before the said Iudge, and by him condemned. And about the ende of October, or in the latter end of Nouember (as it is other∣wise found) they were brought out of prison to their martir∣dome: who by the way said certaine Psalmes mournfullie. Roper was a young man, of a fresh colour, courage and com∣plexion. The other two were somewhat more elderly. Ro∣per comming to the stake, and putting off his gowne, fet a great leape. So soone as the flame was about him, he putte out both his armes from his bodie like a Roode, and so stoode stedfast, continuing in that maner (not plucking his armes in till the fire had consumed them, and burnt them off. And thus these woorthie Martirs at Canterburie gaue witnesse
to the trueth, The xiij. of December died William Wiseman in the lo∣lards Tower, a Clothwoorker of London. Some thought that through famine, or other euill handling, hee was made away. After his death he was throwen into the fields, and charge geuen that none should burie him. But the brethren buried him in the night. In the same yeare, about the vij. of September, Iames Gore deceased in prison at Colchester, being captiue for de∣fence of the trueth. Master Iohn Philpot (after he had béene imprisoned by the Lord Chauncellour a yere & a halfe for his frée spéech in the conuocation house) was the second of October an. 1555. called for before the Quéenes Commissioners, M. Cholme∣ley, Master Roper, Doctor Storie, and one of the Scribes of the Arches, at Newgate Sessions Hall. Where they had nothing particular to charge him with by the Lawe: ney∣ther would he otherwise answere. So they sent him againe to prison. Afterwardes hee was commaunded to appeare the xxiiij. day of October, which he did. And after much rai∣ling against him, and many threatenings, they sent him to the B. of Londons Colehouse, where he found Tho. Whit∣tle Priest, in the stockes: who once (through infirmitie) had relented to the Papistes, but féeling remorse and torment in his conscience, went to the B. Register, desiring to sée his bill againe. Which as soone as he had receiued, he tare in péeces: and after that was ioyfull, & receiued comfort. Whē the B. heard thereof, he beate him, and pulled a greate péece of his beard from his face, and cast him into prison. Which he endured ioyfully for Christes name. Boner vnderstanding of master Philpots imprisonment, sent him bread, and meate, and drinke, with faire wordes, and promise of fauour. And within a while after, one of his Gentlemen was sent for him, and brought him to the presence of Boner. Who vnderstanding by Master Philpot
the cause of his trouble to haue risen by his speach in the cō∣uocation house, said, he would not as then burthen him with his conscience, and said moreouer, that he meruailed they were so merrie in prison, singing and reioycing. To whom M. Philpot answered, that they sang Psalmes, and that hée trusted he would not be offended therewith, since S. Paul saith. If a man be of an vpright minde,Mē of vpright mindes. let him sing: and we therefore (said he) to testify that wee are of an vpright mynd to God, though we be in miserie, do sing. So he was had againe to the Colehouse, where he had other sixe com∣panions of the same affliction. He was examined in all 14. seuerall times: the fourth time in the Archdeacons house of London in the moneth of October, before the Byshops of London, Bath, Worce∣ster and Glocester: with whom after dispute, of the church of Rome and authoritie therof, he was againe dismissed. The Byshops rose vp and consulted together, and cau∣sed a writing to be made, whertoo they put their handes. So he was againe carried to his Colehouse M. Philpot thought then they conspired his death. The 5. examination was before the Byshops of London, Rochester, Couentrie, saint Asses, with another. Doctor Storie, Curtop, Doctor Sauerson, Doctor Pendleton, with other Chaplens and gentlemen of the Quéenes Chamber, and others in the Gallerie of the B. of Londons pallace. Where Boner, because he said hee minded on the morrow to sit in iudgement on him, exhorted him to play the wise mans part, and to conforme himselfe. To whom Philpot answered, he was glad iudgement was so nigh: but refu∣sed Boner, as not being his ordinarie. After much dispute of the Romish church, and reuilings of Doctor Storie against Maister Philpot, he was had againe to the Colehouse, the Byshop of London promising him fauour, and that he had in his hands to do him good. To whō Philpot answered: my Lord, the pleasure that I will
require of you is to hasten my iudgment, and so to dispatch me out of this miserable world vnto my eternall rest.To hasten iudgement a pleasure to the Martyr. The B. for all his faire promises performed no kinde of curtesie vnto him: for a whole fortnight after, he had neither fire, nor candell, nor good lodging. The sixt examination was before the Lord Chāberlaine, the vicont Hereford: the L. Ritch, the L.S. Iohns, the Lord Windsore the L. Shandoys, sir Iohn Brydges lieftenant of the Tower, with the B of London, and Doctor Chad∣sey. The sixt of Nouember, Anno 1555. Before whom he was reasoned with touching the Romish Church, and of the Sacrament of the Altar. The Lordes temporall being halfe amazed at that which they heard, and not giuing M. Philpot an euill word. The vij. examination was had the xix. of Nouember, be∣fore the B of London, and Rochester, the Chauncellor of Litchfield, and Doctor Chadsey. The next morning Boner sent for maister Philpot to come to Masse.A sharpe an∣swere to Bo∣ners message. To whose messenger he answered, his sto∣macke was too weake to digest such raw meates of flesh, blood and bone. The next day the B. sent againe for him, and ministred false articles against him, and could bring no witnesse: but would haue had his prison fellows sworne against him. Which because they refused, they were put in the stockes, and also M. Philpot with them, where they sate from mor∣ning till night. The Sunday after at night betwixt 8. and 9. the Byshop came to the Colehouse himselfe, and caused maister Philpot to be had into another place of imprisonment, and there caused him to be searched, but the searcher missed of his last examination which he had written: yet tooke two Letters from him whiche were of no greate impor∣taunce. The viij. examination was before the B. of London, of
Saint Dauis, maister Mordant and others in the B. chap∣pel: where the B. would haue had him answered onely, yea, or nay to certaine Articles. Which Philpot would not, but made his appeale: which the Bishop said he would stay in his owne handes. So was he had againe to the cole∣house. The 9. time he was examined of the B. alone with his Chaplains: the next day after in the Wardrope. Where maister Philpot woulde not heare so much as Articles read against him: refusing Boner as béeing not his or∣dinary. At the last, they fell to reason of the Sacrament of the altar, and the masse: the Bishop and diuers of his Chap∣laines setting vpon maister Philpot. To whom hée gaue no place nor cause of triumph: but sufficiently mainteined the trueth therein. So for that time he was dismissed to his pri∣son againe. And the next day the tenth time was examined of the B, his register and others: and charged with the booke of Ca∣techisme, made in king Edwards daies, and certain conclu∣sions agréed vpon both in Oxford and Cambridge, &c. But M. Philpot refused him for ordinary, & would not answere: but appealed to him that was in place of the Archbishop∣ricke of Canterbury, because he knew not of his imprison∣ment, who was then Archbishop. The 11. examination was on S. Andrewes day before the Bish. of Duresme, of Chichester, of Bath, of London: the Prolocutor maister Christophorson, Doctor Chadsey, maister Morgan of Oxford, maister Hussey of the Arches, Doctor Weston, Doctor Harpesfield, maister Coosins, mai∣ster Iohnson, register to the B. of London: these disputed a∣gainst maister Philpot touching the true Church, and of the Sacrament of the Altar, and of the antiquity of the religi∣on which maister Philpot professed. Of which companie maister Morgan behaued himselfe aboue all the rest, most insolently against him: who asked maister Philpot howe
hée knew that hée had the spirite of GOD, scoffingly. To whome Philpot aunswered: by the faith of Christ which is in mée: Ah by faith, doe you so, sayth Morgan? I weene it bee the spirite of the buttery, which your fellowes haue had, which haue beene burned before you: who were drunken the night before they went to their death: and I weene went drunke vnto it. To whome Maister Philpot aunswered: It appeareth by your com∣munication, that you are better acquaynted with the spirite of the the butterie,M. Philpots zeale against Morgan. then with the spirite of God. Wherefore I must needes tell thee thou paynted wall, and Hypocrite: In the name of the liuing GOD, whose trueth I haue tolde thee, that God shall raigne fire and brimstone vppon suche scorners of his worde, and Blasphemers of his trueth as thou art. Morgan, What, you rage nowe. Philpot. Thy foolishe blasphemies haue compelled the spirite of God which is in mée, to speake that which I haue saide vnto thee thou enemie of all righteousnesse. By thine owne wordes doe I iudge thée, thou blinde and blasphemous Doctour, for as it is written: By thy words thou shalt be iustified, & by thy wordes thou shalt be condemned. I haue spoken on Gods behalfe, and nowe haue I done with thée Morgan. Why then, I tell thée Philpot thou art an heretike, and shalt bée burned for thine heresie, and afterwarde goe to hell fire. Philpot: I tell thee thou hypocrite, I passe not this for thy fire and fagot, neyther (I thanke GOD my Lorde) stande in feare of the same: my fayth in Christ shall ouercome them, &c. In fine, Chadsey perswaded him to consider of himselfe, and to be wel aduised. To whom M. Philpot said, he would his burning day were to morow: for this delay, (said he) is euery day to die, & yet not to be dead. So for that time they dismissed him. The 12. examination was on Wednesday the fourth
of December before the Bishop of London, Worcester, & Bangor. After Masse the Byshop called him before him into his Chappell, and recited the Articles, which often tymes he had done before, with depositions of witnesses, of whom some were not examined. Philpot againe refu∣sed him for Iudge. So he was had away, and anone after he was called for to come before him, & the Byshop of Bangor. Who being before them, they cauilled with him, where his religion was an hundreth yeare ago, accusing him of singularitie &c. and so dismissed him til after noone. At which time he appeared againe, and after reasoning with him touching the reall presence: they againe dismissed him till Thursday after, which was the 13. examination. On which day he appea∣red before the Archb. of Yorke, and other Bishops, as the bi∣shop of Chichester, Bathe, London, &c & they reasoned with him touching the true Church, and the authority thereof, and vniuersality. But being not able to deale or preuayle with him in strength of argument, nor verity of their cause, they departed. The same day at night againe, Boner called for him, and required him to say directly, whether he would be confor∣mable or not. To whom he answered, that he required a sure proofe of that Church whereto Boner called him: which when Boner could not prooue, they gaue him ouer vntil the xiij. or xiiij. daye of December. On which dayes the Bi∣shop sitting iudicially in his Consistorie at Paules, caused him to be brought thither before him and others, and obiec∣ted vnto him 3. articles. 1. That he refused to be reconciled to the Church. 2. That he had blasphemed the masse,Articles a∣gainst M. Philpot. and called it Idolatrie. 3. That he denied the reall presence. And exhorted him to recant, and to returne to his Romish Church. Whereto when M. Philpot had shewed that he was not out of the church, & that he had not spoken against the masse,
nor sacrament of the Altar. He was once againe dismissed till the sixtéenth day of the same moneth: on which day when neither threatninges, nor faire allurementes could mooue him. The B. after he had brought foorth a certaine instrument containing articles and questions, agréed vp∣pon both in Oxforde and Cambridge: and had exhibited two bookes in print: the one the Catechisme made in King Edwardes dayes, anno. 1552. The other concerning the true reporte of the disputation in the Conuocation house, which Philpot acknowledged to bée his penning, with∣out any iust cause he could pretend against him by forme of lawe,Boner con∣demneth Phil∣pot. procéeded to his tyrannical sentence of condemnation. & so commited him to the Sheriffe: whose officers led him away. And in Pater noster row, his seruaunt méeting him, lamented: to whom Philpot said, content thy selfe, I shal do well ynough, thou shalt sée me againe. So the officers had maister Philpot to Newgate: whom Alexander the kéeper vsed very rigorously, and would not strike off his yrons vn∣der foure pound, but put him in Limbo. Whereof the She∣riffe vnderstanding, caused Alexander to vse him more gently. Vpon Tuesday at supper, being the 17. of December, he had worde from the Sheriffe to prepare himselfe: for the next day he should be burned. Maister Philpot answered, and said: I am readie, God graunt me strength, and a ioy∣full resurrection. In the morning, the sherifes came about viij. of the clocke, and called for him, and hee most ioyfully came down vnto them, When he was entred into Smith∣field, because the way was foule, two Officers tooke him vp, to bear him to the stake. To whom he said merily: what? will you make me a Pope? I am content to goe vnto my Iourneyes ende on my feete. But first comming to Smith∣fielde,M. Philpot payeth his vowes in Smithfield. hée there knéeled downe vpon his knées, saying with a loude voice these wordes. I wil pay my vowes in thée, O Smithfield.
When he was come to the place where he should suffer, he kissed the stake, and said: Shal I disdaine to suffer at this stake, séeing my Redéemer did not refuse to suffer most vile death on the crosse for me? Then méekely he said the 10. 107. and 108. Psalmes. The fire being put vnto him hee yelded his soule vnto God (whose trueth he had witnessed) the eyghtéenth day of December. He wrote many fruitfull Letters. Anno. 1556.1556 Seuen persons burned toge∣ther in Smith∣field. To beginne the new yere withall, about the xxvij. of Ianuarie, were burned in Smithfield these seuē persons following: Thomas Whittle, Priest, Bartlet Green Gentleman, Iohn Tudson Artificer, Iohn Went Artificer, Thomas Browne, Elizabeth Foster, wife, Ioane Warren, a∣lias Lashford, maide: all together in one fire. The Articles obiected against them: were, touching the seuen Sacramēts; the Sacrifice of the Masse; the Sea of Rome; &c. Thomas Whittle was apprehended by one Edmund A∣labaster, and caried to the Bishop of Winchester lying sick, hoping to be preferred for his diligence: but the Bishop re∣pulsed him. So he was had to Boner, who did beate & buffet him, and cast him into prison. D. Harpsfielde offered him a Bill to subscribe vnto, consisting of generall tearmes, the rather to deceiue Whittle. So he subscribed, but afterwarde felt such horror in his conscience, that he could not be in qui∣et till he had gotten his bill againe,T. Whittle re∣penteth, and is condemned. T. Whittles Letters. and rent away his name from it. So the Bishoppe condemned him, after many per∣swasions to haue made him recant, and committed him to the Secular power. He wrote diuers Letters of comforte and exhortation. The next day after was Bartlet Greene condemned. He had béene Student in Oxford, and there by hearing the lec∣tures of Peter Martir, hee came to haue knowledge of the trueth. Afterward he was Student of the common lawes in the Temple. The cause of his first trouble was an answere to a letter
of Master Goodmans, banished at that time beyonde the Seas. Wherein hee wrote that Quéene Marie was not dead: whereof Master Goodman desired to bee satisfied. These Letters came into the Counsels handes, and they would haue made treason thereof, if the lawes would haue serued. But after they had long deteyned him in the tower and elswhere, they sent him to Bishop Boner, to be ordered after their Ecclesiasticall manner. Against whom Sir Iohn Bourne, then Secretarie to the Quéene, was a principall dooer. The xvij. of Nouember, at two of the clock in the after noone, he was presented before the Bishop of London, and two other Bishops: Master Deane, M. Roper M. Welch, Doctor Harpsfielde, D. Dale, Master George Mordant, and Master Dee. Before whom, after he had shewed the cause of his imprisonment, to haue beene his Letter written vnto Master Goodman: Doctor Chadsey (being sent for) repor∣ted, that in the presence of Master Moseley, and the Liefte∣nant of the Tower, he should speake against the Reall pre∣sence, and Sacrifice of the masse, & that their Church was Antichristian. This Master Greene confessed that he had sayde. So after some talke with other, Master Welche desired of the Bishoppe, that hée might haue licence geuen him to talke with him aparte, and then with flattering be∣hauiour, and faire wordes, he laboured to peruert him, and reasoned wt him touching the marks of the church. Wherein Master Greene (shewed himselfe able sufficientlye to an∣swere that which he did obiect. Afterwarde, he had priuate conference with Boner, in his bedchamber: who also labou∣red him all he might, but the spirite of God was of more power: and M. Greene (notwithstanding) continued con∣stant in his holy profession. In the ende, the B. perceiuing himselfe not able to alter his constant minde, the xxviij. of Nouember he examined him vpon certayne poyntes of Christian Religion: and
and out of his answeres drew articles, whereto Maister Greene set to his hand. The fiftéenth day of Ianuary, in his Consistorie at Paules, accompanyed with Fecknam, and other of his Chapleins, after he had condemned the o∣ther sixe, hée called for maister Greene,M. Greene condemned. and asked him if hée would recant. Which when he denyed, the Byshop procéeded in sentence and condemned him, and committed him to the Shiriffes of London, to bee carried to New∣gate, where he continued in prayer and godly medita∣tion, till the 28. of Ianuary. At which time he with the rest were carried to the place of execution. Whither going by the way, as also at the stake,M. Greene at the stake. he vttered often times La∣tine verses: Christe Deus, sine te spes est mihi nulla salutis: Te duce, vera sequor: te duce, falsa nego. He confessed himselfe to to one Maister Cotton of the temple his friend, that he had béene scourged with roddes of Boner: but else for mode∣stye sake kept it secrete. Hee was of nature most milde, and gentle. Hée wrote diuerse Letters and exhortati∣ons. Thomas Browne borne in the parish of Byston within the dioces of Ely, came afterward to London,Tho, Browne where hee dwelled in the parish of S. Brides in Fléetstréete, a mari∣ed man of the age of 37. Who because he came not to his pa∣rish Church, was presented to Boner by the Constable. When Boner laboured to perswade him, and séeing himself not able to preuayle by the worde, to ouerthrowe him, pro∣céedeth to his cruell Sentence, and so committeth him to the Secular power. So hee abode the cruel fire amongest the rest. The same daye also was Iohn Tudson,Iohn Tudson. borne in Ips∣wich, condemned. Who being complayned of to sir Roger Chomley, and Doctor Storie, was sent to Boner. And after much perswasion to recant, according to his māner, he pro∣nounced sentence against him. Iohn Went, borne in Langham in Essex,Iohn Went. within the dio∣ces
of London, of the age of 27. yeares, examined by Doctor Story, vpon the sacrament of the popish Masse, because they disagréed with him in the reall presence, was sent to Bo∣ner, and of him condemned for the profession of the truth. With the fiue aboue recited were condemned two wo∣men, Isabell FosterIsabell Foster. a wife, and the other a maide called Ioan Warne, alias Lashford. Isabell was married to one Iohn Foster Cutler of the parrish of saint Brides in Fléet∣stréet being of the age of 55. yeares. She was sent to Boner for not comming to the church, and constantly mainteining the truth of her profession, was of him condemned. Ioan Lash∣forde.Ioan Lashford borne in the parrish of litle Alhallowes in Thames stréete, was the daughter of one Robert Lash∣ford Cutler, and of Elizabeth, who afterward was marri∣ed to Iohn Warne Vpholster: who was persecuted for the Gospel of God to the burning fire, and after him, his wife, and after her this Ioan Lashford their daughter, after she had remained prisoner in the Counter 5. weekes, and cer∣taine moneths in Newgate. After these 7. aboue rehearsed, shortly after in the same moneth, the 31. of Ianuary, 4. women and one man were burned at Canterbury at one fire. Their names were Iohn Lomas a yong man, Anne Albright, Ioan Catmer, Agnes Snoth widow, Ioan Sole wife. Lomas was condemned the xviij. of Ianuary, Snoth, the xxxi. Albright, alias Chamixes, the xviij. Sole, the xxxi, and at the same time, Ioane Catmer: all fiue at one fire.Fiue martirs sing a psalme in the flaming fire. Who (when the fire was flaming about their eares) sang Psalmes. At the sight whereof, sir I. Nor∣ton Knight wept bitterly. The Iudges, and the other Assistantes which sate vpon them, were Richarde Faucet. Iohn Warren, Iohn Milles, Robert Collins, and Iohn Baker, the Mayor.
The Historie of Thomas Cranmer Archyshop of Canterburie, burned for the truth. An∣no, 1556. THomas CranmerThomas Crā∣mer Archb. of Canterburie. was first of Iesus Colledge in Cambridge, a Master of Arts and fellow of the Colledge: afterward he marryed and gaue ouer his fellowship, and became reader in Bucking∣ham Colledge. Whiles he was reader in that Colledge, his wife dyed, & he was receiued againe to be fellow of Iesus Colledge: where he grew in knowledge in such sort, that he became Doctor of Diuinitie, and was appointed one of the heads, to examine such as yearly were to commence Bache∣lers, or Doctors of Diuinitie. Who neuer would admit any to procéede in Diuinitie, vnlesse they were substancially séene in the story of the Bible: whereby diuerse Fryers and other religious persons were reiected of him. He was greatly sollicited by Doctor Capon to be one of the fellowes in the foundation of Cardinall Wolseys Colledge in Ox∣ford, but could not be drawen thereunto. Whiles he con∣tinued in Cambridge, the matter of the kinges diuorce with the Lady Catherin was in question now two or thrée yeares among the Canonistes: who could not resolue vpon the matter. Now by reason the plague was in Cambridge, Doctor Cranmer remoued to Waltham crosse with two of his pupills to M. Cresseys house, where Doctor Steuens se∣cretarie, and Doctor Foxe Almosiner finding him, conferred with him about that matter of the kinges diuorce. Hée gaue them counsaile rather to cause it to be discussed among the Diuines,M. Cranmers aduice tou∣ching the dis∣putation for the K. diuorce. whether by the worde of God a man may marrie his brothers wife or not, for the satisfying of the Kinges conscience: and that done, to referre it to iudge∣ment how lawfull the diuorce might bée, &c. This dis∣course
they declared vnto the king, who caused Cranmer immediatly to be sent for:Cranmer sent for to the king. and after talke with him con∣cerning the matter, he appointed him to be chiefe doer in the dispute, and conference: and commaunded him to set downe his minde fully in the case, and willed the Earle of Wiltshire to giue him entertainment in Duresme house, and to furnish him with Bookes, and necessa∣ries méete for the busines: who prouided for him accor∣dingly. So doctor Cranmer wrote his minde concerning the kinges question, adding to the same, besydes the authori∣tie of Scripture, of general counsails, and auncient fathers, also his owne opinion, that the Pope could not dispence with ye word of God. Wherupon ye king sent certaine learned mē abroad to the most part of the Vniuersities in Christendome to dispute the question:Embassage to Rome concer∣ning the kings diuorce. as also in Oxford & Cambridge, wher the vnlawfulnes of the matrimonie was concluded: so yt the K. prepared a solemne embassage & sent to the B. of Rome, then lying at Bononie: whither went ye Earle of Wiltshire, Doctor Cranmer, Doctor Stokesley, Doctor Corne, Doctor Bennet, and diuers other learned men and gentlemen: who when they came before the Pope, hee sitting in the chaire of estate, offered his foot, but none would kisse it sauing a great spaniell of the Earle of Wiltshires, who ran & tooke the P. by the great toe,None would kisse the Popes foot but a great spaniel of the Earle of Wilt∣shires, ran to take the Pope by the toe. Cranmer go∣eth to the Emperour. Cranmer sa∣tisfyeth Cor∣nelius Agryp∣pa. & caused him to pul it in in hast. In ye end the Embassadours were dismissed without disputation: & D. Cranmer gratified with ye office of a penitenciariship. Wherupon the Earle, and the other commissioners, retur∣ned againe into England: but D. Cranmer went to the Em∣perour (being in his iourney towardes Vienna against the Turke) there to answere such men of his court as could say any thing on ye contrary part. Where he fully satisfyed Cor∣nelius Agrippa an high officer in the Emp. court: for which cause Cornelius fel into such displeasure with the Emp his M. yt he was committed to prison, where for sorow he ended his life. From ye Emper. court he departed, & as he returned
he satisfied diuers learned men in Germany in that que∣stion. In the meane space, while the matter thus prospered: B. Warrham the Arcb. dieth, and the Archbishopricke was bestowed immediatly on Cranmer,Cranmer made Archb. by the kings gift. In which place, he behaued himselfe with great liking to the king (who would heare no accusation against him) and all good men. After the death of king Henry, in the raign of king Edw. his godsonne,K. Edward godsonne to Cranmer. his estate was more aduanced. Before which time of King Edward, it séemed that Cranmer was scarce throughly perswaded in the right knowledge of the Sacra∣ment, til being instructed by Ridley, he grew so ripe, that he tooke vpon him the whole defence of the cause against the po∣pish deuises. To whose booke, concerning that matter, Ste∣phen Gardiner answereth, and M. Cranmer replieth lear∣nedly and copiously to him againe. Of this Archb. doing was also the booke of the reforma∣tion,Bookes of Cranmer. the Catechisme, with the booke of Homilies. Also there was a confutation against 88. articles, deuised by the Con∣uocation house, of his doing, but not receiued in the time of king Henry the 8. King Edward now not like to liue, bequeathed the suc∣cession of the Realm to the Lady Iane, niece to to king Henry the 8. by his sister, with the consent of the Counsel & Law∣yers, fearing least Mary should alter religion: but CranmerCranmer not brought to it against his cō∣science. wald hardly be brought to assent, til he was informed by the lawyers that he might subscribe therevnto. King Edward being now dead, and Quéene Mary in pos∣session of the crowne, she excepted Cranmer out of all par∣don, and would not so much as vouchsafe to sée him: but com∣mitted him to the tower, yet pardoned him of treason, and caused him to be accused of heresie. The papists had raised a slaunder, that the Archbishoppe, had promised to saye a Dyrge masse for King Edwardes
funeral, to curry fauour of the Quéene: which he endeuou∣ring to stay, gaue forth in writing his purgation, and was challenged of the Quéens cōmissioners for his bil. To whō he said: he was sory it passed him so as it did, (for he graun∣ted a copie to Doctor Story who did disperse it) for his mea∣ning was to haue made it more at large, and to haue set it on Paules Church doore, and on the doores of all the Churches in London, with his seale set thereto. At which words, they for the time dismissed him. At length it was determined that Cranmer shoulde bée remoued from the Tower to Oxford, there to be disputed with, for colour sake: although they had determined what to do with him before. Forasmuch as the sentence giuen against Ridley and La∣timer, by D. Weston was voide, because the authority of the Pope was not yet receiued into ye land: there was a new commission sent from Rome, and a new processe framed for the conuiction of Ridley, Latimer, & Cranmer. In the which commission, was D. Iames Brooks B. of Glocester ye popes subdelegate, with Doctor Martin and Doctor Story com∣missioners in the king and Quéenes behalfe. These commissioners being set in place, in the Church of S. Mary in Oxford: one of the Popes Proctors, or els his D. called, saying: Tho. archb. of Canterbury, appeare here, & make answere to that shalbe laide to thy charge: that is to say, for blasphemy, contumacie, and heresie: and make aun∣swere here to the B. of Glocester, representing the Popes person. He being brought néerer the scaffold where the Bi∣shoppes sate,Cranmer wold do no reuerēce to the Popes subdelegate. gaue reuerence to the Quéenes proctors, but would not to the Bishop, who represented the Pope: allea∣ging, he had taken an oath, neuer to consent to his authority again. When after many meanes vsed, the Archb. would do no reuerence: the Bishop fell to declare vnto him the cause of their comming, and their commission, exhorting him with a long Oration to returne to the Popish church. Who
hauing finished his Oration, D, Martin beginneth, and de∣clareth vnto him as much. Who hauing also finished, doctor Cranmer (after he had knéeled downe on both his knées, to∣wardes the West, and saide the Lordes praier, and rising vp, had repeated the Articles of the beléefe) began to make profession of his faith vnto them: and protested against the popes authoritie, and chalenged the B. of periurie, for ad∣mitting the Pope contrarie to his oath. After Glocester had done, D. Story then entereth to vexe the seruant of God, and laboureth to vphold the Popes Su∣premacie: and required the Bishoppe to make a directe an∣swere to the Articles. After he had played his part, Doctor Martin taketh him in hand, and laboureth to prooue his oth (made to the king against the Pope) vnlawfull. In the end the Iudges willed him to answere directly to certaine Ar∣ticles. Whereto (after the Archbishop had answered) the Bishop Brookes concludeth his examination with an Ora∣tion, to satisfie the people: geuing the Archbishop vp, (hee said) as an abiect, and outcast from Gods fauour. Wherein he established (as much as he coulde) the Supremacie of the Pope; Seruice in Latine; the Sacrament in one kinde; Real presence; Rites; &c. This Oration ended, D. Storie most ar∣rogantly dealeth with him, and laboureth to prooue the in∣sufficiencie of the Archbishops oath against the Pope. And so (séeking to breake vp the Session) calleth for witnesses to be deposed against the next day, whose names were: Doctor Marshall, Commissarie, and Deane of Christes church: Do∣ctor Smith, Vndercommissarie: D. Tresham: D. Cooke:Periured per∣sons for wit∣nesses. M. London: M. Curtop: M. Wade: M. Searles. Against whom the Archhishop tooke exception, because they had béen periu∣red in breaking their oath made to K. Henry the eight. Among other communication, Doctor Martin demaun∣ded of him, who was Supreme head of the church of Eng∣land. To whom the Archbishop answered, Christ, as of the whole body. Why (quoth D. Martin) you made K. Henrie
the viij. the right Supreame head of the church. Yea (said the Archb.) of al the people of england, as wel Ecclesiastical as Tēporal. And not of the church (said Marten?) No, (said he) What (quoth Marten) you durste not tell the king so. Yes that I durst ({quod} the Archbishop) and did.The meaning of Supreme head. In the publication of his Stile, wherein he was named Supreame head of the Church, there was no other thing meant. Thus after they had asked him many friuolous questi∣ons, they cited him to appeare before the Pope, at Rome, within fourtie daies. Which he said he would (if the king and Quéene would permitte him) be content to doe. But from thence they carried him to prison againe:The Archb. condemned for not being at Rome, when they kept him in prison in England. where hée continued, notwithstanding hee was commaunded to ap∣peare at Rome. Before twenty daies of the fourtie were spent, the popes holinesse sente his Letters executorie vnto the King, and Quéene, to degrade, and depriue him of his dignitie. And although (by reason of his straight imprisonment) he could not appeare at Rome, yet was hee condemned to be put to death, as one wilfullie absent, and failing (of frowardnesse) in his appearance. The Popes definitiue Letter was dated about the firste of Ianuarie, and deliuered here about the middest of Februarie. Vpon the receipt of which Letter, another Ses∣sion was appointed for the Archbishop to appeare, the xiiij. of Februarie, before D. Thurlebie, (whom the Archb. al∣waies before vsed as his déere friend) chiefe Cōmissioner, & Boner. Who vpon S. Valentines day, came to Oxford, and calling the Archbishoppe before them in the Quéere of Christes Church read their Commission, full of lies: as, that witnesses were there at Rome examined on both par∣ties,Impudent lies. and all thinges indifferently considered: (he being kept close Prisoner in Oxforde.) And there put vpon him the Robes of an Archbishop, made of canuas, and old cloutes, in scorne: with a miter, and a pal of the same sute in mockery,
and then put they the Crosier staffe in his hand. Which be∣ing all done, Boner falleth to tryumph ouer him, making an oration to the assemblie: in which he said to the people, this is the man that hath euer despised the Popes holy∣nesse:Boner derideth the Archb. this is the man that pulled downe so many chur∣ches: this is the man that lyke Lucifer sate in place of Christ &c. And so prosecuted his oration, lying and railing on the good Archbyshop: & afterward went to his degradation. At what time the Archb. pulled an appeale out of his sléeue, which he deliuered to them, saying: I appeale to the next generall Councell, and thereof tooke witnesses of the stan∣ders by. Which appeale being put vp to the Byshop of Ely Thurleby, hee said, their Commission was to pro∣céed against him without admitting any appeale. To whom when the Archbyshop answered, that then they offered him wrong. Ely said: if it may be admitted it shall, and so receiued it of him: but procéeded to his degrading,The poore es∣tate of the Archbishop. and stripped him out of his owne gowne, and put vpō him a poore yeoman bedels gowne very bare worne: and euil fauouredly made, and a townsemans cappe on his head: and so deliuered him to the secular power, without one penny in his purse to helpe himselfe: so that a gentleman of Glocester shire gaue mo∣ney to the Bailiffes to bestow vpon him. For which déede he was stayed by Boner, and Ely: and if friends had not bene made, he had bene sent to the Councel. In this meanetime, while ye Archb. was thus remaining in¦durance (whom they had kept in prison now by the space of 3 years) by all flattering perswasions and threatnings they laboured him to recant: especially Henry Sydall, and Fri∣er Iohn (a Spaniard,) de Villa Garcina,Cranmer set∣teth his hand to a recanta∣tion. were most ear∣nest with him, and in the end so preuailed, that he set to his hād to a recantation that they had drawen. Which recanta∣tion was not so soon gotten, but the prelates without delay
caused the same to be imprinted. Now all this while Cranmer was in no certayntie of his lyfe, notwithstanding his recantation, although it was faithfully promised him by the Doctors. In the meane tyme whyle these thinges were a doyng, the Quéene taking counsaile how to dispatch him out of the way, (who as yet knew nothing of hir secrete hate against him,Queene Mary bare speciall hate to Cran∣mer. and looked for nothing lesse then death) appointed Do∣ctor Cole, and secretly gaue him commaundement, that a∣gainst the 21. of March he should prepare a funerall sermon for Cranmers burning. Soone after, the Lord Williams of Thaine, and the Lord Shandoys, Sir Thomas Brid∣ges, and Sir Iohn Browne were sent for with other Gentlemen and Iustices, and were commaunded to bée at Oxforde with their retinue, least Cranmers death should rayse there any tumult. On the 21. day of March Doctor Cole commeth to the Archb. in the morning, the very same day which was ap∣pointed for his execution, & asked him if he had any money. To whom he answered that he had none: he gaue vnto him 15. crownes, to giue them to the poore where hée would, and so went about his Sermon. By which dealing the Archbyshop began to suspect more and more what they went about. Afterward came to him the Spanish Frier bringing, a pa∣per with articles, which Cranmer should openly professe in his recantatiō before the people, earnestly desiring him that he would write the same instrument with the articles with his own hād, & signe it with his name. Which when he had don, the Frier desired yt he would write another copy therof, which should remaine with him, and that he did also. Yet the Archb. thinking his time was at hād, wherin he could no lō∣ger dissemble, put his praier in his bosome with his exhorta∣tion to ye people writtē in another paper, which he minded to recite to ye people before he should make ye last profession of
his faith, fearing least if they had heard the confession of his faith first, they would not afterward haue suffered him to exhort the people. About 9. of the clocke, the L. Williams of Thame, Syr Thomas Bridges, Sir Iohn Browne, &c. came with their re∣taine, and Cranmer was brought out of Bocardo, vnto S. Maries Church: where hee had his standing on a scaffold of a meane height, there wayting til maister Cole made him ready to his sermon. In which, he declared causes why iust∣ly the Quéene had determined his death: for that he was a Traitor, and an heretike, &c. And that it séemed méete ac∣cording to the lawe of equality, that as the death of the Duke of Northumberland made euen with Tho. Moore,Law of equa¦lity. so there should bée one that should make euen with Fisher of Rochester. And because that Ridley, Hooper, and Far∣rar were not able to make euen with that man, it séemed méete that Cranmer should be ioyned to them, to fill vp this part of equality, &c. And then turning himselfe to the people, bad them all beware of this mans example. The latter part of his sermon he directed to the Archb. whom he encouraged and comforted: and did promise in the name of al the priests that were present, that immediatly after his death, there should be Diriges, masses, and funerals executed for him in Oxford for his soules health. CranmerThe pitiful case of Cran∣mer. all this time stood heauy, and more then twen∣tye times the teares gushed out of his eyes, and dropped in abundance all the time of Coles sermon. Which bee∣ing ended, hee calleth backe the people béeing ready to depart, to prayers: and prayed Cranmer to expresse the vn∣doubted profession of his faith that he might take away all suspicion from men. I wil do it (said the Archb.) and with a good wil. So hée first read a praier to the people, which he pulled out of his bosome, & gaue them exhortation of contempt of the world, of obedience, of brotherly loue, and aboue all thinges be∣wayled
his recantation,Cranmer be∣waileth his re∣cantation. saying: that when he came to the fire, that hand which had subscribed therevnto, should first burne. And so defyed the Pope, with his detestable doctrine &c. The standers by that looked for other matter, were all a∣mazed at his wordes, and the filthy priests & prelates great∣ly deceiued, who raged against him, especially Cole: so they pulled him downe from the stage, and led him to the fire: the Spanish Frier and the other railing on him in the way. When he came to the place of execution, hee not long tary∣ing in his praiers,Cranmer bur∣neth first the hand where∣with he sub∣scribed. put of his apparell to his shirt, & prepared himselfe to the fire: which being put vnto him, and bur∣ning néere him, he put his right hand in the flame: which hée held so stedfast, sauing that once with the same hand, he wiped his face, that all men might sée his hande bur∣ned before his bodie was touched: which hée held immo∣ueable all the time of his burning: lifting his eyes vp to heauen, and oftentimes repeating his vnwoorthy right hand: and so long as his voyce woulde suffer him, vsing oftentimes the wordes of Stephen. Lord Iesus receiue my spirite.Cranmer burned. And in the greatnesse of the flame, hée gaue vp the Ghost. The wicked cannot discerne the spirits.The Spaniard beholding this constancie of the Archbi∣shop ran, to the Lord Williams of Thame, crying, that Cran∣mer was vexed in minde, and died in desperation. And this was the ende of that woorthy seruaunt of GOD, who suffered in the middest of Quéene Maries raigne, and was almost the very middle man of all the martyrs of her daies. Why Cran∣mer desired life.It was thought he desired life, to finish certaine woorkes, and to reserue himselfe for better times, for the vse of the Church. About the same time that the Archbishop was burned at Oxforde, suffered likewise in Ipswich twoo women: the one named Agnes Potten, the other called Ioan Trunchfield, either in the same moneth of Marth, or (as some said) in the
end of Februarie the next before. They suffered for the matter of the Sacrament, and bare their martyrdome with great patience, and godly courage. After these women, the same moneth suffered thrée men at one fire in Salesburie for the testimonie of the Gospell. Their names were, Iohn Spicer,Iohn Spicer. frée mason, William Co∣berlyWil. Coberley. Tayler, Iohn MaundrellIohn Maun∣drel. husbandman. Vppon a Sunday, they beyng at the Parrish church called Keuell in Wiltshire, and seeing the parrish in procession to follow and worship the Idoll there caryed, aduised them to leaue the same, and to turne to the liuing God: namely speaking to one Robert Barkesdale headman of the parrish, but hee tooke no regard to their woords. After this the Vicar came into the pulpet, who there being about to read his beadroll, and to pray for the soules in purgatorie, Iohn Maundrell speaking with an audible voice, said, that that was the popes pinfold, the other two affirming the same.Purgatorie the Popes Pin∣fold. After which words (by the commaundement of the priest) they were had to the stockes, where they remained till Seruice was done: and then were brought before a Iustice of Peace, and the next day were carryed to Salesburie, and presented be∣fore Byshop Capon, and William Ieffrey Chaunceller of the Dyoces: by whom they were imprisoned, and often examined priuatly. At the last they were examined publick∣lie before them, in the presence of the sheriffe of the Shire, one M. Saint-Iohns, and other popish priests, in the Church of Fisherton-anger. Where the Chauncellour obiected to them, touching the Sacrament; the Popes Supremacie; I∣mages; &c. To which when they answered frankly, accor∣ding to the trueth, they were all there condemned, an. 1556 the xxiij. of March. And the foure and twentith day of the same moneth, they were carried out of the gaole, to a place betwixt Salisburie and Milton, where they were committed to the fire. Which they endured constantly, witnessing the trueth. Of which 3.
Caberley had the painfullest death, by reason of the stan∣ding of the winde, which notwithstanding patiently he did endure. About the 23. of Aprill, Anno, 1556. were burned in Smithfield at one fire,vi. at one fire in Smithfield. vj, constant Martyrs, suffering for the testimonie of the truth, viz. Robert DrakesRobert Drakes minister, William TimmesWil. Timmes. Curate, Richard SpurgeRich. Spurge. Shereman, Thomas SpurgeTho, Spurge. Fuller, Iohn CauellIohn Cauell. Weauer, George AmbroseGeo. Ambrose Fuller, all of Essex, and so of the dyoces of Lon∣don, and were sent vp, some by the L. Ritch, and some by others at sundrie times vnto Stephē Gardiner B. of Win∣chester about the 22. of March, Anno. 1555. who vppon smal examination sent some of them vnto the kings bench, others vnto the marshalsea: where they remained almost al the yéere, vntill the Bishops death, and had nothing said vnto them till Doctor Heath was chosen Chauncellour: to whom foure of these prisoners made their supplication, requiring fauour and deliuerance. Vpon the receipt here∣of, Syr Richard Reade knight, one of the officers of the Court of Chauncery, was sent the sixtéeen of Ianuary vn∣to the marshalsea to examine those foure: Richard Spurge, Thomas Spurge, George Ambrose, & Iohn Cauell. The ef∣fect of which was, that they were complayned vpon, for not comming to the Church, by the parson of Barking, vnto the L. Rich: which they confessed to be true, and declared what moued them to absent themselues. About the iiij. day of March next after, Robert Drakes, Parson of Thundersley in Essex, was also examined. In Quéene Maries dayes there were two sermons prea∣ched in Master Tirrels Wooddes, the one named Plumbo∣rowe-woodde, and the other Bechers-wood: and an hundred at once were at the Sermons. The Sermons were prea∣ched by Master Timmes, Deacon, and Curate of Hocley in Essex. This preaching the saide Master Tirrell tooke for a hainous matter, & charged one Gye which was his heard∣man,
that frequented Sermons, and the societie of the godly, to fetch M. Timmes vnto him. Who made excuse, and saide he could not finde him. Then stepped foorth another of his men, one Richard Shierife, that with the Constable, went and fetcht him to M. Tirrel. Who had talke with him alone thrée houres together, and ended his talke with Ma∣ster Timmes,A short an∣swer of master Timmes. in a heate, calling him traytorly knaue. Why (said Timmes) in king Edwards daies you did affirme the trueth as I doe now. Affirme (quoth Tirrel,) Nay by Gods bodie, I neuer thought it with my heart. Wel (saide Tim.) then I pray you M. Tirrel, beare with me, for I haue béene a traytor but a while, but you haue béene a traytor vj. yeares. After this he was sent to the B. of London, and from him to the B. of Winchester, and so to the kings Bench. When he came to the Bishop of London, there was with him the B. of Bangor, before whom he behaued him selfe in such sorte, as the Constables that brought him reported, that they neuer heard the like. In the Kings bench he was mightely strengthned by the good men which he found there with the other fiue. The xxi. of March hee was brought to publike examina∣tion. First in the Bishops Pallace at London, where hée enquired of him, touching the Sacrament of the Altar: Whereunto he answered contrarie to the Popish doctrine, and was reasoned with of the B. Chaplens, with no great authoritie of scriptures, or fathers. The xxiij. day of the same moneth next after, the Bishop sent againe for Timmes and Drakes, and ex officio obiected articles. And on the xxvi. day of the same moneth, he mini∣stred also the same Articles to the other foure. To which Popish articles they answered negatiuely. And in conclusi∣on, the xxviij. of March, they were all brought particularly to the Consistorie, before the Bishoppe of London, to bée condemned for heresie. Where (when he required Timmes and the rest to recant) he replyed vnto him, that he himselfe
had written against the vsurped power of the Bishoppe of Rome, hauing prefixed his Preface to Winchesters booke, De vera obedientia. After much debate, partly of Bishop Boner, and partly of one Doctor Cooke, & Doctor Pendle∣ton, to peruerte the constant Professour of Iesus Christ: when they could not preuaile against him, they condemned him (as an Heretike) to be burned. And procéeded against the other v godly men, fellow Prisoners with M. Timmes. who all together the xiiij. of Aprill, suffered for witnessing to the trueth. About this time, or somewhat before, came down certain Commissioners, assigned by the Quéene and Counsell, into Norfolke and Suffolke,Commissio∣ners into Nor∣folk and Suff. to enquire of matters of Religion. Vnto which Commissioners there was a Supplication put vp by some well disposed men in those quarters: praying them to haue pitie and compassion, & praying God to moue the Queenes heart, according to the examples of Darius, Assuerus, Traianus, Theodosius, &c. to call back those com∣mandementes and Commissions, which had passed against the Saints of God. The first day of April this present yere, Iohn Harpoole,Iohn Harpool. of the Parish of Saint Nicholas in Rochester, and Ioane BeatesIoan Beats. widowe, were condemned by Maurice, the Bishop of Rochester: and suffered death by fire in the same Towne, for the testimonie of Iesus Christ, against the Sacrifice of the Popish Altar. Next after these ensued the death of Master Iohn Hul∣lier,Iohn Hullier, Conduct in the kings Colledge at Cambridge: who suf∣fered vnder Doctor Thurlebie, bishop of Elie, and his Chan∣cellour, for the sincere setting forth of Gods Gospell, the se∣cond of April. Not long after the death of Robert Drakes, and William Timmes, and the other Essex martirs, vi. other blessed mar∣tirs suffered al at one fire in the towne of Colchester, whose names were these: Christopher Lister,Sixe martirs at one fire in Colchester. Chr. Lyster. of Dagneham, hus∣bandman,
Iohn MaceIohn Mace. of Colchester Apothecary, Iohn Spē∣serIohn Spenser. of Colechester weauer, Iohn HammonIohn Hammō. of Colchester Tanner, Symō IaineSymon Iayne. sawier, Richard NicholasRichard Ni∣cholas. of Colche∣ster weauer. With these 6. was also ioyned another, named Roger Grasbrooke, but he submitted himselfe. Of these yt B. made a quicke dispatch: for soone after they were deliue∣red to one Iohn Kingstone bacheler of the ciuill Law, and then commissary to the B. by the Earle of Oxf. & other com∣missioners, and by him sent vp to his Lord and M. The B. caused them to be brought vnto his house at Fulham, where in the open church were ministred vnto them articles tou∣ching the Romish church, the masse, transubstantiation, and other the Popes trumperie. To which when they answe∣red according to the veritie of the Gospell, they were of him condemned, and sent to Colchester, where the 28. of A∣pril most chéerefully, they suffered, (to the great encourage∣ment of others) for the testimonie of Iesus. The sixtéenth day of Maye, Hugh LauerockHugh Lauore. of 68, yeeres. of the pa∣rish of Barking, painter, of the age of sixtie eight, a lame creeple, and Iohn Ap PriceIohn ap Price a blinde man were burned at Stratford Bow for the constant profession of the Gospell, a∣gainst the superstition of Antechrist, being condemned by Boner. At their death Hugh Lauerocke,Lauerock com∣forteth his fe∣low. after he was chained, casting away his crooch, and comforting Iohn Ap Price his felow Martir, said vnto him: Be of good comfort brother, for my Lord of London is a good Phisition, he will heale vs both shortly: Thée of thy blindnes, and me of my lamenes. And so patiently they suffered together. The next day after the martirdome of these two, there suffered in the fire in Smithfield, iiij. womē: Katherin Hut of Barking, widow, Ioane Hornes of Bellerica, maide, E∣lizabeth Thackuis of great Burstead, maide, Margaret El∣lis of Billerica, maide: these wt other mo, were persecuted, and sent vp to Boner, specially by sir I. Mordāt, & Edmund
Tyrrell Esquire, and were condemned by him the third of Aprill, and burned the sixtéenth of Maye. The 5. day of May was Thomas DrewryTho. Drewry. a blinde boy, and Thomas CrokerTho. Croker. Bricklayer martyred in the fire at Glocester, being condemned by D. Williams then Chaun∣celler. Who when he said that the Chaunceller taught him that which he called Heresie in the pulpit, and the Chaun∣celler bad him doe as he had done. No said the boy to him, though you can so easily dispense with your selfe, and mocke with God, the world and your conscience: yet I will not so do. Then God haue mercie vpon thée (said the Chaun∣celler) for I will reade sentence against thée: and so did, and committed him to the secular power to be burned with Thomas Croker. The 21. of May Anno 1556. Thrée men, Thomas Spi∣cerTho. Spicer. of Winstone laborer, Iohn Denny,Ioh. Denny. and Edmond Poole,Edm. Poole. were burned at Beckles for witnes bearing to the trueth. They were persecuted by Syr Iohn Tyrrel Knight, of Gip∣ping hall in Suffolke: and were condemned by Dunning Chauncelour of Norwich, and maister Monges the regi∣ster, sitting at the towne of Beckles. Where the Chancel∣lour himselfe burst out in teares, exhorting them to returne to the papistical Church. Which when they refused, he read the sentence against them euen with teares, and deliuered them to the Secular power (Sir Iohn Sylliard being then high Sheriffe of Norfolke and Suffolke) notwithstanding that the writ de comburendo, was not yet come downe. After they had prayed, they (making confession of their Faith) came to, I beléeue the Catholike Church. That is well saide (quoth Sir Iohn Sylliard) I am glad to heare that. It is the best word I heard of you yet. To the which wordes Edmunde Poole answered, that though they beleue the Catholike Church, yet doe they not beléeue in their Popishe Church: and therefore no parte of their beléefe. They (being all at the stake, and the fire burning about
them, praised God in such an audible voice,The Martyrs praise God in the flames of fire. as it was won∣derfull to all those that stood by. By the procurement of sir Iohn Tyrrel knight, and other his fellow colleagues, there were persecuted, out of ye towne of Winson in Suffolke these persons here, following: An∣no. 1556. Mistris Ales Twaites gentlewoman, of the age of 60. yeares and more, and two of her seruauntes, Hum∣frey Smith and his wife, William Catchpoole and his wife, Iohn Mawlin and his wife, Nicholas Burlingham and his wife, and one Rought and his wife. There were also dri∣uen out of the Towne of Mendlesame in Suffolke, Simon Harlestone and Catherin his wife with his fiue Children, William Whitting and Catherin his wife, Thomas Dob∣son and his wife, Iohn Deacon, his wife and his maide, William Deacon, Thomas Woodward the elder, one Reynoldes wife a pore widowe, one mother Symons maide, besydes those that were constrained to do against their consciences. The cause of their persecution was, ye they denyed the Popes supremacie, held the Quéene to bée supreme, ye ministers might marry, &c. Many of these per∣sōs were of great substance, & had possessions of their owne. The last day of the moneth of May Iohn Slech being im∣prisoned in the kinges bench for the doctrine of the Gospell there died & was buried on the backsyde of the same prison. About the 6. day of Iune next following Thomas Har∣landTho. Harland. of Woodmancote Carpenter, Iohn Oswald.Iohn Oswalde. ibid. hus∣bandman, Thomas AuingtonTh. Auington. of Ardinglye Turner, & Tho∣mas Read,Tho. Read. suffered at Lewis together for the testimony of the Gospel. In the same towne of Lewis and the same moneth suffered, Thomas Wood,Tho. Wood. and Thomas Milles, the 20. day of the same moneth, for the testimonie of Iesus.Iohn Milles. In the which moneth William Adheral minister dyed in the kinges bench the 24. day of the same moneth, and was buried on the backe side. And so also Clement whéelwright dying there, was buryed vpon a dunghill the 25. of Iune.
A merchants seruant at Le∣cester. Thirtene at one fire.The xxvj. of Iune suffered a merchants seruant at Ley∣cester, for the testimonie of the gospell. The xxvij. ot Iune, xj. men and two womē were burned in one fire at Stratford the Bow by London: whose dwel∣lings were in sundry places in Essex. Their names were Henry Adlington,H. Adlington. Laurence Pernam,L. Pernam. Henry Wye,Henry Wye. Wil∣liam Halliwell,W. Hallywell. Thomas Bowyer,Th. Bowyer. Georges Searles,G. Searles. Ed∣mund Hurst,Edm. Hurst. Lion Couch,Lyon Couch. Rafe Iackson,Rafe Iackson. Iohn Deryfall,Iohn Derifall. Iohn Routh,Iohn Routh. Elizabeth Pepper,Eliz. Pepper. Agnes George:Agnes George vnto whom the sixt of Iune Anno 1556. Doctor Darbyshire Boners Chancellor in forme of law ministred articles of Poperie, to which they made their answeres in simplicitie of good con∣science. When they were condemned and the day appoin∣ted that they should suffer, which was the xxvij. of Iune, they were carried to Stratford bowe, and deuided in two partes into seuerall chambers. Afterward the Shiriffe came to each part, and told them that the other parte had recanted; and should not therefore suffer death,The subtiltie of the diuell. counsailyng them to doo the like, &c. To whom they answered: as their brethren had doone before, that their faith was not builded on Man, but on Christ and his sure worde. So the Shiriffe séeing no hope to preuaile, had them to the stake, which they kissed and embraced very hartely. The two womē were loose and not tied to any stake,Two women stood loose at the stake. and so they all gladly suffered (for the gospels sake) the extremitie of the fire. In the company of those before said, were thrée more condemned to die, whose names were: Thomas Freeman, William Stannard, & William Adams. These being in the hands of the secular power, Cardinall PooleCardinall Poole pardo∣neth certaine condemned for the gospell. sent dispensa∣tion for their liues, by meanes whereof they escaped. The Sunday after the condemnation of the sixtéene afore∣said, Fecknam Deane of Paules preached at the crosse, that they had as many sundry opinions, as they were persons: wherevpon they set foorth a confession of their fayth, and set to their handes.
After the burning of these in Stratford, the same moneth died in the prison of the kings bench in Southwarke, one Tho. Parret, and was buried in the backeside the 27. day of Iune. Also Martine Hunt (as is reported) in the same pri∣son was famished the 20. day. At which time likewise died in the same prison Iohn Norice, and was buried on the back∣side. After the death of the thrée aforesaid, Roger Bernard,Roger Ber∣nard. a labouring man, dwelling in Fransden in Suffolke, was ta∣ken in the night by maister Tamages men, because hée woulde not goe to Church. Adam FosterAdam Foster. of the age of sixe and twentie yeres, husbandman, dwelling in Mendlesham in Suffolke, was taken at his owne house by the Con∣stables of the Towne, George Kiuert, and Thomas Mouse, and carryed to Syr Iohn Tyrrell aforesaid knight, who sent him to Aye dungeon, and from thence to Nor∣wich, where hée was condemned of the Bishoppe Hop∣ton. Robert LawsonRob. Lawson. a single man of thirtye yeeres, a lin∣nen Weauer, was apprehended in the night by one Robert Keerich, at the commaundement of Sir Iohn Tyrrel a∣foresaid, and sent to Norwich, and then was there condem∣ned of the Bishop. These 3. were, after they were condemned, had to Ber∣rie where they chéerefully and ioyfully suffered for the testi∣mony of Iesus. Bernard being threatned at Norwich of the priests whip∣ping, burning, stocking, and such like, to terrifie him, when flattery would not serue, said vnto them: Friends I am not better then my maister Christ, and the prophets which your fathers serued after such sort, and I for his names sake, am content to suffer the like at your hands,A worthy an∣swere of the martyr. if God shall so per∣mit, trusting that he will strengthen me in the same accor∣ding to his promise, in spite of the Diuell and all his mini∣sters. The 20. of Aprill, the same Bishop had before him one
Iohn Fortune otherwise called Cutler, of Hintlesham in Suffolke a blacke smith, a man in spirit zealous, and ar∣dent: in the scriptures ready, in Christes cause stoute, & va∣liant: in his answeres maruellous: patient in suffering, and constant in the doctrine of the Gospel. Him the B. of Norwich, very likely condemned also after diuers examinations. Whether he died in the fire or otherwise was preuented by death, it is vncertaine. But his sentence of condemnation, was drawne and registred. About this time the first of Iuly, died one Iohn CarelesIohn Careles a worthy con∣fessor. of Couentry, a weauer, in the Kings bench, after long impri∣sonment the space of two yéeres. In which captiuity, first being in Couentry gaole, he was there in such credite with his kéeper, that vpon his worde onelie, hée was let out, to plaie in the Pageant about the Cittie with other his companions: and that done, keeping trueth with his keeper, returned agayne into prison at his houre ap∣pointed. After that, béeing brought vp to London: hée shew∣ed such patience, and constant fortitude, that hee lon∣ged for nothing more earnestly then to come to the pro∣motion to dye in the fire for the profession of his fayth: but hee was preuented by death in the prison, through sicknes, and was buried on a dunghill in the fieldes. In the mean time yt he was in the kings bench, he was in great perturbation of minde and conscience: wherevp∣pon hée wrote to maister Philpot, then beeing in the Cole-house, and receyued from him a comfortable letter. Hée had béen examined of Doctor Martin, who vrged him to detect his fellowes, and reasoned with him about Prede∣stination, cauilling and scoffingly. Hée was a man of a most heauenly spirite, and wrote diuers letters to sundry afflic∣ted then for the Gospel,Iohn Careles letters. as to Philpot, to Bradford, to mai∣ster Greene, maister Whitle, M. Timmes, Henry Adling∣ton, &c. a great number.
The same moneth of Iuly suffered at Newbery 3. godly and constant martirs of Christ, Iulius Palmer, Iohn Guin, Thomas Askine.Iulius Palmer. Iohn Guin. Th. Askin. Iulius Palmer was sometime a Student and felow of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, and afterward Schoolemaster in the Towne of Reding. He was borne in Couentrée, and before his calling to the knowledge of the trueth, a great aduersarie to the Gospel, and a contemner of the ministers of the trueth. In so much as hee was expelled his Colledge in the end of king Edwards daies, for popery.Iul. Palmer expulsed his Colledge in K. Edwardes time for po∣perie. So that for his maintenance, he was faine to apply himself to teach children in the house of Sir Fraunces Knolles. In which trade he continued til the comming of Q. Marie. In whose daies he was restored againe to his place by her Vi∣sitors. Where being placed a while, and vnderstanding the cruell dealing of the Papistes against the seruantes of God: and séeing their constancie: in the hearing of diuers of his friends, he burst out into these words, or such like: Oh ra∣ging crueltie, O tirannie tragicall, and more then barba∣rous. From that day forward, he studiously sought to vnder∣stand the trueth, and seriously studied P. Martires Commē∣taries vpon the first to the Corinthians. And at length grew vp in such ripenes of the trueth, that he spared not to declare certaine sparkes thereof in his outward behauiour and do∣ings. Wherefore, being abhorred of diuers (especially of M. Cole, the President) which were before his friends: hée addressed himselfe to depart the house. And being demaun∣ded by a friend of his, how he woulde liue, answered: The earth is the Lords, and the fulnes thereof. &c. After the geuing ouer of his Felowship, he was placed by Patent, Schoolemaster at Reding, and there was accep∣ted of those that feared God. But there hee remayned not long. For certain dissembling Hipocrites, who (pretending zeale to the Gospel) crept into familiaritie with him, and in his absence, spared not to rifle his Studie, and writings. A∣mong
which was his Replication to Meruines verses, tou∣ching Winchesters Epitaph and other Arguments both in Latine and English, against the Popes procéedings, and es∣pecially against their brutish tyrannie towardes the ser∣uants of God. Which these companions hauing found, did threaten him that except he would geue vp his schoole to a friend of theirs, (Thomas Thackam,Th. Thackam a false dissem∣bling hipocrite a false dissembling knaue, and a chéefe woorker of his death) they woulde deliuer those his writings to the Counsell. Whereupon, for sauegarde of his life, he was forced to depart vpon the sodaine, and tooke his iorney towardes Euesham, where his mother dwelt, Hoping to receiue of her certaine Legacies, by his Fathers will due vnto him certaine yeares before. Who so soone as he came to his mother, and asked her blessing, she cursed him, vpbrayding him with his forsaking of Oxforde, and his comming from Reding. She threatning him fire and fa∣gagotte,The mother threatneth her sonne Iulius Palmer with fire and fagot. in steade of his Legacies. So being destitute of all worldly helpe, he aduised himselfe to goe closely to Rea∣ding, there to receiue his quarters stipende, which he lefte vnreceiued at his departure, and to conuey from thence his stuffe. Which he did not so secretly, but that he was espi∣ed, and there by meanes of one Master Hampton, a false hypocrite, vnder pretence of friendshippe, he was betrayed, and within short space was taken at the signe of the Cardi∣nals hatte in Reading, and was put into a vile, stinking, and blinde Dungeon. Where tenne dayes he hanged by the handes and féete, so high, that welnéere no part of his bodie touched the ground. After all this, hee was brought before the Mayor of Reading, and there those false Brethren which before had robbed his studie, obiected against him, Treason, Sedition, Murther, and Adulterie, &c. Which when they coulde not proue, they laide vnto his charge the writings that they had stolne out of his Studie.
Wherefore once againe he was called out of pryson, and appeared before the Mayor, and Byrd the officiall, and two other Iustices, to render an accompt of his faith. And when they had gathered of his owne mouth sufficient matter to entrap him, they deuised a byll of instructions against him, to be directed to Doctor Geffery, who had determined to hold his visitation the next tuesday at Newbery, beyng the sixtéenth day of Iuly. So he was sent to Newbery, and came thether on the Munday at night, and with him Thomas Askins his felow prisoner, where they found Iohn Grome their faithfull brother in the Lord. So the xv. of Iuly the prysoners appeared before Doctor Geffery and other Commissioners, where after reasoning of the authoritie and vniuersalitie of the church of Rome, and of the presence in the Sacrament &c. when no allure∣ments nor perswasions would preuayle, they were all thrée condemned and burned together. Being at the place of their martyrdome, Palmer comfor∣teth his fellowes with the promises of God, and pronoun∣ced with an audible voice the xxxj. Psalme. But the other two made their prayers secretly to al∣mightie God, all thrée falling to the ground: and as Pal∣mer beganne to rise, there came behind him a popish priest, exhorting him to recant, to whome PalmerPalmer at the stake. answered: Away, away, tempt me no longer, away, I said, from mée all yée that worke iniquitie, for the Lord hath heard the voyce of my teares. And foorthwith they put of their ray∣ment, went to the stake and kissed it, and when they were bound to the post, Palmer said: good people pray for vs, that we may perseuere to the end, and for Christes sake beware of popish teachers, for they deceiue you. Which as hée spake, a seruaunt of one of the Bayliffes, threwe a faggot at his face, that the bloud gushed out in di∣uerse places. Thus fire being put to them they all crying Lord Iesu strengthen vs, Lord Iesu assist vs, Lord Iesu
receiue our soules, they ended this mortall life. Palmer was about 24. yeares old when he suffered. The last time of his being at Oxford, one Barwicke then fellow of Trinitie Colledge a rancke papist began to reason with him, and perceiuing him to be earnest and zealous, said vn∣to him in the hearing of Maister Thomas Perrey & others there present. Well Palmer, well, now thou art stoute and hardie in thyne opinion, but if thou were once brought to ye stake, I beléeue thou wouldest tell me another tale. I aduise thée beware of ye fire: it is a shrewd matter to burne. Truly said PalmerPalmer diuers times in daun∣ger of burning. I haue bene in daunger of burning once or twise, and hetherto I thanke God I haue escaped it, but I iudge verily it wil be mine end at the last: welcom be it, by the grace of God. In déed it is an hard matter for them to burne, that haue the minde and soule linked to the bodie, as a théefe is tyed in a paire of Fetters. But if a man be once able through the helpe of Gods spirite to separate and deuide the soule from the bodie: for him it is no more maisterie to burne, then for me to eate a péece of bread.For whom it is easy to burne. About the same moneth of Iuly Agnes Wardal of the towne of Ipswich, a vertuous woman, and one that ha∣ted the Romish trash, was persecuted by Richard Argen∣tine a phisition in the towne, Phillip Vlmes, Edmond Leach Iohn Steward, and Mathew Butler, malicious enemies of Gods children. But by Gods great prouidence they escaped their handes, and was deliuered. In the same moneth also Peter Mone a Tailer of the towne of Ipswich with his wife were called before the B. kéeping visitation at Ipswich, and through frailtie yelded to the Byshop. Whereof after they fsll into great griefe of conscience, when they came home to their house: and loo∣king when they should be sent for againe to the B. the next day, who had appointed them then to appeare. The time ap∣pointed drawing nigh, they heard the belles ring for the
B. departure out of the towne. So they escaped farther trial. Against these, was one Richard Smart a Portman of the towne, an earnest member of the Popish Church: but afterwardes he repented him thereof with teares. In the Isle of Gernesey 3. women, Katherine Cou∣chesCatherine Couches. Guillemme Gilbert. Perotine Mas∣sey. The mother and 2. daugh∣ters at Gern∣sey. the mother, and one Guillemme Gilbert, and Pero∣tine Massey her daughters, were burned for the cause of the Gospel, & refusing to come to Church. Notwithstanding, they protested to hold nothing against the Popish Church: neither was there heard any information against them: nei∣ther were they examined before of their religion at anye time, yet were they condemned by Syr Iames Amy Dean, and the Curates of the Isle to be burned for Heretikes. Which, when the Bayliefes and Iurates vnderstood, howe they had not examined them of their faith, & yet condemned them for heretikes: they would not sit in iudgement that day, but ordeyned they should first bée examined of them. Which being done, an Act and sentence was deliuered a∣gainst them to the former effect, that they should be executed as heretikes: no accuser hauing béene heard against them,Cruelty a∣gainst the mo∣ther and her 2. daughters. and the innocent parties protesting they would entirely o∣bey the ordinances of the Church. So sentence being giuen against them by Elier Gosseline Bailieffe, (notwithstan∣ding they had appealed from the same to the king, Quéene, and Councel) yet were they the 18. of Iuly all burned toge∣ther at 3. stakes, the mother in the middest, the eldest daugh∣ter on the right side, and the youngest on the left. They were first strangled, but the rope brake before they were dead: so the poore women fell into the fire,Marueilous cruelty. Pero∣tine great with child, brast asunder by the vehemencie of the fire, and her infant being a faire manchild fell into the fire, and eftsoones taken out of the fire by one W. Howse, was laid vppon the grasse, from thence it was had to the prouost, and from him to the Baylife. Whose cen∣sure was, that it should be caried backe, and cast into the fire:
so was the child baptized in his owne blood to fil vp the num∣ber of the saints. Néere about the same time that these 3. women with the infant were burned, there suffered for the doctrine of the Gospel at Gréenstéed in Sussex two men Thomas Dungate,Tho. Dungate. and Iohn Foreman,Iohn Forman. and one woman called mother Dree, the 18. of Iuly. About the 26. of Iune, one Tho. MooreTho. More. of the age of 24. seruant in a mans house in Leicester, was condemned and burned, because hée said, his maker was in heauen and not in the pixe. About the same time, the 11. of March, Iohn Iackson was examined of Doct. Cooke, concerning the Church and Sacrament of the altar. In which quarrel, the godly confes∣sor behaued himselfe boldly and wisely against the Bishop. Who when no other argument would serue, he commanded him to prison againe: but what became of him it is vncer∣taine. The first day of August Anno 1556. Ioan WastIoan Wast a blind woman. a blinde woman from her birth of the age of two & twenty, was con∣demned and burned in the towne of Darbie, for maintay∣ning the doctrine in King Edwardes daies. They that sate vpon her, were Sir Rafe Bayne Bishoppe of the dioces, Doctour Dracot his Chauncelour, Syr Iohn Port Knight, &c. Shée being prest and halfe astonied through their ter∣rours and threates, and desirous (as it seemed) to prolong her life, offered vnto the Bishoppe then present, if hée woulde before that companie take it vppon his conscience that the doctrine which hée would haue her to beléeue con∣cerning the Sacrament, was true; and that he would at the dreadfull day of iudgement, aunswere for her there∣in (as Doctour Taylor in diuers of his Sermons did of∣fer) shée woulde then further aunswere them.Her offer to the Iudges. Which when it would not bée stood vnto, the poore woman percei∣uing the same, answered againe: that if they refused to
take of their conscience, that it was true which they would haue her to beléeue, shée would answere no further: but desired them to doo their pleasure. And so after certaine cir∣cumstances, they pronounced sentence agaynst her, and deliuered her to the Bayliffes of the towne of Darbie, to be put to death: where chéerefullie she suffered in the fire for the testimonie of the truth whiche shée before had pro∣fessed. This poore blinde mayde would hyre with mony such as would not fréely, do so much, for to read certain chapters of the New Testament vnto her, and would bargayne with them, how often to read one chapter vpon a price. Al∣though shée was borne blind, yet could shée without a guide goe to any Church in the towne, or to any other place or person, that vsed to reade vnto her, or had anie godlie exer∣cises. The 8. of September suffered Edward SharpeEdw. Sharpe. borne in Wiltshire, of the age of 60. yéers, at Bristow: where he con∣stantly mainteined the quarrel of Christ against Antichrist, to the death. The 24. of September suffered 4 men, Iohn Hart,Foure at May¦field in Sussex. Tho. Rauensdal, a Shoemaker, and a Collier, al foure together at Mayfield in Sussex, for the testimony of Iesus, &c. The next day after was a young man put to death at Bristow for the like testimonie.A young man at Bristow. Not lōg after whose death suffered the xxvij. of September, Iohn Horne,I. Horne, and a woman. and a woman at Wootton Vnder hedge, in Glocestershire. In the parish of Wootton Vnder-hedge, William Dan∣gerfield,W. Danger∣field. (after he had béene a space from home for feare of the crueltie of the time) being a professor of the Gospell, re∣payred to his wife lying in childbed of the tenth childe: who was not so soone come home, but was espied; and apprehen∣ded, and had to prison by the cruel sentence of D. Brookes, bishop. In whose cruel handling he remayned so long, till his féele were almost freited off with Irons.
After the apprehension of the husband, the wife also was taken with hir yong borne childe (being but fourtéene daies old) out of her childbed, and carryed into the common gaole, and there placed among théeues and murtherers,Great crueltie. where both she and hir infant could neuer come to fire, but shée was driuen to warme the clothes that she should put about the childe, in hir bosome. While they both lay thus inclosed, ye B. subtilly got pro∣mise of the husband to recant, declaring vnto him that his wife had so done already. (which was vntruth) So they suffered him vpon that promise to go to his wife. To whom he declared with a sorrowful hart, how hée had bin circum∣uented: and pulled out of his bosome a copie of his recanta∣tion,The wife en∣courageth her husband. wherto he had granted his promise. At the sight wher∣of, his wiues heart claue asunder, saying: hath Sathan so preuailed, &c. So hee departed from hir with teares, and praied GOD he might not liue so long as to call euill good, and good euill: so going homeward to his house, he took his death, and shortly after dyed, according to his pray∣er. After this, Ioane his wife continued in prison with her infant: which being starued in prison with cold and famine, (the milke of the mother failing through euill vsing,) was sent away when it was past all remedie: and shortly after died. And not long after the mother died also, besides, an old woman of 90. yeres, mother of her husband, being lefte a∣lone in the house comfortlesse. In the Moneth of October next following, suffered a Shoomaker,A Shoomaker at North∣hampton. at Northhampton, for the stedfast professing of the trueth. After whom, not long, in the same moneth died thrée god∣ly Confessors in the Castle of Chichester, and were buried in the fieldes. In the same moneth was burned also one HookeHooke. a true witnesse of the Lord, at Chester. As Boner was the cruellest among the bishops, so Harps∣field
among all the archdeacōs (except Dunning of Norw.) was the cruellest: by whose meanes there were now xv. Professors of the Gospel together in prison, in Canterburie Castle. Whereof fiue were famished to death,Fiue famished and x. burned at Canterbury and ten bur∣ned. The names of the famished were these: Iohn Clarke, Dunstan Chittenden, vncondemned: Walter Foster, of Stone, Alice Potkins, wife, of Staplehurst, Iohn Hurst of Cranbrock, Weauer, condemned to be burned. Alice Pot∣kinsA wittie and godly answere of Alice Pot∣kins. being asked of her age, said she was 49. yeres olde, ac∣cording to her old age: and according to her young age, since she learned Christ, she was of one yeares age. In the moneths of September, Nouember, and Decem∣ber, in the Dioces of Couentrée and Lichfield, much trouble fell to diuers persons, for the profession of ye Gospel, through the crueltie of the Bishoppe, named Rafe Bane, and a more cruell Chauncellour, called Doctor Draicotte. By whose meanes many persons were driuen to beare fagots in those quarters. Thus endeth the fourth yere of Quéene Maries Reigne, In which yeare, the number of the slaine for the Gospell,The ende of the fourth yere of Q. Marie. Eightie foure persons put to death in the fourth yere of Q. Marie. came to 84. persons. Besides such as fled, and priuately by practises were made away. About this time, Sir Iohn Cheeke, sometime Schoole∣master to King Edward the sixt, being in Germanie, out of all danger, would néedes take his iourney with Sir Peter Carewe, to Bruxels, with king Philips safe conduct to passe and repasse, by the meanes of the Lorde Paget, and Sir Iohn Mason, who pledged for his safe conduct, king Phi∣lippes fidelitie. But in his returne, when hee had brought the Lorde Paget on his way, from Bruxels towarde Eng∣land, he, (with Sir Peter Carewe,) was taken by the pro∣uost-marshall, spoyled of their horses, and clapped into a Carte, their legges, armes, and bodies, tied with halters to the bodie of the Carte: And so shipped (being blindfolded)
vnder the hatches, and brought to the Tower of London, Where at the length, Sir Iohn CheekeSir I. Cheeke. was brought to re∣cant, and was drawen (vnwares) to sitte in place where the poore Martirs were brought before Boner, and other Bishops, to be condemned. The remorse where∣of wrought such effect in him, that not long after he left this mortall life, repen∣ting him greatly of his fall before his death. The ende of the eleuenth Booke.
The twelfth and last Booke. CArdinall Poole thrée yéeres after his returne into England, aduised him∣selfe of the reforming of the Vniuer∣sitie of Cābridge.The vniuersi∣tie of Cam∣bridge to be reformed. To performe which charge, were chosen Cutbert Scot, not long before cōsecrated B of Che∣ster, Nicholas Ormanet an Italian, archpriest of ye people of Bodalon in the dioces of Veron, professed in both lawes, bearing ye name of Lord Pope his Datary, T. Watson elected B. of Lincoln, Iohn Christophorson elected B. of Chichester, and Henrie Cole, prouost of the Colledge of Eaton. The 9. of Ianuary. Anno 1556.Inquisitors came to Cam∣bridge. The inquisitors afore∣said came to Cambridge, & took vp their lodgings all of them in Trinity colledge with M. Christophorson maister of the Colledge. The next day after their comming, they interdi∣cted two Churches, namely, S. Maries,Q. Maries and S. Michaels Churches were inter∣dicted. where Martin Bu∣cer, and S. Michaels, where Paulus Phagius was buried, now thrée or foure yéeres past. During which time vnto that day, the Priests neuer ceassed to celebrate masses and other ceremonies in these Churches, and that without scruple, till the comming of these Commissioners. Who commaun∣ded hereafter, that the assemblies which should be made for executing of holy ceremonies, should be remoued to ye kings Chappell. On the xj. day the Vicechancellor of the Vniuersitie, wt the Masters of houses, and the rest of the Graduates, were commanded to appeare before the Commissioners in their habites: & so did in the gatehouse of Trinitie colledge, which was adorned for the Commissioners. Where the vicechā∣cellor aforesaid, hauing on a tissue cope, sprinkeled the Com∣missioners with holy water, and purposed to cense thē, but
they refused it there. Which notwithstanding afterward in the Quéenes Colledge, and elswhere they refused not. There M. Iohn Stokes oratour of the Vniuersitie wel∣comed them with an oration, whereto the B. of Chichester answered, with thankefull acceptation of the curtesie of the vniuersitie, and so declared the cause of their commission. From thence they were brought to the kinges Colledge, where was songe a masse of the holy Ghost. From thence they went to the interdicted Church of saint Maries: wher Pecocke preached against heresie and heretickes, naming Bylney, Cranmer, Latimer, Rydley, &c. That being en∣ded, they procéeded to their visitation, which Robert Bras∣sey maister of kings Colledge, a worthy aged man woulde not admit in his colledge,Kings colledge refuseth the in∣quisitors. because the visitation of his house was wholly reserued to the B. of Lincolne. Which excepti∣on they tooke all in great displeasure. The 12. of Ianuary, they resorted to kings colledge, for that Colledge, (time out of mind) had béen counted neuer to be without an heretike or twaine. The M. of that Colledge, maister BrasseyK. colledge ne∣uer without an heretike. Robert Brassey a good old man maister of K. Colledge. maketh his exception againe to their visita∣on: but it would not serue. In that Colledge some there were that refused to take their oath, because they had giuen it to their Colledge be∣fore: and also would not be brought thereby to accuse them∣selues: yet at the length (with much a doe) they were con∣tented to be sworne. Thrée daies long lasted the Inquisiti∣on. There after this it was aduised, that the Vniuersitie should themselues first decrée against Bucer and Phagius, and after make Supplication to the Commissioners, for the confirming of this decrée. So the Vniuersitie authorised their Vicechancellour, to be the common factor for the Vni∣uersitie. Which Supplication being put vp to the Commis∣sioners the xiij. day, was of them graunted: and afterwarde confirmed by the whole consent of the Vniuersitie, and sig∣ned with the common seale the fourtéenth day, by the Vice-Chaunceller
by Doctor Yong Doctor Haruey, Swineborne, Marpetide, &c. After they had all dyned together at master Bacons, maister of Gonwell hall: by and by they carried it to the Commissioners to their Lodging. Their condemna∣tion being openly read, then was it desired to send out pro∣cesse to cite Bucer and Phagius to appeare, or any other that would take vpon thē to plead their cause against ye next mū∣day. So the next day processe went out to cite the offenders. But when neither of the parties accused would appeare at the time appointed, although they might at the first haue condemned them: yet a second processe was published, and sentence deferred till the 26. of the same moneth On which day the Maior was also warned with his bretheren to bée present to behold what should bée determined. When they had taken their places, there was exhibited to the commissioners the processe that was lastly published to cite them. This being done, ye B. of Chester maketh a spéech, & reci∣teth ye sentence out of a scroll, and condemned Bucer & Phagi∣usBucer and Phagius dig∣ged out of their graues. of heresie. After sentence thus read, he commaunded their bodies to be digged out of their graues, & first to be disgraded from holy orders, he deliuered them to the secular power. All this being ended, they dispatch a purseuante to ad∣uertise the Cardinall what they had done, and required the writ de comburendo. And while he went on his message, they willed all suspected bookes to be brought for to be burned with the corps of Bucer and Phagius. The purseuante being returned with the writ: vpon the receipte thereof they appointed the 6, day of Februarie for the accomplishment of the matter. So the Vicechanceller on that day taking with him, Mar∣shall the common notarie, went first to saint Michaels church, where Phagius was buried: there he calleth foorth Andrew Smith, Henry Sawyer, and Henry Adams, men of the same parrish, and bound them with an oth to digge vp
Phagius bones and to bring them to the place of execution. Marshall tooke their othes, receyuing the like of Roger Smith, and William Hasell the towne Sergeants, and of Iohn Capper warden of the same Church, for doing the like with Bucer. Their cofins being taken vp, they were linc∣ked with a chaine to a post on the market hill, and fire put too,Bucer & Pha∣gius corps bur∣ned with many good bookes. were burned: and a number of condemned bookes with them; which while they were burning (that gaue the people cause greatly to mislike their crueltie) on the mar∣ket hill, Doctor Watson enueyeth against them in the pul∣pet in S. Maries church: although Bucer taught no other thing, then both he and Scot had subscribed to in king Ed∣wards daies. The next day after the B. of Chester went with great solemnitie to the Church of our Lady and Saint Michaell. Which doone, the Commissioners bestowed a fewe dayes in punishing such as they thought had offended, and enac∣ted certaine Statutes, prescribing, at how many Masses euery man should be, day by day, and how many Pater no∣sters and Auies euery man should say, when he should enter into the Church. And in his entrance, after what a  his should owe himselfe to the Altar: and at what time of the Masse a man should stand, when sit downe, with a number of such superstitious toyes. Which thinges being thus or∣dered, the Vniuersitie bestoweth the degrée of Doctor vpon Ormane and Cole, and to the holy reformers dep who yet before they departed,The holy com∣missioners de∣part from Cā∣bridge. gaue commaundement that the Maisters of euery house should copie out their Statutes, which contained certayne  rules for euery house par∣ticularlie. Swineborne maister of Clare hall, beeing de∣maunded whether he would haue their engrossed in paper, or parchment, answered: it made no matter, paper would for continuance serue the turne well enough. Accordyng as they dealt with the bodies of Bucer and Phagius at Cambridge, so likewise at Oxford, they vsed
Per MartyrsThey take Pe∣ter Martyrs wiues corpes at Oxford. wife (while she liued, a graue and sober ma∣trone.) Anno 1552. she departed this life. Now when B. Brookes of Glocester, Nichol, Ormanet, Datary, Robert Morwen, president of Corpus Christi Col∣ledge, Cole & Wright, Doctors of the Ciuil law, came thither as the Cardinals visitors. They among other things hauing commission for the same, ministred an oath to such as had ac∣quaintance with her, that they shold not conceale what they knew touching religion, concerning her faith. Who because they vnderstood not her language, answered: they could know nothing. Which the commissioners also certified the Cardi∣nall. But that notwithstanding, he left not the matter so, but wrote down his letters, a good while after, to Marshall, the Deane of Friswides, that he should digge her vp, and lay her out of Christian burial, because she was buried nigh S. Friswides reliques. Whose commandement Doct. Marshall calling his spades and mattockes together in an Euening, when he was well whitled, did fulfill and buried her in a dunghill. Anno 1557.  10 of the 15. persons mentioned in the other booke that were in prison in the castle of Canterbury, wher∣of fiue were famished, were cōmitted to the fire by Thorn∣ton called B. or suffragan of Douer, otherwise called Dick of Douer, and by Nicholas Harpesfield Archdeacon of the same prouince. The names of those tenne be these: Iohn PhilpotIohn Philpot. W. Waterer. Steph. Kempe. W. Haydhith. Th. Hudson. Mathew Brod∣bridge. Tho. Stephens. Nich. Finall. W. Lowicke. W. Prowting. of Ten∣derden. W. Waterer of Bedington, Stephen Kempe of Norgate, W. Haidhith, Th. Hudson of Shalenge, Ma∣thew Brodbridge of Tenderden, Thomas Stephens of Bedingden, Nicholas Finall of Tenderden, W. Lowicke of Crambrooke, W. Prowting of Thoneham. Of these sixe were burned at Canterbury about ye xv. of Ianuary, twoo, that is, Stephen and Philpot at Wye. About the same mo∣neth, other two, Finall and Brodbridge, at Ashford the 16. of the same moneth.
In february following came out another bloody commis∣sion from the king and Quéene,Another bloo∣dy commission. yet more to inflame the fire of persecution. After the publishing of which Commission the eight of February, persecution did rage most fiercely in all quarters: so that the prisons were full of prisoners: namely, in the dioces of Canterbury. And in the towne of Colchester, it was so fierce, that 22. together, men and women were apprehended at one clappe, 14. men and 8. women: of which, some escaped; the other were driuen vp like a flocke of Christian lambes to London, with 2. or 3. lea∣ders at the most. The blood of which people, Boner woulde haue sucked, had not Cardinall PooleCardinall Poole merci∣full. staied his rage. Who although he were a papist and an enemy, yet was he not so bloody as the other were. So these people, being suffered to draw themselues out a submission, were deliuered, notwithstanding diuers of thē afterward were taken and suffered. The names of that multitude were these: Robert Cole∣man of Walton, in the Countie of Essex, labouring man, Ioan Winsley of Horsley magna in the same Countie, Ste∣phen Glouer of Railey in the same Countie, Glouer, Ri, charde Clarke, of much Holland in the same Countie, ma∣riner, W. Munt of much Bentley in the same Countie, husbandman, Thomas Winseley, of much Horsley in the same Countie, sawyer, Margaret Field of Ramsey in the same Countie, Agnes Whitlocke of Douercourte, Alice Munt of much Bentley, Rose Allen of the same towne, Ri∣chard Bongeor of Colchester, Currier, Richard Atkyn of Halstéed weauer, Robert Barcock of Whistone, carpenter, Rich. George of Westbarfolt, labourer, Rich, Gelly of Col∣chester mariner. Tho. Feresham, mercer of Colchester, Ro∣bert Debnam late of Dedham, Cisley Warren of Cockshall, Christian Pepper widow, of the same towne Allen Simson, Eline Euring, Alice the wife of Rob. Wil. at colchester, Wil∣liam
Bongeor of Colchester Glaster. Their chiefe trouble was for the article of the Lords supper. The same yeare, 1557.1557 T. Losebie. H Ramsey. T, Thirtell. M. Hyde. A. Stanley. the xij. of April, suffered v. god∣ly Martirs in smithfield: Thomas Losebie, Henry Ramsey, Thomas Thyrtel, Margaret Hyde, and Agnes Stanley. The vij. of Ianuarie they were examined by Darbishire then Chauncellour to Boner. Who dealt so with them, that they were dismissed for that time: but the B. taking the matter into his handes, the vi. of March, dealt more hardly wt them. And againe, the first day of April conuented them: and fin∣ding them constant in the truth, neither to be moued by his threates, nor allurements, procéeded to their condemnatiō. The afternoone, the B. first called for Loseby (who when in reading of his articles) mention was made of the Sacra∣ment of the altar) the Bishop putting off his cappe,The valeaunt Martir. & his fe∣lowes, said: My Lorde, séeing you put off your cap, I will put on mine, and therewithall did put on his cap. So sen∣tence was pronoūced vpon him, and the rest seuerally. Who couragiously, and constantly defied to the bishops face, their Popish Idolatrie and superstition. And so were they deliue∣red to the Sheriffes of London: who the xij. day of Aprill brought them into Smithfielde. Where all together in one fire ioyfully they slept in the Lord. In the Moneth of May following, thrée other suffered in Saint Georges fieldes in Southwarke: whose names were, William Morant, one King, and Steeuen Grat∣wicke.W. Morant. King. S. Gratwick. Who was aboue all most vnlawfullie put to death: For first he was condemned by the Bishoppe of Winche∣ster, and the Bishoppe of Rochester,Vniust precee∣ding. which were not his Ordinaries: neither could his appeale be taken. Then when they had no colour, they suborned one of the Priestes to come in for a false Ordinarie, and sitte vpon him, and pretended false articles, which were no part of his exami∣nation. And hauing no other ground, nor iust matter against him, but onely for saying these wordes: That which I said,
I haue saide, they read the Sentence of Condemnation a∣gainst them. So he with the other two, about the ende of May, was burned for the testimonie of Iesus Christ in S. Georges fieldes. While the Bishoppe was reading Sentence a∣gainst Gratwicke, his Chaplaines cryed out, saying: stoppe, stoppe my Lorde, for now hee will recant. Then the Bi∣shoppe asked him what he would doe. To whom he answe∣red,Faith surely grounded. My Lorde, my faith is grounded more stedfastly, than to change in a moment. It is not processe of time that can alter me, vnlesse my faith were as the waues of the Sea. So the Bishoppe made an ende, and deliuered him to the Sheriffe. I. Bradbridge. W. Applebie-Pettonel. Ed. Allen. K. his wife. I. Mannings. E. a blind maidIn the xxviij. day of the moneth of Iune, were vij. Chri∣stian, and faithfull Martirs burned at Maidstone in Kente, through the cruelty of Richard Thornton, suffragan of Do∣uer, & the bloudy Archdeacon of Canterburie. Their names were, Ioane Bradbridge of Staplehurst, Walter Ap∣plebie of Maidstone, Petronell his wife, Edmund Allen of Fritēden, Katherin his wife, Ioan Mānings, wife, of maid∣stone, Elizabeth, a blinde mayden. Edm. Allen was a Mil∣ler, in the parish of Frittenden in Kent, who in a déere yeare would féede the poore, and would reade vnto them the scrip∣tures, and exhort them. Hee was taken by the meanes of Iohn Tayler, Priest of the Parish, and committed (after much vile taunting and rayling) to prison, by sir Iohn Baker knight. The nintéenth day of Iune, were burned seuen: foure women and thrée men, at Canterburie, for the testimonie of Christ.I. Fishcock. N. White. N. Pardu, B. Finall. Widow Brad. Wilsons wife. Bendens wife. Their names were these: Iohn Fishcock, Nicholas White, Nich. Pardue, Barbara Final, widow, Bradbridge, widow, who was thought to haue béene with childe, Wil∣sons wife, and Bendens wife. The vsage of Alice Benden was most cruell. Shée being deliuered, was by the foolish wordes of her owne husbande imprisoned againe, who
tooke mony of the Constable to carrie her to prison himselfe:The husband against the wife. but that the wife tendering her husbands fame, and that the world should not witnesse against him so facinorous a fact, went to the Constable, desiring him to go with her: who answered that he could not, but lent her his boy to go with her, with whom she went to Canterbury castell. Where she being in prison, practised with a prison fellow of hers, the wife of one Potkin, to liue both of them with two pence halfe penie a day, to trie thereby, how well they could su∣staine penury, if they were put to it: for they had heard when they should be remoued to the Bishops prison,The martyrs diet in prison. their liuings should be but thrée pence halfe penie each day: & did in déede so liue both, fouretéene daies, ere she were from thence remoued. The two and twentith day of Ianuary following, her husband went and told the Byshop, that shée had a brother, whose name was Roger Hall that resorted vnto her, who if hée were kept from her, hée sayd shée would turne: for hée comforteth her (saith hée) and giueth her mony, and perswadeth her not to recant. Vppon which reporte of her husband, shée was remoued to a pryson called Munday hole, and straight charge giuen, that if her brother came, hée should be taken: but hée comming earely in the morning when her kéeper was gone to ringe, (for he was a bell rin∣ger) otherwise did not know where shée had béene impriso∣ned, but by hearing her voyce as shée powred out vnto God her sorrowfull complaints, saying the Psalmes of Da∣uid. And there putting mony in a loafe of bread, & sticking the same on a pole, so did he reach it vnto her: & this was fiue wéekes after her comming thither: all which time no crea∣ture was knowne to come at her, more then her kéeper.Three far∣things a day the martyrs allowance. Alice Bende a constant martyr. Her lying in that prison was vpon a litle short straw, betwixt a payre of stockes and a stone wall, & her allowance thrée far∣things a day: that is, an halfe peny in bread and a farthing in drincke, neyther could she get any more for her mony:
wherefore shée desired to haue her whole allowance in bread, and vsed water for drinke. Thus did shée lie nine wéekes: during which tyme shée neuer chaunged ap∣parell. At the first comming into this place shée did gréeuously bewayle her state, with great sorrowe, and reasoned with her selfe why the Lord God, with his heauie iustice suf∣fered her to be sequestred from her louing fellowes in so extréeme misery. In which shée continued till on a night as shée was in her sorrowfull supplications, in rehearsing this verse of the Psalme: Why art thou so heauy O my soule, and againe the right hande of the most highest can chaunge all:God sendeth the spirit of comfort. shée receiued comfort in the middest of her miseries, and after that continued ioyfull vntill her deliuerance from the same. So shée with the rest the nintenth of Iune were con∣sumed with fire for the testimony of Iesus, after they knée∣ling downe together had called vpon the name of God. Bradbriges wife when shée was condemned of the Bishop to be burned, had two children named Patience and Charitie. Who then said to the Bishop, that if he would néedes burne her, yet she trusted that he would take and kéepe Patience and Charitie,The B. will neither meddle with Patience nor Charitie. meanyng her two daughters: Nay quoth the Bishop, by the faith of my body, I will med∣dle with neither of them both. About this tyme Matthew Plase weauer of the pa∣rishe of Stone in Kent, was examined before Thorneton, Harpsfielde, &c. And constantly maintayned the truth a∣gainst the popish hypocrites:Ten at one fire Rich. Woodmā G. Stephens, R. Maynard, Alex. Hosemā, Tom. a Wood, Marg. Moris, Iames Moris, Denis Burgis, Ashdons wife, Groues wife. but what became of him it is vncertaine. In the towne of Lewes were ten faythfull seruaunts of God, put in one fire the two and twentith day of Iune. Their names were Richard Woodman, George Stephens, Robert Maynard, Alexander Hoseman, his seruant To∣masin a Wood, Maynards maide, Margery Moris, Iames Moris her sonne, Denis Burgis, Ashdons wife, Groues
wife. Rich. Woodman was twise imprisoned for the testi∣mony of Iesus. At the first apprehension, he was impriso∣ned a yéere and a halfe in the kings bench, and afterwarde 8. wéekes in the Bishops colehouse, lacking one day. His first apprehension was for reprouing a Preacher in the pul∣pit, in the Parish of Wambleton, where he dwelt. For which hée was twise before ye Bishoppe of Chichester, and fiue times before the Commissioners, and then sent to Londons Cole-house, and manie times called before him. He was sixe times examined in the Colehouse, and 26. times before, so that his examinations in all were 32. The second time he was found out, and taken by means of his father and brother:Father against the sonne. who had as much goodes of his in their handes, as were well woorth sixe and fiftie pounds a yéere, a Lordship, and an honor and halfe a Lord∣shippe, which hée had deliuered vnto their handes to pay his debtes, and the rest to remaine to his wife and chil∣dren, which was two hundred pounds better then the debt came to. The same day that Philpot was burned, which was the 18. of December, hée with foure more, were deliue∣red out of Boners hands with very good conditions: in such sort as Woodman said of him, that his heart was so drun∣ken with yt blood of Philpot,Boner drunke with the blood of Philpot. that he thought he could not tell what he did. For two daies before (said he) he promised them they should be condemned, that same day they were deliue∣red. Yet the morning after they were deliuered, hée sought earnestly for some of them again, waxing dry after his great drunkennes. Before his second apprehension, he continued in a Wood vnder a towre, 6. or 7. wéekes: with his Bible, penne and ynke, and other necessaries: his wife bringing him meate daily. Anno 1557. the 14. of April, he was brought before the
Bishop of Chichester, Doct. Story, and Doct. Cooke, of whō after examination of diuers pointes, as of marriage of priests, concerning the assurance of hauing the spirit of God, (which the Papists account arrogancie to affirme,) and con∣cerning the 7. sacraments, he was had to the marshalsea, and there remained till the 27. of Aprill. At which time he appeared againe before Chichester, two of his Chaplains, and Doctor Story, of whom he was examined of the seuen Sacraments, and not agréeing with them therein, hée was commaunded againe to the marshalsea, no man to speake with him. The 12. of May he was examined again of Doct. Lang∣dall, parson of Buxted in Sussex, and Chaplaine to my Lorde Mountague, and maister Iames Gage at my Lord Mountagues house in Southwarke: where he set Lange∣dall vp in diuers pointes of religion: as of the force of Baptisme, whether it bée of necessitie of saluation to all, and of the state of infants that die without it: touching the Sacrament of the Altar, &c. and so was had againe to prison till the fiue and twentie of May. On which day hée was examined agayne of Winchester, Rochester, and a certaine Doctor, with diuers other Priestes and Gentlemen, sitting in Saint Georges Church in South∣warke, of whom béeing wrangled with touching Priestes mariages, and his reproouing of a reuolting Preacher, hée was dismissed againe to the marshalsea, till the fifteene of Iune. At which day he appeared before Winchester, the Archdeacon of Canterbury, Doctor Langdall, &c. and woulde not answere nor sweare before Winchester, be∣cause hée was not his ordinarie. Who when he threatned him, made answere: I looke for no helpe of men, God is on my side, I praise him therefore: I will not care who bée against mée, neyther doe I. So was hée had to the mar∣shalsea againe, where hee remayned till the sixtéenth of Iuly: on which day he was condemned by Winchester,
chiefly for the poynt of the Sacrament of the Altar, and so was burned with nine other, which were taken not past two or thrée dayes before their iudgement, and bur∣ned before the writ could come downe.Quicke dis∣patch. Such quicke dis∣patch they made. They suffered the two and twentith day of Iune at Lewes. About the same tyme one Ambrose died in Maidstone prison, who else should haue béene burned in the quarrell of Christ. About the same time was one Richard Lush condemned of Cutbert Bourne B. of Bath and Welles, and giuen to the secular power for the sinceritie of the Gospell: whether he were burned or not it is vncertaine. In the moneth of Iuly next, ensued the martyrdome of Simon Miller of Linne, and Elizabeth Cooper. Simon Mil∣lerSimon Miller. Eliza. Cooper. being at Norwich, and séeing the people comming from their Popish seruice, asked them where hée might haue the Communion. At which words, a Papist said: he would bring him where hée should not misse, and brought him to the Chauncellour of Norwich, who as hee was exami∣ning him, spied his confession which hee had put into his shoe, which did appeare: and asked if he would stand to the same. Which when he sayd he constantly would do, he was committed to a kéeper in the Bishops house: from whence (on what condition it is vncertaine) he was dismissed, and went home to his house at Linne, Where (when hee had set all things in order) he returned againe to his Prison in the Bishops house, and there continued constant in the professi∣on of the trueth, till by the B. and his Chancellour he was condemned to death. Elizabeth Cooper was a Pewterers wife, dwelling in Saint Andrewes parish in Norwich: where before she had recanted, and being vnquiet in mind, and greatly troubled in conscience for the same, at the last she came into ye church (the people being at their Superstitious Seruice: and
before them all bewailed her fall,Elizab. Coo∣per repenteth of her recanta∣tion. and greatly repented of that she had done. For which she was taken by M. Sutterton the Shiriffe, & burned with Simon Miller. When the fire came vnto her, shee a litle shronke thereat, crying ah a. Which when Simon Miller heard, he put his hand behinde towards her, and willed her to be strong and of good cheare: we shall haue a ioyfull and swéet supper. Whereby she was strengthened still, and quietly ended her combate, with victorie. Of those 22. which were before mentioned: that were then deliuered by the meanes of the Cardinall Poole, was William Moūt of much Bentley in Essex husbandmā,W. Mount. Alice, his wife. Rose Allen. with Alice his wife, and Rose Allen maid, the daughter of the said Allice Mount. They comming home againe, refray∣ned from their parish Church, and frequented the company of good men. Wherefore, a wicked priest of the towne, Syr Thomas Tye, who by reason he himselfe had béen a profes∣sor, knew all their haunt, complained of them to the Lorde Darcie, and wrote also against them to Boner. So the 7, day of March, at two of the clock in the morning, one maister Ed∣mund Tyrrel, (who came of the Tyrrels that murdered K. Edward the 5. and his brother) tooke with him the Baylieffe of the hundred, called William Samuel, dwelling in Col∣chester, and the two Constables of much Bentley, Iohn Baker, and William Harris, and other companie, and came to father Mountes house, and apprehended him, & his wife being sick, saying they shoulde goe to Colchester Castle. Which mother Mount hearing, desired her daughter might first fetch her some drinke, for she was very sicke. Which they graunted her. So her daughter Rose AllenRose Allen. tooke a pot, and went with a candle to drawe drinke: and as she came back againe, Tirrel met with her, and willed her to giue her parents good counsell, &c. To whom she answered: sir, they haue a better instructor than I: for the holy Ghost doeth teach them, I hope, which I trust will not suffer thē to erre.
Tirrel said, Why? art thou still in that minde yu naughty hus∣wife? Marry it is time to looke vnto such heretikes in déede. Rose. Sir, wt that which you call heresie do I worshippe my Lorde God, I tel you truth. Tirrell.The tragicall dialogue be∣twixt Tirrell and R. Allin. Then I perceiue you will burne (gossip) with the rest for companies sake. Rose. If I be so compelled, I hope in his mercies (if he call me to to it) he will make me able to beare it. So he (turning to his companie) said: Sirs, this Gossip will burne, do ye not think it? Marry sir (quoth one) proue her, and you shall sée what she will doe by and by. So the cruell Tirrell taking the can∣dle from her, helde her by the wrest, and the burning can∣dle vnder her hande, burning crossewaies ouer the backe thereof, so long, till the sinewes crackt in sunder. In which time of his tirannie, hee said often to her: Why whoore, wilt thou not crie: thou young whoore, wilt thou not crie? &c. Vnto which she alwaies answered, that she had no cause, she gaue God thankes. He had more cause to wéepe (she saide) than she, if he considered the matter well. In the end,Tyranny o∣uercome with patience. when the sinewes brake, he thrust her violently from him, and said: Ah strong whoore, thou shamelesse beast, thou beastlie whoore, &c. But she (patiently suffering his rage) at the last saide: Haue you done what you will doe? And he said, yea. And if thou thinke it be not well, then mende it. R. Mend it, nay, the Lord mend you, and geue you repentance, if it bée his wil. And now (if you thinke it good) begin at the féete, and burne the head also. And so she went, and carried her mother drinke, as she was commaunded. After they had searched the house for more companie, at the last, they founde one Iohn Thurstone,I. Thurston, & M. his wife. and Margarette his wife also with other, whom they carried to Colchester Castle immediatly. With William Mount and his Familie, was ioyned also in the same Prison at the Towne of Colchester, ano∣ther faithfull brother, Iohn Iohnson, otherwise called Ali∣ker, of the Towne of Thorpe, in the Countie of Essex, La∣bourer,
of the age of 34. yeres, his wife being dead, and thrée children by her left with him. Other sixe prisoners lay in Mot-hall, in the same town, whose names were, William Bongeor,W. Bongeor. of the Parish of S. Nicholas in Colchester, Glasier, about the age of 40. yeres: Agnes Siluerside,A. Siluerside. alias Smith, of Colchester, widow, of the age of sixtie yeres: Thomas BenoldeT. Benold. of Colchester, Talow∣chaundler: William PurcasW. Purcas. of Bocking in Essex Fuller, of the age of twentie yeres: Helene Ewring,H. Ewring. the wife of Iohn Ewring, Miller of Colchester, of the age of fourty & eyght yeres: who was one of the two and twentie prisoners be∣fore mentioned, and was by Robert Maynarde (then Bai∣liffe of Colchester) imprisoned in the Mot-hall. The sixtth of this companie was Elizabeth Folkes,E. Folkes, a seruant, of the age of twentie yeres. These were imprisoned in the Mot-hall, and the other foure were in the Castle. Diuers exa∣minations these good men had at sundrie times, before Iu∣stices, Priestes, and Officers. As, Master Roper, Iohn Kingstone Commissarie, Iohn Boswell Priest, and Bi∣shoppe Boners Scribe. Last of all, they were examined in the Mot-hall the thrée and twentie day of Iune, by Doctor Chadsey, Iohn Kingstone Commissarie, with other priests, and Boswel the Scribe, in the presence of Robert Browne, and Robert Maynard, Bayliffes of Colchester, with diuers Iustices, and Gentlemen of the Countrey. At which time, sentence of death was read against them, chéefly for denying the Reall presence in the Sacrament. Elizabeth Folkes the young maide, being asked whether she beléeued the Lorde to be present in the Sacrament sub∣stantially and really:A sharpe an∣swere of the Martir. made answere, that shee beléeued it was a substantiall Lie, and a reall Lie. Then they read the Sentence of condemnation againste her. In which time Doctor Chadsey wept, that the teares trickled downe his chéekes. This Elizabeth FolkesEliz. Folkes. the day before shee was con∣demned,
was examined onely vpon this article, whether shée beléeued that there was a Catholicke Church or no? Vnto which she answered, yea: then was she immediatly by Bos∣wels meanes the Scribe, deliuered vnto her vncle Holt of Colchester to be kept, who carried her home to his house, where she might haue departed if shée would: meanes being offered to cōuey her away. But she hearing that some doub∣ted that she had yéelded to the Pope (although it was most vntrue) would in no wise content her selfe, but wept, and was in such anguish of minde, that (no remedie) she would to the Papistes againe. And comming before them at Co∣sines house at the white hart in Colchester, she was at vtter defiance with them and their doctrine, and so was condem∣ned with the rest, as also were the 4. that were put into the castle. Of which company, Rose AllenRose Allen cō∣demned soong for ioy. after her condemna∣tion song for great ioy to the wonder of many. The 2. day of August was appointed for their martyr∣dome, on which day betwixt 7, and 8. of the clock in the mor∣ning, these 6. were brought from Mote-hall, to a place of of ground hard by the towne wall, the place of their martir∣dō. Where al things being prepared, they made their prai∣er to God, but not in such sort as they would, because they were interrupted, especially by one maister Cleere, who sometime had béene a Gospeller. Elizabeth preparing her selfe to the fire, when she had pluc∣ked off her peticote, would haue geuen it to her mother,A notable speech of the martir. but was not permitted. Therefore (taking it in her hande) she threwe it from her, saying: Farewell all the world: farewel faith, farewel hope: and so taking holde of the stake, sayde: Welcome loue. When these vi. were all nayled to their stakes, and the fire about them, they clapped their hands to∣gether (for ioy) in the fire. So ioyfully they all ended their liues in the quarrel of Christ. The same day in the afternoone, they foure of the Castle were likewise martired in the flaming fire, and gladly gaue
their liues for the witnessing of the truth. Iohn Thurston, who was taken in the house of W. Mount, of Much Bentley, about the moneth of May, dyed in Col∣chester castle, a constant professor of Iesus Christ. In the Moneth of August was George Eagles put to death at Chelmseford: treason being obiected against him yt he should pray that God would turne Quéene Maries hart, or take her away. He was condemned and executed for treason, but the meaning was for religion. He in the troublesome time of Maries dayes gaue himself in all places to strengthen the brethren. And such was his paines in trauaile that (going from place to place) he was called Trudgeouer.George Eagles called Trudge∣ouer. His diet was for the space of 3. yéeres very thinne, and his drinke water: and such spite had the pa∣pists against him, that there was an edict proclaimed in the Quéenes name through Essex, Suffolke, Kent, and North∣folke: promising the party that should take him 20. pounds for his paines. At length being at Colchester vpon Marie Magdalens day: at which time they kept a faire in the town, he was espied, and flying was taken, and condemned for treason, such as was mentioned before, One Richard Putto the elder, an Inneholder, dwelling at the signe of the cocke at the same time, did much trouble him, in perswading him to confesse he had offended the Quéene, &c. And so did he also trouble him being on the lad∣der. Being drawen to the place of execution, he read very deuoutly on a Psalme booke which he had in his hande: and with patience endured the torment. About this time suffered at Norwich a godly man cal∣led Richard Crashfield,R. Crashfielde condemned by Dunnings the Chā∣cellour. He was foure times examined. The thirde time by Doctor Bridges, and the other by Dunnings: by whom hée was condemned, and suffered the fifth day of August. At whose burning, one Thomas Carman was apprehended. About the same time, the xx of August, one named Frier,
with the sister of George Eagles,Frier and the sister of G. Eagles. Ioyce Lewes. was burned at Rochester. In the moneth of September was Mistris Ioice Lewes, wife to Thomas Lewes of Māchester burned for the gospell at Liechfield. She was instructed in the waies of Christ, and to abhorre the Masse and the popish superstition, by maister Iohn Glouer before mentioned. At which time being com∣pelled by her furious husband to come to church, when holy water was sprinckled vpon her, she turned her backe: wher∣vpon immediatly a citation was sent for her by a Sumner,The Sumner caused to eat the citation & drinke to it. whom her husband caused to eat the citation, and drincke to it: wherefore he was much troubled and was faine to sub∣mit himselfe, his wife remayning cōstant: for whom he was bound in an hundred pound, after a moneths respite to bring her againe. Who at the day, being exhorted not to venture his wife in carrying her to ye bishop, said (most vnkindly) he would not forfet any thing for her, and brought her to the B. who commaunded her to such a stincking prison, that her maid that kept her company did sowne therein. Thus being kept in prison, and found cōstant, after many examinations she was condemned, and the night before she should suffer she was wonderfull chéerefull and merie, so spending the time in prayer, reading and talking with them that were purposely come vnto her, for to comfort her with the word of God. She was (after her condemnation) kept in prison a whole yéere, because the Shiriffe of that yéere would not burne her. About thrée of the clocke in the morning, Sathan began to trouble her with doubt of her saluation:Satan trou∣bleth the martyr. in which doubt by those that were with her, shée receiued great comfort, and assurance. About eight of the clocke, M. Shiriffe commeth & telleth her she had but an hower to liue in this world. To whom she answered: M. Shiriffe your message is welcome to me, and I thanke my God, that he will make me worthy to ad∣uenture my life in his quarrell.
When she was at ye stake, (because she was not acquain∣ted with the fresh ayre, comming out of a close prison) one of her fréends had prouided her drinke. Now when she had praied thrée times, in the which she desired God to abolish the idolatrous Masse, whereto all the people and the Shi∣riffe himselfe said, Amen: She tooke the cup into her hands, saying:She drinketh to all that loue the gospell. I drinke to all those that vnfainedly loue the gospell of Iesus Christ, and wish for the abolishing of the papistrie. When she had drunke, her fréends drunke also, which were afterwards troubled for the same. So being bound to the stake, and fire put to her, she with patience endured, for his names sake that had redéemed her. About the 17. day of September were burned at Isling∣ton nigh London, these foure constant professors of Christ, Rafe Allerton,Rafe Allerton. Iames Austoo. Marg. Austoo. Richard Coth. Iames Austoo, Margery Austoo his wife, and Richard Coth. Rafe Allerton was apprehended by Thomas Tye priest, sometimes a professor of the gospell. He was diuerse times examined before London at Fulham the eight of Aprill: againe the second of May before him and thrée of the Counsaile. Againe the 15. of May in the Bishops pallace at Lon∣don: and at the last, remayning constant in the profession of the truth, beyng vehemently pursued by Thomas Tye, the seuententh of September he was condemned, and burned with the other thrée. The tenth day of September, Iames Austoo beyng brought with the rest into the bishops chappell at Fulham, he was demaunded of the bishop if he knew where he was now,The couragi∣ous martyr. and in what place, and before whom &c. Yea quoth Austoo: I know where I am, for I am in an Idols dem∣ple. Whereat Boner perceiuing his constancie, pronounced sentence against him. Margery his wife was sore afraid, & terrified in the pry∣son at twelue of the clocke at night, one comming in to her, into the pryson with a knife drawne, and attemptyng
to cut her throate, but that shée called vpon God for helpe: whereat hee departed, without doing her any hurt.They feare the martyr in the prison. The next night, they made a rumbling ouer head like thun∣der to scarre her out of her wittes, but GOD gaue her strength. At what time the tenne before suffered at Colchester, there were also twoo women condemned with them, but were deferred, the one omitted and left in the prison, while shée was praying apart, for the strength of Gods spirite, the other, because her name was false written. 1. Their names were, Agnes Bongeor,Agn. Bongeor. Margery Thurstone. whom they wrote Bow∣yer, and Margerie Thurston. These twayne were both the seuentéene day of September, burned at Colchester, for the witnesse of Christ, which they chéerefully endured for his names sake. This yéere the 20. of September, was burned at North∣hampton, Iohn KnodeIohn Knode. a shoemaker, condemned of William Bynsley, Bachelor of law, & Chancelor to ye B. of Peterbo∣row, and deliuered to the sheriffe, Sir Tho. Tresham: whose officers burned him without the Northgate in the stone pits. One Iohn Rote a Popish Priest, Vicar of S. Giles in Northampton standing by, did declare vnto him,The martyr re∣fuseth pardon. that if hée would recant, he had his pardon for him. To whom he an∣swered, that he had his pardon by Iesus Christ. This yéere, the 12. of Sept. suffered Iohn NoyesIohn Noyes. of Lax∣field in ye same towne, in the county of Suffolk, Shoemaker. He was apprehended by M. Tho. Louel, Wolfren Dowsing, and Nichol. Stonnard, of the same towne: and brought be∣fore the Iustices, and the sheriffe, who the next day cast him into Aye dungeon, where he lay a certaine time, & then was caried to Norwich: where the B. condemned him in the pre∣sence of his Chancelor, D. Dunnings, Sir William Wood∣house, Sir Th. Woodhouse, M. Geor. Heyden, M. Spencer, VVilliam Farrar Alderman of Norwich, &c. Being con∣demned, he was sent againe to Aie prison, and vpon the 21.
of September about midnight, was brought from thence to Laxfield to be burned: where comming to the place of mar∣tyrdome, he said the 50. Psalme, with other praiers: and be∣ing bound to the stake, hee saide, feare not them that can kill the body, but feare him, &c. So the fire being kindled, he with patience finished his course, and gaue testimonie to the Go∣spel of God. The 23. of September, was Cecil OrmesCecil Ormes. burned at Nor∣wich for the testimony of the trueth of Christ, betwixt seuen and eight of the clock in the morning. She was taken at the death of Simon Miller, and Elizabeth Cooper, for that she saide, she woulde pledge them of the same cuppe that they dranke on. The 23. of Iuly she was called before the Chauncelour, sitting in iudgement with maister Bridges, and others: who offered her, if shee woulde goe to Church, and keepe her tongue and saie nothing agaynst them, libertie. Which she refused, saying: if shée should doe so, GOD woulde surely plague her. Therefore doe with mée, saith she, what yee will: and saide, if hée condemned her, hée shoulde not bee so desirous of her sinfull fleshe, as shée woulde (by Gods grace) bée content to giue it in so good a quarrell.The constant martyr. So hee pronounced his bloodie sentence against her, and deli∣uered her to the sheriffes, Thomas and Leonard Sother∣ton, This Cecil Ormes had before recanted: for which shee fell into great anguish of mind, and had gotten a letter made to giue vnto the Chancellor, to let him know, she repented her recantation, &c. But before she exhibited her hil, she was taken. Being brought to the place of execution, where Miller and Cooper were burned, and the same stake, shée layed her hande thereon,Cecil Ormes at the stake. and kissed it, and saide, Welcome the swéete crosse of Christ, and so gaue her selfe vnto it. After the tormentors had kindeled the fire to her, she saide, my
soule doth magnifie the Lorde, and my spirite reioyseth in God my Sauiour. And quietly, (as she had béene in a slum∣ber) ended this mortall life. In the dioces of Chichester many were condemned, and martired for the witnesse bearing to the truth: whose names were these: Iohn Freeman of East Grinsted,I. Foreman. Iohn WarnerI. Warner. of Berne, Christian Glouer,C. Glouer. of the Archdeaconrie of Le∣wes, Thomas Athoth,T. Athoth. Priest, Thomas AuingtonT. Auington. of Ar∣dinglie, Dennis BurgesD. Burges. of Buxsted, Tho. RauensdaleT. Rauensdale. of Rie, Iohn MillesI. Milles. of Hellinglesh, Nicholas HoldenN. Holden. of Wi∣thiam, Iohn HarteI. Hart. of Withiam, Margery MoriceM. Morice. of Heth∣field, Anne TrieA. Trie. of East-gréenstéed, Iohn OsewardI. Osewars. of wood∣mancote, Iames MoriceI. Morice. of Hethfielde, Thomas DowgateT. Dowgate. of East-gréenestéed, and Iohn AshdonI. Ashdon. of Ketherfielde. The greatest doer then against these martirs, and sitters vpon their condemnation, were these, Christopherson the B. af∣ter, Day, Richard Briseley, Doctor of Law, and Chancellour of Chichester, Robert Taylor Bachelour of Law, his De∣putie, Tho. Backarde, Ciuilian, Anthonie Clarke, Albane Langdale, Bachelour of Diuinitie. In the Moneth of Nouember, was Thomas SpurdanceT. Spurdance. (one of Quéene Maries seruants) burned at Burie He was taken by two of his felowes, Iohn Hammon, otherwise cal∣led Barker, and George Lawson, both dwelling in Cod∣nam, in the Countie of Suffolke. Who carried him to one Master Gosnall, dwelling in Codnam, and by him was sent to Burie. Hee was first examined by the Bishoppes Chauncellour, and then by the Bishoppe himselfe, and by him condemned. Being before the Bishoppe, he was exhorted by a Gen∣tleman that stoode by him, to take a day, and to aduise him∣selfe. Vnto whom he made answere: If I saue my life, I shall lose it, and if I lose my life for Christes sake, I shall be sure to finde it in euerlasting life. And if I shoulde take a day, when the day commeth, I must say then, euen as I doe
now, except I will lie, and that néedeth not. The same yere, the eightéene day of Nouember, were these thrée burned in Smithfielde: Iohn Hollingdale,I. Hollingdale, Wil∣liam Sparrowe,W. Sparrow. and Richard Gibson.R. Gibson. William Sparrowe had recanted before, and afterwarde did greatly repent him for the same, saying vnto Bishoppe Boner, that it was the worst déede that euer he had done. And said vnto him more∣ouer, That which you call heresie (quoth he) is good and god∣lie, and if euery haire of my head were a man, I woulde burne them all (saide hée) rather then I would goe from the trueth.Note. As Boner ministred his Popish Articles vnto M. Gib∣son, euen so likewise did he againe propounde other Arti∣cles vnto Boner.Articles for articles. As, whether the Scriptures were suffici∣ent to instruct to saluation? From whom authoritie com∣meth, and what it is? Whether any but Christ is Lorde ouer faith? By what markes Antichrist is to be knowen? & so forth, to the number of nine. In the ende, Boner deliue∣red them to the Secular power: and the eyghtéenth day of Nouember they chéerefullie witnessed the trueth in the flames of fire. The xxij. of Decēb. Iohn Rough Minister, a Scotishmā, & Marg. Mearing,M. Mearing. were burned for the gospel in smithfield. Iohn RoughI. Rough. had béene of the order of the black Friers xvi. yeares: and at the request of the Lorde Hāmleton, Earle of Arran, and gouernour of Scotlande, the Archbishop cau∣sed the Prouinciall of that house (hauing thereto authori∣tie) to dispense with him for his habite, & hood, and so he took him to be a Secular Priest, to serue in his Chappell. In whose seruice he remayned a whole yere. In which time, God did open his eyes to sée the trueth, and was sent by the same Gouernour to preach in the frée∣dome of Ayos, where he remayned the spare of foure whole yeares. Afterwarde he came into Englande, after the battayle
of Muscleborow, and preached at Carlill, Barwicke and Newcastell: and after that was placed by the Archbishop of Yorke in a benefice nigh Hull. Where he remained till the death of King Edward: after whose death, he fled with his wife into Fréeseland: and there liued by knitting of caps, hose, and such like: till about the end of the moneth of Octo∣ber last, before his death. At which time, lacking yearne,M. Rough mi∣nister of the congregation at London. he came ouer to make prouision: and comming ouer to Lon∣don, was of the congregation there made their minister. In the end with Cutbert Symson, hée was taken at the Sarasines head in Islington, by the meanes of a dissem∣bling brother, called Roger Sergeaunt a Taylor, and was carryed to the Counsell, and of them was sent to New∣gate: where hée had remayned but a while before Bishop Boner sent for him, the eightéenth day of December, and ministereth vnto him certaine Articles. And againe the nintéenth day perswaded with him. On the twentith day finding him constant, hée pronounceth sentence of condem∣nation against him. Amongst other talke with Bishop Boner, hée affirmed that hée had béene twise at Rome, and there had séene plain∣ly with his eyes, which hée had heard many times before, namely that the Pope was the very Antechrist: for there he saw him carried on mens shoulders, and the false named Sacrament borne before him: yet was there more reue∣rence giuen to him, then to that which they counted for their God. When B. Boner heard this,More reuerēce done to the Pope, then to the bread God. rising vp and ma∣king as though he would haue torne his garments, hast thou (said he) béene at Rome? and séene our holy father the Pope: and doest thou blaspheme him in this sort? and with that flying vpon him, he plucked of a péece of his beard, & af∣ter making spéedy hast to his death, burnt him before six of the clocke in the morning. This Maister Rough being at the burning of Austoo in Smithfield, and returning homeward againe, met with
one M. Farrara a merchant of Hallifar, who asked him where he had béene: vnto whom he answered. I haue béene (said he) where I would not for one of mine eies, but I had béene: where haue you béene (said M. Farrar) Forsooth (said he) to learne the way: and so told him, he had béene at the burning of Austoo, where shortly after he was burned himselfe, and with him Margarete Meering. This Margarete Meering, (wherefore it is vncertaine) gaue occasion to be excommunicated, & so was by M. Rough himselfe in the open face of the congregation: which she tooke in euill part, and gaue out threatnings against the congre∣gation, but God disposed otherwise. For the Sunday after, M. Rough, being taken by the in∣formation of one Roger, Sergeant to the bishop of London, was layd prisoner in the Gate house at Westminster, where none of his fréends could come to visit him. This Margery hearing thereof, got her a basket & a cleane shirt in it, and went to Westminster, where shée fayning her selfe to be his sister, got into the prison to him, and did to her power not a little comfort him. The Friday after she standing at Marke-lane end with another woman a fréend of hers, sawe Cluny Boners sum∣ner comming into the stréete towardes her house. Whom when shée saw,Margery Mee∣rings ready to suffer for Christ. said to the other woman standing with her, whether goeth yoonder fine fellow, said shée? I thinke sure∣ly he goeth to my house, and in vewing him still, at the last shée saw him enter into her doore: so immediatly she went home: and asked him, whom he sought? Wherevnto Clu∣ny answered, for you: you must go with mée: Mary (quoth she) here I am, I will go with you. And comming to the bi∣shop, she was laid in prison, and the Wednesday after, bur∣ned in Smithfield. An. 1558.  the 28. of March was Cutbert SimsonCutb. Symson. deacon of the same Church whereof M. Rough was minister in London, burned in Smithfield, and with him Hugh Fox,Hugh Fox. 1 Deuenish,
and Iohn Deuenish apprehended together at Islington, and so together chéerefully suffered for righteousnes sake. Beeing called into the Warehouse of the Tower before the Constable of the Tower, and the Recorder of London, maister Cholmeley, & refusing to tell who came to the En∣glish seruice, he was put in a racke of yron, where hée stood thrée houres, and being loosed from thence, because he would bewray none, on a Sunday after, they did binde his two fingers together, and put a small arrow betwixt them, and drewe it through so fast,Cuthbert Sim∣son racked twise. that the blood followed and the arrow brake. It was thought this was done rather in the Bishoppes house. After they had twise racked him, they fiue weekes after sent him to Boner, of whom he was con∣demned. Yet gaue he him great testimony of patience before al the people in his Consistorie, saying: if he were not an heretike,Boner commē∣deth the pati∣ence of Cuth. Simson. hee is a man of the greatest patience, that yet euer came before me. For I tell you, hee hath beene thrise racked vpon one daie in the Tower, also in my house hée hath felt some sorrowe, and yet I neuer saw his patience bro∣ken. The 9. of Aprill, An. 1558. William NicholW. Nichol. was burned for the cause of the Gospel, at Hereford in West Wales. The 19. of May after, suffered William SeamanW. Seaman. of the age of 26. an husbandman, dwelling in Mendlesham in the coun∣tie of Suffolke, Tho. CarmanTho. Carman. and Thomas HudsonTho. Hudson. of Arl∣sham in Norfolke all three together at Norwich, for the cause of Christ. William Seamon was pursued and taken by the laying waite of Sir Iohn Tirrel: who hauing searched for him him∣selfe in vain, gaue charge to his seruants, Robert Balding and Iames Clarke: by whom he was taken and brought to Syr Iohn Tirrell, who sent him to the B. of Norwich, by whom he was condemned. After his death he left behind him a wife, and three chil∣dren
very young, and with his children, the wife was per∣secuted out of the towne of Mendlesham, because she would not go to heare masse, and all her corne, and goods seised, and taken away by maister Christopher Coles officers, Lord of the towne. Thomas Carman was taken, because he pledged Bichard Crashfield at his burning. Tho. Hudson, after he had long bin absent from his wife, & children, for the auoiding of the popish idolatry and super∣stition, came home to his house to visit, and to comfort them, and at the first laye among the fagots: where his wife had made him a place to remaine in the day. At the last, he wal∣ked abroad for certaine daies openly in the towne, crying out continually against the masse, and that trumpery: and in the end comming home to his house, he sate him down vpon his knées, hauing his booke by him, reading & singing psalms continually without ceassing, for 3. daies and 3. nightes to∣gether: refusing meate, and other talke, to the great wonder of many. Then one Iohn Crowch, his next neighbour went to the Constables, Robert Marsham and Robert Lawes in the night, to certifie them thereof. For Berrie the Vi∣car of the Towne did commaund openly to watch for him, and the Constables vnderstanding the same, tooke him by breake of day. The two and twenty of Aprill, when Hudson sawe them come in, he saide, nowe mine houre is come, welcome friendes, welcome. You bee they that shall leade me to life in Christ:Note. I thanke GOD therefore, and the Lorde enable mée thereto for his mercies sake. So they ledde him to Berry the Commissary, who wrote vnto the Bishop letters against him, and sent him to Norwich bound like a théefe: whither hee went with ioy, and singing chéere. In prison he was a moneth, where hee did continually reade, and inuocate the name of God.
After they had all thrée béene chained to the stake, Tho∣mas Hudson immediatly commeth foorth from them vnder the chaine, fell downe vpon his knées, and praied vehement∣ly vnto the Lord for comfort, (for he was at the very stake distressed): thē rose he with great ioy, as a man new chaun∣ged from life to death: and said now I thanke God, I am strong, & passe not what man can doo vnto me:Note. & so with his fellowes gaue testimony to the truth in the flames of fire. Somewhat before this time was one mother Seaman, mother to Wil. Seaman persecuted for the gospell, being of the age of 66. and was glad to liue sometimes in groues, in bushes, &c. After she was dead, (the Lord taking her away by sicknesse) one M. Simonds the commissary, dwelling at Thornden, gaue commaundement, she should not come in Christian buriall: so she was buried in a pit, vnder a moats side. Likewise one mother Bennet of the towne of Wetherset, after her departure this life, was laide in a graue by the high way side. The 26. of May, suffered at Colchester, William Harris,W. Harris. Rich. Day,Rich. Day. & Christian GorgeChrist. Gorge. a wife, whose husband had another wife burnt before this Christian, whose name was Agnes Gorge, that suffered with the 13. at Stratford the Bow. After the death of Christian, he maried an honest god∣ly woman, and in the end, being taken with his wife, with her he remayned in prison till the death of Q. Marie, & was deliuered by our most gratious Quéene Elizabeth.A sharpe pro∣clamation a∣gainst godly bookes. In the moneth of Iune came forth a Proclamation very sharpe against godly bookes, by the king and Quéene. On ye backside of the town of Islingtō, were assembled xl. godlie persons, men and women, vertuouslie applying thē∣selues in prayer, and reading the worde. Wherof 22. were by Sir Roger Cholmeley and the Recorder, sent prisoners to Newgate, where they lay eight dayes before they came to examination Of these xxij. thirteene were burned, seuen in
Smithfield, and six at Brainford. In prison two died in Whitson wéeke: the names of whom were Mathew Wi∣thers and T. Taylor. Seuen of them which remained, esca∣ped with their liues hardly without burning, whose names were these: Iohn Milles, Thomas Hinshaw, Robert Bayly wolpacker, Robert Willers, Hudleys, Thomas Ceast haber∣dasher, Roger Sandey. The 7. that suffered were brought before Boner the 14. of Iune, to make answere to such articles as should be obie∣cted. Which when they constātly did, according to the truth of the Gospell, they were by Boner condemned, and the 17. day of Iune were sent againe to Newgate, where they re∣mained til the 27. day. On which day they chéerfully suffe∣red in Smithfield in the fire. Their names were these. Henrie Pond,Henry Pond. Raynold East∣land,Rain. Eastland. Robert Southam,Rob. Southam. Mathew Richarby,Mat. Richarby. Iohn Floyd,Iohn Floyd, Iohn Holiday,Iohn Holiday. Roger Holland.Rog. Holland. This Holland was a mer∣chant taylour in London, sometimes apprentice with one maister Kempton, at the blacke boy in Watlingstréet. Hee was before his conuersion a Papist, and a very lewd yong man: and was brought to the knowledge of the trueth by the exhortation of a sober maide, that was seruant in the same house: whom afterward he did marry, and liued vertuously together til such time as the cruell Papists made separati∣on by fire, The same day they suffered; Proclamation was made, that none should be so bolde to speake or talke any word vn∣to them,A straight Proclamation or receiue any thing of them, or to touch them, vp∣on payne of imprisonment, without eyther Baile, or main∣prise. Notwithstanding, the people cryed out, desiring God to strengthen them: and they likewise prayed for the people, & the restoring of the word of God. R. Holland at the stake.At length, Roger embracing the stake and the Réedes, said these wordes: Lorde, I most humbly thanke thy ma∣iestie,
that thou hast called me from the state of death, vnto the light of thy heauenly word, and now vnto the felowship of thy Saintes, that I may sing and say: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hostes, and, Lord into thy hands I commit my spirit. Lord blesse the people, & saue them from idolatrie. And so with the rest of his felowes ended his life, lauding and praysing God. The fourtéenth day of Iuly suffered other sixe at Brain∣forde, seuen miles from London. Their names were these: Robert Milles,R. Milles. Steeuen Wight,S. Wight. a Tanner, Steeuen Carton,S. Carton. Iohn Slade,I. Slade. Robert Denis,R. Denis. and William Pikes,W. Pikes. or Pikers. They were condemned by the Bishops Chauncellour, D. Darbishire, in the presence of Sir Edward Hastinges, and Sir Thomas Cornwalles, and suffered ioyfully for the te∣stimonie of Iesus. Of the sixe of that companie which escaped burning, two were scourged by Bishoppe Boner in his Garden, Thomas Hinshawe, about the age of ninetéene or twentie yeares, being Apprentice, and dwelling in Paules Churchyarde with one M. Puggeson, and Iohn Milles, a married man: on whom he spent two roddes, and on Hinshaw one. Hinshaw was deliuered by reason he fell sicke of a burning ague (Bo∣ner not thinking he would liue) when he had béene a yere in prison. In which space Quéene Marie died, and hee shortly after recouered health. Iohn Milles was a Capper, a right faithfull seruant of God. The cause why he was scourged, was, because when Boner asked him what time he crept to the crosse, he answered, not since he came to the yeres of discretion, nor woulde not, but rather bée torne in péeces with wilde horses. Boner (ofttimes speaking to Iohn Milles) would say, they call me bloudie Boner: a vengeance on you all, I would fain be rid of you, but you haue a delight in burning: but if I might haue my will, I would sowe your mouthes, and put you into sackes, and drowne you.
On a day, his wife (being great with childe, and looking euery day to be deliuered) goeth vnto Bishoppe Boner, and entreateth him for her husband, saying, she woulde not de∣part, but would lay her bellie in his house, except he were deliuered. So Boner required of him, but onely to say in Latine, In nomine Patris, & Filij, & Spiritus sancti: and so sent him away. The tenth day of Iulie, was Richarde YeomanR. Yeoman. marty∣red for the testimonie of Iesus Christ. Hee was about the age of 70. yeres, and had béen D. Tailors Curat in Hadley, after he had bin kept close a yeare in his owne house, and got his liuing by carding of wool, which his wife did spinne. He was taken by one Parson Newall, who had gotten the Benefice, and put him into the Cage, and set him in the Stockes, where he founde Iohn Dale, who for reproouing Newall & his Curat, calling them blinde Guides, was also stocked in the cage. They were both sent to Burie gaole, by sir H. Doel, after they had pinnioned them, & (as they had bin théeues) boūd their legs vnder ye horses bellies. Where they were put into the lowest Dungeon: where Iohn Dale fell sicke, and died, and was buried in the fieldes. He was of the age of sixe and fourtie yeares, by occupation a Wea∣uer, well learned in the Scriptures, and faithfull in all his conuersation. After Iohn Dale was dead, Richarde Yeoman was re∣mooued to Norwich prison, where hee (remayning stedfast in his confession of the trueth) was condemned, and suffered death for the name of Christ. About this time, there was a young man in the Towne of Hadley, named Iohn Alcocke, a Sherman by his occu∣pation: who (because hee woulde not geue reuerence to the Procession) was sent vp to London by Newall. And being put in the lowest Dungeon in Newgate, died in prison, and was buried on a Dung-hill. The xxix. of Iulie was burned Thomas Benbridge,T. Benbridge. a
a Gentleman, for witnessing to the Gospell. Hée was of the Dioces of Winchester, and sustained sundry conflictes for the truthes sake, at Doctor Wyle the Bishops handes: and beyng condemned, and now tied to the stake: Doctor Seaton, who had once béene with him before to entice him, came againe, and exhorted him to recant. To whom hée said, away Babilonian, away. So when they saw hée would not yéeld, before he was any thing like couered with fag∣gots, they put fire vnto him: which first tooke away a péece of his beard, whereat he nothing shrancke at all: then it came on the other side, & tooke his legges: & the neather stock∣ings of his hose beyng leather made the fire to pearce the sharper, so that the intollerable heate thereof made him cry, I recant. They sodainly therwith thrust the fire from him:A notable con∣flict betwixt the flesh & the spirit of God. which was also remoued in haste by certaine of his friends that stood by, and helped thereto. So the sheriffe (who was Syr Richard Peckhall) tooke him from the stake, for the which he was sent to the Fléete, and laye a certayne time. When he was taken from the stake, Doct. Seaton wrot him articles, wherto with much ado he subscribed. But af∣terwards it grieuously repented him that he had done, & so did he write to Doct. Seaton. Whervpon declaring his con∣science, he was the same day seuenight burnt indéed. Where the vile Tormentors did rather broyle than burne him. About the beginning of August, not long before the sick∣nesse of Quéene Marie, by D. Hopton being Bishoppe of Norwich, and Doctor Spencer, supplying the roome of his Chauncellor, these foure, Iohn Cooke,I. Cooke. a Sawyer, Robert Miles,R. Miles. otherwise called Plummer, a Shereman, and Alex∣der Lane,A. Lane. a Whéelewright, and Iames Ashley,I. Ashley. a Bacheler, were burned at S. Edmundsburie. The same yeare, the fourth day of Nouember, Alexander Gouche,A. Gouche. and Alice Driuer,A. Driuer. were persecuted by M. Moone a Iustice in Suffolke, a bloudie Tiraunte, and were sent
to Melton gaole where they remained a while, and at lēgth they were carried to Burie, against the Assise at S. Iames tide, and being there examined of matters of faith, did bold∣ly stand to confesse Christ crucified, defying the Pope with all his papisticall trash. Among other thinges Driuers wife likened Quéene Ma∣ry in her persecution to Iezabell. For which foorthwith her eares were cut of: which she ioyfully and gladly endured, for his name. After the assise at Burie, they were carried to Melton goale againe, where they remained a time. Alexander Gouch was of the age of xxxvj. a weauer of shredding couerlets, dwelling at Woodbridge in Suffolke and borne at Vfford in the same Countie. Driuers wife was about the age of 30. and dwelt at Gros∣borough, where they were taken in Suffolke: her husband was an husbandman. They were afterward carried from Melton to Ipswich, where they were examined before Doctor Spenser. Driuers wife was twise examined, and with great boldnesse and constancie, mainteined the trueth, and by power of the word did put to silence both the Chancelor, and Doctor Ga∣scoyne, so that they one looked on another, and had not a worde to say (quoth she.) God be honoured, you bée not able to resist the Spirite of God in me a poore woman. I was an honest poore mans daughter, neuer brought vp in the Vni∣uersitie as you haue béene,A. Driuer of an excellent spirit but I haue driuen the plough be∣fore my father (I thank God:) yet notwithstanding, in the defence of Gods truth, I will set my foote against the foote of any of you all. And if I had a thousande liues, they shoulde all goe for payment thereof. So the Chauncellor rose vp, and read the Sentence of condemnation against her. And so was she sent to prison againe, as ioyfull as the Birde of daye, Praysing and glorifying the name of the Lorde.
After her was condemned Alexander Gouch. By seuen of the clocke in the morning they were come from Melton six miles of Ipswich, and beyng in their prayers were greatly molested by Sir Henry Doell then Shiriffe, but especially by Richard Smarte one of the Bayliffes. Then they being tied to the stake, and the iron chaine beyng put about Alice Driuers necke, Oh (said shée) here is a good∣ly neckerchiefe, blessed be God for it. Then diuerse persons came and tooke them by the handes. The Shiriffe cried, lay hands on them, lay hands on them. With that a great mul∣titude ranne to the stake: which when the Shiriffe saw, he let them all alone. There was one Bate a barbour a busie dooer against them at the fire, who within thrée or foure wéekes after died very miserably. In the same moneth that Quéene Mary died, were thrée martyred at Burie, Phillip Humfrey,Phil. Humfrey. Iohn Dauid,Iohn Dauid. Hen∣ry DauidHenry Dauid. his brother, these were burned notwithstanding it was knowne Quéene Mary was past remedy. In the same moneth was the wife of one called PriestPriests wife. of the age of foure and fiftie yéeres, dwelling in the Dio∣ces of Exceter, not farre from Lawceston, burned at Exce∣ter for the testimonie of the truth. Shée was persecuted of her husband and children,The wife was persecuted of husband and children. and condemned by the Bishop, whose name was Troubleuile. Among other communi∣cation, when the Bishop had said: let this mad woman bée put downe to prison till we send for her husband: she answe∣red him: no, I haue but one husband which is here already in this cittie (meaning Christ) and in prison with me, from whom I will neuer depart.Christ the martyrs hus∣band. After that saying they thought good to giue her a moneths libertie, to prooue if she might thereby be chaunged, during which time of her libertie, it happened that shée entring into Saint Peters church, be∣held there a cunning Dutchman, how he made new noses to certaine fine Images, which were disfigured in King Edwards daies. What a mad man art thou (said she) to
make them new noses, which within a few dayes shall al∣so loose their heads. The Dutchman accused her and layd it to her charge. And moreouer she sayd vnto him: thou art accursed, and so are thine Images. He called her whore. Nay (sayd shée) thine Images are whores:A worthy martyr. and thou art a whore hunter: for dooth not God say. You go a whoring after straunge Gods, figures of your owne making? and thou art one of them. Then was shée sent for and clapt fast. At the last when they perceiued her to bée past remedie, and had withstood all their threatnings and flattery, shée was deliuered to the temporall power. Of whom shée was exhorted, yet to call for grace, and to leaue her fond opini∣ons, and go home to thine husband (sayd they:) thou art an vnlearned Woman, thou art not able to answere to such high matters.Note. I am not (sayd shée) yet with my death I am content to be a witnesse to Christes death: and I pray you make no longer delay with mée, my heart is fixed, I will neuer otherwise say, nor turne to your superstitious dooings. Then the Byshop did say, the Diuell did lead her. No my Lord (sayd shée) it is the Spirit of God which leadeth mée, and which called mée in my bedde, and at midnight ope∣ned his truth vnto mée: (for once especially, at midnight praying to God for strength and assistaunce, shée found it plentifully). In the end after shée had receyued sentence of death, shée lifted vp her voyce, and thanked God, saying: I thanke thée my Lord God, this day haue I found that I haue long sought. After iudgement giuen agaynst her, they promised to spare her life if shée would yet recant. Nay that will I not (said shée). God forbid that I should loose the life eternall,Note. for this carnall and short life. I will ne∣uer turne from my heauenly husband to my earthly hus∣band: from the fellowship of Angels, to mortall children. And if my husband and children bée faithfull, then am I theirs: God is my Father, God is my mother, God is my
sister, my brother, my kinsman. God is my friend most faith∣ful: so being brought to the place of slaughter, she méekly suf∣fered, calling vpon the name of God, saying: God be merci∣ful to me a sinner: God be me mercifull to me a sinner. The 7. of May were burned at Bristow, (being condem∣ned by M. Dalbney the Chancelour:) Richad Sharp Wea∣uer of Bristow, and Thomas HallTho. Hall. Shoemaker of the same towne. SharpeIoh. Sharpe. by the perswasion of the Chancelor, had re∣canted, and afterward felt such anguish of minde and con∣science, that shortly after comming to his parish Churche, called Temple, he came to the quire doore, and said with a loude voyce: Neighbors, beare me record, that yonder Idoll (pointing to the altar) is the greatest and most abhominable that euer was: and I am sory that euer I denied the Lorde my God. Wherupon he was apprehended, and burned with the other at one stake: which they chéerefully suffered, em∣bracing the flame. The 27. of the same moneth, Tho. BenionTho. Benion. was burned at Bristow. being condemned by the same Chauncellour Dalbney. The 10. of Nouember, suffered fiue of Gods children at Canterburie: being hastened to the fire, by the bloody Arch∣deacon, notwithstanding he had heard in what danger Q. Mary was. Their names were, Ioh. CornfordIoh. Cornford. of Worthā, Christoph. BrownChristopher Browne. of Maidstone, Iohn HerstIohn Herst. of Ashford, A∣lice Snoth,Alice Snoth. Katherin Knight,Kath. Knight. aliâs Tilney an aged woman. Against these, when sentence should be read, and they ex∣communicated, one of them, Iohn Cornford, stirred with a vehement spirite of the zeale of God, procéeding in a more true excommunication against the Papists (in the name of them all) pronounced sentence against them, in these words following. In the name of our Lord Iesus Christ,The martyr excommuni∣cateth the Pa∣pists. the sonne of the most mighty God, and by the power of his holy spirite, and the authority of his Apostolike church, &c. proceding with his
excōmunication against all mainteiners of the false church. Which sentence tooke such effect against the enemy, that within sixe daies after Quéene Mary died, and the tyranny of all English Papists with her. Note.Alice Snoth, or Agnes Snoth, who was burnt before, be∣ing at the stake; called for her Godfather and Godmothers: whom, when the maide saw, she asked them what they had promised for her, and so immediatly rehearsed her faith, and the commaundements of God, and required if there were a∣nie more that they had promised in her behalfe, and they said no. Then (said she) I die a Christian woman: beare witnes of me And so was she with fire consumed. These godly martyrs, in their praiers which they made before their martirdome, desired God that their blood might be the last that should be shed, and so it was. There were diuers of Gods children in prison, which by the death of Quéene Marie escaped, some after sentence of death pronounced. Of which sort were, Iohn Hunt and Richarde VVhite, who after two yéeres captiuitie, were condemned by Doctour Geffery the Bishops Chan∣cellour. The Sheriffe béeing vrged very vehemently to burne them, refused, because they had no writ. Which com∣ming down not long after, one M. Michael, Syr Anthony Hungerfords vndersheriffe, a godly man, took it, & burnt it, saying: I will not be guiltie of these mens blood. Within foure daies after, the Chauncellour dieth, and the confessors of the Gospel remained in prison, till the happie daies of Queene Elizabeth. There was a godly man, named Iohn Fette, a Tailor, of 42. yéeres, dwelling in the parish of Clarkenwell, accused by his owne wife,The husband accused by his wife. & imprisoned by the B. in Lollards tow∣er, where he suffered great extremity, hanging in the stocks. This poore man had a childe, of 8. or 9. yéeres olde, that came to visite his father: to whom a Priest of the Bishops house, said, why? thy father is an heretike. No (said the boy)
my Father is no heretike, but you are an heretike. For you haue Balaams marke, With that the Priest tooke the child, and scourged him so sore, that he was al on a gore bloud, and so caused Clunie to carrie him to his Father, naked, the Sumner hauing his coate vpon his arme. At his comming to his Father, the childe fell downe vpon his knées, and as∣ked him blessing. And being demaunded by his Father, who had vsed him so, he made answere, that a Priest with Bala∣ams mark,Balaams marke. had done it. And with that Clunie with violence pulled him from his father, and kept him thrée dayes after in the Bishoppes house. Who, to salue vp ths matter, deli∣uered the father and the childe.Crueltie of the Balamites But the childe died within xiiij dayes after. Anno 1560. Nicholas Burton,1560. N. Burton bur¦ned in Ciuil. a Marchant of London, dwelling sometimes in the Parish of little Saint Barthol∣mewes, was burned in the Citie of Ciuill in Spaine. Who died so chearefullie, and with such patience, that the Tor∣mentors and enemies said, that the deuill had his soule be∣fore he came to the fire, and therefore (said they) his sences of féeling were past him. After his death, another marchant of Bristow (for whom Burton was Factor) sent his Atturney into Spaine, called Iohn Fronton, a Citizen of Bristow, to claime those goods which belonged to the other Marchant. Against whō (after imprisonment, because he could not say his Aue Maria after the Romish fashionAue Maria af∣ter ye Romish fashion.) they gaue sentence that he shoulde lose all the goods he sued for, though they were not his owne, and besides, suffer a yeares imprisonment. At what time Burton suffered, which was anno 1560. was also martired another Englishman, with thirtéen mo, one of them being a Nunne, and another a Frier, both con∣stant in the Lord. The ij. day of Nouember, was burned Iohn Baker, and William Burgate, both Englishmen, apprehended in Ca∣lis, and burned in Ciuil.
Anno Domini, one thousande, fiue hundred, and thrée∣score, Marke Burges,M. Burges. an Englishman, Master of an Eng∣lish Ship, called the Minion, was burned in Lishborne, a ci∣tie in Portugall, and Williā Hooke,W. Hooke. of the age of xvi. yeres, stoned to death by certaine young men of Ciuill, for the con∣fession of his faith, As the most were burned and tormented to death, so some were torne with scourging, as, Richard Wylmot, and Tho∣mas Fairefaxe, both whipped in Drapers hall, through the crueltie of Brookes, then Master of the Companie. That Wylmot could not lie in his bed vi. nights after: and neither of them enioyed health after. They were thus scourged for saying, they were sory for D. Cromes recantation. After these two, was one Green scourged because he had a booke, called Antichrist: and woulde not bewraye more matter, to their minde. He was accused by his Master, cal∣led Iohn Waylande, a Printer, and brought before Doctor Storie: by whom (after long stocking, and euill vsage in pri∣sō) he was adiudged to be whipped. Which was performed vpon him in the presence of Doctor Storie, in Christes Hos∣pitall. Also, Steeuen Cotton, burned (as before) at Brainforde, was twise beaten by Boner, Likewise was Iames Harris of Byllerica in Essex, scourged by Boner, in his garden. So likewise Robert Williams endured the same torment by the bloudy Bishop. With these also is to be numbred a poore Beggar, which was whihped at Salisburie, after hee had béene put into a Dungeon, because he would not receiue the Sacrament at Easter, in the towne of Colingborowe. As some were tried by burning, racking, and scourging, so vpon other some the Lorde did lay a lighter hande of im∣prisonment, as vpon William Liuing and his wife, in the citie of London, Iohn Lythall, Elizabeth Yong, and William
Wats of Tunbridge, who fled away, his kéepers beyng tip∣pled and fallen asléepe. Alexander Winshurst a priest that escaped by negligence of Cluny, who left none at home to kéepe him fast, in whose house he was prisoner, Bosomes wife: the Lady Kneuet of Northfolke, towards an hundred yéeres old: the Lady Vane, who with much trouble, yet pas∣sed these terrible daies with life. In the time of King Henry the eight, Anno 1546. there was one Iohn Dauis a childe of twelue yéeres old,Iohn Dauis a child of twelue yeeres old. dwelling with one Maister Iohnson Apothecarie in Wor∣cester, who beyng complained of by his Mistris the wife of Maister Iohnson, for that he had written something a∣gainst the six Articles, and had the Ballad called, Come downe, for all your shauen Crowne. After long imprison∣ment with bolts of irons on his legges, was arraigned, be∣ing holdē vp at the barre in mens armes before the iudges, who were Portman and Meruen, and by the death of king Henry was deliuered: else had hée béene burned for that of∣fence. He endured the prison from the fouretéenth of August, till within seuen daies of Easter. Likewise Mistris Roberts by Gods prouidence escaped daunger, dwelling in Hawkhurst in Sussex, Mistris Anne Lucie of Nottingham, &c. Likewise a congregation at Stoke in Suffolke was deliuered by Gods mercifull pro∣uidence, but especially that of London was diuerse times in perill, and alwayes was preserued of God: in which congregation were sometimes fortie,The congrega∣tion in Lōdon. sometimes an hun∣dreth, sometimes two hundreth, sometimes mo, sometimes lesse. About the latter end of Quéene Mary it greatly in∣creased. From the first beginning, which was about the first entrie of Quéene Maries raigne, they had diuerse mini∣sters: First Maister Scamler, then Thomas Foule,The ministers of the congre∣gation in Lon∣don. after him Maister Rough, then Maister Augustine Benher, and last Maister Bentham: who likewise was by Gods proui∣dence wonderfully preserued.
Likewise at Calis few there were of the professors of the gospell that miscaried: especially Iohn Thorpe and his wife were mercifully preserued and succored of straungers. To these are to be added Edward Benet, Ieffery Hurst, in the towne of Shakerley in Lankeshire, who were saued by the death of Quéene Mary. William Wood of Kent of the pa∣rish of Strowd, who was deliuered by the disagréement of Kennall and Chadsey, two popish Doctors that examined him, as Paule was deliuered by the contention of the Pha∣riseis and Saduces. Likewise was Symon Greeuens mercifully deliuered, beyng at the assembly held at Spire, and complained of to the king by Faber, the B. of Vienna, whom he had gently reprooued for maintaining certaine errours in his Sermon which he had there preached. So likewise the Lady Katherine dutches of Suffolke hardly escaped, and passed the seas into Germany, where she suffered the afflictions of a straunger in another land. Also Th. Sprat, and William Porredge escaped very nar∣rowly persecution by M. Brent Iustice in Kent, and the two Blachendines. Iohn Cornet prentise with a minstrell, was onely whipped by the commaundement of the Earle of Oxford, and banished the towne of Roughedge. So likewise Thomas Brice professor of the gospell hard∣ly escaped the bloudie hands of the tyraunts. To those a∣foresayd are to be added, Gertrude Crockhey of S. Cathe∣rines, William Maulden in the tyme of the six articles, Ro∣bert Hornebey groome of the chamber to the Ladie Eliza∣beth, Mistris Sandes now wife to sir Morice Bartlet, then Gentlewomen waiter to the Ladie Elizabeth while shée was in the Tower, Father Rose borne in Exmouth in De∣uonshire, after much affliction in King Henries daies, and more gréeuous in Quéene Maries, after his constant wit∣nessing of the gospel, escaped, and passedouer seas, and there liued till the death of Quéene Mary: and of late beyng aged
of 76. yéeres, was preacher in the towne of Luton in Bed∣fordshire. Doctor Sandes likewise Vicechauncellor of the Vniuer∣sity of Cambridge, who for his Sermon at Cambridge, preached against Quéene Marie, was imprisoned in the Tower, and afterward in the marshalsea, by the meanes of Syr Thomas Holcroft. Béeing set at libertye, hardly escaped beyonde the seas where hee liued all Queene Ma∣ries time in Germanie. Anno 1556. there was a complaint against such as fa∣uoured the Gospel in Ipswich, exhibited to Quéene Maries Counsel, sitting in commission at Beckles in Suffolke, the 18. of May, An. 1556. by Phillip Williams, aliâs Foteman, Iohn Steward and Mathew Butler sworne for that pur∣pose. The names of such as fled out of the towne,Such as fled out of Ipswich for persecution. and lurked in secret places, were these: Of S. Mary tower, Rober Par∣tridge, Rose Nothingam, daughter of William Notingam the elder. Of L. Laurence: Anne Fenne seruant to Robert Notingam, Andrew Ingforby, his wife and daughter,Ipswich a good towne. Tho∣mas Tomson, Shoemaker, supposed to haue receiued but twise those 17. yéeres, Martine Locksmith his wife. Of Saint Margarets: William Pickesse Tanner, Iohn Wood∣les Couerletweauer, and his wife, William Harset Brick∣layer, Thomas Fowler Shoemaker, W. Wrightes wife at the Windmill, Laurence Waterward, late Curate, borne in Chorley in Lancashire. Of Saint Nicholas, wi∣dow Swanne, Mathew Birde, and his wife, Stephen Green∣wich, and his wife, William Coleman seruaunt to the sayde Stephen, Robert Coleman and his wife, Roger Laurence, aliâs Sparrow, Iohn Carleton Sadler, Wil∣liam Colemam, Iames Hearst his wife. Of Saint Pe∣ters: Richard Houer, apprentise with Nicholas Notin∣gham, Richard Hedley a seller of hereticall Bookes. Of Saint Stephens: Iames Booking Shoemaker, his wife,
Iohn Rawe late seruaunt to Iames Ashley, William Pal∣mer, Richard Richman Shoemaker his wife, daughter to mother Fenkell midwife. Of Saint Clements, mistres Tooley, who departed to Darsham in Suffolke, Agnes Wardall the elder Widowe, Robert Wardall her sonne. Of Saint Mathewes: Iohn Shoemaker and his wife. The names of such as had not receiued the Sacrament. Of saint Clements, Robert Braye, Iohn Notingham, Ag∣nes VVardall wife of Robert VVardal, Nich. Notingham, Richard Michell, William Iordan his wife, Rich. Butler, Robert Browne. Of Saint Peters: Iohn Reede, Thomas Spurdance, Iohn seruaunt to Stephen Greenleefe. Of Saynt Ste∣phens, Robert Scolding. Of saint Margarets, Iohn Green∣wich, and his wife. Of saint Nicholas, Thomas Sturge∣on mariner, Iohn Fenne his wife. Of saint Marie Kye, Ro∣bert Branstone, brother and seruaunt to William Bran∣stone. Of saynt Marie tower, Martine Iohnson, who lyeth bedredde, Agnes his kéeper, Benet Alceed, seruants to Ro∣bert Nottinghā. Of saint Laurence, Robert Silke his sonne. Of saint Marie at Ellens, Iohn Ramsey and his wife in prison. The names of such as obserued not ceremonies. Of saint Clements, some refused the Paxe, Robert Brage his wife refused to suffer anie childe to bee dip∣ped in the Font: Ioane Barber widowe, Thomasin her daughter, refused to beholde the eleuation of the sacra∣ment. Mistresse Ponder mother to Ioane Barber in the same fault, Tye a mariner his wife. Of saint Marie El∣lines, Richarde Hawarde refused the Paxe at Masse in Saynt Laurence. Of saint Peters, Maister Lions at masse at saint Marie Stoke refused the Paxe, mother Fentell, Ioane Warde aliâs Bentley wife, refused to haue their children dypped in the Font. At Saynt Stephens,
mother Beriefe refuseth to haue children dipped in fontes. At S. Nicholas, George Bush his wife reiected the host, af∣ter receit of it. Names of priests wiues that had accesse to their husbands. RAfe Carletons wife, Curate of S. Mathewes, and S. Marie at Ellins. Elizabeth Cantrell wife to Rafe Can∣trell, Iane Barker, wife to Robert Barker, priest late of Bu∣rie, Latimers wife Curate of S. Laurence & S. Stephens, William Clarkes wife late curate of Barkham, and S. Ma∣rie at Ellines. The names of the mainteiners against this complaint. RObert Stirrop Customer to Quéene Marie, Gilbert Stir∣rop, Deputie to Edward Grimstone for his butlerage, Maister Butler the elder, searcher, mistresse Tooly, Marga∣ret Bray, Ioane Barker widowe, mistresse Birde, Bastian Man his wife and himselfe. Their requests to punish, and conuent certaine for example. TO conuent Richarde Byrde, Iayler, who by euil coun∣sell doeth animate his Prisoners of his Secte: Tho∣mas Sadler, for speaking certaine wordes to Iohn Bate, the Crier of the towne, that it might please the Bishop to wish his Commissarie and Officiall, to be vpright and diligent in their office, and to appoint a Curate of abilitie, to féede his Cure with Gods worde. That none might be suffe∣red to be Midwiues, but such as were knowen to be Catho∣likes. That Rafe Carleton, Curate, might be conuented,
whether by corruption of mony he hath ingrossed his booke of any that are there named, and hath not receiued in déed as it is reported. The miraculous preseruation of Lady Elizabeth, now our most gratious Queene of England. QVéene Mary before she was crowned shewed great fa∣uour to the Lady Elizabeth, and would go no whe∣ther but would haue her by the hand, and send for her to din∣ner and supper: but after shée was crowned, shée neuer shewed her any such kindnesse,The affliction of Lady Eliza∣beth, our most gratious Queene. but kept her selfe aloofe from her. After this, it happened immediatly vpon the rising of Sir Thomas Wiat, that the Lady Elizabeth, and the Lord Courtney, were charged with false suspition of Syr Tho∣mas Wyats rising. Wherevpon, the next day after the ri∣sing of Wyat, the Quéene sent for her from her house at Ash∣ridge, by thrée of her Counsellers, Syr Richard South∣well, Sir Edward Hastings, then maister of the horse, and Syr Thomas Cornwallis, with their retinue, and troupe of horsemen, to the number of 250: who at the same time found her sore sicke in her bedde. It was ten of the clocke at night before they came, and they were so boisterous, yt being desired to stay and come in the morning to speake with her, they came hastelie rushing into her Graces chamber, as soone as the Gentlewoman, that was to doe the message frō them to her. And comming in vnto her, they declared the Quéenes pleasure, which was, that she shoulde be at Lon∣don the seuenth day of that present Moneth. Adding more∣ouer vnto her, that their Commission was such, that they must néedes bring her with them, either quick or dead. And thereupon called for Phisitions, Doctor Owen, and Doctor Wendie, and demaunded of them whether she might bée remoued from thence with life, or no. Whose answere was, that she might.
So in conclusion they willed her to prepare against mor∣ning at ix of the clock, to goe with them. On the morrow (at the time prescribed) they had her foorth as she was, very faint and féeble, and in such weake case, that she was readie to sowne thrée or foure times be∣twixt them. So (all sicke in the Litter) she came to Redborne, where she was garded all night. From thence to Saint Albons, to Sir Rafe Rowlets house, where she taried that night, both féeble in bodie, and comfortlesse in minde. From that place they passed to Master Doddes house at Mimmes. Where also they remayned that night. And so from thence she came to Highgate: where (being very sick) she taried that night, and the next day. From that place she was conueyed to the Court. Now when she came to the Court, her Grace was there straightway shutte vp, and kept as close Prisoner the space of a fortnight: which was, till Palme-sunday, séeing ney∣ther King, nor Quéene, nor Lorde, nor friende, in all that time, but onelie the Lorde Chamberlayne, Sir Ioh. Gage, and the Vicechamberlayne, who was attendant vnto the dores. The Friday before Palme-sunday, the Bishop of Win∣chester, with ninetéene of the Counsel, came vnto her grace,L. Elizabeth falsly accused. from the Quéene, & burdened her with Wiates conspiracie, and charged her also with the businesse made by Sir Peter Carewe, and the rest of the Gentlemen of the West Coun∣trey. Which she vtterly denied, and cléered her innocencie therein. In conclusion, they declared vnto her, that it was the Quéenes pleasure she should goe to the Tower, vntill the matter were further examined, and then they departed. Within the space of an houre, or little more, came foure Lordes of the Counsell, which were, the Lorde Treasu∣rer, the Bishoppe of Winchester, the Lorde Stewarde,
the Earle of Sussex: with the Garde, who warding in the next Chamber to her, secluded all her Gentlemen and yeo∣men, Ladies and Gentlewomen, sauing that one Gentle∣man Vsher, thrée Gentlewomen, and two Groomes of her chāber, were appointed in their roomes, & three other men of the Quéenes, and thrée wayting women, to geue atten∣dance that none should haue accesse to her Grace. At which time, there were an hundred of Northerne SouldiersAn hundred northren soul∣diers watch ye L. Elizabeth. al in white coates, wayting about the gardens all that night, and likewise two Lordes watching there also with their bands and companie. Vpon Saterday folowing, two Lords of the Counsel (the one was the Earle of Sussex) came and certified her grace, that forthwith she must goe vnto the Tower. The barge being prepared for her, and the tide now re∣die, in heauie moode her Grace requested the Lords, that she might tary another tide. But one of them replied, that nei∣ther tide nor time was to be delayed. And when her Grace requested that she might write to the Quéene, he made answere, he durst not permitte that. But the other Lorde, the Earle of Sussex, knéeling downe, tolde her Grace that shee shoulde haue libertie to write, and as he was a true man, he woulde deliuer it to the Quéenes Maiestie, and bring her Grace an answere thereof againe, whatsoeuer came thereof. Whereupon (being not permitted to speake with the Quéene) she wrote vnto her Maiestie. On Palmesunday about nine of the clocke, those two Lordes returned again, declaring, that it was time for her grace to depart. So shée tooke her Barge with the two Lordes, thrée of the Quéenes Gentlewomen, and thrée of her owne, her Gentleman Vsher, and two of her Groomes, lying, and hoouering a certaine space vpon the water, because it was yet dange∣rous for them to shoote the Bridge. At the length, com∣ming to the staires, when she lāded, and comming out of the
barge, hauing one foote vpon the staiers. Here landeth (said she) as true a subiect being prisoner,The Lady Eli∣zabeth had none other friends but God. as euer landed at these stayers: and before thée O God I speake it, hauing none other fréends but thée alone. After shée came to the Tower & was imprysoned, the doores were bolted, and forted vppon her.Lady Eliza∣beth prisoned in the Tower. At which time shée called to her Gentlewoman for her booke: desiring God not to suffer her to buylde her foun∣dation vppon the sandes, but vppon the rocke: whereby all blastes of blustering weather should haue no power a∣gainst her. Within fiue daies after commeth Stephen Gardiner, the ruler of the rost, with diuerse other of the Counsaile, and examined her of the talke that was at Ashridge betwixt her and Sir Iames a Croft, concerning her remouing thence to Dunnington castle. To whom she said, she remembred that M. Hobby and her Officers, and Sir Iames a Croft had such wordes: but what is that to the purpose, my Lord (said shee) but that I may goe to mine owne houses at all times. That day or there about, diuers of her owne Officers brought prouision for her meate: offering, and making re∣quest to the Lord Chamberlaine, Constable of the Tower, they might serue the same. Whose request, he with great in∣dignation, and threatnings refused, saying: for that shée is a prisoner, she should be serued with none other, but ye Liefe∣tenants men. Vpon this occasion, her graces officers made sute vnto ye Counsaile, that some might be appointed to bring her diet vnto her: which was graunted, and thereupon were ap∣pointed one of her Gentlemen, the Clark of her kitchen, and her two purueyors, to bring in her prouision once in a day. And vpon the same sute of her Officers, were appointed to waite vpon her Grace, two Yeomen of her Chamber, one of her Robes, two of her Pantrie, and Ewrie, one of her Butterie, and another of her Sellar, and likewise, two of
her kitchen, and one of her larder: all which continued with her the time of her trouble. After this sort hauing lien a whole moneth there in close prison, and beyng very euill at ease, she desired of the Lord Chamberlaine, and the Lord Shandoys, that she might haue libertie to walke in some other place, because she felt not her selfe well at ease. This request could not be granted till the next day the Lord Shandoys had obtained of the Counsaile, that she might walke into the Quéenes lodgings: so that he and the Lord Chamberlaine, and thrée of the Quéenes gen∣tlewomen did accompany her, the windowes being shut, and she not suffered to looke out at any of them. Afterward there was libertie graunted her to walke in a little garden, the doores and gates shutte. At which times of her walking there, the Prisoners on that side were straightly commaunded not to speake or looke out in∣to the garden, till her Grace were gone away: hauing to that purpose their kéepers to waite vppon them for that time. The L. Cham∣berlaine harde to the Ladie E∣lizabeth.During this time, there vsed a little boy, a mans child of the tower, to bring her Grace flowers: who was forbidden any more to do so by the Lord Chamberlaine. The next day as she was walking in the garden, the childe peeping in at a hole in the doore, saide vnto her, Mi∣stresse, I can bring you no more flowers. Whereat shée smyled, vnderstanding thereby what they had done. The fifth day of May the Constable was discharged of his office in the Tower, and one Sir Henrie BenefieldSir Henrie Benefield. pla∣ced in his roome. He brought with him an hundred Souldi∣ers in blewe cotes, which did much amaze her: so that shee asked, whether he were of that conscience or no, that if her murdering were secretely cōmitted to his charge he would sée the execution thereof. They perswaded her, that God would not suffer such wickednesse to procéede: saying, they knew not what maner of man he was. Well (quoth shee)
God grant it be not so: for thou O God canst mollifie all ty∣rānous harts, & disapoint al such cruell purposes, & I beséech thée heare me thy creature, which am thy seruant, & at thy commandement, trusting by thy grace euer so to remaine. On Trinitie Sunday being the 19. of May, she was re∣mooued from the Tower, the Lord Treasuror beyng then there for the loading of the cartes, and discharging the place of the same: where sir Henry Benefield, (being appointed her gailor) did receiue her with a company of rakehels to garde her, besides the Lord of Darbies band, vnto whom at length came the Lord of Tame ioyned in Commission with sir Henry, for the safegarding of her person,Lady Eliza∣beth to Wood¦stocke. and they toge∣ther conueyed her grace to Woodstocke. The first day they conducted her to Richmond, where she continued al night, beyng restrained of her owne men: and Benefields souldiers appointed in their roomes, on which night she looked for none other but to haue béene murthered,Lady Eliza∣beth in great feare. and passed the same night in great feare. Afterwards passing ouer the water at Richmond, going towards Windsore, her grace espied certaine of her poore seruants standing on the other side, who were very desirous to sée her: whom when shée beheld, turning to one of her men standing by (shée said) yoonder I sée certaine of my men, go to them, and say these wordes, Tanquam ouis.Tāquam ouis. So passing for∣ward that night, she was lodged at Windsore at the deanes house. From thence she was garded the next night to Mai∣ster Dormers house. On the morrow her grace passing from M. Dormer (where was for ye time of her abode there, a straight watch kept) shée came to the Lord of Tames house, where shée lay all the night, beyng very Princely entertayned both of Knights and Ladies, Gentlemen & Gentlewomen: where∣at Sir Henry grunted, and was offended. Wherevnto the L. of Tame answered: that he was well aduised of his doo∣ings, being ioyned in Commission aswell as he: adding with
warrantise that her grace should bée merrie in his house. The next day, as she should take her iourney towardes Woodstocke, the Lord of Tame with another Gentleman being at tables playing, and dropping vie Crownes, the Lady Elizabeth passing by, staied and said she would sée the game out: which sir Henry would scarse permit. After this sir Henry went vp into a chamber, where was appointed for her grace a chayre, two cushions and a foote carpet very faire and princely, wherein presumptuously he sat,S. Henry Be∣nefield pre∣sumptuous & vnciuill. and called one Barwicke his man to pull of his bootes. When supper was doone, hée called my Lord, and willed him, that all the Gentlemen and Ladies should withdraw themselues, euery one to his lodgyng, maruelling much that hée would permit such a company, considering so great a charge committed to him. Sir Henry, quoth my Lord, con∣tent your selfe, all shall be voided, your men and all. Nay my Souldiors, quoth Sir Henry shall watch all night. The Lord of Thame answered, it shall not néede. Well said hée, néede or néede not, they shall so doo. The next day she was carried to Woodstocke, where she was inclosed as before in the Tower of London. At length she had gardens appointed for her walke: but alwayes when shée did recreate her selfe therein, the doores were fast locked vp, in as straight manner as in the Tower, being at the least 5. or 6. lockes betwéene her lodging & her walkes: Sir Henry kéeping the keyes and trusting no man therewith. Wherefore she called him her gailer. After she had bin at Woodstocke a while, she was permit∣ted by the Counsell to write vnto the Q. and so she did, sir Henry alwaies at hand to obserue what she wrote: neither would he permit her letters to be carried, 4. or 5. daies after ye writing thereof, till at the last, he deliuered them to one of her Gentlemen. Then about the 8. of Iune, came downe D. Owen, and Doctor Wendie to minister phisicke to her, for that she was sickly. Whereof she being amended, they
returned againe to the Court: making there good report to the Q. of her Graces behauiour, & humblenes towards the Quéenes maiesty: which the Q. tooke very thankfully. About this time, was there a great consulting among the B. & gentlemen-touching a marriage for her Grace. Which some of the Spaniards wished to be with some straunger, that she might go out of the Realme with her portion. A Lord being there, at the last said, that the King shoulde neuer haue any quiet common wealth in England,The Spani∣ards are a∣gainst the mur∣dering of Lady Elizabeth. vnlesse her head were stricken from her shoulders. Wherevnto the Spaniards answered, God forbid that their king, and mai∣ster, should haue that minde to consent to such a mischiefe. Frō that day ye Spaniards neuer left their good perswasions to the king, that the like honor he should neuer obtaine, as he should in deliuering the Lady Elizab. grace out of prison.L. Elizabeth deliuered out of prison. Wherby at length she was happily released from the same. Herevppon, shortly after shee was sent for to come to Hampton Court, from her comfortlesse captiuitie in Wod∣stocke, where she was at sundry times in great daunger of life: first through fire, which began to kindle, betwéene the boords, & séelings vnder the Chamber where she lay: done of purpose, as it was credibly thoght, of a knight who was ioy∣ned in commission with Sir Hen. It was thought, and also was affirmed of one Paule Peny, a kéeper of Woodstocke, a notorious ruffian, & butcherly wretch, that he was appoin∣ted to kill the Lady Elizabeth, who both saw the man oft in her sight, and also knew thereof. An other time, one of the priuie chamber, a great man about the Quéen, and chiefe dearling of Stephen Gardiner, named maister Iames Basset, came to Blandebridge, a myle from Woodstocke, with 20. or 30. priuy coates, and sent for Sir Henrie to come and speake with him. But so it happe∣ned, a little before, Sir Henrie was sent for by Post to the counsel, leauing straight word behind him with his brother, that no man whatsoeuer he were, though comming with a
bill of the Queenes hande, or any other warraunt, should haue accesse to her before his returne againe. By reason whereof maister Benefields brother comming to him at the bridge,God deliue∣reth L. Eliza. would suffer him in no case to approch nigh: who o∣therwise (as is supposed) was appoynted to murder the in∣nocent Ladie. Her Grace being in the Tower of London, a writ came downe, subscribed with certaine hands of the Counsaile for her execution: but that God stirred vp maister Bridges the Lieftenaunt the same time of the Tower, to come in haste to the Quéene, to giue certificate thereof, and to knowe further her consent touching her sisters death. Where∣vppon, the deuise (which was Winchesters diuellish plat∣forme) was disappoynted. Moreouer, during her impri∣sonment, one maister Edmund Tremanie was on the rack, and maister Smithwike, and diuers others in the Tower were examined, and diuers offers made them to accuse the innocent Ladie. Which when shée heard of, depar∣ting from Woodstocke, she wrote these verses with her dia∣mond in a glasse window. Much suspected by me: nothing proued can be: quoth Elizabeth prisoner.Elizabeth pri∣soner. Now departing from Wodstocke, Sir Henrie and his souldiers, with the Lorde of Thame, and Syr Rafe Cham∣berlaine garding her: the first night shee came to Rocet. In which iourney such a mightie wynd did blow, that her seruantes were faine to hold downe her clothes about her: insomuch yt her hood was twise or thrise blown frō her head. Whereuppon, shee desirous to returne to a Gentlemans house néere there, could not be suffered by Sir Henrie, but was constrayned (vnder an hedge) to trimme vp her head, so well as she could. After this, the next night they came to M Dormers, and so to Colbrooke, where she lay all that night, at the George. On which night, all her men were taken from her, sauing her Gentleman Vsher, thrée gentlewomen, two Groomes,
and one of her wardrobe: the souldiers watching & warding about the house, and she close shut vp. This was, because certaine of her Gentlemen and Yeomen (to the number of 60.) came to méete her, and salute her. The next day folowing, her Grace entred Hāpton court, on the backside, into the Princes lodging, the dores being shutte to her, and she garded (as before) with Souldiers. Shée lay there a fortnight at the least, before any body had recourse vnto her. At the length came the Lorde William Howarde, who marueylous honourablie entertayned her. And not long after, came the Bishoppe of Winchester, the Lorde of Arundell, the Lorde of Shrewsburie, and Secre∣tarie Peter, whom she required to be a meane for her deli∣uerie out of prison. S. Gardiner requested her to submit her self to the Quéene, and to craue pardon. Which she said, shée would not doe, hauing neuer offended: and that she had ra∣ther lie in prison all the daies of her life: requiring lawe, if she had offended. The next day he came againe to her, and vsed perswasi∣ons to haue her acknowledge her selfe faultie. She againe refuseth: adding, that it were as good for her to be in prison with honestie and trueth, as abroade, suspected of her Maie∣stie. And this that I haue said, I wil (quoth she) stand vnto, for I will neuer belie my selfe. So Winchester, and the rest (knéeling downe) prayed that all might be forgotten: and so departed, leauing her fast locked as before. A seuennight after, the Quéene sent for her Grace at ten of the cloke in the night, to speake with her: for she had not séene her in two yeres before. So Mistresse Clarentius con∣ducted her to the Quéenes bedchamber, where her Maiesty was. At the sight of whom, her Grace knéeled downe, and desired God to preserue her Maiestie: saying, she mistrusted not, but she should proue her selfe as good a Subiect to ward her Maiestie, as euer did any. And desired her Maiestie euen so to iudge of her. To whom the Quéene answered, you
will not confesse your offence, but stande stoutly to your trueth. I pray God it may fall out so. If it doe not (quoth the Lady Elizabeth) I request neither fauour, nor pardon at your handes. Thus her Grace departing, went to her lod∣ging againe, and the seuennight after, shee was released of Sir Henry her Gaoler. And so (being sette at libertie) shee went into the Countrey, and had appointed to goe with Sir Thomas Pope, a Counseller, and one of the Quéenes Gen∣tlemen Vshers. Then there came to Lamheire, Master Iermingham, and master Norris, gentleman Vsher, Quéene Maries men, and tooke away from her Grace, Mistres Ashley to the Fléete, and thrée other of her gentlewomen, to the Tower. Shortly after God tooke away Gard.Gardiner di∣eth. her mortal enemy: and after him, other of her enemies dropped away, one after another: and her libertie still increased, till at the length, in the Moneth of Nouember, & the seuentéene day of the same, thrée yeres after the death of Gardiner, died Quéene Mary.Queene Marie dieth. Of which Quéene this may truely be affirmed, that before her, was neuer read in storie of any king or Quéen of Eng∣land, since the time of king Lucius, vnder whom (in time of peace) by hanging, heading, burning, and imprisonment, so much Christian bloud was spilled within this Realme, as was vnder the reigne of Quéene Marie, for the space of iiij. yéeres to be séene. The vnprosperous successe of Q. Marie, while she persecuted the children of God. FIrst, incontinently after she had receiued the Pope, the fairest & greatest ship she had, called great Harrie, was burned. A vessel not matchable in al these parts of Europe. Then fel there such a dearth, that her poore subiects were faine to eate Acornes for want of corne. Moreouer, Calice was lost in her time: besides the ill lucke shee had in her
childbirth: and her husband for saking her, and in the end her short raigne, euen the shortest of any King or Quéene since the conquest, onely excepted king Richard the third. The seuere punishment of God vpon the persecutors of his people. OF Gardiner mention hath béene made before. Morgan B. of S. Dauids, who cōdemned B. Farrar, was so stri∣ken by God, that his meat would not go downe, but rise and pick vp againe, sometimes at his mouth, sometime blow out of his nose, most horribly to behold: & so cōtinued till he died. Iustice Morgan that sat vpon the death of the L. Iane, not long after fel mad, and so died, euer hauing in his mouth Lady Iane, Lady Iane, &c. D. Dunning died before Q. Mary fitting in his chaire, he was the bloody Chauncellor of Nor∣wich. Likewise suddaine death fell vpon Berry Commissa∣rie of Norwich, who fell downe suddainly to the ground, gaue an heauy grone, and neuer stirred after. B. Thorneton Suffragan of Douer, looking vpon his men, playing at the boules, fell downe in a palsey, & willed to remember God: yea (said he) and my Lord of Canturbury too. Another Suf∣fragan that succéeded him, brake his necke downe a paire of staires in the Cardinals chamber at Gréenewich, after hée had receiued the Cardinals blessing. One Grundwood of Hitcham, who was procured by William Fenning to witnes salsly against a godly man, one Cooper of Watsame, that he should wish if God would not, that the Diuell would take away Quéene Mary: as hée was in his labour staking vp a gulphe of corne, suddainly his bowels fell out, and so he died. The Parson of Cron∣dall in Kent, hauing receiued the Popes blessing from Car∣dinall Poole, shrunke downe in the pulpet, and was found dead. D. Geffery Chancellor of Salisbury, hauing appoyn∣ted the day before his death, to call 90. persons before him to examination, was preuented by Gods hand, and so died.
Master Woodroof, who was cruell against M. Rogers, was stricken the one halfe of his body, that he lay benum∣med, and so continued seuen or eight yéeres, till he died: and scarse escaped any of them, but the hand of God strangely was vpon them all before their death,Popish pre∣lates die thicke together about the death of Queene Mary. that had defiled them∣selues with the blood of Gods children. Especially it is to be noted, how many of the popish prelates died not long before Quéene Mary, or not longer after. Before her died Coates B. of Winchester, Parfew B. of Harford, Glinne B. of Bangor, Brookes B. of Glocester, King B. of Thame, Peto elect of Salsbury, Day B. of Chi∣chester, Holyman B. of Bristow. After her Cardinall Poole the next day, of some Italian Phisicke, as some did suspect, then I. Christophorsen B. of Chichester, White B. of Winchester, Hopton B. of Nor∣wich, Morgan B. of S. Dauids, Rafe Bayne B. of Liechfield and Couentrie, Owine Oglethorpe B. of Carlill, Cutbert Tonstall, who was no bloudy persecutor B. of Durham, Thomas Raynolds elect of Hereford, after his depriuation died in pryson: Doctor Weston Deane of Westminster, after Deane of Windsore, chiefe disputer against Cran∣mer, Ridley, and Latimer. Maister Slythurst maister of tri∣nitie Colledge in Oxford, who died in the Tower: Seth Holland Deane of Worcester, and Warden of Alsoule col∣ledge in Oxforde, William Copinger monke of Westmin∣ster fell mad and died in the Tower, Doct. Steward Deane of Winchester. Such of the Popish Cleargie as escaped death, and were committed to prison were these: In the Tower, Nicholas Heath Archb. of Yorke, and Lord Chancellor, Th. Thurleby B. of Ely, Th. Watson B. of Lincolne, Gilbert Bourne B. of Bath & Welles, Rich. Pates B. of Worcester, Trouble∣field B. of Exceter, Iohn Fecknam Abbot of Westminster, Iohn Baxall Deane of Windsor & Peterborow, Godwel B. of S. Asse, and Maurice elect of Bangor ran away. In the
Marshalsea, Edmond Boner, Tho. Wood, B. elect. In the Fléete, Cuthbert Scot Bishop of Chester, whence he escaped to Louain, and there died. Henrie Cole Deane of Paules, Iohn Harpesfield Archdeacon of London, and Deane of Norwich, Nicholas Harpesfield Archd. of Can∣terbury, Anthonie Dracot Archd. of Huntington, William Chadsey Archdeacon of Middlesex. Anno 1572. Iohn Whiteman,Iohn White∣man a notable martyr. Shoemaker of Rye in Sussex, a married man of 23. yéeres. It being seruice time at Ostend in Flanders, went to the Church, and at the time of the heaue offering, stept to the sacrificer, and tooke from o∣uer his head his Idoll, saying these wordes in the Duitch tongue. Is this your God? And so breaking it, cast it down vnder his féete, and trode thereon. Forthwith he was ta∣ken, and on Tuesday after had sentence giuen against him: first to haue his hand cut off, and his body scorched to death, and after to be hanged vp. Which sentence he tooke so pati∣ently, and the execution thereof with such willingnes, that so soon as he was out of the prison to be carried to execution, he made such haste, and as it were a ranne to the place of ex∣ecution, that he drew the hangman after him. There was prepared for his execution, a post with spars from the top therof, aslope down to the ground, in maner of a tent: to the end, that he should be scorched to death, and not burned. When he was come to the place, the hangman com∣manded him to lay down his right hand vpon a block, which he immediatly with an hatchet smote of the goodman stil cō∣tinuing patient & constant. Then the hangman stept behind him, & bids him put out his tongue: which he forthwith did as far as he could out of his head, through the which he thrust a long instrument like a packnéedle, and so let it sticke. So being stript into his shirt; he was put into the tent, & made fast with two chaines, and fire put round about him, which broiled him & scorched him al black: and when he was dead, he was carried to be hanged vpon a Gibbet besides ye towne.
Anno 1558. the last day of March was appointed a day of conference, betwixt 9. priests, and 9. protestants, con∣cerning matters of religion. A conference for matters of religion.The names of the Papistes were these: Winchester, Lichfield, Chester, Carlile, Lincoln, Cole, Harpesfield, Long∣dale, Chadsey. The names of the Protestants, Story B. of Chichester, Cox, Whitehead, Grindall, Horne, Sands, Best, Elmer, Iewell. Three proposi∣tions to di∣spute of.The matter they should dispute of, was comprehended in these propositions. 1 It is against the word of God, & the custome of the ancient Church, to vse a tongue vnknown to ye people, in common praier, & administratiō of ye sacramēts. 2 Euery Church hath authority to appoint, take away, and change ceremonies, and Ecclesiastical rites, so the same be to edification. 3 It cannot be proued by the word of God, that there is in the masse offered vp a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead. It was decréed, according to the desire of the papists, that it should be in writing on both partes (for auoiding of much altercation of words) and each of them should deliuer their writings to other, to consider what were improued therein, and to declare the same againe in writing some other conue∣nient day. This was agréed on of both parts. The Lords al∣so of the parlement made means to her maiesty, that ye par∣ties of this conference might reade their assertions in ye En∣glish tongue, and that in the presence of the nobility, and o∣thers of the parlement house, for the better satisfaction, and the better enabling of their owne iudgements, to treate and conclude of such lawes as might depend therevpon. This was thought very reasonable, and agréed vpon: the day being appointed ye last of March, & the place Westmin∣ster church. Notwithstanding this former order appointed, & cōsented vnto on both parts. The assēbly being now made, ye B. of Winchester, & his collegues, alleadging that they had
mistaken that their assertions and reasons should be writtē, & so only recited out of a booke, said that their booke was not then ready written, but they were ready to argue & dispute,The Papists flee from the agreement. and therefore they would for that time, repeate in spéech that which they had to say to the first probation. This varying of theirs from the first order was permit∣ted, without any great refusing, because they excused them∣selues with mistaking the order, and agréed again that they would not faile, but put it in writing according to the former order, and deliuer it to the other part. So the B. of Winchester. & his Colleagues appointed D. Cole, Deane of Paules to be ye vtterer of their mindes. Who partly by spéech only, and partly by reading authori∣ties written, & at certaine times informed by his colleagues what to say, made a declaration of their meanings, and their reasons to their first propositions. Which being ended, they were asked by the priuy Counsaile, if any of them had any more to say? and they saide no. So the other were licensed to shew their mindes: which they did according to their first order, exhibiting all that which they ment to propound, in a booke written: which (after prayer made most humbly to God, for the endewing of them with his holy spirit, & a pro∣testation also to stand to the doctrine of the Catholike church builded vpon the Scriptures, and the doctrine of the Pro∣phets & Apostles) was distinctly read by one Robert Horne batcheler of Diuinitie, after B. of Winchester. Which whē he had doone with some likelihood (it séemed) that the same was much allowable to the audience, certayne of the B. began (contrary to their former answere) to say that they now had much to say to this matter. So it was ordered, & a∣gréed vpon on both parts in full audience, that vpon munday following, the Bishops should bring their minds, and rea∣sons in writing to the second assertion, and the last also (if they could) and first reade the same. And that done, the other part should bring likewise theirs to the same: & being read,
each of them should deliuer to other the same writings: and in the meane time the Bishoppes should put in writing, not onely that which Doctor Cole had that day vttered, but all such other matters as they any otherwise coulde thinke of for the same. And assoone as they might possible, to send the same booke touching that first assertion to the other part, and they should receiue of thē the writing which Master Horne had read there that day. And vpon Munday it should be a∣gréed, what day they should exhibite their answers touching the first proposition. This both parties assented vnto, and so the assemblie was quietly dismissed. On Munday, the assemblie being mette by the Lordes of the Counsell, and other of the Nobilitie, &c. the Popish Bi∣shops brake againe their order agréed vpon,Papists break order againe. and refused to deale in the second Question, according as it was agréed vp∣on, but would néedes reade that which they had written of the first proposition. Moreouer they refused to beginne, but would haue the other part to beginne first, and beyng glad to auoyd altoge∣ther the cause for which they were assembled, began to ca∣uill with Maister Horne of what Church hée was of & his fellowes: my Lord Kéeper perceiuing their digressiō from ye purpose, admonished them thereof. In the end they would not be brought to begin. So ye assembly was faine to breake vp, nothing being doone: for which their wilfulnesse and con∣tempt,Wilfulnes & contempt in the popish bishops. the Bishops of Winchester & Lincolne were com∣mitted to the Tower, & the rest, sauing the Abbot of West∣minster (who was willing to begin) stood bound to make dayly their appearance before the Counsaile, and not to de∣part the citie of London & Westminster, vntil further order were taken with them for their disobedience & contempt. About the time that the B. aforesaid were committed to the Tower, Boner was committed to the Marshalsea. In this Parlement, Doctor Storie vaunted himselfe opē∣lie of his crueltie in Quéene Maries daies (as indéed he was
one of the cruellest) lamenting that he had not laide to the roote, (as his intent was) but rather shrubbed off the twigs,Storie vaun∣teth of his cru∣eltie. saying: he was once at the burning of an heretike (for so hée tearmed the Martirs) at Vxbridge, where he tost a fagot at his face, as he was singing Psalmes, and set a whinbush of thornes vnder his féete, a little to prick him. With many o∣ther wordes to like effect. In this Parlement the Pope lost his supremacie,Popes Supre∣macie repealed: The Gospell aduaunced. and the bloudie Actes of Q. Marie were repealed, the Gospel aduā∣ced, and the olde Bishops deposed for refusing to subscribe to the Quéenes lawfull Title. In whose roomes and places, succéeded, first to Cardinall Poole, D. Mathew Parker, Archbishop of Canterburie: In the place of Heath, succéeded Doctor Yong: In the stead of Boner, Edmund Grindall was Bishoppe of London:Popish Bi∣shops displaced and Prote∣stāts placed. For Hopton, Thurlebie, Tonstall, Pates, Christopherson, Peto, Coates, Morgan, Feasie, White, Oglethorpe, &c. were pla∣ced, D. Parkhurst in Norwich, D. Cox in Ely, Iewel in Sa∣lisburie, Pilkenton in Duresme, D. Sandes in Worcester, M. Downam in Westchester, Bentame in Couētrée & Lich∣field, Dauid in Saint Dauids, Allie in Exceter, Horne in Winchester, Scorie in Hereford, Best in Carlil, Bullingham in Lincolne, Scambler in Peterborow, Bartlette in Bath, Ghest in Rochester, Bailie in Chichester, &c. About the moneth of Iune, anno 1581.  one Richard At∣kins, and englishmā, borne in Hartfordshire, came to Rome, and hauing found the English Colledge, knocked at ye dore, and after other spéech, declareth vnto his Countreimen, that he came louingly to rebuke the great disorder of their liues, and to let the proud Pope vnderstande, that he offendeth the heauenlie Maiestie, committing Idolatrie, &c. When they heard these wordes, one Hugh Gryffon, a welchman, caused him to be put into the Inquisition. From whence (vpon what condition it is not knowen) within few dayes he was set at libertie againe. And one day going in
the stréete, he met a Priest carrying the Sacrament: which offending his conscience to sée the people so worship it, hée caught at it, to haue throwen it downe: but missing of his purpose, & being iudged by the people to haue caught at the holinesse, which (they say, commeth from the Sacrament) of méere deuotion, he was let passe. R. Atkins ouer∣throweth the Chalice at Rome.Within fewe dayes after he came to S. Peters Church, where the Priest was at the Eleuation: and shewing no re∣uerence, stepped among the people to the Altar, and threwe downe the Chalice with the wine, striuing also to haue pul∣led the Cake out of the Priestes handes. For this fact he was caried to prison, and being condem∣ned, within a while after was set vpon an Asse without any Saddle, he being from the middle vpwarde naked: and all the way as he went to execution, foure did nothing els but thrust at his naked bodie with burning Torches. Whereat he neuer moued, nor shrunke any iote, but with a chéerefull countenance laboured to perswade the people: oft bending his bodie to méete the Torches as they were thrust at him, & would take them in his owne hand, & hold them stil burning vpon his bodie: whereat the people wondred not a litle. Thus he continued almost the space of halfe a mile, till he came before S. Peters, where the place of execution was. When he came to the place of execution, they had made a deuise to burne him by péecemeale. Which he suffered with such constancie and chéerefulnesse, that when they offered him a crosse, he put it away with his hand: saying, they were euill men to trouble him with such paltrie, when hée was preparing him selfe to God, whom he beheld in maiestie and mercie readie to receiue him into his eternall rest. They séeing him in that constant mind, left him, & commended him to the deuil, whom they said he serued, thinking he had béene possessed. This is faithfully aduouched by I. Yong, that thē serued M.D. Morton at Rome: who seing his martirdome, when he came home to his house, in presence of M. Smith
his sonne, Maister Creede, and Iohn Yong his man, spake as followeth: Surely this fellow was marueylous obsti∣nate, hée nothing regarded the good counsell which was gi∣uen vnto him, nor shrancke all the way, when the torches were thrust at his naked body: beside in the place of execu∣tion hée did not faint, nor crye one iote in the fire, albeit they tormented him very cruelly, and burned him by de∣grées, yet all this he did but smile at. Doubtles, but that the worde of God cannot bée but true, else wée might iudge this fellow to be of God: for who could haue suffered so much paine as he did. But truely I beléeue the Diuell was in him. Anno 1572.1572. The Admiral of France. the two and twentieth day of August, the Admirall of Fraunce comming from the Counsell table, by the way was strikē with a pistol charged with 3. pellets in both his armes: and at a Watchwoorde giuen, was af∣terward slaine foorthright: and murtherers appointed the whole cittie through to masacre the poore Protestants, men, women, old, & yoong, to the number of 10000. in thrée daies:The masacre of Paris. although the rage endured longer. In which number was slaine Petrus Ramus,Petrus Ramus. the restorer of all liberall artes, espe∣cially the greatest M. of Logike, and the perfectest practiser of the same, that euer liued before him. Also Lambinus, Plateanus, Lomenus, Chapesius with o∣thers suffered this barbarous, and more then beastly cruel∣tie: which did not containe it self onely within Paris walles, but extended it selfe to other partes of Fraunce, especially to Orleans, Tholouse & Roane. In which cities it is almost incredible what crueltie was shewed in numbers destroied: so that within the space of one moneth 30000.30000. mar∣tyrs in Frāce. of religious and christian Protestants are numbred to be slaine. This murther did so reioyce the Pope, that he with his Cardinals went a procession with their gunshot, and sang Te Deum: and in honor of that act, commaunded a Iubelie with great indulgence.
Likewise in France the 18. of the same moneth the king commaunded processions, bonfires, and ringings, singings, & giuing thankes to God for so worthy a victory, vpon S. Bartholomewes day against the innocent protestants. The same yéere about the 4. of Decēber, he began to lay siege to RochellRochell be∣sieged. a towne belonging to ye Protestants, which endured 7 moneths. In which when the poore began to lacke corne & victuall, there was sent to them euery day in the ri∣uer (by the hand of the Lord) a great multitude of fish,Gods proui∣dence. called Surdons, which the poore people did vse in stéede of bread, Which fish the same day that the siege brake vp (about the 10. of Iune) departed, and came no more. At this siege were slaine of the kings captains 132. of the which the chiefest was, Duke D'Aumale. In the end an a∣gréement pacificatory was concluded, containing 25. arti∣cles: (in which also were contained certain other cities pro∣testants. Which the 10. of Iune Anno 1572. was solemnly proclaimed at Rochel. The yéere following, died ye cardinall of Louā, a pestilēt Achitophel against the children of God, & Charles of France the 9. the bloodiest Tyrant that euer the earth bare, the 25. of May, being fiue and twentie yéeres of age. His disease was such, that his blood gushing out by diuers partes of his body, he tossing in his bedde, and casting out many horrible blasphemies, lying vpon pillowes with his héeles vp∣ward, and head downwarde, voyded so much bloud at his mouth, that in fewe houres after he died.The Tyrant dieth. FINIS.
A Table of all the principall mat∣ters conteyned in this Booke. TIberius Nero pag. 1. Christ eadem Caius Caligula eadem Caius Nero eadem Peter and Paule eadem Titus pag. 2 Vespasian eadem Iewes destroyed eadem Stephen eadem Iames eadem Herod eadem Nicanor eadem Simon eadem Parmenas eadem Thomas eadem Simon Zelotes eadem Iudas eadem Augarus eadem Simon eadem Traianus eadem Bartholomeus pag. 3 Andrew eadem Egeas eadem Matthew eadem Hircanus eadem Matthias eadem Phillip and his Daughters. eadem Iames eadem Other eadem The Iewes eadem Nero Domit. pag. 4 Peter eadem Simon Magus eadem Peters wife eadem Paule eadem Domician eadem Nephewes of Iuda eadem Simeon pag. 5 Iustus eadem Iohn eadem Flauia eadem The 2. persecution eadem Euaristus eadem Alexander eadem Hermes eadem Euentus pag. 6 Theodulus eadem Hermes eadem Albina eadem Quirinus eadem The third persecution ead. Nerua eadem Traianus eadem Plinius secundus eadem Plinies letter for mitigation of the persecution ead. The Emperours aunswere. pag. 7 Simeon eadem Attalus eadem Phocas eadem
Sulpitius eadem Seruilianus eadem Emphrosina eadem Theodora eadem Salma eadem Seraphia eadem Nereus eadem Achilleus eadem Sagaris eadem Ignatius pag: 8 Polycarpus eadem Magnesia eadem Publius eadem Hadrian eadem Euentius eadem Theodorus eadem Hermes eadem Quirinus eadem Zenon eadem Achaicus eadem Eustachius eadem Faustinus eadem Iobita eadem Caelocerius eadem Iustus pag. 9 Pastor eadem Sympronissa and her seuen children eadem Sophia, and her two chil∣dren pag. 10 Quadratus eadem Aristides eadem Serenus eadem Persecution asswaged in A∣sia eadem Antonius Pius eadem Persecution ceaseth ead. Ma. Antoninus pag. 11 Verus eadem Lucius eadem Germanicus eadem Polycarpus eadem Irenarchus pag. 12 Herodes eadem Nicetes eadem Metrodorus pag. 13 Pionius eadem Carpus eadem Papylus eadem Agathonica eadem Felicitas with her seuē chil∣dren eadem Iustinus eadem Lucius pag. 14 Concordus eadem Symmetrius eadem Vetius eadem Sanctus eadem Maturus eadem Attalus eadem Blandina pag. 15 Bibledes eadem Photinus eadem Alexander eadem Pontius eadem Melito pag. 16 Claudius Apollinaris ead Quadratus eadem Aristides eadem Athenagoras eadem
Persecution staied eadem Miracle eadem Commodus eadem Martia. eadem Apollonius eadem Vincentius pag. 17. Eusebius eadem Iulius eadem Peregrinus eadem Xistus eadem Telesphorus eadem Hyginus eadem Pius eadem Serapion eadem Egesippus. eadem Miltiades eadem Heraclitus eadem Theophilus eadem Dionysius pag. 18 Penitus eadem Clemens Alexandrinus. ea∣dem Contention among the chri∣stians for Easter day. ea∣dem. Pertinax eadem Seuerus eadem Hillarius pag. 19 Leonides eadem Origen eadem Origens bookes eadem Plutarchus eadem Serenus eadem Basilides pag. 20 Alexander. eadem Narcissus eadem Andoclus eadem Asclepiades. eadem Iraeneus eadem Victor eadem Tertullian pag. 21 Theophilus. eadem Policrates. eadem Zephyrinus pag. 22 Perp. &c. eadem Bassianus eadem Varius Heliogabalus. eadem Mammea eadem Maximinus pag. 23 Calixtus eadem Vrbanus eadem Tiburtius eadem Valerianus eadem Agapitus eadem Calepodius eadem Pammachus eadem Simplicius eadem Quiritius eadem Iulia eadem Tiberius pag. 24 Valerianus eadem Martina eadem Maximinus eadem Gordian eadem Phillip eadem Pontianus eadem Philetus eadem zebenus eadem Ammonius eadem Iulius Aphricanus eadem
Natalius eadem. Anterius pag. 25. Hippolitus eadem Fabian pag. 26 Origen sacrificeth eadem. Origen excommunicated. eadem Origen repenteth. pag. 27 Heracleas eadem Dionysius eadem Alexandrinus. eadem Cruel persecution. eadem Alexander eadem Mezauanes eadem XL. Virgins pag. 28. Peter eadem Andrew eadem Paul eadem Nichomachus eadem Dionysia eadem Germanus eadem Theophilus eadem Cesarius eadem Vitalis eadem Polychronius eadem Nestor eadem Olimpiades eadem Maximus eadem Anatolia eadem Audax eadem Soothsayers eadem Metra eadem Apollonia pag. 29 Serapion eadem Reuolt eadem Iulianus eadem Cronion eadem Eunus eadem A souldier eadem Macer eadem Epimachus eadem Alexander eadem Ammonarion pag. 30. Mercuria eadem Dionysia eadem Heron eadem Isodrne eadem Dioscorus eadem Nemesian eadem Ammon. eadem Zenon eadem Ptolomeus eadem Ingenius eadem Theophilus eadem Ischrion eadem Cheremon eadem Dionysius pag. 31 Alexandrinus eadem Timotheus eadem Gaius eadem Faustus eadem Petrus eadem Paulus eadem Christophorus eadem Menaitus eadem Agatha eadem Tryphon eadem Theodora pag. 32. Agathon eadem Paulus eadem
Andreas ead. Iustinus eadem Portius eadem Secundianus eadem Verianus 33 Marcellinus eadem Sore persecution eadem Children persecuted ead. Pergentius eadem Laurentius eadem Reuolt eadem Nouatus 34 Cyprian eadem Cornelius eadem Aurelius eadem Mappalicus eadem Decius death eadem A plague of ten yeres ead. Cyprian de mortalitate, 35 Vibias eadem Gallus eadem Volusianus eadem The teachers of Christianity banished eadem Nemesianus eadem Felix eadem Lucius eadem Seagrius eadem Rogationus eadem Stephanus eadem Contention eadem Emilianus eadem Valerianus & Galienus ead Valerianus seduced eadem Disordered life of christians 36 A vision eadem Cyprians Apologie for chri∣stians eadem Cyprian once a Magician eadem Cecilius conuerteth Cypri∣an eadem Agrippinus 37 Cyprian banished eadem Cyprian beheaded eadem Diuers Cyprians eadem Sextus with sixe of his Dea∣cons eadem Laurence broyled on a grid-iron 38 Dionisius Bishop of Alexan∣dria eadem The brethren visited eadē Eusebius eadem Faustus eadem Priscus 39 Marcus eadem Alexander eadem 300. martired eadem Three virgins ead. Pontius eadem Gods iudgements eadem Zeno eadem Eugenia eadem Helenus eadem Victor 40 Victorinus eadem Claudianus eadem Bossa eadem Fructuosus eadem
A vision ead. Sapores eadem Gods iudgements eadem Earthquakes eadem Persecution moderated, ead Marinus eadem Theodistus 41 Dionysius eadem Felix eadem Eutichianus eadem Gaius eadem Gregorius magnus eadem Claudius eadem 262. Martirs eadem Quintilianus eadem Aurelianus eadem The tirant terrified 42 Annius eadem Tacitus eadem Florianus eadem Aurelius Probus eadem Carus eadem Carinus eadem Numerianus eadem Cerillus martired eadem Dioclesian eadem 19. yeres quiet in the church eadem 44. yeres quiet, the Church groweth eadem Church dissolute eadem Large Temples builded, ea∣dem The tenth persecution, 43 Maximianus eadem Cesars eadem Dioclesian woulde bee wor∣shipped as a God eadem Miracle eadem Churches burned eadem Scriptures destroyed, eadem Siluanus 44 Pamphilus eadem Tirannion eadem Arnobius eadem Two maides of Antioch ea. Siluanus eadem Tharatus eadem Probus eadem Andronicus eadem Peter of the houshold ead. Dorotheus eadem Gorgonius eadem Anthonius 45 Lucianus eadem Serena the wife of the Em∣peror, martired eadem Two thousand together in a temple burned eadem A whole citie of Christians burned eadem Eustachius eadem Peleus and Nilus eadem The B. with the elders, marti∣tired eadem A legion of Christians mar∣tired eadem Mauritius eadem 79. martired 46 Great persecutiō in Italy, ea.
Victor eadem Lucian eadem 18. martyred eadem Persecution of Spaine ead. Riuers died with bloud of Christians eadem In Britayne great persecu∣tion pag. 47 Strange torments ead. The persecutors weried with slaughter eadem Reuolt eadem 17000. slayne in thirtie daies eadem 300. at Alexandria eadem 300. at Colen eadem Thebane Souldiers 6660. pag. 48 Constantinus eadem Constantius trieth his court who were christians. pa. 49 Gods iudgement vpō Maxi∣minus eadem Syluanus eadem Petrus pag. 50. Quirinus eadem Marcellus eadem Timotheus eadem 270. martired eadem Antheus a king with 37000. martyrs eadem 79. martyrs eadem Famine and pestilence. eadē. The villany of Maxentius. pag. 51 A vision of the crosse eadem Maxentius drowned. pag. 52 The last persecution. eadem. Libertie to the christiās. ead. Dioclesi. dieth eadem Maxim. glorifieth the God of the christians eadem Learning named by Lycini∣us, the poyson of the cō∣mon wealth pag. 53. Lycinius a great persecutor. eadem Churches rased to the groūd eadem Theodorus eadem Basilius eadem Nicholaus eadem Paule eadem 42. Christian souldiers. ead. Inuenters of torments ead. Licinius vanquished ead. Licinius slaine pag. 54 Constantius dieth, & is bu∣ried at Yorke eadem Alban the first martyr in En∣gland eadem Amphibalus eadem Aaron and Iulius eadem England only touched with the tenth Persecution. eadem. A child tormented. pag. 55 A myracle eadem Gordius eadem 40. martyrs eadem
A notable mother pag. 56 Fortie martyrs eadem Cyrus eadem Iohannes eadem Athanasia and her 3. daugh∣ters eadem Sebastian eadem Barlan pag. 57 Agricola eadem Vitalis eadem Vincentius lamentable mar∣tyrdome eadem Tormentors scourged. ead. Procopius eadem Panthaleon pag. 58 318. martyrs eadem 2000. martyrs eadem Cassianus eadem Constancie of women ead. Eulalia eadem A miracle pag. 59 Katherine eadem Iulitta eadem Fausta eadem Succession of the bishops of Rome. pag. 60. Lucina eadem Yet persecution in Asia vn∣der Sapores eadem 128. martyrs pag. 61. The magicians raise perse∣cution eadem Simeon eadem Vsthazares eadem A notable historie eadem An hundred suffer eadem A cruel edict pag. 62. Magicians eadem Azades eadem The teachers onely put to death eadem Trabula eadem Iacolus eadem The Arch-magician pag. 63 Athalas eadem Innumerable slaine. eadem 250, martirs eadem 15. thousand martired amōg the Persians. ead. Constantine to Sapores, for mitigation of the perse∣cution eadem Andas 64 Homisda eadem Suenes eadem Beniamin eadem Iulianus eadem Emilianus eadem The martir comforted, ead. Arethusians 65 Marcus Arethusus ead. The tēple of Venus destroy∣ed eadem The persecution of the pri∣mitiue Church endeth eadem A moneth, for a Saboth of yeres ead, Sathan bounde vp til Wick∣liffe 66
Constantine borne in Eng∣land eadem Helena daughter of K. Coi∣lus eadem Constantines mother ead. Constantine a father of the Church eadem Nicene councell eadem Constātine teacheth his sol∣diers a praier eadem Appeale graunted by Con∣stantine 67 Prouision for learning. ead. The scriptures writtē for the vse of the church eadem Constantine baptised a little before his death eadem The rest of this history con∣cerneth chiefly England, & Scotland 68 Englād receiued the gospell in Tyberius time eadem Easter kept in England af∣ter the maner of the East church eadem The gospell came into Eng∣land from the East, & not from Rome eadem K. Lucius the first Christian K. of England eadem Fugatius & Damianus. ead. Eleutherius 69 Almost all Christianitie de∣stroied in England ead. Guetelinus Archbishop of London eadem 271. of the nobilitie of Engl. slaine by the Saxons. ead. The first persecutiō in Eng∣land by Dioclesian 70 The second by Gnauius and Melga eadem Vrsula eadem 11000. virgins eadem The third by Hengist ead. Aurelius Ambrosius resto∣reth the churches eadem Gurmundus eadem Ethelbert eadem Gospel receiued of the Eng∣lishmen eadem Austen sent into Englād by Gregory B. of Rome. ead. Ile of Tenet eadem Berda, & Lebardus 71 Godly conuersation & mi∣racles eadem None compelled to beleeue the abbey of S. Peter, & S. Paule in Canterbury. ead. Questions resolued from Rome 72 Bishops liuings how to bee bestowed eadem Clarkes may marry ead. Diuerse ceremonies ead. Degrees for marriage ead. A pall from Rome 73 Mellitus eadem Austens oake eadem
Brittaines & Scots, refuse the Easter of Rome 74 Abbey of Bangor eadem Austens pride offendeth the Britains eadem 1100. Monkes of Bangor slaine eadem Dinoe eadem Laurentius eadem Gregory dieth eadem Austen dieth eadem Strife about Primacy 75 Patriarke of Alexādria wold be vniuersall eadem The title of Seruus seruorum Dei ead. Sabinianus first vniuersal bi∣shop eadem Phocas giueth first title of v∣niuersall bishop eadem Ethelbert dieth eadem A vision 76 Edwine baptized eadem Paulinus the first archbishop of Yorke 77 Oswald a notable K. ead. Kinigilsus conuerted Berni∣us 78 The sea of Winchester. ead. Weda conuerted ead. Wolferus conuerted ead. Sigbert baptized 79 Finanus eadem The questiōs of Easter. ead. Hilda eadem Cedda eadem A rude reason of the K. 80 The bones of Aidanus. ead. Southsex conuerted ead. Great famine 81 The art of fishing taught. eadem Wilfride restored eadem Wilfride expulsed again. ead. Mahomet beginneth ead. Turkes conquered the Sara∣cens 82 Theodorus eadem Latine seruice and Masse first brought into Engl. ead. The archbishop plaieth Rex eadem A prouincial Synod at Thet∣ford eadem The sixt generall councell at Constance eadem Marriage forbidden ead. The first Latine masse at Cō∣stantinople eadem King Iua made a monke, & after an abbot 83 Aldelmus eadem Iohn of Beuerley eadem The right obseruing of Ea∣ster, now first receiued of Picts & Brittaines ead. Shauen crownes eadem The K. thāketh God, for the priests shauen crownes. 84 The deuise of Ethelburga
the Queen eadem The Queene becommeth an Abbesse eadem Peter-pence eadem Celulfus a learned king. ea∣dem. Diuers learned men flourish eadem Bedaes Anglorum historia. eadem Beda 85 Beda translated the Gospell of Iohn into English. ead. The king made a monke. ea∣dem A noble library in Yorke by a bishop eadem The lords prayer, and Creed in the English tongue. 86 Cuthbert 87 Pope Boniface an English∣man ead. Boniface a great mainteyner of Nunnes eadem Religious fathers permitted to carry Nunnes about with them a preaching. ea. Libda and Tecla eadem Childerike deposed by the pope eadem Detestable doctrine of Boni∣face 88 Great maisteries wrought a∣gainst the Emperours by popes eadem Philippicus the Emperour lost both his eyes, and the empyre eadem The clause for reliques, me∣moriall offerings, and of∣feringes for the dead e∣adem The priests vesture eadem Constantinus the first, gaue his feete to bee kissed of the Emperour ea∣dem Lambrith to Lichfield 89 The king giueth the tenth of his goodes to the church. eadem Romescot, or peter-pēce. ea. The donation of Pipine the traytour and murtherer. 90 Inuention of Organes. eadē Pope deposed, and his eyes put out ead. Pope striueth for images. ea∣dem Images Lay mens kalender. eadem Cost vpon images eadem Strife for Gregories masse. 91 A miracle falsely interpreted. eadem The empire translated to the French. eadem
A. B. C. Monasteries. ead. Irene the Greeke Empresse a mainteiner of Images. 92 The cruelty of Irene ead. The Emperours eyes pulled out by his mother, ead. Monasteries erected, and founded in England. e∣adem Common schooles at Cam∣bridge 93 The first Nunne in North ū∣berland ead. King Edgar builded 40. ab∣beyes 94 The church freed from tri∣butes. 95 Diuers faxon kings become monks ead. Queenes became Nuns. ead. Vnder the Britains, the Me∣tropolitan sea at London. 96 Cuthbert forbiddeth fune∣nerals to be made for him ead. 34. popes, in the time of 17. archbishops ead. The lande brought into one monarchy, and called An∣glia ead. A Bishop made king of Eng∣land ead. Lands giuē to the church. ea. Peterpence throughout all England 97 Generall councels called by Emperour ead. Against excesse of apparell in the cleargy 98 Against the dicing and who∣ring of the popes cleargy. eadem Siluer and golde not to bee worne in shooes. ead. Feast of al saints first erected. ead. Alteration of popes names. ead. Swines snoute ead. Gilberta a woman pope ead. The pope trauaileth with childe ead. Dirge for the dead 99 Popes decrees, equall with the apostles writings ead. A prelate called God. eadem Polonians & Sclauonians ex∣empt from latine seruice. eadem Against priestes marriages. eadem Huldrich of Auspurgh. ead. The Emperour beginneth to decay, the pope to swell. eadem King Edmund slaine by the Danes 100 Alfred first taketh vnction
from the pope ead. K. of danes christened 101 Alfrede a notable king ead. Time notablie spent by the king eadem Grantchester founded by Beda 102 Paris began frō Grātchester, eadem Alfred very learned eadem The psalter trāslated by Al∣fred 103 The K. carefull to furnish the land with knowledge ead. Neotus ead. Iohannes Scotus ead. Scotus booke de Corpore condemned eadem Sco. slain by his scholers 104 Dauids psalms alwaies with the king eadem 9. popes in 9. yeres ead. P. Steuen rageth against the body of Formosus 105 Barbarous crueltie against Formosus eadem Cādles on cādlemas day, 106 A pope set vp by Theodora a famous harlot ea. Pope smothered ead Pope poisoned ead. Mōks called Cluniacēses, ea. The K. authoritie sufficient in electing of bishops 107 The kinges daughter set to spinning ead. The K. sonnes first Philoso∣phers, then gouernors ea. Empire translated frō Frāce to Germanie ead. Attaching of theeues 108 Stealing aboue xii. d. ead. Monkery commeth into En∣land eadem Oswaldus a great patron of monkerie eadem Saint Edmonds-bury 109 Dunstane suspendeth the K. for adulterie eadem Priests displaced, monks pla∣ced 111 New Monks differ from old eadem K. Edgar mainteined lear∣ning 112 48. monast, foūded by Edg. The K. enioined penance by Dunstan eadem Saboth frō saterday 9. of the clock, til munday 113 Strife betweene priestes and Monks ead. A monstrous euil pope 114 P. restored by harlots ead. P. killed in adulterie ead. Pope geueth his election to the Emperor 115 Pope put in prison ead. Cruel reuēge of the P. ead Christning of belles ead. Pope strangled ead.
Popes eyes put out, & he fa∣mished in prison 116 The popes dead body drawn through the streetes ead popes eies put out ead Crueltie ead A councel at Rome 117 7 Electors of the empire ead The strange reign of a K. ea Peace bought of the Danes for money ead Sea of Durham began 118 Danegelt ead Danes slaine ead Turkillus, a Dane ead Vexation of the Danes ead Treason of a Deacon ead Monks tithed by the Danes 119 Elphegus stoned by the Danes eadem The K. chased by the Danes ead Fasting & praier ead The crown of Englande of∣fered to S. Edm. shrine 120 A false Iudge deposed ead Edmund slaine ead Promise wel performed 121 Reward of traytors ead King Edgars lawes ead Hardeknoutus dieth 122 The last K. of the Danes ead Alfred cruelly murdred ead Romescot ead S. Edmonds burie turned frō priests to monkes 123 A Roode crowned king of England ead A good law against adulterie ead The land vexed by the Danes 255. yeres ead M. Scotus ead Duke of Normandy made heire of the Crowne 124 Harold sweareth to duke W. ead Abbey of Couentrie ead King Edward dieth ead K.E. begā the cōmō law 125 The law at this day ead D. Wil. contrary to his oath, ouerthroweth lawes ead Conditions of peace offered to Harold ead Saxons rule endeth 126 Archb. of Cant. ead Siluest. agreeth with the de∣uill for the popedome ead The deuil deceiued Sil. ead Ratling of Silu. bones 127 Feast of all Souls ead The popedome sold ead Petra dedit &c ead 3 popes at one time ead No P. without the Emp. ead One P. poysoneth 6 ead Hildebrand 128 Councel at Versellis ead Councel at Laterane ead
Priests may not marry. ead. The pope and archbishop fal out at Masse eadem Brazutus the poisoner. ead. The terrible sentence of ex∣communication 130 The pope elected onely by the Cardinall eadem Berengarius recanteth. ead. Transubstantiation hatched. eadem Toctius threatneth the P. ea. Two popes fight eadem Hildebrand pummeled the pope 131 The pope stinted at twentie pence the day eadem Hildebrand encrocheth the treasure of the church. ead. William Conqueror 133 Crueltie of the cōqueror. ea. Englishman, a name of re∣proch eadem England fiue times ouerrun. eadem Normans placed eadem Stigandus archbishop depo∣sed eadem Lanfranke Archb. of Can∣terbury 134 Contentiō for primacie. ead. Two palles geuē to Lanfrank eadem Yorke subiect to Cāterb. ea. Bishops seates altered from townes to citties 135 Ecclesiasticall decrees ead. Priests against monks ead. Lanfranke dieth for sorrow. eadem P. Hildebrād a sorcerer. ead. Hildebrand cōtemneth the Emperour 136 Both the swords eadem Pope cannot erre eadem Presbiteresse eadem Councell against mariage of priests eadem Decree against marriage re∣sisted eadem A schisme eadem Hildebrād a villanous pope eadem None chosen pope vnder 3. daies after his predeces∣sors buriall 137 The pope excommunicateth the Emperour ead. The P. practiseth to kill the Emp. at praier eadem Hildebrand asked counsell of the host, and casteth it into the fire, because it would not answer ead. The Emperour goeth bare∣foote to the Pope ead. A popish interpretatiō of si∣monie 138 A terrible pope eadem The Emper. forced to yeeld
to the Pope eadem The Emper. brought vnder the Popes foote eadem The Emperour yeeldeth his crowne to the Pope ead. Hard conditions eadem Henricus 4. deposed 140 Petra dedit Petro eadem Rodolph chosen Emp. ead. Rodolph woūded to death. eadem Crimes against the P. 141 Hildebrand deposed, dieth in banishment ead. Williā cōqueror dieth. ead. The Cōqueror giuē to make peace in his land 142 Great slaughter of English∣men eadem The first B. of Salisbury. ead. Secundū vsum Sarum ead. The vse of Gregory ead. The Abbot killeth his mōks. eadem A bishop eatē with mise. 143 Rats tower eadem William Rufus eadem Lanfranke dieth eadem Nothing of the king, but for mony eadem Victor 3. Pope eadem Victor poysoned in his cha∣lice 144 Charterhouse monkes. ead. Vrbanus pope eadem Two popes at once ead. White monkes eadem Viage against the Saracens. eadem Peter the heremite 145 Ierusalem wonne from the Saracens eadem Prohibition of goyng to Rome eadem Canonicall houres eadem Lawful for subiects to break their oath of allegeance. eadem The citie of Canterbury ge∣uen to the archb. ead. Anselme the Archbishop a∣gainst the king eadem Vrbane and Clement, popes at strife 146 The king faine to relent to the archbishop eadem A Councell eadem Archb. of Cāterb. called the pope of England ead. 29. Articles of controuersie betweene the Churche of Rome, and the Greeke Church 147 The Latines holden for ex∣communicates eadem The Romanes euery yeare solemnly excōmunicated of the Greekes eadem The Pope excommunicated the Greekes 148
The pope commandeth the king of England. ead. The king slaine pag. 149 Kings of Wales cease. eadem King Beauclarke. eadē King Edwards lawes resto∣red. eadem Little saint Bartholomewes founded by means of a min∣strell eadem Priests sequestred from their wiues eadem Anselme restored ead. Priestes woulde not forsake their wiues 150 Anselm insolent against the king. ead. For the price of his head. eadem A proud pope ead. The king reconciled to An∣selme 151 Priests pay money to the K. for their wiues. ead. Anselme yeelded to in all poynts. eadem Pope Paschalis 152 The popes ornaments. eadē. Popes seuen folde power. eadem That Antichrist was borne. edem Married priests condemned for Nicholaitans. ead. The Emperour deposed by the pope eadem Let God see and iudge. ead. The pope setteth the Empe∣rours sonne against his fa∣ther. 153 The Emperour craueth to be a prebend, but could not obtaine it ead. The Emperour dieth for so∣row. ead. No Emperour to haue to doe with the election of the pope ead. The Emperour like to bee slaine at Rome. ead. The pope faine to agree to the Emperour ead. The pope breaketh coue∣nant. 154 The Germanes rebell. ead. The Emperour giueth ouer to the pope ead. Bernardine monks. ead. Gelasius ead. Gregory 8. ead. Calixtus ead. The Emperor faine to yeeld. ead. A shameful vsage of the pope ead. Imber dayes 155 Premonstratensis ead. Canterbury fiue yeeres voyd to the Kinges vse. ea∣dem
Ely made a bishopricke. ea∣dem A councel of 434. prelates. eadem The pope excommunicateth the Emperour 156 The king of England sueth to the pope eadem Submit to Canterbury. eadē. Pope for Thurstine. eadem The Gray Friers. eadem Priestes pay to the king for their wiues eadem Dane gelt released by the king 157 Honorius 2. eadem Arnulphus eadem Opus tripartitum. eadem Abuses of the church prea∣ched against eadem Knights of the Rhodes, and Templars eadem Honorius ead. Contentiō betwixt the popes 158 Strike a priest eadem Archbishop poisoned in his chalice ead. Petrus Lombardus 159 Petrus Comester ead. Hildegard the Nunne and prophetesse ead. Gilbertines. eadem Priests no rulers in worldly matters. eadem Booke, bel, & candle. eadem Lucius eadem Eugenius 160 Anastasius eadem Adrianus an English man pope ead. Hildegard prophecieth a∣gainst the kingdome of the pope eadem Iustice stourisheth when the pope is ouerthrown. ead. Thomas Becket 161 Gerhard. against the church of Rome eadem The pope Antichrist. eadem Whore of Babylon ead. Execution by the pope. ead. The Emperour holdeth the popes stirrop on the wrōg side 162 Popes legates forbidden in Germany eadem The Germanes excuse the Emperor ead. The pope choked with a flie 163 The order of the hermits, ea. Alexander 3. pope ead. The Emp. fayn to seek peace with the pope eadem The pope set his foot on the Emperors neck ead. Against marriage of priestes. ead. Variance betwixt the king
and Becket 164 Executed for a traytor that brought curse frō Ro. ead. Peter pence denied ead. Saluo ordine suo eadem Becket relenteth to the king eadem Becket stout to the K. ead. The K. should be the popes legate 165 Robbers, felōs, murtherers, among the clergy ead. Becket flieth and turneth his name to Derman ead. Becket in exile 7. yeeres. 166 Beckets kynred banished. eadem The K. feareth Becket ead. Because the pope had con∣demned them 167 The K. yeldeth to Becket. ea. 4. armed mē kill Becket. ead. The murtherers do penāce. eadem Whether Becket were saued or damned eadem 270. miracles done by Bec∣ket eadem A blasphemous anthem. 169 None shold hold Beck. a mar¦tyr, or preach his miracles. ea. The kings penance eadem Sharpe penance eadem Canterbury burnt eadem Contention betwixt York & Canterbury eadem No bishoprick to remain lō∣ger then one yeere in the kings hand 170 Contention betweene the Archbishops ead. From words to blowes. ead. No task, nor first fruits. 171 The king died ead. The forme of wordes in gi∣uing the pall eadem Order of the pall eadem The B. oath to the pope, ead. Becket and Bernard canoni∣zed for saints 172 Baldwinus ead Pauperes de Lugduno ead Waldenses ead Franciscus. Dominicus 173 Waldus ead The doctrine of Waldenses ead The zeale of the Waldenses 174 Testament by heart ead Marks of the crosse, to fight for the holy land 175 Nunnes incontinent life. ead K. Lewes of France maketh pilgrimage to Becket ead Albingenses ead Monks of the Charterhouse ead Pope Clement 176 Iewes destroyed ead
A bishops Chancellor. ead. A Bishop chiefe Iustice of England eadem The iourney for the Holy land eadem The forme of the oath to the holy land, eadem The French breaketh his oth 177 Achon wonne by the Chri∣stians 178 Saladine put to flight. 179 Bishop Williā ruffleth in the kings absence eadem 1500. horse the Bishoppes trayne eadem Clement dieth eadem Pope Celestine eadem P. setteth the crowne on the Emp. head with his feet, & dasheth it of againe 180 The Archbishop rudely hād∣led eadem Rufling Wil. deposed 181 William is taken disguised like a woman eadem William goeth ouer sea. ead. The king taketh truce with the Saracenes. eadem The king taken at his return from the Saracens, & sold to the Emperour. 182 Chalices, crosses, and shrines sold to redeem the K. ead. Chalices of latin & tin. ead. Fulco ead. The kinges three daughters bestowed eadem King Richard slaine eadem King Iohn 183 The K. threatneth the pope. eadem The king interdicted. 184 The king against the cleargy eadem Pandulph and Durance, Le∣gates. ead. Subiects assoiled of their oth, of obedience eadem The king cursed by the pope eadem The Pope giueth England to the french king 185 The king submitteth to the Pope eadem England & Irelande farmed of the Pope eadem The K. resigneth his crowne to the popes legate ead. The Duke of Millan 186 Strange decrees of the Pope eadem Transubstantiation ead. Pope dieth eadem Honorius eadem King Iohn poisoned ead. The prophecie of Caiaphas eadem The monke dieth 187 King Iohn dieth ead.
Mayor in London eadem Americus against Images, 188 Priuate tithes eadem Receiuing at Easter eadem Bell and Candle before the Sacrament ead. The masse receiued, as from the Pope ead. P. stirreth vp diffention in the world eadem Correction of princes belō∣geth to the pope ead. 100. Alsatians burned in one day by the P. ead. Rablement of religious or∣der in the P. church 189 Dominikes 191 Friers Minorites eadem The perfection of the gospel eadem Many sortes of Franciscans eadem Crooched friers 192 Beck. shrined after his death eadem Incredible exactions from Rome eadem The Popes requeste in Eng∣land 193 Gifts to the P. Legat ead. Contention betwixt Canter & York for dignitie ead. The strife ended ead. 300. Romans to be placed in benefices in England 194 The P. desireth to be strōg, to suppresse the Emperor ead. A councel at Lions ead New exactions in Englande eadem No taxe of mony out of En∣gland to Rome 195 The K. relēteth to the P. ead. The 3. part of church goods, & yerely fruit of vacāt be∣nefices to the pope eadem 60000. florens in one yere to Rome, besides &c. eadem The Albingenses assayled by the Pope eadem Frier minorits in Eng. ead. Ioh. de S. Egidio eadem Alexander de Hales eadem Carthusians 196 Minster at Salisburie ead. Contention about spirituall iurisdiction ead. Westminster exempt from the B. of London ead. Wardship, initiū malorū ead Honorius the Emp. enemie, dieth eadē Popes vnreasonable request denied in France 197 War against the good earle of Tholouse eadem The Earle of Tholous excō∣municated eadem
The French K. dieth eadem Auinion ouerrun by treason of the P. Legat 198 P. chased out of Rome ead Cōtentiō for superiority ead Chapt. of the bible distincte by Steuen Lancthō 199 Tenths of al the goods of En¦land and Scotland, to be gi∣uen to the pope ead Prelates driuen to sell their chalices & copes 200 Vsurers brought into Eng∣land by the P. Legate ead Next yeeres corne tithes to the P. ead Earle of Tholouse assayled a∣gaine ead Bishops set on checker mat∣ters, exercised Sessions and iudgements 201 P. neglecteth the K. & satisfi∣eth the Archb. ead Randulph Neuel ead A good bishop ead Hubert L. chiefe Iustice 202 Italians spoyled ead William Withers 203 L. Hubert destitute on euerie side 204 Londoners hate Hub. ead Hubert brought to the To∣wer 205 Hub. sent back again 206 Lucas, archb. of Dublin, true frend to L. Hubert ead Hard choise offered to Hub. ead The K. somewhat appeased toward Hub. 207 Hub. somewhat cheered ead Craft of a bishop ead Great reuerence of ye church 208 The K. hard againe to Hub. ead L. Hub. receiued into the K. fauor ead Caursini, Italiā vsurers ead P. visitation general ead A deformation, no reforma∣tion 209 Benedict order ead Peter bishop of Winchest. ea They wold displace the K. ea Monastery of conuerts ead Edmund 216 R. Grosted ead King floweth bad councel ead Reformation ead Courage of K. ead Pictauians expelled 211 Catini in Almain slain ead Albingenses slain ead Hub. commeth to the K. ead Reconciliation ead Dissention betwixt the P. & the Romans ead P. greater thā any man 212
Romanes slaine eadem Schisme of the East church, from the West eadem Germanus 213 The signe of the Crosse, to fight against Greciās. ead. The people excommunica∣ted eadem Intollerable exactiōs of the pope eadem Prince of Wales set agaynst the K. of England ead. No messenger permitted to, or fro Rome ead. 60000. markes yeerely to Rome eadem The popes legate departeth England eadem Councell at Lions eadem Emperour Frederike cursed by the pope eadem The P. perswadeth to warre against England 215 The popes warres eadem Warre against the Greekes. eadem 60000. poundes exacted by the pope eadem The grieuances of England. 216 The French K. receiueth the signe of the crosse eadem The voyage of the holy land. eadem The P. refuseth all agreement with the Emperor 217 Damiata wonne from the Turkes eadem The P. hindereth peace. 218 The army of christians whol∣ly destroied eadem 80000. christians perish in the wars against the Turks eadem Fredericke crowned Empe∣rour by pope Honorius. 219 Giftes to the churche of Rome ead. Honorius curseth the Emp. Frederik ead. The Emperor recōciled with the pope 220 Honorius dieth ead. P. Gregorie 9 ead. The pope threateneth the Emperor ead. The pope offended with the Emperor for not kissing his feete, but his knee ead. The iourny against the Sara∣cens 221 The popes false accusation against the Emp. ead. Emperor craueth the popes fauor ead. Emperor crowned king of Ie¦rusalem 222 The Pope practiseth against
the Emperour while hee warreth against the Sara∣cens eadem The Pope practiseth with the Saracens eadem A quarrell to the Emp. ead. The Emperour returneth & winneth townes from the Pope in Italy 223 The Emperour offereth to geue account to the Pope. eadem Peace betwixt the Emperor and the pope eadem 120000. ounces of gold to the P. for the Emperours absolution eadem The Pope moueth the Em∣perours sonne to rebell a∣gainst his father ead. The Emperor preuaileth, for all the popes curse 224 The pope pronounceth sen∣tence of proscription a∣gainst the Emperour. ead. Reuolt from the Emperour to the pope ead. The church spoiled to main∣teine the popes warres. ead. The Emperour preuaileth. 225 Euerlasting life promised to suche as woulde fight a∣gainst the Emperor. ead. The pope hindereth the de∣fence of christendome. ead. The Emperour wasteth a∣bout Rome 226 The pope dieth with anger. eadem Salue Regina, brought into the church ead. The Decretals ead. Pope Celestine ead. Pope dieth eadem An army against the Tartari∣ans ead. Innocentius 4. eadem The Emperor seeketh peace, the Pope wil none eadem Pope, Iudge & accuser ead. A voice heard, thou wretch, come & receiue thy iudge∣ment eadem The Emperor dieth eadem Preachers bolde against the Pope 298 Arnoldus de noua villa con∣demned eadem Iohannes Seneca appealeth from the Pope to a Coun∣cell eadem G. de Sanstoamre, against the Pope 229 De periculis ecclesiae eadem Thirty nine arguments that friers be false Apostles, e∣adem Euangelium aeternum Spiri∣tus
Sancti eadem The shell to the kernell. ead. A blasphemous Gospell of the friers eadem Laurence 230 Petrus Iohannes ead. Pope Antichrist ead. Rome Babylon ead. Dead bones burned ead. R. Gallus eadem Visiōs against the pope. ead. R. Gallus B. of Lincoln. ead. Inuectiues against the P. 231 K. of Englād the popes mā∣ciple, vassall, page. eadem Manifest and knowne that once should come a defe∣ction from Rome ead. The Pope an heretike ead. Romane vertues ead. R. Grosted prophesieth a∣gainst Rome eadem The vertues of R. Grosted. 232 A maule of the Romās. ead. P. Innocent 4. a great impo∣uerisher of christēdom. ea. 70000. markes reuenews of forreners placed in the land by the pope ead. Grosted appeereth in a visiō to the pope eadem Grosted striketh the P. 233 Innocent dieth eadem Alexander 3. eadem Wholesome lawes ead. The pope dispenseth with othes eadem Pope dieth eadem Pope Vrbane 4. eadem Warre betwixt the king and the Barons eadem Vrbane dieth eadem Clement 4. eadem Thomas Aquine, Bonauen∣ture 234 Tenths to the King ead. Peace betwixt the king, and the Barons eadem Cathedrall Churches popes pensions eadem Clement 4. dieth ead. Gregory 10. eadem Against the Saracens ead. Great concordances 235 A generall councell ead. Abbey of Hales ead. King dieth eadem Westminster church ead. Blackfriers by Ludgate ead. Iewes banished the realme vtterly eadem The Scots pertaine to the popes chappell eadem Scots conuerted by the reli∣ques of S. Peter 236 Celestine beginneth to re∣forme the Churche of Rome eadem Boniface a crafty knaue. ead.
Peter thrust into prison. ead. Boniface P. of Rome ead. The Pope curseth the Frēch king to the fourth genera∣tion eadem The pope scoffeth, &c. ead. The first Iubilie eadem Power of both swords. ead. Extrauagant 238 Constitutions eadem Sextus Nicholaus eadem Pardons & indulgēces. ead. The quarrell betwixt the P. & the French king ead. The king of France forbid∣deth to carrie treasure to Rome eadem The popes proud stile to the French king eadem Magareta against the Pope. 239 Foure articles against the Pope eadem Magareta against the Pope. 239 Foure articles against the Pope eadem 28. articles against the pope eadem The pope hideth himself. ea. Adulphus eadem Reginaldus de supina. ead. Cardinals goods rifled. ead. Pope craueth truce eadem The pope reiected eadem The pope glad to make a∣mends 241 Conditions offered to the pope eadem The gates of the popes pa∣lace fired eadem The P. rather would die thē renoūce his popedom. ea. The pope spoiled of infinite treasure eadem The pope homely vsed. ead. The P. almost starued ead. The pope deliuered, almost famished 242 Pope dieth eadem Benedict eadem Decretals eadem Clergy exempt from subsi∣die eadem The clergy out of the kings protection eadem The king of England trou∣bled with the sea of Can∣terbury 243 No benefice but one ead. Cussanus king of the Tarta∣rians eadem The Tartariās christened. ea. Mertō college in Oxford. ea. Henr. de Gandauo eadem De villa Noua eadem Scotus, Duns eadem Clement 5. eadem The court of Rome to Aui∣nion eadem The pope reigned as Empe∣rour sede vacante ead. Templars put downe ead. Corpus Christi day 244
The Clemētine decretals. ea. The Emperor poisoned by a monk in the chalice. ead. The Emperor of Constanti∣nople excōmunicated. ea Pope Iohn eadē Pope Benedict eadem This world made for the car∣dinals ead. Complaint against the pope for oppressing Englād. 245 An Epistle of Casse to the church of England. eadem The pope still reigneth his exactions 246 Pope Eugenius eadem Articles against the spiritual∣tie eadem Knowledge of ciuil causes be¦lōgeth not to the clergy. 247 Reformatiō to be done. ead. The king dieth 248 Crouched Friers ead. Knights of the Rhodes. ead. Templars burnt at Paris. ead. The Templars put down v∣niuersally eadem The pope selleth the Tēplars lands eadem Cistercian monks exempt. ea. The pope couseneth the Frā∣ciscane Friers 249 The Venetians cursed of the pope eadem A monstrous tyranny. ead. Walter Reinald 250 Clement 5. dieth ead. Papacy voyd 2. yeeres ead. Pope maketh profite of the variance of princes ead. 8. pence in euery marke. ead. Michael house founded in Cambridge. eadē Nicholaus de lyra ead. Guilielmus 251 Occham ead. Adam eadem Simon M. eadem Clement 252 A great heresie ead. Ludouicus ead. Bauarus Emperor eadem Contentiō betwixt the pope & Emp. 24. yeeres. eadem pope hath ful power to creat and depose Emperors at his pleasure ead. Marsilius Patauinus ead. Defensor pacis eadē Pope Nicholas 253 Benedict. 12 eadem Emperor depriued ead. Variance betwixt the pope & French king ead. The Emp. must resigne all to the pope eadem The feends hant the pope. ea. Black curses against the Em∣peror ead. Archb. of Mētz depriued. ea.
Warre with the king of Eng∣land eadem The Emperour giueth ouer to the pope eadem The Emp. poisoned. eadem Gunterus de monte nigro, chosen Emperour eadem Charles chosen Emp. 255 The Iubile euery 50. yeere. From Auinion to Rome. ea. 50000. pilgrims eadem The forme of the bull of Iu∣bile eadem The pope commandeth the Angels eadem Against prouisions from Rome 256 Tenths to the king ead. Orial colledge and S. Marie hall eadem The abbey of Bury spoyled by the townes men. eadem The towne of Bury fyned at 120000. pound. eadem The abbot of Cheuingtō ea. King Edward the 3. 257 Charter from the king to the cleargy eadem Gregorius Ariminensis. ead. Taulerus eadem Franciscus Petrarcha ead. Iohan. de rupe Scisca. eadem Rome ye whore of Babylō. ea. Vade mecum in tribulatio∣ne. ead. Conradus Hayer 258 Gerardus Rydder ead. Lachrimae Ecclesiae ead. Michael Cesenas ead. Petrus de Carbona ead. Iohannes de Poliaco ead. Rome drunk with the blood of saints ead. Iohannes de Castilion ead. Francisc. de Alcatara ead. Simon Islip ead. Cāterb. college in Oxford. 259 New colledge in Oxford. ead Pope Innocent the 6. ead. Rome ye whore of Babylō. ea. Strife betweene French pre∣lats and Friers eadem Towns-mē of Oxford spoile the scholers 260 Idle holy dayes 262 A priests wages 263 S. Bridgets Nunnes 261 Q. colledge in Oxford. ead. Holy speare, holy nayles. ead. The order of the bishops of Canterbury eadem A prophecy eadem Haynchardus eadem A prophecy of antichrist. 264 Complaint of the plowmen against the cleargy. eadem Church of Rome a byrde, decked with other byrdes feathers, ead. Armanach. archb. of Irelād. ea
Richard Fitzrafe eadem Iohn Badenthorp ead. 9 cōclusiōs against friers, ea. A long controuersie among the friers 265 Fauourers of friers ead. Defensorium curatotiū ead. Armanachus a mighty piller of Gods church ead, How Rome came by her pa∣trimonie eadem Nicholaus Orem 266 Iesuits begin eadem Offices remoued frō the cler¦gie to the laitie eadem The P. remoueth frō France to Rome eadem Melitzing, a Bohemian ead. Reseruations of benefices in England, no more for the Popes vse 267 Premunire to make appeal to Rome for any cause 268 Holy Briget a great rebuker of the popish clergie ead The x. commandemēts tur∣ned into two wordes, Da¦pecuniam eadem M. Paris. of Antichrist ead. Ioh. Montziger ead. Nilus archb. of Thessal. ead. Henricus de Iota 269 Henricus de Hassia ead. The deuils belly ful of the P. voluptuousnes eadem 36. burned for the truth ead. 140. suffered for refusing the Decretals eadem 24. suffer at Paris ead The act of prouision 270 An acte to continue for euer ead. Decrees against oppressiō of the pope ea. In Wickliffs time the worlde in worst case 271 Wickliffe against Images ea. Iohn of Gaunt, & L. Percy fa∣uorers of Wickliffe ead. The opinions of Wic, ead. Wic. brought before the bi∣shops 272 Wic. bid sit down 273 Frō brauling to threats ead. A proud B. wounded ea. K. Edw. the greatest brideler of the P. dieth ead. Wickl. goeth barefoot, prea∣ching ea. Articles out of Wick. prea∣ching ead. Wic. articles cōdemned for heretical 274 Popes bul against Wic. ead. P. diligence against W. ea. 18. heretical opiniōs against Wick. 275 W. escapeth the 2. time 276 W. greatly supported by Lō∣doners ead. pope Gregorie dieth ead.
A schisme betwixt 2. Popes, 39. yeres ea. Popes and antipopes ead Clement ead Benedictus 3 ead Boniface 9 ead Innocentius 8 ead Gregorie 12 ead Crueltie among the clergie, during the schisme 277 S. Sudburie beheaded of the rude people ead Vicechancellor of Oxford e∣nemie to Wickliffe ead Wic. mitigateth his enemies 278 Wickliffes articles condem∣ned ead Tenths are pure almes 279 A terrible earthquake ead Fauourers of Wick. appoin∣ted to preach 280 Stokes an enemie to Wick. 281 D. of Lancastar forsooke the schollers of Wick. ead Repington & Ashton recon∣ciled ead Repington abiureth ead Lōdiners fauor ye truth, 282 VVick. banished ead Schisme cause of W. quiet, ea A cruel bishop 283 Wic. parson at Lutterworth ead Wickliffs constancie ead Wick. bookes burned ead VVic. fauorers 284 Londoners take on them the bishops office ead Bones of wick. burned after his death ead I. Husse, W. Swinderby 285 Articles against Swinderbie 286 Henry 4. first persecuting K. in England 287 Articles against Brute ead Temporalties takē from the Clergie 288 A turncote persecutor 289 Lucifer to the clergie ead Feendes glad at the want of preaching ead Deuil teacheth what should be preached ead Abiurers 290 VVel affected about Leicest. ead R. Dexter, N. Tayler ead Leicester interdicted ead Matild an anchores, of Wic. doctrine 291 Margaret Cailie, a Nun, for∣saketh her order ead Penance ead Peter Pateshul ead Londoners zealous 292 The kings wife hath the gos∣pel in English ead Thomas Arundel ead
Articles in behalfe of the gospell eadem Multitude of artes not ne∣cessary 293 Rithme agaynst the popish priests eadem Fauourers of the gospel. ea. Pope Boniface the 9. ead. The king writeth a christian admonition to the P. 294 Parlements holden against the pope eadem Thomas Arundell proued a traytor 295 The king deposed 296 William Sawtree eadem Obiections against William Sawtree eadem Relapse 297 The māner of disgrading. ea. The surples of a sexten 298 The time of Henry 4. ead. Thomas Badby martir. 299 Crocodiles teares ead. The statute ex officio 300 Many shrinke from the truth eadem Articles eadem William Thorpe ead. Transubstantiatiō inuented by Thomas Aquinas 301 Against swearing on a boke eadem A constant confessor of the truth eadem Iohn Puruey, the library of Lollards 302 Articles recanted ead. The popes curse, the blast of Lucifer eadem How the temporalties of the clergy should bee be∣stowed eadem Boniface impudēt in selling of pardons 404 Order against the Schisme, eadem P. Gregorie the 12. 305 P. Gregory periured. ead. 200000. Christians slaine in a popish quarrell ead. The K. writeth to the P. ead. Pope Alexander 5. 306 Three popes together ead. Pope Iohn 23. eadem Iohn Husse eadem Appeale better aduised. ead. Pope Iohn bendeth all his power against the Bohe∣mians eadem The tolling of Auies 307 40. daies pardon for saying of Auies eadem Steeple, belles, and organes, suspended eadem Contention for litter ead. Penance for bringing litter in sackes, and not in cartes eadem A bill put into the Parle∣ment
to take temporalties from the clergie 308 The kinds of popish feastes. 310 Notes of principall soules feasts eadem Lord Cobham 311 Inquisitors for heresie. ead. Processe to L. Cobham. ead. Lord Cobhams answere to the king 312 Pope knowne by the scrip∣tures to be Antichrist. ead. The king forsaketh L. Cob∣ham eadem Confession of L. Cobhams faith 313 L. Cobham arrested by the kings cōmandement. 314 L. Cobhams answere ead. L. Cobham mocked 315 L. Cobham condemned. ead. A worthy martyr eadem Lord Cobham escapeth. 316 36. martyrs eadem Thomas Arūdell dieth. ead. Henry Chichesley eadem Eate not, tast not, touch not. 317 Craft of the clergy eadem Husse accused eadem Husse excommunicated for an heretike eadem Persecution in Boheme. 318 Prage deuided 319 The people against the Pre∣lates eadem None to control Husse. ead. A Councell at Constance to pacifie the schisme of three popes 320 A councell lasted 4. yeares, & had 45. sessions eadem Coūcell ought to iudge the pope eadem The pope repenteth wel do∣ing eadem 40. articles against P. Iohn. 321 Pope Martin eadem The Emperour leadeth the popes horse eadem The popes Indulgence. ead. 3940. Prelates at the Coun∣cell 322 450. cōmon womē belong∣ing to the Councell ead. Good testimony of Iohn Husse eadem Wenecelate de Duba 323 Iohn de Clum eadem I. Husse commeth to Con∣stance eadem I. Husse kept in prison 324 I. Husse falleth sicke ead. Articles against Husse. ead. An aduocat denied to Husse 325 Husse cruelly hādled in pri∣son eadem
The Emperor breaketh pro∣mise with Husse 326 Husse aunswereth for him∣selfe 327 Husse appeareth again. ead. Husse not suffered to pro∣ceed in his answere. 382 39. articles against Husse. eadem Articles auowed of Husse 329 Iohn Husse will not recant. eadem The Emp. against Husse. ead. Husse disgraded, condēned, and deliuered to the secu∣lars 331 Husse appealeth to christ. ead Husse derided for praying for his enimies 332 The courage of Husse. eadē The Bishops cruelty against Husse eadem The behauiour of Husse at his death. 333 The ashes of Husse cast into the Rhine 334 Treatises of Husse in prison. eadem Hierome of Prage commeth to Constance eadem Treason against Hierome of Prage 335 Ierom carried to prison, ead. Peter the notary & Vitus. ea. Ierome falleth sicke 336 Ierome abiureth eadem New accusations against Ie∣rome eadem D. Naso a great enimy to Ie∣rome eadem New articles against Ierom. 337 Ierome constant eadem Ierō grieuously fettered. ead. Ierome prophecieth eadem Ierome condemned 338 Ierome singeth after his cō∣demnation eadem Ierome singeth at the stake. eadem Letters of the nobles of Bo∣heme to the counsel, sea∣led with 54. seales. 339 Iohn Claidon. eadem Richard Turming eadem The lantern of light. 340 The causes of persecutiō. ead Sharp constitutions 341 Iohn Barton, Robert Chap∣pel eadem Chappel submitteth. eadem Articles inioined Chap. ead. Diuers caused to abiure. 342 Collection to mainteine the popes warre, against the Bohemians. eadem William Clerke eadem William Russell eadem Radulph Mungin eadem Kent wel affected 343
The L. Powes taketh the L. Oldcastle in Wales. 364 L. Cobham condēned. ead. All mischiefe imputed to the Lollards ead. Bohemians cited to the coū∣cell at Constance. eadem Lawes to bridle the Bohemi∣ans ead. 75000. li. the P. goods. 345 The Iewes offer their cere∣monies to the pope. ead Pope threateneth the Bohe∣mians eadem Yeerely memoriall for the death of Iohn Husse, and Ierome of prage ead. Monasteries suppressed. ead. Captaine Nicholas ead. The king threatneth Nicho∣las eadem The kings cruel determinati∣on disappoynted by his owne death 346 Zisca eadem Tabor builded by Zisca. ead. Zisca putteth the Emperor to flight. 337 Zisca loseth his eye eadem Iohan. Premōstratensis, & his cōpanions put to death. ea. Dissention betwixt prage & Zisca 348 Reconciliation ead. Zisca dieth ead. The epitaph of zisca. eadem Zisca buried in a hallowed place in despite of the P. 349 The popes bull, against the partakers of Wickliffe, Husse, or Hierome. eadem Procopius eadem Conradus ead. Orphans ead. 3. armies flie before they see their enimies 350 40000. horse against the protestants 351 The popish army flee before they see their enimies. ead. 50. towns destroyed ead. Councel at Basill ead. Ambassage of the Bohemiās to Basill 352 Peter an English man ead. Foure poyntes wherein the Bohemians dissent frō the church of Rome ead. A disputation continued fif∣ty dayes eadem Henry the 5. prince of priests 353 The names of Archb. of Cā∣terbury ead. William Taylor 354 William Taylor recāted. ead. Foure heretical points of W. Taylor 355 William Taylor condemned and burned ead.
Iohn Florence eadem I. Florence his articles ead. Submission 356 Penance eadem Richard Belward eadem His articles eadem Iohn god de Cell eadem Sir Hen. Pie eadem William White priest 357 Great vexatiō for the truth of Christ eadem Father Abraham 358 William White priest ead. Iohn Weddon priest ead. Many abiure eadem William White, Wickliffes scholler 359 White burnt in Norwich. ea. Crueltie eadem Richard Houedon 360 Th. Baghley, & Paul Craw. ea. Thomas Rhedon burned at Rome eadem Pope Eugenius ead. Persecution about germany. 361 Eugenius began the coūcell at Basil ead. Order for the times of gene∣ral councels ead. The troublesō councel at Ba∣sil, continued 17. yeres. ead. Contention between the P. & the fathers of the coūcel. 362 Nicholaus Casnanus 363 Eugenius pronoūced an he∣retike & relapse. ead. 8. verities ead. Disputation of sixe daies a∣gainst Eugenius 364 Panormitan defender of Eu∣genius ead. Iohn Segonius ead. Panormitane wil haue the P. Lord of the church. 365 Seruant of seruants the most honourable title of the pope ead. The councel aboue the P. ea. Card. Arelatensis 366 Great discord in the Coun∣cel 367 Nicholas Amici ead Panormitan obstinate ead Policie of Arelatensis 368 Arelatensis concludeth ead Bishop of Lubeck 369 B. of Lubeck fauoureth the trueth 370 Promoter of the faith 371 Prayers with teares 372 The princes ambassadoures yelded ead Eugenius deposed 373 Death of pestilence at the Councel ead Oath of the Electors to the pope ead The manner of choosing the pope 374
Amideus Duke of Sauoy. eadem Sigismund dieth 375 Rochezanus dieth eadem Disputations vpon the Bo∣hemians articles eadem Vincelaus eadem Vldericus eadem Peter Paine eadem Rhagusius eadem The Bohemiās offēded. ead. Popish disputers against the Bohemians eadem Ambassadors from the coū∣cell to Prage 376 The Bohemians haue licēce to cōmunicate vnder both kindes 377 Concord betwixt the coun∣cell and Bohemians. ead. The vniuersity to be increa∣sed with prebends. ead. The feast of the conception of the virgin 378 The feast of the visitation. eadem Good lawes ordeined in the councel at Basill. eadem 24. Cardinals ead. Iewes to be conuerted. eadē Stipend for the tongues. ead. 18. new Cardinals ead. The Doulphin of Fraunce vanquished 369 Pope Nicholas 5 eadem The Greeks abhorre the Ro∣manes eadem 11. battels wonn by the pro∣testants against the pa∣pists 380 The papists ranne away fiue times before any stroke was giuen eadem Cruelty and treason against the Bohemians eadem Richard Wich 381 Duchesse of Glocester con∣demned to perpetual pri∣son eadem Roger Only burned eadem Duke Humfreys articles a∣gainst the Cardinal. ead Destruction of Duke Hum∣frey 382 Alsolne & Bernard colledge in Oxford eadem Duke Humfrey imprisoned, ead. Duke Humfrey found dead in prison eadem The desperate cardinall 383 Mary Magdalen Colledge in Oxford ead. Printing inuented eadem Printing later then Gunnes ead. Constantinople taken by the turkes ead. One neighbor destroyeth a∣nother for gaine 384
Crueltie of the turkes ead. No Emperor, but king of the Romans, til the pope cō∣firme him 385 A Iubile eadem pope Calixtus eadem Auies to help thē that fight against the turkes eadem The feast of Transfiguration ead. Edmunde of made a saint ead. P. pius Secundus ea. pope altereth his former iudgement 386 Mentz loseth his freedome ea. Discord betweene pius and Dorotheus ea. p. paulus secundus ea. The pope for priests mariage ea. pope Sixtus 4. ea. Stewes at Rome ea. Iubile altered ea. Beades, and Ladies psalter 387 A prodigal Cardinal ea. Liberty for sodomitry ea. Innocentius 8. ea. K. of Boheme condemned of the pope ea. Colledge of Eaton ea. Henrie 6. canonized for a Saint 388 An heresie to hold that christ was a begger ea. Iohn Goose Martir ea. Iohn a Neat-heard 389 Iohn de Wesalia recanteth ea. Nominals, Reals ea. Reuenues of the pope from the stewes of Rome 390 Begging friers ea. Alanus de Rupe ea. Rosarie of our Ladies psalter Fraternitas coronariorū ea. Institution of the Rosarie ea. Sixtus dieth for anger 391 Platina a shamefull flatterer of the pope ea. Richard 3. vsurper ea. K. Henrie 7 ea. Maxim. foūder of the vniuer∣sitie of Wittemberg ea. Learned men flourish in the time of Maximilian ea. Veselus, a learned man, called Lux mundi 392 Ione Boughton martir ea. Fagots borne ea. A priest burnt 393 Babram, martir ea. An old man burnt ea. Sauanarola burnt ea. The pope Antichrist ea. Spirit of prophecy in Sauana¦rola
394 Philip Norrice ead Germans sue to the Emp. a∣gainst ye romish church ead 10. greeuances ead Emperors edicts against the clergie 395 Iacobus Celestadiensis ead Alexander 6 ead Turkes hire the P. to poyson his brother ead P. procureth the Turk to war against the French King ead P. and his Cardinals poyso∣ned ead Pope Pius 3 ead Pope casteth away the keyes of peter ead 200000. Christians slaine by the popes meanes 396 Councel at Pyse ead Questions against the P. ead Pragmatical function ead Pope curseth the French K. ead Persecution vnder the Turke 397 Saris 399 Ianizaries ead How Christian Captiues flie from their masters 401 Howe the Turke vseth the Churches of Christians, that be vnder his subiec∣on 402 Christians pay tribute to the Turke ead Fagots borne 403 William Tilsley Martir, ea∣dem Crueltie against Nature ea∣dem Penance ead William Page burned in the cheeke ead Father Roberts burnt 404 Thomas Bernard ead Iames Morden ead Father Riuer martir ead Thomas Chast ead Tho. Norrice martir ead Laurence Glest martir 405 A woman burnt ead Gods iudgement ead Iohannes Picus Mirandula 406 Pic{us} set vp 90. conclusiōs to be disputed vpon ead Furniture of Mirandulas stu∣die ead Ecclesiasticall Lawes before the Conquest 407 Death of king Henrie the 7. 409 Henrie 8. ead Strife between the Domi∣nikes & Franciscans ead The feast of the virgine Ma∣ries conception ead
Addition to the Aue Maria. eadem The virgin Mary conceiued without sinne eadem Sleight of the friers ead. Pope Leo 410 Abiuration eadem William Sweeting, Iohn Ba∣nister martyrs eadem Iohn Browne martyr ead. Richard Hunne ead. Doctor Horsey the Chancel∣lour eadem Iohn Stilman burned 411 Thomas Man martyr ead. Pilate washeth his handes. eadem Great abiuration at Amers∣ham eadem 200. conuerted by Thomas Man eadem Knowen men, iustfast men. eadem William Sweeting eadem Iames Brewster 412 Christopher, a Shoomaker. ead. Colledge of brasen-nose in Oxford ead. Brother detecteth brother, & husband the wife. ead. Many abiure ead. Thomas Barnard burned ea∣dem Vnnaturall cruelty 413 Doctor Collet. ead. Paules schoole builded ead. Pardons sold eadem Tecellius a Frier. ead. Luther an Augustine Frier. ead. Luther accused to the bishop of Rome eadem Luther writeth to the pope. eadem Dialogues against Luther. 414 Eckius against Luther. ead. P. complaineth against Luth. ead. Lu. submitteth himself 415 New pardons 416 Maximilian ead. Disputation at Lipsia 417 Zuinglius ead. Yerely mony from Germa∣ny to Rome ead. Luther burneth the popes decrees ead. Pope curseth Luther ead. Luth. appeareth at Wormes ead. Courage of Luther 418 Questions of Eckius to Lut. ead. Luthers bookes of 3. sortes ead Lu. answere to Eckius ead The Emperor purposeth to
roote out the gospel. 419 Luther returneth home. 420 The Emperour outlaweth Luther ead. The booke De Abroganda missa eadem Wittemberg fauoureth Lu∣ther eadem A booke against Luther. 421 Defender of the Christian faith eadem Pope Leo dieth eadem Pope Hadrian 6. ead. A meeting at Noremberge. eadem 100. greeuances of Germa∣ny against the pope. ead. pope Hadrian dieth 422 Pope Clement 7. ead. Carolostadius eadem Luther dieth eadem Lu. prayer at his death. ead. Luther fulfilled Ierome of Prages prophecie eadem A councel at Ratisbone. 423 Acts against Luther. eadem Zuinglius eadem Dominicks against Zuingli∣us 424 Io. Faber against Zuingl. ead Traditions of men abando∣ned in zurike eadem Decree at Lucerna ead. Cantons deuided eadem Images pulled downe. 425 The Cantons that misliked Zuinglius eadem The masse banished eadem A disputation at Berne. 426 Scriptures onely to decide controuersies eadem Ten conclusions eadem The Bishops refuse disputa∣tion eadem The disputation lasted 19. dayes 427 Berne reformed ead. Geneua reformed ead. The Bernats refuse the frēch kings league ea. A monument of reformatiō ea. Masse put downe in Straus∣borough 428 Basil reformed ea. A memoriall of their refor∣mation ea. The name of protestāts 429 Diuision of the pages for re∣ligion ea. Zuinglius slaine ea. Minister goeth with the ar∣mie ea. League betwixt the Cātons 430 Duke of Saxon dieth ea. Henrie Voes ea. Iohn Ech ea. Courage of the Martir ea. Crueltie 432
Iohn M. eadem Maister George eadem Great cruelty, and great pa∣tience 433 Iohn Castellane ead. Constancie eadem Crueltie eadem Courage & constancie 434 Gods vengeance 435 Iohn Huglein ead. No promise to be kept with heretikes eadem George Carpenter eadem Leonard Keysar eadem The mother & brethren, one against another ead. Wendelimata 436 Peter Filsteden eadem Adolph Clarebacke ead. Nicholas of Antwerpe ead. Iohannes Pictor ead. A couragious martyr ead. Mathias Werbell 437 A priest martyred ead. G. Sherrer eadem A signe eadem Henry Flemming eadem Maister Perceuall 438 Antonia eadem Iustice Imsberge eadem Giles eadem Franciscus Encenas eadem Sharpe persecution 439 200. martyrs eadem Martin Heurblot eadem Nicholas van Pole eadem Iohn de Brucke eadem Vrsula and Mary ead. Two brethren & their mo∣ther 440 Peter Bruly eadem Peter Miocaus eadem A round answere eadem Bergeban eadem Iohn Diazius killed by his brother 442 An armed councell at An∣gusta eadem The Interim eadem A priest in Hungary 443 A strange cruelty eadem The duke of Saxonie ead. Lantgraue of Hesse ead. Hermannus archbishop of Colen eadem Martirdom for the truth. ea. Nicholas Marion ead. A worthy martyr 444 Augustine eadem Two virgins eadem Magdeburge eadem Hostius eadem Iohannes Frisius eadem Bertrand le Blos eadem A wonderfull cōstancie. 445 The crustie God ead. 200. preachers banished Bo∣heme eadem. Ministers of Lorraine ba∣nished eadem
Francis Warbut eadem Alexander Dayken ead. Gillotus Viuer 446 Michella eadem Godfrey Hamell eadem Iohn Malo eadem Parents & children marty∣red together ead. Iames Pauan eadem Dionisius Rieux eadem Iohannes Caduceo ead. Fiue burned at Paris ead. Alexander Caius eadem Iohn Pointer eadem Peter Gandet eadem Quoquillard 448 Iohn Coruon eadem Martin Gouin eadem Claudius Painter eadem Steuen Brune eadem Constantinus 449 Iohn du Becke eadem Aymond de la Voy ead. A notable saying eadem Frauncis Bribard ead. William Russen ead. De Landa 450 Iames Cobard ead. Peter Clarke eadem William Briconetus ead. 14, Christian martyrs ead. The priests sing at the death of martyrs 451 Peter Chapet eadem The tongues of martyrs cut out eadem Samnitius eadem Steuen Polliot eadem Iohn English 452 Michaell Michelot ead. Leonardus de Prato ead. Iohn Taffingnot ead. Michaell Mareschall ead. Octauian Blondes eadem Hubert Cherrer 453 Florence Venot eadem Anne Andebert eadem Notable constancie & cou∣rage in a woman ead. A poore tayler ead. Claudius 454 Leonard Galimard ead. Maceus Marreon eadem Thomas Sanpalinus, a nota∣ble martyr eadem Marueylous constancie. ead. Iohannes Put 455 Claudius Mouerius ead. Renat Poyet eadem Iohn Loyer eadem Christian charitie ead. Hugonius Grauier ead. Fiue students burned ead. Christian charitie 456 Petrus Bergerius ead. Iohn Chanbone ead. Dionysius Pelloquine ead. A worthy chāpion of Christ. 457 Mattheus Dimotheus. ead.
William Neele ead. Simon Laloe ead. Iames Siluester ead. Nicholas Nayle ead. Peter Serre ead. The name of a priest, shame∣ful to a christian 458 Stephen King ead. Anthonius Magneus ead. William Alencon ead. Repentance 459 Paris Pamer eadem Peter du Val. eadem Iohn Filiolus eadem Notable constancy ead. Dionysius Vair ead. Cruelty of the fryers 460 Thomas Galbaragne ead. Nicholas Poul ead. Richard Feutus ead. Iohn Bertrand 461 Peter Rouseau ead. Arnold Myner eadem Bartholomew Hector 462 Philip Ceur eadem Archambant eadem Gods vengeance 463 Nicholas Startorius eadem George Tardife ead. The father against the sonne. eadem An assembly of 3. or 4. hun∣dred of the faithful at Pa∣ris 464 A maruellous deliuerance. eadem The cardinall of Lorayne a slaunderer of the faithful. 465 An apology to the king. ea∣dem Nicholas Clinet, and other martyrs ead. A notable widow ead. Bibles & Testaments burnt. 466 Frederick Danuile, & Fran∣cis Rebizies eadem Worthy martyrs ead. Rene Seaw eadem Laurence Almerike ead. Villegaignon 467 Iohn Bordell eadem Gefferey Varagle ead. Benet Roman ead. Francis Viuax 468 Peter Arundeaw ead. Thomas Montard ead. An du Burg ead. The tumult of Amboise. ead. Marlerote ead. Francis Sauromanus 469 The Emperour three tymes admonished by Sauroma∣nus 470 Rochus ead. The execrable inquisition of Spayne 471 Tormentes whole dayes to∣gether ead.
Three sortes of men in dan∣ger of the inquisition. 472 28. martyrs in the towne of Validoly ead. Caracalla ead. A christian flocke ead. Sanbenita ead. Encenas 474 Franciscus Encenas 475 Fauinus eadem A constant martyr 476 The death of pope Paulus the 3. eadem Pope Iulius the 3 eadem Dominicus de Basuna. ead. Galeazius eadem Iohn Mollins 477 Laurentius Spatha ead. De crassis 478 The zeale of Molius eadem Franciscus Ganiba eadem Pompeius Algerius eadem Iohannes Aloisius ead. Iacobus Bonellus ead. Iulius 3 eadē Marcellus ead. Paulus 4 ead. Eighty eight martyrs toge∣ther. eadem The popes promise 480 Georgius Maurellus ead. Petrus Latomus ead. A cruell monke ead. Michellotus Serra 481 William Melius eadem Gods vengeance eadem Despaire eadem Cruell sentence against Me∣rindoll ead. The harlot of the bishop of Aix, laboureth agaynst Merindoll 482 Martir burned with bibles a∣bout his neck 483 The manner of Gods childrē in affliction ead. God heareth the Merindoli∣ans prayers ead. King Francis pardoneth the Merindolians 484 Confession of the Merindo∣lians faith ead. Cabriers ead. Sadolet helped Cabriers. e∣adem Examination of Merindoli∣ans 485 Cruelty of Antichrist. 487 Popish cruelty ead, Maurice Blanc ead. Merindol laid euen with the ground ead. Miniers breaketh his oath with Cabriers 488 Maruellous cruelty ead. 1000. slayne ead. Cossa destroyed 489 Aubrius eadem Gods iudgement vppon the
perse∣cutors ead. Switzers sue for the valley. eadem Gefferey Varicala ead. Persecution 492 Those that yelded, more cru∣elly handeled, than those that were constant. 493 Cruell Monkes 495 The minister rosted eadem The wicked flie, where none persecuteth 497 Odall Gemet 500 Rosa destroyed 501 God fighteth for his people. 502 Supplication to the Duches of Sauoy eadem Liberty granted to the Wal∣dois ead. The Table of the second part. BVrning at Couentry pag. 1 Mistresse Smith eadem Robert Sylkes pag. 2 Patricke Hamleton ead. Patricks articles eadem Patricks places eadem Henry Forrest 3 Iames Hamleton eadem Katherine Hamleton recant ead. Woman of Lieth recant ea∣dem Norman Gorley martyr. e∣adem Dauid Straton ead. Harding ead. Alice Doly 4 Robert West ead. Father, wife, and children, accusing a christian. ead. Thomas Lound ead. Certayne abiured 5 Rome spoyled & the pope taken prisoner. 6 Rymes of the pope ead. 220000. li. out of the kings treasure, for to fight a∣gaynst the Emperor. ead. Proud prelates 7 Compassing the kinges di∣uorce ead. Cardinal in a premunire. ea∣dem The K. gracious to the Car∣dinall eadem A parlement eadem Griefe of communalty a∣gaynst spiritualty ead. Articles against the Cardi∣nall
8 I and my king ead Card. had french pocks ead Cardinall confesseth the ar∣ticles ead Cardinal vngrate to the king 9 Cardinal arrested ead Cardinal dieth ead Body of the Cardi. stinketh aboue ground ead Master Humfrey troubled 10 Abiuring ead Tho. Hitten martir ead Tho. Bilney ead 34, articles against M. Bilney 12 Bilney condemned ead Bilney recanteth 13 Bil. his grieuous anguish af∣ter recantation ead Bilney repenteth ead Bil. smileth at the stake 14 Supplication of beggars 15 Fish hath the kings protecti∣on ead Poore seelie soules of purga∣torie 16 Commission against English bookes ead Testament of Tindals tran∣slation ead Richard Bayfield ead Bayfield condemned 17 Crueltie ead Booke of wicked Mammon 18 Iohn Tewksburie recanteth ead Iohn Tewksburie repenteth Iohn Tewksburie burned e∣adem Edward Freese 19 Bread of sawdust ead Crueltie ead Valentine Freese & his wife 20 Frier Royce burned ead Bishops commanded to trā∣slate the bible ead Iames Baynam ead Baynam submitteth 21 Baynam repenteth ead Baynam burned 22 Courage of a martir ead Iohn Benet ead Idol of Douercourt ead Images cast down ead Christes colledge in Oxford 23 Iohn Frith burned ead Sir Th. More pursueth Frith ead Friths treatise 24 Friths answere gotten ead Frith condemned ead Andrew Hewet ead Thomas Bennet Martir 26
William Tracy ead. During Qu. Anne no great persecution 27 Commons against Clergy. 28 Nothing from Rome ead. Supreme head eadem Popes vsurping put downe. eadem No conuocations without the kings writ eadem Oth of Cleargie to Pope a∣bolished 29 More resigneth chancellor∣ship ead. King renounceth the Pope. eadem Lady Elizabeth borne. ead. The Holy mayde of Kent. 30 Gods iudgement ead. Thomas Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury ead. Preaching against Popes su∣premacie 31 Popes pardōs abolished. ead. Gard. booke, De Obediētia with Boners notes ead. Ruine of religious houses. 32 Iewels & reliques from ab∣beys eadem W. Tindall burned eadem Tindall translated the Testa∣ment 33 Tindals protesting agaynst transubstantiation 35 Q. Anne put to death ead. The K. refuseth the generall councell at Mantua ead. Some religious houses giuē to the king ead. Articles of religion taught. 36 Rebellion suppressed ead. Prince Edward borne ead. Queene Iane dieth ead. Ruffelings against the king calmed eadem The kings articles ead. Many holidais abrogated 37 Scripture in English ead. Register Booke in euerie church eadem Religious houses rooted vp. eadem 45. articles against Lābert 38 A wicked perswasion 39 Lambert disputeth eadem The king condemneth Lam∣bert ead. Cromwell readeth sentence against Lambert ead. Cromwell craueth pardō of Lambert eadem Lābert a worthy martyr. 40 Lamberts treatise of the Sa∣crament eadem Robert Packingtō going to praier is slaine ead.
Collins & his dog burned. ea. Cowbridge eadem Putdew eadem William Lerton eadem Nicholas Peke 41 Notable courage of martyr. eadem The king refuseth the coun∣cell eadem The kings farewell ead. Search iniunctions 42 The king nusled by Winche∣ster eadem Six articles, a whippe of six strings eadem Treason & felonie ead. Cranmer against six articles. eadem Against adultery, &c. of priests 43 Death for adulterie repealed eadem Cromwel maule of the pope eadem Life of Cromwell 44 Cromwell learnd the text of the new testamēt by hart. 45 Cromwell serueth the Car∣dinall eadem English bible printed at Pa∣ris 47 Gardiner enemy to the Gos∣pell ead. Th. Mathewes bible ead. Bible in English presented to the king 48 Bible of large volume ead. Bishops promise to amend the bible, but performe not 49 Doctor Barnes ead. Duns & Darbell put out of Cambridge ead. Disputations of faith rare in Cambridge eadem Doctor Barnes cōuerted by Bilney 50 The white horse in Cam∣bridge called Germany. eadem D. Barnes arrested ead. D. Barnes submitteth ead. D. Barne escapeth out of prison 51 Acta Romanorum Pontifi∣cum eadem Doctor Barnes to the Tower 52 Barnes, Garret, & Hierome burned 53 Vniust proceeding ead. D. Barnes his foure requests to the king 54 Foure papistes executed a∣bout the supremacy. ead. Fauourers of truth ead. Patrons of Popery eadem All prisons in London too litle for the persecuted. ea.
Boner turneth and becom∣meth a persecutor 55 Six Bibles set vp in Paules. eadem The Diuell in the necke. ead. Iohn Porter killed in pryson. eadem Thomas Somers dieth in the Tower 56 Thomas Barnard, & Iames Morton martyrs ead. A popish feare. eadem Bartrams boy, the Diuell in the monks cowle 57 Lady Anne of Cleue diuor∣ced eadem Six put to death for supre∣macie 58 The K. misseth Crōwell. ead. White meates permitted in Lent eadem Marbeck pardoned 60 Filmer, Parson, & Testwood burned eadem Notable martyrs ead. The king pardoneth 61 Winchester out of fauour. eadem False iudges & accusers pu∣nished eadem Adam Damlip 62 Persecution in Calice. ead. Gods iudgement & deliue∣rance of his people 63 The Lord Lisle dieth in the Tower eadem Gods iudgement vppon a false accuser 64 Lord Awdley friend to the afflicted eadem Rockwood a persecutor dis∣paireth 65 Gods iudgement ead. Adam Damlip eadem Adam Damlip executed. ea. Gods iudgement 66 The rigour of six Articles. 67 Noblemen, and Gentlemen permitted to read the scri∣pture eadem Six articles qualified ead. Saxie hanged 68 Henry burned eadem Kerbie eadem Roper eadem A notable speach of the con∣stant seruaunt of Christ. eadem Doctor Crome recāteth. ea. Anne Askew 69 Anne Askew answereth pa∣rabolically & boldly. 70 Anne Askew condemned. eadem Anne Askew sore racked. 71 The King displeased with the racking of Anne As∣kew eadem Martyrs pardoned at the stake eadem
Winchesters practise against the Queene 72 The King much altered. 73 The Queene deliuered from danger ead. Kings of England & France agree for a perfect refor∣mation 74 Sir George Blage condem∣ned eadem The king dieth eadem Persecution in Scotland. 75 Tenne articles against Iohn Brothwicke ead. Thomas Ferrar ead. Saint Frauncis homely vsed. 76 Helene Stirke a notable mar∣tyr ead. George Wiseheart 77 The meeke death of George Wiseheart eadem Gods iudgement eadem Adam Wallace learned the psalter without book. ead. Controuersie in Scotland, whether the Lordes prayer should be sayd to sayntes, or no. 78 The Frier biddeth to say the pater noster to the diuel. eadem Walter Myll eadem A notable speech of the mar∣tyr 79 Style burned with the Apo∣calips about his neck. 81 K. Edward raigneth 83 The K. would not at the em∣perours suit, let the Lady Mary haue masse ead. Sixe articles abolished. ead. Religion restored ead. Peter Martyr at Oxford. e∣adem Bucer. and P. Phagius at Cā∣bridge ead. Thomas Dobbe 84 Commissioners ead. A parlement eadem Rebellion 85 Muskleborow field 86 Boner shifteth and cauilleth. 87 Boner exhibiteth against La∣timer 89 Boner pronounced contu∣max 90 Boner depryued eadem L. protector eadem Altars taken downe 91 Ladie Maries popish practi∣ses restrained eadem Gardiners seditious behaui∣our 92 Gardiner sent to the tower. ead. Winchester depriued. pag. 93
Doctor Redman a fauourer of the gospell ead. W. Gardiner eadem Pendegrace 94 W. Gardiners cruell execu∣tion eadem Maruellous constancy of W. Gardiner 95 Protector put to death for fellony ead. Lord Gilford & Lady Iane, maried 96 Iustice Hales eadem Queene Mary to the Coun∣cell eadem Q. Maries promise to main∣teine religion 97 Ridley sent to the Tower. ead. Q. Mary breaketh promise. eadem Popish bishops restored, and other put downe ead. Hooper committed to the Fleete ead. Proclamation agaynst the word of God ead. A dagger hurled at the prea∣cher ead. Bradford to the tower. 98 M. Iohn Rogers eadem Hooper appeareth 99 Couerdale appeareth ead. Hooper to the Fleete ead. Pet. Martyr returneth home. eadem Latimer appeareth 100 Cranmer to the Tower. ead. French protestāts suffered to passe hence eadem Mary crowned eadem A parlement eadem Statutes repealed 101 Sir Iames Hales apprehen∣ded ead. Sir Iohn Hales lamentable end eadem Disputation of sixe dayes. eadem Disputation confuted 103 The Prolocutor interrupteth Philpot ead. M. Elmer 104 Romish Church against rea∣son ead. Maister Philpot a harty man eadem Maister Philpots argument. 105 Conuocation breaketh vp. eadem Communicatiō of mariage betwixt Q. Mary, and K. Philip 106 Doctor Crome to the fleete. eadem Wiat beheaded ead. Lady Iane, and Lord Gilford
beheaded eadem Gods iudgement vpō Mor∣gan eadem Articles 107 About 800. flie beyond the seas eadem Lady Elizabeth, and Lord Courtney sēt to the Tower ead. Popes supremacie not ob∣teined 108 Boners commendation of priesthood eadem Doctor Cranmer, Doctor Ridley, and M. Latimer sent to prison vnto Ox∣ford 109 Disputers at Oxford ead. Questions to be disputed of eadem Thirtie and three Commis∣sioners ead. Cranmer before the Com∣missioners eadem Vnitie with veritie ead. Ridley appeereth ead. Maister Latimer appeereth. 110 Neither Masse, nor the ma∣rybones, nor the sinewes founde in the Scripture. eadem A disorderly disputation. 111 D. Ridley disputeth eadem D. Smith a turner and retur∣ner eadem Weston triumpheth before the victory ead. Mayster Latimer disputeth. eadem Weston crieth, Vrge hoc. 112 The martirs bid, read on the sentence 113 Latimer would not beholde the procession ead. The Prolocutor breaketh promise with M. Philpot. eadem The Prolocutor openeth Crāmer his letters to the Councell eadem Maister Bradford, Thomas Beacon, & Neron to the to the Tower 114 A false rumor of the archbi∣shop 115 In Kings Colledge Papistes very forward ead. Lady Ellzabeth to the tower 116 Lady Elizabeth to Wood∣stocke 117 Barlow, and Cardmaker to the fleete eadem Against writing Scriptures on Churchwalles ead.
Twenty & foure places voyd together in S. Iohns col∣ledge in Cambridge. ead. Cardinall Poole lādeth. ead. Absolutiō giuē to the Lords and commons 118 Purchases of abbey lands to be cōfirmed by the pope. eadem M. Rose sent to the Tower, eadem The act of popes supremacy eadem Qu. Mary with child ead. Certaine euill praiers to bee treason 119 Iames George ead. Cardmaker submitteth. ead. Sentēce against Tayler, Saun∣ders, & Bradford 120 M. Iohn Rogers martyr. 121 M. Rogers, diuinitie reader in Paules eadem Rogers condemned 122 Cruel Gardiner eadem Boner would not suffer mai∣ster Rogers to talke with his wife before his death. eadem Maister Rogers first martyr of Queene Maries dayes ea∣dem A prophecy of the ruine of the pope in England. 123 Laurence Saunders ead. Laurence Saunders constan∣cy, and his letters 124 Sweete saying of Laurence Saunders eadem Hooper burned at Glocester 125 Hooper preached once or twise a day eadem Hooper depriued 126 Hooper hardly vsed in pry∣son 127 Hooper and Rogers to the Counter eadem False rumors of Hoopers re∣canting 128 Hooper goeth cherefullie to death 129 Hooper refuseth his pardon ead. Hooper a woorthie Martir, ead. D. Taylor martir ead. All the prisons in Englande Christian schooles & chur∣ches 130 Taylor, Bradford, & Saūders, condemned ead. Master Tailor pleasant at the antichristian attire 131 D. Taylor maketh Boner a∣fraid ead. Doctor Taylor masked, that he may not be knowen e∣adem Wormes deceiued by Doct.
Taylor 132 Marueylous courage of Do∣ctor Taylor 133 Doctor Taylors braines smit out at the fire ead Gardiner referreth to Boner the butchering of Gods Saints ead Miles Couerdale graūted to the King of Denmarke, 134 Thomas Tomkins Martir, e∣adem Tomkins his hande burned with a taper ead Tomk. burnt in Smithfielde 135 Father compelled against the sonne ead Hunters mother encoura∣geth him to constancie 136 Hunter encouraged by his brother 137 William Sarton ead M. Higbed, and M. Causton burned 139 Pigot and Knight Martirs ead Iohn Laurence ead Robert Farrar B. of S. Dauids burnt 140 Farrars words to a gentlemā at his death 141 Rawlins White ead Rawlins God, & the Bishops God 142 Rawlins wedding garments 143 Rawlins a worthy martir ea¦dem Rawlins perswasion 144 Pope excōmunicateth those that held abbey lands ead P. Iulius the monster dieth ead P. misseth his peacock 145 A blasphemous pope ead Gods iudgement ead Branch blamed for carrying Deū time, vitiū fuge, about his neck ead George Marsh 146 G. Marsh his great patience 148 Wil. Flower woūdeth a priest at masse 149 Ioy at Q. Maries deliuery of child 151 Cardmaker & Warne Mar∣tirs 152 People encourage Cardm. at his death 153 Iohn Ardley a valeant Mar∣tir ead Iohn Symson martir ead Iohn Tooly ead Haukes at his death geueth a signe to his frends 155 Diuers comfortable epistles written by Haukes ead
Thomas Wats martyr 156 Queene Mary proued not with child eadem T. Mault should haue bin Q. Maries child 157 A Caueat for England. ead. Nicholas Chāberlain, Tho. Sommer, Wil. Bāford. ead. Bradford reioyceth at the newes of his martirdō. 158 M. Bradfords word at the stake eadem I. Leafe of 19. yeeres of age, burned with Bradford. 159 Iohn Leafe a notable yoong martyr eadem Gods iudgement eadem Bradfords letters eadem A dead bodie summoned to appeere, and answere 160 4. martirs in Canterbury ea. Nicholas Hall, Christopher Wade martyrs 161 Margery Polley comforteth Wade eadem Wades prayer eadem Dyrick Caruer burned 162 Iohn Lander eadem Thomas Iueson 163 Iohn Aleworth eadem Iohn Denley, Iohn Newmā, Patrick Packingam ead. The martyr singeth in the fire 164 Richard Hooke eadem 6. godly martirs at Cant. ea. George Tankerfield 165 A prety saying of the martyr 166 For patience of the martirs, the people said that they had the Diuell ead. Robert Smith ead. Martyr giueth a signe 167 St. Harwood, Thomas Fust, William Hayle eadem Robert Samuell 168 Samuell hath a vision ead. Rose Notingham eadem W. Allen eadem Roger Coo eadem Thomas Cobbe eadem Thomas Haywood, Iohn Gateway 169 M. Iohn Glouer ead. God send his spirit of com∣fort 170 Robert Glouer eadem Cornelius Bungey ead. Olyuer Richardine 171 W. Wolsey, & Ro. Pigot. ead. M. Ridley 172 Sundry letters & tractations M. Latimer eadem M. Latimer sometimes an earnest papist, conuerted by Bilney eadem Doctor Buttes a fauourer of good men 173 Verses of Latimer at the
giuing of holy bread & ho∣ly water 174 Smithfield had long groned for M. Latimer 175 Latimer almost starued for cold in the tower ead Latimers sundrie letters e∣adem Sermō of piping and daun∣sing ead Master Latimer to the King for restoring of the Scrip∣tures 176 Latimers new yeres gifte to to the king eod Ridley couereth his head at the name of the Pope e∣adem Ridley not suffered to aun∣swere 177 Ridley & Latimer condem∣ned 178 Ridley refuseth his pardon ead The behauiour of Ridley & Latimer at the place of exe∣cution 179 Latimer prophecieth at the stake 180 Diuers Letters & Treatises ead Steuen Gardiner dieth ead Gods iudgement on Gardi∣ner 181 Winchesters wordes at his death ead Iohn Webbe, G. Roper, G. Parker, Martirs 181 Men of vpright mindes 183 Hastning of iudgement, a pleasure to the martir 184 Sharpe aunswere to Boners message ead Philpots zeale against Mor∣gan 186 Articles against Master Phil∣pot 187 Boner condemneth Philpot 188 M. Philp. payeth his vowes in Smithfield ead 7. burned together in Smith∣field 189 Thomas Whittle repenteth, and is condemned ead Whittles letters ead Bartlet Greene ead Master Greene condemned 191 Master Greene at the Stake ead Tho. Brown ead Iohn Tudson ead Iohn Went ead Isabel Foster 192 Ione Lashford ead 5. martirs sing a psalm in the fire ead Cranmer Archb. of Canter∣burie 193
M. Cranmers aduice touch∣ing the disputatiō for the kings diuorce eadem Cranmer sent for to the K. 194 Embassage to Rome about the diuorce eadem None would kisse the popes foote, but a great Spaniell of the Earle of Wiltshires eadem Cranmer goeth to the Em∣perour eadem Cranmer satisfieth Corneli∣us Agrippa eadem Cranmer made archbishop. 195 King Edward godsonne to Cranmer eadem Bookes of Cranmer ead. Cranmer not brought to a∣gainst his conscience. ead. Cranmer would do no reue∣rence to the popes subde∣legate 196 Periured persons for witnes∣ses. 197 The meaning of supreame head 198 The Archbishop condemned for not beyng at Rome, when he was kept prisoner in England ead. Boner derideth the Archbi∣shop 199 The poore estate of the arch∣bishop ead. Cranmer setteth his hand to a recantation ead. Q. Maryes speciall hate to Cranmer 200 Law of equality 201 The pitiful case of Cranmer. eadem Cranmer bewaileth his recā∣tation 202 Cranmer first burneth his hand, wherewith he sub∣scribed eadem Cranmer burned eadem The wicked can not dis∣cerne spirits eadem Why Cranmer desired life. eadem Iohn Spicer, William Co∣berley, and Iohn Maun∣drell 203 Purgatorie the popes pin∣fold ead. Six at one fire in Smithfield, viz. Robert Drakes, Wil∣liam Timmes, Richard Spurge, Thomas Spurge, Iohn Cauell, and George, Ambrose 204 A short answere of Timmes. 205 Commissioners into Norf∣folke, and Suffolke 206 Iohn Harpoole, and Ioane
Beats eadem Iohn Hullier eadem Sixe martyrs at one fire in Colchester eadem Christopher Lister eadem Iohn Mace, Iohn Spenser, Iohn Hammon, Simon Iayne, & Richard Nicho∣las 207 Hugh Lauercocke, and Iohn appryce burned ead. Lauercock comforteth his fellow eadem Thomas Drewry, and Tho∣mas Croker 208 Thomas Spicer, Iohn Den∣ny, and Edmund Poole, burned eadem The martyrs prayse God in the flame 209 Thomas Harland, Iohn Os∣wald, Th. Auington, Tho. Read, martyrs ead. Also Iohn Milles, & Thomas Wood ead. A merchants seruant at Ley∣cester 210 Thirteene at one fire, viz. Hē∣ry Adlington, L. Pernam, H. Wye, W. Halywell, T. Bowyer, G. Searls, Edm. Hurst, Lion Couch, Rafe Iackson, Iohn Deryfall, Iohn Routh, Elizabeth Pepper, Agnes George. eadem Subtlety of the Diuell. ead. Two women stand loose at the stake eadem Cardinall pardoneth certain condemned ead. Roger Bernard 211 Adam Foster, Robert Law∣son ead. A worthy answere of the martyr eadem Iohn Carlesse a worthy con∣fessor 212 Iulius Palmer, Iohn Guin, Thomas Askin martyrs. 213 Iulius Palmer expulsed the colledge in King Edward his time, for Papistrie. eadem Th. Thackhā a false dissem∣bling hypocrite 214 The mother threateneth hir sonne Iulius Palmer fire & faggot eadem Palmer at the stake 215 Palmer diuerse times in dā∣ger of burning 216 For whom its easie to burne eadem The mother Katherine Cou∣ches, and the two daugh∣ters, Guillemme Gilbert, & Perotine Massey, bur∣ned in Gernesey 217
Cruelty against the mother, and hir daughters. ead. Maruellous cruelty eadem Thomas Dungate, Iohn For∣man, and mother Dree burned 218 Thomas More ead. Ioane Wast eadem Ione hir offer to the Iudges. eadem Edward Sharpe 219 Foure at Mayfield in Sussex. eadem A young man at Bristow. eadem Iohn Horne, & a womā. ead. William Dangerfield. ead. Great cruelty 220 The wife encourageth hir husband eadem A shoomaker at Northamp∣ton ead. Hooke eadem Fiue famished, and ten bur∣ned at Canterbury 221 A witty, and godly answere of Alice Potkins ead. Put to death in the fourth yeere of Qu. Mary, 84. persons eadem Sir Iohn Cheeke 222 The vniuersitie of Cābridge to be reformed 223 Inquisitors came to Cam∣bridge eadem S. Maries, and S. Michaels churches in Cambridge interdicted eadem Kings colledge refuseth the Inquisitors 224 Kings colledge neuer with∣out an heretike ead. Robert Brassey M. of Kings colledge ead. Bucer & Phagius digged out of their graues 225 Bucer & Phagius corps bur∣ned 226 The holy cōmissioners de∣part from Cambridge. ea. Peter Martyrs wifes corps at Oxford 227 Iohn Philpot, W. Waterer, Steph. Kempe, W. Hayd∣hith, T. Hudson, Mathew Brodbridge, Th. Stephēs, Nich. Finall, W. Lowicke, W. Prowting burned. ea. Another bloudy cōmission. 228 Cardinall Poole mercyfull. ead. Tho. Losebie, H. Ramsey, T. Tyroll, M. Hyde, Agnes Stanley 229 The valiant martyr eadem W. Morant, King, S. Grate∣wicke ead. Vniust proceeding ead. Faith surely grounded. 230
Iohn Bradbridge, W. Apple∣bie, Petronel, Ed Allen, K. his wife, I. Mannings, E. a blinde maide ead I. Fishcock, N. VVhite, N. Pardu, B. Fynall, widowe Bradbridge, Wilsōs wife, Bendens wife ead Husbande against the wife 231 Diet of the Martirs in prison ead 3. Farthinges a day the mar∣tirs allowance ead Alice Benden a cōstant mar∣tir ead God sendeth the spirite of comfort 232 The bishop wil neither med∣dle with patiēce nor cha∣ritie ead Tenne burned at one fire, Richard Woodman, G. Steuens, R. Maynarde, A∣lex. Hoseman, Thomasin a Wood, Marg. Moris, De∣nis Burgis, Ashdons wife, Groues wife ead Father against sonne 233 Boner droonk with Philpots bloud ead Quick dispatch 135 Simon Miller, Eliza. Couper ead Elizabeth Couper repenteth her recantation 236 Wil. Mount, Alice his wife, Rose Allen ead A tragicall dialogue betwixt Tirrel & Rose Allen 237 Tirannie ouercome with pa∣tience ead Iohn Thurstone, and M. his wife ead W. Bongeor, A. Siluerside, T. Benold, W. Purcas, H. Ew∣ring, E. Folkes, prisoners in Colchester 238 Sharp answere of the martir ead Eliz. Folkes ead Rose Allen condemned, song for ioy 239 Notable speeche of the mar∣tir ead Geor. Eagles called Trudg∣ouer 240 Richard Crashfield ead Frier and G. Eagles his sister, 241 Ioyce Lewes ead Sathan troubleth the martir ead She drinketh to all that loue the gospel 242 Rafe Allerton, Iames Austoo Margerie Austoo, Richard Coth ead The couragious Martir e∣adem
They feare the martyr in prison 143 Agnes Bongeor. ead. Margery Thurstone ead. Iohn Knode ead. The martyr refuseth pardon. ead. Iohn Noyes eadem Cecill Ormes 244 The constant martyr. eadem Cecill Ormes at the stake. eadem Sixteene martyrs in Sussex. 145 Thomas Spurdance eadem Iohn Hollingdale 246 W. Sparrow eadem R. Gibson eadem Articles for articles ead. Ioh. Rough ead. M. Mearing eadem Maister Rough minister of the congregation at Lon∣don 247 More reuerence to the pope, then to the bread God. ead. Margery Mearings ready to suffer for Chrish 248 Cuthbert Simpson, Hugh Fox, Iohn Deuenish. ead. Cuthbert Simsō racked twise 249 Boner commendeth the pa∣tience of Cuthbert Sim∣son eadem W. Nichol eadem W. Seaman eadem Tho. Carman, Tho. Hudson. ead. W. Harris, Rich. Day, Chri∣stopher Gorge 251 A sharpe proclamation a∣gainst godly books. eadē. Henry Pond, Rayn. Eastlād, Robert Southam, Mar. Richarby, Ioh. Floyd, Ioh. Holiday, Roger Holland. 252 A straight proclamation. ea∣dem R. Holland at the stake, ead. R. Milles, S. Wight, S. Carton, I. Slade, R. Denis, VV. Pikes 253 Richard Yeoman 254 Thomas Benbridge. eadem A notable conflict betwixt flesh, & the spirit of God. 255 I. Cooke, R. Myles, A. Lane, Iames Ashley eadem Alex. Gouch, Alice Driuer. ead. Alice Driuer of an excellent spirit 256 Phil. Humfrey, Iohn Dauid, Henry Dauid 257 Priests wife eadem The wife persecuted of hus∣band,
and children ead. Christ the martyrs husband. eadem A worthy martyr 258 Note eadem Iohn Sharpe, Tho. Hall. 259 Thomas Benion eadem Iohn Cornford, Christopher Browne, Iohn Herst, Alice Snoth, Kath. Knight. ead. The martyr excommunica∣teth the Papists eadem The husband accused by his wife 260 Balaams marke 261 Cruelty of Balaamites ead. N. Burton burned in Siuell. Aue Maria after the Romish fashion eadem Marke Burges, W. Hooke. 262 Iohn Dauies of twelue yeres old 263 The congregation in Lon∣don eadem The ministers of that con∣gregation eadem Those that fled from Ips∣wich for persecution 265 Ipswich a good towne ead. The affliction of L. Eliz. 268 Lady Elizabeth falsly accu∣sed 269 An hundred Northren soul∣diers watch the Lady Eli∣zabeth 270 The L. Eliz. had none other friendes but God. 171 Lady Elizabeth prisoned in the Tower eadem The Lorde Chamberlayne hard to the Lady Eliza∣beth 272 Sir Henry Benefield eadem Lady Elizabeth to Wood∣stock. 273 L. Elizabeth in great feare. eadem Tanquam ouis eadem Sir Henry Benefield presum∣ptuous, and vnciuill. 274 The Spaniards against mur∣dering of Lady Elizabeth. 275 L. Elizabeth deliuered out of prison eadem God deliuereth L. Elizab. 276 Elizabeth prisoner ead. Gardiner dieth 278 Queene Mary dieth ead. Popish prelates die thicke a∣bout the death of queene Mary 280 Iohn Whiteman, a notable martyr 281 A conference for matters of religion 282 Three propositions to dis∣pute of eadem The Papists flie from the a∣greement
