11221 99841371 5949
NORTH-VVEST FOX▪ OR, Fox from the North-west passage. BEGINNING With King ARTHVR, MALGA, OCTHVR, the two ZENI'S of Iseland, Estotiland, and Dorgia; Following with briefe Abstracts of the Voyages of Cabot, Frobisher, Davis, Waymouth, Knight, Hudson, Button, Gib∣bons, Bylot, Baffin, Hawkridge: Together with the Courses, Distance, Latitu ngitudes, Variations, Depths of Seas, Sets of s, Currents, Races, and over-Falls; with other Observations, Accidents and remarkable things, as our Miseries and sufferings. Mr. IAMES HALL's three Voyages to Groynland, with a Topographicall description of the Countries, the Salvages lives and Treacheries, how our Men have beene slayne by them there, with the Commodities of all those parts; whereby the Marchant may have Trade, and the Mariner Imployment. Demonstrated in a Polar Card, wherein are all the Maines, Seas, and Ilands, herein mentioned. With the Author his owne Voyage, being the XVIth. with the opinions and Collections of the most famous Ma∣thematicians, and Cosmographers; with a Probabilitie to prove the same by Marine Remonstrations, compa∣red by the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, experimented with places of our owne Coast. By Captaine LVKE FOXE of Kingstone vpon Hull, Capt. and Pylot for the Voyage, in his Majesties Pinnace the CHARLES. Printed by his Majesties Command. LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and THO. FAVVCET, dwelling in Grubstreet. 1635.
TO THE KINGS MOST SACRED AND EXCELLENT MAIESTIE. MOST MIGHTY MONARCH▪ and MY DREAD SOVERAIGNE. SEeing that it hath plea∣sed You to examine the En∣deavours of those formerly imployed towards the search of the North-west Passage, and that it hath bin Your Highnesse pleasure, to examine me Your meanest Subject, concerning the hope of a further Discoverie, how it formerly had fayled; and what better helpes could now be produced, appointing me Your Highnesse Pinnace the CHARLES, with Your Royall Instructions for my bet∣ter proceeding, which unto me was the greatest Honour that ever Subject received, (and at my Returne continuing Your Royall and Gracious favour, commanding me unto Your Royall Presence to deliver my Accompts;) hath since im∣boldened me to examine with my selfe thus farre, that here∣by
(as duty obligeth) I might bring some better satisfaction to your Royall demand; which was, Whether there were a Passage or no, and were I capable thereof at my being neere the same? But since that meditation and contemplation hath gi∣ven me more insight thereinto, than Speculation at that in∣stant could; For it was not possible for me to frame any Conclusion, untill I had circuted the Bay of Hudson and But∣ton, whereby I might find from whence a new Tyde (which I found there) should come; and heere SIR, I prostrate my Accompt in particular, which then I presented in generall. I begin with King ARTHVR his Conquests, and so pro∣ceeds to all those Discoveries (that I can find Antiquity hath preserved) towards the North-west, untill this Your owne time; to show, how those Maynes, Ilands, and Continents, they have discovered, doth like dew from Heaven deseend upon Your Royall Throne; so as most Dread Soveraigne, the true Right thereto is Yours, which I pray may be aug∣mented unto the furthest bounds of the East and W. Ocean. I doe not onely bring to show, but put your Majesty in mind of what you know: knowing that your Majesty being called by more weighty affaires of State, may passe by (unre∣membred) such small Trifles as this; yet observing Your Highnesse willingnesse to promote Navigation and those dis∣covering Enterprises, hath made me thus presume. I have endeavored the probability of a Passage, praying un∣to Almighty GOD, to set it as a faire Iewell in your Royall Crowne, and bring to passe in those happie dayes which wee doe enjoy under your Gracious and godly Gouernment; Ra∣ther than some Forraigne Prince or State, should advance and finde the same. These shall bee the prayers, with Your long life and prosperous Raigne, Of Your humblest Subiect and Servant, LVKE FOXE.
The Preface to the Reader. GENTLE READER, expect not heere any florishing Phrases or Floquent tearmes, for this Child of mine begot in the North-wests cold Clime, (where they breed no Schollers,) is not able to digest the sweet milke of Retho∣rick, that's food for them▪ the Parent not be∣ing able to maintaine it any longer, it being now past the Cradle, hopes, the Publike will willingly bestow Education of the Infant for his better breeding; for which the Father prayeth, and the rather because the Midwife perswades him that the Child lookes like himselfe, there were some desired to have had him come abroad like the Lapwing, before the shell was from over his head, but the Nurse more carefull of the tenderly borne Infant procrastinated the time, supposing that after birth it would strengthen apace in this temporate Clime, and in time be the better able to Iourney; but in Conclusion its turned to Discoverie, not of a Passage but of the way to find one, to come to the le Iapon, China, and the Orient all India; of which, hea∣ring that divers inquired after; (for who would not share in such Treasures as there's to be had) as what hath Fox done, others how farre farre hath hee beene, hath he beene as farre as any an, If there be a Passage how chance hee hath not found it, if not, why doe they search after it; and in fine, hath hee made a Voyage or no, the mea∣ning of this last I know not, nor I thinke they neither; but for that the most desire to know what I have done, and how farre I have bin; I answer as the Old women tells tales, Further and further than
I can tell; and for the rest I referre them to mine owne Iournall: For I hope it may satisfie those that are indifferent, and that stand well affected to those Discovering enterprises, for whose cause and the good or content of others it was chiefly compiled. I doe confesse, that they have not done me much amisse in causing me to show my selfe; for hereby they shall know, that before this vndertaking I was not ignorant of what my predecessors had done before I came, which was no small helpe both to my safety and proceeding. For some will Calumniate out of malice, some for that they dislike all things but what themselves or friends doth; but I hope the judiciall Sea-man will stand in my defence: For amongst those inquisitors, especially the never-satisfied-curious, I finde few that doth or will know what they inquire after, other having other im∣ployments rests content with the verball Report of their owne Times, rather than looke after the La and Experiences of so vnpleasant, and as it is held vnprofitable a Voyage. For these and others, I leave to peruse what shall follow, wherein the desirous may bee satisfied, how every Successour (as his fancy, direction, or opinion guided) thought to rectifie himselfe by others mistaking, or to finde the Passage in those places left vnsearched or perfectly discovered: For no question, but this Voyage might long since have attained his full perfection; if the first beginners had beene yearely continued, which since Captaine DAVIS was not, but sup∣plyed awayes (after some yeares of breathing) by Greene men, or those who (in that time) had forgot their experience; nay, I may avoch, that if this course had beene taken, and private ends had beene wanting, that since Mr. HVDSON his first Voyage 1610. the Passage had been sayled through before 1618. and done at one quarter of the Charge; and howsoever it was not my for∣tune to finde, yet I praise GOD for that I have brought home the newes thereof, though I have left it for him whose time God shall be pleased to ripen for the same; For it is a wonder that a Voyage of such Consequence as this, wherein all the parts of Navigation may be practised, should so longlye raked in the embers and no
further search made thereinto, (conside-ring that within these few yeares, there hath bin more excellent Secrets in Navigation found out then hath beene in all the former Ages) it being (no questi∣on) but more then the difficultest halfe Discovered; to incourage which thou shalt reade here w great Princes have taken plea∣sure to increase their Dominions (in Person) by Navigation, as al∣so that our Ancestors were not so simple as we make them; and that this Hunting of the Whale (which as yet wee make rare) was in practice in King ALFREDS time related by OCTHER, who cald him Lord, as King ARTHVRS Successour; which OCTHER say∣led about the North Cape of Finmrke, as appeareth by his owne Narration, and this was long before RICHARD CHANCELOR, whom wee make Prima. I begin with those Princes, to show the Honour and Renowne of our Nation, and so proceed to all that went before me North-Westwards, out of a coniecturall necessity which I conceive them to bee as Appendices to the Iournals of these mo∣derne times. It will be obiected, that many of these Abstracts are taken out of other Bookes, and that those are the Voyages of other men; I answer it is true, the most of them are. For what are all those of Mr. Hac∣klits, and Mr. Purchas, but the Collections and preservations of other mens labours; For who can speake or write that which was never done before, and I doe confesse my selfe to be infinitly bound vnto them and others for their paines; for if they had not bin thus carefully stored vp, these had beene wanting as are divers others. For in searching thou shalt finde, that the workes of many brave men are buried in oblivion, whose Names are devolved and but something brought vnto vs through the succession of Ages, and though part of those workes have escaped, the wracke of the rest have perished in the Gulfe of time, which hath swallowed the best of many mens endeavors, and for those extant▪ thou canst not come vnto without labour and charge, all which I have brought to thy hands almost for nothing, considering the charge of Bookes of great prise, the labour in search and Quotations; besides, heere
is much that never came in Print as yet, being very difficult to be had. And though I have abstracted those Workes of my Predeces∣sors, yet I have interlaced my owne experience, and beene curious not to leave out any thing of theirs or my owne, wherein I could thinke my remembrance might avayle thee. And although wee all have sometimes stumbled, yet wee may bee excused, considering the long and strange Iourney wee had to goe, and who followeth doth but persevere by our example, nor have I like the Poet feig∣ned a Storme where I had none: Nor doe I hold that man fit to take charge of Voyages remote, especially Northeast or Westward, and be Ignorant of those Abstracts and Iournals following. For I know, knowledge will conceive them to be good Preparatives. How∣soever in them I have done my best, and whosoever will amend them, I shall take him for my friend, I have restored all the names of Capes, Headlands, and Ilands formerly given by Captaine DA∣VIS, Mr HVDSON, and Sir THOMAS BVTTON, (which since have beene infringed vpon) vnto their first appellations, both in my Booke and Map. I doe confesse, that there be many who might more itly have vndertaken this labour then my selfe, if they had been so well acquainted with the action; For we have many Prac∣titioners, whom we call Mathematicall Sea-men, who that after a little practice in Art, purposeth then to goe to Sea and Travell; therefore carefully busying themselves about perusing the Cosino∣graphicall Maps, and with great industry studied the bookes of Na∣vigation, and to better their knowledge, have enquired of many excellent Mariners for their better satisfaction, in the difficul∣test parts thereof, thinking that they are now it to set sayle and launch foorth to Sea, conceiting of themselves to bee farre more able then the Sea-man; yet when they have taken the charge of the Ship vpon them, and is hoyst forth of the quiet port into the ruffe and boisterous Ocean, where they shall behold many hideous moun∣taines of high threatning billowes, and raging waves, tempestuous gusts, with hayle, raine and thunder, Shifts of windes, and counter Seas, Currents, Races, Sets, and Over-fals, being deprived of Sun,
Moone and Starres for long season, they will then thinke that they onely dreamed before, when they imagined of the Course of the Seas, and that their Bookes were but weake Schoolemasters, that the talke of Art were farre short of the Practice, when at beholding the Starres which they thought to have vsed as guides and directions▪ seeme now as they threatned their ruine and destruction; nay, when you shall looke forth and tremble at the rising of every wave, and shall be agast with feare to refraine those Rockes and dangers which lye hid within the Seas fairest bosome, together with the greatnesse of the Ocean, and smalnesse of their Ship; for want of experience to handle, not knowing how to shun, they will then thinke that the least gale is of force to overthrow them, and know that Art must be taught to practice by long and industrious vse. For it is not enough to be a Sea-man, but to be a painefull Sea-man; for a Sea∣bred man of reasonable Capacity, may attaine to so much Art as may serve to Circle the Earths Globe about, but the other wanting the experimentall part cannot▪ for I doe not allow any to be a good Sea man, that hath not vndergone the most Offices about a Ship, and that his youth hath bin both taught and inured to all labours; for to keepe a warme Cabbin & lye in sheets, is the most ignoble part of a Sea man, but to endure and suffer; as a hard Cabbin, cold and salt Meate, broken sleepes, mould bread, dead beere, wet Cloathes, want of fire, all these are within board; besides Boate, Lead, Top∣yardes, Anchor-morings and the like. For as Oyle Paper layd vp∣on the obiect, makes it more transparant, so doth Experience show Art to see without spectacles; and concluding this point in starling for I have no other Cone and but small store of that, to those who saith, that I am but a North-Countrey Coaster, and hath but been brought vp in small Vessels. I wish their pride to know, that Gods mercy is over all his Creatures, and hath created as good men in the North as in the South, let no man bee disdained, misprised or vn∣dervalued for his wants (except in Vertues.) For I doe not thinke, but litle Mr. IEFFERY that pretty Courtier, can pitch his eye-sight as high into the Firmament, as Mr. EVANS his Maiesties great
Porter. And for Sea-men, where have you better than the Scotsh∣men are, and yet North-Countrey men. It was also cast into my dish, that I was an Officer of the Admiralty; a poore conceit to ob∣iect against me for this vndertaking, and as much as to say; as the greatest Civilian held to be in Christendome, cannot be capable of higher Promotion, if hee belong to the Admiraltie. I have also placed a Polar Map or Card, that this Discoverie may be the better vnderstood, and for that I did desire to give sa∣tisfaction by Demonstration of all treated of in the Booke, for o∣therwise, another proiection could not have contained it but at vn∣reasonable diversity; and because I cannot describe all the Names in Fretum Hudson, of Capes, Ilands, and Bayes at length in Let∣ters, in respect of the smalnesse of the Degrees of Longitude, I have inserted them in a table by the letters of the Alphabet, as thou shalt find, beginning with A, b, c, d, and tracted my owne way and discovery foorth and home, in small prickes. I acknowledge it to be but rough-hewen like Ship wrights im∣ber, but what it wants in smoothnesse or forme, let thy good Re∣port licke it into. I trust I shall not need to vse the fashion of Au∣thors, to make any doubt of carping Momus or rayling Zoilus, seeing I have intended thy Good without any Reservation to my selfe. But I feare mee I have held thee too long in this place, like him who purposeth to take a long Iourney stumbles vpon his owne threshold, but have Patience, for I had rather be in fault then want, I have here prostrated my duty to my King, and my service to my Countrey, craving thy favourable acceptance, I rest. From Kingston upon Hull, this first of Ianuary, 1635. Thine, in all welwilling, Luke Foxe.
polar map
CERTAINE TESTIMO∣nies concerning King Arthur and his Conquests of the North regions, ta∣ken by Mr. Hacklute out of the Histories of the Kings of Brittaine; written by Galfridus Monamutensis, newly Printed at Hedleberg, 1587. Lib. 9. Cap. 10. IN the yeare of CHRIST, 517. King Arthur in the second yeare of his raigne, having subdued all parts of Ireland, sayled with his Fleet into Iseland, and brought it and the peo∣ple thereof into subjection; the rumour being spred throughout all the other Lands, that no Countrey was able to withstand him; Dol∣danius, King of Gotland, and Gunfa∣cius the King of Orkney, came vo∣luntary unto him, and yeelded their obedience, promising to pay him Tribute. The winter being spent, hee returned into Britaine; established his Kingdome in perfect peace; he con∣tinued there for the space of twelue yeares. Lib. 9. Cap. 12. After that, King Arthur sending his Messengers into di∣vers Kingdomes, hee summoned such as were to come to his Court, aswell out of France, as out of the adjacent Ilands of the Sea, and a little after: from these adjacent Ilands came Guillaumarius King of Ireland, Malvatius King of Iseland, Doldunus King of Gotland, Gunnotius King of Orkney, Lot the King of Norway, and Archilius King of Denmarke.
A testimony of the Right and Appendances of the Crowne of the Kingdome of Brittaine, taken out of Mr. Lambert, Fol. 137. pag. 2. ARTHVR which was sometimes the most renowned King of the Britaines, was a mighty valiant and famous War∣riour. This Kingdome was too little for him and his minde was not contented with it; hee therefore valiantly subdue all Scantia now called Norway, and all the Iles beyond Nor∣way; to wit, Iseland, and Groenland, which are appertaining unto Norway. Sweveland, Ireland, Gotland, Denmarke, Seme∣land, Windeland, Curland, Roe, Femeland, Wireland, Flaunders, Cherilland, Lapland, and all other Lands of the East sea even unto Russia, in which Lapland he placed the Eastmost BoundsIt seemeth K. Athur passed y• North Cape of Finmarke. of his Brittish Empire, and many other Ilands beyond Nor∣way even under the Pole, which are appendances of Scantia now called Norway; he planted the Christian Faith through∣out all Norway, matched their Nobility with Brittish bloud, called Norway the Chamber of Brittaine, and incorporated them unto us. Another testimony out of Galfridus Monumetensis con∣cerning the Conquest of Malga King of England, Lib. 11. cap. 7. MALGO succeeded Vorciporius which was the goodliest man in person of all Brittaine, a Prince that expulsed many Tyrants, hee was strong and valiant in warre, taller then most men that then lived, and exceeding famous for his ver∣tues. This King also obtained the Government of the whole Iland of Brittaine, and by most sharpe battailes he recovered to his Empire the sixe Ilands of the Ocean Sea, which were before Tributaries to King Arthur; namely, Ireland, Iseland, Gotland, Orkney, Norway, and Denmarke. The Voyage of Octher to the Northeast parts beyond Norway, reported by himselfe vnto Alfred the famous King of England, about the yeare. 890. OCTHER sayd, that the Countrey wherein he dweit was called Helgoland, hee told his Lord King Elfreed, that he
dwelt furthest North of any Norman, he sayd, that he dwelt towards the North part of the Land towards the West coast. And in another place hee affirmeth, that there was no man dwelling towards the North from him, and alirmed the land to stretch farre to the North, yet all Desert, and not inhabi∣ted. Vpon a time, he fell into a fancy to know how farre the Land stretched Northward, whereupon hee tooke his voyage directly North, along the Coast having alwayes the Desert land upon his Staboard, and upon the Larboard the maine O∣cean, and continued his course for the space of 3. dayes; in which space, hee was come as farre towards the North, as the Whale-hunters used to travell; hee proceeded to the North,Whale-fiing hath beene of long con∣ance. as farre as hee was able to sayle in other 3. dayes, at the end whereof, he perceived the Coast turned toward the East, or else the Sea opened with a maine Gulfe into the land, hee knew not how farre: well he wist and remembred, that he was faine to stay till hee had a Westerne wind and somewhat Northerly, and thence hee sayled plaine East along the Coast still, so farre as hee was able in 4. dayes, at the end of which time, hee was compelled to stay, untill he had a full Northerly wind, for as much as the Coast bowed downe thence direct∣ly towards the Southward, at leastwise, the Sea opened into the Land, that he could not tell how farre; so that hee sayled alongst the coast directly South, so farre as he could travell in five dayes, and at the 5. dayes end, hee descryed a mighty Ri∣ver which opened very farre in the land, at the entry of which River hee stayed his course, and in conclusion turned backe a∣gaine; For he durst not enter so: feare of the Inhabitants of the Land, perceiving that on the other side of the River it was throughly inhabited; which was the first peopled Land he had found from the place of his dwelling; whereas conti∣nually, hee had a desert Wildernesse upon his Starbord-side, except some in places, he saw a few Fishers, Fowlers, and Hun∣ters, which were all Finnes, and on the Larbord the maine o∣cean. Thus much for Octher, whom it appeares was the se∣cond that doubled the North Cape that we have extant, King Arthur being the first. Although I know, heere is something that will not bee be∣leeved, yet I will proceed, seeing that the more and fur∣ther
I doe goe on, I finde some reason to have better confidence of the former, and thus much, &c. Therefore as followeth, out of the Comments of Arn∣grinus, Fitz Ionus. 1598. A Certaine Writer sayth, hee hath put downe the distance betweene the mouth of Elbe and Baczend in the South part of Iseland, to be 400. leagues; from whence if you will accompt the difference of Longitude, to the Meridian of Ham∣brough, Iseland must have none of the Longitudes accompted of, as 5. 7. 6. 20. 30. 28. 325. according to severall Authors, for I am able to prove by 3. severall Voyages of Hamburgers, that it is but 7. dayes sayle from Iseland to Hambrough, besides all the Ilands which for the abundance of Sheepe are called Far∣rier; as likewise the Desert shoares of Norway, are distant from us but two dayes sayling, wee have 4. dayes sayling in∣to habitable Groenland, and almost in the same quantity of time, wee past over to the Province of Norway called Std, lying betweene the Townes of Oridrosia or Trondon, and Bar∣gon, as we find by antient Records of those Nations. Iseland hath bin called by three names one after another; for one Nuddocus a Norvegian borne, who is thought to bee the first Discoverer thereof, as he was sayling towards Farra Ilands, through a violent Tempest did by chance arrive at the East shore of Iseland, where beholding the Mountaines tops covered with Snow, called this Iland Snowland. After this one Gardarus, being moved with Nuddocus re∣ports, went to seeke, and when hee had found, hee called it Garders Ile. After these two, one Flok went into this Land, and named it after the Ice hee found there, Iceland. This land hath some yeares no Ice at all, as in 1592. but the Sea is open for most yeares from Aprill to Ianuary, and in May all is driven to the West, and this Land hee inhabited about the yeare of our Lord, 874. In the yeare 1591. there was a Ship of Germany lay laden with Copper 14. dayes in the harbour of Vopnaford; in No∣vember she set sayle and departed; this was some ship of the Balticke Sea, or Hambrough, which durst not goe through the Narrow seas for Spaine.
The Commentor Arngrinus sayth, in the yeare of Christ 874. Iseland being indeed discovered before that time, as is aboue mentioned was the first of all inhabited by certaine Norvegians, their Chieftaine, was one Ingulphus, from whose name the East Cape of Iseland is called Ingule Hoffdie, these Planters are reckoned vp by name in our Records: saith he, more then to the number of 400. together; with those of their blood and kindred, and great families besides: neither onely is their number described, but it is so plainely set downe what Coasts, what Shoares, and what In-land places each of them did occupie, and inhabite, and what names the inhabi∣tants did giue vnto Straights, Bayes, Harbours, Necklands, Creekes, Capes, Rockes, Crags, Mountaines, Hills, Valleyes, Hammockes, Springs, Flouds, Rivers; and to be short, what names they gaue vnto their Granges, and houses: whereof many as this day are received and vsed. Therefore the Nor∣vages with their company, peopled all the habitable places of Iseland. The voyages of the Brethren Mr. Nicolo and An∣thonie Zeni Venotians, collected out of their owne Let∣ters by Mr. Francisco Maritino. NIcolas caused a ship to be made ready at his owne charge in Italy 1380. with intent to see England and Flanders, but was by tempest cast vpon the Ile of Freesland, where he had beene cruelly entreated, had it not beene for Zichmni, Lord of certaine Ilands, called Porland, lying on the South of Freesland, being rich and populous, he was also Duke of Sorany lying ouer against Scotland. This Prince being arrived vpon Freesland to make warre vpon the same, vnderstanding the shipwracke came present∣ly, and hearing by the Latine tongue that he was of Italy, he received him into protection with great ioy. This Prince having the last yeare, given the overthrow to the King of Norway in some of his Signiories, was come to Friesland also to take the same from the said King whereof he was Lord, and to that purpose, vnderstanding that Mr. Ni∣colo had great judgement, in Sea and Martiall affaires, he gaue him commission, to goe aboord his ships, commanding the
Captaine to honour him in all things, and to vse his counsell: his Nauie consisted of 30. saile, whereof two rowed with Oares. With these small Barkes, and one ship, they ailed to the Westward and won Ledovo and Ilofe, and divers other small Ilands, and turned into a Bay called Sudero; in the Hauen of the Towne called Samstoll, they tooke certaine small Barkes laden with fish. Here they found Zichmni who came thither by land conque∣ring all the Country, they sailed to the W. by another Cape or Gulfe, and conquered all the Ilands they found to the Signorie of Zichmn. These Seas for as much as they sailed, were in manner nothing but shoales and Rockes, so as it was thought amongst them, that the fleete had perished, if it had not beene for the skill and knowledge of Mr. Nicolo and his men, who had beene brought vp in the practise of Nauigation all their liues. At the counsell of Mr. Anthonie they goe on Land, when they heard of the good successe of Zichmni in his warres, and that all the Iland by Embassadors was yeilded vnto him. At their meeting, the Prince gaue Mr. Nicolo the honour of Knighthood, & graced him as the preseruer of his fleete, and rewarded his men. In Triumphant manner they goe towards Friesland, the chiefe Citty thereof is scituate on the S. E. side within a Gulfe or Bay, as there are many in that Iland; in this Gulfe or Bay is such abundance of fish taken, that many ships are laden to serue Flanders, Brittaine, England, Scotland, Nor∣way, and Denmarke. Thus much is taken out of a Letter that Mr. Nicolo sent to his Brother Anthonie, requesting that he would seeke some meanes to come to him. MAster Anthonie furnisht a ship, and after great danger with great joy arrived with his Brother, where he re∣mained 14. yeares, 4. yeares with his Brother and 10. yeares alone, where they so behaued themselues, that Nicolo was made Captaine of Zchmnies Nauie; they set forth for the en∣terprise of Estland, being betweene Friesland and Norway, but by storme of wind they were driven vpon certaine
shoales, where a great part of their Fleete was cast away. The King of Denmarke comming to rescue Estland, his Fleete vt∣terly perished, which Zichmni having notice of by a ship of the Enemies, he determines to set vpon Iseland. Which together with the rest, was subiect to the King of Norway, but he finding the Country well fortified, his small Fleete were glad to retire; In the same channels he assaulted the other Iles, called Iseland; which are 7. Talas, Broas, Heance, Trans, Mimant, Dambere, and Brest; and having spoiled them all, hee built a Fort in Brest, where he left Mr. Nicolo with men, small Barkes, and Munition, and with the few ships he had left, he returned to Friesland. Mr. Nicolo in  with 3. small Barkes sailes Northward, and arrives in Engroneland, where he found a Monasterie of Friers, neare a hill that casteth forth fire, like Vesurius & Etna. They subsist specially, by a Fountaine of water issuing from that Hill, whereby the Monastery and all other buildings are refreshed and warmed at their pleasure, as also their Gardens thowed and watered, their stones for building are cast out of this combustable forge, which being once cooled will not dis∣solue, but taken hot and cast into Water, maketh a marvailous strong lime, the people haue these devoted men in great vene∣ration. They feed vpon wild Fowle and Fish, for the Bay or Ha∣ven, by reason of the heate of this Water doth neuer freeze, by meanes whereof, there is such concourse of Sea-fowle and abundance of fish, whereby all the people are fed and main∣tained, and 1000. imployed about taking the same. Hither in Summer time, which lasts but three Moneths, come many Barkes from the Ilands thereabout, and from the Cape about Norway, and from Trondon, and exchange all needfull commo∣dities for fish, which they dry with the Sunne or cold: to this Monastery resort many Friers of Norway, Setia, but theThe Frost l∣steth 9. Months▪ most part are of Iseland. There are continually in that part many Barkes, which are kept there by reason of the Sea being froze, waiting for the Spring to dissolue the Ice. Their Boates are made like vnto Weavers shuttles, taking the skins of fishes, and sowing them together in many doubles, they fashion them with the bones of the same fish, and make them so sure and substantiall, that it is marvailous to see, how
in tempests they will shut themselues close with in, and let the sea and wind carry them they care not whither, without either breaking or drowning, and if they chance to be driven vpon the Rocks, they remaine sound without any bruise at all, and they haue as it were a sleeue in the bottome which is ty∣ed fast in the middle, and when there commeth any water in∣to the Boat, they put it into the one halfe of the sleeue, then fastening the end with two peeces of wood, and loosening the band beneath, they convay the water forth of the Boat, and this they doe as often as they have occasion. Moreover, this Water is of a Sulphurous brimstone nature, and is conveyed into vessels of Brasse, Tinne, and Stone, and so imployed to all vses, to warme their houses, or boile their meate without any stinke, or noisome smell. The Friers of this Monastery speake all the Latine tongue, and this is all that then was knowne of Engroneland. Mr. Nicolo: dyed in Friesland, and being dead Anthonie suc∣ceeded him both in Goods and Dignitie, and albeit he attemp∣ted and made great supplication, yet could he not obtaine li∣cence to returne to his Countrey. For Zichmni intended to make himselfe Lord of the Sea, vsed his counsell, and deter∣mined to send him with divers Barkes to the West-wards; for that certaine Fishermen of his, had discovered certaine Ilands very rich and populous, which discovery Mr. Anthony in a Letter to his Brother Carolo recounteth thus: SIx and twenty yeares since, there departed 4. fisher Boates,Estotoland the which a mighty tempest, tossed too & fro divers dayes, when at length they discovered, an Iland called Estotoland, lying West-ward above 1000. miles from Freesland, vpon which, one of the Boates was cast away, and the 6. men there∣in were taken and carried to a faire and populous City, where the King sent for many Interpreters, but none could vnderstand their language, but one who spoake Latine, who was also cast there by chance, who vnderstanding their case, rehearsed it to the King, who caused thē to stay in his Country 3. yeares, in which time they learned the Language: one of them was in divers parts of the Iland, and reports it to be Rich and aboundeth with all Commodities of the world, it is little lesse then Iseland, but farre more fruitfull, in the mid∣dle
is a Mountaine, from whence there Springs 4. Rivers that passe through the whole Countrey. The Inhabitants are very witty people, and have all Arts and faculties as we have, and it is credible that in times past, they have had traffique with our men; for be said, he saw La∣tine bookes in the Kings Library, which at that present they did not understand, they have a peculiar language and letters or characters to themselves, they have Mines of all manner of mettals, but they abound with Gold; they have trade in En∣groneland, from whence they bring Furres, Brimstone, and Pitch, he saith, that to the Southward, there is a great populous country very rich in gold, they sow Corne, and make Beere and Ale, and use it as we do wine, they have mighty great woods, there are many Cities and Castles. They build small Barkes, and have sayling, but they have not the Loadstone, nor know not the use of the Compasse; wherefore the Fishers were had in great estimation, insomuch that the King sent them South∣ward to a country they call Dorgio, but in that voyage they had such weather, that they thought to have perished in the sea, but escaping that, they fell into another more cruell, for they were taken in the Country and the most part of themMan eaters. eaten of the Salvage people, which fed upon Mans flesh as the sweetest meat. But this Fisherman escaped, by teaching them to take fish with nets, in the Sea and in fresh rivers, whereby he was ho∣noured and beloved of all. The Lords of the Country fell out about him, and in 13. yeares he was there, he was sent to at least 25. of them from one to another, to teach his Art of Fishing, so that he was in all parts of the Country; which he saith, is very great, the people very rude, and voide of goodnesse, they all goe naked, neither have they wit to cover their bodies with the skins of beasts they take by hunting, whereby they are miserably vexed with cold, they have Lances, sharpe at the point, they have Bowes, and strings made of beast skins, they are a cruell people, and have certaine lawes amongst them∣selves; to Southwards the people have more civility, the aire being more temperate, and have Cities and Temples with I∣dols, there they sacrifice men to Idols, and afterwards eate them, they have some knowledge of gold and silver.
Now this Fisherman had an intent to get home, but his companions being in despaire thereof, never offered to at∣tempt their freedome, and therefore stayed there; whereupon he travailed through the woods towards Dorgio, the next Lord knew him, and he was conveyed from one to ano∣ther, untill at length he came to Dorgio, where he stayed three yeares, and hearing of divers Boates that were arri∣ved there, he went to the sea side, and asking of whence they were, they said of Estotiland, he being glad, requested to be entertained by them, and carried to their country, which they gladly granted and used him for their Interpretor. After that, he frequented that trading with them and be∣came very rich, wherewith he furnished a barke, returned into Friezeland, and to his Lord made this report of that wealthy Country. He is credited here, for that the Mariners doe affirme his reports to be true, wherefore this Lord is resolved to send me forth with a fleete toward these parts, but it was not so; for Zchmni went himselfe, and concerning their proceedings I have a Letter in forme following; OVr preparation for Estotiland was begun in an unluckie houre, for three dayes before our departure the Fisher∣man dyed that should have beene our guide, notwithstanding this Lord would not give over the enterprise, taking the Marriners that returned with him; making our navigation to the Westward, we discovered Ilands subject to Friesland, and having passed certaine shelves, we stayed at Ledovo 7. dayes. The first of Iuly, we arrived at Ilofe, we stayed not there but had a veing storme at Sea for 8. dayes, not knowing where we were, a great part of their barkes were cast away, the wea∣ther being faire they gathered up the pieces of broken barkes sayling on with prosperous wind, they discovered land at W. They tooke harbour, and an infinite company of armed men came to defend their Iland, Zichmni makes signes of peace, sends 10. men, of ten severall languages but they could understand none, but one that was of Iseland, who informed them, that the Ilands name was Icria, named after the name of the first King of that place, whom they say was sonne to Dedalus, King of Scotland, who conquered that Iland, and
left his sonne there for King, and they called this Sea the Ica∣rion Sea, in remembrance of that King, in further search was drowned there. They would not suffer us to land, but onely they would receive one man to learne the Jtalian tongue, as they had received the other tenne. He espying a harbour on the East side, put therein for wood and water, but the inhabitants assaults, slew, and mai∣med many of them, enforcing them away; and sayling about the Cape of the Iland towards the North, we found many shoalds, amongst the which, we were ten dayes continually in danger of losing our whole fleete. Zichmni seeing he could not prevaile against the force of the Ilands, sailed 6. dayes towards the West, but the wind chan∣ging into S. W. he sayled 4. dayes with wind a poope with a growne sea, he discovers land, not knowing what land, and rowing to it with Oares; they finde a good harbour, and see farre off a Mountaine, that cast forth smoake. Zichmni sent forth an hundred Souldiers, to search what people inhabited it, the whiles he takes in wood and water, catches great store of fish and Sea fowle, with such aboundance of Egges, that his men halfe famished were filled therewith, this was in Iune, ye ayre so temperate & pleasant as impossible to expresse. They finde no people, they name the haven Trine, the Soul∣diers returning backe, had bin through the Iland, finds the fire naturall, that the hils bottome produced, and that there was a Spring which issued water like pitch, and run into the Sea, and that there dwelt a multitude of people of small stature, hiding themselves in caves in the ground. Zichmni taking liking to the soyle, stayes there with such as were willing, the rest he sent away in the ships, wherein unwilling, I was Captaine. Anthonie sayles 20. dayes East without sight of any Land, altering his course S. E. in 5. dayes he discovered Neome, he knowing the Country, had sailed past an Iland as he found, he victuailed here, the Iland being subiect to Zichmni: And in 3. dayes he sailes to Friesland. What followed after this Letter he knew not, but by con∣iecture, that Zich: built a City, and discovered on both sides of Engroneland, and that he see it particularly described in the Sea carde, but the narration is lost. The beginning of his let∣ter
is thus. COncerning these things that you desire to know of me, as of their Manners, and Customes, of the Beasts and Coun∣tryes adioyning. I haue made thereof a particular Booke, which by Gods helpe, I will bring with me, wherein I have described, the Country, the monstrous Fishes, the Lawes and Customes of Friesland, Iseland, Eastland, the Kingdome of Norway, Estotiland, Dorgio, an the end of the life, of Mr. Ni∣colo, with his discoverie, and the state of Engroneland: I have also written the Life and Acts of Zichmni, a Prince as worthy of Immortall memory, as any that ever lived, for his great vi∣gilancy, and singular humanity: Wherein I have described the discovery of Engroneland, on both sides, and the Citty he builded; and further, I hope to be with you very shortly to sa∣tisfie you by word of mouth. All these Letters were written by Mr. Anthonie, to Mr. Carlo his brother. FOr the more credit and confirmation of the former Histo∣ry of Mr. Nichcolo and Mr. Anthonie, which for some few respects, may be called in question. I have hereunto annexed, the judgement of that Famous Cosmographer Abraham Or∣telius, or rather the yeilding or submitting of his judgment thereunto, who in his Theatrum Ortis, Fol. 6. next after the Mappe of Mar del Zur, borroweth proofe, and authority out of this Relation, to shew that the N. E. part of America, cal∣led Estotiland, is in the Originall alwaies affirmed to be an Iland: was about the yeere, 1390. discovered by the foresaid Venetians, and aboue 100. yeares before Columbus set sayle for these Westerne Regions, and that the Northerne Seas were even then sailed by our Europian Pilates. This writer acknowledging, that Originall copies of the Zenijs Letters, were by him careleslly torne in peeec in his youth, which losse he now grieued at, I doubt in this, he was en∣forced in many things, to patch vp, as his memorie would serve, so as there may be some likelyhood of vntruths, how∣soever I doe beleeue, the first Copies were true, though this is subiect to mistakings. To continue antiquity may be to some purpose, seeing there
may be some vse thereof by the painfull Seamen, otherwise it may something satisfie, the never satisfied Curious, who en∣quire after the beginning of things, and herein Mr. Hakeluits paines doth deserve great commendations: who recordeth in his English Voyages. That Madoc, soone of Oween Guyneth, Prince of North Wales left the Land in contention, betweene his Brethren, and prepared certaine ships with Men and Munition, and sought adventures by Sea, sailing West, leaving the coast of Ireland so farre North, that he came to a Land vnknowne, where he saw many strange things. This must needes be some part of this Countrey, of which the Spaniards affirme themselves to be the first founders since Dannos time, wherevpon it is manifest, that this Country was by Brittanies discovered long before Columbus. Of Mados returne there be many fables, but he did returne, and declared of the fruitfull Countryes, he had seene with out Inhabitants, and on the contrary, what barren and wild ground, his Brethren and Nephewes, did kill and murder one another for: He prepared a Navie of ships, got with him such Men and Women, as were desirous to live in quiet, and taking leave of his friends, tooke his journey thither againe. Therefore it is to be supposed, that he and his people inhabi∣ted part of this Country; for it appeareth by Francis Lopez de Gomara, that in Acuzamill and other places, the people honored the Crosse, whereby it may be gathered, that Chri∣stians had beene there before the comming of the Spaniards. This Madoc arriving againe in that West Countrey, vnto the which he came 1170. left most of his people there, and returned backe for more of his owne Nation, acquaintance, and friends, to inhabite that faire and large Countrey, went thither againe, with 10. saile, as I find noted by Guyten O∣wen. I am of opinion, that the Land wherevnto he came was some part of the West Indies. As concerning Sebastian Cabot, I cannot find, that he was any further Northward then the 58. Degree, and so returned along the Land of America to the S. but for more certainty, heare his owne Relation to Galacius Burigarius, the Popes Legate in Spaine. Vnderstanding, saith he, by reason of the Spheare, that if I should saile by the way of North-west, I
should by a shorter tract come to India; I caused the King to be advertised of my device, who immediately caused two Caravels to be furnished, with all things needfull, which was as neere as I can remember, in the yeare 1496. In the begin∣ning of Summer, I begun to saile North-west, not thinking to find any other Land then that of Cataia, and from thence to come into India. But after certaine dayes, I found the Land run to the North which was to me a great displeasure, neverthelesse sailing a∣long the Coast, to see if I could finde any Gulfe that turned, I found the Land still to continue continent, to the 56. Degree vnder the Pole▪ and seeing that there the Coast turned toward the East, dispairing to find the passage, I turned backe againe, and sailed downe by the Coast of that Land toward the Equi∣noctiall. Thus much from himselfe. But heare, how Baptistie Ramusius his Country man, how he flattereth him thus. It's many yeares, since it was written vnto me by Sebastian Cabota our Countryman a Venetian, a Man of great experience and very rare in the Art of Navigati∣on, and the knowledge of Cosmographie, who sailed along and beyond this Coast of new France, at the charges of Hen∣ry the 7. King of England, and he advertised me, that having sailed along time West by North, beyond those Ilands into the Latit. of 67. Deg. and ½. vnder the North Pole; and on the 11. day of Iune, finding still the open Sea, without any impe∣diment, he thought verily by that way, to have passed on still to Cataia, which is in the East, and would have done it, if the Mutinie of the shipmasters and Marriners, had not hindered, and made him returne home, from that place. Out of Robert Fabians Chronicle. THere is also mention made of Iohn Cabota, Sebastians Fa∣ther, by his meanes, in the 13. yeare of Henry the Sea∣uenth, at the same Kings charge, one ship was victuailed from Bristow, wherein divers Marchants of London adventured sma stockes, to search for an Iland, he said was very Rich and re∣plenished with great Commodities: In his company went from Bristow 3. or 4. small Barkes, laden with coarse Cloth, Caps, Laces, Points, and other trifles; they departed the
beginning of May, but were not heard of in that Maiors time. Out of the same Chronicle. VVIlliam Purchase being Maior, three Saluages were ta∣ken in New found Land, and brought to the King,3. Salvages brought home▪ they were cloathed in Beasts skinnes, and eate raw flesh, and spake such speech, that no man could vnderstand them, and in their demeanor much like to bruite Beasts; of which two yeares after, I saw two apparrelled after the man∣ner of Englishmen in Westminster Parish, I could not discerne them from English, vntill I had learned what they were. An Extract taken out of the Mappe of Sebastian Cabota, cut by Clement Adams. IN the yeare of Grace 1497. John Cabot a Ʋenetian and Se∣bastian his Sonne, with an English Fleete, set from Bristow, discovered that Iland which before that time, no man had attempted, on the 24. day of June, this Land he called Prima Vesta, that is to say, first seene; that Iland lying out before the Land, he called the Ile of St. John: Because he discovered it vpon that day of St. John Baptist. The inhabitants of this Ile, vse to weare Beasts skinnes, in their Warres they vse Bowes, Arrowes, Pikes, Darts, Wooden-clubs, and slings: The soile is Barren in some places, and yeeldeth little fruit; but is full of white Beares, and Stagges, farre greater then ours, it yeil∣deth plenty of Fish, and these very great, as Seales and Sam∣mons, there are Soales of a yard in length, but especially, there is great plenty of that kind of Fish, which the Salvages call Baccalaos, there are also bred Hawkes and Eagles. Another Testimony of the Voyage of Sebastian Caboc, taken out of the third Decade of Peter Martyr of Angleria. THe North seas have bin searched by one Sbastia Cabot a Venetian borne, he furnished 2. Ships at his owne charge, (and first) with 300. men directed his course, towards the N. Pole, that even in the Moneth of July, he found monstrous heapes of Ice swimming on the Sea, and in a manner continuall day light: Thus seeing these heapes of Ice before him, he was enforced to turne his sailes, and follow the W. coasting the
shore, he was thereby, brought so farre into the South, by rea∣son of the land stretching Southward, that it was there almost equall in latitude with Fretum Herculeum. As he travelled by the coasts of this great Land which he named Bacculaos, he saith, hee found the like course of wa∣ters toward the West, but the same running more soft and gently, then the swift waters, which the Spaniards found in their Navigation South-ward; wherefore it is not onely moe like to be true, but ought also of necessity to be concluded, that betweene both the Lands hitherto vnknowne, there should be certaine great open places, whereby the waters continually passe, from the East, to the West: Which waters I suppose to be driven about the Globe of the Earth, by the incessant Motion and impulsion of the Heavens, and not to be swallowed and cast vp againe, by the breathing of Demo∣gorgon, as some have imagined; because they see the Sea by in∣crease, and decrease to ebbe and flow. Sebastian Cabota him∣selfe calls those Lands Bacculaos, because that in those Seas thereabout, he found so great multitude of certaine bigge Fish▪ much like vnto Tanis, which the Inhabitants call Bacculaos, and that they sometime stayed his ship. He found the people also of these Regions covered with Beasts skins, he saith also, he saw great plenty of Copper, and this is all of Note out of this Author. Francis Lopez de Gomara, out of his Generall Historie of the West-Indies. HE which brought most certaine newes of the Countrey of Bacculaos, saith Gomara, was Sebastian Cabot a Veneti∣an, which rigged 2. ships, at the Cost of Henry the 7. King of England, having great desire to Traffique for the Spices, as the Portugales did; he carried with him 300. men, and tooke the way towards Iseland, from beyond the Cape of Labrador, vntill he found himselfe in 58. Deg. and better, he made re∣lation that in the Moneth of July, it was so cold and the Ice so great, that he durst not passe any further; the dayes were very long in manner without night, he returned and refreshed at Bacculaos, and after sailed along the Coast Southward vnto 38. Degrees, and from thence he shaped his Course to returne into England.
An abstract of the Courses, Distances, Latitudes, Longitudes, Variations, Depths, and other Observations; as also, the severall procee∣dings, Discoveries, Accidents, and remarkable things of the Captaines, Masters, Pilots and others, formerly imployed for the search of the Northwest Passage to the East India. The History of Sir Martin Frobrishes voyage, 1567. WAs 15. yeares in noting and bringing up the Ad∣venture before hee did attempt the same, which was brought to passe by the helpe of the right honourable Ambrose Dudley Earle of War∣wick, the Expedition was prosecuted in two small Barques of 25. tonnes the piece, viz. The Gabriel, and the Michael, and one Pinnace of 10. Tonnes. He departed from Blackwall, Iune 15. went by the North,June 15. the 15. of Iuly he had sight of a ragged land, he tooke to be Freezeland▪ durst not approach the same for Ice and Fogge, and thereabouts he lost the sight of his small Pinnace by storme; which he thought the Sea had devoured, wherein were onely foure Men. The Michael misliking the matter, slipt back for England, with report, that the Captaine was lost at Sea. The worthy Captaine notwithstanding he had sprung his Mainmast in the storme, proceeded on W. Northwards, and the 20. he had sight of a high land he named Queene Eliza∣bethsJuly 20. Forlarnd, and sailing more Northerly along the Coast, de∣scried another Forland with a Gut, Bay or passage Westward: He met great store of Ice along the Coast, was crost with winds that he could not thwart those streights in few dayes; he discernes the Ice to be well consumed, either ingulfed therein by Indrafts, or else set so Southwards by Currents; He enters the 21. sayles Westwards 50. leagues with land on both sides; imagines the one the maine Continent of Asia, the other on larboard the firme land of America, he named the
Straight Frobrishers straight. After he had sailed 60. leagues up he went on land, found signes where fire had beene made; and Deere so mankinde, as he was faine to defend himselfe a∣gainst them: The people resort to him in their Canoes of Leather, had like to have stolne his Boate from him before he was aware; they came on Shipboard, brought him Salmon, Flesh and Fish, they appeared to be nimble of their joyntsSavage theeves Salmon, Flesh, Fish. and strong; they fall to trade for Fish, Seale, coates of Seale skinnes, and Beares skinnes, for bels, looking-glasses, and other toyes; they intercept his boate with 5. men, nere till this dayHis boate and 5 men lost. heard of. The Captaine by the ringing of a bell intices one of the Salvages to him, as though he would give it him, he lets the bell fall into the Sea, as the Salvage should have tooke it,He betraies one Salvage. he takes him by the hand and pulls him with his boate into the Ship: Whereupon in despight, the Salvage bit his tongueThe spight of a Salvage. in twaine, yet he lived till he came into England, and then dyed of cold he had taken at Sea; with this prize he returnes for England, arriveth in Harwich the 2. of October. He commandeth his Company at their landing in the fore∣said Countrey, to bring away something with them of thePossession. first they could lay their hand upon, in token of possession in the right of Queene Elizabeth. Whereupon, some brought Stone, some flowers, some grasse, one brought a peece of stone much like to Sea coale in co∣lour, but by weight seemed to be Mettall or Mynerall; but as yet not esteemed of, but from the place from whence it came. Of this bright Stone he gives a piece (as of something brought from that farre Country) to one of his Adventurers wives, who throwing the same into the fyre to burne; and after it was quenched with vineger, it glistered with a bright Marquesset of Gold; whereupon the matter being called in∣to some question, it was tryed by certaine Goldsmithes inGold Oare. London, who upon essay made, gave out that it held Gold, and that very richly for the quantity; and the said Gold∣smithes promised great matters, if any quantity thereof could be had, which hopes produced a second Voyage. This Voyage they gave names to Sounds, Ilands, Bayes, Capes, Streights, &c, as Elizabeth Forland, Cape Labradore, Gabriels Iland, Priors Sound, Thomas Williams Iland, Bour∣chers
Iland: Frobrishers Streights. And describes the Coun∣try▪ people to be like the Tartars: With long blacke hayre, broad Faces, flat Noses, tawnie coloured, wearing Garments of Seales skinnes. He arrived in Harwich the 2. of October. Navigation of Christopher Hall Master, with Fro∣brisher the first Ʋoyage. SEcretary Woollye, was sent from her Maiestie, to give charge to the Company of the ship to obey their Captaine, and be diligent in all things; he observes at Gravesend and found the. Latitude. 51. deg. 23. min. Variation 11. deg.  / . Inne 24. he had sight of Faires Ile: The 25. he had sight of the Swinborne in Shotland, the S. most Cape beares N. N. W. Fairely at the same time W. S. W. sailing from these bearings with Swinborne, he had depth 60. 50. 40. Fathams.Lat. 59. 46. Fairely bearing W. N. W. 6. leagues offryn, he had depth 59. and 46. fatham, and went into Tromius Sound in Shotland to stop a leake. 14. Leagues West, South-wards from Faire, Ile he had va∣riation W. 11. deg. 9. min. Iuly, 11. He had sight of Friesland sharpe pinacled High-Land,July. Lat. 61. Land, and covered with snow; bearing W. N. W. the Captaine attempted to get on Land, but could not for great store of Ice: And had no ground at 120. Fatham, sailing from thence 20. leag. S. W. observing the Sunne in the Meri∣dian 52. deg. Iudges the variation W. 2. points and a halfe. The 28. was foggie, but at the breaking vp thereof, he had sight of Land, supposed Labrado; found great store of Ice about the Land, but he had no ground at 100. Fath. a Cables lengthGreat Cur∣rent. off shore. And a great Current sets S. W. and N. E. 1. League  / . in the houre, The tide sets to the shore, and thenone great peece of Ice breaking made a noyse, as if the Cliffe had fallen into the Sea. 10. The floud sets S. W. along the Land: And it flowes so.August. A mistake. 11. Latitude here 63.  / . This day they enter the Streights, and set saile for Gabriels Iland, then distant 10. Leagues. 13. They enter within a Sound in a Sandy Bay, the Land beares E. S. E. depth 8. Fatham, a S. E. Moone full Sea; they name this Sound Priors sound, distant from Grabriels 10. leag.
16. Calme and faire, in 2. houres the Ice was froze aboutAugust. the Ship a quarter of an inch thicke. The 19. the Captaine and he went on shore vpon an Iland with 8. men, and from the top thereof, they had sight of 7. Boates which came rowing from the East side to the Iland, then they returned on shipboard and sent their Boate with 5. men to see which way they tooke, and so with a white Cloth or waffe brought one of their Boates with their men in her a∣long the shore, rowing after the Boate vntill they see the ship, and then they rowed on shore, and he followed and gave eve∣ry one of them a threed Point and brought one of themSalvages come on shipboard. aboard, where he did Eate, and Drinke, and then carried him ashore againe; wherevpon the rest being 19. Persons came on boord, but he could not vnderstand their Language, they be like Tartars, with long blacke haire, broad faced, flat nosed, and tawny Coloured, wearing Seale skinnes, and so doe the women, nothing differing, but the women in the Face hath blue stroakes downe the Cheekes, and about the eyes; theirWomen mar∣ked. Boates are made of Seale skinnes, with a wooden keele with∣in them, much like vnto a Spanish shalop, save onely they be flat bottomed, and sharpe ended. 20. They went on Land vpon the East side of the Iland with 4. men more in the Boate, where they see their houses, the people came to them calling (and rowing) one of them came into their Boate, they carried him on board, & gave him a Bell, & a knife, the Captaine commanded 5. men to set him on shore in an Iland, & not amongst their Company, but they not regar∣ding went to them, who surprised their Boat and themselves▪A Surprise. never as yet heard of. 21. The next day, they shot off a Falken-gun, and sounded a trumpet to heare from their men, but were not answered, this morning the Snow was on Foote thicke vpon the hatches. 22. They went to the place where their men were lost, and had sight of 14. Boates, and some came neare them, but they could heare nothing of their men. 26. Returnes homeward, at 8. a clocke in the night, was thwart of Gabriels Ile, and had Cape Labradore as he suppo∣sed, W. 10. Leagues off. 1. Had sight of Friesland 8. leag. off, from this day to theSeptember. 6. they run along Iseland.
25. Sight of Orkney. 1. Anchor at Yarmouth.October. Sir Martin Frobrisher his 2. Voyage. 1577. DEparted from Blackwall the 26. of May, with 3. ships,May. to wit, the Aide of the Queenes, burthen 180. Tonnes, the Michaell, and the Gabriell, accompanied with 140. Gen∣tlemen, Soldiers, and Saylers, victualed for halfe a yeare. He went by the North the 7. of June, arrived at Orkney, inJune. the Iles of Scotland. 8. He departs from thence, sailes be∣twixt W. and N. W. vntill the 4. of July, 26. dayes saile; from thence they meete with much Drift-wood, as they sup∣pose from New found Land: And driven over with the Cur∣rent, which they say, sets from the W. to the East. The 4. of Iuly, they had sight of Friesland, 10. or 12. leagues off, and great store of Ice, 30. or 40. Fatham aboue water, theyJuly. supposed on ground; though they could scarce sound the bot∣tome for depth. The Generall attempteth to goe on Land but cannot: they coast it 4. dayes; sees no signe of habitation. Yet by Birds which in Fogs had lost the land & came to the Ships; they suppose the Country to be more habitable with∣in, then outward shoare maketh shew or signification. The 8. they depart from thence. 16. He comes to the making of the Land, named the yeare before by him, the Queenes Forland, being as they judge it, an Iland lying neere the supposed continent of America: Another Iland lying up∣on the Asian side, called Halls Iland; betwixt which two I∣lands, goeth in Frobrishers straights, or the unknowne passage into the Sea of Sur. He doth suppose that the Ice of this Coast is carried by some contrary E. or W. tyde or current, upon the Coast of Freezland: causing that Country to be farre more intemperate; than other countries farre more North. At their first entrance, they found the Straight mured with Ice, the Captaine with his Pinnace past twice through, before he durst hazzard in the great Ships. They goe on land, the people seemed to be joyfull thereof, they embrace▪ and the Captaine laid hands on them; but they escape through nimblenesse▪ and defends themselves with their bowes and Arrowes; he tooke one, all the rest escaped.
They put their Ships into the Straights all full of Ice, they made 14. bourds in one watch, to refraine the Ice, the light∣nesse of the night did them much comfort and helpe for sight, and this hazard they made for safegard of their Captaine and Master who were on land. 17. Being the day following, the Capt. came on board with report of great riches hid in the bowels of that Continent. Within 3. or 4. dayes after, they had been in the Streights,July. the W. and N. W. winds dispierst the Ice. The 19. they enter without impediment. The 20. they found a good harbour,Iackman Mrs. Mate. and names it Iackmans Sound, anchoring the Ships there. The Generall marches up into the land, takes possession in the Queenes name, and imployes his men about the businesse they came thither for. Whilest they continued in this harbour, they kept watch continually with boates and roapes ready to hale and towe a∣way the Ice, which otherwise might have driven thwart the Ships with Ebbe and flood. The Generall findes not commodity answerable to his Ex∣pectation in the supposed America: leaves the Ships; coasts on to the supposed Asia, the stones on land and Sand in Sea sparkle like Gold on both sides, (if all be Gold that glysters) upon the West shore they found a dead Fish floating, it pro∣ved by the horne to be a Sea Vnicorne; the Spiders put there∣inSea Vnicorne. dyed. The Generall in further search, findes Gold oare as he sup∣posed, with a good harbour, and returnes to the Ships; by the way he espies a Tent covered with Seale skins, the peo∣ple was fled, he leaves glasses, bels, and knives, therein; one∣ly tooke one Dog and nothing else; leaves a letter, withThey tooke a Dog. pen, inke and paper, for his men to write (which was tooke from him the last yeare) if they were living. Their men march up againe, and found their Tents were remooved to the foreside of the Bay, they fled by Sea; ourA conflict. men incompasse them both by land and Sea, they defend them∣selvs with bowes & Arrowes, and fiercly assault our men: We wounded 3. with our Arrowes, who perceiving themselves hurt desperately, lept from the Rockes into the sea and drow∣nedA woman and ld taken. themselves. The rest escaped by flying into the Mountains, onely▪ women stayed, the one for Age, the other having had a
Child, was brought on Shipboard being shot through the hayre of her head but her child was shot through the arme, which the Chirurgion endeavoring to cure, she pluckt off theBarbarous Surgery. applyed salues, and like a Dog, with licking, healed vp the Childs arme. The man Salvage formerly taken and she brought together, every man with silence desired to behold the manner of their meeting, the which was more worth the beholding then can well be expressed; At their first sight they beheld each the other very wistly a good space, without speech or word vt∣tered, with great change of Colour and Countenance, as though it seemed the griefe of their Captivitie had taken a∣way the vse of their tongues, the Woman at first very sod∣dainly, as though she disdained or regarded not the man, tur∣ned away, and began to sing as though she minded another matter, but being againe brought together, the Man broke vp the silence first, and with a sterne and stayed countenance, began to tell a long solemne tale to the woman, wherevnto she gave good hearing, and interrupted him nothing till he had finished, and afterwards being growne into more famili∣ar acquaintance by speech, they were turned together, so that I thinke the one would hardly have lived without the com∣forts of the other, and for so much as we could perceiue; al∣beit they lived continually together, yet they did never vse as man and wife, though the woman spared not to doe all ne∣cessary things that appertaine to a good huswife, idefferent∣ly for them both; as in making cleane their Cabine, and in every other thing appertaining to his ease. For when he was sicke, she would make him cleane, and kill and flea the dogs for their eating, and dresse his meate. Onely I thinke it worthSlavage Mo∣desy. the noting, the continencie of them both, for the man would never shift himselfe, except he had first caused the woman to depart out of his Cabine, and they both were most shamefast, least any of their privie parts should be discovered, either of themselves or of any other. This Bay was named Yorke Sound: The point Bloudy Point. Our men returned to their Tents (seeing there was no hope to bring them to Civility) & made spoile of thē; wherein they found an old shirt, a doublet, a Girdle, and shooes of the men lost the last yeare.
This done they returne againe to their Ship. And the thirdAugust. day they depart from this supposed America: The fourth, they came to the Generall in a faire harbour on the East side, which they named the Countesse of Warwicks Sound; In this place, they fully intend to ade with the supposed gold Mine∣rall, to counteruaile the charge of their first and this second Voyage. The Inhabitants come to them againe, and make shew that 3. of the 5. men are alive, making signes for penne and inke, and that within three or foure dayes they would returne, and bring those that were living. Sir Martin Frobrisher his Letter to the English Captaines, taken the last yeare in Meta Incognita. IN the Name of GOD in whom wee all beleeve, who I trust hath preserved your bodies and Soules amongst those Infidels, I commend me unto you, I will be glad to seeke by all meanes you ca devis for your deliverance, either with force or with any Commodities within my ships, which I will spare for your sakes, or any thing else I can doe for you; I have on board of theirs a man, a woman, and child, which I am contented to deliver for you, but the man of theirs which I carried away the last yeare is dead in Eng∣land; moreover you may declare unto them, that if they deliver you not, I will not leave a man alive in their Countrey: And thus if one of you can come to speake with me, they shall have either the man, woman or child, in pawne for you; and thus unto God whom  trust you doe serve, In hast I leave you to him, we will daily pray for you, this Tuesday morning the 7. of August. Yours to the utmost of my poore. MARTIN FROBRISHER. I have sent you by these bearers, Pen, Inke and Paper to write back againe, if persoally you can, come to satisfie me of their estate. Here their Captive being on shore, set up 5. small stickes in a Circle one by another, with a small bone placed in the
middest, they conceited thereby, he would give his Coun∣trimen to understand, that for 5. men betrayed the last yeare he was taken prisoner, which hee signified by the bone in the middest; for afterwards, wee showed him the Picture of his Countryman which the last yeare was brought into England, whose counterfeit was drawne with his Boate and furniture, both as he was in his owne and also English apparell, hee was upon the sodaine much amazed thereat, and beholding advi∣sedly the same with silence a good while, as though he would straine curtesie, whether should begin the speech (for hee thought him no doubt, a living creature) at length began to question with him, as with his Companion, and finding him dumbe and mute, seemed to suspect him as one disdainfull, and would with a little helpe have growne into choller at the matter, untill at last by feeling and handling, he found him but a deceived Picture, and than with great noyse and cryes ceased not to wonder, thinking that we could make men live or dye at our pleasure. They also make signes they have a King carried on mensA King. shoulders, a man farre surpassing any of ours in bignes and sta∣ture. It may be thought they are vsed to traffique with some other Nation; yet for all this faire dealing they lay lurking to betray our men, with divers signes and raw flesh, which we got, and it served for meate for the man and woman, whose stomackes as yet could not digest the Shippes victuals; One amongst them counterfeited himselfe ame, who being shot at with a Calliver to affright him, he presently tooke to his legges and runne away; but in all this time they cannot heare of their men. Their weapons are Bowes, Arrowes, slings and darts, they have 2. sorts of Boats, the one is for one man and close deckt, shaped like a Weavers shuttle; the other open and will carryGreat Canoes. 14. men more or lesse; and planckt with Seale skinnes. It is thought that their habitation in Winter is farre with∣in the land, and that they abide here in Summer onely to live upon Fish. The 24. of August after they had satisfied their minds and laden their Shippes, they depart, falls with the lands end of England and puts into Milford haven in the Admirall. The 2. barkes were separated at Seaby storme; the one ar∣rived
at Bristow: the other came about Scotland, and arrived safely at Yarmouth. In this voyage they lost two men; Queene Elizabeth named the land Meta incognita. Things Remarkeable in this second Voyage. THey are men of large Corporature, good proportion, and of colour not much unlike the Sunne-burnt Country man. They weare their haire something long, cut disorderly before, their women weare their haire long, knit up with two loopes, some of them Races their cheekes, chins, and faces, whereupon they lye a colour like darke Azure. They eate all their meate Raw, as flesh, fish, fowle, or but lightly perboyled, with water and bloud they will eate Ice as we doe Suger. For necessity, they will eate grasse like bruit beasts, with∣out table or stoole, and when their hands are imbrued in blood they licke them cleane with their tongues. They yoke their Dogs for use, as wee doe Oxen, and when they grow old they fatten them to eate, and if they dye they doe the like. They apparell themselves in skins of Beasts & Fowle, sowed together with the sinewes thereof, to defend them from cold. They make their apparell with hoods and tailes, which tailes they bestow as favours to ratifie any friendship showen them, the mens garments are not so long as the womens. They weare their hose close to their legs, from the wast to the knee without any opening before, as well the one kind as the other, upon their legs they weare hose of leather, with the fur-side inward 3. paire at once, especially the women, in these hose they put their necessaries they carry about them, they put also a bone into their hose from the foote to the knee, where∣on their hose being drawne are held up in place of garters. They dresse theyr skins very soft and supple with haire on, in winter they weare the skin-side inwards, in Sommer out∣ward, other apparell they have none. Their beasts, fishes, and fowles, are all their meate, drinke, apparell, houses, bedding; and all their Riches. Their houses are tents covered with skins, pitched with quarters foure square, meeting at tops sewed together with si∣newes,
their entrance is alwayes ore against the Sunne. They have other sorts of houses which they found not to be inhabited, raised with stones and Whale bones, and covered with skins, the entering not unlike unto an ovens mouth, which they frequent during their hunting time, and so leaves them untill they come thither againe. They have 2. sorts of Boates, the one only for one man the other for 16. men, they kill all their fish and flesh with darts, and it may be thought, they repaire to some other place to live in winter farther from the Sea side, they will eate theyr flesh and fish, smell it never so filthily, what knowledge they haue of God or what Idoll they adore is unknowne, they make signes of people that weare bright plates of Gold in their foreheads. The Country is high and mountainous, great quantity of snow lying thereon, there is little plaine ground and no grasse, but that which is like unto mosse grow∣ing upon soft ground such as we get turffe upon. There is no wood at all. There is great quantity of Deere, their skinnes like unto Asses, their heads or hornes doe farre exceed any, both in length and breadth of those Countryes, their feete are great as Oxen which measured were 7. or 8. inches in breadth, their are also Hares, Wolves, fishing-Beares, and sun∣dry sorts of Sea fowle. The 3. Voyage of Sir Martin Frobrisher, this Voyage the Queene gave him a Chaine of Gold. Articles to be observed in his Fleete. 1. INprimis to banish Swearing, Dice, and Card play∣ing, and filthy Communication, and to serve GOD twice a day with the ordinary service vsed in the Church of England, and to cleare the glasse according to the old order of England. 2. The Admirall shall carry the light, and after his light be once put out no man to goe on head of him, but every man to fill his sailes to follow as neare as they may, without in∣dangering one another. 3. That no man shall by day or night depart further from the Admirall than the distance of one English mile, and as
neare as they may, without indangering one another. 4. If it chance to grow thicke, and the wind contrary ei∣ther by day or night, that the Admirall be forced to cast about, before her casting about she shall give warning by shooting off a piece, and to her shall answer the Vice-admirall, and the Reare-admirall, each of them with a Peece, if it be by night or in a fogge, and that the Vice-admirall shall answer first and the Reare-admirall last. 5. That no man in the fight discrying any saile, or sailes, give vpon any occasion any Chase before he have spoken with the Admirall. 6. That every night all the Fleete come vp and speake with the Admirall, at 7. of the clocke or betwixt that and eight, and if the weather will not serve them all to speake with the Admirall, then some shall come to the Vice-admirall, and receiue the order of their course from Mr. Hall. chiefe pylot of the flight, as he shall direct them. 7. If to any man in the flight there happeneth any mischance, they shall presently shoote off 2. peeces by day, and by night 2. peeces, and show 2. lights. 8. If any man in the night come vp and hayle his fellow knowing him not, he shall give him his watch word, Before the world was God, the other shall answer him if he be one of our flight, After God came Christ his Sonne, so that if any be found amongst vs not of our company, he that first discryeth any such saile or sailes, shall giue warning to the Admirall by him selfe or other that he can speake vnto, that sayles better then he, being nerer vnto him. 9. That every ship in the fleete in the time of Fogs, which continually happen with little winds and most calmes, shall keepe a reasonable noise with Drum and Trumpet, or other∣wise to keepe themselves cleere one of the other. 10. If it fall so thicke and misty, that we lay to Hull, the Admirall shall give warning with a peece, and putting out▪ lights one over the other, to the end that every man may take in his sailes, and at his setting of sailes againe doe the like if it be not cleare. 11. If any man discover Land by night, that he give like warning that he doth for mischances, 2. lights and 2. peeces; if it be by day one peece, and put out his flag, and strike all sailes he hath abroad.
12. If any ship shall happen to loose company by force of weather, then any such ship or ships, shall get him into the Latitude of—and so keepe that Latitude vntill they get Fri∣land, they shall get them into the Latit. of—and to the North of—and being once entred into the straights, all such ship or ships shall every watch shoote off a good peece, & look out well for smoake and fire, which those that get in first shall make every night, vntill all the fleete become together. 13. That vpon the sight of an Ensigne, in the Mast of the Admirall, a peece being shot off, the halfe fleete shall repaire to the Admirall, to vnderstand such conference, as the Gene∣rall is to have with them. 14. If any chance to meete with any Enemie, that 4. ships shall attend vpon the Admirall, viz. The Francis of Foy▪ the Moone, the Barke Dynnis, and the Gabriell; and 4 upon my Liev∣tenant Generall in the Judeth. viz. The Hopewell, the Are∣nall, the Beare, and the Salamander; & the other 4. vpon the Vice∣admiral, the Anne Francis, the Thomas of Ipswich, the Ema∣nuell, and the Michaell. 15. If there happen any disordered person in the flight, that he be taken and kept in safe custody vntill he may con∣veniently be brought aboard the Admtrall, there to receive such punishment as his or their offence shall deserve.120. Persons appointed to in∣habite Metain∣cognita: 3 Ships was appointed to be left for y• use of the Inha∣bitants. He departed from Harwich the 31. of May, 1578. with 15. Shippes, having given that Instructions for ordering of his fleete as well for civill government as direction. He goes by the West; the 6. of Iune he had sight of Cape Cleere sayling towards the N. W parts from Ireland. A great Current from S. W. carried them 1. point to the N. E. of their course, which current seemed to him to con∣tinue its course towards Norway.Freezeland. The 20. of Iune, the Generall discries land, and being Freze∣land, names it West England, he goes on shore, and findes a good harbour for Shippes, the people led; they Iudge it part of Meta incognita, or Groneland, their boats and apparell are all alike with those of Meta incognita; they found in their Tents, a box of small Nayles, red herrings, and divers carved things, so as they iudge them to be civill people, and ArtificersJune. or else to have trade with those that are. 23 They depart from thence, and names a certaine cliffe for
some resemblance Charing crosse, they meete with much yee, many Whales and fogges. The Salamander a ship of his Flight strucke upon a Whale, with full stem being under courses and Bonnets, he makes an uglie noyse and two dayes after they found a dead Whale, sup∣posesJuly. it the same. The 2. they had sight of the Queenes Forland, they beare in all day, had much Ice, at night they were entred the Sreight all overcome with Ice; not froze there, but driven by the windes violence. The writer conceives the Mary glaciale to be a conjecture.It flowes 10. Fatham. And that no salt Sea can be froze ore with Ice, and in these place where it doth ebbe and flow above 10. Fathames. And the Ice he met at Sea 1000. Miles from land, all which congealed upon fresh water; he concludes they were froze in bayes and rivers, and not in the Sea. This Ice doth shut together with winde, and open at the shifting or change thereof as in other places, so as it is passable. The Barke Dennis struck vpon a Rocke: The ship sunke, the men were saved by their boates; therein were much of the house drowned, which the men appointed to winter, should have lived in Meta incognita. Amidst the Ice a storme takes them at S. E. some takes in sailes and hulls, that had roome; others make fast to the Ice others send off Ice with poales, oares, junkes, oken boards, and the like; so as all were put to it: Yet for all this, their ship sides, and waeles were sore torne and bruised. The next day, the winde changed W. N. W. the Ice dis∣pierced, they goe to Sea and meetes 4. more of their Compa∣ny, who had all kept the Sea, during the S. E. storme, they resolue to keepe the Sea vntill the Sunne dissolue, or the wind dispierce the Ice out of the straight. 7. They cast about inward againe, had sight. Of what Land it should be there was difference of opinions; ThroughCurrent N. E the thicke mists, and by snow newly fallen, the habit of the Land was altered: Thinking they had bin to the N. E. of Fro∣brishers straights. Then comming from Land by a Current com∣ming from thence along the Coast, they were carried to S. W. off the Queens Forland, more miles then they thought possible Here they make a peece of Land, for Mount Warwicke, yet
wonders how they should be so farre shot within the straight without their knowledge, how be it they confessed they found a swifter course of flood, then hitherto they had obser∣ved; And here their Ships were whirled about in a moment,Whirlepoole. lying a Hull as though they had beene in a Whirlepoole, the waters making no lesse noyse to be heard a farre off, then the waterfall of London bridge. Here they could have no observation, the Generall sends to the Shippes to know their chiefest opinions; Christopher Hall chiefe Pylate saide, he had never seene that coast before, nor could not make it for any part of Frobrishers streights, although the land did lye and trent alike.July. The 10. the weather continued thicke and darke, and the fleete disperced, they were doubtfull whether to set to Sea, or to follow a doubtfull course in a Sea, Bay, or Streight, they knew not, or stand a long an unknowne coast, where they could not discerne dangers for darke mists and thick weather. Whereupon some betooke themselves to Sea, as thinking that the safest Course, others followed the Generall, within that doubtfull and unknowne Streights above 60. leagues, ha∣ving alwaies a faire Continent upon the Starboard, and a continuance of an open Sea before them, so as if itThis doth ar∣gue that this Streight doth goe through Groeneland in∣to Fretum Da∣vis. had not beene for the gathering of his fleete againe; as also their lading of Ore, he both would and could have gone into the Mare del Sur, for the further they sailed, the lesse Ice, and 50. leagues within this Streight was none at all. This streight hath also a great Indraft; for by the foresaid current, the floting wracke of the barke Dyoniss lost at the Queenes Forland, was brought thither along the Coast, and by the Indraft drawne in there, it being many miles distant. They doe also affirme out of some of their best marriners observation, that in this streight, the lood-tyde doth runne 9. houres, and ebbe 3. which may well come to passe by force of the current comming from the E. and butting upon that coast, may enforce the tyde into all indrafts and rivers, with longer flowings, untill the force of the ebbe, receiving his strength from the West Sea, doe resist it, the Sea will not according to the saying. Naturam expellas furca licit usqui recurrit.
Also they observed vpon this Coast, that lying a Hull, 25.This 15. leag. was to the E. from Land; and this hull∣ling must be neer some in∣draft. If so▪ I am perswaded, the S. part of Groenland is all Ilands. leagues off Land, the wind blowing trade they were brought to within two leagues thereof contrary to expectation. This part of the Country, they hold to be more populous, and fruitfull then any discovered before: And better stored with grasse, fowle, and wild Beasts. And heere they see grea∣ter Boates then before, and of the contents of 20. persons; And they thinke that being 60. leag. vp the soresaid straight, they saw Land on Larboard. To returne backe againe the same way out of this streight, along the supposed backeside of the Continent of America: at the Queenes Forland; he espies a Gut to goe through in Frobrishers straights, sends the Gabriell through, who meetes againe in the streight, so the Queenes Forland proved an Iland. They anchor in the streight, at a Land they named Hattons Head-land, where they met 7. of their ships, and staies for the rest. The 26. they had a cruell storme of winde and snow which disperced their Fleete, and were most cruelly weather-beaten. The 2. of August, all the Fleete arrived except 4. and har∣bours neee Mount Oxford. The 6. day they got vp as high as Leicester point. Then they hold a Consultation for inha∣biting but doth not. 1. ship they had lost then as they thought but she came home without doing any thing. Therest search∣es for Mynes and findes one, cals it Bests blessing, after his owne name, that found it, but in bringing their ship thereto, she grounded vpon a Rocke & halfe dryed; So as they were forced to vnderprop her with their mayne yard, and thereby escaped the danger which they might otherwise have fallen into. Now the Fleete being all laden and ready, they furnish vp a little house with Bells, Babies, Pictures of men and women, Glasses, Whissles, Pipes, with an oven with baked bread, & left it to the Natives. And vpon the last of August, the whole Fleete was ready to depart, but a cruell storme tooke them, some at Sea; some at anchor in Sounds: The Busse was faine to seeke a new way to Sea through a Sound she rid in vpon the backside of Beare sound; and got to Sea to the N. of Frobrishers Straights; but the Generall came home in the Gabriell and could not get aboard his owne ship the Aide.
The Busse comming home, found an Iland in 57d, and a halfe sailed a long 3. dayes, and saith, it is a fruitfull Champion coun∣try, and wooddy. The Busse fell on the South of Freezeland, the 8. of Septem∣ber, they steered from thence S. E. and by S. untill the 12. when they discryed land 5. leagues off: The S. W. part bore S. E. by E. the Northermost, N, N, E. or N, E. the Master accoun∣ted the S. E. point of Freezland was then from him N. W. by N.If this Iland were found a∣gaine there is great store of Fh about . 50. leag. he accounts this Iland to be 25. leagues long S. E. and N. W. the S. side is in 57.  / . they had sight of it 28. houres, they opened 2. harbours therein, the Master did account him∣selfe 50, leagues S. E. by S. from Freezeland, when he first dis∣covered this land; there dyed about 40. persons upon this voyage. It is to be observed in these Ʋoyages, That these are but Histories, and that they did not know whether they saw A∣sia and America or no, as I am sure they did not, nor know in what land they were; yet for certaine they were at Meta In∣cognita, otherwise Groneland. I thinke they meant, to have kept this golden Country to themselves; for the courses, distance, latitude, longitude, variation, and other marine observati∣ons herein is none, only one Latitude of 63. 8. min. the entrance of Frobrishers Straights; and Freezeland they have placed in 61. deg. with this new Iland, the Busse is in 37d. and a halfe Northerne Latitude. There is Beares, Hares, Foxes, and innumerable of Sea-Fowle, where of his men kild in one day 15. hundred, he found of Ginnie beanes in their tents of colour Red, the Inhabitants are good markemen with their darts, for the most part they will strike a Ducke in the eye, but altogether in the head. The first Voyage of Captaine Iohn Dvis of Sandruge in Devonshire 1585. to the North-West. HEe departed from Darmouth the 7. day of Iune, with 2.Thought to find it betwixt Frobrishers 62 and Cbots, 58. as I suppose. Barques, viz. the Sunshine of 50. tonnes 23. persons, and the Mooneshine of 35. tonnes, 17. persons; he put into Fal∣mouth the 8. and remained there untill the 13. he went by the West.
14. He puts into Siey and had contrary windes untill theJune. 28, in his course N. Westward he see many Whales and Por∣poses, they kild a Darly-head or porkfish which eate as sweete as any Mutton. The 19. they fall into a great whirling or brisling of a tydeJuly. setting to Northwards, and they heard a mighty roaring of the Sea, as if it had beene the breach of some Shore, the weather was fogge and mist, they lanch a boare to sound, but findes no ground at 300. fathomes, and found the roaring to be the Sea and Ice beating together. The 20. they descryed land, the most deformed that ever was seene, it seemed like the forme of Suger loafes, over-to∣ping the Clouds and covered over with snow, the shore be∣laid with Ice, a league off he names this Land Desolation. The 21. they perceived themselves imbaid very deepe, and great store of Ice, to the N. N. E. W, and S. W. they cleared themselves by running S. S. W. along the shoare. The Captaine attempts to land but could not for Ice, theyThis water came from land for certaine. try for fish but could get none, the water was black and thick like to a standing poole, here were many Seales. They see woods on land like to those on New found land, they had great store of float-wood upon the Coast, they tooke up one Tree 60. foote long and 14. hands about, they bend their course to South with intent to double the Land. The 23. they coast the land which did lye E. N. E and W, S. W. The 24. they coast the Land lying E. and W. not able to come neere shore for Ice the weather something thicke and colde, the allowance of victuall was encreased, so as 5. men had every morning  / . pound of bread and one can of beere to breakefast, the weather like Aprill in England, but when the winde blew from land or Ice it was colde, but when it came of the Sea it was very hot. They depart from this land, sailes N. Westward above 4. dayes; 29. they descry land in 64. 15. bearing N. E. the aye and sea cleare and temperate, he stands with land, espies many faire sounds and harbours and many Inlets into the land, he Iudges this land to be a number of Ilands, he anchors, goes on land, findes where the inhabitants had beene, he findes also a Shooe, pieces of Leather sowed with seames, and peeces of
furre, and wooll like to Beaver.Wooll like Bea∣ver. The Country people come to him, he causes his Musitians to play wherein they tooke great delight, and fals a dauncing, at night he comes a board, they all depart. The 30. in the morning came 30. Canoes by the Ship, calsThe Savages came. them to land, and they both make protestation by clapping on their brests and pointing to the Sunne, they become familiar, they will sell their cloaths from their backs, with the buskins, hose and gloves made of Seale skins and bird skins, the lea∣ther well dressed and artificially sowed; They had one paire ofLeather well dressed. Buskins full of wooll like Beaver, they are very tractable, voide of subtilty, and easie to be brought to civility, he thinkes they worship the Sunne. During their stay here, they found a reasonable quantity of wood, as Furre, Spruce, and Iunupir, which had floated thither. They saw aboundance of Seales in Shoales, as it had all beene fish, the cliffes was such as Sir Martin Frobrisher brought from Meta Incognita: There was divers slowers, Slud or Musco∣via-glasse,Muscovy-glasse they found an hearbe growing upon the Rockes whose fruite was sweete, full of red luyce, the ripe ones wereA red Berry. like Currans, they iudge the people to have store of Furres,Store of Furres they make shew after they see he would have skins and furrs, that they would goe into the Country and fetch such things as they had, but the winde comming faire he came away. The first of August they proceeded N. N. W. for the disco∣verie. The 6. he descried land in 66. 40. min. voyde of Ice, he an∣chorsAugust. & in a bay neare a faire Mount, the Cliffes thereof as ori∣ent as Gold: He names it Mount Raleigh, the road Totnes-road, the Sound encompassing the road Exeers Sound, the N. For∣land Dyers Cape, the S. For-land or cheekes of the Sound Cape Walsingham; He espies 4. white Beares, and kills one first, and two afterwards. The next day they kill a Beare, the sore-paw was 14. in∣chesA huge Beare kild. over, this Coast was Mountainous without wood, or a∣ny thing growing thereon; the aire was very temperare. The 8. he sets saile from Mount Raleigh, and Coasts along S. S. W. The 9. his men complained their allowance was too small,Allowance augmented. it was augmented to 5. men 4. l. of bread a day, 12. quarts
of beere, 6. New-land fishes, and on the flesh day one gill of Pease more, but Butter and Cheese, was restrained from them. The 11. he comes to the South-most Cape of this Land, he named it the Cape of Gods mercy; the weather foggie, he Coasts the N. side, and at the fogges vp-breaking, he was ente∣red into a faire passage in some places 20. leag. broad; tolera∣ble weather, voyde of Ice, the Sea of the nature, colour and quality of the maine Ocean. Heare he hath great hope of a passage, sailes 60. leag. N. N. W. discovers certaine Ilands in the midst: but passage on both sides, he devides both the ships, the one sailes on the N.Fogge in a strange straight. side the other on the S. where they stayed 5. daies with S. E. winde, fogge and foule weather. 14. They goe on Land, find signes of people, and tame doggs with collers about their neckes; a bone in their Pizels, and are vsed to traile sleddes which they found, like ours; one made of Furre, spruce, and oken boards; the other of Whale∣bone. They had hung vpon the top of these sleds, the heads of 3. Beasts they had killed. They found other trifles no∣thing worth, but onely to show that the people had lately been there, but they find this place all Ilands with great Sounds passing betwixt them. And here they found whales commingWhales▪ from the Westerne Sea; and to the East-ward they had not seene one. As they were rowing into a Sound lying S. W. soddenly there came a violent Counter-checke of a tide from S. W.Tide from S. W. flowed 6. or 7. Fathams. against the flood which they came with; but sounding, they could have no ground heere at 300. fathoms. It flowed uppe and downe 6. or 7. fathoms, and they could not perceive from whence it was maintayned: If care had beene taken at their entrance into this Streight, they might easily have resolved themselves. The 21. they coast the S. shore, they see many Sounds. The 23. they enter into a faire Sound, at the S. entrance of this Streight in 25. fathom greene Ose. The 26. they depart from the sight of the N. land of this en∣trance, directing their course homewards. The 10, he had sight of Desolation. 13, Hee departs from sight thereof; the 27, he had sight of England; and the 30, he came into Dartmouth.
The Observation. He set forth from England, Iune 28, his furthest was 66▪ d. 40. N. latitude, he sayles then N, W. into a passage 60. leag. upon the America side, as was then supposed and found no hin∣derance; yet he returnes homewards the 21. of August: Hee was the first wee know of, that ever was on the West-side of Groenland, or sayled so farre West in that paralell. He discovered upon Groenland-side, from Desolation to 64. 15, min. and on the West-side from 66. 40. to the South-side of his new Entrance, and returned home safely. Captaine Iohn Davis, his second Voyage. 1587. HE departed from Dartmouth with 4. ships, viz. The Mer∣maydMay 7. 100. Tonnes, the Sunshine 60. tonnes, the Moone∣shine 35. tonnes, the North-starre 10. tonnes. The 15. discovers land in 60. deg. and in longitude from theJune. Meridian of London 47. mightily pestered with Ice and snow, from land the Ice lay in some places 10. 20. 50. leagues; hee was constrained to beare backe into 57. deg. to acquit the Ice. The 29. he meets land in 64. and in longitude from London, Meridian 58. 30. for divers reasons he beares into this known harbor, and to set up his Pinnace; he findes many goodly har∣bors, with high land little troubled with snow, and sea altoge∣ther voyd of Ice; he sends his Boats to search before the ships for shoale-water to anchor in. The Countrey people come to them with cries and shouts; but after they espied some of the Company, whom they knew before, they came to their boates and hung vpon them with great joy. The Captaine with di∣vers others goeth on Land. The people come to him with dauncing and leaping; and made signes, they knew all those that had beene there the yeare before: At this present, there were 18. of them to whom he gaue to every one a knife; they offered him skinnes, but he shewed them that he bestowed them in curtesie, and so dismist them; with signes that they should returne in 4. houres. The people repaire to him the next day, and brought withThe people bring Skinnes for trade. them the skinnes of Seales, Stagges, white Hares, Seale-fish, Salmon-peale, small Codde, dry Caplin, with other fish, and Birds.
He sent to search their habitation with command that no hurt should be offered, they find Tents framed vpon wood, covered with Seale skinnes; they find therein dry Caplin, bags of Traine oyle, and Seale skins in tan-tubbs. He mans his Boate attended with 50. Cannoes, intending to view the Country, the people very carefully helpe him up and downe the steepe Rockes. In leaping, our men outstript them, in wrastling they cast our best wrastler that had bothThey found them to have both skill and strength. skill and strength. In a certaine Iland they found a grave wherin men lay buri∣ed covered over with Seale skins, and a Crosse laid over them; they be people of good stature, broad-faced, every time they come they make new truce by pointing to the Sunne, and crying Eleot, striking vpon their brest. He takes them to be Idolaters and witches: They are simple in all their conver∣sation; but very theevish in stealing of Iron; of which they make great account; They in the end began to shew their Nature in cutting of Cables, their Boate from their stern;They gave them knives but not for that purpose. and their Cloathes where they laid to aire. They also stole their Oares, a Calliver, a Boare speare, a sword, wherevpon they brake the Peace, by shooting off a Musket and a Faulcon, at which noise they all departed with great feare. They returned againe within 10. houres, to in∣treat peace which was immediately granted, they brought Seale skinnes and Salmon-peale, but seeing Iron they could not forbeare to steale; they eate their meate raw, drinke salt water, and eate grasse and yee with delight. Their weapons are for the most darts; but some have Bowes and Arrowes, and Slinges, with their Nettes, made of whale-fynne, with which they doe artificially catch fish with. They have warre with some other Nation or Inland people; for many of them are wounded; He had amongst them Cop∣per Ore▪ blacke Copper, and red Copper; thinking to searchOres of blacke, and red Copper. the habitation of this Country in his Piace, he entred a large River and went on Land to discover, but the high Moun∣taines hindred his prospect. He gathers Muscles for his sup∣per, and tooke harbour for that night vnder the Rockes: where he see a mighty while wind, taking vp the water in great  for the pace of  houres without any in∣termission. To conclude, he found this not to be firme Land
but mighty Rivers and Sounds, and Throughlets betweeneMeaning the E. Sea, and Fretum D vast and desert Ilands: with passage betweene Sea and Sea; he returnes to his ship. In his absence the people had stolne an Anchor, and with sligs had thrown stones into the ship of half a pound weight, he seemed to the Inhabitants to take no notice of the injurie done him, hee tills them on land, gives them bracelets and o∣therYet much de∣sirous o re. toyes, and intices 7. or 8. on board, some of them goes into the maine top. After Sunset they begin againe to assault them, with stones in slings into the Mooneshine, and with one stone strucke the Boatswaine, that he overthrew him. The 11. they came to make a new truce, the Ringleader of the mischiefe was one; the truce made they take one priso∣ner,A Salvage a∣ken. who pointed to his fellowes to bring the things that were stolne, and he should be enlarged unto them. The wind within an houre came faire, they brought the fel∣low away. One of his consorts came and followed, talking to him; at length they tooke leave, making great lamenta∣tion: The prisoner spake 4. or 5. words to the other clap∣ping his hands vpon his face; the other doing the like, they depart. This prisoner in few dayes grew a pleasant Compani∣on, trimmed vp his darts, and fishing tooles, made Okum, and would lay his hand vpon a Roape to haile, his meate was first dry Caplin, they had taken there in their Tents; when it was done he eate poore John. The 14. of this Moneth one man dyed: the rest were inIuly. good Health. The 17. in the Latit. of 63.  min. he fell with a huge Iland of Ice in one entire Masse; So big as they could not draw the limits, with Bay and Capes, and like huge Cliffes as he tooke it, to be Land at first. And in this place he had stickle and strong Currents. No other but what the Ice made being forced through the water by the windes, and drawing so much water as they bee eyther on ground or neere. Also, as his motion doth trouble and alter the waters true course, which causeth the Tides to edy, being neere it; as Ilands in the Sea standing in the Flood, or Ebbes way, will doe the like. He Coasts to S. off this Ice vntill the 30. of Iuly, and saith, ti was such a Barre to his pro∣ceedings, as all his hopes were banished. The 24. all his Ropes were frozen: By a grosse fogge his men begin to grow sicke,
and feeble; and told him he ought in Conscience to regard the safetie of his owne life and preservation of others: and not through his over-boldnesse to leave their Widdowes and Fatherlesse children to give him bitter curses; (leave these excuses and come home Davis, come home:) besides, the great Ship was too great and unweldy to discover withall; besides her charge was 100. pound a moneth; So with divers other excuses he sends her homewards, and with the Moone∣shine made shift to steere E, S, E. from the Ice to seeke the next Land. The first of August, he sees land in 66, 33. Longitude from London 70. deg. here he graues the Moonelight (that had beene forth but 3. moneths) in a very good roade he findes this land to be all Ilands, with Sea on E, on W, on N. but a Muskta stung him grievously; the people here sends him a Seale dri∣ving with the tide, which they had boyd up with bladders. The people trade with him for skins as the others did, and are in all things a like, but in pronunciation of language more plaine, and not hollow in the throate. Their Salvage kept him close, and made signes to them to get him a Com∣panion. Here he left the Mermaid at Anchor the 12, day and sailes W, above 50, leagues, sees land in 66, 19, this land is 70, leagues from the other, he anchors by an Iland of Ice from clock 9, to 3, in the morning. The 15. he departs this land to the South, sailes untill theHe findes ma∣ny passages but attempts none. 18, and then he sees land N, W a faire Promontory in 65, and no land to Southward; heere he had great hope of a Passage: He sayles still southwards and sees Land S, W, and by S. the 17. by observation he was in 64, 20, m. he had sailed by Chat and precise account 15, leagues S, by W, yet upon observati∣onSaile more E. & come home then▪ he found it S, W. so as he saith, it was by a Westerne Current. August, 19. it fell snow and foule weather, they lie at hll all Night within 5. leagues of land. The 20. the weather breakes up, they beare in with land and got into a harbour close for all weathers▪ they goe on land and can discere it to be all Ilands, they come away in the afternoone with a N. E. winde faire weather, shapesNow Davis is coming home their course to the South, whereby they may discover the passage.
They coast the land untill the 28. finding it still to continueIn 56. great store of Cod∣fish. to the S. from 67. to 57. he sees marvailous store of Sea fowle, as Guls and others, he tries for fish, in one glasse kills an 100, Codde although he was but badly provided, he doubting the weather, steps into harbor in 56. d. sailes 10. leag. up a River 2 leagues broad, very faire Woods on both sides; stayes here untill the first of Sept. had 2. great stormes, he went 6. miles on land: The woods were Furre, Pyne-apple, Elder, Ewe, Withe and Birch, h sees a black Beare, and here were store of land & river fowle, as Goose, Ducks, Black-birdes, Iayes, Thrush, and of Partridge and Feasant, he kils great store with Bowe and ar∣rowes; At the harbours mouth were greatstore of Cod-fish. The first of September he set saile, and with faire weather, coasts along to the Southward, the 3. day being calme lets fall a Cadger to prove for fish; In which place there was such a∣boundance as the hooke was no sooner over-board but it wasGreat skull of Fish▪ taken, it was the largest and best fed fish that ever he see, and some of his men which were Fishermen, said they never saw a bigger Skull of fish in their lives. The 4. he anchors in a good roade among Ilands, the Coun∣try low-land, pleasant and full of woods: To the N. of this place 8. leag; finding a mighty great Sea between 2. lands to the W. the S, land to his judgement is nothing but Iles, he great∣ly desired to have gone into this Sea but winde or something was against him, he anchored in 4. fadome fine sand. In this place is fish and fowle mighty store, he had left on land some fish to drie, he sent 5. men on land for them; The Countrey people lay lurking in the wood, and on a sudden asaulted them, they slew 2. and greatly wounded other 2. one escaped by swimming with an arrow shot through his arme. Great store of fish and fowle, they made a hook of a crooked Spike, before the baite was changd they tooke more then 40. great Cods, the fish swimming so abundantly thicke about the hooke as is incredible to be reported. This Davis in his Hy∣drographicall doth describe. The 10. he shapes his course for homeward, he arrived in England the beginning of October. The Observation. He departed from England the 7. of May, 15. of June he sell with Land in 66d. 70. d. Longitude from London, he was troubled with Ice, he findes that there is Copper Ore, the
people may be brought to trade, but are theevish and treache∣rous, he stayed in harbours 24. dayes, went no further to the Northwards then 66d. 17. m. in Long from London 70d. he re∣turns the beginning of August, and upon the coast of America in 55d. finds great store of great od-fish, having not done so much as he did in his first voyage, he arrived very safely in England the beginning of October. You shall understand that the Sun-shine and the North-starre, were to seeke the Passage betwixt Iseland and Groenland by the appointment of Captaine Iohn Davis, of which their Ʋoyage the relation is writ by Henry Morgan ser∣vant to Master William Saunderson Merchant of London, a worthy and principall Adventurer in the Voyages of Davis, as followeth. FromCaptaine Davis. THey departed in the Latitude of 60. deg. the 7. of June, and sailed into 66, and tooke harbour in Iseland the 12, and staies there untill the 3, of July, then he comes forth and being a little troubled with Ice shapes his course for Groynland; the 7, he sees it, and ranges along untill the moneths end. The 3, of August, he comes to Gilberts Sound in 64 deg. 14 min. Davis his Randevow; and it seemeth was so ap∣poynted to meete Davis and his fleete, who departed from thence the 11. of July; The people came and traded with them, and in the end sought to betray them, they plaid at foot∣ball and our men cast them. They depart from thence 5, or 6 leag. Southwards, the same people come to them againe, they see Foxes and Dogs runne upon the Ilands as they observe them to be, they found the hornes of Stags and footing, but see none. The 30 of August they depart for England, the winde takes them contrary, so as they take another harbour, there come of the people, and bring them Seale skinnes. The Master would have changed one of the boates he had formerly bought, which they would have taken from them by violence; they fall to combat with our men, and throwing their darts, struck one of our men; another of our men shot one of them into the brest with an arrow, the fight continued, our men tooke one of them into our boate his boate and all, our men kild three of them, two of them
were shot with arrowes, and the other hurt with a sword, he with his boate taken was shot with an arrow, our men cast him over-board, and his consort tooke him up, and conveyed him away, they departed and would not come to us as before. The 31 of August, we departed from Gilbert sound, the 3 of September they lost sight of the North Starre; the 30, they en∣ter500. Seale skins our Channell. They brought home 500, Seale skinnes, 140, halfe skinnes, what bone it was they brought home, they know not. Captaine Davis his 3. Voyage, North-West, 1587. FRom Dartmouth with 3 Shippes, the Elizabeth, the Sunne∣shine,May 19. and a Clincker called the Hellen of London. The 12 of Iune, there fell difference betwixt the Master of the Sunneshine, and the Marriners, for that the Seamen would goe on the Voyage a fishing, the Master would not untill he had the company of the Elizabeth, but the matter was re∣conciled, and all were content to goe to the place of Ran∣devow. The 14. of Iune, they descry land high and mountainous, but did imagine themselves to be 16, or 17, leagues off. The 16, they anchored in harbour, the people came accor∣ding to their olde order with crying Eliout, and shewed them Seale skinnes. The 17, they make way to set up their Pinnace they brought from London. The 18. hee passed about the Iland, hee found blacke Pumice-stones, and salt kerned upon the Rockes white andSalt. glistering, this day he tooke one of the people a strong fellow. The 20, the Salvages came to the Iland, where the Pinnace was set up and made ready to be lancht, and tore the two upper stroaks away from her for love of the Iron; I doubt in revenge of their prisoners, and for harme done the last yeare; but being thus much made unserviceable, it was agreed, the Elizabeth should have her to fish. Now as they were ready to depart, newes was brought the
Captaine, that the ships that they were to venter their lives in (I thinke for the discovery) had at one time 300. stroakes, yet they agree to commit themselves to Gods mercy in her, ratherA Leake. than returne with disgrace; So they stand North-wards along the Land which they call the land of their Merchants: because the people come and traffique with them; but here they were in doubt of their Ship. I take it, the Elizabeth and Sunneshine, are gone a fishing home, himselfe went N. ward into 67. 40. where they had great store of Whales and fowle, which they call Cortenous; two Canoes came to them at Sea, they cry Elout, and gives Birds for bracelets, one had a dart with a peece of Vnicorne horne; the Salvage made stay thereof vntill he saw a knife, and then he truckt; they went along with them 3.Trade to be had. houres. The 25 came 30. Canoes 10. leagues off Land and brought Salmon-peeles, Birds, and Caplyn; they give them Pinnes, Needles, Bracelets, Nailes, Knives, Bells, looking-Glasses, and other tries: For a Knife, a Naile, or a Bracelet: they will sell their Coates or any thing they have. They brought not above 20. skinnes, but made signes that if they would goe ashore; they should have more. Chichesa∣nege, skinnes I thinke. The 30. he was in 72. deg 12 min. at midnight the Com∣passeIune. set the variation 28. deg. West-ward; he Coasted thisThis was the West side of Groynland. Land which he called London Coast. From the 21. to the 30. the Sea all open to the West, and North-ward the Land on Starboard E. from him, the wind shifted to the North. Then he left that shore, and named the N. most part he did discover Hope Sanderson, and shaping his Course West, runne 40. leag. and better without sight of any Land. The 2. he meetes with a mighty banke of Ice, West from him. He would faine have quit it by the North-wards; butIuly. the wind would not; which if he had, he would have runne W. vntill he had seene Land, and have beene resolved. The 6. being faire weather, he puts the Barke amongst the Ice, but could not prevaile: the 7, 8, 9, 10. He coasts the Ice: the 11, was fogge and calme. The 13 he determining to goe againe to the shore: And harbor for 5, or 6, dayes; Hoping in that time the extreame heate of the Sunne, and beating of the Sea; would have made
way with the Ice; but when he was nigh Land he durst notIt is to be vn∣derstood, that these Dars were headed with Vnicorn Horne. anchor, for depth of water; The Salvages came oft and truct for skinnes. Darts they had for old and new knives, and they would gladly have had him to the Land; but he beare away. The 15. he finds himselfe driven 6. points west beyond his6. points W. of his cose. Course: He layes the fault either in the Ship, or Current. The 16. he falls with the banke of Ice againe. The 17. he had sight of Mount Raleigh, at 12 at Night, heAll this time he anged South-ward. was thwart of his old hole againe: He sailes 60. leagues N, W. vp the streights; The 23, he anchors in the bottome of the Gulfe; and calles the Iles, Cumberland Iles. Whilst he was at anchor, a Whale passed vp by him, hereS. W. by W. full Sea. the Compasse set at 30. d. variation; This day also he departs shaping his course S, E. and seeketh to recover the Sea. The 25 be was becalmed in the bottome of the Gulfe, the aire ex∣treame hot, Bruton the Master goes a Land to course Dogges; they find many graves and Trane spilt; the Salvage dogges was so fat they could scarce goe. The 26 was a pretty storme at S, E. 27, 28, 29. faire wea∣ther; He had coasted the South-side shore of Cumber∣lands sound: And was got cleare out into 62, deg. betwixt which and 63. deg. 00. he espies an opening: And namesLmleys In∣let. it Lumleys Ilet: And tells of great falls and Gulfes of water. The 31 he see a Head-land he names Warwicks Forland.August. The 1. he falls with the South-west Cape of the Gulfe, and names it Chidleys Cape, in 61 deg. 10. min. From the first to the 12, He trents along the South-land, sees 5 Deere on the top of an Iland, he calls Darcyes Iland:Darcies Il. they take to another Iland, his Boate was too little to carry his men and chase the Deere: though it were in the water, one of them was as big as a pretty Cowe and very fat, their feete as broad as Oxe feete. The 13. in 54, d. Latitude. Heere he struck vpon a Rocke, he stops his leake: And Coasts along into 52 deg. not fin∣ding his fishing ships as was appointed for them to stay, and fish in Latit. betweene 54, and 55 deg. vntill the fine of this moneth, but in 16 dayes they were fisht and gone home: him∣selfe arrives at Dartmouth, the 15, of September.
The Copie of Davis his Letter to Mr. Saunderson. GOod Mr. Saunderson, with Gods great mercy, I have made my safe returne in health with all my company: And have sailed 60. leag. further, then my determination at my departure; I have beene in 73. deg. finding the Sea all open, and 40 leag▪ be∣tweene Land, and Land; The passage most probable; the Bce∣cution casie: as at my comming you shall fully know. The Marine Observation. THat he Coasted the West side of Groynland, farther then before from 65, deg. odde min. to 72, deg. odde minutes, naming it London-Coast, and on the West side was as farre vp his former streights as before; onely he then forgot to name the Earle of Cumberlands Iles, which now he hath done; And besides, he hath in his returne home, seene and named Lumleys Inlet, and passed by Fretum Hudson, vnknowne: Yet he hath named Cape Warwicke, Which is the East part of Resolution, & Chidleys Cape; the South bounds thereof, now called But∣tons Iles; But vntruely, these two things are both; although in his Letter writ to Mr. Saunderson at his arrivall the 2. Voy∣age he doth assure the Passage; to be in one of the 4. places vpon perill of his Life; But I thinke he durst not venture it: He went forth the 7. of May, and returnes homewards the 23 of July. His greatest Variation West was 30. deg. And the 15, of Iuly, he was driven 5, points W. of beyond his Course, by what accident he knoweth not. For to vse his owne words, speaking of Warwickes Head-land; This Cape as it was the most S. limit of the Gulfe, wee passed over, the 30, of this Moneth: So was it the N. promontorie or first beginning of a very great Inlet, whose South limit at this present wee see not: Which Inlet or Gulfe this afternoone and in the Night wee passed over to our great admiration, for the waters fall. These abstracts are more at large to be seene in the first and 3 Volumes of Mr. Hckluits Voyages.
The Voyage of Captaine George Waymouth, with two Fly-botes, one of 70, th'other of 60. Tonnes; 35 men, victualed for 18 monethes; set forth by the Mus∣covia and Tkie Companies. HE set forth the second of May 1602. hee went by the North, made the Start, or one of the Westmost Iles ofComes to H∣sons Bay, the  of May. Orkney, it being low land, bearing West, in latitude 59 deg. 30 min. he shapes a course betwixt N, and West, untill hee brings the Start North, sayles away W, and by N. in 59 deg. 40 min. then steeres away W, S, W. in 57 deg. 55 min. and there had no variation at all, he hailed away Westward, and had some fogge, much raine, but warme, as in England. 16 This day at noone he was 57 deg. 35 min. and had not seene the Sunne or Moone in 76 houres before, and now had variation 11 deg. 18 He saw a great Iland of Ice, in the afternoon he got sight also of the Southmost part of Groenland, hee coasts this Ice toVide Davi. the North, comming sometime into black water, and present∣ly the Sea would be cleare againe; he could not game ground in 120 Fathoms, neither could hee discerne any Current, at which he reckons Cape Deslation N, N, E, 24 leagues off him. 22 He was in 60 deg. 37 min. latitude. 27 The weather warme, as in England, he had great store of sea-Guls. 28 He directs his course Westwards, and sees the land of America, in 62 deg. 30 min. makes it to be Warwickes fore∣land, it was high-land and covered with snow, with other small Ilands, there was great store of Ice, upon the forelands Eastside, but the sea was altogether cleare, the land lay N, by E. about 6 leagues in length. 29 He was beaten to the Southwards, by N. E. winds, andThese were formerly found and named by Davis. finds Warwicks foreland to be an Iland, hee discovers Lum∣leys Inlet; a great Current setteth to the West, the greatest hope of a passage this way, the weather was fogge and snow, he had a great whirling of a Current, in latitude 61 deg. 12 leagues from the Coast of America.Now was hee in the entrance of the passage Chidlies Isles▪ bearing W, by S, halfe South. The 1 of Julie was fogge and snow, the ayre very cold, hee traverst to, and againe in many overfals, but by his course hee could not discerne which way the Current set, but most like to the West, he travers'd therein 16 or 17 dayes, and could find no ground in 120 fathome.
2 He discernes a maine banke of Ice in 60 deg. faire wea∣ther,Iuly. he lancht his boate, and loaded her twice therewith, to dissolve to fresh-water: hee sets into many overfals alongst this coast of America, which coast here he conceives to be broken land. 3 The S, W. he stands in with the coast of America, and meets with Ice 10 leagues off, the water blacke, and thick as puddle. 8 He had beate it to the Northward, and descries the landThis was upon the Southside of Davis his entrance into Cumberlands Isles. of America, in 60 deg. 53 min. being very high, it bore S, W. covered with snow, he was 5 leagues off, but could not come neare it for Ice. 9 A storme began at N, E. he cleares himselfe of the land and Ice by standing to Southwards, the storme continued, so that he stood to the Southwards in forecourse. 17 From the 9 to the 17, he was in traverse, and heere he heard a fearefull noyse of Ice, he had thicke weather, his roapes and sailes all frozen. 18 The wind N, E. extreame cold and frost, the ayre very cleere; his roapes were froze, and it froze so extreamely, that it was a maine barre to his proceedings, and destruction to his men. 19 He stood to Eastward, with wind N, E. and the same night his men conspired to beare up the helme, and keep him in Cabbin; they shew the reason for so doing in writing; byA mutinie. good chance he understands thereof and prevents them. The Reasons. That although it were granted, that we might winter be∣tweene 60 and 70 degrees of latitude, with safety of lives and vessels, yet it will be May next, before we can dismure them to lanch out into the Sea; and therefore if the Merchants should have purpose to proceed on the discovery of the N. W. parts of America the next yeare: you may be in the fore∣said latitude from England by the first of May, and so be furnished better with men and victuals, to passe and proceed in the foresaid action. Seeing then, that you cannot assure us of a safe harbour to the Northward, wee purpose to beare up the helme for Eng∣land, yet with this limitation, that if in your wisedome you
shall thinke good to make any discovery (it seemeth there were some with him understood more then himselfe) either in 60, or 57 degrees, with this Northwest winde, wee will yeeld our lives with your selfe to encounter any danger, thus much wee thought needfull to signifie, as a matter builded upon reason, and not proceeding upon feare or cowardice.This cannot bee. Then being in latitude 68 and 55 min. there was no meanes to perswade them, but they would beare up the helme, whereupon he came out of his Cabbin, to enquire who was the cause, they answered, one and all, hoysing up sayles, and directing the course South by West. 22 Hee sent for the chiefest of the Mutineeres, and pu∣nishedThis doth not appeare that he could punish, and yet suffer them to carry the ship backe. them severely, this day hee came by an Iland of Ice, both ships launcht their boates, to fetch some to make fresh∣water: this Iland crackt two or three times, as though it had beene thunder-clappes, and it brake in sunder to the great danger of his boates, the one being halfe laden with Ice. 25 It blew hard, the course West by South, with fogge, and was in latitude 61 degrees, and 40 minutes, and findes an Inlet in this latitude. 27 The South-south-East wind blew very hard, with fog and raine, his course West. 30 The wind came in a shower to West, North-west, andJuly. blew hard, and because the yeare was farre spent, and many men sicke in both Ships, he thought good to returne; with great hope of this Inlet to be a passage of more probability, then Davis his Straights, because he found it not pestred withNo such mat∣ter. Ice, and a straight of 40 leagues broad; he saith, he sayled 100 leagues West by South, into the Inlet; he saith also, he found the variation to be 35 degrees Westward, and the needle to decline, or rather incline. Observe. 83 Degrees and a halfe, the 5 of Julie, he was cleere off the Inlet; the 6, South-east wind and fogge, the 7, 8, and 9th, hee passed by many great Ilands of Ice, & discovered an Iland up∣onHere was Da∣vis. the coast of America, latitude 55 degrees, 30 minutes. 14 He stood off and on this coast, from the 5, untill the 14, had some foule weather, and made some Ilands; he stands in∣to an Inlet in 56 degrees, and had good hope of a passage for divers probable reasons.
I finde nothing more of note, but that upon the Coast of America, betwixt 55 degrees, 30 and 50 minutes, he observed two variations, the one of 17 deg. 15 min. the other 18 degr. 12 min. the coast was voyd of Ice, unlesse some great Ilands drive from the North, and that the ship had like to have pe∣rished for want of spare decks; one whirlewind he saw upon this Coast, take up the Sea into the Ayre extreamely, that heeA whirlewind. was entred 30 leagues within one Inlet, latitude 56 degrees, where if the wind had come Northerly, South or East but one day, he had perished. 4 He had sight of the Iland of Silly, the next day hee cameAugust. into Dartmouth. The generall Observation. He set forth the 2 of May, and returned homewards the 30 of Iuly, his greatest latitude wee can be certaine of, was 63 deg. 53 min. and passing the Grand Meridian, betwixt Orkney and Desolation, hee had no variation, his greatest was 35 degrees Westward; hee neither discovered, nor named any thing more then Davis, nor had any sight of Groenland, nor was not so farre North; nor can I conceive hee hath ad∣ded any thing more to this designe; yet these two, Davis and he did (I conceive) light Hudson into his Straights, nor did he, try in so long time being, to and againe, upon the Coast of America for Davis his fishing, having such abundance of the largest, and best fed Cod-fish that he saw; his ships were ne∣ver separated, which shewed that they were not greatly di∣strest. Master Iames Hall of Kingston upon Hull, Pilot Major of three Ships, set forth by the King of Denmark for the disco∣very of Groenland. 1605. his first Ʋoyage Abstracted. FRom Denmarke he set forth the 2 of May, and saith, heeVariation. found the Compasse varie Eastward, at the Naes of Nor∣way, 7 deg. 10 min. He saith, that one league to the Northward of Faire sl; he found the race of a Tyde, setting so strongly Northwest∣ward, as if it had bin in the race of Portland.
Faire Isle, bearing E, S, E. foure leagues off; Swiborne head N. E. by N. eight leagues off. The Ile of Foule, N, E. the Com∣passe was varied to the Eastward, of true North, 60 deg. 10. minutes, and he thinketh that the Iland Busse discovered byA great mi∣stake. the Busse of Bridgewater in Frobrishers last Voyage, is not tru∣ly placed in the Marine Charts. At his falling with Groenland, hee named a headland, CapeIt can be no other but Cape Farwell. Christianus, after the King of Denmarke, in latitude 59 deg. 50 minutes, and he found it due; for that none other before him hath named it; S, W. by W. five leagues from thence, hee had 12 deg. 15 min. variation Westwards, standing from thence to Seawards, he sayled three houres in blacke water as thicke as puddle. He found Cape Christianus and Desolation, to lie W. by N.Two Currents 50 leagues distance, and a Current S, S, W. set him violently into the Ice, he also findes the Current upon the side of A∣merica, to set to the North; but contrary, on the Groenland coast, to the South. He findes a harbour upon the Coast of Groenland, and sailesA good har∣bour. 6 leagues up a great Inlet, or river, before he could find 16 fa∣thomes to anchor in, the land on both sides was steepie and mountainous. He goes on land and findes houses, or rather Tents, cove∣red with Seale-skinnes, the people came to him, crying Eliout, holding up their hands, their boates were covered all over with Seale skinnes, about their Tents, was great abundance of the flesh of Seales (to drie) with Caplin, and of Pilchards in∣numerable,Great store of Pilchards. of which, with other fishes, their rivers are full, their dogs were very fat, they found in their Tents, Foxe and Seale skins, very well drest; also certaine coates of Seale, and Fowle skins, with the feather-side inwards, they also found a certain vessell boyling upon a lampe, the vessell made after the māner of a little pan, the bottome of stone, the sides of Whales Gils, therein was Seales flesh, boyling in Seale oyle; and in another a dogges head boyled, by those Tents lay two great boates, with which he supposed they transported themselves from one place to another, this not being the place of theirGreat Can∣nowes. continuall habits; the boats were open with 8 or 10 thoughts, and 20 foote in length at least, for a saie they have the guts of some beast well drest, and neatly sowed together.
After this the people came to them in their boates, and bartered Seale skins and their Coats, even for olde nailes, or for a knife, they will sell coate and boate, Vnicorne horne, orSalvage barter. Mors teeth, Whale finne, with which they head their darts and weapons, the Latitude of this Harbours mouth is 66. deg.13 30, min. an E, and W. Moone, makes a full Sea, it floweth 3. fathomes and an halfe up and downe, he had made aboutOyle let forth▪ a barrell and  / . of oyle, and leaving it on land all night, the Sal∣vages let it forth.18 The Salvages came the next day and bartered, and going on land upon a sodaine, without violence done them (which shewes their wicked condition) they assailed them withSalvage assault. stones out of slings in most violent manner, at the shooting of a Falcon-gun they all fled. The next day againe they repaire to the number of sixty, making new truce by crying Eliout, but perceiving they had bags full of stones by them, at the report of a Pistoll they all de∣parted, and after that, they came to the same Cliffe againe, and violently assaults them that no man could stand upon the hat∣ches, so as hee was glad to shield himselfe by loosing his Bon∣nets, and lacing them about his ship, and at the firing of a Musket they would ducke downe behind a Rocke, the report gone, they would afresh assault them. He departs from hence19 and came to an anchor in an excellent haven on the S. side of a high hill, which he named Mount Coningham; this Sound forDenmarke Ha∣ven. the goodnesse thereof, he named Denmarke-haven. 20 He loosed from this harbor, the Salvages came againe to the number of 73. beating and making a hideous noise, they enter into barter, and throw Shels and toyes into his Boate, he causing his boy to fetch them, they shoote him through both buttockes, with a Dart; there were at this time mustered up∣on the Ilands, to the number of 300 people. Now followeth Mr. Iames Hall his Topographicall Description of the Land, as hee discovered the same. THe land of Groenland, is a very high ragged, and mountai∣nous Countrey, having many good Rivers, Harbours, and Bayes; into 5. of which, hee sayled 10, or 12 English leagues,
being very navigable, with abundance of Fish of sundry sorts, the Land in all places where I came, seemed to bee fertile, ac∣cording to the Climate wherein it lyeth, for betweene the Mountaines was most pleasant Plaines and Vallies, insomuch as if he had not seene the same, hee would not have beleeved, that such a fertile land in shew could have bin in those Nor∣therne Regions; there is also great store of Fowle, as Ravens, Crowes, Partridges, Pheasants, Seamewes, Gulls, with other sorts; of Beasts he hath not seene any, except blacke Foxes of which there are very many. Hee doth suppose there are also many Deere, for about their tents, they found many Harts∣hornes, with the bones of other beasts, also within the land he saw the footing and dung of divers other beasts, he found the footing of one beast to be 8 inches over; in the rivers were Fishes, as Seales, Whales, and Salmon, with divers o∣ther sorts of fishes; the coast is a very good and faire land, for 3 leag. off, he found 15 fathomes, and as he approached the same 13, 12, 10 fathomes, very faire sandy ground. The peo∣ple are a kind of Samoid or wandering nation, removing from one place unto another, they are people of a reasonable sta∣ture, browne of colour, very like the people of the East and W. India, they are active and warlike, vsing their darts and slings very nimbly, they eate their meate raw, or little par∣boild, with blood, oyle or water; they apparell themselves in skinnes of such beasts as they kill, but especially with Seales and fowles, which they can dresse very soft and smooth, in Summer turning the haire and feather side outwards, in Win∣ter inwards, their weapons are slings, bowes, darts headed with bone or yron, he supposeth them to be Idolatrous, wor∣shipping the Sun, he met all the coast along much drift wood, but from whence it came he knew not, he coasted this Coast along from 66 deg. to 69 deg. and found many good sounds and harbours, and returning towards his Shippe which he found in a harbour, by espying certaine Wor∣lockes, which the Captaine had caused to be set as Beacons, for to give him knowledge of their being. In this his absence from the Admirall, the Saluages hadIuly. done them much violence, the Captaine had taken three of of them, whom he kindly intreated, others of them he slew, this evening he takes in his provision of fresh water.
He sets on land one young man to be left in the Countrey,July. to his cruell fortune, and this was done by expresse command of the State-holder of Denmarke, before his comming sorth they also in the Pinnace set another on land, both being male∣factors, giving of them small necessaries, (It may be those people lived a long time after, and may bee yet living, if the Salvages have not devured them) he sets sailes and comes to Sea, where he found much drift Ice with a high Sea, which he thought to be a current, setting through Fret Davis toA strange cur∣rent. the Southward, as by experience he proved; for by observati∣on this day at noone, he was in Latitude 62 deg. 40. m. where∣as, the day before he was in Latitude 66 deg. 10 min. having made by account a S, by W. way, about 10 leagues, this cur∣rent he did find to set along the Coast of Groenland, South by East. 15 This day he was in Latitude 57 degrees; the 16 day close weather, he meetes with a mighty skull of Whales, amongst drift Ice, and meetes also a great current set∣ting West North-west over for America. This is theA great Cur∣rent. current found by Frobrisher, comming from the East, and butting upon the East-side of Groenland, and doth strike along the Land to Cape Christianus, otherwise called Cape Farewell. 1 Hee met with a skull of Herrings, so that he knew him∣selfeAugust. not farre from Orkney, he was in Latitude, 58 deg. 40 m. and sounding had 42 fathomes, very sandy ground, with some blacke dents, when shortly after, and the same day in the evening, he sounded againe, and had but 20 fathomes den∣ted ground, he was neere the shore before he saw it, for it was thicke weather. 10 He came to Elsenore Rode in Denmarke. The second Voyage of Master Iames Hall from Denmarke to the further discovery of Groenland with five Shippes, (observed 1606.) 7 HEe set forth from Copemanhaven, and went betwixtMay. Orkney and Shotland the 7 of Iue, which day one of the Groenlanders dyed, it seemed it was one of them he had
brought from thence the yeare before. 14 He accounteth himselfe to be 19, deg. 45, min. from the Meridian of the Naes of Norway. 14 He steereth away W. the wind S, E. and thick weather,June. he imagineth himselfe in 58 deg. 10, min. Latit. at which time by reason of a Northerly Current, contrary to his ex∣pectation,Northerly Current vari∣ation 11 deg. he had made a West way Southerly 22 leagues, and then as he supposeth, the Compasse varied West-ward one point. 1 He sees land being 8, leag. off, with a great banke of Ice,July. lying off the S, W. end thereof; he supposeth it to bee BusseBusse Ile again discovered. Iland, and that it lyeth more to the West-ward, then it is pla∣ced in the Marine charts. Steering away W, by N. he was in a great Current, settingCurrent see S, S, W. S, S. W. the which he did suppose, did set betwixt Jseland, and Busse Ile, over with America, from hence he steeres a∣way W, N, W. 6 He found himselfe to be in 58 deg. 50, min. whereby con∣trary to his expectation, he did plainly see the South-erne cur∣rentA caveat for Commanders in Fleets. to be the cause, this Evening he found the Compasse to be varied 12 deg. 5 min. West-ward, this Night their Pinnace and Vice-admirall, come foule of one another. 8 He was in 59, deg. 30, min. and findes still the Current and variation to carry him to the South-ward of West. 10 He sees the Coast of America in Latit. 60, deg. 16,Variation. min. about 9 leagues off, and findes the needle varied 23 deg. W. the hill tops were covered with snow, the shore to theA Current. N. full of Ice; he had a Current set West into the shore, and indangers him: Had not a gale fresh at S, West, brought him off. 18 Vntill this day he passed many Mountaines of Ice, at Noone was in 63, deg. 45, min. Latit. 19 Being amongst much Ice, and plying to get cleare, saithStrong Cur∣rent. he seeth the Land of America in 64 Latit. it lay S, and N. very high, and ragged, covered with Snow: He findesDais doth write of the same not farre from this place. still a strong Current, to the West, from the Latit. 51. his Compasse was placed ¾. of a point to East-ward of N, and was carried almost 4, points to West-wards beyond his judg∣ment, he found this Current to set W, N, W. the Compasse varied 23 degrees.
From the 20, vntill the 25. he passeth and traverseth o∣ver from the West side for Groyneland, and had sight of Queene Annes Cape, 10. leagues off. 27. He seeth the Capes he named the last yeare, as Cape Annt, Cape Sophy, the Foords also, as Rumells foord, Christia∣nus foord, and puts into Coninghams foord; where he saith,Sylver Myne the Silver was. The Salvages come on board, and barter with them forAugust. Iron, with Seale skinnes, and Whale-fynne; he searcht vp the Foord, and findes it to be but a Bay, with many greene, and pleasant Ilands, the people to the number of 25. followes them with their Boates, some of his men on Land travailes vp the Mountaines, and sees raine Deere.Raine Deere. 6 There fell some small difference amongst them about choosing of an anchoring place, the water being deepe, and they removing from their first Road-sted further vp the Ri∣ver; where it floweth S, E. and N, W. in Latitude 66, deg. 25. minutes. 9 The Captaine went vp the River, with his Boate, where they came to see their winter Houses, which were builded with Whales bones, the baulkes thereof were of Whales ribbes, and covered with Earth; they had certaine vaults or roomes vnderground 4 square, two yards deepe in the Earth: The towne consisteth of about 40. houses, they found the bu∣riall of their dead, the Corps wrapped in Seale-skinnes, and stones laid in the manner of a Coffin over them. This day they take 5, of the inhabitants to bring into Den∣marke, to be informed of their Country, which they call Se∣canga, and say, that within the Land, they have a greatA King in Groynland. King; who is carried vpon mens shoulders. 10 They come forth of Rumels foord, and in great danger got to Sea▪ being inforced betweene certaine Ilands, whichHe comes homeward. lye off Cape Sophie 4, leagues into the Sea; the last yeare he na∣med them, Knights Ilands; being got there he came into 66. deg. 50. min. Lait. W, N, W. from Cape Sophy 15 leag. off. 18 He goes within sight of shore, being all high land▪ like Ilands and great store of Ice, betwixt him, and the same. 28 He coasted to and againe amongst Ice, vntill this day ha∣ving had a storme▪ and meetes one of his Fleete, which had beene separated from him, he fell with two bankes of Ice,
and is 8, leag. off Desolation by account, but could not see it by reason of fogge. 31 He meetes Ice which he marvailes at, being that the South-most part of Groynland described in the Marine Chart, is in the Latit. of 60 deg. he being then in 59 deg. 10 min. Desolation bearing W, N, W. halfe N, 64 leag. off; and CapeCape Christi∣anus the next knowne part of Groenland. Christianus, the next knowne part of Groynland N, W, by W. Westerly 38 leag. he holds an E, S, E. Course, and sees Land the same day, being very high, lying along E, S, E. 16. leag; the W. part seemed to fall away E, by N. the land was very high, and covered with snow, he was not certaine, whether it was the Maine or an Iland, he named it Frost I∣land. (I cannot conceive but that by his Latit. it must be the same, he had formerly named Cape Christianus.) 1 He comes homewards the 8, day, and is in 58. d. 36 m.September▪ variation 2 d. 45 m. W. The 10. day, he was in 59 deg. 10. min. variation, 1 deg. 4 min. 18 He espies the Iland of Farrey, Latit. 62 d. 3, m. the streame sets vnder the Iles next hand E, and W. He arrived at Copeman Haven, his conclusion is, that Breda∣rensesOctober. 4. Foord, is the most Northerly, Coninghams Foord is next in 67. d. and odde m. the Foord where they see the Towne, is 2 leag. to S, of Coninghams, the towne stands 10, leag. vp the Foord, the Kings Foord is in 66 d.  / . (but he did not find the Siluer Myne. Master Iames Hall was imployed in a third Voyage from Denmarke 1607. but after that he had made the Land, the Danes mutined, and in fine forced the ships backe againe for Ise∣land, there being then nothing done towards the edifying of this worke, it is needlesse to make any further search after the same. The 4th and last Voyage of Master Iames Hall from Kingstone vpon Hull, with 2 Ships, viz. the Pa∣tience, and the Hearts-Ease, written by William Baffin. HE saith, that in the Morning perceiving the Sunne, and Moone to shine very cleare, he purposed to find out the Longitude, and this day he spent in finding out the true Meridian Line vpon an Iland, by hanging at the extreames
thereof  plummets in threed instead of an Index or sight. 9 He observed the Moone iust vpon the Meridian, at whichIuly. very instant the Sunnes almicanter was 8 deg. 53 min. N. the Poles elevation 65 deg. 20 min. by which working, according to the doctrine of Sphaericall triangles having 3 sides given, to wit, the Complement of the Poles elevation, the Comple∣ment of the Almicanter, and the complement of the Sunnes declination to find out the quantity of the Angle, at the Poe; by which working, he findes the time to be clocke 4, 17 min. and 24 sec. he findes likewise by the Ephemerides, that the Moone came to the Meridian of London at 4 a clocke 25 m. 34 sec. which 17 m. and 24 sec. substracted, leaveth 8 min. 10 sec. of time, for the difference of the Moones passing betwixt both the Meridians, the Moones motion that day was 12 degrees, seaven minutes, which converted into Minutes of time, were 48 minutes 29 sec. this wrought by the rule of pro∣portion, is thus; if 48 min. 29 sec. the time that the Moone commeth sooner to the Meridian, then she did the day before, give 360 deg. the Earths Circumference; what shall 8 min.Longitude wrought in Cockings Sound Latit. 65 deg. 20. min. 10 sec. to wit, 60 deg. 30. min. the difference betwixt the Meridian of London, and Cockings Sound in Groenland. This he affirmeth to be without any great error, the rules truely observed and Ephemerides exact, for that no instrument can be exact enough to find out the true Houre, Minute, and second, the losse of one Minute being the losse of 7 deg. in Longitude. 22 Master Hall was slaine with a Dart, throwne intoMaster Hall slaine. his body, by one of the Groenlanders, before whose death, and since the ninth day, little was done worthy note; but the supposed Myne sought for; and in that search many brave Rivers and Harbours were found, with the foot∣ing of some great Deere or Elke, as bigge as an Oxe; tDeere footing. may be supposed that the cause of this Blow, was for the losse of the Brother, or other the Friends of the Momicide, which might be some of those five, the Danes carried a∣way the last yeare; (and but one before,) for that in all trading, both before and after his Death, they did ne∣verA Caveat. offer any violence, vnto any of the Company, but before, would oftentimes be pointing and ayming as it were at him, calling him Captaine one to another.
They search further for the Myne, and find many places where the Danes had digged, with stone of Orient cou∣ler, but when it was refined, it proved drosse: having no mettall at all therein, but was like to Muscovia sludde, they also found a pleasant Vallie. They find not the Myne, as also the people forbeare to trade with them, as before, they made way againe out of this River, to come to their Admirall, in which way & in many Ilands, they find where many of their winter houses had bin, & some of their Tents were but lately carried away, in which place they also found, of their long Boates made of Wood; and bound together with skinnes of Whale-fyn, and covered with Seale skinnes, being 33 foote long, and 5, broad ha∣ving in them 10 thoughts or Seates, this day they depart Rumells Foord, in 67 degrees Latitude, and 24 degrees 16, minutes variation, it being one of the fairest Rivers he see in that Country, it lyeth in East, and E, by South, and that Night hee came to the Admirall, then in the Kings Foord. 26 They consult about comming home, for the Captain was slaine, and the people refuse to trade with them as they were wont. I thinke for feare, for the same Voyage, one Iames Pullie, was also slaine by a Salvage, for offe∣ring to take one of their people out of his Boate by violence. They depart homewards, Master Andrew Barker, of Hull in the Admirall, William Huntris Master in the Pinnace. 18 HE is in 58 deg. 50 min. he findes the variationAugust. to be 13 deg. 22 min. contrary to observation of other men in this place, and because this was the first Sea-Voyage of this young Arts-man, I will trace his owne words; the 18. the Sunnes declination saith he, was 9 d. 58 min. for the Meridian of London; but being almost 4 houres of time to the West-wards, there is 1 / . to be abated from the rest, for his declination was 9 deg. 55 min. his altitude, 24 deg. 40. min. in Latitude 59 deg. his distance from the South by theSo much Bffin September. Compasse 81 deg. Latitude 57 deg. variation 11 deg. 10 m. 6 Nothing of note but one storme vntill this day, the la∣titude was 61 deg. 18 min. the variation 6 deg. East, the deepe 68 Fathomes.
8 He came to the Ile of Orkney, where anchoring, the peo∣pleSeptember. came, and gave them Hennes, geese, and sheepe, for old cloathes, or shooes. 11 He came to Kingstone upon Hull. The observation he made of Groenland. That it is an exceeding high land, and Mountaines which are very high within the land, they are of stone, some of one colour, some of another; all glistering, but nothing worth, if there be any Mettall, it lyeth low in the earth, and cannot well be come by; there are some rockes purer then Alablaster, the Northside of the Mountaines are continually covered with snow, there are few trees but in one place 40 miles within the land; in a river called Balls-river, upon the Southside of a Mountaine, there is a little Grove of Wood, about 6 or 7 foot high, like a Coppice in England, it being of Willow, Iuniper, and such like, they found much Angelica, And he thinkes the Countrey people do eat thereof, for he saw many of those rootes in their boates. There are store of Foxes in the Maine and Ilands of sundry colours, there are as white as snow, and long surred; there is divers Deere, but they be farre up within the land; for the Inhabitants doe hunt them sore that come towards the Sea, where themselves live; he see 7 at one time, his men had di∣vers Darts, & horns of Deere, he see the foot of one beast big∣ger than the foot of an Oxe, their Dogs and Foxe Pizzels have a bone within them; the people all the Sommer time use nothing, but fishing, drying their fish, and Seales flesh upon the rocks, for their winters provision; every one both man and woman, have a boat covered with Seales skinnes, close sowed, that no water can enter them, some of them are 20 foot long, and not above a foot broad, shaped like a Weavers shuttle, so light, that a man may carry many of them at once; they use but one oare, with a washe at both ends, it is incredi∣ble to see how swiftly they rowe, no ship being able to sayle so fast, they sit in the midst of their boates, and holds their oare in the middle; In these boates they catch their fish, as Seales, Salmon, Morses, and others; they strike some with Darts, and angle others; their coard is made of Whale-bone, their hooke of a bone, with which lines and hookes, wee have cat∣ched very much fish.
I could not learne of their rites and Ceremonies, but gene∣rally they worship the Sun, they remove from place to place as their fishing doth serve; they live in tents in the Summer, and in winter in houses somewhat within the ground, when they approach you they will hold up their hand to the Sunne, Crying Eliout, which we answering in like fashion, they dare boldly come to us. They make a Cave with stones, wherein they bury their dead, according to the bignesse of the Corpes, defending them strongly from the pey of Foxes, or Ravenous beasts, they make another neare the former, where∣in they bury his bowe, arrowes and dats, and other his provi∣sion, and he is buried in his apparell, the coldnesse of the clime keepes the body from putrifaction. 11 They eate their meate rawe, yet they use fire, they drinkSeptember. Salt-water, by the Ship side. Some of our men conceived them to be Man-eaters, but he thinks not, because they might have killed 3 of our men, at one time filling water, in an Iland far from our Ship and without any weapon, at which time, a great company of them came to them, and searching their boate for Iron, they gave them all they had, with their chest keyes; whereupon they departA Cavea. without doing them any harme, but let others take heed. Since that I have entred thus farre into Groenland by the way of Capt. Davis and Mast. Iames Hall, heare the report of Dethmar Plef-kins a Minister, sent into Iseland from Hamburgh, 1563. GRoenland was first so named in the yeare of CHRIST, 900. And although I purposed, saith he, to passe over Groen∣land with silence, yet seeing I touched upon the land, and ob∣served some few things, I thought it not impertinent to make mention of them. There was in a Monastery in Iseland, called Helgafiel, a certaine blind Monke who lived miserably there, he was borne in Groenland, of a darke complexion, and broad face; the Governour commanded him to be brought unto him, that he might know some part of the State of Groen∣land, he said, there was a Monastery of St. Thomas in Groen∣land, into the which, his parents thrust him when he was but young, and after he was taken out by the Bishop of Groen∣land,
when he was 30 yeeres of age, to sayle with him into Norway, to the Archbishop of Nidrosia (or Drunton) to whom the Iland Bishops are subiect; in his returne hee was left in a Monastery by the Bishop, whose Country Groenland was, this was done as he said, in 1546. he said that Iland was called Groenland, Atiphrastically: for that it seldome or never waxeth greene, and that there is so great cold there through∣out the whole yeere (except Iune, Iuly, and August) that being clothed and covered with Furres, they could scarce be warme, and that they had at home, certaine round pieces of wood, which being moved with their feet, kept their feet warme, he saith, that it aboundeth as Island doth with fishes, and that theyTheir Pigmies are beasts, V∣nicornes, fi∣shes. had Beares and white Foxes, ay, Pigmies, and Vnicornes, and that the Day did not appeare, untill the Sun had run through Pisces. This Monke told us marvellous strange things, that there was in the Monastery of S. Thomas (where he lived) a Foun∣taine, which sent sorth burning and flaming water, that this water was conveyed through Pipes of stone, to the severall Cels of the Monks, and that it made them warme as stoves do with us, and all kind of meats might be boyled in this Foun∣tain, and fiery water, & no otherwise than if it had bin on a fire indeed, he advertised moreover, that the wals of the Monaste∣ry, were made with Pumice stones, out of a certaine mountain not farre from the Monastery: like to Hecla in Iseland, for if you powre this water upon the Pumice stone, there will fol∣low a slymie matter, which in steed of lyme they use for mot∣ter. After the Governors conference with him, I came privately to demand, certaine particulars, touching the Pigmies and other things; he had a little skill in the Latine tongue, he un∣derstood me speaking Latine, but answered me by an Inter∣preter; he said the Pigmies represent the most perfect shape of man, that they were hayrie to the outermost joynts of the finger, and that the males have beards down to the knees, but although they have the shape of man, yet they have little sense, or understanding, or distinct speech, but make shew of a kind of issing▪ after the manner of Gese, that his Abbot kept two of them in his Monasterie, male and female, but they li∣ved not long, and that they were unreasonable creatures, and
live in perpetuall darkenesse, that some say, they have Warre with the Cranes; but that, he knew not. He affirmed that the same manner of food was in Groen∣land, as in Iseland; to wit, of Fish, but not of Cattell, because they have no Cattell; and that the Countrey is not populous. Forthwith from Iseland begins the Hperboron Sea, which beates upon Groenland, and the Countrey of the Pigmies, which at this day, is called Nova Zembla, and there the fro∣zen Sea hath a Bay, which is called the white Sea, orPigmies coun∣trey. Mare album; and there are certaine passages whereby they saile into the Soythian Sea, if they can for Ice. And the Governour had a ship of the King of Denmarkes furnished withall necessaries, but when he heard (by the Monke) of the short cut into the Kingdome of China, by the Tartara Sea, which had often been attempted by others, held it but in vaine. The last of March, 1564. he commanded that ship toThe Authors Voyage. sayle to those places, and me also together with them, enjoy∣ning me diligently to marke well the scituation of the places, and whatsoever we met with, worthy of sight or report; we were in the ship 3 score and 4 men, as well Danes as Iselan∣ders, and the 20 day of Aprill we arrived in a certaine Pro∣montorie of Groenland, and when we found no harbour, to the which we may safely commit our selves, letting downe the lead, we found the depth of the Sea, and it was such, as we could not anchor there, and the abundance of Ice was so great, that it was not possible to saile near the rocks, 24 of us armed, with great labour, and danger went on shore in our Skiffe; a∣mong whom I was to try whether I could find a harbour or no, and what kind of men Groenland had, in the meane time the ship floated in the Sea and Ice in a great Calme, halfe our Company abode on the shore (to keepe the Skiffe) another part (and I with them) ranne abroad to discover, they that were left on shore to keepe the Skiffe, going hither and thi∣ther, found a little man dead, with a long beard, with a little boat, and a crooked hooke of the bone of a fish, and a leatherA little man dead. Cord, foure fish-bladders were bound unto the boat (as is supposed) that it should not be drowned, whereof 3 were sunke & fallen flat, this boat (because it was very unlike ours)
the Governour sent to the King of Denmarke. Wee wandred in the meane season, in a land unknowne un∣to us, which was covered with snow, and Ice, we found nei∣ther footing of men or any inhabitants, nor fit place, but the Sea was closed and fensed, on every side with craggy Rocks; yet we met with a great white Beare, which neither feared us, nor could be driven away with our cries, but came full upon us, as to his certaine prey, and when he came neare unto us being twice shot through with a gun, he stood bolt upright, with his fore-feete like as a man standeth, untill he was shot through, the 3. time, and so fell downe dead, his skinne was sent to the King of Denmark, wee agreed amongst our selves before we went on shore, if we found a fit harbour, or else had need of their helpe, that we should plucke up our Stan∣der, which we carried out with us, for that purpose; and that, if they would call us backe, should signifie the same with their Ordnance; a tempest arising in the meane while, the Master of the Ship gives us a signe to returne, and calls us backe unto the Ship, all of us after with great labour, in 3. dayes returned unto the Ship with the Beares skin, we sailedA great mistake The Russ. were the first that named this land Nova Zembla, so Ste∣phen Brrowes, 1556. But this cānot be Pigmies-land, for that must ioyne or be neare to Groenland. therefore to the other side of the Iland to the North, to the Country of the Pigmies or Nova Zembla, that by the mouth of the white Sea, wee might come to the Scythian or Tartari∣an Sea; from thence they say, there is a passage to the King∣dome of China and Cathay, but being hindred by the Ice, wee could not passe the mouth of that Sea, wherefore without do∣ing any thing, we returned into Iseland the 16 of June. The Voyage of Master Iohn Knight imployed into Groyn∣land as Captaine, the yeare before by the King of Denmark but now out of England to search the N. W. passage. 1606. 18 HEe was set forth at the cost and charge of the Mus∣coviaApril. Company, and the East India Merchants. He set sayle from Gravesend the 18 of Aprill, and arrived in Orkney the 26. hee stayed there 14 dayes with contrar windes, and in the meane time hee entertaines 2. men of the Country, to goe along with him on the Voyage. 12 He set forth from St. Margarets Sound in Orkney, andMay. steered away W. by S.
16 This day at noone holding still his course Westward offVariation 48d S. the Latit. was 58 d. 19 m. his magneticall declination 8 deg. also this mornings Sun being 10 d. above the Horizon, was di∣stant from E, Northward 22 degrees. 17 This day he was in 58 d. 10 m. this morning the Sun did rise 50 d. to the N. off East. 12 He was in Latit. 57 d. 50 m. continuing his course still Southwards off W. from the last day much wind at N, N, . and fog, and he had a current setting to the North. 22 He saw many Sea guls and Rock weede. 23 He iudged his way to be made S, W, by W. but it pro∣ved W, by S. or rather W, 20 leag. by reason of a current (there he sees an Owle.) 28 He had Lat. 57 d. 57 m. the variation 14 d. 30 m. West∣ward,Latit. 57 d. 57 m Variation 14 d. 30. this day he had black water streames, leaches and fals of currents, it seemed to the N. and some to the West. 29 Latit. 58 degrees he was in a tyde-gate, which hee judged to set N, and S. or that it was the Eddie of the currents which he saw the other day (he sees white Fowles chirpingDead Cowes. like Sparrowes) and also many dead Cowes adrift (I think ra∣ther Crowes.) His Latit. was 58 d. 3. m. the variation 24 d. to the N, West∣wards,Latitude 58 d. 3 min. Variation 24 d. June. this night he observed the Sun to set 21 d. W. from N. 1 He was in Latit. 57 d. 35 m. and saw many black fowles, like Willockes flying in flocks together. 4 He was in Latit. 54 d. 40 min. 5 He was in 56 d. and had the variation by the Scale 20 d.Latitude 56 d. Variat. 20 and 24 deg. by his other Instruments 24 d. W. the Sun was 22 d.  / . high, and to the North off W. 30 d. by the Instruments, and 26 d. by the skale. 11 At noone, he had Latit. 58. at night the Sun set 14 d. W, from N. at morning it riseth 50. d. to the E. off North. 13 He had sight of land like Ilands, in Latit. 57 d. 25 min. and had some quantity of Ice driving to the South. On Friday he makes fast to the Ice, but the wind calming, he rowes, betwixt Ice and Ice, towards the land, but in a fog he makes fast againe to the Ice, when it cleered he loosed a∣gaine, and Rowes in, and is exceedingly pestered with Ice, suffering a mighty storme (with thick, and foggie weather) which so bruised his Shippe betwixt the Ilands of Ice;
that he was in danger to be crushed to pieces, though im∣ployed all his industry to the uttermost of his power. 19 He againe discovers the Iland of America, bearing N. and by W. about 15 leag. off, the variation 25 d. W. Latit. 56Latitude 56 d. 48 min. Varat. 25 d. d. 48 m. this coast sheweth like broken Ilands and the Tyde of flood commeth from the North. 24 He had a violent storme Northerly, and such a sue of the Sea came in, that his roapes broke that were fast on shoare,Lost his Rud∣er. his Rudder was driven from his sterne by the force of the mighty Ilands of Ice, so that he was forct to hale close into the bottome of a cove, to save his Cloathes, furniture and vi∣tuals, but before he had done, the Ship was halfe full of water,His Ship bul∣ed. and he tooke little rest for that night, (which may very well be beleeved.) 25 The ship on ground, he goeth about to set the water out: of her, and to stop so many of her leakes as he could come by, and some went to building the shallop, he caused his boate to be lanched over the Ice, and sent his mate Edward Gorill with 3 more, to seeke for a better place, where to bring his ship on ground, if it were possible to mend her againe. They retur∣ned without any certainty, by reason of the aboundance of Ice, which choaked every place, yet they found wood growing on the shoare. Here Master Iohn Knight ended, writing his Iournall with his life, another proceedes as followeth. 26 ON Thursday in the morning he caused some of his men to goe on board to save what things they could, him∣selfe, Edw. Gorrill his mate, and 3 more of his company tooke the boate, having with them 4 pistols, 3 muskets, 5 swords, and a halfe pikes, for to goe over to a great Iland, not above a mile from the ship, to see for Harbour to mend his ship in, they tooke with them an Aequinoctiall Diall, a paper to draw the land; when they were passed over, the Mr. his Brother and Mate, with one more went on shore, leaving . in the Boate from 10 of the clocke in the morning untill 11 at night, who heard no newes of them, after they departed from the top of the hill; then did the Trumpeter being one of them left in the Boate, sound two or 3 times, and the other did discharge his
Musket two or 3 times more, and so they came away to theThe Master & other n hard . W. side with the Boate where the ship was, who were wat∣ching for their comming; but when they see these two come and no more, they marvelled where the rest were; and when they were on land, the others inquired for the Master and the rest, but they could tell no newes of them, after their depar∣ture from the boate, but that they did see them goe on to the top of the Iland, which report did strike all the men into great feare, to thinke in what extremity they were, because they wanted their Master & 3 of their men, their ship sunk and they nothing to trust too but their shallop, which was at that time but ½. furnished: This night lying on shoare in their Tent, which was betwixt 2 Rockes, they kept very good watch, for feare of any peoples suddaine assault, or if the Master and his company, had travailed so farre, as they could not come home againe that night, if they should shoote a musket they might heare them; but they came not at all. 27 They consulted that 7 of them should goe over with the boat to try if they could see or learne any newes of their Master or of their men, supposing that they were either sur∣prised by the Salvages of the Country, or else devoured by the wild beasts, so they tooke with them 7 muskets, swords and Targets, and such provision as they had in the ship, and went downe to the Sea side, but they could not get over for Ice, at length they returned, with much adoe to come to shoare, and went to the ship to save such things, as they could get out of her. 28 Faire weather, they make cleare the ship, and helpe to save and mend all things, she lay upon the Rocks; therefore they make her as light as they could, for beating and bruising of her Hull, that night it rained very sore, and about clock 1. in the boat-swain and Stewards watch it being almost out, the Steward goes on board the ship to pumpe, leaving the boate∣swaine at watch, some muskets shot from their Tent, now while he was pumping, there came over the Rockes a great sort of the Countrey people, to the place where the boate∣swaine was at watch, who when they saw him, they shotSalvage tre∣ry. arrowes at him, running to him as fast as they could, whereup∣on he discharged his musket at them, and so fled backe to the Tent as fast as he could, thinking they had beset it they were so
many; the Steward hearing the Musket goe off, came forth of the Ship, & when he was comming saw the Salvages approa∣ching their Shallop, and cryed out to them in the Tent to save the boate, and the Shallop, who made what hast they could; but when they came at their boat and see so many of the Salv. in the Shallop, they were then afraid of being betraied, at this time it rained sore, yet calling their wits together, they sent 2 of their men back to the tent, the rest made towards the Sal∣vages, and shot at them some 3 or 4 muskets, who when they perceived it, they stood in the shallop and held up their hands to them calling one to another; they thinking it were better to dye in their owne defence in pursuing the Salvages, then they them, for it was in the night, and they were still in sight; thus recovering their Shallop, they sent more men to keepe the Tent, the Salvages were but 8 men, and a dog, yet the rest followed, but they were got into other boates, before they over tooke them. The Ice was so thick, that they stucke fast in them, they came so neere them as they could, and shot a doozen shot at them, before they could get cleare, the shot caused them to cry out one to another very sore, for their boates were full of men, as far as they could iudge, they are lit∣tle people, tawny coloured, thick haired, little or no beard, flatSaluages descri∣bed. nosed, and are man-eaters. 26 They carry all their provision aboard their Ship for feareIune. of the Salvages second assault, the ship lying betweene two Rocks, and all without so full of Ice, that they could not passe any way to sea, no not with a boate; this day 2 of our men watcht, that we might have warning, if any of them came a∣gaine with their boates, the Carpenter made what hast he could with the shallop, and did onely tinch, but neither calk nor pitcht her, yet they brought her to the ship. 30 They fall to worke with axes, and pick-axes, to cut the Ice, for all about the Iland was nothing else, and no place to ride free in, that night it pleased God, that they rowed her away with their oares, but she was exceeding leake, and the shallop also, and which was worse, they had never a Rudder to steere withall, yet they rowed all night amongst Ice. 1 and 2. They rowed up and down amongst the driving Ice,July. with little hopes to recover their Countrey. 3 The wind at N. they had a great current set to South∣ward,Currant South▪ward▪
they make fast to a peece of Ice, and went to worke, to stow their things snug & close downe within board to make her stiffe, for they had no ballast, the Carpenter makes what shift he could, to hang their Rudder, having nothing to make Gudgions nor Pintels, they were faine to breake open the Masters Chest, to take the Iron bands, to make fastAn inforced shift to hang a Rudder. 2 pickaxes for 2 pintels, this Night they hang the Rudder with 2 pintels, and a Cable through the middle of it, to keepe it too with two tackes, now were they in good hopes, to get cleare; for before their ship being Leake, with her stem sore beaten with Ice, and Rockes, themselves with pumping and rowing, were both sore and wearie. 4 This day, the wind came W, N, W. and was faire wea∣therIuly. (they got cleere out of the Bay the Noone-watch) and was the first they had of long time before, being all glad to watch to conduct the Ship cleare from the Ice, their ship was so leake, that if she stood vnpumped but halfe an houre, they could not dry her with 1000 stroakes; therefore they were inforced to Rumige, and found many leakes, but not that which caused them to pumpe so sore; at last they find it close abaft the fore-foote, where the keele was split in 2 or 3 places, they could not come to stop it, for it was vnder a timber, in at which the Sea came so fast as it was not possibleThey oder. to keepe her free with both pumpes, then did they take their maine bonnet, and basted it with Okum, and put it over-board right against their leake, which eased them 4 or 500. stroakes in an houre, they all this day consult to shape their course for New-found-land, hoping to meete with some English or French, and to mend their Ship; at this time one of their men was very sicke, another had his hand splinted, and most of them all were so sore with rowing, and pumping, as they were not able to stirre, but that they must perforce. 5 They shape their Course for New-found-land. 21 They fall with land being nothing but Ilands, Latit. 49 degrees, 30 minutes. 22 Faire weather, they stand in among Ilands, and a great Current set from Iland to Iland, no ground at a 100 Fathoms, they keepe too and fro all this night, in great danger▪ being among broken Rockes, with thicke weather. 23 They espie a dozen shallops fishing, they make to∣wards
them, they tooke harbour and remained in this Bay o Fogo: untill the 22 of August, repairing their ship, and re¦freshing themselves; the 24 of September, they arrive a Dartmouth. This journall from the death of Master Iohn Knight, wa writ by Oliver Browne one of the Company. An Abstract of the Voyage of Master Henry Hudson, to the Northwest, begun the 17 of Aprill, 1610. and ended with his life, being treacherously exposed by some of his Company. 22 IN the Road of Lee, in the River of Thames, he causedApril. Master Coolbrand to be set in a Pinke, to bee carried backe againe to London. This Coolbrand was every way held to be a better man than himselfe, being put in by the Adven∣turers as his assistant, who envying the same (he having the command in his owne hands) devised this course, to send him∣selfe the same way, though in a farre worse place, as hereafter followeth. 5 He came to the Isles of Orkney, and here he set the N.May. end of the Needle, and the North end of the Fly all one. 6 He was in latitude 59 d. 23 m. and there he perceived that the N. end of Scotland, Orkney, and Shotland (for hee visi∣ted them all) as he saith, are not so Northerly as is commonly set downe in the Charts. 8 He saw Farre Ilands in Lat. 62. 24 m. but he staid not there. 11 He fell with the E. part of Iseland, then plyed up along the S. part of the land and came to the Westmost; and the 15. he still plyed up untill the last of May, and got some fowles of divers sorts. 1 He put to Sea out of a harbour in the Westmost part ofIune. Iseland, (and according as hee writeth) plyed to the West∣ward in Latit. 66d. 34 m. 2 He was in Latit. 65 d. 57 m. small wind Easterly. 4 He saw Greenland perfectly over the Ice, this night, SunGreenland. set at N. and rise N, N, E. The 5. he plyed in 65 d. still incom bred with Ice, which hang upon the cst of Greenland. 9 He was off Frebrishers sras, and pide Southward untillDavis his error but not belee∣ved. the 15. and then he was in Latit. 9 d. 27 m, and had sight of
Desolation, and finds the errour, of the former lying downe of the land, running to the Northward, as he saith, untill this day in 60 d. 42 m. he saw much Ice, many riplings and overfal∣lings, and a strong streame setting West Northwest. 23 In sight of much Ice, wind variable, and in latitude 62. degrees, 19. minutes. 25 About midnight he saw the land North, but was sud∣denly lost, yet he runne still Westward in 6 deg. 19 min. and he plyed upon the South side seeking the shore, he was trou∣bled with much Ice, in latitude, 52 deg. 16. min. 8 Hee plyed off the shore againe, untill this day, the PolsIuly. elevation 60 d. 0 m. he saw the land from N, W. by W. ½ N. unto the S, W, by W. covered with snow, a Champion land, and cals it Desire provoked. 11 He plyed still to Westward, and fearing a storme, he an∣chored by 3 ragged Ilands, in uncertaine deepes, betweene 8. and 9 fathomes; he findes the harbour unsufficient, by reason of sunken rockes, one of the which was the next morning 2. fathomes above water (which he had gone over) hee calls them the Isles of Gods mercy; it floweth here better thanThe Ile of Gods Mercy▪ 4 fathomes; the stood came from North, flowing 8 a Clock the Change day, the latitude in this place is 62 d. 9 min. 16 Plying to Southward, untill this day he was in 58 deg. 50 min. there he was Imbayed with land, and had much Ice. 19 Vntill this day he plyed Westward, and found his lati∣tude 61 deg. 24 min. where he see a Bay in the South land which he named (Hold with hpe.) 21 Hence he plies to the Northward, had variable winds, and findes the Sea more growne, then he had any time since he left England. 23 The Poles height was 61 deg. 33. min. 25 He saw the Southland, and named it, Magna Britania. 26 He was in latitude, 62 deg. 44 min. 28 He plied Southward off the Westward, and was in 63. deg. 10 min. 31 Plying Southerly, he found himselfe in 62 d. 2 min. 1 He had sight of the North shoare, from the N, E, by .. August. to the W. by. S. the N. 12 leagues off, the W. part 20 leagues, he had no ground at 180 fathomes, and he thought hee see land, bearing E, N, E. on the Suns side, but could not make it perfectly, here he found the latitude, 62 deg. 50. min.
2 This day he had sight of a Faire headland 6 leagues off, which he called Salisburies Foreland, he ran from thence W, S, W. 14 leagues, in the midst of which, he came in to a great whirling Sea, whither caused by the meeting of a streames, or overfals he knew not, thence sayling W, by S. 7 leagves farther; he was in the mouth of a straight, and had no ground at 100 fathomes, the straight not being above 2 leagues broad in the passage, in this Westerne part, which from the Eastern part of Fretum Davis is distant 250 leagues. 3 This day he put thorough this passage (which was nar∣row) after his men had been on land, that did observe; the flood-tide did come from N. flowing by the shore 5 fathoms. After he had sailed West by South 10 leagues, the land fell to the Southwards, and the Iles to the West left him, he ob∣served, and found himselfe in 61 d. 20 m. and a Sea from the Westwards. He names the Cape on the Star-board, C. Digges, being anCape Digges. Iland; that on the Larbord stands upon the maine, named byCape Worsten∣holme. him Cape Worstenholme, here is all I finde extant of his owne writing, although he lived untill Iuly following, before he was exposed. A large discourse of the said Voyage, and the successe thereof, written by Abacuk Pricket, Who lived to come home They came to the Iles of Orkney, and from thence to Farre,May. one day being calme, they fell to fishing, and kild good store of God and Ling, from thence they raise the Iles of Westmony, in one of which the King of Denmarke hath a for∣tresse, by which they passed to raise the Snow-hill-foote, a mountaine so called, on the N, W. part of the land, and in that course, they see the famous Mount Hecla, which cast out much fire, a signe of foule weather to come; they leave Island on sterne, and met a maine of Ice, lying upon the Northpart thereof, which when they see, they stood backe for a Harbour in Island, called Derefer, where he kild good store of Fowle; from thence they put to Sea againe, but the wind not serving, he puts back againe into another harbour, called Lowsie Bay, heare they found a Bath so hot as would scald a Fowle, He put forth for Groenland, and thought he saw land, but iJune 1. prooved a fog banke.
He raised Groenland, but great store of Ice hung upon the land, this land is Mountainous, with hils like Suger loaves, co∣vered with Snow. He coasted along betwixt W, and N, W. untill he saw Dis∣solation, which is a great Iland, on the N, W. part of Groen∣land, here he saw great store of Whales, some came about and under the ship, but did no harme: From hence he directed his course N, W. and would have hailed more Northerly if the winde would have suffered him, in this course he see the first mountainous Ice; about the last of June, he raised the land N. off him, he tooke the same to be that Iland which Capt. Davis set in his Chart, on the W. side of this straight he would have gone to N. thereof, but the winde would not suffer him, so he fell on the Southside into a great ripling or overfall of a current, into this current, he went and made his way Northward off W. untill he met with Ice which hung on this Iland; where∣fore he cast about to the South, and cleared himselfe and then stood to the W, amongst some store of sloting Ice, and upon the Ice store of Seales, he still made way N, W. and meetes sometimes with Ice, and then againe cleare; thus proceeding betwixt Ice and Ice, he sees a great Iland of Ice overtumble, which was a good warning to him not to come neere them; the next day he had a great storme, and was driven to put in a∣mongstA warning. the Ice, and there to lye, some of his men fell sicke, he will not say for feare, though he see no other signe of griefe. The storme ceasing, he put from the Ice standing W, S, W: and N, W. and as the cleare Sea and Ice would suffer him; see∣ing the sea thus continued he would seeke to the S. but the more he strove the worse he was, for he was fast inclosed and began to dispaire (as he after told this Writer) hee thought he should never have got out of this Ice, but there haue peri∣shed. Wherfore he shewed him his Card, that he was 100. leag.See Weymare further than ever any English man was, and referred to their choyse to proceed further or no; whereupon some wisht them at home, others any where so from amongst the Ice, but inDiscontents▪ this distraction, there passed words which was thought upon long time after. There was one told the Master, that if he had a 100 pound he
would give 90 therof to be at home, but the Carpenter made answere and said, if he had 100. he would not give 10 upon any such condition, but would hold it as good money as ever he had any, and by Gods leave, to bring it as well home; well, to worke they goe and with labour get the ship cleare, the sea being also cleere, a league or 2 off; the course now is N, N, W. in the end, he raised high land, at S. W. (covered with snow) and names it, Desire provokes, he heard the noyse of a great o∣verfall of a tide that came out of the Land, and now he could well discerne that formerly he had beene imbayed, and that Time made his acquaintance so well knowne to the Ice, that when wet fogge or foule weather came, he should make fast to the broad peece of Ice, and run and sport, and fill sweete fresh water upon the same, after he had brought this land to beare S off him, he had a current or tyde to open the Ice, be∣ing carried first one way and then another, but in bayes they lay as in a pond, without mooving, in the Bay wherein he was thus troubled, he see of those Icie mountaines on ground, here was 120 and 140 fathomes of water, and here he sees a Beare upon the Ice, his men gave chase, to him, but lost him, by the tydes carrying away the Ice, the Beare was gone out of their reach. He continued his course, towards the North-West, and raised land to the North and Ice, where there was a Beare which came from Ice to Ice, untill she came neere them, and then she runne away; hee stood along on the South side of this land meeting with Ice, which seeing, he stood into the shore, and found a harbour, in the West end of this Iland, he went over one Rock of two fathomes and a halfe, and at low water it was so much bare, he names it the Iles of Gods mercy,Iles of Gods Mercy. Partridges. the Master sent this Author, over to discover this Iland, to the North and North-West he met with a covery of Partrid∣ges, and kild onely the old one, it was barren land, having nothing thereon but water plashes, and torne Rockes, as though it had beene subiect to earthquakes, to the North of this Iland, there is a great bay or Sea, they know not what itSpring tydes carried the Ice to the N, West. may prove, there was a great Iland of Ice on ground, which with the spring tide was set on float and carried to the N, W. but came not backe within sight, here they found some drift wood on shoare.
From thence he stood to S, W. to double the land to the W. off him, through many peeces of Ice, at length he found a cleare Sea, and raised land to the N, W. whereupon he stood more to S. then before (and fell amongst Ice) which he would have doubled to the N. but could not, then he stood to the S, W. a∣mongst the Ice, and strove to get to the land but could not for the Ice, from out of this bay he stood to the North, and was soone cleare of the Ice, then he stood to S. W. and W. where he was inclosed with land and Ice, having land on the one side from the S. to the N, W. and on the other side he see land from E. to W. but the land that lay to the N. and lay E. and W. was but an Iland, he went so farre as he could, (and made fast to the Ice, the tyde brought upon him) but the ebbe did o∣penTide and ebbe. and made way, and 7 or 8 houres he was cleare, and with the great Ilands of Ice, was carried to the N, W. He stands to the W. along the S. shoare and raised 3 Capes or headlands one above another, the middlemost is an Iland, with a Bay which he thinkes will prove a good harbour, he names them Prince Henries Forland, when he had laid these, he raised another which was the extreame part of the land looking towards the N. upon it are two hils (but one above the rest) like an humlocke, he names it King Iames his Cape, to the N. of this lyes certaine Ilands, he names it Queen Annes Forland, he still followed the N. shoare beyond the Kings For∣land, there is a Bay wherein lyeth some broken land and close to the maine, but he passed by on the night. From thence he stood to the N. and W. to double this land againe, and fell with land that stretched from the maine, like a shoare from S, to N. and from N, to W. and downe to S, again, here a storme takes him and he stands to N. and raises land, then he stood to S. againe, for he was loathat any time to see the N. shoare, the storme continuing, and he comming to the S. he found himselfe shot to the W. a great way, which he mer∣vailed at, (considering his leaward way) to S. W. ward off this land, there is a hill he named Mount Charles, to the N. and beyond this is an Iland, that to the East hath a fore head land, and beyond it to the W. other broken land, where he thinks may be found a good harbour, he names this Cape Salisbury. He then left those lands to the North-East, and fell into a ripline or overfall of a current, which he thought to be shoald
water, but had no ground, he put on still in sight of the South∣land, and raised land 2 leag. from the maine, he tooke it to be the North maine, but it proved an Iland, having a very faire Head-land to the West, which he named Cape Digges,Cape Digges. on the other side, to the East, was another Cape or head-land which he called Cape Worstenholme; betwixt which two heCape Worsten∣holme. sailed South. He sends the Boate on shore to Digges his Iland, and in her going she was overtaken by a storme of Raine, Thunder, and Lightning, they came to the N, East-side, being high-land, but with much adoe, going to the highest part, they find someDeee plaine ground, and Deere, 4 or 5. And after 16 in one Heard, but could not come nigh them with Musket shot. Thus going from place to place, they see (to the West) a Hill higher then all the rest, it was steepe, and they could not get vp to it, but on the South-west side; and on that side was a great water pond, from whence on the South runneth a streame of water, as much as would drive a Mill, falling into the Sea: and in this place bred great store of Fowle, and the best grasse grew there, they had seene since their comming from England, they found Sorrell and Scurvey-grasse in great aboundance, they found likewise Hills, made like to hay∣cockes,Fowle hanged. within which were great store of Fowle hanged by the neckes, they tooke many of them; and downe a valley carried them to their Boate. In this time the Master had brought in the Ship, betweene the two lands, & shot off some peeces, to call the boat on board, for it was a fogge, they perswaded him to stay heere for re∣freshing, but he would not, but sailed downe to the S. the land beares E, from him, and the same Maine that he had allHe lost sight of East-land. the time followed, he looseth the sight thereof, because it fell away to the East, and after he had sailed 25 or 30. leag. he came to shallow water, broken ground, and Rockes; which he passed to the S. and in a storme of winde, the water still shoalding, he came to anchor in 15 fathomes. After this, he wayed and stood S, E. for so the Land laid, and came to have land on both sides, then he anchored, and sent the Boate on land, the Land on the W. was a very nar∣rowA large Sea to South. point, and to the S. there was a large Sea: He stood to the South betweene these two Lands in this place, not above
two leagues, and in the sight of the East-shore; in the end he lost sight thereof, and came into the bottome of a bay into 6. or 7. fathom water, then he stands vp againe to the N. by the West-shore, vntill he came to an Iland in 53 deg. where he tooke in water, and ballast. From thence, he passed to the N. but some 2 or 3 dayes af∣ter, there fell some reasoning concerning their comming into this Bay and going out, the Master takes occasion to reviue old matters, and displaces his Mate Robert Ivet, and also his Boate-swaine, for words spoken in the great Bay of Ice; he places Robert Bylot his Mate, and William Wilson Boate-swaine, and then stands vp to the N, vntill he raised land, and then downe to the S. then vp againe to the N. and then downe toMichaelmas Bay. the S. and on Michaelmas day he came in and went out from certaine Ilands which he sets downe for Michalmas Bay; from thence he stood to the N. and came into shole water, the wea∣ther thicke and foule. He anchored in 6 or 7 fadomes, and lay there 8 dayes, before which time he could not have one houre to get vp his anchor, the winde then ceasing, the Master would have vp the an∣chor, against the mind of all that knew what belonged there∣vnto; but when he had his anchor on peake, the Ship tooke one sea and threw them all from Capstone, and diuers were hurt, he left his anchor and saved most of his Cable, for the Carpenter had laid his axe ready to cut the Cable if occasion should so fall out. From hence he stands to S, W. through a cleare Sea of di∣vers soundings, and came to a Sea of two coulours, one blacke the other white, and 16 or 17 fadom water, betweene which he went 5 or 6 leag. the night comming on, he goes in his maine and fore-saile and came into 5 or 6 fathomes, he saw no land for it was darke, so that he stood to the East, and hadThe West most of Hadsons Bayes. deeper water, and then stood to the S. and S. W. and came to the West. most bay of all, (in this bay wintred Captaine Iames of Bristow) in this bay neerest to the N. shore he anchored and sent on Land his boate, he found the land flat, and hisFooting of a Man. men saw the footing of a man & a ducke in the snowy Rockes and found good store of wood, heere he saw a ledge of Rockes lying S. and N. to the South-ward off him, and flowed over at full sea, and a strong tide set in there, he weyed anchor at
midnight and thought to stand forth as he came in, but itS on  Rocke. fortuned that hee runne upon these Rockes, and sate there, for 12 houres, but by Gods mercy he got off againe unhurt though not unafrighted. He then stood up to the East and raised 3 hils lying North and South, he went to the furthermost, and left it to the North he came into a Bay and anchored, and sent the Carpenter, and this writer to looke for a place to winter; it being the last of October; the nights long and cold, the earth all covered with Snow, themselves wearied, having spent 3 moneths in a laby∣rinth,November. in this Bay, they went downe to the East, to the bot∣tome there, but returned not with that they went for; the next day he went to the South, and S, West, where he found a place, unto which hee brought his ship, and hailed her on ground, and on the 10 day she was froze in; now hee lookes to the lengthning of his provision. He was victualled for 6 moneths with good provision and might have had more from home if he would, now hee must pinch for that he knew of no supply untill he came the next yeere to Cape Digs, where the Fowle breed, for there was all his hopes; wherefore hee propounded reward to him that either killed beast, fish, or fowle; his Gunner dyed about the middle of this moneth, he blameth the Masters uncharitable dealing with this man, but note what followed. The Master kept in his house at London, a young man na∣medHenry Greenes condition. Henry Greene, borne in Kent, of worthy Parents, but by his life and conversation, he had lost the love of all his friends, & spent all that he had, but by the means of one Master Venson, his mother parted with 4 l. to buy him cloathes, which money he was not trusted with the disposing of himselfe, this Henry Greene, was not knowne to the Adventurers, nor had any wa∣ges, but came onely on board at Graves-end, and at Harwich, would have gone into the field with one Wilkinson of our Company; at Island he fell out with the Chirurgion in Dutch,Green beats the Surgion. and he beat him on shore in English, which set all the Com∣pany in a rage, so that they had much adoe to get the Chirur∣gion on board againe, this Author told the Master of it, but he bade him let the matter alone; for (said he) the Chirur∣gion hath a tongue that would wrong the best friend he had, but Robert Iuet, the Masters Mate would needs put his fin∣gers
in the Embers, and told the Carpenter a long tale, (when he was drunke) that the Master had brought in Greene to cracke his credit that should displease him, which when the Master heard of, (being forty leagues from Island) he would have gone backe to Island to have sent Juet his Mate home in a Fisherman, but being otherwise perswaded, all was well and Greene stood upright, and was very inward with the Master, and was a serviceable man every way for manhood, but for Religion he would say he was white Paper, whereon he might write what he would; now the Gunner was dead, and then (as order is in such cases) if the Company stand in neede of any thing belonged to the man that is deceas∣sed, then is it brought to the maine Mast, and there sold to them that will give the most for it; this Gunner, had a gray cloth Gowne, which Greene prayed the Master to befriend him, so much as to let him have it, paying for it as another would give, the Master said he should, and therefore answe∣red some, who sought for it that Greene should have it and none else. Now out of time and season, the Master called the Carpen∣ter to goe in hand with a house on shore, which at the be∣ginning hee would not heare of, when it might have beene done; the Carpenter told him that the Snow and Frost was such, as hee neither could nor would goe in hand with such worke, which when he heard he feretted him out of his cab∣bine and struck him, calling him by many foule words and threatned to hang him, the Carpenter tolde him, that he knew what belonged to his place better then he did, and that he was no house Carpenter, yet the house was made with much labour to no end, the next day after, the Master and the Car∣penter fell out, the Carpenter tooke his Peece and Henry Greene with him, for it was ordered that none should goe out alone, but one with a Peece another with a Pike, this did move the Master so much more against Greene, that Robert Bylot his mate must have the Gowne, and had it delivered unto him, which Henry Greene seeing, he charged the Mr. with his pro∣mise, but the Mr. did so raile on Greene, & with so many words of disgrace, telling him that all his friends durst not trust him with 20 shillings, & therfore why should he, and as for wages he was to have none, nor should if he did not please him, yet
the Mr. had promised him as good wages as any man in the ship, and to have him one of the Princes Guard at his home cō∣ming, but you shall see how the Divell so wrought out of this that Greene did the Master what mischiefe he could, in seek∣ingGreene prac∣tise of mischeif. to discredit him, and to thrust him and other honest men out of the ship; to speake of all the troubles, and of this cold Winter would be too tedious. Now he sheweth how mercifully God dealt with them in this time, for in the space of three moneths he had such store of one kinde of Fowle, which were Partridge, as white as Milke, at which he killed at least one hundred dozen, of sun∣dry sorts, for all was fish that came to the net, at the Spring this fowle left them, and in their places came other of divers sorts, as Swannes, Goose, Ducke, and Teale, but hard to come by, he thought that they would have bred there in those broken grounds, but they doe not, but came from the S, and flew to the N. further then he was this Voyage, yet if they had beene taken short with N. or N. E. winds, they stay there a∣gainst the winds returne, and then take their flight to the N. ward, and in short time none of them are to be seene there. Then he searched the wooddy hils and vallies, for all thingsMiserable food. that had any show of substance (for food) how vile soever, the mosse of the ground, and the frog in his ingendring time was not spared, but amongst divers sorts of buds, it pleased God that Thomas Woodhouse brought one of a tree, that was full of Turpentine substance, of this the Surgion made a decoc∣tionA Medecinable bud. to drinke, and applyed the buds hot to them that were troubled with ache in any part, from whence they received present ease. Now about that time the Ice began to breake out of theA Salvage▪ bayes, there came a Salvage to their Ship, as it were to see and to be seene, and was the first, that they had seen in all that time, he intreats him well, and used him kindly, promising to him∣selfe great matters by this meanes; and therefore called for all the Knives and hatchets which every man had to his private vse, and to this Salvage he gave a knife, a looking-glasse, and buttons, who received them thankefully, and made signes that after he had slept he would come againe, which he did and brought with him a sled which he drew after him, and up∣on it two Deere skins, and two Beaver skinnes, he had a scrip
under his arme, out of which he drew those things the Master had given him; and layes the knife upon the Beaver skinnes, and the glasses and buttons upon the other, and so gave them to the Master, who received them; and the Salvage tookeThey trade. those things which the Master had given him, and put them into his scrip againe, then the Master showed him a hatchet, for which he would have given him one of his Deere skins, but the Master would have both, and so he had, although not willingly, after many signes of people to the N. and to the S. and that after so many sleepes, he would come again, he went his way but came no more. Now the Ice being broke out of the Sounds, that a boate might passe, the Mr. appointed William Wilson, Henry Greene, Michael Peirce, John Thomas, Andrew Motter, Bennet Ma∣thewes, and Arnold Lodlo, to go on fishing, these men the first day they went, caught 500. fish as bigge as good Herrings, and some Trouts, here was good hope to have their wantFishing. supplyed, but those were the most that ever they got in one day, for many dayes they got not a quarter so many; in this time of their fishing, Henry Greene, and William Wilson, with some others plotted to take the net & Shallop which the Car∣penter had new set up, and so to shift for themselves, but the Shallop being ready, the Master would goe in it himselfe, to the S, and S, W, to see if he could meete with people, for to that end it was set up: and that way he could see the woods set on fier by them; the Master takes the net and shallop, and so much victuals as would serve for nine dayes, and went to the Southward, they that remained on board were appointed to take in water, wood, and ballast; and to make the ship rea∣dy against his returne; but he could set no time, for hee was perswaded that if he met with the Salvages, hee should have refreshing of fresh meat, and that good store; but in conclusi∣on, he returned worse then he went, and though the Inhabi∣tants set the woods on fire before him, yet they would not come to him. Being now returned, he makes ready for his home cōming,A bill of re∣turne. and first he delivers all the bread in the fore roome, wch came to a pound a peece for every mans share, and delivered unto every man a bill of returne, willing them to have that to shew if it pleased God they came home, and he wept, when he gave
it unto them, but to help themselves to some reliefe; the boat went to fish from Friday morning untill Sunday noone, and brought but 80 small fish for 18 hungry bellies; whereupon he waighed and came away from his wintering place into the Sea, where his bread being gone, that store of cheese which he had must stop the gap, being but five; the Company grud∣ged,Cheese shifted. for they made account of nine; but those five were equal∣ly divided by the Master, some counselling him to the contra∣ry, for there were some, who having it, would make haste to be rid thereof, because they could not gouerne it; I know (saith the writer) when Henry Greene gave halfe his bread which he had for 14 dayes, to one to keepe, and prayed him not to let him have any untill the next Munday, but before Wednesday at night, he never left untill he had it againe, ha∣ving eaten up his first weeks bread before; so Wilson the boat∣swaine, had eat in one day his 14 dayes bread, and hath laid in bed, 2 or 3 dayes for his labour. The cause why the Master delivered all the cheese, was because they were not all of one goodnesse, and therefore they should see that they had no wrong done them, but that every man had the best and worst together, which was 3 pound and one halfe for 7 dayes. The wind serving, he wayed and stands to the N, W. and on Munday night, the 18 of June, he fell into the Ice, and the next day with W. wind he lay fast within sight of land untill Sunday following; now being here the Master told Nicholas Simmes that there would be a breaking up of Chests, and a search for bread, and willed him, if he had any to bring it to him, which he did, and delivered the Master 30 Cakes in a bag; this deed of the Mr. (if it be true) hath made me marvell what should be the reason, why hee did not stop the breach in the beginning, but let it grow to that height as it overthrew him∣selfe and many other honest men; but there are many devices in the heart of man, but the counsell of the Lord should stand. Being thus on the Ice, on Saturday the one and twentiethWilson and Greene, their reachery. of Iune at night, Wilson the Boatswaine, and Henry Greene came to this writer lying lame in his Cabbin, and told him that they and the rest of their associates would shift the Company, and turne the Master and all the sicke men into the Shallop, and let them shift for themselves, for there was not 14 dayes victuall left for all the Company, at that poore allowance they
were at: and that there they lay, the Master not caring to go one way or other; and that they had not eaten any thing this three dayes, and therefore were resolute either to mend o end, and what they had begun, they would go through there∣with, or die; when he heard this, he told them, he marvelled to heare so much from them, considering that they were mar∣ried men, and had wives and children, and that for their sakes they should commit so foule a thing in the sight of God and man, as that would be: for why should they banish them∣selves from their native countrey; Henry Greene bad him hold his peace, for he knew the worst of it; which was to be hanged when he came at home, and therefore of the two heHang or starve would rather be hanged at home then starved abroad, and for the good will they bore him they would have him to stay in the ship; he gave them thankes, and told them that hee came into the ship, not to forsake her, nor yet to hurt himselfe and others by any such deed, Henry Greene told him then, that hee must take his fortune in the Shallop, if there bee no remedy quoth he, the will of God he done. Away goes Greene in a rage, swearing to cut his throat that went about to disturbe them, and left Wilson by him, with whom he had some conference, but to no good, for hee was perswaded to goe on with the action, whilst it was hot, lest their parties should faile them; and the mischiefe they inten∣ded to others, should fall upon their owne shoulders. Greene comes againe and demaunded what he said; Wilson answe∣red and said, he is in his old song, still patient; then he spake to Greene to stay 3 dayes, in which time hee would so deale with the Mr. as all should bee well, but being denied, he dealt with him but for 2 dayes, nay, for 12 houres, there is no way then say they, but out of hand: then he told them that if they would stay while Munday▪ he would joine with them to share all the victuals in the ship▪ and would justifie it when he came at home; but this would not serve, wherefore he told them it was some worse matter they had in hand, then they made shew of, and that it was blood and revenge he sought or else he would not undertake such a deed, at such a time of night, Greene with that tooke his Bible, which lay before him, andSweare. sware that he would doe no harme, and what he did, it was for the good of the Voyage, and for nothing else, and that all the rest should doe the like, the like did Wilson sweare.
Greene went his way, and presently comes Ivett, who be∣cause hee was an ancient man, he hoped to have found some reason in him, but he was worse then Greene, for hee swore plainely that he would justifie this deed at home-comming, after him came, Iohn Thomas, and Michael Pierce, as birds of one feather, but because they died, as hereafter shall be shew∣ed, he let them passe; then came Motter and Bennet, of whom he demaunded, if they were well advised what they had taken in hand, they answered, they were, and therefore came to take their oath. Now saith this writer, because he was much condemned for this oath, as one that plotted with them, and that by an oath he should binde them together to performe what they had begun; he thought good to set downe to the view of all men, to see how well their oath and deeds agreed, and thus it was; You shall be true to God, your Prince and Countrey, you shall doe nothing but to the glory of God, and to the good of the action in hand, and harme to no man. This was the oath without adding or diminishing, he looked for moe of those companions, al∣thoughthose were too many, but there came no more while it was darke, and they in readinesse to put this deed of darkenesse into execution, he called to him Greene and Wilson, and prayed them not to goe in hand with it in the darke, but to stay untill morning, for now he hoped every man would goe to his rest, but wickednesse sleepeth not: for Henry Greene keepeth the Master Company all night, and gave this writer bread, which his Cabbin mate gave him, and others were as watchfull as hee; then he asked Henry Greene, whom he would put out with the Master, he said the Carpenter, Iohn King, and the sick men, he said they should not doe well to part with the Car∣penter, what need soever they should have; why, the Car∣penter was in no more regard amongst them, then another, for that he and John King were condemned for wrong done in the victuals; but the chiefest cause was because the Master loved him, and made him his mate, upon this his returne from his wintring place, thereby displacing Robert Bylot, who they did grudge because hee could neither write nor reade; for therefore said they, the Master and his ignorant mate will carry the ship whether the Master pleaseth; the Master ha∣ving forbidden any man to keepe account or reckoning
having taken from all men whatsoever served for that pur∣pose; well, he obtained of Henry Greene and Wilson, that the Carpenter should stay, by which meanes, after that they had satisfied themselves, the Master and the rest might bee taken into the ship againe, or hee hoped that some one or other would give some notice to the Carpenter, Iohn King, or the Master; for so it might have come to passe, and have beene by some of them prevented, that were the most for∣ward. Now it cannot be amisse to shew how they were lodged, and to begin in the cookes Roome, there lay Bennet, and the Cooper lame without the Cookes roome, on the starboard side lay Thomas Woodhouse sicke, next to him lay Sydrach Fen∣ner lame, then lay Wilson the boatswaine, and then Arnold Lod∣lo next to him, in the Gunners roome lay Robert Iuet and John Thomas, on the Larboard side lay Michaell But, and Adiran Moore which was never well since they lost their anckor, next to him lay Michaell Peirce and Andrew Motter, next to them, without the Gunner roome lay Iohn King, and with him Robert Bilot, next to them himselfe, and next to him Francis Clements, In the midship betwixt the Capstone and the Pompes, Henry Greene, and Nicholas Simmes, this night John King was late up, and they thought he had beene with the Mr. but he was with the Carpenter, who lay in the poope, and comming from him was met by his cabbine mate, as it were by chance, so they went to cabbine together, it was not long ere it was day, then came Bennet, for water for the ket∣tle, he went into the hold, when he was in, they shut the hatch on him, but who kept it downe he knoweth not, but upon the decke came Bennet. In the meane time went Henry Greeene and another to the Carpenter, and held him talke, untill the Master came out of his Cabbin, which hee soone did, then came JohnThe Master bound. Thomas and Bennet, before him, while Wilson bindes his armes behind him, he asked what they meant, they told him that he should know when hee was in the Shallop; now Iuet, while this was doing, came to John King into the hold, whoKing liked one. was provided for him, for hee had got a sword of his owne and kept him at a Bay, and might have killed him but others came to helpe him, and so he came up to the Ma∣ster,
the Master called to the Carpenter, and tolde him that he was bound, but he heard no answer made, now Arnold Lod∣lo, and Michell But, railed at them and told them there kna∣very would show it selfe, then was the Shallop hailed up to the ship side, and the poore sicke and lame men, were called up to get them into the Shallop, the Master called to this writer who came out of his cabbine, as well as he could, to the hatch way to speake with him, where on his knees he besought them for the love of God to remember themselves, and to do as they would be done unto, they bad him keep himselfe well and get him into his cabbine, not suffering the Master to speak to him; but when he came into his cabbin againe, at the horn window which gave light into his cabbine, the Mr. told him that Juet would overthrow them all; nay said he, it is that vil∣laine Greene, and spake it not softly. Now was the Carpenter at liberty, and asked them if they would be hanged when they came at home, and as for him∣selfe, he said he would not stay in the Ship unlesse they would force him, they bid him go then, for they would not stay him, I will said he, so I may have my chest and all that is in it, they said he should, and presently put it into the Shallop, then came he to take his leave of this writer, who perswaded him to stay, which if he would he might so worke that all might be well, but he answered, that he did not thinke but that they would be glad to take them in againe, for he was so perswaded by the Master, that there was not one in all the ship that could tell how to carry her home, but saith he, if we must part (which we will not willingly doe, for they would follow the ship) prayed him if they came to the Cape before them, that he would leave some token, that he had beene there neare to the place where the Fowles breed, and he would doe the like for us, and so with teares we parted, now were the sick men driven out of their cabbines into the Shallop but Iohn Thomas, who was Francis Clements friend, and Bennet, was the Coo∣pers, so as there was words betweene them and Henry Greene, saying that they should goe, and the other swearing that they should not goe, but such as were in the Shallop should returne when Henry Greene heard that, he was compelled to give place and to put out Arnold Lodl and Michael But, which with much a doe they did.
In the meane time there was some that plyed there workeBreaking chests open. as though the ship had beene entred by force, and they had free leave to pillage, breaking up chests and rieling all places, one of them came to this writer, and asked him what they should doe, who answered that they should make an end of what they had begun, for he see him doe nothing but sharkeThe names of those exposed into the Shal∣lop. up and downe; now all the poore men in the Shallop, as Hen∣ry Hudson Master, Iohn Hudson his sonne, Arnold Lodle, Si∣rack Fenner, Phillip Staffe the Carpenter, Thomas Woodhonse, Adam More, Henry King, and Mche But; the Carpen∣ter got of them a peice, and powder and shot and some pikes, an Iron pot with some meale and other things, they stoode out of the Ice the Shallop being fast to the sterne of the Ship, and so when they were high out, for he cannot say they were cleane out, they cut the head-fest from the sterne of their ship, and then out went topsailes, and stood to the E. in cleare Sea, having lost sight of the Shallop, in the end they tooke in top sailes, righted their helme, and lay in foresaile, untill they had ransacked and searched all places in the Ship, in the hold they found one of the vessels of meale whole, and another halfe spent, for they had but two, they found also 2 firkins of but∣ter, some 27 peeces of porke, and halfe a Bushell of pease, but in the Mrs. cabbine they found 200 of Bisket Cakes, a peck of meale, of Beare to the quantity of a Butt, now when it was said that the Shallop was again come within sight, they let fall the maine saile, and out top sailes and fly as from an enemy. Then he prayed them to remember themselves, but Wilson nor the rest would heare of no such matter, comming high the E. shore they cast about to the W. and came to an Iland where they anckred in 16 fathoms, and tries on shoare with the net for fish, but could not drive for rockes, Michaell Peirce, kil∣led two fowle, and heare they found good store of weed cal∣led cockle grasse, of which they gathered (as in their winter∣ing place) and came on board▪ they lay there that night and the most of the next day, in wch time they see not the Shallop norLost the Shal∣for ever. ever after, now came He. Greene and told him that it was the companies will that he should go up into the Mrs. cabbine, and take charge thereof, he told him that it was more fit for Rob. Iuet, he said he should not come in it, nor meddle with the
Mrs. Card nor Iournals, so up he came and Hen. Greene gave the key of the Mrs. chest and told him that he had layde the Mrs. best things together, which he would use himselfe when time did serve, the bread was also delivered this writer by tale. The winde serving they stand N, E. and this was Bylots course contrary to Ivet, who would have gone N, West, they had the E. shoare in sight, and in the night had a stiffe gale of wind and stood before it, untill they met with Ice, and stoode amongst the same untill they were fast, it was so thicke on head, and the winde brought it so fast on a sterne, that they could not stirre backewards, and so laid there 14 dayes in worse plight then ever before they had beene, where was great store, yet it lay not so broad upon the water as this, for this sloating Ice continued miles and halfe miles in com∣passe, having a deepe Sea and a tyde of flood setting S, E. and N, W. but Bilt was confident to goe through to the N, E. as he did. At length being cleare of the Ice, he continued his course in sight of the East shore untill he had raised 4 Ilands which lay North and South but past them 6 or 7 leag. where the wind tooke them short, they stood backe to them againe, and came to anckor betweene 2 of the Westmost, they found nothing on land but Cockle grasse, he saith, he found that before they came to this place; that he was kept in the Ship) against Hen∣ry Greenes minde) because he did not favour their proceeding better then he did, for he drave him to take upon him to search for such things as himselfe had stolne, and accused him of a matter no lesse then treason amongst themselves, for that he had deceived the company of 30 bread cakes; now they be∣gan to talk that England was no safe place for them, and Hen∣ry Greene swore that the ship should not come in any place, but keepe the Sea still, untill he had the Kings hand and seale to show for his safety, they had many devises but Henry Greene was their Captaine and so they called him, from those Ilands he stood to the N. having the Easterne land in sight, and raised these Ilands the Master had called Romnys I∣lands, between which Ilands and the shallow ground to the E. off them, the Mr. stood downe into the first great bay, this was
going outward in the Masters time: they kept the East side ilin sight, and comming thwat of low land, strooke once upon a Rock that lay under water, but without any harme,Sruk upon a Rok. that they saw they continue their course and raise Lan on head which strethed to the North, there they said pil that Robert Bilot by his Northern course had l th s to the South, and that in time they must ske tht way for reliefe, having but small store left: Bu Bilot would still fol∣low the land to the North, saying that  pd in good time to finde what would relieve us that way, as soone as to the South; This Writer faith, that hee told them that this Land was the Mai of Wostenholme Cape, and that the shal∣low Rockey ground was the same that the Master ran down by when he went int▪ the great Bay. Robert Ive, and all said it was not possible unlesse the Master had brought the Ship over land, and willed them to looke into the Masters Card, how well their course and it did agree, they stood to the East, and left the Maine land to the North by many small Ilands in∣to a narrow gut, betweene two Lands and anchored; they went on the West side, and found a great Horne, and cockleFound a great horne which they tooke to bee Sea V∣corne. grasse on the East side, this Grasse was great reliefe to them, for without it they could not have recovered the Capes, for want of Victuall. When they weighed Anchor the doubled the Cape to the North which is high land, even to the Capes which is North and South some 25. or 30. leagues, then they stand to the North, they saw of those Fowles which breed at the Capes, and killed some; at which time with great joy they raised the Capes, and bearing for them, came to the Ilands that lay in the mouth of the Streights: but bearing in they ran upon a Rock, and stood fast for 8. or 9. houres, it wasSet on  Rock ebbe when they grounded, but the next flood floated them off againe. It was faire weather, the ebbe came from the East, and the flood from the West; being afloate they stood to the Eastward and anchored. This day he sent the Boat on land to kill Fowle, they in the Ship had warning to stand as neere as they could: but the winde being contrary, they could not fetch the place where the Fowle breed, but they found great store of Gulls upon
the Cliffes, but hard to come by, but with their peeces they killed 30. and towards night returned on shipboard; then they brought their Ship neerer the Mouth of the Streights, and anchored in 18. Fathoin upon a Riffe or Shelfe: but when they had wayed and stood to the place where the Fowle breed, they were faine to stand to and againe in the Streights mouth under Sayle, because they could not finde ground to Anchor in, the water was so deepe. The Boat went to Diggs Cape, and made directly for the place where the Fowle breed, where they see 7. Boats came about the Easterne point towards them: but when the Salva∣ges saw their Boat, they draw their lesser Boats into their bigger, and when they had done they came rowing to their Boat, and made signes to the rest, our men made ready for all essayes; the Saluages came to them, and they grew fami∣liarSalvages. one with another, so as ours tooke one of theirs into their Boate, and they tooke one of ours into theirs; then they car∣ried our Men to a Cove where their Tents stood to the West∣ward of the place where the Fowle breed, so they carryed our Man into their Tents, where he remained untill our men returned theirs; In our Boat went their man to the place where the Fowle breed; and wee being desirous to know how the Salvages killed their Fowle, hee shewed them theSalvage fow∣ling. manner how, which was thus: They tooke a long Pole with a snare at the end, which they put about the Fowles neck, and so pluck them downe. When our men knew that we had a better way, and so shewed the Salvages the use of our Peeces, which at one shot would kill 7. or 8. To bee short, they re∣turned to the Cove to receive our man, and to deliver: heirs. When they came they made great joy with dancing, leaping,Iuly. Mores teeth, and divers things. and striking of their breasts, they offered divers things to our Men: but they onely tooke some Mores teeth, which they gave them for a knife, and two glasse Buttons, so receiving our Man, they came abroad rejoycing at this chance as if they had met with the most simple people of the World. And Henry Greene more then the rest was so confident thatHenry Greene. by no meanes we should take care to stand upon our guarde: God blinded him so, that where he thought to receive great matters from this people, he received more then hee looked
for; and that suddenly, by being made an example for all men that make no conscience of doing evill; and that wee take heed how wee trust the Salvage people how simple soever they seeme to be. They made haste to be on shore, and because the Ship rid farre off, they weighed and stood as neere the place where the Fowle breed as they could; and because he, this Writer was lame, he was to goe into Boat to carry such things as he had in the Cabbine, of every thing some what; And so with more hast then good speed (and not without swearing) away he went; as Henry Greene, William Wilson, John Thomas, Mi∣chael Pierce, Andrew Motter, and himselfe. When they came neere the shore, the people were on the hills dancing and lea∣ping; to the Cove we came, where they had drawn up their Boats. Wee brought our Boat to the East side of the Cove close to the Rocks; on land they goe, and make fast the Boat to a great stone on the shore; the people came and every one had something in his hand to barter; but Henry Greene swore that they should have nothing untill he had Veison, for that they had so promised him by signes the last day. Now when wee came they made signes to their Dogs,Ealvages tre∣cherous. whereof there were many like Mongrels, as bigge as Hounds, and pointed to the Mountaines, and to the Sunne, clapping their hands. Then Henry Greene, John Thomas, and William Wilson, stood hard by the Boats head; Michael Pierce, and Andrew Motter were got upon the Rocks a gathering of Sor∣rell, not one of them had any Weapon about him, not so much as a stick, save Henry Greene onely, who had a piece of a Pike in his hand, nor saw he any thing they had to shoot him with. Henry Greene and Wilson had Looking glades, lewes-trumps, and Bells, which they were shewing; the Salvages standing round about them; one of them came into the Boats head to shew him a Bottle. This Writer made signes unto him to get him ou shore: but he made as though he had not understood him: whereupon he stood up and pointed him on shore. In the meane time another stole behind to the sterne of the Boat; and when he saw him on shore that was on the Boats head, hee sate downe againe, but suddenly hee sawe the leggs and feete of a man by him; wherefore hee cast up his head and
sawe the Salvage, with his knife in his hand, who stroke atSalvage had a knife. his Brest over his head; hee casting up his arme to save his brest; the Savage wounded his arme, and stroke him into the body under his right Pap, the Salvage stroke a second blow, which he met with his left hand, and then stroke him into the right thigh, and had like to have cut off his little finger of his left hand; Now this Writer had got hold of the string of the knife, and had wound it about his left hand, he striving with both his hands to make an end of that he had begun, found the Salvage but weake in the gripe, (God enabling him) get∣ting hold of the sleeve of his left arme he see his left side lay open to him; which when he saw, he put his sleeve of his left arme into his left hand, holding the string of the knife fast in the same hand, and having got his right hand at liberty, hee sought for somewhat wherewith to strike him, not remem∣bring his Dagger at his side, but looking downe he saw it; and there with strooke the Salvage into the body and throat.Salvage slaine. Whilst he was thus assaulted in the Boat, their men were set upon on the shore, John Thomas and William Wilson had their bowells cut; and Michael Pierce and Henry Greene be∣ing mortally wounded came tumbling into the Boat toge∣ther. When Andrew Moter saw this medley, hee came run∣ning downe the Rock and leaped into the Sea, and so swam to the Boat; and hung at her sterne untill Michael Pierce tookGods judge∣ment upon the trecherous him in, who manfully made good the Boats head against the Salvages that pressed sore upon them. Now Michael Pierce had got an Hatchet, with which hee stroke one that hee lay sprawling in the Sea. Henry Greene cried coragi, and laid a∣bout him with Trunchion; this Writer cryeth to cleere the Boats head, and Andrew Motter cryeth to bee taken in; the Salvages betake them to their Bowes and Arrowes, which they sent so amongst them, that Henry Greene was slaine out∣right,Greene slaine. and Michael Pierce received many wounds, and so did the rest. Michael Pierce cleareth the Boat and put it from the shore, and helpeth Andrew Motter in: but in the clearing of the Boat Pricket received a cruel wound on his back with an Arrow. Michael Pierce and Motter rowed away the Boat; which when the Salvages sawe, they came to their Boats; which they feared they would have lanched to have followed
them, but they did not; their Ship was in the middle of the Channell, and yet could not see them all this time. Now when they had rowed a good way from the shore Pierce fainted, and could rowe no more: then was Motter dri∣ven to stand in the Boats head and wave to the Ship, which at first sawe them not; and when they did, they could not tell what to make of them, but in they stood for them, and so tooke them up. Greene was throwne into the Sea, the rest was taken into the Ship, the Salvage being yet alive, but without sence. That day dyed Wilson cursing and swearing in most fearefull manner, Michael Pierce lived two dayes and thenThe end of 4. wicked men. dyed. Thus have you had the tragicall end of Greene and his 3. Mates, being the lustiest men in all the Ship. The poore number that was left was to ply the Ship to and againe in the mouth of the Straits, for there was no ancho∣ring; and besides, they were to goe in the Boat to kill Fowle to bring them home, which they did with great danger; for if the winde blew, there was an high Sea: and the Eddie of the tide would carry the Ship so neere the Rocks, as it feared the Master, for so now they call By lot. After which great labour, and on the South Cape they had killed 300. Fowle, they stood to the East: but the wind cameThree hun∣ded Fowles killed. East, and put them back againe to the Capes where they kil∣led 100. Fowles; at length a West winde drives them home∣wards, for the most par along the North side of the Streight, untill he fell into broken gound about the Queenes Forland, and there anchored, and om thence he came to Gods mer∣cies, and from thence to those Ilands that lye in the mouth of the Straits: but not seeing the land untill they were ready to runne their Bowsprit against the Rocks in a fogge, but it clee∣red a little, and then they might see themselves inclosed a∣mongst Rockie Ilands, and could finde no ground to an∣chor in. They lie a trye all night, and the next day the fogge conti∣nues, they seeke for ground to anchor in, but found none un∣der 100. Fathoms. The next day he weighed againe and stood to the East, and now they are brought to the allowance of halfe a Fowle a day, yet they had some meatleft, and nothing else; and now were glad to burne of the feathers (for sowing
of the skins, which before they sleaed off the Fowle) because they will not pull, nor the garbidge also was not throwne away. He saith that after they were cleare of those Ilands which lie out with two points, one on the South East, and the other on the North, making a Bay to the sight, as if there were no way through, hee continued his course East South East, and South East, thinking to raise desolations, from thence to shape his course from Ireland, though Ivet perswaded to goe for New-found-land, hoping there to have reliefe amongst our Countrymen: but in Latitude 57. degrees, the winde came South West, and so it was thought fit to seek for food where some grew: viz Ireland, and so the course was directed; In which time they were fain to frie their Fowles bones in Can∣dleFowles Bones fryed for meate. tallow, putting vinegar thereto which was stirred a∣mongst them, and every man had one pound of Candles al∣lowed for one weeke as a great dainty. And when Rob. Juet said that by his reckning they were within 60. or 70. leagues of Ireland, they had 200. leagues thither, their course was much longer, (though evil stony) for their men were so weake as they were faine to sit at the Helme. Then Robert Juet dyed, and the rest despaired, and said they were past Ireland; their last Fowle was in Stepetub, and the men cared not what end went first. The Master was glad to doe their labour and his owne, tackling going to wrack, and none regarding to helpe the same. In this extremity it pleased God to give them sight of Land; not farre from the place where the Master said they should fall, which was the Bay of Galloway to the West of the Derses; so they stood a∣long to the South W. and espied a saile which was a Boat off Foye at anchor fishing; this Barke brought them into BeareBeare Haven in Ireland. Haven; here they stayed some few dayes and dealt with the Irish for Reliefe, but found none: for in that place there was neither bread, drink, nor money, or Country men which were then on fishing, they found as could in kindnsse, that they would doe nothing without present money. In the end John Waymouth one of the Barke brought them in and furnished them with money upon pawne of their best Anchor and Ca∣ble, wherewith they brought Bread, Beare, and Beefe.
Now as they were beholding to Waymouth, so were they beholding to Captaine Tayler for making their Contracts, and for their mens wages, who would not goe with them home, except Waymouth would passe his word; Whereupon Taylor swore he would presse them; and if they would not goe he would hang them. In conclusion, they agreed for 3. pound 10. shillings a man to bring the Ship to Plimouth or Phalmouth, and to give the Pilot 5. pound; and if they were put into Bristow, they were to have 4. li. 10. s. a Man, and the Pilot 6. li. and omitting fur∣ther circumstance, they came to Plimouth, from thence toArive at Pli∣mouth. the Downes, from thence to Gravesend, and so to London; where the Master had this Writer to Sir Thomas Smiths. The Printer on the behalfe of Pricket. FOr as much as this may happily be suspected by some, not so friendly to Pricket, who returned with that company who so cruelly had exposed Hudson; and therefore may seeme to lay heavy imputation, and rippe up further occasion then they will beleeve: he saith also he added the report of Thomas Woodhouse one of the exposed Company, who ascri∣bed the occasions of discord to Juet; I take not on mee to sentence, no not to examine; I present the evidence just as I had it: Let the Bench censure with both eares, that which they may see with both eyes, and there note, to which I first prefixed his letter to Master Samuel Macham. Master Macham, I heartily commend me unto you. I can write unto you no newes, though I have seene much but such as every Fisherman haunting the Coast, can report better than my selfe. We kept our Whitsunday on the N. E. end of Iseland; and I thinke I never fared better in England then we feasted here; they of the Country are very poore, and live miserably: yet we found there store of dainty fresh Fish, and dainty Fowle. I my selfe in one afternoone killed so many as feasted all our Company, being 23. persons at one time onely with Par∣tridges, besides Curlew, Plover, Mallard, Teale, and Geese. IStore of fowle in Iseland. have seene two hot Bathes in Iseland, and have beene in one of them. We are resolved to try the utmost, and lye onely
expecting a faire winde, and to refresh our selves to avoide the Ice, which now is come off the West Coast, of which we have seene whole Ilands: but God be thanked have not bene in danger of any; Thus I desire all your prayers for us. Iseland this 30, of May. 1610. A note sound in the Deske of Thomas Woodhouse Student in the Mathematicks, and one of thse exposed with one Hudson in the Shallop. THE 10. of September 1610. after dinner our Master cal∣led all the company together, to heare and beare witnsse of the abue of some of the company; it having beene the re∣quest of Robert Iuet, that the Master should redresse some abu∣ses and slaunders as he called them, against this Iuet, which thing after the Master had examined, and heard with equitie what hee could say for himselfe, there were proved so many great abuses and mutinous matters against the Master, and action by Ivet, that there was danger to have suffered them longer: and it was fit time to punish and cut off further occa∣sions of the like motives. It was first proved to his face by Bennet Mathew, our Trum∣peter,Inets mutinies. upon our first sight of Island: and hee confest that hee suppos'd that in the account would bee man-slaughter, and prove bloody to some. Secondly, at our comming from Island, in the hearing of the company, hee did threaten to turne the Ship head home, from the action, which at that time was wisely pacefied by the Master, in hope of amendment. Thirdly, it was deposed by Phillip Staffe our Capenter, and Arnold Lodlo to his face upon the holy Bible, that he perswa∣ded them to keepe Muskets charged, and Swords ready in their Cabbines, for they should be charged with shot ere the voyage were over. Fourthly, we being pestered in the Ice, he had used many words tending to mutinie, discouragement, and slaunder of the action, which easily tooke effect in those that were ti∣merous: And had not the Master in time prevented, it might
easily have overthrowne the voiage, and now lately being imbayed in a deepe Bay, which the Master had desire to see, for some reasons to himselfe knowne, his words tended al∣together to put the company into a fright of extremity, by ventring in cold, jesting at our Masters hope to see Bancum by Candlemas. For those and divers other base slaunders against the Ma∣ster,Ivet displac'd. he was deposed, and Robert Bylot who had shewed him∣selfe honestly, respecting the good of the voyage, was placed Masters Mate in his stead. Also, Francis Clements the Boateswaine, at that time was put from his office, and William Wilson a man thought more fit preferred to his place: this man had▪ basely carried himselfe to our. Master, and to the action. Also, Adrian Mtter was appointed Boatswaines mate, and a promise from the Master, that from this day Iuets wa∣ges should remaine to Bylot, and the Bosons overplus of wa∣ges should be equally devided, between Wilson and Iohn King, to the owners good liking, and one of the quarter Masters, who had very well carried themselves to the furtherance of the businesse. Also, the Master promised, that if the offenders yet beha∣ved themselves honestly, he would be a meanes for their good and that hee would forget injuries, with other admonitions. Here the Reader may observe a plaine expression of Hud∣sonsHudsons good nature. good carriage, made concerning the voyage, and pithi∣ly demonstrated, which makes mee ready to call Pricket to further question, who in all his long declaration of this voy∣age, hath not given Hudson any commendations, no not in his good parts: and yet hath taken paines enough other∣wayes, to make an ample expression, and to call the roague Greene, Henry Greene Well Pricket, I am in great doubt of thy fidelity to Master Hudson. The Voyage of Sir Thomas Button with two ships, the Resolu∣tion,August. the Admirall, the Discovery Vice-admirall, manu∣red and victualled for 18. Moneths. 1612. COncerning this voyage there cannot bee much expected from me, seing that I have met with none of the Iournalls thereof: It appeareth that they have beene concealed, for
what reasons I know not, but it is sitting that such things should be made extant, as may any way redound to the good of the Common-wealth; and therefore I can but communi∣cate what I have received from Abacuck Pricket, and others by Relation, who was in the same Voyage, and from Sir Tho∣ut as Roe in the last part of a Iournall of this voyage. He departed about the beginning of May, and went by the West, and entered the passage on the South of Resolution, and sometime was fast amongst the Ice: but at length he came to Diggs his Iland, where hee staied 8. dayes; and in that timeIe Diggs. set up a Pinnace he had brought from home with him in pie∣ces; and they set from thence to the Westward, where hee discovered the Land he called Carys Swansnest; From thence he proceeded to the Southward of the West, falling with land in Latitude about 60. d. 40. with the named Hopes-check. I thinke because that there his expectation was crossed, and thereabout enduring a grievous storme, was put to the South∣ward, and constrained to looke for harbour the 13. of August, to repaire some losses. After which time came on the new Winter with much stormie weather, as he was constrained to winter there, in a small Rile or Creeke on the North side of a River in Lat. 57. d. 10. which River he named Port Nelson,Port Nelson. after the name of his Master (whom he buried there) putting his smal Ship in the foremost and Baracadoe both them (with Piles of Firre and earth) from storme of Snow, Ice, Raine, Floods, or what else might fall. He wintered in his Ship, and kept 3. sires all the Winter: but lost many men, and yet was supplied with great store of white Partridges, and other Fowle, of which I have heard it credibly reported, that this company killed 1800. dozen in the Winter season. The report of Captaine Hawbridge. He entredinthe South Channell. S'eing the South shore within Fretum Hudson, neere Hopes advance twice or thrice, and once trying the tide about Savvage Iles, where it came from the South East, & flowed 3. fathoms. At length he came in the South Channell betweene3. Fathoms. the Ile Salisbury, and the South maine sayling in between C. Wostenholme and Sir Drdley Diggs his Ile, to the West end
thereof, where he saith is a banke of Owes to anchor upon at 13. fathom. C. Wostenholme is to be brought within the West point of the Ile, which will then beare East by South. Here the Salvages did offer to assault his men (bound going to killA Fovvle. Willicks, of which there is such store, as in short time hee could have laded his Boat) with two Canons, and to the num∣ber80 Salvages in 2. Canons. of 70. or 80. men came upon them, untill with one Musket shot he slew one of their men, and hurt more, who much a∣mazed with the report and excecution of a Musket retired, yet at his comming from thence, he sending his Pinnace boat on land to take in fresh water; the Salvages were laid in ambush amongst the Rocks, and slew him 5. men dead, one escaped5. men slaine by swimming. It is much to bee doubted that the Salvages did slay those men in revenge, for 4. of their great Canons he tooke off the Land from this people, whereof he restored but two backe againe. And here it was where the villaines Greene and Juct were slaine, after they had exposed Master Hudson; This is Sir Dudley Diggs his Ile, and there is Deare within the same. Hee passed from hence to a Cape on the N. side of his Bayes entrance, which he named Carys Swans nest, and from thence to his Hopes checkt, was troubled with shift of winds, and should water, took harbour the 15. of August in Port Nelson, he endured a sharpe Winter lost many men, kild 3. Deare in the River as they were swimming for side to side. There came also to them divers Beares and Wolfes, and it was the 16. of February before the River Not above a mile broad. was froze o∣ver, having had divers warme thawing dayes before, the Captain having beene sick the whole Winter, began to mend the 24. of Ianuary. The Ice began not to cleare out of the Ri∣ver until the 21. of Aprill, after which they killed daily with their Net abundance of Fish, as bigge as Mackrils. Now during this wintering it appeareth, that Sir Thomas having good time to advise and contemplate what was to be done the nextyeere; drew some Demands in writing, whichSomething propounded to the compa¦ny. he caused (it seemed) the most understanding men of his Com∣pany to answer. Of which, such answers as came to my hands I doe hereby freely impart, for thy better understanding. Laus Deo, 1612. December the 22. The course and distance from place to place, from Cape Cleare, to this River in New Walles.
Imprimis, from Cape Cleere to Cape Desola∣tion. Variation. 24. strait course by common Compasse North W. by W. ½. 428. leagues. The Latitude of 59. d. 40. m. From Desolation to the Ile of Resolution,Variation 26. d. ½. course is N. W. by W. the Latitude 61. d. the distance 170. Leagues. From Resolution to Sir Dudley Diggs hisVariation 30. d. Ile, Lat. 62. d. 40. m. N. W. the distance is 142. Leagues. From Sir Dudley Diggs his Ile, to theVariation 22. d. Cheeks, the course is W. ½. Northerly, the di∣stance 193. Leagues. From the Cheeks to new Wales, Lat. 57. theVariation 22. d. course is S. by W. the distance 90. Leagues. The courses are all by the common Compas. Your Wor∣ships and ever, or mine owne never, till death, William Hawkeridge. My answere to the first demaund under your favour, I think it not amisse to search this River, if God give strength to our Men, before our departure from it, to have the knowledgeGood advise. how farre it doth extend; and that we may meet with some Inhabitants which may further our expectations, but I cannot thinke of any profit to be made by it. My answer to the 2. Demaund, is to search to the North∣ward about this Westerne land, untill if it be possible that we may finde the Flood comming from the Westward, and to bend our courses against that flood following the ebbe, searching that way for the passage. For this flood which weWell guest Hubart. have had from the Eastward, I cannot be perswaded but that they are the veynes of some head-land to the Northwards of the Cheeks, and by the Inlets of Rivers which let the floods tides into them; which Hedlands being found al, I do assure my selfe that the tyde wil be found to come from the Westward. Herein I have shewed my opinion so farre my Iudgement will afford, untill further reasons induceth me to the contrary. Per me Iosias Hubart. From the Durses in Ireland, being in 52. Lat. to Cape Farewell in Groenland, Lat. 58 56.Variation at Cape Farewell, 11. deg. the course is W. N. W. W. terly, and the di∣stance is 460. Leagues.
The Southermost part of the Iland of Resolution is in Lat. 60. d. 34. m. From Cape Farewell to the Iland of Rosolu∣tion,Varition 29. d.  great mistake. the course is W. and by N. and the di∣stance is 208. Leagues. Sir Dudley Diggs his Iland is in Lat. 62. D. 40. M. and is in distance from the Ile of Re∣solution.Variation 3. points. upon a W. and by N ⅓. Northerlyrose. 180. Leagues. The cheekeslye in 61. D. 17. M. Lat. fromVariatin. 3. d, Sir Dudley Diggs his Iland, thereto the course is W. and by S. and the distance is 190. Leagues. Our wintering being in the Lat. of 56 d. 58. m. From the cheekes to our wintering place,Variation 2. d. different. Great in the Variations. the course is S. and by W. ½ Westerly, and the distance is 87. Leagues. The 27. of November. I made an observation of the Moone, and the planet Mars, and for that I stand in doubt, for the houre to be axactly found out by any Diall Clock, or other Instrument, to hang a plan∣net to find when the foremost Guard was right under the Pole starre, at which instant I found ♂ and ☽ to be one degree, and 41. minutes asunder, by which working I suppose orLong from London. deeme it to bee as followeth; this our wintring place 111. degrees, and 15. of longitude from our Meridian of the Citie of London. Per me Iosias Hubart. In the name of God Amen. Of the courses from the Misson head in Ireland, being bound towards the Northwest passage, Captain Thomas Button Gen∣tleman, being our Generall in the good ship called the Resolu∣tion: John Ingram Captaine and Master of the Pinace, called the Discoverie. 1612. Inprimis, from the Misson head in Ireland, to Cape Discord in Groanland, the course isLatitude 6. d. 30. m. N. W. by N. Northerly, and the distance is 360. Leagues. From the Missonhead to Cape Discord in Groynlaend, the course is N. W. 67. W. Nor∣therly, by the compasse, the Lat. 59. d. 20. . and the distance is 380. Leagues. From the Missonhead to Cape Desolation is the course lyeth W. N. W. & the distance, 490. Leagues.
From the foreside of Cape Discord to Cape Farwel, the course lyeth S. W. Southerly by compasse distance 58. Leagues. From Cape Farwell to the Westerne part of this Head Land, by Cape Desolation, the course is W. N. W. halfe Northerly, 100 Leagues distant, and from this Head Landto Desolation, is 10 Leagues distant, in all from Farwell to Desolation, the distance is 100. Leagues. N. N. E. by compasse betweene Cape Far∣well,Variation 23. degrees, as hee judged. and the foresaid Head Land, there set a very great current to the Westward. From Cape Desolation, to the Ile of Reso∣lution, the course lyeth W. N. W. Westerly,Variation 29 altitude 62. d. 30. m. and the distance 120. Leagues. From Resolution to Salisbury Ile, W. by N. Altitude 63. d. 15. and from the Iland to Wostenholmes Cape, the course lyeth W. S. W. Southerly 140. Leagues. 12. Leagues. And from this Cape to Diggs his Iland 3. Leagues. From Resolution to Westenholmes Cape, theThe Variation of this Ile 34. course lyeth W. by N. Westerly, and the di∣stance is 153. Leagues. From Resolution to Diggs his Ilands, the course is W. by N. Northerly, and the distance 156. Leagues Altitude, 63. d. From Sir Dudley Diggs his Ilands, to Nothinghams Iland, N. by the compasse, and the distance is 7. or 8. Leagues. From Sir Dudley Diggs Iland, to Swanns I∣land, W. by S. 40, Leagues. From Diggs his Iland to Hopes Checkt, the course is W. S. W. a little Welterly, and theHopes Checkt 60. d. 40. m. distance is 200. Leagues. The Altitude is 60. d. 40. m. From Hopes Checkt to the Broken land, when our Admirall received a great storme: the course lyeth S. W. 49. Leagues, Altitude 59. 49. Leagues. From this broken Land, to the head Nor∣therland, the course lyeth W. & the distance is 8. Leagues.
The Headland is the entring into this Bay called New Wales. From this Head land unto the Roade of the harbour, the course lyeth South 42. Leagues, and from Hopes checkt to this Roade, the course lyeth N. E. and by N. 86. Leagues.July. Hitherto the Lord of his mercy hath blessed, preserved, and kept us from all dangers whatsoever, which wee beseech him to blesse us of his mercy, and to send us well forth a∣gaine, Amen. Per me Edward Glanvile. What I received from Sir Thomas Roe, was an Abstract co∣py taken out of Sir Thomas Buttons owne Iournall, being at his returne to this Hopes Checkt, and not before: As from the beginning of his Voyage, or his wintring. I have nothing but by report, and thus he proceeded from thence. 15. This day being there he plyed up with contrary winds, and fogg having diversity of depth, altogether standing East∣wards of sometimes to 30. Faddome and more, and standing in to 7. or 6 m. thus travercing and anckoring, untill the 23. day, finding the Tyde to come from N. E. by N. which is an especiall argument that the land doth lye so, and not any thing else of note. 23 Having thus plyed up to the N. E. wards untill this day, and standing into the shore, hee anckored for to try the tyde, thinking to send his Boate on Land, to see what Land it should be: it bare on him from the N. E. by N. to the N. W. by N. and the depth 42. Fadome not above 4. ½. League from the Land, this was the highest land hee had seene, since hee came from Sir Dudley Diggs his Iland, the last yeare this Land he named Hopes Advance. 24. This morning proved thick easie winde, and it fell to lighten and thunder, so as hee held it not fit to adventure the Boat from the Ship. 25. He stood of from midnight until this day 10. leagues N. E. by N. to anchor: but he saith the winde was N. E. by N. the ground was more even in standing off, and on then before, he stood off 4. leagues more into 87. Fathom. This evening at the Sunnes setting, he took him with two severall Instruments, and found him to goe downe 33. d. to
the W. off North by one, and by the other 30. d. they tooke the middest betwixt both. 26 After midnight he stood in againe N. N. W. 5. leagues, the wind came to the S. W. the weather faire and cleare, and the best he had since he came from his wintering place: about 9. this morning he sees land; it bore on him from the N. E. by North, to the N. W. by North, about 8. or 9. leagues off at noone hee steered to the Easterne point, to get hold thereof, and had a good observation in 62. d. 42. m. and his depth 74. fathoms; who will protract this Voyage to try whether this ut ultra proved a Bay or no, must begin here, and proceed to Carys Swans nest. From this noone untill midnight he stood N. E. by N. 18. leagues with much winde and goowne Sea. From midninght being in 15. fathoms: the weather hazy, the winde S. W. he stood off N. E. by North 12. leagues, till noone; seeing the weather like to be bad, and at 3. in the mor∣ning; he found his depth not answerable to his expectation, for he had but 25. fathom, and at . past 3. 21. fathom; hee stood S. E. till 4. that morning, and had 30. fathom. 27. About 6. this morning hee gave order to take in his Skiffe; the weather clearing, he saw land N. and by E. about 5. leagues off, and was as the other land that hee last sawe something higher; and having edged in with the land, from this mor∣ning 6. untill noone, the land was N. E. and by E. from him. From noone untill 6. in the evening, he steered E. one point without the land 4. leagues; at 6. he anchored 32. fathom. It was then slake water; for at 8. came a strong set from N. by E. at 11, the winde S. S. W. and blew much, hee weighed and stood away N. E. with his Fore and Mision Sayles. 28 At midnight he put out all sayles and stood N. E. away 4. leagues, untill morning 4, having depth then 73. fathom, he edged in N. and N. and by E. upon that tyre, hee found the night before, and runne from this morning 4. untill noone, 6. leagues N somewhat Easterly. This noone with bould winde S. he loost up for the shoreNot certayne whether flood or ebbe at this time. to get an oppertunity, if possibly, to send his Boat on land to have found which had beene the flood, and which the ebbe: but when he came within 2. leagues of shore, hee found the Bay all broken ground, and the Sea full of breaches a good
way off the shore, and some within one mile under his Lee. The weather growing suddenly very thick, he came to an anchor at one a clock in the afternoone, and sent the Boat on Land: but they had not beene from him halfe a Glasse, but it grew so thick, that he caused Muskets to bee shot to call the Boat back againe, at the end of 5. Glasses they returned, say∣ing, that having rode halfe an houre at anchor, they could discerne no tyde, no more could he in the Ship. In this place it is a Bay full of small Iles neere the shore under the high land; and as he rode bore on him N. N. E. Easterly, and S. W. at clock 4. the winde began to blow very much; hee wayedBegan here to protract and finde whether it bee a Bay or me and stands E. N. E. of with a S. S. W. winde untill 6. that night the winde encreasing to a great storme, he takes in his maine and top sayles, and stands away E. N. E. with a foresayle, at 8. a clock he had 63. fathom, and so standing one houre longer, it began to shoald contrary to expectation, he came into 50. fathom for that to fore running Eastward, hee alwaies depe∣ned his water, which now shoalding he edged of E. till mid∣night, & they had but 44. fathom, which perceiving, he found that he was imbayed, therefore to prevent further danger, he strook sayle and lay to Halle. 29. From midnight untill 3. this morning, he lay on Hull, having the water so shoald, and at 3. the weather clearing a little with the increase of the daylight, hee saw land from the E. by S. to the N. N. E. Easterly, which perceiving, hee set his Sayles, and flats about his Ship head, and stood W. of till noone, 4. Leagues. Thus at noone it falling calme and hazie, he anckors with his ledge Anckor, hee feared all the coast along to bee rockie ground, and being thus at anckor at 23. Fadome, he had at 2. a Clock a little cleare, and saw the Land not pastt 2. Leagues from him, from the N. to the W. S. W. which together with the Land which he saw in the morning, from S. to the E. by S. N. E. Easterly, gave him assurance, that he was imbayed, for that he could not be of that Easterne Land, above 7. Leagues.64. deg. 30. m. Being thus at a Non plus himselfe by observation, the day before, & by his reckoning since, to be as far Northerly fully, as 65. d. It troubled him something, and especially to see the Easterne Land to treul away Southerly: well the wind com∣ming about to N. N. E. hee came out of this hee called a Bay,
and saith hee was enforced therein by extremity of a S. W. wind, and yet hee saith that by his not far standing from the West side, this Bay cannot be above 16. or 17. Leagues over, from Land to Land, and in his running hee found the depth of it to be not above 4. and 5. and 30. Leagues. But as a wise Gentleman, and one well understood in the Rules of Navigation, who having exactly surveyd these jour∣nallƲt ukra not proved a Bay. writs in the Margent. I cannot find that it proved a Bay, nor is it one by any thing herein written, and for other things knowne, is none. About 5. in the afternoone, the wind encreased to a great storme, he tooke in his Sayles, and went away with a free andNo course so named. sprit sayle, having 46. Fadome, and betweene 7. and 8. hee came after to 62. Fadome, and in a cleere hee saw the Land E. and by S. 3. Leagues off: From the time that he set sayle, this afternoone untill 8. at night, he ranne 7. Leagues S. S. W. the wind at N. N. E. At Clock 10. hee stood S. E. hoping to have found the Land to wind away, and running but ⅓. of an houre, he came to smooth water upon a suddaine, and had but 26. Fadome. And the weather being yet hazie, hee saw the Land faire by him, bearing E. S. E. very high Land, then he edg'd of untill midnight S. S. E. Easterly, having come since 8. a Clock, 5. Leagues. From Midnight Land still in Verioe he edg'd off W. N. W. and at 2. in the morning hee came into 65. Fadome, then hee edg'd of W. and S. W. and S. S. W. untill 4. in the morning, when the storme was so violent that he was driven to steere away before it, with his fore course, at 5. this morning by the extremity of the Sea, he sunk his long Boate. All this morning he steered untill S. S. S. W. 5. Laagues a∣long the shoare, and every stache hee saw the Land not above 3. Leagues from him, from 8. untill Noone hee steered S. 5. Leagues, then the storme began to lesson, and he put out more Sayle: And this Easterne Land hee saw to beare S. S. E. Ea∣sterly from him, and lyeth as neere as he could Iudge S. We∣sterly, and Westerly. From Noone untill Midnight, hee stood away S. S. E. 13. Leagues, and from Midnight untill this noone S. S. E. 6 Leagues, and 4. Leagues, S. S. W. 31. This day at Noone it was cleere, and by his observa∣tion
this was in 62. d. 57. m. Latitude, the wind comming toLat. 62. d. 57m the East S. E. and E. by S. be stands to the N. wards, desirous to keepe that Land still in sight, or at least to get the shoal∣ding thereof, at Clock 2. the wind encreased, to the taking in of both top Sayles, about 6. it turned about to E. N. E. and to N. E. by E. he tacks about to the Southwards, having run N. wards 4 Leagues, N. by E. about 8. it blew to both Bon∣nets off: and hee stood with two courses, making way untill Midnight S. and by E. 2. Leagues, and other 2. Leagues, un∣till 4. S. and by E. 10. This morning he lay to Hull, the weather extreame andAugust. hazie and so thick, that he could not see a pistalshot from him, in this time hee drew 2. Leagues S. S. E. and this is to be no∣ted that he had 3. stormes in 4. dayes, and for 17. or 18. dayes last past, he had not had past 6. hoes cleere at any time, nor beene 20. houres without a stiffe blowne cold and English storme. After 3. this aftenoone it sell flat calme, hee sets both his Sayles, and stood to the N. untill Evening 6. the wind about N. E. at 6. seeing the wind would not permit him to seize in that N shoare, he stood to the Southward, the weather thick and exceeding uncomfortable his way was I. League N. N. W. S. W. by W. 2. Leagues, and one League S. S. E. 2. From Midnight a League S. S. E. the weather thick and foggie, the Wind Easterly. From this day noone untill Midnight, E. by S. 4. Leagues, and 2. Leagues N. and by E. the wind hanging still to the Northwards, and hazie weather, his depth betweene 70. and 75. Fadome: hee coveted still to hold sight of the N. shoare, but it pleased not God it should be so: Therefore with pati∣ence he stood away as neere as he could, but y his standing Northwards, his water still shoalded, so as , the Ld still winded to the Eastward. 3. From Middight untill Noone 7. Leagues, N. E. from thence 4. Leagues, E. by S. till Midnight. 4. From Midnight untill 5. this morning N. and by E. . Leagues from thence he stood E. S. E. foggie weather with some cleeres- From noone untill 10. at night 6. leagues E. N. E. his depth shoalding from 65. to 40. sathom, the weather thick and bad;
he stood 2. leagues West by North. At 2. this morning hee stands 2. leagues N. E. and untill noone 7. leagues S, S. W. and past 4. this morning he sees landAnd seene from the 31. untll this day about 2. leagues off, beating from E. to S. He writeth that the sight of it grieved him much, so that now he made himselfe assured of that which he did but doubt before; which was, that they joyne to the Easterne part of the Bay from whence he came: but I doe otherwise beleeve. All the afternoone he stood a long the shore edging into 7.August. fathom, and crosse a Race, which set N. E. and S. W. and con∣tinued about halfe a Glasse. At 4. a clock the N. W. point of the land did beare from him N. W. by N. about a mile of: then steering within lesse then one mile of this Cape-land, for so it was; and a faire one of a low one as ever hee saw; you shall have 9. and 10. fathom: and shall open a very safe Bay, the Easterne land whereof will beare from you E. by N. 4. leagues off. In this Bay he handed all his sayles, thinking to have riddeA good Bay to anchor in. and watered: but his anchor being downe, and his Boat al∣most out, one of his Masters Mates said he descried land from the top Mast head S. and by E. the newes whereof made him wonder for that they all knew this was the land they had seene the last yeere, which they tookt to be an Iland. He sent up Captaine Ingram, who assured him it was land; whereup∣on he hoysed up his anchor, and set sayle, and stood S. and by E. and S. and came into 30. fathom: so missing this land, heeA land of fogge. anchored (night at hand) in 30, fathom. At 2, this morning he weighed to better his deepe, and to goe neere the land, he thought he had seene in 2. Glasses, hee lessed his deepe 3. fathom: so steering S. S. E. he came to 46. and 56. fathom in 2. Glasses. About 5. in the morning the wind came about to the N. by E. he stands E. close upon a wind, and came to 125. at noone, without sight of land, whereby hee was assured that it was the imagined last yeeres Iland. From yesterday noone, untill this noone, 14. leagues S. E. by E. and 6. leagues E, N. E. the weather somewhat cleare, but not fit to make observation, after noone the Gale hards on, he strooke his lofty sayles; the Sea somewhat growne, the day cleerest and fairest of 16. or 17. dayes before.
From noone this day until midnight E. N. E. 8. leag. this night 11. the weather grew bad, and hee saith the Sea beat of his Beaks head, at which time he took in sayles, and came to Hull. From midnight before, untill this day noone hee drive on Hull 3. leagues S. S. E, the weather foggie raine, and wind but somewhat lesse. At 2. in the morning the storme being broke up, and Sea downe, he set sayles, and had driven since noone before S. S. E. 4, leagues, the winde betwixt N. N. E. and N. E. At 8. this morning he had 50. fathom, the thick was clee∣red,He named this Mancels Iland. and he see land to beare on him East. From 2. this morning the time of his setting of sayle, hee made N. E. by N. Northerly, 7. leagues; the morning was foggie, but the day proved faire. At noone they had a good observation; and all that didLat. 61. d. 38. m. observe agreed in one, and to be in 61. d. 38. m. Latitude: hee made way to the shore, E. by N. Northerly, 2. leagues, and came to an anchor at clock 2. in 17. fathom, the land bearing from N. E. by N. to E. S. E. After 3. this afternoone the winde comming to the E. N. E. he set sayle and stood to the Northward; and about 5. this evening coasting along the shore, the Northland seemed like small Ilands, and broken lands; the sight whereof made him desirous to put in amongst them, but the winde would not permit: at clock 5. the weather thickned, and the land bore from N. E. Easterly, to S. E. from him 4. leagues. This land was a very low and a smooth land, from hence he stood off to the Westward till midnight; his depth from 14. to 95. fathom, his course W. N. W. Northerly 7. leagues. At Midnight having the same depth, the wind was at noone N. northerly, he stood about to eastward 10. Leagues E. N. E. Somewhat before noone this day it cleered, and in 12. Fa∣dome, hee saw the Land 2. Miles off, and upon the same hee saw 5. white Beares, so standing of the coller of his main stay broke, which caused him to beare up with the S. most part of the Land he saw, to the intent to lend his Boate on Land for water, and to try from whence the flood came; at 1. in the afternoon he anchored in a Bay in 4. Fadome smooth groud, but rockie, for he could see it under him: He sent his man well
mand and armed, who found water instantly, they found notDead mens skulls and bones. farre from them 2. old houses broken, and fallen downe to the ground, wherein were the skulls and bones of deadmen. Images and toyes such as they found by digging with their hands, under the ruines of the decayed houses, with some do∣zenAugust. of small Mors teeth. His opinion is that this were the ruines of some, who by mischance had miscarried there by wrack of their Boate, or being inforced to water there, made their best provision they could to endure it, but the extremity being so strong for them, and the place neither affording meanes for them to repaire their Canooes, (the ruines whereof he found some) for fu∣ell for fire to comfort them in Winter, hee gesses this killedRuines of hou∣ses and Ca∣nooes in Man∣sells Ile. them, for had they beene any other then such as were thus en∣forced by such extremity, they would not have left such things behind them as they found, for there nature is where∣soever they come to have few things of worth or value be∣hind them, much lesse doth hee thinke they have left their Images, which hee perveiveth they account their gods: AndImages and Mans teeth. there was Mors teeth, for which and the treyne thereof they make all their Sommers travells and labours. Thus his Boate having brought him water, he ried all that day with wind of Land, and observed that the flood came from N. and the ebbe from S. making a full stay that day be∣tweeneFlood came from N. 3. and 4. a Clocke, Having watered he weighed and steered untill 4. this mor∣ning N. W. by W. 7. Leagues, the wind N. N. E. It grew thick with fogg, at 4. in the Evening hee tackt a∣bout to the Eastward, till 83. Leagues N. E. by E. the thick cause him to take to the W. ward, and till Midnight he made way N. W. and by W. 3. Leagues. From midnight untill morning 6. he stood in E. N. ½. nor∣therly 4. Leagues, he tackt about untill 10. a Clock 3. Leagues N. W. and by N. At which time hee came to an Anchor in 85. Fadome, and found the tyde of Flood to come from the N. Land ebbe from the S. and ruld within 6. or 7. Leagues of shore, it bearing N.Flood came from the N. E. and by E. This Evening 8. he stood with N. and by E. winde N. W. and by 44. Leagues untill midnight, at noone before hee had
an observation 62. d. 19. m. this day hee saw great store ofLa. 62. d. 19 m geese fly to the Southwards, which hee tooke to bee a token, that the Winter did aproach, the weather was very faire and cleere. From midnight untill 7. this morning, his way W. 5. Leagues N. W. and by W. the wind as before, the weather faire and cleere, and most likly to prove so to continue of a∣ny, he had so seene since he came for his wintering. From 7. this morning untill 2. in the afternoone, hee stood to the E. ward, and made way 4. Leagues N. E. and by E. From 2. the wind wearing he stood to the E. ward, and made way untill midnight 7. Leagues N. W. From midnight untill morning hee held the same course 4. Leagues N. W. northerly, it grew calme, and he was within 5. Leagues of a faire Head land; hee came to Anchor in 65. Fadome, the Land bare from the N. N. W. to the W. S. W. both Lands hee deemed to bee distant 10. Leagues, (it being calme with windward Tyde) hee wayed Anchor, hoping to get to the Northward of this faire Head land, and that the height of that Land would bring him into deeper water. After he was loos'd, he was sagged into the Bay from 62. toLa. 62. d. 38. m 50. fathome, a small gale comming on hee stood off into 60. fathome, when it fell calme he anchored againe: this day was faire and cleere, he obserued in 62. d. 38. m. This Cape was a very faire Head land; and the northerne part is much high∣er then the westerne, but it is all, the other Land is of this straight, except 15. leagues on this side his wintering place, which was woody, else on this side it is all barred and rockie, but a bad shoare to saile along. This forenoone calme but faire and cleere weather, and the onely Somers day hee had since his comming from his win∣tering, being at Anchor bewixt the Cape and the W. point, he saw the Land to make with two Bayes, the further point of the southerne Bay, being from the northerne Land of that Bay W. and by S. southerly, and the North point E. and by N. northerly: And the other Bay from this point to the Cape it selfe lieth E. northerly, and S. westerly, at noone he obser∣ved in 62. d. 42. m. At 4. the afternoone he set sayle, and with small winde atLa. 62. d. 42. m 5. he stood with the Cape, the weather being cleere and faire,
hee sent to the Cape to turne the Tyde, being thwart of the Cape, the point is low with an underland, and some 2. Cables length from shore ia a low flat little Iland; the land you shall open to the Northward, lieth N. W. Westerly, hee boat or bore, he edged of, and anchored within one mile of the land, having opened the land to the westward of the Cape; he an∣chored 15. fathom, and rid there all night to try the tyde, for that his Boat had brought word that it was ebbe tyde, and that it set to the Northward which did agree with the tyde, he found on the Eastland where hee watered: but from the time he now anchored being between 10. and 11. at night, and 3. the next morning, he set sayle, hee could not finde any cer∣tainty, but what followed. This morning was calme, but the night before was full ofNo mention of Ice. strange Harbours as they call them, which is a streame in the Element, like the flame that commeth forth the mouth of a a hot oven, which upon this Coast how faire soever the wea∣ther bee when you see them, yet it is an infallible signe of a storme to follow within 24. houres after, as it proved by this and divers times before. At 3. this morning without certenty of the Tyde, a small gale S. he wayed and advised with Captaine Gibbins, and Cap∣taine Ingram, and with the rest, what course was best to bee taken? they resolved this Land falling away N. W. and by W. westerly, and having 113. Fadome within a Mile of the shore, to stand away N. N. W. alougst the shore, resolving not to leave this Land untill he were fully satisfied, standing thus untill 8. at night, being some 7. Leagues of the Cape, he saw an Iland of the westermost Land, that bore from him W. N. W. 7. or 8 Leagues off, hee had then 100. Fathome, and stood N. N. W. as before. At noone the weather was close and began to blow, heeSir Thomas Button doth allovv 2. points variation. was then 15. Leagues N. N. W. from the Cape; he doth not write whether true course or no, but in all the former Hopes Advance unto this Cape: I have writ by him according to the true course, and had 95. Fadome, which made him as∣sure himselfe, that the Land winded a way more northerly, and thereupon at noone hee stood away N. E. and by N. ho∣ping that course would have bettered his depth, but on the contrary, for in 2. glasses he shoalded to 60. Fathoms, then he
hayled away E. S. E. assuring what experience had often shown him, that as the water shoalded, so the Land winded. At 3. in the afternoone the weather thick, the wind in∣creasing, and hee in 60. Fathome, knowing there was no bet∣ter depth to the N. ward: hee stood E. S. E. till 8. at night, having 50. Fathome, the weather bad and night at hand, hee stood about, and kept it up with short sayle, all that night be∣tweene S. W. and by W. and W. S. W. From midnight till 7. this morning; as from 8. last night, till midnight, thus standing, brought him into 80. fathom, he cast about to the Eastward with much winde, at S. S. W. hazy and thick weather; he heeled it up in courses and Bonnets till clock 2. they being starke calmed as it is a speciall note, every Blower ends with a starke calme in those parts, being then in 65. fathom E. he anchored and rid untill 4. in the eve∣ning, when a smal gale rising at S. S. W. he waighed, and stood S. E. guiding himselfe by his depth, for the winde would not give him leave to better his hopes. 17. From midnight to 8. this morning, as the night before, & after that time, there is small worth the Luke to write upon thaverse; and his greatest depth 140. fathom, untill the next day in the afternoone, and then he had sight of the same Cape he sent his Boat unto the 14. day before. It bore from him N. N. W. by compasse about 7. leagues, so he steered S. S. W. un∣till midnight, having runne since he set sayle at 2. in the after∣noone 10. leagues S. E. and by E. Concluding he writeth that he came to 43. fathom, whichMansells Ile & Ca. Pembrok 10 Leagues di∣stant. shoalding was upon the North part of the Iland he watered upon; and that this Iland and the said Cape where his Boat was at the 14. day lyeth S. S. E. ½. Easterly, and N. N. W. ½. Northerly, about 10. leagues betweene both. This morning day light, he see the land bearing from S. W. by S. at which time he had 65. fathom. 19. From 2. this morning untill noone, he made away E. 8 by N. 10. leagues. At 7. he saw land on head at least 12. leagues of him; he judged it to bee the high land of the Maine within Sir Dudley Diggs his Iland, and yet to beare of him as it did, it was strange unto him: but he saith that Captaine Gibbons confidence was such, as that hee must not let passe unspoken of; for albeit that hee is so neere in blood, as that modestie
will not allow of his speaking too much of his merit, yet heeCapt. Gibbons. will boldly say thus much of his sufficiency, as hee assures himselfe he shall make it appeare at his returne, if God please to let him live so long, as that he is not short of any man that ever yet he carried to Sea. All that he can say of him further is, that for his Countries good, and for the advancement of this businesse we have in hand; he could wish his body were answerable to his other abilities; which were it; not himselfe, but many, and bis Country most would bee the better for it. But that God that made us all of dust, will not faile to raise up some good spirits he hopes for the further prosecution of this businesse: as that by their honest endeavours, and religi∣ous Resolutions, they will effect that which as yet is not ripe for his Sickle: but that God which best knowes what the truth of his endeavours have beene in this businesse, he hopes will not faile to give a blessing to some that shall follow; and for his part he desires to be blest no otherwise, than as he hath sincerely laboured in it; and therefore he must conclude and ever beleeve according to the word, that Paul plants, Apollo waters, and God gives the increase. So that untill his good will and pleasure is, all that we doe cannot in this ought else prevaile. At noone the weather faire and cleare he had a good obser∣vation, by which Captaine Gibbons was well assured; but him∣selfe and some others discenting from him in the bearing ofSet of Tyde. the land from them, were deceived in the set of the tyde, which in his going out last yeere, mightily carried him to the Northward, as now as much to the Southward; which then, nor till now, was not found by any of them all. He steered open of the Land N. N. E. with tyde 5. leagues, untill evening 4. and at 2. he had 307. fathom. At 6. in the evening small winde, C. Wolstenholme bore S. E. 7. leagues of the Westerne point of the westerne Iland, S. E. by S. ½. S. 5. leagnes off, he kept it up that he might get about the Westermost point of Nottinghams Iland; (it lying 8. leagues from Diggs his Iland, there thinking to trie the tyde; and from thence he purposed to goe to the N. maine betweene Salisbury and Nottinghams Ile, to try the distance betweene them, it being all he could doe for this yeere. About 8. this morning the weather thick, and he not above
4. leagues from Ile Nottingham in 64. fathom he anchored, and as he remembreth to his comfort being ebbe, hee found it a very strong one from S. S. E. to S. E. and by S.But was decei∣ved. At noone slack, it was a fresh gale at S. W. hee waighed to get about to the Westward of the Iland, about 2; it blew hard, and was thick weather with raine and thunder, and within a mile of the shore. It fell starke calme upon a sudden, then he was iu a great ripling in 20. fathom water, the Sea all brea∣ches round about him like a Raffe, which deserying, he stood off with little winde along the Iland, and found his drift moreHalf an how∣er. in lesse then in one Glasse. Then hee could run a head before with both top-sayles on trip, and a stiffe gale in 2. houres, hee came to anchor to be fully satisfied of the tyde. But when the tyde came, it came with such force & strengthA strong tyde. Not so. out of the N. W. and by N. as hee had much adoe to ride at, and could not have ridde it had not he steered the ship all the tyde time: the ight (hee writes did comfort him) for what was to be done hereafter for by the course of this tyde, and hs owne knowledge of the land, being to the Westward of that place 200. leagues, is 86. on the Sea, and might very well say one degree more on land to the Northward, hee then sawNot so. good reason for it. At 8. this night the weather being a little cleere, with ebbe he wayed and plied to windward to get about the N. W. end of the Iland; and being about the West point, the ebbe being dne, he saw another point open upon him that bore N. the winde at N. W. in 33. fathoms, the weather thick and bad, he anchored, where in lesse than one houre the tyde of flood came most strong as before, from N. W. and by N. whereby he concluded, having brought the Northerne point N. from him, tha it was the true Channell tyde; for had it beene other∣wise,The true Channell tyde. it would have come as the land lay, which was N. but now being open of the land, and finding it to come from the N. W. and by N. he faith in his judgement that course, and N. N. W. must direct whomsoever shall seeke this passage here∣after. And the rather to continue himselfe in this opinion, he now to late found, that those that were this way first, & him∣selfe the last yeere were all of them deceived of the set of the tyde, within Sir Dudley Diggs his Iland, for there they found it come more Westerly, which was caused by many broken
Ilands that lye to the Westward of it, which he never sawe, untill his returne homewards. And upon this tyde (if I can judge saith he, we cannot be deceived for this caveat, he dothStrong Tyde, or 200. fathom give to whomsoever shall succeed him in this discovery. That whensoever he loseth his strong tyde, or finds ground in 200. fathoms, let himselfe he is out of his direct course for finding of this Voyage. So this his experience upon his unhappy counter-course taught him, that whensoever it is to be found, it must bee in deepe water); and in a strong tyde; and in this course that he took, he hopes it will not be imputed an errour of his; for what he did in the directing of it; for it was to follow the letter of his instructions; For albeit he was pre∣cisely tyed to stand with Hudsons Westerland in 58. d. yet he never came much to Leeward of 61. d. till he was encountered with land 200. leagues Westward from Sir Dudley DiggsNo mole stati∣on of Ice in all his returne. his Iland. How much in effect I received in a Manuscript from Sir Tho∣mas Roe, besides divers others, towards the furtherance of my Voyage. But further from Abacuk Pricket, who saith, they came not through the maine Channell of Fretum Hudson, nor tho∣rowLumleys Inlet. Lumleys Inlet: but that he came through into the Mare Hyperborum betwixt those Ilands first discovered and named Chidleys Cape, by Captaine Davis, and the North part of America called by the Spaniards who never saw the sameCap Labradore Cape Labradorr, but it is meet by the N. E. point of America, where there was contention amongst them, some maintaining (against others, that them Ilands were the Resolution, which Josias Hubbart withstood untill he stood himselfe into the danger of displeasure: but at length it proved a new streight, and a very straight inded to come through, which resolved all doubts, but hereupon all their plots and Iournalls. This part which came unto my hands I have writ, thinking there may be some that will protract the same, he met no Ice in his home comming, untill he came into Fretum Hudson, and but little there. Iournals more taken from them, and therefore who dothNo molestati∣on by Ice in al these Voyages returne. desire any further satisfaction from this Voyage, must seeke it from Sir Thomas Button, onely Pricket saith that they were at home in 16. dayes.
Concerning the Voyage of Captaine Gibbons, with a Ship called the Discovery, vitled for 12. Monethes, in the yeare 1614. LIttle is to be writ to any purpose, for that hee was put by the mouth of Fretum Hudson, 28 with the Ice driven into a Bay called by his Company Gibbons his hole, in Latitude a∣boutGibbons his Voyage, a ca∣veat for others 57. upon the N. E. part o Stinenia, where hee laid 10. weekes fast amongst the Ice i danger to have beene spoyled, or never to have got away, so as the time being lost, hee was inforced to returne. The Voyage of Robert Bilot yet forth by Sir. Dadley Diggs, Mr. Iohn Wolstenholm, Alde man Iones 16. 15. in the dis∣covery of 55. tunnes burthen, Written by William Baffine. THis Robert Bylot had beene in this ship all t 3. voyagesAprill. before viz. Hudson, as you finde by Pricket, Sir Thomas Button and Gibbons, and therefore was a man well experi∣enct, that way his company consisted of 16. men and 2. boyes, he anchored in Lee, read the 18. Aprill. 6 Vpon this day he had sight of Groenland, on the East sideMay. of Cape Farewell, that night he had a great storme, but heeIce on Capes Farewell. 140. Fathomes above water. kept southerly, to get cleare of the Ice that lay on shore: Hee kept his course untill the 17. day, seeing many great Ilands of Ice, some doth affirme that there is not above one 7. part of the Ice above water saith Baffine, hee observed one peece to be 140. Fathome above water, this day hee came to the firme Land of Ice, as hee supposed being in 61. 16. the Latitude of the S. part the Ile Resolution, then hee asked opinion concer∣ning putting in amongst the Ice, saying, the Sea was on the N. side of the South channell and much Ice hee must passe, and if he could get but 2. or 3. Leagues within the Ice, it would o∣pen every Tyde, and so hee should get something on his way, having all the channell to the S. on him, and with this resolu∣tion, he put in W. E. N. E. wind: this first entrance Baffine liked not well, finding scarce a place to put the Ships-headPuts into Ice 30. Leagues of Land. into, being 30. Leagues from any Land, towards evening they were fast amongst the Ice. 22. Sometimes ere day the Ice would something open, and so made what way hee could to the N. W. in for the shore▪
untill this day, the wind all South, yet hee could see plainely, so that he seekt to the Southward doe what he could. This day the wind came up at N. N. W. and hee determi∣ned to stand forth againe, for if the wind had come'd at N. E. it had beeene impossible for him to have fetcht any part of the channell againe, for he thought he drave fast to the south∣ward with South wind, yet he had not seene the Land. 23. Hee was also determined to spend 20. or 24 dayes in Fretum Davis, to see what hopes would bee that wayes, sup∣posing there would be little good done in Hudsons straights: for the time limited hee plyed to get to Sea-ward, and at Clock 8. in the night hee was cleared from the Ice, hee then changed his opinion, and stood to the N. all hee could as the Ice would give him leave, cmming 30. Leagues to N. E. by N. in Latitude 61. d. 50. m. at Clocke 6. the wind came N. N. E. 26. This day was faire and coole, but the after noone was close and hazie, hee tooke in his sayles and held untill mor∣ning 4. all this day he past by many beds of Ice, having great quantity to the N. of him, and having run about 21. Leagues upon a true W. course. 27. This 27. was close foggie weather, with much snow, freezing his shroude and tackling, but at Clock 4. it cleared, and he saw Land: it being the Ile Resolution bearing W. aboutVariation al∣lowed. 13. or 14. Leagues off, he stands to to fro, as Ice would suffer him, when night came with W. wind, he made fast to a peece of Ice. 28. Faire weather all this day, hee being fast to a peece ofWhitsunday. Ice, with W. wind and hee could well perceive that hee et faster into the straights with the flood, then the ebbe could take him back againe. 29. This day the weather was faire and wind variable, hee sets sayle and tacks to and fro along the Iland, the nxt mor∣ning 2. the wind came to S. S E. but he was so postured with Ice, that with faire wind he could doe little good, the wind continued a stiffe gaile all day and night, for it was not darke, and so was set within the point of the Iland, so as now hee was within the straights. This day was faire weather, the wind N. W. hee saw But∣tons Iles beare S. by compasse but S. S. E. with variation al∣lowed,
which was 24. degrees.Vrriation 24, June. A good har∣bour in Resolu∣tion. some snow in the morning, but very faire the afternoone, the wind at W. N. W. hee perceiving the Ice to open close to the shore, made way to get into anchor, and by Clock 7. he was in good harbour on the W. side of Resolution, where an E. S. E. Moone makes a full Sea or halke an hower past 7. On the change day the water doth rise and fall neere 4. Fa∣thome,Flows 4. Fa∣thomes Varia∣tion 24. d. 6. m. Lumleys Iulet 8. miles wide in the narow∣est. the compasse doth vary 24. d. 6. m. and his Longi∣tude from London 66. d. 35. m. the breadth of the S. channell is 16. Leagues, and the breadth of the N. or Lumleys Julet is 8. Miles wide, in the narrowest place. He found here no signe of inhabitants, but the tracte of Beares and Foxes, Rocks and stony ground, hardly any thing growing, thereon it is indifferent high Land to the N. having one hill or summoke to the N. E. but to the South it falleth a∣way very low. This morning the wind came to the E. S. E. with much snow, and foule weather at noone, he wayed anchor and stood about by the Iland side, as well as the Ice would give him leave to get to the N. shore with much variable wind and weather, but stood fast in continuance amongst Ice, untill the 8. day the wind fell contrary, and being somewhat neere a point of a Land, or rather a company of Ilands, which hee called Savage Ilands, having a great Sound or Indrust be∣tweeneSalvage Iles. the N. shore and them, at Clock 6. hee came to An∣chor neere one of them, being the E. most save one, but whiles he was forling this saile, hee heard and saw a great company of Dogs, howling and barking, that it seeming very strange,Dogges. after he had mored his Ship, hee sent his boare neare shore to see if they could discerne any people, who returned said there were Tents, and Canons, and Doggs, but for people they saw none, this writer (being fitted) after Prayers and supper went on Land to their Tents (with 7. others) where finding no peo∣ple, they marched up to the top of a hill, being about a flight shot where they saw a great Canon, which had about 14.14. Salvages in one Canon. men therein, being on the N. W. part of the Iland, and about a Musket shot from them, so called to them in Groenlandish speech, making signes of friendship, they did the like to them, but being fearefull, and he not trusting them also made signes of a knife, and other trifles, which he left upon the top
of a hill, and returned to these Tents againe, where he foundWhalessinnes. to the number of 30. or 40. Whale finnes, with a few Seale skins which hee tooke with him, leaving for them knifes, beades and counters, hee found a little Bay where were the I∣mages of men, and one the Image of a woman, with a childImages. at her back which he brought with him. Amongst these Tents being 5. in number, all covered with Seales skins, were running 35. or 40. Dogs, the most of them muzled, there were of a Mungrills Mastiffe, being of a brin∣ded black colour, looking almost like Wolves: those Dogs they use in stead of Horses, or as the Laplanders doe their Deere, to draw their Steedes which are shot or lyned with bones of great fishes, to keepe them from wearing, theirDogsfurnitur. Dogs have collers and furniture very fitting. Their apparell Boates, and Tents, with other necessaries, are much like to those of Greneland, but not so neate and ar∣tificiall: they seeme to bee more rude and uncivill travelling up and downe, as their fishing is in season, for in most placesLattude 62. d. 32. m. Longitude 72. d. where they were on Land, they see where people had beene, but where their habitation or winter aboad is they know not, nor cannot conjecture. This Iland lyeth in 62. degrees, 32. minutes, and in longitude West from London 72. degrees or neere there about, being 60. Leagues from the entrance of the straights: the compasse doth vary 27. degrees, 30. minutes, and South East MooneVariation 27. d. 30 m. 4. degrees East, maketh full Sea, it floweth almost as much water as at Resolution, the Tyde commeth from the East∣wards. This day morning 6. he set sayle with North winde, which continued not, but was variable, till noone, it came to North West, hee having sayled along the shore some 7½. leagues North North West, the Ice lying so thick in the Offing, thatA good Har∣bor. he could not well get out of it. He perceived a good Harbor betweene two small Ilands and the maine, and went in, wherre he moord and stayd untill the twelfe day in the eve∣ning. In this place a South East Moone make a full Sea, Latitude62. d. 40. m. Lat. S. E. full Sea. 62. degrees, 40. m. the tyde doth come from South East eve∣ry point hath his set and eddy in this place hee could per∣ceive of no people.
Lying still in the Ice, the weather close and hazy, as it had beene for 6. dayes being neere a great company of Ilands (the winde West North West,) he stood in amongst them and at evening, morne to one of them in a small Cove, the, better to defend her from the Ice; here hee stood all the 17. day, the 18. being almost calme, he set sayle, the better to get forth. Here was a great company of Ilands, each whereof hath his severall sets and eddyes, which drive the Ice to and againe with such violence, that hee was in greater danger here, then if he had beene further off, the Latitude of this Ile he lay at, was 63. d. 26. m. longitude, neere 72. d. 15. m. from London, Variation 27. d. 46. m. ½. past 9. the change day ma∣kethDanger neare shore, La. 63. d 26. Lon. 72. d. 25. m. Variati. 27. d 46. m. full Sea, this evening and morning he had a false gale at South East, and he stood along by the land, it being all small broken Ilands, to a point about 12. leagues distance from the Ile he set from, it being all broken land, so calls it broken point. This day 12. he was about 4. miles from the foresaid point, fast amongst Ice; and he saith, he might well have called this Fairenes, or Faire Point; for from this day to the 30. the wea∣ther was so faire, and almost altogether so calme, that in few places else where fairer weather could not be; and untill the 27. hee was so fast inclosed amongst the Ice, that one could not dip water by the Ship sides. Vpon the 29. day he see the Sunne and Moone both at one time, as indeed in faire weather is usuall in those parts. Being faire and calme, the Sea almost as steady as on shore, with his Instruments for Variation, hee went to worke to take the time of the Moones comming to the Meridian, and had a Quadrant of 6. foote Semidiamiter ready to take Sols Almicanter, having taken the Variation of his Needle as pro∣perly as he could, which was 28. d. 10. m. The Sunnes Almicanter at the instant, when the MooneObservaton for Longitude was upon the Meridian, was 26. d. 40. m. the Sunnes declina∣tion 23. d 6. m. by which 3. things given he found the houre to be 5. a clock, 4. m. 54 secon. ⅓ 4 / 4 or 67. d. 13. m. 16. s. of the Equinoctiall, after noone, and according to Scarls Ephemeri∣des the Moone came to the Meridian at London, at 4. a clock, 54. m. 30 s. and after Origanus, the Moone came to the Meri∣dian at 4. a clock, 52. m. 5. s. at Wittenberg the same day now
having this knowne, it is no hard matter to know the Longi∣tude of this place sought; for according to the Moones meane motion, which is 12. d. a day, it is in time 48 m. and to this account, if shee bee on the Meridian at 12. of clocke this day. tomorrow it will be 48. m. past 12. so hee having the time found by observation at this place, viz. 5. houres, 4. m. 52. s. ⅓ 4 / 4. but in this he needeth not come 50. precise, and at London at 4. houres, 54. m. 30. s, which substracted from the former, leaveth 10. m. 22 s. ⅓ 4 / 4. Now the Moones motion, that 24. houres was 22 d. 38. m. which converted into time, is 50. m. 25. s. 20. th. then the protion standeth thus, if 50. m. 25. s. 20. th. give 360. d. what shall 10. m. 22. s. ⅓ 4 / 4. give the propotionals welbes, 74. d. South, which is West of London, because the Moone came later by 10. m. 22. s. and by the working of Origanus his Ephemerides, the distance is 91. d. 35. m. West of West, but whether be the truer, hee leaves it to others to judge; for if those workings bee not carefully looked unto, there may be great errour committed; as in the observation, and in the Moones comming to the Meridian to the place, for which the Ephemerider was Calulated for, and it may be in the Ephemerides themselves; in all which, the best and most judicious may erre. The 6. of Aprill another outward bound at Sea, by the Moones comming in a right line, with two fixed Starres; the one was the Lions heart, a Starre of the first magnitude, the other in the Lions Rumps, of second magnitude, as fol∣loweth. The Circumference or outward eye of the Moones being in a right or straight line, with those two Starres before na∣med, at the instance he tooke the Altitude of the South bal∣lance, 2. d. 38. m. because he would save the time, but in this it is good to waite a fit time, as to gave her in a right line, with 2. Starres not farre distant, and those not to be much dif∣ference in longitude, because the Moone will soone alter, the auyle or potion, and such a time would bee taken, when the wood is in the 19. of the Ecliptique above the Horizon, for then there is no parallel of Longitude, but onely in Latitude: but who is painefull in these businesses, shall soone see what is needfull, and what is not his observations, were as fol∣loweth.
Lions Heart,   degr. min. secon. Right Ascention 46. 28. 30. Declination 13. 20. 45. Longitude 24. 27. 45. Latitude 00. 26. 30. Almicanter 33. 40. 00. Lions Rumpe, Right Ascention 63. 23. 00. Declination 22. 38. 00. Longitude 05. 53. 45. Latitude 14. 20. 00. the Moons Paralax, Paralax 00. 47. 46. Latitude 03. 20. 00. Almicanter 37. 00. 00. Latitude of the 56. 43. 00. This note hee saith is set downe for any that can, and are disposed to spend their time therein themselves, having spentMr. Rudston. some, and would have spent more if leasure had served: but finding it not to his minde, he hath set downe the particular worke as he received it from me Rudstone. 28 Lying here enclosed now among the Ice with faire and calme weather (as before is said) untill the 27. day at evening he set sayle, the winde South East an easie gale, all the 28. and 29. he made way through the Ice: but the 29. it was more open thn before, in 10. dayes at noone Salisbury sie bare West from him. This day was close foggie weather, with much raine, the winde S. S. E. at noone he was 3. leagues from the land, butJuly. had much Ice by the shore. He stood to the N. and the next morning hee was faine by another small Iland, or rather a company of Ilands which he afterwards called Mill Iland, by reason of grinding the Ice, as he had proofe, the Lat. is 64.Mill Ile La. 64 driving here to and fro untill clock 7. the Ice began to open and separate: hee had not past along the Ile by the East sideFlood Tyde from S E Ice drive with swiftnesle▪ thereof: but the Ice came driving with the flood-tyde from S. E. with such swiftnes, that it overwent his Ship, having all sayles abroad with a reasonable gale of winde, and put him out of the streame, into the eddy of the Ile.
This Iland or Iles lying in the middle of the Channell having many sounds running through them, with many points or Head-lands encountering the face of the Tyde, cau∣seth such a rebound of the Ice and water, which ran one way and the Ship another, the Ship having met with Ice, with the first or the flood put him neere the shore, that hee was in the partition betweene the Ice, which the edge caused to runne one way, and the streame another, where shee endured greatDanger neere shore. distresse: Thus hee continued untill towards high water, which about one a Clock, then with no small trouble hee got into the Channell, and stood to the North West ward, after hee had past some distance from this Ile, hee found the Sea more open then it was since he put into the straights, and sayled all the next day with a South wind, thorow. an indif∣ferent cleare Sea, at Clock 8. in the morning hee was come a∣gaine into much Ice, and this Ice was thicker and bigger then any he had before, where he began to be enclos'd 26. LeaguesClock 7. high water. distant from Mill Ile North West by West true course, being first amongst the Ice hee perceived a great Tyde to set to and fro, and had 120. Fathome ozie ground, at 80. Fathomes the wind comming to the North, and setting him somwhat Southward had 110. Fathomes, thus seeing great aboundance120. Fathome high ground. of Ice in this place, and the more he got to the North West∣ward the shoalder it was the Ice being foule and durty, as not bred far from shades, hee determined to stand to the Est∣ward, to be better informed of the Tyde. 6. The morning standing to the Eastward hee brooke a planck, and two timbers in his ships bow, which after hee had mended, he proceeded to the East along the North shore, which Land stretcheth along from Resolution within the streights, and is the West side thereof. 7. This day he saw the Land it being but low, and the Sea shoald in respect of other places, having 10. or 12. Fathome about a League from shore, and some 30. or 35 Fathomes 5. or 6. Leagues from shore, having very good channell ground, some 18. or 20. Leagues off, as small stones and shells, but the farther of the more ozie: Also here runneth a very great Tyde, to the Northward with this evening hee foundThe half tyde betweene▪ Baf∣faime. to be the Tyde of ebbe. For comming neere the shore about Clock 7. hee went on Land with his Boate, and found it so,
he stayed on Land about an houre and an halfe, in which time the water fell about 3. foote and a halfe, and a South South East Moone maketh a full Sea. They saw no signe of people to have beene here this yeare, but other yeares before they could well see by divers places, where their Tents had stood, and perhaps their time of fishing was not yet come, there be∣ing such great abundance of Ice as yet. 8. This day the wind was West. 9. This day was almost calme, and he reckoned to be neere the shore. 10. This day hee entermined to stand to Ile Notingham, to trye the Tyde there, the wind South West, so as hee turned it up untill night, the wind came to North North West 150. Fathome deepe, so as hee stood away to the West ward, and left the stateth of Notinghams Ile, having a great swelling Sea out of the West, with the wind that had blowne which put him in some hopes. 11. This morning hee saw Land West from him, and had no ground at 130, standing along by the Land, which then lay North West, and by West, the next morning hee was thwart of a Bay, then standing over to a faire Cape or Head land, hee saw in the afternoone it was almost calme, being about a League from Land, hee sent his Boate to try the Tyde, and they stayed about 3. houres, going at 5 and returning at 8. and brought word that it was fallig water, and that whilst they were on shore it had ebbe two foote: also they affir∣med that the flood came from the N. in this place, whch he perceived by the Ship, shee setting a pace to the N. although it was no wind: also they might see by the Rocks that the water was a, this made him doubtfull of a passage that way. Master Bylot named this Cape Comfort, for the reasons be∣fore,Cap. Comfort in 65 and not a league from Land, is 140. Fathome water, here a S E. Moone makes a full Sea, the Latitude is 65 and 86. d. 10. W. from London. But this suddaine comfort was soone quailed as hee saith, for the next day having doubted the Cape, and proceeded not above 10. or 13. Leagues, but hee saw the Land Trent, from the Cape to the Westward, un∣till it bare from him N. E. and by E. and very thick peste∣red with Ice. And the further he proceeded N. ward, he found shoalder water, and more Ice, and small show of any Tyde at
6. he had 130. Fathom, soft ozie, and at noone had 150. Fad.Lat 65. 25. Long from London, 86. 10. This was the furthest of this voyage being in Latitude 65. 25. and Longitude from London 86. 10. for seeing the Land so farre to the E. of him 9. or 10. Leagues off, and the Ice hee was fully perswaded this was but a Bay, and so turned the ship homeward without any further search. 14. The wind at S. E. that he could make but small way back againe: the next morning it was foule weather, and hee An∣chored in a small Iulet neere Cape Comfort, on the N. when here he found a S. and by E. Moone to make a full Sea, but could, not discerne from whence the flood came, for it was bad weather at Sea. 16. The afternoon the wind came N. W. stiffe gale, and ha∣zie, he wayed and stood along the shore by the 16. at noon he went with a great quantity of Ice, lying within the point of Land, amongst this Ice hee saw a great number of Sea Mos, not seing any in all the streights but in this place, and those very fearefull, not suffering any Ship or Boate to come neere them: by Clock 8. he was come to this S. shore point, which he called Sea horses Pointe, where he came to Anchor in openSea Horse Points, Flood came from S E Sea, the better to try the Tyde, where he and all his company apparantly found, that in this place the Tyde came from S. E. and the Ebbe from N. W. he wayed after hee had found this, and stood over with a stiffe gale of wind, which continued all day, and at night it was very foule weather, and sowre stormes By Clock 2. he was come to Anchor on the N W side of Not∣inghams Iland, where 2. or 3. small Iles lye off from the grea∣ter, which makes very good sounds and harbour about this Ile, he had store of Ice, but nothing as in other places, he staid here untill the 27. day, with much foule weather, many storms, often fogg and uncertaine winds, many times he wayed An∣chor to goe to that side of the I and where the Ship rod, when Cap. Button was in her finding in other places of this le, the Tyde of flood came from the S. E. ward, and the time of high water upon the change of day to bee at 10. and halfe anBylot was with Thomas Button. houre past and not after, as they supposed before in 10. dayes he stayed about this Ile, he fitted his Ships with ballast and o∣ther necessaries. 26. This day being indifferent faire weather, hee pssd be∣tweene Salisbury and Notinghams Iles, at the S. point thereof.
where lie many small lone Iles, without the which (to have Anchored) had beene a fit place to have found out the true set of the Tyde: but the Mr. being desirous to have come to the same place, where he had rod before, stood along by this Ile to the W. ward, and came to an Anchor in the Eddie of this bro∣ken grounds, where the Ship rod at no cetainety of the Tyde. 27. This morning was soule weather with much raine and wind, that the Reager Anchor would not hold at 8. Fathomes scope, but was driven into deeper water, and enforced to set saile, the wind at E. and came about to N. E. with fowle wea∣ther, he stood away towards Sea Horse Point, he was perswa∣ded that there might be a passage betweene that Land and the Land they called Swan Iland, so this afternoone hee saw bothSwan Ile. Sea Horse Point and Ile Notingham, the distance betwixt both is not above 15. or 16. Leagues, they lye one from another S. E and N. W. 28. In the morning he saw Sea Horse Point, and the Land toAugust. He sought no passage then. stretch away W. S. W. so far as he saw and with Ice, where∣fore he tackt about, and stood away S. E. and by S. 29. This day 11. he came to anchor at Diggs his Iland, having yery foule weather, at this place where he rod, it lyeth open to the W. having 2. of the greatest Iles to breake off the fore of the flood Tyde, for after the water was risen an houre and a halfe by the shore, then would the Ships ride truly on the tide of flood all the Tyde after, now the time of high water on the change is at ½. past 10. or thereabouts. This day was faire weather, he wayed & stood close by DiggsSeptember. his Iland, where presently he perswaded the Salvages to bee close upon the Rocks: but when they saw he had espied them, divers of them came running down to the water side, calling to him to come to anchor, which he would have done if hee could: but in this place the water was so deep, an it is hard to find a place to ride in; which seeing, he lay to and againe with the ship, whilst some of his men with the Boat killed about 70. Fowles, for in this place is the greatest store of those fowles which we call Willicks, that in few places else is not to be seen; for if need were he might have killed many thou∣sand; almost incredible to those that have not seene it; here he had sufficient proofe of other tyde: but when his Boate returned, he set sayle homewards.
The Observation. He set forth the 18. of April, & he saw the land of Groynland the 6. of May; he made Resolution the 27. whereon the N. side he found a good Harbor, where it flowes an E. S. E. moone, and neere 4. fatho. he found people at Salvage Isles, he was much troubled, but especially at Mill Isle, he made Cape Comfort, and found a tyde, but knew not from whence it come. The land to the N. treads about him to N. E. by E. the water the farther Northward, was but more shallow & dirty, he returnes home∣wards the 10. of Iuly, his greatest deep at 180. fathoms. In his returne at Sea-horse Point, he and al his people saw, that plain∣ly the tyde came from S. E. as also at Isle Nottingham he broke in a planck and timber of his ship amongst Ice, he might have killed thousands of Fowle at Diggs his Island; his greatest Variation was 27. d. 46. m. his greatest Lat. was 65. d. 25. m. he saw many Sea Mors, at Cape Comfort; his Longitude from London was 86. d. 10. m. This day he was forced to anchor 30. leagues, within Reso∣lution, upon the N. shore, the next day he weighed, and the 5. day he passed by Resolution, but see it not. He had sight of Cape Cleere in Ireland. He came into Plimouth all his men alive, but 3. sick, which presently recovered. The next yeere being againe imployed in discovery amongst other Instruments he received this; For your course you must make all possible hast to Cape Desolation, & from thence your William Baffyn as Pilot keep along the Coast of Greenland, and Fretum Davis, untill you come towards the height of 80. if the land will give you leave, then for feare of imbaying by keeping off to Northerly a course; shape your course W. and Southerly, so far as you shall thinke it convenient, untill you come to the Lat. of 60. then direct your course to fall with the land of Yed 30. about that height; leaving your further say∣ling Southward to your owne discretion, according to the time of the yeere, and the winds will give you leave, although your desire be, if the Voyage be so prosperous, that you may have the yeere before you, that you goe so far Southerly, as that you may touch the N. part of Iapon, from whence as from Yedzo, if you can see to passe it without danger; wee would have you to bring home one of the men of the Country, and
so God blessing you with all expedition to make you returne home againe. Master Baffyne his Letter to the right Worshipfull Sir Iohn Wolitenholme one of the chiefe Adventurers for the dis∣covery of a passage to the North west. VVOrthy Sir, there needs no filling a Iournall or short Discourse with Preamble circumstance or comple∣ment; and therefore I will onely tell I am proud of my re∣membrance, when I expresse your worth to my capacity; and gal of any good fortune, when I can avoyde the im∣putation of ingratitude, by acknowledgeing your many favours; and seeing it is not unknowne to your Worship in what estate the businesse concerning the North West hath beene heretofore; and how the onely hope was in searching Fretum Davis; which if your selfe had not beene the more forward, the Action had wel-nigh beene left of. Now it remaineth for your Worship to know what hath beene performed this yeare; wherefore I intreat you to ad∣mit of my custome, and pardon me if I take the plaine high∣way in relating the particulars without using any refined Phrases, or eloquent speeches. Therefore briefly thus, and as it were in the Fore-front I entred to shew the whole proceeding of the Voyage in a word, as namely, there is no Passage nor hope of Passage in the North of Davis Straight. Wee having coa∣sted all, or neere all the Circumference thereof, and finde it to be no other then a great Bay, as the Voyage doth truely show: therefore I cannot but much admire the worke of the Almighty, when I consider how vaine the best and chiefest hopes of men are in things uncertaine; and to speake of no other matter than the hopefull passage to the North West. How many of the best sort of men have set their whole endeavours to proove a passage that way? not onely in their Conference, but also in writing and pub∣lishing the Worke: Yea what great summes of money ha∣ving beene spent about the Action, as your Worship hath costly experience of? Nither would the Vaine-glorious Spaniard have scattered abroad so many false Mappes and
Iournals, if they had not beene confident of a passage this way; that if it had pleased GOD a passage had beene found, they might have eclipsed the worthy prayse of the Adventurers, and true Discoverers. And for mine owne part I would hardly have beleeved the contrary, untill my eyes became witnesses of that I desired not to have found, still taking occasion of hope on very likeli∣hood till such time as wee had coasted almost all the Cir∣cumference of this great Ba. Neither was Master Da∣vis to bee blamed in his report and great hopes, if hee had anchored abot Hope Saunderson, to have taken no∣tice of the Tydes; For to that place which is 72. deg. ½▪ the Sea is all open, and of an unsearchable depth, and of a good colour, onely the Tydes keepe a certaine course, nor rise but a small height, as ight or nine foote; and the Flood commeth from the Southward; and in all the Bay beyond that place the Tyde is so small, and not much to bee regarded: yet by reason of Snow melting on the Land, the Ebbe is stronger than the Flood, by meanes whereof, and the windes holding Northerly, the fore part of the yeere the great Ile of Ice are set to the Southward, some into Fretum Hudson, and other into New-found∣land: For in all where the Channell is open, are great quantities of them driving up and downe; and till this yeere not well knowne where they were become. Now that the worst is knowne concerning this Pas∣sage; it is necessary and requisite your Worship should understand what probability and hope of profit might here bee made hereafter, if the Voyage might bee at∣tempted by fitting men. And first, for the killing of Whales, certaine it is, that in this Bay are great numbers of them, which the Biscaver calls the Guard Bay▪ Whales of the same kinde which are killed at Greeneland, and as it seemeth to mee easie to bee strooke, because they are not used to bee chased or beaten. For wee being but one day in Whale-ound, so called, for the number of Whales wee saw there sleeping and lying alo on the water, nor fearing our Shippe, or ought else▪ or if wee had beene fitted with men and things necessarie, it had beene no hard matter to have strooke more then
would have made three Ships a saving Voyage; and that it is of that sort of Whales, there is no feare, I being twice at Greeneland, tooke sufficient notice to know them a∣gaine, besides a dead Whale wee found at Sea, having all her Finnes: or rather all the Roughs of her mouth; of which with small labour wee got a hundred and sixty the same evening wee found her: and if fowle weather the next day had not followed, no doubt wee had got all, or the most part of them: But the winde and Sea rising, shee broke from us, and wee were forced to leave her. Neither are they onely to bee looked for in Whale Sound, but also in Smiths Sound, Wolstenholmes Sound, and o∣thers, &c. For the killing of Sea-mors I can give no certainty, but onely this: that our Boate being but once a shoare in all the North part of this Bay, which was in the en∣trance of Alderman IONES his Sound; at their re∣turne our Men told us they sawe many Mors along by the shoare on the Ice: but our Ship being under sayle, and the winde comming faire, they presently came on board without further search; besides the people inhabiting about 74. degrees▪ tould us by divers signes, that towards the North there were many of those Beasts having two long teeth; and shewed us divers pieces of the same. As for the Vnicorne, it being a great Fish, having a long horne borne growing forth of his forehead or no∣strils (such as Sir MARTIN FROBISHER in his second Voyage found one) in divers places wee see of them: which if the horne be of any good value, no doubt but many of them maybe killed. As concerning what the shoare will yeeld, as Beares skins, Mors teeth, and such like; I can say little, because we came not on Land in any of those places where hope was of finding them. But here some may object why wee sought that Coast no better? To this I answere, that whilest we were there∣abouts, the weather was so exceeding fowle wee could not; for first wee anchored in Wolstenholmes Sound, where presently wedrove with two anchors on head, then we were forced to stand forth with a low sayle; the next day in
Whale Sound we lost Anchor and Cable, and could fetch the place no more; then wee came to Anchor neere a small Iland, being betweene Sir Thomas Smiths Sound, and Whales Sound: but the winde came more outward, that wee were forced to weigh againe. Neverthelesse, if we had beene in a good Harbor, having but our Ships Boat we durst not send her farre from the Ship, having so few men as 17. in all, and some of them very weake: but the chiefe cause why wee spent too little time to seeke a Harbor, was our great desire to performe the discovery; having the Sea open in all that part, and still likelihood of a passage: but when we had coast∣ed the land so farre to the S. ward, that hope of a passage was none, then the yeere was too far spent, and many of our men very weake, and withall we having some beliefe that Ships the next yeare would be set forth about the killing of whales which might doe better then we. And seeing I have briefly set downe what hopes there is of making a profitable Voyage, it is not unfit your Worship should know what let or hindrance may be to the same; the chiefest cause is, that some yeares it may happen by reason of Ice lying between 72. ½▪ and 76. so that the Ships cannot come into those parts untill the middle of Iuly, so that want of time to stay in the Country may bee some let, yet they may well tarry untill the last of August: in which space much businesse may be done, and great store of oyle made. Neverthelesse, if store of Whales come in, as no feare to the contrary; what cannot be made in Oyle, may bee brought home in Blubber, and the Finnes may arise to good profit. Another hinderance will be, because the bottome of the Sound will not be so soone cleare as would bee wished; by meanes whereof, now and then a Whale may be lost. The same cause sometime hapneth in Greeneland. Yet I am perswaded the Sounds before, no never will be cleare before the 20. of Iuly. Wee this yeere were in Whales Iland the 4. day amongst many Whales, and might have strooke them without let of Ice. Furthermore, there is little wood to bee expected either for fire, or other necessaries; therefore Coales and other such things must be provided at home, they will bee much more the ready there. Thus much I thought good to certifie to your Worship,
whom I hope will conceive, that much time hath not beene spent in vaine or the like businesse, nor carelesly neg∣lected, and although wee have not performed what wee desired (that is to have the passage) yet what wee have promised, as to bring certainty, and a true description truth will make manifest, that I have not much erred. And I doe boldly say (without boasting) that more good discovery hath not in shorter time (to my remem∣rance) beene done since the Account was attempted, conside∣ring how much Ice we have passed, and the difficulty of Say∣ling so neere the Pole upon a travis. And above all the variation of the compasse whose won∣derfull opperation is such in this Bay, encreasing and decrea∣sing so suddainely, and swift being in some part, as in Wolsten∣holmesVaia. 26. d. and Smiths Sound varied above 5. points or 56. d. a thing almost incredible, and almost matchiesse in all the world besides, so that without great care and good observations true description would not have beene had. In fine, whatsoever my labours are or shall be, I esteeme too little to expresse my thankfull mind, for your many favours wherein I shall be ever studious to supply my other wants, by my best endeavours, and ever rest at your worships com∣mand. William Baffyn. The Journalls of his Voyage set, forth at the charge of the right worshipfull Sir Thomas Smith Knight, Sir Dudley Diggs Knight, Mr. Iohn Wolstenholme Esquier, and Mr. Alderman Ioanes, with others in the Discovery, Robert Bylot Mr. himselfe Pilot. 1616. HE set from Gravesend, and went about by the W. byMarch. Groenland 6. 5 d. Ireland▪ and the first Land hee saw was within Fretum Davies in 65. degrees 20. minutes, on the 14. May the fore∣noone, and 6. of the people being on fishing, came to him, to whom hee gave small peeces of ron, and they keeping him company with great love, suppose he had intended to come to anchor, but when they see him stand off from shore
they followed a while, and then went away discontented as he thought. Hee prosecuted his voyage being loth to Anchor as yet although the wind was contrary, but plyed to the N. ward, untill he came into 70. d. 20. m. there he entred a faire sound neere Cape Davies his London coast, the people espying himGroanlands wonder. with great wonder, and gazing fled away in their Boates, and after this night hee saw them no more, yet they left there Dogs running to and fro upon the Iland. At this place hee stayed two dayes taking in water, and doing things needfull, the Tydes not rising above eight or nine foote made him dislike of the passage, it floweth ¼. past 9, upon the change day the Tyde commeth from the South. At N. Sun hee set saile, and plied to the Northward, with flood Tyde, Hee found a dead Whale about 26. Leagues from the shoare, hee made fast to her, and got some sinne out of her: the next day he was enforced by storme to leave her, having stood from her not above 3. Leagues N. W. hee came toIceIce. then, and tackt into the shoare againe, and a great storme en∣sued. This day he came faire by Hope Saunderson, Captaine Da∣viesHope Saunder∣son. his farthest, betweene 72. d. and 73. that evening at N. Sunne hee came to Ice, which hee put into, plying all the next day to get through. He was cleere off the Ice, and not farre fromshoare, the wind North East, hee put in amongst divers Ilands, theJune. people seeing him fled away, leaving behind and under a small Rock hidden two young Maids or women, the Ship riding not farre off, the Master with some others went on Land, they making signes to bee carried to the Iland, where their Tents were there adjoyning. When they came there they found two old women more, the one to estimation 80. yeares, the other younger, there was also one woman with a child at her back, who had hidGroanland wo∣men. her selfe amongst the Rocks, untill the other had told her how kindly they had used them in giving them peeces of Iron, and other trifles, in change whereof, they gave them Seale skins, other things they had none, save dead Seales,
and fat and blubber, which the poore women were very diligent to carry to the Boate, and put into their Casks making shew that the men were over at the Maine, and at another small Iland something more Eastward; then they made signes to them that hee should shew them his shippe, and set them where the men were, the foure youngest came into their Boat, and when they were in the Shippe they much wondred, and they gave them of his meate which they taing would not eate, two of them hee set to the Iland where they found the men to be, the other two he set to their Tents againe, those th went to seeke the men could not find them, but came backe to the Ship againe, and were set over to the other side. This place they called Womens Iland, it lyeth in 72. de∣greesWomens Iland. 72. d. 45. m. 45. minutes, the Flood commeth from the S. ward, at deepe Tydes the water  not above 6. or 7. foote S. S. E. Mone  full , the nhabitants being very poore living cheely upon Seales flesh dried, which they eate raw, and clo themseles with the skinnes, as also they doe cover their Tents and Boates therewith, which they can dresse very well, the women differ from the men in apparell, and are marked in the face with divers black streaks or lines the skinne having beene raised with some sharpe Instrument, when they were young, and black colour put therein, so growne in, that by no meanes it can be got forth. Concerning their Religion he saith little onely they have a kind of worship or adoration to the Sunne, to which they will point, striking their hand upon their breasts, and cry∣ing Elyoute, there dead they bury on the sides of the hills, where they he, making a pile of stones over them, yet not so thick but that he could see the dead body, the aire being so piereing, that it keepeth them from stincking savour, so likewise hee hath seene there doggs buried in the same manner. This day hee set saile from thence with faire weather, the wind contrary yet hee plyed it up betweene the Ice and shoare, as it hath beene in a channell of 7. or 8. LeaguesA Channell, 74. d. 4. m. broade, on the 9  was in 74.  / . much pestered with Ice, neere . small Ilands lying 8. Myles from shoare, where hee anchored.
Those Ilands hee taketh to bee frequented by people at the latter end of the yeare, as it seemed by the houses and places where their Tents had stood, but as yet they were not come, the flood Tyde was very small, not rising a∣bove 5. or 6. foote, yet the ebbe runneth with indifferent stream, caused by the melting snow from off the moun∣taines. Seeing that as yet hee could not proceed, hee determined to stand in for the shore, there to abide untill the ee wereHarbour 73. 45. m. more consumed, which he plainely sa to wast very fast, hee came to anchor 73. 45. m. here hee continued 3. dayes with∣out any shew or signe of people. This day there came 42. of the Inhabitants in their Ca∣noes, they gave him Seale skinns, and many peeces of the horne of Vnicorne, and shewed him divers peeces of Ice Mors teeth, making signes that to the N. ward were many of them, hee gave them in exchange thereof peeces of Iron, glasses and Beads, 4. severall times they repayed to him bring∣ing alwayes of those commoditie aforesaid, by reason where∣of he called this place Horne Sound. Here hee staid 6. dayes, and on this day at night sets sayle with little wind, hee stood to the N. ward, the winde having been contrary, the most part of the moneth, bu. it was strange to see the Ice so much consumed in so little space,Ice consumed. for now hee could come to the 3. Ilands formerly named, and stand off to the Westward almost 20. Leagues, without let of Ice, untill hee came to 74. 30. m. Latitude, then hee put amongst scattered Ice, plying all this moneth every day gazing some what, nothing worthy of Note, hoping that hee might see many of those fishes with long hornes, which they cal Sea Vnicornes, the weather variable few dayes without snow and freezing: but Midsommer day his sayles & tackling were frozen, that they could not and them, yet theHee see many Sea Vnicornes cold is not so extreame, but that it may bee well endured, hee being still within sight of Land. Hee came into an open Sea in 75. 40. Latitude, which new∣ly received his hope of a passage, and because the wind wasJuly. contrary, he stood 20. Leagues of the shore, and then he stood in againe, and anchored to try the Tyde, but found small comfort, shortly after the wind came to South East,
and blew very hard with thicke and foggy weather; he set ayle and runne along the shoare: the second day and the next daySir Dudley Diggs Cape. Lat. 76. 35. hee came by a fayre Cape, hee named Sir Dudley Diggs, his Cape in Latitude 76. 35. It hath a small Island close adjoy∣ning to it, the wind still increasing, he past by a goodly sound 12 leagues distant from the former Cape, having a small Island in the middle, making 2 currents, under this Island he Ancho∣red, 2 houres the Ship drove, although he had two Anchors on ground. Whereupon he was forced to weigh and stand forth, he called this sound, Wolftenholmes Sound; It hath many In∣lets or smaller sounds; and is a fit place for killing of Whales.Wolstenholmes Sound. This morning a storme began at West, that blew away his fore-course, continuing so, that he was not able to beare any sayle, but lay to Hull; and when it cleared up, he found him∣selfe imbayed in a great Sound: then he set sayle and stood o∣ver to the S. W. side, and Anchored in a Bay, where he lost both Cable and Anchor, the winde blowing so extreamely from the hill tops, that he could get no place to Anchor in; but was forced to stand too and againe in the sound, the bottome be∣ing all freze over, in the afternoone it was lesse wind, and hee set forth. In this sound was great number of Whales; hee called it Whale-sound in latitude 77. 30. this day was faire weather, and he kept along by the land: untill he came unto a great banke of yce which was backt with land; which hee seeing, determi∣ned to stand backe againe some 8. leagues to an Island he called Hauclites Ile. It lyeth betweene two great sounds, the oneWhales Sound, 78. Whale-sound, and the other Sir Tho. Smiths sound; this last run∣neth to the N. of 78. and is admirable in one respect, because in it is the greatest of variation of the Compasse of any part of the knowne World. For by divers good observations heeVariation 56. found it to bee above 5. points, or 56. varied to the N. ward, this Sound seemeth to bee good for killing of Whales, it be∣ing the greatest and largest in all the Bay, the cause why he minded to stand to this Island, was to seeke for Whale-Finnes; this night he Anchored with foule weather, that his Boate could not land: the next day the Wind more outward, 9. the Sea growne so that he wayed, spending two dayes before he could get a good place to Anchor in. This day it cleared up and he spyed a company of Islands ly∣ing
12 or 13 leagues off from shoare: he minded to go to them but the Wind tooke him short; and hee being loath to spen more time, tooke the opportunity thereof, and left the search of those slles, which he called Caryes Isles. Then he stood to the W. ward with open Sea, & a stiffe gale of wind untill this day, when it fell calme and foggy, he being neere the entrance of a faire Sound, which hee called Alderman Iones his sound; This afternoone it being cleare and faire wea∣ther, he sent his Boate on land, the ship being under sayle, but the wind beginning to blow, they returned, saying, they saw many Sea Mors, by the shoare amongst the yce, but no signe of people so farre as they were, nor any good place to Ancho in, then having the wind E. N. E. hee run along the shore, it beginning now to trent to the South, and shewing it selfe to bee a Baye. This day he was open of another great Sound, he called SirSir Iames Lan∣casters Sound, Lat. 74 Iames Lancasters Sound, here his hope of passage began to lessen every day more then other; for from this sound to the South∣ward he had a ledge of Ice betweene the shoare and him, but the Sea was cleere to the S. of it hee kept close to this Ice vn∣till this day; and then hee was in 71. deg. 16. min. and plainely perceiued the land to 70. deg. 30. min. then hauing much lt about him, hee stood to the E. ward, supposing to haue beene soone cleere, and to haue kept on that side the Ice, vntill he had come into 70. deg. and then to haue stood in againe: but i prooued quite contrary to his expectation; for hee was forced60 leagues a∣mongst Ice. to runne aboue 60. leagues through Ice, and many times fast that hee could goe no way, although so hee kept his course du E. and when hee had gotten into the open Sea; hee kept so neere the Ice, that many times hee had much to doe to get cleere, yet could not get neere the land vntill hee came to 68. when hee see the shoare, but could not come to it by 7. or 8, leagues for the great aboundance of Ice; and this was on the 24. day of Iuly, then hee spent 3. dayes to see if hee could an∣chor to trie the Tide, but the Ice led him into 65. 40. min. lat∣where hee left the west shore; because that then hee was in the Indra of Cimberland; Inlet hee knew no certainties, no hope of passage could bee there. Now seeing that hee had made an end of his discouery, and the yeere being too farre spent to goe for the bottome of the
Bay, to search for drift Finnes; hee determined to goe for the Coast of Groenland, to see for refreshing for his men. Mr. Hu∣bart, and two more hauing kept their Cabbins 8. dayes: be∣sides his Cooke which dyed the day before: and diuers of his company so weake, that they could not labour; so the winde fauouring, hee came to anchor in 65. deg. 45. min. in a place cal∣led Cawkin Sond. The next day, vpon an Island, wee found great store of Scur∣nie-grasse, with Srrill and Orpen; the Scurnie-grasse hee boy∣led in Beere, by meanes whereof, with Gods blessing, his men were in perfect health, in 8. dayes, and so continued vntill his Ariuall in England. Heere hee rode 3. dayes before any of the people came toAugust  him; this day came 6. in Canooes, they brought Salmon, eale, and such like, which was good refreshing for his men; the next day following, the same 6. came againe, but they saw them no more vntill the 6. day, when hee had weighed anchor, and was almost cleere of the harbour, the same 6. and noe more, came and brought of the like commoditie: for which they gaue them Glasses, Beades, Counters, and small pieces of Iron; which they doe esteeme, as wee Christians doe Gold or Sil∣uer. In this Sound was such Skulls of Salmon swimming too andSkuls of Sal∣mon in Cawk sound. fro, that it was much to bee admired: heere it floweth aboue 18. foote water; It floweth on the change till seauen a clock. It is a very good Harbour, and easie to be kowne: having three high round hills like Piramidies close adjoyning to the mouth thereof; and that in the midst is the lowest: All this coast a∣long is full of good Harbours, by reason of so manie Ilands that lie from the Mayne. By 3. this day hee was cleere of this place, hauing a N. N. W winde, faire weather: So God sent him a speedy passeage, for in 19. dayes after hee saw the the coast of England; The 30. h anchored in Douer Roade.
¶ A briefe Discourse of the Probabilitie of a Passage to the Westerne or South Sea, with Testimonies, by mee Henry Briggs. I Thought good to adde somewhat to this Relation of Mr. Baffyn, that learned vnlearned Marriner and Mathematiti∣an, whose wanting Art of words; so really jmployed himselfe in that jndustrious worke, whereof heere you see so euident proofe: This Mappe and Table would much haue jllustra∣ted this Voyage: jf trouble, cost, and his owne dispaire of passage that way, had not made vs willing to content our selues, with what followed of that leaned, and in this Argu∣ment, three times thrice jndustrious Mathematitian, MasterLondon. Henry Briggs famous for his reading in both Vniuersities, and this honourable Citie: that I make a further Voyage of Disco∣uery to find and follow the remote Passage and extent of his name; Mr. Baffyn told mee, that the Tide from the N. W. a∣bout Diggs his Island, was mis-reported by mistaking the houre 8. for 11. and that hee would if hee might get imploy∣ment, search the Passage from Iapon, by the coast of Asia, or (qua data porta) which way hee could: But in the Indies heeBaffyns death. died, in the late Armouse businesse, slaine in fight with a shot as hee was 24. trying bis Mathematticall conclusions, for the discouerie of Sr. Thomas Button: I haue sollicited for his notes, and receiued of him gentle entertainement, and kind promises; being they forced me to stay in the City about necessarie & vr▪ Affaires; hee would at his returne seeke and impart them, since I heare that weighty occasions haue deteined him out of Eng∣land; and I cannot deliuer that I could not receiue, which if I doe, I purpose to giue them out of due place, rather then no at all: once hee was very confident in conferrence with me, o a Passage that way, and said that hee had therein satisfied hi Maiestie, who from his discourse in priuate, suffered the neces¦sitieSr. Iames satis∣fied. thereof: And the mayne Argument was there too: so  the Tyde, for wintering in Port Nelson, hee found the Tid rising euery 12. houres 15. soote: Within the bottome of Husons Bay, it was but 2. Foote: And in the bottome of Fret Davies, discouered by Baffyn but one; yea and a West win
equalled the neepe Tydes to this Spring, arguing the Neigh∣bourhood of the Sea, which is on the West-side of Amenia, the Summer following, hee found about the lat. of 60. a strong Race of a Tyde running sometimes East-ward, sometimes W. ward; Whereupon Iosias Hubbart, in his Plot, called that place Hubbarts Hope; now if any make scruple why this discouery was not persued by Sir Thomas Button, let him consider, that being Prince Henries Seruant, and partly by him imployed, whom I thinke named the Countrey New Wales: The vntime∣ly death of that Prince, put all out of ioynt; nor was hee so open, that others should haue the glory of his discouery. If any man thinke that the Passage is so farre as the Mappes vse to expresse Ammerica, running into the West, it is easi∣ly answered that either of negligence, or ouer-busie dilligeate Mappes by Portugalls in the East, and Spantards in the West, haue beene so cleerely proiected heere: That fabulous streight of Anian, as before by Frances Gaules testimony, and Nauiga∣tion is euident; and hence the Portugalls, to bring in the Mo∣luceas to the Moietie of the World, agreed vpon betweene the Spaniards and them are thought to haue much curtailed Asia, and the longitude of those Islands, giuing fewer degrees to them then in iust longitude is due; so the older Mappes of A∣merica, make the land from Magdalene Sireights to the South Sea, running North-west, when they are rather contracted some-what Easterlie from the North, and the like is iustly re∣ported of their placing Periuvera; and I know not, nor they neither, what Countries they make in America to run so farre to the N. W. ward, which Sir Francis Drake his Voyage in that Sea; his Nova Albion being little further North-ward, then Aguatulie plainely conuinceth to bee otherwise; yea the late Mappe of Culifirma, found to bee an Island; the Saluage discourses of all the Countries North-ward, and West-ward, from Virginia, the Fame whereof filled my friend Mr. Dormer with so much confidence, that hearing of strange Shipps that came thither for a kind of Vre, or Earth; the men vsing Forks in their Diet, with Caldrons to dresse their Meate, and things nothing suitable to any parts of America; hee supposed them to come from the East, neere China and Iapon; and therefore hee made a Voyage purposely to discouer, but crossed with di∣uers disasters, hee returned to Virginia, frustrate of attempting
that yeere, but fuller of confidence, as in a Letter from Virginia hee signified to me, where death ended his designe soone af∣ter; but how often are the vsuall Charts reiected by experience in those Nauigations, in the workes recorded. Painters and Poets are not alwayes the best Oracles. For further proofe of a passage about these parts into the W. or S. Sea, as it is called from the first discouerie thereof to the South, from the parts of new Spaine, whence it was first de∣scribed by the Spaniards, there is mention of a Portugall taken in a Carracke in Queene Elizabeths dayes, of Famous Memo∣rie, confirming this opinion: Sir Martin Frobisher also, from a Portugall in Ginney, receiued Intelligence of such a Passage: hee saying hee had past it; the Pilots of Lisborne are said generally to acknowledge such a thing: And the Admirall,  D'Garsia Ieaffrey Loais, of Citie Royall, in the time of Charles the Fifth, is reported by the Coast of Baccalos and Labradore, to haue gone to the Molla: Yasc Decornado writ to the Em∣perour, that at Sbola, hee was 150. leagues from the South Sea; and a little more from the North: Anthonio de Horera, the Kings Coronista Maior, maketh with vs also in the distance described; but to produce some Authority more full; I haue heere presented Thomas Cowles, a Marriner and Master: Mi∣chaell Lock Merchant, and after them, a little Treatis ascribed to Master Briggs; And if any thinke that the Spanard or Por∣tugall would soone haue discouered such a Passage, this will an∣swere, that it was not for their profit to expose their East or West Indies to English, Dutch, or others, whom they would not haue sharers in those remote Treasures, by so neere a Pas∣sage: First Thomas Cowles auereth thus much. I Thomas Cowles of Bedmester, in the County of Somrset Marriner, doe acknowledge, that Six yeares past, being at Lis∣borne in Portugall; I did heare one Martin Chacke a Portugall, reade a Booke of his owne making, which hee had set out 6. yeeres before that time, in Print in the Portugall tongue, decla∣ring that the said Martin Chacke had found twelue yeeres now past away from the Portugall Iudies, through a Gulfe of the New-found-land, which hee thought to bee in 59. deg. of the N. Pole, by meanes that hee being in the said Indies with 4 shippes of great Burthen; and hee himselfe being in a small ship of 80. Tunne, farre driuen from the companie of the other 4.
shipps, with a West winde; after which hee had past a∣long by a great number of Islands, which were in the Gulfe of the said New-found-land, and after hee ouer-shott the Gulfe, he set no more sight of any other land, vntill hee fell with the N. N. west part of Ireland; and from thence hee tooke his course home-ward; and by that meanes hee came to Lifborne 4. or 5. weekes before the other shipps that were separated from his Company, and since the same time hee could neuer see any of those Bookes, because the King commanded them to bee cal∣led in, and no more of them to bee Printed, least in time it would bee their hinderance. In witnesse whereof I set to my hand and marke the 9day of Aprill, 1579. ¶ A Noate of Michaell Locke, touching Freton Anjoy, through the North-west Passage of Meta Incognita. WHen I was at Venice in Aprill 1596. happily arriued there an old man, aged about 60. called commonly Iuan de Fa, but named properly Apostollos Valerians, of Na∣tion a Greeke, borne in the Island of Sepholonien, of Profession a Marriner, and an ancient Pylot of shippes: This man came lately out of Spaine; ariued first at Legorne, and went thence to Florence, where hee found out Iohn Dowlas, an English-man, a famous Marriner, ready comming for Venice, to be Pylot of a Venetian ship for England, they came both to Venice together; and Iohn Dowlas, being well acquainted with mee, gaue me no∣tice of this Greeke Pylot, and brought him to my speech; and in conference this Pylot declared in the Italian and Spanish tongue, these words following. First, hee said that hee had beene in the West India of Spaine, by the space of Forty yeeres, and sayled too and fro, as Marriner and Pylot to many places thereof in the seruice of the Spaniard. Also he said that hee was in the Spannish shipp, which in re∣turning from the Islands of Philipinas and China, was robb'd neere Cape Callifrnia by Captaine Canndish, an English-man; whereby hee lost 60. Thousand Duckets of his owne goods. Also hee said that hee was Pylot of 3. small Shipps, which
the Victory of Mexicoe sent from thence, armed with a 100. Souldiers, vnder a Captaine Spaniard to discouer the streights of Anian, along the Coast of the South Sea; and to fortefie in that streight to resist the Passage of the English Nation, which were afraid to passe through the streights into the South Sea; and that by reason of a Mutinie which happened amongst the Souldiers, for the Sodomie of their Captaine; that Voyage was ouerthrowne, and the Ship turned backe from Califirnia, to Noud Spania, without any effect of things done in that Voy∣age, and at their returne the Captaine was punished at Mexicoe. Also hee saith, that after the said Voyage was so ill ended, the Vice-roy set him out againe in 1592. with a small Caravell and a Pinnace, armed with Marriners onely for discovery of the said Streight; and hee following his course W. and N. W. in the South-sea, along the coast of Nova Hispaniae, and Cali∣firnia and India, now called North America; all which voyage hee signified vnto me in a great Mappe and Carde of my owne which I laide before him, vntill hee came to the Latitude of 47. degrees. and that there finding the land to trent N. and N. E. with a broad Inlett betweene 47. and 48. hee being entred thereinto; sayling therein more then twenty dayes, and found the land trenting still sometimes N. W. and sometimes N. E. and also S. E. ward, a farre broader Sea then at the said entrance; and that hee passed by divers Ilands in that entrance: and that at the entrance of this said Streight, there is on the North-west coast thereof a great Head-land or Iland, with an exceeding high Pinnacle or spired Rocke like a piller there-vpon. Also he said, that hee went on land indivers places; and that hee saw some people on land clad in Beast-skinns: and that the land was very fruitfull, and rich of gold and silver and Pearles and other things like Nova Hispaniae, Also hee said, that hee being entred thus farre into the said10 Streight, and being come into the North-Sea allready, and finding the Sea wide enough every where, and to bee about 30. or 40. leagues wyde in the Streight where hee entred: hee thought he had now well discharged his office, & done the thing which he was sent to doe: and that he not being armed, to resist the force of the Saluage people that might happen to assault him, therefore hee set sayle, and returned towards Noua Hispaniae,
where he arrives at Aquapulco, Anno 1592. hoping to be well rewarded of the Viceroy for his voyage so performed. Also he said, that he was greatly welcomed to Mexico by the Viceroy and had promise of great reward; but staying there 2 yeares to his small content, the Viceroy told him he should be rewarded in Spaine of the King, and therefore wil∣led him to repayre thither, which he did performe. At his comming thither he was greatly welcomed at the Kings Court in words, but after long suite he could not get a∣ny reward there to his content; and therefore at length he stole away and came into Italy, to get home to live amongst his kindred in his owne country, he being now very old. Also he said, that he thought that the cause of his ill reward was had of the Spaniards to be, for that they did understand ve∣ry well that the English Nation had now given over all their voyages for the discovery of the N, W. passage, wherfore they feared not them any more to come that way into the S. Sea; and therefore they needed not his service therein any more. Also he said, that in regard of his ill reward had of the Spa∣niard; and understanding of the Noble mind of the Queene of England, and of her warres maintained so valiantly against the Spaniard, hoping her Matie, would do him Iustice for his goods lost by Capt. Cavendish, he would be content to goe into Eng∣land and serve her Matie. in that Voyage to discover the N, W. passage into the S Sea, and would put his life in her Maiesties hands to performe the same, if shee would furnish him with one ship of 40 tonnes, and one Pinnace, and that hee would performe the same from the one end of the Straits to the o∣ther, and he willed me so to write into England. Whereupon after this twice conference I did write to the old Lord Treasurer Cicil, and to Sir Walter Rawleigh, and to Mr. Richard Hackluit that famous Cosmographer, praying that 100 pounds might be sent for the charge of sending this Pylot in∣to England, I received answer from some of my friend, that the action was well liked of; if the money could be procu∣red; After one fortnight he went from mee into his owne countrey, where he dyed. There are divers other things written in the Originall, as en∣ticing perswasions to those undertakings, and is to be read as in Sir Humfrey Gilbert and others in Mr. Hackluit; and also other wch
were his collections (after his death) incerted into the latter end of the 4th Booke of the 3 part of Purkas his works; but because these latter truths have proved them to be but the imagination of men, I omit them as things needlesse to this ornament; for although I have beene carefull to be as compendious as I could, yet I feare me my readers will thinke me totedious. Concerning Capt. William Hawkridge of whom I find nothing written by himselfe, but what hath come to my hands by manuscript or relation, as followeth here. HEe went bent by the West, and the 29 of June he foundJune. 29 Lumleys Inlet. himselfe betwixt land and land, and thought he had bin in the great channell or Lumleyes Inlet, where it pleased God by the cleering up of the weather to deliver him from a rocke he might have indangered himselfe upon to the E. ward. This day he plyed it out againe to the E. ward finding that30 he was in the N. or wrong Channell where he saw 3 Rocks he wondred he had escaped, for he had runne in amongst them. This day was fayre and cleare weather, the wind at N, W.July. he stood out againe S, E. all the forenoone amongst yce loofing1 for one, and bearing up for another, the current setting to the W. ward, he tooke marks upon the land and by the logge the Ship run after 5 leag. a watch and for all that got nothing, he observed by his Astrolob, and was in 62 d. 25 m. having hadLat. 62 d. 25 m. Fogs and Mists for 6 dayes before so as he could not observe,Variat. 29 d. and this day he had 29 d variation Westward, the magneticall Amplitude 83 d true Amplitude 54. These dayes were fayre cleare weather, the 4 was foggie.2 3 5 6 This day the winde was E. This day he plyed to windward to weather Resolution, the wind at E, N, E. This day was foggie wind N, E. he lost sight of his Pinnace.7 Hee was the first that entred Lumleys Inlet so farre. The 27 of Iune he made the Resolution, and the 8 of July he was come backe againe out of the N. channell betwixt Resolu∣tion and Cape Elizabeth. This day he met againe with his Pinnace and thought to9 have borne up, but the fogge taking him he plyed to the East∣ward to the intent he might get into the great channell. This day standing to the N-shore with very foggie weather10 A strong Tide.
he was taken with an indraft of a strong tide, and drawne in amongst divers Ilands about Cape Elizabeth and was in more danger then he saw, but having a swelling Sea from the E. hee followed and so escaped all dangers. This day he had a strong ripling of a tide, his Latit. 61 d.11 A ripling tyde. 30 m. and the body of Resolution bore N, W. by N. from him. The 12. 13. and 14 dayes he made account that he had keptHorst 30 leag. to S. ward with a Current. 16 that latit. and rather to the N. ward, but he was horst with a current (he could not tell how) above 1 d. & 30 m. Wch all men know is 30 leag. so that he was to the S. ward of Buttons Iland This day when he came to observe thinking he had bin in the mouth of the strait, it proved otherwise, the wind cóming contrary, as at W, and by S. some hopes were taken away that he should not insist any further for that yeare, but that him∣selfe had framed a sound resolution to continue and persever. From the 16 untill this day he plyed to the West and was22 faire by land, not 3 leag. of the sounding he had no ground in latit. 61. 50. The wind N, N, E. and N, E. cleare weather.23 24 This day he espied land on the S. shore nere Cape Charles, but to the E. ward he espyed a little Iland where he stood into a Bay to water, and anchored in 25 fath. fine fishing groundBad fishing. (but catcht none) he had land bore round from the N, N, W. to the E, by N. the Ilands Lat. 62 d. 19 m. variat. 3 d. 9 m. and here he had a tyde which minding the setting and flowing may cause some Argument of strong consequence to prove a pas∣sage that way, on this Iland he caught Ducks, here he found it to flow 21 foote water the tyde setting S, E. and the flood from N, W. and in this place a S. E. Moone makes a full Sea.As at Salvage Ile. He sent the Mrs. Mate and Carpenter with others in the boat to rowe about the Iland, and when it bore S. E. of them, they had 74 fath, halfe a mile from land, & a strong set tide from E. This day he set saile from this Iland the wind E, S, E. much27 wind all day. This day in the morning he met with much yce.30 31 This day he run 35 leag. W. by N. but the last day at night he reckned himselfe to be at the westermost Cape on the N. side. This day he run 25 leag. W, by N. but the last day he saweAugust. 1 land, and thought it had bin Silisbury and Nottinghams Ilands, but it proved the N. Mayne, he sailed along W. by N. and W,
by S. with a stiffe gale at E, N, E. he found this land to be thickeI know none such. with yce, and very low, and run 30 leag▪ along by it. The first of August he espyed this land and sailed along in 67, 89, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 fat. rocky ground, as he stood to the S. ward it was white sand, his lat. was 63 d. 30 m. variat. 27-he found an Iland sayling along the shore, the depth be∣tweene which and the Mayne was 70 fath. This day he sailed along the N, W. with fayre weather and2 easie wind. This day he stood away S, W. and anchored in 45 fath. clay3 ground. This morning he weighed and stood N, W. 3 leag. and be∣ing4 faire weather, the water shoalding to 30 fath. he anchored againe still finding a pretty soaking current setting most an end N, W. and S, E. This morning clock 8 he anchored againe having but new5 weighed because of the Fog. This morning clocke 4 he weighed and stood away W, N,6 Swelling Sea om W. W. with S, E. wind true course 5 leag. and was in 63 d. 50 m. having a swelling Sea out of the Westerboard, the water wax∣ed deepe from 30 to 50 fath. and the ground was hard chan∣nell ground, from 12 to 4. he sailed N, W. by N. 6 leagues, but found no ground and supposed he saw the W. land bore N, N, W. from him. From 4 untill 8 he stood away N. and by E. 5 leag at 8 he sets, tacks aboard and stood N, E, & by S. in a deep gut, this day he had 45 fath. at clocke 4. at 5 he had 8 fath. and at 8 he had 65 the land bearing N, N, W. and N, W. This day at the dawning the land bore N, W. and he stood7 along it N E. true course, he had sounding 25 and 30 fath. and anchored at clocke 8, and weighed againe presently, the land bore E. and had sounding all day, the further N. ward the deeper water, this writer saith he, iudged it to be Salibury Ile, he sailed N E the forenoone some 7 leag. & in the afternoone N N, E. for so the land did lye, towards the bottome of the Bay the latit. was 64 d. 30 m. variat. 23 d. 10 m. the part of this land bore from him N, N, E. fine low plaine land. The 8 in the morning he was perswaded it was a bay, but that he will not say he was this day calming and did thinke that there was no tide here, but sending his boate on shoare found 20 foot ebbing and flowing, and sport enough for them
all, for in  houres space he saw in conscience as good as 300Fat D Deare, as fat as butter, but caught none, for his intent was to travell as good as 2 miles, hoping to have seene the Sea on the other side but could not. 9 This day clock 8. to 12. he run 6 leag. W, N, W. from 12 he steered away as the land would give him leave, W, S, W. and W, a fine shoalding coast, and dainety sounding, shelly ground, from 10 to 16 fathomes, heere he had a little current, set W, N, W. this as he iudged is all broken land, latit. 63 deg. 40 min. variat. 23 d. 30 m. 10 The wind was at S, E, and by E. the farther to the West∣ward the shoalder water, they iudge themselves to be shot so farre to the W. ward as Sea Horse Poynt, because of the coast trenching to Southerly, his boate rid with her Grapnet, and found a pretty streame. 11 This day he was in 63 d. 40 min. latit. the land bearing from him S, W. and trenching along to the S. being in this lat. they thought themselves farre shot to the Westwards within Sea Horse poynt, and so returned backe againe for the Bay, where they were in almost 65 deg. to the N. wards, but he altered his mind and stood for Diggs his Iland, to try the tyde, N, E, by N. Northerly from thence where he turned out of the Bay of Sea Horse 24 leag. 12 This day the wind was E. and by S, thick weather. 13 From the last day to this day noone, he was becalm'd in thicke weather. 14 From the last day noone till this, he made way 9 leag. E, S, E. and 2 leag. N, W. 14 He tryed the tyde and found as strong a streame at this time, as you have here in the Thames, it set S, E. and N, W. he followed it to see whether it would carry him, at clocke 8 at night he anchored, and wayed againe at 8 next morning, and to 12. he run 4 leag. N, W, by N. from 12 to night 10 leag. and he had soug 60 and 70 fath. but anchored in 30. 16 This morning 4. he wayed and stood to the N. ward, but thought he was stopt by land, and therefore bore up the helme for England, not o that he was out of hope of a passage, for that he will never say. 17 From the last day untill this, S. W. 8 leag. he tackt to the N. ward, this morning he was in sounding 70, 60, 59 fath.
18 From the last noone to this, he drove N, E. 6 leag. both these last dayes were thick weather. 19 To this day noone 20 knots S, E. and 10 knots S, W. 20 To this day noone 20 leag. S, E. the wind W. and foggy. 21 To this day noone he run 20 leag. S, E. thicke weather, and he was in 61 d. 15 m. latit. and sounding he had 86 fath. 22 To this day noone, 15 leag. E, by S. at noone it was cleare weather, and he was in 6 d. 40 m. latit. and he saw land to the N. off him, and had sounding from 45, 40, 36 fath. 23 This day he was in latit. 62 d. 00 m. in the morning the land bore S. off him, and they judge it to be the N. shore or Cape, he had sounding 9 and 19 fath, and had run from last day 22 leag. E, by N. and 6 leag. S he had sounding along the land 17 or 18 fath. fine beach land, and stiffe a gale at N, W. 24 From the last day to this 23 leag. S, E. and 9 leag. E, by S. and this morning he fell with land which he tooke to be the Kings Forland, it bore S, E. 9 leag. off, and latit 61 d. 30 m. this day the Pinnace stole from them as they thinke upon puroose. 25 From this day at noone N, N, W. 8 leag. and N, E, by N. 9 leag. sounding was 40 and 45 fath. 26 This day at noone they saw the same breach that they parted from, and was by observation in latit. 62 deg. 10 min.I know of this breach. A confused ac∣compt. variat. 26 deg. the wind was at S, E. and they thought them∣selves on the W. side of Mansfield Ile 2 leagues off, and had deepe 16 or 18 fath. 27 From last noone to this he run 27 leag. true course N, & by E. and were in latit. of 60 d. the wind at E, S, E. this night at clock 10 the fogge came, the next morning it cleered but he had no ground at 100 fath. he tackt about to the S. ward till next morning and then to the N. ward, but at noone could have no observation. 28 This morning 8 he tackt to the S, for he saw a firmeA firme land of Ice. land of Ice, from last day to this N, E. 12 leag. and 7 leag. S, E, because of the Ice, at clocke 10 he had 80 fath. 29 From last day to this 10 leag. S, E. and 3 leagues N, E, and sounding had no ground. 30 From last day to this was fog, they got but little to the E. ward, and sounding had no ground, and latit. 62 d. 40 min. 31 From the last to this 10 lea. E, by S. and 8, S, E, by E. the wind at N. at 8 in the evening calme, but cleare weather, they were
close about the N. shore in 80 fath. he had a ripling of a Tyde to the E. ward, the land was something low towards the wa∣ter, but double height within land, it lyeth W N, W. and ESE. This day he past by an Iland they tooke to be the W. most end of the straight and see Sir Dudy Diggs his Iland, being high land, and see the S. shore and a gut when it beareth S, W. seemeth to be 4 miles over, they also ee Nottighams andThe open be∣twixt C. Diggs and Cape Wol∣stenholme. Salisburies Ile and a channell betweene them of 8 leag. and this strait is over about 15 leag. they stood away this day E, by N. 1 To this noone from the last 2  leag. E. by S, latit 63. Sa∣lisburySeptember. bore N, N, W. and the W. Cape on the N. shore bore N. E. variat. 28 d. the wind N E, by N. 2 To this noone 21 leag. E, by S▪ and S, S, W. 5 leagues, this morning he was close aboard the N. Coast, it seemeth high ragged land and full of guts, he was becalmed and befogged, and stood S. wards into the channll having 1 10. oazie ground. There is nothing else o note untill the 7 day when Resolu∣tion bore N, W. from him. The 9 day he was open in Davis his straite, in 59 d. 25 m. and had variat. 26 deg. 10 This day by storme his Pinnace threw over their boate and he lost sight of her. This is all that is to be observed, that he entred Fretum Hud∣son the 22 of Iuly and returned from his Search the 16 of August, having beene no further to the N. then almost 65d. and vpon the S. side of Fretum Hudson neare Cape Charles, the Tide came from S, E. as it doth on the N. side, the rest is, he was set at his entring the mouth of the straite 30 leag. to S. of Cape Chidley. FINIS. COurteous Readers, the Printer, but especially the Correc∣tor, craves your patience for this long Errata following, which is also my request although to my unknowledge and in my absence, they not being acquainted with the Methode of our Sea tearmes, have cōmitted all these mistakes in 6. sheets, (beginning at N▪ and ending with S.) being sent to another Presse for expedition; and for others, I desire thy good con∣struction, promising they shalbe amended at the next Edition.
Marg Pag Li For Reade▪   113 39 sowing saving.   114 20 strong (through evill steeridge)   116 7 one Mr. Hudson.     22 account action.   117 34 manured manned.   118 18 the he.   119 14 for from.   121 18 to I hung a plum∣met.   123 13 being beginning.   124 33 tire tide. Marg 125   began begin.     5 me. no▪     23 so to.     29 ledge edge     39 trent wend.   126 12 free▪ fore.     24 verioe view.     30 S. .     3 stache stache.     36 leave out Westerly.     13 drew drive.     24 0 30.   127 11 10 .   128 9 0 This 5th.   129 40 man Boates.   130 3 men men were.     9 mater Winter. Marg   3 Mautls Sir R▪ Moils     17 have leave. Marg 131 2 mans Ms teeth.     18 they hav They would.     24 stay Sea.     29 83 clocke 8. 3.     36 rulde ride.     37 N. land N. and.     39 with N. N     40 by 44 by W. 4.   132 26 is all is as all.     29 bad bold.     1 turne try.     4 he boat or ore the Boat com∣ming on board     4 15 fath. in 15 fath     3 former hopes former from Hopes.   133 15 E. o.     20 Luke note.     21 thaverse traverse.   135 Raffe rate.   136 is 86 and 66.     21 well say well see.     6 himselfe himselfe know.     17 how muc thus much.     32 Iournals Read in the 37 were taken.   137 7 about 57 58 and a halfe.       Stinenia, America▪       20 weeks 10 weekes.     11 10. 5. 1615.   138 2 he seekt he set.     8 nhld and ld.     25 to to fro to and fro.   139 8 maer 5 fa neere 5 fath     15 Sumoche Humocke,     31 Cannons Cwes,     36 Cannon Cw,   140 4 little ay a little box,     12 shot slad,   141 4 morue mored,     13 false faire,   142 7 so pertise so precise,       the uyle the angle,       not come come,     13 welbes will be,     16 W. of W W. of London.   144 7 the edge eddy,   14 35 doubted doubled,   146 28 perswad. perceived,   147 5 4 fath. 5 fthas.   156 6 150,     21 he caud 8th he came,     22 instrūent nstructions,     24 your wil. you William,     25 ler       26 your desi ur desired,     29 gazing gaging,     33 land end.
MY PREPARATIONS to the Voyage. GEntlemen, our Yorkeshire Proverbe is, Plaine dealing is a Iewell; So it is, that I was neither importuned nor intreated to this vndertaking by any eyther Noble or Gentle, but the Truth is, that I had beene itching after it e∣ver since 1606. when I should have gone Mate to Iohn Knight, of whom doth follow, yet I must confesse that heere my ambition soa∣red a pitch higher then my abilitie, as now time hath made me to know, yet his Discretion and Experience taught him to discerne of what could bee in my youth, but I presuming vpon some parts I had, as the vse of the Globes and other Mathe∣maticke Instruments, (having beene Sea bred from my Boyes∣time, and had beene in the Mediterranian, Spaine, France, Holland, Norway, Denmarke, and the Balticke Sea,) thought my selfe to bee fit for the best imployment, desired to be pluckt before I was ripe; but hee durst not depend vpon me in that place for the Voyage, so as I did not proceed with him; yet I was still kept in Marine imployments along the Coast and Crossing the Sea, whereby I gained Experience, and also at the Returnes home of all Ships from thence, I enqui∣red of the Masters Mates and others that were that way im∣ployed,
whereby I gathered by Report and Discourse and Ma∣nuscripts, how farre they had proceeded, what they had done, and what was to doe: To better which, I often repaired to Mr. IOHN TAPPE, whose acquaintance was much amongst these men, he also acquainting me with Mr. THO. STERNE Globe-maker, (whom I have found to have engrossed all those former Voyages by Relation, Manuscripts; and Maps;) from whom I gathered much, and must needs say, hee is a very well deserving Practitioner: So that I thought my selfe to be now ready for the same attempt, when occasion should present it selfe. Which fell out by former acquaintance I had with that fa∣mous Mathematician Mr. HENRY BRIGGES, who moo∣ved me thereto and I willingly consented, so as things could be brought to passe, the which to strengthen himselfe, hee acquainted that Hon: Knight Sir IOHN BROOKE, whom both to▪ doe their King service, & the Publike good, perswades with divers of their friends to come into the Adventure. Whereupon, wee exhibited a Petition to his Maiesty for the lend of a Ship for the Voyage and countenance to the Action, who Graciously accepted and granted both; but the time of the yeare was so farre spent before wee could make our provision ready, as wee were forced to desist vntill the yeare following: in which processe Mr. BRIGGES deceased, and the one halfe of the Adventure fell away. In the meane time and before the next yeare, one Captaine IAMES of Bristow, had so wrought with the Marchants of the sayd Citie for to set forth one Ship for the same designe, as they were willing to adventure so as they might share with London, in equall honour and profit, whether Ship soever found the same, and this as was signified in a Letter from Captaine IAMES to Mr. BRIGGES, which Letter I did see is he showed the same to Sir IOHN BROOKE, they both con∣senting to write backe againe vnto him that the Request was
condescended vnto, of which and for better assurance, Capt. IAMES ridde from Bristow to Oxford before the death of Mr. BRIGGES desiring, that seeing we were both to goe forth in one yeare that hee might goe in the higher place, but was denyed. In this interim came home that Honourable Knight Sir THOMAS ROE from his Ambassage to the King of Swe∣den, who being made acquainted with the Designe, gave it his best furtherance, when his Maiesty sending for this voy∣ages never failing friend Sir IOHN WOLSTENHOLM the elder Knight, appointing them two to expediate forward the enterprize. Commanding the Master and Wardens of the Trinity-House to be assisting hereunto; and young Sir Iohn Wolstenholme, that now is, was appointed Treasurer. The Ship of his Maiesties, was (of my owne chusing, and the best for condition and quality, especially for this voyage that the world could afford) of Burthen 80. Tonnes, the num∣ber of men 20. and 2. boyes, and by all our Cares was shea∣thed, Cordaged, Builded and repaired; all things being made exactly ready against an appointed time. My greatest care was to have my men of Godly conversa∣tion, and such, as their yeares of time not exceeding 35. had gained good Experience, that I might thereby be the better assisted, especially by such as had been vpon those Frost biting voyages by which they were hardned for indurance, and could not so soone be dismayed at the sight of the Ice. For beard∣lesse younkers, I knew as many as could man the Boate was e∣nough; and for all our dependances was vpon GOD alone, for I had neither private end, ambition, or vaine glory. And all these things I had contractedly done by the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the Trinity-House. For a Lieu∣tenant I had no vse, but it grieved me much that I could not get one man that had bin on the same voyage before, by whose counsaile or discourse I might better have shunned the Ice.
I was Victualed compleatly for 18 Moneths, at whether the Baker, Brewer, Butcher, and other, were Mr. of their Arts or professionsor no I know not, but this I am sure of, I had excellent fat Beefe, strong Beere, good wheaten Bread, good Iseland Ling, Butter and Cheese of the best, admirable Sacke and Aqua-vita, Pease, Oat-meale, Wheat-meale, Oyle, Spice, Suger, Fruit and Rice; with Chyrurgerie, as Sirrups, lulips, condits, trehissis, antidotes, balsoms, gummes, vnguents, implaisters, oyles, potions, suppositors, and purging Pils, and if I had wanted Instruments my Chyrurgion had enough. My Carpenter was fitted from the thickest bolt to the pumpe-nayle or tacket. The Gunner from the Sacor to the Pistoll. The Boatswaine from the Cable to the Sayle-twine. The Steward and Cooke, from the Caldron to the Spoone. And for Bookes, if I wanted any. I was too blame being bountifully furnisht from the Treasurer with money to pro∣vide me, especially for those of study there would be no leisure nor was there, for I found worke enough; and if the matter it selfe had not been in another place when sodaine occasion was present, it had bin too late for me (like the Holland Skipper to runne to his Chest) to looke vpon his Waggoner booke. But those things I feare, you will say they are needlesse (yet give me leave to follow the fashion) and good for nothing, but to make Courtiers and Schollers marvell at my curiositie, and thinke strange that there should be so much adoe about making a Ship take the Sea. Things in this readinesse, I was brought to his Maiestie, where I received his Gracious favour with a Mappe of all my Predecessors Discoveries, his Maiesties Instructions, with a Letter to the Emperour of Iapon. The Copies of all which, Captaine IAMES had.
NORTH-VVEST FOX. MAY the 7th, Anno 1631. The Uoyage of Captaine LVKE FOX, in his Maiesties Pinnace the Charles, Burthen 70. Tonnes, 20. Men, and 2. Boyes, Victuals for 18. Moneths; young Sir Iohn Wolstenholme being Treasurer. Orders and Articles for Civill government, to be duly observed amongst vs in this Voyage. FOrasmuch, as the good successe and prosperity of every Action doth consist, in the due service and glorifying of God, knowing that not onely our being and preservation, but the prosperity of all our Actions and enterprizes doe immediatly de∣pend upon his Almighty goodnesse and mercy; of which, this being none of the least, eyther of nature or quality. For the better governing and mannaging of this present voyage, in his Majesties ship the Chrls, bound for the North∣west Passage, towards the South Sea, May 7. 1631. asArticles. followeth. 1. That all the whole Company, a well Officers as others, shall  duy repaire every day twice, at the Call of the Bell, to heare pub∣like Prayerob read, (such as are t zed by the Church) and that in a godly and devont , as good Christians ought. That no man shall  by the name of God, nor vse y pr∣p his hl ▪ vpon pa of r pu∣nishment▪
That no man shall speake any vile or misbeseeming word, against the honour of his Maiesty (our Dread Soveraigne) his Lawes, or Ordinances, or the Religion established, and authorized by him here in England, but as good Subiects shall duely pray for him. That no man shall speake any doubtfull or despairing words, a∣gainst  the good successe of the Voyage, or make any doubt thereof, eyther in publique or private at his Messe or to his Watch-mate, or shall make any question of the skill and knowledge, eyther of Su∣periour or inferiour Officer, or of the vndertakings, nor shall offer to combine against the authority thereof, vpon the paine of severe punishment, as well to him, that shall first heare and conceale the same, as to the first beginner. That no man doe offer to filch or steale any of the goods of the  Ship or Company, or doe offer to breake into hould, there to take his pleasure of such provisions as are layd in generall for the whole Company of the Ship, nor that any Officer appointed for the Charge and oversight thereof doe otherwayes then shall be appointed him, but shall every man bee carefull, for the necessary preservation of the Victuall and fuell conteyned in the hould, and that also every Officer be so carefull of his store, as hee must not be found (vpon examination) to deserve punishment. That no man doe grumble at his allowance of victuall, or steale  any fro others, nor shall give crosse language, eyther to superiour o equall, in reviling Words or daring speeches, which doe tend to the inflaming of blood, or inraging of choller; remembring this also, that a stroke or a blow, is the breach of his Maiesties peace, and may not want his punishment therefore, as for other reasons. That at the Boatswaines Call, all the whole Company shall ap∣ppeare  above Dicke, or else that his Mate fetch vp presently, all such sloathfull persons, eyther with Rope or cudgell, as in such ca∣ses deserve the same. The Quarter-masters shall looke into the Steeredge, while the Captdine, Master, and Mates, are at Din∣ner, or at supper. That all men doe duely observe the Watch, as well at Anchor, as vnder sayle, and at the discharge thereof, the Boatswaine or his Mate, shall call vp the other; all praising God together, with Psalme and Prayer, and so committing our selves, both soules and bodies, Ship and goods, to Gods mercifull preservation, wee beseech him to steer, direct, and guide vs, from the beginning to the end of our Voyage: which hee make prosperous vnto vs, Amen.
I Set sayle from Deptford, and comming by Greenwich where  then the Court lay, I'discharged my Ordnance twice, being 7. in number, and this night anchored at Erith. This day I came to Graves-end, where having bought some  things needfull, I set sayle againe, and anchored that night be∣twixt he Shooe aud Whittaker. This day passing by Essex and Suffolke, it being in the night  and calme, I anchored in Yarmouth Roades. This day I weighed and set sayle, at night I was thwart the  Shield. This day I was put into Flambrough roade, with much raine  and winde at N, N, W. I came into Whitby roade, where I stayed with contrary  windes untill the 14 day. I sayled along the Coast of Yorkshire, Durham, Northum∣berland, and Scotland, to St. Tabs-head. I was thwart of Buckhamnesse in Scotland, where standing  to the Northwards with sharpe winds, I broke my Maine-yard in the middest. I came into Durt-sound, a harbour in the greatest Iland of  Orkney, but could not heere be provided of a new Maine-yard. Wind contrary. At clocke 3. in the morning I weighed, and went out be∣tweene  Pape Iland and Sanda: at the Northend of the two heads of this Iland, there lyeth a Rocke in the midst which doth so straiten the Flood-tyde, it bounding thereon from out the Westerne Ocean, that I was two houres overhaling ¼▪ of aA great flood-Tyde from W. mile, for thereabouts is the length of that straitnesse, and yet I dare say, we went above 6. knots in halfe a minute. I stood from hence N, N, W. with the N. part of Ways or  Hays Iland in 59 deg 8 min; the ebbe comming forth carried  vs (it being calme) 9. miles to the S, W. end (which is a very steepe or perpendicular Cliffe) against a very high Sea, from the West course W, N, W. The rest as followeth in my booke of Courses, Latitudes, Variations, and Distances. The gale increasing, I was enforced to hand both top-sayles,A high Sea from the West. the Ship fell so deepe, and shipped so much water, forward o▪ in that high Sea comming from the West. From this day untill the 23, I did not make above 17 leag.
way W, N, W. it being faire weather with easie wind upon all points of the Compasse, I had no ground at 200 fathomes. I was this noone in 59 deg. 5 min. the weather faire and  cleere, the Sunne setting and rising in our sight. This morning came a great Whale by us, the last night  and this day was calme, we made small way, the weather hot as it hath been since I came from Orkney, latitude 59 d. 56, no ground at 335 fathomes. It was faire weather, and easie wind, latitude 60 d. 0 min. at night, the Sunne went cleare to bed, the variation taken by amplitude was 8 degrees. This day, the 28 and 29, the wind contrary, I was in tra∣verse, had little sight of the Sunne since the 26. It was easie wind and close weather, and I observed in 58  deg. 39 m. I caused 3 peeces of Ordnance to be strooke into the hold, and two of my greatest Anchors to be taken of the bowes, at night I found a drift tree, but it would not make me a maine yard. It was faire, dry, calme, and close weather, since the 26, and  the great Westerne Sea, was not downe untill this day. This day was a faire wind with wet foggy weather. I had faire winds, but thicke close weather. This fulsome ugly morning presented the foulest childe A storme. that the whole voyage brought forth with such variety and changes of the Elements, Ayre, and Water, as if all had con∣spired to make our destiny fatall. I lay a try in the Mizen course, and caused the Carpenter to make loose and strengthen the fishes, and wouldings of the maine-yard, which being done, I caused the Mizen to be strucke, and the helme to be put on weather, to try if the ship would weathercoyle, if I had occasion, to which she obeyed presently, so as I was then put into good assurance of her quicke steerage, against I was to enter into the Ice. This day were many gusts of wind with small raine. This day was lesse wind, and I made good way to the  Westwards. Faire weather, I continued my course to the Westward, and  being in 60 d. 31 m. I directed the course W. by S. Faire weather, but no Amplitude, since the 26 of the last moneth, here was much driftwood.
I proceeded with easie winds, but faire, thicke fog, which ended in raine, the Seas set from S, S, E. the wind changeable. Faire weather, the Sea so smooth, as it had been made ready  to have been bowled upon. Some fog, and easie wind the ship made way to the West∣ward, the Sea exceeding smooth, but no amplitude of long time. Faire weather and easie winds, I force still to the West∣ward;  this last was the coldest night that I felt since I came into this melancholly path, and wee had fewer Seafowle than before, we had no ground at 320 fathome, the wind came to the Northeast. This longest day came in with wet, and blew, so as since  the last noone-tyde, the ship made way 44 leagues to the Westward, I am now in fore-course, and bonnet, with Sprit∣sayle; this evening I came by two pieces of Ice, and now I reckoned my selfe not farre from sight of Cape Farewell.Cape Fare∣well. The wind Veered to the Northward, I set all sayles, and  stood to the Westward, in latitude 58 d. 30 m. this evening the Article for the watch (to be diligent and to looke well foorth for Ice, or other accidents) was againe read over to the Company, and a man constantly, to sit all night in the foretop, the Ayre was hazie to the landward, otherwise wee should have seene Cape Farewell, (if I suppose not amisse. Close weather, the wind contrary, we in traverse, some  drisling mists, but many Grampusses came in a shole, following their Leader, comming close by me, made me remember Mr. William Browne in his Britaines Pastorals, where hee writes, the Tritons wafted Thetis along the British shores; this af∣ternoone, the Polesaltitude being 58 d. 10 m. the variation by Azimuth and Almicanter was 18 deg. From hence, I haled up in N, W. by N. for sight of Desolation. This day was faire close weather, with dispersing fogges. which I doe perceive, to be incident, to those Seas, Poles ele∣vation was 58 d. 50 min. the Sea is here almost continually smooth, the water blacke, but not so thicke as is formerly writ of, and small store of fowle to be seene. This day and last night hath been thicke weather, but so as  we might discerne 3 miles betwixt one Fog-drift & another, I had steered some Watches W, and by N. which for some rea∣son
of a reported Current, I altered to the N, W. by N. againe, although after the variation thwart Cape Farewell was found (and allowed) in my running over betwixt the same, and the West Maine, or the West side of Fretum Hudson, I found my reckoning to agree without any interruption, furtherance or hinderance of Current; therefore what instruction shall as yet be laid down in this way without good judgement, in the practitioner and libertie withall, is but as it were to teach a blind man to see by demonstration. This last night came by us one Whale, this day another, the  waters colour is all one, and but few fowle, this Meridian I did reckon to be in 60 d. 50 m. and that I had neere two points of variation, the weather thicke, with wet fogge. Faire weather but foggy, this noone tyde I did reckon to be  of the 60 parallel 590 leagues from the place in Orkney of my departure, the account is but 600 from thence to Resolution. I60 Parallel. could not observe since the 15 day, yet I am neere in 61 d. 30 m. This day we met with overfalls, and Races of Tide or Cur∣rent; at clock 4, thick weather, and reckoning to be not farre from land, I tooke in all sayles and laid to Hull; at 6 wee were no sooner rise from prayers, but we were close by a mountainAn Iland of Ice. of Ice, hard to Leewards of us, and wee had much to doe to cleere the same by flatting the ship to the S. wards; the most of this evening and night I spent in standing to and againe. This day at noone I had a little cleare, and stood in to the  S, W. ward when it fogged againe, I lay to Hull, two times this day we see the Sunne, but to no use it was so hazie. This last night I laid in Maine saile untill midnight, recko∣ning Latitude 60 degrees. by all accounts that I must be in neere 62 d. and thought it fit to hale in W. true course, especially now it was cleare weather, but it thickned againe and blew to both topsailes in, the wind Veering to the W, S, W. which had been betwixt E. and S. with thickefoggy, or hazie weather, ever since the 14 day, thereupon with cleere weather, I stood to the N. W. close haled amongst Islands, and peeces of Ice, for the Sea bea∣tingSea under∣mine the Ice. continually upon them, doth undermine them, so as they fall in pieces, forced by their own waight, to the Lee of every Iland, is of those little peeces, but are easily to be shunned. This day 11 clocke I had sight of land, almost buried in snow, being two Islands, making a Bay betwixt them, and the North
maine, whereon stood two high hills, bearing Northwest covered with snow, the Bay was full of mash'd Ice, which it seemed the S, E. wind had inforced herein, by dead reckoning I was at that instant in 62 d. 17 m. where presently haveing a good observatiō, at that instant I was in 62 d. 25. m. the diffe∣rence being but 8 m. & that to the W. ward, it doth not shew that there is any current continually, to set out of Fretum Da∣vis to the S. as is generally reported, for from the lat. 58 d. 30 m. crossing Fretum Davis 220 leag. or therabouts to the W side in 62 d. 27 m. and having but 8 min. difference betwixt dead reckoning, and the observation, and that to the North∣ward, whether, doth there any current appeare to come from the N. out of Fretum Davis or no. Having thus met with the land I stood to the Southward untill midnight, with the waide at W. hopeing to ply up into the passage. Seeing now that it hath pleased God, to send me thus hap∣pily neere to the land being the N, side of Lumleys inlet, so na∣med after the right honourable the Lord Lumley, an especiall furtherer to Davis in his voyages, as to many other Lordly de∣signes, as that never to be forgotten act of his, in building up the peere, of that distressed poore fisher towne and corpora∣tion of Hartlepole, in the Bishoprick of Durham, at his owne proper cost and charge, to the value of at least 2000 pounds, at my first comming thither I demanded at whose charge the said Peere towne was builded, an old man answered, marrye at my good Lord Lumleys, whose Soule was in Heaven before his bones were cold. Some may inquire, why I should not have incerted herein my traverse course distance, with all my observation for latit. to which I answer, first, it were needlesse, seeing that few doe looke or search after the Voyage, and many before mee have wrote thereof, besides it lying neare upon the same parallell, there is no neede, secondly, if I had knowne any that would have taken so much paines to have protracted mee, I would have prepared them satisfaction, thirdly, I feare me I should be thought to be too tedious, although I am but newly ente∣red, yet I do purpose to bestow some time of those needy ones concerning this matter▪
A Discourse for the same. Setting forth and beginning my accompts from the W. most place of Orkney I made 2 observations for the variation of the compasse, evenin Amplit. the one was 8 d. the other 4 d. but IThicke Ho∣rizon. do give no certain credit therunto, yet I do rather trust to that of 8 d. at which instant, I did account I was 24 deg. or there∣about, Eastward of the great Meridian, and neere the par∣ralell of 60 deg. continuing the course W. ward as wind would serve, untill I came into the Latit. of 58 deg. 12 min. I was then 12 deg. or thereabouts, from the place of my departure, and traversing with contrary windes, betwixt the latit. of 59 deg. 12 min. and 60 deg. 20 min. at 18 d. ½. distance from my setting forth, I continued the course still Westward, with so small difference, betwixt my observation and protraction, or traverse, as I thought I might as well trust to the one, as the other. Continuing this course in the latit. of 60 deg. 19 m. W.Nta. from the first Meridian 6 deg. I found by my observation that I was to S. ward 5 m of my protracted course, and though then I did perceive, that the Compasse was varied Westward, yet how much for want of Amplitude, or celestiall observation, could not be knowne. Now the wind comming freely on, and, taking Mr. Hals ac∣count. That Cape Farewell in Groyneland, which land first I did desire to fall with (though I did not much regard) lyeth 18 d. W. from the great or first Meridian, as also Mr. Brigges is neare the same, and in latit. about 59 deg. I directed the course W. and W. and by S. thinking thereby to fall in fight of the said Cape. And although there is no certainty of agreement a∣mongst some of my predecessours, concerning the variation there, some writing 11 d. others 14 d. confusedly, yet I did hope that course would have brought mee at least to sight thereof, report making it to be high and Mountainous land, (not withstanding Variation or current) especially having so franke a gale of wind, and but 12 d. of a small circle neere the 60 paralell, the distance being but 120 leag. at most, and in that distance holding the same course, I had 2 deg. 14 min. to wracke upon, and within one point at most of my paralell; and neerer with a stie gale wet and hazie, I durst not hale forSee Mr. Hall Davis, an others. engaging my selfe, with an unknowne Cape, which hath both Ilands, and Ice lying there off, where I might have beene
endangered (at the least incumbred.) Now when I had sailed 100 leag. from the said latit. I met with Ice, and as before, in  such weather, I would not deale with land, but stood away 30 leag. more to the Westward. Hauing an observation in 58 d. 10 min. and by my protract  or dead reckoning, I was in latit. 59 d. 27 min. contrary to ex∣pectation,Variation & Current might doe this. the same afternoone the variation taken by Azimuth and Almicanter was 8 d. 50 m. but being set more to S. ward then this allowance, I did call to minde the current which Sir Martin Frobrisher found upon the coast of Greenland, in theSee Frobri∣sher. lat. about 62. setting from N, E. to S, W. as the land doth there lye; where they doe affirme that the flood tyde did run 9 houres, and the ebbe but 3. I know no other cause for this but the large distance betwixt Nova Zembla on the E. and Groenland, in which the Ocean may take opportunity, to use his naturall agitation from E, to W. being thereunto drawne by the restlesse motion and impulsion of the Heavens, and here butting upon Groenland, must of necessity (the land lying some∣what neere his naturall inclination) trend along there, setting his current to the S, W. or else, as in a huge Bay, make a Re∣percussive motion (as in the Bay of Mexico) by entring in at the S. side, and wheeling about by the bottome, must revert back againe along the North side by Cape Florida. Now this 9 houres of the floud-tyde running, may be by this restraint of the Seas naturall course (in meeting with the land) must needs enforce all the Sounds, Bayes, Rivers, and through-lets, with quantities of waters, and in through-lets especially, setting Westward, and wanting Limitation shall continue his naturall course the longer being assisted by that motion, untill the ebbe being strengthened by the height of waters (or of course) from the W. Sea, shall returne againe, according to his proper retraction. And thus much further I am of opinion, if Sir Martin Fro∣brisher▪See Orteli∣us Ʋnivers. Mappe. had pursued his course West ward in his Straite, he be∣ing 60. leag up the same, he had doubtlesse sailed into Fretum Davis, for he entred upon the East side, and after him Davis on the W. have almost met; nor will I be perswaded, but that if there were a Dorgio, as is mentioned by the Zeni, that that  of land on the S. betwixt Frobrishers strait, and Cape Fare∣well, is the
But to come to my selfe and to end this digression (although I hope, what I have here incerted will not be held any way  impertinent) Cape Farewell I holde for certaine, doth at∣tract the Magnet more suddainly (comming from the East ward towards it) then any any knowne Cape in the world; as did appeare in all this Voyadge. I did here reckon of 24 deg. variation, but sailed all by Me∣ridian compasse and have wrote this Iournall there after, there∣fore the allowance is to be accounted, as the places doe differ in va∣riation. This snowie morning I stoode in againe, at clocke 7. I sell  about 2 leagues more to the West off the same Ile I first dis∣covered yesterday, the Bay lay still full of Ice, this W, N. WestLatit. 92 d. 1 a min.▪ wind bloweth hard by puffes, standing from hence South-W. 2 leagues over Lumleys, Inlet, wee had great store of masht Ice, and was faine to beare up for one, and loose for another, but the Sea was smooth; after this for 2 leagues sailing it was cleare, at night 10. wee see land, and made it upon assu∣rance to be Cape Warwick, and this cleere was in the Lee thereof, for standing still, the same course over wee found more Ice in the South channell, and more comming out of Fretum Hudson, then I had before, the wind blew here bleate and unquoth. This day we had boarded it up in smooth water, bearing a  good saile betweene Cape Chidlie and Cape Warwicke and were entred Fretum Hudson, and now I desire a little of your patience; The Iland Resolution so named, by whom, I know not, but sure I am, Davis was the first of us that see it, naming the East end thereof Cape Warwicke, and it seem∣eth for good reason, for that honourable house hath, and unto this day doth still cherrish, those worthy Marine en∣terprises, as doth appeare by Frobrishers 3, Voyages toVide Frobri∣sher. Lord Riv. Iles. Cumberl. Iles. their no small charge, as also those two Honourable houses of Darcie, now Lord Rivers, by whom Davis named certaine I∣lands, upon the North part of America; wherein he found Deere, the other is Cumberlands, to whom he dedicated other Ilands; in his furthest West, in a passage he entred 60 leagues, but he came backe. Notwithstanding those Nobles, others were, at greatCapt. Davis his appella∣tions charge in his setting forth, as may be observed by the
naming of Lands, as Mount Raleigh, Hope Sanderson, Cape Chidly (now, but not rightly) called Buttons Ile, for to use his owne words speaking, by Warwicks Forland, this Cape as it was the Gulfe, wee passed over the 30. of this moneth, so was it the North Promontorie, or first beginning of a very great Inlet, whose South lymit at this present, wee see not, which Inlet or Gulfe in the night wee passed, to our great admiration, for the waters fall, and he saith, that having past the mouth of this Gulfe, he fell with the Southermost Cape thereof, which he named Chid.Chidl. Cape. lies Cape. Having made this Cape, which to doe I stood over, as neere as I could for ice, but was at least 6 leagues off, it appeared high, and 4 distinct Ilands (in number) I iudge there is more; being now assured that God had sent me into the passage, I stoode over to the North with Cape Warwick, the middle Channell was cleare of ice, and therein I had a good observation of 61 degrees, 10 min. cleare weather, and a constant gale, otherwise I durst not have stoode, to the Southwards, remembring Gibbons;Felix quem▪ it blew in both topsailes, but towards night the wind lessened, and I could perceive the ice betwixt me, and the Cape, to drive to Seaward, of which neere the shoare, was great store. The flood comming on, I caused both Topsayles to bee cast over, and wee threed it, betweene Ice and Ice, with a well bent flood inwards, so as that we had got above the Ile (that tyde) if this faire day had not ended in fogge. A motion was made before this, to looke for harbour, but that I denied, for those reasons given, that I did not know, what danger might fall me, if I had put into the shore, where lay much yce (as we could see) and what yce or sunke Rocks might be in the way, I was as ignorant of; besides not knowing whether the wind would serve to bring me in a safe roade, and how the Tyde might set to turne or sayle in, as occasion might fall out, but the worst was and that was most I feared, the wind might Souther, and then there being such store of yce in the passage, would inforce all the harbours full, and so might cut my cable, and put me on shore upon the Rockes, it flowing much water there, as Bassin reports, with these
reasons wee were all perswaded, to ply it up amongst the Ice in Sea roome, rather then to indanger our selves in  harbour, or neere the shoare where for certaine the broken Rockes, the grounded Ice, the small Ilands by restraining the Tides, must make them Reverse with Counter-sets, and Ed∣dies, as may be observed by London bridge, the bases of whose Arches, being set in the Tides course, doth so restraine his mo∣tion,London Bridge. that the following streames, by heightning the waters, causeth such a Current as it were to ingulfe by the fall there∣of, as you see the water men cannot keepe their boates e∣ven on, the Counter tyde, wheeling on her, of the one side, the eddie coursing her upon the other, not joyning their separations, but goeing as it were distracted above Cole-harbour before they come to themselves againe, to passe Westward; and all this hazard is to no purpose, for wee are safer at Sea, besides wee are not sure of any re∣freshing, and if wee were, wee have no neede, being but newly come from home, and if the wind come to South and so Eastwards to North-East, wee being in the Sea, may proceede night or day, but in harbour wee cannot; and therefore to take harbour were vanity unlesse to loyter, spend away and consume time, the thought whereof is ri∣diculous, the Fogge and night came both together, and having the last 24 houres, quitted aboundance of Ice to Seaward, which might serve as a Baracadoe, if the Wind should come from thence, and keepe us safe amongst it, as after (blessed be God) it proved; wee made fast to a peece of Ice, filld fresh water thereupon, and went all to our beds, save the watch, this fogge night was calme. This misty morning, made the Sunne clime 10 degrees in  height, before he could peepe through the same, which afterwards prooved a very faire calme hot day, making both Ice and Pitch runne, but the ship was inclosed, a∣mongst the Ice driving with ebbe and flood, about 2. leagues from the South end of Resolution, I had no ground at 180 fathomes, some of my men said they saw smoake on land, and after it prooved true, for Captaine James was in harbour there all that same time, my Master went with boate and kild 9, willicks, whereof he kindly bestowed upon every
Messe one (they make strong and good pottage. I pressing hard for getting cleere, that I might proceed, was  demanded why I made such haste, answered, that as every Mountaine consisted of severall peeces, so did my Voyage up∣on Fathomes, which must be measured here with speed, though afterward I might take leisure, which added one to another, might in time compasse all the Mountaines of the world, and that it fared with me, as with the Mackarell-men at London, who must hasten to Market before the fish stinke. This evening the Sun set cleare, the Ayre breathed gent∣ly from the East, and we lay quietly all night amongst the Ice. This morning the wind began to gather strength, from the  E, S, E. the flood came on, and the Ice began to separate; I caused one peece to be made fast unto the ship, with 2. Grap∣nels, to the intent to towe it at the ships sterne, mooring the ship so thereunto, that she might make way N, W. for the North shore, for that it hath been alwayes said, that the North side was cleerest from Ice; thus made fast, although the wind forst on the ship, yet her way was so easie, as she could take no harme, if she had touched upon the same, because this trayle or drag stayed her way; but the wind blowing on, the ship broke one Grapnet off by the Arme of the flooke, and bended the other, so as we were loose from thence; but mee∣ting great store of driving Ice, I caused to make fast a∣gaine for safety, where we were presently inclosed for many miles. This morning, the ship broke loose from that peece, I was  made fast unto, the ship and tackling being more in the winds power then the Ice, (it being lower) caused her to drive faster. I caused the Spritsaile to be loosed, to binde the ships Stem to the Ice, which gave alwayes way with the flood, which set Westward; So the East wind forcing it backe, made it cloze with the ebbe, returning Eastwards, which put mee in good hope, that further within the straight, I should finde all cleare, or at least the Ice so thinne, as I might passe betweene one and another, and with this perswasion I drew on the Company, that the S, E. winds which had blown for 6 or 7 dayes before we came into this Freet, had kept in
this Ice, and those West winds, which had blowne 3 dayes before, and at our entry, comming (from about 140 leagues) from the bottome heere, in some places 20, in some places 30, and in some 40 leagues more, or lesse broad, had packt all from thence, unto this straitened place, betwixt Cape Chidley, and the body of Resolution, and so choaked this entrance, being not above 14 leagues broad, the wind E, N, E. we drive all this time inwards with the ice. Now this prodigious thing we call Ice, is of two sorts, asQuantity and shapes of Ice. mountainous ice wch is a huge peece compact, of a great quan∣tity, some of more, some of lesse; but in this Freet, you seldome have any bigger then agreat Church, and the most therof lesse, being of severall formes, as some 20, some 30, some 40 yards above the superficies of the water, but farre more under, of these you may tell sometimes 7 or eight in sight, so that they are no hindrance to us. The other is smaller, and that we call masht or fleackt ice: of this you shall there have numbers infinite, some of the quantity of a Rood, some a Pearch,  /  an acre, some 2 acres, but the most is small and about a foot or 2, or more above the wa∣ter, and 8 or 10, or more under the water, and those are they which doe inclose you; So as in much wind from the topmast head, you shall hardly see any water for them, but whilst you lie amongst them, it is so smooth as you shall not feele the ship stirre, onely if it be much wind, make the ship snogge, and at returne of the Tydes, when the ice doth loozen, have all care to the Rudder: at shift of wind the ice will make way one from another, in the meane time have patience, and in trailing of ice on sterne, if the ship doe touch but against itTracing of Ice. with the stemme, so as the stroke sodainely stay her way, then have care to keep the helme in midships, for your traile with its way, will come presently against the backe, of the Rudder, and it lying on either side, is in danger to breake, or set it on wry. There is another way which is to muzzell the ship, with a peece of ice close to his stem and bowes the ice, being so swif∣ted, the ship is to drive it, with head saile, but this I doe not cōmend, for that the ship not having fresh way, shall not have her steering beside the edy water, the forst ice shall make, not comming quicke to the Rudder, it shall not command her, so
as if any wind be, shee shall cast a thwart with head to the wind, and drive sterne wayes to the great danger of her Rud∣der  if ice be in the way. This day hath been wet fog, unto evening 6. then it clee∣red, at 10 we see land to the N. not certaine whether Resoluti∣on, or no, for there was no remarkeable thing thereon, this E∣vening Sun kist Tht is in our sight, the same greeting was 5 d. W. from the N. and at the same instant, the Rainebowe was in appearance, I thinke to Canopy them a bed. At the beginning of flood, here is wheeling streames like edie tides, I take to be caused by the ice themselves, one draw∣ing more water then another, and continueth all the time of their moving, untill they be setled, so as it may be conjectured that it doth runne ½ tyde under other, as in most places else∣where all this time, since the wind came E. ward, it hath not blowne above course, and bonnet Gale. This morning the Sun rose cleare, and so continued all this  cold Virgin day, for I have not seene one cloud to interpose, yet he went peeping through a cloud to bed, and now the frost takes care that there shall no more pitch runne from off the Sun side of the ship, and the land towards Sun-set, doth so altar by the exhalation of vapours, that it shewes now firme land, then a Bay, now high, then low, that we cannot say whe∣ther we make maine-land, Bayes or through-lets, the ice with the uncertain reflex of the Sun, made such unconstant shapes. This morning the Sun shewed himselfe, through Fly-land,Vapour∣land. and the Southwind drave away the vapours, which fully satis∣fied our mistaking of land the last evening, yet we were not mistaken, but that we drive into the passage all this while, this wind with tyde, helpes to separate the ice, (a little) it being advantageous for the N. Main, I caused to make loose, whence we furtherd ½ a mile, the wind comming W. with fog caused us to make fast againe, God thinke upon our imprisonment, with a supercedias, this evening Sun dog, I hope may bring some change to our good. This overcast day proved faire, and a pretty W, N, W. gale, untill towards night, my Carpenter made straight a peece, a∣bove the backe of our Rudder, which was set awry with the ice, I caused the lead to be cast in 320 fathomes, but the under∣ebbe-tide did carry it so far to the E. as wee could not thinke
wee had lesse stray then 30 fat homes, the ground was small blacke sand, with long crooked things the length of a needle, and the small body of two shell fishes, like Lobsters, but no bigger then Maggots. This faire hot day is now almost neere at end, we lye a∣mongst  the Ice, and I doe not know what wind to pray for, to quit us of them, they lie so thicke every way; but I thinke we feare more danger then wee are in, God for his mercies sake set us at libertie; I can perceive wee drive to the N, W. ward, and have 210 fat homes of water under vs, the Sunne set cleere this Evening. This hot day is also at an end, I have had an Ayre of wind, with all sayle on board, and threading betwixt the Ice, got a∣bout 4 miles N, W. wards, and stucke fast againe, by the way, I came by one peece of Ice, something higher then the rest; whereupon a stone was of the Contents of 5 or 6 Tonne weight, with divers other smaller stones, and mudde thereon. It see meth to condescend with reason, that these peeces of ice are ingendred upon the Winters snow, which falling in drifts by the forcing & wheeling of the wind, condensing and com∣pacting a great quantity together, over the steepe brow ofCompact∣ing of Ice. some high mountaine, cleaving thereto untill dissolving time of the yeare, when the earth receives her naturall warmnesse then inforced by their weight to tumble into the Sea, carrying with them all such trees or stones as they have formerly in∣closed; God be thanked, the Ice begun to thinne, and sepa∣rate, this hot weather doth fast dissolve them. This night, clocke 2, came a small Iland of Ice, brought up with the latter flood, and by his draught being deeper in the Tydes way then the flact or masht Ice, had a greater motion continued by the undertyde, then that which had inclosed us, of which we were fast unto one, of the biggest, content to wit, 3 Acres; this Iland did drive right with us, and but that some few masht Ice interposed, thereby diverting the course there∣of, some 2 or 3 ships length it had drove directly upon us, and had crusht us mainely, if not to peeces, it being  or 10 fa∣thomes above water; and if it had boarded us, being under∣mined by the waters continuall working, the outside thereof by that shake might have fallen into the ship, and have sunke her; this was the greatest danger we were in, since I came into
Fretum Hudson, the fault being in the watch, who did not call, that we might have set the ship the one way or the other, about the peece we were fast unto, before we were so inga∣ged, as I could doe neither; about one houre after, the said I∣land tooke his recourse backe againe to the East, with the ebbe faster then the other ice could doe. This morning 8, the Sunne was up, before we saw it, the day was warme, and close, but calme, so as I could not stirre for want of wind, the straight doth cleere, and this N. land, that hath continued with us, since we departed with Re∣solution, it now bearing from E. and by S. to N. & by E. if Baf∣finn writ truely, that Resolution is an Iland separate from this, then is this another (though formerly taken for the N. Maine) and longer as shall be showne at my returne home∣ward, the tyde doth set as the land doth lie, South-East, and Northwest. This night 7, it was an Ayre, farre better then a younger brother, the ice well thinn'd, I caused the ship to be loosed, and by that time the Master with the boat was come from killing of Fowle, I stood to the N. about foure miles, this fayre day being at an end, I made fast, set the watch and went to Cab∣bin. This morning 2, an easie gale breathed from the E. by South which caused mee to send to the boatswaine to call up the Company where a chiefe one amongst us, being too suddenly awaked, speaking something peevishly, I told the rest that the matter was not great, for the children did so when they were awaked out of their sleep; I began now to find the want of a Shallop, which at home I did so earnestly desire, for my Cocke boat would nor Rowe no Sayle to any purpose, so as ICock-boat. durst hardly send her from me, for when it was any billow, she was not to be rowed, and with saile to windward shee would doe nothing, although I had caused a large Lee board to be made to helpe her. This Meridianall observation, the wind came West, and I was in 61 d. 57. m. and stood in close to this inremarkeable shore, & so all the land within this straight, may be called, for it is all shoring, or descending from the highest mountaine to the Sea. Whereon the Snow falling by degrees, doth presse  and burthen it selfe, making the masse more solid; which at the
Spring time, when it loosneth from the earth, its own weight doth force downward into the Sea, being all composed of  fresh water, it may be conceived that the most Ice we meete in this passage in thus ingendred, in the Vallies betwixt the Mountaines is some Snow undesolved. We are now cleere of chattered Ice, yet (in sight) are some Islands, about which wee can compasse as we please; here lyeth many small Ilands close by the Mayne, and there doth appeare to be fayre sounds into the land, upon the Sea this calme time that hath beene, doth swimme a kind of corrupt slime, one may thinke it may come by generation of great fishes, for it feeles soft and unctious, but put it into the fire it will not burne. I doe thinke that all this time of our imprisonment, this North shore hath beene free, as I could espie it at Hiperions going downe, which valed with a blacke Skreene of moyst Fogge, wet through our Coates before we see it againe, this fayre dayes Westwind blew cold and uncouth from out the passage, wee are all upon kinde tearmes, drinking one to ano∣ther, God hold it. This morning the Sunne lickt up the Fogges dew, as soone  as hee began to rise, and made a shining day of it, I cannot say hot, it being counter-checkt by a coole Top-sayle Gale, from West, North-West, which made our Noses runne, the cleare day emboldened me to stand within two leagues of land to the deepe of 32 fathomes, the ground white sand and gray with shels, the water was falling, the houre 11 before noone, the Sunne and Moone in opposition, a good Tyde set along the shoare to the Northwards the Sunne set cleare, it was faire weathen and calme, the ship drove along the shore this night to the Westward. This morning at clocke one, I called to lanche the Boate, to send to shore, to try the Tyde, and against that time that I could send to land, I had drawne those instructions follow∣ing, and giving them to Iohn Coatesworth, whom I ap∣pointed alway to goe in the boate, at whose returne I expect∣ed an account. These are the Instructions. First, You shall take with you into the boate, one halfe
houre glasse one halfe minute glasse, one logge and line, cleane Paper, one Pensill of blacke Leade, and one Compasse, with  some peeces of Iron.Take in the boat with you. Secondly, One quarter Saw, two Axes, three Carbins Guns with Powder and Shot, two or three Lances, two Swords, two Pikeaxes and every man his one day bread. Thirdly, At your departure from the ship, turne the halfe houre, and when it is neere out, set your Logge to goe by the halfe minute, that thereby you may estimate the distance be∣tweene the ship and land, as also what the boate can rowe an houre. Fourthly, When you shall approch neere the shore in the Tydes way, I meane cleare of Bay-point, or Rocke, Anchor the Boat, sound the deepe, and marke the Tyde how it doth set, and by your Logge what it doth passe in the halfe minute, having rode there for halfe a Glasse, weigh your Anchor, and goe to land, and duely observe, what quantity of water it doth flow, or fall perpendiculer, in one Glasse, whether the heigh∣tening, or lessening be equall in every Glasse, while yee stay or noe. Fifthly, Being thus on land with your Compasse, set all Lands or Islands in sight, draw the forme with your Paper and Pensill, and estimate their distance. Sixtly, Remember I give you no libertie to goe within the land, yet if for recreation goe no further then the full Sea marke, and armed, leaving two to keepe the Glasse and Boat, looke for stones of Orient colour, or of weight, Seamors teeth, Vnicornes horne, or Whale Finne, Plants, Herbes, or any thing, Spungy fleet out of the Sea, if you finde Scurvie grasse, Orpin, or Sorrill, bring them all on board to me. Seventhly, If you will goe above the full Sea marke, looke for scoting of wilde Beasts; by that, or their dung, you may imagine what they are, if Deere doe not chase them into the land, for feare of being betrayed, for the people in those parts, are all treacherous, how faire soever they intreat you, remem∣ber also that the losse of you or the boate, is the utter over∣throw of the whole Voyage. Eightly, If you finde of their Tents, and they fled, doe no harme to any of their buildings, but bring with you the most
things of marke, leaving in the same place, a peece of Iron, bigger or lesser, as you estimate the same to be of worth unto us; and so neare as you can chuse, a beach or sandy Bay to land in, for there you shall espie most likelihood of Inhabi∣tants. Ninthly, leave one Carbine, one Lance, and one short Sword, to defend the boat, with whose (tow) keepers, you shall give charge, that if either they shall espie any token from the ship, as striking the maine Topsaile, Mison, and Spritsaile, Gunshot, or Firesmoke, or be assaulted by any the Inhabitants, that then they shall discharge the said Carbine. To the first in∣tent, that you repaire with speed on board; to the second for their rescue, and your own saftie; when you come cleerein the tydes way, try it as before in the 4 article; the rest is referred to your own discretion, & so I pray God for your safe returne. This morning at clocke 6. the wind came faire, the wea∣ther  like to be thicke and raine, I beckoned them to come on board, but they saw me not; at their departing the dawning being cleare the Ayre calme, and it was within an houre of Sun-rising, the Sea smooth, the ship nearer the shoare then at any time before, since we came into the passage, and the whole day towards; I would not loose this opportunity to send to land the boat, after 5 houres they returned, and gave account that it was flood-tide about clocke 5. and that they thinke it flowed halfe an houre, the land lay N, N, W. in this time with the ship, we drive by an Iland of Ice a ground in 50 fathome,Salvage Tents. they found where people had been of old, their Tent walls, were of stones laid one upon another, & square built, found one knife haft, three severall sorts of herbes, but my Chirurgion knew not what they were; one peece of drift wood, they found the dung and footing of Deere (lately made) and if they may be beleeved, they affirme that in ¼ of an houre, it did flow above 4 foot water, and that it had above 5 fathomes upright to flow to the full Sea marke, which they could easily perceive by the beach, they being forced to rowe and saile 4 miles be∣fore they could come to a place to land at, this E, S, E. wind blew on with stiffe gale and durt, at noone it fell thicke raine, and continued untill 4 next day morning, in which time wee made way neare 30 leagues in cleare Sea, and then had like to have beene imbayed, which Ices lyeth thick off Prince Henries
Foreland, the South land bearing round from W, N, W. ½ We∣sterly to 108 degrees Southwards, to cleere which wee were  glad to put tackes a board, and turne it orth to the North∣wards, whereit was cleare of Ice. This morning the Sun was vailed with drisling raine, I stood  over for the N. shoare, the Master would have perswaded me to stand over for the S. saying the Capes on the S. which wee had seene were Savage Ilands, so named by Bylot, this being after wee had an observation, of 62 deg. 40 min. we had someVariat. 29d. circumstance about it, but he went away well satisfied, and it proved as I tolde him, for at night wee had Savage Ilands N but noe land Northward in sight. This evening the Sunne set with a weather gall opposite, and Zephyrus blewe on a pretty gale, at the same instant the lead was wet in 150. fathomes, the line having 20. fath. straie to the E. and I thought the Tyde set W. the most of this day I stood away N, W. but was glad sometime to alter course, to the N. for Ice, for the S. land lay all full, this day hath bin very hot. Before this S. wind came  I did thinke the wind had blowne either right up, or right downe the passage, viz. E. or W. as for the most part it doth,Wind blowes up or downe. the W. is cleare, faire and hot Sun-shine, but the aire is cold, when it Veereth about, as once in 3. dayes, and by the S. it is ei∣ther thick raine, soft sleet, or warme fog, the wind E. or therea∣bout, these done, he changeth to the W. againe, bringing the weather faire as before, I did thinke that this day the TideHudson na∣med all on the S. in his Straite. set forth, this morning we saw Cape Charles 12 leag. off, S, S, East. The Sunne did rise cleare, at clocke 8 came on a Fogge, and  continued unto one, wee had store of ice to the S. off us, then it cleared and we were come to the Westward amongst much ice, and had sight of a high Iland, bearing W. about 6 or 7. leag. off, wee saw also the high land, of the N. maine, 12 leag. off. The Sun set valed, and we had no ground at 150 fath. it fell to raine, and I tooke in both topsailes, and stood to and a∣gaine among the Ice. This morning was cold with some snow, and the W. wind  blew hard, we made the ship fast, to a great peece of yce, which she plowed through the rest, by force of the Gale, although we had made her as snug as we could, at Noone we were in 63Latit. 63 de 40 min. deg. 31 min. now the wind calmed, and I made loose, and
stood to the N. and at Sun setting I had sight of the N. Maine  againe, the Sun ser cleare this evening. This mornings Sun raise cleare, and I stood to the N close  to an Iland nere the Maire which Iland at my returne I named Ile Nicholas, from which with a S, W. wind I stood over to the Southward and stood with the Iland I saw the 7th, day be∣fore, I hoped it would prove Salisbury; this day ended wee made fast againe, for all this North Channell was thick with ice, upon which we silled 2 hoggsheads with fresh water, I loosed againe, and with a small gale came within 4 miles of Salisburies Iland, for it can be no other, it is high land but not clifled, I caused to make fast againe, for that nere the land and the middle Channell, was all full of ice, and no ground at 120 fath. and untill 6. the tide set Westward, and then it returned, what tide it was I could not discerne, although I came so nere the land for that purpose, I made loose againe presently, because the Masters mate was of opinion that it was cleare to the W. or at least that was the cleerest way, for my parte I had no more purpose, to have tryed betweene Salisbu∣ry, and the N. Maine or Mill Ile so named by Byot, for Mill Ile being a great Iland lying in the middle of the N. Channell, must needs straiten all the ice that fleets from the N, W. yet for the good of the Voyage, it was fit to try all conclusions, but thus striving to the W. we were presently inclosed againe where we lay vntill the next morning all too nere the Iland, if I could have got further off. This night had a stiffe gale at West with one showre of raine, the Sunne was obscu∣red 2 howres before night, and wee slept safe in our old Innes. I cald at clocke 3. and by 6. with haleing, saleing, towe∣ing  and pulling, wee were got cleere, and thought to have gone about the East end of the Iland, but the flood faceing of the winde, had choaked all the East end, sotheir being one glade or cleere betweene the shoare and the Channell ice, we plide it up therein for 2 or 3 miles but comming nere the W. end it was all choaked there, so shutting betweene one and another for the N. Mayne, I stood to see what better comfort but at halfe straite ouer I was forcd backe againe, for ice andIce and Fg 2. nemies to a discovery Salisb. Ile. Fogge. Well, wee stand againe for Salisburies Ile of which I was now assured, and so named by my predecessour
Hudson, after the right honourable and not to be forgot Ro∣bert Cicell, Earle of Salisbury, then Lord high Treasurer  of England, an honourable furtherer and Adventurer, in this designe as well as in others, as appeareth by Sir Walter Raleigh in his Guianian discoveries, in my standing over I espied a glade wherein I hoped if I did re∣turne I might recover the N. Maine, wherefore I called to tac∣kle about the ship. The Master not seeing what was on the weather Bowe bid the helme man put on Lee, the ship obeying her helme, pre∣sently answered, so as in her winding, her way being not fully ended she checkt upon a peece or ice, and twined off her cut water which was before the stemme, thus con∣strained, I bore up the helme, and went along to the East end of the Ile, and makeing fast to a peece of Ice, theThe fst hame & l I received. Carpenter made good againe the hurt wee had received, in the meane time our men went to supper, the afternoone was more then seven houres old before this was done, then I called againe to make loose, for I thought that the ice, was now with winde and ebbe well cleared from the East end of the Iland, as it proved, but many discon∣tented and doubtfull speeches past, but to no purpose, for I must runne to discover this losse time, when motion was made to make fast againe, which I denyed for these rea∣sons, that wee could see the Sea to be reasonable free and cleere at the East end from the Iland, and the South Chan∣nell would be to be dealt withall, or if not, the passage was forbidden, untill the ice were dissolved, and to fasten nere the land I would upon no condition listen unto, for the winde comming to blow to land, I must upon necessi∣ty bee put thereon, the Shippe alwayes pulling the ice she was fast unto, faster then the other could drive, and for anckoring there was none, if the land had not beene steepe to, for the Eddie Tides, which every Rocke, Bay, or poynt made, would have wheeled the Shippe about in the ice, so as it had not beene possible to have kept my rudder from breakeing, and amongst ice there was no loosing of any saile to have beaten it off shoare. It seemeth these reasons had the force of perswasion, for wee willingly past about the Ile to the South, as well
where we found all over laid with ice, so that wee must make fast, having toyled thus all day untill night, I thought it fit to  repose. This morning clocke 4. I called to make loose, wee  had much to doe to get cleere being all fast immured it was easie wind, I could perceive by the bearing of the land that we had drove above 2 miles, S. wards; now wee thred∣needles to the East, hopeing at further distance from the Ile, to get cleare into the South channell; at clocke 10 the West winde brought on thick Fogges, so as we could not see one hole to peepe through; the ice inclosed us and there we lay, it blew hard untill clocke 7. then it both calmed and cleared. I loosed, and plying 2 leagues, to the South∣wards, had the South Maine in sight from the South-East to the S, West. All this day, untill night 7. we kept our colde lodging, and  then looseing with an easie breath from N, E. we minnend be∣twixt ice and ice S, Westward, untill we got cleare, in which time came under the sheering of our head (easie to have been strooke, if our provisions had beene ready) a Sea Vnicorne. HeA Sea Vni¦corne. was of length about 9 foot, black ridged, with a small fin ther∣on, his taile stoode crosse his ridge, and indented between the pickends, as it were on either side with 2 Scallop shels, his side dapled purely, with white and blacke, his belly all milke white, his shape from his gils to his taile, was fully like a Ma∣karell, his head like a to Lobster, wherout the fore-part grewe forth his twined horne above 6 foote long all blacke save the tip. This evening I had sight of 20 more, the Sun set cleare, and this easie gale continued from the E, N, E. all night wee stood S, W. having the straite cleare to the S. This delicate morning the ice seemed to trent, from Salis∣buries Ile, into the middle channell, I caused the sailes to be clewed up, and lie untill Sols beautifull appearance, and at that fit opportunity, wet the lead in 60 fath. The E end of Sa∣lisbury lying N, by E. from me about 4 leag. the W. end which is Salisburies plaine N, W. about 4 leag, of Nottingham, at thatPlaine ground instant peeping out from beyond it, about 7 leag. off, I stood to the S. into ⅓. of the channell shooting shuttles in the old loome,For Ice and heare the lead fell downe 160 fath. before ground made it stay, it brought from thence such stones, as lye upon the
most of the ice, here in this part of the passage, especially brought from the Mayne, cleaving to the Ice by winters frost, (more broad then thicke) at whose dissolving they fall to the bottome, and the yeerely Ice since the generall Deluge bringing in such quantity cannot chuse, but have covered all the upper part of the Seas bottome there, all this ice is but chattered, no great Ilands since we came by the Ile of Gods Mercy, so that here may be a plaine argument remonstrated, that the Tide setting more strongly into Fretum Hudson then the ebbe doth set forth, doth haile in those mountaines bred in the W. side of Fretum Davis, into Fretum Hudson, as they are passing by to the South. As also this may be noted that here, and especially nere within the mouth of this strait, the Compasse doth almost loose his sensitive part not regarding his magneticall Azimuth, without much stirring, the smooth water may be some cause,Latit. 63 d. 20. m. variat 29. the Ship wanting her active motion, but I should strange that the cold should benum it, as it doth us: Nay I should rather thinke, that the sharpenesse of the ayre, interposed betwixt the needle, and his attractive point, may dull the power of his determination, or here may be some mountaines, of the one side or the other, whose Minerals may detaine the nimblenesse of the needles mooving to his respective poynt, but this I leave to Phylosophie. By this time the kind E, N, E. breese, hath brought me nere the Iland of Nottingham, and I am making ready, to send the boate on land, (within 2 miles) to try the tyde, having cast the lead amongst shels and stones 35 fathomes deepe Sir Dudly Diggs his Iland bare from mee W, S, W. the E. part of Not∣tingham, E, S, E. the Pole, elevated 63 d. 12 m. and comming be∣twixtLatit. 63 d. 12 min. Cape Wolstenholme, and the E. end of Nottingham at noon I met the ebbe comming from the N, W. as I could perceive by the overfalls, I towed my boate into 19. fathomes, and sent her on land, driving along the Iland, untill her re∣turne. These Iles, as Resolution, Salisbury and Nottingham, are  high at the East end, and low at the West, this Iland was also named by Master Hudson, in due bequest to that most ho¦nourable Lord Charles Hawvrd Earle of Nottingham, then Lord high Admirall of England, a small remembrance for
the charge, countenance and instruction given to the Search of the enterprise; and though smaller, yet being by his Lord∣ship  accepted, neither time nor fame, ought to suffer oblivion to burie, for whensoever it shall please God, to ripen those seedes, and make them readie for his sickle, whom he hath appoynted to be the happie reaper of this crop, must remem∣ber to acknowledge, that those honourable and worthy per∣sonages, were the first Advancers. The boate went at clocke 5 in the afternoone, they were away 5 glasses, it was flood, and in one houre it flowed 10 inches, they said that it had 2 houres to slow, and had about 2 foot to high, they brought a little fire-wood and 3 stint birds, they found the foundation of an old Tent, at their comming on board, the W. end of the land bore N, and by E. the S, E. end S▪ by E. I edged off, untill I brought the N, W, end N, E. the E. end E by S. there I caused the boate to anckor in 60 fathomes, the tide came from S, E. 2 leag. a watch: We see great store of Sea Mors, playing by the Ilands side; from thence I directed the course S, W. with carrying away with stiffe gale from S, E, with both top sailes a trip all the night being twi-light, clear, some few Ice was in the way, but by the helpe of the same (thankes be to God) wee shunned them. This morning clocke 8. I had sight of Mansils Ile, for I fell right with the North end thereof, it is lowe land, but the highest is to the East; at that instant, I had also sight of Sir Dudly Diggs his Iland, and I was not certaine whether I saw the East Mayne or no, for a fogge came on presently; Master Hudson, also named this I∣landIle Diggs. of Sir Dudlie Diggs, a gentleman who hath planted ma∣ny of the best Vines, in this Vineyard succeeding his father and Grandfather in the Mathematicks whose learned know∣ledge together with his purse, added no small proportion to this building, to whom my selfe and many others of my quallity, shall be still beholden, while times age con∣tinues. This afternoone was 2 fogges, 2 cleares, the 3 was wet fog; at clocke 7. I thought I see Cape Pembrooke: upon N. Mayne, at clocke 4. before I had 90. fath.; this afternoone wee see many Sea-Mors, and had store of Ice, W from this I∣land, of Sir Robert Mansils (I thinke so named by Sir Thomas Button) as also Cape Pembrooke, Southampton and Carie Swans
nest, the last most eminent of the 3. I stood as ice would give leave S, W. and to the Westward, at clocke 8. wee clewd up  all sailes and drive 2 leag. in 18 houres: The next morning 4. wee had 120 fath. owsie grownd, at 7. before, the deepe was but 96. here we see Sea-Mors, had one sight of the Sunne in the afternoone, and all this day we heard the Sea beate upon the ice, to windward of us. Wee stood 2 glasses to the North with wind at East to get  cleare off the ice, wee drive in all this last night; and had those depths, at 55. 55. 54. the lead brought up a little white Corrall. I set saile this day at clocke 4. and thought then that I seeLa. 62 d. 20 min. land at N. it was hazie, and at clock 12 I thought I had got as much as I lost the day before; I pusled all this day amongst the ice, and at night was glad, to make fast to a peece, whereon was a white Beare; the ice here is not so dirty as it hath been and I iudge my selfe now not farre from Carie Swans nest. Was foggie and calme, the wind all over, the afternoone  began to cleare, the Beare came againe, and wee pursued him from ice to ice, he swimming and diving, at length the Master kild him with a lance, and wee made about 12 gallons of oyleBeare kild of him, although he was but young, some of it wee eate boyld without any taste at all, but like beefe, but being roasted it ta∣sted oylie and rammish. This night was cleare above head, but fog bankes, about the Horizon, at clocke 12 there was Pettiedancers or hen∣banes (as some write them) North in the firmament, be∣tokening a storme to follow within 24 houres; there wasThe first sight of Starres. many Starres also in appearance, as those of note, Charles-Wayne, Auriga, Botes, and Antonius I could have no observation for ice and fogge, dimmed the horizon, I thought I see land againe, at clocke 8. and had deepe 70 fathomes. The Master cald to make loose this morning, and all those  3 or 4 dayes, wee have beene fast, I cold not observe any thing of the tydes set, yet I doe account wee are not far from Carie Swans Nest. Wee steered as ice would suffer betweene W, N, W. and W, S, W. and did iudge wee made way, about 4. leagues and one mile, easie winde and reasonable
cleare at clocke 9. wee make fast to the ice, a reasonable  distance from a low Iland, as I seemed, for it thought I could see both ends. Vpon sight hereof I caused the Boate, to be anchored, be∣tweene2 miles 1 houre. the ship and Iland in 30 fathomes, the tyde went E. 2 knots, the land lay E, and West, but I could not fully say it was an Iland, for it lay like a Ridge, or to Simily it, like to the Retyres, in the mouth of the River of Saine in Nor∣mandie. I do hold that all those peeces of ice here are ingendered a∣bout those low Capes and Bayes, as Mansils also is, where easie tides goe, they are soone frose over, the Snow falling there on thickneth them, so that by degrees they increases; the Pettie∣dancere, brought nor sent us any storme, this night ended in raine, and it was easie wind from the E, N, E. Wee made from the Ice this morning, to stand to the land  we see last night, it was ebbe tyde, and set to the E. and I plide alongst it, to find a fit place for the boate to land in; it was iust at low water, for they were glad to stay the setting of their glasse, untill the tyde began to flowe. And after that time clock 10. they staied, untill it began to fall, viz. 4 houres and so I ac∣counted on shipboard, riding upon 6 fath. nere shoare, the wa∣ter so transparent as you might easily see the bottome, the ice comming upon us, we weyed Anchor, the wind came gently from the N. we stood it upon the tyde to and againe, along the land; loofing and wareing from ice, which came driving with the flood. At their comming on board, their accompt was this; that the tyde did flowe, but 4. howres, and that it heightnedFlood but 4 houres. Tide out saild. but 6. foote; and this was 2 dayes after the Coniunction of the Sunne and Moone, so that the flood began at ½. past 10. and ended at ½. past 2. by this a South and by W. Moon makes a full Sea; and the tydes motion ends with the flowing; assu∣redlySouth by W. Moone full Sea. this was Carie Swans nest, for both from East and West ends it stretcheth to the North, our men chast Swans on shoare, but got none, they say there is earth, strange Mosse, Quag-myres, and water plashes; at clocke 4. I tocke leave and stood along from 6. fathomes into 30 loosing sight thereof; and from thence I stood to the Westward with North-West wind close haled; leaving both th
Cape and the Ice behinde mee, for the Sea Mors to sleepe upon, there being good store thereabout. From the Cape or Swannes Nest, this noone-tyde I was  16 leagues and one mile, no ground at 70 fathomes, for I was loth to stay the ship at any time; me thought sayling had been uncouth; but at 4 this morning I had 90 fathomes owzy ground, thicke weather, the wind easie, and shifting betwixt N, and N, W. my way was to Southward of West. This Meridian I was in 61 deg. 37 min. at 8 the last day, I  tooke the ship about, and made way, untill this day 12; 11 leagues 2 miles, N, W. ½ W. it hath beene a faire cleare day, ea∣sie winds, the ayre warme, and no Ice, since I came into this Sea (I did but thinke I saw land at N, E. by E.) This smooth Sea hath a small set from the West, with lip∣pering rising and falling, as other Shallow Seas use to have; the deepe last night was 115 fathomes, I made way to this115 Fa∣thomes. day, 12, N, W. by W. ½ W. 13 leagues. This close morning hid the Sunne untill noone, we being  in 120 fathomes, the afternoone was cleare, and gently brea∣thed from W, N, W. I have not tryed for fish in this Sea, as I did in Fretum Hudson where I got none; I thanke God here we have not the like leisure, here are some Seales, but fewLatitude 62 d. 20. m▪ Variation 26 d. 3. m. Fowles; the latitude of noone was 62 deg. 20 min. here ap∣peares to be more Riplins of Tyde, the variation by Azimuth, and Almicanter, was 26 deg. 31. min. at most, the Sunne went cleare to bed, and at midnight we had 60 fathomes deepe. This morning, Amplitude was 5 deg. the Refraction is  great here, and the Horizons thicke, which begets uncertain∣ties, besides the Needle yet is very slow, in comming to his re∣spective point; I now hope for warmer weather, and clearer Sea than heretofore, at noone I had 55 fathomes, in latitude to 62 deg. 36 min. since last day I made way N, by E. 18 leagues faire weather, the Sunne went downe cleare. (Ioy to our Antipodes) the Henban flashing all night, was a  hot day in as England, in the morning I had 58 fathomes, andLatitude 63 d. 2 m. white Corall, the latitude 63 deg. 20 min. the way since last day was N. 4 deg. East 18 leagues; since clocke 4, wee lay Larbord Tack N. W. it was a few drops of raine this Evening yet the Sunne set cleare, and wee had deepe 65 fathomes at midnight, and then was in the Ayre many Pettie-dancers.
The last night was so hot as it dryed up 15 fathomes wa∣ter, for this morning we had but 50, the wind was betweene W, and N, N, W. here was great store of Rockeweed, and Tangle. In the Ripline of a Tide, I caused the boat to be lan∣ched in 31 fathomes, the Tyde came from N. by W. ½ a mile in an houre. All this day the fog banks hath deceived mee, but now I am sure I see land, both the maine and Ilands, of which there are many, lying about 2 leagues into the Sea, all ragged and broken rocks within this land bore from N. E. by E. to W. by S. here are great store of fish leaping, and fairer weather can∣not be; I have sent the boat to land, and to my comfort three things I could espie by the shore; that it was flood Tyde, and that it came from the Southward, and that it doth flow and fall very much water, before we came neere the Iland, wee came over a banke of 8 fathomes, and neerer the Iland we fell into 15. there seeming upon the land to be Poles erected, and buildings of stone, and other hillocks like Haycocks. The boat went on land at clocke 6. and stayed 3 glasses or one houre, and ½, in which time it flowed neere sixe foot, it was flood before they went, for while they were rowing to shore, I did observe it had flowed at least 3 foot, by certain rocks that were dry at our first approach, they say that it had about 9 foot to flow; at clocke 8. the tide returned, and set to S. W. ward, which sheweth that it runs halfe tide, or else the Main beyond it, is an Iland, about which the tyde may have an uncontrary course, as in some of the Sounds, of the Iland of Selly, at Englands W. end; this Iland doth lie in 64 d. 10. m. of latitude, and I took this place to be the N. E. side of Sir Thomas Buttons, ut ultra; I could see to the N. E. ward of this, at least 10It flowed here above 23 foot. leagues, but no land at E. or S. E. it being as cleare an evening as could be imagined, the land to be seene was from the N, N. E. to the West Southward. The newes from land was, that this Iland was a Sepulchre, for that the Salvages had laid their dead, (I cannot say inter∣red) for it is all stone, as they cannot dig therein, but lay the Corpes upon the stones, and wall them about with the same, Coining them also by laying the sides of old sleddes above, which have been artificially made; the boards are some 9 orGraves and Burials. 10 foot long, 4 inches thicke, in what manner the tree, they
have bin made out on, was cloven or sawen, it was so smooth, as we could not discerne, the burials had been so old, and as in  other places of those countries they bury all their Vtensels, as bowes, arrowes, strings, darts, lances, and other implements carved in bone, the longest Corpes was not above 4 foot long with their heads laid to the West, it may be that they travell, as the Tartars and the Samoides. For if they had remained here, there would have been some newer burials; there was one place walled 4 square, and seated within with earth, each side was 4 or five yards in length, in the middle was 3 stones, laid one above another mans height, we tooke this to be some place of Ceremony, at the buriall of the dead; neare the sameA Ceremo∣nious place. place, was one station laid, stone upon stone, as though they would have something remarkeable; there was fowle, but so skadle, as they would not abide them to come neere them, and Ravens bigger then ours, we rob'd their graves, to build our fires, and brought a whole boates loading of fire-wood on board, their Corpes were wrapped in Deare skinnes, theirA Copper Dart head. Darts were many of them headed with Iron, (and nailes) the heads beaten broad wayes, in one of their Darts, was a head of Copper, artificially made, wch I tooke to be the work of some Christian, and that they have come by it, by the way of Cana∣da, from those that Trade, with the English and French. Our men found stinking oyle in a fish gut, and some small Whale Finnes; this Iland I named Sir Thomas Rowes Wel∣come; I stood off into 33 fathomes that night, untill clocke 2, the wind West, for I was directed by the letter of my instru∣ction, to set the course from Carie Swannes Nest, N, W, by N. So as I might fall with the Westside, in 63 d. and from thence Southward, to search the passage diligently, all the Bay about, untill I came to Hudsons Bay. I was in latitude 63 d. 37 m. plying up with S, W. winds, very faire and cleare weather, I saw as it were a headland to the South, and petty Islands, and broken ground of the Maine, here was great store of fish leaping, and many Seales I saw one Whale, this day the land lyeth S. W. and by S. along. I stood W. about the headland, the last day shewed me, in 7  and 8 fathomes, untill I raised another white Iland, bearing S. W. and betwixt that Iland the Maine, which I had now brought N. W. on me, there was as it had been a Caw see or
ridge of stone, but bearing with the E. thereof, I fell into 35 and 40 fathomes, the tide runne W. by S. one mile  / 7 in one  houre. After this it fell to be easie wind, I sent the boate to the land, and plyed with the ship, thereunto, for that wind which was, blew from thence, and comming neere it after Sunne-set, we could see 2 or three huge Whales, playing close by the land side, in shoale water; for we, without them in the ship, had but 12 fathomes, I stood to the S, W. end of the Island, and there stayed for my boat, which came at clocke 11 in the night, she had been 14 Glasses from the ship, which was thus imployed. Item, in Rowing to the land 4. one in chasing of Duckes, in the next, the water fell 9 Inches, and for 3 more in the one, it fell 3 Inches, in the other it flowed 3 Inches, and in the 2 last it flowed 2 foot ½, so as it flowed about 10 foot, but I doe trust to this. In their comming on board, they Anchored in 8 fathomes at the Iland point, and that was 2 Glasses after, those formerly accounted, the Tide came from N E. and by E. at 3 miles ½ one houre, this point of the Iland made the Tyde goe sharpe; by this it may be gathered that it was full Sea at ½ past 12. it cannot be otherwise computated, but that it floweth here S: W. it being 3 dayes before the full Moone. But I am notS. W. Moone full Sea. fully acertained of this Tyde as yet; for those Ilands have their severall indrafts and sets betwixt one another; for at clock 1. it set W by S. and now it hath neere the same set, con∣tinuing from 1 unto 10 of clocke, more then 9 houres, it see∣meth strange unto me, being a Tyde, and no Current, to be bet∣ter satisfied I cannot, for the best will runne at their pleasure, when they are on land, to seeke for such things as the shoare may afford them, the worst, & worst able to give account, must keep the boat; therefore this account cannot hold with truth, nor doth it, I named this Iland Brooke Cobham, thinking then of the many furtherances this Voyage received from that Ho∣nourable Knight, Sir Iohn Brooke, whom, together with Ma∣ster Henry Brigges, that famous Mathematicall Professor, were the first that countenanc'd me in this undertaking. This Noble Knight graced me in the delivering of my Pe∣tition to his Majestie, and afterwards brought me to his Roy∣all Presence, there to shew the hopefull possibility of the at∣tempt.
And after this persisting in his kindnesse, invited mee to his owne Table, where I had my dyet, continually assisting  me with monies towards my expence, as also paying for the charge of the Privie Seale, and for the ships bringing about from Chatham to London, and in some with Master Brigges was at all the charge hereof, while the Voyage was put off untill the next yeere, when that yong Sir John Wolstenholme, was appointed Treasurer. Now for this Iland it is all of a white Marble, of indifferent height, with many water Ponds therein, and great store of Fowle, especially water fowle, they brought on board two goodly Swannes, and a young Tall Fowle alive, it was long headed, long neckt, and a body almost answerable; for it was but pen-feathered, I could not discerne whether it was an Estridge or no, within 3 or 4 dayes the legges by mischance were broken, and it dyed. Our dog being on land, hounded himselfe, at a Stagge or Reine Deere, and brought him to obey, Peter Neshfield, one of the Quarter-Masters, followed the chase, and having neitherDeere, ow. Gun, nor Lance, let him goe, (it may be he tooke compassion when he saw the Deere shed teares) the dog having hurt his feet very sore, upon the hard stones, was not able to pursue him and so they parted with blood-shed, but it came from the Deere and Dogs feet, they did imagine that there was store of Deere, in that Iland, I tooke it to be 6 or 7 miles long, but they thought it to be parted in two, it is all shelves, and ridges be∣twixt the shore and it, making, as it were a Bay betweene the North land which is high, and the South, for all the land to South of this, is all low land, except 3 or 4 places, neere unto the West part of Hudsons West Bay, where Captaine Iames wintered, they say in comming on board, hard by the Iland they did espie 40 Whales, some say lesse, but it seemeth, there40 Whales▪ were many lying there to sleepe, so as they tooke them for Rocks, they say there is a Cove or Harbour, made by small Ilands▪ that a ship may ride in safety, for all weathers, and have two athomes at low water, it is on the Eastside, the Masters mate, told me he wisht the ship therein, because there was a bolt in the Stemme which stucke out since the Cut-water was twined off, and that it was dangerous to hurt a Cable, if wee should Anchor, I said wee might Anchor
100 times, and yet have kept the Cable cleare from the bolt, by letting fall an Anchor of the weather bowe: but to conclude  the time was so farre spent, to neglect the opportunity of Discovering to put into harbour for such a trifle. When I had stood W. S. W. away from this Iland twelve  leagues, I hal'd in againe, W. by N. as I see the Ridges and bro∣ken lands stretch, and keeping the West Maine alwayes in sight, many Ridges did appeare; which to goe to Seaward off I stood S, W. and by W. for here is dangerous sayling in the clearest weather, yet I must not part from sight of the Maine for making my discovery exactly, our Deepes from Brooke, Cobham, have beene, 37. 40. 35. 30. fathomes. Thanks be given to God, it is, and hath been long time faire weather, and now faire windes (from land) which makes the better discovering, we have still of those Henbans, or Pettie-dancers, but no storme. I Anchored a thwart a little Iland, twelve leagues from Brooke Cobham, the Master with the boat went on land, where it was low water, about ½ an houre before 8. at night, within this Iland he sees other Ilands, and Ledges at low water, so as he thought he could have gone on footeSea-mors Foxe and Scuvie grasse. to the Maine, from hence wee see other Ilands bearing W. S. W. at this Iland the Salvages had been, and there was great store of Sea Pigeons thereon, he brought alive a dunne Foxe on board, and had encountred two Seamors, whereof hee launc'd one, but for want of helpe they both got away, they brought on board good store of Scurvie-grasse, wch I caused to be pounded, and the juyce to be prest forth, and put into a Hogshead of strong Beare, with command that every one that would should have a pint to his mornings draught, but none would taste it untill it was past time, and themselves al∣most past meanes. The Master told me he had named this Iland Dunne Foxe Iland, after his owne name, and the Foxes colour, whichDun Foxe Iland. I liked well. The Tyde came from Northeast, and it flowed about twelve foote water, now I began to know that I went from the Tyde, for sayling from this Tyde I lost the passage, but II lost the passage. must still follow instruction and hope. I wayed at the Masters comming aboord, clocke 9. in the
Evening, standing away with those Ilands the day light had shewed me, the Direction was West South West, as they  bore the deepe, 7, 8, 10, 15, 12. fathomes I altered the course more Southerly for deeper water, and going South-West, had 12, 15, 12, 10. and so to 25 fathome; from 9. to 4 a Clocke, I stood still away with flood South West, ebbe West, untill 8 a clocke in 35, 30, 20. all to Starreboard was Ridges, and broken lands, even close to the Maine, this night was something darke, the Sunne declines fast South∣ward, and wee sayling as fast the same way, must needes darken the nights a pace, especially those that are thicke, and clouded as this was. All this morning watch from foure to eight it rained, but  was faire weather all day after, untill towards night, it wasLatit. 62 d. 5 m. halfe an houres fogge, betweene three and foure in the after∣noone; after that came North windes, raine and wet fogge, all night the steering was foure leagues West South West, the deepes from 30, 26, to 6 fathomes. With this wind from land, I bore in amongst the Ilands fearing to loose the Maine at any time, standing in betwixt West and West North West, as the wind veered or haled, my depth was sixeteene fathomes, but amongst those Ilands wee came in sundry Over-falls, of sixe fathomes, and had brought them to beare severally from me, North-East by North, North by West, West South West, South West by West, at night clocke tenne, I came to Anchor in seven fathomes, it fell three foote water after that Anchoring, the weather was wette fogge; the flood put in foureteene foote water, it did not fall any water from clocke eleven,Notae. North wind kept up tyde▪ untill foureteene Glasses were out, the flood was so small, being inclosed with Ilands, as it did not make the ship port, yet blowing but to Course and Bonnet, it kept the Tide in seven houres, I durst not hazzard any further within these Ilands, untill I sent the boate to make tryall, who sounded from seven fathomes to tenne foot; I named those Ilands, Brigges his Mathematickes. This morning the Master and I in the Maine top, might August. see two Ridges dry, which last evening wee came hard by, I doe thinke that in Winter, the windy stormes, puts in some
flowings of water incredible to be beleeved, in respect of other places, for it may be perceived, that the water hath  been upon the land, and Ilands higher by five or sixe fathomeThe water high. then the usuall Spring-Tydes, as also our men did perceive the same at Carie Swannes Nest. Being satisfied for what concerned this place, I weyed and stood to Sea in sixe fathomes the least water, fearing to deale any more within the Ilands, when I was cleare, I went to the old course againe S. W. by S. but the land flying me, I hal'd in West, and had water from 14 to 6 fathome, uneven ground, the land met me againe, stretching more to S. and had many humlocks therein; I stood toward it W. and W. S. W. so neere as I durst for shoale water, at which time I dare pre∣sume it was seven miles from me, and yet I had but 6, 7, or 10 fathome: I runne off along time before I came into 20 fa∣thome, and in this wearing off I came by two dry ridges that had been farre without me; I Anchored at night in 25 fa∣thomes 10 leagues S. S. W. from the land and Ilands, which I roade amongst last night, the Tyde came S. S. W. This faire morning, I waited at clocke 6. and stood along  West Southwest, having 25, 25, 25, fathomes at the distance of 7 leagues from my last nights Anchoring place, I met an∣other Iland & three or foure more within it, all lying almost without sight of the Maine, I stood within them to seven fa∣thomes, and tooke about to make a perfect discovery of the Maine, which done, I Veered away, the wind still about North North West, I went to Seaward off the said Iland, at whose Northeast end, there lay a reefe, which with the ebbe that fell over it, made a great Ripling or Race, so as I could discerne thereby when I might edge up againe; here in this Over∣fall was a Sea Mors, I tooke this to be the Checkes; lati∣tudeLatitude 61. d. 10. m. 61 degrees, 10 minutes, I went over in nine fathomes, and then standing Southwest, came presently into twentie, I hoped now for a sight of Hubberts comfortable Hope, the land lay along Southwest and Northeast, it hath blowen all this day to Course and Bonnet, at night I Anchored at twenty fathomes, two or three leagues from shore, the land is low, but within are many water ponds, and small growne wood. I stood along all those supposed Checkes from my last
nights Roade into 3. fathomes upon the shoare, the land lowe but now and then a Sandie knowle or downe, would ap∣peare  much like the coast of Holland and landers, wee made way S, W. and by W. 10 leag. and divers times see dry shelves, betweene us and the shoare. The Latit. w is 60 d. 22 m. this afternoone was small wind from S, W. and I sent the boat to the land, being about 3 miles off, my selfe with ship anchored in 7 fathomes, I gave a token that if the water should shoale sodainely, they in the boate should shoote off a Musket, which before they came to shoare they did, here were many Musketoes. The Master was in the boate, and had but 2 fathomes when they shot; all the water within us was shoald, so that then we were glad to wade forth, although the tyde was flood, it flowing 14 inches in two glasses, but in further examining I found no good account, onely this doth sustice, that as I range along the coast I do goe from the tide, and that it keepeth course, with the Moone, and that the further I speed from Sir Thomas Roes welcome, it still floweth lesse water, and the tides current is the easier; here on land the Mr. found, the reliques of a birch Cannowe, the footings and hornes of Deere, both small and great, and of fowle, an Arrowe headed with a nayle, the head beaten broad, and put into a shaft of 18 inches long, he thought it flowed about 7 foote, the floode began about clocke 8. I am sure it was slacke tyde at ship then and I will be slacke to write any more hereof, for I cannot season the reckoning taken on shoare. After the boates comming on board, I stood off 3 glasses, to anchor in 13 fathome water (Hubbert makes me hope) for now I draw nere, here the tyde did set S, W. and by W. the ebbe E, and by South. From the last day to this I made way S, S, W. 5 leag. and am Latit. 59 d. 53 min. now in 59 d. 53 m. of Latit. standing along betweene 10 and 20 fath. S, S, W. at night 10. I came to a land lying about 2 leag. from the Mayne, but so dry at low water that you may goe to the firme land, betwixt the one and the other, this ly∣eth from my last nights roade 10 leag. S, and by W. At the dayes appearance I went to this Iland, it is all stones  as the other; the Sea hath bin smooth of long time, the Sunne rose cleare, and at the 4 glasse after lowe water, it did
flowe 21 inches, this was when the half tyde came to take his first set, and came with a shuft, I did account that it would It flowed 12 foote. not flow lesse then 18 foote, but after this shuft it flowed lesse and lesse untill full Sea that tyde, the 3 first glasses did not flow above 2 foote: Vpon this Iland were many corpes, laid in the same manner, as at Sir Thomas Roes Welcome, the Salv. inhabi∣tants had lately bin there, & left the skaddles of their fire, they had also sunk a well, & ston'd it about, for there was fresh wa∣ter therein, there was here some store of the ruined fragments of Cannowes, and other firre wood with which we laded the boat on board, there was also carved toyes in their graves. I did Anchor at clocke 8 (now these nights begin to be long) left I might slip by some Inlet unseene; this day was ve∣ry ot, and a small gale from S, S, W. we had all this time very hot dayes, euer since we came from Carie Swans nest, if that the cold N, W. wind had not delayed them; this Meridian, I was in 59 d. 05 m. I stood off into 20 fath. and went in againe to 15. the broken Iland in sight; since noone untill this mid∣night, I made way S. 3 leag. and then I discerned the land to meete upon my weather bough and a head, so I caused to tack about, and lay N, W. by N. in wind W, by S. 5 glasses a leag. it seemed to be higher land then I had lately seen, from 15 fath. deepe, yesterday I came S. as before upon 18 and 20 fathoms, I stood thus to the Northwards untill day light and then I see my land I was upon yesterday morning, and the land within it, which I see yesternight, stretching into Hubberts Hope, I stood about to the Southwards, and the day light being come  on, I could see the bottome of Vainely Hapt Hubbert, for so I ld it, and the South land meeting E and W. the length of it at least 15 leagues, I anchored the boate in 20 fathomes, the Tyde came N. W. and this is that supposed Tide that set E, and W. which was no more but the same Tyde I brought along with mee from Sir Tho. Roes Welcome, comming all along the coast, S, W, by S. falling into this Vaine Hope, is enforced to alter his course, by opposition of the S, side of this large Bay and there to set E, and W. (as the land doth lye) 1 mile 2 / 7. in one houre. The Iland I was upon yesterday was doubtlesse the Checks named by Sir Thomas Button, for what reason I know not, ex∣cept for that here his hope was crost, he tooke it as a checke.
This land bore from me, to the S, E. by E. and was gentlie decending down to the Sea side, the greenest & best like, I have  seene since I came out of the river of Thames, and as it were inclosed with thick rowes of Trees betweene one meadowe and another, distinct as it were Barne Elmes nere London, and at sight hereof I did thinke of them; and if there be any kee∣ping of tame Deere, or other beasts, or tillage in all that coun∣trey, I should think it to be there; for certainely there must, by those burials be great store of people, for it is not to be thought, that they will bring or carry their dead farre to bu∣riall, and it cannot be thought also, but that we were seene by them although they were not seene by any of us, for we stay∣ed not but in the night, all day wee made as much way, as sailes would drive forward, so as if they would have come to us, wee were gone before they could make ready; and al∣though they might see us, whether they durst come or no, I know not, having as I suppose, never seene ship in their lives before, as Hudson who sought after them in his Bay, (though far distant from hence) they set theirwoods on fire hard by him and yet would not come to him, although he was but in his Shallop. But to proceed I stood along the land and had deep from 20 to 3 fath. this morning was gray overcast, the Sun rose thinly valed, but visible, there was a Rainebow in the firmament, and some drops of raine fell, standing along whiles this land trent∣edA great Ri∣ver. E, and W. we see the entrance of a large river but all full of scaupes, shelves and shoale water, wch comming forth chang∣eth the Sea to be more white, at the S. entrance of this River, was a Cliffe like unto Balsea cliffe nere Harwich, and on the S. again, another great Bay, whose bottome was easie to be seen, I was nere the entrance thereof, and found it was all full of shoales, and ridges, at this was Capt. James on ground, as I found by his speeches afterward; the S. part of this Bay lyeth E, and W. and at the E. end thereof lyeth an Iland S, and N. a∣bout 3 miles long, I stood from the mouth of this River and Bay to go to the N. of the said Iland, and came into 7. 6. 5 fath. easie wind the ebbe came 2 miles an houre along the E side of the Iland, & I stood along in 3 fath. the ground to be seen un∣der water, at night the flood tyde came, & we were got above the S, head of the Iland, & went along in 7 fath. well harrowed d even ground.
At clocke 10. we anchored, and could not perceive by out lead, that tyde did flowe. and fall above 12 foote; the tyde set  S. and by N. and here we see white Whales: this afternoone was one of the hottest that ever I have felt (at noone I wasLatit. 58 d. 46 min. in 58 deg. 46 minutes. This beautifull day was promised at Sun rising, it hath blown  to course and bonnet all day; the wind going downe with Sol and in the night up againe, we have run along the land all day with W, N, W. wind: Sometimes loosing too, sometimes wareing off, as the water did deepe or shoale from 7 fath. in∣to 2 ½. upon the shoare, the land lyes S. we think we saw some peeces of ice in the ofine, we runne this day 16 leagues untill clocke 8. when we anchored, the land faire in sight but lowe, with aboundance of wood growing theron, at this anchoring we can make no certainty of the tydes, but that it still com∣meth N. running easilier, and flowing lesse water. This faire day we blesse God for, and have plide it up for  Port Nelson the wind Veering to S, S, E. Latit. 57 d. 48 m. the shoalding wee plide in was betweene 7 and 2 ½. and we could see many shelves, and high stones, lye upon the N. side of the Rivers mouth, appearing as it were trees on land 3 times big∣ger then they be, and that is through the vapours, which the Sun exhaleth: haveing plide all day, in shoale water, at night we anchored in 6 fathomes. In the mouth of Port Nelson at first comming of the tyde,A Boare. it came with a Shuft or Boare, at clocke 10. for one houre, and floured upon the Ships Bowe, and it flowed 9 foote wa∣ter, the tyde runne not above 5 houres; and 2 knots was the speede it made, yet I could perceive the under tyde to Roome an houre before the ship came up, the land faire to see both on S, and N. side, here were many white Whales, the running ofWhite Whales. the tyde was caused by the out-set of the River upon the Coast-tyde, there was a ledge dry at lowe water hard by me when I anchored. This day we consulted and consented to goe, into PortReasons. Nelson, for these reasons following. 1 Considering what hazzard wee had vndergone, for want of our Pinnace, she being made ready for setting vp, yet for the losse of time, we were content to hazard it, having i so faire weather, as I was loath, but to make good vse thereof.
2 The wind was contrary to go Southwards, and like to be bad weather. 3 The Pinnace could not be set up in the Ship as I desired. 4 I hoped to have some intelligence by the Salvages, and to search the head of the River of which I did know nothing from Sir Tho. Button. 5 I was in great hope to get a Maine yard, amongst so many trees, as also some refreshing, fresh water and fire wood, and to rummidge the Ship, and to see her on ground, and to make her cleane or to repaire what else she wanted, as Ballast, or else what. Thinking now it was good to provide for winter, for what is formerly done is so exact, as no discovery was more paine∣fully followed, nor with greater hazard, and lesse helpe; but God alone, besides the knowledge of this harbour might more embolden my men, in staying the longer forth to follow the Search. Now betweene Port Nelson and Hudsons W. Bay, all yet for a great distance not lookd upon by any Christian wee were to discover, which having done, the perfect knowledge of this River might cause us to repaire hither for refuge, when the winter took us from our other labours, if in the meane time wee should not discover a better, or passage. This Raynie morning with S. wind I stood in lowe sailes  with bonnets, along the S. side, which I take to be the plainer, and evener ground of the two. And bearing in upon 3 fath.  / . I espied an overfall on head, it was stood tyde and I caused to beare up it blw much wind and more then at any time, since I came into this Sea, in the channels edge of this overfall, I fel into 10 fath. being now come, within the lippes hereof the wind shrinking I anchored at about ½. flood for that if it had beene a channell well knowne unto me, yet I could not have handled my sayles, to have turned in, wee thought wee saw tokens on land of Inhabitants; at 3 houres flood in the night with much adoe, I wayed anchor, and making 2 or 3 boards I up got a leag. farther before day, (for I was loath to loose any time) but with fearefull sounding as 5 fathomes at most, and it would shoalden 2 fathome at once, and as I found afterwards, that channell was full of high Rockes, in the best of it,
This night I had many gusts of Winde with showres of Raine. I plide up a mile with flood, and thought to have gone be∣yond  a point about 2 miles higher, where I might have ridde land lockt, but the river being full of stones, I grounded in the tides way, there being deepe now 5 fathomes, then 6 foote, on 7 fathomes, so that espying a Wally in the clay cliffe on the North side, I sought and found a place of 5 fathomes to Anchor the Ship safely in, and intended, in the Vallie to set up my Pinnace. This river is on both sides full of small woods, the North side is a clay cliffe, like of that to the Nase in Essex, but not so high; the ship being moored I went on land, and found the Nallie very conve∣nient to set up a Tent and to build the Pinnace in, and here wee found some store of Hogsheads, and Pipestanes, which had beene yron bound, one Maine top, a top gallant Mast, di∣verse blocks, and the sides of stared chests, with divers reliques of some English Vessell, which I tooke to have perished, or beene left not farre from hence; and indeed I did assure my selfe, it must be that of Sir Thomas Buttons, but as yet I have not found a tree will make a Mayne yard. This morning earely, I cald to rommage, for the percels  of the Pinnace to be had on land, which being put into the boate, on land wee goe, the Carpenter at Sea had provi∣ded himselfe, of things necessarie against this occasion, have∣ing all materials in readinesse, which to further with his mate, I caused Peter Nesfeild quarter Master, the Cooper, the Gun∣ner, Expofer Russell, and my selfe to assist him, and this day wee set up the keele, and made a false keele to it, thinking thereby to make her hold a better wind, brought on all the ground timbers, and 3 strokes on each side, while the Mr. and others went to looke for refreshing. The wind being come about to the N, N. I sent the Master word that it was fit to bring the ship to ground, while it blew from land, (as he determined before our comming in) and for that I would not have any thing to doe, that might stay mee after the Pinnace was set up, that such things as was needfull should be taken in hand and brought to passe with all expedi∣tion.
This morning I was glad to bring the ship to land my selfe upon a fine smooth sand, against the Valley, where wee streng∣thened  on, the Cutwater, and tooke away the bolt which stucke out, and made smooth the Shipside, for any harme else our Anchors had done more to the sheathing then the yce, in this river we had set on side, a peece of our false keele which we helped. And now I sent Samuell Blades, and the Chirurgion, to the E. to search the shoare, and to looke for a Mayne yard, who re∣turning told me, that for a Mayne yard there was not a tree to be had of that squarenesse, but that by a little creeke, about a mile off, they had found on, shoare certaine broken Anchors and cable rope, with other small ropes, also one broken Gun, with many round and crossebarre shot, of lead and yron, one Grapnet and store of firewood, pilde up, with one Tent co∣vered, with old sailes, and a Crosse which had beene set up but was puld or fallen downe, with the inscription raced out This night was very hot with much lightning and some drops of raine, here are comming in with the floode, and goeing out with the ebbe, innumerable company of white Whales, a fish as big as Porke fishes, with us and much alike in shape. I went with the Cherurgion to the creeke, and found the  same, as they had told mee, leaveing the Carpenters, and others at worke, and thinkeing to send for those things at the next leisure after the Shippe was Rummadgt; this Tyde did flowe nine foote, to floate the Shippe off ground. This being the Lords day wee rested and served God, the afternoone our men walked abroad to recreate them∣selves, and looke out for fresh releife, this night did the Ship fleete off, and wee moord her againe, in 3 fathomes, at lowe water. This fayre hot day some wrought at the Shallop, o∣thers  fetcht ballast, other romisht, others fild water, and strooke downe the Gunnes, it ioyed mee thus to see all hands at worke, the Pinnace was almost finished, but wee were hindered by one houre of as much rayne (in the time) as ever I was in, with thunder from the South-East.
In this day the most of our labours were brought to end concerning the ships readinesse. The wind blowing E, S, E. stiffe Gale, so as I could not  come forth of this River to follow my discovery, the Master and I went with the ships boate up the river, where, about the turne of a point 6 miles above the ship, lay 2 Ilands in the middle, the tide did not runne above 5 miles from the ship nor flow above eight miles; the river strucke W, N, W. up so farre, and above the Ilands, as we could see; it was Clay clift on both sides, and of reasonable height, but the fresh came down with great force, or else you might wade it over, it is also thicke as can stand, of Firre and Spruce-trees, but small ones, for there is no ground for the wood to take roote upon, for the thicknesse of Mosse, so as they cannot roote in the earth, but grow up, and fall downe and rot, Ilanded on both sides, & Peter Nesfield, (whō I had set out of the boat wt the Master & other for lightning her, that I might have sayled up the higher, but could not, the water was so shallow and came downe so fiercely) told me hee had seene the footing of a man, but he could not bring me to it again, so I stood over to the S. side, the boat still grounding as I went, (where wee landed) me thought the vallies was good grasse, store of wood and here we gathered black-berries, as we found in other pla∣ces, with straw, berries, goose-berries, and Vetches, with seve∣rall sorts of small shrubs & trees, & upon the shore we found, the broad footing of Deere, and hard by them, the frame of a Tent standing, which had lately been made, with the studdle of the fire, the haire of Deere, and bones of fowle, left heere, I tooke leave of the S. side, and named the farthest and headRamsdens Hall. therof Ramsdens Hall, after an Alderman of that Corporation, but the Master and his man travelled by land to thwart of the ship, we have seene no Salvage since I came, although I cau∣sed fires to burne night and day, but the woods are so thicke, as cannot be seene 12 score yards, so that none could come to us, but by water. This day the Pinnace was brought on boord, God grant that with her helpe my hopes, may be ac∣complished, which heretofore hath been dangerous. From a boord wee see a Stag trotting from Port Nelson, along the sand we mand our boat presently, but before they got to shore, he tooke up over a Valley into the woods, where
they mist him. I caused the Crosse which we found to be new∣ly raised, and this inscription of lead nailed thereon. I suppose this Crosse was first erected by Sir Thomas Button 1613. it was againe raised by Luke Foxe, Capt. of the Charles, in the right and possession, of my dead Soveraigne Charles the first King of Great Brittaine, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, the 15 of August, 1631. This land is called New Wales. The wind being E, S, E. I could not yet come to Sea, where∣fore  I sent the Capenter upon the S, side to fell, the likeliest of 5 trees, the Master had made choyse off, to serve us for a Mayne yard, and not one of them, but was rotten within, the wind doth begin to come about the Mrs. mate and I fetcht one boate lading of firewood this afternoone, the Whales have now left to come in, but my cheifest going on land, was to see where the highest tyde, this spring had left his marke and found it to have slowen 14 foote, but the tydes, at height of this spring, were inforcd in with E, S, East, and E, N, East windes, or else they would not have slowed above 1. 2, foote. This night 10. were many Pettiedancers, I hope faire wea∣ther to come, yet have wee had such as I pray our neighbours, in England have no worse, and then they cannot have better harvest weather to have in their crop, and though this may be thought nothing pertinent, to the History of a Sea Iournall yet having been disswaded from this voyadge, in respect of the ice; I may thus much write, for the incouragement of others that may happen to navigate this way, God giving good suc∣cesse to this enterprise, that a Sea voyage of discovery (to a place unknowne, and farre remote and in the like clime) can∣not be taken in hand with more health, ease, and pleasure; I am sure it hath beene warme ever since we came from the yce. The wind came about, I sent the Pinnace on land, to bal∣last, and to bring one broad stone, to make a fire upon in her, which I had formerly marked for that purpose, at Port Nelson they found a board broken in two, the one halfe quite gone, whereon had beene the Kings Armes, and inscription of the time of Sir Thomas Button his owne name, when and why he tooke Harbour with other expressions.
This peice of board I brought away, for I was undersaile, when the Pinnace came on board, so as I could not goe on  shore againe, otherwise I would have endevoured to have renued, the same as the act of my noble predecessors. This ebbe I came to Seawards, but for feare of shoale-wa∣ter, I Anchored in 4 fathome, having little wind to chase the ship, and a strong ebbe, feare call'd what I had observed at my in comming into my remembrance, so as I durst hazzard no farther whiles flood came; and now I must adde one word or two, to what is before, concerning this dangerous river, which I would be loath to seek in thick weather, of ei∣ther side the S. is best, but is flat a great way off, and Rockie ground, the best of the deepe is ⅔ Channell to S. there is 12 fa∣thomes in the entrance; in one place, wee chafed our Cables sore against the stones, of wch you might see 4 or 5 drie in the river, at once the last quarter ebbe come swiftest, & in Spring∣tydes it flowed 3 foot before the tyde set up; the tyde retur∣ned to the Sea, at a full Sea on shore. The Sun and Moone didIt floweth S. E. Moone both set cleare this night; In this River wee got no reliefe but one Duck, heere a N. W. Moone maketh a full Sea. I wayed againe about halfe flood, and stood to Sea from 6. fathomes to 10. and Anchored in high water in 9 fathomes cleare ground, making ready to ply or sayle the next flood, for now I am to discover to the East, betweene this and Ma∣ster Hudson his West Bay, of which I must onely, making a journall, their being nothing else of note. In the morning I tooke the Cocke-boat into the ship, with  the flood I stood to the S. E. and went into the Pinnace at the ship sterne, to see her fitted to sayle, wee came to 7 and 5 fa∣thomes, the land full of woods, but lowe, and stretched here E. and by N. from the Rivers mouth, here is good smooth andLatit. 57 d. 10 m. even ground, if any occasion were hereafter to use it, the land is faire to be seene, (at 10 fathomes deepe) upon the hatches, the wind easie from S. S. W. and we stood 2 or 3 leagues in 7. fathoms, we were at noon in 57 d. 10 m. all this night I could well discerne the land, as I stood under sayle, standing S. E. the land met us, this hot Meridian, but I was not in observation  after dinner (with easie wind) I tooke the Pinnace to sayle to shore, but it fell to be calme, and wee Romed all the way, and therein found a white Beare, which we kild, cōming toshore it was lat, and many great stones lay at the low water mark
we were no sooner landed, but we spied a blacke cloud at N. by W. when presently we see the ship had handed both top∣sayles, so as I was constrained to leave this uninhabited shore, and stand to the ship, without erecting any thing thereon, which we recovered, but our coats were wet through first, and yet the ship was come to us within 5 fathomes upon the Maine, we stood along with land in sight, where there appea∣red to be a Cape, the land trenting more S. from our bowe (we stood off and on, all night from 7 to 20 fathomes. I packt away along the land, as neere as can be thought to  lie S. E. by E. the morning was faire, yet the Sunne was vaied, this calme afternoone we see 3 Beares in the Sea 5 miles from whi Beares . land, the Mr kild them in the Pinnace; this day we tryed the tyde 4 times, and it set alwayes from the E. wards, we are now so far from his primum mobile, as I thinke it not worthy the looking after, yet account must be taken; this night the Sunne set cleare as could be, and it was easie wind, I have seene all the land hither from Port Nelson, as I did before I came there, but I cannot see any high land, nor find any deepe wa∣ter, I would gladly see that comfort, and then I would say that the M. were in the increase, howsoever I thanke God, it doth make the nights grow the lighter, the ship is Anchored, the watch is set, a marke set on the lead-line, & sleep like a theefe doth slily steale upon me, at 12 this night the tide did slacke. I call'd to lift the anchor from the ground, & bring the ship  to saile, the other dayes N. N. W. wind, doth make the Seas swelling still continue; now the wind S. E. by S. I must stop the ebbes, and ply the floods, the distance were too tedious, and to small purpose to insert here. Prayers being ended, I called to heave up anchor, at clock 8  we anchored again, this day we made good way to the E, S, E. and in one Ripling, had 40 fathomes land, faire in sight upon the hatches; but this great comfort was not a furlong long, for the water shoaled to the old rate againe presently, this night was calme with much raine. I had up my anchor clocke 5, and stood along to the East  sometimes E. S. E, sometimes S. E. as the land lay, or met mee, at noone it came fog, &  anchored for 1 houre, it clearing up again after dinner, I see the land trent to the S. wards, where∣fore I tooke the Pinnace, and went within 2 miles of a point, that lay upon our Bowe, as we were at anchor, nere wch point
all the land was belaid with round Rocks, and all along the shore were ledges of the same, and halfe a mile without us, towards the ship, I stood off to give the ship warning thereof, who had espied the same before I came to them, so I stood into the shore, which lay S. along, the ship came along in sixe fathomes, and I had 4 hard within the ridges. This day a N. N. W. wind hath conveid away abundance of wilde Geese by us, they breed here towards the N. in those wildernesses there are infinite numbers, and when their yong be fledge, they flye S. wards to winter, in a warmer countrey; I hoped by their taking flight, the wind would have continued. This low land thus trenting makes me doubt, it will bring  us still with this shallow water, to joyne with Hudson, and then leave us, and fall away S. and there also must I leave it, I could not perceive that it did slow above five foot water yesterday, and the flood set S. E. the waters side is so flat, and Rocky, that we cannot land with the Pinnace, we can discerne the going in of many small Rivers, and there out-sets by the change of waters, whose colour is more dunne then the Sea it selfe. Was thicke close weather, at night 7 it wet, the night  proved close, the wind changed from N. W. to S. E. the land lay S. E. and we had a great plumpe of wood, on shore like an Iland, I stood twice into 4 fathomes of land, and once into 3, and a halfe, but could not see the trees on hatches, the land stretching, the tydes running and flowing, the expected high land, and all hopefull things are now at an end, this night casting up my Cards, I did account I was from Port Neo, true course E. S. E. 60 leagues, and that I must be in 55 degr. 50 min. latitude. This coldest day I felt since I came from Nottinghams Ile, (was but the Harbinger of Winter) I Anchored in 7 fathoms, and 3 leagues oline I had but 4 fathomes, I stood off into 25 fathomes, and in againe into 11 and Anchored; it brew to top-sailes halfe Mast high, the land low, full of trees, the night was thicke with reasonable wind at East. I road still all night for I could get nothing by plying against  wind, the wind now doth Souther, about clock 7. we espied a saile, standing right with us, it was Captaine James of Bristll,Captaine Iames. hee came close in at our sterne, and wee saluted each other, he
standing in towards the shoare, which was in sight, but stan∣ding  off againe, hee could not fetch vs, for it was ebbe, the streame and wind, setting him to lee-ward, whereupon hee stood into Sea, and out of sight, which greeued mee much, sea∣ring I should not see him againe, nor know what discouerie he had made, but he tackt about inward againe, and the wind Este∣ring at night, hee fetch't me, and sent his Shallop on board, in∣uiting mee to dinner the next day, with my Master, and his mate. There came on board of mee, his Lieutenant, his Coxen, and three more; I gaue order to my Officers to take downe the 4. rowers betweene the Decks, and to entertaine them at seuerall messes, and to enquire of them with what land, they fell first, after their comming from our owne Coasts, what lands they had beene at, or in what harbours, when they entered Fretum, Hudson, how long they had beene amongst the Ice, and at se∣uerall times, what Islands they had seene, or Capes formerly discouered, what was there most Northerliest latitude, they had beene in, and what day they see first this side or bottome, and in what latitude they came ouer this bay in: I enquired al∣so the like of his Lieutenant, whom I entertained in my Cabin, so that before they went away, I heard that they first met with Ice, at Cape Farwell, and that they entered Fretum Hudson, the 20. day of Iune; they had beene distrest in harbour, and had like to haue lost their shippe, the fire smoake my men see on land the 23. day of Iune was theirs; they had seene the Iles Not∣tingham and Salisbury, and was on land on Sir Robert Mans∣fells Isle, hauing beforebeene sore pestured with Ice: The grea∣test latitude North was 64. deg. and that in this bay of Sir Thomas Buttons, they had beene troubled with Ice, talking thereof as though they tooke pleasure to runne against it, nay, they said they had runne into the Ice, as far as the maine mast, and that they came ouer in 59 deg. of this their Northmost la∣titude, of their suffering at Resolution, their grounding in this Bay, the harme of their men, throwne at Capsten, and what else I desired to haue, I had, and that they had him on shoare here, but two dayes before, and kill'd two Partridges, they said also that there was no offering to goe home, if they found no passe∣age, for that the Ice could not bee disolued this yeere, but they must stay vntill the next yeere, to haue light nights to shift
themselues amongst them, and this I did for that I did not know how wee might be separated, beefore I talked with Cap. Iames himselfe, and I gaue order to acquaint them, with what also they demanded of vs, telling them that I had beene in Port Nelson, and that I had seene, and came along this coast, neuer without sight of land, from the latitude of 64 deg. 2. quar. and that in Port Nelson, I had beene on the S. side, and on the land also, before they came; and had named it new Yorkeshiere, but being a barren waste Wildernesse of Birds, and wild beasts of prey (and chiefely for that it is out of the roade of trading, and the passage) where none hereafter will desire to come: I conceine that I can haue no great honour thereby, (although I haue giuen it a name) and therefore doe leaue it to those that are disposed to intitle themselues therein. Last night I made loose and stood along in small sailes vn∣till  this day 10 moosling my ship with the fore-saile; I then stood fot Captaine Iames, who was a great way on sterne; at his comming vp, hee sent his shallop on board of mee; who at much perswasion of my Master (although much against myGoon bord the Maria. will) I tooke them in, they rowing mee on board (to bee better confirmed) I did begin to reiterate the last Eue∣nings discourse, they had aboard of mee, to the end I might vnderstand the difference of seuerall reports (for euery man will report the best of his owne Actions) but the conclu∣sion was, that they came ouer, and fell in land with this bay in 59 deg. I was well entertained and feasted by Captaine Iames, with varietie of such cheere as his Sea prouisions could aford, with some Partridges, wee dined betwixt decks, for the great cabin was not bigg enough to receiue our selues and followers; during which time the ship butt in 2 Courses, and maine bon∣net, threw in so much water, as wee could not haue wanted sause, if wee had had roast Mutton. Whereat I began to ponder whether it were better for his company to bee impounded amongst Ice, where they might be kept from putrifaction, by the piercing ayre, or in open Sea, to be kept sweete by being thus daily pickled; howeuer they were to be pittied; the ship taking her liquor as kindly as our selues, for her nose was no sooner out of the pitcher, but her nebe like the Ducks, was in't againe: The Gentleman could discourse of Arte, as obseruations, calculations, and the like, and shew∣ed
me many Instruments, so that I did perceiue him to bee a practitioner in the Mathematicks, but when I found that hee  was no Sea-man, I did blame those very much, who had coun∣celled him to make choyce of that shippe, for a voyage of such importance, for to indure two winters in, as hee must haue done, if hee had any such intent, before hee could come about by Bonu Sperance home: our discourse had beene to small pur∣pose, if wee had not pried into the errours of our predecessors, (and being demanded) I did not thinke much for his keeping out his flagg; for my ambition was more Aetheriall, and my thoughts not so ayerie, so to set my sight towards the skie, but when I either call'd to God, or made Celestiall obseruation; to this was replide, that hee was going to the Emperour of Iapon, with letters from his Maiestie, and that if it were a ship of his Maiesties of 40 Peeces of Ordnance, hee could not strike his flag (keepe it vp then quoth I) but you are out of the way to Iapon, for this is not it: hee would haue perswaded mee to take harbour to winter in, telling mee that Sir Thomas Button tooke harbour the 14 of this instant; Quoth I, hee is no precedent for mee, I must paralell my pouerty with poore Hud∣sons, who tooke no harbour before the first of Nouember; and that then I durst not take harbour vntill the midst of the same, besides I was not come to do so much as another man, but more then any, as I had already done, and i (I did forbeare him in this, or any other thing, it was because I was on board of him, and had made some former obseruation, of which I acquainted my Master with, that thereby wee might the better brooke, what might bee offered, as boasting of our selues, or the like, for it was enough for vs, that wee had so great odds in the dis∣couery, hee said I was to winter; I told him hee had the coppy of my Commission, as also of all my letters, that I was limmi∣ted) but so as hauing sought all this bay, from 64.2 quar. to 60 leag. E, S, E. from Port Nelson, both my selfe & men hauing vi∣sibly beheld all the land along, and that I must see the N, W. from Nottingham, as both hee and I were instructed, and I would performe; after I had ioyned Hudsons W. bay, with this land now thwart of mee; to which words my Master be∣fore him preferred mee his hand, to bee willing to the same, which I gladly excepted, although within three dayes after, he aponed; wee parted not vntill the next mornings dawning;
and this 17 houres, was the worst spent of any time of my dis∣couery. My men told me his men gaue them some Tobacco, a  thing good for nothing. Whilest wee were on board of Captaine Iames, wee stood  off into the Sea; the Mary in two courses and one bonnet, and the Charles but in maine course and Bonnet, yet went faster then the Mary: I came on board with the Mary early this morning, wee Came from a∣bord Captaine Iames. made fast our pinnes, and set saile; I called to take my leaue, as I came by him (for I could ouer-hale him, as the winding of a Clew) but his men told me, that he was in his Cabbin, I gaue him 10 Musquets, one Falconet, and presently I haled in, to the land, for wee were 8 leagues off by account, and in 36 fathoms deepe, it was morning, 6. when wee parted, at 10. I had the land faire by; I stood S, W. in, for that I knew I could see so farr, to the W. ward, as I was when wee both stood off, I bore as much saile (vntill I had the land bould) as the Ship and masts was able to stand vnder, and all the time I had the Maria in sight, I did obserue that shee went away, S. or S. S. E. I made way 10. leagues that day, and ankored at Clocke 8. in 8. fa∣thoms, Thwart of a Riuer, low land, and wooded, it was faire weather, and easie wind all night. This day morning I stood E. South-ward, as the land did September. beare, it being somtimes higher, somtimes lower, one knoale bearing S. W. was higher then all the rest, here seemeth to bee riuers and bayes; our deepe this day hath beene betweene 7. and 11. fathomes; I ankored at night 8. in 7. fathomes, ha∣uing come from shoare two houres in shoale-water, stonie ground, the wind continuing N, W. doth driue a great Sea, be∣foreLati. 55 deg. 14. min. it into this bay; the Meridian latitude, was 55 deg. 14. min. I did account 95. leagues from Port Nelson, and if this strong ground doe not deceiue mee, it flowed 12. foote; the flood ranne but 4. houres; here a good way to the E. seemeth to bee the opening of some great riuer, or the land doth wind S. wards; here is in sight, two ledges of great stones, that lie almost as farre off, as wee ride about 6. miles of the mayne, bearing S. E. this night was faire weather, and cleere Moone∣light. This morning earlie, was the ankor vpon the bow, and I  stood into 3. fathomes, of the shoare, still trenting to the E.
heere was thicke Riuer-water, and small drift wood, such as v∣sually driue out of Riuers, without whose monthes lie alwayes  shelues, barres, or ridges; I did now account I was about 105. leagues E, S, E. on this side Port Nelson. This day being thwart the land, I sawe yesterday when I supposed it: the W. point of some River, or else the winding of the land to S. wards, and could see no land to the E. of the same. I made motion at dinner, for the N. W. (to the Master and his mate) declaring that now all this vndiscovered land, betwixt M. Hudsons & Sr. Thomas Buttons, was now perfectly finished by vs; for that the land now trenting from this Cap, S. ward, must assuredly bee the cheeke of Mr. Hudson his West∣bay, as may appeare by those Maps, brought whome by Bylot, after he was exposed, and now the further search of a passage, this way was hopelesse, and their needed no more search, in all the side of this Bay. From 64. deg. 30 m. circularly to 55. deg. 10 m. and seeing that we could not attempt the N. W. from Notinghams Ile (as I was instructed) for the heavie quan∣titys of Ice, which had choaked all the 3. channels; at our ente∣ring in the midle of Iuly, now I did hope were disolved, or els never, and it was best to make tryall thereof, whilest this good wind lasted, and withall charged them with their promise made, at my parting from Notinghams, which was to haue seene a tryall before their going home, at what danger soever, (though then there was no attempting) if no passage proves else-weere, and to this same purpose, did wish mee to write what I would, and they would set their hands thervnto, which for some concealed reason I did manifest, shewing them also that we had long time to spend, for Mr. Hudson did not har∣bour vntill the first of November, and for S. Thomas Button hee  was constrained: and that I was not to obserue any precedent of that nature, for I was not come to see what my predecessors had done, but to doe more; either finde the Passage, or bring home a good account, which I could not doo, if I did not speed my Commissionith what hast I could, and for harbouring there was none vntill the midest of November. Now how I shall spend all this time, and bee able to giue that account, his Majestie doth expect, I know not, if I do not goe to the N W. For besides it I am not instructed to search, which being put into practice, if it proue not to be had there,
but that the land doth stretch to the E. as Baffine reports in 65. deg. 25 m. then they account will be satisfied, and we may re∣tourne in short time, for this is not aboue sixe dayes worke, if God please this S. winde shall stand, and we may come downe betwixt Sr. Dudlies Diggs Ile, and Cape Wolstenholme, into the bottome of Mr. Hudsons E. Bay, and there winter. Which if we doe, we must stay vntill August, as experience had shewne vs. (Which was neere a whole 11. months) and therefore now would be the best: but to write truth, the Mr. would giue no consent, but to keepe all safe by seeking for harbour, but his mates answere was. Captaine, if there bee any thing more to be done? let vs fall to it, whilest the wind is good, so grace being said, I came foroth and weering out the maine sheate, commaunded him at helme to goe away N. E. by E. when comming more open Hudsons Bay, the winde at S. blowing, but to both top-sailes on taunt, there came so high a Sea from S. E. as if it had come from land 200. leagues distance, it came so naturally oam∣ming, and therefore I doe belieue, that the E. side of those Bayes, lyeth farther E. wards towards the River of Cannada, and the Longitude thereof is more Easterly then is placed in the Marine Maps, standing hence as before we fell into 20. and 30. fathomes, making way 7. or 8. leagues the watch; this day was faire weather, in the night was much lightning. I named the Cape I last parted from, Wolstenholmes vlti∣mum vale, for that I do beleeue Sr. Iohn Wolstehholme will not lay out any more monies in search of this Bay. And yet thus much, if he had beene wanting heerein; I am of opinion, that the most of those discoveries, had never beene attempted: for my owne part I can say, for so I find, that he hath been, for 8. Voyages the principall adventurer in stocke (and Treasrror) supplying the slacke adventure, when the stocke came slowly in, and I dare affirme, concerning this Voyage of mine; that he was at least 400. l. out at my home comming, although I did retourne in 6. compleate monethes: saving 12. monthes vituall and pay, and besides, I am confident, that hee cannot bee lesse out then 1100 l. about this discovery. Yet I am perswaded that vpon good grounds (of which I doe knowe him to bee very able to judge) that no subject in this kingdome parrallelling his degree, would sooner advance
to the furtherance of this, or any other designe of such worth, which hee thinkes may redownd to his Majesties honour, and  his countries good. This morninges W. winde brought in a Sea so high, andHigh Sea. grimme, as though it had in fury overthrowne all lands, and shoales, enterposing the passage betwixt vs and Iapon; it swel∣led so Mountanous high from the N. W. as who of sea-men had seene the same, would haue said, that there could bee noeMuch winde land from whence the same came not of 6. or 700. leagues, and my selfe also if experience had not shewne me the contra∣ry. I was in latitude, 57. deg. 28. m. and from my setting from Vltimum Vale 48 leagues the winde came from N. N. W. and stript mee into a lease of cources, or 3. lowest sailes, almost as much wind as at any time since I came from home, and more behalfe then I found, since I entered Fretum Hudsons, or 300. leagues beyond, towards night I layed to the West in maine course, for feare I might hazard my selfe in the night, amongst hose Ilands which M. Hudson (for good reason) calls by the name of Lancasters Iles; all this night I had deepe 47. 44. 40. 54. 50 fathomes. This day morning I tackt to N. wards, at noone was in 52.Latit. 57. de. 55. min. fathomes: lati. 57. de. 55. m. both top-sayles cast over the low∣sayles, or courses now goeth on Bonnets, I made way in Try 6. lea. S. W. & 12. 2. m. N. E. this night came the wind S. E. a pretty gale, it was over-cast with darknes, wee came by a small Iland at clocke one, the highest I haue seene since I came from Brooke Cobham the deepe 70. fathome: I named the Ile Sleepe. I made way from last noone, to this 30. leagues N. and this morning was some slight. I was constrained to breake vp the Pinnas (now growne Pinace gone. leake) although I did soare doubt the want of her, what ever might befall me: but she being a dragge at sterne, and it was too could and wet, to keepe men in her, to haue kept her at sayle, and as much hinderance to shake the shippe in the winde, vn∣till shee were made dry; besides my men were pittilully wet. I cutte out the toughts and nayles, and saved as much as I could, and sent the rest to hazard, though against my will, for I did thinke if shee had stoode tyght, she might haue afforded mee some helpe in the N. W. whither now I am going, and if it proue a Bay, or trent, E. wards, then God willing I will
hazard to winter in Port Nelson, to the intent I may the next yeare search vt vltra, where the passage I hope doth lye. For if  it bee not in that vndiscovered, betwixt Sr. Thomas Buttons an∣koring last vpon the W. side, and Cary Swanns-Nest, nor at this hoped N. W. then it is not to be looked for, to the W. of Groynland; and though as yet I haue not tryed the N. W. yet by what I heard from Bilct and Baffin in their life time (which wasBaffines Report that if there had bin hopes, they would haue persisted. But quoth Baffin, there I will neuer goe to seeke it) my selfe, haue farre greater confidence, that it should lye neerer Sr. Thomas Rowes Welcome, being moved by the high flowing of the Tyde, and the Whales, for all the tydes that floweth, that Bay, commeth (neere) from thence. The Master is not in health, the Boateswaine hath not been Mr. sicke vpon the vper decke these 2. or 3. dayes, all els are in health, thankes be vnto God: this morning the hoary frost hung in our Roapes. This coole after-noone, the winde veered N. N. E. it blew at most but to course and bonnet: our ship begins to make water, when shee comes to bee wrunge with lowe sayles. Wee were much troubled with stockadge of Coales, before we came into the passage, and heere againe which Coales wee brought for fiering, if need should stand, the windes are variable heere: this night was calme, this easie gale S. E. brought vs since last day 13. leagues N. W. 2. parts N. Wee made way from last day 12. to this 12. 34. leagues by  the logge-board, and at noone I was in 61. 15 m. the deepeLa. 61. d. 15. m. was 90. fathomes; all this day with E. S. E. winde I stoode N. E. by N. close hailed, 13. leagues: this night I see the land, by my account about Carie Swanns-Nest, from whence I de∣parted the 21. of Iuly, the morning was sleete, the day after was faire, and frost. Now the Master and three men more are downe, God better it; I thinke if I had not come foorth vpon the Decke as I did, we had runne a shoare vpon this low land, I caused presently to tacke about, and we stoode off a gaine in∣to 70. fathomes, wee had but 14. presently after wee were tackt. Wee were in 62. deg. 21. m. the land true North 6, myles  off, I found it to be Cape Pembrooke 2 or 3. leagues distance N. E. from Carie Swans-Nest with this S. E. winde I was faine to
plye it up for Sea-horse point, hoping as before for change of Winds, untill then wee must bite upon the Bowline, this  land is stonie, and a good bold shoare. I stood off into 90. and in againe into 13. fathomes, and sometimes lesse, as I had sight, there goeth but small Tydes, for here are neither Rip∣lings nor over-falls, this mornings Amplitude was 21. deg. the Land doth make Bayes, and Capes, lying one from another a∣bout N. E. it is still faire weather, and wee have carried both Top-sayles out since the 4. both day and night. By this we have plyde up another Cape, the deepe of whose  Bay, betwixt the same: and Cape Pembroke, maketh the E. side thereof lye neare S. and by E. I was in 7. fathom. in the Bay, after this Cleare Sunne-rising, fell a short fogge, the blowing away thereof, blew in both our Top-sayles; when I doubled this Cape, the Land stretcht to the N. in dutifull remembrance I named it Cape Linsey; at some boords wee gate but little, as I could perceive by the Land, and yet I cannot discerne any Tyde to come against us; the Land lyeth now N. E. last night were many Petty-dancers, we had in both Top-sayles, and stood off, and on, betweene 20. and 80. fathomes, the Sea came high, and we purchast nothing. This faire mornings cleare ayre blew hard, I cannot con∣jecture  of the Tydes, for if as Sir Thomas Button doth write, that the Floud doth come from N. W. at Isle Nottingham, I am sure there is another comes from S. E. at the same Isle, Those two meeting should both set into the Bay of Hudson, and Button, and especially upon this W. side, passing from Sea∣horse Poynt, by those Capes to Cary Swannes-Nest, should strongly be forced here, being backt by those Winds, but I find no such thing, for notwithstanding the Sea comming Compter from Hudsons Straights, and about Manssils Ile, (from the E. Mayne) yet I gain'd, yea and in low sayles, when much Winde compells in my Top-sayles, which doth shew, that of the two, the Tyde doth set with me, these cold mists, thicks, and drops, doth make many men droope, and those who formerly com∣plained, are not willing to come above-decke. This mornings fresh breefe, shakt both my Bonnets off, and Sea to N. E. stript us into over-lowest sayles, for all this in 48. houres by the Land, we had gained about 6. leagues, by which it may be dis∣cerned what Tyde goeth here.
I stood off 19. leagues S. no ground at 80. I made way 20. leagues, in againe, N. N. E. every night here are Pett-dancers and red fire flashes in the Ayre, most fearefull to behold; I  have plyed 8. watches, in but 3. Courses, by reason of much wind  betweene S. E. and by. E. I had sight of a head-land, with a knowell thereon, descending to the Sea, the Deepe 50. I take it to bee the same Sir Thomas Buttons Boate was at, where the small Island lyeth there off, all this day I was in three cour∣ses, the Ship beate sore in this Counter Sea, and no ground at 80. fathomes. This night was all Raine, as the day before in part was sleet, at clocke 2. the Raine became Victor, which before was food to the Wind, that in his Calming came S. and then I directed the Course N. N. W. thinking to have fight of my last head∣land, and from thence to have gone along to Sea-horse Point, in sight of land as I might have done if the S. W. wind had continued, this cleare Sunne shining Meridian, I was in 62. deg. but the Horizon was not cleare, this sight of the warm Sunne did marvellously cheare up our men, yet the weather is now very Cold. From Noone I stood away N. E. by E. with flowne Sheat,Pont Peregrine the Wind veered againe to S. E. oen of the Bay betwixt Point Peregrine, for so I call the last Head-land, having the Knowle thereon, I had from 70. to 100. 120. 80. and to 30. fathomes, this equally arbitrated, day and  with wet hazle. I stood in two Top-sayles, over my Courses N. E. by E. 24. leagues. This day morning, I met with Land, I tooke to be S. W  side of Sea-horse Point, and this 120. fathomes was open upon the Bay, betwixt point Peregrine, and this Land, where for any∣thing yet knowne; there may be a through-let, this land is of an indifferent height, descending by degrees to, the Set, this night was thicke wet fogge, here was yee put into this Bay, as might be suspected by the S. E. Winds, which had blowne so long before untill now, I stood neare to see, if any thing of note were upon the Land, but comming neare Yee, we Tacked to Sea againe. This morning was sleight fogge and raine, but after prayersPrayers are good. the Sunne shone, and thawed our men, and made them more limber, I was in 63. deg. 41. the Horizon was thicke, but I think I was not farre amisse, at ½ past 12. it fell calme, the weather be∣ganne
to thicke; I Anchored in 55. fathomes, the Tyde came from the W. For so lay the Land, and I have boulted it upon a Bowlin, with more or lesse Wind, ever since the 6. day, I rid at Anchor this night, and at past 1. the ebbe Tyde did not leave his course but onely stacke from 7. to that houre, the Wind at N. blew of the Land, and the Ship came not to Wind-road, I had duly marked the Lead-line, and tryed divers times how the Tyde did flow, and at sake water, I found it to have slowed 20. foot, and this was 24. houres before the conjunction, and as I doe remember Mr. Baffia saith, that on the other side of this Poynt, it doth flow a S. and by E. Moone, this night I did sit up on purpose to be satisfied herein. Henceforth I doe write true course, variation and wreke al∣lowed, the Compasse hath neare 26. deg. heare, this night clocke one, I was under Sayle and Runne 4. Leagues E. N. E. when I met with yee (but small as chaffe) and at the dawning of day, I did by this yee assure my selfe, that I was the length of Sea∣horse Point to the E. For that this North wind had blowne the mash't yee from above the North side of the Poynt, and so it proved, this yee was both small (and small of it) and thinne, we Runne through it without stay, or abatement of Sayle. I stood away from hence close hal'd, E. N. E. 25. leagues 2. miles, then being towards night, I had sight of Mills Isle, so named by Bilot, because of the Ice grinding against him like the grinding of a Mill, and also of Salisburie, bearing S. E. and Mill Ile, from N. E. to N. N. E. this day and night were hazie, the lands had much snow on them, our Sailes with wet fogge and frost were stiffe as Vellome, standing this Milners Isle along, in the night came off, either small mash't Ice, or else the shadow of the Moone deceived me, to trie whether I durst not but cast about to the West againe along the Isle; thinking here in this milde Channell to try the Tyde, that all obstacles being remo∣ved, the difference betweene Baffine, and Sir Thomas Button, might now be reconciled, before I put to the N. W. from Not∣tingham (in practice) as I was instructed, all night I stood to and againe, and found a good flood Tyde, set to N. W. the Mr. was up this night, but was not able to continue. This morning I plyde it up to the West end of the Island, and when the Tyde was done, I put into a through-let I na∣med
Hurins Through-let, for that hee upon the fore-yard con∣ducted in the Ship; in the entrance of this Harbour lyeth a Rocke in the middle, which is covered at ½ Tyde; we borrow∣ed  close upon the W. side, in 10 fathomes, and Anchored in 13Hurins Through . the sound, about 3 flight shot over, the Tyde did flow about 4 fathomes, the flood doth set through it to the N. it lyeth NE. in a S. S. E. Moone, maketh full Sea. This Iland lieth along E. ½ S. Nottinghams Ile, lieth from  this S. ½ E. Salisbury, S. S. ½ E. the North Mayne N. ½ W. all in sight at once, and yet it was none of the cleerest dayes, there is 6. goings out and in, to this sound: 5. to the N. and but one to the South. I went on land this morning, to hasten our men to fill water, in a Coue, where there is good landing for Sea Mors, of which wee see here good plentie; and going on land, one amongst the rest, with her young being in our way, strucke her yong di∣uers times, to make it diue downe, which when shee see it would not, shee encountered our boate, and with her teeth strucke at her. Iohn Coatesworth strucke her through the necke with a Lance, that all the water about the boate was bloodie; the young and damme went downe, and once againe mounted, but after wee see them not; I haue heard the Mors killers say,Sa▪ Mors. that their skinnes are so tough, as no Lance will enter, it doth yeeld so; and therefore to kill them, they must bee before them, to pricke them vpon the nose, that shee by casting vp her head, may stretch her skinne tought at her breast, wherein the launce will enter with more facilitie (but this proued otherwise) After wee had watered and come aboard, the flood bending with easie winde N. N. W. wee could not ouer-haile, to get forth the same way wee came in, but turned it to the N. west∣ward with tide, and came out at the W. most sound, where in the N. Channell I found it to come more then 3. houres Tide, after full Sea on shoare, and that very sharpely, the next nightsA sharpe flood. flood I plied vp to the N. mayne. This morning flood I plied vp, by the N. mayne, and stopt  the ebbe in 60. fathomes neere shoare, the winde N. N. W. with sometimes showers of small snow, and hard frost, so as all our tackling, and shippe bowes where the water came, were all ce-sickles; but it was easie winde, and smoth Sea, here I was 5. miles to N. of a faire head land, so made by the land trenting
E. and N. from the same; I named it King Charles his Promon∣torie with another Cape to the N. the land being there N. and  S. 4. deg. W. which I named Cape Maria in a most bounden,The Kings Pro∣montorie. 64. deg. 461. m. and dutifull remembrance of my King and Queene, because if this proue a passage, these are the most remarkeable, and of greatest note, and most eminencie, drinking their health, with the young Princes; I had no obseruation since the 14, but doe account the Kings Promontorie to lie in 64. deg. 46. min. the Queenes about 8. leagues distant N. from thence, there lieth to the N. W. of the Kings Cape, 3. Islands, passeable round about,Trinitie Isles. standing like an Equilaterall triangle, which I named Trinitie Isles, in the remembrance of the house of Deepeford Strand: A 4th  and out-most, I named Isle Cooke, thinking of my good friend and countenancer, Mr. Walter Cooke, an assistant in that Cor∣poration. This little recreation wee had, at this Celebration, hath much comforted our men that were aboue, and something chee∣red those that were downe; as the Master, the Boate-swaine & his mate, the Gunner, Carpenter, Exposer Russell, yet they seeme to bee the worse, since this certaine triall of the tide to come from S. E. with his constant flowing and ebbing, doth make them conceiue, that this hard labour is in vaine: Yet they say nothing to mee, but that the N. W. tide was mistaken; for the Masters of the Trinity House were very carefull that I should bee well man'd, so that I had not aboue 5. but were capable of an accompt, and therefore the easier to bee gouer∣ned, and more helpefull to the designe, thus wee ended the euening in feasting, and reposed vntill clocke 12. in the night, and then wee weighed ankor againe, Mr. Hurine and my selfe, hoping by this faire meanes to jndure our sufferings, thereby to see the hopes of the supposed passage this way: This ebbe wee held it vp vnder-aile (and ankored not.) This day wee plide about the Queenes Cape, the S. side The Queenes Fore-land. thereof is all Rocks, small Islands, shelues, and ouer-falls, from 45. fathoms into 20. the land to the N. of the Queenes Cape doth lie N. E. this Cape doth lie in aboue 65. deg. 13. min. of latitude, it hath beene showers of snow all day; I ankored at Clocke 5. in 30. sathomes; blew oaze, the ebbe was come on and therfore wee came to a sharpe bitter, before our ship staid, this Tide run from the N. E. as the land wended 3.  /  miles an houre.
The night Tide I plide vp N. E. 6. leagues, and stopt in 23. fathomes, clammy oaze, 4. leagues from land, at first com∣ming  of the flood tide, it came W. and in 3. glasses, it set round about, by the S. to the N. still running without any stop; heere doth appeare to bee Islands, and through lets, that doth after the Tides course, when hee beginneth not to take his Currant,Counter-tyes. vntill the ½ flood bee past, and then hee retaineth his constant course; It is now and then snowing. I rid now in latitude about 65. 50. min. the day came on, and  I see the land lie along N. E. by E. with 2. Islands neere, the one a league off the other, bearing S. E. and S. E. by E. cose weather, some snowie, the low water slacke was, this day at Clocke 11. I made way from 11. that I weighed anchor, to 5. 12. leagues N. E. by N. when I raised a point, or head-land of good height, decfending to the Sea, or W. wards, the Throughlet, or Bay on the Starbord (as I did coast the E. side) I could not see the bot∣tome, not of 7. or 8. leagues deepe, I had 43. fathomes oazie ground; from this Cape the land doth trent to the S. ward of E. the further I came to the N. wards, I haue still darker nights, the Moone is waineing, and it's could weather. Comming neere vnto this Cape, I see many ouer-falls, and ra∣ces in the Tides face, being deeper, & with more breacke then heretofore, so as I caused an ankor to bee made ready, hauing then 20. fathomes, but before I came to the first ouer-fall, I had but 7. 8. 10. differing as fast as the lead went down: I anchor∣ed in 8. the Cape bore S. S. W. 2. leagues off, at the full Sea slacke, I could see betwixt vs and the Cape, all broken grounds, and the ebbe came on so swiftlie, as it was bent, before wee could get vp our anchor, thinking to fall from those ouer-falls, and wee were iust at the S. end of those broken grounds, the land stretcht away S. E. from hence, it runs about ½ Tides, for the broken grounds were drie within vs, before the Tides re∣turne. To conclude, I doe account this Cape to lie some mi. withinArtick Cirkle. the Artick Cirkle; it stretcheth E. wards as before, which in hazie weather, as in the night is easie to discerne in those parts, for the land lying hid in snow, doth cause a white reflexe; in the Ayre all night, as though it were dawning or twi-light, be∣fore and after sun-set, this Cape I named my Lord Westons Portland.
Hauing weighed ankor, I stood off N. by E. and N. N. E. 10. leagues (thinking to stand with the W. side, that thereby, if I had found the land, to stretch to the E. and S. ward, as this did, the flood going accordingly, would haue giuen good sa∣tisfaction to his Majestie, but I was not able, the reasons you shall find after the sequill of this journall, amongst the reasons for my home comming this yeere) and ankored some-while before the ebbe had done running, in 28 fathomes; I comman∣ded the watch to trie the streame of the Flood-tide, by the log (when it was bent) n the fourth glasse of the watch, my selfe comming foorth of my cabbin, and looking ouer-board, see the Tide did not goe aboue 2. knots, the watch answered, that it did not runne so fast as at first commng on, then it went 3. ½ but was now abated; I was no sooner laid downe in my cab∣bin, but that I heard the Cabe run forth, and wee had all much adoe to bring the shippe to a bitter, before it was out, end for end. Now you shall vnderstand, that the ankor had Cadged a great while, when comming to take (a sudaine) hold, broke the two Lashers of our stoppers, and hal'd the Cable about the bitts, the tide taking the ship away E. 4. knots ½ shee hauing driuen an honre, or more before: In the morning the land beare S. by W. from vs, so that wee though wee had run through it the last nights ebbe, when it prooued the former, as Lord We∣stous Portland, for in that bearing i seemed like an Isleland, the deepenesse of the Bay, to the S. E. tooke away the sight of any other land, for making account, that the ebbe set W. standing as before, 10 leagues from the Cape, it should haue beene so, but finding it otherwayes, as wee stood with ebbe. S. W. wee were drawne into the Bay on the S. side of the Cape, where we espied the land to stretch, as it did the day before, with the same for me which I drew then. I knew that for certaine it was the same Portland, wee stood I returned. along S. S. W. this ebbe, and got not so much, with both ebbs and wind, by 2. leagues as wee lost the flood, betwixt them. But ot the Sea-mans better vnderstanding (of this) I con∣ceiue it may bee made appeare by a familliar example, nearer our owne doores, and especially by both example, and demon∣stration: here as followeth may better satisfie, then the historie it selfe can jluserate.
The Example. ADmit a ship to be nere the shore, to the N. W. of the point of Portland in Dorset-shiere with easie S. S. W. gale, stan∣ding W. close hal'd, the Flood-tide being comming in fromNote Seamn. about the Berry, into the Bay of Lyme, falling S. E. into the Race, shall take the said ship vpon the Lee-bowe, and in de∣spight carrie her into the Race, at the S. point of Portland, it set∣ting E. where then shee shall stemme the same, whose greater force (she not being able to ouer-haile) shall tacke her about the said Point, and then setting E. N. E. and N. E. vpon her wether bow, shall carry her into the grasse, now with same wind same tide, and same winding, shee shall bringe the same land, W. S. W. or S. W. vpon her; this same happened to me at this new head-land, which being in the night, did not a little stumble mee to find out, vntill my remembrance questioned with my experience, to find the cause, which otherwise we must haue thought, that wee raised a new land; for which similie, as, other jnducements, to the furtherance of this enterance, I haue named the same fore-land my Lord Westons Portland. Heere followeth the Demonstration.
The tydes do abate, to morrow being quarter day, the last  night was some lightning. This day wee see the Sun but to no use, I drive along the coast with an easie breath from N. (some snow fell.) Standing along this coast, betwixt the Queenes Cape, and  L. Westens Portland. I named another headland Cape Dorchester, remembring Captaine Davis writeing of Secretarie Walsing∣ham, who saith that at his death, this Voyage was left freind∣lesse, though I am sure this Noble Successour revived it againe with his best furtherance, and my incouragement, I came to this Cape at 6 this morning, I had along the land 20 fathomes there are store of Sea Mors in this Sea; the land doth lye full of Snow, it freezeth, the very Ship side and steepe tubbes, the Capes as L. Westens Portland, and Cape Dorchester, are distant a∣bout 20 leagues, the land stretching to the S E. to the North of L. Westens Portland, I named Foxe his farthest, the deep Bay or Inlet to the S. betwixt the same and Cape Dorchester; I na∣med the North side Poynt Barte, that on the South browe Carleton. This Meridian I was in 65 d. 30 min. Cape Dorchester bore S, E. by E. 4 leagues, I have come backe againe from L. Westens Portland 26 leag. S, E, by S. which is about 1 deg. 5 min. and I was to the W. of it 12 min. added maketh 1 deg. 17 min. to 65 deg. 30 min. maketh 66 d. 47 min my furthest N. this day the wind was all over, at clocke 4. it came to the North, and having stopt the flood tyde going 2 knots & ½. I wayed and came along S, S, W. and S, W. by S. as the land did cost, and fell into 40. 60. 78 fathomes; and then it being night I did recount I was past the overfals, to S the Queenes Forland, then I directed the course to be S. This morning Aurora blusht, as though shee had usher∣ed  her Master from some unchast lodging, and the ayre so si∣lent, as though all those handmaides had promised secrecy, the Eastermost of Mill Ile bore S, E. by E. the North Mayne from the Kings Promontory, stretching E. away; Prince Charles his Forland so named by Bilot, bearing E, N, E. and at the East∣ide of the said Forland, goeth in a very fayre sound, I namedVariat. 29▪ by Ampli∣tude. t the Prince his Cradle, an Iland on the West, I named his Nurses of this Cape 1 league. I had 120 fathomes, the Prince his Forland doth lye 5 leagues S, E. from the Kings
Promontory yesterday the Carpenter laid downe, haveing not  beene well for diverse dayes before, it was little wind, with great store of Henbans and Pettidancers, a common incident to these parts in cleare nights. This fayre day, wee came along the North Mayne, E, S, E  with N, W. wind 10 leag. distant from the Princes Cape E, South-East lyeth a fayre Cape I named Cape Dorcet, and 3 leagues to the East of that, is another I named Cape Cooke, in due respect to Sir Iohn Cooke Secretary of State,The Lords Comissi∣oners. with a deepe Bay betwixt them, as it were halfe incir∣cleing an Iland remote from the Mayne, I named it Ile Nicholas, the former names given, as Cape Linsey, Cape Portland, Cape Dorcet, Cape Dorchester, Cape Cooke, I gave in duetifull remembrance, of those Lords Commissi∣oners for the Admiraltie, whose furtherance, and coun∣tenances, in my dispatch, for his Maiesties Pinace the Charles. I had towards the accomplishment, of this designe. Ile Nicholas, I named it in remembrance of Master Edward Nicholus Secretary to the said Lords, whom I have often trou∣bled, I named those Capes, as the occasion in my discoverie offered it selfe. The land to the East from Ile Nicholas along the North Mayne, lyeth in sight North East by East and the same Mayne from Cape Dorcet, by Cape Cooke lyeth East by North about the former distance, at the end thereof there is no land to be seene to the N. I directed the course from Ile Nicholas E, S, E. This evening clocke 8, I was distant as before from the Ile 8 leagues and Salisbury was from mee West by South one halfe Southerly 12 leagues, I lancht away from hence (true Course, as all is set downe) East South East. This noone I had steered this course 4 watches, 25 leag. to bring mee betweene the Salvage, Iles and Prince Charles his Cape, upon the South Mayne, at this time the body of the orthemost Ile bore from mee N, N, E. one halfe N about 6 leagues, the night was close, but faire weather, this night and last day wee came by many small Ilands of Ice all the small chattered, which this strait laid so full of be∣ing desolved, and gone, for we see none since we came from
Sea Horse Poynt, this day was some Snowe God continue  this W, N. W wind, for wee have many that already, have made a Scurvie Voyage of it, the Mr. is up againe, running as before 5 leagues, at clocke 4 Cape Charles, bore S, W. by S 1 / . S. about 12 leagues off. These Ilands called Salvage Iles, lye N. W. from one greater Iland; I cannot say it to be the North Mayne, because it doth bend to the Northwards, both from the W. and E; and therefore, the W. end I take to be that named the Queenes Cape, at the E. end doe lye 2 Ilands, the one bigger the other lesse. I named the one Sackfield, the o∣ther Crowe, after Sir Sackfield Crowe late Treasurer to his Majesties Navie; from the W. to the E. of this land or Iland is many showes of Sounds or Bayes ragged and high; the land being barren to sight. From the last noone to this I made way 32 leagues nere  the S, E, by East, the land of this North side meeting us, bore from the E, by N. to the N, N, West. and is the Mayne or Iland betwixt the Iles of Gods Mercy, and Salvage Iles, all upon the North side of Fretum Hudson and nere those bearings of land, my Latitude was 62 degrees 40 minutes. From the last Meridian unto this, I made way 13 leagues  E, by S. and had Ile Sackveile, N, E. by E, 2 / . E. 7 leagues off, at this present, I had sight of the land from Resolution, and it bore from me from the N, N, E. to the E. about 9 or more leag. This day and night was fayre weather, the one by sight of the Sun, the other by the Moone, although the wind came against our wils, to the S, E. by S. with a frostie fog, turning up to the North land it was cleare, but at Sea it was thicke, and thus plying up to the Eastward, came within 4 leagues, of this land, which lay from East to N, N, E. and was the same, wee drived along, immured amongst the Ice; at our en∣trance inwards, wee got little by plying with contrary winds, and yet I durst not put into a Sound for harbour, of which wee might perceive some, as also Roade-steeds made by Ilands, lying nere the Mayne, our weather side was froze, as also all our ropes were a quarter of an inch thicke about. The wind continued contrary, and I stood off into the
Channell, and on againe, with frostie fogge, and very cold, but the wind blew not to above Course and Bonnet, this day  I appointed 4 beefe dayes in the weeke. With wind contrary I plyed it, to the Eastwards, the Aire was both thicke and cleare, as I was neere or farre off the North Maine, sometime it blew to both topsailes, and some∣time was eafie winde; The evening 8. I stood to the S. ward, being S. W. from the E. point of the N. land, stretching to∣ward Resolution 4 leagues; I stood over untill this day clocke  South▪ maine. one, S. S. E. wreck and variation allowed 28 leag. at what time we thought we had sight of the S. Maine, about S. W. by S. 5. leagues off, very high land. This night was hazie, and blew to Course and Bonnet, comming betweene 2 Ilands of ice, the Sea had beate much, from off the weathermost, which lay flo∣ting betwixt it, and that to Leeward; so as I loosed for one, and bore up for another, for the space of the 60 part of one houre, and this was all the trouble the ice put me unto, home∣ward bound. This first day it blew lesse wind, but all the morning was  Snow, the Lord for his mercy sake looke upon us, for we are all in weake case, dispairing more since this last frost and contrary winds that hath bin within these 5 dayes (although the frost hath not beene uncouth to us) then for the same weather we had for 3 weekes before, and yet our allowance is enlarged to so much as we cannot eate, with Sacke, Aqua∣vita, Beere, as well Oatemeale, Meale, Rice, Pease, and Beefe, for salt fish our men can eate none, nor doe I hold it fit they should. These 2 dayes were spent in plying to the E. sometimes in  the sight of the N. land, or Maine, whereof lay 2 small Ilands  which we drive by, as I drive inwards, being then fast a∣mongst the ice; at 12 this day I tacked to the S. wards, and at this instant the said land-bore from N, W. by W. to the E. the Iland at the N. end, by estimation was one league distant from the Maine, that at the E. was 2 off. This day hath been faire and cleere, and it cleereth with bright Horizons at N. E. God send the wind from thence, to take us out of those dilatory sufferings, which we have more through lingring doubt, of what wee shall feele, then as yet we doe feele, and expecting our freedome, if wee were freed out of Fretum Hudson,
which upon a sodaine change, wee may happely expect. From last day noon unto this day 12, I stood upon a bow∣ling, making a S. E. way 31 leagues, the wind Veering mee Northerly, I stood E. S. E. so neare as I could lie, 20 leagues more, and at midnight I had the Cape, Chidly, since called Buttons Ilands, E. 4 leagues from me, whereupon I stood to the North because I could not carry it about the Cape un∣till this day 5 in the morning, and then tackt to the E. the  wind larging about to the Northward; I doubled the Cape at clocke 12, weathering the same, about 2 leagues, having as at all headlands, (with Sea winds and cold weather) a great Sea with an inset into Fretum Hudson, against me that the shippe strucke in, the Spritsaile yard and bowlspright under wa∣ter; I much fearing that the springing of our yards or Mats setled the topsailes so to ease them, that I thought I did but double the Cape with much adoe, it was high land, consisting of dives ilands, seeming as they were to bee sayled betwixt, these were covered with Snow, as also Resolution, whose Cape Warwicke I see, bearing N. and by W. at that instant after I had brought this Cape or Iles of Chidly W, S. W. either the Tyde or Current did set me fast to theTyde or Current. S. ward: this day it froze so sore with the ships dipping in the Sea, that our head, and wet tackling were Canded over with Icesicles, and many Snowie showres in earnest were sent from Boreas his frozen forge; And for the haire of our faces to be of his hoary colour, had been no noveltie to us these 4. weekes. I stood from the Cape bearing S. E. ½ Southerly, variation  and wreake allowed 51 leagues and 2 mile, untill this noone time. From thence untill this 12 E. by S. 54 leagues, at what time  motion was made to come home in lesse sayle, but answer was that I was not discharged as yet, and therefore I would runne the ship out of victuall and pay, for as yet I never durst carry sayle (to see how fast I could drive Charles his Waine, to the best advantage) fearing that if I had sprung any of my Masts,The ships name. yards or tackling, (or wrong the ship) it might have beene supposed I had done it upon purpose, that then if I had stood need of excuse, for feare or neglect, I might have used that false colour, blessed be the Almighty, who never faileth those
that depend on him truely; this warmeth we find in the open  Ocean, doth much revive us, for truely if this extremity of the frost and snow had continued on with the Easterne winds we had within Fretum Hudson, wee had beene constrained backe to have wintered in Hudsons Bay, or else-where, for the most of us were ready to fall downe with the rest, that were downe already. After I was got cleere, I had for some reasons thought to have home come by the N. but the weaknes of our persons, the long nights, the cold dark weather, with the decayed Moone, altered my purpose, although the N. by Orkny, was the shor∣test cut, and so nearer some refreshing, yet this being the wa∣rmer, and in darke nights the more comfortable; I directed the course to fall with the Iland of Silly, having yet great care day and night, specially to looke out for the Ice, which I sup∣posedSee for Ice. might be set from off Groenland, or out of Fretum Da∣vis, but God be thanked we see none, (after we came from the Cape. The daily courses and distances homewards were followeth, the wind as in the Margent. Our sicke men are as yet able to doe nothing, the Master is  S. E. laid downe againe; wee had last night, and especially this morning a whole storme, the afternoon it faired, and the wind came about with Sunne to the West, wee carried both top sailes a trip. This day considering the great want I found of the Boat. swaine, our sayles and tackling being sore torne, in this time he came not above Decke, I placed John Coatesworth in his roome, for his diligence. This day was reasonable weather, we made way the 8 day, and this 56 leagues 2 miles E. S. E. ½ Southerly. This day was top sayle Gale, last night the wind Southe∣ring, S. W. made us hand them both, we made from last 12 to this 49 leagues E. S. E. ½ S. the wind veered S. ward but staid not. The wind was fickle but we made way E. S. E. 34. leagues  S. W. and were in 57 d. 35. latitude. The wind variable, our way S. E. by E. 27 leagues. After midnight the wind came to S. E. with much raine, I  S. E. S. W. tooke in topsayles, and clued up the foresaile, forting the yard,
Armes, thigh; after clocke 4, the wind favouring came to S. W. and I made way by account as before 33 leagues South-East. This day the Master came abroad againe, and not since the  7 day before; the wind was all day about S. W. thicke and wet, the true way traverse excepted, of the last day and this,S. W. was 47 leag. S. E. by East. Thicke fog, and the way from last day to this 47 leagues  S. E by E. and at clocke 8 we were in 59. degrees 15 minutesW. latitude. The way was S. E. 8. d. E. wards. 36 leagues  / .Betwixt S. W. and W The way 30 leagues E. S. E. The way Veering, 37 S. E. 4 d. E. wards.The wind veering from S. W. to S. S. E. and S. E. by▪ The way 57 S. E. 5 d. E. The way 17  /  E. by N. The way true course 26 E. The way 28  /  E. 4. d. N. The way 33 E. S. E. latitude 51 d. 16. m. The way 42 E. The way 35 E. 4 d. N. The way 14 E. 4. N. latitude 50 d. 9 min. These courses were all true, variation allowed. The way 8 . This day in the morning I had sight of Sii, distant foure leagues off. The 31 blessed be Almighty God, I came into the Downes with all my men recovered and sound, not having lost one Man▪ nor Boy, nor any manner of Tackling, having beene forth neere 6 moneths, all glory be to GOD. To whom this may concerne. Answere to uncertaine rumors, or (aersions) given forth against me, concerning my returne home from the Northwest this yeare (given at my home-comming.) AS wherefore I had not found the passage, and why come I home and did not Winter, hath he fulfilled his Com∣mission,
how farre hath he beene, and those that had more insight, inquired whether I had beene North-West from Ile Nottingham or no, with, Why did hee not bring letters from Captaine Iames, some concluding that I have done nothing. I did attempt the Discovery towards the Northwest from the Iles of Nottingham and Saibury, about the midst of Julie, and had at that time proceeded according to the letter of my Instruction, if I had not beene prevented by these following meanes, viz. 1 I had been immured with Ice, from the first day of my en∣tering Fretum Hudson, being the 23 day of Iune, vntill the 4 of Iuly following, after which time, I got cleere, and comming unto Salisbury Isle, I lay fast againe betweene the South and the North Maine, about 7 dayes amongst ice, where being neere the said Isle I could easily discerne the Tyde come from the East, through Fre∣tum Hudson▪ and not from the Northwest. 2 Getting cleere of the ice, I trent about the said Isle to the South, as also Nottinghams, where sending the Boat on land, brought word that it had flowed so much water, as in my Iournall is mentioned of, and that the water had more to flowe, and after that running off into 60 fathomes, and anchoring the Boat, I found the Tyde come from the South-East or through Fretum Hudson. 3 Standing along the said Isle to W. ward, untill I brought the same, I meane the W. end N. E. it began to be full of ice, in the W. Channell, betwixt Nottingham and Shark Point, as before be∣twixt the North Maine and Salisbury, so as the Master his Mate, and my selfe conclude, that there was no entring the said Northwest▪ as yet, or untill the ice was dissolved; and to that point, the Master and Mate, wished me to write what I would concerning that impossibility of passage untill the ice were gone, and they would signe the same, promising that they would bee wil∣ling to see the same, before their going home, if no passage proved elsewhere to be found. Whereupon considering, that that Tyde came not from the North-West for certaine, which is the absolute ground of my instructions, but from South-East, disproved also by Master Bylot, (who was in the same Voyage and ship,
with Sir Thomas Button) saying that both he and all his Com∣pany, did plainely see the Tyde come from S. E. at Cape Com∣fort, and also the Ile Nottingham, averring that they which tooke that account were mistaken, in the time, taking 8 a clocke for 10. Now as it was not possible as yet to enter for ice, the wind being liberall I directed the course towards Carie Swan Nest, hoping to follow the instructions, in the search of Bt∣tons and Hudsons Bay, (of which there was as great hopes as at the Northwest, and were there as many, and as strongly of that opinion, as of the other) and come backe againe thi∣ther, by that time the ice was dissolved, which I hoped would be about the fine of August or not at all; if no passage proved in the said Bay to be had, but finding none▪ I proceeded from that search, having first finished the search of the foresaid Bay as followeth in briefe. Being come out of Hudsons Bay, and Anchoring at Sharke Point, I found the Ebbe to goe with good Current from the West, but the South-East flood Tyde did slacke the same, when it came, but how it did flow and what water I cannot report for want of my journall, it being now out off my hands, but I did finde the same flood-tide to answere the re∣port of Master Byos journall writ by Baffin; and I found some quantity of ice betweene Cape Pembroke, and Sharkes Point undesolved at that time, being the foureteenth of September. Having made those observations, I stood over (with North-winds) for Mill Iland mentioned in my instucti∣ons, but for no intent to coast the East-side, for I had with that wind much adoe to fetch the same, with bording and turning under the South side of it, two Tides before I got in∣to a Throughlet, at the West end thereof, whereinto I put, and there found it to flow at least foure fathomes. The Tide running halfe Tyde, and comming from South-East, as well upon the North and Southside, as upon the South of Notting∣ham at my departure from thence, whereupon I plied up with North-West windes every Tyde, being forced to stoppe the Ebbe, nor could I recover the West side with those winds, untill I attained the Cape I have called Lord Westos Port∣land
in the latitude about 66 d. 47 m. where I found the Tyde of flood to come still along as the coast did lie, which was to coast from Northwest to North, to Northeast and to East, and to Southeast the deepest water not above 30 fa∣thomes (as I remember) five leagues from land, the Sea slight and smooth with these winds, so as it is easie to con∣jecture thereof, either ice or land was not farre off, for wee found good store of undesolved ice at Sharke Poynt, whereupon I stood 10 leagues from ence (as I supposed) for the Westside which I could not attaine, and if I had continued this course, for the West side, with this winde, I must have stopt the Ebbes, and Baffin writing of 130 fathomes deepe there, the just length of my small cable-shoat, I must have bid the ship to have stoopt for the rest, and to have done the same by my biggest, I had not strength enough to have wayed the same from ground againe, likewise I had no reason to follow the East finding it to Trent away South East from that Headland, which for resemblance and mile, to this of ours. I named L. Westons Portland, from whence I doe per∣swade my selfe, the Ebbe doth take his halfe course, through those Ilands of Cumberlands into retum `Davis, the lood cannot bee great (which conjecture may say should come through that straight, and meet ours at Portland) being hindred by these foresaid Iles▪ where Davis saith hee met a strange Tyde from the South-West, may be the cause, which by that straightnesse may retort the loods way. But to the purpose, the winds were North-west, nor could I stay the change thereof, for the most of my best men, as Master, Gunner, Carpenter, Boatswaine his Mate, and one or two of the common men were downe, the rest complaining of cold paines, and no marvell, they having beene over-toyled in the bottome of Sir Thomas Buttons Bay, (and that undiscovered betwixt him and Hudson) with watching and warding day and night, manning both Shippe, Boate, and Pinnace, both in Anchoring and Sayling (but especially at Leade, when in all the time of my Sayling the said Bay, there was never one from keeping the same.
The weather had beene for about 3 weekes before, no∣thing but Snow, Frost, and sleet at best, our selves, ropes, and sayles froaze, the Sunne seldome to be seene or once in five dayes, the nights 13 houres long, the Moone wayning, and in conclusion, I was enforced either to seeke for Harbour, or freeze to death in the Sea. Whereupon I sent Master Ʋrine, to aske the Masters opi∣nion, who brought unto me, that he thought the Tydes setting from S. E. almost round about to E. would give good satisfa∣ction (for this N. W. search, begun by a wrong report of the Tydes comming from thence) to the Adventurers, and that hee helde it fittest to returne. Yea, and the best also, as I thought, and homewards, and for good cause as hereafter fol∣loweth. First, I referre it to the judgment of indifferent men, whe∣ther having proceeded in these Discoveries, further then any other my Predecessors, in lesse time, and at lesse charge, have closed up all the expected hopes upon the W. side of Buttons Bay, from 64½ circularly to 55, and on the Point from Swans Nest, to Sharke Point, not perfectly discovered but now by mee, and carried a Tyde, comming from South-East through Fretum Hudson, all along that East side to 66 degrees 30 minutes, or thereabouts, (things not knowne heretofore) that I should hazzard the losse thereof to my Countrey, If I should have perished in seeking an unknowen Harbour, in long nights and cold weather, with so many men sicke, who could not have recovered in the wintering, howsoever their helpes would have beene wanting, in lying, or Barracadoing the ship from ice, for wheresoever I had wintered, I must have hled the ship high on shore, and Barracadoe; as also in making my provisions of fresh victuals, and fuell. The necessitie of this, Sir Thomas Button is able to approve to his deare bought experiment. Well, if I had wintered it must have beene with intent to make search, to the North of Sir Tho. Roes Welcome, for in all the hopefull places else I was denyed, and there, and not far frō thence, as about Vtultra, it is, for to give a wise Gentlemā his right (who perusing Sir Tho. Buttons journall about that place, quoteth in the Margent) these words, I doe not find it is proved a Bay, this was suspected by him before, I came to
that knowledge thereof, which I have now, but to proceed, how should I be able to doe this service, when the winter would have consumed all the best of my comfortable stores, as strong Beere, strong waters, sacke, spice, fruite, Rice, Wheat meale, and of my Chirurgery; and if no releife had beene o∣therwise got from land, to have lengthened the most of the provision, as Beefe, Beere, and Fish. Yet had I had no more then would have brought home the Ship, if my men had stood, and if by their death, or reliefe of birds or Deere, I had store remaining, yet I doubt the remay∣ning stomacks, would have beene too weake (before the long winter there had left them) to have endured salt meate in the Summer, so as the more victuall the fewer hands for labour, and there would be no sparing as I conceived by short allow∣ance. All these and many other sufferings endured, is but all for the next yeares Search, about which I have shewed, I had no reason to stay, to put so much to hazzard knowing what I had inquired from some, both of Sir Thomas Button, and Mr. Hud∣sons men of their sufferings, and yet it was July, before they could get well to sea to returne home. And it doth appeare by Sir Thomas Buttons owne words, that he would have procee∣ded the next yeare if he had not been disabled. For when, after my home comming, I told him hee could not be certaine of the Tyde he tooke at Notingham, was true; for that his boate was never on land, his answere was (God a mercy for nothing) for I had not above 8 ound men; so this doth appear as I did cōceive, before my returne. I cōclude that these things in part knowne to me, in part imagined, that if I should not have made good use thereof, having discovered so much as I had done, if I would thus have suffered, I had bin well served, to have come home unpittied.
The benefit ensuing by my comming home this yeare. INprimis my sicke men are (God be glorified) all recovered. The account of my service by my selfe & others brought home, I hope to the satisfying of my King and Country, and more then ever was formerly done by any of my predeces∣sours by much, and at farre lesse charge. The ship and tackling all safe, and without any losse of ei∣ther, which was not done without great hazzard, going from the Latit. of 55. in Hudsons Bay, into the Articke circle to∣wards the end of September. There is also 6 Months pay and victuals saved at above 75 pounds per month, amounting to the some of nere 450 poū. and if they doe not set forth the next yeare, then there is 11 months pay and victuals saved, there is one Sommers time gai∣ned, for if this be distrusted or more required (I meane in dis∣covery) who is so pleased may set forth the beginning of May, and satisfie their desire this next yeare, with ship new∣ly repaired, newly manned with fresh men, & untainted with skurvie, crampe or cold paines, but more and better able to performe, the enterprize, then the Winterer can be. To conclude I referre it to the judgement of reasonable dis∣cretion, whether it may be held fit, that I should suffer, either by want of liberty, good reward or imputation (as hath been wished) untill the returne of Capt. James, who had no intent as by his answer doth appeare, who when I inquired of him, why he being so late had not attempted the N, W. as we both were instructed, answered that Baffine satisfied in his our∣nall, that the Tyde came from S, E. and that himselfe had beene no more N. then 64. the latit of Mill Ile, and then having come over to the W. side of Sir Thomas Buttons Bay, but in 9. and discovered but from thence to 61 leag. E, S, E. from Port Nel∣son, where wee met, having this yeare neither bin at N, W. as before said, nor made any discovery, betwixt the Southside of Hubber Hope to 64½. where the chiefest hope was (as I had done) nor ioyned Hudson and Sir Thomas Button, it may bee thought, he being a Gentleman of quality, will not come un∣till he have done as much as I being a man of meaner
Ranke (in his conceite, for I have heard since that his ambi∣tion hath abused my worth and name) I told him my further intent, which was to attempt the N, W. this yeare, all which to do he must stay the next yeare, as my selfe would, if he had left me in the like case, nor can no unkindnesse be laid to my charge for not bringing of letters from him, taking a fayre farwell of him, for he had time enough in two dayes to have writ, nor was I certaine as then of my returne, which now I doe thanke God for. If this will satisfie to stop the mouth of Rumor, which hath already touched too much vpon my de∣serts, I shall bee glad; otherwise, I wish they would suffer themselves to be judged by performing the like labour. These rumours like ill Newes ridde poast, for they came to Court; insomuch as comming by Boate with a Gentleman from Oatlands to London, where I had beene to deliver my Accompts to his Majesty, it pleased the Gentleman to say, that now is Captaine James in the Mare del Zur, and will come home by Cape Bon Sperance. I was so confident that he could doe no more for that yeare I did leave him, and for the yeare to come, that I replyed with three wishes or desires to my good or ill. The first was, that if Captaine Iames did passe through and come home that way, that I might be severely punished according as I did acknowledge I did deserve. The next was, that if at his home-comming, (for which I pray∣ed vnto Almighty God,) that it did appeare vpon examination (equally ballanced) that hee had done as much as I and no more, I might have reasonable Reward, for so I had deserved. The third, that if hee had not done so much, that I might be re∣warded with what I had saved, to wit; Eleven moneths victuall and pay, at 75. pounds per Moneth, and according to the wearing and tearing of Cordage and Tackling that I had saved, which hee would spend. Now since hee is returned home, and hath neyther beene through nor performed so well as I by very much, I desire to be rewarded as before; and for that this was rehearst before his home-comming, and when I did not know where hee was.
That there is a Passage, hath beene proffered to be proued very Learnedly by Sr Humphrey Gilbert Knight, foure severall wayes, as followeth. THe first by Authority, alledging America to bee that Iland called by Plato and others Atlantes, sayled vnto by the Car∣thagineans, and that it is bound on the East by the Atlanticke sea from which it is named, on the South by Magelan straights, on the West by Mar del Zur, on the North it is severed from Groenland by the Sea, through which the Passage doth lye. And to confirme the former Discovery, he brings in Money found by the Spaniards in the Gold mines of America, having the stampe of Augustus Caesar, and since that time the discontinuance hath beene, for that it hath beene swallowed vp and overflowen with water through a mighty Earthquake, so as the Navigation thereunto was since that time lost, vntill the yeare 1492. that Columbus did after discover the same, (although Malga Prince of Wales was be∣fore him) pretending that since its appearance againe, the Seas about it are made deeper, and the Northwest made more easie to be sayled, confirming the Conclusion by the Cosmographers of those moderne times, especially Ortelius, who maketh both Groenland and America both Ilands, dis-joyned by a great Sea from any part of Asia. The second is by Reason; for sayling from Iseland to where this Freet should be, its thought to bee more deeper water, and that if America were not an Iland, it and Asia should participate of each others animals, or things of like shape or condition as Men, Beasts, and others, of which there hath in found in eyther; also hee alled∣geth, the Seas naturall and circular running from the East o West. Following the dirnall motion of Primum Mobile, it carrying all inferiour and moveable bodyes; so as the Current from the East comming about Cape Bona Spei, cannot be digested by the narrow straite of Magellane, must needs be spe about the North by some passage through this Fret, as also the Current setting from forth the cythian Sea doth sped it selfe in this Strait; and also, that these Currets could not have beene maintained vntill this day, had it no beene for the same passage, that by its circular mot∣on it might meete againe to maintaine it selfe; ee concldes, that
this current was found in the Mare del zur by Barnard de la Torre sent to the Mollucas, by the vice Roy of new Spaine who sayled 750 leag. on the N. side of equatar, and met with a current from N, E. which drove him backe againe to Tidore so by this motion thus continued it doth passe by the Mollucas, and thence againe by Cape de Spei. The third is by experience, Paulus Venetus, saith he dwelt ma∣nyThe Straite of Anian is wide Sea. yeares in Cataia, affirmeth that he sailed 1500 miles upon the coast of Mangia and Anian, towards the N. E. the Sea alwayes o∣pen before him, both as farre as he went and as farre as he could discerne. Also Francisco Vasques in his Voyage to Sierra Nevada, found a great Sea wherein were certaine ships laden with marchandise, on their proves were pictures of certaine birds cald Acatrazy,A good Reason. made of Gold and silver, they made signes that they were 30 dayes in comming thither, those must come from Asia, for that in all the discovered America there hath not bin found any ships. He proveth also, that the Cosmographers of China have extend∣edThis makes our Passage the shorter. their Sea coast N. E. to 50 deg. Latit. being the furthest that the Portingale had knowledge of, and that they know no other but they might continue it further. The 4 by circumstance, he offereth to prove by 3 brethren which sailed through from Europe, as also by ceertaine Indians driven by tmpest upon the coast of Germany and out of Plinie through the abundance of moysture to the North those and other Indians must come to the North-west, and here is as much as is to any purpose in this. Mr. Willes tryeth also to prove this first, by the 3 brethren out of Gemma Friscius, themby a Portgal from Sir Martin Frobisher; Andreus Vrdaneta a Frier of Mexico, which he preferreth also who came out of the Del-zur into Germany this way; this Fryer (saith he) was a great discoverer and his Carde was showne to many Gentlemen. Againe, from Sebastian Cabotta that the entrance hereof doth lye nere the 318 Meridian betwixt 61 and 64 d. of Lat. and that it doth continue that breadth 10 d. W. where it open eth S. erly more and more untill it come under the tropick of Cancer, & so runneth into Mare del Zur, avouching this Strait to be at least 100 English miles wider then Magelans, perswa∣ding still upon this circuiler motion he demands from whence I
pray you came that tyde Sir Martin Frobisher met when hee had sailed no small way in his straite if there were an Ismus of land, which since that time we finde to be the 3 hower ebbe which camethrough the Ilands of his straite out of Fretum Davis f di∣t the East of Anian. And here is in effect what is alleadged to prove this pas∣sage both by Sir Humphrey Gilbert & Mr. Willes which though they make little for our purpose yet they give us to know what they knew in former time for all these arguments as I conceive are but Phylosophiall conjectures and seing Sir Mar∣tin Frobisher is the last spoke on as whence I pray you came that tide Sir Martin Frobrisher found and as Mr. Willes requireth. Heare his owne opinion. That the currnt setting forth of that Bay of Mexico saith hee dothwash upon the S, W. part of Iseland as he found in his 3 voy∣age a current carrying him one poynt to the N. ward of his course, which current he thought to be coutinued towards Norway and o∣ther the N, E. parts of Europe to the Scythian Sea, and by the strengthening helpe of the Mare Gluciale from the E. rebounds a∣gaine from thence Westward by his naturall reverbortion which will not be resisted but must strike upon his object Groneland nor saith he it is unpossible that so great course of loods currents and so high swelling Tides can be disgested here without uburthenin themselves in some open Sea beyond this place. And here Sir Martin Frobisher was not amisse for we finde that on the W. side of this Meta incognita or as we call it Grone∣land, Mr. Iames Hall found the tyde to flow 3, and a halfe fadoms, which tyde Bylot and Baine found to flow lesse and lesse, as hee pst vp to the bottome of his Bay; so as if he found nor a new tyde from the West, there was no hope of a Passage to Catai, and so it provd, for at the bottoe thereof it lowed but about two oote and proved a Bay. The like of Mr. Hudson who found the tyde at the Ile of Gods Mercy, to flow 3  / . fath. and following of this Tide into this Bay it flowed but 2 foote, so that it doth appeare here evidently that those great quantity of waters are in part consumed with owing and reflowing into 2 Bays. The remander may be spent along the coast of America from Cape Chidley Southward, for Mr. Iohn Knight before his death write, that  Tide came from the N. and Oliver Browne after
his death writes, the Current came from N. Capt. Waymouth also saith, the Ice drive from the North, and by this it is probable that heere is the period of this irregular Current. And to conclude with these 10 Fathoms it flowed up and downe, can be by no other meanes then some such Recepta∣cle there, to restraine this great Oceans flood; as at Garnsey in Normandy, and in Severn betwixt England and Wales, the Tyde comming out of the Ocean about Ireland ito the one, and from thence betweene Silly and Vshant into the other, for want of issue being thus affronted must perforce elivate his waters to those great heights vntill the Floods retract. Wee have now made visibly appeare, the best Arguments thes times did affoord; for beleeve mee, if I could have pickt out any better I would not have left them forth, they being pertinent to the purpose I have in taxe, yet hereby wee doe not finde any certainty thereof, as that the 3. Breth came through our Freet, or that any Indians were cast vpon the coast of Germany, or that a Portingall who for his paines was banisht into Afric, or that if we will take such commodity vpon credit, you may have more of Andreas Vrdanatus, and I thinke we may have also of a Spaniard that past it of late in King Iames his time, and to binde up this rabble put to Iohan∣nes de fuco, the Greeke Pylot. Your Phylosopher Plat nor Plinie, your Cosmographers of these moderne times Ortelius and Mercatr doth not all give us any thing that we can make reasonable aurance or that we dare adventer upon, yet see how apt wee are to take those neighbouring fables into beleife, whereby we may de∣prive our selves o our honour before we obtaine it, for it may credibly be affirmed that this Virgin is yet pure and untoucht either by Christian, Indian, or other nation although many great dowries have beene spent about her, and some brave Knights have bid faire for her, yet it is not to be doubted but that the English have imbrac her about the middle. Onely these make for our purpose, that the hinois extend their coast to the N. E▪ into 50 d. and know no other but that they may continue it further. The other is Paulus Venet who sailed along the coast of Mangia from Cataia towards the N, E. 1500 miles, this doth argue that we have not straits or passage to sale from so far W.
as we have bin to the end of our Discovery into Mare del Zur. Resting my weary invention, upon the staffe of this opinion for a while to bee better satisfied concerning this Current, which the most Authors insist so strongly vpon, as makes me doubt if I were to follow thereby to find the end of this De∣dlspon. his Laborinth, I should very hardly have any hopes of returning againe the same way, because they urge so vehe∣mently upon this naturall motion of the Orbes, (so as in Ma∣gellans▪ Strait men are violently driven backe) inferring there∣by, that all things included shall by consequence follow the same; so that I should fight against the streame to Returne the same way. But while I am thus pondering out this doubt, its prompt into my minde, that if all things included must follow, then should also the Earth walke in the same Revolu∣tion with his neighbour the Sea, as also my selfe, and yet keepe at the same distance so as I am never the nearer, nor further for my purpose (by those Circular motions.) But now my Iudgement wishes me to stay nearer home, and let these wan∣dering travels of the thoughts past, for that my owne experi∣ence is better able to satisfie me then, all those Elimentary cogitations, and thus in few words, as thou didst cary a flood tide along with thee through Fretum Hudson to Swans-Nest from the E. out of the Hyperborian, so hast thou found another on the W. side thereof, comming from the W. out of the Mare del zur, which shall bring the home againe with the like expedition whreby thou wert carryed forth. The Probability. WEe have observed in the former Iurnals of Sir Martin Frbrisher, Davis, Waymouth, Hall▪ Knight, and Mr. udson, that the current doth set from the E. side of Groneland over to the S, W, and W, and that nere the coast it sets W. in, wherein we have floated all this time and thereby are brought to harbour in Resolution where it flowes 5 fathomes right up and downe, and if the account brought unto me by my menAt least 7. fathom not far from thence. may be beleeved that the flowing doth farre surmount this and that a E, S, E Moone maketh full Sea, it doth also appeare b Mr. Bylot that farther within the straits as at Salvage Ile a S, E. Moone brings high water and that it flowed quall water
with Resolution, as also at the Iles of Gods Mercy by Mr. HdsonTyde from S▪ . it lowed above 4 fath. they being almost in the halfe way the distances being nere 85 leag. the course W. N. W. 31 deg. and differing in Latit. nere about 1 d. from Salvages to Mill Ile is 59 leag. W. by N. where it loweth nere 4 fath. and a S, S, E. Moone, and in all those three channels in which I have beene viz. betwixt Sir Dudly Digs his Ile and Notighams Ile3, Chānels tryal of the tyde. betwixt that and Mill Ile, as also betwixt Mill Ile and the Kings Promontory, in all these 3 I say for I have had sure tri∣all, and so had no man before mee, that the tide of the flood doth come from the S, E. running halfe tide and with as swift a current as goeth in the River of Thames, from Mill Ile to the S. side of Sea Horse Poynt, they being distant 25 leag. I found the tyde to flow, as nere as I could take it by the lead line 20Horse Point foote, and a S. by E. Moone full Sea, the tide of ebbe there holding his course doth but onely slacke for the time of floud about 4 howres which strong tide in the two N. most chan∣nels betwixt Nottingham and the Kings Promotory by all like∣lyhood doth contiue his pasiage betweene Cape Comfort onPortland. the West, and my Lord Westons Portland on the East, retur∣ning their waters into Frtum Dis by the Iles of Cumber∣land.Cumberland Ile. For the tyde that commeth on the South Channell, between Cape Wlstenholme and Salisbury Ile, are consumed in strength and flowing, setting into Hudsons Bay, betweene Swans nest,Swans-nest. Sir Robert Mansils Ile, and Sir Dudley Digges, the most part of the latter flood falling into Hudsons bay. From Sea-horse Point on the West to Caries Swans-nest, the distance is about 58 leagues, there it doth flow but 6. foote in height, and but 4. houres in time, (for Hudsons Bay hath de∣voured the latter flood) so as heere wanteth both tyde and time, to wit, from neere 5. fathomes to 4. to neere 4. to 20. foot, but now to 6. foot; yet this flowing is continued accor∣ding to the Moones course, to wit, from E▪ S, E. to S, E. to S, S▪ E. to S, by E. to S, by W. Which is an evident and assu∣red token, that this Tyde was fed and continued from the Ea∣sterne Ocean, comming in betwixt Cape Farwell in Groynlad, and the North mae of America, but now ended heere into this great Bay, and bly etuned bake againe at the recourse of the tyde. For in Mr. Hud Voyage the tyde of flood (the
ship setting on ground upon a Rocke) was found to come from the E. the be from the W▪ which was no other, then the Tyde and tht came in and set forth betwixt Cape Wol∣stenholme and Cape Digges. It is now probable that this Tyde of the S. Channell, com∣ming from the East, is not an end; and that Tyde on the North is turned away▪ as I have found by experience at Ca∣rie Swannes Nest. Standing from hence 7 leagues into the latitude of 64A new lood. 10 m. which is to the North of that high land called Hopes Advan'd, I found a Tyde setting from the North, as the land did their coast which Tyde did flood above 20 foote water, in the dead neepe, (as it was at my being there) and that it did runne halfe tide being full Sea about clocke 11. So as a∣bout a W. S. W. Moon maketh full Sea, I was commanded by the letter of my instruction to make a perfect Discovery ei∣ther by Ship or Boat of all that undiscovered betwixt this la∣titude and Port Nelson, and also that betwixt Port Nelson and Hudsons West Bay, in which discovery I now came to finde that I was out of my way, for sayling from this land,Roes Wel∣come. where I found this new Tyde, wch land I have named Sir Th▪ Rowes Welcome, it being on the Northmost known part upon the West side of Bons Bay, whereas there it flowed so much water as before, and a W. S. W. Moone now coasting along this West side upon a S. W. by S. true course as the land did lie about 18 leagues to an Iland I named Brke Cobham, there the best observation that I could make, I found that it flowed a West by South Moone, and but 10 foot the neepe Tyde, but indeed I doe distrust this account, as in my journall doth appeare. Coasting from hence to Port Nelson, 130 leagues, I found it there to flow a N. W. Moone, and in the neepe Tide, but 9 foot water, and the best Spring Tyde as∣sisted by the wind brought in but 14 foot water▪ and after from thence towards Hudsons West Bay, it flowed lesse water vetunne with course, for the time of full Sea went with Sune, so as it was easie to conjecture that I went from the Tyde which is especially to be incerted to make this Trea∣tise to be better understood, and how this tide doth waste it selfe. Now it cannot be denyed but that this Tyde that is moved according to the course of Tydes, with his constant
ebbing and lowing so great a distance as about the West side of this Bay, ccuting neere betwixt Hudsons Bay, and Sir Thomas Roes Wlcome, the distance of it neere 253 leagues, having many rubbes and checkes by the way amongst the ilands and shoals, should be able to repaire and recall againe this huge quantity of waters every 12 houres, if it were not fed and upplyed from some great and waste Ocean, norWaste Oce∣an. if there prove to be a passage, as is most likely, as hereafter shall follow, it cannot be conceived but that it must be so spa∣tious, as cannot be visable betweene land and land, and why may it not be that there is no straight but that the Sea lies open to the North (as at C. Finmarke) after that the land doth trent Westward, as may be suspected by the want of ice,C Finmarke that the land being farre remote to the North or West, the South doth keepe it selfe from frigitating by its conti∣nuall chaing and adjectating, as we see by the iles of farre shotland, and Orkney standing in and neere the same parallel with our frozen, Fretum Hudson, where no Snow will lie for any time in Winter, the cause may be by the Seas moving about them their circuits being so small as the Seas breathing through the Tydes and winds contiuuall chafing, about them doth evaporate some part of his warmenesse into the Ayre, whereby the frost is restrained from the exercise of his pow∣er, for the Sea hath a kinde of temporature betwixt too hot, and too colde, in the hot and cold Zones. it is much to bee hoped by this want of ice, that as at the North Cape of in∣marke,N▪ Cape▪ (although I doe assure mee that this passage lyeth South-wards off that parallell, and about the Articke Circle) that this Continent of the Septentrionall part of Ame∣rica, may incline to the West Southward about this lati∣tude, as that of Europes doth to the East, for by this flo∣wing of water in 60 d. 10 m. neere 4 fathomes (as at Reso∣lution in the East) it cannot be farre to the winding of the land Westwards. The next is to inquire from whence this Tyde should come, for that is the way to the passage, for it cannot be said to come from the East through Fretum Hudson, for there need no more to disprove that then what went before, when that Tyde did end at Carie Swans Nest, in flowing but 6 foote
and 4 houres, as it doth at the height, of all Rivers being farre from the Sea. Should it come from the North, then it should as well Cur∣rent that land on the East side of this Bay to Carie Swans Nest along that small distance of 40 leagues, if such a thing be at all or no, as upon the West side. For, 250 leagues of now knowne discovery setting from the North, it should divide equall waters betwixt them, which is found to the con∣trary, and if such land doth lie 40 leagues along from Swannes Nest Westward, then is there not aboue 30 more for the brenth of the passage, frō through whence this ride doth come which I should thinke were to narrow to let in and out so much water in the time mentioned; to bring any flood on this side, now in handling, for at Swannes Nest the flood set West, and the Ebbe East; and if this Tyde going West, were met with more water, from thence, it must flow extraordinarily high at the Nest (as in great Rivers in time of land-waters, the Sea flood meeting, puts up the waters to such heights, as doth inforce all their bounds) and rejected the Tydes course, which I found to be constant, for that I was there two floods one ebbe and a halfe. How can it now be imagined but that the Tde doth come from the West, and so coasteth along the same side, as wee may observe upon all Tydes from what sea soever they come, looke upon what side they enter, they Current the same, and so doth this, for that called Vtultra, never proved Bay yet, and who hath named the same, might as well be deceived here as at other places by fogs, bankes, for if this part be protracted, I cannot see that there is any discovery made at all on both sides (betweene Hubarts vaine hope, and Swanne Nest) worth the noting. Therefore it must be confest that this Tyde doth come from the West, so inclining to that shore, and that it is a Tide hath been proved, for I doe not thinke that there's any that will pretend inundating, impulsing, or ingulfing, and thatInstruction it doth proceed from some great Ocean, is without all con∣tradiction; for comming to this West side, I found great store of fish playing at the crust of the water, and of great fish which is a maine argument, for there was Whales, Sea-mors,Whales, Sea mors. and Seales, of which there are infinite, which fish doe not
hive in Winter but in deepe Oceans, and that those Whales must come from the West, is certaine, for all the way from Cape Farewell, in all that distance of neere 500 leagues; we did not see one untill I came there, which if there had beene any lying so long becalmed and amongst the ice, having light nights, we should have seene them, for they are fish that affect to play and breath above the water. The maine land was high within Sir Thomas Roes Wel∣come, as in all the straights besides, with deepe water to shore, whereas discovering Southwards, it fell to bee low land with shallow shore, at 11 fathoms, wee could but see it upon the hatches. This is much contrary to the Oceans, who are bounded with high mountainous climes, steepe Promonto∣ries, ragged Rockes, and inamoled Ilands, subsisting upon in∣searchable deepes, salt, and greene-coloured waters, wherein live the great sishes. Now let us compare this Tyde with some others neerer our owne home, with which we are the most familiar; as to begin at the mouth of the River Thames, towards which, two Tydes resort. And at the mouth thereof it floweth a S. and N. Moone, at the S. Foreland, S▪ S. E. in the Channell of the Ile of Wight, S. E. or S. E. by S. at Plimmouth E. at the Gulfe where the Ocean doth first enter our Channell, E. N. E▪ this reckoning goeth against the Sunne and Moone, yet this is the way to finde the Sea from whence the tide doth come. Likewise, along stthe North coast, there commeth another tide to the saide River bringing the like flowing, and al∣most answerable at the same distance, for from off Harwich, it floweth S. S. E. at Yarmouth, S. E. at Laresnesse, E. by N. at Whitby, N. E. at Barwick, N. N. E. at Backhanesse N. by E. in Orkney N. Now we know that both those Tydes, the one from the North, the other from the West, came both out of the Westerne Ocean, and that from the North by the lands trenting his channell, his Current from the West Eastwards, to S. E. as at I mmouth to S. S. E. as at St. Lawrence W. to S. E. as at Hambrough, to S. as at Hull to S. W. as at Harwich, and to W. into the said River of Thames. So as here it is made manifest, that both Tydes comming outAs West in  y• mn of Thames. of the Western Ocean E, doth in the end goe or set just against
themselves, as they set at their first comming from the Oce∣an. And therefore why wee you not thinke that the land to the West in this passage shall bend towards the South, into Mare del Zur, as it doth here trented within this Bay, S. W. by S. from latitude 64. 1 / . to 59. but to draw these points to a head, it is said these Tides met at the Ketish nocke, and turne their streames into Thames, it not being able to retaine them both the other parts are turned along the coast of Flanders, Holland, Frisland, and Zutland, where those sides doe end, by reason of the Baltickes Seas bottome, it being farre unto beside the strait Channels betweene it and the sound. It is made now heare to appeare, that he that will seeke the Oce∣an, as the Atlanticke to the West, or the Hiperorian to the North; for the moth of the River of Thames must follow the Tyde, one thing is to be observed, that it loweth more water upon this coast of England, then it doth upon the other coasts mentioned, the reason may be because England standeth nearer the West Sea. Listen now againe how places farre remote from theseSee Master Hall. our neighbour Channels doth correspond with them as in Grenland it lowed E. and W. Moone, and following the tide 10 leagues to Resolution, it flowed E. S. E. as before, and soO Cape Waricke. the id etting in with the Sunne untill it flowed S. by W. at Swaes Nest, and there is lost in Hudsons Bay, so that it holds the same quality in the processe of time with the for∣mer from the West and it is apparent that to seeke the Oce∣an from the bottome of Rivers deepe Byes, or within lands, as the Mditerranin, or the Blicke, we must find the flood tide, and follow it down the hill of time, I meane procee∣ding against it, we shall shorten the flood, as this day we shallShorter flood. be where it floweth a S. Moone, which we account to bee 12 of the clocke, to morow we shall be where the same Tyde flowed but 9. So that I being but allowed what experience doth make due unto me both neare home and else where, I make no doubt but to prove this passage. It followeth now to parallll this supposed passage with those formerly declared and certainely knowne, beginning at Port Nelson, where I had the exctest account of his flowing point, and climing the flood, for so he must conceive that say∣leth against Tide, found that it flowed there a South East
Moone at the Checks, where I was on land it flowed E. S. E. at Bgges his Mathematickes East, at Brooke Cobham E. be N. at Sir Thomas Roes Welcome, E. N. E. Now it is prooved that the course time and change of this Tyde doth correspond with all other Ocean Tydes, it running also halfe Tyde, (which is the floods running still the way of sood, untill it be halfe bbe on shore, the bbe running likewie his course, in continuance untill the water bee halfe flowed upon the shore) so as it cannot be said to want any joynt or member of an Oceans flood, but may rightly bee tearmed a limme thereof. It may be objected that although by all likely hood that is a passage, yet it may prove to be a great distance to saile through, and how shall a man doe to know when he is thorow, that thereby he may direct his course Southward. I answere it can be no great distance, for that the water doth heighten in Spring-Tydes, almost as much water at Sir Thomas Roes Welcome in the Spring Tydes, as at C. Warwicke which standeth in the edge of the Hyperborion Ocean, and therefore how can this Tyde come farre from his sea, and bring constantly as much water as it floweth in any place that standeth neere the Oceans lips; How can then the Mare del Zur, be farre from hence, for the distance betweene Cape Warwicke and Swans Nest, is not above 200 leagues where this Tydes quite consumed, so at the like distance from Sir Thomas Roes Welcome, This new Tyde along that Bay holds the same untill in the bottome thereof, it be consumed, for I have heard from some, that if North winds doth not inforce the Tydes that they doe not flow above two foot in Hudson E. and W. Bay, Me thinketh there is three materiall proofes that maketh better for our purpose, for to answere and free this doubt, though all the rest of Sir Humphrey Gilbert and Master Wills, makes for the passage. The first is that the Cosmographers of China doe extend their coasts to the N. E. even to the 50 d. of latitude, and may doe further for any thing they know. The second is Paul Ʋenetus, that lived there, and sayled from Catta 1500 leagues North-East, and might have gone further for any land he see.
The 3. is Barnard la Tore, the 4, may be the ships found by Francis▪ Wasques at Sierra Nevado not being of America but were a moneth in comming thither from Asia, all making that this passage cannot be long, for that they of Asia extend the breadth of their country so farre to East. Beside Francisco Gaule the Spanish Pylot reports of a high set of a Sea from the Northward in his passage from Japn to Callyfornia, which he sayth, continued howsoever the windes blew, this doth shew the Sea to be open to the N. for the like may be observed upon our N. coast about Whitby where the highest set of the Sea commeth from the N, N, W. although that poynt bloweth oblicke to the coast, yet there is more Sea therwith then the N. E. wind bringeth, that blowes opposite; the reason is, that the land to the N, N, W. is the furthest re∣mote, all open towards the Pole where these windes East∣wards off N. doe blow, but from Greeneland and the N. Cape at furthest, whose greatest distance being not above 370 leagues must want space to raise his swelling motion, but contrary at the entrance into our Channell from W. you shall have aBetweene England and France. cōtinuall set into Sleeve, which showes the distances of land to be far to the W. and S. wards, and the like must be granted to this set of Francis Gauls, and also by that current that set la Tore to Tidore, it must come out of a wide Sea from the N, E. And for knowing when thou art through, be assured thou shalt have as great a Sea from the del Zur as from the W. into our Sleeve, and the strength of tide along the coast will leave thee, then thou shalt not feare to direct thy course to Tartaria Cataia, or Jaon. It may also be said that the Articke Circle is farre N. and that it will be frost, Icy and cold, and that there is but two moneths in the yeare to make this triall, for in the rest it will not be nauigable. I answere, that the Articke circle is not so farre N. as the Cape of Finmarke neere in 73 d. where there is few or no Ice at any time, and thereby it is Navigable at all times, but that there is no trading in winter; besides the Sunne having great declination South, it is all night. But what is this to the Sea that is cleare of Ice, the like may this be for any yet knowne, for after I went from Swannes Nest, I see no yce to the N. nor doe I thinke there was any to the West, for the winde
blowing from the ayre was as warme as in England in the latter end of August, and the land had no snow thereon, al∣though it be very high land, and surely is inhabited, for else how could there have beene so many corps inwalled at Sir Thomas Roes Welcome, yet passing from hence S. ward into the bay it was colder, and yet warme enough. And for those Ice which are ingendred in this shallow sandy Bay is but as in other places in Europe nere the same Latit. for those that have gone timely into the Balticke Sea hath found yce comming out of the Sound, and it is no marvaile to see the same froze over, which in those parts is as usuall as to have a noose, to have the shipping froze all the whole winter therein, and for waggons to goe in winter where Ships aile in Sommer for many miles; for it is well knowne that those Sandy Easterne low countreys, as Sprutia, Denmarke, Frisland, and the Neather lands, are in winter subiected to violent frost, then why should not wee allow this low sandy countrey and Bay the like, being about the same parallell, and a Bay as the Balticke is also from thence, which Latit. where it free∣zeth so hard, is from 52 to 57d. but elevate the Pole to 73 d. there at that time of winter in the same continent, there is no yce but that you may saile Sea free into the coast of Russia, why shuld then this our Westerne passage be denyed of as good an opinion but that it may be Sea free as well as theirs to saile in∣to the Mare del Zur to Cathaia, being doubtlesse to the South∣ward of that parallell; these a places of Europe and America, thus answering one another both in quality and clime. Goe to Iseland as the Fishers doe now in March the North part lying in the Articke circle, and yet those Fishermen are not so troubled with Ice but that they can saile about it, and for the yce they finde there they conceive to be ingendred in the Bayes, Rivers, and Inlets of Groneland, and not about the Iland nor in the Sea: It now appeares as I said before that this country doth but comply with those countries Eastward, and the like may be expected by them that is found by the other, nor can this channell be narrow, that in 6 poynts of the com∣passe being but 4 howres ½. of time, to wit, from Sir Thomas Roes Iland to Port Nelson, doth send a flood and ebbe it backe againe along the coast for 150 leag. knowne in so short time and this to accord with the Moone.
To remonstrate this by example▪ Admit I were sent out of Russia to discover a land that I have heard lyeth farre S, W. which supose to be, Atlantis or America, now it must be thought that I know of noland to the W. of Europes continent and therefore when I am come about the C. of Finmarke I di∣rect my course to the S. and W. wards as soone as the land will give me leave. For I doe know that it doth trent so, and that the coast of Norway is bonded with an Ocean, now bending towards to the W. of S. not knowing of great Brittaine I di∣rect my I course gainest as I conceive, imagining that at shall meet with no land to the W. of Europe, but thinking thus to proceede I finde the land to meet mee to the W. as I thought to have sailed to wit the coast of great Brittaine, and there I finde a tide going along the land to the S. ward, I follow this coast hopeing it may cast about to the W. and as I proceede so doth this tide keeping the height of his water still, so by this ebbing and flowing, course and Latit. I doe assure it to my selfe that it cannot be any part of the maine continent of Europe, nor adioyning thereunto, and thus persuing to the S. in long distance I finde that this tyde doth still continue his height ofCalis and Dover. water so by that I speede on with more comfort, at length I come betwixt a maine lands, and doubting some alteration or imbayment, I keep still the W. side for thereby I must obtaine my intent if at all, but now when I come to make triall of my tyde I find, it hath left mee, which to fore convayed me ma∣ny leag▪ along this unknowne coast, and now my tide of flood commeth from the W, ward and against me as I should ayle, shall I not then assure my selfe that in pursuing against this tyde that it will bring me into a new Ocean by which I shall obtaine my desire which is the Atlanticke Sea, yea and I shall find it so, for as that tide which came along with me, from the N. out of the Sea which I have failed from, will direct me back againe into the same Sea, so shall this new tide from the W. in following his ebbe, bring me into his Ocean or the Atlantick which I desire. Even so may this tide of mine in persuing his ebbe from the place where I found it first bring me into the Mare al Zur.
Againe a Comparison fained to be sailed into a Sea through our owne Kingdome from the East Sea to the West. ADmit I come from Hambrough or the Easterne Sea to ex∣pediate a Voyage through a great Ocean in a Country I have heard to lye far to the W. directing my course W. ward I met with land sooner then I did expect in coasting this land W. wards, I find an entrance which I follow for by my account I am but newly come to Sea and must be farre short of my intent, but following this entrance I finde there is eb∣bing and flowing which I pursue and finde it to be a River, which conceive to be the river of Thames, I goe therein with the tide without debarre or hinderance, yet finding the fur∣ther up that I do proceede the tide heightneth lesse water and runeth lesse time, so as knowing I goe from the East, W. ward as I desire, yet I doe not know what will become of this haz∣zard, but not knowing how to mend my selfe I must now play the game this way, at length I come to the head of this river, which conceive to be at Kingston, there I finde this tide which I followed out of the Easterne Sea, to fall into a spacious and large Mare or Ponte which Mare I enter. Now it must be conceived, that all the Country betweene Kingston and Severn neere Bristow as part of Surry part of Hampshire, Wiltshire, Glostershire, Oxford, Buckingham and part of Middlesex. To be ingulfed and turned into an inland Sea round about, being entred in this Ponte I begin to circuit about by the S, S, W. and comes to W. side where I finde an Inlet to wit the ri∣verIn Gloster∣shire. at Barkly comming from the W. Sea out of Severne eb∣bing and flowing into the Mare as that did on the E. side by which I entred, now I intend to venter into this ebbing and flowing of waters from the W. and thus persisting against the tyde by observation, as yesterday it flowed a W. Moone, this day it flowed a W. by N. Moone keeping this constant fluxe and refluxe from the W. Eastward so as sayling I shorten the tyde and is come in short distance, to the place where it flow∣ed S. W. the same tide I tooke at my entring this river or in∣set to flow W. I may now assure my selfe that those tyde streames are supported by waters from an Ocean which by pursuite I find to be the Atlanticke,
It is to be observed in discoveries, as is found in other pla∣ces by experience, that in sayling against the flood-tide wee shorten the time of flowing, and in sayling therewith wee lengthen the same. This comparison standeth thus. HAmbrough is England, from whence we saile to Fretum Hudson, which here is conceived to be the Thames, whose head as Kingston, is Cary Swans Nest, the Country, Pont or Mar, so ingulfed is Hudsons or Buttons Bay, the W. Tide com∣ming out of the Ocean at Severne is that new Tide I found at Sir Thomas Roes Ile, which pursued will bring me into the Mare del Zur. Let it not now be said, that there is no passage by the N, W into India, for that the best Cosmographers, those learned in the Mathematickes and all Arts, have in former time consented that America is an Iland and separated from any other conti∣nent, by which great Princes have been perswaded to adven∣ture and countenance with great Summes, (nor were their hopes mistaken, although as yet God hath not appoynted the time) as also the Nobility, Gentry, & Merchants, when in the Voyage of Sir Thomas Button, were about 160 adventurers. My comfort is, that the quantity of Whales and Sea Mors that place affordeth (although it may be thought that I did not see the 100 part) will (when Whale oyle comes into request) drive the Merchant to send the Marriner to visite the Ile of Brooke Cobham for the Whale, & with their shallops range N, wards to search for Vnicorne horne, Mors teeth, and Whale∣finne, to come where Sir Tho: Roe will bid them Welcome, and by these inticements they will be perswaded to inquire after this tide, and at length bring home the good newes (which I expect) of this so long sought for. For my part, I have now washt the Black-moore these five yeares, having yet received neither Sallery, wages or reward;Laboured in vaine. except what som few Gentlemen hath, I know not whether in curtesie or charity bestowed upon me having to fore had my meanes taken from me in the time of warres, betwixt France, Spaine and us, so as I am utterly unable to prosecute the same though I wish well thereto, knowing it is now to be done at very small charge.
And this is more for their great comfort, that it hath plea∣sed almighty God of his great mercy, alwayes so to preserve those imployed this way to search in this discovery, that no ship ever perished, but howsoever they suffered, the account was brought home, and wee made acquainted with their actions; all which, wee must acknowledge to be the provi∣dence of Almighty God, who hath thus preserved those seeds we have owne and will doe still untill the time come which he hath appoynted, to send some happy man to plucke the fruit. Heere lyeh the way to lcos, and be that findes the same, bg home the Goae Fecce. The fifth of the knowne (and supposed passages) to that rich Iies, is by the Pole it selfe, yet never attempted; the gainest and most hopefull of those three, yet unknowne, and the shortest of them all as from our N. parts of Scotlands Iles, from the latit. of 60 d. to the Pole it selfe, is but 600 leag. of which it hath beene sayled to the 82 ½ d. by Captaine Tho∣mas Marmaduke of Hull, his furthest visible marke to the N. From thence was certaine Ilands he named Sheffields Orades, in duty to his most noble favourer in his Northerne designes, was Edmond Lord Sheffield, now Earle of Mulgrave, and at that time Lord President of the North, by whose great assist∣ance, charge, and countenance, with the Merchants of the same Corporation, he was still set forth. By which meanes in his discoveries N. ward towards the Pole, it was his good fortune to enter into a harbour in Green∣land, where he found one Jonas Poole, and Nicholas Woodcocke with others in a ship of London distressed, for that a fall of an Ice had sunke their Ship. Which subjects, with their oyles, Whale▪finnes, and Morsteeth, who must have miserably pe∣rished there if he had not brought them home, to this noble Lords perpetuall honour and the future incouragement of that trade, now the most rich and safest that wee have. And this is the best by prescription or any other claime the City of Yorke and the Corporation of Kingston vpon Hull can pleade for the continuance of their Trade thither; I make no doubt, but that they doe acknowledge his Lordship for the same with all thankfulnesse. This Greeneland was first seene by Mr. Hudson, who was countenanced by Sir Iohn Wolstenholme, in his N E. coursaries.
There may be something objected against this passage. wch may with ease be answered; and this Treatise better supplied, but this I leave to Capt. Goodlade, whose great experience this way, and to the E. ward thereof, is the best able to supply or confute, if he be pleased so to shew himselfe. From the Pole to the knowne Coast of China in Asia, latit. 50 d. is but 800 leag. more, and yet the most Cosmographers have extended the land of Tartaria and Scythia N. ward, to the 60. 70. and 80 Parralell, Septentrionall latitude, and on the America side, is discovered to the 50d. So that the greatest distance is but 1400 leag. nearer by one third part then any other of the S. My pen and selfe now is growne weary, and hoping some other brave Spirit will enter the Lists, and at∣tempt the Enterprize, I rest. FINIS. To the Worpfull, the Masters, VVar∣dens, and Assistants of the Trinity-Houses, but especially to these of Dedford-Strand, and Kingstone upon Hull, with their whole CORPORATIONS. WORSHIPFVLL GENTLEMEN, ANd Foster Fathers of my Academie, I present you heere, neither with Iasons voyage to Colcos, nor the Golden fleece as yet, but with the best of my endeavours to the North-west, which wee poore Discoverers are so eered about, (with so much Phylosophy) as though these Voyages have spent so much time and treasure as it is not able to redeeme it selfe by being guld with the false. Sea cards or fabulous reports of strangers, for no Nation in the World knoweth so much of this as your selves, nor neede wee neither the arguments of Phylosophy to examine so much variety, and that so various as the Schoole-men
finde out, nor (for their inquisitions or disquisitions) their Mr. A∣ristotle did not know, what time since his hath brought forth, and since him wee have almost found out the reason for the Tide, about which some of them have writ he drown'd himself because he could not, nor you neede not got to the N. W. passage to seeke the Philoso∣phers-stone, having one of your owne by which you have angled, levelled, and brigged over the Ocean, from this Monarch to the furthest East and West, the touch thereof hath made you attended home (as the shadow the substance) with the Tawny Peruian and the Sunne-burnt Black-moore Affricans Gold, the rich Sparkling Diamond, the night shining Carbunckle, the Physicall Beazer, the Emerald, Saphire, and the Orient Indian Pearle, adorning the Lilly necks of the most dainiest Ladies, with other of pleasure and price; besides the Drugges, Ʋigitables, Simples and Balsoms for health; and all these and farre more emm of wealth and trea∣sure hath the vertue of your Adamant stone exported hither, to the enriching and honouring of our Nation. I pray that when this abortive shall come to your view, that you passe over its deformity and imperfections (which nature in hast stampt it into, in which it still remayneth, both for want of meanes and Art) and your private admonition shall cause me amend it at the next Edition, for with this I am glad I have not overchar∣ged the presse (as fearing) the worst part of which is already be∣fale (in Erataes) for which if I should excuse my selfe, I know both the Compositor, and the Correcter will witnesse with me in taking the fault upon themselves, I have done my endevour to correct the most palpable, as mistaking words or non-sence, which not being ac∣quainted with our Sea termes they might easily commit, and for the faults in letters, I know your Arithmetick can make whole numbers of Fractions, if these faults had beene committed by my selfe in the Copie I might with some reason have pleaded an excuse, being no Scholler and having had no helpe, which I did knw was very need∣full, but was not able to buy it, and I was told it would not be had for naught, especially by the Scholler that was acquainted with the language of the Sea; therefore now I feele the want of Mr. Hack∣luit, and so I doubt will others in time to come, who for the good of his Country stored those Journals at his owne charge. Whereupon not knowing otherwise how to proceede, I was en∣forced with such Tackling, Cordage, and Raftage, as I had, to Rigge and Tackle this ship my selfe. I hope shee will saile the
better in this Trimm, if you be pleased to conduct her, which I doubt not but you will, having heretofore observed your favours in cherishing and preferring young Sea-men, with your charity  others, not onely in your Almes-deeds to the Fatherlesse and Or¦phans, but your continuall maintinance with all necessaries to a∣ged poore Widdowes and decayed Mariners, your compassion and reliefe to the distressed ship-wrackt-Seamen farre from home, and others, your priviledge to aied Men, with the right in Ju∣stice you dot to those that are not able to wage law for the same, de∣serveth to be inrolled amongst the greatest acts of Christian cha∣ritie. And for that your helpefull care towards my furnishing  with all materials for this service, your loving aspects and bounty since my home comming, hath obliged me to acknowledge your fa∣vours, with thankes, I desire your kind acceptance, and the rather because it is the Present of your younger Brother, Lvke Foxe Resensui librum hunc, cui titulus est [North∣west Foxe] in quo nihil reperio quò minùs cum utilitate publicâ Imprimatur, modò intra sex menses proximè sequentes typis mandetur. Decemb. 1. 1634. Sa. Baker R. P. D. Episcopo Londinensi Cap. domest. Errata. Pag Li For Reade. 259 15 South Sea.     60. 10. 64. 10. 261 36 St. Low¦rence Laresnesse.   3 Hull Soale.     Hambro Haisbrough. 22 2 why we why may wee not.   4 treted tret. 264 38 any yet any thing yet. 266 10 gainest, at gainest.     at shall at I shall.
