12235 99849123 14258
Theeues falling out, True∣men come by their Goods: OR, The Belman wanted a Clapper. A Peale of new Villanies rung out; The sound being Musicall to all Gentlemen, Lawyers, Farmers, and all sorts of people that come vp to the Tearme: Shewing that the Villanies of leawd Women, excell those of Men. Goe not by mee, but Buy mee; and get by mee. Imprinted at London for T. G. and are to be sould by R. Marcha at the Crosse in Pauls Church-yard. 1615.
To all Gentlemen, Marchants Apprenti∣ses, and Countrie Farmers, health. NEwes▪ and greene Bushes at Tauerns new set vp; euery man hath his Penny to spend at a Pint in the one, and euery man his Eare open to receiue the sound of the other. It is the language which at first meetings is vsed in all Countries, What Newes? In Court, tis the Mor∣ninges Salutations; and Noones table-talke; by Night it is stale. In Cittie, tis more common, then, What doe you lake? And in the Countrie, Whistling at Plough is not of greate Antiquitie. Walke the middle Ile in Pauls, and Gentlemens teeth walke not faster at Ordinaries, then there a whole day togeather, about inquirie after Newes. Newes then, being a Fish that's caught euery day, and yet a Meate for euery mans Table; I thinke it not amisse to inuite all men to a Feast of such Newes, as haue of late come in shoales into my Net. I will not hold a Bird in a Cage to sing strange Notes to my selfe, but let her foorth to delight others: And albeit (about some two or three yeares past) the vgly faces of
diuers dambde abuses, were set naked vpon euery Post, their Vizards being flead off, both by  and Candle-light, and by the Belman of London: Yet Villanie when it runns to seed, being of all other Graines the most fruitefull and luxuri∣ant, the Candlelight was burnt to a Snuffe, and the Belman fast asleepe before these Monsters which now are hatcht foorth, creeped out of their Dennes. In Westminster, the Strand, Hlburne, and the chiefe places of resortes about London, doe they euery day build their Nestes, euery hower ge▪ and in Teare  especially fltter they abroad in flockes: You shall know them by their Fethers. And because for the most part, they flye in payres, (a Cocke and a Henne togeather), Behold a couple newly alighted on the Pearch; a Hee-Foyst, and a Shee-Foyst: What they chirrup out, their owne Voyces can best deliuer▪ and therefore listen to them. Suppose you heare the first of them setting foorth a throate thus. Farewell. R. G.
A Disputation betweene a Hee-Foyst, and a Shee-Foyst. Stephen, and Kate. Stephen. FAire Kate, well met, what Newes about your Westminster-Bulding, that you looke so blyth, your herry Cheekes discouers your good fare▪ and your bra Appare▪ be wraies a fate Purse: is Fortune now alate growne so fauourable to Foyste, that your Husband hath lighted on some large purchase; or hath your smooth lookes linck in some young Nouice to  all the byte in his Bunge, & to leaue himselfe as many Crownes as thou hast good conditions, and then he shall be one of Pierce pennilesse fraternitie? How is it sweet Wench, goes the world on wheeles, that you tread on your ? Kate. Why Stephen, are you pleasant or peuish, that you qip with such bree grdes▪ thinke you a quartee winde cannot make a quicke saile, that case lystes cannot make heauy burthens, that women haue not wiles to compasse crownes as well as menyes and more, for though they be not so strong in the , they be more ripe in their wittes: and  that I liue & will liue, in despight of that peuish scholler, that thought with his onny-catching bookes to haue crosbit our Trade. Doest thou maruell to see me thus brisk? fire wenches cannot want fauours, while the world is so full of amorous fooles: where can such Girles as my selfe, be bleh with a thred∣bare Coat, as long as cuntry Farmers haue full Purses; and wan∣ton Citizens pockets full of Pene? Steph. Truth, if fortune so fauour thy Husband, that he be neither smoakt nor cloyed: for I am sure▪ all my brauerie comes by his Nip∣ping, Foysting, and Lifting. Kate. In ayth sir no: did I get no more by mine owne wit, then I reape by his purchase, I might both goe are & pennilesse the whole
yeare; but mine eyes  were I not worthy the name of a more Charmes Calipso more Inchantments, the Syrens more subtil tunes, then I haue crafty flightes to  a Conny, and fetch in a country Farmer. Stephen beleeue me, you men are but fooles, your gettings is vncertaine, & yet you still fish for the Gallowes, though by some great chance you light vpon a good  oung, yet you fast a great while after; whereas, as we mad Weches haue our Tennants (for so I call euery simple Leccher & amorous Fox) as well out of Tearme as in Tearme, to bring vs our Re: alas, were not my wittes, and my wanton pranks more profitable then my sweare my husband gets a hundreth pounds a yeare by Steph. Why Kate, are you growne so stiffe, to thinke that your faire lookes can get as much as our nimble fingers: or that your s∣king can gaine as much as  foysting , no, Kate, you are Bowes downe the  more then twentie the proudest Wenches in all London. Kate Lie a litle further, & giue me some roome: what Stephen, your tongue is too lauish, all stands vpon proofe; & sith I haue lesure, and you no great busines, as being now when Pauls is shut vp, and al purchases & Connes in their , let vs  and take a roome to our selues, & therefor the price of our suppers, I will proue, that women (I meane of our facultie, traffique, or as base: knaues tearme vs, strumpets) are  subtil, more dangerous in the common-wealth, and more , then the cun∣ningest Foyst, Nip, Lit,  this day. Steph. Content; but who shall be sith in disputing pro & contra, betwixt ourselues, it is ut your yea, and my nay, and so neither of vs will yeeld to others victories. Kate Trust me Stephen, I am so assured of the conquest, offering so in the strength of mine owne arguments, that when I haue reaso∣ned, I will referre it to your iudgement and censure. Step. And trust me, as I am an honest man, I will be indifferent. Kate. Oh sweare not so deeply: but let me first heare what you can say for your selfe? Steph. What? why more Kate, then can be painted out in a great volume; but briefly this: I need not discribe the lawes of villanie, be∣cause
the Bel-man hath so amply pend them downe in the first part of Cnuy-catching,Cupurses in their llers. that though I be one of the faculty, yet I cannot ∣couer more then he hath layd open. Therefore first to the Gentleman Foyst, I pray you what finer qualitie? what art is more excllent ei∣ther to trie the ripenes of the wit, or the agilliti of the had, then that for him that will be maister of his trade, must passe the proudest Iug∣ler aliue, the poynts of Leger de maine, he must haue an eye to spye the boung or pursse, and then a heart to dare to attempt it, for this by the way, he that feares the Gallowes shall neuer be good theefe while he liues, hee must as the Cat watch for a Mouse, and walke Powles, Westminster, the Exchange, and such common haunt places, and there haue a curious eye to the person, whether he be Gentleman, Ci∣tizen or Farmer, and note, either where his boung lyes, whether in his hoase or pockets, and then dogge the partie into a presse where his slaule with heauing and houing shall so molest him, that hee shall not feele when wee strip him of his boung, although it e neuer so fast or cunningly cucht about him: what poore Farmer almost can come plead his case at the barre, to attend vpon his Lawyers at the ench, but looke he neuer so narrowly to it we haue his pursse, wherin some∣time there is fat purchase, twentie or thirtie poundes, and I pray you how long would one of your. Traffiques be arning  much wt your Chamber worke. Besides in faires and markets, and in the circuites after Iudges, what infinit mny is gotten from honest meaning men, that either busie about their necassarie affaires, or carelesly looking to their Crownes, light amongst vs that be foysts, ush we dessemble in show▪ we goe so neat in apparrell, so orderly in outward appearance,Three shapes. some like Lawyers Clarkes, others like , that attended there about their maisters businesse, that wee are hardly smoakt, ver∣ing vpon all men with kinde courtesies and faire wordes, and yet be∣sing so warily watchfull, that a good purse cannot be put vp in a faire, but we sigh if we share i ot amongst vs: and though the Bookes of Conny-catching haue somewhat hindred vs, and brought many brue Foysts to the Halter, yet some of our country Farmers, nay of our Gentlemen and Citizens, are so carelesse in a throng of people, that they shew vs the Prey, and so draw on a thiefe, and bequeath vs their Purses whether we will or no; for who loues Wine , that he will not eate Grapes if they fall into his mouth; and who is so base, that if he see a pocket faire before him, wil not foyst in if he may, or if foysting
will not serue, vse his knife and nip, for although there be some foysts that will not vse their knis, yet I hold him not a prfect workeman or maister , that will not cut a Purse as well as Foyst a pocket, and hazrd any limme for so sweet a gaine as gold: how an∣swere you me this  obiection Kate? can you compare with either our cunning to get our gaines in purchase? Kate. And haue you no stronger arguments good man Stephen, The Shee Diuell worst.to argue your excellencie in villanie but this? then in faith put by your pipes, and giue me leaue to speake: your choplodgicke hath no great subtiltie for simple, you reason of foysting, & approbriate that to your selues, to you men I meane, as though there were not women Foysts and Nippes; as neat in that Trade as you, of as good an eye, as fine and nimble a hand, and of as resolute a heart: yes Stephen, and your good mistresses in that mystery; for we without like suspition can passe in your walkes vnder the couler of simplicitie to Westminster, with a Paper in our hand, as if we were distressed women, that had some sup∣plication to put vp to the Iudges, or some bill of information to deli∣uer to our Lawyers, when God wot, we shuffle in for a boung as wel as the best of you all, yea as your selfe Stephen, though you bee cal∣led king of Cutpurses, for though they suke you, they will hardly mistrust vs, & suppose our stomacke stand against it to Foyst, yet who can better play the stanse or the shadowe then wee, for in a thrust or throng if we shoue hard, who is hee that will not fauour a woman, and in giuing place to us, giue you free passage for his purse. Women Foysts and Boyes, most dangerous in Fayres and Markets.Againe, in the market, when euery wife hath almost her hand on her boung, and that they crie beweare the Cutpurse and Conny-catchers, then I as fast as the best with my hand basket as mannerly as if I were to buy great store of Butter & Egs, for prouision of my house, do exclaime against them with my hand on my Purse, and say the world is badde when a woman cannot walke safely to Market, for feare of these vil∣lanous Cutpurses, when as the first boung I come to, I either nip or Foyst, or else ule another, while hee hath stroken, dispatcht & gone: Now I pray you gentle sir, wherin are we inferior to you in foysting: and yet this is nothing to the purpose. For it is one of our most sim∣plest shifts, but yet I pray you what think you when a Farmer, Gen∣tleman, or Citizen, come to the Tearme, perhaps hee is wary of his Purse, & match him neuer so warily, yet he will neuer be brought to the blow, is it not possible for vs to pinch him ere hee passe? He that is
the blow, is it not possible for vs to pinch him ere he passe, hee that is most chary of his Crownes abroad, & will cry, Ware the Conny-cat. chers, will not be afraide to drinke a pint of wine with a pretty wench,A Trull with a Gull. and perhaps goe to a trugging house to ferry one out for his purpose, then with what cunning we can feede the simpl Fop, with what faire words, sweete kisses, fained sighes, as if at that instant we fell in loue with him that we neuer saw before: if we meete him in the euening in the street, if the Farmer, or other whatsoeuer, be not so forward as to motion some curtesie to vs, we straight insinuate into his companie, and claime at quaintance of him by some meanes or other, and if his minde be set for lust, & the Diuell driue him on to match himselfe with some dishonest wanton, then let him looke to his Purse; for if he doe but kisse me in the street, Ile haue his Purse for a farewell, although he neuer commit any other act at all. I speake not this only by my selfe Stephen, for there be a hundred in London more cunning then my selfe in this kind of Cunny-catching. But if he come into a house then let our trade alone to verse vpon him, for first we faine our selues hungry, for the benefit of the house, although our bellies were neuer so full, and no doubt the good Pander, or Bawde,Tricks of bawdes. shee comes foorth like a sober Matron, and sets ore of Cates on the Table, and then I fall  on them, & though I can eate little, yet I make hauake of all, and let him be sure euery dish is well saue'd, for hee shall pay for a Pippin Pye that cost in the Market foure pence, at one of the Trugging houses▪ xviii. pence▪ ush what is daintie if it be not deare bought, and yet he must come off for Crownes besides, and when I see him draw to his Purse, I note the putting vp of it well, and ere wee part, that world goes hard if I foyst him not of all that hee hath, and then suppose the woorst, that he misse it, am I so simple acquan∣ted or badly prouided, that I haue not a friend, which with a few ter∣rible oathes & countenance set, as if he were the proudest Souldd, that euer bare Armes in the Low-country Warres, will face him quite out of his money, and make him walke like a woodcocke home∣ward by weeping crosse, and so buy repentance with all the Crownes in his Purse. How say you to this Stephen, whether are women Foystes inferiour to you in ordinarie cousnage or no? Step. Excellently well reasoned, thou hast told mee wonders, but wench though you be wily and strike often, your blowes are not so big as ours.
Kate. Oh but note the subiect of our disputation, and that is this, which are more subtill and daungerous in the Common-wealth, and to that I argue. Step. I and beshrow me, but you reason quaintly, yet will I proue your wittes are not so ripe as ours, nor so ready to reach into the sub∣tilties of kinde cosnage, and though you ppropriate to your selfe the excellencie of Conny-catching, and that you doe it with more Art then we men do, because of your painted flatteries and sugres words, that you florish rethorically like nettes to catch fooles, yet will I ma∣nifet with a merry instance, a  dne by a Foyst, that exceede any that euer was done by any  in England. A pleasant Tale of a Country Farmer, that tooke it in scorne to haue his Pursecut or drawne fro him, and how a Foyst serued hi. IT was told me of a truth that not long  here in London, there lay a Country Farmer, with  of his neighbours about Law matters, amngst whom,  of them going to Westminster-Hall, was by a Foyst stript of all the pence in his Purse, and comming home, maide great complt of his misfortune, some  his losse, and others exclamed against the Cutpurses, but this Farmer he laught loudly at the matter, & say such fooles as could not keepe their Purses no surer, were well serued, and for my part  hee, I so much scorne the , that I would thank him  that would take paines to Foyst , well sayes hi neighbour, then you may thank me, sith my harmes learnes you to beware, but if it be true, that many things fall out betweene the cup and the lip, you know not what hands Fortune may light in your owne lap, tush quoth the Farmer, heeres fortie pounds in this Purse in gould, the proudest Cutpurse in England win it and weare it; thus he . There stood a subtill Foyst by, and heard all, smyling to himselfe at the folly of the proud Farmer, and vowed to haue his Purse, or venture his necke for it, and so went home and ewryed it to a crew of his Com∣panions, who taking it in , that they should be put downe by a Peasant: But where souer they , they , and both consulted, and concluded all by a generall consent, to bend all their wittes to be possessers of this Farmers Boung, and for the ex∣ecution
of this their vow, they haunted about the Inne where he laie, and dogd him into diuers places, both to Westminster-Hall, and other places, and yet could neuer light vpon it, he was so watchfull and smoakt them so narrowly, that all their trauell was in vaine, at last one of them fledde to a more cunning pollicie, and went & learn'd the mans name & where he dwelt,A prettie ▪ and then he hyed him to the Coun∣ter and entred an Action against him of trespase, damages, two hun∣dreth pounds, when he had thus done, hee feed two Sargiants, and carried them downe with him to the mans lodging, wishing them not to arrest him till hee commaunded them, well agreed they were, and downe to the Farmers lodging they came, where were a rue of Foystes, whom he had made priuy to the end of his practise, stood wayting, but he tooke no knowledge at all of them, but walkt vp and downe, the Farmer came out and went to Powles, the Cutpurse ad stai, and would not yet suffer the Officers to meddle with him, till he came into the West end of Paules Church-yard, and there he willed them to doe their Office, and they stepping to the Farmer arrested him, the Farmer amazed, being amongst his neighbors, asked the Sargiant at whose suite hee was troubled, at whose suite soeuer it be, sayd one of the Cutpurses that stood by, you are wrngd honest man, for hee hath arrested you heare in a place of priuiledge, where the Sherifes nor Officers haue nothing to doe with you, and therefore you are vnwise if you obey him, tush sayes an other Cut∣purse, though the man were so simple of himselfe, yet shall hee not offer the Church so much wrong, as by yeelding to the Mace, to im∣bellish Paules libertie, and therefore I will take his part, and with that he drew his sword, an other tooke the man and haled him away, the Officer he stooke hard to him, and sayd he was his true prisoner, and cride Clubbes, the Prentises arose, and there was a great hurly burly, for they tooke the Officers part, so that the poore Farmer was mightily turmoyld amongst them, & almost haled in peeces, whilest thus the strife was, one of the Foystes had taken his purse away, and was gone, and the Officer carried the man away to a Tauerne, for he swore he knew no such man, nor any man that he was indebted to: as then they satte drinking of a quart of wine, the Foyst that had caused him to be arested, sent a note by a Porter to the Officer that he should relase the Farmer, for he had mistaken the man; which note the Offi∣cer shewed him, and had him pay his fees and go his wayes, the poore
Country-man was content with that, and put his hand in his pocket to feele for his Purse, and God-wot there was nne; which made his heart farre more cold then the Arrest did, and with that fetching a great sigh, he sayd. Alas Maisters I am vndone, my Purse in this Fray is taken out of my pocket, and ten pounds in Gold  it besides white mony.One varlet. smo another. Indeed, said the Sargeant, commonly in such brawles, the Cutpurses be busie, and I pray God the quarrell was not made vpon purpose by the Pick-pockets. Well (sayes his Neighbor) who shall smile at you now, the other day when I lost my Purse, you laught at me? The Farmer oke all, and sate lecontent, and bor∣rowed Mony of his Neighbors to pay the Sargeant, and had a lear∣ning (I beleeue) euer after, to braue the Cutpurse. How say you to this Mistris Kate, was it not well done? What choyce witted Wench of your facultie, or she Foyst, hath euer done the like? ush Kate, if we begin once to apply our wittes, all your inuentions are follies towards ours. Kate. You say good goodman Stephen, as though your subtil∣ties were sodaine as womens are, come but to the old Prouerbe, and I put you downe, Tis s hard to finde a are without a Muse, as a woman without a sese▪ and that wit that can deuise a cunning lye, can plot the inent of deepe villanies. I grant this fetch of the Foyst was prettie, but nothing in respect of that we wantons can compasse, and therefore to quite your tale with another, heare what a mad wench of my profession, did relate to one of your facultie. A passing pleasant Tale, how a whore Conny-catcht a Foyst. THere came out of the Country a Foyst, Country, oyst Gulles e Cittie oystes. to trie his experience, here in Westminster Hall, and strooke a hand or two, but the diuell a snap he would giue to our citizen Foystes, but wrought warily, and could not bee fetcht off by no meanes, and yet it was knowne he had some twentie pounds about him, but he planted it so cunningly in his doublet, that it was sure enough for finding. Although the Cittie Foysts laid all the plottes they could, as well by discouering him to the Gaylors as otherwayes, yet hee was so pol∣tique, that they could not verse vpon him by any meanes, which greeues them so, that one day at dier, they held a counsaile amongst
themselues how to couzen him, but in vaine, till at last a good wench that sat by, vndertooke it, so they would sweare to let her haue all that hee had, they confirmed it sollemnly, and she put it in practse thus: she subtilly insinuated her selfe into this Foysts company, who seeing her a prettie wench, began, after twise meeting, to waxe fami∣liar with her, and to question about a nights lodging, after a little nyce louing and bidding she was content for her supper and what else hee would of curtesie bestow vpon her, for she held it scorne she sayd, to set a salarie price on her body: the Foyst was gladde of this, and yet he would not trust her, so that he put no more but tenne shillings is his pocket, but he had aboue twenty poundes quilted in his doub∣let: well to be short, supper time came, and thither comes my genle Foyst, who making good cheere, was so eager of his game that hee would straight to bedde, by the leaue of dame Bawde, who had her fee too, and there he laye till about midnight, where three or foure old Hacksters, whom she had prouided vpon purpose, came to the doore and rapt lustely: who is there sayes the Bawde looking out of the window, marry say they, such a Iustice (and named one about the Cittie that is a mortall enemy to Cutpurses) who is now come to search your house for a Iesuite and other susspected persons: alas sir sayes shee, I haue none heere, well quoth they, Ope the doore. I will, sayes shee, and with that she came into the Foystes Chamber: who heard all this, and was a frayde it was some search for him, so that he desired the Bawd to helpe him, that he might not be seene. Why then (quoth she) step into this Closet. Hee whipt in hastely, and neuer remembred his Cloathes: shee lock him in safe, and then let in the crew of Rakehels, who making as though they searcht euery Chamber, came at last into that where his Lemman lay, and asked her what she was: She, as if she had been afraide, desired their Wor∣ships to be good to her, she was a poore Countrie Mayde come vp to the Tearme. And who is that, quoth they, that was in bed with you? None for sooth, sayes she. No, sayes one, that is a lie,The Wolfe, eates the Fox. here is the print of two; and besides, wheresoeuer the Foxe is, here is his skine, for this is his Doublet and Hose: Then downe shee falles vpon her knees, and sayes, indeed it was her Husband. Your Husband, quoth they, nay that cannot be (Minion) for why then would you haue de∣nied him at the first? With that, one of them turnd to the Bawd, and did question with her what he was, & where he was? Truly sir, sayes
she, they came to my house, and sayd they were man and wife; and for my part I knew them for no other, and hee being afraid, is indeed (to confesse the troth) shut vp in the Closet.  Cardes well packt, are as halfe the game won. No doubt (if it please your Worship, saies one rakehell) I warrant you, he is some notable Cut∣purse or Pickpocket, that is afrayd to shew his face, come & open the Closet, and let vs looke on him. Nay sir sayes she, not for to night I beseech your worship carry no man out of my house, I will giue my word hee shall be foorth-comming to morrow morning. Your word dame Bawd, saies one, tis not worth a straw. You Huswife, that saies ye are his wife ye shall goe with vs: and for him, that we may be sure he may not start, Ile take his Doublet, Hose, and Cloake, & to mor∣row Ile send them to him by one of my men; were there a thousand pounds in them, there shall not be a penny diminisht. The Whore kneeled downe on her knees, and fained to cry pittifully, & desired the Iustice, (which was one of her companions) not to carry her to Pri∣son. Yes huswife, quoth he, your mate & you shall not tarry togither in one house, that you may make your tales all one, & therefore bring her away: and after, ye dame Bawd, see you lend him no other cloaths, for I will send his in the morning betimes, and come you with him to answere for lodging him. I will sir, sayes she: and so away goes the Wench & her companions laughing, and left the Bawd & the Foyst. As soone as the Bawd thought good, she vnlockt the Closet, & curst the time that euer they came in her house: now (quoth she) heere will  Worse feard, then hurt. be a fayre adoe, how will you answer for your selfe? I feare me I shal be in danger of the Cort. Well (quoth he) to be short, I would not for fourty poundes come afore the Iustice. Mary no more would I, quoth she; let me shift, if you were conueyed hence, but I haue not a rag of mans apparell in the house. Why (quoth he) seeing it is early morning, lend me a Blanket to put about me, and I will scape to a friendes house of mine. Then leaue me a pawne, quoth the Bawde: Alas I haue none, sayes he, but this Ring on my finger. Why that, quoth she, or tarry while the Iustice comes: so he gaue it her, tooke the Blanket and went his wayes, whither I know not, but to some friendes house of his. Thus was this wily Foyst by the wit of a sub∣tile Wench, cunningly stript of all that he had, and turnd to grasse to get more fatte. Kat. How say you to this deuice Stephen, was it not excellent? What thinke you of a Woman's wit, if it can worke such woonders?
Steph. Marry I thinke my Mother was wiser then all the honest Women of the Parish besides. Kate. Why then be-like she was of our facultie, and a Matrone of my profession, nimble of her hands, quicke of her tongue, and light of her tayle; I should haue put in, Sir reuerence: but a foule word is good enough for a filthy Knaue. Stph. I am glad you are so pleasant Kate, you were not so merry when you went to Dunstable: but indeed I must needes confesse that women Foystes, if they be carefull in their trades, are (though not so common) yet more dangerous then men Foystes: Women haue quicke wittes, as they haue short heeles; and they can get with plea∣sure, what we sh for with danger: but now giuing you the Bucklers at this weapon, let me hau a blow at you with another. Kate. But before you induce any more Arguments, by your leaue in a litle by-talke. You know Stephen, that though you can foyst, nip, prg, lift, curbe, & vse the Blacke art,Crosbiting now most in vse. yet you cannot crosbite without the helpe of a Woman: which crosbiting now adayes, is growne to a maruilous profitable exercise; for some cowardly Knaues that for feare of the Gallowes, leaue nipping & foysting, become Crosbites, knowing there is no danger therein but a litle punishment, at the most the Pillorie, and that is saued with a litle Vngentum Aureum: as for example; W. C. is now a reformed man, whatsoeuer he hath been in his youth, now in his latter dayes he is growne a corrector of Uice; for whom soeuer he takes suspitious with his wife, I warrant you he sets a sure fine on his head, though he hath nothing for his mony but a bare kisse: and in this Art, we poore Wenches are your surest props and stay. If you will not beleeue mee, aske poore A. B. in Turnmill street, what a sawcie Signor there is, whose purblind eyes can scarce∣ly discerne a Lowse from a Flea, and yet he hath such insight into the mysticall trade of Crosbyting, that hee can furnish his Boord with a hundred poundes worth of Plate: I doubt the fand-eyde Asse, will kicke like a Westerne Pugg, if I rubbe him on the gaule; but tis n matter if he find himselfe toucht and stirre, although he boastes of the chiefe of the Cleargies feuour, yet Ile so set his name out, that the Boyes at Smithfield-barres shall chalke him on the backe for a Crosbite. Tush, you Men are foppes in fetching nouices ouer the ales: Harken to mee Stephen, Ile tell thee a woonder. There dwelt here somtimes a good ancient Matron, that had a fayre Wench
to her Daughter, as young and tender as a  Masse Priestes Lemman; her she set out to sale in her youth, and drew on sundry to be suters to her Daughter, some wooers, and some speeders; yet none married her, but of her Beautie they made profite, and inueagled all, till they had spent vpon her what they had, and then forsooth, shee and her young Pigion turne them out of doores like prodigall Children: She was acquainted with Dutch, French, Italian, and Spaniard, as well as English, & at last, as so often the Pitcher goes to the Brooke that it comes broken home, my faire Daughter was hit on the maister veine, and gotten with child, and the Mother, to releue this matter to saue her Daughters Marriage, begins to weare a Cushion vnder her owne irtle, and to faine her selfe with child, but let her Daughter passe as though she ayld nothing: whan the fourtie weekes were come, and my young Mistris must needes cry out forsooth, this old . had gotten huswifes, anerable to her selfe; and so brought her Daughter to Bed, and let her goe vp and downe the house, and the old Croane lay i childbed as though she had been deliuered, and said, the Child was hers, and so saued her Daughters . Was not this a witty wonder M. Stephen, wrought by an old Witch, to haue a Child in her age, and make a young Whore seeme an honest Uirgin: Tush, this is litle to the purpose, if I should rcite all,  many she had coned vnder the pretence of marriage: Well, poore plaine Sig∣nior See, you were not stiffe inough for her, although it cost you many Crownes, and the losse of your seruice. Ile say no more, perhaps she will amende her manners. Ah Stephen, how like you of this geare, in Crosbiting wee put you ; for God wot, it is little lookt too in & about London; and yet I may say to thee, many a good Citizen is Crosbit in the yeare by odde Walkers abroad. Steph. I cannot dny Kate, but you haue set downe strange Pre∣sidents of Womens preiudiciall wits; but yet though you be Cros∣bites, Foystes, and Nips, yet you are not good Liftes: which is a great helpe to our Facultie, to  Boult of Satten or Ueluet. Kate. Stay thee a word, I thought thou hadst spoken of I.P.C. his wife: Take heed, they be parous folkes, and greatly acquainted with Keepers and Jaylers, therefore meddle not you with them; for I heare say, the Belman hath sworne in despight of the Brasill affe, to tell such a foule Tale of him in his Second part, that it will co him a dangerous Ioynt.
Ste. Kate, Kate, let I. P. beware, or had not an ill fortune falne to the Bel-man, he could take little harme. Kate. Who is that Stephen, D. VV. Ste. Nay, I will not name him. Kate Why then I prithie what misfortune befell him? Ste. Marry Kate, he was strangely washt alate by a French Barber, and had all the haire of his face miraculously shauen off by the Sythe of Gods vengeance, in so much that some sayd he had that he had not, but as hap was, howsoe∣uer his haire fell off, it stood him in some eed when y• brawle was alate: for if he had not cast off his beard and so being vn∣known, it had cost him some knockes, but it fell out to ye best. Kate The more hard fortune that he had such ill hap, but hastie iourneys bréed dangerus sweates, & y• Phisitians call it y• Ale Peria, yet omitting all this, againe to where you left. St. You haue almost brought me out of my matter, but I was talking about the Lit, commending what a good quali∣ty it was, and how hurtfull it was,The coditi∣ons of a Life. séeing we practise it in Mercers shops, with Haberdshers of small war, Haberda∣shers of Hats & Caps, amongst Marchant Taylors for Hose and Doublets, and in such places getting much gaines by Lifting, when there is no good purchase abroad by Foisting. Kate Suppose you are good at the lift, who be more cun∣ning then we women, in that we are more trusted, for they little suspect vs, & we haue as close conueyance as you men, though you haue Cloakes, we haue skirts of gownes, hand∣baskets, the crownes of our hats, our plackardes, and for a néed, false bags vnder our smockes, wherein we may conuey more closely then you. St. I know not where to touch you, you are so witty in your answers, and haue so many starting hoales, but let me be pleasnt wt you a little, what say you to Priggin or horse-stealing, I hope you neuer had experience in that faculty. Kate Alas simple sot, yes, and more shift to shunne the gallowes then you. St. Why tis impossible.
Kate. In faith sir no, and for proofe,I will tell you wōders of this mad wench & her husband, in my blacke booke, with both their names. I will put you down with a story of a mad, merry, little dapper, fine wench, who at Spilsby faire had thrée horse of our own, or another mans to sell, as she, her husband, and another good fellow, walked them vp and downe the Faire, the owner came & apprehen∣ded them all, & clapt them in prison, the Iaylor not kéeping them close prisoners, but letting them lye all a Chamber, by her wit she instructed them in a formall tale, that she saued all their liues thus. Being brought the next morrow after their apprehension, before the Iustices, they examined y• men how they came by the horses, and they confest they met her with them, but where she had them, they knew not: then was my pretty peat brought in, who being a handsome Trull, blusht as if she had béen full of grace; and being demanded where she had the horses, made this answere: May it please your wor∣ships, this man my husband, playing the vnthrift, as many more haue done, was absent from me for a quarter of a year, which grieued me not a litle, insomuch y• desirous to sée him, & hauing intelligence he would be at Spilsby Faire, I went thither euen for pure loue of him, on foot, & being within some ten miles of y• towne, I waed passing weary, & rested me of∣ten, & grew very faint, at last there came riding by me a Ser∣uingman in a blew coat, with 3 horses tide at one anothers taile, which he led, as I gest, to sell at the faire: the Seruing∣man séeing me so tired, took pitty on me, & asked me if I wold ride on one of his empty horses, for his own wold not beare double, I thankt him hartily, & at the next hill got vp, & rode til we came to a towne within 3 miles of Spilsby, where the Seruing-man alighted at a house, & ad me ride on afore, and he would presently ouertake me. Wel, forward I rode halfe a mile, & looking behind me, could sée no body; so being alone, my heart began to rise, and I to thinke on my husband: a I had rid a little further, looking downe a lane, I saw two men comming lustily vp, as if they were weary; & marking them earnestly, I saw one of them was my husband, which made my heart as light as before it was sa: so staying for them,
after a little vnkinde gréeting betwixt vs (for I chid him for his vnthriftinesse) he asked me where I had the horse: and I told him how curteously the Seruingman had vsed me: why then saies he, stay for him: nay quoth I, lets ride on, and get you two vpon the empty horses, for he will ouer-take vs ere we come at the towne, he rides on a stout lusty yong gelding: so forward we went, and lookt often behind vs, but our Ser∣uingman came not. At last we comming to Spilsby, alighted & broke our fast, & tied our horses at the doore, that if hee past by, séeing them, he might call in; after we had broke our fast, thinking he had gone some otherway, we went into ye horse-faire, and there walkt our horses vp & downe to méet with y• Seruingman; not for the intent to sell them. Now may it please your worship, whether he had stolne the horses from this honest man or no, I know not; but alas, simply I brought them to them to the horse faire, to let him that deli∣uered me them, haue them again: for I hope your worships do imagine if I had stolne them, as it is suspected, I would neuer haue brought them into so publike a place to sell: yet i law be any way dangerous for y• foolish déed, because I know not the Seruingman, it is I must bide the punishment, and as guiltlesse as ny here: and so making a low curtsie she en∣ded. The Iustice holding vp his hand, and wondring at womans wit, that had cléered her husband and his friend, & saued herselfe without compasse of the law. How like you of this Stephen? cannot we wenches prigge well? Step. I think Kate I shal be faine to giue you y• bucklars. Kate. Alas good Stephen, thou art no Logitian, thou canst not reason for thy selfe, nor hast no witty argument to draw me to an exigent: and therefore giue me leaue at large to reason for this supper, remember the subiect of our disputa∣tion, is the positiue question, whether Whoores to Théeues are most preiuditiall to the Cōmon-wealth. Alas, you poore théeues do only steale & purloine from men, & the harme you do, is to imbllish mens goods, & bring them to pouerty: this is the onely end of mens theuery, and the greatest preiudic
that grows from robbing and filching, so much do weby o thet, and more by our lechery: for what is the end of whore∣dome, but consuming of goods and begery; and besides, per∣petuall infamy? We bring yong youthes to ruine and vtter destruction. I pray you Stephen whether had a Marchants sonne, hauing wealthy parents, better light vpon a whore, then a Cut-purse, the one onely taking his money, the other bringing him to vtter confusion. For if the Foyst light vpon him, or the Conny-catcher, he looseth at the most some hun∣dreth pounds: but if he fall into the company of a Whoore, she flatters him, she inueagles him, she bewitcheth him, that he spareth neither goods nor lands to content her, that is on∣ly in loue with his coine: if hee bee married, hee forsakes his wife, leaues his children, despiseth his friends,  to satis∣fie his lust with the loue of a base Whoore, wh when hee hath spent all vpon her, and he brought to beggery, beateth him out like the Prodigall child;The end of keeping a whoores com∣panie. and for a all reward, brings him, if to the fairest end, to begge: if to the second, to the gallowes: or at the last and worst, to the por, or as preiu∣ditiall diseases. I pray you Stephen when any of you come to your confession at Tyborne, what is your last Sermon that you make? That you were brought to that wicked and shamefull end, by following of Harlots: for to that end doe you steale to maintaine whoores, and to content their badde humors. Oh Stephen! enter your owne thoughts, and think what the faire words of a wanton will doe, what the smiles of a strumpet will driue a man to at, into what ieopardy a man will thrust himselfe for her that he loues, although for his swéete villany hee bee brought to a loathsome leprosse. Tush Stephen, they say the Por came from Naples, some from Spaine, some from France: but wheresoeuer it first grew, it is so surely now rooted in England, that by S. Syth it may better bee called A Morbus Anglicus; then Gallicus, and I hope you will grant all these French fauours grew from Whoores: besides, in my high louing, or rather cree∣ping, I meane whermen and women do rob together, there
alwayes the Woman is most bloudy:Women out-strippe men in villany. for shee alwayes vr∣geth vnto death: and though the Men would onely satisfie themselues with the parties coine, yet she endeth her theft in bloud, murthering parties so deeply as shee is malicious: I hope (gentle Stephen) you cannot contradict these reasons, they be so openly manifestly probable. For mine owne part, I hope you do not imagine but I haue had some friends be∣sides poore George my husband: Alas, hee knowes it, and is content, like an honest simple Suffragan, to bee corriuall with a number of other good Companions, and I haue made many a good man, I meane a man that hath a houshold, for the loue of mee to goe home and beate his poore wife, when God wotte, I mocke him for the money hee spent, and hee had nothing for his pence, but the waste beleauings of others beastly labours. Stephen, Stephen,Examples. if Concubines could inueagle Salo∣mon, if Dalilah could betray Sampson, then wonder not if we (more nice in our wickednesse then a thousand Dalilahs) can seduce poore yong Nouices to their vtter destructions. Search the Gayles, there you shall heare complaints of Whoores: Looke into the Spittles, and Hospitalles: there you shall sée men diseased of the French Marbles, giuing in∣struction to others that are said to beware of Whoores, bee an Auditor or eare-witnesse at the death of any Thiefe, and his last testament is, Take héed of a Whoore. I dare scarce speake of Bride-well, because my shoul∣ders tremble at the name of it, I haue so often deserued it: yet looke but in there, and you shall heare poore men with their handes in their Pigeon-hoales, crye: Oh fie vpon Whoores, when Fouler giues them the terrible lash. Exa∣mine Beggars that lye lame by the high-way, and they say, they came to that misery by Whoores. Some thréed-bare Citizens, that from Marchants, and other good Trades, grow to be base Informers and Knights of the Post, crye out when they dine with Duke Humphrey: O what wic∣kednesse comes from Whoores. Prentises that runne from
their maisters, cry out vpon whoores. Tush Stephen, what enormities proceede more in the Common-wealth, then from whooree. But sith it is almost supper-time, and mirth is the friend to digestion, I meane a little to be plea∣sant, I pray you how many bad profites againe growes from whoores? Bride-well would haue very few Tenants, y• Hospitall would want Patients, y• the Surgeants much worke, the Apotheries would haue Surphaling water, and Potato-rootes lye dead on their hands, the Painters could not dispatch and make away their vermillion, if tal∣low-faced whres vsed it not for their chéekes. What should I say more Stephen? The Sub-vrbes should haue a great misse of vs, and Shorditch would complne to dame Anne a Cleare, if wee of the sister-hood she  vphold her iollity. Who is that Stephen comes  heare our talk? Oh tis the boy Kate that tels vs supper is ready. Why then Stephen what say you to me? haue I not proued that in foisting and nipying we excell you, that there is none so great inconuenience in the Common-wealth, as growes from whoores: first for the corrupting of youth, infecting of age, for breeding of brawles, whereof ensue murther, inso∣much that the ruine of many men comes from vs, and the fall of many youthes of good hope, if they were not seduced by vs, do proclaime at Tyborne that wee bee the meanes of their misery: you men théeues touch the body, and wealth, but we ruine the soule, and indanger that which is more pretious then the world treasure: you make worke onely for the gallwes, we both for the gallowes and the el, I and for the Surgian too, that  liue like  La∣zers, and  with the Fre Marbles. Whereupon I con∣clude that I haue . Steph. I confesse it Kate, for thou hast told me such won∣drous villanies, as I thought neuer could haue been in wo∣men, I meane of your profession: why you are Crocodiles when you wéep, Basilisks when you smile, Serpents when you deuise, and the Diuels chie brokers to bring y• world
to destruction. And so Kate lets sit downe to our meate and be merry. THus Countrey-men, you haue heard the disputation betwéen these two cousoning companions, wherein I haue shakt out the notable vilany of whoores, although mi∣stresse Kate this good Oratresse, hath sworne to weare a long Hamborough knife to stab me, and all the crue haue prote∣sted my death: & to proe they meant good earnest, they be∣leagred me being at supper: there were some fouretéene or fiftéene of them met, and thought to haue mad that y• fatall night of my ouer-throw, but that the courteous Cittizens and Apprentises tooke my part, and so two or thrée of them were carried to the Counter, although a Gentleman in my company was sore hurt. I cannot beny but they begin to wast away about London, and Tyborne hath eaten vp ma∣ny of them, and I will plague them to y• extremity, let them doe what they dare with their bilbow blades, I feare them not: and to giue them their last adue, looke shortly Country∣men, for a Pamphlet against them, called,New Lawes. The creeping Law, of petty théeues, that rob about the Sub-vrbs. The limitting law, discoursing the orders of such as follow Iud∣ges in their circuits, and goe about from faire to faire. The Iugging law, wherein I will set out the disorders at Nine∣holes and Rifling, how they are onely for the benefite of the Cut-purses. The stripping law, wherein I will lay open the lewd abuses of sundry Iaylors in England. Beside, you shall sée there what houses there be about the Sub-vrbs and townes end, that are receiuers of Cut-purses stolne goods, Lifts and such like. And lastly, looke for a Bed-roll or Cata∣logue of all the names of the Foysts, Nyps, Lifts, & Prig∣gars, in and about London: and although some say I dare not do it, yet I will shortly set it abroach, and whosoeuer I name or touch, if he thinke himselfe grieued, I will answer him.
The conuersion of an English Courtezan. A Harlots re∣pentance. SIth to discouer my parentage, would double the griefe of my liuing Parents, and reuiue in them the memory of great , and that my vntoward ll, would bee a disho∣nour to the house from whence I came, Sith to manifest the place of my birth, would be a blemish (through my beatly life so badly misled) to the Shire where I was borne: Sith to discouer my name, might bee holden a blot in my kindreds brow, to haue a  their stocke of so little grace, I will conceale my parents, kin, and Country, and shroude my name with silence, least enuy might taunt  for my wantonnesse. Know therfore, I was borne  thréescore miles from London, of honest and wealthy parents, who had many children, but I their onely daughter,and there∣fore the iewell wherein they most delighted, and more, the youngest of all, and therefore the more fauoured; for being gotten in the wayning of my parents age, they doted on me aboue the rest, and so set their hearts the more on fire: I was the fairest of all, and yet not more beautifull then I was witty, or so much that ing a pretty Parrat, I had such quaint conceipts, and witty words in my mouth, that the neighbours said, I was too soone wise, to bee long old. Would to God either the Prouerbe had beene authenticall, or their sayings Prophecies, then had I by death in my no∣nage, buried many blemishes that my riper yeares brought me to: For the extreme loue of my parents, was the very efficient cause of my follies, resembling herein the ture of the Ape, that euer killeth that yong oe which hee loueth most, with embracing it too erently. So my father and mother, but shee most of all, although hee to much, so cocke∣red me vp in my wantonnesse, that my wit grewe to the worst, and I waed vpwards with the ill weeds: Whatso∣euer I did, were it neuer so bad, might not bee found fault withall, my Father would smile at it, and say, 'twas but the
tricke of a childe, and my mother allowed of my vnhappy parts, alluding to this prophane and old prouerbe, An vn∣toward girle makes a good woman. But now I find, in sparing the rod, they hated the child, that ouer-kind fathers make vnruly daughters. Had they bent the wand while it had been greene, it would haue beene pliant; but I, ill growne in my yeares, am almost remedi∣lesse. The Hawke that is most perfect for the flight and wil, seldome proueth hagard, and children that are vertuously nurtured in youth, will be honestly natured in age: fie vpon such as say: yong Saints, old Diuels, it is no doubt a diuel∣lish and damnable saying: for what is not bent in the Cra∣dle, will hardly by bowed in the Sadle.My self am an in∣stance, who after I grewe to bee six yeares old, was st to Schoole, where I profited so much, that I writ and read e∣cellently well, plaid vpon the Uirginals, Lute & Citron, and could sing prick-song at the first sight: insomuch as by that time I was twelve yeares old, I was holden for the most faire and best qualified youg girle in  that Countrey, but with this, bewailed of my wel-wishers, in that my parents suffered me to be so wanton. But they so tenderly affected me, &  so nded with my excellent qualities, that they had no insight into my in∣suing follies. For I growing to be 13 yeare old, féeling the yoke of liberty to be loose on mine owne neck, begin, with y• wanton Heyfer, to aime at mine owne will, and to measure content by the sweetnesse of mine own thoughts, insomuch that  reeping on, I began to pranke  selfe with the proudest, and to hold it in disdaine, that any in the Parish should exceed me in brauer.  apparrell was costly, so I grew to be licentious, and to delight to be lookt on, so that I aunted and frequented all feasts and weddings, & other places of merry meetings, where, as I was gazed on of ma∣ny, so I spared no glaunces to suruey all with a curious eye fauour, I obserued Ouids rule right: Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur vt ipse.
I went to see & be seene, and deckt my selfe in the highest degree of brauery, holding it a glory when I was waited on with many eyes, to make censure of my birth. Beside, I was  ordinary , and grew in that quality so fa∣mous, that I was noted as the chiefest theeat in all the Countrey: yea, and to sooth me vp in these follies, my Pa∣rents took a pride in my dauncing, which afterward proued my ouer-throw, and their heart-breaking. Thus as an vnbridled Colt, I carelesly led forth my youth, and wantonly spent the flower of my yeares, holding such Maydens as were modest, fooles, and such as were not as wilfully wanton as my selfe, puppies, ill brought vp, and without manners. Growing on in yeares, as tide nor time tarrieth for no man, I began to wa passion-proud, and to thinke her not worthy to liue, that was not a little in loue, that as diuers yong men began to fauour me for my beau∣ty▪ I began to censure of some of them partially, and to in the  of many wooers, being ready to fall from the  I was come to the  of a blos∣some; which an  of mine séeing, who was my mothers brother, as carefull of my welfare, as me to mee in kinne, to talke with mee, gaue mee this A wtch-word to want on Maidens. the most sudden showre, and the yogest virgins the  dangerous fortunes, I speake as a kinsman, and wish as a friend, the blossome of a Mai∣dens youth (such as your selfe) hath attending vpon it ma∣ny frosts to nip it, and many cares to consume it, so that i it be not carefully lookt vnto, it will perish before it come to any perfection. A virgins honour consisteth not onely in the gifts of Na∣ture,
as to be faire and beautifull, though they bee fauours that grace Maidens much: for as they be glistering, so they be momentany, ready to be worne with euery winters blast and parched with euery Summers sunne, there is no face so faire, but the least Moale, the slenderest scarre, the smallest brunt of sicknesse, will quickly blmish. Beauty (Cozen) as it flourisheth in youth, so it fadeth in age, it is but a folly that feedeth mans eye, a painting that Nature lends for a time, and men allow on for a while, inso∣much that such as onely aime at your faire lookes, tye but their lous to an Apprentiship of beauty; which broken, ei∣ther with cares, mis-fortune, or yeares, their destnies are at libety, and they begin to loth you, and like of others. For shee that is looked on by many, cannot choose but bee hardly spoken of by some: for report hath a blister on her tongue, & Maidens actions are narrowly measured. There∣fore would not the ancient Romans suffer their daughters to goe any further then their mothers lookes guided them. And therefore Diana is painted with a Tortuse vnder her féet, meaning, that a maid should not be a stragler, but like the snaile, carry her house on her head, and kéepe at home at her worke, so to kéepe her name without blemish, and her vertues from the slander of enuy. Cozen, I speake this generally, which if you apply par∣ticularly to your selfe, you shall find in time my words were well said. I gaue him slender thankes, but with such a frump that he perceiued how light I made of his counsaile: which hee perceing, shakt his head, and with teares in his eyes, de∣parted. But I whom wanton desires had drawn in delight, still presumed in my former follies, and gaue my selfe either to gad abrode, or else at home to read dissolute Pamphlets, which bred in me many ill-affected wishes, so that I gaue leaue to loue and lust to enter into the center of my heart, where they harboured till they wrought my finall and fa∣tall preiudice.
Ths leading my life loosly, and béeing soothed vp with the applause of my too kinde and louing parents, I had ma∣ny of euery degree that make loue vnto me, as well for my beauty, as for the hope of wealth that my father would be∣stow vpon me: sundry sutors I had, and allowed of all, though I particularly granted loue to none, yeelding them friendly fauours, as being proud I had more wooers then a∣ in the parish beside: amongst the rest there was a lthy Farmer that wished me well, a man of some fortie yeares of age, one too worthy for one of so little worth as my selfe, & him my father, mother, and other friends, wold haue had me match my selfe with all: but I that had the raines of liberty too long in mine owne hands, refused him, & would not be ruled by their perswasions; and though my mother with teares intreated me to consider of mine owne estate, & how wel I sped if I wedded with him, yet carelesly I des∣pised her counsell, and aly de answere, that I would none of him: which, though it pinched my Parents at the quick, yet rather than they would displease me, they left me to mine owne liberty to loue. Many there were beside him, men sons of no me worth, that were wooers vnto mee, but in vaine, either my fortune or destiny droue mee to a worser end, for I refused them all, and with the Be, re∣fusing to light on the sweetest flowers all day, neled at night in a Cowshd. It fortuned, that as many sought to win me, so amongst the rest there was an  companion that dwelt with a Gen∣tleman hard by, a fellow of small reputation, and of no li∣ing, neither had he any excellent qualities, but thrumming on the gitton: but of pleasant disposition he was, and con∣gaw out many quaint & ribaldrous Iigges & songs, and so was fauored of the foolish sort for his foppery. This shiing companion, sutable to my selfe in vanity, would oft times be iesting with me, and I so long dallying with him, that I beganne déepely (oh let me blush at this confession) to fall in loue with him, and so construed of al his actions; that I con∣sented
to mine owne ouer-throw: for as smoke will hardly be concealed, so loue will not be long smothered, but wil be∣wray her owne secrets, which was manifest in me, who in my sporting with him, so bewraied my affection, y• he spying I fauoured him, began to strike when the yron was hotte, and to take opportunity by the forehead, and one day fin∣ding me in a merrie vaine, beganne to question with me of loue: which although at the first I slenderly denied him, yet at last I granted, so that not onely I agréed to plight him my faith, but that night méeting to haue further talke, I la∣ciuiously consented that he cropt the flower of my virginity. When thus I was spoiled by such a base companion, I gaue my selfe to content his humor, and to satisfie the swéet of mine owne wanton desire. Oh here let mee breathe, and with teares bewaile the beginning of my miseries, and to exclaime against the folly of my Parents, who by too much fauouring me in my vanitie in my tender youth, laide the first plot of my ensuing repentance: Had they with due cor∣tion chastised my wantonnesse, and supprest my foolish will with their graue aduice, they had made me more ver∣tuous, and themselues lesse sorrowfull. A fathers frowne is a bridle to the childe, and a mothers checke is a stay to the stubborne daughter. Oh had my parents in ouer-louing me not hated me, I had not at this time cause to complaine. But leauing this digression, againe to the loosnesse of mine owne life, who now hauing lost the glory of my youth, and suffered such a base staue to possesse it, which many men of worth had desired to enioy, I waxed bold in sie, and grew shamelesse, insomuch he could not desire so much as I did grant him: whereupon, séeing he durst not reueale it to my father to demand me in marriage, he resolued to carry me a∣way secretly, & therfore wisht me to prouide for my self, & to furnish me euery way both with money & apparrell, hoping as he said, y• after we were departed, and my father saw wee were married, & that no meanes was to amend it, he would giue his  cousent, & vse vs kindly, and ale with vs as
liberally, as if wee had matcht with his good will. I that was apt to any ill, agreed to this, and so wrought the mat∣ter, that he carried me away into a strange place, and then vsing me a while as his wife, when our money beganne to wax low, hee resolued secretly to go into y• Countrey where my father dwelt, to heare not onely how my father took my departure, but what hope we had of his ensuing fauour: al∣though I was loth to be left in a strange place, yet I was willing to heare from my friends, who no doubt conceiued much heart sorrow for my vnhappy fortunes: so that I parted with a few teares, and enioyned him to make all the haste he might to returne. He being gone, as the Eagles al∣wayes resort where the carrion is, so the brute being spred abrode of my beauty, and that at such an Inne lay such a faire young Gentlewoman, there resorted thither many braue yong Gentlemen, and cutting companions, that tic∣kled with lust, aimed at the possession of my fauour, and by sundry meanes sought to haue a sight of me, which I easily granted to all, as a woman that counted it a glory to bee wondred at by many mens eyes: insomuch that comming amongst them, I set their hearts more and more on fire, that there arose diuers brawles who should bee most in my company. Being thus haunted by such a troope of lusty ruf∣flers, I began to find mine owne folly, that had placed my first affection so loosly, and therefore began as déeply to loath him that was departed, as earst I liked him when hee was present, vowing in my selfe, though he had the spoile of my virginity, yet neuer after should he triumph in the possessi∣on of my fauour: and therefore began I to affection these new-come guests, and one aboue the rest, who was a braue yong Gentleman, and no lesse addicted vnto me, then I de∣uoted vnto him: for daily hee courted mee with amorous Sonnets, and curious pend letters, and sent me Iewels, and all that I might grace him with the name of my ser∣uant: I returned him as louing lines at last, and so conten∣ted his lusting desire, that secretly and vnknowne to all the
rest, I made him sundry nights my bed-fellow; where I so bewitcht him with swéet words, that the man began déeply to dote vpon me, insomuch that selling some portio of land that he had, he put it into ready mony, and prouiding Horse and all things conuenient, carried me secretly away, almost as farre as the Bathe. This was my second choye, and my second shame: thus I went forward in wickednesse, and delighted in change, hauing left mine old loue to looke after some other mate more fit for my purpose: how he tooke my departure when he returned, I little cared: for now I had my content, a Gentleman, yong, lusty, and indued with good qualities, and one that loued mee more tenderly then himselfe. Thus liued this new entertained friend & I toge∣ther vnmarried, yet as man and wife for a while, so louing∣ly as was to his content and my credit: but as the Tyger, though for a while she hide her clawes, yet at last shee will reueale her cruelty: and as the Agnus Castus leafe when it lookes most dry, is then most full of moisture, so Womens wantonnes is not qualified by their warines, nor doth their charinesse for a moneth warrant their castity for euer, which I proued true: for my supposed husband being euery way a man of worth, could not so couertly hide himselfe in the Country, though a stranger, but that he fell in acquaintance with many braue Gentlemen, whom hee brought home to his lodging, not onely to honour them with his liberall cur∣tesie, but also to sée me, being proud if any man of worth ap∣plauded my beauty. Alas poore Gentleman, too much be∣witcht by the wilinesse of a woman▪ had hee déemed my heart to be a harbour for euery new desire, or mine eye a suter to euery face, hee would not haue béene so fond as to haue brought his companions into my company, but ra∣ther would haue mewed me vp as a Hen, to haue kept that seuerall to himselfe by force, which hee could not retaine by kindnesse: but the honest minded Nouice little suspected my change, although I (God wot) placed my delight in no∣thing more then y• desire of new choyce, which fell out thus.
Amongst the rest of the Gentlemen that kept him compa∣ny, there was one that was his most familiar, and hee re∣posed more trust and confidence in him then in all the rest: this Gentleman began to bee déepely inamored of mee, and shewed it by many signes, which I easily perceiued; and I, whose eare was pliant to euery sweet word, and who so al∣lowed of all that were beautiful, affected him no lesse: so that loue preuailing aboue friendship, hee brake the matter with me, and made not many suites in vaine before he had obtai∣ned his purpose: for he had what he wisht, and I had what contented me. I will not confesse that any of the rest had some sildome fauours, but this Gentleman was my second selfe, and I loued him more for the time at the héele, then the other at the heart: so that though the other youth bare the charges, and was sir pay for all, yet this new friend was he that was maister of my affections: which kindnesse be∣twixt vs, was so vnwisely cloked, that in short time it was manifest to all our familiars, which made my supposed hus∣band to sigh, and others to smile: but he that was hit with the horne, was pincht at the heart; yet so extreame was the affection he bare to me, that he had rather conceale his griefe, then any way make me discontent, so that he smotherd his sorrow with patience, and brookt the iniurie with silence, til our loues grew so broad before, that it was a wonder to the world: whereupon one day at dinner, I being very pleasant with his chosen friend, and my choyce louer, I know not how, but either by fortune, or it may bee, some set match, there was by a Gentleman there present, a question in about womens passions, and their mutability in affecti∣on, so that the controuersie was defended, pro & contra, with arguments, whether a woman might home a second friend or no, at last it was concluded, that Loue and Lord∣ship brookes no fellowship, and therefore none so bae min∣ded to beare ariuall. Hereupon arose a questiō about friends that were put in trust, how it was a high point of treason for one to betray another, especially in loue, insomuch that
one Gentleman at the boord, protested by a solemne oath, that if any friend of his, made priuy and fauoured with the sight of his Mistresse whom hee loued, whether it were his wife, or no, should secretly séeke to incroach into his roome, and offer him that dishonor to partake his loue, hee would not vse any other reuenge, but at the next gréeting stab him with his poynado, though he were condemned to death for the action. All this fitted for the humor of my supposed hus∣band, and strooke both me and my friend into a quandarie: but I scornfully iested at it, when as my husband, taking the ball before it came to the ground, began to make a long discourse what faithlesse friends they were that would faile in loue, especially where a resolued trust of the party belo∣ued was committed vnto them: and hereupon, to make the matter more credulous, and to quip my folly, and to taunt the basenesse of his friends minde, that so hee might with courtesie both warne vs of our wantonnesse, and reclaime vs from ill, he promised to tell a pleasant story, performed as he said, not long since in Engnd, and it was to this effect. A pleasan discourse how a wise wanton by her Husbands gentle warning, became to bee a modest Matron. THere was a Gentleman (to giue him his due) an Es∣quire here in England; that was married to a young Gentlwoman, faire, and of a modest behauiour, vertuous in her lookes howsoeuer she was in her thoughts, and one that euery way with her dutifull endeour, and outward appearance of honesty, did bréed her husbands content, inso∣much that the Gentleman so déeply affected her, as he coun∣ted all thse  ill spent which he past not away in her com, beoting so himselfe in the beauty of his wife, th hi onely are was to haue her euery way delighted. Liuing thus pleasantly together, hee had one speciall friend the rest, whom he so deerely affected, as hee vnfol∣ded all his  in his bosome, and what passion hee had in
his minde, that either ioyed him, or perplexed him, he reuea∣led vnto his friend, and directed his actions according to the squell of his counsels, so that they were two bodies and one soule. This Gentleman, for all the inward fauour showne him by his faithfull friend, could not so withstand the force of fancy, but he grew enamoured of his friends wife, whom hee courted with many swéet wordes, and faire promises, charmes that are able to inchaunt almost the chastest eares, and so subtilly couched his arguments, discouered such loue in his eyes, and such sorrow in his lookes, that despaire sée∣med to sit in his face, and swore, that if she granted not him, the end of a louers sighes then would present his heart as a Tragicke sacrifice to the sight of his cruell mistresse. The Gentlewoman waring pittiful, as women are kind-harted, and are loth Gentlemen should die for loue, after a few excu∣ses, let him dub her husband knight of the forked order, and so to satisfie his humor, made forset of her own honor. Thus these two louers continued for a great space in such plea∣sures as vnchast wantons count their felicitie, hauing con∣tinually fit opportunity to exercise their wicked purpose, ith the Gentleman himselfe did giue them frée libertie to loue, neither suspecting his wife, nor his friend: at last, as such trayterous abuses will burst forth, it fell out, that a maid, who had béene an old seruant in the house, beganne to grow suspitious, that there was too much familiaritie be∣twéene her mistre, and her maisters friend; and vpon this, watcht them diuers times so narrowly, that at last she found them more priuate then either agréed with her maisters ho∣nor, or her own honesty: and thereupon reuealed it one day vnto her maister. He, little credulous of the light behauiour of his wife, blamed the maid, and bid her take héed, lea sought to blemish her vertues with ander, whom he more tenderly then his owne life: the maid replied, that she spake not of enuy to him, but of meere loue she bare vnto him, and the rather that hee might shadow such a fault in time, and by some meanes preuent it, least if others should
not it as well as she, his wiues good name, and his friends should be cald in question. At these wise words spoken by so base a drudge as his maid, the Gentleman waxed astonished and listned to her discourse, wishing her to discouer how she knew, or was so priuy to y• folly of her mistresse, or by what meanes he might haue assured proofe of it, she told him that to her, her owne eyes were witnesses: for she saw them vn∣lawfully together, and please it you sir, quoth shee, to faine your selfe to goe from home, and then in the backe-house to kéepe you secret, I will let you sée as much as I haue mani∣fested vnto you. Upon this the maister agréed, and warned his maid not so much as to make it knowne to any of her fellowes. Within a day or two after the Gentleman said he would go a hunting, and so risse very early; and causing his men to couple vp his hounds, left his wife a bed, and went a∣broad: as soone as hee was gone a mile from the house, hee commanded his men to ride afore, and to start the Hare, and follow the chase, and wee will come faire and softly after: they obeying their maisters charge, went their waies, and hereturned by a backe way to his house, and went secretly to the place where his maid and hee had appointed. In the meane time the mistresse thinking her husband safe with his hounds, sent for her friend to her bed-chamber, by a trusty seruant of hers, in whom shee assured that was a secret pan∣der in such affaires, and the Gentleman was not slacke to come, but making all the haste he could, came and went into the chamber, asking for the maister of the house very fami∣liarly: the old maid noting all this, as soone as shee knew them together, went and cald her maister, and carried him vp by a secret paire of staires to her mistresse chamber doore; where, péeping in at a place that the maid before had made for the purpose, he saw more then he lookt for, and so much as pincht him at the very heart, causing him to accuse his wife for a strumpet, and his friend for a traytor: yet for all this, valuing his owne honor more then their dishonesty, thinking if he should make an vprore, hee should but aime
at his owne discredit, and cause himselfe to be a laughing game to his enemies, he concealed his sorrow with silence, and taking the maid apart, chaged her to kéepe all secret, whatsoeuer she had séene, euen as she estéemed of her owne life, for if she did bewray it to any, hee himselfe would with his sword make an end of her dayes, & with that putting his hand in his sléeue, gaue the poore maid six Angels to buy her a new gowne: the wnch glad of this gift, wore solemnly to treade it vnder foot, and sith it pleased him to conceale it, neuer to reueale it so long as she liued: vpon this they par∣ted, she to her drudgery, & he to the field to his men; where, after he had kild the Hae, hee returned ome, & finding his friend in y•; garden, y• in his absence had béen grafting hornes in the chimnies, & entertained him with his wonted famili∣arity, and shewed no bad countenance to his wife, but dis∣sembled all his thoughts to the full. As soone as dinner was done, and that he was gotten solitary by himselfe, he began to determine of reuenge, but not as euery man would haue done, how to haue brought his wife to shame, & loue to con∣fusion, but he busied his brains how he might reser his ho∣nor inuiolate, recl his wife, & kéep his frend, meditating a long time how he might bring all this to pas, at last a hu∣mor fell into his head, how cunningly to compasse all thrée, & therfore he went & gt him certaine ips, which are coun∣terfeit péeces of money, being brasse, & couered ouer with sil∣uer, which the common people call ips: hauing furnished himself with these, he put them in his purse, & at night went to bed as he was wnt to do, yet not vsng the kind familia∣rity that he accustomed, notwithstanding he abstained not from y• vse of her body, but knew his wife as aforetimes, & euery time he comitted the act with her, he laid  next mor∣ning in the windo, a slip, where he was sure shee might find it, and so many times as it pleased him to be carnally pleasant with his wife, so many slips he still laid down vpon her . This he vsed for the space of a fortnight, till at last his wife finding euery ay a slip, or smetime more or
lesse, wondred how they came there, & examining her wai∣ting maids, none of them could tell her any thing touching them, wherupon she thought to question with her husband about it, but being out of her remembrance, y• next morning as she lay dallying in bed, it came into her minde, & she asked her husband if hee laid those slips on her cunet, that she of late found there, hauing neuer séene any before. I mary did I, quoth he, & haue laid them there vpon speciall reaon, and it is this: Euer since I haue béen maried to thée, I haue dée∣med thée honest, & therefore vsed & honored thée as my wife, parting coequall fauours betwixt vs as true louers: but a∣late finding the contrary, and with these eies éeing thée play the whoore with my friend, in whom I did repose all my trust, I sought not as many would haue done, to haue reuē∣ged in blood, but for the safety of mine own honor, which o∣therwise would haue béene blemished by they dishonesty, I haue béene silent, and haue neither wronged my quandom friend, nor abused thee, but still doe hold bed with th, that y• world shall not suspect any thing, & to quench the desire of lust I do vse thy body, but not so louingly as I wold a wife, but carelesly as I would a strumpet, and therfore euen as to a whoor, so I giue thée hire, which is for euery time a ip, a counterfeit coine, which is good enough for such a ippery wanton, y• will wrong her husband that loued her so tender∣ly, & thus will I vse thée for the safety of mine owne honor, till I haue assured proofe that thou becomest honest: & thus with teares in his eyes, and his heart ready to burst with sighes, he was silent, when his wife stricken with remorse of conscience, leaping out of her bed i her smocke, humbly confessing all, craued pardon, promising if he should pardon this offence which was new begun in her, she wold become a new reformed woman, & neuer after so much as in thought giue him any occcasion of suspition or iealously: the patient husband not willing to vrge his wife, took her at her word, & told her y• when he found her so reclaimed, he would as afore he had done, vse her louingly & as his wife, but till he was so
perswaded of her honesty, he would pay her still slips for his pleasure, charging her not to reueale any thing to his friend or to make it knowne to him that hee was priuy to their loues. Thus the debate ended, I gesse in some kinde grée∣ting, and the Gentleman went abrode to sée his pastures, leauing his wife in bed full of sorrow, and almost reting her heart asunder with sighes. As soone as hee was walked abrode, the Gentleman his friend came to the house, and as∣ked for the good man: the pander that was priuy to all their practises, said that his maister was gone abrode to sée his pastures, but his mistresse was in bed: why then sayes he, I will go and raise her vp; so comming into the chamber, and kissing her, meaning as hee was wont to haue vsed her ac∣customed alliance, she desired him to abstaine with broken sighes, and her eyes full of teares: he wondring what should make her thus discontent, asked her what was the cause of her sorrow, protesting with a solemne oath, that if any had done her iniury, he would reuenge it, were it with hazard of his life: shee then told him, scarce beeing able to speake for wéeping, that shee had a sute to moue him in, which if hee granted vnto her, she would hold him in loue and affection without change, next her husband for euer: hee promised to doe whatsoeuer it were: then saies she, sweare vpon a Bible you wil do it without exception: with that he toke a Bible that lay in the window, and swore, that whatsoeuer shee re∣quested him to doe, were it to the losse of his life, he would, without exception performe it. Then shee holding downe her head and blushing, began thus: I néede not quoth shee, make manifest how grosly and grieuously you and I haue both offended God, and wronged the honest gentleman my husband, and your friend; hee putting a speciall trust in vs both, and assuring such earnest affiance in your vnfained frendship, that he euen cmmitteth me his wife, his loue, his second life, into your bosme: this loue haue I requited with conancie, in playing the harlot: that faith that he repsed in you, haue you returned with treachery & falshood,
in abusing mine honesty & his honor. Now a remorse of cō∣science toucheth me for my sins, that I heartily repent, and vow euer hereafter to liue only to my husband: & therefore my sute is to you, that from henceforth you shall neuer so much as motion any dishonest question vnto me, nor seeke any vnlawfull pleasure or conuersing at my hands: this is my sute, & hereunto I haue sworne you, which oath if you obserue as a faithfull gentleman, I will conceale from my husband what is past, and rest in honest sort your faithfull friend for euer, at this she burst a fresh into teares, & vttered such sighes, that he thought for very griefe her heart would haue claue asunder. The gentleman astonied at this strange Metamorphosis of his mistresse, sate a good while in a maze, and at last taking her by the hand, made this reply: So God helpe mee faire swéeting, I am glad of this motion, & won∣drous ioyfull that God hath put such honest thoughts into your minde, & hath made you the meanes to reclaime from my folly: I féele no lesse remorse then you do in wron∣ging so honest a friend as your husband, but this y• frailnesse of man, & therfore to make amendes, I protest anew, neuer hereafter so much as in thought, to motion you of dishone∣sty, only I craue you be silent: she promised that, and so they ended, and for that time they parted. At noone the Gentle∣man came home, & chéerfully saluted his wife, & asked if din∣ner were ready, & sent for his friend, vsing him wonderfully familiarly, giuing him no occasion of mistrust, & so pleasant∣ly they past away the day together: At night when his wife and he went to bed, she told him all, what had past betweene her & his friend, & how she had bound him with an oath, and that he voluntarily of himselfe swore as much, being hearti∣ly sorry that he had so déeply offended so kinde a friend. The Gentleman commended her wit, & found her afterward a reclaimed woman, she liuing so honestly that she neuer gaue him any occasion of mistrust. Thus the wise Gentleman reclaimed with silence a wanton wife, and retained an assu∣red friend.
At this pleasant tale all the rd was at a mutiny, and they said the gentleman did passing wiely y• wrought so coning∣ly for the safety of his owne honor, but exclaiming against such a friend as would to his friend offer such villany, al con∣demning her y• would be false to so louing a husband. Thus they did diuersy descant & past away dinner; but this Tale wrought litle effect in me: for as one past grace, I delighted in change; but the gentlemant y• was his familiar, & my Pa∣ramour, was so touched, y• neuer after he would touch mee dishonestly, but reclaimed hinselfe, abstained from me, & be∣came true to his friend. I wondring, that according to his wnted custome, he did not séeke my company, he & I being one day in the chamber alone, & he in his dumps, I began to dally with him, & to aske him why he was so strange, & vsed not his accustomed fauours to me: hee solemnly made answere, that though he had plaid the foole in setting his fan∣cy vpon anothers mans wife, & in wronging his friend, yet his conscience was now touched with remorse, & euer since he heard the tale afore rehearsed, he had vowd in himself ne∣uer to do my husband the like wrong againe. My husband, quoth I, hee is none of mine, hee hath brought me from my friends, & kéeps me here , and therefore am I as frée for you as for him: and thus began to grow clamorous, be∣cause I was  of my lust. The gentleman seeing mee shamelesse, wisht me to be silent, and sai, although you bee but his friend, yet he hos you as déere as his wife, & there∣fore I wil not abuse him, neither would I wish you to be ∣miliar with any other, séeing you haue a friend that loues you so tenderly: much good counsell hee gaue mee, but all in vain, for I scorned it, & began to hate him, and resolued both to be rid of him, & my supposed husband, for  ano∣ther familiar of my husbands, I so  him with  words, that I  him to make a  of money to steale me away, & so carry me to London, where I had not liued long with him, ere he seeing my light behauiour, left me to ye wide world, and to shift for my sefe.
I now being brought to London, and left here at randon, was not such a house-doue while any friend staied with me, but that I had visite some houses in London, that could har∣bour as honest a woman as my selfe; when as therefore I was left to my selfe, I remoued my lodging, & gat me into one of those houses of good hospitality whereunto persons resort, commonly called a Trugging-house, or, to be plaine, a Whore-house, where I gaue my selfe to entertaine all com∣panions, sitting or standing at the dore like a staule, to al∣lure or draw in wanton passengers, refusing none y• would with his purse purchase me to be his, to satisfie the disordi∣nate desire of his filthy lust: now I began not to respect per∣sonage, good qualities, to the gracious fauour of the man, when eie had no respect of person, for y• oldest lecher was as welcom as y• yongest louer, so he broght meat in his mouth. Thus to the griefe of my friends, hazard of my soule, & con∣suming of my body, I spent a yeare or two, in this base and bad kind of life, subiect to y• whistle of euery desperate Ruf∣fian, till on a time, there resorted to our house a Cloathier, a proper yong man, who by fortune comming first to drinke, espying me asked me if I would drink with him, there needed no great entreaty, for as then I wanted company, & so clapt me downe by him, & began very pleasantly to welcom him, y• man being of himselfe modest and honest, noted my personage, & iudicially reasoned of my strumpet-like beha∣uiour, and inwardly, as after hee reported vnto me, grie∣ued that so foule properties were hidden in so good a propor∣tion, and y• such rare wit & excellent beauty was blemisht wt whoredomes base deformity, in so much y• he began to thin well of me, & to wish y• I were as honest as I was beautiful. Again sée how God wrought for my conuersion, since I gaue my selfe to my loose kind of life, I neuer liked any so well as him, in so much y• I began to iudge of euery part, & me thought he was y• properest man y• euer I saw, thus wée sate both amorous of other, I lasciously, & he honestly, at last he questioned with me what country woman I was, & why
being so prop a woman I would beseem to dwell or lie in a base Ale-house, especially in one y• had a bad name: I war∣rant you I wanted no knauish reply to  him, for I told him the house was as honest as his mothers, mary if there were in it a good wench or two, that would pleasure their friends , I gesse by his nose what porredge he lo∣ed, &  none such: well, seeing me in y• voyce he said little, but shaked his head, paid for the beere & went his way, onely taking his leaue of mee with a kisse, which mee thought was the sweetest that euer was giuen me, assoone as he was gone, I began to thinke what a handsome man hée was, & wisht y• he wold come & take a nights lodging wt me, sitting in a dump to think of y• quaintnes of his personage, ll other companions came in, y• shakt me out of y• melan∣choly, but assoone againe as I was secret to my selfe, hee came into my remembrance, passing ouer thus a day or two this Cloathier came againe to our house, whose sight chée∣red mee vp, for that spying him out at a Casement, I ranne downe the staires & met him at y• dore, & heartily welcomed him, & asked him if he would drinke, I come for y• purpose saies he, but I will drink no more below but in a Chamber, marry sir, quoth I, you shall, & so brought him into y• fairest , in their sitting there together drinking, at last y• Clo∣thier fell to kissing & other dalilance, wherein he found mée not coy, at last told mee y• he would willingly haue his plea∣sure of me, but y•  was too lightsoe, for of all things in y• world he could not in such actions away wt a light Cham∣ber, I  vnto him, & brought him into a roome more dark, but still he  it was too light, then I carried him into a further chāber, where drawing a Curtaine before y• win∣dow, & closing y• curtaines of y• bed, I asked him smiling if y• were close enough, no sweet loue saies he, y• curtaine is not broad enough for y• window, some watching  may espye vs, my heart misdoubts, & my credite is my life: Good  if thou hast a closer roome then this, bring me to it: why thē quoth I, follow me, & with that I brought him into a backe
lft, wher stood a little ed, onely appointed to lodge suspi∣tious persons, so darke that at noone daies it was impossible any man to sée his owne hands: how now sir, quoth I, is not this darke enough? He sitting him downe on the bed side, fetcht a déepe sigh, and sayd, indifferent, so, so, but there is a glimpse of light in at y• tiles, some body  fortune sée vs: in faith no, quoth I, none but God.  hee why can God sée vs here? Good sir, quoth I, why I hop you are not so simple, but Gods eyes are so cleare and pene∣trating, that they can pierce through walles of brasse. And alas, qth he, swéet loue, if God sée vs shall we not be more ashamed to do such a filthy act before Him then before men, I am sure thou art not so shamelesse but thou wouldst blu to haue the meanest commoner in London see thee action of thy filthy lust, & dost thou not shamemore to God, the maker of all things see thee, who reength with death, he whose eyes are cleerer then the un, who i y• searcher of the heart, and holdeth vengeance in his hands to punish sinners▪ Oh let vs tremble that we but once durst haue such wanton communication in the hearing of his di∣ine Maiesty, who pronounceth damnatiō for such as giue themselues ouer to adultery. It is not possible aith y• Lord, for any whoremaister or lasciuious wanton, to enter into y• Kingdome of God, for such sins whole Citties haue sunck▪ Kingdomes haue bene destroyed, & though God suffer such wicked liuers to escape for a while, yet at length he payeth home, in this world wt beggery, shame, disases, or infamy, & in the other life, wt perpetuall damnation, weigh but the incōuenience that grows through thy loose life, thou art ha∣ted of all that are god, despised of the vertuous, and onely well thought of, of Reprobates, Rascals, Ruffians, & such as the world hates, subiect to their lust, and gaining thy li∣uing at the hands of euery diseased leacher. O what a mise∣rable trade of life is thine, that liuest of the vomit of sin, in hunting after maladies: but suppose, while thou art yong, thou art fauoured of thy companions, when thou waxest
