15191 99843883 8645
Book plate reflecting previous ownership by John Perceval SUB CRUCE AN Sr John Percivale Baronet of Burton in the County of Cork in Ireland.
A LETTER: Whearin, part of the entertain∣ment vntoo the Queenz Maiesty, at Killingwoorth Castl, in Warwik Shéer in this Soomerz Progress 1575. iz signified: from a freend officer attendant in the Coourt, vntoo hiz fréend a Citizen, and Merchaunt of London. DE REGINA NOSTRA ILLVSTRISSIMA. Dum laniata ruāt vicina ab Regna tumultu: Laeta suos inter genialibus ILLA diebus, (Gratia Dijs) fruitur: Rūpantur & ilia Codro. While that oour neighboourz amz (asaid) vprore dooth rend asunder, In ith amoong the subiects that her Maiesty an Vnder, She (thanks too God) leads pleazaunt daiz: let spite & mallis un.
Ʋntoo my good freend, Ma∣ster Humfrey Martin Mercer. AFter my hartie commen∣dacionz, I commende mee hartily too yoo. Vnderstande yée, that sins throogh God & good fréends, I am placed at Coourt héer (as yée wot) in a woorwipfull room: whearby, I am not onlie acquainted with the most, and well knoen too the best, and euery officer glad of my company: but also haue poour, a dayz (while the Councell sits not) to go and too sée things sight worthy, and too bée prezent at any sheaw or spectacl, only whear this Progresse reprezented vnto her highness: And of part of which sportez, hauing ta∣kin sum notez and obseruationz (for I can not bée dl at ony hand in the world) az well too put fro me suspition of sluggardy, az too pluk from yoo doout of ony my forgetful∣nes of fréendship: I haue thought it méet too impart them vntoo yoo, az frankly, az fréendly, and az fully az I can. Well wot yée the blak Prins waz neuer stained with disloyaltee of ingratitude towarde ony, I
dare bee his warrant hee will not beginne with yoo that hath at hiz hand so déeply de∣zerued. But héerin, the better for conceyuing of my minde and instruction of yoors, ye must gyue mee leaue a littl, az well to preface vntoo my matter, az to discoors sumwhat of Killyng woorth Castl. A Territory of the right honorabl, my singular good Lord, my Lord the Earl of Leyceter: of whooz incomparabl cheeryng, and enterteynment thear vntoo her Maiesty noow, I will shew yoo a part heer, that coold not sée all, nor had I seen all coold well report the hallf: Whear thynges, for the parsons, for the place, time, cost, deuisez, straungnes, and aboundauns of all that euer I sawe (and yet haue I been, what vnder my Master Bomsted, and what on my oun affayres, whyle I occupied Merchaundize, both in Frauns and Flaunders (long and many a day) I saw none ony where so memorabl, I tell you plain. The Castl hath name of Killingwoorth, Killing∣woorth Castl. but of truth grounded vppon feythfull sto∣rie Kenelwoorth. It stonds in Warwyk∣shyre, a lxxiiii. myle northwest from Lon∣don, and az it wear in the Nauell of Eng∣lande.
foure myle sumwhat South from Couentree a proper Cittee, and a lyke di∣stauns from Warwyk, a fayre Sheere Tonn on the North: In ayr sweet and hollsum, raised on an eazy mounted hill, iz sette eeuenlie coasted with the froont straight intoo the East, hath the tenaunts and Tooun about it, that pleasantly shifts from dale too Hyll sundry whear wyth sweet Springs bursting foorth: and iz so plentifullie well sorted on euery side intoo¦arabl, meado, pasture, wood, water, & good ayr az it appeerz to haue need of nothing that may perteyn too liuing or pleazure. Too auauntage hath it, hard on the West, still nourisht with many liuely Springs, a goodly Pool of rare beauty, bredth, length, deapth, and store of all kinde fresh water∣fish, delicat, great and fat, and also of wild∣fooul byside. By a rare situacion and natu∣ral amitee seemz this Pool conioynd to the Castl that on the West layz the head az it wear vpon the Castlz boosom, embraceth it on either side Soouth and North with both the armz, settlz it self az in a reach a flightshoot brode, stretching foorth body and legs a myle or too Westward: between a fayre Park on the one side, which by the
Braiz is linked too the castl on the South, sprinckled at ye entrauns with a feaw Coo∣nyez, that for colour and smallnes of num∣ber, séem too bée suffered more for pleasure then cōmoditée: And on ye oother side, North and West, a goodlie Chase: wast, wyde, large, and full of red Déer and oother state∣lie gamez for hunting: beautified with ma∣nie delectabl, fresh & vmbragioous Boowz, Arberz, Seatz, and walks, that with great art, cost, & diligens wear very plea∣zauntly appointed: which also the naturall grace by the tall and fresh fragrant tréez & soil did so far foorth commēd, az Diana her selfe might haue deyned thear well enough too raunge for her pastime. The leaft arme of this pool Northward, had my Lorde adoourned with a beautifull bracelet of a fayr tymbred bridge, that iz of xiiii. foot wide, and a six hundred foot long: railed all on both sidez, strongly planked for passage, reaching from the Chase too the Castl: that thus in the midst hath clear prospect ouer théez pleasurz on ye backpart: and forward, ouer all the Toun and mooch of the Coun∣trée beside. Héertoo, a speciall commoditee at hand of sundrie quarreiz of large buil∣ding stone, the goodnes whearof may the
eazlyar be iudged, in the bilding and aun∣cienty of the Castl, that (az by the name & by storiez, well may be gathered) waz first reared by Kenulph and hiz young sun and successor Kenelm: born both indeed within the Ream héer, but yet of the race of Sax∣ons: Florileg. fo. 221. & 225. and reigned kings of Marchlond frō the yeer of oour Lord. 798. too. 23. yéerz too∣gyther, aboue 770. yéer ago. Although the Castl hath one auncient strong and large Kéep that iz called Ceazarz Tour, rather (az I haue good cauz to think) for that it iz square and hye foormed after the maner of Guil. Mal∣mesb. li. 1. Cezarz Fortz then that euer he bylt it. Nay noow I am a littl in, Master Martin ile tell you all. This Marchlond that Storyerz call Mercia, iz numbred in their bookes, the fourth of the seauen Kingdomes that the Saxons had whilom heer diuided among them in the Ream. Began in Anno Domi. 616. 139. yéer after Horss and Engist, con∣tinued in the race of a 17. kings. a. 249. yéer togyther: and ended in Ann. 875. Reyzed from the rest (sayz the book) at first by Pen∣daz prezumption: ouerthroun at last by Buthreds Hascardy, and so fel to the king∣doom of the West Saxons.
And Marchlond had in it, London, Mi∣delsex, Mercia. héerin a Bishoprik. Had more of Shyrez: Gloceter, Woorceter, and War∣wik, and héerin a Bishoprik. Chester (that noow we call Chesshyre) Darby and Staf∣foord, whervntoo one Bishop that had also part of Warwik and Shrewsbery and hiz See at Couentree, that waz then afore∣time at Lychfeeld. Héertoo: Hereford, wherin a Bishoprik that had more too iu∣risdiction, half Shreusbury, part of war∣wik and also of Gloceter, and the See at Hereford. Also had Oxford, Buckingham, Hertford, Huntingdon, and halfe of Bed∣ford, and too theez, Norhampton, part of Lecyter and also Lincoln, whearvnto a Bishop: whoz See at Lincoln Citee that sumtime before waz at Dorchester. Héer∣too, the rest of Leyceter & in Nottingham that of olld had a speciall Bishop, whooz See waz at Leyceter, but after, put to the charge of the Archbishop of Yorke. Noow touching the name, that of olld Recordes I vnderstand, and of auncient writers I finde, iz calld Kenelvvorth. Syns most of the Worths in England stand ny vntoo like lakez, and at eyther small Ilandz, such one az the seat of this
Castl hath béen & eazly may bee, or is lond∣ground by pool or riuer whearon willoz, alderz or such like doo gro: which Altha∣merus Vpon Taci fol. 142. The Ger∣mains call werk that we woork. Worl-woorld. Wemut: woorm∣wood. So viel vvor So much woorth. writez precizely that the Germains cal Werd: Ioyning these too togither with the nighness allso of the woords and sybred of the toongs. I am the bolder to pro∣noouns, that az our English Woorth, with the rest of oour auncient langage, waz leaft vs from the Germains: éeuen so that their Werd and our Woorth iz all one thing in signifiauns, common too vs both éen at this day. I take the case so cléer that I say not az mooch as I moought. Thus pro∣face ye with the Preface. And noow to the matter. ON Saterday the nyenth of Iuly, at long Ichington, a Tooun and Lord∣ship of my Lords, within a seaven myle of Killingworth, hiz honor made her Maiesty great chéer at Dinner, and pleazaunt pa∣stime in hunting by the wey after, that it was eight a clock in yt euening ear her high∣ness came too Killingwoorth. Whear in the Park, about a flight shoot from the Brayz & first gate of the Castl, one of ye ten Sibills, that (wée réed) wear all Fatidicae and The∣obulae▪ Sibyl.
(az partiez and priuy too the Gods gracious good wilz (cumly clad in a pall of white sylk, pronounced a proper poezi in English rime and méeter: of effect hoow great gladnesse her hyghnesse prezenze brought into euerie steed whear it pleazed her too cum, and specialli now into that place that had so long longed after the same: en∣ded with prophesie certain, of mooch and long prosperitée health and felicitée: this her Maiestie beningly acceptying, passed fooorth vntoo the next gate of the Brayz, which (for the length, largenes and vse (az well it may so serue) they call noow the Tyltyard, whear a Porter, tall of person, The Porter big of lim & stearn of coountinauns, wrapt also all in silke, with a club & keiz of quā∣titée according: had a rough speech full of passions in méeter aptly made to the pur∣pose: whearby (az her highnes was cum within his warde) hée burst out in a great pang of impatiens to sée such vncooth trud∣ging too and fro, such riding in and out, with such dyn and noiz of talk within the charge of his offis: whearof hee neuer saw the like nor had any warning afore, ne yet coold make too himselfe any cauze of the matter, at last vpon better vieu and auise∣ment
az hee preast too cum neerar: confes∣sing anon that hee found him self pearced at the prezens of a personage so euidently expressing an heroicall Soueraintee ouer all the whole estates, & hy degréez thear be∣syde: callmd hiz stomz, proclaims open gates and frée passage to all, yéelds vp hiz club, hiz heyz, hiz office and all, and on hiz knéez humbly prayz pardon of hiz igno∣rauns and impaciens: which her highnes graciouslie graunting, he cauzd hiz Trum∣petoourz The Trum∣petoours. that stood vppon the wall of the gate thear, too soound vp a tune of wel∣cum: which, besyde the nobl noyz, was so mooch the more pleazaunt too behold, be∣cauz théez Trumpetoourz beeing sixe in number, wear euery one an eight foot hye, in due proportion of parson besyde, all in long garments of sylk sutabl, eache with hiz syluery Trumpet of a fiue foot long, foormed Taperwyse, and straight from the vpper part vntoo the neather eend: whear the Diameter was a 16. ynchez ouer and yet so tempered by art, that being very eazy too the blast, they cast foorth no greater noyz nor a more vnpleazaunt soound for time and tune, then any oother common Trumpet bee it neuer so artifici∣ally
foormed. Theese armonious blasterz, from the foreside of the gate at her high∣nes entrauns whear they began: walking vpon the wallz, vntoo the inner: had this muzik mainteined from them very delec∣tably while her highness all along this tilt∣yard rode vnto the inner gate next the base coourt of the Castl: where the Lady of the Lake (famous in king Arthurz book) with Lady of the Lake. too Nymphes waiting vppon her, arrayed all in sylks attending her highness com∣ming: from the midst of the Pool, whear, vpon a moouabl Iland, bright blazing with torches, she floting to land, met her Maiesty with a well penned meter and matter after this sort: first of the auncientée of the Castl, whoo had been ownerz of the same éen till this day, most allweyz in the hands of the Earls of Leyceter, hoow shée had kept this Lake sins king Arthurz dayz, and now vnderstanding of her highness hither cum∣ming, thought it both office and duetie in humbl wize to discouer her and her estate: offering vp the same, her Lake and poour therein, with promise of repayre vnto the Coourt. It pleazed her highness too thank this Lady, & too ad withall, we had thought indéed the Lake had been oours, and doo you
call it yourz noow? Wel we will héerin com∣mon more with yoo héerafter. This Pageaunt waz clozd vp with a de∣lectable harmony of Hautboiz, Shalmz, Corners, and such oother looud muzik, that held on while her Maiestie, pleazauntly so passed from thence toward the Castl gate: whearunto from the base Coourt ouer a dry valley cast into a good foorm, waz thear fra∣med a fayre Bridge of a twentie foot wide, The bridge. and a seauenty foot long, graueld for trea∣ding, railed on either part with seauē posts on a side, that stood a twelue foot a sunder, Seauen pair of posts. thikned betweene with well proportioned Pillars turnd. Vpon the first payr of posts were set, too cumly square wyre cagez, each a thrée foot long, too foot wide and hy: in them, liue Bit∣ters, Curluz, Shoouelarz, Hearsheawz, Godwitz, and such like deinty Byrds of the Syluanus prezents. prezents of Syluanus the God of foul. On the second payr, too great Syluerd Bollz, featly apted too the purpoze, filde with Applz, Pearz, Cherriz, Filberdz, Walnuts fresh vpon their brauuchez, and with Oringes, Poungarnets, Lemmanz, and Pipinz, all for the giftz of Pomona, Pomona. Goddes of fruiez. The third pair of posts, in too such syl∣uerd
Bollz, had (all in earz, gréen and old) Wheat, Barly, Ootz, Beanz and Peaz, az the gifts of Ceres. Ceres. 3. The fourth Post on the leaft hand, in a like syluered Boll, had Grapes in Clusters whyte and red, gracified with their Vine leauez: the match post against it, had a payr of great whyte syluer lyuery Pots for wyne: and before them two glassez of good capacitie filld full: the ton with whyte Wine, the two other with claret: so fresh of coolor, and of looke so louely smiling to the eyz of many, that by my feith mee thought by their léering, they could haue foound in their harts (az the euening was hot) to haue kist them swéetlie and thought it no sin: and théez for the potencial prezents of Bacchus Bacchus. 4. the God of wine. The fift payr had, each a fair large trey streawd a littl with fresh grass, and in them, Coonger, Burt, Mullet, fresh Herring, Oi∣sters, Samon, Creuis, and such like from Neptunus, God of the Sea. Neptunus. 5 On the sixth payr of Posts wear set two ragged stauez of syluer, as my Lord giuez them in armz, beautifully glittering of ar∣mour thereupon depending, Bowz, Arroz, Spearz, Shéeld, Head pées, Gorget, Corse
lets, Swoords, Targets, and such like for Mars gifts the God of war. And the apt∣lyer Mars. 6. (me thought) waz it that thooz ragged staues supported théez Martiall prezents, as well becauz théez Staues by their tines séem naturallie méete for the bearing of ar∣moour, as also that they chiefly in this place might take vpon them principall protecti∣on of her highnes Parson, that so benignly pleazed her to take herbour. On the seauenth Posts, the last and next too the Castl, wear thear pight, too fayr Bay braunchez of a fourfoot hy, adourned on all sides with Lutes, Viollz, Shallmz, Cor∣nets, Flutes, Recorders and Harpes, as the prezents of Phoebus the God of Muzik Phoebus. 7. for reioysing the mind, and also of Phizik, for health to the body. Ouer the Castl gate was there fastened a Tabl beautifully garnisht abooue with her highness armes, and featlie with Iuy wreathz bordred aboout: of a ten foot square: the ground blak, whearupon in large white Capitall Roman fayr written: a Poem mencioning théez Gods and their giftes thus prezented vntoo her highness: which, becauz it remained vnremooued, at leyzure & pleaz I took it oout, as foloeth.
AD MAIESTATEM REGIAM. Iupiter huc certos cernens TE tendere gressus, Coelicolas PRINCEPS actutum conuocat omnes: Obseqvium praestare iubet TIBI quen{que} benignum. Ʋnde suas Syluanus aues, Pomona{que} fructus, Alma Ceres fruges, hilarantia vina Liaeus, Neptunus Pisces, tela & tutantia Mauors, Suaue melos Phoebus, solidam longam{que} salutem. Dij TIBI REGINA haec (cū SIS DIGNISSIMA) prebēt: Haec TIBI cum Domino dedit se & werda Kenelmi All the letterz that mention her Maiesty, which héer I put capitall, for reuerens and honor wear thear made in golld. But the night well spent, for that théez veriez by Torchlight, coold not easily bée read, by a Poet thearfore in a long cerule∣oous garment, with  side and wide sléeuez Venecian wize, drawen vp to his elboz, his Dooblet sleeuez vnder that, Crimzen, nothing but silke: a Bay garland on hiz head, and a skro in his hand, making first an humble obeizaunz at her highness cum∣myng, and pointing vntoo euerie prezent az hée spake: the same wear pronounced. Pleazauntly thus viewing the giftes az
she past, & hoow the postsmight agrée with the spéech of the Poet, at ye éend of ye bridge & entrée of the gate, waz her highnes recei∣ued with a fresh delicate armony of Flutz, in perfourmauns of Phoebus prezents. So passing intoo the inner Coourt, her Maiesty (that neuer ridez but alone) thear set doun from her Pallfree, waz conueied vp to chamber: when after, did follo so great a peal of gunz, and such lightning by fyre work a long space toogither: as Iupiter woold sheaw himself too bee no fur∣ther behind with hiz welcum, then the rest of hiz Gods: and that woold hee haue all the countrie to kno: for indeed the noiz and flame wear hard and séene a twenty myle of. Thus much Master Martin (that I remember me) for the first daiz Bien venu. Be yée not wery, for I am skant in the midst of my matter. On sunday: the forenoon occupied (az Sunday. for the Sabot day) in quiet and vacation frō woork, & in diuine seruis & preaching at the parish church: The afternoon in ex∣celent muzik, of sundry swet instruments and in dauncing of Lordes & Ladiez, and oother woorshipfull degrées, vttered with such liuely agilitee & commendabl grace:
az whither it moought be more straunge too the eye, or pleazunt too the minde, for my part indéed I coold not discern: but ex∣céedingly well waz it (me thought) in both. At night late, az though Iupiter the last night, had forgot for biziness, or for∣born for curtezy & quiet, part of hiz well∣coom vntoo her highness appointed: noow entring at the fyrst intoo hiz purpoze mo∣deratly (az mortallz doo) with a warning pée or too, proceding on with encres, at last the Alticonant displaz me hiz mayn poour: with blaz of burning darts, flying too & fro, leamz of starz coruscant, streamz and hail of firie sparkes, lightninges of wildfier a water and lond, flight & shoot of thunderboltz: al with such countinauns, terror and vehemencie: that the heauins thundred, the waters soourged, the earth shooke: and in such sort surly, az had we not bee assured of the fulmiant deitée waz all hot in amitée, and could not otherwize wit∣nesse hiz welcomming vnto her highnesse: it woold haue made mee for my part, az hardy az I am, very veangeably afeard. This a doo lasted while h midnight waz past, that well waz mee soon after when I waz cought in my Cabayn. And thiz for
the secund day. Munday waz hot, and thearfore her Munday. 3. highnesse kept in  till a fiue a clok in the éeuening: what time it pleazzd her too ryde foorth into the Chase too hunt the Hart of fors: which foound anon, and af∣ter sore chased, and chafed by the hot The hūting of the Hare of fors. pursuit of the hooundes, waz fain of fine fors, at last to take soil. Thear to beholld the swift fléeting of the Déer afore with the stately cariage of hiz head in hiz swim∣myng, spred (for the quantitée) lyke the sail of a ship: the hoounds harroing af∣ter, az they had bin a number of skiphs too the spoyle of a karuell: the ton no lesse eager in purchaz of hiz pray, then waz the the other earnest in sauegard of hiz life: so az the earning of the hoounds in continu∣auns of their crie, ye swiftnes of the Déer, the running of footmen, the galloping of horsez, the blasting of hornz, the halloing & hewing of the huntsmen, with the excellēt Echoz between whilez from the woods and waters in valleiz resonnding, mooued pa∣stime delectabl in so hy a degrée, az for ony parson to take pleazure by most sensez at onez, in mine opiniō thear can be none ony wey comparable to this: And speciall in
this place that of nature iz foormed so féet for the purpose in feith Master Martin if ye coold with a wish I woold ye had been at it: Wel the Hart waz kild, a goodly Déer, but so ceast not the game yet. For aboout nien a clock at the hither part of the Chase, whear torchlight atten∣ded: oout of the woods in her Maiestiez return, rooughly came thear foorth Hom∣bre The sauage man. Saluagio, with an Oken plant pluct vp by the roots in hiz hande, himself for∣grone all in moss and Iuy: who, for par∣sonage, gesture, and veterauns beside, coountenaunst the matter too very good liking, and had speech to effect: That con∣tinuing so long in theez wilde wastes, whearin oft had he fared both far and néer, yet hapt hée neuer to see so glorioous an assemble afore: and noow cast intoo great grief of mind, for that neyther by himself coold hee gess, nor knew whear else to bee taught, what they should be, or whoo bare estate. Reports sum had he hard of many straunge thinges, but brooyled thearby so mooch the more in desire of knoledge. Thus in great pangz bethought he & cald he vpon all his familiarz & companiōz: the Fawnz, the Satyres, the Nymphs, the
Dryades, & the Hamadryades, but none making aunswear, whearby hiz care the more encreasing, in vtter grief & extréem refuge calld hee allowd at last after hiz olld freend Echo that he wist would hyde nothing frō him, but tel him all if she wear heer. Héer (quoth Echo.) Héer, Echo and Echo. art thou thear? (sayz he) Ah hoow mooch hast thou relieued my carefull spirits with thy curtezy onward. A my good Echo hér iz a marueiloouz prezenz of dignitée, what are they I pray thée, who iz Souerain, tell me I beséech thee, or elz hoow moought I kno? I kno (quoth shee). Knoest thou sayz hee; Mary that iz exceedingly well: why then, I dezire thée hartily to sho mée what Maiestie (for no mean degrée iz it) haue wee héer: a King or a Quéen? A Queen (quoth Echo.) A Quéen sayez hee? Pau∣zing and wisly viewing a while, noow full certeynlie seemez thy tale to be true. And procéeding by this maner of dialog with an earnest beholding her highnes a while, recounts he first hoow iustly that former report agrée with hiz present sight: toou∣ching the beautifull linaments of coounti∣nauns, the cumly proportion of body, the prinsly grace of prezenz, ye graciouz giftz
of nature with the rare and singular qua∣lities of both body and mind in her Maie∣sty comoynd, and so apparant a ey. Then shortly rehearsing Saterdaiz acts: of Si∣bils salutation, of the Porters propositiō, of hiz Trumpetoours muzik, of the Lake ladiez oration, of the seauen Gods seauen prezents: hee reporteth the incredibl ioy that all estatez in the land haue allweyz of her highnes whear so euer it cums: éen∣deth with presage and prayer of perpetu∣all felicitée, and with humbl subiection of him and hizzen & all that they may do. Af∣ter this sort the matter went with littl dif∣ferens I gesse, sauing only in this point: that the thing which héer I report in vnpo¦lisht proez, waz thear pronounced in good méeter and matter, very wel indighted in rime. Echo finely framed most aptly by answerz thus to vtter all. And I shall tell yoo master Martin by the mass of a mad a∣uenture? az thiz Sauage for the more sub¦missiō brake hiz trée a sunder, kest the top from him, it had allmost light vpon her highnes hors hed: whereat he startld and the gentlman mooch dismayd, Sée the be∣nignitée of the Prins, az the foot men lookt well too the hors, and hee of Generositée
soon callmd of him self, no hurt no hurt quoth her highnes. Which words I pro∣mis yoo wee wear all glad to héer, & cook them too be the best part of the play. Tuisday, pleazaunt passing of the time Tuisday. 4. with muzik & daunsyng: sauing that to∣ward night it liked her Maiesty too walk a foot into the Chase ouer the Bridge: whear it pleased her to stand, while vpon the Pool oout of a Barge fine appoynted for the purpoze, too heer sundry kinds of very delectabl Muzik. Thus recreated & after sum wallk her highnes returned. Wednsday, her Maiesty rode intoo the Wedns. 5. chase a hunting again of the hart of fors. The Deer after hiz property for refuge took the soyl: but so masterd by hot pur∣suit on al parts that he was taken quik in the pool: the watermē held him vp hard by the hed, while at her highnes commaun∣demēt The Hart pardoned. he lost hiz earz for a raundsum and so had pardon of lyfe. Thursday, the foourteenth of this Iuly Thursday. 6 and the syxth day of her Maiestyez cum∣ming: a great sort of bādogs wear thear tyed in the vtter Coourt, and thyrteen bearz in the inner. Whoosoeuer made the A queast of Bearz. annell, thear wear inoow for a Queast &
one for challenge & néed we ar. A wight of great wizdoom and grauitée séemed their forman to be, had it cum to a Iury: But it fell oout that they wear cauzd too ap∣peer thear vpon no such matter, but onlie too aunswear too an auncient quarrell be∣twéen them and the bandogs, in a cause of controuersy that hath long depended, béen obstinatly full often debated with sharp and byting arguments a both sydes, and coold neuer bee decided: grown noow too so marueyloous a mallys, that with spite∣full obrayds and vncharitabl chaffings al∣weiz they freat, az far az any whear the ton can héer, see, or smell the toother: and indeed at vtter deadly fohod. Many a maymd member, (God wot) blody face & a torn cote hath the quarrell cost betwéene them, so far likely the lesse yet noow too be appeazd, az thear wants not partakerz too bak them a both sidez. Well syr, the Bearz wear brought foorth intoo the Coourt, the Dogs set too them, too argu the points eeuen face too face, they had learnd coounsell allso a both parts: what may they be coounted parciall that are retaind but a to syde? I wéen no. Very féers both ton and toother &
eager in argument if the dog in pleadyng woold pluk the bear by the throte, the bear with trauers woould claw him again by the skaip, confess & a list, but a voyd a coold not that waz bound too the bar: and hiz coounsell tolld him that it coold bee too him no pollecy in pleading. Thearfore thus with fending & proo∣uing, with plucking & tugging, skratting & byting, by plain tooth & nayll a to side & toother such exspēs of blood & leather waz thear between them, az a moonths licking I wéen wyl not recoouer: and yet remain az far oout az euer they wear. It waz a sport very pleazaunt of théez beastz: to sée the bear with hiz pink nyez léering after hiz enmiez approch, the nim∣blness & wayt of ye dog too take hiz auaun∣tage, and the fors & experiens of the bear agayn to auoyd the assauts: if he wear bit∣ten in one place, hoow he woold pynch in an oother too get frée: that if he wear ta∣ken onez, then what shyft with byting with clawyng, with roring tossing & tum∣bling he woold woork too wynde hym self from them: and when he waz lose, to shake hiz earz twyse or thryse wyth the blud & the slauer aboout hiz fiznamy, waz
a matter of a goodly reléef. Az this sport waz had a day time in the Gunshot & fyrework. Castl, so waz thear abrode at night very straunge and sundry kindez of fier works, compeld by cunning too fly too and fro and too moount very hy intoo the ay vpward, and allso too burn vnquenshabl in the wa∣ter beneath: contrary yee wot, too fyerz, kinde. This intermingld with a great peal of guns: which all gaue, both too the ear and to the ey the greater grace and de∣light, for that with such order and art they wear tempered toouching time and conti∣nuauns, that waz about too houres space. Noow within allso in the mean time Tumbling of the Itali∣an. waz thear sheawed before her highnes, by an Italian, such feats of agilitice, in go∣inges, turninges, tumblinges, castinges, hops, iumps, leaps, skips, springs, gam∣band, soomersauts, caprettiez and flights: forward, backward, syde wize,  doown∣ward, vpward, and with sundry windings gyrings and circumflexions: allso lightly and with such easines, az by mee in feaw words it iz not expressibl by pen or speech I tell yoo plain. I bleast me by my faith to behold him, and began to doout whither a waz a man or a sprite, and I wéen had
doouted mée till this day: had it not been that anon I bethought me of men that can reazon & talk with too toongs, and with too parsons at onez, sing like burds, curteiz of behauiour, of body strong and in ioynts so nymbl withall, that their bonez séem az lythie and plyaunt az syneuz. They dwel in a happy Iland (az the booke tearmz it) four moonths sayling Southward beyond Ethiop. Nay Master Martin I tell you no iest: Diodor. Si∣cul. De anti. Egyptiorū gesta. lib. 3. for both Diodorus Siculus an auncient Greeke historiographer in his third book of the acts of the olld Egypcians: and also from him, Conrad Gesnerus a great lear¦ned man, and a very diligent writer in all good arguments of oour time (but decea∣sed) in the first Chapter of hiz Mithrida∣tes Mithrid. Gesneri. reporteth the same. Az for thiz fellow I cannot tell what too make of him, saue that I may gesse hiz bak be metalld like a Lamprey that haz no bone but a lyne like to a Lute string. Wel syr let him passe and hiz featz, and this dayz pastime withall, for héer iz az mooch az I can remember mee for Thurs∣daiz entertainment. Friday and Saterday wear thear no o∣pen Friday.
sheawz abrode, becauz the weather Saterday. 8. enclynde too sum moyster & wynde: that very seazonably temperd the drought and the heat, cauzed by the continuans of fayr weather & sunshyne afore, all the whyle syns her Maiestiez thither cumming. A Sunday opportunely the weather Sunday. 9. brake vp again, and after diuine seruis in the parish church for the sabot day, and a frutefull sermon thear in the forenoon: at after noon in woorship of this kenel∣woorth Castl, and of God & saint kenelm, whooz day forsooth by the calendar, this waz: a solem brydeale of a proper coopl Brideale. waz appointed: set in order in ye tyltyard, too cum and make thear sheaw before the Castl in the great coourt, whear az waz pight a cumly quintine for featz at armz which when they had don, too march oout: at the northgate of the Castl homeward againe intoo the tooun. And thus were they marshalld. Fyrst, all the lustie lads and bolld bachelarz of the parish, sutablie euery wight with hiz blu buckeram bridelace vpon a braunch of green broom (cauz rozemary iz skant thear) tyed on hiz leaft arme (for a that syde lyez the hart) and hiz allder poll
for a spear in hiz right hand, in mar∣ciall order raunged on a fore, too & too in a rank: sum with a hat, sum in a cap, sum a cote sum a ierken, sum for lightnes in hiz dooblet & hiz hoze, clean trust with a point afore: sum botes & no spurz, he spurz & no boots, and he neyther nother: one a sadel, anoother a pad or a pannell fastened with a cord, for gyrts wear geazon: and théez too the number of a sixtéen wight ri∣ding men and well beséen: but the bride∣groom formost, in hiz fatherz tawny wor∣sted iacket, (for his fréends wear fayn that he shoold be a brydegroom before the Quéen) a fayr strawn hat with a capitall crooun stéepl wyze on hiz hed: a payr of haruest glouez on hiz hands, az a sign of good husbandry: a pen & inkorn at his bak. for he woold be knowen to be bookish lame of a leg that in his yooth was broken at football: well beloued yet of hiz mother that lent him a nu mufflar for a napkin that was tyed too hiz gyrdl for lozyng: It was no small sport too marke this miniō in hiz full apointment, that throogh good coolation becam az formall in his action az had he béen a bridegroom indéed: with this speciall grace by the wey, that euer az
he woold haue framed him the better coun∣tenauns, with the woors face he looke. Well syr, after théez horsmen, a liuely morisoauns, according too the auncient manner, six daunserz, Mawdmarion, and the fool. Then, thrée prety puzels az bright az a breast of bacon, of a thirtie yéere old a pées, that carried thrée speciall spisecakes of a bushell of wheat, (they had it by mea∣zure oout of my Lords backhouse,) before the Bryde: Syzely with set countenauns, and lips so demurely simpring, az it had béen a Mare cropping of a thistl. After théez a loouely loober woorts, freklfaced, red headed, cléen trust in his dooblet & hiz hoze taken vp now in déed by commission, for that hee waz so loth to cum forward, for reuerens belike of hiz nu cut canuas doob∣let: & woold by hiz good will haue been but a gazer, but found too bée a meet actor for hiz offis: that waz to beare the bridecup, foormed of a sweet sucket barrell, a faire turnd foot set too it, all seemly be syluerd and parcell gilt, adourned with a beatiful braunch of broom, gayly begilded for rose∣mary: from which, too brode brydelaces of red and yelloo buckeram begilded, and galauntly streaming by such wind az thear
waz (for hée carried it aloft:) This genet cupbearer, yet had hiz freckld fiznemy sumwhat vnhappily infested az hee went by the byzy flyez, that floct about the bride cup for the swéetnes of the sucket that it sauored on: but hée like a tall fello, with∣stood their mallis stoutly (sée what man∣hood may do) bet them away, kild them by scores, stood to hiz charge and marched on in good order. Then folloed the worshipfull Bride, led (after the cuntrie maner) betwéen too aun∣cient parishionerz, honest toounsmen. But a stale stallion and a wel spred, (hot az the weather waz) God wot, and an il smelling waz she: a thirtie yéer old, of colour broun∣day, not very beautifull in déed but vgly fooul ill fauord: yet marueyloous fain of the offis, because shee hard say shee shoold dauns before the Quéen, in which feat shée thought shee woold foote it az finely az the best: Well, after this bride cam thear by too and too, a dozen damzels for bridemaides: that for fauor, attyre, for facion and clean∣lines: were az méete for such a bride az a tréen ladl for a porige pot: mo, but for fear of carring all clean had béen appointed: but theez feaw wear inoow.
Az the cumpany in this order wear cum into yt coourt, maruelous wear the mar∣ciall acts that wear doon thear that day. The Brydegroome for preeminens Running at Quintine. had the fyrst coors at the Quintyne, brake hiz spear treshardiment: but his mare in hiz manage did a littl so titu∣bate. that mooch a doo had hiz manhod to sit in his sadl, & too scape the foyl of a fall: with the help of his band yet he recoouerd himself, and lost not hiz styrops (for he had none too his saddl): had no hurt as it hapt, but only that hiz gyrt burst, and lost hiz pen & inkorn that he waz redy to wep for. But hiz handkercher, az good hap waz, found he safe at his gyrdl: that chéerd him sumwhat, & had good regard it shoold not be fyeld. For though heat & coolnes vpon sundry occazions made him sumtime too sweat, and sumtime eumatick: yet durst he be bollder too blo hiz noze & wype hiz face with the flapet of his fatherz iacket, then with hiz mothers mufflar. tiz a goodly matter, when yooth iz manerly brought vp in fatherly looue & motherly aw. Noow syr, after the Brydegroom had made hiz coors, ran the rest of the band a
whyle in sum order, but soon after, tag and rag, cut & long tail: whear the specialty of the sport waz, to see: how sum for hiz slakness had a good bob with the bag, and sum for his haste too toppl dooun right, & cum tumbling to the post: sum stryuing so mooch at the first setting oout, that it séemd a question betwéene the man & the beast, whither the coors shoold be made a hors∣back or a foot: and put foorth with the spurz, then wold run hiz race byas among the thickest of the throng, that dooun came they toogyther hand ouer hed: anoother, whyle he directed hiz coors to the quin∣tyne, hiz iument woold cary him too a mare amoong the pepl: so hiz hors az a∣moroos, az him selfe aduenturoous. Ano∣ther, too run & miss the quintyne with hiz staff, and hit the boord with his hed. Many such gay gamez wear thear a∣mong théez ryderz: who by & by after, vpō a greater coorage leaft thear quintining, and ran one at anoother. Thear to sée the stearn countenauns, the grym looks, the cooragioous attempts, the desperat aduē∣turez, the daungeroous coorsez, the féers encoounterz, whearby the buff at the man, and the coounterbuff at the hors, that
both sumtime cam topling to the ground. By my troth Master Martyn twaz a liuely pastime, I beléeue it woold haue mooued sum man too a right méery mood, thoogh had it be toold him hiz wife lay a dying. And héertoo folloed az good a sport (me Hok Tuis∣day by the Couentree¦men. thooght) prezented in an historicall ku, by certain good harted men of Couentrée, my Lordes neighboors thear: who vnder∣standing amoong them ye thing that coold not bee hidden from ony: hoow carefull and studious hiz honor waz, that by all pleazaunt recreasions her highnes might best fynd her self wellcom, and bee made gladsum and mery (the groundworke in∣deede and foundacion of hiz Lordships myrth and gladnesse of vs all) made peti∣tion that they moought renu noow their olld storiall sheaw: Of argument how the Danez whylom héere in a troubloous sea∣zon Florileg. li. 1. fol. 300. wear for quietnesse born withall & suf∣feard in peas, that anon by outrage & im∣portabl insolency, abuzing both Ethelred the king then and all estates euerie whear byside: at the greuoous complaint & cooun∣sell of Huna the kings chieftain in warz, on Saint Brices night. Ann. Dom. 1012.
(Az the book sayz) that falleth yéerely on the thirtéenth of Nouember) wear all dis∣patcht and the Ream rid. And for becauz the matter mencioneth how valiantly our English women for looue of their cuntrée behaued themseluez: expresse in actionz & rymez after their maner, they thought it moought mooue sum myrth to her Maie∣stie the rather. The thing said they iz grounded on sto∣ry, and for pastime woont too bee plaid in oour Citee yéerely: without ill exampl of mannerz, papistry, or ony superstition: and els did so occupy the heads of a number, that likely inoough woold haue had woorz meditationz: had an auncient beginning and a long continuauns: tyll noow of late laid dooun, they knu no cauz why onless it wear by the zeal of certain theyr Prea∣cherz: men very commendabl for their be∣hauiour and learning, & swéet in their ser∣mons, but sumwhat too sour in preaching awey theyr pastime: wisht therefore, that az they shoold continu their good doctrine in pulpet, so, for matters of pollicy & go∣uernauns of the Citie, they woold permit them to the Mair and Magistratez: and seyd by my feyth, Master Martyn, they
, I pr  by profession a  and that right skilfull, very cunning in ens, and hardy az Gawin, for hiz ton∣sword hangs at his tablz éend: great ouer∣sight hath he in matters of storie: For az for king Arthurz book, Huō of Burdeaus, The foour suns of Aymon, Beuys of Hampton, The squyre of lo degree, The knight of courtesy, and the Lady Faguell, Frederik of Gene, Syr Eglamoour, Sir Tryamoour, Syr Lamwell, Syr Isen∣bras, Syr Gawyn, Olyuer of the Castl, Lucres and Eurialus, Virgils life, The castl of Ladiez. The wido Edyth, The King & the Tanner. Frier Rous, Howle∣glas, Gargantua, Robinhood, Adambel, Clim of the clough & Williā a cloudesley, The Churl & the Burd, The seauen wise Masters, The wife lapt in a Morels skin. The sak full of nuez. The seargeaunt that became a Fryar, Skogan, Collyn cloout. The Fryar & the boy, Elynor Rumming, and the Nutbrooun maid, with many moe
then I rehearz héere: I beléeue hee haue them all at hiz fingers endz. Then in Philosophy both morall & na∣turall, I think he be az naturally ouerséen: beside poetrie and Astronomie, and oother hid sciencez, as I may gesse by the omber∣ty of hiz books: whearof part az I remem∣ber, the Sheperdz kalender. The Ship of Foolz, Danielz dreamz, the booke of For∣tune, Stans puer ad mensam, the hy wey to the Spitlhouse, Iulian of Brainfords testament, the castle of Loue, the booget of Demaunds, the hundred Mery talez, the book of Riddels, the Seauen sororz of we∣men, the prooud wiues Pater noster, the Chapman of a peniwoorth of Wit: Beside hiz auncient playz. Yooth & charitée, Hik∣skorner, Nugize, Impacient pouerty, and héerwith doctor Boords breuiary of health. What shoold I rehearz héer, what a bunch of ballets & songs all auncient: Az Broom broom on hil. So wo iz me begon, troly lo. Ouer a whinny Meg. Hey ding a ding. Bony lass vpon a gréen. My bony on gaue me a bek. By a bank az I lay: and a hun∣dred more, he hath fair wrapt vp in Parch¦ment and bound with a whipcord. And az for Allmanaks of antiquitée, (a
point for Ephemerides) I wéene hee can sheaw from Iasper Laet of Anwarp vn∣to Nostradam of Frauns, and thens vnto oour Iohn Securiz of Salsbury. To stay ye no longer héerin I dare say hee hath az fair a library for théez sciencez, & az many goodly monuments both in proze & poetry & at afternoonz can talk az much without book, az ony Inholder betwixt Brainford and Bagshot, what degree soeuer he be. Beside thiz in the field a good Marshall at musters: of very great credite & trust in the toun héer, for he haz béen chozē Alecū∣ner many a yéere, when hiz betterz haue stond by: & euer quited himself with such estimation, az yet too the tast of a cup of Nippitate, hiz iudgement will be taken a∣boue the best in the parish, be hiz noze near so red. Captain Cox cam marching on valiant∣ly before, cléen trust & gartered aboue the knée, all fresh in a veluet cap (master Gol∣dingā lent it him) floorishing with hiz ton∣swoord, and another fensmaster with him: thus in the foreward making room for the rest. After thē proudly prickt on formost, the danish launsknights on horsbak, and then the English: each with their allder
poll martially in their hand. Eeuen at the The couen∣tree play. first entrée the méeting waxt sumwhat warm: that by and by kindled with corage a both sidez, gru from a hot skirmish vnto a blazing battail: first by speare and shield, outragious in their racez az ramz at their rut, with furious encoounterz that togy∣ther they tumbl too the dust, sumtime hors and man: and after fall too it with sworde & target, good bangz a both sidez: the fight so ceassing, but the battail not so ended, fol∣loed the footmen, both the hostez ton after toother: first marching in ranks: then war∣lik turning, thē frō ranks into squadrons, then in too trianglz frō that intoo rings, & so winding oout again: A valiant captain of great prowez az fiers az a fox assauting a gooz, waz so hardy to giue the first stroke: then get they grisly togyther: that great waz the actiuitée that day too be séen thear a both sidez: ton very eager for purchaz of pray, toother vtterly stoout for redempti∣on of libertie: thus, quarrell enflamed fury a both sidez. Twise the Danes had ye bet∣ter, but at the last conflict, beaten doun, o∣uercom and many led captiue for triumph by our English wéemen. This waz the effect of this sheaw, that
and vnrulines of the people, waz cauz that this solemnitee of Brideale, & daun∣cing had not the full muster waz hoped for: and but a littl of the Couentrée ple her highnes also saw: commaunded thear∣fore on the Tuisday folloing to haue it ful oout: az accordingly it waz prezented, whearat her Maiestie laught well: they wear the iocunder, and so mooch the more becauz her highnes had giuen them too buckes and fiue marke in mony to make mery togyther: they prayed for her Maie∣sty, long, happily to reign & oft to cum thi∣ther that oft they moought sée héer: & what, reioycing vpon their ampl reward, and what, triumphing vpon the good accep∣tauns: they vaunted their play waz neuer so dignified, nor euer any players afore so beatified. Thus though the day took an éend, yet
slipt not the night all sléeping awey: for az neyther offis nor obsequy ceassed at any tyme too the full, to perform the plot hiz honor had appoynted: So, after supper waz thear a play prezented of a very good theam, but so set foorth by the Actoourz wel handling that pleazure & mirth made it seeme very short, though it lasted too good oourz and more. But stay master Martyn all iz not doon yet. After the play oout of hand, folloed a most delicioouz and (if I may so terme it) an Ambrosiall Banket: whearof, whither I myght more muze at the deintynesse, shapez and the cost: or els at the variete & number of the disshez (that wear a thrée hundred) for my part I coold littl tel thē, and noow less I assure yoo. Her maiesty eat smally or nothing: which vnderstood, the coorsez wear not so orderly serued & sizely set dooun, but wear by and by az disorder∣ly wasted & coorsly consumed, more court∣ly me thought then curteously. But that was no part of ye matter, moought it pleaz and be liked & do that it cam for, then waz all well inough. Vntoo this banket thear waz appoyn∣ted a mask: for riches of aray, of an incre¦dibl
cost: but the time so far spent and ve∣ry late in the night noow, waz cauz that it cam not foorth to the sheaw. And thus for Sondayz seazon hauing stayd yoo the lenger (according too the matter) heer make I an eend: ye maye breath yee a while. Munday the eyghteenth of this Iuly, Munday. 10 the weather being hot, her highnes kept the Castl for coolness, till aboout fiue a clok her Maiesty in the Chase, hunted the hart (az afore) of fors: that whyther wear it by the cunning of the huntsmen, or by Psal. 24. the naturall desyre of the Deer, or els by both: anon he gat him too soyl agayne, which reyzed the accustomed delight: a pastime indéede so intyrely pleazaunt, az whearof at times whoo may haue the ful and frée fruition, can find no more sacietée (I wéen) for a recreation, then of theyr good vaundes at timez for their sustenta∣tion. Wéll, the game waz gotten, and her highnes returning: cam thear vppon a swimming Mermayd (that from top too tayl waz an eyghtéen foot long) Triton Neptunes blaster: whoo, with hiz trūpet foormed of a wrinkld wealk az her Maie∣sty
waz in sight, gaue soound very shrill & sonoroous, in sign he had an ambassy too pronoouns: anon her highnes waz cum∣men vpon the bridge whearunto he made hiz fish to swim the swifter, and he then declared: how the supreame salsipotent Monarch Neptune, the great God of the swelling seaz, Prius of profunditées, and Soouerain Segnior of al Lakez, fresh∣waterz, Riuerz, Créekes, & Goolphs: vn∣derstanding how a cruel Knight, one syr Bruse sauns pitée, a mortall enmy vntoo Ladiez of estate, had long lyen about the banks of this pooll in wayt with his bāds heer to distress the Lady of ye lake, whear∣by she hath béen restrayned not only from hauing any vse of her ancient liberty and territoriez in théez parts: but also of ma∣king repayr & giuing attēdauns vnto yoo nobl Qnéen (qd. he) az she woold, shee pro∣mist, and allso shoold: dooth thearfore sig∣nify: and héerto, of yoo az of hiz good leag and déer fréend make this request, that ye will deyn but too sheaw yoor parson tow∣ard this pool, whearby yoor only prezens shall be matter sufficient of abandoning this vucurtess knight, and putting all his bands too flight, & also of deliuerauns of
the lady oout of this thralldom. Moouing héerwith from the bridge & fléeting more intoo the pool, chargeth he in Neptunes name: both Colus with al his windez, the waters with hiz springs, hiz fysh & fooul, and all his clients in the same, that they ne be so hardye in any fors too stur, but kéep them calm & quiet while this Quéen be prezent. At which petition her highnes staying, it appeerd straight hoow syr Bruse became vnséen, his bands skaled, and the Lady by and by, with her too Nymphs, floting vpon her moouable I∣lands (Triton on hiz mermaid skimming by) approched toward her highnes on the bridge: az well too declare that her Maie∣stiez prezens hath so graciouslye thus wrought her deliuerauns, az allso to ex∣cuze her not comming to coourt az she promist, and chéefly to prezent her Ma∣iesty (az a token of her duty & good hart) for her highness recreation with thiz gift, which was Arion that excellēt & famouz Muzicien, in tyre & appointmēt straunge well séeming too hiz parson, ryding alofte vpon hiz olld fréend the Dolphin, (that from hed too tayl waz a foour & twenty foot long) & swymd hard by theez Ilands:
héerwith Arion for theez great benefitez, after a feaw well coouched words vntoo her Maiesty of thanksgyuing, in supple∣ment of the same: béegā a delectabl ditty of a song wel apted too a melodious noiz, compoounded of six seuerall instruments al coouert, casting sooūd from yt Dolphins belly within, Arion the seauenth sitting thus singing (az I say) withoout. Noow syr, the ditty in miter so aptly en∣dighted to the matter, and after by voys so delicioously deliuerd: ye song by a skilful artist intoo hiz parts so swéetly sorted: each part in hiz instrument so clean & sharpely toouched, euery instrument again in hiz kind so excellently tunabl: and this in the éeuing of the day, resoounding from the callm waters: whear prezens of her Ma∣iesty & longing too listen had vtterly dam∣ped all noyz & dyn: the hole armony con∣ueyd in tyme, tune, & temper thus incom∣parably melodious: with what pleazure (Master Martin) with what sharpnes of conceyt, with what lyuely delighte this moought pears into the heerers harts: I pray ye imagin yoor self az ye may, for so God iudge me, by all the wit & cunning I haue, I cānot express, I promis yoo. Mais
ieo bien vieu cela Monseur, que fort grāde est la pouuoyr qu'auoit la tresnoble Science de Musique sur les esprites humains. per∣ceiue ye me? I haue told ye a great mat∣ter noow. As for me surely I was lulld in such liking & so loth too leaue of, yt mooch a doo a good while after, had I, to fynde me whear I waz. And take ye this by the way, that for the smal skyl in muzik, that God hath sent me (ye kno it iz sumwhat) ile set the more by my self while my name iz Langham, and grace a God. A, muzik iz a nobl Art. A, stay a while, see a short wit: by my trooth I had almost forgot. This daye waz a day of grace beside, whearin wear auaunced fyue Gentlemen of woorshippe vnto the degrée of knighthood, Sir Tho∣mas Cecyl, sun & heyr vntoo the right ho∣norabl Knights made. the Lord Treazorer, Syr Henry Cobham, broother vnto the Lord Cobhā, Syr Thomas Stanhop, Syr Arthur Basset, and Syr Thomas Tresham: and allso by her highnes accustumed mercy & charitée, nyne cured of the peynfull and daungerous diseaz, called ye kings euill, for that Kings & Quéenz of this Realm, withoout oother medsin (saue only by
handling & prayerz) only doo cure it: bear with me, though perchauns I place not thoz Gentlmen in my recitall héer, after theyr estatez: for I am neyther good he∣raud of armez, nor yet kno hoow they are set in the Subsydy bookez. Men of great woorship I vnderstand they are all. Tuisday, according to commaunde∣ment, Tuisday. 11 cam oour Couentrée men. what their matter waz, of her highnes myrth and good acceptauns, and rewarde vn∣too them, and of their reioysing thear∣at, I sheawd you afore, and so say the less noow. Wednesday in the forenoon, preparaci∣on Wedns. 12. was in hand for her Maiesty too haue supt in Wedgeno, a thrée myle west frō the Castl. A goodly park of the Quéenz Maiestyez: for that cauz, a fayr Paui∣lion, and other prouision accordingly thi∣ther sent & prepared: but by meanz of weather not so cléerly dispozed, ye matter waz countermaunded again. That had her highnes hapned this daye too haue cummen abrode: there was made reddy a deuise of Goddessez & Nymphes: which az well for the ingenious argument, az for ye wel handling of it in rime & endigh∣ting
woold vndooutedly haue gaind great lyking & mooued no less delight. Of ye par∣ticular itéez, whearof I ceas to entreat: least like the boongling carpentar, by mis∣sorting the péecez, I mar a good frame in the bad setting vp, or by my fond tem∣pring afore hand embleamish the beauty, when it shoold be reard vp in déede. A this day allso waz thear such earnest tallk & appoincment of remoouing that I gaue ouer my noting, and harkened after my hors. Mary syr I must tell yoo: Az all ende∣uoour waz too mooue mirth & pastime (az I tolld ye): éeuen so a ridiculoous deuise of an auncient minstrell, & hiz song waz prepared to haue been profferd, if méete time & place had béen foound for it. Ons in a woorshipfull company, whear full ap∣pointed, he recoounted his matter in sort az it shoould haue been vttred, I chaunsed too be: what I noted, heer thus I tel yoo: A parson very méet séemed he for the pur∣poze, of a xlv yéers olld apparelled part∣ly as he woold himself. Hiz cap of: his hed séemly roounded tonster wyze: fayr kembd yt with a spoonge deintly dipt in a littl ca∣pons greaz was finely smoothed too make
it shine like a Mallards wing. Hiz beare smugly shauen: and yet hiz shyrt after the nu trik, with ruffs fayr starched, sléeked, and glistering like a payr of nu shooz: mar∣shalld in good order: wyth a fetling stick, and stoout that euery ruff stood vp like a wafer: a side gooun of kendall green, af∣ter the freshnes of the yéer noow, gathe∣red at the neck with a narro gorget, fast∣ned afore with a white clasp and a kéepar close vp to the chin: but easily for heat too vndoo when he list: Séemly begyrt in a red caddiz gyrdl: from that a payr of capped Sheffeld kniuez hanging a to side: Out of hiz bozome drawne foorth a lappet of his napkin, edged with a blu lace, & marked with a trulooue, a hart, and a D. for Da∣mian: for he was but a bachelar yet. Hiz gooun had syde sleeuez dooun to midlegge, slit from the shooulder too the hand & lined with white cotten. Hiz doob∣led sleeuez of blak woorsted, vpon them a a payr of poynets of tawny Chamblet la∣ced a long the wreast wyth blu threeden points, a wealt toward the hand of fustian anapes: a payr of red neatherstocks: a pair of pumps on hiz féet with a cross cut at the toze for cornz: not nu indéede, yet cleanly
blakt with soot, & shining az a shoing horn. Aboout hiz nek a red rebon dsutable too hiz girdl: hiz harp in good grace depen∣daunt before him: hiz wreast tyed to a gréen lace and hanging by: vnder the gor∣get of hiz gooun a fair flagon cheyn (pew∣cer, for siluer) az a squier minstrel of Mid∣dilsex, that trauaild the cuntrée this soom∣mer seazon vnto fairz & worshipfull mens hoousez: frō hiz chein hoong a Schoochi∣on, with mettall & cooller resplendant vp∣on hiz breast of the auncient armez of Is∣lington: vpō a question whearof: he, az one that waz wel schoold, & coold hiz lesson par∣fit withoout booke too aunswear at full, if question wear askt hym, declared: hoow the woorshipfull village of Istington in Middelsex, well knooen too bee one of the most auncient and best toounz in England next London at thiz day: for the feythfull fréendship of long time sheawed az well at Cookez feast in Aldersgate stréete yeerely vpon holly Rood day, az allso at all solem bridalez in the citie of London all the yéer after: in well seruing them of furmenty for porage, not ouersod till it be too weak: of mylk for theyr flawnez, not pild nor chalked: of cream for their custardes, not
frothed nor thykned with floour: and of butter for theyr pastiez, and pyepast, not made of well curds, nor gatherd of whey in soommer: nor mingled in winter with salt butter watered or washt, did obteyn long ago thez woorshipfull armez in coo∣ler & foorm az yee sée: which are the armz a field argent, as the field and groound in deed, whearin the milkwiuez of thiz woor∣thy tooun, and euery man els in hys facul∣ty doth trade for hiz liuing: on a Fess Ten∣ny thrée platez betwéene thrée milke tan∣kerds proper. The thrée milk tankerds, az the proper vessell whearin the substauns, and matter of their trade iz too and fro transported. The Fess Tenny, which iz a cooler betokening dout & suspitiō: so az sus¦picion & good heed taking, az wel to their markets & seruants, az to their customers yt they trust not too farre: may bring vnto them platez, that iz coynnd syluer: thrée, that iz sufficient and plentie, for so that number in Armory may well signifie. For Creast vpon a wad of ote strawe for a wreath, a boll of furmenty: Wheat (az yee kno) iz the most precious gyft of Ceres, and in the midst of it, sticking a The horn¦spoonz. doozen  hornspoonz in a bunch az the in∣struments
meetest too eate furmenty po∣rage wythall: a doozen, az a number of plenty compleat for full cheere or a ban∣ket, and of horn, az of a substauns more e∣stimabl then iz made for a great deel: bée∣ing nether so churlish in weight az iz met∣tall: nor so froward and brittl to manure, az stone, nor yet so soily in vse nor roough to the lips az wood iz: but lyght, plyaunt, and smooth, that with a littl licking wooll allweiz be kept az clen az a dy. With yoor paciens Gentlmen (quoth the minstrel) be it said: wear it not in deede that hornz bee so plentie, hornware I beleeue woold bee more set by than it iz, and yet are thear in our parts that wyll not stick too auoow, that many an honest man both in citée and cuntrée hath had hiz hoous by horning well vphollden, and a daily fréend allso at néed. And thiz with your fauoour may I further affirm: a very ingenioous parson waz hée, that for dignitée of the stuff, coold thus by spooning deuise, to auauns the horn so neer too the hed. With great congruens also wear théez hornspoonz put too the wheat: az a token and porcion of Cornucopiae, the horn of Achelous, which the Naiades did fil with Ouid. met. lib. 9.
all good frutez, corn & grain: & after did consecrate vnto abooundauns and plenty. This skoochion with beastz very aptly agréeing both to the armz and to the trade of the bearerz, glorioously supported, Be∣twéen a gray Mare (a beast meetest for carying of mylktankards) her pannell on her bak, az alwayz reddy for seruis at euery feast and brydale at neede, her tail splayd at most eaz: and her filly fole, fallo and a flaxen mane after the syre. In the skro vndergrauen (quoth hee) iz thear a proper woord, an hemistichi, well squaring with al the rest, taken out of Sa∣lerns Salern. ca. chapter, of things that most noorish mans body: Lac, Caseus infans. That iz good milke and yoong chéez. And thus mooch Gintlmen, and pleaz you (quoth he). for the armz of oour woorshipfull tooun. And thearwithal made a manerly leg, and so held his peas. Az the cumpany pawzed and the min∣strell sémde to gape after a praiz for hiz Beauparlar: and bicauz he had renderd hiz lesson so well: Saiz a good fello of the cū∣pany, I am sory to see hoow mooch the poore minstrell mistakez the matter: for indeed the armez are thus.
with a , king with her  for flyez, and her  nying after the dam for suk. This woord La, Caseus in∣fans. That is, a fresh cheez and cream, & the cōmon cry that theez milkwiuez make in London stréetes yéerly, betwixt Easter and whitsontide: and this iz the very mat∣ter I kno it well inough, and so ended hiz tale, and sate him dooun again. Héerat euery man laught a good, saue the minstrell: that thoogh the fooll wear made priuy, all waz but for sport, yet too see him self thus crost with a contrary ku that hee lookt not for, woold straight haue geen ouer all, waxt very wayward, eager and soour: hoow be it last by sum entreaty & many fayr woords, with sak & suger, we sweetned him againe, and after becam az mery az a py. Appeerez then a fresh, in hiz ful formalitée with a louely look: after thrée loly cooursiez, cleered his vois with a hem and a reach, and spat oout withal, wi∣ped
hiz lips with the hollo of his hand, for fyling hiz napkin, temperd a string or too with hiz wreast: and after a littl warh∣ling on hiz harp for a prelude, came foorth with a sollem song, warraunted for story oout of king Aurthurz acts, the first booke King Ar∣thurs book. and 26. chapter, whearof I gate a copy, and that iz this. SO it befell vpon a Penticost day, When king Arthur at Camelot kept coourt rial, With hiz cumly Quéen dame Gaynoour the gay. And many bolld Barrons sitting in hall, Ladies apparaild in purpl and pall, When herauds in hukes herried full by Largess Largess cheualiers treshardy. ¶ A doouty Dwarf too the vppermost deas Right peartly gan prik and knéeling on knee, With steeuen full stoout amids all the preas, Said hail syr king, God thee saue and see, King Ryens of Northgalez gréeteth well thee, And bids that thy beard anon thou him send, Or els from thy iawz he will it of rend, ¶ For his robe of state, a rich skarlet mantell, With a leauen kings beards bordred aboout, Hee hath made late, and yet in a cantell
, Lordz begā too , stampt, squirez startld az stéedz in a stoour. Yeemn and pagez yeald out in the hall, Thearwith cam in Syr Bay of Seueshall. ¶ Syleus my suffrainz quoth the courteyz Knight, And in that stoound the chearm becam still, The Dwarfs dynner full deerly waz dight, For wine and wasell hée had at hiz will, And when hee had eaten and fed hiz fill. One hundred peeces of coyned gould, Wear giuen the Dwarfe for hiz message bolld. ¶ Say too Syr Ryens thou Dwarf quoth the king, That for his proud message I him defy, And shortly with basinz and panz will him ring, Oout of Northgalez whearaz hée and I With sweards and no razerz shall vtterly try, Which of vs both iz the better Barber: And thearwith he shook hiz sword Excalaber.
At this, the minstrell made a pauz & a curtzy, for Primus passus. More of the song iz thear, but I gat it not, Az for the matter had it cum to the sheaw, I think the fello would haue handled it well y∣noough. Her highnes tarryed at Kyllingwoorth tyll the wednesday after, being the 27 of this Iuly, and the nintéenth (inclusiue) of her Maiestiez cumming thither. For which seuen daiz, perceyuing my notez so slenderly aunswering: I tooke it less blame, too ceas & thearof too write yoo nothing at al, thē in such matterz to write nothing likely, And so mooch the rather (az I haue well bethoght me) that if I dyd but ruminate the dayz I haue spoken of, I shall bring oout yet sumwhat more, méet for yoor appetite, (thoogh a deinty tooth haue ye) which I beleue yoor tender stomak will brook wel inoogh. Whearof part iz: fyrst hoow according to her highnes name ELIZABETH, The sea∣uenz. which I heer say oout of the Hebru signi∣fieth (amoong oother) the Seauenth of my God: diuerz things heer, did soo iustly in number square with the same. Az fyrst, her highnes hither cumming in this sea∣uenth
vpon her coourt thear too make her Maiesty merry. Sage Saturn himself in parson (that Saturn and Pallas. bycauz of hiz lame leg cold not so well ur) in chayr thearfore too take order with the graue officerz of hooushold, hol∣pe in deed with the good aduise of his prudent Nees Pallas: That no vnruly body or disquiet, disturb the nobl assem∣blée, or els be ons so bolld too enter with∣in the Casti gatez. Awey with al rascallz, captiuez, melācholik, waiward, froward, Coniurerz, and Usurers, and to haue la∣borers and vnderwoorkmen for ye beauti∣fying of ony place, alwey at hand az they shoold be commaunded. Iupiter. Sent parsonagez of hy honor & dignitée: Barōs, Lords, Ladies, Iuges Iupiter. Bishops, Lawyerz, Doctors: with them, vertu, obless, equitée, liberalitée & cōpas¦sion:
due seazō, & fayr weather: sauing that at the petition of hiz déer sister Ceres, he graūted a day or too of sum swéet shoourz for rypening of her corn that waz so well set, & too set forward haruest: Heerwith, bestoed he such plenty of pleazaunt thun∣der, lightning, & thūderbollts: by hiz hal∣ting sun & fyermaster, Vulcan stil fresh & fresh framed: alweyz so frequent, so intel∣labl, & of such cōtinuauns in the spēding (az I partly tolld ye) cōsumed: that surely he séemz too be az of poour inestimabl: so, in store of municion, vnwastabl: For all Ouids censure that saiz. Si quoties peccant homines sua fulmina mittat Iupiter: exigo tempore inermis erit. If Ioue shoold shoot hiz thūderbollts az oft az mē offend, Assure yoo hiz artillary wold soon be at an end What a number of estatez & of nobi∣litée had Iupiter assembled thear, gess yée by this: that of sort woorshipfull thear wear in the coourt dayly aboode fourty, whearof the meynest, of a thoouzād mark yéerly reuenu, and many of mooch more. This great gyft byside, did hiz deitée cast vpon her highnes, too haue fayr & seazo∣nabl weather at her ooun appointment:
, made humbl ute vntoo her highnes too cum: too such whearof as her maiesty coold, it cam: and they seazon ac∣ceptabl. Phoebus, Biside his continuall & most Phoebus. delicious muzik (az I haue toold yoo) ap∣pointed he Princes too adoourn her high∣nes coourt, Coounselerz, Herauds, and sanguine yooth, pleazaunt & mery, costlye garments, learned Phizicianz, & no néede of them. Iuno, Golld cheynez, Ouchez, Iewels Iuno. of gret price & rich attyre, woorn in mooch grace & good beséeming without pryde, or emulacion of ony. Mars. Captainz of good conduct, Men Mars. skylfull in feats of armz, pollitik in stra∣tagemz, Good coorage in good quarelz, va∣liant, & wizehardy: Abandoning pikquar∣rels & ruffianz: appoynting also Pursy∣uaunts, currarz & posts still féeding her highnes with nuze & intelligencez from all parts. Venus. Vntoo the Ladyez & Gentl∣wemen: Venus.
:beauty, good fauour, cumlinesse, galāt attyre, dauncing with cumly grace swéet vois in song & pleazaunt tallk with express cōmaundment & charge vntoo her sunn on her blessing, that he shoote not a shaft in the Coourt all the while her high∣nes remayned at Killingwoorth. Mercuri. Learned men in Sciencez, Poets, Merchaunts, Painterz, Karuerz, Mercuri Players, Engyners, Deuyserz & dexteri∣tée in handling of all pleazaunt attempts. Luna. Callm nights for quiet rest, and syluer moonshine, that nightly in déede Luna. shone for most of her Maiestyez béeing thear. Blinde Plutus. Bags of moony, Custu∣merz. Plutus. Exchaungers, Bankers, Store of riches in plate and in coyn. Bacchus. Full Cups euery whear, eue∣ry Bacchus. oour of al kynds of wyne. Thear waz no deintée that the Sea coold yéeld, but Neptune (thoough hiz Neptune. reign at the néerestly well ny a hundred mile of) did dayly send in great plenty, swéet and freash. As for freashwater fish, the store of all sorts waz aboundaunt. And hoow bountiful Ceres in prouizion Cere. waz, gess ye by this: that in lyttl more then
a thrée dayz space, 72. tunn of Ale & Bée waz pyept vp quite: what that mighte whilst with it of bread beside meat, I re∣port me to yoo. And yet master Control∣ler, master Coferar and diuerz officers of the Coourt, sum honorabl, and sundrye right woorshipfull placed at Warwik for more rooum in the Castl. But heer was no ho Master Martin in de∣uoout drinking allwey: that brought a lak vnlookt for, which being knoen too the Woorshipfull my Lords good neigh∣boourz, cam thear in a too dayz space frō sundry friendz: a reléef of a xl. tunn, till a nu supply was gotten agayn: and then too oour drinking a freshe az fast az euer we did. Flora. Abrode & within the hoous mini∣stred Flora. of flourz so great a quantitée: of such swéet sauoour, so beautifully hued, so large and fayr of proporcion, and of so straunge kindez & shapez, that it waz great plea∣sure too sée: & so mooch the more, az thear waz great store yet counterfet & foormed of featherz by art, lyke glorioous too the sheaw az wear the naturall. Protheus. Hiz Tumbler that coold Protheus. by nimblness cast himself intoo so ma∣ny
foorms & facionz. Pan. Hiz mery morrys dauns with their Pan. pype & taber. Bellona. Her quintine knights & proper Bellona▪ bickerings of the Couentrée men. Polyphemus. Neptunez sun & heyr (let Polyphe∣mus. him I pray & it be but for hiz fathers sake and for his good wyll, be allowed for a God, with hiz bearz hiz bear whealps and bandogs. Aeolus. Hollding vp hiz windez while Aeolus. her highnes at any tyme took pleazure on the water, and staying of tēpests during abode héer. Syluanus. Beūde hiz plentifull prouizion Syluanus. of fooul for deynty viaunds, his pleazaūt and swéet singing byrds: whearof I will sheaw yoo more anon. Echo. Her wel endighted dialog. Faunus. Hiz ioly Sauage. Echo. Faunus. Genius. Genius loci. Hiz tempring of al things within & without, with apt tyme & place too pleazure & delight. Then the thrée Charites: Aglaia, Charites. with her lightsum gladnes. Thalia her floorishing freshnes. Euphrosyne, her cheerfullnes of spirite, and with theez three in one assent Concordia: with
her amitée and good agréement. That too hoow great effects their poourz wear pooured oout heer among vs, let it bée iudged by this: that by a multytude thus met of a thrée or foour thoouzand e∣uery day: and diuerz dayz more, of so sun∣dry degrées, professions, agez, appetytz, dispozicions & affections: such a drifte of tyme was thear passed, with such amitée, looue, pastime, agréement, and obediens whear it shoold: and without quarrel, iar∣ring, grudging, or (that I coold héer) of yll woord betwéen any. A thing master Mar∣tin very rare & straunge, and yet no more straunge then tru. The Parcae (az earst I shoold haue sayd) parcae. the first night of her Maiestiez cumming: they héering & séeing so precioous ado héer at a place vnlookt for, in an vplōdish cun∣trée so far within the Ream: preassing in∣too euery stéed whear her highnes went, whearby so duddld with such varietée of delyghts, did fet aside their huswifrye, coold not for their harts tend their work a whyt. But after they had séen her Ma∣iesty a bed, gat them a prying into euery place olld hags, az fond of nuellries, az yoong girls that had neuer séen Court a∣fore:
but neyther full, with gazing nor wery with gadding, leaft of yet for that time, and at high midnight, gat them gigling, (but not alooud) into the prezens Chamber: minding indéed with their pre∣zent diligens, too recompens their former staknes. So, setting them seluez thus dooun too their woork: alas sayz Atropos I haue lost my shéerz: Lachesis laught apace and woold not draw a thréed: And thinke ye damez that ile hoold the distaff whyle both y sit idle? why no by my mootherz soll qd. Clotho. Thearwith fayr lapt in a fine lawn the spindel and rok, that waz dizend with pure purpl sylk, layd they safely vp toogyther: that of hir Maiestyez distaff for an eightéen dayz, thear waz not a thréed spoon I assure you. The too systers after that, (I hard say) began their woork again: yt long may they continu, but Atropos hard no tydings of her shéers, and not a man that moned her loss. She iz not belooued surely, for this can I tell yoo: that whither it bee for hate too the hag, or looue to her highnes, or els for both: euery man prayz God she may ne∣uer find them for that woork, and so pray I daily
apted in all pointes to the best. Vntoo thiz, hiz honorz exquisit appoint∣ment The Gar∣den. of a beautifull Garden, an aker or more of quantitee that lyeth on the north thear. Whearin hard all along the Castl wall iz reared a pleazaunt Teries of a ten foot hy & a twelue brode: éeuen vnder foot & fresh of fyne grass: az iz allso the side thearof toward the gardein, in whiche by sundry equall distauncez: with obelisks, sphearz, and white bearz all of stone vpō theyr curioouz basez, by goodly shew wear set: too theez, too fine arbers redolent by swéet trées and floourz, at ech end one, the garden plot vnder that, with fayr alleyz gréen by grass, éeuen voided from the bor∣derz a both sydez, and sum (for chaunge) with sand, not light or to soft, or soilly by dust, but smooth and fyrme, pleasaunt too walk on, az a sea shore when the water iz auaild: then, much gracified by du pro∣porcion of four éeuen quarterz: in ye midst of each, vpon a base a too foot square, & hy, séemly borderd of it self, a square pilaster rizing pyramidally of a fyftéen foote hy: Simmetrically perced through frō a foot beneath, vntill a too foot of the top: whear vpon, for a Capitell, an Orb of a ten in∣ches
thik: euery of théez (with hiz base) from the groound too the top of one hole pées, heawen oout of hard Porphiry, and with great art & héed (thinks me) thyther conuey & thear erected. Whear further allso by great cast & cost the swéetnes of sauoour on all sidez, made so respiraunt frō the redolent plants and fragrāt earbs and floourz, in foorm, cool∣ler and quantitée so delicioously variant: and frute Trées bedecked with their Ap∣plz, Peares and rpe Cherryez. And vnto theez in the midst, agaynst ye The Cage Terres: a square cage, sumptuoous and beautifull, ioyned hard to the Northwall (that a that side gards the gardein, as the gardein the Castl) of a rare form and ex∣cellency was reyzed: in heyth a twentye foot, thyrty long, and a foourtéen brode. From the ground strong & close, reared breast hy, whear at a soyl of a fayr mool∣ding was coouched all abaout: From that vpward, foour great wyndoz a froont and too at each éend, euery one a fyue foot wide, az many mo éeuen abooue them, di∣uided on all parts by a transum and Ar∣chitraue so likewize raunging aboout ye Cage. Each windo arched in the top, and
touched a along vpon y• hole square. Which with a , snely nit, of ma∣shez sixe square, an inch wyde (az it wear for a flat roof) and likewise the space of e∣uery windo with great cunning and cum∣lines, uen and tight waz al ouerstrained Vder the Cornish again, euery part beau¦tifyed with great Diamons, Emerauds, Rubyes and Saphyres: poynted, tabld, rok and roond garnisht with their golld, by skilfull hed and hand, and by toile and pensill, so lyuely exprest, az it mought bee great marueil and pleasure to consider how neer excellency of art could approch vntoo perfection of nature. Bear with me good euntréeman thoogh thinges be not sheawd heer az well az I woold, or az well as they shoold. For in déed I can better imagin & cōceyue that I sée, then wel vtter or duly declare it. Holez wear thear also and cauerns in orderly di¦stauns & facion, voyded intoo the wall az wel for heat, for coolnes, for roost a nightz & refuge in weather, az allso for breeding when tyme iz. More, fayr eeuen and fresh
holly treez for pearching and proining set within, tooward each eend one. Heereto their diuersitée of meats, theyr fine seueral vessels for their water, and sundry grainz. And a man skilful and diligent to looke too them and tend them. But (shall I tell yoo) the siluer soounded Lute, withoout the swéet toouch of hand: the glorioous goollden cup, withoout the fresh fragrant wine, or the rich ring with gem, without the fayr feawtered fynger: iz nothing indéede in hiz proper grace & vse: Euen so his Honor accounted of thiz mansion, till he had plast thear tenauntes according. Had it thearfore replenishte with liuely Burds, English, French, spa∣nish, Canarian, and (I am deceaued if I saw not sum) African. Whearby, whither it becam more delightsum in chaunge of tunez and armony too the eare: or els in differens of coolerz, kyndez & propertyez too the ey, Ile tell yoo if I can whē I haue better be thought me. One day (Master Martin) az the Gardin The Gardi∣ner. door waz open, & her highnes a hunting by licens of my good fréend Adriā, I cam in at a bek, but woold skant oout with a thrust: for sure I waz loth so soon to depart.
Well may this (Master Martyn) bee suinwhat too magnitude of mynde, but more thearof az ye shall kno, more cauz ye shall haue so too think: heer out what I tel yoo, and tell me when we méet. In the center (az it wear) of this goodly The Foun∣tain. Gardein, was theer placed a very fayre Foountain, cast intoo an eight square, rea∣red a four foot hy, from the midst whear∣of a Colum vp set in shape of too Ath∣lants ioined togeather a backhalf, the tn looking East, toother West, with theyr hands vphollding a fayr formed boll of a thrée foot ouer: from wheans sundrye fine pipez, did liuely distill continuall streamz intoo the receyt of the Foountayn: mayn∣teyned styll too foot déep by the same fresh falling water: whearin pleazauntly play∣ing too & fro & round about Carp, Tench, Bream, and for varietée, Pearch & Eel, fysh fayrliking all and large, in the toppe the ragged staffe: which, with the boll, the pillar, and eyght sides beneath, wear all heawen oout of rich & hard white Marbl. A one syde, Neptune with hiz Tridental Fuskin triumphing in hiz Throne, tray∣led into the déep by his marine horsez. On an other, Thetis in her chariot drawn
by her Dollphins. Then Triton by hiz fyshez. Héer Protheus hearding hiz sea buls. Thear Doris & her dooughterz so∣lacyng a sea & sandz. The wauez soour∣ging with froth & fome, entermengled in place, with whalez, whirlpoolz, sturgeonz, Tunneyz, Couchs & wealks: all engrauē by exquisit deuize and skill, so az I maye thinke this not much inferioour vntoo Phoebus gatez, which (Ouid sayz) & per∣aduentur a pattern to thiz, yt Vulcan him Metam. 2 self dyd cut: whearof such was the excel∣lency of art, that the woork in valu sur∣moounted the stuff, and yet wer the gatez all of clean massy syluer. Héer wear thinges ye see moought en∣flame ony mynde too long after looking: but whoo so was found so hot in desyre, with the wreast of a Cok was sure of a coolar: water spurting vpward with such vehemency, az they shoold by & by be moy∣stned from top too to. The hées to sum laughing, but the shées to more sport. Thiz sumtime waz occupied to very good pastime. A Garden then so appoynted, az whearin a loft vpon swéet shadoed wallk of Ter∣res, in heat of Soomer, too féel the plea∣zaunt
tabl ith: her∣ lks: ourz urz: mu∣ ,for ing , the waters (for both  & chase  hard at  in ight) the deer, the peepl (that oout of the Gast her in the ase coourt, allso a hande in view) the frute trées, the plants, the earbs, the floourz, the chaunge in coolers, the Burds flyttering, the Foountaine strea∣ming, the Fysh swymming: all in such delectabl varietée, order dignitée: whear∣by at one moment in one place, at hande Paradisus. Giaec. Hortus a∣aenis. Aut He∣brac. Par∣es id est. Hortus. without trauell too haue so full fruition of so many Gods blessinges, by entyer de∣light vnto al sencez (if al cā take) at ones: for Etymon of the woord woorthy to bée calld Paradys: and though not so goodly az Paradis for want of the fayr Riuers, yet better a great deel by the lak of so vn∣happy a trée. Argument most certein of a right nobl minde, that in this sort coold
haue thus all contriued. But Master Martin, yet one wyndlesse must I featch, too make ye one more fayr coors and I can: and cauz I speak of one: let me tel yoo a littl of the dignitée of one∣hod, The nūber  whearin allweyz, al hy Deitee al So∣ueraintee, Préeminens, Principalitee and Concord withoout possibilitee of disagree∣ment iz conteyned. Az one God, one Da∣uioour, one Feith, one Prins, one Sun, one Phenix, and az one of great wizdom sayz: one hart one wey. Whear onehod reinz: ther quiet bears rule, & discord fliez a pase. Thrée again may signify cumpany, a méeting, a multitude, pluralitée: so az all talez and numbrings frō too vntoo three, and so vpward, may well be counted num∣berz, till they moount vntoo infinitée, or els too confusion, which thing the sum of Too can neuer admit: nor it self can well bee coounted a number, but rather a freendly coniunction of too ones, that keeping in a synceritee of accord, may purport vnto vs, Charitée each too other, mutuall looue, a∣gréement & integritée of friendship with∣oout dissimulation. Az iz in théez. The too Testamentes. The too Tables of the Law. The too great lights: Duo lumina∣ria
t ll k z a∣ ō∣ r ē∣ a∣ : Az fyst for pastymez homs and hawks: déer, red & falo, hare & for, par∣trich & fezaunt, fysh & fooul, carp & tench. For warz, spear & shéeld, hors & harneis, swoord & bukler: for sustenauns, wheat & barly, peaz and beanz, meat and drinke, bread & meat, béer & ale, appis and pearz. But least by such dualitéez I draw yoo too far: let vs heer stay, and cum néerer home. Sée what a sort of fréendly bini∣téez we oour seluez doo consist & stond vp∣on. Fyrst oour too feet, too legs, too knéez, so vpward: and abooue, too shoolderz, too armz & too hāds. But chéefly our principll Too, that iz, body and soll: then in the hed whear all oour sensez méet, and allmost all in Tooz: too nozethrills, too earz and too eyz So ar we of fréendly Tooz, from top too to. Wel, to this number of bini∣téez,
take ye one mo for an vpshot, & heer an eend. Too Dyallz ny vnto the battil∣ments The too Diallz. ar set aloft vpon too of the sidez of Cezarz toour one East, thoother Soouth for so stond they best to sheaw the oourz too the tooun & cuntrée: both fayre large and rich, by vyse for grooūd & goold for letterz whearby they glitter conspicuous a great wey of. The clokbell that iz good & shrill, waz commaunded too silens at first, and in deede sang not a note all the while her highnes waz thear, the clok stood also still withall. But mark noow, whither wear it by chauns, by constellation of starz, or by fatall appoyntment (if fatez and starz doo deal with dialz.) Thus waz it in déede: The handz of both the tablz stood firm and The Diallz at ii. a clok. fast, allweyz poynting too iust too a clok, still at too a clok. Which thing beholding by hap at first: but after seriously mar∣king in déed, enprinted intoo me a déepe sign & argument certein. That thiz thing amoong the rest, waz for full signifiauns of his Lordships, honorabl, frāk, frendly, and nobl hart toward al estates. Which, whither cum they to stay & take chéer, or straight to returne: too see, or to be séene: cum they for duty too her Maiesty or looue
too hiz Lordship, or for both: Cum they early or late: for his Lordships part, they cum allweyz all at too a clok een iump at too a clok: That iz to say in good harte, good acceptauns, in amitée and freendlye wellcoom. Who saw els that I saw, in right must say az I say. For so manye thinges byside, Master Humfrey wear heerin so consonant vnto my construction, that thiz poynting of the clok (to my self) I took in amitée as an oracle certain. And heer iz my windlesse, lyke yoor coorse as pleaz ye. But noow syr too cum to eend. For re∣ceyuing of her hignes, and entertainment of all thoother estatez. Syns of delicatez that ony wey mought serue or delight: az of wyne, spice, deynty viaunds, plate Mu∣zik, ornaments of hoous, rich arras & syth (too say nothing of yt meaner thinges) the mass by prouizion waz heaped so hoouge, which the boounty in spending did after bewray. The conceit so déep in casting the plat at first. Such a wizdom and cun∣ning in acquiring things so rich, so rare, and in such abundauns: by so immens & profuse a charge of expens, whiche by so honorabl seruis & exquisit order, curteizy
of officerz and humanitée of al, wear after so boountifully bestoed and spēt, what may this express, what may this set oout vntoo vs, but only a magnifyk minde, a singuler wizdoom, a prinsly {pro}urs, and an heroicall hart? If it wear my theam Master Mar∣tyn, too speake of hiz Lordships great ho∣nor & magnificens, though it be not in me too say sufficiently, az bad a penclark az I am, yet coold I say a great deel more. But being heer now in magnificens, & matters of greatnes: it falz wel too mynd. The greatnes of his honors Tent, that The great Tent. for her Maiestyez dining was pighte at long Ichington, the day her highnes cam to Killing worth Castl. A tabernacl indéed for number and shift of large and goodlye roomz, for fayr & eazy offices both inward & ooutward al so likesū in order & eysight: that iustly for dignitée may be comparabl with a beautifull Pallais, & for greatnes & quātitée with a proper tooun, or rather a Cittadell. But to be short, least I kéepe yoo too long from the Ryall Exchaunge noow, and too cauz yoo conceyue mooche matter in feawest woordes. the Iron bedsted of Og the King of Basan (ye wot) waz foour yards and a halfe long, and too Deut.
yards wide, whearby ye consider a Gy∣aunt of a great proportion waz he. This Tent had seauen cart lode of pynz pertei∣ning too it: noow for the greatness, gess az ye can. And great az it waz (too marshall oour matters of greatnes togither) not forget∣ting a Weather at Grafton, brought too the Coort, that for body and wooll was ex∣ceding great, the meazure I tooke not, let me sheaw you with what great marueyl a great Chyld of Leyceter shire, at this lōg Ichington, by the Parents waz prezen∣ted: great (I say) of limz & proportion, of a foour foot & foour inches hy: and els lanuginoous az a lad of eyghtéen yeerz, béeing indeede auowd too be but six yéer olld: nothing more bewraying hiz age thē hiz wit: that waz, az for thooz yeers sim∣pl & childish. Az for vnto hiz Lordship, hauing with such greatnes of honorabl modestye & be∣nignitée so passed foorth, as Laudē sine in∣uidia et anicos par arit. By greatnesse of Terent. well dooing, woon with all sorts to bée in such reuerens, az: De quo mētiri fama ve∣netur. In synceritée of fréendship so great, Bias. az no man more deuooutly woorships.
Illud amicitiae sanctū et veneral ile nomen. Ouid. So great in liberalitie, az hath no wey to heap vp the mass of hiz trezure, but only by liberal gyuing & boounteoous bestoing hiz trezure: foloing (az it séemez) ye saw of Martiall that sayth. Extra fortunā est, quicquid donatur amicis Quas dederis, solas semper habebis opes. Oout of all hazerd doost thou set that to thy freends thoou gyuest: A surer trezure canst thoou not haue euer whyle thoou lyuest. What may théez greatnesses bode, but only az great honor, fame, & renooum for théez parts héer awey, az euer waz vntoo thoz too nobl Greatz: the Macedonian A∣lexāder in Emathia or grées, or to Romāe Charles in Germanye, or Italy? which, wear it in me ony wey to set oout, no man of all men by God (Master Martin) had euer more cauz, and yt héerby consider yoo. It pleazed his honor to beare me good wil at fyrst, & so too continu. To haue giuē me apparail éeuen from hiz bak, to get me al∣lowauns in ye stabl, too aduauns me vntoo this worshipfull office so néer the most ho∣norabl Councell, to help me in my licens of Beanz (though indéed I do not so much vze it, for I thank God I néed not) to per∣mit my good Father to serue the stabl.
by your leaue while God leds me  to vtter my minde▪  hauing az good cauz of his honor, az Virgil had of Augustus Cezar) wil, I poet it a littl with Virgill, and say. Namque erit ille mihi seper Deus, illius arā Sepe tener nostris ab ouilibus imbuet agnus. Eglog. 1. For he shall be a god to me, till death my life consumez: His auters will I sacrifice with incens and parfumez. A singular patrn of humanitée may he be well vnto vs towarde all degréez: of Honor, toward hy Estates, and chéeflye whearby we may learne in what dignitée, worship and reuerens her highnes iz to be esteemed, honored and receiued, that waz neuer indéed more condignly doon thē héer so as neither by the bylders at first, nor by
the Edict of pacification after, was euer 1266. An. 50. Hen. 3. Kenelworth more nobled then by thiz, hiz Lordships receiuīg hir highnes héer now. But Iesu Iesu whither am I drawen noow. But tallk I of my Lord onz, éen thus it farez with me: I forget all, my fréends, & my self too. And yet yoo, being a Mercer, a Merchant, az I am: my cuntrée man born, & my good fréend withal, whear by I kno ye ar compassiond with me: Me thought it my part sūwhat to empart vn∣to yoo, hoow it iz héer with me, & hoow I lead my life, which in déed iz this. A mornings I rize ordinartly at seauen a clok: Then reddy, I go intoo the Chap∣pell: soon after eyght, I get me commonly intoo my Lords Chamber, or intoo my Lord prezidents. Thear at the cupboord after I haue eaten ye manchet, serued ouer night for liuery (for I dare be az bolld, I promis yoo, az any of my freends the ser∣uaūts thear: and indéed coold I haue fresh if I woold tary, but I am of woont iolly & dry a mornings) I drink me vp a good bol of Ale: when in a swéet pot it iz defecated by al nights stāding, the drink iz ye better, take that of me: & a morsell in a morning with a sound draught iz very holsome and good for the eysight. Thē I am az fresh all the
y• forenoon after, az had I eaten a hole pées of béef. Noow syr, if the Councell sit. I am at hand, wait at an inch I warrant yoo If any make babling, peas (say I) woot ye whear ye ar? if I take a lystenar, or a priar in at the chinks or at ye lokhole, I am by & by in the bones of him, but now they kéep good order, they kno me well mough: If a be a fréend or such one az I lyke: I make him sit dooun by me on a foorm, or a cheast, let the rest walk a Gods name. And héer doth my langagez now and than stond me in good sted, my Frēch, my Spa¦nish, my Dutch, & my Latten: sumtime a∣moong Ambassadours mē, if their Master be within with the Coūcel, sumtime with the Ambassadour himself, if hee bid call hiz lacky, or ask me whats a clok, and I war∣rant ye I aunswer him roundly that they maruell to sée such a fello thear: thē laugh I & say nothing. Dinner & supper I haue twenty placez to go to, & hartly prayd to: And sumtime get I too Master Pinner by my faith a worshipfull Gentlman, and az carefull for his charge az ony hir highnez hath: thear find I alway good store of very good viaunds we eat and bee merry thank God & the Quéene. Himself in féeding ve∣ry temperat & moderat az ye shall sée ony:
and yet by your leaue of a dish, az a colld pigeō or so, that hath cum to him at meat more then he lookt for, I haue séen him éen so by and by surfit, az he hath pluct of hiz napkin, wyept his knife, & eat not a mor∣sell more: lyke ynoough to stik in hiz sto∣make a too dayz after: (Sum hardmessage from the higher officers, perceiue ye me?) Vpon search, hiz faithfull dealing and dili¦gens hath found him fautles. In after∣noons & a nights, sumtime am I with the right worshipfull Sir George Howard, az good a Gentlman as ony liuez: And sumtime at my good Lady Sidneis cham¦ber, a Noblwooman that I am az mooch boound vntoo, as ony poore man may bee vnto so gracyons a Lady: And sumtime in sum oother place. But alwayez among the Gentlwemen by my good will (O, yée kno that cum alweyez of a gentle spirite) & when I sée cumpany according than can I be az lyuely to, sumtyme I foote it with daunsing: noow with my Gittrn, and els with my Cittern, then at the Virgynalz: Ye kno nothing cums amisse to mée: then carroll I vp a song withall: that by and by they com flocking about me lyke béez too hunny: and euer they cry, anoother good Langham anoother. Shall I tell yoo?
when I sée Misterz—(A, sée a madde knaue, I had almost tollde all) that shee gyuez onz but an ey or an ear: why then, man, am I best, my grace, my corage, my cunning iz doobled: She sayz sumtime she likez it, & then I like it mooch the better, it dooth me good to heer hoow well I can doo. And too say truth: what, with myne eyz. az I can amoroously gloit it, with my spanish sospires, my french heighs, mine Italian dulcets, my dutch houez my doobl vp syn houe releas, my hy reachez, my fine feyning, my déep diapason, my wanton warblz, my running, my tyming, my tuning and my twynkling, I can gracify the matters az well az the prowdest of them, and waz yet neuer staynd I thank God. By my troth cuntreman it iz sumtim hy midnight ear I cā get from them. And thus haue I told ye most of my trade, al the léeue long daye: what will ye more, God saue the Quéene, and my Lord, I am well I thank yoo. Hée with ment I fully to bid ye farewell, had not this doubt cum to my minde, that heer remainz a doout in yoo, which I ought (me thought) in any wyze to cléer. Which, iz, ye maruel perchauns to sée me so bookish. Let me tell yoo in, few woords: I went to scool forsooth both at Pollez, &
allso at saint Antoniez: in the fifth foorm, past Esop fabls iwys, red Terens. Vos istaec intro auferte, & began with my Vir∣gill Tytire tu patulae. I coold my rulez coold conster & pars with the best of them syns, that (az partly ye kno) haue I trades the feat of marchaundize in sundry Cun∣treyz, & so gat me Langagez: which do so littl hinder my Latten, az (I thank God) haue mooch encreast it. I haue leizure sum∣time, when I tend not vpon the coounsell: whearby, now look I on one booke, noow on an other. Stories I delight in the more auncient & rare, the more likesum vntoo me: If I tolld ye, I lyked▪ William a Malmesbery so well, bicauz of hiz diligenz & antiquitée. Perchauns ye woold conster it bicauz I loue Mamzey so well: but I feith it iz not so: for sipt I no more Sak & suger (& yet neuer but with cōpany) thē I doo Malmzey, I should not blush so moch a dayz as I doo, ye kno my minde. Well noow thus fare ye hartily well: yfeith, if with wishig it coold haue béen, ye had had a buk or too this soomer, but we shal cum neerer shortly, & then shal we merely méet & grace a God, in the mean time commēd me I besek yo: vntoo my good freends, al∣most most of thē yoor neighbors. Master
Assderman Pullison, a speciall fréend of mine: and in ony wise too my good old freend Master Smith Custumer, by that same token. Set my hors vp too the rak, & then lets haue a cup of Sak. He knoez the token well ynough, & wil laugh, I hold ye a grote. Too Master Thorogood: And too my mery cumpanion (a Mercer ye wot az we be) Master Denman, Mio fratello in Christo: he iz woont too summon me by the name of Ro. La. of the Coounty No∣singham Gentlman, A good companiō I feyth. Well onez again fare ye hartely well. From the Coourt. At the Citée of Worceter, the xx of August. 1575. Yoor countréeman, companion, & freend-assuredly: Mercer, Merchantauenturer, and Clark of the Counsel chamber door, and also kéeper of the same: El Prencipe negro. Par me R. L. Gent▪ Mercer. DE MAIESTATE REGIA Benigno. Cedant arma togae, concedat laurea lingu, Iactanter Cicero, aiustius illud habe: Cedāt arma togae, vigil et toga cedat honori Omnia concedant Imperio{que} suo. DEO OPT. MAX. GRATIAE
