16768.18 33143316 28376
Reasons tendred by the Free Butchers of London, against the Bill in Parliament, to restraine Butchers from Grazing of Cattle. FIrst, the cause of this Bill put in against Butchers for grazing and selling of Oxen and Sheep aliue, is, because that those men that frame their Bill against vs, know that Butchers of London can af∣foord a better penyworth then they can: The reason thereof is, that there is no Butcher of London, but doth serue seuen yeares Apprentice (at the least) before he is made Free, and in that time hee may learne to know what a leane Oxe is worth, and what hee may bee worth when he is fat: But on the other side, these men (for the most part) were neuer Apprentice at all, to know how to buy and sell: and therefore, although we pay as much for ground as they do, yet we will affoord a better peniworth then they either will or can: and in that we hope we are profitable to the Commonwealth. 2. We say, that we are to prouide and keepe in store for the Cittie: For, as it is the care of the Lord Maior & other the Magistrates of the City of London, in the time of plenty to buy Corne in the Markets, and to lay it vp in store, for to supply the Markets when the Country doth faile: So, it is our care (being free Butchers of London) to buy Oxen and Sheepe when they are plentifull, and to keepe them in our grounds neere London, for the prouision of the Cittie, till the Countrey cannot affoord such Cattle sufficient to serue such an honourable Citty as London is, because their drift is long, and the wayes very foule, which is the cause that though they are fat when they come out of the Country, yet they are leane before they come to London: When on the contrary, our Cattle are in our grounds nere London, and may be brought home in halfe a day, so that in driuing they are neuer the worse. This we wil proue, and therfore they cannot affoord so good as we can. 3. It will be proued that in any Market of London, if Butchers do bring Cattle to sell, they do sell them sooner, and as good cheape as any man whatsoeuer that renteth his ground. 4. We craue to haue the liberty that all the Kings subiects haue, viz. All men of what degree, estate or calling what∣soeuer, be they rich or poore, from the highest to the lowest, they may graze Cattle if they will, and sell them aliue: Or any Tradesman in London, or in the Countrey, if he be able to hyre Land, or if he haue land of his owne, it is lawfull for him to graze, and afterwards to sell the Cattle he hath grazed aliue: therefore we trust, that which is allowed eue∣ry one of his Maiesties subiects, is not prohibited for vs to doe: so that we hope we may haue liberty to feed Oxen and Sheepe, and all other Cattle, and sell them aliue if we neede (keeping them so long as the Statute alloweth all men) otherwise, we should seeme Aliens and strangers (being barred of that liberty which is limited to euery one) and not his Maiesties subiects. 5. We craue (not on the behalfe of all Butchers whatsoeuer, for there are many that haue not serued half their time, and some that were neuer Apprentice, that vse the trade of a Butcher, these wee omit: but on the behalfe of the Free Butchers of London, that are a Company of London, and beare the charge of a Company of London) that the benefit of grazing may not be taken from vs, which anciently we haue vsed, and without which, our trade is (as it were) no trade at all, and not worthy seuen yeares seruice. 6. Those that haue put in their Bill against Butchers, haue not done it for the good of the Commonwealth, but for their owne priuate gaine. For, if they can enact an Act of Parliament against Butchers for selling of Sheepe & Oxen aliue, then the London Butchers must many Market dayes in a yeare, giue them that prosecute to haue such an Acte, twenty shillings in one Oxe, and eighteene pence or two shillings in one Sheepe, more in one Market day, then they were worth the Market day before. The cheefest cause that they would haue this Acte, is, that thereby they might haue their willes to inhaunce their prizes at their owne wils and pleasures (not caring for the hinderance of others:) For when the Market is scanty of Cattle, then wee haue them in our grounds to serue our turne, and to furnish the Markets for others of the poore Inhabitants of so great a Citie: for then (vnlesse we our selues would be loosers) we must be forced to sell Beefe at three pence or foure dearer in a stone, & euery ioynt of Mutton three pence or foure pence deerer in one market day then at other times: but hauing in such times of scarsitie Cattle grazing in our own grounds sufficient to serue the Market, we thereby hold downe their excessiue prizes, which is the onely cause they haue prefer∣red this Bill against vs free Butchers of London, for selling of Cattle aliue. 7 When as there happen any deepe snowes, foule weather, or high waters, that the Grasiers cannot bring theyr Cattle to the City: as also in the time of the visitation of the plague, the Butchers of London out of their owne proui∣sion and store, haue vsed and do continually furnish the City of London, which otherwise would not be supplyed. 8. The Kings Maiesties Court at the entertainment of Ambassadors, and other times, is often furnished with pro∣uision out of the Butchers store, which they shall neuer be able to doe, if they shall bee restrained grazing, and so conse∣quently, his Maiesty oftentimes vnprouided. 9. Lastly, when it shall be considered by this high Court of Parliament, how much it may concerne the benefit of the Commonwealth, that we the free Butchers of London should continue the vse of grazing: and on the contrarie, what scarsity it will many times in a yeare bring in the City, if such an Act should be inacted against vs, we doubt not but it will be thought that those men who haue framed this Bill against vs, haue done it more for their owne priuate gaine, then for the good of the Commonwealth.
