17739 99842752 7436
MAYERS CATECHISME ABRIDGED. OR, The A.B.C. inlarged. With many necessary Questions fitted vnto it, for the benefit of all that desire to teach or learne it effectually. A dutie to which all wee of the Church of England are bound, it being generally appointed by Authoritie. The second Edition made more compleat and perfect by the Author. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for I. M. and are to be sold by Iohn Grismand, at his shop in Pauls Alley, at the Signe of the Gun. 1623.
The Epistle to the Reader. COurteous Reader, loe here I offer vn∣to thee the second time, the Briefe of my larger Tract. Thou hast beene once abused by the temeritie and indiscretion of the Stationer, offering thee the English Teacher; a title none of mine, and an imperfect confused Chaos of Questions and An∣swers, whereof I was much asha∣med. To amend this fault, and to satisfie the longing desire of ma∣ny, I haue done that which here thou seest. And I doe now assure
thee of a perfect Catechisme, containing the substance both of Text and Comment compleat, wherein is both milke for Babes, and stronger meate for such as haue attained more growth in knowledge. The milke is in a greater Character, which if you please, may be first learned tho∣row: the stronger meate is in a character somwhat lesser. Read, consider, and vse all according to thy discretion, but be sure to vse it, or some like vnto it for the common good of Vniformitie and Order; and the God of Or∣der graunt, that wee may so lay the foundation of the light of truth here, as that wee may attaine the light of glorie heere∣after.
A Prayer to bee vsed before the reading of Bookes of Pietie, or Instruction. O God that art the Fa∣ther of Lights, enligh∣ten my darkned vnder∣standing, that I may see into the wonders contained in the Law. Dispell in me the mistie clouds of ignorance, expell the loue of darknesse, and repell the rebelli∣ous Law of sinne. Sanctifie my wit, that I may bee able to retaine, and rectifie my will, that I may obedi∣ently submit my selfe to thy good will in all things. Thou which art the Master-builder of thine owne
house, settle me as one of thy liuing stones vpon the right foundation, Iesus Christ; in whom I may daily grow vp, till that all the building, coupled together, groweth to an holy Temple in the Lord. And this I craue in the name of thy deare Son, my most blessed Saui∣our and Redeemer. Amen.
MAYERS CATECHISME ABRIDGED, OR The A. B. C. In∣larged. Question. WHat is your name? Answer. F. or E. Q. Why doth the Catechisme begin with this question touch∣ing your name? A. Because the name doth serue to put vs in minde of our Christian profession, to which we betake our selues in Baptisme. Q. Who gaue you this name?
A. My godfathers, and my god∣mothers in my Baptisme, wherein I was made a member of Christ a child of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdome of Heauen. Q. Is Baptisme of that vertue, that by the outward washing thereof, eueryone is made a member of Christ, the child of God and inheritor of the Kingdome of Heauen? A. Ioh. 3.5. No, for vnlesse a man bee borne againe of water, and the ho∣ly Ghost, he cannot enter into the Kingdome of Heauen. Q. Why then sayst thou, that by Baptisme thou art made a member of Christ? A. Because baptisme is the Sa∣crament of regeneration, and there∣fore we may rightly say, that wee are thereby Sacramentally made the members of Christ, and the chil∣dren of God, and in the iudgement of Charity hold the same touching all others, that are baptized Q. What did your godfathers and godmothers then for you? A. They did promise and vow,
thrée things in my name. First, that I should forsake the Deuill, and all his workes, and pomps, the vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinfull lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I should beléeue all the articles of the Christian faith: And thirdly, that I should kéepe gods holy Will and Commande∣ments, and walke in the same all the dayes of my life. Q. VVhat need is there, that any should stand thus to promise for chil∣dren in their Baptisme? A. There is great need for the more assurance of the Church, into which the childe is by baptisme ad∣mitted. Q. How is the Church the more assured thus? A. Because hee is not onely bound in duty now, but also by vow solemnly made before all the con∣gregation. Q. Dost thou thinke then, that thou art bound to doe, as thy god∣fathers and godmothers promised for thée?
A. Yes verily: and by Gods helpe so I will. And I heartily thanke our heauenly Father, that he hath called me to this state of salua∣tion, through Iesus Christ our Sa∣uiour. And I pray God to giue me his grace, that I may continue in the same vnto my liues end. Q. Thou saydst that thou were bound by vow in baptisme to be∣léeue all the Articles of the Chri∣stian faith, let me therefore heare thée rehearse these Articles? A. I beléeue in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heauen and earth. And in Iesus Christ his on∣ly Sonne our Lord, which was con∣ceiued by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered vnder Ponce Pilate: was crucified, dead, and buried: he descended into hell: The third day he rose againe from the dead: He ascended into heauen, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty: From thence hée shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead. I beléeue in the holy Ghost: The holy Catholike
Church: The communion of Saints: the forgiuenesse of sinnes: The resurrection of the body: And the life euerlasting, Amen. Q. What dost thou chiefly learne in these Articles of thy beliefe? A. First, I learne to beléeue in God the Father, who hath made me and all the world. Secondly, in God the Sonne who hath redéemed mée and all mankind. Thirdly, in God the holy Ghost, who sanctifieth mée, and all the elect people of God. Q. How knowest thou that there is a God? A. Many waies: Rom. 2.15. 1. Cor. 2.11. but chiefly by mine owne conscience, accusing me for secret sinnes. Q. How doth this proue that there is a God? A. It proueth an infinite wis∣dome, that knowes the most secret thoughts of the heart, such as is nei∣ther man, deuill, nor Angell, but God alone. Q. How many Gods be there? 1. Cor. 8.6. Deut. 4.39. A. But one onely true God, the rest are Idols set vp by man.
Q. What is God? A. God is a Spirit, Exod. 3.14. Ioh. 2.24. Ier. 2.24. Psal. 139.8. infinite, most holy, onely wise, most merciful, iust, and Almighty, of whose dayes there is no beginning nor end. Q. Into how many Persons is the God-head destinguished? A. Into thrée, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Q. If in the God-head there bée thrée persons, and euery one be God, how say you then that there is but one God? A. 1. Ioh. 5.7. There is but one onely Es∣sence, one Infinite power and one Eternity. Q. In which words learne you to beléeue in God the Father? A. In these words; I beléeue in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heauen and earth. Q. Declare more fully the faith comprehended in this Article. A. Iam. 1.18. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Gen. 17.1. Reu. 1.8. Psal. 104. Iob 39. c. 40 I learne to beléeue, that God is my Father, able to doe al things; the Creator of the whole world, and the Lord and Gouernour of the same.
Q. Thou saidst that thou didst learne to beléeue in God the Sonne, which redéemed thée & all mankind, what did God the Sonne for the re∣demption of mankind? A. Two things: first, hee was humbled: secondly, he was exalted. Q. wherein standeth his humili∣ation? A. In thrée degrées. Q. Which is the first degrée? A. First, he was made man, Math. 1. Luke 1.2. Esa. 7.14. for he was conceiued by the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary. Q. How can this be, that God should be made man? A. Not by turning the Godhead into the nature of man, but by ta∣king mans nature vnto the God∣head, that so one person might bee both God and Man. Q. Which is the second degree? A. He suffered the death of the Crosse for my sinnes: for he suffe∣red vnder Pontius Pilate, was cruci∣fied, dead, and buried. Q. What neede was there, that the Sonne of God should thus a∣base
himselfe for vs? A. Great need on our part, who could not be deliuered by Angels, 1 Iohn 1.7. 1 Pet. 1.8. or by earthly Treasures, but onely by his blood. Q. Doth sinne deserue so ill, that we could not by other meanes be de∣liuered here from, but by the death of the Sonne of God? A. Yes, it deserues the infinite curse of the Law, Deu. 27.28 Rom. 6.23. that is, all iudge∣ments in this world, and euerlasting damnation in the world to come. Q. If hee must néeds be made fit to beare the curse, why did hee not take some other nature more excel∣lent vnto him? A. Man onely had sinned, and it was most agréeable to the Iustice of God to receiue the payment of the debt of sin in the same nature which committed it. Q. How came it to be thus with vs men? were we made sinners? A. Gen. 1.27. Eccles. 7.31. Genes. 3. Rom. 5. No, God at the first made man righteous, but by yéelding to the de∣uils temptation, hee made himselfe a sinner.
Q. Wherein did man yéeld to the temptation of the deuill? A. In eating of the forbidden fruit, and not contenting himselfe with all other fruits, of which the Lord had allowed him to eate. Q. Was God so angry that hée would curse man for eating an ap∣ple, or figge, or such like? A. That was not the matter of Gods anger, but his vnthankful∣nesse, pride, disobedience, and cre∣diting rather the deuill, then God. Q. But though one man did thus, yet all did not, are we all then sinners, and vnder the curse? A. We were all in his loynes, and so whatsoeuer he did, and what estate he fell into, it is Common to vs all. Q. It séemes then, that we are sinners so soone as we are borne, be∣fore that we haue actually done ei∣ther good or euill? A. Yes verily, the child that is but new borne, yea, but conceiued, Psal. 51.5. Rom. 5.12. and liuing in his Mothers wombe, is a sinner, and néedeth Gods grace.
Q. But as we are all sinners, are we all againe deliuered without excep∣tion, because thou sayst, that hee hath redeemed all mankinde? A. He hath payde a price suffi∣cient to redeeme all, neither doth hee exclude any from the benefit thereof, but onely such as exclude themselues. Q. Who are they? A. All vnbeleeuers, or such, as though they beare themselues vpon their faith, liue according to the flesh, and not according the Spirit. Q. Which is the third degrée of his humiliation? A. Eph. 4.9. 1. Pet. 3.19. Psal. 16 30. He descended into hell that I might be deliuered from hell, and euerlasting death. Q. Js this all the humiliation of the Sonne of God for our redemption, did hee no way else abase himselfe for vs? A. Yes, he became obedient to the Law also, Gal. 4.4. 1. Cor. 1 30. Rom. 8.3. that by his obedience and righteousnesse wee might stand perfectly righteous in the sight of God.
Q. Wherein standeth his exal∣tation? Ans. In foure degrées. Question Which is the first de∣grée? A. First, the third day he rose againe from the dead. Q. Which is the second? A. Secondly, he ascended vp in∣to heauen. Q. Which is the third? Ans. Thirdly, hée sitteth on the right hand of God the Father All∣mighty. Q. What is meant by this? A. That hée hath all honour, power, and authority in heauen and in earth together with God the Father. Quest. Which is the fourth de∣grée? Answ. Fourthly, from thence he shall come to Iudge the quicke and the dead. Q. Thou saydst, that thou didst chiefly learne in the Articles of thy faith, to beléeue in God the Father, so that it seemeth there is some∣what
more, yet to hée learned by these Articles, what is that? A. I beléeue the holy Catholike Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiuenesse of sinner, the resur∣rection of the body, and the life euer∣lasting. Q. What is this Church? A. The whole company of the faithfull, called out from the rest of the world by the preaching of the Gospell. Q. Why is this Church called Holy? A. Rom. 1.7. 1. Pet. 3.9. Eph. 2.19. 1. Ioh. 3.3. Phil. 3.14, 15 Because it is sanctified, and washed by water and the holy Ghost; striueth against all sinne, and to be holy, as God is holy. Q. Why is it called Catholike? A. Pro. 7. Acts 2.5. 1. Tim. 2.1. Because it consisteth of per∣sons of all sorts, scattered all ouer the world and of al times and ages. Qu. How may a man certainely know, where this Church of God is? A. Acts 2.41.47. Esay 8.20. By these two speciall marks, holinesse taught and professed, and antiquity, when they goe together.
Q. Is not the Church of Rome then the true Church of God, seeing it exceeds in holinesse, and is most anci∣ent? A. No: it was a true Church indeed in the Apostles times, and many yeares after; but now it is neither holy, for great vncleannesse is there maintained; nor ancient, for the ancient Religion is defaced with grosse errours, and superstiti∣ons. Q. Where then may we finde the true Church? A. In England, and in all other places where these corruptions are done away, and Religion is restored to the first purity. Q. How can this be, seeing the Re∣ligion here professed is but as it were of yesterday, and neuer heard of before Luther and Caluin? A. This is a meere slander; for there was neuer any age since the Apostles, wherein there haue not beene some standing to the mainte∣nance hereof, against Romish cor∣ruptions.
Q. How happened it then, that the Church of Rome still preuailed, and was generally accounted for Christs true Church, and those oppugners were neuer of any esteeme? A. By the greatnesse and tyran∣ny of the Roman Bishops, whose chiefe care it hath been almost, euer since Constantines time, to magni∣fie their owne Church, and them∣selues, and to suppresse their aduer∣saries. Q. But is it possible, that the Ro∣man Church being once a true Church should fall, seeing God hath promised his Spirit to his Church to be alwaies present, leading it into all truth? A. The Lord tyeth not his Spi∣rit to any place, for then the famous Churches in Asia should still haue beene true Churches; but the Spirit is alwaies present to the faithfull in all places of the world. Q. Hauing found out the true Church, are wee to beleeue in it, as in God. A. No, for then we should some∣time beleeue errours, seeing the
best men, which are the Church, may erre. Q. What is it then to beleeue the Church? A. To beleeue the doctrine of the Church, wherin it followeth Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, the only sure pillars and ground of truth. Q. What is that which follow∣eth in these Articles, viz. The com∣munion of Saints, the forgiuenesse of sinnes, &c. A. They be certaine speciall be∣nesits belonging to the Church, and to euery member thereof. Q. What is the Communion of Saints? A. Ephes. 4. Iohn 15. Gal. 3.28. Reuel. 6.11. Heb. 10.24. That holy and swéet follow∣ship which all the mēbers of Christs Church haue one with another, in forrowing, reioycing, praying, and praising God, for, and with one an∣other. Q. What is the forgiuenesse of sinnes? A. That wonderful grace of God in Iesus Christ, whereby hee passeth ouer our transgressions, as if they
had neuer béen committed, and relea∣seth the punishment due to them. Q What is the Resurrection of the body? A. The raising of the body againe at the last day by Gods power, Math. 22.31. Dan. 12.2. Iob 19.25. 1 Cor. 15. that being ioyned to the soule, it may stand before Gods iudgement Seat, to giue account of all that it hath done, whether good or euill, and bee rewarded accordingly. Q. What manner of bodies shall we haue in the Resurrection? A. The very same which now we haue, only whereas they be now na∣turall, 1 Cor. 15. & 35 43. Iob 19.25. they shall rise againe spiritu∣all, not subiect to death any more, nor sustained by naturall meanes, of meates and drinkes, and sleepe, and the like. Q. Among those that die, some are crooked through age, some tender in∣fants, some blind, and some lame, shall their bodies at the resurrection then bee the same? A. No, for all these are weake∣nesses, which shall be done away to the faithfull; and strength, perfecti∣on,
and comelinesse shall be to euery one of them Q. What is the Life euerlasting? A. Psal. 16.11 Esay 6.1. Reuel. 21. Esay 66.23. 1 Cor. 2.9. All that euer enduring happi∣nes, & all those ioyes which the Lord imparteth to al his elect in the world to come, which are so great, as that the eye hath not séene, nor the eare heard, neither can the heart conceiue throughly. Q. Thou saydst that thou wert bound by vow in thy Baptisme to kéepe Gods holy will and Comman∣dements: tell me therefore how ma∣ny Commandements are there? A. Ten. God spake these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God, which haue brought thée out of the and of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt haue none o∣ther Gods but me. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen Image, nor the likenesse of any thing that is in heauen aboue, or in the earth beneath, or in the wa∣ter vnder the earth: Thou shalt not vow downe to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord thy God am a
iealous God, and visite the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the Children vnto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy vnto thousands in them that loue me and kéepe my Commandements. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine: for the Lord will not hold him guiltles that taketh his name in vaine. Remember that thou kéepe holy the Sabbath day: Sixe dayes thou shalt labour, and doe all that thou hast to doe: but the seauenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt doe no manner of worke, thou, and thy sonne, and thy daughter, thy manseruant, and thy maidsernant, thy cattell, & the stran∣ger that is within thy gates. For in six dayes the Lord made heauen and earth the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seauenth day: where∣fore the Lord blessed the seauenth, day, and hallowed it. Honour thy Father and Mother, that thy dayes may bee long in the land, which the Lord thy God giueth thee.
Thou shalt doe no murther. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steale. Thou shalt not beare false wit∣esse against thy neighbour. Thou shalt not couet thy neigh∣ours house, thou shalt not couet thy eighbors wife, nor his seruant, nor s mayd, nor his oxe, nor his asse, or any thing that is his. Q. What doest thou learne out  these commandements? A. Two things, my dutie to∣ards God, and my dutie towards y neighbour. Q. What is thy dutie towards od? A. My dutie towards God is, to léeue in him, to feare him, and to ue him with all my heart, with all y mind, with all my soule, and with  my strength: to worship him: to ue him thanks: to put my whole ust in him: to call vpon him: to nour his holy name, and his word, d to serue him truely all the dayes  my life. Q. What is thy dutie towards
thy neighbour? A. My dutie towards my neigh∣bour is, to loue him as my selfe, an to doe to all men, as I would the should do to me: to loue, honour, an succour my father and mother:  honour and obey the King and hi Ministers: to submit my selfe to a my Gouernours, Teachers, spirit¦all Pastors, and Masters: to orde my selfe lowly, and reuerently to a my betters: To hurt no body b word nor déed: to be true and iust i all my dealings: to beare no malic nor hatred in my heart: to kéepe m hands from picking and stealing, an my tongue from euill speaking, l¦ing, and flaundering: to kéepe m body in temperance, sobernesse, an chastitie: not to couet nor desire ¦ther mens goods, but learne and l¦bour truly to get mine owne liuin and to doe my dutie in that state  life, vnto the which is shall plea God to call me. Q. How were these Commau¦dements giuen? A. Written with Gods own
hand in two Tables of stone. Q. In which Table do you learne our dutie towards God? A. In the first, containing the foure rmer Commandements. Q. How many bee the parts of ery of these Commandements? A. Two, the Commandement it ife, and the reason of it. Q. Rehearse the first Comman∣dement. A. I am the Lord thy God, &c. Q. In which words is the Com∣andement contained? A. The Commaundement is, hou shalt haue none other Gods ut me. Q. What are wee heere com∣anded? A. To haue the Lord for our God, that is, to loue him aboue all, Deut. 6.45. Mal. 1.6. Math. 10.26 Psal. 20.8. Psal. 125.  feare him aboue all, to put our hole trust in him, and to make our ayees to him alone. Q. What is here forbidden? A. Foure contrary most grosse nnes. Q. What is the first?
A. Psal. 14.1 Iob 22.12. Atheisme, which is the acknow∣ledgement of no God. Q. What is the second? A. Zeph. 1.12 Luk. 12.48 Ignorance, which is a neglec of the knowledge of God, and of his word. Q. What is the third? A. Rom. 1.20. Iohn 3.19. Prophanenesse, which is a re∣gardlesnesse of God, and of his wor∣ship. Q. What is the fourth? A. Esay 3.9. Col 3.5. Phil. 3 18. Inward Idolatry, which is the giuing of Gods worship vnto creatures, by praying vnto them trusting in them, or by setting th heart vpon them. Q. What is the reason of this Commandement? A. I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Lan of Egypt, out of the house of bon¦dage. Q. How doth this reason con¦cerne vs, who were neuer in E¦gypt? A. Our Egypt is the state o corruption, and our bondage i thraldom to Satan, from which th
Lord our God onely hath deliue∣red vs. Q. Rehearse the second Com∣mandement? A. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen Image, or the likenesse of any thing, that is in heauen aboue, or in the earth be∣neath, or in the water vnder the earth: Thou shalt not how downe to them, nor worship them. For I the Lord thy God, am a iealous God, and visite the sinnes of the Fa∣thers vpon the Children, vnto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew merey vnto theusands in them that loue me and kéepe my Commandements. Q. In which words is the Com∣mandement? A. The Commandement is; Thoushalt not make to thy selfe a∣ny grauen Image, nor the likenesse of any thing, that is in heauen a∣boue, or in the earth beneath, or in the water vnder the earth: Thou shalt not how downe to them, nor worship them.
Q. What is heere forbidden? A. All outward Idolatry. Q. What is outward Idola∣try? A. Outward Idolatry is com∣mitted thrée wayes. Q. Which is the first? A. First, Acts 17.29. Deut. 4.15. Es. 40.25. by making the Image of God, or of any creature, to bée worshipped. Q. Which is the second? A Secondly, Exod. 32. Iudg. 8.27. by falling downe before any Image. Q. Which is the third? A Thirdly, 2. Kin. 18.4. Iohn 4.20. by seruing God ac∣cording to our owne phantasies. Q. What are we here comman∣ded? A. 1. Co. 11.20. Esay 1.12. Psal. 50.16. Mat. 6.9. To performe all outward duries of Gods seruice according to his will, reuealed in his Word. Q. What is the reason of this Commandement? A. For I the Lord thy God, am a iealous God, and visite the sinnes of the fathers vpon the children, vn∣to the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mer∣cie
vnto thonsands in them that loue me and kéepe my Commande∣ments. Q. Shall children be punished for their Parents sinnes? A. Yes, if they follow them in sinning, they shall beare both the punishment of their owne, and of their Parents sinnes also. Q. Rehearse the third Com∣mandement? A. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine: for the Lord will not hold him guilt∣lesse, that taketh his name in vaine. Q. In which words is the Com∣mandement? A. The Commandement is, Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine. Q. What is here forbidden? A. All abusing of the name of God. Exod. 3. 2. King. 19. Q. How many wayes is the name of God abused? A. Six manner of wayes. Q. Which is the first? A. By blaspheming, Rom. 3.24. Mat. 5.33.34 or giuing
occasion to others to blaspheme. Q. Which is the second? A. By swearing falsly, deceit¦fully, rashly, commonly, or by crea∣tures. Q. Which is the third? A. By cursing and banning. Q. Which is fourth? A. By vowing things vnpossi∣ble, or vnlawfull, or by neglecting o our lawfull vowes. Q. Which is fifth? A. By lightly vsing the holy name of God, or his word. Q. Which is the sixth? A. By vaine protestations and asseuerations. Q. What are we here cōmanded▪ A. 1. Cor. 10.39 Ephel. 4.29. Phil. 2.10. 2. Cor. 8.19. Mat. 5.16. To glorifie the name of God in all that wée doe, thinke, speake and desire, and to labour, that others may be wonne by our meanes to do the same. Q. What is the reason of this Commandement? A. The Lord will not hold him guitlesse that taketh his name in vaine.
Q. If there bee such daunger in swearing, may a man lawfully sweare in any case whatsoeuer? A. Without doubt a man may sometimes and in some cases law∣fully sweare. Q When, and in what case may a man sweare lawfully? A. In three cases. Q. Which is the first? A. First, for the confirming of a ruth, which cannot otherwise bee knowne, and yet necessary. Q. Which is the second? A. For the strengthening of onest leagues made betwixt men. Q. Which is the last? A. Lastly, being called to weare before a lawfull Magistrate. Q. What else is required, that our wearing may be lawfull? A. These foure things. Q. Which is the first? A. First, we must sweare onely o such a truth as we know to be so. Q. Which is the second? A. Secondly, according to the owne intent of him, vnto whom,
or before whom we sweare. Q. Which is the third? A. Thirdly, we must sweare on∣ly things possible and lawfull. Q. Which is the fourth? A. Fourthly, this being a part of Gods worship, Ier. 4.2, 3. wee must doe it with great reuerence. Q. What if a man shall sweare to an vnlawfull thing, is hee not bound not∣withstanding to performe his eath? A. In no wise; for so he should adde vnto his sinne of swearing vn∣lawfully, Acts 23. a further sinne of doing vnlawfully. Q. Rehearse the fourth Com∣mandement? A. Remember that thou kéep holy the Sabbath day: Sixe daye shalt thou labour, and doe all tha thou hast to doe: But the seuent day is the Sabbath of the Lord th God. In it thou shalt doe no ma¦ner of worke, thou, and thy Sonn and thy daughter, thy Manseruan and thy Maidseruant, thy Cattel and the Stranger that is within th gates. For in sixe daies the Lor
made heauen and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seauenth day. Wherefore the Lord blessed the seauenth day, and hal∣lowed it. Q Which words is the Com∣mandement? A. The Commandement is. Re∣member that thou keepe holy the Sabbath day, sixe dayes shalt thou labour and doe all that thou hast to doe, but the seauenth is the Sab∣bath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt doe no manner of worke. Q What is the duty here com∣manded? A. To kéepe holy the Sabbath day, and to be mindfull of it. Q. How may this be done? A. By assembling together to pray vnto God, and to praise him, to heare his holy Word, and receiue the blessed Sacraments. Q. Is this all that is required to the right keeping of the Sabbath day? A. No, but wee must prepare our selues by prayer, and emptying our hearts of sinne, and meditate
vpon Gods Word, suffering it to worke in vs, so as that we may bee furthred in all holinesse of life. Q. Is there no duty to be done to∣wards our neighbour for the hallowing of this day? A. Yes, it is a speciall time of exercising mercy by helping a∣gainst sudden dangers, Mark. 3.4. Mat. 12.12. 1. Cor. 16.2. by collect∣ing and distributing to the poore, by visiting the sick, and reconciling dissentions amongst neighbours. Q. Is there any set day vnder the new Testament thus to be kept holy? A. Yes, the day which is com∣monly called Sunday, but in the Scripture the Lords day, Mat. 5.20. Acts 20 7. 1. Cor. 16.1. Reuel. 1.10. or the first day in the weeke, is thus to be kept without alteration to the end of the world. Q. When doth the Lords day begin and end? A. It beginneth in the morning at the dawning of the day, and en∣deth next morning likewise. Q. Are we bound to doe the holy duties of Gods worship all this time without ceasing?
A. No, for wee may refresh our selues with eating and drinking, Neh. 8, 9, 10 Hosh. 2.11. singing, and musick, and with any honest delight whatsoeuer, whereby the minde is cheared vp, and ioy and gladnesse befitting the Lords holy day expressed. Q. What auaileth it then, whether he Sabbath beginne in the morning or euening? A. Yes, it auaileth much to know the beginning of the Sabbath rightly that wee be not entangled with any wordly businesse vpon it. Q. Is this all that wee are bound vnto, to keepe the Sabbath our selues, n ceasing from labour, and doing the uties thereof? A. No, but who so hath sonne or laughter, man-seruant, or maid, Exo. 12.21. Iosh. 24.15. 1. Tim. 3.15. Ephes. 6.5. cat∣ell or stranger within his gates, is like bound to prouide as much as n him lieth, that they all obserue his day in their kinde, both man nd beast. Q. Doth the Lord only take care for he right spending of this day, & leaue s to our selues vpon the sixe dayes?
A. No doubtlesse, but it is his will and commandement also, Ephes. 3.28. 2. Thes. 3.10.12. that we should vpon the sixe dayes ab∣staine from idlenesse, and diligently labour in the works of our callings. Q Is it not lawfull then to forbeare working, to attend vpon God and his worship, vpon the sixe dayes? A. 1 Thes. 5.17 2 Tim. 1. Deut. 6 7. Dan. 6. Yes. It is not onely lawfull, but necessary for euery one to doe the duties of Gods worship euery day of the weeke, in priuate and in publike, when iust occasion is of∣fered. Q. How can this stand with the command of working vpon the sixe dayes? A. Yes, very well; because that howsoeuer God is to be serued vp∣on the sixe dayes, yet they are for the most part to bee spent in the workes of our callings. Q What more speciall rules are we to follow in our weekely deuotion? A. These fiue? Q. Which is the first? A Wee must pray euery day, morning and euening.
Q. Which is the second? A. Before and after the vse of Gods creatures. Q Which is the third? A. The more our necessities vrge vs, pray the oftner, and more instantly. Q. Which is the fourth? A Let no day passe without some reading, and Diuine medita∣tion. Q. Which is the fift? A. Iam. 5.13. Heb. 3.13. 1. Tim. 4.13 Amos 12. Neglect not the publike preaching in the weeke-dayes, where opportunity is offered to come vnto it. Q. What is to be thought of whole dayes set apart to publike duties in the weeke, as Saints dayes, and dayes of thankesgiuing? A. Ester 9.21. Mal. 4.59. Iohn 10.22.23. Leuit. 23. All this may lawfully bee done, and is commendable by Gods word, and therefore wee are reue∣rently to conforme our selues to the ordinance of authority herein. Q. What is the sinne by this Commandement forbidden? Answ, All prophaning of the
Sabbath day. Q. How is the Sabbath pro∣phaned? A. Thrée manner of wayes. Q Which is the first? A. By doing worldly workes, which are not of present necessity, by iournying about worldly, af∣faires, idle resting, or absenting our selues from the publique duties o Gods worship. Q. Which is the second? Ans. By forgetfulnesse of the Sabbath vpon the sixe dayes, by which wee often bring vpon our selues a necessitie of prophauing the same. Q. Which is the third? A. When being Parents or Go∣uernours, wée leaue our Children, Pupils, or Sernants to their owne liberties vpon this day. Q. What be the reasons of this Commandement? A. They are partly infolded in the Commandement, and partly ex∣pressed in these words: For in six dayes the Lord made heauen and
earth, the, sea, and all that therein is, and rested the senenth day, where∣fore the Lord blessed the seuenth day and hollowed it. Q. What, and how many are the reasons infolded in this Com∣mandement? A. Thrée. Q. Which is the first? A. Because the Law of the Sabbath is ancient, and was in force in Paradise, before mans fall. Q. Which is the second? A. Because it is most equall, the Lord allowing vs sixe dayes for our worldly affaires, and requiring but one of seuen for the worke of his worship. Q. Which is the third? A. Because the seuenth is the Lords peculiar day, so that with∣out sacriledge we cannot any way prophane it. Q. What are the reasons ex∣pressed? A. Two. Q Which is the first? A. From the Lords owne exam∣ple,
who rested vpon the seuenth day from all his works of creation. Q. Which is the second? A. From his blessing inseperably linked to the hallowing of this day, so that he which kéepeth it holy, shall finde it to his comfort vnto him a blessed day. Q. In which Table do you learne your dutie toward your neighbour? A. In the second Table, contay∣ning the six latter commandements. Q. Reherse the first of these, which is the fift Commandement. A. Honour thy father & mother, that thy dayes may bee long in the land, which the Lord thy God giueth thee. Q. What are we here comman∣ded? A. To honour father & mother? Q. Who are meant by father and mother? A. 2 Kings 5.13 Gen. 45.8. 1 Cor. 4.15 2 King 6.21 Iob 31.18. 1 Tim. 5.1. Our naturall Parents, the Magistrates, who are the parents of our Country; the Ministers of Gods Word, who are our Fathers in Christ; our Masters and Gouernors,
the Ancient, and all our betters. Q. What is meant by this word, Honour? A. To honour, is to loue, reue∣rence, cherish and obey. Q. Are all Superiours then to be obeyed and reuerenced? A. Ephes. 6.1. Col. 2.20. Rom. 13.1. 1 Per. 2.13. 1 Tim. 5.17 1 Thes. 5.12 They are all to be reuerenced and obeied in the Lord, whose image in a speciall manner they beare, Pa∣rents, Magistrates, Ministers, and Gouernors for their authoritie, the Ancient, and other Superiours for their wisedome, experience, and dig∣nitie. Q. Is it our dutie also to cherish and maintaine them? A. It is our dutie to giue main∣tenance to the Magistrate and Mini∣ster, Rom. 13.6 1 Cor. 9. Gal. 6.5. Math. 15.3 who spend their whole time in doing publike Seruice, and to Pa∣rents, & aged persons being in want. Q. Is there no dutie required of Superiours? A. Ephe. 6.4. Col. 4.1. It is the dutie of Superiours to walke worthy the honour due vn∣to them, and to vse all gentlenesse to∣wards their Inferiours.
Q. What is here then forbidden? A. Exod. 21.17. Deut. 17.10. Ephe. 6.9. Col. 4.1. All irrenerence, disobedience, and neglect toward those that his in place and authoritie aboue vs, and churlish behauiour in such toward those that be of a low degrée. Q. Whence is the reason of this Commandement taken? A. From the promise of long life, if God please not to preuent vs with the blessing of eternall life. Q. Rehearse the firth Comman∣dement. A. Thou shalt do no murther. Q. What is here forbidden? A. 1 Sam. 31.4. Math. 27.5 All vnlawfull killing of our selues, or of other men, and all the degrées hereof. Q. What are these degrées? A. The degrées of vnlawfull kil∣ling are sixe. Q. Which is the first? A. 1 Kin. 21 19 Acts 8.1. Deut. 21.7. The approbation of murther either by command, counsell, consent, or concealement. Q. Which is the second? A. Exod. 21.24. Esay 1.15. All injurious actions, tending to the preiudice of our neighbors life
Q. Which is the third? A. Math. 5.22. Iam. 3.6. All rayling and reuiling spée∣ches. Q. Which is the fourth? A. Math. .22 All murdrous desires and af∣fections of the heart, as of anger, malice, hatred, and enuy. Q. Which is the fifth? A. 1 Iohn 3.15 All cruelty towards the crea∣ture, which sheweth a murtherous mind. Q. Which is the firth? A. All impatience, and discontent with our estate, Deut. 22.7. the very high way to most horrible murthers. Q. What are we here comman∣ded? A. Out of the loue which wee beare to our neighbour, Iob 31.19. 1 Kin. 1.13 Hebr. 10.25 Gal. 6.1. as much as in vs lyeth, to preserue his life and health, and specially the life of his soule, by good counsell, exhortation, and admonition. Q. Rehearse the seuenth Com∣mandement. A. Thou shalt not commit Adul∣erie. Q. What is here forbidden?
A. All eshly uncleannesse both in outward act, and inward concep∣tion of the minde, and all occasions thereof. Q. What are the uncleannesses in outward act? A. Gal. 5.17. 1 C. 1.6. Rom. 1. Ephe. 5.12 Adultery, Fornication, Bug∣gery, Sodometry, &c. which are so souse, that it is a shame to name them. Q. What is vncleannesse in the inward conception of the mind? A. To looke vpon a woman to lust after her: for this is adultery in heart. Q. What are the occasions for∣bidden? Ephe. 4.29. Rom. 13.13. Deut. 22.5. Mark. 6.22. Gat. 5.19. Ezec. 16.19. Gen. 19. 2 Sam. 11. A. Filthy songs and talke, cham∣bering and want annesse, being pre∣sent at filthy Stage playes, putting on apparell of another sex, mixt la∣scfuious dauncing, surferting, drun∣kennesse, idlenesse, &c. Q. What are wee heere com∣manded? A. To liue in temperance, cha∣stitie, 2 Cor. 6.16. and sobernesse, and so to keepe my body holy and pure, as a Temple
of the Holy Ghost. Q. Rehearse the eight Comman∣dement? A. Thou shalt not steale. Q. What is heere forbidden? A. All theft and stealing, Deut. 22.29. Exod. 22.1. which is committed many wayes. Q. Which is the first? A. By violence, 1 King. 21. or secret taking away any thing which is our neigh∣bours. Q. Which is the second? A. Hos 5.10. Luk. 2.13. By oppression and tyranny of the rich towards the poore. Q. Which is the third? A. Leu. 25.14 By deceit in buying and sel∣ling. Q. Which is the fourth? A. By vsing any vnlawfull trade, Pro. 11.26. or way of gaine, or gaming, fortune∣telling, or selling drinke vnto drun∣kennesse. Q. Which is the fifth? A. By prodigalitie, Iam. 4. for thus doe men rob their children and posteritie. Q. What more is here forbidden? A. All couetousnesse and vnmer∣cifulnesse, Mat. 6.25. 1 Tim. 6.10 the robbing of God in
things dedicate, Leuit. 27.30. tithes and offrings. Q. What are wee here comman∣ded? A. Math. 7.12. To doe to all men as I would they should doe vnto me, and by dili∣gent paines taking to get mine own liuing in that estate of life, to which it shall please God to call me. Q. Rehearse the ninth Comman∣dement. A. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour. Q. What is here forbidden? A. All false witnesse bearing, to the abuse and hurt of our neighbour, and all maintaining of such as goe about with tales against him. Q. How many wayes is this sin committed? A. Foure. Q. Which is the first? A. Deut. 19.16. 1 Kings 22. By falsly accusing, and wit∣nessing against our neighbour before a Iudge. Q. Which is the second? A. Leu. 19.16. By flaundering and backbi∣ting. Q. Which is the third?
A. Prou. 27.14. c. 26.22. By flattering or soothing any for aduantage against the truth. Q. Which is the fourth? A. By lying, Psal. 12.2. Iohn 8.45. or telling an vn∣truth against our consciences. Q. What are we here comman∣ded? A. As much as in vs lieth, to pre∣serue the good name of our neighbor, Prou. 10.22 Gal. 6.2. Psal. 15.3. Iosh. 7.19. and our owne good name, stopping our eares against false reports, and suppressing them, and alwayes what soeuer comes of it, speaking the truth. Q. Rehearse the tenth Comman∣dement. A. Thou shalt not couet thy neigh∣bours house, thou shalt not couet thy neighbours wife, nor his seruant, nor his maid, nor his oxe, nor his asse, nor any thing that is his. Q. What is here forbidden? A. Rom 7.7. 2 Cor. 12.7 Mark. 7.22. All first motions of the mind vnto sin, though no consent be yéel∣ded vnto it. Q. What are wée commaunded heere? A. To kéepe our very hearts and
minds frée from euill thoughts a∣gainst any of the Commandements of God. 1 Th. 5.23. Ephes. 4.2. Q. What is the breach of the Law, and the punishment of it? A. 1. Ioh. 3.4. Rom 7.7. Rom. 5.18. Iam. 2.10. It is sinne, which if it be but once committed onely, and that but in thought, it makes a man subiect to Gods eternall curse. Q. Is it not iuiustice to appoint so great a punishment for euerie sinne? yea euen for the least? A. It is very iust and right for the Lord to adiudge the least sinne to hell fire. Q. Why so? A. Because his marke which is perfect holinesse set vpon man in his creation, Iohn 8.34. Rom 6.16. 1 Iohn 3.8. is hereby remooued, and a marke with the deuils brand, is made vpon the soule of the sinner, for which it is iust, that the deuill, and not GOD, should now haue such a wicked soule. Q. Is any man able to liue without breaking these Comman∣dements? A. No, not the best that euer
was, except Christ onely, and Adam in the state of innocency. Q. If no man can perfectly kéepe the Law, wherefore then ser∣ueth it? A. First, to humble vs, Rom. 7.9.24 Ro. 7.12.22. Mat. 19.17. Rom. 13.8. in regard of our miserable estate hereby dis∣couered: Secondly, to bée a rule of good life vnto vs. Thirdly, to set vs a worke dayly, to pray and cry to the Lord for mercy, and for strength, to liue according to his Lawes. Q. What is prayer? A. It is a lifting vp of the heart to God, onely in the name of Iesus Christ according to his will, in full assurance to be heard and accepted at his gracious hands. Q. What néed is there that the faithfull pray, séeing God of his owne goodnesse, and not for their prayers will doe whatsoeuer is néedfull for them? A. There is great néed, that all faithfull people should pray vnto God for thrée speciall reasons. Q. Which is the first? A. Because it is a duty that wée
owe vnto God. Q. Which is the second? A. To renew our assurance of the pardon of sinne daily renewed through our great weakenesse, and to increase our loue, patience and humility. Q. Which is the third? A. That we may be fit to receiue the gifts and blessings of the Lord. Q. What times are specially to be spent in prayer? A. The speciall times of prayer are sixe. Q. Which is the first? A. The present time without de∣ferring till sicknesse, or old age. Q. Which is the second? A. The time of publike meeting to the worship of God. Q. Which is the third? A. Exod. 29.39 Euery morning and euening. Q. Which is the fourth? A. 1. Tim. 4.5. 1. Sam. 9.13 Sitting downe and rising vp from our meat. Q. Which is the fift? A. Psal. 50.14. Iam. 5.13. The time of trouble and ad∣uersity, when we ought more often
and instantly to pray. Q. Which is the sixt? A. All the dayes of our Life, through which we must hold out in diligent prayer, according to that of the Apostle, Pray continually. 1 Thes. 5.17 Q. If we obserue these times of pray∣er, shall we be saued from all our sinnes? A. Yes vndoubtedly, Acts 2.21. for whoso∣euer calleth vpon the name of the Lord, shall be saued. Q. Is there nothing else required then vnto saluation, but to pray? A. Yes, for wee must be indued with these properties which the Lord requireth in those that pray, or else we shall pray in vaine Q. How many are those properties? A. Three. Q. Which is the first? A. Obedience: for not euery one that saith, Lord, Lord, Math. 7.21. shall enter into heauen, but he that doth the wil of my Father which is in heauen. Q. Which is the second? A. Humilitie: Iam. 4.6. for God resisteth the proud, and giueth grace to the humble.
Q. Which is the third? A. Iam. 5 16. Feruency, for the prayer of the righteous preuay leth much if it be feruent. Q. What more particular directi∣on is there to be folowed in praying? A. That most excellent prayer, which Christ himselfe framed for vs, rightly therfore called the Lords Prayer. Q. Rehearse the Lords Prayer. A. Our Father which art in hea∣uen, hallowed bee thy Name: Thy kingdome come: Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen: Giue vs this day our daily bread: And for∣giue vs our trespasses, as we forgiue them that trespasse against vs: And leade vs not into temptation: But deliuer vs from euill. Amen. Q. Is this the onely Prayer which we are to vse in calling vpon God? A. No, but we must bee guided by it, as by a rule, both for manner and matter in all our prayers. Q. May wee not vse it then as a Prayer? A. Yes doubtlesse, we may, and
ought to vse it most often, as the chiefe of all prayers, but with great deliberation, not placing confidence in the words, but in the sense vnder∣stood, and affected in the saying thereof. Q. It seemeth then that a set prayer is lawfull. A. It is not onely lawfull, Num. 10.36 Psal. 92 but most expedient, that there should be a set forme of praying in the Con∣gregation, and to helpe the deuotion of the ignorant in priuate. Q. What is to be thought of con∣ceiued prayer? may any man vse that? A. The Spirit of God is not tyed to wordes and phrases, but doth at times suddenly minister matter to the seruants of God, so that they can and doe pray effectually without a set forme, both publikely and pri∣uately. Q. In what manner ought wee to pray, according to this rule of the Lords prayer? A. First, Math. 67. to pray in this manner is, briefely and pithily. Q. What secondly?
A. Propounding Gods glory, as the marke whereat wée ayme, in all our praying, Mat. 6.5. and not our owne vaine glory. Q. What thirdly? A. First, and chiefly séeking af∣ter heauenly things, Mat. 6.33. then after earthly. Q. What fourthly? A. In all things submitting our wils, Mat. 26.39. and desires to the will of God. Q. What be the parts of this prayer? A. Thrée: the Preface; Our Father which are in heauen: the Petitions; Hollowed be thy name, &c. and the Conclusion; For thine is the Kingdome, &c. Q. In the Preface, why call you God, Father? A. Luk. 11.11. Heb. 4.16. Gen. 3.26. Because he is ready as a lo∣uing Father to heare mée, calling vpon his name; wherefore I learne with boldnesse, and confidence to come vnto him in prayer. Q. But may euery man come be∣fore God, as his Father? A. No wicked man that goeth
on impenitently in sinne can call God Father, Ioh. 8.44. Rom. 6.16. because he is the deuils childe, and not Gods. Q. Cannot a wicked man pray then? A. No, Prou. 15.8. Esa. 1.12. he cannot pray with any comfort, for the prayer of the wic∣ked is abomination to the Lord. Q. Why doe you say, Our Fa∣ther, and not my Father? A. 1 Tim 2.2. Matth. 5.44. Because I ought to pray for all other the children of God, aswell as for my selfe. Q. Why adde you in the preface, Which art in heauen? A. Not for that I beléeue God to be in heauen only, for he is euery where. Q Why then? A. 1 Kin. 8.27, Psal. 19.1. Luke 18. Luke 1.53. Esay 66.2. Because to bée in heauen is an Argument of great glory: there∣fore I learne with reuerence to pray vnto him, béeing my Father most glorious. Q. What dost thou aske of God in this prayer? A. I desire my Lord God our heauenly Father, who is the giuer
of all goodnesse, to send his grace vn∣to me and to all people, that we may worship him, serue him, and obey him, as wee ought to doe. And I pray vnto God, that hee will send vs all things that hée néedfull both for our soules and bodies: and that hee will be mercifull vnto vs, and forgiue vs our sinnes: And that it will please him to saue and defend vs from all dangers, ghostly and bodily: and that hée will kéepe vs from all sinne and wickednesse, and from our ghostly enemy, and from euerlasting death. And this I trust hée will doe of his mercy and good∣nesse, through our Lord Iesus Christ. And therefore I say, Amen. So be it. Q. Tell me more particularly, how many be the Petitions of this prayer? A. Six, whereof the thrée former concerne Gods glory, the thrée lat∣ter concerne our selues. Q. Which he those thrée concer-Gods glory? A. First, Hallowed by thy name:
secondly, thy Kingdome come: third∣ly, thy will be done on earth, as it is in heauen. Q. In the first of these what de∣sire you? A. Prou. 16.1. 1. Cor. 10.31 Rom. 11.36 That the name of God may be glorified in the vse of his titles, word, and all his workes. Q. In the second petition, what desire you? A. Psal. 48.2 Psal. 93.1. Mat. 13.. Mat. 9.38. Eph. 6.19. That the number of true be∣léeuers may be daily increased, that Gods Kingdome of Grace being in∣larged, his Kingdome of glory may be hastened. Q. What pray you for in the third petition? A. Ps. 119.34. 1. Thes. 4.3. Ephes. 4.24. Eph. 1.16, 17 That I and all the people of God vpon earth may as readily o∣bey Gods will, as the Angels and Saints in heauen. Q. Which be the thrée petitions concerning our selues? A. The first; Giue vs this day, our daily bread: secondly, forgiue vs our trespasses, as wee forgiue them that trespasse against vs; thirdly, Lead vs not into tēptation,
but deliuer vs from euill. Q What pray you for in the first of these Petitions? A. For all things necessary for this present life, Prou. 20.8. Gen. 28.20. Mat. 6.34. and therefore wee aske but for bread, and but for this day. Q. What pray you for in the se∣cond of these Petitions? A. That God would forgiue vs all our sinnes, Mat 18.26. Luke 18.10 Psal. 39.8. Mat 5.23. as wée doe from our hearts forgiue the offences of men against vs. Q. What pray you for in the third of these Petitions? A. That the Lord would not suffer vs to be carried away by the temptations of the world, flesh, or deuill, 2. Cor. 12.8. Eph. 6.18. Mat. 26.21. to the committing of sin, but that he would deliuer vs from the euill of all temptation, both sinne and damnation. Q. Wherefore serueth the con∣clusion, For thine is the Kingdome, &c. A. It is added as a reason of all the Petitions, to strengthen our faith.
Q. What is this reason? A. Math 6.8. Mark. 9.23. Psal. 19.1 Ephes. 1.6. That God being both able and willing, doth certainly yéeld to those our requests, therefore wee adde a note of confidence, and say, Amen. Q. Hath the Lord made any cer∣taine promise to heare vs, that wee may with so great confidence expect a graunt of our petitions? A. Hee hath both promised, Psal. 50.14. Math. 7.7, 9 and brgeth vs to beléeue from the exam∣ple of an earthly Father. Q. But God is in heauen, and in∣uisible, neither can we sée or heare him speaking vnto vs: what visible and sensible meanes therefore hath he giuen vs, whereby we may be as∣sured of his promise? A. Iohn 20.31. Mar. 16.16 1 Cor. 10.16. He hath giuen vs his written word, wherein his promises are set foorth, and the holy Sacraments as seales for our further assurance. Q. What is the word of God? A. 2 Tim. 3.16 Gal. 1.8. All the Bookes of the Old and New Testament, and not any other bookes or Writings what∣soeuer.
Q. How many, and which are these Bookes? A. The Books of the Old Testa∣ment are seuen and twentie; Gene∣sis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Ioshua, Iudges, Ruth, the first & second of Samuel, the first and second of Kings, the first and se∣cond of the Chronicles, Ezra, Nehe∣miah, Ester, Iob, Psalmes, Prouerbes, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Esay, Iere∣miah, Ezechiel, Daniel, and the 12. small Prophets. The Bookes of the new Testament are seuen and twen∣tie; Matthew, Marke, Luke, Iohn, the Actes of the Apostles, the Epistle to the Romans, first and second to the Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, two to the Thessalonians, and two to Timothy, to Titus, to Philemon, to the He∣brews, the Epistle of Iames, and two of Peter, three of Iohn, of Iude, and the Reuelation of Iohn. Q. Are not the Apocryphall Books part of the word of God? A. They are not, neither haue bin euer so accounted in the Church
of God, but are annexed, as being ful of good Instructions, and Histories declaring Gods wonderfull proui∣dence ouer his people Israel. Q. How is it proued, that these Te∣staments are the word of God? A. It is prooued by their Anti∣quity, some of them being before all other bookes, 2 Tim. 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.20. 1 Thes. 2.13. sundry times oppug∣ned and sought to bee burnt vp by persecutors, and yet wonderfully preserued, and by myracle from hea∣uen confirmed, which shewes, that they came from heauen, and are not of mans inuention. Q. Are the Bookes of the Old and New Testament sufficient to saluation without any other? A. Yes doubtlesse, and it is dan∣gerous to adde any other as necessa∣ry to bee likewise receiued: Reu. 22.18 Deut. 4.2. for to doe thus, is to incurre the danger of Gods curse. Q. Hauing this Word written, is it not sufficient for our saluation, without any helpe by preaching? A. It is not sufficient, 1 Cor. 1.18. but it must also be set foorth by preaching, that
the hard places may be rightly vn∣derstood, Rom. 10.14 2 Tim. 4.2 Actes 8.31 wee may be kept from er∣rors, and haue our dull hearts stirred vp to embrace it. Q. How many bee the Sacra∣ments of the New Testament? A. Two onely, as generally ne∣cessary to saluation: that is to say, Baptisme, and the Supper of the Lord. Q. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament? A. I meane an outward and vi∣sible signe, of an inward and spritu∣all grace giuen vnto vs, ordained by Christ himselfe as a meanes, where∣by we receiue the same, & as a pledge to assure vs thereof. Q. How many parts be there in a Sacrament? A. Two: the outward visible signe, & the inward spirituall grace. Q. What is the outward visible signe, or forme in Baptisme? A. Water, wherein the person baptized is dipped, or sprinkled with it, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy ghost.
Q. What is the inward and spi∣rituall grace? A. A death vnto sinne, and a new birth vnto righteousnes: for, being by nature borne in sin, and the chil∣dren of wrath, wee are hereby made the children of Grace. Q. What is required of persons to be baptized? A. Repentance, wherby they for∣sake sinne: and Faith, whereby they stedfastly beleeue the promises of God made to them in that Sacra∣ment. Q. Why then are Infants bap∣tized, when by reason of their ten∣der age they cannot performe them. A. Yes: they doe performe them by their sureties, who promise and vow thē both in their names: which when they come to age, themselues are bound to performe. Q. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained? A. For the continuall remem∣brance of the Sacrifice of the death of Christ, and the benefits which we receiue thereby.
Q. What is the outward part, or signe of the Lords Supper? A. Bread and Wine, which the Lord hath commanded to be receiued. Q. What is the inward part or thing signified? A. The Body & Blood of Christ, which are verely and indeed taken and receiued of the faithfull in the Lords Supper. Q. What are the benefits, wher∣of we are partakers thereby? A. The strengthening and re∣freshing of our soules by the Body and Blood of Christ, as our bodies are by the Bread and Wine. Q. What is required of them which come to the Lords Supper? A. To examine themselues whe∣ther they repent them truely of their former sinnes, stedfastly purposing to leade a new life, haue a liuely faith in Gods mercy through Christ, with a thankefull remembrance of his death, and bee in charitie with all men. Q. Wherein standeth true Re∣pentance?
A. In three things; First, in knowledge and acknowledgement of our sinnes past: Secondly, Prou. 28.19 Iere. 3.25. Luke 13. Psal. 51.17 Math. 5.4. 2 Cor. 7.11. in godly sorrow and griefe of heart for them: Thirdly, in a godly purpose to for∣sake all sinne, and to leade a new life for all time to come. Q. What is faith? A. Hebr. 11.1. Rom. 8.30. Iohn 6.47. Rom. 16.14 Acts 16.14. It is a certaine perswasion of the heart, wrought by the spirit of God, grounded vpon his promises, that all my sinnes are forgiuen mee in Christ Iesus. Q. Wherein standeth true Chri∣stian loue? A. In affection, when it is the same towards our neighbour, Math. 19.19 1 Iohn 3 17. Iam. 2.15, 16 that it is towards our selues voyde of malice, hatred, and enuy, and desi∣rous of his good, as of our owne. And in action, when wee are ready to doe good vnto others, as vnto our selues, and to kéepe away hurt as from our selues. Q. What shall he doe, that after examination findes not these things in himselfe. A. He may not kéepe away from
the Lords Supper, for this were a pronoking of God to wrath, neither can hee come vnto it, Mat. 22. without offen∣ding in a higher degrée. Q. What may a man doe then in this case? A. Hee must humbly sue vnto God for the pardon of his sinnes, Mat. 5.24. to strike his hard heart, that hee may melt into teares for them, and con∣stantly cleaue to his Commaunde∣ments; and if there be any dissention, he must goe and be reconciled to his brother. Q. What ought a man to doe at the Lords Supper? A. 1 Cor. 11.23 He ought thankefully to re∣member the inward graces of God towards him, by séeing the outward signes. Q. What are these graces? A. They are three. Q. Which is the first? A. The Lords giuing of his Son Iesus Christ to death for vs, set forth by the Ministers taking of the Bread and Wine, Ioh 3.16. breaking and powring out, and offering them to vs all.
Q. Which is the second? A. Eph. 5.30. Our neere vnion vnto Christ, and how we haue all our spi∣rituall food from him, set forth by our taking, eating, and inward di∣gesting the Bread and Wine that become nourishment vnto vs, and are vnited to the substance of our bodies. Q. Which is the third? A. The neare vnion that God hath made by Christ betwixt all the faithfull, set forth by the same Bread, Rom. 12.5. Gal. 3.28. being made of many graines of corne, and by the same Wine made of many grapes. Q. What is to bee done after the receiuing? A. We must meditate of the co∣uenant of new obedience, renewed by this Sacrament, that we may more carefully performe it, and flie sinne and vice all the dayes of our life.
Godly Prayers. A Morning Prayer for a priuate Family. MOst mercifull God, and hea∣uenly Father, wee giue thee hearty thankes, for the sweet sleepe and comfortable rest which thou hast giuen vs this night past, and for that thou hast commaunded by thy holy Word, that no man should bee idle, but alwayes occupied in godly and vertuous exercises, euery man according to his calling; wee most humbly beseech thee, that thine eyes may attend vpon vs, daily defend vs, cherish, comfort, and gouerne vs and all our counsels, studies, and labours in such wise, that we may spend and bestow this day, and the residue of our whole life according to thy most blessed wil and pleasure, setting thee alwayes before our eyes, liuing in thy feare, & working that that may be found acceptable in thy sight, ha∣ting wrong and louing iustice. Also we beseech thee most merciful God, to strengthen and keepe vs in the
faith of thy Catholike Church, & kindle in vs the loue and light of thy holy spirit, that we may walke godly and vertuously in this life, die in the truth of thy word, and liue with thee in euerlasting glory: grant this most mercifull Father, for thy deare Son Iesus Christ his sake, in whose name we further pray as he hath taught vs, saying, Our Father which art, &c. An Euening prayer for a priuate Family. ALmightie and euerliuing God, wee giue thee most humble and heartie thanks, that of thy free mercies thou hast preserued vs this day from all hurts and dangers: vouchsafe also we most humbly beseech thee, to keepe vs this night and euer hereafter, to saue vs from all our ene∣mies both bodily and ghostly: giue our bodies quietnesse and sleepe, but let our minds and soules continually watch vn∣to thee, thinke on thee and thy holy Law, that when the cheerefull light of the day shall appeare, we being whole in body and soule, may ioyfully rise againe, bee thankfull vnto thee, and diligently walke in our vocations, to our comforts, & the
glory of thy blessed name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Prayer before the receiuing of the holy Communion. O Most mercifull God, and heauenly Father, I miserable and wretched sinner, acknowledge and confesse, that I am not worthy the least of all thy mer∣cies, and most vnworthy to receiue thee vnder the roofe of my soule, by partici∣pating of thy most blessed body & bloud, for horrible and infinite are the sinnes wherewith I am defiled: therfore the ve∣ry entrals of my heart are troubled, and my bones doe shake, because I finde my soule a most vnworthy ghest, for so hea∣uenly a supper. But thou camst not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: and I know, and doe constantly beleeue, that notwithstanding my sins, thou canst make me cleane and worthy, and forgiue me my sins: and through thy power and mercy, I beseech thee, grant thy grace vn∣to mee a sinner, that I may worthily ap∣proach to this heauenly Sacrament. Giue me grace, before I presume to come to the receiuing hereof, I may examine my
selfe, call my sinnes to minde, and by vn∣fained and hearty repentance return vn∣to thee my Lord: make mee with heauie sobs to confesse my sinnes, and pardon all my offences: accept me into thy fauour, cleanse me from my wickednes, and for∣giue me all my sinnes. Also graunt, that receiuing this thy Sacrament, I may put off the old man, which is corruption, ac∣cording to the lusts of errour, and be re∣newed in the spirit of my mind; and put on the new man, which after God is cre∣ated in righteousnes & holinesse of truth: and though by nature I cannot liue with∣out spots of sinne, yet so blesse me, that I may neuer willingly offend thee, but al∣together depend vpon thy goodnes: and as a true penitent sinner, repenting of my sinnes, I may approach to thy heauen∣ly Supper. Grant (mercifull Father) that I may alwayes worthily receiue this bles∣sed Sacrament & memoriall of thy death, according to thy holy ordinance, that it may increase in me all goodnes. Be thou the buckler, and perpetual defence of my soule and body, that I may come vnto thy kingdome, where I shall behold thee face to face; whither Lord for thy mercies sake bring me. Amen.
A Thankesgiuing after the receiuing of the holy Communion. ALmighty God, which hast vouchsa∣fed spiritually to giue me these holy mysteries of thy body and bloud; mortifie whatsoeuer is euil in me, and garnish me with thy graces and vertues: renew my spirit, my soule and my body with thy ex∣cellent grace: frame me after thy owne hearts desire, and grant that I may think, speak, doe, and desire all things that may please thee: purge my conscience from dead works, to serue thee the liuing God I thank thee with all reuerence of mind for bidding mee a miserable sinner, vnto the participation of thy holy Supper, and the receiuing of all celestial riches, wher∣by thou bestowest on me particularly all the merits and good things which by thy death thou hast purchased for mee, that I may be a partaker and fellow heyre of e∣ternall blessednes. Raise vp in me by this blessed Sacrament, a continuall remem∣brance of thy bitter passion: make mee retaine it in my mind, as a sufficien ran∣some of my Redemption; let mee neuer doubt of the forgiuenesse of my sins; and
as often as Sathan assayleth mee with his deadly temptations, giue me grace to run to this Sanctuary, as to a strong armor of defence; so that no tribulation, anguish, persecution, life nor death, separate mee from Christ my Head, whereupon being made fast by thy holy Sacrament recei∣ued, I (as a liuing member) depend: and let mee know that I am fed and refreshed by thy body, and precious blood, that wa∣shed therewith, I giue not my selfe here∣after to carnall pleasures, but liue in all sinceritie and truth, as it becometh those that eat af the immaculat Paschall Lamb. Giue me grace, that laying aside all mali∣ciousnesse and enuy, I may forgiue euery one as thou hast forgiuen me: giue mee grace, that participating of the bread of eternall life, I may bee replenished with the fruition of thy blessed sight in thy ce∣lestiall Paradise for euer: and at my re∣surrection from death, appoynt mee a place, O mercifull Lord, at thy heauenly Table, where I may taste the new wine in the kingdome of thy Father, abiding with thine elect Angels, & blessed Saints for euermore. Amen.
Grace before Meat. O Lord, blesse vnto our vse thy Crea∣tures, at this time prouided for our sustenance, that being preserued hereby, and comforted, wee may doe thee more laudible seruice vnto thy glory, who art the Authour of all good vnto vs, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Grace after Meate. COntinuall praise be vnto thee, O Lord, who doest continually pro∣uide so graciously for the feeding of our feeble bodies. Leade vs heereby to a taste of our spirituall food; so that by the helpe of both wee may growe vp in thy seruice, both in body and soule, till at the last we attaine thy heauenly kingdome, and be for euer glorified both in soule and body, through Christ our Lord Amen. Grace before Meat. O GOD, who hast iustly cursed the earth, and all things therein for the
sinne of man, pardon our sinnes, turne a∣way thy curse, & vouchsafe thy blessing vpon these thy gifts, which we are now to receiue, that we vsing them with tem∣perance and thankfulnesse, may obtaine by them refreshing and nourishment, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Grace after Meat. MErcifull Father, who neuer ceasest to doe good vnto vs, though we ne∣uer cease offending thee, and now more especially hast renewed thy bountie, in feeding vs with thy blessings. Let not the common fruition of thy benefites make vs commonly, or lightly to esteeme of them; neither when we are fed, let vs wax wanton against thee, abusing our strength to the seruice of sinne. But let thy perseuerance in goodnesse, worke in vs perseuerance in all dutifull obedience to our liues end, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. FINIS.
