18263 99848204 13283
A Briefe Chronicle, of the Successe of Times, from the Creation of the World, to this in∣stant. CONTAINING, The Originall & liues of our an∣cient Fore-Fathers, before and after the Floude, As also, of all the Monarchs, Emperours, Kinges, Popes, Kingdomes, Common-weales, Estates and Gouernments, in most Nations of this Worlde: And how in alteration, or succession, they haue continued to this day. Printed by W. Iaggard, Printer to the Honou∣rable Citty of London, and are to be sold at his house in Barbican. 1611.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, SIR VVILLIAM CRAVON, Knight, Lord Maior of the Cittie of London; Sir HENRIE MONTAGVE, Seriant at Law to his Maiestie, and Recorder of London: And to all the Knights, Alder∣men, and Worshipfull Bretheren, the carefull Fathers and Gouernours of this Honourable Estate. HAuing collected these briefe notes (Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, and my most respected) concerning the Successe of Times (in most of the Kingdoms tho∣row the World) euen from the Creation, to this instant yeare 1611. and modelled them all in this slender Volume, that such as fauour Reuerend Antiquity, might re∣ceiue both pleasure & profit thereby: I thought
it part of my duty (in regard of some fauour and respect lately by mee receiued) to present your Honor and Worships there-with, as a token of my gratitude, and as a promise of my vttermost imployment, in these, or any other endeuours, whereto my meannesse in ability by you shall be commaunded. I know right well, and such as know me, haue heard me daily confesse it, that I (of infinite others) was the most vnmeetest to vndergoe such a serious businesse, which requi∣red, if not the best able, yet those that therein are much better seene then my selfe. Neuerthe∣lesse, importunitie of Friendes, that greeue to see no willing hand put to the plough, or at least such (euen like my selfe) more forward then wise; their perswasions, I say, and some regard had of the times necessity, euery man beeing borne for the good of his Country; hath (vnder your Ho∣norable and Worshipfull fauour) made me thus aduenturous. Concerning the helpes I haue had in this la∣borious trauaile, the Authors themselues, who haue best written, and discoursed of those seueral Kingdoms and Nations; euen them, & no other haue I herein followed, borrowing beside some such matters from them, as (to my knowledge) haue not in any of our Chronicles heeretofore bin remembred, or at the least, not plainly reuea∣led.
In our home affaires, especially the antiqui∣ty of this famous Cittie, I haue (with others) deliuered my opinion therin, yet swaruing from some, who haue beene thought ouer-scrupu∣lous, sometime straining at a Gnat, yet very ea∣ly swallowing a Camell. The Dignitie that your Honor holdeth, of Lord Maior of this Cittie, and those graue Senators, the Alder-men your Brethren, I haue aymed at the Original & Anti∣quitie thereof; some Authors tearming them Domesmen, Eldermen, or Iudges of the Kinges Court. But that the name of Alderman decla∣reth both verie Reuerend Originall, and great Antiquitie; I find recorded, that in the time of King Eadgar, one Ailwin, a man of the bloud Royall, and, for the speciall great authority and fauour hee had with the King (being Sir-named Healf-Koning, that is, Half-King) was Alderman of all England, who founded that famous Mona∣sterie in the Isle of Ely. Our learned and worthy Antiquary M. Camden, hath obserued the Epi∣taph engrauen on his Tombe, containing these wordes: Hic requiescit Ailwinus incliti Regis Ead∣gari Cognatus, totius Angliae Aldermannus, et huius sacri Coenobij miraculosus fundator. Heere resteth Ailwin, Cozin to the Noble King Eadgar, Alder∣man of al England, and of this holie Abbey the mira∣culous Founder. Whereby appeareth, that the
Title of Alderman, in those ancient, reuerend, and respectiue times, was an addition of honor and high repute, as distinguishing them that de∣serued that grace, to be men of greater, grauer, and more sollide iudgment, in matters appertai∣ning to the Weale-publique, then others, vnca∣pable of such especiall dignity. Of such worthy Fathers hath this famous Cittie beene plenti∣fully furnished from time to time, as in our Chronicle may more at large appeare, and to you those graue Senators and worthily styled Aldermen (out of intire and dutifull affection) haue I consecrated the liuing memorie of these my poore labours: wishing to you all vnfeig∣nedly, that as heauen hath bestowed this earthly honor vpon you, so (hereafter) it may crowne you with neuer dying happinesse. Yours in all dutie to be commaunded, A. Mundy.
To the Maister, Wardens, Assi∣stants, and whole Liuery, of the Honorable Company of Merchant-Tailors, being the worthy So∣ciety of S. Iohn Baptist, anciently deriued from S. Iohn of Hierusalem, and the famous Knightes of that religious Brother-hood. Also to the Wardens Substitutes, and the sixteene men of the same Compa∣ny, &c. IT hath beene my hap (worthy and wor∣shipful Gentlemen) among the variety of Collections, to build vp the body of this briefe Chronicle; to meete with an anci∣ent and much esteemed Record, of a So∣ciety and brother-hood, styled by the name of S. Iohn Baptist of Hierusalem, and how many Great Maisters haue gouerned that Society, from Anno. 1099. to this present yeare, with some briefe obseruations of their liues and actions, as in Follio 187. more at large appea∣reth. Concerning the originall, progression, & seuerall Fortunes of this Military Brother-hood, beeing tear∣med Knights Hospitallers, or Knights of the Hospitall of S. Iohn Baptist of Ierusalem; next, Knights of Rhodes, and lastly, Knightes of Malta; I refer you there to be further satisfied: yet some thinges beeing there acci∣dentally omitted, may fauourably (and not vnnecessa∣rily) here be remembred. These Brethren (by solemne profession) were bound to serue Pilgrims, and poore
people in the Hospitall of S. Iohn at Ierusalem, and to secure (by their man-hood) their passages thither, they charitably buried the dead, were continually in praier, mortifyed themselues with Watchings and Fastinges, were courteous and kinde to the poore, whom they called their Maisters, and fed them with white Bread, when themselues did eate browne. They grew to be loued and liked of all sortes, and, through the liberal bounty of good Princes and priuate persons (admiring their piety and prowesse) they rose from this low de∣gree, to so high an estate and great riches, that about An. 1240. they had within Christendome nineteene thousand Lordships or Mannors, as the Knights Tem∣plers had nine thousand, the Reuennewes and Rentes wherof in England, fell afterward also to these knights Hospitallers of S. Iohn Baptist. And this estate of theirs (growne to so great an height) made way for them likewise to as great honors. So that their Prior in Eng∣land (liuing then in the goodly Pallace of Saint Iohn Baptist of Hierusalem, in the streete which receiued name of that house, and is called yet to this day, Saint Iohns-street) was reputed the Prime Baron of the land, and called the Lord of S. Iohns, beeing able, with ful∣nesse and abundance of all things, to maintaine a very honorable Port. In successe of time, as this worthy Citty grew to encrease, not onely in large extendure and beautie of buildings, but also in election of Companies and Cor∣porations, for better supply of the Magistracy, and conueniency of all the aptest meanes thereto belong∣ing; this Branch of your honorable Society of S. Iohn Baptist (deriued of that ancient and memorable Stem,
of Saint Iohn of Hierusalem) grewe to burgen and spread it selfe in goodliest manner. Beeing Tailors of the Linnen-Armory, and brethren of Saint Iohn Bap∣tist (as most Companies, in those times, had a Saintes appellation) they grew to be great in Kinges fauours, who thought it no indignity to themselues, to be stiled in the Brother-hood of S. Iohn Baptist, and from theyr Guildes first Creation by King Edward the third, with authority to hold a feast yearely at Midsommer, and to make choyce of a Gouernor or Mayster (according to the order of a Great Maister, among the Knights Hos∣pitallers, of Saint Iohn Baptist of Hierusalem) and War∣dens, to assist and ayde him in that weighty charge: they proceeded on still (by the ensuing Kings) in fur∣ther additions of gracious regard, till King Henrie the seauenth confirmed their Charter, naming them Mer∣chant-Taylors, of the Brother-hood of Saint Iohn Bap∣tist, to continue still the memorie of their Originall. Heere may I not also forget, that as the Knightes Hos∣pitallers at Hierusalem, were alwaies respectiue in ser∣uice to Pilgrims and Trauailers: euen so, as if such an humble condition did well merit not to be forgotten, in this Brotherhood (at the beginning) they did vse ech yeare to chuse a Pilgrime, who attended the seruice of the Maister of the Company, and trauailed in behalfe of the whole Society. One of the Pilgrimes names is recorded by Iohn Stow, to be Henrie de Ryall, and that name of Pilgrime continued vntill the eleauenth year of Richard the second, when the foure Wardens, were then called Purueyors of Almes, now called quarte∣rage of the fraternity. Seauen Kings haue borne Bretherens name of that
Society (viz:) Edward the third; Richard the second; Henrie the fourth; Henrie the fift; Henrie the sixt; Edward the fourth; and Henrie the seauenth, and (as is credibly affirmed) wearing the Liueryhood on their shoulders, they haue gone on the election day, from the Hall, to the Pallace of Saint Iohns, in Saint Iohns Streete, there to heare diuine seruice, and graciously permitted the Maister to goe on the vpper-hand, such (in those times) was the milde nature of Princes, shew∣ing (by their owne example) how Magistrates, and o∣ther their meaner Ministers, ought to be held in honor and respect. Passing ouer the Dukes, Earles, Lords, Byshoppes, Knightes, and Gentlemen, who haue likewise beene Bretheren of that honorable Society, and many other memorable persons, of whom this little limit allow∣eth no speech: I wil conclude this Epistle, with a briefe note of two or three worthy Bretheren, among infi∣nite other, whose deserts doe iustly challenge perpe∣tuall acknowledgement. Sir William Fitz William the elder, being a Merchant Taylor, and Seruaunt sometime to Cardinall Wolsey, was chosen Alderman of Bread-street-Ward in Lon∣don, in Anno. 1506. And going afterward to dwell at Mylton in Northamptonshire; in the fal of the Cardinall his former Maister, he gaue him kinde entertainement there at his house in the Countrey. For which deede, being called before the King, and demaunded how he durst entertaine so great an enemy to the State: his an∣swere was, that he had not contemptuously or wilful∣ly done it, but onely because he had been his Maister, and partly the meanes of his greatest Fortunes. The
King was so well pleased with his answer, that, saying, himselfe had too few such Seruaunts; immediatly hee knighted him, and afterward made him a priuy Coun∣celler. This worthy Knight dying, gaue an hundered pounds to poore Maids marriages. His debs and deb∣tors, ouer whose names he had written Amore Dei re∣mitto, he freely forgaue. He gaue to the Vniuersities forty pound; to the poore thirty pound; to mend the high-waies betwixt Chigwell and Copersale in Essex 50. pounds; to mend other high-waies about Thorney and Sawtrie Chappell, and the Bridge, fifty pounds more. And to the Merchant-Taylors his Bretheren, hee gaue his best standing Cuppe, as a friendly remembrance of him. Sir Thomas White, Lord Maior of this honourable Citty, and a worthy Brother likewise of that Society, beeing a louer of Learning, and an earnest furtherer thereof; first purchased the Hall in Oxenford, called Glocester-Hall, for Students and Schollers to receiue there the benefit of learning. But his priuate thoughts very often solliciting him, that he should (in time) meet with a place where two Elmes grewe, and that there his further forward purpose should take effect: At length he found out the place, where (at his owne cost and expences) hee founded the famous Colledge in Oxenford, called Saint Iohn Baptist Colledge, & where those two Elmes (as I haue heard) are yet standing, endowing it with such liberall Guifts, Lands, and Re∣uennewes, as would require too much time here to be remembred. Beside his prouision for Learning in this worthy place, he erected other Schooles, as at Bristow, Reading, and a Colledge at Higham Ferries. More, he
gaue to the Citty of Bristow, the summe of two thou∣sand poundes, to purchase Land, amounting to the yearely valew of an hundred and twenty pounds, the Maior and Cittizens paying therefore yearely an hun∣dred pounds. Eight hundred pounds must bee lent to sixteene poore Clothiers, fifty poundes each man for ten years space, sufficient security being giuen by them for the same. Afterward, that eight hundred poundes was to passe to other sixteene Clothiers, according to discretion of them put in trust. Two hundred poundes beside was reserued, for prouision of Corne and need∣full occasions for the poore, in the order and care of the Maior, Aldermen, and Cittizens, &c. Then, according to his will, which remaineth yet to be seene, out of this bountifull guift to Bristow, these memorable braunches and beneuolences, were by himselfe deuised and ordered, beginning in the yeare 577. and thence forward they went on according to his owne direction. Then was brought to the Mer∣chant-Taylors Hall, an hundred and foure pounds, the hundred pound to be lent (for ten years space) to four poore men in the Citty of Yorke: And the foure pound ouer plus, to be imploied about the charges & paines, that no man (vsed in the businesse) might receiue dis∣contentment. Then in An. 1578. the like summe was to be deliuered thence to Canterburie, and so thence-for∣ward the same summes (yearely) to the Citties and Townes following orderly. 1579. Reading. 1580. The Merchant-Tay∣lrs themselues. 1581. Glocester. 1582. Worcester. 1583. Excester. 1584. Salisbury. 1585. West-Chester.
1586. Norwich. 1587. Sothampton. 1588. Lincolne. 1589. Winchester. 1590. Oxenford. 1591. Hereford East. 1592. Cambridge. 1493. Shrewesbuie. 1594. Lyne. 1595. Bathe. 1596. Derby. 1597. Ipswitch. 1598. Colchester. 1599. New-Castle. This summe of one hundred and foure pounds, pas∣sing yearely to these fore-named places, from the Mer∣chant-Taylors Hall, and to the good intended vses of the giuer; that there might bee no breathing while for so iust a Stewards Talent, but to haue it kept on in continuall imployment for the poore: the same order was to take beginning againe (as before) at the Cittie of Yorke, and so successiuely (while the World stands) to the Townes before named, in selfe-same course as it had the originall, with great care and obseruaunce in them to whom it belongeth, that the dead may not be abused, nor poore mens right iniured. But did he thus shut vp his Pursse, and say to himselfe. I haue giuen sufficient? No, hee did cast his pittying eie next on the Citty of Couentry, distressed (at that time) in great and grieuous manner. What his instant beneuolence was, he tooke it to bee but as an houres Sun-shine, after a whole day of storme and tempest, al∣though it might yeeld some comfort, were the season neuer so short. But to establish a certainty, that no dis∣may or doubt should euer after bee able to remooue, (euen as a worthy Piramide, erected to perpetuity) he gaue to the Citty of Couentry 1400. pound, therewith to purchase Lands, rising to the anuall value of 70. li.
Twelue poore Inhabitants of that Citty, were to haue in free Almes twenty foure poundes, each man forty shillings yearely, on the eleauenth day of March. Four young men were also to haue fortie poundes yearely, ten pound each man, and for nine yeares space, vpon sufficient security giuen; And their turnes thus serued, then foure other young men to haue the like summe, and like limitation, and so from nine yeares, to nine yeares, for euer. Afterward it was ordred to two poore men of the same Citty, and lastly to one; in which nature (according to the seuerall limitations) it doth yet, and doubtlesse shall for euer continue. Also the same summe to one young man in Northampton; next, in the Citty of Leicester; Thirdlie, in Notting∣ham; Fourthly, in Warwick; Then returning to Couen∣trie again for one year, it repasseth to the said Townes againe, each after other yearely for euer. And least his worthy intent should faile in the continuance, hee en∣larged his first gift to Couentrie, of 1400. poundes, to 2000. and 60. pound, to bee imployed as hath beene remembred, fortie pound yearely being paid out of it to Saint Iohn Baptist Colledge in Oxford: And allow∣ances also by himselfe giuen in each place, that bonds should be made without any charge to the receiuer. Sir Thomas Row, Lord Maior of this famous Citty, and a worthy Merchant-Taylor, beside his charita∣ble cost and charges, in building the new Church-yard in Bedlem, for such Parishes as wanted benefit of buri∣all: Gaue forty poundes yearely, to maintaine tenne poore men for euer, such as were not Bretheren of his owne Society, but chosen out of fiue seuerall Compa∣nies (viz.) Clothworkers, Armorers, Carpenters, Tylers,
and Plaisterers: As considering, that by ouer-toyling labour, dangers, fals, bruizes, and such like inconue∣niences, they were soonest like to become impotent, and vnable to helpe or maintaine themselues. There∣fore to each of these ten men, hee freely gaue the sum of foure pound quarterly, to be paid them at the Mer∣chant-Taylors Hall, during their liues; and then to succeede to other men in the same Companies, accor∣ding to due consideration, of iust cause and most ne∣cessity. Lastly, worthy Gentlemen, to hold yee no longer, in matter better knowne to your selues then mee, be∣cause it is in your owne eyes and eares (almost) dailie, the neuer dying memory, of a yet liuing (and long may he so be) Brother Merchant-Taylor, shall be my con∣clusion. This vertuous and Religious man, knowing Death to be an vnindifferent Executor, and Life much more worthy of trust and imployment; hath preuen∣ted that gripple greedy Tyrant, and made such large Legacies to Life, that Death neuer deserued to be put in trust withall. If men of this World, such as GOD hath liberally bestowed his blessings on, would (with this good-minded man) consider, that, let their willes bee neuer so wisely made, yea, all Art and Dexterity therein (to the very vttermost) imployed: yet death, and his long wide gaping Children, haue many hang∣ers on, many meanes & deuises, but many more tricks and vnfaithfull performances; they would trust life the better, as this man hath done, and let death haue on∣ly the reuersion, which is the easier to bee considered on. It is not for my pen to set downe his praises, leaues of Marble or Brasse are meeter for those Carracters,
that the deuouring teeth of Time may neuer deface. Let this thn  ome addition to your honour, that you haue suh a orthy Brother; mindful of the works of Mercy to th oore, among your selues, and many places else-where▪ carefull of offendours, whom law sentencing with Death, by the Watch-bell of Prayer are encited to compunction; and hopefull of al good∣nesse, to pursue  vertuous determinations euerie where. So that wen is Dooue shall finde no resting place for his foote▪  reason of this Worldes tumul∣tuous waues; hee may returne to the Arke of blessed∣nesse, the happy home, that he, you, and all else that feare God, should daily long for. Yours euer, A. MVNDY.
TO THE ANCIENT, WOORTHY, AND RIGHT Worshipfull Company of the Gold-Smiths; the Maister, Wardens, Assistants, Liuery: and likewise to euery louing Bro∣ther, and member thereof. LEt me not be thought (Right Worship∣full Society) more bolde then becomes me, that in search of Antiquitie, and Successe of Times, guided by good ob∣seruation, and probable Authorities, I thus present you (in vnfaigned affection) what I haue gathered, concerning your worthy Brother-hood. If I had time heere to set downe (without preiudice to any other Misterie whatsoeuer) that which Holye Writ recordeth of you, and of men (then) most ex∣pert in your profession; this poore Epistle would en∣crease it selfe to a very large discourse, and exceede the limit wherto I haue tied my self in the whol labor. I passe ouer the captiuity of Gods chosen people in Ba∣bylon, and the Offices of those three especiall chosen
men, Zerubbabell, Ezra, and Nehemiah: the first, being their Captaine to guide them home, and proui∣ded that the Temple was builded: the second, refor∣ming manners, and making a plantation of Religion: the third and last, to builde vp the wals, and make a new Citty of Ierusalem againe: Yet let me tell you, that among the multitude of Officers and Offices, ap∣pointed to this businesse, for building the walles, the Merchants and Goldsmithes do beare a remarkeable note, the very words in Scripture being these: Be∣tweene the Chamber of the Corner vnto the Sheepe-gate, fortifyed the Gold smiths and the Merchants. Beside, that which is spoken of Malchih the Goldsmithes sonne, fortifying to the house of the Nethinims; And then, of Bezaleell the Sonne of Vri, filled with the Spirit of God, in wisedome and vnderstanding, to worke in Gold, Siluer, & Brasse; who had Aholiab ioyned with him, to make all curious workes (appointed by God himselfe) for the Tabernacle of the Congregation, the Arke of the Couenant, and the Mercy-seat, &c. If these be not Testimonies of extraordinary honour and re∣spect, in the very names of Merchants and Golde∣smiths (but much more, in the matter of so high an employment) confirmed by an assurance so vnreproue∣able, and equalling what can be saide (in like case) of venerable Antiquitie; I referre my selfe to be censu∣red by the very seuerest iudgement.
Secondly, concerning the first workers in Gold, Sil∣uer, and other Mettalles, in any place of eminence or note in Europe (vnder controul neuerthelesse, of such as haue reade and obserued more then I haue done) I finde their Originall to be among the euer-curious & ingenious Veniians, euen at the first plantation of Venice, which iustly may be tearmed Miracolo del Mondo. The foundation of Venice, holds paritie and proportion of Antiquity, with the prime estate of the Francs or French, as you may obserue where it is more at large expressed. Looking backe then to the first Note of Diuine obseruation, and remembering (after the worlds deuision among the sons of Noah) that Iaphets son Tubal had all Europe for his parti∣tion, with this last Collestion concerning Venice; and then, as all Arts and Sciences haue a place of Original, as Riuers from the Sea, and extend themselues after∣ward to the remotest places of the worlde: So may it likewise be gathered, that those respectiue times, ad∣myring and honouring Art and Inuention, gaue such way to their present, and succeeding fame & passage, that all Landes became Partners of their predecessors prerogatiues. Lastly, to speake but of our owne Kingdome, and therein (for breuities sake) but of this Noble Citty it self; I find, that when it had cast off the yoke of strange confusion, endured vnder the sufferance of so manie conquerings: After (I say) it came to haue command
within it selfe, vnder the awe and gracious fauour of worthie Kinges and Potentates, who made choyse of Magistrates, to be their Deputies, and to present their God-like persons for general obedience: the very first man that attained to the place of eminence, and was styled Maire of this renowned Citty, was called Hen∣ry Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Liefstane, Goldsmith, and held that supreame Office more then 24. yeares toge∣ther. A memorable Note, in regard of Priority, and as since then, carefully remembred, so iustly challen∣ging continuance to vtmost posterity. But because this slender volume speakes more, (though briefely) of you, then heere can wel be affoor∣ded, and commeth to you from a free hart, in kindnes, requiring but as free and courteous acceptance: this is al the charge by me imposed on it. To tel the whole Golden band of your worthy Brother-hood, that I haue done nothing heerein, either for flatterie or vaineglo∣rie, or in expectation of mercinarie recompence; but according to truth, sincerity, and honesty which is the best defence for any that speakes of Antiquitie. Yours to be commanded, A. Mundy.
A Table of the seuerall Arguments, handled in this Booke. THe Originall and Succession of our fore∣fathers, from Adam to the generall De∣luge. Fol: 1. From the Flood, to the Princes and Iudges of Israel. 5 Frō the Princes & Iudges, to the Iewish kings. 12 From the Iewish Kings, to the Kings of Iuda. 14 From the Kinges of Iuda and Ierusalem, to the Monarchy, &c. 19 The Monarchy of the Chaldeans, Assyrians, &c. 19 The Monarchy of the Persians. 20 The Monarchy of the Grecians. 23 The Kings of Macedon. 24 The Kings of Syria. 26 The Kings of Egypt. 29 The Monarchy of the Caesars or Romaines. 32 The Emperors of the west from Charlemaign. 54 The Emperors of the East. 61
The Ottomans or Turkish Emperors. 89 Originall of the Sarazins. 102 Byshops & Popes of Rome, from the originall, and Ages of the Church. 108 Originall of the Knights of S. Iohns of Ierusalem, and all other Orders of Knight-hood. 157 Of the Emperor of Ethiopia, Prte Ian. 214 Of the Kingdome of Persia. 220 Of the Kingdome of Thunis. 227 Of the great Prouince of Moscouia. 229 Of the Kingdome of Poland. 233 Of sundry other Kingdomes Conquered by the Romaines. 235 Of the Kingdome of Portugall. 241 Of the Kingdome of Italy. 255 The Originall of the Venetians. 258 Of the Dukes of Venice. 269 Of the Kingdome of Spaine. 300 Of Germany, and the Princes Electors. 304 The Originall of the French Nation. 305 Of Pharamond, the first king of France, and con∣sequently of all the other kings of France. 316 Of the Earls of Holland and Zeland. 382 Of the Kingdome of Ireland. 427 Of the Gouernors, Lieutenants, and Deputies of Ireland. 435 Of the Kingdome of Scotland. 442 Of Albion, before Brutes arriuall, & what Kings
raigned there. 466 The Light of Britaine, and of all the Kinges suc∣ceeding after Brute. 471 A Catalogue of the Princes of Wales. 522 Of Englands Bishoppricks, & their circuits. 526 Foundation of the Colledges in Cambridge & Oxenford. 532 Of the Shires in England and Wales. 535 Originall Antiquity, and modern estate of Lon∣don. 537 Temporall Gouernment of London, since the Conquest. 573
A SHORT SVM∣mary or briefe Chro∣nicle of TIMES. ¶Containing the originall and successi∣on of our auncient Fore-fathers, from the first CREATION of the World: As also of the Monarches, Emperours, Kings, Popes, and Famous men, with all the most memorable matters hapning since the Worldes beginning, to this instant time. OVR Eternall GOD, al good,Yeares of the world Almighty, and most mercifull, in the beginning, created and made the World of nothing: that is to say; Heauen, Earth, and Waters, as first and prin∣cipall matter, togither with the Angels. He dis∣posed and gaue forme in sixe daies,Genes. 1. (for he rested the seauenth, and blessed it) to all thinges inclo∣sed within the circle of Heauen. All which hée did by his word, namely Iesus Christ, and the
blessed Spirit: these thrée persons being one Di∣uine essence (for the workes of the sacred Trinity are inseparable) whom I most humbly beséech to fauour and assist me, in beginning and ending this short Summary. After that this soueraigne Architect had cre∣ated (of nothing) in one instant, this first masse or matter, and disposed in sixe daies this whole round frame: at length, & vpon the sixt day he created Man of the slime of the earth (in the Da∣mascene territory scituate in Syria,The Crea∣tion of man or in Hebrō, according to the Haebrues Tradition, into which place he withdrew himselfe after he had sinned) and made him after his owne likenesse, as con∣cerning his soule, which also he created of no∣thing:Gen. 1. he named him Adam, that is to say, Red man, or Red-Earth, according to the Hebrue language. Afterward, he took a rib from Adam, as he lay asléepe in Paradice, and thereof formed Heuah,Marriage & houshold life. which signifieth, as Moses writeth (fol∣lowed by Iosephus) Soroow, and Mother of the Liuing; and according to Zorarus, Woman. Thus began the institution of Marriage, and houshold life togither.Genes. 2, 3. Adam and Heuah our first Parents, by per∣swasion of the Serpent (that is to say,The fall of Man. the De∣uill) transgressed the Commandement which God had giuen them, for effect of their faith and obedience. In regard whereof, they were cast out of terrestiall Paradice, that is to say, a Gar∣den abounding in pleasures, where GOD had placed them together: and (with their posterity)
were subiected to sinne, death, and the Deuill.The repara∣tion of man in the pro∣mise of Ie∣sus Christ. But our good God, being made all of mercy, per∣ceiuing the offence of Man, did promise him, that the séede of the Woman, which is Iesus Christ, should breake the head of the Serpent, that is to say, his kingdome and power, deliue∣ring vs from the captiuity of sinne, death,Gen. 2, 3. & the Deuill. In this promise we may note the sourse or spring-head of the Gospell▪Originall of the Gospell. which afterward was oftentimes repeated, and diuersly signified by sundry figures, for comfort of our holy Fore∣fathers, euen to the comming of Iesus Christ. When Adam was throwne forth of Para∣dice,15. 30. he began to labour in the earth with great pain. Afterward, he knew Heuah his wife, who brought him a sonne called Caine, who was an husbandman, and the first murtherer of his bro∣ther Abell, the iust Shepheard.Genes. 2, 3. In whom be∣gan the first persecution of the Saintes by the wicked, for the true and sincere seruice of God. In this man also began the Kingdom or citty of God, and in the other,The City of God, and of the world. the citty of the World and of the Diuell, as shalbe better manifested in Nimrod. This murder being thus committed, Caine was abhominable in the sight of God,Genes. 4. he withdrew himselfe from his father, and builded a Citty after the name of his first son Enoch. Adam had daughters also,138. and at the age of 230. yeares, he begat Seth. Seth, at the age of 105. yeares, begat Enos.25. Enos aged 99. yeares, begat Cainam.325. Cainam, aged 70. years, begat Malaleel.395.
460.Malaleel aged 605. yeares, begat Iared. 622.Iared aged 160. yeares, begat Enoch. 67.Enoch, who at the age of 65. yeares, begate Methusalem, walked with God, declaring his iudgements, to ensue vppon men degenerating from humaine and reasonable Nature, into bru∣tish and vnbrideled voluptuousnesse. For the Sonnes of God (that is to say, the Sayntes, by the generation of Seth) beholding the Daughters of men (that is to say,Genes. 5, 6. the wicked by the genera∣tion of Caine) to be fayre: tooke them to Wife, without any regarde, and celebrated marriages with the people of abhomination, of whome Gy∣ants were borne men▪ of might,Gyants. and great Re∣nowne. 874.Methusalem at the age of 187. yeares, begate Lamech.90. Adam dyed aged 930. yeares: Iust Enoch was carried aliue vp into heauen. 1056.Lamech, at the age of 182. yeares, begat No∣ah the deliuerer of Iustice: whom the Poets (not vnderstanding the creation of the worlde) called Heauens Chaos, Seede of the world, & Father of the Gods. Noah, being 500. yeares of age, with his wife Thitea, that is to say Earth; or, according to the Poets, Aretia, Cybele, Vesta, and Mother of the Gods, begat Sem, Cham, and Iaphet: with whom by the commandement of God, in the hun∣dred yeare after, he entered into the Arke which had béene built by him, and was preserued from the Flood.
The Generall Deluge. BY which invndation of waters, God brought an horrible vengeance, to punnish the wicked liues of men. Sem, who was Melchizedech,1659. Gen. 10, 11 two yeares af∣ter the flood, begat Arphaxad,1695. beeing then aged 100. yeares. Arphaxad aged 35. yeares, begat Salê.1725. Salê, at the age of thirty yeares, begat Heber,Gen. 1. and builded the Citty of Salem (though some say it was Sem) that should be called Ierusalem, the Citty of God, seated in the midst of Iudea. Heber,1759. of whom the Hebrewes were after na∣med, being aged 34. yeares, begate Paleg:The diuisi∣on or par∣tage of the world. Gen. 10, 11 Berosus in 1. de Antiquit. at which time the earth was diuided betwéene the sonnes of Noah. Sem and his off-spring enioied the East part of Syria, to wit, Asia. Cham Zoro∣astres had Iudea, Egypt, Arabia▪ and all Affrica. Iaphet, who by the Poets is called Iapetus,1789. had (with his people) all Europe. Phaleg, at the age of thirty yeares, begat Reu,The king∣dom of the Celts. The king∣dome of Italy. The king∣dome of E∣gypt. Beros 4. et 5. The King∣dome of Spaine, &c. at which time, Nimrod the Babylonian Saturn, & hindmost Nephew of Cham, began his raigne; builded the Tower of Babell, where beganne the confusion of tongues into seauenty two, the com∣mon language of the Hebrew remaining entyre. Samothes or Dis, King of the Gaules, (of whom the Gaules or Celts, tearme themselues to be dis∣cended, as Caesar declareth in his sixt Booke) be∣gan also his raigne in short time after: as Gome∣rus
Gallus likewise did his in Italy, and Tuball the Sonne of Iaphet his rule in Caltiberia, now called Spaine. Oceanus swayed in Egypt; as Tuiscon or Ascenas did in Allemain or Germany 1821.Reu at the age of 32. yeares, begat Saruch. 10.Saruch, aged thirtie yeares, begat Nahor, or Nachor, tearmed Fayre Iupiter the second, King of the Assyrians. 1879.Nachor, at the age of 29. yeares, begat Thares or Terah, who is saide to be Ninus the third King of the Assyrians. Hee erected Temples, Al∣tars, and Statues to his dead father, which were a great occasion,Coyne first found out in Egypt. The king∣dom of the Syconians. & the verie sourse of Idolatries. Osyris and Isis first found out the means of Corn at this time in Egypt, and nowe did Aegiaeus become first King of the Sicyonians, or Pelopon∣nesus, now named Morea. 1950.Thares, a maker and seller of Idolles, being 70 yeares of age, begat Abraham, Nahor, and Aran the Father of Lot.Beros lib. 5. Diodor. lib. 3 Semiramis the wife of Ninus, (in habit of a man) raigned ouer the Assyrians, in the name of her Sonne. 2007.Noah, died aged 905. yeare old, 350. years af∣ter the flood.Genes. 9. Saturne, Pluto, Cybele, Mother of the Gentiles Gods, Sol, Iupiter, Pallas or Miner∣ua, Venus, Cupid, Vulcane, Mercury, and all the crew of these faigned Gods then began. 2025.Abraham, boing aged 75. yeares, by the Com∣maundement of God, departed from his owne Country and Kindred,Genes. 12. Gen. 21, 20, 25. for God had promised vn∣to him the land of Canaan, and blessing vppon all people, by his wisedome which is Iesus Christ:
he begate Isaac. Saron King of Gaule ordained publicke Schooles. Druis his successor, being a ve∣rie wise Prince, (of whom the Druides are saide to be deriued) appointed Priests & Phylosophers among the Gaules. So do affirme Berosus in his fift Booke, Caesar in his sixt Booke,Berosus lib 5 Caesar. lib. 6. Cor. Tacit in mor. Germ. and Cornelius Tacitus in the Manners of the Allemaynes or Germaines. Isaac, aged 60. yeares,2109. begat on his Wife Re∣becca Esau and Iacob, twinnes. Abraham,Gen. 25. The king∣dome of the Argiues Beros. lib. 5 Diodor. lib 6 Sem and Heber dyed. Inachus was the auncient and first King of the Argiues. At this time Bardus K. of the Gaules, became the inventer of Verses and of Musicke, and Hercules ruled in Lybia. Iacob, called Israel, at the age of 84. years,2193. ma∣ried Lea and Rachel, and of them, together with their two Hand-maids, had twelue sonnes: Ru∣ben, Simeon, Leui, Father of the Leuites, and Priestly lignage: Iuda (of whom the Iewes doo hold their name) and the Royall lignage of Iesus Christ discended: Issachar, Zabulon, Gad, Aser,Gen. 29, 30 Dan, Nephtalin, Ioseph, and Beniamin, all Pa∣triarkes, with Dina, one only daughter, who was the wife of Iob, according as Philo the Iew recor∣deth. Of these twelue Patriarkes, the 12. Tribes or Linages descended. Afterward,229 Iacob being aged 130. yeares, went downe into Egypt with all his family, to his Sonne Ioseph the Deputie to Pharaoh, who had bin sold by his Bretheren.Gen. 37, 41 In that place he gaue vppe the ghost, being aged then 147. yeares: hauing prophesied, that Iesus
Christ should come, before that the Scepter were taken from Iuda,Genes. 49. or a Duke of his generation. Galathes the Sonne of Hercules, was King of Gaule,2257. whereof it tooke the name, Prometheus and Atlas at this time were very excellent Astro∣logians. 2311.Ioseph dyed 54. yeares after his Father. The Israelites now began to be euill intreated by the Egyptians.Genes. 50. Moses the last Nephew of Leui, was borne 64. yeares after the death of Ioseph.2375. Ce∣crops then builded the Citty of Athens, and was first King thereof:The king∣dome of Athens. Also, he was the first Authour of the most abominable idolatries, that euer were among the Grecians. The Deluge of Deucalion. Exodus.Princes and Iudges of Israel. 2454.MOses, aged 80. yeares, by the commande∣ment of God reproued Pharoah;Leuiticus. Numbers. wrought many myracles in Egypt, with-drew the people of Israel our of Egypt by the Red-Sea, béeing in number more then sixe hundred thousand. Exod. 12. Galath. 3.This their departure thence, happened in the yeare 430. of the promise made to Abraham, for the blessing of all Nations by his séede. Moyses gaue the Law to the people (in the Deserts of A∣rabia) as a School-maister, vntil the comming of the promised séed. For this cause he ordained for ye sins of the people, diuers Ceremonies of sacrifices marriages, punishments, & solemnities of feasts. For the action of War,Deuterono. he numbred more then six hundred and thrée thousand, without comprehen∣sion
of the Leuites, to whom he prescribed theyr charge. In the end, he instructed the rude peo∣ple in diuers commandements. For Gods ordi∣nances he constituted Iosuah his successour, and rendred vp his spirit in the 120. yeare of his life: and of the departing out of Egypt, the 40. read Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, and Deuterono∣my, all which are heere thus briefely collected. Dadanus hauing slaine his Brother Iason,The king∣dome of Troy. was the first King of Troy. Ianigines was then King in Italy: the most cruell Tyrant Busiris King in Egypt: and Mercurius Trismegistus, that is to say: thrée times the most great King, Priest and Philosopher: See M. Ficinus in his life. Iosuah passed the people dry foote thorough the Riuer of Iordan, into the Land of Promise.465. The Sunne stayed while he fought the battel:Iosuah. he slew one and thirty Kings. And after he had distribu∣ted their Countries amongst the people: he died thirty yeares after the death of Moyses. The Is∣raelites then left God, and serued Idols. Orcus, King of the Molosses made then a rape of Proser∣pina: And Cadmus brought the Charracters of Letters into Greece. Othoniell, of the Lignage of Iuda,2526. gouerned the people eight yeares, and was the third Iudge of Israel in order, and not the first,Iudges 3. as some haue supposed. He deliuered the people from the oppres∣sion of the King of Mesopotamia. Aiod or Ehua, slew the king of the Moabites,2534. Iudges 3. raigned eight yeares, and deliuered the people from the idolatry of the Moabites. In this time
began, but much rather encreased the Gods and Idolatries of the Gentiles (according to Iose∣phus) as Bacchus, Pandion, Radamanthus, Aea∣cus, Minos King of Creet. Dedalus and Icarus, at this time made their flight. Tantalus Amphi∣on, founder and first King of Thebes. Linus. 2614.Barach with Debora the Prophetesse, iudged 40. yeares, ouercame with ten thousand men on∣ly, the Army of Sisara, consisting of two hundred thousand men. The Argonates sayled then to Colchos; then liued Areus and Thiestes, Pan al∣so, and Midas King of Phrygia, abounded in Treasures. 2654.Gedeon a valiaunt Captaine, iudged fortie yeares, and deliuered the Israelites from the ser∣uitude of the Madianites. In this time liued Cir∣ces, Medea, Enchanteresses, with Medusa and Andromeda.The king∣dome of the Micenes Euristheus first king of Mycena, & was slaine by Aeacides, hauing commaunded (well néere) thorough all Greece, for the space of forty fiue yeares togither. 2694.Abimelech, the naturall Son of Gedeon, was Iudge thrée yeares, he slew 69. of his naturall & legitimate Brethren, only that he might raigne. Sparta or Lacedemon was thē builded by Spar∣tus the Sonne of Phoroneus: Others doo attri∣bute the building thereof to Aristhenes, who was their first king. 267.Thola was Iudge 25. yeares: then liued Ruth Mother to the Grand-mother of Dauid:Ruth. then al∣so were Castor, Pollux, Apollo the inuenter of Musicke, Aesculapius his Sonne, Orpheus and
Museus, who were the first Poets, according to Linus. Iair iudged 22. yeares, during which time,2710. the people liued in maruailous quiet, as they did be∣fore, in the raigne of Thola. But afterward there happened interregnum eightéen yeares together: in all which time, the Israelites were seruile to the Philistims, for their idolatries. Pyrrhus then in∣uented the Tennis Play: Theseus vanquished the Minotaure, and Hercules came from Spayne into Italy, 55. yeares before Aeneas. Iephta the Bastard was Iudge sixe yeares,2760. and being thereto compelled by his vow, hee slew his onely Daughter. Theseus now made his rape of Helena, shee being then a very young Mayden. Sybilla Aericthrea, liued in this time, shee that fore-told the ruine of Troy, and of whom Homer telleth many goodly tales. Abesan or Ibsan iudged seuen yeares:2766. The Hi∣story of Ruth happened in this time. Pluto, Nep∣tune, then were, and Paris stole Helena, the wife to Menelaus king of the Lacedemonians. Elon was Iudge ten years,2773. in whose time hap∣pened the Warre betwéene the Greekes and the Troyans,The war of Troy. for the rape of Helena Wife to Mene∣laus, by Paris Sonne to Priam, the last King of Troy. Abdon iudged eight yeares,2783. Aeneas with his companions came into Italy, and Francus (if wée may beléeue Manethous and others) the Sonne of Hector, with his followers also came into Au∣stria. Of the one descended the Latines, & kings
of the Romaines: and of the other the Kinges of France. In these dayes liued Pilades and Orestes the two loyall friends. 2791.Sampon the strong, was Iudge 20. yeares, he slew a thousand Philistims with the iaw-bone of an Asse,Iudges 20. and was deceiued by a Strumpet. The Linage or Tribe of Beniamin was now almost vtterly destroyed, onely thorow detestable volup∣tuousnesse. 2811.Hely Priest and Iudge, raigned fortie yeares, and was punnished of God, for his ouer great in∣dulgence towards his children. The Ark of Mo∣ses was then taken by the Philistims. Bute the Sonne of Syluius third King of the Latines, ex∣pulsed then the cruell Gyants out of the Island, which (after his owne name) he called Brittaine, now England, and deuided his Land to his thrée Sonnes, in thrée seuerall kingdoms, to wit, Loe∣gria to Locrine: Cambria, now called Wales, to Camber; and Albania, now called Scotland, to his third Sonne Albanact. 2851. The king∣domes of Lacedemō & CorinthSamuel the Prophet, and innocent Iudge to those wicked children. He annointed Saul to the Israelites, they desiring a King t And then began the Kingdome of the Lacedemonians, instituted by Euristhenes, and of the Corinthians founded by Atletes. Kings of all the Iewish people. 2851.SAule, first King of the Israelites, with Samu∣el raigned fortie yeares. Hee pardoned Agag
King of Amalec his Prisoner, and reserueth the spoile to Sacrifice to God,1. Kinges. contrary to his Com∣mandement. He tooke counsell of Pythonissa the Enchantresse: for which he was reproued of God, and was slaine in the battell. Dauid, both King and Prophet,2891. in his youth he was a Shepherd, and feared God:11. Kinges. but afterward forgetting himselfe, he committed both adultry & murder. He raigned forty yeares, and being wea∣ried with many molestations, he wrote his Booke of Psalmes to the glory of God. To him was re∣newed the ancient promise of Iesus Christ, and of his eternall kingdom: who (as concerning his manhood, and according to the flesh) descended of him. Salomon raigned forty yeares.2931. Of such proui∣sion as Dauid (with mighty expences) had pre∣pared:111. Kinges. in the fourth yeare of his raigne hee buil∣ded a Temple to God, which in seauen yeares af∣ter was finished, it being 80. yeares,Kings. 3, 6. after ye com∣ming forth of Egypt. He composed the Prouerbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Canticles. At length, spen∣ding his time in the delight of women & straunge Concubines: he, who was a holy man, elected of God as both Sonne and King: fell into idolatry. In regard whereof, his kingdom (after his death) was deuided to the kingdom of Iuda, which was for Rehoboam the Sonne of Salomon; & to the kingdome of Israell, for Ieroboam the Sonne of Nabat.
Kings of Iuda, or of Ierusalem. 2971.REhoboam the Sonne of Salomon, King of Iuda, despised his Elders, and adhered to the counsell of young heads. He raigned wickedly 17 yeares. Ieroboam the first King of Israel, indu∣ced the people to idolatry. In this time flourished the Poet Homer. 2988.Abiam the Sonne of Rehoboam, raigned thrée yeares. He trusting in God, ouercame Ieroboam king of Israel, who was accompanied with eight hundred thousand chosen, strong & valiant men, yet lost fiue hundred thousand of them, by the o∣thers Army, which consisted but of foure hundred thousand. 2991Asa, a very good King, raigned one and fortie yeares: he tooke away the Idols, and deposed his Mother from the Title of Lady, because shée had erected them. He, trusting in his Physitians, and not requiring helpe of God, being diseased in his féete, dyed. 3032.Iehosaphat raigned fiue and twenty yeares, he was a most debonaire Prince, appointing eue∣ry where Law-makers and Magistrates,1111. Kings. 4. Kings 2. admo∣nishing them daily to do their dutie. In his time the great Prophet Helias was wrapt vp into hea∣uen. Ahab a most wicked King of Israel, tooke to wife Iezabel as wicked a woman: they were both reproued by the Prophet Elias: The Priestes of Baal were destroyed. 3555.Iehorum, the wicked Sonne of a vertuous Fa∣ther
raigned eight yeares, beeing the husband to Athalia the Sister of Achab. Now was the pro∣phet Elizeus. In these dayes Licurgus the Law-maker, did cut off the excesse of foode & garments: Hesiodus. Othozias, importuned by his Mother Athalia,3060. the Daughter of Amry, raigned wickedly one yeare. He was ouerthrowne by Iehu, king of Is∣rael, the last of Salomons line. Iehu also vanqui∣shed Iezabel, & the wife and brethren of Achab, with all the Priestes of Baal, in whose Temple they made their Thefts and Robberies. Athalia slew all the Royall séede or race,306. except Ioas, who was nourished and kept by Iehoida. Afterward Athalia was slaine in the seuenth year of her raigne. Ioas raigned iustly fortie years,3067. during the time of Iehoida the Priest: who being dead, hee slew Zacharias his sonne in the Temple. Sardanapalis king of the Assyrians beeing then vanquished, threw himselfe into a fire. Afterward his Monar∣chie was diuided among his Officers, into the kingdomes of Assyria and Medea.The king∣dome o Carthage. Pigmalion be∣ing king of Tyre, Dido his Sister builded Car∣thage, which she reduced into a kingdome: shee being a woman verie magnanimous, and chast, as Iustine affirmeth, in his eightéenth Booke, whatsoeuer Virgill and Ouid say to the contrary. Amasius raigned fiue and twentie yeares: hee was admonished by the Prophet,3107. not to put his trust in humain strength: yet for idolatry he was taken and slaine by his enimies. Some do report,
that at this time was the ending of the effeminat Saanapalu, and so consequentlie of the first Assyrian Monarchy, which continued after Nim∣rod, 1358. yeares. 3136.Osias raigned iustly two and fiftie yeares. He vndertook the sacrifycing Priests office, for which he was switten with Leprosie, in the 8. yeare of his raigne. In this time, Abdias, Amos, and Ioel the Prophets liued. Belus, by some termed Belocus, first King of the Babylonians, was translated to the new Kingdome of the Assyrians,The king∣domes of the Medes and Mace∣donians. and now was the beginning of the Olympiad in Greece. Then also beganne the kingdome of the Medes, by Arsacus Lieutenant to the womanish Sardanapalus: And that of the Macedonians by Gramaus. 3188.Ioathan a good King, raigned sixtéene yeares, in which time were Micheas, Nahum, and Ionas the Prophets. Romulus and Remus, in the first yeare of the seauenth Olympiade, builded the Ci∣tie of Rome in Italy: For the beginning where∣of, it is necessarie to read Dionisius Halicarnasse∣us in his first Booke: Solynus Cap. 2, and Pausa∣nias, rather then Catoes Originals, and Fabius Pictors fragments, suspected rather of Noueltie, then antiquity:The king∣dom of the Lydians. according to Beat. Reuanus. Some do referre it to the following raigne: about this time began the kingdome of the Lydians, by Ardis, 3204Achaz the idolater, raigned sixtéene years. Esay then prophesied (as appeareth in his seauenth Chapter) of Iesus Christ, to bee borne of a Vir∣gin.
And Micheas, that hee should be borne in Bethlehem:The king∣dom of the Romans. About this time began the kingdom of the Romaines, by Romulus. Ezechias a good King, raigned 29. yeares:3218. hee brake the Serpent of Moses, whereunto the peo∣ple had so many yeares offered Sacrifice. Salma∣nazar King of the Assyrians (for Idolatry) ruined the whole kingdom of Israel vnto Samaria, which had continued 244. yeares. The Angell of God did then ouerthrow an hundred & four-score M. men of warre, in the Army of Sennacherib, for their most exeerable blasphemies. Tobias was captiue then in Niniuy. Numa Pompillius, king of Rome, added two months to the yeare, Ianu∣ary and February, there being no more before, but ten, in regard of them. Manasses, being a wicked and cruel king,3247. raig∣ned 55. yeares: he caused the Prophet Esay to be sawed in sunder thorow the middest. And being captiued by his enemies, he acknowledged God; and being reduced to his kingdom, he demolished the Idols. Tullus Hostilius, third King of Rome destroyed the kingdom of Alba, whence came the family of the Iulij to Rome. Candaulus & Gyges were then Kings of Lydia. Amon, a more wicked King then his Father Manasses, raigned two yeares,3302. 4. Kings 11 and was slaine by his owne seruants. Zaleucus was then Law-gi∣uer to the Locrians. Iosias a very good King, raigned 31. yeares:3304. he cut downe the hallowed Woods and the Idolles. In this time the Bookes of Moyses, which for
many yeares together had bin lost, were found a∣gaine, and now liued Sophonie, Abacuck, and Ieremy the Prophets: as also Archilocus, Simo∣nides, and Phocylides▪ Poets. Ancus Martius, was the fourth king of Rome, Epimenides. 3335.Ioacham, a very euill King, the third moneth of his raigne, was led captiue into Egypt, and his Brother constituted king in his place, by the king of Egypt. 3336.Iocim raigned eleauen yeares. For his abho∣minations, he was chained and led captiue to Ba∣bylon, by Nabuchadonoser the great king of the Assyrians. Tarquinius Priscus, was fift king of the Romains. In Greece then liued Sapho, Ste∣sichorus, Pherecydes, Draco, Solon, and others of the Sages. 3346.Ioachim, otherwise called Ieconias, being 18. yeares old, and besiedged by the Assyrians, yeel∣ded himselfe with his Mother, his Princes, and the greater part of his people, to Nabuchadonoser and was transported into Babylon, where (in pri∣son he begat Salathiell, Father to Zorobabell: then liued Ezechiell, Baruch, and Daniell. 349.Sedechias his Vnckle, was constituted king in the place of Ieconias, by Nabuchadonoser, by whom, after the eleuenth yeare of his raigne, hée was taken as a Rebell: his eyes were pluckt out, and then he was led with the rest of the people to Babylon. In this time, the Temple and City of Ierusalem was miserably burned by the Assyrians Then happened that lamentable captiuity of Babylon, fore-told by the Prophets, and continu∣ed
seauentie yeares: all which was occasioned by the contempt of Gods word, false Doctrine, and auarice in the Priests and Prophets: conioyned with the tirrany of their Kings, and sinnes of the people, but especially idolatry: as appeareth in Ie∣remy, Cap. 19, 22, 23, 29, 32. Baruch 6. Eze∣chiell 13, 22. And then was this great Nabu∣chadonoser (for his arrogancie) thrust out of his kingdome, and fed with the Beasts. Seruius Tul∣lius was sixt King of the Romaines; Croesus in Lydia, Balthazar in Babylon, and, for abusing the Vessels of the Temple, hee was slaine. The kingdome then deuolued to Darius the Medean, Vnckle of Cyrus, King of Persia and Medea. The Monarchy of the Cal∣deans, Assyrians, or Babylo∣nians. NAbuchadonoser,3362. the great King of Baby∣lon, in the 24. yeare of his raign, and of the world 3362. was he that established the great and first Monarchy, described with that of the Persi∣ans, Grecians, and Romaines by Daniell,Daniel. 2, 7 com∣pared to the head of gold, and to the Eagle flying. It endured but seauenty eight yeares, in three Kings, and he that raigned longest, it was but 43 yeares. Euilmerodach, whom Herodotus calleth La∣bynitus, raigned thirty yeares. Thales, Clito,3382. Herod. lib. 1 Pittacus, Bias, Cleobulus and Periander, wise∣men
of Greece, are all referred to this time. And it is an error to seperate them otherwise, as some haue done, Solo being the most ancient. 3412.Balthazar, the contemner of God, and renew∣er of the olde Caldean idolatry (abolished before) abusing (in his feasts) those vesselles,Blasphemie the ruine of the monar∣chy. which had bin taken from the temple of Ierusalem, and ma∣king a mockery at the true God of the Iewes; was put to death by the Medes and Persians, who pos∣sessed them-selues of the Monarchy, in the tenth yeare of his raigne. There is great difficulty a∣bout this Monarchie, which cannot heere bee de∣clared. The Monarchy of the Persians. 3406.CYrus sent home the Iewes into their country, with Zerobabell their conduer, to repayre the Temple. He made warre against the Scythi∣ans for the space of sixtéene yeares: in which time raigned his Son Cmbyses. Daniell then fore∣tolo the passion of Iesus Christ, and the desolate ruine of Ierusalem vnder Vespasian,Dan. 9. Matth 24 Luke 1 after seauen∣ty Wéekes were passed ouer, which were 490. yeares after the repayration of the Citty: Tar∣quine the proude, for the violation of Lucretia, was then chased out of Rome. Consulles were created the year 244. after the building of Rome. Cyrus raigned 29. yeares. Read more of Cyrus & his sonne, Herodotus lib. 1, 3. Xenophon 8.
Cambyses raigned alone eight yeeres,3435. being a cruell man, he slew his Brother and Sister, and caused a Iudges skin to be flayed off, because hee had iudged falsely. Pythagoras the great Phylo∣sopher sailed into Egypt, to learne Diuinity, and to Babylon for Astrologie, and the course of the starres. Many doo referre the History and ouer∣throw of Holofernes to this time: but according to Genebrard, it is reputed to the time of Na∣buehadonoser. Darius, the sonne of Hidaspes, otherwise cal∣led Ahasuerus, the husband of Hester,3443. raigned 36 yearee. He entred into Greece with sixe hundred thousand fighting men, & afterward vanquished Miltiades, being accompanied onely with eleuen thousand men. Coriosanus the Romaine was now put into exile, and Esope composed his booke of Fables. Now liued also Anacharsis, Anxime∣nes, and Heracus Phylosophers. Anaximan∣der invented the Horooge and Spheare, & strong Milo was in this time. Read more of Darius in Herodotus and Iustine. Lib. 1. Xerxes raigned twenty yeares. Hee assayled the Grecians with a far greater Army,3470. then that his Father had, which was repulsed by Themi∣stoles. In meane while, his Sonne Artaxerxes hold the Kingdome, by whose commaundement, Ers restored the Common-weale of the lees; and Nehemias (by strong hande) repayred the walles of the Citty. Now liued Cmon, Ariste∣des and Pindarus the Poet, as also Pericles, that wise and valiant Athenian Captaine: of whom,
read more in his life, set downe by Plutarch. 3506.Artaxerxes, or Darius Long-hand, helde the kingdom aboue twentie yeares. Now did the ten men write the law of the twelue tables at Rome; and now liued Empedocles, Sophocles, Gorgias, Anacreon, Democritus, Euclides, Hippocrares, and Herodotus. Greece became diuided into two factions,The Pela∣ponesian warre. by reason of a great & contentious war. Read more thereof in Thucidides & Xenophon. 3544.Darius the Bastard raigned 19. years: in whose time liued Socrates, Aristophanes, Thucidides, Alcibiades, Lysander, Conon, Epaminondas, Architas, Timon, Dionisius of Siracusa the Ty∣rant. And now was the kingdome of the Sicam∣brians, and Francus in Franconia (according to Trithemius) where raigned forty Kings. 3565.Artaxerxes Mnemon, raigned fortie yeares, and exercised acts of Armes with his Brother Cyrus. Thrasibulus chased the Lacedemonian Tyrants out of Athens. Rome was taken by the Gaules, vnder the conduct of Brennus that bold warriour. Then liued Xenophon the Captaine, Phyloso∣pher and Orator, Plato, Phocion, Isocrates, Po∣lybius,Tit Liu dec. 4. Lib. 8. Praxiteles, Metasthenes, Camillus, and Crates. 3604.Occhus (a most cruell Tyrant) raigned sixe and twenty yeares. Phillip King of Macedon, oppres∣sed the liberty of all Greece. At Rome was then Curtius Torquatus, Decius Corinnus: the hun∣dred and sixty Matron Sorceresses. Iadus was High-Prest of the Iewes, and then liued Berosus the Historian.
Arses or Arsaces, raigned thrée yeares.3625. His tyr∣rannicall actions were the cause, that all the race of great Cyrus perished. Alexander the great, the Son of Phillip, then vanquished and demolished the Citty of Thebes: And then were Demosthe∣nes, Diogenes, and Epicurus. Darius the last King,3629. was ingrateful and disloy∣all, hee was also ouer-come by Alexander, in the sixt yeare of his raigne. The Samnites then sub∣dued the Romaines: and then was Ceius Papy∣rius Cursor. M. Curius Dentatus, triumphing in his humility of minde, refused the treasures of the Samnites, and he would neither be vanquished in warre, nor corrupted with money. Valer. Max. lib. 2. cap. 3. The Monarchy of the Graecians. ALexander the great, hauing one onely Ar∣my, of two and thirty thousand footmen,3630. and foure thousand fiue hundred horsemen, marched thorow all Asia. In the seuenth yeare of his Mo∣narchy, he was poysoned in Babylon. Read his life, set downe in Plutarch, and Iustine lib. 11. After his death, there grew dissention betwéene the Captaines and Macedonian Lordes, who should be successour of this great Empyre. At length it was resolued on the person of Arideus, sur-named Phillip, the Brother of Alexander, & Perdiceas was created Captaine General. Soone after, the Prouinces and Gouernments were di∣stributed among Alexanders Captains, who im∣mediately
appropriated them to themselues, each one enioying the title and quality of a king. Thus this great Monarchy was deuided into many parts and kingdomes: all which (neuerthelesse) were (in short while) reduced into three principall kingdomes, Macedon, Syria, and Egypt. Of Macedon, and the succession of Kings there raigning 3641.ARideus Phillippus, the Brother of Alexan∣der, who had bin elected successor, raigned in Macedon six yeares, gouerning wholy by An∣tipater, who managed all the affaires of the king∣dome. This king was slain by Olympias the mo∣ther of Alexander. 3647.Cassander the Sonne of Antipater, after the death of Arideus inuaded Macedon, hauing cau∣sed the Mother and wife of Alexander to be slain, Olympias and Roxana: hee raigned eightéene yeares. 3665.Antipater and Alexander, the sons of Cassan∣der, raigned together foure years. Antipater slew his Mother. Alexander made warre vpon Anti∣pater, calling Demetrius to his aide: who caused him to be slaine. Demetrius, after the death of Alexander, raig∣ned seauen yeares.3669. But hauing attempted to re∣couer the Empire of his father Antigonus in A∣sia-minr, which Seleucus then held: he was van∣quished and taken by Seleucus, and dyed in pri∣son.
Antigonus, Gomathes,3686. the Sonne of Deme∣trius, raigned afterwarde in Macedo, for the space of 36. yeares, hauing recouered the king∣dome, which (after his Fathers death) had béene inuaded by many, that held it for the space of eight yeares. For Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, held it first. Lysimachus next tooke it from him, while he was seriously busied with the Romaines. Ly∣simachus being dead, Prosomus Ceraunus in∣vaded it: but in short while after, this Ptolomie was slaine by the Gaus, who came into Mace∣don, and (by this meanes) Antigonus re-entred vpon the kingdome of his Father. Demetrius, who raigned eight yeares,3721. left his Sonne, named Phillip, verie young in years, and one Antigonus was made his Tutor or Gouer∣nor, who marrying with the Mother of his Pu∣pill, by that meanes made himselfe king. Antigonus Doson raigned twelue yeares. A∣ratus chiefe of the Achaian line,3732 hee called to his aide, against Cleomines King of the Lacedemo∣nians, who was vanquished by Antigonus, and tooke the Cittie of Spar. Phillip the son of Demetrius, raigned 44. years:3742. and hauing made warre against the Romaines, he was vanquished vnder the conduct of T. Quin∣tus Flaminius, and all taken from him that he in∣ioyed, except the sole kingdome of Macedon: wherein succeeded Persus who raigned eleuen yeares.3786. Hée was vanquished and taken prisoner by Paulus Aemi∣lius, Consull and Captaine Generall of the Ro∣maines,
and led in triumph to Rome, the yeare of the Citties building, 587. And then was Mace∣don reduced into the forme of a Prouince. Of Syria, and the Succession of the Kings there raigning. 3653.AFter the death of Alexander the Great, Se∣leucus was the first king of Syria. Perdiccas being dead, he regained the Cittie of Babylon, & part of the Indiaes, Soone after, by the helpe of Ptolomy king of Egypt, hee made warre against Antigonus, who commaunded in the lesser Asia: and hauing ouercome him, laid claime to the king∣dome, and was made King thereof, and in short time after, he ioyned al Asia-minor to Syria. An∣tigonus being slaine in battaile: And thus by him was established the great Empire of Syria. Hee vanquished also Lysimachus, and took from him the kingdom of Macedon. But soon after, he was slaine by Ptolomeus Cerannus, hauing raigned 32. yeares in Syria. 3684.Antiochus Soter (that is to say, Sauior or Pre∣seruer) the Son of Seleucus, raigned 19. yeares, to whom succéeded. 373.Antiochus, sur-named Deos, that is to say God, who raigned 15. yeares. 3718.Seleucus Callinicus, the son of Antiochus, raig∣ned twentie yeares. In his time, Arsaces the Parthean, reuolted from his obedience, & hauing vanquished manie of his neighboring Nations, hee founded the kingdom of the Partheans, which afterward became most potent.
Seleuchus, sirnamed Cerannus, (that is to say,33. Lightning) raigned thrée yeares: And after him came Antiochus the great, who raigned 36. yéers.3741 He was conquered by the Romans (vnder the Scipioes conduct) in two foughten battailes: with whom (afterward) he made peace, on condition that he should leaue the lesser Asia, from ye moun∣taine Taurus, to the Romans. After whom suc∣céeded his sonne. Seleuchus Philopater, that is to say, A Louer of his Father, who reigned twelue yeares.37 Antiochus Epiphanes (that is to say, Famous) who also was sonne to great Antiochus,379. raigned twelue yeares. This is the King that took Ieru∣salem, and did so much harme to the Iewes, pol∣luted and contaminated the Temple, and would constraine them to change their Religion. He put the seauen brethren most cruelty to death, & made a most famous Martyrdome of them. His Army was vanquished by Iudas Machabeus, and after him, his sonne, Antiochus Eupator, raigned two yeares.380 In which time, Demetrius the Sonne of Seleuchus Philopater (who had béene giuen in Hostage to the Romans, for the peace of Antiochus ye great, his Graundfather) being fled from Rome, & come into Syria; caused a great number of the people to reuolt, that afterwarde deliuered him into the handes of the said King Antiochus, who caused him immediatly to be put to death. Demetrius Soter, after the death of Antiochus,38 raigned x. yeares. In this time, the Iewes were
gouerned by the Machabees. 3813.Alexander, the naturall sonne of Antiochus Epiphanes, hauing gathered an Army, and being seized of some Citties in Syria, vanquished De∣metriu, in battaile, and slew him. This Alex∣ander raigned fiue yeares. 3818.Demetrius Nicanor, the sonne of Demetrius Soler, came into Syria with an Army, and being ayded by the King of Egypt, he invaded the king∣dome. Alexander fled into Arabia, where he was slaine: and Demetrius raigned two yeares. 3820.Antiochus Sedectes, the sonne of Alexander, (assisted by Triphon) expulsed Demetrius, and inuaded the kingdome, which he held 3. yeares. 3823.Triphon slew Antiochus and possessed himself of Syria, where he raigned three yeares: Deme∣trius being yet liuing, who was (in short while after) taken by the Partheans. 3826.Antiochus, surnamed Soter and Pinus, Bro∣ther of Demetrius Nicanor vāquished Tryphon, who afterward was slaine: And hauing raigned twelue yeares, he died in a battel against the Par∣theans. 3838.Demetrius Nicanor, who before had raigned two yeares, was let go by the Partheans, & raig∣ned afterward foure yeares more: But being o∣uercome in battaile by Alexander Zebin, he was slaine. 3841.Alexander Zebin, whome the King of Egypt had sent to the Syrians complaining of the cruel∣ty of Demetrius, raigned three yeares. 3844Antiochus Grypus, the sonne of Demetrius, ha∣uing
vanquished and slaine Alexander Zebin in battell, raigned 29. yeares. During which time, his Brother Antiochus the Cyzicenian, made warre vpon him, without intermission. After the death of this Antiochus Grypus, migh∣tie troubles were in Syria for some time, because they of the royall race were in continuall warres, killing and masacring one another. Vntill such time as one Antiochus (the sole remainder of that race) dying without any successor: Tigranes K. of Armenia inuaded this great kingdom: where∣vpon. he was (not long after) surprized by the Ro∣maines, vnder the conduct of Pompey, and the Countrey was then reduced into the forme of a Prouince: the yeare of the Citty of Rome, 693. Of Egypt, and the Succession of the Kings there raigning. PTolomeus Lagus,3641. Soter the most excellent man of all Alexanders Captains, was made King, & raigned fortie yeares ouer Egypt: Theo∣phrastus, Zeno, Theocritus, and Menander then liuing, and the Romaines made Warre agaynst Pyrrhus. Read more of this King in Iustine,The king∣dome of Scotland. lib. 13, 14, 15. Orosius lib. 3, cap. 23. Fergusius was the first king of Scotland. Ptolome Philadelphus, raigned 38. yeares.3682. He first appointed that great Library in Alexandria, and caused the Bookes of the Bible to be transla∣ted into the Gréeke tongue, by the seauentie two Interpreters. Aristeus, Phalaris, Chrisyppus,
Carneades, and Aratus then liued: and at Rome happened the first Punick warre, Regulus. Ptolomey the Liberall, husband to his owne Sister,17. raigned 26. yeares. At Rome then grew the second Punick War: and then liued the Sci∣pioes, Fabius Maximus, and Marcellus. Hanni∣ball was vanquished by Scipio Affricanus the eldest: And in this time liued the Authour of the Booke of Wisedome. 3743Ptolomey the Parricide, raigned 17. yeares. He slew his Mother and his Sister, who also was his wife. At Rome began the warre of Macedon, a∣gainst King Phillip; and the war of Asia, against the great Antiochus, and Hanniball the Fugi∣tiue. Then liued great Cato, Ennius, Neuius, Plautus, Panetius: And Iesus the Sonne of Sy∣rach, Author of the Booke of Ecclesiasticus: Si∣mon the Iust being Byshop of the Iewes. 3760.Ptolomey Epiphanes, vnder the tutelage of the Romaines, raigned 24. yeares. The Brethren Macchabees did then valiantly withstande An∣tiochus, the most cruell Tyraunt of Syria: his great repentance is to be read in the second Booke of Macchabees, the ninth Chapter. 3784.Ptolomey, called Matricide, raigned 35. yeares. Paulus Aemilius hauing taken the Persian king, made Macedon a Prouince to the Romaynes. Then happened the third Punicke Warre: The warre of Achaia, and of Numantia in Spain, vn∣der Scipio Affricanus the younger, and Lelius, Terence then liuing. 3819.Ptolomey the Liberall, otherwise called Phys∣cus,
a verie detestable man, beeing Brother to Ptolomy the Matricide, raigned nine & twentie yeares. He married his Brothers wife, and af∣terward her Daughter. The Sects of the Pha∣risies, Sadduces, and Esseans then arose.Sects of the Pharisies. At Rome was the seruile warre: And the lawes for actions of the field by the Gracchi. Ptolomey Alexander,3848. hauing expelled his bro∣ther Lathyrus, raigned seauentéene yeares. Af∣terward he was thrust out himselfe by his owne people, for the death of Cleopatra, a wicked wo∣man. At Rome was the Iugurthine warre,pli. l. 2. ca. 31 and three Sunnes visibly séene in this time. Functius doth attribute these seauentéene yeares, and this raigne, to Ptolomey Lathyrus, preferring him before Ptolomey Alexander. Ptolomey Lathyrus, beeing repealed to rule a∣gaine, raigned eightéene years.3865. At Rome was the Cimbrian warre, Mithridates warre, and the ci∣uill warre betwéene Marius and Sylla. Then li-Lucullus, Antonius, and Crassus Orators.Warre be∣tween Ma∣rius & Sylla Lucre∣tius the Poet, Varro: Sylla dominéered cruelie, who retyring himselfe, to liue sollitarilie in the fields:Flor. lib. 3. dyed of Vermine engendred in his owne bodie. Ptolomey Aulees, raigned thirty yeares.883. Be∣ing excluded by his owne people, vnder Pompeyes authority, he was reseated by Gabinius. Pompey ouer-came Hieras and Sertorius, the Pyrates, as also Tigranes and Mithridates. Then was the conspiracy of Cataline; Caesar vanquished the aules: Cicero liued in exile: and Crassus was
foyled by the Partheans. 3913.Ptolomey Dionysius, the last King, raigned 8. yeares: he caused great Pompeyes head to bée cut off. Then liued Catullus, Hortensius, Salust, Dio∣dorus Siculus, Cato Ʋtican, M. Lepidus, Marcel∣lus, and Marke Anthony. 3920.Cleopatra helde the kingdome a-while with her Brother, and afterward (wholly by her selfe) two and twentie yeares: Shee, vnderstanding that Marke Anthonie was vanquished by Augustus, slew her selfe. Now was the ciuil warre between Pompey and Caesar:Ciuil War betweene Caesar and Pompey. And that goodly Library, that contained two hundred thousand Volumes, was burned in this time. Plutarch in vit. Antoni. The Monarchy of the Caesars, or Romaines. 3918.IƲlius Caesar, a very gracious Prince, and one of the Worlds chiefest Captaines: raigned fiue yeares. He vanquished Pompey and his confede∣rates: Ptolomy hee slew, & restored Cleopatra his friend (Sister to Ptolomy) to the kingdom of Ae∣gypt. Returning home to Rome, he was slaine in the Senate house, by Brutus, Cassius, and other Conspirators. Dioscorides then liued: but if you would haue more of Caesars life, read Suetonius & Florus, in the life of Caesar. 3923.Octauius Augustus, the last Nephew of Iulius, by the Sisters side, and his adopted Sonne, raig∣ned 56. yeares: he was happy in war, moderate in peace, and liberall to euery one. Then liued
Virgill, Horace, Tibullus, Propertius, Vitruuius, Mecenas: And then dyed Cleopatra, and her hus∣band Marke Anthony, Aegypt being then redu∣ced into a Prouince. Herod a stranger (fauoured by Augustus) was then King of Iudea. So, the Scepter being wholly taken from Iuda; Iesus Christ, God and man, the Sauiour of the world, was then borne of a Virgin in Bethlehem, accor∣ding to the Prophesies of Iacob, Genes. 49, Esay 7, Micheas 5. Iesus Christ came in the yeare of Augustus forty two, and of the world, 3963.3963. Ouid was then in exile: the Citty of Lyons founded: and then liued Titus Liuius, Valerius Maximus, Strabo: and Francus King of the Sicambrians, in the lower Allemaigne: Aquila, Tuberus, Galba, Labeus and Caius were then Law-giuers, or Law-Ma∣kers. Herod the great murderer of Innocents, and there were numbred then at Rome, foure hundred, sixty foure thousand men. Claudius Tiberius, the Sonne of Liuia, after∣ward Wife to Augustus, raigned 23. yeares,The yeares of Christ. be∣ginning very well, but proouing afterward to bée most wicked. Iesus Christ, for our saluation, was then crucified in Hierusalem, vnder Pilate the Prouost of Iudea: he said, that A good Shepheard should clip his Sheepe, and not deuour them. C. Caligula, Sonne of Germanus,17 a most wic∣ked Man, raigned thirtéene yeares. This beast, the ruine of men, made himselfe to bee adored as God: hee poysoned his Vnckle Tiberius, and de∣floured all his Sisters, leauing them then to o∣thers
like abusing.39 T. Claudius, Vnckle of Cali∣gula, and Monster of Men, raigned fouretéene yeares. He preferred Nero before his owne Son, by the treason of whom hee was poysoned with a Mushrome. Messalina, his first wife peerelesse in all labricity and wickednes, then flourished: And Saint Peter the Apostle liued (reported to bee the first Byshop of Rome:) then liued likewise Philo the Iew, Perseus, Mela, Pliny the elder, and Colu∣mella. Saint Paule the Apostle went then tho∣row the World, proclaiming Iesus Christ, accom∣panyed with Saint Luke. Then liued Dionisius Areopagita: And then was the first Councell of Ierusalem. 43.Nero, the Sonne of Agripina, afterward the Wife of Claudius, raigned thirtéene yeares. Hee was the first Persecuter of the Church, and did put Saint Peter and Saint Paule to death: hee slew likewise his Maister Seneca, also his owne Mother, and Lucan the Poet. Then liued Simon Magus, and Appolonius. Nero beeing erpulsed from Rome, slew himselfe: after hee had set Rome on fire, to make himselfe pastime of a Bon fire. 57.Sergius Galba the seauenth month of his Em∣pire, was slaine by Otho. Suetonius, Egesius, Lib. 4. Cap. 21. 70.M. Siluius Otho, he also most wickedly slewe himselfe, in the third month of his Empire: con∣fessing, that he had cruelly tormented the spirit of Galba. According to Suetonius, and Tacitus, Lib. 7. 71Aulus Vitellius, brought vp at Bourdeaus de
Caprea, being a vicious Man and a glutton, was hewed in péeces, and cast into Tyber, hauing raigned eight months. He caused himselfe to bée serued at his Table, with two thousand seuerall kinds of Fishes, and seauen thousand of Foules, all at one supper. Suetonius, Lib. 9. Iosephus, Lib. 5. de Bel. Iudas. Vespasian, a modest and gracious Prince, a louer of skilfull men, and good Artisans, raigned ten yeares, accompanied with his Sonne Titus,71. who ruinated Ierusalem: Iosephus, Proclus, Epi∣ctetes. This ruine was the most lamentable that euer happened, for therein dyed 110000. men: read Iosephus in his sixe and seauen Bookes of the Iewish wars, and Egesippus. Titus, the delight and sollace of mankind,8. raig∣ned two years. He vsed to say, That no man ought to depart from a Prince, with a sad countenance: Casstus, Neracius, Proculeius and Pegasus were then Lawyers, and Saint Bartholmew was then martired in India: Saint Matthias in Iudea: S. Andrew in Scythia: Saint Mathew in Aethyopia, Saint Thomas in Bragmania. Hierusalem was then taken: the Famine beeing so extreame, as Mothers were compelled to eate their owne chil∣dren. Domitian, Brother to Titus,83. was a most wic∣ked man, and persecuter of the Christians: hee raigned fiftéene yeares: then liued Martiall, Iu∣uenall, Statius, Trogus: and saint Iohn wrote the Gospell, as also Iosephus did the Warres of the Iewes. Domitian would néedes afterward bée
called God and Lord of his people, wherfore (be∣ing hated of all men) he was slaine. 97.Nerua, a good Prince, and the adopted father of Traian, raigned one yeare: he gaue more than an hundred thousand Crownes, to reléeue poore Cittizens. He tooke away extreame taxations, and (wanting mony) he sold his garments, plate and Pallace, esteeming his owne Parents and kindred much lesse, then he did the publick bene∣fit. The Christians were in great quyet vnder him, and the banished repealed, among whome was S. Iohn. Traian a good Emperour, but that he persecu∣ted the Church:99. reigned 19. yeares. Being ad∣monished, that he was ouer gracious to all men, he answered: That he was such to his Subiects, as he could wish others should be to him, if he were a Subiect. Then liued, S. Ignatius, S. Eustachius, Pliny the yonger, Plutarch, Aulus Gellius, Sue∣tonius, Tacitus Solinus. Aelius Adrianus, a man studious and skil∣full in all Sciences,118. and the first Emperour that suffered a beard on his face, raigned 21. yeares: Iulius Celsus, Iulian, and Neracius Priscus, were Lawyers, & councellors to the Emperour. Then were liuing Ptolomy the great Astrologer, Pha∣norinus, Dionisius the Milesian, and Heliodorus. Hierusalem was repaired by Adrian, who there∣fore had his name chaunged, and was called He∣lias. Antoninus Pius, reigned 23. yeares. He was a Prince of such estéeme,139. as straunge Nations
would resort vnto him, and make him Iudge of their differences; for hee had alway this saying ready: I had rather saue one Cittizen,A diuine saying of a Pagane. then kill a thousand Enemies. In this time were Polycarpus, Ireneus, Iustine Martire, Egesippus, Appian, Flo∣rus, Macrobius, Iustine, Gallen, and Palladius: Lucian the Atheyst, also was then torne with Dogs. This Emperour tooke awaie the wages or hire of strumpets, punnished idle Magistrats, and was called Father of his country. Read Eu∣tropius, Lib. 8. Thelesphorus the ninth Pope (as some report) did then institute, or rather re∣store the time of Lent. M. Antoninus, the Phylosopher,162. called Au∣relius, borne in Gaule, with L. Commodus Ve∣rus, and called Brethren in the Bookes of the Pandectes) raigned 19. yeares. This good prince being vnwilling to oppresse his subiectes, made sale of all his fairest and richest Iewels, plate, & wearing garmentes belonging vnto him and his wife. Eutrop. lib. 8. Lucius Aurelius Verus, gouerned the empyre with his brother Marcus Antoninus, the space of eleauen yeares: By some Authors he is set down in order before his brother, & by others after him. L. Commodus,181. the most wicked sonne of good Antoninus, raigned 13. yeares. He was strang∣led by his Concubine, and other Conspirators. Eutrop. lib. 8. Orosius lib. 8. cap. 18. Lampridi∣us doth most amply describe his life at large. Aeius Pertinax raigned six moneths.194. He had refused the Empire, and beeing desirous to re∣forme
the gouernment, he was slaine by Iulian his successour; who bought the name of Caesar of the Warriors. The people much bemoaned this Prince, crying out aloud: O father of good¦nesse; Father of the Senate; Father of al boun∣ty: Farewell. 194.V. Iulian, raigned seauen moneths, and being hated of all men, for sleying his predecessor, him selfe was also slaine by appointment of the Se∣nate. Dissention grew amongst the Christians, for the celebration of Easter; And the second Councell appointed the day of Sunday, and fiue other after, Euseb. lib. 5, cap. 24. Metianus, Se∣uola, Martianus and Cassius, were now Iuris∣consultes: Aphrodiseus and Aphronius Sophy∣sters. Pescennius Niger, or Nigerius, the sonne of Annius Fuscus, indifferently lerned, fierce, proud, and inclined to all vice: was saluted as Empe∣rour by the souldiors of Syria, where he comman∣ded,195. and was slaine by Seuerus. L. Septimus Seuerus, raigned 18. yeares. He was a Persecutor of the Church, but other∣wise a valiant Prince, addicted both to good let∣ters and Armes. He was so well beloued, and gouerned so nobly, that the Senate said of him: Eyther he should neuer haue bin borne, or else hee deserued neuer to die. Read Spart. and Vict. Then liued Origen, Tertullian, Philostrates the Sophister, and Apuleyus. Cl. Albinus, issued of the Romaines families, of the Posthumians and Albines, made himselfe
Emperour in France. He was surprised by the Souldiers, and brought halfe aliue to Souerus: where hauing his head smitten off, he was han∣ged on a gibbet, and being torne with dogges, he was throwne into the Riuer. A. B. Caracalla, the sonne of Seuerus,213. and husband to his stepmother, raigned seuen years. He slue Geta his brother, and Papinian the great and famous Lawyer, with diuers other. At last, himselfe was slaine by a souldior of his Guarde. Herod. lib. 4. Antoninus Geta, the sonne of Seuerus and Iu∣lia, borne at Milaiu, After the Parthian warre, wherein he wan great fauour, was called Caesar Antoninus, in the life time of his father. Op. Macrinus, with his sonne Diadumenus,220. raigned one yeare. Both the one and other had their heads smitten off by their men of warre. Macrinus was learned and seuere, but (withall) detestable and craftie, causing his predecessor to be murdred. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Heliogabalus,221. the Bastard of Caracalla, who was a dishonest whore-hunter, and most abhominable in life be∣side: gaue great estates to wicked Bawds, Pan∣dors, Iesters, &c. And being generally despised, he was slaine by his souldiors, in the fourth year of his raigne: both his owne bodie and his mo∣thers being dragd along the stréets, and cast into the common laystall. Alexander Seuerus, raigned peacebly without eusion of bloud 13. years. He was a good prince,2
and did vtterly forbid the selling of Offices. Vl∣pianus, Paulus, Pomponius, Alphenens, Affri∣canus, Callistratus, and other excellent Ciuill Lawyers (the schollers of Papinian) then liued, with Dion the Historian,The king∣dome of Persia and Philostratus The Kingdome of the Persians was then founded by Artaxerxes, and after transported to the Sara∣zens, and now commanded by the Sophi. 238.Maximinus, a persecutor of the Christians, rai∣gned three yeares. Being at first but a silly shep∣heard, he was made Emperor by the Souldiors (without authority of the Senate) and then by them slaine. Gordianus, a Prince of a Noble spirite, with his sonne named Gordianus the younger,241. a good Prince, raigned six yeares, and was slaine by Phillip his successor. In his time was a woon∣derfull Ecclipse of the Sunne. Read I. Capito∣linus, who placeth also Pupienus and Balbinus (created by the Senate) with Gordianus the elder. Pupienus Maximus, a new man, and sonne to a Smith, gaue himselfe alwaies to vertue and Military seruices, prouing fortunate against the Polonyans and Germans. M. Caelius Babynus, and Pupienus after they had béene Consuls, and that the Gordians were slaine in Affryca, were created Emperors by ap∣pointment of the Senate, against Maximinus, and both of them were vndeseruedly slaine. Gordianus the second, yongest sonne of Gor∣dianus by his daughter, born at Rome: was slain
in a sedition of souldiers, by Phillip Prefect of the Pretorians. C. Ʋalens Hostilianus, is not placed in this ranke by some Historians, because immmediately he died, smitten with the Pestilence, so that scars∣ly there remaineth any memory of him. Phillip, an Arabian by Nation,247. was the first Christian of the Caesars, and raigned fiue yeares. He gaue (by his Testament) all his rightes and treasures to Pope Fabian, And heere began the riches of the Roman Church. Hee was likewise slaine by his successour, as he had kilde his Pre∣decessour. Decius Triaan, a persecuter of the Christians,252. reigned two yeares. S. Saturnine the Byshop was martyred at Tholouse. S. Laurence, Hippo∣lita, Cecily, Agatha, and Appollina. Q. Herennius Hetruscus, is not by any Hi∣storian placed among the Emperours. Neuer∣thelesse, in this ranke is his picture found, in the booke of Hubert Goltzius, and there it is recorded of him, that he was the sonne of Decius, & that he was slaine in Hungaria, in a Battel againste the Gothes. Ʋibius Gallus, with his sonne Volusianus,254. reigned two yeares: Being persecutors of the Church, were both slain by the souldiors. At this time there was such a contagious pestilence, and almost so generally dispearsed, that in many pla∣ces, there was left no Creature liuing. This pe∣stilence continued fiftéene yeares, and séemed to be partly occasioned thorough the wicked gouern∣ment
of this Emperor. Aemilianus Lybienus, borne in Mauritania, in his yong yeares followed Armes, and soon af∣ter he was made Emperor. He was slain at Spo∣leta, being aged 40. yeares. 256.Licinius Ʋalerianus, with his sonne Galien, persecuting the Church, raigned fiftéene yeares. He was Captiue to Sapor King of Persya, whoe vsed him as a footstool when he mounted on hors∣backe. S. Cyprian and S. Cornelia, were then martyred. Porphirius wrote against the Christi∣ans: The thirty Tyrants vsurped the Empyre. Read Trebellius, Polyo, &c. S. Paul the first Hermite began the solitary life. Galien the son of Valerian, suffered the Chri∣stians to liue in quiet, and reigned nine years a∣lone, after that his father was ledde captiue into Persia by Sapor. He was excéeding wise, but ad∣dicted to Lust. Saloninus Valerianus, the sonne of Galien, was slain with his Father, being retired to Mil∣lain, and was but ten yeares old. Cassius Labienus Posthumus, from beeing a simple souldior, attained to great dignities: and being in France was made Emperor in the time of Galien, where he was slaine. 21.Flauius Claudius, (of whom yssued the familie of the Constantines) a good Prince, of Noble lig∣nage, and highly estéemed, reigned two yeares. Dyonisius being then Pope, deuided the Dioces∣ses and Parishes of the Christians. Tom. 1. de Concil. Iamblicus, Plotinus, and Iuvenus priest,
reduced the foure Gospels into Hexameter ver∣ses. Aurelius Quintillius, brother to Claudius, af∣ter the death of his brother was saluted as Empe∣ror by the Senate, and slaine 17. daies after. Ʋalerius Aurelianus, a cruell man, reigned six yeares. He tormented the Christians,273. and re∣pulsed the Franconians, entring out of Germanie into Gaul. He was ye first that wore an Emperial Crowne: a louer of Military discipline, and one that rigorously punnished the vices of his Soul∣diors. He vanquished Zenobia a very Warlike Lady, holding the Empyre of the East. Tacitus was slain the sixt moneth of his em∣pyre.279. This good Prince caused the books of Cor∣nelius Tacitus to be receiued into all Libraries. The Manicheans began (from the time of Aure∣lianus) to infect the Church. Annius Florianus, brother to Tacitus, being desirous to raigne, vsurped the Empyre as by in∣heritance: but in a short time, hee was slaine at Tharsus by his souldiors. Probus a good Prince, the Author of peace in the high and lower Germany or Almain,279. reigned six yeares and foure moneths. He said That hee had no need of Warriors, hauing no enemies; and that the souldior (not doing any thing) ought not to eate vp publike prouision. Carus, a good and wise Prince,286. reigned two yeares, with his sonnes Carinus and Numeria∣nus, two brethren of very different nature. The first, was most wicked, and full of cruelty: The
other full of goodnesse, valour and knowledge. Then liued Ʋolcatius, Herodian, Lampridius, Spartianus, Pollio, Vopiscus and Capitolinus Hi∣storians. 288.Dioclesian with Maximianus Herculius, reig∣ned 20. yeares: he was a most cruell persecutor of the Christians, and would haue himselfe to be worshipped. Katharine, Lucy, Agnes, Barbus, Sebastian, Ʋincent, Cosmo and Damian, and in∣numerable other Martyrs through the world (in his raigne, to the number of 17. M.) were put to death in thirty daies. Valerius Maximus, sir-named Herculius, a man of fierce and cruell nature, was very outra∣gious in lust, especially with his owne Sisters: blockish in giuing councell, without ciuillity and gouernment, and therfore had Dioclesian to assist him in the Empire. 208.Constantius Chlorus, father of Constantine and Galerius, the one gouerned in the East, the other in the West foure yeares togither. Constantine commanded in Gaul, Spaine, Affrica and Italie: The other in Greece. Arnobius, Lactantius, Do∣rotheus bishop of Tyre, Eusebius and other Lear∣ned personages liued at this time. Galerius Maximianus, tearmed Armentari∣us, because he was a Neat-heards son, was made Emp. being a goodly person, & a fortunat warrior. Maximinus, nephue to Armentarius by his sister was Emp. & persecuted the Christians in ye East. Seuerus Prefect of Italy and Africke, was publi∣shed Emperor by Galerius, & fighting with Max¦entius▪ was taken at Ravenna and slaine.
Maxentius, elected Emperor by his souldiors raigned a Tyrant, and was like vnto his Father Maximinus. Being vanquished by Constantine néere to Pont-Miluius, he was drowned in a Gulfe, and his body neuer after found. Licinius Licinianus, borne of Countrey Pa∣rents, was fortunate in the wars which he had against Maximinus. Afterward, hee became a mocker of Christ, and persecuted such as beléeued in him; and because he was ignorant, hee was a great enemy to all that were learned. Martinianus, was created Caesar by Licinius against Constantine, he was in his camp at night, but sled before next morning. Constantine the great, son of Helena an holy woman, with Maxentius and Licinius,310. reigned 31. yeares. He was religious and affable, and transported the Bible into diuers Countries. He assembled the Councell of Nice,The Coun∣cel of Nice. against Arrius the Heretick. He builded the Citty of Constanti∣nople, calling it after his owne name: whither the Imperiall seate was translated, and changed from Rome into Greece, after he had granted Syl∣uester to be Pope. Euseb. lib. 10. Niceph. lib. 8. Crispus was made Caesar by his father Constan∣tine, but being afterward falsly accused to his fa∣ther, he was put to death, for that he would not consent to the inordinate appetite of Faustine his Stepmother. Constantine the second,31. with his brethren raig∣ned 17. yeares, ioyning thereto the thrée yeares raigne of Magnentius. Themistius, Donatus,
and Libanius the Sophister then iued: and S. Anthony the Heremite was knowne in Aegypt by many miracles. 358.Iulian the Apostata, helde the true Religion ten yeares, and was named Emperor by the men of warre in Paris, against his will▪ He forbad the Christians the study of letters: and being woun∣ded to death, hee cryed out: At length thou hast vanquished, O Galilean, S. Cyrill, Optatus, Ba∣sile, Nazianzene, Epiphanius, Hilarie, Didimus, Exuperus· (all learned Diuines) then flourished. 368.Iouianus, a kind and learned man, raigned eight months, and made confession to his Warriours, of the name of Iesus Christ. Now was the first order of Monkes instituted by S. Basile, vnder certaine rules of liuing. 368.Valentian, a good and Catholique Prince, and Valens his Brother, raigned fiftéene years. This man held the error of the Arrians, and constrained the Monkes to vndertake Armes in war: he died vnhappily. 381.Gratian, the son of Valentinian, during whose whole life time, hee was an associate in the Em∣pire. Hee raigned afterward with Valentinian the second, his younger Brother, and Theodosius sixe yeares. 387.Maximus tearmed Emperor by his Souldiers, slew Gratian, and held the Empire foure yeares: after which time, Valentinian returned to the Empire againe fiue yeares. Theodosius, after that Gratian was slaine by Maximus,395. raigned thrée yeares with his Brother
Valentinian: the death of whom was bemoaned by Saint Ambrose, for the great zeale hee had to Christian Religion. S. Hierome, S. Augu∣stine, and P. Orosius then liued. Arcadius and Honorius,399 the Sons of Theodo∣sius, raigned twenty nine yeares, as well in the East as in the West. About this time, the great Empire of Rome began to decline (by the infideli∣ty of Ruffinus and Stilico their Tutors.) The ve∣ry greatest part thereof was vsed by the Scythi∣ans, Burgundians, Lombardes, Hungarians,Rome four times sur∣prized. French, Goths, and Vandals: And Rome was foure times taken by the Goths and Vandals, within a 139. yeares. Then liued S. Chrysostom and Claudian. Honorius raigned with Theodosius,411. Sonne to his Brother, sixtéene yeares. Theodosius the second,427. youngest Sonne of Ar∣cadius, raigned at Constantinople twenty seuen yeares, after the death of Honorius; hauing affli∣ted Valentinian the third, the Son of Constanti∣us, and Placida Daughter is Theodosius, who raigned fiue yeares in the west. At this time, the Frenchmen leauing Franconia, beganne to enter vppon the Gaules, vnder Clodion their second King. F. Valerius Martianus, raigned in the East sea∣uen years,53. and Valentinian the third (at the same time) in the west: during their raigne, the Bur∣gundians & other western Nations, were conuer∣ted to the Faith. The Vandals came out of Spayn into Affrica, and afterward they tooke Rome, vn∣der
the conduct of their King Genserichus. Atti∣la, King of the Hunnes, entred into Gaul with fiue hundred thousand men: deliuered battle to Meroüeus their second king, who had ioined with Aetius Lieutenant to the Emperor. There hee lost an hundred and fourescore thousand men, & fled into Hungaria, not any man being woun∣ded behind. About this time was great Arthur King of Britaine. 460.Leo the first, reigned 17. yeares, associated by Leo the sonne of his daughter; who after he had reigned one yeare alone, gaue vp the Empire to 476.Zeno his Grandsire, who raigned tyrannical∣ly 17. yeares. The estate of the Church was then very greatly troubled, as also that of the Western Empire. Italy had then nine Empe∣rors in twenty yeares, who all slue one another. 493.Anastasius raigned twenty fiue yeares: Hée was an Eutichian Heretique, was smitten with lightning, and dyed (as a iust punishment) for his Heresie. Fulgentius. Iustine raigned 9. years: he was first a Swine-heard,519. afterward a Cow-heard, next a Carpenter, a Souldier, a Captaine, and last of all Emperor, gouerning very well and godly, and expelling the Arrian Heretiques. Then liued Boetius; and S. Bennet or Benedict began his order. 58.Iustinian raigned thirty eight yeares. All his care and study, was to repaire the decayed Em∣pire, and re-establish ciuill right: in the execution wherof, he was seconded by excellent personages, especially by Belfarius, Narses, and Tribonianus.
The first chased the Vandals out of Affrica, which they had held 95. years: and deliuered Rome from the Gothes, who had conquered it, and yet were once more expulsed thence by Narses. Iustine the second, raigned ten yeares,566. beloued of al men for his liberality. Sophia his wife mocked him with Narses, the Gouernour of Italy, where∣at hee beeing offended, called the Lombardes,The king∣dome of the Lom∣bardes. by whose helpe he reuenged himselfe. Now was the Kingdome of the Lombardes founded by Clebus, where raigned thirty two kinges, vntill the time of Charles the Great. Tiberius the second, raigned seauen yeares:577. hée was a very charitable man, one that loued God and his Saints, and therefore (no doubt) was be∣loued of him againe. Mauritius raigned twenty yeares:584. hee was de∣scended of very meane Parentage, and (in the end) was murthered for his couetousnesse: a vice as much discommendable in a Prince, as libera∣lity is beséeming, and maketh him renowmed. Phocas raigned eyght yeares:604. And beeing the Murderer of his Predecessor, himselfe was like∣wise murdered, withall his Race.Contention for Prima∣cy of the Church. Now was the contention for the Primacy of the Church, be∣twéene Rome and Constantinople, and now was Saint Gregory. Heraclius raigned thirty yeares,612. who was the Murderer of Phocas. The fiftéenth yeare of his raigne, beganne the rule of Mahomet, the false Prophet of Arabia, where were the Agarenes and Sarrazins: to whom the Aegyptian and Arabi∣an
Princes (called Soldanes) next succéeded. After them came the Turks, about the yeare 1300. Ma∣homets false Doctrine (by the negligence of the Emperors and Christian Princes) grewe to such a head: that it not onely poysoned Asya and Affrica, but also a very great part of Europe. 640.Constantine the third, raigned foure moneths, being a good Prince, and very young: Hee was poysoned by his Step-mother that her son might raigne. 641.Heraclion, who hauing his nose and tongue cut out, was banished two yeares after. 643.Constans, the Sonne of Constantine, raigned twenty seauen yeares: And being very couetous, he was slain by his own followers, in the Bathes of Syracusa. 670.Constantine the fourth, reigned 17. years. He ouercame in one Battell, thirty thousand Sara∣zins, and afterward fel to great wickednes. The learned and venerable Beda liued in this time. 687.Iustinian the second, a wicked man, raigned 16. yeares, but not without interruption, beeing deiected by Leontius, and Leontius by Tiberius Absimaris, who reigned other thrée yeares, ther∣fore these thrée are said to raigne sixtéene yeares.The State of the Vene¦tians, Now was the beginning of the Dukes of Ʋen∣nice, which had béene gouerned before (for the space of 230. yeares) by Tribunes. 713.Phillip Bardasanes, reigned two yeares. Hee was cast out of his Empyre by his Lieutenant, & after that, they pluckt soorth his eies. Hee had much talke and little wisdome, disposing badly of
the goods of the Empyre: he became after a schis∣maticall Monke. Anthemius, called also Athanasius the second,715. reigned thrée yeares: He was deiected from his Empyre by Theodosius chiefe of his Army, and turned into a Monastery. He hadde taken away the Empyre, and then pluckt out the eies of his predecessor. Theodosius the third, reigned one yeare.718 He left the Empyre, seeing himselfe to be assayled by Leo his successor, and became a Monke. Leo the third, a wicked man,719. reigned twenty foure yeares. He was called Iconomachus, a de∣facer of Images, and would not suffer the Chri∣stians to haue any in their Temples. Hee was excommunicated by Gregory, and by authoritie of a Councell held at Rome, against his owne of Constantinople. Blondus lib, 10. The Sarazins besieged Constantinople three yeares together, in which time died three hundred thousand of Pe∣stilence and Famine. Constantine, fift of that name,742. the son of Leo the Isaurian, succeeded his father in the Empyre of Constantinople, the yeare of our saluation 742. He was sirnamed Copronymus, because he would discharge his belly in the Fonts, appointed for Christian Baptisme. He was an vtter enemy, not only to the Images of Saints, but also vnto their reliques, causing them to be burned. He did put to death many of the best and most respected persons, and (among others) two Patriarches of Constantinople. He made warre againste the
Bulgarians, both by land & Sea, Fortune some∣time smiling vpon him, otherwhiles owring. In his absence, one Artabasdus was made Empe∣ror at Constantinople. But hee receiuing newes thereof returned, and either put out, or rent forth the new Emperors eies, & caused his children to be slaine. In his time, there was so cold a Win∣ter, that the Sea of Constantinople was frozen. After many cruelties, this Emperor died a Lea∣per. 743.Artabasdus, albeit he was descended of mean birth; yet notwithstanding, for the faithfulnesse, good vertues, and commendable qualities which were in him, he was liked of the Senate & soul∣diors, and afterward was elected Emperor by the zealous Christians, for the hatred that euery one bare to Constantine the fift. He became a better louer of the Saints, and fortified the Cittye of Constantinople against Constantine, who had bin expulsed thence. Neuerthelesse, both hee and it were besieged, and the Citty being surprized, his eies were pluckt out, & his chldren put to death. 775.Leo the fourth, was Emperor after his Father Constantine the fift. He was not onely heyre to the Empire, but also to his Fathers vices: And his mother, who was deuout and one that loued God, would giue no consent that he shoulde bee Emperor. He made some attempts vpon the Sa∣razins that dwelt in Syria. He tooke the Crowne which Mauritus had dedicated to God, and set it on his owne head, it being very richly beautified with rich pretious stones: But soone after he had
an Impostume in his head, with a fiery Ague, whereof he died. Constantine, sixt of that name, and sonne to Leo the fourth, was Emperor after his Father:780. Hee reigned nine yeares (very young) with his mother, who with his consent also, was perswa∣ded by Therasius Patriarch of Constantinople, to call a generall Councell of thrée hundred and fifty Bishops. In short while after, Constantine ex∣cluded his Mother from the Empyres gouern∣ment. He caused the eies and toong of Nicepho∣rus to be puld and cut out, hearing of a secret in∣tention, to make him Emperor. Also he did shut vp in a Monastery his wife Mary, who was the daughter of King Charlemaine, and then tooke a Concubine, by the councell of his Mother, whoe pretended that her sonne was hated of the people. Herevpon not long after, she caused him to be ta∣ken, and plucking forth his eies, shut him vp in prison, where he died, in the yeare 798. and then she raigned alone, about the space of fiue yeares. Irene, issued from Attica,798 was wife to the em∣peror Leo the fourth, by whom he had Constan∣tine the sixt before mentioned, and reigned with him nine yeares, and afterward alone by hirselfe fiue yeares, or little more, as hath already beene said. She was thence expelled by Nicophorus, & sent in exile to the Isle of Lesbos, which at this in∣stant is called Mitiline. At the time when this Lady gouerned the Empire of Constantinople, Charlemaine was sacred and crowned Emperor of Rome (or of the West) for his vertues.
A briefe Collection of the History & liues of the Emperours of the West, from the time of King Charlemain, who was the first Emperor in the West. 803.CHarlemaine, king of France, and the greatest Emperor (for all per∣fections) that euer was: The re∣storer of Iustice, equity and peace, among men, and re-establisher of Common-weales, with honest Lawes, and Re∣ligious doctrine,The king∣dome of England learned in languages and al dis∣ciplines: raigned King and Emperor 14. yeares. Gal. lib. 4. Emil. lib. 2. The Kingdome of Eng∣land then began by King Egbert. Lewes his sonne, sirnamed (the Meeke) or De∣bonaire,815. was likewise King and Emperour 26. yeares. He caused a Councell to be held, where∣in all Ecclesiasticall persons were forbidden to weare any superfluous garments, iewelles, and Ringes. In reuenge whereof, they prouoked his sonnes to conspire against him two seueral times. 841.Lotharius his sonne, contended with his Bre∣thren, Lewes Germanicus, and Charles the Bald. After a warre no lesse great and sharpe, then vn∣happy and lamentable, he remained Conqueror, and reigned fifteene yeares. Lewes, the second son of Lotharius, raigned 21 yeares:86 hee was at continuall discord with his Vncle Charles the Bald, for the Kingdom of Au∣strasia.
Charles the Bald, sonne to Lewes the Meeke,877. was Emperor and king of France, two yeares. Lewes the Stammerer,879. was made Emperour by the meanes of Pope Iohn the second: hee died at Compeigne vpon a good-friday. Charles the Grosse, Emperor and k. of France,880. who degenerated from the Noble race of Charle∣main, reigned ten yeares. Arnold, whose body was full of vermine,891 by the iust iudgement of God, he being addicted to so many seuerall rapines. He raigned 12. years. Lewes the third, or rather the fourth sonne of Arnold raigned x. years.903 Som do hold that after Arnold, vntill the time of Otho, there was no true Emperour of Rome, but vacation of the em∣pyre, for the space of thréescore yeares. Conrade,913 being the last of the race of Charle∣main, reigned seauen yeares. Henry the first, called the Faulconer, whoe brought peace to all Germany, reigned 18. years.910 He was expert in Armes, beganne the pence or small money among the Almaynes, and subdued the Vandals, who then receiued the Christ. faith. Otho his sonne reigned 6. yeares.938 It was said of him, that he made good proofe, that he whō God will helpe, no man can harme, for hee had innumerable enemies, and yet very easily he sub∣dued them all. Otho the second, his sonne, too seuere, raigned ten yeares. He re-seated Nicephorus his Godfa∣ther Emperor of Greece,974 after hee had bin driuen out of his Empire.
984Otho the third, raigned ninetéene yeares: Hee was called (for his spirite) the wonder of the world. In his time began the institution of the Princes Electors of the Empire,The begin∣ning of the princes Ele∣ctors of ger¦many. in the yeare 1002. This is the common opinion, which (ne∣uerthelesse) the learned Onuphrius declareth to be erronious, verifying by certaine authorities, and testimonies of the Authors of times: that the Emperors (after this Otho) were elected, not by seauen Princes: but in generall, by voyce of all the Arch-bishops, Byshops, Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of Germany, and continued so till the time of Rodolphus the first, which was in the yeare 1280. And he saith, that it cannot bee cer∣tainely gathered, at what time the seauen Elec∣tors were instituted: not finding any one of the auncient Authors that speakes thereof. And yet notwithstanding, hee is of the minde, that they were established, in the Interim of the interreg∣num and schisme of the Empire, which continued twenty three yeares after the death of Frederick the second, which was in the yeare 1250. vntill the election of Rodolph of Haspurge. 1003Henry of Bauaria the second, raigned twentie two yeares: Hee was a prudent and victorious Prince: and hee expulsed the Sarrazins out of Italy. 1025Conrade the second, raigned fiftéene yeares. In this time the name of a Cardinall (as is saide) came first in vse. 1040.Henry the third, surnamed the Black, raigned 17. yeares, hee laboured earnestly to take away
the Schismes of the Church, happening by the plurality of the Popes: whereof hee deposed three as vnwoorthy, and ordayned, that there should bee no more created, without his permis∣sion. Henry the fourth, raigned fifty yeares.1057. He was present in 62. battels, and great troubles happe∣ned betwéene him and Gregory the seauenth, tou∣ching the power to elect and confirme the Pope.The King∣dom of Ie∣rusalem. Then was Ierusalem taken by Godfrey of Bul∣len, and the floure of Christendomes Nobility. Henry the fift, raigned twenty yeares.1107 Hée tooke Rome, and the Pope, who would not crown him, except hee would ordaine his election to bée without the Emperor,The King∣dōs of Por∣tugall, Na∣ples, and Si∣cily. and contrary to the order of Henry the third. Now began the Kingdomes of Portugal, Naples, and Sicily. Lotharius the second, raigned 11. years, being very much respected for his great valour in war,1127 his loue to religion, & reparacion of good laws, &c. Conrade the third, raigned fiftéene years,1138 a good Prince, and made warre against the Sarrazins, with King Lewes the young. Frederick the first, called Barbarossa, a Prince addicted to hardines, magnanimity, and Iustice,1152 raigned 37. yeares. This is the man, vpon whose ouer-much humility, Pope Alexander the third declared the insolency of his Luciferian pride: in treading on the Emperors back, and then he be∣gan to sing: Super Aspidem & Basiliscum ambu∣labis. Then liued Auicen, Auerroes, & Mesuus,The King∣dom of the Tartars. Phisitions: And Changius was first King of the Tartares.
Henry the sixt, raigned tenne yeares, a good Prince,1190 he subdued the kingdome of Pouilla or Apulia. 1100.Phillip brother to Henry, a good Prince, raigned nine yeares. In his time beganne the Frier or∣ders of Mendicants, or begging Friers, Iacobins and Gray Friers. Ab. Vspergens. hist. 1209.Otho the fourth, raigned foure yeares. He came to the Empyre by the meanes of Innocent the 3. and afterward lost it by his owne occasion, being murdred in the end, as he had done his predeces∣sour. 1212Fredericke the second, reigned 37. yeares, be∣ing both wise and magnanimious. He was ex∣pulsed the Empire, by the meanes of Pope Inno∣cent the fourth. This Prince was the restorer of Astronomy, by helpe of the Almagist of Ptolo∣my. The factions of the Guelphes and Gibelines, now caused great harmes in Italy. 1250.Conrade the fourth, reigned thrée yeares, a good Prince. He was excommunicated by Pope In∣nocent the fourth, according as (by him) his Fa∣ther was depriued of his Empire. 1254Willielmus, raigned two yeares, a good prince. Albertus Maguus, Lullius and Alphonsus, King of Spaine, were then great Astrologers. There was interregnum 17. yeares. 1273.Rodulphus reigned 19. yeares. He made Au∣stria the Imperiall seat, ordaining his sonne Al∣bert first Duke there, of whom is the house of Austria desceaded. 1292Adolphus raigned six yeares. He was expulsed
for his vices, by the Princes Electors, and slain afterward in warre, by Albertus his successor. Albertus raigned ten yeares.1299 Pope Boniface the eight, gaue him the Realme of France, & the Papall chaire was transferred to Auignion,The first tur¦kish Emp. 72. yeares. New was Othoman the first Emperour of the Turkes. Henry the seauenth, reigned six yeares,1309 a very graue and prudent Prince: But a Iacobine frier (being suborned by a Florentine) poisoned him with the consecrated Host. Lewes of Bauaria, reigned 33. yeares.1314 He vsed very great clemency towards his enemy and pri∣soner, Frederick of Austria, restoring him to his Dukedome. Now began the Sects of the Flagel∣lanti or Whippers: Bartholomeus, Petrarch, and Boccace, then liuing. Charles the fourth, Author of the golden Bull,1347 raigned 32. yeares; Dante then liued. Wenceslaus reigned 22. yeares, very carelesly.1379 He was taken by his brother Sigismund, and put into prison at Vienna. They were both sonnes to Charles the fourth. Lithuania then receiued the Christian Faith. Robert or Rupert, reigned ten yeares:1400 then li∣ued Chrysolaras, Laurentius Valla, Poge the Flo∣rentine, and Tamberlain the Tyrant of the Tar∣tares, led an Army of a million of men. Sigismund reigned 27. yeares,1411 a man renow∣ned for wisedome and goodnesse. Then was the Councell of Constance, wherein thrée popes were deposed. Iohn Hus, and Hierom of Prage, were then burned.
1438Albertus the second, reigned two yeares well and valiantly. He chased Amurath the Turke out of Hungary. 1440Frederick the third, a louer of Peace, raigned 53. yeares. Then was Constantinople taken: The Art of Printing found out: Artillerie more auncient 1380. Gaza, Victornius, Blondus, Ae∣neas Syluius, Platina, Bessarion, G. Trapezoncius, N. Perottus, Pomponius Laetus, H. Barbaxus, A. Politianus, I. Picus Mirandula, B. Mantu∣anus. Ph. Beroaldus. 1494Maximillian, a louer of vertuous men, raig∣ned 27. yeares. He was valiant and learned, & could deliuer his actions himselfe, in the Latine tongue. Then liued I. Nauclerus, Volaterra∣nus, G. Ʋalla, Polydor Ʋirgill, A. Sabellicus, I. Reuchlinus, Iouianus, Pontanus, M. Ficinus, P. Crinitus, Amb. Calepinus, Trithenius, P. Bem∣bus, and others. 1514Charles the fift, a most magnanimous prince, raigned 35. yeares. In his time happened mar∣uellous mutinies in Germany, by Peazantes and Rusticke people, of which were slaine more then an hundred thousand, in lesse space then 3. Mo∣neths. Beside these strange warres, there insu∣ed ciuill dissentions likewise, about matters of re∣ligion. Erasmus, Io. Lud Ʋiues, Luther, Mun∣ster, Camerarius, Fuctius, Latomus, Sadoleus, Pagninus, Eugubinus, Melancthon, Rhenanus, S. Grineus, Zozius, Oldendorp, Alciat, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and others then liued. 1558.Ferdinando, a Prince wise, vigillant, liberall,
kind, and a louer of quietnesse: He made warre vpon the Turkes in Hungary, for the space of 38. yeares, and laboured to accord the Christians, to the end that the enemy might be resisted by gene∣rall consent. He raigned seauen yeares: and then liued Gesner, Lycosthenes, Sturmius, Gualterus, Riuius, Pantaleon, Ʋadian, P. Constantinus, Fun∣ctius, &c. Maximillian, the second sonne of Ferdinand,1564 was a good and prudent Prince, not dissolute in habits, but liuing soberly, hauing knowledge in many toogues, good iudgement, speaking discréet∣ly and sententiously, and inclined to receiue al re∣quests, as also to giue liberally: Neuer curious of rich Cabinets, or sumptuous buildings. He reig∣ned twelue yeares. Rodulphus the second,1576. sonne to the most ver∣tuous Prince Maximillian, and raigning at this present. To whom God giue grace, as to al other Monarches, Princes and Potentates, to do those thinges that become a Christian Prince, blessing him with good Councell, faithfull people, &c. Now come we againe to the Emperors of the East. Nicephorus, who was kinsman to Irene,803 got the Empire from her by craft, exiling hir thence, as hath béene before declared, and méerely vsurping the Empire of Constantinople. At his first ente∣rance, euery one hadde a singular good opinion of him, because they grewe weary of a Womans gouernement. Neuerthelesse, he proued to bee
wicked, cruel and couetous, & therfore felt quick∣ly his deserued punishment. For entring battle against the Bulgarians, he was discomfited and slaine. His sonne Stauratius (whom he had made fellow Emperor with him) was likewise then sore wounded, and dismissed of the Empire with in thrée moneths after, by Michaell Curopalates, who had married his sister Procopia. And so hee was sent to finish his daies in a Monastery. 804Stauratius, the sonne of Nicephorus, a man deformed and mishapen, hauing also a simple spi∣rit, was made companion and participant in the Empire with his Father: And yet notwithstan∣ding, very soone after his Fathers death, he was chased from his Empire, his haire being shauen off, and he inclosed in a Monastery, not raigning (after his father) aboue thrée moneths, or therea∣bout. 811Michaell Curopalates, otherwise called Ran∣gabus, was Emperour after Nicephorus and his sonne Stauratius. This Emperor Michaell was better skild in the affaires of peace, pollicy, and Iustice, then in the action of warre. For in his first battell against the Bulgarians, he fled away like vnto a Coward, and hid himselfe in a Mo∣nastery, to which life hee yéelded himselfe, and quite forsooke the Empire, as not willing to med∣dle any more, eyther with warre, or the State of an Emperor. He, according as Nicephorus did the like, sent an Ambassador to Charlemaine, the new made Emperor of the west, to treat of peace and alliance with him. And it was agréed, that
the Ʋenetians should liue according to their own Lawes, Customes, and ancient liberties. Leo of Armenia, was Emperor of Constantino∣ple, being the fift of that name,813 and the fourth af∣ter Charlemaine Emperor of the Romaines, who began with Nicephorus. He was Colonell of the warlike troopes, belonging to the Emperor Mi∣chaell Curopaletes, and aspyring to dominion, he raised a commotion, and so was made Emperor by the Souldiers. Hee being thus elected Empe∣ror, entring into his Pallace-Royall, hee caused the priuy members of the Sonne of the said Em∣peror Michaell, to be cut off, and then banished him. He Conquered the Bulgarians, recouered Thrace, tooke many of his enemies, reprehended their boldnesse, that had surprized Adrianapolis, and prepared also to besiedge Constantinople. Hée would by no means suffer the Images of saints, but beat downe and defaced them. Not long af∣ter, himselfe was taken and slaine in a Church, as he was assisting Diuine seruice, in the eyght yeare of his Empire: his wife was bestowed in a Monastery, and his Children closely conuaied away. Michaell the Stammerer or stutterer,820 a wicked man, and murderer of the foresaid Leo, was after him made Emperor of Constantinople. Hee was descended of base and vile place, and there was one called Thomas, a man also of as base Birth, that sought to vsurpe the Empyre, working so many disturbances thereto, that the Emperour being halfe in despaire, commanded a great chain
of yron to thwart the arme of the Sea, euen from Constantinople, so farre as Pera. But in the ende, he tooke this Thomas, and caused his handes and féet to be cut off. At this time the Sarazins sur∣prised Candy, had two seuerall victories ouer the Gréekes, and Michaell died of a flux in his belly. 829.Theophilus, sonne to Michaell the Stammerer, was Emperor of Constantinople after his father. He was a good Iusticer, & well affected towards his Subiects: but he held the Images of Saints in great detestation, and seuerely punnished all such as worshipped them, being (therein) his fa∣thers true follower. Two seuerall times he gaue battell to the Sarazins, that wasted and spoyles the Countries of Asia: And as many times was he foiled, loosing there all his Tents and Pauilli∣ons. Amorium, a little village of the higher Phry∣gia, (being the place of his birth) was besieged, taken, and rifled by those Sarazins. The Empe∣rour grieued thereat so immeasureablie, that hee refused to eate, and woulde drinke nothing but colde water: So falling into a Dysenterie, hee died. 842.Theodora, after the decease of Theophilus her Husband, (as Tutresse or Guardian vnto her son Michaell, who was in his young yeares) gouer∣ned the Empire of Constantinople very sufficient∣ly, comforting the poore distressed Christians, and reuoking home such as liued in exile, about the question of Images. She treated a peace with the King of Bulgaria, affiancing him vnto hir si∣ster, wherby both he and his Subiects were con∣uerted
to the Christian Religion. At length Mi∣chaell being able to guide the reynes of the Em∣pyre; his mother Theodora entred into Religion and left him to rule alone, in the yeare 856.856 Michaell the sonne of Theophilus, succéeded his father in his infancy, his mother and Gouer∣nesse Theodora, holding (for him) the Empire of Constantinople. But when Michaell grew to gre∣ter strength, hee tooke the charge of the Empire himselfe whereto his mother gladly consented. He more resembled his Graundfather, then his Father, both in negligence and prodigallity, spen∣ding great riches which his warres brought him in. He was sometimes so addicted to the Circei∣ensian sports, as hardly he could be drawne from them. He made Basilius the Macedonian, his e∣quall companion in the Empyre, by whome hee was soone after slaine: hauing reigned eleauen yeares, nine moneths, and fiue daies, after that his mother Theodora had entred into Religion, which, with his former time of rule, compleated 25. yeares, ten moneths, and fourtéen daies. Basilius of Macedon,867. who had slaine the Em∣peror Michaell, entred presently vpon the empire of Constantinople, and was receiued and approo∣ued of all, in the Imperiall Pallace. When hee was a yong infant, he had bin brought (among other captiues) to Constantinople▪ to be there sold: Neuerthelesse, he was in the end Emperor, and Fortune so fauoured him, that his children, and his childrens children, were also Emperors after him. First of all, he caused those summes of mo∣nie
to be restored backe againe, which Michaell his Predecessor had prodigally giuen away, and so they were deliuered into the Treasurie. He in∣stituted his thrée sonnes heyres to the Empire. He had many battailes against the Sarazins, & still proued victorious. Many Iewes and Scythi∣ans (by his meanes) receiued the Christian faith: yet such was his hard hap, to bee slaine (in hun∣ting) by a Hart, that ran his hornes into his bel∣lie. 886Leo, the sixt of that name, sirnamed the Phi∣losopher, began his raigne in the yeare 886. first, with the helpe of the Turkes, he vanquished the Bulgarians, who had reuolted from him: but soon after, being abused by the Turkes, thorow vaine suggestions, he sustained great losse. Notwith∣standing, he failed not to leauy an Army against the Sarazins, whereby (vnder the conduct of Ni∣cetus) he brought away a triumphant Victorie. He was very vigillant ouer the Common-weal, and oftentimes would walke alone in the night, (disguised in habit) only to try his watches; who did beate him soundly, and also carried him to pri∣son, whom the next day he rewarded both with money and honors. 94.Alexander, brother to Leo the forenamed Em∣perour, sucéeded him in the Empire. Hee was quite contrary in manners, both to Basilius his father, and Leo his brother, for he was of badde gouernment, giuen wholy to his pleasures, and committed the charge of his State affaires, to Flatterers and Iesters, who were his daily com∣plices
and companions, in all naughty and wic∣ked actions. He died of a fluxe of bloud, issuing from his Nose and priuy-members, after he had gurmandized and excessiuely played at the Ten∣nis. For, mounting (in an extreame heat) vpon his horsse, and violently stretching himselfe, hee brake a veine, whereof he died. Constantine the seauenth, sonne to Leo the sixt,906 of whom we haue already spoken, was at the age of seauen yeares, left (by his father) vnder the care and charge of his mother Zoa. And he began to holde the Empire of Constantinople, after his forenamed Vnckle Alexander, the yeare of our Saluation, 906. A certaine man, named Roma∣nus Lecapenus, made great resistance against him for space of 26. yeares, and purposed to deiect him quite. But in the end, Lecapenus was seized by his owne sonnes, and shut vp into a Monastery, for he was the sole cause, that Zoa the mother of Constantine, was likewise made a recluse in a Monasterie. Now, when the sonnes of Lecape∣nus had deuised to doe the like to Constantine, as they had done vnto their father: the same strata∣gem happened to themselues, and they were in∣closed in a Monastery. So Constantine recouered his Empire, which he gouerned alone very suffi∣ciently; suppressing some Tyrants, and inducing diuers Princes of the Turkes to the Christian Faith. He made learning to shine in Greece, and left a Booke vnto his sonne, discoursing the af∣faires of the Empire, which the Ʋenetians do yet kéepe as an especiall Iewell. He raigned fourtéen
yeares with his mother Zoa, with Lecapenus 26. yeares, and about fifteene yeares alone, which was in all néere 55. yeares. 920.Romanus Lecapenus, a man of base descent, wrought so much trouble to Constantine the sea∣uenth in his Empire, that he was constrained to receiue him as companion in the Imperiall dig∣nity, in the yeare 920. and Constantine accepted his daughter Helena in marriage. But neyther the saced Oath which he had sworne vnto him, nor yet the néere alliance in kindred with Con∣stantine, could restraine him from vsurpation of the Empire, for himselfe and Christopher his son: but he sought to thrust Constantine wholy out of all. But he was deceiued in his owne disseigns, for, vpon the bad successe in warre which he had against the Bulgarians, and Simeon their Duke, he was taken by his owne sonnes, Stephen and Constantine▪ who despoiled him of his Emperie, and carried him to a Monastery in a néere neigh∣bouring Island, there to plte the Philosopher a∣lone by himselfe. Then, practising to worke the like deuice vpon Constantine Fortune turned hir back towards them, and in the same snare which they laid for another, themselues were cunning∣ly caught: for they were shut vp within a Mona∣stery, and so Constantine remained a peaceable Emperour. 959.Romanus, the yong sonne of Constantine the 7. held the Empire of Constantinople after his Fa∣ther. But he was gouerned vnder the disposition and order of Nicephorus Phocas. This Emperor
Romanus, excluded his mother and his sisters: who, in gréefe and despight, that they should fall from so great pompe and estate, concluded to sup∣port ther weake condition, by the worst meanes that could be, euen the prostitution of their bo∣dies. And as for him, he being addicted to sports and Epicuisme, died poisoned. Nicephorus Phocas, ruled the Empire of Con∣stantinople, in the yeare 963.963 He fought often, & very fortunatly against the Sarazins, who vsur∣pingly held Calabria Scicily, Cyprus, Candy and Cilicia, which at this day is called Caramania. In Scicily the affaires were not well mannaged, by his Committées and Lieutenants: But con∣cerning himselfe, he recouered Cilicia, and the greater part of Asia, for a good beginning: And soone after, he went powerfully vpon Antioche, which hee surprised in the night, and forced the Sarazins to fly for refuge. This man was hated of all his Subiects, because that (vnder the cou∣lour of Warre which he then had) he laide great Imposts, exactions, and polings vpon them. He caused also a corrupt kind of money to be forged, and diminished likewise the waight: by meanes whereof, being so out of fauour with the Citti∣zens, he was the easir slaine sleeping in his cham∣ber, by Iohn Zimiscus, and Theophila, (wife to Nicephorus) gaue fauourable entrance to the mur¦therer, and all the stranglers that were with him. Iohn Zimiscus, the murderer of Nicephorus, was Emperor of Constantinople after him. Hee was a man valiant in warre;6 he recouered all
Bulgaria, which the Roxalians held, and Sphen∣dollanus their king submitted himselfe vnto him. But after this victory, being returned to Con∣stantinople with triumph, he was poisoned. He made fellowes with him in the Empire, Basilius and Constantine, brethren, who were sonnes to Romanus, the predecessor of Nicephorus Phocas. 976.Basilius the second, and Constantine the eight, being brethren, and sonnes to the yong Romanus, were Emperors of Constantinople after Iohn Zi∣miscus, in the yeare of Saluation 976. Barda Sclerus made ciuill warre vpon them, intending to vsurpe the Empire: but being foiled in the bat∣tell, he fled to the Persians. The like did Phocas, when he was ouercome, and for the same cause: for, taking it in scorn to be misprized, after he had well declared his duty against Sclerus, he sought to make himselfe Emperor. Basilius (afterward) vanquished the Bulgarians in many battels, and as a punnishment for their Rebellion, he caused the eies of fiftéen thousand Captiues to be pulled out: reseruing onely but one of them, to guide the rest to Samuell their Duke. For they had ouer∣run the Country of Thrace, Macedon, & Greece▪ and put all to fire and sword. Now was all Bul∣garia subiected to the Empire of Constantinople, which till then had euermore béene Rebellious. Duke Samuell liued not long after, but died with méere grèefe and vexation. Constantine was com∣panion with his brother Basilius in the Empyre, more in Honor then power: But after his death he was sole Emperor almost thrée yeares, and di∣ed
swallowed vp in his pleasures and vaine vo∣luptuousnesse. Romanus of Argyra,1029 or (as he was commonlie called) Argyropilus, kinsman to Constantine the eight, succéeded him in the Empire. At the be∣ginning, he changed many bad matters into bet∣ter: But being vnable to make head against the Sarazins, hee gaue his minde to gather a huge masse of money. Afterward, by the Treason of Zoa his wife, and her Adulterate companion: he was drowned as he bathed himselfe in his stoue, or Hot-house. Michaell the Paphlagon,1034. the Adulterat friend of Zoa the Empresse, and who had suffocated her husband Argiropilus, bathing in his Stoue: was by her made Emperor of Constantinople, in the yeare 1034. He had béene a seruant-straunger, hauing his head very vnfashionable, and euerie houre he was subiect to the falling sicknesse, foa∣ming at the mouth. In briefe, whatsoeuer deser∣ued any respect in him, only was, that he hadde a pleasing Complexion, which made Zoa extream∣ly doate vpon him, she being well stept into age. Yet (for all this) he did not misgouerne the Em∣pyre, but tooke truce with the King of Aegipt for thirty yeares. He deliuered the Citty of Edessa, which was besieged, and was very benigne to all them of his Court; excep to Zoa, for the horride lewdnesse he knew by her. At length, being full of the Dropsie, he appointed Michaell Calapha∣tes (the adopted sonne of his Wife Zoa) to be his immediate successor.
142.Michaell Calaphates, the adopted son of Zoa, (after the death of Michaell the Pphlagon) pro∣strated himselfe at her feete, swearing that he in∣tended not to hold the Empire, but in name only; and that all the power should remaine in her. By which flatteries & coyned speeches, he was made Emperour of Constantinople, in the yeare 1042. Soone after, he laid a plot against Zoa, imposing falsely vpon her, that she had deuised to poison him: Whereupon, her head was shauen, and she commaunded to a Monastery. But the People growing mutinous against him, made Theodora (sister to Zoa) Empresse: repealed Zoa from the Monastery pursued Calaphates, and plucked out both his and his sonnes eies. He was called Ca∣laphates, because his father was a maker of ships, or a Ship wright. 1042Zoa repealed from her exile and Monastery, by the people, was re-placed in the Soueraigne E∣state of Constantinoples empire, to enioy the same with her sister Thedora, which was in the same yeare, when as Michaell Caliphates had raigned but foure moneths. Thus the bad gouernement of Emperors raised an opinion, that the Empire might be better ruled by Women, then by men. But, as a woman is euermore variable and vn∣constant, according to the Poets iudgement: Euen so Zoa (albeit she was a woman, and aged thréescore yeares) did yet neuerthelesse, burne in carnall and voluptuous concupiscence. Where∣vppon, shee re-called Constantine Monamachus from exile, and taking him to be her husband,
made him Emperour. These two women hauing then held the Empire, scarsely three moneths. Constantine the ninth, sirnamed Monamachus,1042 who likewise being of the Imperiall line & race; was made Emperor by his we Zoa, at Constan∣tinople, in the yeare 1042. He was very carelesse, and full of his owne pleasures, and kept a beau∣tifull Strumpet in stead of his Wife: neuerthe∣lesse, hee maintained and got the victory in two great ciuill warres, and some others beside. It was then that the Turkes began to extend theyr powers very farre in Asia and yet no withstan∣ding, they were vanquished with the Roxalians, and Patzinaces, which were two Nations of the Scythians. Zoa died, beeing threescore and tenne yeares old: and Constantine being ful of the gout, hauing also a pluriie, died thereof some few years after. Theodora, sister to Zoa, who had formerly held the Empire of Constantinople,1055. as hath beene alrea∣dy declared in our speaking of Zoa: entred vpon the Empires rule againe, but alone by her selfe, after Constantine Monomachus, in the year 1055. and gouerned about two yeares. And we hold it no shame, to place her in the rancke and number of the Emperors, considering, that she did not de∣clare her authority in the Empire, with an effe∣minate or negligent spirite: But gaue so good or∣ders, and caried her selfe so manly, that she main∣tained peace and tranquility, as well towardes strangers, as among her owne people. Moreo∣uer, all goodnesse and quietnesse so aboundantly
flourished in the time of her gouernment: as no occasion can bee alleadged, neither will any man of wisedome misprise the Empire and Dominion of such a Woman. But as sicknesse (with age) did ouer-charge her, by the pleasing perswasions and remonstrances of her ordinary seruants: she made partaker with her in the Empires sway, a certaine man (some-what too aged) named Mi∣chaell, and then she liued not long after. 1057Michaell, sir-named the Auncient, was Em∣perour of Constantinople after the saide Theodora, and onely by her meanes. Hee was renowmed both for Noblity and riches: but in other affaires, concerning the support and charge of the Empire: he was very vnapt, in regard of his many years, which made him burthenous and in-sufficient. And when he had scarsely ruled one yeare: Isaac Comnenes both dismissed, and deposed him from the State of the Empire. So liuing solitarily, and like a priuate man: he died soone after. Isaac Comnenes, was Emperour of Constanti∣nople, in the yeare 1058.1058 Hee deiected from the Empire, Michaell the Auncient: neuerthelesse, hee was a man, valiant and couragious, renow∣med for his actions both in peace and war, of great spirit, but somewhat arrogant. The Patriarch of Constantinople gaue him good aide, in raising him to the Empires Dignity: but hee requited him very badly, for he banished him & all his friends. He was deriued of a Noble race, diligent, ready and expeditious in al his businesse: But a disease in the side tooke him as hee was hunting, which,
growing to desperation of any long life, he made himselfe a monke, instituting as Emperour Con∣stantine Ducas, with the good liking and consent of the Senate and people. It is written of him, that he was so chast, that he would not accompa∣nie his wife after her first child: albeit his Phy∣sitians aduised him thereto, for helpe and mitiga∣tion of his disease. Constantine the tenth, called also Ducas,1060 was Emperour of Constantinople, after the forenamed Isaacke, in the yeare 1060. At his first entrance there happened a great conspiracy against him, which he suppressed, but with very great difficul∣ty. He was deuout towards God, and a good iu∣sticer: but insatiable auarice disgraced him, for which, he was hated of his owne people, and con∣demned by his enemies, who did much harme to the Empire. In his time happened a strange ac∣cident, and yet no nouelty to Constantinople, that many Churches and houses were ouerthrowne by an Earthquake. He died aged thréescore years, leauing Eudoxia his wife, and thrée of his sonnes heyres to the Empire. Eudoxia and her sonnes helde the Empyre of Constantinople,1067 after their father Constantine Du∣cas. This woman would haue wel gouerned the Empires affaires, if warres had not much mole∣sted her abroad. As strangers (then) cam rushing in on all sides of the Empire, so was it conceiued by generall opinion, that the ablest man that coulde be, had had his hands full, in a charge of such import. And yet at length, Eudoxia (contra∣ry
to her Oath and promise to hir dying husband) hauing reigned seauen moneths and some few o daies: remarried with Romaine Diogenes, which match shee déerely afterward repented, as being much wearied with the arrogancy of this man, who would néedes gouerne all himselfe. 1068Romaine, sirnamed Diogenes, tooke vpon him the Empire of Constantinople, in the year 1068. He made warre two seuerall times, and in the first attempt, Fortune spake him faire, but very vnkindly in the second: for his people being one part slaine, and the other driuen to flight, himselfe left alone (albeit an Emperor) was taken: which accident had neuer been seen before, that the Em∣perour of Constantinople, was taken prisoner in warre. And yet notwithstanding, it is said, that the Turke, Sultan Azan hearing those tidinges, could not beléeue it, but stayed his iourny some∣what short of him. And then sending for him, he had no sooner séene him, but he held him in honor and estimation: and giuing him great presentes, sent him backe againe at liberty, after he had con∣cluded a peace with him. But in this interim, all things were renversed at Constantinople, as it is a vsuall custome, so soone as vnwelcome newes are brought: For Eudoxia, was expulsed, Dio∣genes dismissed, and Michaell de Constantine chosen Emperour: who first caused the eyes of Diogenes to be plucked out, and afterward bani∣shed him: in which miserable estate he died, and was faine to be buried by his wife Eudoxia. 1071.Michaell, who was tearmed Parapinacius,
in reguard of the great Famine that happened in his time, was made Emperour of Constantinople in the yeare 1071. He was a man altogither vn∣apt for so weighty a charge: for, béeing wholely addicted to his Booke, and to compose verses with his Schoolemaister Psellus, the Turkes assailed the Empyre on all sides, especially on that part of Asya: Wherupon, his chiefe Commanders and Captaines, (thorow méere constraint) made ele∣ction of another Emperour ouer them, to wit; Nicphorus otaniat who was the more easilie accepted of the Cittizens, because they held their negligent Emperour in high disdain & contempt. I vnderstand that Michaell was put into a Mo∣nastery, with his wife and son, and there he was made a Monke. Nicephorus Bataniat, who was descended of the line of the Emperor Phocas,1078 easily (as being the very noblest of all other) obtained the Empire when Michaell was expelled thence. Hee tooke Constantine, the son of Constantine Ducas, whoe would haue vsurped the Empire, & causing him to be shorne, aduanced him to the order of priest∣hood. Afterward, Nicephorus himselfe was deie∣cted by the brethren of Comnenes, (who before had assisted him in expelling the vsurpers of the Em∣pire) and was shut vp in a Monastery, where hée liued but a short while. Alexius Comnenes, the younger brother, but best beloued amongst the souldiors, held the empire after him, and on the very day of Easter entred Constantinople, which he spoiled as an enemy.
1081.Alexius Comnenes, Son of the Emperour Isa∣ac, tooke on him the Empire of Constantinople, in the yeare 1081. He went with the Venetians a∣gainst Robert Guiscard, but he was repulsed and vanquished. Moreouer, he stroue to hinder and breake the memorable enterprise of the French, for the recouery of the Holy land. But Bohemond, Duke of Apulia, leuied an Army against him, and besieged Baudras. Then Alexius, dreading his power, made composition with him, promi∣sing to furnish the French with victuals, and all other néedfull things. Afterward, he erected two goodly buildings, one for poore Orphants, and the other for a Colledge. He was also very charitable to poore aged men, discréet and moderate in his manners, and not lightly induced to punish. Hée gaue fauour and support to all men of merite and vertue, exalting them to places of dignity. In the end, being ouerpressed with a long sicknesse, he died in the thréescore and tenth yeare of his age. 1118.Caloian, Sonne to Alexius, held the Empyre after his father, in the yeare 1118. He made ma∣ny warres in Asia, vanquishing in diuers Bat∣tels, both the Turkes and Persians, taking sundry Citties from them. He was a contrary opposite to the Venetians and the French, who were then vnited: Notwithstanding, the Venetians took the Isles of Rhodes, Samos and Miteline. Hee died of the pricke of a Dart, which himselfe had poiso∣ned, smiting his hand (by chance) vpon it, as he made offer with it against a wild Boare: He ad∣uaunced all his owne friends to dignities.
Manuell, or Emanuell, brother,1142 or (as some say) Sonne to Caloian, entred on the Empire of Con∣stantinople after him, in the yeare 1142. He en∣treated Conrade Emperor of Rome, to lende him ayde against Roger king of Scicily, who both troubled, and would haue vsurped the Empyre, each after other, and likewise to assist him against the Turkes, as thus his request seuerally preten∣ded. But Manuell, hauing a contrary, and ano∣ther kind of leauen hid in the dow, sent Conrades men where they were all famished. Nor did it suf∣fice him to deale thus vilely with them, but he did as much to the men sent by Lewes (sirnamed Gods guift) king of France. So that in a short while, so great a number of the French perrished by falshood and Treason, that the name of Ma∣nuell became odious among the French. Roger entred (in earnest) vpon the Countrey of Greece, besieged Constantinople, and with a gallant bra∣uado) culled many floures of gold and siluer, out of the Emperors garden. Manuell offered outrage to an Ambassador of Venice, and (in one day, sur∣prised all their Marchants, whom he had betraied vnder the colour of peace: for which, the Veneti∣ans constrained him afterward, dearly to buy his owne peace. He made warre against the Turks, wherein he was almost taken: And after hee had raigned eight and thirty yeares, hee liued as a Monke, and died of a grieuous disease. Alexius the sonne of Manuell, helde the Em∣pire after him, in the yeare 1180.1180. vnder Andro∣nicus, his coosin-germain, who then was his Tu∣tor,
afterward his companion in the empire, and at last his murderer, for secretly he caused his hed to be cut off, and threw his body into the Sea, he being but fifteen yeares old. 1183Andronicus Comnenes, the sonne of Isaake, en∣tred on the empire of Constantinople, after his coo∣sine germain Alexius, whom cruelly he had cau∣sed to be murdered, in the yeare 1183. William, king of Sicily▪ made warre vpon him, to reuenge the death of Alexius. And as he was assailed on all sides, Isaacke, sirnamed the Angell, (contrary to all opinion) came so suddenly vpon him, that he not onely foiled him, but deiected him from the empyre, and hauing seized vpon his person, hee caused one of his eies to be pulled out, and then set him vppon an Asse, with his face backward, crowning him with a wreath of rotten Garlicke or Onions, and holding the stalke of one of them in his hand, in stead of a Scepter. In this order was he shewen through the Citty of Constanti∣tinople, men, women, and children, doing many iniuries vnto him, casting both durt and filth in his face, smiting him also with stones and staues. In this manner being cruelly bruised and mur∣dered, he was hanged vp: when yet the women would not leaue him so, but dismembred him in∣to the smallest pieces. Isaack the Angell, tooke the empyre on him af∣ter Andronicus, in the yeare 1185.1185 He qualified the tyrranie of many, and entertained magnifi∣cently Frederick Emperor of Rome, who passed into Syria. Hee redéemed (with a great sum of
mony) his younger brother Alexius, whoe (most vnthankefully) bereft him, both of his eies and Empire, because he séemed to fauour the Ʋeneti∣ans. He kept him likewise in prison, vntill that Alexius, the sonne of Isaac, (in despite of his vn∣cles mallice) by tears and faire intreats, obtained succour of the French and the Ʋenetians, where∣with he deliuered his Father: who very soon af∣ter died, hauing taken too much the fresh ayre, af∣ter his so long close imprisonment. Alexius the Angell,1195. murderer of his Brother Isaac, helde the Empire of Constantinople after him, in the yeare 1195. He was most wicked, & cruelly handled his elder brother, onely to vsurpe the Empire. The like hee would haue doone to his Nephew Alexius, who escaping from him, was carried by Sea into Dalmatia, where hee found the Nobility of France, with Baldwin and the Venetians, whom he moued to warre against his vncle, promising them thirty thousand marks of gold, and all kind of victuals, if his imprisoned father, or himselfe, might (by their meanes) re∣gaine the Empyre. Hereupon, those valiant lords hoysed saile towards Constantinople, and tooke it; hauing first broken the chain which thwarted the Sea. Alexus, saued himselfe by flight, Isaac was deliuered out of prison, who died soone after: and his sonne Alexius the younger, was elected Emperor. Alexius the yonger, being sonne to Isaac, was seated in the Empire, in the yeare 1204.1204 by an agreement made betwéene him, and the French
and Venetians. It is said, that then it was sought to haue the Patriarch of Constantinople subiect & inferior to the Pope of Rome: and that the Em∣peror should recompence the French and Veneti∣ans, for the damages which Manuell had doone vnto them. But scarcely was he entred into his gouernment of the Empire, and employing his paines to accomplish his promises, when as Mur∣ziphilus (no Noble man, yet one whom he hadde aduanced to great authority) killed him. And so this yong and innocent Prince died by Treason. Murziphilus finding his sinne much misliked, in the night time fledde away, with his Wife, his strumpets, and treasure: yet, not long after, hee was brought backe againe from Morea, as a Captiue to Constantinople, where he died misera∣bly. By this meanes, both the Citty and empire of Greece remained to the French, and Baldwine was the first Emperour of the French Nation. 1205Baldwine Earle of Flanders, was after Alex∣ius the younger, elected emperour of Constantino∣ple, by all the warlike souldiors of Flaunders, as also the Marquesse of Montferrat, of Sauoy, and of Ʋenice, in the year 1205. Before this election, there was a condition thus determined: That if the emperor (who was to be elected) should be of the French, the Ʋenetians should make a Patri∣arch; as it happened. Baldwine then recouered all that belonged to the Empire of Constantinople, except Adrianople: which Theodor, kinsman to Alexius the murderer, held as his wiues dowry, and kept there his Empire. But as the French
laide siege thereto, and were vpon the very point of surprizing it: Baldwine was there taken and put to death, hauing scarsly gouerned one yeare. Henry the brother of Baldwine,1206 was made Em∣peror after him. Hee pursued the besieging and assault of Adrianople, but the Sarazins comming to succour it, he retyred to Constantinople, which then he strongly fortified. He made peace and al∣liance with the Vallachians, tooke their Dukes daughter in marriage, and (both farre off, and at home) guided all affaires prouidently. Hee con∣stituted William, (son to Boniface) K. of Thessa∣ly, soon after his fathers death, leauing his daugh∣ter Iolanta as his heyre, who was married vnto Peter of Auxerre, that succéeded him in the Em∣pire. Peter de Courtnay, or (to speake better) of France, being the yongest sonne of Lewes le gros,1216. and Earle of Auxerre, (by the meanes and right of his wife Iolanta, in reguard that Henry hadde lefte no heyre male) succéeded in the Empire of Constantinople, the yeare 1216. He returning to Rome after his Coronation, besieged Baudras, in fauour of the Ʋenetians: But it proued in vaine, for at a gallaunt Banquet, hee was beheaded by Theodor Lascarus, who called himselfe Emperor of Adrianople, and of the Graecians. This treche∣ry was performed vnder the shadow of a feigned peace, with a faithfull promise made vpon a false Oath. Others say, that Lascarus had laid ambu∣shes in the Forrest of Thessaly, in the place called Tempe, and that he surprised Peter in such man∣ner,
shutting him vp in Captiuity, and that so he died. His wife Iolanta during this his thraldom, held the Empyre two yeares. 1220.Robert, sonne to the forenamed Peter, so soone as he heard the tidings of his fathers hard aduen∣ture, departed presently from Fraunce, and went directly to Constantinople, where he was recey∣ued as Emperor, in the yeare 1220. There hee carried himselfe valiantly, vntill such time as hée tooke to wife a young Lady, who was promised & troth-plighted to a Gentleman of Burgundy, that neither could or would endure such a shame. But he, boldly comming into the Pallace, did cut off the Ladies nose, and threwe hir mother into the Sea, because she had béen the procurer of this vn∣iust marriage. To all which the Emperour durst not say one word, but went to Rome to receiue the Crowne: And returning thence not long af∣ter, with an intent to bee revenged, he died of a strange disease in Achaia, 1228Baldwine the second, sonne to the said Robert, succéeded his Father in the Empire of Constanti∣nople, in the yeare 1228. But because he was o∣uer-young, Brennus King of Ierusalem (in title onely) was sent from Italy, to be ioyned with him as his gouernour: whose daughter hee married, making none account of the daughter of the king of Pontus, whereby great warres ensued. Bald∣wine, being but barely stored of money for these warres, and very hardly pressed: engaged his son to the Venetians, and to the King S. Lewes, a peece of the true Crosse, as it was reported to be,
and many precious Reliques of the Church. So leuying a great Army, he planted it at the entrāce of the straite of Constantinople: But in the meane while (by secret intelligence) Michaell Paleologus had gotten into the Citty. Then Baldwin flying thence, with the Patriarch, betooke themselues to Negropont, dreading only the outward harmes, while they within were ten times worse. Then did the Greekes recouer the Empire of Constan∣tinople, which the French hadde helde almost the space of thréescore yeares. Michaell Paleologus,1239. hauing thus cunningly seized on the Empire, and got it into his owne possession: held it stil very manfully, for the space of two and twenty yeares. But hee ran into his peoples hatred, for making agréement with pope Gregory the tenth, in the Councell at Lyons, and acknowledging duty to him. After him, his son succéeded. Andronicus, who within a while after,1261 tooke his sonne Michaell to be his associate in the em∣pire. But Michaell being dead, his sonne Andro∣nicus the younger, made warre vpon his graund∣father Andronicus, and compelled him to accept him as companion with him in the Empire. Whereat the Emperour Andronicus conceiued such inward dislike, that he soone after died, ha∣uing raigned 43. yeares. Andronicus the yonger,1304. carried himselfe both wisely and valiantly in gouerning the Empyre. He died of a burning Feauer, hauing raigned 33. yeares, his sonne succéeding.
1341.Iohn Cantacuzen, who was Schoolmaister to Iohn Paleologus, and fellow also with him in the Empires gouernment, of whom more shalbe said in the life of Iohn Paleologus. 1341Iohn Paleologus, called also Caloian, succéeded his father in the Empire of Constantinople, the yeare 1341. He being very young, had for his Tutor and companion in the Empire Iohn Can∣tacuzen, who was expulsed by the seditious de∣uises & sleights of a man of meane birth, but yet quicke, dexterious, and full of courage, which made him the better accepted in Court: It is said also, that the ambition of the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, was thereto a great furtherance. But he being impatient at such an iniurie, made war for fiue yeares, against the mother of Iohn Pale∣ologus, and against Iohn the said Emperour, and was the first man, that brought the Turkes in Armes into Europe. At length, Constantinople yeilded it selfe vnto him, and when he tooke it, he did no wrong to any one, but carried himselfe as fellowe Companion of the Empire, giuing his daughter in marriage to the said Emperour Iohn. Afterward, he made warre vpon the Genowaies, spéeding one while well, and another ill, hauing (neuerthelesse) with him the Venetians, and the men of Arragon. Then Iohn Paleologus, whoe had béene banished, made warre vpon him, being principally ayded by the Turkes, and to whome hee gaue first habitation in Europe: by which meanes, he cunningly entred Constantinople, in the yeare 1357. And then Cantacuzen (forsaking
the Empire) entred into a monastery, and liued there as a Monke. But Matthew, his sonne, sée∣king to be Competitor with Paleologus, was con∣strained to desist. So Paleologus, hauing had the victory in diuers warres, died in the yeare 1384. hauing raigned sixtéene yeares with his Tutour Cantacuzen, and 27. yeares alone by himselfe, in all 43. yeares. After him was Emperour (for the space of thrée yeares) Andronicus the eldest sonne; who neuerthelesse is not set in the number of the Emperors. Manuell (by some called Emanuell) son to the said Iohn Paleologus,1387. held the Empire of Constan∣tinople, in the yeare 1387. And the most remark∣able matter in his life, was that he left seauen sonnes: of which, Iohn the eldest, succéeded in the Empyre, in the yeare 1421. Iohn, eldest sonne to Manuell,1421. entred on the Empire after his fathers decease. He being more addicted to peace and quietnesse, then War, gaue his assistance in the Councell at Ferrara, which was afterward transferred to Florence, Eugenius the fourth, then being Pope. As Emperour of the East, he was graciously welcommed by both the Churches, the Greek and Latine, which were then made one. Returning home to his Empire, he liued no long time after, but died, not leauing any posterity of him, in the yeare 1445. Constantine the eleauenth, and sonne of Ma∣nuell, after the death of his brother Iohn,1445. held the Empire, called the Greeke Empire, in the yeare, 1445. He hauing bin King of Morea before, was
called Draco, for the cruelty which hee exercised against the Turkes. But when Constantinople was taken by Mahomet the second, son to Amu∣rath the second: Then, all trembling, and hee re∣tiring to a gate of the Citty, to escape by flight, was stifled to death, in the prease and confusion of people, that likewise fled away, the 29. day of May, 1453. His head was carried on the point of a Launce, to be shewn through the enimies camp in derision. And vndoubtedly, it is a matter wor∣thy note, as also of some meruaile, that Constan∣tinople, edified or re-edified, enriched, and exalted by Constantine the first, sonne to S. Helena, and after the manner of Rome: shoulde vnder this Constantine the eleauenth (hauing his mother to beare the same name of Helena likewise) bee surprized, and kept vnder the power of the Turkes, euen to this instant.
A briefe History or summa∣rie of the Othomans or Emperors of the Turks, for the space of three hundred yeares. OThoman, the sonne of Orthogules, was Emperor of the Turkes, in the yeare of our Saluation 1300.1300. He was the first of this Nation that carried this name; which he had, in regard of a Castle that he took in Galatia, And he was the first also, that renewed the glory and honor of his Nation. For these people hadde taken Ierusalem, in the yeare 1008. but they were conquered by the Christians, vnder the con∣duct of Godfrey of Bullen, and those that then re∣mained of the Turkes, retired themselues to Ni∣cea, hauing (neuer after) any one K. of renowne vntill this man; who made himselfe a Monarch, & hath the first place in the History of the Turkes. He was but of meane descent, yet of great spirit, cunning, dilligent, and ambitious: hauing euer∣more (in his hart) a desire to raigne, and ponde∣red vpon all meanes, that thereto might best ad∣uance him. In this high disposition, hee founde Fortune very fauourable to him: for he subdued
the greater part of Bithinia, & tooke many fortes néere to the Pontick Sea. But his very greatest honour, was, the surprising of Sina, a Citty an∣ciently called Sebastia. He died aged, in the first yeare of Phillip de Ʋalois, King of France, and Edward the third, King of England. 1328Orchanes, Son to the said Othoman, was Em∣perour of the Turkes after his father. He would not alter a iote of this newe authority, no more then his father did, and whom he farre surpassed in Warlike actions. By his liberality and good carriage, he woon the hearts of his people, pursu∣ing on (very well) what his father had begunne. By his industry, vigilancie, and prouidence, he woon the Countries of Mysia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, and Caria, and tooke in Warre Prusya (which is now called Bursia) and which was the aboade of the Kings of Bithynia, where he receiued a hurt, whereof he died, in the first yeare of the raigne of Io. K. of France, Edward the third of England stil raigning. He raigned 22. yeares, leauing Soli∣man and Amurath his sons and successors. 1348.Soliman, sonne of Orchanes, raigned 2. yeares after his Father. He made warre vpon the Gree∣kes passed from Asya into Europe▪ where he van∣quished the Bulgarians, and tooke many places from them: especially in Thrace, he got the Cit∣ties of Adrianople and Philopolis. Some say that he died in his Fathers life time, with a fall from his horse in hunting, and that (very soone after) his father died with gréefe. And this is the rea∣son, why some doe not set him in the rank of Tur∣kish Emperors.
Amurath, first of that name,1350 and sonne to Or∣chanes, was Emperor of the Turkes, in the year 1350. Good Fortune attended on him, as shee did on his Graundfather, and on his own Father likewise: But he was as contrary to his graund father by the mothers side, as his father had béen to his predecessor, who bereft him of a great part of Cilicia, by killing his sonne. Amurath (inci∣ted thereto by Iohn Paleologus) sent twelue thou∣sand Turkes for seruice of the said Paleologus; which was the source and beginning of the ruyne of Constantinople. For, being allured with the riches of Europe, to make another voyage, he pas∣sed (in the Genowaies gallies) six thousand Turks, vnder colour of (yet) giuing fresh succour to the Emperor of Constantinople, and to expell his ene∣mies out of the Empire: But it was with full in∣tention, to vsurpe Greece. So he crossed the arme of the Hellespont Sea to Abydos, seazing Calypo∣lis, and other Citties. Afterward, with a verie strong power, he set vpon the Emperor himselfe, who no way doubted him: Then tooke he Seruia and Bulgaria, whose Princes he foiled, comming in good manner against him. But one of the fol∣lowers of Lazarus, Despote of Seruia, in reuenge of his Maisters death (slaine in the fight) killed Amurath in the yeare 1378. Baiazeth, King or Emperor of the Turks, first of that name,1378. after the death of Amurath his Fa∣ther, slew his elder brother Solyman by Treason, and enioyed the Empyre of the Turkes alone to himselfe. To reuenge the death of his Father, he
made warre against Marke, Lord of Bulgaria, both vanquishing and killing him, and subduing beside a great part of his country. In short while after, he ran thorow the Countries of Hungaria, Albania, and Valachia, and doing great hurt vn∣to them, tooke many Christians, whom he carri∣ed Prisoners into Thrace. In regard of most bold attempts in his Martiall businesse (wherein hee was both hot and sudden) hee was called Baia∣zeth Hildrin, that is to say, Heauens Lightning. He subdued almost all Greece, being assisted with the guifts and graces of Nature, both in body and mind. He besieged Constantinople, for the space of eight yeares, the Emperor wherof was gon into France, to require assistance, which was granted him. Neuerthelesse, Baiazeth had the victory o∣uer the French, Hungarians, Germaines, Seruians, & Mysians, at once assembled against him. And so returning to Constantinople with a fresh besie∣ging, and finding no meanes to preserue the Em∣pire of Constantinople: suddenly Tamberlain came against Baiazeth, and gaue him battel on mount Stella, where Pompey fought with Mithridates. There did Tamberlain conquer him, bound him in chaines of gold, & placing him in a Cage of y∣ron, led him in that manner thorough Asya and Syria. In which miserable estate Baiazeth died, and after his decease, we find that there was in∣terregnum, vntil Mahomet one of his sons came. 1407.Iosuah or Cyriscelebes, whom some wrongly name Calapine, the eldest sonne of Baiazeth, af∣ter the foyle of his Father, was defeated of Asya
by Tamberlain, & led Captiue to Constantinople for the Emperor, as a singular prize. But he was vsed as the sonne of a Prince, and soon after (with great humanity in the Emp.) released, and sent home into Asya, where he recouered his Fathers kingdome. After, when he had well reestablished his forces, he stoutly resisted Sigismond King of Hungary, who came to assaile him, and had woon diuers Prouinces from him: presuming that the Turks could no way reléeue him, after so great an ouerthrow giuen by Tamb. But Fortune spake no friendlier to Sigismund, then she had formerly don to him, when he fought against Baiazeth at Nicopolis, his people being al larded with arrows before they could fall into order of battell. For the Horsmen turned bridle euen at the first shocke & noise of the Enemy, and Cyriscelebes remained conqueror, who was slaine by his brother Musta∣pha, otherwise called Musulman, in the very flo∣wer of his age, the yeare 1407. Mustapha or Musulman,1408 was Emperor of the Turks a very small time, for his brother Moyses possessed himselfe of the State, and expelled him. Som, name this Mustapha, Orchanes the second; whom they tearme to be son and heire to Iosuah or Cyriscelebes, and that he was slaine by Moyses, his vncle by the fathers side: but Moyses quickly did suffer his deserued punnishment. For loosing both goods and life together, himself was also slain by his owne brother Mahometh. There be that write, that this Mahometh raigned next after his father Baiazeth, making no mention of Iosuah,
or Cyriscelebes, neither of Mustapha or Orchanes, nor of Moyses: but after Baiazeth, do make his sonne Mahometh, presently to follow. 1409Moyses was expulsed, and put to death by his brother Mustapha, or (as others say) his nephue Orchanes, and soone after, he was likewise slaine by his brother Mahometh: And these twoe (by some) are not set in ranke with the Turkish Em∣perors, because they are said to raigne very little time, or not at all. 1409Mahometh, first of that name, brother to Iosu∣ah, Mustapha, and the forenamed Moyses, is said (notwithstanding the rest) to be Emperor of the Turkes, in the yeare 1409. There are som that doo attribute only to this man, all those matters which are reported of Iosuah or Cyriscelebes. He ouer ran the Countries of the Bulgarians & Vala∣chians, imposing great Tributes and Taxations vpon them. Then he entred on the Satrapes of Asya, recouering all those places which Tamber∣laine had taken. He chased out of Galatia, and the Countries of Pontus and Cappadocia, his own kindred and Allies, without extending any pit∣ty, to any Princes and Lordes of his owne blood: albeit it is true, that he left some in their own in∣tire dwellings. Being returned into Greece, hee came to Adrianople, (the Metropolitan Citty of Thrace) and there he constituted the seate of his Empire, expelling thence the Christians that had there any abiding. He died in the twelft yeare of his Empire, which is reckoned to be in the yeare 1418. leauing his sonne Amurath the second, to be his successor.
Amurath the second,1418 Sonne to the forenamed Mahometh, succéeded his Father in the Turkish Empire, in the yeare 1418. He (vnderstanding the death of his father, and desiring to passe from Asya into Thrace) vanquished his Vncle Mu∣stapha, to whom the Gréeks gaue fauour and suc∣cour. He was the first, that (for the guard of his person) made election of Christian Renegados, to bee his Ianissaries, by the power and courage of whom, both he and his successors haue subdued almost the whole East. He assailed with his for∣ces, and did great dammages to the Countries of Hungaria, Bosnia, Albania, Ʋalachia, & Greece. He tooke Thessalonica from the Venetians. He had victory against Ladislaus King of Poland, against the Cardinall Iulian, and against Huniades. He held the Empire or Kingdome of the Turks, for the space of 32. yeares, and then left it to Maho∣met his Sonne. Mahomet the second, Emperor of the Turks, succéeded his Father Amurath in the year, 1450.1450 He began his reigne as an Homicide, causing his younger Brother to be murthered, because his fa∣thers body should not be buried alone. He was a most wicked and sinfull man, not beléeuing in a∣ny God. For he would say, that his Mahomet was a false Prophet, like vnto himselfe, & made a mockery of the Saintes, Prophets, and Patri∣arches. He woon, and left the sirname of Great, to the house of the Otthomans. Hee ruyned the Empyre of Constantinople, which he seized by as∣sault the 29. day of May, 1453. as hath béene al∣ready
declared, in the report of the life of Constan∣tine the eleauenth; togither, with the Empire of Trebisonde. He tooke twelue kingdomes, & two hundred Citties, from the Christians, in the year 1479. He besieged the Isle of Rhodes, which was then held by the knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, but his labour was in vaine, for it was couragi∣ously defended by the said Knights, & their great maister Peter d'Aubusson, or d'Ambois, a French man. At length, he died of the Collick, the fourth day after he sickened; hauing liued 58. yeares, & reigned one and thirty. 1481Baiazeth, second of that name, and sonne to Mahomet the second, by meanes of the Ianissa∣ries, was made Emperor of the Turkes, in the yeare 1481. He conquered and expulsed Zizim, his younger brother, whom the chiefest Lordes would haue had to be Emperour: but hee beeing fled for refuge to the Isle of Rhodes, the great ma∣ster of the Knights, sent him to King Charles the eight. Baiazeth vanquished Caraman, and reco∣uered all whatsoeuer hee hadde gotten from the Turkes, on either side of the Mount Taurus. He subdued Valachia, and so went on against the Sultane of Aegipt, who was too strong for him: For, hauing receiued the fugitiue Mamelukes, af∣ter the death of Caraman, and entertaining (be∣sides) a great number of Arabes, for his defence, oftentimes hee conquered and put Baiazeth to flight. Afterward, Baiazeth subiected the Inha∣bitants of the Ceraunian Mountaines, and tooke from the Venetians Lepanto, Modon and Duraz.
In the end, his youngest sonne Selim, whoe (by means of the Ianissaries) had gotten preferment before the eldest, and was declared to be Empe∣ror in his fathers life time: enforced him to flight, and afterward poisoned him, in the yeare 1512. at the very same time, when the battell of Rauen∣na was fought, vnder the happy reigne of King Lewes the twelfth. Selim hauing expulsed,1512. and after poisoned his Father, because he liued too long, was Emperour of the Turkes, in the yeare 1512. To this par∣racide, he added the murder of his brethren Ach∣met and Corcuthus, and caused seauen of his Ne∣phewes to be strangled, that were the Children of his brothers. He conquered and expelled the Sophi of Persya, and (in diuers battels) discomfited the two Souldanes, Campson and Tomombeus, with the Mamelukes and Arabes. Hee added Aegipt and Arabia to his Empire, and tooke the great Cayro. Then returning home to his coun∣trey of Greece, an vlcer ingendred in his Raines, which increasing continually like a Canker, pro∣cured his death, in the eight yeare of his reygne, Anno 1519. Soliman, whom some tearme to be the second of that name, Emperor of the Turks,1510 carried that name (as is said) because he very wisely prouided for all affaires, whereunto the yssue of them was also as correspondent. For this name of Soliman (by som transposed sillables) deliuereth the name of Salomon, the most renowmed King for Wise∣dome. There was not any before him, nor of the
race of the Othomans, more seuere and valiaunt. For the déedes and warres of Soliman, came not one iote behinde those of his Father: hauing reco∣uered Syria, vanquished Gazel that was reuoul∣ted, and surprised Belgrade and Rhodes; then af∣terward Buda two seuerall times, and put to the worse the Army of Austria, that fled away before him. And néere vnto Buda, had the victory ouer Rokandolphe, who had a great Army. He van∣quished the Spaniards at Castelnoua in Dalmatia, and put to flight the Army by Sea, which séemed inuinsible. In the yeare 1543.1543. he tooke Strigonia and Alba Regalis, two worthy Citties of Hunga∣ria. He conquered the kingdomes of Assyria and Mesopotamia, with the Citty of Babylon, that might be compared with Memphis and Aegypt, conquered by his Father. He ouer-ran and wa∣sted the frontiers of Armenia, Medea and Persia, and twice tooke Tauris, the principall Cittye of Persia, chasing the Sophi (farre off before him) in∣to the mountaines. For the rest, the Turks them∣selues doe confesse, that for 200. yeares before, they neuer had Lord that was a greater Iusticer, more sober, wise, and humane, then he was. But this humanity ceased in him, when he caused his eldest sonne Mustapha to bee strangled, to please his Concubine Rosa, who desired that hir Sonne Selim might be Emperour after his Father. Hee was repulsed by the Emperour Charles the fift, when hee came (with a powerfull Army) to be∣siege the Citty of Ʋienna in Austria. He besie∣ged also the Isle of Malta, in the yeare 1565.1565
whether the Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem had retired themselues, after the surprisall of Rhodes. But the Isle was manfully defended by their great maister, being a Frenchman, named Peter Parisot, called also; le Ʋalette, and Soliman was compelled to raise his siege. In the yeare 1566. He died in Hungary, at his siedge before the Ca∣stle of Sighet, hauing raigned 47. yeares. Selim, second of that name,1566. Emperour of the Turks, succéeded in the Empire (by the meanes of Basha Mehemet) after the death of Soliman his Father in Hungary, which for a time was concealed, and hee entred into possession of the Empire, before the death of his Father was dis∣couered. He subdued Ainan in Arabia, and took the Isle of Cyprus, in the yeare 1571.1571. In the end, he lost his Nauall Army, in the battell of Lepan∣to, which he had against the Christians, in the very same yeare 1571. But soone after, he came vpon them againe, and then renewed peace with the Venetians and their Common-wealth. After∣ward, he recouered Thunis & the Goulette, which the king of Spaine had made vse of in Affrica: And he died in the yeare 1574. hauing reigned eight yeares. But all the forenamed memorable actions, were performed by his Bashaes, and not by himselfe: for hee (all the while) tooke his plea∣sure, being greatly giuen to women and wine. Amurath, third of that name,1574 and son to Se∣lim, was created Emperour of the Turkes, and enioyed the Empire after his fathers death, with∣in eight daies, in the yeare 1574. By a cruel and
barbarous custome of the Contrey, he caused fiue Brethren of his owne to be slaine, and two Con∣cubines of his Fathers, whoe were great with Child: to the end, that he might solely reigne a∣lone, without feare or suspition, and so be auoy∣ded of all impeachments, which he wel vnderstood might ensue by parity, and such as shoulde laye claime to the like Fortune. He began his gouern∣ment somewhat yong, being aged but 28. years, being a woonderfull louer of his paternall Mao∣metane Religion, a great Iusticer, and imitator of his Graundfather Soliman, He tooke som cit∣ties in Hungarie and Sclauonie, which afterward were regained from him. Some say, that he was dull and lumpish of spirit, and fell (oftentimes) with the falling sicknesse, which made his face to look blemished, and of a leaden coulour. He gaue himselfe to women and great feeding, for he was the Father of 102. children, and yet became ve∣ry grosse and corpulent. Hee died in Ianuary, 1595. the 21. yeare of his raigne, not hauing at∣tained to fifty yeares of age. 1595.Mahometh the third, succéeded his Father Amurath the third, in the yeare 1595. And to shew himselfe the sonne of his father, and no whit to degenerate from his Auncestors, he caused 19. of his brethren to be barbarously murdered, and many of his Fathers Concubines to be drowned, that were found to be great with childe after his decease, so that no child should remaine, to trou∣ble him in his gouernment. But, as cruelty and barbarousnesse doth commonly dwell in a negli∣gent
sprit, addicted to sloth and pusillanimity: euen so, did not he any thing deseruing memory, he being wholy giuen to his bodies voluptuous∣nesse. He did put to death his eldest sonne, and the mother of that sonne, because they had inqui∣red of Astrologers, how long time hee shoulde raigne. In the yeare 1603. the Sophi of Persya, regained Tauris and Bages, and those great coun∣tries, which the predecessors of this Mahometh had invaded, as hath bin already declared, in our report of Selim the first, and Soliman the second. He died of the Plague at Constantinople, in Ia∣nuary 1604. hauing raigned nine yeares. Achmet succéeded his father in the Empyre, being but seauentéen years old, in the year 1604.1604 In the yeare 1605. he tooke Strigonia, and some other places in the Kingdome of Hungaria. It is said, that (in his Army) he causeth his Fathers dead body to be carried, embalmed and enclosed in a Coffin of Lead: holding opinion, that his military deseigns and exployts shall therby proue the more fortunat. He hath made peace with the Emperour Rodulphus, and those of the house of Austria for fifteen yeares, which makes it there∣fore the more beléeued, that hee will conuert his forces against the Sophi. He now reigneth, this yeare 1611. and (by outward appearance) couets to be feared.
A briefe Discourse concer∣ning the Sarrazins, the Originall of their name, and what People they haue been, euen to this day. HAuing deliuered a shorte Sur∣uey of the Turkish Ottomans, from their first King or Emperor to the man that now gouerneth: I thought it not impertinent to my purpose, to say somwhat al∣so of the Sarazins, who are held to be before them, and much more auncient then they. Nor list I here to call in question, those errors committed by Sabellicus, Blondus, the Tyrian Bishop, Ʋolatte∣ranus, & many other graue Authors, who (in their writings) doe tearme the Mahumetists or Turks to be Sarazins: for they neuer knewe any such name, neither were at any time so called, but only Mulsulmans,Mulsulmans what it sig∣nifieth. which is as much to say, as, peo∣ple faithfull in the Law. Some others, who haue thought their iudgements to be much more preg∣nant, sticke not to say: that this name of Sara∣zin▪ did come of Sarra, the wife of Abraham, of whose race the great Prophet Mahomet, (inuen∣ter and deuiser of the Law or Religion, helde at this present by the Sarazins and Turkes) they say was discended. But this opinion likewise is not receineable: for they desired rather to be cal∣led Agarians, in reguard of Agar, handmayde to Sarra,Whence the Sazins de∣re theyr de cent. and mother of Ismaeli; or else Ismaelites, because they iudged themselues to be yssued of the said Ismaell, bastard son to the forenamed Abra∣ham.
But let vs leaue these false etymologies, which neither carry or yeeld any true likelihood, & come to the very Originall of the name Sarazin. The error grew from hence, that some short while be∣fore Mahomet (or Muhamet, as others tearms him) arose, and began to extend himselfe as well towards Suria as Persya: there liued then in the Rocky Arabia and Idumea, certain Arabes, who made their abode or dwelling (and yet doe to this day) vnder small Tents or enclosures, and hadde not any other trade or maintenance for their li∣uing, but by thefts and robberies,Sarazins were people dwelling in the desert of Arabia, and Idumea which they dai∣ly exercised vpon all passengers, were they Turks, Christians, Pagans or whatsoeuer. Of which Robbers and Théeues, the Countrey coulde ne∣uer be fréeed, nor can be at this day: as such doe faithfully affirme, who haue trauailed on pilgry∣mage to Mount Sinai in Ierusalem. And the Turkes themselues doe confesse, that when De∣uotion drew them forth on Pilgrimage, to the ci∣ty of Medinat al Nabi, that is to say: the Citty of the Prophet, scituate in Arabia foelix, where the Sepulcher of Mahomet is: and when likwise they doe yet passe thorow the very greatest soli∣tudes and desarts, as many times the Christians doe: They finde them to bee peopled with these wicked kindes of Théeues, as formerly hath bin sa, who name themselues Sarracenis, not in re∣gard of Religion or bloud, but by an auncient ap∣pellation of the said people, of whome Ptolomey makes mention, and saith, that their liuing is in Idumea.
Ami, Mar∣cel, in vita Iul, Apost, lib, 14Amianus Marcellinus, in the History of Iuli∣an the Apostat Emperour, makes a description of them, and saith: that Those places (more than two hundred yeares before the Originall of Ma∣homet,The antiqui¦ty of the Sa¦razin people or of his Alcoran) were fully furnished with the said Sarrazins: and Assyria afterward, euen so farre as the Cataracts of Nylus, or the kingdome of Prester Iohn, where they vsed the same courses, violences & thefts vpon merchants, and inhabitants of the neighboring Countries, according as the Arabes or Alarbes doe at this day. Whereupon, because that their chiefest ha∣bitation was in the Desarts and Mountaines, which are in Arabia and the neighbouring quar∣sers or Countries, as Chaldaea, Assyria, Mesapo∣tamia, Suria and Aegipt, when the Arabes arose with their new Religion, and had frequented the foresaid Regions: the néerer Countries supposed that these people were those former Sarazins, by ignorance of their Language, as also by rashnesse of some Writers, who liued then in Suria, and since that time in Spaine, séeming to haue good knowledge of those people, and therefore continu∣ally then called Sarazins. Moreouer to confirme that vaine appellation, those Interpreters in Spaine,rro in trā∣slatiō of the Alchoran who (by comman∣dement of S. Bernard) were appointed to inter∣pret the Alchoran, in euery place where they found the vocable Mulsulman, which is as much to say in the Arabian tongue, as, Peaceble, and faithfull towards God: they interpreted the same Sarraceni, or Sarazins. This Mulsulman then
is the vocable, whereby al that beléeue in the Al∣coran will be called; whether they bee Arabes, Syrians, Persians, Tartars, Turks, or Moores. Whosoeuer then would enter into any peacea∣ble and friendly conference with them, (albeit none doe hate their name more than the Turks) must call them Mulsulmans, as we do our selues Christians, or faithfull people. So are they all named, by the Author of the Ismaell or Ismaeli∣tish race, and by their Bastard Prophet.Sarazins wil be called Mululmans After our manner, and in respect of Religion, they term a man Mulsulmam, and a woman Mulsulmina, or Mulsulminet: albeit some say Mussim, by a corrupt pronunciation. As we may well conceiue by our owne selues, who do vse to call those disfi∣gured wanderers, that walke among vs with de∣formed faces, and long ilfauored lockes, vsing all subtle Thefts, pieries, and legerdumaines they can deuise, we nick-name them to be Sarrazins, Aegiptians, or Gypsies. I thus conclude then,What peo∣ple are ment by the Sara∣zins. that when Hystorians write, that the Sarrazins inuaded and made vse of Rhodes, next of Thrace, then of Italy, Spaine, and other Countries: it is to be vnderstood of the Orientall people and Affricanes, that were of the Mahometan Religion, because they vsed the selfe same cruelties, thefts, and robberies, as the Sa∣razins of rockie Arabia did. And to speak truly, all Europe wold (at this instant) haue bin haunted with those people, if they had not béene formerlie expelled and spoiled. It remaineth yet freshe in memory, that the great Graundfather to Phillip
king of Spaine (not long since deceased) named Ferdinand,At what time the Sa∣razins were expulsed out of Spaine. expulsed them out of the Kingdom of Granado, with their king called Melen, and he bestowed six whole years together in stout wars, onely in foiling them: And then the dominion, which the Sarazins and Moores held in Spaine, had finall conclusion. After which time, those faith lesse Mahumetists durst neuer presume any more vpon Spaine, where they had held the Kingdome of Granado eight hundred yeares. A great slaughter of the Sarazins in Spaine.Before the said Ferdinand, king Alphonsus, in the yeare of our Lord 1233. slew in diuers places aboue two hundred thousand of them, when they held strong forts and Citties in Spaine, which he forced them to forsake, and since then haue béene vtterly ruined. Henry the Emperour made ano∣ther great massacre of them,Another in Italy. in the yeare of Iesus Christ 1010. in Italy, expelling them wholy out of that Countrey. Among the Sarazins▪ there were not only very generous persons: but like∣wise some men of great learning: as Auicen, Mesuus, Isaac, Mansor, Auerroes, and many others. Now, as all things haue their vicissitude, and alteration by courses: so after that the Sara∣zins had raigned in Africa, and partly in Europe, for about the space of eight hundred yeares, there came a people from diuers parts of Scythia, which at this day we call Turks, who in lesse than twoe hundred yeares,The Turks  the Sarazins. ouercame in Armes those people called Sarazins, with many other Christians be∣side, not onely in Asya, but in Europe and Affri∣ca. And albeit that those Turks were of the same
Religion, to wit, Mahumetists: yet did they not abstaine from vexing and troubling them with warre, euen in like manner as they did the Chri∣stians. For in the yeare 1012. they took Ierusa∣lem and all Iudaea from them: but the Sarazins of Aegipt recouered them againe, and held them for three hundred yeares after. Neuerthelesse, they were yet againe deiected thence in the year 1517 by the Turks, the Sarazins loosing then not onlie Palestine, and the Holy-land, but likewise Egipt, Syria, Arabya, and the very same Countrey of I∣dumea, where as the Sarazins had their original, and are there subiect to the Turkes nowe at this instant. For Campson their King, lost the daie against Selim, Emperor of the Turks, and To∣mombeus his successour, being next chosen to bee King in his place, was taken,The Sara∣zins last Ki. strangled. and afterward ig∣nominiouslie strangled in the graund Caire, the very principall Citty of Egypt, where we may behold the end of the Sarazins, not any part of them now remaining, except such few, as are in the Turks seruility. This short discourse giues vs to vnderstand, that Sarazins were not all such as are called Mahumetists, but they that had their beginning in the Countries of Idumea, and the desart or roc∣kie Arabia, and all those that (being ioined with them) commanded vnder them in diuers Coun∣tries, rendring other Nations subiect to them by Armes. Vncill such time, as they were extermi∣nate by the people, whose Countries they vniust∣lie vsurped, and planted their Religio by war:
As also (at length) by the Turkes, although they be of the same Religion. For warre is maintai∣ned among them, for desire of soueraignty and ambition, euen as well as among vs that are Christians. ¶A briefe Collection of the Byshops and Popes of Rome, from the yeare 44. to this instant 1611. With the seuerall Ages of the Church, since the Ascension of our blessed Sauiour Iesus Christ vp into Heauen. The years of Grace.OVr Lord Iesus Christ, the Naza∣rite, God and man, Messias, Sa∣uiour of the world, Holy of holies, Soueraigne and Eternall Highe Priest, head of the Church. 44.1 Peter, called Cephas, borne in Bethsaida, the sonne of Iohn, and first called of the Apostles, is said to hold his seat seauen yeares at Antioch, and afterward at Rome, xxiiij. yeares, vnder the Empire of Claudius and Nero, who caused him
to be crucified in the same place. Simon Magus, being reputed to be the first Heretique, was then condemned by him. Then was the first Councel holden at Ierusalem, and then also was the first Persecution. 2 Linus, the sonne of Herculanus,57 born at Vol∣terra in Tuscane, was said to be the Disciple to S. Peter, and his Coadiutor. He held the Sée, e∣leuen yeares, fiue Moneths, and twelue dayes: And had his head smitten off vnder Nero. 3 Clement, the son of Romain Faustinus,68 first Priest of the Romain Church, was designed by S. Peter his successour. He was banished to Pon∣tus, and was drowned, hauing an Anchor faste∣ned about his necke. He held the Sée, xij. Mo∣neths, eleuen daies. Sede vacante, xiij. daies. 4 Cletus, son to Emilianus the Romaine,77. was martyred vnder Domitian. He held the See, xij. yeares, one moneth, eleuen daies. Menander, Ebion and Cerinthus, were then Hereticks: And the second Persecution. The first Age. IN this first Age, liued & wrote, Philo the Iew, Dionisius Areopagita, Iosephus, and S. Igna∣tius. In this Age, were two seuerall Persecuti∣ons of the Church: The first vnder Nero, & the second vnder Domitian. 5 Anacletus,84. sonne to Autiochus the Atheni∣an, a Priest of the Romain Church, was marti∣red vnder Nerua and Traian. He held the See, nine yeares, two moneths, ten daies. Ʋacante, thirteen daies.
6. Euaristus a Greeke, Son of Iudas the Beth∣leemite Iew:96. was martyred vnder Traiane. Hée held the Sée, nine yeares, ten months, two daies vacante xix. dayes. Saturnine, Basilides, and Isi∣dorus Heretickes liued then: And then was the third persecution. 7 Alexander, Sonne of Romaine Alexander, was Martird vnder Traian.109 He held the Sée se∣uen yeares, ten Months, two daies, vacante xxv daies. 1178 Sixtus, Son of Romaine Pastor, a Priest of the Romaine Church, was Martyred vnder Adrian, He held the Sée, ten yeares, thrée Mo∣neths, and xxj. daies. vacante foure daies. Then liued, Carpocrates, Epiphanes, and Prodicus, au∣thor of the Gnosticke Hereticks. The fourth per∣secution. 127.9 Telesphorus a Gréeke, sonne to Anachore∣tus, Priest of the Romaine Church, was marty∣red vnder Adrian. He held the Sée, eleuen years, thrée moneths, xxij. daies. vac. foure daies. A∣quila of Pontus, the Heretick, then liued. 10 Higinus a Gréeke, son to an Athenian Phi∣losopher,138. was Priest of the Romain Church, vn∣der the Empire of Antoninm. He held the see, 4. yeares, thrée moneths, foure daies. vac. 4. daies. 24211 Pius of Aquilea, sonne to Ruffinus, Priest of the Romain church vnder Antoninus: He dis∣puted concerning the feast of Easter, at Laodicia. He held the See, nine yeares, thrée Monethes, foure daies. vacante foure daies. Then were he∣reticks, Valentinus and his Disciples, Marcus,
Secundus, Bassus, Colarbasus and Heracleo. 12 Anicetus a Syrian, the sonne of Iohn,153 mar∣tired vnder the Emperour Antonius verus. Hee held the Sée, nine yeares, foure monethes, xiij. daies. vacante xvij. daies. 13 Sother, sonne to Concordius, a Natiue of Fundi, vnder Verus. He held the Sée nine years, iij. months, two daies, Vacante xxi. daies. Then was Tatian, of whom came the Excratites, Se∣uerus and Ammonius Hereticks. 14 Eleutherius of Nicopolis, sonne to Habun∣dius, was Deacon of the Romain Church,171 vnder Commodus. He held the Sée, xv. yeares, iij. mo∣neths, two daies, Ʋacante fiue daies. Montanus the Phrygian, Author of the Cataphriges, Theod. Themist. Alexander and Symmachus Heretiques then liuing. 15 Ʋictor an Affricane borne,186 the Sonne of Foelix, vnder the Emperor Pertinax. Hee helde the Sée ten yeares, thrée months ten daies: va∣cante xxi. dayes. A Synod was then at Rome; some Counsels in Palestine, concerning Easter. Theodotus, Aesclapiodothus, Hermopilus, and Apollonides, were then Heretiques. 16. Zephyrinus a Romaine borne,198 Sonne to Habundius, vnder Antonius Caracalla. Hee held the Sée seauen yeares, seauen months, ten daies, vacante sixe dayes. 17. Calixtus, Sonne to Domitius a Romayne,218 was martired vnder Aurelius Seuerus▪ He helde the Sée sixe yeares, one month, tenne daies, Va∣cante vi. dayes. Then was the fift persecution.
The second Age. 2 In this second Age, liued Iustine the Phy∣losopher and Martir: Dionisius Byshoppe of Co∣rinth S. Policarpus, S. Ireneus; Clemens, Alex∣andrinus, and Tertullian. In which Age, were thrée persecutions: one vnder Traiane: the second vnder Marcus Antoninus, and the thirde vnder Seuerus. 22318 Vrbane, Sonne to Pontianus a Romaine, martired vnder Alexander. Hee helde the Sée foure yeares, ten months, twelue dayes, vacante one month. 23119 Pontianus a Romaine borne, and sonne to Capurnius, dyed in exile in Sardignia, vnder A∣lexander. He held the Sée nine yeares, fiue mo∣neths, two daies, Vacante x. daies. 23620 Antherus a Greeke by birth, son to Romu∣lus, martired vnder Maximinus. Hee helde the Sée fiue yeares, one month, twelue daies, Va∣cante xiij. daies. Then was the sixt persecution. 23721 Fabian a Romaine, sonne to Fabius, vnder Maximinus. He held the Sée, fifteene yeares, e∣leuen dayes, Ʋacante six daies. Gordianus, Phil∣lip and Decius were then martired. The Aelche∣fites, and Nouatus chiefe of the Nouatians, with some Arabian Heretickes, were then. A Counsel was holden at Rome, against Nouatus: The se∣uenth persecution. 25122 Cornelius a Romaine, son to Castinus Priest of the Romaine Church, and martyred vnder De∣cius and Gallus. He held the See two yeares, two months, three daies: Ʋacante one moneth, and
three daies. Then was the Nouatian Anti-pope, and first schisme in the Church. Two Sinodes were held in Affrica, against Nouatian. The sée being vacant, a Synode was held at Rome, con∣cerning them that had denied the Faith. 23 Lucius a Romain,253. and sonne to Porphi∣rius, was martyred vnder Gallien and Valerian. He held the Sée three yeares, three moneths, iij. daies, Vacante one month, v. daies. Two coun∣cels were held at Carthage, one concerning the doubt, whether Heretiques ought to bee rebapti∣zed: and the other about baptizing of Infantes. Two other Councels were likewise in Asya, vp∣on the doubt, whether Heretiques were to be re∣ceiued, comming to resipiscence or knowledge of their error. Now was the eight Persecution. 24 Stephen a Romain, sonne to Iulius,255 Arch∣deacon of the Romain Church, martyred vnder Valerian and Gallien. He held the Sée, 7. years, fiue Moneths, and ij. daies. vacante xxij. daies. A Synode was held in Affrica, against Basilides and Martiall, two renegate Bishops. 25 Sixtus the second, an Athenian borne,257 son to a Phylosopher, and martyred with S. Lau∣rence, vnder Valerian and Gallien. He helde the Sée two years, ten months, xxiij. daies: vacante one moneth, fiue dayes. Then were liuing Noë∣tus and Sabellius, Author of the Sabellian heresie, with the heretick Paule of Samosata. 26 Denis or Dionisius, a Monke vnder Clau∣dius the Emperour. He held the Sée, sixe yeares,260 two moneths, foure daies. vac. six daies. Nepos
the Heretick then renewed the Chiliastes, Two Synodes were at Antioch, against Paule of Samo sata: And a Synode at Rome, for the cause of Denis of Corinth. 271.27 Felix a Romain, son of Constantius, mar∣tyred vnder Aurelian: He held the see, 4. yeares, thrée moneths, xv. daies. vacan. fiue daies. The ninth Persecution. 27528 Eutichianus, sonne to Maximus, & borne at Luna in Tuscane, martired vnder Aurelian, Tacitus and Florian Emperors: He held the Sée, one yeare, one Moneth, vacante eight daies. Then was Manes, head of the Manichean Here∣tiques. 8329 Caius, the son of Caius, borne at Salona, in Dalmatia, martyred vnder Carinus, Numeri∣anus, Dioclesian and Maximianus Emperors. He held the See, eleuen yeares, foure Moneths, xij. daies, vacante eleuen daies. 29630 Marcellinus a Romaine, son to Proiectus, martyred vnder Dioclesian and Maximianus. He held the See, six yeares, two moneths, xvi. daies, Ʋacante seauen yeares, seuen moneths, and xxv. daies. Then was the tenth and bloudy Persecu∣tion: And a Synode holden at Sinüessa, for the cause of Pope Marcellinus. The third Age. 3 In this third Age flourished Origen, Minu∣tius
Foelix, S, Cyprian, S. Gregory, cald the wor∣ker of myracles; Dionisius bishop of Alexandria, Ʋictorinus, Bishop of Poicters, Arnobius, and S. Methodius Byshop of Tyre. In this age were fiue persecutions. The first vnder Maximinus, the second vnder Decius, the third vnder Valeria∣nus and Gallien, the fourth vnder Aureliauus, and the fift vnder Dioclesian. 31. Marcellus a Romaine,304 the Sonne of Bennet or Benedict, Priest, Cardinall of the Romaine Church, vnder Constantine. Hee helde the Sée six yeares, fiue months, thrée dayes, vacante xx. dayes. 32 Euscbius a Greeke, sonne to a Physitian,310 vnder Constantine, He held the Sée four yeares, one month, thrée daies, Vacante thrée dayes. 33 Miltiades or Melchiades an Affricane,311. Cardinall Priest of the Romaine Church vnder Constantine. He held the Sée, foure yeares, sea∣uen months, nine dayes, vacante xx, daies. Then was the Schisme of the Donatists in Affrica: the Elibertine Synod in Spaine; the Synod of Rome and of Carthage. 34. Syluester a Romaine, sonne to Ruffinus,315 Cardinall Priest vnder Constantine. Hee helde the Sée three and twenty yeares, ten months, ele∣uen dayes, vacante fifteene dayes, Then were the Synodes of Ancyra and Neocaesaria: The generall Counsell of Nice, wherein Arrius was condemned, and the third Sinod holden at Rome 35 Marcus a Romaine, the sonne of Priscus, Cardinall Deacon vnder Constantine,33 hee helde
the Sée two yeares, eight months, twenty daies, vacante twenty daies. 33636 Iulius a Romaine, sonne of Rusticius, Car∣dinall Deacon vnder Constantine and his chil∣dren. Hee helde the Sée fiftéene yeares, two mo∣neths, ten dayes, Ʋacante, two dayes. Then wer the Asterians, Anthropomorphites, Eusebians, Macedonians, Dulians, Luciferians, and Mar∣cellian Heretiques; with Photinus, Acacius and Aerius: The Synodes of Rome, Cullen, Sardis, Ierusalem and Alexandria. 35337 Liberius a Romaine, the son of Augustus, a Cardinall Deacon, was sent into exile vnder Constance. He held the Sée, twelue yeares, thrée moneths, foure daies: Vacante sixe daies. Then was the persecution of the church by the Arrians, and second Schisme betwéene Liberius and Foe∣lix. 35538 Foelix the second, a Romaine, and Son of Anastasius, a Cardinall Deacon: was created Pope in the life time of Liberius, vnder Constance and martired by the faction of the Arrians. He held the Sée, one yeare, four months, two daies. 39 Damasus a Portuguize, sonne of Antonio, Cardinall Deacon, vnder Valentinian, Ʋalens, Gratian,366. Theodosius and Arcadius. He helde the Sée tenne yeares, thrée monethes, eleuen daies, Ʋacante xi. dayes. The third Schisme betwéene Damasus and Vrsicinus then happened, and Sy∣nods were held at Rome, in Spaine, and at Valen∣tia in France. As also the Euuomina, Entichian, Priscillianists, Apollonarian and Messalian He∣retickes.
A generall Counsell at Constantinople, against Macedonius. 40 Siricius a Romaine, son of Tiburtius,384 Car∣dinall Deacon vnder Arcadius and Honorius. He held the Sée fifteene yeares, eleuen months, fiue and twenty daies, vacante xx. daies. Some Synods were then held at Carthage: Heluidius, Dorotheus and Vigilantius heretickes, were then. The fourth age. IN this fourth Age liued Lactantius, Eusebius of Caesaria, S. Athanasius, Iuvencus, Sa. Hillarie Bishop of Poictiers, Optatus Byshop of Maltha, S. Basile, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S: Ambrose, S: Hierom, S: Iohn Chrysostome, S: Epiphanius, S: Cyrill of Ierusalem, and Martine Archbishoppe of Tours. 41 Anastasius a Romaine,398 sonne of Maximus Cardinal Priest vnder Honorius: he held the Sée thrée yeares, ten daies, vacante xxi. daies. Then were the synodes of Cyprus and Tolledo. 42 Innocentius a Natiue of Albania,401. or Scot∣land, sonne of Innocentius, Cardinal Deacon vn∣der Honorius: he held the Sée fifteen yeares, two months, fiue & twenty daies, vacante xxij. daies. The hereticks then were Arcadius, Theodosius, and Pelagius. 43 Zosimus of Cappadocia, sonne of Abraham,416 Cardinall Priest vnder Theodosyus the younger: he held the Sée one year, iij. months, xii. daies. va∣ca. xi. daies. Then was the sixt synod of Carthage
41044 Bonifacius a Roman, Son of Iocundus, Car∣dinall-Priest vnder Theodosius: he held the Sée thrée yeares, eight months, ij. dayes, vacante, nine daies. The Schisme of Eulalius Anty-Pope. 45 Celestine a Romaine, Sonne of Priscus, Cardinall-Deacon:423 he held the Sée eight years, ten months, seauentéen daies: vacante, 21. daies. Then was the generall Councell of Ephesus, a∣gainst Nestorius, vnder Theodosius. 432.46 Sixtus the third, a Romaine, and Son of Sixtus, Cardinall-Priest vnder Valentinian: hee held the Sée 8. yeares, eighteene daies. 4047 Leo the Great, a Romaine, sonne of Quin∣ctian, Cardinall Arch-deacon vnder Theodosius: he held the sée one yeare, one month, 13. daies va∣cante, 8. daies. Then was the generall Councell of Chalcedon, against Dioscorus and Eutichus. 46148 Hillarius, borne in Sardignia, son of Cris∣pinus, Cardinall-deacon vnder the Empire of Leo. He held the Sée 7. yeares, three months ten daies, vacante ten daies. 49 Simplicius, a Natiue of Tiuoli, sonne of Castinus,467 or Castorius, vnder Leo, he held the see fifteene yeares, one month, seauen daies, vacante 26. daies. 4850 Felix the third and younger, a Romaine, son of Felix a Priest, Cardinall vnder Zeno. He held the see sixe yeares, eleauen monthes, seauentéene daies, vcante fiue daies. 51 Gelasius an Affricane, sonne of Valuerus Bisoppe,¶ vnder the Empire of Anastasius: hee
held the See fiue yeares, eyght months, seauen∣teene daies, vacante seauen daies. 52 Anaestasius the second, a Romaine,496 sonne of Peter, vnder Anastasius. He held the see 1. yeare, ten monthes, twenty foure daies, vacante foure daies. The fift Age. IN this fift age liued Saint Augustine, Orosius, Cassianus, Eucherius of Lyons, Cyrillus Alex∣andrinus, Ʋicentius Lyrinensis, Socrates, Sozome∣nes, Theodoret, Prosper, Petrus Chrysologus, Sal∣uianus Byshop of Marseillis, Sidonius Apollina∣ris, Gennadius, Petrus Diaconus, Boetius, and many others. 53 Symmachas, a Natiue of Sardignia,498 Sonne of Fortunius, vnder Anastasius: he held the See fifteene yeares, sixe months, twenty two dayes, vacante seauen daies. Then was the fift schisme between Symmachus and Laurentius, who after∣ward was Byshop of Nocera. 54 Hormisda, borne in Terra di Lauoro,514 or the Land of Labour, Sonne of Iustus, vnder Ana∣stasius and Iustine: hee helde the see nine yeares, eighteene dayes, vacante six daies. The Synods of Geronda, of Caesar-Augustus, and of Constan∣tinople. 55 Iohn, a Natiue of Tuscane,523 Sonne of Constantius, Cardinall-Priest vnder Iustine: Hee dyed in Prison at Rauenna, hauing then
bin taken by Theodoric king of the Goths; he held the See two yeares, eight months, eight & twen∣ty daies, vacante one month. 52656 Foelix the fourth, a Samnite borne, sonne of Castorius, Cardinall Priest of S: Syluester, vn∣der Iustine and Iustinian: he helde the See foure yeares, two months, three daies, vacante thirteen daies. The second synod of Tolledo. 5057 Boniface the second, a Romaine, sonne of Si∣gultus, Cardinall Priest of S. Cecily, vnder Iu∣stinian: hee helde the Sée two yeares, two daies, vacante two months. The sixt schisme betweene Boniface and Dioscorus. Three synodes holden at Rome. 53058 Iohn the second, sur-named Mercurius, a Romaine, sonne of Proiectus, Cardinall Priest of S: Clement vnder Iustinian: he held the Sée two yeares, foure months, vacante six daies. 53459 Agapetus a Romaine, sonne of Gordianus, Cardinall Arch-Deacon of the Romaine Church vnder Iustinian: he held the See eleuen Months, nineteene dies, vacante one month, xxix. daies. A synod holden at Constantinople. 53560 uerius, borne in Terra di Lauoro, sonne of Pope ormisda, sub-Deacon of the Romaine church vnder Iustinian: he held the Sée one year, fiue monthes, twelue daies, vacante sixe dayes. Then he was expulsed and banished into the Isle Pontia, where he died. The second synode of Or∣leans. 53761 Ʋigilius a Romaine, sonne of Iohn that had  Deacon of the Roman Church
vnder Iustinian. He held the Sée eighteen years, six months, sixe and twenty daies, vacante three months, fiue daies. The seauenth Schisme be∣tweene Siluerius and Ʋigilius, and the fifte Ge∣nerall Counsell of Constantinople against the Ori∣genists. Also the third Synod of Orleans. 62 Pelagius a Romaine, sonne of Iohn Vleari∣anus, Arch-Deacon of the Romaine Church,553 vn∣der Iustinian: he held the Sée sixe yeares, ten mo∣neths, eight and twentie daies, vacante, three months, and six and twentie daies. Two Synods at Paris. 63 Iohn the third, Catelline a Roman, sonne of Anastasyus, vnder Iustinian and Iustine:561 he held the Sée twelue yeares, eleuen months, sixe and twenty daies, vacante ten monthes, three daies. Then beganne the Lombardes to raigne in Italy. 64 Bennet Bonosus, a Romaine,575 sonne of Bo∣niface, vnder Iustine, and Tyberius Constantine: he held the See foure yeares, one month, eight & twentie daies, vacante two months, ten daies. 65 Pelagius the second, a Romaine,579 sonne of Ʋinigildus, vnder Tiberius and Mauritius: hee held the See ten yeares, two months, ten daies, vacante ten months, x. daies. The Patriar-chate of Aquilea was then transferred to Grada. 66 Gregory sur-named the Great,590 a Romaine Monke, and Doctor of the Church, son to Gordia∣nus the Senator, and Syluia a most holy woman, Arch-Deacon of the Romaine Church, Legate or Agent for the holy see, at Constantinople towards the Emperor, called also the Apostle of the Eng∣lish,
vnder Tyberius, Mauritius, and Phocas, he held the see thirteene yeares, sixe monthes, tenne daies, vacante fiue months, nine daies. The sixt Age. IN this sixt Age flourished Cassiodorus, Bennet Abbat, Fortunatus Byshop of Poictiers, Eua∣grius, Michaell Syngelus, Gregory of Tours, and others. 60467 Sabinianus, borne in Tuscanie, son of Bonus, Cardinall-deacon, and Legate to the Emperour Phoeas at Constantinople. He held the see, 1. year, 5 months, 9. daies, vacante 11. months 26. daies. 60568 Boniface the third, a Roman, son of Iohn, Cardinall-priest vnder Phocas. He held the See nine months, vacante one month nine daies. 60669 Boniface the fourth, borne at Maersia in Lombardy, sonne of Iohn a Phisition, Cardinall-Priest vnder Phocas and Heraclius. Hee held the see sixe yeares, eyght months, thirteen daies, va∣cante seauen months, fifteene daies. 61370 Deus-dedit, a Romaine, sonne of Stephen Subdeacon, cardinall-Priest vnder Heraclius. He held the see three yeares, three months, 20 daies, vacante one moneth, 16. daies. The Synod of Auxerre. 61771 Boniface the fift, borne at Naples, sonne of Iohn, vnder Heraclius. He held the see fiue years, twenty daies, vacante thirteene daies. 62272 Honorius, borne in Terra di Lauoro, son of Petronius, that had been Consul vnder Hera∣clius.
Hee helde the See twelue yeares, eleauen months, sixteene daies, vacante one year, seauen months, thirteene daies. The foure and fiue sy∣nods of Tolledo. 73 Seuerinus a Romaine, son of Labienus,637 vn∣der Heraclius: he held the see one year, 2. months vacante foure months 29. daies. 74 Iohn the fourth, borne in Dalmatia son of Ʋenantius the Scholastick,639. cardinall-deacon vn∣der Heraclius: hee helde the see one yeare, nine months, nine daies, vacante foure monthes 13. daies, the sixt synod of Toledo. 75 Theodorus a Grecian,647 sonne of Theodorus the Byshop, vnder Constantine and Constans, he held the see sixe yeares, fiue monthes, 18. dayes, vacante one moneth 22. daies. A synod at Rome, and three in Affrica. 76 Martine a Tudertine, sonne of Fabritius,647 vn∣der Constans, by whom he was banished (for the faith) to Gersonna in the Isle of Pontus, where he dyed: he held the see sixe yeares, one month, 26. dayes, vacante one yeare, two monthes. A synod at Romo, another in Spaine, against the Mono∣tholites. 77 Eugenius a Roman, sonne of Rufinianus,654 vnder Constans. He held the see two yeares, nine months, vacante foure monthes fifteene daies: synod eight of Toledo. 78 Vitalian a Latine, sonne of Anastasius,657 vn∣der Constans and Constantine: he held the see 14. years, six months, vacante one yeare, one month, 8. daies. A synod at Chaalons, & of Toledo 9. and 10
67279 Adeodatus a Romain Monk, son of Iouini∣anus, Cardinall Priest vnder Constantine: hee held the See foure years, two months, v. daies, vacante foure months, twenty dayes. Synodes then at Hertford in England, Toledo the xi. and at Bracharensys the third. 67680. Domnio or Domnus, a Romaine, sonne of Mauritius vnder Constantine: he helde the See, fiue yeares, fiue months, ten daies, vacante two months, sixteene daies. 67981 Agatho, borne at Palermo in Sicily, a monk, and sonne of Pannonius, Cardinall Priest vnder Constantine: he held the Sée two yeares, six mo∣neths, fifteene daies, vacante one yeare, fiue mo∣nethes. Then was the sixt generall Counsell of Constantinople against the Monotholites. 68282 Leo the second, a Sicillian, sonne of Paule, Cardinall Priest vnder Constantine: hee held the Sée one yeare, vacante eleuen months, xxi. daies. The xiij. Synod of Toledo. 68483 Bennet the second, a Romaine, and sonne of Iohn, Cardinall Priest vnder Constantine: he held the Sée ten months, twelue daies, vacante, two months, fiftéene daies. 68584 Iohn the fift, borne at Antioch in Syria, son of Cyriacus, Cardinall Arch-Deacon vnder Con∣stantine and Iustinian: he held the Sée one yeare, vacante two months, ninetéene daies. The sea∣uenth and eight Schisme betwéene Iohn the fift, and two Anti-popes, Peter and Theodor. 6885 Cuno, or Conon, a Natiue in Thrace, sonne of Bennet, Cardinall Priest vnder Iustinian: hee
held the Sée eleuen months, thrée daies, vacante, two months, thrée and twenty daies. 86 Sergius borne at Antioch,687 sonne of Tyberius Cardinall Priest vnder Iustinian, Leontius, and Tyberius: he held the See thirteene yeares, eight moneths, and three and twenty daies: vacante one moneth, xx. daies. The ninth Schisme, be∣tweene Sergius, Theodor, and Paschall. Three Synods at Toledo. The seauenth Age. IN this seuenth Age, liued S. Isidore the bishop, Georgius Alexandrinus, Andoemus Byshop of Rouen, Iulianus Arch-Byshoppe of Toledo, and others. 87 Iohn the sixt a Greeke, sonne of Paturnus,701. or Patronus, or Petronius, vnder Tyberius: he helde the Sée three yeares, thrée months, vacante one month, ninetéene dayes. A Synod in England. 88 Iohn the seauenth, a Greeke also, son of Pla∣to, Cardinall Deacon vnder Tyberius,705 and Iusti∣nian: he held the Sée two yeares, seuen months, seuenteene daies, vacante three months. 89 Sysinnius, a Syrian, sonne of Iohn,707. vnder Iustinian. Hee helde the Sée xx. daies, vacante one month, eighteene daies. 90 Constantine a Syrian, sonne of Iohn,707 vnder Iustinian and Phillippicus: he held the Sée seauen yeares, twenty daies, vacante two moneths, ten daies. A Synod holden at London in England. 91 Gregory the seconde, a Romaine, sonne of Marcellus, Cardinall Deacon vnder Anastasius,716.
Theodosius and Leo: he held the Sée xvi, yeares, nine months, eleuen daies, vacante one moneth. A Synod holden at Rome, about Images, & ano∣ther synod at Moguntia or Mentz in Allemaign. 731.92 Gregory the third, a Syrian, son of Iohn, Car∣dinall priest vnder Leo Isauricus. Hee helde the Sée, x. yeares, ix. months, xxiiij. daies, Vacante viij daies. A synod at Augusta, vnder Bonifaco. 74193 Zacharias a Greeke, sonne of Polycronius, Monke and Cardinall, Priest vnder Constantine Copronymus: He held the sée, x. years, iij. months, Vacante xij. dayes. Synods at Rome, & in France. 752.94 Stephen the second, Cardinall Priest vnder Constantine. He held the Sée thrée daies. 75295 Stephen the third, a Romaine, sonne of Con∣stantine, Cardinal Deacon vnder Constantine and Leo. He held the Sée v. yeares, one month, va∣cante one month. 757.96 Paule a Romaine, son of Constantine, and brother to Stephen the third Pope, Cardinal Dea∣con vnder Constantine and Leo. He held the Sée x. yeares, x. months, Ʋacante one month, the tenth schisme betwéen Paul and Theophylact: synods in Bauaria, and in Allemayne. 56797 Constantine the second Duke Nepesius son, being a Lay-man, was created pope perforce. But he was afterward shut vp in a Monastery, after yt they had pluckt out his eies. He held the Sée, four months, iij. daies vacante, ix. dayes. The eleuenth schisme was betwéene him and Phillip. 66898 Stephen the fourth, a Sicilian Monk, the son of Olibryus, Cardinall Priest vnder Constantine,
and Leo. He held the See, 4, yeares, v. months, xxiiij. daies, Ʋacante, ix. daies. A synode was at Rome, to take order for ensuing schismes, and an∣other synod was holden at Wormes. 99 Adrian a Romain of a most noble family,772 and son to Theodr, Cardinall Deacon vnder Leo the fourth. & Constantine his son. He held the Sée xxiij. years, x. months, xvi. daies. Then was the se∣uenth general Nicene counsell, against the Ico∣nomaches: and after that Didier was taken, then ended the raigne of the Lombards. 100 Leo the third, a Romaine, son of Azzupius,796 cardinall Priest vnder Constantine, 8. and Nice∣phorus: he held the Sée twenty yeares first, and reseated xvi. years. v. months, xviij. daies, vacante xvij. daies. In this Leos time, was Charles the Great, king of Fraunce, created Emperor of the West, to whom he fled for refuge. The eighth Age. IN this eight age liued the learned venerable Bede, S. Iohn Damascene, Germaine Partriark of Constantinople, Paulus Diaconus, Vsuardus, and Paulinus of Aquileia. 101 Stephen the fift, a Roman,816 son of Inlius Ma∣rinus, cardinall Priest vnder Lewes the meeke Emperor: he held the See six months, foure and twentie daies, Ʋacante xi. daies. 102 Paschall a Romaine, Monke and Abbot,817 son of Maximus Bonosus, cardinall Priest vnder Lewes and Lotharius. Hee held the See seauen yeares, three moneths, seuenteene daies, vacan∣te foure daies.
824103 Eugenius the second (sur-named the poores Father) a Romaine, son of Boëmond, Cardinall Arch-Priest vnder Lewes and Lotharius: he held the Sée foure yeares, sixe months, foure & twen∣ty daies, vacante three daies. The xij. Schisme betweene Eugenius and Zinzinus. 827104 Valentine a Romaine, sonne of Leontius, Cardinal Arch-Priest vnder the same Emperors, he held the Sée one month, tenne daies, vacante thrée dayes. 827105 Gregory the fourth, a Romaine, sonne of Iohn, Cardinall Priest vnder Lewes and Lotha∣rius. Hee helde the Sée sixtéene yeares, vacante fifteene daies. Two Synods in Allemayne. 844106 Sergius the second, a Romaine, sonne of Sergius, Cardinall Arch-priest, vnder Lotharius: he held the Sée three years, vacante two months, fifteene daies. 847107 Leo the fourth, a Romaine Monke, sonne of Rodolphus, Cardinall Priest vnder Lotharius and Lewes the younger: hee helde the Sée, eight yeares, three months, sixe daies, vacante fifteene daies. The Synod of Mentz vnder Rabanus. 855108 This is the man that supplies the place for Pope Ioane. Bennet the third, a Romaine, sonne of Peter, Cardinall Priest vnder Lewes the yonger, he held the Sée two yeares, sixe months, ix. daies, vacante fifteene daies. The xiij. Schisme between Bennet and Anastasius. 858109 Nicholas the Great, sonne of Theodor, Car∣dinall Priest vnder Lewes. He held the Sée nine yeares, seauen months, thirteene daies, vacante seauen months.
110 Adrian the second, a Romaine,859. sonne of Talarus the Byshoppe, Cardinall Priest vnder Lewes. He held the Sée fiue years, nine months, twelue daies: vacante twelue daies. The eight generall counsell at Constantinople, against Pho∣tius. 111 Iohn the eight, a Romain▪872 sonne of Gun∣dus Cardinall Arch-Deacon vnder Lewes the younger, Charles the Balde, Lewes the Stam∣merer, and Charles le Gros. He helde the Sée x. yeares, two daies, vacante two daies. 112 Martine the second,882. otherwise called Ma∣rine, borne in Tuscane, sonne of Palumbas, Car∣dinall Deacon vnder Charles le Gros: He helde the Sée one yeare, fiue months. 113 Adrian the third, a Romaine,884 other-wise called Agapetus, sonne of Bennet, vnder Charles le Gros: He helde the Sée, two yeares, two mo∣nethes, vacante xij. daies. 114 Stephen the sixt, otherwise called Basile,885. son of Adrian, vnder Charles le Gros and Arnould: he held the Sée sixe yeares, eleuen dayes, vacante fiue dayes. A Synod at Cullen. 115 Formosus of Portua, sonne to Leo,891 Byshop of Portua, vnder Arnould. He helde the Sée, fiue yeares, sixe months, Vacante two months. This is the first man, that (of a Byshoppe) was made Pope. The xiiij. Schisme, betwéene Formosus and Sergius the third, who afterward was Pope. 116 Boniface the sixt, a Romaine, sonne of A∣drian, byshop vnder Arnould, or Arnulphus Em∣peror: He helde the Sée, sixe and twenty daies,
Vacante fourteene daies. 896117 Stephen the seuenth, a Romaine, Sonne of Iohn the Priest, Byshoppe of Anagnia, vnder Arnulphus. He held the See one yeare, 3. months, vacante 3. daies. A synod at Tiburtium. 118 Romanus, borne in Tuscany, Son of Con∣stantine,897 who was Brother to Martine the se∣cond Pope, vnder Arnulphus: he held the sée thrée daies, vacante eight daies. 119 Theodorus the second, a Romaine, sonne of Photius,897 vnder the Empyre of Arnulphus: he held the see twenty daies, vacante eleauen daies. 897.120 Iohn the ninth, a Tiburtine Monke, son of Rempaldus, Deacon of the Romain Church, vnder Arnulphus, and during the Schisme of Sergius. He helde the Sée two yeares, fifteene dayes, vacante nine daies. The ninth Age. IN this ninth Age liued Aymonius Monachus, Theophilact, Rabanus Maurus, Ansegisius, & Anastasius. 899121 Bennet the fourth, a Romaine, sonne of Mammolus, vnder Lewes the fourth, son of Ar∣nulphus: he held the see thrée years, four months, Ʋacante six daies. 122 Leo the fift, borne at Ardea; he forsooke the Papacy,903 and became a Monke, vnder Lewes the fourth. He held the See one moneth, tenne daies.
123 Christopher, a Romaine, sonne of Leo,903 Cardinall-Priest vnder Lewes the fourth. Hee gaue ouer his dignity to Sergius the third, & made himselfe a Monk. He held the see, seuen months. The xv. Schisme betwéene Leo the fift, Christo∣pher and Sergius the third. 124 Sergius the thirde, a Romaine,903 Sonne of Bennet, one of the Earles of Tusculum, Cardi∣nall-Priest vnder Lewes the fourth. Hee held the see seauen yeares, foure monthes, sixe daies, va∣cante vij. daies. Two Synods at Rheimes. 125 Anastasius the thirde, a Roman,911. Son of Lucian, vnder the Empire of Conrade, Emperor. He held the see two yeares, vacante two daies. 126 Lando, a Sabine borne, sonne of Tinus,913 vnder Conrade. He held the Sée six months, xxi. daies, Ʋacante xxvi. daies. 127 Iohn the tenth of Rauenna, sonne of Iohn:914 Of Byshop of Bolognia, he was made Arch-By∣shop of Rauenna, vnder Conrade and Henry, sur∣named the Byrder, Emperors: hee helde the sée, thirtéene yeares, two monethes, and thirtéene dayes. 128 Leo the sixt, a Romaine,928 sonne of Christo∣pher, vnder the fore-named Henry: he helde the Sée seauen moneths, fiftéene daies, vacante one month. 129 Stephen the eight, a Romaine,928 Sonne of Teudemunde, vnder Henry: hee helde the See, two yeares, and one Moneth, vacante tenne daies. 130 Iohn the xi. a Romain,930 the natural son of
Sergius, third Pope, one of the Earles of Tuscu∣lum, vnder Henry: He held the Sée, four years, ten months fiftéene daies, vacante twelue daies. 935131 Leo, the seauenth, a Romaine, vnder O∣tho the Great, who was the first Allemayne Em∣peror. He held the Sée thrée yeares, six moneths, ten daies, vacante thrée daies. 939132 Stephen the ninth a Romaine, vnder the Empire of Otho: he helde the Sée thrée yeares, foure-months, twelue daies, vacante ten daies. 942133 Martine the third, whom some others doo tearme Marine the seconde, a Romaine, vnder Otho. Hee helde the Sée thrée yeares, foure mo∣neth, twelue dayes, Ʋacante twelue daies: A Synod at Bonnonie▪ 134 Agapetus the second, a Romain, vnder O∣tho:946. he held the See seauen yeares, nine months, ten daies. vacante twelue daies. Then was the Ingelheimensian Synod. 956135 Iohn the twelfth, a Romaine, called also Octauian, the sonne of Albericus a Romaine Prince, & an Earle of Tusculum, Cardinall Dea∣con vnder Otho: hauing was deposed in a Synod at Rome: he held the Sée ix. years, thrée months fiue daies, vacante one day. 963136 Leo, a Romaine, sonne of Iohn, vnder O∣tho: hee helde the Sée, one yeare, foure months. The xvi. Schisme after Iohn the 12. betwéen Leo the 8. and Bennet the 5. 964137 Bennet the fift, a Romain, Cardinall Dea∣con, was elected in the schisme after the death of Iohn the twelfth: he forsooke the Papacy, by con∣straint,
and was exiled to Hamborough in Saxo∣ny, where he died: he held the Sée one yeare, sixe monthes. 138 Iohn the xiij. a Romaine, sonne of Iohn the Byshop: he was Byshoppe of Naruia,965 vnder Otho: He held the Sée six years, eleuen months, fiue daies, vacante xiij. dayes. 139 Domnus the second, Donus, or Domnio, a Roman vnder Otho: hee held the Sée one yeare,972 vacante two daies. 140 Bennet the sixt, a Roman, sonne of Hil∣debrand, vnder Otho: he held the sée eight years,972 six months, vacante fiue daies. 141 Boniface the seauenth, a Romaine,974. sonne of Franco-Ferrutius, Cardinal Deacon vnder O∣tho the second: he held the Sée seauen moneths, fiue daies, vacante twenty daies. The seauen∣téenth Schisme betwéen Boniface the 7. and Ben∣net the 7. 142 Bennet the seauenth, a Romaine,975 sonne of Deus-dedit an Earle of Tusculum, Byshoppe of Sutrium, vnder Otho the second: he held the Sée eight yeares, six months, Ʋacante, fiue dayes. 143 Iohn the fourtéenth, called also Peter,984 born in Pauia, and Byshop of the place where he was borne; vnder Otho the third: he helde the See, thrée months. 144 Iohn the xv. a Romaine,985 son of Leo Priest vnder Otho the third: hee held the See eight mo∣neths, vacante seauen daies. 145 Iohn xvi. a Romain, sonne of Robert,995 vn∣der Otho the third: he helde the See ten yeares,
six months, ten daies: vacante sixe dayes. 995146 Gregory the fift, a Saxon Allemayne, cal∣led Bruno, the son of Otho, vnder Otho 3: he held the see two yeares, fiue moneths, ten daies. The xviij. Schisme, betwéene this Gregory, and Iohn the xvij. This is he, in whose time the Princes Electors were first created in Allemaign or Ger∣many. 998147 Syluester the second, a Frenchman born in Aquitain, called Gerebert, Monk of S. Floure, Abbot of Bobie, of Arch-byshoppe of Rheimes, he was made Arch-byshop of Rauenna, a very great Phylosopher, vnder Otho 3. He held the sée, foure yeares, i. month, x. daies, vacante xxiij. daies. 1003148 Iohn the xvij. a Romaine, called Sicco, of very meane descent, vnder Henry the second. He held the Sée ten months, vacante twenty daies. The tenth Age. IN this tenth Age liued Ado of Vienna, Odo Ab∣bat of Clugnie, Suidas, Luitprandius, Regino, and Wirichinde. 1003149 Iohn the xviij. a Romaine, called Fasanus or Fanassus, vnder Henry the second: he held the See foure monthes, twenty daies, Vacante nine∣teene dayes, A great synod holden in Allemaign. 1009150 Sergius the fourth, a Romain, called Pe∣ter, the sonne of Martine: he held the Sée, two yres, and fifteene daies, Sede vacante eyght dayes. 1012151 Bennet the eight, a Roman, son of Grego∣gory
Earle of Tusculum vnder Henry. Hee helde the See, eleuen yeares, one moneth, thirteene dayes. The ninetéene Schisme, between Bennet, and one whose name is not truely known. 152 Iohn the xix, a Romaine,1024 and Earl of Tus∣ulum, sonne to Gregory, and Brother to Bennet the eight. Pope, Byshoppe of Portua: hee helde the see foure yeares, foure months, vacante xix. daies. 153 Bennet the ninth, a Roman, Earl of Tus∣culum, called Theophilact, Sonne of Albericus,1032. Brother to Bennet the 8, and Iohn the xix. Popes. Cardinal Deacon vnder Conrade & Henry 3. He held the See, xiij. yeares, foure moneths, nine dayes. The xx. Schisme betweene him and Iohn the 20. called Syluester the third. 154 Iohn 20. called Siluester the 3. a Romain,1045 son of Laurentius Byshop of Sabina, vnder Henry 3. He held the see one month, xix. daies. 155 Gregory the sixt, a Romain, called,1045 Iohn Gratian, sonne of Peter Leo, Arch-Priest vnder Henry 3. he held the Sée two yeares, vij. months. 156 Clement the 2. a Saxon Allemayn or Ger∣maine, called Suidegerus, Byshop of Bemburg,1047 vnder Henry 3. He helde the Sée, nine monthes. vacante nine moneths. 157 Damasus 2. of Bauaria in Allemaign,1048 cal∣led Pope Bagniarius, byshoppe of Brescia: After that Damasus the second, and Bennet the ninth, had beene deposed, hee helde the Sée, sixe mo∣neths, according as hee had helde it nine mo∣neths, and fiftéen daies, after Clement the second,
he helde the Sée thrée and twenty daies, vacante six months. 1049158 Leo the ninth, an Allemayne, called Bruno, Count of Haspurg, otherwise termed Egghisein, sonne to Hugh byshop of Toul, vnder Henrie the third, and was created at Frusina: hee helde the See fiue yeares, two months, six daies, vacante xi. months, xxvi. daies. 1055159 Ʋictor the second of Swethen, called Geb∣hard Count of Gaba, sonne of Arduigus, byshop of Eistat, Counsellor to Henry the third, and his Kinsman, as also to Henry the fourth his sonne, and was created at Mentz: he held the Sée two yeares, three months, foure daies, vacante foure daies. 1057160 Stephen the tenth, borne in Lorraine, called Fredericke, sonne to Gozzelon Duke of Lorrain, Cardinal Arch-Deacon vnder Henry the fourth: he held the Sée seauen moneths eighteene daies, vacante thirteene dayes: The one and twentith Schisme betwéene him, and Bennet the tenth. 18161 Bennet the tenth▪ called Iohn Mintius, son to Guy Count of Tusculum, Byshop of Ʋelitrae, vnder Henry the fourth: he held the Sée nine mo∣neths, twentie dayes. 1058162 Nicholas the second of Sauoy, called Gerard the Burgundian, Byshop of Florence, vnder Hen∣ry the fourth: he held the Sée thrée yeares, six mo∣neths, six and twenty daies, vacante xij. dayes. 1061163 Alexander the seconde, a Milanois, called Anselme de adagio, son of Anselme a Chanon Reguler, Byshoppe of Luca in Tuscanie, vnder
Henry the fourth: he held the Sée eleuen yeares, six months. The xxij. Schisme betwéen him and Honorius the second. 164 Gregory the seauenth, a Tuscane of Soaua,1073 called Hildebrand, one of the Pitilian Countes, sonne to Bonicius Priour of Cluny, Abbot of S. Paule at Rome, Cardinall Arch-Deacon, vnder Henry the fourth: he held the Sée twelue yeares, one month, thrée daies, vacante one yeare▪ foure months, seauen and twenty daies. The three & twenty Schisme, between him, and Clement the third, who was an Anti-pope, in the times of Vi∣ctor the third, Ʋrban the second, and Paschal the second. And this Schisme continued for longe time. 165 Victor the third of Beneuentum,1086 called Di∣dier, sonne to the Prince of Beneuentum, a Monk of Mount Cassina, Cardinal Deacon vnder Hen∣ry the fourth: hee helde the See one yeare, foure months, vacante fiue months. 166 Vrbane the second, a Frenchman,1088 borne at Chastillon in the Diocesse of Rheimes, called Otho the son of Milo, a Canon Reguler of Laterane, Monke of Cluny, and Byshoppe of Ostia; vnder Henry the fourth: he held the Sée twelue yeares, foure moneths, nineteene daies, vacante thirteen daies. The eleuenth age. IN this eleuenth Age liued Burchardus Fulber∣tus, Byshoppe of Chartres, Petrus Damianus,
Lanfrancus, S. Anselme, Yues Byshop of Char∣tres and Bruno, &c. 1099167 Paschall the second, a Tuscane of Bleda, called Rainerius, sonne of Crescentius, Monke of Cluny, Abbot of S. Laurence and S. Stephen with∣out Rome, Priest Cardinall vnder Henry the 4. and Henry the fift: hee held the Sée xviij. yeares, six months, seuen dayes, vacante thrée daies. Al∣bert Atellan, Theodorick a Romaine, & Syluester Anti-popes vnder Paschall 2. who caused the bo∣dy of Clement 3. to be digged vp, and after burned which had bin buried at Rauenna. 1118168 Gelasius 2. a Caietane, called Iohn, sonne to Crescentius Monke of Mount Cassina, Cardinall Deacon vnder Henry the fift. He held the see, one yeare, vacante two dayes. The 24 Schisme be∣twéene him and Gregory the eight, a Spaniard, called Maurice Bonoin. 1119169 Calixtu▪ a Burgundian, called Milo, o∣therwise Guy, son to William Count of Burgun∣die, Arch-byshop of Vienna vnder Henry the fift: he held the Sée fiue years, ten months, six daies. vacante eight yeares. The generall counsaile of Laterane, against these Anti-popes, wherat were present (almost) a thousand Prelates. 170 Honorius 2. a Bolognian, called Lambert de Fagnano,1124 Chanon Reguler of Laterane, Car∣dinall byshop of Ostia, vnder Henry and Lothari∣us, Saxons and Emperors. He held the Sée fiue yeares, two monthes, vacante, eight dayes. The 25. Schisme betwéene him and Celestine the se∣cond.
171 Innocentius 2. a Romaine, sonne of Iohn Guidon, Chanon Reguler of Latterane,1130 the first of the Cardinal Deacons vnder Lotharius of Saxo∣ny and Conrade. He held the See, fourteen years, seauen months, thirteene daies. The 26, schisme betweene him and two Anti-Popes, Anacletus the second and Ʋictor the fourth. The second ge∣nerall counsell of Laterane, wherein assisted well neare a thousand byshops. 172 Celestine the 2. a Tuscane,1143 called Guy de Castello, cardinall-deacon, and afterward Cardi∣nall priest vnder Conrade. He held the Sée, fiue months, and thirteene daies, vacante thirteene daies. 173 Lucius the second, a Bolognian, called Gerard, Cecianimicus, sonne of Albert,1144 Chanon Reguler, Cardinall Priest, and Chancellour to the Apostolique See vnder Conrade: he held the see eleuen months, and foure dayes, vacante two daies. 174 Eugenius the thyrd, of Pisa,1145 called Peter Bernard, a Cisteaux Monke, Scholler to S. Ber∣nard, Abbot of S. Ʋincent, and S. Anastasius at Rome, vnder Conrade and Fredericke Barbarossa Emperors. He held the See, eight yeares, foure months, xx. dayes, vacante two dayes. 175 Anastasius the fourth, a Romain,1153 called Conrade of Subura, sonne of Bennet, Canon Re∣guler, Abbot and Cardinall, byshoppe of Sabina, vnder Fredericke Barbarossa: he helde the See, one yeare, foure months, four and twenty daies, vacante one day.
1154176 Adrian the fourth, an Englishman, called Nicholas Break-speare, sonne of Robert a Monk, Chanon Reguler and Abbot, Cardinall Byshop of Alba, vnder Barbarossa: He helde the Sée iiij. yeares, ten months, vacante three daies. 177 Alexander the thirde, borne at Sienna in Tuscanie,1159. called Rowland Bondinelli, son of Ra∣nutius, Cardinall Deacon, and afterwarde Car∣dinall Prieste, and Chancellour of the Romaine church, vnder Barbarossa: hee helde the Sée xxi, yeares, nineteene daies, vacante, foureteene daies. The third generall counsell of Laterane. The seauen and twenty Schisme, beeing most great, during which time, against Alexander was created Victor the fourth, nexte Paschall the third, then Calixtus the thirde, and Innocentius the third, who (by constraint) renounced the Pa∣pacie. 1181178 Lucius the third, a Tuscane of Luca, called Ʋbaldus Allucingolus, sonne of Bonagiunta, Cardinal Priest, and afterward Bishop of Ostia, and of Velitrae, vnder Barbarossa: he held the Sée foure yeares, two months, eighteene daies, va∣cante twelue daies. 1185179 Vrbane the third, borne in Milaine, called Lambert Cribell, sonne of Iohn, Cardinall Priest and Arch-Byshop of Millaine, vnder Barbarossa: hee held the See one yeare, ten months, fifteene daies, vacante eleuen daies. 1187180 Gregory the eight, of Beneuentum, called, Albert Spanachio, otherwise of Mora Cardinall Deacon, and afterward Cardinall Priest, and
Chancellor to the holy See, vnder Barbarossa: hee held the See one month, seauen and twenty daies, vacante xx. daies. 181 Clement the third, a Romain,1188 called Paule the Scholler, sonne of Iohn, Cardinall of Palae∣strina, vnder Barbarossa: he held the See three yeares, fiue months, vacante eight months. 182 Celestine the third, a Romaine,1191 called Hai∣cinthus Bobo, sonne of Peter Cardinal Deacon vnder Henry the sixt: he held the See six yeares, seauen months, eleuen daies. The twelfth Age. IN this twelfth Age liued Sigebert, Zonarus, Cedrenus, Rupertus, Sa. Bernard, Hugo de S. Victor, Peter Lombard, Peter Comestor, Euthimi∣us, Nicetas Coniates, and diuers others. 183 Innocentins the third, of Anagnia,1198 called Lotharius, one of the Counts of Signia, sonne of Transimund, Cardinal Deacon vnder Henry the sixt, Otho the fourth, and Fredericke the seconde Emperors: he held the See eighteen yeares, vij. months, sixtéene daies, vacante one day: The 4. generall counsell of Laterane, for reformation of the church, where a thousand Prelates were pre∣sent. 184 Honorius the third, a Romaine,1216 called Cen∣ius Sabellus, sonne of Amerie, Cardinal Deacon, Chamberlaine of the church, and afterward Car∣dinall Priest vnder Fredericke the second: he held the Sée ten yeares, seauen moneths, thirtéene
daies, vacante one day. 1227.185 Gregory the ninth of Anagnia, called Hu∣golin, one of the Counts of Signia: of a Cardinal Deacon he was made cardinall Byshop of Ostia vnder Fredericke the second: he held the see four∣teene yeares, three months, vacante one month, one day. 1241.186 Celestine the fourth, a Milanois, cald Gaul∣fridus Castellio, of Cardinall-Priest, was made Byshop of Sabina vnder Frederick 2. He held the see eighteene daies, vacante one yeare, nine mo∣neths. 187 Innocentius the fourth, borne in Genewaie, called Sinibaldus de Fiesca, a Count of Lauinum, sonne of Otho,1243 Vice-chancellor, was made Car∣dinall-Priest vnder Fredericke the seconde, Con∣rade the fourth, Henry the fourth, & William Em∣perors. He held the Sée xi. yeares, six months, xii, daies, Vacante three daies. The generall counsell of Lyons, vnder Frederick the second. 188 Alexander the fourth of Auagnia, called Rainald,1254 one of the Counts of Signia, sonne of Girard Retraent, otherwise called Phillip, of Car∣dinall-deacon was made bishop of Ostia, & Deane of the Cardinal Bishops, vnder William, Richard and Alphonsus. He held the Sée-sixe yeares, fiue monthes, fiue daies, vacante three months, four daies. 1261189 Vrbane the fourth, a French-man of Troy in Champaigne, called Iacques Pantaleon, Patri∣arcke of Ierusalem, vnder Richard and Alphon∣sus: he held the See three yeares, one month, 4.
daies, vacante fiue monthes. 190 Frances, by some called Clement,1265. of Nar∣bona, called also Guy the Grosse, sonne of Fulco∣dius, Arch-byshop of Narbona, and cardinall Bi∣shop of Sabina, vnder Richard and Alphonsus: he held the see fiue yeares, xxi. daies, vacante, two yeares, nine months. 191 Gregory the tenth of Placentia,1271 called Theo∣bald Vicount, Arch-byshoppe of Leige vnder Ro∣dolphus: He held the Sée foure yeares, two mo∣neths, ten daies, Ʋacante nine daies. The second general Counsel of Lyons, for recouery of the Ho∣ly Land. 192 Innocentius the fift, a Burgundian,1276. called F. Peter of Tarentase, of the Order of the preach∣ing Fryers, of Arch-byshoppe of Lyons, he was made Byshop Cardinall of Ostia, and great Pe∣netentiarie, vnder Rodolphus. He held the See six months, two daies, Ʋacante, nine daies. 193 Adrian the fift of Genes, called Othobon,1276 one of the Counts of Lauinum, sonne of Thedisi∣us, Brother to Pope Innocent the fourth, Cardi∣nal Deacon vnder Rodolphus: Hee held the Sée one month, nine daies, vacante eight and twen∣ty daies. 194 Iohn the one and twentith, a Portugais of Lisbone, called M. Iohn Peter Iuliani,1276 byshop Cardinall of Tusculanum, vnder Rodolphus. He held the see eight months, vacante sixe moneths, seauen daies. 195 Nicholas the third, a Roman,1277 called Iohn
Caietane de Vrsini, Cardinall Deacon vnder Ro∣dolphus: he held the Sée three yeares, eight mo∣neths, fifteene daies, vacante fiue moneths, xx. dayes. 1281196 Martine the fourth, borne in Tours, cal∣led Simon de Brie. Cardinall Priest vnder Ro∣dolphus: hee helde the See, foure yeares, one month, vacante thrée daies. 197 Honorius the fourth, a Romaine, called, Giacomo Sabella, sonne of Luke, first, Cardinall Deacon vnder Rodolphus. He held the See two yeares, one day vacante ten months. 1288.198 Nicholas the fourth, a Natiue of Asculum, called F. Hierom; a generall Minister of the Fri∣ars Minors: he was made Cardinall Priest, af∣terward the Praenestine Byshop, vnder Rodolphus, and Adolphus. He held the See foure years, one month, eight daies: vacante two yeares, 3. mo∣neths, two daies. 1294199 Celestine the fift, borne in Isernia, called F. Peter de Morone, sonne of Anglerius, vnder Adolphus: he voluntarily forsooke the Popedom, and was the beginner of the Celestines order: he held the Sée fiue months, seauen dayes, vacante ten daies. 1294200 Boniface the eight, of Anagnia, called Ben∣net Caietane, Sonne of Luitfroy, who was borne in Spaine, Cardinall Deacon, afterward Cardi∣nall Priest, vnder Adolphus and Albertus. Hee instituted the Iubilée of an hundred yeares, and did first celebrate it, in the yeare 1300. He held the see viii. years, nine months, seuenteen, daies,
vacante tn daies. The thirteenth Age. IN this thirtéenth Age liued S. Fraunces, S. Do∣minicke, Albertus Magnus, Mathew Paris, Thomas▪ Aquinas, S. Bonauenture, Cbasilas, Henry of Segusium, Cardinall of Ostia, Nicho∣las de Lyra, Accursius and others. 201 Bennet the eleauenth, a Treuisane,1303 cal∣led F. Nicholas Bocasino: of Generall Minister of the Preachers Order, was made Cardinall Priest, and afterward Byshop of Ostia, vnder the Emperor Albertus. He held the See, eyght moneths, seauenteene dayes, vacante one yeare, one month. 202 Clement the fift, a French-man in Gas∣coigne of Burdeaux, called Raymond Goth,1304 son of Bertrand: of Byshop of Cominges, he became Arch-Bishop of Burdeaux, vnder Albertus and Henry the seauenth: he held the See eight years, ten months, fifteene dayes, vacante two yeares, thrée months, seauenteene dayes. The generall Counsell of Vienna in France, for reformation of the Church. 203 Iohn the xxij. a Frenchman of Cahors,1316 called Iacques d'Ossa, Sonne of Amauldo, Car∣dinall Bishop of Portua, vnder Lewes the fourth of Bauaria: he held the Sée ninetéene years, four months, vacante sixtéene daies. The 8▪ chism betwéene him and Nicholas the fift. 204 Bennet the xij. a Frenchman of Tolosa,1334
called F. Iacques Forneen de Sauardu, a Ciste∣aux Monke, a Diuine, Byshoppe of Mirepoix, and Cardinall-Prieste vnder Lewes the fourth, He helde the Sée seauen yeares, three monethes, seauentéene dayes, vacante fiftéen dayes. 1342205 Clement the sixt, a French-man, borne in Lymosine, called F. Peter Monstrie, son of Ro∣ger, Monke of Maumont, a Diuine, Abbot of Fescamp, Arch-Byshop of Arles, afterwarde of Sens, and lastly of Rouen, cardinal Priest vnder Lewes the fourth. He celebrated the second Iu∣bilee, in the fiftith year, 1350. And held the Sée, eightéene yeares, sixe moneths, eightéene daies. vacante ten daies. 1352206 Innocent the sixt, a French-man of Ly∣mosine, called Stephen d'Albert, Bishoppe of Clermont, cardinall Priest, after made byshop of Ostia, and great Penetentiary vnder Charls the fourth: he held the See nine yeares, eight mo∣neths, and sixe daies, vacante one yeare, fiue mo∣neths. 1362207 Vrbane the fift, a French-man of Lymo∣sine, likewise, called F. Guillaume de Grisac, son of Grimauld, Monke and Abbot of S. Victor de Marseillis, vnder Charles the fourth: hee helde the Sée eleauen yeares, eight months, vacante seauentéene dayes. 1370208 Gregory the eleuenth, a French-man of Lymosine, called Peter, Earle of Beau-fort. He was  Cardinall Deacon by Clement the sixt, Pope and his Vnckle. He returned to Rome and brought the Sée thither agayne, which had
bin at Auignon for the space of seauenty yeares. And because the Romaines stoode in some doubt, least the Sée might againe bee tranferred out of Rome, after the decease of this Gregory, the ele∣uenth, they tooke especiall order, that not anye French Cardinall shoulde afterward bee elected Pope: which procured the most pernicious schism that euer had bin in the Churche, and continued for the space of fifty yeares, beginning with Cle∣ment, called the seauenth: he held the Sée seauen yeares, two months, seauen & twenty daies, va∣cante eleuen daies. 209 Vrbane the sixte, a Neapolitane,1378 called Bartholomew Prignano, Arch-byshop of Ache∣rontia, and afterwarde of Carre, vnder Wence∣slaus. Hee helde the Sée, eleauen yeares, eyght months, vacante seauenteene dayes. The nine and twentith Schisme, betweene him and Cle∣ment, called the seauenth, who was a French∣man of Geneua, named Robert, one of ye Counts of Geneua, Byshop of Cambray. This Vrbane the sixt, instituted the Iubilee of sixe and thirtie yeares. 210 Boniface the ninth, a Neapolitane,1389 called Peter, or Perin Tomcelli, of Cardinall deacon, became Cardinall Priest, vnder Wenceslaus, and Robert Emperors. In the yeare 1390. He celebrated the third Iubilee instituted by his pre∣decessor: and in the yeare 1400. the fourth Iubi∣lee, after the ancient manner. In his time were two Popes, at Auignon, Clement, called the se∣uenth, and Bennet the thirtéenth: he held the See
eleauen yeares, eight months, vacante fifteene daies. The fourteenth age. IN this fouretéenth age, liued William de Nan∣gis, Nicephorus, Bartolus Palanudes, Iohan∣nes Andreas, Petrarche, Franciscus Maronis, deuiser of the Sorbonne, William of Auxere, and others. 1404.211 Innocentius 7. of Sulmona, called Cos∣matus Melioratus; of Arch-byshop of Rauenna, and of Bishop of Bolognia, he became Cardinal Priest, and Chamberlaine of the Church, vnder Robert Emperour: He held the see two yeares, twenty two dayes, vacante twenty thrée daies. Bennet the thirtéenth was (in his time) Pope at Auignion. 1406.212 Gregory the twelfth, a Venetian borne, called Angelo Corratio, Patriarch of Constan∣tinople, and Cardinall-priest vnder Robert and Sigismond: He helde the sée two yeares, seauen months, fiue daies, vacante ten daies. Then was the Councell of Pisa, for auoiding of Schismes, where Gregory the twelfth, and Bennet the thir∣téenth, were both deposed. 1409.213 Alexander the fift, of Creete or Candie, called Peter Philargo, of the Fryers-minors or∣der, a Diuine, Arch-bishop of Millaine, and Car∣dinall-Priest vnder Robert: hee was created in the Councell at Pisa (Bennet the thirtéenth bée∣ing
then Pope at Auignion.) And helde the Sée tenne monthes, eyght dayes, vacante twelue daies. 214 Iohn the twenty thrée, a Neapolitane,1410. called Balthazar Cossa, Cardinall-Deacon, vn∣der Sigismond. He held the Sée fiue yeares, fif∣téene dayes, vacante two yeares. The generall Councell was then at Constance, to take away all Schismes: where were deposed Iohn the 23. and Bennet the thirtéenth again. Bennet would not obey the Councell, but with-drew himselfe into Spaine, to Paniscola: and in the same gene∣rall Councel, Gregory the twelfth (by his Attur∣ney) renounced the Papacy. 215 Martine the fift, a Romaine,1417. called Otho Colonna, Sonne of Agapetus, Cardinall Deacon: he was elected Pope in the Councell of Constance, vnder Sigismond: he held the sée fouretéene yeares, thrée monthes, vacante two dayes. In his time, after the decease of Bennet the thirteenth, Clement, called the eyght, was created as Anty-pope at Paniscola: But he for∣sooke the Papacy, in the yeare 1428. and (by that meanes) the twenty nine schisme ceased, which had continued fifty yeares, or thereabout. This Martine the fift, in the year 1425. celebrated the fift Iubilie. 216 Eugenius the fourth, a Venetian,1431. cal∣led Gabriell Condelmer, Sonne of Angelus, a Celestine Chanon, Byshoppe of Sienna, Car∣dynall-Priest vnder Sigismond, Albert, and Fredericke the third. This manne helde
the Sée fiftéene yeares, eleauen months, one and twenty daies, vacante twelue daies. The coun∣sell of Basile was then, where Eugenius was de∣posed: but he vnwilling to obey, caused the gene∣rall Counsell of Ferrara to bee assembled, whych Counsell ended at Florence, for reduction of the Greeke Church. The 30. Schisme betwéen Eu∣genius 4: and Foelix the fift, called Amades, som∣time Duke of Sauoy, who was elected in the Counsell of Basil, 1437. and was Pope ix▪ years, fiue months. In the end, for good of the Church, he forsooke the Papacy, and continued Cardinal byshop of Sabina, and Legate in Germany. 1447217 Nicholas a Natiue of Luna, called Tho∣mas de Sarzana, or Lucana, sonne of Bartholo∣mew a Physitian, Doctor in the Arts and Diui∣nity, of Bysh of Bolognia, was made Cardinal Priest vnder Frederick the third: hee helde the Sée eight yeares, ninetéene dayes, Ʋacante four daies. In the yeare 140. he celebrated the sixte Iubilee, and the Schism ceased by Felix the 5. re∣nouncing the Papacy. 1455218 Calixtus 3. a Spaniard of Valentia, called Alphonio Borgia, sonne of Iohn: of byshoppe of Valentia, became Cardinall Priest▪ vnder Fr∣derick the third: hee held the See three yeares 3. months, and sixteene daies, vacante seauenteene daies. 1458219 Pius the seconde, borne in Sienna, called Eneas Syluius Picolhomini, sonne of Syluius: of byshop of Sienna, was Cardinal Deacon, after∣ward Cardinal Priest vnder Frederick the third:
he held the See fiue yeares, eleuen months, xxvi. daies, vacante xvi. daies. 220 Paule the second, a Venetian,1464 called Peter Barba, sonne of Nicholas, elect byshoppe of Vin∣centia, Cardinall Deacon, and afterward Car∣dinall Priest, vnder Frederick the 3. He held the Sée six years, ten months, vacante eleuen dayes. 221 Sixtus the fourth of Sauona, called F. Fran∣ces de Rouero, sonne of Leonard,1471. of Minister generall of the Fryers Minors, was made Car∣dinall Priest, vnder Fredericke the third. He ce∣lebrated the seauenth Iubilee, in the yeare 1475. and held the See thirteene yeares, fiue daies: va∣cante xv. daies. 222 Innocentius the eight, borne in Gene∣waie, called Iohn Baptista Cibo, sonne of Aaron:1484 of Bishop of Melphes, was made Almouer▪ and Cardinall Priest, vnder Fredericke: he held the Sée eight yeares, six and twentie daies, vacante two daies. 223 Alexander the sixt, a Spaniard of Valen∣cia, called Rodericke Borgia, sonne of Geffrey,149 Byshop of Valencia, Cardinall Deacon, after Priest, and lastly byshop of Alba, Vice-Chaun∣cellor and Deane of the Church, vnder Maximi∣lian. He celebrated the eight Iubilee, in the year 1500, and held the See eleuen yeares, 8. dayes, vacante foure dayes. The fifteenth Age. IN this fifteenth Age liued Iohn Gerson, Ene∣as Syluius, Froissard, Baldus, Angelus, Bssation,
Chalcondilus, Platina, Nauclerus. And not long after, Martine Luther, Iohn Eckius, Moe, Hosius, Iohn Caluine, &c. 1502.224 Pius the third, a Siennois, called Fraun∣ces Todescin Picolhomini, Sonne to the sister of Pope Pius the second, who maried with Nan∣nes: hee was Arch-byshop of Sienna, and Car∣dinall-Deacon, vnder Maximilian: and held the See sixteene dayes, vacante twenty foure daies. 1503.225 Iulius the second, of Sauona, called Iu∣liano de Rouero, sonne of Raphaell, Brother to Pope Sixtus the fourth, of Cardinall-Priest, be∣came Byshoppe of Alba, afterward Byshop of Ostia, and great Penitentiary, vnder Maximi∣lian. Hee held the See nine yeares, three mo∣neths, twelue dayes, vacante seauenteen dayes. The generall Councell of Laterane was then. 1503.226 Leo the tenth, a Florentine, called Iohn de Medicis, sonne of Laurence, Cardinall Deacon, vnder Maximilian, and Charles the fift: He held the see eyght yeares, eight months, twenty one dayes, vacante one month, seauen daies. 1522.227 Adrian the sixt, a natiue of Vtreicht in Galia-belgica, sonne of Florent; of Byshop of Ertusa, was made Cardinall-Priest, vnder Charles the fift, to whom hee was Schole-may∣ster: he held the see one yeare, eight months, sixe daies, vacante two months, foure daies. 1523.228 Clement the seauenth, a Florentine, cal∣led Iulius de Medicis, Knight of Hierusalem, ne∣phew
to Pope Leo the tenth, elected Arch-By∣shoppe of Florence, Cardinall-Deacon, after∣ward Priest & Chancellour of the Church, vnder Charles the fift: he celebrated the ninth Iubilie, in the yeare 1525. And helde the see ten yeares, tenne monthes, eyght dayes, vacante sixteene daies. 229 Paule the third,1534 called Alexander Far∣nese, sonne of Peter Lewes, Cardinall-deacon, was afterward Byshoppe cardinall of Tuscula∣num, Palaestrina, Sabina, Portua, and Ostia, and Deane of the cardinals, vnder Charles the fift and Ferdinand. Hee held the see fifteene yeares, nineteene daies, vacante two months, 29. daies. The generall councell of Trent beganne Anno. 1525. 230 Iulius the third, borne at Arezza,1550 called Iohn Maria de Monte, sonne of Vincent Arch-Byshop of Sipontum▪ cardinall-priest, and after∣ward Byshop of Palaestrina, vnder Charles and Ferdinand. Hee celebrated the tenth Iubilie, in the yeare 1550. and held the see fiue yeares, one moneth, sixteene dayes, vacante seauenteene daies. 231 Marcellus the second, a Tuscane,1555 called Marcellus Ceruinus, sonne of Richard; of By∣shoppe of Castello Nouo, hee was made cardi∣nall-priest vnder Charles the fift, and Ferdinand. He held the See twenty two daies, vacante sea∣uenteene daies. 232 Paule the fourth, a Neapolitane,1555 cal∣led Iohn Peter Caraffa, sonne of Iohn Alphonso,
Count of Mataluna, of Archbyshop of Naples, he became Cardinall Priest of Alba, Sabina, Tus∣culanum and Ostia, and Deane of the cardinals, vnder Charles the fift, and Ferdinand: he held the See, foure yeares, two Moneths, seauen and twentie daies vacante, foure monethes, sixe dayes. 1559233 Pius the fourth, a Milainois, called Iohn Angelo de Medicis, sonne of Bernardino, Car∣dinall Priest vnder Ferdinand and Maximilian the second: he helde the Sée fiue yeares, eleauen moneths, eight daies. vacante nine and twentie dayes. In his time the counsel of Trent was con∣cluded, an. 1563. 1566234 Pius the fift, an Alexandrine Lombard, of the preaching Fryers order, called F. Michael Giller, of byshop of Surrina, and Nepesina, be∣came cardinall Priest, Graund Inquisitour, and byshop of Montrall, vnder Maximilian. Hee held the Sée six yeares, three moneths, sixteene dayes. 1572235 Gregory the thirteenth, a Bolonois, cal∣led Hugo Bn-compagnio, son of Christopher, Cardinall Priest, vnder Maximilian the second, and Rodolphus the second. He celebrated thee∣leauenth Iubilee, in anno 1575. and helde the See twelue yeares, xi months, xii. daies, vacante eleauen dayes. 1585236 Sixtus the fift, De la Marche d' Ancona, cardinall de Montalto, called F. Foelix Peret, of the Friars Minors order, cardinall Priest vnder Rodolphus the second: Hee helde the Sée, fiue
yeares, foure months, xxi. dayes, vacante foure∣téene daies. 237 Vrbane the seauenth, a Romaine,1590 called Iohn Baptista Castagnia, Sonne of Cosimo, car∣dinall of S. Marcellus, vnder Rodolphus the se∣cond: He helde the Sée fifteene dayes, vacante two months. 238 Gregory the fourteenth, a Milanois,1590 cal∣led Nicholas Sfondratus, cardinall of S. Cecilia vnder Rodolphus the second: Hee helde the Sée ten monethes, tenne dayes, vacante fifteene dayes. 239 Innocentius the ninth, a Bolognois,1590 cal∣led Iohn Baptista Fachineti, cardinall of SS. qua∣tuor, vnder Rodolphus the second, he helde thee Sée two months, vacante two months. 240 Clement the eight, a Florentine, called Hyppolito Aldobrandino, Sonne of Syluester,1592 Auditor of Rota, and Datary or Almoner to the Pope: was made cardinall Priest of S. Pancra∣tia, and great Penetentiary. He was sent Legat into Poland, by Pope Sixtus the fift, in the yeare 1592. Hee was elected Pope vnder Rodolphus the second, and held the Sée thirteene yeares, one moneth, fiue dayes, vntill the thirde of March, 1605. and then died. During his Pontificacie, which deserueth to bee noted, hee procured peace betweene the two Kings most Christian and ca∣tholicke, and the Duke of Sauoy: hee reduced Ferrara vnder obedience to the S. Sée: and cele∣brated the twelft Iubilee, in the yeare 1600. 241 Leo the xi. a Florentine likewise,1605 called
Alexander de Medicis, Sonne vnto Octauian, of the most famous house of the Medici, of Byshoppe of Pistoya, became Byshoppe of Flo∣rence, and Ambassadour of Fraunces de Me∣dicis, great Duke of Tuscany, vnto Pope Gre∣gorie the thirteenth. Hee was made Cardi∣nall, beeing entitled with Saint Quirice and Saint Iulita, after, of Saint Iohn, and Saynt Paule, and in the ende, of Saint Praxedes. Beeing sent Legate into Fraunce, by Pope Clement the eyght: Hee mediated the peace with the Spanyarde: and returning to Rome, hee was made chiefe of the Congregation of Byshoppes. And the second of Aprill, 1605. hee was created Pope: But his Pontificate, was of small continuance, because he helde the See but seauen and twenty dayes onely, and dyed the seauen and twenty day of the sayde moneth, vnder the same Rodolphus the se∣cond. 1605▪242 Paule the fifte, a Romaine, Original∣ly descended from Sienna, called Camillo Bor∣ghese, who had beene Referendary vnto ey∣ther Signature: Vicar of the Patryarchall Churche of Saint Maria Maior, Vice-Legate to Bolognia, Generall Auditour of the Apo∣stolique Chamber: and Nuntio from the S. See into Spayne. Hee was made Cardi∣nall Priest of Saynt Eusebius, in the yeare of our Lorde, 1596. by Pope Clement the eight, and afterward Byshoppe of Esino, in the Mar∣chia d'Ancona. After the decease of Pope Leo
the eleauenth. Hee was elected in his place, the sixteenth daye of May, 1605. As yet to this present yeare 1611. Hee remayneth ly∣uing and hath held the Papacie, the space of fiue yeares, and som∣what more.
TO THE HO∣nourable Company of the Marchant Taylors; being the Society of Saint Iohn Baptist. ¶A briefe Collection of the Originall and Progresse, of the Knights of the worthy Or∣der of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, who were after∣ward called Knights of Rhodes, and Knights of Malta: Likewise their exployts in warre, vnder the conduct of their Great Maysters, from the yeare 1099. vntill this present. With some, as briefe report also, of the Knightes Templers, and all other Orders of knight hood thorough the world. THe Militarie Order of S. Iohn of erusalem,1099 had her byrth and firste Originall in the holy Citty of Ie∣rusalem, and passed there her first yeares of Infancie, with a great part of her adolescentie. When as the Sarazins were Maisters of the holy Citty, and of the coun∣try
all about the sacred Sepulchre of our Lorde, which was ruined about the yeare of saluation, 1012. by the commandement of Equin Califfe of the Sarrazins, and continued so ruined, vntill the time of Constantine Monomachus, Emperor of Constantinople, who at the intreaties of the chri∣stians which then dwelte in Ierusalem (with the consent of Bomensor Elmonius Stensabus, Ca∣liffe or Soldane of Egypt) built it againe at hys owne charges, in the yeare, 1048. About which time, certain Gentlemen and Italian Merchants of the Citty of Melphes, frequenting the Portes and Maritane Citties of Syria and Egypt, and bringing good Marchandizes into those Coun∣tries, woon themselues much loue and liking, not onelie of the citties Gouernours, but also of the Califfe of Egypt: and being wel disposed christi∣ans, they would oftentimes goe to Ierusalem, to visit the holy memorable places: and hauing no place of retirement in the citty, they obtained fa∣uour and permission of the Califfe, to builde there a Church and a Pallace, for their owne vse and habitation, as also for others of their Nation, in that quarter of the cittie, where the christians might dwell neere to the holy Sepulchre. There they erected two Monasteries, one in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, called S. Maria de la Lati∣na (differing from the Greeke churches whych were in Ierusalem, and placed there an Abbot of Mont-Cassina) and was builte to lodge christian Pilgrims therein. The other was dedicated to S. Mary Magdalen, as a place of entertainment
of all such women, as should aduenture thither in pilgrimage, they being both Religiously gouer∣ned. Not long after, they builded an Hospital, wherein to lodge as well all sickly trauaylers, as any other Pilgrimes of honest disposition, with a Church also thereto belonging, beeing both de∣dicated to S. Iohn Baptist. These Monasteries, Churches, and Hospitals, were long time mayn∣tained by the care and cost of the Amalphitanes, who founded them: and vntill such tune as the Citty was conquered by the Christians from the Infidels, and that Godfrey of Bullen was there elected King, which was in the yeare 1099. 1. The Citty being thus woonne,1099 F. Gerard was the first Rector or Gouernor of the hospital of S. Iohn, who, when the Citty was besiedged by the Christians, was very ill dealt with by the Infidels, & was long time (by them) kept a cap∣tiue prisoner, because they distrusted, that he had some secret intelligence with the Christians, which beleagered the Citty. But after that the Christians were maysters thereof, he was dely∣uered out of prison and gouerned both wisely and charitably the Hospitall of S. Iohn, perswading and induring Christian Kinges and Princes, to enrich and endow it with their liberality, which (indéed) they did in bountifull manner, so that in France, Italy, Spaine, and other Prouinces of christendome, the Hospitall of S. Iohn, founde good Benefactors, and attained (in short time) to great reuennewes and possessions. In the yeare 1113.1113. Pope Paschall the second, receiued F. Ge∣rard,
and the Knights of S. Iohn vnder protecti∣on of the Apostolique Seate, and graunted them great priuiledges, ordayning, that after the de∣cease of F. Gerard, they shold proceed cannonically to the election of another Rector or Gouernour: who was afterward called Great Mayster of the Order or military hospitall, of S. Iohn of Ierusa∣lem, a name which continueth yet to this present after fiue hundred yeares from the beginning thereof. 11182 In the yeare 1118. F. Gerard departed out of this life, in the Papacie of Gelasius the second, and when as the order of the Knights Templers began.The begin∣ning of the Knightes Templers. After his decease, there succéeded him by election, F. Raymond de Puy, who was a professed Knight of the Order: Albeit, some holde opinion that F. Roger succéeded deceased Gerard, and go∣uerned the hospitall of S. Iohn, from the yeare, 1118. vntill the death of Baldwine, second of that name, King of Ierusalem, who died in the yeare, 1131. F. Raymond (in a generall Chapter, as∣sembled in Ierusalem, with aduise of the other Knights) made Statutes for the Order, formed and instituted a rule of life, which all the follow∣ing Knights were to obserue. Hee was called Great Maister of the Order, and yet he qualified that Title, by calling himselfe Seruant vnto the poore of Christ Iesus, and Guardian of the hospi∣tall of Ierusalem. This Great Maister, percei∣uing that the reuennewes of the Hospitall did daily encrease, and that hee could not better em∣ploy such wealth, then against the Infidelles by
making war vpon them: he made offer to the K. of Ierusalem, of himselfe, his strength, and all his Knightly Brethren, who bare in their streamers & Ensignes, a Crosse Argent, in a fielde Gules. And thence forward, these religious brethrē were distinguished into thrée degrees: for one company were knights, another Captains, & the third Ser∣uants, not hauing (from the beginning) any other difference among them, but that some were Ec∣clesiastical persons, & the other Layicks. And from that time forward, there was not any enterprize in Palestine against the Infidels, but the Great-Maister was present thereat in person, with his religious Knights:Knightes Hopitallers of the Hos∣pitall of S. Iohn in Ierusalem: became af∣terward to be Knights of the Rhodes, & lastly Knights of Malta. who were first called knights Hospitallers, or of the hospital of S. Iohn of Ieru∣salem, afterward, knights of the Rhodes, & lastly, knights of Malta. They grew into so great credit and reputation, that they were employed in the managing & guiding al affaires of chiefest impor∣tance. Among others, Gerard Gebert, Knight of this Order, was sent by Foulkes K. of Aniou into England, to treat on the marriage of Constance (Princesse of Antioch, Néere to the Q. Melisen∣da, & daughter to Prince Boemond) with Ray∣mond son to the Earle of Poicters, who was then in the Court of Henry King of England. In like maner (this mariage being thus concluded, by ye ingenuity of this knight) at the same time, Ray∣mond Berengarius, earl of Barcelona, & Prince of Cathalonia (who had cōquered the isles of Maio∣rica & Minorica from the Mores, & (in single com∣bat) defended ye chastity & honor of Mahauld, wife
to the Emperor Henry the fift, against two Alle∣maigne Knights, that had falsely accused her of Idolatry) to shut vp the conclusion of his dayes, resolued to take the habite of this famous Bro∣ther-hood, and in that sacred profession, he perse∣uered al his life time after, which was in the year 1131.1131. Not much differing from this time, it is re∣ported, that three Knights of this Order, beeing natiue Frenchmen of Picardie, & detained then by the Soldan of Egypt in captiuity, were admi∣rably deliuered, and trans-ported out of Egypte, with Ismeria, daughter to the saide Soldane, to the place where (at this instant) is the church of Nostre Dame de Liesse, and this hapned in the yeare, 1139.1139. In the yeare 1153. Raymond the Great Master, caused the siedge to be continued before the cittie of Ascalon, which the Infidelles had defended against the christians more then fif∣tie yeares: and at length, it was yeilded to the saide Maister, the 12. day of August, 1154 which was in the tenth yeare of King Baldwine the 3. In acknowledgement of a prize so signale, and beneficiall to all christendome, Pope Anastasius the fourth, gaue and granted verie great priuiled∣ges, to the Order of these Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, the first day of Nouember in the same yeare, exempting them from the iurisdiction and controule of the East Ecclesiasticall Prelates, which was the cause of great troubles, betwéene the Bishops of the country there, and the knights of this order: albeit the Pope and his Cardinals maintained them still stoutly. Some haue held,
that this Great M. Raymond was a Florentine, but the most credible opinion is, that hee was a French-man, a Natiue of Daulphine, issued of a verie Noble house, called du Puy: whereof, namelie, acques Bosius the Italian (who hath amplie written the historie of this order) is an in∣genuous witnesse. Hee died in the yeare, 1160. with this reputation; that hee had bin a man of good and vertuous life, fearing god, valiant, wise, and aduised in the affaires of the world, and one wel approued in warlicke exercises. 3 After that Raymond was deceased,1160 there succéeded in the Maister-ship and gouernment of the Order, F. Auger de Balben, of whome there is found nothing deseruing memorie: but that (in his time) died King Baldwin the third, who was not onlie much bemoaned of the christians, but likewise of the Infidelles, who saide: That the Christians had iust cause to lament for the death of Baldwine, because they had lost a Prince, that had not his equall in the world. This Great-Maister Auger, after he had gouerned his charge in peace and repose about thrée yeares, died in the yeare, 1163. 4 Arnold de Comps,1163 was next elected May∣ster in his place, who was a man of great spirite, valour, and councell. And in short time after his election, he entered into Egypt, with Amaulrie, the new King of Hierusalem, who made warre vpon the Califfe of Egypt; because he refused to continue and pay the anuall tribute, wherein hée had bound himselfe to King Baldwine the third,
for a perpetuall payment to the Kinges of Hieru∣salem. Arnold after he had (with great wisedom and courage) gouerned the Hospitall of S. Iohn about foure yeares, died in the yeare 1167. and then succeeded him 1167.5 Gilbert d'Assaly, or de Sailly, who was of stout mind, and so liberall; that hee flowed in bounty, especially to his Souldiers, so that he fel into great expences, and wasted the whole trea∣sure of the house. Insomuch, that hee was enfor∣ced to borrow Money at interest, with conditi∣ion; that if he tooke from the Infidels the Citty of Belbeis (anciently called Pelusium) he should stand acquitted to his Brother-hood, as indéed he did, and victoriously performed his promise, the third day of Nouember, 1168. In which yeare he held a Chapter generall in Hierusalem, where perceiuing that he was greatly indebted, and had charged the Hospitall, with more than an hun∣dred thousand Crownes of méere debts; beeing also much grieued, that his attemptes found not equall Issue to his high desires: hee determined to renounce his great Maistership, which he did in the yeare 1169. 11696 By his resignation, or renunciation ra∣ther, another Knight was chosen Great Maister, named F. Gastus, or Castus; of whom there is nothing found, that makes to any purpose of this our briefe History. And the breuity of his time of gouernment was the cause, by reason he was not a full yeare in the charge, but dyed in the very same yeare of his election, and had
7 F. Ioubert, a very religious man,1169. for his successor, who in the yeare 1176. ioyned himselfe with Phillip Earle of Flanders, that was then come into Syria, to assist King Baldwine the fourth against Saladine, who had a very power∣full Army, miraculously vanquished by the Chri∣stians, that were but few in number, in the mo∣neth of Nouember 1177. at which time the Em∣perour Frederick Barbarossa, and Pope Alexan∣der the third were reconciled together. At length, Saladine with-drew himselfe from the Countrey of Damas, in the year 1179. And then dyed Iou∣bert Maister of the Hospitallers, a man very charytable to the poore, and sickly. It is saide, that méere conceite of griefe, to behold (so many∣festly) the ruine of christian affaires in Syria, with the shamefull and damageable truce, made betwéene the King of Ierusalem, and the Earle of Tripoli (by his example) with Saladine; was the onely cause of abridging his dayes, hauing go∣uerned the Order of Saint Iohn, about tenne yeares. 8 In his stead was elected Roger de Molins,1179. a man of high discretion and courage. In his time happened a great dissention betwéene the Prince of Antioche, and the Patriarch of the said place: and this Roger was chosen to be me∣diator of peace and agréement betwéene them, which followed in the yeare 1181. This Roger (with Heraclius Patriarch of Ierusalem, and Arnald de Trogo, Master of the Knights Tem∣plers) was sent by the King of Hierusalem (in
quality of an Ambassador) into the West, to re∣quire ayde of the Christian Princes. These Am∣bassadours were kindly entertained by the Em∣perour, King Phillip Augustus, Gods gift, sirna∣med the Conquerour, the Kings of Sicily, Eng∣land, and Hungary: they returned back againe into Syria, all but the Maister of the Templers, who dyed by the way. In the yeare 1187. the Earle of Tripoli, being leagued and confedera∣ted with Saladine; graunted him passage, and reléeued his Army with victuals. And Saladine hauing besiedged the citty of Ptolomais, the Knights of Saint Iohn and the Templers (ioy∣ning together) disordered the whole Army, and Roger the great Mayster, fighting valiantlie, there dyed, with the fall of his Horse vpon him, and smothered in his Armour, as also being much troden on with the enemies Horses. His body being afterward found among the dead, was bu∣ried with great woe and sorrow. And notwith∣standing this losse of the great Maister; yet the Knights of Saint Iohn and the Templers, won the day of battaile against the Turkes and Sarra∣zins; of whom died then in the field about fiftéen thousand, the first day of May, in the yeare 1187 After whom 11879 F. Garnier of Naples in Syria (which was the ancient cittie of Sichem in Canaan) was ele∣cted great Maister. In his time was a bloudy battaile fought betwéene the Christians and Infi∣dels, wherein the King of Hierusalem (named Guy de Lusignan) was taken Prisoner, with
the very chiefe Lordes of his Kingdome. It is said also, that the Christians had then the true Crosse in the battell, but it was taken from them by the Infidels: and almost all the Knightes of Hierusalem, and the Templers, were one part slaine in the battaile, and the rest beheaded in cold bloud. F. Garnier, after he had fought verie manfully, yet being mortally wounded in many places of his body; by the goodnesse and swiftnes of his Horse, escaped into the Citty of Ascalon: where ten daies after, hee departed into a better life, the fouretéenth of Iuly, hauing béene great Maister but two months and sixe daies. 10 The twenty day of the saide moneth of Iuly 1187.1187 the Knights that were in Ierusalem, chose F. Ermingard d'Aps, to bee their Mayster. The second day of October, in the same yeare, the Citty of Hierusalem was submitted to the power of Saladine: 88. yeares, two months and seauentéene daies, after that it was deliuered (by Godfrey of Bullen) from the handes of the Infi∣dels: Frederick the first, sirnamed Barbarossa, then holding the Empire of the West, and Isaac the Angell, that of the East, at Constantinople, Vrbane the third beeing Pope of Rome, and Phillip the second, called Augustus, Gods Gift and Conquerour, raigning in Fraunce. Then were expulsed out of Hierusalem, the Knightes Hospitallers, Templers, and al the Latine Chri∣stians, of which Christians, the Hospitallers re∣déemed from captiuity of the barbarous, to the number of two thousand with their Money. All
the Churches of the cittie were then polluted and prophaned, except the Temple of the Resurrec∣tion; which was bought with a great summe of Money, by the Christians of the East. After the losse of Hierusalem, the Knights Hospitalers were continually in Armes, faithfully assisting the Christian Princes, that had put on Crosses, for the recouery of the holy Land, and did actions (of high desert) at the siedge of Ptolomais: which, after a long siedge of thrée yeares, was re∣gayned from the Infidels by the Christians, the twelft day of Iuly, 1191.1191 And in that Citty, the Knights of Saint Iohn kept then their ordi∣nary aboad and residence. And in the verie same yeare, the Christians wonne a notable victorie against the Barbarians, and Saladine theyr chiefe: wherein they were worthily assisted by the knightes Hospitallers and Templers. The yeare following, beeing 1192.1192 in Winter, dyed Ermingard d'Aps the great maister, in the cittie of Ptolomais, and then was chosen in his place 11 Geoffrey de Duisson. In his time there was truce taken for fiue yeares, betwéene the Christians that were in the holy Land, and Sala∣dine, by which meanes, many Lords and Gen∣tlemen of diuers Nations, who had worne the Crosse, and gotten great store of goodes and pos∣sessions: returned home to their Countries, and gaue their goods to the Brotherhood of saint Iohn, which greatly did augment their renennewes. And after the death of Henry Earle of Cham∣paigne; the Hospitallers and Templers remay∣ned
gouernours, and administrators of the king∣dome of Hierusalem: howbeit, that (by the fewer number of Christians there abiding) election was made of Amaury de Lusignan, who had succéeded the king of Ierusalem in the kingdome of Cyprus, with consent of the Patriarch, the Prelats and Barons of the Realme, in the yeare 1194. when soone after died Duisson the Great-Maister, and then succéeded him, by election 12 F. Alphonso of Portugall,194 a knight of the Order of Saint Iohn, and of the Royall house of Portugall, though it dooth not appeare certaine∣ly, to what king he was Sonne. He made ve∣ry worthy and commendable statutes, whereof (to this day) there are some inuiolably kept. But because he was of too stiffe nature, ouer-rough, surely and seuere: hee encurred the hatred of the greater part of the Knights Hospitallers. Which was the cause that hee renounced his Maister∣shippe, and shipt himselfe for returne home to Portugall, in the same yeare of his election: But he dyed the first day of March, in the yeare 1207. 13 The same yeare that Alphonso renoun∣ced the Great Maistershippe, to wit, in the yeare 1194.1194 Geoffrey le Rat, who was Graund-Pryour of Fraunce, was chosen Mayster: And Saladine then dying, his Sonne Noradine (Lord of Alepo) succéeding him. About this time, Simon, Earle of Montfort, was sent by King Phillip Augustus, with an Army into Sy∣ria; where finding much disorder, he tooke truce
for tenne yeares with the Infidels, in the yeare 1198.1198 In the time of this tranquile estate, there chanced a great difference, betwéene the Knights Hospitallers and Templers, grounded on this occasion. The Hospitallers complayned, that the Templers had enterprised too farre vppon their iurisdiction, with much contempt and vio∣lation thereof. Which quarrell (after manie rough encounters and skirmishes) was appeased & accorded, by the interposition of king Amaury, the Patriarches of Antioch and Hierusalem, and other Princes and Christian Prelats, who comprimitted this difference, in the name of In∣nocentius the third, which fell out very succes∣siuely. For, after that God (the onely Staffe and stay of all affaires in the holy Land) had permitted this friendly vnity, betwéen these two millitary Orders of Knight-hood, King Amaury of Lusignan so preuailed, that the Great May∣ster and Knights of Saint Iohn, might liue with him in the Isle of Cyprus, where hee graunted the gouernment of the Kingdome to them. In the yeare 1205.1205 King Amaury dyed, so did Quéene Isabell, who appointed her Daughter Mary (which she had by Conrade of Monferrat) to be her heire, and he left her to be tutoured and guided by the Knightes Hospitallers and Tem∣plers. In the yeare 1260. Geoffrey le Rat, the Great Mayster dyed, and then succéeded him 126014 Guerin de Montagu, of the language of Auuergne, who (with the Knights of his or∣der)
ayded Lyuon, King of Armenia, against the Turkes and Barbarians, that had intruded into his Kingdome. In recompence whereof, he gaue them the citty of Salef, with the castles of Camard and new castle, and their dependan∣ces. Hee likewise recommended his heire and Kingdome, to the Knightes of the Hospitall of Saint Iohn; which guift was confirmed by the Pope, the fift of August 1209. Then were Iohn de Brienna, and Mary his Wife (Heire to the Kingdome) crowned King and Quéene of Hie∣rusalem. At length, in the yeare 1230.1230 Guerin the great Maister died in the citty of Ptolomais, and during his tyme, all the Christians affaires in the holy Land, depended (very much) vppon the Knightes Hospitalers and Templers: who albeit they had many contentions betwéen them, yet did they still agrée together (in all matters) against the Infidels. After him succeeded 15 One F. Gerin,1240 of whom no other name is found remembred. Richard Duke of Cornewal,This is mi∣staken, for this was K. Richard the first him∣selfe. and Brother to Henrie (then King of England) arryued soone after in Palestine, with an Army of forty thousand men, and did many worthy ac∣tions there. The great Maister also, and his knights with him (bearing him company) fought valiauntly against the Corasmine Infidelles. There the saide Mayster was taken, and sent as a Prisoner to the Soldane of Egypt, where he died, and in his place, the Knights of S. Iohn elected (in the citty of Ptolomais) for their great Maister
134519 Bertrand de Comps, in the time of Pope Innocent the fourth, and when the Generall Counsell was called at Lyons, 1245. This great Maister was present in a furious battaile, fought against the Turcomans, that wasted all the coun∣try about Antioch, in the month of August, 1248 where, hauing receiud sundry deadly wounds, he ended his daies: And in the Citty of Ptolomais, on the 24. of Aug. was elected as Great maister 124817. Peter de Villebride. In his time, Lewes K. of France, called S. Lewes, tooke on him the crosse against the Infidels, with many Princes & Pre∣lates of France, who went and besieged Damieta where they were ayded by the knightes hospital∣lers & Templers, and the City was soon after sur∣rendred to K. Lewes in the yeare 1250. Then did the Soldan of Egypt giue battel to the christians, wherein King Lewes with his brethren, Charles and Alphonsus, the King of Cyprus, as also the Great maister, & many knights of the hospitalers & Templers, were all taken prisoners. Whych surprizall, caused an attonement betwéene King Lewes and the Soldane, & the hospitall Knights lent mony to King Lewes, to pay his ransom. In the year 1251. Villebride the great maister dyed in the City of Ptolomais, & succéeded by election 125118 Guillaum de Chasteau-neuf, or de Castel∣no, of the spéech of Auuergne. He was a great ob∣seruer of Iustice, & pope Alexander 4. gaue to the knights hospitallers, ye castle & lands of Bethania, in the yeare, 1256. In his time, the Christians lost their vtmost hope, of any succour from the
Princes of Europe: and in the yeare 1280. the Great Maister of Castelno died, when as the Hospitall Knights of S. Iohn, elected in his sted 19 Hugues Reuelle, or Reuel,1260 in the tyme of Pope Vrban the fourth, who gaue to the knights of S. Iohn, Mont-Tabor, 1261. and in Anno, 1262. they bought the Castle of Assur, but in the following two yeares, they tooke from the Sa∣razins a Castle named Lilion, whereuppon, the Soldan of Egypt concluded, to worke the ruin of the Knights Hospitallers, and (as an instance) he forcibly tooke from the saide Knights (in the year 1265.1265) the Castle of Assur, at the surprizal wher∣of, there were slaine to the number of 90. knights of S. Iohn, which greatly abated their power and repute. And in the yeare 1267. the Knights hos∣pitallers and Temples were assailed, and much confused in battaile by the Sarazins, néere to the City of Ptolomais, for they wasted and spoiled al the countrey thereabout. In the yeare also 1270 the Knights of S. Iohn lost the Castle of Crac∣quo, which was assaulted by the Soldane, and all the knights within it, were put to the sword. It is likewise saide, that this Great Master Re∣uel, assisted King Lewes in the voyage to Tunis, where the said King died of the plague, and that in the ende, about the yeare, 1278. the Great Maister Reuel ended his daies, hauing helde fiue Chapters, or assemblies of the Brother-hoode of S. Iohn, wherein manie notable Statutes were made, for gouernement and reformation of the Order.
127820 After his decease, Nicholas Lorgus, was chosen Great Maister, who, not to swerue a iot from his predecessor (wel knowing, that nothing sooner procureth the ruine of Common-weales & Comminalties, then discord and dissention) tooke such paines, to reconcile the Knights hospitallers with the Templers, that he drew them to accord, and made them good friends. In the yeare, 1282 the Knights of S. Iohn, woon a famous victorie against the Sarazins, who proudely came to be∣siedge the Castle of Margate, their very principal Fortresse: which was very manfully defended by the Hospitallers, and in the ende, quitted (at composition) by the knights, who returned (with their Ensignes displayed) to the Citty of Ptolo∣mais. And in the yeare, 1288. Lorgus the Great Maister died, with very griefe, because hee saw the Christian affaires in the Holy land, dailie to fall from il, to worse, without any means or hope of remedy. 21 In the same yeare, Iohn de Villiers, a Frenchman borne,1288 was created Great Maister of the Order. In his time, the Citty of Tipoly was taken from the Christians, by the Infidels, as (in like manner) were the citties of Sidonia & Bauth, in the yeare, 1289. all which were ran∣sacked, ruined and burned, and the citty of Tyre brought vnder the Soldanes subiection, whereon the christians of Ptolomais were gladde to séeke their owne peace. During which time, the Great Maister went to Brundusium, with the Great Maister of the Templers, to sollicite the christian
Princes of the Croisade, and the Soldane came to assaile the citty of Ptolomais, which was ver∣tuously defended, by the Knights of the Hospitall and Temple, with many braue sallies forth vp∣on the besiedgers. Especially the Great Maister Villiers, who was sore wounded, with long su∣staining the whol charges of the Barbarian Infi∣dels, the Knights Barricadoing themselues in a quarter of the Citty, which yet was afterward taken on Friday the 18. of May, the same yeare 1292. With this great losse, the Christians were driuen out of ye holy land, 191. years ten months, & thrée daies, after it had bin Conquered by God∣frey of Bullen. The Great M. with the rest of his Knightes, fled (for safety) to the Isle of Cyprus, where they were very kindly entertained by the K. of the Island, who assigned to thē & the Tem∣plers, the Citty of Limosson, which was a Port Towne or Hauen on the Sea. There did they inhabite, and there did the Great Maister assem∣ble two generall Chapters, one in December, 129. and the other in October 1293. making therein dyuers good Statutes for the Order: and in the yeare 12. he dyed at Limosson, & then succéeded him 22 F. Odo des Pins, borne in Prouence,1294 in the time of Pope Boniface the eyght. He incur∣red the hatred and disgrace of the knightes of his Order, by reason of his negligence and couetous∣nesse. And there was a purposed determination, to depriue him of his Great maistershippe; but it was impeached by the Pope, to auoide scandall,
and at length he was cited to appeare at Rome in person to answere to the complaintes of the Hos∣pitallers, and thitherward he trauailed. But be∣fore he could sée Italy, he dyed by the way, in the year 1296. hauing (in the precedent yeares) held two generall Chapters at Limosson. Hee caried also along with him a manuscript Chronicle, wherein hee had appealed certaine letters of the Popes, containing excommunication, whereby he pursued and reléeued his owne appeale. 129623 The Knights hearing the death of theyr Great Maisters des Pins, elected (at Limosson) the twenty foure day of March 1296. F. Guilla∣ume de Villaret to succéed him; who was of the same Countrey of Prouence, and Prior of S. Gilles, where he was at the time of his election. But hauing intelligence thereof, he trauailed im∣mediatly to the Kingdome of Cyprus, and go∣uerned in his charge very prudently. In his time Vsau Cassanus, King of the Tartares, became a Christian, and recouered the Citty of Ierusalem, where hee placed the Knightes Hospitallers and Templers in Garrison, in the yeare 1300. Hée tooke the Citty of Damas likewise, but it was quickly regained by the Infidels, and the Hospi∣tallers and Templers returned then to Cyprus againe, where the Great Maister departed out of this life, in the yeare 1308. hauing helde fiue generall Chapters at Limosson, and séene the vt∣ter ruine of the Knights Templers. 130824 The great Maister being dead, Folquet de Villaret, of the same Nation of Prouence, was elected in his roome. He was a man of liue∣ly
spirit and great courage, and séeing that he had attained to this Soueraigne dignity; he resolued to put in execution a matter, which (in his prede∣cessors daies) had often béene intended, but could not any way be effected (viz.) to depart from the Isle of Cyprus, and to get a dwelling some where else, which hee very happily performed. For in Anne. 1308. the very yeare of his election, hée made a voyage to Constantinople, and after∣ward into France, where the Pope gaue him the Isle of Rhodes, (if he could get it) which with his Knights he conquered, in the yeare 1309. and seauen other Islands néere adioyning. So that thither was the residence of saint Iohns knights transferred, and then they were afterward called,The begin∣ning of the Knights of the Rhodes who helde their first name of S. Iohns Knights stil Knights of the Rhodes, yet kéeping the Name of Saint Iohn of Hierusalem still. Not long af∣ter, Otthoman, first Emperour of the Turkes, came and besiedged Rhodes with a Potent Ar∣my: but it was reléeued by Amadis the fourth, Earle of Sauoy, and Otthoman was compelled to raise his siedge. After which time the Earles of Sauoy wore on their Armours, a Crosse Ar∣gent, in a fielde Gules, in memory of the helpe they had giuen to the Knightes of the Rhodes. The order of the Templers (hauing béene vtter∣ly suppressed, in a generall Councell holden at Vienna in Dolphine) the greater part of theyr goods was giuen to the Order of the Rhodes, and confirmed by Pope Clement the fift, 1312. In the yeare 1314. the Knightes of the Rhodes conquered the Isle of Lango, with other Isles in
the Archipelagus. And in the yeare 1317. Fol∣quet the Great Maister (pleasing his owne hu∣mour ouer-much in his victories and conquestes) beganne to grow haughty, proud, and insolent, which brought him into contempt of his compa∣nions: whereupon, the Knights reuoulted from him, and if he had not saued himselfe in a Castel, they had seized his person. But, in regard they could not get him, they deposed him from the dignity of Great Maister, & in his place, elected 131725 Maurice de Pagnac, wherof Pope Iohn the twenty two, beeing aduertised, hee was greatly offended thereat, and sent two Prelates to the Rhodes, to informe themselues of the fact, with commaund, to cite the Great Maister de Villa∣ret and de Pagnac, to appear at Auignon in per∣son, Gerard des Pins beeing appointed Lieute∣nant Generall in the meane while. At this in∣stant time, Orchanes Emperour of the Turkes, came boldly and besiedged the Isle of Rhodes: but the knights had an admirable victory against him, for there were then tenne thousand Turkes hewen in péeces. In this Interim, Maurice de Pagnac, died at Montpellier, Anno. 1322. and Folquet de Villaret was re-established in the dignity of Great Maister. But hee perceiuing that it was against the liking of his fellowe knights, renounced his Great Maistership, in ye yeare 1323. and liued as a priuate Knight, vntill the first day of September, 1327. when he dyed, and was buried at Montpellier. 1327.26 The same yeare that he gaue ouer his dig∣nity,
the Knights of the Rhodes chose Elion de Villeneufue, borne also in Prouence, and Priour of Saint Gilles. In the yeare 1343. a league was made betweene the Seigneury of Venice, the K. of Cyprus, and knights of the Rhodes. And the Great Master hauing won the name of an happy gouernor, died the 27. of May at Rhodes. In his life time, he had enclosed the great Maisters Pal∣lace with wals & towers, and deuided the langua∣ges, Bayliwicks and other dignities of the Order. 27 After the decease of Villeneufue, Deodon,1346 or Gods-gift (a Natiue of Prouence) was elected Great Maister. About foure yeares before hée was promoted to this Dignity, hee had fought with an horrible and monstrous Dragon, that greatly afflicted the Isle of Rhodes. And hauing kild the Monster, he was therefore so highly ho∣nored and estéemed, that his memory yet remai∣neth renowned to posterity. In the yeare 1347. he ayded the King of Armenia against the Sol∣dane of Egypt. Pope Clement the sixt helde the Knights of Rhodes in such estéeme, that almost all the Fortes in Italy (belonging to the Sée) were gouerned seuerally by one of them. In the yeare 1351. Constance King of Armenia, became a Brother Knight of Rhodes. And in the yeare 1353. the Sonne to Iohn Canta-cuzen, Emperour of Constantinople, came and requi∣red ayde of the Great Maister of Rhodes: who, after he had gouerned this Order of Saint Iohn seauen yeares, sixe months, and ten daies, dyed the seauenth of September, in the saide yeare
1353. and was buried in the Church of S. Iohn of Rhodes. Hee builded Milles in the Citty of Rhodes, and engirt the Subburbs with walles, making them very strong on the Sea side. 135328 Next succéeded him by election (as Great Maister) Peter de Cornilian, Priour of S. Gilles, borne also in Prouence. Hee was Maister, but one yeare, eight months and seauentéene dayes: for, falling into a gréeuous sicknesse, hee died in the Citty of Rhodes, the 24. of August, 1355. He was a man of very exemplarie life, and so seuere, that hee was sur-named the Corrector of Cu∣stomes. He held a generall Chapter at Rhodes, 1354. wherin many good Statutes were made. 135529 After the great Maister was deceased, ac∣cording to acustomed form, Roger des Pins, born likewise in Prouence, did next succéede him. In his time, the Pope perswaded the Knightes of Rhodes, to buy the Principality of Achaia, of Iacques de Sauoy, Prince of Piedmont, and the Knights of Rhodes made a generall assembly in the Citty of Auignon, to effect the treaty of buy∣ing the sayd principality of Achaia, and to reform some abuses, crept into the Order. For their sta∣tutes were now traduced into the Latine tongue, and to all Princes were sent authenticall Copies or Volumes of them, by appointment of the great Maister: And in the yeare, 1359. the great Com∣mander, & the Marshall of the Order, were sent into France (in quality of Ambassadors) to be vi∣siters and reformers. There was an assembly of the Knights, called at the Cittye of Carpentras,
but it could not hold, in regard of the great May∣sters death, who dyed the 28. of May, 1365. and was much lamented, but by the poore especially, to whom hee was a great and charitable Almo∣ner. 30 Raymond Berengarius, of Prouence also,1365 was next chosen great Maister, who had bin be∣fore Commander of Castle Sarrazin. In his time the King of Cyprus, and the Knights of Rhodes made a league together, and tooke (perforce) the Citty of Alexandria in Egypt, which they ran∣sackt, spoyld▪ and burnt. The Armenians being expulsed by the Sarazins out of their dwellinges, wer charitably entertained by S. Iohns knights, in the Isle of Lango: and at the same time, the Citty of Tripoli in Syria, was taken and sacked by the King of Cyprus, and the Knightes of the Rhodes. In the yeare, 1371. the Great Master was (by the Pope) elected Nuntio from the Apo∣stolique seat, to appease the rumors and diuisions, which were then in the Kingdome of Cyprus: whether he went in person, and both by his Au∣thority and wisedome, he soone seased all the tro∣bles and mollestations. The Great Maister ha∣uing gouerned his Order about eighteene yeares and an halfe, departed this life in the yeare, 1373 31 In the same yeare, Robert de Iuliac,1373. or of Gulich, great Priour of Fraunce, was chosen Great-Maister, who (at the time of his election) had the charge of his Priory: but vnderstanding the newes, he went forthwith to Auignon, where he was receiued with great honor, an assemblie
general of this Knightly Order being then there held, and the Great Maister had the gouernment of Smyrna imposed vpon him, vnder paine of ex∣communication. At his comming to Rhodes, he qualified all the contentions, which had hap∣ned in the time of his absence. At this time went the Pope, to hold his seat at Rome againe, which he and his predecessors had kept at Auignon, for the space of seauenty one yeares 1376. In which yeare, the 29. of Iune, dyed the Great Maister, and then 137632 In his place came Iohn Fernandes d'He∣redia, a Natiue of Arragon, in the Citty of Va∣lentia, who was Prior of Cathalognia, and Ca∣stillian d'Emposta. Twice he had bin marryed, and (chancing to be a Widdower) he was made a Knight of Rhodes, in the time of Villeneufue, who was then Great Maister. Being then but a simple Knight, hee went to visite the holy Se∣pulchre, and other memorable places in the holie Land. He was also Ambassador from Pope Cle∣ment the sixt, to the Kings Phillip 6. of France, and Edward the third of England, and did verie good seruice to King Phillip, in the yeare 1346. For he being dismounted from his horse, on a day of battaile against the English he gaue him his owne horse, whereby the King escaped to a place of safety. In like manner he fortified the Basti∣ons and new wals of Auignon, whereof hee was made Gouernor by the Pope. Being great Mai∣ster, hee tooke his way to Rhodes, in the yeare, 1377. and being required by the Generall of the
Venetians Army, to vnite their forces together: they went to Morca, in the yeare, 1378. where they besiedged the Citty of Patras, and tooke both it and the Castle. The great Maister (fighting man to man with the Gouernor of Patras) slewe him manfully. Afterwarde, in an ambuscado of Turkes, hee was taken prisoner, by reason hee was too well knowne to them: Whereuppon, to worke his liberty, Patras and other places (which had bin won from them) were re-deliuered to the Turkes. And yet notwithstanding, they would néeds carrie him with them into Albania, where they kept him as a slaue thrée yeares. In the year, 1381. the great Maisters fréedome was bought with money, and hee returning to Rhodes, the Ambassadors of Smirna came to desire succour of him. In the yeare, 1391. Baiazeth, Emperour of the Turkes made some preparation to besiege Rhodes, whereupon, Phillebert de Naillac, Pri∣our of Aquitaine, was sent by his fellow knights to Auignon, with Letters to the great Maister, to require aide against Baiazeth. Naillac retur∣ning to Rhodes, in the yeare, 1396. Heredia the great Maister died, and was buried at Caspa. 33 Newes beeing brought to Rhodes,1395. that Heredia the great Maister was dead: Phillebert de Naillac, grand Priour of Aquitaine, & borne in France, succéeded in his roome. At the Spring time, he was inuited by Sigismond King of Hun∣garia, to come and assist him with his Knights a∣gainst Baiazeth, which hee did in person, in the yeare, 1397. And then was a battaile fought at
Nicopolis, where Baiazeth had the victorie, the K. of Hungary, being glad to saue himselfe (and with the Great Master) retyred to Rhodes. Thi∣ther also did the Emperor of Constantinople, send all his precious Iewelles, to be kept by the Great Maister, fearing least Baiazeth shoulde surprize Constantinople. But hee was disappointed by Tamberlain, who ouercame Baiazeth, and kepte him captiue in a Cage of yron, so long as he liued, and the siege of Constantinople being raised, the great Master sent home again the Emperors Ie∣wels. After the foyle of Baiazeth, the great Mai∣ster de Naillac sailed with an army into Caria, & there builded an inexpugnable fortresse, which he named S. Peters Castle, in the year 1399. vnder the raigne of Charles the sixt king of France. In the yeare, 1403. there happened wars betweene the k. of Cyprus and the Genewayes; which was pacified and ordered by the wisedome and autho∣rity of the great Maister: to whom the Soldan of Egypt sent an Ambassador, for request of peace. In the yeare 1409. the Great Maister gaue his personall assistance in the Counsell of Pisa, assem∣bled to quench the Schismes, which were then crept into the Church, and the guard of the Con∣claue was committed to the great Maister, when Alexander the fift was elected Pope. The sayde Maister was likewise at the generall Counsell of Constance, where thrée Popes were deposed, and Martine 5. elected, an. 1414. the guard of the Con∣claue being then againe giuen to the great Mai∣ster. Trauelling into France, he held a general as∣sembly
of his knights at Auignon, afterward at Florence, and last at Ancona: whence returning to Rhodes, an. 1420. he held there a general chap∣ter, and in the beginning of Iune, 1421. he dyed.1321. 34 And then in the deads place, Anthony de Fluuiano, or de Riuers,This An∣thony de Riuers was sent for to Rhodes, he being then chiefe Com∣mander of the Brother¦hood, at S. Iohns of Ie¦rusalem, in Saint Iohns street. reported to be a natiue of Arragon (but more say of England) was created Great Maister. In his time began the generall Counsell of Basile, 1430. And not long after, the Soldan of Egypt (puft vp with the victory which he wonne at Cyprus) brake the Truce, and pre∣pared a great Armye, with intent to besiedge Rhodes. But when hee heard, that the Great Maister was prouided of sufficient strength to withstand him: he left off his determination, and so the Order that way remained in quiet. This Great Master founded, and endowed a Chappel in the Citty of Rhodes, which (afterwarde) hee made a Church for his Knights. And the 29. of October hee died, after hee had gouerned (in his place) with much wisedome, 16. years & an halfe. 35 The sixt of Nouemb. in the same year 1437 Iohn de Lastic,1437. borne in Auuergne was elected Great Maister, albeit he was absent at his electi∣on, & remained in Auuergne, whereof he was pri∣or. Before he wold go to Rhodes, he made a gene∣ral assembly of his knightes at Valentia, in the month of Decem. 1438. when he cam to Rhodes, he began to build the new hospital for sick people, which the precedent great M. (by his wil) had ap∣pointed to be done at his expences. In his time, Pope Eugenius 4. was deposed by the Counsell
of Basile, and Foelix the fift, created in his place, who was held at Rome to be an Antipope. In the yeare, 1440. the Soldane of Egypt, beeing come néer to the port of the isle of Cast-Lerouge (which appertained to the Knights) and from thence tur∣ning towards Rhodes, he was put to flight by an army of the Knights, who had but eight Gallies, and in the Soldanes army there were eightéene, and there were slaine about seauen hundred Sa∣razins, beside a great number that were woun∣ded. This foile did so highly offend the Soldan, that he leagued himselfe with Amurath, Empe∣ror of the Turkes, with intention to make him∣selfe Maister of the Isle of Rhodes, and to kill, or expell thence that famous Order of Knight-hood. Héereupon, in the yeare, 1444. he came and be∣siedged Rhodes, which was vertuously defended by the Rhodian Knights: and in the moneth of September the same yeare, a generall assembly was held at Rhodes, to helpe the ensuing necessi∣ties of the Order. So the yeare following, the Great Maister (by aduise of the Pope and the King of Cyprus) made peace with Amurath, and helde a generall Chapter at Rhodes. At whiche time, the Duke of Cleues passed by Rhodes, in his returne from Ierusalem, where he had visited the holy places. In the yeare 1451. a general as∣sembly was made at Rhodes, wherein, the ad∣ministration and gouernment of the Treasure, and whole Fraternity, was giuen to the Great Maister: who in anno 1452. after the death of Amurath, renewed the peace with Mahomet
the second his sonne. And yet the yeare follow∣ing, Mahomet became Maister of the Cittye of Constantinople, the 29. of May: when (beeing not a little proude of this fortunate successe) hee sent to the great Maister of Rhodes, that he shold pay him (yearly) two thousand Ducats, in name of tribute, otherwise, he purposed not to hold (any longer) the peace sworne betwéen them. Where∣vnto the great Maister made a couragious aun∣swere, to wit: That neither his Religion, the Isle of Rhodes, nor himselfe were subiectes to any, but God and his Church, and that he would ne∣uer pay Turke any tribute, being rather resolued to dye (both he and all his Knights) then to in∣dure Christian liberty (which euer had bin free) to come now (by his meanes) into thraldome. Whereupon, he sent Ambassadors to the Pope and Christian Princes, to entreat supplye from them, against the periured Mahomet. And in the yeare, 1454. the 19. day of May, he died, hauing valiantly gouerned his Order sixtéene years, sixe months, and thirtéene daies. 36 Iacques de Milly, borne in Auuergne,1342 whereof he was Prior, succéeded as Great May∣ster the first day of Iune 1454. being in his Pri∣ory when he was elected, & his Nephew George de Boisrond, brought him first tydings thereof. Whereuppon hee immediatly went to Rhodes, and helde a generall Chapter the same yeare, in the month of Nouember. In the yeare 1456. the Isle of Rhodes was greatly afflicted with Pesti∣lence and Famine, whereby it became halfe de∣sert,
and to re-people it againe, many generall ci∣tations were sent abroad to all the Knightes, to méete there at a certaine time. The yeare 1457. Mahomet besiedged the Isle of Lango, and the Castle of the Isle des Singes: but he was coura∣giously repulsed, the Knights hauing a very hap∣py and signat victory against him; which caused Charles the seauenth King of France, to send the Knights (as a gift) sixtéene thousand Crownes: The Bailiffes, Commaunders, and other Offi∣cers of the Order, being then enioyned (by a ge∣nerall Chapter) to come to Rhodes, for more se∣cure and strong defence thereof. The seuentéenth of August 1461. the Great Maister dyed, ha∣uing (with much prouidence) gouerned his charge in hard and troublesome times, seauen yeares, two months, and sixteene daies. He was greatly lamented, because he was very benigne, affable, and humaine, desirous to preserue peace and vnity among his worthy Bretheren. 1461.37 Peter Raymond Zacosta, born in Arragon, and Castileon d'Emposta, was created Great M. next; he being then absent in Spaine; but at his comming to Rhodes, by a generall Chapter there holden, the eight language of Castile and Portugall, was then admitted into the Order. For till that instant, there were but seauen lan∣guages there before; to wit, three of Fraunce, Auuergne, and Prouence; one of Italy, one of Arragon, one of England, and one of Alle∣maigne or Germany. The yeare 1464. the Ve∣netians Army besiedged the Citty of Rhodes:
but the siedge was soone raised, and the Veneti∣ans returned home to their Countrey, the warre beeing appeased by the wisedome of the Great-Maister, who caused the Tower of Saint Ni∣cholas to be built, at the mouth of Rhodes Port, in the very same place, where (in elder times) the great Colossus of the Sunne (numbred among the seauen wonders of the world) had stood. As a helpe to this building, Phillip Duke of Bur∣gundy gaue tenne thousand Crownes of Gold. The yeare 1465. the great Turke sent Ambassa∣dours to Rhodes, to mediate a peace betwéen him and the Knights Hospitallers: but they worthily refused it, and in presence of the Ambassadours, denounced Warre against the Turke. The ge∣nerall Chapter beeing then transferred from Rhodes to Rome, and the Great Maister béeing present in person thereat: he died there the twen∣ty one of February 1467. and was buried in the Church of Saint Peter. 38 Baptista Orsino, Prior of Rome,1467. an Ita∣lian by Nation and tongue, succéeded the Great-Maister Zacosta. No sooner was hee come to Rhodes, but hee receiued intelligence, that the great Turke prepared a puissant Army, purposing to besiedge either Rhodes or Negropont. Wher∣fore he sent for a great number of the Knightes, that were then absent, to come forth-with for de∣fence of the Island. Moreouer, hee leagued him∣selfe with the Seigneury of Venice against the Turke. Neuerthelesse, in the yeare 1470. Maho∣met forcibly tooke the Citty of Negropont, the
last day of Iuly, committing very great and hor∣rible cruelties, killing (in cold blood) all the La∣tines there to be found, and (by sound of Trum∣pet) he proclaimed open war against the knights of Rhodes, which enforced them to séeke all meanes for their best defence, prouiding euerie way to withstand the Turkish Army. But in this time of preparation, the eight day of Iune, the Great Maister died of a long lingering dis∣ease, which had afflicted him a whole yeare toge∣ther: and after him succéeded 147639 Peter d'Aubusson, borne in Auuergne, Prior there, & Captaine of the Citty of Rhodes. He being chosen Great Maister, solemnely took his oath (according to custom) to kéep the statutes of the Order. He visited ye whole Isle of Rhodes, and made very great prouision, to defend it a∣gainst the Turkes Army: sending for all knights and Commaunders appertaining to the Order, to repaire thither for defence of the Isle, and re∣newing peace with the Soldane of Egypt. The same yeare, King Lewes preuailed to haue a Iu∣bilie in Fraunce, in fauour of the Knightes of Rhodes, taking order, that the Monies thereby arising, should soly be imployed for their defence: And by this Iubily came great store of Money, wherewith Castles and fortifications were buil∣ded in the Isle. Truce also was taken, betwéene the Knightes and the King of Tunis, for thirtie yeares, and the Knights of the Sepulcher at Ie∣rusalem, were ioyned with the Rhodians of S. Iohn. In the yeare 1479. Mahomet the second
Emperour of the Turkes, held a solemne Coun∣cell, that Rhodes should bée besiedged with a po∣werfull Army, as indéede soone after it was: in which siedge, many sallies forth were made, and the Turkes daily repulsed and chased, albeit they were an hundred thousand fighting men, and the Army consisted of 160. Saile. The Great mai∣ster was much succoured by Messire Antoine d'Aubusson his Brother, Vicount of Montelis, who was a great Warriour, and a most skilfull Captaine, he was elected Captaine Generall for the besiedged. In fewe daies, the Turkes gaue thrée thousand and seauen hundred shot with the Cannon, against the Citty Wals, and a maruai∣lous assault was made of forty thousand Turks: who neuerthelesse were valiantly resisted, albeit the Great Maister receiued (in this fight) fiue great woundes, one whereof was thought to bée deadly. In the end, so worthily were the assay∣lants withstood, that they were enforced to raise their siedge, hauing lost a great number of theyr Souldiers, and the Army of Turkes returned, (with mighty shame and disgrace) to Constanti∣nople, after they had besiedged the Citty for the space of 89. dayes. After this siedge, Mahomet the second, concluded to com in person to Rhodes, whereupon, a generall assembly of the Knightes was made: But the death of Mahomet hindered this designe, and his Sonnes Baiazeth and Zi∣zime performed the Warre, after the decease of their Father, which gaue some breathing time of rest to the Knights of Rhodes. And yet Zizime
(in person) came to assist the Great Mayster, with-drawing himselfe to Rhodes, in the yeare 1482. where he was receiued with great honour, and from thence conducted into France. In the time of this Great Maister d'Aubusson, the sta∣tutes of the Order were reformed, and brought into one volume; peace being concluded betwéen the Knights and the Great Turk Baiazeth. The Great Maister was made a Cardinall by Pope Innocent the eight, and Legate also into Asia, with honour of Legate and Generall of the lea∣gued Army against the Turke. Finally, he dyed at Rhodes, An. 1503. the third day of Iuly, full of honour and reputation, and was interred with great Funerall pompe. He had liued 80. yeares, thrée moneths and foure daies, and gouerned the Order twenty seauen yeares, and sixtéene daies. 1503.40 There were 387. Knightes assembled at Rhodes, when the Great Maister d'Aubusson dyed, who elected for his successor, Emery d'Am∣boise, Brother to George d' Amboise, Cardi∣nall and Legate in France, Arch-Bishop of Ro∣uen. He was a French-man by birth, and great Priour of France at the time of his election, Guy de Blanchefort comming into France, to accom∣pany him in his voyage to Rhodes: where hée was receiued with much applause and reioycing, because the Kinges of France and Spaine hadde written very fauourable Letters on his behalfe, to the Knights of the order. Hee was no sooner there arriued, but hee helde a generall Chapter,
wherein was concluded, that a sumptuous tomb of Brasse should be made, for the deceased Car∣dinall Great Maister. In the yeare following, they obtained a very famous and nauall victory, against the Soldane of Egypt, vnder the conduct of Phillip de Villiers, of the Isle Adam, a French Knight of the order, and afterward he was great Maister. But this Maister Emerie d'Amboise dyed at Rhodes, An. 1512. 41 And the same yeare,1512 410. of the knights were assembled at Rhodes, where they chose Guy de Blanchefort (borne in Auuergne, and Nephew to the deceased Maister d'Aubusson) to be Great Maister. In his time the generall La∣terane Councel was holden at Rome, where Fa∣britio Carretto, Admiral and Procurator for the Order of Rhodes, was Captaine of the Guard to the saide Councell. This great Maister de Blanchefort, embarking himselfe at Nicea in Prouence, to make for Rhodes; was surprized, (by the way) with a dangerous sicknesse, wherof hee dyed the 24. of Nouember, a yeare and two daies after his election. 42 In his stead, Fabritio de Carretto,1513. borne in Geneway, and an Italian by language, was treated Great Maister, in an assembly helde at Rhodes, the fifteenth of December 1513. where were then present 550. Knightes of the Order, the said Carretto hauing formerly béen Admiral of Rhodes. In the yeare 1516. peace was made betwéene the Knights of Sain Iohn, and To∣mombeus Soldane of Egypt, successor to Camp∣son
Gaury, who (but a short while before was slaine in a battaile, wherein Selim (Emperour of the Turkes) had the victory against him. And Tomombeus was as vnfortunate, for in the yeare 1517. he was taken, and strangled at one of the Portes of the great Cayre, by the appoint∣ment of Selim. And this was the cause, that the great Maister fortifyed the Isle of Rhodes, to his vttermost power, sending Ambassadours to the Christian Princes, to let them vnderstand the great victoryes of Selim, the sooner to take or∣der for sending succour. But Selim dying, his son Sultan Soliman succéeded him: and in Ianuary, 1521. the Great Mayster Carretto finished his daies at Rhodes, leauing great prouision and Munition for warre, which soone after did seruice to his successor 152143 Phillip de Villiers, of the Isle Adam, great Priour of France, and there borne; where because hee also was at the time of his election, Gabriell de Pomereux great Commander, was chosen Lieutenant to the great Maister till hée came. The very same yeare of his election, the twenty two day of Ianuary, 1521. Sultan So∣liman resolued to besiedge the Isle of Rhodes, ex∣ecuting the last will of his Father Selim: where∣of the Great Maister being aduertised, hee made his preparation (by all possible meanes) to with∣stand the Turkes enterprise. Diligently did hee strengthen the Citty of Rhodes, sending for sup∣ply into Christendome; which as then hée could not haue, by reason of the warre happening be∣twéene
Frances the first, King of France, and the Emperor Charles the fift. In the month of Iune 1522. began the memorable siedge of the Cittie of Rhodes, which was besiedged with an Army of two hundred thousand Turkes, and afterward the army encreased to thrée hundred thousand men. The besiedged defended themselues most couragiously, and very worthy exploits of warre were there performed: especially by the Great Maister, who (during the siedge) did neuer put off his Armour. The assaylants were in many attemptes repulsed, and in one of them, twentie thousand Turks remained dead in the place: So∣liman hauing then a purpose to raise his siedge, but that there were some close Traytours, who hindered him from so dooing, and yet they did not escape vnpunished. At length,The losse of Rhodes, to the great geef of al Christen∣dome. the Great Mayster (receiuing no succour) was en∣forced to surrender the Cittie, vppon compositi∣on, the twenty foure day of December 1522. the Turkes hauing lost more then an hundered thousand men. Soliman would néedes sée the Great Maister, and when he beheld him, tears is∣sued from his eyes, in méere compassion of him. So, the first day of Ianuary, 1523. the Great Maister (with 50. sayle) departed from Rhodes, and tooke his way towards Candie: after that the Isle of Rhodes had beene in the power of the Knights Hospitallers, for the space of 213. years, to wit, from the yeare, 1309. to the ende of the yeare, 1522. After this losse of Rhodes, the great Maister and his valiant Religious Knights, had
not any assured place of abyding: vntill the Isle of Malta was giuen thē by the Emperor Charles the fift. For they departed first into Candie: from thence they went into Sicilie and Italy, where the Pope sent them the City of Vitterbo, and where they held a generall Chapter. Afterward they so∣iourned for some small time, at Cornetto, then at Villefranche, and at Nicea. While they remai∣ned at Nicea, the great Maister made a voyage into England, and from thence to France, where being at Lyons, a great sicknesse tooke him: but after his recouery,The knigh∣tes of Saint Iohn becam Knightes of Malta. he went to Cambraye, to hold the Baptisme Font for Phillebert Emmanuell, sonne to Charles Duke of Sauoy. Afterwarde, comming with his Brethren-Knights to Malta, on Wednesday morning the sixt of Octob, 1530. he caused a Pallace to be there erected, for the a∣biding of him and his successors, calling it Ca∣stell Angelo, building another pallace also in the old Citty of Malta. When he had gouerned his Order thirtéene yeares, and seauen months (be∣ing aged seauenty yeares) the 21. of Aug. 1534. he died at Malta, and was buried in a Chappell, which he had builded néere to Castel Angelo, and then succéeded him by election 153444 Pierrin du Pont, a Natiue of Ast, and an Italian by language. Before ye taking of Rhodes, he was Gouernor of the Isle of Lango, and after the osse thereof, he departed (with al the knights vnder his gouernment) and ioyned his power in Candie, with the armye of the Order. In his time, Charles the fift Emperor, attempted to go
in person to the kingdome of Tunis in Affrica; where he was assisted by the Gallies belonging to the Order, and the Knights also, who perfor∣med there great exploits of Armes: especially, in the surprizing of Goletta, which was helde to be a Fort vnconquerable. This war being ended, the great Maister (aged seuenty and thrée years) dyed, hauing gouerned onely fourtéene months, and 22. daies, and was buried by his predecessor Villiers. 45 Desirê, or Didier de S. Iaille de Tolon,1535 borne in Prouence, and Priour of Tholossa, was next made great Maister: when lifting vppe his eies to heauen, he vsed these words! O my God, if thou thinkest me fit for this great charge, I wil not refuse the paine and labour. In his trauay∣ling towards Malta, being very aged, so soone as he arriued at Mont-pellier, he fel into an extream sicknesse, whereof he died the 26. of September, 1536. and was buried with much solemnitie, in the church of the Commandery of S. Gilles, with∣out the gates of Mont-pellier: when the knights were aduertised of his decease, the eightéenth of October in the same yeare, they procéeded to the election of 46 Iohn d'Homedes, a natiue of Arragon,1536. who being then in Spaine, made hast to Malta, where he was ioyfully receiued. Albeit, he was discon∣tented, that they had not sent some of the gallies, nor the great Carrack of the Order, for his con∣duct thither: wherefore he disarmed and destroi∣ed the great Carrack, which caused manie com∣plaints
against him. Very often would hee dis∣course of the siedge at Rhodes, because hee gaue generall notice thereby, that there he had lost one of his eies. He made a goodly Parke of Dear, and a very beautiful Garden in the Isle of S. Micha∣el, & there would he spend the greater part of the day: which raised occasion of murmuring against him, that he was slacke in his publicke gouerne∣ment, and no way carefull to prouide the Isle of Malta, of needfull supplies against the Turks for∣ces, for he trusted too much in the strength of Ca∣stell Angello. In his time, the Citty of Tripoli in Barbary, was lost by the Knights of the Order, & taken by the Turkes, which droue him to no lit∣tle feare and amazement. In the year, 1552. Leo Strozzi, an especiall Commander of the Order, made an attempt vpon the Isle of Zoara, which had very hard successe, because many Knightes were then slaine there of all Nations, especiallye many French, Auuergnacs and Prouenceals. It being declared to the Great Mayster, he grieued extraordinarily thereat, and sayde: That a grea∣ter losse had not happened to the Order, since the surprizall of Rhodes. Hee builded the Ca∣stles of Saint Elme, and Saint Michaell, and being eighty yeares old, died the sixt of Septem∣ber, 1558. hauing gouerned sixtéene yeares, ten months, and xv. daies, and was buried in the Great Maisters Chappell. 155846 Claudius de la Single, borne in Fraunce, was next created Great Maister, and at his elec∣tion,
there were then present at Malta, aboue 400 Knights of the Order. Hee gouerned verie dis∣créetly, by Counsell of fiue woorthie Knights his Officers, and attendaunts, (to witte:) by his Steward, Mayster of the Houshold, Maister of the Horsse, the Treasurer, and Secretary. So that the Order was in great happynesse, du∣ring the time of his Maister-ship, hauing obtay∣ned the priuiledge of Neutralitie, of King Henry the second, and Charles the fifte Emperor, who made Warre against him. Hee was verye valiant, Religious, and a most profitable Ad∣ministrator of the Orders reuennewes, in whose Treasurie he left abundant store: dying of a Ca∣tarrhe, which had much suffocated him, after he had attained to the Climacteriall yeare 63. of his age. 47 F. Iohn de Valette, borne in Prouence,1561. succéeded next as great Maister, and his election was very pleasing to all the Order of S. Iohn, because he was generally beloued of all the Na∣tions, and vniuersally desired, as most woorthie of that charge and dignity. In lesse space then two yeares, hee was Generall of the Gallyes, Bayliffe of Lango, Great Commander, Priour of S. Gilles, and Lieutenant to the great Master, and now at length great Maister also. He did so affect his Knights & Order, that, after the day he first entred in it, he wold neuer more return into his country. So that, by making continuall resi∣dence therwith them, he passed thorow al the de∣grées & offices of honor in the profession: apearing
still (in all his actions) to bee of rare iudgement, perfect integrity, and incomparable valour. So soone as he was aduanced to this soueraigne dig∣nity, he resolued to builde a new Citty at Malta, vpon the Mountaine of S. Elme,A new Cit¦ty builte at Malta on S. Elemes Mount. knowing, that al the other Forts were not sufficiently mumted, to endure the battery of a potent enemy: yet this desseigne was deferred till a further time. Hee fortified the Castle of the Isle of Goza, and (for∣saking his abiding at the Castle of S. Angello) came and dwelt within the Towne of Malta, which he defended most valiauntly, agaynst the siedge of the Emperor Sultan Soliman, when he was gréeuously wounded in his leg, in the yeare 1565. But the siedge being raised, to the shame and confusion of the Turkes, hee greatly streng∣thened the Isle of Malta, and began to builde the new Citty, which was called Valette, according to his sur-name, and whereof himselfe solemne∣ly laide the first stone, on Monday, the eight and twenty of March, 1566. And by the sollicitude of the Great-Maister, the building thereof continu∣ed on still, eight thousand persons being daylye imployed therein, and fiue hundred thousande Crownes monthly paid to the worke-men. At length, the one and twenty of August, 1568. the Great Maister died, on the like day as hee was promoted to his place, hauing gouerned eleauen yeares, fully compleat. 156848 After the obsequies of Valette, the Great Maister, they procéeded to elect a new successor, which was Pedro de Mente, an Italian borne, &
Priour of Capua. Immediately after his promo∣tion to the Maister-ship, hee caused his predeces∣sors body to be carried into the new Citty, and to be honorably buried in the Chappell of our Ladie of Victory, for he worthily deserued to be surna∣med the Father of Souldiours, the Shielde and defender of the Catholicke faith, and the great persecutor or queller of proude Infidelles. This newe Great Maister, before hee attained to so high degrée, had made good proofe of his Wise∣dome and valour, in sundry other honorable and worthy offices. For he was first, Patron of the Gally, which was Captaine or Commaunder of the band: Next, Lieutenant General of the gal∣lies, Castillion or gouernor of the Castell S. An∣gello at Rome; he was then Admiral next Ge∣nerall of the whole Fleet, and Ambassador for the Order to the Popes Pius the fourth, and Pius the fift. Hee came from Rome to Malta, when he was chosen great Maister, and followed hys charge so effectually, that the new Citty was fi∣nished, and thither he purposed to transferre the dwelling of the Order. For the good Olde-man thought it as great honour, to dwell in the newe Cittie▪ and make it habitable, as it was for his predecessour Valette to builde it. In his time, the memorable Nauall battaile of Lepanto was sought, and victorie obtained against the Turks, wherin the Knights of the Order did many wor∣thy actions of armes. The great Maister decea∣sing at Malta 49 Iohn, Bishop of Cassiera, borne in Auuergn,1572
did next succéed him, in the yeare, 1572. Before his election to this office, his vertue had appeared in diuers waighty charges. For, at the enterprize of Zoara, he was Ensigne-bearer to the Order, & defended the Standard very woorthily, bringing it backe with him to Malta, when both it & him∣selfe were smitten into the sea: yet both of them saued by a Gally belonging to the order, after he had a long time fought vndauntedly against the Infidels. Soone after, hee was chosen Captaine general of the horsemen: Commissary of the for∣tifications, then, Marshall of the Order, and now last great Maister, wherein he liued very vertu∣ously, not letting any day passe him, without som especial péece of seruice, and féeding (with his own hands) thirtéene poore men. With his owne mo∣ny, he builded the great Church dedicated to S. Iohn Baptist, in the new City of Valette, endow∣ing it with a thousand Crownes of annuall Re∣uennues: erecting also a goodly Sepulchre, for in∣terring therein the bodies of the great Maisters his predecessors. There happened some discon∣tentment betwéene the Knights and him, which shortning his daies, he died. 158250 And the twelfth of Ianuary, 1582. Hugues de Loubenx Verdale, borne in Prouence was e∣lected great Maister. He was but a yong knight, yet both learning and military knowledge shined clearly in him: For he was in the attempt at Zo∣ara, where he declared himselfe to be truely vali∣ant, and had many honorable Offices imposed vpon him. He dying,
51 Martin Garzes, a natiue of Arragon,1595. suc∣céeded him next as great Maister. Hee qualified the discontentmentes amongst his Brethren-Knights, and tooke away those Taxes, which had bin imposed, and interdicted (for a time) the offi∣cers of the order, to giue a new forme to his owne gouernement, and to the good liking of all the the Knights. He did expressely prohibit, that not any Knight (nor the Great Maister himselfe) might particularly haue any shippe on the Sea) to vse any Pyracies for his owne profit. He died also at Malta, and lieth buried in the Sepulchre of the great Maisters. 52 The Knights assembling for a new electi∣on, the tenth of February, 1601.1601 Aloph de Vig∣nacourt, born in France, was created great mai∣ster. In the yeare 1566. hee comming to Malta, with great store of other French Gentlemen, vp∣on a flying rumor, that the Isle was likely to bee besiedged againe by the Turkes Armie, entered into the order, vnder the Great Maister Valette, receiuing (afterwarde) sundrie great charges, wherein his wisedome and man-hoode was eui∣dently discerned: hauing bin Captain of the citty of Valette, and not long after, great hospitaller of the Order. He yet continueth in the office of great Maister, a great comfort (wee hope) to Christen∣dom, & a terror to the Othomans Empire, when∣soeuer they shall attempt the hurte of the Isle of Malta, where the famous memorie, of that an∣cient Order of Knight-hood of S. Iohn of Ierusa∣lem, is still kept and maintained.
¶ The seuerall Orders of Knight-hood, both Ecclesiasticke and Secular; as they haue beene, and are yet honoured in this Christi∣an World. Ecclesiasti∣call orders.Knights of Saint Iames of Compostella. 1070IN the yeare 1070. this Order of Knight-hood began in Spaine, after that Ramirus had won the most famous victory, in ye Prouince of Com∣postella, against the Moores. At first, their number consisted but of thirtéen, and it was lawfull for them to take Wiues. There was a chéefe man chosen of this Order, by the Name of Great Maister; who (together with the other thirtéene) had power to elect other Knights. The badge or note of honor of this knight-hood, was a red Crosse, carrying the forme of a downe pointed Sword. At the Feast of All-Saints. was their méeting appointed, that they might conferre about their affaires. Many yeares haue they continued, with many priuiledges, and scarcely any but they (called Augustines) holde any such lawes.
¶ Knightes of Saint Iohns of Ierusalem, who were afterward Knights of the Rhodes, and at this day are called Knights of Malta. IN the yeare 1099.1099 the Citty of Hierusalem being recouered against the impulsions of the Infidels, by Godfrey of Bullen, Duke of Lor∣raine: About that very time, a certaine Hospital was erected by the Christians in Hierusalem, consecrated by the name of Saint Iohn Baptist, for the entertainement of Pilgrims. Soone after, was this Order of Knight-hood instituted, and the first Rector or Ruler was called Gerard, and the next after him Raimond. These knights wore a blacke Garment, with a Crosse Argent, in a field Gules vpon their breasts. In the yeare 1308.1308. being enforced from their former abyding by the Turks, & the Isle Rhodes graunted them by Pope Clement the fift, they were (in that regard) called Knights of Rhodes. In the yeare 1523.1523. Rhodes béeing wonne from them, Malta was affoorded them; where∣on to this day they are called Knights of Malta. The duty of this Knight-hoods-order, was, to fight for the Christian Faith, to reléeue the op∣pressed, to defend Widdowes and Orphanes, &c. Nor was any one to bee admitted into this Or∣der, that was descended of a Moore, lew, Ma∣humetist, or any such ignoble race.
¶ Knights Templers, or Knights of the Temple. ANno Domi. 1117. Gotfredus Aldemarus Alexandrinus,1117. and Hugo de Planco de Pa∣ganis (Godfrey Duke of Lorraine, and King of Hierusalem beeing dead, and Baldwine then raigning) this order of Knight-hood first began; And a seat was graunted them in the Temple of Hierusalem, whereupon, they were cald knights Templers, or Knights of the Temple. By entreaty of Stephen, Patriarch of Ierusa∣lem, Pope Honorius brought in this order, and confirmed their Society; giuing them a white garment, whereunto Eugenius the third added a red Crosse on the breast. The charge of these Knightes, was, to guide trauailers on the way of Ierusalem, and to enter∣taine strangers. 1310Anno Domini 1310. Clement the fift (who then helde his Sée in Fraunce) by perswasion of Phillip King of Fraunce, gaue order for the vtter subuersion of this Knight-hoods Society, and all their Colledges, thorough-out our Christian world, wheresoeuer they were builded: in regard of a most abhominable treachery, by them inten∣ded and ratified. Knights Teutons, or Knights of Allemaigne. SOone after that Hierusalem was regained from the Christians, one Teuto a Noble∣man,
and abounding in riches; instituted this Society of knight-hood, building an house (for their entertainment) at Ierusalem, called Hospi∣tium virgini Mariae. Among this Order of Knight-hood, neyther Knight of Malta, nor any other, except a Ger∣main (and he likewise to be Noble by birth) could be receiued into their degrée. Their garment was white, and a blacke Crosse figured vppon theyr breasts. In the yeare 1184. these Knightes (the Cittie of Hierusalem being surprised by the Sarrazins) Ptolomais was graunted them: but beeing like∣wise driuen thence, they came into their Country of Germany. In the yeare 1220. they entreated Frederick the second, Emperour, that he would suffer them to take Armes against certaine fugitiue Idola∣ters in Prussia: who beeing by them subdued, they obtained there a newe seating, and theyr Dition or Lordship of Liuonia was then added to them. ¶ Calatranian Knights, or Knights of Calatrana. IN the yeare 1130.1130 this Order of Knight-hood was instituted by Santio King of Toledo, in imitation of the Order of Saint Iames. These Knights tooke the name of Calatrana, which was a place granted vnto them, where (in former times) had stood a Church, that belonged
to the Knights Templers: And when the Sara∣zins were ouer-powerful for them, those knights were constrayned to surrender this place vnto them. These Knights did weare a blacke Garment, with a red crosse vpon their breast; and were said to be of the Cisternian Order, holding in Spayne very large possessions. ¶ Knights of Alcantara. 1150THese Knights held their name of a Citty in Castile, called Alcantara, and were of the Cisternian Order. They had a goodly Temple néere to the Ryuer Tagus, where they held very ample possessions. Their Ensigne or Badge was a greene Crosse. ¶ Knights of the Redemption. 1212IN Anno Dom. 1212. this Order was insti∣tuted by Iames King of Arragon, who conque∣red the Islands called Baleares, or Maiorque and Minorque in the Spanish Sea. It was the Office of these Knights, to redéeme Captiues, whereuppon, the Tytle of Redemp∣tion was giuen them: they were also called Knights of Marie. These Knights Order was confirmed by Gre∣gory the ninth, By shoppe of Rome: And they wore a white Garment with a blacke Crosse vp∣on it.
¶ Knights of Montesia. THis order was instituted,110. much about that very same time, as the Knights of Calatra∣na were. They deriued their name from Montesia in Va∣lentia, where was their place of abiding. The Ensigne of these Knights was a red crosse. ¶ Knights of the holy Sepulcher. THese Knightes (who deriued their name of Christs Sepulcher) did wear two red crosses.1219 This order (at this day) is quite extinct, or (as some do imagine) the Order of the Knightes of Malta is said to be some-what néere it. ¶ Knights of Christ. IN Anno Dom. 1320.1320 this order was institu∣ted by Iohn the twentith, Byshop of Rome. The place of these Knights abyding, was in Por∣tugall. A blacke garment, and a double Crosse, were the Ensignes of this Knight-hoods order. ¶Knights of Saint Marie, the Mother of Christ. CErtaine Noble-men of Bolognia and Mo∣dena in Italy,12 being much troubled and mo∣lested
by perturbations among the Princes, desi∣red of Vrbane the fourth, Bishop of Rome, that they might be suffered to begin some kind of So∣ciety. Whereupon this order was graunted them, to holde in frée and peacefull manner. A little red Crosse, reflected with Golde, they wore vpon their breasts. These Knights did weare costly Garmentes, and fared delicately: whereuppon they were vul∣garly called by the Italians, Frati Gaudenti. They might not weare any gilt Spurs, or vse any Gold on their Horses furniture. ¶Knights of Saint Lazarus of Hie∣rusalem. 1048THis Order was confirmed, or (as some will haue it) restored by Pius Quartus. And yet the Knightes of this Order, (are saide to bée) in the times of Basilius, and Pope Damasus, when Iulian the Apostata raigned, and then they flourished, as some do af∣firme. The Ensigne or Imprese of this Order, was a gréen Crosse, worn on the left side of the breast. A man twice married might not bee admitted into this order. ¶ Knights of the round Table. The Secu∣lar Orders.IN Anno Domini 516. Arthur, a worthy and Warlike King, raigning in the Isle of Brit∣taine,
the Countrey beeing infested and troubled with Armies of Saxons, &c. was yet (by him) very valiantly supported, and his fame out-stret∣ched to the remotest Regions. Afterward, when peace was established; that other Knight∣ly mindes might bée inflamed with the like glory: this Order hee instituted, which conty∣nued (with others) in long and honourable ob∣seruation. The Order of these Knightes was (especial∣ly) in the Citty of VVinchester, as some haue recorded; and theyr yearely méeting was there, at the Feast of Pentecost or Whitson∣tide. ¶ Knights of the Garter. IN the yeare 1349.1349 Edward the third, King of England, hauing hadde verie great victo∣ries against the French, and other neighbou∣ring Nations, did institute this Order, and consecrated it to S. George. The King appointed a Garter to be the Ensign of this Order, wrought richly with Golde and precious stones, which should circle the Leg be∣neath the knée, and on it to haue these words ap∣parantly discerned: HONI. SOIT. QVI. MAL. Y. PENSE. The number of these Knights are 26. where∣of the King himselfe is the chiefe. The time of this Societies méeting, is the
feast of Saint George, and celebrated at Wind∣sore. These Knightes doe weare the Ensigne of S. George, (fighting with a Draggon) fastened to a rich Chaine or Collar, which weigheth or va∣lueth, neither more or lesse then eighty poundes of English Money, as hath béene saide in former times. Their garments is Purple, with a redde Crosse. ¶ Knights of the Starre. 1350ANno Dom. 1350 Iohn King of Fraunce, being much mooued with the glory of Ed∣ward the third, King of England; did institute this order of Knight-hood, entitling it by those 3 Magi, who (going from the East to honour Christ) were guided by a Starre. The Ensigne of this Order was a Starre, set eminently in the Hat: and the wordes were Monstrant Regibus Astra Ʋiam. The founder of this order, béeing much mo∣lested with the difficulties happening in warre; could not perfect what hée had instituted. And therefore (within a short while after) this Order ceased. ¶ Knightes of the Band. 1367IN the yeare 1367. this Order was instituted y Alphonsus King of Spaine, the Sonne of Ferdinand and Constance.
These Knights did weare a certaine red scarffe or Band, of three Fingers breadth, which (like a scole) was fastned on the left Shoulder, and so come vnderneath the right Arme, thwart the bo∣dy. Into this Order, younger borne Bretheren onely (of Noble descent and Family) and none of the elder, might be admitted. Many Articles (belonging to this order, and to bee obserued by these Knightes) are at large set downe by Sansouino. ¶ Knights of the Annunciation. ANno Dom. 1409.1409 Amades or Amadeus, as some write, the sixt, surnamed The greene Earle of Sauoy, deuised this Order, who were tearmed Knights of the virgin Mary, and for this reason instituted: because Amades the first Earle of Sauoy, (with wonderfull fortitude) defended Rhodes against the Turkish powers, in his me∣mory it was thus celebrated. A Chaine or Collar (such as Knightes vse to weare, made of Gold and Siluer plates, and fa∣stened together with little linkes) each man had about his necke, with these Letters engrauen thereon, F. E. R. T. that is, Fortitudo eius Rhodū tenuit. Thereat hung also (by another small Chaine) the Picture of the Virgine Mary, with the Angels salutation.
¶ Knights of the golden Fliece. 1429.IN the yeare 1429. Phillip, sir-named the good Duke of Burgundie, instituted this Order, and dedicated it vnto Saint Iames. The number these Knightes were twenty foure, whereof the Duke of Burgundy was the chiefe. They vsed to weare the Picture of a Golden Shéepe, affixed to a Chaine, inter-wouen like flames of fire. Charles the warrelike Duke of Burgundy (who also is sayde by euery one, to bee the first Founder of this Order) added thereunto these words: Aute ferit, quam flamma micet. But now at this day, the Knights haue these words: PRETIVM NON VILE LABORVM. ¶ Knights of Saint Mi∣chaell. 1469IN the yeare 1469. Lewes, the eleauenth King of Fraunce, instituted this Order at Amiens, and dedicated it to S. Michaell. The beginning of this Society, consisted of a Band of Men, to the number of thirty sixe, the very chéefest and Noblest Péeres of the king∣dome, béeing Knights cleare from all detection; and the very chéefe of them was the King him∣selfe. At this day, there are a great number of these
Knightes, and the kingdome of Fraunce is not now so respectiue in their election, as at the first. These knights weare a Chaine of gold daily, wouen like little shelles, valewing two hunde∣red Crownes: And thereat hangeth the picture of Saint Michaell, fighting with the Deuill, the Wordes beeing these, Immensi tremor O∣ceani. These knights did vse to méet euerie yeare, at the Feast of S. Michaell, in the Church of S. Michaell on the Mount. Their garments by Henry the second, king of France, were apointed in very honorable maner. Knights of S. Stephen. In the yeare, 1561. this Order was institu∣ted by Cosmo de Medices, Duke of Florence,1561. and the same confirmed by Pius Quartus. The Ensigne of these knightes, was a redde Crosse, worne on a blacke garment. The Statutes of this Order, do not much dif∣fer from them of Malta knights: and they were allowed to haue wiues. The Duke of Florence, is alwayes the chiefe of this Order, and it is not to be censured by anie of the religious degrées, but properly it doth hold a fréedome in liberty. Knights of the Holy-Ghost. In the yeare, 1578. Henry the third,1578 king of
France, instituted this Order, and named it of the Holy-Ghost: the memory whereof, was to be celebrated in the time of Pentecost: vpon which day, the King was borne, and succéeded also in the Kingdome. These Knights are an hunde∣red in number, and the King him-self is the Pre∣sident. This Feast is celebrated yearely the first day of Ianuary, in the Augustines Church in Paris, by the Parisians. The Ensigne of these Knights, is a Doue (in which forme the Holy-Ghost appeared) in midst of a Crosse. The last or lowest degrée of Knight-hoode, is theirs, who (as reward of their Vertues) haue golden Spurres put on their héeles, and vulgarly are called Knights. Concerning Knights Bannerets, who hadde that Title giuen them by the Kings of England in Warre: And Knights of the Bath, they bee∣ing also created by the Kings of that kingdome: because they are of another Nature, I passe them ouer, without vsing any further spéech of them. ¶ Of the Emperor of Ethyopia, called Prete-Ian, or Prester-Iohn: Of his Origi∣nall, and customes of his people. Sabellic. lib. 8. de Suplem. Chron.THe great Emperor of Ethyopia, to whome wee (corruptly) giue the name Prester, or Presbiter Iohn, is neither Priest or Sacrificer,
though he be (by some) called Prete-Ian, and (by his owne people) named Beldugian, that is to say, Ioy of incomparable excellency, or of most great value, and by others of them, he is also cal∣led Ian, which (in their language) signifyeth Mighty.The power of Prester-Ian. He commandeth ouer seuenty and two Kinges, who are all of different languages, ha∣uing their diuersity of customes, and the colour of their faces or complexions are much disagréeing. He is able to levie in preparation for war, a mil∣lion of fighting men: fiue hundred Elephantes, with their armour and munition for encounter, with an infinit number of Horses and Camelles.His souldi∣s Armour fo tir de∣fence. His Knights or warlike Souldiors, enter armed to the battell each wearing a long coat of Maile, stretching downe closely to their thighes a Sal∣let or head-péece on the head, a round Target or Pauois, a crooked Fauchion by his side, and a Launce with two Stéele points or Pikes. Such as haue no Sallets or head-pieces, do wear thick red quilted Cappes on their heades, plated after the manner of the Mameluke Souldiors. The younger sort carried Darts▪ Arrows and Slings, obseruing the same discipline, and be as obedient or well gouerned, in ranging their battails as we are. They vse Drummes of Brasse, and Trum∣pets also, to incourage their souldiors to the fight, which is performed with great hardiment, ap∣pointing likewise sundry honours and respectiue rewards, to such as declare themelues to bee of highest merit. They do daily pay the families of their warriors, and marke the children that are
borne of them, with a Crosse, which they imprint suddenly in the flesh with an hot yron, so that the signe remayneth, as if it were naturall vnto them. The exer∣cise of the King Ptete-Ian.The King himselfe most commonly called Pre∣te-Ian, after he hath bestowed some houres about State affayres, when he perceiueth that he is in∣differently eased of them: he imployeth almost al the remainder of his time, in the study of holye Readings and Histories, which being doone, he vseth a litle exercise of the body, and then entring into his Bath, afterward hee takes his refection, alone by himselfe (as most of our Kings vse to do) vpon a little Table of Golde, without any Cloth or Napkin, and it is set in such a place as there are diuers steppes or degrées in ascending to it. He is serued by sundry Pages, who are of noble birth, and they bring him his meat (ready cut and prepared) in little Baskets or Panyers. He drin∣keth wine in a cup of gold, but hee hath another kinde of drink,His dyet & manner of life. made of sower Apples, and ming∣led with Suger, which he receiueth in a cuppe of Christall. While he féedeth, thrée hundred lusty young men (chosen out of the seuerall kingdomes vnder his Dominion, hauing the place of Ar∣chers, and of his Guarde) do stand round about the Tent-Royall: For, by an ancient custome it hath béene kept, that the King continually liueth out of any Citty, wherein he neuer abydeth but two dayes onely, and those Tents are erected in such manner, that the backe part is euermore pla∣ced to the East, and the doore or opening is oppo∣site
to the West. The vsuall Armes or weapons of those guards, are Swords, Daggers, and Iauelinges, theyr neckes and shoulders, being gorgetted with thick skinnes of Beasts. Foure Kings,The atten∣dance and seruice of the Empe∣ror. who (by com∣mandement) do attend the Court, followe (each after the other) the Table seruice, accompanyed with many Barons and meaner Officers, euen from the Kitchin, to the Tent of Prete-Ian, all cloathed in silke, Seudal and Scarlet: And there they deliuer it to the Pages, who come foorth to receiue it. The King and all his Court fare deli∣ciously, with Fowle, Fish, and all kinds of Ve∣nison. So soon as he hath dined (for he neuer sups but on Festiuall daies) his Eunuches go to fetch diuers Quéenes (according to their seueral quar∣ters, being the Wiues of the fore-named Kings, to waite on the Quéene and Wife to Prete-Ian, conducting her vnto his Tent,The wiues of the Em∣peror. to giue him plea∣sure and contentment, and there they sing and Daunce in his presence. Hee hath foure wiues, who are the daughters of his Neighbour-Kings, but he lodgeth but with one of them, to whom he is solemnly married with many Ceremonies: but if it chance, that he haue no children by her, then he cals to his bed one of the other. When hee purposeth to shew himselfe in pub∣lique, his face is couered with a Vayle of Taf∣fata, which hee lifteth vppe and pulleth downe, that hardlie can his face bee wholly discerned: but if it be, it is very quickly couered againe. He vseth to shewe himselfe vnto the people, three
times in the yeare, that is to say, on the dayes of Christmasse, Easter, and the holy Crosse in Sep∣tember▪ and (for this purpose) is a gooly high scaf∣fold duly prepared.The Origi∣nall of the Ceremony The cause of this ceremony, receiued Originall from Dauid Prete-Ian, Sur∣named Alexander, whose death was three whole yeares concealed by his chiefe Seruants, that go∣uerned the kingdome in his time. Therefore, to auoide all the like succéeding inconueniences, the father of Dauid Prete-Ian, at the earnest intrea∣ties of his people, began first to shew himselfe on these ordained daies, which hath conrinually euer since been obserued, euen to Panusius Prete-Ian, which is nowe raigning in Ethiopia: onely ex∣cepted, when hee marcheth in warre, for then he goeth daily discouered. He is crowned with a precious Diadem,The Empe∣rors Crown Scepter, and habit. the one part whereof is Gold, and the other Siluer, and carrieth (insteade of a Scepter) a Crosse of Siluer in his hand: All his Seruants are marked with a Crosse, in the verie flesh on the right shoulder. Hee is cloathed with rich garments of frizeled Cloath of Golde, wea∣ring a shirte of silke, with very large and wde sléeues, as Dukes in elder times were woont to do: And from the Girdle downward he weareth a wide Kirtle of silke and cloath of golde, with a Linnen couer-ture after a Byshoppes manner. On either side of him goe two Pages, richly ap∣parreled, each holding a Crosse of Siluer in the one hand, and a naked sword in the other. His Lords, who are as Kings, and carrie that Title, do pay him tribute of Gold and other met∣tals,
of horsses and great Cattle of seueral kinds:The Empe∣rors tribute by his Kings. likewise of cloath of Gold, and of wooll, according to the quality and best Nature, of those countries that are vnder theyr gouernment: which rightes and Tributes they haue from their Subiects, al∣though they bee vassailes (indéede) to none but Prete-Ian, himselfe and to whom they yéelde the greater part of their substance. Some do pay him large quantities of Corne, and of Salte,Tributes in generall of his people. for the maintaining of his Armies: Others doo bring him Pepper, which is a rare commodity in that Country, and some do pay him slaues. The Ru∣stickes or countrey Boes, who liue in the wilde and silde-frequented Forrests, do bring vnto the Court, great store of Lyons, Tygres, and other liuing sauage beasts, which are afterwarde shut vp into apt apointed places, to yéeld pleasure and delight to him and his Princes. As for such as dwell further off from the Court▪ it is sufficient for them to bring the skinnes of such beasts only wherewith the Abyssines do (in a brauery cloth) themselues, when they go to warre. This Great Emperour Prete-Ian, gouerneth many Countries, and boundlesse Seas, where∣of, because this place alloweth me not to make any large discourse, as also of the maine matters of State concerning his kingdoms: I referre ye to the Generall History of the Worlde, where, whatsoeuer I am compelled in this Chronicle to abreuiate (not onely of this Emperor, but of all other kingdomes whatsoeuer) shall bee at large described. Let it suffice then, that I close vp this
report, with the onely glories of Prete-Ian, and his Ethyopians,The onely glories of Prete-Ian his Ethyo∣pians. which are, that they doo repute themselues to be the very ancientest Nation, a∣mong men, because they haue alwaies liued in their innated liberty, and were neuer conquered, either by Semyramis, nor Hercules, nor Dyoni∣sius, nor the Romaines: but that they themselues vanquished King Cambyses, and ouerthrew his potent army. Héereto they adde a more true and eminent glory indéede, which is, that they were one of the first Nations, in receipt of the Christi∣an faith, wel néere from the very beginning ther∣of. By meanes of the Eunnuch to the famous Quéene Candace, who was baptized by S. Phil∣lip: And that since their conuersion, they haue constantly kept the same Religion, for so manie hundreds of yeares. Aibeit▪ that during this time they haue béene generally (euen as yet they are at this day) mollested, assaulted, and enuyroned with Moores, Sarrazins, and the Idolatrous Worshippers of Mahomet, yet notwithstanding all those cruell Tempests (which héeretofore de∣stroyed the Romaine Empire, and the very grea∣test part of Christendome) Ethiopia could neuer hitherto bee spoyled, either of their Dominion or Religion, albeit som Idolatrous mixture hath crept thereinto. Which is the lesse to be maruai∣led at, if we may credit their owne saying, in al∣ledging their constancy and antiquitye,Whence the Ethyo∣pians de de∣riue their antiquity. because they deriue this their noble Originall and conti∣nuance, from the Royall Kinges Dauid and Sa∣lomon, of whom the most blessed Virgin Marie
(Mother to our Sauiour) descended, and he him∣selfe according to the flesh: Of whom they kéepe a very solemne memory, and (aboue any other of the Apostles) thinke reuerently of S. Thomas the Apostle. Of the Kingdome of Persia. PErsia hath carried the same name, from the beginning to this day, containing in it these Regions, Lar and Requelmall.The chiefe Citty of Persia. The principall Citty thereof is called Siras, in elder times tear∣med Persipolis, which is gouerned by the Sophy, Great Lord of all Persia, and Azimia, called by our elders Assiria; and the Kingdom of Dear∣bech, sometime named Mesopotamia; And Se∣roan, that was Media; and Parthia, now called Iex; with Hirca, nowe tearmed Coraxan; Sar∣mania, nowe Dulcendano; and Asia, nowe at this instant called Hetti. All these seuerall Regi∣ons, with the greater Armenia, which is a part also of them, are gouerned by the great Sophy,The go∣uernment of the great Sophy. and their greatest or chiefest Cittie is named Tauris, being built in the midst of the Mountain Taurus, foure daies iourney off from the Caspian Sea. Next vnto Tauris, there are other Cittyes, as of Soltauia, Concassan, Spahan, Corazan, Lera, Mora, Sarmachand, Gesti, Far, Siras, and Ormuz, a Citty in the Persick Sea, which at this day is called Mare Misindia. In this Citty is great commerce of Merchandize,Fishing for Pearles. made with the Portugales, and there they fish for great aboun∣dance
of Pearles. There are other Citties also, Cureh, Iex, Casmine, Coy, with infinite Ca∣stles. On the West side of Tauris are the Cas∣pian Mountaines, which are nowe called the Mountains of Arath; And on the Bacchan Sea, aunciently named the Caspian Sea, are these Citties, Sumacchia, Derbent, Bacchan, and Mamutaga. All these Prouinces and their Re∣gions, are very barren, because they haue small store of Riuers, the greatest whereof is called Bindarin, but in former times they entitled it Bragada. Concerning the gouernment obser∣ued among the Persians,Of the Per∣sian gouern¦ment, and nature of the people. it differs farre from all the other Mahumetists; because they hate No∣bility, and relying on the seruile fidelity of slaues, eyther murther their Friendes and Kindred, or put out their eyes. But among the Persians, the Sophy is highly respected, Nobility had in Honour, and many wealthy Lordes are liuing amongst them, whereof not one is to bee found in the Turkish Dominions. The people also are the very ciuillest in all Asia, men of vndaun∣ted courage, and speciall good Warriours, both on Horse-backe and foote: affecting Musique, Learning and Poesie, wherein some attaine to no meane excellency, and they are much addicted to the study of Astrology. So much in bréefe concerning the Persians, the rest remaineth to our Generall History of the World.
¶Of the Kingdome of Thunis. THE Citty of Thunis or Tunis being very great, was by the Latines called Tunetum, and of the Arabians Tunus: but they holde that name to be a very corrupt vocable, because (in their Language) Tunus dooth not signifie any thing. This Cittie was anciently called Tha∣rsus, as that other in Asia, and was at first but a very little Cittie, builded by the Affricanes, vp∣on the Lake which was formed from the Golet∣ta, distant from the Mediterranian Sea, about twelue miles.The anci∣ent name of Tunis. But after that Carthage was destroyed, then did those Citties beginne to en∣crease, both in number of habitations and dwel∣lers: in regard that the Armies which surprized Carthage, béeing vnwilling to tarry there (for feare of fresh supplyes from Europe) came to abide at Tunis, and there they builded many Houses. Not long after, there came thither a Captaine, named Hucha di Vtmen, who gaue them to vnderstand, that an Army ought not to shut vppe it selfe, in any Citty that shoulde touch or bee néere vnto the Sea: And therefore they made a Citty, which they named Cairoan,Cairoan, a new Citty builded. about the distaunce of thirty sixe miles from the Sea, and accounted to be an hundred miles from Tunis. Then did the Armies forsake Tunis, and inhabited this newe Citty; other people gouer∣ning those houses in Tunis, that had bin aban∣doned by the Armirs.
After this, about thrée hundered and fiftie yeares,Cairoan de¦stroyed by the Arabes. the Citty of Cairoan was destroyed by the Arabians, so that the Rector or Ruler thereof fled thence into the West, and raigned in Bug∣gia, as also ouer all the neighbouring partes: but there remained still in Tunis, a Family or kind∣red of the said Rector or Gouernour, fledde from Cairoan, who still possessed the same, as Soue∣raigne Lordes thereof. About ten yeares after, they of Buggia were expulsed by Ioseph, the son of Tessino: but beholding the humility and kind∣nesse of the saide Lord, they left the State vnto him, which continued in tranquility, so long as the Family of Ioseph raigned. But Abdull Mu∣men, King of Marocco, hauing regained Mab∣dia, which had béene taken by the Christians; passed homeward in his returne by Tunis, where hée tooke the gouernment vpon him: And all the time that Abdull Mumen liued,Tunis go∣uerned by the Kinges of Marocco and Ioseph his Sonne, with their Successours, Iacob & Man∣sor, Tunis continued in peace vnder the rule of the Kinges of Marocco. After the death of Man∣sor, his Sonne Muhamet Ennasir, mooued Warre against the King of Spaine, but was o∣uercome and forced to flight, escaping backe to Marrocco, where (after this foile) hee liued but few yeares. Then was his Brother Ioseph e∣lected King, who was slaine by certaine Soul∣diers to the King of Tebesm. Now in the Inte∣rim, betwéene the ouerthrow of Muhament, his death, as also the murthering of his Brother Ioseph, the Arabians returned backe on Tunis,
and besiedged it: But the Gouernour of Tunis,Tunis be∣siedged by the Arabes. gaue notice thereof to the King of Marocco, that if he sent him not some immediate succour, he should be constrayned to deliuer the Cittie to the Arabes. The King well considering on a case of such importance, did as became a man of his high spirit and experience, electing (aboue all o∣ther in his Court) one borne in Ciuill, a Citty of Granado, named Habdulnaihidi, whom hee foorth-with sent thyther, with the same authori∣ty, as if he had gone himselfe in person. Béeing accompanyed with twenty goodly great Sippes,Tunis de∣liuered frō the Arabes. he arriued at Tunis, which was then euen halfe vanquished by the Arabes: But by his wise∣dome, prouidence, and flowing eloquence, hee foyled the Enemy, pacified the State, set all thinges in good order, and made the Countries entrance sure against all Intruders. After him his Sonne succeeded, named Abu Zaccheria, who in learning and wisedome excelled his Father. Hée caused to bée builded in Tunis, on the West side of the Cittyes very highest part, a mightie great Rocke, and many goodly Pallaces in the Cittie, with a beautifull Temple, that had an high Tower on the top thereof, round engirt with strong wals. This Abu Zaccheria went likewise to Tri∣poli, where his valour won him such renowne, and his wisedome made so good benefite of the Countrey; that (at his death) hée left an infi∣nite Masse of Treasure behinde him. Hée be∣ing dead, his Sonne succéeded him, who was
an ambitious proude young man, and would no longer suffer himselfe vnder command of Maroc∣co;The decly∣ning of the kingdome of Maroc∣co, & rising of that of Fez. because he perceiued the declining and down∣fall of those Lords, and that the family of Mari∣no began to get fooling, raigning ouer the Regi∣ons of Fez, as Beni Zeiren did in Telensm, and in Granado. These two great Potentates be∣ganne to warre vppon each other, and to contend for priority of State; But by this their discord; the power of the Lordes of Tunis encreased, so that they went with an Army against Telensi, and compelled them to pay them tribute. Where∣upon the King that new arose from the House of Marino, and had béene at surprizall of Marocco, sent many rich presents to the Gouernour of Tu∣nis, recommending both himselfe and his whole State vnto his fauour. The Gouernour accep∣ted him as a Friende, alwaies prouided, that hee should be inferiour to him: And so he returned in tryumph to Tunis, causing himselfe to bée called King of Affrica,The King of Tunis King of Affrica. which Tytle was thought ve∣ry desertfull for him, because (as then) there was not a more powerfull Prince in all Affrica, then hée. He began then to ordaine his Court Roy∣all, with Secretarie, Councellers, and a Cap∣taine Generall, vsing all those Ceremonies, that the Kinges of Marocco formerly had done. And from the time of this Prince, euen to our dayes, Tunis held on the same encreasing Dignity, as well in habitations as ciuility, so that it became the onely and singular Cittie of Affrica. Where now wee leaue her to our larger History, as also
the Kingdome of Fez, because the Originall of the one came from the other, and therefore they are the more capable of an intire discourse, which aryseth to a very spacious and large quantitie: There also will we relate the condition and ori∣ginall of sundry other remote Kingdomes, which (for the reason before alleadged) are in this briefe Chronicle purposely omitted. ¶ Of the great Prouince of Moscouia; As also the Manners, Religion, and po∣wer of the Prince their ru∣ling. MOscouia is a very great Northerly Regi∣on, containing more then fiue hundered leagues in length: The principall Citty thereof beeing called Mosca, or Moscuua, greater then the Citty Paris in Fraunce, and seated on the Riuer Mosqua. There is a large Stone squa∣red, in the middest of the Cittie,A strange election of the duke of Moscouia. whereon who∣soeuer can mount himselfe (without beating down) in the vacancy of the Crowne; he is held as Prince of the Countrey, and obtayneth the principality: For very great fightes and com∣bates, the Inhabitants haue had one against an∣other, about the mounting on that stone. Hée that comes to be Prince of the Countrey, dooth not call himselfe King, but Duke, being conten∣ted with that popular name, and differeth not in Garments from the other Noble-men of the land, saue only, that he weareth a higher bonnet.
It is a Countrey rich in Siluer, and so stronglie guarded thorow out,Concer∣ning the Countrey. that not onely straungers, but their owne natiue people likewise, can passe no way without the Princes Letters. The coun∣trey is flat and plaine, without any Mountains: therefore, that which is saide of the Ryphean Mountaines, and that they are in this Countrey is méerely fabulous, for there is not any such hill at all. There are great store of Forrests, aboun∣ding with wilde Beasts, which are daily chased: and great profite is made (by Trafficke) for the skinnes of those Beasts, as of Harts, Wolues, Ermines, Martines, Zubelines, Fouoynes, and diuers others. This Prouince confineth Liuonia on the one side, Tartaria, on the other, & on the third quarter it hath the Euxine Sea: con∣taining many other Prouinces to it,Men for the Warre. so that the Prince can (in very few daies) leuie foure hunde∣red thousand men on foote, to begin warre with∣all. They drinke nothing but a kinde of Béere, and yet none but the rich may drinke thereof, for they haue no Wine, but what is broughte from other countries. They be subiect to drunkennes, as all other Northerly people are, and Winter is there so sharpe, long and extreame, that if any Water be hurled vp into the Ayre, it fréezeth be∣fore it can fall to the earth. Their Corne uer perfectly ripens,Their drink and Corne. but when they haue reaped it, they dry it in their stoues or hot-houses, and then grinde it. The Spring time is very colde with them and their Summer, which lasteth but two months onely, is extreamly hot. They haue not
any vse of money, but instead thereof,Their mo∣ney. they haue Plates of Gold or siluer squared, without anie marke or stampe thereon, which is taken for as much as it weigheth in merchandize. As for their Garments, they go cloathed like Turks, in long Gownes or Robes, hauing narrow sléeues, and girded about their middle:Their Re∣ligion. Their buildings and manner of life, differeth very little from them of Poland and Bohemia. They are Christians like vnto the Greekes, receiuing order of Priest-hood from the Patriarche of Constantinople, saying Seruice in their Temples in their vulgar toong, which is the Sclauonian Language, and theyr Carracters are Greeke. The abiding of the Prince,The Prin∣ces Court. is in a goodly great Pallace, in the Citty of Moscuna, built after the Italian manner, being so strong and spacious, as (in our times) the like is not to be found. There are in the fore-named Citty, as also in diuers o∣ther places, men very learned and wise, that did make their aboad whereas the Schooles be. The Muscouite is Tributary to the King of Tartaria,Learned men amōg them. who ouercame them in the yeare of the Worlde, 6745. according as their Annales doo deliuer: their Chronologies are not according to our Ob∣seruation, in accounting after the yeares of Iesus Christ. When the Tartarian Ambassadors doo come before the Moscouite Prince, hee standeth bare headed before them, and they sit couered.His daily warres. He hath (wel-néere) daily Warres against the Po∣lonois and Scythian, who albeit they are subiects to other Kings, yet doth he much enlarge his do∣minions
ouer them. Now, although (as we said at the first) these Princes contented them-selues with the name of Duke, vntill the time of hys Father now raigning: yet would he néeds vsurp the name of King, giuing himselfe these ensuing Titles,The K. of Muscouaes Tules. as his Son also doth the same. The great Lord Basilius, by the grace of God, king & Prince of Russia; Great Duke of Volodimeria, Mosco∣uia, Nouogardia, Plescouia, Sureluchia, Tuueria Iugaria, Permia, Vraquia, Bulgaria; Great Lord and Duke of the Lands in Nouagadia the low∣er: of Cyeruigouia, Rezauia, Riscouia, Belloya, Iaroslauia, Bierosolia, Vdoria, Obdoria, Con∣didia, &c. By which large plurality of Titles, it appeareth, that he is farre more potent then some haue immagined him to be. But concerning his vassailage to the King of Tartars, he holdes it no dishonor to him,He is tribu∣tary to the King of the Tartars. for he doth it to this end: That, while hee kéepeth peace with him, hee bringeth (much more easily) vnder his obedience, all the néere neighboring people, and with the power of the great Tartare, he is ten times stronger then of himselfe: For the saide Tartare bringes (ordi∣narily) a Million of men with him to the field, al well appointed for warre, with two or thrée hun∣dered péeces of Cannon, and thrée hundred thou∣sand horsse, &c. Of the Kingdome of Poland. POlonia, in elder times called Sarmatia, is said to receiue that name of the worde Pole,
which in that Language is as much to say,Of the ma∣ner and sci∣tuation of Polonia. as plaine, smooth, or éeuen: and so much the rather is it to bee credited, because all the Countrey is plaine, spacious, full of thicke woodes, and verie few hilles or mountaines in it. The Earth is colde and fréezing, whereby it produceth little store of Wine or Oyle: but contrarywise, it yéel∣deth much Graine, and diuers other kindes of Pulse, &c. Zechus and Lechus, or Leschus,The firste Rulers of Poland. were the first that euer gouerned in Polonia, or there builded a∣ny Citty & Castle. They both gouerned for some time, but after the whole race of Lechus was ex∣tirpated, the Barons of the kingdome assembling to giue succession to Leschus, concluded to liue at liberty, and without any farther checke or con∣troule. Neuerthelesse, that Iustice might be ad∣ministred to the people,Vayuodes, called Pa∣ladines. and they gouerned as ne∣cessity required: they ordained twelue Vaiuodes or Paladines, which order hath continued in that kingdome, euen to our daies, but not without great hurt to the whole land. For there was no change of these Officers, but the dignitye lasted their life time, although they carried them-selues badly in their authority, despising their betters, and euill entreating their Inferiours. Such as among these Vaiuodes, were Castillians, Com∣maunders of Castelles, Captaines, Iudges, and such like great Magistrates, did what themselues pleased, whereby ensued, that this Kingdome could neuer haue any great progression in armes, being oppressed by such petty, and no mightie or
potent Lords. But in no long while after, the faction of Lechus (growing in hatred of the Vai∣uodes or Paladines gouernment) would néedes haue one peculiar Prince: and therefore, they made choise of a worthy and valiant man,Gracchus the firste Prince of Poland. named Gracchus, who dwelt at the foote of the Sarmati∣an Mountaines, néere vnto the Riuer Vistula. He builded a Citty, calling it Graccouia (which is nowe corruptly named Cracouia) a Cittie greatly blessed, both in beautie and Scituation, as also infinite Marchandizes, which is there Trafficked from all Nations of the worlde, it be∣ing the Metropolis of the whole kingdome. Paladines chosen a∣gaine.The race of Gracchus fayling, it returned a∣gaine to the gouernement of twelue Paladines, but with much infelicity: because, in contending for Competitors, diuers factions grewe amongst them, and (consequently) insurrections in armes to withstand one another, wherby great damage happened to the whole lande. Among these tur∣bulent spirits, there was a Polander named P∣arislaus, a man expert in armes, of quicke appre∣hension, and one that could well fish in such trou∣bled Waters. The people reuolted all to his fac∣tion,A King created a∣gaine. they made him their King, and he was the fift Gouernour of that Prouince, after the firste Lechus or Leschus. After his death, another gal∣lant young man succéeded him, tearmed by the Polacks, Leschus the second, who proued to be a man of singuler prudence: but made olde with time, and dying, he left it to his Sonne Leschus the third. This man made his Sonne Pompi∣lius
Legittimate, but deuided the Kingdome among twenty other, that were his Bastards, to the great detriment of the Country. But Pom∣pilius being legittimate, entred into the gouern∣ment,Gracouia forsaken by the King. and (leauing Cracouia) appointed his seate in another City, called Gneza: but finding it too mollestuous, he transferred the State to an∣other Citty, named Crusuicza. In this Citty he died of the Stone, according as himselfe had continually foretold: And the chiefe Lords being assembled in Counsell, they determined, that no more of Pompilius his successours shoulde raigne ouer them: but (with one consent) made choise of a Countreyman, named Piastus, one of no great stature, but strong and well sinnewed. This was the first branch of those Kings, that continu∣ed to the time of Casimirus the second, & of Lod∣wick: of which selfesame race, were also descen∣ded the moderne Princes of Slesia. This Piastus accepting the Gouernement, tooke vpon him the Title of Duke onely, whose succession comming at length to Boleslaus,Piastus re∣fused the name of K calling him selfe Duke of Poland. in the yeare, D. CCCC. XC. IX. hee was then made King by Otho the third, Emperour. But the Kingdome comming to another Boleslaus, suc∣cessour to the former: hee was expulsed thence, and dyed: Whereupon, the Polonians aduaun∣ced in his place, his Brother Vladislaus, in the yeare, MLXXXII. by the Title of Duke. But in the yeare, MCCXCV. the Title of King was taken againe, by Primislaus the second, who at first was Duke of the greater Poland, and of Po∣merauia
or Pomerland, and so continued the suc∣cession euen to Ladislaus, the first begotten sonne of Cassimirus, who (while his Father liued) was designed to bee King of Hungaria, and of Bohe∣mia.The discent of the kings of Poland. He tooke in Marriage Anne, Daughter to the King of Fraunce, by whom hee had Lodwick and Anne. Lodwicke succéeded his Father in both his Kingdomes, and tooke to Wife Marie, Sister to Charles the Emperour. But in the yeare of Christ, 1492. the Barons of Polonia (at a dyet) elected, after the Death of Cassimirus, his Sonne Iohn Albertus. His continuaunce was but a while, therefore by the greater part of the Barons, Alexander Great Duke of Lithuania, was elected: who going in Armes agaynste the Tartares, dyed in Vilua, aged fiue & forty yeares. Sigismond, his younger Brother, succéeded him, Anno 1500. who hadde the Title of King, Anno 1506. and made great Warre vppon the Neighbouring Nations, especially on the Mos∣couites, of whom he slew thirty thousand, in the yeare, 1514. He deceasing, Augustus Sigismond tooke his place: and after him, Henry the thirde, Brother to Charles the ninth, King of Fraunce, was chosen and made King.Henry heire of France, King of Po∣land. But his Brother dying, and he affecting his paternall kingdome, (more then the other) forsooke Poland, and went into France to his rightfull Inheritance. The Polanders being thus forsaken they made choise of Maximilian the second, being Emperour, to be their King: But he not resoluing to accept it, and the Kingdom standing on some doubtful tearms,
Stephanus Battori, Prince of Transiluania, be∣ing a man of great valor, came into Poland with a slender power, where he was created King, and so continueth. A briefe Suruay of sundry other kingdomes, as they were (by commaund of the Empe∣ror Iustinian) set downe in the Romaine Bookes de Iuris-prudentia. THe Romaine Emperors, in their Imperiall Titles of honour and renowne, did not onely obserue & giue to themselues, the names of those Prouinces wonne by them, or reduced vnder the yoke of their Empire: but likewise of such Nations and people, as lefte theyr owne Countreyes (in abounding multitudes) and entered vppon the possessions of others, to expell and chase thence the Naturall Inhabitauntes, to plant there their owne abyding, by bidding them many Bat∣tailes: in some surmounting, and in others spée∣ding according to the Fortune of Warre. Of those Nations, I intend to speake in some mea∣sure, of their Originall, and howe they succee∣ded, because (at length) they ruined the greate Romayne Empyre:Strange na∣tions weak¦ned the Ro∣man Em∣pire. whereto I am the rather induced, to instruct such as are little skilled in Histories (not onelye Cosmographicall, but likewise Geographicall) and to shewe them
apparantly, howe much they haue iniured the greater part of our Hemisphere. Wee will first beginne with the Gothes, be∣cause they were the first that forsooke their owne natiue Countrey, which was called Gothia, or Gothland,The origi∣nall of the Gothes. signifying a good Land, it béeing a Northerne Prouince of Germanie. This Land abounded in Graine, Fruites, Cattle, Woodes, Riuers, Mettals; but especially, in Copper, and Skinnes seruing for Furres. At all times, and as yet (at this day) is to be discer∣ned, the Kingdom of Swessia or Sweuia, hath bin comprized vnder the Dominion of the Gothes. As the Countrey was fertile in fruites, euen so were the Women thereof likewise in Children, for, as they were strong and of great stature; so had they vsually two Children at a birth, which was the cause then,More peo∣ple then the Countrey can feede. and so it yet continueth, that they had and haue more people, then can wel liue together, the Country not being sufficient to find sustenance for so many. In like manner, they are very great féeders, much more then they that liue in the Easterne or Meridionall partes. The Gothes perceiuing, and aduisedly pondering on this vrgent case, they leuied the more part, of the youngest and strongest men of their Countrey, to the number of thrée hundred thousand; and married such as were not, to ridde themselues of the charge of Daughters, as well as of Sonnes, for the Countrey ordinarily abounded in the Fe∣minine, more then in the Masculine Sexe. So, being well prouided of all necessaries for warre,
and leauing a chiefe commander at home, of the Royal linage; they wandred abroad through the fields, to win by power, or compasse by loue,The Goths wander to seeke a new dwelling. some new habitation wherein to liue. Many Authors, and among the rest Trebel∣lius sayth, that the first tidings of this their strai∣ing, was vnder the raigne of the Emperour Fla∣uius Claudius, about the yeare of Iesus Christ 272. And that they passed thorough Allemaign, Hungary, Thrace, Greece, Gaule, and into Ita∣ly. They lost many battailes, and wonne like∣wise as many against the Romaines, and other people, maintaining themselues so well; that they raigned in Italie (euen in despight of the Italians and Emperours) the space of seauentie one yeares, as Procopius auoucheth.The Goths raigne in Italy and Spaine. At length they went into Spaine, whence afterward they would not remooue: For the Catholique Kinges of Spaine, that then raigned by succession, and raigne yet to this present, were issued from the race and line of their Kinges, who were (indéed) very generous people. Now it is not to bee ima∣gined, that in regard of such a mightie leuy of men, the Countrey of Gothia or Gothland, or the neighbouring borders remained without In∣habitants, or the rule of Kinges: For there were then left behinde, so many as the Land was able to nourish, who had their Kinges in authority o∣uer them, and strength sufficient,The reason of the Go∣thes conti∣nuance. to withstand any inuasion of the Countrey. As for the con∣quering Armyes abroad, they continued in Ho∣nour for a very long time, albeit they lost great
store of men in battailes, encounters, surprisals, and passages of Riuers: yet were these disaduan∣tages still supplied, by the daily birth of Children among them, because they had their wiues in all places with them. Perhaps some strangers ming∣led among thē, who wearing their habits, & lear∣ning their language, holp still to supply the fri of this people.Of the O∣strogoths. Such as haue bin named Ostrogoths, were people issued of the same country of Gothia, or Gotteland, frō a place which is yet cald Ostro∣gothia: the principall Citties whereof are Sche∣ng and Lincopt. They vsed to warre alone by themselues, being separate from the Goths, yet ranging the world according as they did. Westro∣goths.The Westrogothes in like manner, came out of a Country cald Westrogothia, among whom the chéefest Citties, to this day, are Scaris and Vernen.Wisigoths Wisigoths, or Bisigoths, came foorth of a Countrey named Visbi, the principall Cittie whereof i yet called Visbi. I was the more wil∣ling to make this discription; because I haue heard of diuers (who are but slenderly experien∣ced in Cosmography) that do tearme those Ostro∣goths,The errour of some young Cos∣mographer to bee Gothes Orientall, or of the East; and the Westrogoths, Occidentall Gothes, or dwelling in the West, and so contrarywise of the other. Albeit they were all descended and came out of the kingdome of Gothia, or Gotteland, as Munster hath very well obserued. Of the Van¦dales.The Vandales, in the erronious iudgement of Procopius, a Gréeke Authour, are said to bée of the same Nation, and that all the people of
Goths, Vandales, Alains, Hunnes, and others, (whom I am hereafter to describe) were deriued out of one and the same Land,The errour of Proco∣pius. and were compre∣hended all vnder the Name of Sauromates, or Sarmates, and haue no other difference, but by the names of their Captaines or Kinges. But I must maintaine against him, that the land of the Vandales is distant from Gotheland, aboue the space of two hundered leagues, and therefore they cannot bee one people with the Gothes. True it is, that this Nation is Septentrionall, or in the North, as the others are, and is a Mari∣time Countrey, named yet to this day Vandalia: but, as I haue already saide, very farre off the one from the other. This people did (almost) as much hurt to the Romaine Empire, as the Gothes did, for,The trauels of the Van∣dales into diuers coū∣tries. ioyning diuers other people with them, as the Alaines, Suabes, & Franconi∣ans, they trauerssed the Rheine, Gauderichus béeing then their King, and passing among the Gaules, wasted and spoyled them very greatlie. Then went they into Spaine, and tooke posses∣sion (in despight of the Gothes) of the Countrey adioyning to the Kingdome of Granado, which (to this day) is called Vandalia, or (by corrup∣ting the Worlde) Vandelusia, albeit the Spany∣ards mince it more nicely, and nick-name it to be Andalusia. But to bee bréefe, they were thrust foorth of Spayne (wholly) in the yeare 431. vn∣der another of their Kings, named Gensericus, and passed thence into Asia, where they raigned 76. years. From thence they were compelled, in ye
seauenth yeare of the Emperor Iustinian, Anno Dom. 528. by the valour of one of his Captaines, named Belisarius. The Huns of Scythia, and theyr trauailes.The Hunnes departed also out of their Coun∣trey, for the selfe-same cause as the Gothes did, about the yeare one hundred sixty eyght, onely to séeke some Land, where they might liue after the Scythians Religion, making first choyce of Pan∣nonia: where they alwayes so strongly kept and guarded it, till (after their owne name) it was called Hungaria. This people came from that part of Scythia, which is tearmed Hunos, no long distance from the Riuer Tanais: but it is a miserable estate at this day, and vnder sub∣iection of the Moscouite. Hauing vsurped Pannonia, they kept it manfully against the Romaines, and two hundred yeares after, At∣tila theyr King,Attila, King of the Huns accompanied with some people of Allemaigne, as Bohemians, Gepides, or Gir∣pides, Schlesites, Werlies, Thuringians, Goths, Ostrogothes, and others, making (in all) about the number of sixe hundred thousand men: passed through Allemaigne, which they much endama∣ged.Attila, his losse in France. Then went he into France, where hee lost a battaile, in which perished a great number of his men: this battel was giuen him by the Romans, Gaules, and certaine Goths, allied together, and he lost (as some Authors doe affirme) aboue two hundred thousand men. At length he iournyed into Italy, which he (well-néere) vterly ruined: and retiring afterward into his owne Countrey of Hungary, he died within fewe following mo∣neths,
and on the day of his nuptials, which was in the yeare of Iesus Christ 443. The Lombards were a Northerne people,Of the Lom¦bardes, and whence they descen∣ded. de∣cended out of Denmarke, as Eusebius maintai∣neth: and no other reason had they to leaue their Countrey, but onely a desire to win some other. There happened in the time of Seno or Sweno, as some call him, King of Denmark, a very great dearth or scarsity (in the Land) of victuals, and because the people endured it very impatiently: it was concluded by the King and his Councell, (to ease the Countrey of so many men as were ready to famish) that all such persons as were vn∣able, either for war, or labor of the ground, should be slaine, whether they were old or young. But this seuere Edict being reuoked,A very se∣uere Edict. they then resol∣ued, to make a leuy of all sorts of people, that (by the help of armes) might trauaile to find out some other dwelling, so to disburthen the charge of the Countrey. This being put in execution, they tra∣uailed so far, and carried themselues so couragi∣ously in trauersing diuers lands: that they came at last into Italy, and there conquered the Coun∣trey which was called Istria, making themselues absolute Maisters thereof. Now,Istria in Ita¦ly conque∣red, and new named Lombardy. because these people were long and tall of stature the Italians and Istrians called them long Barbarians, which by corruption of the word, and succession of times made them tearmed Longbards, or Lombardes. Some are of opinion, that vnder the raign of Va∣lentinian the Emperor, they began to make thē∣selues first knowne, which was about the yeare
of Christ 385. and that they became commaun∣ders in Istria, in the yeare 570. Likewise, accor∣ding to Diaconus, the Emperours made peace with them, in the yeare 730. and euer since they haue held that Country, which at this day is na∣med Lombardy. Let it here be further noted, that where (in any History) mention is made of people tearmed Daces, or Danians; the Nation of Den∣marke is thereby vnderstood: out of which coun∣trey, many great Armies haue trauailed at sun∣dry times, and haue mightily troubled diuers kingdomes: among which, they continued long time in England, but were thence expelled, about the yeare 860. The Nor∣mans issued from Nor∣duegia.The Normanes were people of Norduegia, or otherwise called Normania, or Norwey, a Coun∣trey in the North, being much addicted to cruel∣tie and inhumanitie, because they vsed many great Piracies on the Sea. An hundred and fifty thousand men of this Nation, bestowed them∣selues in vessels on the Sea, and took possession of that part of Gaule or Fraunce, which was then tearmed Neustria, now Normandie, which was doone in the yeare of Iesus Christ, 600. others saie 884. and in the time of Charles le Gros. But bée it howsoeuer, they haue (since then) kept it against all encounters of the Emperours, Kings of France and England, preseruing it still by the Name of Normandy, and themselues reckoned to bee people of vndaunted courage. There are diuers others, that doe sauour of this their first originall, and doe yet proule vppon the
Seas, committing many cruell Robberies. The Nation which we call Swesses, Zuitzers,Suesses cam out of Swe∣uia. or Sweues, who (at this daie) are auxiliarie to the French, came out of Sweuia or Sweueland, a Northerly Region, like vnto the other. They likewise (by the dearth of food among them) de∣parted forth of their Countrey, about the yeare of Grace 800. and went so farre as the Rhine, which they would haue passed, but were hinde∣red therein by the Franconians. Thence went they to the Land of the Heluetians,They goe among the Heluetians. who dispising the Suessians (because they were poorely and wretchedly apparelled, rude in their féeding, and not looking like souldiers) suffered them to wan∣der about their Countrey. At length, perceiuing the kinde sufferaunce of the Heluetians, they sought to abide in a certaine Canton of their Land. Which when the Heluetians noted, they demaunded of them, to what ende they thus wandered about the World. They answered, that they were poore people, and sought but to weare out their liues in trauaile, by deluing or labouring in the Earth. And séeing that there was wast Ground in those partes, vnlaboured,Their po∣uertie a∣mong the Heluetians. or any vse made of (it béeing Hilles and Val∣lies, enuironed with Lakes) they desired the Heluetians, to permit them to woorke in those rough Fieldes, as yet not cultiue, and they should receiue the benefit thereof, onely allowing them but nourishment for their pains. This was all that they séemed to pretend, iustifying their requests with solemne oathes and protestations.
Theyr desire was graunted, and not long after, the Countrey wherein they liued, was not onely called Suesia, in regarde of the Swesians there dwelling: but likewise the ancient Inhabitants had the same name giuen then, and yet the coun∣try is very hilly, and vnapt for Ryding. Howe afterward it came to be called the Lande of Can∣tons or Leagues, shall at large be shewne in our Generall history. Of the Al∣lemaignes, & whence they were deriued.Iustinian, and other Emperors (both before & after him) entitled themselues Lordes of the Al∣lemaignes, for hauing receiued some victories o∣uer the Allemaignes. But this may not be said, (as some doo) that those victories were obtayned against the Germaines: For euen at this daye, when we speake or write, of Allemaigne, therein is comprehended all the Nations, which are con∣tained throughout Germany, and that do speake the Language of the Tentones. But as for Al∣lemaigne,The true Alemaigns of Suaba. or Almaines, the Romains neuer vn∣derstood, or meant any other people, then those of Suaba. And to speake vprightly, they haue euer bin the true and ancient Allemaines, as Corneli∣us Tacitus plainely confirmeth. Drusus Nero, was the first that styled himselfe Germanicus, for hauing rather angered the Germaines, then foyled them, as diuers other Emperours after∣ward did. Moreouer, by Germany is to be vn∣derstood, nine and forty great Prouinces, as well of the lower part, as the higher part of the sayde Germany, comprizing the Countrey of the Suis∣ses and Heluetians.
Now, concerning the Alaines, or Alans,Alaines, what peo∣ple they were, and whence they came. many haue supposed them to be a people of Germanie: But therein they were and are deceiued, for Pto∣lomy knew them, whom he placeth in a parte of Scythia. Capitolinus bestowes them in Dacia: Marcelinus, Plinie, & Dionisius the Poet, giues them a being in Sarmatia of Europe. Iosephus in his last Booke, affirmes their aboade to bee be∣twéene the Riuer Tanais, and the Palus Moeo∣tides: And saith moreouer, that, in his time, the Alaines or Alanes, accompanied with the Hyrca∣nians, both robbed and spoyled all the Region of the Medes. As for my selfe, by that which I haue gathered, from such as haue written on the acti∣ons of the Gothes: I am perswaded, that those Alaines were theyr companions, and that often∣times (in their warres) for their owne aduantage they sundered them-selues from them, as one while they did with the Vandales. But question∣lesse, their discent was from Scythia, according to Ptolomies affirmation. If we shall speake of the Gepides, Girpedes,Of the Ge∣pides or Girpedes. or Iupedes, what people they were, there are opi∣nions enow concerning them. Some say, that they were at first of Scythia, and came thence as the Lombards did into Italy. But hauing made a more curious and dilligent search, I finde, that they were a people of Germany, and called then Gepudij or Sepusij, and (according to Ptolome∣us Matauastus) now at this day, Siebemburgs, that followed the Gothes, the Vandals, and the Normands also: beeing erring and Vagabonde
people, till at length they ventured on the Seas, and went to inhabite the Isles of the Orchades, whereof Thylle is the latest inhabited, as Vola∣teranus auoucheth, and they are now subiectes to the King of Scotland. The Origi∣nall of the Picts, and their com∣ming into the Isle of Orkeney.In speaking of so many Nations, who are all said to be deriued from the Scithians, we may not forget the Picts, who (by most Writers opinion) are said to be a people of Germany, that had their Originall out of Scythia, descending of the Aga∣thyrsi in Sarmatia, who vsed to paint and collour their faces, & thereupon were named Picts. Before they entred into Britaine, they inhabited the Isle of Orkeney for a long time together, ferrying o∣uer into Cathnesse daily, & so multiplying both in power & number, that (getting vp further into the land) they possessed Rosse, Murrey-land, Merne & Angusse, whence passing into Fife and Louthi∣an, they droue thence the Brittain Inhabitantes, who were onely poore people, that liued by nouri∣shing & breeding Cattle. This their entrance into Albion (for so was it then called) was in the year of the worlds creation,The first k. of the Picts. 3633. Cruthneus Came∣lonus is said to be the first king of the Picts, & that he builded a famous Citty on the bank of the Ri∣uer called Caron, appointing it to be the chief Ci∣ty of all the Pictish kingdom. He builded also the town of Agneda, afterward called Edenbrough, of Ethus king of the Picts, and the Castle, named The Castle of Maydens, because ye Pictish kings kept their daughters there vnder strict custody, in all good exercises, til their yeares of mariage. Con∣cerning
the warres, strifes, and bloody contenti∣ons, betwéene the Albion Scots and Picts, tho∣rough all their Kings raigns, til their vtter ouer∣throw, and quite desolation of Pict-land,Kenneth K. of Scots. de∣solateth Pictland. by Ken∣neth the victorious King of Scots: I referre it to our larger discourse. Only letting you know, that this subuersion, and vtter ruine of the Picts, hap∣ned in the year of our redemption, 839. in the sixt yeare of King Kenneths glorious raigne, & 1168. yeares after their first plantation in Albion. The Getes haue bin,Of the Getes. and yet are a warlick peo∣ple, mollested greatly by the Turkes at this in∣stant: and yet they found the Romain work suf∣ficient. These are the Transyluanians, Valachi∣ans & Moldauians, & their country is neere to the Riuer Ister, where it falleth into the Pontick sea. The Bourguignons are helde by Orosius, to come forth of Germany, and Volatteranus saith,Of the Bour¦guignons. that Iouinianus the Emperour vanquished some such people, that liued by the Riuer of Rhine. But there is nothing more certaine (according as I haue gathered by the Germaine Histories) then that they yssued from some remaynes of the Gothes, Vandals, and Hunnes, who beeing altogether chased by the Romains, threw them∣selues on that part of Gaule, which is called after theyr name, and there (perforce) enthroned them∣selues. For afterwarde, they coulde so well re∣sist the Romaines, that they were constrained to yéelde them tolleration, and let them liue in the saide Countrey amongst the first Inhabi∣tants. There they builded Fortes, Villages,
and Townes,Of their first name. which they called then Bourgs of the Gothes & Hunnes: but being soone corrupted into one word, from Bourgs-Goth-Hunnes, they are now called Bourguignons, as much to say, as a martiall people. Aetius, Lieutenant to the Emperor Theodosius, gaue them a battel in the yeare of Christ, 435. and won the day: But it cost him so deare, that he would neuer after med∣dle any more with them. About the yeare, 430. they receiued and embraced the Christian fayth. This people in these dayes are become very ci∣uill,A faire vni∣uersitie in Bourgougn and are as much addicted to Learning, as to Armes: For they haue a goodly Vniuersitie, founded by one of the Dukes of Bourgougne, wherein many Lectures are read of all the Sci∣ences, to Schollers of all Nations, at Dola the Capitall Cittye of that parte of Bourgougne, which is vnder commaund of the house of Au∣stria, and there they hold a Parliament also. As for the other part of Bourgougne, in obedience to the Crowne of France, Digeon is the Metropo∣litane Citty thereof, where likewise is helde an∣other Parlament: And these two Bourgougnes are maintained in very good peace, albeit they are in obeysance to diuers Princes. We wil conclude this discourse with the king∣dome of Naples,Of the kingdome of Naples. which is a Citty very auncient and Noble in all respects, and giueth the Title of kingdome to the whole Prouince, by her owne proper name. As concerning the name of King∣come, I do not hold it to be of any great antiqui∣ty, because the Normanes took it, from the Gre∣cians,
who possessed this Prouince in diuers partes thereof, and then it was entitled the Earl∣dome of Apulia or Puglia, as some do yet tearme it. Robert Guiscard, a verie valiant and woor∣thy man, expulsed suddenly the Grecians thence,Robert Guiscard the valiant Norman. and tooke Sicilie also from the Sarrazins, entitling himselfe Duke of Apulia, and of Calabria, and Earle of Sicilie. In no long time after, his ne∣phew Ruggiero or Roger, hauing conquered the Citty of Naples, which till that time had béene in the Grecians Gouernment, receiued the Ti∣tle of King of both the Scicilies, by Anacletus the Anti-Pope, in the yeare of our Lorde, 1130. which afterwarde was confirmed vnto him in good and lawfull manner. And from that time forwarde, it was called the kingdome of Scicilie, on this side Pharos,The Scici∣lian eue∣ning. vntill the raigne of Charles the first, when it became deuided from Sicilie, by occasion of that famous accident, cal∣led Vesro Sciciliano, the Scicilian Euening, wherein so many of the French were slaine. I finde moreouer in many good Historians, that Naples hath had three seuerall Names to wit; the Kingdome of Naples; the Kingdome of A∣pulia, and the Kingdome of Scicilie, on this side Pharos. ¶ Of the Kingdome of Por∣tugall. THe Kingdome of Portugall, beganne in the yeare of Christ, M.C.X. after this manner,
Henry Earle of Lorrayne comming thether,Hen. count of Lorraine per∣formed many valiant déedes against the Sarra∣zins: And his high deseruings mooued Alphon∣sus the sixte, King of Castile, to giue him a Ba∣stard daughter of his in mariage, named Tiresia, and (in way of Dowrye) assigned him also that part of Galicia, which then was contained in Lu∣sitania. Of this marriage was Alphonsus borne, who was the first that euer stiled himselfe K. of Portugall,The first K. of Portugal and he was the first also that tooke the Citty of Lisbone from the Sarrazins. For he ha∣uing conquered fiue of their kings in seueral bat∣tels, caused his Armes to bee adorned with fiue seuerall Crownes and Coat-Armors, which euer after continued the Ensigne of the kings of Por∣tugall, in perpetuall memory of his valour. But he quickly stained this faire fame, with crueltie vsed by him to his owne mother, for, after her se∣cond marriage, he caused her to be imprisoned: & albeit the Pope labored the matter greatly by his Legate, yet could hee neuer compasse her deliue∣rance. Which sin was seuerely punished on him by his enemies, who afterward tooke him in bat∣tell. And then his son Sanctio succéeded him, and after Sanctio diuers other, to Iohn, who was the tenth King in direct and natural line. This Iohn was at the first expulsed from his Kingdome,The King of Portugal a Knight of S. Iohn of Ierusalem. and made a Knight of S. Iohn of Ierusalem: but at length he was re-called to his kingdome, where he made very honorable proofe of his valour, and (among diuers famous déeds) he tooke from the Sarrazins the Citty of Septia. Hee had seauen
Sonnes, among which Ferdinand (for intergri∣ty of life) was tearmed a Saint. Henry another of his Sons, was the first that found Noua Insu∣la in the Athlantike Sea. He being very skilful in the Mathematicks, liued continually without a Wife, and made his daily abiding in a Pro∣montory, which was called the Cape of S. Vin∣cent, and there he died in the yeare, 1460. But Edward, who was the eldest brother, was made King, and (by warres) he adioyned to the king∣dome of Portugall, Zelia, Tigea, and Alcazar in Affrica. He had two Daughters, or Sisters (as some say) named Ioane and Leonora:The succes∣sion of the Kinges of Portugall. the first was married to the king of Castille, and the other to Frederick the third, Emperor: of whom was borne Maximilian the first, who was after∣ward Emperor, and Grandfather to Charles the fift. He had also a Son named Alphonsus, who succéeded him in the Kingdome, and begate Iohn & Emanuel, who was 14. king of Portugal. Ema∣nuel had Iohn, who took to wife, ye sister of Charls 5. Emperor, called Katherine. Lodwick died an infant, but Isabel was wife to the said Charles, & he had another daughter yt was maried to Charls D. of Sauoy. After him succéeded Sebastian, who (in our time, fighting with the Moors was slain, and the king of Marocco, with diuers other great Lords of the Moores. Henry, Vnckle to the decea∣sed king, followed him in succession, he being then a Cardinal, & very aged; holding the kingdom but some few months. But he dying, Phillip king of Spain entred on the kingdom, resisting the claime
of Don Anthonio, beeing a Brothers-son of the dead King Henry, and so out-wearied him, that hée could neuer attaine thereto in full possession. So it remaineth still vnder the Spanish gouern∣ment. ¶ The Kingdome of Italy. COncerning the Kingdome of Italy, the anti∣quity thereof, when at first it was called Ia∣nicula, of Ianus; Camesena, of Cameses; Sa∣turnia, of Saturnus, Hesperia, of Hesper, and Italia of Italus, with all the Kinges there raig∣ning, till the Latines, and those likewise that de∣scended of Eneas, to the time of Romulus, with the History both of olde Rome, and Rome as it now is; it remaineth to our generall History. Onely we will say somewhat of the Originall of Venice, moued thereto by iust occasion. A breefe discourse of the Originall of the Ve∣netians; the foundation of Venice, and how it hath beene gouerned, from the year of our saluation 421. to thi instant. To the ancient, Right Worshipfull, and worthy So∣ciety of the Gold-Smiths. HIstoriographers, who haue written of the Venetians, doe not agrée together in theyr true Originall. For some doe write, that they are descended of the Venetian Gaules, inhabiting a∣long
the Ocean Sea in little Britaigne, called Armorica, whereof one of the principall Citties (béeing a Bishops Sée) was called Vennes. O∣thers, and among them; Titus Liuius borne in Padua, assures vs, that they came forth of Paph∣lagonia, and that Philemon their Captaine, (being slaine at Troy the great) they went with Antenor into Italy. Others write, that this Na∣tion, hauing béene Neighbours to the Cappado∣cians, and venturing fight with the Cimmeri∣ans; they hazzarded further vpon the Adriatick Sea in their Fortune. The most common opi∣nion, is of them, who say, that the Hinitians or Henetes came with Antenor, and,People of Paphlago∣nia in sometime after (by changing of a letter) were called Veni∣tians, or Venetes. First of all, they expelled the Euganeans, who inhabited this Countrey,People by the inner gulfe of the Adriatick Sea, to∣wardes the Alpes. be∣twéene the Adriatick Sea and the Alpes, and builded the Cittie of Padua. Afterward, by suc∣cesse of time, they increased in such sort, as they would not be satisfied to bee Maisters (onely) of that which had appertained to the Euganeans, (consisting of thirtie foure faire Citties and Townes;) but intruded farther, to seaze on Bressano and Forli. Some report this Coun∣trey to be bounded with the Riuers of Pau, and that of Adde, as also the Lake of Guard, aunci∣ently called the Benack the Alpes, and the Adri∣atick Sea. And so the auncient Venetians, in this manner extended their Dominion, both in longitude and latitude, in the most pleasant Countrey of Italy:
but the seating of the places, did daily beget the elder estate of the Venitians hatred. For on the one side,Liburnia, the Coun∣trey of Cro∣aua, be∣tween Istria & Dalmatia the ordinary robberies of the Liburni∣ans, and on the other side, ye frequent and fright∣ful courses of the Barbarians, did hinder them frō any long time of continuing in quiet. For, with∣out these impeachments, this Nation had béene most fortunate, in conquering (by the right of Warre) one of the most goodly and beautifull Regions in all Italie.The scitua∣tion of Ve∣nice, and capacitie thereof. Nowe, ouer and beside, that on the South-side, it is enuironed with a most calme circuite of the Sea, and in regard thereof, is the more capable of receiuing all strange Merchandizes: So is it likewise wat∣tered with very delectable Riuers, whereby, whatsoeuer commeth from the Sea, is easilie transported to the very Nauell of the Prouince. It aboundeth in Pooles, Pondes, Forrests and vnder-woodes, and the whole Land is choicelie fertile in Corne, Wine, Oyle, and all kindes of Fruites. It is also plentifully stored with Countrey Houses, Townes, Citties, and Vil∣lages, Castles, Fortes, and such like, very com∣mendable for the scituation, and enclosure of their Wals. These nw Inhabitants, when their weake estate beganne to growe in fairer forme: they were seldome exempted from the Warres and incursions of Straungers. For, after manie bolde insolencies of the Barbarians, with con∣tinued Warres against each other, euen from their very beginning, vntill the time of Attila:
they were yet much more dreadfully encombe∣red, with the furious assault of the Gothes, a tēmpest farre excéeding in turbulencie, all other former disasters happening to them whatsoeuer: For first, the Hunnes (a people of Scythia,Mountains in the north part of Scy∣thia, where snow lieth continually dwelling néere to the Riphean Mountaines) conducted by Attila, the Sonne of Mandluck, dispersed themselues ouer Italie, and making horrible spoyle wheresoeuer they went; fell in∣to the Prouince belonging to the Vinitians. Af∣ter a long siedge, they tooke the Cittie of A∣quileia, and spoyled and burnt it wholly.An ancient citty in that part of Ita∣ly, called Forum Ilij. In like manner did they ruinate the Citties of Con∣cordia and Altina, and almost all the Venitian Region. At the fearefull newes of this Warre, the Venitians were more amazed then any other, and so much the rather, because they had béene formerly invred, to sustaine their chéefest mis∣happes amongst the Barbarians. Whereupon, it is saide, that (euen then) a great number of persons with-drewe them-selues from the firme Land, to the Isles where Venice at this instant is builded: hasting thither from all other partes, especiall vpon the arriuall of this cruell Enemie Attila. Some (of the better sort of Padua) first be∣gan the retreat, and being come to the entrance or issue of the Riuer, which was then very déepe, (whence the name of Rialto hath remained to the same place,The first foundation of Venice. as deriued of the word Riuealto) they there laid the first foundation of the Cittie of Venice.
The meaner people of Paduaj, enforced by the selfe same feare; fled thence, and began to people themselues in Chioggia,Litle Islāds in the Sea, and neere adioining. Malamocco and Albi∣ola. Some of them of Aquileia (at the same time) betooke themselues to the Marshes or Fennes of Grada, and, vpon the fresh returne of Attila, the people ranne (in mighty affluence) along the sea Coastes to the neighbouring Isles. They of Aquileia bestowed themselues in Grada, a place néerest to firme Land, yet engirt with Waters. They that fledde from Concordia, made vse of Coarli and the Attinois, sixe little Islands néere to one another; which they gaue names vnto, ac∣cording to the Names of the Gates of their for∣mer lost and ruined Citties: To wit; Torcello, Maiorbo, Buriano, Muriano, Amiana, & Gon∣stantiaco. The prime estate of the place wher Venice now standeth.These seuerall places, where at this present the citty of Venice is seated, were (in elder times) very straite or narrow Islandes, and néere vnto each other: sauing onely that they were separa∣ted by the pleasing course of Riuers, which ranne into, and returned againe from the Sea, according to the changes of his fluxe and reflux. Nor in these straites were then any dwellinges to bee discerned, but onely of Sea-Fowles, that flew thither from the Seas, to sport them∣selues vppon the Sunnie banckes;The first builders of Venice, & at what time. and Fisher∣men also would some-times there put in for har∣bour. The Paduans, that tooke vp the Rialto, were the first that beganne to builde, and it was in the ve¦ry
same place, where the first Foundation of the Citty was laid: namely, the 25. day of March, in the yeare of our Lord, 421. and second yeare of the raigne of Pharamond, first King of the Gaules or French-men; in the time also of Pope Boniface the first, and of the Emperour Honori∣us. Whereby it plainly appeareth, that at one and the selfe-same time, began both the kingdome of France, and the Commonwealth of Venice. And that both the one and the other haue continued to this present, for twelue hundred yeares, very lit∣tle, either more or lesse. This Cittie so newlie begun, encreased dailie both in people and buildings. But sée what hap∣pened vppon a suddaine, a Greeke Carpenters House (or rather he was one of the Shipwrights,Theyr first buildings destroyed by fire. named Entinopus) falling a fire, consumed in a moment (with a violent & continual embracing) 24. faire new built Houses. Which when these new-come Inhabitantes perceiued, and fearing that Heauen was offended with this their man∣ner of beginning, forgetting God, and seruing their owne appetites. They fell all to praier, and made a solemne vow, to builde a Church in the honour of God, and in memory of the Apostle S. Iames; at which very instant time, a mighty tempest of raine (as suddainelie fell) whereby the rest of the new-begun Cittie was happilie pre∣serued. That Church is yet at this daie plainelie to be discerned, with the markes and appearances of great antiquity, euen in the very midst of the Ri∣alto:
And it was then consecrated by foure By∣shops,The first Church built in Ve∣nice. to wit; Seuerianus Bishop of Padua; Am∣brose, Bishop of Altina; Iocundus, Bishoppe of Treuisa, & Epodius, bishop of Vderzo, & a Priest was there appointed, to performe diuine seruice. Noble and rich men the first foū∣ders of Ve∣nice.The first foundations of this famous Citty, were men of honest repute, Noble and rich. For the ancient Venitians, at the change of their abi∣ding, brought with them thither their Wiues and Children, with the very wealthiest moouea∣bles which they had, and so (at leisure) withdrew themselues, to places of a more secure dwelling. But béeing impeached (by incurssions of the Hunnes) to Till the Groundes vppon the Sea Coastes; such as had any meanes or apt commo∣ditie: gaue themselues to fighting, and to make Salt, or to transport the goods of their neighbors; estéeming the benefite thereby gotten, to bee no more dishonest or vnbefitting, then to Plough and husband the grounds of others. As for the wealthier sort, they addicted them∣selus to Traffick Merchandizes with strangers, and by their frequent aduenturing into diuers Countries, some of them, being very skilfull Mi∣ners, and well experienced in the triall of seuerall Dors or Mettals hidden in the ground, which by industry and endeauour they found in the earth; became Finers or Triers of those Mettals, and extracted (from the grosser substances) the purer perfections of Golde and Siluer, whereby (in their owne language they were tearmed Orifici, deriued of the Latin word Aurifex, Gold-smiths,
or Hammer-Men, that (of those refined Met∣tals) could frame Cuppes, Pots, Ringes, Ba∣sons, Ewres, or any other néedfull matter what∣soeuer, both for the seruice of God in Churches and Temples, and for the royaltie of Emperors, Kinges, and Princes. So that, by the consent of diuers good Authours, as Liuie, Florus, Cas∣sidorus, Trogus Pompëius, and others,The first Goldsmiths knowne in Europe, were in Ve∣nice. the first Gold-Smiths, Workers in Gold and Sil∣uer, and framers of those excellent Mettals into such orderly meanes for vse (within the partes of Europe) liued in Venice, whereas yet (to this day) doe remaine the very best, ingenious and perfect work-men for such matters (according to the iudgement of many) that are to bee found in any part of the World. Concerning such, as re∣mained more ordinarily at home, for rare and safety of the Cittie, they applied their Spirites, to deuise good lawes and customes for generall benefite. During which time, such was their due respect of Iustice, and so precise care of equi∣tie and right to all men, as,Care of Iu∣stice and common good. among so great a number of people, there could not bee any disor∣derly differences noted. Catholique Religion they so singularly com∣mended,Loue of re∣ligion, in especial re∣spect. and the daylie presence of some reue∣rend Prelates, who had saued themselues with their Compatriots: that it augmented (among them) a common affection to piety. And their assi∣stance appeared very requisite, not onely for the ministry of holy offices; but also for retention of the Inhabitants of this new Citty, in auncient piety and Religion.
Fearing, least they might bee infected with the poyson of Arrian Heresie: because nothing else made more spoyle and hauocke thorough all the Prouince, except the Weapons of the Gothes and Hunnes. Such was the beginning of the Citty of Ve∣nice, and in such manner of liuing, and in such exercises, shee spent her first infancy: till (by her Vertues) shee attained to greater groweth, and grounded her selfe in her instant state and condi∣tion. It hath constantly bin held, that this com∣mon-wealth (euer-more) retained that forme of gouernment which is tearmed Aristocratia, that is,Aristocratia optimatum principatus. that the most noble and woorthiest Cittizens, should guide and gouerne. For although it be saide, that it hath bin gouerned, first by Consuls, then by Tribunes, and lastly by Dukes, & Mai∣sters of warlicke power: yet notwithstanding, al these Dignities, being but electiue, and not here∣ditary, the election should (in right) appertain to the most Noble Islanders, and Gentlemen of name, by whose aduise the Common-weal ought to be managed, euen as it hath bin, and still con∣tinueth to this day. Consuls, to the number of thrée, were chosen for two yeares,The Go∣uernment of Consuls, and who were the first in Ve∣nice. and albeit that this kinde of Go∣uernment lasted▪ for about the space of thréescore yeares, yet we finde only but thrée consecutiue or succéeding elections of them. The first Consuls, were Albertus Phalarius, Thomas Candianus, and Zeno Daulo. These men first gouerned the Citty in her Nonage, and some are of the minde,
that they were the first Authors of the Padnaus slight, and their retyrement to the Lakish or mar∣shie Isles, as also of their first building there. The second Consuls, were Lucianus Graulus, Maxi∣mus, or Marinus Lucius, and Hugo Fuscus. The third, were Marcus Aurelius, Andreas Claudius & Albinus Maurus. The names of such as were elected after these, are not to be found in any Hi∣stories. After, that the Isles (about the Rialto) were filled with Inhabitants: in sted of Consuls,The creati∣on of Tri∣bunes, and what they were. Tri∣bunes were created, and for their creation, the matter was first debated priuately by fewe peo∣ple, afterwarde, it was ordained and resolued in open assembly of the Islanders: that in each Isle there should be a Tribune, and he shoulde bee a yearely Magistrate, to render Iustice to the Cit∣tizens, and with seuerity, to punnish their offen∣ces. But the remainder, which concerned the ge∣nerality of the Common-weale: was referred to the generall assembly of the Islanders, to bee by them determined. Afterward, there was but one Tribune created, for gouernement of the Isles, which continued for some yeares. Finally, they concluded to create tenne, whereunto were added two more, who should dwell in Heraclea: And this Tribunary dignity held place for more then two hundred yeares. Héere is to be noted, that the Tribunes of the Isles, abusing their authori∣ties, did so trouble the State with ciuill dissenti∣ons, as it plainly appeared, that the maine bodie of the Citty would bee dissolued, without some
good and immediate remedy. Which gaue occa∣sion, that (to heare the complaints of euery one) a generall assembly of the Isles was published, and their méeting to be in Heraclea. In this assembly, Christophero, Bish. of Grada was President, accompanied with a great num∣ber of the Clergy, & after diuine seruice was per∣formed, the first proposition which he made, was, yt (for good of the commonwealth) each man might complain of ye future Tribune, which being done, and the offences no longer to be indured, for pub∣lick benefit of the state in general, resolution was set down,Election of a Duke a∣mong the Venetians. to make election of a Duke, who should represent all honor and Maiesty in the State or Siegneurie, and he should haue power to assem∣ble the generall counsell, when questions were to be made, of any important matter concerning the Common-wealth. He should haue power al∣so, to elect yearly Tribunes, or Magistrates in euery Isle, and their appellations to bee brought before him. Moreouer, if any should obtaine any dignity, Prelacy or benefice, by Suffrages of the Cleargie or people: that he should not enioy it, or be possessed thereof, without the good liking and consent of the Duke, whose power also ended with his life. Who was the first D. of Venice.This being thus concluded, in the yeare, 697. Paullucio was created the first duke, and so hath yt Ducal dignity continued euer since. Saue only that in the yeare, 737. after the death of the third Duke Orso: it was determined, that no Duke should be elected, for six yeares, but that a Master
of the armed troopes or soldiors should bee establi∣shed, and his authority to be annual, which lasted no longer then fiue yeares. For in the yeare, 742 they procéeded againe to a Dukes election, & since that time, the Commonwealth of Venice hath e∣uermore had Dukes and Princes of the Seig∣neury: by whose wisedome (and his Counsell as∣sisting) it hath bin preserued in an euer flourish∣ing estate, euen to this instant yeare, 1611. ¶ A short Summary, of the liues of the Dukes and Princes of Venice: and a breuiate also of the most remarkable actions, in the times of their go∣uernment. PAuluccio Annapesto, was firste Duke of the people, chosen in He∣raclea. Hee tooke his Oath before Christophero patriarch of Grada to gouerne according to ye Lawes, and to regard nothing more then the weale pub∣licke. He pacified the difference which Luitprand k. of the Lombards had with king Aribert, and made friendship with them both: As well by his authority, as by armes. He brought the rebellious Aequilius vnder obedience, encreased the Citties customes and reuennewes, and dyed, hauing bin Duke xx. yeares, vi. months, and viij. daies. 2 Marcello Tegaliano, of the same place of Heraclea, was elected his successour, by com∣mon voyce of the people. Hee was deuoute,
modest and affable, but much lesse diligent in go∣uerning, then his predecessor. The Patriarchat of Grada was trans-ferred into Aquileia in hys time, by Luitprand, and there he had great wars about the dissentions of the Byshops, whereinto he would not interpose himselfe, but died, hauing bin Duke nine yeares, and xxi. dayes. 3 Orso Hipato, a Noble-man of Heraclea, woon himselfe great Reputation by his famous déedes. Paulo the Exarcho had recourse to him, the Grecian Army being broken, and siedge laid to Rauenna by Luitprand. He regained Rauen∣na, made the Kings Nephew his prisoner, slewe the Duke of Vicenza, and reseated the Exarcho in his due rights. Hee brideled the Aquileians, who troubled the publicke peace, and put courage into the soules of the younger sort. He was slain by reason of the dissentions of Iesolo, the xi. yeare and fift month, of his Principality. 4 Theodato Hipato, sonne of Orso, was pro∣claimed Duke fiue yeares after the death of his Father: during which time, the people were go∣uerned by a Marshall or Maister of the soldiors: and forsaking Heraclea, he brought the State to Malamocco. There he was the first created, and limitted his confines with Astolpho king of the Lombards. He was also slaine, by Galla a citizen of Malamocco, in the 13. year of his principality. 5 Galla de Malamocco, a wicked and seditious man, yet shewing himselfe as Protector of pub∣lick peace, he was established in the place of The∣odato. But his wickednesse being knowne, and
that (being but a subiect) he would néedes make himselfe absolute Lord, hauing before slaine his chiefe Maister Theodato: the people pluckt out his eies, and tooke from him the dignity, which he had a yeare vsurped. 6 Dominico Monegario, of Malamocco, was seated in the sted of Galla. Somewhat to bridle his Dukes authority, the people ioined two year∣ly Tribunes with him. But he, being a man au∣dacious and arrogant, sought to tiranize ouer the people: whereat they growing into fury, pluckt out his eies, the 8. yeare of his Principality. 7 Mauritio Galbaio, a Noble Heraclean, for his Iustice, wisedome, and wealth, was chosen to this dignity. Hee made his sonne Duke with him, and they gouerned together. In his time, the church of Grada being mollested, he sent an Am∣bassador to pope Stephen, to accord the difference. The Bishopprick of S. Peter de Castello Oliuolo was then erected. And he died, hauing gouerned 23. yeares. 8 Giouanni Galbaio, hauing bin Duke 9. years with his father, gouerned the commonwealth yet 9. yeares more, and after the said time, hee made Mauritio his Sonne companion with him in the Principality. But they being both of wicked and vnsufferable life, hauing murdered Iohn Patri∣archat of Grada, throwing him downe headlong from an high tower: Fortunatus, successor in the Patriarchate, made a conspiracy against them, & another was elected Duke. Wherat, being not a little confounded, the Father fled into France, &
the son to Mantua, the xvi. yeare of their rule. 9 Obelerio, being elected Prince by them that had intelligence with Fortunatus, tooke his Bro∣ther Beato as his associate, and Valentine beside (being their thirde brother) was admitted with them in the same dignity. And it is worth note, that of these thrée brethren, Beato is onely placed in the rank of Dukes in the Counsell chamber of Venice, where as Obelerio incited Pepin king of Italy, to make war on the Venetians: and Beato maintained the cōmonwealth raigning 5. years. 10 Angelo Participatio, after he had well born himselfe in the warre against Pepin, was elected Duke, the people being summoned to the Rialto. He founded the Dukes Palace, in the same place where that now built, standeth. The deuision of the Empire was made in his time, & the Veneti∣ans left in their own liberty. The City was diui∣ded into wards, stréets and precinctes. The Pre∣gadi, & the Ouaranta, who (for criminal offences) was then instituted among them. He gouerned eightéen yeares. 11 Giustiniano Participatio, hauing bin an as∣sociate in the dignity with his father, was (after his death) confirmed by the people. He repealed home his brother Iohn, who was then at Con∣stantinople, & accepted him as his fellow ruler: he made the peoples authority greater than before, & gaue aid to Michael the Emp. against the Sara∣zins. The body of S. Mark was in his time broght from Alexandria, accepting into his protection, & the church remaining at this day, was cōsecrated
in his memory. He died the 2. year of his dignity. 13 Giouanni Participatio remained in the roy∣altie, & inlarged the Church of S. Marke, placing therein a great number of priests & Canons, and appointing a Primicerio to gouern them. He cau∣sed the head of Obelerio to be cut off, whom hee had besiedged in the Isle of Curtia. He made war vpon the Nauratines, and ouercame them. In the end, a conspiracy was deuised against him, and being confined to Grada, in the eight yeare of his Principality, he shaued his head and bearde, and made himselfe a Monke, in which estate he died. 13 Pietro Tradonico of Pola, hauing carryed himselfe to the peoples contentment in the wars against Pepin, was elected duke. He ioyned Iohn his son in rule with him, & gaue succor to ye Emp. of Constantinople, who made request thereof by Theodosius Patricius. He was made Protospa∣tary of the empire, in help whereof he sent 60. gal∣lies. Lewes 2. granted him many priuiledges, & in the end he was slain by a sedition, in his 27. year. 14 Orso Participatio, hauing appeased the se∣dition, was made Duke. The Turkes hauing spoiled Dalmatia, euen so far as Grada, wer van∣quished by him, & Giouanni Participatio his son, whom he had made associate with him in his go∣uernment. Basilius the Emperor highly honored him for that good Seruice, and made him Proto∣spatarie of the Empire. He gouerned 17. yeares. 15 Giouanni Participatio, beeing confirmed in his dignity, tooke and burned Comachio, wa∣sted the County of Rauenna, to reuenge himselfe
on the Count of Comachio, who had impriso∣ned and wounded to death his Brother Badoa∣rio. He growing much ouercome with sicknesse, caused the Church of Saint Cornelius and S. Cyprian to be built at Malamocco; and hauing gouerned fiue yeares and sixe monthes, renoun∣ced the Dignitie. 16 Pietro Candiano, was elected after the voluntarie dismission of his Predecessour. Hée was a valiaunt Man, and expert in Armes, and yet notwithstanding, greatlie addicted to deuoti∣on. He went (in person) with tenne Gallies a∣gainst the Narantines, who (as Théeus) robbed and purloined from the Venitians. Fighting valiantlie against them, hee died at the second time, with the weapons in his hands. He gouer∣ned no longer then fiue months. Dominico Tribuno, is set by some in rank with the Dukes: but others, lesse curious in search of the History, haue omitted him, because hee was Duke but thrée months and thirtéen daies, and nothing is remarkeable in his time, but a cer∣taine priuiledge granted by him to Chioggia. 17 Pietro Tribuno, Sonne of Dominico, was elected Duke. He obtained of Guydo, Em∣perour and King of Italy, a confirmation of all auncient Priuiledges. The Barbarian Hunnes came againe into Italy, and burned Heraclea, Capo de Arger, and Chioggia. This Prince o∣uercame them, with very much honour, and this was the third time, that those Strangers sought to vsurpe on that State. Hee gouerned twentie
foure yeares. 18 Orso Badoaro, called himselfe Partici∣patio, and was the first that changed his name. He sent for his Son Pietro to Constantinople, and he was made Protospatarie. In the yeare 920. he obtained of Rodolphus, Emperour and King of Italy, the confirmation of the Venitians auncient authority, to stamp Monies. He addic∣ted himselfe wholy to piety, and in his 20. yeare, hee renounced the Dignity, to make him-selfe a Monke, and liue priuately. 19 Pietro Candiano the second, was a wor∣thy man, and made war on Lauterio Marquesse of Istria, who hindred the Traffique of the Veni∣tians: he ouer-came him, and reconquered the people of Capo d'Istria. He vanquished Albertus, Son to the Emperour Berengarius, who impa∣tronizing himself of Rauenna, impeached the pas∣sage of the Venitians Ships. In his time, May∣dens were stolne by the Testaines, to ioyne in marriage with them; but they were soone recoue∣red. He gouerned seauen yeares. 20 Pietro Badoaro, the Sonne of Orso, was redéemed by him from the Sclauonians. Hée gouerned but two yeares and seauen moneths, alwaies in peace, which he much affected. Beren∣garius the Emperour did him many fauours, for his great deserts. 21 Pietro Candiano the third, Sonne to the second Candiano, associated himselfe in his dig∣nity with his son Pietro; & at two seuerall times armed 33. Shippes against the Narentines; but
at the second time, he made peace with them. His son being reproued by him for his bad behauior; reuolted from him, and against the Common-wealth. The people would haue slaine him, but he was sent into exile: where ioyning with Guy∣do, Sonne of Berengarius; hee endangered the Common-wealth. Whereat his father grieuing, died in his fiftéenth yeare of his gouernment. 22 Pietro Candiano the fourth, being repea∣led from exile (albeit the people had sworne neuer to receiue him) was made prince with very great applause. Hee dealt in such sort with Pope Iohn the 12. that the Churches of Grada was made Patriarchall, and Metropolitane of all the Veni∣tians State, and of Istria. Otho the Emperour, granted him many honourable priuiledges. Hée ruined Vderzo, and was slaine with his Sonne, in a sedition of the people: hauing gouerned 20. yeares. 23 Pietro Orseolo, was a man altogether de∣uout, and was elected by the people against his will. He would very often walke in an vnknown habite, to visite the Houses of poore people and Hospitalles. Hee appeased the dissentions be∣twéen the Venitians, and them of Capo d'Istria, who yéelding themselues tributarie. Hée went with Beato Romualdo of Rauenna, to liue re∣ligiouslie. Hée gouerned two yeares and two moneths, dooing many woorthy and charitable déedes. 24 Vitale Candiano, Sonne of Peitro the third, made the confederacy with the Emperour
Otho. He fell sicke so soone as hee entred vppon his charge: wherfore he became a Monk, hauing gouerned about a yeare. 25 Tribuno Memo, was very rich, but no man of State. In his time happened great dissenti∣ons, betwéene the Families of Moresina and Ca∣loprina, by reason wherof, many notorious mur∣ders were committed. He took part with the Mo∣resini, which caused the other faction to withdraw themselues to Verona to the Emperour Otho. He gaue the Isle of Saint Giorgio Maggiore to the Abbat of Moresini: And renounced the Principality in his twelfth yeare, entering into Religion. 26 Pietro Orseolo the second, being a verie discréete man, ordered the matter so well with the Emperours Basilius and Alexius, that the Venitians were exempted from Toules and tax∣ations. Otho the Emperour lying at Verona, did highly fauour him; and, among other graces, to hold one of his Sonnes at Baptisme. He was the first that extended their Confines on the sea, winning many places in Istria and Dalma∣tia. Hauing caused the Church and Pallace to be finished in his time, hee died the 8. yeare of his Principality. 27 Ottone Orseolo, hauing gouerned some space with his Father Pietro, was confirmed in the dignity, at the age of eighteen years. He won such reputation, that Geta King of Hungaria, gaue him one of his Sisters in marriage. In person he conquered them of Istria, who were be∣come
Rebels; And went into Dalmatia, in the enterprise against Cresmura. At length, the ma∣licious enuiers of his glories, deuised a conspiracy against him, and hee was confined into Greece, in the 17. yeare of his rule. 28 Pietro Centranico, or Barbolano, suc∣céeded next to Otho. But hauing not well quali∣fied all dissentions, as well concerning the Citti∣zens remouing, as the other neighbours: he was compelled to forsake the dignitie, and make him∣selfe a Monke. Orso, Brother of Otho, returned from Constantinople, being Patriarch of Grada, and he was constituted in expectation of Othos comming. He continued about a yeare in the pal∣lace, and forsooke the Principality, newes béeing brought of Othos death. Dominico Orseolo would then perforce vsurpe the Dignity, but hée was expelled by the people the next morning, and dyed at Rauenna. 29 Dominico Flabanico, was elected during his exile, by the faction of them that had excluded Dominico Orsolo. In his time, and in the yeare 1040. the national Councel was held, for gouern∣ment of the Ecclesiasticks. He made the Familie of Orseolo suspitious to the State, by his owne meanes, and laboured for their vtter supplantati∣on. He gouerned ten yeares, foure months, and twelue daies. 30 Dominico Contarini was very pleasing to the people. He brought Dalmatia to peace, béeing heauily burdened with the rebellion of Zara. Hée fauored the Normans against Robert K. of Apu∣lia.
And the discord which happened betwéene the Common-wealth, and Pepo Patriarch of Aqui∣leia, was by him qualified. Hee builded the Mo∣nastery on the Lido, and died in his 28. yeare. 31 Dominico Silino, won himselfe such repu∣tation, that Nicephorus Emperor of Constanti∣nople, gaue him his sister in marriage; by whose perswasion he made war vpon the forenamed K. Robert of Apulia, and (at the first attempt) re∣turned with a very honorable victory, possesing himselfe of Duras. But at his second aduenture, he fought with small aduantage; whereby ensu∣ed the diminution of his credit. He pergetted the Church of S. Marke with Marble, first and be∣fore any other, causing it also to bee beautified with an artificiall Checquer-worke. Hee died in the 13. yeare of his gouernment. 32 Vitale Faliero beeing made Duke, he im∣mediatly obtained of Alexius, then Emperor, to haue the Soueraignety of Dalmatia and Croa∣tia. Henry, successour in the Empire, did him many great fauours: and comming in deuotion to Venice, hée held on of his Daughters at Bap∣tisme. The Office of Proprieties was constitu∣ted in his time, and the workemanship of Saint Markes Church continued. He died in his sixtéen yeare. 33 Vitale Michele, by his woorthy aduentu∣ring on the Sea, did very farre extend the Com∣mon-wealths limits. Hée made the Easterne warre, by perswasion of Pope Vrban the second, for conquest of the holy Land, with the Princes
of Christendome. The Isle of Smyrna, Suria and Ierusalem were then recouered from ye Infidels. He died in his sixt yeare. 34 Ordelafo Faliero, Sonne of Vitale, assi∣sted King Baldwine against the Infidels, in con∣quest of the Holy Land; and made such progres∣sion, as they deuided the Empire betwéene them, thoroughout all the Kingdome of Iudea. In the eight yeare of his Principality, Malamocco was almost all burned and submerged▪ by rea∣son whereof, the Episcopall Sée was transfer∣red to Chioggia; He went in person to the war against Zara, which was become rebellious, and winning the victory: hee would néedes returne thither againe a second time, and on the like oc∣casion; where he died in Armes, in the 15. yeare of his principality. 35 Dominico Michele, being made Duke for his high repute and merit; went to giue ayde to the Christians in the holy Land. With 200. wel appointed ships and Gallies, hee made the Infi∣dels to raise their siedge from before Ioppa. Hée took Tyre, which he gaue to Vaumond Patriarch of Ierusalem. Emanuell the Emperor made war against him, from whom he won Chio, Rhodes, Samos, Mitylline, and Ister. Hée renounced his Principality, in the 13. yeare of his rule. 36 Pietro Polani, Kinsman to Michele, was a very wise Man, insomuch as hee was made Arbitratour of the difference betwéene Con∣rade and Emanuell the Emperour. Hée made Warre against them of Pisa and Padua, whom
hée conquered. He armed himselfe against the Duke of Apulia, in behalfe of the said Emanuell, to whose Empire he added many worthy posses∣sions. Some say, it was his Sonne that won all the battailes, and that himselfe, being fallen sick, returned thence, and died in his eightéene yeare of rule. 37 Dominico Moresini, hée swept the Gulfe of certaine Pyrats of Ancona, the chéefe where∣of, béeing called Guiscardo, was taken and hanged. He laide siedge to Pola, which hée tooke, with Parenzo; which Citties were become rebellious in Istria. Hee held confederacy with William King of Sicilie, of whom hee obtained many exemptions for the Traffique of his Mer∣chants. Zara made the Metropolitane Cittie, at his instaunce, and hee so preuayled, that Dominico his Sonne was made an Earle. He beautifyed the buildinges of the Cittie of Ve∣nice, and began the Tower of Saint Marke. He died seauen monthes after the eight yeare of his Election. 38 Vitale Michele the second, subdued the Tarentines, which nowe had rebelled the third time. He imprisoned Vlrick Patriarch of Aqui∣leia, and twelue Channons. In an hundred dayes, hée put foorth an hundred Gallies, and twenty Ships on the Sea, against the Emperor Emanuell. The great Family of the Iustiniani, were, in his time brought to one onely man, and hee was become Religious; whom hee tooke forth of his Monastery (by the Popes consent)
and gaue him his owne daughter in mariage, be∣ause he would not haue so worthy a house to bee extinct. There happened a great pestilence in hys time, the occasion whereof, the people in theyr weake iudgement laid vpon him. He was woun∣ded, and dyed, hauing gouerned xvij. years, and xxvij. daies. 39 Sebastiano Ziani was the first that euer was elected by the eleauen electors. In his time there was a great Schisme in the Churche, by meanes of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who caused Alexander the thirde to forsake the Sée, Octauian hauing bin made Anti-pope. A∣lexander made his retirement to Venice, where hauing a long time serued in the Monastery of la Charita; he was in the end knowne, and taken thence by the Prince and Seigneury. Héereupon, Barbarossa made warre against the Venetians: but his sonne Octauian being taken, he mediated reconciliation betwéene them. He died in the fift yeare of his gouernment. 40 Orio Malipiero, or Mastropetro, was the first Duke elected by the 40. and for that purpose was created by the death of Ziani. He hadde sixe Councellors allowed him▪ to authorize his deli∣berations. He reconquered Zara, that had nowe the fourth time rebelled. He sent supply vnto the Christians against the Moores, who beganne to vsurpe in the Holy-Lande, 88. yeares after that Baldwine had deliuered it. Ptolomais was re∣couered▪ and Andronicus, successor to Emanuell the Emperour, deliuered many Venitian Mer∣chants.
He renounced the Principality in his 14 yeare, and entred into Religion. 41 Henrico Dandolo was likewise elected by the forty. They of Zaro were once againe van∣quished, and Pola conquered. In his time was the surprizall of Constantinople, and the acquisi∣tion of the East Empire, wherein hee assisted the Princes and French Barons. Hee dyed in his thirtéenth yeare, being Generall of all the Chri∣stian Army. 42 Pietro Ziani, son of Sebastian, was made Duke within a while after the death of Dandalo, the Correctors being then first instituted. In his time came Ambassadors from Athens & Achaia, to submit themselues in obedience to the Com∣mon-wealth. Candie was then peopled with a Colony of Noble Vinitians. He married Con∣stance, Daughter to Tancrede King of Sicilie. In the end, hee renounced the Principality, ha∣uing gouerned 24. yeares. 43 Giacomo epolo, was made Duke by chance, in concurrency of Renieri Candolo, who had as many voyces as he. Candie rebelled, and the seditious were seuerely chastised. Zara, that had long borne the yoake, was now reduced vn∣der obedience. Hee had Warre against them of Ferrara, and against Ezzelino, who would haue inuested himselfe with Padua. In conclusion, he gaue ouer the Principality in his twentith yeare, and dyed soone after. 44 Marino Moresini, was made Duke by the one and fortith, by reason of the precedent con∣currence.
In his time was another Colony of Noblemen sent into Candie, who builded there Canea. Hee made Warre against Ezzelino, who besiedged Mantua, and who (in a furious rage) caused twelue thousande Paduans to bee hewne in peeces, which he had with him then in his Army. He died in the fourth year of his Prin∣cipality. 45 Reuieri Zeno Podesta, at Fermo was elected Duke, and sent to bee fetcht thence with foure Gallies. Vnder him, the Commonwealth won a famous victorie, against them of Genes: but the contentment therewith was very briefe, because Michaell Paleologus expelled both the French-men and Venitians out of Constantino∣ple, being ayded by the Genewaie forces, whych was eight and fiftye yeares after the surprizing of the sayde Citty: yet once more (after that) the same people were againe reconquered: And hauing gouerned this Dignity sixtéene yeares, he dyed. 46 Lorenzo Tiepolo was made Duke, in memory of the victory hee had againste them of Genes at Tyre: hee allyed two of his Sonnes, (verie Nobly) with two strange Ladies: by rea∣son whereof, a Law was then made, that the like might not afterward be done. He brought Ser∣uia in obedience to the Common-wealth, and the Bolognians were vanquished by him: he gouer∣ned seauen yeares, and xxv. daies. 47 Giouanni Contarini, being aged eightie yeares, and Atturney of S. Marke, was made
Duke. The Law against illegitimates was then enacted, and they excluded from all publicke offi∣ces. There were some rebellions moued in Istria, and by them of Genes, but they were quickly ap∣peased. At length, through vnwieldinesse of age, and by aduise of the Senat, he gaue ouer the dig∣nity, hauing gouerned foure yeares, and six mo∣neths. 48 Giouanni Dandolo was elected, beeing then absent. The Citty was (in his time) much afflicted by water, and an Earthquake. He made war in Istria, aginst the Patriarch of Aquileia, & the Count of Goritia. At the instance of pope Ni∣cholas, he assisted the Archbyshop of Tripoli with 25. gallies. He died seauen months after his viij. yeare of rule. 49 Pietro Gradanigo, a man of great courage, deliuered the common-wealth from two impor∣tant dangers. One, was a high disgrace, which hapned in a battel against them of Genes: The other, was the conspiracy of Baiamonte, which was boldly checked with weapon in hande, vpon the place of S. Marke. It was then ordained, that Noblemen onely should gouerne, and the counsel of tenne was then instituted. Hauing ruled 22. yeares and nine months, he died. 50 Marino Giorgio, was a man of such life, that they termed him a Saint. Venice was con∣tinually excommunicated in his time, by reason of the taking of Ferrara. Zara rebelled a∣gaine the sixte time, and much labour it cost to reduce it vnder obedience againe. After, hee
builded the Monastery of S. Dominick, and di∣ed (aged 81. yeares) in his first yeare, hauing go∣uerned ten months, and ten daies. 52 Giouanni Soranzo, had the honor of reco∣uering Zara, and many other places, which had reuolted in his Predecessors time. Negropont, was re-obtained, and Warre afresh commenced against them of Genes. The excommunication was quitted from Venice, by the interposition of Francisco Dandolo, knéeling before the Pope, with a Chaine of yron about his necke. The number of Atturneyes of S. Marke, was increa∣sed to sixe. He gouerned sixtéene yeares, and sixe months. 52 Francisco Dandolo, who had so lowely humbled himselfe for his Countreyes good, was therefore exalted to her highest Dignitie. They of Pola, and of Valesia, submitted themselues to the Common-wealth, which gaue way vnto the warre against the Patriarch of Aquilea. Padua was taken on Albert Scaliger, and Treuisa and the County remained to the Common-wealth. This man was of the league with the Christian Princes, againste the Turke, and in his time were sixty seuerall Ambassadors at Venice. He gouerned ten yeares, and ten months. 55 Bartolomeo Gradenigo, Atturney of Saint Marke, was made Duke at 76. yeares of age▪ by the intercession of Andrea Dandolo, and his cessation. In his time was Venice my∣raculously deliuered from a mighty imminent in∣vndation. Candie rebelled, and the Rebelles
were seuerely punnished. There happened a great Dearth in the Cittie, which droue the people to discontentment. Hee died in his fourth yeare. 54 Andrea Dandolo, who had before resigned his place to Gradenigo, caused the dearth for to cease, by sending for great store of Corne out of Sicilie. Hee obtained of the king of Babylon, frée Nauigation into Egypt. Zara rebelled the seauenth time, and was reprized. The Warre betwéene them of Genes and the Citty, was tro∣bled by two great accidents: One, was an earth∣quake verie dreadfull, and the other, was a grée∣uous Pestilence. Hee gouerned twelue yeares, wanting some few months. 55 Marino Faliero, was elected Duke, being then Ambassador at Rome. Hauing receyued an iniurie by some perticulers, which was not re∣uenged according vnto his owne desire: he de∣termined in the eighty yeare of his age, to make himselfe absolutely Lorde, without any con∣troule. The Conspiracy beeing discouered by Nicholo Lion; he had his head smitten off with∣in the Pallace. And it was ordayned, that his Picture shoulde not bee placed among the other Dukes, but the place being left voyde, had one∣ly this Writing. This is the place of Mari∣no Faliero, who, for his greeuous offence, had his head cut off: he was Duke but ten mo∣neths. 56 Giouanni Gradenigo had an excellent spi∣rite, but a much mishappen countenance. The
Warre was renewed againste the Genes, which tearmined with a mutuall peace. Hee had warre against the King of Hungarie for Dalmatia. Treuisa was besiedged in his time, and thether hee went in person. He gouerned one yeare, thrée moneths and fourtéene daies. 57 Giouanni Delfino, was elected Duke when he was in Treuisa, defending it against the King of Hungary. The Senat sent to demand free pas∣sage for him, which being denied, he came foorth with 200. horse to beard the enemy, & so attained to Margliera, where the Senat in person receiued him. In short time he gaue end to this war, & re∣couered Conciliano, Serualla, & Asola. He made peace for the soueraignty of Dalmatia, and died aged 45. yeares, hauing gouerned foure yeares, two months, & eleuen daies. 58 Lorenzo Celso, vpon a false bruit of a victory against them of reuolted Genes, was made duke in concurrence of Pietro Gradenigo, Leonardo Dandolo, & Marro Cornaro. Candie rebelled a∣gain, & it was regained with very great difficulty. On this occasion, a Iusts and feast was publick∣ly made in the place of S. Mark: he died 2. dayes after the fourth yeare of his Principality. 59 Marco Cornaro, a man very wise & learned, was sent into Candie, which was rebellious, and there he made a cruel bloody war: the Pope gran∣ting plenary Indulgence to al such as went the∣ther. The Rebels being seuerely punished, ye com∣monwealth sent to Pope Vrbane 5. a certain nū∣ber of their Gallies. He gouerned 2. years, 5. mo∣neths and 24. daies.
60 Andrea Contarini, led to the Paduans, fea∣ring to be elected Duke, and as presaging the ru∣ine which (in his time) wold betide the common-wealth. First of all, he made warre with them of Triesta, then soon after, with Carrara for the con∣fines of Padua: and such was the fortune, that Chioggia beeing taken, the Cittie of Venice found it selfe to bee in extreame daunger. But in the ende, hee went and opposed him-selfe (in person) against the Enemies, vanquished them, and regained Chioggia. Hee dyed, ha∣uing gouerned fiftéene yeares, foure months, and fiftéene daies. 61 Michele Morisini, was a man well furni∣shed with Learning and Wisedome. Some say, that in his time the Isle of Thenedes was taken, and not in the time of his Predecessour Contarini. There were diuers Lawes then made, and (amongst others) it was ordayned, that Homicides, who formerly had beene han∣ged, should afterwardes haue their heads smit∣ten off. He liued but four months, & fiue dayes in his Dignity, and died in the 74. yeare of his age. 62 Antonio Veniero, was a rigorous obseruer of Iustice. He confined one of his owne Sonnes in exile, because he had (ouer-lightly) offended the Familie of a Noble Venitian. Hee made league with Galeazzo the Vicounte, against Carrara, whereupon hee tooke Padua. Hee assisted the Emperour Emmanuell against the Turke, and gaue ayde also vnto Sigismond,
King of Hungaria, who afterward came to the Empire. The place of Saint Marke, and that of the Rialto, were greatly beautified in his time. He died two months and thrée daies, after the 18 yeare of his rule. 63 Michele Steno, had the dignity of Attur∣ney of Saint Marke, with that of Duke. Hée wonne an important battaile against the Gene∣waies. Carrera was now the last time vanqui∣shed, and Padua and Verona surprized. They of Vicenza, to frée themselues from his tyranny, yéelded themselues to the Common-wealth. La∣dislaus King of Hungaria, did likewise for-goe Zara. He died, hauing gouerned 13. yeares and thrée daies. 64 Thomaso Mocenigo, was first Generall of the Goulfe. Hee embraced peace, to the ende, that the Cittizens might Traffique. Vdina be∣came obedient to the Common-wealth, with the Countrey of Friuoli; by meanes of the Lordes of Sauorguani, who were made Noble-men of Venice. The Florentines were also succou∣red against the Duke of Milaine. In his tenth yeare he died. 65 Francesco Foscari did stoutly represse the Duke of Milaine, who procéeded too farre on the liberties of Italy. Brescia, Bergamo, and other Citties of Lombardie were then won: among which were Loda and Parma, and Rauenna in Romania. Hée made also a large progresse on the Seas, euen into Morea. The Senate assisted Paleodogus the Emperour, against the Turkes,
who vsurped Constantinople in the yeare 1453. Hée was made Arbitratour by the Duke of Mi∣laine, in certaine differences of neighbour-hood. The King of Dacia was made a Noble Veniti∣an: And afterward, the Duke (in regard of his age and infirmities) was dismissed, hauing go∣uerned 34. yeares, and sixe months. 66 Paschale Malapiero, was appointed in the place of Foscari, being Atturny of S. Mark, who died two daies after his dismission. Hee made a Law, that in following times, the Duke should not be deposed. In his daies, the famous Arte of Printing was brought into Venice. The Arse∣nall was greatly encreased: And hee maintained the people in peace, during foure years, 6. months, and fiue daies that he gouerned. 67 Christophoro Moro, of Procuratour of S. Marke, was made Duke. He liued for some time in peace, till the second yeare of his gouern∣ment; and then the Turke (proud of his surpri∣zall of Constantinople) declared Warre against the Venitians. He made heace with Pope Pius the fift, and the Duke of Burgundy: But the Pope dying, they remained alone, and maintay∣ned war which lasted twenty yeares. And yet he dyed, hauing raigned 9 yeares and sixe months. 68 Nicholo Tono had such good happe, that (in his time) the common-wealths affaires went well against the Turke. Pietro Mocenigo, Ge∣neral in the Archipelagus, vnited his power with the Popes. The King of Naples, & they of Rhods sent 85. Gallies together, and tooke Satalia, a cit∣tie
of Pamphilia. He made league likewise with the King of Persia, against the Turke. Iames King of Cyprus comming to Venice, espoused Catharina Cornara, adoptiue Daughter of S. Mark. He gouerned one year, eight months, and fiue daies. 69 Nicholo Marcello, Atturney of S. Matk, after some lawes made by the Correctours; was elected Duke. In his time there was a conspi∣racie in Cyprus, to haue the Kingdome fall into the power of Ferdinand King of Naples. Pietro Morcenigo went thither with a great Armie, where hee appeased all troubles, and seuerelie chastised the Rebelles. Scutari, a Cittie in Li∣burnia, was besiedged by the Turke, and vali∣antly defended by Antonio Loredano. This Duke gouerned one yeare, foure monthes, and 17. daies. 70 Pietro Mocenigo was elected Duke, in de∣sert of all his worthy deeds. Lepanto was besied∣ged in his time by the Turke, & vertuously main∣tained by Antonio Loredano. They brought their power likewise before the Isle of Stalimena, but the same Loredano (by his valour) defended it. The Daughter to King Ferdinand came to Venice, with the Cardinall her Brother, where they were roially entertained. This Prince cau∣sed a Mony to be stamped, which he sirnamed by his owne name: And gouerned but two yeares and nine months. 71 Andrea Vendramino had such ill hap in his gouernment, that the Venitian Army was
two seuerall times put to flight by the Turkes: Once, néere to Croya in Albania, and the other, in the Countrey of Friuli. He was a goodly man of person, and had a most beautifull Ladie to his Wife, by whom hée had as goodlie Chil∣dren, whom he allyed in marriage with the chée∣fest Families. He gouerned one yeare and eyght months. 72 Giouanni Mocenigo, Brother to Pie∣tro Mocenigo, hauing continued the Warre a∣gainst the Turke; in the ende made peace with him: Ordering the matter so, that hée left Scutari and Stipula in libertie of commerce, and power to kéepe a Deputie at Constantino∣ple. Hée made Warre against Ferdinand King of Naples, at the instance of Pope Sixtus the fourth, which occasioned the long Warre called Sociale. In the ende, peace was made, the Common-wealth hauing gotten Rouigo and Polesano. The Cittie became much disgra∣ced by fire, and a pestilent sicknesse: The Prince dyed, hauing raigned seauen yeares and six mo∣neths. 73 Marco Barbarigo, the Plague béeing ceased, caused all to bée new builded, which the Fire had defaced in the Pallace. Hee was greatly differing from from all other Princes, to wit, in pardoning, and forgetting perticuler in∣iuries doone vnto him: but such as were com∣mitted against the State, he would haue reuen∣ged with stricttest seueritie. The Grand Sig∣neur or Turke, sent a perticular Ambassadour
vnto him, to congratulate his election. He gouer∣ned but nine months. 74 Agostino Barbarigo, withstood the pro∣gresse of Charls 8. King of France, when he made war against them of Arragon, for the kingdome of Naples, which he conquered. The Turke v∣surped on the Common weales of Lepanto, Mo∣dona, and Corona. The Kingdome of Cyprus was brought vnder the tutelage of the Senate, and Quéen Catharina brought thence to Venice. The Office de la Sante was created, by occasion of the Pestilence. The Duke gouerned 15. years, and 21. daies. 75 Leonardo Lauredano sustained a very rigorous war against the chiefest Princes of the world: there being a league made at Cambray, betwéene the Emperor Maximilian; the King of France; them of Naples; and the Dukes of Sa∣uoy, Ferrara and Mantua, incited thereto by Pope Iulius the second. All the whole estate of firme land was surprized, except Treuisa; but in the end it was recouered. He liued in the Prin∣cipality ninetéene yeares, eight months, and 20. daies. 76 Antonio Grimani, being Generall, had a most infamous disrout or foile, by which occasi∣on, he was dismissed of the charge of Procurator of S. Marke, and confined to Cherso. Hee brake his limitation, and with-drewe himselfe to Rome to the Cardinall his Sonne: where hee had so many woorthy Offices imposed vppon him, as, not onely he was re-established in his
Atturnies place againe; but hée was likewise made Duke, at the age of eighty two yeares, and gouerned but one yeare, ten monthes, and two daies. 77 Andrea Gritti, gaining best part of the glory, for the reprisall of Padua, was in very great estéeme. Hee dealt so with the King of Fraunce, (to whom he was Prisoner) that his Maiesty al∣lyed himselfe with the Common-wealth, and Brescia and Verona were reconquered. Hee knew very well, how to make his carriage plea∣sing to the Senate, during the warres betwéene Charles the fift, Emperour, and King Fraunces the first, as also against Solyman. Hee gouer∣ned fiftéene yeares, seauen monthes, and eyght daies. 78 Peitro Lando continued the defence of the Common-wealth against the Turk: with whom (at last) he made a peace, knowing how to make vse thereof, & maintaine his owne charge, while the war continued betwéen Charles the fift, and King Frances the first. He gouerned sixe yeares and eight months. 79 Francesco Donato, making benefit also of this peace, beautified the Citty with many good∣ly buildings, besides that of the Pallace. He sent succour to the Emperour, against certain Rebels in Germany. The Princes of Guise, comming to Venice in his time, were entertained as fitted their dignity. He gouerned seauen yeares and six months. 80 Marco Antonio Treuisano, a Man alto∣gether
deuoute, laboured that the Common-wealth might abound in goodnesse and ciuill manners; preuenting (by his owne worthy ex∣ample) that vices should not be winekt at, as, in too many Countries, they are. He gouerned a yeare, wanting thrée daies. 81 Francesco Veniero, could so well skill of gouerning the Common-wealth, that albeit the Turke (in his time) made Warre in A∣pulia, and the King of Fraunce in Tuscanie: yet all was well at Venice, and the Quéene of Poland Royallie welcommed thither. Hée gouerned two yeares, one moneth, and twentie daies. 82 Lorenzo Priuli, was sollicited (by the Pope) to make Warre against the Emperor. But hée being a Friend to the Common-wealth; by no meanes would offend him, but mediated a pacification of those affaires. In his time peace was made betwéene Fraunce and Spayne, and Charles the fift dyed. This Prince go∣uerned thrée yeares, eleauen months, and eyght daies. 83 Girolamo Priuli, Brother to the prece∣dent Prince, enioyed those great Honours which Pope Pius the fourth gaue to the Com∣mon-wealth: And all his delight was to heare Ambassadours in the Hall of Kinges. In his time the Councell of Trent was concluded, whi∣ther he sent (as Ambassadors) Nicholo de Pon∣te, and Matheo Dandolo. The Common-wealth held (at Baptisme)
the Sonne to the Duke of Sauoy b a Depu∣tie, borne of Marguerite of France. He dyed, ha∣uing gouerned eight yeares, two monthes, and foure daies. 84 Pietro Loredano, by the concurrence of two others, was elected Duke, contrarie to the hope of all, or his owne expectation. The Arsenall was burned in his time, and there then also happened a very great dearth of all thinges. Selim, Successour to Solyman, tooke occasion to breake peace with the Common-wealth, demaunding of them the Kingdome of Cyprus, and mooued Warre vppon this Sub∣iect. He gouerned foure yeares, fiue monthes, and eight daies. 85 Luigi Mocenigo, Warre beeing kind∣led against the Turke; lost the Kingdome of Cyprus, Nicosia béeing taken, and Famagosta surrendered. The Common-wealth made league with Pope Pius the fift, and Phillip King of Spayne▪ so that their Armies (béeing ioyned together in the yeare 1571. they obtayned a woorthy victorie against the Turkes. Soone after, Henry the third, King of Fraunce, came to Venice, where hee was magnyficently en∣tertayned. This Prince dyed in his seauenth yeare. 86 Sebastiano Veniero was elected by com∣mon voyce, and with such applause, that dy∣uers Turkes ranne to him, and kissed his féete. Hée created fiue Correctours of the Lawes, for ruling the affaires of the Pallace. The
Citty was deliuered of a dangerous plague, and the Pallace was againe very greatly defaced by fire. This Prince gouerned not aboue one whol yeare. 87 Nicholo de Ponte, was created Duke, a man very learned in al the Sciences, and where∣of he had made publicke profession in Venice. He passed thorow all the honours of the Common-wealth, wherewith the Cittizens coulde possibly gratifie him. The Seminary of S. Marke was instituted by him. Certaine Princes of Iapponia arriuing then at Venice, were by him most ho∣nourably entertained. He builded the Bridge of Canareggio: and gouerned seauen yeares, nine months, and thirteene daies. 88 Paschale Cicogna, Procurator of S. Mark, was elected when he was at diuine seruice in the Church. In his time there was great warres be∣twéene France and Spaine about Piedmont, and betwéene the Emperor and the Turke, for some parts in Hungaria▪ He caused the Town of Pal∣ma to be builded, in the confines of the countrey of Friuli, and a newe Castle or Fortresse, in the Isle of Cephalonia. He hadde the honour of the wonderfull Bridge of the Rialto, which hee buil∣ded: And gouerned ten yeares, or thereabout. 89 Marino Gimini, Procurator of S. Mark, was so highly in grace and fauour of the people, that on the day of his election, they declared ex∣traordinary signes of ioy, and continued them for many following daies. The second yeare of his Principality, he caused the Dutchesse his Wife
to be crowned in great Triumph. At which time Pope Clement the eight sent hir the Rose of gold. In his time much ioy and triumph was made, for the peace concluded betwéen the Kings of France and Spayne. Vppon occasion of the Popes com∣ming to Ferrara, obtained by the Ecclesiasticall Estate, the Cardinall Aldobrandino passed thence to Venice, where he was most honorably welcommed with diuers other Cardinals. There was such an extraordinary ouer-flow of waters, in the fift yeare of his Principality, yt the Barks, Boats, and Gundeloes floated on the place of S. Marke, euen as if they had béen in a ful maine ri∣uer. He dyed, and was much bemoaned of the people, hauing gouerned ten yeares, and eight mo∣neths. 90 Leonardo Dandolo, hauing by his woor∣thy deseruings, singuler wisedom and dexterity, managed passed affaires, and gone through al ho∣nors of the Common-wealth, giuing euident te∣stimony of his care and faithfulnesse, was ad∣uanced in the place of Grimani, the tenth day of Ianuary, 1606. He had bin sent Ambassador to Constantinople to Mahomet (hee being newlie come to the Empire of the East) in the common-wealthes-name, to salute him with accustomed complements. He hath such a practiue brain, and so happy a memory, seated in a soule so religious∣ly zealous for common benefite, that the Senate hath referred more to him then to any other of his Predecessors. The Citty hath (in his time) béene excommunicated, by Paulus Quintus now pope,
about some pretentions appertaining to his Sée: But it may well be saide of this Prince, that, a∣gainst such Thunder-clappes and lightning fla∣shes, he hath shewne himselfe like an immoouea∣ble Rocke, in defence of that estate in generall. In like manner, two principall Pillers of Chri∣stendome, threatned great disaster and ruine: bu that most Christian Henry the fourth, King of Fraunce, embracing those two Collombes, vpheld both the one and other, & redressed all dis∣contentment, by the entermise of his Ambassa∣dors, and hath erected a Triumphall Arche, to the immortality of his glorie. This Prince now liuing happily in peace, doth dayly acknow∣ledge to Fraunce, his particular affection for such fauour, and may (in time) much better declare it. God long preserue him, and all other good Princes. ❧ Of the Kingdome of Spaine. SPaine was (in her yonger daies) held by sundry petty Kings and Tetrarches;Spaine de∣uided (at first) into six Prouin∣ces. viz. 1. Terracon. 2. Carthage. 3. Lustania. 4. Gallacia. 5. Boetia. 6. Tingintaua. and afterward be∣came deuided into many Com∣monweals. The Carthiginians (a people of Affrica) hazzarding their fortune thither, helde one part thereof, and possessed themselues of many Citties, Townes, and places, vntill they were expelled thence by
the Romaines, in the time of the Punick warres. Since when, it was continually subiect vnto the Commonwealth of the Romaine, & reduced into forme of a Prouince only, in the raign of the Em∣peror Augustus. So it remained till the Emperor Honorius; in whose daies the Vandales (a peo∣ple of the North parts) broght it vnder their com∣mand.433. But they were (soone after) chased thence by the Gothes, who established there the seate of their kingdom, which in that kind they maintai∣ned, for the space of about two hundred years: nor were they then called kings of Spaine, but kings of the Goths. In the raigne of Roderick, king of the Goths, the Moores of Affrica entred Spaine,The Moors in possessi∣on of all Spaine. in the yeare 715. they beeing brought thither by one named Iulian, in very despightfull indignati∣on, and to shape out a way to his bloody reuenge, because King Roderick had dishonoured his Si∣ster, or (as some others say) his daughter. And so did the Moores possesse themselues (wel-néer) of al Spain, seizing the city of Tolledo, which was thē the capital city. Thus ended the kingdom & name of the Goths in Spain. Nor rested they so, but pur∣sued on their conquest still, & there remained none but Galitia, the Asturies & Leon, which countries king Pelagius, Vnkle & successor of Roderick, had fled to for refuge, & there shut vp himself, in regard that those places were inuironed with Moun∣taines & might wel defend & shelter him for some time. But his successors, being hardly pressed by the Sarrazins, could no longer resist: wherefore, vnder the raigne of Alphonsus the seconde, they
were forced to craue the helpe of Charlemaigne, King of Fraunce, by whose valour and Vertue, the Moores were beaten thence a great way, and had bin quite cast out of the Country, if the Spa∣niards mallice had bin no hinderance thereto. Af∣terward, the kings of Leon and Galicia (for such were then their only titles) being so formerly pre∣serued, began somwhat to increase in power. And in regarde of this expedition, performed by the French, the strength of the Moores was so weak∣ned and diminished, that many other Kingdoms were established in Spaine,The King¦domes of Nauarre & Arragon. as that of Nauarre by Enocho Counte of Bigorre, in the yeare, 960. which he tooke away from the Moores and Sarra∣zins, by a very valiant conquest of them. The Son of this Enocho, being named Garzias, se∣cond king of Nauarre, woon and conquered Arra∣gon from the same enemies. And afterward, in the year 116. was Arragon reduced to be a king∣dome, by the Will and Testament of Sanchio the Great, fourth King of Nauarre, for loue to Ramyrus his Natural Sonne, who was the first King thereof. This was the same Sanchio, who being Earle of Castille in the kingdome of Le∣on, tooke on him first the name of King Castille, which he left vnto his Sonne Ferdinand.Portugall conquered from the Moores. The Kingdome of Portugal was also conquered from the same Moores, by Earle Henry, Sonne vnto the Duke of Lorraine; who held it first of all, vn∣der Title of Earle, in the year, 1110. but quickly after brought he it to be a Kingdome. Spaine did continue so (in this kinde of State) for a long
time, deuided into many Kingdomes: And the Moores had also theyr abiding there, possessing still a great part thereof, till such time as Ferdinand the fifte, King of Arragon,1492 who was married to Isabell, the onely heire of Castil∣le: And he (wholly) expulsed the Moores out of Spaine, in the yeare, 1492. In no great distance of time after, he possessed himselfe of Sicilie & Na∣ples, inuading also the East Indiaes. But fraudu∣lentlie he vsurped the Kingdom of Nauar,The begin∣ning of the kingdom of Spaine, and decent of their kings. against Iohn d'Albret, who was (indéede) the lawfull King. And it is this Ferdinand, and Isabell his Wife, that (wee may say truely) the King∣dome of Spaine onely had beginning in. They left one onelie Daughter, named Ioane, who was married to Phillip the first, of Austria, Sonne vnto the Emperor Maximillian, and Mary of Bour∣gundie: hee succéeded in this Kingdome of Spaine, and other Countreyes beside. He was likewise Earle of Bourgondie, of Flaunders, and Lorde of the Lowe-Countreyes, in the right of his Mother. In this his Marriage, was borne Charles the fift, who was afterward Emperor.1516. Hee raigned nine and thirtie yeares, preseruing his Prouinces verie happilie: And he left for suc∣cessour, both in Spaine, and the more part of his other Countries, his sonne Phillip the second,1555 who raigned thrée and fortie yeares, hauing adioyned (to his other Estates) the Kingdome of Portugall, in the yeare of our
Lorde, 1580. and so (consequentlie) all that which the Portugalles helde in the East Indiaes, and else-where, as in Affrica and Brasile, which came vnto him by the death of King Henrie the Cardinall. Hee died aged seauentie yeares, the thirtéenth day of September, 1598. No long time before his death, he hadde made peace with the mighty and most Christian King of Fraunce and Nauarre, Henry the fourth. 1598Phillip the thirde, his Sonne, succéeded him, and raigneth as yet to this day. He married Mar∣garet, Daughter to the Arch-Duke of Austria, by whom he had a Sonne, in the month of April, 1606. Of Germany and the Princes Electors. Of Germa∣ny, and the Princes E∣lectors.LIttle can we héere speake of Germany, in re∣gard it requireth a large & ample discourse: Onely concerning the Princes Electors, I finde it recorded, that Pope Gregorie, the fifte of that name, being a Natiue of Saxonie in Germanie, and Kinsman to the Emperour Otho; to the end that the Empyre might long remaine, in the hands of them of his Nation, procured a Law to be made, with the consent of Otho, about the e∣lection of the Emperor, in the yeare of our Lord, 1002. which Law was afterward duely kepte, and hath béene to our time, that it shoulde be al∣wayes lawful and permitted to the Allemaignes or Germaines only, to elect and chuse the Prince, that was to be called Caesar, and King of the Ro∣maines, with the Title likewise of Soueraigne Emperour and Augustus, so soone as his election
was approoued. It was therefore ordered, that that thrée Ecclesiasticall persons, and foure of the Laytie, shoulde haue the full authority heerein, with the voyce of all the State in generall.Three Ec∣clesiastiks, and three Layickes, with addi∣tion of a fourth, the K. of Bohe∣mia. The Ecclesiasticall men, were the Arch-Byshoppes of Magonoe, Treues, and Colongne; The Lay∣ickes were the Marquesse of Bradenbourg, the Count Palatine of Rhine, the Duke of Saxony, and the King of Bohemia, to all whose Succes∣sors this Dignitie appertained. And the King of Bohemia was added for the seauenth Electour, to the end, of auoyding all differences which might happen in the election, and to iudge espe∣cially ouer the other. ¶ A short Chronologicall Discourse of Fraunce, the Originall of that Nation, and a briefe History of their kings, from Pharamond their first Gouernour, to Lewes 13. now raigning. ¶ To the Worshipful Mayster Richard Lang∣ley, Esquire, Towne-Clarke of the Ho∣nourable Cittie of Lon∣don. THe greater part of such as haue Writ∣ten, concerning the Originall and Ety∣mologie of the Name Francs or Franci∣ons, who afterwarde came to bee called Frenchmen, haue scarse faithfully or respectiuelie
handled that Subiect. Many ancient moderate Writers,The errour of Writers, about the names ori∣ginall. as Sigisbert, Gregory of Tours, Ai∣monius the Monk, Hunibant, and the more part of our Chroniclers and Annalistes, made theyr whole recourse to Dreames and Fables, because they liued in those barbarous times, when lear∣ning was trodden vnder-foot, and good Bookes were burned by the Gothes, Vandales and Hunnes, with other vnciuil Nations, who quen∣ched and smothered the light of good Letters, which being hidden vnder-ground (to auoid such barbarous and abortiue fury) our fore-named Writers were robd of knowing those sound Au∣thors, without whom they could not iudiciouslie censure, or write the History of the French Nati∣on. Others that long time after, and much née∣rer to our instant Age, haue likewise written on the same Argument; by following the track of those former blinde-guides, haue fallen into their errour and folly: reading no other Authours but those misse-leaders, neyther taking any paines to peruse those graue auncients, which more poli∣shed seasons haue discouered vnto vs. So that those best embraced Authours of the French, are euen the loudest lyers, leauing a rooted opinion in their ydle fancies; that they are issued of the Troyans, and that they were named French of Francus,Francus or Frencion, the son of Hector. or Francion, the Sonne of Hector, who, after sacke and spoile of the saide Citty, sa∣ued himselfe (with so many as could escape the Graecians Sword and fire) in the Palus Maeoti∣des, and that (of his name, whom they thus fol∣lowed)
they were first called Francks, or Franci∣ons. Next, that néere to this Palus Maeotides, they builded a Citty, which they named Sicam∣bria, after the name of an Aunt to Francus,Sicambra the Daugh∣ter of King Priam. the Daughter of King Priam; and that there they dwelt, vntill the Emperor Valentinians time, be∣ing then constrained to passe into Allemaigne, and thence into Gaule. See héere the conceite of some fond French-men, concerning the Etimo∣logie of their name; which if any one should offer to take from them, he should (in their iudgment) commit no mean crime. And albeit there are ma∣ny, and contrary opinions in this case, yet I will plainely tell ye no more, then what I haue read, and séene written. Some say, that (in times past) there was a na∣tion in Europe, scattered & dispierced héere and there, who were called Cimmerians;Cimmerians. Cimbrians. Sicambrians. Francs or Francions. one part of them had the Name of Cimbrians, another Si∣cambrians, and a third Francs, or Francions. These people passing thorough the Countrey of Pannonia (now deuided into two parts, the one called Hungaria, and the other Austria) were driuen from their precedent dwelling, which was at the Cimmerian Bosphorus by the Goths, in the yeare of the Worldes Creation, 3520. Others say, that these Cimmerians tearmed thē∣selues to bée deriued of those Fraci, that appea∣red on the Earth after Noahs Floud (viz:) that of those diuisions made in the whole vniuerse, by partage of the Mediterranean Sea, those which were in Europe (distinctly on the right hand)
gaue to the Haebrews these Fraci,The He∣brew Fraci, and the Af∣fricanes. euen as them on the left hand did the Affricanes. There are some others, who doe fetch the Originall of those Cimmerians, from Gomer the Sonne of Iaphet, and youngest Sonne of Noah, of whom they should take their Name, by change of some Letters, calling them Cimmerians, in¦stead of Gomorians. But howsoeuer it was, that Nation of Cimmerians, abandoning the vtmost Confines of Thrace, and the fore-named Bosphorus; deuided themselues into dyuers bands: oe whereof made their way to the Pan∣nonians; another to that side of Germanie, where the Cimbrian Chersonnesus is described by our Geographers; And the rest, leauing Eu∣rope,The Cim∣brian Cher∣sonnesus. passed into Phrygia, and making vppe higher into Asia, set downe their rest on the Banckes of Danubie, and the maine Ocean. There (once more) they separated them-selues into two Troopes: One whereof entred into Eu∣rope, vnder conduct of their King named Fran∣cion. And, being no other then méere Vacabond persons, enquiring still for noueltie of Coun∣tries, after they had runne through a great part of Europe; at length, they rested on the banckes of Rhine, where they would néeds build a Citty, in semblaunce and Name of Troy, the Capitall Commaunder of Phrigia. They began the foun∣dation,Torches or Torques of Torquor their King. but the worke remained imperfect. The other sort, that made their aboad on the banckes of Danubie, elected for their K. one named Tor∣chor, by whose name they were called Torches or
Torques: euen as on the contrary side, the other, after the name of Francion their King, were tear∣med Francs, Françions, or Françons. They wax∣ing weary of their kings Empire (which grew to an insupportable tyranny) expulsed them, & liued a long time without any King, vnder authoritie of their Captaines. But in the end, corruption o∣uer-swaying those Captaines, and threatning a tyranicall vsurpation: they did likewise cast them off, and grew to their former election of Kings a∣gaine, euen from the selfe-same stirp and race, whereof their first Kings had bin elected. They made choise then of a Man named Theudomer,Theudo∣mer, a kins∣man (by descent) to king Priam son to Richomer, a man of strong, great and good∣ly stature, wearing his Haire long, and hée was descended of the race of Priam King of Phrygia, and of Francion. So that, if this opinion be true, it should enstruct vs, that the Originall of the Françons or Françions, procéeded of the Cimme∣rians, and that those Cimmerians came from Phrygia, and the Troyans. The Cimbrians, who were descended of the Cimmerians, went to the banckes of Rhine, and dwelt there in those straits, where (in these daies) are the Countries of Holland and Gueldres: But they were forced thence, by frequent ouer∣flowings, and strange invndations of the waters of Rhine. The Sicambrians, being issued of these Cim∣brians, and who neuer boudged from the shoares of Rhine, as these others did, of whom we haue formerly spoken: they passed into Italy, and from
thence into other Regions heretofore mentioned. And it is to be noted, that when the Cimbrians went first to Rhine (bee it that they came from the Pannonians by Land, or from Phrygia and Thrace by the Germaine Sea, being in number about 489360.) they were by the Teutones and Thuringians, Neighbors to Rhine, named Neu∣magi,Neumagi, is new kins∣men. as much to say, as new Kins-men or Cou∣sins. Afterward, when their King Antenor (a man of great power) had espoused Cambra, a beauti∣full,Antenor married Cambra Daughter to the King of Britaine. wise, and chast Lady, borne in the Country of Brittaine, now called England: in fauour of her, he tearmed his people Sicambrians. This happened in the yeare of the Worlds Creation, 1550. At which time Artaxerxes raigned ouer the Persians, and Hanniball passed first into Ita∣lie. Priam, Son to Antenor succeeded him, & then Marcome∣des.Antenor, King of the Sicambrians, lest to those his people inhabiting on the Rhine, his Sonne Priam for their King. After whom succéeded Marcomedes, who extended his Dominion from the banckes of Rhine, so farre as Thuringe. The other Sicambrian Kinges, succéeding after these fore-named; did (almost all of them) tearme themselues Troyans: which holdeth (with good iudgement) to shew, that the Sicambrians were issued of the Cimmerians and Phrygians. There were also many Kinges of these Nati∣ons, and after that the Sicambrians grew to en∣crease néere the Rhine, both in multitude of men and riches: diuers other Kinges raigned ouer
them, who extended the limites of their posses∣sions, on eyther side the Rhine. In the raignes of Clodion, Clodomire the second,Clodion, Clodomire, Meradac & Bolō kings, leagued with the Teutones. Meradac and Bolon, (vnder conduct of whom, the Cim∣brians forsooke the shoares of Rhine, by rea∣son of the invndations of the saide Riuer, and likewise of the Sea) they leagued them-selues with the Teutones or Allemaignes, and depar∣ted in great troopes from their habitations; lea∣uing very few there behinde them, who being af∣terward vanquished by the Romaines, with o∣ther people of the Gaules neighbouring néere the Rhine; continued peaceably in their dwellings, vntill the declining of the Romaine Empire: but yet they were wadged as Souldiers in the Ro∣maine Legions, and serued the Romains faith∣fully in all their wars. Some certaine yeares after, they rebelled against the Emperour Honorius, who conqu∣red them in a battaile: But, recouering theyr losse, they grew in to good fauour with the Em∣perour Valentinian. Héereupon some haue writ∣ten, that in regard they gaue him good ayde a∣gainst the Alanes, & expelled them from the Palus Maeotides: they were by him called Francks,Why the Emperour Valentini∣an called thē Franc. and dispensed withall for tenne yeares tribute, which formerly (as a Due) they payed to the Ro∣maines. But at the ten yeares end, the Emperor sent his Collectours to them, to leuy againe the saide tribute: whereto they would in no wise li∣sten, but despising his commaundement, they murdered his Officers.
The Emperor being offended at their rebelli∣on,K. Priam slaine, and his people fled into Germany. assembled a potent Army, that vanquished them in battaile, wherein also Priam their King was slaine, and they driuen to flight from theyr Cittie Sicambria. Beeing thus expulsed thence, they came into Germany, which then was enimy to the Romains, & possessing themselues of Thu∣ringe; they liued there (for some time) vnder the raigne of Marcomedes, son to Priam, & of Sueno, sonne to Antenor, one of their Kings: thus you may sée what some haue said. But, as concerning the Citty of Sicambria, builded néer to the Palus Maeotides, not by the Françones or Françions, but onely so auouched, by the writings of Huni∣bant, & afterward by those of Gregory of Tours, of Rheginon, and of Sigisbert: good Authors do make a méere mockery of it, for they neuer knew any other Citty named Sicambria, but that fa∣mous Citty which is in Allemaigne. So that by this our instant deduction, it euidently appears, that ye Sicambrians dwelt with the Pannonians,The Sicam∣brians liued with the Pánonians. & that (from thence) they came into Germany, to the shars of Rhine: and hauing in such manner obtained their liberty, they were then first of all called Francs. But now to come againe to our Francs, Francions, or Francones, admit them to be issued of the Scambrians, or of the Cimbri∣ans, or of the Germans, or of any other: It is no∣torious enough,Franconia in Saxonie, and France in Gaule. that two great Prouinces were by them inhabited, & named; to wit, Orientall France or Françonia, in the Country of Saxony, & the kingdome of France in Gaule: and that the
very first time, that any speach was heard of thē, it was in the declining of the Romaine Empire, vnder the Emperors Aurelianus, Probus, Flori∣anus, and Proculus. Which hath made some to conceit the very same matter of the Sicambrians, and that the name of Francs was giuen them. ey∣ther after one of their Kings; or of their bold cou∣rage, or of the Hebrew Fraci. The Emperor Au∣relianus had to deale with them, when they would needs passe the Rhine, to come into Gaule, and (as some report) slue a great number of them. And yet they were not so much weakened, but they could rebell againe, and withstand the suc∣céeding Emperors. Now let vs come to the Etimologie of this name of Franc, or Francs, there are some,Of the word Franc or Francs. who make no other proofe thereof, but that it was on∣ly in regard of the immunity, giuen vnto them by the Emperor Valentinian, after they had holpen him against the Alaines: Inferring also, that he called them so by a Greek name, François, which is as much to say; as bold, hardy, & valiant, and by those means were enfranchised from all touls, subsidies, and tributes for ten years space. But there is not any Etimology receiued by our Frenchmen, but such as certaine Authors, by idle forged Histories of their owne braine, would make them to beleeue: and that they are deriued of Françus or Françion, son to Hector, according as we haue already declared. Now, to answere all these recited opinions, and to begin with the word Ferocitie, as deriued
of the adiectiue Ferox,The French wold haue their name deriued of Ferocitie. and whereof some great e∣stimulation is made: There is no apparance at al, that they shoulde deriue their name from thence, this Etymologie being but puld in by the eares, and so farre off from the name of Francs, as there néeds no other reason to obiect against it, but the very spacious distance betwéene these two words Ferocitie and Francois, considering withal, that all Authors haue described the French, to be men milde, courteous and affable, and not fierce, stern or cruell. As for the other reason, the best recey∣ued of them, that striues to make vs beléeue, that they are issued of Francus or Francion, the son of Hector: It is most certain, that there neuer was any such Francus or Francion son to Hector, be∣cause Hector had but one son,Hector had no son but Astianax. named Astianax, who at the surprizail of Troy, was thrown by the Greeks from a very high Tower, to the end, that no one of the Troyans race might remaine, to re∣uenge (vpon the Greekes) the sacke of Troy. And to say,Franchise and Immu∣nitie. that the Etymology of the name of Francs came from the franchise and immunity, which was giuen vnto them by the Emperor Valenti∣nian: It hath no likelyhood of reason, because they were called so before Valentinian was borne. Now, albeit that the name of franchise, comes néerest to that of Francs: yet cannot that deriua∣tion be receiued for authentical, because the name of this Nation is more auncient (by more then a thousande yeares) then the worde of franchise, which is but a new coynde word in respect of the other, and which, by Frenchmen (louers of their
owne language) hath bin allowed to signifie the said liberty. ¶ The Election of Pharamond, who was the first King of France, how he was elected for his Vertues and Heroyick actions only. The Francs gaue ayde to the Emperor Valentini∣an, and (by that occasion) were exempted from paying Tribute for ten yeares. In like manner, what Ceremonies were aunciently obserued, in election of their Kings; and of the Salique Law. THe Francs, Francions, or Fran∣cons (of whose aduentures and Etymologie wee haue amplie dis∣coursed) hauing after many pere∣grinations, Voyages,The Francs builded a Citty neere to the Palus Maeotides. and Tra∣uerses, made choise of their abiding at Paulus Maeotides: very néere thereunto, and (according to the opinion of the most common and receiued) they builded a Citty, where they inhabited vntill the time of the Emperor Valentinian, whom they valiantly assisted against the Alaines, that had rebelled against the Emperor and the Romaine Empire. In recompence of which good succour & seruice, the Emperor discharged them (for tenne yeares space) from paying the ordinary Tribute, which they owed to the Romains: yet ordering, that (at expyrarion of such time) they shoulde re∣turne to their former seruitude. The ten yeares being expyred, constraint came for repayment of
the Tribute: But they (féeling ye swéetnes of such an immunity▪ & desirous to reduce to a perpetuall priuiledge, that which the Emperour had but in grace graunted) in pride and presumption re∣plyed, that they purposed no longer paiment of any thing: but, since with price of theyr bloude, and no meane daunger of their lines, they had fréely bought and purchased their fréedome: they were not so weakely aduised, to forgoe (at so cheape a Market) that which had cost them so deare. The Emperour displeased with this their re∣fusall, brought a great Armie against them, and foyling them in the fight, expelled them from their dwelling:The Francs foyled by the Empe∣ror, chuse a Captaine named Mar¦comir. So that they were enforced to assemble themselues, vnder the conduct of a chiefe Captaine amongest them, named Marcomir or Marcmeier, which (in the olde Franc Language) signifieth a Gouernour of they Country. Thus they withdrewe them-selues into a Prouince of Germanie (at this present called Allemaigne) where they inhabited, and after their own name, called the Prouince of their abiding, Franconia. There are some Authors, who will not auouch, that the Emperour Valentinian did vanquishe them, because (in verie trueth) there is no such matter founde in any verye auncient Writer. Contrary-wie, Amianus Marcellinus, an olde and true Historiographer, sayeth, That when as Valentinian was in Italie,The words of Amianus Marcellinus he receyued tydings, that great Brittaine (now named England) was then ouer-runne and spoyled) by the Pictes
and Scottes; And likewise, that a great number of the Francs, as also of the Saxons, did ouer∣spreade Gaule. But common Opinion houl∣deth, that the Francs woulde not pay the Tri∣bute, after tenne yeares were expyred, and that beeing, thereuppon, ouercome by the Em∣perour Valentinian; they were (as alreadye hath béene sayde) expulsed from theyr abiding, and compelled to saue them-selues in the sayde Prouince. Being there seated, they grewe desirous,They chuse an order of gouerment among thē. to choose and establishe a manner of Gouerning their Estate, whereby ensued manie conten∣tions among them. For, some woulde haue it brought into a Monarchie, which is the Go∣uernement of one Prince onely: And others, into an Aristocratie, which is to bee gouerned by a certaine number of Wise and discréete per∣sonnes. Héereuppon, in a publlque assemblie made,The aduise of Chara∣mond, con∣cerning the election of Pharamond on this occasion, one among them, named Chara∣mond, made a verie eloquent Oration in the behalfe of Monarchie, and his maine scope ay∣med; that they shoulde elect for their King and Prince, Pharamond, a man iust, verie deuoute, of good sorte, and valiaunt▪ qualities necessa∣rilie requyred to bee in a Prince. Moreouer, hee added, that if hee shoulde doo anie thing, vnfitting for a King and Prince: it was a very easie matter for them, to take away from him the administration of his Kingdome and Gouernement, because people were before
Kings and made them their Rulers. Nor can I be perswaded, quoth he, that the man now to be elected, will any way fall into Tiranny, or raise vs in any disobedience towardes him, in regard of the vertuous qualities wherewith he is endu∣ed: And from him may we well expect, all such Iustice, kindnesse, care, and assistaunce, as Sub∣iects can hope for in their Prince, his actions & behauiour of life being so wel knowne vnto vs. He is Sonne to this woorthy Captaine Marco∣mir, who so wisely and happily hath brought vs hither, who so securely hath heere established vs, and who so valiantly sheelded vs from the Romaines threatnings; when (by inequality of our power to theyrs) wee were compelled to forsake the Palus Maeotides. Wee are then much obliged to Pharamond, in memory of his Fathers weighty merites: And these two e∣speciall reasons shoulde mooue vs to receyue him as our King, and preferre him (before all other) to that dignity; euen as wee ought to aduance Monarchy before Aristocratie, where∣unto I know some among vs will encline, with∣out fore-seeing the harmes that will befall vs, if we embrace it. For, if wee consider our aunci∣ent manner of life, it hath beene to obey one, and not many, in which regarde, me-thinkes, that the first thing, which ought to be respe∣cted in the establishing of an Estate, is the humour of the Inhabitantes, and to consider, of what commaund or gouernement they are most capeable, to wit; of Monarchie alone, or
many-headed Aristocratie. Thus spake Charamond, and then manie contrarieties were mooued among them, about diuersitie of Opinions. Whereupon, Prince Charamond beganne agayne another most ex∣cellent Oration, maintaining his former spée∣ches againste Quadrek, a great Prince like∣wise, who defended the contrarie, saying:Quadrek his opposi∣tion against Charamond That Kingdomes gouerned by many Princes, were more peaceable, and better pollicied, then to be subiects to one king onely. After all these disputes (long debated on eyther side) the Francs (who were more cape∣able to liue vnder a Monarchie, then a pub∣licke commaunde, because they were men free,The electi∣on of King Pharamond most hardie, and couragious) by common con∣sent, elected King Pharamond, and according to their custome, placing him vppon a Pauois, lifted him vppon the Shoulders of men, and so walked with him thrée times about the place of their méeting, proclaiming him theyr King. This was in the yeare of the Worldes creation, 438. And of Iesus Christ▪ 420. Or after others, foure hundred twenty six, or four hundred twen∣ty and seauen. Some say, that he was the Sonne of Marco∣mir, yet others say no. His name was Pharamōd or Waramond, which in the ancient Franc Lan∣guage, signifyeth a man of truth. And wee may well conceiue, that his name and Nature were correspondent, and that he was a vertuous per∣sonage: considering they chose him for their king,
after such a great contention, and withall, that such as desire to liue vnder a Monarchy, and to haue one King: will haue him to be a good man, which is the onely felicitie that can come to any Estate, when a Prince is furnished with inte∣gritie and trueth, and all other Vertues commen∣dable in a Prince: Euen as contrariwise, it can sustaine no greater mischiefe, then to be subiected to barbarousnesse, and Iniustice of a cruell Ty∣rant. All the truest Histories doo agrée, that Pha∣ramond was the firste King of the Francs or Francons,Pharamond first King of the Francs or Franco∣nians. in Franconia a Prouince of Germa∣nie: but they speake not of his passage into Gaule, for hee was neuer there. And the first of them that euer went thither, was Clo∣dion the Hayrie,Clodion was the first that entred into Gaule. Sonne (according to some) of the fore-named Pharamond. Nor came he also thither (but as wee vse to say) to bidde the Countrey Good morrow: For hee was repulsed, chased, and compelled to returne thence. And hee, that (of the two Nations of the Francones and Gaules) made them but one, reducing them into one bodye: was Meroneus, the Sonne of Clodion, as shall bee after declared in his due place. Pharamond liued onelye on the Bankes of Rhine, without passing anye further thence: it contented him to bring his people onely thither, to sounde, not the foord, but the fortune of passage into Gaule. Beeing chosen King, hee conceiued, that the verie strongest bonde, which bindes and shuttes
vp anie State for longest continuance, is the Constitution of Lawes: which are nothing else, but a reason planted in Nature, com∣mending honest occasions, and prohibiting their contraries. Beside that, they had neuer béene made by Lawe-Makers, but for the conseruati∣on of States, Empyres, Kingdomes, Seigneu∣ries, Citties, and theyr Inhabitantes. And be∣cause long Warres, as also their so recent and late foyle, had brought his people vnto some good forme of obedience: hee concluded to make new Lawes, which might cause them to liue vnder certaine Rules of pollicy, considering,Pharamond deuiseth Lawes for his people, with con∣sent of his Lords. that as hardlie can a people liue without Lawes, as the body without members. For the better establishing of these newe Lawes, hee vsed the aduise of foure his chee∣fest Barons, euen those of woorthiest merrite amongest all his Lordes, to whome some doo giue these Names Vridogast, Sagobast, Vri∣sogast, and Bosogast. Hee likewise deuised certaine Lawes,Lawes Sa∣liques or Ripuaries. which hee tearmed Saliques and Ripuaries, the Chapters whereof are yet to bee seene, which doo not speake any thing of the generall right of his Kingdomes, but con∣cerning the particular right of euerie one, especi∣ally in the Article of Succession. From whence our French Nation hath deriued the Lawe Sa∣lique, speaking of the succession of the Realme of France, the institution whereof, they attribute to Pharamond. Against which Iudgement, wee will not
oppose our selues any way, onely we say, by the testimony of truest Histories, there is not found any but this Salique Law, which the French doe boldely affirme to bee made by Pharamond. Yet such as labour to haue vs beléeue this opini∣on, doe scarcely know howe the Kingdomes of Barbarians, and their Kinges gouerned: Albeit it was a custome obserued among Barbarous Nations,A custome among bar∣barous Na∣tions. that their Daughters should neuer suc∣céede in the Crownes of their Kingdomes. Also, in the raigne of Pharamond, the third generall Councell of Ephesus was holden, against Ne∣storius Byshop of Constantinople; & the fourth Schisme came into the Church.Especiall maters hap∣pening in the time of Pharamond Saint Hierome and Saint Augustine died, the one aged ninetie one yeares, and the other seuenty six, after they had long time gouerned their Churches: And then began Christian Religion to flourish, by the holy and painefull writings of many Doctours. This is all that can be saide of Pharamond, first King of the Francs, or Franconians, who after∣ward were called French-men: And hee, after he had raigned ten, or (according to some others) eleauen yeares, died in Anno Dom. 431. Our Historyes haue not giuen him any Wie, albe∣it some say, that Clodion his Successor was his Sonne. 4312 Clodion, second King of the Francs, Fran∣conians,Clodion sirnamed Hayrie, for wearing long hayre, and a beard in signe of liberty. or French, succeeded his Father Phara∣mond, in the yeare of grace 431. He was sir-na∣med Clodion the Hairy, because hee wore his Beard and Haire long, ordaining the French to
weare the like, in signe of liberty: because the Romaines vsed to poule and shaue all such as they subdued, in signe of seruitude, and this fa∣shion of wearing long haire continued in France, vntill the time of Peter Lombard, in the raigne of Lewes the younger, fourth King of that name. Clodion perceiuing the Romaines to war weak, by Warres which they maintained against the Vrisigotes, and loath to loose occasion for enlar∣ging his Kingdome: leuied a mighty Army,The deedes of Clodion for enlar∣ging his Kingdome. sub∣dued the Thuringians or Lorraignes, took Cam∣bray by assault, putting all the Romaines to the Sword that were therein, and vanquished their Army néere to the Riuer of Rhine. Then passing the Forrest Charbonniere, hee tooke Tournay; and pursuing his purpose, for dilation of his Confines, he went into France, conquering Bur∣gundy, Tholouse, Angolesme and all Aquitain. Clodion hauing raigned twenty yeares, died in An. 449. 3 Meroneus, third King of the French,450 suc∣céeded Clodion as his Sonne, or néerest Kins∣man, Anno 450. Tritemius writeth, that he was Sonne to Clodion, but it is not found to bee so in the Histories of France. In him the genera∣tion of the Kings of Fraunce tooke beginning, which endured vntill King Pepin,The begin∣ning of the Kinges of France in generation. the Sonne of Charles Martell. Meroneus (like vnto his Pre∣decessors) was a Pagan; yet very bold and cou∣ragious in warre, as he declared by many fough∣ten battailes, wherein hee was continually pre∣sent. In his time, Attila King of the Hunnes or
Hungares (who tearmed himselfe Flagellum Dei) leuyed an Army of fiue hundred thousand Men, and came into the Countrey of Gaule; where he spoyled Coulongue and Treues, with many Castles scituated on the Rhine.Attila with his Hunnes inuaded Gaule. Hee tra∣uersed Fraunce also, where hée wasted Amiens, Beauuais, Chaalons, Troys and Rheimes, bring∣ing his siedge before Orleaunce. Meroneus sée∣ing Fraunce so much oppressed (with the helpe of Aetius, Lieutenant Generall in Gaule for the Armie of Theodosius the younger, Emperour of Rome, and of Theodorick King of the Vuise∣gothes) gaue him a strong battaile in the Ca∣talaunique Fieldes (which is sayde to be néere to Chaalons in Champaigne) in which fight, were slaine about two hundred thousand Men of Warre,The ight of Attila out of Oval. as well on the one side as the other▪ Attila beholding his Men in disorder, and that he could not call them backe againe as he would: was enforced to retire home to Hungarie, where he could neuer after re-assemble them of that com∣pany. This battaile was fought in the yeare 452. Others say, it was in the twenty seuenth year of the Empire of Valentinian the third. Meroneus hauing his hopes much more highly aduaunced. by such a great and glorious victory: tooke the Citties of Sens, Paris, and a great part of Gaule, not finding any to offer him resistance. So that thence forward, the Countrey which before has beene tearmed Gaule, began euen then to be cal∣led France.
He caused one of his Sonnes to be throwne into a Fire,When Gaul began to be cald Franc because hee hadde slaine the King of Cornewall, who came in courtesie to bée merrie with him; Cornewall béeing then tributarie to France, as some haue reported, who also doe en∣title Meroneus to be the first king of the French, and all his Race the Merouingians. Hee dyed in the tenth yeare of his raigne (after hee hadde very much enlarged his Kingdome) in Anno Domini. 472. Or, according to others, 459. 4 Childerick, or, as some tearme him,460 Chil∣perick, Sonne to Moroneus, succéeded him in the year 460. The great luxurie,The incon∣tinent life of Childerick. and bad life which he led, in the beginning of his raign, abusing the Wiues and Daughters of many worthy Lords, begot him such indignation and hatred among thē; that they purposing to surprize him, he was faigne to saue himselfe by flight to Basinus, king of Thuringe, now called Lorraigne. This did he by the councell of a friend of his, named Vido∣marck, who (as a secret token betwéene them) breaking a Ring of Gold, gaue him the one halfe: coniuring him, to giue no faith (for his returne) but to him that should bring him that other halfe. The French elected (in his place) a Lieutenant of the Romaines, named Gillon, who held Sois∣sons, and laide such heauy exactions on euery man, exercising also such cruelties on the Prin∣ces of France: that (in the 8. yeare) hée was ex∣pelled, and Childerick againe restored, wholly by the meanes of Vidomarch.
Childerick pursued Gillon his Enemy, and had great victories and conquestes against him. Hee fought a battaile also néere to Orleaunce, a∣gainst Andoacre, who was Duke of the Saxons. Hee enlarged his Kingdome along the Riuer of Loyre, so far as Angeirs. One great and irrepa∣rable errour he committed, for breaking the right of Hospitality,Childebert wronged his dearest frend with Basinus King of Thuringe, (who had receiued, and relieued him in the chie∣fest of his aduersity) he caried away with him his wife Basina, by whom he had a Son called Clo∣uis. He died in An. 485. the 26. of his raigne. The first Christian K. of France.5 Clouis, first King Christian, and fift King of France, succéeded his Father in the year of our saluation 485. He married Clotilda, Sister to the Duke of Burgundy. He made warre vppon Siagrius, the Sonne of Gillon, Lieutenant to the Romaines, who held Soissons, and som other parts of Belgick Gaule: from whence hée expul∣sed him, and made him fly to Tholouze, to Ala∣ic King of the Vuisegoths; who betrayed him, and sending back to Clouis,The Ro∣maines Do∣minion en∣ded in France. he had his head smit∣ten off. So the Romaines, being partly fled, and partly slaine; held no longer dominion in France. Hauing likewise vanquished King Basinus, hee bdued Thuringe, now called Lorraigne: and amplified the kingdom, euen from ye Rhine, so far as Seine, extending her limits to the riuer Loyre. The Quéene his Wife did often times sollicite him to become a Christian, whereto he would by no means listen: til being in a hot conflict against the Allemaignes (who descended in great com∣panies,
to driue the French out of Gaule) and desparing of the battaile;How Clouis conuerted and becam a Christian, by means of his Queene. hee thought vppon the God of Clotilda his Quéene, promising, that he would be a Christian, if that day he obtayned the victory. It pleased God to grant it him, and hée was Baptized at his returne in the Cittie of Rheimes by Remy Arch-Byshoppe of the sayde place, with his two Sisters, and more then thrée thousand of the Nobility. The sacred Oyle was poured on his head, euen in his Baptisme, and all his successours (at their Coronations) haue in like manner béene sacred. Clouis changed his former Coate of Armes, taking thrée Golden Floure-de-luces, in a fielde Azure: where-with hée first warred vppon Gondebant King of Bur∣gundy, who was Vnckle to his Wife, and dis∣comfited the Vuisegothes before Poictiers, ha∣uing slaine (with his owne hand) Alaric theyr King, and wonne from them the Countrey of Aquitaine, so farre as the Pyrenean Moun∣taines, and almost all Gaule and Allemaigne.The Empe∣rour sent Clouis a Crowne of Gold. Héereuppon, the Emperour Anastasius sent him a Crowne of Golde, with th Title and vesture of Patritius and Consull. He made a choyse of Paris for his ordinarie abyding, and commaun∣ded it to bée the chéefe Cittie of his Kingdome: where he dyed in Anno 514. béeing aged eyghty yeares. And was buryed in the Church of S. Geneuiefue du mont de Paris, which him∣selfe had founded, in memory of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, leauing four Sons and two daugh∣ters.
515.6 Childebert succéeded his Father Clouis, in the yeare fiue hundred fiftéene, but not in the whole kingdome;Foure kings raigning to∣gether in France. For he leauing foure Sonnes liuing, it was deuided into foure partes among them, and each one was King of his seuerall portion. Childebert hadde for his part Paris, where hée held his Seate royall, with other de∣pendaunces, as Poictu, Maine, Touraine, Champaigne, Aniou, Guienne, and Auuergne. Clothaire was King of Soissons; Clodomire King of Orleaunce; and Theodorick the Ba∣stard, béeing the eldest, was King of Metz. They made Warre by the procurement of Clo∣tilda their Mother, on Sigismond King of Bur∣gundy; who was slaine (with his Wife & Child) by Clodomire king of Orleaunce: who likewise (in another battaile) was kild himselfe by Gon∣demar, vnder a feigned pretence of friendshippe: but for this (in the end) Burgundy was taken and destroied.Clothaire & Childebert warre in Spaine. Clothaire assisted by Childebert, possessed himselfe of the Kingdom of Orleaunce, and slew his Nephewes. Clothaire and Childe∣bert had great wars together, which in the ende was accorded; and they passed with their armies into Spaine against Almarick, who vsed their Sister very hardly, because she would not bee an Arrian: And killing him in the battaile, they brought her backe with them into France. Hée raigned 45. yeares, and dyed without any Chil∣dren: hee lieth buried at S. Germaine des Prez, which he founded by the name of S. Vincent. 5597 Clothaire, the Sonne of Clouis, succée∣ded
his Brother Childebert, in the yeare 559. or as some say, 560. hee had before béene King of Soyssons fortie fiue yeares, and suruiued all his Brethren and their Children; so that (at length) he remained sole-king of France. He was luxuri∣ous, and cruell in the death of his two Nephews, Children to Clodomire King of Orleaunce. He likewise (with much disgrace) vpon a Good-Fri∣day, slewe Gauliter d'Yuetot in a Church: For reparation of which wrong, he aduanced or erec∣ted the Land of Yuetot (which is in Normandy) into a kingdome, to the heires of the said Gaulti∣er.Clothaire Sole-Mo∣narch of the Gaules. Clothaire séeing himselfe Sole-Monarch of the Gaules; would néedes leuy the third part of the Churches reuennewes: Against which the Arch-bishop of Tours made resistance, telling the King boldly, that the reuennewes of the Church, were the goods of the poore. He lost a battaile a∣gainst the Saxons and Thuringians, because hee would not take them to mercie, and suffer them to depart with their liues saued. Hee ouer∣came (in warre) Cran his Bastard Sonne, who rose in armes against him, causing him, his wife and Children to be burned: hauing also formerly slaine the Duke of Bretaigne, whom he had cau∣sed to reuoult. Hee raigned 51. yeares; dyed at Compeigne, and lieth buryed at S. Medard de Soyssons. Anno 567. 8 Cherebert or Aribert,567 succéeded his Fa∣ther Clothaire, in the yeare 567. Paris fell to him by partage. He was very vnchast of life,Cherebert an vnchast King. & repudi∣ated his Wife, to entertaine two of her waigh∣ting
women: for which Germaine Byshoppe of Paris excommunicated him. Hee raigned nine yeares, died without any heires: And lieth buried at Saynt Romaine néere Blaye in Gas∣coigne. 1579 Chilperick, succéeded his Brother Chere∣bert, in the year 577. hauing before raigned nine yeares King of Soissons. He had thrée wiues, the first whereof he diuorced from him, compelling her to enter into Religion. The second, beeing named Audoüera,Fredegond Concubine to Chilpe∣rick. he banished. And the thyrde, called Athanagilde, he caused to be strangled in her bedde. All which was done by the procure∣ment of Fredegonde, his Concubine, whom hée then married, and had a Sonne by her, named Clothaire. His Brethren warred againste him for his inhumanities, and woulde haue de∣posed him: but in the ende, they were pacifyed. Chilperick perceiuing his Brother Sigibert, king of Metz, to be much molested by the Allemaigns, tooke many Citties from him: whereat Sigibert being iustly offended, neuer ceased, till (by the helpe of Gontran) hee recouered all that was ta∣ken from him, pursuing him still in such sort, that Theodebert his Son was slaine, and hee glad to saue himselse in Iournay, where Sigibert besie∣ged him. Sigibert was slaine in his Tent, by two Traitors hyred thereto by Fredegonde. In short while after, Fredegonde knowing that the king had noted ouermuch familiarity,Fedegonde caused the King to bee murdered. betwéene her and Landry (Maire of the Pallace) her adul∣terer: she caused the king to be murdered by the
said Landry, at Chelles néere Paris, as hee retur∣ned somewhat late one night from hunting, ha∣uing raigned in all 23. years, and lieth buried at S. Germaine des Prez. 10 In the year, 587.587 Clothaire, second of that name, the son of Chilperick & Fredegonde, (be∣ing but foure months old) was acknowledged for Legitimate, and made king, vnder the gouerne∣ment of Gontran King of Orleans his Vnckle, who made Landry (Maire of the Pallace) Tutor to the young King, and because he should bee no∣rished with his Mother Fredegonde.Childebert seeketh to reuenge his fathers death. Childebert King of Metz, endeuoured by Armes to get the gouernment of the kingdome, and (as much as in him lay) to haue Fredegonde punished, for the death of his Father Sigibert, and of his Vnckle Chilperik, whom she had caused to be both mur∣dered. Gontran appeased him by making hym his heire: yet notwithstanding, in short while af∣ter he began war againe, against which Landry with Fredegonde (who was a woman of admi∣red courage) opposed themselues.Fredegonde a woman of great spirit. And she (to im∣bolden the French) carried the young king hir son in her armes, walking so with him thorough the thickest of the battell, and shewing him vnto the soldiors, she would say: Fight for your younge King, and defend his kingdom: by which means Sigibert was foiled, and driuen to flight. Brune∣hault,Brunehault executed. hauing put to death many children of the bloud Royall, was deliuered to Clothaire, who caused her to be torne with four horses. He reuen∣ged himselfe on the Saxons, leauing no male child
aliue that was taller then his sword. He raigned 44. yeares, and lyeth buried at S. Germaine des Pres. 631.11 Dagobert, first of that name, succéeded his Father Clothaire, in the yeare, 631. he gaue to his brother Aribert, the kingdom of Aquitaine in partage, which returned to him againe, by surui∣uing his saide Brother. Dagobert was in great peril of death, in the life time of his father, because he had cut off his schoolmaisters beard, and caused him to bee grieuously beaten:The build∣ing of the Church of S. Denis. but miraculously he auoyded the anger of his father, whereupon he builded the Church of S. Denis in France, which he inriched with treasures taken from other chur∣ches, especially that of Poictiers, and graunted them also the Fayre of Lendit. Hee was the first that gaue any patrimony of the Crown to Chur∣ches. He conquered the Sclauonians, who were then Idolaters, and quieted the Gascoignes that had rebeld against him, compelling also the King of Bretaigne to do him homage. It is said, that be∣ing much addicted to pleasure, he would train af∣ter him a troupe of gallant maidens, apparrelled like to Quéenes.Iewes bani∣shed out of France. By a perpetuall Edict, hee bani∣shed all Iewes out of France, that would not bée baptised. During his raigne, Mahomet the false Prophet, a natiue of Arabia, began to shew him∣selfe. He raigned sixtéene yeares, died of a Flux in his belly at Espinay, and lieth buried at Saint Denis, which hee instituted as a Sepulchre for Kings. 64512 Clouis, second of that name, succéeded his
Father Dagobert, in the yeare of mans saluati∣on, 645. He had but one bastard Brother, named Sigibert, who in the life time of his father Dago∣bert was prouided of the Kingdome of Austrasia, and raigned there but eleauen yeares, leauing a Sonne, whom hee dearely re-commended vnto Grimoald, Maire of his Pallace. But he,The trea∣chery of Grimoald Maire of the Pallace. insted of aduancing him in his right, caused him to bee shauen, and sent vnto a Monastery in Scotland, making his owne sonne Hildebert King of Au∣strasia. Clouis hearing this wicked act, within two yeares after, caused Grimoald to bee put to death,Clouis sole Monarch of the Gaules. and expulsed Hildebert out of the King∣dome: by which meanes, Clouis remained sole Monarch of the Gaules. He had by his wife Bau∣done (a Lady of Saxonie) thrée Sons, who were all Kings each aftr other. In his time there hap∣ned in Fraunce such scarsity of victuals, and con∣sequently such an extreame famine, that Clouis, to redresse it, took from the Church of S. Denis, the siluer couertures about the Relicks and roofe,The care of Clouis for feeding the poore. and other treasures (wherewith his father Dagobert had enriched it, to féede the poore in so great a mi∣sery, exempting thereto (in recompence) the iuris∣diction of the Bishop of Paris. He went to Ierusa∣lem, and there warred against the Infidels. He raigned sixtéene yeares, and dying, was buried at S. Denis. 13 In the yeare, 663.663 Clothaire, thirde of that name, succéeded after his father Clouis. Kinges (in those times) were so carelesse of maintai∣ning their Maiestie Royall, that they suffered
themselues to be gouerned by the Maires of their Pallace, who had charge of all their publicke af∣faires, while they (in meane space) gaue them∣selues wholly to voluptuousnesse.The Maires of the Pals lace ouer∣rule the Kings. These Maires héereby tooke such authority vpon them, that the king was but as their vassaile, and him woulde they kéepe in some Castle, or other place of plea∣sure, neuer shewing him to the people, but one∣ly once in a yeare, the first day of May, and then it was done with great pompe, and Royall mag∣nificence, mounted in a triumphall Chariot, and the people that tooke pleasure in such sights, wold salute him onely with loud acclamations. This course continued till Pepin le Bref, which was al∣most an hundred yeares. During the raygne of such Kings, Paris and Normandie was all their largest demaines: the rest of Oule being diuor∣ced as it were from the Kings Soueraigne prero∣gatiue, was in the possession of many Princes, making themselues Dukes and Earles in theyr seuerall iurisdiction. He lieth buried at Chelles néere Paris, dying in the yeare, 666. and fourth of his raigne. Hee did not any thing deseruing to be written, but onely kept his subiects in peace: For Ebroin was so terrible (he being then Maire and Gouernor) as neither the princes of France, or any other Straungers, durst attempt to rayse Warre against him. The honor both of kings and Kingdome, died with Clothaire, for the Maires of the Pallace, pretending to guard the rightes of the Crowne; beganne (each one tho∣rowe his owne auarice) to debate the Gouerne∣ment
of publicke affaires, as formerly hath béene declared. 14 Childerick, second of that name,666 and sonne of Dagobert, succéeded his Brother Clothaire, in the yeare, 666. being receiued by the French, in hatred of Theodorick: who (by the perswasi∣on of Ebroine) was crowned King, but after∣ward shauen, and put into S. Denis Monastery, as Ebroine himselfe was at Lucon in Burgun∣die. His insolencies and cruelties,Childerick was slaine in hunting, and his Q. also. hastened his tragicall ending, being slaine as he was hunting with his wife Blitilda great with childe, by one named Bodille, a Gentleman of Franconia, whō he had caused to be cruelly beaten. He raigned 12 yeares, and is buryed at S. Germain des Pres. 15 Theodorick, first of that name,680 Sonne also to Dagobert, and Brother to Childerick, was againe made king in the year, 680. He, after the death of Cothaire the third, raigned a yeare and more, before Childerick, albeit he was the youn∣ger Brother, onely by the meanes of Ebroine, Maire of the Pallace. But in regard of his badde gouernment, he was shut vp in a Monastery, and so was Ebroin Maire of the Pallace, whose cru∣elties the French could not endure. But Childe∣rick and his Quéen being murdered in hunting, he was fetcht forth of the Monastery, and aduan∣ced againe to the dignity Royall, in the yeare be∣fore expressed: And then was Landresill, the son of Archambauld, made Maire of his Pallace.Landresill murdered by Ebroin. But Ebroin (forsaking his Cloister, got a great Army together, & won the victory against them;
killing Landresill by Treason, and taking the King and kingdome into his owne gouernment, reuenging himselfe, without sparing any. Hee ouercame Pepin and Martine, Brothers to the Duke of Austrasia, and (contrary to his faithfull promise) killed the saide Martine: himselfe also being after slaine (in the night time) by Herman∣froy,Pepin He∣ristel Maire of the Pal∣lace. Count of the same country. Pepin Heristell was then made Maire of the Pallace, who carri∣ed himselfe valiantly in his Office, and greatlie augmented the kingdome. This King Theodorick, whom some doo call Thierry, hauing raigned xix. yeares, died in An∣no 693. leauing two sons by his wife Clotilda, Clouis who was king after him, and Childebert. During the raigns of these two precedent kings, the greatnesse of Royal Maiesty (which ought to be in Kings) did ouer-much obscure it selfe: & the Church of Rauenna (dissenting from the Romain Church) was yet by meanes of Pope Donus, drawne to voluntary conformity, which greatlie encreased the Cleargies honour, and their digni∣ties, so that the Romain Church much augmen∣ted it selfe. 694.16 Clouis, third of that name, and eldest sonne to Theodorick, entred into possession of the Roy∣altie,The woor∣thy deeds of Pepin He∣ristell. being verie yong in years, An. 694. In his time, Pepin Heristell, Maire of the Pallace, pas∣sed the Rhine with a puissant Army, subduing ye Saxons and Sueuians, who had reuolted from obedience, by reason of some troubles happening in France. Hee also conquered the Frisons with
their Duke, and made them to receiue the Chri∣stian faith. He raigned foure yeares, and his bu∣riall is not recorded. 17 Childebert, second of that name, succéeded his Brother Clouis, in the yeare, 698.698 Of his déeds there is little set downe in writing, for Pe∣pin Heristell (Maire of the Pallace) ruled then the whole kingdome, and mannaged all the af∣fayres of Fraunce at his pleasure.The power and autho∣rity of Pe∣pin Heristel He heard Am∣bassadors, and gaue them aunswere, according peace or truce, as to himselfe séemed best. In these raignes, the Maires of the Pallace held such au∣thority, as it was not lawful for any to contradict them. And yet Lambert, Bish. of Vtrecht (whom Pepin had reuoked from bannishment) notwith∣standing al his power, did not forbeare to reproue his adultry: but it cost him his life, for hee was slaine by Dodon, brother to his concubine. Pepin made his own son Grimoald, Mair of the palace, in which office he was soone after slaine.Charles Martell Ba∣stard sonne to Pepin Heristell. Then he made his bastard son, called Charls Martel, duke of Austrasia, and Maire of the pallace. Pepin died in the 17. year of his gouernment, as Maire of ye Pallace: And Plectrude his wife, being desirous to rule, with her young sonne Thibaulte, caused Charles Martel to be imprisoned at Colougne. Childebert die, hauing raigned 18. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Stephens of Naucy, as some haue supposed that his brother Clouis doth also. 18 Dagobert, second of that name, succéeded his father Childebert, in the yeare 716.716. He was go∣uerned by Plectrude, widdow to Pepin Heristel,
and by Thibaulte, Sonne to his sonne Drogon. Some French men Crowned (as their King) one named Daniell, or Chilperick, hauing the Counte Hermanfroy,Hermanfroy Maire of the Pallace. Maire of the Pallace, that had slaine the cruell Ebroine. Charles Martell was still kept Prisoner at Coulongue, by Plec∣trude, who hindred him (by that meanes) from enioying his Dukedome of Austrasia. Thibault the youngest Sonne of Plectrude, aspyring to bee Sole-Maire of the Pallace, as also to expell Hermanfroy, and his King Chilperick; raysed an Army against them: But Hermanfroy with∣stood him so couragiously, néere to the Forrest Charboniere,Hermanfroy preuailed a∣gainst Thi∣baulte. that Thibaulte was glad to fly, with losse of his people. By this meanes, Her∣manfroy (like a Conqueror) supported the raign of Chilperick, vntill that Charles Martell was escaped out of Prison. Dagobert raigned foure years, leauing two Sons; who, by the factions of diuers Princes (affecting the gouernment) were made Monkes. 72019 Clothaire, fourth of that name, was king in Anno. 720. After that Charles Martell had es∣caped out of Prison, wherein he had béene detai∣ned by Plectrude his Step-mother: he came pre∣sently into Fraunce with a strong Army, to re∣seaze his Lordship of Maire of the Pallace, and to exclude Chilperick (called Daniell) with duke Hermanfroy, Maire of the Pallace, who hadde made him King of France after the death of Da∣gobert the second. They encountred together, and by the ayde of the Duke of Frise; hée was
discomfited and fled. But yet his courage was not quailed, for afterward hee foiled Chilperick néere to Cambray: who hauing revnited his for∣ces, with the helpe of Eudo Duke of Aquitaine, was once more vanquished in Champaign. The Duke of Aquitaine retyring, tooke Chilpericke home with him into his Country. Hermanfroy, (called by some Rainfroy) was pursued and ta∣ken in the Cittye of Angiers, where Martell (in kindnesse) left him to finish his daies.Charls Mar¦tell maire & great Go∣uernour of France. Charles Martell hauing preuailed against all disaduanta∣ges, was receiued in Fraunce for Maire and great Gouernor. After the first victory, which he had against Chilperick; he made Clothaire the fourth King of France, whom some do tearme to be Brother, and others Vnckle to Dagobert the second. He raigned two yeares, and lieth buried at Nancy. 20 Chilperick, second of that name,722 otherwise called Daniel, hauing bin nourished young in a Monastery, had formerly raigned two yeares, before Clothayre the fourth. Charles Martell, after the death of the said Clothaire, sent for him out of Gascoigne, and acknowledging his law∣full right, caused him to be constituted King,The subtle pollicy of Charls Mar∣tell. in the yeare, 722. This did he the rather (nowe in the fresh Sun-shine of his reconfirmed power) to hold him as King in apearance onely, that he dy∣ing without issue, might leaue the Crown to his Brother. He raigned almost fiue yeares, and ly∣eth buried ot Noyon. 21 Theodorick, second of that name,727 or Thi∣erry,
as some call him, eldest sonne of Dagobert the second, was made King in the yeare, 727. Charles Martell sent to fetch him forth of a Mo∣nastery, whereinto he had bin put when he was young, and created him King, in bare Title on∣ly: For Charles Martell (beeing Maire of the Pallace) did mannage the whole businesse of the Kingdome,Charles Martel ru∣led the whol king∣dome. and carried himselfe therein with ve∣ry good credit. Thus did the Maires take such aduantage of the Kings carelesnesse, as (in the end) they expel∣led them from the Royall dignity and vsed it on∣ly for themselues. Charles Martell subdued the Saxons, and those of Bauaria, that entred into re∣bellion. Eudo Duke of Aquitain raised the Sar∣razins (who then bare great sway in Spayne) to come with him, and Warre in France, making open passage for them. They came thether, to the number of foure hundered thousand persons, with Women, Children, and Seruaunts, with purpose to inhabite the Country, wasting it al a∣long as they went.Charles Martell made a gret slaughter of the Sarra∣zins. But Charles Martell met them néere Tours, where hee vanquished and slew 350000. with very small losse of his owne followers. Afterward hee preuailed against the Frisons, and once more hee foyled the Sarrazins before Auignon, expelling them (in the ende) quite out of Fraunce. This king hauing raig∣ned fiftéene yeares, dyed, and lieth buried at S. Denis. 74122 Childerick, thirde of that name, Surna∣med the Insensible, in regard of his blockish neg∣lect
and carelesnesse, beeing likewise brought from the Monastery, succéeded his brother The∣odorick, in the yeare, 741. In which yeare, Charles Martell (Maire of the Pallace,The death of Charles Martel who left three Sonnes. and Go∣uernour of Fraunce) after many famous and woorthy victories by him obtained, dyed: and was in Royall habite interred at Saint Denis, in the ranke of Kinges, albeit hee neuer had the Name nor Title. He left thrée Sonnes, Pepin, Carloman, and Griffon. Pepin, being Maire of the Pallace, lost not a iotte of that authoritie, which his Father hadde formerly exercised ouer the Kinges: but gouerned the Realme with his Brother Carloman. Griffon, thinking himselfe not sufficiently remembered by his Father, sea∣zed Laon to himselfe, and helde it stronglie: but in the ende, hee was constrained to agree with his Bretheren. Carloman, contemning the goodes and honours of this Worlde, went to Rome to Pope Zacharie, and receiued the ha∣bite of Religion at his hands. Pepin, succée∣ding as heyre, to that which Carloman had for∣saken, and hauing the fauour of the chiefest in the Kingdome: sawe occasion smile vppon him,Pepin ma∣keth means to inioy the Kingdome. to make himselfe a King, and therefore woulde not let slippe so fayre an opportunity. Héereupon by his Ambassadors, hee gained the consent of Pope Zachary, whom hee thorowly acquainted with the pusilanimity and dissolute life of k. Chil∣derick, with other his predecessors. In like maner he layed open to him, the paines and Trauayles
of his Father and himselfe, only in defence of the Kingdome, and how it was more conuenable, that hee who attended the charge of publicke af∣faires, should likewise beare the name of king, ra∣ther then hee that waited not thereon at all, but followed his own delights and voluptuous plea∣sures, which being considered by the Pope, by the intermise of Bruchard Byshop of Bourges, and Folrad,The death of Childe∣rick and his wife. Chaplaine vnto the saide Pepin; it was ordained, that Childerick should be shauen, and sent vnto his Monastery againe, where he dyed, with Gisala his wife, hauing raigned nine years. And then was Pepin with ful consent of the No∣bility, and generall sufferages of all the people, proclaimed King of France. Heere ended the first generation of the Kinges of Fraunce, in the ligne Masculine, beeing termed the race of the Merouingians: which lasted from Pharamond to this Pepin, 331. yeares. And heere beginneth the second ge∣neration; called the race of the Carlouingi∣ans. 751PEpin, surnamed Le Bref, or Short, Son of Charls Martel, was made king of France, in the year of grace 751. hauing bin nine years Maire of the Pallace, from the raigne of Chilperick the third. This man, as well by con∣sent of Pope Zacharie, as fauour of the French Nobility (his former good gouernment also (espe∣cially
considered) was sacred King, the first of that race. Pope Stephen, who succeeded Zacharie, withdrew himselfe into France, to haue succour against Astulphus King of the Lombards. Pepin being acquainted therewith,Pepin aideth Rome a∣gainst the Lombards. tooke part with the holy sée of Rome, promising to restore that which was vsurped from it: In requitall whereof, the Pope sacred him againe, with his two Sonnes: And Pepin marching with his Armie into Italy, sent the Pope home to Rome againe, for Astul∣phus was besiedged in Pauia, and constrained to make agréement with the Pope. Pepin gaue to the Sée of Rome, the Exarchate of Rauenna, and many other Citties and Towns by him conque∣red. He had many victories against Gaiser, or Waifer, Duke of Aquitaine, who (in the ende) was slaine, and his Country conquered, in a bat∣taile which he won néere to Perigord. He subdu∣ed the Saxons,Pepin insti∣tuted the Court of parliament. who were reuolted from their al∣legeance: And he instituted the Court of Parla∣ment in France. He died at Paris, in the eygh∣teenth yeare of his raigne, leauing two Sonnes and seauen Daughters, which hee had by Ber∣tha his Wife. In his time was Robert,Robert the Deuill Sur∣named the Deuill, Sonne vnto Aubert Duke of Normandy. 24 Charles the Great, called Charlemaigne,768 son of Pepin le Bref, succéeded in the kingdome, the yeare of Grace, 768. and was Crowned at Wormes, after he had made partage with Caro∣loman his Brother, when hee had raigned 32. yeares King of France, by consent of the Clear∣gie
and Romaine people (in regarde of the great good done by him to Christendome, & the Church of Rome) he was proclaimed,Charlemain made Emp: of the west, And the first that was cal∣led most Christian King, and crowned Em∣peror of Rome, in the year, 800. vpon Christmas day, the people crying aloud thrée seuerall times: To Charls Augustus, crowned of God, the great and peaceable Emperor; life & victory. He was the first, called Most Christian King, being a man of great stature, admirable strength, eloquent in many languages, studious, affecting to heare the reading of histories, a great louer of learning and the learned, as Parls and Pisa can well witnesse. Nicephorus & he deuided the Empire, agreeing, that the one shold be called Emperor of the East, and the other of the West. He quailed the com∣motion raised in Guinne, by the procurement of his Brother Caroloman, who therefore went in a rage to Rome, and returning thence, died soone after. To please his Mother he married Theo∣dora, Sister or daughter to Didier k. of the Lom∣bardes: whom he quickly diuorced, and remar∣ried Hildegrande, Daughter vnto the Duke of Swethen, by whom he had Charles, Pepin, Le∣wes, Rotrude, Bertha, and Gilette. Hauing pa∣cified the broyles in Aquiaine, at the request of Pope Adrian, he went ino Italy against Didi∣er; whom he subdued, and so gaue ending to the Lombards kingdome,The en∣ding of the Lombards kingdome. sending the king, his wife and children into exile. He conquered the Saxons, against whom he warred thirty yeares, hauing twelue seuerall Battailes against them. He re∣pulsed the Sarrazins, that wasted Spaine, and
lost one battaile in dealing with them, wherein perrished thirtie thousand of his men: but retur∣ning on them the second time, he won a famous victory. But too true it is, that bringing his ar∣mie home into Fraunce, and passing by Ronce∣uaux; his arrieregarde was rudely assayled by the Gascoignes,The vnfor∣tunate bat∣taile of Ronceuaux and there he lost a great number of his Knights, among whome were Rowland and Oliuer. He conquered the Hnnes, Sclauo∣nians, Bauarians, and Danes; loosing his two best Sonnes, Charles and Pepin, accomplishing many déedes woorthy of memory, as well in war as peace. He founded the Vniuersities of Paris. Pauia, and Bolongne: apointing also Orders for Ecclesiasticall personnes, called Capitula Caroli Magni, and caused the Counselles of Maience, Rheimes, Tours, Chaalons, Arles & Francfort to bee holden, ordaining withall,The twelue Peeres of Fraunce. the twelue Péeres of Fraunce. Such was the raygne of this great Charles, till beeing crazed with a Feauer: hee dyed, in the sixe and fortyeth yeare of his Kingly Gouernement, the foure∣téenth yeare of his Empyre, the seauenty one of his age, and lyeth buried at Aix la Cha∣pelle. 25 Lewes,816 Surnamed the Debonnaire or méeke, succéeded his Father Charlemaigne,Great diffe∣rence be∣tweene the Sonne and Father. both in the Romaine Empyre, and Kingdom of Fraunce, but not in his Vertue and great∣nesse of courage, for hee was so Nick-named, in regarde of his ouer-much readinesse and fa∣cility, which made his authority despised, both
of his owne people and straungers, in the yeare, 816. Many debanches hapned vnder his raigne, as well on behalfe of Bernard his Nephew, king of Italy, his wife and children (whom he caused to be put to death) as also in his war against the Bretons, who would not bee brought vnder his obedience. He had thrée sonnes by his first wife, to wit; Lothaire, whom he made King of Italy, Pepin King of Aquitaine, and Lewes King of Bauiere. In second marriage, hee had Iudith, daughter to the Count of Altorfe; by whome he had Charles the Balde, who (after him) was K. of France. Hee endeuoured to reforme the ouer-great pompe and dissolutions in them of the Churche, by a Counsell holden at Aix la Cha∣pelle.The sons in Armes a∣gainst theyr father, and their vsage to him. His three first Sonnes made diuers wars vppon him, being thereto prouoked, as well by the Ecclesiastickes, as by the partage which hee had made to Charles the Balde, his yongest son. In their first attempte, they besiedged him at Compeigne, where they tooke their second mo∣ther Iudith, whom when they had shorne & vay∣led, they sent her in Religion to Poictiers; lea∣uing their Father (then) without any admini∣stration or royall charge. But afterward, beeing recouered from such seruility, and causing his wife to be brought him againe: he was so milde and méeke, that he pardoned the Rebels all their offences. A seconde time his Sonnes arose against him, and (accompanied with manie other Traytours) leuied a great Army, wherein Pope Gregory tooke part with them: and then
they compelled their Father, to come and submit himselfe to their mercy, bereauing him of his im∣periall Ornaments, and giuing him the habite of a Monke, they caused him to be strictly guarded in the Abbey of Saint Medard de Soissons. His Wife they sent as an exile into Italy, and his Sonne Charles (as a Prisoner) to Prouence. The Lordes of Fraunce and Allemaigne, béeing vnwilling to suffer that such shame and indigni∣ty should bee done to an Emperour;The Lordes of Fraunce release their Emperour. in the follo∣wing yeare they gaue him his liberty, bringing his Wife and Son againe vnto him, & Lothaire (chéefe causer of his Fathers captiuity) was glad to fly thence into Italy. The Emperor constray∣ned his Sonnes to séeke his mercy, and then hée fréely forgaue them. At Mayence hée dyed, hauing raigned twenty sixe yeares, and was in∣terred at Metz. 26 In the yeare 843.843 Charles the Baulde, Sonne of Lewes the Méeke, was made King, by a diuision or partage made with his Brethe∣ren. Charles remained King of France, Lewes king of Germany; and Lothaire had Italy, with the Empire, Prouence and Austrasia, whereof he made a Dutchy, calling it Lorraine, after his owne name. Before the saide partage, they had a great battaile néere to Auxerre; wherein al∣most all the Nobility of France lost their liues.The Nor∣mans be∣came Mai∣sters (al∣most) of all France. Which was the cause that the Normans (who were risen vnder conduct of two valiant leaders) were become Maisters well-néere of all France; but in the ende, they were expelled by the King,
who was rowned Emperour by Pope Iohn, af∣ter the decease of his Nephew Lewes, the Son of Lothaire. In this time he became very high minded, contemning the French manner of ha∣bite, an wearing the Graecian fashion, with a Dalmatian garment hanging down to his héels, beside other strange & pompous attires. Hauing raigned two yeares in the Empire, he was poy∣soned by his Phisition;K. Charles poysoned by his phisi∣tion. dying at Mantua; and buried at Verceillis, but seauen years after, his body was transported to S. Denis. He raigned in all 38. yeares. 87927 Lewes the second, sirnamed the Stutter or Stammerer, Sonne of Charles the Bauld, suc∣céeded his Father both in the Empire and King∣dome, in the yeare 879. Charles the Bauld had thrée sons, the first was named Charlon; whose eyes hee caused to bee puld out, in regard of his wicked gouernment. The second was called Charles, who dyed before him. And the third, was this Lewes, sir-named the Stammerer, be∣cause his tongue was somewhat short, and made him to falter in his spéech.The Pope escaped out of prison. Pope Iohn came into France, being escaped out of prison, because he stood against the crowning of Charles le Gros, (Sonne to Lewes of Bauaria) Emperour. He Crowned King Lewes the Stutter Emperour, which hée enioyed not long, in regard of his sicklynesse, for he dyed in the second yeare of his raigne: leauing his Wife Richeult (Sister to the King of England, and who was returned home to her Brother) great with Child of a Son,
that was afterward called Charles the Simple. He appointed as his Guardian, Odo, Sonne to the Earle of Aniou, hoping great comfort of the fruit in her Womb. Hee left also two Bastard Sons, Lewes and Carlon. During his raigne, the Normans were valiantly repulsed: hee lyeth buried at Compeigne. 28 Carlon and Lewes,881 the illegitimate sons of Lewes le Begue, were Kings after his decease,The base sons of Le∣wes made Kings. in the yeare 881. not hauing any other heire to succéed him. Some sought to giue the kingdom to Boson, King of Prouence: and others to Charls the Emperor, king of Germany. Carlon & Lewes (neuerthelesse) were crowned Kings, and carried themselues valiantly against the Normans, who (for fiue years space) made very great enterprises on France. In the battaile which they had néere to Chinon, they fought manfully vpon the riuer of Vienna; there nine thousand were slaine, be∣side them that were drowned in flight. They ex∣pelled also the fore-named Boson and Charls the Emperor, séeking to make themselues Kinges of France. These two brethren died strangely.The strange death of both the Kinges. Le∣wes, pursuing a wilde Beare with his Iaueling, was shot thorow with an arrow, which one of his traine did let fly at the beast, & so he died, in the 4. yeare of his raigne. Carlon died a yeare after, as vnluckily, for hee being one day very pleasant on horse-back, galloping after a faire Damsell, who ran (for her safety) into a small Country cottage: he (not staying his horse, nor minding the impos∣sibility of his passage) brake his necke at the doors entrance.
Now, because he was the eldest, and suruiued his Brother, the name of King is atttibuted to him, as if that he had raigned alone. They were both buried at S. Denis. 18629 Lewes the third, sirnamed Fai-neant, Do nothing, after the death of Carlon his Father, was made King in the yeare 886. This man, be∣ing altogether carelesse, albeit hee hadde a great number of men, which his Father had assem∣bled to resist the Normans (who wasted the king∣dome very much) would not vse any resistance: but like one fearefull and negligent,A dishono∣rable com∣position wt the Nor∣mans. made agrée∣ment with them, and promised to giue them 12. thousand pounds of Money yearely, till twelue yeares should bee expired. Whereuppon, the French (disdaining to bée tributary to the Nor∣mans) deposed the said Doe nothing, and made him a shauen Monke at Saint Denis. And the rather they did it, because he had taken a Nunne from Challes S. Baudour, néere Paris, & married her whether she would or no. To resist the Nor∣mans, the French sent for Charles le Gros, Em∣peror of Rome, Nephew also to Charles the bald, and him they made King. The Normans kept Paris besiedged, with forty thousand men, who were in such sort foyled, as not a man of them es∣caped aliue.A great slughter of the Nor∣mans. Neuerthelesse, to containe them in some more moderation; hee made alliance and a∣gréement with their Dukes. Which raised such strange garboiles in the Realme, so displea∣sed the people, and incensed them with such ha∣tred against him: that they expulsed him both
out of the Empire and Kingdome,Charles le Gros expul¦sed from the Empire & kingdom and hee dyed in a poore Village of Suauba, very poore and mi∣serably. Yet the fiue yeares of this raigne are at∣tributed to him and not to Lewes Doe nothing. 30 Odo, or Eudes,891 Sonne to Robert Earle of Angiers, was made King in the yeare 891. after Charles le Gros, by aduise of the Princes: albeit hee was not of the race of Charlemaigne, but onely Tutour to Charles the Simple, and he was preferred by Arnould the Emperour (suc∣cessour to Charles le Gros) who would haue had the Kingdome himselfe. During his raigne, the Normans (breaking their agréement made with Charles le Gros) began to warre againe, much more cruelly then before, and now the second time besiedged Paris: But Odo carried himselfe so vndauntedly, that he ouer-came them manie times. In this while, certaine Barons of the Realme,Charles the Simple sent for out of England, & crowned K. had sent for Charles the Simple into England, and Crowned him King of Fraunce, at the age of fouretéene yeares. Odo, who was then in Aquitaine (hardly brooking this disgrace) mooued great warre against Charles the Sim∣ple, which continued for long time. Neuerthe∣lesse, at the houre of his death, hee entreated the Princes of Fraunce, that they should restore the saide Charles to the Kingdome, because (in true right) it appertained to him. This Odo brought vp (as a noueltie) to haue a great many Floure∣de-Luces (without any direct number) in the Armes of Fraunce, which continued so till the time of Charles the sixt. He raigned nine years,
and lieth buried at S. Denis. 90031 Charles the third, sirnamed the Simple, son of Lewes le Begue, or the Stammerer, began to raigne soly in the yeare 900. After his Tutours death, who had held the kingdome in the mino∣rity of his yeares. The warre of the Normans continued stil: yet the king fel into acquaintance with Raoull, or Rollo their Duke, and gaue him his daughter in marriage, endowed with all the Land,Neustria, now na∣med Nor∣mandy. which then was called Neustria, and afterward made a dutchy, and named Norman∣dy, with especial condition, that he should be bap∣tized. Robert Earle of Paris, Brother to Odo, (lately deceased) pretended to vsurp the kingdom, and drawing many Lords into his faction, crow∣ned himselfe King. But Charles, with the ayde of the Emperour Henrie, gaue him battaile néere to Soissons, wherein the saide Robert was van∣quished and slaine. Héereat Hebert, Earle of Vermandois (his Brother in Law) was highlie displeased, yet hee dissembled it for an apt time, and one day, pretending to feast the King, he en∣treated him to lodge in his castle of Peronne. No sooner was he entred,Charles cō∣pelled to re∣signe his Kingdome. but he did shut him vp in a Tower (where hee dyed) compelling him to re∣signe the Kingdome to Raoull, Brother to the Duke of Burgundy. Hee left by Theargina his Wife, a Sonne named Lewes, who fledde for his safetie into England. This King raigned a∣lone 14. yeares, and lyeth enterred at Peronne. 92732 Raoull of Burgundy, Sonne to Richard Duke of Burgundy, was made King in the year
917. This man not being of the linage of kings, would néedes bée crowned at Soissons:Hugh the great Cout of Paris. as well by fauour of Hugh the great Earle of Paris, as also of Hebert Earle of Vermandois, who then kept King Charles the Simple Prisoner, sea∣zing his person, vnder coulour of feasting him, and constrayning him (before his death) to re∣signe his Kingdome, in presence of many Lords, and to giue it (as a frée guift) to the sayde Ra∣oull, which yéelded the greater authority to his raigne. The Quéene Theargina, wife to King Charles the Simple, séeing such troubles in France; made her retirement into England, to the King her Brother, with her Son Lewes,Lewes d' Outremer, or of be∣yond-Sea. called Lewes of beyond the Sea. Raoull made a voyage into Ita∣ly, pretending to get the Empire, which was then in strife, and there he vanquished Berengarius an Italian Prince, who laide some claime thereto. But finding himselfe not wel affected of the Ita∣lians; hee with-drew thence into France: where hee dyed of a very strange disease,Raoull died very strange lie. béeing eaten with wormes, notwithstanding all remedies ap∣plied by his Phisitions. He raigned about tenne yeares, died at Auxerre, and was buried at S. Colombe néere Sens. 33 Lewes, fourth of that name,929. sir-named Lewes d'Outre-mer, or of beyond the Sea. Son of Charles the Simple, was made K. in the yeare 929. being then in England with the K. his vnc∣kle, the Princes, Prelats, and Barons of France sent for him into England: whither his Mother
Theargina had carried him for refuge, when He∣bert had betraied King Charles her Husband; & he was crowned at Laon. The King had debate with Raoul of Burgundy, about the Kingdome, and made warre vppon the Emperour Otho for the Dutchy of Lorraine: but peace being made betwéene them, he tooke to Wife Herberge, Si∣ster to the said Emperour. At his returne home into Fraunce,Hebert Earl of Verman∣dois execu∣ted. hee caused Hebert Earle of Ver∣mandois to bee hanged, who had procured his Father to dye in Prison. Hugh, the great Earle of Paris, who then held the full sayle of the king∣dome; raised the Normans to rebell against the King: But the King drawing him to his side, he rebelled from him again, because he had made an agréement with the Normans without him, and caused them also to alter their purpose, with a fresh begunne warre: wherein the King was taken Prisoner, and carried to Rouen. After∣ward he was deliuered to the great Earle Hugh, who detained him at Laon: but the Emperour Otho came to his succour, & deliuered him. Lewes raigned twenty seauen yeares, and lieth buryed at S. Remy of Rheimes. 95634 Lothaire, Sonne of Lewes d' Outre∣mer, or of beyond the Sea, was made King in the yeare 956. At the beginning of his raigne, Hugh the great Earle of Paris gouerned all the affaires of France:The death of Hugh the great Earl of Pa∣ris. but he dyed soone after (lea∣uing thrée Sonnes, to wit, Hugh Capet, who afterward vsurped the kingdom; Otho and Hen∣ry, who were successiuely Dukes of Burgundy;)
and was sumptuously enterred at Saint Denis. Lothaire raigned 31. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Remy of Rheimes. 35 After King Lothaire, Lewes his Sonne,986 fift of that name, succéeded in the gouernment, in the yeare 986. He raigned but one yeare, died without any heire, and was the last King of the race or linage of Charles the great, his burial was at Compeigne. Charles, Duke of Lorraine,Charls duke of Lorraine seeketh to be King. (who was his Unckle and néerest Heire) hearing of his death, would néedes passe into France, to make himselfe King: But the French hated him extreamely, as well because he had continually pertaken with the Allemaignes, sworne enemies then to the French; as also, in regard hee was a bad Prince to his owne Subiectes. So that they would not receiue him for their King, but wholy ranne to Hugh Capet, then Maire of the pallace, a very wise and woorthy man. Hee perceiuing that the French fauoured and affected him, knew well enough how to sow (both in their eares and hearts) an vnliking opinion of Charles Duke of Lorrain, to make him the more hatefull to them. He first laid before them, how hee had permitted the Allemaignes frée passage,D. Charles disabled by Hugh Ca∣pet. when they came and warred on France. Next, that he had main∣tained the chéefe enemies to the crown of France, wherein hee stood guilty of high treason; And so, (by consequent) was disabled of any succession to the said Crowne.
¶ Heere endeth the second generation of the Kinges of France, in the ligne Masculine, being the race of the Carlouingians, and which continued (after Pepin) for the space of 233. yeares. 987HVgh Capet, Sonne to Hugh the great Earle of Paris, possessed himself of the Crown of France, in the yeare 987. He was (by some of the French) proclaymed King at Noyon first of al; soone after, in the Citty of Rheimes (partly by fauour, and partly perforce) Crowned King of Fraunce, and made his entrance into Paris: whereuppon, Charles Duke of Lorraine took Rheimes, Laon, and Soissons. Hugh Capet with a potent Armie besiedged Laon,D. Charles and his wife & Children surprized by treason. where hee tooke Charles with his Wife and Children, by Treason in the By∣shop of the said place, and sent them Prisoners to Orleaunce, where they were very strictly kept, and died. Capet being the Conqueror, maintai∣ned, that the kingdome should wholy appertaine to him: because Raoull of Burgundy (his vnckle) had formerly possessed himselfe thereof, by the vo∣luntary resignation of Charles the Simple. Hée caused his son Robert (who had followed his stu∣dies) to be crowned at Orleaunce, and to associate him in the kingdomes regiment: taking away the authority of the Maire of the Pallace, when thus he aduanced his son, whom he had by Adela,
daughter to Edward King of England. Hee ap∣pointed also the twelue Peeres againe; beganne the dignity & office of Constable; and established the Marshals of France. He raigned alone, & with his Son 9. yeares. He founded the Abbay of S. Magloire at Paris, and lieth buried at S. Denis. 37 Robert, the sonne of Hugh Capet, béeing Crowned King in the life time of his Father,997 be∣gan to rule alone in the yeare 997. as true inhe∣ritour, both of the Crowne, and likewise of his Fathers vertues. He raigned worthily, béeing a Man very deuout and méeke, the Kingdome continuing peaceable, and without warre.The vertues of Robert, son to Hugh Capet. This King was very wise, and could compose in La∣tine very learnedlie: for he made many Proses, Himnes, and answeres, which yet (to this day) are sung in the Church. He was also well skild in Musique, and would oft-times sing among the Channons, and weare a Coape (for companie) with them, liuing as religiously, as royally. Henrie Duke of Burgundy (his Vnckle by the Mothers side) made him Heire of his Dutchie, leauing it vnto him by his Testament: and in∣cited him against Landry Duke of Neuers, (bée∣ing beloued and supported by the Burgundians) who insulted vppon his right, in which attempt they foyled him, and droue him to flight. Hée ioyned the Cittie of Sens to the Crowne, by confiscation, for a certaine delict doone by the Counte Reynard. He sent his Armie against the Valentians, with Richard Duke of Norman∣dy, to assist the Earle of Flanders his Kins-man,
against Henry the Emperor.His Wiues & children. He had thrée wiues▪ Luthard, Bertha (whom hee forsooke vppon some occasion) and Constance, by whom hee had thrée sons, one whereof died during his raigne. In his time was an vniuersal famine and mortality. He dyed, hauing raigned 34. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Denis. 1030.38 Henry the first succéeded in the kingdome, after his Father Robert, in the yeare 1030. In his beginning to gouerne, his younger Brother Robert warred against him, béeing allied to the Earles of Champaigne and Flaunders; who stroue to make him King, by the procurement of his Step-mother: but he (assisted by the Duke of Normandy, and the Earle of Corbeile) mayn∣tained his owne quietnesse. He ioyned Meulanc to his Crowne, by rebellion of the Earle of that place. Raoull king of high Burgundy being dead, the Emperor Conrade seazed on that part there∣of, which wee call La Franche Conte; And the Dutchy béeing Roberts, Brother to the King, the kingdome of Burgundy (which had so conti∣ed an hundred and thirtie yeares) was then abo∣lished.The ending of the king¦dome of Burgundy. The King seated young William the Bastard, Duke of Normandy, (to whom he had béene Guardian) peaceably in his Dutchy, be∣cause some of his Subiects would haue depriued him thereof, as beeing vnwilling to entertaine him.The King of the Rus∣sians. He founded Saint Martine des Champs, in the same place where his Pallace was, without Paris. By Anne his wife, daughter to George or Gaultier king of the Russians, he had Phillip and
Hugh, and a Daughter married to the Duke of Normandy. Féeling himselfe to waxe weeke, he caused his Sonne Phillip to bee crowned King of France: And before his death, he left Baldwine Earle of Flanders as Guardian of his Children. He reigned 31. yeares, and lieth buried at Saint Denis. 39 Phillip the first, succéeded after his Father,1061. in the year 1061. During his time, William the Bastard, Duke of Normandy,The con∣quest of England by William the Bastard. conquered the Realme of England: and Godfrey of Bullen was made King of Ierusalem; also the Countrey of Gastinois came then to the Crown. This king raigned 48. yeares, and lyeth buried at S. Ben∣nets on Loire. 40 Lewes the sixt, sir named le Gros,1110 im∣mediatly after the death of King Phillip his Fa∣ther, in the year 1110. was sacred at Orleaunce by the Bishoppe of Sens, the way of Rheimes not beeing then secure. Some Princes and Lordes (assisted by the King of England) in the beginning of his raigne, did giue him many mo∣lestations; but still it was his happe to be Con∣querour, and the Warre of the English (verie many times appointed) was at last ended.The Pope flieth for re∣fuge into France. Pope Gelasius fled for refuge into France, where hee was succoured against the Emperour. In the yeare 1129. the King caused his Sonne Phillip to bée Crowned; who (two yeares after) dyed at Paris, by reason of a Hogges running be∣twéene the Legges of his Horse, that threwe him violently on the Pauement, and dying of
that hurt, he was buryed at Saint Denis. Af∣terward, hée had his other Sonne Lewes crow∣ned, and it was done by Pope Innocent, he bée∣ing then in France. At this time were a great company of Lazers and Leapers in Fraunce, who would haue infec∣ted all the rest of the people; but they were all ta∣ken and burned.Knights Templers, & Chartre∣ux Monkes▪ The order of the Knights Tem∣plers, & Chartreux Monks began in this kinges raigne: and the winds were so rough and impe∣tuous, in the yeare 1135. that they ouer-turned many Towers, Castles, Trées in Forrests, and Mils. This King appeased the troubles in Flan∣ders, Boubonnois, & Auuergne: he builded the Abbay of Saint Victor néere Paris; raigned 28. yeares, died at the age of sixty, leauing six Sons and a daughter, and lieth buried at S. Denis. 113841 Lewes the seauenth, sir-named the Young man, beganne to raigne after his Father, in the yeare 1138. He made war on Thibault Earle of Champaigne, tooo him the Citty of Vitry: And (in a great age) burned the Church, with 13 hundred persons in it,1300. per∣sons uned in a church. that had fledde thither for safety. By the solicitation of S. Bernald, he went to Hierusalem with his Queene, and with the Army of the Emperour Conrade: where, be∣siedging Damas, thorough discord in the Army, hée could boast of no aduauntage; but retyring thence, had not the Shippes of Sicily befrien∣ded him and his; they hadde remained Priso∣ners there. Beeing returned into Fraunce, hée made a separation betwéene him and Queene
Aelianor his wife, Dutchesse of Aquitaine and Aniou, vppon two suspitions conceiued against her. Henry, Duke of Normandie (who after∣ward was King of England) married her, with her Patrimony of the saide two Dutchies: and there-about followed great Warres betwéene France and England. The King married Con∣stance, Daughter to the K. of Spayn, who dyed soon after: And then he remarried Alice, daugh∣ter to the Earle of Blois, by whom he had Phillip Dieu-donne, Gods gift. Then happened great disturbance in England, betwéene the King and his son, who making his recourse to Lewes, cau∣sed thereby a very troublesome war, without any aduantage to either side. But in ye end they were accorded, and a marriage concluded,A marriage betweene England & France. of Alice the daughter of Lewes to the son of England. The King died at Paris, hauing raigned 43. yeares, and lieth buried in the Abbay of Barbeau, which was founded by him. 42 Phillip Augustus, sir-named Dieu-donne,1181. Gods gift, succéeded after his Father, in the year 1181. He banished all the Iewes out of Fraunce, and yet afterward permitted them entraunce a∣gaine: ordaining many Edicts against Blasphe∣mers, as also the vsury of the Iewes. He did put to death the Albigeois Heretiques, and them of Besiers: augmenting greatly the Cittie of Paris, instituting Sheriffes and Alder-men,Vertuous deedes in a King. commaunding the stréetes to be paued, building also the Halles for Studentes, and the Church∣yard of S. Innocent, and enclosing with wals the
Vniuersity side. Hée went to recouer the Cit∣ty of Hierusalem, with Richard Cueur de Lyon, King of England; and falling off from him, re∣turned home into France. Hee hadde afterward great wars against the said K. Richard, and Iohn without Land his brother, who succéeded him; a∣bout the titles of Normandy, Aquitain, Poictu, Maine, Aniou, & Auuergne. He won the battaile at Bouines against the Emperor Otho, and other French Lords who were entred into rebellion a∣gainst him:Fifty thou∣sand men slain in one battaile. In which battell perished fifty thou∣sand men, and Otho himselfe was enforced to flight, the Earle of Flanders and the Earl of Bo∣longne being taken Prisoners, by which reason the king was called the Conqueror. He raigned 43. yeares, died at Mante, aged 59. & lieth buried at S. Denis, leauing two sons and a daughter. 122443 Lewes the eyght, succéeded after his Fa∣ther, in the yeare 1224. In the life time of his Father, hee crossed the Seas, and made Warre in England, attayning to no such successe as hee expected. Hee renewed kindnesse and Brother∣hood betwéene the French and Germaines, tooke Auignon, and warred vpon the Albigeois. He raigned thrée yeares, and lyeth buryed at Saint Denis. 122744 Lewes the ninth, succeeded his Father Lewes the eyght, in the yeare 1227. Blaunche his Mother (in regard of his young yeares) was appointed to bée Regent: whereat some Lords were discontented, but she tooke order suf∣ficiently with them. She maintained the warre
against the English, and agréement was made with them vpon solemne Oath,Peace be∣tween Eng∣lande and France. to holde Aqui∣taine, doing homage, and to yéelde vp Norman∣die, Ponthieu, Maine, and Poictiers. The king being in peace, exercised himselfe to liue Religi∣ously, building Churches, Hospitals, and Mona∣steries, enriching them with rents & reuennues. In the 24. yeare of his raigne, hee went to reco∣uer the Holy Land, descended into Egypt, and tooke Damieta. He was afterward so rudely as∣sayled, that he was taken by the Soldane: but deliuered againe, vppon his restoring Damieta, and paying a great ransome. Hee bought of the Venetians, the Crown of Thornes (as was sup∣posed) with other Relickes of the passion, & cau∣sed them to be safely kept in the holy Chappel at Paris. Many Shepheards,Peazants a∣rie, and do great hurt in France. vnderstanding that the King was prisoner, arose vp in armes, and made great spoile in France: but they were foy∣led by them of Orleance and Bourges. The king at his returne, did very seuerely chastise blasphe∣mers: And passing afterward into Affrica, tooke Carthage, and assailed Thunis, where the Pe∣stilence happening in his Campe, he died of a flux of blood. He raigned 34. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Denis. Behold briefely the life and death of King Le∣wes, ninth of that name, who afterward by Pope Boniface the eight, in the time of Phillip le Bel,K. of France cald a Saint was cannonized among the number of Saints in Romes Kalender, and called S. Lewes. His raigne was truely in piety, religion, sanctitie and
iustice. His youth was much tormented with re∣bellions, subleuations, & seditions of some Lords: but his manly yeares did disperse them, as the Sunne doth dimme clouds. Hee was deuoute, vpright, valiant, liberal, seuere, and yet clement, vsing all these Vertues, according as hee knewe them to be néedfull. 127145 Phillip the third, Son of S. Lewes, was proclaimed King in the Campe before Thunis, in the yeare, 1271. but was afterward Sacred at Rheimes. He was Sur-named Phillip the har∣die, and at his comming back into France, he had many difficulties, about the death of Phillip his impoysoned Sonne, in the Warres of Foix and Terracon. Vpon an Easter day, in the euening houre, all the French (being then in Sicily) were euery one slaine,The Sicili-Vespres. whereon grew the By-word of the Sicilian Vespres or Euening. The king died at Parpignan, in the fortith yeare of his age, and lieth buried at Saint Denis, hee married Isabel, Daughter to Peter of Arragon, by whom he had Phillip, Charles, and Marie: And then, remar∣rying Marie, Daughter vnto Henrie Duke of Brabant, he hadde by her Lewes and Mar∣garet. 1286.46 Phillip the fourth, Sur-named le Bell, or the Fayre, Sonne to the fore-named Phillip, suc∣céeded his Father, in the yeare, 1286. both in the Kingdome of France and Nauarre, in right of his wife. In his younger daies he had a Schoolemai∣ster, a Roman borne, and a great Diuine, named Gilles, who caused the King to write an excellent
worke (yet to be séene) called The Institution of Princes. As the King was at Paris,A Booke written by the King. being retur∣ned from his Corronation at Rheimes; this Di∣uine (according to the Vniuersities ancient cu∣stome, which was, to make a learned spéech after the kings sacring) made a singuler Oratiō to him to encrease his desire in following Vertue & piety, preseruing his subiects in peace and tranquility. He built the sumptuous Pallace of Paris, & sub∣dued the Flemings, who had forsaken his part, & giuen aide to the English against him; the Earle of Flanders, and his two sons beeing then taken prisoners. The King left a Garrison in the coun∣trey, but they were slaine in a commotion of the people: Whereupon, the Earle of Flanders (ha∣uing giuen his faith to the King) was sent thy∣ther with one of his sons: but being able to do no good, he returned backe againe to the King, and died soon after at Compeign. The k. went thither himselfe in person, & at the first had no better suc∣cesse: but at length, he charged them so furiously, that he foiled 36000. wheron they were constrai∣ned to make attonement, and pay him 200000. Crownes. The day of Coutray, was afterward fauourable to the Flemmings, but deplorable to the French, the English preuayling mightily a∣gainst them. Then came the Bulles of Pope Boniface against Phillippe,The Popes Buls against the King, burned. but they were bur∣ned in the Court of the Pallace: which made Boniface to excommunicate the King, but Ben∣net his Successour absolued him againe. In his time was the Papall See, trans-ferred
to Auignon,The Popes See was brought to Auignon. where it continued thréescore & ten yeares, Rome being then gouerned by Legates. The king died at Fountainebleu, which was the place of his byrth: hauing raigned 28. years, and lieth buried at S. Denis. 47 Lewes the tenth, Sur-named Hutin (after the conformity of his manners) succéeded his Fa∣ther, in the yeare, 1314.1314 and had his right also, (after his Mother) in the kingdome of Nauarre. Enguerrand de Marigni, General of the Finan∣ces, being accused to haue robbed the kings trea∣sury, was hanged at Mont-faucon, which hee himselfe first caused to be made. Lewes tooke first to wife Margaret,Enguerrand executed at Mont-fau∣con. Daughter to Robert Duke of Burgundy, by whom he had a Daughter. Next, he married Constance, whom he left with child of a Sonne, named Iohn, that liued but eyght daies. This King raigned but xviij. months, di∣ed at Boys de Vinciennes, and is buried at S. Denis. 1316.48 Phillip the fift, Surnamed the Long, suc∣céeded after his Brother Lewes Hutin in ye king∣dome, being called Long▪ in regard of his tal sta∣ture and slendernesse. The Duke of Burgundie, would haue troubled his possession of the crown, in regarde of his Daughters Daughter▪ but the Salique Law did not fauour him therein. This King Phillip married Iane, Daughter to Otho∣line Earle of Burgundy, by whom hee had three daughters: The first married with the Sonne to the Duke of Burgundy; the second, the Sonne to the Earle of Flaunders; and the thirde to the
Daulphine of Viennois, by which marriages all Warres were asswaged in Fraunce.Marriages make peace in France. During his raigne, diuers Leapers and Lazers (procured thereunto by the Iewes) poysoned all the welles which caused a great Pestilence thorough the Kingdom: but both the one and other were grie∣uously punnished therefore. Neuer coulde this King obtaine of his people, any impost or Taxa∣tion by him leuied. He made a Law, that there shold be in his kingdom, but one kind of weight, one measure, and one money, commanding that it should be duely kept. But while this was in ex∣ecution, he died, without any heires male, hauing raigned fiue yeares in peace, and lieth buried at S. Denis. In these times, certaine Troopes of Countrey people, that were called Pastors and Shepherds, arose againe in Fraunce, as formerly some had done in the time of King Lewes the ninth. These men made their vaunt,Another ri∣sing of Pea∣zants in France. that they would crosse the Seas, and go warre against the Infidels. They had two chiefe men of marke among them, and wel beseeming such an assembly, to wit, a Priest, that (for his mis-behauiour) was expulsed his Church: and an Apostata Monke, of the Order of S. Bennet. These two fellowes, so abused the hearts and beléefe of the poore popularity, that silly Shepheards left their Flocks, and Laborers their Manuall trades, to follow these two impo∣stures: who made them verily beleeue, that the Holy Land could be recouered by none but them. In conclusion, this heape of Rascality was quai∣led
in Languedoc, because, in stead of preparing their fury against the Infidels, and passing the Seas: they fell vpon the Iewes, whom the king had repealed into France. 132149 Charles le Bell, Son to Phillip the fourth, succéeded after his Brother, in the year 1321. and likewise was King of Nauarre, as his thrée pre∣decessors had bin. He had thrée wiues▪ Blaunch, (whom he diuorced for her adultery) Marie, and Margaret. Iourdain de l'Isle (albeit hee was Ne∣phew to Pope Iohn the two and twentieth) was hanged and strangled at Paris,Iourdain de l'Isle han∣ged at Paris for his strange of∣fences. This King fel to concord with the Eng∣lish, appeased the Earle of Flaunders, and drewe his people to a mutuall Reconciliation. He was a great Iusticer, raigned seauen yeares, dyed at Boys de Vinciennes, and is buried at Saint Denis. By his death, the second branch of the Capets (called De Valois) came to the Royalty, and began in 1328.50 PHillip de Valois, Coozin Germaine to the thrée precedent Kings, dying with∣out heire male: his succession was in the yeare, 1328. His right to the Crowne was dearely dis∣puted, betweene him and King Edward the third of England, Son to the Sister of the thrée fore∣named Kings, who (preferring his Mothers Ti∣tle) would néeds be King of France, contrary to the Decrée of the Law Salique, and consent of al
the States. He did king Phillip homage for Guy∣enne and Ponthieu; but (being not well pleased therewith) cut him off quite from Flanders, Bre∣taigne, Germany, Crecy,The Battell of Crecy, & great losse of the French. where Phillip lost the day, with the very flower of al the French Nobi∣lity, taking Calais also by their flight. Truce be∣ing taken betwéene both the Kings: Edward of England had both the Title of king, and Armes of France or conquest, which euer after was at∣tributed to him & his. Phillip, raigned 22. yeares, died at Nogent, and lieth buried at S. Denis. 51 Iohn, Sonne to Phillip de Valois,1350. succee-his Father, in the yeare 1350. proouing as vnfor∣tunate in those tempestuous times, as his father had done before him. He married Ioane, Coun∣tesse of Bolongne, by whom he had foure sonnes and one Daughter. Raoull the Constable of France was beheaded in prison.King Iohn, as a prisoner brought in∣to England. In the day at Poictiers, King Iohn was taken by the English, and carried into England, which imprisonment of his, caused many pittifull Tragedies, the most furious whereof were acted in the chiefe Citties of France. Foure yeares after, King Iohn passed into England, for the fréedome of his Ostages: but there he died at London, hauing raigned 13. yeares. His sonne caused his body to be brought to S. Denis. 52 Charles the fift, Sonne to King Iohn,1364. suc∣céeded his Father, in the yeare 1364. Hee sustai∣ned very great troubles during the captiuitie of his father, by a commotion which the k. of Nauar raised at Paris, who was aided by the merchants
of the saide Citty, and woulde haue had the Re∣gency, but that Charles (being then Daulphine) made opposition against him. He dealte for the ransome and deliueraunce of his Father: after whose decease, he was crowned King. Hee tooke to Wife Ioane, Daughter to Charles Duke of Burbon, by whom he had three Sonnes, and one daughter. He maintained great warres against the English,Fiue armies at one time againste the English. hauing (at one instant) fiue seueral Armies in field against them, because they were such potent enemies: And to supply so mightie a charge, he was faine to lay a heauie taxation vp∣on wine and Salt. Bertrand de Guesclin, a most worthy Knight, was then his high Constable: And the Bastille at Paris was then builded. A se∣dition happened at Montpellier, and six hundred of the seditious were executed. This King was surnamed the Wise, for his deep discretion, good∣nesse, and gouernment.The Bibles first verssion into the French tongue. He so loued Learning, that he caused the Holy Bible to be translated in∣to the French Language (which remaineth yet) in the Royal Cabinet of the Louure) with many other good Bookes beside. Hee had stil an eye to Iustice, sitting daily to hear causes, and ordering all his affayres by Counsel. With much adoo, he regained some Townes from the English, in Poictu and Xaintonge. Hee raigned sixteene yeares, yeelded his soule to God at Chasteau de Beaute, and lieth buried at S. Denis. The Sect of the Turlupins was then abolished. See Emil. Lib. 9. 138052 Charles the sixt, sonne of Charles the fift,
was crowned King at the age of fouretéen years, being vnder the gouernment of his Vnckles, the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy, and the Duke of Aniou, who got into their custody many milli∣ons of Gold, left by the King deceast. And then, (no Money being to bee found) the people were charged with heauy impositions, whereby great seditions happened at Paris, Rouen, and Orle∣aunce. The King tooke into the Armes of France againe, the thrée Floure-de-Luces onely,Factions in the Court of France. and fell sicke of a Phrenzy: by reason of two factions in his Court, the Dukes of Berry and Burgundy, against the Dukes of Orleaunce and Bourbon, whereby many lamentable mishaps ensued. The Princes tooke the gouernment into their hands, and diuision happening (concerning the treasure) the Duke of Burgundy caused the Duke of Or∣leaunce to bee slaine at Paris, and the Duke of Burgundy was slaine at Montereau. Phillip his Sonne craued ayde of the English, who present∣ly tooke (well neere) all Normandy; beside the vnhappy day (to the French) of Agincourt or Azincourt, where many woull Tragedies were acted on the Theater of France by the English, Burgundians, and the Kings Mother, who was imprisoned at Paris. The King of England ma∣ried Madame Katherine of France. The Duke of Burgundy deliuered him the King, the Quéene, and the Citty of Paris,The King of England crowned in France. where he caused him to be crowned King, and many other Citties and Towns were deliuered him beside. King Charls hauing raigned forty two yeares, died at Paris,
and lieth buried at Saint Denis. His raigne was long, but full of calamity. 142354 Charles the seauenth, Sonne to Charles the sixt, was made King in the yeare 142. Hée found his Kingdome possessed (in all partes) by the English; Paris and the greater part of the Realme, beeing then commaunded by the Duke of Bedford, Regent for young Henry King of England; who called himselfe King of Fraunce; held his Parliament at Paris; was there crow∣ned king; and made the Seale and Monies also in his own name: King Charles hauing nothing else, but the Countries of Poictu, Berry, and Orleaunce, whereon the English (in a mockery) called him the king of Bourges. They went to besiedge the Cittie of Orleaunce; but they were thence repulsed by the French Captaines: For they had a Maide in their Company, who was called Ioan the Pucelle,Ioane the Pucelle of France. and they verily beléeued, that she was sent of God, for the succour of King Charles, and to chase the English out of France. The King, after the discomfiture of the English néere to Partenay; was conducted to Rheimes, and there crowned: But the English got the Pu∣celle, and burned her at Rouen The King made peace with the Duke of Burgundy, who foorth∣with left the English; and afterward recouered Paris and Normandy from them. King Charles raigned 38. yeares, and lieth buried at S. Denis. 146155 Lewes the eleuenth, succéeded his Father, in the yeare 1461. beeing then in Burgundy, whence the Duke conuayed him to Rheimes, where he was crowned. Hée found a number of
notable Enemies, both Domesticall and For∣raigne: For his Lords made warre against him, which they tearmed The Weale-publike warre, & he lost the day to them at Montle-hery,The order of S. Micha¦el instituted Grans∣son, Nancy, and Guinegaste. The order of S. Michaell was then instituted, and Iacques d'Ar∣maguac beheaded. His raigne was full of feare, suspition, and treachery, which so pierced his hart; that, in a long time of dismay (after 33. yeares gouernment) he died, and lieth buried at Nostre Dame de Clery. 56 Charles the eight,1484. succéeded his Father Le∣wes, in the yeare 1484. being crowned at the age of 14. yeares: yet the States méeting at Tours, appointed that hee should not haue any Regent. Hee sustained a long warre in Bretayne, which termined by his marriage with Anne, eldest Daughter to Fraunces Duke of Bretayne; by whom he had three Sons, but could not long en∣ioy any one of them. At the request of his Con∣fessour, hee rendered to the King of Spaine the Earledomes of Roussillon and Parpignan, which his Father had won. Being in peace, he aduen∣tured to recouer the kingdom of Naples,The King∣dom of Na∣ples wonne by the French. which he did (without striking one stroke) in full conquest: K. Alphonsus and his son Ferdinand being thence retired, & left Glibert de Montpensier Vice-Roy there. Returning home into France, he was assai∣led on the way by the Romans, Venitians, and them of Milleyne at Fornouë, where his person was in great danger, the enemies being tenne to one: Neuerthelesse, hee charged them with such
courage, that he bare thence the victory. He deli∣uered the Duke of Orleaunce, béeing besiedged in Nouarre, and made peace with the Duke of Millaine. He returned home into France, where hee dyed (within a yeare after) at Amboise, as hée stood and beheld the Princes playing at Ten∣nis. He raigned fouretéene yeares, and lieth bu∣ried at S. Denis. Thus ended (in him) the direct ligne of Va∣lois, he dying without any heires Masle; and then followed the collaterall Issue, which began in 149957 LEwes the twelft, néerest of Kinne to Charles the eight, in the yeare 1499. Hée beeing Duke of Orleaunce, and also of Valois. He repudiated Ioane, Daughter to King Lewes the eleauenth, whom hee had married perforce; and espoused Anne of Bretaigne, Widdow to the King his Predecessour. He established a Parli∣ament at Rouen, gaue orders to the Uniuersitie of Paris; sent his Army into Italy, tooke Genes and Millayne, and Lewes Sforza, Duke of Mil∣leyne,The king∣dome of Naples re∣conquered who dyed a Prisoner in France. The Kingdome of Naples was re-taken, vnder the conduct of Monsieur d' Aubigny: And the King vanquished the Venetians Army at Agnadell, where hée tooke Bartholmew their Leader, albe∣it the Pope banded with the Venetians against him.Gaston de Foix. Gaston de Foix tooke Boulongne, and wonne the battaile néere to Rauenna: where he
was slaine, by chasing the enemies ouer-far; and yet notwithstanding, the victory remained to the French, with surprizall of the Cittie, and many Captaines and great persons taken Prisoners. Hereupon, the Pope raised many heauy enemies against him, whom (in the ende) hee woorthily vanquished. He raigned 17. yeares, and lieth bu∣ried at S. Denis. 58 Frances de Valois (as néerest of Kin) suc∣céeded King Lewes, in the yeare 1515.1515 This King bare such affection to learning, that he was sir-named The Father and Restorer of the Sci∣ences. At his beginning, he ouercame the Swit∣zers, took Millaine and Fontarabie. Afterward, being desirous to winne the Townes belonging to the Dutchy of Millaine, and to bring his siedge before Pauia: hee was taken Prisoner, in the yeare 1524. and carried Captiue into Spaine.The King carried pri∣soner into Spaine. Fraunce was then very greatly afflicted, not only by this disaster; but by a great Famine, because the Corne was frozen vppe in the Earth. The King was deliuered by a treaty holden at Ma∣drill, and married Elianor, Sister to Charles the fift, Emperour; peace beeing then concluded, in the yeare 1535. The King possessed himselfe of Sauoy & Piedmont, repulsing the Emperour out of Prouence: But peace beeing made for tenne yeares, the Emperour passed thorough Fraunce, with very great entertainement. War began in the Low-Countries,The Eng∣lish wonne Bullen. which (after many alarmes) was accorded in the yeare 1544. euen then when the English won Bullen. The King deceased at
Rambouillet, hauing raigned 32. yeares, an lieth buried at S. Denis. 1547.59 Henry the second succéeded his father Fran∣ces de Valois, in the yeare 1547. No way dege∣nerating from the laudable vertues of his father. Hee renewed and confirmed the alliance (made by his Father) with the Switzers, and tooke the Fortes about Bullen on the Sea, by such furious assaultes, and ouer-much neglect in the English, that they forsooke them, and made a peace. In the yeare 1552. he made his voyage for Germa∣nie, to maintaine the liberty of certaine Princes, who had (in ye case) required his help. He brought Metz in Lorraine vnder his obedience; and (at his returne) tooke Danuilliers, Yuoy, Monmedy, and other places, with-drawne by his Enemies. He made agréement with Pope Iulius the third, deliuering Mirandola & Parma; reducing also Si∣ennato her ancient liberty, wherof the Spaniards had bereaued her. During this time, the Empe∣ror came and besiedged Metz, where (without do∣ing any thing) he lost a great number of his men. The K. marching into the Low-Countryes, took Mariembourg, Bouoines, and Diuant, driuing his Enemie vndauntedly before him. In the yeare 1555. truce beeing taken with the Empe∣perour, Phillip King of Spayne, and the King of England (which lasted but a while) & the French forces being in Italy, vnder conduct of Seigneur de Guyse:S. Laurance day at Saint Quintines. the King assailed S. Quintines, and won the day, which was called S. Laurance day. In the yeare 1557. the K. hauing assembled the
same power, and vnder the same Leader; tooke Callice, Guines, Hames, and the County of Oy, with the Cittie of Thionuille the yeare follow∣ing. Peace beeing finally concluded betwéene them, by meanes of marriage of Phillip King of Spaine, with Elizabeth the eldest Daughter of France, and the Prince of Piedmont, with Mar∣garet onely Sister to King Henry: In toy of the saide marriages and peace, a Turney was cele∣brated in Paris, in the streete of Saint Anthony,King Henry hurt in l∣ting. & died soone after. where King Henry (running in the Lists) was smitten with the Counter-cuffe of a Launce in∣to the head, whereof he died the tenth day of Iu∣ly, 1559. and in the 13. yeare of his raigne, being interred at Saint Denis. 60 Frances, second of that name,155 aged about 15. or 16. yeares olde, succéeded his Father, in Anno. 1559. In the life time of his Father, hee marryed Madame Mary Stuart▪ Daughter to the King of Scots: And the 15. day of September, he was sacred at Rheimes, by the Cardinall of Lor∣raine, Arch-Bishop of the said place. Thence hee accompanied Madame the Dutchesse of Lorrain his Sister, so far as Barleduc, and with-drawing thence to Amboise, thither came diuers men in armes (whereon it was called the tumult of Am∣boise) who saide;The tumult of Amboise that they would present re∣quests to the King, concerning the gouernment, and matter of Religion: But because they came in Armes, some of them were executed, and the rest appeased by the Kings Edict. The King, after a Councell holden at Fontainebleau;
appointing an assembly of the States, to heare the gréeuances of his people, and distrusting some intended mutiny: he went to the Citty of Orle∣ance in Armes, where being desirous to procéede in his purpose, hee fell sicke of a Catarrhe which happened in one of his eares, whereof hee dyed the fift day of December, 1560. and lieth buried at S. Denis. 156061 Charles, ninth of that name, succéeded his Brother Fraunces, in the yeare, 1560. And bée∣cause he was but eleauen yeares olde, the King∣domes affayres were gouerned by the Quéen his Mother:Anthony of Bourbon Lieutenant Generall. Anthonie of Bourbon, and king of Na∣uarre, being made Lieutenant generall, which was to the great contentment of all the States then assembled at Orleaunce. The raigne of this King was trauerssed with many ciuill dissenti∣ons, about the matter of Religion: whereon en∣sued the assembly of Poissi, the Edict of Ianuary, the death of the Duke de Guyse, slaine at ye siege of Orleaunce by Poltrot. Then followed the Voyage of Bayonne, the battels of Dreux, S. De∣nis, Ianac, and Montcontour, with other Edicts of pacification: And the marriage of Henrie of Bourbon, with Margaret de Valois, whereat happened that most bloody and lamentable massa∣cre.The bloudy massacre at Paris. Then the siedge of Sancerre, and that of Ro∣chelle, with the retraite of the Prince of Conde in Germany: And lastly, the death of the King, (without any children) being euen ouer-wearied with such numberlesse disturbances. The King died the 30. day of May, 1574. at Chasteau de
Vinciennes lez Paris. But before his death, hee left the Quéene his Mother Regent, vntill hys Brother (who was then King of Poland) were returned to France; and he lieth buried at Saint Denis. 62 Henry, third of that name,1574 being returned from Poland (to the no little griefe of that Nati∣on, so to part with their King) vppon the thyrde day of February, 1575. it being the verye same day in Lent, whereon he had bin formerly crow∣ned King of Poland in the Citty of Cracouia, was likewise Sacred and Crowned at Rheimes by the reuerent Cardinall of Guyse. The 15. day following of the same month, was he married to Madame Loyse, Daughter to my Lord the Earle of Vaudemont, of the ancient and noble house of Lorraine. His raigne was diuersly agitated with partialities in Religion, which passed vnder pre∣text (in faction formed against the State) and co∣uered with the name of an holy league or Vnion,The holy League or Vnion. against which, he combatted with difficulties e∣now▪ and diuersity of exploits on either side. Vn∣der his gouernement was the ouerthrowe of the Rutters Army: the battel of Coutras, the Estates of Blois, and almost the whole reuolt of France. The Reconciliation of two Kings, which so pres∣sed the factious and rebellious:The King murdered by a Iaco∣bine Fryer. that they had no other recourse, but to a most execrable parracide, which was committed on the Kings person at S. Clou, by Iacques Clement a Iacobine Monke, the first day of August. 1589.
And so ended (in him) the race of that Royall branch of Valois. 1589.63 HEnry the fourth, being formerly King of Nauar, by right of suc∣cession came to be K. of France also, being issued in direct ligne from Robert Earl of Clermont in Beaunoisis, and the last Son of S. Lewes. The beginning of his raigne was very Thorny, marked with very signale actions in his progresse, the most memorable whereof, (for breuities sake) by a person of great honor and repute, were noted in these foure liues. Arques, Yuri, Dijon still shall beare the markes, Of honor right and courage in that king, To whom the strangers pride stands trembling, To heare the fights of Dijon, Yuri, Arques. Héere, the life, fame, and due merit of that great King, would giue mee way into a large fielde of ample discourse, did not my purposed breuitie make imbarment. Wherefore, with the verie wordes of a woorthy and learned Gentleman, I will conclude, and summe vp this Man of men, this Prince-like Souldiour, and Souldiour-like Prince: whose Royall face was white with Time, watchinges, and experience, and the Lawrelles which did beguirt his venerable head, and tooke their roote in his Caske, were gathe∣red
in the grounds of thrée pitched fieldes, thirtie fiue encounters of Armies, one hundered and for∣ty Combats, and thrée hundred seuerall siedges of places, in all which, his person stroue (if it were possible) to haue got the start of his corage. That the sacred person of so great a King, should be vndone by the hand of an vnholy villaine, and his owne▪ vassaile: that a Prince of the Sworde, should be butchered with a Knife. That he, who had returned victoriously aliue, from the heade of so manie Armies (where death kept his open Shambles) should bee robbed of his life, by the hand of onely one, and in the peacefull stréetes of Paris, which were as yet euen warme with the glorie of his Quéenes Coronation, perfourmed but the day before: Is such a villanie, as excéeds (if it were possible) the iust merrit of damnation, and that two Kings of one Kingdome, shoulde one after the other be so shamefully murdred,Iacques Clement. the one by a Iacobine Frier, the other sometimes of the Feliants Order,Francis Ra∣uilliart. is such an indelible blot on the brow of Fraunce, as the vtmost date of time can neuer wipe off, nor any Penne sufficient∣lie expresse, the sorrowe fitting a Theame so vn∣pleasing. 64 Lewes, the thirteenth of that Name,1610. el∣best Sonne to King Henry the fourth, and Ma∣ria de Medices his Quéene, being then scarcelie tenne yeares olde, succeeded his Father, in the Kingdomes Dignitie, but the Queene his Mother was proclaimed Regent. May hee long liue, heire vnto his Fathers Fame and
Heroycall vertues, but, defended (by the hand of heauen) from his fate and hard Fortune, as all Christian Princes else (I pray to God) may be likewise preserued. A Briefe Chronologicall Suruay, concerning the Netherlands, deuided into 17. prouinces: with a Breuiate of the Earles and Princes there raigning, from Thierrie (who was the first Earle of Holland and Zeland) to this instant time. COncerning the Originall of the people inhabiting these countries, we finde, that two Brethren, sons to the King of A people neere to the Sethians. Cathes, the one being named Battus, or Batton, & the other Zelandus, were the first Fathers of them, and that (from them) they deriued theyr names. For these two Princes, being too ex∣treamly pursued by the hatred of a Stepmother, & no way pittied or supported by the King their fa∣ther (escaping many traines and machinations, of poysoning, murthering, and diuers other dan∣gers by her daily deuised, & put in practise against them) were forced to forsake their natiue abiding & flie to an Island within the Rhine: where Bat∣tus determining to make his stay,Battauia is Holland. called it Batta∣uia after his owne name, & that is, in plainer vn∣derstanding, Holland. Zelandus, not liking to liue so néere, or with his Brother (least pursute should surprize them both, & reuenge there fasten, which
in more desperate place they had auoided) he tra∣uailed on to the vttermost counes of the Rhine, and liking there to set down his rest, imitated his Brothers example (in styling the Country) and called it Zeland.Zeland na∣med by Ze∣landus. Concerning their building of Citties, Townes, Castles, and Fortes, which af∣terward came to be ruined and defaced againe, by wars with the Romans, Saxons, Gauls, Danes, &c. or to what order of life the people disposed thē∣selues, and thorough how many and infinite en∣cumbrances (from their originall) they passed for no meane store of years together: these are mat∣ters méerely exempt from our intended breuitie, and may more amply be séen in ye history at large, whereunto I referre any such desirous Reader, and borrowing fauour for so large a leape, I in∣stantly procéede to the yeare, 863. when Holland first became to be an Earledome. In the yeare before mentioned,863 Charles the Bald, King of France, at Bladell, in the Pro∣uince of Campeigne, hauing there (in his com∣pany) a general assembly of his Princes and Ba∣rons, for consultation of many important mat∣ters: pleased to aduance the two Sons of Count Haghen (who was Vnckle to the King) for their great deseruinges,The two Sonnes of Counte Haghen. and for the farther encourage∣ment of the like vertuous minded Gentlemen. Walger, who was the eldest Sonne, hee made Earle of Teysterbaudt; and Thierrie, the youn∣gest Sonne, or Theodor, as some tearme him, being formerly called Thierrie of Aquitaine, hee made Earle of Holland.
This gift of the Kings, especially that to Thi∣erry, was much withstood by the Frizelanders, as scorning to be commanded by any new Lorde or Ruler: wherfore they consulted with the Hol∣landers, and a plot was layde to expell this newe Earle. But it proued to no effect, for the King comming thither (in person) with a powerfull ar∣my, made such an example on the Ring-leaders in this Rebellion, that the rest (in great humili∣ty) submitted themselues, casting their weapons not onely at the Kinges féete, but likewise at the Earles, and (vppon pardon) they vowed theyr continuall bounden dutie to Thierrie. His autho∣rity was then further strengthened, in the yeare 868. by the Letters Patents of King Charles, as also by them of Lewes,Thierry Earl of Hol∣land, Zeland and Lord of Frizeland. King of Germany, con∣firming him to be Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Frizeland. This Thierrie maried Gen∣na, or Ienna, Daughter to Pepin the Bald, king of Italy, Sonne to the Emperor Charlemaigne. He woorthily foiled the Danes, that then posses∣sed the Towne of Vtrecht, the Wiltes and the Slaues, disabling them from any further footing in Holland, which made them presume to med∣dle in Zeland, but thence they were repulsed like∣wise. By which meanes he remained afterward in peace, beautifying his Countries, both wyth fayre buildings and good Lawes. Hee dyed verie old, hauing raigned forty yeares, and after him succéeded 2 Thierrie his Sonne, second of that name, Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lorde of Frize∣land,
who married with Hildegarde, Daughter to King Lewes of France, the Stammerer, and Sister to King Charles the Simple. The Frize∣landers did twice reuolt from their obedience,The Frize∣landers re∣bell againe. and would not allow Earle Thierrie to be their Lord, but slew very many of them that obeyed ye Earle, wasting, spoiling, and burning all the way as they went. But at length, they were iustly re∣payed for their insolency, and such a slaughter was made of the Frysons (without any merrie) that few or none of them returned home to their dwellings. Afterward, he forced them to make the doores of entrance into their houses, so low and narrow, that they must stoope very lowe before they could get in, and this he did, to make them ye more humble and seruile, receiuing a new Oath of allegeance of them. And hauing raigned about fiftie yeares, beeing then aged 88. yeares olde, he dyed, leauing two Sonnes behinde him, the eldest whereof (being named Egbert) became Arch-Bishop of Treues, and Arnold his yongest Sonne succéeded him. 3 Arnolde, or (as others will haue it) Ar∣nulph, youngest Sonne to Earle Thierrie, fol∣lowed in rule as his Fathers Successour: But hee helde the Earledomes of Holland, Zeland, and Lordshippe of Frizeland, no longer of the Crowne of France, but of Otho the third, Empe∣ror, and so became in fée to the Empyre. A verie fearful Comet appeared in his time, with strange Ecclipses both of the Sunne and Moone, being
as red as blood,A dreadfull Comet, Ec∣clipses and earthquakes and terrible Earth-quakes: a fire also fell from Heauen, in similitude like an huge Tower, burning for a long time: after which en∣sued so violent a Pestilence, that the liuing dyed burying the dead. The Frizons reuolting a∣gaine from obedience, made all his raigne a con∣tinuall warfare, and the Armies (on eyther side) méeting néere vnto Winckell, so dreadfull a bat∣taile was fought betwéene them; that the Hol∣landers sustained the worst, Count Arnolde be∣ing there slaine, and a great number of his chée∣fest Nobility. This battaile was fought the eigh∣téenth of October, the morrow after Saint Lam∣berts day, in the yeare 993. So this Earle Ar∣nolde, hauing raigned fiue years, and being thus vnfortunately slaine, was buryed by his Father and Grand-father, in the Abbie of Egmont. 4 Thierrie, third of that name, and Sonne to Counte Arnolde, succéeded as fourth Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Frizeland. Being desirous to reuenge his Fathers death vppon the Frizons: hee was much impeached therein by Adelbold,Adelbold Byshop of Vtrecht. Bishoppe of Vtrecht, against whom (neuerthelesse) hepreuailed in two foughten bat∣tailes, in the year 108. and (with great slaugh∣ter of the Fryzons) brought them vnder obedy∣ence to his youngest Sonne Floris, whom hee made Lord of them. This Earle Thierrie, liuing afterward in very peacefull daies, vndertooke a Pilgrimage to Ierusalem, with the Lord of Arc∣kell▪ his loyall Subiect; who died at Hierusalem, and was there very honourably buried by Thier∣rie.
After whose returne home, and some yeares passed in peace with his Wife and Children, ha∣uing raigned 46. yeares, he died in Anno 1039. and was buried by his Fathers in the Abbay of Egmont. 5 Thierrie, fourth of that name,1039. was the fift Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Frize∣land, after the decease of Thierrie his Father. In a Iourney of Princes and Lords, performed (for pleasure) in the Cittie of Liege, it was this Earles hard hap, to kill a Brother of the Bishops of Cullen and Liege:The Bi∣shops of Cullen and Liege. whereby ensued such dis∣cord and mollestation, that, after many aduen∣tures of reuenge, vnder-taken by the Germaine Gentlemen, albeit, therein they sustained much losse of men, the Earle was shot into the Thigh with a poisoned Dart, of which wound hee dyed the fiftéenth of May 1048.1048. after he had gouerned nine years, and was buryed by his Fathers, in the Abbay of Egmont. He was neuer marryed, and therefore left not any Childe to succéede him. 6 Floris, who (as you haue heard before) was Earl of Frizeland, now after his Brothers death, became the sixt Earl of Holland and Zeland. The former mishap at Liege, could not as yet be for∣gotten by the Bishops of Cullen and Liege; but they would needes prosecute fresh reuenge vppon Count Floris, who beeing a man of vndaunted spirite, defeated his Enemies in two seuerall at∣tempts. Once by a cunning Stratagem,Two milli∣tary Strata∣gems. causing Ditches and Pit-fals to be made in South Hol∣land, and couering them with Straw and grasse,
so that they could not be easily discerned. At this time, a bloody battaile beeing fought betwéene them, there was forty thousand of the Earles e∣nemies slaine, beside twenty sixe thousand more, who were drowned and smothered in those Dit∣ches. An. Dom. 1058. The second foile of his ad∣uersaries, happened foure yeares after this, when the Hollanders (putting the Germans to flight) returned with rich spoiles and great store of Pri∣soners, this was in the yeare 1062. yet was it this Earles ill fortune, to be afterward slaine vn∣armed, as he sate vnder an Elme, taking the aire, his enemies preuailing by this aduantage. Hee had ruled in Holland 14. yeares, and in Frize∣land 21. and lieth buried at Egmont. 7, 8. Gertrude, widow to Earl Floris, in regard that Thierrie her son was in his nonage, gouer∣ned those Countries in his right. And in the year 1063.1063. she remarried with Robert the Frizon (son to Baldwin of Lisle de Buck,Robert the Frizon. Earle of Flanders) with the good lyking of all the States and No∣bility. Hee also was made Guardian of young Earle Thierrie, and (had this Gertrude) thrée Sonnes, Robert, Sur-named the young (who went with Godfrey of Bullen to the holy Land, and was (after his Father decease) Earle of Flan∣ders;) Phillip, father to William of Ixt, & Bald∣win Bishop of Teroanne; beside thrée daughters also, which he had by the saide Gertrude. This Robert was called the Frizon, not in regard of his birth, but of his big stature, strength and cou∣rage, for hauing preuailed against the Frizons,
and hearing of his Brothers death, Baldwine de Mons, Earle of Flanders; hee laide claime to the saide Earledome, and (notwithstanding the op∣position of Richild Widdow to Earle Baldwin: by meanes of the Flemings, hee ouer-threwe the King of France in a battaile, and shee with her Sonne Baldwine, remaining satisfied with the Country of Henault,Robert Earl of Flanders Robert became quietly Earl of Flanders. For eight yeares space, he carryed himselfe with great wisedome and valour, and dying in the yeare 1077.1077▪ was buried in the Cannons Church, founded by himselfe at Cassel. Gertrudes time of rule by her selfe, and Roberts after, are reckoned as two seuerall gouern∣ments. 9 Godfrey,The Crook backt duke of Lorraine sir-named the Crooke-backt Duke of Lorraine, in this time of young Earle Thier∣ries minority, was made an instrument (in re∣gard of the former quarrell of Count Floris, and the Byshops of Cullen and Liege, as yet not re∣uenged to their minds) to suggest a false informa∣tion to Henry the fourth, Emperour, whereby the sayde Godfrey became an Vsurper of the young Earles right, for the space of foure yeares. But, as he was sitting on the draught to ease his body, a Seruant of young Count Thierries, did thrust a Iaueling vp into his fundament, where∣of he died (not long after) at Maestrecht. 10 Thierry, fift of that name, who (by Crooke∣backt Godfrey, and other strange oppositions) had long time bin debarred from quiet possession of his right; at length, by an absolute conquest
of the Frizons,The Fry∣zons con∣quered in two battels. in two seuerall great battailes, recouered all, and returned home as a Conque∣rour. Afterward, he married Whithilde, daugh∣ter to Frederick, Duke of Saxonie, by whom hee had a Son and a Daughter: Floris, that succee∣ded him, and Mathild, married to the Duke of Orleans. Earle Thierrie hauing gouerned fiftéen yeares, dyed, and was buried in the Abbey of Egmont. 111911 Floris, second of that name, and sir-named the Fat or Grosse, succéeded next after his father Thierrie: he greatly fauoured men of the Church, whereby the Abby of Egmonts reuenewes were largely encreased. He being a man of very peace∣full inclination, little or no disturbaunces happe∣ned in his time: but onely by the Frizons, who, for their rebelling, were seuerely punnished, and forced to submit themselues to his mercy. This Floris married Petronilla, or Parnell, Daughter to Didier,Dider duke of Sauoy▪ Duke of Saxony, and Sister to Lotha∣rius the Emperor: By her he had thrée Sonnes; Thierrie, Floris, called the Blacke Prince of Ke∣nemerlandt; and Symon, also one Daughter, named Hadewick, who was Countesse of Guel∣dres. Hauing gouerned his Countries very ho∣norably, for the space of thirty one yeares; Hée died in Anno. 1133. and lieth buried in the Abby of Egmont. 113312 Thierrie, sixt of that name, succéeded his Father Floris, and was much mollested by the Frizons, in regard, that his Brother Floris the Blacke Prince, enuying the happinesse & quiet of
Thierrie, went and tooke part with them against him; vntill such time as the Emperor Lotharius (beeing their Vnckle) had reconciled them, and made them friends. Conrade being ioyned as competitor in the Empire, with Lotharius,Lotharius & Conrade Emperors. cau∣sed a fresh quarrell betwéen Thierrie and the Bi∣shop of Vtrecht, he ratifying the former grant of Henry, which caused very long contention, and much blood to be shed on either side. Thierrie ha∣uing gouerned his countries of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland 40. yeares, died in An. 1163. and lieth buried in the Abbey of Egmont. 13 Floris the third, eldest Son of Earle Thier∣rie, as Heire to his Father,113 inherited his right in Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland. The Frizons (pretending their former fréedomes and imperial liberties) made still their reuoltes from time to time, imboldned thereto by the often suggestions of Godfrey of Rhemen, Bishop of Vtrecht, who as his predecessors had done before him,Earledomes of Ostergo & Wester∣goe. still que∣stioned the Earledomes of Ostergo & Westergoe in Frizeland: but the Emperor Frederick went himselfe in person, & made an agréement in wri∣ting betwéene them. Al which notwithstanding, much hurt was doone on either side, as time and treachery fitted them with apt opportunity. A great controuersie hapned between the Earles of Holland & Flanders, for the Isle of Walchren,1166▪ and Count Floris (in triall of fight) became Prisoner to the Earle of Flanders: who neuerthelesse vsed him princely, and they being accorded by ye Arch∣bishop of Cullen, and the Bishoppe of Liege; the
great hole néere to the Dam or Sluce,The Dam or Sluce, called dogs Sluce. was reco∣uered with much adoe, by casting a Dogge-Fish thereinto, & spéedy filling it vp with earth, where∣on they named it Honddam, that is, Dogs-sluce. This Earle Floris, assisting the Emperor Frede∣rick, Phillip King of France, Richard K. of Eng∣land, with many other Dukes, Christian Prin∣ces & Earles, at the siedge of Damieta in Soia; fel there sick in the Army,1208. and died in the year 1208 hauing gouerned his Prouinces 27. yeares. 14 Thierrie the seauenth, hearing of his Fa∣thers death in Palestine; succéeded as his heire in all his Earledomes. The whole time of his regi∣ment, was in warre and continual combustions. First by his Brother Lord William of Holland,L. William of Holland. (who was with his Father Floris in Palestine, & performed there many honourable seruices) tho∣row diuers disagréements yt happened betwéene them, notwithstanding as many labored reconci∣lings,1198. and pacifications. Next, Baldwin Earle of Flanders, he was as molestuous to him likewise, for the Isle of Walchien: besides the Frizons re∣bellions, and his trouble with the Bishops of Co∣logne and Liege, as also his imprisonment to the Duke of Brabant, and then the intrusion of the Bishop of Vtrecht, after which, ensued a peace & vnited amity on all sides. This Count Thierrie had no heirs male, but two beautifull daughters; Adella, married to Henry of Gueldres, who died without any Children, and Ada, meanely mar∣ried by her Mother, (afer her Fathers death) to Count Lewes of Loos, that so the gouernment
might be disposed at her pleasure.1203. In ye year 1203 Earle Thierry died, hauing gouerned his Coun∣tries 1.3 yeares, and lieth buried in the Abbay of Egmont. 15 Ada, daughter to Earl Thierry, was Coun∣tesse of Holland & Zeland, after her fathers death;The go∣uernmet of a Woman despised. which moued a great hart-burning in the Lordes & Gentlemen, that they should liue vnder a Wo∣man, and a poore Earls command. Therfore they sent into Frizeland for Count. William, prote∣sting to assist him in attaining the gouernment of Holland. The young Countesse Ada was sur∣prised in their first attempt, and her husband the Earle of Loos driuen to flight; who yet won the Bishop of Vtrecht (by Money and other promi∣ses) to aide him, and by this meanes he had some small successe for a while. But the Countesse Ada dying without any Children, Earle Willi∣am was then the true and onely Heire to Hol∣land and Zeland, in which right of his, he went with his power against the Earle of Loos, and such was his successe, that the Women did beat his Enemies with Distaues and Stones,Women beat Men with Di∣staues and stones. they beeing glad to cast away their Armour for light∣nesse, to saue themselues by flight: yet many were drowned in the Ditches, and a great num∣ber taken Prisoners, with all the Earle of Loos Tentes, Pauillions, Plate, Iewels, and Mu∣nition, which Count VVilliam royally deuided among his Hollanders, remaining absolute Prince of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland. 16 William, first of that Name,121. succéeded
rightfully in all his Earledomes, by the death of his Néece the young Countesse Ada. Hee had some strife with Didier Byshop of Vtretcht, and Gerard Vander Are his Brother: but (vpon cer∣taine Articles) al displeasures were qualified. By his first wife Alix, daughter to the Earle of Guel∣dres, he had Floris, that next succéeded him, Otho bishop of Vtretcht, William, Lieutenant of Hol∣land, and two Daughters, the one was Abbesse at Rhynsbourg,Edmund of Lancaster, son to the K. of Eng∣land. and the other at Delfte. His se∣cond wife was named Mary, Daughter to Ed∣mund of Lancaster, son to Henry the third, K. of England, by whom he had no issue. He gouerned 19. yeares, & dying, lieth buried at Rhynsbourg. 17 Floris the fourth, succéeded his Father Count William in his Earledomes. Hee tooke great de∣light in Iusts and Turnaments, and the Earl of Clermont proclaiming a publicke Triumph for all commers (at the Countesse his Wiues request who greatly desired to sée this Floris, of whom she had heard much fame and commendation) this honourable Earle of Holland, Zeland, &c. was there treacherously slaine, onely thorough the iea∣lous suspition of the olde Earle of Clermont, who was there likewise presently slaine himself, and the Countes (grieuing for this great mishap) dyed soone after.The won∣derful birth of 365. Children. This Count Floris hadde a Daughter named Mathilde, or Margaret, as some call her, who was married to Count Her∣man of Henneberg; She despising a poore Wid∣dow, that desired her almes vpon vrgent necessi∣ty, holding in either arme a swéete young childe,
both which, God hath sent her at one birth, gaue her uery reproachfull words beside, as, that shee could not be honest of her bodie, and (by her hus∣band) haue two children lawfully begotten.This Histo∣ry is auou∣ched for a truth by di∣uers good Authors. The poore Woman, grieuing to be reiected in such ex∣treame want and néede, but much more, to heare her reputation so néerely touched, knowing her soule cleare from all dishonest detection, made no further suite to the Lady, but (falling vppon her knées) appealed to God for defence of her Inno∣cency, and earnestly desired, that as shee had con∣ceiued, & borne those two infants lawfully by her husband, euen so, if euer that Lady should be sub∣iect to the custom of women, that it would please him, to send hir as many children at one birth, as there were daies in the years. Not long after, the Lady conceiued with child by her husband, & (for hir deliuerance) went into Holland, to visit ye earl hir brother, taking vp lodging in the Abbey of re∣ligious women at Losdunen, and grew so excée∣ding great, as the like had neuer before bin séene. When her time came, on ye Friday before Palm-sunday, in the yeare 1276. shee was deliuered of 365. children, the one halfe being sons, and the other daughters: but the odde child was an Her∣maphrodite, and they were all wel shaped & pro∣portioned in their little members. These children were laid in two Basins, and were all baptized by Guydon, Suffragan to the Bish. of Vtrecht, who named al the sonnes Iohn, and the Daugh∣ters Elizabeth, but what name he gaue the Her∣maphrodite, is not recorded. They were no sooner
baptized, but they all died, and the Mother also. The two Basins are yet to be séene in the sayde Church of Losdunen, and a memory of them, both in Latine & Dutch. The Latine beginning thus. Margareta, Comitis Hennebergiae vxor, & Florentij Hollandiae & Zelandiae filia, &c. Vnderneath are these verses: En tibi monstrosum & memorabile factum, Quale nec à mundi conditione datum. This Count Floris, being so treacherously slaine, as you haue heard before, had his body brought backe into Holland, by the Earle of Cleues, and other Noble Lords, who buried it in the Abbey of Rhynsbourg; hee hauing honorably and vertu∣ously gouerned his Countries 12. yeares. He left but one Son named William, six years old, who was in the tutelage of his Vnckle Otho, bishop of Vtrecht, during his minority. 18 William, second of that name, succéeded his father Floris in all his dominions, being al ye time of his vnder yeares, in the gouernment of Otho Bishop of Vtrecht his Vnckle, who was a verie worthy and carefull Guardian to him. The pope hauing deposed Frederick the second, & Conrade his sonne from the Empire: the princes Electors (in despight of the Pope) made this Earle Willi∣am King of the Romaines, and crowned him at Aix la Chapelle,Earle Willi∣am king of the Romans he hauing then attained to the age of 20. yeares. A long and tedious trouble happened, betweene him, and Margaret Coun∣tesse of Flanders, a very high minded and proude woman, for the Country of Walchren, wherein,
after a great foyle and slaug he Flemings, (taking part with hir) & imprent of her two sons, Guy & Iohn, she implored the aid of Charles Duke of Aniou, against king William, and sped thereby no better then shee had done before, but was glad in the end to séeke reconcilement. This K. William did build the Pallace of the Earles of Holland, in the village of La Hage, or the Hague where it is at this day, & a goodly Cloister at Har∣lem. At his wars in West Frizeland, where he preuailed very successefully, he wold néeds, with∣out any other assistance then himself, follow ye re∣bels ouer the Ice, where his horse slipping in, him selfe almost drowned, & none néer to help him, but enemies of the Frizons, yt lay secretly in ambush:K. William cruelly slain they beat him down with clubs & staues, not kno∣ing that it was the king, & so they slew him. But when afterward they took better notice of him, by his Target & Armes theron emblazoned, in very harty sorrow for their foule déed, they buried him secretly, in a poore house in the village of Hookt∣wonde, thinking so to wipe out all remēbrance of him. But his body was after found, and buried in the Abby of Middlebourg, in the Isle of walchrē. 19 Floris the fift, son to king William, who was slaine so inhumanely, albeit hee was but sixe mo∣neths old, yet he succéeded his father, his Vnckle Floris being his Gouernor and Tutor. At 17. yeares of age, he went with an army against the euer-reuolting Frizons, and ouercame them at a village called Schellinckhout, very seuerely re∣uenging his fathers death on them, & (by building
foure Castles i land) brought them wholy vnder his obed Afterward, Counte Floris made a voyage into England,1290 where a marriage was contracted, betwéene Iohn, eldest Sonne to Earle Floris, and Elizabeth, Daughter to King Edward the first, Iohn being (not long after) sent into England, to accomplish the saide marriage, where he remained in the Court of England, till his Fathers vnfortunate death, which briefely was thus. A Knight liued in the Earles Courte, named Gerard Van Velson,The Histo∣ry of the death of Earle Floris who had bin a whole years space detained in prison, and his Brother behea∣ded, through certaine false suggestions whispered to the Earle, which (afterward) appearing to be a meere iniurie, the Earle sought to repaire this wrong, with verie especiall fauours doone to the Knight, great aduancements, and woulde haue bestowed also his Concubine in mariage on him. Which Gerard disdaining, and replying, that he would not weare his cast shooes: the Earle rashly answered, that he should take his leauings, in de∣spight of his heart. To preuent marriage with the Earles Minion, the Knight bestowed his af∣fections else where, and wedded a Lady of great honor and beauty. Which when the Earl vnder∣stood, he pursued his former rash folly, to the price of his owne life. Sending Gerard on an employ∣ment of much credit and respect, and wherewith he was not a little pleased, not doubting any such wicked intention. The Earl came vnto Gerardes house, vnder colour of hospitaliiy, and there (win∣ning
her to priuat conferene in her bed chamber) forcibly defloured her, to performe his rashe pro∣mise to her husband. At Gerards return, and this foule wrong discouered, it was pursued with ve∣ry bloody reuenge, by a resolued conspiracy sworn against his life: which albeit he had some warn∣ing of (by a paper deliuered him by a poor woman) yet his disaster being ineuitable, a train was laid for him as he rode a hauking, and xxi. wounds he receiued on his body, by the hand of the saide Ge∣rard. But he and the rest of the conspirators esca∣ped not vnpunished,Aseuere r∣uenge for the Earles death. for they had their heads smit∣ten off, and were then laide vpon whéeles: but Gerard was put (stard naked) into a Pipe stuck full of sharpe nailes, and was so rowled vp and downe through all the stréets of Leyden. Then was he beheaded, and laide on a whéele, and all his Kinred to the ninth degrée, put to death, and laide vpon whéeles. 20 After the wicked murther of Earle Floris the fift, committed by the Fryzons,1297 as hath béen declared, Iohn his onely son (being then in Eng∣land with King Edward his Father in law) was next to succéede him as his rightful heire. But be∣fore he could leaue England, some partialities & factions happened in Holland for the gouerne∣ment, which soone were qualified at Earle Iohns being there present, notwithstanding the subtle policie of Wolfart of Borssele, seizing the person of Earle Iohn, and Ladie Elizabeth his Wife,Wolfart of Borssele his secret inten¦tion. thinking to haue the gouernement of the sayde Earle, because as yet hee was but young. Earle
Iohn preuailed against the Frizons, and the By∣shop of Vtrecht, and hauing gouerned his coun∣tries about foure yeares,1300 hee fell sicke at Harlem, and there died. He was the first of al the Earls of Holland,The end of the race of the Dukes of Aquitain and succes∣sion of the Earles of Henault. that died without children: wherfore in him failed the line masculine of the Earles from the Dukes of Aquitain, which from Thierrie, or Theodor, the first Earl of Holland, had continu∣ed 437. yeares. He was buried in the Abbey of Rhynsbourg, his widdow Lady Elizabeth being carried back into England, where she was after∣ward maried to the Earle of Oxford: So that by the death of Earl Iohn in this maner, those coun∣tries were deuolued to the earls of Henault, issu∣ing by the mothers side frō the Earls of Holland. 1301.21 Iohn, second of that name, called Iohn of He∣nault (claiming his right from Alix, sister to Wil∣liam king of the Romans) succéeded after Iohn, as Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland, &c. He had a long and tedious trouble with Iohn de Re∣uesse, who perswaded the Emperor, that Iohn Earle of Holland dying without issue, his Earle∣domes ought (in right) to returne to the Empire: according as Charles the Bald, Emperor of the Romans, had at first giuen them in sée & homage to Thierrie of Aquitaine. This suggestion raised the Emperor Albert in Armes, against Iohn of Henault,Iohn de Re∣uesse drow∣ned. but the Bishop of Cullen compounded the matter betwéen them, and Iohn de Reuesse was afteeward drowned, by which means, Iohn of Henault was rid of a turbulent enemy. Iohn of Henault, hauing gouerned Henault thirty years,
and his Countries of Holland, Zeland,1305 & Frize∣land 5. years, died & was buried at Valenciennes 22 VVilliam the thirde, son and heire to Count Iohn of Henault, succéeded his fathers earldoms:The good Earle willi∣am. he was commonly called The good Earle willi∣am, for his Vertues, Iustice, good life, and hono∣rable actions. In his time happened so great a dearth and famine tn Holland,1316 that poore people died with hunger,A wonder∣full dearth. euen in the streetes as they went: seeking also for hearbes and rootes in the fields and woods, there they were likewise found dead, and in the common high wayes: litle chil∣dren died sucking at their Mothers breasts, and some were enforced to feede on their deade Chil∣dren. In this time of Famine, a poore waman in the Towne of Leyden, being extreamly ouer∣charged with hunger, entreated her owne sister,A straunge example of an vnmer∣cifull Sister. (being a woman of better ability) to lend hir som Bread, which she would thankfully repay again, when God should inable hir. She very vnkindly, & without any pitty of hir extremity, denied her oftentimes, notwithstanding the others often vr∣gings, that she was assured, shee could not bee without bread. Heereupon, the vnmercifull Si∣ster (lying both to God, and to her owne poore sister) saide: If I haue any bread, I wish that it may instantly be turned into a stone: wherewith the heauy displeasure of God laid hold vppon her words, & going afterward to her Cupboord (to re∣lieue hir self) she found al her loaues of bread con∣uerted into apparant stones, & died her selfe with extreamity of hunger. It is crediblie saide,
that one or two of those stones, are yet to be séene in S. Peters Church at Leyden, as a memorie of this iust iudgement of God. A worthy action of Iustice, don by this good Earle William.There is also recorded another memorable Historie, of vpright Iustice doone by this good Earle VVilliam, to a poore Countrey-Man, a∣gainst a Bayliffe of South Holland, who hadde taken a goodly faire Cowe from him, that was the releefe of himselfe, his poore Wife and Chil∣dren, as there are some Kine in that Countrey, which doe giue twenty pottles of Milke and more, in a day. The Bayliffe, at the poore mans complaint to this good Earle William, who lay then sick in his Bed at Valenciennes (yet neuer debarred any suters from audience, were he sick or well) was adiudged to giue the poore man an hundred Crownes of good Gold, for the wrong he had done to him, which was accordingly per∣formed. But for his iniury to publique Iustice, (being himselfe an Officer) and abusing the au∣thoritie committed in trust to him, the Earle sent for an Executioner, and caused his head to be smitten off by his Beddes side. This good Count William, beeing a vertuous Prince, vic∣torious in warre, a Man learned, wise, well spo∣ken, and iudicious, a great friend to peace, gra∣cious to all men, & beloued in all Princes courts, hauing gouerned his Prouences 32. yeares, died the 9. of Iune 1337. and was buried with great pomp at Valenciennes. 133723 William the fourth, Sonne to the good Earle William, came to his Fathers Earledoms
by lawfull succession.Earle Wil∣liam a wor∣thy souldier He was a man of high me∣rit, and a most famous Souldier, whereof hée made good proofe; first against the Sarrazins and Moores, in the Kingdome of Granada; Next,1338 with the Emperour Lewes, and many Noble Earles, ayding his brother in law Edward the 3. King of England, against the King of Fraunce;1342 Thly, in ouer-running all Lithuania, Liuo∣nia, and warring against the Russian Infidels, lading home his men with victory and wealthy spoiles; And lastly, in preuailing against the Fri∣zons,Robert of Arckel, go∣uernour of Vtrecht. and Robert of Arckell Gouernour of V∣trecht. Yet it was his hard hap to bee slaine vn∣knowne (among the Frizons) before any coulde haue power to help him: so that he left no lawful Childe to succéede him, and therefore his Sister,1346 (being Empresse) remained his onely Heire. 24 Margaret, Wise to Lewes of Bauaria,Margaret the Em∣presse Prin∣cesse of Holland. (then Emperour) and eldest Sister to Earl Wil∣liam, slaine (as you haue heard) by the Frizons, by the Emperours interposition of his authority, and her owne Natiue right, went downe by the Rhine into Holland, accompanied with a most princely and well beséeming traine, and was ac∣knowledged to be Lady and Princesse of Hol∣land, Zeland, and Frizeland. But before her re∣turne backe to the Emperour againe, shee consti∣tuted both his and her eldest sonne (named Wil∣liam of Bauaria) to be her Regent there in those Countries, for a summe of Money yearely paied to her; but remaining vnpaid, she might resume all her rights to her selfe againe. The Emperour
deceasing, the Empresse Margaret came thither againe, and had resignation (from her son Willi∣am) of all the fore-said Countries, retyring him∣selfe into Henault, as being well contented there to liue:The factions of Cabil∣laux and Hoecks. till by intestine discord, & dangerous pra∣ctises of two intruded factions, called Cabillaux and Hoecks (wherein both Nobles and Gentle∣men did too far enter) the Mothers gouernment did grow vnsufferable, and Duke William was recouered from Henault, to vnder-goe the Sole-authority. Two very bloudy battailes were fought betwéen the Empresse and her Son;1351. and in the first, Earl William escaped with great dif∣ficultie, and fledde into Holland, for this battaile was fought at La Vere in Zeland. But in the se∣cond, there was so much bloud spilt, that (for thrée daies after) the old Riuer of Mense (at full Sea) was (all ouer) red in that place.A grear ef∣fufion of bloud. The Empresse (by helpe of a small Barke) escaped into Eng∣land, and, vppon an agreement afterward made betwéene them; Duke VVilliam had the qui∣et possession of Holland, Zeland, and Frize∣land assigned him, and the Empresse Margaret had the County of Henault, where (fiue yeares after) she ended her daies, and lieth buried at Va∣lenciennes. 25 Duke William being peaceably possessed of his Seigneuries, according to the former compo∣sition,Mathilda, daughter to Henry duke of Lancaster béeing also Duke of Bauaria, Palatine of Rhine, and Earle of Henault by his Mothers death, tooke to Wife the Lady Mathilda, daugh∣ter to Henry Duke of Lancaster in England,
by whō he had not any children. Much strife, war, and bloodie bickering, happened betwéene him and the Byshoppe of Vtrecht, with shrewd dis∣aduantages on eyther side; till, by the meanes of some Noblemen, they were reduced to amity.1358 This Duke VVilliam (by what occasion it could neuer bee knowne) fell distracted of his senses, and slew a Knight with a blow of his Fist: so that hee was shut vppe (vnder good Guarde) for ninetéene yeares space, euen till he dyed. Ha∣uing gouerned his Prouinces of Holland, Ze∣land, and Frizeland (before his madnesse) seauen yeares, and Henault two. 26 Albert of Bauaria, Brother to Duke Wil∣liam, in the time of his distraction, was sent for from Bauaria, and made Gouernour of his Bro∣thers Countries, in hope of his recouery, which by no meanes coulde hee compassed. Hee van∣quished the Frizons in many rebellions,The Barons of Eughien beheaded. tooke the Towne of Delft, and beheaded the Baron of Eughien, vppon sinister informations, which caused great trouble betweene him, and fire bre∣theren of the said Baron: but, vpon their recon∣cilement, Count Albert builded the Channorny of the Chappell, at the Court of the Hage. In his time,1368. a Sea-Woman (by reason of great Tempestes at Sea, and extraordinarie high tides) was seene swimming in the Zuyder∣zee, betwéene the Townes of Campen and E∣dam; which béeing brought to Edam,A Sea Wo∣man seen in the Zuyder∣zee. and clean∣sed from the Sea-Mosse grown about her, by her long abiding there: she was like to another wo∣man,
endured to be apparrelled, & would féede on meates as others did,1401 yet sought shee all meanes to escape, and get into the water againe, had shee not very carefully bin tended. She did learne to spin, and exercise other womanly qualities, being daily séene of infinite persons, who haue made perfect testimoniall of this race accident, and sig∣nified if for an vndoubted truth, auouching, that she liued fiftéene yeares, and lyeth there buryed in the Church-yard.1404 In the yeare 1404. this fa∣mous Prince Albert dyed, after hée had gouer∣ned his Countries forty sixe yeares: ninetéene as he was Tutor to his distracted Brother, and twenty seauen as Prince, Heire and Lorde of those Countries, beeing buryed at the Hage in Holland. 27 William, sixt of that name, after the death of Duke Albert of Bauaria his Father, succée∣ded as his immediate Heire. His first Wife was Daughter to Charles the fift, King of Fraunce, and shée dyed young, without any Is∣sue. He secondly married the Daughter of Iohn, Sonne to Phillip the bold Duke of Burgundie, by whom he had one onely Daughtex,Phillip the bold Duke of Burgun¦dy. named Ia∣queline, or Iacoba, as the Dutch vse to call her. This Count William wasted Frizeland, spoiled Liege, and preuailed against the Gueldres, as also the Lordes (Father and Sonne) of Arckell at Gorrichom, and reconciled the Duke of Bur∣gundy to the French King. The Dolphine of France, Sonne to King Charles the sixt, marry∣ed Iaqueline, Count Williams Daughter; but
he being poysoned, by putting on a shirt of maile,1417 died without Issue: As Earle William himselfe did not long after, being bitten in the Legge by a mad Dogge, which hurt could neuer bee cured. So that Lady Iaqueline (his Daughter, and wi∣dow to the Dolphine of Fraunce) was his true Heire in all his Seigneuries: He gouerned thir∣téene yeares, and lieth buried at Valenciennes in Henault. 28 Iaqueline, or Iacoba▪ Daughter and Sole-heire to William of Bauaria, succéeded her Father in all his Earledomes and Seigneuries, being then Widdow to the Dolphine of France, and yet but 19. yeares of age. In regard of her youth and widdow-hood, she endured much mol∣lestation in her gouernment, chiefely in Holland: for the two factions tooke head againe, and ban∣died their boldnesse on both sides, the Hoeckins, fauouring the Countesses faction▪ and the Ca∣billantines her Enemies, by which meanes her rule was greatly disturbed.Iohn of Ba∣uaria By∣shop of Liege. For Iohn of Bauaria (forsaking his Bishoppricke of Liege) sought to make himselfe an Earle, and marry his Nice Ia∣queline (vtterly against her will) and yet to dis∣possesse her of her rightfull inheritance, for which purpose he leagued himselfe with the Cabillan∣tines, and other powerfull Friends, who neuer∣thelesse were slaine in their bolde aduenture at Gorrichome. And, to frustrate the Bishoppes vaine hope, the Pope dispenced her marriage, with Iohn Duke of Brabant, albeit hee was her néere Kinsman, whereby their Patrimoniall in∣heritances
were the more strengthened, and hée acknowledged as their Prince, in Henault, Hol∣land, Zeland, Frizeland, &c. It were néedlesse here to relate,Iohn of Ba∣uaria the Bi∣shop recko∣ned the 29. Earl of Hol∣land. the following molestations of Iohn of Bauaria the bishop, to his Niece Iaqueline, ta∣king on himselfe the title of Earle, and therefore, (by some) rancked among the Earls of Holland, or the after marriages of Lady Iaqueline; to the Duke of Glocester, Vnckle to Henry the sixt, King of England; the fourth and last time (in great priuacy) to Frank of Borsselle, Lieutenant of Zeland, or her (no meane troubles) by the Duke of Burgundy, to whom she resigned vp all her Countries:1463 Let it suffice, that she liued in con∣tinuall vexations 19. yeares, and dying at the Hage, was buried in the Chappell of the Court of Holland. 30 Phillip Duke of Burgundy, being (both by Father and Mother) rightfull yeire and successor to the fore-named Countesse Iaqueline; was thus entitled:The Titles of Phillip Duke of Bourgogne. Phillip Duke of Bourgogne, Brabant, and Lembourg; Earle of Flanders, Artois, Bur∣gogne, Henault, Holland, Zeland, and Namur; Marquesse of the holy Empire; & Lord of Frize∣land, Salins and Macklyn. He had thrée Wiues; by the two first hee had no Children, but by the last, named Isabel (daughter to Iohn K. of Por∣tugall) he had thrée sons; Anthony & losse, who died young, and Charles Martin, Earle of Cha∣rolois,The order of the gol∣den Fliece instituted. and successor to his father. This Phillip of Bourgogn instituted the order of Knight-hood of ye golden Fliece, & had much discontent with his
Son Charles, whom (at length he married to the Lady Margaret, Sister to Edward the fourth, K. of England. The Rebels of Gaunt and Bruges dearly felt the valour of this Phillip; he besieged Callis, surprized Luxemboug. subdued Liege; and ouer-came the Hamecons; Hee excéeded all his predecessors (Duks of Bourgogne) in riches, Seigneuries, height of Pomp and State. He di∣ed the fift of Iune 1467.1467. hauing gouerned about forty yeares. In his time was the famous Art of Printing first inuented,The Art of printing first inuented. the men of Harlem in Holland do challenge the first honor thereof, but it was reduced to perfection at Mentz, by one Iohn Faustus, who had béen Seruaunt to Lau∣rence Ianson of Harlem, as they constantly af∣firme it. 31 Charles,The warlike Duke of Bourgogne Sur-named the Warlique Duke of Bourgogne, succéeded in all his Fa∣thers Titles and Dignities. The Inhabitants of Gant resisting him, he brought them vnder obey∣sance, & defeated the Liegeois in battaile, which enforced Liege to yéelde to him. He made peace with the French King, who doubted to be detay∣ned at Peronne by Duke Charles. Vpon a fresh rebellion of the Liegeois. The Duke forced king Lewes to go with him to the siedge of their town; which hee ruined, and practised the like of the House of Brederode. He warred against the Fri∣zons; and carried many Prines in hope of his daughters mariage. The French K. and the duke sought to deceiue each other, and the Constable of S. Paul (waxing hatefull to them both) they resol∣ued
his ruine, and (on a truce taken for 9. years, betwéen the King and Duke) the Constable was beheaded at Paris. The Duke warred against the Swisses, and was defeated by them, both at Granson and Morat, wherewith ye Swisses were enriched. The Duke besiedged Nancie, and was there slain in battel, by the Treason of the Earle of Campobachio,The Earle of Campo∣bachio. an Italian: where being engirt with a great troupe of Lanciers, he receiued thrée wounds,1477 one in the head, the second in the thigh, and the third in the fundament. He left one onlie Daughter and heire. 32 Mary, Daughter and Heire to Duke Charles, the warlike Duke of Bourgogne, suc∣céeded her Father in al his Countries: being but 18. yeares old when he was slaine before Nancy, wherefore shee remained vnder the charge of the Duke of Cleues, and his Brother the Lord of Ra∣uestein. The French King seized Piccardie and Arthois: she happening into the Ganthois pow∣er, endured much trouble, by putting her chiefest seruants and Councellers to death: the Flemings were defeated, and the young Duke of Gueldres slaine.The Duke of Gueldres slaine. Afterward, a marriage was concluded be∣twéene Maximilian Arch-duke of Austria, Son to the Emperor Frederick, and the Lady Marie of Bourgogne▪ albeit shee would more gladly haue matched with the house of France. 33 Maximilian, Arch-Duke of Austria, and Son to the Emperour Fredericke, marrying the Princesse Mary of Bourgogne, was thereby wedded to much war and trouble. For first the
Gueldres reuolted from the house of Bourgogne; Next, happened the battel of Guinegate, where∣in the Arch-Duke was the Conquerour: Then,1479 Turnay yéelded to him, truce was taken betwéen him and the French King,Newe tu∣mults of the Cabillaux and Hoecks and the new tumults of the Cabillaux and Hoecks, were likewise by him pacified. Dordrecht was surprized by the young Lord of Egmont; also, many Townes in Guelders yéelded to the Arch-Duke: and (not long after) followed the death of the Arch-Dut∣chesse Mary;1482 who had (the first yeare of her ma∣riage, a Sonne, named Phillip (Father to Charls the fift) the second yeare a Daughter, called Mar∣garet, betroathed in her infancye, to Charles the Dolphin of France, Sonne to King Lewes 11. and the third year, a Sonne named Frances, ac∣cording to the name of Fraunces Duke of Brit∣taine his Godfather.Engelbert, earl of Nas∣sawe. 1491 Maximilian beeing chosen King of the Romaines, he made Engelbert, Earl of Nassau, Gouernour of the Netherlands in his absence: And afterward, vpon the bold insolency of the Ganthois and Bugois (kéeping the King of Romaines prisoner) Albert Duke of Saxonie, was made second Gouernor of the Netherlands, and General for the Emperor Frederick against the Flemings. But Frederick dying,1494 his Sonne Maximilian succeeded him in the Empire, by which meanes, Phillip of Austria, son to the said Maximilian, inherited his right in Holland, Ze∣land, Frizeland, &c. 34 Phillip, second of that name, being but 16. yeares olde, and succeeding his father Maximili∣an,
Emperor in the Netherlands, had these Ti∣tles.The Titles of Phillip. Arch-duke o Austria. Phillippe Arch-Duke of Austria, Duke of Bourgogne, Lothier, Brabant, Styria, Carin∣thia, Lembourg, Luxembourg, and Guelders; Earle of Haspourg, Flaunders, Arthois, Bour∣gogne, Ferrette and Kiburch; Palatine of He∣nault, Holland, Zeland, Namur and Zutphen: Marquesse of the Holie Empyre, and of Bour∣gan;1497 Landtgraue of Elsaten, Lorde of Windis∣marke, Portenau, Salynes, and Macklyn. Vp∣on his full possession of the Netherlandes, peace was made betwéen him, & Charles the 8. King of France, warre happening betwixt the Arch-duke and the Duke of Guelders, great inconuenien∣ces followed thereon:1503 but Duke Albert beeing slaine before Groningen, the Arch-Duke inheri∣ted the realme of Spain by his wife, being made King of Castile, and George Duke of Saxonie (being then made gouernor of the Netherlands, for the Arch-Duke Phillip) continued the warres in Frizeland. For, vpon the death of Isabell Q. of Castile,Iane, daugh∣ter to Isabel married to the Arch-duke Phillip Iane her daughter, being onely heyre, and married to the Arch-Duke Phillip; she héer∣by inuested him in the Realmes of Spain, Leon, Granado, &c. as absolute King. But he enioy∣ed that dignity not long,1505 for in the yeare, 1506. the 27. of September,1506 hee died (suddenly) in the Citty of Bourgos, suspected to be poysoned. After the death of Phillip King of Castile, the Empe∣rour Maximilian tooke vppon him the gouerne∣ment of the Netherlandes, as Guardian vnto Charles and Ferdinand his Grand-children, be∣ing
the Sons of Phillip and Iane, King & Quéen of Castille. 35 Charles of Austria, second of that name, suc∣céeded rightfully in all his Fathers Landes and Seigneuries,1508 and by the Emperors appointment his daughter the Ladye Margaret (Dowager of Sauoy, and Aunt to the Princes Charles and Ferdinand) was Regent of the low countries.1515 Af∣terwarde, Prince Charles tooke possession of the Netherlands, and being crowned K. of Spain and Arragon, soone after followed the death of the Emperor Maximilian,1519 and in an assemblye at Francfort, for choise of a new Emperor, Charles King of Spaine had frée election, by the name of Charles the fift. Then was Ladye Margaret,1520 (Widdow both of Castile and Sauoy, and Aunt to the Emperour Charles) accepted as sole Go∣uernesse of the Netherlandes,Lady Mar∣garet sole Gouernesse. in her Nephewes absence. Troubles happened in Spaine, by rea∣son of the Kings departure thence, and not onelie warre in Frizeland, but likewise betweene the French and Bourguignons, as also the warre of Boores or Peazants in Germany: and the Gro∣ningeois reiecting the Du. of Guelders,1526 did yeild themselues to the Emperor: then, hapned the 2. bloody edict frō the Emp. against the Netherland protestants, & then was the imperial diet at Aus∣bourg, wher the protestant princes presented the confession of their faith. After followed the deuou∣ring inundation in the Netherlands, & the death of the Lady dowager Margaret, whereby Mary of Austria, 2. daughter to K. Phillip, and Q. Iane of
Castile,1531. succéeded in the gouernment of the Ne∣therlands.Mary of Austria. Warre happened betwéene the Em∣peror and the French King, but vppon the com∣ming of Quéene Elenor of Fraunce to the Em∣peror her Brother,1554. peace was concluded betwixte them. 36 While Mary of Austria gouerned the Ne∣therlands, for the Emperor Charles her brother, great troubles happened to the Protestantes, by opposition of the Pope and Emperour againste them.1549. The Emperor affected the Empyre for Prince Phillip his Sonne, which bred a quarrel betwixt the Emperor, and his brother Ferdinand King of Hungary, to whome the Princes of the Empire were more enclined, then to Phillip; and then the Protestantes denied their comming to the Counsell of Trent.1555 Phillip King of Spaine married Mary Quéene of England: And not long after, ye Emperor resigned the Netherlands to his Sonne King Phillip (whereby he was rec∣koned the 36. Earle of Holland, Zeland, &c.) and the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, K. of the Romans and Hungary, departing out of the Ne∣therlands, to end his daies quietly in a Monaste∣ry, not far from Placentia. He reserued 100000 Crownes yearely to himselfe, employing 4000. for his diet and maintenance, appointing the rest to young maides marriages,1556. and the releefe of Widdowes and Orphanes, he not liuing aboue two yeares after. When not onely happened his death, but likewise the deaths of the Quéens Dowagers of France and Hungarie, as also of
Mary Quéene of England, after whom succéeded her Sister Elizabeth, in which time,Elizabeth Q of Eng∣land. Emanuell Philebert, Duke of Sauoy, and Prince of Pie∣mont, was Gouernour and Lieutenant Gene∣rall of the Netherlands, for King Phillip: till the King of Spaines marriage (beeing turned into tears, by the vntimely death of the French king) caused Margaret of Austria, Bastard to the Em∣peror Charles the fift, and Dutchesse of Parma, to succéede the Duke of Sauoy in the Netherlandes regiment.1559 King Phillip returned then home in∣to Spaine, it being his last departure out of those Countries:The Spa∣nish Inqui∣tion. whereon (not long after) ensued the subtle bringing of the Spanish Inquisition into ye Netherlands, by the creation of new Byshops,1565 and such was the power and priuiledge of the Inquisitors, as none were able to withstande them, in confiscation both of body and goodes at their owne pleasure. Nowe, albeit the Tyrannie of the Dutchesse gouernment in the Lowe Countries, was more then the people could well endure,1568 yet (to putte a sharper Snaffle in their mouthes) King Phillip remooued his Bastard Sister Margaret, and sent Don Ferdinando Aluares, Duke of Alua, who quickly brought the Netherlands into a most pit∣tifull estate: making himselfe sure of Gaunt, and Count Horne and Count Egmont (abusiuelie) made Prisoners: he builded the Castle of Ant∣uerpe, where he erected his owne proud Statue, and procéeded to apprehend the prince of Orange by Commission, setting downe Articles by the
Spanish Inquisition (which were confirmed by the King) to ruinate the Netherlandes, vppon which, soone followed the execution of the sons of Batembourg at Brussels, as also the Earls of Eg∣mont and Horne.1574 William of Nassau, Prince of Orange,Wil. Prince of Orange The Com∣maunder of Castile. was made Gouernor of Holland, Ze∣land & Vtrecht for the States, and proued verie fortunate in many attempts against the Duke of Alua, which made him labor his repeale home in∣to Spaine, with Don Frederick his son. Don Le∣wes de Requesens, the great commander of Ca∣stile, was sent to spoil the Dukes place in the Ne∣therlands, for the king of Spain, to whom Aluaes former behauiour serued for an example, in hys procéeding, and notwithstanding his besieging of Middlebourg (néere hande to famishment) yet was his fléet defeated before his face,1575 & the Town yeilded vppe by Collonell Mondragon, to the Prince of Orange. After many dangerous tur∣moiles, on both sides, the States sent to require succour of Elizabeth Quéene of England, and soone after dyed Don Lewes de Requesens at Brussels;Don Iohn of Austria. in whose roome succéeded Don Iohn of Austria (Bastard sonne to the Emperor Charles the fift) as Gouernor for King Phillip in the Ne∣therlands, all the Prouinces whereof were vni∣ted at the pacification of Gand, whereupon, the Castle was yeelded vnto the States, and all the Spaniards departed out of Antuerp castle, which was also deliuered into the States handes. Don Iohn being receiued as Gouernor, he sought oca∣sions how to renew warre against the Prince of
Orange, and diuers discontentmentes,1577. as also treacherous practises, being noted in Don Iohn, the States grew iealous of him, and he was pro∣claimed the Countries enemye. Then was the Arch-Duke Mathias called to be Gouernor,The Arch-Duke Ma∣thias. and while the heart-burnings helde betweene Don Iohn and the States, the Duke of Aniou, and Duke Casimire also were required to succour them, but to little effect, for Arthois and He∣nault fell from the Netherlands generall vnion, and then followed the death of Don Iohn,1578. of the plague, in the Campe néere vnto Mamure. Then Alexander Farnase,The Prince of Parma. Duke of Parma and Placentia, bastard Nephew to the king of Spain, succéeded Don Iohn in the Netherlands gouern∣ment: Whereuppon, a stricter Vnion (then be∣fore) was made betwixte the Prouinces at V∣trecht.1580. The Duke of Aniou was called to bee Protector,The Duke of Aniou. and partly Lord of the Countreyes in the Vnion, which made the King of Spaine pro∣scribe the Prince of Oraunge, and set his life at sale, to which proscription the Prince (in euerie point) made his iust answere.1581. Then were vali∣ant and woorthye seruices performed by Syr Iohn Norris, and Captain (afterwards) Sir Ro∣ger Williams. In the yeare following, the Gene∣rall Estates of the vnited Prouinces, hauing de∣clared Phillip K. of Spain, second of that name, to be faln from the Seigneury of the said prouinces, in regard of his extraordinary and too violent go∣uernement, against their priuiledges and free∣domes (solemnly sworne by himselfe.) In way
of right and Armes, tooke vpon them all the Go∣uernment of the politicke Estate, and of the Re∣ligion in those Prouinces,The States for them∣selues. breaking the Kinges Seales, absoluing the Subiects of their Oath to him, and causing them to take a new Oath, for preseruation of their Countrey, and obedience to the saide States. Vpon a bargaine made by the King of Spaine, to kill the Prince of Orange, the saide Prince was shot by one Iohn Iauvregui, a banquerout-Merchants Seruant,1582 who was pre∣sently slaine, but the Prince escaped that attempt with life.The prince of Orange shot. Afterward, he was traiterously mur∣dered by one Balthazar Gerard a high Bour∣guignon,1584 The Prince of Orange murdered. at Delft in Holland: whereon, Prince Maurice (being his Sonne) succéeded his Father in the gouernment. Then followed the siede of Antuerpe, in which time, the States once more, re-commended their cause to the Q. of England, either to giue her the full Soueraignty of the Ne∣therlands, or else to succor and reléeue them with her forces, vppon good conditions offered. Her Maiesty graunted to send them assistance, but no soueraignty or protection of them, would she take vpon her: whereupon, certain cautionary towns and Skonces were deliuered vp to her, for repai∣ment of such sums of Mony, as should be disbur∣sed by her,1585 and Articles of couenant set down be∣twéene them. Also, Robert Lord Dudley, Baron of Denbigh, and Earle of Leicester, was appoin∣ted by the Quéene of England,The Earle of Leicester. to be her Gouer∣nor generall, ouer the English powers in the Ne∣therlands.
In the time of the Earle of Leicesters gouern∣ment for the Quéene, were sundry woorthy ser∣uices performed by the Earle of Essex, Sir Iohn Norris, the Lord Willoughby, Sir Phillip Sid∣ney, Sir William Russell, &c. beside the subtile pretences of Sir William Stanley, Rowland Yorke, Patton, and others, who held faire wea∣ther with the Earle of Leicester, and had the go∣uernment of Zutphen Sconce, and the strong Towne of Deuenter (to the great dislike of the States) yet performed no such matter, as the Earles hope was perswaded of them. For, after the death of that matchlesse Noble Gentleman Sir Phillip Sidney, he being shot before Zutphen,Sir Phillip Sidney slain and thereof dying;1587 the Earle of Leicester (being gone for England) both Deuenter and Zutphen Sconce were deliuered vp to the Spaniards, by base oruption of Money. And (not long after) the Prince of Parma beleagering Sluice;Sluice. by composition it was also yeelded vp, after it hadde endured 17000. Cannon shot and more. Beside, vpon some discontentment, betwéene the Earle of Leicester and the States; the Quéene called home the said Earle into England,The Lord willoughby and the Lord Willoughby remayned there Generall of the English forces. The sundry worthy seruices, both by him, and the English performed, with the Spanish vndoubted hopes of Englands cōquest,158▪ in the dreadfull yeare of 1588. Prince Maurice his entrance into the Netherlands regiment,Prince Maurice. and the Duke of Parmaes wars in France▪ all these I passe ouer, referring such as desire farther sa∣tisfaction
therein, to the large History of the Ne∣therlands. The Prince of Parma dying at Artas (after his retreate from Rouen) the second of September 1592.1592 Maurice of Nassan, borne Prince of O∣range, Marquesse of La Vere, and of ing, &c. was made great Captaine and Admirall Ge∣nerall of the vnited Prouinces of the Lowcoun∣tries,Ernestus D. of Austria. by the Estates: And Ernestus, Arch-duke of Austria, was also made Lieutenant Gouer∣nour, and Captaine Generall for Phillip King of Spaine. Prince Maurice proouing very successefull in his warlike artemptes, a Renegate or Apostat Priest (in the habite of a Souldier) was corrup∣ted (by the Arch-Duke Ernestus) to murther the Prince Maurice at Breda; and vppon his owne confession thereof,1594. hée was executed at the Hage.Prince Mau∣rice shoulde be murde∣red twice. Afterward, vppon Prince Maurice his valiant surprisall of Gronning, Ernestus hadde dealt in like manner with a Souldier, named Peter du Four (who had sometime serued in the company of the Guarde to Prince Maurice) o vndertake the murdering of him at Lillo: the which treason beeing confessed by the man him∣selfe, he was executed in the Towne of Berghen vp-zoom. Here might much be said of the hono∣rable seruices of Sir Frances Vere,Sir Frances Vere. and others, but our purposed breuity is the onely imbarment; and the Netherlandes History (at large) may thereof discharge me. The Arch-Duke Ernestus dyed the twenty one day of February, 1595.1595.
Modragons forces defeated by Prince Mau∣rice, and La Motte slaine before Dourlaus; the Estates (vnder the King of Spaine) gladly sought peace with the vnited Prouinces▪ and sent Arti∣cles in writing to Prince Maurice, for considera∣tion of their motion. This was not done but, vppon good aduise in the King of Spaine, percey∣uing the Netherlandes, and Prince Maurice his great fortunes against him, adding euery daie, (more and more) to his vtter abolition thence. Hereupon, Albertus the Cardinall, Brother to deceased Ernestus, & Arch-Duke of Austria,Albertus Arch duke of Austria. was sent (by the King) to gouerne there for him▪ ma∣ny Easterlings and Netherland ships, which had bin staied in Spain to méet the Indian fléete, were suddenly released; and Phillip of Nassau (who is now Prince of Orange and Earle of Buron, that had long time béene restrained of his liberty in Spain) for better countenancing ye intended busi∣nesse,1596 he likewise was sent along with the Cardi∣nall Albertus. The Cardinall being made Gouernour▪ for the King de Spaine, tooke Callice from the French King, as his first peece of seruice, but for losse thereof, he recouered La-fere from the Spaniards.Hulst be∣siedged. Whereuppon, the Cardinall besiedged Hulst in Flanders, which yeilded in the end: but it was a deare purchase to the Cardinall, for this siedge, (continuing some two months) cost him the liues of aboue threescore valiant Captaines, besides o∣ther Commanders, Collonels, and men of mark, and bou fiue thousand well approued souldiers.
Then did the king of Spaine dispense with him∣selfe for payment of his debtes, which made ma∣ny Merchants in Spaine, Italy, Antwerp, Am∣sterdam, and Middlebourg, to become Banque∣routs.1597 A league was made betwéen the French King, the Quéene of England, and the States, against the Spaniardes, and then did Prince Maurice goe to Tournhoult,Tournhoult where the Earle of Varax was slaine. Amiens also was surprised by the Spaniardes; but soone besiedged and recoue∣red by the French King, albeit the Cardinall of∣fered succour, which prooued in vaine. Prince Maurice besiedged and tooke the Townes of Al∣pen, Meurs▪ Rhinberg, Groll, Brefort, Enschey∣de, Oldenzeel, Otmarsom, Goor, and Lingen, all which seruices he performed in thrée monthes. Then hapned another treacherous plot,1598 against the life of Prince Maurice, by perswasion of the Iesuites at Doway,The Iesuits conspire the death of Prince Maurice. and vnder-taken by Peter Panne, a Cooper by Trade, but beeing then a Broaker or Banquerout Merchant; who hauing receiued the Sacrament, to performe the déede either with Knife, Ponyard, or Pistoll, the Pro∣uinciall of the Iesuites made a long Sermon, to encourage him in the action, and assuring him of Paradice, if he performed it, vsed these wordes to him besides: Goe in peace, for thou shalt go like an Angell, in the guard of God. But the man (beeing terrifyed in conscience) discouered the whole Treason, without any compulsion, and was therefore executed at Leyden in Holland. The King of Spaine growing weake and sickly,
gaue his Daughter the Infanta, named Isabella Clara Eugenia, in marriage to the Arch-duke & Cardinall Albertus, with transaction of the Ne∣therlands and Bourgogne: whereupon hee left his Cardinals habit, & went to fetch the Infan∣ta. Soone after died the King of Spaine,The death of K. Phillip on the 13. day of September, Anno 1598. being seuen∣ty one yeares old, add foure months. The Arch-Duke and the Infanta beeing come into the Neatherlandes,1599 had their instalment at Brussels, Louaine, Antwerp, &c. The Emperour sent to the States, concerning a peace, but theyr resolution held to make warre in Flanders.1600 Then happened the siedge and memorable battaile of Nieuport,The battaile of Nicuport where Prince Maurice tooke dyuers Fortes from the Spanyards, and ouer-threw the Arch-dukes Army, he being there in person: but gladly fled away, leauing his Armes, Horse of Combate, all his Houshold, Artillerie, and bag∣gage behind him, and lost 6000. men, beside 800. taken Prisoners, among whom was Don Fran∣cesco de Mendoza, Admirall of Arragon, Mar∣quesse of Guadaleste, and Lieutenant Generall of the Arch-Dukes Army, who was led to Oost∣end; Don Baptista de Villa noua, led to Horne in Holland; Don Alonzo Ricquell, to Delft, Don Gonzalo Hernandes de Spinola, to V∣trecht; Don Pedro de Montenegro, to ye Hague; Don Pedro de Valasco, to Berghen, with Don Francisco de Torres, & Don Antonio de Mendo∣za, & Don Pedro de Leusina, to Enchuisē: besides the Arch-dukes thrée Pages, Count Carlo Rezi,
Don Diego de Guzman, and Mortier; Don Pe∣dro de Monte-maior, his chiefe taster; likewise his Phisition, Barber, Harbinger, Rider, Cook, Porter, the Grooms of his Chamber; most of the Archers and Halberdiers of his Guard, and (in a manner) all his houshold; with thrée Priestes or Monkes; 40. Auncients, and 37. Pentioners, tearmed (by them) Ancient and Sergeants refor∣med. He lost also sixe pieces of Ordynance, 136. Ensignes of foot taken, and fiue Cornets of horse, comprehending the Mutiners Standerd, and the recouered lost Colours. Moreouer, on the Arch-Dukes side were slaine, the Earle of Saume, the Earle of La Fere, the Seneshall of Montelimar, the Baron of Pimereull, Chassy Ortigny, Son to the President Richadot; Don Gaspar de Sa∣pena, Colonel, who dyed at Oost-end, Don Di∣ego de Torres, Don Gaspar de Loyazo, Don Gonzalo d'Espinola, Don Ioan de Pardo, Don Garcia de Toledo, Don Lopode Capeta, Don Alouzo Carcamo, Don Louis Faccardo Seba∣stian Velasco, Sebastian Doteloa, Christionall Verdugues, Mattheo d'Otteuille, Ioannettin de casa nueua, the Pay-Maister Alines, and many other neuer knowne. Prince Mau∣rice and the states losse.Prince Maurice and the States, at the first en∣counter in the morning, and lastly in the battell, lost about 2000. men▪ among whom were Ber∣nard, Couteler, and Hamelton, Captaines of Horse and some twenty Captaines of foote, but no Man of Marke or speciall note. In this braue exploit at Neiuport, the vertue and valour of Sir
Frances Vere Generall, and Sir Horatio Vere, his Brother Colonell, will for euer bee remem∣bred. The occurrences in the following yeares,1601 as the besiedging of Oast-ende; The enterprise on Flessigne; The practise to sacke Antwarpe a∣gain; Graue yeilded vp to Prince Maurice;1602. Al∣so his honourable offers to the Town of Sluice,1604 and it beeing yeelded to him vppon composition, euen in the viewe of the Arch-Dukes Army: They require a larger field of discourse, then by this breuity can be admitted. Procéed we then to speake of the long continued siedge at Oast-end, which lasting thrée whole yeares,The long siedge at Oastend. and elea∣uen wéekes, was at last compounded withall, and on the twenty two day of September 1604. yéelded to the Arch-duke. What numbers were slaine in this long con∣tinued siedge of Oastende, can hardly be gathe∣red, albeit, a note was found in a Commissaries Pocket (who hadde beene slaine the seauenth of August 1604. before Oastend) wherein were dyuers good obseruations; especially concerning the Arch-Dukes Campe, and what number (of each degree) dyed and were slaine therein, du∣ring this siedge, vntill the yeelding vppe thereof, (viz:) Maisters of the Campe, seauen; Colo∣nelles, fifteene; Sergeant Maiors,The Arch-dukes losse at Oastend. twenty nine Captaines, 565. Lieutenants 116. Ensignes, 322. Sergeants 1911. Corporals, 116. Lan∣spizadees, 600. Souldiers, 54663. Mariners, 611 Women and Children, 119. all amounting to 72124. persons.
To continue the memory of this long siedge, as also the winning of Sluice, Counters (of Siluer and Copper) were made in the vnited Prouinces, bearing (on the one side) the figure of Oostend, & on the ther, the Towns of Rhinberke, Graue, Sluice, Ardenbourg, with the Forts of Isendyke and Cadsant, with this inscription round about; Plus triennio obsessa, hosti rudera, Patriae quatuor ex me vrbes dedi. Oost-end being more then 3. yeares besiedged, gaue the Enemy an heape of stones, and to her natiue Country four Towns. Another Counter, concerning Sluice, had these words on the one side, Traxit, duxit, dedit. Anno 1604. And with the Armes of Zeland on ye other side, were these words: Beatus populus cuius ad∣iutor Deus. For the following yeares, from 1604 to 1608.1605. I finde no especiall or memorable accy∣dents;1606 but an enterprise by prince Maurice, on the Riuer of held & Antwerp,1607 with the taking of the Castle of Wouwe,1608 néere to Berghen Vp∣zoome;1069 Spiholas taking of Linghen, with an attempt on Berghen, and Groll, taken by compo∣sition,1610. &c. For a treaty of peace hapning between England and Spaine, the like also chanced to bee talkt on, concerning the Netherlands, and many méetings were made to bring it to effect. At length it was brought to passe by the labor and endeuor of a Frier (as was reported) who made many er∣rands between Spain and the Netherlands, vntil it was accomplished. Since when, nothing hath hapned of any consequence, but the taking in of the Towne of Guliche in Germany, where the prince Maurice behaued himself very honorably.
Of the Kingdome of Ireland. AVoyding all nice and secupulous curiosity, about the first name and Originall of Ireland, I purpose to follow these best receiued authors, as Giraldus Cambrensis, Flats∣bury, Henry of Marleborow, and others, that therein do giue the best direction.The Origi∣nall of the Irish. They say and affirme, that the Hispaniards the Originall off∣spring of the Irish, because Hispaine, in those an∣cient daies was called Iberia, after the name of Iberius, the Sonne of Iuball, and in regard also, that the famous Riuer Iberus was then their ha∣bitation, did entitle this land Iberia, as Leyland, and some other Chroniclers Write, or Ibernia,Leyland in Cyg. Cat. with addition of the letter (n) to expresse a kinde of variation. From which Ibernia, it may easi∣ly be presumed, that Iberland, or Iuerland recei∣ued first sound, and so Ireland, by contraction or corruption in common phrase. It is said like wise to be called Scotia, at the very same time, in re∣uerend respect of Scotach, or Scota,Scotach or Scota the wife of Ga∣thelus. wife to Ga∣thelus, an ancient Noble Captaine of those Ibe∣rians, she being Mother, others say Grand-mo∣ther, to Hiberus and Hermon, the Sons of Me∣tellus, raigning then in Hispaine. Fiue brethren men of no meane merit and valour (beeing sons to one Dela) all woorthy Sea-men, and skilfull Pilots, rigging a fleete, arriued in Ireland, and perceiuing it to be but slenderly peopled, conclu∣ded
(by casting lots, for seuerall shares) to diuide the Country among themselues. The foure elder brethren, who were named Gandius, Genandi∣us,An. mund. 233 Cam∣be. Lib. 1. dict 3. rub. 5, 6. Sagandus or Gangandus, Rutheragus or Ru∣theranus, hauing cast the whole Island into four partitions, and finding their yonger brother Sla∣nius to stand quite exempted from any abyding, sucuaying more aduisedly their seueral portions: (which were thus squared, Lagenia, Leinster, ly∣ing East: Connatia, Connaght, west: Vltonia, Vlster, North: & Momonia Mouuster south, each made an abatement of his proportion, & amongst them laid out a fift part, named Media, Meeth, which afterward, from being the lesser share (by his manly carriage) proued to be the largest, & he obtained the whole monarchy of Ireland, appoin∣ting Meeth to serue for ye monarchs diet or table. The first K. of Ireland.It appeareth then, that Ireland was thus deui∣ded into fiue seueral territories or kingdoms, and that the Spaniards, or Hispaniardes first peopled the same. There are also accounted 130. pettye Kings of that Nation, from Hermon, that slewe his Brother Hiberus (of whose name the Irish receiued theirs) to Laogirius, the Son of Nealus Magnus, in whose daies Ireland was conuerted to the Christian faith, by that holy man S. Pa∣tik. About which time cam Roderick a Scithian Prince,Roderick K. of the Picts. with no great number of men, who were the Picts, & he their king, and there they sought to make their abiding: but the Irish perswaded thē thence, and then they betooke themselues to the North part of Brittaine, where both Rodericke
and the more number of his followers, were slain by Marius King of Brittaine. In no long while after, one Turgesius, a notable Pyrat of the Nor∣weigans, came thether likewise,Turgesius the Tyrant. with a strong power, and made himselfe King or Conquerour of Ireland, vsing much tirrany, and deflouring al the other Kings daughters: till by the pollicie of Omalaghlilen, King of Meth, whose daughter also the tyrant would needs rauish, a company of young youths were disguised like faire Nimphs, with shorte sharpe Skeines hidden vnder theyr Garments, and the faire young Ladye her selfe, Daughter to Omalaghlilen, was theyr chiefe conducter to the lasciuious Tyrants bed Cham∣ber. Turgesius, his onely companions at that in∣stant, were a few dissolute young men, affected like himselfe, whom the King had made acquain∣ted with this amorous purchase, promising, that (his lust being satisfied) where he liked to make election, the rest should remaine at their free dis∣position. No sooner were these disguised yong Gallantes entered the Chamber, and the king preparing him-selfe to embrace the Kinge of Meths Daughter, but,The iust pu∣nishment of a lasciuious Tyrant. drawing foorthe theyr Skeynes, they first cooled the Tyrants heate in his owne bloude, and afterwarde his Minions were in like sort serued. The fame of this vali∣ant acte being quickely flowne thorough Ire∣land, and the Princes rising in Armes on so apte an aduantage, they resolued to free them∣selues from such seruility: as indeede they did, and made Omalaghlilen their chiefe King or
commander, in honor of this their great deliue∣rance. Concerning diuers other inuasions of Ireland afterwarde, by the Danes, Norwegians, Swe∣dens,Saxo Gram∣mat. Albert. Crantz. Normans, &c. reported by Saxo Grammati∣cus, Albert Crantzius, and others: they are mat∣ters no way incident to our present purpose, but referred to our generall determination, more capeable of such plenty of discourse. Therefore, passing ouer those former yeares of trouble and disturbance,Syluest. Gi∣rald. Cam∣brensis. let vs come to Syluester Giraldus Cambrensis, his history of the conquest of Ire∣land, when Dermon Mac Morogh, K. of Leyn∣ster. fled out of Ireland, to craue succor of Henrie the second, King of England, who was then in Aquitaine, busied with very serious affayres, wherein I will be so briefe as I may. This Dermon Mac Morough, King of Lein∣ster,O Der∣mon Mac Morogh. hauing bin (from his youth and entrance in∣to the Kingdome) tirranous ouer his Nobilitie, and full of oppression to all the Gentrie, became highly hated and despised, and so much the rather for rauishing the wife to Ororike prince of Meth, in the absence of her husband. Ororike not broo∣king such an indignity, procured Rotherick (K. of Connagh, and Monarch of all Ireland ouer the other Kings) to giue him aid, with al the for∣ces that either of them could make. Dermon vn∣derstanding this main opposition, fled into Aqui∣taine, where he found Henry the second, King of England, and such was his distressefull tale to him, with Oath of allegeance sworne vnto him.
to be his true vassaile and subiect:Dermon sweareth al∣legiance to K Henry. that king Hen∣ry made kind acceptance of him, and took him in∣to his protection, graunting him his Letters pat∣tents into England, to vse the aide and meanes of his Subiects, for recouery of his right in Ire∣land. Beeing returned from King Henry into England, he came to Bristow, where his letters Patents were many times publickely read, and liberall wadges and offers made, to such as in this extreamity would giue him assistance.Gilbert Earl of Chep∣stone. All proued in vaine, till Richard, sonne to Gilbert, Earle of Chepstone (being promised Dermons Daughter & heire in marriage,Robert Fitz Stephens, & Maurice Fitz-gerard▪ with inheritance and succession in his Kingdome) was bounde to visit him with aide in Ireland, at the following Spring: Robert Fitz-Stephens, and Maurice Fitz-gerald, had promise also of the Towne of Wexford, being the chiefest Towne in Leinster, and sixe Cantreds of land to them and theirs for euer, to come likewise (with their best help) at the Spring ensuing. Vpon hope of this assistaunce, Dermon ventured home among his enimies,Fitzstephens & his men passe into Ireland. but in very priuate manner for his owne safety. At time appointed, Robert Fitz-Stephens accompa∣nied with Maurice Fitz-gerald and with thirtie seruiceable Gentlemen, all of his Kinred, beside thrée hundred bold Archers, the best chosen, and onely men of Wales, sailed in three sundry barks, and landed in thē Calends of May, at the Banne in Ireland. Whereby,A prophes of Merlin an old Prophesy of Mer∣lins was said to be fulfilled, (viz.) A Knight by-parted, should enter first with force in Armes,
and breake the bounds of Ireland. Their land∣ing there, proued so succesful to Derman, that hee kept his word with Fitz-stephens & Fitz-gerald, for the town of Wexford, & territories thereto ap∣pertaining with the cantreds of land: he sent also for Richard Strongbow, Earle of Pembroke, son to Earle Gilbert of Chepstone,Richard Strongbow Earle of Chepstone and Pem∣broke. who, vppon Der∣mons letters, and intelligence of Fitz-Stephens great fortunes (with his followers) there desiring ernestly to make one in so worthy an imploiment made sute to k. Henry for his passage thither. But whither he obtained leaue or no, he being of very noble parentage, greater in spirit, then possessions, & aiming at the fairest fortunes: dreadles of the kings displeasure, with such power as hee coulde prouide, he landed at Waterford in September. Héere it shall not differ much from our purpose, to report those Noble mens names, who before any other of the English assisted this woorthy Earle Richard Strongbow for Dermon, in subduing Ireland to the Crowne of England, according as they are recorded in the chancery of Ireland, & as the learned M. Camden hath also obserued them. Robert Fitz-Stephens. Haruey de Mont-maish. Maurice Prendergest. Robert Barr. Meiler Meilerine. Maurice Fitz-Giald. Redmund, Nephew of Fitz-Stephens. William Ferrand. Miles de Cogan. Gualter de Ridensford. Gualter, & Alexander, sons of Maurice Fitz-Girald. William Notte. Robert Fitz-Bernard. Hugh de Lacie. William Fitz-Adelm. VVilliam Marcarell.
Humfrey Bohun. Hugh de Gundeuill. Phillip de Hasting. Hugh Titell. Dauid VValsh. Robert Poe. Osbert de Hetloter. william de Bendenges. Adam de Geruez. Griffin Fitz-Stephens Ne∣phew. Raulfe Fitz-Stephens. VValter de Barry. Phillip VValsh. Adam de Hereford. Iohn Curcy. Hugh Contilon. Redmund Caumore. Redmund Fitz-Hugh. Miles of S. Dauids. VVith diuers other be∣side. Then also was it generally noised, that Celidons prophesie was fulfilled,Celidons prophesye. (viz) A little Fire-brand shal go before a great fire, and as the sparks kin∣dle the lesser wood, so shal the same set the get wood on fire. There was another prophesy also,Merlins Prophesie, of Merlins, viz. A great fore-runner of a greater follower, shall come, & he shall tread down the heads of Desmond & Leinster, & the waies (be∣fore opened and made ready) hee shall in large. Dublin, Leinster, & diuers other places were im∣mediatly won, & Earle Richard married to Eua, Dermons daughter. By which marriage, he enioyed but one daugh∣ter onely, who enriched VVilliam Marechall with the Earledome of Pembrokes Title, faire Lands in Ireland, fiue Sonnes, all dying child∣lesse, and as many daughters, who honored their husbands (viz. Hugh Bigod, Earle of No folk, Guarin Montchensey, Gilbert Earle of Gloce∣ster, VVilliam Ferrars Earle of Derbie, and wil∣liam Breose, with children, goodly honours, and rich possessions.
Vpon the newes in England, of Earl Strong∣bow and his followers daily preuailing in Ire∣land,King Henry offended with Earle Strongbow King Henry grew offended with him, and made a Proclamation against him, that none of his Subiectes shoulde further assist Dermon or him. But, vppon the Earles priuate passage into England, and conference with the King at Newham, néere to Glocester, all displeasure was forgotten, and the King (hauing then an Armie in readines) should passe forthwith into Ireland, where all should be deliuered vp into the Kinges possession. King Henry landed at Waterford, on Saint Lukes day, in the seauenth yeare of hys raigne, the 41. of his age, and of our Lord, 1172. Dermon Mac Morogh beeing deade some short while before.The princes of Ireland sweare feal∣ty to King Henry. The King beeing Royally wel∣commed into Ireland, Dermon or Mac Carti, Prince of Corke, Donald O Bren, Prince of Limerick, Donold O Carel, Prince of Ossorie, and Macleighlin O Felin, Prince of the Decies or Ophalie, O Roke, K. of Meth, & O∣neale, King of Vlster▪ with Rotherick O Conor Dun, the Brown Monarch of Ireland, came al & submitted themselues to k. Henry, swearing feal∣ty & to be tributaries to him. Al matters being or∣dered in Ireland to the Kings good lyking, he de∣parted thence to England, hauing made Earle Strong-bow Earle of Pembroke, the first Lorde Gouernor of Ireland, ioyning Reimond le Grace in Commission with him▪ in the yeare, 1174.
¶ The names of the Gouernors, Lieutenants, Lord Iustices, and Deputies of Ireland, since the conquest thereof, by King Hen∣ry the second.The yeares of our Lord RIchard Strongbow, Earle of Pembroke,1174 Gouernor, Reimond le Grace being ioyned (for his more ease) in commission with him. Reimond le Grace, Lieutenant by himselfe.1177 William Fitz Adelme, Lieutenant, hauing Iohn de Curcy, Robert Fitzstephans, and Miles Cogan ioyned in Commission with him. Hugh Lacie, Lieutenant. Iohn Lacy, Constable of Chester. and Richard de Peche. Gouer∣nours.1182 Hugh Lacy, againe Lieutenant. Hugh Lacy the younger, Lord Iustice. Henry Loandoris, Arch-bishop of Dublin,1227 Lord Iustice. Maurice Fitzgirald, Lord Iustice.1228. Iohn Fitzgeffery, Knight, Lord Iustice.1253 Alain de la Zouch, Lord Iustice. Stephen de Long Espe, Lord Iustice.1258 William Deane, Lord Iustice. Sir Richard Rochell, or Capell, Lord Iustice.1261. Dauid Barry, Lord Iustice.1267 Robert Vfford, Lord Iustice. Richard de Excester, Lord Iustice.1268 Iames Lord Audley, Lord Iustice.1269 Maurice Fitzmaurice, Lord Iustice.1270 Walter, Lord Genuille, Lord Iustice.1272
Robert Vfford, againe lord Iustice. 1281Fulborne, Byshoppe of Waterford, Lorde Iu∣stice. Iohn Stamford, Arch-Bishop of Dublin, Lorde Iustice. William Vescie, Lord Iustice. 1295VVilliam Dodingsels, lord Iustice. Thomas Fitz-Maurice, Lord Iustice. 1293Iohn Wogan, lord Iustice. 1314Theobald Verdo, lord Iustice. 1315Edmund Butler, lord Iustice. 1317.Roger, Lord Mortimer, Lord Iustice. Alexander Bignor, Arch-Bishoppe of Dubline, Lord Iustice. 1319Roger, lord Mortimer, the second time lord Iu∣stice. 1320Thomas Fitz-Iohn, Earle of Kildare, lorde Iu∣stice. 1321Iohn Birmingham, Earle of Louth, lorde Iu∣stice. 1323Iohn, Lord Darcy, Lord Iustice. 1327Roger Outlaw, Prior of Kilmainan, lorde Iu∣stice. Anthony, lord Lucy, lord Iustice. 1332Iohn, lord Darcy, second time lord Iustice. Iohn, lord Charleton, lord Iustice. 1338Thomas, Bishop of Hereford, lord Iustice. 1339Iohn, Lord Darcy, ordayned lord Iustice by Pa∣tent, during his life, by King Edward the third. Raphe Vfford, lord Iustire. 1346.Robert Darcy, lord Iustice.
Iohn Fitz-Maurice, lord Iustice. VValter, lord Birmingham, Lorde Iustice, his Deputies were Iohn Archer, Priour of Kil∣mainan, and Baron Carew, with Sir Tho∣Rokesby. Maurice Fitz-Thomas, Earle of Desmond, had the Office of Lord Iustice, for tearme of his life, by the graunt of King Edward the third. Thomas Rokesby, Knight, lord Iustice.1355 Almericke de S. Amand.1357 appointed Lord Iu∣stices by turnes. Iohn Butler, Earle of Or∣mund. appointed Lord Iu∣stices by turnes. Maurice Fitz-Henry, Earle of Kildare. appointed Lord Iu∣stices by turnes. Lionell, Duke of Clarence, Lord Iustice.1361 Gerald Fitz-Maurice, Earle of Desmond,1367 lorde Iustice. VVilliam, lord Windsor,1369 the first Lieutenant in Ireland. Roger Ashton, lord Iustice.1372 Roger Mortimer.1381 Iustices and Lieutenaunts especially recorded, in the dayes of King Richard the second. Phillip Courtney. Iustices and Lieutenaunts especially recorded, in the dayes of King Richard the second. Iames Earl of Or∣mund. Iustices and Lieutenaunts especially recorded, in the dayes of King Richard the second. Robert Vere, Earle of Oxford, Marquesse of Dublin, created Duke of Ireland. Roger Mortimer, Earle of March, Lieutenant.1394 Roger Mortimer, Earle of March and Vlster, lieutenant. Roger Grey, lord Iustice. Iohn Stanley, Knight, lord lieutenant. Thomas of Lancaster,1401. brother to king Henry the
fourth, lord Lieutenant; whose Deputies at sun∣dry times, were Alexander, Bishop of Meth, Ste∣phen Scrope, knight, & the Prior of Kilmainan. 1403Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, Lord Iustice. Gerald, Earle of Kildare, Lord Iustice. 1407Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, Son to the fore∣said Iames, Lord Iustice. 1413Iohn Stanley, againe Lord Lieutenant. Thomas Cranley, Arch-Bishop of Dublin, Lord Iustice. 1414Iohn, Lord Talbot of Shefield, Lieutenant. 1420.Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond, the second time Lieutenant. Edmund, Earle of March, Iames, Earl of Ormond, his Deputy. Lieute∣nants to K. Henrie the sixt. Iohn Sutton, Lord Dudly, Sir Tho∣mas Strange, his Deputy. Lieute∣nants to K. Henrie the sixt. Sir Thomas Stanley, Sir Christo∣pher Plunket his Deputy. Lieute∣nants to K. Henrie the sixt. Lion, Lorde Welles, Deputy to the Earle of Ormond. Lieute∣nants to K. Henrie the sixt. Iames, Earle of Ormond, by him∣selfe. Lieute∣nants to K. Henrie the sixt. Iohn, Earl of Shrewsbury, the Arch∣bishop of Dublin (in his absence) Lord Iustice. Lieute∣nants to K. Henrie the sixt. Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, Father to King Edw: the fourth, had the Office of Lieu∣tenant, by letters patents from king Henry the sixt, for tenne years. His Deputies (at sundry times) were the Baron of Deluin; Richard Fits-Eustace, Knight; Iames Earle of Or∣mond;
and Thomas Fitzmoris, Earl of Kildare. Thomas Fitzmoris, Earle of Kildare, Lord Iu∣stice in the daies of King Edward the fourth, vn∣till the third yeare of his raigne. After whom, George Duke of Clarence, brother to the King, had the office of Lieutenant during his life, and made his Deputies (at sundry times) these Men following; Thomas, Earle of Desmond. Deputies to the duke of Cla∣rence. Iohn Tiptoft, Earle of Worcester. Deputies to the duke of Cla∣rence. Thomas, Earle of Kildare. Deputies to the duke of Cla∣rence.1470 Henry, Lord Gray of Ruthine. Deputies to the duke of Cla∣rence. Sir Rowland Eustace, Lord Deputy. Richard, Duke of Yorke, younger son to King Edward the fourth, Lieutenant. Edward, Son to K. Richard the 3. Lieutenant, his Deputy was Gerald, Earle of Kildare. Iasper, Duke of Bedford, & Earl of Pembroke, Lieutenant: his Deputy was Walter, Arch∣bishop of Dublin. Edward Poynings, Knight, Lord Deputy.1494 Henry, Duke of Yorke, afterward King,1501 by the name of Henry the eight, Lieutenant; his De∣puty was Gerald, Earle of Kildare. Gerald Fitz-gerald, Earl of Kildare, L. Deputy. Thomas Howard, Earle of Surry, afterwarde,1520 Duke of Norffolke, Lieutenant. Piers Butler, Earle of Ossorie, Lord Deputy. Geralde Fitzgeralde, Earle of Kildare,1523 againe Lord Deputy. The Baron of Dublin, Lord Deputy. Piers Butler, Earle of Ossorie, again L. Deputy.1529
William Skeffington, Knight, Lord Deputy. Gerald Fitzgerald, Earle of Kildare, ye third time Lord Deputy. William Skeffington, againe Lord Deputy. 1534.Leonard, Lord Gray, Lord Deputy. 1540Sir William Brereton, Knight, Lord Iustice. 1541Sir Anthony Sentleger, Knight, Lord Deputy. ¶ The names of all the Lordes, Deputies, and Iustices in Ireland, since the death of King Henry the eight, who died in Ianuary 1546. 1546.SIr Anthony Sentleger, knight, by Patent,1546 dated 24. Martij. Anno primo Edw. 6. Sir Edward Bellingham, Lord Deputy,1547 22. Aprills An. eodem. 1548.Sir Francis Brian. Lord Iustice. 1549Sir VVilliam Brabeston, Lord Iustice. 1550Sir Anthony Seutleger, the third time Lord de∣puty, 4. August. 1551Sir Iames Croftes, Lord Deputie, twenty nine Aprilis. 1553Sir Anthony Sentleger, the fourth time Lorde Deputy, September 1. Anno primo Reg. Marie. 1555Thomas, Lord Fitzwalter, Lorde Deputie 27. Aprilis. 1556Sir Henry Sidney. Lordes Iusti∣ces. Doctor Coren, or Corwen. Lordes Iusti∣ces.
Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Iustice alone,1556. eightéen Ianuary. Thomas Earle of Sussex, Lord Lieutenant,1557 19. Martij. Sir William Fitz-Williams, Lord Iustice.1558 Thomas, Earle of Sussex, Lord Deputy,1559 6. Maij Anno primo R. Elizab. Sir Nicholas Arnold, Lord Iustice.1564 Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputie the third time.1565 Doctor Weston, Lord Chancellour. Sir William Fitzwilliams.1567 Sir Henry Sidney,1568. Lorde Deputy the fourth time. Sir William Fitz-williams, Lord Iustice.1570 Sir William Fitz williams, Lorde Deputy,1571 11. Decemb. Anno. 14. Elizab. Sir Henry Sidney, Lorde Deputy the fift time,1572 August 3. Sir William Drury, Lord Iustice,1579. 14. Septem. by patent, 18. May. Sir William Pelham, lord Iustice.1580. The Lord Arthur Gray.1580. Adam Arch-Byshoppe of Dublin. Lordes Iustices.1582 Sir Henry Wallop. Lordes Iustices. Sir Iohn Perot, Lord Deputy.1584. Sir William Fitz-Williams, Lord Deputy.1588 Sir William Russell, Lord Deputy.1595 Thomas, Lord Burrough, lord Deputy.1597 Robert, Earle of Essex, Lord Lieutenant.1599 Charles Blunt, Barou Montioy, Lord Deputie.1600 Sir George Carew, Lord Deputy.1602.
1604.Sir Arthur Chichester, Lord Deputy, who yet to this day continueth in that honourable office. ¶ Of the Kingdome of Scot∣land. ACcording to the ancient Historio∣graphers of Scotland in descripti∣on of their Nations first off-spring and originall (after Brutes first de∣uision of Brittaine to his Sonnes) they make relation of a Noble man among the Grecians,Gathelus a noble Gre∣cian. that was named Gathelus, the sonne of Cecrops (in the iudgement of some) who buil∣ded Athens: but, according to the conceite of o∣thers, the Sonne of Argus Nealus, fourth King of the Argines. This Gathelus, being banished by his Father, for some matter of disobedience, departed thence into Aegypt, in the thirty three yeare of Pharao Orus,An. Mund. 2416, then King of that Coun∣trey, and there carried himselfe with such valiant and extraordinary successe, against the Countries Enemies,Ioseph. Lib. 2 Cap. 7. (in the company of Moses, Generall vnder the King himselfe) that Pharao bestowed his faire Daughter (named Scota) on him in ma∣riage, hauing also then giuen him and his foll∣wers, the Citty Thebes (Aegyptiaca) reported to be taken from the Israelites. Vpon iust occa∣sion, Gathelus (after his Fathers in Lawes de∣cease) leauing Egypt, being prouided of Shippes and other apt necessaries, tooke his Wife, Chil∣dren,
and a great multitude both of Greeks and Ethyopians, and setting forth of Nilus, determi∣ned to séeke his fortune in other Countries.Gathelus his depar∣ture out of Egypt. This was in the year of the worlds creation, 2453. and after his abiding in Egypt, aboue 39. years: what accidents befell him in this voyage, is néedelesse to report, his first arriuall was on the Coastes of Numidia in Affrick, now named Barbary: but being not able to settle there, he came into a part of Spaine, long after termed Lusitania. It is said that the place of his landing there, was called Port-Gathele, after the name of Gathelus,He landed in Portin∣gale. which afterward became (corruptly) to bee called Port∣gale, or Portingale, the certainty whereof I re∣ferre to better iudgements. The people there in∣habiting, gaue both him and his, at the first, a bold repulse, but in the end hee preuailed victori∣ously, and after further friendly conference with the Spaniards, he began to builde a Citty named Brachara, on the bankes of the Riuer Mundus,The Citty Brachara builded. and so at the first did hee name the Citty it selfe. Gathelus by the Spaniards further perswasions & promise of assistance to their vttermost, whatso∣euer disasters should betide him and his: remoo∣ued to the Northside of Spaine, on the Cantabri∣an Sea coasts, now called Galitia, where he buil∣ded likewise another Cittie, named Brigantia, afterwarde called Nouium, and nowe Compo∣stella. Héere did Gathelus bear the Title of king,Campostel∣la builded. and gaue lawes to his people, commanding that they should all be called Scottish-men, to honour the
name of his deare beloued wife Scota, as hee had alwayes so tearmed them, in the time of his tra∣uailes. In time, they grew to be so great a Na∣tion,The Scots foyleth the spaniards. that the Spaniards warring with them for their owne safety, sustained the worst: & though victory remained to the Scots, yet such good Or∣ders were agréed on, that both Scots and Spa∣niards should obserue their own lawes, without inuasion offered on either side. Then did Gathe∣lus liue in peace with his neighbors, sitting daily on his Marble stone in Brigantia, administring Lawes and Iustice to his people:Gathelus his Marble stone. which stone was fashioned like a seat or chaire, hauing such a fate thereto belonging (as is said) that wheresoe∣uer that stone should be found, there shoulde the Scottishmen raigne and hold dominion. Héereof it ensued, that there first in Spain, afterward in Ireland, and next in Scotland, the Kings ruling ouer the Scottishmen, receiued the Crowne sit∣ting vppon that stone, vntill the time of Robert the first, King of Scotland. On the stone was this inscription engrauen. The inscrip∣tion on the stone of Gathelus.Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum▪ Inuenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem. Englished thus: Except olde Sawes doo faile, and Wizards wits be blinde: The Scots in place must raigne, Gathelus his people doo greatly a∣abound.where they this Stone shal finde. This quiet life of Gathelus, did so daily encrease the aboundance of his people, that the bounds of
his dominion was not able to containe them, and he beeing religious in couenant with the Spani∣ards, auoiding all meanes of breach of the peace: hauing intelligence of an Island lying North o∣uer against Spaine, and wherein was but fewe inhabitantes: made readie his shipping, leuyed an Armie of his subiectes, and vnder conduct of his two sonnes, named Hiberus and Himecus, or Hermion (which hee had by his Quéene Sco∣ta) conueyed them ouer into that Island,Gathelus his two sonnes come into Ireland. which after-warde was named Hibernia, after the name of Hiberus. The History recordeth, that the Scottishmen offered no violence to the inha∣bitants, but fought all meanes to win them by gentlenesse, which in the end was easilie com∣passed, and all thinges appointed in decent order: which made Hiber leaue his Brother to gouerne there in Hilberland or Ireland,The death of Gathelus and valor of his son Hi∣berus. and return backe to Spaine. There he found his Father Gathe∣lus to be dead, and hee (with the peoples ioyfull consent) was admitted to succéed him as his son: but in regard of his admirable courage, & not sa∣tisfied with those bounds that pleased his father; he made conquest of other Citties & Towns neere about him, so that they were inforced to sue vnto him for peace, and agreed to such conditions,Scottes and Spaniardes one nation. that a league concluded amity, and mariage contracts betwéen both Scots and Spaniards, causing them to become as one people, continuing their succes∣sion of Kings (after Hibers death) in his posteri∣ty, amongst which were Metellus, Hermoneus, Ptolomeus, Hiberius, and Simon Brechus.
Passing ouer the contentions in Ireland, vn∣der the rule of the fore-named Himecus, the three sonnes of Metellus (viz) Hermoneus, Ptolome∣us and Hiberius, being sent thither in defence of the iniuried Scots; let vs speake of this Simon Brechus,Simon Bre∣chus in Ire∣land, first K. ouer the Scots. lineally descended of the Scottish blood, who was the first King that raigned ouer the Scots in Ireland, he brought with him thither ye fatal Marble stone, and was thereon crowned, in signe of his full possession of that kingdome, & in the yeare from the worlds creation, 3270. after the floud, 1616.55. from the building of Rome, after Brutes entrance into Brittaine, 870. and before our Sauiours incarnation, 697. He gouer∣ned his subiects with great Iustice fortie yeares, after whom succeeded Fandufus, from whom ys∣sued Ethion,Fandufus & his issue. that begate Glaucus, whose sonne (named Nottasilus) was the father of Rothsay, all which raigned successiuely ouer the Scots in Ireland. Rothsay, to auoide the super-abounding en∣crease of the Scottish Nation in Ireland,Rothsay transpor∣teth his Scots into the western Isles. trans∣ported them (by diuers numbers) into the Isles anciently called Ebonides, afterward Hebrides, but now (by the Scots) the Westerne Isles, ly∣ing on the West halfe of Scotland, and named the Isle he first possessed them of, the isle of Roth∣say, after his owne name: this was 133. yeares after Simon Brechus was crowned King. Nor may we forget, yt they also named those Islandes (and an especiall part thereof) by the name of Ar∣gathelia, in memory of their first guide & Prince
Gathelus,Argathelia in remem∣braunce of Gathelus. and as yet to this day it is called Ar∣guile, wherein also, as all ouer the mayne and firme land, called then Albion, and they Albion-Scots, they planted themselues, albeit it was a wast and very desert dwelling. Héere could I enter into a necessary declara∣tion, concerning the comming of the Pictes, into those partes of Albion, what people they were,The Pictes come into Albion. their combustions with the Brittains and Scots, and rule of their Kings, till their absolute destru∣ction, according to an ancient Prophesie: That the Scots should in the end destroy all the Pic∣tish progeny: But because I haue briefely spo∣ken of them, and hauing referred their further re∣lation to our generall History, we will now goe on with our matter of the Albion Scots. In the troubles of Ireland,Ferguhar∣dus in Ire∣land. among the Scots there inha∣biting, one Ferguhardus, a very worthy and no∣ble Prince, raigned there, who sent an armie to assist the Brittish and Albion Scots, vppon theyr request of aide, vnder the conduct of his son Fer∣gusius, who was a young gallant Prince, yet an expert Warrior, and tooke with him the Marble stone, because he went to a dangerous war, and hoped withall, that the issue of his paines should be the attaining of a kingdome: As indéed, vpon an assembly and parlement held at Arguile, and his high merit to excéed all others whatsoeuer, he was elected and sacred in that supreame office,Fergusius the first king of Scotland in the yeare after the worlds creation, 3640. before our blessed Sauiours incarnation, 327. after the building of Rome 420. and after Brutes entrance
into Britaine, 790. This Fergusius, after he had raigned royally the space of 25. yeares, sayling into Ireland, to quiet a discontentment amongst the Nobility, was driuen vpon a Rocke, where he perished by drowning, and that Rocke hath e∣uer since, euen to this day, bin called Rock-Fer∣guse, otherwise Knock-Ferguse. After the much lamented death of Fergusius, because his sonnes were ouer young, to vndergo the waighty charge of gouernment,Feritharis the second k. of Scot∣land. his Brother Feritharis was crowned King, being enthroned in his Kingly Ornaments, with all solemnitie: his two edged sworde, his scepter Royall, and his Crowne of Golde, made in forme of a Ram∣pire, for preseruation of his Countries libertie: which manner of inuesting continued (without any alteration) till the dayes of Achaius King of Scotland, who confirming a perpetuall league with Charlemaigne, Emperor and K. of France, to last for euer betwéene Scots and French, ad∣ded to the Crowne foure Floure de Lices, with four Croslets, deuided in sunder with equal spa∣ces, rising somewhat higher then the Floure de Lices, that thereby, the obseruing of Christian Religion, and sincere faith (maintained by the Scottish Nation) might appeare the more appa∣rant to al that behelde it. After Feritharis (who raigned worthy 15. yeares) not Ferlegus,Howe the first kinges of sottes succeded each other. the el∣dest sonne of Fergusius succéeded, but Mainus the younger sonne, being then aged 24. yeares: and after him his son Douadille, the following suc∣cession we will thus briefely relate.
Doruadil raigned 28. yeares. Nothatus, Brother to Doruadil, raygned two yeares. Reuther, son to Doruadill, 26. yeares. Reutha, the Vnckles son to Reuther, seuentéene yeares, and then entering into a priuate life, he resigned the Crowne to Thereus. Thereus, the sonne of Reuther, who raigned 12. yeares. Conanus, Lord of Galloway, who after the de∣cease of Thereus in Brittaine, yeelded the go∣uernment to Iosina, Brother to Thereus, and raigned 24. yeares. Finnanus, sonne to Iosina, thirty yeares. Durstus, sonne to Finnanus, nine yeares. Ewin, Vnckles sonne to Durstus, xix. yeares. Gillus, base sonne to Ewin, who being expulsed, Ewin, second of that name, was crowned K. and raigning xix. yeares, resigned his state to Ederus. Ederus, the sonne of Dothan, 38. yeares. Ewin the third, son to Ederus, 7. yeares. Metellanus, sonne to Carren, the Brother of E∣derus, in the 12. yeare of whose raigne,The birth of our Saui∣our Iesus Christ. our Sauiour Iesus Christ was borne of the bles∣sed Virgin Mary in Bethlem, which was 324 yeares, after the establishing of the Scottish kingdome by Fergusius. This Metellanus di∣ed in the 28. yeare of his raigne. Caratake, son to Cadallan,54 and Nephew to Me∣tellanus, raigned xxi. yeares. Corbreid, yongst brother to Caratake, 34. years.58
71Dardan, sur-named the Great, for his huge sta∣ture foure yeares. 75Corbreid Gald, eldest sonne of King Corbreid, 35. yeares. This was a very worthy and fa∣mous King, and the Countrey where hee last fought with the Romaines, in memory of his owne name, was called Galdia, which (as some thinke) is that now named Galloway. 131Lingthake, son to Corbreid Gald, two yeares. 133Mogall, nephew to Corbreid Gald, six and thir∣ty yeares. 162Conarus, son to Mogall, 14. yeares. 176Ethodius, Nephewe to King Mogall. In this Kingsraigne, Lucius, King of the Brittains, with a great part of his people, receyued the Christian faith, being according to the Scot∣tish Chronicles, in the yeare after our Saui∣ours byrth, 187. This Ethodius raigned 33. yeares. 207Satrahell, or Serrahell, Brother to Ethodius, raigned foure yeares. 211Donald, Brother to Satrahell, 21. years. In this kings time, the Scots receiued with him the Christian faith, 330. yeares after the erection of the Scottish Kingdome. And this Donald was the first that caused Golde and Siluer to bee coyned in his Realme, stamping a Crosse on the one side▪ and his face on the other. 216Euthodius the second, beeing Sonne to the for∣mer King Euthodius, raigned 16. yeares. 242Athirco, son to Ethodius, 12. yeares. 252Natholocus, a Noble man of Argile, xi. yeares.
Findocke, sonne to Athirco, ten yeares. Donald, Brother to Findock, being named Do∣nald of the Isles, twelue yeares.273 Crathlint, Son to King Findock,287 twenty foure yeares. Fincomarke, the Vncles sonne to Crathlint,322 47. yeares. Romacus, Nephewe to King Crathlint,358 foure yeares. Angusianus, Nephewe to King Crathlint,360 two yeares. Fethelmachus, Cozin to Angusianus, thrée years.363 Eugenius, the Sonne of King Fincomarke,369 thrée yeares. Ferguse, Sonne to Erthus, who was Sonne to Ethodius, Brother to Eugenius,424. and borne in Denmarke, 16. yeares. Eugenius, the Son of Ferguse,440 in whose time the Wall, called Adrians Wall, was vndermi∣ned and ouerthrowne; Also the Brittaines were made tributary to the Scots and Pictes:The Brit∣taines tribu∣tary to the Scots and Picts. which was about fiue hundred yeares, after that Iulius Caesar had brought them in subiection to the Ro∣maines; after our Sauiours birth 446. and the seauenth of Eugenius his raigne. Then was the Isle of Albion sore infected with the Pelagians Heresie, and Paladius (tearmed by some the Apo∣stle of Scotland) was sent by Pope Celestine to the Scots and Picts. This Eugenius raigned 30. yeares, and aduanced the State of his Countrey to more wealth and felicity, then any of his Pre∣decessors had done before him.
470Dongard, brother to Eugenius, raignd 5. years. 481Constantine, Brother also to Eugenius, 17. yeares. 501Dongall, or Congall, Nephew to Constan∣tine, and son to his Brother Dongard, 20. years. 521Conranus, Brother to Congall, in whose time the great K. Arthur was borne, and S. Germane preached among the Souldiers in the Camp, and bare the Kings Standard in the field, wben with the cry of Alleluia thrée tunes together, the Sax∣ons were miraculously discomfited. This Con∣ranus died in the 20. yeare of his raigne, the 16. of Arthurs ouer the Brittaines, and fift of the Emperor Iustinian, An. Christi. 531. 531Eugenius, his Nephew, and son to his brother Congall, in whose time was the bloudy battell betweene the Britaines, Scots, and Picts, where∣in aboue 20000. men were slain, with Mordred, K. Arthur,The death of King Ar∣thur, Mor∣dred, &c. & Gawan or Gauan, brother to Mor∣dred, and most part of ye Brittish Nobility. This Eugenius raigned 38. yeares. 578Conuall, Brother to Eugenius, in whose time S. Colme, or Colombe, came from Ireland in∣to Scotland. This Conuall raigned ten yeares, and then Kinnatill his Brother, being enthroned at Argile by free election, liued but twenty dayes after his Coronation. 588Aldan, Sonne to King Conran, was crow∣ned by the holy Father Saint Colme, and raig∣ned thirty seauen yeares. In this Aidans time, the Saxons hauing driuen the Brittaines into Wales, and insulting ouer their lands and Coun∣tries;
deuided the kingdome into seauen parts or deuisions,England made seuen kingdomes. ordaining seuen seuerall Kings to rule ouer them. In this King Aidans rule, died Saint Colme, at Dune in Ireland, whereon his toomb these verses were found engraued. Hi tres in Duno, tumulo tumulantur in vno, Brigida, Patricius at que Columba pius. Saint Colme, Saint Patrick, and Brigetta pure, These three in Dune lies in one Sepulture. Kenethus Keir, Son of Conuall, or Conwall,606 raigued foure months. Eugenius, fourth of that name,620. Son to King Aidan, and (by some) called Brudus, according to S. Colmes prophecy of him, was crowned King of Scotland. He raigned 15. yeares. Ferquhard, Son to Eugenius, 13. yeares.632 Donald, or Donwald,645 the third son of Euge∣nius, 15. yeares. Ferquhard the second, Nephew to Donwald,664 18. yeares. Maldwin, Sonne of king Donwald,684 in whose time was a grieuous Pestilence through most part of the World,A generall Pestilence. consuming a greater number of Men before it ceased, then were left aliue, for it continued the space of three yeares together. He raigned twenty yeares. Eugenius the fift, Nephew to Maldwin,688 foure yeares. Eugenius the sixt, the Sonne of Ferquhard,697 ten yeares.
Strange vi∣sions in Al∣bion.In this Kinges raigne were many wonderfull visions séen in Albion. In the Riuer of Humber (to the apparant view of a multitude of men) a number of Ships appeared vnder saile, as ready furnished for the war. In the Church at Came∣lon, a noyse was heard like the clattering of Armour. Milke was turned into bloud in dy∣uers places of Pict-land, and Chéese conuer∣ted into a bloudie Masse or Cake. Corne, as it was gathered in Haruest time, was all bloudie, and it rained blood in the further partes of Scot∣land, as the Scottish Chronicles doe make men∣tion. 69Ambirkeleth, Nephew, or Son (as some say) to Eugenius the fift, raigned not fully two years. 716Eugenius the seauenth, Brother to Ambirke∣leth, who caused the Histories of his Ancestours liues to be written in Books and volumes,The Histo∣ries of the Kings liues written. for ex∣ample to posterity, appointing those Monuments to bee carefully kept in the Abbay of Iona, now called Colmekill; he raigned 17. yeares, and dy∣ed much lamented. 734Mordacke, Nephew to Eugenius. In whose time (according to venerable Bede) foure seueral people liued in peace and quietnesse within the boundes of Albion, though differing in man∣ners, language, lawes, and ordenaunces: Sax∣ons, whom hee called English-men, Brittaynes, Scots, and Picts. In which time also, Bede con∣cluded his history, with the ending of King Mor∣dacks life. 762Ethfine, Son to Eugenius the seauenth, who
had foure Gouernors vnder him in his Realme: Donald, Treasurer of Argile, Collane of Athol, and Mordake of Galloway his Lieutenants, & Conrath the Thane of Murreyland. He raigned 30. yeares. Eugenius, the eight Son of King Mordacke,767 thrée yeares. Ferguse the third, Son of King Ethfine,769 thrée yeares. Soluathius, Son of Eugenius the eight,788 twen∣ty yeares. Achaius, Sonne of King Ethfine,819 in whose time was a perpetuall league confirmed betwéen him and the Emperor Charlemaigne of France. And then had Hungus, the Pictish King, the vi∣sion of Saint Andrew and his Crosse, as is repor∣ted, whereby S. Andrew, became Patron both of the Scots and Picts. This Achaius raigned 32 yeares. Conuall, the Brother of King Ethfine,824 fiue yeares. Dongall, Sonne of King Soluathius,830. fiue yeares. Alpine, the Sonne of King Achaius,833 foure yeares. Kenneth, the Sonne of Alpine.839 This is that famous and renowmed King, in whose time the Pictish Nation were vtterly destroyed,The vtter sbuersion of the Picts. the Cit∣tie of Camelon cast downe, the Castle of Mai∣dens forsaken by the Picts, and none, or verie few of them left liuing in Albion. Which hap∣pened after their first beginning to raigne there,
1173. yeares; 1166. from the enterance of Fer∣gusius; eight hundred thirty nine after our Sa∣uiours birth, and from the Worldes Creation, 4806.Translation of the Mar∣ble stone. In memorie of this his famous victorie, King Kenneth brought the Marble Stone out of Argile (where till then it hadde béene kept) into Gourie, and placed it at Scone, néere to the place where he preuailed against the Picts. This roi∣all K. died in the yeare 856. hauing raigned 20. yeares in great renowne and glory. 860.Donald, Brother to King Kenneth, died in the sixt yeare of his raigne, which was much molle∣sted by the Danes, vnder Cadane King of Den∣marke, pretending a Title to the Picts lands. 874Constantine, the Sonne of King Kenneth, a very worthy and famous king, who redressed al disorders in his Land, appointing Priests to ap∣ply their vocation, and not to meddle with any seculer businesse, going to warre, or kéeping any Horses,A vertuous King. Haukes, or Hounds. The youth of his land (to auoide wantonnesse and idlenesse) were appointed but one meale a day; and drunkennes, either in man or Woman, was punnished with death. He raigned 13. yeares. 876.Ethus, brother of Constantine, who was a man of such swiftnesse of oot, that he could match and make way in running, with Harts and Hounds, whereupon he was sir-named Light-foot. Hee gouerned scarce two yeares. 893.Gregory, the son of Dongall, that raigned be∣fore Alpine; in whose time liued Iohn Scot the famous Clerke. This Gregory raignd 18. years.
Donald the fift,903 Sonne of Constantine the se∣cond, in whose time Gormond and his Danes were baptized, and Gormonds name was chan∣ged to Athelstane. He raigned almost 11. years.943. Constantine the third, Son of Ethus ye swift, 40. yeares. He gaue ouer his kingly dignity, and entred into Religion, as Hector Boetius affir∣meth. Malcolme, the Sonne of Donald, 15. yeares.959 Iudulph, Sonne of Constantine the third,968 and prince of Cumberland, he raigned about 9. years Duffe, the Sonne of King Malcolme,972 foure yeares. Culene, Prince of Cumberland,976 and Sonne of King Iudulph, raigned not fully fiue yeares. Kenneth, Sonne to King Malcolme the first,1000 25. yeares. Constantine, the Sonne of King Culene,1002 not three yeares. Grime, Nephew to King Duffe,1010. not fully nine yeares. Malcolme the Son of Kenneth,1034 and Prince of Cumberland, 25. yeares. Duncane, Nephew to Malcolme, 6. yeares.1046. In his time was Banquho Thaine of Lochqua∣ber; of whō the house of the Stuarts is descended, euen to his Maiesty now raigning. And then was England. deuided, betwéene Canutus King of Denmarke, and Edmund Ironside, after a va∣liant Combate fought betwéene them. Mackbeth, son to Sinell, Thaine of Glammis,1057 raigned 17. yeares.
1092Malcolme Cammore, Sonne of King Dun∣cane, hee changed the name of Thaines were as Ba∣rons. Thaines into Earls, being ten the first that euer were among the Scots, according to their owne Histories. At this time did William the Bastard, duke of Nor∣mandy, make his Conquest of England. This King Malcolme raigned 36. yeares. And after some difference for the Crown betwéene Donald Bane, Brother to King Malcolme, and Duncane a Bastard Son to King Malcolme (which vsur∣pation continued for the space of thrée years) Ed∣gar the rightfull Prince attayned to his due claime. 1101Edgar, Son to King Malcolme, was the first that euer was annointed King in Scotland: now was the generall passage to the Holy land, vnder Godfrey of Bullen, and many other Christian Princes. This King Edgar raigned nine years. 1109Alexander, Brother to Edgar, being sir-named Alexander the fierce, for his stearne valiancy in pursuing Théeues and Robbers. Dauid, Bro∣ther to King Alexander, being in England, mar∣ried Maude, Daughter to Waltheof, Earle of Huntingdon and Northumberland, & (in right of his wife) was made Earle of Huntingdon and Northumberland, with inheritance of the lands to them belonging. In this King Alexanders time (who raigned 17. yeares compleate) the or∣der of the Knightes of Rhodes,The begin∣ning of the Knights of Rhodes. beeing formerlie Knightes of Saint Iohn of Hierusalem, tooke beginning, and the order of the white Monkes. Then liued also the Holy Man Richard de
sancte Victore, beeing a Scot borne, but lyuing (the more part of his time at Paris in Fraunce) where hee died, and lieth buried in the Abbey of S. Victore, hee being a Brother of the same house. Dauid, Brother to Alexander,1153 succéeded as lawfull heire, and ruled 29. yeares, and two mo∣neths. It is recorded of this King, that he excel∣led in Noble Vertues, and sober conuersation of life, being very pittifull to the poore, and some∣what ouer-bountifull to the Church.The vertu∣ous life and raigne of K. Dauid. For when King Iames the first, came to his Tomb at Dun∣firmling, he saide, That hee was a sore Saint for the Crowne, leauing the Church ouer-rich, and the Crowne too poore. He purged his Court so cleane of al vicious behauiour, and disordered cu∣stomes, that it appeared to be a schoole of vertue. No riotous banquetting, surfetting cheare, or lasciuious word could be herd there, or any wan∣ton signes, whereby to kindle lust or idle concu∣piscence. All the words, workes, and whole de∣meanor of his seruants, tended euer to some good conclusion, frée from moouing strife, or a thought of sedition: the Kings owne life and example, ser∣uing for their guide and direction. He builded 15 Abbeyes (viz) Holy-Rood house, Kelso, Ied∣burgh, Melrosse, Newbottell, Holmecultrane, Dundranane, Cambuskenneth, Kinlois, Dun∣firmling, Holme in Cumberland. Also two Nun∣neries, one at Carleill, and the other at Northe Berwike; with two Abbeyes beside New-Ca∣stle, one of S. Benedictes order, and the other of
white Monks. He erected likewise foure Bishop∣pricks in his Realme Rosse, Brechin, Dunkeld, & Dublane: endowing them with rich rents, faire lands, and very commodious possessions. 1165Malcolme, Sur-named Malcolme the Maid, because his conuersation & delight (both in minde and body) was so chaste from his verie infancie, that he liued single al his daies, and without ma∣riage. Hee was Son to Prince Henry, that was sonne and heire to King Dauid, and raigned not fully twelue yeares. 1214William, Brother to King Malcolme, and for his singuler Iustice Sur-named the Lyon. In this Kings time, Richard King of England, sur-named Cueur de Lyon, went his voyage to the Holy-Lande: King William raigned nine and forty yeares. 1249Alexander the second, Sonne to King Willi∣am the Lyon, who caused his Fathers death to be mourned for thorow his whole kingdom: hee raigned 35. yeares. 1290Alexander the third, sonne to the former King Alexander, in whose time was a generall Coun∣sell at Lyons in France. He raigned 42. yeares, and by reason of his dying without any issue, the controuersie betweene Iohn Ballioll, and Robert Bruse then happened: which was heard and cen∣sured by Edward the first,The seueral claimes of Iohn Baliol, and Robert Bruse▪ king of England, albe∣it they maintained both their claimes, vpon their Titles seuerally, Balioll descending of Marga∣ret, eldest Daughter to Dauid, Earle of Hun∣tington, Brother vnto William the Lyon; and
Bruse comming of Isabell, second daughter of the saide Earle Dauid, and the next heire male to William the Lyon, for want of succession in the right line. By which Title (how euer Balioll is saide to be crowned King) Robert Bruse inioyed the royal dignitie, in the year, 1305. He had issue, Dauid, that left no posterity, and Margery, ma∣ried to Walter, Greate Stewarde of Scotland, (descended lineallie from the Princes of Wales, by Neste, Daughter to Griffithap Lhewlyn, Mother to VValter, the sonne of Fleance, made Great Stewarde of Scotland by Malcolme the fourth.) Of whom came Robert the second, first of the sur-name of Stuart, that bare dominion in Scotland. Robert Stuart, being called Robert the second,1250 was crowned King with Royall solemnitie at Scone, in the 47. yeare of his age,The firste comming of the Stu∣arts to the Crowne, on the Annun∣tiation day of our Lady in Lent, 1370. he raigned ten years. It is recorded of this K. Robert the 2. that hs Captaines & commanders were alwaies fortunat in war, neuer returning but with spoils and victories. He was a Prince of such constancy in promise, that he sildome spake the word which hee not performed. Such an obseruer of Iustice was he also, that he would not remoue from any place, but Proclamation was first made, that if any of his men or officers did take any thing vn∣paid for: the partie to whome the debt was due, should come in, and imediatelie satisfied, he wil∣linglie heard the complaints of the poore, and was as diligent in seeing their wrongs redressed.
1390Iohn Stuart, Earle of Carrike, and sonne to King Robert before named, was crowned king: but because Iohn was iudged to bee an vnfortu∣nate name for Kings, they changed it, and called him Robert,The Kings name chan∣ged. after his Fathers name, and so hee was King Robert the third. Then was the first creation of Dukes in Scotland, for the king made his eldest Sonne Dauid, Duke of Rothsay, and his Brother Robert, Duke of Albanie; yet ney∣ther of these sonnes succéeded their father, but an∣other son, who was named Iames. This King Robert raigned 16. yeares. 1424Iames, Sonne to King Robert, succéeded his Father in the kingdome of Scotland: his Quéen was deliuered of two Sonnes at a birth, named Alexander and Iames; Alexander dyed in his infancy, but Iames liued, and succéeded hys Fa∣ther. This King Iames the first, raigned thir∣téene yeares. Of whom it is written, that he was a very seuere and vpright Iusticer, yet so milde and swéete of Nature, that not any of their Prin∣ces did more reuerently embrace peace at home among his subiects or more willingly conclude it abroad with strangers, then he. His Wisedome appeared so manifestly, in many very great and especiall affaires, that Kinges of other Nations did louingly ioyne in league and friendship with him. He had bin so wel educated in all Sciences and Gentlemanly actiuity, by the carefull dilli∣gence of the best Schoole-maisters, that it coulde not be easily iudged, in which hee was most per∣fect: For hee was an excellent Musitian, a rare
Poet, a most elequent Orator, & so exactly (both in minde and memory he comprehended ye depth of Diuinity and Lawe) that for all these (in his time) he gaue not place to any one. Lastly, he was not onely a beauty to his Countrey, in prouiding his peoples quiet at home, but fought also for their defence against their enemies abroad.The inuen∣tion of guns in this kings time. The inuention of Gunnes happened in his time, and he caused diuers pieces of Artillery to be made in Flanders, one of which being a great and goodly Piece, he called the Lyon, whereon these verses he caused to be engranen. Illustri Iacobo Scotorum Principi digno, Regs magnifico, dum fulmin castra a reduce, Factus sum subito, nuncuper ergo Leo. Iames the second, son to King Iames the first,1436. being but sixe yeares olde, succéeded his Father in the Crown, and was the 103. King of Scotland from Fergusius the first.The Arte of Printing found out. In this Kings time was the famous Art of Printing inuented, in the Cit∣ty of Mentz in Germany. This King raygned 24. yeares, & among his Subiects in the Camp, hee carried himselfe so gently towards all men, that they seemed not to feare him as their King, but reuerenced and loued him like a father. Hee would ride vp and downe amongst them, and eat and drinke with them, euen as if hee had bin fel∣low-like with the meanest. Iames the third,1461 Sonne to King Iames the se∣cond, being but seauen years of age, succéeded his
father in the kingdome, and raigned 29. yeares. 1488.Iames the fourth, son to King Iames the third, was crowned King of Scotland, the 24. day of Iune, 1488. he being then aged xvi. yeares. This King Iames the fourth, married the Princesse Margaret,King Iames married the eldest daugh¦ter to Hen∣ry 7. King of England. eldest Daughter vnto Henry the sea∣uenth, King of England, and raigned fiue and twenty yeares, deseruing to be ranked and num∣bred amongst the best princes that euer there go∣uerned, for his polliticke rule, and administrati∣on of Iustice. 1513Iames the fift, being a Childe, aged one yeare, fiue moneths, and ten daies, and sonne to king Iames the fourth, was Crowned King of Scot∣land, the one and twentieth day of September, 1513. his Mother the Quéene being appoynted Regent of the Realme. This King raigned 32. yeares, being an obseruice of Iustice, a defender of the Law, and a sound shielde for the poore and innocent, in which regard (of his Nobility) hee was called King of the Commoners. He would set at libertie the poore oppressed with the tyranny of the rich, and represse the rich from spoyling the poore. All which he did with a kinde of seueritie, but yet in such sort, as therein appeared a woon∣derfull gentlenesse in his naturall disposition: be∣cause he seldom did put any of them to death, but did eyther by inprisonment, or mulct, punish the offence. For it was his vsuall saying, That he would neuer take life from any, but onelie to keepe the Lawe sound, for example to others, and to keepe downe their boldnesse, that dwelt
about the borders. His death was great lamen∣ted of his subiects, to whom he was a perfect Pa∣tron, and a louing Father. Mary, Daughter and heire to King Iames the fift, began her raigne ouer Scotland,1542 the 18. of December, 1542. She was but seauen daies old when the King her Father died, and left her his kingdome, hir mother then lying in child-bed, in the Castle of Lithquo, of which place the Lorde Leuingston being then Captaine, had the charge both of mother and daughter committed to him, with the mothers good liking, & frée consent. This Q. Mary maried Frances the Dolphin of France, who after his fathers death was king of France: but King Frances dying, Mary Qu. of Scotland,Mary Dow∣ager of France re∣turneth backe into Scotland. and Dowager of France, returned home againe into Scotland, where hir Mother had bin Regent al the time of hir absence, I meane vntill the x. of Iune, 1560. on which day the Queen Mother of Scotland died. Afterward, Mary Q. of Scots ma∣ried Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, Earl of Rosse, Duke of Albanie, & son to the Earle of Lennox, who was proclaimed king at the Market Crosse in Edenburgh, the 28. of Iuly, 1564. and on the tenth of February, 1566. he was made Knight of the Order of S. Michael, in the Chappel of Holi∣rood house, with great reuerence and solemnitie. In the month of Iune next folowing, the 19. day, and betwéen the houres of x. and xi. before noone, Quéene Mary was deliuered of a goodlie young Prince, who afterwarde was crowned King of Scotland, by the name of Iames the sixt.
1567Iames the sixt, Sonne to King Henry and Q. Mary, being about a yeare old, began his raigne ouer Scotland, and was crowned King thereof, the 19. of July, 1567. Hee succéeded also in his rightfull inheritance of the Crowne of England, (after the decease of Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory) the 24. day of March, 1602. gloriously vniting those kingdomes in one, which formerly (by Brute) had bin long time deuided. ¶Of the Island of Albion, before Brutes arri∣uall there, and tearming it Brittaine, after his owne name; Also, what Kinges raig∣ned there before he came thither. ¶To the Worshipfull, Maister William Dios, Esquire, Remembrauncer of the Honourable Citty of London. WHether this Lande were peopled before the flood or no, it is no part of my purpose to argue heer there∣on,Geog. Com. lib. Beros. ant Lib. 1. albeit Dominicus Marius Niger, and Berosus do affirme, that well as this Islande was inhabited with people, long before the dayes of Noah, as any other Countrey or part of ye world
beside. But after the floud,Annius de Viter. in Cō∣ment. sup. 4. Lib. Beros. de aut. Lib. 1 according to Annius de Viterbo, Berosus and others, when Noah deuided the earth among his thrée Sonnes, that part which is now knowne by the name of Asia, fell to the lot of his eldest Sonne Sem; Affrica to his second Sonne Cham; and Europe (withall the Isles thereto appertaining) to his third Son Iaphet, among which, this Island (now called Brittaine, with other Isles thereto belonging) was certainely numbred. Iaphet, Noahs third Sonne (by some called Iapetus; by others, Atlas Maurus, because hee died in Mauritania) in the iudgement of Bodinus,Iohannes Bo∣din ad fact. hist. cogn. auouching the consent and authority of the Hebrew, Greeke, and La∣tine Writers, was the first that peopled the Countries of Europe, deuiding it also (by the Grand-fathers example) among his Sonnes,Franciscus Tarapha. of whom Tuball (according to Tarapha) had the rule of Spaine, Gomer the Italians, and Samo∣thes was the founder of Celtica, which contai∣ned in it (as Bale testifieth) a great part of Eu∣rope, but especially those Countries now called Gallia and Britannia, which peopling of this I∣sland (by Iaphets Children) is affirmed to be 200 yeares after the floud. Samothes, being the sixt Sonne of Iaphet,Samothes, first King of Celtica. Wolfang. Lazius de∣migr. gen. and called (by Moses) Mesech, by others, Dis, had for his portion (as Wolfangus Lazius auoucheth) the Countrey betweene the Riuer of Rhine, & the Pyrenean Mountaines, where hee founded the kingdom of Celtica, tearming his people Celtae: which name was as indifferent to them of Gallia,
as to the Inhabitantes of the Isle of Britaine. This King Samothes, is reported to bee a Man excelling all other (in that age) in learning and knowlede, & that (of him) thē arose a sect of Phi∣losophers,Lib. de Ma∣gic. success. Lib. 22. both in Britaine & Gallia, which were cald Samothei, & as Aristotle and Secion do say, were surpassing, both in the Law of God & man, and therefore greatly addicted to religion: especi∣ally them of Britaine, which not onely made the whole nation to take name of them, but, as Bale and Doctor Caius affirme, the Island it selfe was named Samothea,De ant. Cāt. cet. Lib. 1. Script. Brit. cet. 1. Magus se∣cond King. which was the first peculiar name it had, before the arriuall of Albion. Magus, the Sonne of Samothes, was second King of Celtica after his Father. This Magus was likewise so famous for his learning, that the Persians Magi, or Diuines, are said to come of him. Sarron third King.Sarron, succéeded his Father Magus, in the Countrey of Gallia, and the Isle Samothea, of whom Diodorus Siculus reporteth, that a sect of Philosophers descended among the Celtes, who were called Sarronides. Druis 4. K.Druis, or (after Seneca) Dryus, raigned after his Father Sarron, indifferently ouer the Celtes and Samotheans. Of him came the Philosphers, called Druides,De bello Gal gic. Lib. 9. & Lib. 6. whom Caesar anoucheth, to haue the charge of common and priuate sacrifices, the discussing of pointes of Religion, the educati∣on of youth, the determining of matters in vari∣ance, and full power to interdict so many from the Sacrifices to their Gods, and societie of men,
as disobeyed their award. If any doubt arose in the Countries, about matters of Discipline; they alwayes resorted to these Druides, who,Anti. Lib. 5 (as Humphtey Llhoyd witnesseth) made theyr chéefest aboade in the Isle now called Anglesey, and there (at all times) receiued their resoluti∣on. Bardus, the Sonne of Druis,Bardus fift King. was the fifth King ouer the Celtes and Samotheans: a man much renowmed for inuention of Musique and Ditties, and he made an order of Philosophicall Poets, or Herauldes, calling them Bardi, after his owne Name. Of these Bardi, Nonnius; Strabo, Diodorus, Stephanus. Bale, and Sir Iohn Price doe thus record. That they vsed to Register the Noble exploits of auncient Cap∣taines, and to draw the pedegrées and Genealo∣gies of such as were liuing. They did so excell, in singing swéete Songes and Ditties to theyr Harpes, that, if two Armies had béene ready to ioyne battaile, and any one of these Bards (by for∣tune) entred among them; they had not the power to strike, vntill he left singing, and went from the Armies. When Bardus was deceased, the Celts be∣gan to affect liberty,The Celtes subiected by Albion the Gyant. and (addicting themselues to pleasure and ydlenesse) would liue no lon∣ger vnder the strict orders of their auncient Kinges: which brought them the sooner vnder subiection to the Gyant Albion, who straited Celtica and the Celtes, within the boundes of Gallia, tearming this Island (formerly called
Samothea) Albion, according to his owne name, and subdued the people; albeit the Title of Sa∣motheans (according to the iudgement of diuers Writers) had continued from Samothes to Albi∣on, the space of 310. yeares. This Albion was the fourth Sonne of Neptune, whom Moyses calleth Nepthuim, and who did put his said Son in possession of this Island, by conquering the Sa∣motheans,Bergion ru∣led in Ire∣land. as he did the like to his other Sonne, named Bergion, in Ireland and the Orkenies, which were brought vnder his obeysance. Con∣cerning the Historie of Hercules Lybicus, (whom Moyses nameth Laabin) his Conquests in Spaine, his passage into Italy against Le∣strigo, and lastly his killing Albion and his Bro∣ther Bergion; it being nothing incident to my present purpose, I leaue it. Also the Story of Danaus Daughters, being fifty in number, that they should arriue in this Island (after the slaughter of their Husbandes, the fifty Sonnes of King Aegyptus) and that one of those Ladies should bee named Albina, of whom this Land should bée called Albion: I passe it ouer likewise, and will now procéede to the knowne History of Brute. Yet not daring to enter into so rich a Mine of hidden treasure, till being guided by the Light of Brittaine (the learned labour of a wor∣thy Gentleman and Antiquarie, Maister Henry Lyte of Lytescarie, Esquire, and which (with his owne hand) hée presented to our late Soue∣raigne Quéene and matchlesse Mistresse, on the day when shee came in royall manner to Paules
Church) I be guided therein for my better direc∣tion, vsing his owne words. The Light of Britaine. BRitannia Maior (the Countrey of the bright Britona,Britania of Britona, and Britomartis called Brito∣martis, the president of Britaine) that is to say, the chast Diana of Calydonia sylua: Astrorum decus; Syluarum dea; casta et innupta; custos, et cultrix nemorum; metuenda Ʋirago; terror syluestribus apris. This Britannia maior, was first found by Brute of Albania; the Conqueror of the Greeks; the mightie deliuerer of the Troyans, and first founder of the Noble Britaines. Who by the O∣racle of the bright Britona,Diana Bri∣tonas Ora∣cle. Albania. Calydonia. Aetolia. called Diana of Caly∣donia sylua (Astrorum decus) brought the re∣maines of the Albanian Troyans of Asia, from Albania Calydonia sylua, & Aetolia in Greece; to Albania Calydonia sylua, and Aetolia in Bri∣raine. Before whose most happy and fortunate arriuall, there was neither Towne, Citty, Coun∣trey, Riuer, Region, or place of name in Britan∣nia: for Britannia (at Brutes arriuall) was no Britannia, but a rude and solitary Desert or wil∣dernesse, without name, Ferarum altrix,Britannia a Wildernes. Ferarum al∣trix. a verie nursery or place of store for wilde Beastes. The Countries and Regions of Britayne, were then all ouer-growne with Woodes, replenished with all kindnes of sauage and cruell beasts; as Lyons, Beares, Wolues, Foxes, wild Boares,
and all other game belonging to the Chase. Be∣side diuers other kind of wilde Beastes and Cat∣tell; especially a certaine kinde of white monste∣rous wilde Buls and Kine,Wilde Buls and Kine. with long shagd cur∣led haire and maines, which kind of Cattel were as fierce and cruell, as Lyons, and could neuer be tamed by mans art; as you may finde it regi∣stred and recorded in our ancient Chronicles, and noted in the very common Dictionaries, vppon these wordes Caledonia, and Caledonia sylua Britanniae, alwayes mistaken, and corruptly Written Caledonia, for Calydonia: because the reason why our Countrey was first called Caledonia sylua, was no better knowne to the auncient Romaines in Iulius Caesars time, then it is (at this day) knowne to dyuers of our Anti∣quaries and Chronicles of Britayne. For one de∣riueth Caledonia sylua, from Calden, and ano∣ther fetcheth Calydonia sylua, from Kaled: But the ones faire Daughter Kaled, is too young to bee the Mother of Calydon, or Calydonia sylua Britanniae; And the others Calden, or Hazell∣sticke, is as weake to be the Mother of Calydon. For Calydon,Calydon was the son of Aetolus. Mars the fa∣ther of Eto∣lus. Parthaon & Britona. of whom Calydonia sylua, by Aetolia in Greece tooke name, was the Sonne of Aetolus, who was the Sonne of Mars, the God or Patron of battaile. Mars was the father of Aetolus, of Parthaon, & of the bright Britona called Britomaris, the president of Britayne. Aetolus, the Sonne of Mars, and Brother to bright Britona, was Father of Calydon, of whom Calydonia sylua, by Aetolia in Greece,
(Mother of our Calydonia sylua, the generall name of all Britayne) tooke name: but especially of Calydonia sylua secunda, which is Scotland, called Britannia secunda. In which part of Bry∣taine, at this day, is the most ancient Towne of Parthaon, now called Perth;Parthaon, now Perth in Aetolia. Aetolia, now Athol. and Saint Iohns Towne, the principall Towne of Aetolia, now called Atholl, a Region or Countrey of Britan∣nia, Albania, or Calydonia sylua secunda, where the great Calydon Wood,Calydon wood. which beginneth at Striueling (called the Dolorus Mount) runneth foorth thorough Mentieth and Stratherne, to Aetolia (that fruitefull Region of Grampius Mount) which reacheth to Lochquhaber,Calydoniū Cathnesse. and to Calydonium Promontorium, which is Cathnesse or Orcha, the angle, point, cape, foreland or lands end of Scotland. This Calydonia sylua Brytannia, was the daughter of Calidonia sylua,Calydon. by Aetolia in Greece who tooke his originall from Calydon the Sonne of Aetolus. Aetolia,Aetolia. now called Atholl in Bri∣tayne, is the Daughter of Aetolia, a Citty of Albania, and Calydonia sylua in Greece, so cal∣led of Aetolus the Sonne of Mars. Parthaon,Parthaon. now called Perth, or Saint Iohns Towne, the principall Towne of Aetolia in Scotland, tooke his glorious name of Parthaon, the Brother to bright Britona, called Britomaris, the president Brytaine: Of whome, all Britannia (contay∣ning all the Countries and Regions of England, Scotland, Wales, and Cornewall, called by Alex∣ander Necham, in his book De diuina sapientia,
Bruti tellus) took the most glorious name of Bri∣taine. Britannia of Britona.For Brute of Albania, the Founder of Brit∣taine, came to this Isle by the Oracle of Brito∣na, called Diana of Calydonia sylua: therefore hee called this Isle of Britannia, of the bright Britana, &c. The same Brute also, who was borne in Albania,Albania of Albania. bannished to Albania, and the first founder of Britayne called Albania; called all our Countrey of Britayne, Albion, seu Alba∣nia: not of the White Rockes and Cliftes, as some men suppose, but of Albania in Asia, and Albania Epiri in Greece, the Countrey of Hele∣nus and Andromache, Quéene of Albania Epiri, from whence, Brute of Albania brought the Al∣banian Troyans, the founders of Britayne. Chronicles and written Records of Brute.To approue what formerly hath béene sayde, without any néede of repetition, wée haue a multitude of most glorious Recordes and Chro∣nicles, Written and Printed, confirmed by the Testimony of Iulius Caesar, by Pope Eleu∣therius; by a Parliament holden at Norham vppon Twede; and another at Lincolne, in the time of King Edward the first, who, by his Let∣ters sent from Lyncolne o Pope Boniface, dooth approoue Brutes▪ Historie to bee no F∣ble: as some Criticks of our time haue done, who will not beleeue our ancient written Records, al∣though confirmed by Emperors, Kings, Popes, and Parliamentes, neyther the Testimony of Strangers. Wherefore, by the Oracle of Diana, called Britomartis, the President of Britayne▪
and by the Oracle of Diana Lucifera, that is to say, Venus, called Bosphorus, the bright Quéen of Phrygia, and Caria, Mother of Eneas, and the Graces, of whom came Brute of Albania, foun∣der of Britaine, who brought in Carius, a Noble Prince of Lydia and Caria, with the people of Caria, and Swannes of Carie in Britaine: By the Oracles aforesaide, the Swans of Carie in Britaine, are now stirred vp to maintain the ve∣rity of the Brittish History. The Goddes of the Gentiles, whose Temples our fore-fathers (of the Troyan race) erected in diuers Countries and re∣gions of Britaine: especially at Troia-noua,Dianas Temple at Troia noua now called London in Britaine, where the Troyno∣uants did sometimes Sacrifice Buls, Bullocks,Diana Tau∣ropolia, Theonte Dea. and Stags, to Diana Tauropolia, whome the Gentiles called the Quéene of Heauen: whych was the same Diana called Bellona, whome the Brigantes honoured at Yorke, Brigantium Ciui∣tas. And what were these Brigantes, I pray ye?Diana Bel∣lona of Yorke. Herodian saith, that the Briges, Phryges, and Brigantes were all one. Whereupon I conclude, that the Brigantes, that is to say, our Northerne Britaines, were Phrygian Troyans.Briges. Phryges. Brigantes. The Bri∣gantes of Brittaine, are the people of Yorkshire, Richmondshire, Lancashire, Dutham, westmer∣land and Cumberland, hard to the Pictes Wall, where the Abij and Picti Agathyrsi dwell, about Abus Aestuariū, now called Humber.Abus Aestu∣arium. And what were those Abij, but Albanian Troyans, that came also from Abus, a Riuer of Albania Epiri? And the auncient Brittaines, called Picti Aga∣thyrsi,
what were they? Euen Scythian Troy∣ans of Albania,Abij Alba∣i Agathyrsi who sprang of Scythes and Aga∣thyrsus, the Sonnes of Hercules, that sometime raigned in Troy: for the famous Cittie of Troy in Phrygia, the head of all Asia, was in Scythia. Troyans, called Tau∣rini, & Tau∣roscythi.The noble Troyans were called Taurini, and Tauroscythi, of a famous mountaine of Asia, cal∣led Tauus Mount, which runneth thorough all Asia; a great part of the Mountain Taurus end∣eth in Caria which is a countrey of Asia belong∣ing to Troy.Taurus the mansion of Venus. Venus, called Bosphorus, the mother of Eneas and the Graces (of whome came Brute of Albania, the founder of Britaine) was Quéen of Phrygia and Caria. The famous Riuer of Maeander is in Caria, which riuer hath Golden sands and singing Swannes, that sometime ser∣ued Venus, Quéen of Phrygia and Caria: where∣fore the Swans of Caria, and Signets of Troy in Britaine, must alwayes sing of Troy & Troy∣ans.Riuers of Britaine, are Recordes of Brute. The daughters of heauen and earth, Isis, Themis, Rhea, Thetis, Abus, Arius, Alanus, Ax, Tameres, and all our famous Riuers of Britain, with the Deucalion Sea, and Islandes of Brit∣taine, especially Archadia, Aemonia, & Arachne are glorious records of Brute and the Troyans, the founders of Britaine. Diuers our most anci∣ent Citties and Townes of Britaine, as Oxford vpon Isis and Themis, Troia-noua vppon Isis, Themis,Towns and Citties, Re∣cordes of Brute. and Rhea Albanorum; Yorke, Bri∣gantium ciuitas; Antandros, turned to S. An∣dros; Parthaon, Perthe, turned to Saynt Iohns Town, Albanum ciuitas, turned to S. Albanes,
Chester, and Doriscestria, with the auncient Townes of Derby and Leicester; and Tyanton vpon Tamares Riuer of Britaine, with diuers other Townes and Citties of Britaine, are Re∣cords of Brute and the Troyans, Founders of Britaine. The diuers Nations and people of Britaine,Diuers Na∣tions and people of Britain, Re∣cordes of Brute. as the Troy-nouants, Brigantes, Scotobrigan∣tes, the people of Albania, Calydonia, and Aeto∣lia; the Iberi, the Albani, and Georgij, the peo∣ple of Derbie and Leycester, the people of Che∣ster, that came from Cestria Epiri, with the Dores, loues, and Cares, and the Tamarites of Tyanton, commonly called Tanton: All these are Records of the Noble people of Greece and Asia, the remaines of the Troyans that came in∣to to Britaine with Brute. To these, adde a Catalogue or Register,Princes, No¦blemen, and Gentlemen Recordes of Brute. of the ancient Princes, Noblemen, and Gentlemen of Britaine, whereof there are some remaining to this verie day, beginne wee then thus. Brute, Corineus, Locrine, Camber, Albanacte, Ma∣dan, Mempricius, Ebranke, and hys twentie Sonnes, Brute Greensheild, Assaracus, and Cecilius, &c. Belinus and Brennus, Cambra, or Cambria, Antenors Wife, Cambra, Belinus Daughter, Conidagus King of Albania, slewe Morgan at Glammorgan. Conidagus builded ye Temple of Minerua at Bangor in Wales, & the temple of Mars at Parthaon, now S. Iohns town of Aetolia in Scotland. Aruiragus, in whose
dayes, a Ioseph of Aramithia, preached in Brit∣taine. Leile, Androgeus, Brother to Cassibela∣nus; this Androgeus let Iulius Caesar into Brit∣taine. Pirrhus, Alexander Arcadius, Alexander Audax, Achaius, Etolus, Helena, Coile, Con∣stantine; Graye, Persie, Dercie, Carie, Busir, or Bousir, Cicell, Cydne, Dennis, Bridgis, An∣dros, Carowe, Caros, Tracie, Rhese ap Rhesus; Oen, or Owen, King of Calydon, Brent the son of Hercules. Thinn, Euance, Bryce, Hil, Drake, Calais, Nele, Gryne, Dorill, Hodie, Crane, &c. These and infinite more beside, whiche Brute brought with him from the Countries of Isis and Themis, and from Albania, Calydonia Sylua, and Etolia in Greece, to Albania, Calydonia Sylua, and Etolia in Britaine, are vndoubted re∣cords of him and the Troyans, Founders of Bri∣taine. Thus much out of Maister Lytes Light of Brittaine, which worthy Gentleman being de∣ceased, his Son Maister Thomas Lyte, of Lytes∣carie, Esquire, a true immitator and heyre to his Fathers Vertues, hath (not long since) presen∣ted the Maiesty of King Iames, with an excellent Mappe or Genealogicall Table (contayning the bredth and circumference of twenty large shéets of Paper) which he entitleth Brittaines Monar∣chy, approouing Brutes History, and the whole succession of this our Nation, from the very Ori∣ginal, with the iust obseruation of al times, chan∣ges and occasions therein happening. This wor∣thy worke, hauing cost aboue seauen yeares la∣bour,
beside great charges and expence, his high∣nesse hath made very gracious acceptance of, and to witnesse the same, in Court it hangeth in an e∣speciall place of eminence. Pitty it is, that this Phoenix (as yet) affoordeth not a fellowe, or that from priuacie, it might not bee made more gene∣rall: but, as his Maiesty hath graunted him pri∣uiledge, so, that the world might be woorthie to enioy it, whereto, if friendship may preuaile, as he hath bin already, so shall he be still as earnestly sollicited. Brute, the sonne of Siluius, hauing vnfortu∣nately slaine his father in hunting,Brute slewe his Father Siluius. as he shot his Arrow at a Deare, was therefore bannished his Countrey, whereupon he went into Grece, where a great number of the Troyans (liuing before in seruitude) resorted to him, and by his valour hee gaue them liberty, by conquerring Pandrasus, King of that Country, who was descended of the Noble Achilles. Hee compelled him also, to let him haue his faire Daughter Innogen in marri∣age, with furniture, money, victuals, and Ship∣ping, wherewith (after many hard aduentures) passing along the straits of Gibralterra,Brute met with Cori∣neus. and coa∣sting along the shore on the right hand: hee met with Corineus, and another company, that came with him from Troy likewise with Antenor. Ioyning then their powers together, they sayled on, til arriuing within the riuers mouth of Loire, which deuideth Aquitaine from Celtike Gallia, (supposed to bee Gascoigne) they landed in the Dominions of a King, called Goffarius, and
Surnamed Pictus, by reason hee was descended of the people of Agathyisi, who were other-wise termed Picts. King Goffarius with his men dyd sharply resist those new commers, but sustayned the worst twice,Brutes re∣sistance in Gallia. & in the last conflict, Brutes Ne∣phew (named Turnus) was slaine; in whose me∣mory Brute builded there a City, which (to this day) is called Tours in Touraigne. Departing thence, he and his traine came to the Isle of Bri∣taine, and landed at the hauen, now called Tot∣nesse, Anno. 2855. and after the destruction of Troy 66. before the building of Rome,Brutes lan∣ding in Al∣bion. 368. years which was before our Sauiours natiuity, 1116. almost ended. He found this land desolate, sauing a few Giants, who in short time were vanquish∣ed: for Corineus wrastled with the strongest of them, named Goemagot or Gogmagog, at a place beside Doner, where hee cast him headlong downe from one of the rockes in regard whereof, the place is called Gogmagogs Leap or fal. Brute builded London,The build∣ing of Lon∣don. calling it Troy-newydh, or Troia-noua. He begate on his wife Innogen, 3. sons, among whom he deuided his kingdome be∣fore his death. To Locrine, who was the eldest, hee gaue the middle part, calling it Loegria, or Loegiers.The deuisi∣on of Brit∣taine by Brute, to his sonnes. To Camber his second sonne, he gaue the west part of the Island, calling it Cambria or Cymbry, deuided from Loegria, by the riuer Se∣uerne. To his third son Albanact, he gaue al the North part, entitling it Alban or Albania, accor∣ding also to his name. To Corineus his deare e∣stéemed friende and companion, hee gaue that
part of the Land, which (after him) to this day is called Corinwall. Lastly, when he had gouerned this land 24. yeares. Hee died and was buried at that new Citty which he had builded. Anno ante incarnat. Christi, 1132. Locrine, after his Father Brutes death, was king of Loegria, and Lorde Paramount of the whol Island of Britain. In his time, Humber or Humyr, King of the Hunnes entered into Alba∣nia, and slew Albanact.The death of Albanact But Locrine and Cam∣ber, to reuenge their brothers death, met in Arms with Humber, neere to an arme of the Sea, that parted Loegria and Albania: where killing him in the fight, they threw his body into the water, which in memory of his name, is yet called Hum∣ber. Locrine married Guendolen, Daughter to Corineus, but falling in loue with Estrilde, a strange Lady in King Humbers Campe: hee re∣iected his wife, which caused her to raise an army againste him. In triall of that fight. Locrine was slaine, and Guendolen drowned Estrilde,The death of k. Locrine with her Daughter Sabrine, or Hauren, in the Riuer of Seuerne, so called after her name. Lo∣crine raigned twenty yeares, and left a Sonne, named Madan. Madan, sonne of Locrine and Guendolen, be∣gan his raigne ouer the Britons, an. mundi, 2909 He vsed great tyranny among his people, & buil∣ded Madancaistre, now called Dancaster.Madan de∣uoured by Wolues. Hauing ruled this land 40. yeares, hee was deuoured of Wolues & other wild beasts, as he was abroad in hunting. He left 2. sons, Mempricius & Manlius.
2949Mempricius, eldest sonne of Madan, succéeded his Father, and slew his Brother Manlius, for better confirmation of his gouernement. He fell into vnlawfull lusting after women, so that hee forced his peoples wiues and daughters: and al∣beit he had a wife and many Concubines, yet he vsed the abhominable sinne of Sodome.Mempreci∣us deuou∣red by wild beasts. So that becomming hatefull both to God and man, being one day lost of his people, as he was hunting, hee (as his father) was eaten of wilde beastes, after he had raigned 20. yeares. 2969Ebranke, sonne of Mempricius by his lawfull wife, succéeded in rule ouer the Britons. Hee had one and twenty wiues, on whom he begat twen∣ty Sonnes, and thirty Daughters. He was the first Prince of this Land, that euer inuaded Gal∣lia, now called France, from whence he returned with great riches and triumph.The build∣ing of York Hee builded the Citty of Caerbranke nowe called Yorke, about the 14. yeare of his raigne: & in Albania or Scot∣land, hee builded also the Castle of Maidens, and the Cittie of Alclud. He gouerned Brittain ve∣ry nobly forty yeares, and lieth buried at Caer∣branke or Yorke. 3009Brute Tarianlas, or Greeneshield, Sonne of Ebranke, succéeded his Father in the regiment of Brittaine. Hee sought to bring all Gallia vnder his subiection, and (some do auouch) that hee per∣formed it, albeit Brinchild gaue him a great foile in Henault. He raigned twelue yeares, and was buried by his father at Yorke. 3021Leill, the sonne of Brute Greenshield, raigned
after his Father. He builded the Citty called Ca∣erleil, that is to say, Leill his Citty,The buil∣ding of Car∣leill. or the Citty of Leill, and repaired also Carleon, now called Chester, which is saide to bee built before Brutes entrance into this land, by a Gyant named Leon Gauer. Leill raigned 25. yeares, and was buried at Carleill. Lud, or Ludhurdibras, the Son of Leill,3046. ruled Britaine after his Father. He builded the Citty of Kaerkin, now called Canterbury;The buil∣ding of Cā∣terbury, Winchester and Shafts∣bury. the Citty of Caerguent, now called Winchester, and Mount Paladour, now cald Shaftsbury: Aquila, a Pro∣phet or Bardh of the British nation, wrote diuers Prophesies concerning the building of Shaftsbu∣ry▪ Lud raigned 29. yeares, and was buryed at Canterbury. Baldus, or Bladus, son of Lud-hurdibras,3085 suc∣céeded his Father in the rule of Brittaine. Hee was skilfull in the Sciences of Astronomy and Nigromancy: he builded the Citty of Caerbran, now called Bathe, and made there hot Bathes;The buil∣ding of Bath though William of Malmsbury is of ye mind that Iulius Caesar made those baths: which cannot bée so, because Iulius Caesar neuer went so farre that way into the Land. This Bladud was so proud of his art, that he would needes presume to fly in the aire: but hee fell on the Temple of Apollo in Troy-nouant, and was there torne in pieces, hauing raigned twenty yeares. Leir, the Son of Bladud,3105. followed his Father in Britaines gouernment, being a Prince of most Noble Nature, and gouerned his Subiectes very
royally.The buil∣ding of Leir¦cester, on the Riuer of Sore. He builded the Towne of Caerleir, now called Leircester. And because the History of his thrée Daughters, Gonorill, Regan, & Cordeilla, with their seuerall marriages to Henuinus, duke of Cornewall, Maglanus, Duke of Albania, and Agauippus prince of Gallia, is very wel known, and all the fortunes thereto belonging; I am the easier induced to passe it ouer, with all the trou∣bles happening to King Leir, through his owne weaknesse. Leir raigned forty yeares, and was buried at Leircester. 3155Cordeilla, youngest daughter to K. Leir, suc∣céeded as Quéen and Gouernesse of Britain; but her two Nephewes, Cunedagius and Morgan, sons to hir, as vnkind Sisters, made short hir time of gouernment, after the decease of her Husband Aganippus. For they imprisoning her, and shee being a Lady of vnconquerable courage: gréefe, and despaire of liberty, made her there to slay her selfe, after she had ruled fiue yeares. 150.Cunedagius and Morgan, deuided the whole land between them,Britaine de∣uided the second time after Cordeillas death. But enuy and couetous desire in either, to rule alone, raised them in armes against each other, & Mor∣gan was slaine in Cambria by Cunedagius, and the place of his death is yet called Glan-Morgan, Morgans land, he not hauing raigned aboue two yeares with his Brother: who afterward builded thrée temples,Cunedagius builded 3. Temples. one to Mars, at Perth in Scotland, another to Mercury, at Bangor in Cambria, and the third to Apollo in Cornwall. He raigned 33. yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant.
Riuallus, Son of Cunedagius,3203. next ruled Bri∣taine, in whose time it rained blood 3. daies toge∣ther, which blood engendered such multitudes of Horseflies,The buil∣ding of Rome. that many people were stung to death by them. In his time was the City of Rome buil∣ded: he raigned 46. yeares, & was buried at York. Gurgustius, son of Riuallus, raigned 37. years.3249 Sysillius, or Cecilius, Brother of Gurgustius,3287 49. yeares. Iago, or Lago, Cozin to Gurgustius,3336 twentie eight yeares. Kinimacus, or Kinmarus, Son of Sisillius,3364 54. yeares. Corbodug, Son of Kinimacus, 43. yeares,3418 or (by some) 62. yeares. Ferrex and Porrex, Sons or Gorbodug,3476. raig∣ned ioyntly, till ambition deuided them, & Ferrex being slaine in battaile, the Mother of them both wrought (afterward) the death of Porrex. After which, great troubles endured for the space of fifty yeares, for the Sole-Monarchie of this land became then a Pentarchie,The Pen∣tarchy of fiue Kings: as deuided betwixt fiue Kinges or Rulers: And héere ended the line of Brute. The Pentarchy. 1. Rudacus. King of Cambria or Wales. 2. Cloton. King of Cornewall. 3. Pinnor. King of Loegria. 4. Staterus. King of Aibania. 5. Yewan, or Owen. King of Northumberland.
3529Mulmutius Dunwallo, the Sonne of Cloton, who was allowed for most rightfull Heire, hee succéeded as Sole-Monarch of Britaine, after his Father. This Mulmutius builded a Temple in Troy-nouant, cald ye Temple of Peace, which some do hold to be that ancient monument, called Blackwell-Hall.The buil∣ding of Blackwell hall. Malmsbury and the vies builded. Mulmutius Lawes. He builded also two Townes, Malmsbury and the Vies, and was the first king that was crowned with a Crowne of Gold. He made diuers good Lawes, which long time after were called Mulmutius lawes, being turned out of British into Latine, by Gildas Priscus, & (long time after) translated out of Latine into English, by Alfred K. of England, and mingled among his statutes.The 4 high waies of England. The begin∣ning of san∣ctuary. He began to make the foure great high waies of Britain, and gaue priueledges to Tem∣ples, Ploughes, Citties, & high waies leading to them, so that whosoeuer fled to them, should bee in safety from bodily harme, and thence he might depart without preiudice to his person. In regard that he was the first king crowned with a golden Crowne, most writers giue him the name of the first King of Britaine, And among his other ordi∣nances,Waights & measures to buy and sell by. he first appointed weights and measures whereby men should buy and sel, and deuised ve∣ry seuere punishments for Theft. He raigned 40 yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant. 3574Brennus and Belinus, the Sonnes of Mulmu∣tius, had (in their Fathers life time) the Land once more deuided betwéene them: Belinus en∣ioying Loegria,Britaine a∣gaine diui∣ded. Wales, & Cornwall: and Bren∣nus all the Countries ouer and beyonde Hum∣ber.
But when Brennus grew couetous to exceed his portion, and sought to compasse it by forraine assistance, he was enforced to flight, and Belinus quietly seated in the whole possession. Then fini∣shed he the foure high-waies of Britaine, which his Father had begunne, which were called,The names of the foure high wayes of England. Belines-gate. The buil∣ding of the Tovver of London. the Fosse, Watling-streete, Erming-streete, and Hiknel-streete, confirming to them the priuile∣ges which his Father had formerly granted. He builded the Hauen called Belines-gate, and a Castle also East-ward from that Gate, called (long time after) Belines Castel, but is the same, which we now call the Tower of London: Hee raigned twenty sixe yeares, and was buried in Troy-nouant. Gurguintus, the Son of Belinus,3596 succéeded in Britaine after his Father. He subdued Denmark, and made them pay tribute to Brittaine: In his daies was the Towne of Cambridge,The foun∣dation of Cambridge. with the Vniuersity, first founded by Cantaber a Spany∣ard, according to Caius. Hee raigned 19. yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant. Guintholinus, Sonne to Gurguintus,3614 raigned after his Father, beeing marryed to a vertuous Lady, named Mertia, who deuised certaine Lawes, which afterward were tearmed Mercian Lawes. He ruled 27. yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant. Sicilus, Sonne to Guintholinus,3657 raigned af∣ter his Father, albeit hee was then but seauen yeares old, but his Mother Mertia had both the gouernment of his person, and of the Realme,
in which time shee deuised those Lawes before mentioned. It is saide, that then the Picts ar∣riued in Brittaine, and possessed those partes, which now are the Marches of England and Scotland:The arriual of the Picts. hee raigned seauen yeares, and was buried at Troy-nouant. 3663.Kimarus, Sonne of Sicilius, raigned thrée yeares. 3669Elanius, Sonne of Kimarus, raigned seauen yeares. 3670Morindus, Bastard Son of Elanius; In his time a came a wonderful Monster out of the Irish Seas, that destroyed many people, and the King in fighting with the said monster, was deuoured by him: hauing raigned sixe yeares. 3676Gorbouianus, first Sonne of Morindus, who builded the town of Grantham, raignd 10. years. 3686Archigallus, Elidurus, Vigenius, and Peridu∣rus, being all likewise the Sonnes of Morindus, raigned seuerally in Brittaine, by great contenti∣ons, all their times scarcely reaching to 27. years, yet Elidurus was crowned King three times, ech after other. But no sooner died Elidurus (a King of most milde and princely nature) but there pas∣sed aboue 185. yeares, betweene the said Elidu∣rus, and the beginning of King Luds raigne, in which time there raigned 33. Kinges:33. Kinges betwixt Eli∣durus and Lud. of whose names and rule, Authors doe so disagrée, that I passe them ouer, and come to King Helie, who was the last of those 33. Kings, who gaue name to the Isle of Elie,The Isle of Ely. builded a goodly pallace there, with reparatiens of the Sluces, Ditches, & Cau∣sies
about the Isle, for conuayance away of the water, yet he raigned not fully a yeare. Lud, eldest son to King Hely,3895 succeeded in Bri∣taines gouernment. He enclosed Troy-nouant with a Wall made of lime and stone, and fortifi∣ed with diuers faire townes; building also a gate in the west part of the wall,Luds-gate. which he cald Luds-gate. He erected likewise a goodly Pallace, some∣what néere to Luds-gate, which is now the By∣shop of Londons Pallace, and (in méere affection to the Citty) hee altered the name thereof from Troy-nouant, & called it Caer-Lud,Troy-no∣uant altered to Luds Towne. that is Luds Towne▪ since when, corruption hath tearmed it London. K. Lud raigned 11. yeares, & was buri∣ed néere Lud-gate. He left two sons, named An∣drogeus & Tenancius, whose minority in yeares made them vncapable of gouernment. Cassibaline, Brother to K. Lud,3508 was admitted King of Britaine, or rather Ruler and Protectour of the Land, during his Nephewes nonage. In the 8. yeare of his raigne, Iulius Caesar (with his Romans) came into Britain,The Romā comming into Britain with Caesar. wher being wearied (at first) with a sharp battell, & (after that) his na∣uy well-néere destroyed by a sudden tempest; hee returned back into Gallia or France. But ye next spring (being the year before Christ 51.) he crossed the seas againe with a greater army, and compel∣led Cassibelane to consent, that Brittaine should become tributary to the Romains. Then raigned foure Kings in Kent, Cingetorix, Taximagulus,Four Kings in Kent. Caruilius, & Segonax, all whose power could not withstand Caesar: whose preuailing thus in Bri∣taine,
was Anno mundi, 3913. and after Brute, 1060. Cassibelane raigned 17. yeares. 3921Tenantius, Luds youngest Sonne, succéeded as lawfull King of Brittaine, because his Bro∣ther Androgeus had assisted Caesar, against Cas∣sibelane: He raigned 23. years, and was buried at London. 3944Kymbeline, or Cimbeline, Son to Tenantius, succéeded after his Fathers decease. In his time was the Sauiour of the World,The birth of Iesus Christ our Lord Iesus Christ, borne of the euer-blessed virgine Marie: Kymbeline raigned 35. yeares. Guiderius, eldest Sonne to Kymbaline, was King of Britaine,The year of Christ in the yeare of our Lorde after his incarnation 17. Hee, iudging the Romaines tribute to bée vniust,17 denied to pay it. This Gui∣derius was slaine at Portchester,Guideruis slaine at Portchester. valiantly resi∣sting against Claudius & his Romains, where one Hamo, who was on the Romans side, attired him selfe like a Britain, changed his shield and armor, and so entring the thickest of the British host, cam at last where the K. was, and so slew him. But Aruiragus, Brother to Guiderius, perceiuing this villainy, caused himself presently to be clad in the kings coat, armor, and other furniture, whereby the Kings death was scarcely discerned. He re∣newed the fight with such vndaunted courage, ye Claudius was beat backe to his ships, & Homo to the next adioyning Woods, whether Aruiragus pursued him, and slew him ere he could get off the hauen, casting him peece-meal into the sea, which Hauen (in memory of his name) was euer after
called Hamans Hauen,How South hampton became so named. afterward by corruption) Hampton Hauen, and now (at this day) com∣monly called Southampton. Guiderius raigned 23. or (after others) 29. yeares. Aruiragus, youngest Sonne to Kymbeline,46 succéeded his Brother, as King of Brittaine. In his time, Vespasian came into Britaine, landing at Sandwich or Richborough. Also, about the yeare of Christ,Ioseph of Arimathia came into Brittaine. 53. and while this Aruiragus raigned, Ioseph of Arimathia was sent by Phil∣lip the Apostle into Brittain: and one Simon Ze∣lotes came then thether also. Then began Brit∣taine to be gouerned by Romaine Lieutenantes and Treasurers. Aruiragus raigned 28. yeares,Britain go∣uerned by Romayne. Deputies. dyed in the yeare of Grace, 73. and was buried at Glocester. Marius, sonne of Aruiragus, succéeded his fa∣ther in the State, and then came the Picts,73 with Roderick their King, into this land:The Pictes comming into Britain but Rode∣rick was slaine by Marius, and his people van∣quished. In memory of which victory against the Picts, Marius erected a Stone, where the battell ws fought, whereon was engragen Marij vic∣toria. The Stone was set vppon Stanesmoore, and the whole Country thereabout, taking name of this Marius, was cald Westmaria, now West∣merland. Marius raigned 53. yeares,Westmaria, Westmer∣land. and was buried at Carleill. Coilus, Sone of Marius, was (after his Fa∣thers death) King of Britaine,125 hauing bin educa∣ted among the Romaines, which made him pay them the tribute all the time of his raigne. Hee
builded the Towne of Colichester in Essex,Colchester builded. now called Colchester: he raigned 55. yeares, depar∣ted this life at Yorke, and lieth there buried, as some say, but others, at Colchester. 16Lucius, sonne of Coilus, succéeded King after his Father, being a very godlye and Vertuous Prince. And because since the comming of Io∣seph of Arimathia into the land, there was much talke about Christ, and Holy Religion, whych many had begun to embrace, he sent to Pope E∣leutherius, that hee would send some more lear∣ned men to him, whereby both he and his might fully be enstructed in the faith of Christ. Eleuthe∣rius sent vnto him Dianus and Faganus (by some called Fugatius and Damianus) two woor∣thy learned Clearkes,Britain con∣uerted to the Christi∣an faith. who at theyr comming, conuerted the King and his people from Paga∣nisme. There were in those dayes (within the bounds of Britaine) 28. Flamines, and 3. Ach-flamines,Arch-by∣shops & Bi∣shops ap∣pointed in Britaine. that were as Byshoppes and Arch-by∣shoppes of the Pagan Religion: in whose place King Lucius appointed the 28. Byshoppes, and thrée Arch-Byshops of Christian Religion. O of which Arch-byshops held his Sée at London, another at Yorke, and the thirde at Caerleon Arswike in Glaumorganshire. To the Arch-by∣shop of London was subiect Cornewall, and all the middle part of England, euen vnto Humber. To the Arch-Byshoppe of Yorke, all the North parts of Britaine, from the Riuer of Humber, to the furthest parts of Scotland. And to the Arch-Byshop of Caerleon, was subiect all wales, with∣in
which countrey were then seauen Byshoppes, where now there are but foure. This King Lu∣cius is saide to builde the Church of Saint Peter at VVestminster, and Saint Peters Church of Cornehill in London.S. Peters Churches at Westmin∣ster & Lon∣don in Corne-hill This Lucius raigned 12. yeares, and dying without issue, the Brittaines fell at variance, by which meanes, the Romaine Lieutenants go on againe with their Gouerne∣ment, the Emperor Adrian comming in person into Britain, & then the wal of Adrian was built,The Wall of Adrian. from the mouth of Tine, to the Water of Eske, containing thirty miles in length. Adrian hauing quieted all disturbances in Britain, Lollius, Vr∣bicus, Calphurnius Agricola, Vlpius Marcellus, Pertinax, Clodius Albinus and Heraclitus, suc∣céeded each other as Lieutenantes (ouer the Brittaines) for the Romaines, which manner of Gouernement so continued, to the yeare of our Lord, 207. Seuerns, Emperor of Rome,207 did now beginne his rule in Britaine, causing a Trench to bee cast from Sea to Sea. Hee raigned not fullye fiue yeares, and was buried at Yorke.A Trench cast in Brit∣taine from sea to sea. His Sonnes Geta and Bassianus contended for the Gouern∣ment, Geta was slaine in battell, and Bassianus ruled sixe yeares: but hee was likewise slaine by one Caransius, a Britaine of vnknowne Byrth, whom the Britaines accepted as their King▪ till Alectus was sent from Rome with his Legions of Souldiors, who conquered Caransius in field, and slewe him.
Aesclepiodotus, Duke of Cornwall, preuay∣ling in fight against Alectus, and Liuius Gallus, or Wallus, whom (when he had slaine, he threw into a Brooke,Wallus Brooke, Walbrook. which tooke name of him, and was called Wallus Brooke, nowe Walbrooke) was admitted to raigne ouer the Britaines. And dis∣cord being afterward raised, betwéene the King, and one Coell, Earle of Colchester, they met in a fielde of battaile, where Asclepiodotus was slaine, after he had raigned thirty yeares. At this time was Britaine in cruell persecution,The martir∣dome of S. Alban. vnder the bloody tyrants Dioclesian and Maximus; Al∣ban, a Cittizen of Werlamchester, being the first that suffered martirdome in Britaine, hee being conuerted to Christian faith by zealous Amphi∣bilaus, and because he would not sacrifice to their false Gods, he was beheaded on the top of the hill ouer-against VVerlamchester, where a Church and Monastery was builded in memory of hys martyrdom,Werlam∣chester, S. Albanes. and VVerlamchester being destroy∣ed, the place tooke name of him, and is to this day called S. Albanes. A number of Christians were likewise assembled at another place,Iohn Rossus Warwicons. in l. de wi∣gor. Epis. to heare the word of life preached by that vertuous man Am∣phibilaus, but they were all there slaine by the Pagans, and the place (in their memory) named Lichfield, The fielde of dead bodies. It is also recorded,Lichfielde▪ why it was so called. that in the dayes of these Tyrants, Di∣oclesian and Maximus, of godly men and Wo∣men, professing the faith of Iesus Christe, there were martired in sundry place, aboue 17000. 26Coell, Earle of Colchester, began his rule ouer
the Britaines, in An. Dom. 262. But Constan∣tius being sent from Rome to suppresse him,Constantius married He∣lena, daugh∣ter to King Coell. hee couenanted to pay the tribute, & gaue his daugh∣ter Helena (a Noble and learned Lady) in mar∣riage to Constantius. King Coell raigned 27. yeares, and is said to be buried at Colchester, or rather at Glocester. Constantius succéeded in the rule of Britain,189 af∣ter Coell, and had by his wife Helena a Sonne, named Constantine, that was afterwarde Em∣peror, and sir-named Constantine the Great.The martir∣dome of Amphibi∣laus. In this Constantius dayes, Amphibliaus was ap∣prehended, and suffered martyrdome at Red∣burne, néere to VVerlamchester, fiftéene yeares after the death of S. Alban: Constantius raig∣ned eleuen yeares. Constantine,306 sonne of Constantius and Hele∣na, and sir named the Great, was King after his Father, and created Emperor in Britaine.Q Helena found the Crosse and the Nailes. His Mother Quéene Helena went to Ierusalē, where she found the Crosse that our Sauiour was cru∣cified on, and the Nailes, which shee gaue to her Sonne Constantine; who did set one of them in the Crest of his Helmet, another in the bridle of his horse, and the third he threw into the Sea, to asswage a rough Tempest. Octauius or Octauian, beganne his raigne ouer the Britaines in Anno 329.329 being called Duke of VVindsore.Octauius put to flight by Traher∣nes He assembled a great companye of people, and fought with the Gouernours of the Land which Constantine had heere appoynted: yet was he expelled by Traherne into Norway,
and Traherne being slaine by treason afterward, Octauius sent Maximianus, Cosin to the Empe∣ror Constantine, to whom he gaue his daughter in marriage. Octauius raigned 54. years. About this time,Helena wal∣leth Lon∣don & Col∣chester. the Empresse Helena, Mother to Con∣stantine, for loue she bare to Colchester and Lon∣don, did newly engirt them both with Walles rounde about, causing great Bricke and huge Tyles to be purposely therefore made, which are yet to be seene in the Towne and Castle of Col∣chester. 383Maximianus, or Maximus, vsurped in Brit∣taine the Title of the Empyre, and assembling all the men of Warre, and youth of the Realme, he went into France, expelled the French-men out of Armorica, and placed Brittaines there vnder Conon Meridoc, Duke of Cornewall, whereon it was euer after called Britayne the Lesse.Litle Britain This Maximus or Maximianus, hauing slayne the Emperour Gratian, at Lyons in France, was slaine himselfe at Aquileia, by the Emperor Theodosius, after he had gouerned the Britaines eight yeares. 390Gratian, a Britaine, taking on him-selfe the Rule of Britaine, for his stearne and rough Gouernement was quickely slaine. About this time,The Saxons first ente∣rance into Britaine. did the Saxons first enter into this Lande, and the Romain Empyre greatly declining, their rule in this kingdome, and payment of Tri∣bute (which hadde continued for the space of foure hundered eighty three yeares) nowe quite ceased.
Constantinus, Brother of Aldroemus, King of little Brittaine, at the sute of the Arche-By∣shoppe of London, in Name of all the Brit∣taines, accepted the Gouernment of this Lande,Constanti∣nus crownd at Cicester. and was Crowned at Cicester. Hee had three Sonnes, Constantius (who was made a Monk) Aurelius Ambrosius, and Vter, Sur-named Pendragon. This Constantinus was Tray∣terously slayne in his Chamber, by a Pict, and then one Vortiger, a Britaine, a man of great power amongest the Britaines, tooke Constan∣tius out of the Abbey of Winchester, and Crow∣ned him King. But causing him soone after to bee murdered, and the murderers strangled, least hee should bee discouered, hee got himselfe to bee chosen King, Aurelius Ambrosius, and Vter Pendragon, (Bretheren to the murdered king) being glad to flye into Brittaine Armorica. Hen∣gist the Saxon, and his Brother Horssus, brin∣ging great store of Saxons into the Realme, by marrying his Daughter Rowen to Vortiger,Hengist the Saxon & his Brother Horsus. grewe into no meane sauour, filling still the Lande with three sortes of Germaine people, (to witte:) Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, who at length, made such spoyle and hauucke of the Brittaines, that from Sea to Sea, the whole Realme, was most pittifully wasted and rui∣ned: the Britaines beeing enforced for to flye out of theyr owne Countrey,Vortiger deposed, & Vortimer Crowned. and the Saxons enioyed their possessions. Vortiger was deposed, and Vortimer his Sonne crowned King, who had foure principall Battailes with the Saxons,
and preuailed very worthily against them, til (by the meanes of Rowen, Daughter to Hengist) Vortimer was poysoned after hee had gouerned the Britaines seauen yeares and odde moneths. Then was Vortiger restored to his kingdom a∣gaine, and Hengist performed his bloody treache∣ry on Salisbury Plaine,The Britain Nobles murdered on Salisbu∣ry plaine. on a May day, murde∣ring 460. Noble Britaines with Kniues, which he and his Saxons had closely hid in their Pock∣ets. There was Vortiger taken prisoner, and could not gaine his liberty, till hee had graunted Hengist three Prouinces or Countreyes of his Kingdome, to wit, Kent and Essex, or (as some write) Sussex, where the South Saxons after∣warde inhabited, and Norffolke and Suffolke, where the East-Angles planted themselues. At this time was the Heptarchie or seauen King∣domes of this Lande, Aurelius and his Brother Vter, returned out of Brittaine Armorica, with a powerfull Army, and marching into VVales against Vortiger,The death of Vortiger. assayled him in his Castle, which they consumed with fire, where perrished Vortiger, and all else there with him. Aurelius Ambrose was made King of Britain, anno 481.481. He gaue Hengist battaile, who flying for safety,The death of Hengist. was taken by Edoll Earle of Chester, & beheaded at Conningsborow. In memory of the Britaines slaughter on Salisbury plain, stones were fetcht out of Ireland, and set vp in the same place,Stone-heng and called to this day Stone-heng. Aure∣lius raigned nineteene yeares, was poysoned by a counterfeit Monk, and buried at Stone-heng.
Vter, sur-named Pendragon,500 because Merlin likened him to a Dragons heade, which (at his birth) maruailously appeared in the firmament,The birth of Arthur. at the corner of a blazing Starre. He loued fayre Igrine, wife to Gorlois Duke of Cornwall, on whom he begot the valiant Prince Arthur. Vter raigned 18. yeares, and was buried by his Bro∣ther at Stone-heng. Arthur, Sonne of Vter Pendragon,56 succéeded his Father in the kingdome. Hee fought twelue battailes against the Saxons,Arthur had 12. battailes against the Saxons. returning Conque∣ror in euery one of them: yet coulde he not driue them out of the land, but still they possessed Kent, Sutherie and Norfolke. He instituted the order of the round Table, was deadly wounded in a battell which he fought with his cozen Mordred; and hauing raigned 26. yeares, was buryed at Glastenbury betwéene two Pillers, where hys body was afterward found, in the dayes of King Henry the second, about the yeare, 1191. Constantine, Cozen to Arthur,542 and Sonne of Cador, Duke of Cornewall, succéeded next in ye gouernement: But Aurelius Conan warred a∣gainst him, and slew him in the fielde, when hee had raigned foure yeares, and was buryed at Stone-heng. Aurelius Conan, was next King of Britaine,546 albeit his Vnckle had most right thereto, whom he imprisoned, and cruelly murdred his two sons:Conan mur¦dered his Nephewes. after which himselfe liued not long, but died be∣fore he had raigned two yeares.548 Vortiporus raigned after his Father Aurelius
Conan foure yeares, and left no issue to succeede him in the kingdome. 580Malgo, Nephew of Aurelius Conan, raigned fiue yeares. Careticus ruled Britain thrée yeares, and the English and Saxon Kings (remoouing the Bri∣taines) enlarged the boundes of theyr owne Do∣minions: so that beside the Kinges of Britayne, there raigned eight Kings of the English & Sax∣ons,Eight kings of the Eng∣lish & Sax∣ons. as Ethelbert in Kent, Cissa in Sussex, Ceau∣line in Westsex, Creda or Crida in Mercia, Er∣kenwine in Essex, Titila in East-Angles, Ella in Deira, and Alfred in Bernitia. The Brittaines lost possession of the more part of their auncient seats,The Britains loose theyr ancient seats and the faith of Christ was thereby great∣ly decayed, for the Churches were destroyed, and the Arch-Byshoppes of Caerleon Arswike, Lon∣don and Yorke, withdrew (together with theyr Cleargie) into the Mountaines and Woodes in Wales. Now was Augustine the Monke, and others sent to preach the Christian faith in Brit∣taine,Augustine the Monke sent into Britaine. and was made Arch-byshop of Britaine, or the English Nation, and King Ethelbert (with his people of Kent) were conuerted to the Chri∣stian faith. 613Cadwan was elected King of the Britaines in Anno 613.The Britain 24. yeares without a King. For (after Careticus) they had re∣mained (for about the space of 24. years) without any especiall Gouernor, being led by sundry Ru∣lers: this Cadwan had before bin Duke or Ruler of North-wales. He gouerned two and twentie yeares.
Cadwallo or Cadwalline, Sonne of Cadwan,635 succéeded as King of the Britaines, after his Fa∣ther. He raigned 48. yeares, and being dead, his body was balmed with sweete confections, and put into a Brazen Image, by meruailous Arte melted and cast, which Image was also mounted on a goodly brazen horse, and so set vp aloft on the West gate of London, called Ludgate, in token of his Conquests, and for a terror to the Saxons.S. Martins at Ludgate built. The Church of Saint Martine vnder the same Gate, was then also builded by the Britaines. Cadwallader, Sonne of Cadwallo,678 succéeded him in the Britaines gouernment, whose raygne lasted but thrée yeares, for hee was constrayned (with his people) to forsake their Natiue Coun∣trey, and by Sea to flye ouer into Britaine Ar∣morica, there to séeke reléefe for their languishing bodies. In this Cadwallader ended the line and gouernment of the Britains,The ending of the Bry∣taines Go∣uernment. now called Welch∣men, which name they tooke of their Leader Wallo or Gallo, or else of a Quéen of Wales, cal∣led Gales or Wales. The Britaines had the grea∣ter part of this Lande in rule (reckoning from Brute to this time) 1822. yeares, and nowe the whole Dominion of the Lande, came to the Sax∣ons. Egbert, the Son of Alcmund, a petty Prince,800 the son of Offa, of the bloude of Ina, King of the West-Saxons, hauing bin banished by k. Bright∣rick into France; after Brightricks death, was repealed home, and succéeded as the seauentéenth King of the West-Saxons. He subdued the Cor∣nishmen,
and seuearely punished the vnquyet Welch-men.The victo∣ries of King Egbert. Bernulfe King of Mercia, was o∣uerthrowne by him, and Kent, Essex, Southrie, and Sussex, with their seuerall Kings, al brought vnder his obeysance, and the kingdome of Nor∣thumberland yeelded vnto him. Then subdued he North-wales, and tooke the Citty of Chester. Afterward, assembling a Counsell at Winche∣ster, he was there crowned King and Soueraign Lord of the whole land: which he chaunged from the name of Britaine, and from the seuerall ap∣pellations of the Heptarchie, and called it Engle∣lond,The first no∣ination of England, by K. Egbert. or Angles-land, that is to say, The Eng∣lishmens Land, wherof in Latine it was termed Anglia, a name taken from the Angles, whych, of the three people then possessing it, to wit, the Iutes, Saxons, and Angles (being indéede all but one Nation) were the most valiaunt and popu∣lous. In his time was the first inuasion of the Danes, and hee had an ouerthrowe by them at Carrum:The first in∣asion of the Danes. which successe causing them to aduen∣ture the like attempt the yeare following, lan∣ding theyr Fléet in Wales, and ioyning with the Welch-men, they were ouerthrowne by K. Eg∣bert, at a place called Hengistenton, and a great number of them slaine. This glorious Prince, hauing greatly enlarged the bounds of his king∣dome, and raigned seauen and thirtie yeares, di∣ed, and was verie Royally buried at Winche∣ster. 837.Ethelwolph, eldest sonne to the most victori∣ous King Egbert, succéeded next in the kingdom
of England. All the time of his raigne, hee was grieuously troubled with the Danes inuasions;A woorthie victory ouer the Danes but he had a worthy victory ouer them at Ockley in Southrey, such as the like hath hardly béene heard of in the English Dominions. He deuided the kingdom betweene himself, & his son Ethel∣bald, & hauing raigned twenty yeares▪ was ho∣nourably buried in the Cathedrall Church at Winchester.857 Ethelbald succéeded his Father Ethelwolphe by inheritance, but to his second sonne Ethelbert (in his life time) he had giuen the kingdomes of Kent and Essex, which he had conquered.Ethelbald defiled his fathers bed. This Ethelbald presumed to defile his Fathers bedde, and maried his Step-mother Iudith: he raygned fiue years, and dying, was buried at Shirbourn. Ethelbert, second sonne of King Ethelwolph,862. succéeded after his Brother Ethelbald in the re∣giment. This Ethelbert droue the Danes out of Kent, many times ouerthrew them, & put them to flight. He raigned fiue yeares, and was bury∣ed by his Brother Ethelbald at Shirbourne. Ethelred, third Sonne to King Ethelwolph,867 raigned next after his Brother Ethelbert. Hee fought nine battails with the Danes in one year,Nine Bat fought with the Dans in one ye bearing still the victory away with him; but dis∣sention among the Saxon Kinges, furthered the Danes in conquest of their kingdomes. Ethelred was slaine in fight with the Danes, hauing raigned fiue yeares, and was buried at Win∣bourne Abbey. Alfred, or Alured, sur-named the Great,87 yon∣gest
Sonne to Ethelwolph, succéeded his Bro∣ther in the Kingdome. Hee was very greatly troubled with the Danes, who inuading diuers parts of the Land, did most cruelly wast it: yet had he (in one yeare) seuen battailes with them, and ouer-throwing them at length, recouered his kingdome. He builded 3. Monasteries, one at Ed∣lingsey, afterward called Athelny, neer Taunton in Sommerset-shire;K. Alfred builded 3. Monasteries the second at Winchester, called the New Minster; and the third at Shafts∣bury, where his Daughter Ethelgeda was Ab∣besse.Oxford built by Ki. Alfred. But, by perswasion of Neote, a famous Learned Monke, he built the Vniuersity of Ox∣ford, being himselfe a good Grammarian, Rhe∣torician, Phylosopher, Musitian and Poet, as also a most perfect Architect. Hee raigned 29. yeares, and six months, and was buried in hys New-Minster, at Winchester. 900Edward, sonne to King Alfred, and Surna∣med the Elder, succéeded in the kingdome after his Father. Hee subdued the Kingdome of the East-Angles, and so enlarged the boundes of his Kingdome,The East-Angles cō∣quered by K▪ Edward. that he had most part of Great Brit∣taine vnder his obedience; he built a new Town at Nottingham, on the South-side of Trent, and made a Bridge ouer betwéene the old Town and new. He repayred Manchester in Lancashyre, (accounted then the Southend of Northumber∣land) and built a Towne, called (by ancient wri∣ters) Thilwall,K. Edward a great buil∣der. néere to the Riuer of Mercia, pla∣cing therein a Garrison of Soldiors. Diuer other Townes and Castels also he builded, as two at
Buckingham, on either side the Riuer Ouse, a∣gainst the Danes incursions, and another at the mouth of Auon: he repayred the Towns of To∣ceter and Wigmore, and hauing raygned 24. yeares, was buried in the New Minster or Mo∣nastery at Winchester. Athelstane, or Adelstane, eldest Son of King Edward, succéeded his Father,924 and (as his Aun∣cestors) was crowned at Kingston on Thames. A great army of the Danes, Scots, and Irish, was ouerthrowne by King Athelstane; Northum∣berland, Westmerland, and Cumberland yéel∣ded vnto him.King Athel¦stane the first monark of England. Hee was the first of the English Kinges, that obtained the gouernement of the whole Kingdome, which continued so 140. years after, though not without some interruption, the Danes (in the meane time) vsurping the Crown by the space of thirty yeares. The Welch & Cor∣nishmen ware subdued by him. He builded two Monasteries, one at Wilton, in the Diocesse of Salisbury, and another at Michelme in Somer∣setshire, founding also a Colledge of Priests, at S. Edmunds-bury. There were fewe famous Monasteries in this land, but he beautified them either with some new piece of building, Iewels, Bookes, or Lands, and caused the sacred Scrip∣tures to be translated out of the most pure Foun∣taine of the Haebrewes, into the English Saxon tongue. He raigned 16. yeares, and was buried at Malmesbury. Edmund, Brother to King Athelstane, succée∣ded next after him, and vanquishing the Danes,940
was afterward vnfortunatly slain, hauing raig∣ned fiue yeares, and was buried at Glastenbury. 946Eldred or Eadred, Brother to King Edmund, succéeded next in the royall Dignity, being crow∣ned also at Kingstone vpon Thames. Edwin and Edgar, Sonnes to King Edmund, were put by from ruling, in regard of their tender age. Eldred subdued the Northumbers, repayred the Abbey of Abington, built by King Ina, but ruined by the Danes. And hauing raigned nine yeares, was buried in the olde Monasterie at VVinche∣ster. 955Edwine, eldest Sonne to King Edmund, suc∣céeded his Vnckle Eldred, and was crowned at Kingston. This Edwin was wholly addicted to sensuality and pleasure, banished Dunstane, Ab∣bot of Glastenbury, for reproouing his Rape of Algiua, his neere Kinswoman, euen when hys Lords were sitting in Counsell. He hauing raig∣ned foure yeares, was depriued, and dying with greefe, was buryed in the new Abbey at VVin∣chester. 959Edgar, Brother to King Edwine, was an∣nointed and crowned King at Bathe, and after∣ward at Kingstone. He was a great fauourer of Religious men, and had a Fleete of three thou∣sand and sixe hundered shippes alwayes in readi∣nesse,K. Edgar his fleet of ships and sayled therewith (once a yeare) about all great Britaine. Hee had the whole Isle, and all the Kinges thereof in subiection to him, and was rowed vp and downe the Riuer of Dee, by seauen Kings his vassailes: Luduall, one of those
Kings, did pay him a yearly tribute of Wolues.A tribute of Wolues. He raigned 16. yeares, and was buried at Gla∣stenburie. Edward, eldest Sonne to King Edgar,975 succee∣ded his Father, being crowned at Kingston, but by Counsell of Elfrith, his Step-mother, he was treacherously murdered, when hee had raygned three yeares, and was buried at Shaftesbury. Ethelred, or Egelred,979 second Sonne to King Edgar, was crowned at Kingstone; but because his comming to the Crown was by his brothers murder, he could neuer obtaine his peoples affec∣tion.The Danes murdered in one night. Al the Danes in England (by the command of King Ethelred) were murdered in one night. He raigned 38. yeares, and was buried in Saint Paules Church in London. Edmund, Son to King Ethelred,1016 and Surna∣med Ironside, was immediately proclaimed K. after his Fathers death; as the Cleargy and No∣bility did the like to Canutus, because they hadde sworne fealty to his Father Swaine, or Sweno:Edmund I∣ronside and Canutus both pro∣claimed Kings. whereon three great battailes were fought be∣twixt King Edmund and Canutus, & the Danes ouerthrowne at Otford in Kent, beside the great battell at Ashdone in Essex, neere Saffron wal∣den, where the Englishmen were foyled by the Danes, and the Land once againe deuided, be∣tweene Canutus and King Edmund, who was treacherously slaine at Oxford, hauing raigned but one yeare, and some few months, and was buried at Glastenbury. Canutus the Dane,1017. challenging all England
to himselfe, was crowned King in Saint Paules Church in London, and maried Quéen Emma, the widdow of king Etheldred: hee raigned xx. yeares, and was buried at Winchester. 1035.Harold, surnamed Harefoot, vsing the power of the Danes in England, inuaded the Realme, while his brother Hardi-kenutus Gouerned in Denmarke. Hee raigned foure yeares, dyed at Oxford, and was buried at Westminster. Hardikenutus, or Hardy-Canutus, Sonne of King Canutus,1041 and his Quéene Emma, obtay∣ning his Fathers Kingdome; sent for his mother from exile. He died with the cup in his hand, as he sat merrily disposed at his Table, in the third yeare of his raigne,The ending of the Danes gouerment in England. and was buried at Winche∣ster. With this Hardy-Canutus, ended the do∣minion of the Danes in England, who had grie∣uously oppressed this nation, for the space of 250. yeares. 1042Edward, the sonne of Ethelred and Emma, was next crowned King at Winchester, all the Danes being then quite expulsed the land. This Edward was Surnamed the Confessor, for hys vertuous life and worthy Lawes: also he is saide to be the first that cured the Disease, called, The Kinges Euill.The Kinges Euill. Hee raigned three and twentie yeares, and was buried at Westminster, which (in his life time) hee had most sumptuouslye re∣payred. 1067Harold, sonne of Earle Goodwin, tooke vpon him the gouernment of the kingdome: but Wil∣liam, Duke of Normandy, came into England
with a powerfull Army, and (in battell) Harold was shot through the braines with an Arrowe,England conquered by D. Wil∣liam. hauing raigned but nine months, and was buri∣ed in the Monastery of Waltham in Essex, by whose death, Duke William obtained his Con∣quest of England. William, Duke of Normandy,1067 base Sonne of Robert, Duke of Normandie, and Nephew to King Edward the Confessor, whom he perceiued more addicted to vertue, then policy,Duke Wil∣liams policy to get the Crowne. and through debility of body not like to liue long: contryued his owne attaining to the crowne of this land, af∣ter the decease of the aged King. For hee placed diuers Normans, in the cheefest roomes about him while he liued, and when he was dead, leui∣ed an Army of diuers Nations, and there-with pretending the Patronage of England, agaynst Harold, Earle Godwins Sonne, who vsurped the Kingdome; first fought with him, and flewe him at a place now called Battell, in Sussex, and then tooke the Crowne on him, by election of the Estates. Seeking next to barre Titles,Edgar Ethe∣ling, true heire of the Saxons blood he impri∣soned Edgar Etheling, the onely true heire of the Saxons bloud, and by means of Ethelbert, Arch-bishop of Hamborow, procured Sweno, King of Denmark (for money) to cease the Danes claime. Hee builded foure strong Castles: one, at Not∣tingham, another at Lincoln, the third at York, and the fourth neere to Haftings, where he lan∣ded at his first arriuall in England. Hee deuised the Couer le feu Bell, to bee Rung nightly at eight of the clocke, in all Citties, Townes,Rake vp the fire. and
Villages, for preuention of mighty tumults. He ordained the Tearmes,The foure Tearmes. and that they shoulde be kept foure times in the yeare, and Iudges to sit in seuerall Courtes, for desciding controuersiall matters betwixt party and party, as is vsed vnto this day. He appointed Sheriffes in euery shyre, and Iustices of the peace, to see offenders punni∣shed, and the Countries kept in quiet. He ordai∣ned the Court of Exchequer, with the Barons, Clarkes and Officers, thereto belonging, as also the high Court of Chancery, with the Booke then called,The Exche∣quer and Court of Chancery. The Rowle of Winchester, nowe, The Doomesday Booke, whereby the whole Land was taxed, and euery mans estate, and wealth thoroughly knowne. He raigned twenty yeares, ten months, and 26. dayes, and was bu∣ried in the Abbey of Saint Stephen, at Can in Normandy, which he had founded. And this is well worthy memory, that hee being so great a Conqueror,K. William destitute of a Graue. yet after his death, coulde not haue so much ground to bury his dead body, without wronging some other, vntill that (by his Execu∣tors) it was bought for him. William Rufus, second sonne to the Conque∣ror,1087 by his Fathers appointment succeeded him in the Kingdom, and was crowned at Westmin∣ster. Robert, elder Brother to King William, & Duke of Normandy, went with Godfrey Duke of Bullen, and other Christian Princes to the Holy-land, to recouer it from the Sarazis. This King William Rufus, caused new Walles to be builded about the Tower of London, and layed
the foundation of Westminster Hall.The foun∣dation of Westmin∣ster Hall. Hee raig∣ned thirteene yeares, and was slain with an Ar∣row, by one Sir Walter Tyrel, a French knight, in the New Forrest in Hampshire, his body be∣ing buried at VVinchester. In which Forrest, not many yeares before,511 had stoode 36. Parish Churches, diuers faire Townes, Villages, and Hamlets, containing thirty miles in circuite:New forrest in Hamp∣shire, and strange ac∣cidents the happening. all which was laide wast by the Conqueror, the poor inhabitants expelled thence, and it was made a place for wilde beastes to liue in. It was some∣what strange, that in that very place, the King should bee so vnfortunately slaine; Richard his Brother blasted to death, and Henry the Con∣querors Nephew, by his eldest Sonne Robert, as hee ouer-earnestly pursued the game, in the the bushes (like to another Absolon) straungely strangled to death; vengeaunce from God (as was thought) punnishing the fathers offence in his posterity. Henry,1100 sur-named Beauclerke for his Lear∣ning, and youngest sonne to the Conqueror, suc∣ceeded his Brother King William, & was crow∣ned at VVestminster. Robert,Robert D. of Nor∣mandy. Duke of Nor∣mandy, being returned from the Holie-Lande, warred with his Brother Henry, for his right in the crowne of England, and after much conten∣tion, being taken and committed Prisoner vnto Cardiffe Castle in VVales, after 26. yeares im∣prisonment, hee there dyed, and was buried at Glocester. Maud, King Henries Daughter, was maried to the Emperor Henry: but his other
children, William, Duke of Normandy, his Si∣ster Marie, Countesse of Perch; Richard, Earle of Chester, with his Brother Otwell, Gouernor to Duke William, and the saide Earle of Che∣ster his wife,King Hen∣ries Chil∣dren drow∣ned. the Kinges Neece, with diuers o∣thers, to the number of 140. persons, beside 50. Marriners, following the king out of Norman∣die, were all drowned. King Henry raigned 35. years, died in the Forrest of Lyons in Norman∣die, and was buried in the Abbey of Reading, which he had founded. In this king Henry first of that name, ended the line of ye Norman kings, concerning their heires male, who had raigned about 69. yeares: and then began the French, by Title of the heyres generall. 1135Stephen, Earle of Bullen and Mortaigne, son to Stephen Earle of Bloys, by Adela, Daughter to king William the Conquerour, vsurped the crowne from Maud the Empresse, and her young sonne Henry,K. Stephen vsurped the Crowne. which caused great Warres be∣tweene him and her, and very miserable times to the people; till by an assembly of the Lordes at Winchester, Articles of peace and agreement were concluded. King Stephen raigned eygh∣teene yeares, ten moneths, and three and twen∣ty dayes, and was buried in the Abby of Feuers∣ham in Kent. 1154Henry, sur-named Fitz-Empresse, and Short∣mantle, succeeded next in the crown of England. He expelled strangers out of the Land, and had a long and troublesome contention,Tho. Becket Archbishop of Canterb. with Tho∣mas Becket, Arch-Bishop of Canterburie. Hee
crowned his sonne Henry, as fellow-King with him, which procured him much mollestation, by meanes of his Quéene, and his other sonnes. In his time, was the conquest of Ireland, Dublin, and Waterford, being woon by Earle Strong∣bow. He had diuers Concubines, but especially fayre Rosamond, whom he kept in a Labyrinth at Woodstock, where she was poysoned by Q. Elianor. King Henry the second raigned 34. yeares, nine months and two dayes, and dying, was buried at Font-Euerard in the Dutchy of Alanson. In him ended the raigne both of the Normans and French-men, ouer the Realme of England. Richard, Earle of Poictiers,1189 and second Son to King Henry, was crowned King at Westmin∣ster. He went to the Holy-land,Ki. Richard went to the holy-Land, he was cal∣led Cuee∣de-Lion. and performed many worthy seruices there: his brother Iohn (in his absence) aspired to rule the whole land, being prouoked thereto by the French king. As King Richard besiedged the Castle of Chalus Cheue∣rel; he was wounded with an impoysoned quar∣rell, shot at him by one Barturam de Gurden, or Peter Bazile, whereof he dyed, hauing raigned nine yeares, nine moneths, and odde daies, and was buried at Font-Euerard. Iohn, Lord of Ireland, Earle of Mortaign and Glocester, & brother to king Richard,1199 was crow∣ned at westm. He had long & tedious contentions with his Barons, as also with the pope, by whose meanes, Lewes the French kinges sonne, was drawne into the businesse, & had the crowne offe∣red
him by the Lords, whereon he wrought great spoile in the Land. King Iohn raigned 17. years, six months, and 27. dayes, and dying by poyson, was buried at VVorcester. 1216Henry, third of that name, and eldest Son to King Iohn, succeeded immediately after his Fa∣ther, albeit he was but nine yeares old: the Ba∣rons and French Lewes, being still very molle∣stuous,William Marshall, Earle of Pembroke. against whom VVilliam Marshal, Earle of Pembroke, was chiefe Generall of the Kings forces, and preuayled worthily. This King Hen∣ry, raigned 56. yeares, and 27. dayes, and was buried at Westminster. 1272Edward, eldest Sonne to King Henrie, and Surnamed Long-shankes, was crowned at Westminster, after his returne home from the Holy Land.Wales con∣quered This King conquered Wales, and deuided it into Shyres; and banished the Iewes for euer out of England. Hauing raigned 34. yeares, seauen months, and twenty dayes, hee dyed, and was buried at VVestminster. Edward of Carnaruon, sonne to King Edward the first,2307 succeeded in the kingdome after his Fa∣ther. This king did ouermuch affect an Esquire of Gascoigne,Piece Ga¦uston. called Pierce Gauaston, and dis∣shonoured many of his Lords, to aduance him: as he did the like, by the two Spensers, the Fa∣ther and Sonne. At length, he was imprisoned by his Barons, with helpe of the Queene and Prince, and then deposed, when he had raigned nineteene yeares, sixe months, and seauenteene dayes.
Edward the third,1327 son to king Edward the se∣cond, was crowned at Westminster in his Fa∣thers life time. Flanders, yeelded themselues & all their Townes to King Edward, and, laying claime to the Crowne of France (in right of his Mother Queen Isabell) he entred that land with a puissant army, and quartered the Armes of France, with his owne of England.The Order of the Gar∣ter. He deuised the woorthy Order of the Garter: and Prince Edward, Surnamed the Blacke Prince (beside his famous victories in Fraunce) reseated Don Peter king of Castile in his kingdom, which his bastard Brother Henrie vsurped against him. K. Edward the third raigned fifty yeares, and fiue monethes, and dying at Sheene, was buried at Westminster. Richard, second of that name,1277. son to Edward the Blacke Prince, being about eleauen yeares old, succeeded after his Grand-father King Ed∣ward; the Duke of Lancaster, and the Earle of Cambridge, being Protectors of the yong kings person. The rebellion of Iacke Straw,Iack Straw, & his rebels and Wat Tyler, with the Essex and Kentishmen then hap∣ned, and the worthy act of William Walworth, Lord Maior of London, in arresting the traitor. Great stormes arose betweene the king and hys Nobles, because he had let to Farme the realme of England, to Lords that abused the king, and much misgouerned him, sending abroad blanke Charters, &c. Whereupon, in the end,Articles a∣gainst the King. Articles were framed against the king, and he committed to the Tower of London: Henrie, Surnamed
Bullingbrooke, sonne to Iohn of Gaunt, being proclaimed king, and Richard quite depryued, when he had raigned 22. years, three months, & nine dayes. Dying, hee was buried at Langley. 1399.Henry Plantagenet, borne at Bullingbroke, in the County of Lincolne, beeing Cosin-Ger∣maine to king Richard the second, succeeded next by Richards depriuation,The Crown entailed. and entailed the crown to him and his heires. Owen Glendoure, with his VVelchmen, entered into Rebellion against the king, and did put him in great daunger of his life by Treason, by conueying a Caltrop into his bed. This king Henry raigned 13. yeares, and odde months, and was buried at Canterburie, with great solemnity. 1413Henry of Monmouth, sonne and heire to king Henry the fourth, succeeded after his father. Hee vrged his title to France,The battell of Agin-court. and fought the famous battell at Agin-court. Hee raigned nine yeares, sixe months, and foure daies, and dying at Boys de Vinciennes in France, was buried at West∣minster. Henry of windsore, being but nine moneths olde,1423 did yet succeed in his lawfull right. He was also crowned king of France at Paris, and had his time troubled with many grieuous combustions both abroad and at home, as also diuers foughten battailes,The houses of Yorke & Lancaster. to the effusion of much blood. He raig∣ned 38. yeares, sixe months, and foure daies, and was buried first at Chertsey, and afterwarde re∣moued to windsore. 1461Edward, Earle of March, tooke on him the
gouernment of the Realm, being son to Richard Duke of Yorke, that was slaine at Wakefield. His raigne also was filled with many troubles, broyles, and Rebellions: yet hee gouerned 22. years, one month, and eight daies, and was bu∣ried at Windsore. Edward the fift, son to king Edward the fourth,1483 succeeded after his father, being neuer crowned, but deposed by his Vnckle Richard, Duke of Glocester, when he had raigned two months,Edw. 5. ne∣uer crownd & eleuen dayes, and with his brother, was murde∣red in the Tower of London, where both theyr bodies were obscurely buried. Richard, Duke of Glocester, vsurped the kingdome two years, two months, and one day:1483. and was slaine in battell at Bosworth fielde,Bosworth field. by Henrie Earle of Richmond, and buried at Lei∣cester. In him ended the line of the Plantage∣nets. Henry, Earle of Richmond,1485 surnamed Tu∣dor, son to Edmund of Hadham, Earle of Rich∣mond, who was son of Owen ap Meredyth, and Queene Katherine the French kings daughter, wife to king Henry the fift. This king Henrie, builded and repayred in his life time, many good∣ly houses, beside his Mannor of Richmond,The me∣morable buildings of king Henrie the seuenth. and his Chappell at Westminster; as Baynards Ca∣stle in London; the goodly Hospitall of the Sa∣uoy, neere. Charing-Crosse, to which hee gaue lands, for releefe of an hundred poore people. Sir Religious houses for Franciscan Friers, of the Obseruant and Couentall orders, (viz.) at Rich∣mond,
at Greenwich, and at Newarke, for Ob∣seruants: at Canterbury, New-Castle, & South∣hampton, for Couentals. Hee gaue also manie sums of money, to good and godly vses. And for that one of the goodliest Chappelles in Europe, was (by his meanes) finished, formerly begun by king Henry the sixt, called the Kings colledge Chappell,Kinges Col∣ledge chap∣pel in Cam∣bridge. in the Vniuersitie of Cambridge: I cannot omit the summe he gaue to accomplish the same, which was 10000. lt. (viz.) 5000. pounds in his life time, and the rest by will at his death, vnder his great Seale of England, which was truely paide, as is yet to be seen in the same Col∣ledge. Hee married his eldest daughter Marga∣ret, to Iames the fourth, King af Scots: of which happy marriage, we enioy our dread Soueraign now raigning, King Iames the sixt. King Hentie raigned 23. yeares, and somwhat more then 8. months, and was buried in his new Chappell at Westminster. 1509Henry the eight, sonne of king Henry the sea∣uenth, succeeded next in the kingdome after hys father. He banished the Popes authority out of England, and was proclaimed King of Ireland, because the former Kinges were onely called Lords of Ireland.Lords of Ireland. He wun Terwin, Tourney, and Bullen in Fraunce, and gaue the Church of the Gray Fryers in London to the Cittie, to bee a place of releefe for poore people;King Hen∣ries gifts, to charitable vses. S. Bartholo∣mewes Spittle, the Gray Fryers, and two pa∣rish Churches, the one called S. Nicholas in the Shambles, the other S. Ewin in Newgate Mar∣ket,
were then made all one parish Church, and he gaue in Lands for maintenance thereof, fiue hundred Markes by the yeare for euer. He raig∣ned 37. years, 9. months, and 5. daies, and was buried at Windsore. Edward the sixt,1549 onely son to king Henry the eight, was crowned king at Westminster. Hée caused the Masse to be vtterly abolished,The Masse abolished. Images to be defaced in Churches, and the Lords supper to be ministred in both kindes. There was then good orders deuised for the poores reliefe, & poore people were distinguished by thrée seuerall de∣grées, in manner following: Three de∣grees of poore. 1. The poore by impotency. 2. Poore by casualty. 3. Thristlesse poore. 1. The poore by im∣potency, were also diuided into 3 kinds 1. The fatherles pore mans chd. 2. The aged, blinde, and lame. 3. The diseased person, by leprosie dropsie, &c. 2. The poore by ca∣sualty, were also of three kinds. 1. The wounded Souldior. 2. The decayed Housholder. 3. The visited wt grieuous disease. 3. The thriftlesse poore were like∣wise of 3. kinds. 1. The Riotor, that consmeth all. 2. The Vagabond, that will abyde in no place. 3. The ydle erson, as Strumpets and others. 1 Christs Hospitall was appointed for the in∣nocent and fatherlesse childe,Christs hos∣pitall. to be trained vp in
knowledge of God, and vertuous exercises. 2 Saint Thomas Hospitall in Southwark, was appointed for reliefe of the aged,S. Thomas Hospitall. blinde, and lame. Bridewell.3 Bridewel was also appointed for the Vaga∣bond, ydle strumpet, and vnthrift. Of all which seuerall Hospitals, this Vertu∣ous yong k. Edward was the founder, and gaue the lands of the Sauoy (which then serued as a harbour to Loyterers, Vagabonds, and strum∣pets, that lay all day in the fieldes, and at Night were harboured there) to the maintenance of these houses: which Lands were of the yearelie value of sixe hundred pounds, and he gaue 4000 Markes beside, of Lands taken in Mtmaine, so yearely valewed. This worthy young King raigned sixe years, fiue months, and eight dayes, and was buried at Westminster. 1553Mary, eldest daughter to King Henry the eight, and Sister to King Edward, succeeded after her Brother. She married with the Prince of Spain, who was afterward king, and raigning 5. years, fiue monethes, and tenne dayes, was buried at Westminster. 1558Elizabeth, second Daughter to king Henrie the eight, and Sister also to king Edward, came next to her right in the Crowne of England. To write of the Princely life and raigne of that Vir∣gin Empresse, and matchlesse Queene, woulde require large Volumes, yet all too little for her high deseruing merit. Hauing liued (well neere) threescore and ten years, and happily raigned 44.
yeares, 4. months, and od dayes: she died the 24 of March, 1602. & was buried at Westm. The lines engrauen on her Tombe, may serue for her further memory. A Sacrifice to Posterity. HAuing restored Religion to the Primitiue sincerity, established Peace, reduced coine to the iust valew, reuenged Domestical rebelli∣on, succored France, greeued by ciuill war, sup∣ported Belgia, ouer-come the Spanish inuinci∣ble Nauy, pacified Ireland, by driuing out the Spaniards, and compelling the Rebels to yeeld to her pardon, increased very much the Reuen∣newes of both Vniuersities, by a Law for theyr prouision of Victuall, enriched all England, & administring most prudently the Imperial state thereof 45. yeares in true piety, in the seauen∣ty yeare of her age (in most happy & peaceable maner departed this life) leauing heere hir mor∣tal parts, enterred in this famous and renowned Church (by her conserued) til by the command of Christ, they rise againe immortall. Iames, king of England, Scotland, Fraunce,1602 and Ireland, first Monarch of the whole Islands or Countrey, was proclaimed king the 24. of March, 1602. being the onely inheritour to k. Henry the seauenth, and Elizabeth his Queene, issuing from Lady Margaret, eldest Daughter to them both. In whose happy marriage, ended
the long ciuill dissentions, of the two deuided fa∣milies of Yorke and Lancaster: And by his most rightfull succession, in the deuided kingdomes of England and Scotland, hath vnited them in one sole Monarchy of Great Britaine. Long may hee raigne, to Gods glory, and comfort of his King∣domes. ¶A briefe Catalogue of the Princes of Wales, from the time that King Edward the first had conquered Wales, to this instant. 1. EDward, borne at Caernaruon, & there∣fore called Edward of Caernaruon, be∣ing Sonne to king Edward of England, first of that name, was the first Prince of Wales of the English bloud, after the death of Prince Lhew∣elyn, and came to Chester, in the 29. year of his fathers raigne, where he receiued the homage of the frée-holders of Wales. 2 Edward of Windsore, beeing eldest son to king Edward the second, in the 15. yeare of his fathers raigne, was created Prince of VVales, and Duke of Aquitaine, in a Parlament holden at Yorke. 3 Edward borne at Woodstock, & sonne and heyre to king Edward the third, in the 17. yeare of his Fathers raigne, was created Prince of Wales at London. This Prince was surnamed the Blacke Prince, hee tooke Iohn the French King prisoner, and dyed in the 46. yeare of his
age, his father yet liuing. 4 Richard, sonne to Edward the Black Prince, was created Prince of Wales at Hauering in the Bower, in the fiftie yeare, of king Edward the 3. his Grandfather, and was afterward king of England, by the name of king Richard the se∣cond. 5 Henry of Monmouth, sonne and heire to king Henry the fourth, was in the first yeare of his fa∣thers raigne, created Prince of Wales at VVest∣minster. 6 Edward of Westminster, sonne and heyre to king Henry the sixt, in the 31. yeare of his Fa∣thers raigne, was created Prince of wales, and Earle of Chester, at westminster. 7 Edward, eldest sonne of king Edward the 4. borne in the Sanctuary at Westminster, in the 11. yeare of his Fathers raigne, was created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester at Lon∣don. He was afterward king of England, by the name of Edward the fift, but neuer crowned, be∣cause both he and his Brother were made away, by the treachery of their Vnckle Richard, Duke of Glocester, that vsurped the Crowne. 8 Edward, the onely Sonne of king Richard the third, being a child of ten years olde, in the first yeare of the said kings raign, was created prince of wales at London. 9 Arthur, sonne and heire to king Henrie the se∣uenth, in the fift yeare of his Fathers raigne, was created Prince of wales at London: & dy∣ing at Ludlow Castle, in the 17. yeare of his
fathers raigne, was buried with great Funerall solemnity at Worcester. 10 Henry, Duke of Yorke, son to King Hen∣ry the seauenth, and Brother vnto Prince Ar∣thur, was after the saide Princes death, in the ninetéenth yeare of his Fathers raigne, crea∣ted Prince of Wales: and was afterward King of England, by the name of King Henry the 8. In the 26. yeare of his raigne, the Principality and Countrey of Wales, was (by Parliament) incorporated and vnited vnto the Kingdome of England, and all the Inhabitants thereof made equall in freedomes, liberties, rightes, priuiled∣ges, lawes, and in all other respects, to the natu∣rall subiects of England. 11 Edward, sonne to King Henry the eight, and borne at Hampton Court, the Principality of Wales, being incorporated (as hath bin sayde) to the Crowne and kingdome of England, was no otherwise Prince of Wales, then vnder the generall Title of England, as the King his Fa∣ther was king of England,Prince of Wales by general title and (vnder ye name) king of Wales, as it being a member of England. Nor do I read of any other creation or inuesture, that he had in that Principality. He was King after his Father, by the name of K. Edward 6. 1. Princesse of Wales.1 Marie, Daughter to King Henry the eight by the Princesse Katherine Dowager, Widdow of Prince Arthur, was Princesse of Wales. 2. Princesse of Wales.2 Elizabeth, Daughter also to King Henrie te eight, was in a Parliament, in the 25. yeare
of her Fathers raigne, declared Princesse and Inheretrix of the crowne of England, with all dominions to the same belonging; and therefore was (as her Sister) Princesse of Wales. All these fore-named Princes of Wales, were created (solemnely) by and in Court of Parlia∣ment, except three, which were Richard the se∣cond, Edward the fifte, and Edward, Sonne to Richard the thyrde. Those that were created out of Parliament, were Princes, whose for∣tunes proued hard and disastrous: For Richard the second was deposed, and after murdered; Edward the fift was also murdered in the To∣wer of London; and Edward, sonne to Richard the thirde, dyed within three moneths after, as a iust iudgement of God, for his Fathers wick∣ednesse. 12. Henrie, sonne and heire to our dread Soueraigne King. Iames, in the eight yeare of his Fathers raigne ouer England,Prince of Wales by creation. &c. was crea∣ted in the Court of Parliament at Westminster, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Roth∣say, Earle of Chester, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter: The strong arme of Heauen be his continu∣all keeper and defen∣der.
Briefe Obseruations, not vnfitly annexed to this our short Summary of England. ¶Of Bishopprickes, and their circuites. Iurisdiction of Canterb.CAnterbury erected first by Augustine the Monke, in the time of Ethelbert, king of Kent, by prouincial regiment, reacheth ouer all the South and west parts of this Lande, and Ireland also, and there are few shyres, wherein the Arch-byshop hath not some peculiets. But in it selfe, as (from the beginning) was, and is proper to the See. It ex∣tendeth but ouer one parcell of Kent, which Rud∣burne calleth Cantwarland, the Iurisdiction of Rochester including the rest: so that in this one County, both the greatest Archbishopricke, and least Bishoppricke are vnited together. Canter∣bury hath vnder it one Arch-deaconry, that hath iurisdiction ouer 11. Deanries, or 161. Parish Churches. In time of popery, vndername of first fruites, it paide to Rome (at euery alienation) 10000. Ducats or Florens, beside 5000. which the new elect did vsually pay for his pall, each du∣cat being then worth an English Crowne. Iurisdiction of Roche∣ster.Rochester, included within the limits of Kent, was erected also by Augustine, in the raygne of Ceolrijc, ouer the west-Saxons. It hath one Arch-Deacon, whose gouernement in spirituall causes, ruleth 3. Deanries, or 132. parish Chur∣ches,
whereby appeareth, that in Kent are 393. parish churches, whereof the saide two Arch-dea∣cons haue cure and charge. It paid to Rome at the bishops admission, 1300. Ducats or Florens. London was erected at first by king Lucius,Iurisdiction of London who made it an Archbishops See (as in due place hath already bin remembred) and so it continued till Augustine translated that title to Canterbu∣ry. It includeth Essex, Middlesex, and parte of Hertfordshire, containing (in quantity) the an∣cient Kingdome of the East-Angles, before it was vnited to the West-Saxons. It hath foure Arch-deaconries, (viz.) London, Essex, Middle∣sex and Colchester, that haue vnder them 363. parish Churches, beside peculiers. The Archdea∣conry of S. Albanes, was added thereto by king Henry the eight, which hath also 25. parishes, whereof foure are in Buckingham, the rest in Hertfordshire. It payed to Rome, three thou∣sand Florens. Chichester beganne in the Isle of Seales or Seolsie,Iurisdiction of Chiche∣ster. and was translated to Chichester in the time of William the Conqueror, when generall remoue of Sees was made, from small Villages to greater Townes. It hath Sussex onely vnder iurisdiction, wherein are 16. Deanries, and 551 parish Churches: and paide to Rome (at euerie alienation) 333. Ducates. VVinchester, was giuen to Birius,Iurisdiction of winchest. & his suc∣cessors, by Kinigils & Oswald, of the Northum∣bers, in whose time it was erected. It Gouer∣neth Hampshire, Surrie, Iardseie, Gardeseie, and
the Isle of Wight; contayning eight deanries, 276. Parish-Churches, beside perpetuall Prela∣ry of the Honourable Order of the Garter. It paid to Rome 12000. Ducates or Florens. Iurisdiction of SalisburySalisbury was made chiefe Sée of Shirbourne, by Byshop Harman (Predecessour to Osmond) who brought it from Shirbourne to that Cittie. It gouerneth Barkshire, Wiltshire, and Dorset∣shire. It paid to Rome 4000. Florens. Iurisdiction of Excester.Excester hath Deuonshire and Cornewall, sometimes two seuerall Bishoppricks, but (in the end) brought into one of Cornewall, and from thence to Excester, in the time of King William the Conqueror. It paid to Rome at euery aliena∣tion, sixe thousand Ducates or Florens. Iurisdiction of Bath.Bath, the Sée whereof was sometime at Wels, before Iohn (the bishop there) annexed the church of Bath vnto it, which was in An. 1094. it hath Somersetshire onely, and it paide to the Court of Rome, 430. Florens. Iurisdiction of Worce∣ster.Worcester, hath VVorcestershire, and part of Warwickshire; Before the Bishopricke of Glo∣cester was taken from it, it paid to the Pope two thousand Ducates of Golde, at change of euerie Prelate. It began in the time of Offa, King of the East-Angles. Iurisdiction of Gloster.Glocester hath Glocestershire onely, where∣in are nine Deanries, and 294. Parish-Chur∣ches. It neuer paide any thing to Rome, because it was erected by King Henry the eyght, when he had abolished the Popes vsurped authority. Iurisdiction of HerefordHereford, hath Herefordshire, and part of
Shropshire. It paid to Rome at euery alienation 1800. Ducates. Lichfielde, had Couentry added to it,Iurisdiction of Lichfield in the raigne of King Henry the first, at the earnest sute of Robert, Bishop of that Sée: It hath Stafford∣shire, Darbishire, part of Shropshire, and the rest of Warwickshire, voide of subiection to the Sée of VVorcester. It was erected in the time of Pen∣da, King of the South-Mercians: And paide to the Pope thrée thousand Florens, at euery alie∣nation. Oxford, hath Oxfordshire onely,Iurisdiction of Oxford. & neuer paide any taxation to Rome, being erected by K. Henry the eight. Elie, hath Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Elie, being at first a wealthy Abbey;Iurisdiction of Elie. it was ere∣cted by King Henry the first, in Anno 1109. It paid to the Pope at euery alienation, 7000. Du∣cates. Norwich,Iurisdiction of Norwich called in elder times Episcopatus Donnicensis, Dononiae, or Aestanglorum, was first erected at Felstow, or Felixstow; afterward remoued to Donwich; thence to Helmham; next to Theodford, or Thetford; and lastly (in the Conquerours time) to Norwich. It contayneth Norffolke and Suffolke onely, but (at first) in∣cluded Cambridgeshire also, and so much as lay within the Kingdome of the East-Angles. It be∣gan vnder Cerpenwald, King of the East-Sax∣ons; and paid to Rome 5000. Ducates. It con∣tained sometime 1563. Parish-Churches, beside 88. religious Houses; but now wee heare of no more then 1200.
Iurisdiction of Peterbo∣row.Peterborow, sometimes a notable Monaste∣ry, hath Northampton and Rutlandshires, bee∣ing a Diocesse erected likewise by King Henrie the eyght, and neuer paied first Fruites to the Pope. Iurisdiction of Bristow.Bristow, hath Dorsetshire, sometime belong∣ing to Salisbury: a Sée also erected by king Henry the eight. Iurisdiction of Lincoln.Lincolne, of all other (of late times) was the greatest, and albeit that (out of it) were taken the Sées of Oxford and Peterborow; yet it still re∣taineth Lincolne, Leicester, Huntingdon, Bed∣ford, Buckingham shires, and the rest of Hert∣fordshire, extending it self from Thames to Hum∣ber. It paied to the Pope at euery alienation, 5000. Ducates: and began in the time of King William Rufus. Thus much of the Bishoprickes in Lhoegres or England, as it was left to Lo∣crine; now goe we to VVales. Iurisdiction of Landaffe.Landaffe, or the Church of Taw, hath Ecclesi∣asticall Iurisdiction in Glamorgan, Monmouth, Brechnoch, and Radnor shires, and paide 700. Ducates to Rome, at euery exchange of Prelat. But it was a poore aunswere (vppon call) of the incumbent, in Court before the Lord President, when hée sayd: The Daffe is héere, but the Land is gone. Iurisdiction of S. DauidsS. Dauids, hath Pembroke and Caermardine∣shires, whose liuery and first fruites to the Sée of Rome, was 1500. Ducates. Iurisdiction of Bangor.Bangor is in North-wales, and hath Caernar∣uon, Angleseie, and Merioneth shires: and paid
to Rome, 126. Ducates. S. Asaphes, hath Prestholme,Iurisdiction of Saint Asaphes. and part of Den∣bigh, and Flint Shires, in ecclesiasticall Iurisdi∣ction, and is the least in circuite in VVales, a∣mounting (in all) not to one good Countie; yet it paied to Rome at euery alienation, 470. Du∣cates. Hitherto of the Prouince of Canterburie, for so much thereof as now lieth within compasse of this Island. The Archbishops Sée of Yorke was restored about the yeare of Grace 625. in the time of Ead∣win, king of Northumberland,York & her Iurisdiction. Paulinus sitting as first Byshoppe there, by ordination of Iustus Arch-bishop of Canterbury. It hath Iurisdiction ouer Yorkeshire, Nottinghamshire, and the rest of Lancashire (not subiect to the Sée of Chester.) It paied to Rome 1000. Ducates, beside 5000. for the pall of the new elect. Chester vpon Dee,Iurisdiction of Chester. otherwise called Westche∣ster, hath Chestershire, Darbishire, the most part of Lancashire, euen to the Ribell, Richmond, & a part of Flint and Denbighshires in Wales. It was made a Byshoppricke by Henry the eyght, An. regni 33. Iuly 16. Durham, hath the County of Durham,Iurisdiction of Durham. & Nor∣thumberland, with the Dales; the Bishops haue bin (sometimes) Earles Palantines, ruling vnder name and succession of Saint Cuthbert. It paid to Rome 9000. Ducates, at euery alienation. Caerleill,Iurisdiction of Caerleill. was erected Anno 1132. by king Henry the first, and hath Cumberland & VVest∣merland in rule. It paid to the Pope a thousand Florens.
Bish. of ManThere is another Bishopricke, called the Sée of Mona, or Man, somtime named Episcopatus Sodorensis, whereof one VVimundus was or∣dained the first Bishop, and Iohn the second, in the troublesome time of king Stephen. But the guift of this Prelacy is said to rest in the Earls of Darby, to nominate thereto (from time to time) such as they déeme conuenient. ¶Of the Colledges in Cambridge and Ox∣ford and their Founders. In Cambridge. Years of the foundationsColledges. by Founders. 15461. Trinity Colledge. by King Henry the 8. King Henry the sixt, 14412. The Kings Col. by Edward the fourth, Henry the 7. Hen. 8. 15113. Saint Iohns. by L. Margaret, grand∣mother to Henry 8. 15054. Christs Colledge. by K Hen. 6. and Lady Marg. before named. 14465. The Quéens col. by Lady Margaret, wife to Henry the sixt. 14966. Iesus Colledge. by Iohn Alcock, bishop of Elie. 13427. Bennet Colledge. by The Brethren of a Guild, cald Cor. Chr. 13438 Pembroke Hall. by Maria de Valencia, Countesse of Pembr.
9. Peter Colledge. by Hugh Balsham,1256 by∣shop of Elie. 10. Gundeuill, and Caius Colledge. by Edmund Gundeuil,1348 Parson of Tertington, and Iohn Caius, Doctour of Phi∣sicke. 11. Trinity Hall. by VVilliam Bateman,1354 bishop of Norwich. 12. Clare Hall. by Rich. Badow,1326 Chan∣celler of Cambridg. 13. Katherine Hall. by Robert Woodlark,1459 Doctor of diuinity. 14. Magdalen Colle. by Edward D. of Buck,1519 and Tho. L. Audley. 15. Emanuell Colle. by Sir VValter Mild∣may, &c.1585 In Oxford. 1. Christes Church.1539 by King Henry the eight. 2. Magdalen colledge by Wil. Wainfleet,1459 first fellow of Merton Colledge, then scholler of Winchester, and afterward Bishop there. 3. New Colledge. by Wil. Wickham.1375. By∣shop of Winchester. 4. Merton colledge. by Walter Merton,1276 By∣shop of Rochester. 5. All Soules Col∣ledge. by Hen. Chichelie,1437 Arch bishop of Canterbury 6. Corpus Christi Colledge. by Richard Fox,1516 Bishop of Winchester. 7. Lincoln colledge. by Richard Fleming,1430 bi∣shop
of Lincolne. 13238. Auriell Colledge. by Abraham Browne, Almoner to K. Ed. 2. 13409. Quéens colledge. by R. Eglesfield, Chaplaine to Phillip, Queene and Wife to King Edward the third. 126310. Balioll Colledge by Iohn Baliol, king of Scotland. 155711. Saint Iohns col∣ledge. by Sir Thomas White, Lord Mayor of Lon∣don. 155612. Trinity Colledge by Sir Thomas Pope Knight. 131613. Excester colledge by Walter Stapleton, bi∣shop of Excester. 151714. Brazen-nose. by William Smith, Bi∣shop of Lincolne. 87315. Vniuersity Col. by William Archdeacon of Duesme. 16. Glocester Col∣ledge. by Iohn Gifford, who made it a Cell for 13 Monkes. 17. Iesus Colledge. by Hugh ap Rice, Do∣ctor of the Ciuill-law. Hostels or Hals in Oxford. Broade-gates. Hart Hall. Magdalen Hall. Alburne Hall. Postminster Hall. Saint Mary Hall. White Hall. New Inne. Edmund Hall.
¶ The Names of the Shires in England and Wales. THE first tenne Shires do lye betwéene the Brittish Sea, and the Thames, according to Polydore. Kent. Sussex. Surrey. Hampshire. Barkshire. Wiltshire. Dorsetshire. Sommersetshire. Deuonshire. Cornewall. On the North-side of the Thames, betwéene it and Trent, which passeth thorough the midst of England, are 16. other Shires, sixe toward the East, and the other toward the west. Essex, sometime all Forrest, saue one hundred. Middlesex. Hertfordshire. Suffolke. Norffolke. Cambridgeshire, wherein are twelu hundreds. Bedfordshire. Huntingdon, wherein are foure hundreds. Buckingham. Oxford. Northampton. Rutland. Leicestershire. Nottinghamshire. Warwickshire. Lincolnshire. There are six also westward, toward Wales. Glocester. Hereford. Worcester. Shropshire. Stafford. Chestershire.
These are the 32. Shires, which lye by South of the Riuer Trent; beyond which Riuer, there are other eight. Darby. Yorke. Lancaster. Cumberland. Westmerland. Richmond, wherein are fiue Wapentakes; And when it is accoun∣ted as a parcell of York∣shire (out of which it is taken) then is it reputed for the whole Riding. Durham. Northumberland. So that in the portion somtime called Lhoegria, there are now forty Shires. In Wales also there be thirtéen, whereof seauen are in South Wales. Cardigan, or Cereticon. Penmoroke, or Penbroke. Caermardin, wherein are nine hundreds or Com∣mots. Glamorgan. Monmouth. Brecknocke. Radnor. In North-wales likewise are sixe. Anglescie. Caernaruon. Merioneth. Denbigh. Flint. Montgomerie. Which beeing added to those of England, doe make vp 53. Shieres or Counties.
¶ A Briefe Collection, of the Originall, Antiquity, Increase and Moderne estate of the honourable Citty of London. To the Worshipfull, M. Cornelius Fish, Esquire, and Chamberlaine of the saide most famous Cittie. COncerning the name of this aun∣cient and worthy Citty,The names by diuers giuen to London. by diuers Authors it hath bin (as diuersly) descanted on: Tacitus, Ptolome∣us, and Antoninus called it Lon∣dinium and Longidinium: Amianus Marcelli∣nus tearmed it Lundinum and Augusta: Ste∣phen (in his Citties) calleth it : our Britaines, Lundayn: the old Saxons, Lon∣donceaster, or Londonbeig; Strangers, Lon∣dra and Londres; and the Inhabitants, Lon∣don. By other writers (whom some iudge fa∣bulous) it hath bin called Troia-noua, or Troy∣nouant, New Troy, according to the Name that Brute (first founder thereof) gaue it: Dinas Be∣lin, Belins Citty; & Caer-Lud, or Luds-Towne, of King Lud: who not onely re-edified, but also gaue it that name. Erasmus deriued it from Lin∣dum, a Cittye in the Isle of Rhodes: and so (by variety of iudgements) it hath run into the like variety of names. In which straunge streame of opinion, howe a man may best carry himselfe,
without impeach to any, is, freely to leaue each man maister of his owne coniecture: whether Londons true name took originall from any of these fore-mentioned, or whether Woodes and Groues (being named in ye British toong L'lhwn) London should receiue her title, by way of excel∣lency,Caesar and Strabo, al∣ledged by M. Camden and be called, The Citty, or A City thicke of Trees, because the Britains called those woods and Groues by the names of Citties & Townes, which they had fenced with trees cast downe and plashed, to stop vp all passage. London burnt by the Danes.But leauing the name, we finde that London was burnt and destroyed (howe faire soeuer it was built before) by the Danes, and other Pa∣gan enemies, about the yeare of Christ, 839. but afterward, in the yeare, 886. Alfred, King of the west-Saxons, both restored, repayred, and made it honourably habitable: giuing the charge and keeping thereof, to his Sonne in Law Ethelred, Earle of the Mercians, with whom hee had for∣merly married his Daughter Ethelfleda. That it was strongly defenced with wals, I read, that the Londoners did shut vp their gates, and man∣fully withstood the Danes,Wil. Malins∣bury. preseruing their king Ethelred within their wals; this was in Anno Christi, 994. Also in Anno 1016. when Edmund Ironside gouerned the VVest-Saxons, Canu∣tus the Dane brought hys Fleete to the West part of the bridge, and threw a trench about the Citty, as hoping by assault to win it: but the Ci∣tizens repulsed him, and droue him from theyr walles. Those walles were (from time to time)
wel maintained & repayred:Mainte∣nance of the wals. with stones from the Iewes broken houses, in King Iohns iime, 1215. when the Barons (entring by Ealdgate, or Ald∣gate) brake their houses downe. And in K. Hen∣ries time the thirde, when the walles and gates were repayred (in more séemely wise then before) at the common charge of the Citty. The circuite of London wall on the landes side, is measured thus. From the Tower of London in the East,London wall in cir∣cuite. to Ealdgate, commonly called Aldgate, 82. per∣ches. From Algate to Byshopsgate, 86. perches: From Byshopsgate in the North, to the Postern of Criplesgate, 162. perches. From Criplesgate to Ealdersgate, or Eldrich gate, 75. perches. From Ealdersgate to Newgate, 66. perches. From Newgate in the West, to Ludgate, 42. perches, amounting in all to 513. perches of As∣size. From Ludgate to the Fleete Dike, 60. per∣ches. From Fleet-bridge South, to the Riuer of Thames, about 70. perches. Which perches (in compleat number) rise to 643. each perch contay∣ning fiue yards and an halfe: which in yards doe amount to 3536. & an halfe, containing 10608. foote, that make vp two English miles, & more by 608. foote. There were but foure Gates (at first) made in the wall of this Citty, viz: Aldgate, Eastward;Four Gates & no more in elder time. Aldersgate, North-ward; Ludgate, Westward; and the Bridge-gate (ouer Thames) South-ward. But other Gates and Posterns (for ease and conueniency of passage) were afterwarde made, as mens affayres required to other quar∣ters
of the Citty.The Po∣sterne gate by the To∣wer. A Posterne gate was somtime neere to the Tower of London, which decaying by length of time, and a deepe Ditch made with∣out the wall, it fell downe in the year, 1440. the eighteenth of King Henry the sixt, and was ne∣uer after builte againe: but a plaine Cottage of Timber, Lath, and Loame, with a narrow pas∣sage, being erected instead thereof, it so continu∣eth.Aldgate. Aldgate was next in the East, so named by the antiquity thereof: for it was so called in king Edgars time: and the Soke or Franchise (wyth the Port of Aldgate, and all customs thereto ap∣pertaining) were likewise giuen by Matilda (Q. to Henry the first) to the Priour of the B. Trini∣tie, within Aldgate (and by her founded) in as ample and free maner as she enioyed them.Bishopsgate The third was Bishopsgate toward the North, built by some Bishop of London, as is imagined, for other certainty is not as yet found, which Gate did much ease to such as trauailed East, and by North, as to Norffolke, Suffolke, Cambridge∣shire, &c. because before the erection thereof, such as iournied out at Aldgate, of necessity helde on to the miles end, and turning them on the lefte hand to Blethon-hall, now Bednal-Greene, rde directly to Cambridge Heath, and so tooke their iournies North, or East, and by North, or occa∣sion required. Otherwise, refusing Aldgate way, they had no other helpe then out at Alders∣gate, through Aldersgate streete, and Goswell street, now tearmed Pickt-hatch, towards Isel∣don, and by a Crosse of stone on their right hand,
set vp for a marke by the North end of Golding∣lane; passed throgh a long street (yet called Ald-streete, or Old-street) to another Crosse by Se∣wers ditch Church, where now stands a smiths Fordge, and there they turned againe North-wards, to Totenham, Enfield, waltham, ware, &c. This Bishopsgate,The Easter∣lings. the Dutch Marchants of the Haunce, Stiliard, or Guildhalla Tentonico∣rum, were bound by couenant, both to repayre and defend, at all times of daunger and extremi∣ty. The fourth, was a Posterne, now called Mooregate, which one Thomas Faulconer,Mooregate. Maior of London, An. 1413. and third of Hen∣ry the fift, caused to be made there on the Moores side, where neuer Gate was before: that people might passe vpon cause-wayes into the fielde for recreation, because the fielde was then a marish. The fift Gate was the Posterne of Criplesgate,Criplesgate. so called long before the Conquest, in regarde of Criples begging there: and the body of S. Ed∣mond the Martyre was brought into London thereat, when it was conuayed from Bedris∣worth (now called Bury S. Edmunds) thorough the East Saxons Kingdome, to the parish church of S. Gregory, neere to the Cathedrall church of S. Paul, where it rested 3. daies. This posterne of Cripplesgate, was a prison of commitment for Cittizens and others, being arrested for debte or common trespasses, as now the Compters are:Fabians ma∣nuscript. & it was new builded by the Brewers of London, An. 1244. But in An. 1483. Edmund Shaa, or Shaw, Goldsmith and Maior of London, gaue
400. Markes by his will, and stuffe of the Olde gate, to builde it againe new, as now it is, which his executors performed in the yeare, 1491. The sixt was Aldresgate, or Aldersgate, not Al∣drich,Aldersgate. Elders or Elderngate, as deriued from an∣cient men that builded it, or trées there sometime growing: but from antiquity of the gate it selfe, being one of the foure that were first builded, and to serue the North-parts, as Aldgate did for the East, both bearing the name of Aldgate, and Al∣der or Aldersgate, to differ their seniority in buil∣ding. The 7. was a Posterne gate made in the 6. yeare of Edw. the 6. in the Wall of the dissolued cloyster of Gray Fiers, now cald Christs Church and Hospitall,Christs hos∣pital postem seruing for passage to S. Barthol∣mewes in Smithfield. The 8. west and by North, was called Newgate, because it was later buyl∣ded then the rest,New-gate. by reason that S. Pauls Church being burned in the Conquerors time, about the yeare 1086. Mauritius, then bish. of London, not repayring ye old church, but seeking to begin ano∣ther, extended ye work in such largenes of ground, that al passage from Aldgate in the East to Lud∣gate in the west, was almost stopt vp. Where∣upon this gate was first deuised and made, and so named: seruing aptly for passage & cariages, from Aldgate, along Cornhil, through West-cheap, & S. Nicholas Shambles, and the Market taking name of Newgate, to any Westward part ouer Oldborne bridge; or turning (without the gate) into Smithfield, to Iseldon. or any part North & by west. It hath bin a Gaole or prison for sellons
& other offenders long time, as the records in K. Iohns time testifieth. And in an. 1422. the first of Henry 6. the executors to Richard Whittington had license to reedify the said gate,Ludgate. which they did with his goods. The 8. gate was Ludgate in the west, builded by k. Lud, before Christs natiuitie, 66. years, seruing for the west, as Aldgate for the East, & was repaired with the stones of ye Iewes defaced houses, when the Barons were in armes in k. Iohns time, as Aldgate & the other gates thē were. A notable testimony to confirm this asserti∣on, apeared in the year 158. when the gate was taken downe to be new builded, for a stone was then found in the wal, which had bin taken from one of those Iewes houses, with this Inscription thereon (but in Hebrew Caracters) Haec est statio Rabbi Moses, filij insignis Rabbi Isaac: This is the station or ward of Rabbi Moses, son of the hono∣rable Rabbi Isaac. And it seemed to haue bin fixed in the front of some one of the Iewes houses, as a note or signe, yt such a one dwelled there. It was made a frée prison in the 1. yeare of K. Richard 2. Nicholas Brembar being then maior, & after con∣firmed (in the time of Iohn Northampton Maior 1382) by a common Counsel in the Guild-hal, ye fréemen of the City, for debt, trepasses,Ludgate made a free prison. accounts & contempts, shold be imprisoned in Ludgate, & for treasons, fellonies, murders, and other criminall offences, Newgate should be the prison. Lastly, there is also a breach in the Citty Wall, and a Bridge made of Timber ouer the Fleete Dike, betwixte Fleete-bridge and Thames, directlie o¦uer
against the House of Bride-Well, but it is not as (as I thinke) called any Gate. The South side of Lon∣don.Now concerning the South-side of the Citty, and that it was sometime walled too, the Citty being then round engirt with a Wal: the Testi∣mony of William Fitz-Stephen (who wrote in the raigne of King Henry the second) may serue to approue it,William Fitz Stephē his words. for these are his very wordes. The Wall is high and great, well towred on the North-side, with due distances betweene the Towers. On the South-side also, the Citty was walled and towred: but the Fishfull Riuer of Thames, with his ebbing and flowing, hath long since subuerted them. If then wee shall speake of Water-Gates,Water gates as already wee haue done of Land-gates, and, being now in the west, returne towards the East; the first then was cal∣led Ripa Reginae, the Queens-banck, or Queens Hith,Queenes-Hith. deseruing well to bee estéemed a Water-Gate, and the very chiefe of the Citty, beeing a common Strand or landing place, equall with, and (in olde time) farre excelling Belines-Gate. For, beside the antiquity thereof, and to whom, (in those daies) it seuerally appertained; I finde that King Henry the third, in the ninth of his raigne, commaunded the Constables of the To∣wer of London, to arrest the Shippes of the Cinque-Portes on the Riuer of Thames,The Stil∣yard, or Guilda-Halla Teu∣tonicorum. and compell them to bring their Corne and Fish to no other place, but to the Queenes-Hith only. And when corn arriued betwéen the Gate of Guilde-Hall, of the Merchantes of Colleyne, and the
Soke of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury (for hee had then a House néere to the Blacke-Fryers) it was not to bee measured by any other quarter, then that of the Quéenes Soke or Hith, on paine of forty shillinges amercement. Afterward, Queenes-Hith, and the Farme thereof (granted by Richard Earle of Cornewall) was by the said King Henry the third, confirmed to Iohn Gisors then Maior, the Comminaltie of London, and their Successours for euer (as appeareth by his royall Charter) for the sum of fifty poundes. It was also ordained by King Edward the fourth, that all Shippes, Vessels, or Boates, bringing prouision of Victuall to the Cittie (of what qua∣lity soeuer) if but one Vessell only: it came to the Queenes-Hith; if two, the one to Quéenes-Hithe, the other to Belins-gate; if thrée,The order for the Cit∣ties prouisi∣on, at Belins gate, and Queenes-hithe. two to Quéenes-Hithe, the third to Belins-gate, &c. so that (alwaies) the more part came to Quéenes-Hithe. But if the Vessel were so great, comming with Salt or otherwise, from the Bay, and could not conueniently come to these Gates or Keyes; it was then to bee conuaied to them, (as afore-said) by Lighters. Downe-gate is the next,Downe-gate. and was so named (as is supposed) by reason of the waies suddaine descent or stooping, from Saint Iohns Church in Walbroke, to the Riuer of Thames. It was some-time a large Water-gate, frequented with Shippes and vessels, like to the Queenes-Hithe; and appeared (by an Inquisition, in the twentie eight yeare of Henry the third) to be a part there∣of,
being ordered by the customes thereto belon∣ging. WolfesgateWolfes-gate, now out of vse; one part being builded on by the Earle of Shrewsbury, the other by the Chamberlain of London, and now called Cold-Harbor. Ebgate.Ebgate, so called of olde time: but now it is a narrow passage to the Thames, called Ebgate∣lane, or old Swan. Oyster-gateOyster-gate, so called of Oysters vsually there sold, as chiefest market for them, and other shell∣fish. There now stands the water-engine, that serues the Citty with water, made in the yeare 1582. by Peter Moris, Dutchman. Bridge-gate.Bridge-gate, so called of London Bridge, whereon it standeth, béeing one of the Citties first foure and principall Gates, and long before the Conquest, when there (then) stood a bridge of Timber. Buttolphs-gate.Buttolphs-gate, so called of the Parish-church of S. Buttolph néer adioyning: which Gate was some-time giuen, and confirmed by William the Conqueror, to the Monkes of Westminster, by vertue of a former guift, which Almundus (of the Port of S. Buttolph) gaue them, when hée was there made Monke. Belins-gate.Belins-gate, or Belingsgate, the largest wa∣ter-gate now on the Thames, and most frequen∣ted. Belin, a King of the Brittons (according to Geffrey of Monmouth) first built it, and gaue it his owne name, about 400. years before Christs Natiuity.
There are two Water-gates more,Two water gates. one on the west-side of Wooll-wharffe, or Customers Key, beautifully enlarged and built of late: This gate is commonly called the Water-Gate, at South end of Water-lane. The other, by the Tower Bulwarke, and is the last and turthest Water-gate East-ward. Beside these common Water-gates, there were then diuers priuate wharffes & Keies, all along from East to West of the Cittie, on the banck of the Riuer of Thames. Before we part further frō this famous riuer,London-bridge. let vs here remēber Londonbridge ouer it, which, before there was any bridge at al, or it a bridge of timber, there was a Ferry kept in the same place, & no other passage was there then to Southwark, but by the Ferry onely. The Ferry-man and his Wife dying, left this Ferry to their only daugh∣ter, named Mary; who (with her Parents goods left her, & the profits arising from the Ferry) built a house of Sisters,S. Marie Oueries. where the East part of S. Ma∣ry Oueries Church (aboue the Quier) now stan∣deth, and where she her selfe was buried; giuing them also the ouer sight & benefits of the ferry. Af∣terward this house of Sisters (being conuerted to a Colledge of Priestes) the Priestes builded the Bridge of timber, and kept it in good reparations,London∣bridge of Timber. till the continuall charges growing ouer-burthe∣nous, about the yeare 1176. the course of the Ri∣uer being then turned another way, for a time, by a trench purposely deuised (beginning about Ro∣driffe, or Redriffe in the East, and ending aboue Patrickseie, or Batersey in the west) the Bridge
of stone began to be founded, and continued 33. yeares in building.London bridge of Timber burnt. The Bridge of timber, in the yeare 1136. was burnt down by fire, but in An. 1163. it was not only repaired, but new made of Timber againe, by one Peter of Cole-Church, Priest and Chaplaine: who also began the foun∣dation of the Stone-bridge, som-what néer to the Timber-bridge, and liued till within foure years of the works ending, being buried in a Chappell erected on the Bridge: But the whole bridge of stone, was finished by the worthy Merchants of London, Setle Mercer, Wil. Almaine, & Bene∣dict Botewrite, principal Maisters of that work. Other bridges of stone, also belonging to the City,Fleetbridge as Fleetbridge without Ludgate, made at the charges of Iohn Wels, Maior, Anno. 1431. Oldborne-bridge,Oldbourne bridge. so called of a Bourne, which sometime ran down Old-borne. Cowbridge, by Cow-bridge-street,Cowbridge or Cow-lane; which beeing decaied, another of timber was made by Chick∣lane. Beside, there were other Bridges ouer the Town-ditch, as without Aldgate, Bishopsgate, Mooregate, Cripples-gate, Aldersgate, the Po∣sterne of Christs Hospitall, Newgate, and Lud∣gate, al paued ouer with stone, and leuelled with the stréets: beside diuers bridges (in elder times) ouer the course of Walbrooke. While wee are thus speaking of Water and Bridges, belonging to the Citty, heere I thinke it most conuenient also, to say somewhat concer∣ning the Conduits,Of the Cō∣duites. and swéete-waters conuaied to them by Pipes of Lead. The first Cesterne
whereof (castellated with Stone in the Citty of London) was called the great Conduit in West∣cheap, which was begun to be builded in the year 1285. Henry Wales, then being Maior. The Tonne vpon Cornehill, was cesterned in Anno. 1401. Iohn Chadworth then being Maior. Bos∣ses of water, at Belins-gate; by Paules-wharffe, and by S. Gyles Church without Cripples-gate, were made about the yeare 1423. Water was brought to the Standard in west Cheape, about the yeare 1431.The S¦dard  cheap▪ And King Henry the sixt, in An. 1442. granted to Iohn Hathar∣ley, Mayor, licence to take vppe 200. Fodar of Lead, for the building of Conduites; a common Granery, and of a new Crosse in West-Cheape, for Honor of the Citty. The Conduit in Aldermanbury,Conduits Alderman burie and Fleestreets. and the Stan∣dard in Fleet-street, were made and finished by the executors of Sir Wil. Eastfield, in An. 147. A Cesterne was also added to the Standard in Fleet-street; a second made at Fléet-bridge; and another without Cripples-gate, in An. 1478. The Conduit in Grasse-street, in An. 1491. The Conduit at Old-bourne Crosse, about 1498. and made new againe by Master William Lambe, 1577. with an help also at Old-bourne∣bridge. The little Conduite, commonly tearmed the Pissing-Conduit, by the Stocks-Market, about 1500. The Conduit at Bishops-gate, 1513. The Conduit at London-wall, 1528.
The Conduit without Aldgate, 1535. The Conduite in Lothbury and Colman-street, 1546. The Conduit of Thames-water, at Downe-gate, 1568. Nor may I hear forget the standard of Thames water by Leaden-hall, which being deriued from the forcier of water, made by Peter Moris forena∣med, ascending vp ouer the stéeple of S. Magnus Church, at the north end of London bridge, con∣uaieth water into many mens houses in Thames streete, New-Fish-streete, Grasse-streete; And so mounteth vp stil in Pipes, to the North-west cor∣ner of Leaden-Hall (the highest ground in al the Citty) where the wast of the maine Pipe rising into this standard (prouided at the cities charge) at euery tide was prouided to run forth 4. waies, at foure seuerall spouts, for plentiful seruice of the néere adioyning Inhabitants, and cleansing the Channels passing those foure seuerall waies. The Conduits of Thames-water, by the Pa∣rish-Churches of S. Mary Magdalen, and Saint Nicholas Cold-Abbey, neere to old Fish-stréete, were made in An. 1583. Beside the water▪ For∣cier by London Bridge, before remembred, and another (made since) néere to Broken-wharffe, for conueiance of Thames-water into mens Houses, by an English gentleman, named M. Beuis Bul∣mar, in An. 1594. Nor will wee forget the new Conduit, lately built by Aldersgate, & Thames-water also thither conuaied, by an English Gen∣tleman, named Thomas Hayes, in An. 1610.
Come we now to the ancient deuision of this worthy Citty, which (as Fitz-Stephen, sayeth,The Citties deuision in∣to Wardes. foure hundred yeares agoe.) This Citty, euen as Rome, is deuided into Wards. It hath yearelie Sheriffes, instead of Consuls; and hath the dig∣nitie of Senators, in Aldermen. Those wards, both before, and in the raigne of Henry the third, were 4. in number, 13, lying on the East-side of Walbrooke, and 11. on the West: but those Wards in the west, growing in greatnes to ex∣e the other in the East: in Anno 1393. and 2. of Richard the second. Faringdon Ward, (being then one entire ward) was by Parliament deui∣ded into two, also tearmed Faringdon within, Faringdon without, and allowed to haue two Aldermen. So ye twelue wards were then on the west side of Wabrooke, and the whole number made 25. wards. The Liberties of the Borough of South-warke, were afterwarde purchased by the Maior. Cmminalty, and Cittizens, and ad∣ded to London▪ as the 26. warde,26. wards, 26. Aldermē in An. 1150. whereby the number of Alder-men grewe to bee 26. But because my purposed breuity, kéeps with∣in the Cities bounds only, and not (at this time, till publication of my generall Chronicle of Lon∣don and Middlesex, euen so farre as the Lorde Maior and Sheriffes power extendeth) permits mee to exceede that compasse; I shall nowe say nothing, eyther of South-warke, or Londons Subburbs. Portsoken ward (so named of the Franchise of Aldgate) was somtime a Guild,Portsoken Ward. and beganne in
King Edgars time, aboue 600. yeares since, be∣ing called Knighten Guilde,Khten Guilde. of 13. poore knights or Souldiors, that (being fauoured by the King and Land, for (seruice done them) had a parcel of Land granted them on the Citties East side, and liberty of a Guild for euer. Prouided, that each of them should victoriously accomplishe 3. com∣bates; one aboue ground, one vnder ground; & the third in the water: Also, at a certaine day ap∣pointed, they shoulde run with Speares in East Smithfield, against all commers: all which, they worthily performed, and therefore the King cal∣led it Knighten Guilde. I read but of one parish church in this ward, which is called S. Buttolph without Algate, and a small parish Church, for the Inhabitants of the Close, sometime called S. Trinity, afterward the Minories. This Port∣soken Ward hath an Alderman, and his Depu∣ty, sire common Counsellors, foure Constables, four Scauengers eighteen wardmote Enquest∣men, and a Beadle. It is sessed at foure pounde, ten shillings, for the fifteene. Tostreet Wd.Tower-street ward, is the first warde within London-wall East-ward. In which ward are thrée parish churches, viz. Alhallowes Barking, S. Olaue in Hart-street, and S. Dunstane in the East, beside S. Peter in the Tower, for the in∣habitants there. Also two Halles of Companies, viz. Cloth-workers Hall, in Mincheon Lane, and Bakers Hall, in Hat or Harpe Lane. This ward hath an Alderman, and his Deputy; com∣mon Counsell, eight: Constables thirteen. Sca∣uengers,
twelue. Wardemote Enquest, thir∣teene, & a Beadle: It is also seized at 26. pounds to the fifteene. Aldgate Ward, taketh name of the Gate.Algate ward In which ward are three parish churches, viz. S. Ka∣therine Christ-Church: Saint Of a shaft or Maypole higher then the Church Steeple. Andrew Vnder∣shaft, and S. Katherine Of Colmā Haw, a Haw yard or gar∣den. Coleman. Likewise thrée Hals of Societies or companies: Iremon∣gers Hall, in Fen-Church-streete, Bricklayers Hall, in Sprinckle Alley, now called Sugerloafe Alley, of the like signe: and Fletchers Hal in S. Marystreet. It hath an Alderman and his De∣puty, sixe common Counsellors, nine Scauen∣gers, eightéene Wardemote Enquestmen, and a Beadle. It is also taxed at fiue pound to the fifteene. Limestreet ward, so named,Limestreete Ward. Leaden hall of vsuall making and selling of Lime there in formertimes, as is supposed. In this ward standeth Leaden-Hall, which, before it was built of stone, appertained to Sir Hugh Neuill Knight, in Anno 1309. Af∣terward, the famous and mighty man, Syr Si∣mon Eyre, sometime and Vpholster, and next a Draper, builded it square of stone, as now it stan∣deth, with a fayre and large chappell in the East∣side of the Quadrant, on the Porch wherof, was engrauen, Dextra Domini exaltauit me; The right hand of the Lord hath exalted mee: And on the North-wall in the Church, these wordes, Honorandus famosus Mercator Simon Eyre, hu∣ius operis, &c. The honorable and famous Mar∣chant Simon Eyre, founder of this worke, once
Maior of this Citty, and Cittizen and Draper of the same. He builded there also a goodly Gra∣nary for corne, and made there an open and free market. It was once intended for a Bursse, for assembly of Merchants: but tooke not effect, the Merchants meeting still in Lombard-streete, s before they had done. In this ward, is not anie Parish church, but smal portions of two parishes, and no hall of any company. It hath an Alder∣man and his Deputy, four common Counsellors, foure Constables, two Scauengers, sixteene wardemote Enquest, and a Beadle. It is sessed at one pound, nineteene shillings, two pence half penny farthing in the fifteene. Bishopsgate Ward.Byshopsgate ward, so named of the gate, sup∣posed to be built by a byshop of London. Within this warde and Liberties of London, standeth the Hospitall of S. Marie of Bethlem, founded by Simon Fitz-Mary,Hospitall of Bethelem. New church yard. Sheriffe of London, Anno. 1246. beeing an Hospitall for distracted people. Also, a goodly church-yard for burial of the dead, enclosed with a wall of bricke, performed at the charge of Sir Thomas Roe, Merchant Taylor, and Lorde Maior of London. There is likewise a goodly house,Fishers folly named Fishers-folly by Queene Elizabeth;Croby place. and Crosbies place, so called by the builder thereof, Sir Iohn Crosbie, Grocer and Wool-man.Gresham Colledge. Also Gresham Colledge, builded by Sir Thomas Gresham, Knight, and appointed (by his will) to be a colledge of Readers (wyth large stipends allowed them) in Diuinity, Law, Phisicke, Astronomy, Geometry, and Musicke.
In this ward is three parish churches, viz. Saint Buttolphes without Byshops-gate, S. Ethel∣burge within the Gate, S. Helens adioyning to the Nunnes Prior. There was also (sometime) the parish Clearkes Hall,Leather sel∣lers Hall. and nowe there is the Leather Sellers Hall, which they haue (verie lately) to their great cost, new builded. It hath an Alderman, and his two Deputies, one with∣out, and the other within the gate, 6. common Counsellers, 7. Constables, 7. Scauengers, 13. wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle. It is taxed at 13. li. to the Fiftéene. Broadstreet ward, tooke name of a stréet,Brodestreet ward. cal∣led Brodestreet, wherein are diuers goodly hou∣ses, one that belonged to Sir William Powlet, Lord Treasurer, another to the Earle of Shrews∣bury, and a third, wherein (sometime dwelt the Earle of Oenford, neere to Sir Thomas Gres∣hams Almes houses. In this ward are sixe parish churches, viz. Alhallowes by the wall, at the North-end of Brodestreet, S. Peters the poore, at the South-end, S. Martines Oteswitch, in Three-needle streete, S. Bennet Of three men so na∣med, foun∣ders thereof Fynk, Saint Bartholomew by the Exchange, and S. Chri∣stopher by the Stockes Market. Beside the Fri∣ers Augustines,Of Fynke the founder. which serueth for the Dutch na∣tion, and another church seruing in like manner for the French. There is also a free Schoole called S. Anthonies schoole, and two hals of societies:S Anthonies schoole. Drapers hal one in Throgmorton street, called Drapers hall, which somtime belonged to the Lord Cromwel; the other in Three-needle-streete,Merchant Taylers hal. called Mer∣chant
Taylors Hall. This ward hath an Alder∣mon and his deputy, 10. common counsellers, 10 Constables, 8. Scauengers, 12. wardmote En∣quest, and a Beadle. It is taxed to the fifteene in London at 27, li. and accounted in the Exchequer after 25. li. Corne-hill Ward The Wey∣house.Cornhil ward, deriued the name thereof from a corne Market, which had bin there kept time out of mind. In this ward is the Weyhouse or Kings beame, for all Merchandizes brought from be∣yond the seas; which house was builded by Syr Thomas Louell, Knight, and a faire front of Te∣nements towards the street, which he gaue to the worshipfull company of Grocers, he being a free Brother of that society. There is also the Bursse for Merchants,The Royall Exchange. afterward by Queen Elizabeth named the Royal Exchange, builded by S. Tho∣mas Gresham, knight, Agent to her Maiesty, be∣gun in an. 1566. and finished 1567. In this ward likewise is a Grammer Schoole, adioyning to S. Peters church,S. Peters schoole. which in times past, had bin a Library, and repaired by the executors of sir Iohn Crosby, Alderman. In Corne-hill ward are two parish churches, viz. S. Peters vppon Cornhill, builded in the time of king Lucius, by Thean, the first Arch-byshop of London; And S. Michaell Tharchangell, the foundation thereof being vn∣certaine, but William Rus, Alderman, gaue a fayre bell to this church,Rus Bell in Cornehill. naming it Rus (corrupt∣ly called Rouse) to ring out nightly at eight of the clock. No hall of any Society is in this ward, but it hath an Alderman and his Deputie, foure
commrn counsellors, foure constables, four Sca∣uengers, sixteen wardmote Enquest, and a Bea∣dle: It is charged at sixteene pound in the Fif∣teene. Langborne Warde,Langborne Ward, all fenny about with a Mo∣rish ground. bearing name of a long Bourne of sweete water, which (in elder times) breaking forth into Fen-church street, ran along the same streete, and Lombards street also, called of the Longobards, or Lombards (Merchaunts there meeting twice a day) to the west end of S. Mary woolnothes church, where turning south∣ward, and breaking into small shares, Rilles, or streames: it gaue a name to Shareborn Lane, South-borne Lane, or Shirborne Lane, run∣ning thence South into the Thames. In this warde are seauen Parish churches, viz. S. Gabri∣ell Fenchurch, corruptly called Fanchurch; Saint Dionis Backchurch, at Lime-street end; Alhal∣lowes Staning, or Stane church, or Stone church (by differing from others, then builded of timber) at Martlane end. S. Edmond the king & martir. in Lombardsstreet, néere Of Bir∣chouer the first builder and owner. Birchouers lane, now called Birchen lane. Alhallowes in Lombardes stréet; S. Nicholas Acon or Hacon, in S. Nicholas lane; and S. Mary Woolnoth in Lombardstreet. One Hal there is in this ward,Pewterers Hall. called Pewterers Hall, in Limestreet, which society was admitted a brotherhood, in the 13. yeare of Edward the 4. It hath also an Alderman & his deputy, 8. com∣mon counsellers, 15. constables. 9. Scauengers, 17. wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle: In the Exchequer, it is taxed at 20 li. 9. s. d. to the fifteen.
Belins-gate Ward.Belins gate, or Billingsgate ward (so named of Belin the king, first founder of the gate or hauen) wherein are many Keyes and Wharfes, where∣of is not now my purpose to speake, because they are referred to my Chronicle of London at large. In this ward are fiue parish churches, viz. Saint Buttolph by Belings-gate, in Thames street, S. Marie on the Hill, the streete or lane being so cal∣led; S. Margaret Pattens (because pattens were vsually there made and solde) in Rode lane; S. Andrew Hubbert, in East cheape; and Saynt George in Buttolph-lane. It hath also an Al∣derman and his Deputy, common councellers vncertaine, Constables eleuen, Scauengers six, Wardmote Enquest foureteene, and a Beadle. It is taxed in London to the Fifteene, at two & thirty pound, and in the Exchequer, at one and thirty pounnd, ten shillings. BridgewardBridge-ward within, receiued name of the fa∣mous Bridge of London. In it are foure parish churches, viz. S. Magnus, at the Bridge-foote, Saint Margaret in Bridge-street, S. Leonard Milke Church (so named of William Melker, an especially builder thereof) on Fish-streete hill, and S. Benet Grasse-church, so tearmed of the Hearbe-Market there kept. In this ward also, is the Fishmongers Hall,Fishmon∣gers Hall. Stock fish∣mongers. Salt fish∣mongers. which Societie were (somtime) two seuerall companies, called Stock-fishmongers, and Saltfishmongers: and they had sixe seuerall Halles, because their companie was so great. It hath an Alderman and his de∣puty, sixteene common counsellers, fifteene con∣stables,
Scauengers six, sixteene wardmote En∣quest, and a Beadle. It is taxed at 47. pound to the Fifteene. Candlewick-street Ward,Candlewick street ward. or Candle-wright streete Ward, so called (as is likeliest) of Chand∣lers or makers of candles, both of wax and Tal∣low,Weauers of Drapery, Tapery, and Napery. who seemed (for the more part) there to in∣habite. Albeit it is verie euident, that Weauers of Drapery, Taperie, and Naperie, did altoge∣ther dwell there, time out of minde; till they were out-worne, and their place possessed by the Drapers. In this Warde are fiue Parish churches, (viz.) Saint Clements in East-cheape, Saynt Mary Abchurch, or Vpchurch, Saint Michaell in Crookedlane, which was sometime called the colledge in Crooked-lane, Saint Martine Orgar, and Saint Lawrence Poultney, so cal∣led by Iohn Poultney, Maior of London, who made it a colledge of Iesus, and of Corpus Chri∣sti, for a Mayster and seauen Chaplaynes. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Deputie, eight common counsellers, eyght constables, six Sca∣uengers, twelue Wardemote Enquest, and a Beadle. It is taxed at sixteene pound to the fif∣teene. Walbrooke Warde,Walbrooke Ward. taketh Name of the streete, where vnder was (sometime) a brooke, named Wallus Brooke, as hath already beene else-where declared. In which Ward are fiue Parish churches, viz. S. Swithen by London∣stone, S. Mary Woolchurch, so called of a beam
to weigh wooll,Wooll-Church Haw or Beame. and was called Wooll-Church Haw; Saint Stephen by Walbrooke; Saint Iohn vpon Walbrooke; and Saint Mary But∣haw, or Boathaw, so called, of néere adioyning to a Yard or Haw, where Boates (in elder times) were made, and landed (from Downegate) there to be mended. It hath an Alderman and his De∣puty; 11. common Councellers; 9. Constables; 6. Scauengers; 13. Wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle. It is taxed in London at 33. pounds to the fiftéene. Downegate Ward.Downgate ward, so cald, vpon the down descen∣ding to the Thames. In this ward is the Guilda Aula,Guilda Aula Teutonico∣rum. or Halla Teutonicorū, for the Merchants of the Haunce, or of Allemaigne, commonly cald the Stilyard, where they had their Garners to lay vppe their Corne, and other commodities; as Cables, Ropes, Masts, Pitch, Tarre, Flax, Hemp, Linnen-cloth, Wainscots, Wax, Stéele, &c. There is also a House, anciently called Cold-Harbrough,Colde Har∣brough. which (after diuers passages from Man to Man) in the eyght yeare of King Ed∣ward the third, came to Sir Iohn Poultney, who hauing béene Maior foure times in that house, it then tooke the name of Poultneys Inne. More, there is a famous Grammar-Schoole, founded in the yeare 1561. by the M. Wardens and assi∣stants of the Merchant-Taylors, in the Parish of Saint Laurance Poultney.Merchaunt Taylors schoole, the Mannor of the Rose. Richard Hilles, sometime Maister of that worthy Society, had giuen formerly fiue hundred poundes towardes the purchase of an house, called The Mannor of
the Rose, belonging some-time to the Duke of Buckingham, wherein the saide Schoole is kept. In this Ward are two Parish-Churches (Viz:) Alhallowes ad foenum, in the Ropery, (because Hay was there sold at Hay-wharffe, and Ropes in the High-stréete) or Alhallowes the more; and Alhallowes on the Cellers (because it standeth on Vaults) or Alhallowes the lesse. There are likewise foure seuerall Hals of Companies, as,Skinners hall. Tallow-Chandlers Hall. Ioyners hall Dyers Hall. vpon Walbrooke, the Skinners Hall, belonging to that Worshipfull Company; and Tallow-Chandlers Hall; Ioyners Hall in Greenewich-lane, now called Fryer-lane; and Dyers Hall in Thames-streete. This Ward hath an Alder∣man and his Deputie; 9. common Councellers; 8. Constables; 5. Scauengers; 14. Warde∣mote Enquest, and a Beadle. It is taxed at 28. pounds to the fiftéene. Héere we end the thirtéene Wardes, that are all on the East side of the wa∣ter course of Walbrooke, not any one house lying on the West-side. ¶ Wardes on the West-side of Walbrooke. VIntry Ward,Vintry ward. of Vintoners (cled in olde time Merchants Vintoners) & the Vintry, for the Merchantes of Burdeaux there craned vp their Wines, out of Lighters and o∣ther Vessels, and being there landed, made Sale of them within forty daies after, &c. There are in
this Ward, foure Parish Churches (viz.) Saint Michaell Pater Noster in the Royall, which Church was new builded and made a Colledge of Saint Spirit,Whitting∣tons Col∣ledge. and Saint Marie, founded by Richard Whittington, Mercer, foure times Maior; for a Maister, foure fellowes Maisters of Art; Clearkes, Conducts, Chorists, &c. And an Almes-house called Gods-house, or Hos∣pitall, for thirtéene poore Men, &c. Saint Tho∣mas Apostle, by Wringwren-lane; Saint Mar∣tine in the Vinttie, sometime called Saint Mar∣tine de Beremand Church; and Saint Iames at Garlicke-Hithe, because Garlicke was sold vsu∣ally there, on the bancke of the Riuer of Thames. Richard Plat, Brewer, founded a Frée-schoole there,Parish Clerks hall. 1601. In Brode lane is ye Parish Clearks Hall purchased by them, after losse of their Hall in Byshopsgatestreet. Vintoners Hall, néere the Lane called Stodies Lane,Vintners hall. Plummers Hall. Fruiterers Hall. Cutlers hall Glasiers hal giuen them by Sir Iohn Stodie, Vintoner, Mayor, in Anno 1357. Plummers Hall in Palmers Lane, nowe called Anchor-lane. Fruiterers Hall, in Worcester house, some-times belonging to the Earles of Worcester. Cutlers Hall, in Horsebridgestreet. Glasiers Hall in Kerion Lane: All which Halls are in the said Ward. It hath also an Alderman and his Deputy; nine Common Councellers; nine Constables; foure Scauengers; fouretéene Wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle: It is taxed at sixe pounds, thirtéene Shillings, foure pence, to the fiftéene. Cordwainer street ward.Cordwainer-streete-ward, taking name of
Cordwainers, or Shoe-makers, Curriers, and Workers of Leather, there dwelling. In this Ward are thrée Parish-churches, viz. Saint An∣thonies in Budge-Rowe, corruptly called Saint Antlings; Alde Mary Church; and new Marie Church, or Mary le Bow of Saint Marie de Ar∣cubus, in West-Cheaping, being builded (in the Conquerours time) vppon Arches:Nine a clocke Bell is nightly rung. In which Church is kept the Court of the Arches, which here taketh name of the place, & not of the Court. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Depu∣ty; common Councellers eight, Constables, 8. Scauengers eight, Wardmote Enquest foure∣téene, and a Beadle. It is taxed in London to the fiftéene, at 52. li. 16. s. And in the Exchequer at 52. li. 6. s. Cheape-Ward,Cheap ward taking name of the Market there kept, called West-cheaping, hath in it sea∣uen Parish Churches, viz. Saint Benet Shrog, or Shorehog, but the most ancient name is Be∣net Shorne, of Benedict Shorne, some-time a Cittizen and Stocke-Fish-Monger, a newe builder, repayrer, and Benefactor thereof. S. Pancrace by Sopars-lane; Saint Mildred in the Poultry; Saint Marie Cole-church, of one Cole that builded it; Saint Martin Pomerie, in Iron∣mong-lane, so called of Apples some-time there growing; Alhallowes in Honny-Lane; Saint Laurance in the Iury, and the Chappell of Guild-Hall, sometime a Colledge.Guilde Hall built, Anno 1411. Guild Hall it selfe also is in this Ward, begunne to be new builded in Anno 1411. the twelfth of Henry the fourth,
by Thomas Knoles then Maior, and the Alder∣men his brethren to the charge whereof the com∣panies gaue large beneuolences: it was made (of a little cottage:) so large and goodlie as now it standeth, to haue the Courts for the Cittie kept therein, being nine in number. The Courts kept in Guild. Courts for the Citty.1. Court of Common Councell. 2. Court of the Lord Maior, and the Al∣dermen his Bretheren. 3. The Court of Hustings. 4. The Court of Orphanes. 5. The Sheriffes two Courts. 6. The Court of the Wardmote. 7. The Court of Hall-mote. 8. The Court of Requests, commonly cal∣led the Court of Conscience. 9. The Chamberlaines Court for Prenti∣ses, and making them free. Moreouer, in this Ward, are the Hals of two very worshipfull Companies;Grocers hal the Grocers Hall in Conyhope lane, which Companie being first called Pepperers, were incorporated by the name of Grocers,Mercers Chappell and Hall. in Anno 1345. The Mercers Hall, sometime an Hospitall, entitled of Saint Tho∣mas of Acon, or Acars, wherein is said a Free-Schoole to haue béene long kept. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Deputy, 11. common Councellers; 9. Scauengers; 12. Wardmote
Enquest, and a Beadle. In London it is sessed at 72, li. 16, s. to the fifteen, and in the Exchequer, at 72. li. 11. s. Colemanstreete-ward,Coleman street ward. taking name of a stréet so called, by one Coleman, the first builder and owner thereof, wherein are three Parish Chur∣ches, viz. Saint Olaue Vpwell in the old Iewry, called Colechurch-streete sometimes; Saint Margaret in Lothbury: and Saint Stephen in Colemanstreere. It was named the Old Iew∣ry, because the Iewes had a Sinagogue, where now standeth the Tauerne, knowne by the name of the Windmill,Founders hall. and their dwelling was all there-about. The Founders Hall in Loth∣bury; Lathbery, or Loadberie, so named of a Bery or Court in elder time there kept; whereof some vse hath bin, and is also made by the Mer∣chants Aduentures: and in Coleman street is the Armorers Hall,Armorers Hall. who were made a Fraternitie or Guild of S. George, in the first yeare of King Henry the sixt. This Ward hath an Alder-man and his Deputie; common Counsellors foure, Constables foure, Scauengers foure, wardmote Enquest thirteene, and a Beadle. It is tax∣ed at fiftéene pounds, sixetéen shillings nine pence to the fiftéene. Bassings Hall Ward,Bassings Hal ward. and said to be so named of Bassinges Hall, the very principall House of the Ward, which appertained to the Familie of the Bassings (a name of great renowne and an∣tiquity in this Realme) who builded the goodlie building (afterward called Bakewell Hall, of one
Thomas Bakewel dwelling there, corruptly tear∣med Blackwell Hall) and gaue it the Name of Bassings Haugh,Bassinges Haugh. or Hall, as by theyr Armes, (before the old worke was taken downe) in ve∣ry many places appeared. In this Ward is but one Parish Church, called Saint Michaell at Bassings Haugh: and diuers Halles of Compa∣nies,Masons hall Weauers hall. as Masons Hall, of what antiquity, appea∣reth not. Weauers Hall, being then Weauers of Woollen-cloath, whose Fraternity or Guilde is of great antiquity and power, confirmed by Charter from King Henrie the second, as they held it in time of his Grandfather,Weauers of Woollen Clothes. King Henrie the first, or rather (as the very wordes are) fréeer, better, worshipfullier, and wholier, then in his said Grand-fathers time. Other ordinaunces were there then beside, that Woollen-cloathes shoulde bee in breadth two yardes within the Listes, and as good in the midst, as in the sides, &c. But if any Man made Cloath of Spanish Wooll, mixed with English Wooll; the Port-graue, or principall Magistrate of London ought to burne it, &c. There is also Girdlers Hall,Girdlers hal Coopers Hall. and Coopers haue their Hall néer to the Parish Church of Saint Michaell. This Ward hath an Alderman and his Deputy, foure Common Councellers; two Constables; two Scauengers; 17. Wardmote Enquest, and a a Beadle. In London it is taxed at 7. li. and so in the Exchequer likewise, to the fifteene. Cripples gate Ward.Cripples-gate ward, so named of the gate, cal∣led Cripples-gate, wherin are 6. parish churthes,
viz. S. Mary Aldermanbury, of a Bery or court∣hal there kept, now cald the Guildhal, s. Alphage (sometime Elfing Hospital or spittle) by London wl, s. Mary Magdalen in Milkstreet, s. Albons in woodstreet, s. Michael in Huggenlane,Haberdash∣ers hall. Waxchand∣lers hall. Plaisterers hall. Brewers hal. Pinners hal. Bowyers hal and s. Giles without Cripplesgate. Halles of compa∣nies, are Habberdashers Hall, in Mayden lane, and Waxchandlers Hall there also. Pinners hal sometime, but nowe Plaisterers Hall, in Adle street: and Pinners Hal is now in Siluerstreet. Brewers Hall likewise in Adlestreete, and Bo∣wyers Hall not farre from Monkswel-street. This warde hath an Alderman and his Deputy within the Gate, eight common counsellers, nine constables, twelue scauengers, fifteen wardmote Enquest, and a beadle. Without the Gate also, it hath a Deputy, two common counsellors, foure constables, foure Scauengers, seauenteen ward∣mote Enquest, and a Beadle: It is taxed in Lon∣don at forty pound to the Fif-teene. Aldersgate warde,Aldersgate Ward taking name likewise of Aldersgate, hath six Parish churches in it (viz.) saint Marie Staining, in Stayning lane, s. Iohn Zachary, in Engaine or Maidenlane, s. Leonard in Fauster-lane, saint Olaue in Siluerstreet, saint Anne by Aldersgate, and saint Buttolph with∣out Aldersgate. Hals of companies, first,Goldsmiths Hall. Gold∣smiths Hall at Maydenlane end, they beeing an ancient and very worshipfull society; for the first Maior that euer was in London, was a brother of that society, named Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liesstane, who continued Maior more then 24.
yeares together.Cooks hall. The Cookes or Pastelers haue a Hall also in Aldersgatestreet, and they were admitted to be a company, and to haue a May∣ster and wardens, in the 22. yeare of Edward the fourth. This ward hath an Alderman and his two Deputies; one within, the other without, common counsellers fiue, Constables, 8. Sca∣uengers, 9. wardmote Enquest, fourteene, and a Beadle. In London it is taxed at seauen pound to the fifteene, and in Exchequer at six pounde, nineteene shillings. Faringdon ward withinFaringdon ward within, or Infra, distingui∣shed (by that word of difference) from the other warde of the same name, which is without the citty wals, and thereon fearmed Faringdon ex∣tra, or without. Yet (in elder times) these two wardes were but one, and vnder the care of one alderman, vntill the 17. yeare of king Richard the second; when, the greatnesse thereof caused it to be deuided into two wardes, being then or∣dered (by parliament) to haue two aldermen also as to this day it continueth. This whole great ward of Faringdon both within and without,How Fa∣ringdon warde took name. de∣riued her name of W. Faringdon, or Farendon, Goldsmith, alderman of that warde, and one of the sheriffes of London, in anno 1281. the ninth yeare of King Edward the first, when he purcha∣sed the aldermanry of this ward, as is euident to be seene, by an abstract of deedes, from Thomas de Ardene, or Arderna, to Ankerin{us} de Auern, Ralphe le Feure, and so to William Farringdon, or Farendon, cittizen and Goldsmith, and to his
heires, so comming to Nicholas Faringdon, son to the said William, which Nicholas was a gold∣smith also, and 4. times Maior: liuing 53. years after his first being Maior, and hee buylded the Arch or gate by S. Augustines Church, whych giueth passage into the South Churchyard of S. Pauls. In this ward of Faringdon within,1361. is the good∣ly Cathedrall Church of S. Paule, and 9. other parish Churches beside, viz. s. Peter at the crosse in West cheape, Saint Fauster in Fauster-lane;The free schoole in Paules Church∣yard, foun∣ded by Iohn Collet, Do∣ctor in Di∣uinity and Deane of Paules. Christ Church, made a Parish churche of the Gray-Friers Church, and of two Parish chur∣ches, S. Nicholas, and saint Ewin, and also an Hospitall for poore children, saint Mathew in Fri∣day street, S. Augustine by Paules gate, Saint Faith vnder Paules Church, S. Martins at Lud∣gate, Saint Anne at the Black-fryers, S. Mi∣chael ad Bladum, or at Corne (corruptly called the Querne) by Pauls gate, where somtime was a Corne market kept, and the chappel of s. Iames by Cripplesgate. Hals of Societies,Imbroyde∣rers hall. Barbar chi∣rurgions hall. Sadlers hall. Butchers & Felt makers hall. Imbroide∣rers Hall in Guthurus. Barbar Chirurgions hal in Monkes-well-street, Sadlers hall in Cheap, Butchers Hall in Chick-lane in the Shambles, which serueth also for ye Feltmakers. This ward hath an Alderman and his Deputie, twelue Common Counsellors, seauenteene Consta∣bles, eighteene Scauengers, eyghteen ward∣mote Enquest, and a Beadle, It is taxed at 50. pound to the Fifteene. Bread-streete Ward,Bread-street Ward. so called of bread there
solde (in elder time) in that streete, which giueth name to the whole Warde, and hath foure Pa∣rish Churches in it. viz. Alhallowes in Bread-streete, saint Mildreds in Bread-streete, saynt Iohn Euangelist in Friday-streete, and s. Mar∣garet Moyses in Friday-streete. Hals of compa∣nies,Salters hall. Cordwa∣ners hall. are the Salters Hall in Bread-streete, and Corwainers or Shoo-makers Hall, in Maiden∣lane, or Distar lane. This ward hath an Alder∣man, and his Deputy; tenne common Counsel∣lors, tenne Constables, eight Scauengers thir∣teene Wardemote Enquest, and a Beadle. In London it is taxed at thirty seauen pound to the fifteen, and in the Exchequer at 36. pounde, 18. shillings, two pence. Queenes Hith ward.Queene-Hith Ward, so called of the Queens Hith or water Gate, whereof wee haue alrea∣dye spoken. In which warde are seauen Pa∣rish churches, Viz. saint Trinity in Trinity lane, saint Nicholas Cold-abbey, at Knight-riders streete, saint Nicholas Olaue on Bredstreet hill, saint Mary de Monte Alto, or Mounthaunt, by Old Fishstreet hill, or Fiue foot lane, saint Ma∣chael at the Queens Hith, saint Mary Summer∣set neere Broken wharfe, and saint Peter, called Parua,Painters hal. by Paules wharfe. Hals of companies are these, Painter Stayners Hall in Trinitie Lane, Blacksmiths Hall on Lambert hill.Blacksmiths hall. This warde hath an Alderman and his Deputy, sixe common Counsellors, nine constables, eight Scauen∣gers, thirtéene Warde-mote Enquest, and a beadle. In London it is taxed at twenty pound
to the fifteen, and in the Exchequer at 19. pound 16. shillings, two pence. Castel Baynard ward,Castle Bay∣nard ward. so named of an aunci∣ent castle there standing, belonging sometime to one Baynard, a Nobleman, that came into this Lande with the conquerour, and first buil∣ded it. In this ward are foure parish churches, viz. saint Benet Hude, or Hithe, by Paules Wharfe, saint Andrew by the Wardrobe, saint Mary Magdalen in Old-fishstreete, and saynt Gregory by Paules church. Halles of compa∣nies, are these, Wood-mongers Hall,Woodmon∣gees hall. Stationers Hall. on the East-side of Paules wharfe Hill, and the Stati∣oners Hall, neere the west end of Paules: but conuerted to a Tauerne since then, and the Hall was also in Milkestreet, for a while, but after∣warde translated agayne into Amen lane, at the end of Pater noster row, to a goodly auncient house in oldetime, belonging to Iohn Duke of Britaine, and Earle of Richmond. Afterward called Pembrokes Inne, as appertaining to the Earles of Pembroke, in the time of Richard the second, the eighteenth yeare, and Henry the sixt the fourteenth yeare. But it lately belonged to Henry Lord of Aburgaueny, and was called Aburgauenie house. This ward hath an Alder∣man and his Deputie, common counsellers, 9. constables, 10. Scauengers, 7. wardmote En∣quest, 14. and a Beadle: In London it is taxed at twelue pound to the fifteen, and in the Exche∣quer at 11. li. 13. s. There remayne, yet two more, Faringdon
ward without,Faringdon warde and Bride-ward both with∣out. and Bridgeward without, or the Borough of the South-warke, & the round inui∣roning Suburbs without the wals, the Dutchy of Lancaster, and Cittie of Westminster; All which beeing not comprized within this instant determination, craue fauour for reference to our Chronicle of London, wherein, whatsoeuer is wanting heere, and this slender pile woulde not permit (stretching alreadye beyond expectation) shall (by Gods assistance) be more fully, effectu∣ally, and largely performed, then (as yet) May∣ster Iohn Stow his Suruey, or any other worke (that I haue seene) hath so amply deliuered, espe∣cially concerning this honorable Citty, and the Countie of Middlesex, so far as the cities bounds and priuiledges do grant admittance. Let me not be rashly censured in these gayseeming words, to cast any disgrace or il aspersion, on the painful la∣bors of that worthy and industrious man May∣ster Iohn Stow (whom liuing, I loued as a dear and intimate friend, and dead, I honor with all kinde remembrance) for such as haue had know∣ledge of our inward respect of each other, & what hath past betwéene vs (concerning this businesse for the Citty) I know will no way mis-conceite of me: they are too wise and vertuous, to swerue in a knowne truth, and more sounde and solide, then malice can haue any power to seduce: what∣soeuer then is referred to our further intention, as it hath bin a labour willingly vnder-taken by me (albeit both beséeming and requiring a much better Iudgement) So, by his helpe, who is
both the hope and helpe of all Vertuous endea∣uours, it shall bee effected with all possible dilli∣gence. Of the Temporall Gouernment of this Honorable Citty, since the Conquest. To the worshipfull M. Rowland Smart, Esquire, Sword-Bearer of London. PAssing ouer those Tempestuous times of the old Britons, Romans, Saxons, and Danes,Ethelred Earle of Mercia till Ethelred or Alfred, Earle of Mercia, who had the custody of this citty in his power: he no sooner dyed, but both it, and all o∣ther possessions belonging to the saide Earle, re∣turned to King Edward (surnamed the Elder &) c. Remaining thus in obedience to him, he then or∣daining Portgraues, to haue the gouernement thereof vnder him: which name, Portgraue, or Portreue, is compounded of two Saxon wordes, Porte and Gerefe, or Reue:Portgraue or Portreue Porte signifyeng a Towne or City, & Gerefe or Reue, a Guardian or Ruler of the said town or city. Before the con∣quest, in the daies of k. Edw. the Confessor, one Wolfegare was Portgraue, as appeareth by the kings charter to him, thus: Edward K. greeteth Alfward byshop, Wolfegare my Portgraue,Wolfegar Portgraue. & al the Burgesses in London, &c. These Portgraues con∣tinued in William the conquerors time, William
Rufus, and Henry the first, when Hugh Buche was Portgraue, and Leofstanus, Gold-smith, Prouost,Prouost. which name of Prouost then beganne: for Aubery de Vere was (afterward) Portgraue, and Robert Bar-Querel,Robert Bar-Querel pro∣uost. Prouost. Then (by the same King) was the sheriuewick of London and Middlesex granted to the Cittizens of Lon∣don. In the raigne of King Stephen, Gilbert Becket was Portgraue, and Andrew Bucheuet Prouost: and Godfrey Magnauilla, or Mande∣uil (by guift of Maude the Empresse) was Port∣graue or sheriffe of London and Middlesex,Portgraue and Sheriffe of London & Middle∣sex. for the yearely farme of three hundred pound, as ap∣peareth by the Charter. In the time of k. Hen∣ry the second, those Portgraues were likewise (in diuers records) called Vicecomites, Vicounties or sheriffes, as being vnder an Earle, and then (as since) vsed that Office, as the sheriffes of London now doo. Albeit some Authors tearme them Domesmen, Elder-men, or Iudges of the Kings court. Heere then, it shall not seeme im∣pertinent, once more to remember the wordes of William Fitz-stephen, saying. Euen as Rome is deuided into Wards,William Fitz Stephen his words. so is this Citty. It hath yearely Sheriffes, insted of Consuls. It hath the dignity of Senators, in Aldermen; It hath vn∣der Officers, and (according to the qualitie of Lawes) so hath it seueral Courts, and generall assemblies, vpon appointed daies. At parting with the name of Portgraues and Prouosts,Bayliffes of London. in the first yeare of K. Richard 1. the cittizens obtained to be gouerned by 2. Baliffes,
who (in auncient déedes) were called Sheriffes, as the Lawe tearmeth the Shire Balliua, vsing the same office of Shriuewick, as the Portgraues before did. The names of the first Bayliffes or Officers, entring into their dignity at the Feast of Saint Michaell the Arch-angell, Anno 1189 were Henry Cornehill, and Richard Reynere.The first Bayliffes of London. King Richard also (at that very time) appointed a supreame Officer aboue the rest, by the name of Maior, which worde was borrowed from the Haebrew word Mar, and signifieth Dominus, Lord; a word vsed by the Franconians and old Saxons, their Neighbours (of whom English-men haue their Originall) but called Maire, as the French did their Maires of the Pallace. Thus was the chiefe Gouernor called Lord Maire,Beginning of the May∣ralty. or Maior, because they vnderstood not, that the epe∣thite Maire, or Maior, implyed no lesse then lord, without any other additions, yet thus was it thē giuen, for a larger augmentation of Honor. Now, as the Goldsmiths yéelded London a Prouost before (named Leofstanus) euen so the same Company (albeit not as yet rancked into a List of Brother-hood) gaue London likewise, the first Lord Maire or Maior in Dignity,The first L. Maire of London. whose name was Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liefstane, and being so appointed by the King; he continu∣ed in that supreame Office, from the first yeare of King Richard the first, vntill the fiftéenth of K. Iohn, which was more then twenty foure years. Henry Cornehill and Richard Reynere (béeing first chosen Bayliffes) serued then as Sheriffes,
(by all likelihood) to the said Henry Fitz-Alwin,The time of the L. Mairs election. Fitz-Leifstane, Maire▪ whereby very well may bee obserued, the progresse and continuaunce of those seuerall elections and choyces (euen to this day) the Sheriffes beeing first appointed, and then the Lorde Maire after chosen, & at the Feast of Saint Michaell the Arch-aungell, at the first, (by King Richard) it was ordained. King Iohn in like manner, after this high Dignity (begun by his Brother) graunted them frée liberty by Charter,Choyce of Lord Maire by voyces and hands. Choyce of Sheriffes. to chuse by (voyces and handes) yeare∣ly, out of the twelue chiefest and principall Com∣panies, their Praetor or Maire: Also two She∣riffes, whereof the one should be called the Kings Sheriffe, and the other the Citties Sheriffe, which (in that forme) hath continued euen to this instant. Nay more, he graunted them full power and authority, not onely to chuse theyr Sheriffes at their owne pleasure, but also (vppon iust occasion, either of contempt, mutiny, diso∣bedience, or other offences) to degrade and de∣priue them.Forrest of Middlesex and warren of Stanes. The Forrest of Middlesex, and the Warren of Stanes, being laid open in An. 1218. the King afterward, in the yeare 1226. confir∣med to the Citizens of London, frée warrant and liberty, to hunt a limited circuite about the Cit∣ty, and in the Warren of Stanes. Also, that the Cittizens of London shoulde passe Toule-frée, thorough al England:Toule free thorough al England granted to London. and the Kedeles or weres in the Riuer of Thames or Midway, to be pluckt vp and destroyed for euer. When the Franchises and liberties were thus confirmed by King Iohn,
he granted moreouer, that either Sheriffe should haue two Clarks, and two Sergeants; also,Common seale of the Citty. that the Citty should haue a common Seale, and that the Maior should bee presented to the Barons of the Exchequer, and they then to admit him, as lawful Lieutenant and Deputy (vnder the king) to gouerne the Citty. Hauing thus briefly discoursed, how the dignity of honor began in this famous Citty, both in the stile of Lord Maior and Sheriffes; as briefly wil we also part their progresse and succession, from that first woorthy man Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liefstane, Gold-Smith, to the as worthy Man, Sir William Crauon, now gouerning, this pre∣sent yeare, 1611. Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liefstane,1189 Golde∣smith, beginning to take that high office on him, in the first yeare of King Richard the first (who was also for his valour and courage Surnamed Cueur de Lion) continued still in the same Dig∣nity, for more then twenty foure years, and then deceassing, in the 15. yeare of King Iohn, he was buried in the Priory of the holy Trinity, néer vn∣to Aldgate. In the said 15. yeare of King Iohn (either to serue out the remainder of that yeare,1213. or to go on in a new election,) Roger Fitz-Alwain was cho∣sen Lord Maire: but I neyther find his freedom, or his death, albeit he continued (as it séemeth) in Office but one yeare; the like did Serle Mercer, and William Hardell, in the yeares 1214. and 1215. And then began the raigne of King Henry
the third, Son to King Iohn, the 19. of October, 1216. 1216Iames Alderman, and Salomon Blasing, Lord Maiors, serued out this yeare (by seuerall parts) each after other. 1217.Serle Mercer, was againe chosen Lord Mai∣or, and continued in the Dignity sixe yeares to∣gether. 1223Richard Renger, beeing chosen Lord Maior, continued so the space of foure yeares. 1227Roger Duke, or Duck, was Lord Maior of London foure yeares. 1231Andrew Bokerell, Pepperer, was Lord Mai∣or of London seauen yeares together. 1238Richard Renger, Lorde Maior againe one yeare. 1239William Ioyner, Lord Maior one yeare, who builded the Quier of the Gray-Fryers Church in London, and afterward became a lay brother of that house. 1240Gerard Bat, Lord Maior one yeare: and bée∣ing elected againe for the ensuing yeare, the King would not suffer it, because he had béene charged (in the former yeare) with taking Money of the Victuallers, and could shew no reason for it. 1241Reginald Bongey, was Lorde Maior two yeares. 1243.Raphe Ashwy, Lord Maior one yeare. 1244Michaell Tony, Lord Maior one yeare. 1245Iohn Gisors, Pepperer, Lorde Mayor two yeares. 1247Peter Fitz-Alwin, Lord Maior one yeare.
Michaell Tonny, Lord Maior againe one yeare.1248 Roger Fitz-Roger, Lord Maior one yeare.1249 Iohn Norman, Lord Maior one yeare▪1250 Adam Basing, Lord Maior one yeare.1251 Iohn Tolason, Draper, Lord Maior one yeare.1252 Richard Hardell, Draper,1253 was Lorde Maior sixe yeares together. Iohn Gisors, Pepperer,1259 againe Lord Maior one yeare. William Fitz-Richard,1260 was Lorde Maior two yeares. Thomas Fitz-Richard,1262 was Lorde Maior foure yeares together. Will Richards, againe Lord Maior one yeare.1266 Allen le Zouch, Lorde Maior one yeare:1267 and beeing a Baron of the Land, and chiefe Iustice also, he was slaine in Westminster Hall, by Iohn Warren, Earle of Surry, in An. 1270. Sir Stephen Edwards, Lord Maior one year.1268 Sir Hugh Fitz-Othon,1269 was made Custos of London, and Constable of the Tower, by rea∣son of a great quarrell happening betwéene the Gold-smiths and the Taylors: so that the King gaue the kéeping of the Cittie to his Son Prince Edward▪ who made the saide Sir Hugh Fitz-Othon Custos of the Citty,A Custos appointed ouer the Cittie of London. and Constable of the Tower, as his Deputie. But Prince Edward quickly obtained of the King his Father, to haue the Citties ancient liberties confirmed by Char∣ter againe, and so they proceeded on to their won∣ted election of a lord Maior and Sheriffes, as be∣fore, and Sir Hugh Fitz Othon was discharged
of his office. 1270Iohn Adrian, Vintoner, was Lorde Maior of London two yeares. 1272.Sir Walter Haruey, Lord Maior, and H. Fro∣wike, Pepperer, likewise for part of that yeare: wherein began the raigne of King Edward the first, the 16. of Nouember, 1272. 1273.Sir Walter Haruey, Lorde Maior againe for one yeare. 1274Henry Walleis, Lord Maior for one yeare. 1275Gregory Roksley, Golde-Smith, chiefe Say Maister of all the Kinges Mints thorough Eng∣land, and kéeper of the Kings Exchange at Lon∣don; was Lord Maior seuen yeares together. 1282Henry Walleis, who builded the Tonne vpon Cornhill, to be a Prison, and the Stockes to be a Market-house, was Lorde Maior againe three yeares together. 1285Gregory Roksley being chosen Lord Maior a∣gaine, King Edward was informed, that the said Gregory Roksley tooke bribes of the Bakers, and suffered them to sell bread, that wanted sixe or seauen ounces of weight in a Pennie-loafe, yet Wheat was then sold at London for 12. & 16 pence the quarter. Vpō which information, the K. seized the Franchises and liberties into his own handes, appointing first one Iohn Sandwich, to be Custos thereof for one part of the yeare, and Sir Iohn Breton,London a∣gaine in the charge or rule of a Custos. Knight, for the other part. Thus did the Cittie of London continue vnder the gouernment of seuerall Men, bearing the names of Custos, till King Edward the second
began his raigne, which was the seauenth day of Iuly, 1307. Sir Iohn Blunt, Knight,1307 hauing béene Cu∣stos of the Cittie, for the space of sixe yeares be∣fore, was now in the first yeare of King Edward the second, Lord Maior for one yeare. Nicholas Faringdon, or Farendon,1308 Golde-smith, of whom the Ward of Faringdon (both within, and without) tooke name, was L. Maior for one yeare. Thomas Romaine, Lord Maior one yeare.1309 Richard Reffam, Mercer, Maior one yeare.1310 Sir Iohn Gisors, Pepperer,1311 Lord Maior two yeares. Nicholas Faringdon, Gold-Smith,1313 againe Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Iohn Gisors, Pepperer,1314 againe L. Maior one yeare. Stephen Abendon, Lord Maior one yeare.1315 Iohn Wingraue, Lorde Maior thrée yeares.1316 In his time happened such cheapnesse of Corne, that a Bushell of Wheate (which had béene sold formerly for ten shillings) was then solde for ten pence. Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer,1319 Lorde Mayor one yeare. Nicholas Faringdon,1320 again Lord Maior one years. Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer,1321 againe Lord Mayor two yeare. Nicholas Faringdon, Gold-smith,1323 againe L. Maior one yeare.
1324Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer, againe Lord Mayor two yeares. 1326Richard Britaine, Gold-smith, Lorde Mayor one yeare. In whose time King Edward the third began his raigne, the 25 day of Ianuary, 1326. who graunted the Lord Maior to bee Iustice for the Gaole deliuery at New-gate;The Lord Maior Iu∣stice for Gaole deli∣uery at New gate. and the Citti∣zens of London not to goe (by any constraint) to any Warre out of the Citty of London. Be∣side, that the Franchises and liberties of the Cit∣ty, should not thence-forward (for any cause) bée seized into the Kinges handes: Nor ny Eschetor to bee in the Citty, but the Lorde Maior for the time being. 1327Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer, againe Lord Maior one yeare. 1328Iohn Grantham, Lord Maior one yeare. 1329Richard Swandland, Lord Maior one yeare: In whose time the King kept a great Iusting in Cheape, betwéene Sopas-lane and the great Crosse. 1330Sir Iohn Poultney, Draper, Lord Maior two yeares. 1332Iohn Preston, Draper, Lord Maior one year. 1333Sir Iohn Poultney, Draper, againe L. Maior one yeare. 1334Reginald at the Conduit, Vintoner, L. Maior one yeare. 1335Nicholas Wotten, Lord Maior one yeare. 1336Sir Iohn Poultney, Draper, again Lord Mai∣or one yeare. He founded a Colledge in the parish Church of Saint Laurance Poultney, by Can∣dlewick-streete.
Henry Darcy, Lord Maior two yeares:1337 In whose time the Sergeants to the Lorde Mayor,The first Maces to Sergeants granted. and Sheriffes of London, were graunted by the King, to beate Maces of Siluer and Guilt, with the Kings armes on them. Andrew Aubery▪ Grocer, L. Maior two years.1339 Iohn of Oxenford, Vintoner,1341 Lord Maior one yeare. Simon Francis, Mercer, L. Maior one yeare.1342 Iohn Hamond, Lorde Mayor two yeares.1343 Richard Leget, Lord Maior one yeare.1345 Geffrey Witchingham, L. Maior one yeare.1346 Tho. Leggy, Skinner, Lord Maior one year.1347 Iohn Louekin, Fish-Monger,1348 Lord Maior one yeare. Walter Turk, Fish-Monger,1349 Lord Maior one yeare. Richard Killingbury, Lord Maior one yeare.1350 Andrew Aubery, Grocer,1351 againe Lord Mai∣or one yeare. Simon Francis, Mercer,1352 who (with Henry Fro∣wike) founded the Colledge in Guild-hall Chap∣pell, and was againe Lord Maior two yeares. Thomas Leggy, Skinner,1354 againe Lord Mai∣or one yeare. Simon Francis, Mercer,1355 againe Lord Maior one yeare. Henry Prichard, or Piccard, Vintoner,1356 who (in one day) feasted the kings of England, France,Foure kings feasted at the L. Mai∣ors house in one day. Scots, and Cypres, at his own house, and was L. Maior one yeare.
1357Iohn Stody, Vintoner, Lorde Mayor one yeare. 1358Iohn Louekin, Fish-Monger, againe Lorde Maior one yeare. 1359Simon Dolesby, Grocer, Lord Mayor one yeare. 1360Iohn Wroth, Fish-Monger, Lorde Mayor one yeare. 1361Iohn Peche, Fish-Monger, Lord Maior one yeare. 1362Stephen Gondish, Draper, Lorde Mayor one yeare. 1362Iohn Not, Grocer, Lord Maior one yeare. 1364Adam of Burie, Skinner, Lorde Mayor one yeare. 1365Iohn Louekin, Fish-Monger, againe Lorde Maior, and Adam of Bury one yeare. 1366Iohn Louekin, Fish-Monger, againe Lorde Mayor one yeare. This Iohn Louekin builded Saint Michaels Church in crooked-lane. 1367Iames Andrew, Draper, Lorde Mayor one yeare. 1368Simon Mordon, Fish-monger, Lord Maior one yeare. 1369Iohn Chichester, Gold-smith, Lord Mayor one yeare. 1370Iohn Barnes, Mercer, Lorde Mayor two yeares. 1372Iohn Piell, Mercer, Lord Mayor one yeare. 1373Adam of Bury, Skinner, againe Lord Maior one yeare.
William Walworth, Fish-Monger,1374 Lorde Maior one yeare. Iohn VVarde, Grocer,1375 Lorde Maior one yeare. Adam Staple, Mercer, Lord Maior one yeare.1376 His time no sooner expired, but therewith ended the life of King Edward the third, and on the 21. of Iune 1377. began the raign of King Richard the second. Sir Nicholas Brember, Grocer,1377 Lord Maior one yeare. Iohn Philpot, Grocer, Lord Maior one year.1378 Iohn Hadley, Grocer, Lord Maior one year.1379 Wil. Walworth, Fish-Monger,1380 againe Lord Maior. In this yeare of his Mairalty happened the tumultuous rebellion of Iack Straw, Wat Ti∣ler, Iack Carter, Iack Truman, &c. with the commons of Kent, Essex, and other places: But William Walworth, being then Lord Maior,The Lord Mayor kild Iack Straw the Rebell. ar∣rested the Traytor Iack Straw so stoutly with his Weapon on the head (euen as he saucily took the Kings Horse by the bridle in Smithfielde) that, thrusting him afterward through the throat; the whole crewe were dishartened, and séeing theyr Captaine slaine, betooke themselues to flight. For which worthy act, the King immediatly knighted the Lorde Maior William Walworth, and with him Ralphe Standish, Iohn Philpot, Nicholas Brember, Iohn Launde, and Nicholas Twi∣field, Burgesses of the Citty,The dagger added to the Citties Armes. adding the Dagger into the Citties Armes, which till that day was a red Crosse in a Siluer field onely.
1381Iohn Northampton, Draper, Lord Maior two yeares. 1383Sir Nicholas Brember, Grocer, knighted with Syr William Walworth, Lorde Maior three yeares together. 1387Nicholas Exton, fishmon. lord maior 1. yeare 1388Nicholas Tifield, or Tylorde, knighted with Syr William Walworth, Lord Maior one yeare. 1389William Vnar, Grocer, Lord Maior, one yeare. 190Adam Bmme, Goldsmith (who prouided the Cittie of such plenty of corne from beyonde the seas, that the Citty was able to furnish the coun∣trey) Lord Maior one yeare. 131Iohn Hend, Draper, in whose time happened a great tumult in London, because one of the bi∣shop of Salisburies men, had taken a Horse-loafe from a Bakers man in Fleete-streete, and on the Byshops complaint to the King, the Lord Mai∣or being sent for to Windsore, and other of hys Brethren; the Maior, Sheriffes, and other sub∣stantiall Cittizens, were there arrested, the Ma∣ior committed to the castle of Windsore, and the rest to other Castles and Holdes. The King sei∣zed the citty into his hands, appointing a War∣den to gouerne it,A Warden appointed to gouerne London. named Sir Edward Darling∣g, knight, &c. But in short while the Kinges displeasure was pacified, and the liberties of Lon∣don restored and ratifyed. 1392William Sondon, Grocer, lord maior 1. year. 1393Iohn Hadley, Grocer, againe lord maior one yeare.
Iohn Froshe, Mercer, Lorde maior one yeare.1394 William More, Vintner,1395 L. Maior one yeare Adam Bamme, Gold-Smith,1396 againe Lorde Maior one yeare. Richard Whittington, mercer,1397 Lorde Maior one yeare. Drew Barentine, Gold-smith,1398 Lord Maior 1. yeare. At his expiration of Office, beganne the raigne of King Henry the fourth, the 29. of Sep∣tember, 1399. Thomas Knolles, Grocer, lord maior 1. yeare.1399 Iohn Francis, Goldsmith, lord maior one year.1400 Iohn Shadworth, mercer, lord maior one yeare.1401 Iohn Walcote, Draper, lorde maior one yeare.1402 William Ascham, Fishmonger,1403 lord maior one yeare. Iohn Hend, draper, again lord maior one year,1304 he builded new againe the parish Church of saint Swithen at London stone. Iohn woodcock, mercer, lord maior one yeare.1405 Richard VVhittington, mercer,1406 agayne lorde maior one yeare. In which year died of ye plague more then 30000. people. William Stondon, Grocer,1407 againe lord maior one yeare. Drew Barentine, Gold-smith,1408 againe lorde maior one yeare. Hee builded part of the Golde∣smiths Hall, and gaue them lands. Richard Marlow, Ironmonger,1409 Lorde Ma∣ior one yeare. Thomas Knoles, Grocer,1410 againe L. Maior one yeare: he began anew to builde the Guild-Hall
in London, &c. 1411Robert Chichley, Grocer, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1412William Waldren, mercer, Lord Maior one yeare. In his time died king Henry the fourth, & his sonne King Henry the fift began his raigne, the 20. day of march, 1412. 1413William Cromar, Draper, lorde Maior one yeare. 1414Thomas Faulconer, mercer, who builded the Postern at Moorgate, and lent the king 10000. markes vpon Iewels, Lord Maior one yeare. 1415Nicholas Wotton, Draper, Lord Maior one yeare. 1416Henry Barton, Skinner, who first ordayned Lanthorn and Candle-light in the winter Eue∣nings,First Lan∣therne and candle-light from Hallontide to Candlemasse: Lorde Maior one yeare. 1417Richard Marlow, Iremonger, againe Lorde Maior one yeare. 1418William Seuenoke, Grocer, (who founded a free Schoole, and Almes houses at Seuenoke in Kent) Lord Maior one yeare. 1419Richard Whittington, mercer, of whose wor∣thy déeds we haue else where spoken, Lord Ma∣ior again one yeare. 1420William Cambridge, Grocer, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1421Robert Chicheley, Grocer, againe L. Maior one yeare. He gaue the plot of ground, to builde the parish church of S. Stephens in Walbrooke thereon: In his time died king Henry the fifte,
and King Henry the sixt began his raigne the 31 of August, 1422. William walderne, mercer,1422 again Lord Maior one yeare. Newgate was then builded by Ri∣chard Whittingtons executors. William Cromar, Draper,1423 againe Lord Maior one yeare. Iohn Michell, Fishmonger,1424 Lord Maior one yeare. Iohn Couentrie, mercer, Lord Maior one year.1425 Iohn Reinwell, Fishm. lord maior one yeare.1426 Iohn Gidney, Draper Lord Maior one yeare.1427 Henry Barton, Skinner,1428 againe Lorde Maior one yeare. William East-field, mercer,1429 Lorde Maior one yeare. Nicholas wotton, Draper,1430 againe Lord Maior one yeare. Iohn Welles, Grocer, a liberall benefactor,1431 for newe building the chappell by Guild-Hald; be∣side, of his goodes was builte the Standarde in west-Cheape, Lord Maior one yeare. Iohn Parneis, Fishmonger,1432 Lorde Maior one yeare. Iohn Brokle, Draper, Lord Maior one yeare.1433 Roger Oteley, Grocer, Lord Maior one year.1434 Henry Frowicke, Mercer,1435 Lde Maior one yeare. Iohn Michell, Fishmonger,1436 againe L. Maior one yeare. Sir VVilliam East-field, mercer (who was made a Knight of the Bathe,1437 and gaue great
bounty to rhe Water conduits,L. Maior, Knight of the Bath. Lorde Maior a∣gaine one yeare. 1438Stephen Browne, Grocer, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1439Robert Large, mercer, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1440Iohn Paddesley, Gold-smith, mint-maister, Lord Maior one yeare. 1441Robert Clopto, Draper, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1442Iohn Hatherley, Ironmonger, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1443Thomas Catworth, Grocer, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1444Henry Frowicke, mercer, in whose time Pauls Steeple was fiered with lightning, and hardlye quenched,Pauls ste∣ple fired. Lord Maior againe one yeare. 1445Sir Simon Eyre, Draper (who builded Leaden Hal, for a common Granary to the city, &c.) Lord Maior one yeare. 1446Iohn Olney, mercer, Lord Maior one yeare. 1447Iohn Sidney, Draper, Lord Maior one yeare. 1448Stephen Browne, Grocer, againe Lord Maior one yeare. 1449Thomas Chalton, mercer (in whose time hap∣pened the Rebellion of Iack Cade of Kent) Lord Maior one year. 1450Nicholas VVilford, Grocer, lorde Maior one yeare. 1451William Gregory, Skinner, lord Maior one yeare. 1452Godfrey Filding, mercer, who was made one
of the counsell to King Henry the sixt, and King Edward the fourth, lord Maior one yeare. Iohn Norman, Draper,1453 who was the firste maior that was rowed by water to westminster,The first Maior row∣ed to West∣minster. for (till that time) they rode thither on horseback, lord Maior, one yeare. Stephen Foster,1454 Fishmonger (who enlarged Ludgate) Lord Maior one yeare. William Marrow, Grocer,1455 lorde Maior one yeare. Tomas Canning, Grocer,1456 Lord Maior one yeare. Godfrey Boloine,1457 mercer (who gaue a 1000. li. to poore housholders in London, &c.) lord Maior one yeare. Thomas Scot,1458 Draper lord Maior one yeare William Hulin, Fishmonger,1459 lord Maior one yeare. Richard Lee, Grocer, lord Maior one yeare.1460 In his time began King Henry the sixt his trou∣bles, and King Edward the fourth entered hys raigne the fourth of March, 1460. Hugh witch, mercer, lord Maior one yeare.1461 Thomas Cooke, Draper,1462 Lord Maior Knight of the Bath. made knight of the Bath, in the fifte yeare of King Edward the 4. Lord maior one yeare. Mathew Phillip, Gold-smith (made Knight of the Bath the fift yeare of Edward the fourth,1463 Lord Maior Knighted in the fielde. and afterward knighted in field, the tenth of Ed∣ward the fourth, Lord maior one yeare. Raphe Ioceline, Draper,1464 Knight of the Bath and knighted also in field, Lord maior one yeare.
1465 A sheriffe knight of the Bath.Raph Verney, mercer Lord Maior one yeare. Henry weauer, one of the Sheriffes of London, was then made knight of the Bath. 1466Iohn Yong, Grocer (knighted in the field) L. Maior one yeare.1467 1468Tho. Odgraue, Skinner, L. Mayor 1. year. 1469William Tayler, Grocer, L. Maior one yeare. Lord Maior deliuered the king out of the To∣wer.Richard Lee, Grocer, againe lord Maior one yeare. In whose time the Tower of London being deliuered to him and his brethren, they re∣leased King Henry the sixt thence. 1470Iohn Stockton, mercer, who worthily with∣standing the Bastard Fauconbridge, hee, with eleuen Aldermen,L. Maior 11 Aldermen, and the Re¦corder, knighted in fielde. & Thomas Vrswick, then Re∣corder, were all knighted in the fielde by K. Ed∣ward the fourth; Lord Maior one yeare. William Edwards, Grocer, L. Maior 1. year. 1471Sir william Hampton, Fishmonger, Lorde Maior one yeare.1472 1473Iohn Tate, mercer, lord maior one yeare. In his time ye Sheriffes of London were appointed to haue seuerally 16. Sergeants,Sergeants, yeomen, & Clearks ap∣pointed. & each Serge∣ant his Yeoman. Then also was ordained sixe Clearkes, viz. a Secondary, a Clarke of the Pa∣pers, and foure other Clarkes, beside the vnder-Sheriffes Clarkes. 1474Robert Drope, Draper, L. Maior one yeare. 1475Robert Basset, Salter, L. Maior▪ one yeare. 1407Sir Raphe Ioceline, Draper, knight of the Bath, lord maior one yeare. 1477Humfrey Hayford, Gold-smith, lord maior, one yeare.
Richard Gardener, mercer, lord maior one year.1478 Sir Bartholmew Iames, Draper,1479 Knighted in field and (who newly builded the great Conduit in West-Cheape) lord maior one yeare. Iohn Browne, mercer, lorde maior one yeare.1480 William Hariot, Draper,1481 lord maior one year Edmund Shaa, Goldsmith,1482 who builded Crip∣plesgate, lord maior one yeare. Then beganne the raigne of King Edward the fift, son to King Edward the fourth; but preuented by the cruell vsurpation of his Vncle Richard, Duke of Glo∣cester, who began his raign the 22. day of Iune, 1483. And because many haue often desired, to know the country and parentage of our Lord Maiors of London, in regard that diuers worthy houses haue descended of them: my purpose was, to haue examined our ancient Recordes, from the verye beginning of that honourable dignity, and so to haue pursued the tract thereof (by reporting each mans Fathers name and Country) euen to this instant. Wherein I haue had the most laborious and painfull helpe, of my especiall kind friende, maister W. Williams: And shaping our course from the present gouernment of sir William Cra∣uon, hoping to haue reached the maine height of our purpose, euen to Henry Fitz-Alwin, &c. We could procéed no further backward, then the raign of king Richard the third, where I will now be∣gin with their country, and parents, and so heere∣after, go on with the rest, if this great labor may be but fauourably accepted.
¶ The raigne of King Richard the third. 1483RObert Billisdon, Haberdasher, Sonne to Alexander Billisdō, of Queeningborough, in the Countie of Leicester, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1484Thomas Hill, Grocer, Sonne to William Hil of Hilston, in the Countie of Kent. Sir William Stocker, Draper, sonne to Thomas Stocker, of Eton,Three Lord Maiors in one yeare. in the Countie of Bedford. And Iohn Ward, Grocer, son to Richard Ward, of How∣don, in the Countie of Yorke. These thrée Mai∣ors were all in this one yeare, by reason a swea∣ting sicknesse. And King Richard, being slaine at Bosworth-field; Henry the seauenth began his raigne the 22. of August 1485. 1485Hugh Brice, Gold-smith, Sonne to Richard Brice of Dubline in Ireland: Lorde Maior one yeare. 1486Henry Collet, Mercer, son to Robert Collet of Windouer, in the Countie of Buckingham, Lord Maior one yeare. 1487Sir William Horne, Salter (made Knight in the field by King Henry the seauenth) was son to Thomas Horne of Snaylewell, in Cambridge∣shire; Lord Maior one yeare. 1488Robert Tate, Mercer, Sonne to Thomas Tate, of the Cittie of Couentry; Lord Maior one yeare. 1489William White, Draper, son to Wil. White
of Tickhill in the Countie of York; Lord Maior one yeare. Iohn Mathew, Linnen-Draper,1490 and transla∣ted to the Mercers, Sonne to Thomas Mathew of Sherington, in the Countie of Buckingham; Lord Maior one yeare. Hugh Clopton, Mercer, son to Iohn Clop∣ton of Stratford vppon Auon,1491 in the Countie of Warwicke (where the saide Hugh builded the goodlie Stone-Bridge) Lord Mayor one yeare. William Martine, Skinner,1492 sonne to Walter Martin, of the Countie of Hertford; Lord Mai∣or one yeare. Sir Raphe Ostrich,1493 Fish-Monger (knighted by Henry the seauenth) sonne to Henry Ostrich of Hitchin, in the Countie of Hertford, lord Mai∣or one yeare. Richard Chawry, Salter,1494 Son to William Chawry, of Westram in Kent; Lord Mayor one yeare. Henry Collet, Mercer,1495. again Lord Maior one yeare. Iohn Tate, Mercer,1496 sonne to Thomas Tate of Couentry, and Brother to Robert Tate Maior, forenamed, Lord Mayor one yeare. This Iohn Tate, Robert Sheffielde, Recor∣der, and both the Sheriffes, were knighted in the fielde by King Henry the seauenth,Black heath field. for theyr good seruice against the Rebelles at Black-Heath Fielde. William Purchas, Mercer,1497. son to Iohn Pur∣chas of Gamelinghey, in the County of Cam∣bridge,
Lord Maior one yeare. 1498Sir Iohn Perciuall, Merchant-Taylor, knigh∣ted in field by King Henry the seuenth) sonne to Roger Perciuall of London; L. Maior one year. 1499Nicholas Aldwine, Mercer, Son to Richard Aldwine of Spalding in Lincolnshire, lord Mai∣or one yeare. Hee gaue twelue pence a péece to 3000. poore people in London, and the like to as many in Spalding. 1500William Remington, Fish-Monger, son to Robert Remington, of Boston in Lincolneshire, Lord Maior one yeare. 1501Iohn Shaa, Gold-smith, son to Iohn Shaa of Rochford in Essex,Lord Mairs first riding from the Guild Hall, to take Bardge to Westmin∣ster. Lord Maior one yeare. Hee was made Knight in the fielde by King Henry the seauenth, and hee caused the Aldermen his Bretheren, to ride from the Guilde-Hall to the Thames side, when he took Bardge to Westmin∣ster, where he was sworne by the Kinges Coun∣cell. He first kept Court alone in the afternoon, for redresse of matters called before him. 1502Bartholmew Reade, Gold-smith, son of Ro∣ger Reade of Crowmer in Norffolke; L. Maior one yeare. 1503William Capell, Draper, son of Iohn Capell of Stokeneyland in Suffolke; Lorde Maior one yeare.First setting vp of Cad∣ges. He was knighted by King Henry the sea∣uenth. And he first caused Cadges to be set vp in euery Ward, for punishment of Rogues and va∣gabonds. 1504Iohn Winger, Grocer, son to William Win∣ger of Leicester; Lord Maior one yeare.
Thomas Knesworth, Fish-Monger,1505 sonne to Iohn Knesworth, of Knesworth in Cambridge∣shire, Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer,1506 son of VVil∣liam Haddon, Cittizen and Mercer of London, Lord Maior one yeare. VVilliam Browne, Mercer,1507 Sonne of Iohn Browne, Cittizen and Mercer of London, Lord Maior for one part of the yeare, and Laurance Ailmer, Draper, Sonne of Thomas Ailmer, of Ellesnam in Essex, Lorde Maior for the other part. Stephen Iennings, Merchant-Taylor,1508 sonne to VVilliam Iennings, of VVolnerhampton in Staffordshire (where hee builded a frée Schoole, worthily yet maintained by the Merchant-Tay∣lors, and the greater part of S. Andrews Vnder-shaft Parish Church in London) Lorde Maior one yeare. Thomas Bradbury, Mercer,1509 sonne to VVil∣liam Bradbury of Branghing in Hertfordshire: Lord Maior part of the yeare, and Sir VVilliam Capell the rest, wherein dyed King Henry the seauenth, and Henry the eight his sonne, began his raigne the 22. of Aprill, 1509. Henry Keble, Grocer,1510 son to George Keble of London, Cittizen and Grocer; Lord Maior one yeare. Roger Acheley, Draper,1511 sonne to Thomas Acheley of Stanwardine in Shropshire; Lorde Maior one yeare. Sir VVilliam Coppinger, Fish-Monger,1512 son
to VValter Coppinger, of Buckseill in Suffolk; And Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer, were Lord Maiors this yeare by seuerall partes, each after other. 1513.William Browne, Mercer, sonne to Iohn Browne, Cittizen and Mercer of London, Lord Maior one yeare. 1514George Monox, Draper, borne in London, Lord Mayor one yeare. 1515Sir William Butler, Grocer, son to Richard Butler, of Bindenham in Bedfordshire, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1516Iohn Reest, Grocer, sonne to William Reest of Peterborow, in Northamptonshire, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1517Sir Thomas Exmew, Golde-smith, sonne to Richard Exmew of Ruthin in Cheshire; Lorde Maior one yeare: he made the Water-Conduite in London wall by Moore-gate, &c. 1518Thomas Mirfin, Skinner, sonne to George Mirfin, of Elie in Cambridgeshire, L. Maior one yeare. 1519Sir Iames Yardford, Mercer, sonne to Wil∣liam Yardford of Kidwelley in Wales; L. Mai∣or one yeare. 1520Sir Iohn Brugge, Draper, sonne to Thomas Brugge of Dymmocke in Glocestershire; Lord Maior one yeare. 1511Sir Iohn Milborne, Draper, son to Iohn Mil∣borne of Long-Melford in Suffolke; L. Maior one yeare. 1522Sir Iohn Mundy, Gold-Smith, son to Wil∣liam
Mundy of Wycomb in Buckinghamshire; Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Thomas Baldry, Mercer,1523 son to Richard Baldry, of Stow-market in Suffolke; Lord Ma∣ior one yeare. Sir William Baylie, Draper,1524 son to Iohn Bay∣lie of Thackstead in Essex; Lorde Mayor one yeare. Sir Iohn Allen, Mercer,1525 son to Richard Al∣len of Thackstead, in Essex; Lorde Mayor two yeares. Sir Thomas Seymor, Mercer,1526 sonne to Iohn Seymor of London, Fish-Monger, who was Sonne to Robert Seymor of Walden in Essex; Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Iames Spencer, Vintoner,1527 son to Robert Spencer of Congleton in Cheshire, Lord Mayor one yeare. Sir Iohn Rudstone, Draper,1528 son to Robert Rudstone of Hatton in Yorkshire; Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Raphe Dodmer, Mercer,1529 son to Henrie Dodmer, of Pickering-Leigh in Yorkshire; bée∣ing frée of the Brewers, he was from them tran∣slated to the Mercers, and Lorde Mayor one yeare. Sir Thomas Pargitor, Salter,1530 sonne to Iohn Pargitor, of Chipping-norton in Oxfordshire, Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Nicholas Lambert, Grocer, son to Ed∣mond Lambert of Wilton in Wiltshire;1531 L. Ma∣ior one yeare.
1532.Sir Stephen Peacock, Haberdasher, sonne to Stephen Peacock of the Citty of Dublin; Lorde Maior one yeare. 1533Sir Christopher Askew, Draper, son to Iohn Askew of Edmonton in Middlesex; Lord Maior one yeare. 1534Sir Iohn Champneis, Skinner, sonne to R. Campneis, of Chew in Somersetshire; Lorde Mayor one yeare. 1535Sir Iohn Allen, Mercer, againe Lord Maior one yeare, and made a priuy Counceller to the King, for his great wisedome. 1136Sir Raphe Warren Mercer, son to Thomas Warren of London, Fuller, who was sonne to William Warren, of Fering in Essex: L. Maior one yeare. 1537Sir Richard Gresham, Mercer, son to Iohn Gresham, of Holte in Norffolke; Lorde Maior one yeare. 1538Sir William Forman, Haberdasher, sonne to Willi Forman of Gainsburgh in Lincolnshire, Lord Maior one yeare. 1539Sir William Hollis of London, Mercer, L. Maior one yeare. 1540Sir William Roche, Draper, sonne to Iohn Roche of Wixley in Yorkshire; Lorde Maior one yeare. 1541Sir Michaell Dormer, Mercer, son to Gef∣frey Dormer of Tame in Orfordshire; L. Maior one yeare. 1542Iohn Cootes, Salter, son to Thomas Coots of Bearton, in Buckinghamshire; Lorde Maire
one yeare. Sir William Bowyer, Draper, son to Willi∣am Bowyer, of Harston in Cambridgshire,1543 Lord Maior one yeare. Sir William Laxton, Grocer,1544 sonne to Iohn Laxton, of Yongdel in Northamptonshire; Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Martin Bowes, Golde-Smith,1545. sonne to Thomas Bowes of Yorke Citty, Lorde Maior one yeare. Sir Henry Hubberthorne,1546 Merchant-Tay∣lor, son to Christopher Hubberthorne, of VVa∣dingworth in Lincolnshire, L. Maior one year. In whose time died King Henry the 8. and King Edward the sixt, began his raigne the 28. of Ia∣nuary, 1546. Sir Iohn Gresham, Mercer,1547 son to Iohn Gre∣sham of Holte in Norffolke, Lorde Mayor one yeare. Sir Henry Amcotes, Fish-Monger,1548 son to William Amcotes of Astrap in Lincolnshire, L. Maior one yeare. Sir Rowland Hill, Mercer,1549 sonne to Thomas Hill of Hodnet in Shropshire: Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Andrew Iudde, Skinner,1550 son to Iohn Iud of Tonebridge in Kent, Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Richard Dobbes, Skinner,1551 son to Ro∣bert Dobbes of Baitby in Yorkeshire: L. Maior one yeare. Sir George Barne, Haberdasher,1552 sonne to George Barne, Cittizen and Haberdasher of
London, Lord Maior one yeare. 1553Sir Thomas White, Merchant-Taylor, son to Thomas White of Rickmansworth, in Hert∣fordshire, Lord maior one yeare. Then died king Edward, and Queene Mary began her raign the 6. day of Iuly, 1553. This sir Thomas White founded S. Iohn Baptists Colledge in Oxenford: and gaue 2000. li. to the Citty of Bristoll, to pur∣chase 100. and 20. li. land yearely, &c. 1554Sir Thomas Lyon, Grocer, son to Iohn Ly∣on of Peryfare in Middlesex, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1555Sir William Gerard, Haberdasher, sonne to Iohn Gerard, Cittizen and Grocer of London, who was son to William Gerard, of Sedding∣bourne in Kent; Lord Maior one year. 1556Sir Thomas Offley, Merchant-Taylor, sonne to VVilliam Offley, of the Citty of Chester, lord maior one yeare. 1557Sir Thomas Curteis, Fish-Monger, sonne to Iohn Curteis of Enfield in Middlesex, he was frée of the Pewterers, and from them translated to the Fish-Mongers, Lord Maior one yeare. 1558Sir Thomas Leigh, Mercer, sonne to Roger Leigh, of VVillington, in Shropshire, Lorde Maior one yeare. In which yeare died Quéene Mary, and Quéene Elizabeth began her prince∣ly raigne the seauentéenth day of Nouember, 1558. 1559Sir William Huet, Cloth-worker, son to Ed∣mond Huet of Wales in Yorkshire: Lord Mai∣or one yeare.
Sir William Chester, Draper,1560 sonne to Iohn Chester, Cittizen and Draper of London; Lord Maior one yeare. Sir William Harper, Merchant-Taylor,1561 son to William Harper, of the Towne of Bedford, lord maior one yeare. Sir Thomas Lodge, Grocer,1562 son to William Lodge, of Cresset in Shropshire, Lorde Maior one yeare. Sir Iohn White, Grocer,1563 Sonne to Robert White of Farnam in Surry, Lorde Maior one yeare. Sir Richard Malory, Mercer,1564 son to Anthony Malory of Papworthamus, in Cambridgeshire; Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Richard Champion, Draper,1565 son to Ri∣chard Champion of Godilming in Surrey, Lord maior one yeare. Sir Chtistopher Draper, Iron-monger,1566 son to Iohn Draper of Melton Mowbrey; Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Roger Martin, Mercer,1567 son to Laurance Martine of Melford in Suffolke, Lord maior one yeare. Sir Thomas Roe Merchant-Taylor,1568 son to Robert Roe, Cittizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, who was son to Reiginald Roe, of Lee in Kent, lord maior one yeare. Sir Alexander Auenand, Iron-monger,1569 son to Robert Auenand, of Kings-Norton in Wor∣cestershire, Lorde maior one yeare. Sir Rowland Heyward, Cloth-worker,1570 sonne
to George Heiward of Bridge-north in Shrop∣shire, Lord Maior one year. 1571Sir William Allen, Mercer, son to William Allen, Cittizen and Pasteller of London, who was son to Richard Allen, of Stondon in Hert∣fordshire; Lord Mayor one yeare. 1572Sir Lionell Ducket, Mercer, son to William Ducket of Flynton in Nottinghamshire, Lorde maior one yeare. 1573Sir Iohn Riuers, Grocer, son to Richard Ri∣uers of Penseherst in Kent L. Maior one yeare. 1574Sir Iames Hawes, Cloth-worker, son to Tho∣mas Hawes, Cittizen and Merchant of London, who was son to Iohn Hawes of Stokenwenton, in Middlesex, Lord Maior one yeare. 1575Sir Ambrose Nicholas, Salter, sonne to Iohn Nicholas of Nedingworth in Huntingdon∣shire, Lord Maior one yeare. 1576Sir Iohn Langley, Gold-Smith, son to Ro∣bert Langley, of Althrop in Lincolnshire, Lord Maior one yeare. 1577Sir Thomas Ramsey, Grocer, sonne to Iohn Ramsey, of Elenbridge in Kent; lord Maior one yeare. 1578Sir Richard Pipe, Draper, sonne to Richard Pipe of Wolnerhampton, in Staffordshire, hée was frée of the Leather-sellers, and from them translated to the Drapers, Lord Maior one year. 1579Sir Nicholas Woodroue, Haberdasher, son to Dauid Woodroue, Cittizen and Haberdasher of London, who was son to Iohn Woodroue, of the Parish of Vscombe in Deuonshire; Lorde Maior one yeare.
Sir Iohn Branche, Draper,1580 sonne to Iohn Branche, Cittizen and Draper of London, who was son to Iohn Branch of Laynham in Suffolk; Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Iames Haruey, Iron-monger,1581 son to Wil∣liam Haruey, of Cotwalton in Staffordshire, L. Maior one yeare. Sir Thomas Blanke, Haberdasher,1582 sonne to Thomas Blanke, Cittizen and Haberdasher of London, who was sonne to Thomas Blancke of Guildford in Surry, Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Edward Osborne, Cloth-worker,1583 sonne to Richard Osborne of Ashford in Kent, Lorde Maior one year. Sir Thomas Pulloccill, Draper,1584 son to Wil∣liam Pulloccill, of Fotescray in Kent, lord Maior one yeare. Sir Wolstane Dixie, Skinner,1585 son to Thomas Dixie of Catworth in Huntingdonshire, Lorde Maior one yeare. Sir George Barne, Haberdasher,1586 son to Sir George Barne, Knight, Cittizen and Haberda∣sher of London, Lorde Maior one yeare. Sir George Bond, Haberdasher,1587 sonne of R. Bond of Trull in Somersetshire, Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Martine Calthrop,1588 Cittizen and Draper of London, Lord Maior for part of the yeare, and Richard Martine, Gold-smith, for the rest. Sir Iohn Hart, Grocer,1589 son of Raphe Hart of Sproston Court in Yorkshire, L. Maior one year Sir Iohn Allot, Fish-Monger,1590 son to Richard
Allot of Lymbergh in Lincolnshire, Lord Mai∣or one part of the yeare, and Sir Rowland Hey∣werd the rest. 159Sir William Webbe, Salter, Sonne to Iohn Webbe of Reading in Barkshire, lord Maior one yeare. 1592Sir William Roe, Iron-monger, Sonne to Thomas Roe of Penseherst in Kent, Lord Maior one yeare. 1593Sir Cutbbert Buckle, Vintoner, son to Chri∣stopher Buckle, of Bourgh in Westmerland, L. Maior for part of the yeare, and sir Richard Mar∣tine Goldsmith, the rest: This sir Richard Mar∣tine was sonne to Thomas Martine, of Saffron VValden in Essex. 1594Sir Iohn Spenser, Cloth-worker, son to Rich. Spenser of Waldinfield in Suffolke, Lord Maior one yeare. 1595Sir Stephen Slaney, Skinner, sonne to Iohn Slaney of Mitton in Staffordshire, Lorde Maior one yeare. 1596Thomas Skinner, Cloth-worker, son to Iohn Skinner of Walden in Essex: Lorde Maior for part of the yeare, and sir Henry Billingsley Ha∣berdasher the rest. This sir Henrie Billingsley was sonne to William Billingsley, Cittizen and Haberdasher of London, who was sonne to Ro∣ger Billingsley, of the Citty of Canterbury in Kent. 1597Sir Richard Saltonstall, Skinner, son to Gil∣bert Saltonstal, of Hallyfax in Yorkeshire, Lord Mayor one year.
Sir Stephen Soame, Grocer,1598 son to Thomas Soame of Bradley in Suffolke, Lord Maior one year. He was frée of the Girdlers, and from them translated to the Grocers. Sir Nicholas Mosley, Cloth-worker,1599 sonne to Edward Mosley of Hough in Lancashire, Lord Maior one yeare. Sir William Ryder, Haberdasher,1600 sonne to Thomas Ryder of Muckleston in Staffordshire, Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Iohn Gerard, Haberdasher,1601 son to sir Wil∣liam Gerard, Knight, Cittizen and Haberdasher of London, Lorde maior one yeare. Sir Robert Lee, Merchant-Taylor,1602 sonne to Humphrey Lee of Bridge-north, in Shropshire, Lord maior one yeare. Sir Thomas Benet, Mercer,1603 sonne to Thomas Benet of Wallingford in Barkshire, Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Thomas Low, Haberdasher,1604 son to Simon Low, Cittizen and Merchant-Tailor of Lon∣don, who was sonne to Raphe Low of London, Gentleman; Lord Maior one yeare. Sir Leonard Holyday, Merchant-Taylor,1605 son to William Holyday, of Redborow in Glo∣cestershire, Lord maior one yeare. Sir Iohn Wats, Cloth-worker,1606 sonne to Tho∣mas Wats of Buntingford in Hertfordshire, Lord maior one year. Sir Henry Roe, Mercer,1607 sonne to sir Thomas Roe, Knight, Cittizen and Merchant-Taylor of London; Lorde Mayor one yeare.
1608Sir Humphrey Welde, Grocer, son to Iohn Welde of Eaton in Cheshire; Lord Maior one yeare. 1609Sir Thomas Cambell, Iron-Monger, son to Robert Cambell, of Fulsam in Norffolk, Lord Maior one yeare. 1610Sir William Crauon, Merchant-Taylor, son to William Crauon, of Appletreewick in York∣shire; Lord Maior now gouerning, to whom (with the rest of his worthy Brethren) I wish all health and hap∣pinesse.
Since the time also of King Richard the third, these Gentlemen haue born office in this Cit∣ty, according to their names and places. ¶ Recorders of this Citty. M. HVmphrey Statkey, Esquire. M. Thomas Fitz-Williams, Esquire. Sir Robert Sheffield, Knight. M. Iohn Chaloner, Esquire. M. Robert Brooke, Esquire. M. Shelley, Esquire. M. Baker, Esquire. M. Roger Cholmeley, Esquire. M. Richard Onslow, Esquire. M. Thomas Bromeley, Esquire. M. VVilliam Fleetwood, Esquire. M. Edward Coke, Esquire. M. Edward Drew, Esquire. M. Thomas Fleming, Esquire. M. Iohn Crooke, Esquire. Sir Henry Montague, Knight. Common Sergeants of this Citty. M. Robert Moloneux, Esquire. M. Iohn Haugh, Esquier. Thomas Higham. M. Thomas Frowick, Esquire. M. Thomas Marow, Esquire. M. Iohn Greene, Esquire. M. VVhite, Esquire. M. VValsingham, Esquire.
M. VVonley, Esquire. M. Robert Sothwell, Esquire. M. Robert Brooke, Esquire. M. Atkins, Esquire. M. Marsh, Esquire. M. Randall, Esquire. M. Thomas Kirton, Esquire. M. Thomas Wilbraham, Esquire. M. Richard Wheeler, Esquire. ¶ Chamberlaines of this Citty. M. WIlliam Phillip, Esquire. M. Miles Adys. M. VVilliam Purhas. M. William Milborne. M. Nicholas Mattock. M. George Medley. M. Thomas Haies. M. Iohn Sturgeon. M. George Heaton. M. Iohn Mabbe. M. Robert Brandon. M. Thomas Wilford. M. Cornelius Fish. ¶ Common-Clearkes, or Towne-Clearkes. M. WIlliam Dunthorne. M. Nicholas Pakenham.
M. Walter Stub. M. William Pauior. M. Thomas Rushton. M. Blackwell. M. Anthony Stapleton. M. William Sebright. M. Richard Langley. Esquires attending on the Lorde Maior in his house, and else-where. Sword-bearers. IOhn Metford. Walter Thomas. Iohn Pynchbecke. Valentine Mason. Richard Berwick. Walter Smith. Robert Smart. Mathew Sturdeuant. Rowland Smart. Common Hunt. IOhn Stokker. Arnold Babington. Iohn Burton. Thomas Abbot. Thomas Vnderhill. Iohn Lune. Iohn Dewell. William Richbell.
Common Proclaimer, or Cryer. Iohn Ashe. Thomas Camery. Thomas Say. Richard White. VVilliam Nicholson. Iohn Hallyday. Iohn Greene. Christopher Fowkes. Iohn Northage. Edward Ap-Iohn. VVater Bayliffe. IOhn Good. Henry Snowe. Geffrey Morton. Thomas Briggs. Sebastian Hillarie. Henry King. Nicholas VVillie. Robert Sharborowe. Cuthbert Thursbie. Thomas Benson. These Officers also doo attend the Lorde Maior in their seuerall places. VNder Chamberlaine. Foure Clearkes of the Lord Maiors court, who wrote weekely in the Lorde Maiors house se∣uerally.
Coroner of London. Sergeant Caruers, three. Sergeants of the Chamber, three. Sergeant of the Chanell. Yeoman of the Channell. Yeomen of the Water-side, foure. Vnder water Balyffe Yeomen of the Chamber▪ two. Meale weighers▪ three. Yeomen of the wood wharfes, two. The Sword-Bearers man. Esquires men. Common Hunts-men two Esquires men. Common Cryers man▪ Esquires men. Water ayliffes men two Esquires men. The Caruers man Esquires men. Nine of these haue iueries of the ▪ aior. v▪ The Sword bearer, and his man. Three Caruers. Foure Yeomen of the water side. FINIS.
