18553 22121742 25099
AN EPISTLE SENT VNTO TVVO daughters of VVarwick from H. N. THE OLDEST Father of the Fami∣lie of Love. VVith a refutation of the errors that are therin; by H. A. Rescue me (Lord), and deliver me from the hand of stran∣gers: whose mouth talketh vanity; and their right-hand is a right-hand of falshood. Psal. 144. 11. Imprinted at Amsterdam by Giles Thorp. 1608.
To the Christian reader, wisdome & grace. AS ther are many enimies of the truth of the gospel, and many that write to broach and spread their errors: so is it needful that some write against them, least troden truth be quite forsaken; and silly sowles be wrapped in error, vnto perdition. It is not easy for al men to espie Satans subtilties, nor the deceitful sophismes of his ministers: both he & they, can trāsforme themselves like Angels of light. Such therfore as discern them through the grace of God, should give warning vnto others; that as the foolish womā isPro 7. 11. & 9. 13. 18 troublesome, babling & lowd, inviting her ghests to the depth of hel: so thePro. 9. 3. maidens of wisdom, may lift vp also their voice; and make their crie be heard, on the highest places of the citie. What wormwood and bitternes & even deadly poi∣son, is sparsed abroad in Henry Nicholas his writings, (who caleth himself the 1 Exhort. cap. 11. See. 1.Father of the Family of Love;) the chil∣dren of wisdome that do read the same, may by the light of Gods law soon perceive: yet with faire and flattering speeches, he hath beguiled many vnstable sowles; & such as have had no love to the truth, have been givē over vn∣to his lies. And never had Satan a fitter time to work his malicious wil on the sons of Adam: then in these last evil dayes, when Atheisme and iniquity, doe so much abound. Never had he a fitter religion for Atheists and carnal hypocrites, then that which H. N. out of his cor∣rupt and fleshly hart hath set abroach. It taketh away the crosse of Christ, & persecution for righteousnes sake: and teacheth men to cōmunicate with al religions, servi∣ces and ceremonies; so as they cleave in hart to his feigh∣ned
service of the Love; It maketh them pure and without al syn, in their own foolish imaginations; yea (more then which the Serpent himself did never teach,) it deifieth them with God. In a word, it bringeth a fretting lepro∣sie vpon al religion, & overthroweth the grounds of faith layd in holy scriptures, which H. N. by foolish allegories, perverteth to the destruction of himself and his Family. And for the principles of theologie, he hath written more blasphemously and absurdly then ever did Mahomet in his Alcoran. For this cause, in answering this his letter, (as I was requested by some that heard how much it was boasted of, among the Nicholaitans;) I have touched by the way some of the impious heresies that are in his other writings, without knowledge wherof, his frawd in this Epistle cannot easily be perceived. For as a child of dark∣nes, he laboureth to be obscure in his words, yt men may admire the deepnes of Satan by which he speaketh; and himself when he is folowed, & can no other way escape, may have this for his last refuge, that men vnderstand him not. ButEphe. 5. 13. al things when they are reproved of the light, are manifest: for the light is that which maketh al things manifest. Now the Ps. 119. 105 Pro 6. 13.word of the Lord is a lantern, & his Law a light; by it therfore have I assayed to discover the snares of this seducer: not doubting but God, who cau∣seth the Morning to know his place, that it may take hold of the corners of the earth, Iob. 38. 13& that the wicked may be shaken out of it; wil, notwithstanding al the dark delphick speeches, and glozing allegories of these falsers, declare their works and manifest their impieties, and wil Iob. 34. 25.turn the night, (in the darknes wherof they think to be shrowded) and they shalbe destroyed. Let therfore the prudent reader, make trial of that
which on both sides is said, by the word of truth: least, as the serpent beguiled Evah through his subtilty, so their harts be withdrawn from the sincerity of Christ. And the Lord give them vnderstanding in al things; and pre∣serve them Ps. 12. 7. 8.from this generation for ever; for the wicked walk on every side, whiles vilenes is extolled among the sons of Adam. Henry Ainsworth.
The preface, made by some of H. N. his disciples. THis Epistle was written by the author vnto two maydens that were before purposed out of zele to have suffred death for the confession sake of the Christiā ceremonies, which as he saith in divers places of his works, are no more but outward meanes set forth by God & his ministers to direct people to the inward righteous life of Christ in the spirit;) supposing therin that they should rightly have obeyed & fulfilled the cōmandemēt of Christ, who willeth vs to for∣sake our own lives for his sake. But vpon better consideration therof, through the grace of God, and these distinct godly testimonies and reasons, (both touching that point and divers others) herein conteyned; their mindes as it hath bene repor∣ted by some of that followship wer altered herin to an other vnderstanding of the matter, and they did willingly indevour themselves afterwards, to follow his good counsel. Answer. THe drift of this Epistle / being (at the best) to disswade from the pacient and cōstant witnes∣sing of the truth of Christ / especially in the out∣ward ordinances of the gospel and open profession of the same, Under a colour of inward and spiritu∣al confession / and service of God in the holy Ghost it shal not be amisse to look a little into the sleights of Satan / wherby (as it seemeth) he hath deceived / and would stil deceive the simple; and to shew the weaknes and insufficiencie of the reasons alleged in this Letter: as also to manifest / how the outward obedience of the body / must be conjoyned with the inward of the mind and spirit; and the external or∣dinances of Christs testament professed and practi∣sed; if we would have the spirit and life which is of God. And howsoever H. N. accounteth the or∣dinances of the gospel but ceremonies; yet in that he confesseth them to be outward meanes set forth by
God, to direct people to the inward righteous life of Christ in the spirit, he manifesteth himself to be but a seducer / in perswading the two maydens not to suf∣fer death for the confession sake of them: seing the outward meanes of mans salvation and of the righ∣teous Christian life / is to be stood for vnto the death / as in handling the particulars shal by Gods grace appear. And if by the authors counsel / those daugh∣ters were drawn (as here is insinuated) from their outward confession & suffring affliction for the ordi∣nances of Christ / against the Romish Antichristian doctrines & ceremonies; their faith was but weak / they forsook the inward righteous life of Christ in the spirit / and their mindes were perverted to a ve∣ry evil vnderstanding. If also they assented to other points of H. Ns. heresies / and folowed his corrupt counsel: then were they led2 Tim. 3. 6. 7. captive / (as the A∣postle sayth / ) being simple women / laden with synns and led with divers lusts. From which estate / God keep al his people / & direct their feet in the wayes of life & peace.
AN EPISTLE. Sent vnto two daughters of Warwick. From H. N. THe wisdome of the Father, through the Love of Christ in the power of the holy Ghost, in the second birth out of the new life, of the heavenlie being, be vnto every one which with an vnpartial hart seeketh the godlynes in Ie∣sus Christ, to a harty salvation. Because that every one which seeketh God with hart, mought know the right diversitie betwixt the heavenly and the earthly, betwixt the spirit & the flesh, betwixt the light and the darknes, betwixt the death & the life, and betwixt the righteousnes of the spirit, and the righteousnes of the elementish things; and then to love the same. That grant vs the Almightie God through his love, Amen. 1. Because ye mought through the spirit of Christ inherit the same gift and meere affection or goodwillingnes to the godly life: I do bear or cary the same gift, (God is my witnes) before al men. But now am I compelled through the love of Christ, severally to open the same gift vnto two yong daughters of a certayn place named Warwick. The Lord give his prosperitie and grace thervnto; for that his righteousnes which is wrought through the Spirit of Christ, mought be knowen of them, and that the life of Christ which by many is sought after the flesh, might be knowen and inherited of them according to the spirit, even like as God which is blessed is a Spirit. Ioh. 4. 2 Cor. 3. H. A. OUr saviour Christ / the 1 Cor. 1. 24.wisdome of the Father / hath war∣ned vs to bewareMath. 7. 15. of false prophets / which come vnto vs in sheeps clothing / but inwardly are ravening wolves. The Apostles / through the love of Christ in the power of the holy Ghost, have foretold vs / thatTim. 4. 1. in the latter times / some should de∣part from the faith / and give heed vnto spirits of error and doc∣trines of Divils, speaking lies through hypocrisie / and having their consciences burned-with-a-hot-yron; and therfore counselled vs / 1 Ioh. 4. 1.not to beleev everie spirit / but to trie the spirits whither they ar of God / because many false prophets / were even then gone out in∣to the world. The evil that they should enterprise / is2 Pet. 2. 1. privilie to bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that hath bought them: the maner of their cariage should be to vsevers. 3. feighned words, Rom. 16. 18fayr, flattering and good speech,2 Pet. 2. 18. swelling words of vanityvers. 19. pro∣mises of liberty, and the like. The effect of their doctrine should be / Rom. 16. 18. deceiving of the harts of the simple, even ofMat. 24, 5. many / yea / if it were possible / ofvers. 24. the verie elect; and by those many that follow
their damnable wayes / 1 Pet. 2. 2. the way of truth should be blasphemed. The end of al which (touching themselves) is / that because such reprobates / receive2 Thess. 2. 10. 11. 12. not the love of the truth / that they mought be saved; therfore God sendeth them strong delusion / that they should beleeve lies / and they al may be damned / which beleeve not the truth / but hav pleasure in vnrighteousnes. These things considered / it standeth vs vpon / to look wel to our selves / least we be caried away with the error of the wicked. This author H. N. beginneth (as was foretold) not onely with fayr and flatte∣ring speech / but also with swelling words of the second birth, out of the new life of the heavenly being, and sondry the like. He boast∣eth of the gift / of the godly life / which he beareth before al men / and here severally openeth vnto two yong daughters: and of this he ta∣keth God to witnesse: He telleth them / (in the 2. section folowing / ) that the Christ of God was not yet declared vnto them according to the heavenly truth. Thus promiseth he great matters / and seem∣eth to be a setter forth of a new Christ / and consequently of a new God. Very needful therfore it is / to attend vnto his doctrine / and if it be true / for to receive it; if false / for to abhorr it / and to hold the author therof accursed. And herevnto the Lord inable and guide vs by his grace. 1. First where he vaunteth of the gift borne before al men / (in his other writings / ) opened to these daughters / (in this Epistle;) let vs bring it to the trial / by the word of God, who (he saith) is his witnes. For we read of some / that haveEzek. 16. 33 given gifts vnto their lovers / that they might come vnto them on every side for fornica∣tion: and whither this writing / and other pamphlets of H. N. be not gifts sent abroad for such evil purpose / let the godly reader judge. If his gift have wytnes of God / it hath witnes of his written word / as the prophet saith / Isa. 8. 20. to the Law, and to the Testi∣mony, if they speak not according to this word, it is, because ther is no light in them. Is H. N. willing to come to this trial? it seemeth farr otherweise; for in al his writings he much inveigheth against scripture-learning; contrary to the true prophets and Apostles / who highly commended this / as being2 Tim. 3. 15 16. able to make men wise vn∣to salvation / and profitable to teach / to improve / to correct / to instruct in righteousnes: and never did any of them entwite the learning or knowledge of the scriptures; as the reader may see H. N. to doe in this Epistle and his other pamphlets. Our savi∣our Christ / willed al men / even his adversaries / toIob. 5. 39. serch the scrip∣tures / for they testified of him. If they testified likewise of H. N. and his doctrine; doubtlesse he would not despise (as his manner is) the scripture-learning of others; especially whiles he wil seem to rely vpon the testimonies of the same for himself. But if we may not learn the truth of religion / out of holy writt; how then
may we attayn it? H. N. telleth vs in his First exhortation to his children, thus1 Exhort. chap. 6. sect. 7. My beloved children, like as the true Commu∣niality of holy ones, and Elders of the house of Love, confesse, vnder the obedience of the Love, the beleef in Iesu Christ, and the Christian baptism; and like as I expresse the same here vnto you, and confesse or acknowledge it before al men to be the true faith, and the vpright baptisme; even so ground with fast beleef, your harts likewise therin. So then the doctrine of H. N. and his folowers must be the groūd of our faith: as they confesse and beleev / so must we. And herein the Familists religion accordeth wel with the Turks, whose great pro∣phet Mahomet in his law or Alchoran / to draw disciples after him saith thus;Alchoran. Azoar (or chapter) 18. They that worship God, let them if they be good, be∣leev his Messenger (Mahomet:) and again; O ye good men, be fol∣lowers of God and of his messenger, & never wittingly depart from them. But may we not our selves / by the light and grace that God giveth vs / make trial of H. N. his religion by the word of the Lord? No: for in his First exhortation he saith;chap. 16. sect. 16. no man can rightly according to the truth of the holy scriptures nor according to the spiritual vnderstanding of the godly wisdome, deal in, or vse the true God-services, nor the services of the holy word, (it becometh not likewise, that any man should take in hand to busy himself thera∣bout,) but onely the illuminated Elders in the godlie wisdom, which walk in the house of Love. But what if H. N. with his coelders / be but deceivers of mens sowles / seduced themselves and seducing others? for be they not men as others are / and subject to error? He telleth vs no / foribidem. they have received the word of life, through the power of the most highest, out of his holy heaven, from the living God, and are even so through the same word, Godded with God. Therfore in an other place of that book / he saith menchap. 13 sect. 11. ought to be∣ware that they distrust not the Eldest in the Familie of Love, nor suspect any maner of evil or vnwisdom by him: nor yet also in anywise per∣swade themselves yt the exercises, documents & instructions which ar taught or set forth before them, by the Father of the Familie of Love, or oldest elder, are too slight, too childish, or too vnwise for them to follow after or to obey. But with perfect harts, humbly and single-mindedly, even as good willing children vnto the Obedience; to re∣ceive the same instructions, proceeding out of the wisdom and coun∣sel of the Eldest. And must we needs put out our own eyes / that H. N. may lead vs? may we trust him that he himself is not a blind guide / and false prophet / such as Christ foretold should come in this last time? For this matter he hath given vs his warrant thus / First exhort. Cap. 11. sect. 1 My loving children, and thou Familie of Love, give ear to me your Father, and live according to my doctrine, that it may goe wel with you: For the Lord wil have the Father honoured of the children, and what the mother biddeth or commandeth the children
to doe, that wil he have kept.Sect. 2. Take heed to my doctrine; and all what I out of Love, do set forth, teach, and exhort you vnto, that print to a seal of life, or a witnes of the truth, in your harts. For it is your life. By this we may see what a good ground H. N. hath layd for himself and his cause: that men should receive his word and doctrines / for Oracles of God. He saw that his brother / the Antichrist of Rome / had much prevailed in the foolish world / by making men beleev / that he and his church could not err: he min∣ded also (perhaps) the glorie that Mahomet hath among Turks / by perswading them / that the Alchoran (his law-book)Azoar 20. is with∣out all falshood; therfore H. N. wil sayl by that compas; and make that the foundation of his work. And coming as an enemy to warr against Christians / he is much more malicious then Na∣chash the Ammonite / who would have1 Sam. 11. 2 thrust out but one ey of the Israelites / wheras this tyrann would thrust out both; and that not of the body / (as Nachash would) but of the mind and vnderstanding; that having bereft men of their wits / he might keep them prisoners vnder his heresies. For in his Crying voice, he hath proclaymed saying / Crying voice chap. 3. sect. 11 Let your selves now in all your Being, nature, mind, and disposition, become renued through the Love, in her service; and give al your vnderstanding captive, vnder the obedi∣ence of the Love. Thus H. N. wil be gaoler and keep in captivity the minds of al men; til they bow vnto him and say / as he hath taught his children (or rather his slaves) in his First exhortation, chap. 13. sect. 2.O my father in the Love, I submit my self, and al myne vnderstanding, vnder the wisdome of thy doctrine. And when he hath gotten mens minds thys captived; he may lead them whither he lyst / though it be into the deepest dungeon of hel. We find in Christs Testament the Beraeans commended / that tried the Apostles doctrines by the scriptures dayly; Act. 17. 11. and other Christians also / that took heed to the most sure word of the Prophets / as to a light shining in a dark place; 2 Pet. 1, 19. Howsoever therfore H. N. would extin∣guish the seven lamps of the golden candlestick of Gods law / that men might see by the smoke of the fyre which he hath kindled: we mean not to trust his pretended light / but to bring to the trial both his spirit and his gift. For the serpent by his subtilty / brought Evah vnto death / whiles he took away Gods playn word / and set his own in the place: like may be our end / if we submit our selves / and all our vnderstanding / vnder the foolishnes of this mans doctrine. H. N. 2. See my beloved in the Love of Christ, I must speak vnto you even like as Paul spake vnto the fleshly Israelites, where he saith, I bear
Israel witnes that they stand fervently minded towards the lov of God, but not according to knowledg; for they seek to set up their own righ∣teousnes. Rom. 10. So is now the witnes of God in our spirit with the holy Paul towards you, that yee likewise stand fervently minded towards the love of God, but not according to knowledge, because that the Christ of God is not yet declared vnto you according to the heavenly truth, but wel according to mans wisdom or industrie, which to the literal scripture, add their own prudencie, and even so goe forth withal, or occupie their own righteousnes without the spirit of Christ, which is a miserable doctrine, being taught without the spirit of Christ. H. A. SOlomon warneth vs of an heretik vnder the figure of a foolish woman / that calleth vnto her / Pro. 9. ver 13. 15. them that passe by the way: yea such as go right on their way / saying / vers. 16. who so is simple let him come hither. And in this her cal / she counter∣feiteth Wisdomes words / for even so had her maidens spokē:vers. 4. before to the sons of men / that went astray. The Apostle Paul / found fault with the Israelites / that for want of knowledge did seek to set by their own righteousnes / by the works of the Law: neglec∣ting the righteousnes of God / which is by the faith of Jesus Christ. H. N. here cometh / like the troblesom woman / and cal∣leth these two daughters / which went right on their way / even in the true path beaten by Paul and the other Apostles. And the more to allure them / he vseth Pauls words / and pretends his affec∣tion: but his drift is to draw them quite awry / from the true way of righteousnes / which Paul did preach / vnto a false righ∣teousnes by the works of the law / a miserable doctrine which H. N. in his writings hath taught without the spirit of Christ. These two daughters of Warwick, did (as I have heard) so know and beleev in Christ and in God / and seek the true righteousnes / which is by faith; as other true Christians of our English nation have done and doo. But the Christ of God was not yet declared vnto them, (as H. N. sayth) according to the heavenly truth. Wheras that which he meaneth by heavenly truth / wil be found indeed to be hel∣lish error; he teaching such things of God, and of Christ, and of mans righteousnes; as the prophets and Apostles have every wher condemned: which anon will appear. H. N. 3. Because that the same miserable doctrine and false wisdom of the flesh which gendreth her own righteousnes, mought be made known,
and even so then to be forsaken, therfore hath God now in the same last day showed his grace & mercifulnes on vs poor & wretched ones, and hath declared vnto vs through his holy spirit, his service of Love, for to declare vnto al good willing ones through the self same service, which is the true way to the everlasting life. Therfore let everie one now through the same service of love be warned that he look wel here∣to, that he boast not himself in any of the works of righteousnes, or take on the same to salvation neyther to condemnation, before that he in the spirit of Christ through the love of the Father be renewed in al righ∣teousnes of life. Not that I mean in the elementish ceremonial righ∣teousnes, which the man setteth forth or occupieth out of his owne prudencie, but I mean in that righteousnes which according to the hea∣venly truth is in the being of Christ, and is set forth through the spirit of God. For the Father is not honoured but through the Son, that is, no man may know, eyther serve God, but that he must be born out of the spirit of Christ, even like as ther standeth written; Ther availeth before God neyther circumcision nor vncircumcision, but onely a new creature in Christ Iesus wrought through the Love, Gal. 6. Therfore shal Christ in the day of judgements, accuse and find faultie a flesh in their righteousnes, even like as he saith, I shal reprove or rebuke the world of their righteousnes. Ioh. 16. That this is al what the man out of his first birth, hath set vp for a righteousnes, which is an eni∣my vnto God, even like as he sayth, Ioh. 10. They are al theeves and murtherers which are come before me: that is, whosover letteth him∣self think, that he is a Christian before the spirit of Christ be born in him, that same is a theef and a murderer. For whosoever hath not the spirit of Christ, the same belongeth not vnto him. Rom. 8. Even like as Paul hath witnessed wher he saith, I durst not speak any word, vnlesse that Christ had spoken the same in me, or through me. Rom. 15. yea no man (sayth he in an other place) can name Iesus to be the Lord, but through the holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 12. A natural man (sayth he) testeth not the spirit of God. 1 Corinth. 2. My children (saith Paul to the Ga∣lathians) with whom I travel agayn in birth, vntil that Christ be fa∣shioned in you. 1 Gal. 4. Here may we mark that without the Spirit of Christ, ther is no knowledge of God, And vvher God is not knovvn, ther can ther not any doctrine be occupied to the mans salvation. It is verie true. H. A. THe author pretending to deal against that / which he would faynest establish / to weet / the miserable doctrine and false wis∣dome of the flesh, which gendreth her own righteousnes: first draweth the readers to himself and his familie / and the service of Love; as being the declarers of the true way to the everlasting life,
now in the same last day. But this is like the cariage of the who∣rish woman whoPro. 7. 13. 14. 15. caught the yong man and kyssed him / and with an impudent face sayd vnto him / I have peace offrings, this day have I paid my vowes: therfore came I forth to meet thee. &c. and H. N. hath no better warrant then his predecessor Mahomet, who (before him) boasted himself to be theAlchoran. Azoar 77. Teacher of the nations. That the reader may discern the frawd of this falser / I wil first briefly shew what doctrine he hath taught cōcerning God and Christ; And then I wil proceed in answering this his Letter. The God which H. N. treacheth to the world / is not as the scriptures declare the true God vnto vs / One eternal / everliving / infinite / incomprehensible / al∣mighty / vnserchable and vnchangeable Being / who onely hath immortality / and dwelleth in the light that none can attayn vnto / whom never man saw / neither can see / vnto whome be honour and power everlasting Amen. 1 Tim. 6. 16 Exod. 3. 14. Rev. 1. 4. Iob. 11. 7. 8. 9. & 36. 26. Psal. 90. 2. & 93. 2. & 102. 26. 27. & 145. 3. Act. 17. 25. Iam. 1. 17. But H. N. telleth vs of a God / thatEpistles of H. N. Epist. 3. chap. 3. sect. 3. 3 was in the beginning as a light af life, of one substance with the manly crea∣tures. For as he saith aftersect. 22. Gen. 1. & 3. in this letter, God had created the man, that he should be of one life, one Being, one Spirit, and of one nature with God. Now the manly creature we know was finite / compre∣hensible / not from eternity / but had his beginning in the sixt day of this world / and soon was changed from his estate and became like to the beasts that perish. How then can it without highest blasphemie / and dishonour of God / be sayd or thought / that God was of one substance with the man? yet H. N. to bring his blasphe∣mie to a higher degree / if he may; hath further manifested his mind thus:H. N. Man falling &c. sect. 1. See and mark ye beloved, in the beginning, when God made al things wel, then was the Lord one Lord of his kingdom, & one God of his works; ther was also no more but one God and one man, and they were one, and had in al one order, being and nature, for God was al that the man was, and man was al that God was. The Divil when he had theGen. 3. Serpent for his instrument / (the subtilest beast of the field) durst not vtter such abomination vnto Evah / as to say she should be of one substance with God, or al that God was; but on∣ly that she should be like vnto God, knowing good and evil: but here having gotten a new instrument H. N. (which mystical letters may rightly be readGen. 3. 1. in the Hebrew. Ha Nachash, that is / The Serpent, who now is weren more old in evil / more bold in falshood / ) he shameth not to teach / that God and man were one substance and being: God al that man; and man, al that God was. By this doctrine H. N. leadeth men at once from God to the Divil / and deifieth the Serpent. For the Serpent was too subtile for the manly creature: the Divil de∣ceived and overcame the man / with al that he was: his body sowl and spirit. Now seing God the creator / and man the creature /
had al one substance and being, and the one was al that the other was; it wil folow vpon this blasphemers doctrine / that the man had as much power / wisdom / wil and ability everie way to with∣stand the Divil / as God himself had: but the Divil was too strōg and too wise for the man; therfore also he was too strōg and to wise for H. Ns. God / who had no more of any thing then the mā. Now he that is most mighty / most wise &c. must needs / (even in any Pagans judgement) be esteemed for God.Mat. 4. The Divil could not pre∣vayl with Christ / though he proffered him al the kingdomes of the earth / to fal down and worship him: but he hath gottē this ho∣nour and much more from H. N. for far lesse preferment / that he wil not only worship him / himself; but draw al the world / if he can to doe the like / by his Serpentlike doctrine. But a man would think / that vpon consideration of Adams fal / and al his childrens miserie; H. N. would change his more then beastly judgement / of God and man to be one substance. No it is farr otherwise. For as he hath feighned such a God as never was; so hath he begotten and brought vs forth a Christ/to weet / a Love∣ly Being; or rather a lothsom Idol in his own hart / as after shal be shewed; which Christ, (he sayth)H. N. Epist. 4. chap. 5. sect. 14. maketh of two that they be one, namely the Godhead and the manhood. By meanes of this mediator / ibid. see. 18. is God the Father one substāce, or manned with vs through Christ, and is al in al. Herevpon H. N. (which hath written the world a new Gospel / and beginneth it with his own praise / asMat. 1. 1. Mar, 1. 1. the holy Evangelists begin theirs with Christs / ) telleth vs of him∣self / that he isGospel of the kingd. Chap. 1 Sect. 1. Godded with God in the spirit of his Love. And least men should neglect to worship this beast / and give him his Divine honour; he every wher vrgeth his godhed and authority; one example wherof I wil set down.Proverbs of H. N. chap. 8. sec. 3. The God of heaven, as the Fa∣ther himself, is come down, and he bringeth in the service of his Love, himself with his Christ and his holy Ghost, & with al that which with him is Gods: vnto his obedient mā H. N. & Godding the same wth him, he hath Manned him with the same; and his wil is, that now in the last time, through his service of Love, al people or generations of men, which are good willing to his righteousnes, should assemble them vnto him & his Godded man, & even so likewise with them, al that which is manly; to the end that they al should become of one Being with him and his godded man, & so be al named Gods, and children of the most highest. For even so in the same conjoyned comming and conformi∣ty of being; namely God with al what is Gods, and the man with al what is manly; it al, what is not Gods nor manly, becommeth through God and the man vtterly condemned. Was ther ever any trump of Satan / that durst proclaym such Atheisme to the world vnder co∣lour of religion as this man doeth? Mahomet was never so grosse or wicked to think thus of God / or of himself: He in his Alcho∣ran
every where speaketh rightly of God / that he isAzoar . 9. 4. 5. &c. One, immu∣table, most wise, most high, incomprehensible, omnipotent &c. He was willed (he sayth) to say,Azoar 3. Nothing is injoyned me, but to worship God alone, and not to esteem any his fellow (or partner.) and agaynAzoar 7. That thou (Mahomet) mayst be proved true, cal thy self but a messenger onely. But H. N. wilbe Godded with God, and have al that is Gods, (as himself sayth:) then is he doubtlesse Gods fellow: and hath the eternal power and godhead, which the Apostle sayth,Rom. 1. 2. ar seen by the creation of the world &c. Now what can H. N. or any of his ylluminated Elders, answer to that which the true God propounded vnto Job;Iob. 38 4. &c. wher wast thou when I layd the foun∣dation of the earth? declare if thou hast vnderstanding &c.Iob. 40. 4. . 6. 9. Hast thou an arm like God? or doost thow thunder with a voice like him? deck thy self now with majesty & excellencie, & array thy self with bewty and glory. Cast abroad the indignation of thy wrath, and behold eve∣ry one that is prowd, and abale him &c. Then wil I confesse vnto thee also, that thy right hand can save thee. Wee know the true God Iob. 42. can do al things / and that there is no thought hid from him. Let H. N. with his new Gods / shew forth their Godhead in their powerful works. Let them (as the prophet Isaias sayth) shew things that ar to come hereafter, that we may know that they ar Gods. Isa. 41. 23. Christ said to the Jewes / If I should bear witnes of my self, my witnesse vver not true. Ioh. 5. 31. But H. N. beareth witnesse of himself / and hath no testimony from God / nor his scriptures / more then hadAct. 5. 36. 37. Theudas or Iudas of Galilee. or Maho∣met. Christ did confirm his authorityAct. 2. 22. by signes and wonders. He alleged his works forIoh. 5. 36. witnesses that the Father had sent him. But blessed be God / who though he hath suffred these idols of indignation (the Familists) to vtter the pride of their arro∣gant harts / yet hath he not permitted Satan to give them power to work any miracles / for to seduce the world withall: that such as do follow them / may shew them selves deprived of wisdome and humane reason / in crediting such an impostor / that hath no∣thing but foolish words to bewitch their minds withall. The prophet Isaias teacheth / thatIsa. 40. 17. &c. Al nations before God are as no∣thing / and they are counted to him / lesse then nothing and vanity. To whom then wil ye liken God?vers. 25. To whom now wil ye liken me / that I should be like him? sayth the Holy one. H. N. an∣swereth / that himself is not onely like God / but hath one substāce with him / and al that is Gods. But as the prophet mocked those woodden idols / that wereIsa 44. 16. 17. half burnt in the fyre / and the other half worshipped as a God: so may al men deride these earthen idols / that cannot save their bodyes out of the dust or fyre? For goe they not down to the grave as other men / and perish like their doung? Is not H. N. rooted out of the land of the living / and doth
not his name rott with him? Can any of his Godded men save themselves from fyre or sword / and scape out of the hand of the hangman? And then may we speak to them as did the Lord to the king of Tyrus;Ezec. 28. 9. wilt thou say before him that slayeth thee, I am a God? but thou shalt be a man, and no God, in the hands of him that slayeth thee. The Apostle Paul sheweth the folly and blind∣nes of the Gentiles thatRom. 1. 23 turned the glorie of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of the image of a corruptible man; and is not H. Ns. foolish hart more ful of darknes then theirs; that after soo great light of the scriptures / turneth the glory and Being of the incorrup∣tible God / into (not the image onely but) the verie Being of a cor∣ruptible man? Doubtles God hath delivered him vp into a re∣probate mind; that his madnes may be manifest vnto al men; which thus hath turned the truth of God into a lie / magnified and honoured the creature, to the dishonour and blasphemie of the crea∣tor / who is blessed for ever / Amen. To al then that H. N. can say for his own Godhed/or his disciples / let al true Christians answer / as Jeremy taught the Jewes to answer the men of Babel; The Gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, shal perish from the earth and from vnder these heavens, Ier. 10. 11. By this the reader may perceive / what a poysoned religion this Nachash H. N. hath brought into the world / concerning God. Now for his Christ, H. N. teacheth vs not according to the scrip∣tures / of one particular man / of the stock and generation ofRom 9. 5. the Jewes / born about xvi. hundred yeres agoeMat 2. in Bethlehem; who himself alone (being GodPhil. 2. 6. equal with the FatherIoh. 17. 5. before the world was / and in that fulnes of timeHeb. 2. 14. took vnto him our humane na∣ture) 1 Pet. 2. 24.bare in his own body the syns of al his elect / and by that Heb. 9. 26. 28.once offring of himself vpon the crosse / hath purged them al / from al their syns &c. No, H. N regardeth not (as after in this Letter sect. 11. he sheweth) this knowledge / that in times past ther was one Christ in Israel which was born amongst his own &c. but telleth vs of a Lovely being/and a holy life: this is his Christ. For in his First exhortation he sayth / chap. 12. sec. 23. 24. walk with your spirit in the Lovely and vertuous Being: Fasten your mind therto, and build your righteousnes theron. For that is an eternal and fast standing foundation, wheron al Gods prophets and holy ones have builded, and is Christ himself. Agayn / in the same book he sayth / chap 20 sec. 5. After a little time of your distresse and anguish, or heavines, the Lord wil bring his Christ, (that is his best beloved and most holy being) in power and glory vn∣to you. In this his Epistle to the two daughters,sect 4. he expoun∣deth Pauls words 1 Cor. 13. though I had al faith, &c. if I had not love, it were nothing; that is (sayth H. N.) whosoever hath not Christ, he is with u God: thrfre also in an other place / he calethFirst exh. ch. 12. sec. 33 Love, the vpright Being of Christ himself; And because this
Lovely life and being / appeareth dayly fresh and new / in those that come to the family of Love / therfore they professe to beleeve / not that Christ was, but that heFirst exhort. ch. 7. sec. 14. I eived of the holy Ghost, through the power of the most highest, & born of the H. virgin Mary. And wheras the scriptures teach that Christ suffredRom. 5. 6. 8 & 4. 25. for vs/and for our syns; H. N.  Christ bearethFirst exhort. ch. 7. sec. 17. in vs our syns. The scriptures teach / thatRom. 5. 19. by the obedience of one (meaning Christ) many are made righteous: he hath washed vs from our synsRev. 1. 5. in his blood / he wasHeb. 9 28. once offred to take away the syns of many / and withHeb. 10. 14 one offring hath he consecrated for ever them that are sancti∣fied: H. N. teacheth vs thatFirst exhor. ch. 7. sec. 17. Christ / vnder the obedience of the Love of his Father, is gone before vs therin, for that we should, in like manner follow after him, vnder the obedience of his Love, in his death of the crosse, to the safemaking of vs from our syns. Thus must we save our selves by our own suffrings / and Christ (set forth vnto vs in the scriptures) is but an example / to teach vs what we must doe. But what should I stand longer vpon this point; for the Familists hold and professe / thatPattern of pres. temp. an obedient and godly life is Christ Iesus; and so their doctrine of Christ, agreeth with their for∣mer doctrine of God: both being wretched and blasphemous. Ha∣ving thus opened the groundwork of H. Ns. religion, it shalbe the easyer to discerne his frawd in this Letter / which I now wil par∣ticularly answer. Let every one now, through the same service of Love (sayth this au∣thor) be warned, that he boast not himself in any of the works of righ∣teousnes, or take on the same to salvation neyther to condemnation, before that he in the spirit of Christ, though the love of the Father be renewed in al righteousnes of life. In that H. N. sayth / before he be renewed, he playnly intimateth that his deadly error / that after men are renewed / they may boast in and take on their works to salvation; contrarie to Pauls doctrine / who sheweth that not onelyRom. 3. 3. the vncircumcision, (the vnrenewed Gentiles / ) but also the circumcision (the renewed Jewes) should be justified of God by faith, which faith excludeth mansvers. 27. rejoycing or boasting; and vers. 20. 28.al works of the Law. He confirmeth it also byRom 4. 1. 2. Abrahams ex∣ample / who though he were renewed in righteousnes of life / had nothing to rejoyce of with God; but was justified by faith alone; and as he / sovers. 23. 24. we al / shal have faith (not works) imputed to vs for righteousnes. But H. N. speaking of the 10. commande∣ments given on mount Sina / caleth that law / GodsH. N. First. exhor. cha. 1. sec 12. 4. eternal, true, & living righteousnes; that he would have to be erected through his people Israel, vpon the earth, and wherin al the children of men, generations and heathen, should live. Wherin his doctrine is quite contrary vnto Pauls / who sayth / Gal 3 21. 22. if ther had been a law given, which could have given life, suerly righteousnes should have been by
the Law; but the scripture hath concluded al vnder syn, that the pro∣mise by the faith of Iesus Christ, should be given to them that beleeve. Now the way of life / the Apostle had before shewed / in the same chapter / saying / vers. 11. 12. it is evident that no man is justifyed by the Law in the sight of God, forHab. 2. 4. the just shal live by faith; and the Law is not of faith, but the man that shal do thoe things shal live in them. H. N. therfore teaching contrary to the Apostle (as we have seen,) even a miserable doctrine / and false wisdome of the flesh / which gen∣dreth her own righteousnes / is by th' Apostles commandement to be holden accursed. Gal. 1. 8. And this gift of his / hath no wit∣nesse of the holy prophets or Apostles to confirm the same; but by his predecessor Mahomet is wel approved; for evē so did he teach the TurksAlchoran, Azoar (or chapter) 4. 5. 35. & 42. That the Law of God is not impossible and intollerable: (how∣soever the Apostles say the contrary (Rom. 8. 3. Act. 15. 10.) and that they which keep the the Law are joyned with God & saved. After this H. N. sheweth that he meanes not the elemetish & cere∣monial righteousnes, but that which according to the heavenly truth is in the Being of Christ, (for this we had heard is his heavēly truth, that every man should have the Being of Christ / or be Christ him∣self.) His proof herof is, The Father is not honoured but through the Son; that is (sayth H. N.) no man may knowe or serve God, but that he must be born out of the spirit of Christ. And thus he leadeth the daughters by degrees / to their own new birth / for their righteous∣nes and salvation: and to maynteyn this heresie / he corrupteth and abuseth the scripture Gal. 6. 15. wher Paul sayth (against such as vers. 12.vrged Christians to be circumcised / that they might avoid perse∣cution) that in Christ Iesus neyther circumcision avayleth any thing, nor vncircumcision, but a new creature; meaning that such as were graffed into Christ by faith / vnto salvation from their syns; they need not care in this estate for having or wanting the outward Jewish signe of circumcision / but labour for that which it signi∣fied / namely to become new creatures / dying dayly vnto syn / and living vnto righteousnes / which fruits ar vndoubted testimonies that they ar in Christ. But H. N. corrupteth the words / first saying Ther avayleth before God, and then adding, in Christ Iesus wrought in the Love, meaning / that a new creature / in Christ (which Christ is) wrought in the Love / (for so he thinketh Christ to be the Love∣ly Being in vs / as before is shewed;) this new creature avayleth before God / for righteousnes / and safe-making from our syns; as his words elswhere are. Thus careth he not / how he wrest / or what he add vnto the scriptures / so as they may seem to serve his turn. That the reader may see his deceit / I wil shew what is his veyn and manner of reasoning. Two things are given vs of God through Christ. 1.Rom. 4. 25. justification, and 2.1 Thes. 4. 3 sanctification. Justifi∣cation
is byRom. 3. 25. the forgivnes of our syns for Christs sake / and for the death thatHeb. 9. 26. 28. he once suffred for vs himself alone on the crosse; whervpon followeth our blessednes and salvation; and this justifi∣cation we apprehend byRom. 3. 28. faith alone. After which foloweth the work of Christ in vs / by sanctifying our bodies sowles and spirits / and making vs conformableGal. 5. 24. Rom. 6. to his death burial and resurrection / and furnishing vs with fruits and graces of the Spirit: which beingIoh. 15. 5. Colos. 1. 10. fruits of faith in Christ / following the same; are no cause of our justification or blessednes / for that we haveRom. 3. 24. freely before given vs of grace. Now cōmeth H. N. and he taketh this latter point of Sanctification, and al such scriptures as speak therof / and putteth it in place of the former / to weet / our justification, ma∣king this our new birth / and these fruits of faith / to be the very cause of our happines / righteousnes it self / yea and Christ himself. Which deceitful reasoning of his / may further be manifested / by a type and shadow of our redemtion / shewed to our fathers / tra∣veling towards their outward rest in Canaan; as we do now tra∣vel towards our eternal rest in heaven. They in their journey wereNum. 21. 6. stung by fyrie serpents / and many of them died. To save them from this death / a serpent ofvers. 9. brasse was set vp / on which who so looked / was (without any other salves or medicines / ) hea∣led of his deadly wound. Then being thus healed, they wentvers. 10. 11. &c. for∣ward on their way / foughtvers. 21. 24. &c. against the Amorites and other eni∣mies, and won the promised land; and this they were to doe / be∣fore they could have possession of the same. If H. N. had then li∣ved / and should have perswaded the people / that not the looking vp to the brazen serpent / but their after journeyes / and battels a∣gainst the Amorites / did heal them of their stings; should he not haue belyed the work of Gods grace / who without any work or war of theirs / did heal them freely? even so doth he in this. The venim of Synn / by the fyrie serpents the Devils / tormenteth men, and bringeth them toRom. 6. 3. death. Jesus Christ is lifted vp vnto vs / Ioh. 3. 14. 15.as was the Serpent in the wildernes / vnto whom we looking vp byGal. 2. 16. Rom. 5. 1. faith / are throughly healed. After this God unployeth vsRom. 6. 1. &c. in a holy life / and Christian warfare / to subdue our lusts and affections / and bring forth fruites of the spirit in sanctification. Now cōmeth H. N. and telleth vs / this holy life / this Christian warfare / is our righteousnes / our safemaking from our syns / and is Christ himself. Thus is he an enimie vntoGal. 5. 4. the grace of God / and hinderer omans salvation; seeking to procure it by the works of the law / by which no flesh shalbe saved; and in stead of Christ / would give vs an idol of his own fiction. After this / as vnsavourly and to as little purpose / he alledgeth / an other scripture / wher Christ (as he sayth) in the day of judgemēts,
shal find faulty al flesh in their righteousnes, as he saith I shal rebuke the world of their righteousnes. Ioh. 16. First it is to be observed that Christ spake these words of the Comforter (the Holy Ghost) which he / being gone away would send to his Apostles / Ioh 16. 7. (as after came to passe / Act. 2. 33.) and sayth / when he is come he will reprove the world &c. but H. N. allegeth this / that Christ himself should do it / and falsifyeth our Lords words / putting I, for He, the reason wherof seemeth to be for that H. N. holdeth not a distinctiō of the three persons in the Godhed / as we professe1 Ioh. 5. 7. Mat 28. 19. accor∣ding to the scriptures; but ignorantly shuffleth and confoundeth al. Secondlly / he addeth to the scripture / saying their righteous∣nes; wheras Christ sayth onely that the Holy Ghost should con∣vince the world of righteousnes; which may as wel / (if not better) be vnderstood of Christs righteousnes / then of the worlds; espe∣cially seing the reason therof is rendred thus / vers. 1. Of righteousnes, be∣cause I goe to my Father. Now though one may vnderstand it other∣weise / of the worlds feighned righteousnes / yet is it overmuch boldnes in H. N. to put his own vnderstanding in sted of the text it self: for this is the meanes to corrupt Gods pure word / even as the mans hart is most corrupt. Thirdly, he referreth this to the day of judgements, which is far from Christs meaning; for he promiseth the efficacy and power of the Holy Ghost in his ser∣vants / whiles he is absent from them / before the day of judgemēt; as the text sheweth to any wise hart. But wherfore doth H. N. put in this, may we think? Doubtlesse to draw men vnto him∣self / for he is the Comforter promised / yea he is Christ himself; and this day and time of his preaching / is the day of judgements. This is evident by his own words otherwhere. For in his First Exhor∣tation, he thus writeth;chap. 16. sect. 10. According to al the testimonies of the ho∣ly spirit of Love, this gracious word, and his service of Love, is the Light, and the day of the true judgement, wherwith God with his holy ones accomplisheth, and wherwith also he wil accomplish, his judge∣ment vpon the earth, according to the truth. In the Gospel of H. N. it is also thus written;Evang. chap. 1. sect. 9. For behold in this present day, the glorious coming of our Lord Iesu Christ, with the many thowsāds of his Saincts, becommeth manifested, which hath set himself now vpon the seat of his majesty, for to judge in this same day, which the Lord hath ordey∣ned or appointed, the whol world with equity and with faithfulnes and truth according to his righteousnes. And agayn in the same book.chap. 34, sect. 2. Behold and consider my beloved, how wonderfully God work∣eth in his holy ones, and how that now, in this day or light of the Love, the judgement seat of Christ is revealed and declared vnto vs out of heaven, to a righteous judgement vpon earth, from the right hand of God, and how that on the same judgement seat of Christ, (that the scripture mought be fulfilled) ther sitteth one now, in truth in the
habitation of David, which judgeth vprightly, thinketh vpon equity and requireth righteousnes. By this the reader may see / what this man aymeth at in al his writings / even to draw al men vnto him∣self / as judge of the world sitting on the throne of Christ / and spa∣reth not to apply the promises of Christs coming / to this day of his preaching / being a more shamelesse and presumptuous blas∣phemer then ever was Mahomet / or any arch-heretik that Satan sent to bewitch the world. As he hath abused this 16. of Iohn, so doth he afterwards the 10. of John. They are al theeves and mur∣therers which are come before me: that is (sayth H. N.) whosoever letteth himself think that he is a Christian before the spirit of Christ be born in him, that same is a theef and a murtherer. Wher againe he intimateth Christ and a Christian to be al one: and if the Spirit of Christ be borne in a man / then though he make himself Christ / the door / the shepheard &c. he is no theef / no murderer. Thus H. N. sheweth himself to be sold vnto syn / and given over to an here∣tical and reprobate mind / perverting al scripture vnto his destruc∣tion. It is very true. H. N. 4. See my beloved in the love of Christ, even thus standeth the foū∣datiō of ye Christianity, & in such maner of wise havth Apostles taught the salvation in Christ, even like as Paul sayth to the Corinthes. 13. although I givc al my goods to the poor, and that I suffer my body to be burned, and although I had faith (saith he) that I could remove moun∣tayns, if I had not love, it were not any thing vnto me: that is, who∣soever hath not Christ, he is without God, and without righteousnes in this world. I mean the being like Christ, which is received through the power of the holy Ghost, and not any ceremonial Christ, which one man speaketh of or promiseth to an other, through the ceremoni∣al service, which he out of his prudencie according to his fleshly mind hath set vp. O no, The work and begetting or procreating of the chil∣dren of God, cometh not so slenderly to passe, as men now at this time teach each other: out of their vnregenerate spirit, which never proceedeth from God. H. A. UUHat a sandy foundation of Christianity H. N. hath layd / we hav seē before by his doctrine of God and of Christ / and of mans righteousnes. Here / (to build hay on his rotten ground / ) he perverteth an another scrip∣ture /
and would father his error on the Apostle Paul / who most of al other did set against it. For the teaching the salvation in Christ to be by Fayth, as before is shewed: H. N. wil have him say it is by Love, the Love that is in vs; which Love he expoundeth (as his manner is) to be Christ himself; so wresting the word / (as did the old serpent / ) vnto mens destruction. The Love treated of by the Apostle / 1 Cor. 13. is a qualitie in the Saincts / wrought in them by the spirit of God; as it is written / Gal. 5. 22.The fruit of the spirit is Love, &c. Now this Love which is in vs / (whither it be towards God or our brethren / ) is not the foundatiō or cause of our happines / but an effect thereof / as we may learn by the Apostle / that sayth / 1 Ioh. 4. 10. Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved vs, & sent his son, to be a reconciliation for our synnes. Which Love / when we perceiv by faith; then we agayn doe love the Lord; as it after followeth / vers. 19. We love him, because he loved vs first. Then from the Love of God / floweth also the Love of our brethren / as is further added / vers. 21. And this commandement have we of him, that he which loveth God, should love his brother also. And that these graces come not of our selves / (and consequently ar not meri∣torious in vs / nor causes of our salvation.) Moses taught his peo∣ple / when he sayd / Deut. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy hart & the hart of thy seed, that thou mayst Love the Lord thy God with al thy hart & with al thy fowl, that thou mayst live. As for the cause of our salvation / that it is onely Gods Love and grace towards vs / the Apostle Paul sheweth sayingEph. 2. 4. 5. God which is rich in mercy, through his great Love wherwith he loved vs, even when we were dead by syns, hath quickned vs togither in Christ; (so) by grace ye are saved. This Grace we apprehend by fayth; which fayth / if it be alive / stirreth it self / andGal. 5. 6. worketh by love. And thus the Saincts doe shew their fayth by their Love and good works; but in case of justification be∣fore God / and mans salvation / al works are excluded / as the same Apostle proveth saying / Rom. 4. 6. David declareth the blessednes of the man, vnto whom God imputeth justice without works. This being so / what labour they for / but our curse and wretchednes / which would have vs rely vpon our Love, or any good works / for the sa∣ving of our sowles. His next inference is more mischeevous / when he expoundeth those words / if I have not Love, thus: That is (sayth H. N.) whosoe∣ver hath not Christ is without God. Thus maketh he Love in vs to be Christ; and so the playn doctrines of the Gospel concerning our Saviour shal be but a fable. And that this is his meaning / he shew∣eth elswhere more playnly / when he sayth / H. N. First exhort. ch. 12. sect. 23. 24. If ye wil not that the wrath of God should come or fal vpon you, so deal faithfully before God & his holy ones, & walk with your Spirit, in the Lovely and ver∣teous
Being, fasten your mind therto, & build your righteousnes ther∣on, for that is an eternal fast standing foundation, wheron al Gods pro∣phets & holy ones have builded, and is Christ himself. Here men may see what a miserable foundation he hath layd / for to build our righteousnes on / evē our own walking in the lovely & verteous be∣ing, and this with him is Christ. Wherby he proclameth himself to be Antichrist: for the Apostle John sayth / 1 Ioh. 4. 3. Every spirit which confesseth not Iesus Christ comen in the flesh, is not of God, but this is (the spirit) of Antichrist. Now to say that Love (which is an affection of the mynd / ) is Christ; is to deny him comen in the flesh / out of the loynes of David and Abraham / of the virgin Mary / in the dayes of Herod the King / as the scriptures playn∣ly teach.Mat. 1. & 2. Rom. 1. And by as good reason may H. N. deny that ever ther was any such man as Adam, any such beast as the Serpent, any such creation of the world / as Moses describeth / Gen. 1. or a∣ny God: and so by his allegories / overturne al religion / and bring Atheisme in the place; which in deed he hath done / with most high abomination / in deifying himself and blaspheming God. By Christ, or righteousnes, H. N. sayth he meaneth the being like Christ, not any ceremonial Christ: so he seemeth to esteem the playn doctrines of the gospel / to be but ceremonial, that wheras we read there of one Jesus to be crucified for our syns &c. this he coūteth but a ceremonie / shadow or figure / such (it may be) as was theGen. 22. 13. ram that Abraham offred / or the beasts that Aaron killed / or (perhaps) the parable thatIudg. 9. 7. &c. Jotham told: for the true Christ that saveth men / is the Lovely being that is in the Familists themselves: this idol hath their god H. N. out of his prudency according to his fleshly mind set vp. And this is a great secret / or mysterie of iniquity. H. N. 5. Herevpon my beloved mought ye or som other say, we learn not, or ther is not any thing taught vnto vs, then out of the clear scrip∣ture, which may not lie. Yea my beloved the scripture lyeth not, but al those which ar not instructed through the spirit of Christ, they lie & are beguiled, & signify or expoūd the scripture which is spokē through the holy Ghost, & shewed out in the spirit of life Iohn. 6. vpon an ear∣thy or elementish foundation, wherthrough the man can not obteyn or get any renewing of the hart. Even like as in the witnessing of the scrip∣ture ther is witnessed sufficiently to those that can vnderstand the same. Who is ther without the word of the Lord which is spirit & life, Iohn 6. that hath atteyned vnto the salvation, or who hath I beseech you in any world, brought forth any true witnes, vnlesse that he through the
Spirit of the Lord, which is his word, become altogether born anew H. A. UUE are sure the sacred scripture lth not / but H. N. which abusth and falsifieth the scripture / and denieth Jesus to be the Christ / making Love and the Lovely Being in himself and his familie / to be Christ, (as we have heard:) is by the Apostle condemned for a Liar and an Antichrist, 1 Ioh. 2. 22. and he not being instructed through the Spi∣rit of Christ, hath taught an earthly and rotten foundation / to the ruine of true religion. The scripture cannot rightly be vnderstood or opened but by the Holy Ghost, that is the gifts of the holy Ghost. But some have the gifts of the Spirit / which yet are not themselves altogither born anew: as had Balaam / the Scribes and Pha∣rises / Caiaphas / Judas the traitor and others many / which as the Apostle sayth / Heb. 6. 4. were once lightned & have tasted of the heavenly gift, & were made partakers of the holy Ghost. Ther∣fore it is false which H. H. writeth / that none in any world, brought forth any true witnes, vnlesse that he became altogither born anew. Againe he here brocheth another error / in expounding the Spirit of the Lord, to be his word; which H. N. in his grosse vnderstand∣ing perversly gathereth from Christs words Iohn. 6. 63. the words that I speak vnto you are spirit, wherby our Lord meaneth that his words were spiritual, not that they were the Holy Spi∣rit it self. For he vseth the like phrase of a spiritual and rege∣nerated man saying / Except a man be born of water and of the spirit / he cannot enter into the kingdome of God; and / that which is born of the spirit is spirit. Iohn. 3. 5. 6 Now seing H. N. describing his Communialty of the Love / sayth / Spirit, land of peace. cha. 33. sect. 5. Whosoever cometh into this good city, he becometh altogither born anew in the spirit, he may by like reason conclude that himself and his Ni∣cholaitans / are also the holy Spirit, and so be a blasphemer a∣gainst the Holy Ghost, as he is against the Father and the Son. The Scriptures teach vs playnly to distinguish between the word and the Spirit of the Lord / this latter being cause and author of the former / as it is written / 2 Sam. 23. 2. The Spirit of the Lord spake in me & his word was in my tongue: and of al the prophets it is witnessed / that they spake as they were moved by the holy Spirit. 2 Pet. 1 21. The Apostle sayth / 1 Pet. 1. 25. this is the word which is preached among you; and how they preached it / an other sheweth / when he sayth / that1 Cor. 2. 12. 13. by the spirit of God they knew the things given them of God, and spake those things not in words which
mans wisdom teacheth but which the holy Spirit teacheth. that al men may see how ignorantly (if not worse) H. N. hath confoun∣ded the word and the Spirit of the Lord / as if they were one thing. H. N. 6. Note wel, or consider of fellowship, the estate or manner of the Apostles, how that they, although they went about so long tyme with Christ, & wer alwayes with him, whiles the power of God was wrought through him, vnderstood not what the mind of the Lord was, concerning the godly causes, before that the day of Pentecost or Whit∣sontide, when that they received the holy Ghost, was come vnto them. Even like as there standeth written, how that they sayd at the tyme when Christ was crucified among them, we had hoped or supposed, that he should have delivered Israel, and it is now the third day, and ther cometh nothing of it, we wil goe a fishing. For they supposed that Christ should have set vp a fleshly kingdom. H. A. HEre H. N. to magnify himself / as a spiritual and god∣ded man, spareth not to wrong the holy Apostles; as if they before Pentecost, (Acts. 2.) vnderstood not the scrip∣tures / nor preached the word truly; wheras it is evident that they were sent and had preached the word long before / Luk. 9. 1. 2. which word Christ had given them and they received / Iohn. 17. 8. 14. and were made clean by it / Iohn. 15. 3. and he had opened their vnderstanding to vnderstand the scriptures Luk. 24. 45. though afterward at Pentecost, they received more plen∣tifull graces of the spirit / when Christ was gone from them. Act. 2. 1. 2. 4. &c. Again H. N. as if he delited to falsify the scripture / sayth there standeth written, how that they sayd when Christ was crucified, we hoped that he should hav delivered Israel &c. wheras these words were spoken by Cleopas and an other disciple which were none of the Apostles / as appeareth Luk. 24. vers. 18. 21 33. and to make vp his patcherie / he addeth that they sayd / it is now the third day, & there cometh nothing of it, we wil go a fishing Wher∣as those two spake not at al of going a fishing, but other men at an other time, Ioh. 21. 3. By this the reader may mind what credit is to be given to H. N. his allegations of scripture / who careth not to profane the holy word / for maintenance of his
lies / and setteth things down as they come in his idle head. But why say I so of this godded man; seeing menH. N. 1. exh. ch 13. S. 11. ought not to distrust him, nor suspect any manner of evil or vnwisdom by this Oldest Father; whose eysight (as himself sayth)Proph. of the spir. ch. 1. s. 2. was clearer then Chrystal, & his vnderstanding brighter then the Sun. H. N. 7. The whiles then that the Apostles which dayly went about with Christ, and had the word of the Father dayly among them, vnderstood not the Spirit of the Lord: how should then the multitude of these, (which now say that they are Christians, & yet neyther have nor know spirit nor word, but go on with their fleshly prudencie in the literal scripture, and set forth the same with their fleshly harts before the sim∣ple people, as it seemeth best vnto them, and say even so very stowtly, we have the word of the Lord, wheras it is but their own word, wher∣in that they through their own prudencie are gendred or begotten,) feel eyther perceiv the same. H. A. THe application of this invective / belongeth to H. N. him∣self and his Nicholaitans / who out of his fleshly hart as seemeth best vnto him / though against the literal scrip∣ture / setteth forth his forgeries to the simple people; yet boasteth very stowtly / that he isH. N. Gos∣pel. ch. 1. se. 1. anoynted with the holy ghost, in the old age of the holy vnderstanding of Iesu Christ, godded with God in the spi∣rit of his Love, made heyr with Christ in the heavenly goods of the ri∣ches of God; illuminated with the spirit in the heavenly truth, the true light of the perfect being: elected to a minister of the gracious word &c. so that in him and his sect / the prophesie is fulfild / which foretold how in the last dayes / men should be lovers of them selves, boasters, proud, cursed speakers &c. 2 Tim. 3. 1. 2. But if the Apo∣stles (as he sayth) vnderstood not the spirit of the Lord; how should then he / (that is sold into syn / and given over vnto heresies which are worksGal. 5. 20. of the flesh / ) feel or perceiv the same? H. N. 8. It is true they have the scripture, and the same giveth wit∣nes of the Lord and of the word, but is not the word it self Iohn. 5. neyther yet may any man vnderstand the witnessing of the same,
vnlesse that he hath first inherited the spirit of the Lord in the se∣cond birth. H. A. ONe evil and heresie draweth on another / wher God re∣streyneth not men by his grace. Here H. N. denieth the scripture to be the word of the Lord / saying that it gi∣veth witnes of the Lord and of the word. Which he would ga∣ther from Christs speech Iohn. 5. 39. Serch the scriptures for they testifie of me; but he abuseth the scripture and concludeth amisse / as if because it giveth witnes of the Lord Iesus, therefore it is not the word; the contrarie wherof is true / it giveth witnes of him, therfore it is his word. For Christ playnly calleth that which is written in the Law / the word, Iohn 15, 25. and so doth Paul / Rom. 9. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 54. and Peter 2 Pet. 1. 19. The scriptures (for we speak not here of the essential word of the Father / which Iohn. 1. .is Christ himself) are the word of the Lord written, even as the lively preaching of the prophets and Apostles / was the word of the Lord spoken. The beginning of their books sheweth this; as Hos. 1. 1. The word of the Lord that came to Hosea; Ioel. 1. 1. The word of the Lord that came to Ioel; and many the like. It is sayd Exod. 20. 1. God spake al these words; and in Exod. 24. 4. it is said Moses wrote al the words of the Lord. If then that be Gods word which is spoken / that also is his word which is written; and H. N. is but an instrument of Satan / to teach o∣therwise / that he may bring his own word in the place. If the scripture be not Gods word, because it is a witnesse: then the Holy Spirit, which H. N. made the word (before in sect. 5.) is not so / seeing that is a witnesse also; 1 Iohn 5. 6. yea Christ is a wit∣nesse Rev. 1. 5. God the Father is a witnesse, 1 Iohn 5. 9. 10. the Apostles also were witnesses, Luk. 24. 48. If then that which is a witnes, is not the word, then none of these / but H. N. and his dreames must be the word, to weet / of the Serpent; and he indeed is no witnesse of God / neyther do his writings bear testimo∣ny to the truth / but seek to destroy it. H. N. 6. Oh my beloved look into the same a little with me, what vncertayn witnessings that we out of an earthly or a natural Being, have followed after, even vntil this day. We may wel say with the Prophet, it is altogither lies what the scripture learned preach
eyther teach for asmuch as they do reject the word of the Lord Ier. 8. Here giveth the prophet a distinction or diversity, betwixt the word of the Lord, & the witnessing of an vnregenerated man, which he bring∣eth forth out of the Letter of the scripture. H. A. THe more we look / the more indeed we see what vncertayn witnessings you H. N. out of an earthly Being, have followed after, even vntil this day. This stil more and more appeareth in your abusing of the prophets and Apostles. Here you would father a distinction vpon Jeremy / as if the word of the Lord, and that which is written in the scripture / were not one and the same; the Prophet teacheth no such thing; but blameth the Jewes for rejecting the word in truth and deed / whiles they boas∣ted to be wise / and to have the law with them Ier. 8. 8. 9. He de∣nyeth not the written law to be the word; (for I have before proved / that it was Gods word Exod. 20. 1. & 14. 4.) but shew∣eth how vnregenerate men wil abuse it / and yet boast of it; as your self H. N. are found to falsify the word / and yet vaunt your self to be a godded man, and minister of the gracious word. Eve∣ry Mat. 5. 18.jod and title / and consequently every Letter word and sen∣tence of the scripture / is Gods vndoubted word / though yow and al Divils should deny it; the false glosses / and heresies that yow and other vnregenerated men gather from it / are the word of Satan; which the scripture it self / by help of Gods spirit / evidently doth disprove / and so the word of the Lord en∣dureth for ever; and that is the word which the Apostles prea∣ched / 1 Pet. 1. 25. and what they did preach / is recorded in their writings. H. N. 10. Oh if these men, which now so boldly or freemindedly doe say that they are Christians, and wil alwayes confesse Christ with the mouth; had eyes to see, & the right spirit for to vnderstand: then should they surely cease or leav off, for to walk in the strange or erring wayes. 11. There is read in the scripture, that Christ should be confessed or acknowledged; which is a very true witnes: but the mind or meaning of the Lord therin do verie few vnderstand. And many suppose (whiles they have read in the scripture of one Christ, & likewise through their industry or prudencie, they know that in times past ther was one Christ
in Israel, which was born amongst his own,) that the same when they know it, & confesse it with their mouth, is the right confessing of Christ, wherof the scripture speaketh. No my beloved, no, the confession of Christ must stand in greater force or effect, then to be confessed with the mouth, in the ceremonical service, which is a baptising with wa∣ter, or an other elementish confession. H. A. HEre H. N. openeth his evil mind more playnly to the two daughters; Whom hitherto he hath boarded with feighned flattering speeches. First he is offended that mn wil so boldly say they are Christians: But we have no cause to be afrayd or ashamed of this name / which is warran∣ted in the word of God / Act. 11. 26. 1 Pet. 4. 16. But to be caled The family of Love, is a name that H. N. hath invented and ta∣ken to himself and his sectaries. Secondly he speaketh of er∣ring wayes; when he hath not yet shewed any one error / that we walk in;3 Ioh. 1. but pratled against vs (as the Apostle sayd of Di∣otrephes) with malicious words. Then coming to speak of confessing Christ he denyeth not the thing; but stands vpon the meaning. He inveigheth against the knowing & confessing with the mouth of one Christ, (whom they read of in the scripture) that in times past was born in Israel &c. Wher∣in he teacheth open Antichristianity; for our Saviour speaking of his own person that was born in Israel / sayd / Ioh. 8. 4. except ye be∣leev that I am He, (meaning the redemer of the world which was promised;) ye shal die in your syns. and agayn praying to his Father he sayth / Ioh. 17. 3. this is life eternal that they know thee the onely very God, & whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ. The Apostles 2 Tim. 2. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 3. 4. Ioh. 1. 1. 14.preached this one man and no other / who was born among his own / of Davids seed after the flesh / according to the scrip∣tures; they require a confession of this Christ withRom. 10. . the mouth / as well as beleef in him with the hart; and did themselves confesse him with the mouth / as ensamples vnto vs. Act. 2. 22. 23. &c. & 3. 13. &c. But H. N. liketh not of this Christ, nor of this manner con∣fessing with the mouth; he would perswade an other Christ bred and borne in his own fansie and corrupt imagination / as be∣fore hath bene shewed; and another manner confession doth he require: which what it is / let vs now examine.
H. N. 12. Mark wel what I write, No man can confesse Christ among al those that wil confesse him, vnlesse that he in his like being, have his fashion or shape in him; not according to the elementish ceremonies, wherwith the one maketh another wise with the historical scriptures: O no, but according to the true being, or flowing out of the Christian-like nature. Through which Christian-like nature, ther is subdued or brought vnder foot, among al those wher the same is born, out of grace, the death, Divel & hel. H. A. UUE mark wel that H. N. writeth for truth / his own errors and deceits / out of his corrupt hart. No man (sayth he) can confesse Christ, vnlesse that he in his like being have his fashion in him. This is an vntruth of H. Ns. fiction; he writeth thus / but in the holy scriptures it is not so written. For to confesse Christ, is one thing / to hav his fashion in vs, is another thing: the first may be / wher the latter is not; as the Apostle telleth vs of some that confesse that they know God / but in works do deny him, Tit. 1. 16. The confessing of Christ is with the mouth; Rom. 10. 10. the having of Christs shape in vs / is by fayth; Eph. 3. 17. Phil. 3. 8. 9. which faith is in the hart; and (as th'Apostle sheweth Rom. 10. 10.) these both / (confession with the mouth / and beleef with the hart) are needful to salvation. It is possible for hypocrites to make a good and true confession of Christ with the mouth / and yet in their harts not be partakers of the Christian or godly nature; as Iudas Iscariot, Simon Magus, and others that were baptised and made Christs disciples by a true outward confes∣sion: but it is vnpossible that any should have the Christian like nature in him in deed and truth / but he wil also confesse Christ with his mouth; or weep bitterly withMat. 26. 75 Peter / if through fraylty of the flesh he doe deny him. Wheras therfore Gods word requireth both these in Christians; and H. N. would draw these two daughters from the one (namely from outward con∣fessing with the mouth / ) vnder pretense and colour of the other / (namely of having Christs shape within them:) he dealeth de∣ceitfully / and not according to truth. It is / as if he should al∣lure them to fornication; and when they alleged against him Gods Law / Heb. 12. 16. Let ther be no fornicator &c. he should answer / true, but the meaning you vnderstand not; many suppose
that the chastity of body, is the right chastitie; no my beloved no, the godly chastitie must stand in greater force & effect then to be in the out∣ward or elementish body, for so the Pharisees vnderstood the Law of old; but Christ applyeth it against the lusts of the hart. Mat. 5. 27. 28. If this reasoning be naught / so is H. Ns. about confessing Christ. For as Gods word requiring chastitie / intendeth it both of the body and of the mind: so when it requireth confessing of Christ / it meaneth both with mouth and hart / as is playnly set down Rom. 10. 10. Other deadly poison hath H. N. here touched / as where he sayth Christ in his like Being must have his shape in the man; wherby he meaneth such a kind of trāsubstātiatiō / as that Christ and the man, should be one substance one being; yea the Lovely vertuous being in man / that is his Christ / as before I have shewed. This opi∣nion is not possible to be warranted by holy writ / but is the mere invention of this Antichristian. Christ our redeemer / is in his own substance and person / in heaven at Gods right hand / Mark. 16. 19. Act. 3. 21. but we areEccles. 5. 1. on earth / and Christ dwelleth not other∣wise in vs thē by fayth / Ephe. 3. 17. which faith purifieth the hart / Act. 15. 9. and worketh by Love Gal. 5. 6. and fayth / which is the evidenceHeb. 11. 1. of things not seen / apprehendeth Gods great and preci∣ous promises / which are given vnto vs2 Pet. 1. 4. that by them we should be partakers of the godly nature / in that we flee the corruption which is in the world through lust / (not by having the very sub∣stance and Being of God and of Christ / as H. N. grossly imagineth / ) and wayt with pacience for the second coming of our Lord in the clowdes of heaven / at what time both the dead in Christ / and those that are alive / shabe caught vp in the clowds to meet the Lord in the aire / and so shall we ever be with the Lord / as th'Apostle sayth 2 Thes. 4. 17. An other damnable error / H. N. here hath / saying that through the Christian-like nature, ther is subdued among all those where the same is born out of grace, the death Divil and hell. Wherby he would teach vs to be our own saviours / we our selves must conquer the death divil and hell; for as wee have heard our own Lovely Being / that is H. Ns. Christ. And wheras the Apostles teach vs / that forgiv∣nes of syns is by Gods imputation of Christs righteousnes and death / and not imputing our syns vnto vs / and that our fayth in Christ is imputed vnto vs for justice; Rom. 4. 6. 8. 24. 25. 2 Cor. 5. 19. H. N. hath put imitation in stead of imputation / saying / that H. N. First exhort. c. 20. sec. 19.through the dayly God-service and offring in the Holy, in the taking vp of our crosse, in the Imitation of Christ in his death, we obteyn the remission of syns. Therfore he willeth vs toibid sec. 26. 27. follow after Christ in his suffring, for those are the dayes of affliction heavines and death, wher∣in Christ hath gone before vs in the Holy, for to prepare vs throuh the
same death of the crosse, the everlasting forgivnes and redemtion of syns. Agayn in his book called The spiritual land of peace,chap. 8. sec. 5 6. he tel∣leth vs of an Instrument wherwith all enimies be overcome. This in∣strument of victorie is the crosse of Christ; (not that which Christ / of whome we read in the scriptures / died himself on / and triumphed in the same over the principalities and powers / Col. 2. 15. but that which we bear in imitation of Christ / ) & it is named patience or sufferance / (such as is mentioned Heb. 12. 1. Iam. 5. 7.) and it (sayth H. N.) is the true altar in the Holy, vpon the which the true meat of∣fring is, that is given to the faithful beleeving travellers to eat, and also the true drink offring that is given them to drink, which meat offring is named the flesh or body of Iesu Christ, and the drink offring is named the blood of Iesu Christ. And the same body and blood of Iesu Christ, is vnto the constant & faithful traveiler in the proceeding on in his pil∣grimage, a true mediator to lay away the syn in the flesh, & to establish the promises with him that are made to the Fathers. Thus the things which are spoken of Christ and his oblation of himself / and of our partaking therofIoh. 6. 29. 35. by faith; this man perversly applyeth to our own patient suffrings; and maketh Patience to be our victory, con∣trarie to the evident doctrine of the Apostle / who sayth that it is Faith, 1 Iohn 5. 4 5. Agayn, the scriptures teach not that our Chri∣stianlike nature / but that Christ himself in his own person for vs by death destroyed him that had the power of death which is the Di∣vil / and so delivered al vs his children which for feare of death wer all our life time subject to bondage / Heb. 2. 14. 15. but H. N. tea∣cheth that Christs death / is our like suffring / as appeareth by his First exhortationchap. 20. sec. 3. where he sayth that the man ought in his yongnes, to learn to take vp his crosse on him, to follow after Christ, his Saviour, in his like suffering and death of the crosse, and to shew forth patience with Christ, against all the assaultings, vntil that all the enemies or ad∣versaries of the Lovely life, through theRom. 6. 4. 1 Cor. 15. f. death of Christ, (that is, in maner of suffering,) be vtterly vanquished. By these wordes / and the scriptures which he quoteth / it is playne / that he meaneth our own suffrings in imitation of Christ / to be our vanquishing the e∣nimies / and our salvation: which heresie he every where out of his own carnal wisdome vrgeth and perswadeth / to the dishonor of our Lord Jesus / and magnifying mens own sufferings and me∣rits. And if we look further what H. N. meaneth by his Death, Divil, and Hel; we shal find these also to be idols and fictions of his own; that in deed his victory / is like his Christ; even erroneous fabulous and blasphemous. The holy scriptures teach vs of a death in syn, (when men are wholly given over therevnto / ) Ephe, 2. 1. contrary to which is a death to syn / by sanctification of life Rom. 6. 2. They
teach vs also of a death for syn, (that is a reward of eternal pu∣nishment in hel.) Rom. 6. 23. Gen. 2. 17. Iam. 1. 14. called the se∣cond death, Rev. 2. 21. & 20. 14. Vnto which the Divils and all reprobate men shalbe condemned for ever and ever for their syns at Christs appearing; Mat. 25. 41. 46. Now H. N. (playing the part of the old Serpent / which perswade▪ Evah thatGen. 3. she should not die / ) perswadeth his disciples that here in this present world and life / is death and hel; so the judgement / the fyre / the condem∣nation threatned in the scriptures; he maketh fantastical imagina∣tions or humane affections. For as with him / the Love / and to 1 Exhort. chap. 12. sec. 23. 24. 33.walk in the Lovely & vertuous Being / is Christ himself: so on the o∣ther hand inveighing against them that speak evil by the service of Love / and the minister of the same; he sayth / theiribid. chap. 15 sec. 17. false Being is the Divil, the Antichrist, the wicked Spirit, the kingdome of Hel, and the Majestie of the Divil himself. Now the punishment for this / is the Sentence which H. N. (who as we have heard / vaunteth that he sits on the throne of Christ to judge the world) pronounceth: his condemnation of the false Being / is eternal death and hel fyre / as appeareth by his Crying voice,chap. 3. sec. 2. 3. 4. where he calleth al men to him∣self / to Come al and cōfesse their syns / and make known vncovered∣ly the inwardnes of their harts / to the end that they may become justified or purged from all their synnes, and received into the holy Communialty of the Love / when as now in thissame day the wicked world becommeth judged with the Lords mighty hand. Which wicked world (sayth he) is reserved or kept in store til vnto this same day of the Love, to the fyre of hell, for to be condemned in the self same day of the Love, for evermore, to her eternal cursing & judge∣ment of the fyers cruel vehemencie. And a little after he addeth,sec. 4. Ve∣rily, now in thissame day, when as now all vngodly, and all selfwise, with al vnrepentant persons, and false harts of the scripture-learned &c. in∣herite with much smart and grief in the vehement crueltie of the fyre of hel, the terrible condemnation: then shal the people of God / name∣ly, the whol communialty of the Love of Iesu Christ &c. rejoyce them in all Love &c.: And that this their joy / is like Epicures in this present world and life / and in their counterfeyt regeneration and godded estate: he elswhere playnly confirmeth / saying that in their citie of PeaceSpirit. land. chap. 27. sec. 11. 12. there is a watchman on the wal therof / that hath a trumpet named After-this-time-no-time-more; and that the watchmā foūdeth out of the same last time / as out of the last trum∣pet, the sound of the everlasting life, after the which there is no life more to be wayted for, for the same life continueth for evermore. Therfore in the conclusion of his Crying voice when he had bidden allsec. 5. Come now hither to the Love and her service; he addeth / sec. 18. Come now al hither to the Paradise of your Lord and God &c. Come in now
all hither to the Paradise of the Love, and pluck in her garden the ten∣der Olives;Sec. 24. Become drunken with the wine of her soon-ripe grapes, and embrace her to al concordable friendlynes. Thus like an harlot, he allureth men to his religion / and imitateth the whore of Baby∣lon whichRev. 17. 2. made the inhabitants of the earth drunken with the wine of her fornications. For his vaine conceyted Lovely Being, with the toyes and pleasures that men imagine in that estate / is a fooles paradise, wher men become drunken and besotted in syn / and drowned in perdition. This is H. Ns. heaven; and they that are not here / he thinks they are in hel; yea playnly sayth / (in his new gospel / )Evang reg. chap. 27. sec. 5. that the second death is come and beareth dominion over the world, and all vnbeleevers. By this the discreet reader may see / what a Christ and salvation H. N. doth teach, and what a Death Divil and Hel / the Nicholaitans or Familists doe subdue. This wret∣ched man seemeth to have written his books in scorn of al true reli∣giō, that Atheisme and Epicurisme / vnder shew of religiō mought reign in the earth. H. N. 13. Herevpon mought some men say, ye would have the man per∣fect. No, my beloved, no; I speak not of the perfection of the man, but I speak of the perfectnes which Christ ought to have with the man, be∣fore he can be confessed or acknowledged. The man in his vnregenera∣ted spirit is vnperfect, I speak not thereof, but what he is, that is he out of grace, without cause of boasting. 14. Therfore let every one look wel vnto it that he be not self-mind∣ed in his vncertayn forecasts or preconceiving: but that he take heed, or be wel advised, whither he be worthy to receive the same grace of God. H. A. THat which David sayth of the wicked man / thatPsal. 1. 7. his mouth is ful of deceit and frawd, vnder his tongue is mischief and ini∣quitie: is verifyed of H. N. in his deceitful writings. He seemeth here at first / as if he would not have the man perfect; no, my beloved, (crieth he at it) no; but presently from vnder his tongue floweth out mischief and iniquitie; when he speaks of the perfectnes which Christ ought to have with the man, before he can be confessed▪ This is a depth of Satan / to bring men into misery vnder colour of perfection; and to abolish them from Christ / whiles they may imagine / he is perfectly with them. Though Christ (I mean
the true Christ whom we professe / not the idol which H. N. feigh∣neth of the Lovely Being / ) be in himself perfect / yea perfectiou it self; and though the work that he hath done for vs / be also perfect; because with one offring heHeb. 10. 14. hath consecrated for ever them that are sanctified / and his blood1 Ioh. 1. 7. hath clensed vs from all syn: yet his work in vs is yet vnperfect even in the best men that ever con∣fessed Christ whiles they lived on earth; who therfore were taught every day to pray thatLuk. 11. 4. their syns might be forgiven them: and the Apostle Paul / after he had long confessed and preached Christ tru∣ly / sayth of himself / Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I were already perfect, and agayn, Rom. 7. 19.I do not the good thing which I would, but the evil which I would not that do I; and agayn / 1 Cor. 13. 9. 10. 12. we know in part, and we prophesie in part, but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part, shal∣be abolished; now wee see through a glasse darkly, but then (shal we see) face to face &c. But H. N. by an other spirit which perswa∣deth him: that he isGen. 3. like God / yea Godded with God; writeth of his citie or communialtie and those that are come vnto it / thatSpirit. land chap. 33. sec. 9. as then there is no more evil, nor evil suspition, nor yet sight of evil in them; for within the same, one doth neyther see nor think any thing els, but all good, joy, rest and peace, in the everlasting life. Such a societie hath yet never been heard of on earth since Adams fall / ney∣ther doth the historie of the bible shew vs any such church; onely it telleth vs / ther is a generatiō yt at pure in their own eyes, which yet ar not washed from their filthines, Pro. 30 12. If the Familists be this generation, they may rejoyce in the sparks of the fyre that they hav kindled / til they shal lie down in sorow. As for vs / we have lear∣ned of a better teacher / that there isEccle. 7. 22. no man iust in the earth that doeth good and synneth not, butIam 3. 2. in many things we syn all, for syn yetRom 7. 7. dwelleth in vs / and if we should say we have no syn / we should but1 Ioh. 1. 8. deceive our selves / and the truth were not in vs. Yet know we that our confession of Christ / is acceptable vnto him / because hePsal. 103. 8. pardoneth all our iniquities / and healeth al our infirmities / hathRev. 1. 5. washed vs from our syns in his blood / and wil not impute them vnto vs. Wheras H. N. to help the matter / sayth The man in his vnregene∣rated spirit is vnperfect / he followeth but his wonted course to de∣ceive the readers; for none are so grosse as to think the vnregenera∣ted man is perfect; neyther is this the question between him and vs; but whither the regenerated be perfect or no / which H. N. er∣roneously holdeth but cannot prove; we contraryweise have pro∣ved that the Apostles and other Christians were regenerated / but not perfect / whiles they lived here on earth among men / Phil. 3. Rom. 7. 1 Cor. 13. Iam. 3.
H. N. 15. Now mought ye say, we encline or endevour our selves theraf∣ter, so much as we may, for we have given our selves to the Christian-like baptismey and supper of the Lord. 16. Oh my beloved, that were very wel, if it were even so in the truth; for ther ar many that boast themselves of the baptismey of Christ, and they have not known him in any world. For were they baptised in Christ, then should they have put on Christ, even like as Paul sayth to the Galathians 3. so many of you as are baptised have put on Christ. 17. I would gladly now ask of al those which say they have recei∣ved the Christianlike baptismey, how or after what maner Christ hath a shape or fashion in them. I am verie sure, that they all for the most part should be deceived, and should find themselves vnmighty or weak in that Being of Christ, wherin many should make manifest themselves, that they have not received the baptismey of Christ, but their own bap∣tismey. 18 Everie one therfore that is vpright of hart, and seeketh the truth in Christ vnpartially, let him prove himself how he hath put on Christ, according to the spirit. And if he then finde not the stirring of the ho∣ly spirit of Christ in him, then let him advisedly look sharply yea sharp∣ly herevnto, that he boast not himself of the Christianity, but let him humble himself before the might of the Lord, and trust vpon his grace. H. A. THe Christian baptisme / consisteth of an outward washing with water by Christs Minister; and of an inward washing with the holy Ghost / by Christ himself. Ioh. 1. 33. Act. 8. 38. and 10. 47. The outward washing of the flesh / without the inward clensing of the hart, is not avaylable to salvation. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Yet may not the outward action be despised or neglected. For as the true circumcision was ofRom. . 29.  the hart in the spirit; yet if any had not circumcision also in his flesh, he wasGen. 17. 14. to be cut off from his people / as having broken Gods covenant; so is it likewise for baptisme come in place of circumcision. Act. 2. 38. Colos. 2. 11. 12. The outward baptisme many do rightly receive / which have not the inward; as did Symon Magus, Act. 18. 13. 20. 21. The in∣ward none have in deed and truth / that do despise the outward; we teach that these both must be joyned togither according to the scrip∣tures; and labour for both. The Familists therefore which boast
of their inward baptisme / and administer not the outward among themselves / but present their children to be baptised of Papists or any other Antichristians / so offering their children vntoLevit. 18.  Molech, and perswading others to do the like; shew themselves to be farr from true Christian baptisme / which defile their bodies and sowles with such hypocrisie and idolatrie. And H. N. which laboureth here to disswade these two daughters from suffring and witnessing against Popery / bewrayeth himself not to have known Christ in any world; nor can he shew Christs shape to be in him / whiles vnderhand he teacheth grosse impietie; pretending inward baptis∣me and spiritual regeneration. But the drift of this man is / by his invective against others / to allure men to himself; for when he concludeth with his exhortation that every one should hum∣ble himself before the might of the Lord, and trust vpon his grace; his meaning is / as elswhere he explaneth himself,Crying voice chap. vlt. sec. 11. Let your selves now in all your being, nature, minde, and disposition, become renew∣ed through the Love, in her service: and give all your vnderstanding captive vnder the obedience of the Love, and humble your selves even so vnder her service; to the end that ye all may become washed in the Love, with the pure water of the Love. For to become washed in the Love with her pure water, is the vpright washing, and the true Font of the regeneration or new birth▪ Now seing thus harlot-like he allu∣reth all men to hisProv. 9. 17. stollen waters within his lovely Family; for th'vpright washing; let vs see what manner of washing and bap∣tisme that is / which he so boasteth of. In this Letter he coucheth his heresie in a word, namelySec. 17. that Being of Christ; wherby the mea∣neth that the man / or the lovely Being in the man baptised / is Christ himself / as before is manifested / and after shal further appear. This error he would ground on the Apostles words Gal. 3. 27. For all ye that are baptised into Christ, have put on Christ; which place this author thusSec. 16. allegeth / so many of you as are bap∣tised have put on Christ. Where first (as his maner is) he corrupt∣eth the text it self / by taking away those words into Christ / and saying onely baptised/wherby he would intimate / that none are rightly baptised / but such as have put on Christ; contrary to the scriptures which shew thatAct. 8. 13. 19. 20. 21. Symon Magus and1 Cor. 10. 2. 5. many others were rightly baptised / as touching the Ministerie of man / which yet had not put on Christ / because they were not baptised into Christ as the Apostle here addeth / but H. N. omitteth. Agayn / he gathe∣reth that which the Apostle strowed not / namely that to put on Christ is to have the Being of Christ in vs: but this H. N. fansieth to himself; for the spirit of God speaketh not so; yea the Apostle meant farr otherweise; as his former words shew / wher he sayd / vers. 26.for ye al are the sonnes of God, by faith in Christ Iesus. So Christ
is put on by faith, as also elswhere he is sayd toEph. 3. 17. dwel in vs by faith, not by a real or essential Being, such as the Familists feign to themselves by the spirit of error. Now to Beleeve in Christ, and to have the Being of Christ, that is / to be Christ himself: are farr differing things / as all men know. And as wel might the Familists plead / that Abraham was God / because heGen. 15. 6. beleeved in God; and that the multitude of Israel were the Lord because theyExod. 14. 31. beleeved in him; as that men are Christ or have the Being of Christ / because they beleev in him / and by beleef have put him on. Neither can our imitation or followingEphe. 5. 1. Rom. 6. 3. 4. of God or of Christ in the likenes of his death and resurrection / make the Being of God or of Christ to be in vs; any more then our following of the Apo∣stles / (which also we are1 Cor. 4. 16. & 11. 1.  Thes. 3. 7. 9. exhorted vnto;) can make vs of one Be∣ing with them. How absurd these things are / any reasonable man may see: Yet such absurdities many / ar the groundly documents of this oldest Father H. N. touching Baptisme and other myste∣ries of religion; as is more playnly to be seen in his First exhorta∣tation; For there treating of Baptisme / and having described God to be a might Spirig, a perfect cleer Light, and a true Being; he ad∣deth thatFirst exhort. chap. 7. sec. 2. the same Being, is God the Fathers name, (meaning that Name of the Father into which we are baptised / ) and his Love it self. No word of God telleth him this / but he forgeth it out of his fleshly hart. The Being of God (as we may learn by the Scrip∣tures) is such a thing / as neyther men nor Angels can know or comprehend: how then should they Be the same? 1 Tim. 6. 16. Isa. 6. 2. Psal. 145. 3. Iob. 11. 7. 8. and 36. 26. But the Name of God is that wherby in some sort he hath made known and manifested him∣self in his word and works; Exod. 3. 15. and 6. 3. & 33. 19. Deut. 12. 8. 11. Psal. 9. 11. After this having discoursed of theibid. sec. 3. 4. &c. Fathers plucking vs to the Love of Christ / and so baptising vs into the name of the Fa∣ther / and this by the Familists / in the administration of the holy word vnder the obedience of the Love / with the Law of the Lord and with his correction; &c. H. N. telleth vs thatibid. sec. 9. God the Father with the discipline of his Law, manneth himself with vs, and we be∣come likewise Godded with him, to the end that we through his own Being, should bear as men of God, his holy Name, vnder the o∣bedience of his Law &c. Wherin this heretik vttereth double blas∣phemie; first that God the Father manneth himself with vs; by which doctrine Athan like he spoileth God of his true Being, his simplicity / immutability / infinitenes and the like / which the scrip∣tures shew to be in God; Deut. 6. 4. Iam. 1, 17. 1 King. 8. 27 Se∣condly in saying / that men become Godded with him / he wret∣thedly extolleth corruptible man into the throne of the incorrup∣tible
God; confounding heaven and earth / the creator and the creatures / between whose Being there is no comparison. Which things if he would not learn of the H. scriptures / (because he scor∣neth scripture learning / ) yet might he have learned of Philoso∣phers and heathen men / who have sayd / thatGalen. lib. 9. de placitis Hipp. et Plat. though by certayn demonstration it is manifest that a divine artizen hath procreated vs, yet by no reason or wit can we perceave what his essence (or being) is. That God isProclus in theolog. Plat. One alone separated from all, who cannot be explay∣ned nor perceived, that he is the first simplicity, incomprehensible, in∣comparable, vniform; thatTheophrast. in Metaph. he cannot be known or found out, yea that itPlotin. En. 6. lib. 8. chap. 11. is neyther possible to find him out, nor lawful to serch him out. And many like speeches have the Pagans spokē of God / more divinely soundly and religiously a great deal / then this Epicure H. N. (the God of the Familists) hath written in his blasphemous pamphlets. After he hath thus describedH. N. first exhort. chap. 7. sect. 10. the vpright Christian Baptisme (as he sayth) or washing in the name of the Father; he proceedeth with his Baptisme / in the Name of the Son; of whom he sayth that ibidē sec. 14.he is conceived of the holy Ghost, and born of the holy Virgin Mary. And thatsect. 17. thissame Son of God beareth in vs our synnes &c. and that he vnder the obedience of the Love of his Father, is gone before vs therin, for that we should in like manner follow after him vnder the obedience of his Love, in his death of the crosse, to the safemaking of vs from our synns: become incorporated to him with his like death, and baptised or washed vnder the obedience of the Beleef in his Name or safemaking, and bury even so through the beleef the old man &c. to the forgiving and releasing of our synns through his name or safema∣king, to the end that we might even so through Iesu Christ, obteyn the renewing of our spirit and mind, in an vpright life and resurrection from the dead with Christ in the appearing of his Majesty. And that sec. 18.this is the vpright Christian Baptisme in the name of the Son, and is the true forgivnes and purging of our synns through Iesu Christ. And all that thus folow not Christsect. 20. are no Christians, nor yet baptised in the name or salvation of the Son. Here is an other puddle of heresie for men to be washed in / in the name of H. Ns Christ. Of whom he first telleth vs / that he is con∣ceived and born; whereas we beleeve in that Christ whichMat. 2. 1. was conceived and borne now many yeres ago. But the Nicholaitans have a Christ in them / to weet / their Lovely Being, aspag. 18. before is shewed; Neither is their fayth setled on one Jesus borne hereto∣fore in Israel, but they themselves are born of the virgin Mary / as their Father H. N. teacheth them in his Gospel / chap. 18. sec. 10. saying / the vpright children of the beleef, which had their discent out of the seed of the faith of Abraham, and the pure virgin Mary, as also from the ho∣ly
Ghost, were known to be the true seed of Abraham, because the same seed, was the seed of the promise of God the Father, & was likewise in his mind, according to the spirit, the likenes of God his Father; also spirit & spiritual, of the godly nature & being, & according to the wil of God, wholly minded wth God. These vpright children of the beleef / ar the Familists themselves / (if we wil beleev them / ) they are born of the holy Ghost / and of the pure virgin Mary / and are not onely their own saviours / but / as a little before in the same place he writeth / sec. 9.the seed out of the faith of Abraham, & out of the pure Virgin Mary, is the true seed of promise, to the blessing of all generations of the earth. Thus do these caytiffs take to themselves the honour of Christ; and though the Prophet telleth vs but of oneIsa. 9. 6. 7. child that is born vnto vs / which should be prince of peace / should order and stablish the kingdome of David forever: yet these tel vs of many children of the pure virgin Mary / as being that seed of promise in whom al ge∣nerations of the earth should be blessed. How they have this strange birth / we may gather by H. N. his learned interpretation of the name Mary / which he saythEvang. reg. chap. 18. sec. 3. signifieth a Doctresse; for the doctrine of H. N. is that wherby his disciples are born anew; as els∣wher he expoūdeth that to be born of the virgin Mary out of the seed of David after the flesh / isDocum. sent. chap. 3. sect. 5. of the pure doctrine out of the seed of Lov. Now Mary caled in Greek Luk. 1. 27. Mariam / in Hebrew Exod. 15. 20. Mirjam, I find in the scripture to signify their rebellion; Nehem. 9. 17. which name ve∣ry fitly agreeth to the Familists Doctrine: but how or in what tongue it signifieth a Doctresse / themselves I suppose can hardly shew / vnlesse vpon H. Ns authority / who as he hath given them a new gospel / so also a new language / (farr differing from the lan∣guage Isa. 19. 18.of Canaan / ) wherby they may make what meaning and gather what allegories they lyst from words; and none must sus∣pect any vnwisedome to be in them. Secondly H. N. sayth that thissame Son of God beareth in them their synns; wheras that Son of God / in whom the scriptures teach vs to beleev / hath washed vs from our synnsRev. 1. 5. in his own blood / and put thē away by the sacrificeHeb. 9. 26. of himself: for he was wounded Isa. 53. 5.for our transgressions;1 Pet. 2. 24. his own self bare our syns in his body on the tree / and diedRom. 5. 8. for vs. How erroneously then doth H. N. perswade / that Christ beareth in vs our synns? Thirdly he sayth that Christ is gone before vs / for that we should in like maner follow after him vnder the obedience of his Love, in his death of the crosse / to the safemaking of vs from our synns: so teaching vs to save our selves by imitation of Christ; this being all the benefit we have by his death / that it is an example vnto vs how to do likewise. Wherin H. N. sheweth himself to be a greater enemy to Christianity then was Caiaphas / who sayd it was expe∣dient
thatIoh. 11. 5. One man should die for the people / and that the whol nation perished not; so prophesyingvers. 51. that Christ should die for the nation; wheras H. N. would have men die themselves for their own salvation / that so they might all perish for ever. But we have otherweise learned the true Christ / who was delivered to death Rom. 4. 25.for our syns / and is risen agayn for our justification. That as byRom. 5. 1. one man / (the first Adam) syn entred into the world, and death by syn / and so death went over all men; so by one man / (the se∣cond Adam Christ) we mightvers. 17. reign in life / and as byvers. 18. one mans disobedience many were made synners / so by the obedience of one / many might he made righteous. Fourthly H. N. teacheth that men are baptised vnder the obe∣dience of the beleef in his name or safemaking, and bury even so through the Beleef, the old man &c. to the forgiving and releasing of their synns. Where agayn he perversly applieth that to obedi∣ence and mortification / which is due vnto faith. For when the Eunuch would be baptised / Philip required nothing of him butAct. 8. 36. 37. to beleeve; and Paul sayth / to him that worketh not, but beleeveth in him that justifyeth the vngodly,Rom. 4. 5. his faith is counted for righteous∣nes. Although therforeRom. 1. 5. obedience to the faith must be given by all true Christians / and they which are baptised into I. Christ / are baptisedRom. 6. 3. 4. into his death and buriall; yet is not this done / to the forgiving and releasing of their synns, as H. N. Pharisaically in∣ferreth; but to shew forth the fruit and force of faith / wherby the justGal. 3. 11. doe live / and lay hold on Christ / whom GodRom. 3. 25. hath set forth for a reconciliation though faith in his blood, to declare his righteousnes by the forgivnes of synns that ar passed through the pacience of God. Wheras therfore H. N. doth gather from the premisses that this (which he hath set down) is the vpright Christiā baptisme in the name of the Son, & is the true forgivnes & purging of our synns through Iesu Christ; he is found a false witnes against God and Christ / and would give vs a synful sink of error / even a vayn perswasion of our own obedience righteousnes and sanctification / to wash our selves in; and hath royled with his feet / the pure fountayn of Christs blood / which clenseth all beleevers from all syn. That vpon himself his own words may justly be retorted / he boasteth himself of the baptismey of Christ, and he hath not known him in a∣ny world. Of like leven / is H. Ns baptisme in the name of the ho∣ly Ghost; which he maketh to be also1 Exhort. c. 7. sec. 31. the second birth out of the holy Ghost, the true love of God & Christ. And this (even as the former of baptising in the name of the Father and of the Son / ) we must not vnderstand / of any outward action by the minister of Christ / washing with water as did John the Baptist /
nor yet to be done at one and the same time with the former: but as H. N. sayth / ibid. sec. 29. in the oldnes of time, when the dayes of the pa∣tience of Christ, in the obedience of the holy and gracious word, & his service of Love are fulfilled, (that is / when men have walked long ynough in the Familists religion) that then the holy Ghost becommeth powred forth through Iesus Christ (vnderstanding / H. Ns Christ / to weet / the Lovely being;) over them all that have followed Christ in his death of the crosse obediently, (that is / which have saved themselves from their synns / by their own fantasti∣call suffrings / ) and have kept his doctrine, with the word of his patience even vnto the end. Thus hath this deceiver of minds / drawn all Gods ordinance of Baptisme / (which with men is out∣ward / and was byAct. 8. 36. 38. and 10. 47. 48. the Apostles admininstred with materiall water / ) vnto a blasphemous imagined Being and conformity with God / or regenerated estate: and the holy doctrine of Justi∣fication / by forgivnes of synns through the blood of Christ shed for vs / and sealed vnto vs inAct. 2. 38. and 22. 16. baptisme; he hath wiped away vnder colour of Sanctification or deification by our own fol∣lowing of Christ. Which things he teacheth by the same spirit that the Serpent taught Evah not to fear the outward eating of the forbidden fruit, seing she should be like vnto God / know∣ing good and evil. H. N. 19. After such a like maner witnesseth Paul of the supper of Christ wher he sayth, so many of you as have eaten of one bread, are become partakers of one body. Hath any man now rightly vsed the supper of Christ, the same is then become partaker of the body of Christ, accor∣ding to the mentioning of the scripture. 20. Therefore see vnto it, yea see vnto it, everie one which sayth, that he hath fulfilled the service of Christ, or would be a disciple of Christ. For those services and ceremonies which are ministred through the comandement of the holy Ghost, out of a Christianlike Being; they have the promises whiles they are rightly obeyed, that should receive the pledge of the godly inheritance, which is the holy Ghost. And where that cōmeth not to passe, vnto them ther is not the Christian service ministred; let them make them then so like fashioned to the scripture as they wil. For whatsoever is served without the spi∣rit of Christ, it is an abomination before God; therein may everie one think freely.
H. A. That which is here sayd of the supper of Christ / if an honest faithful mā had written the same; might wel be yielded vnto / for in the words ther would lurk no frawd. But coming from this old seducer / H. N. and being affixed to his former here∣sies / I deny that after such a like manner (as H. N. before treated of Bapisme) Paul witnesseth of the supper of Christ. For Paul sayth not that we ar one Being with Christ / but that we are the1. Cor. 12. 17. body of Christ / and that the bread which we break / is the1. Cor. 10. 16. communion of his body; which body we eat and have communion with / byIohn. 6. 35. 29. faith / not really and essentially as fleshly men imagine; and we ar caled the body of Christ, not properly but figuratively / by way of1 Cor. 12. 12 similitude / and inEph. 5. 30. 32. great mystery; for as a man joyned to a woman / is one flesh, so1. Cor. 6. 16 17. he that is joyned vnto the Lord is one Spirit. But as the wo∣man / notwithstanding her conjunction / is not the man / neyther hath the Being of the man; so the church notwithstanding her con∣junction / is not Christ / neyther hath the Being of Christ but by faith is coupled vnto him / as he sayth by the prophet / Hos. 2. 2. I will mary the vnto me in faith. Now that H. N. hath the like grosse understanding of the Lords supper / as he shewed before of Baptisme; appeareth not onely by his entrance saying After such a like manner &c: but also by his words in his Gospel wher speaking of the Passover, he saythEvangel. reg. cap. 21. sect. 5. Christ gav his disciples to drink out of the cup, (which is his passion,) his true blood, which is his holy life of the New Testament. Thus applyeth he all things about Christ / to a holy life; even then and there / wher it is playnly spoken of death. For though blood whiles it is in the body / is the life of the same: yet when it is shed out of the body / (as Christ therMark. 14. 24. sayth his was / ) it signifieth death & not the life of the party; as also the Apostle testifieth / 1. Cor. 11. 26. so oft as ye eat this bread / and drink this cup ye shew the Lords death til he come. And as David would not drink the water that came out of the well of Bethlehē / because it was2. Sam. 2. 17. the blood of the men that fetched it / that is / because they jeoparded their lives vnto the death to fetch it; so we when we drink the wine out of the cup in the Lords supper / doe drink the blood of Christ, that is his death which for our synns he did vnder∣goe. But H. N. by the spirit of error that possessed him / he takes Christs death for vs / to be a holy life in vs; as before is more large∣ly shewed. Vnsound it is / and savoring of a fātastical spirit / that he opposeth in the end / the services and ceremonies which ar ministred through the
comaundement of the holy Ghost out of a Christian like being, vnto the service fashioned like to the scripture. For ther is no service com∣manded by the holy Ghost, but it is fashioned like to the scripture, and hath the ground and warrant therfrom; otherweise it cometh from the Spirit of Satan / and not from God. For Gods Spirit leadeth men into al truth / Iohn. 16. 13. and it is Gods word which is the truth. Iohn. 17. 17. The three that bear witnes in hea∣ven / The Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, as they ar in Being / so are they also in their testimony one. 1. Ioh. 5. 7. As the doctrin of Christ was not his own / Iohn. 7. 16. but the Fathers that sent him: so neyther is the doctrine of the holy Ghost his own / but the sons that sent him / as Christ witnesseth sayingIohn. 16. 13. he shal not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shal hear he shal speak; and agaynVers. 14. he shal glorify me, for he shal receiv of mine, and shal shew it vnto yow. Now seing the holy Ghost teacheth no other doctrine then Christ / nor Christ then the Father; and seing Christ himself sendeth al men to serch the scriptures / as they whichIohn. 5. 39. testify of him; and his Apostle hath taught vs / that the knowledge of the scriptures is able2. Tim. 3. 15 to make vs wise vnto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus: we may veryly deem it to be a delusion of Satan / whatsoever any would teach vs towching Gods service / that is not war∣ranted by the scriptures; and that those are spirits of errour / which so disdeyn and scoff at scripture-learning, and boast of il∣lumination by the holy Ghost. Vnsound also it is / and contrary to the scriptures / that H. N. here would perswade vs / that where it commeth not to passe, that the holy Ghost which is the pledge of the godly inheritance, is not received: vnto them there is not the Christian service ministred. For the Apostle sheweth / that Israel had the true Christian service ministred to them / when they did1. Cor. 10. 3. 4. al eat the same spiritual meat / and drink of the spiritual Rock which followed them / which Rock was Christ: yet received they not the Godly inheritance which is the holy Ghost; for withVer. 5. many of them God was not pleased / they were overthrown in the wildernes / andHeb 3. 19. could not enter into the Rest of God / because of their vnbeleef. The Christian service was rightly administred toAct. 8. 13. Simon Magus, whē he was baptised: yet was not hisVers 21. hart right in the sight of God; also vnto Iudas, when he did sit and eat with the other A∣postles; yet even thenIohn. 13. 27. Satan / (and not the holy Ghost / ) entred into him. Even so with vs / the true Christian service in the administration of the word / seales / and censures / is set forth and practised: though many receiv it into evil harts and vnfaith∣ful / to their greater condemnation. But the elect of God / are edified / comforted and confirmed in his grace hereby: though these are not many; for many be called but few elected. Mat. 20. 16
Agayn / H. N. hath here set down that which overthroweth the whole scope of his writing; when he sayth / Those services & cerimonies which are ministred through the commandement of the holy Ghost, out of a Christian-like Being; they have the promi∣ses, whiles they are rightly obeyed &c. If thus it be; then ought all Christians to labour and seek for those services and ceremo∣nies / (as he calleth them) that so they may obteyn the promises: then also must they shun and refreyn from al false and humane ceremonies or services / which have no promise / and are but the profaning of Gods name. And this is our cause / fayth and practise / which witnes against and absteyn from the Antichri∣stian services and ceremonies of Popery / for which doing / the world hateth and persecuteth vs: from which profession / prac∣tise / and patient suffering / this writer would diswade / and allure to communion with wickednes / by the vayn pretenses set forth in this Letter: as after more playnly foloweth. H. N. 21. Oh, how wel should they doe, which do now extol them∣selves before the simple, and say that they are preachers of Christ, if they would first learn to know Christ, before they made them∣selves ministers of him. They wil preach the word of Christ, and yet they have not according to the Spirit, seen the fashion or shape of Christ, or heard of the same in any world. They say the scrip∣ture witnesseth vnto vs, that we for Christs cause should forsake our lives, the which according to the truth, is very true: but the most part which speaks so much thereof, they themselves vnderstand not the mind or meaning of God, in that which the scripture sayth: namely, how that we must hate and forsake our own life, or els we cannot be the disciples of Christ. Therfore mark wel therevpon; & not only vpon that, but also vpon al the witnessings of the scripture. 22, Oh vnderstand advisedly what I doe write, of the forsaking of our own life. When God had created the man, then was the man in subjection to the life of God, and not to his own life: for therevnto God had created the man, that he should be of one life, one being, one Spirit, and of one nature with God. But when the man desyred in his hart, to love some other thing beside the life of God, (namely the concupiscence of the syn,) then went he into his own life, and contentation, and forsook the life of God, and lived even so his own life, and the life of the Divil. 23. The whiles now that the office of Christ hath his ministra∣tion,
for to bring the man agayn vnto God the Father: so cannot Christ bring the man to the Father, vnlesse that the man forsake his own life, which he hath lived so long to the Divel and to himself, which is al that same wherin he hath sought, loved & lived to him∣self. 24. Is not this now a great overshooting or misunderstanding that the children of men, can say and teach, that Christ meant here∣by, the natural or elementish man? H. A. IT had been wel in deed if H. N. who so extolleth himself before the simple, & sayth that he is a preacher of Christ, (yea Godded with God / ) would first have learned to know Christ, before he hade made him self a minister of him. For now being ignorant of the principles of religion / and a meer stranger from the life of God; he hath perverted al things to his own and ther mens perdition. Witnes this his corrupt doctrine about the forsaking of our own life. Wherin he first and generally seeketh to colour his iniquity with deceit and fraud. For / to perswade that we need not give our lives / our natural & elementish lives, for Christs cause / at any tyme; which is a doctrine of the serpent: he maketh a discourse of our spiritual life in synn / and the old man corrupted with vices / that we ought to lay down and forsake; which we al acknowledge to be a truth. And from this he gathereth a great overshooting and misunderstanding, of such as say Christ meant the natural or elementish man; which is a false and deceitful conclusion. We know that these both are required at our hands; the one (which is the mortifying of lusts and synful affections / ) of al men / if they would be saved: the other (which is a suffering of natural death for Christs sake / ) of so many as God calleth thervnto / in times of per∣secution. But H. N. vrgeth the one / that he might abolish the other; with as good reason / as if one should perswade vs not to serv or worship God with body, because ChristIohn. 4. sayth / we must worship him in spirit; or as if to defend fleshly filthynes / he should reason in this manner. The wordome which God condemneth, is the whoring with mens own inventions, Psal. 106. 39. the fornication, with stones and stocks, Ier. 3. 9. the going a whoring after other Gods. Deut. 31. 16. Is not this then a great overshooting or misunderstanding, that the children of mē can say & teach of that commandement, Thou shalt not comit whordom, Deut. 5. 18. that God meant hereby fleshly whordom, done by the natural or elemētish man? Loe this is the mould of H. Ns argument / and may as truly be alleged for defence of carnal forni∣cation / as he allegeth it for defēce of carnal idolatry / which he
would perswade these two daughters to commit with the man of syn, rather then to suffer bands or death for the witnesse of Christs truth. Neyther is it to be thought but he thus vnder∣standeth in deed the 7. commandement; who so erroneously vnderstandeth / and expoundeth the second / for the maintenance of his fleshly ease. But Oh he woulde have vs vnderstand ad∣visedly what he doth write of the forsaking of our own life. God (sayth H. N.) had created the man, that he should be of one Life, one Being, one spirit, and of one nature with God; this he mea∣neth / as before we have seen / to be godded with God, and that the man should be al that God was. Which blasphemous error / I have before by the scriptures refuted. Neither doth H. N. confirm his cursed doctrine here by any scripture; because in deed he cannot. For al that the scripture sayth is / that God created man in his own image and likenes, Gen. 1 26. & 5. 2. but that the man should be of one Being with him; it sayth not / but H. N. hath forged it out of his arrogant mind / who would thrust himself into Gods throne. The image of God, is expounded by the Apostle to be inCol. 3. 10. Eph. 4. 24. knowledge, righteousnes and true holynes: and H. N. addeth / to be of one Being. which if it had been true / then could not man have fallen any more then God himself; and if he had had the same life essentially with God; then should he have ben immortal / and incorruptible / death could never hav seised on him / 1. Tim. 6. 16. So H. N. must eyther deny the fal and cor∣ruption of man / wherof not onely the word of God / but nature it self and dayly experience wil convince him / and himself yeeldeth: or els / he must hold a God subject to corruption and mortalitie. Which if he doe / then is he a monster among men / and a wonder∣ment to the very hethen. For wheras the Stoiks of old / esteemed their Gods subject to al humane changes and corruption; a hethen man writing against them sayth;Plutarch. advers. Stoic. It may be one may meet with some barbarous and savage men, that think ther is no god: but ther hath not been any one man found, who thought their was a God, and yet the same not free from corruption, and eternal. Let this errour therfore (which draweth such hethenish and blasphemous consequences after it / ) returne into H. Ns. bosome wher first the Serpent hatched it. The next deceit wherwith he would beguile his reader / lieth in this word Life; wherby he meaneth mans cariage or conversation / according as the Apostle speaketh of walking in newnes of Life, Rom. 6. 4.: wheras the Life which Christ telleth vs we must be ready to lay down for his sake / is an other thing / both for Name and sig∣nification; For the Name, is. Psuche, the sowl, Luk. 17. 33. & 9. 23. 24. which word howsoever we may translate Life, because the
sowl is the life of the body; yet can we not take it for a Life or con∣versation, whch the Apostle in Rom. 6. caleth. Zoe, Wheras therfore H. N. speaketh of the Life of God, and then of mans own life, and life of the Divil; (as if Christ spake or meant of it / when he spea∣keth and meaneth of the Sowl and natural life;) herein he vseth fraud / and not Christian simplicity; or ells / bewrayeth grosse igno∣rance. Which may yet further be thus proved. Our saviour spea∣keth of such a Life as himself layd-down for vs / saying / Iohn. 10. 15. I lay down my life for my sheep; now let H. N. say what life that was; whi∣ther it were not his very natural and elementish life; (as he caleth it) for I hope he wil not be so wretched as to say that Christ had any wicked synful life or life of the Divil in him / to lay down; seing we know that in Christ ther never was synn; or if he should be so ab∣surd as to say it / yet Christ him self wil convince him sayingIohn. 10. 17. I lay down my life, that I might take it agayn; for was he to take agayn a synful life? far be it from Christian thoughts. Now from this ex∣ample of Christ the Apostle reasoneth thus / 1. Iohn. 3. 16 Hereby have we per∣ceived love, that he layd down his Life for vs: therfore we ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren. So then what Life or Sowl Christ layd down for vs; the like ar we to lay down for our bre∣thren; and for Christ himself / (as PeterIohn. 13. 37 sayd he would;) but that was no synful life or conversation / but the natural life which he did lay down; therfore ours must be the like. Agayn this is further confirmed by Christs words saying / heMat. 16. 25. that looseth his life (or sowl) for my sake shal find it; meaning in the world or life to come; but I hope we shal there find no synful life, such as H. N. fansieth Christ here to mean. Agayn the words folowing make it more playn / Christ sayingVers. 26. For what should it profit a man though he should win the whole world, if he loose his own life (or sowl.) But it is our grea∣test profit / to loose our synful life. Of that therfore Christ speaketh not / as any reasonable man may perceiv. So the Psyche sowl or life, which we must be ready at Gods pleasure to lay down for Christs cause / is not onely the synful life, but also the natural life of the natural or elementish man; and H. N. is but a carnal worldling to love his elementish life more then Christ / and teach men so; vnder colour of forsaking our own wicked life and life of the Divil. If the prophets and Apostles had known this deep vnderstanding which H. N. conceiveth, and had not thought they were also bound to lay down the natural and elementish man, they would never have endured such things in their flesh as is witnessed of them. What neededDan. 3. Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, to have changed the kings commandement / and yielded their bodies to the fyre / rather then they would serv or worship his image; orDan. 6. Daniel have jeopar∣ded his life among the Lions; orAct. 7. Stephen have been stoned to death for confessing of Christ; orHeb. 11. 35. 36. &c. others to have been racked / scourged /
prisoned / hewen asunder / slayn with the sword &c? or what meant the Apostles / to shew vs these patterns / and wil vs toIam. 5. 10. take the pro∣phets for an example of suffering adversity? Was is not (thinketh H. N.) a great overshooting or misunderstanding in al these / to teach both by word and practise / that afflictions should be suffred in the natural or elementish man? Or rather had not al these holy martyrs / first layd down the spiritual synful life, and then gave vp the natu∣ral life also? How cōtrary then is this H. N. to al holy men that ever were or wrote / that thus disswadeth frō the outward crosse / vnder pretence of inward holynes? Therfore let vs al yt lov the Lord Je∣sus / sayGal. 1. 9. Anathema to such false prophets / as thus teach doctrine cō∣trary to the scriptures / for to favor the flesh / & avoid afflictiō / as is best pleasing to their sēsual minds. Let the samePhil. 2. 5. 8. mind be in vs that was in Christ Jesus / who (besides the troubles and anguishes in his hart) humbled himself and became obedient vnto the death / evē the death of the crosse. And he which suffred these things for vs / hath1. Pet. 2. 21. left vs an ensample (as sayth the Apostle) that we should folow his steps; who his own self bare our synns inVers. 24. his body on the tree. And let vs learn with Paul, to take2. Cor. 12. 10. & 11. 23. 24. &c. pleasures in infirmities / in re∣proches / in necessities / in persecutions / in scripes and prisonment / in hunger and thirst / in cold and nakednes / and al other anguish for Christs sake; for when we are weak / then are we strong; and this is a part of our mortification and denyal of our selves: vnto which when true faith and obedience in the spirit is adjoyned / Gods work goeth forward in vs towards perfection / the end wherof wilbe everlasting life. H. N. 25. Oh comprehend I beseech yow, the vnderstanding. We our selves have not made the natural mā: wherfore he cannot belong vnto vs. For the heaven with the earth and al that is therin, belongeth vnto God; and it is Gods pleasure and will; that al shaped creatures, so wel the manly creature as any other of al those which God hath created, should live, and that it mought goe wel with them. 26. What shal the man then forsake, that he mought be reconciled to God? not any thing els but his own life, that is the man of syn, which hath so long lien hidd in the hart of man, which is the temple of God, and hath sayd that he was God. 2. Thes. 2. H. A. IT is hard to cōprehend any good vnderstanding in any thing which H. N. doth write / he is so ledd with the spirit of error in al his wayes. yet may we comprehend that his first reason here is against himself; we have not made the natural man;
wherfore he cannot belong vnto vs. Very true; but God hath made it; therfore it belongs to him. If he made it / and it be his; then may he require it when he wil / and we must not deny him his own. Now he requireth it / when for witnesse of his truth men wil shed our blood; though they doe it vnjustly / yet his requiring is just; and we may not deny him or his truth / for the saving of our lives; as before is proved. Of this reason therfore which H. N. bringeth / we may say with the prophet / Psal. 37. 15. his sword hath entred into his own hart. His next reason is a depth of iniquity; for seeming to plead for God / he seeketh to draw men from God. Gods wil is (sayth he) that al shaped creatures, so wel the manly creature as any other, should live & that it might goe wel with thē. So then to save their natural lives / ye Familists think they may deny & forswear Christ & al true reli∣gion; & may cōmunicate with al idolatrie & worship of divils / if Princes vpō payn of death / shal so cōmād. This was the intende∣ment of this present Letter / sent to two maydens / that refused (as it seemeth) the idolatrous Masse and subjectiō to the Romish An∣tichrist / with hazard of their lives. This is the dayly practise of the Nicolaitans H. Ns disciples / who rather then they wil suffer imprisonment / banishment / death or the like / for their religion; wil joyn with Papists / Protestants / Arrians / Anabaptists / or any religion / if the magistrate authorize and cōmand it. For though they hold that theirFidelitas. Declar. chapt. 4. sect. 11. God of Love (as they cal him) is the true living God, and besides him ther is no God more; and his Gods-service of Love, which they minister vnder the obedience of his Love, is the true safe-making Gods-service, and besides the same ther is not any Gods-service more, neyther in heaven nor yet in earth: yet wil they partake with any of the Godservices vsed in the world / though they be contrary one to another. For H. N. in his new Gospel complayneth thatEvangel. cha 2. sect. 4. many have vnorderly rejected and blasphemed the services and ceremonies of the catholik church of Rome, rented the concord & nur∣turable sustentation of the same, & turned them away therfrom, & even so out of their knowledg which they took out of the scripture, brought in certayn services & ceremonies in another wise or order &c. But his disciples in England / which land hath rejected / and departed from the catholike church of Rome / (as many other nations have / ) doe pretend / in their late supplicatiō to the King, yt they ar his true faith∣ful loyal and obedient subjects, to al his lawes and ordinances spiritual & temporal, and doe deny that they vary or swarve frō the now esta∣blished religion in this land, eyther in services, ceremonies, sermons or sacraments. Thus eyther H. N. or these his folowers / or both / must needs be hypocrites / that so doe write and professe of two adverse
churches and religions; when in deed they approve of neyther, but think as H. NsFidelitas. Declar. ch. 4. sec 11. Co-elder avoucheth / that they which remayn without them and their Communaltie, and without the Requiring of the gra∣cious Word, and his Service of Love, or withdraw them selves therfrō: have no living God, nor yet true God-service; but areEph. a. b. without God, and without Gods-service, in this world. yet notwithstanding this their judg mēt and profession, rather then the manly creature should die / they wil fal down before idols / wil deny their God of Love, and wil worship the Papists God of bread in the Masse / yea wil cōfesse or deny any point of doctrine / and submitt vnto any Gods-service or religion. And if they wil thus doe / in things concerning God; how much more may we think they wil so doe / in things concer∣ning men. That if any Prince should be so wicked as to forbid al mariage on payn of death / and cōmand or permit a community of womē / or whordome; these mē rather thē ye māly creature should pe∣rish / would not spare to defile their bodies (as wel as their sowles) in al manner filthynes. Yet syn they not (as they perhaps think) if their God of Love have their hart in hold / and they be obedient to the requiring of the service of the Love; for as H. N. saythSpir. land. cha. 39. sec. 8. They know not of any other religion or godservice, then of the service of Love. But let vs further see / if we can comprehend what H. Ns. positi∣on here doth imply. If it be Gods wil that the manly creature should live; and this be absolute and without restraynt; then may not the Magistrate put any to death for any crime; or make warre vpon a∣ny occasion; for H. N. wil tel the magistrate / he made not the natu∣ral man, wherfore he cannot belong vnto him; but vnto God, & his wil is, that al shaped creatures should live, and that it mought goe wel with them. This Anabaptistical error / is built on H. Ns. rotten ground; and that the Familists doe indeed deny the vse of the sword vnto the Magistrate (contrary to Pauls doctrine Rom. 13.) and al vse of warrs / may appear by H. Ns. words otherwhere / complayning of the Land of ignorance (which is every where / but in his Familie) thatSpirit. land. chap. 5. sec. 9. they make there many swords, halberds, spears, bowes & arrows, guns, pellets, powder, armor or harnesse &c. for that the tyrannical op∣pressors and those that have a pleasure in destroying, should vse warr & battel therwithal one against another. And because the taking away of the sword / is the frustrating of the magistrates office / (for wher∣fore serveth he / if not as for the wealth of the good / soRom. 13. 4. to take ven∣geance on them that do evil?) therfore it followeth necessarily / that they condemne al magistracie in the church / as do also the Anabap∣tists; for H. N. sayth of his lovely city / thatSpirit. land. ch. 37. sec. 2. no man reigneth over an other, and that pleaseth God wel, namely that the one man of God reigneth not over the other. Thus vnder a colour that Gods crea∣tures al should live / he would abolish Gods ordinances / (who
hath commandedExo. 21. 12. 25. 16, 17. &c. that some malefactors should die and not live) and bring confusion vpon civil polities / as he hath vpon Christian religion. Agayn / in that he sayth al shaped creatures should live / and then the manly creature, so wel as any other; wil it not folow also herevp∣on that Beasts must live / & may not be killed for the food of man. For they are shaped creatures / and made by God / not by vs; and so by H. Ns. learning / cannot belong vnto vs; and therfore may not be killed for our sustenance; though God do playnly permit it in his law / Gen. 9. 3. Deut. 12. 20. 21. 22. And so here is another doctrine of Divils, (as the1 Tim. 4. 1. 3. holy Ghost caleth it) comprehended in this Oldest Fathers deep head / whiles by consequence he commandeth to ab∣steyn from meates; or els his ey-sight fayled him / when he set down this reason. But the Apostle gathereth quite contrary to this man; as namely because / The earth is the Lords and the plenty therof / therfore we may eat al flesh / 1 Cor. 10. 25. 26. Accordingly / should H. N. (if he had savoured the things of God) have reasoned and con∣cluded; The Lord made our bodies and our sowles / therfore it be∣longeth vnto vs / to look that with both we1 Cor. 6. 20. glorify him. The bo∣dy is for the Lord / therforever. 13. not for fornicatiō: the body is the tem∣ple vers 19.of the holy Ghost; therfore it may not be prostrate before idols; for2 Cor. 6. 16. what agreement hath the temple of God with idols; the body is the Lords / therfore it may not sit at the table of Divils; and what∣soever the1 Cor. 10. 20 21. Rev. 9. 20. hethens or Antichristians offer / they offer vnto Divils / and we cannot drink the cup of the Lord / and the cup of Divils. Thus should H. N. if any Christian wisedome or grace had been in him / have collected and inferred; and not as now he doeth / per∣swade the two daughters to communion with the church of Rome / (which the holy Ghost calethReve. 18. 2. the habitation of Divils) because their bodies or lives are the Lords; and it belongs not vnto them / to lay down their natural lives for the testimony of Jesus at any time. But if H. N. had known in any world what the true life meaneth; he would not so have disswaded from suffring temporary death for the Gospels sake. This present life (which he so much estemeth) is a1 Cor. 15. 31 dying dayly, as the Apostle teacheth: the true life is / when the bo∣dy having beenvers. 42. sowen in dishonour / shalbe raysed in glory. Of which raysing vp / this Sadducee H. N. is vtterly ignorant / as af∣ter shal be shewed; and in his ignorance perverteth al religion / and even reason it self / for to maynteyn a momentany natural life / though it be to the / perpetual damnation of body and sowl in hel. Hissect. 26. conclusiō what the man must forsake, that he may be recōciled to God? not any thing els but his own life, that is the man of syn &c. is like his premisses / ful of guile and errour; and what truth is in it / is against himself. Erroneous it is / to say or to insinuate / that we
may be reconciled to God, by any thing that we can forsake / be it syn or what els. For our reconciliatiō to God is wrought by Christ alone / not by ourselves when we forsake synn; of which poynt we have before spoken. Guileful it is to say or insinuate / that Christ in willing vs to forsake our lives for his sake / meant that by so doing / we should be reconciled to God, or that we do so esteem of any mar∣tyrs death. The man doth by it / (as ChristIohn. 21. 19. signified of Peters death) glorify God; vnto whom he was before by Christs death re∣conciled. False it is to say a man must not forsake any thing els but his own synful life; for Christ telleth vs further ofMat. 19. 29 forsaking how∣ses, brethren, sisters, father, mother, wife, children, lands for his names sake; and these I trow are not also the Man of syn that lieth hid in mans hart. But it was farr from H. Ns hart / to forsake any of these for Christ; he loved his sensual life so wel. Erroneous it is / that our synful life is that man of synn spoken of 2 Thes. 2. of which poynt / is to be spoken in the next place. And this onely truth / that we should forsake our own synful life, overthroweth H. Ns doctrine / and his disciples practise. For syn it is and a continual synful life / to frequent idolatrous assemblies / hear masse / worship a God of bread / and the beast Antichrist; ob∣serve his wicked ceremonies / and professe his heretical doctrines; as the Nicolaitans wil doe / and H. N. would perswade these daugh∣ters vnto; whiles yet he pretends to have them leav syn. Dissimi∣lation andMat. 23. 28. 1 Pet. 2. 1. hypocrisie / is a hateful syn both to God and man; wher∣in they that live / are altogither strangers from the life of God: and this is the trade of life and religion among the Familists, who ha∣ting all religions but their own; yet wil professe counterfeit and walk in any religion / save their own; for that they doe onely in se∣cret / because their works are evil; but God in his time / wil give them their due reward / even openly. H. N. 27. Oh how grosly then do they comprehend this, which signify or apply this same vnto vs vpon the Pope of Rome, & say that the Pope is the Antichrist. Oh, oh, no: the Antichrist is nearer vnto vs, were it wel known. The wisdome of the flesh, wherewithal the man wil judg the godly causes, is verily the right Antichrist; I say, the wicked nature of the Divil, (wherwith the man is of one mind; so long as he in the re∣newing of his spirit, is not incorporated with Christ,) is verily that same right Antichrist. Oh vnderstand it rightly, with an vnpartial hart. H. A. HEre H. N. crieth out of their grosse comprehension, that say / the Pope of Rome is the man of syn, the Antichrist; in the meā
time / he sheweth himself to be most grosse / and carnal in his com∣prehension / that expoundeth that man of syn spoken of 2 Thes. 2. to be The wisdome of the flesh; the wicked nature of the Divil &c. The va∣nity and falshood wherof / every babe in Christ / that looketh into that scripture / may easily perceiv. For th'Apostle speaking there of Vers. 2.the day of Christs comming, teacheth them not to exspect that / vntil Vers. 3.the departing (from the fayth) were first come, and the man of syn, the Son of perdition were first disclosed. But the wisdome of the flesh and wicked nature of the Divil, was come already / for Adam and his children had brought it forth and nourished it in the world / even from the beginning Gen 3. Rom. 5. 12. 14. 17. 18. &c. and it was dis∣closed both by the Law / Rom. 3. 20. and by the Gospel already prea∣ched / 1 Cor. 1. 18. 19. 21. 27. and 2. 6. 7. &c. 1 Iohn 3. 8. &c. Wherfore it is but deceiving of mens sowles / to teach them to wayt and look for that thing to come / which is already come; and H. N. sheweth how farr he is from vnderstanding the scriptures / which yet so in∣solently vaunteth himself over al men. As for vs / we have learned of the Apostles / to vnderstand generally every false prophet to be an Antichrist, 1 Ioh. 2. 18 19. 22. But specially one great Antichrist to come after the Apostles times / whose mystery began even2. Thes. 2 7. then to work whiles they lived; but somthing ther was which thenVers 6. with∣held his reveling / (namely the hethen monarchie of the Romane empire / ) which at that timeVers. 7. withheld and hindred (the doctrine of the Gospel) by open tyrannie and persecution; and should let the working and disclosing of that great Antichrist in the Papacie / vn∣til himself (that hethen Empire) were taken out of the way. Then after him should arise an otherRev. 13. Beast or Monarchie / with hornes like the Lamb (Christ / ) pretending his faith and Religion / (as doe the Papists / ) though his speech be like the Dragons / in al damna∣ble doctrines and idolatries. And this Antichrist, should seat him∣self 2. Thes. 2. 4in the Temple or howse of God / (which is the1. Tim. 3. 15 Church;) and in the consciences of men / by his errors wherwith he should deceiv mens sowles. A large and lively description of which Beast and great whore / that reigneth in theRome. city built on 7. hills / we have in the book of Revelation / the light wherof H. N. would darken by the foggs and mists / of his own fleshly and allegorical interpretati∣ons. Now that the reader may see how good a proctour H. N. is for the Pope / and wherfore he is so neerly affected to him / and denyeth him to be Antichrist; it shal not be amisse / to shew what paynes he hath taken / to compare himself and his societie with the Pope / and his clergie: that al mē may discern them to be both sworn brothers against Christ. In his new Gospel / caled Evangelium regni, H. N. hath thus ap∣plied
things / Cha. . .. This same foregoing (sayth he) of the Elders of the ho∣ly vnderstanding, and their anoynting of the holy Ghost, to Priests El∣ders and Fathers, hath the catholik church of Rome, til vnto this day, ministred and observed in figures, as is abovesayd. For to a token of re∣membrance of the holy anoynting of Christ with the holy spirit, they have vsed the anoynting with oyl, & it is a sacramēt of the holy church of Christ, which signifyeth vnto vs the anoynting of the Priests or El∣ders, with the holy Ghost. 5. Of which anoynted Elders or foregoers of the cōminalty of the catholik church of Rome, the cheefest anoynted is named Papa, & sig∣nifieth vnto vs an old Father in the holy vnderstanding: also the chief Bishop or high priest which hath his being or conversation in the most holy of the true and perfect sanctuary, & ministreth his office of the ho∣ly word therout, and for that cause is also named The most holy Father. &c. sect. 8. Those now that are next to the forenamed Papa, are named Cardi∣nals, which signify vnto vs the principallest, which are neerest in the most holy vnderstanding of the godlines, vnto the Eldest or holyest Fa∣ther; and have their communion with him in the most holy of the true and perfect being &c. After this he proceedeth to shew how thesect. 1. Bishops signified the pastors of the sheep and lambs of Christ;sect. 14. The Parish priests or curats, signified Levitical priests, or adjoyned Pastors and elders of the holy vnderstanding &c.sect. 17. The Deacons, signified ministers or helpers of the parish priests in the holy Godservices;sect. 18. The Sextons, signified conser∣vers or keepers of the holy things.sect. 1. The many manner of orders, wher∣through many anoynted ones and zelous people sought the righteous∣nes and holynes, which are named Monks, signified such as dwel alone, & are through the love of the righteousnes Sanctified, & for that cause also separated from the world, and from al what is worldly and fleshly &c. And,sect. 1. Next vnto al these forenamed anoynted ones, are the com∣mon people, which beleev and cleave vnto the services religions and ce∣remonies of the Anoynted, and which also humble them to the requi∣ring of those same, &c. Thus hath H. N. fetched the mysterie of his Family of Love / from the Popes forge; that al men may see it is no marvel that he denyeth the Pope to be Antichrist; for H. N. (the oldest Father of this Family / ) wil be the Papa and great Antichrist himself / and the Pope of Rome / was but his shadow and figure. Howbeit / herein he was overseen to gather his pedegree frō the Papacie / which he enought much better have fetched frō the holy scriptures; (but that he is an enimy to scripture learning: as he oftē bewrayeth.) For H. N. the greatest in the Family / who is (as himself sayth)Evan. ch 1. sect. 1. God∣ded with God in the spirit of his Love; BecauseProv. of H. N. ch. 8. s. 3. The God of heaven
as the Father himself, is come down, & bringeth in the service of his Love, himself with his Christ, & his holy Ghost, & with al that which with him is Gods, vnto his obedient man H. N. & Godding the same with him, he hath manned him with the same; This new God of the Nicolaitans is described in scripture thus;Rev. 9. 11. They have a king over them which is the Angel of the bottomlesse pitt, (for so also H. N. sayth / he wasEvang. reg. ch. 1. s. 1. raysed vp from the death;) whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek he is named Apollyon, [in al languages / The destroyer.] The doctrine taught by this H. N. corrupting and darkning al the holy scriptures / was figured out by theRev. 9. 2. smoke of the botomlesse pit, which darkned sun and aier. And the yllumina∣ted Elders of this Family / ar pourtrahed out byVers. 3. 10. Locusts that came out of the smoke of H. N. his heresies / with stings in their tayls like scorpions / to wound mens cōsciences by their deceivable doc∣trines. This had ben a directer and playner pourtrature of the Fa∣milists / then that figure fetched frō the Papists. And thus we may perceiv / it was not without cause that H. N. cried out / Oh, oh, no, the Antichrist is neerer vnto vs, wer it wel knowen; when in deed so great a monster of Antichristianity was hatched in his own bo∣some / who thus hath Deified hmself and blasphemed God? Ney∣ther is he a friend to Popery onely / and a Lover of the whore of Babylon; but of Judaisme also / that he may appear to be quite abo∣lished from Christ. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrewes / Chapters. 7. 8. 9. & 10. proveth at large the abrogating of the Levitical Priesthood and sacrifices / by the coming of our high priest Christ Jesus / and sacrifice of his own body / (according as was prophesied of him / thatDan. 9. 27. he should cause sacrifice and; oblation to cease;) and for the Jewes / that would stil continew their figurative worship / he sheweth them to have no part in Christ / when he saythHeb. 13. 10. &c. We have an altar, wherof they have no authority to eat which serv in the Tabernacle. But H. N. teacheth vs that the services of Aarōs priesthood are yet necessary for some; in these words / Evangel. regni. Chap. 13. s. 8. Oh alas, how grosly hav then certayn wise of the world, and scripture-learned overreached them herein, which have without diversity forsakē the law & the service of the Elders Testamēt, and of the Priests office after the ordinance of Aaron, and set back the same as a thing vnneedful: not once distincting vnto whom the service after the ordinance of Aaron, is yet necessarie, nor yet with whom the same at th'appointed time ceaseth or leaveth off. Thus H. N. sheweth how good a friend he is to Jewes and Papists; But his enmity agaynst Christ and his Gospel / can not easily be opened / it is in so many particulars. He thrusteth himself into Christs throne / and maketh himself the Judge of al the world;Evang. ch. 1. s. 9. For behold (sayth he) in this present day, the glorious coming of our Lord Iesus Christ with his many thowsands of his saincts, which hath set himself now vpon the
seat of his Majestie, for to judge in this same day which the Lord hath ordeyned or appoynted, the whol world with equitie &c. with ma∣ny like speeches (as before is shewed) wherin the scriptures which foretel of Christs comming to judgement at the worlds end / H, N. applieth to himself; and so the playn doctrines of the gospel / are made but fabulous / by this blasphemers allegorie: and he sheweth himself to be the Father of those2 Pet. 3. 3. 4 mockers that wer foretold should come in the last dayes / which walking after their lusts / should say where is the promise of his comming? &c. Now because at Christs comming / must be the resurrection of the dead / therfore that one errour / necessarily draweth on another / namely that the resurrectiō is past already, which was the kanker wherby2 Tim. 2. 17 18. Hymeneus and Phi∣letus in the Apostles dayes / destroyed the fayth. This heresie hath H. N. published in his Gospel; saying / Evang. reg. ch. 35: s, 8, 9. Behold in this present day is this scripture fulfilled and according to the testimony of the scripture, the raysing vp & the resurrection of the Lords dead cometh also to passe presently in this same day, through the appearing of the cōing of Christ in his majestie. Which resurrection of the dead, seing that the same is come vnto vs from Gods grace, we doe likewise in this present day, to an Evangelie or joyful message of the kingdome of God & Christ, pub∣lish in al the world, vnder the obedience of the Love. In which resur∣rection of the dead God sheweth vnto vs, that the tyme is now fulfilled that his dead, or the dead which ar fallen a sleep in the Lord, rise vp in this day of his judgment, & appear vnto vs in Godly glory, which shal also from henceforth live in vs everlastingly with Christ, and reign vpon the earth. Thus hath this Sadducee overturned that mayn groūd and principle of Christian religion / without which our fayth were but1 Cor. 15. 16. 17. vayn / and we were of al men thever. 19. most miserable; And that his religion might be even a sink of synful errors / he hath taught / that in their Lovely societie / theySpir. land. ch. 37. sect. 7. do not vow or bind themselves in the matrimony of men, nor yet suffer themselves to be boūd therin, but are like the Angels of heaven: to verify the Apostles words / that1 Tim. 4. 1. 3. in the latter times some should teach and give heed vnto doctrines of Divils / forbidding to marry &c. Now seeing he sayth in another place / Spirit. land. ch, 36. sec. 6. that they commit not any adultery, for they are honest & chast of life, and clean or pure of hart; what may we think is among them / but a cōmunity of al men and women / yet without syn (as they sup∣pose / ) so long as it is not with them of the World / especially seing he sayth also further / Ibid. ch. 35. sect. 4, & 5. There is no man that claimeth any thing to be his own, as to possesse the same to his own private vse. For no man (& that out of every ones good disposition) can desire any thing to be his own, or yet to make any thing proper to himself from an other, but also whatsoever is there is free, & is there left free in his vpright form. Ther is also no man denyed to vse any thing in freedom, of al what is profita∣ble
and needful for him; for they stand all in the equitie as one in the Love; and again / Ibid ch. 39. se. 8. That they know not of any other religion or God-service, then of the service of Love, and to love one an other, and so to keep themselves pure and vnspotted of the world; Which writing of H. N. may give al wise men occasion to suppose / that he teacheth in secret commune filthynes; even the doctrineRev. 2. 1. of the old Nicolaitans, which God doth hate. In secret / I say / for his lothsome carnal abominations he wil not openly publish / (though he hath publish∣ed too much / ) eyther to the world or to his yong disciples; but this caveat he hath given to his fautors / Pro. of H. N cha. 22. s. 16. ye shal not talk of your secrets, eyther yet vtter your mysteries opēly or nakedly in the hearing of your yong children and disciples: but spare not the same in the ears or hea∣ring of the Elders which can vnderstand the same, and are able to bear or away with the sound therof. For it is given to the Elders to vnder∣stand the privy mysteries of the wise, and to expound their parables. This is the counsell of H. N. touching the secrets of his religion; quite contrary to the counsel and practise of Christ / his prophets and Apostles; for Christ sayd to his Disciples / Mat. 1. 27. what I tel yow in darknes, that speak ye in light, and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye on the howses; and when the ProphetsPsal. 78. 2. opened their mouthes in parables / and declared high sentences of old / they wouldver. 4. 6. not hide them from their children / but shew thē that posterity might know it / and children which should be born / might declare vnto their children &c. But the deep mysteries of H. N. must not be disclosed / because as it is writtē / Ioh. 3. 2. every mā that doth evil hateth the light, and / Iob 4. 17.the morning, is to thē as the shadow of death: wherfore his doctrine is like thePro. 9. 13. 7. foolish womans which sayd / Stollen waters are sweet, & hid bread is pleasant; but let al Gods people know / thatvers. 18. the dead are there / and that her ghests are in the depth of hell. Now though he wil not let his yong-anes know his secrets; yet he wil be so bold as to know their secrets; and hath taught them to shrive them vnto him / with farr greater spiritual slavery / then the Antichrist of Some hath done. For H. N. in hischap. 13. First exhortation (after he had warned his childrensect. 11. not to distrust the Eldest in the Family of Love, nor suspect any manner of evill or vnwisdom by him) sayth;sect. 12. Fourthly it is expedient, that they should make manifest their whol hart, with al their counsels, minds, wils and thoughts, togither with al their doings dealings & exercises, naked and bare before the El∣dest in the Family of Love, and not cover or hide any thing, (be it what it is,) before him. Also al whervnto their inclination, kind, and nature draweth them, and al wherwith they become tempted or assaulted in their harts. The Pope requireth but confession ofConcil. Trid. soss. 14, ch. 5. mortal, not of ve∣nial syns; But this tyrann H. N. wil know al / be it what it is; yea even mens natural inclinatiōs. Now be it his wisdome was much
overseē to make such a law: for this may cal his Godhed into ques∣tiō / & make mē think / he is but a Liar / whiles he would be a God▪ for our Lord Jesus knew theMat. 9.  Iohn 2. 25. thoughts of men / and had no need that any should testify of man / for he knew what was in man. If H. N. be godded with God / what needeth he that men should thus make known their inclinations and actions vnto him. But his disciples are wel ynough served; that wheras the Romish priests did whip thē with rods / these their Godded Priests should scourge them with scorpions. Finally this H. N. teacheth almost every where in his abomina∣ble books / the doctrine of that old Serpent / Gen. 3. 5. ye shal be as Gods: say∣ing that his peopleSpirit. land ch. 38. sect. 7. have their inhabiting in Gods vnderstanding, & stand cōprehended in the light of life, being vnited in Gods true being: thatibid. cha. 40. sect. 18. they are one being with ech other, namely God & his people of peace: thatEpis. of. H. N 3. ch. 4. se. 5. God the Father through his onely born son Christ, is be∣come of one substance agayn with the manly creatures; and to that end also, because that al manly creatures should through Christ be one sub∣stance with God the Father, is Christ preached; thatEpis. 4. c. 5. sect. 18. when as we are renewed in Jesus Christ through faith / also come to the same age of the man Christ / so is God the Father thē likewise one substance or māned with vs through Christ, & is al in al: that it isProv. of H. N. ch. 8. s. . Gods wil, that now in the last tyme, through his service of love, al people or generati∣ons of men, which are goodwilling to his righteousnes, should assemble them vnto him and his godded man (H. N.) and even so likewise with them al that which is manly, to the end that they all should become of one being with him and his godded man, and so be al named Gods, and children of the most highest. These and many the like blasphemies (wherby he quite overthroweth the Being of God / as before is proved / ) ar often to be found in his writings. For which also / (that he might the more imitate the first serpent / which saydGen. 3. 9. God doth know,) he allegeth and corrupteth the holy scriptures; that if he be Antichrist, which should sit in the temple of God / 2 Thes. 2. 4. shewing himself that he is God / (as Paul warneth:) this H. N. may be known to be a great Antichrist; and al the world may see / Iohn 11. 4. 50. 51. Caiaphas prophesied not righter of Christ and of his death for the nation; then H. N. hath spoken / when he cried out of the Antichrist to be so neer vnto him. It is very true. H. N. 28. Oh, what a slight and earthly vnderstanding is this, that God should be appeased with an elementish body: even like as though that God were fleshly, even as an vnregenerate man. 29. I say on Gods behalf, that God is not in that manner of sort with
the man; but rather the vngodly being or nature, which all vnregenera∣ted men do cary in their harts, wherout al wickednes is ingendred and brought forth. Read Mark. 7. Mat. 23. and in more other places in the scriptures, wher the same is rcited or mentioned. 30. Therfore my beloved, this is the counsel of God towards yow both, that yow should not boast yourselves in such an vncertayn confe∣ssing; but for the love of Christs sake, take it for the best, which I hav here witnessed vnto yow; namely that yow have not confessed Christ according to the truth, but the elementish ceremonies, even as they out of the darknes, without the Spirit of Christ, wer taught vnto yow. Not that I therin do accuse or blame any man, as one that doth evil of a set purpose. O no; for they know not any other, then that they doe vse the doctrine of Christ. But my harty desire is towards every one, which say that they seek Christ, that they mought seek and find him aright. H. A. OH what a slight and serpentlike subtilty is this / that H. N. should abuse and deprave the words and actions of Gods servants in this manner; as if by their meek and patient suffrings for Christs sake / they thought to appease God wth an elementish body. It is far from the harts of al the faithfull / to imagine that any thing which themselves can eyther doe or suffer / in body or sowl / is able to appease God. They have otherweise lear∣ned to know the guilt and wages of syn / the infinitenes of Gods majesty who is angry with the world for their misdeeds / the weaknes and vnworthynes of al mens works and suffrings. To that therfore which H. N. pretendeth to say on Gods behalf; I an∣swer with Job / and ask him / Iob. 13. 7. if he wil speak wickedly for God; or talk deceitfully for his cause? For we esteem our suffrings no∣thing / and all our righteousnes as dung. It is theHeb. 10. 5. 6. 10. body of our Lord Jesus that was hanged on the tree / which is the onely sacri∣fice for our synns / and appeaseth the wrath of his Father: and the things that we doe or suffer / benifit not him but our selves: for the chastisements of God / whither on our bodies or sowles / are (as the Apostle teacheth vs / )Heb. 12. 10. for our profit, that we might be parta∣kers of his holynes. Wherfore H. N. hathPsa. 7. 14. conceived mischief and brought forth a lie / whiles labouring to abolish the outward con∣fessing and suffring of Christians / he falsly imputeth vnto thē this error / to beleev they appease God with an elementish body, yea the frawd of this falser is manifestly discovered / as the reader may observ; for the error which he would lay vpon others / is found to
be in himself / whose doctrine is such as teacheth men to be their own saviours. By the Apostles Gospel / we have our redemp∣tion and forgivenes of syns throughCol. 1. 14. Heb 9. 28. the blood of Christ once of∣fred; to him also giveAct. 10. 43. al the prophets witnesse / that through his name / al that beleev in him shal receiv remission of syns / (sayth Pe∣ter:) but by H. Ns. Gospel / we obteyn itFirst Exhor. ch. 20. s. 19. by our own imitation of Christ in his death / and taking vp of our crosse. And many such like deadly venimous doctrines are sparsed in his writings / to disanull the true Christ / with his suffrings and merits / and to set vp a false and imaginary Christ bred / and born in his corrupt hart / as I have before proved. Now though we hold not God to be appeased with our suffrings / as this man cavilleth; yet hold we vpon ground frō the scriptures / that we must serve and glorify God both with our 1 Cor. 6. 20.bodyes and with our spirits / because both ar Gods; and therfore are we willed to give vpRom. 12. 1. our bodies / a living sacrifice / holy and ac∣ceptable vnto God / which is our reasonable serving of God. And if by bonds and prisonment / by racking / scourging / stoning / hew∣ing asundex; or other the like torments of body / asHeb. 11. 35. 36. 37. & 13, 3. 2 Cor. 11. 23. 25. &c. others before vs have suffred / God also try vs: we ought with patience to bear them / and not to go from the confessing of Christ and his truth / for avoyding them / as this deceiver would perswade vs. His conclu∣sion therfore / which he maketh agaynst these two daughters / name∣ly / that they have not confessed Christ according to the truth, &c. is yet to be proved / for asmuch as he hath not by any ground from Gods word / overthrowen their faith or confessiō in any poynt / but onely sought to vndermine it / by falshood and deceyt; abusing the readers / ād perverting the holy scriptures; his desire being to draw others into the same destruction with himself; who in sted of confes∣sing Christ according to the truth, hath like an Antichristian over∣thrown the whol Gospel of Christ / denyed him to be come in the flesh / and set vp an Idol in his place / even the Lovely Being out of his own fleshly hart. H. N. 31. God is my witnes, that it is true which I here write vnto you; & the occasion of my writing is chanced, for that I bear a sorrowfull hart with you both. But this is my hope over you, that ye will take it at my hands, as out of the Love of Christ, and not to be in any case obstinate in your selves, for to wind away your selves from the reading of these Letters with humble harts. 32. And when ye have deliberately read the same witnesses, and the Lord added his wisdome therto, wherby the eyes of your harts mought be a little opened: then spare me not to be your servant, and give me to
vnderstand by the bringe therof, & ther shal yet more be brought vnto yow, then that which yow have presently. 33. And if yow cannot acknowledge this for the truth, yet look well alwayes hereto, that ye do not blaspheme the same which ye know not. And I likewise shal not blame yow, although that yow cannot comprehend the same. For the godly gifts cannot be brought to a∣ny one by violence or compulsion, for they are the gifts of God. 34. Herewith I salute yow both, (whose names I know not,) very hartily through the love of Christ; & wish vnto yow, out of the ground of my sowl, the knowledge of the very true Spirit of Christ, that ye mought learn to know aright, your caling in Christ. That grant vs the Almighty God, through his Love, Amen. By your vnknown friend H. N. H. A. IF God were witnes, that it is true which H. N. here hath written; the scriptures / which are Gods witnesses or testi∣monies would approve of the same; but by holy writ / his er∣rors are disproved; and the evils which he vnjustly layeth vpon others / are justly returned vpon his own head; and found to be in himself and his bewitched folowers / whom I leav to the doon of him which hath sayd / Mal. 3. 5. I wil come neer to yow to judge∣ment, and I wilbe a swift witnes against sorcerers, & against adulterers, and against false swearers. &c. And for al that shal read these writ∣ings / as they ought to be farr from blaspheming the truth which they know not; so should they be far also from approving or heark∣ning to a knowen deceiver and blasphemer of God; such as this Henry Nicolas by this Epistle and his other vngodly writings is proved for to be. His fawning words and submissive cariage / with promise of more matters after; are but the behaviour of theProv. 7. 14—21. Lewd woman / that vseth to entise with flattering lips; when hervers. 27. howse is the way vnto the grave / which goeth down to the chambers of death. What thank or reward then remaynes for H. N. for al his paynes and proffered kindnes / but that which the wise man hath appointed saying / He that blesseth his friend with a lowd voice, rising early in the morning, it shal be counted to him as a curse. Pro. 27. 14. FINIS. In pag. 47. lin. 5. before the end, for love read live
