19945a 99854392 19811
TO MY WORSHIPFVL and godly friend, Master IOHN BAILIFE, one of the Masters of the Towne of Marlbrough, grace, and peace from God in Iesus Christ. SIr; your willingnes to haue beene present at the preaching of this Sermon, restrained on∣ly by instant, & urgent occasions, as my selfe well know, hath moved me to deliver vnto your minde by reading, that, which otherwise you would, but could not receiue by hearing. And this rea∣son is generall, for all of like minde, I meane, which are zealous of godly do∣ctrine; made publike by preaching, as Christ commādeth; but more publike,Matth. 28.19. by printing, as Christians also desire. And if my small store in handling this Scripture, very briefly in some points, for wāt of time, hath yet afforded this, a plaster for the sore of some Mini∣sters, & people now, as I hope it hath
what should my desire be, but that the same may be spread as broad, & lie on so long, as the sore requireth, by this large, & lasting delivery therof, as you see. Onlie I beseech the greater Phy∣sitians to have an eye to the sore, and to wag the plaster; and if they see it heale not, to adde (as I hope they wil) some cunning of their owne: and yet not their owne, but that, which they have learned, more deeplie then I, of the greate Physitiā of our soules Christ Iesus. Vnto whose grace I com∣mend you, and yours, and us all, for the cure of all our sores,Rev. 22.20. and come, Lord Iesus: even so, Amen. From Wotton Basset  the 20. of Oct. 1596. Yours in Christ. Charles Pinner.
Take heede vnto thy selfe, & vnto doctrine: and continue therin: for in doing this thou shalt save thy selfe, and them that heare thee. 1. Tim. 4.16. THe Apostle in these wordes, instructing Ti∣mothie, setteth down these two pointes, a Pre∣cept, & a Pro∣mise, as a rea∣son, the rather to induce him to the obedience of the com∣mandement. The precept or commande∣ment hath two parts, the first, that he en∣ter into a godly care, and haue a serious respect, first, unto himselfe; and next vnto his doctrine, in these words, Take heede vnto thy selfe, and vnto doctrine: the second, that hee cease not at any time, much lesse giue over, to embrace this du∣tie; wherefore he saith, continue therein. The reason, containing a promise, is in these wordes, For in doing this thou shalt saue thy selfe, & them that heare
thee. Thus, it bringeth salvation both to him, and to his hearers, to do, as is re∣quired. But of this, in place. First therefore of the precept & mat∣ter thereof: which being such, as we see, namely, that Timothy must take heed to himselfe, and to his doctrine, importeth this much, that doubtlesse there is daun∣ger vnto both. Else shoulde the Apostle bring them into a needelesse feare: which is neebles to refute, because we daily see, and feele to well, that the devill, and the world labour nothing more, then to re∣mooue, or reprooue both the Minister, & his doctrine. The reason may be gathe∣red out of the words of Peter, in the fifth of the first exhorting thus, Be sober, and watch:1. Pet. 5.8. for your adversary the devil as a roaring Lion walketh about seeking whom he may devour: whom resist stedfast in the faith. And out of these words of Paul the Apostle in the tenth to the Romans,Rom. 10.14. How shall they beleeue in him, of whom they haue not heard? and how shall they heare without a preacher? Looke therefore how much
our adversary the devil in the rage of his desire, and diligence to destroy, prevai∣leth against the preacher, that is, the Mi∣nister, and his doctrine, so much he pre∣vaileth against our faith: and if he pre∣vaile, as the stronger of the twaine, (as we reade in the parable of the Gospell:Luk. 11.22) he taketh away our armour, wherein we trusted, and devideth the spoiles. And therefore here he fighteth, and stri∣veth, and here he spendeth shot and pow∣der, to make a breach, where most assu∣redly he may enter the fort of our soules; and the malice which hee beareth vnto the Church, and the whole body of the people of God, here he vnladeth it to the full. And the worlde is on his side, and worldly courses may beguile, even vs my brethren, called to be Timothies, as well as others. In the fourteenth of the fourth to the Colossians,Coloss. 4.14. and in Phile∣mon the foure and twentith, Demas, sa∣luteth,Philem. 24. and is saluted, as a fellow-helper with the Apostles in the worke of the Lord. But in the seconde to Timothie
the fourth, and tenth, the Apostle com∣plaineth, thus,2. Tim. 4.10. Demas hath forsaken mee, and hath embraced this present world. And for the flesh, my brethren, (I speake nowe vnto Timothies) are wee more mortified, then hee, who saith, I beate downe my body, and bring it in∣to subiection,1. Cor. 9.27. least by some meane or other after that I haue preached vnto other I my selfe shoulde bee reiected. And, this diligence notwithstanding, in the seventh to the Romans (so sore is the fight of the flesh with the spirite) exclai∣meth thus: Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!Rom. 7.24. thus, if we knowe our war∣fare, and the enimies, that are rounde a∣bout vs, the counsaile of the Apostle is more then necessary, by taking heede to prevent the evils, that may fal vpon vs, if we take not heede. And heere it may seeme needeles in so plaine a worde, as this, to explaine the sense and meaning, I meane, of taking heede, what it should meane: saue that so
little heede is taken by manie of vs, my brethren, pudet hou, piget{que}, as if we never knewe what this dutie, a briefe summe of all dutie, meaneth , saith the Apostle, attend, as much as , extend, or bend thou all the power of thy minde, and will to take care of thy selfe, and of thy doctrine, that both bee found such, as they ought to be. And this care is grounded in a godly feare, which looketh partly to the severity, and to the perfect & impartiall righteousnesse of God him∣selfe; of which Peter in the first of the first speaking exhorteth thus,1. Pet. 1.17. If yee call him father, which without respect of per∣son iudgeth according to every mans workes, passe the time of your dwel∣ling heare in feare. And partly to the power, and industrie of our enemies, as the same Apostle warneth in the place before alleadged, Be sober, (saith hee) and watch: (and what is this watchful∣nesse but an effect of this feare?) the rea∣son:1. Pet. 5.8. for your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walketh about seeking whome he may devoure. And partly to
our owne infirmity, who, having nothing of our selues to will, or to doe well, re∣ceaue all of God. Vpon which ground S. Paul in the second to the Philippians exhorteth thus,Philip. 2.12.13. Finish your salvation with feare and trembling. For it is God which worketh in you both to will, and to performe of his own good pleasure. And to shew what this feare is, and how it worketh, not only in the soule, but also in the body, David in the hundred and 19. Plalme,Psal. 119.120. the hundred and 20. verse, saith, it had taken his flesh▪ Horret pavore tui caro mea, My flesh quaketh for feare of thee. What feare? surelie not a servile, but a filiall feare, (for other feare in Da∣vid there could be none) a feare to offend, and so to provoke the iustice, and iudg∣ments of God against him. For so it fol∣loweth, adeò a iudicijs tuis timeo: I stand in such awe of thy iudgments. And to this feare he also exhorteth others in the second Psalme,Psal. 2.11. thus, Service Iehovae cum timore: Serue the Lord with feare. Thus, my brethren, if with reverence, and a religious feare in the whole man,
through knowledge of our selues, how weake; our adversaries, how strong they are, we serue the Lorde, and dread his iudgements; if we set a watch vnto our selues, both soule, & body, that we sinne not, and abstains from worldlie lustes, which fight against the soule; if in all so∣brietie, puritie, integritie, we walke wor∣thie of the Gospell, which we preach vn∣to others; if we giue no occasion of offence in any thing, that our ministerie be not reprooved;Tit. 2.9. but rather (as the Apostle re∣quireth of servantes, much more then of vs) adorne the doctrine of God our Sa∣viour in all things; if, when others are weake, wee are strong; when others fall, we stand vpright; and being rooted in the faith, and walking in righteousnes and holines of the spirit through Christ, wee grow at the length to that, that wee may bee called and reported (as in the three∣skore and first of Esay the third verse) quercus iustitiae▪Isa. 61.3. oakes of righteousnes: not bowing at every blast, but bearing out the force of all temptations; and so, proposing ourselues as ensamples to the
flocke, (not in a shew of painted holines, but in evidence of the trueth, approving our selues vnto every mans conscience in the sight of God) may say with the A∣postle, Brethren,Philip. 3.17. be yee followers of vs, and looke on them which walke, so, as yee have vs for an ensample; and so our liues also may teach religion: doubtlesse we haue obeyed the Apostolike precept in taking heede vnto our selues; and for our selues haue done sufficient; but not, for the malice of the world. For when al is done, yet (as it is said) Nobis non licet esse bonis: Wee shall haue no leaue to be that we be, nor none of ours, but must go for such, as men will make vs. We haue paied them the things we never tooke,Psal. 69.5. God thou knowest our simplenesse, and our faultes are not hid from thee. What this mea∣neth, you knowe, my brethren of Marl∣brough. I speake to the malicious minds, and mouthes amongst you. But what fruit had yee of that slaunder, whereof ye are now ashamed? Or, if not ashamed, speake yet againe, and speake plainly, and make vs ashamed. Or, if you cannot, take
the sinne, and shame vnto your selues. For we haue ruled, not only our selfe, but our houshold well; and the filth of forni∣cation is among your selues. I am a foole in this my great boasting; and I charge you far. You wil say: yee haue cō∣pelled me. And I see this caution must be added to the counsaile of the Apostle, for the comfort of vs Ministers, that when wee haue taken heede to our selues, and ours, and both are blamelesse, yet we shal be blamed: as we know who saith,Ioh. 15.25. Ode∣runt me gratis, They hated me without a cause. Except this bee a cause, as him∣selfe in the seventh of Iohn saith vnto his brethren, which were yet of the worlde, & beleeved not in him, The world, saith he,Iohn. 7.7. cannot hate you: but me it hateth, be∣cause I testifie of it that the deedes thereof are evill. Thus, my brethren, be∣cause we testifie of the world, as needs we must, that the deedes thereof are evil, the world hateth vs; and hating vs, speaketh evil of vs, without a cause; that our deeds also vnto some at the least maie seeme to bee evill; and so our liberty may be ta∣ken
from vs to reprooue those deedes whih are evill indeede. Which giveth vs this lesson in this pointe of exhortation now in hand, namely, that we walk more warelie, then any other, and cut of occasi∣ons from them that seeke occasions; and never thinke we haue taken heed enough vnto our selves, vnlesse we avoid, not on∣ly evill it selfe, but (if it were possible) eve∣ry shadow and shew of evill: as the Apo∣stle exhorteth the Thessalonians,1. Thes. 5.22. Absti∣nete ab omni specie mali: Abstaine ye frō all appearance of evill. And lo, my brethren, yet more, besides our selues, even our ministerie, greater then our selues. This also we must take with vs, to looke vnto it; else wee shall doe a sunder that which God hath ioyned together; and the Proverbe will be vsed of vs. Bonus vir, malus magistratus: A good man, but an evil magistrate: good men, but evill Ministers; as, alas, how many? but, to the matter. And vnto doctrine] this then is the other point, which our care respecteth in the first part of the precept of the Apo∣stle,
namely, that we take heede, not on∣ly to our selues, but also to doctrine. And how, to doctrine? first, that we deliver it: secondly, what doctrine we deliver: & thirdly, how. For the first, my brethren, if we consider Timothie as our selues, and our selues as Timothie, and both, as the Ministers, not only of Christ, but also of the salvation of the people; as Paul in this very place, to goe no farther, no∣teth in the wordes following, For in do∣ing this, saith he, thou shalt saue thy selfe, and them that heare thee: it is more then evident that no Timothie hath done sufficient in looking to his doc∣trine, if only he provide what, and how to preach, and the matter, and manner be laide vp at home, and he bring it not out vnto the people. For they are not saved, except they heare; and heare they cannot, except we speake. This then is the first care in looking to doctrine, that we alwaies haue a bent and a ready will to deliver doctrine, and as neede requi∣reth in deede deliver it. Therefore our Saviour Christ in the thirteenth of the
Gospell by S. Matthew having taught his Disciples, whome he appointed ste∣wardes over his household, many doc∣trines by parables, at last he saith,Mat. 13.51.52. Vn∣derstand ye all these thinges? and they said vnto him, yea, Lord. Then said he vnto them, therefore every Scribe which is taught vnto the kingdome of heaven is like vnto an householder, which bringeth forth out of his trea∣sure thinges both new and old. Where we see, my brethren, that looke whatsoe∣ver we vnderstand by reading or hearing the word of God, and by study and me∣dication haue laid vp either first, or last, (as still I confesse we must be laying vp) as faithfull and good stewardes of the household of God, as neede requireth, we must bring it out to the benefit of the houshold. And alas, that any Minister which hath learning and knowledge (for I speake to the ignorant, which haue no knowledge: for who can drawe anie thinge out of an emptie vessell?) that any Minister, I say, who hath learning and knowledge, should neede to be remem∣bred
of this duetie, so to take heede vnto doctrine, that hee starue not the householde by keeping vppe that, which hee hath layed vppe not onelie for him∣selfe, but also for the householde. Yet these are the times, and the thing doeth speake it, that manye though they knowe this duty, and haue hearde the voyce of the Lorde in the sixth of Ieremie,Ier. 6.17. Also I set watch∣men over you saying, take heede to the sounde of the trumpet: yet their sloath, desidia, dulce malum, their leasure, and pleasure, and those Sirenes within, doe aunswere, as there wee reade, But they sayed, wee will not take heede. Where the Lord by the Prophet speaketh vnto the Priests, as watchmenne, which had taken the charge of sounding the trumpet vn∣to the people: as Saint Paule here∣unto Timothie, and in him vnto vs, Take heede vnto doctrine. And our aunswere is theirs indeede, though not in wordes, for so wee doe, as if wee had sayed. We will not take heede.
Else, what meaneth this great silence in many places, not only where is no trumpet, or voice to sounde it; but e∣ven there also, where is breath, and voice enough: What meaneth it, I say, that wee take so little heede, but that a crooked will hath ruled the matter; and saie the Prophete, and Apostle what they will, wee saie with the watch∣men of the house of Iuda, Wee will not take heede. As if it were in our wils, to preath, or not to preach; and no purse were broken, no danger woulde followe, to omitte doctrine. Amos had a greater feare, when he was sent to prophecie,Amos. 3.8. The Lyon (saieth hee) hath roared; who will not bee a∣fraide? The Lorde God hath spo∣ken: who can but prophecie? And the roaring of this Lyon to feared Paul in the ninth of the first to the Corin∣thians, that hee crieth out,1. Cor. 9.16. Vae mihi, nisi Evangelizem, Woe is mee, the Lyon will teare mee in peeces, if I preach not the Gospell, knowing therefore the terrour of the Lorde wee
perswade men, yea Ministers; and I woulde to God wee mighte perswade them for this first point of attendance or giving heed vnto doctrine, namely, that they deliver it vnto the people. And then the nexte pointe is this, what doctrine we should deliver, which what shoulde it bee, but that which may make vnto salvation: For such doctrine the Apostle requireth of vs; the matter whereof, if wee looke vnto it, wil saue both ourselues, & them that heare vs. And whence haue wee this, but from the most pure fountaines of the worde of God, which is the seede of our new-birth, as Iames saith, Of his owne will be gate he vs by the word of truth: and that to immortality;Iam. 1.18. even as this seede it selfe is immortall; as Peter saith, that we are borne a newe,1. Pet. 1.23. nor of mortall seede, but of immortall, by the word of God, which liveth and lasteth for ever. And afterwards the same word he calleth the sincere milke, wherby al∣so we grow vp after that we haue tasted how sweet the Lord is.1. Pet. .1.2.3. Wherefore saith
he laying aside all maliciousnes, & all guile, & dissimulation, & envie, & all evil speaking, as new-borne babes, de∣sire ye the sincere milke of the worde; forasmuch as yee haue tasted that the Lord is sweet and good. And in no other knowledge doubtles thē of this word, as strong meats also, wherby we grow frō faith to faith, from vertue to vertue, frō strēgth to strēgth, vntill we attaine vnto a perfect man in Christ Iesus, the Apo∣stle requireth vs to be of a ripe age, wher he thus exhorteth: Brethrē, be not chil∣dren in vnderstanding, but as concer∣ning maliciousnes be children,1. Cor. 14.20. but in vnderstanding be of a ripe age. Onlie we must see to this, that this seede of our new birth be not corrupted; this milke of our spiritual nourishment be not min∣gled, this foode of our foules be not infe∣cred, but alwaies preserved in all inte∣gritie; and so it will be able to saue our soules. Wherefore S. Peter (as before we heard) exhorceth not simplie to desire the milke, but, as there he calleth it, the sincere milke of the word. And Paul al∣luding
vnto this sinceritie, and puritie of the word, which we must preach, calleth it faithful word; wholsōe word:Tit. 1.9. Tit. 2.8. 2. Tim. 4.3 Tit. 2.7. wholsōe doctrine; vncorrupt doctrine: and oft, a earnestly comēdeth it both to Tit & Tim? And least they might wander in see∣king this word, he leadeth them to the Scriptures, & to the Scriptures only, as able to make them absolute, & perfectly to instruct them in every good duty if their ministery. Wherfore in the 3. of the 2. to Timothie he saich, The whole scripture is given by inspiratiō of God, & is pro∣fitable to teach, to cōvince, to correct, & to instruction righteousnes, that the  of God, to wit, Tim.1. Tim. 6.11. so called in the 1 of Tim. the 6. & 11. & indeede every Mi∣nister: that this mā of God, may be ab∣solute, & perfectly instructed vnto eve¦rie good worke, to wit, of his ministerie cōmitted to him. And in the same chap, also noting some deceivers, which should waxe worse, & worse, deceaving, & be∣ing deceaved,2. Tim. 3 14. as if they had erred from the rule of the Scriptures; by & by be addeth, But continue thou in the things
which thou hast learned, & which are cōmitted vnto thee, knowing of whō thou hast learned them; and that of a childe thou hast knowne the holye Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise vnto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Iesus. Here the church of Rome would chide, if wee had time to here her, for reiecting her vnwritten verities, indeede verie va∣nities; and al that heape of extors, not on∣ly fathered vpon the Scriptures, by false interpretations of the Scriptures, but also brought in against the manifest light of the holy Scriptures. And such Pha∣ristes, and blinde guides, deceiving, and being deceived, we had to leade us. Who as Iannes & Iambres resisted Moses, so did these also resist the truth. But the prophesie of the Apostle is fulfilled in them; & they haue prevailed no longer: for their madnes is manifest to al mē,2. Tim. 3.8.9. as theirs also was. And the whore of Babi∣lon, with her cup of spirituall formicati∣as is departed from vs; the greatest blessing that ever came to this land.
But yet, if wee take not heede my bre∣thren, even wee of the Ministerie, unto doctrine, such as even now also is allow∣ed vs to draw, & to deliver out of the most pure fountaines of the holy Scriptures, the Devill will creepe in another waie; even as be hath alreadie beguiled the mindes of manie, by mulciplying a ge∣neration of hearers amongst vs; of whom the Apostle in the fourth of the second to Timothie foretold, saying, The time wil come, when they will not suffer whol∣some doctrine: but having their cares it ching, shal after their owne lusts get them an heape of teachers, and shall turne their ears from the trueth, & shal be given vnto fables. The skum of A∣theists, so sold vnto pleasure, and whose mindes are so beguiled with loue of thē∣selues, & the lusts of their sin are so deare vnto them, that rather then they will in∣dure wholsome doctrine, which hath salt in it to season their putrified soules, bring them what vntrueth, & fables, you will, a religion, I think, cōpact of Iudaisme, Gentilisme, Panisme, & any pelfe, most
certaine poison of the soule, they will take it for the deliverye, if it bee fine e∣nough, & you touch not their lustes, but leave them to them selues, to liue as they list. Provided, that they heare not one but ouce, if they may haue their willes; their eares are so itching, & their taste but so be served with new teachers, till they haue even heaped them to themselues, & in their owne desire, though not in fact alwaies, as the Apostle saith of them, ha∣ving itching eares shall heape vnto thē selues teachers according to those their peculiar desires. And because the times will not suffer that any tables, or vntruth shall now bee taught them, the truth it selfe must bee so attempered vnto the taste so delivered in Thesi, not medling with their manners, or matters, as they call it; that if anie haue plaied the poet, and Oratour, and philosopher well; and for a shew of divi∣nitie, hath borrowed some morals of the fathers to hee is a Preacher, and the only fine fellow for e or other, as the humour serveth: & so they divide vs, as the secta∣ries
in the Church at Corinth; and one saith I am Pauls; another, I am Apol∣los; and a third, I am Cephas; & a fourth is a plaine fellow, and will none of them all, and hee is Christes. And shall I saie it, because wee see it? this kind of hearers hath begotten a kind of Preachers, which haue lear∣ned their lesson of the people; touching whome the Lord in the thirteenth of E∣saie commandeth the Prophet thus, Now goe, and write it before them in a table, and note it in a booke,Isa. 30.89. & seq. that it may bee for the last day, for ever and ever; that it is a re∣bellious people, lying children, children that would not heare the lawe of the Lorde. Which say vn∣to the feers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecie not vnto vs right thinges, speake flattering things vnto vs, prophecie errors; depart out of the waie, goe aside out of the path, muse the holy one of Is∣raell to cease from vs. For either they preach  at all, and play the
good-fellows, and do as the people doth: or els they speake placeuta, pleasing things vnto the people: as if Christ had not saied of vs, as he said indeede, ye are the salt of the earth,Mat. 5.13. to season mens soules from the corruption of their sins; but, lyee are the sugar of the worlde, to sooth men in their sinnes, to the destruc∣tion of their soules. Whereby it is come to passe, that, though the falles both of Church, and common-wealth are grie∣vous, and their mounds, almost, deadlie; yet the complaint in the Prophet Iere∣mie is true of vs my brethren, which looke no better vnto our doctrine, Cu∣rant cour it io filia popule me secūdum cura mali leviul dicendo,Ier. 8.11. pax, pax; et si nulla est pax: They heale the bruze of the daughter of my people accor∣ding to the cure of a light hurt, saying, peace, peace, though their be no peace. Where a similitude, is taken from litle children, which fall oft, and lightly, and take little harme; and when the nurse ta∣keth them vp, and loweth the hand, and saieth peace, peace, the hurt is healed.
Thus the Prophets of that people, as some preachers now, stopped the crie of repentance in the harts of the people, and warranted they should take no harme, saying, peace, peace, though there was no peace, but famine, & pestilence, and the sword hanged over them; even as over vs also this day, for the grievous falls, and deadly ure which we all haue taken, as Esaie deserie thin the 1. chapter,Isa. 1.6. From the sole of the foote vnto the head her is nothing whole therin, but wounds, and swellinges, and sores fall of cor∣ruption. And this will goeth on so fast, that we cannot but, exclaime with the Proph Ieremie in the fifth  peer, Res stupend & hrrla i in terra :Ier. 5.31. A wonderfull, and horrible thing is, done in this land: The Prophets prophecie falsely, & the Priests be are rule by their meanes,  , and my people loue it well▪ and what will yee doe at the last? as if hee should say, wher, will your sinnes goe, if you should  bee bridl and those plagis fall upon? you which: I
haue threatned? Thus the outrage and licentiousnesse of wickednesse in the worlde, and this sea (almost) of sinne, which is fallen in vpon vs, will not bee stayed, but by the heavie hand of God, and his revenging power▪ and all, because the people will bee flat∣tered, and the Preachers will not reprooue, for feare of offending, and loosing their praise, and profite. Forturne the edge of the sword, and beade the power of that rodde against the worlde, which God gaue vnto Christ, and Christ vnto vs, saying. As my father sent mee,Ioan. 20.21. so sende I you: and the prophecie of Esaias shall bee fulfilled, Hee shall smite the earth with the rodde of his mouth, and with the breath of his lippes shall hee ssaye the ungodlye.Isa. 11.4. For the hearts of men shall melte with repentaunce for their sinnes, or their thoughtes shall accuse them, and their condem∣nation shall bee sealed within them∣selues: the lust shall bee guided in the wayes of righteousnesse, and he
wicked shall not make vs stumble, be∣cause the shame and reproofe, and the chastisemente of their sinne shall bee vppon them: noe mourning soule in Syon, but shall bee comforted; no Dake so stronge in Basan, no Cedar so aule in Libanus; noe hearte so harde, and stonye; no minde so high and haughtye of anie mightie Poten∣tate, but shall bee humbled before the Lorde? For what sayeth the Lorde by the Prophete Ieremie in the three and twentith Chapter,Ierem. 23.29. Is not my woorde like fire, sayeth the Lorde▪ and like the hammer, that breaketh the stone? And in the same Chapter speaking of the Prophets, whom hee re∣proued before, he saith, If they had stād in my counsell, and had declared my words to my people,Vers. 22. and had declared my words to my people, then they should haue turned them from their evil way, & from the wickednes of their inven∣tions. And Paul in the seconde of the se∣cond to the Corinthians speaking of the power of this pure & sincere handling of the word of God, saith: Now thanks be
be vnto God, which alwaies maketh vs to triumph in Christ;2. Cor. 2.14. & seq. and maketh manifest the savor of this knowledge by vs in every place. For we are vnto God the sweete savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perishd the one we are the savour of death vnto death; & to the other the savour of life vnto life: and who is suf∣ficient for these things? For we are not as many, which make marchandize of the worde of God: but as of sinceritie, but as of God, in the sighte of God speake wee of Christ. And in the fourth of the same Epistle, Therefore, faith he, seeing that we haue this Ministerie,2 Cor. 4.1. & seq. as we haue received mercy, we faint not: but haue cast from vs the cloakes of vnhonesty, and walke not in craftines, neither handle wee the worde of God deceitfully; but in declaration of the truth we approoue our selues to every mans conscience in the sight of God. From whence he gathereth this conclu∣sion: If then our Gospell be hidde, it is hid in them that are lost, in whom the
God of this worlde hath blinded the mindes, to wit, of the vnbeleevers, that the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ, which is the image of God should not shine vnto them. As if not by a fine, or fraudulent, but by a full, and an honest handling of the worde of God, he had done sufficient to convince the vn∣beleevers, to reveale their reprobation, and to cast their condēnation vpon them selues. And the same minde hee also tes∣tifieth in the first to the Galathians: For nowe (saith he) preach I más doctrine or Gods? or go I about to please men? for if I should yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ. Thus the Prophets, Esaie, and Iere∣mie, & Paul the Apostle, for this point of syncerity, looked to their doctrine. And what do we? Tell it not in Gath, and publish it not in the streetes of Ashkelon,2. Sam. 1.20. least the daughters of the Philistins reioyce, least the daughters of the vncircumcised triumph. Yes, tell it to the very skorners, and to the greatest amongst them, that never (al∣most)
such vowing to the sinnes of men, by them, that should make all the world to bend. But tel them withal what Iere∣mie saieth, populus meus it a amant: My people love it well, they will haue it so. Thus, this disease in you my brethren of the Laitie, to loue your sinnes so well, that they must not bee reproved, hath in∣fected, and bread this weakenes in many of vs Ministers, to let them alone, & not reproove them. And when the Sermon, or cold Collation is ended, the pride, and self-loue, the tyrannies, cruelties, and oppressions of men; their greate & open adulteries in the sight of the sunne, their riot and wantonnesse, covetousnesse, bri∣beries, blasphemies, what shall I saie? the heape of all their sinnes together are fast a sleepe for vs, wee wake them not; and they fester in the soule, and are now so strong, that they will not obey the bri∣dle▪ they say with the rebels, in the se∣cond Psalme,Psal. 2.3. Let vs breake their bands asunder, and cast awaie their cordes frō vs. And according to their power so is their pride; and the power of manie, yea
all (almost) so greate (the staffe of dis∣cipline beeing fallen downe▪) that they said it not only, but do it in deede. This bringeth mee, my brethren, vn∣to the third and last point to bee regarded mattending our doctrine; name lie, the Manner: in which first is required a spi∣rituall, dnesse, such, as was in the Prophets, and Apostles of Iesus Christ; &▪ without the which thee shall even feare the fares of men. For so did Ieremie at the first, vntill the Lorde which sent him▪ thrust him forward, thus, Trusse vp thy lones, and arise, & speake vnto them all that I commaund three: bee not a∣fraide of their faces,Ierem. 1.17. least I destroie thee before them. And so did Ezechiel, vntil the Lord in the third chapter made him a promise thus, Behold I haue made thy face strong against their faces,Ezech. 3. and thy forehead hard against their foreheads. I haue made thy forehead as the ada∣mant, & harder then the flint: feare them not therfore, neither bee afraide of their looked, because they are a  house. And least me may thin
that this was the maiestie of the Pro∣phets onlie, and that the Gospell must treepe lower to the becks of men; the Apostle in the fourth in the Colostians praieth the saithfull to praie for him, that God (saieth he) may open vnto vs the doore of vtterance,Coloss. 4.3. to speake the mysterie of Christ. And then he addeth, that I may , as it becommeth mee to speake. And how that is, hee sheweth in the sih to the Ephesians; where making the same request to them to praie for him,Ephes. 6.18. & seq. hee saieth. Pray al∣waies with all manner prayer and sup∣plication in the sphrite: and watch ther∣vnto with all perseverance & supplica∣tion for all Saintes; and for mee, that vtteraunce may bee given mee, that I may open my mouth boldlie to pub∣lish the secret of the Gospell; whereof I am the embasse dour in bondes, that therein I may speake boldly, as I ought to speake. As I ought to speake, saith Paul: for such speech both becommeth the maiestie of the Gospell; and armeth vs against their lookes, which
are so bent against us,  when wee prth vnto them; as if wee were  rthy to looke vpon them▪ And this  make as lowde. and lift vp our voices, as Esai is: commounded in  eight  fifteth chapter, thus, Crie as the hoae▪ and cease not▪ lift vp thy voice like a umpe and shew my people ther transgresson; & the house of I ob their sinces. Euen as thbrw  hattes all lleepe in their  this  halfe,  and extent of  I  the  is so spiri∣, and  all  which fa vnto verie trem∣bling. Example of Paul himselfe, so greate an Apostle, in the second of the first to the Corthians:1. Cor. 2.3. And I (saith hee) was among lyon in weakenesse, & in fear, and in much trembling. Why
Paul: euen because h was  wea , that thing  him, ( in s)  wrdes should  in  mindes of  as: himselfe where confesse of this effect of his Minter, And such trust,2. Cor. 3.4.5. saith hee, haue ves through Christ to God. Not that wee are sufficient of our selues to think ¦ny thing a of our selues, but out suf∣fciencie is o God. And the  renoceh all him  had  Law, or Philosophie; or had  tught h  I (saith he)  not to ∣ni thing,1. Cor. 2.2. that is, I  my  in the  thing  you, so  I  Christ, and him  effect▪ Ye, and his  so liked him  hee faith, And I  I  car not  of wordes or of wisedome,1. Cor. 2.1. sheing  the testimonie  speaking of the thinges of God, which
revealed vnto vs by the spirit▪ he saieth, which thinges also we speake,Vers. 13. not in the wordes which mans wisdom teacheth, but which the holy ghost tea∣cheth, matching spirituall thinges with spiritual things. He therefore who in prea∣ching must be so spirituall, to speake only the things of God only with the wordes of God; & eelling that, which we al feele, our nature inclined vnto pride & vanitie, which so far as it prevaileth, so far it hueth and hindereth all holy doctrine; must needes hee in weakenesse, and in feare, and in much trembling. Thus faithfulnesse and synceritie, for the matter; and boldnesse, with reve∣rence & humilitie, for the maner, maketh vp the whole harmony of a lawful delive∣rie of the word of God. And here we haue the rule: which if wee coulde followe (to say no more of this) doubles it would fil our harts with reioycing, & our mouthes with the praise of God, who hath given such a treasure vnto his church: it would make vs leape for ioy, & sing in our beds a the Psalmist exhorteth in the hundred
fourtie and ninth Psalme▪ I  Saintes,Psal. 149.5.6. & seq. saieth hee, bee ioyfull for the glorie, let them sing in their beds: let the praises of God be in their mouthes for all where with hee doth exalt them; and namely, for this, that a two edged swoorde is given to their hand to bee avenged of the heathen, and to rebuke the people; to binde their kinges in chaines, & their honorables with links of iron; to exercise over them  scrip∣tum, the written Lawe which is the ho¦nour of all his Saintes. As Moses also saith in the fourth of Deuteronomie vn∣to the people,Deut. 4.6. This is your wisdome & your vnderstanding in the sight of the people, which shall heare all these Or∣dinaunces, and shall say, surely this people is wise, and of vnderstanding, and a greate nation. And what: the Prophets were not yet. But wee haue Moses and the prophets; yea, Christ, & his Apostles, the whole Scriptures of both Covenantes, this is our  scrip∣tum, our written Lawe, this our ho∣nour, our ornament; and let us ho∣nour
it. And thus much of the first part of the Apostolique Precept vnto Timo∣thie in these wordes▪ Take heede vn∣to thy selfe, and vnto doctrine. The second followeth in these wordes, and continue therein. Wherein to speake a little I may begin, but not continue, least the time take mee vp. Wherefore onely as Paul biddeth the brethren at Co¦losse thus, Saie to Archippus,Coloss. 4.17. take heede to the Ministerie, that thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it: Euen so say I vnto you my brethren, and to my selfe, Let vs take beede vnto our Ministerie, which wee haue recei∣ved in the Lord, that wee fulfill it: let vs take heede vnto our selues, and vnto doc∣trine, and continue therein. For it is a small thing to begin, except thou per¦severe, yea, it were better, as Peter saith,2. Pet. 2.21. never to haue knowen the waie of righte∣ousnesse, then after wee haue knowen it to turne from the holie commandement. And nothing more dolefull, then this in∣uersion, which is our subversion, ye were
light in the Lorde, but are now dark∣nesse  yet were starres of heavens but the Dragons taile hath cast you vnto the earth.Revel. 12.4. 2. Tim. 4.10. As Demas: Demas hath forsa∣ken mee, and hath embraced this pre∣sent worlde. Lo, a starre fallen vnto the earth. And so, as manie, as once shi∣ned in life, and learning, as heaven lye lights,Philip. 2.21. but now are earthlye minded, seeking (as the Apostle saith) their owne thinges, and not the thinges of Iesus Christ. And I would this cuntrie aire, yea the aire (almost) of England all a∣broade, had no such Cometes; which gaue a flash at the first in the Universi∣ties, and places, to which they first went; but, the earthly matter, whereof they con∣sist, inflamed with the fire of I know not what zeale at the first, consumed, to darkenesse, and the desolation of their flockes, portended, as it were, before, and imported by these false, and fatall Lightes. Which if they gather not th strength againe, and shine, as they be∣gaune, vnto the end; the mist of darke∣nesse for ever, as the punishment of their
darkenesse, andithe darkenesse,  haue brought vpon others. I feare ll fall vpon them. And this, of those, whose candle is quite put out, & which veterly cease in their Ministery to do any good, I not withstāding their good beginninges of whome wee may say ne.Eceboliue Socrat. Hist. Eccle siast. l. 3. c. 11. I would them selues would saie, but to repentāce as hee saide of himselfe, without repen∣tance, Calcatema spidum, salom: Tread vpon mee vnsavourie salt: if woorthie to lie anie where, to bee trodden vpon. For salt is good:Luke. 14.34.35. but if salt hue lost hi savour, wherewith shall it bee sea se∣ued? it is neither meete for the lande nor yet for the dunghill, but men cast it out. Hee that hath eares to heare le him heare. There is yet one other point of contra∣diction vnto Continuance; which is in∣cermission; not all, and veris intermis∣sion, but that, which will not stand in anie good construction with that instanes required by the Apostle in the fourth of of the second to Timothi.2. Tim. 4.2. Preach (saith bee) the worde. There is the charge in
generall. But howe bee instane, in season, out of season. Here is the kind and quantitie: such, and so much, as some men will thinke, and saie, as they saie too often, it is out of season; & much preaching (as Pestus saied of Paul much learning had made him madde) so much preaching (almost) hath made vs madde.Act. 26.24. But the madnesse is theirs indeede, be∣ing drunken with this opinion, that Quarter Sermons are sufficient. And yet the quarter watch will not awake the straw verie Preachers, as a godlie father calleth them: for they come onlie once a yeare,Latimer. & tarrie a while, and then awaie, this is to much intermission, & far from continuance: much like the ser∣vice of those, whome wee call Retainers which see their Masters once a yeare; & weare their liveries for a countenaunce; but do their owne worke, and make their titles serue their turnes. For when a fat morsell is falling from their masters table, then they waite, and holde the treancher; and then, if you watch the time, you may heare a sermon: But in
their parishes: where they should preach indeede from Sabath, to Sabaoth, all the yeare, ltum sileiium greate, & con∣tinuall silence. And it a continuall Prea∣cher meate anie of these (as wee meete but to often, because they are manie:) as if wee were the uials, they squine; and hang the lippe; yea, they are so wic∣ked (as the servant saied of Nabal) that a man cannot speake to them: no,1. Sam. 25.17. not their owne wiues: A meane, the people of the Parish, (if anie haue that Zeales as manie, no doubt, haue) maie not saie o nie of them; sin, whie do you sol I pray preach ofter. For then they shall hee presenced for Puricanes. And this I hope the Court will loohe vnto, and take order for it, if anie bee so busie with their bus bandes. But rather indeede I would they would herken; or, (because wee would some out seede in the best ground) do you harken my brethren, which yee continue, to this counsail of continuāce ingd life; and Iearning, that so you may continue vnto the d. For he that cōtus vnto the end shall be saved,
and saue other a aso,  in the promis following: and without commiance is will not bee; because our adversaries, the devill▪ he worlde, and the flesh, are continuall in their worke, to come vp our planning; to blot out our writinge, to breake downe our building before our eies, so soone as wee plucke our hande frō the worke, as too often is seene. And the importunitie of sinne, is greate, and rusheth in in hast, so soone as it geteth the least advantage: and afterwards ge∣teth strength, and will not bee tamed, but by that instant preaching, which the Apostle before requireth; and it is the reason, wherefore hee requireth it. As nothing indeene but this assiduitie can make Archippus fulfill his Minisie. Besides that it wil be our great rebuke to u discontinuance to haue i saied, as Paul saieth to the Galathiane,Gal. 5.7. Yee did runne well: who, or what did  you? Yet manie lets, I confesse, (if wee leap not over them) to breake vs of ∣owne proclivitie, as hee sath,  ad libidnum, from labou s, or
leasure: the vngracefullnesse; yea, the stubbrnesse & rebellion of our he ar. Come, le vs conspire against Ieremie;Ierem. 18.18. let vs ste him with the tongue, and let vs not giue heede vnto anie of his woordes. But ne  this▪ the cold comfort, that wee haue of those which raig over , and are as the Apostles in  and office, to see h onlye to them selues, but also to others, as Paul  vnto . These shoulde bee called, as the prophet before saith, Quer∣cia stua oakes of righteousnesse and parternes of al diligēce in their doctrine:Isa. 61.3. that for (if need required) as children we might go by their hands, & light our can∣dles at their to the. But what are they? what do they? I need not tel▪ psares  ∣ter▪ the thing doth speake. Yet I must say nothing; and you must see nothing: but we al must heare what they say; as those in Ieremie, the three and eth, Who hath stand in the counsell of the Lord, that hee hath perceived and heard his woordes who hath marked his word,Ierem. 23.18. and heard  s if they should say, who,
but,Ierem. 18.18. wee? For the Lawe shall not pe∣rish from the priest, nor counsell from the wise, no the worde from the pro∣phet. But, by their leaves, I will say, as Christ in the sixteenth of S. Luke saieth where having preached against covetous∣nesse,Luke. 16.13.14.15. and concluded thus saying. Yee cannot serue God and riches: it is ad∣ded by the Evangelist, All these things heard the Pharisies also, which were coverous, and they mocked him.  hee saied vnto them, yee are they that iustifie your selues; but God knoweth your hartes. Yea men know your harts, by the briberies, open briberies; and cor∣ruptions of your handes. They eate (saieth the Lord by the prophet Osea) The sinne of my people,Hosea. 4.8. that is, the sacrifices for sinne; therefore everye one lifteth vp his minde to their ini∣quitie. And wee now also haue sacrifi∣ces for sin, and sinne offeringes. For they commute Penances; & the paine is past, when the pennie is paide; and so they eate the sinne of the people: they feede, and are fat, and in good liking, and so are
theirs: for Of a prince that harkeneth,Proverb. 29 12. vnto lies, saith Salomon, all his servāts are wicked. Therefore (as Ose saieth) everie one lifteth vp his minde to their iniquitie. For sinne bringeth sacrifice; and sacrifice is sweete: and hence is this wincking at, yea this warming of sinne & iniquitie. And how shall wee continue to beate downe sinne, which they set vp? yet these are the onlie Timothies in the world, and who, but these? but, as our Saviour addeth in the place before alle∣ged,Luk. 16.15. That which is high and loftye with men, is abhomination in the sight of God. Yea, and damnation too, if they take not heede betime. For salvati∣on is for them that doe take heede. For so it follweth in the second & last generall part of this Text, which is the Promise, in these wordes: For by do∣ing this thou shalt saue thy selfe, and them that heare thee. A greate Promise, and a high speech of the Apostle, to saue our selues, and them that heare. But hee meaneth it passiuelie, that wee shall bee sa∣ved.
and it is resolved into the actiue, ts, that, because the Gospell i called the Gospell of our salvation,Ephes. 1.13. in the first to the Ephesians; and in the first to the Romans,Rom. 1.16. the po∣wer of God which bringeth salvati∣on to everye one that beleeveth, and the preaching of this Gospell is committed to vs,2. Co. 5.19 and so is ours, as Ministers; and so called by the Apostle in the second to the Romans, where speaking of God he saieth, who shall iudge the secretes of men by Iesus Christ according to my Gos∣pell;Rom. 2.16. and in the fourth of the second to the Corinthians,2. Cor. 4.3 If our Gospell bee hidde, it is hidde in them that are lost: therefore the Ministers of the Gospell, of salvations are here saied to saue themselues, and others. And so the Apostle speaketh of him∣selfe in the eleventh to the Romans and fourteenth verse,Ro. 11.14. 1. Cor. 9.22 and in the first to the Corinthians, the ninth chap∣ter, and two and twentieh verse which places for brevitie I now omit.
But this I cannot omited: shall wee in deede bee saved, and saue others also, by doing this, and do∣ing it vnto the end? Then faint not thou faithfull, and painefull labourer in the woorde of God: for loe, thy labours, as the seales of a double salvacion, thine owne, and others; and a greate crowne of righteous∣nesse remaineth for both. And shall wee noe bee saved, nor none of ours, if wee do it not, or lightlye, and without continuance, as a flourish, and no more? Then loe Hel-fire al∣readye kindled, and a double dam∣nation prepared alreadie, for al ig∣norantes, which cannot; all are∣lesse Ministers, will not, and doe not fulfill their Ministerie. For they are guilty not onlie of their owne sinnes and damnation, but of the sinnes and damnation of then people also. Wherefore, to daye if yee will heare his voice, my bre∣thren, harden not your hartes: that you and your people, and we with
you, may bee all as wee desire, populus salutis, the saved of the Lorde. The last point, with which I end, is this, touching the people: whome here, in the mention of their salvation, hee calleth hearers. And why? For whosoever calleth vpon the name of the Lorde (saieth the Prophet Ioel) shalbe saved.Ioel. 1.38. Rom. 10.14. But how (saieth the Apostle) shal they call on him, in whome they haue not beleeved? and how shal they beleeue in him, of whome they haue not harde? heare therefore, good people, and so bee saved har∣ken, and your soules shall liue. But take heede,Isa. 55.3. Mark. 4.24. as Christ warneth, what you heare, that is, how you heare, and profit in that you heare: and be∣ware of those hearers in the three and thirteeth of Ezechiel; whome the Lord describeth to the Prophet, thus, Also thou sonne of man,Ezech. 33.30. et seq. the children of thy people, that talke of thee by the walkes, and in the doores of
houses; and speake one to another, every man to his brother, saying, come, I pray you, and heare what is the word that commeth from the Lord: they come vnto thee, as the people vseth to come; and as my people sit before thee, and heare thy wordes, but doe them not: though with their mouth they make them most sweete, their hart goeth after their covetousnesse. And lo thou art vnto them as a plesaunt song of one that hath a sweete voice, and can sing well: for they heare thy wordes, but doe them not: Such hearing is heere condemned, contemned of all men, and hath no promise of blessing from God; but that, which is ioyned with peace, with puritie, with reverence and humilitie, and with true obedience of that we heare:Iam. 1.19. et seq. as Iames most am∣ply ehorting, saith, Wherefore, my deare brethren, let every man bee swift to heare, slowe to speake, and slowe to wrath. For the wrath
of an doth not accomplish the righ∣teousnesse of God. Wherefore laye a∣part all filthinesse, and superfluitye of malitiousnesse, and receiue with meekenesse the woorde that is graffed in you, which is able to saue your souls. And bee yee doers of the woorde & not hearers onlye, deceiving your owne selues. For if anie heare the woorde, and doe it not, hee is like vnto a man, that beholdeth his natu∣rall face in a glasse, for when hee hath considered himselfe, hee goeth, his waie and for getteth immediatlie what manner of one hee was. But who so looketh in the perfect Lawe of liberty, and continueth therein, hee not bee∣ing a forgetfull hearer, but a doer of the woorke, shall bee blessed in his deede. Thus, blessed are they, and saved shall they bee, and onlye they, which heare the woorde of God,Luk. 11.28. and keepe it. And as manye as walke ac∣cording to this rule,Gal. 6.16, peace bee upon them, and mercie, & vpon the Israel of God. To god, even the father, and
to Iesus Christ, with the Holy Spi∣rit, one, immortall, invisible, and onelie wise, God, bee rendred all glorie, and praise, do∣minion, and maies∣tie both now, and ever. A∣men.
